Materia Medica Pura, Vol. I (Aconitum–Helleborus)
Samuel Hahnemann (translated by R. E. Dudgeon, with annotations by Richard Hughes), 1880
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Vol. I of Dudgeon's English translation of Hahnemann's Materia Medica Pura — the foundational provings of homeopathy, remedy by remedy. The translation that carried Hahnemann's pure materia medica into English. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b28121612_0002). This 1880 Dudgeon translation, vol. 1 (London: Hahnemann Publishing Society, 1880) is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

MATERIA  MEDICA 


PURA 


BY 


SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN. 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  LATEST  GERMAN  EDITIONS  BY 

R.  E.  DUDGEON,  M.D. 

WITH  ANNOTATIONS  BY 

RICHARD  HUGHES,  L.R.C.P.E. 


VOL.  I. 

ACONITUM— IPECACUANHA. 


HAHNEMANN  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY. 

LIVERPOOL : 

THE  HON.  SECRETARY,  117,  GROVE  STREET,  E. 

LONDON  : E.  GOULD  AND  SON,  59,  MOORGATE  STREET,  E.C. 

NEW  YORK:  BOERICKE  AND  TAFEL,  145,  GRAND  STREET. 

1880. 

IJrae  i6g.  fmks,  13s. 


i 


<\* 

o 


WELLCOv  .TITUTE 

LIB'  3Y 

Coll. 

welMOmec 

Call 

No 

cW 

PRINTED  BY  J.  E.  ADLARD,  BARTHOLOMEW  CLOSE. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I 


PAGE 

Translator’s  Preface  v 

Preface  i 

Spirit  of  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  Doctrjne  6 

Preamble 18 

Aconitum  24 

Ambra  grisea  46 

Angustura .. 63 

Argentum  77 

Arnica 89 

Arsenicum  113 

Asarum  1 66 

Aurum „ 179 

Belladonna  , 198 

Bismuthum 256 

Bryonia  262 

Calcarea  acetica  291 

Camphora  304 

Cannabis  320 

Capsicum 334 

Carbo  animalis 347 

Carbo  vegetabilis  354 

Chamomilla  , ...  379 

Chelidonium  400 

China  408 

Cicuta 467 

Cina  478 

Cocculus 491 

COLOC  YNTHIS  51 1 

Conium 524 

Cyclamen  541 

Digitalis 551 

Drosera  57° 

Dulcamara 583 

Euphrasia  600 

Ferrum 606 

Guaiacum  619 

HELLEBORUS  NIGER  626 

Hepar  sulphuris  calcareum  639 

Hyoscyamus  650 

Ignatia 674 

Ipecacuanha  70.8 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016 


https://archive.org/details/b28121612_0002 


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE. 


The  Materia  Medica  Pura  as  left  to  us  by  Hahnemann  con- 
sists of  six  volumes,  two  of  which,  viz.  Vols.  I and  II,  had  reached  a 
third  edition,  while  the  remainder  did  not  get  beyond  the  second. 

The  dates  of  the  publication  of  these  volumes  are  as  follow  : — 
Vol.  I,  1830;  Vol.  II,  1833;  Vols.  Ill  and  IV,  1825;  Vol.  V, 
1826  ; Vol.  VI,  1827.  In  the  earlier  editions  the  pathogeneses  of  the 
various  medicines  are  not  arranged  in  the  same  way  as  they  are  in  the 
latest.  Thus,  in  the  former,  Hahnemann’s  own  observations  are  put 
first  and  by  themselves  and  separately  numbered ; the  symptoms 
observed  by  his  disciples  under  his  superintendence,  and  those  derived 
from  the  works  of  other  observers,  being  arranged  together  in  a different 
list,  and  specially  numbered. 

In  the  third  edition,  to  which  only  the  first  two  volumes  attained, 
the  arrangement  is  different.  Here  all  the  symptoms  of  each  medicine, 
whether  observed  by  Hahnemann  himself  or  his  disciples,  or  taken 
from  old-school  authorities,  are  combined  in  one  schema  and  numbered 
continuously  ; Hahnemann’s  own  observations  being  distinguished  by 
having  no  name  or  sign  attached,  while  those  of  his  pupils  are  indicated 
by  an  abbreviation  of  the  name  of  each  appended  to  their  respective 
observations.  The  authorities  of  the  old  school  are  named  after  the 
symptoms  for  which  they  are  responsible. 

Another  peculiarity  in  the  work  as  it  has  been  left  us  is,  that  the 
medicines  are  not  arranged  alphabetically.  Each  volume  contains  a 
varying  number  of  medicines,  arranged  alphabetically  according  to  their 
common  German  names,  but  there  is  no  attempt  to  maintain  the  alpha- 
betical arrangement  in  respect  to  the  whole  work. 

In  making  a translation  the  work  might  be  presented  to  the  English 
reader  exactly  as  we  have  it,  i.e.  each  separate  volume  given  with  its 
own  peculiar  arrangement  of  symptoms,  the  medicines  of  each  being 
only  arranged  alphabetically  according  to  their  English  or  Latin  names. 
This  would  give  six  volumes  of  various  sizes  and  with  their  contents 
differently  arranged.  It  would  reproduce  the  work  as  it  exists  in 
the  German  original,  but  it  would,  like  that,  be  difficult  to.  use  as  a 
book  of  reference  ; and  if  the  minor  details  of  the  German  work  were 
also  preserved  it  would  involve  a considerable  additional  amount  of 
printing  without  any  advantage  therefrom. 

Though  some  were  of  opinion  that  the  work  should  be  presented  to 
the  English  reader  in  the  above  form,  it  appeared  to  the  translator  that 
it  would  be  paying  but  a poor  compliment  to  PIahnemann  to  neglect  to 

b 


VI 


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE. 


brino-  the  volumes  of  the  second  edition  into  conformity  with  the 
perfected  arrangement  of  those  he  brought  out  in  a thir • 

P Moreover,  the  translator  thought  that  instead  of  PU^  S arrange- 
volumes  of  very  unequal  size,  with  no  general  alphabetical  a g 
ment  oMhe  medicines,  it  would  be  altogether  better,  because  more  con- 
venient to  the  reader  and  practitioner,  and  decidedly- more  ; ai rtis sticfi ■ 
literary  point  of  view,  to  arrange  the  medicines  throughou  the  work 

ulnhaheticallv  to  arrange  the  symptoms' on  the  plan  adopted  in 

alphabetically  to  ar  j handsome  volumes  of  equal  size, 

fuch  "a  proceeding  wouldinvolve  a considerable  addition  to  the  trans- 
lator’s labour,  but  this  would  be  fully  compensated  y t e grea 
utility  and  the  literary  homogeneity  of  the  work  distributed 

.llrtfut  th?oSini  volumes  hs.e  been  divided  between  the  two 

P • translation.  These  abbreviations  are  printed  in  italics. 

Hahnemann’s  abbreviations  of  his  provers’  names  are  not  always rthe 

same  but  uniformity  has  been  maintained  m this  translation.  Thenam 

of  old-school  authorities  for  symptoms  are  printed  >n  s^ll  caP^  S^ 
that  the  student  and  casual  reader  can  see  at  a glance  whether  th 
simp  om  s one  produced  by  an  intentional  proving  or  is  the  result  of 
rr  rail  "accidental  poisoning  or  over-dose  of  an  old-school  ob- 
served As  In  the  original,  the  symptoms  with  no  name  or  abbreviation 

of  their  names  employed  in  this  work,  and  the  medicines  proved  by  each. 


Adam,  Dr 

Ahner,  G.  A 

Anton,  C.  Chr 

Baehr,  Aug 

Becher,  Huld 

Caspari,  Dr 

Clauss,  W 

Cubitz,  C.  A 

Flaming,  Joh.  Gtfd. 

Franz,  Carl  

Gersdorff,  Fr.  von 


Gross,  W 

Gunther,  — 

Gutmann,  Salomo 


id.  (cb-a.,  cb-v.) 

ir.  (aco.,  cap.,  cin.,  men.) 

4n.  (chi.) 

Bhr.  (ars.,  bel.,  chi.,  coc.) 

Bch.  (chi.,  chi.,  dig.,  led.,  ph-x.,  spi.,  squ.,  ver.) 

'das.  (cb-v.) 

Css.  (chi.) 

Ctz.  (dul.,  opi.,  stp.) 

Fg.  (coc.,  hyo.,  nx-v.)  . 

Fz.  (ano-.,  arg.,  arn.,  asr.,  aur.,  ca-a.,  cam.,  can.,  cm., 
con.,  eye.,  dig.,  hyo.,  led.,  mt-n.,  mt-s.,  man., 
men.,  oln.,  ph-x.,  rhs.,  rut.,  sam.,  spi.,  stn.,  stp., 
str.,  trx.,  thu.,  ver.) 

Gjf.  (amb.,  cb-v.)  . 

Gss.  (aco.,  ang.,  arg.,  arn.,  ars.,  aur.,  bel.,  can.,  chi., 
chi.,  coc.,  dul.,  dig.,  fer.,  ign.,  man.,  mer., 

| msc.,  oln.,  ph-x.,  rhe.,  rut.,  sam.,  opi.,  stn., 

^ stp.,  thu.,  vrb. 

Gth.  (mt-n.)  . 

Gn.  (col.,  dro.,  men.,  mer.,  mu-x.,  oln.,  opi.,  pn-x., 
spi.,  spo.,  stp.,  str.,  trx.) 

Fr.  H—n.  (aco.,  arn.,  ars.,  aur.,  bel.,  bry.,  can.,  cic., 
col.,  dro.,  eup.,  fer.,  hep.,  hyo.,  ign.,  mer.,  msc., 
nx-v.,  ph-x.,  pul.,  rhs.,  spo.,  str.,  sul.,  thu.,  ver.) 


Hahnemann,  Fried 


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE.  vii 


Harnisch,  Ernst 

Hartlaub,  C 

Hartmann,  Franz  

Hartung,  J.  C .s._ 

Haynel,  Adolph.  Fr 

Hempel,  Gust 

Hempel,  H 

Herrmann,  Chr.  Th 

Hornburg,  Chr.  G 

Hugo,  — 

KummeRj  Ernst 


Langhammer,  Chr.  Fr.  ... 


Lehmann,  Chr.  F.  G 

Lehmann,  J.  G 

Meyer,  F.  

Michler,  C 

Mockel,  A.  F 

Mossdorf,  Theod 

Moller,  — 

Nenning,  Caj 

Rosazewsky,  — 

Ruckert,  E.  Ferd 

Ruckert,  Leop.  E 

Rummel,  F 

SCHoNIKE,  

Schroder,  — 

Stapf,  Ernst 


Teuthorn,  J.  Chr.  Dav... 

Trinks  and  Hartlaub 

Urban,  F.  C 

Wagner,  Gust 

Wahle,  Wilh 

Walther,  Fr 

Wenzel,  Jul 

Wislicenus,  W.  E 


Hsch.  (ang.,  chi.,  mt-n.,  mt-s.) 

Hb.  (see  Trinks  and  Hartlaub.) 

CHtn.  (bel.,  bis.,  ca-a.,  chi.,  chi.,  gui.,  hel.,  mt-n., 
} men.,  mer.,  mu-x.,-oln.,  ph-x.,  rut.,  sam.,  sar., 

spi.,  spo.,  squ.,  stn.,  stp.,  thu.,  vrb.) 

Htg.  (bel.,  cap.,  chi.,  Cyc.) 

(Hnl.  (arg.,  coc.,  man.,  men.,  mu-x.,  spo.,  stn.,  stp., 
1 thu.)  ‘ 

HI.  (aur.,  can.,  mt-n.,  thu.) 

Hpl.  (Bel.)' 

( Hrr.  (arg.,  aur.,  bel.,  bry.,  bis.,  cam.,  chi.,  chi.,  eye., 
( led.,  ph-x.,  rut.,  sar.,  spi.,  stn.,  stp.) 

C Hbg.  (aco.,  arn.,  ars.,  asr.,  bel.,  bry.,  chi.,  cic.,  coc., 
} col.,  dig.,  hel.,  man.,  men.,  mer.,  pul.,  rhe., 

(_  rhs.,  rut.,  spi.,  spo.,  squ.,  stp.) 

Ho.  (can.) 

Kr.  (arn.,  bel.,  hel.,  mt-s.,  spi.,  stp.,  trx.) 

Lr.  (ang.,  arg.,  arn.,  ars.,  aur.,  bel.,  bis.,  ca-a.,  chi., 
chi.,  cic.,  cin.,  coc.,  col.,  con.,  eye.,  dig.,  dro., 
eup.,  gui.,  hel.,  hyo.,  ipc.,  led.,  mt-n.,  man., 
men.,  mer.,  mu-x.,  oln.,  ph-x.,  rut.,  sam.,  spi., 
spo.,  stn.,  stp.,  trx.,  thu.,  vrb.) 

Lhm.  (chi.,  rhs.) 

Ln.  (bel.,  chi.,  dig.,  ipc.,  spo.) 

Myr . (ang.,  arg.,  ars.,  chi.,  chi.,  dig.,  ph-x.,  spi.) 
Mck.  (ang.,  bry.,  chi.,  mt-n.,  pul.,  rhs.) 

Mkl.  (bel.,  men.) 

Mss.  (ang.,  cap.,  hel.,  squ.,  vrb.) 

Mr.  (dul.) 

Ng.  (dul.) 

Rz.  (fer.,  trx.) 

Rkt.  (aco.,  bry.,  dig.,  dul.,  hel.,  pul.,  rhe  , rhs.) 

L.  Rkt.  (asr.,  bel.,  cin.,  col.,  man.) 

Rl.  (mer.) 

Sche.  (opi.) 

Sr.  (rhs.) 

f Stf.  (aco.,  arn.,  ars.,  asr.,  bel.,  bry.,  cam.,  can.,  cha., 
\ chi.,  cin.,  col.,  dig.,  dul.,  hel.,  hep.,  hyo.,  ipc., 

1 mt-s.,  man.,  mer.,  msc.,  mu-x.,  opi.,  ph-x.,  pul., 

k rhs.,  rut.,  spi.,  spo.,  squ.,  stp.) 

( Urn.  (chi.,  chi.,  dig.,  gui.,  led.,  man.,  men.,  ph-x., 
( rhe.,  sar.,  squ.,  stp.,  thu.,  ver.) 

Ts.  Hb.  or  Hb.  Ts.  (can.,  coc.,  dul.,  ign.,  rhs.) 

Ur.  (man.) 

Wr.  (chi.,  dul.,  spo.,  thu.) 

We.  (aco.,  can.,  coc.,  dul.,  man.,  nx-v.) 

Wth.  (chi.,  chi.,  led.,  spi.,  squ.,  sul.) 

Wz.  (man.) 

C Ws.  (ang.,  arg.,  arn.,  aur.,  bel.,  ca-a.,  cam.,  cap., 
^ chi.,  con.,  dro.,  eup.,  hel.,  hyo.,  men.,  mu-x., 

ph-x.,  rut.,  sam.,  spi.,  spo.,  squ.,  stn.,  thu.) 


Of  these  provers  Adam  was  a Russian  physician,  Von  Gersdorff 
a nobleman  residing  in  Eisenach,  Nenning  a surgeon  who  furnished 
many  of  the  symptoms  for  the  Materia  Medica  of  Hartlaub  and 
Trinks,  from  whose  work  Hahnemann  took  some  symptoms,  indi- 
cated by  the  abbreviation  of  their  names,  Hb .,  Tj.,  either  singly  or 
conjointly. 

The  remainder  are  more  properly  Hahnemann’s  own  disciples,  who 
furnished  him  with  a written  statement  of  the  symptoms  they  observed, 


Vlll 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 


on  which  Hahnemann  examined  them,  carefully  going  over  all  the 
symptoms,  and  correcting  or  altering  them  so  as  to  make  them,  as  far 
as  possible,  the  exact  sensation  or  pain  observed  with  all  its  conditions 
and  concomitants.  Stapf,  who  resided  at  Naumburg,  transmitted  to 
Hahnemann  the  symptoms  he  observed,  in  a letter,  and  accordingly  in 
the  older  editions  we  find  after  Stapf’s  name,  “ in  einem  Briefe,"  in 
place  of  the  expression  used  after  the  name  of  those  whose  writings 
Hahnemann  could  examine  their  authors  on — u in  einem  Aufsatze.’’ 

Most  if  not  all  of  these  provers  were  medical  men,  many  of  them 
well-known  as  eminent  practitioners  of  homoeopathy,  and  some  distin- 
guished by  their  valuable  contributions  to  homoeopathic  literature. 

Many  of  the  symptoms  have  the  time  of  the  occurrence  after  taking 
the  medicine.  This  is  indicated  by  contractions  between  brackets. 
Here  “ m."  means  minutes,  “ h."  hours,  and  u d.”  days. 

This  is  not  the  first  English  translation  of  Hahnemann's  Materia 
Medica  Pura.  In  1846  Dr.  Hempel  published  a translation.  But,  as 
Dr.  Hughes*  has  pointed  out,  Hempel's  translation  is  extremely 
imperfect.  He  has  employed  the  third  edition  of  the  first  volume,  but  the 
second  edition  of  all  the  other  volumes.  He  has  omitted  all  names  of 
authorities  for  the  symptoms,  which  are  not  in  separate  paragraphs.  His 
arrangement  of  the  symptoms  is  sometimes,  but  not  always,  the  same 
as  Hahnemann's,  and  he  has  not  attempted  uniformity  of  arrange- 
ment. Several  of  Hahnemann's  medicines  are  omitted — as  many  as 
eighteen  indeed.  But  not  only  are  the  entire  pathogeneses  of  all  these 
medicines  omitted,  many  omissions  of  symptoms  are  made  from  the 
pathogeneses  given.  Mis-translations,  curtailments,  and  omissions,  are 
also  frequent  in  the  prefaces  and  notes.  In  short,  Hempel’s  transla- 
tion is  altogether  very  imperfect  and  gives  the  reader  a very  inadequate 
idea  of  the  original  work. 

Dr.  Quin  commenced  a translation  of  the  Opus  Magnum  of  Hahne- 
mann. The  first  volume,  indeed,  was  completed  and  printed,  but 
unfortunately  the  whole  impression  was  destroyed  by  a fire  at  the 
printer’s.  The  only  copy  saved  is  in  the  library  of  the  British 
Homoeopathic  Society.  It  has  no  preface  or  introduction  by  the 
translator,  nor  even  a title  page,  so  we  cannot  for  certain  know  his 
intentions  with  regard  to  the  whole  translation.  This  first  volume  is 
translated  from  the  second  edition,  but  the  medicines  it  contains  do  not 
altogether  correspond  with  those  in  the  original.  Thus,  mercurius  is 
omitted,  but  asarum , chamomilla , cyclamen , pulsatilla , squilla , stramonium , 
and  veratrum , which  are  not  in  the  first  volume  of  the  original,  are 
inserted.  The  arrangement  of  the  symptoms  is  not  that  of  Hahne- 
mann in  either  his  second  or  third  editions.  Dr.  Quin  puts  together 
all  the  symptoms  of  Hahnemann  and  his  disciples,  and  arranges  in  a 
separate  list  those  obtained  from  old- school  authorities.  The  translation 
is,  as  might  be  expected  from  Dr.  Quin's  familiarity  with  the  German 
language,  fairly  good.  But  the  work,  even  if  it  had  been  completed  as 
Dr.  Quin  designed,  would  not  have  presented  the  reader  with  the 
actual  Materia  Medica  of  Hahnemann  ; so  our  regret  at  the  inter- 
ruption of  the  work  is  tempered  by  this  consideration. 

* On  the  Sources  of  the  Hotnceopathic  Materia  Medica.  Turner.  London,  1877. 


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE. 


ix 


The  present  is  the  first  attempt  to  give  a faithful  and  complete 
English  translation  of  the  latest  editions  of  the  work.  The  translator 
must  here  express  his  obligations  to  his  collaborator,  Dr.  Hughes,  for 
the  careful  revision  of  the  proof  sheets  and  for  numerous  suggestions  of 
improved  versions  of  the  original,  whereby  both  the  faithfulness  and  the 
readableness  of  the  translation  have  been  greatly  improved.  It  is,  of 
course,  impossible  to  render  exactly  into  English  the  expressions 
peculiar  to  the  German  language,  or  to  give  an  exact  translation  of 
every  word.  All  the  translator  can  do  is  to  give  the  English  equiva- 
lents for  German  phrases  where  such  exist,  or  to  give  the  English  expres- 
sions that  most  nearly  correspond  with  the  German  originals.  This  he 
has  endeavoured  to  do,  and  he  trusts  he  has  succeeded.  But  he  is 
fully  aware  that  there  are  certain  German  words  and  phrases  used  by 
Hahnemann  for  which  we  have  no  precise  English  equivalent.  In 
some  respects  German  is  richer  than  English,  and  so  one  English  word 
has  to  do  duty  for  several  German  analogues.  On  the  other  hand, 
English  is  in  some  respects  richer  than  German,  for  two  totally 
different  things  are  sometimes  expressed  by  one  word  only,  and  the 
translator  has  to  take  great  care  that  in  his  translation  he  gives  the 
English  word  for  the  thing  intended  by  the  original.  For  example, 
the  German  Hals  is  used  for  both  throat  and  neck ; Brust  is  either 
chest  or  mamma  ; Fuss  is  sometimes  used  to  denote  the  foot , sometimes 
the  leg  up  to  the  knee,  and  sometimes  the  whole  lower  extremity  ; 
Schenkel  is  sometimes  thigh , sometimes  leg,  and  occasionally  the  whole 
lower  limb  ; Schooss  is  sometimes  the  groin , sometimes  the  iliac  region , 
occasionally  the  whole  hypogastrium ; Gesicht  is  sometimes  sight,  some- 
times face . Great  care  is  required  to  determine  in  what  sense  these 
different  words  are  used  by  Hahnemann  and  his  fellow- pro  vers. 
Driickend  must  sometimes  be  translated  pressive,  sometimes  aching,  and 
it  is  not  always  easy  to  determine  which  English  equivalent  should  be 
used  ; no  hard  and  fast  rule  can  be  adopted,  and  the  translator  must 
determine  from  the  context,  or  sometimes  from  his  u inner  conscious- 
ness,” which  translation  should  be  employed.  As  a rule  driickend 
followed  by  auf  or  an  must  mean  pressive,  whereas  if  followed  by  in  it 
probably  means  aching ; but  to  this  rule  there  are  exceptions,  and  the 
reader  must  credit  the  translator  with  the  possession  of  reasons  for  the 
particular  translation  he  has  adopted. 

R.  E.  DUDGEON. 


Dr.  Dudgeon  has  wished  me  to  say  a few  words  for  myself  on  the 
special  matter  in  which  I have  had  the  pleasure  of  assisting  him  in  this 
undertaking  of  his.  I refer  to  Hahnemann’s  quotations  from  authors. 
These  are  absent  from  few  of  his  pathogeneses,  and  in  many  are  very 
numerous  ; so  as  to  number  in  the  whole  Materia  Medica  Pura  up- 
wards of  4000.  It  is  obvious  that  no  new  edition  of  a work  so  full  of 
citations  can  be  satisfactory,  which  does  not  examine  these  in  their 


X 


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE. 


originals  for  purposes  of  verification  and  (if  necessary)  of  correction. 
More  especially  is  this  so  when  a translation  has  to  be  made,  and  where 
the  author  himself  has  rendered  his  cited  matter  into  his  own  tongue. 
That  one  should  take  the  German  symptoms  by  which  Hahnemann 
has  represented  the  Latin,  French  and  English  authors  from  whom  he 
has  borrowed,  and  simply  re-translate  them,  would  be  running  a great 
risk  of  missing  their  true  meaning. 

Were  it  only,  therefore,  to  make  this  translation  of  the  Materia 
Medica  Pura  as  accurate  as  possible,  it  would  be  desirable  that  all  the 
citations  contained  in  the  work  should  be  verified  from  their  original 
sources,  and  rendered  (or,  if  English,  reproduced)  from  thence.  But 
there  is  something  more.  It  often  adds  to  the  value  of  a symptom 
that  we  should  know  the  subject  and  circumstances  of  its  occurrence, 
the  dose  by  which  it  was  produced,  and  so  forth.  Hahnemann  rarely 
gives  such  information  as  to  the  effects  of  drugs  he  gathers  from 
authors,  but  confines  himself  to  presenting  them  in  the  same  uncon- 
nected way  as  that  which  he  follows  in  respect  of  his  own  and  his 
fellow  provers’  symptoms.  We  long  for  the  day-books  of  the  experi- 
ments which  gave  us  these : in  the  case  of  the  cited  symptoms  we 
have  them.  From  the  original  records  we  can  illuminate  the  isolated 
phenomena  and  sensations  presented  to  us,  so  as  to  show  their  occa- 
sion, their  order,  and  their  terminations. 

Yet  again, — examination  of  the  sources  of  the  symptoms  in  question 
shows  that  they  are  of  very  unequal  value.  Sometimes  they  are  records 
of  poisonings,  when  they  are  of  unquestionable  value.  Sometimes  they 
are  the  mere  statements  of  systematic  writers  on  Materia  Medica, 
which  must  be  taken  quantum  valeant.  Very  often,  however,  they  are 
narratives  of  cases  of  disease  treated  by  the  drug  in  question,  and  the 
symptoms  are  such  as  were  supposed,  either  by  the  observer  or  by  the 
citer,  to  have  resulted  from  (so  to  speak)  the  obiter  facta  of  the  medi- 
cine. It  is  obvious  that  great  discrimination  is  needed  here ; and  it  is 
the  unanimous  judgment  of  those  who  have  enquired  into  the  matter 
that  Hahnemann  has  hardly  exercised  it.  In  my  Sources  of  the  Homoeo- 
pathic Materia  Medica  (p.  16 — 18),  I have  given  many  instances  of 
the  wholesale  way  in  which  he  has  adopted  symptoms  from  these 
records  ; and  the  facts  are  such  that,  without  the  knowledge  which 
enables  us  to  judge  for  ourselves,  we  could  not  safely  accept  any 
symptoms  so  derived  as  genuine. 

For  estimation,  then,  as  well  as  for  verification  and  illumination,  it 
is  necessary  to  trace  Hahnemann’s  cited  symptoms  to  their  originals. 
The  work  has  been  done  from  time  to  time  for  individual  medicines, — 
as  by  Frank  and  Wurmb  for  Arsenic,  by  Gerstel  for  Aconite,  by 
Watzke  for  Colocynth,  by  Roth  for  Dulcamara  and  others,  by  Lang- 
heinz  for  Opium,  Moschus,  and  Cannabis.  As  a co-labourer  with 
Dr.  Allen  in  his  Encyclopedia , I made  it  my  task  to  complete  these 
investigations  and  extend  them  to  every  drug  in  the  Materia  Medica 
Pura  and  the  Chronic  Diseases.  The  results  are  embodied  in  that  work, 
after  the  manner  suitable  to  it ; but  remain  available  for  such  a repro- 
duction of  Hahnemann’s  own  pathogeneses  as  Dr.  Dudgeon  is  giving 
us.  Strictly  speaking,  it  is  verification  only  for  which  they  should  be 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xi 

applied  here  ; but  it  has  seemed  a pity  that  their  further  possibilities 
should  not  also  be  utilised,  and  I have  accordingly,  with  the  trans- 
lator’s approbation,  extended  their  employment  in  the  other  directions 
I have  indicated.  On  the  first  mention  of  any  authority  in  each 
pathogenesis  I have  stated  the  nature  of  his  observations  ; and  to  each 
symptom  that  has  required  it  I have  appended  such  explanations  and 
corrections  as  might  be  necessary  to  set  it  forth  in  its  full  meaning 
and  value.  All  this  matter  will  be  found  in  the  notes  at  the  bottom  of 
the  pages,  designated  by  the  small  figures,  d,  3,  &c.,  and  divided  by  a 
line  from  Hahnemann's  own  annotations,  which  have  the  usual  *, 
f,  &c.  At  first,  when  any  corrections  were  required,  I made  these  in 
the  text,  so  that  any  deviations  to  be  found  from  Hahnemann’s  pre- 
sentation of  his  cited  symptoms  must  be  charged  to  my  responsibility. 
Subsequently,  however,  I thought  it  better  to  leave  Dr.  Dudgeon  to 
render  the  text  as  it  stood,  and  to  make  my  emendations  in  the  foot- 
notes. 

I am  very  glad  to  have  been  able  to  contribute  this  mite  to  the  im- 
portant task  of  giving  to  his  English-speaking  disciples  the  Materia 
Medica  of  the  Master  of  our  school. 


R.  HUGHES. 


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE.1 


I am  not  going  to  write  a criticism  of  the  ordinary  Materia  Medica, 
else  I would  lay  before  the  reader  a detailed  account  of  the  futile 
endeavours  hitherto  made  to  determine  the  powers  of  medicines  from 
their  colour,  taste,  and  smell.  I would  show  how  chemistry  has  been 
applied  to,  in  order  by  wet  and  dry  distillation  to  extract  from  medicinal 
substances  phlegma,  ethereal  oils,  empyreumatic  acids  and  oils,  volatile 
salts,  and  from  the  residuary  caput  mortuum  fixed  salts  and  earths  ( all 
nearly  Identical  with  one  another).  I would  set  forth  the  methods  adopted 
by  the  latest  chemical  science  of  obtaining  extracts  to  be  afterwards 
inspissated  by  dissolving  their  soluble  parts  in  various  fluids.  I would 
describe  the  mode  of  separating  from  them  resin,  gum,  gluten,  starch, 
wax,  albumen,  salts  and  earths,  acids  and  alkaloids,  by  means  of  various 
reagents  ; and  I would  tell  how  to  convert  them  into  gases.  It  is 
well  known  that  not  a single  one  of  the  innumerable  medicinal  sub- 
stances, in  spite  of  all  these  technical  torturings,  could  be  brought  to 
reveal  what  sort  of  healing  power  it  was  possessed  of.  Certainly  the 
material  substances  extracted  from  them  were  not  the  spirit  animating 
every  single  substance  which  enables  it  to  cure  certain  morbid  states. 
This  spirit  cannot  be  laid  hold  of  by  the  hands ; it  can  only  be  recog- 
nised by  its  effects  on  the  living  body. 

The  day  of  the  true  knowledge  of  medicines  and  of  the  true  healing 
art  will  dawn  when  men  cease  to  act  so  unnaturally  as  to  give  drugs  to 
which  some  purely  imaginary  virtues  have  been  ascribed,  or  which  have 
been  merely  vaguely  recommended,  and  of  whose  real  qualities  they 
are  utterly  ignorant ; and  which  they  give  mixed  up  together  in  all 
sorts  of  combinations.  With  these  delectable  mixtures  * a hap-hazard 
treatment  is  pursued,  not  of  cases  of  disease  that  have  been  carefully 
investigated  as  to  their  special  signs  and  symptoms,  but  of  purely 
artificial  forms  and  names  of  diseases  invented  by  pathology.  By  this 
method  no  experience  whatever  can  be  gained  of  the  helpful  or  hurtful 

# The  ordinary  medical  world,  as  long  as  they  know  no  better,  may  go  on  sending 
their  multiform  complex  prescriptions  to  be  made  up  at  the  chemist’s.  In  order  to  do 
this  they  do  not  require  to  know  anything  about  the  sphere  of  action  or  the  special 
properties  of  each  ingredient.  Moreover,  even  should  we  know  perfectly  the  powers 
of  drugs  when  given  singly,  we  can  have  no  idea  what  they  will  do  when  given  mixed 
up  together. 

This  they  call  treating  [curiren],  and  they  may  well  continue  to  call  it  so  until  a 


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830. 


I 


1 


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE. 


qualities  of  each  medicinal  ingredient  of  the  mixture,  nor  can  any 
knowledge  be  obtained  of  the  curative  properties  of  each  individual 
drug. 

The  day  of  the  true  knowledge  of  medicines  and  of  the  true  healing 
art  will  dawn  when  physicians  shall  trust  the  cure  of  complete  cases 
of  disease  to  a single  medicinal  substance,  and  when,  regardless  of 
traditional  systems,  they  will  employ  for  the  extinction  and  cure 
of  a case  of  disease,  whose  symptoms  they  have  investigated,  one 
single  medicinal  substance  whose  positive  effects  they  have  ascertained, 
which  can  show  among  these  effects  a group  of  symptoms  very  similar 
to  those  presented  by  the  case  of  disease. 

Among  the  observations  from  extraneous  sources  in  the  following 
pages  are  some  which  were  observed  in  patients  ; but  as  these  were  the 
subjects  of  chronic  disease  whose  morbid  symptoms  were  well  known 
and  were  not  confounded  with  the  new  effects  caused  by  the  medicine 
taken — at  least  Greding  seems  to  have  carefully  avoided  doing  so — 
these  observations  are  not  altogether  valueless  ; at  all  events,  they  serve 
occasionally  to  confirm  similar  or  identical  symptoms  that  may  appear 
in  pure  experiments  on  the  healthy. 

As  regards  my  own  experiments  and  those  of  my  disciples  every 
possible  care  was  taken  to  insure  their  purity,  in  order  that  the  true 
powers  of  each  medicinal  substance  might  be  clearly  expressed  in  the 
observed  effects.  They  were  performed  on  persons  as  healthy  as  possible, 
and  under  regulated  external  conditions  as  nearly  as  possible  alike. 

But  if  during  the  experiment  some  extraordinary  circumstance  from 
without  happened  which  might  even  be  supposed  to  be  capable  of 
altering  the  result — for  example,  a shock,  vexation,  a fright,  an  external 
injury  of  considerable  severity,  dissipation  or  over-indulgence  in  some- 
thing or  other,  or  any  other  circumstance  of  importance — from  that 
time  no  symptom  that  occurred  in  the  experiment  was  registered  ; they 
were  all  rejected,  so  that  the  observation  should  contain  nought  that 
had  a suspicion  of  impurity  about  it. 

If  some  little  circumstance  happened  during  the  experiment,  which 
could  hardly  be  expected  to  interfere  with  the  effects  of  the  medicinal 
action,  the  symptoms  subsequently  noticed  were  inclosed  within 
brackets  as  not  certainly  pure. 

With  respect  to  the  duration  of  action  ascribed  to  each  medicinal 
substance,  which  I endeavoured  to  determine  by  repeated  experiment, 
I should  state  that  it  was  only  learned  from  experiments  on  the 
healthiest  possible  persons.  In  diseases,  according  as  they  are  more  or 

spirit  of  improvement  wakes  up  within  them  impelling  them  to  begin  curing  [heilen], 
which  can  only  be  done  with  simple  medicinal  substances. 

It  is  only  of  such  substances  that  the  pure  effects  can  be  ascertained  whereby  we 
may  be  able  to  say  beforehand  whether  this  one  or  the  other  may  be  of  use  in  a 
given  case. 

But  what  conscientious  man  would  consent  to  work  away  at  hap-hazard  on  a sick 
person  hovering  between  life  and  death  with  tools  that  possess  powers  to  hurt  and 
destroy,  without  an  accurate  knowledge  of  their  powers  ? 

No  carpenter  would  work  upon  his  wood  with  tools  whose  uses  he  was  ignorant  of. 
He  knows  eveiy  one  of  them  perfectly,  and  hence  he  knows  when  to  use  the  one  and 
when  the  other,  in  order  to  effect  <z with  certainty  what  he  intends  to  do  ; and  it  is  only 
wood  he  works  upon,  and  he  is  but  a carpenter  ! 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE.  3 

less  acute,  more  or  less  chronic,  the  duration  of  action  of  the  medicine 
is  much  shorter  or  much  longer  than  here  stated,  but  can  never  be 
rightly  determined  if  the  medicine  be  given  in  a large  dose  or  in 
unsuitable  cases.  In  both  these  instances  the  duration  of  its  action 
will  be  much  shortened,  for  the  medicine  goes  off*,  as  it  were,  in  the 
evacuations  it  causes  (such  as  epistaxis  and  other  haemorrhages,  catarrh, 
diuresis,  diarrhoea,  vomiting,  or  perspiration),  and  thus  soon  exhausts  its 
energy.  The  living  body  spits  it  out  quickly,  so  to  speak,  just  as  it 
often  does  with  the  miasm  of  infectious  diseases,  where  it  weakens  the 
noxious  agent  and  partly  rejects  it  also  by  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  haemor- 
rhages, catarrh,  convulsions,  salivation,  perspiration,  and  such-like 
processes  and  evacuations.  Hence  it  happens  that,  in  the  ordinary 
practice,  no  one  knows  either  the  peculiar  effects  or  the  duration  of 
action  of,  e.  g.  tartar  emetic  or  of  jalap,  because  these  drugs  are  only 
given  in  doses  so  large  that  they  excite  the  organism  to  cast  them 
quickly  out.  Sometimes  the  organism  does  not  do  this ; sometimes, 
that  is  to  say,  the  remedy  given  to  provoke  violent  evacuation  is  not 
evacuated,  in  which  case  it  is  vulgarly  said  to  stick.  When  this  happens 
there  occur  pure  symptoms  ofteii  of  a very  important  and  enduring 
character  (the  peculiar  medicinal  action).  But  it  is  very  seldom  that 
they  have  been  thought  worth  observing  and  recording. 

The  vomiting  caused  by  two  to  three  grains  of  tartar  emetic,  or  by 
twenty  grains  of  ipecacuanha,  the  purging  produced  by  thirty  grains  of 
jalap,  and  the  perspiration  excited  by  an  infusion  of  a handful  of  elder- 
flowers,  are  not  so  much  peculiar  effects  of  these  substances  as  an  effort 
of  the  organism  to  destroy  with  all  possible  speed  the  peculiar  medicinal 
effects  of  these  drugs. 

Hence  the  very  small  doses  prescribed  by  homoeopathy  produce  the 
uncommon  effect  they  do  just  because  they  are  not  so  large  as  to  render 
it  necessary  for  the  organism  to  get  rid  of  them  by  the  revolutionary 
processes  of  evacuations.  And  yet  these  very  small  doses  excite  the 
system  to  evacuations  (which  shorten  their  duration  of  action)  in  cases 
of  disease  where  the  remedy  has  been  unsuitably  and  not  accurately 
homceopathically  chosen. 

In  the  Organon  of  Medicine  I have  taught  this  truth,  that  dynamically 
acting  medicines  extinguish  diseases  only  in  accordance  with  the  simi- 
larity of  their  symptoms.  He  who  has  understood  this  will  perceive 
that  if  a work  on  materia  medica  can  reveal  the  precise  qualities  of 
medicines,  it  must  be  one  from  which  all  mere  assumption  and  empty 
speculation  about  the  reputed  qualities  of  drugs  are  excluded,  and  which 
only  records  what  medicines  express  concerning  their  true  mode  of 
action  in  the  symptoms  they  produce  in  the  human  body.  Hence  the 
practitioner  will  rejoice  to  find  here  a way  in  which  he  can  remove  the 
maladies  of  his  fellow-creatures  surely,  rapidly,  and  permanently,  and 
procure  them  the  blessing  of  health  with  much  greater  certainty. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  give  instruction  as  to  how  to  select  for  the 
group  of  symptoms  of  a particular  case  of  disease  a remedy  which 
presents  in  its  pure  effects  a very  similar  group  of  peculiar  symptoms. 
The  Organon  contains  full  instructions  on  this  point,  together  with 
general  directions  on  the  subject  of  the  doses  required  in  homoeopathy. 


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE. 


The  smallest  possible  quantity  of  medicine  in  potentized  development 
is  sufficient  for  this  purpose. 

I have  arranged  the  symptoms  of  the  more  perfectly  observed 
medicines  in  a certain  order,  whereby  the  search  for  the  desired 
medicinal  symptom  will  now  be  facilitated.  In  the  complex  symptoms, 
however,  there  occur  not  unfrequently  some  to  which,  if  I had  had 
time,  I would  have  added  parallel  citations  referring  them  to  their 
proper  position. 

The  usual  order  of  the  symptoms  is  as  follows  : 

Vertigo, 

Confusion, 

Deficient  mental  power, 

Loss  of  memory,1 
Headache,  internal,  external, 

Forehead,  hair, 

Face  in  general  (vultus)l  f visus, 

Eyes  and  sight  (visus)  j (_vultus, 

Ears,  hearing  (maxillary  joint), 

Nose,  smell, 

Lips, 

Chin, 

Lower  jaw  (submaxillary  glands), 

Teeth, 

Tongue  (impediments  to  speech), 

Saliva, 

Internal  throat, 

Fauces,  oesophagus, 

Taste, 

Eructation,  heartburn,  hiccup, 

Nausea,  vomiting, 

Desire  for  food  and  drink,*  hunger, 

Scrobiculus  cordis  (pit  of  stomach),  stomach, 

Abdomen,  epigastrium,  hepatic  region,  hypochondria, 

Hypogastrium, 

Lumbar  region, f 
Groin,  inguinal  region, 

Rectum,  anus,  perinaeum, 

Alvine  evacuation. 

Urine,  bladder,  urethra, 

Genital  organs, 

Sexual  desire, 

Sexual  power,  emission  of  semen, 

Menstrual  flux,  leucorrhoea. 

* Thirst  sometimes  comes  after  hiccup,  and  sometimes  also  among  the  febrile 
symptoms. 

f Sometimes  placed  among  the  symptoms  of  the  back  and  lumbar  vertebrae. 


1 This  order  is  not  always  preserved  ; the  mental  symptoms  are  sometimes  placed 
at  the  end  of  the  list  of  symptoms.  The  inconvenience  of  separating  mental  and 
emotional  symptoms  is  tacitly  acknowledged  by  Hahnemann,  as  he  places  them 
together  in  the  Chronic  Diseases. 


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE. 


5 


Sneezing,  coryza,  catarrh,  hoarseness, 

Cough, 

Breathing, 

Chest, 

Heart’s  movements, 

Sacral  region,  lumbar  vertebrae, 

Back, 

Scapulae, 

Nape, 

External  throat,* 

Shoulders  (axillae), 

Arms,  hands, 

Hips,  pelvis, 

Buttocks, 

Thighs,  legs,  feet, 

General  corporeal  sufferings  and  cutaneous  affections, 

Sufferings  from  open  air, 

Exhalation,  temperature  of  the  body,  disposition  to  catch  cold, 
sprains,  paroxysms, 

Convulsions,  paralysis,  weakness,  fainting, 

Yawning,  sleepiness,  slumber,  sleep,  nocturnal  ailments,  dreams, 
Fever,  chill,  heat,  perspiration, 

Anxiety,  palpitation  of  heart, f restlessness,  trembling, J 
Disturbances  of  the  disposition,  affections  of  the  mind. 

SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN. 

Kothen;  January , 1830. 

# The  external  throat  sometimes  also  comes  after  lower  jaw. 
f Palpitation  unattended  by  anxiety  comes  under  chest  symptoms. 

J Restlessness  and  trembling  of  a merely  corporeal  character,  in  which  the  dispo- 
sition does  not  participate,  generally  comes  among  the  symptoms  of  the  extremities  or 
of  the  body  generally. 


SPIRIT  OF  THE  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICAL 

DOCTRINE  * 


It  is  impossible  to  divine  the  internal  essential  nature  of  diseases  and 
the  changes  they  effect  in  the  hidden  parts  of  the  body,  and  it  is  absurd 
to  frame  a system  of  treatment  on  such  hypothetical  surmises  and 
assumptions  : it  is  impossible  to  divine  the  medicinal  properties  of 
remedies  from  any  chemical  hypotheses  or  from  their  smell,  colour,  or 
taste,  and  it  is  absurd  to  attempt,  from  such  hypothetical  surmises  and 
assumptions,  to  apply  to  the  treatment  of  diseases  these  substances, 
which  are  so  hurtful  when  wrongly  administered.  And  even  were  such 
practice  ever  so  customary  and  ever  so  generally  in  use,  were  it  even 
the  only  one  in  vogue  for  thousands  of  years,  it  would  nevertheless 
continue  to  be  a senseless  and  pernicious  practice  to  found  on  empty 
surmises  our  idea  of  the  morbid  condition  of  the  interior,  and  to  attempt 
to  combat  this  with  equally  imaginary  properties  of  medicines. 

Appreciable,  distinctly  appreciable  to  our  senses  must  that  be,  which 
is  to  be  removed  in  each  disease  in  order  to  transform  it  into  health, 
and  right  clearly  must  each  remedy  express  what  it  can  positively 
cure,  if  medical  art  is  to  cease  to  be  a wanton  game  of  hazard  with 
human  life,  and  to  commence  to  be  the  sure  deliverer  from  diseases. 

I shall  show  what  there  is  undeniably  curable  in  diseases,  and  how 
the  curative  properties  of  medicines  are  to  be  distinctly  perceived  and 
employed  for  curative  purposes. 

* * * * 

What  life  is  can  only  be  known  empirically  from  its  phenomena  and 
manifestations,  but  no  conception  of  it  can  be  formed  by  any  meta- 
physical speculations  a priori ; what  life  is,  in  its  actual  essential  nature, 
can  never  be  ascertained  or  even  guessed  at,  by  mortals. 

To  the  explanation  of  human  life,  as  also  its  two-fold  conditions, 
health  and  disease,  the  principles  by  which  we  explain  other  pheno- 
mena are  quite  inapplicable.  With  nought  in  the  world  can  we 
compare  it  save  with  itself  alone  ; neither  with  a piece  of  clockwork, 


* This  essay  appeared  in  a journal  twenty  years  ago,  in  those  momentous  days 
(March,  1813)  when  the  Germans  had  no  leisure  to  read  and  still  less  to  reflect  upon 
scientific  matters.  The  consequence  of  this  was  that  these  words  were  not  listened 
to.  It  may  now  have  more  chance  of  being  perused,  particularly  in  its  present  less 
imperfect  form.  [From  vol.  ii,  3rd  edition,  1833.] 


HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICAL  DOCTRINE. 


7 


nor  with  a hydraulic  machine,  nor  with  chemical  processes,  nor  with 
decompositions  and  recompositions  of  gases,  nor  yet  with  a galvanic 
battery,  in  short  with  nothing  destitute  of  life.  Human  life  is  in  no 
respect  regulated  by  purely  physical  laws,  which  only  obtain  among 
inorganic  substances.  The  material  substances  of  which  the  human 
organism  is  composed  no  longer  follow,  in  this  vital  combination,  the 
laws  to  which  material  substances  in  the  inanimate  condition  are  subject; 
they  are  regulated  by  the  laws  peculiar  to  vitality  alone,  they  are  them- 
selves animated  and  vitalized  just  as  the  whole  system  is  animated  and 
vitalized.  Here  a nameless  fundamental  power  reigns  omnipotent,  which 
abrogates  all  the  tendency  of  the  component  parts  of  the  body  to  obey 
the  laws  of  gravitation,  of  momentum,  of  the  vis  inertia , of  fermentation, 
of  putrefaction,  &c.,  and  brings  them  under  the  wonderful  laws  of  life 
alone, — in  other  words,  maintains  them  in  the  condition  of  sensibility 
and  activity  necessary  to  the  preservation  of  the  living  whole,  a con- 
dition almost  spiritually  dynamic. 

Now,  as  the  condition  of  the  organism  and  its  health  depend  solely 
on  the  health  of  the  life  which  animates  it,  in  like  manner  it  follows 
that  the  altered  health,  which  we  term  disease,  consists  in  a condition 
altered  originally  only  in  its  vital  sensibilities  and  functions,  irrespective 
of  all  chemical  or  mechanical  considerations ; in  short  it  must  consist  in  a 
dynamically  altered  condition,  a changed  mode  of  being,  whereby  a change 
in  the  properties  of  the  material  component  parts  of  the  body  is  after- 
wards effected,  which  is  a necessary  consequence  of  the  morbidly 
altered  condition  of  the  living  whole  in  every  individual  case. 

Moreover,  the  influence  of  morbific  injurious  agencies,  which  for  the 
most  part  excite  from  without  the  various  maladies  in  us,  is  generally  so 
invisible  and  so  immaterial,*  that  it  is  impossible  that  it  can  immediately 
either  mechanically  disturb  or  derange  the  component  parts  of  our  body 
in  their  form  and  substance,  or  infuse  any  pernicious  acrid  fluid  into 
our  blood-vessels  whereby  the  mass  of  our  humours  can  be  chemically 
altered  and  depraved — an  inadmissible,  quite  unprovable,  gross  invention 
of  mechanical  minds.  The  exciting  causes  of  disease  rather  act  by 
means  of  their  essential  properties  on  the  state  of  our  life  (on  our 
health),  only  in  a dynamic,  very  similar  to  a spiritual,  manner ; and  inas- 
much as  they  first  derange  the  organs  of  the  higher  rank  and  of  the 
vital  force,  there  occurs  from  this  state  of  derangement,  from  this 
dynamic  alteration  of  the  living  whole,  an  altered  sensation  (uneasiness, 
pains)  and  an  altered  activity  (abnormal  functions)  of  each  individual 
organ  and  of  all  of  them  collectively,  whereby  there  must  also  of 
necessity  secondarily  occur  alteration  of  the  juices  in  our  vessels  and 
secretion  of  abnormal  matters,  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  altered 
vital  character,  which  now  differs  from  the  healthy  state. 

These  abnormal  matters  that  show  themselves  in  diseases  are  conse- 
quently merely  products  of  the  disease  itself,  which,  as  long  as  the 
malady  retains  its  present  character,  must  of  necessity  be  secreted,  and 


* With  the  exception  of  a few  surgical  affections  and  the  disagreeable  effects 
produced  by  indigestible  foreign  substances,  which  sometimes  find  their  way  into  the 
fitestinal  canal. 


8 


SPIRIT  OF  THE 


thus  constitute  a portion  of  the  morbid  signs  (symptoms)  ; they  are 
merely  effects,  and  therefore  manifestations  of  the  existing  internal  ill- 
health,  and  they  do  certainly  not  react  (although  they  often  contain  the 
infecting  principle  for  other,  healthy  individuals)  upon  the  diseased  body 
that  produced  them,  as  disease-exciting  or  maintaining  substances,  that 
is,  as  material  morbific  causes,*  just  as  a person  cannot  infect  other  parts 
of  his  own  body  at  the  same  time  with  the  virus  from  his  own  chancre 
or  with  the  gonorrhoeal  matter  from  his  own  urethra,  or  increase  his 
disease  therewith,  or  as  a viper  cannot  inflict  on  itself  a fatal  bite  with 
its  own  poison. 

Hence  it  is  obvious  that  diseases  excited  by  the  dynamic  and  virtual 
influence  of  morbific  injurious  agents  can  be  originally  only  dynamical 
derangements  (caused  almost  solely  by  a spiritual  process)  of  the  vital 
character  of  our  organism. 

We  readily  perceive  that  these  dynamic  derangements  of  the  vital 
character  of  our  organism  which  we  term  diseases,  since  they  are 
nothing  else  than  altered  sensations  and  functions,  can  also  express  them- 
selves by  nothing  but  by  an  aggregate  of  symptoms,  and  only  as  such 
are  they  cognisable  to  our  observing  powers. 

Now,  as  in  a profession  of  such  importance  to  human  life  as  medicine 
is,  nothing  but  the  state  of  the  diseased  body  plainly  cognisable  by  our 
perceptive  faculties  can  be  recognised  as  the  object  to  be  cured,  and 
ought  to  guide  our  steps  (to  choose  conjectures  and  undemonstrable 
hypotheses  as  our  guide  here  would  be  dangerous  folly,  nay  crime  and 
treason  against  humanity),  it  follows,  that  since  diseases,  as  dynamic 
derangements  of  the  vital  character,  express  themselves  solely  by  altera- 
tions of  the  sensations  and  functions  of  our  organism,  that  is,  solely  by 
an  aggregate  of  cognisable  symptoms,  this  alone  can  be  the  object  of 
treatment  in  every  case  of  disease.  For  on  the  removal  of  all  morbid 
symptoms  nothing  remains  but  health. 

Now,  because  diseases  are  only  dynamic  derangements  of  our  health 
and  vital  character,  they  cannot  be  removed  by  man  otherwise  than  by 
means  of  agents  and  powers  which  also  are  capable  of  producing 
dynamical  derangements  of  the  human  health,  that  is  to  say,  diseases 
are  cured  virtually  and  dynamically  by  medicines.  + 

These  active  substances  and  powers  (medicines)  which  we  have  at 


* Hence  by  clearing  away  and  mechanically  removing  these  abnormal  matters, 
acridities  and  morbid  organisations,  their  source,  the  disease  itself,  can  just  as  little 
be  cured  as  a coryza  can  be  shortened  or  cured  by  blowing  the  nose  frequently,  and  as 
thoroughly  as  possible  ; it  lasts  not  a day  longer  than  its  proper  course,  although  the 
nose  should  not  be  cleansed  by  blowing  it  at  all. 

f Not  by  means  of  the  pretended  solvent  or  mechanically  dispersing,  clearing-out, 
and  expulsive  powers  of  medicinal  substances ; not  by  means  of  a (blood-purifying, 
humour-correcting)  power  they  possess  of  electively  excreting  fancied  morbific  prin- 
ciples ; not  by  means  of  any  antiseptic  power  they  have  (as  is  effected  in  dead, 
putrifying  flesh)  ; not  by  any  chemical  or  physical  action  of  any  other  imaginable  sort, 
as  happens  in  dead  material  things,  as  has  hitherto  been  falsely  imagined  and  dreamt 
by  the  various  medical  schools. 

The  more  modern  schools  have  indeed  begun  in  some  degree  to  regard  diseases  as 
dynamic  derangements,  and  their  intention,  too,  is  to  remove  them  in  some  sort 
of  dynamical  way  by  medicines,  but  inasmuch  as  they  fail  to  perceive  that  the 
sensible,  irritable,  and  reproductive  activity  of  life  is  in  modo  et  qualitate  susceptible  of 


HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICAL  DOCTRINE.  9 

our  service  effect  the  cure  of  diseases  by  means  of  the  same  dynamic 
power  of  altering  the  actual  state  of  health,  by  means  of  the  same 
power  of  deranging  the  vital  character  of  our  organism  in  respect  of  its 
sensations  and  functions,  by  which  they  are  able  to  affect  also  the 
healthy  individual,  to  produce  in  him  dynamic  changes  and  certain 
morbid  symptoms,  the  knowledge  of  which,  as  we  shall  see,  affords  us 
the  most  trustworthy  information  concerning  the  morbid  states  that  can 
be  most  certainly  cured  by  each  particular  medicine.  Hence  nothing 
in  the  world  can  accomplish  a cure,  no  substance,  no  power  can  effect  a 
change  in  the  human  organism  of  such  a character  as  that  the  disease 
shall  yield  to  it,  except  an  agent  capable  of  absolutely  (dynamically) 
deranging  the  human  health,  consequently  also  of  morbidly  altering  its 
healthy  state.* * 

On  the  other  hand,  however,  there  is  also  no  agent,  no  power  in 
nature  capable  of  morbidly  affecting  the  healthy  individual,  which  does 
not  at  the  same  time  possess  the  faculty  of  curing  certain  morbid  states. 

Now,  as  the  power  of  curing  diseases,  as  also  of  morbidly  affecting 
the  healthy,  is  met  with  in  inseparable  combination  in  all  medicines, 
and  as  both  these  properties  evidently  spring  from  one  and  the  same 
source,  namely,  from  their  power  of  dynamically  deranging  human 
health,  and  as  it  is  hence  impossible  that  they  can  act  according  to  a 
different  inherent  natural  law  in  the  sick  to  that  according  to  which 
they  act  on  the  healthy ; it  follows  that  it  must  be  the  same  power  or 
the  medicine  that  cures  the  disease  in  the  sick  as  produces  the  morbid 
symptoms  in  the  healthy.  + 

Hence  also  we  shall  find  that  the  curative  power  of  medicines,  and 
that  which  each  of  them  is  able  to  effect  in  diseases,  expresses  itself  in 
no  other  mode  in  the  world  so  surely  and  palpably,  and  cannot  be 
ascertained  by  us  by  any  purer  and  more  perfect  manner  than  by  the 
morbid  phenomena  and  symptoms  (the  kinds  of  artificial  diseases)  which 
the  medicines  develop  in  healthy  individuals.  For  if  we  only  have 
before  us  records  of  the  peculiar  (artificial)  morbid  symptoms  pro- 
duced by  the  various  medicines  on  healthy  individuals,  we  only  require 
a series  of  pure  experiments  to  decide  what  medicinal  symptoms  will 
always  rapidly  and  permanently  cure  and  remove  certain  symptoms  of 
disease,  in  order  to  know,  in  every  case  beforehand,  which  of  all  the 
different  medicines  known  and  thoroughly  tested  as  to  their  peculiar 
symptoms  must  be  the  most  certain  remedy  in  every  case  of  disease.  J 


an  infinity  of  changes,  and  as  they  do  not  regard  the  innumerable  varieties  of  morbid 
signs  (that  infinity  of  internal  alterations  only  cognisable  by  us  in  their  reflex)  for 
what  they  actually  are,  to  wit,  the  only  undeceptive  object  for  treatment ; but  as  they 
only  hypothetically  recognise  an  abnormal  increase  and  decrease  of  their  dimensions 
quoad  quantitatem,  and  in  an  equally  arbitrary  manner  confide  to  the  medicines  they 
employ  the  task  of  changing  to  the  normal  state  this  one-sided  increase  and  decrease, 
and  thereby  curing  them ; they  thus  have  in  their  mind  nothing  but  false  ideas,  both 
of  the  object  to  be  cured  and  of  the  properties  of  the  medicine. 

* Consequently  no  substance,  for  example,  that  is  purely  nutritious. 

f The  different  result  in  these  two  cases  is  owing  solely  to  the  difference  of  the 
object  that  has  to  be  altered. 

X Simple,  true,  and  natural  as  this  maxim  is,  so  much  so  that  one  would  have 
imagined  it  would  long  since  have  been  adopted  as  the  rule  for  ascertaining  the  curative 


10 


SPIRIT  OF  THE 


If  then  we  ask  experience  what  artificial  diseases  (observed  to  be 
produced  by  medicines)  can  be  beneficially  employed  against  certain 
natural  morbid  states  ; if  we  ask  it  whether  the  change  to  health 
(cure)  may  be  expected  to  ensue  most  certainly  and  in  the  most  perma- 
nent manner  : 

1,  by  the  use  of  such  medicines  as  are  capable  of  producing  in  the 
healthy  body  a different  (alloeopathic)  affection  from  that  exhibited  by  the 
disease  to  be  cured, 

2,  or  by  the  employment  of  such  as  are  capable  of  exciting  in  the 
healthy  individual  an  opposite  (enantiopathic,  antipathic)  state  to  that  of 
the  case  to  be  cured, 

3,  or  by  the  administration  of  such  medicines  as  can  cause  a similar 
(homoeopathic)  state  to  the  natural  disease  before  us  (for  these  are  the 

powers  of  drugs,  it  is  yet  a fact  that  nothing  the  least  like  it  has  hitherto  been 
thought  of.  During  the  several  thousands  of  years  over  which  history  extends,  no 
one  fell  upon  this  natural  method  of  first  ascertaining  the  curative  powers  of  medicines 
before  giving  them  in  diseases.  In  all  ages  down  to  the  present  times  it  was  imagined 
that  the  curative  powers  of  medicines  could  be  learned  in  no  other  way  than  from 
the  result  of  their  employment  in  diseases  themselves  ( ab  usu  in  morbis ) ; it  was 
sought  to  learn  them  from  those  cases  where  a certain  medicine  (more  frequently  a 
combination  of  various  medicines)  had  been  found  serviceable  in  a particular  case  of 
disease.  But  even  from  the  efficacious  result  of  one  single  medicine  given  in  a 
case  of  disease  accurately  described  (which  but  rarely  happened),  we  never  can  know 
the  case  in  which  that  medicine  would  again  prove  serviceable,  because  (with  the 
exception  of  diseases  caused  by  miasms  of  a fixed  character,  as  smallpox,  measles, 
syphilis,  itch,  & c.,  and  those  arising  from  various  injurious  agencies  that  always 
remain  the  same,  as  rheumatic  gout,  &c.),  all  other  cases  of  disease  are  mere  individu- 
alities, that  is  to  say,  all  present  themselves  in  nature  with  different  combinations 
of  symptoms,  have  never  before  occurred,  and  can  never  again  occur  in  exactly  the 
same  manner  ; consequently,  because  a medicine  has  cured  one  case  we  cannot  thence 
infer  that  it  will  cure  another  (different)  case.  The  forced  arrangement  of  these 
cases  of  disease  (which  nature  in  her  wisdom  produces  in  endless  variety)  under 
certain  nosological  heads,  as  is  arbitrarily  done  by  pathology,  is  an  ureal  human 
performance,  which  leads  to  constant  fallacies  and  to  the  confounding  together  of 
very  different  states. 

Equally  misleading  and  untrustworthy,  although  in  all  ages  universally  practised, 
is  the  determination  of  the  general  (curative)  actions  of  medicines  from  special 
effects  in  diseases,  where  in  the  materia  medica — when,  for  example,  in  some  cases 
of  disease  during  the  use  of  a medicine  (generally  mixed  up  with  others)  there 
sometimes  occurred  a more  copious  secretion  of  urine  or  perspiration,  the  catamenia 
came  on,  convulsions  ceased,  there  occurred  a kind  of  sleep,  expectoration,  See. — the 
medicine  (to  which  the  honour  was  attributed  more  than  to  the  others  in  the  mixture) 
was  instantly  elevated  to  the  rank  of  a diuretic,  a diaphoretic,  an  emmenagogue, 
an  antispasmodic,  a soporific,  an  expectorant,  and  thereby  not  only  was  a fallacium 
causa  committed  by  confounding  the  word  during  with  by,  but  quite  a false  conclusion 
was  drawn,  a particulari  ad  universale,  in  opposition  to  all  the  laws  of  reason  ; 
indeed  the  conditional  was  made  unconditional.  For  a substance  that  does  not  in 
every  case  of  disease  promote  urine  and  perspiration,  that  does  not  in  every  instance 
bring  on  the  catamenia  and  sleep,  that  does  not  subdue  all  convulsions,  and  cause 
every  cough  to  come  to  expectoration,  cannot  be  said  by  a person  of  sound  reason  to 
be  unconditionally  and  absolutely  diuretic,  diaphoretic,  emmenagogue,  soporific, 
antispasmodic,  and  expectorant ! And  yet  this  is  what  the  ordinary  materia  medica 
does.  Indeed  it  is  impossible  that  in  the  complex  phenomena  of  our  health,  in 
the  multifarious  combinations  of  different  symptoms  presented  by  the  innumerable 
varieties  of  human  diseases,  the  employment  of  a remedy  can  exhibit  its  pure, 
original  medicinal  effect,  and  exactly  what  we  can  expect  it  to  do  for  derangements 
of  our  health.  These  can  only  be  shown  by  medicines  given  to  persons  in  health. 


HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICAL  DOCTRINE, 


ii 


only  three  possible  modes  of  employing  them),  experience  speaks  indu- 
bitably for  the  last  method. 

But  it  is  moreover  self-evident  that  medicines  which  act  hetero- 
geneously  and  allceopathically^  which  tend  to  develop  in  the  healthy  subject 
different  symptoms  from  those  presented  by  the  disease  to  be  cured, 
from  the  very  nature  of  things  can  never  be  suitable  and  efficacious  in 
this  case,  but  they  must  act  awry,  otherwise  all  diseases  must  neces- 
sarily be  cured  in  a rapid,  certain  and  permanent  manner  by  all 
medicine,  however  different.  Now,  as  every  medicine  possesses  an 
action  different  from  that  of  every  other,  and  as,  according  to  eternal 
natural  laws,  every  disease  causes  a derangement  of  the  human 
health  different  from  that  caused  by  all  other  diseases,  this  propo- 
sition contains  an  innate  contradiction  ( ' contra  diction  em  in  adjecto ), 
and  is  self-demonstrative  of  the  impossibility  of  a good  result,  since 
every  given  change  can  only  be  effected  by  an  adequate  cause,  but  not 
per  quamlibet  causam.  And  daily  experience  also  proves  that  the  ordi- 
nary practice  of  prescribing  complex  recipes  containing  a variety  of 
unknown  medicines  in  diseases,  does  indeed  do  many  things,  but  very 
rarely  cures. 

The  second  mode  of  treating  diseases  by  medicines  is  the  employment 
of  an  agent  capable  of  altering  the  existing  derangement  of  the  health 
(the  disease,  or  most  prominent  morbid  symptom)  in  an  enantiopathic , 
antipathic , or  contrary  manner  (the  palliative  employment  of  a medicine). 
Such  an  employment,  as  will  be  readily  seen,  cannot  effect  a permanent 
cure  of  the  disease,  because  the  malady  must  soon  afterwards  recur,  and 
that  in  an  aggravated  degree.  The  process  that  takes  place  is  as  follows : — 
According  to  a wonderful  provision  of  nature,  organized  living  beings 
are  not  regulated  by  the  laws  of  unorganized  (dead)  physical  matter, 
they  do  not  receive  the  influence  of  external  agents,  like  the  latter,  in 
a passive  manner,  but  strive  to  oppose  a contrary  action  to  them.#  The 
living  human  body  does  indeed  allow  itself  to  be  in  the  first  instance 
changed  by  the  action  of  physical  agents ; but  this  change  is  not  in  it 

* The  expressed,  green  juice  of  plants,  which  is  in  that  state  no  longer  living, 
when  spread  upon  linen  cloth  is  soon  blanched  and  its  colour  annihilated  by  exposure 
to  sunlight,  whereas  the  colourless  living  plant  that  has  been  kept  in  a dark 
cellar,  soon  recovers  its  full  green  colour  when  exposed  to  the  same  sunlight. 
A root  dug  up  and  dried  (dead),  if  buried  in  a warm  and  damp  soil,  rapidly 
undergoes  complete  decomposition  and  destruction,  whilst  a living  root  in  the 
same  warm  damp  soil  sends  forth  gay  sprouts. — Foaming  malt-beer  in  full  fer- 
mentation rapidly  turns  to  vinegar  when  exposed  to  a temperature  of  96°  Fahr.  in 
a bottle,  but  in  the  healthy  human  stomach  at  the  same  temperature  the  fermen- 
tation ceases,  and  it  soon  becomes  converted  into  a mild  nutritious  juice. — Half- 
decomposed  and  strong-smelling  game,  as  also  beef  and  other  flesh  meat,  partaken 
of  by  a healthy  individual,  furnish  excrement  with  the  least  amount  of  odour ; 
whereas  cinchona-bark,  which  is  calculated  powerfully  to  check  decomposition  in 
lifeless  animal  substances,  is  acted  against  by  the  intestines  in  such  a manner  that  the 
most  fetid  flatus  is  developed. — Mild  carbonate  of  lime  removes  all  acids  from  inor- 
ganic matter,  but  when  taken  into  the  healthy  stomach  sour  perspiration  usually 
ensues. — Whilst  the  dead  animal  fibre  is  preserved  by  nothing  more  certainly  and 
powerfully  than  by  tannin,  clean  ulcers  in  a living  individual,  when  they  are  frequently 
dressed  with  tannin,  become  unclean,  green,  and  putrid. — A hand  plunged  into  warm 
water  becomes  subsequently  colder  than  the  hand  that  has  not  been  so  treated,  and  it 
becomes  colder  in  proportion  as  the  water  was  hotter, 


12 


SPIRIT  OF  THE 


as  in  inorganic  substances,  permanent  ( — as  it  ought  necessarily  to  be 
if  the  medicinal  agent  acting  in  a contrary  manner  to  the  disease  should 
have  a permanent  effect,  and  be  of  durable  benefit — ) : on  the  contrary, 
the  living  human  organism  strives  to  develop  by  antagonism* * * §  the  exact 
opposite  of  the  affection  first  produced  in  it  from  without, — as  for 
instance,  a hand  kept  long  enough  in  ice-cold  water,  after  being  with- 
drawn does  not  remain  cold,  nor  merely  assume  the  temperature  of  the 
surrounding  atmosphere,  as  a stone  (dead)  ball  would  do,  or  even  resume 
the  temperature  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  no  ! the  colder  the  water  of  the 
bath  was,  and  the  longer  it  acted  on  the  healthy  skin  of  the  hand,  the 
more  injlamed  and  hotter  does  the  latter  afterwards  become. 

Therefore  it  cannot  but  happen  that  a medicine  having  an  action 
opposite  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  will  reverse  the  morbid  sym- 
ptoms for  but  a very  short  time,f  but  must  soon  give  place  to  the 
antagonism  inherent  in  the  living  body,  which  produces  an  opposite  state, 
that  is  to  say,  a state  the  direct  contrary  of  that  transient  delusive  state 
of  the  health  effected  by  the  palliative  (and  corresponding  to  the  original 
malady),  which  constitutes  an  actual  addition  to  the  now  recurring, 
uneradicated,  original  affection,  and  is  consequently  an  increased  degree 
of  the  original  disease.  And  thus  the  malady  is  always  certainly  aggra- 
vated after  the  palliative  — the  medicine  that  acts  in  an  opposite  and 
enantiopathic  manner — has  exhausted  its  action. J 

In  chronic  diseases, — the  true  touch-stone  of  a genuine  healing  art, 
— the  injurious  character  of  the  antagonistically-acting  (palliative) 
remedy  often  displays  itself  in  a high  degree,  since  from  its  repeated 
exhibition  in  order  that  it  should  merely  produce  its  delusive  effect  (a 
very  transient  semblance  of  health)  it  must  be  administered  in  larger 
and  ever  larger  doses,  which  are  often  productive  of  serious  danger  to 
life,  or  even  of  actual  death. § 

* This  is  the  law  of  nature,  in  obedience  to  which,  the  employment  of  every  medicine 
produces  at  first  certain  dynamic  changes  and  morbid  symptoms  in  the  living  human 
body  ( primary  or  first  action  of  the  medicines ),  but  on  the  other  hand,  by  means  of  a 
peculiar  antagonism  (which  may  in  many  instances  be  termed  the  effort  of  self-preserva- 
tion), produces  a state  the  very  opposite  of  the  first  (the  secondary  or  after  action ), 
as  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  narcotic  substances,  insensibility  is  produced  in  the 
primary  action,  sensitiveness  to  pain  in  the  secondary. 

f As  a burnt  hand  remains  cold  and  painless  not  much  longer  than  whilst  it 
remains  in  the  cold  water,  but  afterwards  feels  the  pain  of  the  burn  much  more 
severely. 

J Thus  the  pain  of  a burnt  hand  is  subdued  by  cold  water  quickly,  it  is  true,  but 
only  for  a few  minutes,  afterwards,  however,  the  pain  of  the  burn  and  the  inflamma- 
tion become  worse  than  they  were  previously  (the  inflammation  as  the  secondary  action 
of  the  cold  water  makes  an  addition  to  the  original  inflammation  of  the  burn,  which  is 
not  to  be  eradicated  by  cold  water).  The  troublesome  fulness  of  the  abdomen  in  cases 
of  habitual  constipation  appears  to  be  removed,  as  if  magically,  by  the  action  of  a 
purgative,  but  the  very  next  day  the  painful  fulness  returns  together  with  the 
constipation,  and  becomes  worse  afterwards  than  before.  The  stupified  sleep  caused 
by  opium  is  succeeded  by  a more  sleepless  night  than  ever.  But  that  the  state  that 
subsequently  occurs  is  a true  aggravation,  is  rendered  evident  by  this,  that  if  we 
design  again  to  employ  the  palliative  ( e.g . opium  for  habitual  sleeplessness  or  chronic 
looseness  of  the  bowels),  it  must  be  given  in  a stronger  dose,  as  if  for  a more  severe 
disease , in  order  that  it  should  produce  its  delusive  amelioration  for  even  as  short  a 
period  as  before, 

§ As,  for  instance,  where  opium  is  repeated  in  always  stronger  doses  for  the  sup- 
pression of  urgent  symptoms  of  a chronic  disease, 


HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICAL  DOCTRINE. 


*3 


There  remains,  therefore,  only  a third  mode  of  employing  medicines 
in  order  to  effect  a really  beneficial  result,  to  wit,  by  employing  in  every 
case  such  an  one  as  tends  to  excite  of  itself  an  artificial,  morbid  affec- 
tion in  the  organism  similar  (homoeopathic),  best  if  very  similar , to  the 
actual  case  of  disease. 

That  this  mode  of  employing  medicines  is  and  must  of  necessity  be 
the  only  best  method,  can  easily  be  proved  by  reasoning,  as  it  has  also 
already  been  confirmed  both  by  innumerable  experiences  of  physicians 
who  practise  according  to  my  doctrines,  and  by  daily  experience.* 

It  will,  therefore,  not  be  difficult  to  perceive  what  are  the  laws  of 
nature  according  to  which  the  only  appropriate  cure  of  diseases,  the 
homoeopathic,  takes  place,  and  must  necessarily  take  place. 

The  first  of  these  unmistakeable  laws  of  nature  is  : the  susceptibility  of 
the  living  organism  for  natural  diseases  is  incomparably  less  than  it  is  for 
medicines . 

A multitude  of  disease-exciting  causes  act  daily  and  hourly  upon  us, 
but  they  are  incapable  of  deranging  the  equilibrium  of  the  health,  or  of 
making  the  healthy  sick  ; the  activity  of  the  life-sustaining  power 
within  us  usually  withstands  the  most  of  them,  the  individual  remains 
healthy.  It  is  only  when  these  external  inimical  agencies  assail  us  in  a 

* I may  adduce  merely  a few  examples  from  daily  experience ; thus,  the  burning 
pain  produced  by  the  contact  of  boiling  water  with  the  skin,  is  overpowered  and 
destroyed,  as  cooks  are  wont  to  do,  by  approaching  the  moderately  burnt  hand  to  the 
fire,  or  by  bathing  it  uninterruptedly  with  heated  alcohol  (or  turpentine),  which  causes  a 
still  more  intense  burning  sensation.  This  infallible  mode  of  treatment  is  practised 
and  found  to  be  efficacious  by  lacquerers  and  others  engaged  in  similar  occupations. 
The  burning  pain  produced  by  these  strong  spirits  and  their  elevated  temperature 
then  remains  alone  present,  and  that  for  but  a few  minutes,  whilst  the  organism, 
homoeopathically  freed  by  them  from  the  inflammation  occasioned  by  the  burn,  soon 
restores  the  injury  of  the  skin  and  forms  a new  epidermis  through  which  the  spirit 
can  no  longer  penetrate.  And  thus,  in  the  course  of  a few  hours,  the  injury  caused 
by  the  burn  is  cured  by  a remedy  that  occasions  a similar  burning  pain  (heated 
alcohol  or  turpentine),  whereas  if  treated  with  the  ordinary  cooling  palliative  remedies 
and  salves,  it  is  transformed  into  a bad  ulcer  and  usually  continues  to  suppurate  for 
many  weeks  or  months  with  great  pain.  Practised  dancers  know  from  old  experience 
that  those  who  are  extremely  heated  by  dancing  are  very  much  relieved  for  the  first 
moment  by  stripping  themselves  and  drinking  very  cold  water,  but  thereafter  infallibly 
incur  mortal  disease,  and  they  do  not  allow  persons  excessively  heated  to  cool  them- 
selves by  exposure  to  the  open  air  or  by  taking  off  their  clothes,  but  wisely  administer 
a liquor  whose  nature  is  to  heat  the  blood,  such  as  punch  or  hot  tea  mixed  with  rum 
or  arrack,  and  in  this  manner  walking  at  the  same  time  gently  up  and  down  the  room, 
they  rapidly  lose  the  violent  febrile  state  induced  by  the  dance.  In  like  manner  no 
old  experienced  reaper,  after  inordinate  exertion  in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  would  drink 
anything  in  order  to  cool  himself  but  a glass  of  brandy  ; and  before  an  hour  has 
elapsed,  his  thirst  and  heat  are  gone  and  he  feels  quite  well.  No  experienced  person 
would  put  a frost-bitten  limb  into  warm  water,  or  seek  to  restore  it  by  approaching 
it  to  the  fire  or  a hot  stove  j applying  to  it  snow,  or  rubbing  it  with  ice-cold 
water,  is  the  well-known  homoeopathic  remedy  for  it.  The  illness  occasioned  by 
excessive  joy  (fantastic  gaiety,  trembling  restlessness  and  uneasiness,  palpitation  of 
the  heart,  sleeplessness)  is  rapidly  and  permanently  removed  by  coffee,  which  causes 
a similar  morbid  affection  in  persons  unaccustomed  to  its  use.  And  in  like  manner 
there  are  many  daily-occurring  confirmations  of  the  great  truth,  that  nature  intends 
that  men  should  be  cured  of  their  long-standing  diseases  by  means  of  similar  affections 
of  short  duration.  Nations,  for  centuries  sunk  in  listless  apathy  and  serfdom,  raised 
their  spirit,  felt  their  dignity  as  men,  and  again  became  free,  after  having  been  igno- 
miniously  trodden  in  the  dust  by  the  western  tyrant. 


IN- 


SPIRIT OF  THE 


very  aggravated  degree,  and  we  are  especially  exposed  to  their  influence, 
that  we  get  ill,  but  even  then  we  only  become  seriously  ill  when  our 
organism  has  a particularly  impressionable,  weak  side  (predisposition), 
that  makes  it  more  disposed  to  be  affected  by  the  (simple  or  compound) 
morbific  cause  in  question,  and  to  be  deranged  in  its  health. 

If  the  inimical  agents  in  nature  that  are  partly  physical  and  partly 
psychical,  which  are  termed  morbific  noxae,  possessed  an  uncon- 
ditional power  of  deranging  the  human  health,  they  would,  as  they 
are  universally  distributed,  not  leave  any  one  in  good  health  ; every  one 
would  be  ill,  and  we  should  never  be  able  to  obtain  an  idea  of 
health.  But  as,  taken  on  the  whole,  diseases  are  only  exceptional  states 
of  the  human  health,  and  it  is  necessary  that  such  a number  of  circum- 
stances and  conditions,  both  as  regards  the  morbific  agents  and  the 
individual  to  be  affected  with  disease,  should  conjoin  before  a disease  is 
produced  by  its  exciting  causes,  it  follows,  that  the  individual  is  so 
little  liable  to  be  affected  by  such  noxce,  that  they  can  never  uncon- 
ditionally tnake  him  ill , and  that  the  human  organism  is  capable  of  being 
deranged  to  disease  by  them  only  by  means  of  a particular  predisposition. 

But  it  is  far  otherwise  with  the  artificial  dynamic  agents  which  we 
term  medicines.  For  every  true  medicine  acts  at  all  times,  under  all 
circumstances,  on  every  living,  animated  body,  and  excites  in  it  the  sym- 
ptoms peculiar  to  it  (even  in  a way  perceptible  to  the  senses  if  the  dose 
be  large  enough)  so  that  evidently  every  living  human  organism  must  always 
and  inevitably  be  ajfected  by  the  medicinal  disease  and , as  it  were , infected , 
which,  as  is  well  known,  is  not  the  case  with  respect  to  natural  diseases.* 

All  experience  proves  incontestably,  that  the  human  body  is  much 
more  apt  and  disposed  to  be  affected  by  medicinal  agents  and  to  have  its 
health  deranged  by  them,  than  by  the  morbific  noxae  and  contagious 
miasms,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  that  the  medicinal  agents 
possess  an  absolute  power  of  deranging  human  health,  whereas  the 
morbific  agents  possess  only  a very  conditional  power,  vastly  inferior 
to  the  former. 

To  this  circumstance  it  is  owing  that  medicines  are  able  to  cure 
diseases  at  all  (that  is  to  say,  we  see,  that  the  morbid  affection  may 
be  eradicated  from  the  diseased  organism,  if  the  latter  be  subjected  to 
the  appropriate  alteration  by  means  of  medicine)  ; but  in  order  that  the 
cure  should  take  place,  the  second  natural  law  should  also  be  fulfilled,  to 
wit,  a stronger  dynamic  ajfection  permanently  extinguishes  the  weaker  in  the 
living  organism,  provided  the  former  be  similar  in  kind  to  the  latter ; for 
the  dynamic  alteration  of  the  health  to  be  anticipated  from  the  medicine 
should,  as  I think  I have  proved,  neither  differ  in  kind  from  or  be 
allcecpathic  to  the  morbid  derangement,  in  order  that,  as  happens  in  the 
ordinary  mode  of  practice,  a still  greater  derangement  may  not  ensue  ; 
nor  should  it  be  opposite  to  it,  in  order  that  a merely  palliative  delusive 
amelioration  may  not  ensue,  to  be  followed  by  an  inevitable  aggravation 
of  the  original  malady  ; but  the  medicine  must  have  been  proved  by 

* Even  the  pestilential  diseases  do  not  affect  every  one  unconditionally,  and  the  other 
diseases  leave  many  more  individuals  unaffected,  even  when  all  are  exposed  to 
changes  of  the  weather,  of  the  seasons,  and  to  the  influence  of  many  other  injurious 
impressions; 


HOMCEOPATHIC  MEDICAL  DOCTRINE. 


i5 


observations  to  possess  the  tendency  to  develop  of  itself  a state  of  health 
similar  to  the  disease  (be  able  to  excite  similar  symptoms  in  the  healthy 
body),  in  order  to  be  a remedy  of  permanent  efficacy. 

Now,  as  the  dynamic  affections  of  the  organism  (caused  by  disease 
or  by  medicine)  are  only  cognisable  by  the  phenomena  of  altered  func- 
tion and  altered  sensation,  and  consequently  the  similarity  of  its  dynamic 
affections  to  one  another  can  only  express  themselves  by  similarity  of 
symptoms ; but  as  the  organism  (as  being  much  more  liable  to  be 
deranged  by  medicine  than  by  disease)  must  yield  more  to  the  medicinal 
affection,  that  is  to  say,  must  be  more  disposed  to*  allow  itself  to  be 
influenced  and  deranged  by  medicine  than  by  the  similar  natural  morbid 
affection,  it  follows  undeniably,  that  it  will  be  freed  from  the  natural 
morbid  affection  if  we  allow  a medicine  to  act  on  it,  which,  while  differ- 
ing * in  its  nature  from  the  disease,  resembles  it  very  closely  in  the 
symptoms  it  causes,  that  is  to  say,  is  homoeopathic  ; for  the  organism,  as 
a living,  individual  unity,  cannot  receive  two  similar  dynamic  affections 
at  the  same  time,  without  the  weaker  yielding  to  the  stronger  similar 
one  ; consequently,  as  it  is  more  disposed  to  be  more  strongly  affected 
by  the  one  (the  medicinal  affection),  the  other,  similar,  weaker  one 
(the  natural  morbid  affection)  must  necessarily  give  way ; and  the 
organism  is  therefore  cured  of  its  disease. 

Let  it  not  be  imagined  that  the  living  organism,  if  a new  similar 
affection  be  communicated  to  it  when  diseased  by  a dose  of  homoeopathic 
medicine,  will  be  thereby  more  seriously  deranged,  that  is,  burdened 
with  an  addition  to  its  sufferings,  just  as  a leaden  plate  already  pressed 
upon  by  an  iron  weight  is  still  more  severely  squeezed  by  placing  a stone 
in  addition  upon  it ; or  as  a piece  of  copper  heated  by  friction  must 
become  still  hotter  by  pouring  on  it  water  at  a more  elevated  temperature. 
No,  our  living  organism  does  not  behave  passively,  it  is  not  subject  to  the 
laws  that  govern  dead  matter ; it  reacts  by  vital  antagonism,  so  as  to 
surrender  itself  as  an  individual  living  whole  to  its  morbid  derangement, 
and  to  allow  this  to  be  extinguished  within  it,  when  a stronger  affec- 
tion of  a similar  kind,  produced  in  it  by  homoeopathic  medicine,  takes 
possession  of  it. 

Such  a spiritually  reacting  being  is  our  living,  human  organism, 
which  with  automatic  power  expels  from  itself  a weaker  derangement 
(disease),  whenever  the  stronger  power  of  the  homoeopathic  medicine 
produces  in  it  another  but  very  similar  affection  ; or  in  other  words, 
which,  on  account  of  the  unity  of  its  life,  cannot  suffer  at  the  same 
time  from  two  similar  general  derangements,  but  must  discard  the 
primary  dynamic  affection  (disease),  whenever  it  is  acted  on  by  a second 
dynamic  power  (medicine),  more  capable  of  deranging  it,  that  has  a 
great  resemblance  to  the  former  in  its  power  of  affecting  the  health  (its 
symptoms).  Something  similar  takes  place  in  the  human  mind.f 

# Without  this  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  morbid  affection  from  that  of  the 
medicinal  affection,  a cure  were  impossible ; if  the  two  were  not  merely  of  a similar, 
but  of  the  same  nature,  consequently  identical,  then  no  result  (or  only  an  aggravation 
of  the  malady)  would  ensue ; as,  for  example,  if  we  were  to  touch  a chancre  with 
other  chancrous  poison,  a cure  would  never  result  therefrom. 

f For  example  : a girl  plunged  into  grief  by  the  death  of  her  companion,  if  taken 
to  see  a family  where  the  poor,  half-naked  children  have  just  lost  their  father,  their 


1 6 


SPIRIT  OF  THE 


But  as  the  human  organism  even  in  health  is  more  capable  of  being 
affected  by  medicine  than  by  disease,  as  I have  shown  above,  so  when 
it  is  diseased,  it  is  beyond  comparison  more  affectable  by  homoeopathic 
medicine  than  by  any  other  (whether  alloeopathic  or  enantiopathic)  and 
indeed  it  is  affectable  in  the  highest  degree ; since,  as  it  is  already  disposed 
and  excited  by  the  disease  to  certain  symptoms,  it  must  now  be  more 
susceptible  of  the  altering  influence  of  similar  symptoms  (by  the  homoeo- 
pathic medicine) — just  as  similar  mental  affections  render  the  mind  much 
more  sensitive  to  similar  emotions — hence  only  the  smallest  dose  of  them 
is  necessary  and  useful  for  their  cure,  that  is,  for  altering  the  diseased 
organism  into  the  similar  medicinal  disease ; and  a greater  one  is  not 
necessary  on  this  account  also,  because  the  spiritual  power  of  the  medi- 
cine does  not  in  this  instance  accomplish  its  object  by  means  of 
quantity,  but  by  potentiality  and  quality  (dynamic  fitness,  homoeopathy), 
— and  a greater  dose  is  not  useful , but  on  the  contrary  injurious , because 
whilst  the  larger  dose,  on  the  one  hand,  does  not  dynamically  over- 
power the  morbid  affection  more  certainly  than  the  smallest  dose  of  the 
most  appropriate  medicine,  on  the  other  hand  it  imposes  a complex 
medicinal  disease  in  its  place,  which  is  always  a malady,  though  it  passes 
off  after  a certain  time. 

Hence  the  organism  will  be  powerfully  affected  and  taken  possession 
of  by  the  power  of  even  a very  small  dose  of  a medicinal  substance,  which, 
by  its  tendency  to  excite  similar  symptoms,  can  outweigh  and  extinguish 
the  totality  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease ; it  becomes,  as  I have  said, 
free  from  the  morbid  affection  at  the  very  instant  that  it  is  taken 
possession  of  by  the  medicinal  affection,  by  which  it  is  immeasurably 
more  liable  to  be  altered. 

Now,  as  medicinal  agents  do  of  themselves,  even  in  larger  doses,  only 
keep  the  healthy  organism  for  a few  days  under  their  influence,  it  will 
readily  be  conceived  that  a small  dose,  and  in  acute  diseases  a very  small 
dose  of  them  (as  it  ought  evidently  to  be  in  homoeopathic  treatment), 
can  only  affect  the  system  for  a short  time  ; the  smallest  doses,  indeed, 
in  acute  diseases,  only  for  a few  hours  ; and  then  the  medicinal  affec- 
tion substituted  for  the  disease  passes  unobservedly  and  very  rapidly  into 
pure  health. 

sole  support,  does  not  become  more  sorrowful  from  witnessing  this  touching  scene, 
but  is  thereby  consoled  for  her  own  smaller  misfortune  ; she  is  cured  of  her  grief  for 
her  friend,  because  the  unity  of  her  mind  cannot  be  affected  by  two  similar  passions 
at  once,  and  the  one  passion  must  be  extinguished  when  a similar  but  stronger 
passion  takes  possession  of  her  mind,  and  acts  as  a homoeopathic  remedy  in  extin- 
guishing the  first.  But  the  girl  would  not  be  tranquillized  and  cured  of  her  grief  for 
the  loss  of  her  companion,  if  her  mother  were  angrily  to  scold  her  ( heterogeneous , 
alloeopathic  influence),  but,  on  the  contrary,  her  mind  would  be  still  more  distressed  by 
this  attack  of  grief  of  another  kind  \ and  in  like  manner  the  sorrowing  girl,  if  we 
were  to  cause  an  apparent  but  only  palliative  alleviation  of  her  grief,  by  means  of  a 
gay  entertainment,  would  subsequently  in  her  solitude  sink  into  still  more  profound 
sadness,  and  would  weep  much  more  intensely  than  previously  for  the  death  of  her 
friend  (because  this  affection  would  here  be  only  of  an  opposite,  enantiopathic 
character). 

And  as  it  is  here  in  psychical  life,  so  is  it  in  the  former  case  in  organic  life.  The 
unity  of  our  life  cannot  occupy  itself  with,  and  receive,  two  general  dynamic  affections 
of  the  same  kind  at  once  ; for  if  the  second  be  a similar  one,  the  first  is  displaced  by 
it,  if  the  organism  be  more  energetically  affected  by  the  latter. 


HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICAL  DOCTRINE. 


i7 


In  the  permanent  cure  of  diseases  by  medicines  in  living  organisms 
nature  seems  never  to  act  otherwise  than  in  accordance  with  these  her 
manifest  laws,  and  then  indeed  she  acts,  if  we  may  use  the  expression, 
with  mathematical  certainty.  There  is  no  case  of  dynamic  disease  in  the 
world  (excepting  the  death  struggle,  old  age,  if  it  can  be  considered  a 
disease,  and  the  destruction  or  some  indispensable  viscus  or  member), 
whose  symptoms  can  be  met  with  in  great  similarity  among  the  positive  effects 
of  a medicine,  which  will  not  be  rapidly  and  permanently  cured  by  this  medi- 
cine. The  diseased  individual  can  be  freed  from  his  malady,  in  no 
more  easy,  rapid,  certain,  reliable  and  permanent  manner,  by  any  con- 
ceivable mode  of  treatment,*  than  by  means  of  the  homoeopathic  medi- 
cine in  small  doses. 

* Even  those  striking  cures  which  occur  in  rare  instances  in  ordinary  practice,  take 
place  only  by  means  of  a homoeopathically  appropriate  medicine,  which  forms  the 
chief  agent  in  the  receipt,  into  which  it  has  been  accidentally  introduced.  Phy- 
sicians hitherto  could  not  have  chosen  the  medicines  homoeopathically  for  diseases,  as 
the  positive  effects  of  the  medicines  (those  observed  from  their  administration  to 
healthy  persons)  had  not  been  investigated  by  them,  and  accordingly  remained 
unknown  to  them  ; and  even  those  which  have  been  known  otherwise  than  by  my 
writings,  were  not  regarded  by  them  as  capable  of  being  utilized  for  treatment, — 
and  moreover,  the  relation  of  the  effects  of  medicines  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease 
they  resemble  (the  homoeopathic  law  of  cure),  which  is  requisite  in  order  to  effect 
radical  cures,  was  unknown. 


PREAMBLE.1 


Many  persons  of  my  acquaintance  but  half  converted  to  homoeo- 
pathy have  repeatedly  begged  me  to  publish  still  more  exact  directions 
as  to  how  this  doctrine  may  be  actually  applied  in  practice,  and  how 
we  are  to  proceed.  I am  astonished  that  after  the  very  particular  direc- 
tions contained  in  the  Organon  of  Medicine  more  special  instructions 
can  be  wished  for. 

I am  also  asked,  cc  How  are  we  to  examine  the  disease  in  each 
particular  case  As  if  special  enough  directions  were  not  to  be  found 
in  the  book  just  mentioned. 

As  in  homoeopathy  the  treatment  is  not  directed  towards  imaginary 
or  invented  internal  causes  of  the  disease,  nor  yet  towards  names  of 
diseases  invented  by  man  of  which  nature  knows  nothing,  and  as  every 
case  of  non-miasmatic  disease  is  a distinct  individuality,  independent, 
peculiar,  a complex  of  symptoms  always  differing  in  nature,  never 
hypothetically  presupposable,  so  no  particular  directions  can  be  laid 
down  for  it  (no  schema,  no  table),  except  that  the  physician,  in  order  to 
effect  a cure,  must  oppose  to  every  aggregate  of  morbid  symptoms  in 
a case  a group  of  similar  medicinal  symptoms  as  complete  as  can  be  met 
with  in  any  single  known  drug ; for  this  system  of  medicine  cannot 
admit  of  more  than  a single  medicinal  substance  (whose  effects  have 
been  accurately  tested)  being  given  at  once  (see  Organon  of  Medicine , 
4th  edit.,  § 270,  27 1 ).2 

Now  we  can  neither  enumerate  all  the  possible  aggregates  of  sym- 
ptoms of  all  cases  of  disease  that  may  occur,  nor  indicate  a priori  the 
homoeopathic  medicines  for  these  ( a priori  indeterminable)  possibilities. 
For  every  individual  given  case  (and  every  case  is  an  individuality,  differ- 
ing from  all  others)  the  homoeopathic  medical  practitioner  must  himself 
find  them,  and  for  this  end  he  must  be  acquainted  with  the  medicines 
that  have  till  now  been  investigated  in  respect  of  their  positive  action, 
or  consult  them  for  every  case  of  disease  ; but  besides  this  he  must  do  his 
endeavour  to  prove  thoroughly  on  himself  or  on  other  healthy  individuals 


1 From  vol.  ii,  3rd  edit.  1833.  [The  cases  here  given  originally  appeared  in 
1816  in  the  first  edition  of  the  R.  A.  M.  L.,  but  the  notes  and  most  of  the  prelimi- 
nary matter  are  of  the  date  we  have  given,  and  we  may  therefore  consider  the  whole 
to  represent  Hahnemann’s  opinion  and  practice,  with  the  exception  of  the  dose  in 
these  two  cases,  of  the  latter  period.] 

2 The  corresponding  paragraphs  of  the  5th  edit,  are  272,  273. 


PREAMBLE. 


29 


medicines  that  have  not  yet  been  investigated  as  regards  the  morbid 
alterations  they  are  capable  of  producing,  in  order  thereby  to  increase 
our  store  of  known  remedial  agents,*  so  that  the  choice  of  a remedy 
for  every  one  of  the  infinite  variety  of  cases  of  disease  (for  the  combat- 
ing of  which  we  can  never  possess  enough  of  suitable  tools  and  weapons) 
may  become  all  the  more  easy  and  accurate. 

That  man  is  far  from  being  animated  with  the  true  spirit  of  the 
homoeopathic  system,  is  no  true  disciple  of  this  beneficent  doctrine, 
who  makes  the  slightest  objection  to  institute  on  himself  careful  experi- 
ments for  the  investigation  of  the  peculiar  effects  of  the  medicines 
which  have  remained  unknown  for  2500  years.  Without  this  investi- 
gation (and  unless  their  pure  pathogenetic  action  on  the  healthy 
individual  has  previously  been  ascertained)  all  treatment  of  disease  must 
continue  to  be  not  only  a foolish,  but  even  a criminal  action,  a 
dangerous  attack  upon  human  life. 

It  is  somewhat  too  much  to  expect  us  to  work  merely  for  the 
benefit  of  selfish  individuals,  who  will  contribute  nothing  to  the 
complete  and  indispensable  building  up  of  the  indispensable  edifice,  who 
only  seek  to  make  money  by  what  has  been  discovered  and  investigated 
by  the  labours  of  others ; and  to  furnish  them  with  the  means  of 
squandering  the  income  derived  from  the  scientific  capital,  to  the 
production  of  which  they  do  not  evince  the  slightest  inclination  to 
contribute. 

All  who  feel  a true  desire  to  assist  in  elucidating  the  peculiar  effects 
of  medicines — our  sole  instruments,  the  knowledge  of  which  has  for  so 
many  centuries  remained  uninvestigated,  and  which  is  yet  so  indispens- 
able for  enabling  us  to  cure  the  sick,  will  find  the  directions  how  these 
pure  experiments  with  medicines  should  be  conducted  in  the  Organon 
of  Medicine , 4th  edit.,  § in — 136.1 

In  addition  to  what  has  been  there  stated  I shall  only  add,  that  as 
the  experimenter  cannot,  any  more  than  any  other  human  being,  be 
absolutely  and  perfectly  healthy,  he  must,  should  slight  ailments  to 
which  he  was  liable  appear  during  these  provings  of  the  powers  of 
medicines,  place  these  between  brackets,  thereby  indicating  that  they 
are  not  confirmed,  or  dubious.  But  this  will  not  often  happen,  seeing 
that  during  the  action  upon  a previously  healthy  person  of  a sufficiently 
strong  dose  of  the  medicine,  he  is  under  the  influence  of  the  medicine 
alone,  and  it  is  seldom  that  any  other  symptom  can  show  itself  during 
the  first  days  but  what  must  be  the  effect  of  the  medicine.  Further, 
that  in  order  to  investigate  the  symptoms  of  medicines  for  chronic 
diseases,  for  example,  in  order  to  develop  the  cutaneous  diseases, 
abnormal  growths  and  so  forth,  to  be  expected  from  the  medicine,  we 
must  not  be  contented  with  taking  one  or  two  doses  of  it  only,  but  we 
must  continue  its  use  for  several  days,  to  the  amount  of  two  adequate 
doses  daily,  that  is  to  say,  of  sufficient  size  to  cause  us  to  experience  an 

* Before  the  discovery  of  homoeopathy,  medicinal  substances  were  known  only  in 
respect  to  their  natural  history,  and  besides  their  names  nothing  was  known  regard- 
ing them  but  their  presumed  qualities,  which  were  either  imaginary  or  altogether 
false. 


1 The  corresponding  paragraphs  of  the  5th  edit,  are  120 — 145. 


20 


PREAMBLE. 


action  from  it,  whilst  at  the  same  time  we  continue  to  observe  the 
diet  and  regimen  indicated  in  the  work  alluded  to. 

The  mode  of  preparing  the  medicinal  substances  for  use  in  homoeo- 
pathic treatment  will  be  found  in  the  Organon  of  Medicine , § 267 — 269, 1 
and  also  in  the  second  part  of  The  Chronic  Diseases . I would  only  observe 
here,  that  for  the  proving  of  medicines  011  healthy  individuals,  dilutions 
and  dynamizations  are  to  be  employed  as  high  as  are  used  for  the 
treatment  of  disease,  namely,  globules  moistened  with  the  decillionth 
development  of  power.2 

The  request  of  some  friends,  halting  half-way  on  the  road  to  this 
method  of  treatment,  to  give  some  examples  of  this  treatment,  is 
difficult  to  comply  with,  and  no  great  advantage  can  attend  a compli- 
ance with  it.  Every  cured  case  of  disease  shows  only  how  that  case 
has  been  treated.  The  internal  process  of  the  treatment  depends 
always  on  the  same  rules,  which  are  already  known,  and  they  cannot 
be  rendered  concrete  and  definitely  fixed  for  each  individual  case,  nor 
can  they  become  at  all  more  distinct  by  the  history  of  a single  cure 
than  they  were  already  by  the  publication  of  these  rules.  Every  case 
of  non-miasmatic  disease  is  peculiar  and  special,  and  it  is  the  special  in 
it  that  distinguishes  it  from  every  other  case,  that  pertains  to  it  alone, 
but  that  cannot  serve  as  a model  for  the  treatment  of  other  cases. 
Now,  if  it  is  wished  to  describe  a complicated  case  of  disease  consisting 
of  many  symptoms,  in  such  a circumstantial  manner  that  the  reasons 
that  influence  us  in  the  choice  of  the  remedy  shall  be  clearly  revealed, 
this  demands  a multiplicity  of  details  fatiguing  at  once  for  the  describer 
and  for  the  reader. 

In  order,  however,  to  comply  with  the  desire  of  my  friends  in  this 
also,  I may  here  detail  two  cases  of  homoeopathic  cure  of  the  most 
trivial  character. 

Sch — , a washerwoman,  somewhere  about  40  years  old,  had  been  more 
than  three  weeks  unable  to  earn  her  bread,  when  she  consulted  me  on 
the  1st  September,  1815. 

1.  On  any  movement,  especially  at  every  step,  and  worst  on  making 
a false  step,  she  has  a shoot  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  that  comes,  as  she 
avers,  every  time  from  the  left  side. 

2.  When  she  lies  she  feels  quite  well,  then  she  has  no  pain  any- 
where, neither  in  the  side  nor  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. 

3.  She  cannot  sleep  after  three  o’clock  in  the  morning. 

4.  She  relishes  her  food,  but  when  she  has  eaten  a little  she  feels  sick. 

5.  Then  the  water  collects  in  her  mouth  and  runs  out  of  it,  like  the 
water-brasE. 

6.  She  has  frequent  empty  eructations  after  every  meal. 

7.  Her  temper  is  passionate,  disposed  to  anger. — When  the  pain 
is  severe  she  is  covered  with  perspiration. — The  catamenia  were  quite 
regular  a fortnight  since. 

1 The  corresponding  paragraphs  of  the  5th  edit,  are  269 — 271. 

2 In  place  of  this  paragraph  the  2nd  edition  (published  in  1824)  has  four  paragraphs 
describing  the  mode  of  preparing  the  remedies  then  adopted,  which  are  superseded  by 
the  instructions  in  the  Organon.  In  the  older  edition  there  is  no  mention  of  the 
decillionth  potency  being  the  appropriate  dose  for  therapeutic  and  pathogenetic 
purposes. 


PREAMBLE. 


21 


In  other  respects  her  health  is  good. 

Now,  as  regards  Symptom  i,  belladonna , china,  and  rhus  toxicodendron 
cause  shootings  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  but  none  of  them  only  on  move- 
ment, as  is  the  case  here.  Pulsatilla  (see  Symp.  38  71)  certainly  causes 
shootings  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  on  making  a false  step,  but  only  as 
a rare  alternating  action,  and  has  neither  the  same  digestive  derange- 
ments as  occur  here  at  4 compared  with  5 and  6,  nor  the  same  state  of 
the  disposition. 

Bryonia  alone  has  among  its  chief  alternating  actions,  as  the  whole 
list  of  its  symptoms  demonstrates,  pains  from  movement  and  especially 
shooting  pains,  as  also  stitches  beneath  the  sternum  (in  the  pit  of  the 
stomach)  on  raising  the  arm  (448),  and  on  making  a false  step  it  occa- 
sions shooting  in  other  parts  (520,  600). 

The  negative  Symptom  2 met  with  here  answers  especially  to  bryonia 
(638) ; few  medicines  (with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  nux  vomica  and 
rhus  toxicodendron  in  their  alternating  action — neither  of  which,  how- 
ever, is  suitable  for  the  other  symptoms)  show  a complete  relief  to 
pains  during  rest  and  when  lying  ; bryonia  does,  however,  in  an  especial 
manner  (638,  and  many  other  bryonia-symptoms). 

Symptom  3 is  met  with  in  several  medicines,  and  also  in  bryonia  (694). 

Symptom  4 is  certainly,  as  far  as  regards  “ sickness  after  eating,”  met 
with  in  several  other  medicines  ( ignatia , nux  vomica , mercurius,ferrum , 
belladonna,  pulsatilla,  cantharis),  but  neither  so  constantly  and  usually, 
nor  with  relish  for  food,  as  in  bryonia  (279). 

As  regards  Symptom  5 several  medicines  certainly  cause  a flow  of 
saliva  like  water-brash,  just  as  well  as  bryonia  (282)  ; the  others,  how- 
ever, do  not  produce  symptoms  similar  to  the  remaining  ones.  Hence 
bryonia  is  to  be  preferred  to  them  in  this  part  of  the  ailment. 

Empty  eructation  (of  wind  only)  after  eating  (Symptom  6)  is  found 
in  few  medicines,  and  in  none  so  constantly,  so  usually,  and  to  such  a 
great  degree,  as  in  bryonia  (253,  259). 

To  7. — One  of  the  chief  symptoms  in  diseases  (see  Organon  of 
Medicine,  § 213)  is  the  “state  of  the  disposition,”  and  as  bryonia  (77 2) 
causes  this  symptom  also  in  an  exactly  similar  manner — bryonia  is  for 
all  these  reasons  to  be  preferred  in  this  case  to  all  other  medicines  as  the 
homoeopathic  remedy. 

Now,  as  this  woman  was  very  robust,  and  the  force  of  the  disease 
must  consequently  have  been  very  considerable  to  prevent  her  by  its 
pain  from  doing  any  work,  and  as  her  vital  forces,  as  has  been  observed, 
were  not  impaired,  I gave  her  one  of  the  strongest  homoeopathic  doses, 
a full  drop  of  the  undiluted  juice  of  bryonia  root,*  to  be  taken  imme- 
diately, and  bade  her  come  to  me  again  in  48  hours.  I told  my  friend 

* According  to  the  most  recent  development  of  our  new_  system  the  ingestion  of  a 
single,  minutest  globule,  moistened  with  the  decillionth  (X)  development  of  power 
would  have  been  quite  adequate  to  effect  an  equally  rapid  and  complete  recovery ; 
indeed,  equally  certain  would  have  been  the  mere  olfaction  of  a globule  the  size  of  a 
mustard  seed  moistened  with  the  same  dynamization,  so  that  the  drop  of  crude  juice 
given  by  me  in  the  above  case  to  a robust  person,  should  not  be  imitated. 


1 The  numbers  are  altered  so  as  to  suit  the  3rd  edit.,  which  Hahnemann  neglected 
to  do,  when  this  edition  appeared. 


22 


PREAMBLE. 


E.,  who  was  present,  that  within  that  time  the  woman  would  assurdly  be 
quite  cured,  but  he,  being  but  half  converted  to  homoeopathy,  expressed 
his  doubts  about  it.  Two  days  afterwards  he  came  again  to  ascertain 
the  result,  but  the  woman  did  not  return  then,  and,  in  fact,  never  came 
back  again.  I could  only  allay  the  impatience  of  my  friend  by  telling 
him  her  name  and  that  of  the  village  where  she  lived,  about  a mile  and  a 
half  off,  and  advising  him  to  seek  her  out  and  ascertain  for  himself  how 
she  was.  This  he  did,  and  her  answer  was  : u What  was  the  use  of  my 
going  back  ? The  very  next  day  I was  quite  well,  and  could  again 
go  to  my  washing,  and  the  day  following  I was  as  well  as  I am 
still.  I am  extremely  obliged  to  the  doctor,  but  the  like  of  us  have  no 
time  to  leave  off  our  work  ; and  for  three  weeks  previously  my  illness 
prevented  me  earning  anything.” 

W — e,  a weakly,  pale  man  of  42  years,  who  was  constantly  kept  by 
his  business  at  his  desk,  complained  to  me  on  the  27th  December,  1815, 
that  he  had  been  already  ill  five  days. 

1.  The  first  evening  he  became,  without  manifest  cause,  sick  and 
giddy,  with  much  eructation. 

2.  The  following  night  (about  2 a.m.)  sour  vomiting. 

3.  The  subsequent  nights  violent  eructation. 

4.  To-day  also  sick  eructation  of  fetid  and  sourish  taste. 

5.  He  felt  as  if  the  food  lay  crude  and  undigested  in  his  stomach. 

6.  In  his  head  he  felt  vacant,  hollow,  and  gloomy,  and  as  if  sensitive 
therein. 

7.  The  least  noise  was  disagreeable  to  him. 

8.  He  is  of  a mild,  soft,  patient  disposition. 

Here  I may  observe  : — 

To  1.  That  several  medicines  cause  vertigo  with  nausea,  as  well  as 
pulsatilla  (3),  which  produces  its  vertigo  in  the  evening  also  (7),  a 
circumstance  that  has  been  observed  from  very  few  others. 

To  2.  Stramonium  and  nux  vomica  cause  vomiting  of  sour  and  sour- 
smelling mucus,  but,  as  far  as  is  known,  not  at  night.  Valerian  and 
cocculus  cause  vomiting  at  night,  but  not  of  sour  stuff.  Iron  alone  causes 
vomiting  at  night  (61,  62),  and  can  also  cause  sour  vomiting  (66),  but 
not  the  other  symptoms  which  should  be  attended  to  here. 

Pulsatilla , however,  causes  not  only  sour  vomiting  in  the  evening 
(349,  354)  and  nocturnal  vomiting  in  general  (355),  but  also  the  other 
symptoms  of  this  case  not  found  among  those  of  iron. 

To  3.  Nocturnal  eructation  is  peculiar  to  pulsatilla  (296,  297). 

To  4.  Fetid, putrid  (259)  and  sour  eructation  (301,  302)  is  also  peculiar 
to  pulsatilla. 

To  5.  The  sensation  of  indigestibility  of  the  food  in  the  stomach  is 
produced  by  few  medicines,  and  by  none  in  such  a perfect  and  striking 
manner  as  by  pulsatilla  (321,  322,  327). 

To  6.  Besides  ignatia  (2)  which,  however,  cannot  produce  the 
other  ailments,  the  same  state  is  produced  by  pulsatilla  (20  compared 
with  42,  94,  98). 

To  7.  Pulsatilla  produces  the  same  state  (995),  and  it  also  causes 
over-sensitiveness  of  other  organs  of  the  senses,  for  example,  of  the  sight 
(107).  And  although  intolerance  of  noise  is  also  met  with  in  nux 


PREAMBLE, 


23 


vomica , ignatia , and  aconite , yet  these  medicines  are  not  homoeopathic 
to  the  other  symptoms  and  still  less  do  they  possess  symptom  8,  the 
mild  character  of  the  disposition,  which,  as  stated  in  the  preface  to 
pulsatilla , is  particularly  indicative  of  this  plant. 

This  patient,  therefore,  could  not  be  cured  by  anything  in  a more 
easy,  certain,  and  permanent  manner  than  by  pulsatilla , which  was 
homoeopathic  to  the  case.  It  was  accordingly  given  to  him  immedi- 
ately ; but,  on  account  of  his  weakly  and  exhausted  state,  only  in  a 
very  minute  dose,  i.  e.  half  a drop  of  the  quadrillionth  of  a strong  drop 
of  pulsatilla.*  This  was  done  in  the  evening. 

The  next  day  he  was  free  from  all  ailments,  his  digestion  was  restored, 
and  a week  thereafter,  as  I was  told  by  him,  he  remained  free  from 
complaint  and  quite  well. 

The  investigation  in  such  a slight  case  of  disease,  and  the  choice  of 
the  homoeopathic  remedy  for  it,  is  very  speedily  effected  by  the  prac- 
titioner who  has  had  only  a little  experience  in  it,  and  who  either  has 
the  symptoms  of  the  medicine  in  his  memory,  or  who  knows  where  to 
find  them  readily ; but  to  give  in  writing  all  the  reasons  pro  and  con 
(which  would  be  perceived  by  the  mind  in  a few  seconds)  gives  rise,  as 
we  see,  to  tedious  prolixity. 

For  the  convenience  of  treatment,  we  require  merely  to  jot  down 
after  each  symptom  all  the  medicines  which  can  produce  such  a symptom 
with  tolerable  accuracy,  expressing  them  by  a few  letters  (e.  g.  Ferr., 
Chin.,  Rheum,  Puls.),  and  also  to  bear  in  mind  the  circumstances  under 
which  they  occur,  that  have  a determining  influence  on  our  choice  ; and 
proceed  in  the  same  way  with  all  the  other  symptoms,  noting  by  what 
medicine  each  is  excited j from  the  list  so  prepared  we  shall  be  able 
to  perceive  which  among  the  medicines  homceopathically  covers  the 
most  of  the  symptoms  present,  especially  the  most  peculiar  and  charac- 
teristic ones, — and  this  is  the  remedy  sought  for. 

* * % % % 

As  regards  the  following  catalogue  of  medicinal  symptoms  there  are 
in  this  part  also  many  observations  by  my  disciples,  mostly  made 
on  themselves.  Their  names  will  be  found  attached,  with  the  addition, 
cc  in  an  essay T1  On  every  occasion  when  my  Leipzic  disciples 

delivered  to  me  their  essays  I questioned  them  respecting  the  symptoms 
they  observed  (and  this  I would  advise  every  teacher  to  do  under  similar 
circumstances)  in  order  to  get  as  precisely  as  possible  the  verbal  expres- 
sions of  their  sensations  and  sufferings,  and  to  ascertain  with  exactness 
the  conditions  under  which  the  symptoms  occurred.  By  this  means  I 
have,  as  I believe,  elicited  the  truth.  I knew  also  that  they  had  faith- 

* According  to  our'present  knowledge  and  experience  the  same  object^would  have 
been  attained  by  taking  one  of  the  smallest  globules  of  pulsatilla  X (decillionth 
potency)  and  with  equal  certainty  a single  olfaction  of  a globule  the  size  of  a mustard 
seed  of  the  same  potency  of  pulsatilla. 


1 Although  this  statement  occurs  in  this  “ Preamble  ” as  prefixed  to  the  3rd  edition 
of  vol.  ii,  it  is  not  correct  as  applied  to  that  edition,  where  the  names  of  Hahne- 
mann’s disciples  are  indicated  by  their  abbreviations  only  within  square  brackets. 
The  plan  he  mentions  was  adopted  in  the  2nd  edition  of  all  the  vols. 


24 


PREAMBLE. 


fully  observed  the  carefully  regulated  diet,  and  had  led  a lire  undisturbed 
by  passions  during  their  provings,  in  order  to  be  able  to  observe  the 
alterations  in  their  health  purely  and  obviously  due  to  the  medicine 
taken. 

By  conducting  their  trials  in  this  manner  they  become  careful, 
delicately  sensitive  observers,  and  if  with  this  they  combine  pure  moral 
conduct  and  the  acquisition  of  other  useful  branches  of  knowledge,  they 
will  become  proficients  in  the  healing  art.1 


1 It  was  not  until  the  ist  vol.  of  the  ist  edition  had  been  published  that  Hahne- 
mann obtained  any  assistance  from  others  in  his  provings.  This  is  the  reason  of  the 
appearance  of  these  last  two  paragraphs  in  the  2nd  vol.,  in  which  vol.  they  are  still 
retained  in  the  two  last  editions. 


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.1 


( Monkshood .) 

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  the  plant  at  the  time  ot  the  commencement  ot 
flowering  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  spirits  of  wine.) 

Although  the  following  symptoms  do  not  express  the  whole  signifi- 
cance of  this  most  valuable  plant,  still  they  reveal  to  the  thoughtful 
homoeopathic  physician  a prospect  of  relieving  morbid  conditions  in  which 
traditional  medicine  has  hitherto  employed  its  most  dangerous  methods, 
e.g.  copious  blood-letting  and  all  its  complex  would-be  antiphlogistic 
treatments,  often  ineffectually,  and  almost  always  with  disastrous 
consequences.  I allude  to  the  so-called  pure  inflammatory  fevers,  in 
which  the  smallest  dose  of  aconite  enables  us  to  dispense  with  all  the 
traditional  antipathic  treatments,  and  relieves  rapidly  and  without  evil 
effects.  In  measles,  in  purpura  miliaris,  and  in  the  acute  pleuritic 
fevers,  &c.,  its  curative  power  is  marvellous,  when,  the  patient  being 
kept  rather  cool,  it  is  given  alone , all  other  medicinal  substances , even 
vegetable  acids,  being  avoided , in  the  dose  of  a thousandth  part  * of  a 
drop  of  the  decillionth  development  of  power.  It  is  seldom  that  a second 
similar  dose  is  required  thirty-six  or  forty-eight  hours  after  the  first. 

But  in  order  to  remove  from  our  conscientious  treatment  all  that 
routine  practice  which  is  only  too  apt  to  regulate  its  treatment  in 
accordance  with  delusive  names  of  diseases,  it  is  indispensable  that,  in 
all  morbid  conditions  in  which  aconite  is  given,  the  chief  symptoms 
of  the  malady,  therefore  also  of  the  acute  disease,  should  be  found 
accurately  reproduced  among  the  symptoms  of  aconite. 

The  effect  is  then  astonishing. 

It  is  precisely  in  the  great  acute  inflammatory  fevers  in  which 
allopathy  chiefly  plumes  itself  as  alone  able  to  save  life  by  means  of 
bold,  frequent  venesections,  and  imagines  that  here  it  is  superior  in 
curative  efficacy  to  all  homoeopathic  treatment — it  is  precisely  here  that 
it  is  most  mistaken.  It  is  precisely  here  that  the  infinite  superiority  of 
homoeopathy  is  manifest,  that  it  needs  not  to  shed  a single  drop  of 
blood,  that  precious  vital  fluid  (which  the  allopath  recklessly  draws  off 
in  streams,  to  the  often  irremediable  disadvantage  of  the  patient),  in 
order  to  transform  this  dangerous  fever  into  health  in  as  many  hours  as 
the  allopathic  vitality-diminishing  treatment  often  requires  months  for  the 
perfect  restoration  of  those  who  are  not  carried  off  during  the  process 

* That  is,  a small  globule  the  size  or  a poppy  seed  moistened  with  it,  of  which 
more  than  a thousand  are  moistened  by  one  drop  of  spirits  of  wine,  and  which  are 
so  small  that  300  of  them  weigh  only  one  grain. 


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit,,  18,30. 


26 


ACONITUM. 


by  death,  or,  at  all  events,  in  the  chronic  after-affections  artificially 
caused  by  the  means  employed. 

In  these  acute  cases  of  disease  sometimes  a homoeopathic  intermediate 
remedy  is  required  for  the  morbid  symptoms  remaining  after  twelve  or 
sixteen  hours’  action  of  the  first  dose  of  aconite ; but  it  is  very  rarely 
that  a second  dose  of  aconite  is  needed  after  this  intermediate  remedy. 

By  means  of  aconite  carefully  administered  in  this  way  in  a disease  of 
the  above-mentioned  character  all  danger  is  removed  even  in  four  hours, 
and  the  excited  circulation  resumes  its  tranquil  vital  course  from  hour 
to  hour. 

Although  aconite,  on  account  of  the  short  duration  of  its  action 
(which  in  such  small  doses  does  not  exceed  forty-eight  hours),  might 
seem  to  be  useful  only  in  acute  diseases,  yet  it  is  an  indispensable 
accessory  remedy  in  even  the  most  obstinate  chronic  affections,  when 
the  system  requires  a diminution  of  the  so-called  tension  of  the  blood- 
vessels (the  strictum  of  the  ancients).  On  this  subject,  however,  I 
cannot  enter  more  fully  in  this  place.  Its  utility  in  such  cases  is 
shown  by  the  symptoms  it  produces  in  the  healthy  subject,  which  are 
partially  recorded  in  the  following  pages. 

Aconite  is  also  the  first  and  main  remedy,  in  the  minute  dose  indi- 
cated above,  in  inflammation  of  the  windpipe  (croup,  membranous 
laryngitis),  in  various  kinds  of  inflammation  of  the  throat  and  fauces,  as 
also  in  the  local  acute  inflammations  of  all  other  parts,  particularly  where, 
in  addition  to  thirst  and  quick  pulse,  there  are  present  anxious  im- 
patience, an  unappeasable  mental  agitation,  and  agonizing  tossing  about. 

It  produces  all  the  morbid  states  similar  to  those  seen  in  persons  who 
have  had  a fright  combined  with  vexation,  and  is  also  the  surest  and 
quickest  remedy  for  them. 

In  the  selection  of  aconite  as  a homoeopathic  remedy  particular 
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disposition,  so  that 
they  should  be  very  similar. 

Hence  it  is  indispensable  after  fright  or  vexation  in  women  during 
the  catamenia,  which  without  this  excellent  soothing  remedy  are  only 
too  easily,  often  instantaneously,  suppressed  by  such  emotional  disturb- 
ances. For  this  purpose  a single  momentary  olfaction  at  a phial  con- 
taining a globule  the  size  of  a mustard-seed,  moistened  with  the  de- 
cillionth  potency  of  aconite  (which  may  be  kept  for  this  use  for  years  in 
a well-corked  phial  without  losing  its  curative  power)  is  quite  sufficient. 

Most  of  the  apparently  opposite  aconite  symptoms  recorded  below 
are  merely  alternating  states,  and  it  may  be  curative  by  means  of  both, 
but  it  is  most  so  in  respect  of  those  which  have  a tonic  character. 

Vegetable  acids  and  wine  antidote  its  effects,  and  so  do  other  medi- 
cines which  correspond  palliatively  or  homoeopathically  to  some  of  its 
troublesome  symptoms  (produced  by  too  large  a dose  or  unhomoeopathic 
selection). 

[The  names  of  Hahnemann’s  disciples  who  assisted  him  in  this  proving  are  : 
Ahnef,  Gross,  Friedrich  Hahnemann,  Hornburg,  ROckert  senior,  Stapf, 
Wahle. 

The  authorities  ot  traditional  medicine  quoted  by  him  for  some  of  the  recorded 
effects  of  aconite  are  : 


ACONITUM. 


27 


Abano,  Pet.  de,  De  Venenis,  cap.  30,  1496. 

Bacon,  Vinc.,  Philo  soph.  Transactions , xxxviii. 

DORR,  Hufel.  Journ ix,  4. 

Gmelin,  Eberh.,  Nov.  Acta  Nat . Cur.,  Vi. 

Greding,  Vermischte  Schriften. 

Helmont,  J.  B.  v an,  Demens  Idea,  § 12.  ( Orteus  Medicina,  1652.) 

Matthiolus,  Comment,  in  Diosc.,  lib.  iv,  cap.  73. 

Moraeus,  Konigl.  Vetensk.  Acad.  Handl .,  1739. 

Richard,  Glaud.,  in  P.  Schenck's  Obs.  Med.,  lib.  vii,  obs.  136. 

Rodder,  in  Alberti's  Jurisprud.  Med.,  tom.  vi. 

Stoerck,  Ant.  von,  Libellus  de  Stram.,  Hyos.  et  Aeon. 

In  the  Frag,  de  Vir.  the  symptoms  of  aconite  are  213,  in  the  first  edition  of  the 
R.  A,  M.  L.}  they  are  314,  in  the  second  429,  and  in  the  third  541.] 


ACONITE. 

Vertigo  ; feeling  of  swaying  to  and  fro  in  the  brain. 

Vertigo,  especially  when  stooping;  she  staggered  to  and  fro, 
especially  towards  the  right  side  (aft.  3 6 h.).  [Stf  Gss .,  Archiv  f.  d. 
Homoopath . Heilkunst , iv,  i.1] 

She  could  hardly  get  into  bed  for  vertigo,  in  which  all  seemed  to 
turn  round  in  a circle  with  her  (aft.  37  h.).  [Stf.  Gjj.J 

She  has  a whirling  in  the  head,  so  that  she  dare  not  move  it, 
with  a feeling  as  if  the  eyes  would  close.  [St/.  Gvr.] 

5.  As  if  intoxicated;  all  goes  round  with  her,  she  staggers  when 
walking,  as  if  she  would  fall,  with  nausea,  not  on  sitting,  worst  on 
rising  from  a seat,  less  when  walking  (aft.  \ h.).  [Stf.  Gjj.] 

Vertigo  very  much  increased  on  shaking  the  head,  when  it 
became  quite  black  before  her  eyes.  [Stf.  Gjj.] 

Vertigo  and  dizziness. 

Giddy  weight  of  the  head,  especially  in  the  forehead  and  on 
stooping,  with  nausea,  and  qualmish  feeling  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
(aft.  2 h.).  [Stf.  Gvr.] 

Vertigo.  [Matthioli,2  Comment . in  Diosc.,  lib.  iv,  cap.  73. — - 
Vinc.  Bacon,3  in  Philosoph.  Transact .,  xxxviii,  p.  287.] 

10.  Vertigo,  tightness  of  chest  and  dry  cough,  with  pain  in  hip. 
[Greding,4  Vermischte  Schriften , p.  90 — 113.] 

Giddy  obscuration  of  sight,  with  unaltered  pulse.  [Claud. 
Richard,  in  P.  Schenck ,5  lib.  vii,  obs.  136.] 

1 In  the  original  this  is  erroneously  printed  “ V.  iii.”  The  symptoms  taken  from 
the  Archiv  were  observed  by  Drs.  Gross  and  Stapf  on  themselves  and  others. 
Hahnemann  refers  to  the  Journal  in  which  they  were  first  published  after  each 
symptom  taken  therefrom,  but  as  Drs.  Gross  and  Stapf  were  essentially  fellow- 
workers  with  Hahnemann,  and  assisted  him  to  prove  many  of  his  medicines,  we  have 
considered  it  best  to  give  the  abbreviations  of  their  names  after  the  symptoms  for 
which  they  are  responsible,  as  well  to  avoid  confusion  as  to  do  honour  to  these  able 
pioneers  of  homoeopathy. 

2 Narrative  of  two  cases  in  which  aconite  was  administered  to  criminals  (male 
adults)  to  test  the  efficacy  af  the  bezoar-stone  as  an  antidote. 

3 Poisoning  of  an  adult. 

4 An  account  of  the  treatment  of  nine  patients,  variously  afflicted,  with  increasing 
doses  of  the  extract.— -The  patient  in  whom  these  symptoms  occurred  had  suffered 
from  them  before  taking  the  medicine. 

5 As  Matthiolus  (one  case).  See  note  a. 


28 


ACONITUM. 


Vertigo  and  headache,  unaffected  by  active  exercise  (aft.  \ h.). 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

Vertigo  and  headache  in  sinciput  and  occiput,  both  worst  when 
stooping  (aft.  io  m.).  [Fr.  H — n .] 

Distraction  of  the  attention  when  reading  and  writing  by  a 
frequent  cessation  of  the  thoughts,  [.£/£/.] 

15.  Preoccupation  of  the  mind  ; he  is  unable  to  complete  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  thoughts  that  he  had  conceived  and  half  written  down, 
without  first  making  an  effort  to  recall  them  (3rd  day).  [We.] 

Stupid  feeling  of  the  head  ; as  if  he  had  a board  before  the  fore- 
head (aft.  J h.).  [£//'.  Gss.] 

The  head  in  front  is  as  if  nailed  up,  in  the  warm  room. 

[St/.  Gss.] 

Unsteadiness  of  the  ideas ; if  she  wants  to  pursue  one 
train  of  thought  a second  chases  this  away,  a third  again 
displaces  this,  and  so  on  and  on,  until  she  becomes  quite 
confused.  [St/.  Gjj.] 

Want  of  memory;  he  feels  as  if  what  he  had  just 
done  were  a dream,  and  he  can  scarcely  recall  what  it 
was.  [St/  Gss.] 

20.  Weakness  of  memory  (aft.  5 and  9 h.). 

Lively  memory. 

Weakened  power  of  thinking.  [We.] 

He  can  think  of  nothing,  consider  nothing,  knows  nothing,  and 
can  form  no  idea  of  anything  in  his  head,  as  he  usually  could — but 
he  feels  as  if  all  these  mental  operations  took  place  in  the  pit  of  the 
stomach — after  two  hours  he  has  two  attacks  of  vertigo,  and  then 
his  usual  thinking  faculty  returns  into  his  head.  [J.  B.  v.  Helmont,1 
in  Demens  Idea , § 12.] 

In  the  morning  vacancy  and  emptiness  of  the  head,  as  after 
severe  intoxication.  [-£/£?.] 

25.  Confusion  of  the  head,  as  after  intoxication,  with  aching  in  the 
temples. 

Stupid  bruised  pain  in  the  head,  with  bruised  feeling  in  all  the 
limbs  (aft.  14  h.). 

Feeling  of  fulness  and  heaviness  in  the  forehead,  as 
if  an  out-pressing  weight  lay  there,  and  as  if  all  would 
be  forced  out  at  the  forehead  (aft.  ± h.).  [St/.  Gss.] 

Stupifying  drawing  in-pressing  in  the  left  temple.  [St/  Gjj.] 

Feeling  as  if  some  one  drew  him  up  by  the  hair.  [Stf.  Crxx.] 

30.  Semilateral  drawing  in  the  head.  [St/  Gss.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  temporal  region,  afterwards  also  in  jerks  in 
the  occiput,  lastly  confusion  of  the  head  and  contractive  pain. 

Contractive  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Ar.] 

Tension  all  over  the  forehead.  [Hbg.] 


1 Effect  of  putting  a piece  of  the  root  on  his  tongue.  Of  the  state  described  in 
this  symptom  and  S.  502  he  writes  : — “ I had  already  often  had  ecstasies,  but  I never 
found  myself  quite  like  this.  I have,  further,  repeated  the  experiment  in  vain  : I 
have  felt  nothing  similar  again.'’ 


ACONITUM. 


29 


On  stooping  her  forehead  feels  very  full,  as  if  all  would  come 
out  (aft.  25  h.).  [St/.  G-fj.] 

35.  Headache,  as  if  the  eyes  would  fall  out  of  the  head  (aft.  \ h.). 

Headache,  as  if  the  brain  pressed  out. 

Headache,  as  if  here  and  there  a part  of  the  brain  were  lifted  up, 
which  is  increased  by  slight  movement,  even  by  drinking  and  speak- 
ing  (aft.  J h.). 

Speaking  increases  the  headache. 

Shooting,  throbbing  headache,  as  it  an  ulcer  were  inside,  which 
sometimes  prevents  speaking. 

40.  Sometimes  a fine  shooting,  sometimes  throbbing,  sometimes 
aching  headache  in  the  forehead  when  walking,  relieved  by  sitting. 

A fine  throbbing  here  and  there  in  the  head. 

Headache ; a throbbing  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead, 
whilst  strong  heats  occur  in  the  right  side  by  fits  (aft.  3 h/). 

In  the  left  side  of  the  head,  pain  as  if  the  head  were  compressed. 
[Jr.] 

Headache,  as  if  the  skull  were  externally  constricted  with  a 
ligature  and  drawn  tightly  together.  [Helmont,  1.  c.] 

45.  Very  painful,  sharp,  pressing  headache  above  the  forehead.  [JVe.] 

Out-pressing  pain  in  the  forehead.  [We.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  temple,  [Ar.] 

In  the  left  temple  shooting  pain  by  jerks  ; stitches  pass  through 
the  temple  into  the  head.  [Stf.  Gss. ] 

Shooting,  beating  headache  in  the  temples.  [Stf.  Gss.] 

50.  Shooting  by  jerks  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  forehead.  [Stf.  Gr*.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  temple,  with  roaring  noise  in  the  ears. 
[Stf.  Gss.] 

Feeling  of  contraction  of  the  brain  under  the  torehead  (aft.  20  h.). 
[Stf  Gss.] 

Squeezing,  tensive  headache  close  behind  the  orbits. 

A pinching  and  squeezing  in  the  forehead,  as  if  it  were  in  the 
bones  ; she  feels  ill,  as  though  about  to  go  mad  (aft.  12,  24  h.). 

55.  A squeezing  in  the  forehead,  above  the  root  of  the  nose,  as  if  she 
would  lose  her  reason  (as  if  wrong  in  the  head)  ; aggravated  by 
walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  4 h.). 

A feeling  of  crepitation  (like  bending  gold  tinsel  to  and  fro)  in 
the  temples,  nose,  and  forehead. 

Shooting  and  somewhat  aching  headache  above  the  orbits  towards 
the  superior  maxilla,  which  causes  nausea,  or  as  usually  occurs  during 
the  vomiting  caused  by  an  emetic  (aft.  2 h.). 

Aching,  shooting,  sick  headache  above  the  orbits  and  down  to  the 
upper  jaw. 

Feeling  as  if  something  were  drawn  out  of  the  head,  whereby  her 
upper  eyelids  are  drawn  upwards  (aft.  \ h.).  [Stf.  Gjx.] 

60.  Twitching,  tearing  pain  in  the  occiput.  [Ar.] 

Jerking,  shooting,  drawing,  tearing  pain  in  the  upper  part  ot  the 
right  side  of  the  head.  [Ar.] 

A shoot  in  the  occipital  bone.  [Hbg.] 

Creeping  on  the  left  side  of  the  head,  as  from  a brush.  [Hbg.] 


3o 


ACONITUM. 


Feeling  as  if  a ball  rose  from  the  umbilical  region  and  spread  a 
cool  air  in  the  vertex  and  occiput.  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

65.  Burning  headache  as  if  the  brain  were  moved  by  boiling  water. 
[Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

Heaviness  of  the  head.  [V.  Bacon,  1.  c.] 

Pain  in  the  occiput  and  neck.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Headache,  roaring  in  the  ears,  coryza  and  colic,  especially  in  the 
morning,  as  if  a chill  had  been  taken  after  profuse  perspiration.1 2 
[Greding,  1.  c.] 

Towards  evening  she  got  very  hot  in  the  whole  head,  after  which 
there  occurred  tenderness  of  the  whole  head,  especially  of  the  fore- 
head, lasting  all  the  evening  (aft.  11  h.).  [St/.  Gjj.] 

70.  (Puffy  face  and  forehead.) 

Bluish  face,  black  lips.  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

Distortion  of  the  facial  muscles.  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

Very  widely  dilated  pupils.  [We.] 

Obscuration  of  the  sight.  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 

75.  Repeated  blindness,  with  undiminished  power  of  speech.3  [Mat- 
thioli, 1.  c.] 

Distortion  of  the  eyes.  [Matthioli, — Bacon,  1.  c.] 

Distortion  of  the  eyes  and  grinding  of  the  teeth  (about  midnight).3 
[Greding,  1.  c.] 

On  opening  the  eyelids  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  eye  (as  if  it 
would  be  pressed  out),  which  pain  spread  over  the  region  of  the  eye- 
brow into  the  interior  of  the  brain  (aft.  21  h.).  [Stf.  Gjj.] 

Dilated  pupils  (immediately). 

80.  His  eyes  are  staring  (immediately). 

Desire  for  light,  longing  to  look  into  the  bright  light  (aft.  3 h.). 
Black  spots  hovering  before  the  sight. 

Misty  before  the  eyes  j she  does  not  see  distinctly,  with  giddy 
feeling.  [Stf.  Gjj.] 

Photophobia  (aft.  6 and  12  h.).* 

85.  Acute  vision. 

Dryness  of  the  upper  eyelids,  which  causes  a sort  of  aching  in  the 
eyes  (aft.  5 h.). 

Heaviness  of  the  eyelids ; they  seemed  to  him  too  heavy  on 
raising  them.  [St/  Gjj.] 

(The  eyes  feel  cold  in  the  open  air.) 

Very  painful  inflammation  of  the  eyes  (chemosis). 

90.  Sensation  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  were  greatly  swollen  (aft.  5 h.). 
[St/  Gss.] 

The  eyes  are  closed  with  a jerk,  as  in  irresistible  sleepiness. 
[Stf.  Gss.] 

Protruding  eyes.  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

Aching  of  the  eyes,  most  observable  when  looking  down  and 
* Probably  an  alternating  symptom  with  8 1 , so  that  both  are  primary  effects. 


1 This  was  the  effect  of  an  actual  chill,  not  **  as  from  a chill.” 

2 See  S.  539. 

3 In  a demented  and  epileptic  patient,  subject  to  spasms. 


ACONITUM. 


3i 

when  moving  the  eyes  to  and  fro,  at  the  same  time  with  heat  in  them. 
[Rkt.-] 

Aching  and  burning  in  the  left  eye  and  over  the  eyebrows. 
[Hbg.] 

95.  Hard,  red  swelling  of  the  right  upper  eyelid,  with  tensive  sensa 
tion,  especially  in  the  morning.  [F.  H — n.] 

Ophthalmia,  with  discharge,  which  is  so  painful  and  horrible  that 
he  longs  for  death.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Constant,  dull,  humming  before  the  ears,  followed  by  fainting. 
[Bacon,  1.  c.] 

Pain  in  the  zygomatic  process,  as  from  an  internal  ulcer  there. 
Ringing  in  the  ears  (aft.  10  m.).  [Stf.  Gw.] 

100.  He  feels  as  if  something  lay  before  the  left  ear.  [Ar.] 

Tickling  sensation  in  the  right  ear,  as  if  a small  worm  crept  in. 
[Jr.] 

Tearing  in  the  left  ear.  [Hbg.] 

Pain  behind  the  left  ear,  like  a pressure  with  the  thumb.  [ Hbg .] 
Sensation  as  if  the  cheeks  were  swollen  to  double  their  size. 
[Bacon,  1.  c.] 

105.  Pain  in  the  maxillary  joint  behind  the  zygomatic  process,  when 
chewing. 

During  the  perspiration  a burning  pain  shot  several  times  into 
the  left  ear  and  upper  maxilla. 

Perspiration  on  the  cheek  on  which  she  lies  in  bed. 

Creeping  pain  on  the  cheeks. 

Sensation  of  stupifying  compression  of  the  root  of  the  nose.  [Stf, 
Gss.] 

no.  Epistaxis. 

Perspiration  on  the  upper  lip,  under  the  nose. 

Itching  pimples  on  the  upper  lip  (aft.  24  h.). 

Shooting  jerks  in  the  lower  jaw. 

Shooting  pain  in  various  teeth  (aft.  36  h.).  [We.'] 

1 15.  Aching  toothache  in  the  left  upper  jaw.  [We.] 

Very  penetrating  pain  in  jaws  as  if  they  would  fall  off.  [Mat- 

THIOLI,  1.  C.] 

In  the  tongue  and  jaws  a creeping  and  burning,  so  that  the  teeth 
seem  loose.  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 

Smarting  sensation  in  the  tongue,  chiefly  towards  its  tip.  [Stf. 
Gss.] 

Penetrating  fine  stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue. 

120.  In  the  tongue  a burning  of  long  continuance.  [Ant.  r.  Stoerck:,1 
Libellus  de  Stram .,  Hyos.  et  Aeon .,  pp.  71,  74,  80,  91,  96,  1 10] 

Momentary,  flying  stitches  in  the  tongue,  with  flow  of  saliva. 
[Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Coolness  and  dryness  of  the  mouth,  without  thirst.  [Hbg.] 

Dry  feeling  first  of  the  lips,  then  of  the  interior  of  the  mouth, 


1 This  and  the  following  symptom  were  experienced  by  Stoerck  himself  after 
placing  a small  quantity  of  the  root  on  his  tongue.  The  rest  of  his  symptoms  were 
observed  on  patients  to  whom  he  gave  the  drug. 


32 


ACONITUM. 


with  heat  rising  up  from  the  chest  towards  the  head  (without  redness 
of  the  cheeks).* 

Transient  paralysis  of  the  tongue. 

125.  Dryness  of  the  interior  of  the  mouth  (immediately). 

On  the  middle  of  the  tongue,  sensation  of  dryness  and  roughness, 
without  thirst  (aft.  1 h.). 

Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  fore  part  of  the  mouth. 

Feeling  of  soreness  of  the  orifices  of  the  salivary  glands,  as  if  they 
were  excoriated. 

In  the  throat  a scraping  with  difficult  deglutition.  [St/.  Grr.] 

130.  Drawing  from  the  side  of  the  throat  to  behind  the  ear.  [St/.  Gbr.] 

On  the  left  side  of  the  throat,  internally,  on  a small  spot,  a 
shooting  choking,  when  not,  but  especially  when,  swallowing  and 
speaking.  After  J of  an  hour  it  passed  to  the  right  side,  whilst  the 
painful  sensation  in  the  left  side  disappeared,  it  remained  there  J of 
an  hour,  and  went  off  entirely.  [St/  Gss .] 

Prickling  sensation  at  the  back  of  the  tongue  as  from  pepper, 
with  flow  of  saliva. 

Creeping  in  the  fauces. 

Fine  shooting  sensation  at  the  back  of  the  throat,  as  from  the 
prickly  hairs  of  the  dog-hip  (aft.  1 h.). 

135.  Burning  and  fine  shooting  pain  in  the  back  of  the  throat 
(fauces). 

Contractive  feeling  in  the  back  of  the  throat,  as  from  something 
astringent. 

Pepper-like  taste  in  the  mouth.1  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

Along  with  deficient  appetite,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  with 
pains  in  the  chest  and  under  the  short  ribs.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Bitter  taste. 

140.  Nasty,  fishy  taste,  as  from  stagnant  putrid  water. 

She  felt  as  if  the  whole  mouth  filled  with  air  of  the  taste  of  rotten 

eggs-  lStf- 

Sourish  taste  in  the  mouth,  with  loss  of  appetite.  [St/  Gjj.] 

What  formerly  had  a good  and  strong  taste  is  now  tasteless  to 
him.  [St/.  Gjj.] 

Sweetish  water  rose  up,  like  water-brash  ; at  the  same  time  roar- 
ing in  the  ears.  [St/  Gjj.] 

145.  Belching  up  of  sweetish  water,  with  nausea.  [Stf.  Gr*.] 

Scraping  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis  up  into  the  throat,  with 
nausea  and  qualmishness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  water  would 
come  into  her  mouth.  [St/  Gjj.] 

Empty  eructation.  [St/  Gss.] 

Ineffectual  effort  to  eructate  ; he  wishes  to  eructate  but  cannot. 

Thirst  for  beer  ; but  when  she  has  drunk  it,  it  oppresses  her 
stomach. 

* This  parenthesis  refers  to  a person  who,  when  in  good  health,  had  generally 
great  redness  of  the  cheeks,  which  was,  therefore,  homoeopathically  removed,  as 
aconite  almost  always  produces  heat  of  the  cheeks. 


1 Immediate  local  effect. 


ACONITUM. 


33 


150.  (She  will  not  eat  anything.) 

Nausea,  vomiting,  thirst,  general  heat  and  profuse  sweat  with 
diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

She  vomits  lumbrici.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Vomiting  of  green  bile  (aft.  1 h.).  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

Vomiting  of  mucus  mixed  with  blood  for  three  or  four  successive 
days.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

155.  Vomiting  of  blood.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Qualmish,  sick  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  worse  when  sitting,  going 
off  almost  when  walking  (immediately  after  taking  it).  \_Stf.  Grr.] 
Disgust  and  sinking,  qualmish  feeling  (aft.  J h.). 

Long-continued  disgust  and  anorexia. 

Inclination  to  vomit  on  walking  in  the  open  air. 

160.  Inclination  to  vomit  at  first  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  then  beneath 
the  sternum,  lastly  in  the  throat,  without  flow  of  saliva. 

Inclination  to  vomit,  just  as  if  he  had  eaten  something 
disgustingly  sweet  or  greasy  (aft.  1 h.). 

Profuse  sweat  after  vomiting  bloody  mucus.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 
Vomiting,  followed  by  violent  thirst.  [Moraeus,1  in  K'dnigl. 
Fetensk.  Acad.  Handle  1739,  p.  41] 

Vomiting,  artificially  excited,  only  temporarily  restored  the 
patient  from  his  state  of  syncope.  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 

165.  Vomiting  with  anxiety.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Inclination  to  vomit  with  severe  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 
Hiccup.2  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  hiccup.2  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  long-continued  hiccup.2  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

170.  (Hiccup  after  eating  and  drinking.) 

Aching  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  increased  to  tight- 
ness of  the  chest  (aft.  2\  h.). 

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis  pressure  as  from  a stone  lying  there, 
which  soon  afterwards  extended  to  the  back,  with  a squeezing- 
together  sensation,  as  if  she  had  injured  herself  by  a strain  ; as  if 
stiff.  [Stf.  Gjj.] 

Cardialgia.  [Rodder,*  in  Albert? s Jurisprud . Med.,  tom.  vi, 

p-  724-] 

Aching  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  when  sitting,  walking,  and 
standing.  [ Ar .] 

175.  Pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  it  were  swollen  internally, 
with  loss  of  appetite  and  attacks  of  dyspnoea. 

Pressive  pain  in  the  stomach,  like  a weight  (aft. 
li  h.). 

Pressive  pain  like  a weight  in  the  hypochondria  (aft. 

h.). 

Tensive  pressive  pain,  as  from  fulness  or  a weight 
pressing  in  the  stomach  and  hypochondria  (aft.  ij  h.). 

* All  the  symptoms  observed  by  Rodder  were  caused  by  applying  the  juice  to  a 
wound. 


Poisoning  of  two  adults* 


2 See  note  to  S.  77* 

3 


34 


ACONITUM, 


Contractive  sensation  in  the  stomach  as  from  an  astringent. 

180.  Sensation  of  violent  constriction  in  the  hypochondria. 

Aching  pain  in  the  stomach.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Along  with  repeated  vomiting  and  frequent  stools  he  always 
complains  that  he  feels  as  if  a cold  stone  lay  in  the  stomach. 
[Richard,  1.  c.] 

Drawing-in  of  the  navel,  especially  in  the  morning  when  fasting. 

A burning  in  the  umbilical  region. 

385.  Burning  sensation  in  the  umbilical  region,  which  ran  rapidly 
over  her,  and  extended  to  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  with  a sensation  of 
anxious  beating  and  shooting  there  ; after  some  time  a rigor  ran  all 
over  the  body,  with  cessation  of  the  hot  feeling  and  of  the  painful 
sensation  in  the  umbilical  region  (aft.  i4  h.).  [St/.  Grr.] 

Pinching  pain  in  the  umbilical  region.  [St/  Gxr.] 

Compression  of  the  navel ; immediately  afterwards  intermitting 
aching  in  the  navel,  like  jerks.  [St/  Grr.] 

Griping  and  clawing  in  the  umbilical  region.  [St/  Grr.] 

Above  the  navel  to  the  left  a painless  sensation,  as  of  something 
cold  (a  cold  finger)  forcing  itself  from  within  outwards.  [St/  Gjj.] 

190.  Aching  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  whereby  the  respiration  is 
impeded,  immediately  thereafter  (pinching?)  bellyache  in  the  supra- 
umbilical  region. 

Jaundice. 

From  both  sides  towards  the  navel,  drawing  pains  in  the  abdomen, 
which  are  also  produced  by  bending  the  abdomen  together. 

The  epigastrium  and  hypochondria  are  occupied  by  a tense, 
painful  swelling.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Swollen,  distended  abdomen,  like  ascites.  [Richard,— 
Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

195.  Violent  jerks  (blows)  in  the  hepatic  region  that  take  away  the 
breath.  [Hbg.] 

Some  hours  earlier  than  usual  a hard  stool,  for  which  he  must 
strain  much. 

Rolling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  feeling  of  rawness. 

Css.] 

Rolling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  all  night. 

A sort  of  fermenting  rumbling  in  the  abdomen. 

200.  In  the  morning,  in  bed,  he  cries  out  and  does  not  know  how  to 
compose  himself  for  intolerable  (cutting)  pain  in  the  belly,  and  he 
tosses  about  in  bed  (aft.  16  h.). 

Colicky,  stretching,  tensive,  and  aching  pain  in  the  belly,  as  from 
flatulence. 

On  laughing  loud  a sharp  stitch  in  the  right  side  below  the  ribs. 
[St/  Gss.] 

On  inspiring  dull  stitches  in  the  left  side  below  the  ribs.  [St/ 
Gss.] 

Drawing  from  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium  towards  the  back  ; 
the  side  of  the  abdomen  is  painful  when  pressed  upon.  [St/  Grj.] 

205.  Flatulent  colic  in  the  hypogastrium  as  if  he  had 
taken  a flatus-producing  purgative. 


ACONITUM, 


35 


Very  hot  flatus  (aft.  9 h.). 

With  a feeling  as  if  only  flatus  were  passing,  unexpected  dis- 
charge of  thin  faeces  (aft.  4 h.). 

Hard  stool,  attended  with  pressing. 

Purging.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

210.  Sometimes  before,  sometimes  after  the  diarrhoea,  nausea  and 
perspiration.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Soft,  small  stools,  accompanied  with  tenesmus,  from  three  to  five 
per  diem. 

White  stool. 

White  stool  and  red  urine. 

Watery  diarrhoea. 

215.  The  hypogastrium  is  painfully  sensitive  to  touch. 

Weakness  of  the  bowels  such  as  is  apt  to  arise  from  abuse  of 
purgatives. 

Pain  in  the  rectum  (aft.  1 h.). 

Shooting  and  aching  in  the  anus. 

Transient  paralysis  of  the  anus,  involuntary  evacuation. 

220.  Fluent  haemorrhoids. 

During  the  diarrhoea  copious  flow  of  urine  and  moderate  perspi- 
ration. [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Pressure  on  the  bladder,  with  retention  of  urine.1 2  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Suppression  of  urine,  with  needle-pricks  in  the  renal  region. 
[Richard,  1.  c.] 

Diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

225.  Diuresis,  with  profuse  perspiration  and  frequent  watery  diarrhoea, 
with  bellyache.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Diuresis  and  along  with  it  constant  perspiration  [Greding,  1.  c.]. 

Copious  diuresis.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Diuresis,  with  distortion  of  the  eyes  and  spasmodic  contraction 
of  the  feet.3  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

On  passing  urine  a slight  sensation  (of  splashing)  in  the  vesical 
region.  [St/.  Gw.] 

230.  Painful  urging  to  urinate  ; she  must  make  water  very  frequently, 
because  the  bladder  fills  rapidly  with  a quantity  of  urine  as  clear  as 
water.  [£//'.  Gw.] 

Urging  to  urinate  on  touching  the  abdomen. 

Urine  passed  with  difficulty  (dysuria)  (aft.  J2,  18  h.). 

Anxious  urging  to  urinate  (aft.  4 h.). 

Urging  to  urinate  ; the  urine  passed  in  unusually  small  quantity, 
not  without  difficulty,  as  if  it  would  not  come  away  properly,  but 
without  pain  5 at  the  same  time  slight  pinching  in  the  umbilical 
region  (from  smelling  the  tincture).  [Stf.  Gw.] 

235.  Copious  discharge  of  urine,  which,  on  standing,  deposits  blood. 

Transient  paralysis  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  involuntary 
discharge  of  urine. 

Burning  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  when  not  urinating; 

Pain  of  the  bladder  when  walking  (aft.  4 h.). 


1 This  patient’s  bladder  was  previously  unhealthy; 

2 See  note  to  S.  77. 


36 


ACONITUM. 


Tenesmus  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder  (aft.  4 h.). 

240.  Brown  urine  passed  with  burning,  afterwards  depositing  brick- 
coloured  sediment. 

On  walking,  pains  in  the  loins  like  labour-pains. 

Itching  on  the  prepuce,  relieved  by  rubbing,  but  soon  returning 
(aft.  3 d.).  [TVe.-] 

Shooting  and  pinching  pain  in  the  glans  penis  when  urinating. 
Simple  pain  in  the  testicles,  like  that  which  remains  after  being 
squeezed  (aft.  2 h.) 

245.  Slight,  not  disagreeable  creeping  in  the  genitals.  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

He  has  amorous  fits.  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

(Very  much  increased  sexual  desire,  rapidly  alternating  with 
relaxation.)  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

Diminished  sexual  desire. 

Metrorrhagia. 

250.  The  menses  that  had  ceased  the  day  before  taking  the  drug, 
break  out  again  copiously  immediately  (aft.  J h.).  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 
Copious,  viscid,  yellowish  leucorrhoea.1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Fury  on  the  occurrence  of  the  menses.2  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

* * 

Anxiety  with  fear  of  suffocation.  [Rodder,  1.  c.] 

Tightness  of  the  chest.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

255.  Frequent  violent  sneezing,  with  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Stf.  Gjj.] 
Cannot  sneeze  thoroughly  on  account  of  pain  in  the  left  costal 
region.  [*S7/r.  Gss.~\ 

Extreme  sensitiveness  of  the  olfactory  nerves  disagreeable 
smells  have  a great  effect  on  her. 

Attacks  of  catarrh  and  coryza  (between  8 and  12  h.). 

Morning  hoarseness  (aft.  8 h.). 

260.  Attack  of  coryza.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Tussiculation  from  a tickle  at  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx 
(immediately). 

Short  cough. 

(Cough  during  the  heat  of  the  body.) 

Cough  after  drinking. 

265.  Severe  cough,  immediately,  from  a little  tobacco  smoke  (in  a 
person  accustomed  to  tobacco  smoking). 

He  (a  habitual  smoker)  cannot  smoke,  without  constantly  clear- 
ing his  throat  and  coughing,  either  because  the  epiglottis  allows  the 
smoke  to  penetrate  into  the  windpipe  or  because  the  larynx  has 
become  too  sensitive  (aft.  6 h.). 

After  midnight,  every  half  hour,  a short  cough  (kechekeh)  from 
a tickle  in  the  larynx ; the  more  he  tries  to  suppress  it,  the  more 
frequent  and  the  worse  it  was. 

Haemoptysis. 

Dry  cough.3  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

1 In  a woman  treated  for  “ a considerable  swelling  in  the  left  iliac  region.”  This 
discharge  coincided  with  the  diminution  and  disappearance  of  the  swelling. 

2 In  a maniac. 

3 The  patient  had  had  this  cough  previously* 


ACONITUM. 


37 


270.  Short  respiration  in  sleep,  after  midnight. 

Interrupted  respiration  through  the  nose,  especially  during  sleep. 

Foetid  breath. 

Noisy,  loud  respiration,  with  open  mouth. 

Tightness  of  the  chest,  with  strong,  loud  respiration. 

275.  Morbid  condition  (attacks  of  paralysis  ?)  of  the  epiglottis  ; food 
and  drink  are  apt  to  get  into  the  windpipe  when  swallowing,  so  that 
they  threaten  suffocation  and  excite  coughing ; he  is  apt  to  swallow 
the  wrong  way. 

He  is  apt  to  choke  on  swallowing  the  saliva.  \_Stf  Gw.] 

Anxiety  in  the  thoracic  cavity,  and  oppression  on  the  right  half 
of  the  chest,  then  in  the  whole  chest.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

Squeezing  together  of  the  chest  on  the  right  side  near  the 
sternum  ; a kind  of  tightness  of  the  chest.  [£//'.  Gw.] 

He  feels  as  if  the  chest  were  contracted.  [ Stf Gw.] 

280.  Compression  of  the  chest  in  the  region  of  the  heart.  [Stf.  Gw.] 
Anxiety  that  impedes  respiration,  with  warm  sweat  on  the 
forehead. 

Aching  pain  in  the  chest,  which  is  somewhat  relieved  by  bending 
the  upper  part  of  the  body  backwards,  but  returns  immediately  on 
resuming  the  erect  position  (aft.  12  h.).  \_We^\ 

Contractive  pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  the  ribs  on  both  sides  were 
drawn  towards  one  another.  \ArI\ 

He  feels  a weight  in  the  chest ; it  is  as  if  the  whole  chest  were 
compressed  from  all  sides. 

285.  Painful  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the 
lowest  rib,  which  extend  towards  the  sacrum  (aft.  10  h.).  \JVe.~\ 
Shooting,  aching  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  sternum.  \_We7\ 
Pinching,  digging  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  between  the 
third  and  fourth  ribs,  unaltered  by  anything,  until  it  disappears  of 
itself.  [dr.~\ 

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest  near  the  axilla,  oppressive,  obtuse 
stitches.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

Stitches  in  the  chest  (on  breathing).  [£//'.  Gss.~\ 

290.  At  every  breath,  shooting  from  the  lowest  rib  on  the  right  side 
extending  to  the  apex  of  the  scapula,  through  the  middle  of  the  chest, 
with  complaining  disposition. 

Shooting  in  the  right  side,  with  complaining  lachrymose  dispo- 
sition. 

Single,  large  stitches  in  the  side  through  to  the  back  (aft.  24  h.). 
Pain  in  the  chest,  like  a shooting,  interrupting  the  breathing. 
With  anxiety  and  peevishness,  a shooting  in  the  side  of  the  chest, 
followed  by  throbbing  in  the  side  of  the  chest,  then  aching  headache. 
295.  A burning,  fine  shooting  pain  in  the  chest. 

Sensation  as  if  the  windpipe  under  the  sternum  had  gone  asleep 
and  were  numb  (aft.  8 h.). 

By  touching  very  much  increased  pain,  as  from  a bruise,  in  the 
lowest  rib,  about  which  the  patient  makes  much  ado  and  complains. 

On  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  pain  as  if  bruised  (also  increased  by 
external  touch). 


3« 


ACONITUM. 


Slow  blows  in  the  cardiac  region  directed  towards  the  outside  of 
the  chest.  [*Sy.  Gw.] 

300.  Squeezing  pain  in  the  chest. 

Aching,  squeezing  pain  in  the  chest,  under  the  sternum. 

Shooting,  boring,  digging  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  between 
the  fourth  and  sixth  ribs,  for  ten  minutes.  [ArJ] 

Aching,  tightening  pain  in  the  side  of  the  chest. 

A creeping  pain  in  the  chest. 

305.  A crawling  in  the  chest  as  from  beetles. 

(Increase  of  milk  in  the  breasts.) 

Lumbar  pain.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  sacrum  on  the  left  side  [Hbg.~\ . 

Burning,  corrosive  pains  near  the  dorsal  vertebrae  in  the  right 
side.  [We\ 

310.  Violent,  shooting,  digging  pain  all  down  the  left  side  of 
the  spine  to  the  sacrum,  which  was  so  much  increased  by  inspiration 
that  tears  came  repeatedly  into  the  eyes,  for  four  hours.  [Ar!\ 

On  moving  painful  stiffness  of  the  sacral  and  hip-joints  ; he  is  as 
if  paralysed  in  the  sacrum  (aft.  2 h.). 

Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  articulation  of  the  lowest 
lumbar  vertebra  with  the  sacrum;  the  sacrum  feels 
hacked  off. 

Tensive,  aching  pain  in  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  or  as  if  from  a 
bruise ; at  the  same  time  pain  in  abdomen  as  from  flatulent  colic. 

Pain  as  if  bruised  from  the  sacrum  through  the  back  up  to  the 
nape  (aft.  4 h.). 

315.  Crawling  pain  in  the  spine  as  from  beetles. 

A cutting  round  from  the  spine  to  the  abdomen,  over  the  left 
hip,  in  a circle. 

On  the  left  side  near  the  sacrum  a painful  boring. 

A digging,  boring  pain  from  the  right  scapula  forwards  to  the 
chest,  that  was  increased  by  inspiring,  but  not  by  expiring,  but  never 
ceased,  for  twelve  minutes.  [Ar.~\ 

In  the  nape  a pain  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached,  with  a feeling 
as  if  the  nape  had  no  firmness,  and  as  if  the  head  would  fall  forwards  in 
consequence ; on  moving  the  head  shooting  in  the  nape.  [ Stf \ Gw.] 
320.  Rheumatic  pain  in  the  nape  only  observed  on  moving 
the  neck  (between  the  5th  and  9th  h.). 

Fine  shooting  externally  on  the  neck. 

Single  shoots  in  the  nape  on  both  sides.  \_Rkt.~\ 

Aching  pain  in  the  left  cervical  vertebra.  \_We^\ 

A pain  in  the  neck  pressing  inwards  towards  the  trachea,  like  a 
pressure  with  the  point  of  the  finger  into  the  neck.  [Ar.\ 

325.  Pain  in  the  left  shoulder-joint.  \_Hbg.~] 

Some  flying  stitches  in  the  left  shoulder.  [Stf,  Gw.] 

The  shoulder  hurts  her,  and  tends  to  sink  down.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

A swelling  in  the  muscles  of  the  shoulder,  with  violent  pains  as  if 
bruised  when  touched  (aft.  4 h.). 

Tearing  pain  from  the  shoulder  down  into  the  arm  as  far  as  the 
wrist,  and  even  the  fingers,  almost  only  on  every  movement ; during 
the  pain  the  hand  is  blue  (aft.  1,  14  h.) . 


ACONITUM. 


39 

330.  After  sleeping,  a pain  on  moving  in  the  shoulder  (and  hip)  joint 
as  from  being  crushed,  or  as  if  the  bed  had  been  too  hard. 

Single  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  right  upper  arm  on  its 
anterior  aspect,  when  at  rest,  unaffected  by  motion  and  by  pressing 
on  it.  [Arb] 

Sudden  drawing,  shooting  pain  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  right 
upper  arm.  [Arb] 

Trembling  of  the  arms  and  hands  (immediately).  \_Hbgb\ 

Pain  in  the  arm  and  fingers.1 2  [Rodder,  1.  c.] 

335.  A numbness  and  paralysis  in  the  left  arm  (and  leg),  so  that  he 
can  scarcely  move  the  hand.3  [Matthioli,  1.  c.) 

His  arms  are  as  if  bruised  and  sink  powerlessly  down.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 
Chilliness  and  insensibility  of  the  arms. 

Pain  on  the  forearm,  as  from  a severe  blow.  [Stf.  Gssb] 

Drawing,  shooting  pain  in  the  bone  of  the  forearm,  excitable  by 
movement. 

340.  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  arms,  from  the  elbow  to  the  fingers  ; 
she  would  like  to  let  them  sink  down  j with  feeling  of  being  asleep 
in  the  fingers  when  she  grasps  anything.  \_Stf.  GTf.] 

In  the  elbow-joints  drawing  pain.  \_Stf.  Gxj.] 

Paralytic  sensation  in  the  right  forearm  and  hand  (when  writing), 
which  went  off  on  stronger  movement,  but  soon  returned  when 
writing  and  when  at  rest,  but  slighter,  [Arb] 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  whole  left  forearm,  not  relieved  by  any- 
thing. [Arb] 

Drawing,  tearing  pain  in  the  external  side  of  the  right  fore- 
arm. [Arb] 

345.  Undulating,  tearing  pain  in  the  upper  end  of  the  left  forearm.  [Arb] 
Twitching,  drawing  pain  in  the  lower  end  of  the  inner  surface  of 
the  left  forearm  over  the  wrist  to  the  palm,  [Arb] 

Drawing,  paralytic  pain  in  the  right  wrist-joint.  [Web] 

Morbid  contractive  pain  in  the  left  palm,  so  that  he  can  hardly 
extend  the  fingers,  [Ar.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  wrist. 

350.  One  hand  becomes  icy  cold  and  insensible,  as  if  numb  (aft.  2 h.). 

Cool  sweat  on  the  palms. 

Cramp-pain  in  the  right  hand.  [Web] 

Swelling  of  the  hands,  with  frequent  cough,3  with  good  appetite. 
[Greding,  1.  c.] 

On  bending  the  hand  up  and  down  a trembling  movement  in  the 
wrist-joint.  [Rktb] 

335.  Cramp-like  pain  with  fine  stitches  in  the  right  hand,  going  off 
by  moving  it.  [Arb] 

Some  pulsating  pricks  in  the  right  palm,  as  with  a sharp  needle. 

\Ar- 1 

Cutting,  aching  pain  in  the  side  of  the  right  index  towards  the 
middle  finger,  when  moving  and  when  at  rest.  [Arb] 

1 Local  effect.  See  S.  387. 

2 With  stupor. 

3 This  is  the  cough  mentioned  in  note  to  S.  269. 


40 


ACONITUM. 


Painful  drawing  in  the  left  thumb.  [We.~\ 

Twitching  pains  in  the  right  thumb,  [y/r.] 

360.  When,  she  bends  the  fingers  down  to  the  wrist,  immediately 
violent  stitches  in  the  elbow-joints  down  to  the  wrist,  on  the  external 
aspect  of  the  arm.  [Stf  Gw.] 

Paralytic  pain  in  the  thumbs.  [Stf  Gw.] 

Painful  movement  of  the  right  thumb-joint,  as  if  sprained. 

Creeping  pain  in  the  fingers. 

Creeping  in  the  fingers,  also  when  writing.  [Hbg,~\ 

365.  Tensive  pressure  in  the  thighs  as  from  a tightly-drawn  bandage, 
with  great  exhaustion,  when  walking.  [.££/.] 

After  sleeping,  a pain,  on  moving,  in  the  hip  (and  shoulder)  joint 
as  from  being  crushed,  or  as  if  the  bed  had  been  too  hard. 

In  the  head  of  the  femur  of  the  left  leg  drawing  pain,  when 
standing  or  sitting,  still  more  when  walking.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

Fine  needle-pricks  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

After  sitting,  an  almost  paralytic  weakness  in  the  thighs  and  legs. 
370.  Powerlessness  in  the  head  of  the  femur,  or  inability  to  walk,  on 
account  of  an  indescribable,  intolerable  pain,  almost  as  if  the  head 
of  the  femur  were  crushed,  which  sometimes  declines,  sometimes 
increases,  and  occurs  after  lying  and  sleep  (aft.  5 h.). 

Tottering  walk,  owing  to  powerlessness  and  pain  in  the  head  of 
the  femur. 

A numbness,  like  paralysis,  in  the  left  leg  (and  arm).  [Mat- 

THIOLI,  1.  C.]  ; 

Tearing  pain  upwards  on  the  outer  ankle  of  the  left  foot  (aft. 
14  h.).  [Jr.] 

Want  of  firmness  and  unsteadiness  in  the  knees  ; the  knees  totter 
on  standing  and  walking. 

375.  Want  of  firmness  of  the  knees,  especially  of  one  of  them  ; it 
gives  way  when  walking  (immediately  and  aft.  1 h.). 

Heaviness  of  the  feet  (immediately). 

Pains  in  the  ankle-joints,  with  despairing  thoughts  and  reflections 
on  death. 

The  legs  in  their  lower  parts  and  the  feet  are  as  if  numb  and 
gone  asleep.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

Deep,  slow  stitch  over  the  right  knee.  [Stf  Gw.] 

380.  Painful  drawing  in  the  leg  from  the  knee  to  the  heel  and  back 
again.  [Stf  Gw.] 

Twitching  tearing  on  the  internal  side  of  the  knees.  [Stf  Gw.] 
Paralytic  drawing  in  the  right  leg  and  the  tendo  Achillis  to  the 
heel.  [Stf  Gw.] 

Coldness  of  the  feet  up  to  the  ankles,  with  perspiration  of  the 
toes  and  soles. 

Sensation  on  the  ankles  as  if  they  were  constricted  by  a bandage, 
in  the  morning. 

385.  Horrible  pain  in  the  ankles,  relieved  by  external  compression  (aft. 

7 h-)- 

Coldness  of  the  feet,  especially  of  the  toes.  [. Rkt. ] 

Swelling  of  the  part  (to  which  the  juice  has  been  applied)  anJ 


ACONITUM. 


4i 


acute  inflammation,  followed  by  excessive  suppuration.  [Rodder, 

1.  c.] 

Sensation  of  tingling  and  burning  goes  gradually  through  the 
whole  body,  especially  through  the  arms  and  legs.  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 
Itching  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  genitals.1 *  [Stoerck, 

Lc-3. 

390.  Fine  needle-pricks  here  and  there  on  the  body.  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

Single,  long-continued  stitches  here  and  there,  mingled  with  sore 
feeling,  at  length  ending  in  pure  sore  pain. 

Formication,  itching,  and  desquamation  of  the  skin,  especially  on 
the  affected  parts. 

Fleabite-like  spots  on  the  hands,  face,  &c. 

Reddish  pustules  filled  with  acrid  fluid.1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

395.  Broad,  red,  itching  pimples  all  over  the  body.1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 
The  whole  body  is  painful  to  the  touch  j the  child  will  not  allow 
itself  to  be  taken  hold  of ; it  whines. 

Feeling  as  if  she  was  just  recovering  from  a serious  disease,  and 
had  risen  from  a sick  bed  (aft.  6,  12  h.). 

Paralytic  sensation  and  bruisedness  in  the  arms  and  legs,  with 
violent  trembling  all  over  the  body,  especially  of  the  extremities, 
owing  to  which  he  can  hardly  walk  or  step ; at  the  same  time 
excessively  pale  face,  dilated  pupils,  faintness,  palpitation  of  the  heart, 
cold  sweat  on  the  back  and  bursting  headache  in  the  temples — soon 
followed  by  burning  heat  in  the  face,  with  a feeling  of  tension  and 
redness  of  face,  sleepiness  (after  dinner)  (aft.  46  h.)  (secondary  effect  ?). 
[St/.  Gss .] 

The  paralysis  on  the  left  side  soon  disappeared,  and  quickly  went 
into  the  right  side.8  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

400.  After  the  cessation  of  the  madness,  pain  in  the  stomach,  head, 
jaws,  chest,  and  now  in  one  now  in  another  joint.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 
Shaking  of  the  limbs.3  [Greding,  1.  c.  ] 

In  the  evening  sudden  cry,  grinding  of  the  teeth,  then  through 
long  hiccup  stiff  immobility  like  a statue  (catalepsy)3  [Greding, 
1.  c.]. 

Gradually  all  parts  of  the  body  become  black,  the  whole  trunk 
swells,  the  eyes  protrude  from  the  head,  the  tongue  hangs  out  of  the 
mouth.  [Pet.  de  Abano,4  de  Venenis , Cap.  30.] 

All  the  joints  are  painful  (aft.  7 h.).5  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

405.  Great  weakness  of  the  joints,  especially  of  the  knee-  and  ankle- 
joints,  with  twitching  in  the  tendons,  so  that  he  can  scarcely  walk. 
[Bacon,  1.  c.] 

Painfulness  all  over  the  body,  with  increased  weakness.6  [Gred- 
ing, 1.  c.] 

Weakness  and  laxity  of  the  ligaments  of  all  the 
joints  (aft.  46  h.). 

1 In  cases  of  neuralgic  pain  in  the  extremities.  As  these  cutaneous  symptoms 

appeared  the  pains  subsided. 

2 See  S.  335  and  note.  3 See  note  to  S.  77. 

4 General  statement  of  effects  of  poisoning  by  A. 

5 See  S.  400,  6 Ending  in  death, 


42 


ACONITUM. 


Painless  cracking  of  all  the  joints,  particularly  of  the  knees. 
Weariness  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  feet,  with  constant 
sleepiness  and  crossness. 

410.  In  the  morning,  on  waking,  such  great  weariness,  that  he  did  not 
like  to  get  out  of  bed,  which,  however,  went  off  after  getting  up. 

He  complains  of  weariness  of  the  whole  body,  great  weakness 
and  pain  in  the  heart  (aft.  3 h.).  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

Sinking  of  the  strength.  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 

Progressive  sinking  of  the  strength.  [Eberh.  Gmelin,1  Nov. 
Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  vi,  p.  394.] 

Fainting.  [Pet.  de  Abano,  1.  c. — Rodder,  1.  c.] 

415.  Pulse  intermitting  and  irregular,  two  or  three  beats  followed 
rapidly  in  succession,  and  then  came  a pause  of  no  long  duration. 
[Bacon,  1.  c.] 

Syncope. 

In  the  open  air  the  head  is  free  and  all  the  symptoms  ameliorated. 
[Stf.  Gjj.] 

Disinclined  for  movement,  she  prefers  to  sit.  \_Stf,  Gw.] 

Urgent  desire  to  lie  down.  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 

420.  She  must  lie  down  (between  the  3rd  and  5th  h.). 

Irresistible  inclination  to  lie  down  (from  2 to  5 h.). 

Sleepiness  and  laziness  ; even  when  walking  uncommon  sleepi- 
ness. [Hbg.'] 

(Interrupted  yawning  ; she  cannot  yawn  perfectly.) 

Yawns  often,  without  being  sleepy.  [Stf.  Gss.] 

425.  Yawning  and  stretching.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

Sleepiness,  sleep  (aft.  2 h.). 

In  the  afternoon  great  sleepiness,  the  eyes  close,  but  he  easily 
wakes  at  a slight  noise,  but  always  falls  asleep  again.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

After  eating  unusual  sleepiness.  [Stf,  Gw.] 

Light  sleep  (from  1 to  5 h.). 

430.  Sleeplessness  (in  the  4th  h.). 

Sleep  full  of  dreams  ; confused,  vivid  dreams.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

He  cannot  lie  on  the  right  side,  nor  on  the  back  he  turns  about 
in  bed  with  pains,  from  one  side  to  the  other. 

In  the  morning  he  lies  in  sleep  on  his  back,  the  left  hand  opened 
laid  under  his  occiput. 

He  sleeps  sitting  with  head  bent  forward. 

435.  Slow  respiration  in  sleep. 

(Inspiration  with  double  jerk,  like  the  butting  of  a goat,  in 
sleep.) 

Long  dreams,  with  anxiety  in  the  chest,  that  impeded  breathing, 
so  that  he  woke  up  in  consequence  (nightmare). 

Dreams  during  which  he  talked  much. 

She  has  vexatious  dreams. 

440.  He  starts  in  affright,  makes  many  movements,  and  speaks  in  his 
sleep. 

She  starts  up  in  sleep  and  says  some  one  is  seizing  hold  of  her. 


1 Effect  of  A.  when  given  to  patients  for  a long  time. 


ACONITUM. 


43 


He  is  delirious  while  awake,  jumps  out  of  bed,  and  thinks  he  is 
driving  sheep  (aft.  14  h.). 

In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  and  by  day  when  sitting  he 
has  waking  dreams,  and  has  delusions  as  though  he  were  far  away 
from  home. 

Towards  morning  he  has  a very  vivid  dream,  which  gives  him  a 
correct  explanation  of  a circumstance  that  was  an  inexplicable  riddle 
to  him  when  awake  (aft.  20  h.). 

445.  He  dreams  half  the  night  about  a single  subject,  and  is  also  occu- 
pied with  it  alone  several  hours  after  waking,  so  that  nothing  besides 
this  subject  possesses  his  mind  (like  the  fixed  idea  of  an  insane  person), 
which  is  very  annoying  to  him  and  bothers  him. 

At  night  anxious  dreams,  and  frequent  waking  in  a fright. 
{Rkt.] 

Restless  night.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Inability  to  keep  awake.  [Moraeus,  1.  c.] 

Quiet  sleep  for  4 or  5 hours.1  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 

450.  Desire  for  cold  water.  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

Feverish  pulse,  frequently  intermitting.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 
Sensation  as  if  all  the  blood-vessels  grew  cold.  [Matthioli, 
1.  c.] 


Sensation  as  if  the  circulation  in  all  the  blood-vessels  was 
impeded.  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 

He  lies  quiet,  but  is  cold  and  shivers,  and  wishes  to  be  covered 
with  much  bedclothes.  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 

455.  In  the  morning  on  waking  dizzy  in  the  head. 

In  the  morning  on  waking,  he  feels  as  if  he  had  fetid  breath. 

In  the  evening  on  lying  down,  shivering. 

Rigor  and  frequent  yawning,  in  the  morning  after  rising  [St/. 
Gw.] 

Anxious  chilliness  (aft.  3 h.). 

460.  Chill  on  the  slightest  movement  (aft.  10  h.). 

Chilliness  in  the  abdomen.  [St/  Gw.] 

A coldness  runs  continually  up  her  arms  and  legs ; in  her  face 
also  she  has  a chill.  [£//'.  Gw.] 

A shiver  runs  through  her  from  below  up  into  the  chest.  [*SV/'. 
Gw.] 

She  is  chilly  and  shivers.  [$f/l  Gw.] 

465.  Rigor  over  back  and  arms.  [St/  Gw.] 

Attack  of  faintness  with  chilliness. 

At  first  coldness,  rigor  and  paleness  of  the  finger  tips,  then  in  the 
fingers,  afterwards  sensation  of  cramp  in  the  soles  and  calves,  finally 
chill  in  the  forehead  (aft.  \ h.). 

Coldness  all  over  the  body. 

Fever : Chill  of  the  whole  body,  with  hot  forehead,  hot 
ear-lobes,  and  internal  dry  heat. 

470.  Fever:  coldness  with  stiffness  of  the  whole  body,  redness  and 
heat  of  one  cheek,  coldness  and  paleness  of  the  other,  with  open, 


1 Symptom  of  convalescence. 


44 


ACONITUM. 


staring  eyes,  and  contracted  pupils,  which  only  dilate  slightly  and 
slowly  in  the  dark. 

Towards  evening,  chill  and  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  then  sick- 
ness in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  which  continues  even  when 
taking  food  that  tastes  well,  though  there  is  neither  appetite  nor 
dislike  for  it ; after  eating  the  sickness  goes  off,  followed  by  heat  of 
face,  accompanied  by  sad  despairing  thoughts. 

Frequent  attacks  (about  every  other  hour),  for  a quarter  of  an 
hour  at  time,  of  the  most  extreme  weakness  and  insensibility,  so  that 
he  can  move  neither  hands  nor  feet,  nor  sit  up  in  bed,  nor  yet  feel 
his  former  pain,  nor  see,  hear,  or  speak  aloud  ; the  legs  at  the  same 
time  are  extended  (aft.  a few  h.). 

Alternate  attacks  (aft.  3,  4,  6 h.)  : either  along  with  redness  of 
the  cheeks,  silly  gaiety  with  sensation  of  heat  all  over  the  body,  and 
headache  on  moving  the  eyes  upwards  and  sideways ; 

Or,  along  with  redness  of  cheeks  and  heat  of  head,  shuddering  all 
over  the  bodv,  with  proper  taste  in  mouth  ; 

475.  Or,  along  with  redness  of  cheeks,  shivering,  with  weeping, 
accompanied  by  aching  headache  ; 

Or,  along  with  redness  of  cheeks,  an  obstinate,  contrary  disposi- 
tion, burning  in  the  umbilical  region,  and  aching  pain  in  head. 

Extreme  redness  of  cheeks,  with  a peevish,  complaining,  lachry- 
mose disposition  (aft.  3 h.). 

Towards  evening  burning  heat  in  head  and  face,  with  redness  of 
cheeks  and  outpressing  headache  ; at  the  same  time  rigor  all  over  the 
body  with  thirst  (aft.  14  h.).  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

Towards  evening,  dry  heat  in  face  with  anxiety. 

480.  Hot  on  the  head,  with  forehead  hot  to  the  touch,  and  rigor  of 
the  rest  of  the  body,  on  the  slightest  movement. 

Feeling  of  heat,  first  in  the  hands,  then  in  the  whole  body,  even 
in  the  chest,  without  perceptible  external  heat  (aft.  4 h.). 

Several  times  heat  ran  over  his  back.  \_Stf.  Gss  ] 

(Heat  with  throwing  off  the  clothes.) 

General  heat  with  thirst. 

485.  During  the  heat  moderate  thirst  for  beer. 

(She  drinks  little  in  the  heat  and  yet  has  dry  lips.) 

(In  the  heat  the  cough  is  troublesome.) 

(Great  heat  from  10  p.m.  until  after  midnight,  with  short 
breath  ; she  wished  to  cough  but  could  not,  speaking  also  was 
difficult  for  her  ; at  the  same  time  extreme  restlessness  and  crying 
out  from  pains  in  the  hands,  feet,  abdomen,  and  sacrum  ; she  stamped 
her  feet  and  would  not  allow  any  one  to  touch  her.) 

Perspiration  with  febrile  rigor  (aft.  3 h.). 

490.  Slight  perspiration  all  over  the  body. 

Sour-smelling  perspiration  all  over  the  body. 

Perspiration  of  weakness. 

Slight  warmth  with  moderate  perspiration.1  [Bacon,  1.  c.] 


1 Reaction  from  S.  454. 


ACONITUM.  45 

Along  with  profuse  perspiration  frequent  micturition.  [Greding, 

l-c.] 

495.  Along  with  profuse  perspiration,  diarrhoea  and  increased  flow  of 
urine.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Great  internal  heat  with  thirst.  [Rodder,  1.  c.] 

Transpiration  and  sweat  all  over  the  body.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 
(Towards  noon)  perspiration.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Profuse  perspiration  without  exhaustion.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

500.  Along  with  bold  speech  and  sparkling  eyes,  cold  sweat  stands  on 
the  forehead,  and  the  pulse  is  almost  imperceptible.  [Matthioli, 

J.  c.] 

Nocturnal  furious  delirium  ; he  cannot  be  kept  in  bed  3 in  the 
morning  very  profuse  sweat.  [Durr,1  in  Hufel.  Journ./ix,  4,  p.  108.] 
He  does  everything  in  a hurry,  and  runs  about  the  house. 
[Helmont,  1.  c.] 

Transient  insanity.2  [Moraeus,  1.  c.] 

Morose,  inclined  for  nothing,  depressed  spirits,  even  when 
walking.  [Hbg.'\ 

505.  Morose,  as  though  she  had  no  life  in  her  (aft.  2 h.).  [St/'.  Gw.] 
Becomes  gay  and  inclined  to  sing  and  dance  (aft.  \ h.).  [St/. 
Gw.] 

More  gay  and  excited  than  usual  (the  first  h.). 

Alternate  attacks  of  opposite  states  of  humour.3  [Matthioli, 
1.  c.] 

Sometimes  he  is  quite  rational,  sometimes  he  talks  nonsense. 
[Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

510.  Sometimes  he  despairs  of  his  recovery,  sometimes  he  is  full  of 
hope.  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 

After  vomiting,  immediate  revival  of  hope.4  [Richard,  1.  c.] 
Trembling  and  tendency  to  palpitation  of  the  heart. 

Palpitation  of  the  heart  and  anxiety,  and  increased 
heat  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  face.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

Palpitation  of  the  heart  with  great  anxiety;  oppres- 
sion of  the  breathing  and  great  weariness  in  all  the 
limbs ; it  rises  from  thence  into  the  head,  and  she  is  as 
if  stupified  from  flying  redness  in  the  face.  [Stf.  Gw.] 

515.  Anxiety  and  peevishness,  with  fine  shooting  in  the  side  of  the 
chest 3 then  beating  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  then  aching  pain 
in  the  head. 

Inconsolable  anxiety  and  piteous  howling,  with  com- 
plaints and  reproaches  about  (often  trifling)  evils  (aft.  5 h.). 

Piteous,  anxious  complaints,  with  cowardly  fears,  despair,  loud 
whining  weeping,  bitter  complaints  and  reproaches. 

Fear  lest  he  should  fall. 

Anthropophobia  (aft.  3 h.). 

520.  He  is  in  a reverie,  and  sits  buried  in  thought. 

1 Effects  of  a mixture  of  A.  and  antimonial  wine. 

2 Not  found  in  Moraeus’  narrative. 

3 The  two  following  symptoms,  and  S.  536,  are  given  as  instances  of  this. 

4 Mental  effect  of  vomiting  after  the  antidote  had  been  given. 


46 


ACONITUM. 


Lucid  vision  : he  says,  now  my  beloved  (70  miles  away)  must 
have  sung  the  difficult  passage*  that  I was  just  singing. 

Solicitude,  grief. 

The  slightest  noise  is  intolerable  to  him  (aft.  j h.). 

Music  is  intolerable  to  her ; it  goes  through  every  limb  5 she 
becomes  quite  melancholy  (aft.  24  h.). 

525.  Excessive  tendency  to  be  startled  (aft.  J h.). 

He  takes  every  joke  in  bad  part  (aft.  3 h.). 

She  is  extremely  disposed  to  be  cross  (aft.  J h.). 

She  becomes  quarrelsome. 

She  makes  reproaches. 

530.  Quarrelsomeness,  alternating  from  hour  to  hour  with  silly 
insanity — he  chatters  childish  nonsense,  and  is  extravagantly  merry. 
Angry  disposition. 

Obstinacy. 

Misanthropy. 

Composed,  staid,  although  not  cheerful  humour  (secondary  and 
curative  action)  (aft.  8 h.). 

535.  Lively  power  of  imagination. 

Sometimes  he  appears  to  weep,  sometimes  he  trills.  [Matthioli, 

U.] 

Insane  tricks.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Dread  of  impending  death.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Mortal  anxiety  recurring  from  time  to  time.  [Matthioli,  1.  c.] 
540.  Lamentable  fears  of  impending  death  (from  2 to  12  h.). 
Fear  of  some  misfortune  happening  to  him. 

* The  passage  from  Beethoven  : “ Ah  ! perfido!”  she,  although  previously  danger- 
ously ill,  had  this  day  sung  at  a concert,  particularly  well,  only  five  hours  before  her 
betrothed,  who  was  particularly  susceptible  to  mesmerism. 


47 


AMBRA  GRISEA.1 

(. Ambergris , sometimes  Ambra  ambrosiaca , L.) 

This  substance,  often  adulterated  on  account  of  its  high  price,  we 
can  hope  to  get  genuine  only  in  first-class  drug  stores.  The  true 
ambergris,  developed  in  the  intestines  of  the  sperm  whale,  as  was  proved 
by  Schwedjaur,  and  probably  a fatty  excretion  from  its  gall-bladder,  is 
obtained  of  best  quality  from  the  sea,  especially  after  stormy  weather, 
off  the  coasts  of  Madagascar  and  Sumatra.  It  consists  of  small,  rough, 
opaque  masses,  which  are  lighter  than  water,  of  spongy  consistence, 
and  can  easily  be  broken  up  into  rough,  uneven  pieces,  externally  of  a 
brownish-grey  colour,  internally  permeated  by  yellowish,  reddish,  and 
blackish  fibres  intermingled  with  whitish,  very  odorous  points,  some- 
what greasy  to  the  touch,  and  of  faint  but  very  refreshing  fragrance. 

By  the  warmth  of  the  fingers  it  becomes  soft  as  wax,  by  the  heat  of 
boiling  water  it  melts  into  oil,  at  the  same  time  exhales  a strong,  very 
agreeable  fragrance,  and  on  heated  metal  burns  quite  away.  On 
applying  a light  to  it  it  quickly  takes  fire,  and  burns  with  a bright 
flame.  Alcohol  dissolves  it  very  sparingly,  but  sulphuric  ether  dis- 
solves it  almost  completely,  and  on  adding  alcohol  a white  wax-like 
substance  is  thrown  down.  Its  feeble  odour  is  much  increased  by  this 
solution,  as  also  by  triturating  it  with  other  substances. 

A grain  of  such  genuine  ambergris  is  triturated  for  an  hour  with 
ioo  grains  of  milk-sugar  in  a porcelain  mortar  (every  io  minutes 
divided  between  6 minutes  of  trituration  and  4 minutes  of  scraping). 
Of  this  powder  a grain  is  again  triturated  with  another  100  grains  of 
milk-sugar  for  an  equal  length  of  time,  and  in  the  same  manner ; and, 
lastly,  of  this  powder  so  obtained  one  grain  is  again  triturated  with  a 
similar  quantity  of  milk-sugar,  in  the  same  manner,  and  also  for  an 
hour.  This  furnishes  a potentized  millionth  attenuation  of  ambergris, 
a small  portion  of  a grain  of  which  is  not  only  sufficient  for  a dose  for 
most  homoeopathic  purposes,  but  is  often  found  to  be  quite  too 
powerful ; in  which  case  its  effects  may  be  moderated  by  several  small 
doses  of  camphor,  but  in  many  cases,  according  to  the  symptoms  deve- 
loped, by  nux  vomica,  and  in  rarer  cases  by  pulsatilla. 

The  duration  of  the  action  of  such  a dose  is,  in  chronic  cases,  at 
least  three  weeks. 

(The  symptoms  indicated  by  the  letters  Gff.  were  observed  by  the 
State-councillor  Freiherr  von  Gersdorff.) 

[None  of  the  symptoms  are  derived  from  old*school  sources.  Ambra  first  appears 
among  Hahnemann’s  medicines  in  the  2nd  edition.] 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827. 


48 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


Great  vertigo. 

Extraordinary,  even  dangerous  vertigo. 

Vertigo  while  walking  in  the  open  air,  in  the  forenoon  and 
afternoon. 

On  account  of  vertigo  and  weak  feeling  in  the  stomach  she 
must  lie  down  (afternoon,  aft.  72  h.). 

5.  He  is  always  as  if  in  a dream. 

He  cannot  think  of  anything  properly  ; he  is  as  if  stupid  (the 
first  24  h.). 

Bad  memory  ; the  thinking  power  is  very  feeble ; he  must  read 
everything  three  or  four  times  over,  and  even  then  cannot  take  it  in. 

Great  weakness  in  the  head,  with  vertigo  (aft.  48  h.). 

Weakness  in  the  head,  and  a kind  of  chill  in  it. 

10.  Every  morning  headache,  like  emptiness,  as  if  he  had  been 
drinking  over  night. 

Confusion  in  the  occiput.  [Gff.] 

Tension  in  the  head,  making  him  stupid. 

Squeezing  headache  from  both  temples.  [Gff.] 

Squeezing  confusion  of  the  head.  [Gff.] 

15.  Aching  confusion  in  the  head,  immediately  after  eating,  espe- 
cially when  moving. 

Pressure  in  the  forehead  (with  anxiety  lest  he  should  go  mad) 
(aft.  48  h.). 

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Gff.] 

Aching  pain  in  occiput  and  nape. 

Every  other  day  down-pressing  pain  in  the  forehead  and  top  of 
the  head,  with  heat  in  head  and  burning  in  the  eyes,  with  pale  face 
from  the  morning  onwards,  only  worse  in  the  afternoon. 

20.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head  for  two  days. 

(Painless)  feeling  of  pressure  on  the  top  of  the  head  and  heavi- 
ness of  the  head,  in  the  evening  (aft.  36  h.). 

Aching  in  the  head  combined  with  shooting. 

Aching  pain  on  a small  spot  at  the  occiput. 

Aching  pain  on  the  left  frontal  protuberance. 

25.  Aching  drawing  from  the  nape  upwards  and  through  the  head  to 
the  front,  whilst  pressure  remains  on  the  occiput.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  whole  occiput,  also  to  the  crown  and  in 
the  forehead.  [ Gff, !] 

Transient  tearing  through  the  head.  [Gff.] 

A drawing  hither  and  thither,  or  tearing  in  the  head. 

On  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  towards  the  nape  and  behind  the 
ear,  tearing. 

30.  Tearing  in  the  left  temple  up  to  the  top  of  the  head,  on  the  right 
frontal  protuberance  and  behind  the  left  ear.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  headache  in  the  forehead  extending  into  the  upper  part 
of  the  face.  [Gff.'] 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


49 


Very  painful  tearing  above  on  the  crown  and  as  if  in 
the  whole  upper  half  Of  the  brain,  with  pale  face  and  coldness 
of  the  left  hand.  [Gff.] 

(Twitching  in  the  head.) 

Above  the  left  temple,  a stitch  in  the  head  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gff.] 

35.  In  the  evening,  several  very  sharp  stitches  upwards  towards  the 
occiput. 

On  exertion,  a shooting  and  cutting  headache  ; he  feels  it  at  every 
step  ; better  when  lying. 

External  headache ; also,  in  the  nape  and  neck,  pain  as  from  a 
sprain,  with  tenderness  to  touch,  the  whole  day  (aft.  12  d.). 

Headache  as  if  catarrh  would  come  on,  sometimes  more,  some- 
times less,  and  persistent.  [Gff.] 

40.  On  the  right  side  of  the  head,  a part  where  the  hair  is  painful  as 
if  sore,  when  touched.  \Gff. ] 

A painful  spot  on  the  occiput. 

Roaring  about  the  temples. 

The  hair  of  the  head  falls  out  (aft.  24  h.). 

Aching,  tearing  headache,  especially  over  and  on  the  head.  [Gff^\ 
45.  Pressure  on  the  left  eyebrow.  [Gff.] 

Pressure  on  the  eyes,  as  if  they  lay  deep  (with  tearing  head- 
ache above  from  the  forehead  downwards,  or  from  the  ear  through 
the  occiput)  (aft.  3 h.). 

Short,  violent  pressure  just  above  the  nose,  in  the  forehead,  in 
frequent  fits,  which  changes  into  tearing,  and  leaves  behind  it  con- 
fusion in  the  occiput.  {Gff) 

A painful  pimple  on  the  forehead.  {Gff.) 

A red  papule  on  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  close  to  the  hair, 
touching  it  causes  a sore  pain,  not  suppurating.  ( Gff. ) 

50.  In  the  eye,  pressure  and  smarting,  as  if  dust  had  got  in  it.  {Gff.) 

Smarting  in  the  eyes  and  lachrymation. 

Pressure  on  the  eyes,  which  are  opened  with  difficulty,  and  pain 
in  them  as  if  they  had  been  too  tightly  shut,  especially  in 
the  morning.  [ Gff.] 

Distended  blood-vessels  in  the  white  of  the  eye.  [ Gff.\ 

Tearing  or  short  rends  in  and  around  the  right  eye.  [Gff.] 

55.  Burning  pain  in  the  right  eye  (aft.  10  h.). 

Burning  in  the  eyelids. 

Itching  On  the  eyelid,  as  if  it  would  inflame  to  a stye. 

Around  the  eyes,  intolerable  itching  tickling. 

Dim  vision,  as  if  through  a fog  (aft.  some  h.). 

60.  Very  dark  before  the  eyes  (aft.  3d.). 

Spasmodic  trembling  in  the  facial  muscles. 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  spasmodic  twitchings  in  the  face. 

Plying  heat  in  the  face. 

Jaundiced  face. 

65.  Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  face,  without  sensation. 

Gnawing  formicating  itching  in  the  face. 

Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  face,  especially  near  the  right 
ala  nasi.  [Gff.'] 


4 


5o 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


Red  spot  on  the  cheek,  without  sensation. 

Eruption  of  pimples  and  itching  on  the  whiskers. 

70.  Tension  in  the  cheek,  as  from  swelling. 

(Painful  swelling  of  the  cheek  on  the  upper  jaw,  with  throbbing 
in  the  gums)  (aft.  a few  h.). 

Tearing  in  the  morning,  and  often  at  other  times,  in  the  right  ear. 

Creeping  in  the  ears  (aft.  48  h.). 

Itching  and  tickling  in  the  ears. 

75.  Roaring  and  whistling  in  the  ear,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  4 d.). 

(Crepitation  and  creaking  in  the  left  ear,  as  when  a watch  is 
wound  up.) 

Deafness  of  one  ear. 

Hearing  diminished  from  day  to  day,  for  five  days  (aft.  6 d.). 

Violent  tearing  pain  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear  and  behind  it.  [Gff.] 
80.  Spasm  of  the  right  ala  nasi  towards  the  malar  bone. 

(Great  dryness  of  the  interior  of  the  nose,  although  the  air  passes 
well  through  it.) 

Dry  blood  collects  in  the  nose  (aft.  16  h.). 

Epistaxis,  especially  in  the  morning. 

Hot  lips. 

85.  Spasm  in  the  lower  lip  and  sensation  as  if  it  were  pressed  against 
the  gums  and  torn  away  again. 

(Pain  in  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  like  soreness.) 

Shooting,  aching  pain  in  the  jaws. 

In  the  jaws,  pain  as  if  they  were  screwed  together  or  asunder. 

Drawing  pain,  now  in  one,  now  in  another  tooth,  which  was 
aggravated  by  warmth,  was  relieved  for  a moment  by  cold,  was  not 
aggravated  by  chewing,  and  went  off  after  eating  ; at  the  same  time 
the  gums  were  swollen  on  the  inside. 

90.  Greatly  swollen  and  painful  gums. 

Pain  in  a hollow  tooth,  in  the  evening. 

Pain  in  a hollow  tooth,  especially  in  the  open  air,  as  if  the  nerve 
were  touched. 

After  dinner,  pain  in  a hollow  tooth,  more  shooting  than  tearing, 
for  half  an  hour  (aft.  5 h.). 

Squeezing,  drawing  in  the  right  upper  molars.  [Gff. J 
95.  In  the  evening  in  bed  aching,  digging  pain,  as  if  under  the  left 
lower  molars.  [Gff] 

Drawing  toothache,  at  one  time  in  the  right,  at 
another  in  the  left  teeth,  by  day  and  during  several 
nights.  [Gff] 

Drawing  in  an  incisor  tooth,  as  if  a draught  of  air  penetrated  it 
and  caused  a stitch.  [ Gff.] 

Bleeding  from  the  teeth. 

Uncommonly  profuse  bleeding  out  of  the  right  lower  teeth.  [ Gff.] 
100.  Pain  in  a submaxillary  gland,  which  was  as  if  swollen  (aft.  3 d.)< 

Fcetor  of  the  mouth. 

In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  tongue,  mouth,  and  lips,  as  if 
numb  and  quite  dry.  [Gff.'] 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


5i 


In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  great  dryness  of  the  mouth,  with 
complete  absence  of  thirst,  for  several  days.  [Gff.~\ 

Smarting  and  soreness  in  the  interior  of  the  mouth ; on  account 
of  the  pain  she  could  not  eat  anything  hard. 

105.  Vesicles  in  the  mouth,  which  pain  as  if  burnt. 

The  tongue  is  covered  with  a greyish-yellow  coating.  [ Gff.~\ 

Under  the  tongue  lumps,  like  small  growths,  which  pain  like 
excoriation. 

Contractive  sensation  in  the  salivary  glands,  when  eating,  especi- 
ally during  the  first  mouthfuls. 

Rheumatic  pain  at  the  back  of  the  tongue  and  in  the  fauces,  when 
not  swallowing.  [Gff.'\ 

no.  Tearing  pain  on  the  palate  extending  into  the  left  ear.  [Gff.~] 

Scraping  sensation  on  the  palate. 

Scraping  in  the  throat.  \_Gff.~\ 

Scraping  in  the  throat,  as  in  catarrh,  for  some  days. 

In  the  morning,  dryness  in  the- throat. 

1 15.  Feeling  in  her  throat  as  if  something  were  sticking  in  it. 

Tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  throat  and  above,  quite  at  the 
back  of  the  fauces.  [Gff.~] 

Smarting  at  the  back  of  the  fauces  when  not  swallowing.  \_Gff.'] 

Aching,  smarting  pain  at  the  back  of  the  throat  from  time  to  time. 

Pain  in  throat  like  something  obstructing  deglutition  (aft.  8 d.). 

i<m 

120.  (Sore  throat,  not  when  swallowing  food,  but  during  empty 
swallowing,  and  on  pressing  on  it  externally,  with  tension  in  the 
cervical  glands,  as  if  they  were  swollen)  (aft.  4 d.) 

(Sore  throat  after  a draught  of  air;  shooting  from  the  throat  into 
the  right  ear,  and  pain  especially  when  moving  the  tongue.) 

Secretion  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  with  roughness  and 
scraping.  [Gtf.] 

Hawking  of  mucus,  in  the  morning. 

When  hawking  up  mucus  from  the  throat,  almost  unavoidable 
retching  and  vomiting. 

125.  The  (accustomed)  tobacco-smoking  greatly  irritates  and  excites 
him,  although  it  tastes  good  ; hiccup. 

Frequently  in  the  afternoon,  rather  tasteless  eructation. 

Frequent,  empty  eructation  (aft.  3J  h.). 

After  a meal,  violent  eructation. 

Frequent,  sour  eructation  (aft.  48,  72  h.). 

130.  Audible  eructation,  of  a bitter  taste. 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  heartburn,  with  baulked 
eructation.  \_Gff.~\ 

Every  evening,  sensation  as  from  disordered  stomach  and  scrapy 
belching  up  as  high  as  the  larynx,  like  heartburn* 

(In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth.) 

After  drinking  milk,  acidity  in  the  mouth. 

135.  (After  breakfast,  nausea)  (aft.  72  h.) 

(In  the  stomach  clawing  nausea)  (aft.  24  h«) 


52 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


Oualmishness  about  the  stomach. 

Burning  in  the  stomach  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gff.] 

Burning  in  the  gastric  region  and  higher  up.  [Gff. J 

140.  Aching  and  burning  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  goes  off 
by  eructation.  [Gff.'] 

After  eating,  anxiety. 

After  eating,  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,  as  if  food  still  stuck 
there,  and  would  not  go  down. 

During  dinner  tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  palate,  and  at  the 
back  of  the  throat.  [Gff.] 

After  a meal,  transient  tearing  first  about  the  left,  then  about  the 
right  eye.  [G/i] 

145.  Immediately  after  eating  aching  confusion  of  the  head,  especially 
when  moving. 

On  account  of  weak  feeling  in  the  stomach  and  vertigo  she  must 
lie  down,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  72  h.). 

Tension  and  pressure  in  the  gastric  region. 

Spasm  in  the  stomach. 

Shooting  and  aching  in  the  gastric  region. 

150.  Pressure  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  in  the  hypogastrium, 
from  time  to  time,  also  at  night.  [Gff.] 

Pressure  in  the  epigastrium,  with  cold  hands  or  feet.  [Gff.] 
Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  passing  into  squeezing.  [Gff] 

Aching  in  the  umbilical  region,  with  heartburn,  that  goes  off 
by  eructation.  [Gff] 

Pressure  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen  over  the  right  hip.  [Gff] 

155.  Violent  spasms  in  the  abdomen. 

Continual  pressure  in  the  epigastrium,  allayed  by  walking  in  the 
open  air,  returning  when  sitting.  [Gff.] 

An  aching  in  the  hypogastrium  for  several  hours,  equally  severe 
when  walking  and  when  sitting  (aft.  6 d,). 

Aching  pain  in  a small  spot  on  the  right  side  of  the 
abdomen,  in  the  hepatic  region,  but  not  felt  when  touched. 
[Gff] 

Aching  pain  in  the  hepatic  region.  [Gff] 

160.  Tension  and  distension  in  the  abdomen,  after  everything  he  eats, 
even  after  every  mouthful  of  fluid. 

Tense  abdomen  (aft.  some  h.). 

Distended  abdomen  (aft.  5 d.). 

Early  in  the  morning  great  compression  in  the  abdomen. 

The  abdomen  feels  compressed. 

165.  Weight  in  the  abdomen,  and  as  if  sprained  and  pressed  from  the 
spinal  column. 

After  pressure  in  the  abdomen  discharge  of  inodorous  flatus. 

[Gff] 

Squeezing  pain  in  the  right  hypogastrium.  [Gff] 

First  pinching  bellyache,  followed  by  some  cutting  in  the  epigas- 
trium, which  goes  off  by  eructation.  [Gff] 

Discomfort  from  displacement  of  flatus,  causing  pain,  especially 
in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen. 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


53 


170.  Immediately  after  midnight  he  wakes  up  with  great  distension  of 
the  abdomen,  especially  of  the  hypogastrium,  from  flatulence,  which 
cannot  pass,  and  excites  colic,  or  at  least  severe  pressing  downwards ; 
this  accumulation  of  flatulence  goes  off  during  subsequent  sleep, 
without  discharge  of  flatus,  and  the  abdomen  becomes  quiet. 

Fermentation  and  rumbling,  heard  but  not  felt,  in  the  bowels. 

IGjR 

Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  violent  fermentation  and 
gurgling,  especially  in  the  epigastrium,  when  lying  in  bed,  in  the 
morning,  diminished  by  rising,  and  renewed  on  again  lying  down, 
especially  when  lying  on  the  back.  [Gff] 

Violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening. 

After  midnight,  cutting  in  the  abdomen  in  bed,  even  during  the 
general  perspiration  of  the  body. 

175.  Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  a soft  stool,  in  the  morning,  for 
two  successive  mornings  (aft.  5 d.). 

Severe  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  three  diarrhoeic  stools,  on 
three  successive  days  (aft.  5 d.). 

(Burning  in  the  abdomen.) 

Cold  feeling  in  the  abdomen. 

Coldness  of  one  side  of  the  abdomen  for  two  days  (aft.  48  h.). 

180.  Twitching  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  in  the  evening. 

Shooting  over  the  hips,  for  two  days  (aft.  5 a.). 

A sharp  pressure,  or  obtuse  stitch,  over  the  right  hip.  [Gff.] 

On  drawing  in  the  abdomen  violent  needle-pricks  in  the  hypo- 
gastrium, also  excited  by  external  pressure.  [Gff.] 

Shooting  bellyache  about  the  navel,  on  moving  the  abdomen, 
especially  on  drawing  it  in.  [Gff.] 

185.  A frequent  call  to  stool,  but  no  motion  occurs,  and  this  makes 
her  very  anxious,  and  then  the  propinquity  of  other  people  is  in- 
tolerable to  her. 

After  ineffectual  call  to  stool,  a pinching  pain  in  the  hypogas- 
trium, especially  in  the  right  side  (after  some  days).  [Gff.] 

Tenesmus  in  the  rectum. 

Stool  too  scanty  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gff.] 

Constipation  (aft.  4 d.).  [GffJ] 

190.  (Drawing  in  the  rectum.) 

Itching  at  the  anus. 

Itching  in  the  anus  (aft.  some  h.).  [Gff] 

Tickling  in  the  rectum. 

Itching  and  smarting  in  the  anus,  which  goes  off  by  rubbing. 

[<?/.] 

195.  Shooting  in  the  anus. 

Four  stools  of  ordinary  character  within  a few  hours  (aft.  a few  h.). 
Copious,  soft,  bright  brown  stool  (aft.  8 d.).  [ Gff. ] 

(Seems  to  effect  improvement  in  the  hitherto  sluggish  stool,  in  the 
secondary  action)  (aft.  10,  15  d.) 

Along  with  not  hard  stool,  great  discharge  of  blood  (aft.  7 d.). 
200.  After  stool,  aching  deep  in  the  hypogastrium.  [Gff'.] 
(After  each  stool  a weakness  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis.) 


54 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


After  passage  of  stool  there  remains  in  the  abdomen  a wanting  to 
go  (he  feels  as  if  he  had  not  finished)  for  more  than  a minute. 

Pain  in  the  rectum  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  bladder  (aft. 

5d.). 

Sensation  as  if  some  drops  escaped  from  the  urethra. 

205.  Urine  lemon  coloured,  almost  inodorous,  with  a small  cloud. 

vm. 

Urine  brown. 

Urine  like  whey. 

Scanty  urine,  with  reddish  cloud,  with  absence  of  thirst.  \_Gff^\ 

Urine  dark  brown  and  somewhat  turbid,  even  during  its  passage 
(aft.  20  h.). 

210.  Urine  turbid,  even  when  first  passed,  yellowish-brown, 
and  depositing  a brown  sediment,  whilst  the  clear  urine  above  it  was 
yellow. 

Urine  with  reddish  cloud.  [Gff.] 

Urine  after  standing  a short  time,  of  penetrating  odour. 

Bloody  urine  (aft.  7 d.). 

Diminished  secretion  of  urine  (the  first  3 days). 

215.  Scanty  urine,  which  after  some  hours  has  a reddish  sediment. 

[Gf.] 

Much  micturition  at  night. 

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  for  two  hours,  urging  to  urinate,  so 
that  he  often  cannot  retain  the  urine. 

He  urinates  three  times  as  much  as  he  drinks,  especially  in  the 
morning  ; thereafter  by  a dull  pain  in  the  renal  region. 

Copious,  bright  coloured,  unclouded  urine  (aft.  4 d.). 

220.  Burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  and  in  the  anus. 

Burning  at  the  mouth  of  the  urethra  (aft.  6 d.). 

(Twitching  in  the  urethra)  (aft.  12  d.). 

(Twitching  in  the  testicles)  (aft.  14  d.). 

Tearing  in  the  glans  penis. 

225.  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  glans  penis. 

An  itching  pimple  above  the  male  genitals. 

Burning  internally  in  the  region  of  the  seminal  vesicles. 

Burning,  smarting,  tickling  and  itching  on  the  vulva  and  in  the 
urethra  when  urinating. 

Burning  in  the  female  genital  organs,  with  discharge  of  some 
drops  of  blood,  especially  after  walking  and  after  a hard  stool. 

230.  Severe  itching  on  the  pudendum  (more  rarely  at  the 
anus)  ; she  must  rub  the  parts. 

Sore  pain  and  itching  on  the  pudendum,  also  when  not  urinating. 

Swelling  and  soreness  of  the  labia  pudendi,  and  itching  there. 

Itching  in  the  glans  penis,  continuing  while  sitting,  lying,  stand- 
ing and  walking. 

Violent  voluptuous  sensation  in  the  interior  of  the  genital  organs, 
lasting  for  an  hour,  without  considerable  erection  or  irritation  of  the 
external  sexual  parts  (aft.  4 d.). 

235.  In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  violent  erection,  without  voluptuous 
sensation,  with  external  numbness  and  diminished  sensibility;  on  the 


AMBRA  GRTSEA. 


55 

cessation  of  the  erection,  a creeping  tearing  in  the  anterior  part  of 
the  urethra. 

It  takes  away  the  erections  (in  the  secondary  action). 

Menses  three  days  too  early  (aft.  4 d.) . 

Menses  four  days  too  early  (aft.  20  d.). 

Great  excitement  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  menses  were  about  to 
come  on,  which  had  appeared  only  21  days  previously  (aft.  2 h.). 

240.  Discharge  of  blood  from  the  uterus  (aft.  2 h.). 

During  the  menses  the  left  leg  becomes  quite  blue  from  distended 
veins,  with  pressing  pain  in  the  leg. 

(At  night,  much  leucorrhoea. ) 

(Discharge  of  bluish-white  masses  of  mucus  from  the  vagina.) 

(Thick  slimy  leucorrhoea,  increased  day  by  day,  and  before  each 
discharge  a stitch  in  the  vagina.) 

* * 

* 

245.  In  the  forehead  and  eyes,  sensation  as  before  the  outbreak  of 
coryza.  [ Gff.~\ 

Headache  on  blowing  the  nose. 

Nose  stopped  up  and  sore  pain  in  the  inside  of  it. 

Long  continued,  great  dryness  of  the  nose,  but  frequent  smarting 
in  it  as  if  he  would  sneeze.  \Gff.~\ 

Sometimes  sneezing  with  dry  nose. 

250.  Creeping  in  the  nose,  as  if  about  to  sneeze. 

Frequent  feeling  as  if  about  to  sneeze. 

She  sneezes  almost  every  day,  which  never  occurred  before. 

Stuffed  coryza. 

Scraping  in  the  throat,  as  in  catarrh. 

255.  The  voice  is  rough  and  hoarse  ; viscid  mucus  collects  in  the 
throat. 

Hoarseness ; rough,  deep  voice,  alternating  with  thick  mucus  in 
the  windpipe,  which  he  easily  gets  rid  of  by  hawking  and  voluntary 
tussiculation  (aft.  10,  24  h.). 

Fcetid  breath,  in  the  morning  after  awaking. 

Coryza  and  cough,  with  expectoration  of  white  mucus. 

Tickling  in  the  throat,  exciting  cough. 

260.  Cough  only  at  night  from  extreme  irritation  in  throat — not  by  day. 

Cough  excited  by  scraping  in  the  throat.  \_Gff.'\ 

Collection  of  greyish  mucus  in  the  throat,  which  is  coughed  out 
with  difficulty  ; at  the  same  time  scraping  in  the  throat.  [ Gff, !] 

Itching  in  the  throat  and  thyroid  gland  during  the  cough. 

Burning,  itching  tickle  from  the  larynx  down  into  the  abdomen. 

265.  While  coughing  pain  in  the  side  below  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Every  evening  cough,  with  pain  under  the  left  ribs,  as  if  some- 
thing were  torn  away  there. 

Cough  only  at  night,  on  account  of  horrible  irritation  in  the  throat* 

Cough  comes  sometimes  in  regular  great  fits. 

Frightful  spasmodic  cough,  with  much  eructation  and  hoarseness. 

270.  A kind  of  whooping-cough  (aft.  48  h.). 

Deep,  dry  cough,  with  flow  of  water  into  the  mouth,  and  after- 
wards scraping  in  the  throat.  \Gff.] 


56 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


When  coughing,  sensation  as  from  a sore  place  in  the  throat. 
Very  salt  expectoration  when  coughing. 

When  coughing  there  is  a pressure  in  the  umbilical  region. 

275.  Sensation  like  rawness  in  the  chest. 

Burning  in  the  chest. 

A burning  in  the  external  parts  of  the  chest.  [Gff.\. 

On  one  of  the  right  ribs,  an  aching  burning  pain,  aggravated  by 
external  pressure ; then  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  a similar  pain. 

{Gf.\ 

A stitch  in  the  chest  extending  into  the  back  (aft.  some  h.). 

280.  A violent  obtuse  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  catching  the 
breath.  [Gff] 

Whistling  in  the  chest. 

Oppression  on  the  chest.  [Gff.] 

Oppression  in  the  back  through  the  chest. 

Oppression  of  the  chest  and  in  the  back  between  the  scapulae, 
which  goes  off  for  a short  time  by  eating. 

285.  Tight  chest,  with  much  restlessness,  all  day  (aft.  3 d.). 

Tightness  of  the  chest ; she  cannot  take  a deep  breath  nor  yawn 
properly. 

Anxiety  at  the  heart,  hindering  respiration,  with  flying  heat. 
Palpitation  of  the  heart,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  with 
pale  face. 

Along  with  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  pressing  in  the  chest, 
as  if  a lump  lay  there,  or  the  chest  were  stuffed  there. 

290.  Aching  sensation  deep  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  on  expiring 
forcibly,  most  painful  on  a small  spot.  [ Gff, !] 

Aching  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  in  fits  of  five  minutes. 
Aching  superiorly  in  the  chest.  [Gff.] 

Aching  under  (in  ?)  the  left  side  of  the  chest. 

Aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  in  the  cardiac  region.  [Gff.] 
295.  In  the  chest,  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  an  aching  bruised 
pain,  relieved  by  eructation.  [Gff. J 

Bruised  pain  on  the  right  lowest  true  rib,  rather  posteriorly.  [ Gff.] 
Rheumatic  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  under  the  arm. 

[Gff.} 

T.  earing  pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  [ Gff.] 

Violent  pressure  on  the  lower  part  of  the  sacrum.  [Gff.'] 

300.  In  the  sacrum  stitches,  when  sitting  (aft.  8,  9 d.). 

In  the  sacrum  single,  violent,  sharp  stitches,  increased  by  the 
least  movement.  [Gff.] 

Painful  tension  in  the  lumbar  muscles. 

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  back,  on  the  right  side.  [Gff.] 

Backache,  as  if  the  bowels  were  compressed,  and  a weight  therein, 
as  if  he  could  not  straighten  himself. 

305.  A burning  in  the  left  scapula. 

Shooting  in  the  left  scapula  (the  first  days). 

Rheumatic  pain  on  the  right  scapula.  [Gff.] 

Aching,  drawing  pain  in  the  nape. 

Tearing  in  both  shoulders. 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


57 


310.  Tearing  in  the  left  shoulder-joint.  [Gff] 

In  the  evening  drawing,  and  as  if  dislocated  and  paralysed 
in  the  shoulder. 

On  the  right  shoulder  a violent  obtuse  stitch  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Gff.] 
The  arms  are  apt  to  go  to  sleep  on  lying  on  them. 

At  night,  in  the  right  arm,  frequently  numbness  and  gone  asleep. 
315.  The  left  arm  frequently  goes  asleep,  by  day,  when  at  rest. 
Tearing,  in  the  morning,  in  the  right  arm  for  five  minutes. 
Clucking  in  the  arm. 

Twitching  in  the  arm. 

(Paralysis  in  the  right  upper  arm.) 

320.  Tearing  in  the  right  elbow. 

Tearing  on  the  right  elbow. 

Tearing  in  the  right  elbow  and  forearm.  [Gff.] 

Aching,  drawing  pain  in  the  right  forearm  up  into  the  elbow. 

[Gff.] 

Falling  asleep  of  the  hands  at  night. 

325.  Cramp  in  the  hands  (aft.  some  h.). 

In  the  evening  the  fingers  are  drawn  crookedly  inwards  (aft.  7 d.). 
Paralysis  of  the  hand  for  some  minutes  (aft.  6 d.). 

At  night  weakness  of  the  fingers  so  that  he  can  only  by  an  effort 
press  them  upon  the  palm,  or  move  them  quickly.  [Gff.] 

Long-continued  icy  coldness  of  the  hands  (aft.  1 h.).  [Gff.] 

330.  Painful,  long-continued  coldness  of  the  hands.  [Gff.] 

In  the  evening  icy  coldness  of  the  hands  ; he  is  chilled  by  it.  [Gff.] 
Tearing  in  the  inside  of  the  right  metacarpus.  [Gff.] 

Prickings  in  the  hands  and  fingers  as  from  gadflies. 

Prickings  now  in  the  right  index,  now  in  the  right  thumb. 

335.  Itching  in  the  palms. 

Rheumatic  pain  from  the  proximal  joint  of  the  thumb,  through 
its  metacarpal  bone  to  the  wrist-joint.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  thumb.  [Gff.] 

Trembling  in  the  thumb,  in  the  evening,  in  frequent,  short  fits. 
Tearing  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  left  index.  [Gff.] 

340.  (The  proximal  joints  of  the  fingers  become  stiff  in  the  evening, 
and  the  proximal  joint  of  the  thumb  swollen  ; it  is  painful  when 
flexed — worst  when  she  has  made  no  movement  of  the  fingers  during 
the  day.) 

Tearing  in  the  right  index.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  two  last  fingers,  in  the  evening,  before  going  to 
sleep.  [Gff] 

Drawing  in  the  fingers  and  thumb. 

Tearing  in  the  tip  of  the  right  little  finger.  [Gff] 

345.  Tearing  under  the  nail  of  the  right  middle  finger.  [Gff.] 

The  skin  of  the  finger  tips  is  wrinkled,  in  the  morning. 

The  wart  on  the  finger  pains  as  if  sore. 

Itching  in  the  finger  tips. 

A small  tetter  appears  between  the  thumb  and  index,  which 
itches. 

350.  In  the  tip  of  the  left  thumb  a shooting  tearing  pain,  and  also  on 


58 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


gently  touching  it,  it  feels  as  if  a splinter  were  stuck  in  under  the 
nail ; the  sensation  is  less  on  pressing  strongly  on  it.  [ Gff. i] 

In  the  tip  of  the  thumb  a formication  as  if  it  were  asleep,  which 
goes  off  for  a short  time  by  external  pressure.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  left  and  then  also  in  the  right  hip.  [Gff.] 

Aching,  tearing  pain  anteriorly,  just  below  the  left  hip.  [Gff.] 
Clucking  tearing  posteriorly  below  the  left  buttock.  [Gff.] 

355.  Tearing  in  the  right  buttock.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  left  lower  limb,  in  the  morning. 

Rheumatic  tearing  in  the  right  lower  limb.  [Gff.] 

Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs. 


Tension  in  the  thigh,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  especially 
when  walking. 

360.  Stretching  and  relaxation  in  the  lower  limbs. 

The  lower  limbs  feel  gone  to  sleep ; he  cannot  step  firmly 
(aft.  8 d.). 

Tearing  on  the  right  knee.  [Gff.] 

Drawing  in  the  knees  and  ankles. 

Paralysis  of  the  knee  for  some  minutes  (aft.  6 d.). 

365.  Above  the  knee  pain  as  of  dislocation,  especially  after  sitting 
(aft.  5 d.). 

Itching  on  the  knees. 

In  the  morning  stiffness  in  the  hough  (the  first  days). 

Soreness  in  the  houghs,  the  pain  is  worst  in  the  evening. 

Tearing  under  the  left  knee,  at  the  upper  part  of  the  tibia.  [Gff.] 
370.  More  cold  feeling  in  the  legs  than  externally  perceptible  coldness. 

[Gff-] 

The  right  leg  is  very  cold,  especially  the  knee. 

Cold  feet. 

Very  cold  feet.  [Gff.] 

On  both  tibiae  painful  spots  (aft.  28  d.). 

375.  (The  legs  from  the  knees  downwards  very  swollen,  especially  the 
feet)  (aft.  3 d.). 

Swelling  of  the  left  inner  ankle ; it  is  only  painful  there  when 
walking ; but  on  walking  for  a considerable  time  it  no  longer  hurts 
(aft.  7 d.). 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  itching  on  the  legs  above  the 
ankles ; after  rubbing  it  pains  as  if  sore  and  bruised. 

Intermitting  tearing  on  the  left  calf.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left  leg.  [Gff.] 

380.  Cramp  in  the  lower  limbs  and  cramp  in  the  calves 
almost  every  night. 

Grumbling  in  the  calves  and  feet. 

Creeping  in  the  feet,  which  are  as  if  numb  (a  tingling  in  them)  ; 
when  he  stood  up  he  felt  faint,  all  became  dark  before  his  eyes  ; he 
could  not  remain  up,  he  must  vomit  (bile),  and  had  to  lie  down 
again. 

Itching  on  the  ankles. 

Tearing  in  the  ankles. 

385.  Gouty  pain  in  the  ankle-joints. 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


59 

Pain  on  walking  in  the  left  ankle-joint. 

In  the  left  foot  tearing  and  shooting  (aft.  26  d.). 

In  the  left  foot  occasional  shooting. 

Tension  in  the  left  foot  (at  noon). 

390.  Stiffness  of  the  feet,  which  are  very  weary  (aft.  6 d.). 

Gouty  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe. 

Stitch  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe. 

Itching  on  the  toes. 

Intolerable  tickling  on  the  tip  of  the  big  toe. 

395.  Tearing  in  the  middle  toes  of  the  left  foot.  \Gjff'.'] 

Tearing  on  the  external  border  of  the  left  foot.  \Gff< !] 

Pain  in  the  heel  when  walking. 

Stitches  in  the  heel. 

Itching  in  the  interior  of  the  soles,  not  allayed  by 
scratching. 

400.  Great  burning  in  the  soles. 

Pain  of  the  corns,  as  if  sore. 

By  gentle  walking  in  the  open  air  the  symptoms  are  alleviated, 
but  return  when  sitting.  \Gff.'\ 

When  walking,  profuse  perspiration  chiefly  on  the  abdomen  and 
thighs. 

Perspiration  all  day  long  (aft.  24  h.). 

405.  Itching  almost  all  over,  even  on  the  abdomen. 

Produces  the  itch-eruption  on  the  skin,  with  much  itching. 

Causes  the  tetters  to  reappear. 

A burning  in  several  parts  of  the  skin  of  the  body. 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  the  skin  of  the  body  is  as  if  numb  and 
insensible  to  the  knees,  without  being  cold  ; the  hands  have  only  an 
indistinct  sensibility — a kind  of  gone-to-sleep  condition  of  the  skin, 
but  without  formication.  [ Gff?\ 

410.  He  feels  the  pulse  in  the  body  like  the  ticking  of  a watch. 
Twitching  in  the  limbs. 

Uncommon  twitching  in  all  the  limbs  and  coldness  of  the  body 
at  night  (aft.  5 d.). 

From  walking  in  the  open  air,  commotion  in  the  blood  and 
accelerated  circulation,  with  greater  weakness  of  the  body. 

Uneasiness  in  all  the  limbs,  like  a formication,  with  a kind  of 
anxiety — only  by  day. 

415.  In  the  morning  (in  a heated  room),  he  became  suddenly  so  weak 
that  he  could  not  walk  alone,  with  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  and 
hands. 

Very  exhausted  (aft.  8,  24  h.). 

Exhaustion  in  the  morning  in  bed.  \Gff\'\ 

In  the  morning  great  weakness  in  the  lower  limbs. 

Weariness,  with  painfulness  of  all  the  limbs. 

420.  Exhaustion  that  goes  off  by  walking  (aft.  5 d.). 

Heavy  in  the  body  and  very  tired  (aft.  7 d.). 

Faintness,  sinking  in  the  knees  (aft.  3 h.). 

Weakness  in  the  feet  like  insensibility  (aft.  48  h.). 


6o 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


She  must  lie  down  on  account  of  weak  feeling-  in  the  stomach 

O 

and  vertigo  (aft.  72  h.). 

425.  Inclination  to  stretch  himself. 

(Sleepiness  by  day.) 

Before  midnight  sleeplessness. 

He  cannot  sleep  at  night,  he  knows  not  why. 

For  several  nights  sleeplessness,  and  in  the  morning  slumber  full 
of  fantastical  dreams. 

430.  Frequent  waking  at  night.  \Gff] 

Frequent  waking,  and  at  2 a.m.  long  uneasiness  in  the  whole 
body,  especially  in  the  occiput. 

Very  late  of  falling  asleep — then  very  restless  sleep  on  account  of 
pressure  in  the  epigastrium,  particularly  the  right  side. 

For  several  successive  nights,  always  after  midnight  until  7 or 
8 a.m.,  pain  over  the  eyes,  with  nausea. 

In  the  evening,  late,  after  going  to  sleep  in  bed,  aching,  tearing 
from  the  occiput  into  the  forehead.  \Gff.'\ 

435.  The  first  half  of  the  night  heat  in  the  head. 

Uneasiness  in  the  occiput  after  midnight. 

At  night  he  wakes  up  with  headache,  which  goes  off  on  rising. 

Waking  with  exhaustion,  dryness  of  mouth,  and  great  pressure  in 
the  epigastrium,  diminished  by  lying  on  the  abdomen,  whereupon  he 
has  tearing  in  the  sacrum  instead,  which  goes  off  when  he  again  lies 
on  the  back.  [ Gjf. !] 

On  awaking  about  midnight  weakness,  nausea,  great  pressure  in 
the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  abdomen,  violent  erections,  without 
voluptuous  sensation,  dryness  in  the  mouth,  and  insensibility  of  the 
surface  of  the  body.  [ Gff. !] 

440.  Very  early  waking  \ followed  by  frequently  interrupted,  but  very 
profound  sleep,  with  eyes  fast  closed.  [ Gff.\ 

In  the  morning,  after  waking,  in  bed,  great  weariness,  especially 
in  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  confusion  of  the  head  and  sensation  as 
if  the  eyes  were  very  fast  closed,  besides  some  nausea  in  the  scrobiculus 
cordis ; he  has  hardly  resolution  to  get  up. 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  weariness,  with  feeling  in  the  eves  as  if 
they  were  too  firmly  closed. 

At  night  when  asleep  he  lies  on  his  back,  the  occiput  supported 
by  both  hands,  and  with  bent  knees,  with  very  vivid  dreams. 

Starting  up  in  fright,  in  the  evening,  on  going  to  sleep,  with  illu- 
sion as  if  there  was  too  much  light  in  the  room  ; he  sprang  out  of 
bed  in  anxiety  (aft.  some  h.). 

445.  For  three  successive  nights  restless,  with  many  dreams  (aft.  5 d.). 

While  in  the  act  of  going  off  to  sleep  vivid,  uneasy  dreams,  which 
almost  prevented  any  sleep  (aft.  8 d.). 

The  child  sleeps  restlessly,  talks  in  its  sleep,  and  wants  to  drink. 
Sleep  restless,  with  anxious  dreams  (aft.  5 d.). 

The  night  full  of  uneasy,  anxious  dreams.  [Gff-] j 

450.  After  falling  asleep  late,  anxious  dreams,  as  if  he  was  ill  used,  and 
on  account  of  weakness  could  not  defend  himself ; he  then  awakes  with 
great  weakness  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  with  squeezing  pressure 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


61 


under  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  nausea,  sensations  that  recur  when 
he  lies  down  again  and  falls  asleep — to  which  is  then  added  pressure 
in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  ; but  on  waking  up  and  sitting  up  and 
moving  the  symptoms  go  off,  with  discharge  of  flatus,  fermentation 
in  the  abdomen  and  eructation. 

Vexatious,  anxious  dreams,  and  talking  in  sleep,  for  eight 
days  (immediately). 

Dreams  full  of  business. 

At  night  restless  sleep,  on  account  of  coldness  of  the  body  and 
twitching  in  all  the  limbs  (aft.  5 d.). 

Internal  chilliness  at  night,  on  account  of  which  he  cannot  go  to 
sleep,  or  from  which  he  wakes  up  at  night ; he  does  not  become 
warm  at  all. 

455.  Chilliness  and  weariness  as  if  he  wanted  to  sleep,  for  four  successive 
forenoons,  which  went  off  by  eating  his  dinner  (aft.  72  h,). 

From  early  morning  chill,  sleep-weariness,  and  numb  headache, 
which  only  went  off  by  walking  in  the  open  air. 

After  two  diarrhoeic  stools,  chill,  great  weariness  and  headache. 

Before  dinner  chilliness  (the  first  days). 

(Coldness  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body — excepting  only  the  face, 
neck,  and  genital  organs.) 

460.  For  two  successive  evenings  heat,  from  7 to  8 p.m.  (aft.  12  d.). 

Every  quarter  of  an  hour  heat  in  the  face  and  all  over  the  body 
(aft.  5,  6 d.). 

Nocturnal  perspiration  for  two  successive  nights  (aft.  6,  7 d.). 

Profuse  night  sweat  for  two  successive  nights  (aft.  5 d.). 

Always  after  midnight  general,  strong-smelling  sweat,  for  many 
nights. 

465.  Every  night  a strong  exhalation,  almost  like  sweat. 

Moderate  night  sweat  all  over,  with  great  warmth  of  the  body. 

Every  morning  sweat,  most  profuse  on  the  ailing  side. 

Very  restless  by  day. 

Restless  all  day,  with  tightness  of  chest. 

470.  Disposition  restless  and  excited. 

Hurriedness  in  intellectual  occupations. 

Irritable  humour,  as  if  weak  in  nerves  and  impatient. 

Excited ; she  spoke  unusually  much  (loquacious),  was  very  much 
exhausted  thereby,  could  not  sleep  at  night,  got  a headache,  as  if  a 
great  weight  lay  on  her  head  ; she  felt  much  oppressed,  must  sit  up 
in  bed,  and  had  anxiety,  and  perspired  all  over  the  body. 

Unusually  long  excitement. 

475.  Is  irritated  by  speaking,  has  shaking  and  trembling  all  through  the 
body,  especially  in  the  lower  extremities,  and  must  remain  for  some 
time  alone,  in  order  to  rest. 

Music  sends  the  blood  to  his  head. 

The  imagination  is  occupied  with  many  lascivious  ideas,  even  in 
dreams,  and  yet  the  disposition  and  the  sexual  organs  are  but  little 
excited  by  them  (in  the  first  24  h.). 

Distorted  fancies,  grimaces,  satanic  faces  take  possession  of  the 
mind,  and  he  cannot  get  rid  of  therm 


62 


AMBRA  GRISEA. 


Anxious  thoughts  arise  in  him. 

480.  Anxious  in  the  evening. 

Anxious  and  trembling  (aft.  8 d.). 

Great  dejection  (aft.  6 d.). 

Sad  thoughts  take  possession  of  him,  with  sinking  feeling  about 
the  heart  he  is  for  a long  time  depressed  in  spirits. 

Very  sad  (aft.  72  h.). 

485.  Despair  (aft.  48  h.). 

Immediately  lachrymose,  then  peevish  and  quarrelsome,  for  two 
hours. 

His  humour  is  easily  embittered. 

Constant  alternation  of  dejection  and  passionate  disposition,  which 
will  not  allow  him  to  get  a tranquil  disposition. 

Indifferent  to  joy  and  sorrow,  but  more  dejected  than  calm. 

Very  composed  disposition.*  \Gff^\ 


* Secondary  action  produced  by  the  organism. 


63 


ANGUSTURA.1 

( Cortex  Angustura  or  Angustura.) 

(The  best  pieces  of  the  bark  of  this  South  American  tree,  called  Bonplandia 
trifoliata , are  about  one  line  in  thickness,  slightly  bent,  on  their  external  convex  side 
covered  with  a greyish-white,  easily  scraped  off,  fine  coating  ; traversed  by  fine  trans- 
verse furrows  ; on  the  inner  concave  surface  of  a bright  brownish  yellow,  very  friable, 
and  cinnamon  coloured  and  porous  on  the  fractured  surface ; of  a disagreeable  spicy 
smell,  and  of  a penetrating,  somewhat  hot,  spicy  bitter  taste,  the  powder  of  which 
resembles  rhubarb  powder  in  colour;  the  decoction  is  not  precipitated  by  a solution  of 
sulphate  of  iron.  Fifty  grains  of  this  powder  digested  in  1000  drops  of  alcohol 
without  heat  so  as  to  form  a tincture  are  employed  for  medicinal  purposes  after 
appropriate  dilution.) 

For  many  years  complaints  have  been  publicly  made  about  a substi- 
tution in  commerce  for  this  true  angustura  bark  of  a false  bark,  which 
displays  dangerous  and  poisonous  properties,  and  for  many  years  the 
tree  from  which  this  false  bark  was  derived  was  unknown. 

Now  the  Brucea  ferruginea  is  said  to  be  the  tree  from  which  this 
false  suspicious  bark  is  derived  \ chemical  investigation  has  shown  that 
it  furnishes  the  same  alkaloid  as  nux  vomica,  ignatia,  &c. 

However,  the  above-described  genuine  angustura  bark  likewise 
possesses  uncommonly  great  medicinal  power,  so  that,  when  it  is 
procured  direct  from  the  tree  Bonplandia  trifoliata  at  St.  Thomas  del 
Angustura,  in  South  America,  as  it  is  now,  without  any  doubt  it  can, 
like  every  other  very  powerful  medicine,  do  great  harm  if  given  in 
immoderate  doses  and  in  unsuitable  cases.  In  F.  A.  G.  Emmert’s 
Curgeschichte  (HufelancT s Journ .,  August,  1815,  p.  75)  a case  is  related 
where  three  tablespoonfuls  of  a decoction  of  five  ounces  of  (presum- 
ably spurious)  angustura  bark,  evaporated  to  five  ounces  of  liquid,  were 
given  to  a boy  five  and  a half  years  old.  This  unreasonable  dose,  which 
contained  about  an  ounce  and  a half  of  angustura  power,  proved  fatal, 
as  we  read  with  a shudder,  in  a couple  of  hours,  with  horrible  suffer- 
ings. This  substance  would  in  the  same  dose  have  a like  effect  not 
only  on  a boy  but  on  an  adult  person. 

In  this  fatal  case  described  by  Emmert  the  boy  presented  the 
following  symptoms  : 

Trembling,  soon  passing  into  violent  convulsions  (aft.  \ h.). 

When  the  medical  attendant  touched  the  arm  in  order  to  feel 
the  pulse  tetanus  suddenly  ensued. 

The  eyelids  were  wide  open. 

The  eyes  were  staring,  projecting,  and  immovable. 

Trismus,  with  wide  separation  of  the  lips,  so  that  the  front  teeth 
were  quite  exposed. 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827* 


6+ 


ANGUSTURA. 


Tension  of  individual  facial  muscles. 

The  limbs  were  stretched  out  to  the  utmost,  stiff,  and  stark. 

The  spinal  column  and  the  head  strongly  drawn  backwards. 

The  trunk  was  from  time  to  time  shaken  by  violent  jerking  along 
the  back,  as  from  electric  shocks,  and  somewhat  raised. 

Cheeks  and  lips  became  blue. 

Respiration  intermitting. 

After  an  attack  that  lasted  six  minutes  the  boy  breathed  with 
great  effort,  panting,  with  blueness  of  the  cheeks  and  lips. 

Great  and  frequent  longing  for  coffee. 

Even  swallowing  tepid  water  excited  tetanic  spasms. 

Pulse  102,  spasmodic,  irregular. 

The  tetanus  sometimes  returned  without  perceptible  cause,  some- 
times was  excited  by  a noise,  or  by  touching  any  portion  of  the  body  ; 
he  constantly  called  out  that  no  one  should  touch  him. 

After  the  tetanus  the  eyes  were  closed,  the  forehead  and  face 
covered  with  sweat  ; blueness  of  the  cheeks  and  lips  ; groaning 
without  (acknowledged)  pains. 

The  whole  body  became  flaccid  and  relaxed ; the  eye  dead-like ; 
convulsive  breathing  came  back  only  after  long  pauses. 

Death  after  an  hour. 

Half  an  hour  after  death  the  body  was  stiff  and  stark. 

After  twenty-four  hours  there  was  already  a strong  corpse-like 
smell  outside  and  inside ; on  opening  the  veins  cherry-coloured  fluid 
blood  was  found. 

The  right  lung  was  externally  pale  and  bloated,  internally  full  of 
blood ; the  left  lung  was  externally  blue,  when  incised  blackish  and 
very  heavy  from  blood. 

Besides  the  above  other  reports  of  the  consequences  of  strong  doses 
of  angustura  have  been  recorded,  such  as  spasmodic  twitchings,  vertigo, 
anxiety,  immobility  of  the  muscles  as  from  stiffening,  and  a report  has 
been  communicated  to  me  by  the  late  Dr.  Wurzner,  of  Eilenburg, 
relating  to  four  persons,  each  of  whom  took  from  ten  to  twelve  grains 
of  the  extract  in  the  form  of  pills,  in  whom  there  occurred  : 

Stiffness  of  all  the  muscles  of  the  body,  like  tetanus  ; one  fell  to 
the  ground  suddenly,  retaining  his  consciousness. 

Closure  of  the  jaws,  trismus. 

Very  similar  though  slighter  symptoms  will  be  found  in  the  following 
list  of  the  effects  of  carefully  selected  pieces  of  angustura  bark  on  the 
healthy  body. 

I have  employed  for  homoeopathic  purposes  the  smallest  portion  of  a 
drop  of  the  billionth  dilution  of  the  above-described  alcoholic  tincture, 
but  have  found  that  in  some  cases  a still  higher  dilution  would  have 
been  more  suitable. 

Camphor  is  not  an  antidote  for  its  too  violent  effects,  but  coffee  is. 

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by: — Franz,  Gross,  Harnisch, 
Langhammer,  Meyer,  Michler,  Mossdorf,  Wislicenus.  No  old-school 
authorities  are  quoted. 

In  this  2nd  edition  Hahnemann  has  added  3 to  his  own  symptoms,  and  excluded 
6 of  those  of  his  disciples  that  appeared  in  the  ist  edition.] 


ANGUSTURA. 


65 


ANGUSTURA. 

In  the  open  air,  vertigo  (aft.  20  h.). 

A feeling  of  vertigo  comes  over  him  when  he  crosses  flowing 
water  or  walks  at  the  side  of  a canal ; he  fears  he  will  sink.  [Tz.] 

Dulness  and  stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  as  from  intoxication  on 
the  previous  day.  [Mir.] 

The  head  is  confused  ; throbbing  in  the  forehead. 

5.  Confusion  and  contractive  feeling  in  the  head  on  walking  quickly. 

[*•] 

Suddenly  great  confusion  of  the  head,  as  from  a skin  stretched 
over  the  brain,  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  J h.).  [Mss.] 

Great  distraction  ; when  he  occupies  himself  with  something 
serious,  other  things  immediately  come  into  his  head  (aft.  45  h.). 

[*■*•] 

Sometimes  he  loses  himself,  now  in  a dreamy  state,  now  in  com- 
plete absence  of  thought,  and  he  readily  falls  asleep  when  reading. 

[*■*.] 

In  the  afternoon,  along  with  repeated  (occurring  the  first  three 
afternoons)  warmth  of  the  body,  excessive  liveliness,  and  very  active 
memory ; but  he  can  think  of  nothing  attentively  on  account  of  a 
not  disagreeable  scheme  that  forces  itself  upon  him,  which  he  almost 
thinks  is  true  and  feasible,  and  owing  to  which  he  neither  sees  nor 
hears  anything  beside — a kind  of  very  strong  waking  dream  (aft.  4 d.)* 

[**•] 

10.  In  the  afternoon  great  sprightliness  and  vivacity  of  the  mind; 
he  comprehends  everything  much  more  easily  than  on  the  first  day, 
and  more  readily  than  before,  but  on  account  of  a feeling  of  inward 
restlessness  as  if  a great  happiness  awaited  him,  and  on  account  of  a 
concourse  of  scheming  ideas,  he  is  unable  to  stick  to  his  subject 
(aft.  35  h.).  [^z.] 

In  the  morning  after  rising  great  weight  in  the  forehead  without 
confusion  (aft.  3 d.).  [Tz.] 

In  the  open  air  he  had  some  headache  and  heat  (towards  evening). 

Cramp-like  headache. 

Headache  : aching  in  the  forehead  above  both  eyes,  as  if  all  would 
come  out  there,  during  rest  and  when  moving. 

15.  Aching  in  the  left  half  of  the  brain  on  bending  down  the  head, 
which  is  relieved  by  raising  it  up  (immediately).  [Mss.] 

Aching  in  the  temples  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.] 

Towards  evening,  aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  with  great  heat  in 
the  face.  [Tz.] 

Headache  only  occurred  when  there  was  heat  of  face.  [Fz.] 

The  headaches  always  occur  in  the  evening  when  it  becomes 
dark,  and  last  till  he  goes  to  sleep.  [G^.] 

20.  Headache  as  if  all  moved  round  in  the  brain,  with  aching  and 
boring  pain,  especially  in  the  temples  ; if  he  lays  his  head  down  on 
the  table,  he  feels,  with  the  exception  of  some  tension  in  the  forehead, 

5 


66 


ANGUSTURA. 


for  the  moment  nothing,  but  the  pains  soon  come  back,  only  not  so 
severe  ; on  the  other  hand,  when  he  raises  the  head  up,  they  again 
increase  to  their  former  intensity  (aft.  12  h.).  [Z%.] 

Aching  in  the  forehead.  \_HschJ\ 

Bruised  pain  in  the  brain  in  the  sinciput,  increased  by  stooping, 
diminished  in  the  open  air  (immediately). 

Boring  headache  in  the  temples. 

A stitch  as  from  electricity  darting  up  and  down  from  the  temples. 

25.  Drawing,  aching  pain  in  the  temporal  region.  \_Hsch.~\ 

Headache  : aching  in  the  occiput,  in  the  afternoon. 

In  the  evening  aching,  drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head, 
with  aching  in  the  lower  jaw  (aft.  16  h.).  [Zz.] 

Rather  external  tearing  headache  from  the  crown  forwards  over 
the  temple  (aft.  24  h.).  \}Vs^\ 

Intermittent  needle-pricks  in  the  right  temporal  region,  rather 
externally  (aft.  4 h.).  [Zr.] 

30.  Continued  itching  stitches  in  the  forehead  and  temple,  externally, 
which  are  not  removed  by  rubbing  (aft.  5 h.). 

Stiffness,  numbness  in  the  temporal  muscles,  as  if  something  were 
forced  out  there. 

Tensive  pain  in  the  temporal  muscles  on  opening  the  jaws. 

Twitching  under  the  skin  of  the  left  parietal  region,  on  a small 
spot,  which  when  pressed  pains  as  if  bruised  (aft.  1 h.).  [Afss.^\ 

Whilst  reading  a quivering  between  the  eyebrows. 

35.  Some  stitches  above  the  eyes. 

Contraction  of  the  pupils  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Zr.] 

Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  13  h.).  [Zr.] 

In  the  afternoon  and  evening,  several  times  a violent  burning  in 
the  inner  half  of  the  eyes  themselves  and  in  their  inner  canthus. 

A tension  first  in  one  then  in  the  other  eye,  as  from  behind,  in 
the  morning. 

40.  Pressure  on  the  right  eye  and  orbit  in  the  evening  (aft.  14  h.). 
•] 

In  both  eyes  an  aching,  as  if  a dazzling  light  struck  them,  and 
the  eyes  became  weak. 

The  eyes  are  red  and  burn  from  heat  ; in  the  morning  they  are 
sealed  up  with  matter. 

Sore  pain  of  the  eyelids. 

Feeling  of  dryness  under  the  upper  eyelids. 

45.  Itching  stitches  on  the  upper  eyelid,  not  removable  by  rubbing 
(aft.  1 h.).  \Ws.~\ 

Like  a thin  vapour  before  the  eyes,  soon  going  off. 

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  quite  dim  before  the  eyes,  as  if  the 
cornea  were  dim  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zz.] 

Sharper  and  more  distinct  vision  at  a distance  than  usual.* 
[Hsch.] 

Long  sight  : he  could  see  distant  objects  distinctly,  though  he  is 
naturally  very  short-sighted*  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Zr.] 

50.  Cramp-pain  on  the  zygomatic  arch  (aft,  J h.).  [WsJ\ 

* Curative  secondary  action  of  the  organism. 


ANGUSTURA.  67 

The  hearing  is  much  more  acute  than  usual*  (aft.  h.).  [jFz.] 
Ringing  in  the  right  ear  (aft.  33  h.).  [Lr.] 

Stitches  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  meatus  auditorius  externus. 

A burning  in  the  inner  ear,  in  the  region  of  the  membrana 
tympani. 

55.  Sensation  as  if  something  came  in  front  of  the  ear  and  something 
were  sticking  in  it. 

Cramp  in  the  external  ear. 

Heat  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear. 

Tearing,  twitching  before  the  left  ear  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVsT] 

Transient  drawing  several  times,  now  in  the  right,  now  in  the 
left  ear.  [ Mss .] 

60.  Very  painful  tearing  twitching  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear, 
which  gradually  changes  into  drawing  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Mss .] 

Behind  the  ears,  on  the  side  of  the  neck,  a throbbing  pain,  as  if 
the  great  cerebral  artery  was  beating  violently. 

Tearing  in  a boil  over  the  right  mastoid  process  (aft. 
\ h.).  [Mss.] 

Heat  in  the  ears  and  in  both  cheeks. 

Smarting,  sore  feeling  deep  in  the  nose  (immediately). 

65.  In  the  evening  hot  feeling  on  the  cheek,  which  does  not  feel 
warm  to  the  touch  (aft.  12  h.).  [T%.] 

Feeling  of  heat  in  both  cheeks,  without  externally  perceptible 
warmth. 

Pain  in  the  masseter  muscles  of  the  cheek,  as  f he  had  chewed 
too  strongly  and  had  tired  them. 

In  the  masseter  muscles  near  the  maxillary  joint  a cramp-like 
pain,  especially  when  at  rest,  which  is  relieved  by  opening  and 
shutting  the  jaw. 

Great  dryness  of  the  lips  and  mouth  without  thirst  (aft.  3 h.). 
[*■*•] 

70.  (A  digging  in  the  lower  jaw)  (aft.  18  h.) 

Slight  drawing  in  undefined  upper  molars.  [Mss.] 

Drawing  pain  in  both  right  upper  incisors.  [Mss.] 

Drawing  pain  apparently  among  the  crowns  of  the  right  middle 
upper  molars,  palliatively  alleviated  by  applying  a cold  finger  (aft. 
1 h.).  [Mss.] 

Throbbing  toothache  in  a hollow  tooth,  in  the  evening,  after  lying 
down  (aft.  14  h.).  [TVs.] 

75.  In  the  gums  of  the  right  upper  row  a shooting  drawing  (aft.  3 h.). 
[TVs.] 

Shooting,  pinching  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  extremely  painful, 
even  when  not  moving  it  (aft.  6 h.).  [TVs.] 

Burning  on  the  left  side  of  the  tongue,  almost  on  its  border,  as 
from  pepper  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.] 

White  tongue,  with  rough  sensation  (aft.  12  h.).  [Lr.] 
Roughness  and  dryness  on  the  back  of  the  palate  and  in  the 
fauces,  without  thirst,  worse  when  swallowing  (aft.  25  h.).  [Lr>] 

80.  The  voice  is  louder  and  bolder*  (aft.  5^  h.).  [Tz.] 

* Curative  secondary  action  of  the  organism. 


68  ANGUSTURA. 

(Taste  like  peach  kernels  in  the  mouth.) 

(Bread  tastes  sour  to  her.) 

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  after  (accustomed)  tobacco-smoking. 

[Mir.'] 

Putrid,  flat  taste  in  the  mouth  for  a short  time  (aft.  2 h.). 
[Mss.] 

85.  After  dinner,  which  tasted  good,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  and 
several  slight  eructations  (aft.  30  h.).  [Fz.] 

No  desire  to  drink  and  no  pleasure  in  doing  so,  and  yet  sensation 
of  thirst  more  for  warm  than  for  cold  drinks  ; but  cold  drinks  did  not 
produce  chilliness. 

Much  thirst  for  cold  drinks  (aft.  15  h.).  [Lr.] 

Frequent  hiccup  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.] 

Nausea,  especially  while  eating.  [Mir.] 

90.  Sensation  of  nausea  in  the  stomach  (aft.  1 h.).  [Ws.] 

In  the  evening  during  slumber  he  had  very  viscid,  sickly  tasting, 
and  putrid  mucus  in  the  mouth,  and  could  not  drink  enough.  [Fz.] 
Although  he  has  great  appetite,  food  is  not  relished  ; he  feels  as 
if  it  were  repugnant  to  him,  at  the  same  time  an  incomplete  eructa- 
tion causes  fulness  in  the  chest,  and  yet  he  cannot  get  satiated  with 
a very  plentiful  meal  (aft.  6 h.).  [Fz.] 

When  walking,  nausea,  as  if  he  would  fall  down  in  a faint ; at 
the  same  time  great  exhaustion  all  over,  which  is  not  relieved  by  sitting 
down  ; he  then  felt  as  if  the  nausea  rose  into  his  head,  and  he  became 
hungry. 

On  commencing  to  eat  a cutting  pain  in  the  stomach  like  sore 
pain,  which  went  off  on  continuing  to  eat  (aft.  3 d.).  [Fz.] 

95.  After  eating,  much  eructation  of  wind. 

Bilious  eructation. 

Cramp-like,  pinching  pain  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  in  the 
evening,  while  sitting  (aft.  13  h.).  [Fz.] 

Cutting  tearing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  increased  by  moving  the 
trunk,  after  dinner.  [Ws.] 

Shooting  in  the  abdomen,  followed  by  a drawing  in  it. 
loo.  Under  the  short  ribs,  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  a cutting 
on  moving  the  trunk  (aft.  48  h.).  [Gjj.] 

In  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  flying,  shaking,  obtuse  stitches 
here  and  there.  [Gjj.] 

An  obtuse  shooting  in  the  hypogastrium,  on  the  left  side,  near 
the  navel  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gjj.] 

In  the  left  lumbar  region  cutting  pain  from  within  outwards 
(aft.  3 h.).  [^.] 

Cutting  in  the  hypogastrium  over  and  across  the  os  pubis,  with 
pressing  towards  the  rectum  (aft.  J h.).  [Mss.] 

105.  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  abdomen  when  walking.  [Fz.] 

Pinching  in  the  right  lumbar  region  when  at  rest.  [Ws.] 
Drawing,  bruised  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  when 
walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.] 

Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium  from  within  outwards,  with  anxiety 
(aft.  16  h.).  [Fz.] 


ANGUSTURA. 


69 


Above  the  os  pubis  a cramp-like  pressure  when  sitting,  as 
if  something  bored  outwards  there  (aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

110.  Audible  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  eructation,  [Fz.] 

A fermentation  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea 
would  ensue,  with  displacement  of  flatulence  (aft.  3 h.).  [Mir. ] 
Loud  gurgling  in  the  abdomen. 

On  drinking  warm  milk  a cutting  and  gurgling  in  the  hypo- 
gastrium  above  and  across  the  os  pubis  (aft.  J h.).  [Mss.'] 

Painless  movements,  almost  incessant  rumbling  and  gurgling 
in  the  bowels,  for  three  hours.  [Mss.] 

1 15.  In  the  morning  after  previous  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  nausea, 
diarrhoea  ensues  ; the  last  stool  was  pure  mucus. 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  purging  ; the  last  time  mucous 
(aft.  12,  84  h.). 

Diarrhoeic  commotion,  with  penetrating  drawing  through  all  the 
intestines  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fz.] 

Repeated  sensation  in  the  bowels  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue. 
[Mss.] 

(Crawling  tickling  in  the  rectum,  as  from  ascarides.) 

120.  Frequent  straining  in  the  rectum  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on 
immediately,  with  shuddering  over  the  face.  [Mss.] 

After  every  stool  shuddering  over  the  face,  with  goose-skin. 
[Mss.] 

The  stool  was  not  so  thin  as  the  diarrhoeic  feeling  led  him  to 
anticipate.  [Mss.] 

Feeling  as  if  the  stool  had  not  been  completely  evacuated,  and  as 
if  there  was  more  to  come.  [Mss.] 

Sensation  in  the  rectum  as  if  it  would  come  out,  followed  by  the 
evacuation  of  a yellow,  soft,  very  copious  stool  (aft.  i§  h.).  [Fz.] 
125.  Within  four  hours,  three  evacuations  of  a large  quantity  of  thin 
faeces.  [Mss.] 

Thin  copious  stool,  without  pains  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gjj.] 

Discharge  of  stinking  flatus.  [Mss.] 

Painful  pressing,  as  from  great  contraction  of  the  anus,  with 
swelling  of  the  haemorrhoidal  veins,  accompanied  by  burning  pain,  as 
if  the  anus  was  corroded,  with  a soft  stool  (aft.  3 d.).  [Fz.] 
Moderate  constipation.  [Fz.] 

130.  Frequent,  though  not  urgent,  call  to  stool  ; he  felt  as  if  the  stool 
would  not  come,  and  when  he  endeavoured  to  evacuate,  only  some 
hard  pieces  came  away,  with  much  pressing  and  straining  (aft.  12  h.). 

[ Lr •] 

Orange-coloured  urine,  which  soon  becomes  very  turbid  (aft. 

24  h.). 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine 
(aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.] 

(A  burning  after  urinating ; he  had  frequent  call  to  urinate,  but 
only  a few  dark  yellow  drops  were  passed,  which  always  caused 
burning.) 

Frequent  discharge  of  copious,  white  urine,  preceded  by  pressing 


7o 


ANGUSTURA. 


in  the  bladder ; arid,  after  urinating,  ineffectual  straining — strangury 

(aft.  36  h.).  [Fz.] 

135.  A voluptuous  itching  at  the  point  of  the  glans,  which 
compelled  him  to  rub  it,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft. 
6J  h.).  [Lr.] 

Itching  of  the  scrotum. 

On  the  prepuce  shooting,  sometimes  itching. 

(Drawing,  alternating  with  twitching,  in  the  left  spermatic  cord, 
with  sensation  of  shuddering  in  the  neighbouring  parts  of  the  scrotum 
and  thigh.)  [Mss.] 

* * 

■x- 

A stitch  in  the  epiglottis  (immediately). 

140.  Hoarseness  caused  by  much  mucus  in  the  larynx  (aft.  10  h.).  [Fz.] 

Tickling  irritation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx,  which  caused 
dry  short  cough,  lasting  a long  time  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Lr.] 

Frequent  short  cough,  followed  by  a single  sob  (aft.  15  h.). 

All  day  long  tussiculation  from  an  irritation  deep  in  the  larynx, 
which,  only  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  was  associated  with 
rattling  in  the  chest,  and  with  much  expectoration  of  yellow 
mucus.  [Lr.] 

Violent  cough  from  deep  down  in  the  trachea,  in  the  morning, 
with  expectoration  of  yellow  mucus  (aft.  24  h.).  [Lr.] 

145.  Often  scrapy  in  the  throat ; he  must  hawk,  without  being  able  to 
bring  up  anything  (aft.  6 h.).  [TVsT] 

In  the  trachea  viscid  mucus,  which  is  not  easily  coughed  up 
(aft.  10,  11  h.).  [Fz.] 

Cutting  pressure  in  both  sides  of  the  chest,  at  first 
only  when  inspiring,  afterwards  increased  to  cutting 
blows,  which  continue  even  when  holding  the  breath 

(aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.] 

Transient  tightness  of  the  chest  (immediately). 

On  walking  quickly,  tightness  of  the  chest  and  aching  in  its  left 
side  (aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

150.  Pain  in  the  pectoral  muscles  in  the  morning,  which  she  moves  in 
bed,  and  during  the  day,  when  she  lays  the  arms  together,  they  pain 
as  if  bruised  ; on  touching  the  parts  she  feels  nothing,  not  even  when 
breathing. 

A sharp  aching,  as  it  were  pinching  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
chest,  on  a small  spot  (aft.  15  h.). 

Cutting  stitches  in  the  last  rib  during  inspiration,  and  besides  that 
shortly  before  going  to  sleep  and  after  lying  down. 

Spasm  of  the  chest,  as  when  suddenly  exposed  to  severe  cold. 
[Myr.] 

Pressure  over  the  whole  of  the  right  side  of  chest  and  abdomen,  as  if 
it  were  compressed  from  before  and  behind,  with  sharp  inward-cutting 
down  the  sternum  and  behind  on  the  spine,  increased  by  inspiration 
and  every  movement  of  the  trunk  (aft.  5 h.).  [TVs.] 

155.  Towards  evening,  on  going  upstairs,  great  oppression  and  pressure 
on  the  chest,  with  aching  on  the  sides  of  the  frontal  bone  and  violent 
palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fz.] 


ANGUSTURA. 


7i 

Cutting  blows  on  the  sternum  and  spine,  towards  the  interior 
(aft.  36  h.).  [TVsT] 

When  sitting  and  bending  forwards,  violent  palpitation  of  the 
heart,  with  painful  sensation  of  contraction  of  the  heart.  [Gw.] 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  while  lying  on  the  left  side,  he  feels  a 
violent  palpitation  of  the  heart ; relieved  by  sitting  up.  [Gw.] 

A beating  pain  in  the  cardiac  region.  \_Hsch.~\ 

160.  When  he  takes  as  deep  a breath  as  he  can,  it  seems  to  stop  under 
the  upper  part  of  the  sternum  ; he  feels  there  a pain,  almost  like 
obtuse  shooting  or  pressure  (aft.  72  h.).  [Gw.] 

On  drawing  in  the  breath,  internally  a trembling  feeling,  like 
hiccup,  so  that  he  has  to  draw  his  breath,  as  it  were,  in  two  jerks 
(aft.  8 h.).  [Tz.] 

Cutting  pressure  out  from  the  thoracic  cavity,  with  feeling  of 
anxiety  (aft.  J h.).  [TVsT] 

Single  stitches  on  the  sternum  when  sitting  (aft.  28  h.).  [Zr.] 
Painful  sensibility  of  the  chest  when  he  presses  but  lightly  on  it 
(aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.] 

165.  Pressure  on  the  chest  towards  the  axilla  and  on  the  tendon  of  the 
pectoralis  major  (aft.  3 d.).  [Zz.] 

Very  sharp,  shooting,  itching  in  front  at  the  last  right  true  rib, 
which  at  first  does  not  go  off  even  by  scratching,  but  afterwards 
disappears  spontaneously  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zz.] 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  pain  in  the  sacrum  as  if  all  were  broken ; 
after  rising  she  could  not  lift  anything  from  the  ground  for  some 
hours  ; then  hunger,  followed  by  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  purging, 
at  last  mucous  evacuations. 

All  night  a pressing  in  the  sacrum  as  if  bruised  ; she  often  woke 
up  from  this  pain  ; it  was  worst  about  4 a.m.,  but  when  she  got  up 
it  was  gone. 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  pain  of  stiffness  betwixt  the  scapulae  and 
in  the  nape,  like  drawing  ; on  getting  up  she  could  not  move  herself 
with  the  arms  for  pain  nor  turn  her  neck  all  the  forenoon — for  several 
successive  mornings,  until  noon,  with  exhaustion  of  the  whole  body. 

170.  Stitches  below  and  near  the  sacrum  when  sitting.  [Zz.] 

Dull  clucking  in  the  os  sacrum  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.'] 

Sacral  pain  more  to  one  side,  as  if  bruised,  and  drawing  aching, 
when  sitting  (aft.  35  h.).  [Zz.] 

At  night  in  bed  he  often  feels  in  the  right  side,  near  the  spine, 
betwixt  the  scapulae,  when  moving,  a stitch,  that  seems  to  penetrate 
deep  into  the  chest.  [Gw.] 

In  the  left  cervical  muscles,  towards  the  shoulder,  only  when 
moving,  a bruised  pain,  and  as  if  over-stretched,  which  is  relieved  in 
the  open  air. 

175.  Tension  in  the  dorsal  muscles  at  the  axilla;  he  has  a difficulty 
in  raising  up  the  arms  (immediately).  [ Ws. ] 

Cutting  stitches  on  the  scapula. 

In  the  nape  a drawing  stitch. 

Strong  quivering  in  the  cervical  muscles  of  the  left  side  (aft.  2 h„). 

[Mss.] 


72 


ANGUSTURA. 


Even  when  at  rest  tension  anteriorly  on  the  right  side  of  the 
neck,  together  with  sharp  stitches  (aft.  3 h.).  [Ws.] 

180.  Obtuse  stitches  betwixt  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder  and  the  neck. 

[<?«.] 

On  the  shoulder  a quivering  pain. 

Aching  cutting  in  the  axilla  (aft.  J h.).  [Ws.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  humerus,  like  bruised  pain  (aft.  if  h.)  [Lr.] 

The  left  arm  is  heavy  when  walking,  with  aching  externally  on 
the  bend  of  the  elbow,  as  if  it  were  drawn  down,  when  he  lets  it 
hang  freely  (aft.  4 h.).  [Tz.] 

185.  On  stretching  out  the  arm  sensation  as  if  he  had  held  a great 
weight  for  a long  time  in  the  hand  — a kind  of  paralysis. 

Stiffness  in  the  elbow-joints,  with  weakness  of  the  forearms. 

Pain  on  the  elbow-joint,  as  if  in  the  sinews,  as  if  he  had 
received  a blow  there,  increased  by  moving  the  arm  and  by  leaning 
upon  it  (after  walking  in  the  open  air)  (aft.  24  h.). 

Fine  itching  on  the  arms  which  goes  off  by  rubbing(aft.  1 h.).  [ Ws .] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  arms,  rather  as  if  in  the  bones,  worse  when 
at  rest  than  when  moving  (aft.  2 h.).  [Ws.] 

190.  Drawing  in  the  forearm  and  hand,  like  cramp. 

Single,  deeply  penetrating  stitches  above  the  right  wrist  (aft.  7 h.). 
[tVs.] 

Hot  feeling  on  the  back  of  the  left  hand  (aft.  6 h.).  [Tz.] 

Rheumatic  drawing  aching  on  the  back  of  the  right  hand,  in  the 
evening.  [Tz.] 

Obtuse  stitches  on  the  back  of  the  right  hand,  in  front  of  the 
wrist  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Ws.] 

195.  Drawing  in  one  finger  of  the  left  hand. 

Pain  in  the  right  middle  finger  as  if  it  were  torn  out. 

Pain  in  the  proximal  finger-joints  as  when  an  ulcerated  part  is 
moved. 

Insensibility  of  the  ring  finger,  as  if  numb,  stiff,  and  dead. 

The  fingers  of  the  right  hand  only  are  cold  to  the  touch,  with 
feeling  of  cold  (aft.  8 h.).  [Fz.] 

200.  Aching  pain  internally  in  the  flesh  of  the  left  thumb-ball  (aft. 
ih.).  [ Mss.] 

Drawing  round  about  the  thumb-joint,  as  if  it  were  sprained, 
especially  when  he  bends  the  thumb.  [.Fz.] 

The  whole  right  side  of  the  abdomen  and  of  the  thigh  and  leg  is 
as  if  bruised,  and  as  if  it  would  break  on  account  of  rheumatic 
drawing  when  walking  (aft.  1^  h.).  [Fz.] 

Sudden  heaviness  and  exhaustion  in  the  lower  limbs  (aft.  i h.). 
[Mss.] 

In  the  pelvis,  when  walking,  a drawing  squeezing  sensation. 

205.  Cramp  pain  on  the  superior  border  of  the  os  ilii  extending  to  the 
spine  (aft.  12  h.).  [Ws.] 

Frequent  pain  in  the  hip,  on  moving,  as  if  stiff,  or  as  if  dislocated, 
almost  like  cramp. 

On  the  left  os  innominatum,  just  behind  the  hip-joint,  obtuse 
stitches  in  short  fits,  increased  by  every  movement.  [Gjj.] 


ANGUSTURA, 


73 

The  hip-joint  superiorly  pains  as  if  dislocated,  and  is  almost 
useless  for  walking.  [Fz.] 

On  the  sciatic  nerve,  on  the  back  of  the  thigh  downwards,  a 
boring  paralytic  pain.  [Fz.] 

210.  In  both  inguinal  joints,  deep  in  the  sinews,  an  aching  drawing 
pain  when  rising  from  a seat  (aft.  7 h.).  [Fz.] 

Fine  stitches  dart  through  the  skin  of  the  gluteal  muscles,  with 
external  formication  (aft.  6 h.),  [/FF] 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  right  thigh.  [GF.] 

Twitching  stitches  in  the  left  thigh  and  the  superior 
border  of  the  os  ilii,  extremely  painful,  only  when 
sitting  (aft.  J h.).  [Wsl.] 

In  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  right  thigh  a tensive  pain  when  he 
flexes  the  knee.  [GF.] 

215.  After  walking  in  the  open  air,  excessively  tired,  especially  in 
the  thighs. 

A fatigue  and  lassitude  in  all  the  limbs,  without  sleepiness. 

The  anterior  muscles  of  the  right  thigh  are  as  if  paralysed  ; when 
moving  he  feels  a painful  tension.  [Gw.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  thighs,  more  as  if  in  the  bones,  worse  when 
at  rest  than  when  moving  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs .] 

On  the  outside  of  the  thigh  a drawing  aching  pain  when  walking. 

[■Fz-] 

220.  Cramp  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  posterior  part  of  the  thigh,  only 
when  walking  (aft.  21  h.).  [TVs.] 

Anteriorly  and  superiorly  on  the  recti  muscles  of  the  thigh  a 
tensive  aching  pain  on  extending  it  (aft.  2|  h.).  [Fz.] 

Fine  itching  on  the  thighs  that  goes  off  by  rubbing  (aft.  1 h.). 

He  cannot  walk  at  all  quick;  the  lower  limbs  feel  stiff.  [Fz.] 
Weakness  of  the  lower  limbs,  especially  felt  above  the  knee- 
joint,  as  after  a long  journey  on  foot. 

225.  In  the  lower  extremities  feeling  of  stiffness,  almost  as  if  contact 
with  a sickly  person  had  bereft  him  of  strength. 

In  the  right  knee-joint,  when  walking  and  when  lifting  the  leg 
stretched  forwards,  a drawing  squeezing  sensation. 

In  the  external  tendons  of  the  hough  stitches  darting  upwards, 
when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  13  h.).  [Lr.] 

Intermittent  needle-pricks  on  the  left  patella,  when  walking  in  the 
open  air  (aft.  6 h.).  [Lr.] 

Spasmodic  stretching  drawing  in  the  calf,  and  from  the  hough 
into  the  thigh.  [Fz.] 

230.  Paralytic  sensation,  as  from  contraction  of  the  ligaments,  from 
the  middle  of  the  hough  to  the  calf,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving 
(aft.  \ h.).  [Mss.] 

On  crossing  the  legs  he  feels  a spasmodic  tearing  drawing  in  the 
heel  of  the  left  foot  that  is  planted  firmly  on  the  ground  and  in  its 
ball,  and  an  aching  drawing  on  the  knee  of  the  other  leg  that  is 
thrown  across  (aft.  10  h.).  [Fz.] 

Drawing  in  the  tibia  and  the  neighbouring  muscles. 


74 


ANGUSTURA. 


On  the  tibia  and  about  the  ankle-joint,  while  walking,  a drawing, 
softly  pressing  pain  and  sensation  as  if  the  tibia  would  break,  which 
prevents  him  walking,  [i'z.] 

Obtuse  stitches  on  the  left  tibia  (aft.  I h.).  [TVs.'] 

235.  Burning  on  the  tibiae  when  walking.  [Tz.J 

Pressure  and  drawing  on  the  tibia,  in  the  evening,  when  sitting 
(aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

In  the  morning,  when  walking  about,  a drawing  aching  pain  in 
the  ankle-joints,  with  heat  in  them,  and  sensation  as  if  they  were 
dislocated,  towards  the  outer  ankle  (aft.  3 d.).  [Fz.'] 

The  legs  are  numb  and  stiff  up  to  the  knees,  but  without  formica- 
tion. 

the  right  foot,  while 


Pressing  pain,  as  from  dislocation,  on 
walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  2J  h.).  [ Lr .] 

240.  Cramp  in  the  feet,  for  instants. 

Cramp  pain  in  the  front  part  of  the  foot  without  actual  muscular 
contraction,  that  is  to  say,  without  spasmodic  cramp,  more  when 
seated  and  when  at  rest  (aft.  \ h.). 

Pain  in  the  foot,  when  treading. 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  foot,  and  the  following  day  an  aching 
pain  and  as  if  bruised  when  treading. 

Paralysis  in  the  ankle-joints.  [Hsch.] 

245.  Obtuse  shooting  drawing  in  the  right  ankle-joint,  when  sitting 
(aft.  11  h.).  [Fz.] 

Burning  sensation  of  heat  about  the  right  external  ankle,  while 
walking  and  sitting  (aft.  26  h.).  [Tz.] 

Almost  shooting-like  tearing  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot, 
mostly  when  moving.  [Tz.] 

On  the  border  of  the  left  foot  externally  on  the  projection  of  the 
fifth  metatarsal  bone  a cramp-like  aching  drawing,  as  if  he  had 
sprained  it  (aft  5 h.).  [Tz.] 

The  outer  border  of  the  foot  and  the  part  below  the  outer  ankle 
goes  to  sleep  when  walking.  [Tz.] 

250.  Shooting  in  the  heel,  when  sitting,  in  the  evening.  [Tz.] 

In  the  sole  of  the  foot  a sudden  tearing,  when  sitting.  [Tz.] 

Perspiration  of  the  feet.  [Hsch.] 

When  walking  he  feels  here  and  there  painful  tension  in  the 
muscles.  [Gjj.] 

In  the  evening,  after  sitting  for  an  hour,  he  is  quite  stiff  and 
contracted  ; after  rising  from  his  seat  he  cannot  straighten  himself 
(aft.  13  h.).  [Tz.] 

255.  Paralytic  weakness  in  the  hands  and  elbow-joints  ; he  can  hardly 
move  them,  but  without  stiffness  or  other  hindrance,  with  chilliness 
and  loss  of  vital  heat  (aft.  1 h.).  [Tz.] 

Cracking  in  almost  all  the  joints,  but  inaudible. 

Cracking  in  all  the  joints  (aft.  26  h.).  [Tz.] 

Great  irritability  and  strained  vivacity,  with  drawing  in  the 
limbs,  as  if  the  tendons  were  stretched,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  2d.) 


ANGUSTURA. 


75 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  itching ; after  rubbing  there  came  flat, 
very  painful  sores. 

260.  Sensation  in  the  whole  body  as  if  his  strength  went  away,  and  as 
if  especially  the  marrow  in  the  bones  were  stiffer  and  more  coagu- 
lated (immediately) . 

When  not  engaged  in  any  mental  work  he  is  tolerably  brisk  and 
lively  ; but  he  becomes  dazed  when  he  reads  anything,  and  imme- 
diately falls  asleep.  [Fz.] 

In  the  morning  discomfort,  frequent  yawning,  and  disinclination 
to  all  work  (aft.  4 d.).  [Fz.] 

He  falls  asleep  when  reading  whilst  seated,  but  starts  up  at  the 
slightest  noise,  and  has  a shock  with  great  rigor  which  goes  through 
and  through  him.  [Fz.] 

Frequent  attacks  of  yawning  without  sleepiness,  with  a cramp- 
like pain  in  the  jaws. 

265.  Disposition  to  constant  stretching. 

Very  frequent  yawning,  with  stretching  and  extending  the  limbs 
(aft.  24  h.),  [Fz.] 

In  the  evening  great  weariness  and  irresistible  desire  to  sleep ; 
he  sleeps  for  an  hour  while  sitting,  with  snoring,  but  when  he  goes 
to  bed  cannot  get  to  sleep  before  1 o’clock.  [Fz.] 

In  the  evening  great  drowsiness  till  9 o’clock,  then 
great  wakefulness  until  after  midnight.  [Fz.] 

270.  Sleep  disturbed  by  dreams  until  6 a.m.,  then  he  wakes  up  wide, 
and  again  falls  asleep ; in  the  morning  he  could  not  free  himself 
from  sleepiness,  and  remains  drowsy  until  noon.  [Fz.] 

Sleep  towards  morning,  with  dreams.  [Fz.] 

Vivid  dreams,  sometimes  disagreeable,  sometimes  anxious,  with 
frequent  awaking  from  sleep  ; on  again  falling  asleep  he  always  dreamt 
of  quite  other  things.  [Fr.] 

Restless  sleep ; she  often  wakes  without  cause. 

Restless  sleep.  [T//r.] 

.At  night,  restless  sleep,  and  that  only  towards  morning,  with 
dreams.  [Fz.] 

275.  Sleep  restless  and  full  of  dreams,  but  without  waking,  and  on  two 
successive  nights,  pollutions.  [Fz.] 

Very  confused  dreams,  sometimes  of  a horrible  character.  [ Gjj.1 

In  the  morning,  chilliness  in  bed,  not  followed  by  heat. 

Violent  rigor  over  the  back  when  walking  about  the  room,  in  the 
forenoon  (aft.  25  h.).  [Fz.] 

In  the  afternoon  (about  3 o’clock),  internal  shivering,  with  great 
thirst,  not  followed  by  heat,  for  several  successive  days. 

280.  In  the  afternoon  (about  3 o’clock),  shivering  with  goose-skin, 
allayed  in  the  open  air,  and  without  thirst,  for  several  successive  days. 

After  the  shivering,  slight  heat. 

In  the  forenoon,  much  thirst,  and  an  hour  afterwards  rigor  over 
the  back.  [Fz.] 

Towards  evening  rather  warm  all  over  the  body. 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  heat  about  the  head,  with  perspiration  on 
the  forehead. 


76  ANGUSTURA. 

285.  Heat  at  night,  especially  in  the  forehead,  so  that  he  cannot  sleep 
after  3 a.m.  then  in  the  forenoon,  about  9 a.m.,  there  occurs  rigor. 

Towards  evening,  for  three  successive  days,  increased  warmth  of 
the  cheeks  and  body,  with  aching  pain  and  confusion  of  head  in 
the  temples  and  the  sides  of  the  forehead.  [Tz.] 

Immediately  after  eating  supper,  internal  and  external  heat  of  face. 
[Mss.] 

In  the  afternoon,  feeling  of  warmth  all  over  the  body,  especially 
in  the  cheeks,  not  without  thirst  (aft.  2 d.).  [Tz.] 

Towards  evening,  warmth  of  the  whole  body,  with  aching  draw- 
ing in  the  side  of  the  forehead  and  thirst  (aft.  4 d.).  [Fz.] 

290.  Warmth  of  all  the  body,  except  the  head  ; the  cheeks  were  cold.* 
[Hsch.] 

In  the  evening,  on  coming  into  the  room,  great  heat,  he  does 
not  know  how  to  calm  himself,  but  without  thirst  (aft  2 d.).  [Tz.] 
No  confidence  in  himself  to  undertake  and  carry  through  volun- 
tary movements. 

Pusillanimity. 

Sadness  and  crossness  (aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.] 

295.  Sadness,  discontent  with  his  position,  disagreeable  sensitiveness 
to  jokes  \ slight  offences  fill  him  with  bitterness  (aft.  12  h.).  [TVs.] 
He  is  easily  frightened  and  starts.  [Az.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  his  disposition  is  good  and  cheerful 
(immediately).f 

Cheerfulness  and  self-confidence  that  he  can  undertake  anything 
with  powerf  (aft.  48  h.).  [TVs.] 

Briskness  and  activity  of  mind.§  [Hsch.] 

* The  last  part  of  this  symptom  was  antagonistic  reaction  of  the  vital  power 
(secondary  action),  as  the  person  had  for  several  days  heat  only  in  the  cheeks,  before 
he  took  angustura. 

f Seems  to  be  merely  curative  action, 
j Reaction  of  the  vital  power,  curative  action. 

§ Reaction  of  the  vital  power,  secondary  action,  curative  action- 


ARGENTUM.1 

(Silver.) 

This  metal  in  its  pure  state,  as  leaf-silver  (argentum  foliatum),  from 
the  supposed  impossibility  of  its  being  dissolved  in  our  juices — an 
impossibility  that  has  no  better  basis  than  theoretical  speculation — is  said 
by  the  teachers  of  materia  medica  to  be  just  as  powerless  as  gold  (which 
see). 

At  first  I allowed  myself  to  be  deterred  by  these  confident  asser- 
tions from  using  it  medicinally,  and  therefore  employed  only  the 
solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  (in  the  dose  of  a drop  of  the  quintillionth 
dilution),  when  I had  the  opportunity  of  observing  the  few  subjoined 
symptoms  caused  by  it. 

But,  in  spite  of  all  the  denials  of  theorists  without  experience,  who 
always  persist  in  regarding  the  stomach  as  a cooking  or  digesting 
machine,  containing  gastric  juice  which,  judging  by  their  trials  in  the 
vessels  of  their  laboratory,  they  found  to  be  incapable  of  dissolving 
either  metallic  gold  or  metallic  silver,  and  therefore  considered  these 
medicines  to  be  incapable  of  exciting  any  action  upon  us  such  as  they 
do  when  chemically  dissolved  lege  artis  in  the  stomach,  when  they  are 
methodice  absorbed  and  introduced  into  the  circulation  of  the  blood  ; 
influenced  by  the  reasons  I have  adduced  respecting  gold,  I could  not 
refrain  from  emploving  pure  silver  in  the  metallic  state.  I therefore 
made  experiments  on  the  healthy  body  with  leaf-silver,  after  triturating 
it  for  an  hour  to  the  finest  powder,  with  a hundred  parts  of  milk- 
sugar. 

The  few  symptoms  observed  from  it  and  set  forth  in  the  following 
pages  furnish  the  homoeopathic  physician,  in  silver  under  this  form,  with 
a curative  instrument  in  many  similar  morbid  states,  which  cannot  be 
cured  by  any  other  medicinal  agent,  and  for  which  the  ordinary  physician 
fails  to  find  a remedy  in  all  his  therapeutics,  clinical  experience  and 
voluminous  prescription-books. 

But  I subsequently  found  that  for  homoeopathic  use  another  hundred- 
fold attenuation,  that  is  to  say,  a grain  of  powder  containing  y^-th 
of  silver,  may  be  a still  too  large  dose. 

The  empirical  reputation  of  nitrate  of  silver  in  the  ordinary  forms  of 
epilepsy  is  not  well  founded,  and  seems  to  have  arisen  from  the  circum- 
stance that  in  some  varieties  of  convulsions,  where  copper  is  indicated, 
a salt  of  silver  containing  copper  has  been  used.  But  that  pure  silver, 
such  as  leaf-silver  is,  should  be  efficacious  in  the  worst  and  commonest 
form  of  epilepsy,  is  not  borne  out  by  the  primary  symptoms  as  yet 
revealed  from  its  administration. 


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


78 


ARGENTUM. 


R.  Boyle’s  so-called  diuretic  pills , which  contain  nitrate  of  silver, 
and  which  are  so  much  praised  by  Boerhave,  are  quite  unsuitable 
for  their  purpose,  not  only  on  account  of  the  perilous  size  of  the  doses, 
but  also  because  silver,  as  the  subjoined  symptoms  produced  by  it  show, 
only  increases  the  urinary  secretion  in  its  primary  action  (consequently 
the  opposite  of  the  diminished  urinary  secretion  in  dropsical  diseases), 
whereupon,  by  means  of  the  ensuing  reaction  of  the  vital  force,  the 
opposite  of  the  end  aimed  at  must  take  place,  which  is  its  permanent 
secondary  action,  to  wit,  a still  greater  diminution  of  the  urinary  secretion ; 
a true  antipathic  and,  for  this  case,  injurious  procedure. 

Such  hurtful  mistakes  must  have  hitherto  been  committed  by  the 
ordinary  physicians,  because  they  were  unacquainted  with  the  primary 
effects  of  the  medicines,  and  knew  of  no  way  whereby  they  could  learn 
them,  and  took  no  pains  to  discover  the  right  way.  Indeed,  for  five- 
and-twenty  centuries  they  have  had  no  notion  of  primary  and  secondary 
actions,  and  knew  not  that  the  human  organism  develops  as  secondary 
action  of  medicines,  as  a permanent  condition,  the  exact  opposite  of 
their  primary  action,  and  that,  consequently,  in  order  to  effect  any 
permanent  cure,  medicines  to  be  really  curative  must  be  able  to 
produce  in  their  primary  action  the  simile  of  the  morbid  state  actually 
present,  to  allow  us  to  expect  from  the  reaction  of  the  organism  the 
opposite  of  the  medicinal  primary  action  (and  of  the  disease  similar  to 
it),  that  is  to  say,  the  destruction  and  alteration  into  health  of  the 
deranged  sensations  and  functions. 

On  the  other  hand,  silver  can  cure  permanently  some  kinds  of 
diabetes  when  the  other  symptoms  of  the  disease  correspond  in  simi- 
larity to  the  other  primary  symptoms  of  the  disease. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by — Franz,  Gross,  Haynel,  Hart- 
mann, Herrmann,  Langhammer,  Meyer,  Wislicenus. 

The  following  old-school  authorities  were  consulted  for  the  effects  of  nitrate  of 
silver : 

Hall,  Thom.,  Phys.  Med.  Journal , 1800,  July,  also  in  Duncan's  Annals  of  Med., 
v,  1801. 

Kinglake,  London  Medical  and  Physical  Journal , 1801. 

Moo  die,  Med.  and  Phys.  Journal , 1804. 

No  old-school  writers  are  quoted  for  effects  of  metallic  silver. 

The  istedit.  gave  200  symptoms  to  silver,  to  this  2nd  edit.  23  have  been  added.] 


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM. 

Vertigo,  with  complete  but  transient  blindness.  [Thomas  Hall, 
in  the  Phys.  Med.  Journal , 1800,  p.  518,  also  in  Duncan's  Annals  of 
Med .,  1799.1] 

(It  affected  the  head,  as  if  the  fit  of  epilepsy  would  come  on.) 
(Premonitory  feeling  of  the  impending  fit.) 


1 Effects  of  A.  n.  given  to  a woman,  aet.  35,  for  convulsive  attacks.  This  occurred 
twice,  three  hours  after  taking  the  drug.  The  name  of  this  author  is  wrongly  given 
by  Hahnemann  as  “ Hull.” 


ARGENTUM. 


79 


Dimness  of  vision  with  anxiety,  heat  of  face,  and  weeping  eyes. 

5.  Spongy,  easily  bleeding  gums,  which,  however,  were  not  painful 
nor  swollen.  [Moodie,  in  Med.  and  Phys.  Journal , 1804.1] 

Sensation  as  if  the  velum  palati  were  swollen,  not  per  se,  but  on 
moving  the  tongue  and  when  swallowing. 

Sickness,  weight,  and  pressure  in  the  stomach.2  [Hall,  1.  c.] 
Burning  heat  in  the  stomach.  [Kinglake,  in  London  Medical  and 
Physical  Journal , 1801.3] 

Burning  in  the  stomach  and  on  the  chest.  [Moodie,  1.  c.] 

10.  The  urinary  organs  are  at  first  greatly  irritated.4  [1.  c.] 

Disagreeable  stoppage  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose  for  three 
days.  [Hall,  1.  c.] 

Discharge  from  the  nose  like  white  pus  mixed  with  blood-clots.5 
[Hall,  1.  c.] 

Feeling  in  all  the  limbs  as  if  they  would  go  to  sleep  and  stiffen. 
Exhaustion,  in  the  afternoon. 

15.  Profuse  night  sweat. 

Anxiety  that  compels  him  to  walk  quickly. 


ARGENTUM  FOLIATUM. 

He  became  suddenly  dizzy,  and  as  if  a mist  were  before  the  eyes. 
Vertiginous,  sleepy  intoxication  ; his  eyes  closed. 

Attacks  of  vertigo  ; he  cannot  think  properly  ; also  when  sitting 
and  reflecting  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gw.] 

Stupid  in  the  head.  [Gw.] 

5.  His  head  began  to  creep  and  crawl,  as  from  intoxication. 

He  is  always  in  a kind  of  intoxication  ; he  knows  not  what  is 
the  matter  with  him.  [F%.] 

Feeling  of  gloominess  in  the  head,  as  if  smoke  were  in  the  brain. 
[Myr.] 

As  if  stupid  and  hollow  in  the  head,  the  whole  brain  is  painful, 
with  chilliness. 

Shooting  burning  pain  in  the  head. 

10.  Severe  shooting  and  tearing  pain  in  the  head. 

(In  the  morning  shooting  headache,  with  redness  of  one  eye.) 
When  standing  and  reading  he  had  a sudden  burning  sensation 
in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a sensation  of  dull  contraction  of  the  brain 
from  all  sides,  and  like  a threatening  of  vertigo,  with  sick  nausea  in 
the  region  of  the  sternum,  such  as  is  apt  to  occur  after  rapid  violent 
turning  round  in  a circle  ; at  the  same  time  a sudden  heat  all  over 


1 General  statement.  Literally,  u after  a time,  tenderness  of  the  gums,  with  a 
disposition  to  bleed  $ they  were,  however,  neither  painful  nor  swollen.” 

2 On  three  occasions,  three  hours  after  ingestion. 

3 Effects  of  A.  n.  given  to  a man,  get.  30,  for  epilepsy. 

4 Not  found  ; the  name  of  the  authority  being  omitted,  it  is  doubtful  to  which  it 
rightly  belongs. 

5 After  the  three  days  of  S.  n.  The  pus  is  said  to  have  been  like  braimsubstance. 


8o  ARGENTUM. 

the  body,  but  more  in  the  face,  and  momentary  perspiration  on  the 
chest  and  face. 

A sensation  compounded  of  pressure  and  drawing  in  the  head, 
above  the  right  ear  towards  the  back  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gtt.] 

In  the  left  temple  horrible  pain  compounded  of  aching  and 
tearing  (aft.  5 h.).  [Gw.] 

15.  Tearing  in  the  left  temple.  [Gw.] 

Tearing  as  if  in  the  bone  of  the  left  temple  and  above  the  left 
mastoid  process. 

Drawing  pain  from  the  occipital  bone  to  the  middle  of  the  frontal 
bone,  in  a curved  direction  over  the  right  temporal  bone,  externally. 
[Hrr.] 

Aching  tearing  pain  on  the  left  and  right  temporal 
bones,  increased  by  touch.  [Hrr.] 

Squeezing  pressure  on  the  right  temple,  with  intermittent  sharp 
stitches  inwards  (aft.  5 d.).  \JVs.~\ 

20.  Cutting  stitches,  as  if  in  the  bone  or  on  the  surface  of  the  brain, 
just  in  front  of  the  left  ear,  going  forwards.  \_HnL] 

Aching  pain  on  the  temporal  bones,  externally,  [//rr.1] 

Aching  pain  on  both  parietal  bones,  externally,  [//rr.] 

Aching  pain  on  the  left  parietal  bone,  externally.  \_Hrr.~\ 

A slight  pressure  on  the  head  causes  sore  pain.  [i^z.] 

t rippling  shudder  over  the  right  side  of  the  hairy  scalp. 

Aching  pain  with  stupefaction  in  the  sinciput,  and  drawing  aching 
in  the  occiput. 

Aching  headache  in  the  forehead  above  the  eyebrows  (aft.  2 h.). 
•]  . 

Aching  tearing  headache  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance  (aft. 
6 h.).  [Gss.~\ 

Aching  tearing  headache  under  the  left  frontal  protuberance, 
during  which  the  eyeball  also  seems  to  be  compressed.  [Gw.] 

30.  Intermittent  boring  pains,  anteriorly  on  the  left  side  of  the  fore- 
head  all  day,  aggravated  after  lving  down  in  the  evening  (aft.  7 h.). 
[Zr.] 

1 he  nape  feels  stiff,  and  there  is  a strange  feeling  in  the  occiput ; 
a kind  of  drawing  and  aching  therein. 

In  the  right  temporal  muscles,  the  right  frontal  muscles,  the 
lateral  cervical  muscles  near  the  thyroid  cartilage,  and  posteriorly 
towards  the  nape,  a spasmodic  twitching  and  jumping  of  the  mus- 
cles that  pushed  away  the  hand,  with  twitching  pain. 

A pimple  on  the  left  temple,  that  when  touched  pains  like  a boil. 
(The  borders  of  the  upper  and  lower  eyelids  are  Very  red  and 
swelled,  but  the  eyes  do  not  suppurate.) 

35.  Great  itching  in  the  canthi  of  the  eyes. 

Painful  gnawing  aching  in  the  facial  bones  of  the  right  side, 
worst  on  the  malar  bone  (aft.  1 h.).  \JVs ,] 

Tearing  on  the  left  zygoma.  [Hrr.] 


1 [ Hartmann  in  orig.  evidently  a misprint  for  Herrmann.'] 


ARGENTUM. 


8i 


Fine  drawing  pain  in  the  facial  muscles,  especially  on  the  malar 
bones.  \_TVs.~\ 

Fine  painful  stitches  on  the  right  malar  bone.  [ TVs .] 

40.  Cutting  stitches  from  the  interior  of  the  left  ear,  extending  into 
the  brain. 

Sensation  in  the  right  ear  as  if  it  was  stopped  up.1 

Above  the  left  ear,  on  a small  spot,  aching  tearing  (aft.  12  h.). 

[<?«•] 

Great  itching  on  the  external  ear,  causing  scratching  till  blood 
comes. 

Gnawing  itching  on  the  lobes  of  both  ears,  in  the 

morning,  after  rising  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gjj.] 

45.  From  the  depression  under  the  lobe  of  the  right  ear  to  the  skin 
of  the  cheek,  a drawing  pain,  that  extends  to  the  lower  jaw,  as  if  it 
were  in  the  periosteum.  [Fz.] 

On  chewing,  cutting  sensation,  as  if  he  had  taken  some  acrid 
acid,  in  the  Eustachian  tube  towards  the  parotid  gland.  [Fz.] 

Profuse  epistaxis  from  blowing  the  nose  (immediately  after 
dinner),  and  again  three  hours  afterwards. 

Epistaxis  came  on  after  creeping  and  tickling  in  the  nose. 

Swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  close  below  the  nose. 

50.  The  gums  are  painful  per  se,  but  more  when  touched. 

(An  incisor  tooth  pained  when  it  was  pressed  forwards)  (aft.  ^ 

h.).  [m.] 

On  the  outside  of  the  neck,  left  side,  aching  while  walking  in  the 
open  air.  [Fz.] 

Cutting  stitches  inwards  under  the  right  lower  jaw,  as  if  in  a 
gland.  \Hnl.~\ 

The  neck  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sub-maxillary 
glands  is  swollen,  and  in  consequence  the  neck  is  stiff 
and  tense  when  moving ; at  the  same  time  swallowing 
is  rendered  difficult  by  internal  swelling  of  the  throat, 
and  he  must  force  every  mouthful  with  an  effort  through 
the  gullet  (aft.  48  h.).  [m.-] 

55.  Dry  feeling  of  the  tongue,  which,  however,  is  moist.  [Fz.] 

A small  vesicle  on  the  tongue  with  burning  sore  pain. 

In  the  throat  he  has  a raw  and  sore  pain. 

Boring  and  digging  pain  in  the  throat. 

Soreness  and  rawness  in  the  throat  when  expiring  and  swallowing. 

[**•] 

60.  Rough  and  scraping  in  the  throat,  lasting  all  day.  [//»/.] 

On  the  velum  palati  a scraping  sensation,  as  if  a rough  body  were 
adherent  there,  not  exactly  painful  but  disagreeable,  more  felt 
during  empty  deglutition  than  when  swallowing  a morsel,  but  con- 
stantly felt  and  compelling  him  to  swallow  his  saliva  5 after  several 
hours  this  secretion  goes  deeper  down  in  the  fauces.  [Fz.] 


1 [SS.  40  and  41,  though  they  have  no  name  attached,  are  among  the  symptoms 
observed  by  others,  therefore  not  by  Hahnemann.] 


6 


82 


ARGENTUM. 


When  yawning,  a painful  tension  in  the  fauces,  as  from  a 
swelling.  [Gw.] 

The  collection  of  viscid  saliva  in  the  mouth  renders  speaking 
difficult.  [Fz.] 

Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  with  shivering  shaking.  [Fz.] 

6 5.  Viscid,  grey,  gelatinous  mucus  in  the  "fauces,  which 
can  he  easily  expectorated  by  hawking,  in  the  morning. 

[Gss.] 

(Great  longing  for  wine.) 

Appetite  quite  gone;  he  feels  a loathing  at  food,  when  he 
merely  thinks  about  it. 

Indifference  to  all  food,  and  he  is  easily  satiated.  [Fz.] 

The  morning  hunger  disappears.  [Fz.] 

70.  Very  great  appetite  (aft.  40  h.).  [Grr.] 

Though  the  stomach  is  full,  the  appetite  still  continues  great. 

[<?«.] 

Excessive  gnawing  hunger  all  day,  not  extinguished  by  eating. 
Afterwards,  for  several  days,  it  could  only  be  allayed  for  a short  time 
by  eating.  [ Hn /.] 

In  the  morning,  in  the  abdomen,  stomach,  and  chest,  a burning 
sensation  as  from  heartburn. 

Sensation  similar  to  heartburn  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Myr.] 

7 5.  Hiccup  during  (accustomed)  tobacco  smoking  (aft.  ij  h.  [Lr.] 
Almost  uninterrupted  qualmishness  and  nausea.  [Fz.] 

Sick  feeling  in  the  throat,  and  immediately  afterwards  heat  all 
over,  but  chiefly  on  the  head,  with  redness  of  face,  without  thirst 
(aft.  1 h.).  [Myr.] 

Retching,  whereby  a bitter,  pungent,  ill-tasting  fluid  is  brought  up 
from  the  stomach  into  the  mouth,  after  which  a scraping,  scratching, 
very  burning  sensation  remains  permanently  in  the  fauces  (heartburn) 
(aft.  8 h.).  [Gss.] 

Aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.'  [Fz.] 

80.  Pinching  over  the  stomach  and  in  the  left  hypochondrium.  [Fz.] 
After  he  has  commenced  to  eat,  there  occurs  a severe  aching 
from  the  abdomen  towards  the  pubic  region,  which  is  aggravated  by 
inspiration,  and  is  relieved  by  rising  from  his  seat.  [Grr.] 

At  night  an  aching  painful  distension  in  the  abdomen,  which 
went  off  without  discharge  of  flatulence. 

Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  at  night  and  discharge  of  flatus. 

Loud  noises  in  the  abdomen,  on  the  left  side,  like  the 
croaking  of  young  frogs  (aft.  J h.).  [Lr.] 

85.  After  the  morning  stool,  contractive  bellyache,  as  from  a chill, 
when  sitting. 

Bellyache,  as  in  diarrhoea.  [Fz.] 

Cutting  internally,  transversely  through  the  abdomen. 
Contraction  of  the  abdominal  muscles  when  walking,  with  ten- 
sion in  them,  so  that  he  must  walk  bent  forwards.  [Fz.] 

In  the  abdominal  muscles,  near  the  last  two  ribs,  sharp  stitches 
from  within  outwards,  which  end  in  a fine  pinching,  and  are  some- 
what allayed  by  rubbing  (aft.  60  h.).  [TVs.] 


ARGENTUM.  83 

90.  A boring  pain  in  the  right  hypogastrium,  just  above  the  groin 
(aft.  34  h;).  [Lr.) 

Shooting  cutting  on  both  sides  in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  ring 
(aft.  3i  h.).  [HnL] 

In  the  bend  of  the  left  groin,  sensation  of  straining  of  the 
tendon  (of  the  lumbar  muscle)  which  pains  as  if  bruised  when 
pressed  on.  [Az.] 

Pressing  in  the  hypogastrium  during  the  stool,  which  is  mode- 
rately soft,  and  also  thereafter  (aft.  72  h.).  [TVs.] 

Frequent  (never  ineffectual)  urging  to  stool  in  the  lower  part  of 
the  rectum,  and  evacuation  of  a scanty  soft  stool  (aft.  2\  h.),  lasting 
several  days.1 

95.  During  the  evacuation  of  a soft  stool,  a painful  urging  in  the 
hypogastrium. 

During  the  evacuation,  in  the  afternoon,  he  vomited  twice. 

After  dinner,  a stool  which  is  very  dry  and  sandy,  but  is  passed 
without  difficulty  (aft.  8 h.).  [Az.] 

Very  frequent  micturition  (aft  6 h.).  [(?«.] 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  and  copious  flow  of  urine 
for  several  hours  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Lr .] 

100.  Almost  every  night  an  emission  of  semen. 

At  night  pollutions,  without  lascivious  dreams.  [Lr.] 

A pain  in  the  left  testicle,  as  after  a contusion  (aft.  49  h.).  [Lr.] 
* * 

■Jf 

Irritation  in  the  nose,  as  if  coryza  were  about  to  come  (aft.  1 h.). 
[ Myrf] 

The  nose  is  as  if  stopped  up  anteriorly  in  both  nostrils,  and 
there  is  smarting  in  the  left  nostril.  [Az.] 

105.  Fluent  coryza  ; the  nose  is  always  full  of  mucus.  [Gjj.] 

Excessive  fluent  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing,  for 
two  days.  [Hnl.] 

Severe  fluent  coryza,  without  sneezing  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.] 

Raw  and  sore  pain  superiorly  in  the  larynx,  when  coughing,  not 
when  swallowing. 

By  day  (not  at  night  and  not  in  the  open  air),  several  attacks  of 
short  rattling  cough,  with  white,  thick,  easily  detached  expectora- 
tion, like  boiled  starch,  but  opaque,  without  taste  or  smell, 
no.  (In  the  morning,  cough.) 

By  laughing  mucus  is  produced  in  the  trachea,  and  cough 
excited.  [Az.] 

Mucus  in  the  chest  and  cough  with  expectoration  (aft.  26  h.). 

[>.] 

On  going  upstairs  and  stooping  mucus  comes  in  the  windpipe, 
which  is  expectorated  by  a single  impulse  of  cough.  [Az.] 

On  stooping  mucus  comes  into  the  windpipe,  which 
is  expectorated  by  a single  impulse  of  cough.  [Az.] 

1 1 5.  In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed,  an  irritating  tussiculation 
without  expectoration  (aft.  48  h.).  [Lr.] 


1 This  symptom  has  no  name  attached,  but  being  among  the  “ observations  ot 
others  ” must  not  be  attributed  to  Hahnemann. 


8+ 


ARGENTUM. 


Obtuse  cutting,  passing  into  shooting,  rises  up  into  the  wind- 
pipe, and  compels  him  to  cough  two  or  three  times,  and  thereafter 
continues  for  some  time  ; the  cough  brings  watery  expectoration, 
which  does  not  remove  the  irritation  to  cough  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Fz.] 

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  from  within  outwards,  such  a 
violent  stitch,  lasting  about  a minute,  that  he  can  neither  inspire 
nor  expire  (when  sitting)  (aft.  28  h.).  [Lr.] 

Fine  stitches  in  the  interior  of  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum, 
from  within  outwards  (aft.  48  h.).  [TVs.] 

Sharp  stitches  on  the  right  side,  near  the  nipple.  [Hrr.] 

120.  Under  the  right  nipple,  a shooting,  not  connected  with  inspiration 
or  expiration.  [Gsr.] 

Tearing  under  the  right  nipple.  [Grr.] 

Gnawing  scraping  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  when  at  rest. 
•] 

Cramp  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  and  when  it  is  gone  the 
part  still  pains  when  touched  (aft.  9 h.).  [TVs.'] 

(Oppressive  burning  in  the  region  of  the  heart.)  [Hnl.] 

125.  Feeling  of  pressure  and  oppression  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest 
above  the  heart  (aft.  78  h.).  [TVs.] 

A shooting,  squeezing  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  sternum,  most 
severe  when  sitting  bent  forwards,  unconnected  with  expiration  or 
inspiration  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.] 

Aching  shooting  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  and  sternum,  only 
slightly  increased  by  inspiring  deeply  (aft.  some  m.).  [TVs.] 

On  inspiring  deeply  an  out-pressing  pain  on  a spot  the  size  of  a 
florin  under  the  second  and  third  right  ribs.  [Hnl.] 

On  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  a spot  with  aching  pain,  as  if 
something  hard  was  pressed  against  the  ribs.  [Fz.] 

130.  Violent  aching  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  internally,  very 
much  increased  by  every  movement,  especially  by  stooping  forwards 
and  then  rising  up.  [Hnl.] 

Aching  pain  on  the  sternum,  externally.  [Hrr.] 

Needle-pricks  under  the  ensiform  cartilage  of  the  sternum. 
[Hrr.] 

Sharp  stitches  on  the  right  near  the  manubrium  sterni  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Hrr.] 

On  some  ribs,  a spasmodic  aching  tensive  pain. 

135.  Sharp  stitches  between  the  sixth  and  seventh  true  ribs  of  the 
right  side,  which  are  aggravated  by  inspiring  deeply.  [Hrr.] 

Under  the  last  left  rib  a cutting  stitch  transversely  across,  on 
leaning  over  to  the  side  and  on  supporting  himself  with  his  arm. 
Obtuse  stitches  on  the  left  side,  under  the  last  false  ribs.  [Hrr.] 
Obtuse  stitches  under  the  third  true  rib  of  the  left  side,  equally 
felt  when  inspiring  and  expiring.  [Hrr.] 

Slowly  intermittent  obtuse  stitches  under  the  cartilages  of  the 
last  true  ribs,  on  the  left  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (in  the  evening 
in  bed)  (aft.  31  h.)  [Gjj.] 

140.  Severe  cutting  from  within  outwards,  in  both  sides  at  the 
lowest  ribs,  when  inspiring  deeply,  only  slight  at  other  times  ; if  he 


ARGENTUM. 


85 


moves  the  trunk  without  inspiring  he  experiences  no  increase,  but 
he  does  so  immediately  on  drawing  in  the  breath  (aft.  10  h.). 

Cutting  stitches  at  the  end  of  the  ribs  on  the  right  side  near  the 
spine,  especially  on  bending  the  back.  \_Hnl.~\ 

In  the  side  of  the  back,  opposite  the  abdomen,  first  an  aching,  after- 
wards when  standing,  on  the  slightest  movement  and  when  breath- 
ing, a frightfully  severe  aching  shooting,  almost  as  if  he  should  die  ; 
he  must  walk  in  a bent  posture  ; it  felt  like  the  grasping  pain  of  a 
malignant  ulcer  when  he  lay  still ; in  the  chest  itself  there  was 
oppression,  so  that  he  could  not  get  his  breath,  as  if  a great  weight 
lay  on  the  chest. 

Burning  shooting  in  the  right  side  of  the  sacrum  when  sitting  ; 
when  he  rises  up  and  when  he  presses  on  it  the  spot  has  only  a burn- 
ing pain,  and  does  not  shoot  any  more.  [Tz.] 

Drawing  on  the  right  side  of  the  posterior  portion  of  the  pelvis 
and  in  the  sacrum  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gjj.] 

145.  Sensation  as  if  the  sacrum  were  beaten  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gjj.] 

His  sacrum  is  very  painful,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gjj.] 
Obtuse  stitches  in  the  second  lumbar  vertebra.  [Afrr.] 

A tickling,  itching  shooting  betwixt  the  scapulae,  as  from  a 
severe  flea-  or  gnat-bite  ; he  cannpt  scratch  enough. 

Sharp  aching  inside  the  scapulae  (aft.  1 h.).  \_tVs.~] 

150.  On  the  upper  part  of  the  left  scapula  excessive  tearing,  when 
sitting,  which  went  off  on  rising  from  the  seat,  [Gw.] 

Formication,  as  if  asleep,  in  the  left  scapula.  [T%.] 

Tearing  on  the  top  of  the  shoulder  aad  on  the  head  of  the 
humerus.  \_Hrr.'] 

Tearing  in  the  glenoid  cavity  of  the  shoulder-joint,  extending 
into,  the  clavicle.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Boring  stitches  in  the  right  axilla,  which  did  not  go  off  by  touch- 
ing  (aft.  30  h.)..  [Zr.] 

155.  Aching  tearing  beneath  the  shoulder-joint.  [G^.] 

Continued  pinching  on  the  right  upper  arm  (aft.  1 h.). 

Tearing  in  the  left  upper  arm.  [Hrr.'] 

A burning,  very  transient  stitch  anteriorly  in  the  middle  of  the 
left  upper  arm. : 

Aching  pain  in  the  flesh  of  the  upper  arm,  which  is  increased  by 
touching,  [ii/rr.] 

160.  Cramp  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  arm  on  raising  it  3 otherwise 
little  felt  (aft.  10  h.).  \_TVs.'] 

Tensive  drawing,  resembling  shooting,  in  various  parts  of  the 


arms. 


In  the  bend  of  the  right  elbow  a spasmodic,  aching,  drawing 
pain,  as  if  the  arm  had  been  strained  by  violent  exertion,  only  when 
moving  it,  but  more  when  extending  than  when  flexing  it. 

In  the  bend  of  the  right  and  left  elbow  and  in  both  knees  an 
aching,  drawing,  tensive  pain  (under  all  circumstances),  which  only 
goes  off  for  a moment  by  pressing  strongly  on  it,  but  then  returns 
immediately. 


'86 


ARGENTUM. 


Paralytic  sensation  in  the  arms  on  moving  them,  especially  at  the 
elbow-joint  (aft.  32  h.).  [Ws.] 

165.  A kind  of  paralysis  of  the  right  arm  and  hand  ; it  sinks  down, 
and  he  can  hardly  write  even  with  much  effort  (aft.  3 h.).  [Hrr.] 
On  flexing  the  arm  a tension  externally  on  the  point  of  the 
elbow  (aft.  1 h.).  [Ws.] 

Burning  in  the  point  of  the  right  elbow  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gw.] 

On  the  inside  of  the  left  forearm  a spasmodic,  aching,  drawing  pain. 
In  the  muscles  betwixt  the  ulna  and  the  radius  of  the  left 
forearm,  on  the  back  thereof,  not  far  from  the  wrist  bone,  a very 
severe,  aching  tearing  (aft.  31  h.).  [Gw.] 

170.  A not  long  continued  jerking  tearing,  as  if  in  the  middle  of  the 
radius,  first  of  the  right  then  of  the  left  forearm,  and  lastly  in  the 
proximal  phalanx  of  the  right  middle  finger,  recurring  from  time  to 
time.  [Hnl.] 

Sharp,  intermittent  stitches  on  the  right  radius,  rather  in  the 
muscles,  [Hrr.] 

Sharp,  continued  stitch  behind  the  wrist-joint,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  radius  (aft.  6 h.).  [ W f.] 

Shooting,  itching  burning  under  the  skin  on  the  inside  of  the 
left  wrist-joint  (aft.  32  h.).  [Ws.] 

A tickling  in  the  right  palm  that  compels  scratching  (aft.  33  h.). 
[Zr.] 

175.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  hand  and  foot.  [Tz.] 
Aching  tearing  in  the  wrist  bones  of  both  hands.  [Gw.] 

Tearing  aching  pain  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  thumb  and  in 
the  metatarsal  bone  and  proximal  phalanx  of  the  big  toe  of  the  right 
and  left  foot,  increased  by  touching.  [Hrr.] 

Tearing  in  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  fourth  finger  of  the  left 
hand  and  in  its  metacarpal  bone,  with  spasmodic  drawing  inwards  of 
the  finger,  particularly  when  grasping  anything.  [Hnl.] 

Drawing  in  the  joints  of  the  three  middle  fingers  of  the  left 
hand,  when  moving  and  when  at  rest,  [Hrr.] 

180.  Tension  and  drawing  in  the  groin  below  the  inguinal  ring,  in  the 
left  thigh.  [Fz.] 

In  the  hip  and  thigh  a paralytic  weakness. 

On  a spot  behind  the  left  hip,  a violent  pain,  as  if  he  had  fallen 
hard  upon  it,  only  when  moving ; standing  did  not  cause  it  (aft. 
32  h.).  [Zr.] 

When  running,  when  he  treads  upon  the  projected  left  foot,  a 
painful,  sharp  aching  in  the  right  hip-joint.  [Gw.] 

When  walking,  paralytic  weakness  in  the  right  hip-joint,  especi- 
ally when  drawing  forward  the  foot,  and  stitches  in  it  when  treading, 
which  makes  him  limp  in  his  gait,  soon  going  off.  [Hnl.'] 

185.  Formicating  humming  in  the  left  thigh,  and  drawing  in  its 
anterior  muscles.  [Fz.] 

Twitching  and  palpitation  in  several  muscular  parts,  especially 
on  the  right  thigh.  [Gw.] 

Slight  twitching  on  the  outside  of  the  left  knee,  together  with  a 
sensation  like  gurgling,  when  sitting  (immediately).  [Ws.] 


ARGENTUM.  87 

Above  the  left  knee  cramp-like  cutting-inwards  on  both  sides 
when  he  is  not  moving  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.] 

Tearing,  obtuse  stitches  above  the  left  patella,  in  all  positions. 
[Hnl] 

190.  In  the  left  knee-joint  a tearing  when  sitting  (aft.  72  h,).  [Gj.t.] 
The  knee  pains  as  if  bruised,  more  severe  when  sitting  than 
when  walking  (aft.  \\  h.).  [TVs.] 

The  knees  often  bend  below  him  when  walking.  [Hnl.] 

Pressing  pain  in  the  knee-joint  and  pressing  outwards  in  the 
muscles  of  the  left  lower  extremity  when  sitting.  [Hrr.] 

(Several  papules  on  the  tibia  causing  burning  pain.) 

195.  In  the  evening,  in  bed,  burning,  corroding  stitches  in  the  left 
tibia,  not  far  from  the  knee,  so  that  his  foot  twitched  involuntarily 
(aft.  17  h.).  [Hnl] 

Cramp  in  the  left  calf,  worst  when  at  rest  (aft.  4 h.).  [ TVs .] 

On  going  down  stairs  the  muscles  of  the  calves  pain  as  if  they 
were  too  short.  [Hnll] 

Bruised  pain  in  the  ankle-joints  and  throbbing  in  them,  worst 
when  sitting  (aft.  3 h.).  [TVs.] 

In  the  ankle-joints  and  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  legs  a strong 
beating  and  dull  throbbing,  as  from  being  over-tired,  with  crawling 
and  stitches  on  the  skin  of  the  leg,  worst  when  at  rest,  less  when 
moving  (aft.  14  h.)  [TVs.] 

200.  In  the  left  ankle-joint  a sensation  as  if  the  foot  were  detached 
there,  and  as  if  the  cartilages  of  the  joint  did  not  touch  one 
another,  when  walking.  [Tz.] 

Shooting  cutting  in  the  outer  ankles,  from  within  outwards, 
when  sitting,  scarcely  at  all  when  walking  ; it  is  most  severe  when 
the  foot  is  resting  on  a narrow  ledge  (aft.  some  h.).  [TVs.] 

Tearing  in  the  feet,  at  one  time  on  the  sole,  at  another  on  the 
dorsum  of  the  foot,  then  in  the  heel,  then  in  the  toes  (especially  in 
their  proximal  joints),  then  in  the  bones  of  the  feet,  then  in  the 
metatarsal  bones,  which  pains  do  not  extend  beyond  the  ankles  $ 
only  occasionally  a flying,  tearing  pain  extends  farther  up.  [Hrr.] 
Pain  in  the  heel  when  treading,  as  if  numb  (continued) . 

In  the  right  heel  and  tendo  Achillis  a (somewhat  burning)  sensa- 
tion of  gone-to-sleep.  [Tz.] 

205.  Intermittent  violent  burning  in  a corn,  also  when  not  pressed 
from  without,  for  24  hours.  [TVs.] 

On  the  ends  of  the  hollow  bones,  near,  above,  or  beneath  their 
joints,  on  several  parts  of  the  body,  an  aching  tearing  (aft.  48  h.). 
[<?«•] 

Great  exhaustion  of  the  body,  especially  of  the  thighs,  when 
sitting  and  walking,  with  drowsiness  (aft.  4 h.).  [Myrl] 

Discomfort,  lassitude  in  all  the  limbs.  [GiT.] 

Chill  in  the  back  and  from  below  to  above  the  ankles,  where 
it  continued  for  two  hours,  and  was  very  sensitive  $ walking  did  not 
allay  it  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Hnl] 

210.  In  the  afternoon  chilliness,  until  he  went  to  sleep  j he  could  not 
get  warm  even  in  bed  after  midnight,  perspiration. 


88 


ARGENTUM. 


At  night,  in  bed,  on  the  least  raising  of  the  bed-clothes,  or  letting 
in  the  air  under  them,  febrile  rigor  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body  ; 
but  when  he  was  properly  covered  he  had  only  normal  warmth 
(aft.  4 h.). 

Shivering  through  the  whole  body  (aft.  i|  h.).  [Lr.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  exhaustion  and  heat  all  over, 
without  perspiration,  and  anxiety  as  if  his  clothes  were  too  tight. 

In  the  forenoon  heat  and  hot  feeling  all  over  the  body,  but  less 
in  the  head,  without  thirst,  with  perspiration  only  on  the  abdomen 
and  slightly  on  the  chest. 

215.  In  the  evening,  in  bed,  quick  pulse,  with  thirst  (aft.  11  h.). 
[Afyr.] 

The  attacks  recur  every  day  at  noon. 

Intolerable  itching,  like  a flea  or  a louse  running  over  the  head 
and  all  the  body. 

A burning  itching  here  and  there  on  the  skin,  e.g.  of  the  face, 
the  hands,  &c.,  which,  however,  does  not  compel  him  to  scratch. 

Dreams  of  what  occurred  during  the  day. 

220.  Anxious  dreams  ; after  waking  he  was  still  so  anxious  that  he 
imagined  it  had  really  happened  as  he  had  dreamt  (aft.  65  h.). 

(In  her  contentment  she  is  extravagantly  merry,  but  a trifle 
immediately  sets  her  off  weeping  for  a long  time.) 

Greater  cheerfulness  of  disposition  and  inclination  to 
speak  all  day  (aft.  3 h.#).  [Lr.] 

Ill-humoured. 


# Curative  secondary  action. 


ARNICA  MONTANA.1 


The  root  of  this  plant,  whose  favourite  habitat  is  in  shrub-grown 
upland  plains,  very  soon  loses  in  the  air  a considerable  portion  of  its 
odour  and  of  its  medicinal  power,  but  it  loses  most  by  boiling.  Still 
the  freshly  prepared  powder  dried  rapidly  and  thoroughly  in  the  water- 
bath  may  be  kept  with  almost  unimpaired  power  for  several  years  in 
well-corked  phials. 

All  the  artificial  dogmas  enunciated  by  the  ordinary  medical  art, 
which  is  in  its  way  a learned  science,  all  its  scholastic  definitions, 
distinctions,  and  hair-splitting  explanations  were  in  all  past  centuries 
unable  to  discover  the  specific  curative  power  of  this  plant  or  to  find 
out  the  real  remedy  for  the  often  dangerous  general  derangement  of  the 
health  which  is  caused  by  a severe  fall,  by  blows,  knocks,  contusions, 
sprains,  or  by  over-stretching  or  laceration  of  the  solid  parts*  of  our 
body.  Common  people  had  to  do  this  for  them,  and  after  the  fruitless 
employment  of  innumerable  things  they  found  at  last  by  accident  the 
true  remedy  in  this  vegetable,  and  hence  they  called  it  Fallkraut  ( fall - 
plant).  Some  200  years  ago  a physician  (Fehr.)  first  mentioned  this 
discovery  of  domestic  practice  to  the  learned  medical  art  (this  plant  was 
then  named  by  her  “ Panacea  lapsorum  ”),  which  has  likewise  borrowed 
all  the  other  still  extant  specific  remedies  she  possesses  without  excep- 
tion from  the  accidental  discoveries  of  domestic  practice,  but  was  unable 
to  find  them  for  herself,  because  she  never  attempted  to  ascertain  the 
pure  effects  of  natural  substances  on  the  healthy  human  body. 

The  symptoms  of  all  injuries  caused  by  severe  contusions  and 
lacerations  of  the  fibres  are  tolerably  uniform  in  character,  and,  as  the 
following  record  shows,  these  symptoms  are  contained  in  striking 
homoeopathic  similarity  in  the  alterations  of  the  health  which  arnica 
develops  in  the  healthy  human  subject. 

In  severe  and  extensive  contusion-injuries  the  cure  is  very  much 
promoted  when,  in  addition  to  a small  dose  of  arnica  taken  internally 
(when  necessary  a dose  every  three  days),  the  parts  are  also  for  the  first 
twenty-four  hours  externally  moistened  with  wine  or  equal  parts  ot 
brandy  and  water,  with  one  pound  of  either  of  which  five  to  ten  drops 
of  the  hundred-fold  potentized  dilution  of  arnica  are  mixed  and  strongly 
succussed  about  ten  times. 

But  the  following  list  of  its  pure  powers  points  to  several  other 
morbid  conditions  in  the  human  system  for  which  arnica  offers  sure 

* Hence  it  is  very  beneficial  in  the  most  severe  wounds  by  bullets  and  blunt 
weapons,  as  also  in  the  pains  and  other  ailments  consequent  on  extracting  the  teeth, 
and  in  other  surgical  operations  whereby  sensitive  parts  have  been  violently  stretched, 
as  also  after  dislocations  of  the  joints,  after  setting  fractures  of  the  bones,  &c. 


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830. 


9o 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


homoeopathic  relief.  It  is  a medicine  of  much  utility,  and  although  its 
action  even  in  large  doses  does  not  last  beyond  six  days,  yet  I have 
found  it  an  indispensable  auxiliary  and  intermediate  remedy  even  in  the 
most  chronic  diseases. 

But  we  must  never  employ  it  in  purely  inflammatory  acute  diseases, 
with  general  heat,  chiefly  external,  nor  in  diarrhoeas.  In  such  cases  it 
will  always  be  found  to  be  very  hurtful,  the  reason  of  which  is  obvious 
from  its  peculiar  mode  of  action. 

In  some  kinds  of  false  pleurisy,  however,  it  is  very  efficacious,  in 
such,  namely,  whose  symptoms  correspond  to  those  of  this  root. 

The  best  preparation  of  this  medicine  for  internal  use  is  the  decil- 
lionth1  development  of  power.  When  we  can  obtain  the  plant  in  the 
green  state  we  mix  the  freshly  expressed  juice  obtained  from  the  whole 
plant  when  near  its  flowering  time  with  equal  parts  of  spirits  of  wine. 
Two  drops  of  the  clear  fluid,  obtained  by  allowing  the  mixture  to 
stand,  are  first  diluted  with  ninety-eight  drops  of  spirits  of  wine  and 
potentized  by  two  succussions.  The  dilution  is  carried  on  through 
twenty-nine  other  phials,  always  one  drop  of  the  weaker  dilution  added 
to  ioo  drops  of  spirit  in  the  next  phial,  and  shaken  twice.  In  the  last 
phial  it  is  brought  to  the  decillionth  development  of  power. 

But  if  we  cannot  get  the  plant  in  the  green  state  we  must  be  satisfied 
with  a tincture  made  by  adding  ten  grains  of  the  finely  powdered  root, 
as  fresh  as  it  can  be  had,  to  1000  drops  of  alcohol,  and  allowing  it  to 
digest  for  a week,  giving  it  one  shake  per  diem.  Of  this  one  drop  is 
mixed  with  ioo  drops  of  alcohol,  and  potentized  with  two  succussions, 
and  so  on  until  the  decillionth  potency  is  reached.  Two  or  three  of 
the  smallest  globules  moistened  with  the  highest  potency  are  the  most 
ordinary  dose  for  internal  use. 

Camphor  is  the  antidote  for  large  doses  in  unhomoeopathic  cases,  but 
wine  aggravates  its  injurious  effects. 

[The  names  of  Hahnemann’s  fellow-observers  are:  — Aug.  Baehr,  Franz, 
Gross,  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Hornburg,  Kummer,  Langhammer,  Stapf,  Wisli- 

CENUS. 

The  old-school  authorities  quoted  are  : 

Aaskow,  Act.  Soc.  Med.  Hafn .,  ii. 

Collin,  Obs.  circa  Morbos , iv  and  v. 

Crichton,  A.,  Samml.  br.  Abk.f.pr.  Aerzte , xiii,  3. 

De  la  Marche,  Diss.  de  Arnica  njera , Halae,  1719. 

De  Meza,  Samml.  br.  Ahh.f.pr.  Aerzte , xiii. 

Edinb.  Med.  Comment .,  Dec.  ii,  vol.  ii. 

Murray,  Appar.  Medicam.,  i. 

Pelargus,  Obs. , i. 

Stoll,  Rat.  Med.,  iii. 

Thomas  a Thuessink,  Waarnehm.,  Groning.  1805. 

Veckoskrift  for  Lakare , viii. 

Vic  at,  Mat.  Med.,  i. 

In  the  Frag,  de  Fir.  Arnica  has  150  symptoms,  in  the  1st  edit.  230,  in  the  2nd 
edit.  592,  and  in  this  the  3rd  edit.  638.] 

1 In  this  as  in  many  other  places  Hahnemann  calls  the  potency  by  the  degree  of 
its  dilution,  and  not  as  on  other  occasions  by  the  number  of  times  it  has  been  diluted 
by  the  addition  of  99  or  100  parts  to  1 of  the  stronger  preparation.  Thus  “the 
hundred-fold  potentized  dilution”  is  the  first  dilution,  “the  decillionth  development 
of  power  ” is  the  thirtieth  dilution. 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


91 


ARNICA. 

During  dinner  sudden  vertigo,  as  if  he  would  fall  forwards. 
[Gw.] 

Giddy  whilst  walking.  [Stf.  Gss .,  Archiv  f.  d . homoop.  Heilk ., 
v,  iii.1 2] 

Vertigo  in  the  forehead,  especially  when  walking,  when  it  seems 
to  her  as  if  all  went  round  with  her  in  a circle  and  would  tumble 
with  her.  Gss.] 

Vertigo  3 when  she  sits  and  leans  the  head  forward,  almost 
unnoticed  ; but  when  she  raises  or  moves  the  head,  immediately  a 
feeling  as  if  all  went  round  with  her.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

5.  Vertigo. 

Confusion  of  head. 

Confusion  of  head,  vertigo,  and  anxiety,  increased  by  artificial 
vomiting. 

Stupifying  headache  in  the  morning. 

Heaviness  in  the  forehead  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Stf  \ Gw.] 

10.  He  sits  buried  in  thought,  but  does  not  actually  think  of  any- 
thing. [Kr.] 

Want  of  memory  3 he  forgets  the  word  on  his  lips.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 
Distraction  of  the  mind ; he  cannot  fix  his  thoughts  long  on  one 
subject.  [TVs.] 

Along  with  cloudiness  of  the  head  and  confusion  of  the  lateral 
parts  of  the  skull,  contracted  pupils.  [Tz.] 

Dulness  in  the  head,  without  any  particular  headache  (aft.  2 h.). 

[Kr.] 

15.  He  readily  falls  into  a waking  dream.  [Kr.] 

Internal  heat,  especially  in  the  head,  with  heaviness  of  it,  with- 
out thirst.  [TVs.] 

Burning  in  the  head,  with  aching,  out-stretching  pain. 

Burning  in  the  brain,  the  rest  of  the  body  being  cool, 
at  least  not  hot. 

Heat  in  the  head;  the  rest  of  the  body  being  cool,  at 
least  not  hot. 

20.  Headache.  [De  Meza,3  in  Samml.  br . Abh.fpr.  Aerzte , xiii. — 
Edinb.  Med.  Comment .,  Dec.  ii,  v.  ii,  p.  350.] 

In  the  temples  an  aching  pain  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Kr.] 

After  aching  headache,  there  occurs  also  in  the  temples  throbbing, 
aching  headache. 


1 In  the  original  the  symptoms  contributed  by  Stapf  and  Gross,  which  first  ap- 
peared in  the  Archiv,  are  indicated  by  a reference  of  each  to  that  periodical.  For  the 
reason  stated  in  regard  to  aconite  we  have  substituted  the  names  of  the  provers  for  the 
reference  to  the  periodical.  No  explanation  of  these  symptoms  is  given  in  the  Archiv , 
save  that  they  were  observed  on  healthy  persons. 

2 A case  of  paraplegia  induced  by  suppressed  menstruation  (from  fatigue  and 
fright)  in  a young  girl,  cured  (after  lasting  three  years)  by  arnica,  which  brought  on 

the  menses  immediately,  motion  returning  in  two  days.  (The  symptoms  have  been 
translated  direct  from  the  Latin  original).  See  S.  339  and  note. 


92 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


Aching  pain  in  the  forehead. 

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  which  increases  when  near  the 
warm  stove,  as  if  the  brain  were  rolled  into  a lump.  [T%.] 

25.  Aching  and  out-stretching  pain,  as  from  something  soft  in 
the  crown,  with  drawing  in  the  occiput  and  tearing  towards  the 
temples.  [Fz.] 

Aching  pain  over  the  eyes,  going  towards  the 
temples,  with  sensation  as  if  the  integuments  of  the 
forehead  were  spasmodically  contracted  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Ws ] 

First  aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  then  shooting  and  jerking- 
shooting  pain  in  the  forehead  ; with  chilliness  (aft.  8 h.). 

Aching,  pressing  pain  in  the  forehead,  especially  severe 
when  walking,  going  up  stairs,  thinking  and  reading.  [Hbg] 

Aching  in  the  right  frontal  bone,  followed  by  sneezing,  where- 
upon it  extended  first  into  the  left  then  into  the  right  ear  (aft.  2 d.). 

[Hbg.] 

30.  Aching,  painful  drawing  in  the  left  half  of  the  skull  from  the  ear 
upwards  (aft.  3 h.).  [Hbg] 

Aching,  stupifying  pain  in  the  forehead,  rather  externally  (aft. 
5^  h.).  [Lr.] 

Aching  pain  externally,  on  the  crown.  [TVs] 

After  sneezing  twice,  a pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  as 
after  a violent  blow.  [Hbg] 

When  coughing  violent  shooting  in  the  sinciput  (aft.  7 h.). 
[Lr.] 

35.  Great  shoots  in  the  head  on  coughing  (aft.  10  h.). 

Headache;  shootings  outwards,  which  recur  when  coughing  and 
even  when  moving  the  head,  and  which  are  only  allayed  when  he 
lies  on  the  painful  side  of  the  head. 

Fine  shooting  pain  in  the  forehead  which  is  aggravated  by  raising 
the  eyes,  with  heat  of  face  and  thirst. 

Shooting  in  the  forehead. 

In  the  forehead  jerking  shooting.  [St/  Gjj.] 

40.  On  the  left  temple  jerking  shooting.  [St/.  Gjj.] 

Headache  as  if  a nail  were  driven  into  the  temple,  with  general 
perspiration,  about  midnight,  followed  by  exhaustion  (aft.  a few  h.). 

From  time  to  time  recurring,  fine  shooting  tearing 
headache  in  the  left  temple  (aft.  4 h.). 

Stitches  rapidly  following  one  another  in  the  temporal  region 
towards  the  forehead  (aft.  4 h.).  [ Kr .] 

In  the  left  frontal  protuberance  a rapid  shooting,  with  the  sensa- 
tion as  if  blood  were  extravasated  in  the  forehead.  [Grr.  ] 

45.  Shooting  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Hbg] 

Obtuse  stitches  into  the  temples  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs] 

Jerking,  shooting  headache  on  stooping,  as  if  all  would  come  out 
at  the  forehead  ; at  the  same  time  nausea,  qualmish  about  the  heart. 
[Stf  Gss] 

Twitching,  tearing  headache,  increased  by  stooping  and  coughing. 

Twitching  headache  in  the  sinciput  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs] 

50.  Tearing  in  the  left  temple,  and,  when  walking  in  the  open 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


93 

air,  recurrence  of  the  aching  out-stretching  headache  (aft.  10  h.). 

[Fz.] 

Repeated  tearing  headache  in  the  left  temple.  \_Hbg. ] 

Great  internal  and  external  heat  of  the  head.  [A/zr.] 

Transient  burning  on  the  crown  and  neck  externally.  \_Fr. 
H—n .] 

Formication  in  the  forehead. 

55.  Formication  above  the  orbits. 

(Headache  only  tolerable  when  lying,  but  on  rising  up  and  sitting 
in  bed  intolerable.) 

Formication  on  the  crown,  externally. 

Sensation  of  coldness  on  a small  spot  on  the  forehead,  as  if  he 
were  touched  there  by  a cold  thumb. 

A pain  as  if  a knife  were  thrust  through  from  the  left  side  of  the 
head  across  to  the  other  side  ; at  the  same  time  internal  coldness  in 
the  head,  so  that  the  hair  stood  on  end.  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

60.  On  some  parts  of  the  occiput  pain  as  if  the  hair  were  pulled  out, 
or  like  sharp  electric  shocks.  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

Shooting  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp,  not  removed  by  scratching. 
[TVs.] 

The  scalp  down  to  the  eyebrows  lies  closely  attached  to  the 
skull,  and  is  almost  immovable  (aft.  ij  h.).  [ Ws .] 

On  the  side  of  the  forehead  pimples,  partly  filled  with  pus  (aft. 

3 d.)-  [Kr.] 

The  face  is  very  much  fallen  in.  [Thomas  a Thuessink, 
JVaarnehm .,  Groning,,  1805.] 

65.  Dry  heat  in  the  face  towards  evening  to  behind  the 
ears,  without  thirst,  with  very  cold  nose  (aft.  24  h.). 
IHbg.-] 

Cramp-like  tearing  on  the  left  eyebrow.  [Gjj.] 

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  2 h.).  [Ar.] 

Staring  eyes,  betraying  anxiety. 

The  border  of  the  upper  eyelid,  where  it  touches  the  eyeball 
internally,  is  painful  when  the  eyeball  is  moved,  as  if  it  were  too  dry 
and  somewhat  sore. 

70.  Contracted  pupils,  with  cloudiness  of  the  head.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

Sharp,  fine  stitches  in  the  inner  canthus.  [St/'.  Gw.] 

When  during  the  noon  siesta  he  has  the  eyes  closed,  he  feels 
comfortable  ; on  opening  them  nausea  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. 
[Stf.  Gss .] 

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  26  h.).  [Ar.] 

Stitches  in  the  eyes.  [Collin,1 2  Obs.  circa  Morbos , iv,  p.  5,  and 
v,  p.  108.] 

75.  Itching  in  the  canthi  (aft.  27  h.).  [Ar.] 

Burning  in  the  eyes.3  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

1 Not  accessible. 

2 Effects  of  arnica  when  given  for  paralysis,  amaurosis,  spasms,  fever,  and 
dysentery.  SS.  74  and  76  occurred  in  amaurotic  eyes  recovering  sight  under  the 
influence  of  the  medicine  (comp,  note  to  S.  403). 

3 See  note  (2). 


94 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


Burning  in  the  eyes,  without  dryness.  \_Bhr.~\ 

Sometimes  hot  tears  flow  which  burn  like  fire.  \_Bhr.~] 

The  right  eye  protrudes  somewhat  from  the  head,  and  looks 
higher  and  larger  than  the  left.  \_Bhr.~\ 

80.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right  eyeball  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Kr.~] 

On  the  border  of  the  left  orbit  very  painful,  intermittent,  obtuse 
aching.  [Gw.] 

Spasmodic  aching  twitching  underneath  the  left  eye  on  the  nasal 
bone,  which  spreads  over  the  eyeball.  [Gw.] 

On  the  left  ear-cartilage  internal  pain  as  from  a blow 
or  a bruise.  \_Hbg.'\ 

In  both  ears  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  membrana  tympani, 
intermittent  aching  (aft.  io  h.).  [Kr.] 

85.  Obtuse  stitches  inwards  through  the  internal  ear  (aft.  1 h.). 

[^•] 

A shooting  pain  darts  into  the  right  ear,  immediately  after  into 
the  left,  at  last  into  the  eyes,  with  the  feeling  in  the  latter  as  if  they 
were  forcibly  turned  upwards.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

Heat  and  burning  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

Feeling  as  if  one  ear  were  hot,  which  it  is  not  (aft.  1 h.). 

Behind  the  ear  dull  long  shoots. 

90.  First  stitches,  then  tearing  pain  in  the  ear  (aft.  1 h.). 

Aching  in  the  ear. 

Perceptibly  diminished  hearing  (aft.  30  h.). 

Much  increased  acuteness  of  hearing  (aft.  10  h.). 

Roaring  in  the  ears. 

95.  Ringing  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  3 h.).  \Kr.~] 

Buzzing  in  the  ears  (aft.  7 h.).  [Zr.] 

External  hot  feeling  on  the  left  ear  and  in  the  cheek.  \_Hbg.~\ 
Small-pox-like  eruption  on  the  cheeks  ; mostly  under  the  eyes. 
\_Fr.  H—n .] 

Twitching  throbbing  in  the  left  cheek  (aft.  f h.).  [/Fw] 

IOO.  In  the  swollen  cheek  throbbing  and  pinching,  as  when  two 
hammers  are  knocked  together  bruising  the  flesh  \_Bhr.~\ 

(Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  right  maxillary  joint,  on  moving  the  jaw 
backwards  and  forwards,  in  the  morning)  (aft.  20  h.). 

Redness  and  burning  in  one  cheek,  the  rest  of  the  body  being 
cool,  at  least  not  hot. 

Red  swelling  of  the  right  cheek,  with  throbbing  nipping  pain, 
swollen  lips  and  great  heat  in  the  head  and  cold  body  ; only  the  feet 
were  sometimes  hot. 

Heat  running  over  the  head,  at  the  same  time  her  face  becomes 
bathed  in  perspiration.  [G Z/'.  Gw.] 

105.  Heat  running  over  the  face,  in  the  evening  (aft.  36  h.).  \_Stf. 
Gw.] 

Hot,  shining  red,  stiff  swelling  of  the  left  cheek.  \_Bhr. ] 

On  yawning,  cramp-pain  in  the  cheek  (aft.  1 h.). 

Running  formication,  like  shivering  without  chilliness,  on  the 
left  cheek,  to  the  side  of  the  occiput  (aft.  6 h.). 

Cramp-pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose  (aft.  2 h.).  \Ws7\ 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


95 


no.  The  nose  pains  from  above  downwards,  as  if  he  had 
had  a severe  fall  upon  it.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  nose. 

Swelling  of  the  nose. 

Sensation  as  if  the  nostrils  were  ulcerated  ; the  nose  is  sore 
internally. 

In  and  under  the  nose,  pimples  which  get  pus  in  their  apices,  with 
smarting  pain. 

1 15.  Hot  feeling  in  the  nose,  and  yet  it  is  cold  to  the  touch.  \_Hbg.~] 

Frequent  epistaxis.  \_Bhr.~\ 

The  nasal  bones  are  the  seat  of* obtuse  pressure  combined  with 
numbness.  [Gjj.] 

Sensation  as  if  an  insect  was  crawling  near  the  nose ; not 
removed  by  wiping.  [Gjj.] 

Itching  formication  on  the  side  of  the  nose,  going  off  by  rubbing 
(aft.  1 h.). 

120.  Itching  on  the  upper  lip,  which  becomes  burning  on  rubbing. 

[m.] 

The  outer  border  round  about  the  lips,  especially  about  the 
upper  lip,  becomes  rough  and  as  if  cracked,  as  from  cold  (aft.  8 h.). 
ILr.-] 

On  both  sides  of  the  upper  lip  a pimple  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Kr.~\ 

A pimple  in  the  depression  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  lip,  with 
redness  round  about  it  and  tensive  pain.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Dry  lips  as  if  parched  by  thirst. 

125.  Chapped  lips. 

Ulcerated  angles  of  the  mouth,  with  burning  pain,  especially  on 
moving  these  parts. 

Formication  in  the  lips,  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep  (aft.  7.\  h.). 
[***•] 

Burning  heat  in  both  lips,  with  moderate  warmth  of 
the  body.  [Ws^ 

Thick  swollen  lips.  \_Bhr.~\ 

130.  Violent  trembling  of  the  lower  lip.  [a  Thuessink,  1.  c.] 

Commencing  paralysis  of  the  lower  jaw. 

Swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands. 

In  the  muscles  on  the  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw,  aching  jerking 
(intermitting  tearing).  \_Gss.~\ 

The  submaxillary  glands  are  swollen  and  painful,  especially  when 
he  raises  and  turns  the  head,  but  particularly  when  touched  (aft. 
4 d.).  [Kr.l 

135.  The  cervical  glands  are  projecting  and  swollen,  and  are  exces- 
sively painful  per  &?,  but  more  especially  when  moving  and  when 
speaking.  \_Bhr.~\ 

Rough  drawing  in  the  left  cervical  muscles,  with  bruised  pain. 

[*%•]  ... 

Tearing  pain  in  the  neck.  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

Aching  in  the  cervical  muscles,  as  if  the  neckcloth  was  tightly 
tied.  \_Hbg.'] 

Her  head  is  so  heavy  that  it  always  sinks  to  one  side.  [ Bhr. ] 


96  ARNICA  MONTANA. 


140.  The  head  is  heavy,  and  on  account  of  weakness  of  the  cervical 
muscles  so  movable  that  it  easily  falls  to  either  side  (aft.  4 h.). 

[Kr.-] 

Pain  in  the  teeth,  as  if  their  roots  were  scraped  with  a knife. 
[Bhr.] 

In  the  gums  formication,  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep.  [ Gss . Stf.] 
Slimy  teeth  (aft  1 h). 

Looseness  and  elongation  of  the  teeth,  without  pain. 

145.  (Toothache  as  from  bitten  out — dislocated,  loose — teeth,  aching 
throbbing,  as  if  they  were  pressed  out  by  afflux  of  blood  j they  are 
more  painful  on  being  touched). 

Pressure  on  the  lower  gums  internally,  as  from  a leaden  ball. 
[*■*•] 

While  eating,  tearing  pain  in  the  left  upper  molars,  going  off 
after  a meal.  [T%.] 

When  chewing,  the  gums  are  painful  as  if  ulcerated,  particularly 
also  the  part  under  the  tongue.  [Tz.] 

Dryness  in  the  mouth,  without  thirst.  \_Fr.  H — n .] 

150.  Dryness  in  the  mouth,  with  great  thirst.  [ Bhr.'] 

ue  furred  quite  white,  with  good  appetite  and  proper  taste 

). 

In  the  morning  dryness  of  the  mouth,  without  thirst,  with  foul 
taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  14  h.). 

Sensation  of  thirsty  dryness  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  the  palate, 
and  the  lips,  with  rigor  over  the  arms  and  thighs  (aft.  2 h.). 


Smarting  sensation  on  the  tongue  (aft.  4 h.). 

155.  Sensation  of  soreness  of  the  tongue  (aft.  4 h.). 

Corrugating  sensation  on  the  palate  as  from  an  astringent  (aft. 

5 h.). 

Aching  pain  on  the  hard  palate. 

Burning  posteriorly  in  the  throat,  with  sensation  of  internal  heat, 
or  rather  of  that  anxiety  that  heat  occasions  (without  perceptible 
external  heat). 

Shooting  posteriorly  in  the  throat  when  not  swallowing. 

160.  Pain  in  the  gullet  as  if  something  hard  and  rough  (e.  g.  a crust 
of  bread)  were  sticking  in  it,  in  the  afternoon  when  lying  down, 
which  goes  off  on  standing  up  (aft.  6 h.). 

Noise  when  swallowing. 

Swallowing  prevented  by  a sort  of  nausea,  as  if  the 
food  would  not  go  down. 

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  in  the  morning  after  waking. 

Putrid  slimy  taste  in  the  mouth. 

165.  (All  he  takes  tastes  sour.) 

(Distaste  for  milk.) 

The  (accustomed)  smoking  is  distasteful  to  him,  he  has  no  relish 
for  it. 

Distaste  for  meat  and  meat  soup. 

Longing  for  vinegar. 

170.  Want  of  appetite  in  the  evening. 

Want  of  appetite,  with  yellow  and  white  furred  tongue. 


Arnica  Montana. 


97 


Dysphagia.  [ Bhr .] 

Rotten-egg  taste  in  the  mouth  when  not  eating.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 
Mucus  in  the  throat,  which  tastes  bitter  on  being  hawked  up 
(aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

175..  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hbg.] 

Blood  in  the  saliva  ejected  (aft.  2 d.).  [Hbg.] 

After  eating  a kind  of  suppressed  incomplete  hiccup.  [Tz.] 

Empty  eructation  (aft.  J h.).  [Hbg.] — (aft.  \ h.)  [ Kr .] 
Tendency  to  eructate.  [De  la  Marche,1  Diss.  de  arnica  vera, 
Halae,  1719,  pp.  15 — 22.] 

180.  On  eructating  a bitter  mucus  rises  up.  [Kr.] 

Empty  eructation. 

In  the  morning  eructation  like  rotten  eggs. 

Eructation  bitter  and  like  rotten  eggs  (aft.  2 h.). 

Salt  water  rises  up  and  is  belched  up. 

185.  In  the  morning  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  14  h.). 

Heartburn.  [A.  Crichton,3  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.  fur  pr.  A. 
xiii,  3.] 

She  wants  always  to  drink,  and  knows  not  what,  because  every- 
thing is  repugnant  to  her.  [Bhr.] 

Half-suppressed  eructation.  [ Stf  *.  Gss.] 

Inordinate  appetite  in  the  evening,  and  after  eating  immediately 
a sensation  of  fulness  and  a colicky  aching  in  various  parts  of  the 
abdomen,  especially  in  the  sides. 

19O.  (When  eating,  at  noon,  a perceptible  warmth  in  one  cheek.) 

After  the  (evening)  meal  she  weeps,  is  peevish,  will  listen  to 
nobody,  and  will  not  hear  of  anything. 

Total  want  of  appetite  with  nausea.  [Bhr.] 

Nausea,  [Murray,3  Appar.  Medicam .,  i,  p.  234.] 

Nausea  in  the  stomach,  with  empty  eructation.  [TVs.] 

195.  Nausea  without  vomiting  and  without  stool.  [De  la  Marche, 

1-  c.] 

On  reading  for  a long  time  he  grows  giddy  and  sick.  [Hbg.] 
Retching.  [Stoll,4  Rat.  Med.,  iii,  p.  162.] 

Violent  retching  to  vomit.  [Aaskow,5  Act.  soc.  med.  Hafnt , ii, 
p.  162.] 

Vomiting.  [Murray, — Collin,  1.  c.] 

200.  Vomiting  of  coagulated  blood.6  [De  la  Marche,  1.  c.] 

Empty  retching,  ineffectual  inclination  to  vomit  (aft. 
4 k.). 

She  must  get  up  at  night  and  retch  as  if  to  vomit,  but  is  unable 
to  vomit  ; she  feels  a weight  like  a lump  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 


1 Effects  of  arnica  in  cases  of  injury  treated  with  it. — This  symptom  preceded  the 
Vomiting  of  S.  200  (see  note  there). 

' 2 A brief  statement  of  the  observed  effects  and  virtues  of  arnica.  This  symptom 
does  not  appear  in  the  English  original  ( Lond . Med.  Journ 1789,  p.  236). 

3 Summary  of  observed  effects  of  arnica. 

4 As  in  note  (3). 

5 Not  found  at  place  referred  to. 

6 In  a ease  of  fall  from  a height,  Where  the  chest  was  bruisedi 


98 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


Above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  in  the  sternum,  violent  aching. 
{Stf.  <?«.] 

Violent  jerks  under  the  stomach  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

205.  In  the  scrobiculus  cordis  a digging,  and  sensation  as  if  something 
knotted  itself  there  together.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

After  eating  a fulness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  a painful 
aching  on  a small  spot  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  just  behind  the  os 
pubis  (in  the  bladder?),  most  felt  when  standing,  which  almost 
constantly  urges  to  urinate  (aft.  4 h.). 

The  stomach  is  as  if  full ; a satiety  combined  with 
loathing. 

Pressure  as  with  a hand  on  the  scrobiculus  cordis  ; this  pressure 
rose  up  gradually  to  the  throat ; then  she  became  sick,  and  water 
collected  in  the  mouth  ; after  lying  down  this  went  off,  and  then 
she  had  only  pressure  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.). 

A pinching  spasmodic  grasping  in  the  stomach. 

210.  (A  smarting  pain  in  the  stomach  (immediately)  ). 

Flatulence  with  stomach-ache. 

In  the  cardiac  region  pain  as  if  it  was  compressed,  or  as  if  it  got 
a severe  blow.  Ctjj.] 

Cardialgia.  [Crichton — Stoll,  1.  c.] 

Pressure  as  if  a stone  lay  in  the  stomach  (immediately).  \_Hbg.~\ 
215.  Rumbling  in  the  stomach  and  colic.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Painful  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  transversely  across, 
with  tightness  of  breath.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Spasm  in  the  region  of  the  lower  ribs  (praecordia).  [Collin, 

l.c.l 

Pressure  under  the  last  ribs  (aft.  2 h.).  JVs.~\ 

Digging  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  ^ h.),  and  sensation  as  if 
something  knotted  itself  there  (aft.  24  h.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

220.  Pinching  in  the  stomach.  [F/^f.] 

In  the  splenic  region  a pressure  darting  upwards,  with  a con- 
tinual stitch  (what  one  calls  a stitch  in  the  spleen)  when  walking 
(aft.  6 h.).  [Fz.] 

Stitches  under  the  false  ribs  of  the  left  side  which 
take  away  the  breath  when  standing.  \_Hbg.~] 

On  the  left  side  betwixt  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  navel 
squeezing  beating.  \_Stf.  Gjj.] 

Cutting  above  the  navel,  especially  when  breathing  deeply  and 
at  every  step,  but  not  immediately  before  or  during  a motion  of  the 
bowels. 

225.  Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a chill. 

Dysenteric  bellyache;  a digging  deep  in  the  hypo- 
gastrium inside  the  hips  on  both  sides  combined  with 
nausea  and  drowsiness  (between  the  2nd  and  5th  h.). 

A couple  of  hours  after  a (moderate)  supper,  tightness  and  dis- 
tension of  the  abdomen,  especially  of  the  hypogastrium,  with  dull 
general  pressure  in  it,  especially  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  but 
without  any  distinct  amount  of  flatus,  which  lasts  all  night,  with 
heat  of  the  limbs  and  dreams  which  strain  the  thinking  power ; he 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


99 


wakes  up  every  hour,  and  the  inodorous  flatus  that  escapes  affords  no 
relief. 

Hard  distension  of  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  paining  of  itself 
when  at  rest,  like  an  internal  sore  ; when  coughing,  blowing  the 
nose,  and  stepping  as  if  painfully  concussed,  lacerated,  or  cut  to  pieces  ; 
and  even  on  slightly  touching  it  externally,  as  if  a wound  were  cut 
into ; only  relieved  by  the  discharge  of  flatus ; occurring  daily  from 
the  morning  till  2 p.m. 

On  expiring  and  inspiring  pressive  pain  as  from  a stone  in  the 
hepatic  region,  when  lying  on  the  left  side.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

230.  Although  she  had  eaten  much,  she  felt  as  empty  in  the  abdomen 
as  if  she  had  eaten  nothing,  but  had  drunk  much,  so  that  it  rolled 
about  in  the  abdomen.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

Tearing  in  the  abdomen  above  the  navel. 

Violent  cutting  on  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  which  darted 
like  a stitch  into  the  crown  of  the  head,  so  that  he  started  as  from  an 
electric  spark  (aft.  24  h.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

Pinching  above  the  navel.  [HbgJ\ 

A severe  jerk  under  the  stomach.  \_Hbg.~\ 

235.  Pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  from  a sudden  contusion 
when  walking  (aft.  36  h.).  [Fz.] 

On  the  left  side  between  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  navel, 
squeezing  beating.  [Gw.] 

Sharp  stitches  in  both  loins  (aft.  3 h.).  \_WsJ\ 

Cutting  pain  inwards  in  the  loins,  especially  when  stooping  (aft. 
60  h.).  \Ws.~\ 

In  the  right  side  under  the  ribs  obtuse  stitches.  [Gw.] 

240.  Sharp  blows  through  the  hypogastrium  from  one 
side  to  the  other  (aft.  3 h.).  [Ws.~\ 

In  the  hepatic  region  painful  pressure  (aft.  2 d.) . \_Hbg.~\ 

Burning  shooting  pains  in  the  epigastrium.1  [Collin,  1.  c.] 
Drawing  in  of  the  navel.1  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  abdominal  muscles  (aft.  1 h.).  \Ws.~\ 

245.  Fine  stitch  in  the  muscles  of  the  hypogastrium,  which  leaves 
an  itching,  that  goes  off  on  scratching  (aft.  3 h.).  \JVs.~\ 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen;  an  hour  afterwards  urging  to  stool,  and 
at  length  a stool  in  broken  pieces  mingled  with  flatus.  [Gw.] 
Flatulence,  rumbling  in  the  bowels.  [Stoll,  1.  c.] 

Bellyache  as  if  flatulence  pressed. 

Flatulent  colic. 

250.  Rumbling,  rolling  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen. 

Fermenting  flatulent  disturbance  in  the  abdomen. 

Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  emptiness  (aft.  10  h.\ 

o-i 

Rumbling  and  fermenting  flatulent  movements  below  the  umbi- 
lical region  (aft.  h.).  \_KrJ] 

Whilst  straining  at  stool  discharge  of  flatus,  after  previous 
rumbling  in  the  bowels  (aft  1 h.).  [Fz.] 


1 In  a ease  of  opisthotonos. 


100 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


255.  Flatus  smelling  like  rotten  eggs  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Kr.~\ 

Urging  to  stool  followed  by  a copious  thin  or  pappy,  sour 
smelling  motion,  with  great  relief  (four  or  five  times  a-day).  [Gw.] 
Ineffectual  urging  to  stool. 

Very  great  urging  to  stool  every  half  hour,  but  nothing  came 
away  except  mucus. 

Hard,  difficult  stool  with  aching  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  36  h.). 
\_Hbg.-] 

260.  Pappy  diarrhoea,  with  distension  of  the  abdomen,  before  the 
motion  (aft.  24  h.).  \JVs.~\ 

Bloody,  purulent  stools.  [Pelargus,1  Obs .,  i,  pp.  263,  264.] 
Pappy  brown  stool,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea 
was  coming  (aft.  ij  h.).  [F%.] 

In  the  rectum,  an  aching  pain  (aft.  6 h.).  [Kr.] 

Frequent  small  stools  consisting  of  mucus  only  (aft.  6, 
7 h.). 

265.  Frequent  stools,  after  every  one  of  which  he  must  lie  down. 
White  diarrhoeic  motions.* 

(Diarrhoea  like  brown  yeast.) 

Constipation. 

Nocturnal  diarrhoea  with  aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  from 
flatulence. 

270.  Involuntary  evacuation  of  faeces  at  night  in  sleep. 

Undigested,  but  not  liquid,  motions. 

A pressure  in  the  rectum'. 

Tenesmus  in  the  anus. 

Squeezing  and  pressing  in  the  anus  when  standing  (aft.  7 h.). 

[Fz.] 

275.  Blind  haemorrhoids.2  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

More  frequent  inclination  to  urinate  than  usual.  \_Kr.~] 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  great  discharge  of  urine  (aft. 
I h.).  [Zr.] 

Watery  urine.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Retention  of  urine  with  aching  and  pressing. 

280.  Strangury  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  ineffectual  urging  to 
urinate. 

Strangury,  with  involuntary  dribbling  of  urine  (aft.  1 h.). 

When  making  water  he  must  stand  long  before  anything  comes 
away.  \_Stf.  Gw.] . 

An  urging  to  urinate  with  a somewhat  smarting  burning,  still 
worse  after  urinating,  but  not  whilst  the  urine  is  flowing. 

Cutting  pain  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  at  the  end  of  mictu- 
rition. 

# Diarrhoea  with  copious  evacuation  of  faeces  seems  only  to  be  a secoridary  action 
of  arnica. 


1 Case  of  fall  of  a child  from  a height  in  which  arnica  was  given. — This  symptom 
occurred  on  the  fourth  day  j and  was  regarded  by  the  reporter  as  a sign  of  internal 
contusion  or  extravasation. 

2 In  case  mentioned  in  note  to  S.  242. 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


IOI 


285.  Stitches  in  the  urethra. 

Stitches  in  the  urethra  after  micturition  (aft  1 h.). 

Frequent  discharge  of  watery  urine  (aft.  12  h). 

Discharge  of  a large  quantity  of  urine,  which  he  cannot  retain 
long,  especially  at  night  (aft.  30  h.). 

Brown,  clear  urine,  which  immediately  becomes  turbid  of  a 
whitish  colour  (aft.  48  h.). 

290.  Brown  urine  with  brick-red  sediment. 

Scanty  red  urine.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

Frequent  discharge  of  a smaller  quantity  of  white  watery  urine, 
than  he  had  drunk,  the  last  drops  of  which  he  could  with  difficulty 
press  out  (the  first  4 h.).  [Fz.] 

In  the  morning  he  passes  much  urine,  which,  however,  flows 
slowly,  as  if  the  urethra  were  narrowed  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.] 

He  passes  more  dark-red  urine  than  he  had  drunk.1 2  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

295.  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  little  yellowish-red  urinary 
discharge  (aft.  46  h.).  [Fr.] 

Itching  in  the  front  of  the  urethra  in  the  region  of  the  glans 
when  not  urinating. 

Itching  or  itching  shooting  in  the  glans. 

A fine  stitch  through  the  glans. 

On  the  glans,  an  itching,  red  spot. 

300.  On  the  prepuce,  an  itching  pimple. 

Single  stitches  in  the  scrotum. 

(A  painless  pimple  on  the  scrotum.) 

After  waking,  strong,  continued  erections,  without  inclination  for 
coitus  and  without  lascivious  thoughts  (aft.  12  h.). 

Great  inclination  for  coitus  and  continued  erections  of  the  penis 
(in  a weak  old  man). 

305.  Several  pollutions  in  one  night  with  lascivious  dreams. 

(By  day)  when  indulging  in  an  amorous  embrace  the  semen 
comes  away. 

In  the  morning  in  bed,  feeling  of  weakness  with  lax  testicles,  as 
if  he  had  had  a pollution  the  previous  night  in  sleep,  which,  however, 
had  not  occurred. 

Promotion  of  the  menses.3  [De  Meza,  1.  c.] 

In  an  otherwise  healthy  girl  of  20  years,  who  had  not  men- 
struated for  a year  previously,  immediately  after  taking  the  drug, 
sensation  of  nausea  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  whereupon  a clot  of 
thick  blood  came  away  through  the  vagina.  [Stf.  Gss.] 

* * * 

310.  Sneezing. 

Severe  coryza. 

In  the  evening  on  going  to  sleep,  coryza  (aft.  3 h.),  and  in  the 
morning  on  awaking,  catarrh  on  the  chest. 

In  the  morning,  hoarseness. 

(Creaking  in  the  windpipe  when  walking  and  in  the  evening  on 
lying  down.) 


1 In  case  mentioned  in  note  to  S.  242. — The  reporter  says  <e  red  ” merely. 

2 Curative  effect.  See  note  to  S.  20, 


102 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


315.  Foetid  smelling  breath  from  the  month. 

(Constant  burning  on  the  edges  of  the  nostrils  with  irritation  to 
sneeze.) 

Sneezing  (aft.  2\  h.).  \_Kr.~] 

Frequent  sneezing  (aft.  48  h.).  [Zr.] 

Fetid  exhalation  from  the  mouth  on  expiration,  for  two  days. 
[Fr.  H— ».] 

320.  The  breath  on  expiration  appeared  to  him  to  cause  a sensible 
coolness  in  the  windpipe,  as  if  its  skin  were  too  thin.  [Z%.] 

Feeling  of  internal  coldness  in  the  chest,  [a  Thuessink,  1.  c.] 

Dry  tussiculation  as  from  a tickle  in  the  lower  part 
of  the  trachea,  every  morning  after  rising.  [Zr.] 

Quite  dry  cough  from  a tickle  in  the  lower  part  of  the  trachea 
(aft.  4 h.). 

(Cough  with  expectoration,  which  seems  to  come  from  the  pos- 
terior nasal  orifices.) 

325.  During  the  midday  sleep,  cough  from  an  itching  irritation  at  the 
upper  part  of  the  larynx  (aft.  4 h.) . 

Cough  at  night  during  sleep. 

Even  yawning  provokes  cough. 

Crying  in  children  with  crossness  and  tossing  about  excites  cough 
(between  the  7th  and  8th  h.). 

After  weeping  and  whining,  cough,  in  children. 

330.  (When  coughing,  pain  as  if  raw  in  the  chest  and  clawing  in  the 
larynx.) 

Haemoptysis. 

Cough  causing  vomiting. 

Cough  that  causes  bruised  pain  of  all  the  ribs. 

Cough  with  stitches  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen  (aft.  10  h.). 

335.  Bloody  expectoration  from  the  chest,  [a  Thuessink,  1.  c.] 

Short  kinking  breath,  [a  Thuessink,  1.  c.] 

Oppression  of  the  breathing,  rapid  expiration  and  inspiration. 
[Bhr.] 

Anxiety  and  pains  in  the  chest.1  [De  la  Marche,  1.  c.] 
Oppression  of  the  chest  with  anxiety,  pains  in  the  hypogastrium 
and  headache.2  [De  Meza,  1.  c.] 

340.  Extreme  dyspnoea.3  [Fehr,  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur .,  Dec.  I,  Ann.  9, 
10,  O.  2.] 

Frequent,  slow,  deep  breathing,  with  pressure  under  the  chest. 
[Hbg.} 

An  aching  pain  about  the  lower  end  of  the  sternum,  especially 
severe  on  fetching  a deep  breath  (aft.  12  h.)  [Z>.] 

Above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum, 
obtuse  pressure.  [(?«.] 

Aching  stitches  in  the  chest.  [Gw.] 

345.  Cutting  pressure  outwards  on  both  sides  of  the  chest,  increased 
by  inspiring  (aft.  1 h.)  \Ws^\ 


1 In  a case  of  heavy  fall.  Very  similar  symptoms  were  noted  before  arnica  was  given. 

2 Immediately  preceding  the  restoration  of  the  catamenia.  See  note  to  S.  20. 

3 Only  an  aggravation  of  difficulty  of  breathing  existing  before  arnica  was  taken, 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


103 

Obtuse  stitches  through  the  sternum  into  the  thoracic  cavity 
(aft.  2 h.).  \Ws.] 

Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  like  needle  pricks  (aft.  29  h.). 
[Lr.] 

Fine  shooting  pain  in  the  sides  of  the  chest.  [HbgJ\ 

(Rapid,  difficult  inspiration,  slow  expiration.) 

350.  Shooting  pain  on  one  side  of  the  chest,  with  a short  cough  that 
increases  the  pain,  and  constant  tightness  of  the  chest. 

Fine  and  severe  shooting  pain  under  the  last  ribs. 

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest  pain  like  needle  pricks. 

In  the  middle  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest  severe  stitches. 

In  the  right  side  close  to  the  ribs  obtuse  stitches.  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

355.  On  breathing  deeply  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  near  the 
sternum.  [St/.  Gw.] 

Shooting  on  both  sides  under  the  ribs  as  from  flatulence  (aft.  1 h.). 

Anteriorly  on  the  sternum  aching  shooting  pain,  especially  when 
walking. 

The  chest  is  affected,  as  if  raw,  whereby  he  several  times 
spat  blood  with  the  saliva  ; especially  when  walking  (aft.  3 6 h.). 
\_Stf  Gtt.]  _ 

All  the  joints  and  connexions  of  the  bones  and  cartilages  belong- 
ing to  the  cflest  are  painful  on  moving  and  breathing  as  if  bruised. 

360.  Stitches  in  the  heart  from  the  left  to  the  right  side.  [Bhr.~\ 

Squeezing  of  the  heart.  [Bhr.~\ 

The  beating  of  the  heart  is  more  like  a jerking.  [Bhr.~\ 

In  the  region  of  the  heart  pain  as  if  it  was  compressed  or  as  if  it 
got  a blow  (aft.  36  h.).  [Hbg.] 

The  movement  of  the  heart  is  at  first  very  rapid,  then  suddenly 
extremely  slow.  [ Bhr.~\ 

365.  Pain  as  from  dislocation  in  the  connexions  of  the 
parts  of  the  chest  with  the  hack. 

(A  drawing  pain  in  the  chest,  with  anxiety.) 

Anxiety,  across  the  chest,  with  sickness  (aft.  2 h.). 

In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  a weight  of  blood  seems  to  have 
accumulated  in  the  chest ; he  feels  better  after  a little  exercise. 

In  the  middle  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest  a constrictive,  painless 
sensation,  impeding  respiration,  with  a pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
when  touched,  which  interferes  with  breathing. 

370.  (Sensation  of  tension  over  the  chest  to  the  throat,  which  is 
lessened  by  lying  on  the  back,  is  increased  by  walking,  and  is  painful 
on  standing)  (aft.  2 h.). 

An  aching  pain  in  (the  right  side  of)  the  chest,  on  a 
small  spot,  which  is  not  increased  either  by  movement, 
touch,  or  breathing. 

Red  perspiration  over  the  chest.  [Vicat,1  Mat.  Med.,  i,  pp.  20 
and  362.] 

Shooting  itching  in  the  sides  of  the  chest  and  on  the  back,  not 
removed  by  scratching  (aft.  a few  m.).  \JVs.~\ 


1 General  statement  of  effects. 


104 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


Formicating  itching  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.] 
375.  In  the  os  sacrum  pain  as  after  a severe  blow  or  fall.  [Hbg.] 

The  sacrum  pains  as  if  beaten.  [Hbg.] 

In  the  sacrum  pain  as  if  something  was  lacerated  internally.  [ St f 
Gss .] 

Pain  in  the  sacrum  ; there  was  shooting  in  it  when  coughing, 
breathing  deeply,  or  walking. 

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  back  and  limbs. 

380.  Bruised  pain  in  the  back. 

Burning  pain  in  the  back  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 

In  the  back,  almost  under  the  shoulders,  sensation  as  if  something 
like  a lump  lay  there,  with  obtuse  stitches  on  moving,  not  when  at 
rest.  [St/.  Glt.] 

At  every  inspiration  a stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  back  from 
the  last  ribs  up  to  the  axilla  (aft.  48  h.).  [TVs,] 

Sensation  as  if  the  spinal  marrow  were  injected,  with  the  feeling 
of  a shock.1  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

385.  Formication  in  the  spine.  [Hbg.] 

Formication  in  the  dorsal  spine,  then  in  the  false  ribs,  to  the 
stomach.2  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

In  the  middle  of  the  spine  painful  aching  (when  sitting).  [Hbg.] 
The  spine  is  painful,  as  if  it  could  not  support  the  body.  [Bhr.] 
Aching  pain  between  the  scapulae  (aft.  2 d.).  [Hbg.] 

390.  Cutting  blows  between  the  scapulae  through  into  the  thoracic 
cavity,  when  walking  (aft.  6 h.).  [TVs.'] 

Shooting  itching  on  the  scapula  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.] 

On  the  right  scapula,  towards  the  hack,  pain  as  after 
a severe  blow  or  fall.  [Hbg.] 

On  the  lowest  cervical  vertebra  aching  and  tension,  when  he 
leans  the  head  forwards.  [Fz.] 

Cramp-pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape,  with  obtuse  stitches 
inwards  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.] 

395.  In  the  muscles  of  the  nape  cramp-like  tensive  pain  on  sneezing 
and  yawning. 

On  the  side  of  the  nape  a pimple  that  causes  shooting  and  ulce- 
rative pain  when  touched  * (aft.  48  h.) . 

On  the  left  shoulder  drawing,  aching  pain  on  standing  erect. 
[Fz.] 

Broad,  sharp  stitches  inwards  under  the  axilla.  \Ws.\ 

Raw,  sore  sensation  under  the  shoulder.  [Fz.] 

400.  The  arms  are  tired  as  if  beaten,  so  that  he  could  not  flex  the 
fingers.  [Hbg.] 

On  the  anterior  aspect  of  the  arms  pain  as  if  beaten. 

* This  kind  of  pimple,  so  painful  when  touched,  with  an  inflamed  red  areola,  which 
arnica  produces  specifically,  bears  the  greatest  resemblance  to  the  well-known  boils 
(furunculi),  and  consequently  these  are  homoeopathically  cured  by  arnica,  and  in 
persons  who  are  frequently  troubled  with  them  are  prevented  by  the  use  of  arnica, 
and  their  future  occurrence  warded  off,  as  experience  has  taught  me. 


1 See  note  to  S.  242.  The  sense  of  concussion  was  felt  in  the  body  generally. 

? See  note  to  S.  242, 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


105 

Backward  mounting,  drawing,  cramp-like  pain  in  the  bone  shafts 
of  the  fingers  and  forearm. 

Formication  in  the  arms.1  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

Painful  blows  in  the  arms  almost  like  electric  shocks.1  [Col- 
lin, 1.  c.] 

405.  Painful  stitches  like  blows  on  the  upper  part  of  the  upper  arm 
[Gss.] 

In  the  left  upper  arm  twitching  as  if  a nerve  were  pulled.  [Gjj.] 
Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm  (immediately).  \JVs^\ 
Obtuse  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  arm,  so  that  he  starts. 
IGss.-] 

From  the  lower  part  of  the  left  upper  arm  to  the  elbow  inter- 
mittent, painful  aching  tearing,  as  if  in  the  bone.  [Gw.] 

410.  Formication  in  the  forearms. 

On  flexing  the  arm,  stretching  of  the  flexor  muscles  of  the  fore- 
arm, so  that  extension  of  the  arm  causes  tensive  pain  (aft.  2 h.).  [F%.] 
Sharp,  broad  stitches  below  the  elbow-joint  (aft.  2 h.).  \Ws, ] 
Slow  obtuse  stitches  in  the  left  forearm,  with  acute  pains,  as  if  it 
were  broken  at  that  part  (in  the  morning  in  bed).  [Gw.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  arms  and  hands. 

415.  Burning  shooting  in  the  forearm.  [Gw.] 

In  the  wrist-joint  dislocative  pain.  [Gw.] 

In  the  left  wrist-joint  pain  as  if  sprained  (aft.  2 d.).  \_Kr.~\ 

In  the  wrist-joint  sharp  stitches,  increased  by  movement  (aft.  2 h.). 

[m.] 

Pain  as  from  dislocation  of  the  wrist  (chest,  back,  hips). 
420.  In  the  left  wrist-joint,  especially  when  writing,  a tearing  pain, 
which  manifests  itself  particularly  on  the  back  of  the  hand  ; on 
letting  the  hands  hang  down  the  pain  is  diminished.  \_Kr.~] 

Shooting,  tearing  in  the  wrists,  chiefly  in  the  left  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 
A creeping  and  formication  in  the  hands.1  [Collin,  1.  c.] 
Distended  veins  of  the  hands,  with  full,  strong  pulse.  [_Hbg.~] 
Powerlessness  of  the  hands,  especially  on  grasping  anything  (aft. 
2 h.).  [Kr.] 

425.  On  the  back  of  the  hand  painful  aching.  \_Hbg.~] 

Cramp  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  [ Hbg .] 

Pain  in  the  balls  of  both  thumbs,  as  if  they  had  been  knocked 
against  something  hard.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Fine  shooting  itching  on  the  proximal  finger-joints,  completely 
removed  by  scratching  (aft.  36  h.).  [ Ws .] 

A pimple  betwixt  thumb  and  index,  which  itches,  but  when 
touched  causes  fine  shooting  pain,  as  if  a splinter  were  sticking  in 
(aft.  40  h.). 

430.  Stitches  in  both  middle  fingers  (and  in  the  knee). 

Shooting,  twitching  pain  in  the  fingers. 

Fine  stitches  in  the  distal  joint  of  the  middle  finger  (aft.  J h.). 

W^ 

Itching  stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger  (aft.  2 h.).  \Ws.~\ 


1 In  paralysed  limbs,  to  which  arnica  was  restoring  power. 


io6 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


2 

435 


44°. 


h.). 


knock. 


Sharp  stitches  in  the  bend  of  the  middle  joint  of  the  index  (aft. 
h.).  \_Ws.1 

Trembling  in  the  lower  extremities.  [Hbg.~\ 

Tearing  pain  in  the  lower  extremities.1  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

(Abscess  of  the  lumbar  (psoas)  muscles). 

Single  blows  in  the  hips. 

Pain  as  from  dislocation  in  the  hips  (back,  chest,  wrist). 
Tearing  pain  in  the  lower  extremities. 

At  night  the  lower  extremities  are  painful  when  they  lie  on  one 
another.  [Bhr.] 

Drawing  aching  pain  in  the  left  hip-joint  when  the  leg  is 
stretched  out  when  sitting  (aft.  5 h.).  [Tz.] 

Pain  in  the  thigh  on  rising  up  and  treading. 

Twitching  sensation  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh. 

445.  Continued  pinching  on  the  outside  of  the  thigh  (aft. 

When  walking,  pain  on  the  thighs  as  from  a blow  or 

[a.] 

When  sitting,  drawing  cramp-like  pressing  in  the  muscles  of  the 
left  thigh  (aft.  48  h.).  [An] 

Pinching  twitching  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  thigh  near  the 
scrotum.  [Gw.] 

Stitches  in  the  knee  (and  both  middle  fingers). 

450.  Fine  stitches  on  the  thigh  above  the  knee  (aft.  \ h.).  \JVsi] 

On  the  inside  of  the  thigh  above  the  knee  itching  stitches,  that 
become  more  severe  by  rubbing  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.'] 

On  the  inside  of  the  thigh  a fine  shooting  itching,  like  sore 
feeling,  ameliorated  by  touch.  [Tz.] 

The  knee-joints  have  no  steadfastness  and  totter  when  standing 
(aft.  3 h.).  \_Kr.~] 

The  knees  knuckle  under  him  when  standing  (aft.  1 h.).  [Kr.] 
455.  Sometimes  in  the  knee  a sudden  loss  of  power;  they  knuckle 
under  him,  whilst  the  feet  are  numb  and  insensible. 

(In  the  knee  and  leg  a cramp-like  pain.) 

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  foot  with  slight  fever  towards  evening. 
Standing  causes  pain. 

In  the  right  knee,  on  going  up  stairs,  a pain  as  if  he  had 
knocked  himself  (aft.  3 h.).  [Kr,] 

460.  On  the  knee  when  touched  a prick  as  with  a needle 

(aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.] 

Aching  tearing  below  the  left  knee.  [Gw.] 

Above  the  calf  of  the  right  leg  pain,  as  after  a violent  blow,  with 
weariness  of  the  legs.  [Hbg.] 

Twitching  shooting  pain  in  the  tibia  upwards  (aft.  6 h.). 

(Aching  pain  in  the  paralysed  foot.) 

465.  A creeping  formicating  sensation  in  the  feet. 

Sudden  swelling  of  the  (affected)  foot. 

Indescribable  pain  in  the  (affected)  foot,  as  from  internal 


1 See  note  to  S.  403. 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


107 


uneasiness,  and  as  if  he  were  lying  on  something  hard,  which 
compels  him  to  lay  the  part  here  and  there  and  to  move  it  about,  in 
the  evening  (aft.  8 h.). 

Tearing  pain,  like  boring  and  digging  downwards  on  the  left 
calf ; after  remaining  some  time  there  it  extends  upwards  into  the 
thigh,  and  thence  around  behind  the  coccyx  ; it  ends  on  the  right 
os  ilii  (aft.  6 h.).  [Kr.~\ 

Upward  tension  in  the  muscles  of  the  calf  and  drawing  therein 
when  standing  (aft.  7 h.).  \_FzC | 

470.  Aching  on  the  tibia  as  after  a blow,  only  when  walking  (aft. 
30  h.)-  [fz.j 

Gurgling  from  below  upwards  in  the  lower  part  of  the  leg, 
when  at  rest  (aft.  £ h.).  \JVs^\ 

Undulating  tearing  (almost  obtuse  shooting)  pain  in  the  ankle- 
joint.  [Gjl] 

In  the  ankle-joint  dislocation  pain.  [Glt.] 

Tearing  in  the  ankle. 

475.  Tearing  in  the  heel. 

Stitches  in  the  foot  through  the  great  toe. 

A shooting  in  the  right  foot,  above  the  heel  in  the  tendo 
Achillis,  only  on  extending  the  ankle-joint,  but  not  when  walking 
(aft.  2 h.).  [JSTr.] 

Stitches  on  the  soles  of  the  feet,  on  one  and  the  same  place,  when 
walking,  as  if  a corn  were  there  (aft.  36  h.).  [Tz.] 

Formicating  stitches  on  the  sole  of  the  foot,  on  one  and  the  same 
place.  [Tz.] 

480.  Violent  burning  in  the  feet.  [ Bhr .] 

Formication  in  the  feet.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Cramp  in  the  toes  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  36  h.).  [Hbg.'\ 

In  one  of  the  toes  dull  throbbing  pain.  [Gr*.] 

In  one  of  the  toes  dull  (numb)  trembling  pain.  [Grr.] 

485.  Violent  shooting  in  the  toes  when  walking.  [Tz.] 

A gradually  coming  on  shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  point  of  the 
big  toe  on  lying  down  for  his  noon-day  rest. 

Towards  evening  a gouty  numb  pain  as  from  dislocation  in  the 
joint  of  the  big  toe,  with  some  redness. 

Single  severe  stitches  in  the  big  toe  (aft.  1 h.). 

A dull  long  stitch  in  the  right  big  toe. 

490.  Single  blows  in  the  big  toe. 

Perspiration  of  the  soles  and  toes. 

Painful  cramp  in  the  muscles  of  the  soles. 

Shooting  tearing  on  the  inferior  surface  of  the  big  toe, 
especially  on  treading  on  it  (aft.  4 h.).  \JVs^\ 

Formicating  sensation  in  the  hands  and  feet,  and  shooting  pains 
in  various  joints.1  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

495.  Here  and  there  in  the  limbs  deeply  penetrating,  obtuse  stitches. 
[Gss.] 


} See  note  to  S.  4.03, 


io8 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


A sharp  pricking  sensation  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  body. 
[Crichton,  1.  c.] 

Shooting  pains.  [Vicat,  1.  c.] 

Fine  shooting  in  almost  every  part  of  the  body,  especially  on  the 
nose,  eyebrows,  eyelids,  also  on  the  hands  and  fingers. 

A burning  pain,  sometimes  in  one,  sometimes  in  another  part  of 
the  body,  in  the  skin. 

500.  A cold  pain,  sometimes  in  one,  sometimes  in  another  part  of  the 
body,  in  the  skin. 

(Here  and  there  in  the  skin  a shooting,  burning,  itching  pain  on 
lying  down  for  the  noonday  rest,  which  rapidly  goes  off  on  scratching, 
and  by  itself.) 

Burning  and  cutting  pains  here  and  there.1  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

Jerks  and  blows  in  the  body,  as  from  electricity.2  [Crichton,  1.  c.] 
After  touching  the  skin  with  the  tincture  there  arises  an  itching 
miliary  rash. 

505.  Sudden  twitching  of  single  muscles  in  almost  all  parts  of  the 
body,  especially  in  the  limbs,  whereby  sometimes  single  parts,  some- 
times the  whole  body,  are  shaken.  \_Bhr.~\ 

The  pains  are  aggravated  by  speaking,  blowing  the  nose,  move- 
ment, and  almost  every  noise.  [5/zr.] 

The  sensations  resembling  tearing  occur  from  time  to  time  in 
almost  every  part  of  the  body,  but  especially  in  the  upper  and  lower 
extremities  ; in  the  lower  mostly  when  sitting ; the  pain  seemed  to 
spread  chiefly  upwards.  [TTr.] 

Twitching  pain  in  the  affected  part  (aft.  2 h.). 

A twitching  in  all  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  feet  and  shoulders, 
with  heat  of  the  feet. 

510.  It  seemed  to  him  as  if  everything  on  his  body  was  too  tightly  tied. 
Restlessness  of  the  whole  body,  without  mental  anxiety;  an 
excessive  mobility  that  develops  into  trembling  of  the  whole  body. 
The  limbs  on  the  side  on  which  he  lies  go  to  sleep.  [ St/, \ Gjj.] 
Painful  sensibility  of  all  the  joints  and  of  the  skin  on  the  slightest 
movement  (aft.  4 h.). 

Painful  over-sensitiveness  of  the  whole  body. 

515.  All  his  limbs  are  affected;  a kind  of  paralytic  pain 
in  all  the  joints,  and  as  if  bruised,  on  moving  (aft.  8 h.). 

A tingling  pain  in  all  the  limbs  when  the  body  is 
shaken  (e-g.  in  a carriage),  or  when  treading. 

Disagreeable,  formicating,  aching  feeling  in  the  part 
injured  by  a contusion. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  limbs.3  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

Extremely  violent  pains,  so  that  many  scratch  with  their  nails  on 
the  wall  or  the  floor,  as  if  they  were  mad,  these  pains,  however,  do 
not  last  more  than  an  hour  (immediately  after  taking  it).  [De  la 
Marche,  1.  c.] 

520.  Trembling  in  the  limbs.  [De  la  Marche, — Collin,  1.  c.] 


1 See  note  to  S.  403. 

2 Evidently  taken  from  Collin’s  observations.  See  S.  404  and  note. 

3 See  note  to  S.  403. 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


109 


Pain  in  all  the  limbs,  as  if  bruised,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving 
(aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 

Weariness  in  the  feet  and  arms  when  walking  in  the  open  air 
(aft.  2 1 h.).  [Kr.] 

Exhaustion,  fatigue,  bruised  feeling,  that  compels  him  to  lie  down. 
[St/.  Gss.] 

Trembling  restlessness  and  exhaustion.  [Stf.  Cu.] 

525.  When  walking  he  becomes  faint,  but  on  standing  still  he  recovers. 

After  a walk  in  the  open  air,  weak  in  the  legs  ; the  knees  bent 
under  her;  as  soon  as  the  weakness  came  in  her  legs  she  imme- 
diately grew  drowsy,  fell  asleep  at  once,  and  dreamed  immediately. 

The  whole  right  side,  especially  the  shoulders,  seemed  to  him, 
when  walking  in  the  open  air,  too  heavy,  and  to  hang  down  as  if 
paralysed,  but  of  this  he  feels  nothing  in  the  room  (aft.  8 h.).  [Tz.] 

Heaviness  in  all  the  limbs,  as  from  great  fatigue.  [Hbg.~\ 

In  the  muscles  under  the  joints  of  the  upper  and  lower  extremi- 
ties, when  walking  in  the  open  air,  sensation  of  weight  and  pressure 
(aft.  8 h.).  [Tz.] 

530.  Extraordinary  heaviness  of  the  limbs.  [Bhr.\ 

Heaviness  of  the  limbs. 

Relaxed  state  of  the  limbs,  as  if  they  were  all  over-stretched. 
[*■*•] 

Lassitude  and  laziness  of  the  whole  body,  the  legs  can  scarcely 
stand  [HbgJ\y 

535.  General  sinking  of  the  strength;  he  imagines  he  can 
scarcely  move  a limb.  [Hbg.~\ 

Yawning  (aft.  | h.).  [Kr.] 

When  yawning  a violent  shudder  passes  through  him.  [Gjj.] 

Yawning  and  stretching,  with  dilated  pupils,  without  sleepiness 
(aft.  1 h.). 

Frequent  yawning. 

540.  In  the  evening  frequent  yawning  without  sleepiness. 
Sleepiness  (aft.  j h.). 

Too  early  sleepiness  in  the  evening. 

He  becomes  very  drowsy  when  he  has  walked  long  in  the  open 
air,  is  then  not  disposed  either  for  thinking  or  speaking,  although  he 
was  previously  very  wide  awake.  [St/  Gss.'] 

Much  sleep. 

545.  Sleep  full  of  dreams. 

Sleep  full  of  dreams,  which  does  not  refresh  him  ; he  thinks  he 
has  not  slept  at  all. 

Anxious  heavy  dreams  from  the  beginning  of  the  evening  all 
through  the  night,  which  fatigue  him  greatly. 

Frightful  dreams,  immediately  in  the  evening  (after  going  to 
sleep),  about  large  black  dogs  and  cats. 

He  has  frightful  dreams,  cries  out  aloud  in  sleep,  and  wakes  up 
in  consequence, 

550.  Starting  up  in  affright  in  sleep. 

Starting  and  jerking  the  head  backwards  in  sleep. 

1 No.  S.  534 — a misreekoning. 


no 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


Moaning  in  sleep  (aft.  2 h.). 

Loud  incomprehensible  talking  in  sleep,  without  remembered 
dreams. 

Loud  blowing  expiration  and  inspiration  in  sleep  (aft.  24  h.). 

555*  Involuntary  evacuation  of  faeces  in  sleep. 

A dream  that  lasts  all  night,  in  which  she  is  always  scolded  and 
shameful  reproaches  (about  immoral  conduct)  are  addressed  to  her ; 
on  awaking  she  hardly  knows  whether  the  dream  was  not  true. 

A dream  lasting  several  hours  in  half  sleep,  during  which  the 
dreamer  exhibits  much  irresolution. 

She  sleeps  for  a couple  of  hours  in  the  evening,  then  remains 
wide  awake  until  5 a.m.,  but  then  sleeps  soundly  until  9 a.m. 

Sleeplessness  and  wakefulness  until  2 or  3 a.m.  ; at  the  same 
time  shooting  and  smarting  itching  here  and  there. 

560.  Sleepiness  by  day  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Kr.~\ 

In  the  evening  he  becomes  sleepy  too  early.  [Fr.  H — n.'\ 
Drowsiness,  [a  Thuessink,  1.  c.] 

On  going  to  sleep  sudden  starting  as  from  fright.  [Zr.] 

Anxious  dreams  about  things  he  had  formerly  dreamt  of. 

[Kr.-] 

565.  The  dreams  of  the  previous  night  recur.  \_Bhr.~\ 

Vivid  dream,  at  first  cheerful,  afterwards  anxious.  [Zr.] 

Vivid  unremembered  dreams.  [Zr.] 

Dreams  of  frightful  things,  as  lightning  strokes, 
graves,  &c.  [Ws.] 

Dreams  about  flayed  persons,  very  frightful  to  him.  [Zz.] 

570.  Vivid  dreams  towards  morning,  in  which  he  talks  aloud,  so  as  to 
awake  himself  (6th  d.).  [Zr.] 

Frequent  waking  out  of  sleep  with  emissions  of  semen  (2nd  night). 

{Lr.} 

During  sleep  at  night  he  wakes  up  from  a peculiar  hot  feeling  in 
the  head,  followed  by  anxiety  when  awake  ; he  dreads  the  recur- 
rence of  new  attacks  of  the  same  sensation,  and  thinks  he  is  going 
to  have  a fit  of  apoplexy  (aft.  10  h.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

Chilly  feeling  in  the  morning  in  bed,  beginning  before  getting  up 
and  lasting  ail  the  forenoon.  [Bhr.~\ 

He  cannot  sleep  in  the  early  part  of  the  night,  but  sleeps  all  the 
longer  in  the  morning. 

575.  Sleeplessness  with  anxiety  as  from  heat  until  2 to  3 a.m. 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  cold  sensation  on  the  right  side,  on 
which  he  lay  (aft.  | h.).  [Zz.] 

A flush  of  heat  over  the  face,  and  sensation  of  agreeable  warmth 
of  the  body  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zz.] 

Great  internal  heat  with  cold  hands  and  feet,  and  rigor  all  over 
the  body.  [Bhr.~\ 

Dry  heat  in  bed  with  great  thirst  for  water  ; the  heat  is 
intolerable ; he  will  throw  off  the  clothes,  but  on  doing  so,  indeed, 
by  merely  moving  in  bed,  he  is  chilly. 

580.  When  he  lies  long  without  moving  he  becomes  hot,  especially  on 
the  head,  which  he  must  lay  first  in  one  place  then  in  another  in  bed- 


ARNICA  MONTANA. 


in 


An  internal  continued  chilliness  through  the  whole  body  on 
awaking  from  sleep  by  day  and  night,  but  without  shivering. 

On  yawning  a violent  shivering  goes  through  him.  [Stf  Gjj.] 
After  awaking  in  the  morning  dry  heat  all  over. 

Flushes  of  heat  over  the  back. 

585.  Repeated,  anxious,  transient  perspirations  all  over  the  body,  at 
night. 

Nocturnal  sour  perspiration. 

The  exhalation  smells  sour. 

Nocturnal  thirst  (aft.  48  h.). 

Thirst  for  water. 

590.  Thirst  without  external  heat,  with  pupils  little  capable 
of  dilatation  (aft.  1 h.). 

He  longs  for  the  open  air. 

Sensation  as  if  cold  all  over,  though  he  is  warm  enough  (aft.  1 h.). 
Chill  in  the  back  and  in  the  front  of  the  thighs,  in  the  morning. 
Chill,  mostly  in  the  evening. 

595.  Morning  fever;  first  chill,  then  attack  of  heat. 

Very  disagreeable  painfulness  of  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones 
of  the  body,  almost  like  a drawing  in  all  the  limbs,  as  in  a fit  of  ague. 

Fever ; rigor  all  over  the  body,  on  the  head,  at  the  same  time  heat 
in  the  head  and  redness  and  heat  of  the  face,  with  cool  hands  and 
bruised  feeling  in  the  hips,  the  back  and  the  front,  of  the  arms. 

Fever  ; on  yawning  before  the  chill,  much  thirst,  much  drinking  ; 
then  in  the  heat  also  thirst,  with  but  little  drinking. 

Febrile  rigor,  without  thirst. 

600.  Slight  repeated  attacks  of  anxiety  with  flying  heat  all  over  the  body. 
One  hour  after  the  headache,  external  and  internal  chill  and  con- 
stant anxiety. 

In  the  evening,  along  with  dizziness  in  the  head,  ebullition  of  the 
blood  ; he  feels  the  pulse  all  over  the  body  (he  coughs  for  hours  until 
he  vomits,  and  often  wakes  up  at  night  with  it). 

Heat  of  the  whole  body1.  [De  Meza,  1.  c.] 

Perspiration.  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

605.  On  waking  from  sleep,  slight  perspiration.  [Zr.] 

Frequent  perspirations.  [ Veckoskrift  for . Lakare ,3  viii.] 

Attacks  of  anxietas.  [De  la  Marche,  De  Meza,  Collin,  1.  c., 

Hbg.\ 

Severe  attacks  of  anxietas.  [Vicat,  1.  c.] 

Anxious  concern  about  the  present  and  the  future.  (3rd  d.)  [Zr.] 

610.  Excitable,  sensitive  disposition.  \_Bhr.~\ 

Fright  and  starting  at  unexpected  trifles  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Ar.} 
Dejection  and  absence  of  thought  (aft.  3J  h.).  [ Kr .] 

After  walking  in  the  open  air  he  becomes  disinclined  for  thinking 
and  speaking,  although  he  was  previously  very  lively  (aft.  9 h.).  [Z%.] 
Surly  humour,  as  after  a quarrel.  [Zr. ] 

615.  Gay,  talkative.*  [Zr.] 

* Curative  and  secondary  action  in  a person  of  the  opposite  humour. 


1 See  note  to  S.  339. 


2 Not  accessible. 


f 1 2 ARNICA  MONTANA; 

Composed,  cheerful  humour.*  \_Hbg.~\ 

Hypochondriacal  anxiety. 

Hypochondriacal  peevishness  ; he  is  indisposed  for  everything. 

Uncommonly  peevish,  everything  is  repugnant  to  her,  every- 
thing annoys  her.  [6y.  Gjj.] 

620.  Restlessness  of  body  and  mind  (but  without  actual  anxiety),  as  if 
he  was  prevented  doing  something  necessary,  with  complete  indis- 
position for  occupation. 

All  work  annoys  him  ; he  is  lazy  for  all  business. 

Indifference  to  work,  everything  is  indifferent  to  him. 

(Over-busy,  inclination  and  disposition  for  great  and  continuous 
literary  work  with  no  power  to  do  it  without  injury  to  the  health.) 

Over-sensitiveness  of  the  disposition  ;t  extreme  inclina- 
tion for  agreeable  and  disagreeable  mental  emotions,  without  weak- 
ness or  over- sensitiveness  of  the  body. 

625.  Over-excitability  ; she  could  easily  laugh  when  there  was  no 
occasion  for  it,  and  when  one  said  something  annoying  to  her,  she 
got  angry  and  broke  out  into  loud  howling. 

Very  cross  and  reticent,  she  will  not  speak  a word. 

Surly,  wants  to  have  many  things  and  then  refuses  them. 

Very  cross,  everything  annoys  her,  all  her  former  cheerfulness 
and  friendliness  is  gone  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Stf.  Gw.] 

Distraction  of  mind,  her  thoughts  stray  unobserved  from  the 
subject  in  hand,  and  diverge  into  phantasies  and  pictures  of  the  fancy. 
[Stf.  Gss.] 

630.  He  contradicts  ; is  opinionative  ; no  one  can  please  him  (aft.  3, 
12  h.). 

Quarrelsome  crossness. 

Cross  ; he  wants  to  quarrel  with  every  one. 

Stiff-necked  obstinacy  (aft.  4 h.). 

Surly  insolence  and  imperiousness  (aft.  a few  h.). 

635.  Easily  startled. 

Weeping. 

Fears ; anxious  dread  of  coming  evil* 

Hopelessness. 

# Curative  and  secondary  action  in  a person  of  the  opposite  humoul*. 
f This  appeared  once  later  as  over-sensitiveness  of  the  body,  but  I have  seen  it 
also  alternating  with  the  latter,  and  even  occurring  at  the  same  time. 


ARSENICUM.1 

(The  semi-oxyde  of  metallic  arsenic  in  diluted  solution.) 

As  I write  down  the  word  Arsenic,  considerations  the  most  momen- 
tous throng  upon  my  mind. 

When  the  beneficent  Creator  made  iron  He  no  doubt  permitted  the 
children  of  men  to  fashion  it  either  into  the  murderous  dagger  or  the 
gentle  ploughshare  wherewith  to  kill  or  to  feed  their  fellow-creatures. 
How  much  happier  would  they  be  did  they  employ  His  gifts  only  for  the 
purpose  of  doing  good  ! This  should  be  the  aim  of  their  life  this  was 
His  desire. 

It  is  not  to  Him,  the  All-loving,  we  can  impute  the  wickedness  prac- 
tised by  men,  who  have  misemployed  the  wonderfully  powerful  medi- 
cinal substances  in  enormous  doses  in  diseases  for  which  they  were  not 
suitable,  guided  only  by  frivolous  ideas  or  some  paltry  authority, 
without  having  subjected  them  to  any  careful  trial,  and  without  any 
substantial  reason  for  their  choice. 

If  a careful  tester  of  the  uses  of  medicines  and  of  their  doses  arise, 
they  inveigh  against  him  as  an  enemy  to  their  comfort,  and  do  not 
refrain  from  aspersing  him  with  the  vilest  calumnies. 

The  ordinary  medical  art  has  hitherto  employed,  in  large  and  fre- 
quently repeated  doses , the  most  powerful  drugs,  such  as  arsenic,  nitrate 
of  silver,  corrosive  sublimate,  aconite,  belladonna,  digitalis,  opium, 
hyoscyamus,  &c.  Homoeopathy  cannot  employ  stronger  substances, 
for  there  are  none  stronger.  When  physicians  of  the  ordinary  stamp 
employ  them,  they  evidently  vie  with  one  another  who  shall  prescribe 
the  largest  possible  doses  of  these  drugs,  and  make  a great  boast  of 
increasing  these  doses  to  such  enormous  extremes.  This  practice  they 
laud  and  recommend  to  their  fellow  practitioners.  But  if  the  homoeo- 
pathic medical  art  employ  the  same  drugs , not  at  random,  like  the  ordinary 
method,  but  after  careful  investigation,  only  in  suitable  cases  and  in  the 
smallest  possible  doses,  it  is  denounced  as  a practice  of  poisoning.  How 
prejudiced,  how  unjust,  how  calumnious  is  such  a charge  made  by 
persons  who  make  pretensions  to  honesty  and  rectitude ! 

If  Homoeopathy  now  make  a fuller  explanation — if  she  condemn  (as 
from  conviction  she  must)  the  monstrous  doses  of  those  drugs  employed 
in  ordinary  practice — and  if  she,  relying  on  careful  trials,  insist  that 
very  much  less  of  them  should  be  given  for  a dose,  that  where  ordinary 
practitioners  give  a tenth,  a half,  a whole  grain,  and  even  several  grains, 
often  only  a quadrillionth,  a sextillionth,  a decillionth  of  a grain  is 
required  and  sufficient,  then  see  the  adherents  of  the  ordinary  school 
who  denounce  the  homoeopathic  healing  art  as  a system  of  poisoning, 
see  how  they  laugh  aloud  at  what  they  call  childishness,  and  declare 


1 From  vol,  ii,  3rd  edit.,  1833. 


8 


ARSENICUM. 


114 

themselves  convinced  (convinced  without  trial  ?)  that  such  a small 
quantity  can  do  nothing  at  all,  and  can  have  no  effect  whatever — is, 
indeed,  just  the  same  as  nothing.  They  are  not  ashamed  thus  to 
blow  hot  and  cold  from  the  same  mouth,  and  to  pronounce  the  very 
same  thing  to  be  inert  and  ludicrously  small  which  they  had  just 
accused  of  being  a system  of  poisoning,  whilst  they  justify  and  praise 
their  own  monstrous  and  murderous  doses  of  the  same  medicines.  Is 
not  this  the  grossest  and  most  wretched  inconsistency  that  can  be 
imagined,  perpetrated  for  the  purpose  of  being  shamelessly  unjust 
towards  a doctrine  which  they  cannot  deny  possesses  truth  and  con- 
sistency, which  is  borne  out  by  experience,  and  which  enjoins  the  most 
delicate  cautiousness  and  the  most  unwearied  circumspection  in  the 
selection  and  administration  of  its  remedies  ? 

Not  very  long  ago  a highly  celebrated  physician*  spoke  of  pounds 
of  opium  being  consumed  every  month  in  his  hospital,  where  even  the 
nurses  were  allowed  to  give  it  to  the  patients  according  to  their  fancy. 
Opium,  mind  ! a drug  that  has  sent  many  thousands  of  persons  to 
their  graves  in  ordinary  practice  ! Yet  this  man  continued  to  be  held 
in  honour,  for  he  belonged  to  the  dominant  clique  to  which  everything 
is  lawful,  even  if  it  be  of  the  most  injurious  and  absurd  character. 
And  when,  a few  years  since,  in  one  of  the  most  enlightened  citiesf  of 
Europe,  every  practitioner,  from  the  betitled  physician  down  to  the  bar- 
ber’s apprentice,  prescribed  arsenic  as  a fashionable  remedy  in  almost  every 
disease,  and  that  in  such  frequent  and  large  doses,  one  after  the  other, 
that  the  detriment  to  the  health  of  the  people  must  have  been  quite  palpa- 
ble ; yet  this  was  held  to  be  honourable  practice,  though  not  one  of  them 
was  acquainted  with  the  peculiar  effects  of  this  metallic  oxyde  (and  con- 
sequently knew  not  what  cases  of  disease  it  was  suited  for) . And  yet  all 
prescribed  it  in  repeated  doses,  a single  one  of  which,  sufficiently  attenuated 
and potentized,  would  have  sufficed  to  cure  all  the  diseases  in  the  whole 
habitable  world  for  which  this  drug  is  the  suitable  remedy.  Which  of  these 
two  opposite  modes  of  employing  medicines  best  deserves  the  flattering 
appellation  of  u system  of  poisoning  ” — the  ordinary  method  just 
alluded  to,  which  attacks  with  tenths  of  grains  the  poor  patients  (who 
often  require  some  quite  different  remedy),  or  homoeopathy,  which 
does  not  give  even  a droplet  of  tincture  of  rhubarb,  without  having 
first  ascertained  whether  rhubarb  is  the  most  suitable,  the  only  appro- 
priate remedy  for  the  case — homoeopathy,  which,  by  unwearied  mul- 
tiplied experiments,  discovered  that  it  is  only  in  rare  cases  that  more 
than  a decillionth  of  a grain  of  arsenic  should  be  given,  and  that  only  in 
cases  where  careful  proving  shows  this  medicine  to  be  the  only  one 
perfectly  suitable  ? To  which  of  these  two  modes  of  practice  does  the 
title  of  honour,  “ thoughtless,  rash  system  of  poisoning,”  best  apply  ? 

* * * 

There  is  yet  another  sect  of  practitioners  who  may  be  called  hypo- 
critical purists.  If  they  are  practical  physicians  they,  indeed,  prescribe 

* Marcus,  of  Bamberg. 

f To  what  a low  depth  of  degradation  as  an  art  must  not  medicine  have  sunk  in 
this  quarter  of  the  globe  when  such  a state  of  things  could  exist  in  a city  like  Berlin, 
which  yet  in  all  other  departments  of  human  knowledge  has  scarcely  an  equal ! 


ARSENICUM. 


US 

all  sorts  of  substances  that  are  injurious  when  misused,  but  before  the 
world  they  wish  to  pose  as  patterns  of  innocence  and  caution.  From 
their  professorial  chairs  and  in  their  writings  they  give  the  most  alarming 
definition  of  poison,  so  that  to  listen  to  their  declamations  it  would 
appear  unadvisable  to  treat  any  imaginable  disease  with  anything  stronger 
than  quick-grass,  dandelion,  oxymel,  and  raspberry  juice.  According 
to  their  account  poisons  are  absolutely  (/.  e.  under  all  circumstances,  in 
all  doses,  in  all  cases)  prejudicial  to  human  life,  and  in  this  category 
they  include,  as  suits  their  humour,  a lot  of  substances  which  in  all  ages 
have  been  extensively  employed  by  physicians  for  the  cure  of  diseases. 
But  the  employment  of  these  substances  would  be  a criminal  offence 
had  not  every  one  of  them  occasionally  proved  of  use.  If,  however,  each 
of  them  had  only  been  of  use  on  one  single  occasion — and  it  cannot  be 
denied  that  this  sometimes  happened — -then  this  definition,  besides  being 
blasphemous,  is  a palpable  absurdity.  Absolutely  and  under  all  circum- 
stances injurious  and  destructive,  and  at  the  same  time  beneficial,  is  a 
self-evident  contradiction,  utter  nonsense.  They  seek  to  wriggle  out 
of  this  contradictory  assertion  by  alleging  that  these  substances  have 
more  frequently  proved  injurious  than  useful.  But,  let  me  ask,  did  the 
injury  so  frequently  caused  by  these  things  come  of  itself,  or  did  it  not 
come  from  their  improper  employment  ? in  other  words,  was  it  not 
caused  by  those  physicians  who  made  an  unskilful  use  of  them  in  diseases 
for  which  they  were  unsuitable  ? These  medicines  do  not  administer 
themselves  in  diseases  ; they  must  be  administered  by  somebody,  and  if 
ever  they  were  beneficial  that  was  because  they  happened  to  be  given 
appropriately  by  somebody  ; it  was  because  they  might  always  be 
beneficial  if  nobody  ever  employed  them  otherwise  than  appropriately. 
Hence  it  follows  that  whenever  these  substances  were  hurtful  and 
destructive,  they  were  so  only  on  account  of  having  been  inappropriately 
employed.  Therefore,  all  the  injury  they  did  is  attributable  to  the 
unskilfulness  of  their  employer. 

These  narrow-minded  individuals  further  allege,  u that  even  when 
we  attempt  to  tame  arsenic  by  means  of  a corrective,  e.g.  by  mixing  it 
with  an  alkali,  it  still  often  does  harm  enough.” 

Nay,  I reply,  the  arsenic  must  not  be  blamed  for  this ; for,  as  I 
before  observed,  drugs  do  not  administer  themselves,  somebody  admi- 
nisters them  and  does  harm  with  them.  And  how  does  the  alkali  act  as  a 
corrective  ? Does  it  merely  make  the  arsenic  weaker,  or  does  it  alter 
its  nature  and  convert  it  into  something  else  ? In  the  latter  case  the 
neutral  arsenical  salt  produced  is  no  longer  arsenic  proper,  but  some- 
thing different.  If,  however,  it  be  merely  made  weaker,  then  a simple 
diminution  of  the  dose  of  the  pure  solution  of  arsenic  would  be  a much 
more  sensible  and  effectual  mode  of  making  it  weaker  and  milder  than 
leaving  the  dose  in  its  hurtful  magnitude,  and  by  the  addition  of  another 
medicinal  substance  endeavouring  to  effect  some,  but  nobody  knows 
what,  alteration  in  its  nature,  as  takes  place  when  a pretended  corrective 
is  used.  If  you  think  a tenth  of  a grain  of  arsenic  too  strong  a dose, 
what  is  to  prevent  you  diluting  the  solution  and  giving  less,  a great  deal 
less  of  it  ? 

“ A tenth  of  a grain,”  I hear  some  one  say,  M is  the  smallest 


ARSENICUM. 


1 16 

quantity  the  etiquette  of  the  profession  allows  us  to  prescribe.  Who 
could  write  a prescription  to  be  made  up  at  the  apothecary’s  shop  for  a 
smaller  quantity  without  rendering  himself  ridiculous  ?” 

Oh,  indeed  ! A tenth  of  a grain  sometimes  acts  so  violently  as  to 
endanger  life,  and  the  etiquette  of  your  clique  does  not  permit  you  to 
give  less — very  much  less.  Is  it  not  an  insult  to  common  sense  to 
talk  in  this  way  ? Is  the  etiquette  of  the  profession  a code  of  rules 
to  bind  a set  of  senseless  slaves,  or  are  you  men  of  free  will  and 
intelligence  ? If  the  latter,  what  is  it  that  hinders  you  to  give  a 
smaller  quantity  when  a large  quantity  might  be  hurtful  ? Obstinacy  ? 
the  dogmatism  of  a school  ? or  what  other  intellectual  fetters  ? 

“Arsenic,”  they  protest,  “would  still  be  hurtful,  though  given 
in  much  smaller  quantity,  even  if  we  were  to  descend  to  the 
ridiculous  dose  of  a hundredth  or  a thousandth  of  a grain,  a minute- 
ness of  dose  unheard  of  in  the  posological  maxims  of  our  materia 
medica.  Even  a thousandth  of  a grain  of  arsenic  must  still  be  hurtful 
and  destructive,  for  it  always  remains  an  incontrollable  poison.  So  we 
affirm,  maintain,  conjecture,  and  assert.” 

What  if  with  all  this  complacent  asserting  and  conjecturing  you 
have  for  once  blundered  upon  the  truth.  It  is  evident  that  the 
virulence  of  the  arsenic  cannot  increase,  but  must  decrease  as  the  dose 
is  reduced,  so  that  we  must  at  length  arrive  at  such  a dilution  of  the 
solution  and  diminution  of  the  dose  as  no  longer  possesses  the 
dangerous  character  of  your  regulation  dose  of  a tenth  of  a grain. 

“ Such  a dose  would,  indeed,  be  a novelty  ! What  kind  of  dose 
would  it  be  ?” 

Novelty  is,  indeed,  a capital  crime  in  the  eyes  of  the  orthodox  school, 
which,  settled  down  upon  her  old  lees,  subjects  the  reason  to  the 
tyranny  of  antiquated  routine. 

But  why  should  a pitiful  rule — why,  indeed,  should  anything — 
hinder  the  physician,  who  ought  by  rights  to  be  a learned,  thinking, 
independent  man,  a controller  of  nature  in  his  own  domain,  from 
rendering  a dangerous  dose  mild  by  diminishing  its  size  ? 

What  should  hinder  him,  if  experience  should  show  him  that  the 
thousandth  part  of  a grain  is  too  strong  a dose,  from  giving  the 
hundred-thousandth  part  or  the  millionth  of  a grain  ? And  should  he 
find  this  last  act  too  violently  in  many  cases,  as  in  medicine  all  depends  on 
observation  and  experience  (medicine  being  nothing  but  a science  of 
experience),  what  should  hinder  him  from  reducing  the  millionth  to  a 
billionth  ? And  if  this  prove  too  strong  a dose  in  many  cases  who 
could  prevent  him  diminishing  it  to  the  quadrillionth  of  a grain,  or 
smaller  still  ? 

Methinks  I hear  vulgar  stolidity  croak  out  from  the  quagmire  of  its 
thousand-year-old  prejudices  : “ Ha  ! ha  ! ha  ! A quadrillionth  ! 
Why,  that’s  nothing  at  all  !” 

H ow  so  ? Can  the  subdivision  of  a substance,  be  it  carried  ever  so 
far,  bring  forth  anything  else  than  portions  of  the  whole  ? Must  not 
these  portions,  reduced  in  size  to  the  very  verge  of  infinity,  still 
continue  to  be  something , something  substantial,  a part  of  the  whole, 
be  it  ever  so  minute  ? What  man  in  his  senses  could  deny  this  ? 


ARSENICUM. 


ii  7 

And  if  this  (quadrillionth,  quintillionth,  octillionth,  decillionth) 
continue  still  to  be  really  an  integral  portion  of  the  divided  substance, 
as  no  man  in  his  senses  can  deny,  why  should  even  such  a minute 
portion,  seeing  that  it  is  really  something , be  incapable  of  acting, 
considering  that  the  whole  was  so  tremendously  powerful  ? But  what 
and  how  much  this  small  quantity  can  do  can  be  determined  by  no 
speculative  reasoning  or  unreasoning,  but  by  experience  alone, from  which 
there  is  no  appeal  in  the  domain  of  facts.  It  belongs  to  experience 
alone  to  determine  if  this  small  portion  has  become  too  weak  to 
remove  the  disease  for  which  this  medicine  is  otherwise  suitable,  and  to 
restore  the  patient  to  health.  This  is  a matter  to  be  settled  not  by  the 
dogmatic  "assertion  of  the  student  at  his  desk,  but  by  experience  alone, 
which  is  the  only  competent  arbiter  in  such  cases. 

Experience  has  already  decided  the  question,  and  is  seen  to  do  so 
daily  by  every  unprejudiced  person. 

But  when  I have  finished  with  the  wiseacre,  who,  never  consulting 
experience,  ridicules  the  small  dose  of  homoeopathy  as  a nonentity,  as 
utterly  powerless,  I hear  on  the  other  side  the  hypocritical  stickler  for 
caution  still  inveigh  against  the  danger  of  the  small  doses  used  in  homoeo- 
pathic practice,  without  a shadow  of  proof  for  his  reckless  assertion. 

A few  words  here  for  such  persons. 

If  arsenic  in  the  dose  of  a tenth  of  a grain  be,  in  many  cases,  a 
dangerous  medicine,  must  it  not  be  milder  in  the  dose  of  a thousandth 
of  a grain  ? And,  if  so,  must  it  not  become  still  milder  with  every 
further  diminution  of  the  size  of  the  dose  ? 

Now,  if  arsenic  (like  every  other  very  powerful  medicinal  substance) 
can,  by  merely  diminishing  the  size  of  the  doses,  be  but  rendered  so 
mild  as  to  be  no  longer  dangerous  to  life,  then  all  we  have  to  do  is 
merely  to  find  by  experiment  how  far  the  size  of  the  dose  must  be 
diminished,  so  that  it  shall  be  small  enough  to  do  no  harm,  and  yet 
large  enough  to  effect  its  full  efficacy  as  a remedy  of  the  diseases  for 
which  it  is  suitable. 

Experience,  and  that  alone,  not  the  pedantry  of  the  study,  not  the 
narrow-minded,  ignorant,  unpractical  dogmatism  of  the  schools,  can 
decide  what  dose  of  such  an  extremely  powerful  substance  as  arsenic  is, 
is  so  small  as  to  be  capable  of  being  ingested  without  danger,  and  yet 
of  remaining  sufficiently  powerful  to  be  able  to  effect  in  diseases  all  that 
this  medicine  (so  invaluable  when  sufficiently  moderated  in  its  action, 
and  selected  for  suitable  cases  of  disease)  was  from  its  nature  ordained 
to  do  by  the  beneficent  Creator.  It  must,  by  dilution  of  its  solution 
and  diminution  of  the  dose,  be  rendered  so  mild  that  while  the  strongest 
man  can  be  freed  by  such  a dose  from  a disease  for  which  it  is  the 
appropriate  remedy,  this  same  dose  shall  be  incapable  of  effecting  any 
perceptible  alteration  in  the  health  of  a healthy  infant.*  This  is  the 

# A medicine  homoeopathically  chosen,  that  is  to  say,  a medicine  capable  of  pro- 
ducing a morbid  condition  very  similar  to  that  of  the  disease  to  be  cured,  affects  only 
the  diseased  part  of  the  organism,  therefore  just  the  most  irritated,  extremely  sensitive 
part  of  it.  Therefore  its  dose  must  be  so  small  as  only  to  affect  the  diseased  part  just 
a little  more  than  the  disease  itself  did.  For  this  the  smallest  dose  suffices,  one  so 
small  as  to  be  incapable  of  altering  the  health  of  a healthy  person,  who  has  naturally 


1 1 8 


ARSENICUM. 


grand  problem  that  can  only  be  solved  by  oft-repeated  experiments 
and  trials,  but  not  settled  by  the  sophistical  dogmatism  of  the  schools 
with  its  guesses,  its  assertions,  and  its  conjectures. 

No  rational  physician  can  acknowledge  any  such  limitations  to  his 
mode  of  treatment  as  the  rusty  routine  of  the  schools — which  is 
never  guided  by  pure  experiment  combined  with  reflection — would 
dictate  to  him.  His  sphere  of  action  is  the  restoration  to  health  of  the 
sick,  and  the  countless  potent  forces  of  the  world  are  freely  given  to 
him  by  the  Sustainer  of  life  as  implements  of  healing ; nought  is  with- 
held. To  him  whose  calling  it  is  to  vanquish  the  disease  that  brings  its 
victim  to  the  verge  of  corporeal  annihilation,  and  effect  a kind  of  re- 
creation of  life  (a  nobler  work  than  most  other,  even  the  most  vaunted 
performances  of  mankind),  to  him  the  whole  broad  expanse  of  nature, 
with  all  her  curative  powers  and  agents,  must  be  available,  in  order  to 
enable  him  to  perform  this  creative  act,  if  we  may  so  call  it.  But 
he  must  be  at  liberty  to  employ  these  agents  in  the  exact  quantity,  be 
it  ever  so  small  or  ever  so  large,  that  experience  and  trials  show  him  to 
be  most  adapted  to  the  end  he  has  in  view ; in  any  form  whatever  that 
reflection  and  experience  has  proved  to  be  most  serviceable.  All  this 
he  must  be  able  to  do  without  any  limitation  whatsoever,  as  is  the  right 
of  a free  man,  of  a deliverer  of  his  fellow  creatures,  and  a life- restorer, 
equipped  with  all  the  knowledge  pertaining  to  his  art,  and  endowed  with 
a god-like  spirit  and  the  tenderest  conscience. 

From  this  God-serving  and  noblest  of  all  earthly  occupations  let  all 
hold  aloof  who  are  deficient  in  mind,  in  the  judicial  spirit,  in  any  of  the 
branches  of  knowledge  required  for  its  exercise,  or  in  tender  regard  for 
the  weal  of  mankind,  and  a sense  of  his  duty  to  humanity,  in  one  word, 
who  are  deficient  in  true  virtue  ! Away  with  that  unhallowed  crew 
who  merely  assume  the  outward  semblance  of  health-restorers,  but 
whose  heads  are  crammed  full  of  vain  deceit,  whose  hearts  are  stuffed 
with  wicked  frivolity,  whose  tongues  make  a mock  of  truth,  and  whose 
hands  prepare  disaster  ! 

* * 

* 

The  following  observations  are  the  result  of  doses  of  various  strengths 
on  persons  of  various  sensitiveness. 

For  curative  purposes,  according  to  the  homoeopathic  method,  doses 
of  very  high  dilution  have  been  found,  by  innumerable  experiments,  to 
be  amply  sufficient.  The  dose  of  the  smallest  part  of  a drop  contain- 
ing the  decillionth  of  a grain  of  white  arsenic  usually  suffices  for  the 
cure.  In  order  to  prepare  this  dose,  one  grain  of  white  arsenic  reduced 
to  powder  is  rubbed  up  with  thirty-three  grains  of  powdered  milk-sugar 
in  a porcelain  mortar  (unglazed)  with  an  unglazed  pestle  for  six 
minutes,  the  triturated  contents  of  the  mortar  scraped  for  four  minutes 
with  a porcelain  spatula,  then  rubbed  a second  time,  without  any  addi- 
tion to  it,  for  six  minutes,  and  again  scraped  for  four  minutes.  To 
this  thirty-three  grains  of  milk-sugar  are  now  added,  triturated  for  six 
minutes,  and  after  another  four  minutes  of  scraping,  six  minutes  of 

no  points  of  contact  sufficiently  sensitive  for  this  medicine,  or  of  making  him  ill,  which 
only  large  doses  of  medicine  can  do.  See  Organon  of  Medicine , § 277 — 279,  and 
Spirit  of  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  Doctrine , at  the  beginning  of  this  volume. 


ARSENICUM. 


ri9 

triturating,  and  again  four  minutes  of  scraping,  the  last  thirty-three 
grains  of  milk-sugar  are  added,  triturated  for  six  minutes,  scraped  for 
four  minutes,  and  again  triturated  for  six  minutes,  whereby,  after  a last 
scraping,  a powder  is  produced  which,  in  every  grain,  contains  --^th  of 
a grain  of  uniformly  potentised  arsenic.  A grain  of  this  powder  is,  in  a 
similar  way,  with  three  times  thirty-three  grains  of  fresh  milk-sugar,  in 
one  hour  (thirty-six  minutes  of  triturating,  twenty-four  of  scraping*), 
brought  into  the  state  of  a potentised  pulverulent  attenuation,  one 
hundred  times  more  diluted.  Of  this  one  grain  (containing  T?i{wth 
of  a grain  of  arsenic)  is  rubbed  up  for  a third  hour  in  a similar  manner 
with  ninety-nine  grains  of  milk-sugar ; this  represents  a pulverulent 
arsenic  dilution  of  the  million-fold  degree  of  potency.  One  grain  of  this 
is  dissolved  in  ioo  drops  of  diluted  alcohol  (in  the  proportion  of  equal 
parts  of  water  and  alcohol)  and  shaken  with  two  succussions  of  the  arm 
(the  phial  being  held  in  the  hand).  This  gives  a solution  which, 
diluted  by  means  of  twenty-six  more  phials  (always  one  drop  from  the 
previous  phial  added  to  ninety-nine  drops  of  alcohol  of  the  next  phial, 
and  then  succussed  twice,  before  taking  one  drop  of  this  and  dropping 
it  into  the  next  phial),  furnishes  the  required  potency,  the  decillionth 
(x)  development  of  power  of  arsenic. 

In  order  to  prepare  this  highly  potentised  medicine  for  administration 
about  ten  grains  of  the  smallest  globules,  made  of  starch  and  cane- 
sugar,  such  as  confectioners  use  for  sprinkling  (300  to  the  grain), 
are  to  be  placed  in  a small  round  porcelain  capsule,  and  six  to  eight 
drops  of  this  spirituous  liquid  dropped  on  them,  and  stirred  with  a 
wood  chip  in  order  that  the  globules  may  be  equally  moistened, 
then  all  are  to  be  turned  out  on  a piece  of  paper  and  spread  out,  and 
when  quite  dry  kept  in  a corked  phial  with  the  name  of  the  medicine 
on  it. 

It  is  much  better  to  make  a quantity  of  globules  so  saturated  with 
the  tincture  for  dispensing  purposes  than  to  moisten  one  globule  every 
time  it  is  required,  for  by  this  process  the  phial  must  be  frequently 
inclined  on  one  side,  which  causes  it  to  become  more  highly  potentised, 
almost  as  much  as  repeated  shaking  would  do. 

Such  a globule  is  a sufficient  dose  for  administration  in  every  case  of 
disease  for  which  arsenic  is  appropriate.  This  dose  may,  if  necessary, 
be  repeated  at  suitable  intervals,  in  spite  of  the  circumstance  that  its 
action  lasts  for  several  days. 

In  a similar  manner  are  moistened  and  kept  in  store  the  globules  the 
size  of  a mustard  seed  (twenty  of  which  weigh  a grain),  each  one  of 
which,  kept  in  a well-corked  little  phial,  is  sufficient  for  olfaction. 
This  is  a mode  of  administering  medicine  which  more  recent  very 
extensive  experience  teaches  is  greatly  to  be  preferred  in  most  cases  to 
any  administration  of  small  globules  by  the  mouth  for  the  homoeo- 
pathic cure  of  all  chronic  as  well  as  acute  diseases.  But  this  is  not 
the  place  to  give  the  reason  why  this  is  so. 

* After  this  operation  the  mortar,  together  with  the  pestle  and  the  porcelain  spatula, 
after  being  wiped  with  a dry  cloth,  should  be  rinsed  three  times  with  boiling  water, 
between  each  rinsing  rubbed  dry  with  blotting  paper,  then  gradually  heated  over  a 
charcoal  fire  to  a red  heat,  in  order  that  these  articles  may  be  as  good  as  new  for 
future  trituration  of  medicines. 


120 


ARSENICUM. 


A sensible  homoeopathic  physician  will  not  give  this  remedy,  even  in 
such  a minute  dose,  unless  he  is  convinced  that  its  peculiar  symptoms 
have  the  greatest  possible  resemblance  to  those  of  the  disease  to  be 
cured.  When  this  is  the  case  it  is  certain  to  be  efficacious. 

But  if,  owing  to  human  fallibility,  the  selection  has  not  been  quite 
appropriate,  one,  two,  or  several  olfactions  of  ipecacuanha,  hepar  sul- 
phuris,  or  nux  vomica,  according  to  the  circumstances,  will  remove  the 
bad  effects. 

Such  an  employment  of  arsenic  has  shown  its  curative  power  in 
countless  diseased  states  ; among  the  rest,  in  several  kinds  of  quotidian 
fevers  and  agues  of  a peculiar  kind ; in  varicose  veins ; in  stitches  in  the 
sternum  ; vomiting  after  almost  every  article  of  food  ; excessive  loss  of 
blood  at  the  menstrual  period,  and  other  disorders  in  connexion  with 
that  function  ; in  constipation  ; in  acrid  leucorrhoea  and  excoriation 
caused  thereby ; in  indurations  of  the  liver  ; oppression  of  the  chest 
when  going  up  hill ; fetid  smell  from  the  mouth  ; bleeding  of  the  gums  ; 
haemoptysis ; aching  in  the  sternum ; gastralgia ; drawing  shooting 
here  and  there  in  the  face ; drowsiness  in  the  evening ; shivering  in  the 
evening  and  stretching  of  the  limbs,  with  timorous  restlessness  ; diffi- 
culty of  falling  asleep  and  waking  up  at  night ; weariness  in  the  feet  ; 
bruised  pain  in  the  knee-joint ; itching  tetters  on  the  knee  ; pain  in 
the  ball  of  the  big  toe,  as  if  excoriated,  when  walking;  old  ulcers  on 
the  legs,  with  (burning  and)  shooting  pain  ; tearing  shooting  in  the  hip, 
groin,  and  thigh  ; nocturnal  drawing  tearing  from  the  elbow  to  the 
shoulder ; painful  swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands,  &c. 

(The  subject  of  poisoning  with  large  doses  of  arsenic  would  be  out  of 
place  here.  It  is  to  be  relieved  as  much  as  possible  by  giving  carbonate 
of  potash  shaken  up  in  oil,  by  a solution  of  hepar  sulphuris,  and  by 
copious  draughts  of  rich  milk ; but  the  complete  removal  of  the  re- 
maining nervous  symptoms  must  be  effected  by  other  remedies  appro- 
priate to  them.) 

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  : — Baehr,  Gross,  Fr.  Hahnemann, 
Hornburg,  Langhammer,  Meyer,  Stapf. 

The  following  authorities  are  quoted  for  the  effects  of  the  drug  : 

Albf.rti,  Jurisprud.  Med.,  tom.  i,  ii,  iii,  iv. 

Amatus  Lusitanus,  Cent.  ii. 

Apono,  Pet.  de,  De  Venenis ; in  Schenck , lib.  vii. 

Baylies,  in  Samtnl.  br.  A'bh.f.  pr.  Aerzte , vii. 

Bernhardi,  Annalen  der  Heilkunst , 1811. 

Bonetus,  Sepulcr.  Anat .,  sect.  x. 

Borellus,  Hist,  et  Obser<v.,  cent.  iii. 

Borges,  Kopp's  Jahrb.  d.  Staatsarzn.,  ii. 

Bbchholz,  Beitr.  z.  ger.  Arzn.,  iv  ; Hufel.  Journ .,  v. 

Buttner,  Unterricht  iiber  die  ‘Todtlichkeit  der  Wunde. 

Cardanus,  De  Venenis , i,  iii,  1563. 

Cruger,  Dan.,  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii. 

D.  H.,  in  Kopp's  Jahrb.  d.  Staatsarzn.,  ii. 

Degner,  J.  K.,  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  vi. 

Degrange,  Phys.  Med.  Journ.,  1800,  April. 

Ebers,  Hufel.  Journ.  f.  pr.  A^z.,  1813,  Sept.,  Oct. 

Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  cent,  x,  app. 

Feldmann,  in  Commerc.  Lit.  Nor.,  1743. 

Fernelius,  Pherapeut.,  lib.  vi. 

Forestus,  Pf,  lib.  xvii  and  xviji, 


ARSENICUM. 


1 2 1 


Fowler,  Th.,  Med.  Rep.  of  Effects  of  Arsenic  in  Cure  of  Agues.  London,  1787. 
Friedrich,  in  Hufel.  Journ.f  pr.  Arz .,  v. 

Gabezius. 

Gerbitz,  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  5,  6. 

Goritz,  in  Brest.  Samml .,  1728. 

Greiselius,  J.  G.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  i,  ann.  2. 

Grimm,  G,  C.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii. 

Guilbert,  Med.-Chir.  Wahrnehm.,  vol.  iv,  Altenb. 

Guldenklee,  Timaeus  a,  Cas.  Medic.,  Lips.,  1662  ; Opp.,  Lips.,  1715. 
Hammer,  J.  D.,  in  Common.  Lit.  Norimb.,  1738. 

Hargens,  in  Hufel.  Journ.f.pr.  Arz.,  ix. 

Hartlauh  und  Frinks ' R.  A.  M.  L.,  iii. 

Hartmann,  Diss.  Aethiop.  Antim.  et  Arsenicalis,  Halle,  1759. 

Heimreich,  Arsen,  als  Frebermitt.  ; in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  ii. 

Heinze,  in  Ebers,  1.  c. 

Henkel,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  ii. 

Henning,  in  Hufel.  Journ.f.  pr.  Arz.,  x. 

Heun,  in  Allgem.  Med.  Annal.,  1805,  Feby. 

Huber,  in  N.  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  iii. 

Isf.nflamm-Steimmig,  Diss.  de  Remed.  Suspect,  et  nsenen .,  Erlangen,  1767 
Jacobi,  Joh.,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  vi. 

Jenner,  J.  C.,  in  Simon's  Samml.  d.  neuest.  Beohacht.f.  d.  Jahr  1788,  Erf.,  179 
Justamond,  On  cancerous  disorders,  London,  1750. 

Kaiser,  C.  L.,  in  Henke's  Zeitsch.f.  d.  Staatsarz,  vii,  pt.  3. 

Kellner,  in  Bresl.  Samml.,  1727. 

Knape,  Annalen  d.  Staatsarzn.,  i. 

Kopt,  Jahrb.  d.  Staatsarzn .,  ii. 

Laborde,  Jour,  de  Medecine,  lxx. 

Low,  in  Sydenham's  Opera,  II. 

Majault,  in  Samml.  br.  Abhandl.  f pr . Aerzte,  viii. 

Marcus,  A.  F.,  Ephem.  d.  Heilk.,  heft.  iii. 

Med.  Nat.  Zeit.,  1798,  Sept. 

Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  9,  10. 

Montanus,  J.  B.,  in  Schenck,  lib.  7. 

Morgagni,  De  Sed.  et  Caus.  Morb .,  lix. 

Mueller,  J.  Mat.,  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  cent.  v. 

Myrrhen,  A.,  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  9,  10. 

Neue  Med.-Chir.  Wahrnehm.,  vol.  i,  Altenb.,  1778. 

Pearson,  in  Samml.  hr.  Ahh.,fpr.  Aerzte,  xiii. 

Pfann,  Samml.  merk^w.  Falle,  Niirnb.,  1750. 

Preussius,  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  cent.  iii. 

Pyl,  Samml.,  i,  v,  vi,  viii. 

Quelmalz,  Commerc.  lit.  Norimb.,  1737,  heb.  28. 

Rau,  Th.,  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  ix. 

Richard,  A.,  in  Schenck,  lib.  vii. 

Salzburg  Med.-Chir.  Zeitung. 

Seiler,  Progr.  de  Venef.per  Arsen.,  Viteb.,  1806. 

Sennert,  Prax.  Med.,  lib.  6. 

Siebold,  in  Hufel,  Journ.f.  pr.  Arz.,  iv. 

Stahl,  G.  E.,  Opusc.  Chym.  Phys.  Med. 

Stoerck,  Med.  Jahrg.,  i. 

Tachenius,  O.,  Hipp.  Chym.,  c.  24. 

Thilenius,  in  Richter's  Chir.  Bibl.,  v. 

Thomson,  Edinburgh  Essays,  i v. 

Van  Eggern,  Diss.  de  Vacill.  Dentium , Duisb.,  1787. 

Verzasch,  Bernard,  Obs.  Med.,  obs.  66. 

Vi  cat,  Observ. 

Wedel,  G.  W.,  Diss.de  Arsen.,  Jen.,  1719. 

Wolff,  J.  Ph.,  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  v. 

The  1st  Edit,  gave  662  symptoms,  the  2nd  948,  this  3rd  Edit.  1068.  The  Chr.  Kr. 
contains  163  additional  symptoms.] 


122 


ARSENICUM. 


ARSENICUM. 

Vertigo,  so  that  she  must  hold  on  by  something,  when  she  shuts 
her  eyes,  every  evening  * 

Vertigo  when  sitting. 

Vertigo  (aft.  12  h.).  [Thomson,1 2  Edinburgh  Essays , iv.f — 
Sennert,3  Prax.  Med.,  lib.  6,  p.  6,  C.  2.  J] 

Vertigo  causing  obscuration  of  vision. § [A.  Myrrhen,  Misc.  N. 
C .,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  91,  10,  obs.  220.3] 

5.  Giddy  in  the  head.  [Alberti,  Jurisprud . Medic.,  tom.  ii,  pp. 
527— 53°-4 5] 

He  is  attacked  with  violent  vertigo  and  sickness  when  lying ; he 
must  rise  up,  in  order  to  diminish  it.  [<Sy.] 

Vertigo;  when  he  rises  up,  his  thoughts  go  away. 

Vertigo  only  when  walking,  as  if  he  would  fall  to  the  right  side 
(aft.  9i  h.).  [Lr.] 

Vertigo  and  unconscious  stupefaction.  [Ebers,  in  Hufel.  Journ ., 
1813,  Octob.,  p.  8.3] 

10.  Loss  of  sensation  and  consciousness,  so  that  he  knew  not  what 
was  going  on.  [Pyl,6  Samml.,  viii,  pp.  98,  105,  108. ||] 

She  lay  on  the  bed  completely  devoid  of  sense,  muttered  incom- 
prehensible sounds,  the  eyes  staring,  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead, 
trembling  all  over  the  body,  pulse  small,  hard,  and  very  quick. 
[Ebers,  1.  c.,  p.  9.^] 

Loss  of  reason  and  of  the  external  and  internal  senses  ; he  did  not 
see,  for  many  days  did  not  speak,  did  not  hear,  and  understood 
nothing,  and  when  one  roared  very  loudly  into  his  ears  he  looked  at 
those  around,  like  a drunken  person  wakened  out  of  profound  sleep. 
[Myrrhen,  1.  c.] 

Delirium  recurring  from  time  to  time.  [Guilbert,7  Med.-Chir. 
JVahrnehm.,  vol.  iv,  Altenb.**] 

Diminution  of  memory. 

# Therefore  recurring  after  the  manner  of  an  intermittent  fever.  Of  such  ague- 
like recurring  symptoms,  arsenic  has  several,  <v.  SS.  265,  375,  868,  918. 
f From  the  dust  of  sulphuret  of  arsenic. 

J Vide  Dr.  C.  L.  Kaiser,  in  Hartlaub  and  Trinks ' R.  A.  M.  L.,  vol.  i,  p.  249«8 
Sympt.  8,  “Vertigo  ;”  Sympt.  9,  “ Vertigo  with  Headache.” 

§ From  drawing  up  a solution  of  arsenic  into  the  nose. 

||  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  Sympt.  5,  “The  distinctself-consciousness  vanishes,  or  is  observed 
in  a slight  degree.” 

Ibid.,  S.  7,  “ The  organs  of  sense  seem  to  be  in  abnormal  activity.” 

Ibid.,  S.  6,  “ Delirium.” 

1 Poisoning  of  a woman, 

2 From  inhaling  realgar.  (This  symptom  not  found.) 

3 From  drawing  a solution  of  A.  into  the  nostrils  for  coryza. 

4 Cases  of  poisoning  in  healthy  adults. — This  giddiness  occurred  during  vomiting. 

5 Effects  of  arsenite  of  potash  in  ague  patients. 

6 Poisoning  of  adult. 

7 Poisoning  of  adult. 

8 Poisoning  of  a whole  family  by  A.  (Quoted  in  H.  and  T.  from  Henke's  Ztsch ., 
vii,  pt.  3.  Amalgamated  with  pathogenesis  in  Chronischen  Krankheiten.) 


ARSENICUM. 


123 


15.  Very  defective  memory  for  a long  time.  [Myrrhen,  1.  c.] 

His  memory  leaves  him  ; he  is  forgetful. 

Stupid  and  weak  in  the  head ; towards  noon  (aft.  30  h.). 

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  giddy  in  the  head,  which  is 
increased  on  coming  again  into  the  room  (aft.  \ h.). 

Head  is  confused.  [Pearson,  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.  f.  p.  Aerzte , 
xxii,  4.1 2] 

20.  Empty  in  the  head.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Giddy  in  the  head  ; he  cannot  think.  [Myr.~\ 

Chronic  weakness  of  mind.3 4  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  Sept.,  p.  48.] 

Weak  reason8.  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  p.  56.] 

From  pains  she  got  such  a weakness  in  her  head,  and  became  so 
qualmish  and  weak  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  that  she  was  very  ill. 

25.  Obtuseness  in  the  head,  without  pain. 

Great  confusion  of  the  head,  in  the  evening  (3rd  d.). 

After  sleeping  he  was  very  dazed  in  the  head. 

(From  11  a.m.  until  6 p.m.)  headache,  is  stupid,  as  if  from 
insufficient  sleep. 

Internal  uneasiness  and  a stupefaction  of  the  head,  such  as 
arises  from  too  hasty  performance  of  an  excessive  amount  of  business 
(aft.  2 d.). 

30.  Head  stupid  and  empty  (like  a lantern),  as  if  he  had  a very  severe 
cold  and  is  very  cross. 

While  walking  in  the  open  air  very  stupid  and  giddy  in  the  head, 
chiefly  in  the  forehead,  as  if  intoxicated,  so  that  he  staggered  first  to 
one  side  and  then  to  the  other,  and  feared  to  fall  every  instant  (aft. 
9i  h.).  [Lr.] 

Dulness  in  the  head.  [Buchholz,  Beitr.  z.  ger.  Arzn .,  iv,  p. 

l6+-] 

Uncommon  heaviness  in  the  head  with  roaring  in  the  ears,  which 
goes  off  in  the  open  air,  but  immediately  returns  when  coming  again 
into  the  room  (aft.  16  h.).* 

Head  heavy  and  empty,  so  that  he  cannot  easily  rise  up ; he 
must  lie  down. 

35.  Excessive  heaviness  in  the  head,  especially  when  standing  and 
sitting.  [Buchholz,  1.  c.] 

Headache.  [G.  C.  Grimm,  Misc.  N.  C.,  Dec.  iii,  obs.  174.] 5 
Pains  in  the  head  and  vertigo  for  several  days.f  [G.  W.  Wedel, 
Diss.  de  Arsen. , Jan.,  1719,  p.  io.]6 

Headache  (for  some  days),  which  is  immediately  relieved  by  the 
application  of  cold  water,  on  removing  which  it  is  worse  than  before. 
[Vicat,  Observ .,  p.  197.7] 

In  the  morning  immediately  on  rising  from  bed,  a one-sided 
headache,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  12  h,). 

* Comp.  969.  f From  the  vapour  of  arsenic. 


1 Effects  of  arsenite  of  potash  in  an  epileptic. 

2 See  note  to  S.  118.  5 From  the  black  oxide,  in  an  adult. 

3 From  suppression  of  ague  by  A.  6 From  arsenical  vapours. 

4 Case  of  poisoning.  7 From  powdering  the  hair  with  A, 


124 


ARSENICUM. 


40.  Semilateral  headache.  [Knape,  Annalen  d.  Staats-Arzn .,  i,  i.1] 

Every  afternoon  headache  for  some  hours,  a drawing  under  the 
coronal  suture. 

Uncommon  heaviness  of  the  head,  as  if  the  brain  was  pressed 
down  by  a weight,  with  roaring  in  the  ears,  in  the  morning  after 
rising  from  bed  (aft.  24  h.). 

(Tearing  in  the  head  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  right  eye.) 

Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  aching  pain,  in  the  morning  (aft.  72  h). 
45.  Aching  stupefying  headache,  especially  in  the  forehead,  in  every 
position  (aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.] 

Aching  stupefying  headache,  especially  on  the  right  side  of  the 
forehead,  just  above  the  right  eyebrow,  which  pains  as  if  sore  on 
wrinkling  his  forehead  (aft.  8^  h.).  [Lr.] 

Aching  drawing  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  2J  h.). 

iLr-] 

Aching  pain  on  the  right  temporal  region,  in  all  positions  (aft. 

3 h-)-  [Lr.]  . 

Aching  stitch-like  pain  on  the  left  temple,  which  does  not  go  off 
by  touching  (aft.  2\  h.) . [ Lr .] 

50.  Aching  stupefying  headache  (chiefly  on  the  forehead),  with  fine 
stitches  on  the  left  temporal  region  near  the  outer  canthus  of  the  eye, 
when  walking  and  standing,  going  off  when  sitting  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Lr.] 

Stitch-like  pain  on  the  left  temple,  which  went  ofF  by  touching 
(aft.  2\  h.).  [Lr.] 

As  if  beaten  on  the  front  of  the  head. 

At  night  (about  2 a.m.),  along  with  an  outbreak  of  perspiration, 
a hacking  (sharp  hard  beating)  in  the  head,  as  if  it  would  burst  her 
skull  asunder. 

On  moving,  violent  throbbing  headache  in  the  forehead.  [St/'.] 
55.  In  the  whole  head,  especially  in  the  forehead,  on  rising  up  in  bed, 
a violent  throbbing  headache,  with  sickness.  [Stf.] 

Throbbing  headache  in  the  forehead,  just  above  the 
root  of  the  nose  (aft.  \ h.). 

At  noon  and  midnight,  for  half  an  hour,  a hammering,  like  blows 
of  a hammer,  in  the  temples,  very  painful,  after  which,  for  a couple 
of  hours,  she  is  as  if  paralysed  in  the  body. 

A dull  throbbing  pain  in  one  half  of  the  head,  to  above  the  eye. 

Pain  above  the  nose  and  in  the  forehead,  as  if  sore  or  bruised, 
which  goes  off  for  instants  by  external  rubbing. 

60.  Periodical  headache.  [Th.  Rau,  Acta  N.  U.,  ix,  obs.  37-2] 

Horrible  headache.  [Joh.  Jacobi,  Acta  N.  C.,  vi,  obs.  62. 3 — 
Rau,  1.  c. — (aft.  6,  7 d.)  Knape,  1.  c.] 

Headache  in  the  occiput. 

Tearing  shooting  in  the  left  temple. 

Tearing  pains  in  the  occiput.  [Bhr.] 

65.  A small  boil  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  with  smarting  pain, 
for  eight  days  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Fr . H — n.] 

1 Effects  of  powdering  hair  with  A. 

2 From  application  of  A.  to  the  scalp. 

3 From  suppression  of  ague  by  A,  in  a young  man. 


ARSENICUM. 


On  moving  he  feels  as  if  the  brain  moved  and  struck  against  the 
skull  internally. 

Transient,  squeezing  headache  above  the  eyes. 

Headache  as  if  stretched. 

A headache  compounded  of  weight  and  tearing,  with  sleepy 
exhaustion  by  day  (aft.  4 d.). 

70.  Clicking  sensation  in  the  head  above  the  ears,  while  walking. 

The  scalp  pains  as  if  festering  when  touched. 

External  headache  as  if  bruised,  which  is  aggravated  by  touch 
(aft.  3 h.). 

Touching  the  hair  of  the  head  causes  pain. 

Formication  on  the  integuments  of  the  occiput,  as  if  the  roots  of 
the  hairs  moved  (aft.  1 h.). 

75.  Contractive  pain  in  the  head. 

(Throbbing  like  pulse-beats  in  the  eyes,  and  at  each  throb  a 
stitch,  after  midnight.) 

Sunken  eyes,  yellow  complexion. 

Drawing  pains  in  the  eyes,  and  quivering  in  the  eyelids. 

Above  the  left  eyelid  and  in  the  upper  half  of  the  left  eyeball  an 
aching  pain,  increased  by  looking  upwards  (aft.  if  h.). 

80.  (The  right  eye  was  painful  quite  internally,  she  could  scarcely 
turn  it,  there  came  such  severe  stitches  in  its  interior.) 

Itching  around  the  eyes  and  about  the  temples,  as  from  innumer- 
able red-hot  needles. 

Burning  in  the  eyes. 

In  the  eyes  a tiresome  tickling,  owing  to  which  he  could  not 
see  well. 

Twitching  in  the  left  eye. 

While  reading  by  candlelight,  dryness  of  the  eyelids,  as  if  they 
rubbed  the  eyes. 

The  eyes  are  dazzled  by  snow ; they  weep. 

White  spots  or  points  hover  before  the  eyes. 

The  eyelids  are  stuck  together  in  the  morning. 

Constant  trembling  in  the  upper  eyelids,  with  weeping  of  the 
eyes. 

90.  At  night,  under  the  right  eye,  for  an  hour,  an  aching  pain,  so 
that  from  anxiety  she  could  not  remain  in  bed. 

The  borders  of  the  eyelids  are  painful  on  moving,  as 
if  they  were  dry,  and  rubbed  upon  the  eyeballs  (while 
walking  in  the  open  air  and  in  the  room). 

Red  inflamed  eyes.  [ Neue  Med.  Chir . Wahmehm.^  vol.  i, 
Altenb.,  1 778.*] 

Aching  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  sand  had  got  into  it  (aft.  2 h.). 

[Lr.] 

Itching  and  watering  of  the  eyes  ; in  the  morning  some 
matter  in  them.  \Fr.  H — n.\ 

# Vide  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  11,  “Inflammation  of  the  conjunctiva.” 


1 Not  accessible. 


126 


ARSENICUM. 


95.  Smarting  eroding  itching  in  both  eyes,  compelling  him  to  rub 
them  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Zr.]* 

Inflammation  of  the  eyes.  [Heun,  in  Allgem.  Med.  Annal .,  1805, 
February.1 2] 

Violent  inflammation  of  the  eyes.3  [Guilbert,  1.  c.] 

Swollen  eyes  and  lips.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

Swelling  of  the  eyes.  [Quelmalz,  Commerc.  lit.  Norimb .,  173 7, 
heb.  28.3] 

100.  Swollen  eyelids.  [Neue  Med.-Chir.  JVahrnehm .,  1.  c.] 

Burning  in  the  eyes,  nose,  and  mouth.  [Neue  Med.-Chir. 
JVahrnehm. , 1.  c.] 

Projecting  eyes  filled  with  tears  ; the  acrid  tears  make  the 
cheeks  sore.  [Guilbert,  1.  c.]f 

Constant  severe  watering  of  the  right  eye  (from  2nd  to  10th  d.). 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

Painless  swelling  under  the  left  eye  which  partially  closes  the 
eye  and  is  very  soft  (aft.  5 d.).  \_Fr.  H — n .] 

105.  Contracted  pupils  (aft.  ij,  5 h.).  [Zr.] 

Sensitiveness  to  light,  photophobia.4  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  Octob.,  p.  14.] 
Sparks  before  the  eyes.4  [Ebers,  1.  c.] 

(She  sees  everything  indistinctly,  as  through  a white  veil.) 
(Yellowness  in  the  eyes,  like  jaundice.) 
no.  Wild  look.  [MAjAULT,in  Samml.  br . Abhandl.f.  p . Aerzte ,F\\ , I,  2.5] 
Staring6  look.  [Guilbert,  1.  c:J] 

Frightfully  staring7  eyes.  [Myrrhen,  1.  c.] 

Distortion  of  the  eyes.  [J.  Mat.  Mueller,8 *  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur., 
cent,  v,  obs.  5 1 .§J 

The  eyelids  are  drawn  to ; he  is  tired.  [Hbg.\\\ 

115.  Distortion  of  the  eyes  and  cervical  muscles.  [Eph.  Nat.  Cur. 
cent,  x,  app.,  p.  463.9] 

He  does  not  recognise  those  about  him.  [A.  Richard,  in 
Schenck , lib.  vii,  obs.  21 1.10] 

Obscuration  of  sight.  [Baylies,11  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.f.p.  Aerzte , 
vii,  2.f] 

* Schlegel  also  observed,  “Sometimes  tearing  in  the  eye,”  Vide  also  Hartlaub 
and  Trinks  R.  A.  M.  L.}  B.,  iii,  p.  126,  S.  3. 12 

f See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  12,  “Projecting  eyes.” 
j Ibid.,  S.  15,  “ Staring  look,  without  dilatation  of  the  pupils.” 

§ Ibid.,  S.  13,  “ Fixed  eye,  directed  upwards.” 

||  Ibid.,  S.  14,  “Dull  eye.” 

Ibid.,  S.  17,  “ Darkness  and  glittering  before  the  eyes.” 

1 From  application  of  A.  to  a cancerous  ulcer  of  the  cheek. 

2 Frequently  recurring. 

3 Poisoning  of  a girl  by  the  black  oxide.  See  note  to  S.  139. 

4 With  headache  and  vertigo. 

5 Poisoning  of  several  subjects  with  different  preparations  of  A.  (Original  in 
Seance  Publique  de  la  Faculte  de  Medecine  de  Paris , 1779,  P«  55*) 

6 Rather,  “wild.”  7 Rather,  “ distorted.”  8 General  statements. 

9 Poisoning  of  a man  with  twelve  grains  of  A. 

10  Poisoning  of  adult. 

11  General  statement  from  authors. 

12  From  smoking  tobacco  mixed  with  A.  The  symptoms  quoted  from  H.  and  T. 

are  taken  from  various  sources,  and  were  chiefly  caused  by  accidental  poisoning. 


ARSENICUM. 


127 


A weak-sighted  person  became  almost  quite  blind,  lost  hearing 
for  some  time,  and  fell  into  a long-continued  state  of  stupidity.1 
[Ebers,  1.  c.,  Oct.,  p.  15.] 

Obscuration  of  sight ; it  is  black  before  his  eyes  (in  the  1st  h.). 
[Richard,  1.  c.] 

120.  During  the  nausea,  yellowness  before  the  eyes.  [Alberti,  1.  c., 
ii,  p.  527.] 

Long- continued  weakness  of  sight.  [Myrrhen,  1.  c.] 

Pimples  on  the  forehead.  [ 'Neue  Med.-Chir.  JVahrnehm .,  1.  c.] 
Eruption  on  the  forehead.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

Red,  bloated  face  and  swollen  lips.  [*SV/V] 

125.  Bloated  face.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

Pale  face.  [Majault,  1.  c.*] 

Pale  face  with  sunken  eyes.  [J.  G»  Greiselius,  in  Misc.  Nat. 
Cur .,  Dec.  i,  ann.  2,  p.  149. 3] 

Deadly  paleness.  [Henning,  in  Huf.  Journ.  d.  p.  Arzn.,  x,  2.3] 
Deathly  hue  of  the  face.4  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

130.  Death-like  appearance.4  [Alberti,  1.  c.f] 

Bluish,  discoloured  face.5  [Mueller,  1.  c.,  and  Eph.  Nat.  C .,  1.  c.] 
Earthy  and  leaden  complexion,  with  green  and  blue  spots  and 
stripes.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

Twitchings  in  the  facial  muscles.  [Guilbert,  1.  c.] 

Distorted  features,  as  from  discontent.  J 
135.  Face  full  of  ulcers.  [Neue  Med.-Chir.  IVahrnehm .,  1.  c.] 

Swelling  in  the  face§  of  an  elastic  character,  particularly  in  the 
eyelids,  especially  in  the  morning.  [Th.  Fowler,  Medical  Reports  ot 
the  Effects  of  Arsenic  in  the  Cure  of  Agues.  Lond.  1 7 8 7.]  6 

Swelling  of  the  face  and  head.  [Siebold,7  in  Huf  journ. , iv.||] 
Swelling  of  the  face,  syncopes,  vertigo.  [Sennert,  1.  c.,  lib.  6, 
P-  237-l 

Swelling  of  the  whole  head.8  [Quelmalz,  1.  c.] 

140.  Swelling  of  the  head.  [Heimreich,  in  Act.  N.  (7.,  ii,  obs.  10.9] 
Swelling  of  the  face. 11  [Jenner,  in  Simon’s  Samml.  d neuest. 
Beohacht.f.  d.  Jahr  1788,  Erf.  1791,  p.  27.10] 

# See  also  Kaiser,  S.  20,  “ Paleness  of  face  and  features  strikingly  distorted.” 
f See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks , 1.  c.,  S.  4,  “ Pale,  yellow,  cachectic  appearance,” 
and  S.  5,  “ Sunken  features.” 

X See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  21,  “Altered  features.” 

§ In  three  among  48  persons. 

||  Comp.  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  19,  “Face  red  and  swollen,” — and  Hartl.  and  Frinks , 
1.  c.,  S.  6,  “ Swelling  of  the  whole  face  (aft.  1 h.).”  (From  the  external  application 
of  Cos  me' s powder  in  a case  of  labial  cancer.) 

H From  internal  use. 

1 Doubtful  how  much  is  ague  and  how  much  A. 

2 Observations  on  miners  in  A. 

3 From  application  of  A.  to  a diseased  breast. — With  violent  vomiting, 

4 During  vomiting. 

5 Literally — “face  livid  and  lurid.” 

6 Effects  of  arsenite  of  potash  in  ague  patients. 

7 Effect  of  dressing  pustular  scalp  with  mixture  of  A.  and  cinnabar. 

8 Should  read — “ Swelling  of  the  veins  of  the  whole  head,  after  violent  vomiting  ” 

9 Effects  of  A.  sprinkled  on  the  hair. 

10  Not  accessible. 


128 


ARSENICUM. 


Enormous  swelling  of  head  and  face.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 
Cutaneous  swelling  of  the  head,  face,  eyes,  neck  and  chest,  of 
natural  colour.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

Eruption  of  pustules  on  the  hairy  scalp  and  face,  with  burning 
pain.  [Heimreich,  1.  c.] 

145.  The  hairy  scalp  to  the  middle  of  the  forehead  covered  with  an 
ulcerous  scab.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

Ulcerous  scab  a finger’s  breadth  in  thickness  on  the  hairy  scalp, 
which  fell  off  after  some  weeks.  [Heimreich,  1.  c.] 

On  the  hairy  scalp  innumerable  very  red  pimples.  [Vic at, 

1-  c.] 

On  the  whole  hairy  scalp  eruption  of  pimples,  which  on  being 
rubbed  and  touched  pain  as  if  festering,  and  the  whole  hairy  scalp 
was  painful  as  if  blood  was  effused  in  it  (aft.  nj  h.).  [Zr.] 

Eroding  ulcers  on  the  hairy  scalp.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

150.  Gnawing  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

Gnawing  itching  on  the  whole  hairy  scalp,  inciting  him  to  scratch 
(aft.  8 h.).  [ Lr .] 

Burning  pain  on  the  hairy  scalp.  [Knape,  I.  c.] 

Burning  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

Itching,  with  pain  like  ulceration,  that  incites  to  scratching, 
on  the  whole  hairy  scalp,  which  pains  in  every  part,  as  if  from 
effused  blood,  but  mostly  on  the  occiput  (aft.  8g  h.).  [Zr.] 

155.  On  the  left  parietal  bone,  on  the  hairy  scalp,  a pimple  covered 
with  scurf,  which  incites  to  scratching,  and  when  rubbed  pains  as  if 
festering  (aft.  7 h.).  [Zr.] 

Two  large  pimples  betwixt  the  eyebrows,  which  incite  to 
scratching  and  discharge  bloody  water,  the  following  day  they  are 
full  of  pus  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Lr .] 

Pimples  on  the  left  temple,  inciting  to  scratching,  discharging 
bloody  water,  and  after  rubbing  sore  pain  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 

Falling  out  of  the  hair.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

Stitches  in  the  nasal  bones. 

160.  Pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose  in  the  bone. 

(Alternately  smell  of  pitch  and  sulphur  in  the  nose.) 

Aching  in  the  left  upper  jaw. 

Burning  in  the  external  ear,  in  the  evening  (aft.  5 h.). 

External  pain  in  the  ears,  like  cramp. 

165.  Stitches  in  the  ear  (in  the  morning). 

Tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  ear. 

Behind  the  ear,  down  the  neck  to  the  shoulder,  drawing  tearing 
while  sitting. 

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  lobe  of  the  left  ear. 

Tearing  shooting  outwards,  in  the  left  meatus  auditorius  ex- 
ternus,  more  in  the  evening  (1st.  d.). 

170.  Shooting  in  the  ear  (in  the  morning). 

The  left  meatus  externus  seems  to  be  stopped  from  without. 
Great  roaring  before  the  ears,  as  from  a water-weir. 

Hardness  of  hearing,  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped,  (aft.  60  h.). 

He  does  not  understand  what  is  said  to  him.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 


ARSENICUM. 


129 

175.  When  swallowing  the  ears  become  closed  internally,  like  deaf- 
ness. 

Roaring  in  the  ears  at  each  attack  of  pains.-* 

Ringing  noise  in  the  whole  head. 

Voluptuous  tickling  in  the  right  meatus  auditorius, 
that  compelled  him  to  rub  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Zr.] 

reeable  crawling  deep  in  both  ears,  for  ten  days  (aft.  15  h.). 
[Fr.  H—n .] 

180.  Ringing  in  the  right  ear  (when  sitting)  (aft.  i|  h.).  [Zr.] 
Rushing  noise  in  the  ears.  [Thomson,  1.  c. — Baylies,  1.  c.] 
Pinching  in  the  ears.  [Bhr. ] 

An  ulcer  eroding  all  round  on  the  lip,  with  tearing  pain  and 
smarting  as  from  salt,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  in  the  day- 
time when  moving,  worst  when  touched  and  in  the  open  air ; it 
prevents  sleep  and  wakes  him  up  in  the  night  (aft.  14  d.). 

Itching  as  from  innumerable  burning  needles  in  the  upper  lip  to 
under  the  nose ; the  following  day  the  upper  lip  swelled  above  the 
red. 

185.  (Painful  lumps  in  the  upper  lip.) 

Round  about  the  mouth  red  tettery  skin. 

Eruption  (breaking  out)  on  the  lips  at  the  edge  of  the  red, 
painless  (aft.  14  d.f). 

(Eruption  on  the  mouth  with  burning  pain.) 

A kind  of  pinching  quivering  on  one  side  of  the  upper  lip, 
especially  when  going  to  sleep. J 

190.  A brown  stripe  of  shrivelled  epidermis,  almost  like  a burnt  part, 
extends  through  the  middle  of  the  red  of  the  lower  lip. 

Eruption  of  ulcers  about  the  lips.  [Isenflamm-Steimmig, 
Diss.  de  Remed.  Suspect,  et  Venen .,  Erlang.,  1767,  p.  2 7.1] 
Black-spotted  lips.  [Guilbert,  1.  c.] 

Bluish  lips  and  tongue.  [Baylies,  1.  c.§] 

After  eating,  bleeding  of  the  lower  lip  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Zr.] 

195.  Externally  about  the  mouth  blackish.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Constant  twitching  toothache  up  to  the  temple,  which  is  relieved 
or  removed  by  sitting  up  in  bed  (aft.  8 d.) . 

Shooting  in  the  gums  (in  the  morning). 

Pain  of  several  teeth  (in  the  gums)  as  if  they  were 
loose  and  would  fall  out,  hut  the  pain  is  not  increased 
by  chewing  (aft.  i h.). 

Toothache  as  from  loose  teeth  • they  are  loose,  and  pain  as  if 
sore  per  se^  and  still  more  when  chewing  ; touching  the  gums  like- 
wise causes  similar  pain  3 the  cheek  swells  on  that  side. 

* The  occurrence  of  other  symptoms  during  the  pains  is  quite  peculiar  to  arsenic. 
See  S.  970. 

f Although  in  this  observation  the  eruption  on  the  mouth  appeared  very  late,  it  is 
yet  a primary  action,  and  rapidly  cures  homoeopathically  a similar  morbid  state,  if  the 
symptoms  of  the  disease  are  not  unsuitable  for  arsenic. 

+ Twitchings  on  going  to  sleep  are  often  observed  from  arsenic.  Comp.  708, 
889,  890,  891,  899. 

§ See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  23,  “ Bluish  lips.” 


1 General  statement. 


9 


130  ARSENICUM. 

200.  Toothache,  rather  pressive  than  drawing. 

Tearing  in  the  teeth  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  head,  at  which 
she  became  so  furious  that  she  beat  her  head  with  her  fists  (just 
before  the  occurrence  of  the  menses)  (the  15th  d.). 

A tooth  becomes  loose  and  protruding  (in  the  morning) ; its  gum 
is  painful  when  touched,  but  still  more  so  the  external  part  of  the 
cheek  behind  which  lies  the  loose  tooth  (when  touched)  ; the  tooth 
is  not  painful  on  biting  the  teeth  together. 

Nocturnal  (tearing)  pain  of  the  gum  at  the  canine  tooth,  which 
is  intolerable  as  long  as  he  lies  on  the  affected  side,  but  is  removed 
by  the  heat  of  the  stove  ; the  following  morning  the  nose  is  swollen 
and  painful  when  touched*  (aft.  3 d.). 

Convulsive  grinding  of  the  teeth.  [Van  Eggern,1  Diss.  de 
Vacillat.  Dentium , Duisb.,  1787.] f 
205.  All  the  teeth  fall  out.  [Van  Eggern,  1.  c.] 

Itching  on  the  neck  under  the  jaw. 

Swollen  glands  under  the  jaw,  with  pressive  and  contusive  pain. 
Great  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  great  thirst. 

Her  throat  feels  dry ; she  must  always  drink,  and  if  she  did  not 
drink  she  felt  as  if  she  must  die  of  thirst. 

210.  Wooden  dry  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Absence  of  thirst,  loss  of  thirst. % 

Uncommon  thirst,  so  that  he  must  drink  much  cold  water  every 
ten  minutes,  from  morning  till  evening,  but  not  in  the  night.  \_Fr. 
H-n .]§ 

Slimy  mouth,  sliminess  in  the  throat  (aft.  2 h.). 

The  tongue  eroded  at  the  side  of  the  tip  with  smarting  pain 
(aft.  14  d.). 

215.  Pricking  pain  as  from  a fish-bone  in  the  root  of  the  tongue,  when 
swallowing  and  turning  the  head. 

Boring  pain  in  the  right  border  of  the  tongue,  during  half 
sleep. 

He  feels  as  if  he  had  no  taste,  as  if  the  tongue  were  burnt  dead 
and  were  without  feeling. 

Pain  on  the  tongue  as  if  there  were  vesicles  there  with  burning 
pain. 

White  tongue.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

220.  He  must  spit  often.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Feeling  of  dryness  of  the  tongue.  [Buchholz,  in  Hufel.  Journ ., 
V,  P-  378-2] 

* It  is  a peculiarity  of  arsenic  pains,  that  they  are  relieved  by  external  warmth. 
Comp.  686,  687,  37. 

f See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  24,  “ Grinding  of  the  teeth.” 

X A rare  alternating  action  compared  with  the  much  more  frequent  one  where 
there  is  constant  longing  for  drinks,  and  yet  only  little  is  drunk  at  a time,  but  very 
often  (rarely  much  at  a time).  Vide  362,  927. 

§ See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  26,  “Violent  thirst” — and  S.  27,  “Violent  thirst 5 
drinking  does  not  afford  the  patient  refreshment  and  alleviation.” 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 Poisoning  of  several  adults  by  black  oxide.  (Vol.  v,  part  ii,  p.  104.) 


ARSENICUM. 


Great  dry  feeling  in  the  mouth,  with  frequent  severe  thirst,  yet 
he  drinks  but  little  at  a time.  [£//’.] 

Great  dryness  in  the  mouth.  [Thilenius,  in  Richter’s  Chir. 
Bibl.,  v,  p.  540.1] 

Dryness  of  the  tongue.  [Guilbert,  1.  c. — Majault,  1.  c.] 

225.  Quavering  voice.  [Guilbert,  1.  c.]* 

Speechlessness  and  insensibility.  \Misc.  N.  C.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  9,  10, 
p.  390.2] 

Bloody  saliva.  \Neue  med.  chir.  TVahrnehm .,  1.  c.] 

(A  feeling  in  the  throat  as  if  a hair  were  in  it.) 

Sensation  in  the  throat  as  from  a lump  of  mucus,  with  taste  of 
blood. 

230.  Behind  on  the  velum  pendulum  palati  a scraping  scratching 
sensation,  when  not  swallowing  (aft.  2 h.). 

Tearing  pain  in  the  oesophagus  and  all  up  the  throat,  also  when 
not  swallowing. 

A kind  of  paralysis  of  the  fauces  and  oesophagus; 
the  chewed  bread  could  not  be  swallowed  down,  it  only 
went  down  with  difficulty  with  an  uneasy  pressure,  as  if  the 
oesophagus  had  no  power  to  swallow  itj  he  heard  it  rattle 

down. 

Burning  in  the  throat.  [Richard,  1.  c. — Buchholz,  1.  c.] 
Long-continued  rough  feeling  on  the  palate  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.] 
235.  Internal  inflammation  of  the  throat.  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

Gangrenous  sore  throat. t [Feldmann,  in  Commerc.  lit.  Nor ., 
*743,  P- 5°-] 

Difficulty  of  swallowing.  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

Painful  deglutition.  [ Neue  med.-chir.  Wahrn .,  1.  c.] 

Burning  in  the  fauces.  [Richard,  1.  c. — Knape,  1.  c. — Kopp, 
Jahrbuch.  d.  Staatsarzn .,  ii,  p.  182.4] 

240.  In  the  fauces  and  stomach  a sensation  as  if  a thread  was  rolled 
into  a coil.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

The  oesophagus  is  as  if  constricted.  [_N . m.-ch.  TVahrn .,  1.  c.] 
Constrictive  sensation  in  the  throat.  [Preussius,  Eph . N.  C., 
cent,  iii,  Obs.  15.5] 

He  complains  that  he  feels  as  if  the  throat  would  be  completely 
closed  ; as  if  nothing  more  could  get  through  the  oesophagus. 
[Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Taste  in  the  mouth  sour ; the  food  too  tastes  sour. 

245.  Putrid  foetid  taste  in  the  mouth. 

In  the  morning,  taste  in  the  mouth  like  putrid  flesh. 

In  the  morning  the  expectorationj  is  green  and  bitter. 

* See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks.,  1.  c.,  S.  7,  “Very  unequal  voice,  sometimes  strong, 
sometimes  weak.” 

f From  the  external  application  of  the  arsenical,  so-called  magnetic  plaster.3 
£ But  only  what  is  hawked  up  from  the  fauces. 

1 Effects  of  arsenic  in  a patient  with  mammary  scirrhus. 

2 Same  case  as  Myrrhen’s  (see  S.  4). 

3 Applied  for  a quartan  ague. 

4 Poisoning  of  man  of  56. 

5 Poisoning  of  a boy. 


132 


ARSENICUM. 


He  ejects  grey  mucus  by  hawking. 

The  saliva  he  spits  out  tastes  bitter. 

250.  (The  first  morsel  she  swallowed  in  the  morning  scraped  and 
scratched  her  afterwards  in  the  throat,  like  rancid  fat.) 

Salt  expectoration  (sputum  salsum).  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Bitter  expectoration  (sputum  amarum).  [Richard,  1.  c.] 
Bitterness  in  the  mouth  with  yellow  diarrhoea.  [Morgagni, 
De  Sed.  et  Caus.  Morb .,  lix,  § 6,  8.1] 

She  loathes  all  food  ; can  relish  nothing. 

255.  Absence  of  hunger  and  desire  to  eat,  for  ten  days.  \_Fr.  H — ».] 
Anorexia.  [Stoerck,  Med.  Jahrg .,  i,  p.  107. 2 — Jacobi , 1.  c.]* 
Complete  anorexia.  [Buchholz  in  Huf.  Journ .,  1.  c.] 

Anorexia  with  violent  thirst.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.J 
Loathing  of  food.  [Goritz,  in  Brest.  Samml .,  17 28s. — Grimm, 
>•  c.] 

260.  Insuperable  loathing  of  all  food,  so  that  he  could  not  think  of 
eating  without  feeling  sick.4  [Ebers,  1.  c.  Sept.,  p.  56.] 

Loathing  of  all  food.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

He  is  unable  to  get  the  food  down.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

The  smell  of  cooked  meat  is  intolerable  to  him  (aft.  5 h.). 
[Richard,  1.  c.] 

He  has  no  appetite,  but  when  he  eats  it  tastes  well. 

265.  Along  with  proper  taste  of  food,  bitterness  in  the  throat  after 
eating,  on  alternate  days  (like  a tertian  fever)  (aft.  2 h.).+ 

After  eating,  bitter  taste  in  the  month  (aft.  3,  48  h.).j 

After  eating  bitter  eructation,  and  there  comes  into  the  mouth  a 
greenish  bitter  mucus. 

After  eating  and  drinking  repulsive  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. 
Bitter  in  the  mouth  without  having  eaten  anything. 

Food  has  a salt  taste. 

The  food  tastes  as  if  insufficiently  salted. 

Taste  of  beer  flat. 

Taste  of  unhopped  beer  bitter. 

(Dislike  to  butter.) 

Longing  for  acids.  [£//i] 

Appetite  for  vinegar  and  water. 

Great  longing  for  acids  and  sour  fruit. 

Great  longing  for  coffee. 

Great  appetite  for  milk,  which  she  formerly  loathed. 

80.  Qualmishness,  in  the  forenoon  about  il  a.m.,  and  in  the  after- 
noon about  3 p.m. 

Nausea.  [Pfann,5  Samml.  merkw.  Falle , Niirnb.,  1750,  pp.  129, 
130. — Neue  JVahrn .,  1.  c.]§ 


270. 


275 


* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  25,  “Extinct  appetite.” 

f Comp.  1.  I Alternating  action  with  269,  270. 

§ See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  28  “Nausea.” — 29,  “Inclination  to  vomit.” 

^ . 

1 Poisoning  of  several  adults.  3 NoPfound. 

2 FfFects  of  arsenite  of  potash  in  ague  patients.  4 See  note  to  S.  118. 

5 Poisoning  by  cobalt  (“fly-powder,”  a mixture  of  metallic  arsenic  with  arsenious 
acid). 


ARSENICUM. 


i33 


Anxiety  with  nausea.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  nausea,  and  at  the  same  time  a sweetish  taste  in  the 
mouth,  not  immediately  after  eating. 

Nausea  in  oesophagus  and  stomach. 

285.  Nausea,  rather  in  the  throat ; at  the  same  time  water  accumulated 
in  the  mouth. 

In  the  open  air  she  felt  sick. 

Long  continued  nausea,  like  faintness  ; she  trembled  all  over,  at 
the  same  time  she  became  hot  all  over,  afterwards  shivering  came  on 
(aft.  some  h.). 

On  account  of  nausea  and  sickness  he  must  lie  down  in  the 
forenoon  ; at  the  same  time  tearing  about  the  ankle  and  on  the  dorsum 
of  the  foot.* 

The  childf  vomits  after  eating  and  drinking,  and  then  will 
neither  eat  nor  drink  any  more,  but  sleeps  well. 

290.  Waterbrash  (in  the  afternoon  about  4 p.m.). 

Incomplete  excitation  to  flow  of  water  from  fauces  and  mouth, 
what  is  called  waterbrash,  shortly  before  and  after  dinner,  with 
nausea  (aft.  5 d.). 

Frequent  empty  eructation. 

Constant  eructations.  [Goritz,  1.  c.J  . ; 

Frequent  empty  eructation  (aft.  \ h.).  [Lr.] 

295.  Frequent  hiccup  and  eructation.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

After  eating  frequent  hiccup,  each  time  followed  by  eructation 
(aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.] 

Frequent  hiccup  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.'] 

Convulsive  hiccup.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Sickness.  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

300.  When  sitting,  nausea ; much  water  came  into  the  mouth,  as  in 
waterbrash  j when  walking  in  the  open  air  the  nausea  went  off,  and 
there  ensued  a copious  pappy  stool  (aft.  yj  h.).  [Lr.] 

Sour  eructation  after  dinner  (aft.  6 d.) 

A quarter  of  an  hour  after  breakfast  and  after  dinner  an  aching 
in  the  stomach  for  three  hours,  with  empty  eructation,  whereupon  a 
relaxed  condition  of  the  body  ensued,  which  produced  nausea. 

Much  eructation,  especially  after  drinking. 

Flatulence  rises  upwards  chiefly,  and  causes  eructation. 

305.  Eructation  after  food. 

Ineffectual  efforts  to  eructate. 

In  the  forenoon,  a constant,  severe,  empty  eructation,  with  con- 
fusion of  the  head  (aft.  36  h.). 

While  eating,  a compressive  sensation  in  the  chest. 

At  night  on  rising  up,  hiccup,  with  scraping,  disgusting  taste  in 
the  mouth. 

310.  In  the  hour  when  the  fever  should  come  on,  a long-continued 
hiccup. 

* That  symptoms  of  a not  very  important  character  (comp.  302,  605,  991,  823, 
861)  and  otherwise  trivial  affections  induce  a sudden  and  complete  sinking  of  the 
strength  is  a very  important  and  characteristic  peculiarity  of  arsenic. 

f An  infant,  whose  mother  had  taken  arsenic,  and  was  thereby  cured  of  her 
ailments. 


T34 


ARSENICUM. 


Vomiting.  [Majault,  1.  c.— Grimm,  and  many  others.] 

He  vomits  immediately  after  each  meal,  without  nausea.  [Fr. 
H — n.  ] 

Vomiting  of  all  food,  for  several  weeks.  [ Sahb . m.  ch.  Zeitung.1] 
Vomiting  (immediately).*  [Fernelius,  Therapeut.^  lib.  vi,  cap.  18, 
p.  45i.2] 

315.  Day  and  night  constant  vomiting  with  horrible  cries.  [Heim- 

RE1CH,  1.  C.] 

On  rising  up  in  bed  immediately  uncontrollable  qualmishness, 
nausea,  and  frequently  rapid  vomiting.  [*SV/i]f 

Vomiting  of  a thick,  glassy  mucus.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

He  vomits  mucus  and  green  bile.3  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

During  the  vomiting  complaints  of  severe  (internal)  heat  and 
great  thirst.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

320.  Internally  severe  burning,  thirst,  and  heat,  with  violent  vomit- 
ing.  [Alberti,  1.  c.,  iii,  p.  533.] 

Excessive  vomiting,  with  the  greatest  effort,  of  drinks,  yellowish- 
green  mucus  and  water,  with  very  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  which 
remained  long  after  the  vomiting  had  ceased.  [67/1] 

Frequent  vomiting  with  fear  of  death.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Vomiting  of  bloody  mucus.  \Neue  Wahrn .,  1.  c.]J 
Vomiting  of  blood.  [Kellner,  in  Bresl.  Samml. , 1727.4] 

325.  Passed  blood  upwards  and  downwards.  [Gerbitz,  in  Eph.  N.  U., 
Dec.  iii,  ann.  5,  6,  obs.  137. 5] 

Excessive  vomiting  and  purging.  [Preussius,  1.  c.] 

Violent  continued  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.]§ 
When  the  syncope  goes  off,  diarrhoea  and  vomiting.  [P.  Forestus, 
i,  xvii,  obs.  13.6] 

Spasm  in  the  stomach  ; syncope  ; very  violent  pain  in  the 
abdomen  ; diarrhoea. ||  [Low,  in  Sydenham , Opera  ii,  p.  324.7] 

330.  Empty  retching.  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

Pains  in  the  stomach.  [Quelmalz,  1.  c. — Richard  and  several 
others.] 

The  stomach  very  painful.  \Neue  Wahrn .,  1.  c.] 

* From  arsenic  sprinkled  on  an  ulcer  on  the  breast — and  after  six  days  death, 
f See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks , 1.  c.,  S.  8,  “ Nausea  and  several  times  violent 
vomiting  (3rd  d.)” 

| See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  30,  “ Nausea  and  violent  vomiting  of  a brownish  mass, 
often  mixed  with  blood,  with  great  straining  of  the  body.” — S.  31,  “Vomiting  of  a 
thin  or  thick,  brownish  dark  mass,  produced  by  violent  effort  and  increase  of  the  pains 
in  the  stomach,  without  subsequent  relief.” — S.  32,  “Violent  vomiting  of  a thin, 
bluish,  dirty  yellow  mass,  followed  by  great  weakness  and  prostration.” 

§ Ibid.,  S.  38,  “The  vomiting  declines,  whereupon  a copious  very  watery 
diarrhoea  ensues.” 

||  From  yellow  arsenic. 

1 From  application  of  arsenic  to  a fungus  on  the  head. 

2 From  sprinkling  arsenic  on  a cancerous  ulcer  of  the  breast. 

3 Literally,  “vomiting  of  green  matter  at  night,  of  whitish  stuff  next  morning.” 

4 Poisoning  of  a girl  of  20. 

5 From  orpiment. 

6 From  orpiment,  in  a woman. 

7 Not  found. 


ARSENICUM. 


*35 


Stomachache  causing  nausea.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Praecordial  aching  ; aching  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 
[Kellner,  1.  c. — Goritz,  1.  c. — Buchholz,  in  Hufel.  Journal,  c.] 
335.  Pain1  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  forcibly  distended  in  its  whole 
extent,  and  would  be  torn.  [D.  H.,  in  Kopp’s  Jalnrb.  d.  Staatsarzn ., 
ii,  p.  182.] 

He  felt  as  if  the  heart  were  pressed  down.  [St/'.'] 

Sensation  of  pressing  weight  in  the  stomach,  without  thirst  and 
without  fever.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Great  oppression  of  the  stomach  as  if  it  were  troubled  with 
flatulence,  that  seems,  indeed,  to  be  relieved  by  vomiting  and 
diarrhoea,  but  afterwards  becomes  all  the  worse.  [Morgagni,  1.  c., 
§ 3-] 

A very  violent  cardialgia  with  thirst.  [Buchholz,  in  the  last 
1.  c.] 

340.  Burning  pain  in  the  stomach.  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  Octob.,  5,  8.]* 

Incessant  burning  and  great  oppression  in  the  stomach  and  chest. 
[Borges,2  in  Kopp’s  Jahrb .,  1.  c.,  p.  222.] 

Aching  and  burning  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Goritz, 
1.  c.] 

Pressive  pain  like  a weight  and  burning  in  the  stomach.  [Mor- 
gagni, 1.  c.,  § 6.] 

Burning  in  the  stomach  like  fire.  [Richard,  1.  c."| 

345.  Burning  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Buchholz,  in  the  last  1.  c.] 
Eroding,  gnawing  pain  in  the  stomach.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 
Uncommon  pains  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [J.  Ph. 
Wolff,  Act . N.  C.,  v,  obs.  29. 3] 

The  region  under  the  ribs  (hypochondria)  and  the  stomach  are 
tense  and  distended  before  the  bowels  are  moved.  [Richard,  1.  c.]f 
Complaints  and  lamentations  about  indescribable4  anxiety  in  the 
region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  without  distension  or  pain  in  the 
stomach.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

350.  Great  anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Mor- 
gagni, 1.  c. — Bernard  Verzasch,  Obs.  Med .,  obs.  665 — Jacobi, 
1.  c.] 

After  a meal  an  aching  at  the  mouth  of  the  stomach  and  in  the 
oesophagus,  as  if  the  food  was  retained  up  above  ; then  empty  eructa- 
tion. 

When  speaking  an  aching  in  the  anterior  wall  of  the  stomach 
(aft.  J h.). 

A hard  pressure  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (immediately). { 


* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  39,  “Burning  feeling  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.” 
•f  Ibid.,  S.  4.0,  “Inconsiderable  distension  in  the  gastric  region,”  and  S 


“The  stomach  begins  to  rise,  and  is  warmer  than  the  rest  of  the  body.” 

J Ibid.,  S.  37,  “Hot  feeling,  pain  and  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,’ 
S.  38,  “ Hot  aching  sensation  in  the  praecordia.” 


S.  41. 


and 


1 “ Severe  pain,”  the  author  says. 

2 Poisoning  of  an  adult. 

3 Poisoning  of  two  women.  “ Pains  ” should  be  “ anxietas.” 

4 In  the  original,  “ inexplicabilis.” 

5 Not  accessible. 


i36 


ARSENICUM. 


Her  heart  feels  pressed  down. 

355.  In  the  evening,  when  sitting,  drawing  pain  from  the  scrobiculus 
cordis  around  beneath  the  left  ribs,  as  if  something  was  forcibly  torn 
away  there. 

Dull  tearing  transversely  across  the  gastric  region,  when  walking, 
in  the  afternoon. 

Cutting  pain  in  the  stomach.  [Thilenius,  1.  c.] 

Spasmodic  pain  in  the  stomach,  two  hours  after  midnight.* 

When  he  eats  anything  it  presses  in  and  about  the  stomach,  so 
that  he  cannot  bear  it ; the  pressure  occurs  always  some  time  after, 
not  immediately  upon  eating. 

360.  Gnawingf  and  pecking  (fine  and  sharp  throbbing)  pain  in  the 
scrobiculus  cordis,  with  tense  feeling. 

Anxiety  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  rises  up,  all  night. 

Burning  pain  round  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

In  the  evening  she  disliked  eating,  she  was  so  full ; she  had  pain 
in  the  stomach  when  she  ate. 

Fulness  in  the  epigastrium,  with  pinching  in  the  abdomen. 

365.  Pressing  ache  in  the  liver,  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 

Before  eating  nausea,  and  after  eating  or  drinking  distension  of 
the  abdomen,  also  aching  and  cutting. 

After  a meal  weight  in  the  stomach,  as  from  a stone. 

The  abdominal  pain  is  fixed  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen. 

After  a meal  great  distension  of  the  abdomen,  without  pain  ; he 
must  lean  his  back  on  something  in  order  to  relieve  himself. 

370.  After  eating  yawning  and  exhaustion,  which  compelled  him  to 
lie  down  and  sleep. 

He  cannot  keep  himself  warm  enough,  he  has  always  an  internal 
chilliness  in  the  epigastric  region,  although  that  part  feels  warm  to 
the  touch. { 

A rumbling  in  the  abdomen  as  from  much  flatulence,  but  without 
pain  (aft.  1 h.). 

Drawing  pain  in  the  umbilical  region  (aft.  2 h.). 

Frequently  a spasmodic  jerk,  making  him  start,  from  the  scrobi- 
culus cordis  into  the  rectum. 

375.  Every  morning  flatulent  distension  ; the  flatus  is  discharged  only 
after  some  hours  (aft.  14  d.). 

Discharge  of  much  flatus,  preceded  by  loud  rumbling  in  the 
abdomen  (aft.  9 h.).  [Zr.] 

Discharge  of  putrid  smelling  flatus  (aft.  11  h.).  [Z>.] 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  like  spasms  and  pinching  in  the 
abdomen,  with  an  outburst  of  perspiration,  followed  by  discharge  of 
flatus,  and  then  quite  thin  stool. § 


* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  34,  “ Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  stomach,  which  soon 
afterwards  changes  into  an  aching,  tearing,  also  spasmodic  pain,  and  continues  j” 
further,  S.  35,  “ Periodical  spasmodic  pains  in  the  stomach  and  bowels  j”  finally,  S.  36, 
“ Violent,  tearing,  boring  pain,  and  spasm  in  the  stomach  and  the  rest  of  the  bowels.” 
f Comp.  995.  X Comp.  525. 

§ Many  arsenic  symptoms  occur  only  in  the  evening,  and  after  lying  down  to 
sleep,  some  a couple  of  hours  after  midnight,  many  in  the  morning  after  rising,  not 
a few  after  dinner. 


ARSENICUM. 


I37 


In  the  evening,  after  lying  down  in  bed,  and  in  the  morning  after 
rising,  violent  colic,  squeezing  cutting  pains  in  the  bowels,  which 
sometimes,  also,  shoot  through  the  inguinal  ring  (as  if  they  would  force 
out  a hernia)  as  far  as  the  spermatic  cord  and  perinaeum  ; when  this 
colic  ceases  there  occurs  a loud  rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the 
abdomen. 

380.  Tearing  stitches  in  the  left  side  under  the  short  ribs,  in  the 
evening  soon  after  lying  down  (aft.  3 h.). 

Hypogastric  pains,  heat  of  face. 

Cutting  pain  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  under  the  last  ribs, 
per  se , but  most  severe  when  touched. 

Only  every  morning,  pinching  increasing  to  cutting  colic,  deep  in 
the  hypogastrium,  before  and  during  diarrhoeic  stools,  which  pains  do 
not  cease  after  each  stool,  although  they  do  not  excite  the  stool. 

In  the  morning,  first  great  rattling  in  the  abdomen,  then  a 
cutting  twisting  together  of  the  bowels,  then  thrice  diarrhoea. 

385.  Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  but  only  when  at  rest. 

Weakness  of  the  abdominal  muscles. 

On  stooping,  shooting  dislocation  pain  in  the  right  iliac  and 
inguinal  regions. 

Burning  pain  in  the  abdomen,  at  noon  and  in  the  afternoon, 
going  off  after  stool. 

Violent  pain  in  the  right  epigastrium.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

390.  Pain  in  the  right  epigastrium  and  neighbouring  lumbar  region, 
whence  it  spreads  sometimes  through  the  hypogastrium,  at  other  times 
into  the  right  side  of  the  scrotum  and  into  the  flank,  like  renal  colic 
(at  the  same  time,  however,  the  urine  appears  healthy).  [Morgagni, 
1.  c.] 

Jaundice.  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

Cholera.1  [Wolff,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety  and  complaints  about  pain,  as  if  the  upper  part  of  the 
trunk  were  quite  cut  away  from  the  abdomen.  [Alberti,  Jurispr. 
Med.  t.  iv,  p.  259.] 

Horrible  pains  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen.  [Wolff,  1.  c. — 
Majault,  1.  c.] 

395.  Cutting  (lancinantes2)  and  gnawing  pains  in  the  stomach  and 
bowels.  [Quelmalz,  1.  c.] 

Swollen3  abdomen.  [Guilbert,  1.  c.] 

Enormously  swollen  abdomen.  [Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  1.  c.] 

Distension  and  pains  of  the  abdomen.  [Muller,  1.  c.] 

Very  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  whole  abdomen.  [Morgagni, 
!•  c-] . 

400.  Violent  pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  such  great  anxiety  that  he 
can  nowhere  get  ease,  he  rolled  about  on  the  ground  and  gave  up  all 
hope  of  life.  [Pyl,  Samml .,  viii,  pp.  98,  105,  108.] 

After  eating,  great  distension  of  the  abdomen,  without  pain  ; he 
must  lean  with  his  back  supported,  in  order  to  get  relief.  \Myr.] 

1 That  is,  constant  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  with  sharp  nose,  cold  limbs,  cramps, 

and  death. 

2 In  Chr.  Kr.f  (l  reissende,”  i.e.  tearing.  3 “ And  painful,”  the  author  says. 


J3y 


ARSENICUM. 


Along  with  anxiety  in  the  abdomen,  fever  and  thirst.  [Mor- 
gagni, 1.  c.] 

The  most  violent  pains  in  the  abdomen.  [Dan.  Cruger,  Misc. 
Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  4.1] 

Twisting  colic. ^ [Richard,  1.  c.] 

405.  In  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  a digging  aching.  [Hbg. ] 
Tearing  in  the  abdomen.  [Pfann,  1.  c. — Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Tearing  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  icy  coldness  of  feet 
and  hands,  and  cold  sweat  on  the  face.  [Alberti,  I.  c.] 

Cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Buchholz,  1.  c. — Kellner, 
1.  c.] 

In  the  abdomen  burning,  shooting,  and  cutting.  [Buchholz, 
BeitrcLge , 1.  c.] 

410.  Burning  in  the  abdomen  with  heat  and  thirst.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 
Burning  in  the  flank.  [Hbg.] 

Colics  recurring  from  time  to  time.  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  in  the  morning  on  awaking. 

Noises  in  the  abdomen.  [Thilenius,  1.  c.] 

Here  and  there  wandering  pains  in  the  abdomen,  yellow  diar- 
rhoea and  tenesmus,  with  burning  pains  in  the  anus  and  thirst. 
[Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

415.  After  the  stool  the  colic  is  allayed.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

After  the  palpitation  of  the  heart,  a rattling  in  the  abdomen, 
and  a pinching  and  twisting  together  of  the  bowels,  before  and 
during  the  fluid  motions.  \Myr^\ 

Dysenteric  colic2  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 
Constipation  of  the  bowels.3  [Goritz,  1.  c. — Rau,  1.  c.]f 
He  has  ineffectual  urging  to  stool. 

420.  Burning  in  the  anus,  for  an  hour,  which  was  allayed  after  the 
evacuation  of  a hard,  knotty  stool. 

Burning  and  pains  in  the  rectum  and  anus,  with  constant 
pressing  ; a kind  of  tenesmus,  as  in  dysentery. 

After  the  stool  there  was  great  weakness  and  burning  in  the 
rectum,  with  trembling  in  all  the  limbs. 

After  the  stool,  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  trembling  weakness  ; 
he  must  lie  down. 

Spasmodic  urging  and  pressing  out  at  his  rectum,  with  great 
pains  (aft.  72  h.). 

425.  The  faeces  pass  away  from  him  unnoticed,  as  though  they  were 
flatus. 

The  faeces  passed  are  enveloped  in  watery  blood. 

Dysentery.  [Cruger,  1.  c.] 

Almost  every  moment  a bloody  discharge  by  stool,  with  vomiting 
and  horrible  pains  in  the  abdomen.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  43,  “ Twisting  and  curling  up  in  bed.” 
f Comp.  Hartl.  and  Trinks , Arznei  M.  L .,  1.  c.,  S.  9,  “ Pains  in  the  abdomen, 
with  constipation  (Trevosso,  The  New  Lond.  Med.  Journ.,\ ol.  ii,  1793)  (from  the 
vapour  of  wax  lights  rendered  poisonous  by  arsenic).” 

1 Poisoning  of  an  adult.  2 Literally,  “ tormina.” 

3 In  Rau’s  case,  for  four  days. 


ARSENICUM. 


*39 

Before  the  diarrhoea  he  has  a feeling  as  if  he  would  burst. 
[Alberti,  1.  c.] 

430.  Diarrhoea,  alternating  with  constipation  ; there  often  passed  a 
little  yellow  fluid,  then  urging  came  on  as  if  more  would  come,  with 
acute  pains  in  the  abdomen  about  the  navel.  [£//!] 

Evacuation  of  faeces,  sometimes  more  sometimes  less  pappy  (aft. 
6,  13  h.).  [Zr.] 

Diarrhoea.  [Majault,  1.  c. — Kellner,  1.  c.]* 

Stools  pass  without  his  knowledge.  [Chr,  G.  Buttner,  Unterricht 
uber  die  Todtlichkeit  der  Wunden , p.  197.1] 

Mucous  and  green  evacuations  by  stool.  [Thilenius,  1.  c.] 

435.  Frequent  discharge  of  a viscid  bilious  matter  by  stool,  for  two  days. 
[Pfann,  1.  c.] 

After  much  uneasiness  and  colic,  discharge  of  a black  fluid  by 
stool,  burning  like  fire  in  the  anus.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Black,  acrid,  putrid  faecal  evacuations.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

Discharge  by  stool  of  a round  lump,  which  appeared  to  consist  of 
undigested  fat  mixed  with  fibrous  parts  (aft.  8 d.).  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 
Diarrhoea,  with  violent  burning  in  the  anus.  [Thilenius,  1.  c.] 
440.  (Thin  mucous  evacuations,  as  if  chopped  up.) 

Along  with  urging  to  stool,  evacuation  of  masses  of  mucus,  with 
cutting  pains  in  the  anus,  as  from  blind  piles. 

After  colic  small  evacuations  with  tenesmus,  at  first  of  dark  green 
faeces,  then  of  dark  green  mucus. 

Constipation. 

(Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  without  stool.) 

445.  (Itching  in  the  anus.) 

Itching,  scraping,  or  sore  pain  in  the  anus. 

The  anus  is  painful  when  touched,  as  if  sore. 

At  the  anus,  haemorrhoids  with  shooting  pains,  when  sitting 
and  walking,  not  connected  with  the  stool. 

Haemorrhoidal  lumps  at  the  anus,  which,  especially  at  night,  burnf 
like  fire,  and  permit  no  sleep,  but  by  day  the  pain  becomes  worse, 
and  changes  into  violent  stitches ; worse  when  walking  than  when 
sitting  or  lying. 

450.  Blind  haemorrhoids  with  pains  like  slow  pricks  with  a hot  needle. 
During  the  stool  painful  contraction  just  above  the  anus  towards 
the  sacrum. 

Burning  in  the  anus.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Tenesmus  with  burning.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Eroding  itching  on  the  perinaeum,  compelling  him  to  scratch  (aft. 
5 h-)-  [Lr-1 

455.  Itching  on  the  perinaeum,  especially  when  walking,  that  compels 
him  to  scratch  (aft.  5!  h.).  [Z>.] 

# Comp.  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  45,  “ Great  evacuations  by  stool,” — S.  46,  “Diarrhoea 
that  often  becomes  very  severe,” — S.  47,  “ Involuntary  discharge  of  faeces  and  urine.” 
f Burning  is  a main  symptom  of  arsenic.  Comp.  163,  362,  450,  471,  769,  77 7, 
793)  794)  816,  819,  814,  789,  790. 


1 Poisonings.  This  S.  not  found. 


1 40 


ARSENICUM, 


Painful  swelling  of  the  haemorrhoidal  veins  with  tenesmus.  [Mor- 
gagni, 1.  c.,  § 8.] 

Retention  of  stool  and  urine  in  spite  of  all  internal  feeling  of 
wanting  to  pass  them.  [Alberti,  Jurisprud . med .,  tom.  iv,  p.  260.] 
Burning  in  passing  urine.  \_Neue  Wahrn. — Morgagni,  1.  c.,  § 6.] 
Bloody  urine.  [O.  Tachenius,  Hipp.  Chym .,  c.  24,  p.  149.*  4 5] 

460.  Suppression  of  urine.  \_N.  Wahrn.,  1.  c. — Guilbert,  1.  c.j 
Diminished  flow  of  urine.2  [Th.  Fowler,  1.  c.] 

Increased  flow  of  urine.3  [Th.  Fowler,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  copious  flow  of  urine 

(aft.  2,  3,  4,  s|,  16,  17  h.j.  [ Lr .] 

After  urinating  great  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  epigastrium,  so 
that  she  trembled. 

465.  On  passing  urine  contractive  pains  in  the  left  iliac  region. 

Involuntary  micturition  ; she  could  not  get  to  the  utensil ; the 
urine  ran  away  from  her,  and  yet  there  was  but  little  of  it. 

He  must  rise  at  night  three  or  four  times  to  pass  urine,  and  each 
time  he  passes  a great  deal,  for  several  successive  days. 

Burning  in  the  bladder,  and  urging  to  urinate  every  minute. 

In  the  morning  burning  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra  at  the 
commencement  of  urination  (aft.  24  h.). 

470.  Retention  of  the  urine  as  from  paralysis  of  the  bladder. 

But  little  water  passes,  and  it  burns  during  the  flow. 

(Urine  almost  colourless.) 

Very  turbid  urine  (aft.  5 d.) 

(In  the  urethra  smarting  pain.) 

Deep  in  the  urethra  frequent  pain,  like  tearings  (in, the  afternoon). 

475.  Single,  severe,  slow  stitches  on  both  sides  of  the  pudendum  in  the 
flanks  (aft.  3 h.). 

(In  the  inguinal  swelling)  a burning  and  digging  ; even  a slight 
touch  (with  the  bedclothes,  for  example)  excites  the  pain. 

(Itching  of  the  pudendum.) 

Severe  itching  on  the  glans  penis  without  erection  of  the  penis. 
Nocturnal  emission  of  semen  with  voluptuous  dreams,  [Ar.] 

480.  Nocturnal  emission  of  semen  without  voluptuous  dreams,  fol- 
lowed by  long- continued  erection  of  the  penis  (aft.  20  h.).  [Ar.] 
Erection  of  the  penis  in  the  morning  without  pollution.  [Ar.] 
The  glans  penis  is  bluish-red,  swollen,  and  cracked  with  rhagades 
[Pfann,  1.  c.] 

On  the  penis,  near  the  scrotum,  eroding  itching,  compelling 
scratching  (aft.  5J  h.).  [Ar.] 

Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  genital  organs,  going 
the  length  of  mortification,  with  horrible  pains.  [J.  H. 
Degner,  Act.  Nat . Cur.,  vi.4] 

485.  Extremely  painful  swelling  of  the  genitals.  [Neue  Wahrn.,  1.  c.] 
Sudden  occurrence  of  mortification  in  the  male  genitals.  [G.  E. 
Stahl,  Opusc.  Chym.  Phys.  Med.,  p.  454.5] 


1 From  inhaling  sublimed  arsenic.  2 Sometimes.  3 Often. 

4 Effects  of  applying  a solution  of  arsenic  for  itch,  in  two  men. 

5 Poisoning  of  two  adults.  “ Mortification  ” is  “ sphacelatio.” 


ARSENICUM. 


141 

Swelling  of  the  testicles.1*  [Alberti,  Jurispr.  Med.,  tom.  i, 
P-  i67-].  . 

Lasciviousness  in  a woman  ; she  desires  coitus  twice  a day,  and 
when  it  is  not  accorded  a discharge  takes  place  of  itself. 

Shooting  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  down  into  the  vagina. 

490.  Leucorrhoea,  of  a yellowish  and  thick  character,  about  a cupful 
in  the  twenty-four  hours,  with  smarting  erosion  where  it  runs,  the 
parts  on  both  sides  of  the  vulva  become  excoriated  by  it,  for  ten  days. 

When  standing  the  leucorrhoea  drops  away  during  a discharge  of 
flatus  (aft.  24  h.). 

Menses  too  soon. 

Excitation  of  too  profuse  menstrual  flux. 

During  the  menses  sharp  shooting  in  the  rectum  into  the  anus 
and  vulva. 

495.  After  the  cessation  of  the  menses  bloody  mucus  passes. 

During  the  menses  pinching,  shooting,  cutting  from  the  scro- 
biculus  cordis  to  the  hypogastrium,  also  in  the  back  and  sides  of  the 
abdomen  ; she  must  bend  herself  together,  standing  and  cowering 
down,  on  account  of  pain,  with  loud  groaning,  complaints,  and 
weeping,  and  with  loud  eructation. 

* * 

* 

A profuse  bleeding  of  the  nose  after  severe  vomiting.  [Heim- 
REICH,  Arsen,  a Is.  Fiebermlttel .] 

(During  vexation)  profuse  flow  of  blood  from  the  nose  (aft.  3 d.). 

Dryness  of  the  nasal  cavity. 

500.  Severe  continued  sneezing. 

Frequent  sneezing,  without  coryza  (aft.  3,  6 d.).  [ Lr .] 

Frequent  sneezing  with  fluent  coryza  (aft.  11  h.).  [Lr.] 

Discharge  of  acrid  fluid  from  the  nose.  [Myrrhen,  1.  c.] 

Stopped-up  coryza  combined  with  fluent  coryza. 

505.  Every  morning  on  waking  sneezing  and  coryza,  which  each  time 
goes  off  quickly. 

Watery  mucus  flows  from  the  nose,  smarting  and  burning  at  the 
nostrils,  as  if  they  became  sore  from  it. 

Severe  fluent  coryza. 

Excessivef  coryza  with  hoarseness  and  sleeplessness. 

In  the  morning  his  throat  is  rough  and  hoarse  (aft  24  h.). 

510.  Dryness  of  the  larynx. 

Rough  speech  and  hoarseness. 

* From  the  internal  use  of  arsenic. 

f There  is  scarcely  any  heroic  remedy,  which  is  not  sometimes  capable  of  producing 
this  kind  of  crisis  (a  violent  coryza,  and,  at  other  times,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  perspira- 
tion, salivation,  diuresis,  &c.)  in  healthy  persons  or  in  cases  of  disease  in  which  it  is 
improperly  given,  where  nature  endeavours  to  remove  and,  as  it  were,  to  eject 
what  is  prejudicial  to  the  life  of  the  body  $ and  thus  suddenly  destroys  a large,  often 
the  largest,  portion  of  the  remaining  medicinal  power  of  the  remedy.  But  yet  these 
corporeal  actions  which  destroy  the  other  medicinal  disease  are,  at  the  same  time 
characteristic  medicinal  symptoms,  and  the  coryza  of  arsenic  remains  very  different 
in  many  essential  and,  as  yet,  not  sufficiently  accurately  observed  circumstances  from 
that  produced  by  the  magnet,  belladonna,  nux  vomica,  mezereum,  &c. 


3 For  “testicles,”  read  “scrotum.” 


142 


ARSENICUM. 


Palpitation  of  the  heart.  [Majault,  1.  c.]* 

At  night,  about  3 a.m.,  an  irregular  but  so  violent  palpitation, 
that  he  thinks  he  hears  it,  combined  with  anxiety.  [Myr.] 

Excessive,  very  troublesome  palpitation  of  the  heart. 

515.  When  he  lies  on  his  back,  the  heart  beats  much  quicker  and 
stronger.  [*9//'.] 

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  anxiety.  [Hbg!] 

Very  viscid  mucus  in  the  chest,  that  can  with  difficulty  be 
coughed  up.  (aft.  48  h.) 

Streaks  of  blood  in  the  mucus  expectorated. 

He  hawks  up  mucus  with  blood  streaks  ; then  follows  nausea. 

520.  Sensation  of  rawness  and  soreness  in  the  chest. 

Pains  in  the  chest.  [Pearson,  1.  c.] 

Much  pain  in  the  chest.  [N.  tVahrnehm.,  1.  c.] 

Internal  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  (aft.  5 h.). 

Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  uppermost  right  rib. 

(Formication  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest).1 

525.  Towards  evening,  a chilliness  internally  in  the  chest,  also  after 
supper.f 

Tensive  pain  in  the  chest,  especially  when  sitting.  J 
Stitches  superiorly  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  especially  felt 
when  drawing  the  breath,  like  pressure,  that  ends  in  a stitch  (aft.  1^ 

M- 

Violent  shooting  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  only  during  expira- 
tion, which  is  thereby  rendered  difficult  (aft.  7^  h.).  [Lr.] 

Aching  on  the  chest.  [Buchholz,  Beitrdge , 1.  c.] 

530.  Burning  in  the  chest.  [Storck,  1.  c.] 

Burning  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  extending  to  the  flank, 
where  it  ached.  [ Hbg.] 

After  a meal,  a sweet  taste  of  blood,  with  a scraping  shooting 
pain  in  the  throat,  as  if  he  had  swallowed  a fish-bone,  for  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  followed  by  short  cough  with  haemoptysis,  at 
first  like  coagulated  blood  ; after  the  spitting  of  blood  nausea,  and 
after  two  hours  anxiety.  [Myr.] 

Great  heat  in  the  chest  to  below  the  diaphragm.  [Hbg.] 

A long-continued  burning  in  the  region  of  the  sternum.  [Storck, 
1.  c.] 

535.  Violent  morning  cough. 

Constant  tickling  in  the  whole  windpipe,  which  excites  him  to 
cough,  also  independent  of  breathing. 

In  the  morning,  after  the  (accustomed)  tea  drinking,  a short 
cough. 

Dry  violent  cough  (aft.  2 h.). 

When  he  drinks  without  thirst,  it  causes  coughing. 

540.  Cough  especially  after  drinking. 

At  night,  when  the  cough  comes  on,  he  must  sit  up. 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  50,  “ The  heart’s  beat  generally  excited.” 
f Comp.  371.  J Comp,  note  to  677. 


1 A mis-reckoning  here. 


ARSENICUM. 


*43 


In  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down,  cough  ; she  must 
sit  up,  thereafter  a contractive  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and 
gastric  region,  keeping  up  the  cough,  which  exhausted  her. 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  a cough  lasting  some  minutes,  with 
nausea  and  heaving  to  vomit. 

Cough  immediately  after  lying  down. 

545.  Cough  woke  him  up  at  night  ; severe  bursts  of  it,  so  that  he  felt 
like  to  choke,  and  his  throat  swelled. 

Deep,  dry,  short,  incessant  cough  after  midnight. 

(The  chest  feels  like  to  burst  from  the  cough.) 

On  walking  in  the  open  air  she  feels  such  a smothering  sensation 
that  she  must  cough. 

Hard  cough,  difficult  to  loosen,  which  causes  sore  pain  in  the 
chest. 

550.  Cough  when  she  comes  into  the  cold  open  air. 

Dry  cough  during  bodily  exertion.* 

Twitching  in  the  hip  followed  by  dry  cough,  which  seems  to  be 
excited  by  the  former. 

During  the  cough  heat  in  the  head. 

With  violent  cough  much  water  flows  from  the  mouth,  like  water- 
brash. 

555.  During  the  cough  bruised  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  crushed  (aft. 
2 h.). 

During  the  cough  shooting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

When  hawking,  drawing  shooting  pain  under  the  left  short  ribs 
up  into  the  chest. 

During  the  cough  shooting,  first  in  the  side  of  the  chest,  then 
(two  days  afterwards)  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen. 

During  the  cough  shooting  pain  in  the  sternum  upwards. 

560.  When  drawing  a deep  breath  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest, 
which  compel  him  to  cough. 

When  stooping  dull  stitches  in  the  chest. 

Shooting  in  the  side  under  the  short  ribs,  he  dare  not  lie  on  that 
side.f 

By  coughing  increased  stitches  under  the  ribs  and  increased  head- 
ache as  from  heat  in  it. 

A constrictive  sensation  up  in  the  windpipe  (in  the  region  of  the 
pit  of  the  throat),  as  from  sulphur  vapour,  which  excites  cough. 

565.  In  the  evening,  after  getting  into  bed  as  gently  as  possible  and 
lying  down  very  carefully,  his  breath  goes  immediately,  and  such  fine' 
whistling  in  the  (constricted)  windpipe  as  if  a fine  harp-string  sounded. 

Excitation  to  short  cough  in  the  windpipe,  without  expectoration 
(aft.  31  h.).  [Zr] 

Dry  tussiculation.  [Storck,  1.  c.] 

Dry  fatiguing  cough.  [Storck,  1.  c.] 

In  the  evening  tightness  of  the  chest  and  dry  cough. 

570.  Great  tightness  of  chest.1  [Pyl,  Samml .,  viii,  p.  98,  &c.] 

* Which  often  makes  him  very  quickly  breathless.  f Comp.  621. 


1 For  a long  time. 


144 


ARSENICUM. 


1.  c.] 


a very 
[Mor- 


Constrictive  sensation  in  the  chest.  [Preussius,  1.  c.]* 

Painful  respiration.  [iV.  Wahrnehm .,  1.  c.] 

Oppression  of  the  chest.1  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

Oppression  of  the  chest,  difficult  breathing.  [Thilenius 

575.  Difficult  respiration.  [Tachenius,  1.  c.] 

Anxious,  groaning  respiration.2 3  [Guilbert,  1.  c.] 

Piteous  lamentation,  that  an  intolerable  anxiety  and 
oppressive  sensation  in  the  abdomen  hinders  respiration. 
gagni,  1.  c.]f 

Frequently  recurring  tightness  of  chest.  [Morgagni,!,  c.,  S.  6.] 
Tightness  of  chest  for  an  hour,  which  threatens  suffocation. 
[Greiselius,  1.  c.]  J 

580.  Long-continued  tightness  of  chest.  [Timaeus  a Guldenklee, 
opp Lips.,  1715,  p.  280.3] 

He  feels  like  to  suffocate  ; sticks  his  tongue  out.  [Wedel,  1.  c.] 
Choking  rheum.4  [ Misc . Nat . Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  9,  10,  p.  390.] 
On  moving  (walking)  sudden  tightness  of  chest  and  want  of 
breath,  weakness,  and  excessive  prostration. 5||  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

Nocturnal  sudden  catarrh,  threatening  suffocation .41T  [Myrrhen, 

1-  c.] 

585.  First  oppression  of  the  chest,  then  pain  in  the  chest  with  short 
cough  and  salt  expectoration.6  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  Oct.,  pp.  8 and  11.] 
Great  anxiety,  as  if  all  would  be  constricted,  with  anxiety  in 
the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

During  the  abdominal  pains,  difficult  breathing,  as  if  the  chest 
were  compressed. 

Frequent  short,  difficult  respiration,  and  dry  short  cough,  with 
ulcerative  sore  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  up  to  the  middle  of  the 
chest. 


Frequent  oppressive,  anxious,  short  breathing  in  the  chest,  in  all 
positions. 

590.  Oppression  during  the  cough  and  on  walking  quickly,  or  on 
going  upstairs. 

* See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks , A.  M.  L.,  1.  c.,  S.  11,  “The  chest  contracted,  so 
that  he  could  hardly  speak  a word  and  almost  fainted  (3rd  d.),”  and  S.  12,  “ Constant 
tussiculation  and  contraction  in  the  chest  (3rd  d.).” 

f See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  49,  “ The  breathing  oppressed,  the  anxiety  increases.” 
X See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks , 1.  c.,  S.  10,  “Short  breath.” 

§ From  arsenical  vapour,  during  the  preparation  of  arsenicum  fixum. 

||  As  the  symptoms  mentioned  are  not  observed  in  the  mass  from  any  other  known 
medicine,  it  is  evident  how  arsenic  is  homoeopathic  to  inflammation  of  the  chest,  and 
that  it  can  and  does  cure  it  specifically. 

I  cured  myself  rapidly  with  arsenic  of  a similar  suffocative  catarrh  that  always 
came  on  more  severely  every  evening  after  lying  down,  which  brought  me  near  to 
death  5 the  dose  I used  was  of  a minuteness  that  passes  all  belief.  The  other  sym- 
ptoms of  my  malady  were  certainly  also  met  with  among  the  symptoms  of  arsenic. 


1 In  the  original  “ anxietates  pectoris.” 

2 Literally  “ breathing  difficult,  and  often  interrupted  by  sighs.” 

3 From  the  vapour. 

4 These  two  symptoms  describe  the  same  attack  of  suffocative  bronchitis,  brought 
on  by  drawing  a solution  of  arsenic  into  the  nostrils  for  coryza,  and  ending  in  con- 
vulsions and  death. 

5 The  original  is  simply  “ much  lassitude  and  oppression  of  breathing  in  walking.” 

6 See  note  to  S.  1 18. 


ARSENICUM. 


i45 


In  the  evening,  great  anxiety  and  restlessness,  and  the  chest  as 
if  contracted. 

Dyspnoea  for  eight  days,  oppression  in  the  region  of  the  sternum, 
on  breathing  deeply. 

Always  immediately  after  coughing  the  breath  is  so 
short,  as  if  his  whole  chest  was  contracted. 

Frequent,  quite  short,  dry  cough,  excited  by  a suffocative  sensa- 
tion in  the  larynx,  such  as  is  apt  to  occur  from  sulphur  fumes. 

595.  Pain  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  takes  away  the  breath. 

When  he  gets  vexed  he  has  tightness  of  chest. 

When  he  has  fatigued  himself  he  gets  a tightness  of  the  chest, 
such  as  is  apt  to  arise  from  anxiety. 

Eruption  of  yellow  spots  on  the  chest.  [Wedel,  1.  c.] 

Distortion  of  the  cervical  muscles.1  [Muller,  1.  c.] 

600.  Tensive  stiffness  of  the  neck.  [ Bhr.~\ 

(At  night  and  in  the  morning)  stiffness  in  the  nape,  as  if  bruised 
or  strained,  and  a similar  pain  above  the  hips  (aft.  12  h.). 

External  swelling  of  the  neck  without  pain. 

On  stooping  low  the  artery  of  the  left  side  of  the  neck  swells  out 
to  an  extraordinary  degree.  [Bhr.] 

All  round  the  neck,  on  the  shoulders  and  in  the  sides,  a kind  of 
colourless  smarting  eruption.  [Fr.  H- — n.~\ 

605.  Drawing  pain  between  the  scapulae,  which  compels  him  to  lie 
down  (aft.  5 h.).* 

Drawing  from  the  sacrum  up  into  the  shoulders,  and  at  the  same 
time  stitches  in  the  sides,  during  which  flatulence  moves  about  in 
the  abdomen,  which,  not  being  able  to  be  discharged,  presses  upwards, 
as  it  were,  then  eructation  ensues,  and  he  gets  relief. 

(Stiffness  in  the  spine,  from  the  coccyx  upward.) 

The  sacrum  is  painfully  stiff*  all  day. 

Want  of  strength  in  the  small  of  the  back. 

610.  Drawing  pain  in  the  back  (in  the  forenoon)  (aft.  6 d.). 

Drawing  up  and  down  in  the  back. 

Along  with  pain  in  the  back  restlessness  and  attacks  of  anxietas. 
[Buttner,  1.  c.] 

Only  when  lying  on  the  right  side  strong  clucking  movements 
in  the  muscles  of  the  left  side  of  the  back  (aft.  3I  h.).  [Zr.] 

Bruised  pain  in  the  back  and  over  the  scapulae  as  if  beaten 
(aft.  4 d.). 

615.  In  the  sacrum  pain  as  if  bruised  (aft.  4 h.). 

In  the  loins  (renal  region)  stitches  when  breathing  and  sneezing. 

Excoriation  beneath  the  arms  in  the  axillae.  [Klinge,  in  Huf. 
Journ.  d.  p.  A .,  vi,  p.  904. 2] 

Tearing  shooting  pain  in  the  right  armpit. 

A painful  lump  on  the  arm.  \_Neue  JVahrn .,  1.  c.] 

620.  At  night,  in  bed,  tearing  in  the  elbow  and  wrist-joint  (aft. 
4 h.). 

* See  note  to  288. 


1 Not  found. 

2 Observation  on  miners  in  arsenic. 


O 


146 


ARSENICUM. 


At  night  pain  in  the  arm  of  the  side  lain  Oil.* 

(When  he  lies  on  the  right  side  the  right  arm  goes  to  sleep.) 
Eroding  itching  on  the  left  forearm  near  the  wrist-joint,  inciting 
to  scratch  (aft.  i|  h.).  [Ar.] 

Great  formication  in  the  hands  at  night. 

625.  Painful  swelling  of  the  hands.  [N.  IVahrn .,  1.  c.] 

Stiffness  and  insensibility  of  the  hands.1  [Pyl,  Samml .,  viii, 
p.  98,  &c.] 

Fine  tickling  in  the  left  palm,  causing  him  to  rub  it  (aft.  7 h.). 
[Lr.] 

Cold  hands.  [*S 'tf~\ 

Small  lumps  on  the  hands.  [iV.  TVahrn.,  1.  c.] 

630.  Always  towards  evening  in  both  wrists  a drawing  pain. 

Tickling  itching  on  the  inside  of  the  right  middle  finger,  compel- 
ling him  to  scratch  (aft.  5 h).  [Ar.] 

Tearing  shooting  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  hand  and  of  the  little 
finger  (aft.  2 h.). 

Drawing  pain  in  the  middle  fingers. 

Drawing  tearing*  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  metacarpal  bones,  in  the 
morning. 

635.  Drawing  and  twitching  (tearing)  from  the  finger  tips  up  to  the 
shoulder. 

Cramp  in  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand  when  he  stretches  them 
straight  out. 

Painful  cramp  in  the  proximal  joints  of  the  fingers  of  both  hands. 
From  morning  till  noon  a painful  spasm  in  the  finger  tips,  calf, 
and  toes  (aft  5 d.). 

Inflexibility  of  the  fingers,  as  if  they  were  stiff. 

640.  Finger-joints  painful  when  moved. 

Discoloured  nails.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

Paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs.2  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  Octob.,  p.  18.] 

Gout  in  the  hip  (sciatica). f [Borellus,  Hist.et  Observ.  cent,  iii, 
obs.  36.]  % 

Excoriation  betwixt  the  thighs,  with  itching.  [Klinge,  1.  c.] 
645.  Eroding  itching  on  the  right  thigh,  near  the  groin, 
causing  him  to  scratch  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Ar.] 

Eroding  itching  on  both  thighs,  causing  scratching,  in  the  evening 
on  undressing  (aft.  13  h.).  [Ar.] 

Convulsions  of  the  knees  and  thighs.  § [Alberti,  1.  c.,  tom.  i.] 
Spasm  (cramp)  in  the  lower  extremities  (thighs).  [Pyl,  Samml . i, 
P.  245.] 

Pain  and  shooting  in  the  knees  (aft.  2 h.).  Richard,  1.  c.] 

650.  Paralysis  in  both  knees.  [J.  B.  Montanus,  in  Schenck,  lib.  7,  obs. 
209.3 


* Comp.  562. 

4 Worn  as  an  amulet  in  the  pocket.  [The  original  is  simply  “ sciatica.”] 
j See  also  Hartl.  and  'Trinks,  1.  c.,  S.  13,  “In  the  morning  after  a rather  sleepless 
night,  violent,  drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  hips  and  left  foot  (3rd  d.).” 

§ Shortly  before  death. 


1 Lasting  for  a long  time. 


2 Not  found. 


Poisoning  of  a woman. 


ARSENICUM. 


H 7 

In  the  hough  tension,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  when 
sitting  and  standing,  but  not  when  walking. 

Paralysis  of  the  legs,  so  that  he  can  hardly  walk.  [Pet.  Forestus, 
lib.  1 8.  Schol.  ad.  obs.  28.] 

Emaciated  legs.  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

Tearing  pains  in  the  bones.  [ Bhr .] 

655.  Cramp  in  the  calf  when  walking,  and  in  the  hand  on  moving  it 
(aft.  2 h.). 

Tearing  pain  in  the  right  calf  (when  sitting)  (aft.  11  h).  [£r.] 

In  the  ankle  and  knee-joints  tearing,  only  when  moving. 

A weakness  in  the  knees,  so  that  he  can  only  sit  down  with 
difficulty. 

At  night  profuse  sweat  on  the  lower  extremities,  especially  the 
knees. 

660.  In  the  left  knee  dislocated  and  bruised  pain,  especially  on  rising 
up  from  sitting. 

(In  the  right  knee  great  want  of  firmness,  it  bends  under  him.) 

Drawing  tearing  in  the  right  hough  down  to  the  heel,  as  from  a 
sprain. 

Drawing  tearing  in  the  anterior  side  of  the  thigh  down  to  the 
knee  and  ankle-joint  when  walking. 

Sharp  drawing  in  the  tibia. 

665.  In  the  tibia  single,  violent  tearings  making  him  cry  out. 

A boring  pain  in  the  right  tibia. 

Tearing  shooting  internally,  at  the  lower  part  of  the  leg,  on  a 
small  spot. 

Under  the  knees  sensation  as  if  the  legs  were  tightly  bound  there. 

Formication  in  the  lower  extremities,  as  if  they  were  asleep. 

670.  In  the  morning  spasmodic  pain  in  the  foot,  which  changes  into  a 
vibration  and  tingling  in  it  (aft.  96  h.). 

Tearing  in  the  lower  extremities  from  above  downwards  to  the 
lower  part ; he  could  not  tread,  sit,  or  lie,  either  in  bed  or  on  a bench  ; 
day  and  night  he  must  either  keep  the  foot  swinging  to  and  fro  or  limp 
about  with  it,  and  he  could  not  rest  upon  it ; worst  at  night.* 

A tearing  shooting,  as  if  in  the  periosteum,  down  the  thigh 
and  leg  as  far  as  the  tip  of  the  big  toe  (aft.  24  h.). 

At  night  he  often  cannot  lie,  must  lay  the  feet  first  in  one  place 
then  in  another,  or  must  walk  about  to  get  relief. 

Drawing  in  the  foot ; he  cannot  keep  it  still  -}  at  the  same  time 
he  can  walk  gently  with  care,  but  not  quickly. 

675.  In  the  afternoon,  when  sitting,  a twitching  in  the  feet. 

On  making  a false  step  with  the  affected  foot  there  occurs  a jerk 
in  it  that  gives  a shock  to  the  whole  limb. 

On  the  side  of  the  knee  a point  that  pains  as  if  bruised,  only 
when  touched,  as  if  the  flesh  was  loose  there,  only  when  seated,  not 
when  walking.! 

# From  fever-drops,  which  in  Saxony  the  wandering  pedlars  lately  used  to  sell  to 
the  country  people  in  small  four-sided  bottles,  and  which  I found  to  contain  a very 
strong  solution  of  arsenic. 

f The  alternating  action  of  arsenic,  in  which  symptoms  are  produced  or  renewed 


148 


ARSENICUM. 


(When  the  feet  hang  down  perpendicularly  when  sitting  they 
have  drawing  pains.) 

Heaviness,  fatigue,  and  drawing  pain  in  the  legs  with  knuckling 
(unsteadiness  and  weakness)  of  the  knees,  especially  in  the  morning. 
680.  Weariness  in  the  lower  extremities.* 

Morning  sweat  on  the  legs  (the  first  night). 

Feet  so  heavy,  he  can  hardly  lift  them. 

Continual  cold  feet  when  he  sits  still ; he  can  scarcely  warm 
them  in  bed. 

In  the  calves  an  aching  pain. 

685.  The  calf  became  hard  and  pressed  flat  with  intolerable  pain, 
almost  like  cramp  pain  (but  much  worse),  making  her  scream  for  an 
hour  and  a half ; the  whole  limb  was  stiff,  she  could  not  move  it  at  all, 
and  quite  cold  and  insensible  ; there  remained  tension  in  the  calf  and 
a kind  of  paralysis  in  the  thigh  (aft.  50  h.). 

Feet  swollen,  the  swelling  extending  up  over  the  calves;  previously 
tearing  in  the  calf,  which  was  removed  by  applying  warm  clothsf 
(aft.  3d.). 

The  ankles  swell  without  being  red,  and  have  tearing  pains, 
which  are  relieved  by  external  warmth. 

Shining  hot  swelling  of  the  feet  (dorsum  and  soles),  to  above  the 
ankles,  with  round,  red  spots,  which  cause  a burning  pain  (aft.  3 d.). 

The  swelling  of  the  feet  itches. 

690.  On  treading,  on  the  top  of  the  instep,  in  the  ankle,  pain  as  if 
ricked  or  sprained  (aft.  72  h.). 

Shooting  and  tearing  in  both  the  ankle-joints  ; when  treading  and 
walking  stitches  in  them,  as  if  the  feet  were  sprained,  so  that  she  is 
like  to  fall ; the  ankles  are  painful  when  touched  (aft.  12  h.).J 

A tearing,  drawing,  and  twitching,  from  the  ankles  up  to  the 
knees. 

Tearing  in  the  ankles. 

Coldness  of  the  knees  and  feet,  with  cold  sweat  on  them  ; they 
cannot  be  warmed. 

695.  (Cold  sensation  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.) 

Tearing  in  the  heels.  \_Bhr^\ 

Tearing  in  the  lower  extremities.  [Pyl,  1.  c.] 

Violent  pains  in  the  legs,  especially  in  the  joints.  [Majault, 
1.  c.] 

When  she  does  not  set  down  her  foot  straight,  or  when  she 
makes  a false  step,  she  has  a pain  in  it  as  if  dislocated.  \_Bhr.'\ 

700.  The  pains  in  the  foot  are  aggravated  by  movement.  [Bhr.] 

by  movement,  is  much  rarer  than  that  in  which  the  symptoms  are  produced  or 
increased  when  at  rest  when  (lying  and)  sitting,  or  are  diminished  by  standing  or 
moving ; the  latter  alternating  action  is  therefore  much  more  important  for  homoeo- 
pathic curative  action  by  arsenic.  Comp.  526,  671,  674,  675,  707,  776,  777,  779, 
780,  821. 

* See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks , 1.  c.,  S.  21,  “ Great  weariness  (aft.  1 h.).” — S.  22, 
“ On  going  upstairs  a sensation  as  if  the  legs  would  break  down  under  him  (7th  d.).” 
4 Comp,  note  to  203. 

+ See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks , 1.  c.,  S.  18,  “ The  ankles  are  painful  to  the  touch.” 


ARSENICUM. 


149 

After  vomiting,  paralysis  of  the  feet.  [Cardanus,  De  Venen.  i, 

iii,  i563-1] 

Coldness  of  the  feet  with  contracted  pulse.  [Morgagni,  1.  c., 

§ 8.] 

Swelling,  stiffness,  insensibility  and  numbness  of  the  feet ; occa- 
sionally they  were  full  of  great  pains.  [Pyl,  Samml.,v  iii,  p.  97,  & c.]* 
On  awaking  the  heels  are  painful,  as  if  she  had  lain  on  something 
hard. 

705.  Under  the  left  heel,  on  treading,  single  stitches  up  to  the  back  of 
the  thigh. 

Several  stitches  in  the  sole  (aft.  J h.). 

When  lyingf  he  has  nausea  and  tearing  about  the  ankles  and 
dorsum  of  the  feet. 

(In  the  evening,  in  bed,  the  toes  are  drawn  backwards,  and  some 
muscular  fibres  in  the  calves  and  thigh  are  contracted  with  a spas- 
modic pain  for  three  hours,  whereupon  he  became  very  exhausted.) 

Cramp  in  the  calves  and  fingers  frequently,  especially  in  bed  at 
night. 

710.  The  whole  of  the  left  side  of  the  body  affected  with  a numb 
pain.  [Bhr.] 

The  right  foot  has  numb  pains  ; when  seated  she  can  only  lift  it 
with  the  help  of  the  hands.  [Bhr.] 

Tickling  running  itching  on  the  right  big  toe,  something  like  the 
healing  of  a wound,  compelling  him  to  rub  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Lr.] 

Swelling  of  the  whole  of  the  right  side  to  the  hips  and  left  thigh. 
[Thilenius,  1.  c.] 

General  anasarca.2  [Ebers,  1.  c.] 

715.  Complete  anasarca3  (aft.  4 d.).  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  p.  56.] 

Swelling  of  the  face  and  feet,  dry  mouth  and  lips,  distended 
abdomen,  diarrhoea,  colic,  vomiting.4  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  Sept.,  p.  28.] 
Great  swelling  of  the  face  and  the  rest  of  the  body.  [Fernelius, 
1.  c.] 

Swelling  of  the  feet.  [Jacobi,  1.  c.] 

Swelling  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  of  an  elastic  kind.  [Th. 
Fowler,  1.  c.] 

720.  Pains  in  the  feet.  [Tim.  a Guldenklee,  Opp.,  p.  280.] 

Violent  pains  in  the  soles,  which  sometimes  bring  on  convulsions. 
[Pfann,  1.  c.] 

Convulsive  attack  : at  first  she  struck  outwards  with  her  arms, 
then  she  lost  all  consciousness,  lay  like  a dead  person,  pale  but  warm, 

# See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks,  1.  c.,  SS.  14 — 17,  “ Intolerable  pains  m the  lower 
extremities,  with  swelling  of  one  of  them  (aft.  8 weeks).” — “First  on  the  right,  then 
on  the  left  foot  a hard,  reddish-blue,  greenish-yellow,  and  very  painful  swelling  (aft. 
28  d.).” — “ Great  pains,  tearing  and  stiffness  in  the  limbs,  as  if  he  could  not  move 
them  (14th  d.).” — “ Stiffness  of  the  limbs,  especially  of  the  knees  and  feet,  alternating 
with  tearing  pains  (28th  d.).” 
f Comp,  note  to  677. 

1 General  statement  from  authors. 

2 See  note  to  S.  118. 

3 From  suppression  of  ague  by  arsenic. 

4 As  S.  714. 


ARSENICUM. 


150 

turned  the  thumbs  in,  twisted  the  hands,  which  were  shut,  drew  the 
arms  slowly  up  and  pushed  them  slowly  down  ; after  ten  minutes 
she  drew  the  mouth  hither  and  thither,  as  if  she  waggled  her  jaw  5 
at  the  same  time  no  respiration  could  be  detected  ; after  this  had  lasted 
a quarter  of  an  hour  the  fit  ended  with  a jerk  through  the  whole 
body  like  a single  thrust  forwards  with  arms  and  legs,  and  then 
immediately  full  consciousness  returned,  only  great  exhaustion  re- 
mained. , . . 

Twitching,  like  something  alive  (felt  when  touched),  in  some 
muscular  parts  of  the  thighs  and  legs,  with  spasmodic  pain  in  them 

by  jerks.  . 

Attacks  of  tetanus.  \_Salzb.  Med.-Ch.  Xeitung.\ 

72c.  Spasms.  [Henning,  1.  c. — Kellner,  1.  c.] 

Convulsions.  [Forestus,  lib.  17,  obs.  13.— Cruger,  1.  c.— 
Wedel,  1.  c.] 

The  most  violent  convulsions.  [Van  Eggern,  1.  c.J 
(Before  death)  convulsions.  [Alberti,  1.  c.— (aft.  4d.)  Bonetus, 
Sepulcr.  Anat.,  sect,  x,  obs.  xiii,  part  I,  1.  c.]+  ^ 

Convulsions  and  miserable  distortions  of  the  limbs. % [Morgagni, 

1.  c.]  ..  , . 

7-20.  Epilepsy.§  [Cruger,  1.  c.  — Buttner,  1.  c.J 

Trembling  of  the  limbs.  [N.  TVahrn.,  1.  c.— Buchholz,  Beitrage, 

Qt Bonetus,  1.  c. — Heimreich,  1.  c.  Greiselius,  1.  c.]|] 

Trembling  and  shaking  with  perspiration  on  the  face.  [Alberti, 

1 C 1 

Trembling  in  all  the  limbs.  [Justamond,  On  Cancerous  Dis- 
orders^ Lond.,  1 7 5°0 1 rTT1  . 

He  trembles  in  every  part.  \_Hbg. J 
70c.  Trembling  all  over  the  body.  [Guilbert,  1.  c.J 

After  vomiting  trembling  of  the  limbs.  [Cardanus,  1.  c.J 
Trembling  in  the  arms  and  feet. 

Paralysis  of  the  feet.  [Heimreich,  1.  c.J 

Paralysis;  contraction.  [Pet.  de  Apono,  in  Schenck , lib.  vn, 

740^  Contraction  of  the  limbs.  [J.  D.  Hammer,  in  Commerc.  lit. 

Norimb.,  17385  Hebd.  24.]  -,-r 

Stiffness  of  all  the  joints.  [Pet.  de  Apono,  de  Venen.,  cap.  17-J^I 
Immobility  of  all  the  joints.  [Pet.  de  Apono,  1.  c.J 
Paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities.  [Bernhardi,  in  the  Annalen 
der  Heilkunst , 18 11,  January,  p.  60.2] 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  56,  “ Tetanus.” 

+ Qpp  ql cn  Kaiser  1.  c.,  S.  <9, “ Death  with  and  without  spasms, 
t Shortly  before  death— just  as  most  of  the  considerable  convulsions  from  arsenic 

are  nothing  but  secondary  action  and  transition  to  death. 

S Only  secondary  action  and  transition  to  death.  Probably  not  actual  epilepsy, 
but  convulsions  similar  to  those  observed  by  the  other  authors. 

II  See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  55,  “Trembling.”  Also  Hartl.^ and  Tanks,  1.  c., 
S.  "9  “Trembling  in  the  limbs  even  after  very  moderate  walking. 

From  sulphuret  of  arsenic,  realgan 

1 From  arsenic  given  to  a woman  with  cancer  of  the  tongue. 

2 Not  accessible. 


ARSENICUM. 


151 

Paralysis  ; inability  to  walk.  [Cruger,  1.  c.] 

745.  Paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities,  with  loss  of  sensation.  [Huber, 
N.  Act.  Nat.  Cur .,  iii,  obs.  100.1 2] 

She  becomes  much  emaciated,  with  earthy  complexion,  blue 
rings  round  the  eyes,  great  weakness  in  all  the  limbs,  disinclination 
for  all  work,  and  constant  desire  to  rest  (aft.  8 d.). 

Emaciation.3  [Storck,  1.  c. — Jacobi,  1.  c.] 

Complete  emaciation.  [Greiselius,  1.  c.] 

Gradual  emaciation  (and  death  within  the  year).  [Amatus 
Lusitanus,  Cent,  ii,  cur.  4,  65.3] 

750.  (Fatal)  marasmus.  \_Saltzburger  Med.-Ch.  Zeit.~\ 

Wasting.  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

Phthisical  fever.4  [Storck,  1.  c.] 

Horrible  pains  in  the  limbs.  [Pfann,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning  in  bed  sudden  tearing  twitching  or  shooting,  which 
changes  into  burning,  in  the  thumb  or  big  toe. 

755.  In  the  evening  in  bed  drawing  pain  in  the  middle  finger  of  the 
hand,  and  in  the  foot  (aft.  7.  d.) 

(At  night  in  the  back,  sacrum  and  thighs  a drawing,  shooting 
and  throbbing  pain  (aft.  3 h.). 

Drawing  from  the  abdomen  to  the  head,  where  there  was  throb- 
bing and  still  more  tearing  ; it  then  came  into  the  left  side,  where  one 
or  two  stitches  came  in  jerks  (aft.  8 d.). 

Pain  in  the  sacrum  and  back,  especially  after  riding  (in  one  accus- 
tomed to  ride). 

Gouty  pains  in  the  limbs,  without  inflammation. 

760.  During  a sedentary  occupation  such  peevish  restlessness  that  she 
must  rise  up  and  walk  about. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  joints  of  the  knees,  ankles,  and  wrists. 

Indescribably  painful  and  extremely  disagreeable  feeling  of  illness 
in  the  limbs. 

Severe  tearing  in  the  arms  and  legs,  owing  to  which 
he  cannot  lie  on  the  side,  where  it  tears;  it  becomes 
most  tolerable  by  moving  about  the  part  where  the 
tearing  pain  is. 

All  her  limbs  are  painful. 

765.  Throbbing  in  all  the  limbs,  and  also  in  the  head. 

All  his  limbs  are  painful,  whether  he  walks  or  lies. 

Extreme  painfulness  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body. 

Fine  pricks  all  over  the  body. 

Here  and  there  slow  pricks,  as  with  a red-hot  needle. 

770.  (The  pains  become  slighter  and  leave  off  by  compressing  the 
part.)^ 

Tearing  pains  in  the  hollow  bones. 

(On  the  occurrence  of  the  pains,  heat  of  face  and  body.) 

The  nocturnal  pains  only  become  tolerable  when  he  walks 

1 Statement  that  the  author  knows  a woman  so  affected  by  arsenic. 

2 See  note  to  S.  1 iS. 

3 Poisoning  of  a youth. 

4 See  note  to  S.  1 18. 


152 


ARSENICUM. 


about  ; they  are  unendurable  when  sitting,  and  particularly  when 
lying  still. 

The  pains  are  felt  at  night  when  asleep. 

775.  The  pains  are  intolerable,  they  make  the  sufferer  furious. 

The  pain  of  the  affected  part  is  even  felt  during  (light)  sleep,  and 
wakes  him  up  occasionally  during  the  night, especially  before  midnight. 

On  the  affected  part  a pain  as  if  an  abscess  had  passed  into  sup- 
puration there  and  would  burst  ; observed  when  sitting  (aft.  4 h.). 

On  the  affected  part  a pain  as  if  the  bone  was  swollen  there  ; 
observed  when  sitting. 

An  ulcer  that  is  particularly  painful  in  the  morning,  which 
contains  a dark  brown,  bloodv  matter  under  a thin  scab,  with  .single 
stitches  whilst  sitting,  which  are  relieved  by  standing,  but  most 
effectually  by  walking. 

780.  After  the  (midday)  meal,  whilst  sitting,  the  pains  increase,  but 
they  are  relieved  by  standing  and  moving  the  body. 

Conversation  addressed  to  him  by  others  is  intolerable  to  him  ; 
it  increases  his  pains  enormously  (aft.  \ h.). 

Tearing  pain  in  the  ulcers. 

On  the  affected  part,  in  the  ulcer,  a burning  as  from  a live  coal. 

(From  dipping  the  hands  in  a cold  solution  of  arsenic,  a frightful 
burning  pain  in  the  fourth  finger,  as  if  the  part  were  burnt  with 
boiling  fat  (for  4 hours)  (aft.  | h.), 

785.  The  ulcer  gets  very  elevated  borders. 

The  old  ulcers,  hitherto  painless,  became  painfully  sensitive. 

The  ulcer  discharges  much  black  coagulated  blood. 

Ulcers  on  the  heels  with  bloody  pus.1 2  [Guilbert,  1.  c.] 

Itching  in  the  ulcer  passing  into  burning.  [Heun,  1.  c.] 

790.  Burning  pain  in  the  ulcer  [Hargens,  in  Huf.  'Journ.  d.  pr.  A 
ix,  i.]3 

Cancerous  ulcer  which  rendered  it  necessary  to  amputate  the 
limb.3  [Heinze,  in  Ebers , 1.  c.,  Octob.,  p.  38.] 

The  ulcer  becomes  inflamed  all  around,  bleeds  on  being  bandaged, 
and  gets  a superficial  dry  scab.  [Hargens,  1.  c.] 

An  ulcer  appears  on  the  leg,  which  is  covered  with  a grey  scab, 
has  burning  pain,  and  an  inflamed  border. 

Burning  pain  in  the  ulcers. 

795.  Around  the  ulcer  (not  in  the  ulcer  itself)  burning  pain,  like 
fire  ; it  has  a very  fetid  smell  and  discharges  little  ; at  the  same 
time  exhaustion  and  drowsiness  in  the  daytime. 

After  the  burning  about  the  border  of  the  ulcer,  an  itching  in 
the  ulcer  itself. 

A burning  itching  on  the  body. 

Much  itching  on  the  right  thigh  and  on  the  arms. 

Itching  running  sensation  as  from  fleas  on  the  thigh  up  to  the 
abdomen,  also  on  the  loins  and  nates,  making  him  scratch. 

800.  Burning  itching,  and  after  scratching  the  part  is  painful. 

1 In  the  original,  “ichorose  Stoff.” 

2 From  application  of  arsenic  to  a cancerous  ulcer. 

3 In  a refiner  of  arsenic. 


ARSENICUM. 


*53 


Intolerable  burning  in  the  skin.  [Heimreich,  1.  c.] 

Burning  eroding  pains.  [Preussius,  1.  c. — Gabezius,  1.  c.] 
Burning  pains.  [Quelmalz,  1.  c. — Henkel,  Act.  N.  £.,  ii, 
obs.  155.] 

Needle  pricks  on  the  skin.  \N.  Wahrn .,  1.  c.] 

805.  Inflamed  measle-like  spots  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  head, 
face  and  neck.1  [Thomson,  1.  c.] 

Spots  here  and  there  on  the  skin.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

Thick  eruption  of  little  white  elevations  the  colour  of  the  skin,  of 
the  size  of  a lentil  and  smaller,  with  smarting  pain,  which  is  usually 
worst  at  night.  \_Fr.  H — nJ\ 

Cutaneous  eruption.2  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

Miliary  eruption  all  over  the  body  which  falls  off  in  scales  (aft. 
14  d.).  [Guilbert,  1.  c.]* 

810.  The  whole  body,  even  the  hands  and  feet,  full  of  small  spots  with 
white  points,  which  resemble  millet  seeds.  [Degrange,  in  Phys. 
Med.  Journ .,  1800,  April,  p.  299. 3] 

Eruption  of  a copious  red  scorbutic  miliary  rash.  [Hartmann, 
Diss.  Aethiop.  Antim.  et  Arsenicalis , Halle,  1759,  p.  49-4 5] 

Eruptions  5 resembling  urticaria.  [Fowler,  1.  c.] 

Very  painful  black  pocks. f [B.  Verzasch,  1.  c.] 

Eruption  of  black  pocks,  which  cause  burning  pain  (aft.  8 d.). 
[Pfann,  1.  c.] 

815.  Pimples  very  difficult  to  heal.6  [Amatus  Lusitanus,  Cent,  ii, 
cur.  34.] 

Eruption  of  small  pimples  on  several  parts,  also  on  the  forehead 
and  under  the  jaw,  which  cause  burning  pain  and  slight  itching. 

(On  the  appearance  of  small  pointed  pimples,  itching  which  goes 
off  on  scratching,  not  followed  by  soreness  or  burning.) 

With  burning  itching,  as  from  gnat-bites,  an  eruption  comes  out 
on  the  hands,  between  the  fingers  (at  the  union  of  the  fingers),  and 
on  the  abdomen,  consisting  of  whitish,  pointed  pimples,  which  contain 
watery  fluid  in  their  apices  ; scratching  causes  the  fluid  to  escape, 
and  the  itching  goes  off. 

In  the  eruption  of  pimples  there  is  such  burning  that  she  can 
scarcely  remain  quiet  from  anxiety. 

820.  In  the  evening  (from  6 to  8 o'clock)  great  anxiety,  with  violent 
aching  and  pressing  in  the  head,  transient  sweat,  and  extreme 
anorexia  (aft.  106  h.). 

Weariness  and  pain  in  the  joints,  an  hour  before  dinner,  more 
felt  when  sitting  than  when  walking. 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S,  60,  “ Blue  spots  on  the  abdomen,  genitals,  and  white 
of  the  eye.” 

f On  the  spot  on  which  the  suspended  arsenical  amulet  hung. 

1 After  opium  as  an  antidote. 

2 Not  found. 

3 From  rubbing  arsenic  into  the  head. 

4 Not  accessible. 

5 Slight. 

6 The  symptoms  815,  917,  and  1031  were  observed  on  patients  affected  with  itch, 
that  had  been  suppressed  by  an  arsenical  ointment  (Frank,  Hygea , xix.) 


i54 


ARSENICUM. 


She  becomes  quite  stiff,  cannot  move  or  stir,  she  can  only  stand 
(aft.  72  h.). 

After  eating  great  weariness. 

Astonishing  exhaustion,  anxiety,  she  cannot  recollect  herself,  she 
has  a difficulty  in  giving  her  attention,  and  is  at  the  same  time  very 
giddy. 

825.  During  the  depression,  weakness ; on  returning  cheerfulness, 
stronger. 

Faintings.  [Buchholz,  Beitrage , 1.  c. — Pet.  Forestus,  1.  c. — 
Henckel,  1.  c. — Morgagni,  1.  c. — Verzasch,  1.  c. — Tim.  a 
Guldenklee,  Cas.  Medic.,  Lips.,  1662,  lib.  7.  cap.  ii.] 

Frequent  syncope,  with  weak  pulse 1 (aft.  3 h.) . [Fernelius,  1.  c.] 
Severe  faintings.  [Guilbert,  1.  c. — Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Profound  syncope  (from  the  smell  of  orpiment).  [Sennert,  Prax. 
Med.,  lib.  6,  p.  6,  c.  9.] 

830.  Commencing  debility.  [Friedrich,  in  Hufel.  Journ.  d.  pr.  A., 
v,  p.  172.2] 

Exhaustion  (aft.  6 h.).  [Buchholz,  Beitrage,  1.  c.] 

For  several  days  weakness  of  the  whole  body,  weak  pulse,  must 
lie  down  for  several  days.  [Wedel,  1.  c.]* 

Great  weakness,  especially  in  the  legs, 
p.  98,  &c.] 

Weakness  so  that  he  could  scarcely  walk  across  the  room.3 
[Ebers,  1.  c.] 

835.  He  trembled  from  loss  of  strength,  and  could  hardly  leave  his  bed. 
[Ebers,  1.  c.,  p.  56.] 

Extreme  weakness.  [Goritz,  1.  c.] 

Sinking  of  the  strength.  [Storck,  1.  c. — Guilbert,  1.  c. — Rau, 
1.  c. — Grimm,  1.  c. — Hammer,  1.  c.] 

So  weak  he  cannot  walk  alone  (before  the  vomiting)  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Alberti,  1.  c.,  tom.  i,  app.,  p.  34.] 

On  attempting  to  walk  he  falls  down,  though  he  retains  his  senses. 
[Pyl,  Samml. , vi,  p.  97.] 

840.  He  cannot  step  properly;  he  is  as  if  paralysed  in  all  his  limbs. 
[Hbg.] 

W alking  is  extremely  difficult  for  him  ; he  thinks  he  will  fall. 

[as*.] 

Great  exhaustion  ; he  cannot  walk  across  the  room  without  sinking 
down.  \_Stf. ] 

Great  exhaustion  for  several  days,  so  that  he  can  scarcely  stand 
up.  \Stf] 

Death — without  vomiting,  with  only  extreme  anxiety  and  ex- 
cessive sinking  of  the  strength  (aft.  16  h.).  [Seiler,  Progr.  de  Venefic. 
per  Arsen.,  Viteb.,  1806.4] 

845.  Death — without  vomiting  or  convulsions,  only  from  sinking  of 
the  strength.  [Bonetus,  1.  c.5] 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  53,  “General  weakness  in  the  body,  especially  in  the 
legs,  which  can  scarcely  be  moved,”  and  S.  54,  “ The  strength  becomes  more  and 
more  lost.” 

1 With  vomitings.  2 Poisoning  of  a woman.  3 See  note  to  S.  118. 

4 Not  accessible.  5 Case  of  poisoning. 


[Pyl,  Samml.,  viii, 


ARSENICUM. 


155 


Death — more  from  rapid  sinking  of  the  strength  than  from  the 
vioience  of  the  pains,  or  convulsions  (aft.  12  h.).  [Morgagni,  1.  c., 

§ 30 

Violent  vertigo,  complete  exhaustion,  continual  vomiting, 
haematuria,  and  rapid  extinction  of  life  (without  convulsions,  fever 
or  pain).* 

Uncommon  prostration  and  weakness  of  the  limbs,  which  com- 
pels him  to  lie  down.  [Goritz,  1.  c.] 

He  must  lie  down  and  becomes  confined  to  bed.  \_Fr.  H — n. ] 

850.  Lying  down.  [Alberti,  1.  c.,  tom.  ii.] 

Sleeplessness.  [Buchholz,  Beitrage , 1.  c. — (aft.  14  d.)  Knape, 
1.  c. — Degner,  1.  c. — Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Yawning  and  stretching,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  (aft.  2f , 
1 1 h.).  [Zr.] 

(Incomplete  yawning,  short  yawning,  he  cannot  yawn  fully.) 

Extremely  frequent  yawning. 

855.  In  the  daytime,  frequent  paroxysms  of  sleep,  when  sitting. 

After  dinner  excessive  yawning  and  great  fatigue  (aft.  100  h.). 

Exhaustion,  as  if  suffering  loss  of  strength  from  want  of  food. 

The  strength  of  the  hands  and  feet  as  if  lost,  and  they  are  very 
trembling,  in  the  morning  (aft.  12  h.). 

He  keeps  lying  down  all  day. 

860.  He  can  scarcely  walk  across  the  room  without  sink- 
ing down. 

When  he  walks  but  little,  he  feels  immediately  an  extraordinary 
weakness  in  the  knees. 

He  wishes  to  rise  up,  but  when  he  rises  he  can  hardly  maintain 
himself. 

In  the  morning  he  cannot  get  out  of  bed,  he  feels  as  if  he  had  not 
had  enough  sleep,  and  is  weary  in  his  eyes. 

When  she  gets  out  of  bed  she  immediately  falls  in  a heap  on 
account  of  weakness  and  vertigo,  the  headache  also  is  then  worse. 

865.  In  the  morning  faint  and  anxiously  weak. 

She  emaciates  much,  with  earthy  complexion,  blue  rings  round 
the  eyes,  great  weakness  in  all  the  limbs,  disinclination  for  all  work, 
and  constant  inclination  to  repose  (aft.  8 d.) 

Emaciation  of  all  the  body,  with  very  profuse  sweats. 

Paralytic  weakness  of  the  limbs,  daily  at  a certain  hour,  like  a 
fever. 

Sleeplessness  with  restlessness  and  moaning. 

870.  He  talks  and  scolds  in  his  sleep. 

From  3 a.m.  she  only  sleeps  interruptedly  and  tosses  about. 

At  night  (about  3 a.m.)  pricking  pain  in  the  left  meatus  audi- 
torius  as  from  within  outwards. 

For  two  successive  nights,  in  sleep,  feeling  of  illness. 

The  whole  night  much  heat  and  restlessness,  on  account  of 
which  she  cannot  fall  asleep,  at  the  same  time  pulsation  in  the 
head. 

# Gehlen  died  thus  from  inhalation  of  arseniureted  hydrogen.  \Halle  Allg. 

Lit.  Zeit 1815,  No.  181.] 


156 


ARSENICUM. 


875.  Only  at  night  much  thirst,  on  account  of  great  dryness  in  the 
throat,  which  ceases  in  the  morning. 

In  the  evening  (at  night)  while  lying  in  bed,  some  pricking 
tearing  in  a corn. 

Sleepless  tossing  about  at  night  in  bed,  with  a crawling  in  the 
abdomen. 

In  sleep  he  lies  on  his  back,  the  left  hand  supporting  the  head. 

In  the  evening  in  sleep  loud  moaning. 

880.  During  sleep,  turning  about  in  bed,  with  moaning,  especially 
about  3 a.m. 

Grinding  of  the  teeth  in  sleep. 

She  cannot  get  warm  in  bed  at  night. 

After  midnight  feeling  of  anxious  heat,  with  desire  to  throw  off 
the  clothes. 

In  the  morning  in  bed,  at  sunrise,  general  heat,  sweat  on  the 
face  and  dryness  of  the  front  of  the  mouth,  without  thirst. 

885.  In  the  morning  in  bed  a dull  headache,  that  goes  off  on  getting 

UP* 

In  the  morning  in  bed  qualmish,  sick  up  into  the  chest,  then 
vomiting  of  white  mucus,  but  with  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. 

After  waking,  great  peevishness  5 she  knew  not  how  to  compose 
herself,  owing  to  ill-humour,  pushed  and  threw  the  pillows  and 
bedclothes  away  from  her,  and  would  look  at  and  listen  to  nobody. 

In  the  evening  in  bed,  immediately  before  going  to  sleep,  she  has 
a choking  feeling  in  the  throat  like  sulphur  fumes,  making  her  cough. 

In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  at  the  commencement  of  sleep, 
violent  twitching  in  the  limbs. 

890.  Movements  of  the  fingers  and  hands  in  sleep. 

Twitching  on  going  to  sleep. 

Sleep  restless  ; she  wakes  up  very  early.  [Bhr. ] 

Could  not  get  to  sleep,  and  occasionally  fell  into  faints.  [Tim.  a 
Guldenklee,  Opp.)  p.  280.] 

Great  inclination  to  sleep  ; he  falls  asleep  again  immediately 
after  having  had  a conversation  (from  the  6th  to  the  10th  day). 
[Fr.  H—n .]* 

895.  Sleep  full  of  the  most  violent  startings  and  shudderings.1  [Thom- 
son, 1.  c.]f 

Vivid  vexatious  dreams  (aft.  19  h.).  [/>.]{ 

Rambling  at  night.  [Siebold,  1.  c.] 

Spasmodic  starting  of  all  the  body  (aft.  36  h.).2  [Thomson,  1.  c.] 
In  the  evening,  on  going  to  sleep,  startling  twitches,  like  shaking 
blows  on  the  affected  part,  which  are  excited  by  a slight  ailment 
on  a distant  part,  by  a tearing,  an  itching,  See.  (aft  4 d.). 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  63,  “Great,  almost  irresistible,  inclination  to  sleep, 
alternating  with  great  restlessness,  without  particular  fear  of  death.” 

f See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  64,  “ Sleepiness,  which  is  interrupted  by  uneasy 
dreams  and  great  anxiety.” 

% See  also  Hartl.  and  Trinks , 1.  c.,  No.  25,  “The  night  full  of  uneasy  dreams.” 

1 After  opium  had  been  given  as  an  antidote. 

2 As  S.  895.  Should  be  after  12,  not  36  hours. 


ARSENICUM. 


*57 


900.  Immediately  after  lying  down  he  dreams  that  he  was  about  to 
knock  his  foot  against  a stone,  whereupon  he  has  a sudden  jerk  in  the 
knee,  and  thereafter  he  is  awakened  as  if  by  an  electric  shock. 

When  he  is  going  to  sleep  an  anxious  dream,  he  would  like  to 
cry  out,  but  can  hardly  bring  out  a word,  and  he  suddenly  wakes  up 
by  a call  which  he  continues  to  hear. 

He  dreamed  all  night  incessantly  of  storms,  conflagrations,  black 
water,  and  darkness. 

He  sleeps  disturbed  by  dreams  full  of  care,  distress,  and  fear. 

At  night  anxious  frightful  dreams. 

905.  Dreams  full  of  cares  and  dangers,  from  each  of  which  he  wakes 
up,  sometimes  with  a cry,  and  he  always  dreams  something  new. 

In  the  morning  slumber  he  hears  every  sound  and  every  noise, 
and  yet  he  dreams  all  through  it. 

Care-beset  dreams  ; he  wakes  up,  and  after  going  to  sleep  again 
dreams  the  same  thing. 

Dreams  full  of  threatenings  and  apprehensions,  or  remorse. 
Dreams  accompanied  by  fatiguing  reflections. 

910.  On  awaking  frequently  at  night  she  has  burning  in  all  the 

blood-vessels. 

Towards  evening  drowsiness,  with  chilliness,  with,  at  the  same 
time,  a disagreeable  feeling  of  illness  through  the  whole  body,  as  in 
ague  when  the  fit  is  quite  or  nearly  over — recurring  at  the  same 
hour  two  days  later — after  midnight  profuse  perspiration  on  the 
thighs. 

Towards  evening  he  feels  very  uncomfortable  in  the  body,  like 
fever,  and  when  he  lies  down  his  head  becomes  hot,  especially  the 
ears,  but  the  knees  are  cold  (aft.  36  h.). 

Almost  constant  yawning. 

Fever.1  [Heun,  1.  c.] 

915.  (During  the  febrile  attack)  increased  tension  in  the  hypochondria, 
lying  on  the  side  is  almost  impossible.  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  p.  68.] 
Violent  fever.  [Knape,  1.  c. — Degner,  1.  c.] 

(Fatal)  fever.1  [Amatus  Lusitanus,  1.  c.] 

Renewal  of  the  same  arsenical  disease  2 in  the  quartan  type,  at 
the  same  hour  in  the  forenoon.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  § 8.] 

Thirst,  fever.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  § 6.] 

920.  Thirst.  [Pet.  de  Apono,  1.  c. — Rau,  1.  c.-— Preussius,  1.  c.] 
Great  thirst.  [Alberti,  1.  c.,  tom.  ii.] 

He  drinks  much  and  often.  [ Stf. !] 

Incessant,  great  thirst.  [Buttner,  1.  c.] 

Sweat  and  excessive  thirst ; he  is  always  wanting  to  drink.  \_Hbg.~\ 

925.  Violent  thirst.  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

He  cries  out  about  choking  thirst.  [Forestus,  lib.  17,  obs.  13.] 
Burning  thirst.  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

He  is  thirsty,  yet  drinks  but  little  at  a time.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 


1 See  815,  note. 

2 More  correctly  in  the  Chr.  Kr.  “ Arsenik-Beschwerden.”  The  recurrence 
only  took  place  once. 


158 


ARSENICUM. 


Unquenchable  thirst.  [Buchholz,  Beitrage,  1.  c. — Kellner,  1.  c. 
— Guilbert,  1.  c. — Cruger,  1.  c.] 

930.  Unquenchable  thirst,  with  dryness  of  the  tongue,  fauces,  and 
larynx.  [Tim.  a Guldenklee,  Opp.,  p,  280.] 

After  the  occurrence  of  diarrhoea  thirst  and  internal  heat  (aestus). 
[Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Violent  thirst  not  without  appetite  for  food.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 
Violent  rigor.  [Fernelius,  1.  c.]* 

Shivering.  [Buchholz,  Beitrage , 1.  c.] 

935.  Febrile  rigor.  [Med.  Nat.  Zeit .,  1798,  Sept.] 

Febrile  rigor  through  the  whole  body,  with  hot  fore- 
head, warm  face  and  cold  hands,  without  thirst  and 
without  subsequent  heat  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Lr .] 

Rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  warm  forehead,  hot  cheeks,  and 
cold  hands,  not  followed  by  heat  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Zr.] 

In  the  afternoon  stretching  and  drawing  in  the  limbs,  with  rigor 
in  the  integuments  of  the  head,  as  in  sudden  shuddering  from  fear ; 
thereafter  chill,  with  goose  skin.  This  was  followed  in  the  evening 
from  8 to  9 o’clock,  by  heat  in  the  body,  especially  in  the  face, 
without  sweat,  with  cold  hands  and  feet. 

After  drinking  a shudder  as  from  disgust.  [Alberti,  1.  c.,  tom.  iii.] 
940.  The  limbs  are  cold.  [Richard,  1.  c. — Fernelius,  1.  c.] 

External  coldness  of  the  limbs  and  internal  heat,  with  anxious 
unrest  and  weak  variable  pulse.  [Alberti,  1.  c.,  tom.  iii.] 

Chill,  febrile  rigor. 

After  dinner  shivering. 

A chilliness  in  the  external  skin  over  the  face  and  feet. 

945.  After  drinking,  chill  and  shivering  (immediately). 

An  attack  of  fever,  which  recurs  daily  at  a certain  hour. 

Febrile  rigor,  without  thirst  (immediately). 

By  day  much  chilliness,  after  the  chill  thirst,  in  the  evening 
much  heat  in  the  face. 

Chilliness,  with  inability  to  get  warm,  without  thirst,  with 
crossness,  and  when  she  spoke  or  moved,  a flush  of  heat  ran  over  her, 
she  became  red  in  the  face,  and  yet  was  chilly. 

950.  In  the  chill  no  thirst. 

(In  the  forenoon  violent  rigor  without  thirst ; he  has  at  the  same 
time  spasms  in  the  chest,  pains  throughout  the  body,  and  cannot  collect 
his  thoughts  ; after  the  chill  heat  with  thirst,  and  after  the  heat 
perspiration  with  roaring  in  the  ears  (aft.  20  h.). 

The  rigor  goes  off  after  dinner,  f 

Every  afternoon  about  3 o’clock  chill  attended  with  hunger  ; after 
eating  the  chill  became  still  more  severe. 

(In  the  afternoon  chill,  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  diarrhoeic 
stool,  and  thereafter  continued  cutting  in  the  abdomen.) 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  65,  “ Chilliness  up  to  the  greatest  degree  of  cold.” — 
S.  66,  “General  coldness,  with  copious  sweat  on  the  skin,” — S.  67,  “The  body 
feels  cold  to  the  touch  and  dryness  of  the  skin  alternates  with  cold  sweat.” 

f A (rare)  alternating  action  compared  with  the  more  frequent  one  in  which  sym- 
ptoms occur  after  dinner. 


ARSENICUM. 


159 


955.  The  rigor  returns  always  about  5 p.m. 

In  the  evening,  immediately  before  lying  down,  rigor. 

Towards  evening  chill  with  coldness. 

Every  evening  a febrile  rigor. 

Chilliness  internally,  heat  externally,  with  red  cheeks,  in  the 
afternoon. 

960.  He  was  chilly,  the  feet  were  cold  ; he  began  to  perspire. 

In  the  evening  coldness  and  chilliness  in  the  feet,  and  even  the 
abdomen  is  cold  to  the  touch. 

In  the  evening  chilliness  on  the  legs,  from  the  calves  down  to  the 
feet. 

She  is  either  too  cold  in  the  whole  body  and  yet  is  nowhere  cold 
to  touch  ; or  she  is  too  warm,  and  yet  is  nowhere  hot  to  touch, 
except  slightly  in  the  palms. 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  great  chilliness,  in  bed. 

965.  He  cannot  get  warm  in  bed  3 thinks  he  has  caught  cold  in  bed. 
During  the  febrile  rigor  tearing  in  the  legs. 

Shivering  when  out  of  bed. 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  shivering  occurs. 

When  he  comes  into  the  room*  from  the  open  air  there  occurs 
chilliness,  followed  by  long-continued  hiccup,  then  general  perspira- 
tion, and  then  again  hiccup. 

970.  During  the  pain  rigor,  after  the  pain  thirst. f 

At  one  time  chilliness,  at  another  heat.  [Alberti,  J.  c.,  tom.  iii.] 
Internal  heat.J  [Goritz,  1.  c.] 

Heat  all  through  the  body,  internally  and  externally,  as  from 
drinking  wine,  with  thirst  for  beer.  [T/yr.] 

Anxious  heat.1  [Pet.  de  Apono,  1.  c.] 

975.  General  anxious  warmth.  [Hbgj] 

Sensation  as  if  the  blood  ran  too  quickly  and  too  hot  through  the 
blood-vessels,  with  small,  quick  pulse.  [$£/'.] 

In  the  evening,  at  10  o’clock,  heat  and  redness  all  over  the  body  3 
after  the  heat,  sweat.  [ Si f] 

Violent  palpitation  in  the  night.  \_Bhr.~\ 

Excessive  ebullition  of  the  blood.1  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

980.  After  the  febrile  heat,  sick  feeling  (aft.  15  h.). 

Nocturnal  heat  without  thirst  and  without  perspiration.  § 

At  7 p.m.  heat  of  face  lasting  an  hour. 

In  the  evening  after  a short  sleep  she  wakes  with  toothache. 

At  the  commencement  of  sleep,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down, 
perspiration,  which  goes  off  during  subsequent  sleep. 

* Comp.  33. 

f As,  according  to  the  characteristic  peculiarity  of  the  action  of  arsenic,  another 
symptom  occurs  during  the  attack  of  pain  (see  note  to  176),  and  here  (970)  chilliness 
and  rigor  in  particular  ; so,  again,  pains  are  associated  with  the  arsenical  febrile  rigor, 
as  we  see  in  960  and  995. 

X See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  S.  69,  “ Great  heat.” — S.  70, et  Dry  heat  of  the  skin,  after 
preceding  chill.” — S.  71,  “ Skin  dry  and  hot.” 

§ Characteristic  for  arsenic. 


1 The  original  of  both  these  symptoms  is  “ exaestuatio,”  the  real  meaning  of  which 
is  best  rendered  in  979. 


i6o 


ARSENICUM. 


985.  At  the  commencement  of  sleep*  perspiration,  only  on  the  hands 
and  thighs,  which  goes  off  during  subsequent  sleep,  and  is  not 
perceived  any  more  after  waking  (aft.  6 h.). 

About  2 a.m.  increased  warmth,  sweat  on  face  and  between  the 
legs,  and  colic-like  painful  tension  in  the  epigastrium  and  the  region 
beneath  the  ribs,  which  causes  anxiety. 

The  perspiration  each  time  comes  on  only  when  the  fever  has  come 
to  an  end.f 

Morning  sweat  from  waking  until  rising,  all  over  the  body. 

Sweat  on  three  successive  nights. 

990.  Sweat  only  on  the  face,  on  waking  in  the  morning. 

(The  perspiration  exhausts  him,  as  he  lies  in  bed,  almost  to  the 
production  of  syncope.) 

During  the  perspiration  his  skin,  and  especially  his  eyes,  acquired 
a yellow  tinge.1  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  p.  69.] 

Perspiration.2  [Majault,,  1.  c.] 

Cold  clammy  sweat.3  [Henning,  1.  c.]J 
995.  Along  with  febrile  rigor  and  shivering  and  heat  of  the  external 
ear,  anxiety  and  gnawing  § pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  from 
fasting  long,  mingled  with  nausea. 

Fever  every  alternate  day  : the  first  afternoon,  about  6 o'clock, 
chilliness  and  fatigue,  and  bruised  feeling  in  the  thighs  ; the  third 
afternoon,  about  5 o'clock,  at  first  inclination  to  lie  down,  then  rigor 
all  over  without  thirst,  then  heat  without  thirst,  with  aching  pain  in 
the  forehead. 

In  the  morning  rigor  alternating  with  heat. 

In  the  forenoon  perspiration,  heaviness  of  the  head,  roaring  in  the 
ears,  trembling. 

V ery  slow  pulse,  only  thirty-eight  beats  in  the  minute.  [Pearson, 

1.  c.] 

1000.  Small,  quick  pulse.  [N.  TVahrn.,  1.  c. — Majault,  1.  c.] 

Quick,  weak  pulse.4  [Majault,  1.  c.] 

Very  rapid,  small,  weak  pulse.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Tense  pulse.  [Knape,  1.  c.] 

Extremely  quick,  intermittent,5  weak  pulse.  [Guilbert,  1.  c.] 
1005.  Very  febrile  pulse.  [Knape,  1.  c.]  || 

* Characteristic. 

f Characteristic,  and  to  be  met  with  almost  only  with  arsenic, 
j See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  No.  72,  “ Cold  sweat  alternating  with  cold  dryness  of 
the  skin. 

§ Comp.  360. 

||  The  variations  of  the  pulse  are  given  thus  by  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  SS.  73—78  : “ Small, 
quick,  hard  pulse.” — “ Pulse  weak  and  small.” — “ Pulse  small  and  intermitting.” — 
“The  pulse  becomes  irregular,  intermittent,  small,  and  at  last  quite  extinct.” — “Pulse 
frequent,  not  full,  and  irritated.  The  heart’s  beat  is  very  violent,  tumultuous.” — 
“ Absence  of  the  pulse,  with  quick,  very  irritated,  frequent  beat  of  the  heart.” 


■ See  note  to  S.  1 18. 

2 With  vomiting. 

3 Stated  to  be  the  effect  of  aniseed  given  as  an  antidote. 

4 Not  found. 

5 Rather,  “ irregular.” 


ARSENICUM. 


161 


After  dinner  a sad  melancholy  disposition  with  headache  (aft. 

Boh.). 

The  child  is  full  of  restlessness,  cross,  and  whines. 

He  can  find  rest  in  no  place,  continually  changes  his  position 
in  bed,  will  get  out  of  one  bed  and  into  another,  and  lie  now  here, 
now  there.* 

About  i a.m.  excessive  anxiety  ; sometimes  she  is  hot,  some- 
times as  though  she  would  vomit. 

10 10.  She  cannot  fall  asleep  before  midnight  on  account  of  anxious 
heat,  for  many  days. 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  and  at  about  3 a.m.  (after 
waking),  anxiety.f 

Anxiety,  anxietates.  [iV.  JVahrn .,  1.  c.- — Med.  Nat . Zeit .,  1.  c. — 
Myrrhen,  1.  c. — Quelmalz,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety  so  that  he  frequently  fainted,  besides  a violent  pain  in 
the  place,  and  black  pocks  on  the  spot.J  [Bern.  Verzasch,  Obs. 
Med.,  obs.  66.] 

The  most  intolerable  anxiety.1  [Forestus,  1.  c.] 

T015.  Talks  little,  only  complains  of  anxiety.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Deathly  anxiety.2 3  [Henning,  1.  c.] 

Praecordial  anxiety,  interrupted  by  the  occurrence  of  faintings.8 
[Friedrich,  1.  c.] 

Long-continued  anxiety.4  [Tim.  a Guldenklee,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety,  trembling,  and  quaking,  with  cold  sweat  in  the  face. 
[Alberti,  1.  c.] 

1020.  Anxiety  and  restlessness  in  the  whole  body  (aft.  1 h.).  [Richard, 

c-] 

On  account  of  increasing  pains  he  appeared  to  lie  at  the  last 
gasp,  with  unspeakable  anxiety.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Restlessness,  with  pains  in  the  head,  abdomen,  and  knees. 
[Richard,  1.  c.] 

Sadness  and  restlessness  and  tossing  about  in  bed,  with  unquench- 
able thirst  § (aft.  24  h.).  [Buttner,  1.  c.] 

Piercing  lamentations,  interrupted  by  the  occurrence  of  faintings.5 
[Friedrich,  1.  c.] 

1025.  He  wept  and  howled,  and  spoke  little  and  but  few  words  at  a 
time.  [<Sy.] 

Piteous  lamentations,  that  the  most  intolerable  anxiety,  with 
extremely  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  whole  abdomen,  took  away 

^ Scarcely  occurs  so  markedly  in  any  other  medicine, 
f Characteristic. 

X When  arsenic  was  worn  in  a bag  on  the  bare  chest  for  four  days. 

§ From  external  application  on  the  head  in  two  children.  Death  ensued  after  two 
days,  and  revealed  inflammation  of  the  luhgs  and  great  inflammation  in  the  stomach 
and  small  intestines. 


1 Not  found. 

2 With  vomiting. 

3 See  note  to  S.  1024, 

4 In  the  original  “ praecordiorum  angustia.’’ 

5 The  attacks  were  of  weaknesses  (Schwachheiten),  hot  faintings  (bhnmachteh); 


162 


ARSENICUM. 


his  breath  and  compelled  him  to  curl  himself  together  now  here  now 
there,  then  again  to  rise  up  and  walk  about.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  § 8.] 

Trembling,  anxious,  he  is  afraid  that  he  cannot  refrain  from  killing 
some  one  with  a sharp  knife.  [A.  F.  Marcus,  Ephe?n.  d.  Heilk ., 
pt.  iii.]1 

Driven  by  great  anxiety  he  turns  and  twists  about  in  bed. 
[Buttner,  1.  c. — Tim.  a Guldenklee,  Opp.,  p.  280.] 

He  wants  to  get  out  of  one  bed  into  another.  [Myrrhen,  1.  c.j 
1030.  Great  anxiety,  trembling,  and  shaking,  with  severe  tearing  in  the 
abdomen.  [Alberti,  1.  c.,  iii,  p.  533.] 

He  became  furious,  must  be  bound,  and  seeks  to  run  away.2 
[Amatus  Lusitanus,  1.  c.] 

Mania : first  headache,  horrible  anxiety,  noise  before  the  ears,  as 
from  a number  of  large  bells,  and  when  he  opened  the  eyes,  he  always 
saw  a man  who  had  (formerly)  hung  himself  on  the  ground-floor  of  the 
house,  who  incessantly  beckoned  him  to  cut  him  down  ; he  ran 
thither  with  a knife,  but,  as  he  could  not  cut  him  down,  he  became 
overwhelmed  with  despair  and  wished  (as  his  friends  assured  him)  to 
hang  himself ; but  being  prevented  from  doing  so,  he  became  so 
restless  that  he  could  hardly  be  kept  in  bed,  he  lost  the  power  of 
speech,  though  complete  consciousness  remained,  and  on  attempting 
to  express  himself  by  writing,  he  could  only  put  down  unmeaning 
signs,  whilst  he  trembled,  wept,  his  forehead  bedewed  with  the  sweat 
of  anxiety,  and  he  knelt  down  and  raised  his  hands  in  a supplicating 
manner.  [Ebers,  1.  c.] 

He  despairs  of  his  life.3  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Hypochondriac  anxiety,  such  as  is  wont  to  occur  from  sitting 
much  in  a room,  just  as  if  it  came  from  the  upper  part  of  the  chest ; 
without  palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  some  minutes). 

1035.  He  is  cold,  shivers  and  weeps,  and  thinks,  in  his  despair,  that 
nothing  can  help  him,  and  he  must  die ; followed  by  general 
exhaustion. 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  anxious  sad  fancies,  e.  g.  that  something 
bad  must  have  happened  to  his  relatives. 

Easily  startled. 

When  he  is  alone  he  is  beset  by  thoughts  about  disease  and  other 
thoughts  of  an  indifferent  character,  of  which  he  cannot  get  rid. 

Persistent  anxiety,  like  a qualm  of  conscience,  just  as  if  he  had 
failed  to  do  his  duty,  but  without  knowing  wherein.* 

1040.  Over-sensitiveness  and  excessive  tenderness  of  disposition;  de- 
jected, sad,  lachrymose,  is  distressed  and  anxious  about  the  slightest 
trifle. 

Very  sensitive  to  noise. 

Irritated  state  of  the  disposition,  he  vexes  himself 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  SS.  1 — 3, ie  Internal  anxiety.” — “Great  feeling  of  anxiety.” 
— “ High  degree  of  anxiety,  oppression  of  the  chest  and  difficulty  of  breathing.” 


1 In  a fever  patient,  after  taking  arsenite  of  potash. 

2 See  815,  note. 

3 Not  found. 


ARSENICUM.  163 

about  trifles,  and  cannot  leave  off  talking  about  the 
faults  of  others. 

Discomfort,  he  has  pleasure  in  nothing. 

Recurring  fits  of  irresolution  ; he  wishes  something  and  when 
one  attempts  to  gratify  his  wish  the  merest  trifle  will  alter  his  resolu- 
tion, and  he  wishes  it  no  longer. 

1045.  Her  desire  is  greater  than  her  need  ; she  eats  and  drinks  more 
than  is  good  for  her ; she  walks  further  than  she  need  do  or  can 
bear. 

Having  not  the  least  appetite,  she  allows  herself  to  be  pressed  to 
take  something,  but  gets  furiously  angry  about  it  (aft.  7 d.). 

Very  cross,  irritable,  whimsical,  takes  every  word  in  bad  part,  and 
becomes  angry  when  she  should  answer. 

Cross  about  trifles. 

Discontented  with  everything,  finds  fault  with  everything ; every- 
thing is  too  strong  and  too  irritating,  all  conversation,  all  noise,  and 
all  light. 

1050.  Anxiously  impatient. 

Ill-humour  in  bed  in  the  morning ; he  peevishly  knocks  the 
pillows  about,  throws  off  the  bed-clothes  and  uncovers  himself,  he 
looks  at  nobody  and  does  not  want  to  know  about  anything. 

Variable  humour;  ill-humour  alternating  with  mild  friendli- 
ness ; in  the  ill-humoured  state  will  not  look  at  any  one  nor  hear  about 
anything  ; he  weeps  also. 

Weak  in  body  and  mind  (down-hearted),  he  does  not  speak  and 
yet  is  not  morose. 

(Talking  nonsense,  with  open  eyes,  without  being  conscious  of 
having  fancies  either  before  or  after.) 

1055.  Great  indifference  and  want  of  interest. 

Life  appears  to  him  naught ; he  attaches  no  value  to  it.* 

Uncommonly  tranquil  disposition  ; quite  unconcerned  about  their 
approaching  death,  they  neither  hoped  nor  wished  to  recover. f 

Religious  melancholy  and  reserve.1 2  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  p.  18.] 

Tranquillity  of  mind  (in  a despairing  melancholic).  [Laborde, 
in  Journ.  de  Medecine , lxx.]3 

1060.  Tranquil  serious  mood  ; he  remained  undisturbed  throughout  all 
the  events  that  occurred.  [Zr.] 

Good  humoured ; he  has  pleasure  in  entertaining  himself  with 
others.  [Zr.] 

More  disposed  to  gaiety  and  inclined  to  be  always  occupied* 

[2>.] 

^ See  also  Raiser,  1.  c , S.  4,  “ Indifference  to  life.” 

f A secondary  or  curative  action  observed  in  two  suicides,  who  in  the  most 
intolerable  depression  of  mind  took  one  a drachm  the  other  about  two  scruples  of 
powdered  arsenic,  and  in  a few  hours  died  with  the  greatest  calmness  of  mind. 


1 Not  found. 

2 La  Motte  in  Hahnemann.  A woman  taking  arsenic  for  suicide.  The  calmness 

was  rather  mental,  from  her  determination,  than  physical. 


162 


ARSENICUM. 


his  breath  and  compelled  him  to  curl  himself  together  now  here  now 
there,  then  again  to  rise  up  and  walk  about.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  § 8.] 

Trembling,  anxious,  he  is  afraid  that  he  cannot  refrain  from  killing 
some  one  with  a sharp  knife.  [A.  F.  Marcus,  Ephe?n . d.  Heilk ,, 
pt.  iii.]1 

Driven  by  great  anxiety  he  turns  and  twists  about  in  bed. 
[Buttner,  1.  c. — Tim.  a Guldenklee,  Opp.,  p.  280.] 

He  wants  to  get  out  of  one  bed  into  another.  [Myrrhen,  1.  c.] 
1030.  Great  anxiety,  trembling,  and  shaking,  with  severe  tearing  in  the 
abdomen.  [Alberti,  1.  c.,  iii,  p.  533.] 

He  became  furious,  must  be  bound,  and  seeks  to  run  away.2 
[Amatus  Lusitanus,  1.  c.] 

Mania : first  headache,  horrible  anxiety,  noise  before  the  ears,  as 
from  a number  of  large  bells,  and  when  he  opened  the  eyes,  he  always 
saw  a man  who  had  (formerly)  hung  himself  on  the  ground-floor  of  the 
house,  who  incessantly  beckoned  him  to  cut  him  down  ; he  ran 
thither  with  a knife,  but,  as  he  could  not  cut  him  down,  he  became 
overwhelmed  with  despair  and  wished  (as  his  friends  assured  him)  to 
hang  himself ; but  being  prevented  from  doing  so,  he  became  so 
restless  that  he  could  hardly  be  kept  in  bed,  he  lost  the  power  of 
speech,  though  complete  consciousness  remained,  and  on  attempting 
to  express  himself  by  writing,  he  could  only  put  down  unmeaning 
signs,  whilst  he  trembled,  wept,  his  forehead  bedewed  with  the  sweat 
of  anxiety,  and  he  knelt  down  and  raised  his  hands  in  a supplicating 
manner.  [Ebers,  1.  c.] 

He  despairs  of  his  life.3  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Hypochondriac  anxiety,  such  as  is  wont  to  occur  from  sitting 
much  in  a room,  just  as  if  it  came  from  the  upper  part  of  the  chest ; 
without  palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  some  minutes). 

1035.  He  is  cold,  shivers  and  weeps,  and  thinks,  in  his  despair,  that 
nothing  can  help  him,  and  he  must  die ; followed  by  general 
exhaustion. 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  anxious  sad  fancies,  e.  g.  that  something 
bad  must  have  happened  to  his  relatives. 

Easily  startled. 

When  he  is  alone  he  is  beset  by  thoughts  about  disease  and  other 
thoughts  of  an  indifferent  character,  of  which  he  cannot  get  rid. 

Persistent  anxiety,  like  a qualm  of  conscience,  just  as  if  he  had 
failed  to  do  his  duty,  but  without  knowing  wherein.-* 

1040.  Over-sensitiveness  and  excessive  tenderness  of  disposition;  de- 
jected, sad,  lachrymose,  is  distressed  and  anxious  about  the  slightest 
trifle. 

Very  sensitive  to  noise. 

Irritated  state  of  the  disposition^  he  vexes  himself 

* See  also  Kaiser,  1.  c.,  SS.  1 — 3, te  Internal  anxiety.”-— u Great  feeling  of  anxiety.” 
— “ High  degree  of  anxiety,  oppression  of  the  chest  and  difficulty  of  breathing.” 


1 In  a fever  patient,  after  taking  arsenite  of  potash. 

2 See  815,  note. 

3 Not  found. 


ARSENICUM.  1 63 

about  trifles,  and  cannot  leave  off  talking  about  the 
faults  of  others. 

Discomfort,  he  has  pleasure  in  nothing. 

Recurring  fits  of  irresolution  ; he  wishes  something  and  when 
one  attempts  to  gratify  his  wish  the  merest  trifle  will  alter  his  resolu- 
tion, and  he  wishes  it  no  longer. 

1045.  Her  desire  is  greater  than  her  need  ; she  eats  and  drinks  more 
than  is  good  for  her ; she  walks  further  than  she  need  do  or  can 
bear. 

Having  not  the  least  appetite,  she  allows  herself  to  be  pressed  to 
take  something,  but  gets  furiously  angry  about  it  (aft.  7 d.). 

Very  cross,  irritable,  whimsical,  takes  every  word  in  bad  part,  and 
becomes  angry  when  she  should  answer. 

Cross  about  trifles. 

Discontented  with  everything,  finds  fault  with  everything  ; every- 
thing is  too  strong  and  too  irritating,  all  conversation,  all  noise,  and 
all  light. 

1050.  Anxiously  impatient. 

Ill-humour  in  bed  in  the  morning ; he  peevishly  knocks  the 
pillows  about,  throws  off  the  bed-clothes  and  uncovers  himself,  he 
looks  at  nobody  and  does  not  want  to  know  about  anything. 

Variable  humour  ; ill-humour  alternating  with  mild  friendli- 
ness ; in  the  ill-humoured  state  will  not  look  at  any  one  nor  hear  about 
anything  ; he  weeps  also. 

Weak  in  body  and  mind  (down-hearted),  he  does  not  speak  and 
yet  is  not  morose. 

(Talking  nonsense,  with  open  eyes,  without  being  conscious  of 
having  fancies  either  before  or  after.) 

1055.  Great  indifference  and  want  of  interest. 

Life  appears  to  him  naught ; he  attaches  no  value  to  it.* 

Uncommonly  tranquil  disposition  ; quite  unconcerned  about  their 
approaching  death,  they  neither  hoped  nor  wished  to  recover.f 

Religious  melancholy  and  reserve.1 2  [Ebers,  1.  c.,  p.  18.] 

Tranquillity  of  mind  (in  a despairing  melancholic).  [Laborde, 
in  Journ.  de  Medecine , lxx.]3 

1060.  Tranquil  serious  mood  ; he  remained  undisturbed  throughout  all 
the  events  that  occurred.  [Zr.] 

Good  humoured ; he  has  pleasure  in  entertaining  himself  with 
others.  [Zr.] 

More  disposed  to  gaiety  and  inclined  to  be  always  occupied* 
[Zr.] 

* See  also  Raiser,  1.  c , S.  4,  “ Indifference  to  life.” 

f A secondary  or  curative  action  observed  in  two  suicides,  who  in  the  most 
intolerable  depression  of  mind  took  one  a drachm  the  other  about  two  scruples  of 
powdered  arsenic,  and  in  a few  hours  died  with  the  greatest  calmness  of  mind. 


1 Not  found. 

2 La  Motte  in  Hahnemann.  A woman  taking  arsenic  for  suicide.  The  calmness 

was  rather  mental,  from  her  determination,  than  physical. 


ASARUM.1 

(The  spirituous  tincture  of  the  dry  root  of  Asarum  europaum  or  the  juice  of  the 
whole  plant  mixed  with  alcohol.) 

Even  when  the  ordinary  physicians  have  taken  the  trouble,  which 
they  but  seldom  did,  to  ascertain  by  their  own  experiments  the  powers 
of  simple  medicinal  substances,  we  can  see  how  carelessly  they  went  to 
work  by  such  an  example,  among  others,  as  the  labours  in  this  direction 
of  Coste  and  Willemet,  who,  in  their  prize  essay  entitled  Essais  sur 
quelques  plantes  indigenes  (Nancy,  1778),  pretend  to  give  us  among 
others  a complete  proving  of  Asarum.  And  what  then  did  they 
discover  from  the  trials  they  themselves  made  of  it  ? Nothing 
of  all  the  remarkable  symptoms  recorded  below,  except  that,  when 
given  in  doses  of  from  twenty-eight  to  forty  grains,  it  caused 
vomiting  five  or  six  times.  But  what  was  the  peculiar  character  of 
this  vomiting,  or  by  what  dangerous  symptoms  it  was  accompanied,  of 
this  they  give  us  no  hint.  Further,  that  forty-eight  grains  given  to  a 
porter  caused  severe  colic  pains  and  violent  vomiting  and  purging,  which 
had  to  be  allayed  by  a clyster  of  milk.  And  hence,  as  they  imagine, 
this  root  must  be  regarded  as  identical  in  its  action  with  ipecacuanha. 
And  did  it  do  nothing  more  than  this  ? And  is  this  all  the  curative 
action  that  can  be  expected  from  it  ? How  carelessly  must  they  have 
acted  in  such  an  important  matter  when  they  observed  nothing  more 
and  discovered  no  more  medicinal  uses  for  it  ! 

No  ! asarum  is  as  little  adapted  for  employment  as  an  emetic  in  the 
place  of  ipecacuanha  (which  also  causes  many  other  changes  in  the 
health  of  human  beings)  as  many  other  substances,  which  when  taken 
in  excess  are  also  rejected  from  the  system  by  forcible  vomiting,  such 
as  arsenic,  sulphate  of  zinc,  acetate  of  copper,  veratrum  album,  &c. 
Do  all  these  substances,  which  when  taken  in  excess  cause  dangerous 
vomiting,  merely  exist  in  nature  in  order  that  we  may  use  them  as 
emetics  ? What  short-sightedness,  what  dangerous  superficiality ! 
And  my  remarks  do  not  apply  only  to  Coste  and  Willemet,  but  the 
same  complaint  may  be  made  of  all  our  ordinary  (non-)  observers. 
Mutato  nomine  de  te  fabula  narratur.  They  will  see,  and  have  seen, 
almost  nothing  from  the  administration  of  all  medicinal  substances  but 
evacuations  by  the  skin,  kidneys,  bowels,  &c.,  for  they  have  always 
sought  to  sweep  out  material  morbid  stuff  that  has  seldom  any  exist- 
ence, and  have  no  idea  of  effecting  cures  in  any  other  way. 

If  we  take  into  consideration  what  these  authors  relate  about  their 


1 From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


ASARUM. 


67 


porter  in  an  offhand  manner,  as  if  it  were  a mere  nothing  because  he 
did  not  die  on  the  spot,  together  with  what  may  be  read  in  the 
following  observations,  it  would  seem  to  be  highly  probable  that  this 
root,  when  given  in  such  a large  dose  as  that  it  shall  excite  that 
evacuation  upwards  of  which  the  saburralists  are  so  fond,  is  capable  of 
putting  a human  being  in  imminent  danger  of  his  life,  and  that  conse- 
quently it  may  actually  produce  a fatal  result,  as  was,  indeed,  seen  by 
Wedel.  That  would,  indeed,  be  a splendid  inestimable  remedy 
which  should  remove  the  (imaginary)  foulness  of  the  stomach  with  no 
other  disadvantage  than — palpable  danger  to  life  ! Preserve  us  from 
acting  so  barbarously  towards  our  sick  fellow-creatures  ! 

No  ! the  beneficent  Preserver  of  life  created  this  root  for  much 
nobler  objects.  To  cure  natural  morbid  vomiting  accompanied  by 
threatening  symptoms  like  those  of  asarum  with  the  smallest  dose  of  the 
excessively  diluted  tincture  of  asarum,  this  is  the  first  noble  employ- 
ment that  we  have  to  make  of  it — exactly  the  opposite  of  that  murder- 
ous misuse  of  it  in  which  it  was  recommended  in  large  doses  as  an 
emetic. 

What  else  it  can  do  in  the  way  of  homoeopathic  help  may  be  seen 
from  its  other  symptoms  detailed  below,  which,  to  the  thoughtful 
physician,  require  no  elucidation,  nor  is  it  necessary  to  give  any  other 
indication  of  the  diseases  curable  by  it. 

The  homoeopathic  practitioner  who  does  exactly  the  opposite  of  that 
which  the  ordinary  medical  school  has  hitherto  enjoined  knows  how  to 
make  a better  use  of  this  mighty  gift  of  God  ; he  never  misuses  it  for 
the  production  of  such  involuntary  break-neck  upsettings  of  the  human 
organism ; even  our  domestic  animals  should  be  spared  those  cruelties 
practised  under  the  name  of  veterinary  medicine. 

No,  the  Creator  wished  that  we  might  learn  to  overcome  great 
diseases  by  means  of  powerful  medicines  having  similar  symptoms 
(homoeopathically)  in  doses  of  the  smallest  size,  and  therefore  incapable 
of  doing  harm.  He  did  not  create  them  in  large  quantities  in  order 
that  we  should  by  giving  them  in  large  doses  inflict  injury  on  the 
noble  human  race  without  affording  relief,  as  is  the  case  in  the  ordinary 
allopathic  treatment.  These  substances  are  ordained  by  nature  for 
very  different  ends  and  purposes,  all  of  which  we  do  not  yet  know,  and 
for  which  they  have  been  produced  in  great  quantities  ; nothing  has 
been  created  for  one  single  object ; on  the  contrary,  the  purposes  of 
their  useful  production  are  manifold.  And  if  among  these  their  utility 
as  medicines  is  included,  the  large  supply  nature  affords  us  of  them 
cannot  warrant  us  to  misuse  them  in  great  doses  for  diseases.  Thus, 
for  instance,  arsenic  has  undoubtedly  other  important  uses  in  the  divine 
economy,  for  we  can  only  employ  a very  small  portion  of  the  many 
hundred  tons  of  it  which  the  Saxon  Erzgebirge  alone  can  furnish  for 
a useful  medicinal  purpose. 

According  to  Coste  and  Willemet  vinegar  is  an  antidote  to 
asarum.  Camphor  is  apparently  efficacious  in  alleviating  the  injurious 
effects  of  its  employment  in  unsuitable  cases  or  in  large  doses. 

A quadrillionth  of  a grain  (in  the  form  of  diluted  solution)  of  the 
alcoholic  tincture,  and  the  quintillionth  dilution  of  the  freshly-expressed 


1 68 


ASARUM. 


juice  mixed  with  an  equal  quantity  of  alcohol  (in  the  dose  of  a drop  or 
a small  portion  of  a drop),  appear  to  be  the  best  doses  for  homoeopathic 
purposes. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  the  proving  of  this  medicine  by  C.  Franz,  C.  G, 
Hornburg,  L.  Ruckert,  E.  Stapf. 

The  following  old-school  authorities  are  cited  : 

Coste  and  Willemet,  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.f  pr.  A iv. 

Helmont,  J.  B.  van,  Pharmac , mod, 

Murray,  Appar.  Med.,  iii. 

Ray,  Hist.  uni<v.  Plant.,  i. 

Wedel,  G.  W.,  Amcenit.  Mat.  Med. 

The  ist  edit,  had  268  symptoms  3 only  2 new  symptoms  appeared  in  the  2nd  edit.] 

ASARUM. 

Vertigo,  as  from  slight  intoxication,  on  rising  from  a seat  and 
walking  about  (aft.  10  m.).  [St/.] 

He  does  not  notice  things  about  him.  [Zz.] 

Mental  condition  as  if  just  falling  asleep ; a gradual 
vanishing  of  the  thoughts.  [Fz.] 

Thoughts  so  overstrained  that  they  vanish  completely.  [Fz.] 

5.  He  is  quite  stupid  in  his  head  and  has  no  inclination  for  any- 
thing. [Z.  Rkt.~] 

Incapacity  for  any  work,  and  he  can  do  nothing ; his  mental 
powers  fail  him  (before  each  attack  of  vomiting,  afterwards  some- 
what better)  3 as  a rule  his  reason  is  defective  all  throughout  the 
medicinal  disease.  [Z.  Rkt .] 

Sensation  of  vertigo,  as  if  he  could  not  stand  very  surely,  in  the 
evening  (aft.  4 d.).  [Z.  Rkt.'] 

Confusion,  like  stupidity  of  the  whole  head,  with  tension  in  the 
region  of  the  ears.  [Z.  RktJ] 

In  the  morning,  on  rising,  dizzy  in  the  head,  with  headache  in 
the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  22  h.).  [£//".] 

10.  When  he  wishes  to  work  with  his  head  and  to  reflect,  the  want 
of  thinking  power  immediately  returns  and  the  drawing  pressure  in 
the  forehead,  so  that  he  must  immediately  leave  off.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

As  often  as  he  attempts  to  reflect  a little,  the  head  affections  and 
the  sick  feeling  increase  perceptibly;  he  must  quickly  cease  thinking, 
which  would  besides  be  in  vain,  as  he  is  quite  stupid.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Aching,  stupefying,  dull  headache  in  the  forehead,  as  if  he  had 
been  wakened  too  soon  from  sleep.  [St/'.] 

Dull  headache  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hbg.] 

Headache,  like  confusion  in  the  left  temple,  thereafter  under 
the  parietal  bones,  lastly  in  the  occiput.  [Hbg.] 

15.  Confusion  of  the  head,  less  observable  when  walking,  more 
when  sitting,  and  pressing  in  the  eyes  as  with  a blunt  point  from 
within  outwards,  especially  under  the  right  eyelid  (aft.  \ h.).  [Fz.] 
Tensive  painful  confusion  of  the  head.  [Stf.] 

The  head  is  heavy  and  confused,  at  the  same  time  pressure  above 
the  sagittal  suture,  as  if  he  were  intoxicated  (aft.  3 h.).  [*SYA] 


ASARUM. 


169 


The  head  becomes  heavy,  as  if  there  were  something  that  shook 
or  swayed  in  it,  which,  after  bending  it  forwards  or  backwards,  lets 
its  weight  be  felt.  [ Fz.] 

Pressure  in  the  brain,  chiefly  anteriorly  (aft.  f h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

20.  Aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  extending  towards  the  side 
of  the  head  (aft.  3 m.).  [£//!] 

Out-pressing  pain  on  both  sides  of  the  head.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Very  acute  headache  in  the  left  temple  and  behind  the  ears,  like 
compression,  which  becomes  worse  when  walking  and  shaking  the 
head,  but  is  alleviated  by  sitting  (aft.  12  h.).  [£//'.] 

Pressure  from  without  inwards  over  the  greatest  portion  of  the 
brain  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Pressure  in  the  brain  from  above  downwards  as  with  a stone,  on 
a spot  of  the  forehead  (aft.  J h.).  [Z.  Rkt.'] 

25.  Violent  pressure  downwards  in  the  forehead  upon  the  eyes,  which 
then  water  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Z.  RJct.] 

Pressure  combined  with  other  sensations  here  and  there  in  the 
brain.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Sensation  of  pressure  of  alternating  severity  from  above  downwards 
in  the  forehead.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  temples,  especially  the  left.  [Zz.] 

Sharp  aching  headache  above  the  root  of  the  nose.  [Zz.] 

30.  Tearing  aching  pain  in  the  left  temple.  [£//'.] 

Violent,  drawing  pressure  in  the  brain  under  the  forehead  (in- 
creased every  time  he  retches).  [Z  Rkt.] 

Drawing  headache,  as  if  it  would  draw  into  the  temple  (at  noon)  ; 
it  appears  to  be  alleviated  in  the  open  air  and  by  lying.  [5£Z] 

A (stupefying)  drawing  here  and  there  in  the  brain,  ear,  and  nape. 

[*/•] 

When  he  has  stooped  and  rises  up  again,  for  some  seconds, 
lacerating  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

35.  Tearing,  pulse-like  throbbing  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Z.  Z/£/.] 

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed,  throbbing  pain  in  the  fore- 
head (aft.  24  h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

By  stooping  forwards,  throbbing  headache  is  excited  in  the 
forehead.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

He  feels  the  beat  of  the  arteries  in  the  occiput,  afterwards 
throughout  the  body.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Tension  of  the  whole  scalp  so  that  he  is  (painfully)  conscious  of 
the  hairs.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

40.  Itching  commencing  with  fine  pricks  under  the  left  temple. 

[/*.] 

A cold  sensation  on  a small  spot  of  the  left  side  of  the  head,  a 
couple  of  inches  above  the  ear.  [£//'.] 

Formication  under  the  upper  eyelid,  especially  of  the  left  eye. 

The  left  upper  eyelid  is  somewhat  swollen  ; the  eye  cannot  bear 
much  reading.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Twitching  of  the  lower  lid  of  the  right  eye.  [Zz.] 

45.  Sensation  of  twitching  in  the  left  upper  eyelid  from  within  out- 


i ;o 


ASARUM. 


wards,  by  fits,  but  only  when  he  holds  the  eyelid  still ; but  when 
he  elevates  it  in  order  to  look  at  anything,  it  goes  off  immediately 
(aft.  9 h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

In  the  outer  canthus  of  the  right  eye  a feeling  of  cold  as  from  a 
cold  breath.  [£7/*.] 

When  he  uses  the  eyes  for  reading,  there  occurs  in  each  of  them 
a feeling  as  if  it  was  forced  asunder.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Pressure  in  the  left  eye.  [S^Z.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  right  eye  synchronous  with 
the  pulse  (aft.  i|h.).  [Z.  .£/£/.] 

50.  Sensation  of  dryness  and  drawing  in  the  eyes.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Dry  burning  in  the  eyelids  and  inner  canthi,  especially  in  the 
left  eye.  [£7/*.] 

Painful  dry  feeling  in  the  interior  of  the  eye,  [£7A] 

Warm  feeling  and  slight  pressure  in  the  eyes  ; they  have  lost 
much  of  their  brightness  and  look  duller.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Obscuration  of  the  eyes  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zz.] 

55.  The  whole  of  the  right  outer  ear  is  hot  to  the  touch,  frequently 
recurring  during  the  whole  medicinal  disease.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Sensation  of  warmth  at  the  orifice  of  the  right  meatus  auditorius 
and  feeling  as  if  a thin  skin  were  over  it  (aft.  \ h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Dull  roaring  in  the  left  ear,  like  a distant  wind  ; in  the  right 
clear  singing.  [Zz.] 

In  the  ear,  externally  as  well  as  internally,  a pinching  feeling,  like 
earache.  [^Hbg.] 

Aching  behind  and  below  the  left  ear.  [Hbg.] 

60.  On  bending  the  head  towards  the  left,  a pain,  as  if  from  over- 
exertion a fasciculus  of  muscular  fibres  was  out  of  its  place,  which 
spreads  over  the  left  temple  and  behind  the  ear  towards  the  left 
shoulder,  and  in  unison  with  the  pulse  increases  as  that  rises,  and 
diminishes  as  it  falls. 

Continued  pressive  and  tensive  pain  at  the  orifice  of 
the  meatus  auditorius.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

In  the  left  ear  a sensation  observed  outwardly  and  inwardly,  as 
if  the  cartilages  of  the  ear  contracted.  [Hbg.] 

Diminished  hearing  of  the  left  ear,  as  if  it  were  closed  by  the 
hand  ; it  is  as  if  the  cartilages  went  closer  together,  or  as  if  cotton- 
wool plugged  the  ears.  [Zz.] 

He  feels  as  if  a skin  were  stretched  over  the  right  meatus 
auditorius  (immediately).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

65.  A sensation  in  the  external  meatus  as  if  the  orifice  in  front  of  the 
membrana  tympani  were  pasted  up.  \_Hbg.] 

In  front  of  both  ears  he  feels  as  if  they  were  stopped.  [Zz.] 

He  hears  worse  with  the  right  than  with  the  left  ear  (aft.  1 h.j. 
[Z.  Rkt.] 

He  feels  as  if  a membrane  were  before  the  orifice  of  the  meatus 
auditorius,  with  sensation  as  if  it  was  compressed  (aft.  \ h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 
It  is  as  if  a membrane  were  stretched  over  the  right  meatus 
auditorius,  with  a tensive  pressure  therein — almost  continuously  for 
seven  days,  but  always  worse  during  the  chill.  [Z.  Rkt. ] 


ASARUM. 


171 


70.  The  feeling  of  tension  and  pressure  on  the  right  meatus  auditorius 
scarcely  ever  remits,  and  when  it  does  it  extends  to  the  right  lower 
jaw,  and  when  it  is  severe  a large  quantity  of  apparently  cold  saliva 
flows  from  the  right  side  of  the  mouth  (aft.  h.).  [A.  Rkt.~\ 
Burning,  shooting  pain  on  the  left  cheek.  [ Zz .] 

Feeling  of  warmth  in  the  left  cheek  (aft.  4 h.).  [67/1] 

Feeling  of  warmth  in  the  cheeks  (aft.  10  h>).  [Z.  Rkt.~\ 

On  washing  the  face  with  cold  water  the  vertigo,  headache, 
burning  on  the  tongue  and  in  the  mouth,  contraction  of  the  left 
cervical  muscles  and  the  weakness  of  the  knees  went  off,  but  after 
drying  the  face  they  returned.  [6^/1] 

75.  Fine  shooting  on  the  right  cheek.  [Zz.] 

On  the  left  cheek  a contractive  pain  accompanied  by  gentle,  but 
sharp  blows,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  third  molar  tooth.  [Zz.] 

Produces  in  the  nose  * a discharge  of  bloody  mucus  [Murray, 
Jppar.  Med,.,  iii,  p.  519.1] 

Dryness  of  the  inside  of  the  lower  lip.  [Zz.] 

A feeling  of  coldness,  like  a cold  breath,  in  the  upper  incisors. 

[*'/.] 

80.  Sensation  in  the  left  row  of  teeth  as  if  they  were  hollow.  \_HbgP] 
Cutting  pain,  with  cramp,  at  the  maxillary  joint.  [Zz.] 

Much  cool  saliva  collects  in  the  mouth.  [67/1] 

Frequent  sensation  of  contraction  in  the  interior  of  the  mouth, 
causing  flow  of  watery  saliva.  [ L . Rkt.~\ 

The  saliva  in  the  mouth  seems  to  be  quite  viscid  (aft.  24  h.). 
\_L.  Rkt.] 

85.  The  saliva  ejected  was  burning  hot  in  the  mouth  (aft.  \ h.).  [Stf.] 
Tongue  furred  white  (aft.  2 6 h.).  \_L.  Rkt.~\ 

A smarting  sensation  on  the  tongue  and  gums.  [67/1] 

Sensation  of  burning  transversely  across  the  middle  of  the  tongue, 
then  burning  and  dryness  in  the  whole  of  the  mouth  (aft.  20  m.). 

im 

Mucus  in  the  mouth,  with  sweetish  flat  taste.  [Zz.] 

90.  Taste  in  the  mouth  as  if  the  stomach  were  deranged.  [Z.  Rkt.] 
Tobacco  smoking  is  not  relished.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Tobacco  when  smoked  tastes  bitter.  [Zz.] 

Bread  tastes  bitter.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

The  dry  bread  eaten  tastes  bitter  (in  the  evening).  [Zz.] 

95.  Dryness  of  the  throat,  with  shooting.  [Zz.] 

Scraping  in  the  throat.  [£^] 

In  the  throat  such  viscid  mucus  that  he  could  not  bring  it  up  nor 
hawk  it  out,  for  eight  days.  [Z.  Rkt.~\ 

Swallowing  is  difficult,  as  from  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands. 
[Z.  Rkt.] 

Hiccup  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Z.  Rkt. — Hbg.] 

100.  Hunger  in  the  morning.  [Zz.] 

Frequent  eructation.  [Z.  Rkt. — Hbg. ] 

* Snuffed  up  into  the  nose. 


1 Statement. 


172 


ASARUM. 


Frequent  empty  eructation.  [Stf.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a rising  up  as  of  air,  out  of  the 
stomach,  and  when  it  came  to  the  mouth  he  must  yawn  a couple  of 
times,  then  for  an  hour  empty  eructation  and  copious  discharge  of 
flatus. 

Incomplete  eructation  up  to  the  upper  part  of  the  chest.  [Zz.] 
105.  Shivering  from  nausea.  [ Z . Rkt.] 

Nausea  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

General  discomfort  and  nausea.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Nausea  and  loathing  with  shuddering  (immediately).  [Zz.] 
Constant  nausea  and  sickness  in  the  fauces.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Iio.  Nausea,  with  aching  in  the  forehead,  and  great  flow  of  water  into 
the  mouth.  [Z.  Rkt. ] 

Empty  retching,  with  flow  of  water  into  the  mouth  (aft.  1 \ h.). 
[Z.  Rkt.] 

The  retching  is  always  more  violent  the  oftener  it  comes  ; the 
eyes  become  filled  with  water.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

When  retching  all  the  symptoms  are  increased,  except 
the  stupidity  of  the  head,  which  decreases.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Vomiting  (an  hour  after  the  first  retching),  with  great  straining 
of  the  stomach,  in  five  or  six  paroxysms,  each  time  as  if  the  head 
would  burst  in  the  region  of  the  ears  ; only  a little  greenish,  slightly 
sour,  gastric  juice  is  ejected  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

1 15.  Vomiting,  with  great  anxiety.  [J.  6.  v.  Helmont,  Pharmac. 
mod.,  § 47.1] 

Vomiting,  diarrhoea — death.  [G.  W.  Wedel,  Amcenit.  Mat. 
Med.,  p.  240. 2] 

Vomiting  with  great  effort  and  violent  pressure  in  the  stomach  ; 
the  effort  to  vomit  takes  away  his  breath,  so  as  almost  to  suffocate 
him,  and  yet  nothing  but  sourish  water  is  ejected  (aft.  2\  h.). 
[Z.  Rkt.]  ‘ 

Vomiting,  with  sensation  of  straining  of  the  stomach  and  violent 
compression  in  the  epigastrium,  and  a similar  feeling  in  the  head  (aft. 
2\  h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

There  always  remains  some  nausea  in  the  stomach,  with  disincli- 
nation to  work,  sensation  of  want  of  thinking  power  and  laziness. 
[Z.  Rkt.] 

120.  (After  the  vomiting  alleviation  of  the  head  symptoms.)  [Z.  Rkt.] 
Fulness  in  the  stomach,  with  hunger.  [Zz.] 

Pinching  in  the  stomach  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Hbg.] 

Slight  pinching  in  the  stomach  or  just  over  it.  [Zz.] 

In  the  stomach  a pressure  as  with  a blunt  point.  \_Hbg.] 

125.  Troublesome  pressure  on  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  prevents 
him  feeling  whether  he  is  hungry  or  not — all  day.  [Z.  Rkt .] 

Hard  pressure  on  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  scrobiculus 
cordis  for  two  successive  days.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Pressure  on  the  gastric  region  on  inspiring.  [Z.  Rkt.] 


1 General  statement. 

2 Case  of  poisoning  of  a strong  man. 


ASARUM. 


173 


Feeling  of  constriction  in  the  region  of  the  diaphragm.  [Z.  Rkt.] 
From  time  to  time  sharp  cutting  round  about  in  the  epigastrium, 
which  is  always  relieved  by  the  discharge  of  some  flatulence.  \_L.  Rkt .] 
130.  Cutting  in  the  epigastrium  (aft.  2 h.).  [ L . Rkt."] 

Horrible  colic  and  vomiting.  [Coste  and  Willemet,  in  SammL 
br.  Abh%  f pr.  A.,  iv,  2.1] 

Fulness  in  the  abdomen,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  appetite  and 
hunger.  [Zz.] 

Qualmishness  in  the  abdomen,  with  repeated  aching  pain  along 
the  coronal  suture  (aft.  8 h.).  [££/!] 

A painless  and  gentle  working  about  in  the  abdomen.  [Stf.] 

135.  Explosion  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen  which  is  not  discharged. 
[Fz.] 

Pressure  in  the  abdomen.  [A.  Rkt,] 

Feeling  of  aching  and  painful  pressing  on  the  left  side  of  the 
abdomen,  observed  when  moving.  [Z.  Rkt.'] 

Single  painful  sensations  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  obliquely 
below  the  navel.  [ St f] 

Before  the  stool  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  sharp  stitches  in  the 
rectum  from  above  downwards  (in  the  morning).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

140.  He  has  hurried  urging  to  stool  (i^  hour  after  the  first  stool)  with 
cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  rectum  before  and  during  the  (looser) 
stool.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Stool  in  hard  small  pieces.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

The  usual  morning  stool  was  delayed  for  some  hours,  and  then  it 
was  scanty,  yellow  like  an  egg  (slimy)  and  of  slender  form.  [££/'.] 
Diarrhoea.  [Coste  and  Willemet,  1.  c.] 

Diarrhoeic,  viscid  slimy,  as  it  were  resinous  stool  ; ascarides 
pass  in  shaggy  masses  of  mucus,  for  six  days.  \_Stf.] 

145.  Stool  whitish-grey  and  ash  coloured,  with  bloody  mucus  on  the 
top. 

Pressure  on  the  bladder,  during  and  after  urinating.  [Z%.] 
Constant  urging  to  urinate.  [Zz.] 

(A  drawing  in  the  urethra.) 

A wild,  acute  pain  in  the  left  groin,  which  darted  quickly 
through  the  urethra  into  the  glans  penis,  and  there  a smarting, 
contractive,  violent,  internal  pain  remained  for  a long  time.  [£//*.] 
150.  Premature  birth,  expulsion  of  the  foetus.2  [Ray,  Hist . univ. 
Plant .,  i.] 

■ * * 

(Stuffed  coryza  ; the  left  nostril  is  stopped  up).  [67/1] 

(Violent  sneezing.) 

A tickling  runs  through  the  nose  (as  from  the  positive  galvanic 
pole),  which,  after  ineffectual  urging,  causes  sneezing  and  a flow  of 
clear  fluid.  [67/1] 

Sensation  as  if  the  breath  and  saliva  were  hot,  but  without  dry 
feeling  in  the  mouth.  [Z.  Rkt.] 


1 General  statement. 

51  This  represents  Ray’s  statement  that  A.  is  abortifacient* 


174 


ASARUM. 


155.  Repeated  coughing  on  account  of  mucus  in  the  chest,  which  first 
rises  up  into  the  throat  and  causes  difficulty  of  breath,  and  at  length 
cough,  with  expectoration,  [Zz.] 

Inspiration  causes  an  irritation  in  the  throat,  which  excites 
cough.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Very  short  breath  (at  night). 

(Angry  and  cross  before  the  cough.) 

Great  expectoration  of  mucus  by  hawking  and  coughing. 

160.  (At  the  commencement  of  the  cough  the  respiration  is  whistling.) 
Short  breath  ; the  throat  is  constricted  and  this  causes  hacking 
cough.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Obtuse  stitch,  impeding  respiration,  quite  low  down,  as  if  in  the 
left  lung,  at  every  inspiration  (aft.  15  h.).  [ Z . Rkt.] 

He  can  only  breathe  short  and  by  jerks  on  account  of  stitches 
and  constriction  in  the  larynx  ; short  coughing  relieved  the  constric- 
tion for  a little  time.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Obtuse  stitch  on  the  left  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  9 h.). 
[Z.  Rkt.] 

165.  In  the  right  lobe  of  the  lung  stitches  when  inspiring 

(aft.  12  h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Frequent,  obtuse  stitches  in  both  lungs,  during  inspir- 
ation, for  eight  days.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Stitches  in  the  chest  during  respiration  (aft.  24  h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 
When  he  takes  a rather  deep  breath  immediately  obtuse  stitches 
in  both  lungs.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Sensation  of  pressure  on  the  whole  of  the  chest.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

170.  In  the  region  of  the  last  ribs  a sharp  pressure  as  if  with  the  back 
of  a knife.  \_Hbg.] 

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest  a severe,  forcible  pressing  at 
regular  intervals  (aft.  h.).  \Hbg.] 

Visible  twitching  and  palpitation  in  the  muscles  of  the  region  of 
the  clavicle.  \_Hbg.  ] 

Stretching  pain  in  the  left -side  (aft.  f h.).  [Zz.] 

Sensation  as  if  the  left  lung  were  constricted  or  cut  into  by  a 
string  or  wire.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

175.  Pain  round  about  in  both  lungs,  as  if  they  were  constricted  by  a 
sharp  wire.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest  a burning  sensation,  more  exter- 
nally than  internally.  \_Hbg.] 

Burning  pain  with  shooting  in  the  sacrum,  while  sitting.  \_Fz.] 
From  one  crista  ilii  to  the  other  over  the  spine,  pain  as  if  the 
flesh  of  the  muscles  were  rent  outwards,  in  tearing  jerks,  when 
walking.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Paralytic  pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  back,  as  long  as  he  remains 
erect,  stands  or  sits,  but  does  not  lie.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

180.  Bruised  pain  in  the  back.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Obtuse  stitches  under  the  scapulas.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

At  the  inner  border  of  the  right  scapula  a pain  as  from  a knock 
or  blow,  especially  felt  on  touching  the  scapula  or  drawing  it  inwards 
(aft.  25  h.).  [Stf.] 


ASARUM. 


*75 


Pain  in  the  nape  on  the  left  side  as  if  by  over-exertion  a bundle 
of  muscular  fibres  had  got  out  of  their  place,  the  pain  then  spreads 
over  the  head  and  shoulders  (aft.  6 h.).  [£//’.] 

Paralytic  pain  in  one  of  the  muscles  of  the  nape,  as  if  it  were 
bruised,  on  moving  the  neck.  [ A . Rkt^] 

185.  On  the  muscles  of  the  nape  a sensation  as  from  a too  tight  neck- 
cloth, and  as  if  a blunt  knife  were  pressed  on  it.  [Fz.] 

Feeling  of  weight  on  the  neck  and  sensation  as  if  the  muscles 
were  compressed  by  bandages.  \_Hbg.] 

Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  left  cervical  muscles,  with  percep- 
tible bending  of  the  head  to  that  side.  [<S7/'.] 

Violent  tearing  stitches  in  both  shoulders  during  motion  and  rest. 
[A.  Rkt.] 

In  the  axilla,  as  if  in  the  axillary  glands,  a rapidly  occurring 
obtuse  pain. 

190.  A pressure  in  the  left  axilla,  as  with  a rough  piece  of  wood. 

[Hbg.] 

Under  the  right  axilla  towards  the  front  an  itching,  as  from  a flea- 
bite.  [Fz.] 

Pain  in  the  shoulder,  as  if  dislocated,  on  moving  the  arm.  [Fz.] 
On  the  deltoid  muscle  of  the  upper  arm  a contractive  tensive 
pain,  on  laying  the  hand  on  the  table,  and  also  when  it  is  left  lying 
there.  [Fz.] 

Paralytic  weakness  in  the  arm.  [A.  Rkt.] 

195.  He  cannot  keep  the  arm  lying  on  the  table  long  without  discomfort 
and  feeling  of  exhaustion  ; but  when  he  allows  the  arm  to  hang  down 
he  feels  nothing.  [A.  Rkt .] 

Aching  tearing  in  the  left  arm  in  all  positions.  [ L . Rkt.] 
Drawing  paralytic  pain  in  the  left  wrist-joint.  [Sf/i] 

Quick,  drawing  burning  pain  from  the  wrist  through  the  thumb 
and  index  finger  (aft.  3 h.),  [ Hbg .] 

A drawing  in  the  fingers,  in  the  evening,  while  lying  in  bed. 
goo.  Occasional  twitching  tearing  pains  in  the  upper  and  lower 
extremities.  [A.  Rkt.'] 

Bruised  feeling  and  sometimes  transient  painful  tearing  in  the 
upper  and  lower  extremities.  [A.  Rkt.] 

Painful  sensation  on  the  hip.  [Fz.] 

In  the  right  hip  an  obtuse  aching.  \_Hbg.] 

In  the  head  of  the  left  thigh  and  beyond,  especially  when 
walking,  a (drawing  tensive)  pain.  [Stf.] 

205.  In  the  hips  a drawing  aching  pain  (when  walking).  \_Hbg.] 

When  walking  or  moving  after  sitting,  as  also  when  touching,  a 
dull  pain  in  the  hip-joint  and  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh.  [Stf.] 

Sensation  from  the  right  hip-joint  to  the  knee,  as  if  the  limb 
were  going  to  sleep.  [Stf.] 

When  he  treads  he  has  a violent  pain  in  the  hip-joint  and  in  the 
middle  of  the  thigh,  and  the  limb  is  as  if  paralysed  by  it ; he  cannot 
tread  properly.  [§//'.] 

Sudden,  digging  pain  in  the  upper  muscles  of  the  left  thigh. 

[**.] 


176  ASARUM. 

210.  Tearing,  shooting  pain  in  the  left  thigh.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh,  near  the 
knee,  which  goes  off  on  stretching  out  the  leg.  [Z%.] 

A drawing  in  the  knee. 

A drawing  in  the  tendons  of  the  hough,  in  the  evening  while 
lying  in  bed. 

(Clucking  in  the  hough.) 

215.  Violent  tearing  stitches  in  the  knees,  on  moving  and  when  at 
rest.  [Z.  Rkt.~] 

Fatigue  of  the  thighs  on  going  upstairs,  for  many  days.  [Z.  Rkt.] 
Exhausted  feeling  in  the  thighs  as  if  he  had  not  obtained  rest  by 
sleep.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  knees  with  visible  staggering  when 
walking,  when  he  does  not  take  great  care  (aft.  15  m.).  [£//*.] 

Exhaustion  and  bruised  feeling  of  the  thighs  and  knees,  as  in  a fit 
of  ague.  [Z.  Rkt.~] 

220.  Restlessness  in  the  left  knee-joint,  which  forces  him  to  move 
(aft.  ih.).  [Fz.] 

Above  the  right  hough  a pressure  as  with  some  hard  blunt 
substance.  [Hbg.] 

The  left  leg  is  as  if  asleep,  and  the  foot,  as  when  very  cold, 
insensible  and  as  if  dead.  [Zz.] 

Visible  twitching  and  palpitation  in  the  muscles  of  the  calf. 

the  left  tibia  sensation  as  if  bruised.  [ Hbg.] 

225.  In  the  sole  of  the  foot  quick  shooting  pains  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Hbg.] 
A drawing  in  the  toes,  in  the  evening  when  lying  in  bed. 

(On  both  feet  the  little  toes  are  painful  as  if  frozen.)  [5/A] 

Over  sensitiveness  of  all  the  nerves  ; when  he  thinks  (which  he 
cannot  help  doing  constantly)  of  someone  scratching  gently  with  the 
finger-tip  or  nail  on  linen  or  something  similar,  a very  disagreeable 
sensation  runs  through  him,  which  for  an  instant  stops  all  his 
thoughts  and  actions  (aft.  11  h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

After  dinner  great  fatigue.  \_Stf.] 

230.  Every  afternoon  great  exhaustion  and  constant  yawning.  [Z.  Rkt.] 
Laziness,  slowness,  and  dislike  to  all  work.  [Z.  Rkt.'\ 

General  feeling  of  exhaustion  and  sometimes  bruised  feeling  [Z. 
Rkt.] 

Agility  in  all  the  limbs  -}  he  does  not  know  that  he  has  a body. 

[**.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  the  headache,  heat  of  the  cheeks 
and  sleepy  crossness  go  off.  \_Stf. ] 

235.  When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  seems  to  be  floating  like  a 
disembodied  spirit.  [Zz.] 

Frequent  yawning.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Towards  evening  he  becomes  so  weak,  with  sick  feeling,  that 
when  he  sits  upright  he  feels  as  if  he  would  every  moment  succumb 
and  die,  he  must  lie  down  in  bed.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Very  great  drowsiness  by  day  (aft.  12,  13,  14  d.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 
Drowsiness,  crossness.  \_Stf.] 


[ Hbg.-] 

In 


ASARUM. 


l77 


240.  (On  alternate  nights  restless  sleep;  he  cannot  readily  fall  asleep.) 
During  sleep  such  a violent  shooting  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left 
foot,  that  he  dreamt  he  got  a stab  during  the  application  of  a blister ; 
on  awaking  he  felt  nothing.  [Hbg.] 

At  night  vexatious  and  annoying  dreams  of  being  put  to  shame, 
&c.  [Fz.] 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  an  ebullition  in  the  blood  that  prevented 
him  going  to  sleep,  for  two  hours. 

Shaking  all  over  the  body  (immediately),  [A%.] 

245.  Slight  shiver  over  the  body  (aft.  J,  ij  h.).  \_L.  Rkt.] 

Shiver  (with  loathing  and  nausea)  (immediately),  [Ax.] 

A rigor  in  the  back  (which  came  on  suddenly  on  biting  a hard 
crust). 

Rigor  and  chilliness,  without  thirst.  [A.  Rkt.] 

Uninterrupted  chilliness,  goose-skin  ; hands  and  face  cold,  blue- 
ness of  complexion.  [A.  Rkt.] 

250.  The  hands  are  icy  cold,  but  the  arms  and  the  rest  of  the  body 
warm,  yet  covered  with  goose-skin,  and  he  is  very  chilly.  [A. 

Rkt.] 

In  the  evening  rigor  with  extreme  weakness,  especially  in  the 
knees  and  sacrum,  without  thirst;  the  hands  are  cold,  but  the  rest 
of  the  body  as  warm  as  usual,  the  forehead,  however,  hot.  [A.  Rkt.'] 
Shivering  with  heat  in  the  face.  [A.  Rkt.] 

All  day  long  chilliness  ; when  he  sits  still  or  lies  and  keeps  him- 
self covered,  he  feels  nothing  (except  a pain  in  the  eyes,  pressure  in 
the  forehead  and  on  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  sometimes  external 
heat)  ; but  when  he  moves  about  in  the  room  ever  so  little,  or  sits 
out  in  the  open  air  without  moving,  he  is  excessively  chilly, 
almost  entirely  without  thirst ; but  when  he  walks  quickly  out  of 
doors  or  comes  from  the  open  air  into  the  warm  room,  or  when  he 
becomes  heated  by  animated  conversation  in  the  room,  or  after  dinner, 
as  also  when  lying  in  the  warm  bed,  he  feels  well  and  warm  enough, 
he  has,  indeed,  some  heat  with  thirst  for  beer.  [A.  Rkt.] 

Chill  when  drinking.  [A.  Rkt.] 

255.  Cold  sensation  on  the  body,  as  if  a cold  wind  blew  on  him  ; at 
the  same  time  he  felt  cold  to  the  touch,  almost  always  with  goose- 
skin;  after  a few  hours  warmth  returned  somewhat  increased  (in  the 
afternoon),  with  slimy  mouth,  dryness  in  the  throat  and  thirst ; here- 
after a similar  coldness,  and  in  the  evening  (an  hour  before  bedtime) 
again  increased  warmth,  which  lasted  in  bed,  during  which  he  must 
put  the  hands  outside  the  bed-clothes,  also  with  great  dryness  on  the 
palate.  [Az.] 

All  day  long  fever  : in  the  forenoon  chilliness,  which  does  not 
go  off  either  by  moving  in  the  open  air  or  by  external  warmth  ; after 
the  midday  siesta  external  feeling  of  heat,  with  internal  rigor  and 
thirst.  [A.  Rkt.] 

When  seated  and  not  well  covered  up,  or  when  he  moves,  imme- 
diately chilliness,  but  when  he  covers  himself  up  he  instantly  becomes 
hot,  though  sometimes  with  rigor.  [A.  Rkt.] 

After  the  cessation  of  the  hot  feeling,  while  heat  of  the  head  and 

12 


178 


ASARUM. 


face  remains,  chilliness  comes  on,  so  that  he  shivers  on  the  slightest 
movement.  \_L.  Rkt.] 

Heat  of  the  forehead  and  scalp,  the  rest  of  the  body  of  normal 
temperature,  with  shivering  and  chilliness  without  thirst,  and  strong 
and  quick  pulse.  \_L.  Rkt.'] 

260.  After  the  chilliness  feeling  of  heat  and  actual  heat,  especially  of 
the  face  and  palms,  whereupon  the  pains  in  the  ear  return.  \_L.  Rkt.] 
Feeling  of  warmth,  as  if  sweat  would  break  out  (aft.  4 h.).  \_L. 
Rkt.] 

Unusual  warmth  of  the  body  all  day  (aft.  24  h.).  [F%.] 

Slight  sweat  only  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body  and  the  upper 
extremities.  [Hbg.] 

In  the  evening  in  bed,  immediately  after  lying  down,  perspiration. 

265.  Profuse  night  sweat.  \_L.  Rkt.] 

Warm  perspiration,  even  when  sitting  still.  [L.  Rkt.] 

He  perspires  very  readily  from  a slight  cause.  [A.  Rkt.] 
Melancholy  peevishness. 

Lachrymose  sadness  and  anxiety.  [St/.] 

270.  Great  gaiety  (aft.  6 to  12  h.),  alternating  with  calmness  or  even 
sadness  for  some  moments.  [L.  Rkt.] 


AURUM.1 

( Gold , the  well-known  metal.) 

Just  as  superstition,  impure  observations,  and  credulous  assumptions 
have  been  the  source  of  innumerable  falsely  ascribed  remedial  virtues  of 
medicines  in  the  Materia  Medica  ; in  like  manner  physicians  by  their 
failure  to  resort  to  the  test  of  experiment  and  by  their  futile  theorizing, 
have  quite  as  unreasonably  denied  the  possession  of  any  medicinal  power 
whatever  to  many  substances  that  are  very  powerful,  and  consequently 
of  great  curative  virtue  ; and  by  so  doing  they  have  deprived  us  of  these 
remedies. 

In  this  place  I will  only  speak  of  gold,  and  not  of  this  metal  altered 
by  the  ordinary  chemical  processes,  consequently  not  of  it  dissolved  by 
the  action  of  acids  nor  precipitated  from  its  solution  (fulminating  gold), 
both  of  which  have  been  declared  to  be,  if  not  useless,  then  absolutely 
noxious,  apparently  because  they  cannot  be  taken  without  dangerous 
consequences  when  given  in  what  is  called  a justa  dosis , or,  in  other 
words,  in  excessive  quantity. 

No  ! I speak  of  pure  gold  not  altered  by  chemical  manipulations. 

Modern  physicians  have  pronounced  this  to  be  quite  inactive  ; they 
have  at  length  expunged  it  out  of  all  their  Materia  Medicas,  and  thereby 
deprived  us  of  all  its  mighty  curative  virtues. 

u It  is  incapable  of  solution  in  our  gastric  juices,  hence  it  must  be 
quite  powerless  and  useless.”  This  was  their  theoretical  conclusion,  and 
in  the  medical  art,  as  is  well  known,  such  theoretical  dicta  have  always 
availed  more  than  convincing  proof.  Because  they  did  not  question 
experience,  the  only  possible  guide  in  the  medical  art  which  is  founded 
on  experience  alone ; because  it  was  easier  to  make  mere  assertions , 
therefore  they  usually  preferred  bold  dicta,  theoretical  empty  assump- 
tions and  arbitrary  maxims  to  solid  truth. 

It  is  no  excuse  for  them  that  the  older  physicians  have  also  deemed 
gold  to  be  quite  useless  and  powerless,  that,  for  example,  Fabricius  (in 
Obs.  Med.)  says  : — u What  effect  can  the  low  temperature  of  our  stomach 
have  on  gold-leaf,  seeing  that  it  is  unaltered  by  the  most  intense  heat?” 
Or  Nicholas  Monardes  ( De  Ferro , pp.  32,  33) : — u Patients  may 
take  my  word  for  it,  and  spare  themselves  the  expense  of  employing  gold 
as  a medicine — they  can  never  obtain  any  medicinal  virtue  from  it  for 
their  maladies.”  Or  Alston  ( Mat . Med.,  i,  p.  69)  : — u Seeing  that 
gold  in  its  metallic  state  cannot  be  dissolved  or  altered  by  the  vital 
power,  it  can  consequently  have  no  medicinal  action,  but  what  it  exerts 
on  the  intestines  by  virtue  of  its  weight,  hardness,  and  mechanical 


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


i8q 


AURUM. 


form.”  Or,  lastly,  J.  F.  Gmelin  (Appar.  Med.  Min.,  i,  p.  445)  : — 
uAs  gold  is  not  destructible,  not  resolvable  into  vapour,  and  is  hence 
incapable  of  union  with  the  juices  of  the  animal  body,  therefore  it 
cannot  possess  curative  virtues.”* 

Nor  are  they  excused  when  they  adduce  a number  of  other  older 
physicians  as  deniers  of  the  medicinal  properties  of  gold,  and  refer  to 
such  names  as  Ant.  Musa  Brassavolus,  Fel.  Platerus,  Hier. 
Cardanus,  Jo.  Bravus  Petrafit,  Franc.  Pic.  Mirandola,  Merinus 
Mercenius,  Duretus,  Camerarius,  Cordosus,  Conringius,  Lemery, 
Angelus  Sala,  or  Joh.  Schroder,  who  in  other  matters  is  so  extremely 
credulous. 

They  were  all  wrong , and  so  are  all  the  modern  physicians. 

Gold  has  great , peculiar  medicinal  powers. 

At  first  I allowed  myself  to  be  deterred  by  these  deniers  from 
hoping  for  medicinal  properties  in  pure  gold  ; but  as  I could  not  persuade 
myself  to  consider  any  metal  whatsoever  as  destitute  of  curative  powers, 

I employed  it  at  first  in  solution.  Hence  the  few  symptoms  from  the 
solution  of  gold  recorded  below.  I then  gave,  in  cases  where  the  sym- 
ptoms guided  me  to  the  homoeopathic  employment,  the  quintillionth  or 
sextillionth  of  a grain  of  gold  in  solution  for  a dose,  and  observed  curative 
effects  somewhat  similar  to  those  I afterwards  experienced  from  pure 
gold. 

But  because,  as  a rule,  I do  not  like,  when  I can  avoid  it,  to  give  the 
metals  dissolved  in  acids  (when  I cannot  avoid  doing  so,  I prefer  their 
solutions  in  vegetable  acids),  and  least  of  all  in  mineral  acids,  as  that 
detracts  from  their  noble  simplicity,  for  they  must  assuredly  undergo 
some  alteration  in  their  properties  when  acted  on  by  these  acids — as  we 
must  perceive  on  a comparison  of  the  curative  effects  of  corrosive 
sublimate  with  those  of  the  black  oxyde  of  mercury — I was  delighted 
to  find  a number  of  Arabian  physicians  unanimously  testifying  to  the 
medicinal  powers  of  gold  in  a finely  pulverized  form,  particularly  in 
some  serious  morbid  conditions,  in  some  of  which  the  solution  of  gold 
had  already  been  of  great  use  to  me.  This  circumstance  inspired  me 
with  great  confidence  in  the  assertions  of  the  Arabians. 

The  first  trace  of  this  we  meet  with  in  the  eighth  century,  when 
Geber  [De  Alchimia  traditio , Argent,  ap.  Xetsoner,  1698,  lib.  ii,  p.  iii, 
cap.  32)  vaunts  gold  as  a u materia  laetificans  et  en  juventute  corpus 
conservans.” 

Towards  the  end  of  the  tenth  century  Serapion  the  younger  [De 
Simplicihus  Comment .,  Venet.  fol.  ap.  Junt.,  1550,  cap.  415,  p.  192), 
recommends  it  in  these  words  : — u Powdered  gold  is  useful  in  melan- 
choly and  weakness  of  the  heart.” 

Then  at  the  commencement  of  the  eleventh  century  Avicenna 
(Canon.,  lib.  ii,  cap.  79)  says  : — u Powdered  gold  is  one  of  the  medicines 
against  melancholy,  removes  foetor  of  the  breath,  is,  even  when  given 
internally,  a remedy  for  falling  out  of  the  hair,  strengthens  the  eyes,  is 

* It  was  very  stupid  to  attempt  to  decide  theoretically  the  question  whether  gold 
can  possess  remedial  properties — the  only  proper  thing  to  do  was  to  convince  oneself 
by  trial  and  experience  whether  it  had  remedial  powers  or  not.  If  it  has  curative 
virtues  then  all  the  theoretical  denials  are  ridiculous. 


AURUM. 


182 


useful  in  pain  of  the  heart  and  palpitation,  and  is  uncommonly 
serviceable  in  dyspnoea.”* 

Abulkasem  (Albucasis),  at  the  commencement  of  the  twelfth 
century,  is  the  first  who  describes  (in  Libro  Servitoris  de  prap.  Med., 
p.  242)  the  preparation  of  this  gold  powder  in  these  words  : — cc  The 
gold  is  rubbed  on  a rough  linen  cloth  in  a basin  filled  with  water,  and  the 
fine  powder  that  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the  water  is  to  be  employed  for 
administration.”  Johann  von  St.  Am  and  (in  the  thirteenth  century) 
describes  the  same  method  of  its  preparation  (in  the  Appendix  to  Mesue, 
Opera , Venet.,  1561,  p.  245,  4 E.). 

This  mode  of  preparation  was  imitated  by  Zacutus,  the  Portuguese, 
and  he  records  ( Histor . Medic.,  lib.  i,  obs.  33)  the  history  of  the  case 
of  a nobleman  who  had  long  been  troubled  by  melancholy  ideas,  whom 
he  cured  in  a month  By  the  sole  use  of  a fine  powder  obtained  by  rubbing 
gold  on  a grindstone. 

I may  refer  here  to  the  laudations  of  gold  powder  and  of  gold  by 
Jo.  Platearius  {purest.  Therap .),  Rodericus  a Castro  {De  .Meteor, 
Microcosm .,  cap.  3),  Abraham  a Porta  Leonis  ( Dialog . de  Auro ), 
Zaccharias  a Puteo,  Joh.  Dan.  Mylius  ( Anatomia  Auri ),  Horn 
( Ephem . Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  3,  obs.  159),  Fr.  Baco  ( Historia 
Vitce  et  Morns'),  Fr.  Joseph  Burrhi  ( Epist . 4 ad  Thom.  Barthol.  de 
Oculis),  Jo.  Jacob  Waldschmiedt  {Diss.  de  Auro,  Marb.,  1685), 
Chph.  Helwig  {Diss.  de  Auro  ejusque  in  Medic,  virihus,  Gryphisv., 
1703),  Lemnius,  Pet.  Forestus,  Ol.  Borrichius,  Rolfinck,  Andr. 
Lagner,  Ettmuller,  Tackius,  Helcher  {Diss.  de  Auro,]en.,  1730), 
P oterius,  J.  D.  Horstius,  Hollerius,  Hcefer,  and  Zwelfer 
{Pharm.  August).  But  leaving  these  authorities  out  of  the  question, 
I thought  I might  attach  more  value  to  the  testimony  of  the  Arabians 
as  to  the  curative  powers  of  finely  powdered  gold  than  to  the  theoretical 
unfounded  doubts  of  the  moderns,  so  I triturated  the  finest  gold  leaf 
(its  fineness  is  23  carats,  6 grains)  with  100  parts  of  milk-sugar  for  a 
full  hour,  for  internal  medical  use. 

I will  not  attempt  to  determine  if  in  this  fine  powder  the  gold  is  only 
triturated  smaller,  or  if  by  this  energetic  trituration  it  has  become  to 
some  degree  oxydated.  Enough,  that  in  proving  it  on  some  healthy 
adults,  100  grains  of  this  powder  (containing  one  grain  of  gold),  and 
on  others,  200  grains  (containing  two  grains  of  gold),  dissolved  in  water, 
sufficed  to  excite  very  great  alterations  in  the  health  and  morbid  sym- 
ptoms, which  are  recorded  below. 

From  these  it  will  be  perceived  that  the  assertions  of  the  Arabians 
are  not  without  foundation,  as  even  small  doses  of  this  metal  given  in  the 
form  mentioned  caused  even  in  healthy  adults  morbid  states  very  similar 
to  those  cured  (in  unconscious  homoeopathic  manner)  by  those  Orientals, 
who  deserve  credit  for  their  discovery  of  remedies. 

Since  then  I have  cured  quickly  and  permanently  of  melancholia 
resembling  that  produced  by  gold  many  persons  who  had  serious 
thoughts  of  committing  suicide,  by  small  doses,  which  for  the  whole 

* The  Arabic  word  for  this  last  has  two  meanings ; according  to  the  accentuation 
of  the  word  it  means  either  <£  talking  to  himself,”  or  “ dyspnoea.”  Experience  of  the 
curative  power  of  gold  shows  the  last  to  be  the  true  meaning. 


182 


AURUM. 


treatment  contained  altogether  from  the  -f-oth  to  the  T-§-oth  of  a grain 
of  gold  ; and  in  like  manner  I have  cured  several  other  severe  affec- 
tions, resembling  the  symptoms  caused  by  gold.  I do  not  doubt  that 
much  higher  attenuations  of  the  powder  and  much  smaller  doses  of 
gold  would  amply  suffice  for  the  same  purpose. 

* * 

-5f 

Some  time  after  writing  the  above  I had  an  opportunity  of  convincing 
myself  that  a hundred-fold  higher  attenuation  of  the  above  preparation 
(made  by  triturating  gold  with  a hundred  parts  of  milk-sugar),  conse- 
quently To-g-oo-th  part  of  a grain  of  gold  for  a dose,  showed  itself  not 
less  powerful  in  a curative  point  of  view,  especially  in  caries  of  the 
palatal  and  nasal  bones,  caused  by  the  abuse  of  mercury  prepared  with 
mineral  acids.*  In  the  subjoined  schema  the  symptoms  of  gold  homoeo- 
pathic to  these  affections  will  be  readily  observed. 

By  further  trituration  and  dilution  the  power  of  gold  is  still  more 
developed  and  spiritualized,  so  that  I now  employ  for  all  curative 
purposes  only  a very  small  portion  of  a grain  of  the  quadrillion-fold 
dilution  for  a dose. 

Would  our  physicians,  by  their  customary  method  of  fabricating  the 
virtues  of  medicines  out  of  airy  hypothesis,  and  constructing  a materia 
medica  of  such  fanciful  materials,  ever  have  discovered  this  remarkable 
power  of  a metal  which  their  learned  speculations  had  consigned  to  the 
category  of  utterly  powerless  substances  ? And  which  other  of  the 
favourite  methods  of  our  materia-medica  manufacturers  would  have 
taught  us  these  remedial  properties  of  gold  ? These  have  been  clearly 
and  certainly  taught  to  the  homoeopathic  physician  by  the  symptoms  it 
produces,  which  resemble  the  morbid  states  it  is  capable  of  curing. 

Poor,  fabulous  materia  medica  of  the  ordinary  stamp,  how  far  dost 
thou  lag  behind  the  revelation  which  medicines  in  their  action  on  the 
healthy  human  body  clearly  make  by  the  production  of  morbid  sym- 
ptoms, which  the  homoeopathic  physician  can  employ  with  infallible 
certainty  for  the  cure  of  natural  disease  ! 

The  duration  of  the  action  of  gold  in  not  extremely  small  doses  is  at 
least  twenty-one  days. 

[Hahnemann’s  disciples  who  helped  him  with  this  proving  are — Franz,  Gross, 
Fr.  Hahnemann,  Hempel,  Herrmann,  Langhammer,  Michler,  Wislicenus. 

The  only  old-school  authorities  referred  to  for  symptoms  are — 

Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  6. 

Ephem.  Nat.  Cur.,  Cent.  io. 

Hoffmann,  Fr.,  Med.  Rat.  Syst.,  ii. 

Ludovici,  Pharmac.  Med.  Sec.appl .,  Gotha,  1685. 

Pharmac.  JVirtemh.,  ii. 

Schulze,  J.  H.,  Pralectiones  in  Phar. 

The  1st  Edit,  has  313  symptoms,  this  2nd  Edit.  379.  In  the  Chr.  Kr . there  are 
461.] 


* This  remedial  power  of  the  internal  employment  of  gold  in  the  evil  effects  of 
mercury  was  observed  by  Ant.  Chalmeteus  (in  Enchiridion  Chirurg.,  p.  402). 


AURUM. 


183 


SOLUTION  OF  GOLD.1 


Drawing  pain  in  the  forehead  (aft.  2 h.). 

A tickling  itching  on  the  forehead  (aft.  1 h.). 

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  eye. 

Redness  and  itching  inflammation  on  the  nose,  which  afterwards 
desquamates. 

5.  Red  swelling  of  the  left  side  of  the  nose  ; the  cavity  of  the  nose 
is  ulcerated  deep  in,  with  a dry,  yellowish  scab,  with  sensation  of  in- 
ternal stoppage  of  the  nose,  although  the  air  passes  readily  through  it. 

Red  swelling  on  and  under  the  right  nostril  ; in  the  nostril 
itself  there  is  a painless  ulcer-scab  ; it  feels  to  him  stopped  up, 
although  the  air  passes  through  it.  [MchJ\ 

Externally  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose  a burning  (and  some- 
what itching)  pain. 

A crawling  in  the  interior  of  the  nose,  as  if  something  were 
running  about  in  it. 

Discharge  of  a greenish-yellow  matter  from  the  nose,  without 
bad  smell,  for  7 days  (aft.  10  d.). 

10.  (Ringing  in  the  ears)  (aft.  6 h.). 

(After  the  ringing  in  the  ears  a kind  of  dulness  of  hearing,  as  if 
the  ears  internally  were  wide  and  hollow,  owing  to  which  nothing  was 
heard  distinctly.) 

Twitching  toothache  sometimes  on  one  side,  sometimes  in  the 
upper  incisors. 

Twitching  toothache  also  in  the  anterior  upper  row  of  teeth. 
[Mch.] 

Distension  of  the  abdomen. 

15.  His  breathing  is  very  short,  and  as  if  the  larynx  were  stopped  up, 
for  some  days. 

(A  couple  of  stitches  just  above  the  heart.) 

(Swelling  in  the  wrist,  without  pain  per  se,  only  a tension  on 
bending  back  the  hand  ; on  grasping,  however,  he  has  stitches  in 
■*•) 

1 earing  pain  in  the  middle  finger  (after  dinner). 


AURUM. 

(Gold-leaf). 

More  acute  thinking  faculty,  and  more  accurate  memory 
Intellectual  labours  affected  him  much  ; he  felt  exhausted. 

On  stooping,  vertigo,  as  if  all  turned  round  in  a circle  ; on 
assuming  an  erect  position  it  went  off  each  time  (aft.  40  h.).  [Zr.] 
# Curative  action. 


1 [This  is  called  Aurum  muriaticum  in  the  Chr.  Kr.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the 
usual  order  of  the  schema  is  departed  from  here,  the  nose  coming  before  the  ear. 
In  the  Chr.  Kr.  the  usual  arrangement  is  adopted  and  the  signs  of  parenthesis  are 
omitted.] 


184 


AURUM. 


On  walking  in  the  open-air  there  occurred  a vertigo  as  if  he 
would  always  fall  to  the  left  side  and  was  intoxicated,  which  obliged 
him  to  go  to  bed,  and  for  some  time  whilst  lying  in  bed  it  returned 
on  the  slightest  movement  (aft.  43  h.).  [Lr.] 

5.  In  the  morning,  on  rising,  confusion  of  the  head ; great  weight 
in  the  occiput.  \JVs.\ 

Confusion  of  the  head.  [Hrr^\ 

When  standing  he  is  suddenly  seized  with  vertigo,  which 
compels  him  to  sit  down  (aft.  28  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Headache  as  from  commencing  catarrh. 

Headache  (increasing  from  morning  onwards),  as  if  the  brain 
were  bruised,  which  by  merely  thinking  and  reading,  but  especially  by 
continued  talking  and  writing,  is  increased  to  the  extremest  violence, 
so  that  the  ideas  become  confused,  and  it  is  only  by  the  greatest 
effort  that  anything  connected  can  be  spoken  or  written  ; but  when 
he  ceases  to  speak,  reflect  and  write,  the  headache  always  departs  ; 
at  7 p.m.  it  spontaneously  ceases  entirely  (aft.  6 h.). 

10.  Headache,  which  is  felt  partly  like  bruised  pain,  partly  in  one 
portion  of  the  brain,  sometimes  like  painful  pressure,  sometimes  like  a 
tearing,  increases  from  morning  onwards  and  goes  off  about  3 p.m. 
(aft.  24  h.). 

(One-sided  headache  like  digging,  boring,  pecking,  in  the 
morning  immediately  after  waking,  increased  by  coughing  and 
bending  the  head  backwards.) 

One  sided,  sharp  beating,  hacking  headache. 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  head,  here  and  there,  espe- 
cially in  the  forehead,  with  giddy  feeling.  [Hrr.] 

A prickling  sensation  in  the  sinciput. 

15.  Headache,  anteriorly  in  the  forehead  and  temples,  deep  in  the 
brain,  a very  severe  tearing,  which  is  allayed  in  the  open  air.  [Gjj.] 

Aching  stupefying  headache,  as  if  excited  by  a strong  wind 
(aft.  11  h.),  [Lr.] 

Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  i|  h.). 
[#«■•] . 

Aching  tearing  from  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  to  the  right 
side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Hrr .] 


Tearing  pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  crown,  worse 
on  movement.  [Hrr.'] 

20.  Tearing  in  the  left  temple.  [Fz.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  crown  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Hrr.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  crown  (aft  \ h.). 
[Hrr.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  worse  on 
movement.  [Hrr.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  forehead.  [Hrr.] 

25.  Tearing  cutting  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  crown  (aft.  17  d.). 
[Hrr.] 

Fine  tearing  from  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  through  the  brain 
to  the  forehead,  worse  on  movement  (aft.  1 h.).  [Hrr.] 


AURUM. 


185 


Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput.  [Hrr.] 

A roaring  and  rushing  in  the  head,  as  if  he  were  seated  beside 
rushing  water  (aft.  15  d.). 

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head. 

30.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  brain  (aft.  f h.). 

Violent  rush  of  blood  in  the  head,  on  stooping,  which  goes  off 
again  on  rising  up  (aft.  8 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Shooting  on  the  frontal  bone,  like  a slow  drawing  (aft.  6 h.).  [F%.] 
A sharp  stitch  on  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  where  the  hair 
begins. 

Needle-pricks  on  the  forehead  externally  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hrr.] 

35.  A small  osseous  tumour  on  the  right  side  of  the  vertex,  with 
boring  pains  per  se , but  worse  when  touched. 

A small  osseous  tumour  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  superiorly. 
Pressure  on  and  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  externally  and 
internally  (aft.  10  h).  [Hrr. ] 

Painful  pressure  in  the  temples. 

Pressure  on  the  left  temple  (aft  32  h.).  [Hrr.] 

40.  Aching  externally  on  the  left  temple,  worse  when  touched  (aft. 
4 h.).  {Hrr.-] 

On  lying  down  the  cranial  bones  are  painful  as  if  broken  to 
pieces,  so  that  it  took  away  all  his  vital  energy. 

(His  head  is  shaken  sideways  and  up  and  down.) 

Feeling  of  weakness  and  aching  in  the  eyes. 

Pressure  from  without  inwards  on  the  left  eye  (aft.  8 
d.).  [Hrr.] 

45.  Pressive  pain  from  above  downwards  on  the  right  eyeball.  [Hrr.] 

Pressive  pain  from  without  inwards  on  the  right 
eyeball,  worse  when  touched  (aft.  6 h ).  [Hrr.] 

Aching  in  the  eye  as  if  a foreign  body  had  got  into  it. 

On  looking,  a sensation  in  the  eyes  as  when  one  has  been  much 
heated,  as  if  the  blood  pressed  strongly  on  the  optic  nerves. 

(A  kind  of  burning  in  the  eyes.) 

50.  An  obtuse  stitch  outwards  on  the  lower  part  of  the  left  orbit. 

Extreme  pressure  in  the  left  orbit  almost  like  a spasm,  on  its 
internal  aspect  posteriorly. 

Fine  tearing  in  the  right  orbit  in  the  vicinity  of  the  external 
canthus  (aft.  5 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Sensation  of  pressing  out  of  the  left  eyeball  in  its  inner  and 
upper  angle.  [Fz.] 

Tension  in  the  eyes  which  interferes  with  vision  (aft. 
1 h.).  [Hrr.] 

55.  Extreme  tension  in  the  eyes  with  diminution  of  the 
visual  power;  he  cannot  distinguish  anything  dis- 
tinctly, because  he  sees  everything  double  and  one 
object  seems  to  run  into  another;  the  tensive  pain  is 
worse  when  he  fixes  the  eyes  on  something,  and  less 
severe  when  he  closes  them  (aft.  9 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Several  single  stitches  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye  and  in 
the  eyelid  itself  (aft.  36  h.).  [Hrr.] 


1 86 


AURUM. 


Contraction  of  the  pupils  (aft.  2,  3J  h.).  [Lr.] 

Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  3 a h.).  [Lr.] 

It  seems  as  if  the  upper  half  of  the  right  eye  were  covered  by  a 
black  body,  so  that  he  can  only  see  with  the  lower  half  objects 
below  him,  but  those  above  remain  invisible.  [Hrr.] 

60.  It  seems  as  if  a black  veil  were  drawn  over  the  eyes,  whereby 
distinct  vision  is  impaired  (aft.  6 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Sparks  of  fire  appear  suddenly  before  the  eyes.* 

A smarting  pain  on  the  left  upper  eyelid. 

A painless  smooth  pimple  on  the  right  lower  tarsal  edge. 

Swelling  of  the  lower  eyelids.  \_Fr.  H — n .] 

65.  (Bluish  internal  canthus.) 

The  face  swollen  and  shining,  as  from  perspiration  ; the  eyes  as 
if  distended  and  protruding. 

On  the  right  side  of  the  face  itching  needle-pricks. 

Drawing  tearing  on  the  left  side  of  the  face  (aft.  2 h.).  [WsT] 

In  the  face,  on  the  neck,  and  on  the  chest  an  eruption  of  small 
pimples  with  purulent  apices,  for  some  hours. 

70.  Excessive  tearing  in  the  frontal  process  of  the  malar  bone.  [Gjj.] 
A tearing  in  the  right  zygomatic  arch.  [Gw.] 

Aching  tearing  in  the  left  external  meatus  auditorius  (aft.  f h.). 
[Hrr.-] 

Humming  before  the  left  ear. 

Crepitation  in  the  left  ear. 

75.  In  the  morning  in  bed  roaring  in  the  ears. 

A tickling  formication  internally  in  the  alae  nasi,  as  during 
coryza  (aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.] 

A tickling  formication  internally  in  the  alae  nasi, 
compelling  him  to  scratch  (aft.  2\  and  21  h.)  [Lr.] 

Sensation  of  stoppage  of  the  nose  as  in  stuffed  coryza,  and  yet  he 
could  draw  air  through  it  very  well  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Lr.] 

The  nasal  hone  of  the  right  side  and  the  neigh- 
bouring part  of  the  upper  jaw  are  painful  to  the  touch, 
especially  where  the  facial  nerve  comes  out. 

80.  After  walking  in  the  open  air  the  nose  swells  in  the  room. 

Twitching  on  the  septum  of  the  nose  from  above  downwards. 

He  cannot  get  air  through  the  nose ; the  nostrils  are  ulcerated 
and  agglutinated  and  painful. 

The  nostril  appears  to  him  to  be  stopped  up,  and  yet  he  can  get 
air  through  it.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

A transient  smell  of  brandy  in  the  nose,  with  oppression  of  the 
chest. 

85.  (On  blowing  the  nose  he  perceives  a foetid  smell  in  the  nose.) 
Extremely  sensitive  smell  ; everything  smells  too  strong  (aft. 

48  h.). 

Smarting  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  nose.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

* Sparks  of  fire  in  the  eye  are  the  usual  prodromataof  partial  paralysis  of  the  optic 
nerve,  or  obscuration  of  the  sight  by  black  spots  always  hovering  before  the  eye.  I 
cured  one  such  case  by  means  of  gold. 


AURUM. 


187 


Smarting  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  nose,  so  that  tears  came 
into  the  eyes,  as  when  strong  sunlight  excites  an  inclination  to 
sneeze,  or  during  exalted  religious  sadness,  or  the  highest  degree  of 
compassion,  [ife.] 

Sore  feeling  in  the  nose.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

90.  Sore  pain  in  both  nostrils,  especially  on  taking  hold  of  them.1 

Ulcerated  scab  in  the  right  nostril,  almost  painless,  yellowish, 
and  almost  dry.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Dark,  brownish- red,  slightly  elevated  spots  on  the  nose,  which  are 
the  seat  of  aching  pain  only  when  touched  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Hrr.] 

Swelling  on  and  under  the  right  nostril,  with  redness.  [Fr. 
H—n .] 

Both  cheeks,  lips,  and  nose  are  much  swollen  (in  the  morning) . 
95-  Swelling  of  one  cheek  with  drawing  and  tearing  in  the 
upper  and  lower  jaw,  and  a sensation  as  of  grumbling  and  hacking 
in  the  teeth,  which  feel  longer. 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  lower  jaw,  especially  in  its 
ascending  ramus,  which  goes  off  by  pressing  on  it  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hrr.] 

On  the  outer  border  of  the  lower  jaw  intermittent  obtuse  shoot- 
ing (aft.  24  h.). 

In  the  right  half  of  the  chin  a tearing.  [Gjj.] 

(On  the  red  of  the  under  lip  a burning  vesicle.) 

IOO.  Dull  aching  pain  per  se  and  when  swallowing  in  the  gland 
beneath  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw,  as  in  a swelling  of  the  cervical 
glands  (aft.  3 h.). 

Pain  in  one  of  the  submaxiilary  glands  as  if  it  were  swollen. 

The  gland  beneath  the  ear  lobe  (parotid  gland)  is  very  painful 
when  touched,  like  a gland  pressed  and  squeezed  between  the 
fingers. 

Tearing  pressure  on  the  right  side  and  lower  part  of  the  neck, 
near  the  clavicle  (aft.  14  d.).  [ Hrr .] 

(A  jerking,  tearing  shooting  on  the  external  cervical  muscles  of 
the  left  side.)  (aft.  7 d.). 

105.  Ulcer  on  the  gums  and  swollen  cheeks  (aft.  4 d.). 

Swelling  of  the  gums  on  the  posterior  right  upper  molars,  with 
aching  sore  pain  when  touched  and  when  eating,  whereby  the  pain 
extends  to  the  two  backmost  molar  teeth,  where  it  becomes  an 
obtuse  tearing  (aft.  14  d.).  [Hrr.'] 

On  chewing  the  upper  incisors  are  very  sensitive. 

(Single  stitches  in  the  teeth.) 

Sudden  attack  of  painful  loose  teeth,  even  the  incisors. 

110.  The  molars  feel  on  edge  (aft.  \ h.). 

Twitching  pain  in  the  upper  row  of  teeth.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

An  agreeable  milky  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Sweetness  in  the  fore  part  of  the  tongue. 

Insipid  taste  in  the  mouth. 

1 15.  Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  when  not  eating,  like  high  game. 

Sometimes  a sourish  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  2±  h.). 

1 This  symptom,  though  without  name  attached,  is  among  the  “ Observations  of 
others.” 


1 88 


AURUM. 


Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  with  feeling  of  dryness  (aft.  8 h.).  [Lr.]. 

Pleasantly  sweetish  saliva  collects  in  the  mouth.  [F%.] 

A kind  of  aching  in  the  region  of  the  palate,  lasting  several 
hours. 

J20.  (Attacks  of  stretching  asunder  of  the  gullet,  as  if  going  to  vomit, 
but  without  nausea.) 

(Sore  throat,  like  shooting  soreness,  only  when  swallowing)  (aft. 

7 d0- 

(Much  mucus  in  the  fauces,  for  several  days.) 

Putrid  smell  from  the  mouth. 

Smell  from  the  mouth  like  old  cheese. 

125.  Bad  smell  from  the  mouth,  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  which  he 
is  not  conscious  of  himself. 

His  food  tastes  well,  but  does  not  quite  satisfy  his  appetite,  and 
he  could  again  eat  immediately.1 

Whilst  eating  the  anxiety  goes  off.  [Fz.] 

Great  thirst  for  six  days.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Nausea  in  the  stomach  and  throat.  [Hrr. ] 

130.  Scrobiculus  cordis  as  if  swollen;  the  whole  epigastrium  also 
swollen,  and  when  pressed  on,  or  when  she  laces  herself  tight,  there 
is  shooting  there. 

Pain  in  the  stomach  as  from  hunger. 

(At  noon,  aching  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.) 

Aching  in  the  abdomen. 

Aching  (continued)  in  the  subcostal  region,  as  from  flatulence, 
especially  after  taking  something  (food  or  drink),  often  increased  by 
movement  and  walking ; it  goes  off  at  last  almost  without  any 
discharge  of  flatus. 

135.  Weight  in  the  abdomen,  with  icy  cold  feet  and  hands. 

Aching  in  the  abdomen  and  heaving  as  though  she  would  vomit. 
[Fr.  H—n .] 

Tensive  pressure  in  the  hypogastrium  just  below  the 
navel  and  on  both  sides  in  the  lumbar  regions,  with 
feeling  of  fulness,  most  severe  under  the  navel  (aft.  53  h.). 

L Hrr.-] 

Tensive  pressure  in  the  hypogastrium  on  both  sides 
in  the  lumbar  regions,  but  most  severe  just  below  the 
navel,  with  call  to  stool  (aft.  6 d.).  [ Hrr .] 

Single  tearings  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  up  to  beneath  the 
ribs,  as  if  all  there  were  smashed,  which  compels  him  to  bend  double, 
when  sitting  (aft.  36  h.).  [Fz.] 

140.  In  the  afternoon  shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  like 
stitches  in  the  spleen. 

Pinching  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  sometimes  here, 
sometimes  there  (aft.  12  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Pain  like  contraction  in  the  abdomen. 

Flatulent  colic  about  midnight  ; much  flatulence  is  quickly  deve- 
loped, which  cannot  find  an  exit,  and  painfully  rises  up  here  and 


1 This  symptom  also  is  among  “ Observations  of  others,”  without  name  attached. 


AURUJVL  189 

there,  presses  and  resists  and  causes  anxiety,  equally  felt  when  at 
rest  and  when  moving. 

Flatulent  colic  soon  after  the  lightest,  most  moderate  meal. 

145.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen. 

Grumbling  in  the  abdomen. 

Grumbling  and  rumblingin  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.) . [ Hrr .] 
Grumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Hrr .] 

Discharge  of  much  foetid  flatus  (aft.  8 h.).  [Hrr.] 

150.  Colic.*  [Ephem.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  6,  app.,  p.  6.1] 

Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  right  hypogastrium,  when  sitting,  which 
goes  off  on  rising  up  and  when  he  draws  up  the  thighs  (aft.  24  h.). 

[*■*•] 

Pain  in  the  groin  as  from  a swollen  inguinal  gland. 

Protrusion  of  a hernia  with  great  pain,  like  cramp ; flatus  seems 
to  get  into  the  hernia. 

A weakness  in  the  groin. 

155.  Drawing  out  of  the  groin  down  into  the  thigh. 

In  the  bend  of  the  groin  and  in  the  tendons  of  the  lumbar 
muscles  a want  of  mobility  and  stiff  pain  when  walking  and  spreading 
out  the  legs,  as  after  a long  journey  on  foot  (aft.  3J  h.). 

Cutting  blows  in  both  groins,  during  which  he  is  obliged  to  draw 
in  the  abdomen  and  to  draw  up  the  legs.  [Ws^\ 

Forcing  in  the  right  groin,  in  the  inguinal  ring,  as  if  a hernia 
would  protrude,  when  sitting  ; on  stretching  out  the  body  ; it  goes  off 
on  standing  up.  [F%.] 

A twitching  pinching  in  the  left  side  of  the  pelvis,  which  makes 
him  start  and  jump  (aft.  4 h.).  [Ws.] 

160.  Cramp-like  pain  on  the  inner  border  of  the  pelvis  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  hip,  which  is  increased  by  rubbing  (aft.  36  h.). 

Pinching  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  ischias.  \TVs.] 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  anus  and  rectum  (aft.  J h.).  [Hrr.] 

Discomfort  in  the  hypogastrium  and  feeling  as  if  he 
wanted  to  go  to  stool,  especially  after  a meal  (aft.  36  h.). 
[Hrr.] 

Every  morning  soft  stool  with  some  pinching. 

165.  Unusually  copious  stool,  in  the  evening  (aft.  10  h.). 

Diarrhoea.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Nocturnal  diarrhoea  with  much  burning  in  the  rectum. 

Very  large  formed  stool  and  hence  difficult  discharge  of  the  faeces. 

(Whitish' yellow  stool.) 

170.  Frequent  but  ordinary  stool  (aft.  16  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Constipation  for  three  days.  [G^.] 

(The  quantity  of  urine  passed  is  greater  than  the  amount  of  fluid 
he  has  drunk.) 

Constant  call  to  urinate,  whereby  little,  but  natural  urine  is 
passed.  [ Gss .] 

* From  swallowing  gold. 


1 A casual  mention  of  “ aurea  colica  ” as  having  occasionally,  but  rarely,  occurred. 
Preparation  of  metal  not  stated. 


190 


AURUM. 


Obtuse  shooting  tearing  in  the  urethra.  [Hrr.] 

175.  In  the  morning,  after  rising,  frequent  erections  and  desire  for 
coitus  (aft.  16  and  40  h.). 

Very  much  increased  sexual  desire,  which  had  previously  been 
long  dormant  in  him. 

Nocturnal  erections  for  many  successive  nights. 

Nocturnal  erections  without  seminal  emissions  (the  1st  night). 

Ws.] 

Seminal  emissions  for  three  successive  nights,  without  subsequent 
weakness. 

180.  Nocturnal  seminal  emissions  (the  following  nights).  [TVs.] 

At  night  seminal  emission  with  voluptuous  dreams  (aft.  7 d.). 
[Hrr.] 

In  the  night  erections  and  pollutions.  [Gss.] 

Prostatic  fluid  escapes  from  a flaccid  penis. 

Shooting;  tearing;  on  the  glans  penis,  when  he  has  a call  to  urinate 
(aft.  3 h.).  \m.} 

185.  Needle-pricks  on  the  point  of  the  glans  penis  ; each  is  followed 
instantly  by  a stitch  over  the  navel  towards  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
(aft.  3 h.).  [!Vs.] 

(Very  painful  twitching  in  the  penis  backwards.) 

Itching  on  the  scrotum. 

Aching  tensive  pain  in  the  right  testicle,  as  from  a contusion  (aft. 
3i  h.).  [Lr.] 

Swelling  of  the  lower  part  of  the  right  testicle,  with 
aching  pain  only  when  touched  and  rubbed,  which  com- 
menced every  evening  about  6 p m.,  and  went  off  again 
about  11  o’clock  (aft.  5 d.).  [Hrr.] 

190.  Labour-like  pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  menses  would  come 
on. 

* * 

* 

Coryza.  \_Fr.  H — nT\ 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  dry  catarrh  tightly  seated  in  the 
chest  ; he  can  only  cough  up  a little  viscid  mucus  with  great  effort, 
and  this  only  after  first  getting  up  from  bed  (aft.  16  h.). 

Cough.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

Great  tightness  of  chest  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 

195.  Very  great  tightness  of  chest. 

Tightness  of  the  chest ; when  he  laughs  or  walks  quickly  he 
feels  the  chest  too  tight  on  inspiring,  and  it  seems  to  him  that  the 
chest  is  too  flat  (aft.  44  h.).  [CAj.] 

Tightness  of  the  thoracic  cavity,  and  on  inspiring 
obtuse  stitches  here  and  there  in  the  chest.  [Hrr.] 

Extreme  tightness  of  the  thoracic  cavity  with  diffi- 
culty of  breathing  at  night  (aft.  58  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Tightness  of  chest,  also  when  sitting  and  when  not 
moving,  not  allayed  by  any  position ; he  always  takes  a 
deep  breath,  and  cannot  get  enough  air.  [Gss.] 

200.  Cough  on  account  of  want  of  breath  at  night.  [Hrr.] 

Sometimes  at  the  top  of  the  trachea  adherent  mucus,  which  is 


AURUM. 


191 


with  difficulty  detached  by  short  cough,  also  mucus  lower  down  in 
the  lung,  which  is  expectorated  in  large  quantity  and  easily  ; soon 
after  this  his  respiration  was  very  free,  and  he  is  wide  chested  (he 
was  formerly  very  narrow  chested). 

She  must  sometimes  take  a very  deep  breath. 

On  breathing  deeply  and  yawning,  painful  stitches  under  the 
ribs,  whereby  yawning  and  breathing  are  obstructed  ; this  goes  off  on 
going  to  bed. 

On  inspiring  sharp  stitches,  and  (to  his  feelings)  in  the  side  of 
the  bladder. 

205.  Frequently  mucus  deep  in  the  trachea  below  the  larynx,  which, 
in  spite  of  the  greatest  efforts,  cannot  be  coughed  up.  [Gta.] 

(On  expiring  a rumbling  in  the  chest  down  into  the  abdomen 
and  groin,  and  after  the  rumbling  a very  rapid  palpitation  of  the 
heart,  with  exhaustion  and  anxiety — thereafter  slumber.) 

Mucus  in  the  fauces  that  can  be  hawked  up,  but  that  prevents 
him  taking  a full  inspiration  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fz.] 

Some  very  violent  stitches  in  the  chest,  above  the  heart  (aft.  72  h.). 
Aching  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  in  the  region  of  the  fourth 
rib,  which  causes  him  immense  anxiety.  [Fz.] 

210.  Feeling  of  anxiety  often  in  connexion  with  tightness  of  the 
thoracic  cavity  (aft.  3 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  \ h.). 

Sometimes  a single  very  strong  beat  of  the  heart. 

Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  4 d.).  [Hrr. ] 

When  walking  the  heart  appears  to  shake  as  though  it  was  loose. 

[Fz.] 

215.  Obtuse  cutting  and  shooting  pain  on  the  right  side 
near  the  sternum  under  the  last  true  ribs.  [ Hrr .] 

Obtuse  cutting  pain  on  the  left  near  the  sternum  more  severe 
on  inspiring  (aft.  9 d.).  [Hrr.'] 

Obtuse  stitches  on  both  sides  of  the  chest,  with  feeling  of  heat 
and  oppression  in  the  chest,  increased  by  inspiration  (aft.  2 h.).  [Ws.] 
Sharp  stitches  on  the  sternum  (aft.  2 h.).  \JVs!\ 

On  the  sternum  aching,  with  busy  anxious  state  of  mind,  as  if 
some  great  happiness  were  about  to  befal  him.  [Fz.] 

220.  Over  the  cartilages  of  the  first  three  ribs  on  the  right 
side  a red  spot,  and  under  these  cartilages,  especially 
the  second,  a squeezing  obtuse  shooting,  which  some- 
times lasts  like  a peg  stuck  in  there,  sometimes  slowly 
declines ; but  he  feels  little  of  it  when  walking  quickly 
(aft.  1 6 h.).  [Gss.] 

Pressure  on  the  left  side  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis, 
under  the  cartilages  of  the  upper  false  ribs,  more  severe 
when  expiring  (aft.  7 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Pressure  as  from  something  hard  on  the  sternum,  with  drawing 
tearings  towards  the  shoulders.  [Fz.] 

In  the  morning  such  severe  pain  in  the  spine  that  he  could 
not  move  a limb. 

Pain  in  the  sacrum,  as  from  fatigue  (aft.  3 h.). 


AURUM. 


192 

225.  While  sitting  cutting  above  the  sacrum  as  if  it  was  pressed  on 
by  something  sharp.  [Fz.J 

Fine  shooting  tearing  on  the  right  side  near  the  lumbar  vertebrae, 
always  removed  by  pressing  on  it  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Pressure  on  the  left  side  near  the  lumbar  vertebrae 
just  above  the  os  innominatum,  and  on  its  upper  border. 

[Hrr.] 

On  the  right  near  the  spinal  column,  just  below  the  right  scapula, 
a painful  pricking  as  with  needles  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gjj.] 

Tearing  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  scapula  and 
beneath  it,  when  bending  the  body  backwards  and  to 
the  left  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Hrr .] 

230.  Tension  in  the  nape,  as  if  a muscle  there  were  too  short,  even 
when  not  moving,  worse  when  stooping  (aft.  10  h.).  [TVs.] 

Fine  stitches  in  the  axilla.  [TVs.] 

Sore  pain  of  the  shoulders,  even  when  not  touched  or  moved. 
[pz.-] 

Tearing  tension  under  the  axilla.  [TVs.] 

Gone-to-sleep  feeling,  numbness  and  insensibility  of  the  arms 
and  thighs  in  the  morning  after  waking,  felt  more  when  lying  still 
than  when  moving  (aft.  16  h.). 

235.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  anterior  surface  of  both 
upper  arms  (aft.  15  d.).  [Hrr.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  left  upper  arm,  most  severe  when  it  is 
uncovered  (aft.  3 h.).  [TVs.] 

Pressure  on  the  under  surface  and  in  the  middle  of 
the  right  upper  arm.  [Hrr.] 

Pressure  on  the  left  upper  arm,  in  the  periosteum  (aft.  43  h.). 
[Hrr.-] 

Down  the  left  arm  a drawing  pain  lying  on  the  bone,  which 
goes  off  on  moving.  [Fz.] 

240.  Heaviness  of  the  forearm  when  at  rest,  but  not  when  moving 
(aft.  12  h.).  [TVs.] 

Pressure  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  right  forearm 

[Hrr.] 

Intermittent  tearing  pressure  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  left 
forearm  (aft.  3d.).  [Hrr.] 

Pressure  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  forearm  (aft.  12  d.).  [Hrr.] 

Cramp-like  tearing  deeply  seated  internally  in  the 
bones  of  the  wrist,  now  of  the  right,  now  of  the  left 
hand,  also  in  the  right  elbow-joint ; it  draws  from  the 
inferior  to  the  superior  row  of  the  carpal  bones,  especially 
observable  in  the  night,  but  also  during  the  day.  [Gss.] 

245.  Tearing  in  the  right  carpal  bones  (aft.  8 h.j.  [Hrr.] 

Tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  and  the  proximal 
phalanx  of  the  left  little  finger.  [Hrr.] 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  left  hand, 
especially  of  the  thumb,  which,  however,  does  not  interfere  with 
movement.  [Gw.] 

Itching  between  thumb  and  forefinger. 


AURUM. 


193 

Very  quick,  continued,  almost  shooting  pecking  between  thumb 
and  forefinger. 

250.  Fine  tearing  in  the  ring  and  middle  finger  of  the  right  hand 
(aft.  J h.).  [i/rr.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  distal  phalanx  of  the  right  thumb.  [_Hrr,~\ 
Obtuse  tearing  in  the  finger-joints  of  both  hands,  which  often 
extends  into  the  limbs  of  both  sides  (aft.  5 d.).  [i/rr.] 

Tearing  in  the  proximal  joints  of  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand 
(aft.  4 d.).  [//rr.] 

Drawing  in  the  finger-joints.  \_Hl.~] 

255.  A fine  stitch  darts  in  a tortuous  manner  through  the  gluteal 
muscles  of  the  right  side  in  a downward  direction,  recurring  several 
times  (aft.  16  h.).  \JVs.~\ 

A kind  of  paralysis  of  the  thigh ; he  cannot  raise  it  on  account 
of  stiff  pain  up  above  in  the  tendons  of  the  psoas  muscle. 

Tearing  in  the  thigh,  like  growing  pain,  only  on  moving,  not 
when  sitting  (aft.  24  h.). 

On  walking  in  the  open  air  an  aching  tensive  pain  in  the  muscles 
of  the  left  thigh,  which  did  not  go  off  by  touching,  standing,  or 
walking,  but  did  so  when  sitting  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 

Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  tendon  of  the  psoas  muscle  which 
flexes  the  left  thigh,  down  into  the  thigh,  when  sitting ; it  goes  off 
on  standing  up.  [Tz.] 

260.  On  the  outside  of  the  left  thigh,  in  its  middle,  a spot  which 
pains  as  if  excoriated  (coming  on  at  night  when  lying).  [Gw.] 

Sensation  in  the  shaft  of  the  right  femur  when  he  throws  the  right 
thigh  over  the  left,  as  if  the  former  were  broken.  [Z%.] 

When  sitting,  if  he  throws  the  left  leg  over  the  right,  the 
muscles  on  the  posterior  side  of  the  right  thigh  towards  the  hough 
seem  to  be  in  a twitching  movement,  which  is  not  observable  in 
another  posture  or  when  the  legs  are  not  crossed.  [Gw.] 

Painful  stiffness  and  paralyzed  feeling  of  the  knees  when  at  rest 
and  when  moving. 

When  walking  a simple  pain  in  the  right  knee. 

265.  Pain  in  the  knees  as  if  they  were  tightly  bound,  when 
sitting  and  walking. 

The  right  knee  is  weakened  by  walking,  so  that  when  he  treads, 
and  also  after  walking,  in  every  position,  a drawing  pain  is  felt  in  it 
for  a long  time  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gw.] 

Unsteadiness  of  the  knees. 

Aching  on  the  left  tibia  when  he  stretches  out  the  leg.  [T%.] 
Above  the  ankles,  on  both  sides,  dull,  gnawing  pain,  and  single 
sharp  stitches  in  the  tendo  Achillis,  when  at  rest,  which  go  off  when 
moving  (aft.  14  h.).  \Ws^\ 

270.  Tensive  pressure  near  the  right  inner  ankle  (aft.  5 d.).  [Z/rr.] 

The  heels  pain  as  if  festering  or  as  if  they  were  filled  with  blood. 
(Violent  stitches  behind  the  toes  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot.) 
(Digging  pain  in  the  place  where  a chilblain  had  been)  (aft.  1 h.). 
Pain  as  if  bruised  and  dislocated  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  big 
toe  when  walking. 


*3 


194 


AURUM. 


275.  Paralytic  drawing  in  the  right  metatarsal  hone  of  the 
big  toe,  extending  to  its  tip.  [Hrr.] 

Paralytic  drawing  in  the  toes  of  the  right  foot.  [Hrr.] 
Pine  tearing  in  the  toes  of  the  right  foot.  [Hrr.] 
Drawing  in  the  toe-joints.  [HI.] 

Pressure  as  from  something  hard  in  the  hollow  part  of  the  sole. 

280.  Tearing  pain  on  the  posterior  part  of  the  right  sole  (aft.  30  h.). 
[Hrr.] 

In  the  morning  and  all  the  forenoon,  pain  of  all  the  joints  as  if 
beaten. 

In  the  morning,  at  dawn,  in  bed,  simple  or  bruised  pain  in  all 
the  joints,  especially  in  the  sacrum  and  knees,  which  increases  the 
longer  he  lies  still,  whether  on  the  back  or  the  side,  but  soon  goes 
ofF  after  getting  up. 

In  the  whole  body  an  extremely  great  sensitiveness  ; too  sensitive 
to  every  pain  ; on  merely  thinking  of  pain  he  imagined  he  felt  it ; a 
feeling  of  intolerance  of  everything.  [HI.] 

In  the  afternoon  prostration  and  painful  drawing  in  the  blood- 
vessels. 

285.  Comfortable  feeling  in  the  whole  body.* 

All  his  sensations  are  fine  and  acute.  [HI.] 

Even  in  the  worst  weather  he  feels  well  and  comfortable  in  the 
open  air.  [Fz.] 

(Formication  on  the  body  here  and  there.)  [ Hi ] 

Itching  burning  radiations  darting  here  and  there,  almost  like 
stitches. 

290.  In  the  afternoon  when  sitting  and  reading  he  was  overcome  by 
great  exhaustion,  during  which  he  fell  asleep,  but  it  was  quite  gone 
when  he  awoke  (aft.  9 1 h.).  [Lr.] 

Remarkable  ebullition  in  the  blood  (aft.  24  h.),  as  if  it 

boiled  in  the  blood-vessels. 

A weakness  of  the  head  combined  with  sopor  while  sitting,  in 
the  daytime. 

Irresistible  sleep  after  dinner,  and  during  this  nap  he  thinks  a 
great  deal  (aft.  4 h.)  [F%.]. 

Frequent  waking  out  of  sleep  as  from  fright.  [Lr.] 

295.  He  moans  aloud  in  his  sleep.  [Gss.] 

Agreeable  and  very  rational  but  little  remembered  dreams  (aft. 
8 h.). 

Frightful  dreams. 

He  has  frightful  dreams  of  thieves,  and  cries  out  aloud  in 
sleep. 

Dreams  of  dead  people. 

300.  He  awakes  in  vivid  dreams. 

Dream  as  if  he  should  fall  from  a great  height. 

Dreams  full  of  quarrelling. 

Every  night  dreams  and  erection  of  the  penis. 

In  the  evening  immediately  after  going  to  sleep,  almost  half 
awake,  she  dreamt  much,  as  if  some  one  were  speaking  to  her. 

305.  All  night  long  she  dreamt  that  she  was  in  the  dark. 

* Curative  action. 


AURUM. 


*95 


The  child  slept  till  3 a.m.,  then  it  became  wide  awake,  and 
spoke  in  bold  tones  deliriously,  with  rapid  utterance  and  red  face  : 
“ Mother,  thou  art  my  gold  daughter  !”  cc  What  dog  is  that  ?” 
cc  What  head  is  that  on  the  wall  ?”  C£  What  is  that  running  about 
the  room  ?”  and  her  raving  consisted  always  of  questions. 
Frightful  dreams  at  night.  [Gss.] 

At  night  unrememhered  dreams.  [Lr.] 

At  night  vivid  and  yet  unremembered  dreams.  [Lr.] 

310.  All  night  long  wide  awake  and  sleepless,  although  without  pains, 
and  yet  neither  sleepy  nor  tired  in  the  morning,  as  is  usually  the  case 
after  a sleepless  night. 

In  the  morning  from  4 o’clock  onwards  he  cannot 
sleep  properly  any  longer ; he  tosses  about  restlessly 
from  one  side  to  the  other,  because  he  cannot  lie  long  in 
one  position ; the  hand  on  which  he  lies  becomes  soon 
tired;  he  often  wakes  up.  [Gss.] 

In  the  morning  on  waking  very  weak. 

In  the  morning  in  bed,  immediately  on  waking,  bruised  head- 
ache  and  bruised  pain  in  all  the  joints,  worst  when  quite  at  rest ; 
immediately  after  getting  up  these  pains  disappear. 

In  the  morning  very  tired ; her  legs  are  painful  so  that  she 
would  like  to  lie  down  again. 

315.  Chilliness  in  the  evening  in  bed  ; the  legs  up  to  the  knees  are 
icy  cold ; he  cannot  get  warm  all  night  ; sleeps  in  all  scarcely  two 
hours,  only  for  half  an  hour  at  a time,  during  which  he  has  anxious 
but  unremembered  dreams  (aft  16  d.). 

Alternate  heat  and  chills.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

Shivering  through  the  whole  body,  with  goose  skin  on  the 
thighs,  and  with  shock  of  the  brain  under  the  frontal  bone  (aft. 
ioh.).  [Fz.]. 

In  the  evening,  before  lying  down,  headache,  and  after  lying 
down  shivering  and  chilliness. 

Rigor  in  the  back. 

320.  Sometimes  chilliness  betwixt  the  scapulae. 

(When  he  got  into  bed  in  the  evening  his  soles  and  patellae 
became  cold.)  [HI.] 

In  the  evening  in  bed,  before  going  to  sleep,  a febrile  rigor  over 
the  whole  body  as  if  he  had  taken  a chill  in  a draught  of  air  (aft. 
19  h.).  [Lr.] 

In  the  evening  febrile  rigor  all  over,  during  which  the  hands 
were  cold,  but  the  face  and  forehead  warm,  without  thirst  (aft.  14  h.). 
[*>•] 

At  night  in  bed,  before  going  to  sleep,  a febrile  rigor  through 
the  whole  body;  he  could  hardly  get  warm  in  bed  (aft.  16  h.). 

[Lr.] 

325.  When  he  lies  down  in  bed  in  the  evening  he  is  quiet,  yet  sleep  is 
not  to  be  thought  of ; he  thinks  it  is  owing  to  the  position,  and  he 
changes  it  ever  and  anon,  but  cannot  sleep  before  3 a.m.  ; in  the 
morning,  waking  up  at  6 a.m.,  he  is  as  refreshed  as  if  he  had  slept 
sufficiently,  for  three  successive  nights.  [HI.] 


196 


AURUM. 


In  the  evening  febrile  rigor  over  the  whole  body,  with  stuffed 
coryza,  not  followed  by  heat,  and  without  thirst  (aft.  14  h.).  [Zr.] 
Heat  of  face  with  cold  hands  and  feet. 

Slight  transpiration  at  night  like  a vapour,  and  only  between  the 
thighs  moisture  like  perspiration  (aft.  10  h.). 

Morning  sweat  all  over. 

330.  All  daylong  good  humour;  he  was  talkative  and  con- 
tented with  himself.*  [Zr.] 

Cheerful  humour ; he  was  always  disposed  to  converse  with 
others,  and  was  quite  contented  with  his  position.*  1 

Tolerable  gaiety  and  agreeable  comfort*  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gw.] 

In  the  evening  sometimes  weeping,  sometimes  laughing,  as  if  she 
was  not  quite  conscious. 

Trembling  agitation  of  the  nerves  as  if  under  the  influence  of 
some  joyous  hope  (aft.  36  h.).  [Z%.] 

335.  Quiet  moroseness  (aft.  1 h.)  ; cheerfulness  (aft.  3 h.)  ; the  two 
emotions  afterwards  alternated  with  one  another.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Moroseness;  he  is  indisposed  to  talk  (aft.  8 h.).  [ZZr.] 
Very  much  given  to  feel  offended  ; the  slightest  thing  which  he 
thought  offensive  affected  him  deeply,  and  caused  him  to  resent  it. 

im  .... 

Irascibility  ; he  is  very  excitable,  and  the  slightest  contradiction 
excites  the  utmost  anger  (aft.  48  h.).  [Gw.] 

Choleric. 

340.  He  sits  apart,  all  by  himself  in  a corner,  wrapt  up  in  himself,  as 
if  in  the  deepest  melancholy,  when  left  undisturbed  ; but  the  slightest 
contradiction  excites  the  greatest  heat  and  anger,  when  he 
quite  forgets  himself,  at  first  with  quarrelling  and  much 
talking,  afterwards  with  few  disconnected  words  (chiefly  aft.  5 d.). 
[. Hrr .] 

Constant,  Sulky  seriousness  and  reservedness.  [Zr.] 

Peevish  dejection  ; he  thinks  nothing  will  succeed  with  him. 

[**.] 

He  thinks  that  everything  happens  awkwardly,  or  that  he  does 
everything  awkwardly.  [///.] 

Discontent  with  all  his  circumstances  ; he  imagines  that  he  finds 
everywhere  some  obstacle  in  the  way  ; at  one  time  he  thinks  that 
this  is  owing  to  an  unlucky  fate,  at  another  that  he  himself  is  to 
blame  for  it  ; when  the  latter  was  the  case  he  was  particularly 
mortified  and  dejected.  [Z/7.] 

345.  An  urging  to  activity,  bodily  as  well  as  mental  ; when  he  did 
anything,  he  thought  he  did  not.  do  it  quick  enough,  and  that  he  had 
a great  deal  more  to  do  ; he  could  not  live  to  his  liking.  [///.] 

Remorse  about  his  idleness,  and  yet  he  cannot  work  at  anything; 
it  drives  him  out  of  the  house,  he  must  be  always  moving.  [Zz.] 
Always  very  restless  and  undecided — thought  he  was  neglecting 

* Alternating  action  ? 


1 Though  without  name  attached,  this  symptom  occurs  among  (l  observations  ot 
others.” 


AURUM. 


197 


something  for  which  he  must  incur  reproach— without  perceptible 
ebullition  of  blood  ; he  seemed  to  carry  about  this  restlessness  with 
him  in  his  inmost  parts  ; this  condition  deprived  him  of  all  perseve- 
rance, all  energy.  [HI.] 

A noise  before  the  door  made  him  anxious  ; he  feared  lest 
some  one  would  come  in ; like  anthropophobia.* 

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  extraordinary  anxiety,  weariness  of  all 
the  limbs  and  drowsiness  (for  an  hour). 

350.  Great  anxiety  that  has  its  origin  in  the  praecordial  region  ; it 
draws  him  to  a place  that  was  previously  a favourite  one,  and  drives 
him  away  again,  and  so  from  one  place  to  another,  so  that  he  can 
remain  long  in  no  place.  [Fz.~\ 

Great  weakness  and  anxiety,  so  that  he  is  thought  to  be  near 
death.  [J.  H.  Schulze,  Prcelectiones  in  Pharm .,  Aug.,  p.  46.1] 

Amid  howling  and  crying  she  imagines  herself  to  be  irretrievably 
lost. 

He  imagines  he  has  forfeited  the  affections  of  others,  and  this 
grieves  him  to  tears.  [Fz.] 

Sad,  dejected. 

355.  He  is  discontented  with  himself  and  depressed  in  spirits. 

Melancholy ; he  imagines  he  is  unfitted  for  the  world  ; he  is 
filled  with  intense  delight  when  he  thinks  of  death,  so  that  he  longs 
to  die.  \Fz.~\ 

Contrariety  of  disposition. 

Frequent  attacks  of  praecordial  anxiety  and  trembling  anxiety. 
[ Ephem . Nat.  Cur .,  Cent.  10,  obs.  35«2] 


FULMINATING  GOLD. 

Bellyache,  especially  in  children,  with  anguish.  [. Pharmac . 
Wirtemh .,  ii,  p.  38. 3 4] 

Sinking  of  the  strength,  syncope,  cold  sweat  on  the  limbs,  violent 
vomiting,  convulsions.  [Fr.  Hoffmann,  Med.  Rat.  Syst.,  ii,  p. 
287.4] 

Violent  diarrhoea.  [Ludovici,  Pharmac.  Med.  Sec.  appl.  Gotha, 
1 68 5,  pp.  182,  188. 5] 

* Hence  it  was  useful  in  cases  of  too  great  hesitancy  of  mind. 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 No  observation  about  gold  occurs  here. 

3 Not  accessible. 

4 Statement  of  poisonous  effects  of  gold.  The  symptoms  are  stated  as  “ leading  on 
t©  death.” 

5 Not  accessible. 


BELLADONNA1 

( Atropa  Belladonna). 

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  the  whole  plant  at  the  commencement  of  its 
flowering,  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.) 

The  plant  gathered  in  the  garden  (on  a rather  dry  soil  and  preferably 
on  the  slope  of  a hill)  is  little  if  at  all  inferior  in  medicinal  power  to 
the  wild  plant,  although  some  physicians  have  asserted  the  contrary. 

From  the  following  completed  list  of  the  symptoms  of  belladonna  it 
will  readily  be  seen  that  it  corresponds  in  similarity  to  a number  of 
morbid  states  not  unfrequently  met  with  in  life,  and  that  hence  it  must 
frequently  be  homoeopathically  applicable  for  curative  purposes,  like  a 
polychrest. 

Those  small-souled  persons  who  cry  out  against  its  poisonous  cha- 
racter must  let  a number  of  patients  die  for  want  of  belladonna,  and 
their  hackneyed  phrase,  that  we  have  well-tried  mild  remedies  for  these 
diseases,  only  serves  to  prove  their  ignorance,  for  no  medicine  can  be  a 
substitute  for  another. 

To  take  an  example,  how  often  are  the  worst  forms  of  sore-throat 
(especially  those  combined  with  external  swelling)  given  over  to  death, 
in  spite  of  all  their  employment  of  venesection,  leeches,  blisters,  gargles, 
emollient  poultices,  cooling  powders,  sudorifics  and  purgatives.  And 
yet,  without  all  these  tortures,  they  might  have  been  cured  in  a few 
hours  with  a single  minute  dose  of  belladonna. 

And  what  other  real  medicine  would  not  be  hurtful,  dangerous,  and 
poisonous  in  the  hands  of  the  ignorant  ? Certainly  every  powerful 
medicine  would  be  so  if  given  in  unsuitable  cases  of  disease  and  in  dis- 
proportionately large  doses — for  which  the  so-called  physician  would  be 
solely  to  blame.  On  the  other  hand,  the  most  potent  and  energetic 
medicines  will  become  the  mildest  by  diminishing  the  dose  sufficiently, 
and  they  will  become  the  most  curative,  even  for  the  most  delicate  and 
sensitive  bodies,  when  they  are  given  in  appropriate  smallest  possible 
doses,  and  when  the  case  of  disease  consists  of  affections  very  similar 
to  what  the  medicine  itself  has  shown  it  can  call  forth  in  healthy  human 
beings.  With  such  potent  drugs  as  belladonna,  we  must  never  neglect 
to  exercise  the  requisite  care  in  the  homoeopathic  selection.  But  this 
would  never  enter  the  head  of  the  routine  practitioner  who,  as  is  well 
known,  is  in  the  habit  of  treating  all  cases  with  a few  prescriptions 
learned  by  rote. 

Taught  by  a hundredfold  experience  at  the  sick  bed  during  the  last 
eight  or  ten  years,  I could  not  help  descending  to  the  decillion-fold 


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830. 


BELLADONNA. 


x99 


dilution,  and  I find  the  smallest  portion  of  a drop*  of  this  for  a dose 
quite  sufficient  to  fulfil  every  curative  intention  attainable  with  this 
medicine. 

Two  drops  of  the  juice  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol,  taken  as 
unity  (as  with  other  vegetable  juices),  and  shaken  with  99  to  100 
drops  of  alcohol  by  two  downward  strokes  of  the  arm  (whose  hand 
holds  the  mixing  phial)  gives  a hundredfold  potentized  dilution  ; one 
drop  of  this  shaken  in  the  same  way  with  another  100  drops  of  fresh 
alcohol  gives  the  ten-thousandfold  dilution,  and  one  drop  of  this  shaken 
with  100  drops  of  alcohol,  the  millionfold.  And  thus  in  thirty  such 
phials  the  potentized  dilution  is  brought  to  the  decillionfold,  with 
which  the  homoeopathic  physician  effects  the  cures  he  can  expect  to 
make  with  belladonna. 

(The  above  is  the  method  to  be  employed  for  the  dilution  and  potenti- 
zation  of  the  other  vegetable  juices.) 

Belladonna,  in  the  small  dose  just  described,  is,  if  the  case  is  homceo- 
pathically  adapted,  capable  of  curing  the  most  acute  diseases  (in  which 
it  acts  with  a rapidity  proportionate  to  the  nature  of  the  disorder).  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  not  less  serviceable  in  the  most  chronic  ailments, 
in  which  its  duration  of  action,  even  in  the  smallest  dose,  amounts  to 
three  weeks  and  more.f 

Almost  all  authors  have  asserted  that  vinegar  is  an  antidote  to 
belladonna,  but  that  is  a mere  conjecture,  copied  in  simple  faith  by  one 
from  another,  and  yet  nothing  is  further  from  the  truth.  Repeated 
experience  has  taught  me  that  vinegar  only  aggravates  the  ill-effects  of 
large  doses  of  belladonna.  J 

Opium  relieves  the  paralytic  symptoms  and  abdominal  pains  caused  by 
belladonna,  but  only  in  an  antipathic  and  palliative  way,  very  probably 
also  it  removes,  in  very  small  doses,  the  sopor  caused  by  belladonna. 

But  the  stupefied  condition,  the  mania  and  the  fury  caused  by 
belladonna,  are  soonest  and  most  surely  homoeopathically  removed  by 
one  or  two  small  doses  of  henbane.  But  the  intoxication  by  itself  is 
best  subdued  by  wine^  as  I have  seen,  and  as  Trajus  and  Moibanus 
long  ago  observed. 

When  a small  dose  of  belladonna,  unhomceopathically  selected, 
causes  lachrymose  disposition  with  chilliness  and  headache,  an  equally 
small  dose  of  pulsatilla  relieves. 

But  suitable  help  is  most  urgently  required  in  cases  where  belladonna 
has  been  swallowed  in  considerable  quantities,  for  example,  in  the  form 
of  its  berries.  In  such  cases  relief  is  obtained  by  drinking  a large 
quantity  of  strong  coffee,  which  removes  the  loss  of  irritability  and  the 
tetanic  convulsions,  though  it  only  does  that  antipathically.  It  also  pro- 
motes the  vomiting  of  the  berries  most  certainly,  the  fauces  being  at 

* As  the  dose  is  one  globule  the  size  of  a poppy  seed  (300  of  which  weigh  only  a 
grain),  moistened  with  it,  we  give  less  than  ~^th  of  a drop  of  the  decillion-fold 
medicinal  dilution  spiritualized  (potentized)  by  succussion,  for  with  a single  drop 
many  more  than  1000  such  small  globules  can  be  moistened. 

f The  best  preventive  of  hydrophobia  is  the  smallest  dose  of  belladonna,  given  at 
first  every  third  or  fourth  day,  and  repeated  at  ever  longer  intervals. 

+ Staff  also  observed  that  in  the  violent  headache  from  belladonna  vinegar  laid 
on  the  forehead  increased  it  to  such  an  intolerable  degree  that  it  had  to  be  taken  off. 


200 


BELLADONNA. 


the  same  time  irritated  with  a long  feather  in  order  to  empty  the 
stomach. 

The  erysipelatous  swellings  caused  by  belladonna  are  readily  removed 
by  hepar  sulphuris.  Camphor,  too,  displays  much  antidotal  power 
against  some  of  the  morbid  effects  caused  by  belladonna. 

The  prophylactic  power  of  belladonna  (given  in  the  smallest  dose 
every  six  or  seven  days)  discovered  by  me,  against  the  true  erysipelatoid 
smooth  scarlet  fever , as  described  by  Sydenham,  Plencitz,  and  others, 
was  calumniated  and  ridiculed  for  nineteen  years  by  a large  number  of 
medical  men,  who  were  not  acquainted  with  this  peculiar  form  of 
children’s  disease,  and  consequently  mistook  for  it  the  red  miliary 
(purpura  miliaris,  roodvonk*)  that  came  from  Belgium  in  1801.  This 
they  falsely  called  u scarlet  fever,”  and  naturally  they  failed  to  get  any 
result  from  the  administration  of  my  prophylactic  and  curative  remedy 
for  true  scarlet  fever,  in  this  red  miliary  fever.f  I am  happy  to  say 
that  of  late  years  other  medical  men  have  again  observed  the  old  true 
scarlet  fever.  They  have  amply  testified  to  the  prophylactic  power  of 
belladonna  in  this  disease,  and  have  at  last  rendered  me  justice  after 
having  been  treated  so  long  with  unmerited  contempt. 

* See  Thomassen  a Thuessink,  “Over  de  Roodvonk ,”  181 6,  extracted  from  his 
Geneeskundige  Waarnemingen. 

f This  red  miliary  (roodvonk)  is  quite  a different  disease,  requiring  quite  different 
treatment.  Belladonna  naturally  does  no  good  in  it,  and  the  ordinary  routine  practice 
allows  the  majority  of  patients  to  die  of  it.  These  might  be  all  cured  by  the  alternate 
administration  of  aconite  and  tincture  of  raw  coffee — the  former  for  the  heat  and 
increasing  restlessness  and  agonizing  anxiety,  the  latter  for  the  excessive  pains  with 
the  lachrymose  humour.  The  aconite  should  be  given  in  the  decillion-fold  dilution  of 
the  juice,  and  the  raw  coffee  in  the  million-fold  dilution  5 both  in  the  smallest  portion 
of  a drop  for  a dose,  the  one  or  the  other,  according  as  they  are  indicated,  given  every 
twelve,  sixteen,  or  twenty-four  hours.  In  recent  times  these  two  very  different 
diseases  (smooth  scarlet  fever  and  purple  miliary)  seem  to  have  occurred  complicated 
with  one  another  in  some  epidemics  ; hence  in  some  of  the  patients  belladonna,  in 
others  aconite,  seemed  to  have  been  most  useful. 

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  his  proving  of  belladonna  by  the  under-mentioned 
disciples: — Baehr,  Gross,  Hartmann,  Hartung,  C.  Hempel,  Herrmann, 
Hornburg,  Kummer,  Langhammer,  J.  G.  Lehmann,  Mockel,  L.  E.  Ruckert, 
Stapf,  Wislicenus. 

Symptoms  have  been  taken  from  the  following  old-school  authorities : 

Ackermann,  in  Struve's  Triumph  d.  Heilk .,  iii. 

Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  vol.  ix. 

Albrecht,  in  Commerc.  lit.  Nor.,  1731. 

Baldinger,  in  Neues  Magazin  f.  Aerzte , i. 

Baylie,  Prac.  Essays  on  Med.  Subjects. 

Boucher,  in  Journ.  de  Med.,  xi,  Aout. 

Buchave,  in  Samml.  hr.  Ahh.,f.pr.  Aerzte , xiv. 

Buchholz,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  v. 

Buc’hoz,  in  Vic  at,  Plantes  Venen.  de  la  Suisse. 

Camerarius,  El.,  Obs. ; Med.-Chir.  Wahrnehm .,  vii  $ and  in  Wepfer,  Hist.  Cic. 

Carl,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  vol.  iv. 

Commercium  liter.  Nor.,  1731. 

Cullen,  Mat.  Med.,  ii. 

D aries,  Diss.  de  Belladonna,  Lips.,  1776. 

Dillenius,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,ann.  7,  8, 

Dumoulin,  in  Journ.  de  Med.,  xi,  Aout, 

Ehrhardt,  Pfanzenhistorie , x, 


BELLADONNA. 


201 


Elfes,  in  Rust's  Magazin,  vol.  xxi. 

Evers,  in  Berliner  Samml. , iv. 

Evers,  in  Schmucker' s Vermischten  Schrijten , i. 

Faber,  Strychnomania. 

G — ch,  in  Hufel,  Journ .,  xxii. 

Gmelin,  Eb.,  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  vol.  vi,  app. ; Pjlanzengifte. 

GoCKEL,in  Frankische  Samml.,  iii. 

Greding,  in  Ludvjigii  Adversaria  med. 

Grimm,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  vol.  ii. 

Hasenest,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  vol,  iii. 

Henning,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xxi. 

Hochstetter.,  Obs.  Med.,  Fft.,  1674. 

Hoffmann,  Fr.,  Medicina  Ration. 

Horst,  Opera,  ii. 

Hoyer,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  7,  8. 

Huf eland's  Journal f.  pr.  Arzn.,  xvi. 

Justi,  in  Hufeland's  Journ.,  vii. 

Lambergen,  Tib.,  Lectio  inaug.  sist.  eph.pers.  carcin.,  Groning.,  1754. 

Launay  d’Hermont,  de,  in  Hist,  de  l' Acad,  des  Sc. 

Lottinger,  Med.-Chir.  Wahrnehm.,  Altenb.,  ii. 

Manettj,  Viridarium  fiorentinum , Florent.,  1751. 

Mappi,  Plant.  Alsat. 

Mardorf,  Diss.  de  Maniacis  Giessensibus,  Giesae,  1691. 

May,  in  Hannover.  Mag.,  1773,  No.  97. 

Med.-Chir.  W ahrnehmungun  aus  verschiednen  Sprachen  ubersetzt)  Altenb.,  vii. 
Meza,  de,  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.f.  pr.  Aerzte , xiv. 

Moibanus,  in  Schenck,  vii. 

Muller,  in  Horn's  Archiv,  ix. 

Munch,  Ueber  die  Belladonne. 

Munch,  in  Richter's  Bibliothek , v. 

Ollenroth,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  vii. 

Porta,  J.  B.,  Magia  Natur.,  viii. 

Rau,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  vol.  x. 

Ray,  Histor.  Plant.,  lib.  13. 

Remer,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xvii. 

St.  Martin,  de,  in  Journ.  de  Med.,  xvrii,  Aout. 

Saute r,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xi. 

Sauvages,  Nosol.,  ii. 

Schaffer,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  vi. 

Schmucker,  Chirurg.  Wahrnehm.,  ii ; Vermischten  Schriften. 

Schreck,  in  Commerc.  lit.  Nor.,  1743. 

Sicelius,  Observ .,  Dec.  iv. 

Solenander,  in  Abh.  der  Konigl.  Acad.  d.  Wissensch.,  Breslau,  1750. 

Struve,  Triumph  der  Heilk .,  i. 

Timmermann,  Diss.  Periculum  Belladonna. 

Valentini,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  10. 

Vi  cat,  Plantes  Veneneuses  de  la  Suisse. 

Wagner,  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  10. 

Ware,  James,  in  Gilbert's  Annals,  1816,  xi. 

Wasserberg,  in  Stoll's  Ratio  Medendi,  iii. 

Wei n mann,  in  Gmelin' s Pflanzengifte. 

Wells,  Charles,  in  Gilbert's  Annals , 1813,  ii. 

Wetzler,  in  Annal.  d.  Heilkunde,  1811,  Feb. 

Wiedemann,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xxii. 

Wien  holt,  Heilkr.  d.  Tkier.  Magnetismus,  i. 

Wierus,  De  praestig.  Damonum,  iii. 

Ziegler,  Beob.,  Lips.,  1787. 

In  the  Fragmenta  there  are  405  symptoms  of  belladonna,  in  the  1st  Edit.  650,  ip 
the  2nd  Edit.  1422,  and  in  this  3rd  Edit.  1440.] 


2Q2 


BELLADONNA. 


BELLADONNA. 

Vertigo.  [Sicelius,* 1  Observ .,  Dec.  iv,  Cas.  4. — Ziegler,1  Beob ., 
Leipz.,  1787,  pp.  21 — 38.— R.  Buchave,2  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.f.pr. 
Aerzte,x  iv,  iv. — Henning, 3 in  Hufel.  Journ.^xx  i,  i.— Eb.  Gmelin,4 
in  yfcta  Afa/.  C«r.,  vi,  App.] 

Vertigo  ; objects  seem  to  sway  hither  and  thither.  [WsJ\ 
Whirling  in  the  head,  vertigo  with  nausea,  as  after  rapid 
turning  round  in  a circle,  or  as  after  the  morning  sleep  following  a 
nocturnal  debauch.  \_HbgJ\ 

Whirling  in  the  head,  and  at  the  same  time  a similar  whirling 
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; after  rising  it  became  so  bad  when 
walking,  that  she  could  not  distinguish  anything*,  everything  vanished 
from  her  sight.  [KrJ] 

5.  Vertigo  as  if  all  whirled  round  in  a circle  (aft.  1 h.).  [Afrr.] 

He  goes  round  in  a circle.  [De  St.  Martin,5  Journal  de  Med ., 
xviii,  Aout.] 

Stupid  and  whirling  in  the  head  ; she  feels  better  in  the  open  air, 
worse  in  the  room  (aft.  \ h.).  [<SV/'.J 

Attacks  of  vertigo,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving.  [Gw.] 

A giddy  feeling  in  the  whole  head,  like  vertigo,  when  sitting. 
[Htn.] 

10.  Vertigo  and  trembling  of  the  hands,  so  that  she  could  not  do  any- 
thing with  them.  [Baldinger,6 *  Neues  Magazin  f Aerzte^  i,  1 St., 
P-  3°-] 

When  walking  he  staggers,  holds  on  to  the  walls,  complains  of 
anxiety  and  vertigo,  and  often  talks  nonsense  like  a drunken  person. 
[Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

She  rises  from  bed  in  the  morning  and  staggers  as  if  intoxicated, 
hither  and  thither.  [Greding,  in  Ludwigii  Adversar.  med.  />r.,  i, 
P.  iv,  p.  670’’  (14).] 

Giddy  swaying.  [Mardorf,8  Diss.  de  Maniacis  Giessensibus , 
Giesae,  1691. — Lottinger,9  Med.  Chlrurg.  Wahrnehm .,  Altenb.,  ii, 
p.  326. — Tib.  Lambergen,10  Lectio  inaug.  sist.  eph.  pers.  carcin ., 

Groning.,  1754,] 

1 Not  accessible. 

2 Symptoms  observed  in  whooping-cough  patients  to  whom  large  doses  of  the 
extract  had  been  administered. 

3 Effects  of  grain  doses  of  powdered  leaves  given  for  pemphigus. 

4 Poisoning  of  an  old  man  by  the  berries.  [When  the  form  in  which  the  plant 
was  taken  is  not  mentioned,  it  will  be  understood  that  the  berries  were  ingested.] 

5 Poisoning  of  a boy  of  four.  6 Poisoning  of  four  adults. 

7 Greding’s  symptoms  from  vol.  i of  Ludwig’s  Adversaria  are  taken  from  a series 

of  twenty-three  cases,  of  which  the  first  thirteen  were  pure  epileptics  and  the  remainder 
epilepto-maniacs,  treated  by  belladonna  in  increasing  doses  of  the  powdered  leaves. 
As  all  mental  symptoms  occurring  in  the  patients  of  the  second  category  must  be 
esteemed  doubtful,  I have  indicated  them  by  adding  to  each  the  number  of  the  case 
from  which  they  were  taken. 

8 Poisoning  of  several  persons.  9 Not  accessible. 

10  Symptoms  observed  in  a patient  taking  an  infusion  of  Belladonna  for  some 

mammary  indurations. 


BELLADONNA, 


203 

Attacks  of  vertigo  with  obtuseness  of  senses  for  some  minutes 
(aft.  12  h.). 

15.  All  daylong  cpnfusion  of  senses;  he  knows  not  what  he  is 
doing.  [Zr.] 

Obtuseness  of  senses. 

Cloudiness  of  the  head,  with  swelling  of  the  glands  in  the  nape 
(aft.  6 h.). 

Intoxication. 

Immediately  after  a meal  as  if  intoxicated. 

20.  On  drinking  the  smallest  quantity  of  beer  immediate  intoxi- 
cation. 

Muddled  head  and  intoxication  as  if  from  drinking  wine,  with 
bloated  red  face.  \_Commercium  liter.  Nor .,l  1731.] 

His  whole  head  is  dazed  for  many  days.  [£/A] 

Muddled  state  as  in  intoxication.  [Hochstetter,2  Obs.  Med ., 
Fft.,  1674,  obs.  7. — May,3  in  Hannover . Mag.,  1773,  No.  97. — 
Sicelius,  1.  c. — de  Launay  d’Hermont,4  in  Hist,  de  I'Acad.  des 
Sc .,  1756. — Albrecht,5  in  Commerc.  lit.  Nor.,  1731.— Buc’hoz,6 
in  Vicat , Plantes  venen.  de  la  Suisse , p.  183.]  \_L.  Rkt.~\ 

Muddled  state  of  sinciput  as  if  an  oppressive  fog  went  hither  and 
thither,  especially  under  the  frontal  bone.  [G^.] 

25.  Muddling  of  the  head  as  from  much  brandy  and  tobacco  smoke. 
\_Hbg.-] 

Muddling  and  confusion  of  the  whole  head,  as  from  the  dis- 
agreeable feeling  of  commencing  intoxication.  [Gt*.] 

Confusion  of  the  head ; worse  during  movement.  \_HrrJ\ 
Disinclination  for  all  intellectual  work.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Weakness  of  mind  and  body,  [ii/irr.] 

30.  Weakness  of  mind.  [Wierus,7  de  Praestig . Dcemonutn,  iii,  cap. 

17-] 

Stupefaction.  [Wagner,8  Miscell.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  10, 
obs.  108  (11) — Buchave, — Wierus,  1.  c.] 

Confusion  of  mind.  [Sicelius,  1.  c.] 

Confusion  of  mind,  so  that  he  knows  not  whether  he  is  dreaming 
or  awake.  [Moibanus,9  in  Sclnenck,  vii,  obs.  164.] 

Confusion  of  the  senses  ; sleepy  and  yet  awake,  he  thinks  he  is 
dreaming.  [Moibanus,  1.  c.] 

35.  His  senses  deceive  him.  [Ackermann,10  in  Struve,  Triumph  der 
H.,  iii,  p.  303.] 


1 Same  as  Albrecht,  q.  <v. 

2 Effects  of  infusion  in  an  adult. 

3 Not  accessible. 

4 Poisoning  of  an  adult. 

5 Poisoning  of  two  women  and  a boy. 

G Poisoning  of  a young  boy. 

7 Poisoning  of  an  adult. 

8 Poisoning  of  (1)  two  old  women  and  (11)  some  children.  [These  numbers  will 
be  used  to  designate  the  subjects  to  whom  the  symptoms  belong.] 

9 Poisoning  of  a man. 

10  Not  accessible. 


204 


BELLADONNA. 


Exalted,  deluded  phantasy  conjures  up  a number  of  beautiful 
pictures  to  her.  [JSTr.] 

He  imagines  he  sees  ghosts  and  insects  of  various  kinds.  [Moi- 
banus,  Lc.] 

Her  nose  appears  transparent  to  her.  \_Kr.~] 

He  imagines  he  sees  things  not  present.  [Wiedemann,1 2  in 
hufel . Jour .,  xxii,  l.] 

40.  It  seems  to  her  that  a spot  on  the  left  side  of  her  head  is  trans- 
parent and  spotted  brown.  \_Kr.~\ 

He  thinks  he  is  riding  an  ox.  [G — ch,3  in  Hufel.  Jour .,  xvii, 

!•] 

He  does  not  know  his  own  relations.  [Wierus,  1.  c.] 

Want  of  consciousness  ; he  sat  as  if  in  a dream.  \_Hbg.~\ 
Unconsciousness.  [Stf] 

45.  He  often  lay  without  sense,  without  consciousness.  [Stf] 

Loss  of  consciousness  and  convulsions  in  the  arm,  at  night. 
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  672.] 

Extreme  stupefaction  of  the  senses.  [Ollenroth,3  in  Hufel. 
Jour.,  vii,  4.] 

Unconsciousness.  [Hasenest,4  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  iii,  obs.  35. 
— Grimm,5  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  vol.  ii,  obs.  60 — (aft.  2 h.).  Rau,6 
in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  x,  obs.  24. — Eb.  Gmelin,  1.  c. — Hochstetter, 
c-] 

Unconsciousness  with  convulsions  of  the  limbs.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 
50.  Complete  unconsciousness ; she  knows  nothing  going  on. 
[Henning,  1.  c.] 

Complete  loss  of  reason.  [Sauter,7  in  Huf.  Jour,  xi,  1,  p.  125, 
(1). — Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Loss  of  reason,  for  some  weeks.  [Rau,  1.  c.J 

Insensibility.  [Vicat,8  Plantes  veneneuses  de  la  Suisse,  p.  1 8 1 .] 

Stupidity.  [Wagner,  1.  c.  (1)] 

55.  During  the  headache  her  thoughts  leave  her;  she  forgets 
what  she  thought  of  shortly  before,  and  cannot  recollect  herself. 
IBhr.) 

Distraction  of  the  mind  ; he  easily  makes  mistakes  in  his  work, 
and  forgets  things  that  he  has  just  undertaken  to  do.  \JVs.] 

He  thinks  now  of  one  thing  now  of  another  ; he  could  not  think 
of  anything  properly,  and  he  immediately  forgot  all  he  had  just 
thought  of  or  read.  \_Lr.] 

Impaired  memory. 

Very  weak  memory  ; he  forgets  what  he  intended  to  do  imme- 
diately, and  can  remember  nothing. 


1 Effects  of  B.  when  given  freely  to  children  for  whooping-cough. 

2 Effects  of  enema  of  infusion  of  leaves  given  for  incarcerated  hernia. 

3 Effects  of  extract  given  for  mammary  scirrhus. 

4 Poisoning  of  a young  woman. 

5 Poisoning  of  a child  of  three. 

6 Poisoning  of  a man  of  fifty. 

7 Poisoning  of  a child  of  six. — This  case  will  be  distinguised  by  a (1). 

8 Account  of  general  effects  of  leaves  and  berries. 


BELLADONNA.  205 

60.  Return  of  the  lost  memory.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  650.] 

He  remembers  long  forgotten  things.  [Wiedemann,  1.  c.] 

He  remembered  things  that  happened  three  years  before. 
\_Med . chir.  Wahrnehmungen  aus  verschiednen  Sprachen  iibersetzt , 
Altenb.,  vii,  p.  6g.2] 

Lively  memory  (curative  effect)  (aft.  24  h.). 

Violent  headache.  [Lambergen — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  669.] 

65.  Headache  as  though  the  brain  was  numb. 

His  whole  head  feels  heavy,  as  from  intoxication.  [St/'.] 

A weight  in  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead,  which  causes  vertigo 
and  as  it  were  intoxication  (aft.  14  d.). 

The  head  feels  heavy  as  though  he  would  fall  asleep  ; he  is 
disinclined  for  everything. 

Headache,  only  over  the  eyes,  like  a weight  in  the  head,  in  the 
morning  on  waking,  and  when  he  touches  the  eyes  it  hurts. 

70.  Feeling  of  weight  with  violent  aching  in  the  whole  occiput 
(aft.  2i  h.).  [Htn.] 

Weight  of  the  head  as  if  it  would  fall  down.  \_Ln.~\ 

In  the  morning  headache  as  if  something  in  the  forehead  above 
the  eyebrows  sunk  down,  which  hinders  the  opening  of  the  eyes 
(aft.  4 h.).  [Zr.] 

An  aching  feeling  of  weight,  from  the  centre  of  the  brain  towards 
the  temples,  with  diminution  of  the  hearing  in  both  ears.  \_Mkl.~\ 
x^ching  in  the  right  side  of  the  crown,  later  shifting  into  the  left 
side,  then  back  again  into  the  right.  \_Mkl. J 

75.  Aching  headache,  especially  in  the  forehead  (aft.  2 d.). 
[j Hrr.~\ 

Constant  dull  aching  headache  in  the  side  of  the  head 

(aft.  5,  24  h.). 

Painful  aching  feeling  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  lower  part 
of  the  forehead,  just  above  the  nose,  intolerable  on  stepping.  [L.  Rkt^\ 
Headache  above  the  orbits,  as  if  the  brain  were  pressed  in,  so 
that  he  must  shut  his  eyes.  \_Hbg.'] 

Aching  pain  beneath  the  right  frontal  protuberance,  which  soon 
afterwards  involves  the  whole  forehead  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gw.] 

80.  Violent  aching  under  the  right  frontal  protuberance.  [Gw.] 

The  aching  pain  under  the  frontal  bone  only  occasionally  declines 
to  return  again  in  still  greater  intensity,  [Gw,] 

Aching  pain  beneath  the  frontal  protuberances,  in  the  morning 
soon  after  waking,  on  getting  up.  [Gw.] 

Violent  outward-pressing  pain  in  left  frontal  protuberance.  \_Htn.~\ 
Violent  inward-pressure  in  the  left  temple,  which  on  leaning  this 
side  of  the  head  on  something  extends  over  the  whole  of  the  anterior 
half  of  the  brain  (aft.  f h.).  \_Htn.~] 

85.  Violent  outward-pressure  in  the  whole  of  the  left  half  of  the 
brain,  especially  severe  in  the  forehead  (aft.  h.).  [Htn.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  right  temporal  region,  which  on  leaning  the 
head  on  the  hand  changes  into  a bursting  pain,  and  extends  to  the 

right  frontal  protuberance  (aft.  8 h.).  \_Htn.~\ 

2 Not  accessible. 


1 Temporary  only. 


2o6 


BELLADONNA. 


Pressure  in  the  head,  now  here,  now  there,  that  each 
time  involves  large  spaces.  [Hrr.~\ 

Aching  headache  in  the  forehead,  so  had  on  moving 
that  it  made  the  eyes  close,  alleviated  when  sitting  ; he  must 
lie  down,  whereupon  it  went  off ; on  standing  up  it  immediately 
returned,  for  two  days,  not  aggravated  either  by  eating  or  by  drinking  ; 
as  soon  as  he  goes  into  the  open  air  he  feels  as  if  the  forehead  would 
be  pressed  in,  just  as  if  a heavy  stone  lay  on  it ; the  third  day  it  went 
off  completely  when  sitting  in  the  room.  \_Hbg.~\ 

An  aching  deep  in  the  brain  over  the  whole  head,  whilst  and 
after  walking  in  the  open  air. 

90.  Headache  pressing  like  a stone  in  the  forehead,  ameliorated  by 
laying  the  head  down  and  stooping  forwards,  with  dilated  pupils  and 
whining  ill-humour  about  trifles  (aft.  3 h.). 

Tensive  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  forehead,  [//rr.j 

Tensive  pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  crown  and  in 
the  forehead  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Hrr .] 

Headache  as  if  the  head  was  screwed  together  from  both  sides 
and  thereby  became  narrower.  \_Bhr.~\ 

A constant  expansion  of  the  whole  brain.  \_Ln.~\ 

95.  Violent  pressing-outwards  in  the  whole  head,  as  though  it  would 
burst  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Htn. ] 

Headache  as  if  the  brain  would  be  pressed  out,  just  above  the 
orbits  in  the  forehead,  which  hinders  the  opening  of  the  eyes,  and 
compels  lying  down,  with  extreme  contraction  of  the  pupils  and  very 
low  voice  (aft.  5,  24  h.). 

On  stooping  forwards  pain  as  if  all  would  come  out  at  the  fore- 
head. [Stf.] 

Sensation  as  if  the  brain  pressed  towards  the  forehead,  which 
immediately  went  ofl7  when  he  bent  the  head  backwards  a little  (aft. 
Ii  h.).  [Htnl 

On  coughing  the  feeling  of  pressing  asunder  in  the  head  is  much 
more  severe  (aft.  3^  h.).  \_Htn.~] 

100.  In  the  open  air  the  feeling  of  bursting  in  the  head  is  very  severe, 
and  he  is  afraid  to  cough  on  account  of  increasing  the  pain  (aft. 
4 h.).  \_Htn.~] 

Throbbing  pressing  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  (aft.  5 h.). 
[Htn.-] 

On  account  of  pain  in  the  forehead  he  must  often 
stand  still  when  walking,  at  every  step  it  feels  as  if  the 
brain  in  the  forehead  sank  and  rose ; this  was  alleviated 
by  pressing  strongly  on  it  (aft.  6 days).  \_Hbg.~\ 

Strong  pulsation  of  the  blood-vessels  in  the  forehead,  and  pain  as 
if  the  bone  were  raised  up.  \_Hbg.~\ 

On  awaking  beating  of  the  blood-vessels  in  the  head  and  in  most 
parts  of  the  body.  \_Kr .] 

105.  Violent  throbbing  in  the  brain  from  before  backwards 
and  to  both  sides;  externally  it  ends  in  painful  shoots. 

Aching  gnawing  headache  on  the  right  side  of  the  upper  part  of 


BELLADONNA. 


20  7 


the  head  down  to  the  ear,  produced  by  transient  gnawing  pain  in  the 
hollow  tooth  (aft.  9 h.).  \JVs.'] 

Aching  shooting  in  the  temples  from  within  outwards  (aft.  | h.). 
[^*] 

Cutting  pressure  in  the  temples  from  within  outwards,  always 
becoming  more  violent,  extending  through  the  brain,  and  there 
turning  into  severe  throbbing,  continuing  in  all  positions.  \Ws^\ 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  head,  now  here,  now  there,  especially  in 
the  forehead  and  temporal  region.  \_Hrr.~\ 

110.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  temple  and  crown,  that  spreads  out 
in  various  directions.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  head  here  and  there  (aft.  5 h.). 
[. Hrr .] 

Drawing  aching  headache.  [ Hbg.~\ 

A drawing  in  the  head  towards  the  forehead,  as  if  the  brain 
would  expand.  \_Ln.~\ 

Drawing  pain  from  the  temple  to  above  the  right  orbit. 

1 15.  A drawing  downwards  at  the  temples  and  in  the  right  orbit. 

Boring  and  throbbing  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  like  that  in 
the  cheek,  aggravated  by  every  movement.  \_Kr.~\ 

Boring  and  aching  headache  during  the  day  on  various  parts,  in 
the  evening  shooting.  [ATr.] 

Boring  pain  under  the  right  frontal  protuberance,  soon  after 
awaking  in  the  morning.  [C^.] 

Incessant  drawing  and  outstretching  headache,  as  if  something 
rocked  or  swayed  about  in  it  by  jerks. 

120.  Jerking  headache,  which  became  extremely  violent 
on  walking  quickly  or  going  quickly  upstairs,  and  at 
every  step  jerked  downwards  like  a weight  in  the  occiput 

(aft.  48  h.).  \Ws?\ 

The  whole  head  is  affected  with  shooting  pain,  chiefly  in  the 
forehead.  [iSy.] 

Obtuse  shoots  in  the  left  temple  from  within  outwards.  \_JVs.'\ 

In  the  whole  forehead  slight  shooting  headache  (aft.  ij  h.). 

im 

Sharp  shooting  outwards  in  both  frontal  protuberances  (aft.  2 h.). 
[*”'•] 

125.  Excessively  violent  headache  of  obtuse  or  aching  shoots,  which 
dart  through  the  brain  from  all  sides. 

In  the  right  temple  violent  shooting  pain  for  a quarter  of  an  hour 
(aft.  25  h.).  W] 

Some  obtuse  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput.  [£«.] 

In  the  right  frontal  protuberance  severe  shooting,  aggravated  by 
stooping  forwards,  lessened  by  touch  (aft.  5 m.), 

Stabbing  through  the  head  as  with  a two-edged  knife,  in  the 
evening.  \Kr.~\ 

130.  Stabs  as  with  a knife  from  one  temple  to  the  other.  \_BhrJ\ 

In  the  evening  some  large  stitches  in  the  occiput  close  behind 
the  ear,  as  rapid  as  lightning,  so  that  he  could  have  cried  out  (aft* 
6 d.). 


208 


BELLADONNA. 


In  the  right  side  of  the  head  cutting  stabs  as  with  a two-edged 
knife  which  extend  at  one  time  into  the  sinciput,  then  into  the 
crown,  and  then  into  the  occiput,  so  that  he  cannot  lie  on  either 
side.  [Kr.] 

Three  violent  strong  shoots  through  the  head  from  the  forehead 
to  the  occiput,  whereupon  all  the  previous  headache  suddenly  dis- 
appears (aft.  3!  h.).  [*Sy.] 

Shooting  tearing  in  the  head  above  the  right  orbit.  [Hrr.~] 

135.  Cutting  tearing  pain  in  the  head  that  extends  from  one  part  to 
another.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Burning  tearing  pain  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance  (aft.  4 h.). 

«.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  crown,  aggravated 
by  movement.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Tearing  in  the  forehead  externally. 

Tearing  in  the  forehead.  [Hbg.~] 

140.  Tearing  above  the  eyebrows.  \_Hbg.~] 

Violent  pains  in  the  head  of  a tearing  kind,  in  the  sinciput  (aft. 
8 h,).  [Gss.] 

Headache  on  the  crown,  a twisting,  sometimes  also  digging, 
sometimes  tearing ; the  pain  was  much  aggravated  by  external 
pressure  ; her  skull  appeared  to  her  quite  thin,  as  though  it  might  be 
pressed  through.  [ Kr .] 

Cold  feeling  in  the  brain,  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead. 

Drawing  in  the  forehead.  \_Kr.] 

145.  Drawing  pain  in  the  frontal  bone  and  in  the  nape,  when  at  rest 
and  when  moving.  [Gjj.] 

A headache  apparently  tearing  asunder  the  sutures  of  the  skull, 
as  if  a lever  were  inserted  in  order  to  burst  open  the  head.  [A«.] 

Sensation  in  the  brain  as  of  splashing  water.  [Buchholz,1  in 
Hufel.  Journal,  v,  1,  p.  252.] 

On  stooping  forwards  the  blood  rushes  towards  the  forehead. 

stooping  the  blood  mounts  into  the  head  and  he  becomes 
heavy  and  as  if  giddy. 

150.  Ebullition  of  the  blood  to  the  head,  without  internal  heat  of 
head  ; when  he  leaned  the  head  back  it  seemed  to  him  that  the  blood 
rushed  in.  \_Hbgl\ 

Heat  in  the  head  (aft.  \ h.).  [StfJ\ 

External  pain  in  the  whole  head  like  that  from  rough  pulling  and 
rumpling  the  hair  ; pain  remains  in  the  scalp.  [A.  Rkt.~\ 

Gnawing  headache  externally  on  the  frontal  protuberances. 

[^•] 

Fine  shooting  burning  on  the  left  frontal  protuberance  (aft.  J h.). 
[Htn.-] 

155.  A cutting  headache  on  the  left  side  near  the  occipital  protube- 
rance. [Gto.] 


1 Effects  of  two-grain  doses  of  the  powdered  root  given  to  a boy  as  prophylactic  of 
hydrophobia. 


BELLADONNA. 


209 


On  the  right  side  of  the  head,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  right 
arm,  drawing  pain,  when  at  rest  (after  dinner).  [_Hbgl\ 

Very  transient  cramp  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  vertex  (aft. 
11  h.).  [TVs.] 

Cramp  pain  on  the  root  of  the  nose.  \JVs.~\ 

Severe  cramp  pain  on  the  frontal  protuberance,  that  extends 
downwards  over  the  zygoma  to  the  lower  jaw.  {JVs.~\ 

160.  External  feeling  of  contraction  of  the  frontal  and  eye  muscles. 
[Z«.] 

Scratching  itching  on  the  forehead  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.'] 

A painful  boil  on  the  temple. 

Red  painless  pimples  break  out  on  the  temple,  on  the  right  corner 
of  the  mouth,  and  on  the  chin ; on  scratching  bloody  water  exudes 
(aft.  13  h.).  [Zr.] 

Swelling  of  the  head.  \_Kr. — Munch,1  On  Belladonna — Horst,2 
Opera , ii,  p.  488.] 

165.  Great  swelling  of  the  head  and  redness  all  over  the  body/* 
[Munch,1  in  Richter's  Biblioth .,  v,  p.  387.] 

Falling  out  of  the  hair,  for  an  hour  (aft.  24  h.). 

The  hairs,  which  were  previously  idioelectric,  are  no  longer  so 
(aft.  24  h.). 

The  external  head  is  so  sensitive  that  the  slightest  touch,  even 
the  pressure  of  the  hair,  causes  her  pain.  \_Kr.~\ 

Restless  expression.  [Boucher,3  in  Jour,  de  Med .,  xxiv,  310.] 
170.  Distorted  features.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 

Paleness  of  face.  [Sicelius,  1.  c.] 

Pale  face  with  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  650.] 

Pale  face  with  increased  appetite.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  650.] 
Sudden  paleness  of  face  for  a considerable  time.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  67  7 (16).] 

175.  Often  extreme  pallor  of  face,  instantaneously  changing  into  red- 
ness of  face,  with  cold  cheeks  and  hot  forehead.4  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  662.] 

Hot  feeling  in  face  without  external  redness  (aft.  8 h.).  \_TVs.\ 
Burning  hot  feeling  in  the  whole  face,  without  redness  of  cheeks 
and  without  thirst,  with  moderately  warm  body  and  cold  feet  (aft. 
+ h .).[Htn.} 

Creeping  hot  feeling  in  the  face  beneath  the  skin  (aft.  \ h.). 
[PTs.] 

Burning  heat  over  the  face,  without  thirst  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 
180.  Unusual  redness  of  the  face.  [Z».] 

Great  redness  and  heat  in  the  face,  without  perspiration  (aft.  24, 
30  h.).  [Mkl.] 

* In  two  boys. 


1 Effects  of  large  doses  (gr.  4 — 14)  of  the  powdered  root  given  as  prophylactic  of 
hydrophobia. 

2 Poisoning  of  an  adult  by  inspissated  juice. — The  head,  he  says,  “ swelled  to  double 
its  size.” 

3 Poisoning  of  five  children. — It  is  only  the  eyes  which  are  said  to  be  distorted. 

4 Occurring  during  a succession  of  epileptic  paroxysms. 

14 


210 


BELLADONNA. 


Very  red,  hot  face,  with  icy-cold  limbs.  [*SV/r.] 

Glowing  redness  of  face,  with  violent  indescribable  pains  in  head 

and  redness  only  on  the  head. 

185.  Perspiration  only  on  the  face. 

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  red  cheeks.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Great  heat  and  redness  of  the  cheeks.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Face  very  swollen  and  hot.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Redness  and  heat  in  the  whole  face,  as  if  he  had  drunk  much 
wine.  \_Hbg.~] 

190.  Heat  in  the  face  all  day,  as  if  the  blood  had  mounted  to  the  head 
from  drinking  wine  (aft.  12  h.). 

Blood-red  face.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (1).] 

Swollen  skin  of  face,  as  if  an  eruption  were  going  to  break  out. 
[Sauter,1  1.  c.  (n).J 

Face  bluish  red,  with  great  heat  of  the  body,  in  the  evening. 
[Wiedemann,  1.  c.] 

Scarlet  redness  of  the  face  and  chest  during  sleep.  [Schaffer,2 
in  Hufel.  Journ .,  vi.] 

195.  Scarlet  redness  of  the  skin  of  the  body,  especially  of  the  face, 
with  marked  activity  of  the  brain.  [Wetzler,3  in  Annalen  der 
Heilkunde , 1811,  Febr.] 

Dark  red  spots  on  the  face,  resembling  the  rash  of  scarlet  fever, 
with  full  pulse.  [Wiedemann,  1.  c.] 

Along  with  sudden  rigor  great  dulness  of  head  and  sight,  red 
eyes,  and  swollen  face  covered  with  very  small,  unequal,  dark 
red  spots,  especially  on  the  forehead.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  685  (19).] 
In  the  morning  on  awaking  a small  bluish-red  spot  on  the  left 
cheek,  which  gradually  enlarges  until  the  bluish- red  swelling  involves 
the  whole  cheek,  with  burning  and  shooting  in  the  actual  red  part, 
and  boring  and  throbbing  in  the  whole  cheek,  much  aggravated  by 
movement  ; after  some  days  the  other  cheek  swelled,  and  the 
swelling  lasted  eight  days.  [ Kr. ] 

Red  swollen  face.  [May,  1.  c.] 

200.  Red  swollen  face  with  staring  eyes.  [JusTi,4in  Hufel . Jour.^  vii, 
4,  p.  65.] 

Swollen  face. 

The  face  was  red  and  swollen,  but  the  rest  of  the  body  pale. 
[Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Swelling  of  the  cheeks,  with  burning  pain.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Hard  large  swelling  on  the  face  about  the  nose  and  eye,  with 
swelling  of  the  parotid  gland  on  the  opposite  side,  lasting  five  days. 
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  668.] 

205.  Swelling  of  the  left  cheek  about  the  nose  and  eye,  which  comes 


1 Effects  of  large  doses  of  powdered  leaves  given  in  fully-developed  hydrophobia. 
Symptoms  from  this  source  will  be  distinguished  by  a (n). 

2 Effects  of  B.  given  to  children  for  whooping-cough. 

3 Not  accessible. 

4 Effect  of  a single  full  dose  given  to  an  adult  as  prophylactic  of  hydrophobia. 


BELLADONNA. 


2 1 1 


on  in  the  afternoon,  increases  the  following  day  with  heat,  and  lasts 
live  days.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  667.] 

Swollen  face.  [Munch,  1.  c.] 

Swelling  of  the  face,  and  especially  of  the  lips.  [Lambergen,1 

i-c-] 

An  uninterrupted  quivering  (and  winking)  of  both  eyelids.  [Z?z.] 
All  day  long  an  uninterrupted  trembling  and  quivering  of  the 
right  upper  eyelid,  that  at  last  becomes  painful.  \_HtgJ\ 

210.  Expanded  eyelids,  eyes  standing  wide  open. 

Throbbing  pain  in  the  lower  eyelid  towards  the  inner  canthus,  with 
great  inflammatory  swelling  at  that  point,  with  much  lachrymation, 
for  half  an  hour  (aft.  32  h.).  [ Mkl.~\ 

The  eyes  close  and  become  watery.  [Z.  Rkt.~\ 

Heaviness  in  the  eyes,  especially  the  upper  lid.  [Z.  Rkt.~\ 

After  waking  in  the  morning,  the  eyes  again  close  involuntarily  ; 
she  cannot  keep  them  open  until  she  gets  up.  [Zr.] 

215.  Itching  stitches  in  the  inner  canthi,  which  only  leave 
off  for  a short  time  on  rubbing  (aft.  1 h.).  [Ws.] 

The  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye  is  very  painful,  even  when 
lightly  touched.  [Gjj.] 

Smarting  in  both  eyes.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Involuntary  lachrymation  of  the  eyes. 

Salt  water  runs  constantly  out  of  the  eyes.  [ Hbg.~\ 

220.  Lachrymation  of  the  eyes.  ( Mkl.\ 

Dryness  of  the  eyes  (of  the  nose,  mouth,  pharynx).  [Wasser- 
berg,2  in  Stoll^  Ratio  Medendi , iii,  p.  403.] 

Burning  dry  feeling  in  both  eyes,  alternately  worse  in  one  or  the 
other  (aft.  7 h.).  \MkU\ 

Pain  and  burning  in  the  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  644.] 

Increased  heat  and  hot  feeling  in  the  eyes.  \_Mkl.~\ 

225.  Feeling  of  heat  in  the  eyes  ; it  is  as  if  they  were  enveloped  in  a 
hot  vapour. 

Photophobia  ; he  avoids  looking  into  the  light.  [Justi,  1.  c.] 
Burning  of  the  eyes,  accompanied  by  painful  itching  ; but  both 
cease  when  the  eyes  are  pressed  upwards  (aft.  28  h.).  \MkL\ 

In  the  morning  the  white  of  the  eye  is  red-streaked,  with  aching 
pain. 

Inflammation  of  the  eyes  ; injection  of  the  veins  of  the  white  of 
the  eye,  with  a tickling  sensation. 

230.  Inflammation  of  the  eyes ; the  conjunctiva  is  traversed  by  red 
blood-vessels,  with  shooting  pain  ; the  eyes  water.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Shooting  in  the  eyes  towards  the  interior.  [Zr.] 

Yellowness  of  the  white  of  the  eye. 

In  the  morning  the  eyes  are  quite  sealed  up  with  matter.  [ Mkl ., 
Kr. ] 

Swelling  and  purulent  inflammation  of  the  left  punctum  lachry- 


1 In  connection  with  S.  367. 

2 Proving  on  self.  The  observer  adds,  after  “ eyes,”  “ with  burning  in  these  and 
in  the  lids.” 


212 


BELLADONNA. 


male,  at  first  with  burning  pain,  afterwards  with  aching  pain,  for 
three  days  (aft.  4 d.).  [Mkl.~\ 

235.  A general  aching  in  both  eyes,  as  if  hard  spring  water  had  got 
into  the  eyes.  \Ln. ] 

When  she  closes  the  eyes,  an  aching  pain  deep  in  the  eyeball. 

A cloudy  aching  comes  in  the  right  orbit  and  goes  from  that 
alternately  into  the  forehead  and  back  again.  [ Gss .] 

Aching  and  watering  of  the  eyes,  especially  in  the  morning. 
IF.  H—n .] 

Creeping  aching  pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  full  of  sand  ; 
she  must  rub  them  (aft.  1 h.). 

240.  Aching  in  the  eyes, [as  if  sand  had  got  into  them  (aft.  2|  h.). 
[£>■•] 

Aching  in  the  eyes,  as  from  a grain  of  sand.  [Greding,  loc.  cit., 
p.  650. — Mkl.\ 

Pain  in  the  orbits  ; sometimes  it  is  as  if  the  eyes  were  torn  out, 
sometimes  (and  this  more  persistently)  as  though  they  were  pressed 
into  the  head,  to  which  a pain  is  superadded,  that  presses  from  the 
forehead  upon  the  eyes.  [G^r.] 

A tearing  in  the  eyes  proceeding  from  the  inner  canthi.  [Z.  Rkt^\ 
Drawing  pain  under  the  left  eye  upwards. 

245.  Contracted  pupils,  difficult  to  dilate. 

Very  contracted  pupils  all  day  ; they  only  dilate  in  the  evening. 

[*/•] 

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gjj.] 

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  ij  h.).  \}Vs^\ 

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  2^  h.).  [Zr.] 

250.  The  dilatation  of  pupils  commenced  after  half  an  hour,  and  then 
increased  gradually.  [G^.] 

Dilated  pupils  after  3J  hours.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (1). — Ln.~\ 

The  pupils  are  very  dilated  in  the  evening,  even  when  the  light 
is  held  close  to  the  eye  (aft.  12  h.).  [Grr.j 
Dilated  pupils  (aft.  14,  15  h.).  [Zr.] 

The  pupils  are  more  dilated,  from  the  third  day  onwards.  [<Sy.] 

255.  Dilated  immovable  pupils.  [May,  1.  c.] 

Extremely  dilated  pupils.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 

A small  white  pustule  in  the  left,  extremely  dilated  pupil.  [ Hbg .] 
Extremely  dilated  pupils  (from  laying  a fresh  belladonna  leaf  on 
an  ulcer  beneath  the  eye).  [Ray,  Histor.  plant.,  lib.  13,  cap.  23.] 
Sometimes  complete  loss  of,  sometimes  merely  diminished,  vision, 
with  enormously  dilated  and  quite  immovable  pupils.  [Elfes,  in 
Rust’s  Magaz .,  vol.  xxi,  pt.  3.] 

260.  Complete  dilatation  of  the  pupil  of  the  right  eye  and  blindness 
for  three  weeks  (from  the  juice  of  the  plant  injected  into  the  eye). 
[Daries,  Diss.  de  Belladonna , Lips.,  1776,  pp.  34,  35.] 

Obscuration  of  vision  from  dilated  pupils.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 
Obscuration  of  vision,  with  extremely  dilated  pupils.  [Greding,1 
1.  c.,  vol.  ii,  p.  324.] 

1 From  three  cases  of  jaundice  treated  by  belladonna. 


BELLADONNA. 


213 

Blindness,  the  pupil  of  the  right  eye  extremely  dilated  and 
incapable  of  contracting.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  662.] 

Great  dimness  of  vision.  [Justi,  1.  c.] 

265.  Before  the  eyes,  as  if  dim,  dark,  and  black  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Sf/l] 
Blindness.  [Hasenest,1  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  vol.  iii,  obs.  35.] 
Amaurosis  for  three  days  ; he  cannot  read  print.  [Hasenest,  1.  c.] 
He  awakes  blind.  [El.  Camerarius,2  in  his  Obs.  and  in  JVepfer , 
Hist.  Cici\ 

The  eyes  are  blind  and  stand  open.  [El.  Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

270.  Extreme  weakness  of  sight.  [Ollenroth,  1.  c.] 

Transient  blindness,  with  headache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  679 

(17)0. 

Dimness  of  vision,  alternating  with  convulsions  in  hands  and  feet, 
dulness  of  head  and  weariness  of  limbs.  [Greding,  1.  c.,p.  683  (18).] 
Dimness  of  vision,  dryness  of  mouth,  and  pain  in  belly.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p 606.] 

Dulness  of  sight  for  three  hours.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  679  (17).] 
275.  Along  with  dulness  of  sight  trembling  in  all  the  limbs.  [Gred- 
ING,  1.  C.,  p.  643.] 

Long-sightedness  (presbyopia),  as  in  old  age.  [Lottinger,  1.  c.] 
He  only  sees  distinctly  distant  objects  and  perfectly  parallel  rays 
( e.g . a star  in  the  sky)  (from  belladonna  juice  injected  into  the  eye). 
[Charles  Wells,  in  Gilbert’s  Annals , 1813,  pt.  ii,  p.  133,  and 
James  Ware,  ibid.,  1816,  pt.  xi.] 

Long-sightedness,  as  in  old  age  (presbyopia)  ; he  can  only  read 
large  print.  [Lambergen,  1.  c.] 

Mist  before  the  eyes,  blindness.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (1). — Buchholz, 

}•  C-] 

280.  As  if  mist  were  before  the  eyes,  obscuration.  [Z«.] 

On  reading  he  cannot  perceive  anything  in  the  book  except  the 
white  border,  which  surrounds  black  letters  transformed  into  rings. 
[Moibanus,3  in  Schenk , vii,  obs.  164.] 

Feeling  as  if  he  could  see  nothing,  and  yet  he  saw  when  he  tried 
to  see  anything,  and  strained  the  eyes  to  do  so.  \L.  Rktl\ 

The  letters  tremble  and  quiver,  of  a golden  and  blue  colour,  when 
reading.  [Buchholz,  1.  c.] 

Before  the  eyes  a large,  bright  coloured  ring  round  the  candle, 
particularly  of  a red  colour ; sometimes  the  flame  seems  to  be  quite 
dissipated  in  rays  (aft.  15  h.).  \_Mkll\ 

285.  Before  the  eyes  she  sees  flames,  when  she  lays  her  hand  on  the 
swollen  cheek,  and  the  air  appears  to  be  misty.  \Krl\ 

She  sees  on  the  ceiling  of  the  room  a white  star  as  large  as  a plate, 
and  light  silver  clouds  pass  over  it  from  left  to  right — several  times 
and  in  various  places.  [Zr.] 

Large  bright  sparks  from  the  eyes. 

He  sees  sparks  before  the  eyes.  [Ziegler,  1.  c.] 


1 Poisoning  of  a young  woman. 

2 Poisoning  of  four  children. 

3 Poisoning  of  a man. 


214 


BELLADONNA. 


295. 


3°°. 


On  moving  the  eyelids  he  sees  sparks,  as  from  electricity.  [Zie- 
gler, 1.  c.] 

290.  Sees  objects  double.  [Henning, — Sicelius,  1.  c. — Stf.~] 

He  sees  nothing  at  all  near,  and  everything  double  at  a distance. 

[St/.] 

He  sees  objects  multiplied  and  dark.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 

He  sees  objects  inverted.  [Henning,  1.  c.] 

Feeling  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  stood  farther  out.  [$//'.] 

Projecting  eyes,  with  dilated  pupils  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Mkl.~] 

Staring  eyes.  [Muller,1  in  Horn’s  Archiv , ix.] 

Bold  look.  [Dumoulin,2  in  Jour . de  Med.,  xi,  Aout.] 

The  eyes  are  projecting  and  sparkling.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Glittering  (glassy)  eyes.  [Ziegler,  1.  c.] 

The  eyes  are  very  animated,  with  fully  dilated  pupils  (aft.  20  h.). 
[Boucher,  1.  c.] 

The  eyes  are  red,  glittering  (glassy),  and  roll  about  in  the  head. 
[Sauter,  1.  c.  (n).] 

The  eyeballs  roll  about  in  a circle  spasmodically.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 
The  eyes  are  distorted.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  657.] 

Spasms  of  the  eyes,  distorting  them.  [Schreck.,3  in  Commerc.  lit. 
Nor.,  1743.] 

305.  Eyes  and  hands  are  in  constant  spasmodic  movement.  [Boucher, 
1.  c.] 

Unsteadiness  of  head  and  hands  (aft.  6 h.). 

The  eyes  are  distorted,  with  redness  and  swelling  of  face. 
[Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Squeezing  pressure  on  the  left  zygoma.  \JVsI\ 

A tearing  and  drawing  under  the  right  zygoma  (aft.  J h.).  [Gbr.] 
310.  Pressure  under  the  right  zygoma.  [Gbj.] 

When  chewing,  in  the  right  maxillary  joint  a violent  shooting, 
extending  into  the  ear,  which  continues  after  chewing,  but  more  as  a 
twitching  (aft.  1 h.).  [Stf.] 

Fine  stitches  in  the  cavity  of  the  maxillary  joint  (aft.  1 h.).  \JVs.\ 
Stitches  from  the  upper  jaw  into  the  inner  ear. 

Stitches  in  the  parotid  gland. 

315.  Violent  stitch  in  the  right  parotid  gland,  extending  to  the  auricle, 
when  it  terminates  in  a crampy  pain  (aft.  2 h.)  ; next  day  the  same 
about  the  same  hour  (aft.  26  h.). 

Tearing  pain  on  the  posterior  side  of  the  cartilage  of  the  left  ear. 

Tearing  pressure  on  the  lower  half  of  the  cartilage  of  the  right 
ear.  \_Hrr. ] 

Tearing  in  the  right  auricle,  which  extended  backwards.  [HbgJ] 
Tearing  downwards  in  the  inner  and  outer  ear. 

320.  Tearing  pain  in  the  right  auricle,  and  downwards  in  the  whole 
side  of  the  face  (aft.  24  h.). 

Stitches  in  the  external  meatus  auditorius.  \_L.  Rkt. ] 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 Poisoning  of  two  little  girls. 

3 Fatal  poisoning  of  boy  of  three. 


BELLADONNA. 


215 


Pinching  in  the  ears,  first  in  the  right,  then  in  the  left,  immedi- 
ately after  the  hiccup.  [Kr.] 

A disagreeable  aching  in  the  meatus  auditorius,  as  if  a finger  were 
bored  in.  [Z?z.] 

Feeling  in  the  external  meatus  auditorius,  as  if  some  one  pressed 
upon  it.  [Z.  Rkt. ] 

325.  A very  disagreeable  feeling  in  the  right  ear,  as  if  it  were  forcibly 
torn  out  of  the  head.  [Gw.] 

Alternately  out-tearing  and  in-pressing  pain  in  the  ears  and 
temples,  alternating  with  a similar  pain  in  the  orbits.  [Gw.] 

Earache  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  5 d.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

Sharp  blows  in  the  inner  ear,  with  squeezing,  like  earache.  \_TVs.] 
Near  the  right  ear  boring  pain.  [ Kr .] 

330.  Aching  tearing  behind  the  right  ear  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Htn.~] 

Behind  the  left  ear  to  the  neck  the  muscles  are  painful,  as  if  they 
were  strongly  pressed,  the  same  in  the  frontal  muscles.  \_Hbg~\ 

A flying  stitch  darts  from  the  ear  into  the  chin  (aft.  1 h.). 

[**•]. 

Stitches  in  the  inner  ear,  with  impaired  hearing  in  it. 

Stitches  in  the  inner  ear  during  eructation  from  the  stomach  with 
the  taste  of  food  (aft.  12  h.). 

335.  Drawing  pain  from  the  ears  to  the  nape.  \_Hbg. ] 

Violent  pressure  on  the  mastoid  processes  below  the  ear.  [Gw.] 
Cutting  blows  through  the  mastoid  process  inwards  (aft.  12  h.). 

\_m.] 

Purulent  discharge  from  the  ears  for  twenty  days.  [F.  H — n.~\ 
Increased  sensitiveness  of  the  auditory  organ.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (n).] 
340.  First  a noise  like  trumpets  and  drums  in  the  ears  and  like  roaring 
(immediately) ; afterwards  humming  and  buzzing,  worst  when  sitting, 
better  when  standing  and  lying,  still  better  when  walking. 

Noises  in  the  ears.  [Vicat,  1.  c.,  p.  181.] 

Rushing  noise  in  the  ears,  vertigo,  and  dull  bellyache.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  658.] 

Wind  rushes  out  of  the  ears.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  658.] 

In  the  morning,  immediately  after  waking,  a fluttering  and 
bubbling  before  the  ears. 

345.  Deafness,  as  if  a skin  were  stretched  before  the  ears. 

Difficulty  of  hearing.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  694  (23).] 

On  the  root  of  the  nose  a couple  of  small  red  lumps,  paining 
like  a fester,  but  only  when  touched  (aft.  16  d.).  \JVs.\ 

Pimples  break  out  on  the  cheeks  and  nose,  rapidly 
fill  with  pus,  and  become  covered  with  a scab. 

Very  cold  nose.2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  664.] 

350.  Smell  before  the  nose  like  rotten  eggs  for  a quarter  of  an  hour 
(aft.  4h.).  [Zr.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  nasal  bones.  [Gw.] 

In  the  nose  above  the  alae  pain  as  if  bruised  on  touching  it 
externally. 

1 Immediately  after  a severe  epileptic  paroxysm. 

2 Continuing  during  seven  days  of  mania. 


2l6 


BELLADONNA. 


Too  sensitive  sense  of  smell ; the  odour  of  tobacco  smoke  and 
soot  is  intolerable  to  him  (aft.  I h.). 

Nose-bleeding  (immediately). 

355.  Nose-bleeding  at  night. 

Nose-bleeding  in  the  morning. 

Painful  drawing  over  the  left  half  of  the  nose.  \_HbgJ] 

Creeping  in  the  point  of  the  nose,  that  goes  off  on  rubbing.  \JVs.\ 
Fine  stitches  in  the  point  of  the  nose  from  the  evening  onwards 
through  the  night. 

360.  Sudden  redness  of  the  point  of  the  nose,  with  burning  sensation. 
A very  painful  left  nostril,  that  is  plugged  up  with  matter  in  the 
morning  (aft.  6 weeks).  [67/1] 

Under  the  nose  fine  stitches  (aft.  A h.).  \JVs.~\ 

Great  swelling  of  the  upper  lip  ; it  is  stiff  on  opening  the  mouth. 
Painful  ulcerous  state  of  the  nostrils  at  the  side  where  they  unite 
with  the  upper  lip. 

365.  The  nostrils  and  the  angles  of  the  lips  are  ulcerated, 
hut  neither  itch  nor  are  painful. 

Drawing  in  the  upper  lip  followed  by  red  swelling.  \_Kr.~\ 
Abscess  of  the  upper  lip,  causing  painful  swelling,  with  fever, 
headache,  and  loss  of  appetite,  ending  in  free  discharge  of  pus.1  [Lam- 
BERGEN,  1.  C.] 

A white-headed  pimple  under  the  left  ala  nasi,  without  pain. 
Ulcerated  angle  of  the  mouth,  exactly  where  the  two  lips  unite, 
with  uncommon  tearing  pains  round  about,  even  when  at  rest  and 
per  se  (aft.  5 h.). 

370.  Sore  feeling  in  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  as  if  they  would  become 
ulcerated  (aft.  5,  6,  7 days).  [Si/.] 

Small  pimples,  one  on  the  upper  lip  near  the  right  ala  nasi, 
covered  with  a scab,  another  under  the  border  of  the  lower  lip  and 
on  the  inner  skin  of  the  lower  lip,  all  with  smarting  pain  as  from  salt 
water.  [Hbg,~\ 

Small  pale-red  pimples  at  the  corners  of  the  mouth  without  sensa- 
tion ; they  soon  go  off  without  suppurating.  \_Hrr. ] 

On  the  upper  lip  a pimple,  with  creeping  sensation  when  let 
alone,  but  with  itching  shooting  when  touched. 

In  the  corner  of  the  lips  an  ulcer  with  red  border  and  eroding 
itching. 

375.  On  the  lower  external  lip-edge  burning  pain  and  small  vesicles 
(aft.  24  h.).  [ Stf.~\ 

The  lips,  especially  the  upper  lip,  crack  in  the  middle  on  sneezing 
and  coughing. 

A pimple  on  the  border  of  the  lip,  equidistant  from  the  middle 
and  the  corner,  which  becomes  transformed  into  an  ulcer  covered  by 
a scab,  and  pains  like  an  inflamed  part. 

Spasmodic  movements  of  the  lips.  [Muller,  1.  c.] 

The  right  corner  of  the  mouth  is  drawn  outwards.2  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  662.] 


1 Filled  up  from  Hahnemann’s  abbreviations. 

2 See  note  to  S.  175. 


BELLADONNA. 


2I7 

380.  A spasm  draws  the  mouth  awry  (risus  sardonicus).  [Wein- 
MANNj  in  Gmelin’s  Pjlan%engifte , p.  296.] 

Mouth  drawn  awry  by  spasms,  [de  St.  Martin,  1.  c.] 

Bloody  foam  before  the  mouth  (shortly  before  death).  [ Commerc . 
lit,  Nor .,  1731.] 

Bloody  foam  before  the  mouth,  shaking  of  the  head,  and 
grinding  of  the  teeth  from  early  morning  till  noon.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  691  (22).] 

Pimples  betwixt  lips  and  chin,  filled  with  pus,  with  burning 
smarting  pain,  especially  painful  at  night  (aft.  6 days).  [£Y/~.] 

385.  A pimple  with  smarting  eroding  pain  externally,  below  and  to  the 
side  of  the  lip. 

A pimple  on  the  side  of  the  chin,  with  itching  shooting,  but 
more  shooting  than  itching ; this  sensation  is  removed  by  scratching. 
Several  small  pimples  on  the  chin. 

A number  of  small  miliary  papules  on  the  chin,  with  burning  pain 
on  touching  them  (aft.  3d.).  [Hbg.~\ 

Sharp  stitches  on  the  chin  (immediately).  \JVs7\ 

390.  A nestling  spasm-like  feeling  in  the  chin. 

Trismus  ; impossibility  of  opening  the  jaws  on  account  of  painful 
stiffness  of  the  chewing  muscles  (by  day). 

Closure  of  the  jaws,  trismus.  [Hasenest — May,  1.  c.] 

She  clinched  her  teeth  together  so  that  they  could  not  be  sepa- 
rated, though  great  force  was  employed,  with  twitchings  in  all  the 
limbs  and  chilliness.  [Munch,  in  Richter’s  Bibliothek , v,  p.  566.] 

She  bit  her  teeth  so  tightly  together  that  a tooth  had  to  be 
broken  out  in  order  to  introduce  fluids.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

395.  Stitches  and  tension  in  the  lower  jaw  towards  the  ear.  [A.  Rkt. ] 
She  feels  as  if  the  lower  jaw  were  drawn  backwards  ; pushing  it 
forwards  causes  great  pain,  biting  causes  horrible  pains.  \_Kr .] 

At  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw  a red  boil,  which  is  hard  and  not 
painful  unless  pressed  on,  which  causes  shooting  pain. 

On  the  lower  border  of  the  right  lower  jaw  sharp  stitches. 

Throbbing  on  the  lower  border  of  the  lower  jaw  (aft.  \ h.). 

400.  In  the  lower  jaw  (in  the  glands  ?)  (a  jerking  drawing  ?)  pain  that 
darted  in  rapidly  and  quickly  went  off.  \_StJ'.'] 

Swollen  cervical  glands,  which  are  painful  at  night  j on  swallow- 
ing they  do  not  hurt.  \_Bhr.~\ 

Stitches  in  a gland  at  a side  of  the  neck. 

On  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  in  the  cervical  muscles,  a cramp- 
like tensive  sensation,  even  when  not  moving  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Htn,~\ 

Her  head  is  drawn  backwards  ; it  buries  itself  at  night  deep  in  the 
pillow.  [Bhri] 

405.  Stiffness  of  the  neck,  so  that  he  cannot  lay  the  head  sideways. 

[Kr-l 

Stiffness  of  the  nape.  [Bhr.] 

Drawing  in  the  cervical  muscles.  \Hbg.'\ 

In  the  right  cervical  muscles  drawing  aching  pain.  \_Hbg.~] 


2l8 


BELLADONNA. 


Fine  stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  throat.  \Ws^\ 

410.  Aching  sensation  on  the  left  side  of  the  larynx,  which  is  increased 
by  external  pressure  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Htn.'] 

Feels  the  beating  of  the  cervical  arteries.  \_Kr.~\ 

Aching  pain  in  the  nape  close  up  to  the  occiput,  which  is  not 
altered  by  movement  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lfr/z.] 

Violent  stitches  in  the  nape  often  renewed,  in  the  region  of  the 
second  and  third  cervical  vertebrae,  on  holding  up  the  head  (aft.  J h.). 
[Htn.] 

Violent  grinding  of  the  teeth.  [Munch,  1.  c.] 

415.  Grinding  of  the  teeth  with  much  foam  before  the  mouth  of  the 
smell  of  rotten  eggs.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  692  (22).] 

Grinding  of  the  teeth  and  convulsion  of  the  right  arm.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  687  (20.).] 

Grinding  of  the  teeth  with  copious  flow  of  saliva  from  the  mouth. 
[Greding,!.  c.,  p.  653.] 

Extremely  painful  swelling  of  the  gums  on  the  right  side,  with 
fever  and  chilly  feeling.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  686  (20).] 

Vesicle  on  the  gums  beneath  one  of  the  front  teeth,  with  pain 
as  if  burnt. 

420.  The  gums  on  being  touched  pain  as  if  ulcerated. 

Heat  in  the  gums  ; itching  and  throbbing  in  them. 

Very  tiresome  itching  on  the  gums,  with  pains  in  the  throat. 
[Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

The  gum  at  a hollow  tooth  bleeds  (aft.  6 d.)  \}Vs7\ 

On  sucking  with  the  tongue  at  the  hollow  teeth,  blood  flows  out 
of  them,  without  pain. 

425.  A drawing  in  the  upper  front  molars  of  the  right  side,  remaining 
the  same  under  all  conditions.  [Gw.] 

Tearing  pain  in  a lower  hollow  tooth  and  in  the  sound  molar 
next  it  ; the  contact  of  air  or  of  food  increases  the  pain  horribly 
(aft.  4 a.).  [Hrr. ] 

Toothache  more  drawing  than  shooting. 

Toothache  with  drawing  in  the  ear. 

He  wakes  up  after  midnight  with  violent  tearing  (?)  in  the  teeth. 

430.  By  the  contact  of  the  open  air  a uniform  simple  toothache,  like 
the  pain  of  excoriation  (aft.  \ h.). 

Not  while  eating,  but  only  several  minutes  after  eating  the  tooth- 
ache comes  on,  increases  gradually  to  a high  degree,  and  declines 
equally  gradually  ; it  does  not  come  on  after  drinking. 

Toothache  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  and  during  intellectual 
work ; a dull  pain  in  the  nerve  of  the  roots  of  the  teeth,  almost 
like  the  pain  of  excoriation,  and  when  worse  like  a continual  cutting. 

Toothache;  a sharp  drawing  from  the  ear  downwards  into  the 
hollow  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw,  where  the  pain  became  boring, 
slighter  whilst  eating,  more  severe  after  eating,  never  quite  leaving 
off  by  day,  but  worst  at  night  and  completely  hindering  sleep  (after 
drinking  coffee  it  changed  to  a dull  jerking  and  boring).  \_Hpl.'] 

Dull  drawing  in  right  upper  row  of  teeth  all  night ; 

the  pain  prevented  sleep ; the  painful  part  was  somewhat  swollen 


BELLADONNA. 


219 

(with  burning  pain)  and  hot  to  the  touch  ; sometimes  painful  jerks 
in  the  teeth.  [Hbg.] 

435.  A fine  shooting  pain  in  an  upper  hollow  molar  all  day,  allowing 
him  but  little  sleep  at  night,  followed  by  swelling  of  cheek. 

(A  (transient)  digging  toothache.) 

(The  incisors  feel  too  long.) 

Teeth  painful  on  biting  as  if  the  roots  were  festering  and  would 
break  off. 

Single,  very  painful  twitches  or  throbs  in  the  root-nerves  of  one  or 
several  teeth. 

440.  In  the  mouth  a feeling  of  increased  space,  just  as  if  the  tongue 
was  further  down  than  usual.  \_Kr.~] 

Feeling  as  if  the  tongue  were  asleep,  dead  and  numb,  in  the 
morning.  [Kr .] 

of  coldness  and  dryness  in  the  fore  half  of  the  tongue. 

The  whole  tongue  is  painful,  especially  when  touched.  [5//i] 

Cracked,  white  furred  tongue,  with  great  secretion  of  saliva. 

[*%.] 

445.  On  the  middle  of  the  white  furred  tongue  severe  smarting  pain, 
as  from  a vesicle  (aft.  3d.).  [St/.'] 

On  the  tip  of  the  tongue  a feeling  as  if  a vesicle  were 
there  which  has  burning  pain  on  being  touched,  for  two 
days.  [Hbg.] 

The  lingual  papillae  are  bright  red,  inflamed,  and  much  swollen 
(aft.  3 d.).  [St/.] 

Trembling  of  the  tongue.  [Weinmann,  1.  c.] 

Stammering  of  the  tongue.  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

45°*  Stammering  weakness  of  the  organs  of  speech,  with 
perfect  consciousness  and  dilated  pupils  (aft.  2,  3 h.). 

He  stammers  like  a drunken  person.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Transient  speechlessness  (aphonia).  [Sauvages,  Nosol .,  ii,  2, 

P-  338-] 

Paralytic  weakness  of  the  organs  of  speech. 

Speechlessness ; they  emit  no  sound  (aphonia)  .l  [Wagner,  1.  c.(i).] 

455.  Dumbness.  [Hasenest,  1.  c.] 

Difficult  speech,  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  great  prostration, 
after  the  anxiety. 

Speaking  is  very  difficult  for  him  ; his  voice  is  piping. 

Very  low  voice,  with  headache,  as  if  the  brain  would  be  pressed 
out,  just  over  the  orbits,  in  the  forehead,  which  prevents  the  eyes 
being  opened,  and  compels  him  to  lie  down,  with  extreme  contrac- 
tion of  the  pupils. 

Tongue  covered  with  much  viscid,  yellowish-white  mucus.  [Justi, 

i-  c0 . 

460.  Viscid  mucus  in  the  mouth.  [Mkl. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  648.] 

Viscid  saliva  hangs  in  long  strings  out  of  the  mouth.  [Greding, 
l.c,  p.687.] 


1 In  the  original,  “ stupidae  atque  acpuvoi.” 


220 


BELLADONNA. 


Great  flow  of  saliva.  [Ollenroth,  1.  c.] 

Ptyalism. 

Soreness  inside  the  cheek ; the  opening  of  the  salivary  ducts  is  as 
if  eroded. 

465.  He  often  spits  out  viscid  mucus.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  684 

(z9)0 

He  has  much  mucus  in  the  mouth,  especially  in  the  morning  after 
rising,  sometimes  of  a putrid  taste,  [i/rr.] 

The  saliva  in  the  throat  was  inspissated,  viscid,  white,  and 
adherent  to  the  tongue  like  glue,  so  that  she  must  always  take  some 
liquid  into  the  mouth.  [Sicelius,  1.  c.] 

Slimy  mouth,  with  the  feeling  as  if  he  had  a bad  smell  from  the 
mouth,  as  when  the  stomach  is  deranged. 

In  the  morning  the  mouth  is  full  of  mucus  ; he  must  wash  it  out 
from  time  to  time ; after  eating  the  mucus  disappears. 

470.  Slimy  mouth  in  the  morning  on  awaking,  with  aching 
headache  (both  lasting  but  a short  time). 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  he  smelt  very  badly  out  of  the  mouth. 

Great  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  mouth,  with  very  irritable  humour  ; 
yet  the  mouth  and  tongue  look  moist. 

Great  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  mouth  ; there  was  very  little  viscid 
mucus  on  the  tongue,  and  the  lips  were  hot  and  their  skin  peeled  off. 

Viscid  mucus  in  the  mouth  and  dry  feeling,  [F/rr.] 

475.  Dryness  in  the  mouth.  [Ziegler,  1.  c.J 

Great  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  moist  mouth,  with  stickiness  and 
great  thirst.  [6V/1] 

Great  dryness  in  the  throat.  [Cullen,1 2  Mat . Med.,  ii,  p. 

3°  7-1 

Dryness  in  the  mouth  with  thirst.  [Z;z.] 

Aridity  of  the  mouth,  as  if  the  inner  skin  had  been  removed  by 
something  acrid.  [Lottinger,  1.  c.] 

480.  Dryness  of  the  mouth  that  can  scarcely  be  got  rid  of.  [De  Meza,3 
in  Samml.  br.  Abh. f.  A .,  xiv,  3.] 

Dryness  in  the  throat.  [Wienholt,3  Heilkr.  d.  Thier.  Magnetis- 
mus , i,  p.  310.] 

Feeling  of  excessive  dryness  in  the  mouth,  and  yet  the  tongue 
was  always  moist.  [£//'.] 

Excessive  dryness  of  the  mouth  that  caused  constriction  in  the 
throat.  [Stf.] 

His  fauces  and  pharynx  were  constricted  on  account  of  the 
extreme  dryness  of  the  mouth  ; there  was  not  a trace  of  mucus  there, 
and  only  moderate  thirst,  still  he  could  swallow  milk.  [StfJ] 

485.  Dryness  in  the  mouth,  the  fauces,  and  the  nose.  [Buchave — 
Lambergen,  1.  c.] 

He  cannot  swallow  on  account  of  dryness  of  mouth,  fauces,  and 
nose.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 


1 Effects  of  infusion  in  a sufferer  from  cancer  of  lip. 

2 Effects  of  a five-grain  dose  of  the  powdered  leaves  in  a case  of  mammary  tumour. 

3 Not  accessible. 


BELLADONNA. 


221 


Throwing  up  of  blood,  seemingly  proceeding  from  the  fauces.* 
[Cullen,  1.  c.] 

Flow  of  blood  from  mouth  and  nose.1  [Wagner,!,  c.  (ii)  .] 
Scraping  scratching  on  the  palate,  occurring  by  itself.  \Ws.~\ 

490.  On  the  palate  all  as  if  raw  and  sore,  especially  painful  when 
touched  with  the  tongue  and  on  chewing,  as  though  denuded  of  skin 
(aft.  6 days,  lasting  several  days).  [6Y/1] 

Pains  in  the  throat.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

Fine  tearing  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  angle  of  the 
left  side  of  the  inferior  maxilla,  on  the  left  tonsil  and 
behind  it,  unaltered  by  touching ; violent  tearing  on 
swallowing  (aft.  2 d.).  [ Hrr .] 

Dryness  in  the  fauces  and  burning  on  the  tongue.  [Ollenroth, 

c-] 

Burning  sensation  in  the  fauces.  [Henning,  1.  c.] 

495.  Though  the  mouth  is  sufficiently  moist  there  is  violent  burning 
in  the  throat,  which  is  not  alleviated  by  drinking,  but  is  transiently 
ameliorated  by  a little  sugar.  [Bhr.] 

Long-continued  burning  pain  in  the  fauces  ; food  and  drink  burn 
in  the  mouth  like  alcohol.  [Remer,2  in  HufeL  Jour .,  xvii,  2.] 

Inflammation  of  throat  and  fauces.  [Rau,  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur ., 
vol.  x,  p.  90 — Gockel,  in  Frdnkische  Samml .,  iii,  p.  44. 3] 

Constant  urging  and  need  to  swallow;  he  felt  as  if  he  must 
choke  if  he  did  not  swallow. 

Sore  throat ; stitches  in  the  pharynx  and  pain  as  from  internal 
swelling,  only  felt  when  swallowing  and  on  turning  the  neck,  as 
also  when  touching  the  side  of  it,  but  not  when  at  rest  or  when 
talking. 

500.  The  throat  is  swollen  internally.  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

The  throat  is  sore  on  swallowing  and  spitting  out;  a sensation  as 
from  swelling,  more  on  the  left  side.  [Zr.] 

Pain  in  the  throat  and  bellyache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  652.] 

Sore  throat  becoming  worse  every  hour,  heat,  scratching,  con- 
striction and  sore  feeling.  [Zr.] 

Difficult  and  painful  swallowing.  [Vicat,  1.  c.] 

505.  A violent  shooting  pain  in  the  throat  on  swallowing  and  breath- 
ing.  [Stf.] 

Stitches  in  the  throat  on  the  left  side,  equally  bad  whether 
swallowing  or  not.  \_Htn. ] 

Inflammation  of  the  tonsils,  which  after  4 days  pass  into  suppu- 
ration, during  which  he  cannot  swallow  a drop.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
vol.  ii,  p.  321]. 

# This  terminated  fatally.  Even  after  death  the  bodies  of  those  poisoned  by 
belladonna  showed  bleeding  from  nose,  mouth,  and  ears ; they  became,  either  only  in 
the  face,  or  on  one  side  of  the  body,  or  all  over,  blackish-violet,  or  covered  with  gan- 
grenous spots;  the  epidermis  soon  became  detached,  the  abdomen  swollen,  and  within 
twelve  hours  they  became  decomposed,  as  testified  to  by  Eb.  Gmelin  and  Faber. 


1 When  throwing  up  the  berries  from  the  operation  of  an  emetic. 

2 Effects  of  full  doses  of  powdered  root  in  a case  of  melancholia. 

3 Poisoning  of  a child  of  five. 


222 


BELLADONNA. 


Difficult  deglutition.  [May, — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  694.] 

Impeded  swallowing. 

510.  Painless  inability  to  swallow. 

Impeded  swallowing.  [Remer,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  648.] 
Great  constriction  of  the  gullet.  [Cullen,  1.  c.] 

Transient  but  frequently  recurring  contraction  of  the  oesophagus, 
more  on  swallowing  than  at  other  times,  each  time  followed  by  a 
scratching  pain  in  the  region  of  the  epiglottis  as  if  there  was  some- 
thing raw  and  sore  there.  [Ln.] 

Sore  throat ; when  swallowing  scraping  in  the  palate  and  as  if 
rubbed  raw  there. 

515.  Throat  affection  ; narrowing  (contraction)  of  the  gullet,  whereby 
swallowing  is  impeded  (aft.  3 h.). 

Painful  narrowing  and  contraction  of  the  gullet; 

on  making  the  preparatory  movements  to  swallow  it  feels  tense  and 
stretched  although  nothing  is  swallowed  ; when  actually  swallowing 
it  is  not  more  painful ; even  when  quiet  the  feeling  of  narrowness 
in  the  throat  is  painful  (aft.  60  h.).  \W$^\ 

On  swallowing,  a feeling  in  the  throat  as  if  all  were 
too  narrow  there,  as  if  contracted,  as  though  nothing 
could  get  rightly  down  (aft.  2 h.).  [St/.] 

She  could  not  swallow  solid  food.  [Sicelius,  1.  c.] 

He  chews  the  food  without  being  able  to  swallow  it,  because  the 
throat  appears  to  him  to  be  contracted.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

520.  In  her  unconscious  state  she  often  pushes  her  finger  deep  down 
her  throat,  scratches  her  gums,  and  presses  her  neck  with  both  hands. 
[Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

He  swallows  water  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  and  can  only  get 
down  an  extremely  small  quantity.  [El.  Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

Horror  of  all  fluids,  so  that  she  makes  frightful  faces  at  them. 
[Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

Liquid  poured  out  makes  her  furious.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 
Inability  to  swallow.  [De  Launay  d’Hermont,  1.  c. — Man- 
etti,1  Viridarium  florentinum , Florent.,  1757.] 

52 5.  Paralytic  weakness  of  the  internal  parts  of  the  mouth.  [Lot- 

TINGER,  1.  C.] 

Something  rose  from  the  abdomen  and  pressed  in  the  throat,  with 
retching,  but  without  nausea  and  without  vomiting.  [Stf.] 

Lost  taste.  [Lottinger,  1.  c.] 

Insipid  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Hbg.] 

Spoilt  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  657.] 

530.  Disgusting  taste  in  the  mouth,  with  clean  tongue. 

Corrupted  taste  of  the  saliva.  [Vicat,  1.  c.] 

Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  when  she  had  eaten. 

Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth  as  from  putrid  meat,  two  hours  after 
eating  (aft.  8 h.).  [Mkl.\ 

Putrid  taste  comes  up  from  the  fauces,  also  when 
eating  and  drinking,  although  food  and  drink  have  their 
proper  taste.  [JVs.] 

1 Poisoning  of  a puppy  by  the  juice  of  the  berries. 


BELLADONNA. 


223 


535.  A sickly  sweet  taste  in  the  mouth.  [_Hbg.] 

Sticky  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Salty  sourish  taste  in  the  mouth.  [St/] 

Salt  taste  of  the  food,  as  if  it  were  all  salted  (aft.  25  h.).  [£//i] 

At  the  commencement  of  the  meal  proper  taste  of  the  food,  but 
all  at  once  everything  tasted  partly  too  salt,  partly  like  nothing  and 
insipid,  with  feeling  in  the  throat  (pit  of  the  throat)  as  if  the  ingesta 
would  be  thrown  up  again.  [St/.] 

540.  Bread  smells  and  tastes  sour  to  him. 

Bread  tastes  sour  to  him. 

The  bread  tastes  sour  to  her.  [Hbg.] 

Disgust  at  milk,  which  at  other  times  she  generally  drank  and 
with  relish  ; it  has  a disgusting  very  repulsive  smell  and  (sourish- 
bitter)  taste  to  her,  which,  however,  goes  off  on  continuing  to  drink. 

[*/•] 

In  the  evening  the  bread  and  butter,  at  least  the  last  portion  of 
it,  tastes  very  sour,  whereupon  generally  some  heartburn  ensued, 
which  lasted  two  hours  (for  eight  successive  evenings)  (aft.  4 d.). 

545.  (Bitter  taste  of  bread  and  apples,  in  the  evening.) 

Coffee  is  repugnant  to  her.  [Bhr.] 

Disgust  at  camphor.  [BhrT] 

Hunger,  but  no  inclination  for  any  kind  of  food.  [Hbg.] 
Repugnance  to  food.  [Grimm, — Lottinger,  1.  c.] 

550.  Complete  repugnance  to  all  food  and  drink,  with  quick  weak 
pulse.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  677  (16).] 

Total  loss  of  appetite.1  [Lambergen,  1.  c.] 

Want  of  appetite,  with  headache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  659.] 
Diminished  appetite 3 animal  food  is  especially  repugnant.  [TVs.] 
Dislike  to  beer. 

555.  Dislike  to  acids. 

Long-continued  repugnance  to  food. 

No  appetite  ; he  loathes  everything. 

(He  gets  a longing  for  one  thing  or  another  3 but  when  he 
partakes  of  it  he  does  not  relish  it.) 

After  smoking  tobacco  all  appetite  goes. 

560.  Anorexia,  with  empty  feeling  and  hunger 3 on  commencing  to 
eat  he  relishes  the  food  and  eats  as  usual.  [Hrr.] 

Increased  appetite  (curative  action). 

Appetite  for  water-soup  and  bread  and  butter,  but  for  nothing 
else.  [Kr.] 

After  eating  but  little,  a peculiar  contracting  feeling  in  the  stomach. 
[Mkl.] 

After  eating  cough  and  great  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  665.] 
565.  Immediately  after  a meal  as  if  intoxicated  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Lr.] 

After  eating  violent  pinching  below  the  navel,  close  beneath  the 
abdominal  integuments  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Htn.] 

After  taking  beer,  internal  heat.  [TVs.] 

No  desire  for  drinks  3 adipsia. 

Adipsia.  [Hrr.] 


1 In  connection  with  S.  367. 


224 


BELLADONNA. 


570.  Desire  for  drinks  without  thirst  ; he  hardly  brought  the  cup  to 
his  mouth  when  he  set  it  down  again  (aft.  8 h.).  [Zr.] 

Astonishing  thirst  in  the  evening  with  watery  taste,  but  all  drinks 
disgusted  her.  \_Kr.~] 

Strong  thirst  for  cold  drinks,  without  heat  (aft.  7 h.).  [Zr.] 

At  noon,  violent  thirst  (returning  several  days  at  the  same  time). 
[*••] 

Eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  ingesta. 

575.  Bitter  eructation  after  eating. 

Frequent  eructation  from  the  stomach.  [Zw.] 

Eructation  with  loss  of  appetite.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  679  (17).] 
Eructation  and  vertigo.  (Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  673  (15).] 
Ineffectual  desire  to  eructate. 

580.  Half  suppressed,  incomplete  eructation. 

Putrid  eructation.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  657.] 

Burning,  sour  eructation,  whereby  also  corrosive  sour  fluid  came 
into  the  mouth  with  a kind  of  retching.  [<SV/'.] 

Heartburn  (when  smoking  tobacco)  ; there  long  remains  a 
scratching  burning  smarting  sensation  at  the  entrance  to  the  gullet, 
and  chiefly  at  the  upper  border  of  the  larynx  (aft.  2 h.). 

Flow  of  water  into  the  mouth,  in  the  evening,  for  half  an  hour.  [Zr.] 
585.  Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  in  the  throat  (not  in  the  pit  of 
the  stomach),  sometimes  with  bitter  eructation,  in  the  evening.  [Stf,"] 
After  breakfast,  squeamishness. 

In  the  forenoon,  frequent  attacks  of  nausea  (aft.  72  h.). 
Inclination  to  vomit  while  walking  in  the  open  air. 

Nausea  in  the  stomach.  \_Hrr.~] 

590.  Disgust  with  inclination  to  vomit,  especially  when  he  is  about  to 
eat.  [Sicelius,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  disgust  and  retching.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  645.] 

Nausea,  inclination  to  vomit,  and  such  great  thirst  that  she 
must  drink  enormous  quantities  of  water.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 
Vomiting  in  the  evening.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  650.] 

Vomiting,  vertigo,  and  flying  heat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  643.] 
595.  Vomiting  and  profuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  675  (16).] 
Excessive  vomiting.  [Gockel,  1.  c.] 

Vomiting  of  mucus  about  noon.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  67 2.] 
Bilious,  slimy  vomiting.  [De  Meza,  1.  c.] 

Vomiting  of  undigested  food  partaken  of  twelve  hours  previously. 
[Grimm,  1.  c.] 

600.  Vomiting  (aft.  6 h.),  and  immediately  afterwards  sleep  for  several 
hours.  [El.  Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

Inclination  to  vomit,  ineffectual  retching.  [May,  1.  c.] 

He  yawns  and  retches  till  he  is  blue  in  the  face,  whilst  he  stretches 
one  hand  over  the  head,  but  with  the  other  strikes  his  abdomen 
irrepressibly.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  668.] 

Ineffectual  effort  to  vomit.  \_Hbg.~\ 

He  awakes  thrice  about  midnight ; he  heaves  thrice  as  if  to  vomit, 
but  without  result,  with  the  sweat  of  anxiety. 

605.  Ineffectual  effort  to  vomit,  empty  retching. 


belladonna. 


225 


want  of  irritability  of  the  stomach.  [May, 


He  cannot  vomit, 

not  even  fcelfic^  vomit,  he  does 

Several  times  violent  hiccup.  [Ln.l  'J 

deaf  until  the  next  a^ci^lt.]^  UpWards’  whereupon  she  became 

610.  Violent  hiccup  about  midnight.  [Greding  1 c n 

Somethmg  intermediate  between  eructation’ and  hiccS^ 

tionandhfecup?tatl°n;  a Spasm  comP°unded  of  eructa- 

669^4)nfht  erUCtat'°n>  with  Infuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c>,  p. 

wearineSs.hfGURPEDiNGjS!°c.*  ^672  (hi4nand  bmbS’  the"  naUSea  and 

'followed' by  °f  lhe  r'ght  arm  and  left  leg, 

1.  c.,  p.  670  fit]  and  heat  °f  head’  [Grading, 

v2e„StSnt!ilend  bCatiT  If  the  PJt  of  stomach. 

1.  c.  (11)  ] P S m the  re8'°n  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Wagner, 

(aft.  24  h.)?f[  j/r^6  ^ bble  S*0mac^>  especially  after  eating 

fix  es  ex  “si” 

~ «r-~ M;  — 

that  a mea1' “*<■  a,s»  later  after 

off  by”  h"'  ¥""""l”eJ>  whli  wint 

more  intense.  \_Kr.~]  ' ’ UP0n  C^e  nausea  became  always 

Spasm  in  the  stomach.1  [Manetti,  1.  c.l 
opasm  in  the  stomach  like  cramn  PTTr  „ 

with  tensi/e^in^the  stomach.the  £Venmg’  distended  epigastrium, 
Contractive  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  [Mill 
Burnm8  m the  stomach.’  [Henning,  1 c.l  ] 
otitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Hbg.~\  J 

Thefdi ~ 

2 Every  time  she  took"’  f°r  haIfa”  hour.” 

*5 


r pro 


BELLADONNA. 


635.  Stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Horrible,  shooting  cutting  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which 
forces  the  body  to  bend  backwards,  and  compels  him  to  hold  his 
breath. 

Inflammation  of  the  stomach.1  [Gockel,  1.  c.] 

Inflammation  of  the  upper  part  of  the  duodenum.1  [Gockel, 
I.C.] 

Burning  in  the  abdomen.  [Albrecht,  1.  c.] 

640.  Constant  bellyache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  644.] 

Bellyache,  constipation,  diuresis,  with  eructation  and  inclination 
to  vomit.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  666.] 

(After  drinking  milk,  bellyache,  some  stitches.) 

(Cutting  in  the  belly,  in  the  evening,  some  hours  before  going  to 
sleep.) 

Bellyache,  spasmodic  tension  from  the  chest  to  low  down  in  the 
hypogastrium,  which  does  not  permit  the  slightest  movement, 
(aft.  \ h.). 

645.  Bellyache  and  leucorrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  672  (14).] 

In  the  evening  pressure  in  the  abdomen  as  from  a stone,  with 
pains  in  the  loins.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  681  (18).] 

Bellyache,  as  from  a hard  weight,  only  when  walking  and  stand- 
ing, always  going  off  when  sitting. 

Quite  low  down  in  the  hypogastrium  pressure  as  from  a heavy 
weight.2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  vol.  ii,  p.  ii,  p.  323.] 

In  the  right  groin,  in  the  inguinal  ring,  on  sitting  stooping 
forwards,  a sensation  as  if  a hard  body  pressed  out,  but  the  part  is  not 
hard  to  the  touch  (aft.  6 d.).  \_JVs.~] 

650.  On  sitting  bent  forwards  a sensation  in  the  right  groin  as  if  a 
hard  body  pressed  out.  [*SV/'.] 

In  the  hypogastrium,  immediately  below  the  navel,  sensation  as 
if  the  bowels  were  forcing  outwards,  most  felt  when  standing  (aft. 

6 d.).  [m.] 

When  pressing  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach  he  has  an  out-pressing 
pain  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen. 

Inflation  of  the  abdomen.3  [Gockel,  1.  c.] 

Distended,  but  not  hard  nor  painful  abdomen.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 
655.  Distended,  hard  abdomen.  [Justi,  1.  c.] 

Along  with  sensation  of  distension  of  the  abdomen  a constrictive 
bellyache  below  the  navel,  which  comes  by  jerks,  and  compels  him  to 
bend  himself  forwards  (aft.  4 h.). 

Abdomen  tense  round  about  the  ribs.  [El.  Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

A distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  rumbling  or  rolling  in  the 
bowels  on  the  left  side.  [Z«.] 

A drawing-in  of  the  abdomen,  with  pressive  pain  (when  lying)* 

[Hbg.-} 

660.  Squeezing,  constrictive  pain  in  the  bowels  deep  down  in  the 

1 Ascertained  post  mortem . 

2 Taking  the  place  of  a pain  in  the  hypochondrium,  back,  and  loins,  which  he 
had  before  beginning  the  medicine. 

3 After  death.  It  is  described  as  “ extraordinary  and  preternatural.” 


belladonna. 

a?™""®  Wi,h  °U *M'*  » J«fa  towards  ,h, 

knot  or  lump  wouXrfXX^ZnX  'hC  UmbllicaI  region,  as  if  a 

tensive  ichi”g7i\lTwhi\f“  8'“"S  T °!  M’  * 
pubic  region , it  is  as  if  the  hypogaitj  ’fc'  “ >be 

spasmodically  constricted  sometime  « v v 7 “ ?P'gastrlum)  were 

“fXrrXpT1 in  ,he  Moaa>  •>»  »»*  <«.d  a™*  „„ 

”»v  ^ a» 

in  the  E2  '°8"h'r  in  ‘h'  “”bil”'  'egion,  a,  „„  a„d 

belly,  besides  sharp’  shmtinsfr'om  !°getber  m the  right  side  of  the 
■he  chest  and  out L the  axifh  [m]“ '‘P  ,hrouSh  ,be  right  side  of 

co±  SThe'Xtd  SjiSXs  %V7““‘  "8i“’ 

h 

Pinching  in  the  bowels.  [Hbg.] 

when  he  wished  toriitplm' ft ’ regi°n’  S°  that 

of  the  pain.  [Hbg.]  P he  couId  not  do  s°  on  account 

[MU.]  Chmg  3Cr0SS  the  -P'Sastrium  and  downwards  as  if  in  the  colon. 

by  drawing  ^"th^belly^nd  abbd°]“en-’  ™hlch  is  much  aggravated 
, over  to  the  left  side  (aft!  6 h A ^ P«  offhe  bod y 
675.  Great  stitches  in  the  inguinal  glands. 

^ine  stitches  in  the  left  groin.  [Mkl.  1 

^Obtuse  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  at  the  last  ribs. 

the  a WUnt  kn'fe  betW£en  the  ri§ht  hiP  and 

vertebra  ^ sh^hi^c ut § as" i fin" t °Ver, the, ]eft  hiP  to  the  lumbar 
gon  it  terminated,  ani  where  it  was® LV^nful 

>8°-  Obtust s knifc-thrusts  on  the  left  side  below  the  navel  TGn  1 
[Ln.]  3C  Wg’  S °°tmg  paln  in  the  umbilical  region  '(aft.  24  h.). 

Early  in  bed,  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  on  which  he  is  lying 


228 


BELLADONNA. 


quietly,  an  aching  cutting,  which  goes  off’  as  soon  as  he  turns  on  the 
other  side  (aft.  n d.).  [TVs.] 

Violent  cutting  pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,  some- 
times here,  sometimes  there  (aft.  ih.j.  [Hrr.] 

Cutting  in  the  whole  of  the  hypogastrium,  but  more  violent  in 
the  left  side.  [Gjj.] 

685.  Itching  stitches  at  the  navel,  which  go  off  by  rubbing  (aft.  1 h.). 

Anxious  heat  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  chest,  and  in  the  face,  with 
stuffed  nose.  [TVs.'] 

Heat  from  below  upwards,  so  that  the  sweat  of  anxiety  broke  out, 
followed  by  nausea  combined  with  frightful  anxiety,  until  the  nausea 
went  always  further  down.  [Kr.] 

Painfulness  of  the  whole  abdomen,  as  if  all  were  sore  and  raw, 
lasting  long  (aft.  1 h.).  [£//'.] 

Violent  reiterated  rumbling  in  the  bowels.  [G\fj.] 

690.  Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  the  feeling  as  if  all  there 
were  mixed  up  together  ("aft.  \ h.).  [tSV/'.] 

A rumbling  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen.  [ZtzT] 

Very  frequent  discharge  of  flatus  almost  without  smell.  [Ln.] 
Frequent  discharge  of  inodorous  flatus. 

During  a motion  of  the  bowels,  shivering. 

695.  During  a motion  of  the  bowels  a shudder  ran  over  the  child. 

On  straining  at  stool  feeling  in  the  abdomen  as  if  diarrhoea  were 
coming  on,  with  internal  heat  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.] 
Pappy  stool  mixed  with  mucus.  [Hbg.] 

Heat  of  head,  alternating  with  diarrhoea. 

(H)-] 

Diarrhoea,  inclination  to  vomit,  and  stomachache.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  672  (14).] 

700.  Curdled,  yellow,  somewhat  mucous  stool. 

(Motions  of  a very  sour  smell.) 

Stools  as  white  as  chalk.1  [Weinmann,  1.  c.,  p.  138.] 

Green  stools.2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  vol.  ii,  p.  320.] 

Green  stools,  with  diuresis,  and  yet  sweat  at  the  same  time.2 
[Greding,  1.  c.,  vol.  ii,  p.  319.] 

705.  Several  watery  stools  immediately  after  profuse  sweat.  [Justi, 
1.  c.] 

At  first  soft  diarrhceic  stool,  but  afterwards  frequent 
urging  to  stool,  whereby  very  little  or  nothing  at  all 
comes  away.  [TVs.] 

Uncommonly  diminished  stool,  only  small  evacuations  occur  for 
several  days.  [Hbg.] 

Urging  to  stool,  which  comes  away  thinner  than 
usual,  but  in  sufficient  quantity.  [Hrr.] 

Frequent  thin  stools,  with  tenesmus  ; he  felt  a frequent  desire  to 
go,  he  must  go  to  stool  every  quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  48  h.). 


[Greding,  1.  c.,p.  672 


1 Not  found. 

2 During  recovery  from  jaundice. 


belladonna. 


229 


71  o.  He  has  a constant  desire  to  go  to  stool. 

Straining  at  stool ; a scanty  diarrhceic  motion  comes  away,  and 
.^immediately  followed  by  very  much  increased  straining  (aft h.). 

and  haTmodS^^0015  any’°rWith  °n'y  3 Ver?  scantr 

Tenesmus  and  bellyache.  [Faber,1  Strychnomania,  p.  13,  obs.  5 1 
ineffectual  urging  to  stool.  ° J 

715*  -After  ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  vomiting. 

A kjnd  of  tenesmus,  a constant  pressure  and  forcing  towards  the 
(Sf.  i7h  femUls’  alternat,ng  w'th  painful  contraction  of  the  anus 

Pressure  in  the  rectum  towards  the  anus.  [Mkl  1 

Constipation.  [Fr.  Hoffmann,2  Medicina  ration. , p.  2711 1 

u,™"  a confinfd  motion  distension  of  the  abdomen  and  heat  of 
head.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  673  (r4).] 

720.  He  cannot  strain  at  stool.  [Fr.  H—n.~\ 

follf:0IitrKCt:1Ve-jajn  ’u  the  rectum' then  sore  Pain  in  the  epigastrium, 

slvere  >rv  dlsdJarge°f  sbmy  diarrhoea,  at  last  empty  straining! 

Jni,  e”  ‘tchmS>  and  at  same  time  constrictive  sensation  in  the 
anus.  lCtj-j.j 

Itching  in  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum. 

iolent,  sudden,  painful  itching  in  rectum  and  anus 
Itching  externally  at  the  anus  (while  walking  in  the*  open  air). 

A pleasant  tickling  in  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum. 

<,hen  "o,,ng)  3 h')' 
*ii^[ij!iS,L  “"po”>'  rm'r‘k  °!  ,h' 

73(22)1]  VOlUntar7  dischargeof  £he  cerements.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  690 

Small,  rapid,  involuntary  stools. 

Suppressed  evacuation  of  stool  and  urine  for  ten  hours. 

uppressed  evacuation  of  stool  and  urine,  with  extraordinary 
perspiration.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.]  quinary 

Difficult  micturition. 

735- c Suppressed  urine.2  [De  Launay  d’Hermont,  1.  c.— Siceuus, 

1.  c ^etent‘0n  of  the  urine>  which  only  Passes  by  drops.  [Lottinger, 

Frequent  call  to  pass  urine.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  6c8.1 

auanHtqUfh C Cf  unnat.e>  but  the  urine  passed  in  strikingly  small 
quantity,  though  of  natural  colour.  [Gssj]  6 7 

i h ^[Zr ^ UFSinS  t0  uHnate5  With  Scant^v  discharge  of  urine  (aft. 


725. 


* General  account  of  effects  of  B. 

3 5^tement  of  effects  of  soporifics  in  general  (including  opium). 

“ difficul^micTurkbn!^  ab°Ut  SlcdlUS’  but  de  Launaf  d’Hermont’s  symptom  is  only 


BELLADONNA. 


740.  Incessant  urging  to  urinate.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Yellow,  turbid  urine.  [Ackermann,  1.  c.] 

Clear,  lemon-coloured  urine.  [Justi,  1,  c.] 

Golden-yellow  urine.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Bright  yellow,  clear  urine  (aft.  4 h.). 

745.  (Whitish  urine.) 

Urine  with  white,  thick  sediment  (aft.  12  h.). 

Urine  turbid,  like  yeast,  with  reddish  sediment. 

Frequent  micturition.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Frequent  micturition  of  copious  urine.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11) .] 

750.  Flow  of  urine  (enuresis1).  [Sauter  (ii),  L c. — Greding,  1.  c., 
pp.  644,  648,  650,  652,  675,  686.] 

Frequent  micturition  of  copious,  pale,  thin,  watery  urine.  [Grimm, 
1.  C.] 

Discharge  of  a quantity  of  watery  urine,  with  perspiration. 
[Baylies,  Pract.  Essays  on  Med.  Subjects , p.  37.] 

Along  with  discharge  of  a large  quantity  of  urine,  and  with 
increased  appetite,  he  is  quite  cold  to  the  touch.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
P.  694  (23).] 

At  night  diuresis,  with  profuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  689 

755.  Along  with  constant  diuresis  profuse  night  sweat.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  689  (21).] 

Diuresis,  thirst,  and  obscuration  of  vision  in  the  morning.  [Gred- 
ING,  1.  C.,  p.  670  (14).] 

Diuresis,  with  perspiration,  good  appetite  and  diarrhoea.  [Gred- 
ing, 1.  c.,  p.  667.] 

Diuresis,  with  profuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p,  684  (19).] 
Diuresis,  diarrhoea,  and  appetite.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  661.] 

760.  Urine  more  copious  than  the  drink  taken  would  warrant.  [Horst, 

J-c.] 

Diuresis  on  the  occurrence  of  the  catamenia.  [Evers, in  Schmuckers 
Vermlschten  Schr.,  i,  p.  185.2] 

Involuntary  discharge  of  urine.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 

Involuntary  discharge  of  urine,  temporary  paralysis  of  the  neck 
of  the  bladder.3  [Dumoulin,  1.  c.] 

During  profound  sleep  (by  day)  his  urine  escaped. 

765.  He  cannot  retain  his  urine. 

Sensation  of  winding  and  turning  in  the  bladder,  as  from  a large 
worm,  without  urging  to  pass  water. 

In  the  night  obtuse  pressure  in  the  vesical  region. 

Immediately  after  making  water  a smartging  sensation  on  the 
outer  border  of  the  prepuce. 

In  the  anterior  part  of  the  glans  penis  an  itching  tickling  like 
the  bite  of  a flea.  \_Hbg.'] 

770.  Before  falling  asleep  in  the  evening  in  bed  tearing  upwards  in  the 
left  spermatic  cord  several  times  repeated.  [Mkl.'] 


1 This  is  what  we  now  call  “ diuresis.” 

2 From  a case  of  serous  apoplexy,  in  which  B,  was  given. 

3 See  S.  729. 


BELLADONNA. 


231 

The  prepuce  is  retracted  behind  the  glans,  whence  he  has  a 
disagreeable  sensation  in  the  exposed  glans  (aft.  4 h.).  fMkl  1 

A long  stitch  along  the  urethra,  which  commenced  at  thebulbous 

(T3\f  Tun*  ' 3nd  £°  kS  °rifice’  waling 

violent  forcing  and  straining  towards  the  eenitals 
and  when  w°,Fd  ^ °Ut  ^ Worse  -hen  sitting  Lft  foS 
hO  fSJTf  S’  etter  When  Standins  and  upright  (aft. 

When  not  passing  water  obtuse  stitches  in  the  urethra  behind 
the  glans,  especially  when  moving.  ’ 

775.  Whilst  passing  water  drawing  in  the  spermatic  cord. 

Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  from  flaccid  penis. 

Un  the  glans  penis  a soft  painless  pimple, 
bweat  on  the  genitals  at  night. 

30  E).eat  stltclies  in  the  drawn-up  testicles  (aft.  12,  18, 

780.  Nocturnal  emission  of  semen,  with  flaccid  penis 

Two  seminal  emissions  in  one  night.  penis. 

At  every  step  violent  stitches  in  the  pubic  region,  as  if  in  the 
internal  genital  organs  (aft.  io  h.).  [<S7/;]  & > e 

nigh^^Zn]1  Semmal  emission  without  lascivious  dreams  (the  first 

Indifferent  at  the  thought  of  the  difference  of  the  sexes  • he 
cannot  summon  up  any  lascivious,  lustful  thoughts ; the  sexual  desire 
in  the  imagination  is  as  if  extinct.  S ’ “at  aesire 

^ The.  most  voluptuous  pictures  and  stories  excite  neither  his 
(aftS20  h?J!  ^ ^ gen'taI  °rganSi  he  remainS  indifferent  to  them 

Before  the  catamenia  weariness,  bellyache,  want  of  annietite  anfl 
dimness  of  vision.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  679  (17  . 7 PP ’ 

■ v~>unn?  the  cat®menia  perspiration  on  the  chest,  yawnine  and 
rigor  running  over  the  back.  [Greding,  1.  c„  p.  671  (i4)7 

During  the  catamenia  cardiac  anxiety.  [Greding,  1 cl 
During  the  catamenia  great  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  672  (id)J 

79therPhiThe  back^"1?1*  * .cra“P~like  tearingi  sometimes  here  tnd 
mere  in  tne  back,  sometimes  in  the  arms. 

Appearance  of  the  catamenia. 

Catamenia  four  days  too  soon. 

Increased  menses.1  [Lambergen,  1.  c.l 

and  forty3 delnh  da^  menSeS  t0  ^ thirt7“s^ond,  thirty-sixth, 

(T  lu  [Ceding,  in  several  places.] 

79?enLk  ke.®°™lng  a pressing  as  if  all  would  be  forced  out  at  the 
genitals  (with  distension  of  the  abdomen)  ; after  the  pressing  the 

in  smefftraCted’  and  whlte  mucus  escaped  from  the  vagina,  f 

Le'ucorrhr^  met,rorr]hagla.  [Evers, * in  the  Berliner  Salmi,  iv.] 
ucorrhoea  and  colic.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  672  (14).] 

% 


1 Curative  efFect. 


3 Not  found. 


232 


BELLADONNA, 


Repeated  sneezing.  [Z,«.] 

The  nose  is  sometimes  stuffed,  sometimes  water  flows  from  it. 
[B/jr.] 

800.  Catarrh,  or  cough  with  coryza. 

Extent  coryza  only  in  one  side  of  the  nose  and  out  of  one  nostril. 
Ooryza,  with  stinking  odour  in  the  nose  as  of  herring-pickle, 
especially  on  blowing  the  nose.  \_Kr.~\ 

Hoarseness.  [Vicat,  1.  c.] 

Rough,  hoarse  voice. 

805.  Noise  and  rattling  in  the  bronchial  tubes.  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

Every  inspiration  excites  irritation  to  (dry)  tussiculation. 

For  several  successive  days,  about  noon,  violent  cough,  with 
discharge  of  much  viscid  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  691  (22).] 

Fit  of  coughing,  followed  by  heat.  \_Kr.~] 

Nocturnal  cough,  which  often  wakes  her  out  of  sleep,  after  which 
she  immediately  falls  asleep  again.  [Kr. ] 

810.  Fit  of  coughing,  as  from  inspiring  dust,  wakes  her  up  at  night, 
with  expectoration  of  mucus.  \_Hbg.\ 

(In  the  forenoon)  severe  dry  cough,  as  if  some  foreign  substance 
had  fallen  into  the  trachea,  with  coryza  (aft.  3 h.).  [Z,r.] 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down  in  bed,  an  itching  tickle  in 
the  back  part  of  the  larynx,  exciting  to  irresistible,  dry,  short 
cough. 

It  is  as  if  something  lay  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  always 
excites  coughing. 

He  has  a tightness  in  the  chest  like  dry  catarrh,  excit- 
ing him  to  dry  cough. 

815.  Oppression  in  the  chest  (in  the  upper  part  of  the  trachea)  ; he 
expectorates  something  like  old  catarrhal  mucus,  of  purulent  appear- 
ance (in  the  morning  in  bed  and  after  getting  up)  (aft.  16  h.). 

Cough  commences  in  the  evening  (about  10  o'clock),  and  comes 
every  quarter  of  an  hour  and  oftener,  of  three  or  four  impulses. 

Cough  with  taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth. 

In  the  morning  on  coughing  expectoration  of  bloody  mucus. 
(Cough  hollow  and  scraping.) 

820.  Violent  cough  during  sleep,  with  grinding  of  the  teeth  (aft. 
10  h.). 

Cough  with  needle-pricks  in  the  side  under  the  left  ribs  (aft. 
6 h.).  [Lr.] 

When  coughing  a violent  aching  pain  in  the  nape  as  if  it  would 
break  (aft.  3J  h.).  \_Htn.~] 

Dry  tussiculation  whereby  the  throat  is  scraped. 

Oppression  of  the  chest.  [Schmucker,1  Chirurg . Wahrnehm .,  ii.] 

825.  Difficult  breathing.  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

(When  coughing  the  child  strains  much,  and  is  peevish.) 

(Before  every  fit  of  coughing  the  child  became  quiet,  and  just 
before  the  cough  came  it  cried.) 

<vThe  attacks  of  coughing  ended  in  sneezing.) 


1 Observation  on  a patient. — In  original,  “viel  Angst  und  Beklemmung.” 


BELLADONNA. 


233 

(When  coughing  the  stomach  turns  over  as  about  to  vomit,  even 
when  it  is  empty.) 

830.  Very  difficult  respiration.1  [De  Launay  d’Hermont,  1.  c.] 

Violent,  small,  frequent,  anxious  respirations  (aft.  18  h.).  [Grimm, 
!.  c.] 

A pressure  in  the  cardiac  region,  which  stops  the  breath  and  causes 
anxiety. 

Pressure  on  the  chest  (it  affected  the  heart). 

She  felt  at  the  heart  (the  scrobiculus  cordis)  like  cardiac  oppression ; 
she  could  not  breathe  properly ; at  the  same  time  nausea,  which  rises 
up  to  the  throat,  as  if  she  must  vomit,  and  so  cardiac  oppression  and 
nausea  in  fits  about  every  seven  minutes  (aft.  \ h.). 

835.  After  drinking  (coffee)  short  breathing  (in  the  afternoon)  (aft. 

3 d-)-  [Hbg.-] 

Whilst  walking  frequently  an  oppression  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis, 
a kind  of  spasmodic  feeling,  that  compels  him  to  breathe  deeper  (aft. 
ih.).  [Htn.] 

Over  the  chest  violent  oppression  as  if  it  was  forced  inwards  from 
both  sides  (aft.  5 h.).  \Htn.~\ 

Tightness  of  chest.  [Vicat,  1.  c.] 

In  the  evening  in  bed  a very  oppressed  feeling  in  the  chest,  which 
is  not  removed  by  voluntary  coughing  ; he  could  only  draw  his  breath 
with  difficulty,  just  as  if  the  phlegm  in  the  windpipe  hindered  him  ; at 
the  same  time  a burning  in  the  chest  (aft.  60  h.). 

840.  Sometimes  he  breathed,  sometimes  he  seemed  to  have  fetched  his 
last  breath,  in  four  recurring  attacks  during  a quarter  of  an  hour. 
[El.  Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

Burning  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest.  [Htg.'] 

Heat  rises  suddenly  from  the  abdomen  into  the  chest  and  goes 
off  very  rapidly  (aft.  h.).  [JVs.~\ 

Stitches  in  the  sternum  when  coughing  and  when  yawning. 

Whilst  walking  fine  stitches  under  the  clavicle  from  before  back- 
wards (aft.  4 d.).  \JV± r.] 

845.  Fine  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  from  the  sternum  to  the 
axilla,  aggravated  by  movement,  without  reference  to  breathing. 

[/r,.] 

Fine  shooting  pain  in  the  chest.  [Gredjng,  1.  c.,  pp.  661,  681.] 

On  the  right  side  of  the  chest  a deeply  penetrating  and  enduring 
stitch,  without  reference  to  breathing  (aft.  72  h.). 

Stitches  in  the  side  of  the  chest  under  the  right  arm,  which  im- 
pede respiration,  in  the  evening. 

In  the  right  side,  stitches  here  and  there  under  the  skin,  to  a 
certain  extent  externally. 

850.  Stitches  in  one  of  the  breasts  (aft.  3 h.). 

Painful  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  without  relation  to 
breathing.  [JVs,~\ 

Stabs  of  short  duration,  as  from  a blunt  knife  under  both  last 


1 No  such  symptom  found  in  d’Hermont’s  narrative.  He  expressly  says,  “ la 
respiration  etoit  libre 


334 


BELLADONNA. 


ribs,  near  the  ensiform  cartilage,  and  above  the  false  ribs  (aft.  8 
m.).  [Gw.] 

Shooting  pinching  pain  in  the  chest  on  both  sides  of  the  upper 
part  of  the  sternum.  \Ws7\ 

Intermitting  aching  cutting  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  with- 
out  reference  to  inspiration  or  expiration  (aft.  | h.).  \}Vs^\ 

855.  Continued  aching  shooting  in  the  left  costal  cartilages,  becoming 
still  more  violent  and  passing  into  an  almost  burning  sensation  on 
expiration  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Htn .] 

Sharp  pressure  from  within  outwards  in  the  region  of  the  sixth 
true  rib  (aft.  \ h.).  [JVs.] 

A sharp  pressive  pain  in  the  sternum,  immediately  above  the  ensi- 
form cartilage.  [Gw.] 

An  aching  pain  under  the  right  nipple.  [Gw.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  chest  and  between  the  shoulders. 

860.  Aching  pain  in  the  chest  with  short  breath,  at  the 
same  time  between  the  shoulders,  when  walking  and 
sitting.  [Hbg.] 

Aching  squeezing  pain  in  the  left  and  right  breast.  [ Hbg .] 

A throbbing  pain  under  the  sternum  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

tG"]- 

Aching  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  which  causes  anxiety. 

Great  restlessness  and  throbbing  in  the  chest. 

865.  (When  at  rest,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  as  if  the  shock  went  up 
to  the  throat,  worse  on  moving,  with  difficult  slow  breath.) 

When  she  goes  upstairs  the  heart  clucks,  a kind  of  palpitation. 

[*/] 

A corroding  gnawing  pain  under  the  last  right  cartilages  of  the 
ribs  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gw.] 

Painful  blisters  containing  water  on  the  sternum.1  [Lambergen, 
1.  c.] 

The  chest  and  thighs  covered  with  very  small  dark-red  irregular 
spots.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  685  (19).] 

870.  In  an  unimpregnated  woman,  milk  comes  into  the  breasts  and 
flows  out  ; on  the  left  breast  there  appeared  small,  scattered  pimples, 
which  cause  creeping  itching,  which  is  relieved  by  rubbing. 

The  ischia  are  painful  ; she  feels  as  if  she  had  no  flesh  there,  but 
she  is  better  when  sitting  on  a hard  than  on  a soft  seat.  \Kr.~\ 

A dark  (mist-like),  painful  drawing  in  the  whole  extent  of  the 
pelvis,  but  this  pain  wanders  alternately  from  the  sacrum  to  the 
os  pubis.  [Gw.] 

Spasmodic  sensation  in  the  left  lumbar  region.  [Hbg.] 

Extremely  painful  cramp-pain  in  the  sacrum  and  coccyx  ; he  can 
only  sit  for  a short  time,  becomes  quite  stiff  from  sitting  and  on 
account  of  the  pain  cannot  rise  up  again  ; he  cannot  even  lie  com- 
fortably, it  often  wakes  him  up  at  night,  and  then  he  turns  on  the 
other  side  with  violent  pains  ; he  cannot  lie  at  all  on  the  back ; he 
gets  most  relief  from  standing  and  walking  about  slowly,  but  he 
cannot  walk  quickly  (for  8 days).  \JVs.~\ 


1 Probably  the  effect  of  long-continued  wet  dressings  on  the  mamma. 


BELLADONNA. 


235 


875.  When  he  rises  up  after  sitting,  he  gets  a pain  at  the  border  of  the 
ilium  over  the  hips,  as  if  a sharp  body  was  cutting  its  way  outwards. 
VTs.\ 1 

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  back.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  67 4 (15).] 

At  the  left  side  of  the  spinal  column,  below  the  false  ribs,  aching 
pain.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Gnawing  in  the  spinal  column  and  cough. 

Shooting  and  gnawing  pain  in  the  spinal  column. 

880.  In  the  vertebrae,  stabbing  from  without  inwards  as  with  a knife. 
[Kr.] 

In  the  right  side  of  the  back  and  spinal  column,  pain  as  if 
dislocated. 

Cramp-like  aching  sensation  in  the  middle  of  the  spinal  column, 
which  becomes  tensive  when  he  tries  to  straighten  his  back  (aft. 
5 h.).  [Htn.] 

The  back,  especially  the  scapulae,  is  covered  with  large  red 
pimples  ; the  whole  skin  looks  red,  and  pains,  when  touched,  as  if 
excoriated,  but  in  the  apices  of  the  pimples  the  pain  is  fine  shooting 
(aft.  10  d.). 

Pain  in  the  head  extending  into  the  scapulae.  [Greding,  1.  c., 

p.  656.] 

885.  Boil  on  the  shoulder. 

Aching  pain  under  the  left  shoulder-blade,  more  towards  the 
outer  side.  [Gw.] 

Drawing  pressure  between  the  right  scapula  and  the  spinal 
column,  \_Hrr.~\ 

Pain  between  the  scapulae  as  from  a sprain. 

Violent  drawing  between  the  scapulae  down  the  spinal  column, 
in  the  evening. 

890.  Cramp  pain,  almost  like  pinching,  between  the  right  scapula  and 
the  spinal  column.  \JVs .] 

(A  tickling  itchirfg  on  the  left  scapula.)  [Z«.] 

Itching  shooting  on  the  right  scapula,  causing  her  to  scratch. 

[Ws] 

Shooting  itching  on  the  scapulae,  that  goes  off  on  scratching. 

[«'>•] 

Fine  stitches  on  the  right  scapula.  [7 Vs.~\ 

895.  Repeated  shoots  as  from  electricity,  from  the  left  scapula  towards 
the  right  (aft.  1 h.).  \MkU\ 

Shooting  aching  on  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder  (aft. 

3 h.)*  [Htn.] 

Painful  stiffness  between  the  scapulae  and  in  the  nape  on  turn- 
ing the  neck  and  head  hither  and  thither,  in  the  morning  (aft. 
16  h.). 

Externally  on  the  neck  aching  pain,  on  bending  the  head  back 
and  on  touching  the  place. 

Glandular  swellings  on  the  nape  with  cloudiness  of  head  (aft. 
6 h.). 

900.  Pimples  break  out  on  the  nape  ancLarm,  rapidly  fill  with  pus, 
and  become  covered  with  a scab. 


236  BELLADONNA 


Painful  swelling  of  the. left  axillary  gland  (aft.  5 hj. 

Swelling  of  the  affected  arm  and  foot.  [Munch,  in  Richter’s 
Bihliothek , v,  p.  558.] 

A stretching  and  wrenching  of  the  upper  extremities. 

[■ Ln 0 

Rheumatic  pains  of  the  arm  combined  with  formication,  followed 
next  day  by  spasm  of  the  arm.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  671  (14).] 

905.  Arm  as  if  numb  and  painful.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 

Swelling  of  the  arm.  [Munch,  1.  c.] 

Great  feeling  of  exhaustion  in  the  arms,  still  more  in  the  hands,  as 
if  she  must  allow  them  to  hang.  [*S’//r.] 

Heaviness  in  both  arms. 

Heaviness  of  the  left  arm.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  694  (23).] 

910.  Paralysis  of  the  right  arm.2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  662.] 

A heaviness  and  paralysis  of  the  upper  extremities,  most  of  the 
left  arm.  [Ln.] 

Weakness,  like  paralysis,  first  in  the  right  upper  arm,  afterwards 
also  in  the  forearm  (aft.  5 h.).  [Mkl.] 

Paralytic  aching  in  the  left  upper  arm,  with  paralytic 
feeling  and  weakness  in  the  whole  of  the  left  arm. 

[Hrr.] 


Paralytic  drawing  aching,  with  weakness  in  the  right 
upper  and  forearm  (aft.  4 d.).  [ Hrr .] 

915-  Paralytic  tearing  aching  on  the  anterior  surface  of 
the  left  upper  arm  (aft.  5 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Cramp  of  the  right  arm,  with  grinding  of  the  teeth.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  687  | 

(Painful) 

He  raises  the  right  arm  involuntarily  and  without  knowing  it 
above  the  head.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  692  (22).] 

A downward-drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  arm,  and 
when  it  got  down  it  then  twitched  several  times  back  in  the  region  of 
the  right  elbow-joint  upwards  towards  the  shoulders,  and  then  it 
ceased  for  a time. 

920.  Convulsive  shock  of  the  arms  as  from  the  most  violent  shivering. 
Spasmodic  shocks  of  the  arms.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  644.] 
Continual  inward-twisting  (intorsio)  of  the  arms  and  hands.3 
[Boucher,  1.  c.] 

She  occasionally  stretched  out  her  arms  and  hands,  as  if  she  would 
clutch  something.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 

A violent  outward-stabbing  pain,  as  with  a blunt  knife,  under  the 
head  of  the  humerus.  [Gjj.] 

925.  In  the  right  arm  on  which  she  had  not  lain  (about  3 a.m.)  a 
stiffness  (she  could  not  bend  it),  with  a feeling  as  if  it  were  shorter 
than  the  other,  and  tearing  pain  in  it).  [Stf.] 


2°)-J  . 

twitching  in  the  arms,  more  in  the  right  than  the  left. 


1 Relieved  by  venesection. 

2 See  note  to  S.  175. 

3 The  original  is  simply  “ contorsiotis  continuelles.” 


BELLADONNA. 


237 


Drawing  pain  in  the  inside  of  the  left  upper  arm. 

[Hbg.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  humerus.  [Hbg.] 

Bruised  pain  in  the  upper  arms  (aft.  6 h.).  [Ws.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  humerus. 

930.  A slow  running  upwards  on  the  left  arm,  as  when  a fly  creeps  on 
the  skin,  frequent  rubbing  does  no  good. 

A pimple  on  the  left  arm,  below  the  elbow- joint,  dark  red, 
without  sensation  or  suppuration,  paining  . like  a sore  on  being 
touched  (aft.  9 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Below  the  right  elbow  a pimple,  touching  it  causes  shooting  pain. 
[TVs.] 

(The  elbow  pains  on  being  moved  and  touched,  as  if  burnt.) 

A rumbling  in  the  left  arm  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  as  if  water  or 
a heavy  fluid  coursed  through  the  blood-vessels.  [Hbg.] 

935.  Cutting  pain  in  the  left  elbow-joint  internally,  when  walking. 

[m.] 

Sharp  stitches  externally  on  the  left  elbow-joint  (aft.  72  h.). 

[*Ts.] 

Paralytic  drawing  pain  in  the  elbow. 

Paralytic  drawing  pain  in  the  elbow  and  fingers  of  the  left  hand. 

{Hbg.} 

Fine  stitches  on  the  left  forearm  (aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.] 

940.  Obtuse  shooting  in  the  middle  of  the  internal  portion  of  the 
forearm  which  becomes  gradually  worse,  and  at  length  very  violent. 

[<?»•] 

Cutting  tearing  in  the  lower  muscles  of  the  right  forearm  (when 
at  rest)  (aft.  5J  h.).  [Htn.] 

Cutting  tearing  in  the  lower  muscles  of  the  left  forearm  (aft.  j 
h.).  [Htn. ] ✓ 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  wrist.  [Hrr.] 

Shooting  tearing-  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  left  hand. 
[Htn.] 

945.  Tearing  ache  in  the  metacarpal  bones  and  the  distal  joint  of  the 
left  index.  [Hrr.] 

Frequent  cold  perspiration  of  the  hands. 

The  backs  of  both  hands  are  covered  with  small,  red  spots, 
which  rapidly  disappear*  [TVs.]  ^ 

Swelling  of  the  hands.  [Wienholt,  1.  c.,  p.  310.] 

Great  swelling  of  the  hand.  [Munch,  1.  c.,  p.  390.] 

950.  Feeling  of  stiffness  on  the  right  hand  and  fingers  ; she  could  not 
bend  them. 

He  cannot  turn  the  hand  freely  on  its  axis  ( e . g.  when  dropping 
a fluid  out  of  a phial),  he  can  only  do  it  by  jerks,  just  as  if  there  was 
a deficiency  of  synovia  in  the  wrist-joint  ; but  this  impeded 
movement  is  painless  (aft.  4 h.). 

Painful  drawing  in  the  proximal  phalanges  of  the 
left  middle  finger,  as  if  in  the  periosteum.  [Hrr.] 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  right 
index.  [Hrr.] 


238 


BELLADONNA. 


The  distal  joint  of  the  middle  finger  feels  stiff,  and  on  bending  it 
has  simple  (sore  ?)  pain. 

955.  Tearing  cutting  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  little  finger.  [Htn.] 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  thumb  (aft.  1 h.). 

The  points  of  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand  pain  as  if  pinched. 
\_Hbg.-] 

Along  with  chilliness  of  the  body  stitches  out  at  the  finger  points, 
chiefly  when  grasping. 

In  the  point  of  the  middle  finger,  feeling  as  if  something  were 
stuck  in  and  had  caused  ulceration,  worst  when  touched.  [TVs.'] 

960.  On  the  finger  a blister  with  painful  inflammation.  [Lambergen, 
1.  c.] 


A pustule  breaking  out  close  to  the  nail  of  the  right  index 
exuded  much  fluid.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  673  (15).] 

The  fingers  are  easily  dislocated. 

On  the  inside  of  the  thigh,  sore  pain. 

Pain  of  the  thighs  and  legs  as  if  generally  bruised,  and 
as  if  brittle,  towards  the  shafts  of  the  bones  fine  shoot- 
ing and  gnawing,  besides  severe  tearing  in  the  joints ; 
the  pain  mounts  gradually  from  the  ankles  to  the  hips, 
when  seated  compelling  the  feet  to  be  constantly  moved 
and  shifted;  relieved  by  walking  (aft.  4 h.).  [TVs.] 

965.  In  the  legs  sometimes  weariness,  with  drawing  pain  in  them. 

A kind  of  stretching ; he  is  compelled  to  stretch  out  the  legs 
(aft.  11  d.). 

When  walking,  weight  in  the  thighs  and  legs,  al&ng  with  stiff- 
ness of  the  knee-joints  (aft.  12  h.).  [TVs.] 

Increased1  weight  of  the  thighs  and  legs  (and  discharge  of  yellow 
nasal  mucus  with  increased  thirst).  [Greding,  1.  c.,  vol.  ii,  p.  321.] 
Paralytic  drawing  in  the  right  thigh  and  leg.  [Hrr.] 

970.  Paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities,  she  must  lie  down,  with 
nausea,  trembling,  anxiety  and  vertigo.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

Temporary  paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities.2  [Dumoulin,  1.  c.] 
Cramp-pain  in  the  gluteal  muscles  with  tension,  on  bending  the 
body.  [TVs.] 

On  the  right  hip  three  or  four  violent  stitches  when  at  rest  and 
when  moving.  [St/.] 

On  the  right  hip-joint  cold  feeling  (rapidly  passing  off)  (aft.  1 h.). 

[»*.] 

975.  Pain  in  the  left  hip  with  limping.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  687  (20).] 
When  she  lies  on  the  right  hip  she  has  pain  in  the  left,  but  if  she 
lies  on  the  left  the  pain  goes  off  (aft.  8,  9 d.). 

On  walking  a paralytic  tension  in  the  hip-joints  as  if  they  were 
dislocated.  [TVs.] 

Cutting,  jerking  tearing  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  left 
thigh  when  sitting  (aft.  j h.).  [Htn.] 


1 “Increased,”  i.e.  only  an  aggravation  of  a symptom  she  had  before  beginning 
the  medicine. 

2 See  SS.  729,  763. 


I 


BELLADONNA. 


239 


Cutting  shooting  in  the  external  muscles  of  the  right 
thigh,  just  above  the  knee,  only  when  sitting  (aft.  2J  h.). 
[Htn.] 

980.  In  the  thighs  extreme  heaviness  and  stiffness  when  walking. 
[Kr.] 

Heaviness  in  the  thighs  even  when  sitting.  [Hbg.] 

A pain  drawing  outwards  towards  the  skin  at  a small  spot  on  the 
inner  surface  of  the  left  thigh  (aft.  1 h).  [Gw.] 

Hard  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  right 
thigh,  [Hrr.] 

A knife-stab  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh  more  towards  the 
posterior  side  (immediately  after  a meal).  [Gw.] 

985.  A fluctuating  throbbing  pain  on  the  upper  and  inner  part  of  the 
left  thigh  (aft.  29  h.).  [Gw.] 

Tingling  buzzing  sensation  above  the  right  knee  when  sitting 
(aft.  i h.).  [Htn.] 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  knee,  near  the  patella,  towards  the 
outer  side,  when  sitting.  [Htn.] 

Violent  pains  in  the  knee.  [St/.'] 

On  moving,  the  outer  hamstring  of  the  left  knee  feels  tight  and 
as  if  too  short,  alternating  with  a similar  feeling  in  the  inner  ham- 
string, but  it  is  always  worst  in  the  outer.  [Mkl.] 

990.  In  the  right  popliteal  region  pinching  and  aching  pain.  [Hbg.] 
Obtuse  stitches  in  the  left  popliteal  region  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gw.] 

A twitching  in  the  right  popliteal  region  (aft.  4 h.).  [Ln.] 
Trembling  of  the  knees.  [Muller,  1.  c.] 

A disagreeable  feeling  in  the  joints  of  the  lower  extremities, 
especially  the  knees,  as  if  they  would  bend  beneath  him,  especially 
when  walking  and  chiefly  when  descending. 

995.  A twitching  in  the  popliteal  region  upwards  into  the  muscles  of 
the  thigh. 

A clucking  in  the  foot  as  if  drops  fell  in  it  (aft.  54  h.). 

Very  rapid  clucking  in  front  of  the  left  knee,  when  sitting 
(immediately).  [TVs.] 

Needle  pricks  under  the  left  patella,  when  sitting.  [Gw.] 

Aching  shooting  in  the  right  patella,  when  sitting  (aft.  3^  h.). 
[Htn.] 

1000.  When  treading  with  the  left  foot  painful  stitches  shoot  up  to  the 
knee  (aft.  38  h.).  [TVs.] 

Cutting  drawing  on  a small  spot  on  the  feet,  that  spread  from 
below  upwards,  first  through  the  legs  and  thighs,  then  through  the 
sacrum  up  to  the  shoulders.  [Kr.] 

Paralytic  weariness  in  both  legs.  [Mkl. ] 

On  going  upstairs  weariness  of  the  legs,  especially  of  the 
calves.  [Stf.] 

In  the  legs  a drawing-up  sensation,  externally  only  crawling, 
internally  innumerable  stitches.  [Ws.] 

1005.  In  the  leg  pain  as  if  it  were  squeezed  and  a commotion  (dull 
tearing)  and  working  in  it,  especially  at  night,  relieved  by  hanging 
down  the  leg  freely  (aft.  10  h.). 


24-0 


BELLADONNA. 


A burning  tearing  up  the  leg  through  the  inner  surface  of  the 
popliteal  region. 

Trembling  heaviness  of  the  legs. 

Dull  tearing  in  the  legs.  [Hbg.] 

The  foot  was  so  painful  that  she  had  to  keep  the  limb  hori- 
zontally extended  and  immovable.1  [Lambergen,  1.  c.] 
i oio.  Painful  feeling  of  weight  of  the  right  leg  on  crossing  it  over  the 
left  leg  (4  hours).  [Htn.] 

A drawing  heaviness  of  the  legs. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  tibia. 

Feeling  in  the  right  leg  like  growing  pain,  a stiff  feeling  combined 
with  heaviness.  [Htn.] 

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  right  tibia  with  an  out-pressing 
sensation  in  it  (aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.] 

1015.  Sharp  shoots  in  the  left  calf  which  come  from  below  upwards. 

[m.] 

Cramp  in  the  calf  on  bending  the  leg,  in  the  evening  in  bed, 
which  goes  off  on  stretching  out  the  leg  (aft.  72  h.). 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  inside  of  the 
leg,  without  reference  to  movement  or  touching,  [Hrr.] 
On  the  left  tibia  in  front  an  aching  when  standing.  [Hbg. ] 

Sweat  on  the  feet  without  warmth  when  sitting.  [Hbg.] 

1020.  Eroding  itching  on  the  feet  and  dorsum  of  the  feet.  [Hrr.] 

Obtuse  stitches  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  when  sitting,  not 
affected  by  external  pressure.  [IVs.] 

On  walking  in  the  open  air  tension  in  the  right  ankle-joint. 

On  walking  and  bending  the  foot  pain  in  the  metatarsal  bones  as 
if  sprained. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  metatarsal  bone  of  the  big  toe. 

1025.  Cramp  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  in  the  evening,  in  bed,  on  drawing 
up  the  knees. 

Burning  and  digging  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.  [Kr.] 

Violent  itching  of  the  feet. 

Creeping  upwards  in  the  feet  (aft.  20  h.). 

Swelling  of  the  feet. 

1030.  Heat  especially  in  the  feet. 

In  the  soles  of  the  fee t boring,  digging  pain  (aft.  several  h.). 
Shooting  pain  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  (aft.  \ h.). 

Bruised  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  heel  when  treading. 

A kind  of  painless  drawing  or  running  from  the  heel  to  the  toes, 
round  about  the  ankle  (aft.  30  h.).  * 

1035.  Boring  or  tearing  stitches  in  the  tendo  Achillis. 

(When  walking)  tearing  in  the  sole  of  the  left  foot,  mingled  with 
stitches,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.  [Mkl.] 

Tension  on  the  sole  of  the  right  foot  about  the  heel, 
which  then  changed  into  tensive  pressure;  on  press- 
ing on  it  the  pain  goes  off  for  some  time  (aft.  \ h.). 
[Hrr.] 


1 In  connection  with  S.  1044. 


Belladonna. 


241 

for  p,™' [ivjlg  sh'  “h'd  “ bersclf,  b«.  could  do  1, 

part.  [6’ss.]  here  OCCurred  ,nste®d  a Pain  at  another 

c™sig“5”ne,5  :«,h  t fe“  ;°"ch-  t&j 

there,  [m.]  S th  b dy>  flUng  about,  now  here,  now 

the  abdomen^  [Ziegler  Vf] l0Wef  PartS  °f  tbe  b°d^’  extending  to 

^ f ” b«”«.  blisters 

1045.  When  walking,  at  every  sZ  J STT*’  1 ^ 
affected  part  extending  into  die  hear!  ° ftep’  3 stlt.ch  in  the 

self  unexpectedly  ; noSt  whenshttf  jUSt  38  Whe"  ’0ne  pricks 

exte(rnaietourch.rhere  ^ Sh°°ting  P31'n  had  been  are  Painful  to 
Boring  pain  in  the  glands. 

Gnawing  pain  in  the  affected  part  (aft  1 h 1 

to  the  oepen  aTr"  ^P1*3"011  °f  bellado™a  makes  the  part  sensitive 
I0ScS?f  2S$  lumps  and  swellings  (apparently 

in  the  evening;  aftw ^uWbW  the ' etSpe?ally  a(ter  tying  down  in  bed 
more  severe.  ”g  the  teanng  Pam  alone  remains,  but 

Ulcer  is  painful  almost  only  in  the  nio-ht  if  f 
burning,  as  if  something  would  press  o f (f™*  1 6P-m-  to  6 a.m.) 
paralysed  and  stiff  (aft,  4 8 h ) P f’  d the  Part  were  as  if 

In  the  ulcer  violent  itching  (aft. VS  pain (aft-  4 *>•)• 

moving  the  part  (afT^h  Whe”  M rest>  and  faring  pain  on 

1060.* o?rtehpil(5  ♦ h->- 

?£  th”  cheat,  on*  oS  sfdSflhe  X25'p4n  °n  °“e  side 

together  (aft.  8, 16,  3 Ph.)  1 part  inwards  and  to  crouch 

thence  into  the  fingers^  lMtlyTnto°Se  ^Th^8  i!°  the  scaPuI*’  and 
on  edge  and  become  loose.)  7 tecth>  which  thereby  are  set 

(Drawing  pain  in  all  the  limbs  ) 


6' 


242 


BELLADONNA. 


In  the  evening  in  bed  itching  stitches  here  and  there  in  the  skin, 
as  if  from  fleas. 

In  the  afternoon  especially  (about  3 or  4 o’clock),  all  the  ail- 
ments are  worse ; in  the  forenoon  they  are  more  tolerable. 

1065.  Violent  spasmodic  laughter. 

Slight  convulsive  movements  of  the  limbs.  [Dumoulin,  1.  c.] 
Convulsive  movement  of  the  limbs.  [Rau,  1.  c. — Greding, 
I.  c.,  p,  671.] 

Subsultus  tendinum.  [Elfes,  1.  c.] 

Twitching  in  the  limbs.  [Ziegler,  1.  c.] 

1070.  After  a slight  vexation  the  most  violent  spasms,  which  urged  him 
to  run  against  the  walls.  [$£/'.] 

Convulsions  of  the  limbs  with  hiccup.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  671 

(h).] 

During  startings  of  the  limbs,  weariness  and  anxiety.1  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  673  (14).] 

Convulsions.  [Eb.  Gmelin,  Pflanzenglfte , 1.  c.] 

Convulsive  momentary  stretching  out  of  the  limbs  on  awaking. 
1075.  Repeated  convulsions  and  cruel  spasms,  especially  in  the  flexor 
muscles.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Severe  jerks  and  very  loud  raving.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

Epileptic  convulsions.  [Wagner,  1.  c.,  (1).] 

Horrible  convulsions  resembling  epilepsy.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 
Convulsions,  distortions  of  all  muscles.  [De  St.  Martin,  1.  c.] 
1080.  Convulsions  of  all  the  limbs.  [Munch,  1.  c.] 

In  the  intervals,  when  free  from  convulsions,  he  utters  the 
loudest  cries,  as  if  he  suffered  great  pains.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Head  and  trunk  drawn  quite  back  to  the  left  side,  so  that  he  could 
not  walk.2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  662.] 

Insensible,  with  rattling  breathing  and  twitching  in  face  and 
hands.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

At  one  time  amazing  distortion  of  the  limbs,  at  another  complete 
immobility.  [El.  Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

1085.  Loss  of  all  sensation;  stiffness  of  the  lower  extremities  ; exces- 
sive distension  of  all  the  blood-vessels  of  the  skin,  with  uncommonly 
red,  swollen  face,  extremely  full  and  rapid  pulse  and  profuse  sweat. 
[Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  stiffness  and  immobility  of  the  limbs  ; for  example,  he 
could  not  move  the  left  foot.  [*9//'.] 

Stiffness  of  all  the  limbs  under  the  guise  of  a feeling  of  weariness. 
Stiffness  of  the  whole  body.3  [Ehrhardt,  PJlanzenhistorie , x, 
p.  126.] 

Spasmodic  stretching  of  the  limbs  with  distortion  of  the  eyes. 
[Greding,  l.c.,  p.  664.] 

1090.  In  the  morning  weary  and  restless  in  the  limbs  on  account  of 
pains,  she  wanted  always  to  change  the  position  of  her  limbs.  [ Kr .] 

1 This  would  be  better  stated — “ After  heat  and  redness  of  the  face,  with  great 
thirst,  she  had  lassitude,  anxiety,  and  slight  startings  of  the  limbs/’ 

2 See  note  to  S.  175. 

* Poisoning  of  a boy  of  seven. 


belladonna. 


243 

S°  tha‘  he  C0UW  n0t  remain  stiIL 

whole  bo^y  hither  and  ihhtW*18  COmP?fed  to  move  the 
feet;  he  cannot remain wS  ^fiall-?-the  hands  and 
he  lies,  sometimes  sit<?  Position,  sometimes 

always  changes  hi  poslion  fn^68  stands’  and  he 
[Or.]  s position  in  one  way  or  another. 

In_  ~renfo]!ng  w‘th  convulsive  shock. 

for  several  days.7  [BaldinSer,  1.  c.]  "g  Sensatlon  m the  throat, 
Tremh!;”8  3tIhe  heart’  in>tl’e  forenoon. 

Wearin  7 C>  * *44-] 

• .00.  c-ft.  so  h.). 

Heaviness  of  the  hands  and  feet.  \Bhr  1 
Weakness  of  the  body.  [Wierus,  1.  c.f 
oinking  of  the  strength.  [Wagner  1 o m i 
1105.  Great  weakness.  [Carl  r ( 

^Scially  in" 

ness  of  breath.  S ^ nt’  nd  at  t^le  same  time  short- 

General  weakness. 

hin.r£kcmori8“'  ""  k"”’  m incli“J  » bend  beneath 

°„f Bra;  n &■, 

together.  [ Bhr .]  g wards  as  though  she  would  sink 

extremities  (aft.  ^ mUSCleS  °f  the  uPPer  and  lower 

Paralysis, If  oneadmTinf  f ifat”^'^  esPeciaI17  of  the  legs. 
ding,  1.  c,  p.  703. ] tH,S’  at  another  ln  that  part.3  [GSe- 

PP.  66?XT3.f  the  r'Sht  arm  and  riSht  leS-2  [Greding,  1.  c, 

[Greding,  L^p.^  the  arm  and  leg>  are  qnite  paralysed.3 
Attacks  of  syncope.  '[Greding,  1.  c 1 
Apoplectic  state.3  [Wagner,  1.  c.  („).] 

cm:  ferss.*ss  “Sf  “j 

[l  ^ .0...  . for  a day  and  4.  .boy  V without 

5 si.  lot.  A”!"  by  3 dfC0,,ltn  of  lhe  r00t  '*n  . sufftter  born  rh.ama.it  go.,. 

Alter  epileptic  convulsions. 


BELLADONNA. 


244 

motion  in  any  limb  ; on  being  pinched  they  opened  their  eyes,  but 
emitted  no  sound.  [Wagner,  1.  c.,  (1).] 

1 120.  Soporose  state.  [Hasenest,  1.  c.] 

Very  deep  slumber. 

Deep  sleep.  [Dillenius,* 1  Misc.  Nat.  Cur . Dec.  iii,  ann.  7,  8, 
obs.  1 6 1.] 

Deep  sleep  for  twenty-four  hours.  [Wierus,  1.  c.] 

Very  deep  sopor,  with  subsultus  tendinum,  pale  cold  face,  cold 
hands,  and  hard,  small,  rapid  pulse.  [May,  1.  c.] 

1125.  Stupefaction  that  compels  him  to  sleep  in  the  forenoon;  he 
slept  profoundly  for  an  hour  and  a half ; on  awaking  great  hunger, 
with  severe  burning  heat  and  dryness  in  the  mouth,  without  thirst  ; 
thereafter  when  coughing  foul  breath,  smelling  of  human  excrement. 

midnight  restless  sleep  ; the  child  tosses  about,  kicks,  and 
speaks  crossly  in  its  sleep. 

Immediately  on  falling  asleep  he  dreams. 

After  long  sleep  great  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  684  (19).] 

Sleep  full  of  dreams  ; she  is  occupied  with  many  people  ; she 
wants  to  go  away,  but  does  not  go  so  far  as  that.  \_Kr.~] 

1130.  She  dreams  to  an  uncommon  extent,  but  tranquilly,  of  home 
occupations.  [£r/i] 

Very  profound  sleep,  without  many  dreams,  until  towards  morn- 
ing (aft.  5 d.).  [ Hbg .] 

Night  sleep  with  unremembered  dreams ; he  fell  asleep 
sooner  than  usual  and  woke  earlier,  and  not  without 
refreshment,  which,  however,  always  after  a few  hours 
gave  place  to  the  lassitude  in  the  limbs  that  was  always 
present  at  other  times.  [ Gss .] 

He  dreams  of  danger  from  fire,  and  wakes  in  consequence  (aft. 
54  h.). 

Frightful  dreams  vividly  remembered. 

1 135.  At  night  very  stupefied  sleep,  anxious  dreams  of  murderers  and 
highwaymen  ; he  once  heard  himself  call  out  loudly,  but  without 
thereby  coming  to  his  senses. 

In  the  evening  frequent  starting  up  out  of  sleep  on  going  to  sleep  ; 
the  feet  were  jerked  upwards  and  the  head  forwards.  [I^j.] 

Intolerable  sleep  on  account  of  horribly  increased  pains  and 
frightful  dreams. 

He  starts  up  and  wakes,  just  when  about  to  fall  asleep. 

Full  of  affright  and  terror  she  awakes  at  night  ; it  seemed  to  her 
as  if  there  was  something  under  her  bed  that  made  a noise ; she  had 
dry  heat  on  waking. 

1140.  She  started  in  otherwise  quiet  sleep,  as  though  she  were  falling 
deep  down,  whereupon  she  gave  a violent  start.  [ St/, i] 

In  his  sleep  he  starts  up  in  a fright  and  wakes.  \Hbg.\ 

Anxiety  prevents  sleep. 

Nocturnal  sleeplessness  on  account  of  anxiety,  with  drawing 

pain  in  all  the  limbs. 

1 Poisoning  of  a mother  and  six  children  by  the  berries. 


[Htg.] 


BELLADONNA. 


245 

Fright  in  a dream,  whereon  he  wakes,  and  there  is  sweat  on  the 
forehead  and  pit  of  the  stomach. 

1145.  He  is  constantly  wakened  up  out  of  sleep  by  frightful  dreams  and 
twitchings.  [Ziegler,  1.  c.] 

In  his  stupefied  sleep  he  opens  his  eyes,  gazes  wildly  about  him, 
and  then  falls  again  into  snoring  sleep.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.J 

At  night  he  had  dreams  that  tried  his  mind  very  much,  and  in  the 
morning  he  was  quite  weary  when  he  ought  to  get  up.  [ L.  Rkt. ] 

At  the  time  of  going  to  sleep  he  knew  not  whether  he  was 
dreaming  or  waking.  [Hbg.] 

Vivid,  but  unremembered  dreams.  [Lr.] 

1150.  Lying  in  bed  in  the  evening  it  seems  to  him  that  he  is  swimming 
away  with  his  bed  ; for  ten  successive  evenings,  immediately  after 
lying  down,  he  seems  to  swim  in  his  bed.  [ Fr . H—n.] 

In  the  morning  he  cannot  rouse  himself  out  of  sleep  : on  awaking 
he  is  very  cross.  \JVsJ\  5 

Singing  and  talking  loudly  in  sleep. 

She  sleeps  much,  and  even  when  the  cough  wakes  her,  she  falls 
asleep  again  immediately,  and  yet  in  the  morning  she  is  giddy  and 
tired.  [ Kr .]  ' & 1 

Frequent  waking  out  of  sleep,  and  though  he  turns  first  on  one 
si  e and  then  on  the  other,  he  can  get  no  rest  and  cannot  go  to  sleep 
again.  [Lr.]  r 

1155.  At  night,  sleeping  or  waking,  interrupted  breathing;  inspiration 
and  expiration  last  only  half  as  Jong  as  the  pause  before  taking  the 
new  inspiration  ; the  expiration  came  in  jerks,  and  was  louder  than 
the  inspiration ; the  inspiration  lasted  only  a little  longer  than  the 
expiration.  0 

(When  asleep  suffocating  snoring  during  inspiration.) 

Frequent  waking  out  of  sleep  at  night,  just  as  if  he  had  slept 
enough  (the  first  night).  [Lr.] 

Vain  efforts  to  sleep:  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

He  cannot  sleep  at  night;  the  delusion  that  he  had  to  do  some- 
thing  necessary  keeps  him  from  sleeping. 

1 160.  Very  little  sleep.  [L«.] 

Sleeplessness  for  several  days.  [Hover,1  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec 
111,  ann.  7,  8,  obs.  176.] 

Constant  drowsiness,  with  inclination  to  stretch  out  the  limbs  in 

the  evening  from  5 to  9 o’clock  (aft.  11  h.).  [M£L] 

(Sleeplessness,  with  alleviation  of  the  pains,  at  night ) 

Sleeplessness.  6 *' 

1165.  Constant  confusion,  with  sleepiness  (aft.  4.  h.).  rGj\r.l 

Drowsiness  (aft.  \ h.).  ’ L ’J 

Towards  evening,  in  the  twilight,  sleepiness  withyawning,  but  in 
the  morning  feeling  of  not  having  slept  enough. 

On  awaking  from  sleep  headache  and  great  exhaustion. 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  headache  only  over  the  eyes,  like  a 
weight  in  the  head,  and  touching  the  eye  causes  pain. 


1 Poisoning  of  an  old  woman  by  the  berries, 


246  BELLADONNA. 

1170.  In  the  morning  very  tired  and  giddy.  [Kr.~\ 

Drowsiness  perceived  immediately  after  waking. 

Dozing.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.—Valentini,1 2  Mi  sc.  Nat . Cur.,  Dec.  ii, 
ann.  10,  obs.  1 18.] 

A sort  of  coma,  with  small,  weak,  irregular  pulse.  [Boucher, 
1.  c.] 

Drowsiness,  with  restlessness.  [Mardorf,  1.  c.] 

1175.  Great  drowsiness.  [Sicelius,  1.  c.] 

Afternoon  attack  of  frequent  stretching  and  yawning,  during 
which  the  eyes  fill  with  tears  (aft.  48  h.). 

Frequent  yawning.  [Eb.  Gmelin,  1.  c.] 

Yawning  like  an  intoxicated  person.  [Mardorf,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  yawning  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Zr.] 
1180.  Feverish  movements.  [Ziegler,  1.  c. — Sauvages,  1.  c.] 

Feverish  movements  every  other  day.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11) . ] 

Fever  after  every  dose.  [Lentin,3  Beobacht .,  p.  81.] 

Evening  fever.3  [G— -ch,  1.  c.] 

Violent  thirst  (aft.  30  h.). 

1185.  Violent  thirst  after  midnight  and  in  the  morning. 

Anxious  thirst.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Very  troublesome  thirst.  [May,  1.  c.] 

Excessive  thirst  for  cold  water  (aft.  4 h.).  [El.  Camerarius,  1.  c.] 
Tormented  by  burning  thirst  and  heat  in  all  parts;  she  longs  for 
drink  from  time  to  time,  but  rejects  it  when  offered  to  her.  [Grimm, 

l-c.] 

1190.  After  the  perspiration  at  first  induced  has  diminished,  the  thirst 
increases  and  the  appetite  falls  off.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  650.] 

At  night  much  thirst  and  dryness  of  the  mouth. 

Thirst,  frequent  micturition,  and  dimness  of  vision  in  the  morn- 
ing.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  670  (14).] 

In  the  morning  great  thirst.  \_Hbg,~\ 

Great  thirst,  frequent  micturition,  profuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  690  (22).] 

1195.  She  is  deathly  pale,  quite  lifeless,  and  cold  as  snow,  [Zr.] 

In  the  morning,  icy-cold  hands,  with  confusion  of  the  head  and 
lachrymose  humour. 

Coldness  of  the  whole  body,  with  pale  face. 

Cold  feet,  with  heat  in  the  internal  ear,  in  the  evening. 

Cold  feet,  with  swollen  red  face  and  rush  of  blood  to  head. 

1200.  Coldness  of  the  whole  body,  especially  of  the  feet. 

Cold  hands  and  feet,  with  rather  profuse  cold  perspiration  of  the 
feet  (aft.  10  h.).  [MkL] 

Cold  hands  and  feet.  [Z?z.] 

An  unusual  cold  feeling  in  the  legs,  chiefly  in  the  feet  (aft.  5 h.), 

[Ln.] 

Chilliness.  [Munch,  1.  c.] 


1 Same  narrative  as  that  of  Mardorf  (y.'V.)* 

2 Effects  of  B.  administered  for  mammary  scirrhus. 

3 Not  found. — The  whole  history  related  by  G — ch  embraces  a few  hours  only. 


belladonna. 

24/ 

is  also  choTdtePa;hakingChlIl7and  ^ ^ C°ldneSS  while  asl-P  i she 
at  undressing  j 

stov? Sft “h g00Se-skin  even  when  cl°se  to  the  warm 
Wlth  ^"e  sh00ting  pain  in  tbe  chest-  [Greding, 

* 

Uver-sensitiveness  to  cold  air.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  fn).l 

ning  over  the  skTexferna^1 T„" the  bUt  °"Iy  rUn- 

I2I,  i‘g°!,j0Tr|armfS  a"d  abdomen,  not  on  the  head  (aft.  2 h ) 

[&»«“*?!$  p^'ss  "Z  ,li61"  **  of  visi.„. 

Rigor  over  one  arm.  [Hbg.] 

Rigor  over  the  abdomen.  [Hbg.  1 
Febrile  rigor  and  cold  hands.  [L.  Rkt  1 

12 [tr!.]  Sh°n  fitS  rig°rS  run  d0Wn  the  back>  not  followed  by  heat. 
Very  small,  slow  pulse.  [Hbg.-] 

[Greding^  /"c.Jp  ^ ^ f°IIwed  ^ sliSbt  b-t. 

of  thrbodvaandSfrtpfebnl.e  C^U’  ?tich  WaS  soon  succeeded  by  heat 

.he  following  night  ItawTiSr^d:  T, 

vertigo  and  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c,  P.  642. 1 kmd’  Wlth 

spreafts^oler  ‘hrough  the  1k"J-V  1 '«  .he  afternoon  heat 

tolE4“  ” * 

only  on  the  face"  'the  handset  ^d  fh  S^veral,  hours>  the"  sweat 
comes;  no  sleep durinS^h. £ H r ^ ket  (?>  before  the  heat 
during  the  chillP  nnrl  S th  ^n5  j most  complete  absence  of  thirst 

stizP  - K “ SitsXTrr  && 

quently  during  the  day  repeated  febrile  attacks,  shaking  rigor 


248 


BELLADONNA* 


[<?«•] 


C-] 


followed  by  general  heat  and  sweat  all  over  the  body,  without  thirst 
either  in  the  chill  or  the  heat. 

1230.  Fever:  along  with  external  coldness  there  is  inward  burning 
heat. 

Fever  : alternations  of  chill  and  heat.  [_3//r.] 

Fever:  sudden  alternations  of  heat  and  chill,  both  without 
thirst,  with  drowsiness  by  day  (aft.  12  d.).  \Ws^\ 

Several  febrile  attacks  in  one  day,  in  which  the  heat  followed  the 
chill  in  from  a few  minutes  to  half  an  hour,  always  without  thirst  in 
the  chill  and  heat,  and  generally  with  confusion  of  the  head. 
[Hrr.] 

Fever  ; in  the  evening,  in  bed,  chill,  then  heat ; the  chill  spread 
from  the  sacrum,  ran  up  over  the  back,  and  down  again  to  the 
thighs.  [Kr.] 

1235.  Strong,  quick  pulse.  [Ln.] 

Large,  full,  slow  pulse. 

Very  small,  quick  pulse. 

Large  quick  pulse,  accelerated  by  ten  beats. 

Violent  heat.  [Rau,  1.  c.] 

1240.  Burning  skin.  [El.  Camerarxus,  1.  c.] 

Very  great  heat  all  over,  with  delirium.  [ Commerc . lit.  Nor. 

1 73 1 -3 

Burning  heat  externally  and  internally.  [Vicat, 

Inward  burning.  [Carl,1.  c.] 

General  dry  heat  on  the  extreme  ends  of  the  feet  and  hands  with 
adipsia  and  paleness  of  face,  for  twelve  hours. 

1245.  Internal  heat,  burning  in  the  gastric  region.  [Hasenest,  1.  c.] 
Internal  heat ; everything  she  takes  seems  too  cold.  [Kr.] 

Acute  fever,  burning  fever.1  [De  Launay  d’Hermont,  1.  c.] 
Burning  fever  (causus)  (aft.  12  h.).  [De  St.  Martin,  1.  c.] 
Burning  heat  of  the  body  and  greatly  swollen  blood-vessels  of 
the  skin,  with  rage.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

1250.  Along  with  great  heat,  swelling  of  the  external  blood-vessels  ot 
the  body,  with  unquenchable  thirst.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 

Swollen  cutaneous  veins.  [Hbg.] 

The  blood-vessels  of  the  limbs  are  distended,  the  arteries  of  the 
neck  in  particular  beat  so  that  the  lower  jaw,  when  the  mouth  is 
a little  open,  at  every  beat  strikes  against  the  upper  jaw,  and 
thus  a slight  chattering  of  the  teeth  arises,  at  the  same  time  warmth 
and  warm  feeling  all  over  the  body,  but  especially  on  the  head. 
[F.  H—n .] 

In  the  morning  on  waking  a beating  of  the  arteries  in  the  head, 
and  in  all  parts  of  the  body.  [ Kr .] 

At  night,  particularly  towards  morning,  he  is  too  hot  in  bed,  and 
yet  he  dare  not  uncover  himself ; the  uncovered  parts  pain  as  from 
a chill. 

1255.  Great  heat  of  the  body,  more  violent  and  more  frequent  pulsations 


1 This  represents,  in  the  original — “ the  skin  was  dry  and  burning,  and  the  pulse 
small,  wiry,  hard,  and  extremely  frequent.” 


BELLADONNA. 


249 

of  the  arteries,  especially  of  the  temporals,  with  stupid  feeling  of  the 
head,  followed  by  profuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  ii,  2,  p.  319.] 

Daily  after  dinner  great  heat  of  body,  especially  of  the  head,  so 
that  the  face  becomes  occasionally  very  red.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  i,  p. 

665.] 

Daily  about  noon  (for  twelve  days)  sudden  heat  of  head,  and 
redness  of  face,  with  great  dimness  of  vision  and  much  thirst,  for  an 
hour.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  670  (14).] 

Feeling  of  heat,  with  heat  of  the  whole  body,  especi- 
ally in  the  face,  which  was  red  and  perspiring,  with 

confusion  of  head  (aft.  4 h.).  {Hrr.~\ 

(In  the  evening  heat  on  the  hands  and  feet,  but  not  on  the  arms 
and  legs.) 

1260.  Slight  movement  (walking)  causes  heat  of  the  body. 

Redness  and  heat  of  face,  with  great  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
P.  672  (h).] 

Inflammation  of  the  surface  of  the  whole  body.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.] 
Redness  of  the  whole  body.  [Munch,  1.  c.] 

Redness  of  the  whole  body,  with  quick  pulse.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 
1265.  Heat  of  the  whole  body,  with  violet-redness  of  all  the  skin. 
[Wiedemann,  1.  c.] 

Great  swelling  of  the  face,  and  intense  heat,  which  at  times 
extends  over  the  whole  body.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

The  whole  body  is  swollen,  burning  hot,  and  red.  [Sauter, 

1.  C.  (I).] 

Speedy  death,  and  a universal  gangrene  throughout  the  whole 
body,  which  in  a short  time  became  black  throughout,  and  so  flaccid 
that  the  cuticle  adhered  to  the  surgeon’s  hands,  [Mappi,  Plant. 
Alsat .,  p.  361.] 

Sudden  inflammations.  [Mardorf,  1.  c.] 

1270.  Very  transient  inflammations  (phlogoses)  and  tightness  of  the 
chest.  [Greding,  1.  c.,'p.  648.] 

Redness  and  swelling  of  the  affected  part.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 
Prickling,  stinging  sensation  all  over  the  skin,  especially  on  the 
soles  of  the  feet.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 

Creeping  sensations.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  672  (14).] 

Itching  of  the  whole  body  and  eruption  of  red  fleabite  spots  (aft.  4 
h.).  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 

1275.  Chest  and  abdomen  are  covered  with  small,  red,  somewhat 
elevated,  painless  spots,  that  often  disappear  and  then  suddenly  re- 
appear, with  general  redness  of  the  skin.  \Ws^\ 

Acute,  erysipelatous  fever,  accompanied  by  inflamed  swellings, 
even  passing  into  mortification. 

Inflamed  red  and  variously  shaped  patches  on  the  skin  ; scarlet- 
red  spots  over  the  body  (which  itch  ?)  (aft.  16  h.). 

Blood-red  spots  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  face,  neck, 
and  chest.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 

Measly  cutaneous  eruption.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

1280.  Dark  red,  scarlatina-like  spots  all  over  the  body,  with  small, 


1 From  drinking  a large  quantity  of  the  juice  mixed  with  wine. 


250 


BELLADONNA. 


quick  pulse,  tightness  of  chest,  violent  cough,1  raving,  increased 
memory,  rubbing  of  the  nose  and  dilated  pupils.  [ W iedemann,  1.  c.] 

Scarlatina  rash  (the  first  days).  [Struve,2  Triumph  d.  Heilk.,  i, 

p.  64.] 

Eruption  on  the  skin  of  bullae,  which  exude  a quantity  of  limpid 
or  creamy  lymph,  and  therewith  such  intense  pain  that  the  patient, 
though  accustomed  to  suffering,  cannot  refrain  from  lamentations  and 
tears.  [Lambergen,  1.  c.] 

Great  heat  (immediately)  and  then  very  profuse  sweat.  [Greding, 
1.  C.,  ii,  2,  p.  320.] 

Heat  of  the  body  with  sweat  (aft.  2 h.).  [Z«.] 

1285.  Sweat  (after  several  hours).  [Ackermann,  1.  c.] 

He  perspires,  on  slight  movement,  all  over,  chiefly  on  the  face, 
down  the  nose. 

He  feels  very  hot ; he  perspires  all  over,  but  without  thirst. 

He  perspires  freely  all  over  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (in  the 
wind)  and  at  the  same  time  gets  bellyache,  just  as  if  he  had  got  a 
chill. 

Night-sweat,  which  has  a burnt  odour. 

1290.  Profuse  night-sweats,  which  do  not  weaken  him.  [Ackermann, 
1.  c.] 

Night-sweat.  \Hbg.\ 

Morning  sweat.  [Ziegler,  1.  c.] 

Profuse  sweat.  [Evers,  in  Schmuckers  verm . Schriften , i,  p.  185. 
— Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  652.] 

Cold  sweat  on  forehead  (aft.  1 h.).  [Z.  RktP] 


1295.  Every  night  profuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  in  various 

places.] 

Night  sweat  during  sleep,  after  midnight. 

Waking  immediately  after  midnight  in  perspiration  (he  cannot  go 
to  sleep  again)  ; the  sweat  continues  while  he  is  awake  (aft.  54  h.). 

(During  sleep  at  night  no  perspiration,  but  he  perspires  in  his 
day  sleep.) 

Sweat  while  asleep.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

1300.  Sweat  all  over  the  body  during  sleep.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 

Sweat  all  over  from  4 p.m.  to  midnight,  then  sleep  during  the 
sweat.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 

Profuse  sweat  with  diuresis.  [Ziegler,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c., 
pp.  688,  689  (21,  22).] 

Very  profuse,  long-continued  sweat,  which  stains  the  linen  dark. 
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  6 67.] 

Sudden  breaking  out  of  general  sweat,  which  disappears  as  sud- 
denly. [Z.  RktJ] 

1305.  Sweat  as  soon  as  he  covers  himself  with  the  bedclothes,  especially 
on  the  upper  parts.  \_Hbg.~\ 

It  is  only  the  parts  that  are  covered  with  the  bedclothes  that 
perspire,  in  the  evening. 

Quite  early  in  the  morning  (about  2 or  3 a.m.)  after  awaking, 


1 This  was  the  previously  existing  whooping-cough,  increased  in  violence. 

2fcNot  accessible. 


BELLADONNA. 


251 


perspiration  when  the  arms  are  covered,  which  goes  off  when  he 
uncovers  them. 

In  the  morning,  intermitting  sweat,  that  rose  from  the  feet  up 
into  the  face,  where  it  was  particularly  profuse  ; but  immediately 
afterwards  she  got  cool  again.  \Kr.~\ 

During  the  febrile  heat  there  occurs  general  perspiration  when 
the  hands  are  covered  by  the  bedclothes,  but  when  she  uncovers 
them  general  chilliness. 

1310.  Trembling.  [Horst. — DeLaunay  d’Hermont.— ~Eb.  Gmelin, 
1.  c.] 

He  readily  starts,  especially  when  any  one  approaches  him. 
\_L.  Rkt.] 

By  day,  great  anxiety  ; she  cannot  rest  anywhere  ; she  feels  as  if 
she  should  run  away. 

Great  anxiety  about  the  praecordia.  [Wagner,  1.  c.  (1).] 

Very  anxious  and  fearful.  \_MkL] 

1315.  Anxiety  in  the  cardiac  region  (aft.  3 h.).  [Ln. ] 

Anxiety,  during  the  menses.  [Schmucker,  1.  c. — Lambergen, 
l c.] 

Frequent  groaning  (grunting)  especially  in  the  morning,  without 
being  able  to  tell  why,  or  what  pain  makes  him  do  so. 

Grunting  and  groaning  at  each  expiration. 

Grunting  and  groaning  in  sleep. 

1320.  Sighs.1  [Eb.  Gmelin,  1.  c.] 

Groaning  alternating  with  hopping  and  dancing.  [Mardorf, 
].  c.] 

With  a sudden  cry  he  trembles  in  hands  and  feet.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  644*] 

Much  anxiety,  and  an  hour  afterwards  perspiration.  [Henning, 
L c.] 

Events  which  hitherto  he  had  hoped  for  with  pleasure,  now 
appear  to  him  in  an  anxious  light  : they  appear  to  him  frightful  and 
horrible.  [L.  Rkt.] 

1325.  In  the  momentary  intervals,  when  free  from  fury,  complaints  of 
intolerable  anxiety,  so  that  she  wished  to  die.  [Baldinger,  1.  c.] 
About  noon  and  evening,  praecordial  anxiety,  headache,  redness  of 
face  and  bitterness  of  mouth.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  671  (14).] 
Anxiety  and  restlessness.  [Eb.  Gmelin,  1.  c.] 

Restlessness.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 

Great  restlessness,  she  cannot  remain  long  seated  in  one  place ; 
she  is  driven  all  about.  [Kr.] 

1330.  Continual  turning  about  of  the  whole  body,  as  in  chorea. 
[Boucher,  1.  c.] 

Incessant  movement  of  the  body,  especially  of  the  arms,  with 
unaltered  pulse.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 

Great  movement  hither  and  thither  in  bed.  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 
Unconnected  talking  in  the  evening.  [Ackermann,  1.  c.] 
Raving,  delirium.  [Ziegler. — May.— El.  Camerarius. — Med. 
Chirurg . JVahrnehm .,  vii. — Eb.  Gmelin. — Buc’hoz,  1.  c.] 


1 Immediately  before  death. 


25'2 


BELLADONNA. 


1 335*  Continual  delirium.  [Horst,  1.  c.] 

After  eating  the  delirium  is  allayed.  [,P.  H — n.] 

He  makes  preparations  to  go  home.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  688 

(«).]  ... 

He  is  delirious,  and  cries  out  in  his  dreams  that  he  must  go  home, 
because  everything  is  on  fire  there.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  688  (21).] 
Raves  about  wolves  being  in  the  room  ; at  the  same  time  full 
pulse.  [G — ch,  1.  c.] 

1340.  Delirious  talk  about  dogs  surrounding  him.  [Hufeland,  your ., 
xvi.] 

He  is  beside  himself,  raves,  talks  much  about  dogs,  his  arm  and 
face  swell.  [Munch,  1.  c.] 

At  night  he  talks  nonsense,  by  day  he  is  sensible.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  676  (16).] 

Nocturnal  delirium,  which  is  allayed  by  day.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
P.  655.] 

At  one  time  he  is  delirious,  at  another  he  answers  sensibly  and 
bemoans  himself.  [El.  Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

1345.  Delirium  in  recurring  paroxysms.2  [Albrecht,  1.  c.] 

He  murmurs  as  in  sleep.  [Hasenest,  1.  c.] 

She  talks  nonsense  and  extreme  folly.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Foolish  chatter.  [Boucher. — El.  Camerarius  (aft.  6 h.). — 
Buchave,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  650.] 

She  chatters  nonsense  with  great  rapidity.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (1).] 
1350.  Chattering  like  a mad  person,  with  staring,  protruding  eyes. 
[Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Chattering,  lascivious.3  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  663.] 

After  the  chattering  fit  speechlessness.  [Buchave,  1.  c.] 

Gay  mania.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.] 

Sits  unoccupied  behind  the  stove  ; she  tries  to  compose  songs, 
and  sings  aloud  songs  of  a gay,  though  nonsensical  character ; some- 
times she  whistled,  but  would  neither  eat  nor  drink ; at  the  same 
time  she  neither  heard  nor  saw  anything,  with  paleness  of  face  and 
sweat  on  the  forehead.  \_F.  H — n.~\ 

1355.  He  sings  and  trills.  \Med.  Chir.  TVahrnehm.,  vii.] 

Excessively  gay  disposition,  he  is  disposed  to  sing  and  whistle 
(evening)  (aft.  13  h.).  [TVs.] 

Involuntary,  almost  loud  laughter,  without  having  any  laughable 
thoughts.  [L.  Rkt.~\ 

He  smiles  for  a long  time  to  himself.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  650.] 
Frequent  laughter.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  651.] 

1360.  Laughing  and  singing  she  touches  surrounding  objects  all  day. 
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  690  (22).] 

She  bursts  out  in  loud  laughter,  sings,  and  touches  things  near 
her.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  679  (17).] 

Loud  laughter.  [Grimm. — Dumoulin. — Hochstetter,  1.  c. — 
Med.  Chirurg.  IVahrnehm .,  vii.] 

1 See  next  symptom. 

2 Not  found. 

2 See  note  to  S.  175. 


BELLADONNA.  253 

Uncontrollable  loud  laughter.  [Carl,  1.  c.] 

Unrestrainedly  and  exuberantly  merry,  inclined  to  scold  without 
cause,  and  to  insult  in  a laughing  humour. 

1365.  Excessive  gaiety  after  supper,  the  vital  powers  extraordinarily 
increased  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  followed  by  drowsiness.  [MkL~\ 
Ridiculous  grimaces ; she  takes  hold  of  those  about  her,  at  one 
time  she  sits,  at  another  she  acts  as  if  she  were  washing,  at  another 
as  if  counting  money,  at  another  as  if  she  were  drinking.  [Hasenest, 
1.  c.] 

At  one  time  he  displays  laughable  madness,  at  another  he  talks 
sensibly  (aft.  1,  16  h.). 

He  does  foolish,  ridiculous  tricks  (aft.  J,  6,  8 h.). 

Various  gesticulations.  [Hochstetter,  1.  c.] 

1370.  Insanity.  [Hochstetter,  1.  c.] 

Insanity ; they  strip  themselves,  run  about  the  streets  in  their 
shirts,  gesticulate,  dance,  laugh  loudly,  chatter  nonsense,  and  do 
foolish  things.  [Dillenius,  1.  c.] 

He  walks  lifting  his  feet  high,  as  if  he  must  step  over  things  in 
his  path,  like  a drunken  person.  [Sicelius,  1.  c.] 

Violent  shaking  of  the  head.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  653.] 

Great  shaking  of  the  head,  foam  before  the  mouth,  and  lost 
consciousness.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  673  (14).] 

1375.  She  claps  her  hands  above  her  head,  with  a short,  very  violent 
cough  that  threatens  to  suffocate  her,  at  night.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
P.  691  (22).] 

He  claps  his  hands,  wags  his  head  from  side  to  side,  and  viscid 
saliva  hangs  down  in  long  strings  from  his  lips.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
P.  691  (22).] 

She  distorts  her  facial  muscles  in  a horrible  way,  protrudes  her 
tongue  to  its  full  extent,  clacks  with  her  tongue,  and  retches  as 
though  she  would  vpmit,  in  fits.  [Greding^  1.  c.] 

At  one  time  he  grasps  hastily  at  those  near  him,  at  another  he 
shrinks  back  in  affright.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11 ).] 

Weeping.  [Dumoulin,  1.  c.] 

1380.  Very  excited  humour,  she  is  always  disposed  to  weep.  \_Bhr.~\ 

While  walking  in  the  open  air  she  is  overcome  by  lachrymose 
anxiety ; she  is  weary  of  life,  and  wishes  to  go  into  the  water  to 
drown  herself. 

Lachrymose  fearfulness  (aft.  f h.,  aft.  2,  and  within  8 h.). 
At  first  piteous  weeping,  which  then  passes  into  impatient  and 
impassioned  howling  (with  chilliness)  (aft.  1 h.). 

Violent  weeping,  whining,  and  howling  without 
cause,  combined  with  fearfulness  (aft.  2 to  8,  aft.  8 to  12, 
rarely  aft.  12  to  20  h.). 

1 385.  Weeping  and  excessive  crossness  on  awaking  from  sleep. 
Depression,  unhappiness,  [Boucher,  1.  c.] 

He  gets  up  at  night  and  walks  up  and  down  buried  in  thought. 
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  682  (18).] 

Indisposed,  indifferent  to  everything,  defective  activity  of  body 
and  mind.  \Mkl?\ 


254 


BELLADONNA. 


Hourly  alternation  of  weeping  and  cross  humour. 

1390.  Excessive  indifference,  for  hours  ; one  might  take  her  life,  she 
would  not  stir.  [Jifr.] 

Apathy ; nothing  can  make  an  impression  on  her ; after  some 
days  very  sensitive  cross  humour  ; she  has  no  pleasure  in  anything. 
Cheerless,  peevish,  disinclined  for  everything. 

Whining  peevishness  about  trifles,  with  headache  like  pressure 
from  a stone. 

Disinclined  to  speak.  \_Hrr.~\ 

1395.  He  wishes  for  solitude  and  quiet  ; all  noise  and  visits  from 
others  are  repugnant  to  him.  [i/rr.] 

Silent  moroseness  (aft.  8 h.),  two  days  afterwards  ordinary 
humour,  but  the  following  day  again  morose.  [Hrr.~\ 

Very  morose  and  serious.  \_Hbg.~\ 

He  was  cross  about  one  thing  and  another. 

Very  irritable  humour  with  great  dryness  in  the  mouth. 

1400.  Great  irritability  and  acuteness  of  the  senses  ; everything 
tastes  and  smells  stronger ; the  sense  of  touch,  the  sight,  and  the 
hearing  are  more  acute,  and  the  humour  is  more  mobile  and  the 
thoughts  more  active  (aft.  3 h.). 

Peevishness,  nothing  was  right  for  him  ; he  was  angry  with 
himself.  \_Fr.  H — «.] 

Very  excited  ; she  soon  loses  her  temper  and  then  begins  to 
weep.  [Bhr.] 

He  is  easily  excited  to  anger,  even  by  trifles.  [ Hrri] 

They  stammered  out  violent  language.  [Dumoulin,  1.  c.] 

1405.  Delirium  either  in  recurring  paroxysms  or  continued  ; it  was  at 
first  merry,  but  afterwards  changes  into  fury.  [Vicat,  1.  c.] 

Howling  and  crying  out  about  trifles,  which  becomes  worse  when 
spoken  to  kindly,  with  pupils  that  easily  dilate  and  very  readily 
contract. 

Violent  inclination  to  quarrel,  which  cannot  be  soothed. 

Delirium  with  wildness.  [Hoyer,  1.  c.] 

Fury.  [Valentini. — Wierus. — Schreck,  1.  c.] 

1410.  Fury;  the  boy  does  not  know  his  parents.*  [Solenander,1  in 
Abhand.  der  Konigl . Acad.  d.  TVissench .,  Breslau,  175°?  P-  364.] 

She  tosses  wildly  about  in  bed  (aft.  10  h.).  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (1).] 
She  tears  her  night-dress  and  bedclothes.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (1).] 

He  strikes  his  face  with  his  fists.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  664.] 
Maniacal  fury  with  violence. 

1415.  Fury,  with  gnashing  of  the  teeth  and  convulsions.  [May,  1.  c,] 
In  place  of  eating  what  he  desired  he  bit  the  wooden  spoon  to 
pieces,  gnawed  the  dishes,  and  growled  and  barked  like  a dog. 
[Munch,  in  Richter’s  Biblioth .,  v,  p.  564.] 

Madness,  in  which  the  patient  was  often  very  merry,  sang  and 
cried  out,  then  again  spat  and  bit.  [Elfes,  1.  c.] 

* From  a single  berry. 


1 Same  case  as  that  of  Wierus.  The  symptom  is  made  up  of  SS.  1409  and  42. 


BELLADONNA. 


255 


She  does  nonsensical  things,  tears  her  clothes  to  rags,  picks  up 
stones  from  the  ground  and  pelts  those  around  her  with  them  (aft.  2 

h. ).  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (1).] 

Fury  ; he  injures  himself  and  others  and  strikes  about  him. 
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  664.] 

1420.  He  tries  to  bite  those  about  him  at  night.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  682(18).] 

Fury  ; she  clutches  those  about  her  by  the  hair.  [Mardorf, 

i.  c.] 

Along  with  burning  heat  of  the  body,  with  open,  staring,  and 
fixed  eyes,  such  fury  that  she  must  constantly  be  held  fast  in  order 
to  prevent  her  attacking  others,  and  when  thus  held  so  that  she 
could  not  move  she  spat  constantly  at  those  about  her.  [Baldinger, 
J.C.] 

After  sleep  excessive  moroseness ; he  bites  those  about  him. 
[Buchave,  1.  c.] 

He  bites  at  everything  near  him.  [Munch,  1.  c.] 

1425.  Inclination  to  bite  those  about  him.  [Dumoulin,  1.  c.] 

Inclination  to  tear  everything  about  her  to  pieces.  [Dumoulin, 

1-  c.] 

He  tears  to  pieces  everything  about  him,  bites,  and  spits. 
[Sauter,  1.  c.  ('ll).] 

Throws  off*  the  bedclothes  in  his  madness.  [Eb.  Gmelin,  1.  c.] 
Tries  to  jump  out  of  bed.  [Eb.  Gmelin,  1.  c.] 

1430.  So  anxious  and  distracted  that  she  apprehends  the  approach  of 
death.1  [Timmermann,  Diss.  Periculum  Belladonna.'] 

He  fears  death  is  nigh.  [Eb.  Gmelin,  1.  c.] 

Fearful  mistrust. 

Fearful  madness ; he  is  afraid  of  an  imaginary  black 
dog,  of  the  gallows,  &c.  (more  frequently  in  the  first  12  hours, 
more  rarely  in  the  following  hours). 

Madness ; he  thinks  that  his  living  body  is  putrifying. 

1435.  He  tries  to  run  away.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (11).] 

He  makes  an  excuse  and  runs  out  into  the  open  fields.  [Munch, 

>•  c.] 

She  tries  to  strangle  herself,  and  begs  those  about  her  to  kill  her, 
for  this  time  she  must  die.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  690  (22).] 

She  begs  those  around  her  to  kill  her.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  692 
(22).] 

Throws  herself  down  from  a height  (in  delirium).  [Buch’oz, 
1.  c.] 

1440.  Throws  herself  into  the  water.  [Sauter,  1.  c.  (1).] 


1 This  symptom  cannot  be  found  in  Timmermann’s  treatise. 


BISMUTHUM.1 

( Bismuth , Wismuth.) 

(This  brittle,  easily  melted,  reddish-white  metal  is  dissolved  in  a sufficient  quantity 
of  nitric  acid  to  saturation,  the  perfectly  limpid  solution  is  dropped  into  a considerable 
quantity  of  pure  water — from  50  to  100  parts — and  well  stirred  ; the  precipitated  white 
sediment  (oxyde  of  bismuth),  after  standing  a couple  of  hours,  is  freed  from  the 
superincumbent  fluid  by  carefully  decanting ; then,  again,  as  much  pure  water  mixed 
with  a few  drops  of  potash  is  poured  on  it,  and  the  sediment  well  stirred  through  it. 
The  precipitate,  after  standing  for  some  hours,  is  freed  from  the  superincumbent  water 
by  decanting,  and  the  sediment  is  completely  dried  on  blotting-paper,  on  which  other 
blotting-paper  is  laid,  and  weights  laid  on  it,  until  all  moisture  is  removed.  When 
perfectly  dried  this  is  the  oxyde  of  bismuth,  one  grain  of  which  is  triturated  for  an 
hour  with  a hundred  grains  of  milk-sugar  in  a porcelain  mortar,  what  adheres  to  the 
bottom  of  the  mortar  being  frequently  scraped  up  with  a bone  spatula.  Of  this 
hundredfold  powder-attenuation  one  grain  is  again  triturated  with  a hundred  grains  of 
milk-sugar  in  the  same  manner  for  an  hour,  so  that  To^QQth  of  a grain  of  oxyde  of 
bismuth  is  contained  in  each  grain  of  this  powder  5 a very  small  portion  of  a grain  of 
this  is  the  dose  employed  for  homoeopathic  use.) 

The  few  symptoms  recorded  below  of  the  pure  effects  of  bismuth  on 
the  healthy  human  body,  which  I should  like  to  see  increased,  will  teach 
us  useful  homoeopathic  employment  of  it  in  important  morbid  states. 
Among  others  they — e.  g.  Symp.  32  and  53 — show  how  the  com- 
mendations of  oxyde  of  bismuth  in  a kind  of  stomach-ache  and 
gastralgia,  by  Odier,  Carminati,  Bonnat,  and  others,  are  solely 
based  on  homoeopathy,  though  this  was  unknown  to  them,  and  also 
that  the  power  of  oxyde  of  bismuth  in  palpitation,  warranted  by  Odier, 
rests  only  on  the  peculiar  property  possessed  by  this  drug,  of  exciting 
strong  and  peculiar  palpitation  of  the  heart  in  the  healthy  (see  Symp.  56)  \ 
not  to  mention  other  indications  for  its  use. 

But  as  these  qualities  of  our  oxyde  of  bismuth  are  purely  homoeo- 
pathic, we  see,  at  the  same  time,  how  improperly  these  and  other 
physicians  acted  in  administering  in  such  cases  such  large  doses  of  it — - 
I,  2,  6,  up  to  12  grains  for  a dose,  two,  three,  and  four  times  a day — 
thus,  in  their  ignorance,  running  the  risk  of  injuring  their  patients. 

As  has  been  said,  and  the  most  careful  observations  prove  it,  where 
bismuth  is  indicated  in  similar  and  other  cases,  a single  dose  of  the 
smallest  possible  part  of  a ten-thousandfold  attenuation  prepared  in  the 
manner  described  above  fulfils  the  object  perfectly. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  F.  Hartmann,  C.  T.  Herrmann, 
C.  F.  Lanchammer. 

No  symptoms  are  derived  from  old-school  sources. 

The  1 st  edit,  had  only  7 fewer  symptoms  than  are  in  this  2nd  edit.] 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827. 


BISMUTHUM. 


257 


BISMUTHUM. 

In  the  morning,  long  continued  dizziness. 

Vertigo  ; sensation  as  if  the  brain  whirled  round  in  a circle 
(aft.  1 h.).  [Hrr.'] 

Vertigo : sensation  as  if  the  front  half  of  the  brain 
whirled  round  in  a circle,  several  times  a day,  for  several 
minutes  at  a time.  [ Hrr .] 

Confusion  of  the  head.  [Hrr.] 

5.  The  head  is  extremely  heavy  (aft.  1 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Violent  aching  heavy  pain  in  the  forehead,  especially  above  the 
root  of  the  nose  and  in  both  temples,  when  sitting  (aft.  3J  h.). 
[Htn.] 

Pressure  and  feeling  of  weight  in  the  forehead,  more 
severe  when  moving.  [Hrr.] 

Pressure  and  feeling  of  weight  in  the  occiput,  more 
severe  when  moving.  [Hrr.] 

Hard  pressure  from  within  in  both  temples,  unaffected  by  move- 
ment or  touching  (aft.  h.).  [Hrr.] 

10.  Dull,  aching  drawing  in  the  head,  here  and  there, 

worse  on  moving.  [Hrr.] 

Dull  aching  drawing  in  the  head,  here  and  there,  [Hrr.] 

Obtuse  cutting  pain  in  the  brain,  which  commences 
over  the  right  orbit  and  extends  to  the  occiput  (aft.  3 d.). 

[Hrr.] 

Boring  pain  outwards,  now  in  the  right,  now  in  the  left,  frontal 
protuberance,  sometimes  in  both  at  once  (aft.  9 h.).  [Htn^]. 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  temple  internally,  but  more  exter- 
nally, increased  by  pressing  on  it.  [Hrr.] 

15.  Twitching  tearing  pain  in  all  the  left  occipital  bone,  more  violent 
close  to  the  parietal  bone  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Htn.] 

A burning,  contractive  pain  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  fore- 
head and  eyes. 

A constant  digging  and  boring,  as  with  a blunt  instrument,  in  the 
forehead,  eyes,  and  nose  down  to  its  tip — an  alternate  contraction 
and  expansion. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  forehead,  over  the  right  internal  canthus  of 
the  eye  and  posteriorly  in  the  orbit  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Pressure  on  the  right  eyeball  from  before  backwards 
and  from  below  upwards  (aft.  10  h.).  [Hrr.] 

20.  Mucus  in  both  canthi  (aft.  8J,  10  h.).  [Lr.] 

Earthy  complexion,  blue  borders  round  the  eyes  ; the  features 
are  quite  disfigured,  as  if  he  had  been  very  ill.  [Hrr.] 

Drawing  pressure  in  the  external  meatus  auditorius  of  the  left 
ear  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  external  cartilage  of  the  ear,  which 
went  off  by  pressing  on  it  (aft.  4 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Pressure  on  the  right  zygomatic  arch  regularly  recurring  at  short 
intervals,  unaffected  by  touch.  [Hrr.] 


7 


258 


BISMUTHUM. 


25.  Gums  swollen,  with  sore  pain — the  whole  of  the  interior  of  the 
mouth  is  painful  as  if  excoriated. 

A drawing  aching  in  the  molar  teeth,  from  the  back  to  the  front 
ones,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  cheeks. 

In  the  evening  tongue  furred  white,  without  heat  or 
thirst  (aft.  7,  12  h.).  [Lr.] 

In  the  morning,  taste  of  blood  ; the  mucus  hawked  up  is  tinged 
with  blood. 


Metallic  sweetish  sour  taste  on  the  back  part  of  the  tongue.  [ Hrr.] 

30.  In  the  evening  great  thirst  for  cold  drinks,  without 
heat  (aft.  6,  12  h.).  [Lr.] 

Nausea  in  the  stomach,  he  feels  as  though  he  would 
vomit— especially  severe  after  a meal.  [Hrr.] 

Pressure  in  the  stomach,  felt  particularly  after  a 
meal.  [ Hrr .] 

Loud  rumbling  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  when  standing 
(aft.  2 h.).  [ Lr .] 

Rumbling  in  the  hypogastrium,  without  sensation. 

[Hrr.] 

35.  Painless  rattling  in  the  hypogastrium.  [Hrr.] 

Frequent  discharge  of  flatus.  [Hrr.] 

Discomfort  in  the  hypogastrium  with  pressure  here  and  there 
(aft.  8 h.).  [ Hrr.] 

Pinching  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  here  and  there 

(aft.  7 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Pinching  pressure  here  and  there  in  the  hypogastrium 
with  rumbling  and  rattling.  [Hrr.] 

40.  Pinching  pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,  and  rumbling 
with  urging  to  stool— sensation  as  if  he  must  go  to 
stool.  [Hrr.] 

In  the  evening  straining  at  stool,  without  being  able  to  pass  any- 
thing (aft.  13  h.).  [Lr.] 

He  must  frequently  pass  urine,  and  every  time  in 
large  quantity;  the  urine  is  watery  (aft.  12  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  right  testicle,  worse  when  touched  (aft.  2 
h.).  [Hrr.] 

At  night  emission  of  semen  without  voluptuous  dreams.  [Lr.] 


45*  Oppression  of  the  chest. 

A hot  burning  contraction  of  the  chest,  so  that  he  can  with 
difficulty  breathe  and  speak. 

Cough  which  disturbs  him  at  night  in  his  sleep,  with  much  ex- 
pectoration— also  as  much  coughing  by  day. 

Pain  in  chest  and  back,  a boring  and  burning. 

Fine  shooting  in  the  sternum,  in  its  middle,  not 
affected  by  inspiration  or  expiration  (aft.  8 h.).  [Htn.] 

50.  Tearing  around  and  near  the  left  nipple  (aft.  2 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Pressive  pain,  sometimes  greater,  sometimes  less,  in  the  right 
side  of  the  chest,  near  the  sternum,  on  a small  spot,  unaffected  by 
inspiration  or  expiration  (aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.] 


BISMUTH  UM.  259 

Hard  pressure  near  the  left  nipple  inwards  towards  the  sternum. 
[ Hrr.\ 

Squeezing  pressive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  diaphragm,  trans- 
versely through  the  chest,  when  walking  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.] 

Fine  tearing  stitches  in  the  region  of  both  nipples  (as  if  super- 
ficially in  the  lungs  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  pectoral  muscles), 
sometimes  more  severe  on  inspiring  and  expiring,  [Hrr.] 

55.  (Pinching  stitches  in  the  region  of  both  nipples,  unaffected  by 
inspiration  and  expiration).  [Hrr.] 

Strong  beating  of  the  heart.  [Hrr.] 

Obtuse  shooting  tearing  in  the  region  of  the  last  rib.  [Hrr.] 
Intermittent  stitches  on  the  last  false  ribs  of  the  left  side,  where 
they  are  attached  to  the  spinal  vertebrae,  [Hrr.] 

When  sitting,  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  back,  as  from  prolonged 
stooping  (aft.  8 h.).  [Lr.] 

60.  Sharp  pressure  on  the  upper  border  of  the  right  scapula  and  the 
clavicle,  [Hrr.] 

Tensive  pressure  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  near  the  cervical 
vertebrae,  when  moving  and  when  at  rest  (aft.  3 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Sensation  of  muscular  twitchings  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck. 
[Hrr.] 

Aching  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder-joint.  [Hrr.] 

In  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm,  a contractive 
spasmodic  pain,  during  complete  corporeal  rest  (aft.  24  h.).  \_Lr. ] 

65.  A (spasmodic)  contractive  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right 
arm  (aft.  14  h.).  [Lr.] 

Paralytic  pressure  on  the  front  of  the  right  upper  arm.  [Hrr.] 
Hard  pressure  on  the  left  forearm,  more  towards  the  inferior  and 
outer  part.  [Hrr.] 

Paralytic  tearing  pressure  on  the  right  forearm, 
towards  the  outside,  sometimes  more  above,  sometimes 
more  below,  which  went  off  on  moving  and  touching.  [Hrr.] 
Paralytic  weariness  and  weakness  in  the  right  arm. 
[Hrr.] 

70.  Cutting  tearing  in  the  inferior  muscles  of  the  right  forearm  (aft. 
12  h.).  [Htn.] 

A vibrating  pain  in  both  bones  of  the  left  forearm,  as  if  bruised 
(aft.  13  h.).  [Htn.] 

Paralytic  tearing  pressure  on  the  right  forearm, 
particularly  severe  in  the  bones  of  the  wrist  (aft.  1 h.). 
[Hrr.] 

Tearing  in  the  right  wrist  bones,  which  went  off  by  movement. 
[Hrr.] 

Trembling  of  the  hands,  observed  when  eating. 

75.  Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  hand,  as  if  he  could  not  hold  the 
pen,  and  trembled  (aft.  8 h.).  [Htn.] 

Acute  tearing  pain  about  the  right  external  protuberance  of  the 
wrist  extending  into  the  muscles  of  the  hand,  worst  in  the  protube- 
rance itself  (aft.  1 1 h.).  [Htn.] 


26o 


BISMUTHUM. 


Violent  tearing  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  left  wrist  (aft.  h.). 
[Htn.] 

Tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  right  fore  and 
middle  fingers  (aft.  n h.).  [Hrr.\ 

Itching  tearing  pressure  on  the  inner  protuberance  of  both  wrists, 
which  induces  scratching.  [Hrr.] 

80.  Fine  tearing  in  the  proximal  joints  of  the  little  finger.  [Hrr.] 
Aching  tearing  in  the  tips  of  the  ring  and  little  fingers  of  the 
right  hand.  [Hrr.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  finger  tips  of  the  right  hand,  es- 
pecially under  the  nails  (aft.  3 d.).  [ Hrr .] 

Intermittent  fine  tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  left  thumb  (aft.  2 h.). 
[Hrr.] 

Intermittent  hard  pressure  above  the  left  knee-joint,  on  the  lower 
part  of  the  thigh,  towards  the  outside,  unaltered  by  touching  or 
moving.  [Hrr.] 

85.  Drawing  from  the  middle  of  the  calf  and  the  front  of  the  left  leg, 
extending  down  into  the  foot.  [Z/n\] 

Itching  erosion  near  the  tibiae  and  on  the  dorsum  of 
both  feet,  near  the  ankle-joint,  which  becomes  worse  by 
scratching  ; he  must  scratch  till  the  blood  comes.  [Hrr.] 
Drawing  on  the  right  outer  ankle,  that  went  off  on  moving. 
[Hrr.] 

Tearing  pain  under  the  right  outer  ankle,  which 
always  ended  behind  on  the  tendo  Achillis  (aft.  9 h.). 
[Hrr.] 

Aching  tearing  between  the  two  last  metatarsal  bones  of  the  left 
foot  close  to  the  toes,  whilst  sitting  (aft.  10  h.).  [Htn.] 

90.  Fine  tearing  in  the  left  heel.  [Hrr.] 

Tearing  pain  on  the  right  heel,  near  and  on  the  tendo  Achillis 
(aft.  5 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Aching  tearing  in  the  point  of  the  right  big  toe.  [Hrr.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  proximal  phalanges  of  the  left  toes.  [Hrr.] 

Exhaustion  and  relaxation.  [Hrr.] 

95.  Whilst  working  a great  desire  to  sleep  overcomes  him  ; he  reads, 
but  knows  not  what ; he  must  lie  down,  when  he  immediately  fell 
asleep  and  had  confused  dreams,  in  the  forenoon.  [Hrr.] 

In  the  morning,  some  hours  after  getting  up,  extreme 
drowsiness ; but  after  dinner,  when  in  his  healthy  days 
he  sometimes  had  a nap,  he  could  not  fall  asleep,  for 
several  days.  [Hrr.] 

In  the  evening,  during  slumber,  violent  starting,  as  if  he  were 
falling  (aft.  14J  h.).  [Lr.] 

At  night,  frequent  waking  up  out  of  sleep,  as  from 
fright.  [Lr.] 

At  night,  vivid  anxious  dreams.  [Lr.] 

100.  At  night,  sleep  disturbed  by  voluptuous  dreams, 
without,  but  oftener  with,  seminal  emissions.  [Lr.] 

He  lies  on  his  back  at  night.  [Lr.] 

At  night  frequent  waking  with  weariness.  [Lr. J 


BISMUTHUM. 


261 


Flying  heat  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  head  and  chest, 
without  chilliness  either  before  or  afterwards,  in  the  morning  soon 
after  rising  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Restless  crossness  ; everything  is  repugnant  to  him.  At  one 
time  he  sits,  at  another  he  lies,  sometimes  he  walks  about,  but 
remains  only  a very  short  time  in  one  position,  because  it  imme- 
diately becomes  disagreeable  to  him.  [Hrr.] 

105.  Ill-humour  all  day;  he  was  very  quiet  and  would  not  speak;  in 
the  evening  more  cheerful.  [Lr. ] 

He  is  sullen  and  discontented  with  his  condition  and 
complains  about  it  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hrr.] 

He  commences  first  one  thing  then  another,  hut  only 
remains  for  a short  time  at  one  thing.  [Hrr.] 

Solitude  is  intolerable  to  him.  [Hrr.] 


BRYONIA  ALBA.1 

( White  Briony.') 

(The  juice  expressed  from  the  fresh  root  dug  up  before  the  flowering  time,  is 
mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol,  and,  for  homoeopathic  use,  is  diluted  and  poten- 
tized  as  directed  in  the  introduction  to  pulsatilla,  up  to  the  thirtieth  potency.) 

The  duration  of  the  action  of  a somewhat  large  dose  of  this  vegetable 
juice  can  be  perceived  for  a couple  of  weeks. 

The  similarity  of  its  effects  to  many  of  the  symptoms  of  rhus  toxico- 
dendron cannot  fail  to  be  noticed  ; in  the  preface  to  the  latter  medicine 
I have  sufficiently  dwelt  upon  this.  At  the  same  time  bryonia  affects 
the  disposition  quite  differently,  its  fever  consists  chiefly  of  chilliness, 
and  its  symptoms  are  mostly  excited  or  aggravated  by  corporeal  exertion, 
although  its  alternating  effects,  when  the  symptoms  are  relieved  by 
movement,  are  not  very  rare. 

Hence,  when  using  bryonia  in  diseases,  there  occur  cases  where  the 
remedy,  although  chosen  as  homoeopathically  as  possible  and  given  in 
sufficiently  small  dose,  does  not  render  adequate  service  in  the  first 
twenty-four  hours.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  only  one,  and  that  the 
wrong  series,  of  its  alternating  actions  corresponded.  In  such  cases  a 
fresh  dose  administered  after  twenty-four  hours  effects  amelioration  by 
the  production  of  the  opposite  alternating  actions.  (The  same  happens 
with  respect  to  all  drugs,  a second  dose  given  immediately  and  quickly 
after  the  first  one  partially  destroys  the  action  of  the  first  dose.)  This 
happens  with  only  very  few  other  medicines  having  alternating  actions 
[vide  the  preface  to  ignatia),  but  it  occurs  not  rarely  with  bryonia. 

When  it  has  been  really  wrongly  selected  and  was  not  truly  homoeo- 
pathic, the  bad  effects  are  generally  removable  by  rhus,  or,  according 
to  circumstances,  by  some  other  medicine  corresponding  more  exactly 
to  the  bad  effects  produced,  such  as  camphor. 

From  the  rich  treasury  of  symptoms  it  causes  in  the  healthy  human 
body,  a number  of  artificial  morbid  states  may  be  put  together,  of  which 
we  may  happily  avail  ourselves  for  the  homoeopathic  relief  of  many 
ailments  of  daily  occurrence,  especially  certain  fevers,  and  some  kinds 
of  the  so-called  abdominal  spasms  of  the  female  sex.  Hence  its  remedial 
powers  are  of  great  extent. 

In  severe  acute  diseases,  with  great  excitement,  the  most  serviceable 
dose  is  a very  high  attenuation,  one  higher  than  I have  previously 
used,  to  wit,  a very  small  globule  of  the  decillionfold  potency.  The 
more  or  less  strong  olfaction  of  a globule  the  size  of  a mustard  seed 
moistened  with  this  attenuation  acts  more  gently  and  certainly,  and  is 


1 From  vol.  ii,  3rd  edit.,  1833. 


BRYONIA. 


263 


equally  efficacious  in  its  effects  upon  the  vital  force— so  amenable  to 
accurately  selected  homoeopathic  remedies — which  has  been  appointed 
by  the  wise  Creator  for  bringing  about  the  cure. 

[The  following  assisted  Hahnemann  in  his  proving  of  bryonia  : — Fried.  Hahne- 
mann, Herrmann,  Hornburg,  Michler,  E.  F.  Ruckert,  Stapf. 

The  only  reference  to  another  authority  is  in  Symptom  682  where  the  name 
Nicolai  appears,  but  without  any  reference  to  enable  us  to  identify  him. 

The  1st  edit,  gives  510  symptoms,  the  2nd  and  3rd  781.] 


BRYONIA. 

Vertigo. 

Vertigo,  as  if  he  were  whirled  round,  or  as  if  everything  whirled 
round  him,  when  standing. 

In  the  head  a dull,  giddy  confusion.  \_Mch.~] 

A kind  of  vertigo  as  if  he  were  intoxicated,  and  as  if  the  blood 
rushed  violently  towards  his  head.  \_Hrr. ] 

5.  He  feels  as  if  intoxicated,  he  is  disposed  to  lie  down.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

Vertigo  as  soon  as  he  rose  from  his  seat ; all  turned  round  about 
him  ; after  walking  for  some  time  this  went  off. 

Vertigo  as  if  from  intoxication,  all  day  (aft.  8 d.). 

Staggering  in  the  morning.  [Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Vertigo,  with  feeling  of  heaviness,  he  felt  as  if  all  whirled  round 
him  in  a circle.  [Hrr.~\ 

10.  Vertigo  and  fullness  in  the  head.  [Hbg.~\ 

Giddy,  as  if  whirling,  when  she  sits  up  in  bed,  and  nausea  in  the 
centre  of  the  chest,  as  if  about  to  faint. 

In  the  evening  (at  8 p.m.)  such  vertigo  when  standing  that  he 
staggered  backwards,- and  would  have  fallen  backwards. 

When  he  attempts  to  walk  he  staggers  as  if  he  would  fall  back- 
wards. 

When  walking  staggering  to  either  side,  as  if  he  could  not  stand 
firmly  (aft.  48  h.). 

15.  After  moving,  when  standing,  she  sways  to  one  side. 

In  the  morning,  on  rising  from  bed,  so  giddy  and  whirling,  as 
if  all  went  round  in  a circle  in  his  head. 

All  day  long  giddy  in  the  head  and  weak  in  the  limbs. 

He  can  hardly  turn  his  head  on  account  of  a feeling  of  fulness  in 
it.  [Hbg.] 

In  the  region  of  the  crown  and  forehead  dull  movements  in  the 
head,  which  cause  vertigo  and  cessation  of  thought.  [Mch.~] 

20.  Rather  dizziness  in  the  head  than  vertigo. 

So  weak  in  mind  that  his  thoughts  leave  him,  as  if  he  were  about 
to  faint,  at  the  same  time  heat  of  face,  chiefly  when  standing. 

Illusion  of  the  mind  ; her  own  head  seems  to  her  much  too 
heavy.  \_Fr.  H—n.~\ 

Stupid  in  the  head,  with  striking  forgetfulness.  \_Fr.  H — n. ] 

She  did  not  rightly  know  what  she  was  doing  (in  the  room),  worse 
when  lying,  for  twenty-four  hours  (immediately).  [Fr.  H — «.] 


264 


BRYONIA. 


25.  She  did  not  know  what  she  was  doing,  and  let  everything  fall 
out  of  her  hands  (in  the  room).  [ Fr . H — «.] 

The  head  is  stupid,  thinking  difficult.  \_Hrr.~] 

He  wishes  for  things  that  are  not  present. 

He  wishes  for  things  immediately,  and  then  will  not  have  them. 

Want  of  memory,  forgetfulness  (aft.  4 h.). 

30.  His  head  felt  very  heavy. 

Excessive  heaviness  of  the  head  (frequently,  and  aft.  4 d.). 

IHrr.-} 

Great  heaviness  of  the  head  and  pressure  of  the  whole  brain 
forwards. 

Stupefaction  of  the  head. 

Head  feels  empty  (aft.  1 h.).  [i/rr.] 

35.  Dulness  in  the  head  until  he  goes  to  sleep. 

In  the  morning  the  headache  commences  not  on  awaking,  but  on 
first  opening  and  moving  the  eyes. 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  the  head  is  dull  and  painful,  as  if  he 
had  been  drinking  and  dissipating  the  previous  evening  ; he  is  unwil- 
ling to  get  out  of  bed. 

(On  treading  a pressure  in  the  head.) 

In  the  occiput  obtuse  pain.  \_Hbg.~\ 

40.  Dull  aching  in  the  occiput.  \_Rkt.~\ 

Throbbing  headache  in  the  forehead,  so  that  he  must  lie  down. 

[Fr.  //—».] 

Digging  pressure  in  the  front  part  of  the  brain,  with 
pressing  towards  the  forehead,  especially  violent  when 
stooping  or  walking  quickly;  a walk  tires  him  very 
much  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hrr] 

A pain  in  the  forehead,  aching  so  much  that  he  can  hardly  stoop, 

Pressure  from  within  outwards  above  the  left  orbit,  in  the  brain, 
which  passed  into  a pressure  from  above  inwards  in  the  eyeball  (aft. 
3 d-)-  IHrr.} 

45.  Aching  pain  in  the  head,  mainly  on  one  side,  together  with 
tiresome  aching  feeling  in  the  eye  of  that  side  (after  noon).  \_Rkt.~\ 

An  obscure  compression  in  the  head,  in  the  forehead  above  the 
eyes. 

First  the  blood  mounted  to  the  head,  then  ensued  a compression 
from  both  temples. 

Sensation  as  if  the  head  were  compressed  from  both  ears. 

Compressive  pain  at  both  sides  of  the  head.  \_Hbg.~] 

50.  Headache  : a compression  with  jerks  in  the  brain,  like  beating  of 
the  pulse. 

In  the  morning,  before  day-break,  pain  as  if  the  head  were  bound 
round,  with  weight  in  it,  mingled  with  stitches ; on  account  of  pain 
she  could  not  raise  her  eyes,  and  when  she  stooped  she  could  not  rise 
up  again  (aft.  60  h.). 

Violent  headache,  like  great  heaviness  in  it,  as  if  it  inclined  to  all 
sides;  with  pressure  in  the  brain  outwards,  and  great  desire  to  lie 
down  (immediately). 


BRYONIA.  265 

Headache,  after  a meal,  and  when  walking  an  outward  pressure 
in  the  forehead. 

Headache  as  if  all  would  come  out  at  the  forehead.* 

55.  Headache  when  stooping  as  if  all  would  fall  out  at 
the  forehead.t 

When  sitting  (stooping)  and  reading,  giddy  heaviness  in  the  head, 
which  is  allayed  by  raising  up  the  head. 

Headache  only  when  stooping,  a pressing  out  at  the  forehead, 
mingled  with  stitches. 

In  the  head  an  aching  as  if  the  brain  were  full  and  pressed 
asunder,  chiefly  when  sitting. 

An  out-pressing  pain  in  both  temples. 

60.  Headache  as  if  something  pressed  the  skull  asunder. 

In  the  morning,  in  bed  after  awaking,  when  lying  on  the  back, 
headache  in  the  occiput,  which  extends  to  the  shoulders,  like  a weight 
which  presses  on  a sore  place. 

Semilateral  headache  : a (digging)  pressure  on  a small  spot  of  the 
right  half  of  the  brain,  as  from  a kind  of  digging  or  tearing  along  the 
bones  of  the  upper  and  lower  maxillae,  stands  in  connexion  with  a pain- 
ful submaxillary  gland  (aft.  30  h.). 

Headache  : in  the  morning  after  rising  a twitching  drawing  in 
the  bones  of  the  cheeks  and  jaws. 

Twitching  tearing  from  the  right  malar  bone  up  to 
the  right  temple  externally,  more  violent  when  touched. 
\_Hrr.~\ 

65.  Tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  head  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Fr . H — n.] 
(Tearing  pain  over  the  forehead,  then  tearing  in  the  cervical 
muscles,  then  tearing  in  the  right  arm.) 

While  walking  in  the  open  air  a stitch  in  the  head  through  the 
temple. 

Anteriorly  in  the ' forehead  single  stitches,  with  dulness  of  the 
head.  [Hbg.] 

Shooting  in  the  head  from  the  forehead  to  the  occiput. 

70.  A whirling  sensation  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  and  a stitch 
in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead. 

More  twitching  than  throbbing  pain  in  the  head,  with  hot  face. 

In  the  right  side  of  the  head  a throbbing,  which  can  also  be  felt 
externally  by  the  hand. 

In  the  morning,  on  waking,  headache  on  the  crown,  a painful 
throbbing. 

In  the  forehead  and  occiput  pain,  a hollow  throbbing  (aft.  2 h.). 

7 5.  A throbbing  headache,  which  includes  the  eyes,  so  that  she  cannot 
see  well ; on  moving  the  beating  in  the  head  is  quicker,  she  imagines 
she  hears  it. 

In  the  head  a chirping  as  from  grasshoppers. 

* Comp.  395. 

f The  sensation  ot  asunder-pressing  corresponds  almost  completely  with  that  of 
compression  46,  47,  48,  50,  51,  as  it  is  felt  by  the  brain  enclosed  in  the  unyielding  skull  ; 
the  organic  sense  cannot  then  distinguish  whether  the  pain  is  owing  to  the  great 
distension  or  from  the  resistance  of  the  skull,  and  yet  both  are  to  blame  for  it. 


266 


BRYONIA, 


pulled  him  by  the  hair 


A clucking  in  both  temples. 

Pain  on  the  temple,  as  if  someone 
there. 

On  the  top  of  the  head  a spot,  the  size  of  half-a-crown,  with 
burning  pain,  which  is  not  painful  when  touched. 

80.  The  head  is  especially  painful  when  touched,  chiefly  on  the 
sinciput,  for  twenty-four  hours.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Sore  feeling  on  one  side  of  the  occiput  when  touched.  [ Hbg .] 

A smarting  erosion  on  the  occiput  (at  night). 

In  the  morning  great  greasiness  of  the  hair  of  the  head,  the  head 
itself  is  cool ; the  hands  became  quite  greasy  on  combing  the  hair 
(aft.  10  h.). 

On  combing  out  the  hair  great  itching  on  the  head. 

85.  (A  painful  throbbing  in  all  parts  of  the  face,  which  is  also-  felt 
under  the  fingers  when  touched.) 

Itching  needle-pricks  in  the  right  frontal  muscle.  [Hrr.] 

A tension  in  the  frontal  muscles  beneath  the  skin,  on  moving  the 
eyes. 

Heat  in  head  and  face,  with  redness.  [Hbg.] 

Great  heat  in  head  and  face.  [Hbg.] 

90.  Flying  heat  over  the  face.  \_Hbg. ] 

A tension  in  the  skin  of  the  face,  on  moving  the  facial  muscles. 
Red  spot  in  the  face  and  on  the  neck  (for  two  days). 

Paleness  of  the  face  for  twenty-four  hours.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Red,  hot,  soft  swelling  of  the  face.  [ Fr . H — n.] 

95.  Swelling  of  the  left  side  of  the  face,  more  down  along  the  nose, 
with  some  pain  in  it  (during  the  diarrhoea).  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Great  swelling  of  the  upper  half  of  the  face,  especially  a great 
swelling  under  the  eyes  and  over  the  root  of  the  nose,  with  swelling 
of  the  eyelids  ; he  could  not  open  the  left  eye  for  four  days  (aft.  3 d.). 
[Fr.  H—n .] 

Contractive  pain  in  the  right  palpebral  muscle.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Redness  and  swelling  of  the  eyelids,  with  aching  in  them,  for 
three  days  (aft.  3 d.).  [. Fr . H — n.] 

In  the  left  lower  eyelid  a pimple  the  size  of  a pea,  painful  when 
touched,  for  sixteen  days  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

100.  Soft  boil  at  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye  ; from  time  to  time 
much  pus  escapes  from  it,  for  ten  days  (aft.  6 d.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

In  the  morning  on  waking  he  can  scarcely  open  the  eyes,  they 
are  stuck  together  by  a purulent  mass.  [Hrr.] 

Pain  as  from  a burn  above  the  left  eye  and  on  the  left  side  of  the 
nose,  which  is  somewhat  allayed  by  pressing  on  it.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Pain  like  burning  out  at  the  left  eye  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 
Aching  in  the  eyes,  with  burning  itching  sensation  in  the  eye- 
lids. [Hbg.] 

105.  Aching  in  the  eyes  for  sixteen  successive  days.  [Fr.  H — n .] 

Pressure  on  the  right  eyeball,  more  from  above  downwards  (aft.  3 
d.).  [Hrr.] 

A fine  throbbing  in  the  right  eyeball.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Frequent  lachrymation  of  the  eyes.  [Hrr.] 

A dimness  of  vision  of  the  left  eye,  as  if  it  were  full  of  water. 


BRYONIA,  267 

no.  In  the  morning  weakness  of  vision  ; when  she  attempted  to  read 
all  the  letters  ran  together. 

[Presbyopia)  : she  could  see  at  a distance,  but  not  near  (aft.  24 

h.). 

The  lower  eyelid  sometimes  red  and  inflamed,  the  upper  quivers. 
In  the  left  inner  canthus  raw  pain  and  soreness. 

In  the  morning  the  eyelids  as  if  gummed  together,  somewhat  red 
and  swollen,  and  with  pain  as  if  rubbed  and  heated. 

1 15.  In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  an  aching  in  the  eye,  as  if  pressed 
on  by  the  hand,  or  as  if  in  a room  full  of  smoke. 

In  the  morning  the  integuments  of  the  eyes  are  swollen  and  as 
if  gummed  up  with  matter. 

Swelling  of  the  lower  eyelid,  internally  aching  pain ; eyes 
gummed  up  in  the  morning. 

Smarting  in  the  eyes,  as  if  sand  (?)  were  in  them,  which  compels 
rubbing. 

In  the  afternoon  sensation  in  the  right  eye,  as  if  a grain  of  sand 
were  in  it. 

120.  In  the  forenoon  sudden  swelling  of  one  eye  with  pain,  without 
redness  ; matter  exudes,  and  the  conjunctiva  is  dark  red  and 
swollen. 

The  eyes  water  in  the  air. 

On  the  border  of  the  left  upper  eyelid  an  itching  mingled  with 
burning  and  tearing. 

Itching  in  the  left  outer  canthus  mingled  with  some  smarting, 
not  removed  by  rubbing  (aft.  6 h.). 

The  eyes  full  of  tears  and  the  eyelids  itch,  as  if  something  were 
healing  ; he  must  rub. 

125.  A small  tetter  on  the  right  cheek  (aft.  4 d.).  \_Fr.  H—n .] 

Swelling  of  the  right  cheek  close  to  the  ear,  with  burning  pain 
(aft.  4 d.).  [Fr.  H—n;] 

Painful  pressure  under  the  right  malar  hone,  re- 
moved by  external  pressure  (aft.  1 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Pinching  pressure  in  the  cavity  of  the  joint  of  the 
right  jaw,  increased  by  movement.  [Hrr.] 

Ringing  before  the  left  ear,  as  of  small  bells  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Fr . 
H — n.] 

130.  In  the  meatus  auditorius  a contractive  pain,  which  at  first  went 
off  by  clearing  away  the  wax  with  the  finger,  but  always  came  back 
again,  with  hardness  of  hearing.  [Mch.] 

Sensation  in  the  external  meatus  as  if  a finger  were  pressed  upon 
it,  which  is  increased  by  bending  down  to  read. 

Obtuse  pain  round  about  the  left  ear.  [HbgJ] 

Pain  like  a burning  out  at  the  left  ear  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Fr.  H — n.] 
Burning  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear.  [Hbg.] 

135.  Hard  boil  behind  the  ear,  which  often  changes  its  size  (aft,  24  h.). 
[Fr.  H — n.] 

Boil-like  swelling  in  front  of  the  ear,  which  after  twelve  hours 
burst,  discharged,  and  formed  a yellow  scab.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Humming  before  the  right  ear. 


268 


BRYONIA. 


Sensation  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped  up,  and  no  air  could 
penetrate  into  them. 

When  he  walks  in  the  open  air,  and  after  his  walk  comes  into 
the  house,  he  feels  stitches,  now  in  one,  now  in  the  other,  ear. 

140.  Blood  comes  out  of  the  ears. 

Violent  aching  on  the  right  concha. 

(Ulcerated  concha.) 

A frequent  formication  and  tickling  in  the  septum  of  the  nose, 
especially  when  blowing  the  nose. 

On  the  left  side  of  the  tip  of  the  nose  a swelling,  with  twitching 
pain  in  it,  and,  on  touching  it,  as  if  it  were  going  to  gather. 

145.  An  ulcer  inside  the  left  nostril  with  smarting  pain. 

Swollen  nose  with  epistaxis  for  several  days  (aft.  5 d.).  [Fr.  H — nb\ 
Epistaxis  on  three  successive  days  (the  10th,  nth,  and  12th  d.). 
[Fr.  H—n .] 

Epistaxis,  several  times  a day,  for  fourteen  days.  [Fr.  H — «.] 
Epistaxis  (aft.  10,  16  d.).  [ Fr . H — n.] 

150.  Epistaxis  from  the  right  nostril  (aft.  9 d.).  [Fr.  H — n .] 

Daily  profuse  epistaxis  (aft.  14  d.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

First  epistaxis  and  then  ulcerated  nostrils  (sore  nose). 

Epistaxis  (aft.  48,  72  h.). 

In  the  morning  after  rising,  epistaxis  for  a quarter  of  an  hour. 

155.  Epistaxis  in  sleep,  about  3 a.m.,  so  that  he  is  woke  up  by  it. 
(aft.  4 d.). 

Epistaxis  without  having  previously  stooped. 

(A  pimple  on  the  chin,  which  causes  shooting  pain  when 
touched.) 

Drawing,  with  pressure  in  the  throat  up  to  the  ear.  [Hbg.] 

Pain  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  throat,  felt  when  moving. 

[Hbg.] 

160.  Tensive  stiffness  of  the  left  side  of  the  neck.  [Hbg.] 

Rheumatic  stiffness  in  the  side  of  the  neck  towards  the  nape. 

[Hbg.] 

Tension  in  the  nape  on  moving  the  head.  [Hbg.] 

On  the  left  side  of  the  nape  and  neck,  of  the  facial  and  masseter 
muscles,  sore  pain  on  moving,  which  rendered  turning  the  head  and 
chewing  difficult  and  almost  impossible  (aft.  24  h).  [Hbg.] 

Itching  needle-bricks  on  the  neck  (especially  when 
he  has  walked  quickly)  which  cause  him  to  scratch; 
they  are  removed  by  scratching  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hbg.] 

165.  Chap  in  the  lower  lip.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Burning  in  the  lower  lip.  [Hbg.] 

On  the  lower  lip  small  ulcerated  fissures,  which  cause  burning 
pain  when  touched.  [Fr  H — n.] 

On  the  right  commissure  of  the  mouth,  and  more  on  the  lower 
lip,  a small  elevation,  which  from  time  to  time  bleeds  profusely,  for 
six  days.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

A vesicle  on  the  red  part  of  the  lower  lip  with  burning  pain. 

170.  Eruption  below  the  left  commissure  of  the  lips  with  smarting 
pain. 


BRYONIA.  269 

Eruption  on  the  lower  lip  beyond  the  red  part,  with  itching 
smarting  pain  as  from  salt. 

Between  the  under  lip  and  gum  a shooting,  very  acute  twitching 
(in  the  morning  in  bed),  as  in  cancer  of  the  lip. 

Toothache,  twitching  and  shooting  in  the  teeth  towards  the  ear, 
which  compelled  her  to  lie  down.* 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  twitching  toothache,  now  in  the  upper, 
now  in  the  lower  molars  (for  an  hour)  ; when  the  pain  was  above, 
and  the  point  of  the  finger  was  applied  there,  the  pain  suddenly 
ceased  and  went  into  the  opposite  lower  tooth  (aft.  5 d.). 

175.  Twitching  toothache  during  the  (accustomed)  tobacco  smoking 
(aft.  1 h.). 

Drawing,  sometimes  twitching  toothache  in  the 
molars  of  the  left  upper  jaw,  only  during  and  after 
eating,  at  the  same  time  the  teeth  felt  too  long  and  as  if 
they  waggled  to  and  fro  (aft.  6 h.).  [Hrr.\ 

Drawing  pain  in  the  molars  of  the  upper  and  lower  jaw  (aft.  24  h.). 
[. Hrr .] 

Looseness  of  all  the  teeth  observable  when  touching  them  and 
biting. 

Pain  in  a molar  tooth  only  when  chewing. 

180.  When  at  rest,  and  especially  in  bed,  a horrible  toothache,  which 
is  alleviated  by  chewing.  \_Hbg.'\ 

Toothache  on  taking  something  warm  into  the  mouth. 

While  eating  there  occurs  a tearing  shooting  toothache  (that 
extends  down  into  the  cervical  muscles),  which  is  especially  aggra- 
vated by  warmth. 

Pain  as  if  the  tooth  were  screwed  in  and  then  raised  up  (which 
is  only  relieved  for  an  instant  by  cold  water,  but  is  better  by  walking 
in  the  open  air) ; at  the  same  time  tearing  in  the  cheek  and  pinching 
in  the  ears,  at  night  until  6 a.m. 

Toothache ; on  opening  the  mouth  the  air  entering  causes  pain. 
185.  Toothache  after  midnight  (about  3 a.m.)  as  if  an  exposed  nerve 
in  a hollow  tooth  were  painfully  affected  by  cold  air  penetrating  to 
it ; the  pain  is  increased  to  an  intolerable  degree  by  lying  on  the 
unaffected  side,  and  only  goes  off  when  lying  on  the  cheek  of  the 
affected  side. 

On  drinking  cool  liquid  a sore  pain  comes  into  the  tooth.1 

The  gums  are  painful  as  if  sore  and  raw,  with  painful  loose 
teeth. 

In  the  morning  after  waking  sensation  as  if  all  the  molars  were 
too  long ; they  could  be  moved  to  and  fro  by  the  fingers  so  loose 
were  they  ; she  could  bite  nothing  with  them,  and  when  she  bit  with 

* There  are  several  symptoms  caused  by  bryonia  which  compel  the  person  to  lie 
down;  comp.  285,  4.79,  631,  708,  or,  at  least,  to  sit  down,  296,  and  several  that  are 
increased  by  walking  and  standing,  e g.  308  ; but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  alternating 
action,  where  the  symptoms  are  relieved  by  movement,  and  cannot  bear  quiet  lying 
and  sitting,  is  much  more  frequent  with  bryonia. 


1 This  symptom  is  given  here  as  it  stands  in  the  2nd  edit.  In  the  3rd  the  tran- 
scriber has  introduced  a superfluous  “ not  ” that  destroys  the  sense  of  the  symptom. 


270 


BRYONIA. 


them  there  was  pain  as  if  the  teeth  fell  out,  for  fifteen  hours  (aft. 

48  h. ).[&/.] 

The  teeth  appear  to  him  to  be  too  long.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

190.  Spongy  gums. 

Simple  pain  of  one  of  the  submaxillary  glands,  as  if  from  being 
pinched  (aft.  12  h.). 

Painful  stiffness  of  all  the  cervical  muscles  on  movement,  and 
roughness  in  the  throat  on  swallowing. 

Sensation  on  the  lower  jaw  as  if  there  were  a node  on  the  bone, 
with  tensive  pain  on  turning  the  head  (aft.  61  h.).  [£//;] 

Red  miliary  eruption  on  the  neck.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

195.  Rough  scrapy  feeling  in  the  throat  (aft.  5 h.).  [Hbg.] 

He  feels  as  if  swollen  at  the  back  of  the  throat,  and  as  if  he  had 
a severe  catarrh,  which  makes  talking  difficult.  [Hbg.] 

Round  the  neck  a smarting  itching  eruption,  especially  after  the 
sweat. 

In  the  inside  of  the  throat  shooting  on  pressing  it  from  the  out- 
side and  on  turning  the  head. 

Shooting  in  the  throat  when  swallowing. 

200.  Pressure  in  the  oesophagus  as  if  he  had  swallowed  a hard  angular 
body. 

She  cannot  get  the  food  and  drink  down  ; she  has  a choking  in 
the  oesophagus. 

(Sensation  when  swallowing,  as  if  the  throat  were  swollen 
internally  or  were  full  of  mucus,  which  cannot  be  got  rid  of  by 
hawking.) 

Sore  throat : dry  and  raw  in  the  throat  during  empty  swallowing  ; 
on  drinking  this  sensation  goes  off  for  a short  time,  but  soon  recurs  ; 
it  is  worst  in  the  warm  room. 

In  the  evening  dry  feeling  at  the  back  and  upper  part  of  the 
throat  (aft.  48  h.). 

205.  Dry  feeling,  not  on  the  tongue,  but  above  on  the  palate. 

Blisters  on  the  border  of  the  tongue  anteriorly,  which  smart  and 
burn.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Dryness  in  the  mouth,  so  that  the  tongue  sticks  to  the  palate. 
[Fr.  H—n .] 

Dryness  in  the  mouth  without  thirst.  [Hbg.] 

In  the  morning  dry  feeling  in  the  mouth  (aft.  48  h.).  [Mch.] 
210.  The  interior  of  the  mouth  feels  to  him  dry,  without  thirst. 

Dry  feeling  only  inside  the  upper  lip  and  in  the  upper  teeth. 
Much  thirst  by  day,  without  heat. 

Violent  thirst  for  twenty- two  days.  [Fr.  H—n.] 

Thirst,  especiallv  in  the  morning.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

215.  Violent  thirst,  day  and  night.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

After  eating  great  thirst,  for  sixteen  days.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

The  saliva  runs  out  at  the  corners  of  the  mouth  involuntarily. 
Spitting  much  saliva.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Collection  of  much  soapy  frothy  saliva  in  the  mouth. 

[Hbg.] 

220.  Tongue  furred  very  white. 


BRYONIA. 


271 


Insipid,  disgusting  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  5 d.).  [Mch.] 

Sweetish,  disgusting  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Insipid,  sickly  taste  in  the  mouth ; he  has  almost  no 
taste. 

Insipid  taste  and  sickly  feeling  in  the  mouth. 

225.  Sweetish,  qualmish  taste  in  the  mouth. 

She  has  no  taste  of  the  food  ; but  when  not  eating  her  mouth  is 
bitter. 

Everything  tastes  bitter,  he  cannot  get  down  the  food. 

After  dinner  a bitter  taste  remained  constantly  at  the  back  of  the 
palate. 

In  the  morning  sickly,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. 

230.  In  the  morning  when  fasting  taste  in  the  mouth  as  from  decayed 
teeth  or  putrid  flesh  (aft.  12  h.). 

With  tolerably  clean  tongue  a nasty  taste  in  the  throat,  as  when 
one’s  breath  smells  ; the  taste  is  like  the  smell  of  stinking  flesh  ; 
whilst  eating  she  feels  nothing  of  it. 

He  has  a foetid  smell  from  the  mouth. 

Late  in  the  evening  there  comes  a rancid,  smoky  taste  in  the 
throat. 

Anorexia  without  bad  taste  (aft.  3 h.). 

235.  Spoilt  appetite.  [Hbg.] 

Want  of  appetite  (for  10  d.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

The  stomach  is  empty ; he  has  hunger  without  appetite,  [i/rr.] 
In  the  morning  when  fasting  voracious  hunger,  with  want  of 
appetite.  [ Hbg .] 

Hunger,  with  anorexia.  [Mch.] 

240.  Constant  nausea,  and  immediately  afterwards  voracious  hunger 
(aft.  some  h.).  [Fr.  H — ».] 

In  the  morning  voracious  hunger,  with  thirst  and  flying  heat 
(aft.  30,  72  h.).  [Mch.]' 

Great  hunger  for  fourteen  days.  [ Fr . H — n.] 

Excessive  hunger  for  six  days.  [Fr.  H—n .] 

Voracious  hunger,  without  appetite. 

245.  Voracious  hunger,  lasting  into  the  night. 

He  has  hunger,  and  eats,  but  he  does  not  relish  food. 

He  has  no  appetite  for  milk ; hut  when  he  takes  it  the 
appetite  for  it  comes,  and  he  commences  to  relish  it. 

He  longs  for  many  things  which  he  cannot  relish. 

The  food  smells  good,  but  on  commencing  to  eat  her  appetite 
goes  off. 

250.  Appetite  for  wine. 

Appetite  for  coffee. 

Great  longing  for  coffee  (aft.  5 h.).  [Fr.  H—n.]  [Mch.] 

Frequent  eructation  of  nothing  but  air. 

After  eructation  hiccup,  without  having  previously  taken  any 
food. 

255.  After  eructation  hiccup  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  48  h.). 
Violent  hiccup. 

Violent  eructation  after  a meal,  from  morning  till  evening. 


2J2 


BRYONIA. 


Eructation,  with  taste  of  food. 

Drinks  do  not  cause  eructation,  but  the  smallest  quantity  of  food 
does,  but  only  of  air,  without  bad  taste. 

260.  (Eructation,  with  burnt  taste  in  the  mouth  and  mucus  in  the 
throat.) 

With  every  eructation  a shooting  pain. 

(A  burning  almost  uninterrupted  eructation,  which  makes  his 
mouth  rough  and  prevents  his  tasting  of  food.) 

After  eating  an  acrid  dry  taste,  with  persistent  dryness  in  the  front 
part  of  the  mouth,  without  thirst ; the  lips  are  dry  and  chapped. 

In  the  evening  after  lying  down  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. 

265.  Eructation  after  eating,  at  last  bitter  eructation. 

After  a meal  bitter  eructation. 

Without  eructation  there  comes  a bitterness  up  into  the  mouth 
with  sickness. 

He  eructates  acidity,  and  sourish  water  collects  in  the  mouth. 

In  the  morning,  after  an  anxious  dream,  sickness  without  being 
able  to  vomit,  and  frequent  empty  eructation. 

270.  Nausea  in  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep. 

Frequent,  sometimes  sourish  eructation  after  eating. 

[Hrr.] 

Nausea,  lasting  24  hours,  with  running  of  much  water  from  the 
mouth  (aft.  5 m.).  \_Fr.  H- — ».] 

Nausea,  especially  when  smoking  tobacco  (in  one  accustomed  to 
it).  [Hbg.] 

Sickness  (immediately).  \_Mch.'\ 

275.  Several  times  vomiting  of  yellow  and  green  mucus.  \_Fr.  H — n .] 

Immediately  after  midnight  he  wakes  with  nausea  ; he  must 
vomit  food  and  bile. 

She  has  rising  of  food  which  comes  into  the  mouth  by  a kind  of 
belching. 

Eructation  of  the  contents  of  the  stomach,  with  hardly  any  effort 
to  vomit. 

After  eating  food  that  he  relished  sickness  and  loathing. 

280.  She  vomits  solid  food  but  not  fluids. 

Early  every  morning,  two  hours  after  rising,  nausea  for  half  an 
hour,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth. 

In  the  evening  nausea,  and  then  flow  of  a quantity  of  water 
from  the  mouth  (waterbrash).* 

Nausea,  sickness,  without  having  eaten  anything  (aft.  1 h.). 

In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  nausea,  sickness. 

285.  (Vomiting  of  blood  and  lying  down.) 

In  the  morning  (about  6 a.m.)  vomiting  of  a bitter,  musty,  and 
putrid  fluid,  the  taste  of  which  remains  in  her  mouth. 

After  drinking  (in  the  afternoon)  qualmish  and  sick. 

In  the  evening  vomiting  of  mucus  (aft.  5 h.). 

In  the  evening  (6  p.m.)  retching  of  water  and  mucus,  like  water- 
brash  ; it  rose  up  in  his  chest,  and  at  the  same  time  the  whole  body 
was  cold. 


Comp,  402. 


BRYONIA. 


273 


290.  Painful  sensation  in  the  oesophagus,  rather  low  down,  as  if  it 
were  constricted  there. 

In  the  morning  she  brings  mucus  up  from  the  stomach  by  a kind 
of  belching. 

(Cough,  especially  after  eating.) 

(A  quarter  of  an  hour  after  each  meal  headache,  which  then  goes 
off  gradually,  but  is  renewed  after  the  next  meal.) 

After  every  meal  distension  of  the  abdomen. 

295.  Cutting,  as  with  knives,  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
(aft.  1 h.). 

Immediately  after  the  (evening)  meal  violent  aching  in  the 
scrobiculus  cordis  when  walking,  at  last  pressure  on  the  bladder  and 
perinaeum  to  an  intolerable  degree  ; it  went  off  on  sitting  (aft.  12  h.). 

Stomachache  as  soon  as  he  has  eaten  anything,  and  even  while 
eating. 

After  eating  pressure  in  the  stomach ; it  was  as  if  a 
stone  lay  there  and  made  him  cross. 

After  eating  pressure  in  the  stomach.  \_Hbg.'] 

300.  Pressure  in  the  stomach  when  walking.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Pinching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  12  h.).  \_Mch.~\ 

Sensation  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  as  if  it  were 
swollen.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Under  the  scrobiculus  Cordis  a very  disagreeable  feeling,  like 
swelling.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Heat  in  the  abdomen  (and  all  the  interior  of  the  body).  \_Hbg.~] 
305.  Aching  and  pinching  in  the  hypogastrium.  \Hrr.~\ 

Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  for  fourteen  days.  \_Fr.  H — n. ] 

Loud  rattling  in  the  abdomen,  especially  in  the  evening  in  bed, 
for  eighteen  days.  \_Fr.  H—n.~\ 

A squeezing  and  aching  in  the  abdomen  in  the  umbilical  region, 
when  walking  and  standing. 

Contractive  pain  in  the  stomach,  some  hours  after  eating. 

310.  After  a meal  contractive  pain  in  the  stomach,  then  cutting  in  and 
over  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  eructation,  heat  rising  up,  nausea  and 
vomiting  only  of  the  food  that  has  been  eaten  (aft.  48  h.). 

Hard  swelling  about  the  navel  and  under  the  hypochondria. 

Sudden  ascites  ; he  cannot  get  his  breath  and  must  sit  down 
(aft.  18  h.). 

Excoriation  in  the  overlapping  folds  of  the  abdomen,  in  the  iliac 
region. 

Tensive  pain  in  the  hepatic  region. 

315.  Burning  pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  hepatic  region  (aft.  8 h.). 

Pain  in  the  abdomen  as  though  he  would  vomit  (aft.  5 d.). 

Pain  in  both  sides  of  the  abdomen  like  stitches  in  the  spleen. 

First  tearing  and  drawing  in  the  abdomen,  especially  on  moving, 
then  shooting,  especially  during  an  evacuation  of  the  bowels,  and 
chiefly  in  the  evening. 

Violent  cutting  stitches  in  the  abdomen  from  below  upwards,  as 
high  as  the  stomach  (after  drinking  a cup  of  warm  milk,  in  the  after- 
noon) ; the  pain  compelled  him  to  bend  double,  and  disappeared  after 
a motion  of  the  bowels. 

18 


274 


BRYONIA. 


320.  Around  the  navel  a painful  twisting  with  stitches. 

Bellyache  combined  with  anxiety,  that  impedes  his  breathing  ; it 
was  relieved  by  walking. 

Flatus  passes  in  the  night,  not  without  previous  loud  rumbling 
and  noise. 

After  the  (evening)  meal,  flatulent  colic  with  a pressure  in  the 
region  of  the  caecum. 

Pains  in  the  abdomen  as  if  he  had  been  purged,  or  as  if  haemor- 
rhoids would  come  on. 

325.  After  dinner  spasmodic  pains  in  the  abdomen. 

Rumbling  in  the  bowels  and  sensation  as  if  he  would  be  purged. 

Bellyache  as  if  diarrhoea  was  about  to  come  on,  for  an  hour  and 
a half  (aft.  5 m.).  \_Fr.  H — «.] 

Horrible  cutting  in  the  bowels  (in  the  forenoon)  as  if  she  would 
have  dysentery,  without  evacuation  of  the  bowels. 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a pressure  on  the  navel,  as  from  a 
button. 

330.  (Sensation  as  if  a lump  lay  deep  in  the  abdomen.) 

In  the  abdomen  and  in  the  umbilical  region  a griping  and 
pinching  as  after  a chill,  for  several  days,  and  (aft.  3 d.)  after  the 
bellyache  a copious  thin  evacuation  by  stool. 

Very  ill-smelling,  frequent  stools,  preceded  by  cutting  in  the 
abdomen. 

Distended  abdomen  ; there  is  always  a rumbling  in  the  abdomen 
and  bellyache  (cutting  in  the  bowels),  and  yet  constant  constipation; 
sensation  as  if  something  stuck  in  his  abdomen. 

Bellyache  during  the  stool,  as  from  constriction  and  pinching 
together  with  the  hand. 

335.  Causes  open  bowels. 

Stool  twice  daily  ; after  some  days  constipation.* 

Brown,  frequent,  thin  stools  in  an  infant  at  the  breast. 

Frequent  stools  (aft.  48  h.). 

Very  big  formed  faeces  passing  with  difficulty. 

340.  Diarrhoea  (aft.  3 d.). 

Diarrhoeic  stool  (aft.  28  h.).  [Flbg.] 

Loose  evacuations  without  suffering  (aft.  24,  30  h.). 

Diarrhoea  for  four  successive  days,  once  every  three  hours,  so 
quick  that  he  cannot  retain  it ; the  following  twelve  days  the  ordi- 
nary stool  passed  with  equally  unexpected  rapidity.  \_Fr.  H — «.] 

Diarrhoea  for  two  days,  which  made  her  so  weak  that  she  had  to 
keep  her  bed  (aft.  3 d.).  \JFr.  H — «.] 

345.  Diarrhoea  mostly  in  the  morning.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Diarrhoea,  especially  at  night,  and  with  every  evacuation  burning 
in  the  anus  (aft.  7 d.).  \Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Diarrhoea  which  smelt  strongly  of  decayed  cheese.  \_Fr.  H — «.] 

Thin,  bloody  stool  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fr.  H — /z.] 

* Bryonia  seems  more  frequently  in  its  primary  action  to  keep  back  the  stool,  and 
its  secondary  action,  in  which  it  does  the  opposite,  is  rarer ; hence,  when  its  other 
symptoms  indicate  it,  it  can  cure  constipation  permanently,  which  few  medicines 
besides  nux  vomica  and  opium  can  do. 


BRYONIA. 


275 


Diarrhoea  preceded  by  cutting  in  the  abdomen  (aft. 
44?  7^  ^*)  • 

350.  After  hard  stool  long-continued  burning  in  the  rectum. 

Very  costive  motion,  with  pressing  out  of  the  rectum,  which, 
however,  soon  returned  of  itself ; thereafter  diarrhoeic  stool  with 
fermentation  in  the  abdomen.  \_Fr.  H — ».] 

Very  hard  stool. 

Soft  stool,  with  burning  sharp  pain  in  the  anus. 

Itching,  jerk-like,  coarse  stitches  from  the  anus  up  into  the 
rectum. 

355.  (Nocturnal  diarrhoea.) 

Burning  and  cutting  before  the  urine  comes  (aft.  3 d.).  [Fr. 

H—n .] 

The  urine  is  hot  as  it  passes.  [Tr.  H—n.~\ 

Pain  in  the  abdomen  when  urinating. 

Sensation  when  urinating  as  if  the  urinary  passages  were  too 
narrow. 

360.  He  must  get  up  several  times  at  night  to  pass  water. 

He  had  great  urging  to  urinate  ; he  must  get  up  at  night  to 
urinate. 

Although  the  bladder  was  not  full  he  had  such  urging  to  make 
water  that  he  was  hardly  able  to  retain  it  for  an  instant  (aft.  12  h.). 

When  he  has  urinated  the  neck  of  the  bladder  contracts,  and  yet 
he  feels  as  if  some  more  urine  wanted  to  pass. 

He  cannot  retain  his  urine  long ; when  he  has  the  desire  to 
urinate  and  does  not  immediately  respond  to  it,  he  feels  as  if  the 
urine  passed  involuntarily  (and  yet  when  he  looks  he  finds  that  none 
has  come  away.) 

365.  When  moving  there  often  pass  unconsciously  some  drops  of  hot 
urine. 

After  urinating  he  feels  in  the  bladder  as  if  he  had  not  passed  all 
the  urine,  and  some  drops  pass  away  involuntarily. 

Urging  to  urinate  and  frequent  discharge  of  urine  when  walking 
in  the  open  air  (aft.  6 h.). 

A pain  compounded  of  itching,  burning,  and  shooting  in  the 
anterior  part  of  the  urethra,  when  not  urinating. 

Burning  in  the  urethra. 

370.  (An  aching  pain  in  the  urethra.) 

(A  drawing  and  tearing  in  the  forepart  of  the  urethra,  when  not 
urinating.) 

Some  stitches  in  the  testicles  (immediately)  when  sitting. 

On  the  border  of  the  prepuce  a shooting,  burning  itching. 

The  glans  penis  is  covered  with  miliary  rash  which  itches. 

375.  Swelling  of  the  left  labium  majus,  on  which  a black,  hard  pustule 
comes,  resembling  a small  button,  without  pain  and  without  inflam- 
mation. 

Very  distended  abdomen  ; she  has  great  uneasiness  there,  and 
such  pinching  as  though  the  catamenia  were  coming  on. 

The  menses  come  on  eight  days  too  early.  [ Fr . H — n.~\ 

The  menses  come  on  fourteen  days  too  early.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\ 


276 


BRYONIA. 


The  menses  appeared  slightly  three  weeks  too  soon.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 
380.  The  menses  occur  within  a few  hours,  sometimes  eight  days  too 
soon.* 

(Increase  of  the  leucorrhoea.)  [Fr.  H — n.] 

* 

In  the  morning,  violent  sneezing  (aft.  18  h.). 

In  the  morning  violent  sneezing  and  yawning  (aft.  48  h.). 
Frequent  sneezing,  especially  when  he  passes  his  hand  over  the 
forehead. 

385.  Some  hoarseness  and  only  one  tone  of  the  voice  when  walking 
in  the  open  air. 

A kind  of  hoarseness,  and  at  the  same  time  disposition  to  perspire. 
Voice  rough  and  hoarse  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Hoarseness  for  twenty-one  days.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Fluent  coryza  for  eight  days.  [Fr.  H—n.] 

390.  Severe  fluent  coryza,  so  that  he  talked  through  his  nose,  at  the 
same  time  continual  chilliness,  for  eight  days.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Severe  fluent  coryza  with  much  sneezing,  for  eight  days  (aft.  48 
h.).  [Fr.  H—n.] 

Severe  coryza  with  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Severe  coryza  without  cough  (aft.  36  h.). 

Violent,  rather  stuffed  coryza  (aft.  48  h.). 

395.  Severe  coryza,  with  shooting  headache,  as  though  all  would  come 
out  at  the  forehead,  especially  on  stoopingf  (aft.  70  h.). 

Viscid  phlegm  in  the  fauces  that  was  detached  by 
hawking.  [Hbg.] 

Dry  cough. 

Dry  cough  as  it  were  from  the  stomach,  preceded  by  a crawling 
and  tickling  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Cough  from  a constant  crawling  up  in  the  throat  ; phlegm  is 
then  ejected. 

400.  Cough  with  expectoration  (immediately).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Cough  with  expectoration,  in  the  forenoon,  for  four  successive 
days  (aft.  34  h.).  [Fr.  H — n.\ 

Continual,  dry  cough,  especially  in  the  morning,  during  which 
water  runs  out  of  his  mouth,  like  waterbrash.J 
(Nausea  excites  him  to  cough.) 

When  coughing  vomiting  of  food. 

405.  When  coughing  a long-continued  stitch  deep  in  the  brain  on  the 
left  side. 

A dry,  hacking  cough  ; single,  spasmodic  severe  blows  against 
the  upper  part  of  the  windpipe,  which  seems  to  be  covered  with 
dry,  firm  mucus  ; even  tobacco  smoke  excites  it. 

Irritation  to  hacking  cough;  it  seems  as  if  some 
mucus  were  in  the  windpipe ; when  he  has  coughed  for 
some  time  he  feels  a pain  there  compounded  of  soreness 

* This  is  primary  action,  hence  bryonia  will  often  be  a powerful  stopper  of 
metrorrhagia. 

f Comp.  54,  55. 
t Comp  282. 


BRYONIA.  277 

and  pressure ; the  pain  becomes  more  violent  by  speak- 
ing and  smoking  tobacco  (aft.  4 h.).  [iZrr.] 

When  he  comes  from  the  open  air  into  the  warm 
room  he  has  a feeling  as  if  vapour  were  in  the  windpipe, 
which  compels  him  to  cough ; he  feels  as  if  he  could  not 
breathe  in  air  enough  (aft.  2 h.).  [i/rr  ] 

Viscid  phlegm  in  the  windpipe  that  is  detached  by 
frequent  hacking  cough.  [Hrr.] 

410.  In  the  morning  in  bed  a severe  cough,  that  lasted  a quarter  of 
an  hour,  and  brought  away  much  mucous  expectoration. 

In  the  morning  he  has  oppression  of  the  chest  ; he  feels  as  if 
clogged  with  mucus  in  the  chest,  and  it  is  not  readily  detached. 

In  the  throat  scraping,  painful,  hacking  cough,  as  from  roughness 
and  dryness  of  the  larynx,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed. 

A hacking  dry  cough  striking  against  the  top  of  the  windpipe. 

He  coughs  up  small  lumps  of  coagulated  blood  (aft.  3 h.). 

415.  He  coughs  and  hawks  yellow  mucus  from  the  fauces. 

When  coughing  shooting  in  the  throat  internally. 

When  coughing  stitches  in  the  last  rib. 

When  coughing  stitches  in  the  sternum  ; he  must  support  the 
chest  with  his  hand ; stitches  also  when  merely  touching  it.* 

When  coughing  he  sneezes  twice. 

420.  When  coughing  he  has  heaving  as  if  he  would  vomit,  without 
nausea. 

When  coughing  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

When  coughing  it  goes  through  his  whole  head. 

When  coughing  it  always  goes  into  the  head  like  a 
pressure. 

Immediately  before  a fit  of  coughing  frequent  gasping  for  air, 
quick  spasmodic  breathing,  as  if  the  child  could  not  get  its  breath, 
and  on  that  account  could  not  cough ; a kind  of  suffocative  attack, 
followed  by  cough  ; particularly  after  midnight. 

425.  Aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  oppresses  her  chest. 

An  extraordinary  warmth  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
makes  her  breathing  short  with  a kind  of  aching  pain. 

Burning  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  8 h.). 

Impeded  respiration. 

The  breathing  is  made  short ; he  must  expire  more  quickly. 

43°.  Tightness  of  chest  (aft.  1 h.). 

An  attack  of  stitch  in  the  side  and  oppression  of  the  chest  for 
twelve  hours. 

Tightness  of  chest ; she  felt  a need  to  breathe  deeply  (as  if  her 
chest  were  stopped  up  and  she  could  not  get  air),  and  when  she  tried 
to  breathe  deeply  she  had  pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  something  were 
stretched  out  which  opposed  itself  to  stretching. 

Anxiety  in  the  morning  which  proceeded  from  the  abdomen,  as 
if  a purgative  had  been  taken,  and  as  if  the  breath  were  too  short. 

Rapid,  anxious,  almost  impossible  breathing  on  account  of 


Comp.  512,  535,  601. 


278 


BRYONIA. 


stitches  in  the  chest,  first  under  the  scapulae,  then  under  the 
pectoral  muscles,  which  hinder  breathing  and  compel  him  to  sit  up  ; 
then  stitches  in  the  crown  of  the  head. 

435.  Aching  all  over  the  chest  (aft.  24  h.). 

On  the  sternum  superiorly  pressure  as  with  the  hand  ; she 
fancies  she  cannot  walk  in  the  open  air  without  pain  there. 

In  the  middle  of  the  sternum  aching  pain,  also  when  breathing, 
with  icy  cold  feet. 

On  the  chest  an  aching,  as  if  it  were  oppressed  with  phlegm,  and 
on  inspiring  some  shooting  in  the  sternum,  which  seems  to  be 
alleviated  by  eating. 

Heaviness  in  the  chest  and  heaviness  in  the  body,  which  went 
off  by  eating. 

440.  On  breathing  deeply  stitches  in  the  side  on  the  ribs,  in  jerks, 
which  went  off  in  the  open  air. 

On  inspiring  a stitch  from  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  through  to 
the  scapula. 

On  inspiring  the  curves  of  the  ribs  towards  the  back  are  the  seat 
of  tensive  pain,  which  on  breathing  more  deeply  increases  to  an 
obtuse  stitch,  especially  under  the  scapulae,  and  mostly  on  stooping 
forwards. 

In  the  evening  (6  p.m.)  shooting  in  the  chest  with  oppression. 

A momentary  stitch  in  the  left  clavicle,  followed  by  a simple 
pain  (afterwards  there  was  only  simple  pain). 

445.  On  turning  in  bed,  stitch  in  the  chest  on  the  side  on  which  he  is 
not  lying. 

In  the  lower  part  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest  shooting  and 
beating  like  a pulse. 

A shooting  pressing  from  within  outwards  in  the  chest. 

On  the  slightest  breath  a stitch  as  if  in  an  ulcer,  which  lasts  as 
long  as  the  respiration,  on  a small  spot  beneath  the  sternum,  which 
smarts  like  an  ulcer  even  when  touched,*  but  still  more  on  raising 
the  right  arm,  in  the  morning  (aft.  24  h.). 

Pain  on  the  ensiform  cartilage  on  touching  it,  as  if  blood  were 
extravasated,  in  the  evening. 

450.  Pain  all  over  the  chest,  with  oppression,  which  goes  off  on 
discharging  flatus,  in  the  evening  (9  p.m.). 

An  attack  as  if  the  ailment  rose  up  and  took  away  breath  and 
speech. 

A grasping  together  of  the  chest  near  the  sternum. 

Pain  in  the  chest  close  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  squeezing, 
worst  when  she  sits  on  a chair  and  stoops,  and  when  she  lies  in  bed 
upon  the  side. 

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  for  several  successive  days  (aft.  12  h.). 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

455.  Internal  heat  in  the  chest.  [£%.] 

Heat  in  the  chest  and  face,  \_Hbg.~] 

Sensation  as  if  all  were  loose  in  the  chest  and  fell  down  into  the 
abdomen.  \_Hbg.] 

* Comp.  418,  512,  535,  602. 


BRYONIA. 


279 


Squeezing  pressure  behind  the  sternum,  aggravated  by  expiration 
and  inspiration  (aft.  5 d.).  [Hrr.~\ 

Great  swelling  of  the  anterior  of  the  chest  externally.  \_Hbg.~\ 

460.  In  an  indurated  nipple  single  slight  electric-like  shocks  for  two 
and  a half  hours,  after  which  all  traces  of  the  induration  were  gone 
(aft.  5 h.).  \_StfJ\ 

Sharp  outward  shooting  pain  under  the  right  nipple, 
in  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  only  on  expiring.  [ Hrr .] 

(A  stretching  over  from  the  short  ribs.) 

Tension  in  the  chest  when  walking. 

On  the  right  side  of  the  nape  towards  the  shoulder  painful  stiff- 
ness of  the  muscles  when  moving  the  head. 

465.  A pain  in  the  nape  where  it  joins  the  occiput,  like  combined 
pain  and  weakness,  as  if  the  head  were  weak. 

Pain  in  the  nape  as  after  a chill. 

Aching  between  the  scapulae  and  opposite  them  in  front  of  the 
chest,  when  sitting,  which  went  off  by  walking. 

Burning  under  and  between  the  scapulae.  \_Mch.~] 

Painful  pressure  on  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder, 
worse  on  being  touched ; on  breathing  deeply  an  obtuse 
shooting  there  which  extends  backwards  and  outwards 
into  the  shoulder-joint  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Hrr .] 

470.  A spasmodic  pain  between  the  scapulae,  almost  like  shuddering. 

Shooting  in  the  lumbar  vertebrae.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Shooting  pain  in  the  sacrum  and  back,  at  night  for  six  hours  (aft. 
70  h.).  \_Fr.  H—n.] 

Sacral  pains  which  interfere  much  with  walking.  [ Fr . H — «.] 

Burning  in  the  back.  \_Mch.~\ 

475.  A contractive  pain  across  the  whole  back,  as  if  it  were  firmly 
bound  with  bands,  almost  like  cramp  (in  the  afternoon  from  4 to 
8 p.m.)  (aft.  48  h.). 

A drawing  down  the  back  when  sitting,  which  goes  off  by 
movement. 

Painful  shooting  twitching  close  to  the  spine  on  both  sides,  when 
sitting,  especially  in  the  morning  and  evening. 

Bruised  pain  in  the  sacrum  when 
felt  when  moving. 

He  can  neither  bend  nor  stoop  for  pain  in  the  back  and  lumbar 
vertebrae,  a tearing,  more  felt  when  standing  than  when  sitting, 
but  not  when  lying. 

480.  A couple  of  coarse  stitches,  like  knife  stabs,  in  the  hip. 

A crawling  running,  as  of  a mouse,  from  the  axilla  to  the 

hip. 


sitting,  worst  when  lying,  little 


Obtuse  stitch  over  the  shoulder,  towards  the  arm.  [HbgJ] 

In  the  upper  arm,  especially  on  raising  it,  a kind  of  stitches. 
[Rkt.] 

(A  quivering  and  twitching  in  the  deltoid  muscle.) 

485.  A drawing  through  the  shafts  of  the  arm-bones,  like  a thread, 
extending  into  the  tips  of  the  fingers. 


28o 


BRYONIA. 


An  aching  on  both  humeri  which  prevents  him  falling  asleep  in 
the  evening. 

A nervous  tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  arms  downwards. 

Sweat  in  the  axillae. 

Pain  on  raising  the  arm  in  the  region  of  the  acromion  process,  as 
from  dislocation  (aft.  3 h.). 

490.  Swelling  of  the  right  upper  arm  to  the  elbow. 

Stitches  in  the  right  elbow-joint.  [Hbg.] 

Swelling  on  the  elbow-joint  and  somewhat  above  and 
below  it  to  the  middle  of  the  upper  and  fore-arm  and  on 
the  feet,  for  three  hours.  [Hbg.] 

Tearing  pain  on  the  internal  surface  of  the  forearm,  from  the 
elbow  in  a line  to  the  wrist-joint  (aft.  5 d.).  [Hrr.] 

Red  miliary  eruption  on  the  upper  side  of  the  forearm.  [Fr . 

H — n.] 

495.  (Violent  shooting  and  formication  in  the  left  arm.) 

Shooting  in  the  point  of  the  elbow,  with  drawing  in  the  tendons, 
extending  into  the  hand  ; the  shooting  is  aggravated  by  bending  the 
elbow. 

(In  the  hand  formication,  as  if  gone  asleep.) 

Shooting  pains  in  the  joints  of  the  hands  and  heaviness  of  them. 

[Hbg.-] 

He  cannot  grasp  firmly  with  the  hands.  \_Hbg.] 

500.  Trembling  of  the  hands  and  distended  veins  thereof.  [Hbg.'] 

In  the  wrist-joint  pain  as  if  sprained  or  dislocated  at 

every  movement  (aft.  24  h.). 

Fine  shooting  in  the  wrist,  when  the  hand  becomes  warm  and 
when  at  rest ; but  it  does  not  go  off  by  movement. 

About  midnight  an  inflammation  of  the  back  of  the  hand,  with 
burning  pain. 

Hot  feeling  in  the  palms  of  the  hands  and  the  forearms  ; she 
must  lie  out  of  bed  in  the  morning;  after  some  hours  cold  feeling  in 
them. 

505.  Stiffness  and  numb  feeling  in  the  palms  of  the  hands.* 

Jerking  tearing  in  the  joints  between  the  metacarpus  and  fingers, 
or  in  the  last  finger-joints,  lasting  a short  time.  [. Rkt .] 

Involuntary  twitching  of  the  fingers  of  both  hands  on  movement. 
[Hbg.] 

In  the  fingers  shooting  pains  when  writing.  [Hbg.] 

(Falling  asleep  of  the  fingers  of  both  hands  up  to  the  wrists.) 

510.  Feeling  of  paralysis  in  the  fingers. 

(In  the  ball  of  the  thumb  pain  like  shooting  and  cramp.) 

Somewhat  hot,  pale  swelling  of  the  distal  joint  of  the  little 
finger ; there  are  shoots  in  it  on  moving  the  finger  and  pressing  on  it. f 

A papule  between  the  right  thumb  and  index,  which  causes 
shooting  pain  when  touched. 

In  the  root  of  the  little  finger  pain  as  if  there  were  matter  in  it. 

515.  Bruised  pain  of  the  sacrum  and  thighs. 


* Comp.  576. 


f Comp.  448,  535,  602. 


BRYONIA. 


281 


A pain  comes  by  jerks  like  cramp  into  the  sacrum  when  sitting 
and  lying. 

The  sacrum  pains  as  if  bruised  when  lying  on  it. 

Pain  in  the  hip-joint,  like  jerks  or  blows,  when  she  lies  or  sits  ; 
it  is  better  when  walking. 

When  walking  bent  forwards  shooting  pain  from  the  hip-joint 
into  the  knee. 

520.  Pain  in  the  trochanter,  startling  shooting  on  making  a false  step ; 
when  at  rest  throbbing  therein  j the  part  hurts  very  much  when 
touched.* 

Unsteadiness  in  the  thighs  and  legs,  and  staggering  when  going 
downstairs  (aft.  20  h.). 

In  the  hips  obtuse  shooting  pain.  \_Hbg.'] 

Itching  on  the  hips  and  thighs  (aft.  48  h.).  \_Fr.  H — n .] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  right  thigh  when  moving.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

525.  Great  weakness  in  the  thighs;  he  can  hardly  go  up- 
stairs ; less  when  going  downstairs.  [Rkt.] 

Vacillation  of  the  thighs,  especially  on  "going  up  and  downstairs 
(aft.  2d.).  [Fr.  H—n.] 

Great  weakness  in  the  thighs,  observable  even  when  sitting  (aft. 
8 h.).  [Rkt.] 

Drawing  in  the  thighs  as  if  the  catamenia  were  about  to  come  on. 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  the  thigh  becomes  stiff,  like  cramp. 

A stitch  in  the  upper  and  anterior  part  of  the  thigh. 

530.  Bruised  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  and  beating  as  with  a 
hammer  on  the  same  spot  when  sitting. 

When  sitting  and  at  night  when  lying  cramp  in  the  knee  and 
sole  of  the  foot. 

On  going  downstairs  pain  as  if  the  patellae  would  break. 

On  going  upstairs  the  legs  are  weak. 

Tensive,  painful  stiffiiess  of  the  knees. 

535.  Under  the  knee  a pustule,  which  only  hurts  and  shoots  when 
touched. 

A (tearing  and)  burning  in  the  right  knee. 

The  patellae  are  painful  as  if  they  had  been  beaten  loose. 

An  itching,  as  if  something  were  healing,  in  the  hough,  and  sweat 
on  that  part  at  night. 

Stitches  in  the  knees  when  walking.  [Hbg.~\ 

540.  Fine,  flying  stitches  in  the  knee-joints  only  when  moving.  [. Rkt.~\ 

Dry  eruption  on  and  in  the  houghs,  which  itches  in  the  evening, 
looks  red,  and  after  scratching  causes  stinging  pain.  \_Fr.  H — n .] 

Weakness,  especially  in  the  knee-joints.  \_Hbg.~] 

Weakness,  especially  in  the  knee-joint  (immediately).  \_Mch.~\ 

The  knees  totter  and  bend  under  him  when  walking. 

\_Hbg.] 

54 5-  The  legs  are  so  weak  that  they  can  scarcely  support 
him,  on  beginning  to  walk,  and  even  when  standing. 

[Hbg.] 

Swelling  of  both  legs  (aft.  40  h.).  \_Fra  H — »,] 

* Comp.  601,  602. 


282 


BRYONIA. 


On  the  outside  of  the  left  calf  bruised  pain  on  moving  and  turn- 
ing the  foot,  as  also  on  touching  ; when  quite  at  rest  numb  feeling 
on  the  part  for  many  days  (aft.  12  h.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

Swelling  without  redness  of  the  lower  half  of  the  legs,  with  the 
exception  of  the  feet,  which  are  not  swollen.  \_Hbg. J 

Violent  drawing  pain  in  the  leg,  especially  the  calf,  for  an  hour, 
followed  by  sweat  (aft.  4 d.). 

550.  Drawing  pain  in  the  shafts  of  the  bones  of  the  legs. 

(^Eruption  exuding  moisture  on  the  thighs.) 

A tearing,  twitching  pain  in  the  upper  half  of  the  tibia. 

A twitching  in  the  leg  at  night ; by  day  a twitching  like  an 
electric  shock. 

Sudden  swelling  of  the  legs. 

555.  In  the  morning  cramp  in  the  left  calf  (aft.  12  h.). 

At  night,  when  lying  in  bed,  cramp  in  the  feet,  in  the  dorsum  of 
the  feet  and  heels  (aft.  6 h.). 

At  night  cramp  in  the  calf  (a  contractive  tension)  which  went 
off  by  movement. 

Stitch-like  tearing  from  the  feet  up  to  the  houghs,  less  when  at 
rest  than  when  moving.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Pressure  on  the  inner  border  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  1 h.).  [i/rr.] 

560.  Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot  the  first  night.  [Tr. 

H— ».] 

Hot  swelling  of  the  foot  (aft.  8 h.). 

Hot  swelling  of  the  instep,  with  bruised  pain  when  the  foot  is 
stretched  out ; the  foot  feels  tense  on  treading,  and  on  touching  it  it 
pains  as  if  gathering  and  as  if  ulcerated. 

(White  pustules  on  the  foot,  with  pain  in  them  like  a bad  ulcer, 
the  foot  became  red,  and  he  could  not  walk  for  pain.) 

Along  with  the  swelling  of  the  feet  tearing  in  the  tibiae  and 
heaviness  in  the  arms. 

565.  In  the  evening  the  feet  feel  tense  and  swollen. 

In  the  ankle-joint  tension  on  moving. 

In  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  tensive  pain,  even  when  sitting. 

On  two  nights,  immediately  after  lying  down,  feeling  as  if  a hook 
penetrated  the  heel ; obtuse  stitches  rapidly  following  one  another, 
for  a quarter  of  an  hour. 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  needle-pricks  in  both  heels,  which  went 
off  after  rising. 

570.  Pain  in  the  feet  as  if  sprained. 

Shooting  in  the  feet.  \_Hbg.~\ 

In  both  soles  such  violent  shooting  that  she  could  not  tread,  with 
tension  in  the  ankle-joints  ; neither  could  she  lie  on  account  of 
tension  and  shooting.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Single  stitches  into  the  toes.  [Hbg.] 

In  the  hollow  part  of  the  sole  stitches  on  treading. 

575.  Knife-stabs  in  the  left  sole. 

In  the  hollow  of  the  soles  when  treading  pain  as  though  they 
were  numb*  and  tense. 

# Comp.  505. 


BRYONIA.  283 

Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  feet  and  numb  feeling  in  them,  as 
if  they  were  swollen. 

Shooting  and  aching  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,  also  pain  there 
as  if  frost-bitten. 

The  corn,  hitherto  painless,  aches  and  pains,  worst  when  tread- 
ing, but  also  when  at  rest. 

580.  Corns  pain  as  if  sore  on  the  slightest  touch,  even  of  the  bed- 
clothes. 

In  the  right  toe-ball  a shooting  pain,  more  when  sitting,  less 
when  walking. 

In  the  toe-balls  of  both  feet  a shooting,  with  great  feeling  of  heat 
towards  evening  ; he  must  take  off  his  shoes. 

The  (hitherto  painless)  corn  has  burning  shooting  pain  when 
touched  ever  so  gently  ; but  this  pain  ceased  immediately  on  apply- 
ing strong  pressure. 

Pain  on  the  left  toe-ball  as  if  bruised. 

585.  Bruised  pain  of  the  arms  and  legs,  even  when  lying,  and  worse 
when  sitting  than  when  walking  ; when  lying  he  must  always  change 
the  position  of  the  limbs  on  account  of  this  pain  j but  wherever  he 
placed  them  it  appeared  to  him  better  to  lay  them  somewhere  else. 

Every  part  of  the  body  when  grasped  pains  as  if  bruised  or  gather- 
ing, especially  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  particularly  in  the 
morning. 

All  the  body  is  painful,  as  if  the  flesh  were  loose,  for  sixteen  days. 

[Fr.  H — «.] 

All  the  limbs  are  as  if  bruised  and  paralysed  (in  the  evening),  as 
if  he  had  lain  on  a hard  couch  (aft.  4 h.). 

A painless  drawing  to  and  fro  in  the  affected  part. 

590.  Uneasy  aching  drawing  pain  in  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones, 
as  in  the  commencement  of  intermittent  fever,  in  the  forenoon  (aft. 
24  h.).  ' 

A pressing  in  the  whole  body,  especially  on  the  chest. 

Severe  drawing  through  all  the  limbs. 

It  is  intolerable  to  him  to  keep  the  affected  part  still,  he  moves 
it  up  and  down. 

A visible  twitching  in  the  arms  and  legs  when  sitting,  by  day. 

59 5.  When  the  pain  declines  the  part  trembles  and  the  face  becomes 
cold. 

Stitches  in  the  affected  part. 

Pricks  all  over  the  body,  as  with  pins. 

On  a slight  mental  emotion  fon  laughing)  there  suddenly  occurs 
a shooting  (itching)  burning  all  over  the  body  as  if  he  had  been 
whipped  with  nettles  or  had  nettlerash,  though  nothing  is  to  be  seen 
on  the  skin  ; this  burning  came  on  afterwards  by  merely  thinking  of 
it,  or  when  he  got  heated. 

Burning  itching  and  persistent  stitches  on  various  parts,  in  the 
evening  after  lying  down  in  bed  (aft.  2 h.). 

600.  Stitches  in  the  joints  when  moving  and  touching  them. 

Stitches  that  make  her  start  in  the  affected  part.* 

* Comp.  520. 


284 


BRYONIA. 


Shooting  in  the  affected  parts  when  pressing  on  them.* 

(A  painful  beating  in  the  arteries  throughout  the  body.) 

(Itch-like  eruption  only  on  the  joints — on  the  inside  of  the  wrists, 
on  the  bend  of  the  elbow  and  on  the  outer  side  of  the  olecranon  pro- 
cess, also  on  the  outer  side  of  the  knee  more  than  on  the  hough.) 

605.  Miliary  rash  on  the  arms,  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  chest,  and 
above  the  knees,  which  becomes  red  in  the  evening,  itches  and  burns 
before  she  lies  down  in  bed  ; in  bed,  however,  when  she  becomes 
warm,  the  rash  and  itching  disappear. 

Papules  come  on  the  abdomen  and  hips,  which  burn  and  itch,  and 
when  she  scratches  they  feel  sore. 

Yellowness  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body,  also  of  the  face 
(aft.  12  d.).  [Fr.  H—n .] 

Red  elevated  miliary  eruption  all  over  the  body,  in  a mother  and 
her  sucking  infant ; in  the  latter  it  appeared  after  two  days,  in  the 
mother  after  three  days.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Eruption  on  the  abdomen  and  on  the  back  up  to  the  nape  and  on 
the  forearms,  which  burns  and  smarts  before  midnight  and  in  the 
morning.  [Fr.  H — n.~\ 

610.  Eruption  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  back  to  over  the 
throat,  itching  so  violently  that  he  would  like  to  scratch  all  to  pieces. 

In  the  evening  griping  and  itching  on  the  legs,  about  the  knees 
and  on  the  thighs  ; after  scratching  or  rubbing  there  appear  small,  red, 
elevated  papules,  which  cause  a burning  pain ; when  the  papules  are 
developed  all  the  itching  ceases. 

Immediately  before  going  to  sleep,  by  day  or  in  the  evening,  on 
various  places  of  the  soft  parts  of  the  body,  a tearing  itching,  or, 
rather,  digging,  itching-burning  stitches. 

A tickling  itching  (by  day)  on  the  arms,  hands,  and  feet,  with 
miliary  papules. 

Red  round  spots,  like  lentils  and  larger,  on  the  skin  of  the  arms, 
without  sensation,  which  do  not  disappear  by  pressing  on  them. 

615.  Red,  small  spots  on  the  skin  of  the  arms  and  legs,  which  cause 
pain  as  from  stinging  nettles  ; when  pressed  they  disappear  for  an 
instant. 

An  excoriated,  painless  part  commences  to  burn  violently. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  ulcer. 

(The  ichor  of  an  ulcer  stains  the  linen  blackish.) 

The  ulcer  feels  chilly,  and  is  painful,  as  if  exposed  to  excessive 
cold. 

620.  In  the  morning,  after  rising,  a smarting  pain  in  the  region  of  the 
scab  (of  the  ulcer),  which  increases  when  he  stands,  is  relieved  when 
sitting,  and  disappears  during  moderate  exercise. 

In  the  region  of  the  scab  a throbbing,  which  is  nearly  shooting 
(after  dinner). 

He  disliked  the  open  air,  though  he  was  formerly  fond  of  it. 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

In  the  room  he  felt  too  anxious,  but  better  in  the  open  air.  [Fr. 
H—n.] 

* Comp.  418,  448,  512,  535. 


BRYONIA. 


285 


General  weakness.  \_Hbg.~] 

625.  Weakness  in  the  lower  extremities,  which  compelled  him  to  sit 
down,  [i/rr.] 

Weak,  lazy,  tired  and  sleepy.  \_Fr . H — «.] 

She  is  weak,  the  arms  and  legs  are  painful;  when  she  works  a 
little,  the  arms  are  like  to  sink  down,  and  when  she  goes  upstairs 
she  can  scarcely  get  on. 

When  walking,  especially  after  rising  from  a seat  and  on  com- 
mencing to  walk,  want  of  firmness  in  all  parts  of  the  body,  as  though 
all  the  muscles  had  lost  their  power  ; on  walking  further  this  is 
relieved  (aft.  48  h.). 

She  feels  weakest  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 

630.  When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  feels  qualmish  and  sick,  the 
legs  are  so  feeble  and  he  is  so  weak  in  the  head,  that  he  feels  as  if  he 
would  fall ; he  pants  and  there  comes  a warmth  into  the  chest  which 
goes  to  the  head ; in  the  room  this  went  off,  but  returned  in  the 
open  air. 

During  a walk  in  the  open  air  she  was  not  tired,  but  as  soon 
as  she  came  into  the  room  she  was  immediately  so  tired  that  she 
must  sit  or  lie  down. 

On  the  slightest  exertion  the  strength  is  immediately  gone. 

Heaviness  and  weariness  in  all  the  limbs  ; she  can  scarcely  move 
her  feet  from  heaviness,  when  walking. 

Weariness  of  the  feet,  as  if  she  had  been  running  a great  way. 

635.  On  rising  after  a meal  his  feet  feel  enormously  heavy. 

Exhaustion. 

Very  feeble  when  sitting,  less  so  when  he  walks. 

He  thinks  he  is  better  when  he  is  lying. 

In  the  morning  he  cannot  get  out  of  bed,  and  (without  being 
exhausted)  would  like  to  remain  long  in  bed. 

640.  Great  exhaustion  on  awaking  from  sleep. 

Soon  after  waking  from  his  (mid-day)  sleep  he  feels  more  poorly, 
all  his  morbid  symptoms  are  in  increased  degree,  and  he  is  out  of 
spirits. 

One  night  he  sleeps  soundly  till  the  morning,  and  remains  sleepy 
all  day,  the  next  he  sleeps  uneasily,  and  the  following  day  is 
wide  awake. 

On  rising  from  bed  he  has  an  attack  of  faintness,  with  cold  sweat 
and  rattling  in  the  abdomen. 

Very  much  disposed  to  yawn  (gapish) ; frequent  yawn- 
ing all  day. 

645.  Frequent  yawning.  [HbgJ] 

Constant  yawning  before  dinner,  with  great  thirst.  [.££/.] 

Stretching  and  extending  the  limbs  (in  the  afternoon), 

Drowsiness  immediately  after  eating.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Great  drowsiness,  also  by  day,  for  several  successive  days.  \_Fr. 
H — n.~\ 

650.  Constant  inclination  to  sleep  for  three  days.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

So  sleepy,  he  would  like  to  sleep  all  day,  for  thirteen  successive 
days.  \_Fr.  H — «.] 


286 


BRYONIA. 


Great  drowsiness  by  day  and  great  desire  for  the  midday  sleep  ; 
and  when  he  woke  from  this  all  his  limbs  were  as  if  asleep. 

By  day,  when  alone,  great  drowsiness. 

(Tired,  and  yet  he  cannot  sleep  ; when  he  wants  to  go  to  sleep 
he  loses  his  breath.) 

655.  She  tosses  about  with  her  hands  and  feet  till  1 a.m.,  as  from 
anxiety ; she  lies  as  if  deprived  of  reason,  with  cold  sweat  on  the 
forehead,  and  groans  ; thereupon  exhaustion  came  on. 

He  cannot  lie  in  bed  in  the  morning,  everything  he  lies  on  hurts 
him. 

At  night  in  bed  restlessness ; he  is  late  of  falling  asleep,  and  does 
not  sleep  soundly. 

She  tosses  about  in  bed  at  night  till  1 a.m.,  she  cannot  fall  asleep 
on  account  of  anxious  feeling  of  heat,  and  yet  she  has  no  heat 
perceptible  externally. 

Sleeplessness  on  account  of  agitation  in  the  blood  and  anxiety  (he 
must  get  up  out  of  bed)  ; the  thoughts  crowded  on  one  another, 
without  heat,  sweat,  or  thirst. 

660.  Immediately  after  lying  down  in  the  evening  in  bed  sensation  of 
heat  and  external  heat  all  over,  without  thirst,  all  night  long  ; he 
turns  from  one  side  to  the  other,  but  cannot  expose  any  part  without 
immediately  getting  violent  bellyache,  a pinching  shooting,  or  a 
shooting  pinching,  such  as  occurs  from  flatulent  spasm  here  and  there, 
with  sleeplessness  on  account  of  a great  flow  of  thoughts  ; in  the 
morning  this  condition  is  allayed,  but  no  flatulence  is  observed. 

Sleeplessness  at  night  on  account  of  agitation  in  the  blood  ; he 
tosses  about  in  bed. 

For  several  nights  he  cannot  sleep  for  heat  ; the  bed-clothes  are 
too  hot  for  him,  and  on  throwing  them  off  he  becomes  too  cool,  but 
without  thirst  and  almost  without  sweat. 

He  could  not  go  to  sleep  rightly,  a warmth  and  agitation  in  the 
blood  kept  him  awake  till  1 2 o’clock. 

He  cannot  get  to  sleep  at  night  before  2 a.m.,  and  must  toss  about 
in  bed  like  a child  that  has  become  restless  ; in  the  morning  after 
awaking  he  is  still  very  sleepy. 

665.  She  does  not  get  to  sleep  until  about  4 a.m.,  and  then  dreams  of 
dead  people. 

The  child  cannot  go  to  sleep  in  the  evening,  cannot  get  any 
rest  ; it  gets  out  of  bed. 

Sleeplessness  before  midnight. 

He  cannot  get  to  sleep  before  midnight  on  account  of  a frequent 
shuddering  sensation  that  runs  over  one  leg  or  arm,  followed  by 
some  perspiration. 

In  the  evening  in  bed,  after  a short  sleep,  she  wakes  up  ; she  has 
a twisting  about  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  she  becomes  sick  and  like 
to  be  suffocated,  she  must  sit  up. 

670.  Moaning  in  sleep  about  3 a.m. 

In  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep  she  starts  up  in  affright. 

Starting  on  going  to  sleep  in  bed  every  evening. 

Starting  up  in  sleep  so  as  to  wake. 


BRYONIA. 


287 


He  starts  up  from  an  anxious  dream  and  howls  aloud. 

675.  On  awaking  he  cannot  get  rid  of  his  dream  ; he  continues  to 
dream  though  awake. 

She  awakes  every  hour  during  the  night,  and  remembers  what 
she  has  dreamt,  and  when  she  falls  asleep  again  she  dreams  another 
equally  vivid  dream  which  she  remembers  equally  well  on  awaking. 

Very  restless  at  night ; about  3 a.m.  anxious  dreams  ; she  cries 
out  aloud  in  sleep. 

Dreams  causing  anxiety. 

He  dreams  when  awake  that  he  wishes  to  smash  some  one’s 
windows. 

680.  Restless  sleep  with  confused  dreams  ; he  tosses  from  one  side  to 
the  other.  [. Hbg .] 

Restless  sleep  full  of  thoughts.  \_Mch.'\ 

Somnambulic  state,  sleep-walking.  [Nicolai  . . .] 

Stool  passes  involuntarily  at  night  in  sleep.  \_F.  H — n. ] 

Dreams  full  of  quarrelling  and  vexatious  things. 

685.  Dreams  all  night  very  vividly  of  anxious  and  careful 
attention  to  his  business. 

In  his  dreams  he  is  occupied  with  household  affairs. 

In  her  dream  at  night  she  gets  up  and  goes  to  the  door  as  if  she 
would  go  out. 

(He  makes  motions  of  his  mouth  in  his  sleep  as  though  he  were 
chewing.) 

Wakened  up  out  of  sleep  he  talks  nonsense. 

690.  Nocturnal  delirious  talking. 

In  the  morning,  at  break  of  day,  delirious  chattering  of  business 
to  be  done,  which  ceases  when  the  pain  commences. 

Before  midnight  (about  10  p.m.),  along  with  great  heat  of  the 
body  and  perspiration  (without  thirst),  a delirious,  frightful  delusion, 
as  if  attacked  by  soldiers,  so  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  running 
away  (by  throwing  off  the  clothes  and  getting  cool  the  delirium  was 
allayed). 

Towards  evening,  in  sleep,  the  mouth  was  drawn  to  and  fro, 
the  eyes  were  opened  and  distorted,  and  she  talked  nonsense,  as 
though  she  were  awake ; she  spoke  distinctly,  but  hurriedly,  as  if 
she  imagined  that  strange  persons  were  about  her  ; she  looked  freely 
about  her,  talked  as  to  strange  children,  and  wanted  to  go  home. 

Waking  up  early  at  night. 

695.  He  sleeps  only  before  midnight,  and  then  no  longer,  remains 
wide  awake,  but  feels  great  weariness  when  lying,  which  increases  in 
the  legs  after  getting  up,  but  then  soon  goes  off  again. 

Sleep  does  not  refresh  him  ; on  awaking  in  the  morning  he  is 
still  quite  tired ; the  weariness  goes  off  in  getting  up  and  dressing. 

She  sleeps  all  day,  with  dry  intense  heat,  without  eating  or 
drinking,  with  twitching  in  the  face  ; she  passes  her  stools  involun- 
tarily six  times  under  her  ; they  are  brown  and  very  fetid. 

In  the  afternoon  shivering,  then  heat,  at  the  same  time  with 
chilliness  ; the  chilliness  was  in  the  chest  and  arms  (and  yet  the 
arms  and  chest  were  warmer  than  usual),  the  heat  was  in  the  head, 


288 


BRYONIA. 


with  pulsating  throbbing  pain  in  the  temples,  which  was  worse  in 
the  evening  j shivering,  heat  and  chilliness  were  unaccompanied  by- 
thirst. 

After  the  midday  siesta  he  is  chilly  and  dazed  in  the 
head. 

700.  He  must  drink  frequently  at  night  (aft.  30  h.). 

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  headache. 

On  awaking,  chilliness. 

(At  night  the  hands  and  feet  are  as  if  dead  (insensible),  asleep, 
icy  cold,  and  cannot  be  warmed.) 

He  feels  cold  all  down  his  right  side. 

705.  Chilliness  in  the  arms. 

Chilliness  all  over,  all  the  first  day. 

Chilliness  in  the  open  air.  \_Fr.  H — «.] 

Violent  rigor  throughout  the  body,  as  in  ague,  which  compels 
her  to  lie  down,  with  shooting  pain  in  the  left  side,  above  the  hip, 
as  if  a suppurating  ulcer  there  would  contract,  but  without  thirst  or 
subsequent  heat  (aft.  48  h.).  \_Stf.'] 

Rigor  all  over  the  skin. 

710.  Rigor  towards  evening. 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  chilliness  in  bed. 

Chilliness  in  the  evening  before  lying  down. 

Much  shivering. 

Chilliness  in,  and  dread  of,  the  open  air. 

715.  After  a walk  in  the  open  air  she  gets  chilly  in  the  room  ; she  did 
not  feel  chilly  in  the  open  air. 

During  a sudden  general  heat,  feeling  of  chilliness  (aft.  | h.). 

Great  thirst  (he  must  drink  much  cold  fluid)  with 
internal  heat,  without  being  hot  to  the  touch  externally. 

lHbg.-\ 

Great  thirst.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Thirst  without  external  heat.  \_Hbg.~\ 

720.  Sensation  of  heat  in  the  face  with  redness  of  it  and 
thirst  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Hrr .] 

Flying  heat.  [//%.] 

Heat  in  the  interior  of  the  body  (especially  in  the  abdomen). 

[Hbgl 

In  the  evening  heat  in  the  external  ear,  followed  by  shivering 
and  rigor  in  the  thighs  (aft.  4 h.). 

Fever:  lying  down,  chilliness,  yawning,  nausea  ; then  perspira- 
tion without  thirst,  from  10  p.m.  till  10  a.m. 

725.  Fever : in  the  forenoon  heat  (with  thirst)  ; after  some  hours  (in 
the  afternoon)  chilliness  without  thirst  with  redness  of  face  and  slight 
headache. 

At  every  movement  and  every  noise  she  is  attacked  with  sudden 
dry  heat. 

Heat  only  in  the  lower  extremities,  in  frequent  fits  ; she  feels  as 
if  she  got  into  hot  water. 

In  the  evening,  hot  red  cheeks  and  rigor  all  over,  with  goose-skin 
and  thirst. 


BRYONIA, 


289 


h.),  then  adipsia,  with  cold  hands  and  feet 


740. 


First  thirst  (aft. 

(aft.  4 h.). 

’3°'  ViotZt1  >“■  *1*  g»  thirsty. 

Great  thirst. 

drink  doe!  nhotrSoppresVh“.and  mUSt  ^ mUCh  3t  3 time>  and  the 

T(,thlm°rning’  °n  risinS>  great  thirst. 

735’  At  t.hlrst  'Vncreased  by  drinking  beer. 

Only  internal  heat  with  insatiable  thirst. 

Heat  on  the  body  without  thirst 

a.  ii7h”r 1 ,im“ drf  h“  ■“ 

S the  SS  to“nhSI  Ldhe  Si  ""dl,"d  “*  W™' 
forehead.  d ’ 11  aPPeared  to  come  out  at  the 

. „ r T°Wfds  evening  heat  of  the  face. 

745-  A red,  round,  hot  spot  on  the  cheek,  over  the  zviroma 

vessel  7 Sreat  Warmth  ; the  bIood  — to  blrl  Tn  the  blood- 
Red  urine. 

nigh?  br°ke  °Ut  int°  PersP'ration  on  the  least  exertion,  also  at 

°yZ  Sf  ’'*“■»  to  ^ otol  air. 

Morning  swea"'"®  esPecia%  - the  feet. 

An  anxious  perspiration  preventing  sleep  [Fr  H „ 1 
He  perspires  while  eating.  [Fr  H-„  ? L ] 

He  perspires  on  the  slightest  exertion.  [Fr  H-n  ^ 

lyingTn  rd.P^rS-„.°/  th£  Wh°le  b0d>g  aIso  of  ‘he  head,  when 
nigh?]/Y ,I]ICh  l0°ked  like  oiI  when  w,Ped  off,  by  day  and 

hair  waJdPri^g  wT  [fTh!^  the  whoIe  bod7  i even  the 

sive^8®  “r0^-”]1  SWCat  fr0m  3 P-m-,  for  twenty  succes- 

76°'  Jtofuse  perspirationfor  six  successive  nights.  (Fr  H-n  1 
Some  perspiration  towards  morning  after  waking  ] 

InThAnAhfA  P/°fuse  sweat  during  a sound  sleep  at  night. 

for  four  hours  perspiration ^ ^ bef°re  the  sweat>  then 
ceased  headache  came  on  mm  sweetish-sour  smell,  before  this 

after  getdng  up  changed  into  emSn«  rf^htf 

transput6,  whS  fasted”  tlf/  nf  ^ 3 ^ ^ M into  3 s%ht 
, wmch  lasted  till  morning,  during  which  he  lay  most 

*9 


750. 


755' 


290 


BRYONIA. 


easily  on  the  back,  and  only  slumbered  a little,  with  dryness  of  the 
mouth  in  front  and  of  the  lips,  without  thirst  (aft.  8 h.). 

765.  In  bed  slight  transpiration  from  evening  till  morning,  during 
which  he  only  sleeps  from  12  till  3 o’clock. 

Raving  about  business  for  an  hour  (aft.  J h.). 

He  attempted  several  times  to  escape  from  bed.  [Fr.  H — n.~\ 
Hesitation  ; apprehensiveness  (aft.  18  h.). 

Anguish  in  the  whole  body,  that  always  drove  him  about,  and 
wherever  he  came  he  had  no  rest. 

770.  Anxiety;  he  is  apprehensive  about  the  future.  \_Hrr.~] 
Very  irritable  disposition,  disposed  to  starting,  fear,  and  crossness. 
Very  cross  and  inclined  to  anger. 

First  dejection  of  spirits,  lastly  (aft.  5 d.)  cheerfulness.  \_Mch.~\ 
Dejection  of  spirits.  \_Hbg.~] 

775.  Much  weeping  for  a day  and  a half.  [Fr.  H — n .] 

Disposition  at  once  angry,  cross  and  lachrymose. 

Cross  ; imagined  she  could  not  finish  her  work  ; she  always  took 
hold  of  the  wrong  thing  and  constantly  wished  to  take  something 
else  ; then  a pressing  aching  headache  in  the  forehead. 

Ill-humoured  and  disposed  to  scold.  \Hbg.~] 

Morose  ; looking  at  everything  with  ill-  will.  \_Hbg!\ 

780.  Too  busy  ; she  wishes  to  undertake  and  to  work  at  too  many 
things  (aft.  20  h.). 

(Extreme  ill-humour;  indisposed  to  think;  fatigue  of  the  mental 
powers.) 


CALCAREA  ACETICA.1 

(. Acetate  of  Lime.') 

Experience,  and  experience  alone,  but  not  baseless  conjecture,  can 
and  dare  pronounce  respecting  the  power  of  drugs  to  effect  alterations 
in  the  health  of  human  beings. 

From  the  earliest  times  it  has  been  firmly  accepted  as  a maxim  in 
ordinary  medicine,  that  calcareous  substances  introduced  and  taken  into 
the  human  body  are  useless  and  powerless.  It  was,  no  doubt,  conceded 
that  they  absorbed  and  neutralised  morbid  acids  present  in  the  stomach, 
but  even  in  such  cases  the  calcareous  neutral  salt  thence  resulting  was 
held  to  be  unmedicinal. 

In  the  ordinary  condition  of  the  stomach  there  is  no  free  acid  in  the 
gastric  juice,  and  likewise  none  in  many  of  its  morbid  states,  and  hence 
pure  calcareous  earth,  considering  its  nature,  may  perhaps  not  be  a 
medicine  capable  of  altering  the  health  of  human  beings ; but  the  infer- 
ence from  this  as  to  its  non-medicinal  character  in  a state  of  solution,  with- 
out an  appeal  to  experience  on  the  subject,  is,  like  all  inferences  a priori 
in  medicine,  which  are  not  based  on  facts,  to  say  the  least,  extremely 
premature  and  dogmatic,  like  most  of  those  in  ordinary  medicine. 

Some  cases  of  great  disturbance  of  the  health  following  the  ingestion 
of  pure  carbonate  of  lime  in  persons  who  were  manifestly  suffering 
from  morbid  acidity  in  the  stomach  induced  me  to  institute  experi- 
ments with  it  in  a dissolved  state,  and  I found  it  possessed  of  great 
medicinal  power,  as  the  following  symptoms  show. 

In  order  to  obtain  pure  calcareous  earth  dissolved  in  pure  acetic  acid, 
I boiled  crude,  well-washed  oyster  shells  for  an  hour  in  pure  spring 
water,  then  broke  them  into  fragments  without  using  any  metal  instru- 
ment, and  dissolved  these  fragments  in  distilled  vinegar,  which  I 
heated  up  to  the  boiling  point  in  a porcelain  vessel  until  complete  satu- 
ration was  gradually  effected.  The  filtered  solution  was  evaporated  to 
one  fifth  in  a similar  vessel,  and  with  this  fluid  neutral  salt,  without  the 
addition  of  alcohol,  the  following  experiments  were  made. 

It  has  a dark  yellow  colour,  and  after  a time  precipitates  a dark 
coloured  glutinous  substance,  whereby  the  solution  obtains  a lighter 
yellow  colour.  The  addition  of  some  alcohol,  about  half  as  much  by 
measure  as  the  quantity  of  the  solution,  preserves  the  preparation  from 
becoming  mouldy,  and  makes  it  fit  for  medicinal  use. 

A drop  of  this  is  not  seldom  a too  large  homoeopathic  dose.  Ten  to 
twelve  globules  the  size  of  poppy  seeds  moistened  with  it  are  usually 
sufficient  for  a full  dose. 


1 From  vol.  v,  2nd  edit.,  1826. 


292 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


Frequent  very  small  doses  of  camphor  allay  the  action  of  this  medi- 
cine when  it  acts  too  violently  in  irritable  subjects. 

[Ha  hnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Franz,  Hartmann,  Lang- 
HAMMER,  and  WlSLICENUS. 

No  symptoms  are  taken  from  old-school  authorities. 

The  1st  Edit,  has  255  symptoms,  all  “observations  of  others.”  This  2nd  Edit, 
has  270,  236  only  being  observations  of  others,  while  34  are  Hahnemann’s  own.  In 
the  Chr.  Krank.  the  symptoms  of  calc,  acet .,  reduced  to  253,  are  incorporated  with 
those  of  calc.  carb.y  but  distinguished  by  a sign.] 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 

Vertigo,  as  if  the  body  did  not  stand  firm  (aft.  6 h.).  [/ZT] 
Attack  of  stupefying  vertigo,  the  head  tended  forwards  to  the 
left  side  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  f h.).  [Zr.] 

Slight  transient  giddiness  in  the  head  (aft.  | h.).  \_Htn.~\ 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  vertigo,  he  inclined  to  fall  to  the 
right  side  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

5.  Headache  as  from  much  rapid  turning  round — as  if  stupid  in  the 
head,  from  3 a.m.  till  4 p.m.  (aft.  25  d.). 

Every  time  he  stooped  sensation  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  as 
if  pains  in  the  head  commenced  (aft.  h.).  \_Htn.~\ 

Aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  forehead,  as  in  vertigo, 
when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  h.).  [Zr.] 

In  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  jerking  pressing  outwards,  which 
extended  to  the  nape  (aft.  14  h.).  \_Htn. ] 

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  especially  over  the  left  eyebrow, 
when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 

to.  Violent  pressing  outwards  in  the  whole  of  the  left  half  of  the 
brain  (aft.  12  h.).  \_Rtn .] 

Aching  pain  darting  rapidly  through  the  occiput, 
which  only  goes  off  gradually  (aft.  34  h.).  [Htn.] 

Pressive  pain  in  the  right  temple,  close  to  the  eye,  as 

if  something  hard  pressed  upon  it  (aft.  5^  h.).  \_Htn.~\ 

After  stooping  for  some  time,  when  standing,  heavy  headache, 
with  pressure  outwards  in  the  whole  forehead,  but  especially  over  the 
left  eye  (aft.  5J  h.).  [ZZ«.] 

Aching  pressing  pain  in  the  whole  head,  especially  in  both 
temples  (att.  9 h.).  \_Htn.'] 

15.  Drawing  aching  headache  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  with 
stiff  sensation  in  the  nape.  [Zz.] 

Drawing  aching  headache  in  the  left  palpebral  region.  [Zz.] 

In  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  an  outward  pressing  pain  (aft.  J 
h.).  \_Htn.~] 

When  reading  obfuscation  of  the  whole  head,  with  aching  stupe- 
fying pain  in  the  forehead  like  a vertigo,  which  deprived  him  of  his 
mental  powers  ; he  must  stop  reading,  and  knew  not  where  he  was 
(when  sitting)  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Zr.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  right  frontal  protuberance,  which  extended  to 
the  right  eye,  and  caused  it  to  close  involuntarily  (aft.  1 J h.).  \_Htn.'] 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


293 


20.  In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed,  aching  stupefying  pains  in 
the  whole  head,  as  if  he  had  not  yet  slept  enough,  or  had  been 
revelling  all  night  (aft.  14  h.).  [Lr.] 

Violent  out-pressing,  aching  pain  in  the  left  temporal  region  (aft. 

13*  M- 

Whilst  reading,  when  sitting,  aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  fore- 
head, such  as  one  gets  in  a violent  wind  (aft.  29  h.).  \_Lr.~] 

Sensation  in  the  occiput  as  if  it  were  pressed  asunder  from  time 
to  time  (aft.  9^  h.).  [Htn.] 

Aching  stupefying  headache,  which  involves  espe- 
cially the  whole  forehead,  when  at  rest  and  when 
moving.  [. Lr .] 

25.  Drawing  headache  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  over  the  eye 
and  in  the  occiput,  on  straining  the  thinking  power  (aft.  2 h.).  [/%.] 
Obtuse  pressive  darts  into  both  temples  (aft.  24  h.).  [TV's.] 

When  walking  obtuse  pressive  darts,  especially  in  the  left  side 
of  the  forehead,  going  off  during  the  walk  (aft.  27  h.).  [Lr.] 

The  head  is  very  heavy,  in  both  temples  he  has  strong  jerks,  and 
the  whole  head  is  painful  when  he  stoops,  but  this  goes  off  on  rising 
up  again  (aft.  9^  h.).  [HtnT] 

On  the  top  of  the  head  in  the  region  of  the  crown  strong  throbbing, 
like  that  of  an  artery,  with  cutting  blows  outwards  (aft,  10  h.).  [TVs]. 

30.  Aching  drawing,  sometimes  tearing,  headache,  sometimes  in  the 
forehead,  sometimes  in  the  occiput,  sometimes  in  the  temples,  which 
goes  off  by  applying  pressure,  and  disappears  on  straining  the  thoughts 
(aft.  3 d.).  [Fz.-] 

When  standing,  regularly  recurring  out-boring  knife  thrusts  in 
the  left  temporal  region,  which  were  only  alleviated  by  touching,  but 
which  immediately  disappeared  on  sitting  down  (aft.  j h.).  [ Lr .] 
Violent  stitches  by  jerks  through  the  whole  left  half  of  the  brain, 
which  are  often  renewed,  and  then  leave  there  an  asunder-pressing 
sensation  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.] 

Intermittent  boring  knife  thrusts  in  the  left  temple,  going  off  on 
touching  (while  sitting)  (aft.  8 h.).  [Lr.] 

Pulsating  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  crown  (aft.  some  m.). 

35.  When  sitting  boring  stitch-like  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  fore- 
head, which  goes  off  immediately  on  touching,  walking,  and  standing 
(aft.  121  h.).  [Lr.] 

Intermittent  needle  pricks  in  the  left  side  of  the  fore- 
head in  all  positions  (aft.  7,  27  h.).  [Lr]. 

In  the  open  air  he  is  quite  well,  but  as  soon  as  he  enters  a room 
the  headache  recurs  with  increased  severity,  and  he  is  very  cross 
and  unwilling  to  speak.  [Tz.] 

Aching  stupefying  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  above  the 
eyebrow,  which  is  particularly  aggravated  by  stooping  (aft.  50  h.). 

VLr-\ 

Fine  stitches  on  the  crown,  externally  (aft.  7 h.).  [TVs.] 

40.  Itching  formication  on  the  hairy  scalp,  not  removed  by  rubbing 
(aft.  10  h.).  [TVs.] 


294 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


Tickling  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp,  which  compels  scratching, 
during  which  the  roots  of  the  hairs  are  painful  when  touched,  for 
half  a day  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Zr.] 

Boring  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  just  as  if  it  penetrated 
into  the  brain  (aft.  3 h.).  {JVs.~\ 

On  touching  the  occiput  sore  pain  on  the  left  side,  as  if  the  part 
were  gathering  (aft.  32  h.).  [Zr.] 

The  whole  of  the  scalp  is  painfully  sensitive,  especially  on  moving 
the  frontal  muscles  to  and  fro  (aft.  i-J  h.).  \JVsJ\ 

45.  Drawing  and  aching  in  the  temporal  bone.  [Z%.] 

Aching  drawing  headache  in  the  right  temporal  muscle,  and 
pressure  on  the  upper  row  of  teeth  ; both  go  off  as  long  as  he  presses 
on  the  temple,  and  instead  thereof  there  occurs  aching  pain  in  the 
forehead  (aft.  2 d.).  [Z%.] 

In  the  evening  drawing  aching  pain  in  the  temporal  muscle. 
[.Fz.] 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Ws.~\ 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left  temporal  region  (aft.  8, 
14  h.).  [Zr .] 

50.  After  a meal  drawing  aching  pain  about  the  temples  (aft. 2 d.). 
[Tz.] 


Pressive  sensation  in  the  left  temporal  bone  as  if  it 
were  pressed  in,  at  once  internally  and  externally  (aft. 
7ih.).  [®».] 

On  moving  the  lower  jaw  digging  stitches  in  the  left  temple, 
near  the  superciliary  arch  (aft.  5 h.).  \_Lr.~] 

Suppurating  pimple  above  the  left  eyebrow  (aft.  5 h.).  [Zr.] 
Boring  stitch  on  the  upper  border  of  the  orbit,  from  within  out- 
wards (aft.  5 h.).  [/Zr.] 

55.  Dilated  pupils  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Zr.] 

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  25,  26  h.).  [Zr.] 

Shooting  in  the  internal  and  external  canthi.  [Z%.] 

Violent  tearing  stitches  in  the  right  eye  as  if  it  were  inflamed 
(aft.  4h.).  [Fz.] 

Itching  stitches  in  the  internal  canthi,  which  go  off  by  rubbing 
(aft.  ih.).  [IVs.] 

60.  Burning  sensation  in  the  left  upper  eyelid,  towards 
the  inner  canthus  (aft.  6£  h.).  [/ZT] 

Mucus  in  the  canthi,  for  two  days  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 

On  moving  the  eyelids  he  notices  stickiness  of  them,  with  aching 
in  the  outer  canthi  (aft.  55  h.).  [Zr.] 

On  awaking  from  sleep  the  eyes  were  closed  up  with  mucus 
(aft.  24  h.).  [Zr.] 

Tickling  itching  on  the  right  outer  canthus,  which  compels 
rubbing  (aft.  25  h.).  [Zr.] 

65.  Fine  formication  under  the  eye  and  on  the  side  of  the  nose  under 
the  skin.  [/ZT] 

Fine  twitching  on  the  upper  border  of  the  orbit  down  to  the  nose 
(aft.  f h.).  [PTs.] 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


295 


Long-sightedness  *$  he  could  see  all  objects  distinctly  at  a con- 
siderable distance  all  day  long  (aft.  284  h.).  [Lr.] 

Slight  whirring  in  both  ears,  with  confusion  of  the  whole  head 
(aft.  i h,).  [IVs.] 

Cramp-feeling  on  the  back  of  the  left  concha  (aft.  9 h.).  [LL/z.] 

70.  Twitching  in  the  cartilage  of  the  ear  (aft.  48  h.).  \_Ws?\ 

A boil  under  the  lobe  of  the  ear,  on  account  of  which,  when 
chewing,  there  is  tensive  pain  in  the  maxillary  joint. 

Sensation  in  the  right  ear  as  if  something  were  pushed  before  the 
membrana  tympani,  without  diminution  of  the  hearing  (aft.  15  h.). 
[Lr.] 

Stitches  in  the  ears. 

Throbbing  on  both  malar  bones  like  the  pulsation  of  an  artery 
(aft.  6 h.).  [TVs.-] 

75.  Tensive  sensation  in  the  right  cheek  as  if  it  were  swollen  (aft. 
2d.).  [Fz.] 

In  the  middle  of  the  cheek  a painless  pimple  that  exuded  moisture 
after  scratching  it,  and  left  behind  it  a greenish  scab  (aft.  48  h.). 
r. 

Dull  pain  in  the  fleshy  parts  of  the  left  cheek  (aft.  2^  h.).  [Lr.] 
Gnawing  pain  at  the  root  of  the  nose  (aft.  1 h.).  \JVs.~\ 

Illusion  of  smell  ; in  the  nose  he  perceived  a smell  as  of  rotten 
eggs  or  gunpowder  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Lgh.~\ 

80.  Aching  pain  in  the  right  upper  jaw  when  chewing  (aft.  3 h.). 
[ Htn.~\ 

Violent  tearing  in  the  right  upper  jaw  (aft.  9 h.).  \_HtnJ\ 

Itching  formication  on  the  upper  lip,  under  the  septum  nasi, 
which  goes  off*  on  rubbing,  but  immediately  reappears  in  another 
place  close  by  (aft.  1 h.).  \Ws^\ 

Roughness  and  dryness  of  the  lips,  especially  of  the  upper  lip,  as 
if  it  would  chap  (aft.  49  h.).  [Lr.] 

Under  the  right  commissure  of  the  mouth  a large  exuding  scab, 
for  many  days  (aft.  14  d.). 

85.  Tickling  itching  on  the  border  of  the  left  lower  jaw 
which  forces  him  to  scratch  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.] 

Swelling  of  the  submaxillary  gland,  with  aching  feeling  in  it. 

[^z-] 

Gnawing  toothache  in  the  right  upper  molars,  as  if  they  would 
become  hollow,  in  all  positions  (aft.  6 h.).  [Lr.] 

Boring  sensation  in  the  upper  gums,  on  the  right  side,  followed 
by  swelling  of  them,  with  aching  drawing  in  the  right  temporal 
muscle  (aft.  3 d.).  [L%.] 

Stitches  in  the  teeth. 

90.  Toothache  : fine  shooting  in  the  gums  of  the  whole  upper  jaw 
(aft.  h.).  [Lr.] 

Sensation  of  roughness  and  soreness  of  the  tongue,  which  is 
covered  with  white  fur  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.] 

Heat  in  the  mouth,  burning  on  the  tongue,  and  painful  vesicles 
on  it. 


In  a very  short-sighted  person  5 curative  reaction  of  the  organism. 


296 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


The  back  of  the  palate  is  rough  and  scrapy  ; this  excites  coughing, 
but  is  not  removed  by  coughing  (aft.  12  h.).  \Ws.] 

Sore  throat : violent  stitch  on  the  right  and  upper  part  of  the 
oesophagus  when  not  swallowing  (aft.  J h.).  [ Htn .] 

95.  In  the  morning  much  hawking  up  of  mucus. 

Swelling  of  the  left  cervical  gland  under  the  angle  of  the  jaw,  as 
large  as  a pigeon’s  egg,  with  shooting  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the 
throat  when  swallowing. 

Dryness  in  the  mouth,  with  feeling  of  an  excessive  quantity  of 
mucus  at  the  back  of  the  pharynx,  observable  when  swallowing 
(aft.  if  h.).  [Lr.] 

Dryness  in  the  mouth  as  from  chalk  (aft.  1 h.).  [Tz.] 

Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  ; he  could  not  swallow  down 
the  saliva  fast  enough  (aft.  1 J h.).  [Zr.] 

100.  Qualmishness  and  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  (aft.  3 h.). 

00 . 

Milk  tastes  sour  and  is  repugnant  to  him  (aft.  \ h.).  [Htn.] 

Milk  tastes  well  to  him  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn!] 

Food  has  too  little  taste  ; meat  especially  is  not  relished. 
[*■*•]  „ 

After  a meal  the  headache  is  always  increased,  and  even  while 
eating  it  comes  on  with  great  sensitiveness  of  the  teeth  when  chewing, 
as  if  they  were  loose  and  bent  over.  [Fz.] 

105.  Great  thirst  and  desire  for  cold  drinks,  particularly 
for  fresh  water;  he  must  drink  much  cold  water,  for 
eight  hours  (aft.  8,  10,  55  h.).  [Lr .] 

Frequent  empty  eructation  (aft.  £,  1 h.).  [Lr.] 

Sourish  eructation  (aft.  \ h.).  [Lr.] 

Constant  sourish  eructation.  [Htn.] 

Disgusting  sourish  eructation  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.] 
no.  Frequent  hiccup  (aft.  J,  31,  10,  28,  34  h.).  [Lr.] 

Severe  hiccup  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  5 h.).  \JVs.] 

Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  ; he  thought  he  must  vomit 
(aft.  Q h.).  [Lr.] 

He  felt  as  if  he  must  vomit  ; he  has  eructations,  and  the  water 
flows  into  the  mouth,  with  a kind  of  vertigo  in  the  head  (imme- 
diately). [Htn.] 

When  sitting  great  anxiety,  which  appeared  to  come  from  the 
stomach,  with  hot  burning  in  the  abdomen,  which  all  goes  off  imme- 
diately when  standing  or  walking  (aft.  26  h.).  [Lr.] 

1 15.  Long  stitches  in  the  right  side  under  the  ribs  (aft.  13 \ h.). 

[®*.] 

Tensive  oppressive  pain  in  the  whole  subcostal  region,  and  in 
the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  19  h.).  [Htn.] 

Pinching  nipping  sensation  in  the  whole  subcostal  region,  which 
extends  to  the  sternum,  there  becomes  fine  shooting,  and  excites 
eructation  (aft.  J h.).  [Htn.] 

Dull  pinching  choking  sensation  just  under  the  scro- 
biculus cordis  (aft.  i h.).  [Htn.] 

Anxiety  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  6 h.).  [Ws.] 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


297 


120.  Violent  pinching  pains  in  the  epigastrium  and  chest,  which  end 
here  and  there  in  a small  stitch  (aft.  \ h.).  [Htn. ] 

A stitch  that  gives  a shock  from  the  hepatic  region  into  the 
chest  (aft.  10  h.).  [Tz.] 

Pinching  sensation  on  a small  spot,  somewhat  below  the  navel, 
which  on  rubbing  with  the  finger  changes  into  a clucking  (aft.  2§  h.). 
[Htn.] 

Tearing  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  increased  by  inspiration  (aft. 
2 h.).  [Ws.] 

In  the  abdominal  muscles  under  the  ribs  a number  of  needle- 
pricks  from  within  outwards,  especially  on  inspiring  (aft.  5 h.). 

125.  Frequent  formicating,  upward-pushing  and  loud  rumbling  in  the 
right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  from  accumulated  flatulence,  which  also 
came  away  (aft.  J h.).  [Lr.] 

Audible  bubbling  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  diar- 
rhoea would  come  on  (aft.  3 J,  5 h.).  [Lr.] 

Loud  rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen  as 
from  emptiness  (aft.  i±,  28  h.).  [Lr.] 

In  the  right  lumbar  region  a cutting,  out-pressing  pain,  which 
goes  off*  for  a short  time  when  touched,  but  returns  immediately. 
[*■*.] 

Sore  pain  on  both  sides  of  the  groin,  as  if  a glandular  swelling 
would  occur  there,  especially  perceptible  when  walking ; a small 
elevation  of  the  gland  can  be  felt  there  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.] 

130.  Tearing  pain  in  the  inguinal  glands  when  sitting  and  walking 
(aft.  9 h.).  [Fz.] 

Pinching,  almost  spasmodic,  pain  in  the  abdominal  integuments 
of  the  right  groin  on  a small  spot,  only  painful  when  speaking  and 
pressing  with  the  finger  on  it  (aft.  8 h.).  [Htn.] 

Aching  tensive  sensation  in  the  left  inguinal  region  (aft.  8 h.). 
[Htn.] 

Swelling  of  the  glands  in  the  left  groin  (aft.  22  d.). 

Tension  in  the  inguinal  glands,  also  when  sitting  (aft.  40  d.). 
135.  Pinching  bellyache  low  down  in  the  hypogastrium  in  the  region 
of  the  bladder,  frequently  recurring,  whereupon  some  flatus  always 
passes  (aft.  \ h.).  [Htn^] 

Frequent  noiseless  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.] 

During  the  evacuation  of  the  stool,  a tenesmus  at  the  end  of  the 
rectum,  and  loud  grumbling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Ws.] 

Diarrhoea  three  or  four  times  a day,  for  many  days,  not 
weakening. 

Frequent  evacuation  of  hard,  pappy,  and  thin 
motions  during  the  day,  without  suffering;  but  the 
following  two  days,  constipation.*  [Lr.] 

140.  The  second  day  he  has  no  stool.  [Fz.] 

* 139  to  143.  As  acetate  of  lime  excites  and  frequently  causes  with  such  certainty 
stools  and  urine  in  the  primary  action,  and  that  without  pain  in  the  bowels  (the 
sensation  in  the  rectum,  S.  1 37,  excepted),  the  homoeopathic  physician  will  know  how 
to  employ  it  usefully. 


29$ 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


Stool  first  thin,  then  crumbly,  without  pain  in  the  bowels  (aft. 

5i  h.).  [Htn.] 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  copious  discharge  of 
urine  (aft.  i,  4 h.).  [ Lr .] 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  scanty  and  very 
scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  2 6 h.).  [Lr.] 

(The  urine 

[TVs.-] 

145.  An  acute  tug  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.* 

Tickling  itching  at  the  end  of  the  glans  penis,  compelling 
rubbing  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.] 

Itching  tickling  on  the  prepuce,  compelling  rubbing  (aft.  9 h.). 
[Lr.] 

Along  with  the  tensive  pain  in  the  left  groin,  the  left  testicle  is 
drawn  spasmodically,  and  with  pain,  like  aching,  up  to  the  abdo- 
men, and  is  also  painful  when  touched. 

The  first  night  two  seminal  emissions  with  voluptuous  but 
unremembered  dreams.  [Htn.] 

150.  Two  seminal  emissions  in  one  night  without  voluptuous  dreams. 

[Lr.] 

Seminal  emission  the  first  night.  [T%.] 

(At  first  it  increases  the  leucorrhoea.) 

Discharge  of  blood  from  the  womb,  for  some  days,  like  menses, 
not  weakening,  in  an  old  woman  who  had  not  menstruated  for  years 
(aft.  7 d.). 

* * 

* 

Frequent  sneezing,  without  coryza.  [Lr.] 

155.  Coryza  with  painful  sensitiveness  of  the  nose  and  internal  heat 
in  the  head  (aft.  72  h.).  [JVs.] 

Fluent  coryza  with  much  sneezing  (aft.  27  h.).  [Lr.] 

Fluent  coryza  with  headache  t (aft.  5 d.). 

Stuffed  coryza  with  frequent  sneezing  (aft.  52  h.).  [Lr.] 

Severe  stuffed  coryza  with  pains  in  the  head  (aft.  32  d.). 

160.  Tickling  irritation  in  the  trachea  causing  short  cough 
(aft.  2\  h.).  [Lr.] 

On  expiration  loud  rattling  in  the  windpipe,  as  in  children  whose 
chest  is  full  of  mucus,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  37  h.).  [Lr.] 

Obtuse  blows  from  the  posterior  wall  of  the  tho- 
racic cavity  up  to  between  the  shoulders,  synchronous 
with  the  heart’s  heats,  with  great  anguish  (aft.  8 h.). 

Ws.] 

Difficult  inspiration  and  great  anxious  tightness  of  chest,  like 
tension  on  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,  so  that  it  took  away  his 
breath,  to  suffocation,  for  an  hour  3 when  moving  and  when  sitting 
(aft.  30  h.).  [Lr.] 

Anguish  in  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  too  tight;  his 
breath  is  short,  particularly  when  sitting,  and  he  feels 
an  aching  pain  in  the  whole  chest,  especially  on  inspi- 

* From  a dose  of  powdered  oyster  shells  in  acidity  of  the  stomach. 

-}•  Both  removed  immediately  by  smelling  at  a solution  of  camphor. 


after  standing  looks  cloudy,  like  muddy  water.) 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


299 

ration;  the  heart  heats  anxiously  and  tremblingly. 

[^.]  . 

165.  Itching  stitches  on  the  chest,  worst  when  expiring,  going  off  by- 
rubbing  (aft.  46  h.).  \Ws^\ 

At  every  beat  of  the  heart  a broad  stitch  upwards  in  the  pectoral 
muscles  (aft.  10  h.).  \_TVs.~] 

Shooting  drawing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart  (aft.  9J  h.) 

The  whole  chest  is  painfully  sensitive  on  touching  and  on  inspi- 
ration. [ TVs .] 

Gnawing  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  as  if  externally  on  the 
ribs  and  sternum,  only  slightly  aggravated  by  inspiring  (aft.  l h.). 

170.  In  the  last  false  ribs  a cutting  pain  from  within  outwards,  in- 
creased by  inspiring  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Ws!\ 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  left  side  under  the  axilla  out  of  the  chest, 
worst  when  inspiring  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.'] 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  from  within  outwards, 
independent  of  inspiration  (aft.  7 h.).  \_TVs.~] 

Severe  stitches  out  of  the  thoracic  cavity  through  the 
spinal  column,  out  between  the  shoulder  blades  (aft.  | h.). 
[^•] 

Twitching  shooting  on  the  sacrum  and  at  the  same 
time  on  the  leg  above  the  ankle-joint  (aft.  2 h.).  [/Vs.] 

175.  On  walking  in  the  open  air,  frequent  needle  pricks  in  the  middle 
of  the  spine,  almost  making  him  cry  out,  somewhat  diminished  by 
standing  (aft.  30  h.).  [Zr.] 

Sharp  stitches  inside  the  scapula  (aft.  \ h.).  \Ws .] 

Severe  stitches  in  both  axillae  (aft.  7 h.).  [ TVs .] 

Twitching  in  the  shoulder  and  arm. 

In  the  right  shoulder-joint,  a pressive  pain,  only  when  at  rest,  not 
on  moving  or  raising  the  arm. 

180.  Fine  twitching  in  the  left  upper  arm  (aft.  J h.).  [TVs.~\ 

Cramp-like  pains,  quite  superiorly  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper 
arm  (when  walking  in  the  open  air)  (aft.  29  h.).  [Zr.] 

le  muscles  of  the  upper  arm  (when  sitting)  (aft. 

in  the  upper  arm  (aft.  7 h.).  \Ws.\ 

_ in  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  arm  (when 
sitting)  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

185.  Fine  needle  pricks  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  forearm  near  the 
wrist-joint  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 

Twice,  cramp-like  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  forearm  (aft. 
40  h.).  [Zr .] 

Cramp-like  pain  on  the  outside  of  the  left  and  right 
forearms,  near  the  wrist-joint  (aft.  i^,  13,  29  h.).  [Zr.] 

Cramp-pain  on  the  forearm  in  front  of  the  elbow-joint  (aft.  1 h.). 

[^]  . 

Boring  needle-pricks  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  forearm,  near  the 
wrist-joint  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.] 


Tearing  stitch  in  th 
36  h.).  [Zr.] 

Tearing  twitching  : 
Cramp-like  tearing: 


3°° 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


190.  Tearing  stitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  forearm  (aft.  37  h.). 

[Lr-] 

Tearing  stitch-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  forearm  (aft. 
1 i h.) . [Lr.] 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  forearm, 
when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.] 

When  walking  painful  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the 
left  forearm,  which  goes  off  immediately  on  touching, 
standing,  and  sitting  (aft.  J h ).  [Zr.] 

Dislocation  pain  on  the  outer  border  of  the  left  forearm,  near  the 
wrist-joint,  worse  when  at  rest  than  when  moving  (aft.  4 h.). 

[ Lr 0 

195.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  external  protuberance  of  the  wrist  (aft. 
1 h.).  [TVs.] 

Shooting  crawling  on  the  wrist-joint  (aft.  10  h.).  [TVs.] 

Tickling  like  needle-pricks  in  the  right  palm,  exciting  scratching 
(aft.  12  h.).  [Zr.] 

Tickling  itching  in  the  right  palm,  compelling  scratching  (aft. 
30  h.).  [Lr.] 

Itching  tickling  on  the  outer  border  of  the  left  palm,  near  the 
little  finger,  compelling  scratching  (aft.  5J  h.).  [Zr.] 

200.  Cramp-like  pain  near  the  proximal  joint  of  the  right  forefinger 
(aft.  2 1 h.).  [Zr.] 

Cramp-like  pain  betwixt  the  proximal  joints  of  the  third  and 
fourth  fingers  of  the  right  hand  (aft.  7 h.).  [Htn.] 

Tickling  itching  on  the  outer  border  of  the  proximal  phalanx  of 
the  forefinger,  exciting  scratching  (aft.  4 h.).  [Zr.] 

Tearing  in  the  knuckles  of  the  fingers  (aft.  28  d.). 

Pinching  on  the  upper  and  anterior  border  of  the  os  ilii.  [TVs  ] 
205.  Cutting  pain  in  the  acetabulum  of  the  hin-joint  (when  sitting) 
(aft.  3 h.).  [TVs.] 

Pinching  twitching  on  the  posterior  aspect  of  the  hip-joint,  more 
severe  when  at  rest  than  when  moving  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVs.\ 

When  walking  drawing  dislocation  pain  in  the  hip-joint  (aft. 

4h.).  [/%.] 

Tearing  in  the  hip-joint  and  about  the  anterior  crest  of  the 
ilium,  extending  into  the  groin,  when  moving.  [Fz.] 

When  standing  and  walking  a cramp-like  needle-prick  in  the 
muscles  of  the  right  thigh,  which  went  off  on  sitting  down  (aft. 
1 h.).  [Lr.-] 

210.  Tearing  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh,  when  moving.  [Fz!\ 
Shooting  aching  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh  (when  sitting) 
(aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.] 

Sharp  stitch  above  the  left  knee  on  its  outer  side  (aft.  5 h.). 

[Ws.] 

Tearing  stitches  above  the  knee  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh 
when  sitting  (aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  right  knee-joint  (aft.  4 h.).  [TVs.] 

215.  Swelling  of  the  knees. 

Under  both  patellae  an  inflamed  swelling. 


CALC  ARE  A ACETICA. 


3°i 


When  walking  in  the  open  air  bruised  pain  close  under  the 
patella  (aft.  13  h.).  [Ar.] 

When  sitting  dislocation  pain  on  the  left  patella,  which  went  off 
on  touching,  walking,  and  standing  (aft.  12  h.).  [Ar.] 

Drawing,  cramp-like  pain  on  the  patella  (aft.  2 d.).  [Az.] 

220.  When  lying  the  lower  extremities,  especially  the  legs,  are  painful, 
as  if  bruised.  [Az. ] 

Cramp-like  pain  close  to  the  shaft  of  the  tibia  (when  sitting) 
(aft.  36  h.).  [Lr.-] 

Tearing  twitching  on  the  front  of  the  leg,  under  the  knee  (when 
at  rest).  \Ws.'\ 

Intermittent  pressive  pain  on  the  calf.  [Az.] 

Aching  pain  on  the  left  tibia,  near  the  ankle-joint,  when  walking 
in  the  open  air  (aft.  52  h.).  [Ar.] 

225.  Bruised  pain  of  the  legs  as  if  fatigued  ; he  must  often  change  his 
position.  \JVs.~\ 

Swelling  of  the  feet  (for  11  d.). 

(Burning  of  the  feet  in  the  evening.) 

When  sitting  and  standing  intermittent  cramp-like 
needle-pricks  in  the  toes  of  the  right  foot,  which  go  off 
when  walking  (aft.  \ h.).  [Ar.] 

Violent  stitch  in  the  right  little  toe,  which  seems  to  be  outside 
the  toe  (aft.  14  h.).  \Htn.~\ 

230.  Painful  cramp  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  the  toes,  only  at  night 
(aft.  11  d.). 

Painful  cramp  in  the  soles  on  bending  forwards  the  foot,  as  when 
drawing  on  boots. 

Cramp  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  after  walking  a little  time,  which 
is  relieved  by  walking  longer,  but  goes  off  when  sitting. 

In  the  soles  of  the  feet  severe  tearing. 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  left  sole,  more  towards  its 
outer  border  (aft.  5^  h.).  [Aftw.] 

235.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  big  toe  when  at  rest 
(aft.  24  h.).  [TVs,~\ 

After  working  in  water  and  washing,  aggravation  of  the  symp- 
toms. 


Itching  all  over  the  body,  also  by  day  (aft.  5,  23  d.). 

Brings  on  itching  in  a spot  where  there  was  a tetter  a year 
previously  (aft.  5 d.). 

Frequent  yawning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  (aft.  56  h.). 

[ Lr •] 

240.  Towards  evening  great  drowsiness  and  crossness.  [Az.] 

In  the  morning  great  drowsiness  and  crossness,  with  aching  pain 
all  over  the  forehead  (aft.  2 d.).  [Az.] 

Frequent  waking  up  from  sleep,  with  tossing  about ; he  imagines 
he  is  lying  upside  down  in  bed  (aft.  23  h.).  [Ar.] 

Frequent  waking  from  sleep  as  from  being  disturbed  (aft.  20  h.). 
[£r.] 


3°2 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


At  night  he  is  very  restless,  frequently  wakes  up,  speaks  aloud  in 
his  sleep,  but  in  the  morning  knows  nothing  about  it.  [Htn.] 

245.  Restless  sleep  ; almost  all  night  long  he  cannot  go  to  sleep,  and 
while  tossing  about  he  gradually  perspired  all  over  the  body  (aft. 
10  h.).  [Lr.] 

Frequent  waking  from  sleep,  as  if  he  had  already  slept  enough 
(aft.  67  h.).  [Lr.] 

Long  profound  sleep  in  the  morning,  with  many  vivid  dreams 
about  innocent  events  of  long  ago.  [TVs.] 

Vivid  dreams  full  of  strife  and  quarrelling.  [Lr.] 

Dreams  of  a horrible  frightful  character.  [Lr.] 

250.  Vivid,  confused,  unremembered  dreams.  [Lr.] 

Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  frequent  yawning,  without 
thirst,  and  not  followed  by  heat  (aft.  h.).  [Lr.] 

Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  body  as  if  he  had  caught  cold  (aft.  f h). 
[Lr.] 

Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  back  (aft.  25  h.).  [Lr.] 

Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  cold  hands  and  warm  face 
(aft.  48  h.).  [Lr.] 


255.  Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  warm  forehead, 
hot  cheeks,  and  icy  cold  hands,  without  thirst  (aft.  2 h.). 
[Lr.] 

Evening  fever : externally  he  was  chilly  with  internal  heat  and 
great  thirst  ; even  in  bed  he  was  chilly  and  at  the  same  time  he 
perspired,  but  he  could  not  get  warm  ; at  last  profuse  sweat  till 
morning  (aft.  10  h.). 

At  night  much  heat  and  short  breath. 

In  the  evening  on  lying  down,  external  heat,  with  internal 
chilliness  (aft.  72  h.  [TVs.] 

Glowing  heat  and  redness  of  the  whole  face,  with  hot  forehead 
and  cold  hands,  with  great  thirst,  for  several  hours  (aft.  12  h.). 
[Lr.] 

260.  Morning  sweat  every  day  (aft.  7 d.). 

Not  without  inclination  to  work,  but  indifferent  to  all  external 
things  ; sunk  in  thought  about  the  present  and  future.  [Lr.] 

Very  grave  and  full  of  care;  busied  with  the  present  and  the 
future  ; he  becomes  sad  almost  to  tears.  [Lr.] 

Anxious  disposition  as  if  something  evil  had  happened  or  he  had 
to  fear  reproaches  ; at  the  same  time,  however,  persistent  inclination 
to  work.  [Lr.] 

Very  sad  humour,  as  if  he  had  to  expect  bad  news  (aft.  14  h.). 

[Lr.-] 

265.  Morose,  crbss,  very  peevish,  also  very  indifferent  to  the  most 
important  things ; he  did  everything  unwillingly  and  as  if  forced  to 
do  them.  [Lr.] 

Whenever  he  sits  idle  and  quiet,  he  becomes  sleepy  and  cross, 
and  everything  is  distasteful  to  him.  [Fz.] 

All  day  long  peevish  and  cross,  but  at  last  crotchetty  and  talka- 
tive (aft.  39  h.).  [Lr.] 


CALCAREA  ACETICA. 


303 

He  is  not  disposed  to  speak,  but  not  ill-humoured  (aft,  6\  h.). 
\_Htn.~] 

He  is  more  cheerful  and  would  like  to  be  in  company  and  speak 
with  people  (aft.  10  h.).  \_Htn.] 

270.  The  first  part  of  the  day  anxious,  then  cheerful,  and  at  last 
contented  with  himself  (aft.  62  h.).  [Zr.] 


CAMPHORA.1 


[The  alcoholic  solution  of  the  almost  crystalline  substance  resembling  a solidified 
aethereal  oil,  derived  from  the  camphor-tree,  Laurus  camphora , L.] 

I give  here  the  symptoms  hitherto  observed  from  camphor,  not  as 
a complete  list  of  all  the  effects  to  be  expected  from  it,  but  only  as  a 
commencement  thereof,  so  that  at  some  future  period  the  remainder  of 
its  effects  may  be  added  to  this  list. 

From  the  earliest  times  this  medicine  has  been  blindly  used  and 
improperly  employed  in  large  and  massive  doses,  so  that  its  true  action 
has  never  been  ascertained,  nor  could  it  be  ascertained,  as  it  has  almost 
always  been  given  only  along  with  several  other  drugs,  either  mixed  up 
with,  or  administered  at  the  same  time  with  it,  and  moreover,  and  this 
is  the  worst,  it  has  only  been  employed  amid  the  tumult  of  the  symptoms 
of  diseases.  For  the  pure  effects  of  it,  observed  by  Alexander,*  are 
very  meagre  and  confined  to  mere  general  expressions. 

The  action  of  this  substance  is  very  puzzling  and  difficult  to  deter- 
mine, even  in  healthy  organisms,  because  its  primary  action  more  often 
rapidly  alternates  and  becomes  mixed  up  with  the  reactions  of  the  life 
(secondary  action)  than  is  the  case  with  any  other  medicine,  so  that  it 
is  frequently  hard  to  distinguish  what  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  reaction 
of  the  body,  and  what  to  the  alternating  action  of  the  camphor  in  its 
primary  action. 

But,  at  all  events,  a commencement  of  a pure  proving  of  it  must  be 
made,  and  as  such  I offer  the  following  symptoms. 

In  its  curative  action  camphor  is  just  as  puzzling  and  wonderful,  for 
it  removes  the  violent  effects  of  very  many,  extremely  different , vegetable 
medicines  (and  even  those  of  the  animal  drug  cantharides  and  of  many 
mineral  and  metallic  drugs),  and  hence  it  must  have  a sort  of  general 
pathological  action,  which,  however,  we  are  unable  to  indicate  by  any 
general  expression  ; nor  can  we  even  attempt  to  do  so  for  fear  of 
straying  into  the  domain  of  shadows,  where  knowledge  and  observation 
cease,  whilst  imagination  deceives  us  into  accepting  dreams  as  truth  ; 
where  we,  in  short,  abandoned  by  the  guiding  of  plain  experience,  grope 
about  in  the  dark,  and  with  every  desire  to  penetrate  into  the  inner 
essence  of  things,  about  which  little  minds  so  presumptuously  dogma- 
tize, we  gain  nothing  by  such  hyperphysical  speculations  but  noxious 
error  and  self  deception. 

* Will.  Alexander,  Medicai  Essays  and  Observations , 1755. 


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


CAMPHORA. 


3°5 


Camphor,  as  I can  testify  from  experience,  removes  the  too  violent 
action  of  very  many  drugs,  whether  unsuitably  employed  or  given  in 
too  large  doses,  but  generally  only  in  the  primary  action,  as  a kind  of 
contrarium,  as  a palliative.  For  this  purpose  it  must  be  given  very 
frequently,  but  in  very  small  doses — when  requisite  every  five  to 
fifteen,  or  when  there  is  great  urgency  every  two  or  three  minutes, 
about  one  drop  of  the  saturated  alcoholic  solution  (one  eighth  of  a 
grain)  shaken  up  in  half  an  ounce  of  water  until  dissolved,  or  by  means 
of  olfaction  of  a saturated  alcoholic  solution  of  camphor  every  three, 
four,  six,  ten,  fifteen  minutes. 

One  grain  of  camphor  (dissolved  in  8 drops  of  alcohol)  combines 
with  400  grains  of  tepid  water,  and  when  shaken  becomes  completely 
dissolved,  contrary  to  the  assertion  in  almost  all  works  on  materia 
medica  that  it  is  quite  insoluble  in  water. 

I have  not  found  camphor  suitable  as  an  antidote  to  the  violent 
effects  of  ignatia.1 

The  rapid  exhaustion  of  its  action  and  the  quick  change  of  its 
symptoms  render  it  incapable  of  curing  most  chronic  diseases. 

That  cutaneous  inflammation,  which  spreads  in  a radiating  manner, 
is  bright  red,  the  redness  disappearing  for  an  instant  when  pressed  with 
the  finger,  commonly  called  erysipelas  (rose),  when  it  arises  from  in- 
ternal causes  is  always  only  a single  symptom  of  the  disease.  Now,  as 
camphor  when  applied  externally  excites  a kind  of  erysipelas,  so,  in 
acute  diseases  accompanied  by  erysipelas,  it  is  useful  as  an  external 
application,  if  the  other  symptoms  of  the  internal  malady  are  present 
among  the  symptoms  of  camphor. 

When  the  influenza  endemic  in  Siberia  comes  among  us,  as  it  does 
occasionally,  when  the  hot  stage  has  already  commenced,  camphor  is  of 
service,  only  as  a palliative  certainly,  but  an  invaluable  palliative,  seeing 
that  the  disease  is  one  of  short  duration.  It  should  be  given  in  frequent 
but  ever  increasing  doses,  dissolved  in  water  as  above  described.  It  does 
not  shorten  the  duration  of  the  disease,  but  renders  it  much  milder, 
and  hence  it  conducts  the  disease  innocuously  to  its  termination.  (On 
the  other  hand,  nux  vomica,  in  a single  dose,  and  that  the  smallest 
possible,  will  often  remove  the  disease  homoeopathically  in  a few  hours.) 

When  dangerous  effects  ensue  from  a large  dose  of  camphor,  opium 
is  useful  as  an  antidote  ; and,  on  the  other  hand,  camphor  is  a prompt 
antidote  in  opium  poisoning  ; thus  each  of  these  substances  removes  the 
effects  of  the  other.  It  is  therefore  astonishing  how  opium  and  cam- 
phor have  hitherto  been  given  in  combination  in  one  prescription  ! 

[In  this  proving  Hahnemann  was  assisted  by  Franz,  Herrmann,  Stapf, 
Wislicenus. 

The  following  old-school  authorities  are  quoted : 

Alexander,  Experim.  Essays. 

Breynius  and  Paulinus,  in  Murray's  App.  med. 

Collin,  Observat.  circa  morbos. 

Cullen,  W.,  Mat.  Med.,  ii. 

Geoffroy,  Matiere  medic.,  iv. 

Griffin,  Diss.  de  Camphorce  <viribus,  Edin. 

Heberden,  Medic.  Transact i. 

1 In  the  preface  to  Ignatia,  camphor  is  said  to  be  the  antidote  to  some  of  its  effects. 

20 


3°6 


CAMPHORA. 


Hergt,  in  Hufel.  Journ xxvii. 

Hoffmann,  Fr.,  Diss.  de  usu  int.  Camph 1714. 

H ufeland,  "journal fur  pr act.  A.,  i. 

Koolhaas,  in  Med.  Not.  Zeit 1799. 

Loss,  Obs.  med. 

Meza,  de,  Compend.  med.  pr act. 

Murray,  Appar.  med. 

Ortel,  Med.  pract. 

Pouteau,  Melanges  de  Chirurgie. 

Quarin,  Method,  med.febr. 

Sommer,  in  Hufel.  Journ. , vii. 

Sponitzer,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  v. 

Tode,  in  Acta  Hajfn .,  iv. 

Unzer,  Med.  Handbuck , ii. 

Whytt,  Works. 

In  the  Frag,  de  ‘vir.  Camphor  has  147  symptoms,  in  the  1st  Edit.  344,  and  only 
one  additional  symptom  in  this  2nd  Edit.] 

CAMPHORA. 

He  staggers  to  and  fro  when  walking,  and  must  catch  hold  of 
something  in  order  to  stand  firmly.  \JVsf\ 

He  rubs  his  forehead,  head,  chest,  and  other  parts,  knows  not 
what  is  the  matter  with  him  ; he  leans  against  something,  his  senses 
leave  him,  he  slips  and  falls  to  the  ground  stretched  out  quite  stiffly, 
the  shoulders  bent  back,  the  arms  at  first  somewhat  bent,  with  hands 
directed  outwards  and  somewhat  flexed,  spread-out  fingers,  afterwards 
all  parts  stretched  straight  out  and  stiff,  with  head  bent  over  to  one 
side,  with  stiff  open  lower  jaw,  with  incurved  lips  and  gnashing'teeth, 
closed  eyes  and  incessant  twitchings  of  the  facial  muscles,  coldness 
all  over,  and  breathlessness  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  2 h.).  \Ws .] 
Vertigo.  [Unzer,1  Med . Handbuch , ii,  25. — Alexander,2  Experi- 
ment. Essays , p.  227. — Collin,2  Observat . circa  morbos , pt.  iii,  p.  148.] 
Vertigo,  he  must  hold  on  by  something,  he  felt  as  if  he  could  not 
stand  firmly,  [Hrr.] 

5.  Intoxication.  [Collin,  1.  c. — Griffin,2  Diss.  de  Camphor ce 
viribus , Edin. — De  Meza,3  Compend.  med.  prac .,  p.  3.] 

Heaviness  of  the  head  with  vertigo,  the  head  sinks 
backwards  (aft.  io  m.).  [Hrr.] 

Giddy  heaviness  of  the  head  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Hrr.] 

When  walking  he  staggers  as  if  drunk.  [Hrr.] 

Vertigo  recurring  at  different  times.  [Griffin,  1.  c.] 

10.  Frequent  short  attacks  of  vertigo.  [Hufeland,4  Jour,  fur  pract . 
J.,  i,  p.  428.] 

Confusion  of  the  head  with  perfectly  clear  consciousness.  [£//'.] 
Want  of  memory.5  [Alexander. — Unzer,  1.  c.] 

After  the  attack  of  tetanus  with  unconsciousness  and  vomiting, 
complete  want  of  recollection,  like  loss  of  memory  (aft.  3 h.).  \Ws!\ 

1 Not  accessible. 

2 Proving  with  large  doses. 

3 Not  accessible. 

4 From  large  doses  in  rheumatic  patients. 

5 With  Alexander,  this  describes  the  state  of  his  mind  after  recovering  consciousness. 


CAMPHORA. 


3°7 


The  senses  vanish  (aft.  a few  m.). 

15.  Loss  of  consciousness. 

His  senses  leave  him.  [Alexander,  1.  c.] 

Heaviness  of  the  head.  [Geoffroy,1 2  Mature  medic.,  iv,  p.  30.] 
Headache.  [Hufeland,  1.  c.] 

For  several  successive  days  headache  after  rising  in  the  morning. 
[Fz.] 

20.  Severe  headache.  [Unzer,  1.  c.] 

Throbbing  headache. 

Aching  feeling  in  the  head.  [£//'.] 

Aching  tearing  headache. 

Headache  like  bruised  feeling  or  soreness  of  the  brain. 

25.  Headache  as  from  constriction  of  the  brain. 

Aching  in  the  occiput. 

In  the  evening,  aching  headache  over  the  left  eve  (aft.  9 h.). 
[Fz.] 

Throbbing  shooting  headache  in  the  forehead,  which  lasts  all 
night,  with  general  dry  heat,  but  without  thirst. 

In  the  temples,  throbbing  aching.  [£//'.] 

30.  Transient  headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  compressed  from  all 
sides,  but  only  felt  in  semi-consciousness  when  he  pays  no  atten- 
tion to  his  body ; when,  however,  he  becomes  conscious  of  his  pain 
and  thinks  of  it,  it  immediately  disappears  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Fz.] 
Pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead  (aft.  31  h.).  \_Hrr.~\ 

Obtuse  headache  over  the  frontal  bone,  with  inclina- 
tion to  vomit. 

Headache  pressing  from  within  outwards  (immediately).  \Ws?[ 
Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  1 h.).  [iLrr.] 

35.  Tearing  aching  and  pressing  outwards  in  the  left  side  of  the  fore- 
head (aft.  71  h.).  [FFr.] 

Headache  : cutting  blows  dart  through  the  forehead  and  temples 
to  the  middle  of  the  brain,  returning  after  short  pauses,  immediately 
after  lying  down  (aft.  ^ h.).  \JVs.\ 

Violent  single  shoots  in  the  right  half  of  the  brain  (aft.  4 h.). 
Cutting  pressure  from  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  to  the  forehead 
(aft.  ih.).  [ Hrr .] 

Tearing  shooting  headache  in  "the  forehead,  and  pressive  on  the 
upper  part  of  the  frontal  bone  (aft.  4 h.).  [Fz.] 

40.  Fine  tearing  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  forehead  (aft.  7 h.). 
\_Htncr\ 

Fine  tearing  in  the  right  temple  and  forehead  (aft.  if  h.).  [Ffrr.] 
A constrictive  pain  in  the  base  of  the  brain,  especially  in  the 
occiput  and  above  the  root  of  the  nose,  which  continues  without 
intermission,  during  which  the  head  is  leant  to  one  side  or  the  other  ; 
a pain  that  is  much  aggravated  by  stooping  low,  lying  down,  or 
external  pressure — with  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  hot  forehead,  and 
waking  slumber. 


1 General  statement  from  authors. 

2 Probably  a misprint  for  Hrr.,  as  Hartmann  does  not  appear  as  one  of  the  provers. 


3°8 


CAMPHORA. 


Fine  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  and  left  side  of 
the  occiput  (aft.  \ h.).  [i/rr.] 

Heat  in  the  head  and  tearing  headache,  transient  in  character, 
and  going  off  by  pressing  on  it  (aft.  n h.).  [Tz.] 

45-  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head  (aft.  6 h.). 

Extraordinary  rush  of  blood  to  the  head.*  [Whytt,1  Works , p. 
646. — Murray,2  Jppar . Med.,  iv.,  p.  584.] 

The  head  is  drawn  spasmodically  towards  the  shoulderf  (aft. 
some  m.). 

(Fatal)  inflammation  of  the  brain.  [Quarin,3  Method,  med. 

febr.,  p.  57.] 

Paleness  of  the  face. 

50.  Very  pale  face,  with  eyes  at  first  closed,  afterwards  open  and 
staring,  with  eyeballs  directed  upwards  (aft.  2 h.).  \WsI\ 

Very  red  face.  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

Spasmodic  distortion  of  the  facial  muscles,  with  foam  before  the 
mouth. J [Ortel,4  Med.  pract.  Beob .,  i,  1,  Lpz.,  1804.] 

Pressure  on  the  right  palpebral  muscle  (aft.  £ h.).  [ Hrr.~\ 

Staring  inflamed  eyes.  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

55.  He  stares  at  every  one  with  an  astonished  expression,  without 
consciousness  (aft.  2 h.).  \Wsi\ 

Sensation  of  tension  in  the  eyes  (aft.  j h.).  [i/rr.] 

In  the  outer  canthus  of  the  eye  a smarting  (aft.  h.). 

Frequent  twitching  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  eye  (aft.  28  h.V 

[*■*■]. ... 

Visible  twitching  and  quivering  of  the  upper  eyelid  (aft.  36  h.). 

[^•] 

60.  Smarting  itching  in  the  eyelids,  [<Sy.] 

Smarting  and  shooting  in  the  eyelids  (aft.  5 h.).  [F%.] 

* The  preliminary  vertigo  and  the  unconsciousness  from  a strong  dose,  along  with 
the  coldness  of  the  rest  of  the  body  (see  2,  note  to  47,  304,  311  to  313),  seems  to  be 
the  primary  action  of  camphor,  and  points  to  a diminished  flow  of  blood  to  parts  at  a 
distance  from  the  heart ; on  the  other  hand,  the  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  the  heat  of 
the  head,  & c.,  are  only  a secondary  action  or  reaction  of  the  life  in  the  same  degree  of 
intensity  as  w^as  the  previous  opposite  state,  the  primary  action  above  mentioned. 
Just  so,  rapidly  occurring,  slight  inflammations  may  therefore  sometimes  be  removed 
by  the  palliative  refrigerant  effect  of  the  primary  action  of  camphor  given  internally, 
but  long-standing  inflammations  cannot  be  so  removed.  The  prolonged,  or  frequently 
repeated  administration  of  camphor,  is  not  unfrequently  followed  by  obstinate  inflam- 
mations of  the  eyes,  which  are  of  long  duration,  like  every  secondary  action  or  reaction 
of  the  organism  (comp.  283  to  292  and  297).  I will  not  deny  that  the  external 
application  of  camphor  acts  homoeopathically  in  acute  cases  of  ophthalmia,  but  I will 
not  venture  to  say  that  this  is  my  experience,  as  I never  treat  such  cases  by  external 
remedies. 

f From  a large  dose  given  to  a child,  which  caused  loss  of  consciousness  and 
deathly  coldness  of  all  parts  of  the  body. 

J From  several  grains  of  camphor  injected  into  the  median  vein. 


1 Effect  of  thirty  grains. 

2 General  statement  from  authors.  Here  he  is  merely  quoting  Whytt. 

3 Occasional  effects  of  large  doses  in  fever  patients.  Query  always,  how  much  is 
fever  and  how  much  camphor  ? 

4 Not  accessible. 


CAMPHORA. 


3°9 

The  eyelids  are  studded  with  many  red  spots  (aft.  24  h.).  \JVs.\ 
The  eyes  water  in  the  open  air.  [S^.] 

In  the  white  of  the  right  eye  a couple  of  red  spots,  without  pain 
(aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.] 

65.  Out-pressing  pain  in  the  right  eyeball  on  moving  it  (aft.  2 h.). 

iFz-} 

Sensation  in  the  left  eyeball  like  pressure  and  blows  from  behind 
upon  it  (aft.  2J  h.).  [T%.] 

Inflammation  of  the  eyes  (aft.  10  h.). 

The  eyeballs  are  turned  upwards. 

Distorted  eyes.  [Ortel,  1.  c.] 

70.  Staring,  distorted  eyes. 

Contracted  pupils. 

Extremely  contracted  pupils  (aft.  35  m.).  [Hrr.] 

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  5 h.). 

Obscuration  of  the  sight.  [Whytt, — Unzer,  1.  c.] 

75-  Sensation  as  if  all  objects  were  too  bright  and  shin- 
ing (aft.  5 h.). 

Wonderful  figures  hover  before  his  eyes.  [Unzer,  1.  c.] 

He  cannot  bear  the  light  (aft.  \ h.). 

Feeling  of  heat  in  the  lobes  of  the  ears.  [*S7/'.] 

Redness  of  cheeks  and  lobes  of  the  ears. 

80.  Hot,  red  ear-lobes.  [Stf.] 

Ringing  in  the  ears.1  [Alexander,  1.  c.] 

A kind  of  tearing  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  1 h.). 

In  the  left  meatus  auditorius  externus  a dark  red 
abscess,  larger  than  a pea  ; on  touching  it  he  felt  a shoot- 
ing pressure  (aft.  12  h.);  it  suppurated  after  36  hours. 

[Hrr.] 

In  the  anterior  angle  of  the  nostrils  a shooting  pain,  as  if  the 
part  were  ulcerated  and  raw  (aft.  2 h.). 

85.  Painful  looseness  of  the  teeth  (aft.  10  h.). 

The  teeth  feel  too  long,  with  a toothache  apparently 
proceeding  from  swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands. 

Toothache  : transient  cutting  blows  dart  through  the  gums  at 
the  roots  of  the  incisors  and  canine  teeth*  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVs.] 

Dry  feeling  on  the  back  of  the  tongue,  like  scraping,  with  much 
saliva.  [*S'{/'.] 

Constant  collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hrr.] 

9°-  Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  which  is  sometimes 
slimy  and  viscid  (aft.  1 J h.).  [Hrr. ] 

Foam  appears  in  front  of  the  mouth  (aft.  a few  m.). 

A dry  scraping  sensation  on  the  palate.  [Stf.~\ 

Single  coarse  stitches  in  the  palate  (aft.  4 h.). 

A chilly  sensation  rises  into  the  mouth  and  along  the  palate  (aft. 
4 to  6 h.).  [Fz.] 

95.  Disagreeable  warmth  in  the  mouth.  [Alexander,  1.  c.] 

* From  the  smell. 


1 Just  before  losing  consciousness. 


310 


CAMPHORA. 


Violent  burning  on  the  palate  down  into  the  oesophagus,  that 
urges  him  to  drink,  but  is  not  allayed  by  any  amount  of  drinking* 
(immediately).  [JVs.'\ 

Sensation  of  heat  in  the  mouth  and  stomach.  [Murray,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  bad  smell  from  the  mouth,  which  he  is  himself 
aware  of  (aft.  20  h.). 

Closure  of  the  jaws  (trismus). 

100.  (Nocturnal)  sorethroat  per  se , and  still  more  when  swallowing, 
as  if  the  gullet  were  sore  and  excoriated,  with  sensation  in  the  throat 
as  from  partaking  of  something  rancid. 

Eructation  and  bringing  up  of  the  contents  of  the  stomach. 

After  a meal  frequent  and  almost  constant  empty 
eructation  (aft.  3 h.  and  later),  [F/rr.] 

Pleasure  in  drinking,  without  thirst. 

The  first  24  hours,  adipsia.  [/^>.] 

105.  The  first  36  hours,  adipsia.  [//rr.] 

Increased  taste  of  all  food  ; the  beef  tea  tastes  too  strong  (aft. 
2 h.). 

The  taste  in  the  mouth  is  in  itself  correct,  but  everything  he  eats, 
and  even  the  (accustomed)  tobacco  smoking,  tastes  bitter  (aft.  13  h.). 
[Fz.-] 

Tobacco  has  a disagreeable  bitter  taste  (aft.  2|  h.).  [Tz.] 

Dislike  to  the  (accustomed)  tobacco  smoking;  although  it  does  not 
taste  ill,  tobacco  is  repugnant  to  him,  and  causes  him  to  vomit, 
no.  Food  tastes  bitter,  meat  more  so  than  bread,  with  eructation 
during  and  after  eating,  tasting  of  camphor  (aft.  4 h.).  [Fz.] 

Frequent  ejection  of  watery  saliva.  [iS1*/!] 

Nausea.  [Griffin, — Alexander,  1.  c.] 

Nausea  with  flow  of  saliva.  [£//'.] 

Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  which  always  goes  off  after  an 
eructation  (aft.  \ h.).  [Tz.] 

1 15.  After  several  attacks  of  inclination  to  vomit,  short  attacks  of 
vertigo.  [Hufeland,  1.  c.] 

At  the  commencement  of  the  vomiting,  cold  sweat,  especially 
in  the  face.  \Wsd\ 

Bilious  vomiting,  tinged  with  blood.  [Griffin,  1.  c.] 

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  feeling  as  if  it  was  distended  and 
bruised,  with  fulness  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  25  h.).  [Tz.] 

Pain  in  the  stomach. 

120.  Pain  in  the  gastric  region.  [Hufeland,  1.  c.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  or  in  the  anterior  part 
of  the  liver. 

Contractive  pain  under  the  short  ribs  extending  into  the  lumbar 
vertebrae. 

Aching  pain  in  the  hypochondria  (aft.  1 h.). 

Manifest  coolness,  especially  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Fr. 
Hoffmann,  Diss.  de  usu  int.  Camph .,  1714,  p.  20.] 

125.  Cold  sensation  in  the  epigastrium  and  hypogastrium  (aft.  J h.). 
IHrr.-] 


* From  the  smell. 


CAMPHORA. 


31 1 


Violent  burning  heat  in  the  epigastrium  and  hypo- 
gastrium  (aft.  4 h.).  \_Hrr.'] 

Burning  heat  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  ij  h.).  [F£rr.] 

Burning  in  the  stomach.  [Whytt, — Unzer, — Griffin,  1.  c.]. 
First  discharge  of  much  flatus,  and  after  several  hours,  presssure 
in  the  abdomen,  in  the  morning,  as  from  distension  with  flatulence. 
130.  Flatulent  sufferings  in  the  abdomen. 

The  digestion  is  impeded  [W.  Cullen,1  Arzneimittell .,  ii,  p.  331.] 
Cutting  colicky  pain,  at  night  (aft.  5 h.). 

Feeling  of  hardness  and  weight  in  the  abdomen  above  the  navel. 

[St/.] 

In  the  whole  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  far  as  the  hepatic 
region  and  chest,  drawing  bruised  pain,  more  internally  than  exter- 
nally, especially  when  inspiring  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Fz.] 

135.  Pinching  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  especially  the  umbilical  region 
(aft.  71  h.).  [ Hrr .] 

In  the  right  side  of  the  hypogastrium  a shooting  drawing  heavi- 
ness, which  is  still  more  distinctly  felt  on  pressing  on  it.  [Fz.] 

Hard  pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  1 h.) . [F/rr.] 
Drawing  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium  with  a tensive 
bruised  sensation  (aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

Burning  shooting  on  a spot  the  size  of  the  hand,  below  the 
anterior  crest  of  the  ilium  towards  the  groin.  [Fz.] 

140.  Aching  on  the  left  side  of  the  pubes  at  the  root  of  the  penis,  in 
the  groin,  when  standing  (aft.  10  h.).  [Fz.] 

Itching  formication  in  the  right  groin,  which  goes  off  on  rubbing 
it  (aft.  Jh.).  [Ws.~] 

Out-pressing  on  the  pubes  in  the  groin,  at  the  root  of  the  penis, 
as  if  a hernia  would  come  out  (aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

Ascites  of  short  duration.  [Hergt,2  in  \_Hufel . Journ .,  xxvii,  I, 
p.151.] 

Urging  to  stool  : the  stool  is  of  the  ordinary  character,  but  little 
is  passed,  whereupon  there  is  again  great  urging  with  the  evacuation 
of  a still  smaller  quantity  (after  1 h.).  [FTrr.] 

145.  Urging  to  stool  (aft.  4 h.].  [FTrr.] 

The  first  day  two  stools  after  some  pinching  in  the  abdomen, 
the  second  day  no  stool,  the  third  day  rather  hard  and  difficult  stool. 

[*■*•] 

Constipation. 

The  excrements  are  passed  with  difficulty,  not  without  exertion 
of  the  abdominal  muscles,  just  as  if  the  peristaltic  movement  of  the 
bowels  were  diminished,  and  at  the  same  time  the  rectum  were 
contracted  (aft.  24  h.). 

Obstinate  constipation  of  the  bowels.3 *  [Alexander,  1.  c.]. 

150.  The  rectum  is  as  if  contracted,  swollen  and  painful  when  flatus 
is  expelled. 


1 From  forty  grains  taken  by  a female  maniac. 

2 From  three  grains  twice  daily. 


This  symptom  not  found. 


3 Alexander  simply  states  that  he  was  (l  extremely  costive  at  stool  the  day  after 

swallowing  the  dose. 


312 


CAMPHORA. 


Soreness  in  the  rectum.  [*S7/'.] 

Greenish-yellow  turbid  urine  of  a mouldy  smell  (after  io  h.). 

[**•] 

He  passes  turbid  urine,  which  on  standing  becomes  quite  turbid 
and  thick,  of  a whitish-green  colour,  without  depositing  a sediment. 


Red  urine. 

155.  Red  urine.1  \_Fr.  Hoffmann , 1.  c.] 

In  the  first  hours,  little  urine  and  without  suffering,  but  after 
several  hours  (in  the  afternoon)  when  urinating  a smarting  pain,  for 
several  days,  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  urethra,  and  after  urinating 
pressure  in  the  vesical  region,  like  a fresh  call  to  urinate,  [Tz.] 

Diminished  power  of  the  bladder ; although  there  is  no  mechanical 
obstruction  the  urine  passes  very  slowly  out  of  the  bladder  when 
urinating  (aft.  20  h.). 

Thin  stream  of  the  urine  discharged. 

The  urine  passes  in  a very  thin  stream,  as  in  stricture  of  the 
urethra  (aft.  2\  h.).  [//rr.] 

160.  Retention  of  urine  with  urging  to  urinate  and  tenesmus  of 
the  neck  of  the  bladder. 

Retention  of  the  urine  the  first  twelve  hours,  with  constant 
pressure  in  the  bladder  and  call  to  urinate,  during  which  nothing 
passed  ; but  after  twenty-four  hours,  frequent  urination  in  the  ordi- 
nary quantity,  therefore  on  the  whole  increased  quantity  of  urine 
discharged,  but  after  forty-eight  hours  more  frequent  and  more 
copious  urination,  [i/rr.] 

In  the  first  ten  hours,  no  urine  is  passed. 

Strangury  almost  immediately.  [Heberden,2  Medic.  Trans.,  i, 
P-471-] 

Involuntary  urination  after  great  urging  to  urinate. 

165.  Almost  involuntary  urination,  and  after  urinating  pain  in  the 
urethra,  like  a contraction  from  before  backwards. 

Painful  urination. 

Scalding  urine. 

Shooting  itching  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  prepuce,  [//rr.] 

(A  contractive  sensation  in  the  testicles.)  [£//'.] 

170.  The  first  two  days,  weakness  of  the  genital  organs,  and  loss  ot 
sexual  desire.  \_Wsd\ 

The  first  two  days,  relaxation  of  the  scrotum,  deficiency  of  erec- 
tion of  the  penis,  loss  of  sexual  desire,  but  after  48  hours  much 
stronger  erections  than  in  ordinary  times.*  \_Hrr.~\ 

Tendency  to  nocturnal  seminal  emissions. 

* The  loss  of  sexual  desire,  erections,  and  seminal  emissions,  is,  as  is  obvious  from 
these  observations,  only  primary  action  of  camphor,  and  hence  it  only  acts  in  a palli- 
ative manner  when  we  attempt  to  combat  with  it  inordinate  sexual  desire,  erections, 
and  the  frequent  nocturnal  seminal  emissions  which  have  lasted  long ; there  follows 
then  an  increase  of  the  malady  by  the  opposite  reaction  of  the  organism  (secondary 
action).  (Comp.  173.) 


1 u Very  rarely,”  the  author  says. 

2 Effects  of  large  doses  in  patients. 


CAMPHORA. 


3J3 


For  several  nights,  seminal  emissions  (aft.  60  h.).  [Fz.] 

Exalted  sexual  desire.  [Breynius  and  Paulinus,  in  Murray’s 
Jppar.  Med.,  iv.,  p.  518.] 

175.  Sexual  ecstasy.  [Koolhaas,1  in  Med.  Not.  Zeit .,  1799.] 
Impotence  in  the  male.  [Loss,2  Obs.  Med.,  p.  314.] 

A kind  of  violent  labour  pains,  as  if  during  parturition.* 
[Heberden,3  1.  c.] 

* * 

* 

In  the  morning,  on  rising  (and  in  the  evening  on  going  to 
sleep  ?),  discharge  of  thin  nasal  mucus,  without  sneezing  and  with- 
out true  coryza  (aft.  18  h.). 

Coryza  (aft.  10  h.). 

180.  Stuffed  coryza. 

Deep  and  slow  respiration. 

Oppressed,  anxious,  panting  respiration.  [Ortel,  1.  c.] 

Heavy,  slow,  difficult  breathing  (aft.  ij  h.).  \_Hrr.~\ 

Almost  complete  suspension  of  the  respiration. 

185.  The  breathing  almost  entirely  ceases.4  [Cullen,  1.  c.] 

On  the  sternum  superiorly,  pressure  as  from  a weight.  [Fz.] 
Pressure  on  the  sternum  when  standing  (aft.  27  h.).  [Fz.] 

Soft  pressure  internally  on  the  chest  under  the  sternum,  with 
difficult  inspiration,  and  a chilling  sensation,  which  rose  out  of  the 
chest  into  the  mouth  (aft.  29  h.).  [Fz.] 

Mucus  in  the  windpipe,  which  makes  the  voice  not  clear,  and  is 
not  removed  by  hacking  cough  and  hawking. 

190.  Pain  in  the  trachea  and  bronchial  tubes,  most  when  coughing, 
but  also  by  clearing  the  throat  and  hawking. 

Complaint  of  a constrictive  feeling  in  the  larynx,  as  from 
sulphur  fumes.  [Ortel,  1.  c.] 

Feels  as  if  he  would  be  suffocated,  and  the  larynx  constricted. 
[Sommer,5  in  Hufel.  Jour.,  p.  87.] 

Suffocating  tightness  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  arose  from  a pressure  in 
the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  1 h.). 

Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  when  walking 

(aft.  i h.).  [Fz.]  . 

195.  Painful  sensation  in  the  chest  like  stitches.  [Stf.'] 

Shooting  in  the  chest  and  tussiculation,  as  if  caused  by  a cutting, 
chilling  sensation  deep  in  the  trachea  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fz.] 

The  stitches  in  and  on  the  chest  became  every  day  stronger. 

[Fz.-] 

Palpitation  of  the  heart. 

After  a meal  he  feels  and  hears  the  beating  of  his  heart  against 
the  ribs  (aft.  4!  h.).  [Fz.] 

* In  a widow. 

1 Not  accessible. 

2 From  continual  smelling  of  camphor  in  a man,  aet.  40. 

3 From  forty  grains  given  in  enema.  Nothing  is  said  about  the  patient  being  a 
widow. 

4 In  original — “ the  breathing  seems  to  have  almost  entirely  ceased.” 

5 From  gr.  viij  to  xij  given  in  lead-colic. 


3H 


CAMPHORA. 


200.  Fine  shooting  in  the  nipples  (aft.  2 h.). 

Fine  tearing  pain  on  the  right  side  near  the  nipple  down  towards 
the  pelvis  (aft.  4^  h.).  [ Hrr.] 

Tearing  pressure  on  the  anterior  border  of  the  scapula,  which 
interferes  with  the  movement  of  the  arm  (aft.  32  h.).  [Fz.] 

Drawing  painful  stitches  through  the  scapulae  and 
between  them,  extending  into  the  chest,  on  moving  the 
arms,  for  two  days  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  nape  on  bowing  the  head  (aft.  2 h.). 

205.  Repeated  painless  drawing  in  the  cervical  vertebrae  when  moving. 

[*/•] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  painful  drawing  and  stiff  feeling 
on  the  side  of  the  neck  and  down  the  nape  (aft.  5 h.).  [Fz.] 

Tensive  pain  in  the  nape  and  posterior  cervical  muscles,  increased 
by  every  movement  and  by  turning  the  neck  (aft.  15  h.).  [Hrr. ] 

Stitches  in  the  nape,  near  the  right  shoulder,  on  moving  (aft.  1^ 
h.).  [Fz.] 

Pressure  on  the  top  of  the  shoulder  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fz.] 

210.  Convulsive  circular  movement  (rotation)  of  the  arms. 

Tearing  pressure  posteriorly  in  the  middle  of  the  right  upper  arm. 
[Hrr.] 

Twitching  fine  tearing  from  the  middle  of  the  inner  surface  of 
the  left  upper  arm  to  the  middle  of  the  forearm  (aft.  j h.).  [Hrr.] 

Painful  pressure  in  the  right  elbow-joint,  worse  on 
leaning  on  it,  whereby  the  pain  extends  into  the  hand 

(aft.  1*  h.).[Hrr.] 

Stitches  in  the  forearm  (aft.  if  h.).  [Fz.] 

21^.  Tearing  pressure  on  the  left  radius,  a little  above  the  wrist-joint 
(aft.  7 h.)-  [Hrr.] 

Painful  pressure  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  left  forearm  (aft. 
ifh.).  [Hrr.] 

Tearing  pressure  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  left  forearm  (aft.  if 
h.).  [Hrr.] 

Constantly  increasing  itching  combined  with  pricking  pain  on  the 
back  of  the  hand  and  the  knuckles  of  the  fingers,  going  off  on  scratch- 
ing  (aft.  4±  h.).  [Fz.] 

Itching  on  the  knuckles  of  the  fingers  and  between  them  (aft. 
25  h.).  [Fz.] 

220.  In  the  distal  joint  of  the  thumb,  on  moving  it,  a pain  as  if 
sprained  (aft.  20  h.). 

Itching  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  (aft.  5 h.).  [Fz.] 

Drawing  in  the  glutaeus  maximus  at  its  attachment  to  the  crest  of 
the  ilium,  as  if  it  would  lame  the  thigh.  [Fz.] 

Difficulty  of  moving,  and  fatigue  of  the  thighs. 

Drawing  bruised  pain  in  the  thighs,  after  walking  (aft.  5 h.).  [Fz.] 
225.  In  the  right  thigh  and  on  the  inside  near  and  below 
the  patella,  drawing  bruised  pain;  he  fears  that  the 
leg  would  bend  forwards  under  him  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Fz.] 

Tearing  in  the  thighs  (aft.  28  h.).  [Fz.] 


CAMPHORA. 


3r5 


The  thighs  at  the  back  above  the  houghs  are  painful,  as  after  a 
long  journey  on  foot.  [Tz.] 

When  sitting  with  the  knee  flexed  the  leg  goes  to  sleep,  with 
cold  feeling  (aft.  21  h.). 

Shooting  on  the  right  patella,  when  sitting  (aft.  1 h.).  [Tz.J 
230.  Tearing  on  the  knees  under  the  patella,  worst  when  walking 
(aft.  6 h.).  [Fz.] 

Cracking  and  creaking  in  the  joints  of  the  loins, 
knees,  and  ankles. 

Staggering,  weariness,  and  heaviness  of  the  lower  extremities 
(aft.  1 h.).  [Hrr.] 

The  knees  seem  to  him  to  bend  forwards,  and  are  as  if  bruised 
(aft.  26  h.).  [Fz.] 

Aching  drawing  under  the  patella,  on  the  inside  of  the  knee  (aft. 
30  h.).  [Fz.] 

235.  Great  feeling  of  weakness  of  the  legs  when  walking ; the  thighs 
are  as  if  bruised  and  stiff.  [*S7/'.] 

Heaviness  of  the  legs,  as  from  a weight  hanging  in  the  knee- 
joints  and  drawing  them  down.  [ Hrr .] 

Pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  inner  surface  of  the  left  leg. 

[Hrr.] 

Pressure  on  the  left  leg  above  the  ankle  and  more  posteriorly. 
[Hrr.] 

In  the  morning  on  treading  and  walking,  pain  in  the  ankle-joint, 
as  from  having  made  a false  step  or  sprained  the  part  (aft.  18  h.). 
240.  Under  the  right  ankle  when  standing,  an  aching  drawing  pain 
between  the  ankle  and  the  tendo  Achillis,  which  becomes  tearing  on 
moving  the  foot  (aft.  h.).  [Fz.] 

Trembling  of  the  feet. 

Trembling  staggering  and  unsteadiness  of  the  feet. 

Drawing  cramp  pain  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot, 
especially  when  moving.  [Fz.] 

Tearing  pressure  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot.  [Hrr.] 

245.  Tearing  cramp-pain  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  up 
along  the  outside  of  the  calf  to  the  thigh  (aft.  13  h.). 
[*■*•] 

Tearing  anteriorly  in  the  tips  of  the  toes  and  under 
the  nails  of  the  left  foot,  when  walking  (aft.  10  h.). 

[Tz.] 

Sore  pain  on  the  knuckles  of  the  toes  and  in  the  corns  (aft. 
26  h.).  [Fz.] 

Most  of  the  pains  of  camphor  are  when  moving.  [Tz.] 
Discomfort  in  the  whole  body  (aft.  3 h.).  [Hrr.] 

250.  Indescribable  discomfort  in  the  whole  body  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hrr.] 

Most  of  the  pains  from  camphor  were,  on  the  first  day,  only 
present  in  a state  of  half  attention  to  himself — hence  also  when 
going  to  sleep,  tearing  in  various  parts  of  the  body — and  they  went 
off,  especially  the  headache,  as  soon  as  he  became  aware  that  he  had 
pains  and  paid  attention  to  them  ; on  the  other  hand,  he  could,  the 
following  day,  cause  pains  by  force  of  imagination,  or,  rather,  he  felt 


3 1 6 


CAMPHORA. 


them  only  when  giving  great  attention  to  himself,  hence  he  felt  best 
when  he  did  not  think  of  himself.  [Fz.] 

Rheumatic  shooting  pains  in  all  the  muscles,  especially  between 
the  scapulae. 

Pain  in  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones. 

Difficulty  of  moving  the  limbs. 

255.  Paralytic  relaxation  of  the  muscles. 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down  in  bed,  an  itching  here  and 
there  in  the  body  (aft.  6 h.). 

Violent  itching.*  [Sponitzer,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  v,  pp.  518,  545.] 
Erysipelatous  inflammation. t 
Erysipelas. J [Sponitzer,  1.  c.] 

260.  Syncopal  stupefaction  of  the  senses.  [Unzer,  1.  c.] 

Insensibility.  [Cullen,  1.  c.] 

He  beats  his  breast  and  falls  into  a faint  (aft.  \ h.).  [Cullen, 

1.  C.] 

Out-stretching  tetanus  with  unconsciousness  for  a quarter  of  an 
hour,  then  sinking  down  in  a relaxed  state  of  the  whole  body,  so 
that  he  can  scarcely  be  kept  in  the  erect  position,  for  a quarter  of 
an  hour,  after  which  consciousness  returns  on  vomiting  (aft.  2J  h.). 

[**•] 

Extreme  weakness.  [De  Meza,  1.  c.] 

265.  Unusual  sinking  of  the  forces,1  with  yawning  and  stretching. 
[Alexander,  1.  c.] 

Relaxation  and  heaviness  of  the  whole  body  (aft.  25  m.).  \_Hrr.~\ 
Frequent  yawning.  [67/1] 

Yawning  and  sleep.  [Griffin,  1.  c.] 

Drowsiness. 

270.  Drowsy  fatigue  : he  felt  as  if  he  would  fall  asleep  (aft.  1 h.). 
[Hrr.] 

Sopor.  [Alexander,  1.  c.] 

Sopor  and  talking  nonsense.2  [Fr.  Hoffmann,  1.  c.] 
Sleeplessness.  [Geoffroy,  1.  c.] 

(In  sleep  the  inspiration  is  shorter  than  the  expiration.) 

275.  During  sleep  he  mutters  and  sighs. 

Talking  in  a low  voice  during  sleep  all  night. 

Snoring  in  sleep  during  both  inspiration  and  expiration. 

During  slumber  with  closed  eyes,  objects  present  themselves  to 
his  fancy,  which  seem  to  him  at  one  time  too  thick,  at  another  too 
thin,  changing  as  rapidly  as  the  pulse  goes  (aft.  2 h.). 

Dreams  about  schemes  to  be  carried  out.  \_Fz.~\ 

280.  Spasms.  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

Convulsions.3  [Quarin, — Alexander,  1.  c.] 

* From  the  external  application, 
f F rom  camphor  applied  externally. 

J From  the  external  application. 


1 In  the  original,  “ unusual  lassitude  and  depression  of  spirits  ” 

2 Quoted  from  authors  only  to  question  it. 

3 In  Alexander’s  case,  during  loss  of  consciousness. 


CAMPHORA. 


3i7 


Violent  convulsions.  [Tode,1  in  Acta  Hajfn .,  iv,  4.] 

Trembling.  [Alexander, — Unzer,  1.  c.] 

Small,  hard,  and  always  slower  and  slower  pulse. 

285.  Small  slow  pulse,  60  beats  per  minute  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Hrr.~] 

Pulse  slower  by  3 beats.  [Alexander, — Griffin,  1.  c.] 

Pulse  slower  by  10  beats.  [Hufeland, — Alexander, — Cullen, 
1.  c.] 

Weak,  small  pulse.2  [Hoffmann,  1.  c.] 

Very  weak,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse.  [Cullen,  1.  c.] 

290.  Full,  quick  pulse. 

Pulse  gradually  increasing  in  rapidity.  [Griffin,  1.  c.] 

On  continuing  to  take  larger  doses3  the  pulse  became  quicker 
by  10  to  15  beats,  and  tense.  [Hufeland,  1.  c.] 

After  leaving  off  the  gradually  increased  doses  of  camphor,  the 
pulse  increased  in  rapidity  for  several  (nearly  ten)  days  without  in- 
crease of  the  temperature  of  the  body.  [Hufeland,  1.  c.] 

Pulse  increased  by  twenty-three  beats  (aft.  3 h.).  [Alexander, 
1.  c.] 

295.  Quicker  pulse.  [Murray, — Hoffmann,  1.  c.] 

Full,  irritable  pulse.  [Hufeland,  1.  c.] 

Very  quick  pulse.  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

Disposition  to  inflammations.  [Geoffroy,  1.  c.] 

He  is  over  sensitive  to  cold  air. 

300.  He  easily  takes  cold,  and  then  there  ensues  either  rigor  or  cutting 
in  the  abdomen,  with  diarrhoeic  discharges  of  blackish-brown  or  black 
faeces  like  coffee  grounds. 

Chilliness  (after  10  h.). 

Shivering,  chilliness  and  occurrence  of  goose-skin  all  over  the 
body  for  an  hour  (immediately).  [Fz.]. 

Frequent  chilliness  in  the  back.  [*SY/'.]. 

Shivery  feeling,  shivering  with  goose-skin  ; the  skin  of  the 
whole  body  is  painfully  sensitive  and  the  slightest  touch 
is  painful. 

305.  Slight  shivering  with  pale  face.  [Griffin,  1.  c.] 

Heat  in  the  head  and  sensation  in  it  as  if  sweat  would  break  out, 
whilst  a shudder  goes  over  the  limbs  and  abdomen  (aft.  3 h.). 
Chilliness  on  the  cheeks  and  in  the  back.  \_Stf.] 

Chilliness  over  the  whole  body  (aft.  | h.).  \_Hrr.\ 

Rigor  and  chattering  of  the  teeth.  [Ortel,  1.  c.] 

310.  The  body  is  quite  cold  all  over. 

Coldness  of  the  body  with  paleness.  [Cullen,  1.  c.] 

After  a meal  coldness  and  drawing  through  the  whole  body,  with 
cold  arms,  hands  and  feet  (aft.  4f  h.).  [Fz.] 

Coldness  for  an  hour,  with  deathly  pallor  of  the  face.*  [Pouteau,4 
Melanges  de  Chirurgie , p.  1 84*J 

* From  60  grains. 


1 From  five  grains  in  commencing  fever.  2 Not  found. 

3 By  “ large  doses  ” gr.  xl — lx  are  meant.  • 

4 In  a woman,  three  weeks  after  labour.— The  sixty  grains  were  given  for  colic. 


CAMPHORA. 


(Fever:  great  chilliness  with  chattering  of  the  teeth  and  much 
thirst,  and  after  the  chill  he  immediately  falls  asleep,  but  the  sleep  is 
often  interrupted,  almost  without  the  least  heat  following.) 

315.  Cold  sweat. 

Profuse  cold  sweat.  [Ortel,  1.  c.] 

In  the  evening,  great  feeling  of  coldness  over  the  whole  body  and 
headache  as  if  the  brain  was  contracted,  with  aching  above  the  root 
of  the  nose  (aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

Chilliness  on  the  whole  body  (aft.  2J  h.)  ; then  (aft.  i\  h.) 
increased  warmth  of  the  whole  body.  \_Hrr. ] 

Chilliness  in  the  back  intermingled  with  warmth  as  if  sweat  would 
break  out.  [6'^/'.] 

320.  Along  with  cold  hands,  hot  sensation  in  the  face  (aft.  i|  h. 
[*■*■] 

Heat  on  the  head,  hands  and  feet,  without  thirst. 

Increased  warmth  of  the  whole  body,  with  redness  of 

the  face  (aft.  f h.).  [i/rr.] 

Agreeable  warmth  through  the  whole  body  (after  3 h.).  [F%.] 

Heat  on  the  whole  body,  which  increased  to  the 
greatest  height  when  walking  (aft.  5 h.).  [i/rr.] 

325.  Heat  with  trembling.  [Alexander, — Unzer,  1.  c.] 

Sopor  and  squeezing  (contractive)  headache,  great  heat  of  the 
whole  body  with  distended  blood-vessels,  very  rapid  breathing,  and 
bruised  pain  in  the  back,  but  without  thirst  and  with  clean  taste. 
Great  heat  1 (after  some  time).  [Hoffmann,  1.  c.] 

Sweat  (with  odour  of  camphor).  [Murray,  1.  c.] 

Warm  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  palms. 

330.  Warm  sweat  all  over  the  body. 

Feeling  of  dryness  in  and  on  the  body,  especially  on  the  head  and 
in  the  bronchial  tubes  (aft.  2 h.). 

Very  dry  skin,  even  in  bed,  with  good  appetite.  [Hufeland,  1.  c.] 
Trembling  movement  of  the  heart.  [Ortel,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety. 

335.  Very  great  anxiety.  [Hoffmann,  1.  c.] 

She  tosses  about  anxiously  in  bed,  with  constant  weeping.  [Hufe- 
land, 1.  c.] 

The  ideas  become  confused  ; delirium.  [De  Meza,  1.  c.] 

Talking  nonsense.  [Hufeland,  1,  c.] 

He  talks  nonsense  and  undertakes  nonsensical  things.  [Unzer, 
1.  c.] 

340.  Rage,  with  foam  before  the  mouth.* 1 2  [Alexander,  1.  c.] 

All  external  things  are  repugnant  to  him,  and  excite  in  him  a 
repellent  crossness. 

The  boy  crawls  into  a corner  and  howls  and  weeps  ; he  takes 
offence  at  everything  one  says  to  him,  as  if  he  thought  he  was  being 
ordered  about,  and  he  thinks  he  is  insulted  and  affronted. 

The  pain  disappeared,  but  this  condition  supervened.  On  recovering  from  it,  she 
was  well. 

1 Quoted  from  authors  only  to  question  it. 

2 During  unconsciousness. 


CAMPHORA. 


3i9 

Quarrelsomeness,  insists  he  is  right. 

He  is  hasty  and  does  things  in  a hurry. 

345.  The  first  day  the  disposition  was  lazy  and  unhappy  during  the  cold 
and  rigor ; after  twenty-four  hours,  however,  the  disposition  became 
ever  better  and  better,  even  during  the  pains.  [Tz.] 


CANNABIS  SATIVA.1 

(Hemp.) 

(The  fresh  expressed  juice  of  the  tops  of  the  flowering  male  or  female  hemp-plant, 
mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol,  and  after  standing  some  time  the  clear  supernatant 
fluid  decanted  off.) 

Hitherto  only  the  seeds,  generally  (rubbed  up  with  water)  as  emul- 
sion, or  as  decoction,  have  been  used  with  advantage  in  the  inflamma- 
tory stage  of  gonorrhoea,  and  in  ancient  times  (by  Dodon^us,  Sylvius, 
Herliz)  in  some  kinds  of  jaundice.  In  the  former  case  the  homoeo- 
pathic reason  for  its  utility  is  evident  from  the  peculiar  similar  morbid 
states  observed  in  the  urinary  organs  after  the  administration  of  hemp 
to  healthy  persons,  although  no  physician  ever  recognized  this.  The 
plant  itself  has  only  been  used  as  a domestic  remedy,  but  it  was  much 
employed  in  Persian  country  inns  in  order  to  relieve  the  fatigue 
of  pedestrian  travellers  (Chardin,  Voyage  en  Perse ),  for  which  it  is 
truly  homoeopathic  as  the  following  cannabis  symptoms  (269  to  275) 
demonstrate. 

But  we  may  employ  the  juice  of  hemp  for  curative  purposes  of 
much  more  importance  in  various  diseases  of  the  genital  organs,  of  the 
chest,  of  the  organs  of  the  senses,  &c.,  for  which  the  following  obser- 
vations present  the  homoeopathic  indications. 

For  a long  time  I employed  the  undiluted  alcoholic  tincture  of 
cannabis,  in  the  dose  of  the  smallest  portion  of  a drop  ; but  the  higher 
and  the  very  highest  yet  made  dilution  and  potency  (x)  of  it  develops 
the  medicinal  powers  of  this  plant  in  a much  greater  degree. 

[Hahnemann’s  fellow- provers  of  cannabis  were — Franz,  Gross,  Fr.  Hahne- 
mann, Hempel,  Hugo,  Stapf,  Trinks,  Hartlaub,  and  Wahle. 

A few  symptoms  were  taken  from  the  following  old-school  sources  : 

Haller,  in  Vicat , Mat.  Med. 

Morgagni,  De  Sed.  et  Causis  Morb. 

Neuhold,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.>  iii. 

Olearius,  Oriental.  Reisebeschreib. 

Ramazzini,  Diatribe  de  Morb.  Artif. 

The  1 st  Edit,  has  only  69  symptoms,  the  2nd  Edit,  has  308,  this  3rd  Edit.  330.] 


CANNABIS. 

Vertigo  when  standing  and  dizziness.  [Glt.] 

Vertigo  when  walking,  as  if  he  would  fall  sideways  (aft.  1 h.).  [//<?.] 
Whirling  and  stupid  in  the  head  (immediately).  [Grr.] 

Giddy  and  dull  in  the  head.  \JVs-~\ 


From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830. 


CANNABIS. 


321 


5.  Attacks  of  vertigo.  [Neuhold,1  in  Act . Nat.  Cur.,  iii,  p.  150, 
et  seq.] 

Confusion  and  dulness  of  the  head.  [St/.] 

Hesitation  and  unsteadiness  of  the  mind  ; overpowering  vivid- 
ness  of  the  thoughts  that  arise.  [HI.] 

Wanting  in  reflective  power,  deficient  in  imagination,  spiritless. 

[*/] 

The  thoughts  seem  to  stand  still  ; he  stares  before  him ; he 
feels  as  if  his  mind  were  occupied  by  elevated  contemplations,  but 
he  does  not  know  what  they  are  ; with  a slight  feeling  of  aching 
pain  on  the  parietal  bone.  [Tz.] 

10.  He  can,  no  doubt,  think  of  one  thing  and  another,  but  the  ideas 
remain  stationary,  as  if  they  stood  still,  and  he  looks  long  at  the 
object  on  which  he  was  going  to  work.  [Tz.] 

He  often  makes  mistakes  in  writing. 

Agreeable  warmth  in  the  brain.  [Fz.] 

Quivering  as  if  in  the  blood  of  the  head,  chest,  and  stomach. 
Great  rush  of  blood  to  the  head. 

15.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  which  causes  an  agreeable  warmth  in 
it,  but  with  aching  pain  in  the  temples.  [Tz.] 

Throbbing  pain  that  extends  forwards  into  the  right  temple  ; at 
the  same  time  a warmth  about  the  head  ; the  cheeks  are  red  and 
hot ; in  the  warmth  the  nausea  increases.  [ Ts.  Hb.] 

Violent  pains  in  the  head.  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

Very  penetrating  headache.  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

Uninterrupted  headache  all  day.  [Tz.] 

20.  Constant  pain  on  the  top  of  the  head,  as  if  a stone  lay  on  it. 

[A.] 

Confusion  of  the  head ; it  is  heavy  and  she  feels  a painful  pres- 
sure on  the  forehead  and  eyelids,  so  that  they  are  like  to  close. 
[Gss.] 

Pressure  under  the  frontal  protuberance  to  deep  through  the  brain 
into  the  occiput.  [Grr.] 

When  leaning  the  head  against  the  wall  an  aching  on  the  oppo- 
site side  internally  in  the  head.  [Glt.] 

Pressure  in  the  temples.  [Ho.] 

25.  Aching  pain  in  the  right  occipital  bone.  [We.] 

Tension  first  in  the  occiput  then  in  the  sinciput,  lastly  in  the 
temples  (aft  \ h.).  [Ho.] 

On  moving  the  head  a painful  sensation  in  the  head  and  nape. 

[*/•] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  occiput  towards  the  ears.  [St/] 

Painful  constriction  of  the  sinciput.  [Gjj.] 

30.  The  sinciput  is  compressed  from  the  borders  of  the 
orbits  to  the  temples ; not  relieved  by  stooping.  [Gss.] 

Below  the  left  frontal  protuberance  a beating  outwards,  imme- 
diately followed  by  stupefying  pressure  on  that  part.  [G^.] 

On  a small  spot  of  the  parietal  bone  (afterwards  on 


1 Effects  of  effluvia  of  hemp,  before  being  dried. 


21 


322 


CANNABIS. 


other  parts  of  the  head  also)  a cold  feeling  as  if  a drop  of 
cold  water  fell  on  it.  [Gw,] 

A creeping  in  the  skin  of  the  hairy  scalp. 

A kind  of  tickling  spasm  in  the  temples  (aft.  f h.).  [Ho.] 

35.  Feeling  as  if  the  eyebrow  were  pressed  down.  [Gw.] 

Tearing  pressure  on  the  upper  eyelid.  [Gw.] 

Alternate  dilatation  and  contraction  of  the  pupils  in  one  and  the 
same  light  (aft.  1 h.).  [Ho.'] 

Weak  feeling  in  the  eyes,  and  weakness  of  vision  ; distant 
and  near  objects  are  indistinct  (after  1 \ h.).  [Ho.] 

The  cornea  of  the  eye  becomes  opaque  ; pannus. 

40.  A circle  of  white  flaming  zig-zags  on  the  right  side  of  the  field  of 
vision ; so  that  he  can  see  objects  only  partially  and  indistinctly.  [Gw.] 
Cataract.1  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

Pressure  outwards  at  the  hack  of  the  eyes.  (aft.  j h.). 
[Ho.] 

Sensation  of  spasmodic  drawing  in  the  eyes.  (aft.  J h.). 
[Ho.] 

Slight  palpitation  on  many  parts  of  the  face,  especi- 
ally in  the  muscles  of  the  left  cheek.  [Gss.] 

45.  Paleness  of  the  face  [Morgagni,2  Sed.  et  Causis  Morb.,  Epist. 
x,  art.  13.] 

Drawing  pressure  on  the  left  zygoma.  [Gw.] 

Itching  here  and  there  in  the  face. 

Formication,  itching,  and  smarting  as  from  salt,  in  the  face. 

Large  lumps  on  the  nose  surrounded  by  red  swelling,  like  acne. 

50.  Itching  swelling  on  the  ala  nasi  (aft.  some  h.). 

Dryness  in  the  nose. 

Stupefying  pressure  as  with  a blunt  point  on  the  root  of  the  nose. 
[Gss.] 

Warm  sensation  in  the  nose  as  if  it  would  bleed.  [Fz.] 

Epistaxis  to  syncope.3  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

55.  Epistaxis. 

Roaring  before  the  ears. 

Sensation  as  of  a skin  drawn  before  the  ears.  [TVe.] 

Instantaneous  pain  as  if  the  auricle  were  drawn  out  of  the  head. 
[Gss.] 

Acute  twitching  pain  in  the  right  membrana  tympani  extending 
to  the  shoulder.  [We.] 

60.  Sore  pain  in  the  external  aural  cartilage,  which  he  might  have 
somewhat  pressed  as  he  lay  at  night  in  bed.  [Gw.] 

Tinnitus  aurium.  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

A throbbing  in  the  ear.  [St/.] 

1 The  original  is  “ suffusiones  oculorum,”  and  occurs  in  a list  of  the  observed  effects 
of  hemp.  Though  technically  this  phrase  may  mean  cataract  (as  in  Celsus,  seventh 
book,  vii,  13,  14),  yet  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  author  means  to  hazard  in  this 
manner  so  startling  an  assertion  as  that  hemp  can  cause  it. 

2 Cases  of  disease  occurring  in  adult  male  hemp-dressers,  but  not  adduced  as  results 
of  their  occupation.  This  is  merely  a statement  that  the  man  was  pale,  but  otherwise 
in  good  health. 

u From  the  odour  alone. 


CANNABIS. 


323 


In  the  ear  a throbbing  forcing  pain  that  extends  almost  into  the 
cheek,  goes  off  immediately  on  stooping  and  recurs  on  prising  up 

again  (aft.  3 h.).  [St/.] 

Stitches  in  the  external  meatus  when  chewing.  [Gw.] 

65.  Fine  stitches  from  within  outwards  in  the  left  ear.  [We.] 

Pain  behind  the  right  ear  as  if  a blunt  point  were  violently  thrust 
in.  [Gss.] 

Large  sharp  stitches  on  the  mastoid  process.  [Gss.] 

Stupefying  compressive  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  chin,  in  which 
the  teeth  of  that  side  participate.  [Gw.] 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  teeth  on  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw. 

[^•]  . 

70.  Fine'pecking  in  the  left  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw,  on  the  cessation 
of  which  a drawing  always  ensues.  [Gw.] 

A darting  and  fine  pecking  in  several  teeth  at  the  same  time. 
•] 

Eruption  on  the  red  part  of  the  lips  and  on  the  corner  of  the 
mouth. 

Pinching  aching  in  the  cervical  muscles  over  the  throat.  [Gw.] 
Speech  is  difficult.1 2  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  xv,  art.  6.] 

75.  Altered  speech,  more  a clangour  than  a human  voice.3  [Morgagni, 
1.  c.,  Epist.  vii,  art.  13.] 

He  could  not  speak  properly  ; at  one  time  words  failed  him,  at 
another  the  voice  itself  (for  4 hours)  ; towards  evening  the  attacks 
recurred,  at  one  time  there  was  a stream  of  eloquence,  as  if  forced 
from  him,  at  another  a stoppage  in  his  discourse,  so  that  he  some- 
times repeated  the  same  word  ten  times  in  succession  in  one  breath, 
sometimes  anxiously  recalling  his  whole  thought  he  was  annoyed 
that  he  could  not  repeat  it  in  the  same  words.  [Fz.] 

The  speech  stops  with  extraordinary  anxiety  and  agony  on 
account  of  pain  in  the  back.  \Fz.] 

In  the  morning  burning  dryness  in  the  palate. 

A burning  in  the  throat.3  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  xv,  art.  6.] 
80.  Dryness  in  the  mouth ; the  saliva  is  viscid,  at  the  same  time 
want  of  thirst  especially  in  the  evening,  and  hot  hands.  [Stf.] 

On  partaking  of  food  that  he  relishes  highly,  there  occurs,  when 
he  is  nearly  satiated,  a transient  sickness  up  in  his  throat.  [Gw.] 
Belching  of  a bitter-sour  acrid  fluid.  [Gss.] 

Without  nausea  or  retching,  a tasteless  water  rises  up  in  his 
throat  and  windpipe  so  that  he  always  chokes  in  swallowing.  [Gw.] 
Eructation  of  a bitter-sour  fluid  into  the  mouth.  [Gw.] 

85.  Eructation  of  nothing  but  air.  [Gss.] 

A choking  sensation  always  rises  up  in  the  throat,  as  from  acidity 
of  the  stomach.  [Gss.] 

A choking  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  rises  thence  up  into  the 
throat.  [Gw.-] 


1 In  subject  of  S.  223,  q.v, 

2 Local  effect. 

3 See  note  to  S.  74. 


324 


CANNABIS. 


Nausea ; she  heaves  as  though  she  would  vomit.  [ Ts . Hb.~\ 
Vomiting  of  a slimy  bitter-tasting  water;  at  the  same  time  a 
scraping  in  the  throat,  followed  by  stupid  feeling  and  confusion  of 
the  head  in  the  occiput.  [ Ts.  HbT\ 

90.  Green  bilious  vomiting.1  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  vii,  art.  13.] 
She  became  anxious  and  apprehensive  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis, 
with  oppression  of  the  breathing  and  palpitation  ; warmth  rises  up  to 
the  throat  and  stops  the  breath,  as  if  something  stuck  in  the  wind- 
pipe, with  flying  heat.  [Gw.] 

Fulness  in  the  abdomen,  compelling  him  to  breathe  deeply. 
Cardialgia.  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

Pinching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gw.] 

95.  Cutting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gw.] 

After  stooping  a cutting  above  and  across  the  stomach.  [ Fz .] 
Uninterrupted  obtuse  shooting  in  front,  just  below  the  ribs  near 
the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  only  varies  in  degree  ; by  moving  the 
body  forwards  or  backwards  it  is  alleviated  for  an  instant,  but  soon 
returns.  [Gw.] 

On  the  left  side  near  the  xiphoid  cartilage,  burning  shooting 
pain.  [PFe.] 

In  the  left  side,  just  under  the  ribs,  an  obtuse  shooting  when 
breathing  and  when  not  breathing.  [Gw.] 

100.  At  various  times  several  attacks  of  the  most  violent  stomach  pains, 
with  paleness  of  the  face  and  perspiration  on  the  face,  pulse  almost 
extinct,  and  rattling  respiration  like  that  of  a dying  person.2  [Mor- 
gagni, 1.  c.,  Epist.  xxiv,  art.  13.] 

The  stomach  is  extremely  painful  to  the  touch,  as  if  ulcerated  ; 
but  it  goes  away  on  eating.  j\Ez.] 

He  feels  as  if  he  had  caught  cold  in  the  stomach ; in  the  fore- 
noon especially  he  has  working  round  in  the  bowels  and  pinching, 
but  without  diarrhoea. 

Several  mornings,  from  8 to  10  a.m.,  sensation  under  the  navel 
as  if  he  had  caught  cold  ; a working  round  in  his  abdomen,  but  with- 
out diarrhoea. 

Just  above  the  navel  pinching  (after  a meal).  [Gw.] 

105.  Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium  and  cutting  in  the  loins.  [Gw.] 
Pinching  throughout  all  the  abdomen.  [Gw.] 

In  the  epigastrium  anxious  beating,  like  strong  pulse  beats. 
[Gw.] 

On  the  right  near  the  navel  pain  like  a beating  there  from 
within  outwards.  [Gw.] 

In  the  left  side  under  the  last  ribs,  towards  the  back,  there  is  a 
beating  outwards  as  with  a small  hammer.  [Gw.] 
no.  On  the  left  near  the  navel,  and  at  the  same  time  behind  near  the 
spine,  pain  as  if  the  parts  were  seized  by  pincers  and  compressed. 
[Gw.] 

All  the  bowels  pain  as  if  bruised.  [Ez.] 


1 Local  effect.  See  S.  226. 

3 Subject  of  S.  218,  219,  224,  307.  Heart  found  much  enlarged  post  mortem. 


CANNABIS. 


325 


In  the  abdomen  shaking  of  the  bowels  on  moving  the  arms 
violently,  as  if  the  bowels  were  quite  loose,  [Tz.] 

An  almost  sore  itching  for  several  hours  at  the  navel,  where,  after 
rubbing,  there  is  acute  sore  pain. 

Tickling  sensation  on  the  integuments  of  the  hypogastrium  (aft. 
i h.).  [Ho.] 

115.  Shudder  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  the  movement  of  cold  water 
therein  (aft.  8 m.).  [//<?.] 

In  the  side  of  the  abdomen  an  out-stretching.  [Tz.] 

In  the  right  hypochondrium  a painful  hard  swelling.1  [Mor- 
gagni, 1.  c.,  Epist.  xxiv,  art.  13.] 

Encysted  abdominal  tumour,  without  swelling  of  legs  or  feet.2 
[Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  x,  art.  13.] 

Abdomen  and  chest  are  externally  painful.3  [Morgagni,  1.  c., 
Epist.  xv,  art.  6.] 

120.  Drawing  pain  from  the  renal  region  to  the  inguinal  glands,  with 
anxious  sick  feeling  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

In  the  renal  region  pain  as  if  ulcerated  per  se , and  on  touching. 

[*■*•] 

In  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  just  under  the  ribs,  sharp  blows. 

[<?«•] 

Flying,  pinching  stitches  in  the  abdomen.  [Gw.] 

A working  round  in  the  abdomen,  and  then  in  the  left  side 

obtuse  stitches  up  into  the  ear.  [Gw.] 

125.  Flatulence  sticks  in  the  epigastrium  and  hypogastrium  until  the 

evening  with  colicky  pains.  \We .] 

Painful  jerks  dart  round  about  in  the  abdomen  from  one  place  to 

another,  as  if  something  alive  was  in  it ; at  the  same  time  a drawing 

from  the  left  hip  bone  over  to  the  right  and  thence  into  the  knee ; 

but  the  pain  remains  all  the  time  in  the  hip,  and  assumes  the 

character  of  tearing  blows.  [Gw.] 

In  the  evening  in  bed  she  has  obtuse  stitches  in  both  sides  of  the 

abdomen,  they  then  spread  up  the  back,  and  there  are  similar  stitches 

between  the  scapulae,  they  then  return  into  the  sides  of  the  abdomen. 

[Gw.] 

Painful  blows  above  the  bend  of  the  left  groin.  [Gw.] 

Needle  prick  on  the  right  side  of  the  mons  veneris.  \_TVe.~] 

130.  In  the  bend  of  the  groin  at  first  some  twitching  blows,  he  then 
feels  the  region  of  the  inguinal  ring  as  if  stretched,  and  the  inguinal 
ring  itself  as  if  pressed  out.  [^z.] 

In  the  inguinal  ring  an  out-pressing  and  pain,  as  if  all  were 
ulcerated  there.  [#z.] 

Every  morning  discharge  of  much  almost  inodorous  flatus.  [Gw.] 
Colicky  pains  in  the  epigastrium,  followed  by  a diarrhoeic  stool 
and  a sore  pain  in  the  anus.  [ We .] 


1 Liver  found  diseased  post  mortem. 

2 Subject  of  S.  217,  found  post  mortem  to  be  due  to  spinal  incurvation.  This 
symptom  occurred  eight  days  before  death.  Morgagni  says  only  “ abdomen  universum 
tumere.”  After  death  much  turbid  fluid  was  found  in  the  peritoneum. 

* See  note  to  S.  74. 


326 


CANNABIS. 


The  first  five  days  normal  stool,  the  following  two  days  quite 
constipated.  [Gjj.] 

135.  In  the  rectum  and  sacrum  a pressing  as  if  all  the  bowels  descended 
and  would  be  pressed  out,  when  sitting.  [Tz.] 

At  the  anus  a sensation  as  if  something  cold  dropped  out  on  the 
skin.  [Tz.] 

Contractive  pain  at  the  anus ; at  the  same  time  she  feels  as  if  the 
thighs  were  drawn  together,  so  that  she  must  close  them.  [Gtj.] 

Itching  in  the  perinaeum. 

Urging  to  urinate,  with  aching  pain. 

140.  Turbid  white  urine. 

Urine  reddish  and  turbid. 

Difficulty  in  urinating  ; paralysis  of  the  bladder.*  1 [Morgagni, 
1.  c.,  Epist.  x,  art.  13.] 

Urine  full  of  flocci,  as  if  pus  were  mingled  with  it.  [Fr.  H — n .] 

Diuresis  ; he  must  urinate  frequently  at  short  intervals,  when  a 
large  quantity  of  urine  resembling  water  is  discharged  (immediately). 
[Gss.] 

145.  A tearing  as  if  in  the  fibres  of  the  urethra,  as  it  were  in  the  form 
of  a zig-zag.  [ HI.] 

Itching,  tickling  stitches  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra.  \We^\ 

Burning  shooting  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  urethra  during  the 
passage  of  the  urine  (aft.  10  h.).  \_HoJ\ 

Whilst  urinating  pain  from  the  mouth  of  the  urethra  going  back- 
wards, burning  smarting,  posteriorly  more  shooting. 

Simple,  but  violent  burning  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra 
during  the  flow  of  urine. 

150.  Burning  in  the  mouth  of  the  urethra  while  urinating. 

Burning  while  urinating,  but  especially  immediately  afterwards. 

Burning  during,  but  especially  after  urinating,  worst  in  the  evening. 

Whilst  urinating,  from  the  glans  penis  to  the  back  part,  a pain  at 
first  burning,  and  after  urinating  smarting  pain. 

Even  when  not  urinating  some  burning  pain  in  the  anterior  part 
of  the  urethra,  which  obliges  him  to  be  almost  continually  trying  to 
pass  water,  even  when  there  is  no  more  urine  in  the  bladder. 

155.  Shooting  smarting  pain  when  passing  water,  when  not  urinating 
a smarting  pain. 

When  not  urinating  pressure  as  if  to  make  water,  especially  in 
the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra. 

Stitches  along  the  urethra  when  not  urinating. 

When  standing  twitching  stitches  in  the  posterior  part  of  the 
urethra. 

Burning  throughout  the  urethra,  but  only  at  the  beginning  and 
the  end  of  micturition.  \_Fr.  H — ».] 

160.  Anteriorly  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  very  fine  shooting  pecking 
when  not  urinating.  [Tz.] 

* The  urine  could  at  first  only  be  passed  by  means  of  the  catheter,  but  afterwards 
not  even  by  this  instrument,  because  it  gets  stopped  up  by  mucus  and  pus. 

1 In  subject  of  S.  118,  eight  days  before  death,  after  paraplegia  had  lasted  some 
time. 


CANNABIS. 


327 


Cutting  pain  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra  when  urinating. 

[Fz.] 

Watery  mucous  discharge  from  the  urethra.  [ Fr . H — n.] 

Painless  discharge  of  a clear  transparent  mucus  from  the  urethra 
(prostatic  fluid  ?)  without  erection.  [Fz.] 

The  orifice  of  the  urethra  is  stuck  together  by  a fluid  which 
becomes  visible  when  pressed,  [HL] 

165.  The  whole  penis  is  somewhat  swollen,  without  actual  erection. 

[Fr.  H—n .] 

The  urethra  is  as  if  inflamed,  and  painful  in  its  whole  length 
when  touched ; during  erection  there  occurs  tensive  pain. 

Stream  of  urine  spread  out. 

Frequent  erections  of  the  penis ; afterwards  stitches  in  the 
urethra. 

Frequent  erections  by  day,  only  when  sitting,  not  when  walking. 
170.  When  coughing  erections  of  the  penis,  then  pain  in  the  urethra. 
Painless  discharge  of  mucus  from  the  urethra  (a  kind  of  gonor- 
rhoea ?). 

Swelling  of  the  glans  and  penis ; a kind  of  erection  without  sen- 
sation. [T%.] 

Coldness  of  the  genitals  with  warmth  of  the  rest  of  the  body  (the 
same  day,  and  lasting  three  days).  [HL] 

Disinclination  for  coitus.  \Fr.  H — nf] 

175.  Swelling  of  the  right  and  lower  side  of  the  prepuce.  [ Fr . H—n.] 
Swelling  of  the  frenum  and  of  the  prepuce,  especially  where  the 
frenum  ends.  [HL] 

Pleasant  itching  on  the  border  of  the  prepuce  and  at  the  orifice  of 
the  urethra.  [TVe.] 

Disagreeable  itching  on  the  right  side  of  the  prepuce  at  its 
anterior  border,  more  internally,  but  pleasant  during  and  after 
scratching.  [. Fr . H — n.] 

An  itching  under  the  prepuce  and  at  the  frenum,  with  some  red- 
ness and  moisture  behind  the  corona  glandis.  [HL] 

180.  Eroding  burning  and  shooting  in  the  external  parts  of  the 
prepuce,  and  in  the  urethra  at  the  corona  glandis.  [Fz.] 

The  whole  of  the  prepuce  is  dark  red,  hot,  and  inflamed.  [Fr. 
H—n.] 

Soreness  on  the  border  and  on  the  inside  of  the  prepuce.  [Fr. 
H—n.] 

Constant  burning  on  the  whole  of  the  prepuce  and  glans,  for  four 
days  ; on  applying  cold  water  there  occurred  soreness.  [Fr.  H — n.] 
The  border  of  the  prepuce  is  excoriated.  [Fr.  H — -n.] 

185.  The  glans  itself  is  dark  red,  as  dark  red  as  the  prepuce  itself. 

[Fr.  H—n.] 

The  skin  of  the  glans  is  covered  with  lentil-sized,  bright  red 
spots,  brighter  than  the  glans  itself.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

The  whole  penis  pains  when  walking  as  if  excoriated  and  as  if 
scalded  (he  must  tie  it  up  in  an  upright  position).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Round  about  the  back  of  the  corona  glandis  an  exudation  and 
moisture  like  gonorrhoea  preputialis.  [ Fr . H — n.] 


328 


CANNABIS. 


On  the  right  near  the  penis  pain  like  penetrating  blows,  when  at 
rest  and  when  moving.  [Gw.] 

190.  When  standing,  a tensive  pain  in  the  spermatic  cord,  and  con- 
traction of  the  scrotum,  with  a contractive  feeling  in  it. 

When  standing  a pressive  feeling  in  the  testicles,  a tugging  in 
them. 

Swelling  of  the  prostate  gland. 

The  sexual  desire  is  much  excited,  but  sterility  is  caused. 
[Olearius,1  Oriental.  Reisebeschreib .,  p.  529.] 

Excites  the  sexual  desire  in  human  beings  and  in  animals.  [Haller, 
in  Vicat ,2  Mat.  Med.] 

195.  Profuse  menstrual  flux  (from  external  application).  [Neuhold, 
1 c-] 

Premature  labour  (in  the  eighth  month)  accompanied  by  frightful 
convulsions.3  [Neuhold,  1.  c.]. 

Dryness  and  dry  feeling  in  the  nose  (aft.  5 d.). 

Dry  feeling  and  heat  in  the  nose. 

Sneezing  and  feeling  of  stuffed  coryza,  and  yet  he  can  breathe 
through  the  nose.  [We.] 

200.  In  the  morning,  viscid  mucus  sticks  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
windpipe ; coughing  and  hacking  cannot  reach  it,  and  he  strains 
much  to  detach  a little,  which,  however,  does  not  come  into  the 
mouth,  and  which  he  must  swallow  ; after  the  coughing  and  hack- 
ing there  remains  a scraping  feeling  down  along  the  windpipe,  as  if 
it  was  raw  and  excoriated  there  ; at  length  the  mucus  detaches  itself 
spontaneously  and  he  must  repeatedly  hawk  it  up.  [ Gss .] 

In  the  morning  she  has  scraping  in  the  chest  as  from  salt ; she 
must  hack  and  swallow  what  she  hawks  up  because  it  will  not  come 
into  the  mouth.  [Gw.] 

About  the  seventh  day  the  'previously  viscid  phlegm  detaches 
itself  easily  in  the  morning,  and  the  previous  difficulty  of  breathing 
(as  if  a weight  lay  on  the  chest)  was  immediately  relieved.  [G*w] 

Oppression  of  the  breathing  from  a tensive  aching  pain  in  the 
middle  of  the  sternum,  which  is  also  painful  to  the  touch  ; at  the 
same  time  sleepiness. 

Inspiration  is  difficult ; it  is  as  if  a weight  lay  on  her  chest.  [Gw.] 

203.  She  is  oppressed  on  the  chest  and  has  a feeling  of  anxiety  in  the 
throat  ; she  must  breathe  deeply.  [Gss.] 

Violent  pinching  together  under  the  sternum,  in  the  lower  part  of 
the  chest,  whereby  the  breathing  is  not  impeded  ; on  bending  back 
it  goes  off,  and  is  worst  when  stooping  forwards  and  then  worse  when 
inspiring.  [Gw.] 

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  without  oppression  of  the  breathing, 
a pushing  with  intermittent  obtuse  stitches — a kind  of  pressing 
inwards.  [Gw.] 


1 General  statement  of  effects ; but  C.  Indica  is  probably  intended. 

2 General  statement  of  effects. 

3 From  lying  all  day  on  fresh  hemp.  Preceded  by  S.  18. 


CANNABIS. 


329 

In  both  sides  of  the  chest  blows  or  knocks,  which  recur 
frequently  and  at  the  same  time  impede  respiration,  but  are  most 
painful  in  the  region  of  the  heart. 

On  corporeal  exertion  and  stooping,  a couple  of  violent  blows  at 
the  heart,  as  if  it  would  fall  out  ; at  the  same  time  a warmth  about 
the  heart  (aft.  48  h.) . 

2io.  A beating  in  her  left  side  on  the  ribs.  [Gw.] 

An  out-hammering  under  a costal  cartilage  near  the  sternum. 

[<?«•] 

Digging  under  the  top  of  the  sternum,  without  oppression  of  the 
breathing.  [Gw.] 

Drawing  pain  at  the  left  last  rib.  [Tz.] 

Shooting  in  the  external  thoracic  integuments,  [Tz.] 

215.  Cutting  over  the  external  thoracic  integuments,  [Tz.] 

Tensive  oppression  of  the  left  half  of  the  chest,  with  slight 
jerking,  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  anxiety.  [Gw.] 

At  the  xiphoid  cartilage  an  elevation  and  a node,  which  grew 
for  two  years  painlessly  and  then  caused  difficulty  of  breathing.1 
[Morgagni,  Epist.  x,  art.  13.] 

Beating  of  the  heart  at  a low  place.3  [Morgagni,  Epist.  xxiv, 
art.  13.] 

Pain  in  the  cardiac  region.3  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

220.  Tightness  of  chest.  [Ramazzini,4  Diatribe  de  morb.  artif , 
Cap.  26.] 

Difficult  breathing,  without  expectoration.5  [Morgagni,  1.  c., 
Epist.  vii,  art.  18.] 

Very  much  impeded  respiration.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  xv, 
art  6.] 

Orthopncea ; he  could  only  breathe  with  his  neck  stretched 
upwards,  with  whistling  in  the  windpipe,  and  great  distension  of  the 
abdomen.6  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

On  lying  down,  difficult  respiration.7  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  x, 
art.  13.] 

225.  Six  or  seven  times  inflammation  of  the  chest  and  lungs.8  [Mor- 
gagni, Epist.  vii,  art.  13.] 

Inflammation  of  the  lungs  with  vomiting  of  a green  bilious 
matter.8  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Inflammation  of  the  lungs  with  incoherent  talking.8  [Morgagni, 
I-  c.] 

1 See  note  to  S.  1 18. 

2 Rather,  “ the  pulsations  of  the  heart  are  felt  below  the  natural  limits.'”  See  note 
to  S.  100. 

3 See  note  to  S.  100. 

4 Affections  of  workers  in  hemp  and  linseed ; therefore  mere  local  and  mechanical 
irritations. 

5 Subject  of  S.  225.  Being  tired  with  carrying  a burden,  had  S.  309  and  228, 
and  came  into  hospital  with  this  dyspnoea.  Died  of  phrenitis.  See  Hahnemann’s 
note  to  S.  330. 

6 A man  convalescing  from  acute  fever,  <(  after  irregularities  in  food  and  drink  and 
continual  handling  of  hemp,”  had  this  symptom  with  S.  222,  74,  79,  119,  229. 

7 See  note  to  S.  100. 

8 Local  effect. 


330 


CANNABIS. 


Pain  like  needle-pricks  on  the  left  nipple.1  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 
Expiration  caused  him  to  cough.2  [Morgagni,  Epist.  xv,  art.  6.] 
230.  Sometimes  tussiculation  proceeding  from  the  pit  of  the  throat, 
when  a cool,  salt  fluid  is  felt  deep  back  in  the  throat.  [£V/'.] 

Constant  cough.  [Ramazzini,  1.  c.] 

Dry,  very  violent  cough.  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

On  the  coccyx,  pressure  as  with  a blunt  point.  [Gw.] 

On  the  left  near  the  coccyx  in  the  bone,  a pain  as  if  this  part  was 
forcibly  pressed  against  a hard  body.  [Gw.] 

235.  On  the  lower  dorsal  vertebrae  of  the  thorax  a heavy  pressive 
and  fine  shooting  pain  (for  50  days),  which  sometimes  extended  to 
the  loins  or  to  the  scapulae.3  [Morgagni,  Epist.  x,  art.  13.] 

Slowly  intermitting  obtuse  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  back, 
under  the  last  rib.  [Gw.] 

Pain  in  the  middle  of  the  back  as  if  pinched  with  forceps,  which 
extended  forwards  towards  the  abdomen.  [Tz.] 

The  pain  in  the  back  often  takes  away  his  breath.  [Tz.] 

On  the  right  near  the  scapula,  itching  fine  stitches,  that  go  off 
after  scratching.  [Gw.] 

240.  Burning  under  the  right  scapula.  [Tz.] 

On  the  lowest  part  of  the  nape,  stabbing  as  with  a knife.  [Tz.] 
Drawing  upwards  in  the  nape  on  the  cervical  vertebrae.  [Tz.] 
Drawing  from  the  nape  to  the  ear,  rather  cramp-like  and  external. 

"•] 

Tearing  pressure  on  the  top  of  the  shoulder  in  fits.  [Gw.] 

245.  On  pressing  between  the  head  of  the  clavicle  and  the  head  of  the 
humerus  a severe  pain,  that  radiated  down  into  the  fingers.  [Gw.] 

On  extending  the  arm,  sensation  in  the  shoulder,  as  if  it  was 
bruised.  [Tz.] 

Cramp-like,  intermitting  contraction  of  the  right  hand.  [Gw.] 
(Wrist-joint  as  if  dead  j he  could  not  move  it.) 

Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  metacarpal  bones.  [Gw.] 

250.  Obtuse  stitch  inferiorly  in  the  palm  over  the  bones  of  the  wrist. 

[<?«.] 

Coldness  and  cold  feeling  of  the  hands.  [//<?.] 

Cramp  in  the  joint  of  the  thumb  when  writing.  [-Ez.] 
Formication  as  if  asleep  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  and  as  if  they 
were  numb  (immediately  after  taking  the  drug).  [i//.] 

A sudden  paresis  of  the  hand  ; when  eating  he  could  not  hold 
the  fork  with  the  fingers  ; the  whole  hand  trembled  on  taking  hold 
of  anything ; there  was  a kind  of  helplessness  and  painful  powerless- 
ness in  it.  \_Stf.] 

255.  Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  buttock  and  thigh  ; small  white 
vesicles  with  large,  red,  smooth  areola,  which  burn  like  fire,  especially 
when  lying  on  them|or  touching  them  ; they  leave  brownish-red  spots 
after  two  days,  which  are  very  painful  when  touched.  [Tz.] 


1 See  note  to  S.  221. 

2 See  note  to  S.  223. 

3 See  note  to  S.  1 18. 


CANNABIS. 


33i 

On  the  right  hip  a cramp-like,  twitching,  strangling  pain,  almost 
making  him  cry  out. 

In  the  flesh  of  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh,  near  the  groin,  acute 
sharp  needle-pricks.  [Gw.] 

A shudder  passes  over  the  thighs  (immediately).  [Gw.] 

Shudder  on  the  right  thigh,  like  goose-skin,  [i^z.] 

260.  Painless  cramp-sensation  at  the  back  of  the  right  thigh,  as  if  a 
muscle  were  beginning  to  twitch,  [Tz.] 

Constant  aching  anteriorly  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  when 
sitting.  [Gw.] 

A shudder  often  runs  over  the  legs  from  below  upwards. 

[<»'.] 

Prickling  burning  on  the  left  knee  in  fits.  [Gw.] 

Cramp  in  the  calf  when  walking. 

265.  When  walking  a drawing  like  cramp  in  the  popliteal  space, 
which  spreads  up  along  the  inner  muscles  of  the  thigh,  [Tz.] 
Snapping  of  the  patella  on  going  upstairs,  [Tz.] 

The  right  leg  is  first  difficult  to  move,  then  paralysed,  so  that 
the  power  of  movement  more  than  the  sensibility  is  awanting.1 
[Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  x,  art.  13.] 

Burning  in  the  right  tibia  when  standing.  [Tz.] 

Painful  live  blood  on  the  back  of  the  foot.  [Gw.] 

270.  Painful  stretching  tension  on  the  arch  of  the  foot.  [Gw.] 

Drawing  hither  and  thither  in  the  left  foot  from  the  toes  to  the 
ankle.  [Gw.] 

Drawing  and  aching  in  the  heel,  when  sitting.  [Tz.] 

Drawing  in  the  ball  of  the  right  big  toe.  [Tz.] 

Shooting  itching  in  the  ball  of  the  left  big  toe.  [Tz.] 

275.  On  moving,  rheumatic  drawing  in  the  periosteum  of  the  shafts  of 
the  bones  of  all  the  limbs,  as  if  they  were  bruised.  [Tz.] 

Here  and  there  in  the  flesh  a superficial  pinching,  as  if  the  part 
were  grasped  by  the  fingers.  [Gw.] 

Tearing  contractive  pressure  on  the  left  knee,  in  the  forehead, 
and  on  several  other  parts  of  the  body.  [Gw.] 

A very  tiresome  fine  pricking,  as  with  a thousand  needle  points, 
all  over  the  body,  so  that  he  cannot  bear  it,  at  night  in  bed,  when  he 
gets  into  a perspiration  from  warm  covering ; it  first  commences  in 
a few  places,  and  when  he  then  scratches  and  it  leaves  off  for  a 
short  time,  it  then  spreads  over  many  other  parts ; at  the  same  time 
he  has  great  cardiac  anxiety,  and  the  sensation  as  if  he  were  repeat- 
edly sprinkled  with  hot  water  ; it  goes  off  when  he  removes  the 
bedclothes.  [Gw.] 

Tearing  blows,  and  tearing,  deeply-penetrating  pricks  on  several 
parts,  especially  on  the  limbs.  [Gw.] 

280.  Hysterical  fits.2  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

Tetanic  spasms  of  the  upper  extremities  and  of  the  trunk  from 
time  to  time,  which  lasted  a quarter  of  an  hour,  and  during  which 


1 See  note  to  S.  1 18. 

2 “ In  those  predisposed  to  them,”  Neuhold  says. 


332 


CANNABIS. 


vomiting  of  yellow  fluid  or  some  confusion  of  the  mind  ensued.*1 
[Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  x,  art.  13.] 

After  a meal  he  is  weary  and  lazy ; everything,  even  speaking 
and  writing,  affects  him.  [Gjj.] 

After  a meal  her  feet  are  very  heavy.  [Gta.] 

Immediately  after  a meal  he  is  weary  in  every  limb,  and  feels  in 
the  left  side  under  the  short  ribs  a tearing  pressing  j pressing  upon  it 
causes  pain  in  the  part.  [Gxr.] 

285.  Lazy  and  indolent  throughout  the  body.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

He  is  lazy  and  weary,  yawns  much  and  stretches  himself  as  if  he 
would  go  to  sleep.  [Gjj.] 

Great  exhaustion  after  slight  movement  ; after  going  upstairs  he 
lay  for  a long  time  quite  exhausted  on  the  sofa  before  he  could  again 
move  freely  and  speak.  [*Sy.] 

She  feels  ill  all  over  the  body,  cannot  remain  up,  must  lie  down 
from  weariness  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs.  \_Ts.  Hb.~\ 

He  fears  he  will  fall  to  the  ground  so  suddenly  does  weakness 
arise,  particularly  in  the  lower  extremities ; he  staggers  on  the 
slightest  movement  of  the  body,  but  he  seems  to  possess  more  firm- 
ness when  walking  (aft.  3 h.).  [Ez.] 

290.  Exhaustion,  giving  way  of  the  knees,  and  sensation  like  dull 
pain  in  them  (aft.  1 h.).  [//<?.] 

Powerlessness  of  the  body.1  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  x,  art. 


130 

Incessant  yawning  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  ij  h.). 
[Ho.] 

Drowsiness  by  day.  [aS’Z/Z] 

Irresistible  drowsiness,  in  the  forenoon. 

295.  Drowsiness  all  day.  \_Fz.] 

Sleeplessness.2  [Morgagni,  Epist.  xv,  art.  6.] 

Sleeplessness  after  midnight. 

Restless  sleep. 

He  wakes  at  night  out  of  slumber  with  horrible  dreams,  and 
cannot  remember  where  he  is. 

300.  (Extraordinary  fear  of  bed,  in  which,  however,  he  lies  down  after 
all.)  [Fz.] 

At  night,  restless  sleep,  frequent  waking,  confused,  sometimes 
anxious  dreams,  pollutions  and  after  them  sleep  of  exhaustion,  [Fz.] 
Dreams  of  misfortunes  happening  to  others. 

Dreams  of  disagreeable  and  frightful  character,  in  which  he  is 
unsuccessful  in  everything,  which  causes  him  great  anxiety.  [Grr.] 
He  has  every  night  confused  dreams,  which  are,  however, 
remembered  after  awaking.  [Czjj.] 

305.  Very  vivid  dreams  of  a horrible  character,  whereby,  however,  he 


* Then  ensued  paralysis  and  death.  Post-mortem  examination  showed  pus  in  the 
kidneys,  thickened  lining  membrane  of  the  bladder,  distension  of  the  blood-vessels  of 
the  diaphragm,  water  in  the  convolutions  of  the  brain,  none  in  the  cavities. 


1 See  note  to  S.  1 18. 

2 In  subject  of  S.  223.  Much  serum  found  in  brain  post  mortem. 


CANNABIS. 


333 

does  not  feel  anxious,  but  always  retains  a sort  of  presence  of  mind. 
[Gss.] 

In  the  morning  after  waking  from  an  almost  unbroken  sleep,  he 
is  more  weary  than  when  he  lay  down  the  night  before.  [Gjj.] 

Very  small  pulse.1 2  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  xxiv,  art.  13.] 
Slow,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse.  [i/<?.] 

Rigor.3  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  Epist.  vii,  art.  13.] 

310.  Fever,  rigor  with  the  most  extreme  thirst,  and  after  drinking 
shivering,  at  the  same  time  cold  hands,  knees  and  feet;  therewith 
hurried  disposition,  trembling,  contortion  of  the  face  ; sometimes 
lachrymose,  sometimes  joyful,  sometimes  furious  disposition ; every- 
thing annoyed  him,  so  that  he  got  in  a furious  passion  over  it ; during 
the  rigor,  some  warmth  in  the  back  and  feet,  which  perspired,  but 
did  not  feel  warm  to  the  touch,  [Tz.] 

Chill  with  thirst,  not  followed  by  heat,  and  without  perspiration, 
in  the  afternoon  (after  52  h.). 

The  whole  body  is  cold,  but  the  face  grows  always  warmer  and 
warmer.  \_Ho.] 

Warmth  and  feeling  of  warmth  of  the  face. 

Perspiration  on  the  forehead  and  neck,  at  night. 

315.  Shudder  passing  over  the  trunk  with  a sensation  of  a certain  dis- 
comfort, in  short  attacks.  [G^.] 

Shudder  runs  over  all  the  body,  comes  also  on  the  head  and  draws 
as  it  were  the  hairs  together.  [G^.] 

Chilly  for  several  hours  (immediately).  \We.\ 

He  is  cold  to  the  feeling  in  the  limbs  and  has  rigor.  [G^.] 
Ebullition  of  blood.  [Neuhold,  1.  c.] 

320.  Nothing  gives  him  pleasure;  he  is  indifferent  to  everything. 

[*■*•]. 

Disposition  in  the  forenoon  dejected,  in  the  afternoon  cheerful. 
Sadness. 

Cheerfulness  as  from  intoxication  (aft.  1 h.). 

Wavering  and  uncertain  humour.  [///.] 

325.  Mind  anxious. 

Apt  to  start  at  a slight  noise  (aft.  ij  h.).  \_Ho  ~\ 

Peevish,  especially  in  the  afternoon.  [Fr,  H — n.~\ 

Sometimes  gay,  sometimes  grave  mania.3  [Morgagni,  1.  c., 
Epist.  vii,  art.  13.] 

Very  vexed  and  angry  about  trifles.  [$£/'.] 

330.  Sometimes  furious  mania,  so  that  he  spat  in  the  faces  of  those 
around  him.*  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

* After  a poultice  on  the  head,  convulsions,  subsultus  tendinum,  death.  Post- 
mortem examination  showed  purulent  deposits  and  pus  in  the  lungs,  pleuritis,  and  dia- 
phragmitis,  firm  clots  in  the  cavities  of  the  heart. 


1 See  note  to  S.  100. 

2 See  note  to  S.  221. 

3 In  subject  of  S.  221. 


CAPSICUM  ANNUUM.1 

(The  ripe  seed-capsules  along  with  the  seeds  reduced  to  powder  and  digested  in 
alcohol,  in  the  proportion  of  20  grains  of  the  powder  to  400  drops  of  alcohol,  without 
heat,  for  a week,  the  mixture  being  shaken  twice  daily  to  form  a tincture,  twenty 
drops  of  which  contain  one  grain  of  capsicum-power.) 

In  both  the  Indies  where  “Spanish  pepper”  ( Piper  Indicum  sive 
Hispanicum ) , as  it  is  called,  is  indigenous,  it  is  chiefly  used  only  as  a 
spice.  It  was  introduced  as  such  into  England,  France,  and  Italy,  and 
at  length  was  adopted  in  Germany  as  a spice  to  season  sauces  at  the 
dainty  tables  of  high  livers  (the  pulverised  seeds  of  the  still  more 
pungent  Capsicum  baccatum,ox  “Cayenne  pepper,”  being  often  used  as  a 
substitute)  in  order  to  stimulate  the  palate  to  an  unnatural  appetite,  and 
thus — ruin  the  health. 

In  the  meantime  but  little  was  heard  of  the  medicinal  use  of  this 
powerful  substance.  Bergius  alone  ( Mat . Med.,  p.  147)  mentions 
having  cured  several  agues  of  long  standing  with  two-grain  doses  of 
capsicum  ; but  he  did  not  give  it  alone,  for  the  old  original  sin  of 
traditional  medicine,  the  mixture  craze , induced  him  to  combine  it  with 
bay  berries,  in  the  proportion  of  twenty  of  the  latter  to  three  of  the 
former.  He  does  not  describe  the  agues  cured  by  it  according  to  the 
totality  of  their  symptoms,  but  only  employs  the  expression  “old 
agues  ” after  the  manner  of  his  other  old  school  colleagues,  so  that  the 
virtus  ab  usu  of  the  mixture  prescribed  is  shrouded  in  darkness. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  homoeopathic  physician  proceeds  much  less 
doubtfully  and  with  much  greater  certainty  in  his  cures  with  capsicum, 
for  guided  by  the  peculiar,  pure  morbid  states  produced  by  this  powerful 
medicinal  substance  in  the  healthy  body  (some  of  which  I here  record), 
he  only  attempts  the  removal  of  those  natural  diseases  the  sum  of  whose 
symptoms  is  contained  in  the  greatest  possible  similarity  among  those 
of  capsicum. 

The  diseases  curable  by  capsicum  are  rarely  met  with  in  persons  of 
tense  fibre. 

A very  small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  tincture  diluted  to  the  trillion- 
fold degree — each  diluting  bottle  having  been  only  twice  succussed — I 
have  found  to  be  quite  sufficient  for  a dose  for  all  homoeopathic  curative 
purposes ; and  as  an  antidote  to  diminish  the  over-strong  action  of  a 
dose  of  capsicum  in  some  very  sensitive  persons  I have  found  the 
olfaction  of  a saturated  solution  of  camphor  efficacious. 

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Ahner,  Hartung,  Mossdorf,  and 
Wislicenus. 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827. 


CAPSICUM. 


335 


Symptoms  are  taken  from  the  following  old-school  sources  : 

Browne,  in  Murray's  Appar.  medic.,  i,  2nd  edit. 

Fordyce,  in  Murray's  Appar.  medic.,  i,  2nd  edit. 

Pelargus,  Obs tom.  ii. 

In  the  Frag,  de  Vir.  capsicum  has  147  symptoms,  in  the  1st  Edit.  346,  in  this  2nd 
Edit.  344.] 


CAPSICUM. 

Intoxication. 

When  he  wakes  up  from  sleep,  his  head  is  so  stupid  as  if  he  did 
not  know  himself. 

Cloudiness  of  the  head.  [Htg^\ 

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  dull  in  the  head. 

5.  During  the  febrile  rigor  and  coldness  at  the  same  time  anxiety, 
dizziness  and  stupidity  in  the  head,  like  thoughtlessness  and  awk- 
wardness, so  that  she  knocks  against  everything. 

Emptiness  and  stupidity  of  the  head  (aft.  12  h.).  [Jr.] 

Dulness  and  confusion  of  the  head.  [Jr.] 

Vertigo,  swaying  from  side  to  side. 

All  the  senses  are  more  acute.* 

10.  When  moving  the  head  and  when  walking,  headache, 
as  if  the  skull  would  hurst. 

Throbbing,  beating  headache,  in  one  of  the  temples. 

Beating  headache  in  the  forehead. 

A throbbing,  beating  headache. 

Aching  pain  in  the  temples. 

15.  Aching  pain  in  the  temporal  region.  [Htg.] 

Pressive  pain  in  the  forehead  as  if  it  pressed  from  the 
occiput  forwards  out  at  the  forehead,  with  a cutting  from  the  occiput 
forwards  (immediately). 

A continual  pressive  headache  in  the  forehead  above  the  root  of 
the  nose  and  occasionally  some  stitches  through  the  ear  and  over  the 
eye. 

A semi-lateral,  pressive  shooting  headache,  like  a hysterical  me- 
grim, which  is  aggravated  by  raising  the  eyes  and  head,  or  by  bowing 
the  head  forwards,  and  is  accompanied  by  forgetfulness  and  nausea. 

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  head  (aft. 
I7>48  h.).  [Jr.] 

20.  A shooting  headache. 

A headache  more  shooting  than  tearing,  which  is 
worse  when  at  rest,  but  mitigated  by  movement. 

An  outstretching  headache,  or  as  if  the  brain  were 
too  fuU. 

A pressing-asunder  headache  in  the  forehead. 

A drawing  headache  in  the  forehead. 

25.  Drawing  tearing  pains  in  the  frontal  bone,  more  on 
the  right  side  (aft.  6,  7 h.  and  3 d.).  [Jr.] 

Violent  deeply-penetrating  shooting  in  the  crown.  [. Ar .] 

# Reaction  of  the  vital  force  of  the  organism,  secondary  action,  curative  action. 


336 


CAPSICUM. 


(Tearing  headache.) 

On  the  hairy  scalp  an  eroding  itching,  as  from  vermin,  which 
compelled  scratching  ; after  the  scratching  the  roots  of  the  hair  and 
the  scalp  were  as  painful  as  if  the  hair  had  been  pulled  out. 

Slight  shudder  on  the  hairy  part  of  the  head,  followed  by  a 
burning  itching  of  the  integuments  of  the  head,  which  is  diminished 
by  scratching,  but  then  returns  with  increased  violence  (aft.  2 h.) . 

30.  Unusual  redness  of  the  face,  without  heat,  but  after  half  an  hour 
a wretched  appearance  and  pale  complexion  (aft.  3 h.).  \HtgJ\ 

Sweat  on  the  forehead.  [yfr.] 

Facial  pains,  sometimes  as  pains  in  the  bones,  excitable  by 
external  touch,  sometimes  as  fine  pains  penetrating  through  the 
nerves,  which  torment  him  when  going  to  sleep. 

(On  the  left  side  of  the  face  pimples,  with  smarting  sensation  as 
from  salt.) 

In  the  face  red  points,  and  on  the  forehead  a tetter  with  eroding 
itching  (aft.  2 and  24  h.). 

35.  Very  dilated  pupils. 

Great  dilatation  of  the  pupils.  [.//r.] 

Pressure  on  the  eyes  so  that  he  cannot  open  them  wide  enough. 

o.] 

Eyes  projecting  out  of  the  head  with  paleness  of  face  (aft.  16  h.). 
An  aching  pain  in  the  eyes  as  from  a foreign  body. 
40.  In  the  morning  a burning  in  the  eyes,  which  are  red  and  water. 
Fine  shooting  pain  in  the  eyes.* 

Inflammation  of  the  eyes. 

In  the  morning  a dimness  of  vision,  as  if  a foreign  substance  swam 
upon  the  cornea  and  obscured  it,  so  that  by  rubbing  the  eye  the 
transparency  can  be  restored  for  some  instants. 

All  objects  appear  black  before  the  eyes. 

45.  Vision  almost  quite  extinguished,  like  blindness. 

Tearing  in  the  concha  of  the  ear. 

An  itching  pain  quite  deep  in  the  ear  (aft.  16  h.). 

An  aching  pain  quite  deep  in  the  ear  (aft.  1 and  8 h.). 
On  the  petrous  bone  behind  the  ear  a swelling,  painful  to  the 
touch. 

50.  Tearing  pain  behind  the  left  ear  (aft.  6 h.).  \Ar.~\ 

A pain  under  the  ear. 

(An  itching  mingled  with  stitches  in  the  nose.) 

Contractive  twitching  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  nose  to  above 
the  left  eye  (aft.  5 h.).  [^r.] 

Burning  tensive  sensation  on  the  left  nostril,  as  if  a pimple  would 
come  there.  [Mss,'] 

55.  Epistaxis  in  the  morning  in  bed,  and  afterwards  frequent 
blowing  of  blood  from  the  nose. 

Bloody  nasal  mucus. 

Painful  pimples  under  the  nostrils. 


* From  the  exhalation. 


CAPSICUM. 


337 


Burning  in  the  lips.  [Afss.] 

Ulcerated  eruption  on  the  lips — not  in  the  angles — which  is 
painful  only  on  moving  the  part. 

60.  Swollen  lips. 

Rough  lips. 

Chaps  on  the  lips ; fissured  lips. 

Pains  on  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw,  as  from  a boil  or  an  ulcer, 
for  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  [ \Ar.~\ 

Swelling  of  the  gums. 

65.  Drawing  pain  in  the  gums. 

A drawing  pain  in  the  tooth,  which,  however,  is  not  increased 
either  by  touching  the  tooth  or  by  eating. 

The  teeth  feel  to  him  as  if  lengthened  and  elevated,  and  as  if  on 
edge. 

Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  inside  of  the  cheeks. 

On  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  pimples,  which  when  touched  cause 
shooting  pain. 

70.  Flow  of  saliva. 

Twitching  tearing  pain  in  the  right  cervical  glands. 

[^r.] 

Pain  when  swallowing,  as  in  inflammation  of  the  throat, 
but  when  not  swallowing  a drawing  pain  in  the  oesophagus. 

Pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  oesophagus,  when  not  swallowing,  as  if 
the  parts  were  sore  and  spasmodically  drawn  together,  as  in  waterbrash. 

A simple  pain  in  the  fauces,  only  when  coughing. 

75.  In  the  palate  a pain,  as  if  it  were  pressed  or  pinched  by  something 
hard,  at  first  more  when  not  swallowing,  afterwards  more  whilst 
swallowing  (aft.  i\  h.). 

Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  oesophagus. 

Dryness  in  the  mouth. 

On  the  anterior  part  of  the  tongue,  a dry  feeling,  without  thirst, 
in  the  morning  (aft.  8 h.). 

Adipsia. 

80.  Viscid  mucus  in  the  mouth  (aft.  2 h.). 

Taste  in  the  mouth  as  from  foul  water. 

Insipid,  qualmish,  earthy  taste  (e.g.  of  butter). 

Watery  insipid  taste  in  the  mouth,  then  heartburn. 
Heartburn. 

85.  Eructation  from  the  stomach  only  when  walking,  and  at  every 
eructation  a stitch  in  the  side  3 when  sitting  no  eructations  and  hence 
no  stitch. 

An  astringent,  sourish  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Sour  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Sour  taste  of  soup  (aft.  2 h.). 

Qualmishness  in  the  stomach  (aft.  1 h.). 

90.  A coldness  in  the  stomach 3 a sensation  as  if  cold  water  were  in 
it — followed  by  a sensation  as  if  he  trembled. 

Want  of  hunger,  anorexia. 

When  he  would  eat  he  must  force  himself  to  do  so  3 he  has  no 
appetite,  although  food  tasted  all  right. 


22 


338 


CAPSICUM. 


After  a meal,  frequent  yawning. 

Longing  for  coffee  (aft.  8 h.). 

95.  Nausea  with  inclination  to  vomit,  and  spitting  of  saliva  after 
drinking  coffee. 

Inclination  to  vomit. 

Qualmishness  and  inclination  to  vomit  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
in  the  morning  and  after  noon  (aft.  24.  h.). 

Aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  with  inclination  to  vomit. 

After  a meal,  fulness  and  anxiety  in  the  chest  ; thereafter  sour 
eructation  or  heartburn — finally  thin  stool. 

100.  After  a meal  (at  noon),  immediately  stool  with  redness  of  the 
cheeks  (aft.  6 h.). 

Immediately  after  a meal,  at  noon  and  evening,  a burning  over 
the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

A burning  in  the  stomach  up  into  the  mouth,  after  breakfast. 

Deep  in  the  abdomen,  a pain  in  the  bowels  more  burning  than 
shooting— with  simultaneous  cutting  in  the  umbilical  region — when 
moving,  especially  when  stooping  and  walking,  with  ill-humour  on 
account  of  the  pain  and  discontent  and  tendency  to  weep  about  life- 
less things  (not  about  persons  or  moral  subjects),  and  during  the 
crossness  a kind  of  anxiety  with  perspiration  on  the  face. 

An  aching  tension  in  the  abdomen,  especially  the 
epigastric  region,  between  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and 
navel,  which  is  particularly  increased  by  movement,  at 
the  same  time  with  an  aching  tension  in  the  lower  part 
of  the  hack. 

105.  Distension  of  the  abdomen  two  hours  after  eating  ; followed  by 
a headache  darting  towards  the  occiput,  and  profuse  perspiration. 

A tensive  pain  from  the  abdomen  to  the  chest,  as  from 
distension  of  the  abdomen. 

Distension  and  hardness  of  the  abdomen  ; she  could  not  bear  any 
tight  clothing. 

Sensation  as  if  the  abdomen  was  distended  almost  to 
bursting,  whereby  the  breathing  is  impeded  to  suffoca- 
tion. 

A rumbling  in  the  abdomen  going  upwards  and  downwards. 

no.  Grumbling  in  the  abdomen  from  flatulence  (aft.  1 h.). 

Pinching  in  the  epigastrium. 

An  aching  under  the  short  ribs,  and  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Fine  quick  stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  some  m.). 

Aching  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  [y/r.] 

1 15.  In  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a pinching,  out-boring  pain,  especially 
when  sitting  bent  forwards,  lasting  severely  for  eight  minutes  (aft. 
ii  h.).  [Jr.] 

Uncommonly  strong  pulsation  of  the  bloodvessels  of  the  abdomen. 

iHtg.-] 

A hard  pressing  almost  shooting  pain  on  a small  spot  in  the  left 
hypogastrium  (aft.  1 h.). 

An  aching  here  and  there  in  the  abdomen. 


CAPSICUM. 


339 


Increased  internal  heat  in  the  bowels.  [Htg.] 

120.  Aching  pinching  pain  in  the  belly  immediately  after  a meal,  like 
incarcerated  flatulence. 

Bellyache  as  from  flatulence  in  the  hypogastrium. 

The  flatulence  moves  about  painfully  in  the  abdomen. 

Much  flatulence.  [^K] 

Painless  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [ Htg.] 

125.  Along  with  cutting  colic  twisting  round  the  navel,  diarrhoeic 
evacuations  of  viscid  mucus  sometimes  mingled  with  black  blood  ; 
after  every  stool  thirst,  and  after  every  drink  shuddering. 

A drawing  and  turning  over  in  the  abdomen,  without 

and  with  diarrhoea. 

A flatulent  hernia  comes  forcibly  and  with  pain  out  at  the 
inguinal  ring. 

After  some  flatulent  colic  in  the  hypogastrium,  small 
frequent  stools  which  consist  of  mucus  sometimes  inter- 
mixed with  blood,  and  cause  tenesmus. 

Slimy  diarrhoea  with  tenesmus. 

130.  Immediately,  diarrhoea  3 and  shortly  afterwards,  ineffectual  urging 
to  stool. 

Small  stools,  consisting  of  nothing  but  mucus. 

Small  stools  of  bloody  mucus. 

Tenesmus. 

Tenesmus.  [Browne,1  in  Murray , Appar.  Medic. , i,  edit,  sec., 

P-  7°3-] 

135.  Along  with  pressive  pain  in  the  bowels,  he  has  urging  to  stool, 
but  he  is  costive,  \_Ar.~] 

After  drinking  he  must  go  to  stool,  though  he  is  costive,  but  only 
mucus  is  passed.  \_Ar.~\ 

As  soon  as  he  has  drunk  something  he  feels  as  if  diarrhoea  would 
come  on,  but  every  time  only  a little  is  passed.  \_Ar.~\ 

Constipation,  as  if  there  was  too  much  heat  in  the  abdomen. 
Burning  pain  in  the  anus  (after  3,  4,  8 h.). 

140.  Burning  at  the  anus.  [Browne,  1.  c.] 

Itching  in  the  anus  (aft.  3,  4,  8 h.). 

Smarting,  shooting  pain  in  the  anus,  with  the  diarrhoeic  stool. 

Blind  haemorrhoids  \ vascular  knots  at  the  anus,  which  cause 
severe  pain  during  the  evacuation. 

Piles  at  the  anus,  which  sometimes  itch. 

145.  Discharge  of  blood  by  the  anus  for  four  days. 

Strangury,  tenesmus  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder ; he 
has  urging  to  frequent,  almost  ineffectual  urination  (aft. 
4,  8 h.). 

Spasmodic  contraction,  with  cutting  pain,  at  the  neck  of  the 
bladder — not  exactly  like  urging  to  urinate — sometimes  intermitting, 
sometimes  recurring,  in  the  morning  in  bed ; it  seems  to  be  some- 
what allayed  by  urinating  (aft.  24  h.).  [/^j.] 

The  urine  is  passed  only  with  great  difficulty  by  drops  and  in 
spurts  (immediately  and  for  a long  time). 


1 General  statement 


34o 


CAPSICUM. 


Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  chiefly  when  sitting,  not  when  walk- 
ing (aft.  42  h.). 

15°-  Scalding  of  urine. 

After  urinating  a burning,  smarting  pain  in  the  urethra  (aft.  7 d.). 

A burning  in  the  mouth  of  the  urethra  immediately  before, 
during,  and  one  minute  after  urinating. 

Pain  in  the  urethra,  especially  in  the  forenoon. 

Immediately  after  urinating  a fine  shooting  in  the  orifice  of  the 
urethra. 

155.  When  not  urinating,  pricking  as  with  needles  in  the  fore  part  of 
the  urethra  (aft.  8 h.). 

When  not  urinating,  severe  stitches  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra. 

When  not  urinating,  a cutting  pain  in  the  urethra  backwards 
(aft.  6 h.). 

The  urethra  is  painful  when  touched  (aft.  7 d.). 

The  urine  deposits  a white  sediment. 

160.  A constant  aching  and  prickling  in  the  glans  penis,  especially  in 
the  morning  and  evening. 

A fine,  itching  pricking  on  the  glans  penis,  like  gnat  bites.  [y/r.] 

In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  coldness  of  the  scrotum. 

Coldness  of  the  scrotum  and  impotence. 

Seminal  emission  at  night. 

165.  A drawing  pain  in  the  spermatic  cord  and  a squeezing  pain  in 
the  testicle  whilst  urinating,  and  for  some  time  afterwards  (aft.  48  h.). 

Erections  in  the  forenoon,  afternoon,  and  evening. 

Stiffness  of  the  penis,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  without  amorous 
thoughts. 

Violent  erection,  in  the  morning  on  getting  up,  only  to  be  allayed 
by  cold  water. 

During  amorous  toying,  an  uncontrollable  trembling  of  the  whole 
body  (aft.  24  h.) . 

170.  Purulent  discharge  from  the  urethra,  a kind  of  gonorrhoea. 

Urethral  blennorrhcea.*  [Fordyce,  in  Murray , App.  Med.,  i, 
edit,  sec.,  p.  704.] 

(The  gonorrhoea  becomes  yellow  and  thick)  (aft.  7 d.). 

During  the  menstrual  flux,  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  with 

inclination  to  vomit. 

* * 

Creeping  and  tickling  in  the  nose,  as  in  stuffed 
coryza. 

175.  Burning  formication  in  the  nose,  with  violent  sneezing  and  flow 
of  mucusf  (immediately).  \_Ws.~\ 

Violent,  shaking  sneezing,  with  discharge  of  thin  mucus  from  the 
nose  (immediately).  [ Mss.\ 

Stuffed  coryza. 

Hoarseness. 

Feeling  of  roughness  in  the  throat,  for  nearly  two  days.  [ Mss .] 

# From  wearing  on  the  abdomen  next  the  skin  a linen  bag  filled  with  the  powdered 

seeds  of  the  Capsicum  baccatum. 

*j-  From  the  exhalations. 


CAPSICUM. 


34i 


180.  Tickling  sensation  in  the  windpipe,  so  that  he  must  sneeze 
violently  several  times.  [Ar7\ 

Continual  stitches  in  the  throat  in  the  region  of  the  epiglottis, 
which  excite  dry  cough,  that,  however,  does  not  remove  them. 
[Mss.] 

Mucus  in  the  upper  part  of  the  windpipe,  which  must  be  expec- 
torated from  time  to  time  by  hawking  and  voluntary  tussiculation 
(aft.  3 h.). 

Very  frequent  short  cough. 

Dry,  frequent,  short  cough. 

185.  Cough,  especially  towards  evening  (from  5 to  9 o’clock). 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  a formication  and  tickling  in 
the  larynx,  and  dry  short  cough. 

Cough,  especially  after  drinking  coffee. 

Painful  cough. 

Only  when  coughing,  a pain  in  the  throat,  as  from  a simply  pain- 
ful swelling. 

190.  Only  during  the  fit  of  coughing,  an  aching  pain  in  the  throat,  as 
if  an  abscess  were  about  to  burst  there. 

When  coughing  headache,  as  if  the  skull  would 
burst. 

The  cough  causes  inclination  to  vomit. 

Fits  of  coughing  in  the  afternoon  (about  5 o’clock),  which  cause 
nausea  and  vomiting. 

With  every  cough  a pressive  pain  in  the  ear,  as  if  an  abscess 
would  burst  there. 

195.  When  coughing  a drawing  pain  in  the  side  of  the  chest  extending 
up  to  the  throat. 

When  coughing  a deep  pressing-in  pain  on  the  side  of  the  thigh 
extending  into  the  knee. 

From  coughing  or  sneezing  a pain  darts  through  one  or  other 
limb. 

Whilst  coughing  and  some  time  afterwards  a pressing  towards 
the  bladder  and  some  stitches  from  within  outwards  in  the  region  of 
the  neck  of  the  bladder.  [JlAss.'] 

The  air  from  the  lungs,  when  coughing,  causes  a strange 
disagreeable  taste  in  the  mouth. 

200.  The  cough  forces  an  ill-smelling  breath  from  the  lungs. 

Pain  in  the  ribs  and  sternum  when  fetching  a breath. 

Pain  on  the  chest,  under  the  right  arm,  when  he  touches  the  place 
or  raises  the  arm. 

A single  prick  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  between  the  third 
and  fourth  ribs,  as  with  a blunt  needle.  \_Ar. ] 

Stitches  in  the  left  side,  at  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs  (aft.  1 h.). 

[^•] 

205.  Single  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  between  the  second 
and  third  ribs  (aft.  5 h.).  \_ArJ] 

Shooting  in  the  left  side,  which  takes  away  his  breath  (aft.  10  h.). 
[Jr.] 


34* 


CAPSICUM, 


Shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  when  fetching  a breath, 
between  the  third  and  fourth  ribs,  [y/r.] 

(Simple  pain  on  a rib,  on  a small  spot,  which  is  worst  when 
touching  it,  but  is  not  excited  either  by  breathing  or  by  coughing.) 

When  coughing  pain  like  shooting  in  the  side  of  the  chest  and 
in  the  back. 

2io.  When  breathing  a shooting  pain  between  the  scapulae  and  in 
the  region  of  the  stomach,  and  single  stitches  in  the  side  of  the 
abdomen,  on  the  ensiform  cartilage  and  in  the  sternum — pains  which 
do  not  penetrate,  however,  but  appear  to  be  superficial  only. 

When  breathing,  whilst  walking,  a stitch  in  the  side  of  the  chest  ; 
not  when  sitting. 

In  the  region  of  the  heart  several  violent  stitches,  so  that  he  was 
inclined  to  cry  out. 

Anxiety  compelling  him  to  breathe  deeply. 

An  involuntary,  strong  expiratory  impulse. 

215.  He  must  often  draw  a single  very  deep  breath,  whereby  he 
imagines  that  he  feels  alleviation  of  all  his  sufferings. 

Deep  breathing,  almost  like  a sigh. 

A pain  in  the  chest  when  sitting,  as  if  the  chest  were  too  full  and 
there  was  not  room  enough  in  it. 

Tightness  of  chest  even  when  at  rest,  with  stiffness  of  the  back, 
which  hurts  when  stooping  forwards,  while  occasionally  a deep  sighing 
inspiration  and  dry  cough  occur. 

Asthma,  feeling  of  fulness  of  the  chest. 

220.  Tightness  of  chest,  which  appears  to  come  out  of  the 
stomach. 

Easier  respiration  from  day  to  day.* 

Tightness  of  chest,  with  redness  of  face,  eructations,  and  sensa- 
tion as  if  the  chest  were  distended. 

Tightness  of  chest  when  at  rest  and  when  moving. 

He  can  only  breathe  when  his  body  is  erect — orthopnoea. 

225.  Pain  as  if  the  chest  were  constricted  which  oppresses 
the  breath,  and  is  increased  on  very  slight  movement. 

A pain,  like  pressure  on  the  chest,  on  breathing  deeply  and  turn- 
ing the  body. 

Tightness  of  chest  when  walking. 

A throbbing  pain  in  the  chest. 

An  aching  pain  in  the  side  of  the  chest  on  which  she  lies. 

230.  In  the  sacrum  a dragging-down  pain  when  standing  and  moving, 
with  bruised  pain. 

Pain  in  the  back  on  stooping. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  back. 

Drawing,  aching  pain  in  the  back. 

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  and  near  the  spine. 

235.  Sudden,  drawing  shooting  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  spine. 

[^•] 

Stiffness  in  the  nape,  which  is  diminished  by  movement. 


# Reaction  of  the  vital  force  of  the  organism,  secondary  action,  curative  action. 


CAPSICUM. 


343 


Painful  stiffness  in  the  nape,  only  felt  on  moving  it. 

Feeling  of  weakness  over  the  whole  nape,  as  if  it  were  loaded 
(aft.  4 h).  [Htg.] 

A twitching  pain  in  the  nape. 

240.  A pain  externally  in  the  neck. 

Sweat  under  the  shoulders  (aft.  8 h.). 

The  shoulder-joint  pains  as  if  dislocated. 

(Drawing,  paralytic  pain  above  and  below  the  elbow-joint.) 
Drawing,  tearing  pain,  which  extends  from  the  right  clavicle  over 
the  whole  of  the  right  arm  to  the  finger  tips,  for  three  minutes,  \Ar.] 

245.  Shooting  in  the  left  elbow-joint,  which  darted  into  the  hand  with 
flying  heat,  causing  the  arm  to  feel  as  if  asleep.  \_Ar.] 

Vibrating  pain  in  the  left  forearm.  \_Ar.] 

Twitching,  quivering,  painful  sensation  in  the  left  palm  (aft. 
8 h.).  [Ar.\ 

Contractive  pain  in  the  left  index  finger.  \_Ar.~] 

Violent,  deep  stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  left  little  finger.  \_Htg.] 

250.  Fine  shooting  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  wrist.* 

Cool  sweat  in  the  hands  (aft.  3 h.). 

A drawing  pain  in  the  hip-joint  (a  pain  like  stiff-neck),  which  is 
aggravated  by  touching  and  by  bending  the  body  backwards. 

From  the  hip-joint  to  the  feet,  a shooting  tearing  pain,  especially 
on  coughing. 

In  the  muscles  of  the  thigh,  pain  like  aching  and  dislocation. 

255.  Bruised  pain  in  the  right  thigh,  going  off  on  walking,  but  re- 
turning when  at  rest.  [Ar.] 

Dislocation-pain  in  the  right  thigh  ; when  he  separates  the 
thighs  outwards,  the  pain  is  severe  there,  but  not  otherwise.  \Ar.] 
Convulsive  jerking  and  twitching  sometimes  of  the  thigh,  some- 
times of  the  forearm.  [Htg.'] 

Tearing  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh.  \Ar.\ 

Drawing,  shooting,  digging  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  posterior 
aspect  of  the  left  thigh,  going  off  by  movement.  \_Ar.] 

260.  Tensive  pain  in  the  knee. 

An  internal  pain  compounded  of  drawing  and  shooting  in  the 
left  leg.  [Htg.] 

Stiffness  in  the  calves  when  walking. 

(Bruised  pain  of  the  os  calcaneum,  as  if  the  heel  were  numbed  or 
bruised  by  a great  leap,  sometimes  changing  into  a tearing,  in  fits) 
(aft.  2 h.). 

Single  stitches  in  the  right  big  toe,  ceasing  on  stamping  the  foot. 

I>'0 

265.  Shooting  out  at  the  tips  of  the  toes. 

For  many  hours,  transient  drawing  pains  here  and  there  in  the 
limbs,  in  the  back,  in  the  nape,  in  the  scapulae,  and  in  the  hands, 
which  are  excited  by  moving. 

Cracking  and  grating  of  the  knee  and  finger-joints. 

In  all  the  joints  sensation  of  stiffness  and  simple  pain,  worst  on 


* From  the  exhalations. 


344 


CAPSICUM. 


commencing  to  move^  but  allayed  by  continuing  to  move — together 
with  catarrh  of  viscid  mucus  in  the  windpipe. 

In  the  morning,  on  rising,  he  feels  as  if  all  the  joints  had  been 
broken  on  the  wheel,  a laming  stiff  pain  on  commencing  to  move, 
especially  in  the  knees  and  ankle-joints, allayed  by  continuing  to  move 
(aft.  io  h.). 

270.  When  he  has  lain  all  the  joints  are  as  if  stiff,  and  in  the  morning 
on  getting  out  of  bed  he  feels  as  if  all  the  joints  were  broken  on  the 
wheel,  the  lameness  in  the  knees  and  ankle-joints  especially  is  much 
worse  after  resting  than  when  he  is  moving. 

All  the  joints  are  painful  as  if  dislocated,  with  the  sensation  as  if 
they  were  swollen. 

Cramp  at  first  in  the  left  arm  and  then  in  the  whole  body  ; the 
arms  were  stiff,  she  could  not  straighten  them,  the  feet  also  were 
stiff  on  rising  up  after  sitting,  as  if  asleep  and  formicating. 

Transient  aching  pains  now  in  one  part,  now  in  another. 

A crawling  here  and  there  in  the  skin  of  the  body,  as  if  from  a fly. 

275.  Sensation  all  over  the  body  as  if  all  the  parts  would  go  to  sleep.* 

Formicating  sensation  in  the  arms  and  in  the  lower  extremities, 
from  the  foot  up  to  the  gullet. 

An  itching  here  and  there  in  the  skin,  but  chiefly  in  the  face  and 
on  the  nose. 

(Itching  only  after  touching  the  part.) 

Itching  in  the  hairs  of  the  head  and  on  small  parts  on  the  rest  of 
the  body,  which  goes  off  on  scratching  gently. 

280.  Shooting,  burning  itching  all  over  the  body,  but  chiefly  on  the 
chest  and  face.  [Htg.] 

Corrosive  burning  on  several  tender  parts  (lips,  mouth,  nose,  tip 
of  the  nose,  alae  nasi,  eyelids,  &c.).f  \JVs^\ 

(Red,  round  spots  on  the  abdomen  and  thighs.) 

A painless  sensation  running  upwards  and  downwards  in  the 
body,  with  redness  of  the  cheeks. 

Lassitude  in  the  limbs,  but  more  when  at  rest  and  when  sitting. 

285.  Weakness  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  followed  by  trembling  of 
the  upper  extremities  and  knees ; his  hands  fail  him  for  writing  (aft. 
7 h.).  [Htg.] 

Great  weariness,  but  not  inviting  sleep  (aft.  2 h.). 

Greater  weariness  in  the  morning  than  in  the  evening. 

Trembling  weakness  in  the  feet. 

Complete  prostration  of  the  strength. 

290.  (Clucking,  quick  throbbing  in  some  large  blood-vessels)  (aft.  24 
h.).  [Htg.] 

He  shuns  all  movement. 

Sleep  full  of  dreams. 

Dreams  of  a sad  character  of  things  long  passed  ; on  awaking  he 
did  not  know  if  it  was  reality  or  not. 

Dreams  full  of  obstacles. 


* Inhaling  sulphur  vapour  soon  relieved  this, 
i From  the  exhalations. 


CAPSICUM. 


345 

295.  Sleep  interrupted  by  crying  out  and  starting  as  if  he  fell  from  a 
height. 

During  sleep  he  snores  when  inspiring  by  the  nose,  as  if  he  could 
not  get  air  through  it,  and  his  breath  were  taken  away  (aft.  1 h.). 

He  wakes  up  several  times  after  midnight. 

Complete  waking  up  after  midnight  and  later. 

He  is  wide  awake  in  the  night  and  cannot  sleep  (af t. 

5,9*0- 

300.  The  disinclination  for  everything  and  the  crossness  go  off  by 
sleep.* 

Yawning,  almost  uninterrupted  (aft.  J h.). 

Cool  air,  and  especially  a draught,  is  disagreeable  to  him  ; he 
cannot  bear  them  (aft.  12  h.). 

Gradually  diminished  temperature  of  the  body. 

Coldness  on  the  whole  body  ; the  limbs  are  cold,  without 
shivering. 

305.  As  the  coldness  of  the  body  increases f so  also  does  the  ill- 
humour  and  the  contraction  of  the  pupils. 

Every  time  after  drinking  shivering  and  rigor. 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  uncommon  chilliness,  followed 
by  coryza  (aft.  72  h.). 

Evening  chilliness. 

The  feet  to  up  above  the  ankles  are  cold  and  cannot  be  warmed, 
along  with  ordinary  temperature  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  in  the 
morning  (aft.  12  h.).  \Ws^\ 

310.  He  is  chilled  by  letting  a little  air  in  under  the  bedclothes. 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  sensation  on  the  thighs  as  if  they 
were  covered  with  cold  sweat  (as  when  cold  air  comes  in  contact 
with  a perspiring  part),  and  yet  the  thighs  did  not  perspire. 

He  trembles  with  chilliness. 

In  the  evening  shivering  and  chilliness  in  the  back,  not  followed 
by  heat  or  thirst,  but  yet  by  slight  perspiration. 

(Febrile  rigor  in  the  evening,  with  thirst  (without  heat,  yawning, 
or  stretching),  with  great  exhaustion,  short  breath,  drowsiness,  and 
crossness  ; from  the  smallest  movement  shivering,  without  feeling  of 
cold,  and  without  being  actually  cold,  yet  it  did  not  feel  too  warm 
in  a hot  room.) 

315.  The  first  night  chilliness  and  coldness  j the  next  night  sweat  all 
over. 

In  the  morning  sweat  all  over. 

After  general  heat  and  perspiration,  without  thirst,  which  lasted 
some  hours,  shivering  at  6 p.m.,  with  shaking  and  chattering  of  teeth 
- — at  the  same  time  he  was  thirsty  and  cold  all  over,  with  anxiety, 
restlessness,  want  of  recollection,  and  intolerance  of  noise — similar 
shivering,  rigor,  and  coldness,  with  thirst,  the  following  evening 
about  7 o’clock. 

* Reaction  of  the  vital  force  of  the  organism,  curative  action, 
f I have  seen  it  increase  from  capsicum  for  11  hours,  and  it  took  12  hours  longer 

to  decline  and  go  off  entirely. 


3+6 


CAPSICUM. 


Heat,  and  at  the  same  time  shivering,  with  thirst  for  water. 

Heat  in  the  face  and  redness,  with  trembling  of  the  limbs 
(immediately). 

220.  At  noon,  after  eating,  glowing  cheeks,  with  cold  hands  and  feet, 
without  shivering — recurring  on  two  days  at  the  same  time. 

Red  cheeks. 

The  face  is  alternately  pale  and,  along  with  the  lobes  of  the  ears, 
red,  with  a sensation  of  burning,  but  no  particular  heat  is  felt  with 
the  hand. 

(Burning  on  the  hands,  feet,  and  cheeks,  which  latter  are 
swollen.) 

Heat  in  the  hands,  but  not  on  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  [y/r.] 

325.  Hot  ears,  and  hot,  red  tip  of  the  nose,  towards  evening. 

(Internal  heat,  with  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead.) 

He  is  silently  wrapped  up  in  his  own  thoughts. 

He  is  indifferent  to  everything. 

Disinclination  for  work  or  thinking.  [_Htg.~\ 

330.  He  is  quiet,  sullen,  and  obstinate. 

Anxiety  and  anguish  almost  to  death.  [Pelargus,1 *  Obs.y  tom.  ii, 
p.  206.] 

Repugnance  and  crossness. 

Resistance,  with  howling  (aft.  3 h.). 

He  makes  reproaches,  and  is  indignant  at  the  faults  of  others  ; he 
takes  trifles  ill  and  finds  fault  with  them. 

335.  In  the  midst  of  joking  he  takes  the  slightest  trifle  in  bad  part. 

He  can  get  angry  very  easily. 

A restless,  over-busy  disposition. 

Disposition  to  start  (aft.  2 h.). 

Variable  humour ; sometimes  constantly  laughing,  and  then 
again  weeping. 

340.  Jocular,  given  to  witticisms. 

He  is  of  contented  disposition,  is  jocular  and  sings, 
and  yet  on  the  slightest  cause  he  is  disposed  to  get 
angry  (aft.  4 h.). 

Contentedness.* 

Staid,  easy  humour.* 

Quiet  state  of  the  disposition.*  \_Htg!\ 

* Curative  action,  reaction  of  the  organism. 


1 Poisoning  of  a girl  of  13.  It  was  the  observer  who  feared  that  death  would 

result. 


CARBO  ANIMALIS 1 

(. Animal  charcoal .) 

(In  order  to  prepare  animal  charcoal,  a thick  piece  of  ox-leather  is  placed  among 
red-hot  coals,  and  allowed  to  burn  until  the  last  flame  has  completely  expired,  and 
then  the  red-hot  piece  of  leather  is  quickly  placed  betwixt  two  stone  plates,  so  as  to 
extinguish  it  immediately,  otherwise  it  would  continue  to  smoulder  in  the  air,  and 
thus  dissipate  the  greater  portion  of  its  charcoal.  A grain  of  this  is  triturated  wth 
100  grains  of  milk-sugar  in  a porcelain  mortar  for  an  hour  (every  ten  minutes  being 
divided  between  six  minutes  of  trituration  and  four  minutes  of  scraping)  ; of  this  pro- 
duct one  grain  is  again  triturated  in  a similar  manner  with  ioo  grains  of  milk-sugar, 
and  of  the  powder  thus  made  one  grain  is  again  triturated  for  an  hour  in  the  same 
manner  with  ioo  grains  of  fresh  milk-sugar,  in  order  to  produce  the  million-fold 
potentized  attenuation  of  carbo  animalis.) 

Although  the  animal  charcoal  presents  so  much  similarity  in  its 
effects  on  the  human  health  to  the  vegetable  charcoal,  yet  there  are  so 
many  differences  from  the  latter  in  it,  and  so  many  peculiar  symptoms, 
that  I consider  it  useful  to  record  here  what  I have  observed  from  it. 

Some  symptoms  were  observed  by  a Russian  physician,  Dr.  Adam  ; 
these  I have  indicated  by  the  letters  Ad. 

A very  small  portion  of  a grain  of  the  million-fold  (-J-)  pulverulent 
attenuation  is  usually  quite  sufficient  for  a dose  and  acts  for  at  least 
three  weeks  in  chronic  diseases.  Camphor  proved  itself  an  antidote 
and  alleviating  remedy  for  its  too  energetic  action  in  highly  sensitive 
persons. 

[Besides  Adam,  above  mentioned,  Hahnemann  got  a few  symptoms  from  Weise 
in  Rust's  Magazin  f d.  gesammte  Heilk.,  vol.  xxii.  This  medicine  makes  its  first 
appearance  in  the  and  Edit.,  where  its  symptoms  are  191  ; in  the  Chr.  Kr.  there  are 
728,  214  of  these  being  selected  from  the  254  symptoms  in  Hartlaub  and 
Trinks’s  R.A.M.L. , and  23  contributed  by  Wahle.] 

CARBO  ANIMALIS. 

Vertigo  : it  becomes  black  before  her  eyes. 

Vertigo  with  nausea,  on  rising  up  after  stooping. 

Vertigo  : towards  evening  (7  o'clock)  when  she  raised  up  her  head 
all  went  round  in  a circle  with  her  ; she  must  always  sit  in  a stooping 
posture,  and  when  she  rose  up  she  staggered  to  and  fro;  she  felt  dull 
in  the  head  and  as  if  all  objects  moved  ; while  lying  all  night  long 
she  felt  nothing  of  it — but  did  so  in  the  morning  again  on  getting  up. 

Sensation  in  the  head,  as  on  coming  out  of  great  cold  into  a 
room  and  going  up  close  to  a hot  stove — a sensation  as  if  there  was 
something  heavy  in  the  forehead,  or  as  if  a board  was  before  the 
head. 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827. 


348 


CARBO  ANIMALIS. 


5.  In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  headache,  as  after  drinking  much 
wine. 

Heaviness  of  the  head.  [Ad.~\ 

The  head,  especially  the  OCCipilt  (and  the  left  temple)  is 
heavy  and  confused.  \_Ad.\ 

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head  with  confusion  of  the  head. 

Aching  pain  in  the  occiput.  \_Ad.\ 

10.  Aching  pain  on  a small  spot  in  the  occiput. 

Headache  : aching  in  both  temples. 

On  the  lower  part  of  the  temple  a pinching  pain.  [Ad."] 

Boring  pain  in  the  temporal  bone  extending  into  the  zygomatic 
process.  | Ad.] 

Boring  drawing  pains  in  the  head  accompanied  by  tearings  ; when 
the  head  becomes  cool  it  is  worse,  especially  towards  the  ear  (aft.  7 d.). 
15.  Shooting  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  temple. 

Severe  tearing  in  the  external  parts  of  the  head. 

Tearing  on  the  right  side  of  the  head. 

The  left  side  of  the  head  is  painful  as  if  festering. 

Anything  upon  the  head  pressed  him ; his  neckcloth  also  op- 
pressed him  (aft.  18  d.). 

20.  At  night,  pain  on  the  head  and  neck  as  if  both  were  gone  to 
sleep  and  dislocated. 

Falling  out  of  the  hair  (aft.  12  d.). 

Feeling  as  if  something  lay  in  the  forehead  above  the  eyes,  so 
that  he  cannot  look  upwards  (aft.  6 h.). 

Pressive  shooting  pain  from  above  downwards  above  the  left  eye, 
the  eyelid,  and  upper  part  of  the  eyeball.  \_Ad.~\ 

(Shooting  in  the  eyes.) 

25.  Aching  in  the  eyes  in  the  evening  by  artificial  light. 

Aching  in  the  inner  canthus  (aft.  72  h.). 

In  the  evening  the  eyes  are  hurt  by  the  light. 

Weakness  in  the  eyes. 

In  the  outer  canthus  sore  burning  pain. 

30.  Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  left  eye  as  if  something  had  flown 
into  it,  which  interferes  with  vision  ; he  must  always  be  wiping  it ; 
at  the  same  time  the  pupil  is  extremely  dilated  with  great  long- 
sightedness— he  could  not  distinctly  recognise  any  object  held  near 
him. 

Coppery  eruption  on  the  face.*  [Rust’s  Magaz , f d.  gesammte 
Heilk.J-  vol.  xxii,  pt.  i,  p.  198.] 

Pimples  On  the  face  in  quantities  without  sensation. 

Eruption  on  the  cheek  like  red  spots. 

Frequently  flying  heat  in  the  cheeks,  with  redness. 

35.  In  the  afternoon  heat  of  face  and  head. 

# The  author  prepared  his  animal  charcoal  in  rather  a different  manner.  He  took 
any  kind  of  flesh  freed  from  fat,  added  one  third  by  weight  of  bone  to  it,  and  roasted 
the  mixture  in  an  ordinary  coffee  roaster. 


1 Statement  from  observation  (by  Weise). 


CARBO  ANIMALIS. 


349 

(Smarting  of  the  skin  on  the  cheeks,  about  the  mouth,  and  on  the 
chin,  after  shaving).  [Ad.~\ 

Cramp-pain  in  the  interior  of  the  left  ear.  [Ad.~] 

Cramp  in  the  ear  down  towards  the  gullet  on  the  left  side, 
whereby  swallowing  was  rendered  difficult.  [Ad.] 

Drawing  in  the  ear. 

40.  At  night  constant  ringing  in  the  ears. 

Behind  the  right  ear  a sort  of  periosteal  swelling,  with  shooting 
therein  every  evening  from  5 o’clock  onwards. 

Swellings  in  the  parotid  glands.  [Rust's  Magaz .,  1.  c.] 

Epistaxis  (in  the  morning  when  sitting). 

Nose  and  mouth  swollen. 

45.  Blisters  on  the  lower  lip. 

Chapped  lips. 

Stiffness  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck. 

The  cervical  glands  are  swollen. 

The  gums  are  red  and  swollen  and  very  painful. 

50.  Pain  in  the  lower  gums  and  looseness  of  the  lower  teeth. 

Looseness  of  the  teeth  and  tearing  in  them,  most  violent  in  the 
evening  in  bed. 

Great  looseness  Of  the  teeth,  so  that  he  cannot  chew  the 
softest  food  without  pain  (aft.  12  d.). 

The  upper  and  lower  teeth  are  loose  and  too  long. 

The  hollow  tooth  is  dully  sensitive  and  as  if  projecting ; it  is 
painful  when  biting  and  still  more  in  the  evening  in  bed,  with  much 
saliva  in  the  mouth. 

55.  In  the  teeth  a drawing  to  and  fro,  also  in  the  front  teeth. 
Drawing  in  the  teeth,  with  flying  heat  in  the  face. 

Vesicles  on  the  tongue  which  are  painful  as  if  burnt. 

Blisters  in  the  mouth  which  cause  burning  (aft.  21  d.). 

(Burning  feeling  in  the  throat.) 

60.  An  aching  in  the  throat  and  dryness  on  the  tongue. 

Aching  in  the  throat,  only  when  swallowing. 

Internal  aching  in  the  gullet  down  to  the  stomach. 

Bad  smell  from  the  mouth. 

Bitter  taste  every  morning. 

65.  Sometimes  bitterness  in  the  mouth. 

Bitter  foul  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Bitter  sour  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Sour  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  5 d.). 

(The  appetite  quickly  goes  off  while  eating.) 

70.  On  commencing  to  eat,  internal  chilliness. 

After  eating  a little,  with  good  appetite,  soon  fulness  of  the 
stomach.  [Ad.] 

After  eating,  aching  in  the  stomach. 

After  eating,  tightness  of  the  chest. 

Soon  after  eating,  anxiety  and  uneasiness  in  the  back,  without 
pain. 

75.  After  eating,  palpitation  of  the  heart. 

Eructation,  with  the  taste  of  food  that  had  been  long  eaten. 


350 


CARBO  ANIMALIS. 


Several  times  eructation.  [. Ad .] 

Towards  evening  qualmishness  in  the  abdomen,  with  heat  rising 
up  (aft.  io  d.). 

After  much  walking,  when  he  comes  to  sit  down,  nausea. 

80.  Aching  in  the  stomach,  even  when  fasting. 

Severe  aching  in  the  stomach,  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down  in 
bed  ; in  order  to  relieve  herself  she  must  press  her  hand  on  the  gastric 
region  (aft.  16  h.). 

On  breathing  deeply  a quick,  short,  pressive  pain  in  the  scrobi- 
culus  cordis.  [Ad.] 

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis  pain,  as  after  violent  coughing  (as  if 
bruised)  (aft.  6 d.). 

Clucking  in  the  stomach.  [Ad.] 

85.  Audible  rumbling  in  the  stomach  in  the  morning  on 
waking.  [Ad.] 

Pressure  in  the  liver,  even  when  lying. 

A severe  aching  pain  in  the  liver,  almost  like  cutting ; the  region 
even  externally  felt  as  if  sore  when  touched. 

A heavy  weight  in  the  abdomen  like  a lump,  also  when  fasting, 
for  several  days. 

Painful  tension  in  the  abdomen,  with  pain  under  the  ribs,  on 
touching,  as  if  there  were  a sore  there  and  the  parts  were  festering 
(aft.  18  d.). 

90.  Great  distension  of  the  abdomen. 

The  abdomen  is  always  very  distended  with  flatulence. 

He  is  very  much  troubled  with  flatulence. 

When  walking  burning  in  the  abdomen. 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  forenoon. 

95.  Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on.  \_Ad.] 

Audible  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  and  stomach  (imme- 
diately). [Ad.] 

Audible  rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  large  intestine,  which 
then  rose  to  beneath  the  stomach,  and  then  went  down  again. 

yd.} 

After  drinking  (warm  milk),  rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  right 
hypogastrium,  sometimes  above,  sometimes  below,  with  ineffectual 
desire  to  discharge  flatus.  [Ad.] 

(Fermentation  in  the  bowels.) 

100.  The  hernia  comes  out,  and  is  painful  when  walking,  moving,  and 
touching. 

Rumbling  in  the  rectum.  [Ad.] 

Frequent  discharge  of  fetid  flatus  (while  walking,  after  supper). 

[m 

Frequent  pressing  on  the  rectum,  but  only  flatus  comes,  and  then 
the  pressing  returns  immediately. 

Frequent  but  ineffectual  urging  to  stool  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
rectum.  [Ad.] 

105.  After  24  hours  only  a scanty  stool,  hard,  and  in  small  pieces. 

Before  the  stool  a drawing  from  the  anus  through  the  pudendum 
(aft.  22  d.). 


CARBO  ANIMALIS. 


35i 


During  the  stool  tearing  from  the  pudendum  internally  up  into  the 
abdomen  (after  22  d.). 

(During  the  evacuation  of  the  stool  pains  like  needle  pricks  in 
the  anus.)  [Ad.] 

After  the  second  stool  on  the  same  day  a great  weakness  and 
pain  in  the  bowels,  as  if  they  were  screwed  together. 

no.  Painful  contraction  of  the  anus  (aft.  27  d.). 

After  the  stool  she  had  urging  to  pass  urine  (which  smelt 
strongly),  thereafter  she  became  quite  weak  and  early  drowsy,  but 
after  lying  down  she  could  not  sleep  ; she  jumped  up  again  imme- 
diately, and  after  waking  she  had  ringing  in  the  ears  as  though  she 
should  faint ; thereafter  rigor. 

A sticky,  odourless  moisture  passes  out  of  the  rectum. 

A sticky,  odourless  moisture  exudes  in  great  quantity  behind  the 
scrotum  from  the  perinaeum. 

(He  excoriates  the  nates  readily  when  riding;  large  blisters  appear.) 

1 15.  A boil  appears  on  the  anus  (aft.  16  d.). 

Great  swelling  of  the  haemorrhoidal  vessels,  which  are  the  seat  of 
burning  pains  when  walking. 

Tearing  transversely  across  the  os  pubis  and  then  through  the 
pudendum  to  the  anus  (aft.  14  d.). 

Pressure  on  the  bladder  at  night. 

Sudden  call  to  urinate.  [Ad.] 

120.  The  discharge  of  urine  becomes  much  more  copious. 

In  the  morning  after  waking  very  profuse  discharge  of  urine 
(aft.  13  d.). 

On  slightly  pressing,  the  urine  is  discharged  almost  against  his 
will  (aft.  1 6 d.). 

Nocturnal  seminal  emission — for  the  first  time  for  a long  period 
—with  lecherous  dreams,  without  stiffness  of  penis,  and  after  waking 
a spasmodic  pain  along  the  urethra,  especially  at  its  back  part.  [Ad.] 

Leucorrhoea  (aft.  14  d.). 

125.  Leucorrhcea  which  stains  the  linen  yellow  (aft.  21  d.). 

* * 


Fluent  coryza  (aft.  to  d.). 

Stuffed  coryza ; he  cannot  get  air  through  the  nose. 

Above  the  nose  sensation  as  at  the  beginning  of  a cold  in  the 
head — after  eating ; in  the  evening  this  sensation  increased.  [Ad.] 

In  the  windpipe  pain  as  after  much  coughing. 

130.  In  the  morning,  dryness  of  the  throat  and  coughing  therefrom  ; 
as  soon  as  mucus  is  expectorated  the  cough  is  gone. 

Cough  with  expectoration. 

(Cough  which  takes  away  the  breath,  as  if  the  breath  would 
remain  away.) 

In  the  evening,  hacking  cough,  especially  in  the  evening  in  bed. 

In  the  morning,  anxiety  on  the  chest. 

135.  After  a meal,  tightness  of  the  chest. 

When  sitting  and  writing  she  gets  shooting  under  the  right 
breast  so  that  she  cannot  sit  quietly  on  account  of  it ; after  rising  up 
it  goes  off. 


352 


CARBO  ANIMALIS. 


In  the  evening  in  bed  for  an  hour  rattling  and  wheezing  in  the 
chest. 

Painful  nodes  in  the  breasts.  [Rust’s  Magazin.  1.  c.] 

Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  chest  (aft.  7 d.). 

140.  In  the  evening,  palpitation  of  the  heart  without  anxiety  (aft. 
24  d.). 

On  the  coccyx  pain,  and  on  touching  the  part  there  occurs  a 
burning  pain. 

In  the  sacrum  a severe  stitch. 

On  breathing  deeply,  shooting  above  the  sacrum. 

Low  down  in  the  back,  pain. 

145.  Tension  in  the  nape. 

Stiffness  in  the  nape. 

Both  axillae  secrete  very  much  moisture  (aft.  22  d.). 

Severe  itching  in  the  right  axilla. 

(A  digging  down  in  the  arm,  as  if  it  worked  about  in  the  bone  ; 
when  she  lies  on  this  arm  she  feels  less  of  it.) 

150.  Drawing  pain  in  the  arms  and  hands. 

The  wrist-joint  is  as  if  dislocated. 

Pain  in  the  wrist-joints,  like  stiffness,  on  moving  them. 

Every  day,  the  hand  goes  to  sleep. 

The  left  hand  is  numb  in  the  morning  in  bed,  this  goes  off  after 
rising. 

155.  First  the  fingers,  then  the  whole  hand  also,  go  to  sleep. 

Tearing  in  the  hands  (aft.  10  d.). 

The  middle  joints  of  the  fingers  are  painful  on  bending  them. 

In  the  proximal  joint  of  the  middle  finger,  a stiffness,  on  moving. 
Itching  on  a wart  on  the  finger. 

160.  (In  the  muscles  of  the  thigh,  drawing  and  tearing.) 

When  walking  some  painful  stitches  in  the  left  hough.  \Ad .] 

At  night  a painless  drawing  up  the  leg. 

Jerking  drawing  on  the  tibia.  [ Ad .] 

Painful  tension  in  the  calves,  when  walking. 

165.  For  several  days,  in  the  morning,  cramp  in  the  calves. 

One  leg  bends  under  him  when  walking,  as  from  weakness  of 
the  joint. 

In  the  morning  prickling  formication,  as  if  asleep,  in  the  feet. 
Inflammatory  swelling  on  the  foot  which  breaks  out  on  one  toe. 
In  the  morning  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  is  swollen  ; there  is 
much  heat  in  it,  and  it  is  painful  as  if  it  had  been  frost-bitten,  and  as 
if  ulcerated. 

170.  Great  itching  of  the  toes  that  had  once  been  frost-bitten  (aft. 
24  d.). 

Cramp  very  often  in  the  toes,  by  day ; on  walking  on  an  uneven 
road  they  seemed  as  if  they  bent  under  him. 

All  her  limbs  are  as  if  numb,  especially  also  the  head. 

Aching  pains  in  the  joints  and  muscles. 

Itching  spreads  over  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  evening  in 

bed. 

175.  (At  night  much  pain  in  the  joints)  (aft.  20  h.). 


CARBO  ANIMALIS. 


353 


At  night  very  vivid  dreams.  \_Jd.~\ 

Vivid  dreams  about  scientific  subjects ; straining  of  the  thinking 
faculty  when  dreaming ; he  composed  literary  essays  in  thought  and 
spoke  aloud.  \Add\ 

Sleep  full  of  vivid  fancies. 

Sleep  very  restless  with  frequent  waking. 

180.  Very  restless  night;  about  2.30  a.m.  no  more  sleep  on  account 
of  internal  restlessness. 

Sleep  very  restless  ; he  was  very  much  excited,  and  could  not 
get  to  sleep  before  2 a.m. 

In  the  morning  he  can  scarcely  get  warm. 

From  9 a.m.  until  3 p.m.  very  cold  feet. 

In  the  evening  cold  hands  and  cold  feet. 

185.  In  the  evening  very  cold  feet,  when  she  went  to  bed  (aft.  10 

h.). 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  chilly  ; then  sweat  during  sleep. 

At  night  heat  and  moisture  on  the  skin  (aft.  18  d.). 

Profuse  night  sweat  (aft.  6 d.). 

At  first  indifferent,  afterwards  increased  excitability  of  the  dis- 
position for  emotional  impressions.  \Ad.~] 

190.  Takes  things  in  bad  part.  \Ad.~\ 

Extraordinarily  gay.  \_dd.~\ 


23 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.1 

( IV ood-charcoal.') 

(The  charcoal  of  any  kind  of  wood,  thoroughly  heated  to  redness,  manifests  a uni- 
formity in  its  effects  on  the  human  health,  after  adequate  disengagement  and  develop- 
ment (potentization)  of  its  innate  medicinal  spirit  by  trituration  with  a non-medicinal 
substance  (e.g.  milk-sugar)  in  the  manner  I have  recorded  above  when  speaking  of 
carbo  animalis.  I employed  the  charcoal  of  birch  wood.  Some  of  the  provings  of 
others  were  made  with  the  charcoal  of  red  beech  wood.) 

From  the  earliest  times  physicians  have  considered  charcoal  to  be 
non-medicinal  and  powerless.  Empiricism  only  placed  among  the 
ingredients  of  her  highly  composite  powders  for  epilepsy,  the  charcoal  of 
lime-wood,  without  being  able  to  adduce  any  evidence  of  the  efficacy  of 
this  substance  by  itself.  It  is  only  in  recent  times,  since  Lowitz,  of 
St.  Petersburg,  discovered  the  chemical  properties  of  wood  charcoal, 
especially  its  power  of  removing  from  putrid  and  mouldy  substances 
their  bad  smell,  and  of  preserving  fluids  from  foetid  odours,  that 
physicians  began  to  employ  it  externally.  They  advised  rinsing  of  the 
mouth  with  powdered  charcoal  in  cases  of  fcetor  of  the  breath,  the 
application  of  the  same  powder  to  putrid  ulcers,  and  in  both  cases  the 
fcetor  was  immediately  removed.  Administered  internally  in  the  dose 
of  several  drachms,  it  removed  the  evil  odour  of  the  stools  in  autumnal 
dysentery. 

But  this  is  merely  a chemical  use  of  wood-charcoal,  for  it  takes  away 
the  foul  odour  of  putrid  water  when  mixed  with  it  in  lumps  not 
pulverised,  and  indeed  it  does  so  most  effectually  in  coarse  fragments. 

This  medicinal  employment  of  it  was,  as  I have  said,  merely  a 
chemical  one,  and  not  at  all  a dynamical  employment  penetrating  into 
the  inner  vital  sphere.  The  mouth  rinsed  out  with  it  only  remained 
free  from  fcetor  for  a few  hours.  The  evil  smell  of  the  mouth  returned 
every  day.  The  old  ulcer  was  not  improved  by  it  and  the  fcetor, 
chemically  removed  from  it  for  the  moment,  always  recurred.  The 
powder  ingested  in  autumnal  dysentery  removed  the  fcetor  of  the  stools 
chemically  for  but  a short  time  ; the  disease  remained  and  the  disgust- 
ing smell  of  the  stools  soon  returned. 

In  such  a coarse  pulverised  state  charcoal  can  exercise  almost  none 
other  than  a chemical  action.  A considerable  quantity  of  wood 
charcoal  may  be  swallowed  in  its  ordinary  crude  condition  without 
producing  the  slightest  alteration  of  the  health. 

It  is  only  by  prolonged  trituration  of  the  charcoal  (as  of  many  other 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit,,  1827. 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


355 


dead  and  apparently  powerless  substances)  with  a non-medicinal  sub- 
stance, such  as  milk-sugar,  that  its  inner  concealed,  and  in  the  crude 
state  latent  and,  so  to  speak,  slumbering  dynamical  medicinal  power 
can  be  awakened  and  brought  into  life.  This  can  be  effected  by  tritu- 
rating one  grain  of  wood  charcoal  for  an  hour  with  ioo  grains  of 
milk-sugar ; but  its  power  will  be  developed  still  more  vivaciously  and 
powerfully  if  one  grain  of  this  powder  be  triturated  for  the  same  length 
of  time  with  ioo  grains  of  milk-sugar,  and  it  will  be  made  far  more 
efficacious  (potentized)  if  one  grain  of  this  last  powder  be  again  tritu- 
rated for  an  hour  with  another  ioo  grains  of  milk-sugar.  In  this  way 
a million-fold  powder-attenuation  is  produced,  a small  portion  of  a 
grain  of  which  moistened  with  a drop  of  water  and  ingested  produces 
great  medicinal  effects  and  derangement  of  the  human  health. 

The  following  peculiar,  pure  effects  of  wood-charcoal  on  the  human 
health  were  caused  by  the  ingestion  of  a few  grains  of  this  million- 
fold powder-attenuation  of  wood-charcoal.  Its  medicinal  powers  can  be 
developed  in  a still  higher  degree  by  a further  trituration  with  ioo  parts 
of  fresh  milk-sugar ; but  for  homoeopathic  medicinal  use  a stronger 
potentization  of  wood-charcoal  than  the  million-fold  attenuation  should 
by  no  means  be  employed. 

The  occasional  production  in  sensitive  patients  of  too  energetic 
action  from  a small  dose  of  this  preparation  is  soon  diminished  by 
smelling  several  times  at  a saturated  solution  of  camphor  in  alcohol, 
and  apparently  completely  removed  by  frequent  repetitions  of  the 
olfaction. 

The  symptoms  marked  (Jd.)  are  furnished  by  the  Russian  physician, 
Dr.  Adam  ; those  marked  (Gff.)  by  State-Councillor  Baron  von  Gers- 
dorff,  of  Eisenach,  and  the  few  symptoms  marked  ( Cas .)  by  Dr. 
Caspari,  of  Leipzig. 

[The  records  of  traditional  medicine  have  contributed  no  symptoms  to  this  proving. 

This  medicine  first  appears  in  the  2nd  Edit.,  where  it  has  723  symptoms  ; in  the 
Chr.  Kr.  there  are  1189.] 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 

Whirling  in  the  head  (aft.  24  h.). 

Vertigo  on  rapidly  moving  the  head  (aft.  4 d.). 

Whirling  all  day  long. 

Vertigo  so  that  he  must  hold  on  to  something  (aft.  15  d.). 

5.  On  walking,  vertigo  and  staggering. 

Vertigo  when  stooping,  as  if  the  head  wagged  to  and  fro. 

Vertigo  in  bed,  after  waking  from  sleep. 

In  the  evening,  after  sleeping  when  sitting,  he  was  giddy,  with 
trembling  and  vibration  in  the  whole  body,  and  on  rising  from  a 
seat,  as  if  faint,  which  continued  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  even  while 

tying- 

(Pain  rising  from  the  stomach  into  the  head,  which  took  away 
her  senses  for  a short  time.) 

10.  Vertigo,  only  when  sitting,  as  if  the  head  swayed  to  and  fro. 


356 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


Sudden  loss  of  memory;  he  could  not  remember  what  he  had 
just  said  to  some  one  nor  what  the  latter  had  said  to  him.  [Ad.] 

Slow  march  of  the  ideas,  which  always  turn  round  one  subject ; 
at  the  same  time  sensation  as  if  the  head  was  too  tightly  bound 
(aft.  2 h.).  [Ad.] 

Confusion  of  head  ; thinking  is  difficult  for  him. 

In  the  morning,  immediately  after  rising,  great  confusion  of  the 
head  ; he  cannot  think  well,  and  must  collect  himself  with  difficulty 
as  if  out  of  a dream  ; it  went  off  after  lying  down  again.  [Gff.] 

15.  Confusion  of  the  occiput,  as  after  a debauch.  [Ad.] 

Headache  ; dizzy  as  after  a debauch,  which  spreads  from  the 
occiput  to  the  front,  increases  towards  evening,  and  involves  the 
whole  head,  is  also  aggravated  by  walking.  [Ad.] 

Confusion  of  the  occiput,  more  like  a tension  towards  the  outside 
(aft.  * h.).  [Jd.] 

Stupid  feeling  in  the  head  after  waking  from  the  midday  sleep. 

Sensation  in  the  head  as  on  the  occurrence  of  coryza. 

20.  Headache  involving  the  whole  right  side  of  the  head  and  face 
(with  chilliness,  coldness,  and  trembling  of  the  body  and  jaws). 

Dulness  and  heaviness  before  the  forehead.  [Gff] 

A dull  headache  in  the  occiput.  [Gff.] 

Heaviness  in  the  head. 


Pain  in  the  head  as  if  too  full. 

25.  Pressure  in  the  occiput,  especially  after  supper.  [Ad.] 

On  and  in  the  occiput,  quite  low  down,  violent  pressive  pain. 

\.w\ 

Constant  pressive  pain  on  the  crown,  during  which  the  hairs  are 
painful  when  touched.  [Gff.] 

Pain  in  the  crown  of  the  head,  with  painfulness  of  the  hairs  when 
touched.  [Gff.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  side  of  occiput,  with 
aching  in  the  eyes. 

30.  Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  especially  just  above  the 
eyes,  which  are  painful  when  moved,  all  the  afternoon.  [Gff.] 

Pressure  on  the  top  of  the  head  every  afternoon. 

Pressive  pain  above  the  eyes,  extending  into  the  eyes.  [Gff.] 
Pressure  in  both  temples  and  on  the  top  of  the  head. 

Pressure  from  within  outwards  in  the  left  temple,  lasting  several 
hours.  [Ad.] 

35.  A pressure  on  the  top  of  the  head,  then  drawing  all  about  the 
head,  but  chiefly  on  the  left  side. 

Pressure  and  drawing  in  the  head,  by  fits. 

Aching  pain  on  a small  spot  where  there  had  been  a wound  in 
former  times,  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gff.] 

Compressive  headache. 

A pressure  as  if  something  lay  on  the  crown,  or  as  if  the  integu- 
ments of  the  head  were  constricted,  which  spreads  thence  over  the 
forehead.  [Ad.] 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  357 

40.  Headache,  like  a contraction  of  the  integuments  of  the  head, 
particularly  after  supper.  \_j4d.~\ 

Headache,  as  from  contraction  of  the  integuments  of 
the  head. 

Contractive  pain  in  the  head,  especially  on  movement. 

The  hat  presses  on  the  head  like  a heavy  weight,  and  when  he 
takes  it  off  the  sensation  remains,  as  if  the  head  was  bound  round 
with  a cloth.  \_Adf\ 

Spasmodic  tension  in  the  brain. 

45.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head. 

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  hot  forehead,  and  empty  feeling  in 
the  head. 

For  five  days  severe  headaches  ; on  stooping  feeling  as  if  some- 
thing would  come  out  at  the  occiput  and  sinciput. 

After  a meal  pulsating  headache  in  the  forehead,  and  pressure  in 
the  occiput,  with  heat  in  the  head  and  eructation. 

Throbbing  headache  in  the  evening  in  bed,  with  difficult  respira- 
tion. 

50.  After  waking  from  a profound  long  midday  sleep  a throbbing  in 
the  temples  and  fulness  of  the  brain.  \Ad .] 

In  the  afternoon  throbbing  headache. 

Twitching  headache. 

Very  violent  headache,  throbbing  as  if  gathering  in  the  occiput, 
from  morning  till  evening  (aft.  9 d.). 

During  a persistent  headache  a place  the  size  of  a hand  on  the 
head  is  quite  hot  to  the  touch  (aft.  4 d.). 

55.  In  the  evening  in  bed  violent  pressing  and  burning  headache, 
especially  on  the  crown  and  in  front  to  the  forehead.  \Gfff] 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  iti  bed,  in  the  right  half  of  the  head 
whereon  he  lay,  and  in  the  occiput,  a violent  headache  of  a smarting 
aching  character,  like  what  is  felt  in  the  nose  during  abortive  sneezing, 
a pain  that  was  only  relieved  by  raising  up  the  head,  but  which  went 
off  completely  on  rising  from  bed.  [Gff.'] 

Cutting  and  squeezing  headache  above  and  behind  the  left  ear. 

IGf.]  . . 

Pinching  headache  in  the  occiput. 

General  painfulness  of  the  surface  of  the  brain,  with  stitches 
inwards  here  and  there. 

60.  Shooting  upwards  in  the  head  towards  the  temples. 

Some  stitches  in  the  forehead  above  the  right  outer  canthus  of 
the  eye  (aft.  2 h.).  \Ad^\ 

Burning  shooting  on  a small  spot  on  the  occiput.  [ Gff, '] 

Painful  boring  under  the  left  temple. 

Drawing  pains  here  and  there  on  the  head  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gff.] 

65.  Drawing  headache  here  and  there,  especially  in  the  forehead  to 
above  the  root  of  the  nose.  [ Gff. !] 

On  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  a frequently  recurring,  short, 
drawing  pain  (aft.  2\  h.).  [ Gff'.] 

Tearing  drawing  superiorly  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head.  \Gff^\ 


358 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


On  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  on  a small  spot,  a tearing  through 
the  head.  [Gff I] 

Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput 

(aft.  6 h.).  [Gff.] 

70.  Tearing  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  head  above  the  temple  (aft. 
12  h.).  [Gff\] 

Frequent  attacks  of  tearing  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  head, 
towards  the  right  temple.  [ Gff.'] 

Tearing  in  the  left  half  of  the  head,  starting  from  the  left  half  of 
the  nose.  [Gff.] 

Attacks  of  dull  tearing  headache  on  the  crown  and  in  the  temples. 

[Gff] 

Tearing  on  the  old  scar  of  a sabre  wound  on  the  left  side  ot 
the  top  of  the  head.  [Gff'.'] 

75.  Tearing  on  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  left  half  of  the  head,  and  at  the  same  time  a 
rheumatic  drawing  in  the  left  arm.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  temples  that  extends  to  the  molar  teeth.  [Gff.] 

Violent  tearing  on  a small  spot  in  the  forehead,  near 
the  temple.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  head  for  four  days  (aft.  24  h.). 

80.  Formication  on  the  integuments  of  the  occiput,  as  if  the  hairs 
moved,  [Ad.] 


The  hair  of  the  head  falls  out  very  much. 

On  the  forehead,  near  the  hairy  scalp,  a red  pimple,  which  pains 
as  if  sore  only  when  pressed.  [Gff.] 

On  the  forehead,  here  and  there,  eruption  of  pimples,  which  are 
red,  smooth,  and  painless.  [Gff.] 

Itching  in  the  face,  especially  around  the  eyes. 

85.  Itching  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye.  [Gff.] 

Smarting  itching  sensation,  especially  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the 
right  eye.  [Gff.] 

Itching  in  the  left  eye  and  smarting  after  rubbing,  especially  in 
the  inner  canthus.  [Gff.] 

Smarting  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye.  [Gff.] 

Itching  of  the  right  eye,  with  great  dryness  of  the  lid  (aft.  14  d.). 
90.  In  the  right  eye  great  lachrymation  and  smarting  (aft.  24  h.). 

[Gff.] 

Smarting  in  the  right  eye  with  sore  feeling,  especially  in  the 
canthi,  and  aching  in  the  eye  as  from  a grain  of  sand.  [Gff  ] 

Aching  smarting  sensation  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  right  eye. 

[Gff] 

Aching  in  the  eyes,  with  confusion  of  the  head  (aft.  6\  h.).  [Gff.] 
On  the  left  eye  a tearing  pressure.  [Gff.] 

95.  Painful  pressure  from  above  on  the  right  eyeball  (aft.  \ h.). 

[Gff-]  . . 

On  moving  in  the  open  air  a pressure  in  the  upper  lids  and  in 
the  upper  half  of  both  eyeballs.  [Ad.] 

Obtuse  pain  in  the  left  eye.  [Gff] 

Swelling  of  the  left  eye. 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


359 

The  left  eyelids  appear  to  him  to  be  stuck  together,  which,  how- 
ever, is  not  the  case. 

ioo.  At  night  she  cannot  open  the  eyelids,  though  she  could  not  go  to 
sleep. 

Inflammation  of  the  right  eye. 

In  the  morning  the  eyelids  are  stuck  together. 

The  muscles  of  the  eye  are  painful  when  he  looks  upwards. 

Drawing  in  the  right  eyelid  (aft.  13  d.). 

105.  Drawing  above  the  right  eye  through  the  head. 

(During  the  headache  pain  in  the  eye  as  though  it  would  be  torn 
out.) 

Quivering  of  the  left  eyelid  (aft.  9 d.). 

Extreme  short-sightedness ; he  can  only  recognise  an  acquaint- 
ance when  he  comes  within  a couple  of  paces  (aft.  3 d.). 

Black  spots  before  the  eyes. 

no.  Glittering  before  the  eyes,  immediately  on  rising  in  the  morning, 
for  a quarter  of  an  hour.  \Gff. ] 

A weight  upon  the  eyes  so  that  he  must  make  a great  effort  to 
see  anything  while  reading  and  writing. 

In  the  afternoon  great  pallor  of  the  face  (aft.  9 d.). 

Many  pimples  on  the  face  and  forehead  (aft.  3d.).  \CasJ\ 

A white  papule  on  the  lower  part  of  the  cheek. 

1 15.  Swelling  of  the  cheek. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  cheek  for  two  days  (aft.  24  h.). 

Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  cheek  as  if  something  burned  and 
bored  round  about  in  it,  in  a jerking  manner,  by  fits  (aft.  6 d.). 

Fine  tearing  prick  on  the  right  cheek  (aft.  3 h.).  \Gff.'] 

Pain  of  the  bones  of  the  face  of  the  upper  and  lower  jaw. 

120.  Tearing  in  the  face. 

Tearing  pain  on  the  left  angle  of  the  mouth  and  thence  into  the 
cheek.  [Gf.] 

Tearing  by  jerks  in  the  right  upper  jaw. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  right  and  left  upper  and  lower  jaw, 

with  drawing  in  the  head  and  confusion  in  it  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Gff.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  depression  behind  the  right  ear. 

[Gf.] 

12 5.  Violent  tearing  by  jerks  in  the  left  zygomatic  process,  in  front  of 
the  left  ear,  in  the  evening  in  bed.  [Gff.] 

Single  stitches,  or  tearing  jerks  in  the  right  internal  meatus 
auditorius.  \_Gff.~\ 

Tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear.  [ Gff. ] 

Earache  in  the  left  ear.  \GffJ\ 

A kind  of  earache  in  the  right  ear,  in  the  evening.  [Gff.'] 

130.  A kind  of  forcing  outwards  in  both  ears  (aft.  17  d.). 

Violent  formicating  itching  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear,  which 
recurred  after  boring  in  with  the  finger.  [Gff.~\ 

Fine  pinching  in  the  left  ear.  [ Cas .] 

Ringing  in  the  ears. 

Ringing  in  the  left  ear,  with  whirling  vertigo. 


36° 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


135.  Roaring  in  the  ears. 

Great  rushing  noise  before  both  ears  (aft.  36  h.). 

Loud  speaking  is  painful  to  the  hearing  and  very  disagreeable.  \Ad.\ 
A weight  upon  the  ears  like  two  sandbags  lying  at  the  entrance 
of  the  meatus  auditorius.  [Add] 

A weight  in  and  upon  the  ears ; they  feel  stopped  up  to 
him,  but  without  diminution  of  the  hearing  power  (aft.  \ h.).  [Add] 
140.  Every  evening  his  left  ear  is  hot  and  red. 

Tearing  burning  pain  on  the  lobe  of  the  left  ear.  [Gffd] 

Itching  behind  the  ear. 

Great  swelling  of  the  parotid  gland  between  the  cheek  and  ear,  to 
the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw. 

Feeling  of  heaviness  of  the  nose. 

145*  Epistaxis,  at  night,  with  ebullition  in  the  blood  (aft.  52  h.). 
In  the  morning,  in  bed,  very  severe  epistaxis,  and  immediately 
thereafter  pain  in  the  chest. 

Severe  epistaxis,  that  can  scarcely  be  stopped  (aft.  48  h.). 
(Eruption  on  the  corner  of  the  ala  nasi.) 

Scabby  nose-tip. 

150.  Swelling  of  the  upper  lip  and  cheek,  with  twitching  pain. 

Twitching  in  the  upper  lip. 

Painful  eruption  on  the  upper  lip  ; the  red  part  of  the  lip  is 
studded  with  pimples. 

Drawing  from  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth  to  the  chin. 
Spasmodic  pain  on  the  lower  jaw  (aft.  13  d.). 

155.  Painfulness  of  the  roots -of  the  teeth  above  and  below. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  hollow  tooth. 

Drawing  and  tearing  toothache  in  the  upper  and 
lower  molars  (aft.  41,  5,  16,  26  h.).  [Gff] 

Drawing  pain  in  one  upper  incisor.  [Gff] 

Gentle  drawing  in  the  right  molars,  mingled  with  violent  jerks. 

160.  Violent  drawing  jerk  in  one  hollow  molar.  [ Gff. ’] 

Tickling,  shooting  drawing  in  the  first  molar  on  the  left  side 
(aft.  26  h.).  [Gff]] 

Squeezing  pain  in  the  right  lower  molars.  [Gffd] 

Pressive  toothache  in  the  left  upper  molars. 

Smarting  drawing  pain  in  the  upper  and  lower  incisors — more  in 
the  gums.  [Gffd] 

165.  Toothache  in  the  front  sound  incisors.  [Add] 

Gnawing  and  drawing  pain  in  the  hollow  tooth,  with  swelling  of 
the  gums. 

The  gums  are  painfully  sensitive  when  chewing. 

The  first  upper  molar  on  the  left  side  is  often  painful  as  if  sore, 
with  drawing  pain  in  it.  [Gff.] 

The  gums  (by  day)  feel  sore. 

170.  The  gum  at  the  hollow  tooth  is  swollen  (aft.  21  d.). 

The  gums  are  detached  from  the  teeth  and  sensitive. 

Recession  of  the  gums  from  some  of  the  lower  incisors. 

A pustule  on  the  gums. 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


361 


After  sucking  the  gums  bloody  saliva  (aft.  2 d.).  [Cas.] 

175.  On  drawing  with  the  tongue  the  teeth  and  gums  bleed  profusely. 

[Gf.] 

For  several  days,  frequent  bleeding  of  the  teeth  and  gums.  [Gff.] 
The  tongue  is  furred  white. 

The  tongue  is  covered  with  brownish-yellow  mucus.  [ Gff.] 

The  tip  of  the  tongue  is  hot  and  dry.  [Cas.] 

180.  On  the  left  side  of  the  root  of  the  tongue  cramp  pain  (aft.  3 h.). 

LGf-] 

He  had  a difficulty  in  speaking,  just  as  if  the  tongue  were 
difficult  to  move.  [Jd.] 

Fine  tearing  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  tongue.  [ Gff. ] 

Dryness  in  the  mouth,  without  thirst. 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  very  dry  mouth. 

185.  At  the  back  of  the  palate  an  aching  pain.  [Gff. ] 

Burning  in  the  upper  part  of  the  fauces. 

Frequent  burning  and  smarting  in  the  fauces  and  palate.  [Gff.] 
Aching  pain  behind  the  palate  in  the  fauces. 

Smarting  sensation  posteriorly  in  the  fauces  as  at  the  commence- 
ment of  a coryza,  but  more  smarting.  [Gff.'] 

190.  Tearing  pressure  at  the  back  of  the  fauces  and  on  the  left  side  of 
the  root  of  the  tongue.  [Gff.] 

In  the  throat  and  fauces  a very  violent  scraping  and  formication 
only  relieved  for  a short  time  by  hawking.  [Gff.] 

Scraping  in  the  throat. 

(Feeling  of  coldness  down  in  the  throat.) 

Painless  impediment  to  swallowing ; the  saliva  swallowed  does 
not  go  down  well  and  at  once,  but  only  gradually.  [Gff.] 

195.  The  food  is  not  easily  swallowed  down  ; the  throat  feels  as  if 
constricted  by  a spasm,  but  without  pains. 

The  throat  feels  swollen  internally  and  as  if  contracted. 

A pressive  feeling  in  the  upper  part  of  the  gullet,  as  if  it  were 
narrowed  or  contracted,  even  when  not  swallowing.  [Gff.] 

Sore  throat,  as  from  swelling  on  the  palate — painful  swallowing 
for  four  days. 

Sore  throat ; when  eating  the  throat  feels  excoriated. 

200.  (Sore  throat,  uvula  inflamed  and  swollen,  and  shooting  in  the 
throat.) 

A kind  of  fulness  and  pressure  down  the  gullet  as  far  as  the 
stomach — almost  like  heartburn. 

Eructation  (aft.  1 \ h.).  [Cas.] 

Frequent  almost  continual  eructation. 

Frequent,  empty  eructation,  all  day,  at  least  all  through 
the  afternoon.  [GffJ] 

20 5.  Frequent,  empty  eructation,  after  short  pinching  in 
the  abdomen  (aft.  3^,  44  h.).  [Gff] 

She  has  sweet  eructations. 

Bitter  and  scraping  eructations. 

Waterbrash. 

Salt  taste  in  the  mouth  all  day  (aft.  48  h.). 


362  CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 

210.  (Sour  eructation,  after  taking  milk.) 

(Sensation  as  of  constant  heartburn  ; acidity  always  rose  up  into 
the  mouth.) 

In  the  forenoon,  frequent  sensation,  as  if  something  hot  and 
acrid  rose  up  in  the  gullet. 

Bitterness  in  the  mouth  and  eructations. 

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  before  and  after  eating. 

215.  Little  appetite  and  no  taste,  as  in  catarrh. 

Little  appetite,  with  heat  in  the  mouth  and  roughness  and 
dryness  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  (aft.  42  h.).  [Cas. ] 

(Anorexia  and  nausea,  also  when  fasting,  but  worse  after  eating, 
with  anxiety,  dizziness,  darkness  before  the  eyes,  and  white  tongue  ; 
towards  evening  he  must  lie  down,  without  sleepiness)  (aft.  6,  7 d.). 
Absence  of  hunger ; he  could  have  remained  without  eating. 

Little  appetite ; she  is  soon  satiated ; she  feels  pain  in  the  scro- 
biculus  cordis,  and  as  if  too  empty  in  the  stomach,  for  half  an  hour. 

220.  Anorexia  and  frequent  eructation  (with  confusion  of  head). 
Towards  noon,  diminished  appetite  and  nausea  (aft.  3 d.). 

In  the  morning,  an  hour  after  waking,  nausea,  and 
as  if  qualmish  in  the  stomach. 

At  night,  nausea. 

Frequent  inclination  to  vomit,  and  yet  he  did  not  vomit. 

225.  Constant  nausea,  without  appetite  and  without  stool. 

Repugnance  to  butter. 

After  eating  a painful  hiccup  in  the  gullet.  [Ad.7\ 

After  a moderate  dinner,  repeated  hiccup.  [Cas.'] 

(After  a meal,  strong  palpitation  of  the  heart.) 

230.  During  and  after  a meal,  pinching  in  the  abdomen.  [ 

Every  afternoon,  after  a meal,  great  heaviness  in  the  feet,  for 
eight  days. 

After  eating  but  little,  distension  and  fulness  of  the  abdomen  and 
rumbling  in  the  bowels.  [Gff.] 

After  a moderate  breakfast,  immediately  full  and  satiated  (aft. 
68  h.).  [Cas.’] 

After  a meal,  headache. 

235.  A small  quantity  of  wine  heats  him  much. 

After  a moderate  breakfast,  general  perspiration.  [ Cas.] 

After  a meal,  sour  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Spasm  in  the  stomach  and  incessant  eructation,  which  was  quite 
sour  in  the  mouth. 

An  almost  burning  sensation  in  the  stomach. 

240.  A scraping  sensation  in  the  stomach  up  into  the 
throat  like  heartburn. 

Throbbing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Anxious  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  4 d.). 

A continued  painful  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  epi- 
gastrium, as  if  in  the  stomach,  after  7 o’clock.  [ Gff, '.] 

A pressure  as  if  on  something  sore  in  the  stomach  -}  worse  on 
touching. 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


363 


245.  In  the  evening,  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  was  painful 
even  to  the  touch  ; at  the  same  time  she  had  nausea,  and  she  com- 
menced to  have  loathing  when  she  only  thought  of  eating. 

The  region  of  the  stomach  is  very  sensitive. 

(The  stomach  is  heavy  and  there  is  as  it  were  trembling  in  it.) 
(On  walking  and  standing  the  stomach  is  as  if  heavy  and 
hanging  down  painfully.) 

Contractive  sensation  under  the  stomach. 

250.  Contractive  pain  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  on  the  right  side, 
in  the  morning  and  afternoon. 

Under  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a constrictive  pain,  which  is 
aggravated  by  pressure  with  the  finger.  [ Ad.] 

Short  but  violent  pain  in  the  right  side  under  the  short  ribs. 

[Gf-] 


Close  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  thence  to  both  sides  a 
very  painful,  shooting  tearing,  radiating  behind  the  ribs.  [Gff.] 

Violent  shooting  in  the  hepatic  region  (aft.  48  h.). 

255.  Continued  aching  pinching  sensation  in  the  epigastrium.  [ Gff.] 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen. 

Pain  in  the  abdomen  as  after  a chill ; it  increases  before  the 
discharge  of  flatus  and  persists  thereafter. 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  only  for  instants,  but  very  frequently. 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  which  darts  through  the  bowels  like 
lightning. 

260.  In  the  evening,  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  like  colic. 

Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  abdomen,  even  when  she  does 
something  with  the  hand,  whereby  the  arm  is  slightly  raised ; the 
same  pain  also  occurs  on  touching  the  abdomen. 

She  dare  not  lie  on  the  side,  for  then  she  has  the  same  pain  as  is 
caused  by  a sprain  or  over-lifting,  chiefly  on  the  left  side  of  the 
abdomen. 

After  a meal,  sleep,  and  on  awaking,  tension  in  the  hepatic 
region,  as  if  it  was  too  short  there. 

Constantly  distended  abdomen.  [ Gff. !] 

265.  Day  and  night  as  if  overloaded  with  food,  and  as  if  full  and 
pressed  in  the  abdomen,  with  eructation. 

(Great  anxiety  in  the  abdomen.) 

In  the  left  epigastrium,  under  the  short  ribs,  going 
towards  the  back,  a squeezing  pain  from  imprisoned 
flatulence.  [Gff'.] 

Frequent  squeezing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  especially  in  the  right 
side  of  the  abdomen.  [Gff'.] 

Squeezing  pressure  deep  in  the  abdomen.  [Gff.] 

270.  Squeezing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  hypogastrium. 
[Gff] 

Sensation  as  if  her  abdomen  hung  heavily  down;'  she  must 
walk  quite  bent  down  (aft.  3d.). 

Aching  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  (immediately).  [Gff.] 

Aching  pain  under  the  short  ribs,  after  breakfast.  [Gff.] 


3^4 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


Dull  aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  on  the  right  side,  on  a small 
spot.  [Gff.] 

275.  Pressure  in  the  right  inguinal  region.  [Gff.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  with  some  urging  to  stool  and 
discharge  of  hot  flatus,  which  relieves  (aft.  2 6 h.).  [Gff.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  anus  (aft.  48  h.).  [Gff.] 

Under  the  coccyx,  aching  sore  pain.  [Gff] 

Aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  with  rumbling  and  discharge 
of  inodorous,  moist,  warm  flatus,  whereupon  the  bellyache  ceases 
(aft.  | h.).  [Gff.] 

280.  Aching  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  ; there  is  a move- 
ment about  in  the  bowels,  with  pinching.  [ Gff. ] 

Pinching  pressure,  deep  in  the  right  hypogastrium,  extending 
towards  the  hip  (aft.  3I  h.).  [Gff.] 

When  sitting  bent  forward,  fine  pinching  in  the  abdomen.  [Cas.] 
After  partaking  of  a small  quantity  of  harmless  food,  violent 
pinching  about  the  umbilical  region,  which  is  quickly  removed  by 
eructation  and  the  discharge  of  some  flatus.  [Gff.] 

Pinching  pain  in  the  right  inguinal  region  (aft.  10  h.).  [Gff, !] 
285.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen  with  good  stool. 

Pinching,  obtuse  stitches,  as  from  below  upwards  in  the  abdomen 
(aft.  3*  h.).  [Gf] 

Shooting  and  pinching  pains  in  the  left  hypogastrium.  [Gff.] 
Pricking,  creeping,  running  pain  deep  in  the  hypogastrium 
(aft.  28  h.).  [Gff] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  (and  chest),  in- 
creased by  drawing  a breath.  [Gff.] 

290.  Tearing  stitch  in  the  hypogastrium  extending  to  the  navel. 

[Gff] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  hygogastrium  up  to  the  navel  (aft.  48  h.). 

[Gff] 

Burning  in  the  abdomen. 

Burning  about  the  umbilical  region.  [Gff.] 

Burning  pain  in  the  skin,  near  the  navel,  frequently  recurring 
(aft.  4 h.).  [Gff] 

295.  Under  the  navel  a sore  painful  spot.  [Gff.] 

Sore  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  also  felt  when  touched  (aft. 
4l  h.).  [Gff] 

Imprisoned  flatus  in  the  left  epigastrium,  more  towards  the  back. 
Flatulent  colic,  with  discharge  of  inodorous  flatus.  [Gff.] 
Flatulent  colic  ; the  flatulence  goes  about  in  the  abdomen,  and 
there  are  single  stitches  here  and  there,  especially  in  the  left  side 
towards  the  back.  [Gff.] 

300.  He  has  working  about  in  the  bowels  (immediately).  [Gff.] 

He  has  working  about  in  the  abdomen  deep  in  the  hypogastrium. 

[Gff] 

He  has  working  about  in  the  abdomen,  and  several  dis- 
charges of  moist  flatus  take  place,  sometimes  loud,  sometimes  noise- 
less. [Gff] 

Clucking  in  the  left  hypogastrium.  [Gff.] 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  365 

Audible  rumbling  works  slowly  round  about  in  the  bowels 
(aft.  3^  h.).  [G/] 

305.  Audible  rumbling  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Ad.] 

Audible  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  with  some  pinching.  [Ad.] 
After  the  rumbling  great  discharge  of  flatus.  [ Ad.] 

Audible  rumbling  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  noiseless 
discharge  of  almost  inodorous  (moist,  warm,  and  sometimes  hot) 
flatus.  [Gff.] 

Wind  works  about  in  the  abdomen,  and  some  inodorous  flatus  is 
passed  (aft.  | h.).  [Cas.] 

310.  In  the  morning  on  awaking  enormous  discharge  of  flatus,  without 
smell. 

Food  that  was  usually  easily  digested  creates  much  flatulence  and 
distension  of  the  abdomen. 

Flatus  of  a foetid  smell  (aft.  i|  h.).  [ Gff. !] 

Along  with  colicky  forcing  towards  the  sacrum  and  thence  to  the 
abdomen  discharge  of  very  offensive,  and,  latterly,  moist  flatus  (aft. 
2 h.).  [Gff.] 

The  urging  to  stool  goes  off  with  loud  discharge  of  flatus.  [Gff.] 
315.  Discharge  of  flatus  with  burning  in  the  anus,  and  sensation  as  if 
a stool  were  coming.  [ Gff, i] 

Burning  on  the  right  side  of  the  anus  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gff.'] 

Pappy  stool,  which  causes  burning  in  the  rectum. 

During  the  stool,  consisting  of  a few,  hard,  unconnected  masses 
of  faeces,  burning  in  the  anus.  [Cas.] 

Drawing  pain  through  the  abdomen  transversely  across,  before  the 
stool.  [Cas.] 

320.  In  the  evening  a couple  of  violent  stitches  in  the  anus.  [Cas.] 
During  the  stool  cutting  in  the  anus.  [Cas.] 

The  hard  stool  passes  with  a cutting  pain  in  the  anus.  [Gff.] 
During  the  stool  pricking  in  the  rectum  as  with  needles. 

Itching  at  the  anus  and  after  rubbing  burning  therein.  [Gff.] 
325.  Itching  at  the  anus,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  increased  by  scratch- 
ing, and  thereafter  burning,  [Cas.] 

Smarting  at  the  anus.  [Gff] 

Sudden  sensation  of  fulness  in  the  rectum  as  if  for  an  evacuation, 
which  soon  went  off.  [Ad.] 

The  urging  to  stool  passes  off  with  loud  discharge  of  flatus.  [Gff.] 
Pain  in  abdomen  and  sacrum,  like  a call  to  stool.  [Gff.] 

330.  A kind  of  haemorrhoidal  colic ; violent  urging  to  stool,  formica- 
tion in  the  anus,  and  violent  pressure  on  the  bladder  and  towards 
the  sacrum,  spasmodically  recurring  in  fits  ; in  spite  of  the  great 
urging  it  seems  that  no  stool  will  come  ; on  the  other  hand,  there 
occur  violent  labour-like  pains  in  the  hypogastrium  to  the  front  and 
back,  with  burning  in  the  anus  and  a sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would 
ensue  ; on  trying  to  have  a motion  there  comes  after  such  a pain,  and 
after  much  effort,  some  faeces  consisting  of  soft  pieces,  whereupon  the 
urging  to  stool  and  the  pain  in  the  bowels  go  off  immediately.  [Gff. ] 
After  breakfast  call  to  stool,  which  though  not  hard  is  only  passed 
with  much  straining.  [Gff.] 


366 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


Great  urging  to  stool  whereby  only  a scanty  and  hard  one  is 
passed  (aft.  50  h.).  [Gff. J 

Hard  stool  (aft.  62  h.).  [Gff.'\ 

Hard  stool  passed  much  later  than  usual,  and  with  much  effort 
(aft.  36  h.).  [Gff.] 

335.  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool  (aft.  80  h.).  [Gff.~\ 

The  first  week  during  stool  there  comes  first  mucus,  then  followed 
hard  and  then  soft  faeces,  afterwards  cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen. 
Stool  with  discharge  of  much  mucus. 

Discharge  of  much  mucus  from  the  rectum,  during  several  days. 
The  stool  is  enveloped  with  yellowish,  thread-like  mucus,  which 
in  the  latter  portion  of  the  stool  is  quite  bloody.  \Ad.~\ 

340.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  anus. 

With  every  stool  discharge  of  blood. 

Swollen  haemorrhoidal  veins  (blind  haemorrhoids)  which  are 
painful  (aft.  2 d.). 

The  latter  portion  of  the  stool  is  coloured  with  blood.  \_Ad.'] 

An  acrid  biting  moisture  escapes  from  the  rectum  (aft.  24  h.). 
345.  Acrid  stool  with  furred  tongue. 

At  night  a viscid,  musty-smelling  fluid  escapes  in  considerable 
quantity  from  the  anus. 

At  night,  moisture  on  the  perinaeum  from  the  anus  to  the 
scrotum,  with  itching  and  excoriation. 

Excoriation  on  the  perinaeum ; on  touching  the  part  it  itches 
painfully. 

Excoriation  at  the  anus. 

350.  Shooting  pain  in  the  perinaeum,  near  the  anus  (aft.  2\  h.). 

\.Gn 

After  stool  repeated  pain  in  the  abdomen  towards  the  sacrum  and 
bladder,  almost  as  after  taking  rhubarb.  [ Gff.~\ 

After  the  stool  forcing  pain  in  the  abdomen.  \Gff.~] 

After  the  stool  squeezing  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [ GJf. ] 

In  the  morning,  after  a hard  scanty  stool,  a pinching  shooting  in 
the  left  hypogastrium  and  incomplete  call  to  stool,  like  a pressure  on 
the  rectum,  all  day  (aft.  4 d.).  [ Gffd\ 

355.  After  the  stool  complete  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  particularly 
observable  when  walking.  [C^a.] 

The  urine  is  reddish  and  turbid.  [ Gff.\ 

The  urine  is  dark  coloured. 

Red,  dark  urine,  with  roughness  of  the  larynx.  [Gff.~\ 

Dark  red  urine,  as  if  it  were  mixed  with  blood  (aft.  2 d.). 

360.  Reddish,  turbid  urine. 

Red  sediment  in  the  urine. 

Urine  of  very  pungent  odour. 

After  drinking  but  little,  copious  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  6 h.). 

IGff.] 

The  urine  is  much  more  scanty  (aft.  48  h.).  \_Gffd\ 

365.  He  must  rise  several  times  during  the  night  to  make  water,  and 
the  quantity  of  urine  passed  is  increased  3 he  has  at  the  same  time 
pressure  on  the  bladder. 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


367 


Frequently  during  the  day  pressing  on  the  bladder,  but  yet  she 
could  retain  the  urine. 

When  urinating  there  is  often  tearing  in  the  urethra  ; the  last 
drops  consist  of  mucus  and  pass  with  pain. 

In  the  morning,  after  urinating,  tearing  and  drawing  in  the 
urethra.  [ Gff. ] 

On  the  prepuce  itching  and  excoriation. 

370.  On  the  prepuce  a great  itching,  and  on  its  inner  surface  a vesicle 
and  an  excoriated  spot. 

Formication  in  the  testicles  and  scrotum. 

Itching  near  the  scrotum  on  the  upper  part  of  the 

thigh;  the  part  exudes  moisture  (aft.  24  h.). 

Swelling  of  the  scrotum  which  is  hard  to  the  touch. 

A seminal  emission  that  affects  the  nerves  violently  and  pain- 
fully, and  is  followed  by  an  extremely  violent  burning  in  the  ante- 
rior part  of  the  urethra,  and  when  urinating,  a severe  cutting  and 
burning,  which  lasts  long  and  is  renewed  by  slight  external  pressure. 

[Gff-] 

37 5.  Persistent  erection  of  the  penis,  at  night,  without  lascivious  feeling 
or  ideas.  [ Gff.] 

Complete  want  of  sexual  desire  in  the  morning,  which  is  not 
excitable  even  by  sensual  thoughts  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Gff. !] 

Great  excoriation  on  the  female  pudendum  anteriorly,  in  the 
evening. 

Burning  on  the  female  pudendum. 

A sore  pain  on  the  female  pudendum,  with  discharge  of  much 
leucorrhoea  for  two  days,  thereafter  occurrence  of  the  menses,  which 
had  not  appeared  for  several  months  previously ; they  flow  for  three 
days  but  are  quite  black  ; thereafter  very  little  leucorrhoea  without 
soreness. 

380.  Menses  five  days  too  soon  (aft.  21  d.). 

Just  before  the  occurrence  of  the  menses,  pain  in  the  abdomen, 
like  spasms,  from  morning  till  evening. 

During  the  menses,  very  violent  headache,  which  drew  her  eyes 
quite  together. 

Cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  during  the  menses. 

Severe  itching  of  a tetter,  before  the  occurrence  of  the  menses. 

385.  In  the  morning,  on  rising,  much  very  thin  leucorrhoea,  and  then 
no  more  all  day. 

Discharge  of  white  mucus  from  the  vagina  (aft.  4 d.). 

* 

Stoppage  of  the  left  nostril  for  an  hour.  [Gff] 

The  left  nostril  is  stopped  (aft.  h.).  [Cas.] 

Sneezing  followed  by  stoppage  of  the  left  nostril.  [Gff.'] 

390.  Stuffed  coryza. 

Frequent  sneezing  with  constant  and  violent  tickling 
and  formication  in  the  nose,  and  catarrhal  roughness  in  the 
nose  and  upper  part  of  the  chest,  at  night  in  bed.  [Gff.] 

Very  frequent  sneezing  without  coryza.  [Gff.] 


368 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


Sneezing  with  watering  of  the  left  eye,  which  causes  smarting  in 
the  inner  canthus.  [Gff, '.] 

Violent  sneezing  followed  by  severe  smarting  pain  above  and 
in  the  nose  and  watering  of  the  eyes  as  if  severe  coryza  were  about 
to  burst  forth  ; this  pain  in  the  nose  also  came  on  when  blowing  it. 

[Gf.] 

395.  Formication  in  the  right  nostril,  discharge  of  nasal  mucus,  then 
violent  sneezing,  watering  of  the  right  eye  ; coryza.  [Gff.] 

Incomplete  abortive  irritation  to  sneeze,  returning  at  one  time 
more  at  another  less  strongly.  [Gff.] 

Sneezing  which  occasions  stitches  in  the  abdomen.  [Gff.] 
Sneezing,  which  is  followed  by  burning  on  a large  portion  of  the 
right  side  of  the  abdomen.  [Gff.] 

In  the  root  of  the  nose  feeling  of  a commencing  coryza.  [Ad.] 

400.  Pressing  pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose  and  nasal  bones,  as  in  a 
severe  coryza,  but  he  could  get  air  through  the  nose.  [Ad.] 

Ineffectual  irritation  to  sneeze  with  formication  in 
the  left  half  of  the  nose ; it  then  became  moist,  and  after 
blowing  the  nose  the  right  nostril  remained  stopped  up  ; at  the  same 
time  some  feeling  of  coryza — a formication  and  smarting  on  the  left 
side  of  the  palate  (aft.  5 h.).  [Gff.] 

Fluent  coryza  with  sneezing  (almost  immediately).  [Gff.] 

For  several  days,  at  night  and  in  the  morning  on  awaking,  irrita- 
tion like  coryza  which  (with  the  exception  of  occasional  sneezing) 
went  off  during  the  day.  [Gff.] 

Severe  fluent  coryza. 

405.  Coryza  and  catarrh  (aft.  7 d.). 

Hoarse,  in  the  evening  (aft.  12  d.). 

Catarrh,  owing  to  which  he  could  scarcely  speak  loud  (aft.  8 d.). 
In  the  evening,  suddenly  great  hoarseness,  so  that  he  could 
scarcely  utter  a sound,  with  great  tightness  of  the  chest,  so  that 
when  walking  in  the  open  air  he  had  scarcely  any  breath  (aft.  6 d.). 

Roughness  and  hoarseness  of  the  larynx  ; she  could  not  speak 
loud  without  great  exertion. 

410.  Great  roughness  of  the  larynx  ; the  voice  is  deep  and  rough,  and 
when  he  exerts  it  it  fails  him,  but  without  pain  in  the  throat  on 
swallowing.  [Gff.] 

Roughness  on  the  chest  and  frequent  irritation  to  cough.  [Gff.] 
In  the  evening  and  morning,  scraping  in  the  throat,  which  excites 
her  to  dry  cough. 

Scrapy  in  the  throat,  with  some  cough,  during  which  the  left  eye 
especially  waters  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Gff.] 

Formication  in  the  upper  part  of  the  windpipe,  as  if  something 
adhered  there,  exciting  cough  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gff.] 

415.  Itching  in  the  larynx  exciting  cough  (with  viscid,  salt  expectora- 
tion), in  the  evening  on  going  to  sleep,  and  in  the  morning  an  hour 
after  rising.  [Cas.] 

Irritation  to  cough,  as  from  sulphur  fumes,  with  choking. 
Frequent  short  hacking  cough  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Gff.] 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  369 

Irritation  to  COUgh  at  the  back  of  the  throat,  with  short 
cough,  frequently  recurring.  [Gff.] 

Great  formication  in  the  throat  removed  for  a short  time  by- 
hawking,  with  great  flow  of  saliva.  [ Gff. ] 

420.  Constant  rough  feeling  in  the  throat,  with  formication  and 
frequent  semi-voluntary,  rough  cough,  which  causes  pain  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  chest.  [Gff] 

After  formication  and  irritation  in  the  throat,  some  deep  coughs, 
whereupon  the  chest  pains  as  if  pressed  in.  [Gff.] 

(When  coughing,  pain  on  the  chest  as  if  raw.) 

During  the  cough-irritation,  in  the  evening,  a chilliness  and  a 
drawing  in  the  cheeks. 

Cough,  in  the  evening  in  bed. 

425.  Spasmodic  cough,  daily,  in  three  or  four  fits. 

(In  the  evening,  cough,  which  causes  vomiting  and  retching.) 
Along  with  tightness  of  chest  and  burning  on  the  chest,  a fatiguing 
cough. 

Expectoration  of  mucus  from  the  larynx  by  hacking  or  short 
cough. 

Expectoration  of  masses  of  green  mucus. 

430-  Tearing,  pressive  pain  on  (in)  the  left  side  of  the  chest 

(aft.  26  h.).  [Gff.] 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  tearing  from  the  chest  towards  the  back 
(in  the  arms  and  left  ear),  with  internal  heat,  especially  in  the  head. 
Drawing  (rheumatic)  pain  on  the  right  short  ribs.  [Gff.] 
Tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest.  [Gff-'] 

Rheumatic  pain  from  the  left  short  ribs  to  the  hip.  [Gff.] 

435.  Aching  rheumatic  pain  in  the  right  side  on  the  short  ribs,  for  a 
quarter  of  an  hour.  [Gff.] 

Painful  drawing  in  the  chest,  shoulders,  and  arms,  more  on  the 
left  side,  with  hot  sensation  and  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  during 
which  she  feels  cold. 

Obtuse  pain  first  in  the  left,  then  in  the  right,  side  of  the  chest, 
more  perceptible  on  expiring  than  on  inspiring.  [Gff.] 

Obtuse  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  6 h.)„  [Gff.] 
Obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  towards  the  short  ribs 

440.  Obtuse  shooting,  oppressive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart, 
which  goes  off  with  audible  rumbling  in  the  left  side,  as  from  incar- 
cerated and  now  liberated  flatulence  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Gff.] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (and  of  the  abdomen) 
increased  by  drawing  a breath.  [Gff.] 

On  going  to  sleep,  some  very  painful  stitches  through  the  chest, 
which  impeded  respiration.  [Gff] 

On  drawing  a deep  breath  a deep  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the 
chest.  [Gff] 

Violent,  obtuse  stitches,  as  if  darting  outwards,  deep. in  the  lower 
part  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest.  [Gff!] 

445.  Severe  stitches  under  the  left  breast  (without  chill  or  heat)  ; on 

24 


370 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


account  of  them  she  could  not  sleep  or  walk  ; even  when  sitting  they 
continued. 

Pains  more  of  a burning  than  a shooting  character  in  the  region 
of  the  heart. 

Severe  burning  in  the  chest,  as  from  red-hot  coals  (almost 
uninterruptedly). 

Burning  pain  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  on  the  left  side  of 
the  chest. 

Burning  and  rush  of  blood  in  the  chest. 

450.  She  always  felt  as  if  the  blood  rose  into  her  chest,  and  at  the 
same  time  she  was  cold  in  her  body. 

Rush  of  blood  to  the  chest  in  the  morning  on  awaking,  and 
furred  tongue. 

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  chiefly  when  sitting. 

Frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  some  quick  beats. 

In  the  evening,  on  going  to  sleep,  palpitation  of  the  heart  and 
intermitting  pulse  (aft.  16  d.). 

455.  Excessively  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  for  several  days. 

Spasmodic  oppression  and  contraction  of  the  chest  for  three  or 
four  minutes. 

Pain  in  the  chest  as  from  displaced  flatulence. 

Tightness  of  the  chest  and  short  breathing,  as  from  flatulence 
pressing  upwards  (aft.  48  h.). 

Feeling  of  oppression  in  the  chest,  which  goes  off'  immediately 
after  eructation. 

460.  In  the  morning,  after  rising  from  bed,  chest  and  shoulders  as  if 
pressed  together. 

(Pain  on  dilating  the  chest.) 

In  the  evening,  when  lying  in  bed,  difficult  respiration  and 
throbbing  in  the  head. 

(The  breath  is  quite  cold  also  coldness  in  the  throat,  mouth, 
and  teeth.) 

Difficult  respiration,  chiefly  when  sitting. 

465.  Frequent  attacks  of  constriction  of  the  chest,  which  stops  the 
breathing  for  instants. 

Frequent  oppressive  aching  on  the  chest.  [Gff. J 

Pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest. 

Pressive  pain  superiorly  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest, 

through  into  the  right  scapula. 

On  the  sternum,  just  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a dull  pain  on 
a small  spot,  excited  bv  stooping  forwards  and  also  by  touching. 

470.  Feeling  of  weakness  and  fatigue  of  the  chest. 

On  awaking  he  feels  the  chest  as  if  fatigued. 

Itching  internally  in  the  chest. 

Pricking  itching  in  the  region  of  the  coccyx,  in  the  evening  in 
bed.  [Ctfj.] 

In  the  sacrum,  sensation  of  coldness,  numbness,  and  tension* 

475.  Tensive  pain  and  stiffness  in  the  sacrum. 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


37i 

(Severe  sacral  pain;  she  cannot  sit,  she  feels  like  a plug  in  the 
oack,  she  must  put  a pillow  below  her.) 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  sacrum.  [Gff.] 

Aching,  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  through  to  the  back,  near 
the  left  hip. 

Violent  external  burning  on  the  right  hip.  [ Gff] 

480.  Tearing  low  down  in  the  back,  near  the  sacrum.  [ Gff, !] 

Heaviness  in  the  back  and  oppression  on  the  chest. 

Drawing  in  the  back,  chiefly  when  sitting. 

Pressive  pain  near  the  lowest  part  of  the  back  (aft.  3 h.). 
Squeezing  pressive  pain  near  the  lowest  part  of  the  spine. 

485.  Pain  in  the  side  of  the  back,  as  if  bruised. 

Jerking  of  the  muscles  in  the  left  side  of  the  back.  [Gff.'] 
Burning  on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  of  the  back. 

(Shooting  betwixt  the  scapulae,  taking  away  the  breath,  at  night.) 
After  the  (accustomed)  washing  with  water  by  no  means  cold, 
rheumatic  pains  at  the  upper  part  of  the  left  scapula  (aft.  26  h.).  [ Cas .] 
490.  Rheumatic  sensation  in  the  whole  of  the  left  scapula  when 
writing  (aft.  6 h.).  [Cas.] 

On  bending  back  the  left  arm,  violent  tearing  in  the  left  scapula. 

[Gff.] 

Burning  sensation  on  the  right  scapula.  [Gff.] 

Burning  on  the  right  shoulder.  [Gff.] 

Burning  on  the  shoulder-joint  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gff.] 

495.  Drawing  pain  in  the  left  shoulder-joint.  [Gff.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  shoulder. 

Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  right  shoulder.  [Gff.] 

Violent  tearing  pain  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  especially  on 
moving,  with  drawing  in  the  shafts  of  the  arm  bones.  [Gff.] 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  frequently  recurring. 
500.  Paralytic  weakness  of  the  right  shoulder  and  right  arm  (aft.  J h.). 
[Cas.] 

Shooting  in  the  right  shoulder  by  day  and  night. 

Tearing  in  the  posterior  cervical  muscles.  [Gff.] 
Aching,  tearing  pain  in  the  cervical  muscles.  [Gff] 

In  the  muscles  on  the  neck  (right  side)  violent  aching  pain.  [Gff.] 
505.  Pressive  pain  on  the  neck  (aft.  6 d.). 

Pricking  itching  on  the  neck  and  nape,  and  red  spots  there  (aft 
38  h.).  [Cas.] 

An  aching  drawing  pain  under  the  right  axilla,  felt  especially 
when  moving.  [Gff.] 

Burning  pain  in  the  right  axilla.  [Gff.] 

Itching,  moisture,  and  excoriation  in  the  axillae. 

510.  Bruised  pain  of  the  right  arm. 

Drawing  in  the  right  arm. 

Cramp  in  the  arms. 

On  the  inner  side  of  the  left  upper  arm,  dull  drawing  (aft.  4 h.). 
[Cas.] 

The  upper  arm  is  particularly  heavy.  [Gas.] 

515.  Drawing  pain,  with  burning,  on  the  upper  arm  (aft.  48  h.).  [Gff.] 


372 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


Burning  superiorly  on  the  upper  arm,  first  on  the  left  then  on  the 
right  (aft.  5 h.).  [Gff] 

Tearing  in  the  left  upper  arm  (aft.  4 h.).  [ Gff. !] 

A large  boil  on  the  upper  arm,  surrounded  by  many  itching 
pimples  (aft.  7 d.). 

Burning  on  the  right  elbow.  [Gff.'] 

520.  Drawing  pain  in  the  shaft  of  the  ulna  towards  the  wrist  (aft. 
20  m.).  [Cas.] 

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  upper  side  of  the  left  forearm,  near 
the  elbow,  where  also  the  part  is  likewise  painful  when  the  shaft  of 
the  bone  is  pressed  (aft.  3I  h.).  [Gff.] 

Burning  itching  on  the  forearm  near  the  elbow.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  drawing  from  the  left  elbow  to  the  hand  (aft. 
48  h.).  [Gff] 

Paralytic  pain  in  the  wrist  on  moving  it. 

525.  Arms  and  hands  go  to  sleep,  especially  at  night,  so  that  she  does 
not  know  where  to  put  them  in  bed  ; also  by  day  they  go  to  sleep. 

Tendency  of  the  hands  to  become  numb. 

In  the  morning,  when  washing  the  hands  she  feels  as  if  they  would 
go  to  sleep. 

Icy  cold  hands  (aft.  48  h.).  [Gff] 

On  making  certain  movements,  sensation  in  the  left  wrist-joint 
as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short. 

530.  Sensation  in  the  hands  as  if  the  muscular  power  were 
weakened,  felt  especially  when  writing  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gff.] 

Writing  is  performed  slowly  and  with  difficulty  (aft.  i\  h.). 
[Cas.] 


Tearing  in  the  right  or  left  wrist.  [Gff.] 

On  the  hands  an  itching  fine  eruption. 

Bruised  pain  on  the  back  of  the  left  hand.  [Gff.] 

535.  Drawing  in  the  right  metacarpal  bones  (aft.  J h.).  [Cas.] 

Great  itching  in  the  palms,  at  night. 

Tearing  in  the  inside  of  the  left  hand  from  the  root  of  the  little 
finger  inwards.  [Gff] 

Violent  tearing  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  left  index  (aft.  28  h.). 

i<ffl 

Tearing  pain  in  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gff] 
540.  Fine  tearing  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  fingers  of  the  right 
hand.  [Gff] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  right  index.  [Gff.] 

Fine  burning  tearing  in  the  tip  of  the  right  thumb.  [Gff.] 
Tearing  in  the  tip  and  beneath  the  nail  of  the  left  fourth  finger 
(aft.  48  h.).  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  joints  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  fingers.  \_Gff.] 

545.  Tearing  beneath  the  thumb-nail.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  right  little  finger,  increased  by  movement.  [Gff.] 
A drawing  in  the  right  index  forwards  towards  the  tip. 

In  the  inner  side  of  the  middle-joint  of  the  left  index,  when  at 
rest,  a boring  pain,  but  on  flexing  it  a fine  pricking  as  from  a splinter, 
for  six  hours.  [Ad.] 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


373 

Boring  pain  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  middle  linger  and  in  the 
proximal  joint  of  the  thumb,  when  at  rest.  [Ad.] 

550.  A slow  throbbing  pain  in  the  distal  phalanx  of  the  thumb.  [Ad.] 
Pulsation  on  the  back  of  the  thumb  for  some  minutes  and  recur- 
ring.  [Cas.] 

Throbbing  pain  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  middle  linger. 

[Ad.] 

Tearing  shooting  in  the  middle  joints  of  the  lingers. 

Stitch  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  left  middle  finger  (aft.  } h.). 

[Gw.] 

555.  Pricking  as  from  a splinter  in  the  distal  phalanx  of  the  fourth 
finger.  [ Cas .] 

Shooting  in  a finger,  on  rising  from  a seat. 

Shooting  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb  proceeding  from  the  wrist- 
joint. 

Fine  pricks  in  the  skin  of  the  right  index,  renewed  on  flexing 
the  arm  (aft.  2 h.).  [Cas.] 

Chilling  burning  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  right  middle  and 
ring  fingers.  [Gff.] 

560.  Violent  itching  on  the  outer  side  of  the  left  thumb.  [Gff.] 
Tearing  in  the  right  hip.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  aching  pain  below  and  near  the  left  hip  towards  the 
back  and  sacrum,  frequently  repeated  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gff.] 

Severe,  paralytic  drawing  pain  proceeding  from  the 
abdomen  down  into  the  left  lower  extremity.  [Gff] 

Jerking  of  the  muscles  in  the  superior  posterior  part  of  the  left 
thigh,  in  the  morning  in  bed.  [Gff] 

565.  Obtuse  stitch  in  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh.  [Gff.] 

Burning  on  the  thigh  at  night  in  bed. 

Burning  sensation  on  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh  superiorly. 

In  the  left  thigh,  rheumatic  drawing,  in  the  evening  in  bed, 
alleviated  by  lying  on  that  thigh.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  frequently  recurring. 

57 o.  At  the  lower  and  outer  part  of  the  left  thigh,  cramp-pain  when 
walking,  especially  when  raising  the  thigh  and  going  up-stairs ; the 
part  is  also  painful  to  the  touch  (aft.  35  h.).  [Cas.] 

When  walking,  numbness  of  the  thighs. 

Stiffness  in  the  thighs  above  the  knees,  in  the  morning  on  rising. 
Stiffness  and  drawing  in  the  left  thigh,  as  if  paralysed  and  dis- 
located (the  first  4 d.). 

Feeling  of  restlessness  in  the  right  thigh  and  leg,  which  causes 
him  to  be  constantly  changing  his  position  in  his  chair.  [Cas.] 

575.  Pain  in  both  lower  extremities,  especially  in  the  legs,  when 
sitting  and  lying  ; he  knows  not  where  to  put  them. 

Tearing  in  the  right  thigh  and  leg.  [Gff.] 

Tearing  in  the  left  thigh  and  leg  (aft.  29  h.).  [Gff.] 

Heaviness  in  the  lower  extremities  (aft.  5 d.). 

In  the  lower  extremities,  numbness  and  insensibility. 

580.  Drawing  pain  in  the  knees  when  standing. 


374 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


In  the  knees  and  ankle-joints,  tenseness  (aft.  5 d.). 

Paralytic  pain  in  the  knee  when  sitting  and  rising  from  a seat, 
and  at  night  when  lying,  on  turning  round,  or  extending  the  knee. 

On  slightly  knocking  on  the  knee,  great  pain  in  the  bone. 

On  going  upstairs,  pain  in  the  knees. 

585.  Weakness  and  unsteady  feeling  in  the  knees  when  walking  and 
standing.  \_Gff'.'] 

Weakness  and  stiffness  in  the  knee. 

Great  burning  on  the  right  knee. 

After  rising  from  a seat,  shooting  in  the  patella,  as  if  the  knee 
were  swollen. 

In  both  knees  aching  tearing,  and  also  in  the  legs. 

590.  Drawing  sensation  in  the  lower  extremities,  especially  from  the 
knee  down  the  leg.  \_Gff.~] 

Tearing  in  the  right  leg.  [Gff'.~\ 

Tearing  in  the  leg  from  the  calf  down  to  the  inner  ankle.  \Gff.~] 

Drawing  and  gnawing  in  both  legs  ; he  cannot  let  them  lie  quiet, 
and  must  stretch  them  out  or  draw  them  up,  for  half  an  hour,  in  the 
afternoon. 

Paralytic  sensation  in  the  left  leg. 

595.  At  the  lower  part  of  the  calf  a swollen  spot  that  is  painful  when 
touched. 

On  the  calves,  itching  wheals. 

Severe  cramp  in  the  leg,  especially  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  when 
walking  in  the  open  air. 

Severe  cramp,  at  night  in  bed  in  the  whole  leg,  especially  in  the 
sole  of  the  foot. 

Cramp  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  in  the  evening,  after  lying 
down  ; the  toes  are  drawn  crooked. 

600.  Tearing  in  the  bone  above  the  left  inner  ankle  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gff.'\ 

Drawing  in  the  feet,  chiefly  when  sitting. 

Tearing  pain  under  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,  increased  by 
walking.  [Gff.~\ 

Tearing  in  the  middle  toe  of  the  right  foot.  [Gff.] 

Severe  tearing  under  the  nails  of  the  toes,  from  the  evening  into 
the  night  ; it  extended  into  the  soles  of  the  feet  (the  first  4 d.). 

605.  Pain  in  the  right  big  toe  under  the  nail.  \Gff.'\ 

On  treading  pain  in  the  metatarsal  bones,  as  if  they  were 
lacerated. 

Restlessness  in  the  left  foot;  he  must  move  it  to  and  fro. 

Burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  after  standing. 

Great  sweat  of  the  feet  (aft.  9 d.). 

610.  (During  the  pains,  great  anxiety  and  heat.) 

(After  the  pains  great  exhaustion.) 

Bruised  pain  in  ail  the  limbs  (aft.  24  h.). 

In  the  morning,  after  waking,  in  bed,  great  bruised  feeling  in  the 
joints,  relieved  by  stretching  out  the  limbs,  gradually  going  off  after 
rising. 

Every  limb  of  the  body  is  painful,  so  also  is  the  back  (with  much 
headache  and  great  weakness). 


GARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


375 


615.  The  limbs  go  to  sleep. 

The  limbs  on  which  he  is  lying  are  apt  to  go  to  sleep. 

Formication  all  over  the  body. 

In  the  morning  in  bed,  a shooting  under  the  left  ribs,  which 
radiates  into  the  abdomen,  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  the  left  and 
right  side  of  the  chest,  showed  itself  as  aching  in  the  larynx,  was 
aggravated  by  expiration,  and  when  it  went  off  was  renewed  by 
pressure  on  the  abdomen.  [Gff.] 

Itching  pricks  on  the  side  on  which  he  is  lying,  in  the  evening 
in  bed. 

620.  Itching  like  flea  bites  on  several  parts  of  the  body.  [Cas.] 

Itching  and  shooting  on  several  parts  of  the  body.  [Cas.] 

Nettle-rash  for  some  weeks  (aft.  4 d.). 

Itching  and  burning  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  on  the 

back,  chest,  navel,  thighs,  &c.  [Gff.] 

Burning  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  at  night  in  bed. 

6 25.  Here  and  there,  on  the  back  and  in  the  sides,  as  also  in  the  right 
side  of  the  abdomen,  a burning  sensation  on  the  skin,  as  from  a 
mustard  plaster  (aft.  12  h.).  [ Gff !] 

Stiffness  in  the  knees  and  hip-joints,  in  the  morning  on 
awaking. 

Tension  in  the  knees  and  left  hand  as  if  they  had  been  fatigued 
by  too  great  exercise. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  limbs. 

Drawing  and  tearing  pains  on  various  parts  of  the  body.  [Gff.] 

630.  Drawing  in  the  back  and  feet,  only  when  sitting. 

Drawing  in  the  wrist,  elbow  and  shoulder-joints,  which  goes 
off  by  moving.* 

Tearing  in  various  parts  of  the  body,  at  night  in  bed. 

Rheumatic  sensation  in  the  whole  body,  with  coldness 
of  the  hands  and  feet.  [Gff'.'] 

In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  tearing  sensation  in  the  left 
shoulder,  then  in  the  right  hand,  then  in  the  right  upper  jaw  in  the 
incisor  teeth.  [Gff.] 

635.  Frequent,  tearing  pains  here  and  the*e,  e.g.  in  the  left  half  of  the 
face,  then  as  if  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  in  the  left  thigh,  and 
left  shoulder,  at  the  same  time  great  pressure  in  the  arms  and 
lower  extremities.  [Gff.] 

(A  healed  ulcer  again  breaks  out,  and  discharges,  instead  of  pus, 
lymph  mixed  with  blood ; the  part  is  hard  and  painful  when 
touched.) 

The  pus  of  the  ulcer  becomes  foetid  like  asafoetida. 

The  sore  of  the  issue  excretes  a corrosive  moisture. 

After  sitting  for  a long  time  he  feels,  on  rising  from  his  seat, 
heaviness  and  stiffness  in  the  limbs,  which  is  relieved  by  walking  a 
little. 

640.  Indisposed  for  bodily  exertion.  [Cas.] 

Want  of  energy  in  the  muscular  movements  (aft.  1 h.).  [Cas.] 

Exhaustion.  [Ad.] 

# Especially  by  exposure  to  the  morning  wind. 


376 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


Exhaustion  in  the  morning  in  bed  (aft.  48  h.).  [ Gjff, i] 

Great  feeling  of  fatigue,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  especially  in  the 
joints,  which  goes  off  after  rising  from  bed.  [Gff.] 

645.  In  the  morning,  weak,  lazy,  trembling  in  the  limbs  and  readily 
perspiring  (aft.  2 d.).  [Cas.] 

Trembling  in  the  body,  with  faintness. 

In  the  morning  feeling  of  great  exhaustion,  with  trembling  in  the 
limbs  and  round  about  the  stomach,  as  after  drinking  wine  in  excess 
(aft.  24  h.).  [Gff.] 

Attacks  of  sudden  faint  weakness. 

Very  frequent,  but  only  momentary  attacks  of  fainting,  causing 
him  to  sink  down,  also  accompanied  by  vertigo — followed  by  cutting 
in  the  abdomen  and  griping  in  the  bowels  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue 
— but  yet  only  an  ordinary  stool  was  passed  (aft.  24  h.). 

650.  Exhaustion  after  a short  slow  walk  in  the  open  air.  [Gff.] 

Whilst  walking  in  the  open  air  sudden  fatigue  came  on,  which, 
however,  soon  went  off  (aft.  3 d.). 

Weakness,  especially  in  the  lower  extremities.  [Gff.] 

In  the  forenoon,  weakness,  as  from  stupefaction. 

Exhaustion  in  the  evening. 

655.  In  the  evening,  laziness,  drowsiness,  indisposed  for  exertion. 
Yawning.  [Ad.] 

Much  stretching  and  yawning  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gff] 
Drowsiness  and  frequent  yawning.  [Gff.] 

Drowsiness  in  the  forenoon,  when  sitting  (and  when 
reading),  which  goes  off  on  moving.  [Ad.] 

660.  After  the  midday  meal,  inclination  to  sleep,  without  being  able 
to  sleep. 

After  a meal  uninterrupted  sleep  for  hours  which  is  beset  with 
anxious  dreams.  [Ad.] 

After  a meal  overpowered  by  sleepiness. 

Very  early  in  the  evening  inclined  for  sleep. 

Great  sleepiness  in  the  evening. 

665.  When  he  gets  into  bed,  in  the  evening,  he  is  attacked  by  anxiety 
so  that  he  can  scarcely  keep  lying  (aft.  19  d.). 

Late  of  falling  to  sleep— not  till  1 a.m. 

At  night  though  his  eyes  are  heavy  with  sleep  he  cannot  get 
to  sleep. 

She  cannot  get  to  sleep  at  night,  but  yet  cannot  open  the  eyes. 

In  the  evening  very  cold  feet  and  hands. 

670.  In  the  evening,  before  going  to  sleep,  a severe  internal  shivering, 
without  chilliness,  and  at  the  same  time  much  eructation. 

She  frequently  wakes  up  at  night  with  coldness  of  the  lower 
extremities  and  knees. 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down  in  bed,  his  eyes  were  painful. 

At  night  heaviness  in  the  lower  limbs  and  back,  like  fatigue. 

In  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  a drawing  sensation  in  both 
lower  limbs. 

675.  At  night,  in  bed,  the  corns  ache. 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


377 

At  night  he  cannot  lie  quiet  except  with  both  lower  extremities 
drawn  up  to  the  abdomen, 

At  night  he  wakes  up  several  times  on  account  of  pulsation  in 
the  head  and  anxiety  as  if  about  to  have  a fit  of  apoplexy  ; some 
instants  after  awaking  he  was  composed  and  felt  that  it  was  an  illu- 
sion, and  then  the  beating  in  his  head  went  off ; when  he  attempted 
to  await  in  slumber  what  would  happen  to  him,  the  lower  extre- 
mities and  knees  were  drawn  up  to  the  upper  part  of  his  body  and 
the  back  became  bent — both  involuntarily — and  he  felt  that  if  he 
put  off  awaking  longer  he  would  have  fainted. 

In  the  evening,  after  going  to  sleep,  in  bed,  he  wakes  up  several 
times,  with  a feeling  of  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  hair  on  end, 
anxiety  accompanied  with  shivering,  and  a feeling  over  the  body 
as  if  some  one  stroked  him  with  the  hand,  and  as  if  ants  were  running 
over  the  skin,  at  every  movement  in  bed — at  the  same  time  the 
hearing  is  so  sensitive  and  so  extremely  acute  that  the  slightest  noise 
echoed  in  his  ear. 

In  the  evening,  during  sleep,  deception  of  the  hearing ; he 
thought  he  heard  some  one  approach  his  bed,  this  woke  him  up  with 
anxiety., 

680.  At  night,  he  started  at  a noise,  with  shudder  in  the  back. 

Much  connected  talking  in  dreams,  whereby  he  woke  up  and 
remembered  what  he  had  dreamt. 

Nights  very  full  of  dreams  (aft.  16  h.).  \_Gff.~\ 

At  night,  vivid,  but  unremembered  dreams.  [Gff.'\ 

Frightful  dreams. 

685.  Extremely  anxious  dreams.  [Gff.~\ 

Restless  sleep,  anxious  dreams,  and  at  night  a pressure  under  the 
stomach. 

Restless  sleep,  frequent  waking,  and  in  the  morning  in  bed,  head- 
ache, with  burning  here  and  there  on  the  body.  \_Gff-~\ 

Restless  sleep  with  many  dreams  until  after  3 a.m.,  when  he 
awoke  with  violent  squeezing  and  Torcing-down  pains  in  the  abdo- 
men, which  pressed  particularly  on  the  sacrum  and  somewhat  on  the 
bladder  also,  with  rumbling  in  the  bowels.  \Gff.~\ 

Very  restless  sleep  full  of  anxious  dreams,  until  1 a.m.  [Gff.~\ 

690.  Restless  sleep,  without  refreshment ; in  the  morning  he  was  in 
perspiration. 

Feverish  coldness  in  the  evening  ; he  did  not  feel  the  heat  of  the 
stove  (aft.  48  h.). 

Anxiety  in  the  form  of  fever,  the  hands  become  cold  and  he 
trembles. 

In  the  evening,  great  anxiety  and  sensation  of  heat,  though  she 
was  cold  all  over  to  the  touch. 

(Weak,  depressed  pulse.) 

695.  Frequent  chilliness,  especially  at  night,  chilliness  and  coldness. 

In  the  evening  weariness  and  febrile  rigor,  and  before  going  to 
sleep  flying  heat  (aft.  10  d.). 

Chilliness  and  heat  towards  evening  (aft.  12  d.). 

All  day  long,  much  heat,  but  always  attended  by  cold  feet. 


378 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS. 


At  night,  heat  in  bed. 

700.  She  could  not  sleep  at  night  owing  to  heat  in  the  blood. 

Warm  perspiration  in  the  morning  (aft.  29  h.).  [ Cas.~\ 

Sour  smelling  sweat  (aft.  8 d.). 

Out  of  humour  (after  a meal).  \_Ad.~] 

Indifferent,  unsympathetic.  \_Ad.~\ 

705.  Music,  which  he  is  fond  of,  he  does  not  care  for  all  day.  \_Ad,~\ 
Anxious,  as  if  oppressed,  for  several  days. 

Very  oppressed  and  full. 

In  the  evening,  restlessness. 

In  the  evening,  anxiety  increasing  for  several  hours,  with  much 
heat  in  the  face. 

710.  Great  irritability. 

Excessive  irritation,  as  if  she  were  too  much  hurried,  or  had 
too  much  to  do. 

Irritability,  sensitiveness.  \_Ad.~\ 

Ill-humoured,  very  sensitive  (aft.  h.). 

Peevish,  impatient  and  desperate,  so  much  so  that  he  would  like 
to  shoot  himself. 

715.  Peevish,  irritable  disposition,  with  confusion  of  the  head. 
Irritable,  violent  temper. 

Involuntary  angry  outbursts  (aft.  36  h.). 

Sensitive,  lachrymose  disposition. 

Sensitive,  easily  irritated  humour,  which,  however,  on  cause 
given  is  apt  to  change  into  silly  gaiety,  that,  on  laughing,  is 
attended  by  relaxation  of  the  muscles  of  the  arms  and  hands  espe- 
dally.  [Gffi.~\ 

720.  Excessively  cheerful,  but  apt  to  be  easily  put  out  of  humour. 


CHAMOMILLA.1 

{Camomile.') 

(The  juice  of  the  whole  plant,  Matricaria  chamomilla,  freshly  expressed,  and 
mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.) 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  following  symptoms  of  camomile,  though 
they  are  far  from  being  exhaustive,  that  this  plant  must  evidently  be 
reckoned  among  the  medicines  of  many  uses  (polychrests).  Hence 
in  their  domestic  practice  the  common  people  have  employed  it  in  all 
kinds  of  maladies,  especially  those  of  an  acute  character.  On  this 
account  physicians  in  their  ludicrous  pride  have  not  deigned  to  regard  it 
as  a medicine,  but,  giving  it  the  contemptuous  name  of  “ domestic 
remedy,”  they  permitted  their  patients  to  use  it  by  handfuls  in  infusion 
as  a tea  or  as  a clyster  along  with  the  medicines  they  prescribed,*  just 
as  if  camomile,  being  but  a vulgar  domestic  remedy,  was  of  no  account. 
In  like  manner  they  allowed  their  patients  to  apply  bagfuls  of  the 
warmed  flowers  in  any  quantity  they  pleased  to  painful  parts,  whilst 
they  themselves  directed  quite  different  medicines  to  be  taken  inter- 
nally. Obstetric  practitioners  permitted  the  midwives  and  mothers  to 
mix  camomile  tea  in  almost  all  the  drinks  and  food  of  children  at 
the  breast  and  wet-nurses,  as  though  it  were  a purely  wholesome, 
non-injurious,  or  at  least  a perfectly  unimportant  and  indifferent 
matter. 

To  such  an  extent  did  the  blindness  of  physicians  go  with  respect  to 
a plant  which  belongs  to  the  category  of  powerful  medicines,  whose 
exact  power  and  importance  it  was  their  duty  to  ascertain,  in  order  not 
only  to  learn  how  to  make  a rational  and  wholesome  employment  of  it, 
but  also  to  prevent  its  misuse  by  the  common  people,  and  to  teach  them 
in  what  particular  cases  camomile  could  only  be  employed  beneficially, 
and  in  what  cases  its  use  was  to  be  avoided. 

But  hitherto  physicians  have  neglected  their  duty  in  all  these 
respects  ; on  the  contrary,  they  vied  with  the  common  people  in  the 
thoughtless  recommendation  or  permission  to  use  this  powerful  medi- 

* In  order  to  avoid  the  degradation  of  admitting  into  their  elegant  prescriptions 
a vulgar  folk’s -remedy  like  the  ordinary  camomile,  when  it  was  desired  to  give  a 
medicine  of  this  sort,  they  preferred  to  order  the  dearer  and  more  aristocratic 
Chamomilla  romana  off.,  without  considering  that  this,  being  quite  a different  plant, 
belonging,  indeed,  to  a totally  different  genus  of  plants  {Anthemis  nobilis , L.),  must 
possess  different  properties  and  actions.  But  what  does  a man  who  only  wants  a 
name  in  his  prescriptions  care  about  the  peculiar  actions  of  medicines  ? 


1 From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


380 


CHAMOMILLA. 


cinal  plant  in  all  cases  of  disease,  without  any  distinction , in  any  quan- 
tity or  dose  the  patients  chose. 

But  it  does  not  require  much  sense  to  perceive  that  no  medicine  in 
the  world  can  be  useful  in  all  diseases,  and  that  every  one  possesses  an 
accurately  defined  curative  sphere  of  action,  beyond  which  every 
powerful  medicinal  substance,  like  camomile,*  must  act  in  a thoroughly 
injurious  manner,  and  so  much  the  more  injuriously  the  greater  its 
powers  are.  Hence  the  physician  who  does  not  desire  to  act  like  a 
charlatan  ought  to  be  able  to  tell  beforehand,  not  only  the  cases  in 

which  camomile  must  be  beneficial,  but  also  those  in  which  its  use 

must  be  injurious.  Finally,  he  should  be  able  also  to  determine  the 

exact  dose,  which  shall  be  neither  too  large  nor  too  small  for  the 

disease.  By  the  administration  of  the  appropriate  dose  the  cure  of  the 
disease  by  this  plant  may  be  anticipated  with  the  greatest  certainty. 

Did  we  not  know  by  thousands  of  other  instances  in  what  a melan- 
choly state,  in  what  incomprehensible  blindness,  so-called  practical 
medicine  has  groped  through  so  many  centuries,  and  how  it  has  done 
every  thing  to  emulate  the  common  herd  in  their  folly,  it  would  only 
be  necessary  to  direct  the  attention  of  an  unprejudiced  person  to  the 
proceedings  of  physicians  in  regard  to  this  powerful  medicinal  plant, 
camomil*. 

For  as  it  is  impossible  that  any  one  medicine,  be  it  ever  so  useful,  can 
be  serviceable  and  curative  in  one  tenth  part  of  the  enormous  number  of 
different  morbid  states  that  exist  in  nature,  so  neither  can  camomile. 

But  let  us  suppose  the  impossible  case,  that  camomile  is  curative  in 
a tenth  of  all  known  diseases,  must  it  not,  if  employed  as  hitherto,  in 
almost  all  cases  of  disease  without  distinction,  do  harm  in  the  other 
nine  tenths  ? Is  it  wise  to  purchase  a single  benefitf  by  a ninefold 
injury?  u What  ! injury?”  retorts  the  ordinary  practitioner;  “ I 
never  saw  any  injury  from  camomile.”  Yes,  as  long  as  you  are 
ignorant  of  the  morbid  symptoms  and  ailments  that  camomile  as  a 
powerful  medicine  is  capable  of  developing  per  se  and  in  a peculiar 
manner  in  the  healthy  human  body,  you  cannot  recognise  the  ailments 
due  to  its  employment  in  diseases,  as  the  injurious  effects  of  camomile; 
and  in  your  ignorance  you  often  attribute  them  to  the  course  of  the 
disease  itself,  to  the  malignity  of  the  disease,  and  thus  you  deceive  your- 
self and  the  poor  tortured  patient. 

Look  in  this  mirror,  look  at  the  following  camomile  symptoms,  and 
when  you  are  practising  your  ordinary  slipshod  treatment  with  an  un- 
limited simultaneous  employment  of  camomile,  behold  the  serious 

* Every  medicine  that  is  capable  of  curing  serious  ailments  must  naturally  be  a 
powerful  medicine. 

f It  would  be  sufficiently  stupid  if  one  should  purchase  all  the  tickets  of  a class- 
lottery  in  order  to  obtain  the  several  prizes  in  it,  without  considering  that  he  thereby 
incurs  a palpable  loss  of  ten  per  cent.  But  what  could  possibly  be  more  foolish  than, 
supposing  there  was  a lottery  which  obviously  brought  a loss  of  nine  tenths  to  its 
subscribers,  for  a person  to  buy  up  all  the  tickets  and  so  incur  a certain  loss  of  nine 
whilst  he  could  only  win  one  ? And  yet  the  ordinary  practitioner  who  employs 
camomile  in  every  case  is  far  more  foolish ; he  does  a much  greater  proportion 
of  injury,  only  with  this  difference,  that  the  injury  does  not  touch  himself,  but  only 
his  wretched  patient. 


CHAMOMILLA. 


381 


hurtful  symptoms  and  ailments  caused  by  camomile,  consider  how  much 
discomfort  and  torture  you  inflict  on  your  patients  by  the  abuse  of 
this  powerful  plant  in  unsuitable  cases  and  in  excessive  doses.* 

See  from  this  list  of  symptoms,  incomplete  though  it  be,  how  often, 
where  the  disease  would  frequently  have  passed  away  by  itself,  you  have 
prolonged,  doubled,  multiplied  the  sufferings  of  the  patient  by  exciting 
an  accumulation  of  the  peculiar  camomile  ailments  by  your  senseless 
continued  abuse  of  this  drug  ! As  long  as  you  really  did  not  know,  did 
not  suspect  the  peculiar  sufferings  camomile  is  capable  of  occasioning, 
you  sinned  out  of  pure  ignorance  ; but  now  that  you  have  here  displayed 
before  you  a list  of  the  pure  pathogenetic  effects  of  camomile,  you  may 
well  begin  to  be  ashamed  of  your  sin  in  inflicting  so  much  suffering  on 
your  patients,  who  come  to  you  in  order  to  obtain  from  you  an  alleviation 
of  their  sufferings,  a cure  and  relief  of  their  diseases,  by  your  every-day 
employment  or  unlimited  permission  to  take  it  in  cases  for  which  it  is 
unsuitable,  and  moreover,  in  such  enormous  doses. 

From  the  symptoms  and  ailments  which  camomile  excites  per  se  in 
the  healthy  human  being  (and  the  same  is  the  case  with  all  dynamically 
acting  medicines)  we  see  what  are  the  natural  morbid  states  it  can  and 
must  cure  rapidly,  certainly,  and  permanently.  I need  not  point  out 
these  to  him  who  knows  how  to  employ  it  homceopathically. 

In  the  cases  for  which  this  plant  is  suitable,  indicated  by  the  corre- 
spondence of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  with  the  peculiar  camomile 
symptoms,  it  effects  a perfect  cure  in  very  small  doses,  when  the 
patient  is  protected  from  all  other  foreign  medicinal  influences , as  he  ought 
to  be  in  every  rational  mode  of  treatment.  I have  found  a single  drop 
of  the  quadrillion-fold  attenuation  of  the  juice  of  the  plant,  prepared  as 
above  directed,  not  only  sufficient,  but  sometimes  (when  the  patient 
was  very  sensitive)  rather  too  strong.  Any  one  who  has  a fancy  to 
compare  these  doses  with  the  ordinary  ones  of  a couple  of  ounces  of 
camomile  flowers  in  infusion,  the  drug  being  also  given  at  the  same 
time  in  clysters  and  fomentations,  as  it  often  is  in  the  ordinary  stupid 
routine  practice,  may  do  so.  Well-attested  truth  is  on  my  side. 

Chamomilla  has  not  a long  duration  of  action,  but  in  large  doses  its 
action  extends  over  some,  occasionally  many  days. 

The  injurious  effects  of  its  employment  in  excessive  doses  and  in 
unsuitable  cases  are  soon  removed,  according  to  the  symptoms,  some- 
times by  raw  coffee , sometimes  by  ignatia , sometimes  by  pulsatilla ; but 
if  they  consist  of  tearing  and  shooting  pains  relieved  by  moving  the 
affected  part,  by  aconite . Coffee , when  it  is  not  used  by  the  patient  as 
his  daily  beverage,  also  removes  many  of  the  sufferings  caused  by 
camomile,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  camomile  is  often  a powerful  antidote 
to  the  hurtful  effects  of  coffee,  when  the  symptoms  do  not  rather  point 

* Often,  when,  in  the  ordinary  hap-hazard  practice,  camomile  may  have  been 
administered  in  an  appropriate  case  (for  it  must  occasionally  happen  that  a poly- 
chrest  medicine,  which  is  given  in  all  sorts  of  cases,  will  by  chance  meet  with  a case  of 
disease  for  which  it  is  suited),  it  does  harm,  owing  to  the  excessive  quantity  in  which 
it  is  taken.  It  removes  the  symptoms  of  the  malady  to  which  it  is  homoeopathic,  but 
inflicts  in  addition  many  useless  sufferings,  by  producing  some  of  its  other  severe 
symptoms  which  are  not  developed  by  a small  dose,  and  thus  it  does  harm  in  even  the 
most  appropriate  cases  by  the  unnecessarily  strong  dose. 


382 


CHAMOMILLA. 


to  nux  vomica.  But  when  the  injurious  effects  of  coffee  are  con- 
tinually renewed  by  its  daily  use  as  a beverage,  camomile  can  no  more 
relieve  the  coffee-drinker  of  his  morbid  symptoms  than  wiping  up  can 
avail  while  the  rain  continues  to  fall. 

Camomile  in  the  smallest  dose  seems  to  diminish  in  a remarkable 
manner  over-sensitiveness  to  pain  or  the  too  acute  sufferings  of  the 
organs  of  the  emotions  from  excessive  pain.  Hence  it  alleviates  many 
of  the  affections  caused  by  coffee-drinking  and  by  courses  of  treatment 
with  narcotic  palliatives.  On  this  account  it  is  unsuited  for  persons 
who  bear  pain  calmly  and  patiently.  I attach  great  importance  to  this 
observation. 

Of  late  I have  seldom  been  able  to  employ  camomile  as  a curative 
agent.  When  in  new  patients  the  symptoms  indicated  the  employ- 
ment of  camomile  I have  usually  found  that  they  were  not  original 
symptoms  of  disease,  but  as  the  history  showed,  symptoms  resulting 
from  the  abuse  of  camomile,  so  that  I had  only  to  give  antidotes  for 
the  ailments  occasioned  by  the  latter  in  order  to  cure  the  disease  that 
had  been  artificially  produced  thereby. 

[The  only  one  of  his  disciples  who  assisted  Hahnemann  in  this  proving  was 
Stapf. 

The  old-school  authorities  are  very  few. 

Cullen,  Mat.  Med.,  is  quoted  for  one  symptom:  “ diarrhoea.” 

Lind,  Monro,  Pringle,  and  Rosenstein  (no  reference  being  given  to  their 
works)  are  cited  for  another  : te  vomiting.” 

Senac,  De  Recondita  Febrium  Intermit,  et  Remitt.  Natura,  supplies  a third : 
“ pungent  heat.”  All  the  other  symptoms  were  observed  by  Hahnemann  himself. 

The  Frag,  de  Fir.  had  275  symptoms,  the  1st  Edit.  481,  and  this  2nd  Edit.  493.] 


CHAMOMILLA. 

(Vertigo  on  stooping  forwards.) 

Giddy  when  sitting  upright,  not  when  lying.  [£//'.*] 

Vertigo,  especially  when  talking  (aft.  16  h.). 

Vertigo  after  a meal. 

5.  Soon  after  a meal,  when  walking,  vertigo  as  if  he  would  fall,  just 
as  if  the  head  were  top-heavy. 

Vertigo  after  drinking  coffee. 

Vertigo  in  the  morning. 

Drunken,  staggering  vertigo  in  the  morning  on  rising 
from  bed. 

Vertigo  with  dizziness. t 

10.  Vertigo  in  the  evening,  as  if  he  could  not  recollect  himself 
properly. 

(Vertigo  and  dimness  of  vision  after  lying  down,  with  flying 
heat  in  the  face.) 

Syncopal  vertigo. 

Slight  attacks  of  syncopal  vertigo  (aft.  | h4). 

* In  a girl  of  19,  from  some  cupfuls  of  strong  camomile  tea.  [Apparently  all 
Stapf’s  symptoms  were  observed  in  this  subject.] 

f See  also  the  following  symptoms  of  dizziness,  also  245. 


CHAMOMILLA.  383 

Obtuseness  of  the  senses,  diminished  power  of  col- 
lecting himself  (aft.  4,  5,  6 h.). 

15.  Joyless  obtuseness  of  the  senses  with  drowsiness, 
but  without  being  able  to  sleep. 

Stupidity  in  the  head. 

He  does  not  rightly  understand  a question,  and  answers  wrongly, 
with  low-toned  voice,  as  if  he  was  delirious  (aft.  6 h.). 

He  is  easily  fatigued  by  thinking. 

He  understands  and  comprehends  nothing  properly, 
just  as  if  he  were  prevented  doing  so  by  a sort  of  dul- 
ness  of  hearing,  or  a waking  dream  (aft.  i±  h.). 

20.  A state  of  distraction  ; he  sits  as  if  absorbed  in  thought. 

His  thoughts  leave  him. 

When  writing  and  speaking  he  leaves  out  whole  words. 

He  stammers,  he  makes  mistakes  in  speaking  (aft.  4 h.). 
Unobservant,  inattentive  ; external  things  make  no  impression  on 
him  ; he  is  indifferent  to  everything  (aft.  2 h.). 

25.  Dull  aching  headache  when  sitting  and  thinking. 

Heaviness  in  the  head. 

Heaviness  in  the  head.  [*S7/r.] 

Headache  compounded  of  heaviness  and  bruised  feeling  (aft.  3 h.). 
Headache  felt  even  when  asleep. 

30.  Headache,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  while  the  eyes  are  still  shut, 
in  a half  waking  state,  which  goes  off  when  quite  awake  and  after 
getting  up. 

On  awaking  from  sleep,  pain  in  the  head,  as  if  it  would  burst 
(aft.  13  h.). 

Repeated  attacks  of  tearing  pain  in  the  forehead. 

(When  sitting  up  or  turning  in  bed,  tearing  pains  in  the  forehead, 
with  the  sensation  as  if  a lump  fell  forward.)  [*S7/\] 

Very  violent  tearing  headache  at  midnight,  which,  however,  only 
wakes  him  up  for  instants  on  account  of  the  very  profound  sleep. 

35.  Semilateral  drawing  headache  (aft.  3,  4 h.). 

Tearing  headache  on  one  side  in  the  temple. 

Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  forehead,  which  extends  to  the  chest. 
Pain  in  the  bone  on  both  sides  of  the  forehead  (aft.  3 h.). 
Tearing  and  shooting  outwards  at  the  temples. 

40.  Single  stitches  in  one  half  of  the  brain,  especially  the  right  (aft. 
11  h.). 

Single  severe  stitches  in  the  brain. 

Severe  stitches  in  one  half  of  the  head,  as  after  a chill. 

Fine  shooting  headache. 

Headache  like  needle-pricks,  as  if  the  eyes  would  fall  out  of  the 
head. 

45-  Transient  attacks  of  throbbing  in  one  half  of  the 
brain. 

Throbbing  headache  (aft.  14  h.). 

Single  beats  in  the  head  (aft.  i h.). 

Twitching  headache  in  the  forehead,  especially  after  a meal* 

A cracking  and  grating  in  the  left  half  of  the  brain. 


384 


CHAMOMILLA. 


50.  The  left  temple  is  swollen,  and  painful  when  touched  (aft.  6 h.). 

The  forehead  wrinkled  above  the  nose.  [67/i] 

Her  head  waggles  to  and  fro.  [$£/'.] 

Puffiness  of  the  face  and  hands.* * * § 

An  eroding  itching  on  the  skin  of  the  forehead. 

55.  When  the  consciousness  has  returned  and  the  drowsiness  is  past 
the  pupils  become  more  dilated  (aft.  7 h.). 

Pupils  very  contracted,  or  rather  having  a tendency  to  contract  t 
(aft.  several  h.). 

Contracted  pupils  (the  first  4 h.). 

A great  dryness  (of  the  Meibomian  glands)  on  the  border  of  the 
upper  and  lower  eyelids  (aft.  1 h.). 

Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  outer  canthi  of  the  eyes,  and  sore 
excoriated  lips  (aft.  36  h.). 

60.  The  canthi  in  the  morning  full  of  matter. 

The  eye  is  swollen  in  the  morning,  and  sealed  up  with  muco- 
pus. 

After  sleeping  the  eyelids  are  gummed  together. 

Painless  extravasation  of  blood  in  the  white  of  the  inner  angle 
of  the  right  eye  (aft.  14  h.). 

Aching  in  the  eyes  ; the  eyes  are  inflamed  and  full  of  mucus  in 
the  morning. 

65.  An  aching  pain  under  the  upper  eyelid  on  moving  the  eye  and 
on  shaking  the  head. 

Severe  stitches  in  the  eyes. 

Sensation  as  if  fire  and  heat  came  out  of  the  eyesf  (immediately). 

Glittering  before  the  eyes  (immediately). 

Glittering  before  the  eyes  ; she  did  not  see  where  she  was.  \_Stf.'\ 

70.  Obscuration  of  the  sight  on  one  side,  when  he  fixes  his  look  on  a 
white  object. 

Eyes  dull  and  weak  in  the  morning,  more  rarely  in  the  evening ; 
with  the  candle  a ray  of  light  seems  to  extend  from  the  eyes  to  the 
candle  flame. 

Dimness  of  vision,  with  chilliness. 

It  became  black  before  his  eyes. 

Red  miliary  rash  on  the  cheeks. 

75.  Tearing  in  the  ears,  earache. 

(Tearing  in  the  lobe  of  the  right  ear.) 

Single  coarse  stitches  in  the  ear,  especially  when  stooping,  with 
taking  things  ill  and  vexation  about  trifles. 

Some  stitches  on  the  neck  near  the  ear. 

When  stooping  obtuse  pressure  in  the  internal  ear,  as  from  a 
blow. 

80.  Sensation  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped  up,  and  as  if  a bird  were 
rustling  and  scratching  in  them. 

In  the  evening  he  has  dulness  before  the  ears.§. 

* 52>  53> — see  91?  104>  J°5* 

4 See  41 1. 

X See  412. 

§ See  410. 


CliAMOMILLA. 


385 


Roaring  in  the  ears  as  from  rushing  water.  ^ 

Ringing  in  the  ears  (aft.  i,  3,  4 h.). 

Epistaxis. 

85.  Ulcerated  nostrils  ; sore  nose. 

The  lips  become  cracked  and  desquamate  (aft.  16  h.). 

The  lower  lip  parts  in  the  middle  in  a crack  (from  the 
3rd  to  the  10th  h.). 

Scabby  ulceration  on  the  border  of  the  lip  (from  1 to  4 h.). 

Swelling  of  the  gums. 

90.  Looseness  of  the  teeth. 

Toothache,  with  swelling  of  the  cheek.* 

After  midnight  (3  a.m.),  wakened  by  toothache  (a  gnawing  pain 
as  if  the  nerve  were  scraped),  which  ceased  about  7 a.m.,  so  that 
only  occasional  stitch-like  jerks  remained. 

In  the  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw  a stirring  up  and  formication. 

Stirring-up  drawing  toothache  in  the  jaw. 

95.  Drawing  pain  in  the  teeth. 

Toothache  as  from  a chill  from  exposure  to  the  open  air  while 
perspiring  profusely. 

Toothache  on  taking  something  warm  into  the  mouth. 

(Toothache  renewed  in  the  warm  room.) 

Toothache  particularly  severe  after  warm  drinks, 

especially  after  coffee. 

100.  After  eating  and  drinking,  especially  warm  things  (but  also  from 
cold  things),  the  toothache  comes  on  either  immediately  or  after  a 
minute. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  teeth  after  eating  and  drinking. 

Toothache  after  eating  and  drinking,  although  neither  was 
either  warm  or  cold  (later). 

On  opening  the  jaws,  pain  as  if  the  masseter  muscles  ached 
as  from  cramp,  which  pain  at  the  same  time  extends  into  the 
teeth. 

Toothache  recurring  intermittently  in  fits,  with  swelling  of  the 
cheek  and  accumulation  of  saliva  ; the  pain  darts  hither  and  thither, 
and  extends  even  to  the  eyes,  and  is  aggravated  by  drinking  cold 
water. 

105.  Tearing  toothache  in  the  jaw  towards  the  ear,  with  swelling  of 
the  cheek. 

In  the  lowe-r  jaw,  towards  the  front,  drawing  toothache  (aft.  £ h.). 

Drawing  toothache,  he  knows  not  in  which  tooth  exactly,  which 
goes  off  while  eating,  and  rages  particularly  at  night,  during  which 
the  teeth  feel  too  long.f 

* See  104  and  105,  also  50  and  53.  The  toothache  which  camomile  can  cause 
(see  89  to  108)  corresponds  very  closely  to  that  so  frequently  prevailing  in  recent 
times  (generally  resulting  from  drinking  coffee)  and  hence  this  will  be  homoeopathi- 
cally  and  specifically  cured  by  small  doses  of  camomile. 

f The  camomile-pains  have  this  peculiarity  as  a rule,  that  they  are  most  severe  in  the 
night,  and  then  often  drive  the  victim  almost  to  despair,  not  unfrequently  with  incessant 
thirst,  heat,  and  redness  of  one  cheek  ; sometimes  also  hot  sweat  in  the  head  even  in 
the  hair.  The  pains  of  camomile  seem  generally  intolerable,  and  not  to  be  endured 
(see  457).  All  these  characteristic  symptoms  of  camomile  point  to  the  similar  cases 
of  disease  capable  of  being  cured  homoeopathically  by  it. 


25 


386 


CHAMOMILLA. 


Single  stitches  in  the  jaw  into  the  internal  ear. 

Spasmodic  drawing  pain  in  the  palate  towards  the  fauces. 

i io.  On  and  under  the  tongue  vesicles  with  shooting  pain. 

A severe  smarting  at  the  back  of  the  tongue  and  on  the  palate 
(aft.  i h.). 

Red  tongue.  [67/i] 

Simple  pain  at  the  back  of  the  throat,  which  is  increased  on 
moving  the  neck  and  on  swallowing. 

Sore  throat,  as  from  a plug  in  the  throat,  on  swallowing  (aft. 

4 h.). 

1 15.  Sore  throat,  with  swelling  of  the  parotid  gland. 

(Throbbing  pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands)  (aft.  4 h.). 
Throbbing  at  the  back  of  the  throat  (aft.  J h.). 

Ptyalism. 

Teeth  covered  with  mucus. 

120.  Slimy  taste  (aft.  2 and  12  h.). 

Sour  taste  (aft.  3 and  18  h.). 

Bread  tastes  sour. 

Eyerything  he  takes  tastes  like  old  rancid  fat  (aft.  2 h.). 

What  he  hawks  up  tastes  putrid. 

125.  (At  night  he  has  a putrid  taste  in  the  mouth.) 

He  has  a putrid  smell  from  the  mouth  after  dinner, 
like  foetid  breath  (aft.  3 h.). 

In  the  morning  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  24  h.). 

Want  of  appetite. 

Anorexia,  but  on  eating  his  appetite  returns. 

130.  He  has  no  appetite  and  he  relishes  nothing ; the  food  will  not  go 
down. 

No  desire  for  food  3 nothing  tastes  good. 

He  shudders  when  food  is  placed  before  him  3 he  has  repugnance 

to  it. 

Want  of  appetite,  as  if  he  loathed  the  food,  though  it  tastes  all  right. 
No  hunger  and  no  appetite. 

135.  (He  dislikes  soup.) 

Beer  smells  ill. 

He  dislikes  coffee. 

After  his  early  coffee  nausea,  as  if  he  would  vomit,  with  suffocative 
attacks. 

In  the  morning,  after  drinking  coffee,  heat  all  over  and  perspira- 
tion, with  vomiting  of  bitter  mucus  3 afterwards  bitter  taste  in  the 
mouth,  weakness  in  the  head,  and  inclination  to  vomit. 

140.  Great  appetite  for  coffee.*  (aft.  7 h.). 

(Appetite  for  raw  sour  crout.) 

Unnatural  hunger,  in  the  evening  (aft.  3 h.)» 

During  supper  the  food  seems  to  go  no  further  than  the  pit  of 
the  throat  and  to  stick  there,  with  sensation  of  fulness,  sickness,  and 
eructation. 

Empty  eructation  (aft.  \ h.). 

145.  Sour  eructation. 

* 14.0  seems  to  be  alternating  action  with  137. 


CHAMOMILLA. 


387 


The  pains  present  are  aggravated  by  eructation. 

Frequently  a single  hiccup  (aft.  1 h.). 

During  the  meal  fulness,  and  after  the  meal  nausea. 

After  a meal,  fulness  of  satiety  in  the  stomach  even  till  the  next 
day  ; inclination  to  vomit. 

150.  After  breakfast  inclination  to  vomit,  all  the  morning. 

After  a meal  the  abdomen  becomes  distended. 

Nausea  after  a meal. 

After  a meal  fulness,  anxiety,  and  tearing  pain  in  the  back,  which 
then  goes  into  the  abdomen. 

In  the  morning  dryness  in  the  mouth,  then  distension  of  the 
abdomen,  and  the  stool  is  incompletely  evacuated. 

155.  Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  as  if  about  to  faint. 

Qualmishness  and  faint-like  nausea. 

The  qualmishness  (faint-like  nausea)  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
goes  off  by  eating. 

Nausea,  inclining  to  vomit,  with  collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth. 

In  the  morning  nausea,  inclining  to  vomit. 

160.  Vomiting.  [Lind. — Monro. — Pringle.— Rosenstein.] 

(Vomiting  without  previous  eructation.) 

(Sour  vomiting ; she  also  smells  sour  from  the  mouth.) 

The  food  is  returned  by  eructation,  it  is  belched  up  (aft.  5 h.). 

Vomiting  of  food,  which  is  first  excited  by  fulness  of  the 
abdomen,  but  afterwards  by  intolerable  nausea. 

165.  After  eating  and  drinking  beat  and  sweat  on  the  face  (aft. 
14  h.). 

After  a meal  aching  in  the  hypochondria  and  stomach. 

He  cries  out  anxiously  about  a pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as 
if  it  were  pressed  down,  and  he  sweats  profusely  during  it.* 

Painful  flatulent  distension  of  the  epigastric  region  in  the  morning. 

In  the  hypochondria  the  flatulence  pushes  upwards  (later). 

170.  Pressure  on  the  stomach,  as  if  a stone  pressed  downwards. 

Pressive  pain  in  the  stomach  and  under  the  short  ribs  that 
tightens  the  breath,  especially  after  drinking  coffee  (aft.  1 h.). 

Pressive  pain  above  the  navel. 

Flatulent  colic  ; flatulence  presses  now  here  now  there  with  great 
force,  as  if  it  would  bore  through  the  abdominal  muscles,  with  loud 
rumbling  and  grumbling ; it  presses  especially  on  the  inguinal  rings  ; 
when  the  colic  subsides  very  little  flatus  is  passed,  and  then  scarcely 
any  is  felt  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  3 h.). 

Flatulent  colic  (aft.  1 and  several  h.). 

175.  Colic  recurring  from  time  to  time  ; the  flatulence  accumulates  in 
the  hypochondria,  and  stitches  dart  through  the  chest  (aft.  8 h.). 

Continued  tensive  pain  beneath  the  ribs,  with  a tension  about 
the  brain  (and  dry  catarrh  in  the  chest)  (aft.  1 h.). 

Clucking  in  the  side  down  into  the  abdomen. 

Bruised  pain  of  the  hypogastric  muscles  (aft.  9 h.). 

Hard  distended  abdomen. 

180.  Compressive  pain  in  the  abdomen  (immediately). 

* See  247,  *49»  457- 


388 


CHAMOMILLA. 


Intolerable  pain  in  the  abdomen  in  the  morning  at  sunrise. 

Extraordinary  pain  in  the  abdomen,  owing  to  which  he  did  not 
know  how  to  rest. 

Sensation  as  if  the  whole  abdomen  were  hollow,  and  at  the  same 
time  a perpetual  movement  in  the  bowels  (with  blue  rings  round  the 
eyes),  and  when  the  attack  comes  on  in  the  evening  it  is  for  a short 
time  combined  with  anxiety  (aft.  24  h.). 

Colic,  more  cutting  than  pinching. 

185.  Colic,  more  cutting  than  shooting,  with  collection  of  saliva  in  the 
mouth. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen. 

Single  attacks  of  violent  pinching  in  the  abdomen  ; each  of  these 
pains  lasts  for  full  a minute  (aft.  12  h.). 

Pinching,  tearing  colic  in  the  umbilical  region  and  further  down 
on  both  sides,  with  a pain  in  the  sacrum  as  if  it  was  broken. 

Constant  tearing  colic,  as  if  rolled  up  in  a ball,  in  the  side  of  the 
abdomen. 

190.  Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  caused  by  costiveness  of  the  motion, 
the  evacuation  of  which  is  delayed.* 

Sufferings  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  constipation  (aft.  4.  h.). 

Constipation. 

Constipation  from  inaction  of  the  rectum,  so  that  the  excrements 
can  only  be  pressed  out  by  the  efforts  of  the  abdominal  muscles  (aft. 

In  the  midst  of  sharp  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  bright 
coloured  faeces  are  passed  (aft.  12,  24  h.). 

195.  (Undigested  excrements.) 

(Hot,  diarrhceic  stool,  smelling  like  rotten  eggs.) 

Diarrhoea.  [Cullen,  Arzneimittell .,  Tom.  ii,  p.  94.] 

Painless,  diarrhoeic,  green,  watery  stools,  composed  of  faeces  and 
mucus. 

Watery  diarrhoea,  with  (and  without)  cutting  in  the  abdomen. 

200.  Nocturnal  diarrhoea,  with  pains  in  the  abdomen,  so  that  he  must 
crouch  together. 

Excrements  covered  with  mucus,  and  with  mucus  in  the  intervals 
between  the  lumps  of  faeces. 

Only  white  slimy  diarrhoea  with  bellyache  (aft.  1,  3 h.). 

Shooting  pain  in  the  rectum  after  every  stool. 

A forcing  towards  the  inguinal  ring,  as  if  that 
part  were  now  too  weak  to  resist,  as  if  a hernia  would 

come  (aft.  3 h.). 

205.  Tendency  to  blind  piles. 

Fluent  piles. 

Blind  piles. 

Itching  pain  in  the  anus  (aft.  J h.). 

(The  discharge  of  urine  is  held  back  by  pairts  in  the  belly.) 

210.  Shooting  pain  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  when  not  urinating. 

* 190,  1 91,  192,  193.  All  the  constipation  symptoms  are  secondary  action,  i.e. 

reaction  of  the  organism  against  the  efforts  of  the  camomile  to  produce  diarrhoea  in  its 

primary  action. 


CHAMOMILLA. 


389 


Burning  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  when  uriffating. 

Smarting  pain  in  the  urethra  while  urinating. 

Anxiety  whilst  urinating,  without  any  mechanical  obstacle. 

Weakened  power  of  the  bladder;  the  urine  passes  in  a sluggish 
stream  (aft.  20  h.). 

215.  Anxiety  with  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate,  though  there  is  not 
much  urine  in  the  bladder. 

Involuntary  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  3,  4 h.). 

Itching  of  the  scrotum  (aft.  6 h.). 

Sexual  desire  (later). 

Nocturnal  seminal  emission. 

220.  In  the  morning  in  bed,  erection  of  the  penis. 

Excoriation  on  the  border  of  the  prepuce. 

On  the  border  of  the  prepuce,  itching  pricking  pain  (aft.  3 h.). 

Sore  burning  in  the  vagina. 

Yellow,  smarting  leueorrhcea. 

225.  Acrid,  smarting,  watery  discharge  from  the  vagina  after  dinner. 

Forcing  towards  the  womb,  like  labour  pains,  with  very  frequent 
urging  to  urinate. 

Cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen  and  drawing  in  the  thighs  before 
the  menses. 

Amid  severe  pains  as  if  going  to  get  a child,  and  like  labour  pains 
in  the  womb,  frequent  discharge  of  clotted  blood,  with  tearing  pains 
in  the  blood-vessels  of  the  legs. 

Drawing  from  the  anterior  part  of  the  sacrum,  grasping  and 
griping  in  the  womb,  and  then  large  pieces  of  blood  are  always 
passed. 

230.  Metrorrhagia. 

Metrorrhagia,  even  in  old  persons. 

(On  the  advent  of  the  menses,  cross,  intolerant,  and  disposed  to 
quarrel  sooner  than  give  in. 

Suppression  of  the  menses,  with  swelling  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
and  a pain  as  if  it  would  be  pressed  down,  with  swollen  abdomen, 
labour-like  pains,  and  anasarca. 

* , *' 

* 

Stoppage  of  the  nose,  as  from  stuffed  coryza  (aft.  1 h.). 

235.  Catarrhal  stoppage  of  the  nose,  with  flow  of  mucus  from  the  nose. 

Coryza  lasting  five  to  eight  days  (aft.  2 h.). 

Whistling,  wheezing,  rattling  in  the  windpipe  when  breathing. 

Hoarseness  from  viscid  mucus  sticking  in  the  larynx, 
which  can  only  he  brought  away  by  violent  hawking 

(aft.  8 h.). 

Catarrhal  hoarseness  in  the  windpipe,  with  dryness 
of  the  eyelids  (aft.  1 to  8 h.). 

240.  Hoarseness  and  cough  on  account  of  rattling  mucus  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  windpipe,  and  where  the  mucus  is  detached  by  coughing 
the  part  is  painful  (aft.  2 h.). 

A burning  in  the  larynx. 

Short,  croaking  respiration. 


390 


CHAMOMILLA. 


Fetches  short  deep  breath,  with  great  elevation  of  the  chest. 

[St/.] 

A burning  pain  under  the  sternum  up  into  the  mouth. 

245.  A burning  in  the  chest  with  stupidity  of  the  head,*-  as  if  he  did 
not  know  where  he  was,  with  anxiety. 

The  chest  internally  is  painful,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  24  h.). 

An  aching  pain  under  the  sternum,  which  does  not  interfere  with 
breathing,  and  is  not  increased  either  by  breathing  or  by  the  touch 
(aft.  12  h.). 

A pressive  pain  under  the  sternum  that  tightens  the  breath  (aft. 
10  h.). 

It  lies  heavy  on  his  stomach,  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  as  if 
it  were  pressed  down.f 

2 co.  Quick  stitches  at  the  heart  when  moving,  which  oppress  the 
breathing.  [S^.] 

A drawing  pain,  or  sensation  as  if  the  right  side  of  the  chest  were 
repeatedly  drawn  inwards  (aft.  12,  16  h.). 

Contraction  of  the  chest. 

Oppression  of  the  chest. 

Tensive  pain  over  the  chest  on  inspiring. 

255.  Across  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  a squeezing  pain  (in  the 
evening)  (aft.  5 h.). 

Oppression  of  the  chest,  as  from  flatulence  which  is  dammed  up 
in  the  epigastrium,  with  pressive  pain  ; at  the  same  time  stomachache, 
as  at  the  commencement  of  heartburn  ; afterwards  a burning  in  the 
spinal  column. 

Constriction  of  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  which  then  also  is 
painful  on  coughing  (aft.  4 h.). 

Suffocative  tightness  of  the  chest  (the  larynx  feels 
constricted)  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  throat,  with 
constant  irritation  to  cough  (aft.  J h.). 

About  midnight  a fit  of  coughing,  whereby  something  seems  to 
rise  up  in  the  throat,  as  if  she  would  suffocate. 

260.  Almost  uninterrupted  tickling  irritation  to  cough 
under  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum,  hut  it  does  not 
always  result  in  coughing. 

Dry  cough  on  account  of  an  itching  irritation  and  constant 
tickle  in  the  part  of  the  trachea  behind  the  pit  of  the  throat  (aft. 
4 h.). 

A severe  dry  cough  in  sleep  (aft.  1 1 h.). 

Dry  cough  four  or  five  times  daily. 

(The  child  gets  angry  and  then  has  cough.) 

265.  Before  midnight,  stitches  radiating  from  the  abdomen  into  the 
chest,  with  constant  thirst,  without  heat. 

(Rather  obtuse)  stitches,  which  dart  from  the  abdomen 

* See  9,  10,  14,  15,  17,  18,  19  to  26,  298. 

f The  word  here  translated  stomach  is  “ Herz,”  respecting  which  Hahnemann  says 
in  a note,  <£  Common  people  mean  by  this  usually  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; see  also 
167,”  where  “ Herz  ” is  also  the  word  used.  This  being  so  the  symptom  ought  pro- 
perly to  be  placed  beside  167. 


CHAMOMILLA. 


39 1 

into  the  middle  of  the  chest,  as  from  flatulence  (aft. 
2,  4 h.). 

After  every  start,  waking  or  sleeping,  stitches  from  the  abdomen 
up  into  the  chest. 

Stitches  in  the  side  of  the  chest,  under  the  ribs  and  scapulae,  on 
breathing  (aft.  4 h.). 

Pricking  in  the  chest  like  needle-pricks. 

270.  At  times  single  severe  stitches  in  the  chest  (aft.  2,  4 h.). 

Stitches  right  through  the  chest  at  every  breath. 

Stitches  from  the  middle  of  the  chest  towards  the  right  side,  after 
every  expiration  (aft.  i'J  h.). 

Scirrhous  hardness  of  the  mammary  glands. 

A hard  lump  under  the  nipple,  painful  when  touched,  and  also 
sometimes  with  drawing  tearing  pains  per  se. 

275.  In  the  region  of  the  clavicle  and  neck  tearing  pain  (aft.  2 h.). 

(Tensive  stiffness  of  the  cervical  muscles.) 

Drawing  pain  in  the  scapulae,  chest  and  hands,  as  from  a chill 
(aft.  15,  16  h.). 

Fine  shooting  pains  in  the  back. 

Tearing  in  the  back. 

280.  Drawing  pain  in  the  back,  for  an  hour  (aft.  1 h.). 

Contractive  sensation  in  the  spine. 

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  back. 

Pain  in  the  sacrum,  especially  at  night. 

Sacrum  as  if  bruised. 

285.  (A  kind  of  irregular  labour  pains)  from  the  sacrum  into  the  thighs, 
a drawing  paralytic  pain  (aft.  1,  1 h.). 

After  sitting  a stiff  pain  in  the  loins  (aft.  16  h.). 

At  night,  intolerable  pain  in  the  loins  and  hip-joint,  when  he  lies 
on  the  opposite  side. 

From  midnight  onwards  an  uninterrupted  fine,  painful  aching  in 
the  articular  ligaments  and  the  periosteum  of  the  arm,  from  the 
shoulder  to  the  fingers,  which  resembles  a drawing  or  tearing  (almost 
as  bad  when  not  moving  as  when  moving) ; late  at  night  it  is  at  its 
worst,  especially  when  lying  on  the  back,  and  it  is  easiest  when 
lying  on  the  painful  arm  (aft.  8 h.). 

A crawling  tearing  in  the  shafts  of  the  arm-bones  to  the  fingers, 
as  if  the  arm  were  numb  or  asleep,  or  had  no  feeling. 

290.  A stiffness  of  the  arm,  as  if  it  would  go  to  sleep,  on 
grasping  anything  with  the  hand. 

The  arms  go  to  sleep  immediately,  when  she  grasps 
anything  strongly ; she  must  immediately  let  it  go. 

The  left  arm  goes  to  sleep  without  having  lain  on  it. 

Drawing  paralytic  pain  in  the  elbows  and  hands. 

Late  in  the  evening  a drawing  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  arm, 
from  the  elbow  to  the  tips  of  the  fingers  (aft.  1 h.). 

295.  Drawing  pain  in  the  wrist-joint. 

Pain  of  the  thumb  and  index  finger,  as  from  a sprain,  or  as  from 
too  great  exertion,  or  as  if  they  were  broken,  felt  when  moving 
them. 


CHAMOMILLA. 


392 

Burning  pain  in  the  hand,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  72  h.). 

The  hands  are  cold  ; she  feels  a paralytic  stiffness  in  them,  and 
cloudiness  of  the  head  ; she  is  sensitive  to  the  open  air  as  if  she  would 
easily  take  cold. 

Coldness  of  the  hands,  with  cold  sweat  on  the  palms,  the  rest  of 
the  body  being  sufficiently  warm  (aft.  2 h.). 

300.  The  fingers  become  cold  and  have  a tendency  to  go  to  sleep, 
when  sitting  (aft.  1 h.). 

In  the  morning  the  fingers  go  to  sleep  (aft.  12  h.). 

Tearing  pain  in  the  thighs  and  legs. 

In  the  hip-joint  pain  as  if  dislocated,  on  treading  after  sitting  (in 
the  evening)  (aft.  5 h.). 

Lame  stiffness  with  weakness  in  the  thigh  like  a paralytic  stroke. 
305.  In  the  thigh  an  indescribable  pain,  on  attempting  to  rise  after 
sitting,  and  when  lying  on  stretching  out  the  leg. 

Transient  bruised  pain  in  the  thighs  (aft.  J h.). 

Creaking  and  cracking  in  the  knee  on  moving  it  (aft.  3 h.). 

Tension  in  the  knee.  [6y.] 

Late  in  the  evening,  drawing  pain  from  the  knee  through  the  leg. 
310.  In  the  knee  a drawing  tearing  pain  down  into  the  ankles. 

Sensation  in  the  legs  as  if  they  would  go  to  sleep. 

He  must  stretch  out  the  legs  from  time  to  time  in  order  to  get  rest. 

At  night  in  bed,  on  stretching  out  and  pressing  the  feet  against 
something  he  gets  cramp  in  the  calves,  which  is  relieved  by  flexing 
the  knees  (aft.  8 h.). 

Cramp  in  the  calves  (aft.  10  h.). 

315.  Especial  tendency  to  cramp  in  the  calves. 

Tensive  cramp-like  pain  in  the  calves  on  moving  the  feet  (aft. 
8 h.). 

Tension  in  the  legs  up  the  calves. 

She  must  draw  the  legs  up  on  account  of  pain  in  the  calves  and 
knees j when  she  stretches  herself  out  they  go  to  sleep.  [St/.] 

Nocturnal  paralytic  powerlessness  of  the  feet ; they  have  no 
strength,  he  cannot  tread,  and  when  he  stands  up  he  sinks  down  to 
the  ground,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  leg  and  stiffness  and  numbness 
of  the  soles  of  the  feet. 

320.  Feet  are  as  if  paralysed.* 

Tearing  pain  in  the  feet ; he  dare  not  cover  them  with  the  bed 
clothes. 

In  the  night  the  soles  of  the  feet  burn,  and  he  puts  his  feet  out 
of  bed. 

In  the  feet  a burning  and  itching  as  if  they  had  been  frost- 
bitten (aft.  3 h.). 

Rapid  swelling  of  one  foot  and  of  the  sole. 

325.  In  the  interior  of  the  heel  an  itching  pain  (aft.  3 h.). 

Itching  on  the  sole  of  the  foot. 

* The  paralytic  sensation  of  camomile  in  any  part  is  never  without  accompanying 
drawing  or  tearing  pain,  and  the  drawing  or  tearing  of  camomile  is  almost  always 
accompanied  by  paralytic  or  numb  sensation  in  the  part.  See  285,  293  (288,  289), 
320>  34-7  (3 57,  364)> 


CHAMOMILLA. 


393 


Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  toes  with  tearing  pain  in  the  limbs. 

Feeling  as  if  the  toes  would  bend  and  go  to  sleep,  while  sitting, 
especially  the  big  toes  (aft.  i h.). 

Great  dread  of  the  wind. 

330.  The  hands  and  feet  easily  become  benumbed  in  the  cold,  as  if 
they  would  be  frost-bitten  (aft.  5 h.). 

Pain  compounded  of  itching  and  pricking,  now  in  one  part  now 
in  another,  in  a small  spot ; after  scratching  the  pain  increases  (aft. 

4 h0- 

A slightly  elevated  cutaneous  eruption  in  the  nape,  which  causes 
a smarting  sensation  that  compels  scratching. 

Pustule-like  pimples  here  and  there  in  the  face,  which  are  not 
painful  and  only  itch  when  touched. 

Red  miliary  eruption  on  the  cheeks  and  forehead,  without  heat. 

335.  Small  red  spots  on  the  skin,  which  are  covered  with  miliary 
papules. 

Thick  eruption  of  red  papules,  which  are  crowded  together  on  a 
red  spot  on  the  skin,  which  itches  and  smarts  somewhat,  particularly 
at  night,  on  the  lumbar  vertebrae  and  the  side  of  the  abdomen  ; 
from  time  to  time,  especially  in  the  evening,  there  occurs  a shudder 
round  about. 

The  skin  becomes  oedematous,  unhealthy,  and  every 
injury  takes  on  a bad  character  and  tends  to  suppurate, 

An  existing  ulcer  becomes  painful  (aft.  f h.). 

In  the  ulcer  there  occurs  twitching  and  shooting  pain. 

340.  Iii  the  ulcer  there  occurs  at  night  a burning  and 
smarting  pain,  with  creeping  in  it  and  painful  over- 
sensitiveness  to  the  touch. 

(Round  the  ulcer  on  the  foot  there  occurs  redness,  swelling,  and 
bruised  pain.) 

There  arise  around  the  ulcer  papules  covered  with  a scab  and 
going  on  to  suppuration  with  itching  (the  border  round  the  base  of 
the  ulcer  is  very  red). 

Cracking  in  the  joints,  especially  of  the  lower  limbs, 

and  pains  in  them,  as  if  bruised,  and  yet  no  proper  feeling  of 
fatigue  (aft.  8 h.). 

Simple  pain  of  all  the  joints  on  moving,  as  if  they  were  stiff  and 
would  break  (aft.  6 h.). 

345..  All  the  joints  are  painful,  as  if  bruised  and  beaten  ; there  is  no 
power  in  the  hands  and  feet,  but  without  proper  feeling  of  fatigue. 

All  his  limbs  are  painful. 

Pain  in  the  periosteum  of  the  limbs  with  paralytic  weakness. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  limbs,  which  can  only  be  allayed  by  perpetu- 
ally turning  about  in  bed. 

Attack  of  tearing  pains  in  the  evening. 

350.  Single,  rare,  drawing  tearing  jerks  in  the  shafts  of  the  bones  of 
the  limbs,  or  in  the  tendons. 

Convulsive,  single  twitches  of  the  limbs  when  on  the  point  of 
falling  asleep. 

Twitching  in  the  limbs  and  eyelids* 


394 


CHAMOMILLA. 


Single  twitchings  of  the  limbs  and  head  in  the  morning  sleep. 

Infantile  convulsions  : alternately  first  one  then  the  other  leg  is 
moved  up  and  down ; the  child  grabs  at  and  tries  to  get  something 
with  its  hands,  and  draws  the  mouth  to  and  fro,  with  staring  eyes. 

355.  The  child  lies  as  if  unconscious,  completely  devoid  of  sense,  its 
face  is  frequently  transformed,  the  eyes  distorted,  the  facial  muscles 
drawn  awry ; it  has  rattling  in  the  chest,  with  much  cough  ; it  yawns 
and  stretches  much. 

General  stiffness  for  a short  time. 

In  the  parts  whence  the  pain  has  departed  sensation  of  paralysis. 

Weariness,  especially  of  the  feet  (aft.  10  h.). 

Weakness;  she  wants  to  be  always  seated  (aft.  5 h.). 

360.  Dreads  all  work. 

Greater  weakness  when  resting  than  when  moving ; he  is  strong 
enough  when  moving. 

The  greatest  weakness  in  the  morning,  which  does  not  allow  him 
to  rise  from  his  bed. 

After  breakfast  he  feels  at  first  very  well,  but  after  a few  minutes 
a faint-like  sinking  of  the  strength  (aft.  8 h.). 

When  the  pain  begins  there  immediately  occurs  weakness,  so  that 
he  feels  like  to  sink  down  ; he  must  lie  down. 

365.  The  child  insists  on  lying  down,  it  will  not  allow  itself  to  be 
carried  (aft.  2 h.). 

The  child  will  not  put  its  foot  to  the  ground  nor  walk ; it  weeps 
piteously  (aft.  4 h.). 

The  greatest  weariness  and  weakness,  which  borders  on  fainting 
(aft.  4 h.J. 

Fainting  fits. 

Sinking  feeling  about  the  heart. 

370.  Fainting  fits  that  return  sooner  or  later  (aft.  ±,  3,  4,  5 h.). 

A kind  of  faint  : he  becomes  sick,  and  has  a sinking  feeling  about 
the  heart ; the  legs  become  suddenly  as  if  paralysed,  and  he  has  pains 
in  all  the  limbs  as  if  they  had  been  beaten. 

Heaviness  of  the  limbs,  yawning  and  drowsiness  all  day. 

Frequent  very  violent  yawning,  without  sleepiness,  with  gay 
activity  (aft.  1 h.). 

Frequent,  interrupted  (ineffectual  attempts  at)  yawning  (aft.  \ h.). 

375.  By  day,  drowsiness  and  laziness. 

Drowsiness  when  eating. 

Uncommon  sleepiness  (aft.  § to  i\  h.). 

When  seated  by  day  he  feels  like  to  go  to  sleep,  but  when  he  lies 
down  he  cannot  sleep,  but  remains  awake. 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  half-open,  downward-directed  eyes,  pupils 
somewhat  dilated,  stupefied  drowsiness.  [St/.'] 

380.  Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  accompanied  by  attacks  of  anxiety;  very 
vivid  visions  and  fantastic  pictures  hover  before  him  (aft.  1 to  4 h.). 

In  the  drowsy  state  of  awaking  he  imagines  one  about  him  to  be 
quite  another  (stouter)  person. 

At  night  it  seems  to  him  as  though  he  heard  the 
voices  of  absent  persons. 


CHAMOMILLA. 


395 

He  chatters  unintelligibly  in  his  sleep,  directing  this  or  that  obstacle 
to  be  removed. 

At  night,  when  awake  and  sitting  up  in  bed,  he  talks  nonsense. 

385.  Sleep  full  of  fantastic  dreams. 

Vivid,  distinct  dreams,  as  if  a story  were  being  acted  before  him 
while  awake. 

In  his  dream  he  carries  on  conversations  with  lively  memory 
and  thoughtfulness. 

Moaning  in  sleep. 

Weeping  and  howling  in  sleep. 

390.  Quarrelsome,  vexatious  dreams. 

His  sleep  seems  to  him  to  be  more  fatiguing  and  tiresome  ; his 
expression  in  sleep  is  gloomy,  cross  and  sad. 

At  night  in  sleep  he  starts  with  affright. 

Starting  up,  crying  out,  tossing  about  and  talking  in 
sleep  (aft.  6 h.). 

He  tosses  about  anxiously  at  night  in  bed,  is  full  of  fantasies. 

395.  He  cannot  stay  in  bed. 

He  has  the  greatest  anxiety  in  bed,  but  not  when  he  is  out  of 
bed  ; at  the  same  time  the  pupils  dilate  and  contract  rapidly. 

The  nocturnal  pains  can  be  allayed  by  warm  compresses. 

(Sitting  up  in  bed  alleviates  the  nocturnal  pains.) 

Snoring  inspiration  in  sleep. 

400.  In  sleep  snoring  inspiration  which  is  shorter  than  the  expira- 
tion, with  mouth  somewhat  opened,  and  hot  clammy  sweat  on  the 
forehead,  (aft.  3 h.). 

Groaning  in  sleep,  with  hot  clammy  frontal  sweat. 

Waking  stupefied  slumber,  or  rather  inability  to  open  the  eyes  ; 
slumber  without  sleep,  rapid  expiration  and  tearing  pain  in  the  fore- 
head, with  inclination  to  vomit,  (aft.  ij  h.). 

Shivering  on  single  parts,  which  are  not  cold,  with  drowsiness 
(aft.  2i  h.). 

He  has  shivering  on  certain  parts,  in  the  face  (aft. 
i h.),  on  the  arms  (aft.  2 h.),  with  or  without  external 
coldness. 

405.  He  is  cold,  and  at  the  same  time  the  rigor  usually  courses  from 
the  back  to  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 and  4 h.). 

When  he  uncovers  himself,  he  shivers. 

Chilliness  (immediately)  ; none  of  his  articles  of  clothing  are 
warm  enough  for  him. 

He  shivers  at  cold  air  (aft.  2 h.). 

In  the  evening  on  lying  down,  coldness,  a kind  of  dulness  of 
hearing,  in  which  the  sound  appears  to  come  from  a distance,  nausea, 
restlessness,  tossing  about  in  bed,  a kind  of  stupefaction  of  the  head 
and  diminished  sensibility  of  the  skin,  so  that  the  skin  when  scratched 
feels  numb. 

410.  Icy  coldness  of  the  cheeks,  hands  and  feet,  with  burning  heat  of 
the  forehead,  neck  and  chest ; then  again  heat  and  redness  on  the 
right  cheek,  during  which  the  hands  and  feet  become  again  properly 


396 


CHAMOMILLA. 


warm,  with  contracted  and  not  dilatable  pupils  ; thereafter  snoring 
sleep  (aft.  i to  3 h.) 

Coldness  of  the  whole  body,  with  burning  heat  of  the  face,  which 
flames  out  at  the  eyes. 

Cold  limbs,  with  burning  heat  of  the  face,  burning  heat  in  the 
eyes,  and  burning  breath  (aft.  5 h.). 

(Violent,  internal  chill,  without  coldness  of  the  external  parts, 
excepting  the  feet  which  are  cold,  with  thirst ; then  great  heat  with 
sweat ; when  he  then  stretches  his  arms  out  of  bed,  chill,  and  when 
he  covers  them  again  with  the  bedclothes,  perspiration ; at  the  same 
time  tearing  in  the  forehead.) 

(After  a meal  chill  all  over,  followed  by  heat  in  the  cheeks.) 

415.  Shivering  over  the  posterior  aspect  of  the  body,  the  arms,  the 
thighs  and  the  back,  which  recurs  in  fits,  without  external  coldness, 
rather  with  internal,  dry  heat,  and  external  heat,  especially  of  the 
forehead  and  face. 

Chill  only  over  the  anterior  aspect  of  the  body  (aft.  J h.). 

(Fever  : during  the  chill  he  is  compelled  to  lie  down,  thirst  during 
the  chill,  no  thirst  during  the  heat  ; sweat  after  the  heat ; during  the 
perspiration  only,  shooting  pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  brain ; the 
following  morning  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth.) 

In  the  afternoon  (about  4 o'clock)  chill  (during  which  he  says 
things  he  did  not  wish  to  say),  with  nausea  in  the  abdomen,  until 
1 1 p.m.  ; in  addition  to  this  throbbing  shooting  pain  in  the  forehead, 
aggravated  by  lying  down. 

(Fever  : rigor  in  the  afternoon,  he  cannot  get  warm,  with  flow 
of  saliva  from  the  mouth,  bruised  pain  in  the  back  and  side,  and 
aching  stupid  pain  in  the  forehead,  then  at  night  extreme  heat  with 
violent  thirst  and  sleeplessness.) 

420.  In  the  evening  chilliness  ; at  night  much  sweat  and  thirst. 

Immediately  after  throwing  off  the  clothes  violent  chill.  [£//'.] 

In  the  evening  burning  in  the  cheeks,  with  transient 
rigor. 

~ Ee|>eated  attacks  of  redness  in  one  cheek,  without 
shivering  or  internal  heat  (aft.  4 and  12  h.). 

Internal  heat  with  shivering. 

425.  External  heat  with  shivering. 

Continual  alternation  of  heat  and  cold  in  various  parts ; the  hands 
are  at  one  time  cold,  at  another  warm -—sometimes  the  forearm, 
sometimes  the  upper  arm  at  one  time  cold  at  another  warm — 
sometimes  the  forehead  cold  while  the  cheeks  are  hot,  &c.  [St/.] 

Before  midnight,  when  he  tries  to  go  to  sleep  lying  on  his  back, 
immediately  heat  attended  by  general  perspiration  (aft.  6 h.). 

At  night  the  lips  were  dry  and  stuck  together,  without  thirst. 

Along  with  febrile  heat  and  redness  of  cheeks,  thirst. 

430.  Glowing  heat  in  the  cheeks  with  thirst. 

Hot  face  with  redness  of  cheeks.  [St/.] 

Along  with  febrile  heat  and  redness  of  cheeks  he  tosses  about 
in  bed  and  talks  nonsense,  with  open  eyes. 


CHAMOMILLA. 


39  7 

Feeling  of  external  heat,  without  actual  external  heat 

(aft.  i and  3 h.). 

Feeling  of  heat,  without  external  heat  and  without  thirst. 

435.  The  lightly  covered  parts  are  burning  hot,  the  uncovered  parts 
almost  cold.  [St/.] 

Excites  a pungent  heat.  [Senac,1  De  recondita febrium  interm . et 
remitt,  natura , p.  188.] 

At  night  terrible  feeling  of  heat,  with  burning  unquenchable 
thirst,  dry  tongue,  stupefaction.  [St/] 

At  night  great  heat  with  sleeplessness  (aft.  24  h.).  [St/] 

General  heat,  in  the  forenoon  from  9 till  12  o’clock  ; then  profuse 
perspiration.  [ St/'.'] 

440.  His  tongue  is  dry,  with  thirst  for  water,  anorexia,  flying  heat, 
perspiration  on  face  and  palpitation  of  the  heart  followed  by  un- 
natural hunger. 

Violent  thirst  for  water.  [St/.] 

Unquenchable  thirst  and  dryness  of  the  tongue  (aft.  5 h.). 

Evening  thirst  and  waking  at  night  with  pain. 

On  account  of  feeling  of  external  heat  he  cannot  bear  the  bed 
clothes. 

445.  (General  morning  sweat  with  smarting  sensation  in  the  skin.) 

Nocturnal  general  perspiration  (from  10  p.m.  till  2 a.m.),  with- 
out sleep. 

Profuse  sweat  of  the  covered  parts.  [St/] 

Perspiration  on  the  face,  neck,  and  hands  (aft.  6 h.). 

Perspiration,  especially  on  the  head  under  the  temples. 

450.  Frequent  transient  perspirations  on  the  face  and  palms. 

Involuntary  groaning  during  the  heat  of  the  face. 

Repeated  attacks  of  anxiety  by  day. 

Anxiety  as  if  he  must  go  to  stool  and  evacuate  his  bowels. 

Trembling  anxiety,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  1 h.). 

455.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  heart  (immediately). 

Extreme  restlessness,  anxious  agonised  tossing  about, 
with  tearing  pains  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.),  followed  by 
obtuseness  of  the  senses  and  then  intolerable  headache. 

Hypochondrial  anxiety. 

He  feels  a sinking  in  the  precordium ; he  is  beside  himself  with 
anxiety,  moans  and  sweats  profusely  therewith. 

Weeping  and  howling. 

460.  (Attacks  lasting  some  minutes,  every  two  or  three  hours)  : the 
child  makes  itself  stiff  and  bends  backwards,  stamps  with  its  feet  on 
the  nurse’s  arm,  cries  in  an  uncontrollable  way,  and  throws  every- 
thing away. 

Lachrymose  restlessness ; the  child  wants  this  thing 
and  the  other,  and  when  given  anything  he  refuses  it  or 
knocks  it  away  from  him  (aft.  4 h.). 


1 When  used  in  agues.  Original  not  accessible,  but  Caldwell’s  translation  (Phila- 
delphia, 1805)  gives  the  quality  of  heat  as  “ pungent,”  by  which  word  Hahne- 
mann’s “beissend  ” may  also  be  rendered. 


39§ 


CHAMOMILLA. 


With  weeping  and  ill-humour,  she  complains  of  sleeplessness  on 
account  of  bruised  pain  in  all  the  limbs,  [£y.] 

The  child  can  only  be  quieted  by  carrying  it  in  the  arms. 

Lamentable  howling  of  the  child  when  refused  what  it  wanted 
(aft.  3 h.). 

465.  Very  anxious;  nothing  she  does  seems  to  her  to  be  right  ; she 
is  irresolute ; at  the  same  time  transient  heat  in  the  face  and  cool 
sweat  on  the  palms  of  the  hands. 

Trembling  apprehensiveness. 

He  has  a tendency  to  start  (aft.  24  h.). 

She  starts  at  the  least  trifle. 

Howling  on  account  of  a slight,  even  an  imaginary 
insult,  which,  indeed,  occurred  long  ago. 

470.  Cannot  cease  talking  about  old  vexatious  things. 

Suspicion  that  he  may  have  been  insulted. 

His  hypochondriacal  whims  and  his  crossness  at  the  smallest 
trifles  appear  to  him  to  proceed  from  stupidity  and  heaviness  of  the 
head  and  constipation. 

Moroseness  after  dinner. 

Moroseness  for  two  hours. 

475.  Sulky  moroseness  ; everything  others  do  is  displeasing  to  him;  no 
one  does  anything  to  please  him. 

He  vexes  himself  inwardly  about  every  trifle. 

He  is  always  morose  and  disposed  to  crossness. 

Crossness  about  everything,  with  tightness  of  the  chest. 

He  cannot  stand  being  talked  to  or  interrupted  in  his  conversa- 
tion, especially  after  rising  up  from  sleep,  with  sluggish  pupils  that 
dilate  and  contract  with  difficulty*  (aft.  10  h.). 

480.  She  cannot  bear  music. 

Excessively  sensitive  to  all  smells. 

Irritated  disposition. 

Sullen,  disposed  to  quarrel  (aft.  12  h.). 

The  disposition  is  inclined  to  anger,  quarrelsomeness  and  dispu- 
tation (aft.  2 h.). 

485.  Quarrelsome  crossness ; she  seeks  for  everything  vexatious  (aft. 

3 h.). 

Groaning  and  moaning  from  low  spirits  (aft.  5 h.). 

He  is  silent  and  does  not  speak  when  he  is  not  obliged  to  answer 
questions  (aft.  6 h.). 

She  sits  stiffly  on  a chair  like  a statue,  and  seems  to  take  no 
notice  of  anything  about  her  (aft.  24  h.). 

Speaks  unwillingly,  in  disjointed  phrases,  curtly.  [67/1] 

490.  (She  has  scruples  of  conscience  about  everything.) 

* (See  77.)  The  sometimes  dangerous  illness  resembling  acute  bilious  fever,  that 
often  comes  on  immediately  after  a violent  vexation  causing  anger,  with  heat  of  face, 
unquenchable  thirst,  taste  of  bile,  nausea,  anxiety,  restlessness,  &c.,  has  such  great 
homoeopathic  analogy  with  the  symptoms  of  camomile,  that  camomile  cannot  fail 
to  remove  the  whole  malady  rapidly  and  specifically,  which  is  done  as  if  by  a miracle 
by  one  drop  of  the  above-mentioned  diluted  juice. 


CHAMOMILL  A. 


399 

Serious  reservedness 3 calm  submission  to  his  profoundly  felt  fate 
(later) . 

Very  reserved  3 one  cannot  get  a word  out  of  her.  [*SV/i] 

Fixed  ideas  (later).1 


1 The  number  of  symptoms,  493,  does  not  correspond  with  the  numeration  in  the 
original,  461  + 3 3=494-  This  is  owing  to  a mistake  in  the  reckoning  of  his  own 
symptoms  by  Hahnemann.  The  symptom  he  has  marked  395  is  actually  394,  and 
the  whole  subsequent  numeration  is  vitiated  by  the  error.  In  place  of  his  tale  of 
symptoms  being  461  it  is  actually  only  460. 


CHELIDONIUM.1 

(i Celandine .) 

(The  expressed  juice  of  the  root  of  Chelidonium  majus,  mixed  with  equal  parts 
of  alcohol.) 

The  ancients  imagined  that  the  yellow  colour  of  the  juice  of  this 
plant  was  an  indication  (signature)  of  its  utility  in  bilious  diseases. 
The  moderns  from  this  extended  its  employment  to  hepatic  diseases, 
and  though  there  were  cases  where  the  utility  of  this  plant  in  maladies 
of  that  region  of  the  abdomen  was  obvious,  yet  the  diseases  of  this 
organ  differ  so  much  among  one  another,  both  in  their  origin  and  in 
the  attendant  derangements  of  the  rest  of  the  organism  ; moreover,  the 
cases  in  which  it  is  said  to  have  done  good  have  been  so  imperfectly 
described  by  physicians,  that  it  is  impossible  from  their  data  to  tell 
beforehand  the  cases  of  disease  in  which  it  must  certainly  be  of  use  ; 
and  yet  this  is  indispensably  necessary  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  of 
mankind  which  are  of  such  serious  importance.  Hence,  a recommenda- 
tion of  this  sort  ( ab  usu  in  morbis ) is  of  but  a general,  undefined,  and 
dubious  character,  especially  since  this  plant  was  so  seldom  given  simply 
and  singly  by  physicians,  but  almost  always  in  combination  with 
heterogeneous,  powerful  substances  (dandelion,  fumitory,  water-cresses), 
and  along  with  the  simultaneous  employment  of  the  so-called  bitters, 
which  vary  so  much  in  their  effects. 

The  importance  of  human  health  does  not  admit  of  any  such  un- 
certain directions  for  the  employment  of  medicines.  It  would  be 
criminal  frivolity  to  rest  contented  with  such  guesswork  at  the  bedside 
of  the  sick.  Only  that  which  the  drugs  themselves  unequivocally 
reveal  of  their  peculiar  powers  in  their  effects  on  the  healthy  human 
body — that  is  to  say,  only  their  pure  symptoms- — can  teach  us  loudly  and 
clearly  when  they  can  be  advantageously  used  with  certainty  ; and  this 
is  when  they  are  administered  in  morbid  states  very  similar  to  those 
they  are  able  to  produce  on  the  healthy  body. 

From  the  following  symptoms  of  celandine,  which  it  is  to  be  hoped 
will  be  completed  by  other  upright,  accurate  observers,  a much  more 
extensive  prospect  of  the  real  curative  powers  of  this  plant  is  opened 
up  than  has  hitherto  been  dreamt  of.  It  is,  however,  only  the  phy- 
sician who  is  conversant  with  the  homoeopathic  doctrine  who  will  be 
able  to  make  this  advantageous  employment  of  it.  The  routine 
practitioner  may  content  himself  with  the  uncertain  indications  for 
the  employment  of  celandine  to  be  found  in  his  benighted  materia 
medica. 


From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


CHELIDONIUM. 


40- 


[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Becher,  Gross,  Hartmann,. 
Hermann,  Langhammer,  Meyer,  Teuthorn,  and  Walther. 

The  old-school  authorities  quoted  are  : 

Horn's  Archiv,  Bd.  xi. 

Wendt,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xvi. 

The  ist  Edit,  gives  151  symptoms,  this  2nd  Edit,  only  5 more.] 


CHELIDONIUM, 


(His  senses  left  him.) 

Cloudiness  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gto.] 

Contractive  headache. 

Dull  headache,  with  beating  synchronous  with  the  pulse  on  the 
right  temple,  as  if  the  vessels  were  too  full  of  blood  (aft.  2 h.). 
[Trn.] 

5.  Headache,  aching  pressing  from  within  outwards,  especially 
towards  the  forehead,  which  is  very  much  aggravated  by  open  air, 
coughing,  blowing  the  nose  and  stooping  but  is  absent  while  eating, 
lasting  all  day.  \Htni\  4 . ; 

A forcing  in  the  cerebrum,  as  if  it  had  not  room  in  the  skull,  and 
would  be  forced  through  the  ear,  wherein  is  heard  a noise  like  a 
distant  water  weir.  \JVth. ] 

Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  left  temple  as  if  the  blood  stagnated 
there  all  at  once,  followed  by  an  obtuse  shooting  pain  in  the  same 
place  (aft.,  J h.).  [JVth.~\ 

Aching  pain  in  the  right  temporal  region,  during  which  the 
right  nostril  was  stopped  up  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Afyr.~\ 

Pressive  tearing  headache  betwixt  the  eyebrows,  which  tended  to 
press  the  eyelids  to,  went  off  after  eating  and  returned  three  quarters 
of  an  hour  later  (aft.  ^ h.).  \_Bch.~\ 

10.  Tearing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  with  long  severe 
stitches  towards  the  front  (aft.  15^  h.).  \Htn.~\ 

Violent  tearing  stitches  in  the  left  frontal  eminence  (aft.  3J  h.). 
[Htn.] 

Obtuse  shooting  extending  across  the  whole  forehead.  [Zr.] 
Sensation  of  transient  drawing  under  the  frontal  bone  (aft.  | h.). 

[<?«•] 

Formications  in  the  frontal  eminences  in  intermittent,  short 
intervals.  [G^.] 

1 5.  Shooting,  aching  headache  in  the  vertex,  by  fits,  especially  on 
walking  rapidly. 

Slow,  drawing,  pressive-like  stitch  from  the  left  side  of  the 
occiput  towards  the  forehead  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Htn.~\ 

Pinching  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  (aft.  h.). 
\_Htn.~\ 

Pinching  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  as  if  externally, 
but  neither  increased  nor  diminished  by  pressing  on  it  (aft.  7 h.). 
\_Htn.~\ 

(In  the  eyeballs  a tickling  itching.) 


2 6 


402 


CHELIDONIUM. 


20.  Stupefying  pressure  on  the  right  orbit  as  if  from  without  inwards. 
[Gss.] 

Contraction  of  the  pupils  (immediately).  [Bch.] 

Contraction  of  the  pupils  immediately  after  taking  the  medicine, 
but  after  an  hour  they  dilated  to  their  ordinary  size.  [Trn.] 

Pressive  pain  over  the  left  eye  that  seemed  to  press 
down  the  upper  lid  (aft.  f h.).  [Htn.] 

Pressure  on  the  right  upper  eyelid,  [Hrr.] 

25.  A pimple  on  the  left  upper  tarsal  cartilage  containing  pus,  with 
aching  pain  in  it  on  touching  it  and  on  shutting  the  eyes.  [Hrr.] 

A dazzling  spot  appeared  before  the  eye,  and  when  he  looked 
into  it  the  eye  watered. 

Tension  and  drawing  in  the  left  zygoma,  only  when  lying  (aft. 

9h.).  [G«.] 

Pale  face.  [Trn.] 

Pain  as  from  a contusion  in  the  left  ear  lobe,  and  immediately 
afterwards  burning  in  the  right  lobe  as  from  a live  coal  (aft.  13  h.). 
[Myr.] 

30.  A long-lasting  stitch  in  the  right  external  ear  that 
gradually  disappears  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.] 

When  walking,  ringing  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  9 h.).  [Lr.] 

Ringing  before  the  ears,  like  whistling  (aft.  \ h.).  [Myr.] 
Roaring  before  the  ears,  like  a strong  wind  (aft.  1^  h.).  [Myr.] 

Intolerable  sensation  in  both  ears,  as  if  wind  rushed 
out  of  them,  so  that  he  must  often  introduce  the  finger 
in  order  to  remove  this  sensation  (aft.  i,  3,  4 h.).  [Wth.] 
35.  In  both  ears  a noise  like  distant  thundering  of  cannon. 
[Wth.] 

Intermitting  tearing  pressure  in  the  right  internal  meatus  audi- 
torius  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  right  internal  meatus  auditorius  (aft.  f h.). 
[Hrr.] 

Tearing  in  the  inner  ear;  by  boring  in  the  finger  in  order  to 
relieve  it,  ringing  came  on  in  addition.  [Myr.] 

Toothache  in  the  left  upper  jaw.  [Lr.] 

40.  In  the  tip  of  the  nose  a trembling  and  quivering. 

A digging  tearing  in  the  antrum  Highmorianum  (aft.  3 h.). 

The  teeth  of  the  left  lower  jaw  have  a dull  pain  when  touched, 
and  are  loose  (alt.  3 to  21  h.).  [Bch.] 

Great  tension  on  and  in  the  throat,  above  the  larynx, 
as  if  it  were  constricted,  whereby,  however,  only  the 
gullet  was  narrowed  (aft.  J h.).  [Gss.] 

Sensation  as  if  the  larynx  were  pressed  upon  the 
oesophagus  from  without,  whereby  not  the  breathing 
but  the  swallowing  was  rendered  difficult  (aft.  5 m.). 
[Gss.] 

45.  A choking  in  the  throat,  as  if  too  large  a morsel  had 
been  too  hastily  swallowed.  [Gss.] 

Tongue  covered  with  a white  fur.  [JVth.] 

Slimy  tongue.  [Gw.] 


CHELIDONIUM.  403 

Disgusting  flat  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  after  drinking  elder- 
flower  tea,  but  the  food  tastes  quite  right.  [Gw.] 

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  whilst  food  and  drink  tasted  all  right 
(aft.  2 h.).  [Myr.] 

50.  Diminution  of  the  appetite.  \_Bch. ] 

Diminution  of  the  thirst. 

Much  thirst  for  milk,  followed  by  comfortable  feeling  through 
the  whole  body ; though  he  took  a good  deal  of  it,  he  did  not  suffer 
any  inconvenience,  whereas  formerly  a great  deal  of  flatulence  was 
produced  (aft.  36 \ h.).  [ Bch .] 

F requent  eructation  of  air.  [ Trn.] 

Empty  eructation.  [Gw.] 

55.  Inclination  to  vomit.  [ Horn  s Archiv , vol.  xi,1  ii.] 

Nausea  with  inclination  to  vomit  (from  external  use). 

Great  nausea  with  increased  temperature  of  the  body  (aft.  J h.). 
[Wth.] 

Hiccup  (aft.  ij  h.  and  oftener).  [Lr. ] 

Pinching  aching  pain  in  and  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  in- 
creased by  touch  (aft.  3 h.).  [Bch.] 

60.  Cramp-like  throbbing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  caused 
anxious  breathing  (aft.  5 h.).  [Htn. ] 

Burning  on  the  left  side  under  the  ribs  on  a level  with  the 
scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gw.] 

Pain  in  the  stomach.  [Horn's  Archiv , 1.  c.] 

A tension  over  the  epigastric  region. 

Constant  gurgling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Gw.] 

65.  Pain  in  the  abdomen. 

Pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Horn's  Archiv , 1.  c.] 

Painful  pressure  just  above  the  navel.  [Gw.] 

Dull  pinching  in  the  umbilical  region,  followed  by  discharge  of 
flatus  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Htn .] 

Spasmodic  retraction  of  the  navel  accompanied  by  transient 
nausea  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Bch.] 

70.  Burning  pain  in  the  abdomen,  just  under  the  short  ribs  of  the 
left  side  (aft.  14  h.).  [Gw.] 

Continued  cutting  in  the  bowels,  immediately  after 
eating,  the  food,  however,  was  relished.  [Gw.] 

Pinching  pain  in  the  left  inguinal  region  (aft.  9 h.).  [ Htn. ] 
Flatus  is  passed  in  large  quantities. 

Constipation : the  stool  is  passed  in  small,  hard  lumps,  like 
sheep’s  dung  (for  two  successive  days).  [Trn.'] 

75.  Diarrhoea.  [Horn's  Archiv , 1.  c.] 

Every  night  three  diarrhoeic  stools. 

Mucous  diarrhoea. 

Urging  to  urinate,  all  day  long,  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine 
(aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.] 

He  must  urinate  during  the  day  ten  to  twelve  times,  and  at 
night  two  or  three  times,  and  each  time  copiously  (aft.  24  h.). 


1 Not  accessible. 


404 


CHELIDONIUM. 


80.  Just  before  passing  urine,  a burning.  [Myr.] 

Reddish  urine  (from  the  external  application). 

Burning  in  the  urethra,  immediately  before  the  urine  comes 
away. 

A shooting  and  cutting  in  the  urethra  when  urinating,  and 
during  bodily  exercise. 

Urethral  blenorrhoea.1  [Wendt,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xvi,  iii.] 

* * 


85.  Stuffed  coryza  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

Pain  in  the  chest.  \Horn’s  Arclniv .,  1.  c.] 

Tightness  of  the  chest. 

Oppression  of  the  chest  and  respiration.  [Gw.] 

Oppression  of  the  thoracic  cavity  during  expiration.  [Gw.] 

90.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  left  axilla  and  further  forwards  towards 
the  nipple  (aft.  30  h.).  [i/rr.] 

Sharp  shooting  near  the  vertebrae  in  the  middle  of  the  back. 

[<?"•] 

Obtuse  stitches,  in  rapid  succession,  in  the  left  lumbar  region, 
more  towards  the  back  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gw.] 

Tearing  pressure  on  the  lowest  lumbar  vertebrae, 
extending  forwards  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  os  ilii ; 
it  feels  as  if  the  vertebrae  were  broken  away  from  one 
another,  only  when  bending  forwards  and  on  again 
bending  backwards,  for  several  days,  felt  also  when  walking 
(aft.  86  h.).  [Hrr.~\ 

Pinching  spasmodic  pain  on  the  inner  border  of  the  right  scapula, 
that  prevented  him  moving  the  arm  (aft.  1 h.).  \Htn.\ 

95.  (When  sitting)  shooting  in  the  left  axilla  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

Tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  arm  (aft.  28  h.). 
\_Hrr .] 

Paralytic  pressure  on  the  left  upper  arm  (aft.  2 d.).  \_Hrr.~\ 

A kind  of  paralysis  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm,  on  moving 
it.  [Gw.] 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left  elbow-joint,  which  a bent  position  of 
the  arm  made  still  more  painful  (aft.  4^  h.  \Htn^\ 

100.  A drawing  in  the  left  forearm  and  thence  into  the  palm  of  the 
hand,  in  which  there  was  a quivering  movement. 

Relaxation  of  the  muscles  of  the  right  forearm,  so  that  they  can 
only  be  brought  into  movement  with  difficulty,  and  every  movement 
and  grasping  anything  caused  pain  (aft.  26  h.).  [Htn. ] 

The  left  wrist-joint  was  as  if  stiff  in  the  evening. 

In  the  right  wrist-joint  an  impediment  to  movement  and  stiff- 
ness, only  perceptible  on  moving. 

Squeezing  tearing  pain  in  the  back  of  the  right  hand  (aft.  ijh.). 


[Htn.] 

105.  Tearing  shooting  pain 


in 


the  right  metacarpal  bones,  which  is 


much  increased  by  pressing  on  them  (aft.  26  h.).  [ Htn.'] 


1 This  is  the  return  of  a suppressed  gonorrhoea,  occurring  while  Chelidonium  was 
being  taken  for  the  swollen  testicle  which  had  resulted. 


CHELIDONIUM. 


405 


Fine  tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bone  and  carpal  bone  of  the 
right  thumb  (aft.  7 h.).  \_Hrr. ] 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  and  the  proximal  joints 
of  the  thumb  and  index  finger  of  the  left  hand.  [Hrr.] 

The  distal  phalanx  of  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand 
became  yellow,  cold,  and  as  if  dead,  the  nails  blue  (aft.  1 
h.).  [Myr.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand. 
[Hrr.] 

no.  Frequently  recurring  tearing  in  the  distal  phalanx  of  the  little 
finger  of  the  right  hand,  independent  of  moving  or  touching  (aft.  3^ 
h.)  [Htn.] 

Burning  itching  in  the  left-hip-joint  on  its  anterior  aspect  (aft. 
10  m.j.  [Gw.] 

A pain  above  the  left  hip,  as  if  something  were  swollen  and 
bulged  out  there. 

From  the  hip-bone  to  the  toes  of  the  right  foot,  a paralytic  draw- 
ing pain,  which  remained  the  same  when  walking,  sitting,  and  lying, 
and  suddenly  disappeared  (aft.  39J  h.).  [Bch.] 

Some  red  papules  with  white  apices  on  both  thighs,  with  smarting 
eroding  itching. 

1 15.  Gone-to-sleep  feeling  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh,  with 
fine  stitches  and  sore  pain  (from  external  application). 

A kind  of  paralysis  and  loss  of  power  in  the  left  thigh 
and  knee  when  treading.  [Gw.] 

The  knees  bend  under  him  when  standing  and  walking  (aft.  12 
h.).  [Htn.] 

Hard  pressure  two  fingers’  breadth  under  the  right 
patella.  [Hrr.] 

Hard  pressure,  two  fingers’  breadth  under  the  left 
patella,  more  towards  the  inner  side.  [Hrr.] 

120.  Shooting  in  the  right  hough  (when  sitting)  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Lr .] 

Down-drawing  pain  in  the  left  calf.  [Lr.] 

Some  burning  painful  spots,  with  stitches  in  their  centre,  above 
the  tendo  Achillis  ; the  pain  is  increased  by  scratching.  [Trn. ] 

Some  stiffness  in  the  ankle-joint,  as  if  sprained. 

Aching  pain  in  the  right  ankle-joint,  when  sitting  (aft.  ij  h.). 
[Myr.] 

125.  Clucking  pain  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  9 h.). 
[Myr.] 

Cramp  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  which  together  with  the  toes 
was  bent  downwards  ; the  toes  were  as  if  dead  and  insensible  ; the 
cramp  was  relieved  by  compressing  the  calf  with  the  hand,  but  was 
aggravated  by  attempting  to  tread  (aft.  12  h.).  [Bch.] 

Single  transient  needle-pricks  alternately  on  various  parts,  some- 
times on  one  hand  or  one  arm,  sometimes  on  one  foot,  on  the  knee, 
on  the  abdomen,  See.  [Gw.] 

(Apoplectic  insensibility  and  numb  sensation  of  the  whole  body, 
with  trembling,  but  with  unaltered  pulse.) 

Fatigue  and  laziness  of  the  limbs  ; it  is  impossible  for  him 


406 


CHELIDONIUM. 


to  move  a limb  quickly,  he  is  disinclined  to  move  and  avoids 
doing  so  ; at  the  same  time,  yawning  and  drowsiness  (aft.  15  h.). 
[Htn.] 

130.  After  a meal  very  great  laziness  and  disinclination  for  work,  with 
drowsiness.  [Htn.] 

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  such  great  weariness,  that  he  can 
with  difficulty  make  up  his  mind  to  get  up.  [WthT] 

Great  laziness  and  drowsiness  without  yawning  (aft. 
6 h.).  [Gss.] 

Great  discomfort : he  feels  not  at  all  well,  without 
knowing  what  is  actually  the  matter  with  him ; he  must 
lie  down  but  could  not  sleep,  and  everything  was  intolerable  to  him. 
[Gss.] 

Desire  to  lie  down,  without  being  sleepy  or  able  to  sleep. 

[<?«.] 

135.  After  a meal,  desire  to  lie  down,  without  actually  being  able  to 
sleep  ; he  started  up  several  times  in  this  slumber,  and  when  he 
got  up,  the  headache  was  worse.  [ Htn .] 

Sleep  with  dreams  about  the  occupations  of  the  day.  [Lr.] 
Restless  sleep  full  of  dreams.  [ Myr .] 

Restless  sleep,  without  particular  dreams.  [ Bch .] 

Very  restless  sleep  with  quick  waking  and  with  profuse  sweat, 
which  occurred  during  sleep  and  continued  till  the  morning,  even 
when  awake.  [ Htn .] 

140.  Morning  sweat.  \_Myr.] 

Sweat  during  the  morning  sleep.  [TVth.] 

Diminished  temperature. 

While  lying  in  bed  in  the  evening,  he  is  seized  with  a violent 
rigor,  that  lasted  about  an  hour,  with  external  warmth  all  over  the 
body,  and  yet  with  goose-skin,  followed  by  sweat  which  lasted  all 
night  (aft.  38  h.).  [Htn.] 

Every  time  he  goes  out  into  the  open  air  rigor,  without  coldness 
(in  summer),  which  did  not  leave  off  until  he  again  came  into  the 
room  (for  2d.).  [Htn.] 

145.  Sometimes  he  had  a feeling  of  warmth  all  over  the  body  at  once, 
sometimes  a feeling  of  coldness ; he  had  often  an  alternation  of  this 
sort  in  single  limbs  (aft.  18  h.).  [Bch.] 

Shivering  through  the  whole  body,  with  unaltered  temperature 
thereof,  without  thirst  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.] 

Shivering  all  over  the  body,  with  unaltered  temperature  thereof. 

[G«.] 

Strong,  not  rapid  pulse  (when  sitting)  (aft.  f h.).  [Lr.] 

Cold  hands  (aft.  2|  h.).  [Lr.] 

150.  Rigor  (with  cold  hands)  over  the  whole  body.  [Myr.] 

Rigor  with  nausea,  without  eructation  (aft.  J h.).  [Myr.] 
Shivering  in  the  hands,  which  are  warmer  than  usual  ^aft.  J h.). 

[<?«•] 

The  right  leg,  up  to  the  knee,  is  icy  cold,  with  feeling  of  cold- 
ness in  it,  whilst  the  other  leg  and  all  the  rest  of  the  body  are 


CHELIDONIUM. 


407 

normally  warm  and  the  bloodvessels  of  the  hand  and  arms  are 
swollen  (aft.  3J  h.).  [ Htn.'\ 

Extraordinarily  depressed,  full  of  gloomy  thoughts  about  the 
present  and  future,  causing  him  to  weep ; he  could  get  no  rest  in 
any  place.  [Myr.'] 

155.  Sad  to  weeping,  and  depressed  about  the  present  and  future. 
\_Wth.-\ 

Cheerful  disposition.*  [Zr.] 

* Curative  secondary  action. 


CHINA.1 

( Cinchona  Bark.) 

(The  alcoholic  tincture  of  the  thin  tubular  as  well  as  the  royal  bark , Cinchona 
officinalis.) 

Excepting  opium  I know  no  medicine  that  has  been  more  and 
oftener  misused  in  diseases,  and  employed  to  the  injury  of  mankind, 
than  cinchona  bark.  It  was  regarded  not  only  as  perfectly  innocuous, 
but  as  a wholesome  and  universally  beneficial  medicine  in  almost  all 
morbid  states,  particularly  where  debility  was  observed,  and  was  often 
prescribed  in  large  doses  several  times  a day  for  many  weeks,  and  even 
months,  together. 

In  so  acting  the  ordinary  physicians  were  guided  by  an  utterly  false 
principle,  and  they  confirmed  the  reproach  I have  already  frequently 
made  against  them  to  the  more  sensible  portion  of  the  public,  that  they 
have  hitherto  sought  in  traditional  opinions,  in  guesses  prompted  by 
false  lights,  in  theoretical  maxims  and  chance  ideas  what  they  could 
and  should  find  only  by  impartial  observation,  clear  experience,  and 
pure  experiment,  in  a pure  science  of  experience  such  as  medicine  from 
its  very  nature  must  only  be. 

Setting  aside  all  guesswork  and  all  traditional  unproved  opinions,  I 
adopted  the  latter  method,  and  I found,  as  with  the  other  medicines,  so 
especially  with  cinchona  bark,  by  testing  its  dynamical  powers  on  the 
healthy  human  being,  that  as  certainly  as  it  is  extremely  curative  in  some 
cases  of  disease,  so  surely  can  it  also  develop  the  most  morbid  symptoms 
of  a special  kind  in  the  healthy  human  body ; symptoms  often  of  great 
intensity  and  long  duration,  as  shown  by  the  following  true  observations 
and  experiments. 

Thereby,  first  of  all,  the  prevailing  delusion  as  to  the  harmlessness, 
the  child-like  mildness  and  the  all-wholesome  character  of  cinchona 
bark  is  refuted.* 

* As  long  ago  as  the  year  1790  (see  W.  Cullen’s  Materia  Medica , Leipzig,  bei 
Schwickert,  ii,  p.  109,  note)  I made  the  first  pure  trial  with  cinchona  bark  upon  my- 
self, in  reference  to  its  power  of  exciting  intermittent  fever.  With  this  first  trial  broke 
upon  me  the  dawn  that  has  since  brightened  into  the  most  brilliant  day  of  the  medical 
art ; that  it  is  only  in  virtue  of  their  power  to  make  the  healthy  human  being  ill 
that  medicines  can  cure  morbid  states,  and,  indeed,  only  such  morbid  states  as  are 
composed  of  symptoms  which  the  drug  to  be  selected  for  them  can  itself  produce  in 
similarity  on  the  healthy.  This  is  a truth  so  incontrovertible,  so  absolutely  without 
exception,  that  all  the  venom  poured  out  on  it  by  the  members  of  the  medical 
guild,  blinded  by  their  thousand-years  old  prejudices,  is  powerless  to  extinguish  it ; as 
powerless  as  were  the  vituperations  launched  against  Harvey’s  immortal  discovery 
of  the  greater  circulation  in  the  human  body  by  Riolan  and  his  crew  to  destroy  the 


1 From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


CHINA. 


409 


But  equally  evident  is  it,  from  the  symptoms  of  disease  produced  by 
cinchona  bark  in  healthy  observers  recorded  below,  that  the  numerous 
unhappy  results  of  the  treatment  by  this  bark  occurring  in  the  practice  of 
ordinary  physicians,  and  the  frequently  incurable  aggravations  of  disease 
developed  where  bark  in  long-continued  and  large  doses  was  the  main 
remedy  in  their  prescriptions  were  owing  solely  to  the  noxious  character 
of  this  drug  when  employed  in  unsuitable  cases , and  in  too  frequent  and 
too  large  doses.  This  noxious  character  is  demonstrated  by  the  medi- 
cinal symptoms  recorded  below,  which  physicians  till  now  were  not 
aware  of,  and  which  they  made  no  effort  to  ascertain.  On  the  contrary, 
they  innocently  ascribed  these  aggravations  to  the  natural  course  of  the 
disease  itself. 

But  I refrain  from  blaming  these  physicians,  whose  judgment  is 
biassed  by  the  prejudices  of  their  schools,  on  this  account,  (their  con- 
science will  doubtless  reproach  them  for  it)  I will  content  myself  with 
expressing  my  own  convictions  in  a few  remarks. 

1.  Cinchona  bark  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  vegetable  medicines. 
When  it  is  accurately  indicated  as  a remedy,  and  when  the  patient  is 
seriously  and  intensely  affected  by  a disease  that  china  is  capable  of 
removing,  I find  that  one  drop  of  a diluted  tincture  of  cinchona  bark, 
which  contains  a quadrillionth  (r /1000000,000000,000000,000000th) 
of  a grain  of  china-power,  is  a strong  (often  a too  strong)  dose,*  which 
can  accomplish  and  cure  all  alone  all  that  china  is  capable  of  doing  in 
the  case  before  us  ; generally  without  it  being  necessary  to  repeat  this 
dose  in  order  to  effect  a cure  ; a second  dose  being  rarely,  very  rarely, 
required.  In  the  case  neither  of  this  nor  of  any  other  medicine  did  a 
preconceived  opinion  or  an  eccentric  fancy  lead  me  to  this  minuteness  of 
dose.  No,  multiplied  experience  and  faithful  observation  led  me  to 
reduce  the  dose  to  such  an  extent.  Led  by  experience  and  observations 
I clearly  saw  that  larger  doses,  even  where  they  did  good,  acted  much 
more  powerfully  than  was  needed  for  the  cure.  Hence  the  smaller 
doses  ; and,  as  I repeatedly  observed  from  thes£  the  same  effects  though 
in  a less  degree,  I gave  still  smaller,  and  the  very  smallest  doses.  These 
proved  sufficient  to  effect  a complete  cure,  and  they  did  not  display  the 
violence  of  larger  doses,  which  tends  to  delay  the  cure. 

truth  revealed  byyHARVEY.  These  opponents  of  an  inextinguishable  truth  fought 
with  the  same  despicable  weapons  as  do  to-day  the  adversaries  of  the  homoeopathic 
medical  doctrine.  Like  their  modern  congeners  they  also  refrained  from  repeating  his 
experiments  in  a true , careful  manner  (for  fear  lest  they  might  be  confuted  by  facts), 
and  confined  themselves  to  abuse,  appealing  to  the  great  antiquity  of  their  error  (for 
Galen’s  predecessors  and  Galen  himself  had  arbitrarily  decided  that  the  arteries 
contained  only  spiritual  air,  irvtviia,  and  that  the  source  of  the  blood  was  not  in  the 
heart  but  in  the  liver),  and  they  cried  out : Malo  cum  Galeno  err  are,  quam  cum 
Harveyo  esse  circulator ! This  blindness,  this  obstinate  appeal  to  the  extreme 
antiquity  of  their  delusion  (it  was  only  after  thirty  years  and  more  that  Harvey  had 
the  satisfaction  of  seeing  his  true  doctrine  universally  adopted),  was  in  those  days  not 
more  stupid  than  the  blindness  of  to-day,  and  the  present  aimleSs  rancour  against 
homoeopathy  which  exposes  the  pernicious  rubbish  talked  about  ancient  and  modern 
arbitrary  maxims  and  unjustifiable  practices,  and  teaches  that  it  is  only  by  the  responses 
given  by  nature  when  questioned  that  we  can  with  sure  prescience  change  diseases 
into  health  rapidly,  gently,  and  permanently. 

* Compare  this  with  the  large  doses  of  this  drug  given  in  ordinary  practice  ! 


410 


CHINA. 


2.  A very  small  dose  of  china  acts  for  but  a short  time,  hardly  a 
couple  of  days,  but  a large  dose,  such  as  is  employed  in  the  practice 
of  every  day,  often  acts  for  several  weeks  if  it  be  not  got  rid  of  by 
vomiting  or  diarrhoea,  and  thus  ejected  from  the  organism.  From  this 
we  may  judge  how  excellent  the  ordinary  practice  is  of  giving  every 
day  several  and  moreover  large  doses  of  bark  ! 

3.  If  the  homoeopathic  law  be  right — as  it  incontestably  is  right 
without  any  exception,  and  is  derived  from  a pure  observation  of  nature 
-—that  medicines  can  easily,  rapidly,  and  permanently  cure  cases  of 
disease  only  when  the  latter  are  made  up  of  symptoms  similar  to  the 
medicinal  symptoms  observed  from  the  administration  of  the  former 
to  healthy  persons  ; then  we  find,  on  a consideration  of  the  symp- 
toms of  china,  that  this  medicine  is  adapted  for  but  few  diseases,  but 
that  where  it  is  accurately  indicated,  owing  to  the  immense  power  of 
its  action,  one  single  very  small  dose  will  often  effect  a marvellous 
cure. 

I say  cure , and  by  this  I mean  a cc  recovery  undisturbed  by  after 
sufferings.”  Or  have  practitioners  of  the  ordinary  stamp  another,  to 
me  unknown,  idea  of  what  constitutes  a cure?  Will  they,  for  instance, 
call  cures  the  suppression  by  this  drug  of  agues  for  which  bark  is  un- 
suited ? I know  full  well  that  almost  all  periodic  diseases,  and  almost 
all  agues,  even  such  as  are  not  suited  for  china,  must  be  suppressed  and 
lose  their  periodic  character  by  this  powerful  drug,  administered  as  it 
usually  is  in  enormous  and  oft-repeated  doses ; but  are  the  poor 
sufferers  thereby  really  cured  ? Has  not  their  previous  disease  only 
undergone  a transformation  into  another  and  worse  disease,  though  it 
may  no  longer  manifest  itself  in  intermittent  attacks  recurring  periodi- 
cally ; but  has  become  a continued  and,  we  may  say,  a more  insidious 
disease  by  this  very  powerful  and,  in  this  case,  unsuitable  medicine  ? 
True,  they  can  no  longer  complain  that  the  paroxysm  of  their  original 
disease  reappears  on  certain  days  and  at  certain  hours  ; but  note  the 
earthy  complexion  of  their  puffy  faces,  the  dulness  of  their  eyes  ! See 
how  oppressed  is  their  breathing,  how  hard  and  distended  is  their 
epigastrium,  how  tensely  swollen  their  loins,  how  miserable  their 
appetite,  how  perverted  their  taste,  how  oppressed  and  painful  their 
stomachs  by  all  food,  how  undigested  and  abnormal  their  faecal  evacua- 
tions, how  anxious,  dreamful,  and  unrefreshing  their  sleep  ! Look  how 
weary,  how  joyless,  how  dejected,  how  irritably  sensitive  or  stupid  they 
are  as  they  drag  themselves  about,  tormented  by  a much  greater 
number  of  ailments  than  afflicted  them  in  their  ague  ! And  how  long 
does  not  such  a china-cachexy  often  last,  in  comparison  with  which 
death  itself  were  often  preferable  ! 

Is  this  health  ? It  is  not  ague,  that  I readily  admit  ; but  confess — 
and  no  one  can  deny  it — it  is  certainly  not  health.  It  is  rather  another, 
but  a worse,  disease  than  ague.  It  is  the  china-disease,  which  must 
be  more  severe  than  the  ague  otherwise  it  could  not  overcome  and 
suppress  (suspend)  the  latter. 

Should  the  organism,  as  it  sometimes  will,  recover  from  this  china- 
disease  after  many  weeks,  then  the  ague,  which  has  till  now  remained 
suspended  by  the  superior  force  of  the  dissimilar  china-disease,  returns 


CHINA. 


41  r 

in  an  aggravated  form,  because  the  organism  has  been  so  much  dete- 
riorated by  the  improper  treatment. 

If  the  attack  be  now  renewed  in  a still  more  energetic  manner  with 
cinchona  bark,  and  continued  for  a longer  time  in  order,  as  it  is  said,  to 
ward  off  the  fits,  there  then  occurs  a chronic  china-cachexy,  a faint 
picture  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  symptoms  recorded  below. 

Such  are  most  of  the  bark  treatments  of  our  physicians,  because 
they  know  not  what  are  the  cases  for  which  bark  is  suited.  They  are 
suppressions  of  the  original  affection  by  the  production  of  a stronger 
china-disease,  which  is  mistaken  for  a manifestation  of  the  obstinacy  of 
the  original  disease,  the  development  of  new  symptoms  being  attributed 
to  its  peculiar  malignity  ; because  it  is  not  known  that  these  ailments 
are  due  to  china,  because  it  is  not  recognised  what  they  are,  namely, 
artificially  induced  china-disease. 

The  following  symptoms  caused  solely  by  bark  acting  on  the  healthy 
body,  will  open  the  eyes  of  physicians  on  this  subject,  those  of  them  at 
least  who  have  not  yet  acquired  the  faculty  of  silencing  their  con- 
sciences, and  in  whose  bosoms  a warm  heart  for  the  welfare  of  their 
fellow  creatures  still  beats. 

Most  intolerable  and  unjustifiable,  however,  is  the  monstrous  abuse 
made  by  the  dominant  school  of  medicine,  which  plumes  itself  on  being 
the  only  rational  school,  of  this  powerful  drug  in  all  kinds  of  debility. 

There  is  no  disease  which  is  attended  by  weakness  (as  almost  every 
one  is  naturally),  or  which  physicians  by  their  unsuitable  allopathic  medi- 
cinal mixtures  have  reduced  to  exhaustion  of  the  vital  powers — where 
they  did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  give  this  bark  in  large  doses  in  order 
to  strengthen  as  they  call  it ; no  patient  prostrated,  ruined  and  enfeebled 
by  improper  drugs  to  a condition  of  complicated  cachexy  whom  they 
have  not  endeavoured  to  set  up  and  restore  to  a healthy  condition  by 
tonic  potions  of  infusion,  decoction,  extract,  electuary  of  china,  or  by 
the  same  drug  in  powder.  He  is  stuffed  and  tortured  with  it  for  weeks 
and  months  under  the  pretence  that  it  will  do  him  good.  Of  the 
consequence  of  such  treatment  I would  prefer  to  say  nothing.  If  the 
death-rolls  could  speak,  they  would  most  eloquently  speak  the  praises  of 
this  abuse  of  bark  ; and  so  also  would  the  crowds  of  the  living  victims  of 
asthmatic,  dropsical,  and  icteric  diseases,  and  those  other  unfortunates 
who  remain  affected  with  neuralgic  or  spasmodic  maladies,  or  with  malig- 
nant growths,  abdominal  sufferings  or  lingering  fever,  if  they  but  knew 
what  mischief  had  been  done  to  them. 

I would  appeal  to  the  common  sense  of  these  practitioners  and  ask 
them  how,  without  being  guilty  of  the  most  unpardonable  slipshod 
practice,  they  can  venture  to  administer  bark  in  all  those  infinitely 
various  diseases,  which  of  themselves,  as  also  especially  in  consequence 
of  the  traditional  medical  treatment,  must  necessarily  be  attended  by 
weakness  ? How  can  they  ever  imagine  that  they  can  strengthen  a 
sick  person  whilst  he  is  still  suffering  from  his  disease,  the  source  of  his 
weakness  ? Have  they  ever  seen  a patient  rapidly  cured  of  his  disease  by 
appropriate  remedies  who  failed  to  recover  his  strength  in  the  very 
process  of  the  removal  of  his  disease  ? If,  however,  as  is  natural,  it  is 
only  by  the  cure  of  the  disease  that  the  weakness  of  the  patient  can 


412 


CHINA. 


cease  and  give  place  to  strength  and  activity,  and  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  can  be  no  question  of  a removal  of  the  weakness  as  long  as  its 
source  is  not  dried  up,  that  is  to  say,  as  long  as  the  disease  on  which  it 
depends  is  not  cured,  what  a perverse  treatment  must  not  that  be,  which 
seeks  to  make  strong  and  active  by  the  administration  of  china  (and 
wine)  a patient  at  whose  vitals  the  disease  is  still  gnawing  ! These 
practitioners  cannot  cure  diseases,  but  they  attempt  to  strengthen  these 
uncured  patients  with  cinchona  bark.  How  can  such  a stupid  idea 
ever  enter  their  heads  ? If  bark  is  to  make  all  sick  persons  strong, 
active  and  cheerful,  it  must  needs  be  the  universal  panacea  which  shall 
at  once  deliver  all  patients  from  all  their  maladies,  from  all  morbid 
sensations  and  abnormal  functions,  that  is  to  say,  make  them  in  all  their 
ailments  in  every  respect  well  and  free  from  disease  ! For  so  long  as 
the  plague  of  disease  deranges  the  whole  man,  consumes  his  forces  and 
robs  him  of  every  feeling  of  well-being,  it  is  a childish,  foolish,  self- 
contradictory undertaking  to  attempt  to  give  such  an  uncured  person 
strength  and  activity. 

That  cinchona  bark  is  no  panacea  for  all  diseases,  we  are  taught 
by  the  sad  experience  of  the  ordinary  practice ; but  its  symptoms  show 
that  it  can  be  an  appropriate,  real  remedy  for  only  a few  cases  of 
disease. 

It  is  no  doubt  true  that  hy  the  first  doses  of  bark  the  strength  of  the 
patient,  be  he  ever  so  ill,  is  increased  for  a few  hours  ; he  is  able  to 
raise  himself  up  in  bed  all  alone,  as  if  by  a miracle ; he  wants  to  get 
out  of  bed  and  put  on  his  clothes  ; all  at  once  he  speaks  in  a stronger 
more  resolute  manner,  venturing  to  walk  alone,  and  grows  animated, 
eagerly  desires  to  eat  this  or  that, — but  a careful  accurate  observer  easily 
sees  that  this  excitation  is  only  an  unnatural  tension  (see  below  the 
note  to  § 895).  A few  hours  pass  and  the  patient  sinks  back,  sinks 
deeper  down  into  his  disease,  and  the  fatal  result  is  often  accelerated. 

Do  not  these  gentlemen  perceive  that  no  one  can  become  well  (truly 
strong  and  active)  as  long  as  his  disease  lasts  ? 

No  ! the  always  suspicious  semblance  of  strength  communicated 
to  the  patient  for  a few  hours  by  bark  is  invariably  attended  by  the 
saddest  results,  and  this  will  ever  be  so,  except  in  those  rare  cases 
where  cinchona  bark  is  at  the  same  time  the  right  remedy  for  the 
disease  on  which  the  weakness  depends.  In  such  cases  the  patient’s 
weakness  ceases  immediately  with  the  disease.  But,  as  I have  said, 
such  cases  are  rare,  for  cinchona  bark  is  the  true  remedy  (which  relieves 
rapidly,  permanently,  and  without  after-ailments)  for  but  few  diseases. 
In  all  the  many  other  cases  bark,  as  a medicine  and  so-called  tonic, 
must  do  harm,  and  the  more  so  the  stronger  its  medicinal  power 
(injuring  when  given  improperly)  is.  For  all  medicines,  without  excep- 
tion, can  do  no  good  when  unsuitable  for  the  case  of  disease,  and 
must  inflict  so  much  the  more  injury  the  greater  their  medicinal 
strength  (and  the  larger  the  doses  in  which  they  are  given). 

Hence,  physicians  should  first  learn  the  peculiar  power  of  action  of 
cinchona  bark,  and  exactly  what  particular  alterations  in  the  health  of 
human  beings  it  is  capable  of  causing,  before  they  presume  to  under- 
take the  cure  of  diseases,  and  consequently  the  morbid  weakness, 


CHINA. 


4i3 

with  this  powerful  medicinal  agent.  They  should  first  know  the  sym- 
ptoms of  china  before  attempting  to  determine  for  what  collection  of 
morbid  symptoms,  that  is,  for  what  case  of  disease  it  may  be  curative  ; 
it  can  be  curative  for  none  but  those  whose  symptoms  are  to  be  found 
in  similarity  among  the  symptoms  of  china.  He  who  fails  to  do  this 
will  always  commit  mistakes,  and  do  infinitely  more  harm  than  good 
to  his  patient. 

When  china  has  been  selected  according  to  conscientious  homoeo- 
pathic conviction  (but  not  as  hitherto,  according  to  theoretical  views, 
deceptive  names  of  diseases,  or  the  misleading  authority  of  equally  blind 
predecessors),  and  is  consequently  the  truly  appropriate  remedy  of  the 
case  of  disease  to  be  treated,  in  such  a case,  and  for  that  very  reason,  it 
is  also  the  true  strengthening  remedy.  It  strengthens  inasmuch  as  it 
removes  the  disease,  for  it  is  only  the  organism  free  from  disease  that 
restores  the  defective  strength ; strength  cannot  be  materially  poured  into 
it  by  a decoction  of  china  (or  by  wine). 

There  are  no  doubt  cases  where  the  disease  itself  consists  of  weak- 
ness, and  in  such  cases  bark  is  at  once  the  most  appropriate  curative 
and  strengthening  remedy.  Such  a case  is  that  where  the  sufferings  of 
the  patient  are  solely  or  chiefly  owing  to  weakness  from  loss  of  humours , 
from  great  loss  of  blood  (also  from  repeated  venesections),  great  loss  of 
milk  in  nursing  women,  loss  of  saliva,  frequent  seminal  losses,  profuse 
suppurations  (profuse  sweats),  and  weakening  by  frequent  purgatives, 
where  almost  all  the  other  ailments  of  the  patient  are  wont  to  corre- 
spond in  similarity  with  the  china  symptoms  (see  notes  to  837  and  860). 
If,  then,  there  is  here  no  other  disease  in  the  background  to  produce 
dynamically  or  to  keep  up  the  loss  of  humours,  then  for  the  cure  of  this 
peculiar  weakness  (from  loss  of  humours),  which  has  here  become  the 
disease,  one  or  two  doses  as  small  as  those  above  mentioned,*  together 

# Here  as  elsewhere  I insist  on  the  sufficiency  and  efficacy  of  such  small  doses. 
And  yet  the  vulgar  herd  can  never  understand  me,  for  they  know  nothing  of  the  pure 
treatment  with  one  single  simple  medicinal  substance  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other 
sorts  of  medicinal  irritants,  and  their  thoughts  are  enchained  in  the  mazes  of  their  old 
routine.  Even  when  the  ordinary  physicians  now  and  then  constrain  themselves  to 
give  in  some  (acute)  disease  one  single  medicine,  they  never  have  the  heart  to  refrain 
from  using  at  the  same  time  several  other  things  possessing  medicinal  power,  which, 
however,  they  regard  as  of  no  consequence,  and  to  which  they  apply  the  trivial  name 
of  domestic  remedies.  They  must  always  use  simultaneously  either  a poultice  of  so- 
called  aromatic  or  solvent  herbs  applied  to  the  most  painful  part  (just  as  though  these 
could  have  no  effect  on  the  patient  through  his  olfactory  nerves,  nor  act  as  a hetero- 
geneous medicine  through  the  skin  !),  or  they  must  rub  in  some  medicinal  ointment, 
or  give  a medicated  vapour  bath,  or  a medicinal  gargle,  or  apply  a blister  or  a 
sinapism,  or  prescribe  several  half,  whole  or  foot-baths,  or  order  clysters  of  valerian, 
camomile,  &c.  (just  as  though  all  these  were  a mere  nothing  and  did  not  act  on  the 
human  system  as  heterogeneous  powerful  medicine  through  the  skin,  the  mouth,  the 
rectum,  the  colon,  &c. !),  or  they  must  administer  simultaneously  a tea  of  mint,  camo- 
mile, elder-flower,  so-called  pectoral  herbs,  &c.  (just  as  though  a handful  of  such  herbs 
or  flowers  infused  in  boiling  water  counted  for  nothing !).  In  such  an  onslaught 
with  heterogeneous  drugs,  which,  although  ignorance  looks  upon  them  as  innocuous 
domestic  remedies,  are  to  all  intents  and  purposes  medicines,  and  some  of  them  very 
powerful  medicines ; in  this  accessory  quackery,  I say,  even  a large  dose  of  medicine 
of  another  kind  can,  of  a truth,  never  display  its  peculiar  action,  and  such  an  uncom- 
monly small  dose  as  homoeopathy  requires  is  completely  powerless  ; it  will  be  instan- 
taneously overpowered  and  annihilated.  No ! in  the  language  of  rational  men  that 


4H 


CHINA. 


with  appropriate  treatment  in  other  respects,  by  nourishing  diet,  open 
air,  cheerful  surroundings,  &c.,  are  as  efficacious  to  effect  recovery  as 
larger  and  repeated  doses  are  to  cause  secondary  and  injurious  effects, 
as  is  the  case  with  every  nimium,  every  excess  even  of  the  best  thing 
in  the  world. 

This  suitableness  of  cinchona  bark  in  diseases  of  debility  from  loss 
of  humours  led  physicians  of  the  ordinary  sort,  as  it  were  instinc- 
tinctively,  to  a mode  of  treatment  of  many  diseases  which  has  been,  and 
still  continues  to  be,  the  most  prevalent  of  all  modes  of  treatment — the 
weakening  treatment  by  means  of  squandering  the  humours  (under  pretence 
of  loosening  the  morbid  matter  and  expelling  it  from  the  body)  by 
means  of  frequently  repeated  so-called  solvents  (that  is,  drugs  of  various 
kinds  that  purge  the  bowels),  by  means  of  exciting  an  increased  flow  of 
urine  and  copious  perspirations  (by  many  tepid  and  warm  drinks  and 

alone  can  be  called  giving  a single  medicine  in  a disease,  when,  excepting  this  one , all 
other  medicinal  influences  are  excluded  from  the  patient  and  carefully  kept  away  from  him. 
But  he  who  will  do  this  must  know  what  things  brought  in  contact  with  the  human 
body  act  medicinally  on  it.  So  long  as  he  does  not  know  this  it  must  be  ascribed  to 
his  ignorance  that  he  considers  as  nothing,  as  not  at  all  medicinal,  such  things  as  herb- 
teas  and  clysters,  poultices  and  baths  of  herbs  and  salts,  and  the  other  things  just 
mentioned,  and  continues  to  use  them  thoughtlessly  under  the  name  of  domestic 
remedies  during  the  employment  of  medicine  internally.  Still  more  heedlessly  in  this 
respect  is  the  treatment  of  chronic  maladies  conducted  ; for,  in  addition  to  what  the 
patient  takes  from  medicine  chests  and  bottles,  and  the  external  applications  and  so- 
called  domestic  remedies  that  are  usually  administered  to  the  patient,  lots  of  superfluous 
hurtful  things  are  allowed,  and  even  prescribed,  which  are  also  regarded  as  indifferent 
matters  in  spite  of  the  disturbing  effects  they  may  exercise  on  the  patient’s  health, 
and  of  the  confusion  they  may  cause  in  the  treatment.  Besides  the  internal  and 
external  use  of  medicines  the  patient  is  allowed,  for  example,  to  take  (for  breakfast) 
mulled  beer,  vanilla  chocolate,  also  (even  several  times  a day)  strong  coffee  or  black 
and  green  tea,  not  unfrequently — to  strengthen  the  stomach  (?) — claret-cup,  liqueurs 
containing  strong  spices,  seasonings  of  all  sorts  in  the  food,  and  especially  in  sauces 
(made  of  soy,  cayenne  pepper,  mustard,  &c.) — these  things  are  supposed  merely  to 
increase  the  appetite  and  promote  digestion,  but  to  possess  no  hurtful  medicinal 
quality! — moreover,  quantities  of  uncooked  herbs  cut  small  and  sprinkled  over  the 
soup — which  are  regarded  as  supremely  wholesome,  but  are  really  medicinal — also 
various  sorts  of  wine — one  of  the  main  reliances  of  ordinary  practice — must  not  be 
forgotten.  Besides  all  these  there  are  tooth-powders,  tooth-tinctures,  and  tooth-washes 
— also  composed  of  medicinal  ingredients,  and  yet  considered  innocuous  because  for- 
sooth they  are  not  swallowed $ just  as  though  medicines  only  taken  into  the  mouth  or 
their  exhalations  drawn  into  the  nose  did  not  as  surely  act  on  the  whole  organism 
through  its  living  sensitive  fibres  as  when  they  are  swallowed ! And  then  the 
various  kinds  of  perfumes  and  washes  (musk,  ambergris,  peppermint  drops,  oil  of 
bergamot  and  cedar,  neroli,  eau  de  Cologne,  eau  de  luce,  lavender  water,  &c.), 
besides  perfumed  sachets,  smelling  bottles,  scented  soaps,  powders^and  pomades,  pot- 
pourri, and  any  other  noxious  articles  de  luxe  the  patient  may  desire.  In  such  an 
ocean  of  medicinal  influences  the  otherwise  adequate  homoeopathic  dose  of  medicine 
would  be  drowned  and  extinguished.  But  is  such  a medley  of  medicinal  luxury 
necessary  and  useful  for  the  life  and  well-being  or  compatible  with  the  recovery  of 
the  patient  ? It  is  injurious,  yes,  extremely  injurious ; and  yet,  perhaps,  it  has  been 
invented  by  physicians  themselves  for  the  upper  classes  in  order  to  please,  to  stimu- 
late and  to  keep  them  ill.  But  even  though  physicians  may  not  directly  recommend 
it,  it  is  sufficiently  sad  that  they  do  not  know  the  medicinal  noxiousness  of  all  this 
luxury,  and  that  they  do  not  prohibit  it  to  their  chronic  patients.  This  hotch-potch 
of  noxious  influences,  due  partly  to  the  luxurious  habits  of  the  patient  himself,  partly 
to  the  simultaneous  use  of  domestic  remedies  ordered  or  permitted  by  the  doctor,  is  so 
much  the  rule,  so  universally  prevalent,  that  the  ordinary  practitioner  cannot  think  of 


CHINA. 


4i5 


quantities  of  tepid  and  warm  baths),  by  means  of  blood-letting  by  vene- 
section and  leeches,  by  means  of  salivation,  by  means  of  drawing  off 
imaginary  impure  humours  by  open  blisters,  issues,  setons,  See.  If 
such  a treatment,  especially  that  by  mild  purgatives  the  use  of  which  is 
so  general,  be  long  enough  continued,  then,  by  means  of  irritation  of 
the  intestinal  canal,  not  only  is  the  greater  disease  of  the  abdomen  that 
keeps  in  suspense  the  acute  disease,  so  long  kept  up  until  the  natural 
termination  of  the  acute  disease  is  reached,  but  also  a disease  of  debility 
from  loss  of  humours  is  induced,  for  which,  then,  after  months  of 
treatment,  when  the  strength  and  humours  are  much  exhausted, 
cinchona  bark  will  assuredly  restore  the  health  in  the  only  remaining 
malady  (the  artificially  produced  disease  of  debility  from  loss  of 
humours).  But  none  perceived  by  what  a circuitous  round-about  way 
such  a cure  was  effected.  Thus,  inter  alia , the  spring  tertian  fevers, 
and  most  other  diseases  of  an  acute  character,  having  of  themselves  a 

treatment  without  such  a simultaneous  medicinal  confusion,  and  hence,  under  these 
circumstances,  he  is  unable  to  promise  any  decided  effect  from  the  internal  admini- 
stration of  a single  medicinal  substance  in  a disease,  even  when  it  is  given  in  a large 
dose,  far  less  from  a very  small  dose  of  medicine  homoeopathically  employed  ! 
Co  nr  adi  was  acquainted  with  no  other  treatment  than  such  as  is  constructed  amid 
such  a confused  medley  of  medicinal  influences,  as  is  evident  when  he  says  ( Grunariss 
der  Pathologie  und  Therapie , Marburg,  1801,  p.  335)  that  the  action  ascribed 
by  me  to  such  small  doses  is  beyond  all  belief.  Here,  not  to  dwell  upon  the 
trifling  circumstance  that  the  determination  of  the  action  of  medicinal  doses  is  hardly 
a matter  of  belief,  but  rather  of  experience , he  seems  no  more  than  other  ordinary 
practitioners  to  have  either  the  slightest  conception  or  the  slightest  experience  of 
the  action  of  a small  dose  of  appropriate  medicine  in  a patient  completely  excluded  from 
the  simultaneous  irritation  of  all  other  kinds  of  medicinal  substances , otherwise  he  would 
have  spoken  in  a different  manner.  A pure  treatment  with  a single  homoeopathic 
medicine,  all  counter-acting  medicinal  contaminations  being  removed  (for  it  is  only 
of  such  I speak  and  only  such  I teach),  never  is  seen  or  dreamt  of  in  routine 
practice.  But  the  difference  is  enormous  and  incredible. 

So  the  glutton  just  risen  from  his  luxurious  meal  of  highly-spiced  food  is  incapable 
of  perceiving  the  taste  of  a grain  of  sugar  placed  upon  his  over-stimulated  tongue  $ 
whereas  a person  contented  with  simple  fare  will,  when  fasting  in  the  morning, 
experience  an  intense  sweet  taste  from  a much  smaller  quantity  of  the  same  sugar. 
Similarly  amid  the  multifarious  noises  in  the  most  crowded  part  of  a large  town  we 
can  often  not  comprehend  the  loudly  spoken  words  of  a friend  at  the  distance  of  five 
or  six  paces,  whereas  in  the  dead  of  night,  when  all  the  sounds  of  day  are  hushed 
and  perfect  stillness  prevails,  the  undisturbed  ear  distinctly  perceives  the  softest  tone 
of  a distant  flute,  because  this  gentle  sound  is  now  the  only  one  present,  and  therefore 
it  exercises  its  full  action  on  the  undisturbed  organ  of  hearing. 

So  certain  is  it,  that  when  all  accessory  medicinal  influences  are  withheld  from 
the  patient  (as  should  be  done  in  all  rational  treatment),  even  the  very  minute  doses 
of  a simple  medicinal  substance,  especially  of  one  chosen  according  to  similarity  of 
symptoms,  can  and  must  exercise  its  adequate  and  complete  action,  as  a thousand- 
fold experience  will  teach  any  one  whom  prejudice  does  not  deter  from  repeating  the 
experiment  accurately. 

Quite  small  doses  of  medicine  are  all  the  less  likely  to  fail  to  exercise  their  peculiar 
action,  inasmuch  as  their  very  smallness  cannot  excite  the  organism  to  revolutionary 
evacuations  (what  is  morbid  in  the  organism  is  altered  by  the  small  dose),  whereas  a 
large  dose,  by  the  antagonism  it  excites  in  the  system,  will  often  be  rapidly  expelled 
and  bodily  ejected  and  washed  away  by  vomiting,  purging,  diuresis,  perspira- 
tion, &c. 

Will  the  ordinary  physicians  at  last  understand  that  the  small  and  smallest  doses  of 
homoeopathically  selected  medicines  can  only  effect  great  results  in  a pure  genuine 
treatment,  but  are  quite  unsuitable  in  routine  treatment  ? 


416 


CHINA. 


duration  of  only  a few  weeks,  are  spun  out  into  (rational  ?)  treatments 
of  many  months’  duration  ; and  the  ignorant  patient  is  happy  in  having 
escaped  with  his  life,  whereas  a real  cure  of  the  original  disease  ought 
only  to  have  occupied  a few  days. 

Hence  the  everlastingly  repeated  warnings  in  so-called  practical 
works,  not  to  administer  cinchona  bark  in  agues,  until  all  the  (ima- 
ginary) impurities  and  morbid  matters  have  been  energetically  and 
repeatedly  evacuated  upwards  and  downwards,  or,  according  to  the 
euphemistic  expressions  of  the  moderns  (though  the  same  thing  is 
meant),  until  the  solvent  treatment  [i.e.  laxatives  and  purgatives  to 
produce  many  liquid  stools)  has  been  employed  to  a sufficient  extent 
and  long  enough  ; in  reality,  until  the  artificially  produced  abdominal 
disease  has  lasted  longer  than  the  normal  duration  of  the  ague,  and  so 
the  disease  of  debility  from  loss  of  humours  which  alone  remains  can  be 
transformed  into  health  by  cinchona  bark,  as  of  course  it  will  be. 

Th  is  is  what  was  and  is  still  called  methodical  and  rational  treatment, 
in  many,  many  cases  of  disease. 

With  equal  justice  might  we  rob  widows  and  orphans  in  order  to 
establish  an  asylum  for  the  poor. 

* *• 

•jf 

As  cinchona  bark  in  its  primary  action  is  a powerful  laxative  (see  the 
symptoms,  497  et  seq.)  it  will  be  found  to  be  very  efficacious  as  a remedy 
in  some  cases  of  diarrhoea  when  the  other  symptoms  of  china  are 
not  inappropriate  to  the  rest  of  the  morbid  symptoms. 

So  also  in  those  cases  where  we  have  to  do  with  so-called  moist 
gangrene  in  the  external  parts,  we  shall  generally  notice  in  the 
remainder  of  the  patient’s  ailments,  morbid  symptoms  similar  to  the 
symptoms  peculiar  to  cinchona  bark ; hence  it  is  so  useful  in  such 
cases. 

The  too  easy  and  too  frequent  morbid  excitation  to  seminal  discharges 
of  the  genitals,  caused  sometimes  by  slight  irritation  in  the  hypogastrium, 
is  very  permanently  removed  by  the  smallest  dose  of  bark  (in  conformity 
with  its  peculiar  symptoms  of  this  character). 

Those  attacks  of  pain  which  can  be  excited  by  merely  touching  (or 
slightly  moving)  the  part  and  which  then  gradually  increase  to  the 
most  frightful  degree  are,  to  judge  by  the  patient’s  expressions,  very 
similar  to  those  caused  by  china.  I have  sometimes  permanently 
removed  them  by  a single  small  dose  of  the  diluted  tincture,  even  when 
the  attacks  had  been  frequently  repeated.  The  malady  was  homoeo- 
pathically  (see  note  to  685),  as  it  were,  charmed  away,  and  health 
substituted  for  it.  No  other  known  remedy  in  the  world  could  have 
done  this,  as  none  other  is  capable  of  causing  a similar  symptom  in  its 
primary  action. 

Bark  will  hardly  ever  be  found  curative  when  there  are  not  present 
disturbances  of  the  night’s  rest  similar  to  those  the  medicine  causes  in 
the  healthy  (which  will  be  found  recorded  below). 

There  are  some,  though  but  few,  suppurations  of  the  lungs  (especially 
accompanied  by  stitches  in  the  chest,  almost  always  only  aggravated  or 
excited  by  external  pressure),  that  may  be  cured  by  bark.  But  in 
these  cases  the  other  symptoms  and  ailments  of  the  patient  must  b 


CHINA. 


4-i  7 


found  in  similarity  among  the  symptoms  of  china.  In  such  cases  only 
a few,  sometimes  but  a couple  of  doses  of  the  above  minuteness,  at 
long  intervals,  suffice  for  the  cure. 

So  also  there  are  a few  icteric  diseases,  of  such  a character  that  they 
resemble  the  symptoms  of  china ; when  this  is  the  case  the  disease  is 
removed  as  if  by  magic  by  one,  or  at  most  two,  small  doses,  and  perfect 
health  takes  its  place. 

An  intermittent  fever  must  be  very  similar  to  that  which  china  can 
cause  in  the  healthy,  if  that  medicine  is  to  be  the  suitable,  true  remedy 
for  it,  and  then  a single  dose  of  the  above  indicated  minuteness  relieves 
— but  this  it  does  best  when  given  immediately  after  the  termination  of 
the  paroxysm,  before  the  operations  of  nature  are  accumulated  in  the 
body  for  the  next  fit.  The  usual  method  of  suppressing  an  ague  not 
curable  by  cinchona  bark,  by  means  of  large  doses  of  this  powerful  sub- 
stance, is  to  give  it  shortly  before  the  paroxysm ; it  is  then  most  certain 
to  produce  this  act  of  violence,  but  its  consequences  are  very  injurious. 

Cinchona  bark  can  only  permanently  cure  a patient  affected  with 
intermittent  fever  in  marshy  districts  of  his  disease  resembling  the 
symptoms  of  china,  when  the  patient  is  able  to  be  removed  from  the 
atmosphere  that  causes  the  fever  during  his  treatment,  and  until  his 
forces  are  completely  restored.  For  if  he  remain  in  such  an  atmosphere 
he  is  constantly  liable  to  the  reproduction  of  his  disease  from  the  same 
source ; and  the  remedy,  even  though  frequently  repeated,  is  unable  to 
do  any  further  good  \ just  as  the  morbid  state  induced  by  over-indulgence 
in  coffee  is  rapidly  relieved  by  its  appropriate  remedy,  but  while  the 
hurtful  beverage  is  continued  to  be  taken,  it  will  recur  from  time  to 
time. 

♦ * * 

But  how  could  physicians  act  so  stupidly  as  to  think  of  substituting 
other  things  for  cinchona  bark,  which  in  its  dynamic  action  on  the 
human  health,  and  in  its  power  to  derange  that  health  in  a peculiar 
manner,  differs  so  immensely  from  every  other  medicinal  substance  in 
the  world  ?*  How  could  they  dream  of  finding  a surrogate  for  china, 
that  is  to  say,  a medicinal  substance  of  identical  and  precisely  the  same 
medicinal  power  among  other  extremely  different  substances  ? Is  not 
every  kind  of  animal,  every  species  of  plant,  and  every  mineral  some- 
thing peculiar,  an  entity  never  to  be  confounded,  not  even  in  external 
appearance,  with  any  other?  Could  any  one  be  so  short-sighted  as 
from  their  external  appearance  to  mistake  a cinchona  tree  for  a willow 
tree,  an  ash  or  a horse-chestnut  ? And  if  we  find  these  plants  differ  so 
much  in  their  external  characters,  though  nature  cannot  offer  so  much 
difference  to  a single  sense — that  of  vision — as  she  can,  and  actually 
does,  to  all  the  senses  of  the  practised  observer  in  the  dynamic  action 
of  these  various  plants  on  the  health  of  the  living  healthy  human 
organism,  shall  no  attention  be  paid  to  these  latter,  the  multiform 
peculiar  symptoms  which  each  single  one  of  these  plants  elicits  in  a 
manner  so  different  from  those  of  the  second  and  third,  and  whereon 
alone  depends  the  specific  medicinal  power  of  each  medicinal  plant  with 
which  only  we  are  concerned  in  curing  disease  ? Shall  we  fail  to  per- 
* See  the  peculiar  symptoms  it  causes,  recorded  below. 


27 


4i8 


CHINA. 


ceive  their  high  significance,  shall  we  fail  to  recognise  them  as  the 
highest  criterion  of  the  differences  of  drugs  among  one  another  ? Or 
shall  we  consider  all  things  that  have  a bitter  and  astringent  taste  as 
identical  in  medicinal  effects,  as  a kind  of  cinchona  bark,*  and  thus 
constitute  the  coarse  sense  of  taste  in  man  (which  can  scarcely  judge  of 
similarity  of  taste,  but  never  of  identity  of  medicinal  power)  the  supreme 
and  sole  judge  for  determining  the  medicinal  significance  of  the  various 
plants  ? I should  think  it  were  impossible  to  act  in  a more  short-sighted 
and  foolish  manner  in  matters  of  such  extreme  importance  for  the 
welfare  of  humanity ! 

I grant  that  all  the  medicinal  substances  that  have  been  proposed  as 
substitutes  for  cinchona  bark,  from  the  lofty  ash  down  to  camomile  and 
the  lichen  on  the  wall,  as  also  from  arsenic  down  to  James’s  powder 
and  sal-ammoniac,  I grant,  I say,  that  every  one  of  those  medicinal 
substances  I have  named,  and  others  I have  not  named,  has  of 
itself  cured  particular  cases  of  ague  (their  reputation  proves  they  have 
done  this  now  and  then).  But  from  the  very  circumstance  that 
observers  state  of  one  or  other  that  it  was  efficacious  even  when 
cinchona  hark  did  no  good  or  was  hurtful , they  prove  clearly  that  the 
ague  which  the  one  medicine  cured  was  of  a different  kind  from  that 
the  other  cured  ! For  had  it  been  an  ague  suited  for  china,  this  medi- 
cine must  have  removed  it,  and  none  other  could  have  been  of  use. 
Or  else  there  must  be  foolishly  attributed  to  the  china  in  this  case  a 
peculiar  malignity  and  spitefulness,  making  it  refuse  to  be  helpful,  or 
to  the  other  vaunted  medicine,  which  was  efficacious,  a peculiar 
amiability  and  obligingness,  causing  it  to  do  as  the  doctor  wished  ! It 
would  almost  appear  as  if  some  such  foolish  notion  was  entertained ! 

No ! the  truth  of  the  matter,  which  has  not  been  perceived,  is  as 
follows  : It  is  not  in  the  bitterness,  the  astringent  taste,  and  the  so-called 
aroma  of  the  cinchona  bark,  but  in  its  whole  intimate  nature,  that 
resides  the  invisible  dynamical  working  spirit,  that  can  never  be  exhi- 
bited in  a material  separated  condition  (just  as  little  as  can  that  of  other 
medicinal  substances),  whereby  it  differentiates  itself  from  all  other 
medicines  in  the  derangements  of  the  human  health  it  causes.  See  the 
observations  recorded  below. 

Every  one  of  the  medicinal  substances  recommended  in  agues  has  its 
own  peculiar  action  on  the  human  health,  differing  from  the  medicinal 
power  of  every  other  drug,  in  conformity  with  eternal  immutable  laws 
of  nature.  Every  particular  medicinal  substance,  by  the  will  of  the 
Creator,  differs  from  every  other  one  in  its  externals  (appearance, 
taste,  and  smell),  and  even  much  more  so  in  its  internal  dynamic 
properties,  in  order  that  we  may  be  enabled  by  means  of  these 
differences  to  fulfil  all  possible  curative  intentions  in  the  innumerable 
and  various  cases  of  disease.  Is  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  all-good  and 
omnipotent  Creator  of  the  infinite  varieties  of  nature  could,  would,  or 
should  have  done  less  ? 

Now,  if  every  one  of  the  vaunted  ague  remedies,  whilst  leaving  other 

* As  W.  Cullen  amongst  others  does  (see  Ahk.  iiber  die  Materia  Medica,  ii, 
p.  no,  Leipz.,  17-90). 


CHINA. 


419 


agues  uncured,  has  really  cured  some  cases — which  I will  not  deny  as 
far  as  regards  those  cases  where  the  observers  have  given  the  remedy  by 
itself— and  if  every  single  one  of  these  remedies  has  effected  its  cure, 
not  as  a matter  of  especial  favour  towards  the  doctor  who  prescribed  it, 
but,  as  it  is  more  rational  to  suppose,  owing  to  a peculiar  pow(er 
bestowed  on  it  in  conformity  with  eternal  laws  of  nature,  then  it  must 
necessarily  be  that  the  case  in  which  this  remedy,  and  not  another,  did 
good,  was  a peculiar  form  of  ague,  adapted  for  this  medicine  oply,  and 
different  from  that  other  ague  which  could  only  be  cured  by  some  other 
remedy.  And  so  all  agues,  each  of  which  requires  a different  medicine 
for  its  cure,  must  be  agues  absolutely  dissimilar  to  one  another. 

Again,  when  two  agues  betray  their  difference,  not  only  by  symptoms 
palpably  different  from  one  another,  but  also,  as  I have  said,  by  this, 
that  the  one  can  only  be  cured  by  one  remedy  and  the  other  by 
another  remedy,  it  plainly  follows  from  this,  that  these  two  remedies 
must  differ  from  one  another  in  their  nature  and  action,*  and  cannot 
be  identical,  consequently  cannot  be  considered  the  same  thing,  and 
therefore  cannot  reasonably  be  substituted  for  one  another ; in  other 
words,  the  one  ought  not  to  be  represented  as  a surrogate  for  the  other. 

Or  have  those  gentlemen,  who  do  not  see  this,  some  mode  of  thinking 
peculiar  to  themselves  and  unknown  to  me,  some  logic  of  their  own 
that  stands  in  direct  contradiction  to  that  of  the  rest  of  mankind  ? 

Infinite  nature  is  much  more  multiform  in  her  dynamic  endowment 
of  medicinal  substances  than  the  compilers  of  medicinal  virtues,  called 
teachers  of  Materia  Medica,  have  any  idea  of,  and  immeasurably  more 
multiform  in  the  production  of  innumerable  deviations  in  human  health 
(diseases)  than  the  bungling  pathologist  enamoured  of  his  natty  classi- 
fication is  aware  of,  who,  by  his  couple  of  dozen,  not  even  correctlyf 
designated,  forms  of  disease,  seems  only  to  give  expression  to  the  wish 
that  dear  nature  might  be  so  good  as  to  limit  the  host  of  diseases  to  a 
small  number,  so  that  his  brother  therapeutist  and  practitioner — his 
head  stuffed  full  of  traditional  prescriptions— may  the  more  easily  deal 
with  the  little  collection. 

That  the  ordinary  physicians,  by  mingling  iron  in  the  same  prescrip- 
tion with  bark,  often  dish  up  for  the  patient  a repulsive-looking  and 
unsavoury  ink,  may  be  overlooked,  but  they  must  be  told  that  a com- 
pound results  from  this  mixture  that  possesses  neither  the  virtues  of 
cinchona  bark  nor  those  of  iron. 

The  truth  of  this  assertion  is  manifest  from  the  fact  that  when  cin- 
chona bark  has  done  harm  iron  is  often  its  antidote  and  the  remedy 
for  its  injurious  action,  as  cinchona  bark  is  for  that  of  iron,  when  indi- 
cated by  the  symptoms  caused  by  the  unsuitable  medicine. 

* Otherwise  the  one  medicine  must  have  been  able  to  cure  just  as  well  that  ague 
which  yielded  to  the  other  medicine,  if  the  action  of  both  was  the  same. 

■f  What  physician,  except  Hippocrates,  has  ever  described  the  pure  course  of 
any  disease  where  no  medicine  has  been  given  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  ? Con- 
sequently,  do  not  the  recorded  histories  of  diseases  contain  the  symptoms  of  the 
diseases  mixed  up  with  those  of  the  domestic  remedies  and  drugs  given  during  their 
course  ? 


420 


CHINA. 


Still  iron  can  only  remove  some  of  the  untoward  symptoms,  those, 
namely,  which  it  can  produce  in  similarity  in  healthy  persons. 

After  long-continued  treatments  with  large  doses  of  china  many 
symptoms  often  remain  for  which  other  medicines  are  required ; for 
we  frequently  meet  with  china-cachexias  of  such  a severe  character 
that  it  is  only  with  great  difficulty  that  the  patient  can  be  freed  from 
them  and  rescued  from  death.  In  these  cases,  Ipecacuanha  in  small 
doses,  more  frequently  Arnica , and  in  some  few  Belladonna , is  of  use, 
the  indication  for  the  antidote  being  determined  by  the  symptoms  of 
the  china-disease.  Veratrum  is  useful  when  coldness  of  the  body  and 
cold  sweats  have  been  caused  by  bark,  if  the  other  symptoms  of  this 
drug  correspond  homoeopathically. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Anton,  Baehr,  Becher,  Clauss, 
Franz,  Gross,  Harnisch,  Hartmann,  Hartung,  Herrmann,  Hornburg, 
Ch.  Lehmann,  J.  G.  Lehmann,  Michler,  Meyer,  Stapf,  Teuthorn,  Wagner, 
Walther,  Wislicenus. 

The  following  old-school  authorities  are  quoted  : 

Alpini,  Hist.  Fehr.  epid. 

Baglivi,  Praxis,  Lib.  ii. 

Baker,  in  Medical  Transactions , vol.  iii.  Lond.,  1785. 

Bauer,  J.  Fr.,  in  Acta  Nat . Cur.,  iii. 

Berger,  Joh.Gottfr.,  Diss.  de  Chinchina  ab  iniquis  judiciis  <vindicata.  Viteb.,171 1. 

Breslauer  Samml .,  1728. 

Cartheuser,  J.  F.,  Diss.  de  Febre  intermitt . epid.  Francof  ad  V.,  1749. 

Cleghorn,  Diseases  of  Minorca. 

Cruger,  Dan.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  3. 

Ettmuller,  B.  M.,  Diss.  de  usu  et  abusu  pracepit. 

Fischer,  C.  E.,  in  Hufel.  Journal f.pr.  A.,  iv. 

Formey,  Med.  Ephem.,  i,  2. 

Fothergill,  Essays,  tom.  ii. 

Friborg,  Diss.  de  usu  cort.  Peruv.,  1773. 

Gesner,  J.  A.  Ph.,  Sammlung.  <v.  Beob.,  i.  Nordlingen,  1789. 

Greding,  in  Lud'w.  Adders.,  tom.  i. 

Hildenbrand,  J.  V.  von,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xiii. 

Juncker  et  Fritze,  Diss.  de  usu  cort.  peruaj.  discreto.  Halae,  1756. 

Koker,  Joh.  de  (work  not  given). 

Kreysig,  Diss.  Obs.  de  Febr.  Quart.  Viteb.,  179 7. 

Limprecht,  J.  A.,  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  ii. 

May,  W.,  in  Lond.  Med.  Journ.,  1788. 

Morton,  Opera,  ii. 

Murray,  Apparat.  Medicam .,  2nd  edit.,  i. 

Pelargus,  Obs.,  ii. 

Percival,  Essays,  vol.  i. 

Quarin,  Method.  Med.  Febr. 

Raulin,  J.,  Obserajat.  de  Med.  Paris,  1754. 

Richard,  Recueil  d'Observ.  de  Mdd.,  ii. 

Romberg,  J.  W.,  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  Ann.  9,  10. 

Roschin,  in  Annalen  der  Heilkunde,  1811,  Feb. 

Schlegel,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  vii. 

Stahl,  J.  E.,  Diss.  Problem,  de  Febribus, — Obs.  Clin. 

Sydenham,  Opusc.  Lips.,  1695. 

Thompson,  Al.,  in  Med.  Inqu.  and  Obseraj .,  iv,  No.  24. 

Thomson,  Thom.,  Med.  Rathpfleg.  Leipzig,  1779. 

In  the  Frag,  de  Vir.  China  has  221  symptoms,  in  the  1st  Edit.  1082,  and  in  this 
2nd  Edit.  1143.] 


CHINA. 


421 


CHINA. 

Vertigo.  [J.  F.  Cartheuser,1  Diss.  de  Febre  intermitt.  epid. 
Francof.  ad  V.,  1749.] 

First  vertigo  and  giddy  nausea,  then  general  feeling  of  heat.* 
Vertigo  in  the  occiput,  when  sitting.  [Fz.] 

Vertigo;  the  head  tends  to  sink  backwards,  worse 
when  moving  and  walking,  diminished  by  lying  down 

(aft.  a few  m.).  \_Hrr.~\ 

5.  Constant  vertigo,  the  head  tends  to  sink  backwards,  in  every 
position,  but  worst  when  walking  and  moving  the  head  (aft.  6 h.). 

Stupidity.  [Cartheuser,  1.  c.] 

He  is  long  in  collecting  his  thoughts,  is  much  disinclined  for 
movement,  and  more  disposed  to  sit  and  to  lie. 

Confusion  of  the  head.  [C.  E.  Fischer,2  in  Hufel.  Journal , iv, 
pp.  652, 653, 657.] 

Confusion  of  the  head,  like  vertigo  from  dancing  and  as  in 
catarrh. f 

10.  Confusion  and  emptiness  in  the  head  and  laziness  of  the  body  as 
from  watching  at  night  and  sleeplessness  { (aft.  1 h.). 

Confusion  of  the  head,  like  a catarrh§  (aft.  9 d.).  \JVs.~\ 
Confusion  of  the  head  in  the  forehead. 

Confusion  of  the  head,  as  after  a debauch,  with  aching  in  the 
temples.  \_Hbg.~\ 

A cloudiness  spread  all  over  the  head,  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  j h.). 

[flfr.] 

15.  Stupefaction  of  the  head,  with  aching  in  the  forehead  (aft.  J h.). 

A dull  feeling  in  the  lower  part  of  the  head  behind,  as  from 
awaking  from  sleep.  \_Bch.'\ 

Heaviness  of  the  head  (at  noon  vertigo  rises  up  into  the  head, 
without  pain). || 

Heaviness  of  the  head.fl  [J.  E.  Stahl,3  in  various  works, 
particularly  in  his  Diss.  Problem,  de  Febribus.~\ 

Heaviness  in  the  head,  which  tends  to  sink  backwards,  when 
sitting.  [ Hrr.'\ 

20.  Headache,  like  heaviness  and  heat  in  it,  worst  when  turning  the 
eyes,  at  the  same  time  with  twitching  pains  in  the  temples. 

In  the  morning,  on  awaking  from  sleep,  dull,  stupefying  head- 
ache. 

* Comp,  with  1,  3,  4,  5. 
t Comp,  with  11  and  49. 

X 10,  15,  21,  comp,  with  6,  8,  11,  12,  13,  14,  16  and  23. 

$ See  9 and  49. 

« | 17,  20,  comp,  with  18,  19,  22. 

•ff  18,  19,  22,  see  17,  20. 


1 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  china. 

2 Effects  of  china  in  agues. 

3 As  \ 


422 


CHINA. 


In  the  morning,  on  awaking  from  sleep,  heaviness  of  the  head  and 
weariness  in  all  the  limbs.  \_Lhm.\ 

In  the  morning  quite  dazed  in  the  head,  as  after  a debauch,  with 
dryness  in  the  mouth.  [F%.] 

Headache  in  the  frontal  region.  [Fz. — CV* * * §.] 

25.  Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  forehead  and  temple  of  one  side  (aft. 

4 h.). 

Headache  in  the  temples.  \_Hbg .] 

Headache,  exhaustion,  then  some  coldness,  [F%.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  occiput*  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Myr.'] 

Pressure  on  the  left  temple.  [Hrr.] 

30.  Compression  in  the  temples  (aft.  5 h.).  [F%.] 

In  the  evening,  aching  pain  in  the  temple.  [-Fz.] 

Headache  from  afternoon  till  evening,  an  aching  in  the  middle  of 
the  forehead. 

Aching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.  [G^.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead  ; on  bending  backwards 
it  came  with  increased  intensity  in  both  temples ; when 
sitting  it  remained  confined  to  the  forehead.  [Bch.] 

35.  Aching  pain  when  walking,  first  over  the  forehead,  then  in  the 
templesf  (aft.  6 h.). 

Headache,  first  an  aching  in  the  forehead,  which  then  spreads  all 
over  the  head.  \_Bch.'\ 

Headache  as  if  the  brain  was  compressed  from  both  sides  and 
pressed  out  at  the  forehead,  very  much  increased  by  walking  in  the 
open  air. 

Violent  aching  pains  deep  in  the  brain,  and  like  constriction, 
especially  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  and  in  the  occiput,  very 
much  increased  by  walking.J  [ An .] 

Aching  pain,  especially  in  the  occiput.  [An.~\ 

40.  Aching,  pressing  headache,  which  is  aggravated  by 
open  air  (aft.  9 h.).  [Htn.] 

Hard  pressure  in  the  occiput,  as  if  the  cerebellum  were  pressed 
out  (aft.  5j  h.).  \Myr.~\ 

Painful  aching  and  pressing  in  the  head,  towards  the  forehead,  as 
if  all  were  too  heavy  and  would  be  pressed  out,  relieved  by  pressing 
strongly  on  it  with  the  hand  (aft.  8 h.).  \_Htn.~\ 

Aching  pressing  headache  in  the  side  towards  which  he  leans. 
[Htn.] 

A kind  of  aching,  as  if  oppressed  in  the  head,  with  frontal  sweat 
(aft.  J h.).  \JVr.~\ 

45.  An  aching,  like  fulness,  in  the  head  just  over  the  eyes  (aft.  2 h.). 

JVr.-\ 

The  brain  feels  as  if  pressed  by  excess  of  blood, § 

Headache  over  the  orbits,  which  comes  on  in  the  forenoon  hours,  is 
increased  by  walking,  but  is  removed  by  the  mid-day  meal  (aft.  18  h.). 

* *8,  zg,  30,  31,  33,  34,  36,  see  35  and  39. 

f Comp,  with  28,  29,  30,  31,  33,  34,  3 6,  39. 

I See  37,  40—46,48,  50,  51,  53—63,  65—67,  69,  70. 

§ 37,  46,  comp,  with  38  and  40 — 45,  48  and  70. 


CHINA. 


423 


Headache  as  if  the  brain  were  kneaded  together,  with  too  great 
excitement  of  the  mind,  restlessness,  inordinate  and  too  rapid  atten- 
tiveness and  over-strainedness  of  the  imagination,  [Tz.] 

Headache  in  the  temples  like  stuffed  coryza. # 

50.  Pressive  tearing  in  the  temporal  region  as  if  it  would 
press  out  the  hone,  f \_Hrr.‘] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  temple.  [Zr.] 

Headache  now  in  one  part  then  in  another  part  of  the  brain. 
Tearing  on  several  spots  in  the  head,  aggravated  by  walking 
and  by  moving  the  head.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Tearing  headache  from  the  right  occipital  bone  to  the  right 
frontal  protuberance.  \_Hrr. ] 

55.  Drawing  headache  from  the  occiput  to  the  forehead,  as  if  the 
whole  forehead  were  contracted,  which  ended  in  the  temples  like  a 
beating  ; it  was  alleviated  by  walking,  increased  by  sitting  and 
standing,  and  ceased  by  pressing  on  it  with  the  hand.  [ Trn.~\ 
Drawing  headache  in  the  occiput,  when  sitting.  [Tz.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  head  behind  the  ears  to  the  mastoid  process. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  that  goes  off  on 
bending  back  the  head.  [Tz.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  forehead.  \_Hbg.~\ 

60.  When  he  places  his  hand  on  his  forehead  there  occurs  there  a to- 
and-fro  drawing  pain.  [Zz.] 

Violent  twitching  tearing  on  several  spots  in  the 
head,  which  is  increased  by  movement  and  by  walking, 
diminished  when  lying  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Hrr .] 

Twitching  tearing  on  the  frontal  protuberances.  [Gjj.] 
Twitching  tearing  in  the  right  temporal  region,  for  three  days. 
\_Hrr.~\ 

Twitching  headache  in  the  temple  to  the  upper  jaw.J 
65.  Twitching  from  both  parietal  bones  of  the  head  along  the  neck.§ 

IBtg-] 

Headache,  like  a twitching  towards  the  forehead,  increasing  in 
severity  till  evening,  when  it  went  off.  [Z«.] 

Digging  headache  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  when  he  sits 
doing  nothing,  or  occupies  himself  with  something  for  which  he  has 
no  inclination.  [Gjj.] 

Headache,  first  spasmodic  in  the  vertex,  then  on  the  side  of  the 
head  as  if  bruised,  increased  by  the  slightest  movement. 

Headache,  a digging  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  when  sitting 
(aft.  91  h.).  [Htn.-] 

70.  Headache  so  painful,  as  if  the  skull  would  burst  asunder;  the 
brain  beats  in  an  undulating  manner  against  the  skull.  \_Trn.~] 


* Comp,  with  9 and  11. 

f Tearing  (drawing)  pressure,  and  pressive  tearing  (drawing),  seems  to  be  a chief 
character  of  pain  with  china,  see  also,  686,  687,  739,  746,  779,  780. 

+ Comp,  with  65,  66,  also  partly  with  61,  62,  63. 

§ 63,  65,  see  64. 


424 


CHINA. 


Violent  hammering  in  the  head  towards  the  temples.  [Zw.] 
Headache  in  the  left  parietal  bone,  like  beating.  [Hbg.~] 

An  uninterrupted,  dull,  cutting  pain  from  both  temples  and 
occiput  up  into  the  orbits,  more  acute  and  severe  when  moving  and 
when  stooping.  \_Lhm.~\ 

Shooting  headache,  especially  in  the  left  frontal  region  (aft.  h.). 

[Htg.-] 

75.  Shooting  betwixt  forehead  and  temple  on  the  left  side;  on 
touching  the  temple  he  felt  a strong  throbbing  of  the  artery,  and  the 
shooting  went  off  by  this  touching.* 

Betwixt  forehead  and  vertex  burning,  severe  stitches.  [ Htg.'] 
Continued  shooting  sensation  in  the  right  temple.  \Wthi\ 
Shooting  headache  in  the  forehead  (when  sitting).  [Zr.] 

Fine  shooting  in  the  left  temple.  [Z%.] 

80.  Shooting  headache  between  the  right  temple  and  forehead,  with 
strong  pulsation  of  the  temporal  artervf  (aft.  \ h.).  \dn.\ 

Single  stitches,  which  darted  from  the  internal  ear  upwards 
through  the  brain.  [ZWz.] 

Shooting  tearing  on  several  parts  in  the  head,  increased  by 
moving  the  head.  [Z/rr.] 

Headache  when  walking  in  the  wind,  compounded  of  bruised 
and  sore  pain. 

Headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  sore,  which  is  increased  by  the 
slightest  touching  of  the  head  or  any  part  of  it,  but  especially  by 
strained  attention  and  profound  reflection,  indeed,  even  by  speaking. 

85.  The  integuments  of  the  whole  head  are  so  sensitive  to  touch  that 
all  thereon  is  painful,  and  the  roots  of  the  hair  in  especial  seem  to 
suffer  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gw.] 

Painful  drawing  on  the  right  side  of  the  occiput.  [Zz.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  occipital  joint  when  touched,  so  that  he 
must  bend  the  head  backwards.  [Zz.] 

Painful  drawing  in  the  occipital  bone.  [Zz.] 

Contractive  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  in  the  skin.  [Gw.] 
90.  Contractive,  external  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the 
occiput ; it  feels  as  if  the  skin  were  drawn  together  on 
one  point ; not  increased  by  touching.  [ Hrr .] 

Pain  as  if  the  skin  on  the  upper  part  of  the  head  was  grasped  by 
a whole  hand.  [Gw.] 

A pain  drawing  together  in  a circle  on  the  middle  of  the  head 
superiorly  (aft.  J h.).  [ZZrr.] 

Sweat  among  the  hair  of  the  head. 

Profuse  sweat  among  the  hair  of  the  head  when  walking  in  the 
open  air. 

95.  Sharp  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  hairy  scalp.  [Zz.] 

Shooting  itching  in  the  hairy  scalp  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zz.] 

(A  crawling  in  the  skin  of  the  forehead.) 

Shooting  aching  externally  on  the  left  frontal  protuberance, 
accompanied  by  vertigo  and  some  nausea  in  the  throat.  [ Hrr.'] 

* Comp,  especially  with  80,  also  with  74,  76,  77,  78. 
t See  7 5. 


CHINA. 


425 


Shooting  aching  on  the  right  frontal  protuberance, 
more  violent  when  touched  (aft.  10  m.).  [HrrJ] 

100.  Frequent  alteration  of  the  colour  of  the  face. 

Paleness  of  the  face.* 

Bad,  earthy  complexion. 

Pinched,  pale  face. 

Hippocratic  face  (pointed  nose,  hollow  eyes  with  blue  rings), 
indifference,  insensibility ; he  wants  to  know  nothing  about  those 
around  him,  nothing  about  things  that  he  most  liked  (aft.  1 h.). 

105.  Pinched,  sharpened  features,  pale,  unheal thy-lookiog  complexion, 
as  after  debauches,  f 

Redness  of  the  cheeks  and  of  the  ear-lobes. 


Puffy,  red  face.  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

Heat  of  the  face.  [J.  Raulin,1  Observat.  de  Med .,  Paris,  1754, 
PP-  243>  248;] 

On  coming  from  the  open  air  into  the  not  warm  room,  there 
occurred  burning  heat  in  the  face. 
no.  Alternate  heat  and  redness  in  the  face.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Momentary  contraction  of  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  as  if  the  skin 
in  the  middle  of  the  forehead  were  drawn  together  on  one  point  (aft. 

5 h.) . [m.-] 

Burning  pain  on  the  forehead  and  hot  frontal  perspiration. 
[Lhm.~\ 

Aching  over  the  face,  especially  near  the  nose  and  cheeks,  toge- 
ther with  a contraction  of  the  eyelids,  as  if  the  upper  and  lower  lids 
were  drawn  towards  one  another  (aft.  3 h.).  \Wsi\ 

Shooting  pressure  on  the  forehead,  above  the  nose  and  on  the 
cheeks  (aft.  32  h.).  [Fz.] 

1 15.  A pecking  pain  in  the  zygomatic  process  and  in  a right  molar 
tooth.  \_Htg7\ 

Fine  stitches  in  the  right  malar  bone,  which  go  off  by  pressure. 

[Htn.] 

A boil  on  the  cheek. 

Soft  pressure  going  upwards  over  the  root  of  the  nose  and  on  the 
eyebrow,  which  goes  off  on  touching,  with  tension  of  the  skin  of  the 
left  ala  nasi.  [Fz.] 

Aching  in  both  eyebrows,  more  externally,  aggravated  by  moving 
the  frontal  muscles  (aft.  3 h.).  [. Myr .] 

120.  Pain  above  the  left  orbit.  \_Hbg.~] 

Tearing  on  the  outer  canthus  of  the  left  eye.  \_Lr.~\ 

Fine  itching  pain  above  the  orbits.  [ Hbg.} 

Itching  on  the  left  eyelid.  \_Fz.] 

A tickling  sensation  on  the  eyelids  (aft.  5 h.).  [Htg.~\ 

125.  Violent  pain  in  the  eyelids.  [CW] 

Dry  feeling  betwixt  the  eyelids  and  eyeball,  causing  rubbing  pain 


# 101  to  104,  comp,  with  105. 
f See  101  to  104. 


1 Not  accessible. 


426 


CHINA. 


on  moving  the  eyelids,  without  alteration  in  the  appearance  of  the 
eye.  [Htg.] 

Eye  gum  in  the  outer  canthus  (after  sleep). 

Aching  pain  in  the  outer  canthi.  [Tz.] 

Smarting  first  in  one,  then  in  the  other  eye,  accompanied  by 
watering  of  them. 

130.  Aching  smarting  pain  in  the  eyes  as  from  salt,  she  must  always 
rub  them*  (aft.  J h.). 

Painless  pressure  in  the  eyes,  such  as  is  apt  to  occur  from  fatigue 
and  want  of  sleep  (aft.  ioj,  12  h.).  [Htn.] 

On  awaking,  at  night,  the  right  eye  felt  as  if  it  were  swimming 
in  water  (aft.  19  h.).  [St/.] 

In  the  eyes  a sensation,  as  in  general  weakness,  as  if  they  were 
much  sunk,  which  they  are  not  (aft.  j h.).  [Tz.] 

A quivering,  winking,  trembling  in  both  eyes  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Ln.] 
1 35 . Twitching  to  and  fro  of  the  left  lower  eyelid  (aft,  6 h.).  [TVs.] 

Lachrymation  of  the  eyes,  with  creeping  pains  in 
them  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  eyelids.  [Bch] 

The  eyes  are  somewhat  red,  with  aching  burning  pain  in  them, 
and  much  heat  (in  the  afternoon)  (aft.  6 h.). 

Contracted  pupils. 

Contracted  pupils  (immediately  and  aft.  3^  h.).  [Bch.] 

140.  Contracted  pupils  (aft.  f h.).  [ Htn .] 

Very  contracted  pupils  (aft.  1 h.).  [St/.] 

Pupils  mobile,  but  more  disposed  to  contraction  than  dilatation 
(aft.  20  h.). 

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Htn.] 

Very  dilated  pupils  (aft.  J h.).  [Htn.] 

145.  Extreme  dilatation  and  almost  immobility  of  pupils,  with  weak- 
ness of  vision,  so  that  he  cannot  see  distant  things  distinctly  (myopia), 
with  high  complexion  and  liveliness  (aft.  6 h.).  [Tz.] 

Black  points  fly  before  the  sightf  (aft.  4 h.). 

Darkness  before  the  eyes.J  \Lhm.] 

Dimness  of  vision.  [Cartheuser,  1.  c.] 

Amaurosis.  [Breslauer  Samml / 1728,  p.  1066.] 

150.  A ticking  noise  in  the  ear,  as  from  a distant  watch. 

First  a beating  sensation  in  the  ear,  then  a loud  ringing.§ 

Ringing  in  the  ears. 

Frequent  ringing  in  the  right  ear,  and  at  the  same  time  a tickling 
crawling  in  it,  as  if  an  insect  had  crept  in. [|  [Bch.] 

Ringing  in  the  ears  with  headache  in  the  temples.  [Tz.] 

155.  Ringing  in  the  ears  with  headache  in  the  temples.  [Lr] 

Roaring  in  the  ears.fj 

* From  the  exhalation,  compare  with  137. 
f Comp,  with  14.7 — 149. 

X 147— 149,  see  146. 

§ I5I>  15 comp,  with  153 — 1 55- 
II  *53 — 1 5 5?  comP-  with  151,  152. 

Comp,  with  157. 


1 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  china. 


CHINA. 


4*7 


Roaring  in  the  ears.*  [Css .] 

Something  seems  to  come  before  the  hearing  internally  (as  from 
deafness)f  (aft.  i h.). 

Hardness  of  hearing.^  [Morton,1  Opera,  ii,  pp.  76,  81.] 

160.  Tearing  in  the  lobes  of  the  ears.§ 

Heat  of  the  external  ear. 

A tickling  in  the  ear.  [ Hbg.~\ 

Vesicles  behind  the  ears. 

Eruption  in  the  concha. 

1 65 . Tearing  on  the  cartilage  of  the  ear  and  in  the  external 
meatus  anditorius.  I!  [Hrr.] 

(Aching  pain  in  the  internal  ear,  like  earache)  (aft.  3 h.). 

Pain  in  the  left  ear  only  when  touched  (aft.  6 d.).  [TVs.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose  (after  the  heat  of  the  cheek 
has  gone)  that  spreads  on  to  the  side  of  the  nose  (aft.  5 h.). 

Tearing  pain  on  the  back  of  the  nose. 

170.  Smarting  deep  in  the  left  nostril,  every  inspiration  causing  a sud- 
den stitch-like  pain  ; on  compressing  the  nose  the  smarting  becomes 
worse,  and  then  it  also  itches  externally  on  the  back  of  the  nose,  in 
the  evening  (aft.  | h.).  [Fz.] 

Fine  needle-pricks  on  the  cartilage  of  the  septum  narium.  [ Hrr .] 
Redness  and  heat  only  on  the  nose  (aft.  12  h.). 

(He  fancies  he  smells  a corpse-like  odour.) 

Epistaxis,  in  the  morning  between  6 and  7 o’clock,  after  rising 
from  bed,  for  several  successive  days.  [Htg.] 

175.  Frequent  profuse  epistaxis.  [Raulin,  1.  c.] 

Epistaxis  after  blowing  the  nose  strongly.  [TVs.'] 

On  the  upper  lip,  on  the  right  side  near  the  commissure  of  the 
mouth,  sore  feeling  as  after  much  wiping  in  coryza. ^1  [Tz.] 

On  the  lower  lip,  near  the  left  commissure  of  the  mouth,  pain  as 
if  an  eroding  ulcer  were  there.  [Tz.] 

The  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lip  pains  as  if  sore  and  exco- 
riated.** 

180.  Eruption  on  the  lips  and  tongue;  small  ulcers  which  itch  and 
burn  much.  [Schlegel,2  in  Hufel.  Journ.  vii,  iv,  p.  1 6 1 .] 
(Puckered,  wrinkled  epidermis  of  the  lips)  (aft.  5 h.). 

The  lower  lip  cracks  in  the  middle  (on  sneezing). 

(Chapped  lips.) 

Dry  lips,  without  thirst  (aft.  7 h.).  [.Fz.] 

185.  Blackish  lips.  [Dan.  Cruger,3  in  ATI  sc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii, 
Ann.  3.] 

Speechlessness.  [Richard,3  Recueil  d’Observ.  de  Med.,  ii, 
P-  5I7-] 

* Comp,  with  156.  ||  See  160. 

f Comp,  with  159.  177,  178,  see  179. 

X See  158.  Comp,  with  177,  178. 

§ Comp,  with  165. 


1 Observed  effects  of  overdosing. 

2 Effects  of  china  in  agues.  This  eruption  is  said  to  be  critical. 

3 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  china. 


428 


CHINA. 


Slight  rigor,  followed  by  speechlessness.  [A.  Thompson,1 2  in 
Med,  Inq . and  Observ.  iv,  No.  24. 

At  night  (before  12  o’clock)  tearing  pressure  in  the  right  upper 
and  lower  jaw.* 

On  the  upper  jaw  a cutting,  burning  pain  (when  standing)  (aft. 
7 h.).  [/is.] 

190.  Twitching,  obtuse  stitches  in  the  right  fewer  jaw.f  \Wth.'\ 

Tearing  on  the  left  lower  jaw.  [ATrr.j 

Swelling  of  the  gums  and  lips.  [Formey,s  Med.  Ephem .,  i,  2.] 
Drawing  toothache  readily  occurs  in  the  open  air  and  when 
exposed  to  a draught  of  air. 

Toothache ; stuffed  coryza  and  watering  eyes. 

195.  Toothache,  a shooting  outwards  in  the  front  teeth. J 
Toothache  with  looseness  of  the  teeth  (aft.  3 h.). 

Loose  teeth,  only  painful  when  chewing. 

On  biting  the  teeth  together  aching  pain  in  the  crowns  of  the 
right  molars.  [Tz.] 

Toothache,  like  an  aching  drawing  in  the  left  lower  jaw. § [Fz.] 
200.  Twitching  tearing  in  the  upper  hack  molars  of  the 
left  side  (aft.  5 h.)  [Htn.] 

Digging  in  the  upper  molars,  diminished  momentarily  by  biting 
the  teeth  together  and  pressing  on  them  (aft.  40  h.).  \_Htn.'\ 

(During  the  accustomed  tobacco-smoking)  tearing  toothache 
extending  upwards  and  backwards  in  the  upper  jaw  followed  by  a 
sort  of  fainting  fit.  [Tz.] 

Aching,  drawing  pain  in  the  left  upper  row  of  molars,  with 
sensation  as  if  the  gums  or  the  inside  of  the  cheek  were  swollen 
(aft.  1 h.).  [Tz.] 

In  the  morning,  drawing,  aching  toothache  in  one  upper  molar, 
with  sensation  of  numbness  in  it  (aft.  24  h.).  [Tz.] 

205.  The  lower  incisors  are  painful,  as  if  they  had  been  knocked. 

In  the  morning,  drawing  pain  in  the  incisor  teeth.  ||  [Tz.] 

Small,  fine  stitches,  with  tearing  in  the  right  upper  molars, 
neither  diminished  nor  increasedsby  touching  or  drawing  in  cold  airff 
(aft.  2*  h.).  [Htn.\ 

Throbbing  toothache.** 

Pecking  pain  in  one  of  the  upper  molars. ft  [Htg.~] 

210.  Sorethroat.3  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

In  the  pit  of  the  throat,  sensation  as  if  it  would  be  painful  on 

* Comp,  with  199,  203,  204,  partly  also  with  191,  198,  200,  202,  206. 
f See  195,  207. 
j Comp,  with  190  and  207. 

§ See  188,  203,  204. 

||  For  204  and  206  Rhus  toxicodendron  seems  to'  be  an  antidote. 

IT  See  190,  195. 

**  Comp,  wdth  209. 
ff  See  208. 

1 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  china.  This  symptom,  with  S.  448, 
574,  602,  676,  698,  occurred  in  a hysterical  subject  instead  of  a paroxysm  of  ague. 

2 Not  accessible. 

3 In  original  “angina  faucium.” 


CHINA. 


429 

swallowing,  like  a sore  throat  (and  yet  it  does  not  hurt  when  he 
swallows). 

Painful  deglutition,  swollen  submaxillary  glands,  which  are 
painful,  especially  when  he  swallows. 

A shooting  on  the  right  side  in  the  throat  only  when  he 
swallows. 

Throat  internally  as  if  swollen  ; shooting  pain  on  the  left  side  of 
the  tongue  only  when  swallowing  ; there  is  only  aching  pain  at  this 
spot  when  speaking  and  breathing. 

215.  Shooting  in  the  throat  from  a slight  draught  of  air,  when  not 
swallowing. 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  shooting  in  the  throat,  not 
when  swallowing,  but  when  breathing. 

Contractive  sensation  in  the  throat.* * * §  \_Hbg.~\ 

(A  choking  and  contraction  in  the  gullet  without  impediment  to 
breathing.) 

Deglutition  difficult,  as  if  caused  by  narrowing  of  the  throat. 

[An.-] 

220.  On  bending  back  the  head,  tension  in  the  gullet,  which,  how- 
ever, does  not  prevent  deglutition.  [T%.] 

Scratching  on  the  palate,  also  when  not  swallowing  (aft.  8 d.). 

Tobacco  smoke  seems  to  him  unusually  acrid  and  stinging  at 
the  back  of  the  palate  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.] 

Tiresome  rough  feeling  in  the  throat.  \_Stf',’] 

Painless  swelling  of  the  velum  palati  and  uvula  f (aft.  3 h.). 

225.  Painful  swelling  on  the  side  of  the  tongue  poste- 
riorly. 

It  smarts  on  the  middle  of  the  tongue  as  if  the  part  was  exco- 
riated or  burnt. 

A vesicle  under  the  tongue,  which  is  painful  when  the  tongue  is 
moved. 

Fine  stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue. 4 

Sensation  on  the  tongue  as  if  it  were  dry  and  covered  with 
mucus  § (aft.  1 h.). 

230.  Smarting  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  as  from  pepper,  then  accumu- 
lation of  saliva  at  this  part.  [Fz.] 

Burning  stitches  on  the  tongue.jl  [Hrr.~\ 

Here  and  there  in  the  parotid  gland  flying  shooting  pains. 

Simply  painful  submaxillary  glands  (under  the  angle  of  the  lower 
jaw),  especially  on  touching  and  on  moving  the  neck. 

A choking  or  squeezing  aching  jn  one  of  the  right  submaxillary 
glands  per  se , but  more  when  moving  the  neck  or  touching  it. 

235.  Contractive  sensation  in  the  salivary  glands  3 ptyalism.  [Fz.] 
Much  saliva  in  the  mouth  with  nausea  (after  2 h.).  \Ln.~\ 

* 217,  219,  see  224,  225. 

f 224,  225,  comp.  217,  219. 

j Comp.  231. 

§ Comp.  239  to  241. 

||  See  228. 


CHINA. 


430 

Collection  of  saliva,  combined  with  nausea.  \_Hbg^\ 

After  an  agreeable  surprise  much  bright  blood  came  rapidly  into 
the  mouth  (aft.  24  h.).  [6y.] 

Dryness  in  the  mouth.*  [Stahl,  Obs.  Clin.,  pp.  144,  171.] 

240.  Dryness  in  the  mouth  with  thirst.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Great  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  throat,  with  cool  breath  (aft.  1 
h.).  [Ln.] 

, not  covered  with  dirty  fur.) 
ngue,  especially  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  7 h.). 

In  the  morning  very  white  furred  tongue.  \Wth.'\ 

245.  Tongue  covered  with  a thick,  dirty  white  crust  (aft.  5 h.).  [G^.] 
Yellow  furred  tongue.  [Fischer,  1.  c. — Bek.] 

Yellowish  furred  tongue.  [Bch.~\ 

Clean  tongue,  with  bitter  taste.  [Schlegel,  1.  c.] 

The  mouth  is  slimy,  and  the  taste  watery  and  insipid. 

250.  Slimy  taste  in  the  mouth,  which  makes  butter  nauseous. 

After  drinking,  flat,  qualmish  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Bitter  taste  of  food,  especially  of  flour  cakesf  (aft.  6 h.). 

Though  he  has  no  bitter  taste  per  se  in  the  mouth,  yet  all  he  eats 
tastes  bitter  ; after  swallowing  the  food  there  was  no  longer  bitterness 
in  the  mouth. 

Constant  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. { 

255.  In  the  morning,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Bitter  taste. § [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

Bitterness  of  the  mouth.  [Quarin,1  Method.  Med.  Feb.,  p.  23.] 
Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  ; tobacco  tastes  bitter  when  smoking. 

l^-i. 

Bitter  taste  in  the  throat,  causing  him  to  swallow  his  saliva  con- 
stantly (immediately).  [Htn.~\ 

260.  A nasty,  sometimes  bitter,  taste  in  the  mouth,  especially  in  the 
morning ; the  food  did  not  taste  nice,  but  not  bitter,  [i/rr.] 

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  on  drinking  coffee.  [Cn.] 

Beer  tastes  bitter  and  goes  to  his  head. 

Bread  when  chewed  tastes  well,  but  is  bitter  when  swallowed. 

Bitter  salt  taste  of  roll  and  butter,  with  dryness  in  the  palate  and 
thirst ; when  not  eating  there  is  no  abnormal  taste  in  the  mouth, 
only  dryness  and  thirst.  [. Bch .] 

265.  Salt  taste  in  the  mouth.  || 

All  food  tasted  uncommonly  salt,  afterwards  bitter.  [Myr.] 
Sourness  in  the  mouth. [T%.] 

# 239  to  241,  see  229. 

f 252,  253,  262,  comp,  with  261,  partly  also  with  258,  263,  266. 

X 254,  255,  comp,  with  256  to  260. 

§ 256  to  260,  see  254,  255. 

if  Comp,  with  660,  partly  also  with  264  and  271. 

See  268,  272,  275. 


(Yellowish  tongue 
Thickly  furred  to 
[Htg.-] 


1 Physical  effects  of  powder. 


CHINA. 


43 1 

Frequently  a sour  taste  in  the  mouth  as  if  his  stomach  was 
deranged  by  fruit. 

Black  bread  tastes  sour*  (aft.  3 h.). 

270.  Coffee  tastes  sourish. 

A sweetish  salt  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  3 h.).  [S//1] 

First  sweetish  then  sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  much  saliva.  [Fz.] 
Sweetish  taste  in  the  mouth.  \JVth.~\ 

Tobacco  when  smoked  tastes  sweetish.  \Wtln^\ 

275.  A sensation  in  the  mouth  causing  collection  of  saliva,  as  if  he  had 
smelt  strong  vinegar,  f 

Nasty  taste  in  the  mouth  as  after  cheese.  \_Hsch.'] 

Sensation  as  of  a putrid  exhalation  out  of  the  mouth. 

Towards  morning  a nauseous,  putrid  smell  out  of  the  mouth, 
which  goes  off  as  soon  as  she  eats  something. 

Mucus  in  the  mouth  in  the  morning  after  walking  and  after  some 
prolonged  exertion,  which  he  thinks  must  smell  ill  to  those  about 
him  j he  thinks  he  smells  badly  out  of  the  throat. 

280.  He  has  no  taste  in  consequence  of  smoking  tobacco.  [Hbg.] 
Tobacco  has  no  taste  when  he  smokes. J [Jn.] 

He  cannot  bear  his  (accustomed)  tobacco  smoking,  it  affects  his 
nerves.§ 

He  feels  always  as  if  he  had  eaten,  drunk,  and  smoked  to  satiety, 
and  yet  he  has  a proper,  good  taste  of  all  those  things ||  (aft.  some 
hours). 

Aversion  from  coffee,  though  food  tastes  right. 

285.  Aversion  from  beer. 

Aversion  from  water  and  inclination  for  beer. 

Great  longing  for  wine. 

Supper  has  little  taste.' % \_Hbg.'\ 

Supper  is  relished,  but  he  is  immediately  satiated,  and  hence  can 
eat  but  little. 

290.  No  desire  for  food,  but  the  taste  is  all  right. 

Anorexia.  [J.  W.  Romberg,1  Mis.  Nat.  Cur .,  Dec.  iii,  Ann.  9, 
10,  Obs.  109.] 

Little  appetite.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Indifference  to  food  and  drink;  it  is  only  when  he 
begins  to  eat  that  some  appetite  and  relish  for  food 
comes  (aft.  6 h.). 

No  desire  for  food  or  drink.** 

295.  Want  of  appetite  as  from  slight  nausea.ft  [#/£.] 

The  midday  meal  is  not  at  all  relished. 

# 269,  270,  comp,  with  316,  partly  also  with  315. 

t 268,  275,  comp,  with  267,  272. 

X See  282. 

||  283,  290,  comp,  with  297. 

§ Comp,  with  281,  partly  also  274,  280. 

f See  296. 

Comp,  partly  with  299,  300. 
ft  See  298. 

++  Comp,  with  288,  partly  also  with  280. 


1 Effects  of  china  in  agues. 


432 


CHINA. 


Little  appetite  at  noon  from  feeling  of  satiety.* * * §  [Bch.] 

Extreme  aversion  from  and  loathing  of  not  disagreeable  food, 
even  when  it  is  not  present  and  he  only  hears  it  mentioned,  with 
dread  of  work,  constant  day-drowsiness,  and  yellowness  of  the  eye- 
ballsf  (aft.  8 h.). 

Little  thirst.j  [An.] 

300.  No  thirst  when  eating.  \_Bch.~\ 

Canine  hunger,  with  insipid  taste  in  the  mouth. 

She  is  hungry,  but  does  not  relish  her  food. 

Hunger  and  yet  want  of  appetite ; the  food  which  tasted  right 
was  disagreeable  to  him  in  his  mouth.  [An.] 

Hunger  at  an  unusual  time  in  the  afternoon.  [ Htn .] 

305.  Longing  appetite ; he  has  longings,  but  he  knows  not  for  what.§ 

He  has  appetite  for  many  things,  hut  knows  not 
rightly  for  what. 

Longing  often  for  unknown  things. 

In  the  morning  (8  o’clock)  great  hunger  and  appetite,  he  knows 
not  for  what.  ||  [Lhm.] 

Great  desire  for  sour  cherries.  [Bch.] 

310.  A kind  of  ravenous  hunger,  with  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit, 
(aft.  2 h.). 

Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  fauces  and  oesophagus  (aft.  11  d.). 

[m.] 

First  a burning,  then  an  agreeable  warming  sensation  from  the 
upper  part  of  the  chest  to  the  stomach.  [Htg.] 

Scraping  sensation  in  the  fauces,  especially  on  the  border  of  the 
larynx,  as  after  rancid  eructation  or  heartburn. 

Eructatioillf  (immediately).  [Htn.] 

315.  After  bread  and  butter  bitter,  sourish  eructation.**  [Lhm.] 

After  partaking  of  milk  incomplete,  sourish  eructationff  (aft.  i\ 
h.).  [Fz.] 

Tasteless  eructation  after  eating.  [Stf.] 

A nasty  slime  often  rises  up. 

After  a meal  bitter  eructationf  J (aft.  2 h.). 

320.  Eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  food  he  had  eaten. 

Empty  eructation  of  nothing  but  air  §§  (aft.  2 h.). 

A sighing  kind  of  movement  with  eructation,  intermediate 
between  sighing  and  eructation  (aft.  f h.). 

Eructation,  as  if  caused  by  loathing,  and  pain  in  abdomen  (aft.  £ 
h.).  [tFr.] 

An  eructation,' as  from  inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  1 h.).  [Wr.] 
325.  Whilst  eating  and  drinking  shooting  in  the  side  and  back,  and 
constant  inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  5 h,). 

Whilst  eating  drawing  twitching  pain  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen 
(aft.  2 h.). 

* See  283,  290.  314,  317,  see  321. 

f Comp,  with  295.  ##  See  319. 

% See  294.  ft  See  269,  270. 

§ 3 °5>  306,  307,  comp. 'with  308.  ||  Comp,  with  315. 

||  See  305,  306,  307.  §§  Comp,  with  314,  317. 


CHINA. 


433 


After  a meal,  nausea  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  throat.  [Hrr.] 
Want  of  appetite  and  nausea,  he  has  always  an  inclination  tro 
vomit  without  being  able  to  do  so  (forenoon  and  afternoon). 

* After  eating  fulness,  and  yet  good  appetite  before  the  meal.* 

330.  After  eating,  distension  of  the  abdomen,  like  fulness. 

After  eating  a motion  of  the  bowels. 

After  eating  drowsiness,  t 

After  the  midday  meal  great  desire  to  lie  down  and  sleep. 

After  eating  exhaustion,  so  that  he  would  like  to  lk  down  and 
sleep. 

335.  After  eating  the  loathing,  the  flying  heat  and  ebullition  of  blood 
go  off. 

Nausea  [Baker,1  Med.  Transact . iii,  p.  i62.-*-Quarin, 
1.  c.] 

Nausea  with  good  appetite.  [Schlegel,  1.  c.,  p.  161. ] 

He  feels  as  if  some  food  remained  up  in  his  throat  (aft.  3 h.).  [£//'.] 
After  a meal  he  remains  for  a long  time  as  full  as  when  he  had 
just  eaten ; the  food  seems  to  stick  high  up. 

340.  Inclination  to  vomit.  [Mch.'] 

Nausea  without  vomiting.  \_Lhm.~\ 

Inclination  to  vomit  and  vomiting. 

Vomiting.  [Morton,  1.  c. — Baker,  1.  c. — Friborg,3  Diss.  de 
usu  cort . Peruv .,  1773.] 

Continued  vomiting.  [J.  Fr.  Bauer,3  Acta  Nat.  Cur.  iii, 
obs.  70.] 

345.  Half  an  hour  after  the  midday  meal  pressing  aching  headache 
that  lasted  till  bed-time.  \_Wr.~\ 

After  a moderate  meal  followed  by  a walk,  while  sitting  sick 
anxiety  in  the  stomach,  as  from  over-loading  and  derangement 
of  the  stomach,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  hunger.J  [#z.] 

Weariness  and  laziness  after  dinner.§  [Htn.] 
Exhaustion  and  drowsiness  after  supper  (aft.  12  h.). 
[Htn.] 

After  a meal  a hard  pressing  pain  in  both  sides  below  the  navel. || 

[Bch.] 

350.  After  a moderate  supper,  eaten  with  appetite,  immediately  colic, 
that  is  : distended  abdomen  and  here  and  there  sharp  aching  pains 
mixed  with  pinching  in  all  the  bowels. H 
Stomachache,  spasm  of  stomach.** 

# 329>  33°5  339>  comp,  with  338. 

t 332>  333)  334)  comp,  with  347,  348. 

+ See  3^4)  366,  367,  368,  369. 

§ 347 > 348,  see  332,  333. 

I!  See  350. 

*f[  Comp,  with  349. 

**  Comp,  with  352 — 355  and  359,  360,  362,  363,  365. 


1 Effects  of  Cinchona  rubra.  This  symptom  in  both  from  the  powder. 

2 Physical  effects  of  the  powder. 

8 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  china. 


28 


434 


CHINA. 


Pressure  in  the  stomach.*  [Roschin,1  Annalen  der  Heilkunde 
1811,  Febr.] 

In  the  morning  in  bed,  when  lying  on  the  side  a pressure  in  the 
stomach  (as  if  it  were  constricted),  which  went  off  on  lying  on  the 
back.  [S//'.] 

In  the  stomach  a pressure  as  from  fulness. 

355.  In  the  stomach  violent  aching,  which  went  off  while  eating. f 

im 

After  eating  any  food,  however  little,  immediately 
a hard  long-continued  pressure  in  the  stomaeh.J  [Hrr.] 
After  every  meal  hard  pressure  in  the  stomach.  § 

With  a good  appetite,  after  eating  (vegetables),  at  first  stomach- 
ache, then  accumulation  of  flatulence,  then  vomiting. 

Weight  and  pressure  in  the  stomach. ||  [Percival,2  Essays , 
vol.  i.] 

360.  Heavy  pressure  in  the  stomach.  [Kreysig,3  Diss.  Obs.  de  Febr . 
Quart.,  Viteb.,  1797,  p.  17.] 

After  aching  in  the  stomach,  a burning  rises  half  way  up  in  the 
chest. 

Oppresses  the  stomach.  [Baker,  1.  c.] 

Feeling  of  fulness  in  the  stomach.  \An.~\ 

The  food  partaken  of  at  supper  remains  undigested  in  the 
stomach.fi 

365.  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  stomach.  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

Milk  readily  deranges  the  stomach. 

By  taking  rather  too  much  food,  even  of  the  most  innocent  kind, 
the  stomach  is  immediately  deranged,  and  an  insipid  taste  in  the 
mouth,  a fulness  in  the  abdomen,  crossness  and  headache  come  on. 
Indigestion.  [Friborg,  1.  c.] 

Feeling  of  emptiness  and  qualmishness  in  the  stomach. 

370.  Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  stomach. 

After  every  mouthful  of  drink  feeling  of  internal  coldness  in  the 
epigastrium,  which  is  renewed  at  every  breath  (aft.  4 h.). 

Pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  like  aching,  which  is  alleviated 
every  time  he  rises  from  his  seat,  recurs  on  sitting  down  and  lasts  two 
hours  (aft.  f h.).  \Wrd\ 

Tearing  aching  under  the  last  true  ribs,  at  the  left  side  of  the 
ensiform  cartilage.  [Gjj.] 

Sore  sensation  with  pressure  (or  pain  as  if  a wound 
were  pressed  on)  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis 

(several  mornings).  [Gjr.] 

* 352  to  355,  see  351.  _ 
f Alternating  action  with  356. 

X See  357,  358. 

§ 357?  358>  comp,  with  356,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  alternating  action  355. 
tl  359,  360,  362,  363,  365,  see  351. 

364,  366,  367,  partly  also  369,  comp,  with  346  and  368. 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 Physical  effects  of  powder. 

3 Not  accessible. 


CHINA. 


435 


375.  A violent  aching  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  all  were 
excoriated  there,  the  same  in  all  positions,  also  when  touched  ; soon 
after  this  a violent  diarrhoea,  whereby  the  pain  in  the  scrobiculus 
cordis  was  not  relieved  (aft.  7 h.) . [Myr.] 

Stomachache,  which  takes  away  the  breath.  [Stahl,  l.c.] 

A squeezing  together  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  impedes 
inspiration  (aft.  \ h.),  \_Htn.~\ 

Sufferings  under  the  short  ribs.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Hypochondrial  sufferings.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

380.  Anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  especially  after  a 
meal.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Cartheuser, 

l-c.]  . . 

Pain  in  the  abdomen,  aching,  pinching  (shooting),  under  the 
scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue,  but  no  stool  comes, 
in  the  evening*  (aft.  36  h.).  \_Fz .] 

Twitching  shooting  in  the  stomach  (aft.  3 h.).  \Wth.~\ 

Under  the  last  rib  tearing  drawing,  when  standing.  [Fz.] 

385.  Under  the  last  rib  contractive  pain  and  as  if  bruised,  only  when 
walking  + (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.] 

Flying  stitches  here  and  there  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen. J 
After  every  drink  a stitch  in  the  precordial  region. § 

After  every  mouthful  of  drink  shivering  or  chilliness 
with  goose-skin  (aft.  6 h.). 

After  drinking  griping  as  from  a purgative. 

390.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  ||  \_Hrr.~\ 

Sharp  stitches  in  front  under  the  last  ribs,  without 
relation  to  expiration  or  inspiration.!  [Gss.] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  to  the  sternum.  [Lhm.\ 
Shooting  aching  in  several  spots  of  the  epigastrium,  in  the  morning 
in  bed  (for  four  successive  days).  \_Hrr.~\ 

After  moderate  eating,  at  noon  and  in  the  evening,  a pinching 
aching  somewhat  above  the  navel  in  the  epigastrium,  which  becomes 
intolerable  on  walking,  and  is  only  allayed  by  perfect  rest. 

395.  In  the  umbilical  region  severe  cutting,  with  cold  sweat  on  the 
forehead  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  a few  minutes).  \_TVr.~\ 

Pains  in  the  abdomen  in  the  umbilical  region,  com- 
bined with  shivering. 

In  the  region  of  the  spleen  cutting  aching,  as  if  the  spleen  were 
indurated.  [Fz.] 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  epigastrium,  just  beneath  the 
ribs,  from  within  outwards,  increased  by  inspiring  (aft.  7 h.).  [i/rr.] 
When  walking,  even  slowly,  shooting  in  the  spleen.  [Fz.] 

400.  Pinching  stitches  in  the  left  epigastric  region  (aft.  ij  h.). 

[Htn.] 


# 382,  383,  but  especially  390  to  392,  comp,  with  386,  459. 
f See  433,  455,  also  446  to  453. 

t Comp,  with  391,  398,  399,  402,  403,  and  464  to  469. 

§ Comp,  with  638^ 

||  See  649. 

! See  386,  398,  399,  402,  403,  and  464  to  469. 


CHINA. 


3 ^ 


Obstruction  of  the  spleen.  [Murray,1  Apparat.  Medicam .,  edit, 
sec.,  i,  pp.  856,  857.] 

Continued  stitches  under  the  right  ribs  in  the  hepatic  region, 
neither  diminished  nor  increased  by  inspiration  or  expiration  (aft. 
4h  .).[Htn.] 

Violent  stitches  from  within  outwards  in  the  hepatic  region,  only 
during  expiration  (aft.  5 h.).  [Htn.\ 

Several  attacks  of  intermittent  aching  in  the  hepatic  region  when 
standing,  which  goes  off  on  bending  the  body  forwards ; on  touching 
the  region  is  painful  as  if  gathering  (aft.  5 h.).  \_Fz .] 

405.  Swelling  of  the  liver.  [Kreysig,  1.  c.,  p.  27.] 

Obstruction  of  the  liver.  [Murray,  1.  c.] 

Indurations  in  the  abdomen.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Indurations2  of  the  intestines.  [Joh.  Gottfr.  Berger,  Diss.  de 
Chinchina  ab  iniquis  judiciis  vindicate* , Viteb.,  1711.] 

The  epigastrium  feels  tightened,  \_Hrr.'] 

410.  Fulness  of  the  abdomen.*  [Kreysig,  1.  c.] 

Obstinate  and  anguishing  tension  of  the  abdomen.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 
Flatulent  distension.  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

Flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Painful  distension  of  the  abdomen,  and  especially  of  the  hypo- 
gastrium.f 

415.  In  the  morning  distension  of  the  abdomen,  without  flatulence. 

At  noon  before  eating  and  soon  after  eating,  cutting  in  the 
abdomen,  as  in  incarceration  of  flatulence. 

Fermentation  in  the  abdomen  from  eating  fruit  (cherries). 
Flatulence  and  frequent  discharge  of  flatus.  J \_Hbg.~] 

Tympanites. § [Stahl,  1,  c. — Thom.  Thomson,3  Med.  Rath - 
Pfl‘geK Leipzig,  i779>  P-  H7-] 

420.  Distension  of  the  abdomen  as  from  drinking  much,  and  partaking 
of  flatulent  food.  [ Hbg .] 

Distension  of  the  abdomen,  pain  in  the  abdomen  and  diarrhoea. 
[Kreysig,  1.  c.,  p.  25.] 

Attacks  of  hardness,  distension,  and  pains  of  the  abdomen.4  [Al. 
Thompson,  in  Med.  Inq.  and  Obser .,  iv,  No.  24.] 

Tiresome,  tight  distension  of  the  abdomen.  [iST/i] 

Swelling  of  the  abdomen.  [Cartheuser,  1.  c.] 

425.  Ascites,  encysted  dropsy.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.).  \Stf.~\ 

Rumbling  in  the  epigastrium  (aft.  2 h.).  \Wth.\ 

* 410  to  41 3,  see  414,  41 5. 

t 414?  415,  comp,  with  410  to  413,  and  419  to  424. 

J See  492. 

§ 4i9  to  423»  see  414,  415. 


1 Supposed  ill  effects  of  china,  mentioned  only  to  reject  them. 

2 In  the  original,  “angustia  et  firmitas.”  All  other  effects  of  china  referred  to 
this  writer  are  mentioned  by  him  only  to  reject  them. 

3 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  China. 

4 This  with  S.  740  and  882,  occurred  instead  of  the  ague  paroxysm,  five  days  after 
beginning  China. 


CHINA,  437 

Rattling  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  backwards  and  down- 
wards, as  if  in  the  descending  colon,  [Fz.] 

Grumbling  in  the  hypogastrium.  [Fr.] 

430.  Cruel,  intolerable  colicky  pains.  [J.  Fr.  Bauer,  1.  c.] 

Colics.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Flatulent  colic  (aft.  2 h.). 

Flatulent  colic  deep  in  the  hypogastrium ; the  lowest  bowels  are 
as  if  constricted,  and  the  flatulence  vainly  attempts  to  force  its  way 
out  with  aching  and  tensive  pains,  and  even  under  the  short  ribs  it 
causes  tension  and  anxiety. 

Pain  in  the  abdomen  with  nausea.  [W.  May,1  in  Lond.  Med, 
Journ .,  1788.] 

435.  Pain  in  the  abdomen,  and  at  the  same  time  great  thirst  (aft.  1 
h.).  [ Bch .] 

Scorbutic  colic.  [Cruger,  1.  c.] 

Indescribable  pains  in  the  abdomen.  [J.  A.  Limprecht,2  Acta 
Nat.  Cur .,  ii,  Obs.  129.] 

Ulcers  in  the  abdomen.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Inflammation  in  the  abdomen.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

440.  Heat  in  the  umbilical  region.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Aching  in  the  umbilical  region.  \_Hbg.'] 

During  the  aching  in  the  abdomen  some  chilliness.  [ Wr.~\ 

Hard  pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  3 m.). 

Aching  pain  in  the  region  of  the  caecum  (when  sitting).  [An."] 
445.  In  the  evening  severe  aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea 
would  come  on,  when  sitting,  which  was  dissipated  by  walking  and 
standing.  [F%.] 

Contractive  pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening  when  sitting, 
which  goes  off  on  raising  himself  up,  but  still  more  on  standing  and 
walking.*  [Fz.] 

On  the  right  side,  below  the  navel,  a contractive  aching,  as  if  an 
induration  were  there,  when  sitting.  [Fz.] 

Contraction  of  the  abdomen  and  of  the  sides  with  heavings  and 
fallings  of  the  scapulae.3  [Al.  Thompson,  1.  c.] 

Pain  in  the  abdomen,  like  pinching  and  drawing,  mostly  when 
sitting.  [Fz.] 

450.  Sensation  of  contraction  of  the  intestinal  canal,  and  grumbling  in 
the  hypogastrium.  \_Hrr. ] 

Cramp  pain  in  the  groin  coming  in  jerks,  when  standing.  [Fz.] 
Pinching  and  colic-like  constriction  of  the  bowels  above  the 
navel,  when  he  rises  up  after  stooping.  [Fz.] 

Pinching  together,  as  if  it  were  externally,  under  the  right  side  of 
the  navel,  when  sitting,  in  the  evening  (aft.  13  h.).  [Fz.] 

Violent  pinching  in  the  epigastrium  (he  must  crouch  together  to 

* 446  to  453,  see  385,  433  and  455. 


1 Physical  effects  of  powder. 

2 Effects  of  China  in  agues. 

3 See  note  to  S.  187. 


438 


CHINA, 


relieve  himself)  (aft.  I h.),  alternating  with  inclination  to  vomit  and 
urging  to  stool,  with  rigor  all  over ; after  the  pinching  aching  in  the 
epigastrium.  \JVth.~] 

455.  Spasmodic  pain  in  the  abdomen,  compounded  of  aching  and 
constriction  (aft.  24  h.). 

Aching  and  heaviness  in  the  abdomen. 

Pinching,  aching  pain  in  the  abdomen  when  walking,  towards 
evening.  [Tz.] 

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  with  increased  hunger  and  exhaustion 
(aft.  3 h.). 

Pinching,  shooting  pains  in  the  abdomen*  (aft.  i-J-  h.). 

460.  Violent  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  which  went  off  on  rising  up 
from  his  seat.  \Wr.~\ 

In  the  abdomen  above  the  pubes  pinching  going  here  and  there, 
as  if  a diarrhoea  would  occur,  with  small  discharges  of  flatus,  while 
sitting  (aft.  27  h.).  [Tz.] 

Beating  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen. 

Extremely  violent  aching  shooting  on  the  left  side 
below  the  navel,  on  walking  quickly  and  afterwards 

(aft.  2 h.).  [G^.] 

Obtuse  shooting  pain  in  the  region  of  the  right  kidney, 
worse  on  bending  the  bodyt  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hrr.] 

465.  Obtuse  shooting  on  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  round  about 
the  navel,  and  at  the  same  under  the  right  nipple  towards  the 
interior  (aft.  1 h.).  [i/rr.] 

Obtuse  shooting  above  the  navel  on  the  right,  worse  when 
touched.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Obtuse  shooting  in  the  left  hypogastrium,  in  the  region  of  the 
kidney.  \_Hrr.~\ 

Obtuse  stitches  in  the  lumbar  regions.  \Hrr.~\ 

When  sitting,  during  inspiration,  stitches  daiting  downwards  in 
the  abdomen.  [Tz.] 

470.  Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  in  frequent  fits,  in  the  umbilical  region. t 

[A.] 

When  walking,  drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen. 
[*“*•] 

Great  discharge  of  flatus,  together  with  a drawing  in  the  abdo- 
men during  a hard  stool,  which  is  evacuated  with  difficulty  § (aft.  48 

h.).  [m.] 

When  flatus  is  about  to  be  discharged,  the  abdomen  is  pinched 
together  with  violent  pains. |j 

In  the  evening,  between  6 and  10  o’clock,  great  grumbling  and 
rolling  about  of  much  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  with  aching  sensa- 
tion, whereupon  very  foetid  flatus  is  discharged.  [Bhr .] 

475.  Tearing  in  the  navel.  [Gjj.] 

# Comp,  with  382,  400. 

t 464—469?  see  386,  391. 

+ See  491?  549- 

§ See  495,  496,  also  481  and  516. 

||  See  461,  490,  491. 


CHINA. 


439 


Extremely  violent  tearing  on  the  right  side  near  the  navel, 
towards  the  groin,  in  the  whole  inguinal  region,  diminished  by 
bending  back.  [G^.] 

In  the  abdomen,  under  the  navel,  tearing  and  rumbling.  \_Hbg.~\ 
Pain  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  i £?)’. 

In  the  inguinal  ring  excoriation-pain,  and  sensation  as  if  a 
hernia  would  come  out  through  the  sore  ring  (aft.  4 h.). 

480.  Aching  tearing  pain  on  the  left,  near  the  pubes,  [i/rr.] 

Increased  peristaltic  movement  in  the  hypogastrium,  associated 
with  aching.  \_Hbg.~] 

Aching  in  both  sides  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  a stool  ought  to  come 
but  cannot. 

(With  urging  and  straining  to  stool,  nothing  but  flatus  comes 
away.) 

CalJ  to  stool.  \_Hrr.~] 

485.  During  the  day  a soft  stool.  \_Bhr,"] 

Stool  thinner  than  usual*  (aft.  24  h.).  [Bch.] 

Looseness  of  the  bowels.  [Morton,  1.  c.] 

Lumpy,  yellow,  soft  stool,  in  the  morning,  [T%.] 

Bilious  stools.  [Alpini,1  Hist.  Febr.  Epid .,  p.  9 3.] 

490.  Pain  in  the  bowels  before  a discharge  of  flatus. 

Before  a discharge  of  flatus,  cutting  pains  dart  in  all  directions 
through  the  abdomen  + (aft.  1 h.). 

Accumulation  of  and  then  great  discharge  of  flatus  % (aft.  J h.). 

Discharge  of  extremely  foetid  flatus  (aft.  10  h.). 

Much  horribly  foetid  flatus  is  discharged.  [*S7/r.] 

495.  Bellyache  before  the  stool.  § 

Stool  with  bellyache. 

Three  times  soft  stool  with  smarting  burning  pain  in  the  anus, 
and  with  bellyache  before  and  after  each  stool.  || 

Looseness  of  the  bowels,  like  diarrhoea. 

Frequent,  diarrhoeic,  blackish  stools.2  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

500.  Severe  purging.  [Sydenham,3  Opuscula , Lips.  1695,  p.  382.] 
Diarrhoea  of  undigested  faeces,  like  a kind  of  lientery. 

Diarrhoea  : it  is  as  if  the  excrement  contained  undigested  food  ; it 
comes  away  in  separate  pieces  (aft.  12  h.),  and  when  it  is  passed, 
there  still  remains  desire  to  go  to  stool,  but  no  more  passes. H [i/rr.] 
He  must  press  out  the  motion  with  the  greatest  effort,  although 
it  is  not  hard,  but  pappy,  and  is  followed  by  ineffectual  urging  to 
stool,  with  pain.**  [Fz.] 

* 486,  487,  see  497 — 502. 

f Comp,  with  470  and  549. 

X Comp,  with  418. 

§ 495 — 497,  comp,  with  472,  481. 

II  497,  498,  501,  comp,  with  486,  487,  499,  500,  502. 

H See  501. 

**  5°3>  5°7,  509,  see  5°4>  5°S 


1 General  statement  from  observation. 

2 From  the  extract ; the  stools  looking  (says  the  author)  like  the  extract  itself. 

3 Observed  effects  of  China.  This  symptom  not  found. 


44® 


CHINA. 


Costiveness  and  accumulation  of  the  faeces  in  the  bowels,  with 
heat  of  head  and  dizziness.* 

505.  The  stool  comes  after  long  urging  only,  with  great  pressing, 
and  then  it  causes  much  pain. 

Stoppage  of  the  evacuations.  [Murray,  1.  c.] 

All  day  long  constipation,  and  in  the  evening  costive  stool. f 

{Trn.l 

Constipation.  [Quarin, — Bauer, — Fischer,  1.  c.] 

Constipation  : long-continued  accumulation  of  hard  faeces  in  the 
rectum.1  [Fothergill,  Essays , tom.  ii,  p.  92.] 

510.  Haemorrhoidal  bleeding.  [Alpini,  1.  c.] 

Sensation  in  the  anus  during  the  stool,  as  from  an  acrid  matter. 

A burning  and  burning  itching  at  the  orifice  of  the  anus  (imme- 
diately). 

Diarrhoea  with  burning  pain  in  the  anus. 

Stitches  in  the  anus  during  an  evacuation  mixed  with  blood  J 
(aft.  5 h.j. 

515.  Penetrating  stitches  in  the  anus  and  rectum,  not  during  evacua- 
tion (aft.  5 d.). 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum,  especially  in 
the  sphincter  ani ; also  during  and  after  the  stool,  shooting  drawing 
for  three  days.§  [i/rr.] 

After  the  stool  a crawling  in  the  rectum,  as  from  thread-worms. 

Crawling  in  the  rectum,  as  from  thread-worms,  and  evacuation  of 
many  of  them. 

A crawling  in  the  anus. 

520.  A constant  burning  pain  in  the  rectum  after  the  midday  sleep 
(aft.  4 d.). 

An  aching  in  the  rectum  (aft.  2,  6 h.). 

Tearings  and  tearing  jerks  in  the  rectum  while  lying  in  bed  (aft. 
10  h.). 

Contractive  pain  in  the  rectum,  especially  when  sitting  (aft.  72  h.). 

Fine  stitches  in  the  inguinal  flexure,  on  the  pubes,  almost  only 
when  walking.  [Tz.] 

525.  In  the  inguinal  flexure,  especially  on  the  tendon  (of  the  psoas 
muscle),  an  aching  drawing,  when  sitting.  \_Fz.~] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  perinaeum,  especially  acute  when  sitting  down. 

The  urine  is  not  passed  more  frequently,  but  is  paler,  and  yet 
deposits  a cloud  (aft.  3 h.).  [Tz.] 

In  the  evening,  when  passing  urine,  a burning  smarting  in  the 
anterior  part  of  the  urethra.  || 

A throbbing  in  the  region  of  the  bulb  of  the  urethra  (aft.  6 h.). 

504,  505,  comp,  with  503,  507  to  509.  The  costiveness  of  china  is  secondary- 
action  or  reaction  of  the  organism  to  the  great  tendency  of  this  medicine  to  excite 
diarrhoea  in  its  primary  action, 
t 5°7?  5°9>  see  note  to  504,  505. 

I 5T4>  5 1 5?  526>  comP-  with  5i6« 

§ See  514,  515,  526. 

II  Comp,  with  539  and  540. 


1 No  such  symptom  to  be  found. 


CHINA. 


441 


530.  While  urinating  a shooting  in  the  urethra. 

Painful  sensitiveness  in  the  urethra,  especially  when  the  penis 
is  erect,  also  observable  while  sitting  and  standing  up. 

After  frequent  and  almost  ineffectual  urging  to 
urinate,  a pressing  in  the  bladder. 

The  first  twelve  hours  scanty  secretion  of  urine,  but  thereafter 
more  copious. 

The  urine  flows  in  a weak  stream  and  slowly,  and  there  is  very 
frequent  call  to  urinate. 

535.  Very  frequent  urination  (aft.  24  h.). 

Frequent  and  such  urgent  call  to  urinate  that  the  urine  is  in- 
voluntarily pressed  out. 

Burning  pain  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  during  and  after  urina- 
tion (aft.  3 h.). 

A continual  burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra. 

Increased  discharge  of  urine,  with  burning  at  the  orifice  of  the 
urethra*  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.'] 

540.  Continual  burning  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  with  a feeling  of 
excoriation  at  the  seam  of  the  prepuce,  both  especially  painful  from 
the  friction  of  the  clothesf  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.] 

A twitching  pain  betwixt  glans  and  prepuce  when  walking. 

Pressing  pain  in  the  glans  before  urinating. 

Itching  on  the  glans  penis,  which  makes  him  rub  it,  in  the 
evening  in  bed. 

A pain  as  of  fine  needle-pricks  on  the  frenum  of  the  glans ; on 
touching  it  the  pain  became  more  severe,  namely,  shooting  and  ten- 
sive ; nothing  was  to  be  seen  externally. 

545.  Excites  urination.  [Alpini,  1.  c.] 

Whitish  cloudy  urine  with  white  sediment.f 

Scanty,  yellowish-green  urine.  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

Pale  yellow  urine,  which,  the  following  morning,  deposits  a dirty 
yellow,  rather  loose  sediment.  [Bhr.] 

Pressing  and  cutting  in  the  bowels  during  and  after  the  discharge 
of  a white  cloudy  urine.  § 

550.  White  stool  and  dark  urine||  (aft.  48  h.). 

Dark  coloured  urine  with  brick-red  sediment^  (aft.  24  h.). 


Scanty  urine  with  brick-red  sediment,  and  red-spotted,  hard 
prominent  swelling  of  the  foot.** 

Spasmodic  contractive  pain  from  the  rectum  through  the  urethra 
to  the  glans  penis,  and  through  the  testicles,  in  the  evening. 

A crawling  running  and  itching  in  the  anus  and  urethra,  with  a 
burning  in  the  glans  penis. 

555.  Increased  sexual  desire. 

Frequent  erections  of  the  penis  (aft.  6 h.). 

Nocturnal  seminal  emissions,  ft 


[Trn.] 


* 539>  540,  see  528. 


||  Comp,  with  856,  857. 

IT  See  552-  . 

**  Comp,  with  551. 
ff  Comp,  with  558. 


f Comp,  with  754,  819. 


% Comp,  with  527. 
§ See  470  and  491. 


442 


CHINA. 


Great  seminal  discharge,  about  3 a.m*  [. Bch. ] 

Swelling  of  the  spermatic  cord  and  testicle,  especially  of  the 
epididymis,  painful  to  the  touch. 

560.  Drawing  pain  in  the  testicles. 

A kind  of  tearing  pain  in  the  left  testicle  and  the  left  side  of  the 
prepuce,  in  the  evening  in  bed. 

An  itching  crawling  in  the  scrotum,  in  the  evening  in  bed,  com- 
pelling him  to  rub  it. f 

Shooting  itching  in  the  scrotum.  [Tz.] 

Hanging  down  of  the  scrotum  (aft.  1 h.). 

565.  Increase  of  the  menses  that  are  present,  to  the  extent  of  metror- 
rhagia; the  discharge  passes  in  black  clotsj  (aft.  1 h.). 

Suppression  of  the  menses§.  [Raulin,  1.  c.] 

* * 

* 

Sneezing  (aft.  ±,  2,  3 h.). 

Sneezing  with  coryza  (aft.  1,  2 h.). 

Several  times  violent,  ary  sneezing  (aft.  7 h.).  [67/i] 

570.  Watery  discharge  from  the  nostril,  which,  nevertheless,  is  stopped 
up  (aft.  13  h.).  \_Fz .] 

Coryza,  with  sensitiveness  of  the  nose  and  some  papules  on  the 
border  of  the  nostrils  and  the  septum  nasi  painful  to  the  touch  (aft. 

9d.).  [m.] 

Coryza,  so  that  there  is  running  from  the  nose  for  two  hours. 

[/*.] 

Symptoms  of  a stuffed  coryza,  [An.] 

Noisy  breathing  through  the  nose.1  [Al.  Thompson,  1.  c.] 

575.  Something  is  adherent  in  the  throat  (the  larynx),  so 
that  the  tones  of  the  voice  and  of  singing  become  deeper 
and  deficient  in  clearness||  (aft.  2 h.). 

A whistling  and  wheezing  in  the  windpipe  when 
breathing  (aft.  2 h.). 

Tightness  on  the  chest  (at  night) ; whistling,  rattling,  snoring, 
and  wheezing  in  the  windpipe,  and  yet  the  viscid  mucus  does  not 
excite  coughing  (aft.  5 h.). 

In  the  larynx  stitches  and  feeling  of  roughness. [An.] 

Sensation  of  accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  larynx,  [An.] 

580.  Mucus  adheres  in  the  larynx,  which  he  continually  hawks  up,  and 
which  makes  the  voice  hollow  and  hoarse.  [*S7/i] 

Hoarse  rough  voice.  [An.] 

A kind  of  suffocative  attack,  as  if  the  larynx  were  full 

# See  557. 
f Comp,  with  563. 

J 56 5 seems  to  be  the  primary  action  of  china,  and  566  the  secondary  action  or 
reaction  of  the  organism $ for  excitement  of  the  circulation  and  haemorrhages  from 
the  nose  174  to  176,  from  the  mouth  238,  and  from  the  lung  586,  are  its  not  infre- 
quent primary  effects. 

§ See  565. 

II  575,  576,  577,  comp,  with  578  to  581. 

1 578  to  581,  see  575  to  577. 


1 See  note  to  S,  187.  “ Gerausch  ” in  original  is  “ sibilus.” 


CHINA. 


443 

of  mucus,  especially  towards  evening,  and  (at  night)  on 
awaking  from  sleep*  (aft.  8 h.). 

Violent  cough  immediately  after  eating  (aft.  4 h.). 

In  the  evening  tickling  causing  cough,  which  he  could  suppress. 

585.  Cough  excited  by  laughing. 

(Coughing  up  of  bloody  mucus)f 

At  night  about  2 and  about  4 a.m.  suffocative  cough  lasting  half 
a quarter  of  an  hour  (a  kind  of  whooping-cough)  ; she  screams  out 
from  it,  but  not  before  she  has  coughed  several  times. J 

He  wakes  up  after  midnight  with  a cough  ; at  each  cough-impulse 
he  feels  a sharp  shooting  in  both  sides  of  the  chest,  and  yet  he  could 
cough  in  the  lying  position. 

Pain  in  the  trachea  and  sternum  when  coughing. 

590.  From  the  cough,  pressive  pain  in  the  chest  and  excoriation  feeling 
in  the  larynx.  § 

(During  the  chill  of  an  ague)  troublesome  cough  with  stitches 
in  the  side.  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

Continual  irritation  to  hacking  cough,  in  the  morning 
after  rising,  as  from  sulphur  fumes,  whereby  nothing  is 
expectorated,  for  several  mornings.  [ Gss .] 

Suspicious  cough  ||  [Juncker  et  Fritze,1  Diss.  de  usu  cort.peruv. 
discreto , Halas,  1 756,  p.  26.] 

In  the  windpipe  under  the  larynx,  a kind  of  drawing,  followed  by 
cough  with  one  impulse.  \FzJ] 

595.  Tightness  of  the  chest.H  [Baglivi,2  Praxis , lib.  ii,  § 2,  3. — Al. 
Thompson,  1.  c.] 

Tightness  of  the  chest.  [Cartheuser,  1.  c.] 

Oppression  on  the  chest.  [Tz.] 

Inclination  to  breathe  deeply  before  the  midday  meal. 

In  the  evening  a feeling  of  oppression  and  uneasiness  in  the  chest ; 
he  feels  compelled  to  breathe  deeply  and  then  must  expire  in  a sighing 
manner,  whereby  the  oppression  is  diminished  for  the  moment,  with 
weak,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse  and  anxious  impatient  humour. 
\Bhr.~\ 

600.  Great  oppression  of  the  chest  in  the  region  of  the 
scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  something  was  digging  around 
therein  (aft.  4 h.).  [> Gss .]. 

Tightness  of  the  chest  with  difficult,  sometimes  rattling,  expiration 
(chiefly  when  walking)  and  roughness  of  the  chest  (aft.  4 h.).  [i/f/z.] 

Impeded  respiration,  for  half  an  hour.3  [Al.  Thompson,  1.  c.]. 

Heavy,  difficult,  painful  inspiration,  and  rapid  expiration. 

* 582,  603,  comp,  with  595  to  597,  599  to  602,  604  to  606. 

f Comp,  with  593. 

X 587*  588,  589>  comp,  with  5 91,  653. 

§ 590,  610,  613,  621,  comp,  with  6 11,  612,  614,  615,  617,  620,  622. 

||  Comp,  with  586. 

it  595  t0  597»  599  t0  602,  604  to  606,  comp,  with  582,  603. 


1 From  China  given  for  gangrene  of  foot,  with  alkermes  and  syrup  of  Canella. 

2 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  China. 

3 See  note  to  S.  187. 


444 


CHINA. 


Suffocative  asthma.1  [Al.  Thompson,  1.  c.] 

605.  Fatal  oppression  of  the  chest  * [Joh.  de  Koker,  1.  c.] 

An  agreeable  fulness  in  the  chest,  as  from  satiety,  with  (sweet) 
pleasant  taste  of  the  saliva  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.] 

Tensive  pain,  especially  in  the  external  pectoral  muscles  (in  the 
morning). 

Some  twitching  and  subsultus  here  and  there  in  the  pectoral 
muscles.  \_An^\ 

(A  creeping  in  one  side  of  the  chest  as  if  something  were 
running  about  in  it.) 

610.  A sharp  aching  combined  with  creeping  in  one  side  of  the 
chest.) 

Pressure  on  the  chest. f [Fz.] 

Aching  pain  in  the  chest.  [Cjj.] 

Pressure  on  the  whole  anterior  part  of  the  chest,  at  night  when 
he  lay  on  the  back. 

Pressure  on  the  left  side  near  the  ensiform  cartilage.  \_Hrr.~\ 

615.  External  pressure  on  the  middle  of  the  sternum  when  the  upper 
part  of  the  body  is  bent  forward,  also  when  standing,  which  is 
removed  by  pressing  upon  it  (aft.  26  h.).  [Fz.] 

Pressure  outwards  in  the  region  of  the  lowest  ribs  (aft.  24  h.). 

[**.] 

Great  pressure  in  the  sternum  after  a meal ; worst  when  he  sat 
in  a stooping  position  and  had  his  arms  elevated. 

On  inspiring  severe  stitches  under  the  last  ribs,  that  take  away 
his  breath. 

Under  the  right  last  rib  a small  spot,  which  causes  a shooting 
pain  both  by  the  slightest  pressure  and  when  walking. 

620.  When  sitting  in  a stooping  attitude,  pressure  externally  on  the 
sternum,  which  causes  anxiety  and  does  not  allow  the  breath  to  be 
drawn  in  enough,  going  off  when  raising  himself  up  (aft.  6 h.). 

[**•] 

In  the  side  of  the  chest  a pressive  pain  that  impedes  respiration. 
Hard  pressive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  in  the  region  of 
the  fourth  and  fifth  ribs.J  [Fz.] 

On  the  right  side  of  the  chest  drawing  aching  when  sitting, 
which  is  relieved  when  standing  and  walking.  [Fz.] 

Pain  in  the  side,  as  if  bruised  or  as  if  from  a blow. 

625.  Drawing  pain  behind  the  sternum.  [FFt.] 

In  the  whole  chest  a burning  inward-pressure. 

Inferiorly  over  the  chest  aching  drawing  pain  when  sitting,  which 
causes  anxiety  ; it  goes  off  when  standing  and  walking.  [Fz.] 

On  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  in  the  middle,  on  a not  large  spot, 
a contractive  pain  so  that  he  must  almost  involuntarily  suddenly  jerk 
out  and  expel  the  breath.  [Fz.] 

* When  the  cinchona  bark  was  administered  in  the  cold  stage  of  ague, 
f See  590,  610,  613,  621. 

J See  590,  610,  613,  621. 


1 In  the  original,  simplya“  asthma.” 


CHINA. 


445 


Over  the  chest,  when  sitting  in  a stooping  attitude,  an  inter- 
mitting cutting  aching,  which  goes  off  on  raising  himself  up,  but 
still  more  completely  when  standing  and  walking.  [ Fz .] 

630.  Aching,  line  shooting  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  84  h.). 
[Htn.] 

Stitch  in  the  side.  [Richard,  1.  c.] 

Shooting  in  the  chest,  in  the  morning.  [Hsch.] 

Shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  [ Lhm .] 

Shooting  in  the  side,  at  night,  but  during  the  day  only  when 
moving  or  touching  it  (aft.  13  d.). 

635.  Shooting  in  the  chest  on  walking  quickly,  which  went  off  when 
at  rest.  [Lr.] 

Some  violent  stitches  in  the  chest,  immediately  above 
the  precordial  region,  when  he  was  not  moving,  espe- 
cially when  reading  (aft.  34,  16,  18  h.).  [ Ln.] 

Stitches  in  the  side  when  sitting  and  reading.  [Ln.] 

Some  stitches  from  the  sternum  through  to  the  back  soon  after 
drinking  * (aft.  8 h.). 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  thoracic  cavity,  from  within 
outwards,  in  the  region  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  true 
ribs,  without  relation  to  expiration  or  inspiration  (aft. 
fh  .).[Hrr.] 

640.  Regularly  recurring  obtuse  stitches,  from  within  out- 
wards, in  the  thoracic  cavity,  when  at  rest  and  when 
moving,  and  without  relation  to  respiration  (aft.  1 h.). 

\m.-\ 

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the  fourth  rib  under 
the  arm,  a shooting,  as  if  it  were  in  the  pleura,  almost  like  a persist- 
ent stitch,  which  goes  off  by  pressing  on  it  and  by  stooping  down 
(aft.  6 h.).  [Fz.]  ' " ; 

Sharp  stitches  between  the  seventh  and  eighth  left  ribs.  [Hrr.] 
Pain  in  the  bone  in  the  joints  of  the  ribs,  as  if  bruised,  on  inspi- 
ration. 

Sharp  stitches  near  the  right  nipple,  from  within 
outwards  (aft.  10  h.).  [. Hrr .] 

645.  Sharp  stitches,  from  within  outwards,  on  the  ster- 
num where  the  ribs  join  on  to  it  on  both  sides,  without 
reference  to  expiration  or  inspiration  (aft.  2 d.).  [Hrr.] 
Sharp  shooting  pain  on  the  left,  near  the  ensiform  cartilage  and  in 
the  scrobiculus  cordis,  only  when  expiring  (aft.  60  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (during  expiration)  when 
sitting  (aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.] 

A tickling  shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  towards  the 
region  of  the  heart.  [Htg.] 

When  drawing  in  the  breath  severe  stitches  in  the  scrobiculus 
cordisf  (aft.  3 h.). 

650.  Obtuse  stitches  on  the  chest,  which  compel  him  to  expire.  [Fz.] 
Obtuse  shooting  on  the  cartilages  of  the  third  and  fourth  left 
false  ribs,  without  relation  to  inspiration  or  expiration.  [Hrr.] 

* Comp,  with  387.  f Comp,  with  390,  392. 


446 


CHINA. 


Stitches  in  the  side  with  great  heat,  strong,  hard  pulse,  and 
staring  eyes.  [J.  A.  Ph.  Gesner,1  Sammlung  v,  Beob .,  i,  p.  244, 
Nordlingen,  1789.] 

Fever  like  a kind  of  false  pleurisy.*  [Greding,2  in  Ludw . Advers ., 
tom.  i,  p.  90.] 

A boil  on  the  pectoral  muscles. 

655.  (Throbbing  in  the  sternum,  in  the  evening  and  morning.) 

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  t 

Palpitation  of  the  heart  and  rush  of  blood  to  the  face,  which 
became  hot  and  red,  and  at  the  same  time  coldness  of  the  hands  (aft. 
1 h.).  [Bch.-] 

Violent  beating  of  the  heart,  with  depressed  pulse  and  coldness 
of  the  skin.  \JVth.\ 

Strong  beating  of  the  heart  combined  with  an  anxious  feeling. 

660.  Pain  as  from  dislocation  in  the  scapula  (aft.  24  h.). 

Tearing  in  the  region  of  the  left  scapula,  on  inspiration.  [(?«.] 
Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  left  scapula  (aft.  9 h.).  [///«.] 
Contractive  pain  between  the  scapulse,  when  standing  (aft.  3 h.). 

Needle  pricks  over  the  right  scapula  and  in  the  left  side  of  the 
chest  (aft.  J h.).  \JVs^\ 

665.  Pain  in  the  back  on  the  slightest  movement,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  3 

Throbbing,  shooting  pain  in  the  back.f 
Small  stitches  on  the  middle  of  the  spine  § (aft.  5h.).  \Htnd\ 
Shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  back  (when  sitting.  [Lr.] 
Intolerable  pain  in  the  sacrum,  as  from  cramp,  or  as  if  beaten  and 
crushed,  which  on  the  slightest  movement  forces  out  a sudden  cry . || 

670.  A crawling  itching  on  the  coccyx,  which  goes  off  for  a short 
time  only  by  rubbing  (aft.  1 h.). 

Twitching  tearing  on  the  left  side  in  the  sacrum.  [Gbj.] 

Severe  shooting,  drawing  pains  in  the  middle  of  the  sacrum 
towards  the  lumbar  vertebrae.  [ Htg.] 

Twitching  over  the  sacrum  (aft.  -J  h.).  \Wthd\ 

Painful  jerks  on  the  sacrum  11  (aft.  21  h.).  [ Ws. ] 

675.  (Stretching)  pain  in  the  sacrum,  as  from  a heavy  weight,  or  as 
after  long  stooping  (aft.  23  h.).  \Htnd\ 

The  neck  drawn  obliquely  on  one  side.3  [Al.  Thompson,  1.  c.] 
Several  stitches  in  the  nape  (which  leave  behind  a kind  of 
stiffness  therein.**  \Htgd\ 

* 591,  653,  comp,  with  587  to  589.  ||  Comp,  with  674. 

f Comp,  with  657  to  659.  See  669. 

J Comp,  with  667,  668.  **  See  680,  68a,  683. 

§ 667,  668,  see  666. 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 In  an  epileptic,  taking  Hyoscyamus.  After  an  intermediate  dose  of  China,  he 
had  “ diarrhoea,  dolores  rheumatici,  febrisque  pleuritiden  spuriam  cemulans 

3 In  original,  simply  te  contractions  of  the  neck.”  See  note  to  S.  187* 


CHINA. 


447 

Slow  drawing  stitches  in  the  anterior  cervical  muscles,  when  at 
rest.  [ Bhr .] 

(Anteriorly  on  the  neck  red  miliary  eruption,  without  itching. 
680.  Movement  of  the  nape  is  painful.* 

Pain  in  the  nape  towards  the  neck,  on  turning  the  head,  as  if 
he  had  swollen  cervical  glands  (though  he  has  none) ; on  touching 
the  pain  is  still  more  severe,  as  if  bruised  (after  a walk). 

Drawing  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck  inferiorly,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  nape,  when  standing,  which  goes  off  when 
stooping. f [Tz.] 

Drawing  pains  in  the  nape.  [An.] 

On  the  slightest  movement  sweat  on  the  nape  and  back. 

685.  Paralytic  twitching  tearing  on  the  top  of  the 
shoulder,  which  is  acutely  painful  when  touched,  and 
when  the  pain  is  gone  it  can  he  excited  anew  by  touch- 
ing; even  the  pressure  of  the  coat  on  the  shoulder 
excites  it.  f [ Hrr .] 

Tearing  pressure  in  the  left  axilla  and  on  the  anterior  and  inner 
border  of  the  scapula,  [Hrr.] 

Intermittent  pressive  drawing  pain  on  the  border  of  the  right 
axilla  towards  the  front  (aft.  3 d.) . [Hrr.] 

Paralytic  twitching  tearing,  which  proceeds  from  the 
head  of  the  humerus,  and  extends  (in  the  muscles  and 
bones)  to  the  phalanges  of  the  fingers,  where  it  becomes 
less  painful;  at  the  same  time  the  whole  arm  is  weaker ; 
the  pain  is  increased  by  touching  (aft.  3 h.).  [Hrr.] 

A weakness  in  the  arms,  observable  when  he  tightly  closes  the 
hands. § 

690.  Shooting  pains  in  the  upper  arm  which  however  went  off  imme- 
diately on  moving  it  (aft.  | h.).  [Wr.] 

Twitching  tearing  in  the  humerus  towards  the  upper  and  inner 
part  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Hrr .] 

Tearing,  first  in  the  left,  then  in  the  right  upper  arm  (aft.  | h.). 

[Zr.] 

Paralytic  pain  on  the  right  upper  arm,  which  begins 
at  the  head  of  the  humerus,  and  becomes  lost  in  the 
hand  as  a fine  and  feeble  tearing,  during  which  the 
whole  body,  and  especially  the  forehead,  is  warm  (aft. 
8 h.).  [Hrr.] 

Tearing  and  drawing  in  the  arm  when  she  stands  at  the  window. 

695.  Paralytic  twitching  tearing  in  the  long  bones  of  the 
upper  extremities,  more  violent  when  touched  (aft.  1 h.). 
[Hrr.] 

# Comp,  with  677,  682,  683. 
t 682,  683,  see  677  and  680. 

+ It  is  peculiarly  characteristic  of  China  that  its  pains  are  aggravated  not  only  by 
movement,  and  especially  by  touching  the  part  (see  4 66,  619,  634,  688,  695,  696, 
701,  704,  713,  761,  776,  830),  ISut  also  that  they  are  renewed  when  not  present  by 
merely  touching  the  part,  as  in  this  symptom  and  749,  772,  and  then  often  attain  a 
frightful  intensity,  hence  this  medicine  is  often  the  only  remedy  in  cases  of  this 
description. 

§ Compare  partly  with  688  and  693,  695,  696. 


44-8 


CHINA. 


Paralytic  tearing  in  the  upper  extremities,  which 
spreads  into  all  their  parts,  increased  more  by  touching 
than  by  movement.  [. Hrr .] 

A tension  in  the  arms  and  hands  (aft.  2 h.). 

Stretching  out  the  arms  with  bent  fingers.1  [Thomp- 
son, 1.  c.] 

A tearing  darting  through  the  left  elbow-joint,  frequently  re- 
curring. 

700.  On  the  elbow-joint,  sensation,  as  if  blood  were  extravasated  in 
the  skin.  [Htg.] 

Painful  drawing  in  the  coronoid  process  of  the  left  elbow  (in  the 
bend  of  the  elbow),  worse  when  touched.  [Hrr.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  elbow-joint,  worse  on  movement  (aft.  2 
h.).  [Hrr.] 

Shooting  in  the  left  elbow-joint.  [Fz.] 

Tearing  in  the  shafts  of  both  ulnae,  worse  when  touched.*  [Hrr.] 
705.  From  the  elbow  to  the  fingers  drawing  pain  in  the  bones,  in  the 
eveningf  (aft.  24  h.). 

Tearing  extending  hither  and  thither,  at  one  time  in  the  right 
forearm  (which  went  off  by  rubbing),  at  another  in  the  left  (aft.  4 
h.).  {_MyrP\ 

Drawing  pain  on  the  bones  of  the  forearm,  as  from  scraping  on 
the  periosteum  with  a blunt  knife.  [Fz.] 

The  forearm  goes  to  sleep  when  flexed  ( e.g . when  writing),  with 
a fine  shooting  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  J 

Sharp  drawing  shooting  across  the  left  wrist  (in  the  evening)  (aft. 

J3>  14  M-  [**•] 

710.  In  the  hollow  of  the  hand,  across  the  roots  of  the  fingers,  draw- 
ing pain.  \_Fz.] 

The  hand  is  painful  (cramp-like  drawing)  on  grasping.  [Fz.] 

Trembling  of  the  hands  when  writing  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.] 
Twitching  tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  and 
fingers,  aggravated  by  toucbing.§  [Gss.] 

Twitching  tearing  in  the  wrist  and  metacarpal  bones,  [Hrr.] 

715.  Tearing  where  the  metacarpal  bones  join  the  wrist  (aft.  5 h.). 
\_Hrr.~\ 

Obtuse  shooting  on  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  index. 
[Hrr.] 

On  moving  the  left  hand  a drawing  pain  over  the  back  of  the 
hand,  which  is  swollen. 


Tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  distal  phalanges  of  the 
fingers  of  the  right  hand,  especially  severe  in  the  joints, 
without  relation  to  movement  (aft.  | h.).  [Hrr.] 

A drawing  upwards  in  the  left  thumb,  index,  and  middle  finger. 
720.  Fine  shooting  tearing  in  the  distal  joint  of  the  right  thumb.  || 
[Hrr.] 


* 704,  707,  see  705.  J Comp,  with  731,  828. 

•f  Comp,  with  704,  706,  707.  § 713,  714,  see  722. 

||  Shooting  tearing  and  shooting  drawing  (which  sometimes  passes  into  twitching 


1 See  note  to  S.  187. 


CHINA. 


449 

fingeSCf&g,]tearing  °"  the  me£aCarPaI  of  the  right  little 

Twitching  pain  in  the  left  little  finger.f 

account  of  stiffness ^ndpah?!6  swollen  ; he  cannot  move  it  on 

^Twitching  tearing  in  'the  phalanges  of  the  fingers  (aft.  24  h.). 

725’  On6  ca^S.are  sometimes  warm,  sometimes  cold 
One  hand  is  icy  cold,  the  other  ’warm. 
nlue  nails.  [Cruger,  1.  c ] 

increasing'Tn'  °L -I*.^  aching 

standing  up.  [ Fz.J  ^ Cr’  e Slttlng,  which  goes  off  on 

730  D^lwin  ?™™ing  in  the  left  nates  when  sitting. t \Fz  1 

73.™| rs  •i™ 11  ^ — 

pis  ?v°  when  "«>"!.§ 

extremities  at  the  samf  time  [Gnf’  Van°'IS  P3™  °f  the  lower 
.higEt  ^lTiOB-  “ im  3 W jontney  on  foot,  i„  ,he 

..ccSrrgaTiTrhi"  s,'dehT,‘nd 

previous  day:  on  prolono-ed  „ “ d a,Io"g  journey  on  foot  the 
joints,  and  gives  place  to^a  h ovl:men,:  *Ee  feeling  goes  out  of  the 
bn.  the  aecond  % £ * S' kg,P"S®f  ^ ^ 

(aft.  'he  l0W"  "he"  walking,  all  da,  1„„B 

Exhaustion  in  the  thighs.  |J 

tremitiesi!  (affTdftf  [ffrJj6  long  bones  of  tlle  lower  ex- 

[/mP]Sm0d,C  (stItch~1,‘ce)  drawing  in  the  thighs  and  legs  (aft.  i h.). 

which  goes  when  sittin& 

dislocated  or  cut .topie°ces>  “ if  ^ Were 

scraped  with  f blunt  knife  [Az!]  b°neS’  38  lf  the  Peri°steum  were 

%t7Vrs Th°  t0  be  ““  0f  the  characteristic  pains  of  china,  see  also  7o9,  73? 

* 721,  see  722. 
t Comp,  with  7j3,  7I4>  ?2 
+ 729,  730,  see  748. 

§ See  828. 

||  Comp,  with  733. 

See  748. 


among  Hahnemann’s  owh ob^enIadMwanied  ^ ^ name  °f  any  authoi%>  is  hot 
See  note  to  S.  422. 


45° 


CHINA. 


Slow,  painful  drawing  in  the  inside  of  the  left  thigh,  which  seems 
to  be  only  in  the  skin,  [Tz.] 

Pain  of  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  thigh,  as  if  they  were  beaten, 
when  sitting. 

In  the  anterior  muscles  of  both  thighs  tension  when  walking. 

745.  (A  burning  anteriorly  on  the  upper  parts  of  the  thighs.) 

Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  right  thigh  from  the  hough  upwards 
(with  sensation  of  pressure),  just  as  if  it  would  draw  up  the  leg,  in 
the  evening  when  sitting,  which  goes  off  by  standing  and  walking. 

[**•] 

In  the  middle  of  the  left  thigh  a twitching  (aft.  5 h.).  [TVth,] 

A tearing  by  jerks  in  the  thigh. 

Twitching  tearing  on  the  right  and  left  thighs  for- 
wards and  outwards,  excited  only  hy  touch,  not  by 
movement.  [Hrr.] 

750.  Twitching  tearing  on  the  anterior  aspect  of  the  left 
thigh  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gw.] 

Tearing  in  the  thigh  bones,  from  above  downwards,  when  at  rest 
and  when  moving,  in  fits,  for  several  days  (aft.  72  h.).  \_TVs.] 

Tearing,  that  extends  from  the  knee-joint  to  the  thigh, 
accompanied  hy  a weakness  which  renders  walking  and 
standing  difficult.  [ Hrr .] 

In  the  shaft  of  the  thigh-bone  a painful,  aching  drawing  down- 
wards, chiefly  when  sitting,  in  the  afternoon.  [Tz.] 

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  on  the  thighs,  from  the  friction 
of  the  clothes,  as  if  the  skin  were  rough  and  covered  with  papules 
(aft.  8 d.).  [Ws.] 

755.  In  the  left  thigh,  when  standing,  a sensation  as  if  there  were  a 
hardened  node  in  the  flesh,  with  drawing  pain  in  it*  (aft.  2 h.).  [Tz.] 

Hard  swelling  of  the  thighs,  which  sometimes  goes  down  over 
the  knees  to  the  beginning  of  the  feet,  becomes  thinner  below,  is 
reddish,  and  is  painful  when  touched. f 

Stitch  darting  upwards  in  the  right  thigh  posteriorly,  when 
standing.  [Tz.] 

When  he  rises  from  a seat,  burning  and  formication,  as  of  having 
gone  to  sleep,  in  the  thigh  on  which  he  was  sitting,  especially  in  the 
hough,  particularly  observable  when  standing.  [Fz.] 

Cramp-like,  paralytic  pain  in  the  right  thigh  and  knee-joint  on 
rising  up  from  a seat,  when  he  has  sat  for  a considerable  time,  and 
when  walking  (aft.  5!  h.).  \Htn.~\ 

760.  Twitching  tearing  internally  in  the  patella.  [Gw.] 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  right  knee-joint,  which 
spreads  now  towards  the  thigh  and  now  towards  the 
leg,  with  weakness  of  the  part,  and  aggravation  more 
by  touch  than  by  movement.  [Hrr.] 

In  the  right  knee,  on  rising  up  from  a seat  and  when  walking,  a 
sharp  drawing  pain,  which  went  off  again  when  sitting  (in  the  after 
noon).  [Si/,] 

* See  771. 

f Comp,  with  785,  792,  793. 


CHINA. 

45 1 

Shooting  in  the  left  knee-joint.  [Fz.  1 
went  offwMsT waking  '[jS*  “ ™inS  UP  *f,er  “«»*.  which 
'6[>.0n“etling  '°S"l"r  0f  ,h'  t““.  .n  going 

***"■ 

In  the  knees  twitching  pain  * 'j' 

which  he  awakes  at  rnidn^fht  Wlth  drawmS  tearing  pains,  from 

77°‘  ^nln  the" C3teSt  m0ti°n’  38  if  bruised+  (aft-  3 h.) . 
[lumps  in  the  skin  there].)  'D®  lf’  Preventlng  sleep,  with  nodes  f 

Srl°"  th?  Slde  °/the  Patel,a  when  touched  (aft.  » hi. 
drawing,  synchronous  with^the^pulse  ^ h°Ugh  jerking 

« - * 

fnd  draw  thTm  upnfK]  kgS  C°mpeIled  him  t0  bend  them 

on  toimhing^;3  wheri^^to^rched^th6^  W^tfn  treading’  and  sti11  worse 

~ if  rASSj  itlncSd6  " f°0t  ShiV£red  “d 

in  the  whole  foot  (whtn  sitting)^ \l, ^,oAy'near  the  heel>and  then 

bruised  and  swolle^only  when  sfcrnV683’  **  'f  the  periosteum  were 
if  on  an  excoriated  CKpot  ® J °n  t0Uching  k sore  Pain>  as 

superiorly  on  th?  inside of  The^hTftof1' the  W^bT  drawinS  Pain 
which  goes  off  on  flexing  the  leg  1 ^ tlbm  below  the  PateHa, 

7 S°e  w?  wLt”ding  and  walking ‘^rr1”2’  Sltting’  which 
when  aterestTa^5inafdl°r°e  r?r  ?“  tibi®>  which  went  off 
the  on  extending  and  flexing 

stitches  in  the  upper  pa^ofThe"  calf  nji’  Sharft  recurring 

„Sr  Jea?nf  « the  calf.  [Lr.]  1 ' J 

Which  went  011  to  suppura- 
te Co°“pP:  “d  "“>>  773- 

S See768With  755' 

II  See  837  to  840, 

IT  See  75 6,  792,  753. 


1 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  china. 


452 


CHINA. 


Over  the  tendo  Achillis  a severe  burning  tension.  [Htg.] 
Weariness  of  the  feet,  as  if  they  were  bruised  (aft.  4 h.). 

Paralysis  of  the  feet.  [Cruger,  1.  c.] 

Violent  shooting  burning  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  close  to  the 
tibia  (when  sitting).  [Gjj.] 

790.  Coldness  of  the  feet,  in  the  evening. 

Shooting  in  the  left  foot.  [Zr.] 

Swelling  of  the  feet.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Painful  swelling  of  the  feet.  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

Very  soft  swelling  of  the  soles  of  the  feet. 

795.  Contractive  pinching  pain  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  foot, 
on  the  side  of  the  sole  (aft.  6 h.).  [Htn.] 

Violent  itching  on  the  right  sole  when  walking  and  sitting, 
relieved  for  a short  time  by  scratching.  [Hrr. ] 

Pricking  formication  from  the  big  toe  up  to  the  dorsum  of  the 
foot,  as  if  the  part  had  been  frost-bitten,  in  the  evening  when  sitting, 
which  goes  off  when  walking  and  standing.*  [Z%.] 

Shooting  drawing  in  the  heel  (aft.  48  h.).  [Gtj.] 

Shooting  tearing  in  the  sole  of  the  foot  in  the  region  of  the  heel, 
while  sitting  and  walking.  \_Hrr.\ 

800.  Very  violent  tearing  shooting  in  the  soles,  when  sitting  and 
walking.  [Zz.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  metatarsal  bones  of  the  right  foot.  [Hrr.] 
When  standing,  drawing  with  sore  pain  on  the  dorsum  of  the 
foot,  which  goes  off  when  sitting,  [Zz.] 

Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  inner  side  of  the  left  foot  when 
sitting.  [Fz.] 

Twitching  tearing  in  the  hones  of  the  foot  and 
metatarsus,  [Hrr.] 

805.  Twitching  tearing  in  the  metatarsal  hones  and  toes. 

[Gss,] 

Twitching  tearing,  increased  only  when  touched,  not 
by  movement,  in  the  metatarsal  hones  and  phalanges  of 
the  toes,  especially  in  the  joints  (aft.  31  h.).  [Hrr.] 

Twitching  tearing  where  the  metatarsal  bones  unite  with  the 
bones  of  the  tarsus  (aft.  25  h.).  [Hrr.~\ 

Boring  stitches  in  the  tips  of  the  toes.f 

Shooting  now  in  the  tibiae,  now  in  the  back,  now  in  the  chest, 
when  sitting  (aft.  14  h.).  [ Lr. ] 

810.  Excessive,  almost  painful  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  of  the  whole 
body,  even  of  the  palms  of  the  hands  J (aft.  10  h.). 

In  the  wound  a digging  pain. 

In  the  ulcer  boring  pain. 

* Although  the  china  pains  and  sufferings  are  most  frequently  (next  to  touch,  see 
685)  aggravated  and  increased  by  movement  of  the  part,  yet  there  is  a not  altogether 
rare  alternating  action,  where  they  are  diminished  and  allayed  by  movement,  as  here 
and  682,  728,  739,  746,  775,  779,  780,  and  also  where  they  are  especially  produced 
when  at  rest,  729,  743,  753,  837,  838,  839. 


CHINA. 


453 

(afLsome  h/).1"^  ^ 2 shooting  itching  pain  for  two  hours* 

81  p ^‘hr'Cr  shooting.  fobbing  pain,  even  when  at  rest.) 

SinTn  it  becomes  painfully  sensitive,  and  there  occurs  a boring 

rest1"  tHe  UlC6r  thr°bbinS  Pain  °n  moving  part,  but  not  when  at 

che|f£ScS!^2w«f  & “ ,h' 1"1"'  "d 

8?9%.,,chinsp'ra  “mt  u|>pc"nos,' ,hi 

nettle-sti"n|s°f  ^ Skm  5 ^ scratching  blisters  appear,  as  from 
Itchmg  of  the  skin  j on  scratching  blood  exudes. 

8?e  fck  shooting  on  various  parts  of  the  skin.  [Fz.l 
«25.  (Shooting  in  a cicatrized  wound  on  the  left  foot.f)  \FZ  1 

if  a ha,r  wetlnp’uhePrt%jf  ^ abd°me"’  °“  PartS  3 ^ as 

muscular  parts.  [An.] 

and!cTPuLainaVif?hei°intS  I/*16  rib\ofthe  “mbs,  of  the  shoulders 
very  least.?'  W6re  ^ ^ ^ StU'S  °r  m0Ves  in  thc 

In  the  bones  he  feels  like  a drawing.  [Fz.l 

83s.  Rheumatic  pains.  [Greding,— Raulin,  1.  c.l 

ains  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  joints.il  [Fischer,  1.  c.j 

1 


454 


CHINA. 


Pain  of  the  joints  when  sitting  and  lying  ; the  limbs  will  not 
allow  him  to  lie  quietly  in  one  position,  as  after  excessive  fatigue 
from  a long  journey,  or  as  after  great  debility  caused  by  excessive 
bloodletting  or  too  frequent  seminal  emissions  ; the  limbs  must  be 
laid  now  here,  now  there,  and  be  sometimes  flexed  and  at  another 
time  extended.* 

Pain  of  all  the  joints  as  if  beaten,  in  the  morning  slumber  ; the 
longer  they  are  left  lying  still  the  more  painful  are  they  ; — hence  it  is 
necessary  to  turn  the  limbs  frequently,  because  the  pains  are  dimi- 
nished by  movement  ; on  awaking  completely  they  go  off. 

Pain  in  all  the  joints,  as  from  a great  weight  pressing  on  them, 
in  the  morning  in  bed,  which  goes  off  on  getting  up. 

840.  While  sitting,  pain  in  all  the  joints,  as  from  a heavy  weight 
pressing  on  him  ; the  longer  he  sits  the  more  weary  he  becomes. 

On  rising  from  (the  noon)  sleep  all  the  joints  feel  stiff. 

On  rising  from  sleep  in  the  morning  and  from  the  midday  sleep, 
a paralytic  stiffness  of  all  the  limbs,  that  causes  dejection  of  mind. 

Cracking  in  the  joints. 

Everywhere  he  is  in  pain,  the  joints,  the  bones,  and  the  perios- 
teum, as  if  he  had  sprained  himself,  and  like  a drawing  and  tearing, 
especially  in  the  spinal  column,  in  the  sacrum,  in  the  knee  and 
thighs. 

845.  Tensive  pains.  [B.  M.  Ettmuller,1  Diss.  de  usu  et  abusu 
pracipit .,  cap.  3,  § 5.] 

Oppression  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  as  if  his  clothes  were  too 
tight  (after  a walk  in  the  open  air) . 

Wandering  rheumatism,  sometimes  in  one  part,  sometimes  in 
another,  without  swelling  or  fever,  alternating  with  pains  in  the 
interior  of  the  body.f  [Sydenham,  Opusc .,  p.  351.] 

* 837  to  840  comp,  with  775.  The  weakness  here  described,  as  if  proceeding 
from  a great  loss  of  humours,  is  in  conjunction  with  the  phenomena  indicated  under 
860,  862,  863,  865,  889,  and  893,  together  with  the  symptoms  of  the  disposition  of 
china  (1095,  1096,  1103,  1107  to  mo,  1113,  1125,  1126,  1131),  the  symptoms  of 
deranged  digestive  organs  (229,  242,  249  to  255,  265,  269,  277  to  279,  283,  289, 
290,  293,  294,  296,  298,  301,  302,  305  to  307,  310,  318  to  321,  329,  330,  339),  the 
suffering  after  food  (332,  333,  350,  351,  357,  358,  364,  366,  367,  369  to  371,  387, 
394,  414,  416),  the  too-easily  excited  perspiration,  especially  in  the  back  on  move- 
ment and  during  sleep  (684,  1058,  1060,  1061,  1064),  and  the  confusion  of  the  head 
(6,  8,  11  to  16,  18,  19,  21  to  23),  exactly  that  for  which  china  is  the  only  suitable 
remedy,  and  which  almost  without  exception  occurs  in  persons  who  have  experienced 
a very  considerable  loss  of  strength  by  haemorrhages  and  frequent  bloodletting,  by 
prolonged  escape  of  milk  from  the  breasts  and  unduly  prolonged  suckling,  by 
excesses  in  venery  and  onanism,  or  frequent  involuntary  seminal  emissions,  by  profuse 
morbid  sweats  or  taking  sudorifics  in  excess,  by  diarrhoeas,  or  frequently  repeated 
purgatives.  In  morbid  debility  of  other  kinds,  when  the  disease  itself  is  not  suitable 
for  this  remedy,  the  administration  of  china  is  always  followed  by  injurious,  often 
fatal  consequences,  although  even  in  such  unsuitable  cases  a stimulation  of  the 
strength  is  produced  by  it  in  the  first  few  hours  ; but  the  unnatural,  over-strained 
character  of  this  is  easily  perceived,  and  but  too  often  a premature  death  is  the 
consequence  of  this  over-stimulation,  and  if  in  such  cases  its  use  is  long  continued, 
the  patient  falls  into  a cachectic  condition  hard  to  cure,  and  which  is  the  result  ot 
the  physician’s  maleficent  art. 

f From  the  long-continued  employment. 

1 Results  of  suppression  of  intermittents  by  china. 


CHINA. 


455 

A burning,  mingled  with  some  formication  and  itching,  in 
various  parts  of  the  body,  by  day.  [Glt.] 

Consumption.  [Murray, — Baglivi,  \>c.] 

850.  Cachexiae.  [Murray, — Berger,  1.  c.] 

Lingering  fevers.  [Baglivi,  1.  c. — Stahl,  Obs.  Clin.] 

Dropsy.  [Murray, — Baglivi,— Berger, — Richard, — Rau- 
lin, — Romberg, — Stahl, — Thompson,  1.  c.] 

. Anasarca.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Swelling  of  the  limbs.*  [Cartheuser,  1.  c.] 

855.  Erysipelatous  swelling  of  the  whole  body.  [Formey,  1.  c.J 
Yellow  colour  of  the  skin.  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

Jaundice.  [Berger, — Stahl,-— Thompson, — Richard,  1.  c,] 
He  feels  ill  all  over ; he  is  not  at  all  well. 

The  sensitiveness  of  the  whole  nervous  system  is,  as  it  were, 
morbidly  increased,  strained  and  irritated. 

860.  Excessive  sensitiveness  of  all  the  nerves,  with  a morbid  feeling  of 
general  weakness. f 

Internal  feeling,  as  of  an  illness  about  to  come  on. 

Over-irritation,  with  pusillanimity  and  intolerance  of  all  noises. 
Languishing  condition  of  mind  and  body,  with  over-sensitive- 
ness.;]; 

Ailments  from  a slight  draught  of  air. 

865.  Too  great  delicacy  and  over-sensitiveness  of  the  nervous  system  ; 
all  impressions  of  sight,  smell,  hearing,  and  taste  are  too  strong  for 
him,  they  offend  his  inner  sensibility  and  affect  his  disposition. 

The  former  pains  are  as  if  kept  back  and  forcibly  suppressed,  and 
at  the  same  time  a great  heaviness  in  the  whole  body. 

Weariness. 

Trembling  powerlessness  of  the  limbs,  with  dilated  pupils. § 
Inclination  to  lie  down. 

870.  Exhaustion.  [Gesner,  1.  c.] 

Exhaustion  in  the  limbs.  [Stahl,  Obs.] 

Chronic  weakness.1  [Thompson,  1.  c.] 

Sinking  of  the  forces.  [Romberg,  1.  c.] 

Sunken  forces.  [Cleghorn,2  Diseases  of  Minorca , pp.  191,  213.] 
875.  Feeling  of  exhaustion,  especially  when  he  rises  from  a seat  ; he 
would  like  to  sit  down  again,  and  unless  he  strains  his  muscles  he 
sinks  back  on  his  chair,  whereupon  an  agreeable  feeling  of  rest 
ensues  (aft.  3,  4 h.).  \_Bhr.] 

He  had  a difficulty  in  walking,  and  felt  soon  exhausted,  as 
from  a feeling  of  weight  and  paralysis  in  the  thighs.  [57/1] 

# 854,  855,  see  756,  785,  792,  793,  794. 

f 860,  comp,  with  the  symptoms  mentioned  in  the  note  to  837.  Here  is 
described  the  peculiar  weakness  which  china  specially  excites  in  a high  degree,  and 
it  is  especially  this  form  that  is  permanently  relieved  by  china,  when  at  the  same  time 
the  other  symptoms  resemble  those  produced  by  it.  This  particular  kind  of  weak- 
ness is  especially  characteristic  of  those  exhausted  by  loss  of  humours. 

X Comp,  with  888. 

§ Comp,  with  890. 


1 Not  found. 

2 Effects  of  china  in  agues. 


456 


CHINA. 


Heavy  feeling  of  the  body.  [Raulin,  1.  c.] 

Heaviness  in  all  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  thighs,  as  if  lead  hung 
upon  them..*  \_An.\ 

Laziness.  [ TVth.~\ 

880.  When  he  tried  to  keep  himself  erect  for  some  minutes  there 
ensued  stiffness,  paleness  and  loss  of  consciousness.  [Gesner,  1.  c.] 
Unconsciousness  and  exhaustion  at  the  same  time.  [Lhm.\ 

Slight  attacks  of1  apoplexy  and  unconsciousness.  [Thompson, 
1.  c.] 

Exhaustion  and  relaxation  of  the  whole  body.  [ Hrr .] 

Severe  fainting  fit.f  [Baker,  in  Medical  Transactions , vol.  iii, 
Lond.  1785.] 

885.  Syncopes.  [Morton, — Murray, — Cruger, — Gesner,  1.  c.] 
Syncope — death.  J [De  Koker,  1.  c.] 

Asphyxia,  apparent  death.  [Cruger,  1.  c.] 

Exhaustion  and  relaxation  of  body  and  mind  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Hrr.~\ 
Exhaustion  : he  can  scarcely  hold  up  his  head,  and  falls  asleep. 

[*■*•] 

890.  Flaccidity  in  all  the  limbs  and  trembling  in  the  hands. § \_Lhm.~\ 
Relaxation  of  the  whole  body,  felt  also  when  seated,  but 
far  more  when  walking.  [dn.~\ 

Sometimes  weakness,  sometimes  feeling  of  excessive  strength  in 
the  joints. ||  [Tz.] 

He  feels  quite  weak  and  faint  in  the  open  air,  and  as  if  sinking 
away  about  the  stomach  and  chest,  although  he  has  plenty  of  strength 
for  walking.  [Tz.] 

Extraordinary  facility  of  all  movements,  as  if  he  had  no  body^T 
(aft.  2 to  3 h.).  [Tz.] 

895.  Liveliness,  but  with  staring  eyes,  all  the  evening.**  [Hsch. ] 
Comfortable  feeling,  in  the  evening.  \_Lhm.'] 

Trembling  in  all  the  limbs,  felt  not  seen,  combined  with  feeling 
of  coolness.  [ Hbg.  ] 

Twitchings.  [Gesner,  1.  c.] 

She  cannot  sleep  all  night ; she  is  occupied  with  nothing  but 
disagreeable  thoughts,  one  after  the  other. 

900.  He  cannot  fall  asleep  on  account  of  many  ideas  and  reflections, 
each  of  which  only  engages  him  for  a short  time,  but  is  always 
supplanted  by  another 3 hence  almost  all  night  long  no  sleep  comes 

* Comp,  with  733,  736. 

f In  a powerful  man,  to  whom  a drachm  of  best  red  cinchona  bark  had  been 
given  in  one  dose ; the  fainting  fit  was  so  severe  that  he  could  not  be  roused  from  it 
until  an  emetic  was  given  to  him. 

J Sydenham  also  (Opera,  Lips.,  1695,  p.  379)  mentions  two  men  having  died 
in  his  time  from  cinchona  bark  taken  a few  hours  before  the  attack  of  ague. 

§ See  868. 

||  Alternating  action  in  a healthy  person. 

Alternating  action  after  previous  feeling  of  weakness  caused  by  cinchona  bark. 
##  A kind  of  unnatural  excitement,  as  in  the  so-called  strengthening  treatment 
of  ordinary  practitioners,  when  they  are  unable  to  remove  from  the  patient  his 
disease,  and  yet  will  hypocritically  procure  for  him  strength  and  liveliness  for  a few 
hours. 


1 Should  be  u as  of.”  See  note  to  S.  422, 


CHINA. 


905. 


910. 


457 

to  his  eyes ; towards  morning  he  becomes  quite  warm  all  over 
30th<)ann0t  beaf  thr0Wlng  off  tke  bedclothes,  without  thirst  (aft.’ 

Sleeplessness  after  midnight;  but  sleepy  though  he  is,  his 
thoughts  remain  wide  awake,  he  shuts  his  eyes  and  often  changes  his 
position  in  bed.  5 

He  fell  asleep  late ; on  account  of  many  thoughts  he  could  not  go 

Sht'Sd  ,e„«  ”•  ,'"p  ■nd  ” h«  » * 4 

headSI'£[&T]eSS  Undl  midnight’  Wkh  aChl‘ng  Pain  °Ver  the  whole 

When  about  to  fall  asleep  he  is  awakened  by  horrible  fancies  t 
He  starts  up  when  about  to  go  to  sleep.  ' 

Before  midnight  till  2 a.m.  unusual  wakefulness,  \Lhm  1 
Drowsiness,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart. 

Incessant  yawning,  without  sleepiness.! 

Drowsiness  by  day.§ 

The  eyelids  will  close  from  weariness  and  sleepiness  (aft.  4 h.l 
Constant  day-drowsiness ; he  falls  asleep  unexpectedly. 

When  sitting  invincible  drowsiness. 

sI„nA,tr!°°K  f ■ rShf  Sr S j°Wn’  by  da7>  she  immediately  nods  and 
leas”  noise.  6 *“*  W"’  beC°meS  wide  awak«  from  ‘he 

Sleepiness  and  soon  thereafter  again  wakefulness.  \Hbg  ^ 

915.  Drowsy  lassitude.  [Stahl,  1.  c.]  L 

c4row--  a11  da7>  with  stretching  of  the  limbs  and  yawning. 

He  wakes  in  the  morning  two  hours  earlier  than  usual  \Bhr  1 
He  starts  up  at  night  in  sleep.  L -J 

Sleeps  only  from  3 till  5 a.m.  [Lhm. ] 

920.  Very  deep  sleep,  like  that  of  an  intoxicated  person,  without  once 
waking;  m the  morning  his  head  is  quite  dazed,  as  if  he  had  not 

3.|,en[^’  ^ he  g6tS  aChmg  in  the  temPIes  on  shaking  ‘he 

Snoring  and  whining  in  sleep,  in  children.1T 
Snoring  inspiration  and  expiration  in  sleep. 

Snoring  inspiration  (through  the  nose)  in  sleep  (aft  2 h ) 

In  sleep  there  occurs  at  one  time  snoring  inspiration,  at  another 
blowing  (puffing)  expiration.  ’ “er 

925.  In  sleep  one  eye  is  open,  the  other  half  shut,  with  eyeballs  turned 
backwards  like  a dying  person  (aft.  i h ) y turned 

In  sleep  he  lies  on  the  back,  with 'head  bent  back,  the  arms 

17  s “ad  ? 

^&etreniig in  bed>-93z>  ^ * 

dreams,  after  which ’on  waking'consciousness  knofnu't^’  f ‘th  an?lous’  frightful 
cause  continues  (934,  935),  Je  quite  ^ ^ 

I 9°8>  and  955,  958,  are  alternating  action  with  016  93  ’ 937’  939  * H7' 

909  to  913,  comp,  with  915,  916.  y ’ 

Comp,  with  951.  ^ 


458 


CHINA. 


stretched  out  above  the  head;  with  slow  expiration  and  strong  quick 
pulse. 

Restlessness,  sleeplessness.  [Raulin,  1.  c.] 

Restless  sleep,  with  tossing  about,  without  waking.  \_Htg.~\ 
Restless  sleep.  [Cleghorn,  1.  c.] 

930.  Restless  sleep  j he  could  not  fall  asleep  ; when  he  got  to  sleep 
he  soon  woke  up  again,  with  perspiration  on  the  hair  of  the  head 
and  on  the  forehead,  and  chilliness  over  the  back.  \Wr.~\ 

Restless  sleep,  and  after  waking  in  the  night,  slight  sweat  all 
over. 

In  the  evening  in  bed  a pinching  pressure  in  the  umbilical 
region,  [Fz.] 

At  night  a frightful  dream  (aft.  8 h.). 

Heavy  dreams  in  the  night  sleep,  which  make  him 
anxious  after  waking. 

935.  Anxious  dream  : he  has  to  go  perpendicularly  down  into  an  abyss, 
whereupon  he  wakes,  but  retains  the  dangerous  place  so  vividly  in 
his  imagination  (especially  when  he  shuts  his  eyes)  that  he  remains 
for  a long  time  in  great  fear  about  it  and  cannot  calm  himself. 

All  night  long  alternately  headache  and  dreams,  from  which  he 
starts  up  in  affright.*  \_Lhm.] 

At  night  restless  sleep,  from  which  he  started  up  from  time  to 
time,  and  then  every  time  remained  for  some  instants  without  being 
able  to  collect  himself.  \Myr.] 

Restless  sleep  full  of  dreams  and  crying  out. 

In  the  evening,  on  going  to  sleep,  confused  dream-pictures,  from 
which  he  wakes  up  again  (aft.  16  h.).  \_Ws?\ 

940.  At  night,  on  awaking  out  of  frightful  dreams,  anxiety,  [i^rr.] 

At  night  fearful,  startling  dreams  of  falling  from  a height,  with 
waking  up  full  of  restlessness  and  inability  to  collect  himself  for  some 
instants.  \JVth.~] 

Fearful  dreams  of  misfortunes,  from  which  he  wakes  up,  but 
without  being  able  to  come  to  himself.  [Gtt.] 

Anxious  dreams  at  night,  from  which  he  awoke  in  a half- 
conscious state,  and  for  some  time  continued  afraid. 

A sleep  disturbed  by  confused  and  disconnected  dreams,  with 
repeated  awakings ; he  woke  up  but  could  not  quite  recollect  him- 
self. [Bch.] 

945.  Confused,  nonsensical  dreams  after  midnight,  min- 
gled with  semi-conscious  waking.  [Hrr.] 

When  he  wakes  at  night,  he  cannot  recollect  himself. 

Confused,  absurd  dreams,  by  which  he  is  often  woke  up  from 
sleep,  [i/rr.] 

At  night  restless  sleep,  with  vexatious  dreams  and  tossing  about, 
from  which  he  wakes  up  every  time.  [Fz.] 

Voluptuous  dreams  with  pollutions.  \_Hbg.'] 

950.  As  soon  as  she  closes  her  eyes  to  go  to  sleep,  she  dreams  about 
nasty  things. 

At  night,  in  sleep,  he  tosses  about  hither  and  thither,  throws  off 
* 936,  937,  939  t0  94-5,  947,  see  note  to  904. 


CHINA. 


459 


the  clothes,  and  has  all  kinds  of  vexatious  dreams  about  things  that 
have  occurred  long  ago  ; in  the  morning  he  cannot  get  quite  awake 
on  account  of  emptiness  and  confusion  of  the  head  ; in  the  morning 
he  is  as  if  broken  on  the  wheel  and  not  at  all  refreshed  by  sleep. 
[Fz.] 

On  awaking  at  night  he  feels  giddy,  so  that  he  could  not  trust 
himself  to  sit  upright. 

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  anxious  ideas  and  thoughts. 
Towards  morning  heat  in  the  head  and  oppression  of  the  chest. 
1955.  Inclination  to  yawn.  [/F>.] 

Yawning. 

Stretching. 

Yawning  and  stretching  of  the  limbs.  [Htn.~] 

Dread  of  the  open  air. 

960.  In  the  open  air  great  shuddering,  with  rigor  and  goose-skin. 

\_mh.} 

He  gets  shuddering  and  chilliness  in  the  open  air  which  is  not 
cold,  this  goes  off  immediately  in  the  room.  [Tz.] 

In  the  open  air  of  moderate  coldness,  trembling  of  the  limbs 
from  chilliness,  and  shudder  passing  over  the  thighs.  [Tz.] 

Though  the  room  is  cold  he  does  not  feel  chilly  (aft.  9 h.). 
[Fz.] 

Cold  hands  and  chilliness  externally  all  over  the  body,  as  if  he 
had  cold  water  poured  over  him,  in  the  open  air,  where  it  went  on  to 
chattering  of  the  teeth  ; in  the  room  this  went  off,  but  the  hands 
remained  cold.  [7r».] 

965.  Coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet,  even  in  the  warm  room.  [Tz.] 
Cold  hands  (aft.  J h.). 

Sensation  of  icy  coldness  in  the  left  hand  which,  however,  is  not 
colder  externally  to  the  touch  than  the  right.* 

Coldness  of  the  hands,  feet,  and  nose. 

Coldness  of  the  hands.  [£r.] 

970.  Cold  feet  in  the  evening  (aft.  4 h.).  \Mch.\ 

A cold  feeling  of  the  left  leg  from  the  knee  to  the  foot.  \_Hbg.~\ 

A shudder  of  the  same  kind  over  both  elbows  and  knees,  [Fz.] 
Icy  cold  feet  with  warmth  of  the  rest  of  the  body  (aft.  1 h.). 
[Hbg.] 

Sensation  of  coldness  on  the  lower  extremities,  whilst  the  face 
and  chest  are  still  warm  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Hrr.~\ 

975.  The  right  hand  is  warm  (while  writing),  the  left  cold.f  \_Hbg.'\ 
The  right  hand  is  perceptibly  colder  than  the  left.  \_WthJ\ 

In  the  morning  cold  hands  and  feet,  and  rigor  over  the  thighs, 
which  increases  when  walking  (aft.  28  h.).  [Fz.] 

Shivering  (aft.  J h.).  \An.~] 

A slight  shiver  all  over  the  body.  \_Htg.~\ 

980.  Flying  chill,  especially  over  the  back  (immediately).  JVr^\ 

A slight  shivering  in  the  back  (aft.  3 h,).  [*SV/'.] 

Along  with  chilliness  of  the  body,  yawning. 

# Alternating  action  with  975,  976. 
t 9 75)  976,  alternating  action  with  967. 


460 


CHINA. 


Chilliness  of  the  whole  body,  with  very  cold  feet  (aft.  2 h.). 
[■ Fz •] 

He  is  cold  all  over.* 

985.  Rigor  all  over  the  body,  without  thirst.  [Lr.] 

Chilliness  all  over  the  body,  with  cold  hands  (aft.  h.).  [ Myr. ] 
Chilliness  in  the  whole  body,  without  external  coldness.  [Lhm.\ 
Chilliness  in  the  whole  body,  more  internally  (aft.  3^  h.). 
[Myr.] 

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  followed  immediately  by  chilliness  f 
(aft.  20  m.). 

990.  Chilliness  on  the  body,  as  if  a cold  wind  blew  on  him,  especially 
when  walking,  seldom  with  shivering,  which  only  comes  on  when 
he  sits  down,  over  the  arms,  loins,  and  thighs  (aft.  8 h.).  [/%.] 

Shuddering  all  over  the  body,  with  goose-skin  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.] 

Shuddering  and  rigor  all  over  the  body.  [Wth,] 

(In  the  evening,  on  lying  down,  severe  rigor.) 

Rigor  internally  and  externally  in  the  whole  body,  sometimes 
more  in  the  marrow  of  the  bones  of  the  feet,  which  are  colder  than 
the  hands  (aft.  J h.).  [Ghj.] 

995.  Internal  coldness,  periodically  with  shuddering  and  rigor  all  over 
the  body  (immediately).  [Wth!\ 

Internal  chill,  without  externally  perceptible  coldnessj  (aft.  4 h.). 

[P'-i 

Internal  feeling  of  coldness,  chiefly  in  the  arms  and  hands. 

[Be/,.] 

Rigor  on  the  chest  and  arms  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 

Chill  over  the  arms,  with  sickness  about  the  stomach,  then  cold 
limbs,  with  shuddering  and  recurring  nausea. 

1000.  Chilliness,  without  coldness  of  the  body,  without  thirst§  (in  the 
interval  betwixt  heat  and  chill,  ij  h.).  [Hrr.] 

In  the  morning  rigor  for  half  an  hour,  without  thirst,  and  with- 
out subsequent  heat. 

(During  the  febrile  chill,  thirst.  ||) 

* Alternating  action  with  996,  997,  1000. 

f The  china-fever  often  commences  with  an  accessory  symptom,  with  palpitation 
of  the  heart,  989,  or  with  sneezing,  1083,  or  great  anxiety,  1016,  1093,  or  nausea, 
999,  1017,  or  great  thirst,  1048,  or  ravenous  hunger,  1053,  1054,  or  aching  pain  in 
the  hypogastrium,  1014,  or  headache,  1015. 

J 996,  1000,  alternating  action  with  984. 

§ On  the  second  and  third  day  after  taking  the  drug,  in  the  febrile  attacks  the 
interval  betwixt  chill  and  heat  became  always  greater. — Herrmann. 

||  This,  as  also  1046,  seems  not  to  have  been  properly  observed,  for  in  every  other 
observation  I found  that  in  the  china-fever  there  is  no  thirst  during  the  chill  or  rigor, 
985,  1000,  1001,  1003  to  1005,  1007,  1008,  1040  ; on  the  contrary,  the  thirst  only 
came  after  the  chill  or  rigor,  as  we  learn  from  the  observations  1009  to  ion,  or 
which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  immediately  before  the  heat,  as  in  1048.  So  also 
the  thirst  during  the  china-fever  is  not  met  with  even  during  the  fully-developed 
febrile  heat,  see  1036,  1038,  1042,  1043,  io54>  io55>  1056,  1093,  except  some 
burning  of  the  lips,  see  1053,  or  dryness  of  them,  see  1037  and  1055  j which  dryness 
is  indicated  by  the  expression — “ Sensation  of  some  thirst  during  the  heat,”  1020,  for 
“ Thirst  during  the  flying  heat,”  1047,  does  not  refer  to  fully-developed  febrile  heat. 
The  thirst  is  rather  only  after  the  heat  in  the  china-fever,  1018,  1049,  1052,  or, 
which  is  the  same  thing,  during  the  perspiration,  1064.  But  the  febrile  heat  accom- 
panied by  stitches  all  over  the  body  seems  to  be  exceptional,  1074,  1075. 


CHINA. 


461 


Along  with  internal  chill,  external  rigor  and  shivering,  during 
which  at  first  the  left  hand  and  left  foot  are  colder,  afterwards  both 
hands  and  feet  are  equally  cold,  without  thirst  (aft.  J — 1 h.).  [TVth.] 
Shivering  all  over  the  body,  but  less  violent  on  the  limbs,  without 
thirst ; the  body  is  not  cold,  only  the  hands  (aft.  J h.).  [Hrr.] 

1005.  Shivering  all  over  the  body,  without  thirst  (aft.  2 \ h.).  [Hrr.] 
Shivering  and  chill  when  he  comes  from  the  open  air  into  the 
warm  room*  (aft.  5 h.). 

Rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  icy  cold  hands,  without  thirst  (aft. 

1—3  *>•)•  [ Htn-) 

Rigor  and  internal  coldness,  for  several  hours,  without  thirst 
(aft.  i,  1 h.).  [Wth.] 

After  the  shivering  through  the  skin,  thirst. 

1 010.  After  the  chill  thirst,  not  followed  by  heat.  [Trn.] 

All  day  long,  from  time  to  time,  febrile  chill  over  the  whole  body, 
especially  on  the  forehead,  which  is  bedewed  with  cold  sweat ; a 
quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  first  chill,  great  thirst  (aft.  1 h.).  [Bch. ] 
Febrile  chill  (aft.  f h.),  alternately  coming  and  going  off,  at  the 
same  time  weakness  of  the  knees  and  tibiae  when  walking  and 
standing,  less  when  sitting.  [. Bch.'] 

In  the  morning  (about  5 o’clock)  severe  febrile  shivering,  with 
weakness  of  the  feet  (aft.  12  h.).  [Css.] 

During  the  febrile  chill,  aching  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft. 
i h.).  [Bch.] 

1015.  Shivering  throughout  the  body,  without  external  coldness,  then 
dull,  cutting  headache  extending  into  the  orbits.  [Lhm.] 

Shuddering  and  rigQr  through  the  whole  body,  with  cold  hands 
and  oppression  of  the  mind  (aft.  1 h.).  [Wth.] 

In  the  morning  and  forenoon  shivering,  with  cold  hands,  feeling 
of  nausea,  and  quick  pulse.  [Fz.] 

In  the  evening  (about  5 o’clock)  coldness  and  shivering  when 
walking  in  the  open  air,  going  off*  in  the  room  (aft.  10  h.)  ; an  hour 
afterwards  great  heat,  especially  in  the  face,  which  is  increased  by 
movement  and  when  walking ; an  hour  after  the  disappearance  of 
the  heat,  thirst  comes  on.  [/z.] 

Two  attacks  of  chilliness  at  different  times  before  the  febrile 
heat.  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

1020.  Heat  alternating  with  chill ; from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour  after 
the  chill  the  heat  comes  on ; some  thirst  for  cold  water  in  the  heat. 
[. Hrr .] 

While  walking  in  the  open  air,  shivering  on  the  back,  then  heat 
in  the  back,  with  breaking  out  of  perspiration,  followed  immediately 
by  renewed  sensation  of  coldness  and  shivering.  \Wr.] 

Quick  and  hard  pulse,  with  flying  heat  alternating  with  chilliness 
in  the  back,  which  is  covered  with  cold  sweat,  as  is  also  the  forehead 
(aft.  a few  m.),  without  thirst  in  the  chill  and  heat,  for  five  hours, 
[IVr.] 

All  the  afternoon  chilliness  alternating  with  heat,  at  the  same 

* A rare  alternating  action  in  comparison  with  the  much  more  frequent  960  to 

964,  998,  1018. 


462 


CHINA. 


time  weakness  in  the  lower  extremities ; all  much  worse  when 
walking  in  the  open  air.  \WrJ\ 

Heat  in  the  head,  with  distended  blood-vessels  on  the  hands*  (aft. 

4 b.). 

1025.  The  blood  mounts  to  the  head,  the  forehead  is  hot  and 
the  limbs  are  eold.t 

During  the  feeling  of  heat,  intermingled  with  alternating  redness 
of  face,  lasting  all  day,  febrile  attacks  of  chill  and  perspiration,  with 
but  little  thirst.  \_An^\ 

All  over  the  body  sometimes  warmth,  sometimes  coldness  (aft.  -J — 

1 h.).  [Wth.\ 

Redness  and  heat  in  the  cheek  and  lobe  of  the  ear,  with  chill 
over  the  arms  and  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.). 

Redness  and  heat  in  the  cheek  and  ear-lobe  of  one  side  or  the 
other,  and  before  this  goes  off,  chill  all  over  the  body,  at  last  on  the 
lower  extremities  (aft.  4 h.). 

1030.  Heat  in  the  face,  and  after  some  hours  shivering  and  chilliness, 
with  coldness  of  the  whole  body. 

In  the  evening,  cold  hands  with  hot  cheeks, 

During  the  heat  he  can  scarcely  uncover  the  hands  without 
suffering. 

Warmth  and  redness  in  the  face,  whilst  the  rest  of 
the  body  was  cold;  at  the  same  time  a disagreeable 
cold  feeling  (chill)  on  the  warm  forehead.  [Bch.] 

Very  great  internal  heat  in  the  whole  face,  the  trunk  and  the 
thighs,  with  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead,  cold  cheeks  and  cold  feet 
(aft.  ioj  h.).  [Htn.] 

1035.  Warmth  in  the  face  with  chilliness  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  and 
shortly  afterwards  coldness  of  the  forehead,  with  warm  feeling  of  the 
rest  of  the  body.  [Hbg.] 

Very  great  feeling  of  heat  on  the  whole  body,  with  red  cheeks, 
heat  on  the  trunk  and  arms,  moderately  warm  thighs,  legs,  and  feet, 
with  damp  forehead,  without  thirst.  [Htn.] 

During  the  heat,  immediately  after  midnight,  no  thirst,  only  dry 

lips. 

Feeling  of  heat  and  redness  of  the  cheeks,  without  externally 
perceptible  warmth  in  them,  without  thirst,  with  cold  feet  (aft.  9 h.). 
[Fz.  1 

After  previous  increased  warmth  in  the  not  warm  room,  whilst 
walking  in  the  open  air,  feeling  of  coldness  about  the  ankles,  and 
coldness  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  in  the  forenoon  before  a meal,  [.Fz.] 
1040.  He  eats  his  dinner  with  relish  and  great  appetite,  and  an  hour 

* In  the  china-fever  the  blood-vessels  are  generally  distended,  even  during  heat  in 
the  head  alone,  as  here,  or  during  considerably  increased  temperature  of  the  body, 
1042,  or  during  mere  feeling  of  heat  without  externally  perceptible  heat,  1041,  and 
so  also  during  actual  external  heat,  1056. 

f 1024,  1025.  In  the  china-fever  rush  of  blood  to  the  head  is  very  frequent, 
generally  with  redness  and  heat  of  face,  3030,  1055,  often  with  chilliness  of  the  rest 
of  the  body,  1028,  1029,  1035,  also  with  external  coldness,  1031,  1033,  or  only 
internal  feeling  of  heat  on  the  face,  with  cheeks  cold  to  the  touch,  and  cold  sweat  on 
the  forehead,  1034. 


CHINA.  463 

afterwards  there  occurs  chilliness,  without  thirst,  then  feeling  of 
heat.  [Fz.] 

Sensation  of  heat  throughout  the  body,  with  distended  veins  and 
cold  feet ; on  the  rest  of  the  body  also  there  is  no  perceptible  ex- 
ternal increase  of  temperature. 

Temperature  of  the  whole  body  somewhat  elevated 
and  distended  blood-vessels,  but  without  thirst,  with 
readily  dilatable  pupils  (aft.  8,  12  h.). 

Heat  all  over  the  body  without  thirst  (aft.  3 h.). 

Heat  and  feeling  of  heat  on  the  body  ; at  first  the  limbs  are  at 
the  same  time  still  cold,  and  he  has  also  a feeling  of  coldness  in 
them  (aft.  \ h.),  with  slight  thirst  for  cold  water.  \Hrr.~\ 

1045.  Dry  heat,  all  day  long. 

Unquenchable  thirst  during  the  chill  and  heat  of  an  ague.  [J.  V. 
von  Hildenbrand,1  in  Hufel.  Journal , xiii,  i,  p.  142.] 

Feeling  of  flying  heat,  with  thirst  for  cold  drinks.  [Gtj.] 

Very  great  thirst,  for  an  hour  (aft.  9J  h.),  and  thereafter  a 
burning  heat  all  over  the  body,  with  throbbing  in  all  the  blood- 
vessels, without  sweat,  and  without  thirst,  with  violently  burning 
ears  and  burning  in  the  forehead,  but  only  normally  warm  cheeks, 
hands,  and  feet,  notwithstanding  which  all  these  three  parts  seem  to 
his  inward  feeling  to  be  too  hot  (aft.  io|  h.).  \Htn^\ 

In  the  evening,  an  hour  after  the  heat,  drv  palate  and  thirst. 

[A.] 

1050.  After  the  febrile  heat,  during  the  sweat  on  the  back  and  fore- 
head, thirst.  [IVr.] 

Fever  with  anorexia.  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

In  the  evening,  an  hour  after  the  heat,  thirst  and  hunger,  then, 
after  eating,  there  ensued  coldness  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen. 

[A.] 

Heat  of  the  body  and  redness  and  heat  of  face,  for  three  hours, 
with  great  hunger ; the  lips  burn  when  he  brings  them  together ; 
in  the  skin  about  the  lips,  also,  there  is  burning  shooting  pain  (after 
noon).  [Fz.] 

Heat  of  the  whole  body  (in  the  afternoon  from  5 to  7 o’clock) , 
which  on  walking  in  the  open  air  increases,  and  sweat  breaks  out  on 
the  forehead,  with  great  hunger  preceding  and  lasting  into  the  com- 
mencement of  the  heat,  returning  also  after  the  fever ; when 
walking  he  feels  in  the  abdomen  as  if  hot  water  ran  down  it  (heat 
running  all  over  the  abdomen  and  down  the  thighs),  with  red 
cheeks,  without  thirst  (aft.  12  h.).  [Fz.] 

1055.  Warmth  in  the  face  and  redness  of  the  cheeks,  with  dry, 
sticky  lips,  without  thirst,  in  the  afternoon  about  3 o’clock,  [Fz.] 

Heat  on  the  whole  body  with  swollen  blood-vessels  on  the  arms 
and  hands,  without  perspiration  and  without  thirst  (aft.  4J  h.). 
[Htn.] 

Irregular,  acute  fever,  with  profuse  sweat.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

He  perspires  incessantly  at  night,  even  under  light  bedclothes. 

On  covering  himself  up  with  the  bedclothes  he  immediately 


1 Effects  of  china  in  agues. 


464 


CHINA. 


sweats  profusely  all  over ; disagreeable  as  this  is  to  him,  he  is  at  the 
same  time  so  drowsy  that  he  cannot  collect  himself  nor  get  up. 

1060.  Sweat  during  sleep. 

Sweat  during  sleep  in  the  morning. 

Greasy  sweat  in  the  morning. 

In  the  morning,  as  soon  as  he  gets  up,  sweat  came  on  his  face. 
After  awaking  (about  3 a.m.),  sweat  of  the  body  with  thirst,  but 
no  sweat  on  the  feet,  and  on  the  head  only  where  the  cheek  lies  on 
the  pillow. 

1065.  Profuse  sweat.  [Morton,  1.  c.] 

Debilitating  sweat  at  the  end  of  the  febrile  heat.  [Schlegel, 
1.  c.] 

General  profuse  sweat.  [Alpini,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  after  the  night  sweat, "the  skin  is  not  sensitive  to 
the  open  air,  nor  apt  to  be  chilled  ; he  can  throw  off  the  clothes 
without  injury. 

Profuse  sweat  all  over  the  body  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 

1070.  Cold  sweat  on  the  face  with  thirst. 

Cold  sweat  all  over  the  body  (aft.  \ h.). 

The  whole  body  is  very  warm,  especially  the  face  and  chest  (aft. 
k h.).  [Hrr.] 

Heat  through  the  whole  body,  internally  and  externally,  as  from 
drinking  wine,  with  redness  of  the  face.  \JVth.'\ 

Heat  all  over,  and  fine  needle-pricks  in  the  skin  of  the  whole 
body,  particularly  on  the  neck,  at  the  same  time  great  thirst  for  cold 
water  (aft.  22  h.).  [i/rr.] 

1075.  Over  the  whole  body  a transient  feeling  of  heat  and 
actual  heat,  and  on  some  parts  of  the  skin  fine  weak 
needle-pricks,  with  thirst  for  cold  water  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Hrr .] 

Great  thirst  for  cold  water,  and  yet  chilliness  and  heat,  especially 
in  the  morning  immediately  after  waking.  \_Hrr.~\ 

More  thirst  every  morning  than  after  noon.  \_Hrr. ] 

Towards  evening  some  heat,  quite  without  chilliness,  with 
quicker  pulse  (aft.  12  h.).  \_Bch.~\ 

Quick  irregular  pulse  beats  (aft.  6 h.).  [ Bch.~] 

1080.  Pulse  much  slower  and  weaker  (in  the  first  h.).*  [De  Koker, 

I.C.] 

Slow  weak  pulse  (aft.  1 J h.).  \_Htn.~\ 

Slow  weaker  pulse,  which  gradually  becomes  quicker  and  stronger 
(aft.  i h.).  [Htn  ] 

The  febrile  attack  commences  with  sneezing. 

(Fever  returning  earlierf.)  [Schlegel,  1.  c.] 

1085.  (Decrease  of  the  febrile  chill,  and  increase  of  the  febrile  heat.) 
[Schlegel,  1.  c.] 

(Increased  febrile  heat.)f  [Fischer,  1.  c.] 

(Talking  nonsense  during  the  febrile  heat.)  [Schlegel,  1.  c.] 
(Talking  nonsense.)f  [Cleghorn,  1.  c.] 

(Delirium.) f [Gesner,  1.  c.] 

# From  a half-ounce  dose, 
f From  its  employment  in  agues. 


CHINA.  465 

1090.  Anxiety,  anguish.  [Cleghorn, — Quarin, — Roschin,  1.  c.] 

Extraordinary  anguish.  [Stahl,  1.  c.] 

Great  anxiety — death.*  [De  Koker,  1.  c.] 

Intolerable  anxiety  (about  8 p.m.  and  2 a.m.)  ; he  jumps  out  of 
bed  and  wants  to  make  away  with  himself,  and  yet  he  fears  to  go 
near  an  open  window  or  to  approach  a knife — with  corporeal  heat, 
without  thirst. 

Quite  besides  himself,  and  in  despair  he  tosses  about  in  bed.f 
1095.  Too  anxious  caution. 

An  over-anxious  concern  about  trifles  (aft.  ij  h.). 

Dejection.  [Gesner,  1.  c.] 

Gloominess,  hopelessness.}  [Gw.] 

Inconsolableness.  § 

1 100.  Discouragement.  \_An.~\ 

Want  of  the  (usual)  cheerful  humour;  he  prefers  to  be  alone. 
[Htn.] 

Piteous,  subdued  whining  and  crying  out. 

She  falls  from  time  to  time  into  a lachrymose  humour,  without 
external  cause,  from  some  self-made,  trivial  whim,  e.g.  from  some 
imaginary  want,  such  as  that  she  cannot  eat  enough,  See.  (aft.  20  h.). 

In  the  midst  of  cheerful  humour,  sudden,  short-lasting  crying  out 
and  tossing  about,  without  visible  or  appreciable  cause. 

1105.  What  formerly  appeared  to  him  in  a bright  genial  light,  seems 
now  to  be  lustreless,  unworthy,  and  shallow.  [£//'.] 

Morose,  disposed  to  quarrel.  ||  [Tr«.] 

He  is  cross,  angry,  and  easily  moved  to  anger^f  (aft.  4 h.). 

Ill-humour,  going  on  to  the  most  violent  anger,  so  that  he  could 
have  stabbed  some  one. 

Cross  when  cause  is  given,  otherwise  stupid,  perplexed,  em- 
barrassed. 

1 1 10.  Extremely  disposed  to  be  vexed,  and  to  take  every  occasion  to 
get  cross ; afterwards  quarrelsome  and  disposed  to  vex  others,  and  to 
make  reproaches  and  give  annoyance  to  others  (aft.  2 h.). 

He  is  inwardly  very  cross.  \_An.~] 

Discontented  and  sensitive,  disposed  to  quarrel.  \JVth.'] 

Discontented;  he  thinks  himself  unfortunate,  and 
fancies  he  is  opposed  and  tormented  by  everybody  (aft. 
5 h.). 

Disobedience. 

1 1 15.  Indisposed  to  think,  alternately  gay  and  gloomy  for  three  hours 
(aft.  2 h.).  JFth.~\ 

Distaste  for  mental  and  serious  occupations.  \_Bch.~\ 

No  desire  for  work  ; he  is  idle. 

Serious  humour.  [HtgJ\ 

# From  cinchona  bark  taken  during  the  chill  of  ague. 

f Comp,  with  1091,  1092. 

} 1098,  1100,  see  1094. 

§ Comp,  with  1098,  1 100. 

||  1106,  1112,  see  1107,  1108,  1 1 xo. 

11  1107,  1108,  iiio,  comp,  with  1106,  1112. 

3° 


466 


CHINA. 


Humour  gloomy,  no  wish  to  live. 

1120.  Contempt  for  everything* * * §  (aft.  i h.). 

Indifference  to  all  external  impressions,  and  disinclination  to 
speak.f  \_Bch,'] 

Tranquillity  of  mind.J  [Lr.] 

Ill-humour,  but  neither  sad  nor  quarrelsome,  yet  not  at  all 
disposed  for  rapid  thinking.  § 

Quiet  ill-humour,  and  not  disposed  to  speak  (the  first  day),  [Lfrr.] 
1125.  Complaining  ill-humour. 

Sighing  ill-humour.  || 

Ill-humoured,  laconic,  disposed  to  reverie. 

He  is  silent  and  will  not  answer. 

Obstinate  silence  ; he  will  not  answer  at  all. 

1130.  Caresses  increase  his  ill-humour. 

Ill-humoured  irresolution ; she  can  never  come  to  the  point,  and 
is  disobliging  at  the  same  time. 

Dislike  to  mental  work  and  drowsiness.  [Hrr.] 

Dislike  to  bodily  and  mental  exertion,  [An.] 

Liking  for  work,  reading,  writing,  and  thinking  ; particularly  well- 
disposed  and  industrious. 

1135.  He  makes  a number  of  grand  plans  for  the  future.**  \_Htn.~\ 

He  makes  many  plans,  and  thinks  over  their  accomplishment ; 
many  ideas  force  themselves  upon  him  at  once.  \_Hrr.~] 

He  has  many  ideas,  undertakes  to  carry  out  all  sorts  of  things, 
builds  castles  in  the  air  (aft.  some  h.).  [JVth.] 

He  has  a number  of  plans  in  his  head  which  he  greatly  desires  to 
carry  into  execution,  in  the  evening.  [Grr.] 

A quantity  of  scheming  ideas. ff 

1140-  Slow  flow  of  ideas. 

Periodical  cessation  of  thoughts.  \Lhm.\ 

He  is  lost  in  thought  (as  if  the  flow  of  ideas  stood  still)  (aft.  3 h.). 
He  cannot  keep  his  ideas  in  order,  and  commits  mistakes  in 
writing  and  speaking,  inasmuch  as  he  puts  words  first  that  should 
come  afterwards  the  talking  of  others  distracts  him  much  (aft.  2 h.) 

* Comp,  with  1 1 2 1> 

t See  1120. 

J Curative  action,  apparently. 

§ Comp,  with  11 15,  11 16,  1132,  1140  to  1142. 

||  1126,  1128,  1129,  comp,  with  1124,  1127. 

Curative  action. 

**  113S  t°  II3^>  see  1 1 3 9 , 1143* 

tf  1 1 3 9 j 1 143,  together  with  1135  to  1138  are  alternating  actions  with  7,  1140, 
1141  and  1142. 


CICUTA  VIROSA.1 

(^Long-leaded  Water  Hemlock .) 

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  from  the  root  gathered  when  the  plant  is  commencing 
to  flower,  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.) 

The  following  symptoms  can  only  be  regarded  as  a commencement 
of  a thorough  proving  of  the  peculiar  effects  of  this  powerful  plant  in 
altering  the  human  health. 

Further  and  more  complete  provings  will  show  that  it  is  useful  in 
rare  cases  where  no  other  remedy  is  homceopathically  suited,  and  par- 
ticularly in  chronic  cases,  for  I have  seen  its  effects  last  for  three  weeks, 
even  when  given  in  small  doses. 

Traditional  medicine  has  never  made  any  internal  use  of  cicuta 
virosa ; for  when  cicuta  was  prescribed,  as  it  was  very  often  some  years 
ago,  it  was  actually  conium  maculatum  that  was  meant  by  that 
name. 

The  juice  of  cicuta  was  used  only  for  external  application  in  pre- 
paring the  cicuta  plaster  on  Linnjeus’s  recommendation,  particularly 
by  the  Danish  Pharmacopoeia  (Empl.  de  cicuta,  Pharm . Dan .).  It  was 
applied  for  the  purpose  of  allaying  gouty  pains, 

The  juice  of  the  fresh  root  (for  it  has  little  action  when  dried)  is  so 
powerful  that  ordinary  practitioners  did  not  dare*  to  give  it  internally 
in  their  accustomed  big  doses,  and  consequently  had  to  do  without  it 
and  its  curative  power  altogether. 

Homoeopathy  alone  knows  how  to  employ  with  advantage  this 
powerfully  remedial  juice  in  the  decillion-fold  dilution  (30th  dilution). 

[In  this  proving  Hahnemann  had  the  assistance  of  his  son  Friedrich  Hahne- 
mann, Hornburg,  and  Langhammer. 

The  only  authorities  of  traditional  medicine  quoted  are  : 

Allen,  Synopsis. 

Bresl.  Samml.y  1727. 

Wepfer,  De  cicuta  aquat. 

The  number  of  symptoms  is  the  same  in  both  Editions.] 


CICUTA  VIROSA. 

In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed,  confusion  of  the  head. 
Stupid  and  dazed  (after  10  m.).  [Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Stupid  in  the  head,  with  rigor ; at  the  same  time  the  neck  felt 
stiff  and  the  muscles  too  short.  \_Fr.  H — 72.] 

* “Nee  ulli  auctor  essem,  ut  interno  usui  dicaret, ” says  Murray  (Apparat> 
Medicam.,  tom.  i,  2nd  edit.,  p.  402). 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1826. 


468 


CICUTA  VIROSA. 


Absence  of  thought,  difficulty  of  recollecting  himself, 
deprivation  Of  the  senses.  [Wepfer,  De  Cicuta  aquat.J  and 
Allen,  Synopsis?] 

5.  Intoxication,  staggering.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

When  walking,  vertigo,  as  though  he  would  fall  forward  to  the 
left  (aft.  72  h.).  [Lr.] 

On  stooping  he  feels  as  if  he  would  fall  head-foremost  (aft. 
80  h.).  [Lr.] 

Vertigo,  staggering.1 2 3  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Staggering  and  swaying  when  walking  (aft.  82  h.).  [Lr.] 

10.  When  sitting,  standing,  and  walking,  he  is  as  if  intoxicated  (aft. 
5 m.)  [Fr.  H—n.] 

All  objects  appear  to  him  to  move  round  in  a circle,  especially 
when  he  is  seated — for  many  hours  (aft  2 h.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Objects  seem  to  him  to  move  hither  and  thither,  from  one  side 
to  the  other,  although  they  all  retain  their  right  shape  (aft.  10  m.). 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

She  thinks  she  must  place  or  seat  herself  more  firmly,  because 
she  sees  nothing  steady  or  firm  about  her,  and  she  consequently 
thinks  that  she  herself  is  unsteady;  everything  dazzles  her  (aft.  15 
m.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

She  imagines  she  is  swaying  to  one  side  or  another,  or  that  the 
objects  around  her  are  moving  to  and  fro  ; it  seems  to  her  that 
nothing  is  standing  still,  but  that  everything  swings  backwards  and 
forwards  like  a pendulum.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

15.  When  she  has  to  stand  still,  she  wishes  she  could  lay  hold  of 
something,  because  the  objects  seem  at  one  time  to  come  near  her 
and  then  again  to  recede  from  her.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Staggering,  so  that  she  thinks  she  must  fall  (aft.  6 h.).  [Fr. 
H—n.] 

Vertigo;  he  fell  to  the  ground.  [Wepfer  and  Allen, 
1.  c.] 

He  is  always  inclined  to  fall  to  the  ground.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

He  fell  to  the  ground  without  saying  a word.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

20.  He  falls  to  the  ground  and  rolls  about.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

A hammering  pain  in  the  forehead,  from  noon  till  evening  (aft. 
2 h.).  [Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Anxiety  in  the  head.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Stupefied  and  heavy  in  the  head  (aft.  74  h.).  [Lr.'] 

Heaviness  in  the  head  when  sitting.  [Hbg.] 

25.  In  the  morning  on  waking,  headache,  just  as  if  the  brain  were 
loose  and  shook  when  walking ; when  he  set  himself  to  think  what 
sort  of  pain  it  was  exactly,  it  was  gone. 

Headache  pressing  together  from  both  sides.  [Hbg.] 

Aching  in  the  left  frontal  bone.  [Hbg.] 


1 Two  boys  and  six  girls  ate  largely  of  it.  (Quite  half  of  the  symptoms  referred 
by  Hahnemann  to  this  authority  are  not  to  be  found,  after  the  most  diligent  search, 
in  his  pages.) 

2 Poisoning  of  four  children. 

3 Not  found. 


CICUTA  VIROSA.  469 

Pressive,  stupefying  headache  externally  on  the 
forehead,  more  when  at  rest  (aft.  1,  36  h.).  [Lr.] 

Semilateral  headache,  like  an  aching  more  externally. 

30.  Severe  headache  in  the  occiput  like  dull  pressure,  accompanied 
by  some  coryza  (aft.  48  h.). 

(After  sickness  in  the  abdomen,  violent  headache  lasting  two 
days ; shooting,  which  extended  from  the  nose  and  right  eye  to  the 
occiput)  (aft.  15  d.). 

(After  the  headache,  dazedness  for  two  days.) 

The  headache  went  off*  on  sitting  upright. 

The  headache  is  relieved  by  discharge  of  flatus. 

35.  Creeping  in  the  forehead  as  from  ants  (aft.  2 m.).  [Fr.  H — «.] 
Shooting  pain  in  the  frontal  bone.  [Hbg.~] 

Stitches  extending  along  the  eyebrow  (aft.  12  h.).  [Z>.] 

Great  eruption  on  the  hairy  scalp  and  face.  \_Fr.  H — ».] 
Exanthematous  elevations,  the  size  of  a lentil,  all  over  the  face 
(and  On  both  hands),  which  caused  a burning  pain  when  they  first 
appeared,  then  became  confluent,  of  a dark  red  colour,  lasting  nine 
days,  when  desquamation  ensued,  which  lasted  three  weeks.*  [Fr. 
H—n .] 

40.  Redness  of  the  face.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Face  (and  neck)  swollen.2  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Eyes  protruded  from  the  head.2  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Staring  look.2  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

He  keeps  staring  at  one  and  the  same  spot,  whereby  everything 
appears  to  him  like  black  stuff*  (aft.  6 m.).  [ Fr . H — n.~\ 

45.  Staring  (aft.  \ h.)  ; she  looks  fixedly  at  one  and  the  same  place, 
and  cannot  help  doing  so,  much  as  she  would  like  to ; at  the  same 
time  she  has  not  full  command  of  her  senses,  and  must  be  very 
strongly  excited  in  order  to  answer  correctly  ; if  she  compels  herself 
forcibly,  by  turning  away  her  head,  to  cease  having  her  eyes  directed 
on  the  object,  she  loses  consciousness,  and  all  becomes  dark  before 
her  eyes.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

Even  though  she  keeps  her  look  steadily  fixed  on  an  ohject,  she 
sees  nothing  distinctly ; everything  runs  together,  as  when  one  has 
looked  too  long  on  one  and  the  same  object,  when  the  sight  becomes 
blurred.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

If  she  looks  long  at  the  same  spot,  she  grows  sleepy,  and  she  feels 
as  if  the  head  were  pressed  down,  though  nothing  of  the  sort  is 
noticed,  and  she  then,  her  eyes  being  open  and  staring,  is  unable  to 
tell  the  letters  of  a book.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

As  often  as  she  is  spoken  to,  and  thereby  forced  out  of  her  un- 
conscious staring,  and  wakened  up  by  shouting  to  her,  so  often  does 

* I have  cured  chronic,  suppurating,  confluent  eruptions  in  the  face  having  only 
burning  pain  by  means  of  one  or  two  doses  of  a small  part  of  a drop  of  the  juice,  but 
I did  not  venture  to  give  the  second  dose  in  less  than  three  to  four  weeks,  when  the  first 
dose  did  not  suffice. 


1 With  S.  ao 6. 
9 Not  found. 


4?o 


CICUTA  VIROSA. 


she  always  relapse  again  into  it,  and  in  this  state  her  pulse  is  only  50 
in  the  minute.  [Fr.  H—n.\ 

If  she  is  allowed  to  sit  still  for  a considerable  time  her  head  sinks 
down  gradually,  whilst  the  eyes  continue  to  stare  at  the  same  point, 
so  that  as  thus  the  head  sinks  very  low  the  pupils  become  almost 
hidden  under  the  upper  eyelids ; she  then  gets  an  inward  shock, 
which  brings  her  quickly  to  her  senses  for  a short  time ; she  then 
falls  again  into  a similar  state  of  unconsciousness,  out  of  which  she 
is  from  time  to  time  awakened  by  an  internal  shivering,  which  she 
says  is  a febrile  rigor.  [ Fr . H — n.] 

50.  Sometimes  everything  appeared  double  and  of  a black  colour, 
sometimes  she  was  affected  with  dulness  of  hearing.  [Fr.  H — n.~\ 
First  (aft.  ii,  h.)  contracted,  then  (aft.  8,  9 h.)  very 
dilated,  pupils.  [ Lr .] 

At  first  extremely  contracted,  soon  afterwards  extremely  dilated, 
pupils.  [Hbg.~\ 

Aching  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  right  eye,  so  that  he  must 
shut  and  press  to  the  eyes  in  order  to  get  relief.  [Hbg.] 

A quivering  under  the  lower  eyelid  in  the  orbicularis  muscle. 

55.  Heat  and  burning  round  about  the  eyes. 

Sore  pain  behind  the  left  ear.  [Hbg.] 

Sore  sensation  behind  the  left  ear,  as  after  a knock  or  blow. 
IHbg.] 

Pain  behind  the  right  ear,  such  as  would  remain  after  a knock  or 
blow.  [Hbg.] 

Great  eruption  on  the  ears.  [ Fr . H — n.] 

60.  Exanthematous  pimples  below  and  in  front  of  the  ears,  their 
apices  filled  with  pus  and  painful  like  a boil.  \_Fr.  H — n.\ 

When  swallowing  something  bursts  in  the  right  ear.  [ Fr . H — ».] 
Roaring  before  both  ears,  worse  in  the  room  than  in  the  open  air. 
[Fr.  H—n .] 

Loud  ringing  in  the  left  ear.  [Hbg.] 

She  does  not  hear  well  unless  one  speaks  loudly  in  her  ear  and 
attracts  her  attention.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

65.  Discharge  of  blood  from  the  ears.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Yellow  discharge  from  the  nose. 

The  right  ala  nasi  is  painful  as  if  excoriated,  as  from  a knock  or 
blow.  [Hbg.~\ 

A burning  itching  vesicle  on  the  left  side  of  the  upper  lip  at  the 
edge  of  the  red.  [I ibg.~\ 

A kind  of  cramp  in  the  cervical  muscles : when  he  looks  round,  he 
cannot  immediately  turn  the  head  back  again  ; the  cervical  muscles 
do  not  yield,  and  if  he  should  effect  his  object  by  force  it  would  give 
him  great  pain. 

70.  Tension  in  the  cervical  muscles.  [ Hbg. ] 

On  bending  the  head  backwards  a sore  tension  in  the  left  cervical 
muscles.  [Hbg.~\ 

Drawing  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck  (aft.  6 h.).  [Hbg.] 
Swollen  neck.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 


1 Not  found. 


CICUTA  VIROSA. 


47i 

Bending  back  of  the  head  (a  kind  of  opisthotonos).  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 
75.  Twitching  and  jerking  of  the  head.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Lock-jaw.  [Wepfer,-— Allen,  1.  c.] 

Teeth  firmly  closed,  lock-jaw.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Grinding  of  teeth.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Mouth  full  of  foam.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

80.  Foam  before  the  mouth.3  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Toothache  in  the  nerves  of  the  lower  row  of  teeth.  \_Hbg.] 

A whitish  sore  place  on  the  border  of  the  tongue,  very  painful 
when  touched.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

On  speaking  several  words  he  can  bring  out  the  first  five  or  six 
words  without  hindrance,  but  with  the  remainder,  in  pronouncing 
the  word  he  gets  a small  jerk  backwards  of  the  head  observable  by 
others,  and  at  the  same  time  the  arms  twitch  somewhat,  so  that  he 
must,  as  it  were,  draw  back  and  swallow  the  syllable  about  to  be 
spoken,  almost  like  what  frequently  occurs  in  hiccup.  [Fr.  H — n.] 
Dumbness.  [Allen,  1.  c.] 

85.  Inability  to  swallow.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

The  throat  appears  to  be  grown  together  internally,  and  exter- 
nally it  pains  as  if  bruised  on  being  moved  or  grasped,  getting  worse 
for  several  hours,  with  eructation  from  noon  till  evening.  [Fr.  H — n.] 
Dry  feeling  in  the  mouth.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Constant  hunger  and  desire  for  food,  even  when  he  has  just  been 
eating.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Great  thirst  (during  the  convulsions).3  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

90.  He  had  a great  longing  for  coals  and  swallowed  them.3  [Wepfer, 
1.  c.] 

Hiccup.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.,  and  Breslauer  Samml .,  172 7,  p.  313,3 
and  Hbg.] 

Loud  hiccup.3  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

When  she  was  stooping  (in  the  open  air)  a very  bitter  yellow  fluid 
was  belched  up,  as  by  eructation,  from  the  stomach  into  the  mouth, 
and  thereafter  she  had  burning  in  the  oesophagus  all  the  forenoon. 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

A sensation  up  from  the  stomach  like  water-brash ; he  felt 
qualmish  and  hot  all  over,  and  a quantity  of  saliva  that  had  risen  up 
from  his  stomach  flowed  out  of  his  mouth  (aft.  9 to  13  h.).  [Fr.] 

95.  Nausea  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hbg.] 

Nausea  while  eating.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

In  the  morning  nausea,  with  shooting  tearing  headache.  [Fr. 

H—n.] 

Nausea  and  shooting  in  the  forehead,  all  day.  [Fr.  H — n.] 
Vomiting.  [Allen,  1.  c.] 

100.  Vomiting  without  relaxation  of  the  lock-jaw.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 
Want  of  appetite  on  account  of  dry  feeling  in  the  mouth  ; food  has 
no  wrong  taste,  but  not  its  full  flavour. 

At  noon,  appetite  for  food,  but  the  appetite  went  away  at  the 
first  mouthful. 

1 Post  mortem.  2 Not  found, 

3 Poisoning  of  three  children  by  root. 


472 


CICUTA  VIROSA. 


Breakfast  is  not  relished  ; he  felt  a stuffy  sensation  in  the  abdomen, 
as  if  he  had  already  eaten  too  much. 

Immediately  after  eating  cutting  in  the  hypogastrium. 

105.  Immediately  after  eating  an  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis, 
which  compels  him  to  draw  a deep  breath,  at  the  same  time  tendency 
to  eructation. 

Immediately  after  eating  bellyache  and  drowsiness. 

In  the  morning  sick  feeling  in  the  abdomen,  and  when  this 
passed  off,  in  the  afternoon,  headache,  a shooting  on  the  right  side  of 
the  head,  which  extended  from  the  right  eye  and  the  nose — in  both  of 
which  it  was  at  its  worst — to  the  occiput,  for  three  days,  whereon  the 
nose  became  unstopped,  and  yellow  mucus  was  discharged  (aft.  9 d.). 
Vomiting  of  blood.  [Breslauer  Samml .,  1.  c.] 

Burning  scraping  sensation  from  the  inside  of  the  throat  to  the 
gastric  region.  [Hbg.] 

no.  Burning  pressure  in  the  stomach.  [Hbg.] 

Scraping  scratching  sensation  in  the  stomach.  [Hbg. ] 

Tightness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  anxiety,  for  eight  days, 
he  wishes  always  to  go  out  in  order  to  cool  himself. 

A blow  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  as  with  a finger, 
which  makes  him  start,  and  then  only  he  collects  himself  and  comes 
to  his  senses.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Throbbing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  is  swollen 
as  large  as  a fist.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

1 15.  Great  throbbing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 
Shooting1  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis.2  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Heat  in  the  abdomen  (and  chest).  [Hbg.] 

Great  accumulation  of  flatulence,  with  constant  anxiety  and 
crossness. 

120.  Grumbling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Hbg.] 

Much  flatus  is  discharged.  [ Hbg.'] 

Constipation.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Diarrhoea.  [Allen,  1.  c.] 

In  the  right  groin  a sensation  as  if  an  ulcer  would  break  out 
(while  sitting).  [Hbg.] 

125.  Itching  internally  in  the  rectum,  just  above  the  anus;  after  rub- 
bing there  is  burning  pain,  a pain  that  caused  a shudder  through  him 
every  time  it  came— after  walking,  when  standing  still,  and  when  at 
stool. 

Retention  of  urine.3  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

At  night  difficulty  of  urinating.2  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Involuntary  discharge  of  urine.2  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  call  to  urinate.  [Lr.] 

130.  Very  frequent  urination.  [ Fr . H — n.] 

Violent  ejection  of  the  urine.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 


1 The  author  adds  “ and  burning.” 

2 Not  found. 

3*With  S.  122. 


CICUTA  VIROSA.  4-73 

Sore  drawing  pain  under  the  penis  as  far  as  the  glans,  which  com- 
pels him  to  urinate  (aft  12  h.).  [Hbg.] 

Three  emissions  of  semen  in  the  night.  [Hbg.] 

Emission  of  semen,  without  voluptuous  dreams.  [/>.] 

135.  The  menses  come  later.  [Fr.  H — ».] 

* * * 

Stoppage  of  the  nose,  and  at  the  same  time  copious  secretion  of 
mucus  from  it. 

Very  frequent  sneezing,  without  coryza  (aft.  29  h.).  [Lr.] 
Aching  under  the  larynx  when  sitting  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hbg.] 
Sensation  in  the  chest  and  in  the  throat,  as  if  something  that 
pressed  asunder  were  sticking  there,  as  big  as  a fist,  which  hindered 
respiration,  and  felt  as  if  it  would  burst  the  throat — worse  when 
sitting  than  when  walking.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

140.  Tightness  on  the  chest,  so  that  she  can  hardly  draw  her  breath  all 
day  long  (immediately).  [Fr.  H—n.] 

Want  of  breath  all  day  long  (immediately).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

On  inspiring  and  expiring  some  needle-pricks  under  the  last  false 
ribs  of  the  left  side,  which  went  off  when  standing  and  walking  (aft. 
3 h.).  [Lr  ] 

Hoarseness.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Cough,  with  much  expectoration,  especially  by  day.  [Fr.  H — n.] 
145.  Burning  round  the  nipple  (aft.  3 h.).  [Fr.  H — n.\ 

Itching  combined  with  sensation  of  heat  in  the  right  side  of  the 
chest.  [Hbg.] 

Heat  in  chest  (and  abdomen).  [Hbg.] 

At  the  inferior  extremity  of  the  sternum  an  ache,  as  after  a blow, 
and  as  if  excoriated,  when  walking.  [Hbg.] 

General  heat,  and  particularly  heat  in  the  chest,  for  three 
quarters  of  an  hour,  increased  by  (accustomed)  tobacco  smoking. 
[Hbg.] 

150.  A tugging  at  the  chest  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  1 h.). 

[Hbg.] 

Tearing  twitching  in  the  coccyx.  [Hbg.] 

A blow  in  the  dorsal  vertebrae.  [Hbg.] 

Tetanus,  bending  the  back  backwards  (opisthotonos).  [Wepfer, 
l.c.] 

Back  bent  like  a bow.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

155.  Painful  tension  above  the  right  scapula.  [Hbg.] 

Painful  sensation  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  scapulae. 

[Hbg.] 

Sensation  as  if  there  were  an  ulcer  on  the  right  scapula.  [Hbg.] 

A red  vesicle  on  the  right  scapula,  that  was  very 
painful  when  touched.  [Hbg.] 

Sore  pain,  as  from  a blow,  in  the  right  shoulder-joint.  [Hbg.] 
160.  Painful  sensation  under  the  right  arm.  [Hbg.] 

Twitching  in  the  left  shoulder  (aft.  20  m.).  [Fr.  H—n.] 
Sensation  of  cracking  in  the  shoulder-joint,  which  is  not  audible. 
[Fr.  H—n.] 


1 Not  found. 


474 


CICUTA  VIROSA. 


Tearing  pain  in  the  whole  of  the  left  arm  down  to  the  fingers. 

Fr.  H—n.] 

On  raising  it  the  arm  feels  very  heavy,  and  at  the  same  time 
there  are  such  violent  shoots  in  the  shoulder  that  she  cannot  bring 
the  arm  on  to  the  head  without  screaming  loudly ; she  dare  not  even 
move  the  fingers.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

165.  Sensation  in  the  left  arm  as  if  he  had  no  power  in  it,  with  a 
shooting  tearing  pain  on  raising  it.  [Fr.  H — ».] 

Powerlessness  of  the  whole  arm  and  fingers.  [Hbg.] 

Twitching  in  the  left  arm,  so  that  the  whole  body  is  jerked  (aft. 
4 m.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Frequent  involuntary  twitching  and  jerking  in  the  arms  and 
fingers  (lower  extremities  and  head).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

(On  the  inside  of  the  left  elbow-joint,  a swelling,  as  if  a boil 
would  come  there ; on  raising  the  arm  it  was  painful  there,  as  when 
one  presses  on  an  ulcer.) 

170.  Stitch-like  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  forearm  when 
writing,  which  went  off  when  the  body  was  perfectly  inactive  faft. 

i*  h-)-  [Lr-I 

Sore  pain,  as  from  a knock  or  blow,  in  the  left  forearm.  [Hbg.] 
Distended  blood-vessels  on  the  hands.  [Hbg.] 

Feeling  of  cracking  in  the  wrist,  which  is  not  audible.  [Fr. 
H — n.] 

Exanthematous  elevations,  the  size  of  a lentil,  on  both  hands, 
even  on  the  balls  of  the  thumbs,  which  on  their  appearance  cause  a 
burning  pain ; they  then  become  confluent,  of  a dark  colour,  and 
last  nine  days.  [ Fr . H — «.] 

175.  Twitching  together  of  several  fingers  and  of  the  thumb  of  the 
right  hand.  [Fr.  H — n.~\ 

Dying  away  (gone-to-sleep  feeling,  numbness,  coldness)  of  the 
fingers.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

In  the  right  pelvic  region,  on  the  border  of  the  os  ilii,  a kind  of 
sore,  drawing,  pulsating  pain,  as  after  a violent  blow.  [Hbg.'] 
Burning  shooting  in  the  left  hip-bone.  [Hbg.\ 

Frequent  involuntary  twitching  of  the  lower  extremities.  [Fr. 
H — ».] 

180.  Painful  tense  and  stiff  feeling  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  ex- 
tremities, so  that  he  cannot  walk  at  all,  for  three  hours  (aft.  1 h.). 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  thighs  and  heaviness  of  them  when  walking. 

[Fr.  H—n.] 

Pain,  like  tearing  in  the  thighs,  immediately  after  rising  from  a 
seat,  and  pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  knees ; on  walking  the  pain 
in  the  thighs  increases,  like  a deep-seated  stiffness.  [Fr.  H — n.~] 
Burning  itching  on  the  right  thigh,  so  that  he  must  scratch, 
whereupon  it  went  off.  [Hbg. ] 

Creeping  close  beneath  the  skin  of  the  thighs  and  legs,  and  espe- 
cially of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  as  if  the  limbs  would  go  to  sleep,  only 
when  sitting.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

185.  Perceptible  trembling  of  one  thigh.  [Fr.  H — n.] 


CICUTA  VIROSA. 


475 


Very  violent  trembling  of  the  left  leg.  [Fr.  H — n .] 

When  walking  she  does  not  tread  properly  on  the  soles  of  the 
feet ; they  tip  over  towards  the  inside,  [Fr.  H — nf\ 

Tearing  round  the  ankles  of  the  left  foot.  [ Hbg .] 

Frequent  needle-pricks  in  the  heel,  when  sitting.  [Hbgf] 

190.  Tingling  and  “pins  and  needles”  in  the  left  sole.  [Hbg.~\ 
Drawing  twitching  pains  in  the  toes.  \_Hbgf\ 

Trembling  in  the  upper  and  lower  extremities.  [ Hbg.~\ 

Burning  itching  all  over. 

Itching  all  over  the  body,  so  that  he  must  scratch.  \Fr. 
H—n.-] 

195.  Spasmodic  stiffness  of  all  the  body,  with  coldness  thereof.  [Brest. 
Samml .,  1727,  p.  314.] 

(About  noon,  anxiety,  perspiration  in  the  face,  and  trembling  of 
the  hands;  about  his  heart  [in  the  middle  of  the  chest]  he  feels  as 
though  he  would  faint.) 

Whilst  lying  in  bed  a peculiar  sensation,  as  if  his  whole  body  were 
swollen,  and  at  the  same  time  (while  awake)  frequent  starting,  as 
though  he  were  falling  out  of  bed  (aft.  15  h.).  [Zr.] 

Catalepsy ; the  limbs  hang  down  loosely,  as  in  a corpse,  without 
breathing.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

The  most  violent  (tonic)  spasms,  so  that  neither  can  the  flexed 
fingers  be  stretched  out,  nor  the  limbs  be  either  flexed  or  extended.1 
[Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

200.  Tossing  of  the  limbs  to  and  fro.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

He  threw  the  limbs  now  on  one  side  now  on  the  other.  [Wepfer, 
I.C.] 

Epileptic  convulsions  in  three  children,  one  of  whom  recovered. 
[Breslauer  Samml. , 1.  c.,  p.  313] 

Spasmodic  distortions  of  the  limbs  which  threw  him  a distance  of 
two  feet.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

General  convulsions.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

205.  Very  violent  convulsions.  [Wepfer,— Allen,  1.  c.] 

Epilepsy.  [Wepfer, — Allen,  1.  c.] 

Frightful  epilepsy,  recurring  first  at  shorter,  then  at  longer 
intervals,  the  limbs,  head,  and  upper  part  of  the  body  are  moved  in  a 
wonderful  manner,  with  closed  jaws.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Epileptic  fits  with  wonderful  distortions  of  the  limbs,  upper  part 
of  the  body,  and  head,  with  bluish  complexion,  and,  for  some  instants, 
interrupted  respiration,  with  foam  before  the  mouth ; and  after  the 
convulsions,  when  the  breathing  was  free,  he  was  unconscious  and 
lay  as  if  dead,  gave  no  sign  of  sensation  when  called  to  or  pinched.*1 
[Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

She  lies  like  a corpse,  with  closed  jaws.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

* In  a young  man  of  twenty,  whose  death  took  place  in  two  hours,  the  body 
remained  warm  for  a whole  day  without  any  blue  discoloration  or  swelling ; the 
limbs  were  stiff,  the  lungs  full  of  blue  and  yellow  spots,  the  blood  red  and  fluid,  the 
heart  empty  of  blood,  the  oesophagus  internally  bluish  and  dry. 


1 Not  found. 


476  CICUTA  VIROSA. 

210.  Immobility.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

They  all  lay  prostrated  with  weakness,  without  consciousness  and 
immovable,  like  blocks  or  corpses.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  yawning.  [Hbg.] 

Frequent  yawning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  (aft.  if  h.). 

[•*>.] 

Drowsiness,  so  that  his  eyes  always  closed.  [ Hbg.] 

21 5.  At  night,  vivid  dreams  about  events  that  had 
occurred  during  the  day. 

Vivid  but  unremembered  dreams.  [ Lr .] 

Many  confused  dreams  with  much  restlessness.  [ Hbg .] 

Sleeplessness,  all  night  (immediately).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Sleeplessness ; he  woke  up  every  quarter  of  an  hour  with  a pain- 
ful feeling  of  weight  in  the  head.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

220.  Every  morning  he  has  not  slept  enough,  is  not  satiated  with 
sleep.  [ Fr . H — «.] 

Frequent  waking  up  out  of  sleep,  in  which  he  per- 
spired all  over,  but  from  which  he  felt  strengthened. 

[Lr.-] 

They  all  wish  to  come  near  the  warm  stove.1  [Wepfer, 
L c.] 

She  has  a feeling  of  coldness  running  down  her  thighs,  then  coldness 
in  the  arms — the  coldness  seems  to  come  chiefly  out  of  the  chest — then 
comes  on  a greater  inclination  to  stare  fixedly  at  one  point.  [Fr. 
H—n.] 

Uncommonly  strong  heat  in  all  parts  of  the  body  from  beginning 
to  end  of  the  action  of  the  drug.  [Hbg^\ 

225.  Perspiration  on  the  abdomen  at  night. 

He  became  indifferent  to  everything,  and  began  to  doubt  whether 
this  was  really  the  condition  in  which  he  was. 

He  confounded  the  present  with  the  past. 

He  thought  with  anxiety  of  the  future  and  was  always  sad. 

Anxiety;  he  was  violently  affected  by  sad  stories.1 

[Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

230.  Moaning,  whining  and  howling.  [Wepfer, — Allen, 
1.  c.] 

Excitement,  with  concern  for  the  future,  he  represented  to  him- 
self as  dangerous  everything  that  would  happen  to  him. 

W hen  others  were  gay  he  was  sad. 

Sadness  for  several  days.1  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Great  liability  to  be  startled  ; every  time  a door  is  opened,  or  a 
word  spoken,  even  not  loudly,  he  starts  and  feels  stitches  in  the  (left) 
side  of  the  head.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

235.  He  did  not  think  he  was  living  in  the  ordinary  conditions  ; every- 
thing appeared  to  him  strange  and  almost  frightful  j it  was  as  if  he 
woke  up  out  of  an  acute  fever  and  saw  all  sorts  of  figures,  and  yet  he 
did  not  feel  corporeally  ill. 

Mania  \ after  unusual  sleep,  heat  of  the  body ; she  leapt  out  of 


1 fJot  found. 


CICUTA  VIROSA. 


477 


bed,  danced,  laughed,  and  did  all  sorts  of  foolish  things,  drank  a great 
deal  of  wine,  jumped  about  constantly,  clapped  her  hands,  and  at  the 
same  time  was  very  red  in  the  face — all  night  long.  [ Bresl.  Samml ., 
1.  c.,  p.i  58.] 

Depreciation  and  contempt  of  mankind  5 he  fled  from  his  fellow- 
creatures,  was  in  the  highest  degree  disgusted  with  their  follies,  and 
his  disposition  seemed  to  change  into  misanthropy  5 he  withdrew 
into  solitude.  [Zr.] 

Want  of  trust  in  people  and  anthrophoby ; he  fled  from  them, 
remained  solitary,  and  thought  seriously  about  their  errors  and  about 
himself.  [Zr.] 

Suspicious. 

240.  He  felt  like  a child  of  seven  or  eight  years  old,  objects  were  very 
dear  and  attractive  to  him,  as  toys  are  to  a child. 

Tranquillity  of  mind  ; he  was  extremely  satisfied  with 
his  position  and  with  himself,  and  very  cheerful.*  [Zr.] 

* Curative  secondary  action. 


1 In  an  adult  woman. 


CINA.1 

( Semen  cina,  Semen  santonici , Sem.  contra.') 

(The  tincture  obtained  by  macerating,  for  a week,  without  heat,  one  part  of  the 
unpowdered  buds  with  twenty  parts  of  spirits  of  wine  ; twenty  drops  of  this  represent 
one  grain  of  the  drug.) 

Even  the  best  generally  consists  only  of  small  oblong,  light  yellowish- 
green  buds,  mixed  with  a few  stalks,  from  a shrub-like  plant,  Artemisia 
contra , The  finest  comes  to  us  from  Aleppo.  It  has  also  been  impro- 
perly called  zedoary  seed,  Semen  zedoariae,  merely  because  its  odour 
has  a great  resemblance  to  that  of  the  zedoary  root. 

For  centuries  no  other  use  has  been  made  of  this  very  important 
vegetable  substance,  except  for  the  expulsion  of  lumbrici  in  children,  in 
doses  of  10,  20,  30,  60,  and  more  grains.  I pass  over  the  not  unfre- 
quently  dangerous,  or  even  fatal,  effects  of  such  doses,  nor  will  I dwell 
on  the  fact  that  a few  lumbrici  are  not  to  be  considered  as  an  important 
disease  in  otherwise  healthy  children,  and  are  common  in  childhood 
(where  psora  is  still  latent),  and  generally  unattended  by  morbid  sym- 
ptoms. On  the  other  hand,  this  much  is  true,  that  when  they  are 
present  in  large  numbers,  the  cause  of  this  is  always  some  morbid 
condition  of  the  body,  namely,  the  evolution  of  psora,  and  unless  this 
be  cured,  though  large  numbers  of  the  lumbrici  may  be  expelled  by 
cina,  they  are  soon  reproduced.  Hence,  by  such  forcible  expulsion  of 
the  worms  not  only  is  nothing  gained,  but  such  improper  treatment,  if 
persisted  in,  often  ends  in  the  death  of  the  tortured  children. 

This  vegetable  substance  has  much  more  valuable  curative  properties, 
which  may  be  easily  inferred  from  the  subjoined  characteristic  morbid 
symptoms  produced  by  it  in  the  healthy. 

Experience  of  what  it  can  do,  for  instance,  in  whooping-cough,  and 
in  certain  intermittent  fevers  accompanied  by  vomiting  and  ravenous 
hunger  will  excite  astonishment.  I will  not  dwell  on  the  other  morbid 
states  for  which  it  is  adapted,  as  the  initiated  homoeopathic  physician 
will  be  able  to  discover  these  by  himself. 

Formerly  I used  to  employ  the  tincture  potentised  to  the  trillion-fold 
dilution,  but  I have  found  that  when  raised  to  the  decillion-fold  develop- 
ment of  potency,  it  displays  its  medicinal  powers  still  more  perfectly. 
One,  two,  or  three  smallest  globules  moistened  with  this  serve  for  a 
dose, 

[In  this  proving  Hahnemann  was  assisted  by  Ahner,  Gross,  Langhammer, 
Ruckert,  jun.,  Stapf. 


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit,,  1830. 


CINA. 


479 


The  medical  writers  quoted  are  : 

Andry,  De  Generatione  Vermiutn. 

Bergius,  Mat.  Med. 

Pelargus,  Obser<v.>  tom.  i,  ii. 

In  the  ist  edition  of  the  R.  A.  M.  L.  cina  had  48  symptoms,  in  the  2nd  edition  287, 
the  3rd,  as  we  see,  has  301.] 


CINA. 

On  rising  from  bed  blackness  before  the  eyes,  dizziness  in  the 
head,  faintness  ; he  staggers  to  and  fro ; on  lying  down  he  is  imme- 
diately better. 

Violent  headache.  [Pelargus,1  Observat .,  tom.  i,  pp.  8,  31, 

275-] 

Headache,  with  a feeling  of  general  discomfort.  [Z.  Rkt.~\ 

On  the  middle  of  the  vertex  intermittent  pressure,  as  from  a heavy 
weight,  as  if  the  brain  were  pressed  down  ; pressing  upon  it  increases 
and  renews  the  pain.  [Gw.] 

5.  A pain,  pressing  from  above  downwards,  externally  on  the  fore- 
head, as  if  a weight  gradually  sank  down  there  (aft.  f h.).  [Zr.] 

All  day  long  some  headache,  a tearing  aching,  spreading  even  into 
the  zygoma. 

Aching  pain  in  the  head  all  day,  in  the  evening  also  in  the  fore- 
head. [Z  .Rkt.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  stupefying,  internal 
headache,  especially  in  the  sinciput,  afterwards  also  in 
the  occiput  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 

On  waking  from  sleep  an  out-pressing  pain  in  the  right  parietal 
bone,  and  the  right  side  of  the  forehead. 

10.  (While  sitting)  pressive  stupefying  pain  externally  on  the  forehead 
and  temples,  which  at  length  involved  the  whole  head  (aft.  36  h.). 
[An] 

Pressure  on  the  frontal  bone,  and  at  the  same  time  internally  a 
fluctation  like  the  beating  of  waves.  [Gw.] 

Headache,  as  if  the  whole  head  were  screwed  in,  with  numbness. 

IGSS.] 

Pain,  as  if  the  upper  part  of  the  frontal  bone  were  strongly  pressed 
together  from  both  sides.  [Gw.] 

Immediately  after  a meal  and  later,  a dull  drawing  pain  in  the 
interior  of  the  head,  increased  by  reading  and  mental  work.  [Z. 

[ Rkt.-] 

15.  The  headache  is  increased  by  reading  and  thinking,  relieved  by 
stooping.  [Gw.] 

Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  temples,  increased  by  pressing  on 
them.  [Gw.] 

Stretching  tearing  pain  in  the  right  temple.  [Z.  ^i^.] 

On  the  left  side  of  the  sinciput  drawing  aching.  [Gw.] 


1 Observation  of  effects  of  overdosing.  This  symptom  occurred  in  a child,  with 
S.  242  and  291. 


480 


CINA. 


Aching  pain,  like  fine  tearing,  in  the  left  temporal  region,  that 
went  off  on  moving  the  head  (aft.  11  h.).  [ Zr.] 

20.  Confusing  drawing  from  the  left  frontal  protuberance  towards  the 
root  of  the  nose.  [Gw.] 

In  the  left  frontal  protuberance  a paralytic  tearing,  with  stupe- 
faction of  the  head  ; immediately  afterwards  in  the  right  frontal  pro- 
tuberance. [Gw.] 

Drawing  tearing  pain  on  the  whole  left  side  of  the  head,  [Ar.] 

A small  spot  on  the  right  parietal  bone  feels  numb  and  as  if 
asleep.  [Gw.] 

Obtuse  stitches  in  the  brain,  especially  in  the  left  side  of  the 
crown  (aft.  i \ h.).  [Z.  Rkt .] 

25.  In  the  frontal  bone  over  the  right  temple  severe  obtuse  stitches 
deep  into  the  brain,  which  threaten  to  stupefy  him.  [Gw] 

When  the  headache  goes  off  there  occurs  an  aching  pain  in  the 
abdomen,  and  when  this  goes  off  the  headache  returns. 

Over  the  upper  orbital  border  a slow  obtuse  stitch  extending  deep 
into  the  brain.  [Gw.] 

Palpitation  of  the  muscle  of  the  eyebrow,  a kind  of 
convulsion.  [ Gw .] 

Dull  headache,  affecting  the  eyes,  in  the  morning. 

[Z.  Rkt .] 

30.  Obtuse  pain  in  the  eyes  while  reading,  and  during  mental  labour. 
[Z.  Rkt.) 

Pressing  ache  in  the  interior  of  the  eye,  generally  with  dilatation 
of  the  pupils.  [Z.  Rkt.’] 

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.] 

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Zr.] 

Great  contraction  of  the  pupils  (aft.  1 h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

35.  In  the  evening  when  he  wishes  to  see  accurately  (read)  by  candle- 
light, he  sees  everything  as  through  a veil ; on  wiping  the  eyes  he  sees 
better  for  a short  time.  [Gw.] 

On  reading  a book  there  comes  a dimness  before  the  eyes,  so  that 
he  can  only  read  again  after  rubbing  the  eyes  strongly  with  the  finger. 
[Jr.] 

(In  the  morning)  fatigue  in  the  eyes ; the  upper  lids  were  so  weak 
he  could  scarcely  open  them,  lasting  all  the  forenoon.  [Ar.] 

Burning  pain  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  eye,  mingled  with 
itching,  and  on  the  border  of  the  upper  lid  (aft.  2 h.). 

(Burning  in  the  eyelids,  especially  in  the  inner  canthus,  in  the 
evening,  by  candle-light.)  [Gss.] 

40.  In  the  evening,  by  candle-light,  dryness  of  the  eyelids  and  an 
aching  feeling  in  them,  as  if  sand  had  got  into  them.  [Gw.] 

Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  interior  of  the  eye,  and  drawing  aching 
pain,  when  he  only  exerts  the  eyes  a little  in  reading.  [Z.  Rkt.] 
Formication  in  the  eyelids,  so  that  he  must  rub  them.  [Gw.] 
Tickling  itching  in  the  right  inner  canthus,  compelling  him  to 
rub  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.] 

Tickling  itching  on  the  left  outer  canthus,  compelling  him  to  rub 
(aft.  3 6 h.).  \Lr .] 


CINA.  4**  i 

45.  (In  the  morning,  after  rising,  the  inner  canthi  are  stuck  together, 
as  with  matter.)  [Gw.] 

He  looks  ill  about  the  eyes  and  pale  in  the  face.  [Gw.] 

On  the  lower  border  of  the  orbit  an  obtuse  pressure  ; by  pressing 
on  it  it  increases,  and  may  be  excited  anew.  [Gw.] 

Pain  as  if  both  zygomatic  arches  were  seized  and  compressed  by 
pincers  ; the  pain  is  aggravated  by  external  pressure.  [Gw.] 

Cramp-like  twitching  in  the  zygoma,  a pain  which,  even  after  it 
is  gone,  can  be  excited  anew  by  pressing  strongly  on  it,  only  it  then 
comes  as  a continued  cramp-like  or  paralytic  pain.  [Gw.] 

50.  Periodical,  stretching  tearing  pain  in  the  zygomatic  arches,  going 
from  one  place  to  another,  aggravated  by  pressure.  [Z.  Rkt.~] 

In  the  external  ear,  cramp-like  twitching,  like  earache. 
[Gw.] 

Under  the  mastoid  process,  obtuse  shooting,  like  a 
pinching  pressure ; on  pressing  on  it,  as  from  a blow  or 
knock.  [Gw.] 

White  and  bluish  round  the  mouth.  [Pelargus,  1.  c.,  tom.  ii, 
p.  458.] 

Puffy,  bluish  face.  [St/.] 

55.  The  child  often  bores  so  long  in  his  nose  that  blood  comes  from  it. 
On  the  cheek  a boil,  with  hardness  round  about  it. 

Aching  pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands. 

Obtuse  shooting  pain  in  the  right  ramus  of  the  lower  maxilla, 
aggravated  by  pressure.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Single  fine  pricks  as  with  needles  on  the  left  lower  maxilla, 
aggravated  by  pressing  on  it  with  the  hand.  [Ar.] 

60.  Twitching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw  [Ar.~\ 
Toothache  as  if  from  excoriation. 

The  inspired  air  and  cold  drinks  cause  pain  in  the  tooth. 

The  child  leans  the  head  on  one  side. 

Paralytic  feeling  in  the  nape.  [ Z . Rkt.~\ 

65.  Boring  stitches  in  the  right  cervical  muscles,  synchronous  with 
the  pulse,  which  go  off  on  moving  the  neck  (aft.  11  h.).  [Zr.] 

Dryness  and  roughness  of  the  interior  of  the  mouth,  especially  of 
the  palate,  with  sick  qualmishness  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Zr.] 

Cannot  swallow. 

Inability  to  swallow ; liquids  roll  about  in  the  mouth  for  a long 
time.  [<SV/'.] 

Great  hunger  shortly  after  a meal.  [Gw.] 

70.  Thirst. 

In  the  morning  when  fasting,  empty  eructation.  [Gw.] 

After  a meal,  eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  food.  [Gw.] 

Not  long  after  a meal,  belching  of  a bitter-sour  fluid  up  into  the 
mouth.  [Gw.] 

Qualmish  feeling  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  with  a shudder  running 
over  him  (immediately).  [Gw.] 

75.  (Several  lumbrici  come  up  through  the  child’s  mouth.)  [St/.] 
Sickness,  with  empty  feeling  in  the  head.  [Ar.] 

Frequent  hiccup  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Zr.] 


31 


482 


CINA. 


(At  night,  a continued  pressure  in  the  stomach.) 

Transversely  across  the  epigastrium,  in  the  region  of  thescrobicu- 
lus  cordis,  a pinching  or  cramp-like  pressure,  after  a meal.  [Gw.] 

80.  In  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a pain  that  hinders  respiration  (aft.  4 

M.  [Lr-l 

A digging,  wriggling  pain  in  the  epigastric  region  (scrobiculus 
cordis),  as  if  bruised.  [Gw.] 

Obtuse  shooting,  on  the  left  below  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  aggra- 
vated by  pressure,  and  relieved  by  deep  breathing.  [Gw.] 

Boring  pain  above  the  navel,  going  ofF  by  pressure.  \ArI\ 

Continued  pinching  in  the  abdomen.  [Pelargus,  1.  c.,  t.  i.] 

85.  Intermitting  needle-pricks  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  like 
colic,  when  sitting  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 

Sudden,  deep,  sharp,  intermitting  stitches  internally,  on  the  left 
near  the  navel,  especially  on  inspiring,  and  always  at  the  same  time 
stitches  on  the  internal  side  of  the  scapula,  towards  evening  (aft.  12 
h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Cutting  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  that  does  not  cease  until  he 
has  been  to  stool  (aft.  48  h.).  [Zr.] 

Violent  pain  in  the  navel  and  in  the  umbilical  region,  as  if  the 
navel  were  forcibly  pressed  in,  or  as  if  he  had  been  struck  there,  at 
first  for  a short  time,  afterwards  for  a longer  time,  when  it  was 
aggravated  by  breathing.  \Ar^\ 

About  the  navel  a painful  twisting,  also  pain  when  pressing  on 
the  navel.  [Gw.] 

90.  After  a meal  an  aching  pain  in  the  navel,  also  when  pressing 
on  it.  [Gw.] 

Cutting  in  the  small  intestines,  in  the  morning.  [Gw.] 

Disagreeable  warm  feeling  in  the  abdomen,  that  at  last  changed 
into  pinching  (aft.  4 h.).  [Zr.] 

Labour-like,  frequently-recurring  pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the 
catamenia  were  about  to  come  on  (aft.  2 h.). 

In  the  abdomen,  immediately  above  the  pubes,  a pulsation,  as 
if  he  felt  the  pulse  beat  in  the  interior.  [Gw.] 

95.  Flatus  explodes  with  little  noise  and  goes  quietly  about  in  the 
bowels.  [Gw.] 

During  discharge  of  flatus  single  stitches  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
rectum,  [J?r.] 

Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  with  silent  discharge  of 
flatus  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.] 

(A  voluptuous  itching  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  anus,  which 
compels  him  to  scratch)  (aft.  4 h.).  [Zr.] 

Frequent  urging  to  pass  water,  with  copious  discharge  of  urine, 
all  day  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 

100.  Turbid  urine  (immediately). 

Urine  that  soon  becomes  turbid. 

Uterine  haemorrhage  as  long  as  she  (a  girl  of  ten  years)  takes 
cina  seeds.  [Bergius,1  Mater . Med .,  p.  709.] 

* * 

* 


1 Observation. 


CINA. 


483 


In  the  left  nostril,  deep  in,  a not  disagreeable,  hot,  burning  sensa- 
tion, as  if  blood  would  come,  or  as  if  brandy  had  been  sniffed  up.  [Gn.] 

In  the  left  nostril  on  the  septum  narium  a burning  pain,  as  if  a 
scab  had  been  scratched  off ; aggravated  by  external  touch.  [Gj-j.] 
105.  Violent  sneezing  (aft.  J h.).  [Z,.  Rkt. — Lr.] 

Sneezing  so  violent  that  it  rushed  into  the  head  and  pressed  out 
at  the  temples ; the  headache  pressing  out  through  the  temples 
remained  some  time  afterwards.  [G^.] 

Sneezing  so  violent  that  it  seems  as  if  it  would  burst  the  thorax 
on  both  sides ; afterwards  he  still  feels  a pain,  especially  in  the  right 
side.  [Gjj.] 

Fluent  coryza  (aft.  J h.).  [Z>.] 

A kind  of  coryza ; in  the  morning  he  must  frequently  blow  his 
nose,  the  nose  is  always  full  of  loose  mucus  (aft.  a few  days).  [Gfj.] 
110.  Discharge  of  purulent  matter  from  the  nose.1  [Pelargus,  1.  c., 
t.i.] 

In  the  evening  the  nose  is  stuffed,  after  having  had  fluent  coryza 
in  the  forenoon.  [Gjj.] 

Mucus  in  the  larynx,  which  he  expels  by  voluntary  tussiculation 
and  hacking  cough  (aft.  6 h.).  [Z>.] 

On  walking  in  the  open  air  short,  rattling  respiration,  as  if  he  had 
much  mucus  in  the  chest,  without  being  obliged  to  cough  (aft.  6 h.). 

Difficult,  loud  breathing  (aft.  \ h.). 

115.  Very  short,  rattling  respiration. 

Very  short  breathing,  sometimes  with  interruptions,  so  that  some 
respirations  are  awanting. 

The  child  is  very  short  breathed,  with  loud  rattling  in  the  chest. 

[*/•] 

On  inspiring  a loud  whistling  whooping  in  the  windpipe,  not 
audible  during  expiration  (aft.  12  h.).  [Z,r.] 

In  the  morning  after  getting  up,  mucus  adheres  to 
the  larynx,  so  that  he  must  often  hawk,  after  which, 
however,  it  is  soon  formed  again.  [ Gss .] 

120.  In  the  morning  he  must  always  hack,  and  scrape,  and  clear  the 
throat  on  account  of  mucus,  which  is  constantly  produced  at  the 
back  of  the  throat  and  in  the  larynx.  \_GssJ] 

In  the  morning  great  dryness  at  the  back  of  the  throat  (trachea)  ; 
a feeling  of  catarrh.  [Gjj.] 

Inclination  to  cough  is  caused  by  deep  breathing.  [G^.] 

Tickling  irritation  to  cough,  rather  deep  in  the  windpipe,  and  if 
he  does  actually  cough  there  occurs  expectoration  of  whitish  phlegm 
(aft.  24  h.).  [Lr.] 

Tickling  irritation  to  cough  in  the  region  of  the  trachea,  under 
the  sternum,  with  expectoration  of  white  mucus  (aft.  16  h.).  [Zr.] 
125.  Before  the  cough  the  child  suddenly  rises  up,  stares  about  ; the 
whole  body  is  somewhat  stiff ; she  is  unconscious,  just  as  if  going  to 
have  an  epileptic  fit,  and  then  the  cough  comes. 


1 With  S.  2,  242,  291. 


484 


CINA. 


After  the  cough  the  child  whines,  Au,  Au  ! a gurgling-down 
sound  is  heard ; she  is  anxious,  gasps  for  breath,  and  becomes  at  the 
same  time  quite  pale  in  the  face — in  fits  of  two  minutes’  duration. 
Attacks  of  violent  coughing  from  time  to  time. 

Hoarse  hacking  cough  consisting  of  few  impulses, 
with  long  pauses  before  the  exciting  irritation  recurs ; 
in  the  evening.  [Gss.] 

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  hoarse  hacking  cough,  the  exciting 
irritation  to  which  (as  if  from  feather  dust)  occurs  after  a long  pause 
on  inspiring.  [Gw.] 

130.  In  the  morning,  after  rising,  hollow  cough;  violent  succussions 
against  the  upper  part  of  the  windpipe,  whereby  mucus  is  detached, 
though  with  difficulty  (after  several  days).  [Gw.] 

In  the  morning,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  mucus  accumulated 
during  the  night,  he  must  cough  so  violently  that  tears  come  into 
the  eyes.  [Gw.] 

During  the  morning  cough,  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  (under 
the  top  of  the  sternum)  is  painful,  and  when  he  detaches  something 
with  difficulty  this  part  continues  to  have  raw  and  burning  pain  for  a 
long  time,  as  if  something  were  torn  away.  [Gw.] 

Squeezing  on  the  chest  during  inspiration.  [Gw.] 

Tightness  of  the  chest  when  standing  (lasting  half  an  hour)  with 
anxiety,  during  which  he  perspires  profusely  on  the  chest,  [dr.] 

135.  A kind  of  oppression  of  the  chest;  the  sternum  seems 
to  press  on  the  lungs  and  the  breathing  is  somewhat 
impeded.  [ L . Rkt.] 

In  the  left  half  of  the  chest,  cramp-like  contraction.  [Gw.] 

Pain  anteriorly  under  the  sternum  only  per  se.  [Gw.] 

When  running,  a squeezing  pain  on  the  sternum.  [Gw.] 

Sudden  oppressive  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  [dr .] 

140.  Under  the  sternum  cramp-like  digging  pain,  as  if  the  thorax 
would  burst  asunder,  [dr.] 

On  the  clavicle,  a fine  squeezing,  like  the  pressure  of  a blunt 
point.  [Gw.] 

An  out-pressing  pain  sometimes  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest, 
sometimes  in  the  sacrum,  the  latter  as  from  prolonged  stooping, 
especially  during  expiration  (aft.  4.  h.).  [Lr.] 

Painful  digging  superiorly  under  the  sternum.  [Gw.] 

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  pinching  pains,  increased  by  every 
inspiration  (aft,  30  h.).  [dr.] 

145.  Pinching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  between  the  second 
and  third  ribs,  [dr.] 

Pinching,  shooting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (lasting  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  [dr.] 

From  time  to  time  single  stitches  in  the  chest.  [L  Rkt .] 
Prickling  burning,  intermitting,  fine  stitches  in  the  side,  on  one  of 
the  true  ribs.  [Gw.] 

Obtuse  stitches  near  the  sternum  on  one  of  the  costal  cartilages, 
increased  by  pressing  on  it  and  by  expiration,  diminished  by  inspira- 
tion. [Gw.] 


CINA. 


485 

150.  Near  the  sternum  underneath  the  left  clavicle  on  deep  inspira- 
tion, two  obtuse,  penetrating  stitches,  in  rapid  succession  ; during 
expiration  he  feels  nothing,  on  pressing  on  it  it  is  very  painful. 
IGss.] 

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  between  the  sixth  and  eighth  ribs, 
twitching  shooting  pains,  not  affected  by  pressing  or  by  inspiration  or 
expiration,  [Jr.] 

Sudden  twitching  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  between 
the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,  [Jr.\ 

In  the  middle  of  the  right  side  under  the  ribs,  a boring  shooting 
pain,  that  goes  off  on  pressing  thereon,  [Jr.] 

Bruised  pain  in  the  sacrum,  not  increased  by  move- 
ment (aft.  35  h.).  [Jr.] 

155.  Tearing  in  the  left  hip  and  buttock. 

Paralytic  drawing  in  the  loins.  [Gw.] 

After  a meal,  sensation  as  if  the  lumbar  region  just  above  the  hips 
were  constricted  by  a tight  ligature.  [Gw.] 

In  the  loins,  a weary  pain  as  if  he  had  stood  long.  [Gw.] 

Pain  of  the  loins  and  spine  when  he  bends  to  the  side  or  back- 
wards, as  if  he  had  over-fatigued  himself.  [Gw.] 

160.  Tearing  twitching  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  spine,  [Jr.] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  spine,  that  went  off  on  moving 
the  body,  but  returned  when  at  rest,  [Jr.] 

In  the  evening  in  bed,  when  lying  on  the  side,  the  spine  is 
painful,  as  if  broken.  [Gw.] 

When  lying  on  the  back  in  bed,  the  spine  is  painful  as  if  broken. 
«•] 

Drawing  tearing  pain  downwards  throughout  the 
whole  spine  (aft.  29  h.).  [Jr.] 

165.  Tearing  shooting  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  spine  towards  the 
right  scapula.  [ Jr.] 

Shooting  pain  on  the  outer  border  of  the  right  scapula.  [Jr.] 

In  the  scapulae  pain  when  he  moves  them.  [Gw.] 

A squeezing  on  the  top  of  the  shoulder.  [Gw.] 

Needle-prick  on  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder.  [Jr.] 

170.  Shooting  pain  on  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder,  which  does  not  go 
off  by  pressure  or  by  moving  the  arm  (aft.  32  h.).  [Jr.] 

Single  stitches  anteriorly  in  the  left  shoulder.  [L.  Rkt.] 

Paralytic  drawing  down  through  the  right  arm,  especially  when 
he  lets  it  hang  down,  or  when  he  lays  it  down  anywhere,  particu- 
larly on  a hard  place.  [Gw.] 

Paralytic  pain  in  the  arm,  so  that  he  must  let  it  sink  down.  [Gw.] 
Paralytic  sensation  in  the  whole  of  the  right  arm  ; it  felt  as  if 
stiff  in  the  joints,  so  that  he  could  not  move  it  (aft.  29  h.).  [Jr.] 
175.  Stretching  tearing  pain  in  the  arms,  with  paralytic  pain;  on 
touching  it,  bruised  pain,  as  after  great  muscular  exertion.  [L.  Rkt.] 
Paralytic  drawing  through  the  upper  arm  from  above  down  to 
the  middle,  so  that  he  hardly  dare  move  it ; on  pressing  on  the 
affected  part  it  is  painful,  as  if  he  had  received  a knock  or  blow  there, 

[G«.J 


486 


CINA. 


Boring  cramp-like  pain  in  the  left  upper  arm,  not 

removed  by  pressure  (aft.  25  h.).  [Jr.] 

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  right  upper  arm,  going  off  by  pressing 
on  it,  but  immediately  returning  (aft.  27  h.).  [Jr.] 

Violent  squeezing  pain  in  the  right  upper  arm,  that  went  off*  on 
moving  it,  but  returned  when  at  rest,  [Jr.] 

180.  On  the  upper  arm,  above  the  elbow-joint,  pain  as  from  a knock 
or  blow.  [Gtt.] 

Paralytic  pain  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow  towards  the  outside,  like 
a twitching,  in  fits.  [Gjj.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  right  elbow-joint,  when  at  rest,  not  affected 
by  movement  (aft.  27  h.).  [Jr.] 

In  the  left  forearm,  a drawing  digging  pain  from  the  wrist  to  the 
elbow-joint  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Jr.] 

In  the  whole  right  forearm,  a drawing  tearing  pain,  that  did  not 
go  off  by  movement  (aft.  7 h.).  [Jr.] 

185.  Cramp-like  aching  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  forearm,  especially 
when  bending  it.  [L.  Rkt.] 

Paralytic  twitching  from  above  downwards  on  the  under  surface 
of  the  forearm,  but  especially  violent  in  the  place  where  it  com- 
mences. [Gh*.] 

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  when  he  extends  the  arm  forcibly, 
cramp-like  pain  in  the  forearms,  especially  from  the  elbow  down- 
wards ; if  he  bends  the  hands  to  and  fro  whilst  keeping  the  arms 
extended,  the  same  pain  comes  in  the  wrist-joints.  [Gjj.] 

Contractive  tearing,  like  cramp,  in  the  inferior  muscles  of  the  left 
forearm,  close  to  the  wrist,  quickly  going  off  on  movement  (aft.  17 
h.).  [£r.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  wrist-joints  (aft.  12,  24  h.). 

190.  Wrist-joint  as  if  dislocated. 

Pinching,  boring  pain  in  the  right  wrist  (aft.  3 h.).  [Jr.] 
Intermittent,  cramp-like  contraction  of  the  hand.  [Gjj.] 
Twitching  tearing  pain  in  the  palm  of  the  left  hand,  increased  by 
extending  the  hand.  [Jr.] 

Single  stitches  in  the  left  hand,  towards  the  little  finger,  [Jr.] 
195.  Single,  small,  twitching  stitches,  sometimes  in  the 
right,  sometimes  in  the  left  hand  (aft.  33  h.).  [Jr.] 

On  the  back  of  the  left  hand  an  itching,  that  compels  scratching, 
whereby  it  is  removed  (aft.  6j  h.).  [Jr.] 

Itching  tickling  externally  on  the  border  of  the  right  hand  near 
the  thumb  and  index,  compelling  him  to  scratch  (aft.  35  h.).  [Lr.] 
Fine  stitches  on  the  upper  end  of  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  ring 
finger ; on  pressing  on  it  it  pains  as  if  bruised.  [Gkr.] 

Spasmodic  contraction,  with  cramp-like  pain,  of  the  middle  finger 
of  the  right  hand  ; it  was  bent  inwards.  [Jr.] 

200.  Quick  inward  twitching  of  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  [Jr.] 
Cramp-like  twitching  in  the  fingers.  [Gjj.] 

Drawing  in  the  fingers  (aft.  48  h.). 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  outside  of  the  left  little 
finger,  going  off  on  moving  it  (aft.  12  h.).  [Lr.] 


CINA. 


487 


On  the  proximal  joint  of  the  middle  finger,  burning  pain.  [Gw.] 
205.  Paralytic  drawing  in  the  ring  finger,  when  at  rest  and  when 
moving  it.  [Gw.] 

In  the  proximal  joint  of  the  thumb  a formication,  almost  as  if 
asleep.  [Gw.] 

Formication  in  the  tip  of  the  thumb,  as  if  asleep  ; it  is  as  if 
numb.  [Gw.] 

In  the  ball  of  the  thumb  pains  as  after  a severe  blow,  when  he 
presses  on  it,  and  also  when  he  moves  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the 
thumb  towards  the  palm.  [Gw.] 

An  out-boring  pain  below  the  glutaei  muscles,  when  sitting, 
going  off  by  pressing  on  them  and  by  movement,  but  soon  returning 
when  at  rest,  \_dr.] 

210.  When  sitting  the  nates  are  painful,  as  if  tired  by  prolonged 
sitting.  [Gw.] 

When  walking,  pain  in  the  great  trochanter,  as  if  he  had  fallen 
on  it.  [Gw.] 

A shudder  runs  over  the  thighs.  [Gw.] 

Whilst  standing,  cramp-like  pain  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the 
left  thigh  (aft.  i h.).  [Lr.] 

Drawing  tearing  pain  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  right  thigh, 
going  off  by  active  movement,  [y/r.] 

215.  Paralytic  pain  in  the  left  thigh,  not  far  from  the 
knee.  \_L.  Rkt .] 

The  child  stretches  out  the  legs  spasmodically.  [StfJ] 

The  left  leg  of  the  child  is  in  constant  spasmodic  motion  ; at 
last  it  remains  much  averted  from  the  body,  lying  motionless.  [£//'.] 
Now  and  then  single,  obtuse  stitches  in  the  knees.  [X.  Rkt.] 
Single  needle  pricks  on  the  patella  (aft.  10  h.).  \_Lr.] 

220.  On  the  knee  a hot  flush,  with  a not  disagreeable  sensation,  as  if 
a hot  body,  e.  g.  a live  coal,  were  brought  near  the  knee.  [Gw.] 
Paralytic  twitching  on  the  front  of  the  leg,  betwixt  the  tibia  and 
fibula.  [Gw.] 

While  walking  in  the  open  air,  cramp-like  pain  sometimes  in  the 
muscles  of  the  right,  sometimes  in  those  of  the  left  leg,  quickly 
going  off  on  standing  and  sitting  (aft.  30  h.).  [Lr.] 

Under  the  left  knee,  on  the  tibia,  a digging  pain  (aft.  8 \ h.).  [Lr.] 
In  the  left  tibia,  close  under  the  knee,  intermittent  pricks  as  with  a 
fork.  [Xr.] 

225.  In  the  middle  of  the  left  calf  tearing  pains  (while  sitting),  [y/r.] 
Twitching  tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  foot.  \_L.  Rkt.'] 

Stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  right  foot.  [L.  Rkt.] 

Cutting  pain  in  all  the  toes  of  the  left  foot,  as  if  they  were  being 
detached,  not  relieved  by  movement  (aft.  2 h.).  [Ark\ 

Tearing  shooting  pain  in  the  left  heel  (while  sitting).  [Ar.] 

230.  Here  and  there  on  the  trunk,  but  especially  on  the  abdomen,  very 
painful  stitches  ; when  sitting  (aft.  8 h.).  [Ar.] 

Obtuse  stitches  here  and  there  on  the  body  (aft.  several 
d.).  [L.  Rkt.] 

Here  and  there  on  the  body,  sometimes  on  the  limbs, 


488 


CINA. 


arms,  feet,  toes,  sometimes  in  the  side,  or  on  the  back, 
sometimes  on  the  nasal  hone,  hut  especially  on  the  pos- 
terior crista  ilii  (on  the  hip),  obtuse  stitches,  sometimes 
like  a squeezing,  sometimes  like  aching,  sometimes  like 
knocks  or  ierks,  sometimes  like  an  itching;  on  pressing 
on  the  part  it  pains  as  if  sore  or  bruised.  [Gss.] 

Burning  fine  pricks  here  and  there,  removed  by  scratching. 
[Gss.] 

Prickling,  itching,  formicating  sensation  on  several  parts  of  the 
body,  that  soon  goes  off  on  slightly  scratching.  [GTr.] 

235.  Severe  itching  here  and  there  in  the  skin,  at  night. 

In  the  evening  eruption  of  red  itching  pimples  which  soon  go  off. 
Transparent  miliary  rash.  [Pelargus,  1.  c.,  t.  i and  t.  ii.] 

(Whilst  sitting)  cramp-like  contractive  stitches  sometimes  in  the 
muscles  of  the  right,  sometimes  in  those  of  the  left  thigh,  sometimes 
in  the  muscles  of  the  left,  sometimes  in  those  of  the  right  upper  arm, 
and  sometimes  up  along  the  sacrum  like  pains  in  the  back,  which 
however  go  off  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  27  h.).  [Zr.] 

Whilst  sitting,  cramp-like  tearing,  sometimes  in  the  muscles  of 
the  right,  sometimes  in  those  of  the  left  leg,  sometimes  in  the 
muscles  of  the  left,  sometimes  in  those  of  the  right  forearm,  which 
went  off  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  52  h.).  [Zr.] 

240.  Tearing  and  partly  sharp  cutting  pains  in  the  limbs,  the  head, 
and  the  jaws,  often  only  momentary.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

After  a meal — where  during  the  first  days  the  symptoms  are 
always  most  severe — stretching  tearing  pain  in  the  scapulae,  upper 
arms,  head  and  nape,  increased  by  touching.  [ L . Rkt.] 

Twitchings  and  distortions  of  the  limbs.  [Pelargus,  1.  c.,  t.  i.] 
Paralytic  twitching  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  especially  in  the 
limbs.  [Grr.] 

Epileptic  convulsions  with  consciousness  (eclampsia). 

245.  In  the  afternoon  (4  p.m.)  an  attack  of  spasmodic  extension  of  the 
body,  then  trembling  in  the  whole  body,  with  blue  lips  and  lachry- 
mose complaints  of  pain  in  the  chest,  neck,  and  all  the  limbs. 

Paralytic  pain  in  the  arms  and  legs  ( for  several  days).  [ L . 
Rkt.] 

The  child  is  very  weak  and  ill.1  [Pelargus,  1.  c.,  t.  ii.] 

Grunting,  groaning,  and  croaking  (in  the  afternoon). 

Painful  sensitiveness  of  all  the  joints  of  the  body  when  moved  or 
laid  hold  of.  [Grr.] 

250.  The  attacks  are  worst  in  the  morning  and  evening.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Frequent  yawning  as  though  he  had  not  slept  enough  (aft.  5 h.). 

While  sitting,  great  drowsiness;  he  must  lie  down  (aft.  6J  h.). 

[Lr.\ 

In  the  afternoon  he  is  overtaken  by  unusual  drowsiness.  [Gjj.] 
Drowsiness  all  day.  [v/r.] 

255.  Irresistible  drowsiness,  in  the  evening  (for  several  days).  [Z.  Rkt.] 


1 The  next  morning  after  S.  285. 


CINA.  489 

Nocturnal  restlessness,  frequent  turning  from  one  posture  to 
another,  on  account  of  discomfort.  [< Gw .] 

The  child  tosses  about  uneasily  even  when  awake.  [S//7.] 
Sleeplessness. 

Tossing  about  in  sleep  and  piteous  howling  and  crying  owing  to 
bellyache  (aft.  8 — 12  h). 

260.  Awakes  with  piteous  weeping,  groaning  and  hiccup,  with  restless 
movements  (aft.  2 h.). 

Many,  absurd  dreams. 

Sleep  in  an  upright  position,  with  the  head  leant  backwards  or  to 
the  right  side  (aft.  2 h.). 

Frequent  waking  out  of  disagreeable  or  busy  dreams.  [Gw.] 
Anxious  dreams.  [Gw. — Zr.] 

265.  Sleep  full  of  tiresome  dreams.  [Gw.] 

After  sleep,  flushes  of  heat  and  glowing  redness  of  the  cheeks, 
without  thirst.  [Zr.] 

When  yawning,  trembling  of  the  body  with  shud- 
dering feeling.  [Gw.] 

Shudder  over  the  upper  part  of  the  body  up  to  the  head,  as  if  the 
hair  would  stand  on  end,  even  when  near  the  warm  stove  (imme- 
diately. [Gw.] 

Febrile  rigor  all  over  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.] 

270.  Shudder  moving  over  the  trunk  so  that  he  trembles  (even  beside 
the  warm  stove).  [Gw.] 

Coldness  of  the  face  with  warm  hands.  [£//'.] 

Pale,  cold  face. 

Cold  cheeks. 

Cold  frontal  sweat. 

275.  Cold  forehead  and  sweat  on  the  hands. 

Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead,  nose,  and  hands  (aft.  12,  20  h.). 
Fever  : vomiting  of  the  ingesta,  then  chill  all  over,  and  then  heat 
with  great  thirst  (aft.  a few  h,). 

Quotidian  fever  at  the  same  hour  : chill,  then  heat  without  thirst 
(aft.  24  h.). 

Quotidian  fever  at  the  same  hour,  with  very  short  breath  (aft. 

48  h.). 

280.  Fever : every  day  in  the  afternoon  (from  1 p.m.  onwards) 
several  attacks  of  chill  with  thirst,  with  cold  hands  and  feet ; after- 
wards heat  of  the  pale  face,  but  especially  heat  of  hands  and  feet, 
with  cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen. 

In  the  morning,  even  beside  the  warm  stove,  cold  hands,  and 
rigor  running  over  him  without  thirst.  [Gw.] 

Strong  fever  and  heat.1  [Andry,  De  Generations  Vermium , p. 
182.] 

Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  hot  cheeks,  without  thirst 
(aft.  25  h.).  [Zr.] 

Strong  fever  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.2  [Pelargus,!.  c.,  t.  i.] 


1 Observations. 

3 In  several  children. 


490 


CINA. 


285.  Heat  in  the  evening  and  throughout  the  night.  [Pelargus,  1.  c., 
t.  ii.] 

Heat  in  the  fever,  chiefly  in  the  head,  with  yellow  colour  of  the 
face,  and  blue  rings  round  the  eyes. 

(Heat  with  redness  of  face,  immediately  accompanied  by  perspi- 
ration, without  thirst  (aft.  8 h.). 

Hot  feeling  and  heat  and  redness  in  the  face  (aft.  2 h.).  [Z. 
Rkt .] 

Burning  heat  over  all  the  face  with  redness  of  the  cheeks  and 
thirst  for  cold  drink  (aft.  35  h.).  [Zr.] 

290.  Trembling  of  the  heart.  [Gfj.] 

Talking  nonsense.  [Pelargus,  1.  c.,  t.  i.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  great  anxiety  and  anguish  about 
the  heart,  as  if  he  had  done  something  bad  (aft.  37  h.).  [Zr.] 

The  child  is  very  lachrymose  and  complaining.  [67/^] 

Weeps  piteously  when  one  attempts  to  touch  or  lead  him  (aft. 

3 M- 

295.  Great  seriousness  and  sensitiveness  ; he  takes  the  slightest  joke  in 
bad  part.  [Zr.] 

Indifference  , nothing  either  agreeable  or  disagreeable  could  make 
the  slightest  impression  on  him.  [Zr.] 

Restlessness. 

Incessant  restlessness. 

Longs  for  many  different  things. 

300.  Refuses  everything  offered  to  him,  even  what  he  used  to  like 
best. 

Cannot  be  quieted  by  any  persuasion  ; insensible  to  caresses. 


COCCULUS.1 

( Menispermum  cocculus.) 

(The  tincture  prepared  by  macerating  the  powdered  seeds  at  a moderate  tempera- 
ture in  twenty  parts  of  spirits  of  wine.) 

This  vegetable  substance,  hitherto  only  used  for  the  purpose  of 
destroying  some  noxious  vermin  and  for  stupefying  fish  so  that  they 
may  be  taken  by  the  hand,  was  (like  staphisagria)  first  employed  by 
myself  as  a medicine  after  I had  ascertained  its  dynamic  effects  on  the 
healthy  human  body.  It  possesses  many  curative  virtues,  as  the 
following  symptoms  produced  by  it  show,  and  the  tincture  prescribed 
according  to  the  similarity  of  effect  in  high  attenuation  and  potency 
is  indispensable  for  the  cure  in  many  cases  of  common  human  diseases, 
more  especially  in  some  kinds  of  lingering  nervous  fevers,  in  several  so- 
called  spasms  in  the  abdomen,  and  so-called  spasmodic  pains  of  other 
parts,  where  the  mental  state  is  one  of  extreme  sadness,  particularly  in 
the  female  sex,  in  not  a few  attacks  of  paralysis  of  the  limbs,  and  in  the 
emotional  derangements  resembling  those  that  cocculus  can  itself 
produce. 

Camphor  is  its  principal  antidote. 

The  duration  of  its  action  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  disease  in 
which  it  is  used  3 it  quickly  passes  in  acute,  but  lasts  many  days  in 
chronic  diseases. 

[Hahnemann  was  helped  in  this  proving  by  Baehr,  FlIming,  Gross,  Haynel, 
Hornburg,  Langhammer,  Trinks  and  Hartlaub  (from  their  * R.  A.  M.  L.’), 
Wahle. 

The  old-school  authorities  quoted  are  : 

Amatus  Lusitanus,  Cent.  iv. 

John  Hill,  Hist,  of  the  Mat.  Med. 

Rumpf,  Atnbcin .,  v. 

In  the  Fragmenta  there  are  162  symptoms  ot  cocculus,  in  the  1st  edit,  of  the 
R.A.M.L.  230,  in  the  2nd  edit.  554,  and  in  this  last  edition  557.] 


COCCULUS. 

Vertigo  as  of  intoxication  and  stupid  feeling  in  the  forehead,  as  if 
he  had  a board  before  the  head.  [Gtt.] 

Attack  of  vertigo  as  from  intoxication  (when  sitting)  (aft.  if  h.). 
[Lr.] 

Tendency  to  vertigo  (the  8th  d.).  \Hnl.\ 

Vertigo  for  six  hours. 

5.  When  he  rises  up  in  bed,  there  occur  whirling  vertigo  and  sick- 
ness, which  compel  him  to  lie  down  again. 

A sick  headache,  just  as  if  he  had  taken  an  emetic,  with  nausea. 


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830. 


49  2 


COCCULUS. 


Stupid  in  the  head. 

Stupidity  in  the  head  with  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  hands 
and  aversion  from  food  and  drink. 

Distraction  (want  of  memory) ; he  easily  forgets  something  he 
had  just  thought  of.1  [Gw.] 

10.  Stupidity  and  confusion  of  the  head,  increased  by  reading,  so 
that  he  must  read  a passage  several  times  over  in  order  to  under- 
stand it.  \_Hnl.~\ 

Heaviness  in  the  head.  [Hnl.] 

Feeling  as  if  something  heavy  lay  on  the  head,  but  without  pain. 
[We.] 

Thinking  tries  his  head  much.  \_Hnl.~\ 

In  the  morning  confusion  of  the  head  ; there  is  a humming  in  it, 
as  after  a debauch  the  previous  night. 

15.  Heaviness  and  confusion  of  the  head,  as  after  a debauch  the  day 
before. 

Cloudiness  of  the  head,  chiefly  aggravated  by  eating 
and  drinking. 

Pain  in  the  head  as  if  it  were  bound  up. 

Headache  as  if  the  brain  were  constricted. 

Headache  in  the  temples,  as  if  the  head  were  screwed  in. 

20.  (Painful  shock  in  the  brain  when  walking,  moving  the  head  and 
speaking.) 

A headache  compounded  of  constriction,  burning,  tearing,  dig- 
ging and  boring. 

A violent  aching  through  the  whole  head,  chiefly  in  the  forehead 
(in  the  forenoon),  which  increases  to  unconsciousness  by  reading 
and  thinking  (aft.  60  h.). 

Aching  headache  in  the  sinciput.  [We.] 

Aching  headache  in  the  vertex  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Hbg.~\ 

25.  Dull  compression  in  the  right  half  of  the  forehead.  [Gw.] 

Pressive  pain  in  the  head,  as  if  the  brain  were  compressed  (aft. 

5 h.)-  [>•]  . 

In  the  right  temple  a pressing  inwards  as  from  a blunt  body 
slowly  pressed  deep  into  the  brain.  [Gw.] 

In  the  left  temple,  a pressing  inwards.  [Gw.] 

Violent  pressing  downwards  in  the  whole  head,  especially  in  the 
forehead,  increased  by  walking  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Zr.] 

30.  In  the  left  half  of  the  forehead,  a dull  undulating  compression. 

[<?«.] 

Tearing  throbbing  headache  in  the  forehead  in  the  evening 
(from  7 to  9 o’clock)  (aft.  38  h.). 

Frequent  attacks  of  headache  lasting  some  minutes  on  a small 
spot  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance,  at  first  of  raging,  throbbing 
shooting  pain,  which  then  spreads  to  the  right  frontal  protuberance 
as  a formication  and  there  goes  off. 

A fine  shooting  in  the  temples. 

A severe  stitch  in  the  head  above  the  right  eye  (aft.  12  h.). 


1 This  S.  occurs  almost  identically  in  Hb,  and  7s.  1 R,  A.  M.  L.' 


COCCULUS, 


493 


35 


40 


Several  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  brain  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Hnl .] 
Intermitting  boring  needle-pricks  in  the  right  frontal  region.  [Z>.] 
Fine  needle-pricks  in  the  left  temple  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.] 

Headache  as  if  the  eyes  would  be  torn  out. 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left  temporal  muscle  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Zr.] 
Headache  as  if  something  closed  the  eyes  forcibly. 

Convulsive  trembling  of  the  head. 

Shuddering  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  as  if  the  hair  would 
stand  on  end.1  [Gjj.] 

On  the  outer  border  of  the  orbit  obtuse  pressure  (immediately). 
LGss.-] 

Aching  in  both  eyes,  as  if  dust  had  got  into  them  (aft.  7 h.).  [Zr.] 

45.  Aching  pain  in  the  eyes  with  inability  to  open  the  eyelids,  at 
night. 

Bruised  pain  in  the  eyes  with  inability  to  open  the  eyelids,  at 
night  (aft.  5 h.). 

Stitches  in  the  eyes  from  within  outwards  (aft.  24  h.). 

(After  severe  nocturnal  headache,  in  the  morning  swelling  of  one 
eye  and  of  half  of  the  nose.) 

Dryness  of  the  eyelids. 

50.  Dimness  of  sight. 

Flies  and  dark  spots  float  before  the  eyes,  as  if  amaurosis  were 
coming  on. 

She  sees  a black  figure  before  the  eyes  that  receded  from  her ; 
when  she  turns  it  turns  along  with  her,  and  yet  she  saw  everything 
clearly. 

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  5 h.).  [Zr.] 

Blue  rings  round  the  eyes.  [BhrJ\ 

55.  A kind  of  pressive  sensation,  more  stupefying  than  painful,  in  the 
left  zygomatic  process.  [G\fx.] 

Cramp  in  the  zygomatic  process,  in  the  masseter  muscles  (aft. 

2 h.). 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  masseter  muscles  per  se,  but  increased  by 
opening  the  jaws  (aft.  3 h.). 

(Heat  in  the  right  ear  externally  and  internally,  in  the  morning 
in  bed.) 

A sensation  alternately  in  either  ear,  as  if  they  were  stopped  up 
and  deaf. 

60.  Rushing  sound  in  the  ear,  as  when  hearing  through  a tube. 
[Hbg.] 

Noise  in  the  ears  like  the  rushing  of  water,  with  hardness  of 
hearing  (aft.  1 h.). 

It  seems  to  him  as  if  he  were  hard  of  hearing  in  the  right  ear. 

Swelling  of  the  right  half  of  the  nose. 

Stitches  externally  in  the  skin  and  muscles  of  the  cheek. 

65.  Flying  heat  of  the  cheeks,  without  thirst  (aft.  27  h.).  [Zr.] 

Redness  of  the  cheeks  and  heat  in  the  face,  without  thirst,  in  a 
cold  room.  \_Hbg.~\ 


1 This  S.  is  also  in  Hb.  and  Ts.  ( R.  A.  M.  JL.’ 


494 


COCCULUS. 


A pustule  under  the  right  outer  angle  of  the  mouth,  with  a red 
areola,  with  tensive  pain  on  touching  it  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zr.] 

Swelling  of  the  parotid  gland. 

Fine  stitches  in  the  external  parts  of  the  throat  (aft.  1 h.). 

70.  Swollen  hard  glands  under  the  lower  jaw  and  lumps  on  the  fore- 
arm, which  are  painful  when  stroked. 

Painless  glandular  swellings  under  the  chin  (aft.  8 h.).  [Zr.] 

Paralytic  drawing  on  the  side  of  the  neck  and  other  parts,  some- 
times almost  like  intermittent  paralytic  pressure.  [Gw.] 

When  moving  the  neck  and  yawning  stiff*  pain  in  the  cervical 
muscles.  [Gw.] 

Fine  stitch  externally  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck.  \_HnlJ\ 

75.  Pulsating  stitches  externally  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck. 

Weakness  of  the  cervical  muscles  with  heaviness  of  the  head  for 
several  days  ; the  cervical  muscles  seemed  unable  to  support  the  head  ; 
he  must  lean  his  head  in  one  direction  or  another,  otherwise  the 
cervical  muscles  were  painful ; what  gave  him  most  ease  was  leaning 
backwards.  [ Hnl .} 

Tearing  digging  pain  in  the  lower  jaw. 

Smarting  sensation  in  the  upper  and  lower  molars,  as  after  taking 
a quantity  of  sea-salt ; biting  the  teeth  together  causes  an  agreeable 
sensation.  \JVe.'\ 

The  incisors  are  as  if  lifted  out  and  seem  to  her  to  be  so  heavy 
they  must  fall  out.  \_Bhr.~\ 

80.  The  decayed  tooth  seems  to  have  become  longer ; it  is  loose  ; the 
gum  around  it  is  swollen  (aft.  12  h.). 

The  hollow  tooth  is  painful  only  when  eating  even  soft  food,  as 
if  it  were  quite  loose,  and  yet  not  on  merely  closing  the  teeth  when 
not  eating. 

(The  gums  are  sensitive  and  as  if  sore.) 

(When  speaking  she  has  a sort  of  contraction  in  the  mouth  and 
must  speak  more  slowly.) 

In  the  morning,  rough  tongue. 

85.  Dryness  in  the  mouth,  at  night,  without  thirst.1 

Dryness  of  the  tongue,  with  whitish-yellow  fur,  without  thirst 
(aft.  i h.).  [TFe.] 

Dry  feeling  in  the  mouth  with  frothy  saliva  and  violent  thirst. 
[. Bhr .] 

Water  runs  into  his  mouth  without  sickness  (aft.  i\  h.).  [ Hnl .] 

Sensation  as  if  water  collected  in  the  mouth  for  a long  time, 
without  sickness.  [ZZz/.] 

90.  If  he  puts  out  his  tongue  far,  he  feels  pain  at  the  back  of  it  as  if 
bruised.  [Gw.] 

Dryness  and  roughness  in  the  fauces  and  oesophagus,  especially 
observed  when  swallowing,  without  thirst  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

In  the  throat  scraping,  scratching,  which  goes  off  on  swallowing. 
[Is.  Hb.] 

Great  sensitiveness  in  the  interior  of  the  throat ; all  the  food 


1 This  S.,  without  “ at  night,”  is  also  in  Hb,  and  4 R.A.M.L.’ 


COCCULUS.  495 

seems  sharp  and  stinging,  as  if  it  contained  too  much  salt  and 
pepper.  \_Bhr.] 

Dryness  at  the  back  and  upper  part  of  the  throat,  as  if  it  and  the 
tongue  were  rough. 

^5.  Dryness  in  the  oesophagus. 

Dryness  in  the  throat,  with  hot  sensation  in  the  oesophagus  and 
stomach  (aft.  2 h.). 

Burning  in  the  palate. 

Burning  like  fire  in  the  oesophagus  up  to  the  palate,  in  the 
evening,  and  at  the  same  time  shuddering  round  about  the  head. 

Pain  at  the  top  of  the  oesophagus  with  sensation  of  swelling  at 
the  root  of  the  tongue,  which  is  painful  on  swallowing. 

100.  Aching  pain  in  the  tonsils,  much  worse  on  swallowing  the  saliva 
than  on  swallowing  food. 

A kind  of  choking  constriction  in  the  top  of  the  oesophagus, 
which  impedes  respiration  and  at  the  same  time  excites  coughing 
(aft.  1 h.). 

A kind  of  paralysis  of  the  gullet ; the  oesophagus  is  unable  to 
swallow. 

Taste  in  the  mouth  as  if  he  had  fasted  a long  time. 

Metallic  taste  posteriorly  on  the  root  of  the  tongue. 

105.  Coppery  taste  in  the  mouth. 

Metallic  taste  in  the  mouth,  with  loss  of  appetite.  [GVj.] 

After  eating  sourish  taste  in  the  mouth.  [GVj.] 

When  coughing  he  has  a sour  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Bhr.] 
Tobacco  tastes  bitter  when  smoking.  [ Hbg .] 
no.  Slimy  taste  in  the  mouth  ; the  food  however  has  the  right  taste. 
[TFe.]  ; 

The  food  has  not  its  right  taste,  as  if  tasteless  and  unsalted,  [Bhr.] 
Sensation  in  the  mouth  as  if  he  smelt  badly  from  his  mouth  (aft. 
6 h.). 

A bitter  taste  comes  on  the  root  of  the  tongue. 

Frequent  empty  eructation  (aft.  3±h.).  [Zr.] 

1 15.  Bitter  eructation  (aft.  J h.).  [Hnl.] 

Very  bitter  eructation  (immediately).  [Hnl.] 

Acrid,  scraping  eructation,  especially  in  the  evening.  [TV.  Hb.] 
Empty  eructation,  which  leaves  a bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  and 
throat  (aft.  24  h.). 

Eructation  with  taste  of  food  (aft.  18  h.). 

120.  In  the  forenoon  he  has  putrid  eructation. 

Eructation  of  musty,  foul  air  (aft.  8 h.). 

Attempts  to  eructate,  which  cause  pain  in  the  stomach  (aft.  | h.). 
At  every  eructation,  a pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  he  had 
got  a blow  or  knock  there. 

When  eructating  a pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  almost  like  a 
stitch.  [Zz.] 

125.  When  she  eructates,  she  has  a pressure  on  the  chest. 

First  attempts  to  eructate,  and  imperfect,  baulked  eructation, 
causing  hiccup,  that  lasts  for  an  hour  (aft.  3 h.). 

Hiccup  (aft.  10  m.).  [Hbg.] 


496 


COCCULUS. 


Hiccup  (immediately).  [Amatus  Lusitanus,1  Cent,  iv,  Curat. 

79-] 

Inclination  to  hiccup. 

130.  Hiccup  (aft.  J h.). 

No  appetite  for  breakfast;  he  feels  quite  full. 

Extreme  loathing  at  food,  the  very  smell  of  food  irritates  him, 
and  yet  he  is  hungry.  [Bhr.] 

Feeling  of  hunger  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  little  relieved  by 
eating,  almost  all  day.  [Hnl.] 

Great  thirst  at  all  times  of  the  day,  but  especially  when  eating. 
[Bhr.] 

135.  Aversion  from  food  and  drink. 

Want  of  appetite,  and  what  he  eats  has  no  taste. 

When  smoking  the  tobacco  tastes  bitter  (aft.  2 h.). 

He  is  very  sensitive  to  sour  things ; he  has  an  aversion  for  sour 
things ; bread  tastes  sour  (aft.  3 h.). 

In  the  stomach  a feeling  as  if  a worm  moved  therein.  [Bhr.] 

140.  Nausea  as  from  over-eating.  [Hbg.] 

Nausea  while  smoking  tobacco  (to  which  he  is  accustomed),  going 
the  length  of  vomiting  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.] 

Nausea  (immediately).  [Amatus  Lusitanus,  1.  c. — John  Hill,2 
Hist,  of  the  Mat.  Med.,  p.  504.] 

Excitation  to  vomit.  [Hbg.] 

When  she  eats,  she  becomes  sick  and  inclined  to  vomit. 

145.  After  each  time  she  drinks,  in  the  afternoon,  nausea,  that  seems 
to  be  chiefly  in  the  mouth. 

Frequent  inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  several  h.). 

When  driving  in  a carriage  unusual  nausea  and  inclination  to 
vomit  (aft.  48  h.). 

In  the  morning  she  cannot  raise  herself  up  in  bed  on  account  of 
feeling  poorly  and  inclined  to  vomit  (aft.  48  h.). 

When  he  becomes  cold,  or  catches  cold,  there  occurs 
an  inclination  to  vomit,  causing  a copious  flow  of  saliva. 
150.  Inclination  to  vomit  in  connexion  with  headache,  and 
a pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  bowels  (aft.  J h.). 

(Vomiting  about  midnight  with  attacks  of  suffocation,  he  vomits 
food  and  mucus,  during  which  he  has  a bitter  and  sour  taste  in  the 
throat.) 

Sensation  in  the  stomach  as  if  he  had  eaten  nothing  for  a long 
time  and  his  hunger  had  gone  off. 

Immediately  after  eating  pain  under  the  stomach. 

Gurgling  under  (in)  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gri.] 

155.  Pecking  and  gnawing  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gjj.] 

After  eating,  aching  in  the  stomach.  [ Hbg .] 

Aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Hbg.'] 

Aching  pain  in  the  stomach,  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  hypochondria 
some  hours  after  a meal  or  at  night  in  bed. 


1 Poisoning  of  a man  by  four  grains. 

2 General  account  of  effects  of  C. 


COCCULUS. 

497 

(aftAIPhO.SUre  in  the  SCr0biCU'US  COrdis’  that  t3kes  the  breath 

stomach^  SpaSm  in  ^ 

away  the  brefth  g ther  m the  epigastrium,  that  takes 

which  extends  trthrilTsfdTofthe^abd^'^^'T  meal> 

ioo  h.).  ak>aomen  and  the  chest  (aft. 

Aching  in  the  epigastrium. 

and  on  msp, ration,  but  not  by  external  touch  ’ 7 g S 

(ram  in  the  hypochondria  as  if  bruised  (aft.  i2  h.U 
Continued  fine  stitch  in  the  slcin  nf  t-r.,3  1 r*.  • 

went  off  on  rubbing.  [Hnl.]  k f h ef  gaStnc  reSlon>  that 

I7°  ^ 
inc  mg  pain  in  the  abdominal  muscles  oft  he  left  side  \IVp  1 
intes ttfB^Ptyand  hoUoW  “ th£  abdomen,  afifte  E L 

_ Squeezing  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  § h ) [ Hhcr  1 

175-  Audible  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  [#«/] 
iJrawing  pam  in  the  bowels.  ’J 

(aft.  4dW).I1f HnL]  “ tHe  abd0men  from  ‘he  right  to  the  left  side 

feeling  of  cold  ancf vertigo  (8th T”  [Afe/.f  Wh‘Ie  waIkinS>  with 
standing!"! j/„/]he  hyP°gaStnum  up  to  the  epigastrium,  alleviated  by 

l8°'  £Sfi  dtChAtheur>ht  Side  °f  the  abdomen.  [HnlJ 
Stitrhpc  • 60  abd°men,  several  needle-pricks  \JVe  1 

(aft.  15 [Hnl]  ^ °f  the  abd°men>  onl7  wh'ei  stooping 
Tearing  in  the  bowels. 

Burning  in  the  abdomen. 

I»5-  Oreat  distension  of  the  abdomen 

time.Tne  “ ?,  «»<»•  distends  some- 

with  difficulty  (aft  5 h"  Wels’  and  is  eXP£lled 

santly  generated^ whidi^htendf^U  hcf)aWakeS  and.  flatus  is  inces- 
hereand  there  and  passing  off  sino-1  abd°men,  causing  aching  pain 
flatus  continues  mfo  KMT ^TiT^  relief’  whilst  new 
bed  from  Side  t0  ,ide  ^ “ 

'Inthe"i®i^^ 

32 


498 


COCCULUS. 


In  the  lumbar  and  renal  regions,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  whilst 
lying,  a sharp  hard  pressure,  that  goes  off  after  getting  up. 

The  flatulence  presses  upwards. 

190.  A constrictive  pain  in  the  abdomen  with  pressing  towards  the 
genital  organs  (female),  and  at  the  same  time  a qualmishness  in  the 
scrobiculus  cordis  with  tendency  to  water-brash. 

Nausea  (without  inclination  to  vomit)  spreading  up  from  the  right 
side  of  the  abdomen  towards  the  navel  (immediately).  [Gw.] 

Constipation  for  several  days. 

A hard  stool  only  every  other  day,  that  comes  away  with  great 
effort. 

After  the  passage  of  a motion  violent  tenesmus  in  the  rectum, 
causing  faintness. 

195.  There  occur  tendency  to  and  premonitory  signs  of  inguinal  hernia 
(aft.  8 h.). 

Dilatation  of  the  left  inguinal  ring  and  tendency  to  the  protru- 
sion of  inguinal  hernia,  with  sore  pain  (aft.  14  h.). 

Continued  stitch  in  the  right  inguinal  region.  \_Hnl.~\ 

Painful  tendency  to  inguinal  hernia,  especially  on  rising  up  from 
a seat.  [Gw.] 

In  the  right  inguinal  ring  paralytic  pain,  as  if  something  would 
be  forced  out  there  ; a rupture-pain  only  whilst  sitting,  going  off  by 
rising  up.  [Gw.] 

200.  Forcing  pain  in  the  flanks,  as  if  the  catamenia  were  coming  on. 
[Ts.  Hb .] 

In  the  flanks  internally  all  is  full  and  swollen  as  if  stuffed  full ; 
only  in  both  sides,  not  in  front ; especially  when  stepping  forwards, 
when  it  feels  as  if  the  swelling  was  pushed  along  and  as  if  every- 
thing came  asunder  (aft.  some  h.).  [Tj.  Hb.~\ 

Soft  stool,  diarrhoea  (aft.  J h.). 

Frequent  small  evacuations  by  stool  (aft.  several  h.). 

(Every  day  several  bright  coloured,  pale  motions.) 

205.  (Slimy  stools.) 

Discharge  of  hot  flatus  before  the  fasculent  diarrhoea.  [Gw.] 

Urging  to  stool,  thin  fasculent  diarrhoea  of  a foetid  odour.  [Gw.] 

Soft,  thin  motion  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

Urging  to  pass  a motion  and  break  wind  at  the  same  time,  and 
with  the  latter  there  rapidly  occurs  in  short  fits  diarrhoeic  faecal 
evacuations  in  small  quantities.  [Gw.] 

210.  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool  with  constipation  for  three  days;  the 
fourth  day  hard  stool  passed  with  effort.  [Hnl.] 

Excitation  to  stool  in  the  rectum  ; but  the  peristaltic  movement 
is  deficient  in  the  upper  intestines ; hence  the  stool  is  delayed  for 
36  hours  (aft.  ^ h.).  [ We.~\ 

Creeping  and  itching  in  the  rectum,  as  from  ascarides. 

Contractive  pain  in  the  anus,  that  prevents  him  sitting,  in  the 
afternoon  (aft.  20  h.). 

Burning  itching  in  the  anus. 

215.  (Retention  of  the  urine  for  10  minutes.) 

Watery  urine  (aft.  h.). 


COCCULUS. 


499 


. ,pafses  a*  very  short  intervals  a great  quantity  of  waterv 
thenbkadder  )e[G«.]8  “ renewed>  on  account  of  fulness  of 

di«rh^r,eqUe?t  Urg/"g,  t0  urinate’  evety  quarter  of  an  hour  with 
discharge  of  very  little  urine,  for  30  hours  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.l  ’ 

220  PricklL^V61"8  V°  PfS  Water’  Pain  in  the  urethra.  [W] 

220.  Pricking  itching  in  the  fore  part  of  the  urethra  (aft.  1 3 h ) \W  1 

(aft.^  hj6  S Pam  in  the  urethra}  orifice  when  not  urinating 

Shooting  pain  in  the  urethra  (aft.  12  h ) 

Shooting  pain  at  the  end  of  the  prepuce.' 

Itching  on  the  scrotum. 

225-  Itching  in  the  scrotum. 

Itching  burning  in  the  scrotum.  [Hnl.] 

touched  CSthTr  [HnL]h  t6Stlcles  as  ip  bruised,  especially  when 

Shooting  pain  in  one  of  the  testicles, 
drawing  pains  in  the  testicles. 

2»d  “n!r-  ”>h  of  abdomen, 

every  breath  • at  the  S1L  th  abdomen  at  every  movement  and 
48  k).  ’ th  tlme  a contraction  in  the  rectum  (aft. 

and?Dake?natbight  dayS-t0°  soon  with  distension  of  the  abdomen 
step  gkell  buTf  n0t  °nIyat  £Ver^  nrovement-every 

a sLSm  nres  ?.rbf  alsowhlle  s‘ttmg,  as  if  the  internal  parts  suffered 

PreTM«rorfh?4YaS  an  ^ 1 ce  r *i  n tern  ally  ! °"  eXternal 

Leucorrhcea. 

di.J,lTc“”>*“]hl<l  c“'d  fcr  * — - -- 

235.  Excitation  of  the  genitals  and  inclination  for  coitus 
Increased  sensitiveness  of  the  genital  organs.  S 
Nocturnal  emission  of  semen  (aft.  6 h.)  L J 

the  glame(rftShi2rh!red  °rganS  apd  prepuce  retracted  behind 


240. 


Sneezing.  [Gss.—JVe.~\  * 

Sneezing. 

(Sh^blows^bhf  T tbe  °pe"  air’  bc  cann°t  sneeze. 

(She  blows  bloody  mucus  from  the  nose.) 

especially  on  touching^t.3™^  °f  ^ nostnI  at  cbe  Point  of  the  nose, 
Severe  coryza  all  day.  [Zr.l 

2+5'  VktL't ryzafor  four  days!™  “ When  "0t  t0Uched' 

and  hawk.  mUCUS  adhereS  t0  the  Ial?nx  and  compels  him  to  cough 

Cough  ThI?  stra!nslnhthe  UPPtr  part  of  the  Wnx. 

g strains  him  much  on  account  of  an  oppression  of 


5oo 


COCCULUS. 


the  chest,  that  comes  on  every  time  when  he  begins  to  cough  (in 
48  h.).  [Fg.] 

250.  In  the  evening  in  bed  irritation  to  cough  in  the  back  of  the 
larynx  ; the  cough  always  consists  of  two  impulses. 

In  a quartan  type,  every  fourth  night,  about  12  o’clock,  also  at 
2 o’clock,  a cough  wakes  him  up,  with  dryness  of  the  mouth  ; on 
coughing  it  feels  as  if  the  glottis  were  not  wide  enough. 

A suffocating  sensation,  taking  away  the  breath  and  contracting 
the  windpipe,  which  almost  always  excites  coughing. 

In  the  pit  of  the  throat  a sensation,  as  if  something  were  there 
that  takes  away  the  breath  ; the  glottis  is  constricted.  [Tjt.  Hb.~\ 
Audible  rattling  as  if  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  as  from  an 
emptiness  there,  especially  perceptible  on  walking  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Lr.] 

255.  She  has  no  breath,  must  always  breathe  short,  gasp.  \_Ts.  Hb.] 
Tightness  of  the  chest  and  difficult  respiration.  [Hbg.] 
Tensive  constriction  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest, 
which  oppresses  the  breathing  (aft.  ± h.). 

Oppression  of  the  chest  especially  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
sternum,  which  impedes  respiration  (aft.  4 h.). 

A whistling,  snoring  breathing,  oppressed  almost  to  suffocation, 
especially  the  inspiration  ; very  slow  breathing  alternates  with 
complete  cessation  of  respiration,  and  the  face  is  swollen  as  in 
apoplexy. 

260.  (Rawness  and  sore  feeling  in  the  chest.) 

Aching  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum  with  anxiety,  after- 
wards shooting  pain  in  the  sternum  (aft.  3 h.). 

In  the  middle  of  the  sternum  a pain  as  if  a blunt  instrument  were 
pressed  on  it.  [Ctjj.] 

In  the  sternum  a sudden  pressure,  as  if  from  a push  with  the  fist. 
[Hbg.] 

On  bending  the  body  towards  the  right  side,  when  sitting  and 
standing,  a dull  drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  as  long  as 
the  bending  is  continued.  \_Hnl.~\  \ 

265.  Reading  aloud  fatigues  his  chest  to  such  a degree  that  he  cannot 
continue  reading  without  great  effort.  [_HnL] 

Stitches  in  the  interior  of  the  chest  synchronous  with  the  pulse, 
when  sitting,  lasting  continuously  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.  \_Bhr.~\ 
When  walking,  an  extraordinarily  violent  stitch  through  the  left 
side  of  the  chest  as  far  as  the  back.  \_HnL] 

Anteriorly  on  the  right  false  ribs  intermittent  blunt  stitches. 
[Gss.] 

Fine  shooting  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  during  inspiration, 
by  paroxysms.  [Fff.] 

270.  Some  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hbg.] 
Fine  shooting  pain  in  the  sternum  when  walking  (aft.  48  h.). 
Stitches  in  the  right  side  (aft.  ih.). 

Stitches  in  the  left  side  (aft.  3 h.). 

Fine  stitches  in  both  nipples  (aft.  \ h.). 

275.  Shudder  over  the  breasts  (aft.  | h.). 


COCCULUS. 


501 


Some  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  near  the  scrobiculus 
cordis,  in  the  evening  (aft.  24  h.). 

In  the  articulations  of  the  thorax,  and  in  all  the  vetebrae,  a pene- 
trating pain,  as  if  they  were  dislocated  or  spasmodically  contracted, 
particularly  when  moving  (aft.  20  h.). 

A paralytic  pain  in  the  sacrum  like  weak  back. 

A paralytic  pain  in  the  sacrum  with  spasmodic  drawing  over  the 
hips,  which  hindered  him  greatly  when  walking,  with  anxious  timid 
disposition. 

280.  In  the  lumbar  region,  paralytic  aching  pain.  [Gw.] 

Bruised  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  sacrum,  not  increased  by  touching. 

Through  the  abdomen  out  to  the  lower  part  of  the  back,  several 
stitches  in  the  morning  in  bed. 

Trembling  in  the  back. 

An  itching  in  the  back,  in  the  evening  after  undressing,  with  an 
eruption  of  red  pimples. 

285.  In  the  side  through  to  the  back  a drawing  pain  when  talking, 
walking,  and  stooping  ; when  lying  the  drawing  becomes  worse  for 
a few  minutes,  then  goes  off  completely. 

Aching  pains  in  the  back,  especially  on  his  left  side  (when 
sitting)  (aft.  5 h.).  \Lr. ] 

Drawing  pains  in  the  back. 

Tearing  pains  in  the  back. 

Boring  pains  in  the  back. 

290.  Pain  in  the  back  when  standing,  as  if  over-tired  or  sprained  (aft, 
12  h.). 

Pain  in  the  spine  as  if  it  were  broken. 

Tearing  pain  betwixt  the  shoulders  and  spine,  in  the  evening 
before  going  to  bed  (aft.  36  h.). 

Immediately  beneath  the  left  scapula,  drawing  pains  when 
standing  and  lying,  worst  in  the  morning  (aft.  6 h.).  [i^.] 

Under  the  left  scapula  intermittent  aching  paralytic  pain,  when 
at  rest.  [Gjj.] 

295.  When  he  moves  the  shoulders,  his  back  feels  stiff  and  painful. 

[<?«■] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  nape  on  moving  the  head  backwards  and 
forwards.  [//«/.] 

Stitches  in  the  scapulae  from  right  to  left. 

Pressure  in  the  scapulae  and  nape. 

Painful  cracking  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  when  moving  the  head. 

300.  After  a meal,  on  raising  the  arm,  a very  severe  drawing  pain  in  the 
shoulder-joint  and  the  shafts  of  the  bones  of  the  arm  ; on  touching 
the  parts  they  pain  as  if  bruised  and  crushed. 

In  the  shoulder-joint  and  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper 
arm  single  stitches  when  at  rest  (aft.  1 h.). 

Itching  prick  in  the  left  axilla,  as  from  a flea.  \_Hnl.\ 

Under  the  shoulder  a pimple  which  itches  under  the  bed-clothes 

[Hbg.-] 

Under  the  right  shoulder,  a sort  of  living  crawling  and  throbbing, 
and  a burning  which  extends  to  the  fingers  (aft.  x h.). 


502 


COCCULUS. 


. 305.  In  the  shoulder  and  elbow-joints,  as  also  in  the  shaft  of  the 
humerus  between  them,  a pain  compounded  of  crushing,  tearing, 
and  shooting,  which  is  intolerable  when  at  rest,  with  a sensation  of 
heaviness  he  dreads  moving  the  arm  and  yet  the  pain  is  alleviated 
by  moving  (aft.  5 h.). 

Paroxysms  of  burning  pain  in  the  left  arm. 

Convulsions  of  the  arms  with  the  thumb  turned  into  the  fist. 
During  and  after  a meal,  sufferings  in  the  arms  as  if  asleep  and 
paralysed  (aft.  3 h.). 

The  arm  as  if  asleep  with  formicating  sensation.  [Hbg.] 

310.  Whilst  writing,  a kind  of  paralysis  of  the  arm  ; he  could  scarcely 
hold  the  pen  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hbg.] 

During  violent  movement  of  the  arms  an  acute  paralytic  pain,  as 
if  its  bones  were  broken  in  two.  [Gw.] 

When  he  raises  the  upper  arm  it  pains  as  if  it  was  broken.  [Gw.] 
The  shafts  of  the  humeri,  just  above  the  elbows,  are  as  if  bruised 
and  have  paralytic  pains  when  moved.  [Gw.] 

The  arm  on  which  he  lies  in  bed  pains  as  if  bruised.  [Gss.~\ 

315.  In  the  shaft  of  the  left  humerus,  a digging  (undulatory  drawing) 
bruised  pain.  [Gw.] 

Drawing  in  the  humerus  with  bruised  pain.  [Gw.] 

Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm.  [Hnl.] 
Pulse-like  visible  twitchings  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm, 
and  immediately  afterwards  above  the  elbow  of  the  right  arm.  [Hnl.] 

Stitches  in  the  right  upper  arm.  [Hbg.] 

320.  On  the  outer  side  of  the  left  upper  arm  below  the  head  of  the 
humerus,  intermitting,  obtuse  stitches  (like  blows).  [Gw.] 

While  eating  the  right  arm  gives  him  great  pain,  it  is  very  heavy 
and  tired,  when  he  tries  to  raise  it  up  high. 

Sudden,  paralytic  pain  in  the  bend  of  the  right  elbow.  [Gw.] 
Continued  shooting  in  the  left  elbow  (4th  d.).  [Hnl.] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  outer  side  of  the  left  forearm  down  to  the 
little  finger.  [We.] 

325.  Pressive  pain  on  the  right  forearm.  [We.] 

In  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  forearm,  intermitting,  very  acute, 
almost  tearing,  paralytic  aching,  especially  when  at  rest. 

In  the  radius  of  the  forearm,  a pain  as  from  dislocation,  when 
moved  or  touched. 

The  forearm  gone  asleep,  with  a sensation  in  the  hand,  as  if  it 
were  swollen,  and  a constrictive  pain  in  the  muscles  ; the  fingers  are 
cool,  with  an  internal  sensation  of  icy  coldness  (aft.  3 h.). 

Cold  sweat  now  on  one,  now  on  the  other  hand. 

330.  Sweaty  hands  (immediately). 

Sometimes  one  hand,  sometimes  the  other,  is  as  if 
insensible  and  asleep. 

Sometimes  one  hand,  sometimes  the  other,  is  alter- 
nately hot  and  cold  (aft.  \ h.). 

On  the  border  of  the  hand  where  the  little  finger  ends,  a blister, 
which  comes  on  in  the  night,  and  the  following  day  bursts  (aft. 

5 d-)« 


COCCULUS. 


503 

Her  hand  trembles  while  eating,  and  all  the  more  the  higher  she 
raises  it.  \_Bhr.~\ 

335.  Spasmodic  pain  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  hand  and  of  the 
four  fingers,  with  some  heat  of  the  hand. 

Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  finger.  [Gw.] 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  little  finger  when  writing.  [Zr.] 
Cramp-like  shooting  pain  from  behind  forwards  in  the  right 
index.  [_We.~] 

Painful  paralytic  twitching  through  the  fingers  (6th  d.).  [Gw.] 

340.  Tearing,  boring,  drawing  pain  in  the  fingers. 

A deep,  penetrating,  tickling  itching  on  the  ball  of  the  thumb, 
not  alleviated  by  scratching  and  rubbing  (aft.  16  h.). 

In  the  right  nates  a nipping  when  sitting ; it  afterwards 
changes  into  obtuse  blows.  [Gw.] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  left  hip-joint,  when  walking  (5th  d.). 
[HnL] 

On  turning  the  thigh,  a cracking  and  painful  sensation  in  the  left 
hip-joint,  especially  observed  when  walking  (aft.  24  h.).  [iZz/.] 

345.  Repeated  stitches  on  the  outside  of  the  left  hip-joint.  [_Hnl.~\ 
Twitching  in  the  muscles  around  the  right  hip-joint.  [iZz/.] 

In  the  left  hip-bone,  intermitting  aching,  paralytic  pain.  [Gw.] 

In  the  middle  of  the  left  thigh,  intermitting  aching  bruised  pain. 

«■] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  bone  of  the  whole  right  thigh,  only  when 
walking.  \_Hnl,'] 

350.  When  sitting  violent  pulsating  stitches  on  the  outer  side  of  the 
left  thigh,  that  caused  involuntary  movements.  [iZz/.] 

Paralytic  numb  feeling  traverses  in  paroxysms  the  left  leg  from 
the  middle  of  the  thigh  downwards. 

Numb  feeling  from  the  thigh  over  the  knee  downwards.  [Gw.] 
Paralytic  drawing  in  the  thighs  with  weakness  in  the  knees,  as  if 
they  would  bend  under  him.  [Gw.] 

Paralytic  feeling  in  the  left  thigh,  worst  when  at  rest.  \_We^\ 

355.  The  thighs  feel  paralysed  and  bruised.  [Gw.] 

When  he  walks  round  in  a circle  towards  the  left,  the  inner  side 
of  the  left  thigh  pains  as  if  bruised.  [Gw.] 

When  he  lifts  up  the  thighs  they  pain  as  if  broken.  [Gw.] 

On  commencing  to  walk  after  sitting,  the  thighs  pain  as  if 
bruised.  [Gw.] 

When  he  raises  the  legs  while  sitting,  the  thighs  are  very 
acutely  painful  as  if  bruised.  [Gw.] 

360.  Constrictive  not  painful  sensation  down  the  thigh,  sometimes 
attended  by  a sensation  as  if  it  would  become  rigid  ; the  constriction 
then  extends  downwards  in  the  muscles  of  the  leg  below  the  hough. 
[Gw.] 

Drawing  pains  in  the  feet. 

Tearing  pains  in  the  feet. 

Boring  pains  in  the  feet. 

Paralytic  insensibility  of  the  lower  extremities  (aft.  24  h.). 

365.  A boil  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh  (aft.  12  h.). 


504 


COCCULUS. 


(On  kneeling  down,  a trembling  in  the  thighs.) 

Cracking  of  the  knee  when  moving  (immediately). 

On  rising  up  after  sitting,  an  intolerable  drawing  pain  in  the 
knee. 

Stitches  in  the  knee. 

370.  In  the  patella,  a drawing,  tearing  pain. 

Violent  stitch  in  the  left  knee-joint  (aft.  27  h.).  [Hnl.] 

In  the  outer  side  of  the  left  knee-joint,  a continued  stitch,  while 
walking  (6th  d.).  [ Hnl .] 

At  night  when  bending  the  knees,  cramp  in  the  calves. 

Tensive  pain  in  the  calves  while  moving. 

375.  While  sitting,  violent  stitches  in  the  skin  of  the  left  knee, 
so  that  at  every  stitch  he  must  move  the  leg  involuntarily.  [Hnl.] 

Itching  in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee,  the  calf  and  the  ankle-joint, 
when  walking ; it  went  off  when  standing,  but  returned  when 
walking.  [Hnl.] 

Great  lassitude  in  the  knees,  as  if  after  a long  walk,  frequently 
recurring  (immediately).  [We.] 

Under  the  left  knee,  feeling  as  if  he  had  tied  his  garter  too 
tightly  on  the  leg.  [Gw.] 

Constrictive  sensation  on  the  outer  side  of  the  left  leg,  more  numb 
than  painful.  [Gw.] 

380.  On  the  outer  side  of  the  left  leg  downwards,  a dull,  undulating 
paralytic  pain.  [Gw.] 

While  walking  after  sitting,  the  left  foot  falls  asleep,  and  he  has 
pricks  in  it  as  with  many  pins.  [Gw.] 

While  sitting  both  feet  fall  asleep.  [Gw.] 

Swelling  of  the  feet  in  the  evening. 

Cold  sweat  on  the  feet. 

385.  Heat  and  swelling  of  the  feet,  with  incessant  eroding  itching. 

Itching  in  the  ankle-joint. 

Violent  pain  as  if  dislocated,  in  the  ankle-joint,  when  moving. 

Bruised  pain  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  when  bending  the  foot 
upwards,  and  when  touching  it  (aft.  3 h.). 

Tearing  jerks  and  tearings  in  the  hitherto  painless  corn,  when  at 
rest  in  the  evening. 

390.  Pain  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  big  toe,  as  if  a chilblain  were 
about  to  come  there,  and  like  a boil ; painful  also  when  touched. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  big  toe,  even  when  at  rest. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  right  toes  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hbg.] 

Eroding  pain  in  the  toes  (aft.  3 h.). 

Pain  on  the  inner  part  of  the  heel,  as  if  in  the  heel-bone,  just  as 
though  it  was  bruised  (aft.  \ h.). 

395.  The  muscles  of  the  limbs  are  painful  when  touched  (aft.  24  h.). 

Here  and  there  burning  obtuse  stitches.  [Gw.] 

Here  and  there  in  the  skin,  burning  itching  pricks  as  if  from 
fleas.  [Hnl.] 

When  he  touches  with  the  fingers  the  affected  part  (that  was 
previously  swollen  and  inflamed)  he  has  fine  pricks  in  it,  as  if  he 
pressed  upon  it  with  a pin's  point. 


COCCULCJS.  505 

Itching  on  the  skin  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  evening,  when 
undressing. 

400.  When  undressing,  violent  smarting  itching,  as  after  profuse 
sweat,  in  the  skin  of  the  whole  body,  compelling  him  to  scratch 
(aft.  16  h.).  [Zr.] 

Itching  in  the  skin  under  the  bedclothes  ; after  scratching  it 
becomes  more  tickling.  [ Hbg.~\ 

Itching  and  burning  here  and  there  in  the  skin,  especially  on 
the  inner  side  of  the  thighs,  as  if  from  nettles  ; also  eruption  of 
pimples  there,  which  have  shooting  pain  when  touched. 

At  night  itching  on  various  parts  ; after  scratching  these  parts 
are  painful. 

At  night  an  itching  sometimes  on  the  chest,  from  the  scrobiculus 
cordis  to  the  neck,  sometimes  on  the  tibia  and  under  the  shoulders  ; 
after  scratching  serum  exudes  from  the  parts  (aft.  4 h.). 

405.  Single  pimples  which  fill  with  pus  and  afterwards  dry  up  and 
disappear,  above  the  nose,  on  the  temples,  on  the  chest  and  between 
the  scapulae. 

Eruption  of  red  miliary  papules  on  the  face,  on  the  back  and  on 
the  chest,  which  itch  in  the  warmth  (not  when  taking  off  the  clothes). 

Pimple-like,  hard  pustules,  which  contain  no  fluid,  have  a red 
areola,  and  all  day  itch  with  burning  pain,  on  the  limbs,  wrist,  and 
back  of  the  fingers. 

Eruption  of  red,  shapeless  spots  on  the  skin,  as  if  coloured  with 
red  wine,  over  the  whole  of  the  chest,  and  on  the  sides  of  the  neck 
behind  the  ears,  without  heat  or  other  sensation. 

Excites  tearing  pain  in  indurated  glandular  swellings. 

410.  Excites  shooting  pains  and  heat,  in  cold  glandular 
swellings,  at  least  when  they  are  touched. 

All  the  symptoms  and  sufferings,  especially  in  the 
head,  are  aggravated  by  drinking,  eating,  sleeping,  and 
speaking. 

The  symptoms  are  exceptionally  aggravated  by  smoking  tobacco. 

The  symptoms  are  increased  by  coffee. 

After  drinking,  flying  heat  in  the  face. 

415.  The  symptoms,  especially  the  headache,  are  much  aggravated  by 
cold  air. 

Haemorrhages.  [Rumpf,  Amboin.J-  v,  p.  35.] 

He  shuns  the  open  air. 

The  open  air  feels  too  cold  to  him. 

Intolerance  of  cold  and  warm  air. 

420.  Intolerance  of  the  open  air,  with  heat  and  redness  of  the  cheeks 
(aft.  4 h.). 

Pain  of  the  limbs  when  moving,  as  if  they  were  crushed  or 
broken. 

Subsultus  (palpitation)  of  single  muscular  parts,  especially  on  the 
lower  extremities,  as  after  a long  journey  on  foot.  [Grr.] 


1 General  statement  of  effects  of  C.  This  symptom  not  found. 


5°6 


COCCULUS. 


Here  and  there  in  the  limbs  an  acute  paralytic 
drawing,  continuous  and  in  jerks,  as  if  in  the  hone.  [Gss.] 

Internal  digging  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  limbs.  [Gn.] 

425.  Internal  pain  of  the  limbs,  increased  by  touching  and  external 
pressure  (aft.  24  h.). 

Drawing  pain  in  the  limbs  of  the  left  side. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  limbs  and  abdominal  muscles,  as  after 
taking  cold. 

Cracking  and  creaking  in  the  joints. 

The  joints  crack  when  walking.  \_HbgJ\ 

430.  Painful  stiffness  of  all  the  joints,  at  one  time  in  the  hands  and 
fingers,  at  another  in  the  knees  and  ankle-joints,  for  two  days 
(aft.  24  h.).  [Fg.] 

Painful  stiffness  of  the  joints  (aft.  8 h.). 

Falling  asleep  of  the  feet  and  hands  alternately,  in 
short  paroxysms. 

Tendency  to  tremble  (aft.  1 and  6 h.). 

Trembling  in  all  the  limbs. 

435.  Want  of  vital  spirits. 

The  limbs  are  as  if  paralysed. 

Paralytic  immobility  of  the  limbs  with  drawing  pains,  apparently 
in  the  bones. 

Attacks  of  paralytic  weakness  with  backache. 

Hemiplegia  of  the  left  side. 

440.  A kind  of  epilepsy  : he  comes  into  the  room  with  a cheerful 
countenance  and  sits  down,  when  he  feels  as  if  intoxicated  ; there- 
upon he  becomes  quiet  and  stares  long  at  one  point,  not  replying  to 
questions  ; he  then  falls  unconscious  to  the  ground  and  curls  himself 
up  with  unintelligible  whinings  : cc  Ah  ! au  ! au  ! ah  ! brr,”  &c.  The 
urine  comes  away  involuntarily  ; the  limbs  and  all  the  body  are 
shaken  by  spasmodic  starts,  and  the  outstretched  hands  are  bent 
convulsively  inwards  ; at  the  same  time  he  has  choking  of  a jerking 
and  spasmodic  character  in  the  throat,  with  mouth  half  open,  as  if  he 
were  about  to  vomit,  with  frothy  foam  at  the  mouth  ; the  hands  are 
oold,  the  face  covered  with  cold  sweat  and  spasmodically  contorted, 
the  eyes  glassy  and  protruded.  He  then  stands  up,  but  does  not 
answer  questions,  but  shows  his  teeth  and  bellows  at  those  question- 
ing him  ; will  not  allow  himself  to  be  touched,  but  endeavours  to 
strike  those  about  him  and  to  wrestle  with  them  ; the  expression  of 
the  countenance  is  that  of  furious  rage ; at  last  he  grunts  and 
groans,  until  after  a quarter  of  an  hour  he  gradually  recovers 
and  regains  consciousness.  This  is  followed  by  disinclination  for  all 
food,  even  such  as  he  formerly  liked  best  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gjj.] 

The  slightest  movement  causes  loss  of  strength  ; the  least  thing 
fatigues  him. 

Very  exhausted  by  a short  walk. 

She  is  so  weak  that  she  must  sit  down  to  an  easy  work  she  used 
to  do  standing.  [. Blnr. ] 

The  knees  are  like  to  give  under  him  from  weariness ; when 
walking  he  staggers  and  would  fall  to  one  side. 


COCCULUS. 


507 

445.  Painful  paralytic  feeling  in  the  arms  and  legs ; she  can  hardly 
rise  from  the  seat ; at  the  same  time  loss  of  appetite.  [Gjj.] 
Exhaustion  of  the  body,  especially  when  sitting.  \_Hnl.\ 
Extraordinary  weakness  of  the  body  when  walking.  [Hnl.~\ 
Great  exhaustion  of  the  body,  so  that  it  was  an  exer- 
tion to  him  to  stand  steady.  [Hnl.] 

In  the  morning,  about  9 o’clock,  such  heaviness  in  the  limbs,  and 
such  great  fatigue  in  the  whole  body,  that  she  cannot  ward  off  sleep 
— for  several  days  at  the  same  time.  \_Bhr.'\ 

450.  Syncope.1  [John  Hill,  1.  c.] 

On  moving  the  body,  syncope,  with  spasmodic  distortion  of  the 
facial  muscles. 

Extreme  weakness. 

Laziness  with  silence. 

The  slightest  interruption  to  sleep  causes  loss  of  strength  ; he 
misses  every  hour  of  sleep. 

455.  Desire  to  lie  down. 

After  lying  down  in  bed,  constant  yawning  and  stretching  of  the 
limbs.  [ Hbg .] 

Interrupted,  short  yawning,  for  which  he  cannot  draw  sufficient 
breath. 

Much  yawning  towards  evening. 

Violent  yawning. 

460.  Forcible  yawning  with  a cracking  in  the  internal  ear. 

Somnolence  (sopor). 

Unconquerable,  waking  sleepy  stupefaction  (coma  vigil). 

(Whilst  sleeping  he  lies  prone  on  the  abdomen.) 

When  asleep  he  lays  one  arm  under  the  head  (aft.  4 h.). 

465.  Frequent  waking  out  of  sleep. 

Frequent  waking  out  of  sleep,  as  from  fright.  \_Lr.~\ 

He  frequently  wakes  up  at  night  with  a sensation  of  being  too 
warm. 

At  night  sleepless,  restlessness  in  the  whole  body ; pricking  and 
stinging  here  and  there. 

Many  ideas  about  his  daily  business  prevented  him  sleeping  for  an 
hour ; he  woke  about  1 o’clock  and  could  not  go  to  sleep  again. 
[Hnl.~\ 

470.  He  wakes  up  at  night  with  fear,  as  if  he  were  afraid  of 
ghosts. 

Very  vivid,  fear-exciting  dreams  (aft,  2 h.). 

Dreams  of  dying  and  of  death. 

Dream  of  having  done  something  bad. 

Vivid,  unremembered  dreams.  [Zr.] 

475.  He  dreams  that  his  knees  are  swollen  and  painful.  \JVe.~] 

She  cries  out  anxiously  in  her  sleep,  calls  her  mother  and  sisters, 
with  rapid,  anxious  respiration  ; she  clutches  with  her  hands  about  the 
bed,  and  strikes  out  with  her  hands  ; at  the  same  time  she  opens  her 


1 Not  found. 


5°8 


COCCULUS. 


eyes  and  distorts  them,  without  waking  up,  and  moves  her  head  about 
constantly,  especially  towards  the  left  side.  [We.] 

The  sleep  is  interrupted  by  frequent  starting  up  and  waking. 

Frightful  anxiety  like  a dream,  which  frustrates  every  attempt  to 
fall  sleep. 

He  would  like  to  sleep  until  the  day  is  advanced,  and  is  also  very 
sleepy  by  day. 

480.  He  sleeps  in  the  morning  until  late  in  the  day  ; the  eyes  will  not 
open  in  the  morning ; he  is  awake  but  cannot  get  up  nor  open  the 
eyes. 

In  the  morning  after  waking  laziness  and  disinclination  to 
speak.  [Hbg.] 

In  the  morning  he  has  not  slept  enough  and  yawns  incessantly. 

Shivering  in  the  evening  in  the  back. 

Chill  in  the  back,  as  if  it  was  touched  here  and  there  with  ice, 
which  is  not  removed  by  the  warmth  of  the  stove. 

485.  Shivering  on  the  lower  part  of  the  body  (very  soon). 

In  the  afternoon  rigor  over  the  whole  body. 

In  the  morning  (about  8 a.m.)  rigor  for  half  an  hour,  without 
thirst  and  not  followed  by  heat. 

General  coldness,  without  rigor,  with  bluish  hands  (the  first  h.). 

Repeated  though  short  shiverings,  especially  through  the  lower 
extremities  (immediately).  [Gjj.] 

490.  Shiver  running  through  the  whole  body.  [Ghj.] 

In  the  evening,  along  with  longing  for  stimulating  strengthening 
food,  he  is  suddenly  affected  with  internal  chilliness,  so  that  he  trem- 
bles, and  yet  he  is  not  externally  cold  to  the  touch.  [Gw.] 

The  hands  feel  cold  when  held  to  the  face,  but  warm  to  one 
another.  [Grr.] 

Trembling  in  all  the  limbs,  always  with  chilliness,  which  does 
not  go  off  in  the  warm  room,  especially  in  the  evening.  [Fg.] 

He  has  a cold  shiver  over  the  back,  although  sitting  near  the  warm 
stove  (8th  d.).  [Hnl.] 

495.  Chilliness  and  cold  feeling  on  the  back.  [Hnl.] 

Chilliness  which  does  not  go  off  with  the  heat  of  the  stove,  with 
violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen  (8th  d.).  [Hnl.] 

Severe  chilliness  over  the  whole  body,  in  the  evening  (7th  d.). 
[Hnl] 

Cold  feeling  without  perceptible  external  coldness,  on  the 
shoulder  (aft.  4 h.). 

Fever  : frequent  rigor,  followed  by  flying  heat  on  the  head. 

500.  Fever  : alternate  heat  and  chill  of  the  body  (aft.  some  h.). 

(Fever  : gradually  increasing  chilliness,  with  little  or  no  thirst, 
warm  forehead,  cold  cheek  bones,  cold  nose,  and  icy-cold  hands  ; 
then  heat  with  great  anxiety,  as  if  he  could  not  get  breath  enough, 
with  nausea  and  great  thirst,  until  perspiration  came  on  \ the  perspi- 
ration was  slight,  quite  cool,  almost  confined  to  the  head  and  hands, 
the  anxiety  continuing  all  the  time.) 

Fever  : frequently  during  the  day  he  begins  shuddering,  as  when 


COCCULUS. 


509 


one  warms  oneself  at  the  fire  in  the  cold ; he  then  again  becomes 
hot,  exhausted,  must  lie  down,  but  all  without  thirst  and  without 
perspiration. 

Fever  : in  the  afternoon  (6  p.m.)  hot  hands,  with  sensation  of 
dry  heat  all  over  the  body  ; sleeplessness  until  4 a.m.,  then  shivering 
and  cold  hands  all  day. 

(External  heat  of  the  body,  without  feeling  hot  and  without 
thirst)  (aft.  5 h.). 

505.  Burning  heat  in  the  cheeks  with  quite  cold  feet. 

The  pulse  is  not  quicker,  but  very  small  and  hard. 

Heat  in  the  forehead. 

Increased  feeling  of  heat,  quick  pulse  (aft.  24  h.).  \_HnL] 

Redness  of  the  left  hand  with  drawing  in  the  middle  finger 
(4thd.).  \_HnL] 

510.  Glowing  heat  of  the  cheeks,  at  the  same  time  chilliness  of  the 
whole  body.  \_Hnl.~] 

Rapid  alternation  of  heat  and  chill ; she  is  suddenly  attacked  by 
great  heat  rising  up  from  the  feet  and  spreading  all  over  the  body  ; 
at  the  same  time  a sensation  as  if  the  blood  rushed  into  the  face  ; but 
withal  she  is  more  pale  than  red ; after  a few  minutes  she  is  over- 
run by  icy  coldness  from  the  head  down  to  the  feet,  and  the  heat  is 
momentarily  suppressed— attacks  which  come  on  several  times  during 
the  day. 

Quick  and  severe  flushes  of  heat.  [Gss.~\ 

Frequent  transient  attacks  of  a disagreeable  burning  heat  and 
redness  of  the  cheeks,  such  as  are  wont  to  occur  when  one  gets 
angry  or  receives  disagreeable  news. 

Heat  and  redness  in  the  face  with  thirst. 

515.  Thirst  for  cold  drinks,  especially  beer. 

Perspiration  on  the  body  (immediately)  from  evening  till  morning, 
with  cold  sweat  on  the  face. 

General  perspiration  in  the  morning,  chiefly  on  the  chest  and 
the  part  affected. 

Transpiration  and  slight  perspiration  over  the  whole 
body  on  the  slightest  exertion  (aft.  1 h ). 

Dejection. 

520.  The  thoughts  are  fixed  on  a single  disagreeable 
subject;  she  is  absorbed  in  thought  and  notices  nothing 
about  her. 

He  is  sunk  in  the  saddest  thoughts,  and  insults  he  has  received 
he  takes  deeply  to  heart. 

She  sits  in  deep  reverie. 

Time  passes  too  rapidly  with  him,  several  hours  appear  to  him  as 
short  as  one  hour.1  [Gw.] 

Continual  sad  thoughts,  just  as  if  he  had  received  insults.  [F^-.] 
525.  He  has  no  inclination  to  do  anything,  and  finds  no  pleasure  in 
anything. 

Weeping. 


1 This  S.  also  appears  in  Hb.  and  Ts.  4 R.  A.  M.  L.’ 


5io 


COCCULUS. 


He  has  no  desire  for  any  work. 

He  has  no  pleasure  in  anything,  and  no  inclination  to  do  any- 
thing. 

Great  discontent  with  himself.  \_Hbg.~\ 

530.  He  is  extremely  serious,  afterwards  he  breaks  out  into  com- 
plaints. 

Serious,  and  though  caring  little  about  his  own  health,  he  is  very 
anxious  about  the  illnesses  of  others. 

She  dawdles ; in  business  she  cannot  accomplish  anything  nor 
finish  anything,  with  contracted  pupils  (aft.  12  h.). 

Busy  restlessness. 

Anxiety. 

535.  In  the  morning,  anxiety  respecting  the  incurability  of  a trifling 
malady. 

Anxiety  as  if  she  had  committed  a great  crime. 

Great  anxiety  as  if  he  had  done  something  bad  (aft.  29  h.).  [Zr.] 

Cardiac  anxiety,  mortal  anguish1  (immediately).  [Amatus 
Lusitanus.,  1.  c.] 

Palpitation  of  the  heart. 


540.  Sudden,  extreme  anxiety. 

Despairing  disposition. 

Hypochondriacal,  especially  in  the  afternoon. 

Over  sensitiveness  (aft.  24  h.). 

A slight  noise  goes  through  all  his  limbs. 

545.  He  dreads  any  sudden  surprise. 

He  is  easily  startled. 

Great  sensitiveness  of  disposition  ; everything  offends  him. 

He  cannot  bear  any  interruption  in  conversation,  nor  any  noise. 

Too  great  irritability  of  disposition  ; every  trifle  makes  him 
angry.  \_Hnl.~\ 

550.  Everything  angers  and  vexes  him  ; after  a few  hours  he  becomes 
lively  and  disposed  to  make  jokes.  \Hbg,"\ 

Easily  annoyed  ; he  takes  everything  in  bad  part  (aft.  24  h.). 

Extreme  inclination  to  be  annoyed  and  to  take  every  trifle  in  bad 
part  (aft.  I h.). 

She  is  annoyed  at  the  merest  trifle  even  to  weeping,  when  the 
pupils  are  contracted  ; after  the  weeping  want  of  appetite. 

He  is  very  indignant  and  annoyed  at  slight  faults  and  fibs  of 
others. 

555.  Joyous,  contented,  merry  ; he  becomes  witty  and  makes  jokes  * 
(aft.  6 h.). 

Happy  humour,  and  contented  with  himself.f  [Zr.] 

Irresistible  inclination  to  trill  and  sing ; like  a kind  of  madness. 


* Partly  curative  action, 
f Curative  action. 


1 The  original  is  simply  “ anxietas.” 


COLOCYNTHIS.1 

( Cucumis  Colocynthis , Colocynth. ) 

(The  dry  fruit  reduced  to  powder  and  digested  with  alcohol,  in  the  proportion  of 
20  grains  of  the  powder  to  400  drops  of  alcohol,  without  heat,  for  a week,  two 
succussions  being  given  every  day  so  as  to  form  a tincture,  twenty  drops  of  which 
contain  one  grain  of  colocynth-power.) 

The  older  physicians  brought  colocynth  into  disrepute  by  giving  it 
in  large  dangerous  doses  as  a purgative.  Their  successors,  terrified  by 
this  dreadful  example,  either  rejected  it  entirely,  whereby  the  curative 
power  it  possessed  was  lost  to  mankind,  or  they  only  ventured  to 
employ  it  on  rare  occasions,  and  then  never  without  previous  alteration 
and  weakening  of  its  properties  by  silly  procedures,  which  they  called 
correction , whereby  its  pretended  poisonous  character  was  said  to  be 
tamed  and  restrained.  With  the  aid  of  mucilage  they  mixed  up  with 
it  other  purgative  drugs,  or  they  partially  destroyed  its  power  by 
fermentation  or  by  prolonged  boiling  with  water,  wine,  or  even  urine, 
as  had  already  been  stupidly  done  by  the  ancients.  But  even  after  all 
this  mutilation  (their  so-called  correction)  colocynth  always  continued 
to  be  a dangerous  remedy  in  the  large  doses  in  which  physicians 
prescribed  it. 

It  is  really  wonderful  that  in  the  medical  school  there  has  always 
been  such  an  absence  of  reflection,  and  that  in  regard  to  matters  like 
this  the  obvious  simple  thought  never  occurred  to  any  one  that,  if  the 
heroic  medicines  acted  too  violently  in  a certain  dose,  this  was  owing 
less  to  the  drug  itself  than  to  the  excessive  magnitude  of  the  dose, 
which  yet  may  be  diminished  to  any  extent  required  ; and  that  such  a 
diminution  of  the  dose,  whilst  leaving  the  drug  unaltered  in  its  proper- 
ties, only  reduces  its  strength  so  as  to  make  it  innocuous  and  capable 
of  being  employed  with  advantage,  and  hence  must  be  the  most  natural 
and  appropriate  corrigens  of  all  heroic  medicines.  It  is  obvious  that  if 
a pint  of  alcohol  drunk  all  at  once  can  kill  a man,  this  is  owing  not 
to  the  absolute  poisonousness  of  the  alcohol  but  to  the  excessive  quan- 
tity, and  that  a couple  of  drops  of  alcohol  would  have  been  harmless  to 
him.  It  is  obvious  that  whilst  a drop  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  imme- 
diately produces  a blister  and  erosion  on  the  part  of  the  tongue  to 
which  it  is  applied,  on  the  other  hand,  when  diluted  with  20  or 
joo,ooo  drops  of  water  it  becomes  a mild,  merely  sourish  fluid,  and 
that  hence  the  most  natural,  the  simplest,  corrigens  of  all  heroic 
substances  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  dilution  and  the  diminution  of  the 
dose  until  it  becomes  only  useful  and  quite  innocuous. 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827. 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


512 

In  this  way,  and  in  this  way  only,  can  the  inestimable  curative 
powers  for  the  most  incurable  diseases  that  have  hitherto  lain  con- 
cealed in  the  heroic — 'much  less  in  the  weaker — medicines  (called 
poisons  by  those  afflicted  with  intellectual  poverty)  be  elicited  in  a 
perfectly  sure  and  mild  manner  to  the  advantage  of  suffering  humanity. 
By  means  of  the  knowledge  so  obtained  we  may  effect  results  in  the 
treatment  of  acute  and  chronic  diseases  such  as  the  whole  medical 
school  has  hitherto  failed  to  effect.  This  method,  so  childishly  simple, 
of  rendering  the  strongest  medicinal  substances  mild  and  useful  never 
occurred  to  the  minds  of  physicians,  and  they  were  consequently  forced 
to  dispense  with  the  aid  of  the  grandest  and  most  useful  remedies. 

Guided  by  the  following  peculiar  pathogenetic  effects  produced  in 
the  healthy  by  colocynth,  I have  been  enabled  by  means  of  it  to  perform 
extraordinary  cures  on  the  homoeopathic  principle  by  the  administration 
of  a small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  octillion-  or  decillion-fold  dilution 
of  the  above  tincture  as  a dose. 

Thus,  to  mention  only  a single  example,  many  of  the  most  violent 
colics  may,  under  the  guidance  of  symptoms  69  to  109,  be  often 
very  rapidly  cured,  when  at  the  same  time  the  other  characteristic 
symptoms  of  the  disease,  or  a portion  of  them,  are  to  be  found  in 
similarity  among  the  symptoms  of  colocynth. 

The  action  of  colocynth  is  of  long  duration. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Gutmann,  Fr.  Hahnemann, 
Hornburg,  Langhammer,  L.  Ruckert,  Stapf. 

The  following  old-school  authorities  furnished  some  of  the  symptoms  : 

Alibert,  in  Med.  Nat.  Zeit .,  1799. 

Breslauer  Sammlungen , 1727. 

Hoffmann,  J.  M.,  in  Ephem.  Nat.  Curios .,  Cent.  x. 

Hoyer,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  Ann.  7,  8. 

KoLpin,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  iii. 

Plater,  Obs .,  Lib.  iii. 

Salmuth,  Obs.,  Cent.  iii. 

Schenck,  Obs.,  Lib.  vii. 

Schneider,  in  Annal.  d.  Heilk .,  18 u,  April. 

Stalpaart  van  der  Wiel,  Cent.  i. 

Tulpius,  Obs.,  Lib.  iv. 

Valentini,  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  Ann.  3. 

Zacutus  Lusitanus,  in  Pharmac. 

In  the  1st  edit.  Colocynth  has  227  symptoms,  in  this  2nd  edit.  250  ; 33  additional 
symptoms  appear  in  the  Chr.  Kr.~\ 


COLOCYNTHIS. 

On  turning  the  head  quickly,  vertigo  apparently  arising  in  the 
left  temple,  as  if  he  would  fall,  with  a giving  way  in  the  knees. 

[*/•] 

Dazedness  and  confusion  of  the  head.  [Alibert,  in  Med.  Nat. 

Zeit.)  1799.1] 

Confusion  of  the  head,  especially  in  the  sinciput.  [Gn.~\ 


1 Not  accessible. 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


513 

Head  dazed  and  empty,  as  after  a noisy  nocturnal  debauch. 

[Hbg.]  . 

5.  Vertigo  and  stupid  feeling  in  head,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
bellyache.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Violent  pains  in  the  head,  as  from  a draught  of  air,  which  go  off 
when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.] 

Single,  slight  pressures  here  and  there  in  the  interior  of  the  head.* 

[ L . Rkt.] 

Pressing,  aching  pain  in  the  sinciput,  most  violent 
on  stooping  and  when  lying  on  the  hack,  for  six 

hours.  [ Gn .] 

Aching  pain  along  the  sagittal  suture,  worse  on  moving  and 
shaking  the  head  and  on  stooping  forwards.  [Stf.] 

10.  Pressing  squeezing  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  brain.  [Gn.] 
Digging  pressive  pain  in  the  left  temple.  [ Gn.~\ 

Pressing  drawing  headache  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead. 

[ Gn.] 

Drawing,  semilateral  headache  (aft.  1^  h.).  [ Hbg .] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  whole  brain,  which  became 
a pressure  in  the  forehead,  as  if  it  pressed  out  the  fore- 
head-more violent  on  moving  the  eyelids.  [Gn.] 

15.  In  the  morning  after  rising,  a dull  pricking  pain  on  the  fore- 
head, as  if  externally  (aft.  J h,).  [Lr.] 

Burning  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  above  the 
eyebrows.  [Gn.] 

Boring  stitches  in  the  right  temple,  which  went  off  on  touching 
(aft.  8i  h.).  [Lr.] 

Smarting  burning  pain  on  the  hairy  scalp,  left  side.  [Gn.] 
Burning  sensation  in  the  right  upper  eyelid  (aft.  34  h.).  [Gn.] 

20.  Burning  pain  in  the  whole  of  the  right  eyeball.  [Gn.] 

Sharp  cutting  pain  in  the  right  eyeball  (aft.  7 h.). 

0 Gn- ] 

Sparks  before  the  eyes.  [Schneider,  in  Annal . d.  Heilk .,  1811, 
April.1] 

Prickling  burning  pain  in  the  right  inner  canthus.  [Gn.] 

Burning  cutting  pain  in  the  right  lower  eyelid,  when  at  rest. 

[<?».] 

25.  Severe  itching  in  the  right  eyeball,  rendering  rubbing  necessary. 

[<?».] 

Paleness  and  relaxation  of  the  facial  muscles ; the  eyes  looked 
sunk  in.  [Gni] 

Eruption  of  a pimple  on  the  left  cheek,  which  smarts  when 
touched,  and  after  scratching  discharges  a watery  fluid  (aft.  \\  h.). 
[Lr.-] 

* The  following  peculiar  varieties  of  headache,  which  colocynth  causes,  explain 
the  homoeopathic  cures  effected  by  the  Swede  D alb  erg  ( Vetensk.Acad . Handl .,  1785, 
p.  146)  from  the  administration  of  tincture  of  colocynth  in  some  chronic  headaches, 
especially  in  those  called  gout  in  the  head. 


1 From  colocynth  given  in  apoplexy. 


33 


5H 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


Digging  burning  pain  in  the  cheek  worse  when  at  rest  than 
when  moving.  [G«.] 

Eruption  of  white  pimples  on  the  face,  especially  betwixt  eye 
and  ear,  on  the  forehead  and  chin,  which  itched  a little,  but  smarted 
when  touched  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.] 

30.  Tearing  and  tension  on  the  left  side  of  the  face  to  the  ear  and 
into  the  head. 

Earache  in  the  right  ear,  not  going  off  by  introducing  the  finger. 
[■ Gn ■] 

Cutting  shooting  pain  in  the  lower  cavity  of  the  right  auricle 
that  goes  off  on  introducing  the  finger.  [Gn.] 

Deep  in  the  ear  an  itching  shooting  pain  which  extends  from  the 
Eustachian  tube  to  the  membrana  tympani,  and  is  momentarily 
removed  by  boring  in  the  finger  (aft.  i\  h.).  [££/!] 

Formicating  sensation  in  the  inner  ear  which  goes  off  on  intro- 
ducing the  finger.  [Gn.] 

35.  Painful  long-continued  drawing  behind  the  left  ear.  [Hbg.] 

Aching  behind  the  left  ear.  [ Hbg.] 

Throbbing  and  digging  pain  from  the  middle  of  the 
left  side  of  the  nose  to  the  root  of  the  nose.  [Gn.] 

In  the  evening,  a violent  itching  in  the  left  nostril,  compelling 
him  to  scratch,  as  irritating  as  if  coryza  were  coming  on  (aft.  15  h.). 

iLr-\ 

Burning  pain  in  front  of  the  right  commissure  of  the  mouth 
(aft.  12  h.).  [Gn.] 

40.  A suppurating  pimple  on  the  left  commissure  of  the  mouth  (aft. 
2 h.).  [Lr.] 


Quivering  in  the  muscles  of  the  chin,  only  when  the  parts  are  at 
rest.  [Gn.] 

Pain  in  the  lower  row  of  teeth,  as  if  the  nerve  were 
tugged  and  stretched.  [Hbg.] 

(A  shooting  throbbing  pain  in  the  right  lower  molars,  as  if  struck 
with  a metal  wire.)  [St/] 

In  the  morning,  white  tongue  with  rough  sensation  upon  it  as 
from  too  much  tobacco  smoking  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Lr.] 

45.  Rough  tongue  as  if  sand  were  strewed  upon  it  (aft.  36  h.).  [Fr. 
H-n .] 

On  the  upper  surface  of  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  a metallic 
astringent  taste.  [St/.] 

Smarting  pain  on  the  inside  of  the  right  cheek  and  side  of  the 
tongue.  [Gn.] 

A scraping  feeling  on  the  palate,  also  when  not  coughing. 


[St/.] 

In  the  throat,  a fine  pricking  as  with  needles,  or  as  if  an  awn  of 
an  ear  of  corn  were  sticking  there,  on  the  upper  part  of  the  velum 
pendulum  palati.  [St/.] 

50.  Fine  smarting  stitches  in  the  fauces,  not  observed  when  swallow- 
ing.  [G».] 

Frequent  hiccup  (aft.  i|  h.).  [Lr.] 


COLOCYNTHIS.  515 


A disgusting  putrid  taste,  stronger  in  the  fauces  than  in  the 
mouth  [ Gn .] 

Bitterness  in  the  mouth,  for  four  hours  (immediately).  [Fr. 
H—n .] 

After  drinking  beer,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  which  increases 
for  several  minutes  (aft.  37  h.).  \_Gn.~\ 

55.  Anorexia.  [Alibert,  1.  c.] 

Diminished  appetite,  though  the  food  tastes  all  right,  \_Fr. 
H-n.] 

Much  desire  to  drink,  without  thirst ; the  mouth  is  always 
watery,  the  liquid  drunk  tastes  very  good,  but  immediately  after  every 
draught  a flat  taste  comes  into  the  mouth. 

Feeling  of  thirst  in  the  gullet.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Eructation  of  a bilious  fluid. 


60.  Empty  eructation.  [Z%.] 

Nausea.  [Schneider,  1.  c.] 

Nausea  for  two  hours  (immediately).  [Zr.  H — n.] 

Nausea  for  six  hours,  until  he  falls  asleep  at  night ; in  the 
morning  after  waking  the  nausea  returns.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Nausea  for  eight  hours.  [ Fr . H — «.] 

65.  Vomiting  twice  of  food  only,  without  nausea  and  without  bad 
taste  (aft.  10  m.).  [j Fr.  H — n.] 

Very  frequent  vomiting.  [J.  M.  Hoffmann,  in  Ephem.  Nat . 
Curios .,  Cent,  x,  Obs.  30.1] 

A pressure  in  the  stomach,  as  from  a stone.  \_Hbg.] 

Violent  stomachache,  precordial  pressure  (immediately).  [Hoff- 
mann, 1.  c.] 

After  eating  particularly,  an  aching  sensation  in  the  gastric 
region,  with  sensation  as  of  hunger,  not  relieved  by  eating  more  — 
every  day.  [A.  Rkt.] 

70.  Cutting  pressure  in  the  epigastrium,  as  from  flatulence,  on 
inspiring.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Transient  cutting  in  the  epigastrium.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Single  stitches  under  the  last  ribs.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Pressure  in  the  bowels,  which  seems  to  come  sometimes  from 
emptiness,  but  is  rather  increased  than  diminished  by  eating,  espe- 
cially by  bending  forwards  when  sitting,  for  about  six  successive 
days,  particularly  in  the  evening.  [Z.  Rkt .] 

Great  distension  of  the  abdomen  occasionally. 

75.  Pressure  as  from  fulness  in  the  abdomen.  \_Hbg.] 

Along  with  some  distension  colic-like  pain  in  the  abdomen  and 
discharge  of  flatus.  [£//!] 

Colic.  [Tulpius,  Obs.,  Lib.  iv,  Cap.  25.3 — Alibert,  1.  c.] 
Continued  pain  in  the  abdomen  through  all  the  bowels,  com- 
pounded of  bruised  pain  and  aching. 

In  the  hypogastrium,  a sore  cutting  pain,  which  commenced 
when  walking  and  increased  in  violence  at  every  step  (aft.  5 d.). 
[Z.  Rkt.] 


1 Poisoning  by  a whole  apple. 


3 Poisoning. 


5i6 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


80.  Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen.  [ Breslauer  Sammlungen , 1727, 
P-  T48-1] 

Continued  cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  at  last  so  violent  that  he 
must  walk  in  a bent-forward  attitude ; at  the  same  time  weakness  in 
the  whole  body,  so  that  walking  was  a trouble  to  him,  with  dread  of 
the  work  he  had  to  do.  [Gn.] 

The  most  violent  pains  in  the  abdomen.  [Hoffmann,  1.  c.] 
Indescribable  bellyache.  [Stalpaart  van  der  Wiel,  Cent,  i, 
Obs.  41. 2] 

Excessive  pain  in  the  abdomen,  on  a small  spot  below  the  navel, 
which,  after  the  night-sweat,  spread  through  the  whole  abdomen. 
[Fr.  H—n .] 

85.  At  each  attack  of  pain  in  the  abdomen,  restlessness  in  the  whole 
body,  whereby  a kind  of  shudder  rushes  through  both  cheeks,  which 
gradually  rises  up  from  the  abdomen,  and  after  a more  severe  pain 
immediately  goes  off.  [Hbg.] 

Movement  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  he  were  still  fasting,  in  the 
afternoon  (aft.  8 h.).  [Zr.] 

Emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  there  were  nothing  in  it  (aft. 
10  h.).  [Hbg.] 

An  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  as  though  he  had  had  a severe 
diarrhoea.  [£//.] 

Pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  from  catching  cold,  or  from  having 
eaten  a variety  of  incongruous  articles  of  food.  [Hbg.] 

90.  Alleviation  of  the  violent  bellyache  by  smoking  tobacco,  but  a 
sensation  long  remains  in  the  abdomen  as  if  he  had  taken  cold.  [Fr. 
H—n.] 

Pinching  sensations  in  the  abdomen,  which  terminate  above  the 
pubes.  \_Hbg.] 

Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  without  evacuation  of  the  bowels  (aft. 

3+  h.).  [G#.] 

Pinching  and  grasping  pains  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  21  h.).  [Hbg.] 
Acute  pains,  as  if  severely  clawed  in  the  abdomen — a grasping  in 
the  bowels ; on  account  of  these  pains  he  can  neither  lie  quiet  nor 
sit,  and  can  only  walk  bent  double  ; by  lying  still  these  pains  were 
not  allayed,  but  they  were  when  he  had  moved  quickly  or  tossed 
about  (aft.  6 h.).  [Hbg.] 

95.  Shooting  pain  in  a small  spot  in  the  umbilical  region,  which 
compels  him  to  bend  and  stoop  forwards,  and  is  increased  to  the 
severest  degree  by  lifting  anything,  for  eighteen  hours  (aft  f h.). 
[Fr.  H — n.\ 

Bellyache,  which  compels  him  to  crouch  and  bend  together. 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

Dull  tensive  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which  went  off  by  pressure. 

[G».] 

Pains  as  if  the  bowels  were  squeezed  in  and  pressed ; at  the 
same  time  cutting  pain  towards  the  pudendum  ; below  the  navel  the 


1 Nothing  about  colocynth  can  be  found  here. 
3 Poisoning. 


COLOCYNTHIS, 


5i7 


pains  were  so  violent  that  the  facial  muscles  were  much  distorted 
and  the  eyes  closed  ; this  pain  was  only  allayed  by  pressing  with  the 
hand  on  the  abdomen  and  bending  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  8 h.). 
[Hbg.] 

Constriction  of  the  bowels  in  the  hypogastrium  always  gradually 
increasing  every  ten  to  twenty  minutes,  which  goes  off  by  strong 
pressure  with  the  hand  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Hbg.~\ 

100.  Forcing  together  of  the  abdominal  intestines,  especially  round 
about  the  pudendum.  [Hbg.] 

Sensation  in  the  whole  abdomen  as  if  the  bowels  were  squeezed 
between  stones  and  threatened  to  burst  out,  sometimes  so  severe  that 
the  blood  mounted  to  the  upper  parts,  the  face  and  head,  with  out- 
breaks of  perspiration  on  these  parts ; the  face  and  head  felt  as  if  a 
cool  air  blew  on  them  when  the  cramp-like  pains  declined  (aft.  7 h.). 

[Hbg.] 

Cramp-like  bellyache,  so  that  he  can  neither  sit  still,  nor  lie,  nor 
walk  ; after  a meal  there  ensued  immediately  an  almost  resultless 
urging  to  stool,  tenesmus  (aft.  10  h.).  [Hbg.] 

A forcing  from  both  sides  of  the  hypogastrium  towards  the 
middle  of  the  pelvic  cavity,  like  flatulence  which  will  not  come  away 
(compelling  emission  of  semen). 

Boring  pain  in  the  left  iliac  region,  close  to  the  bones  of  the 
pelvis  (aft.  12  h.).  [ Gn .] 

105.  Digging,  tearing  pain  in  the  umbilical  region,  more  violent  when 
expiring  and  laughing  loud.  [ Gn.] 

All  the  abdominal  pains  from  colocynth  went  off  on  drinking  a 
cup  of  coffee  ; but  he  must  then  go  immediately  to  stool.  [Hbg.] 
After  eating  a single  potato,  violent  pain  in  the  abdomen  and 
hurried  evacuation  of  the  bowels.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

Violent  urging  to  stool,  which  consisted  of  copious,  yellowish- 
brown,  semi-fluid  faeces,  as  from  a purgative,  of  sourish-putrid  smell ; 
after  this  evacuation  the  bellyache  seemed  to  disappear,  but  soon 
returned  (aft.  9 h.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

Greenish-yellow  diarrhoeic  stools,  with  sensation  as  if  he  had 
taken  cold.  [ Fr . H — n. ] 

no.  Quite  thin,  frothy  stool  of  saffron-yellow  colour  and  mouldy 
smell,  almost  like  burnt  grey  blotting-paper  (aft.  12  h.).  [Hbg.] 

Diarrhoea ; fifteen  motions  in  eighteen  hours,  by  which  the 
bellyache  was  gradually  allayed  (aft.  I h.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Day  and  night,  diarrhoea  with  nausea,  without  being  able  to 
vomit.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Frequent  urgent  call  to  stool  ; at  the  same  time  sensation  at  the 
anus  and  in  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum,  as  if  these  parts  were 
weakened  by  long-continued  diarrhoea  and  had  lost  their  tone. 
[Hbg.-] 

He  must  keep  back  the  evacuation  by  a great  effort,  in  order  that 
it  should  not  come  away  involuntarily  before  reaching  the  night- 
chair  (aft.  10  h.).  [Hbg.] 

1 15.  Small  faecal  evacuation  which  was  viscid  and  slimy.  [Hbg.] 

Hard  stool  with  little  pressing  (aft.  48  h.).  [Gn.] 


5j8 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


Very  hard  stool,  which  comes  away  in  pieces*  (aft.  5,  6 d.).  [L. 

First  watery  and  slimy,  then  bilious,  at  last  bloody  stools.  [Hoff- 
mann, 1.  c.] 

Bloody  stools.  [Hoyer,  in  Mi  sc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  Ann.  7,  8, 
Obs.  178  -,l 2  and  Bresl.  Samml. , 1.  c.] 

120.  Haemorrhage  from  the  anus.  [Tulpius,  1.  c.] 

Excites  dysentery.  [Zacutus  Lusitanus,  in  Pharmac.,  p.  208.3] 
Fatal  dysentery. f [Plater,  Obs .,  Lib.  iii,  p.  858.] 

Haemorrhage  from  the  anus,  some  hours  after  death. J [Schenck, 
Obs.,  Lib.  vii.] 

Pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum  from  swollen  haemorrhoidal 
venous  lumps,  when  sitting,  walking,  and  during  stool. 

125.  Blind  haemorrhoids. 

A constant  grumbling  and  croaking  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  frogs 
were  in  the  bowels. 

Grumbling  and  creaking  in  the  abdomen,  with  cutting  pains. 

Hbg-] 

Frequent  noisy  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  J h.).  [Zr.] 

Illusory  desire  to  discharge  flatus  for  some  minutes ; after  that 
some  came  away  with  great  violence.  \_Hbg.~] 

130.  In  the  whole  abdomen,  flatulence,  which  is  not  discharged. § 

[Hbg.] 

Retained  flatus. ||  [Hbg.~\ 

Pain  above  the  hips  with  nausea  and  chilliness  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Fr. 

H—n.] 

Tensive  shooting  pain  in  the  right  loin  only  felt  on 
inspiration,  and  most  violent  when  lying  on  the  hack.^1 

(aft.  54  h.).  [ Gn .] 

Constant  pressure  in  the  pubic  region  (aft.  8,  10  h.).  \_Hbg.'\ 

135.  Tensive  pain  in  the  right  iliac  region  worse  when  pressed  on. 

{.Gn.l 

A violent  itching  stitch  in  the  anus,  not  connected  with  the 
evacuation  of  the  bowels.  \Gn.~\ 

Pressure  on  the  pubic4  region,  with  call  to  urinate  (aft.  8 h.). 

[Hbg.] 


* Secondary  effect. 

f From  a whole  gourd  macerated  in  wine. 

t From  a drachm  in  a clyster.3 

§ Apparently  secondary  action. 

||  Apparently  secondary  action. 

Note  to  132  and  133.  This  lumbago,  which  colocynth  is  apt  to  produce  in  the 
healthy,  explains  how  D alb  erg  ( Konigl . Vetensk.  Handl .,  1785,  p.  146)  was  able  to 
effect  such  happy  homoeopathic  cures  with  this  plant  in  some  kinds  of  lumbago. 
The  symptoms  184,  185,  point  to  the  curative  power  of  colocynth  in  affections  of 
some  parts  near  the  hip. 


1 From  the  decoction. 

2 From  an  enema  containing  colocynth. 

3 Administered  for  apoplexy. 

4 In  the  original  “ Schienbein-Gegend  ” (region  of  the  tibia),  evidently  a misprint 
for  “ Schambein-Gegend  ” (region  of  the  os  pubis).  (Corrected  thus  in  Chr.  Kr.y  S. 
i6°.) 


GOLOCYNTHIS. 


5i9 


Some  minutes  after  passing  urine,  an  aching  pain  at  the  end  of 
the. urethra,  as  if  it  were  bruised  (aft.  14J  h.).  [Zr.] 

Urine  seems  to  be  secreted  sparingly.  [iZ%.] 

140.  Frequent  strangury,  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  1 h.). 
[Zr.] 

Strangury,  with  inability  to  pass  urine,  which  as  a rule  was 
passed  very  sparingly,  [i/%.] 

Urine,  immediately,  of  intolerable  odour ; in  the  utensil  it 
became  at  once  thick,  gelatinous,  viscid,  like  coagulating  albumen. 
[Schneider,  1.  c.]1 

Complete  impotence  ; the  prepuce,  that  at  other  times  always 
covered  the  glans,  remained  retracted  behind  the  glans,  though  he 
was  not  deficient  in  sexual  desire. 


* 

In  the  morning,  fluent  coryza,  without  sneezing  (aft.  ij  h.). 

[Lr.] 

145.  In  the  morning,  when  inspiring,  a whistling  in  the  chest  (aft. 
1 1 h.).  [Zr.] 

In  the  evening  short  cough  when  smoking  tobacco  (aft. 
!5  h.).  [Zr .]  . 

Frequent  irritation  to  dry  cough  in  the  larynx,  like  a tickling 
(aft.  1 h.).  [5//.] 

1 he  place  in  the  larynx  where  it  scrapes  and  tickles  so  as  to 
cause  cough,  becomes  more  scrapy  during  inspiration.  [5//1] 

Pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  as  if  something  lay  on  the 
lung.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

T50.  For  several  days,  breathing  twice  as  short  as  normal,  without 
tightness  of  chest  or  heat. 

In  the  night,  an  attack  of  tightness  of  chest  with  slow  difficult 
breathing,  which  forces  him  to  cough. 

Oppressive  pressure  anteriorly  on  the  chest ; it  seems  to  be  much 
too  narrow — also  compression  on  the  sides,  especially  when  sitting 
bent  forwards,  and  in  the  evening,  for  six  days  (aft.  2j  h.).  [Z. 
Rkt.] 

Increased  oppression  of  the  chest : on  inspiring  the  lung  feels  as 
if  squeezed  by  a pressure  from  without,  but  on  inspiring  there  are 
stitches  in  it  (aft.  6 d.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

A running  and  creeping  in  the  skin  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest 
and  abdomen,  as  if  insects  were  running  about  in  it  (aft.  6 d.). 

[<?».] 

155.  Pressure  with  obtuse  stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which 
compels  rapid  breathing  ; the  lung  appears  to  be  unable  to  expand 
itself  sufficiently.  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Obtuse  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  on  inspiring,  but 
on  expiring  a slight  pressure,  for  six  days  (aft.  1 h.).  [Z.  Rkt.] 

Muscular  twitching  in  the  right  intercostal  muscles,  which  went 
off  on  raising  himself  up  (aft.  5 h.).  [Gn.] 


1 Not  found. 


$10 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


Single  stitches  in  the  chest  and  under  the  ribs,  here  and  there, 
every  day.  [Z.  Rkt.~\ 

A grasping  pain  in  the  right  intercostal  muscles  (aft.  i h.).  [Gn.] 
160.  Betwixt  the  scapulae  a shooting  tensive  pain,  chiefly  when 
walking,  so  that  he  must  walk  for  some  time  crooked. 

An  aching  bruised  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  back,  with,  at 
the  same  time,  hard  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  equally  felt 
when  at  rest  and  when  moving. 

Obtuse  stitch  under  the  right  scapula,  during  inspiration.  [Z. 

Rkt.] 

Sore  pain  in  the  left  scapula,  when  at  rest.  [Gn.] 

In  the  region  of  the  right  scapula,  an  internal 
drawing  sensation,  as  if  the  nerves  and  vessels  were 
stretched.  \_Hbg.~] 

165.  From  the  right  side  of  the  neck  to  down  over  the  scapula,  severe 
pain,  as  if  the  nerves  were  forcibly  opened  out  and  tugged,  or  as  if 
bruised.  [Hbg.] 

A drawing  pain,  like  a violent  contraction  in  the  left  sterno- 
cleido-mastoideus  muscle,  when  at  rest ; on  moving  and  walking  it 
extends  towards  the  back  part  and  goes  off  entirely  (aft.  \ h.).  [*SVZ] 

Stiffness  of  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  painful  on  moving.  [Hbg.] 
Severe  drawing,  sharp  pain  in  the  left  cervical  mus- 
cles, still  more  severe  on  movement  (aft.  1 h.).  [Hbg.] 

Painful  drawing  in  the  nape,  even  when  at  rest  soon  afterwards 
stiffness  of  the  nape,  which  is  painful  even  without  movement,  but 
most  so  on  turning  the  head.  [ Hbg.] 

170.  In  the  nape,  towards  the  protuberance  of  the  occipital  bone,  a 
feeling  as  if  a heavy  pressing  weight  lay  across  it,  as  acute  when 
turning  the  head  as  when  at  rest.  [Hbg.] 

Sensation  behind  the  right  scapula,  as  if  the  arm  were  sprained 
when  at  rest  and  when  moving.  [ Hbg .] 

A suppurating  boil  in  the  glands  of  the  axilla.  [Kolpin,  in  Hufel. 
Jour.,  iii,  p.  S75-1] 

Prickling  burning  pain  in  the  right  upper  arm,  when  moving. 
[Gn.] 

Occasional  stitches  in  the  arms,  here  and  there  (aft.  4 h.). 


[Z.  Rkt.] 

175.  Fine,  itching  stitch  in  the  bend  of  the  right  elbow,  when  at  rest. 
[<?»•] 

Paralytic  pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  arms,  occasionally  (aft.  5 d.). 
[Z.  Rkt.] 

Aching,  drawing  pain  in  the  shafts  of  the  arm  bones,  when  at  rest, 
especially  under  the  head  of  the  humerus  and  above  the  wrist-joint, 
where  it  pains  as  if  in  the  periosteum  on  raising  the  arm. 

Tensive  pain  in  the  right  forearm  (aft.  27  h.).  \_Gn.] 

Violent  drawing  pains  in  the  thumb  of  the  right 
hand,  feeling  as  if  in  the  tendons,  which  commenced  in  the  bail  and 
terminated  in  the  tip  of  the  thumb  (aft.  5 h.).  [Lr.] 


1 Critical  phenomena  in  a rheumatic  paralysis  getting  well  under  colocynth. 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


521 


180.  Spasmodic  pain  in  the  right  palm,  so  that  he  could  only  open  the 
fingers  with  difficulty ; the  pain  was  more  severe  when  at  rest  than 
when  moving.  [Gn.] 

A burning  painful  point  in  the  right  middle  finger.  [Hbg.] 

In  the  gluteal1  muscles  of  the  left  side,  a tickling  itching  when 
sitting.  \_Hbg.] 

On  the  right  thigh  a drawing  tension. 

Only  when  walking,  pain  in  the  right  thigh,  as  if  the 
psoas  muscle  that  raises  it  were  too  short ; on  standing 
it  ceased,  hut  on  walking  it  returned  (aft.  32  h.).  [ Gn .] 

1 8c.  Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  right  thigh,  when  standing  and 
sitting  (aft.  2 d.).  [Z.  Rkt .] 

In  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  tearing  stitches,  when  sitting.  [Z. 

Rkt.] 

Trembling  of  the  feet,  as  after  a severe  fright,  with  rigor  for  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fr.  H — n.] 

(Cold  sensation  on  the  knees,  which,  however,  are  warm.) 
Paralytic  pain  in  the  knee  when  walking,  as  if  the  joint  were 
tightly  bound. 

190.  Only  when  moving,  pains  like  needle-pricks  in  the  left  hough, 
which  at  length  changed  into  itching  pricking.  \_Gn.] 

In  the  evening  a violent  itching  in  the  left  hough,  which  com- 
pelled him  to  scratch  ; after  scratching  there  ensued  a smarting  sen- 
sation (aft.  14  h.).  [Zr.] 

Tensive  pressure  on  the  tibiae,  even  when  sitting.  [Z.  Rkt.] 
Itching  prick  in  the  right  tibia,  most  severe  when  at  rest  (aft. 
2i  h.).  [<?«.]. 

Itching  prick  in  the  right  leg,  continuing  also  when  moving.  \_Gn.] 
195.  Weakness,  chiefly  of  the  legs,  as  from  fatigue. 

Pain  in  the  hitherto  painless  varicose  knots  of  the  right  leg.  [Gn.] 
Quivering  in  the  right  calf,  when  at  rest,  which  went  off  on 
movement.  [ Gn .] 

Sharp  cutting  pain  in  the  inner  side  of  the  left  calf,  when  at  rest. 

[<?».] 

In  the  calves  sometimes  a tearing  pain,  when  sitting  and  standing. 
[Z.  Rkt.] 

200.  Itching  prick  in  the  right  calf,  which  was  not  removed  by 
rubbing.  [Gn.] 

Aching  tearing  pain  in  the  ankle-joint,  when  sitting.  [Z.  Rkt.] 
Going  to  sleep  of  the  left  foot  [Hbg.] — when  at  rest.  [Gn.] 
Itching  boring  prick  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  most  severe 
when  at  rest  (aft.  25  h.).  [Gn.] 

Severe  tearing  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot  upwards  (aft.  4 h.). 
[Zr.] 

205.  Tearing  pain  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  most  violent 
when  at  rest  (aft.  35  h.).  [Gn.] 

Twitching  of  some  muscular  parts  of  the  limbs.  [J.  M.  Hoff- 
mann, 1.  c.] 

1 “ Gesichtsmuskeln,”  in  place  of  “ Gesassmuskeln  ” in  original.  This  mistake 
is  corrected  in  Chr.  Kr. 


522 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


All  the  limbs  are  drawn  together,  so  that  he  resembles  a hedge- 
hog.  [Stalpaart,  1.  c.] 

Tearing  stitches  lengthways  on  the  whole  body,  on  the  forehead, 
temples,  back,  upper  and  lower  extremities,  side  of  the  abdomen, 
and  chest  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.] 

An  itch-like  eruption.  [Kolpin,  1.  c.] 

2io.  In  the  evening  in  bed  a smarting  itching  here  and  there  on  the 
body,  which  is  removed  only  momentarily  by  scratching,  and  at  last 
develops  into  a restlessness,  during  which  he  must  constantly  move 
the  limbs,  and  is  unable  to  get  to  sleep  (aft.  32  h.). 

Troublesome  itching,  in  the  afternoon  and  evening,  followed  by 
perspiration.  [Kolpin,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  on  waking  and  after  rising,  a violent  itching,  as 
after  profuse  perspiration  all  over  the  body,  but  especially  on  the 
chest  and  abdomen  (aft.  26  h.).  [Zr.] 

The  skin  of  the  whole  body  desquamates.  [Salmuth,  Obs .,  Cent, 
iii,  Obs.  2.1] 

Forces  completely  sunk.  [Hoyer,  1.  c.] 

215.  Syncope.  [Valentini,  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.y  Ann.  3,  Obs.  78.2] 

Syncopes,  with  coldness  of  the  external  parts.  [Hoffmann,  1.  c.] 
Fatal  syncope.  [Hoyer,  1.  c.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  weariness  of  all  the  limbs,  as  after 
a long  journey  on  foot ; in  the  lower  extremities  he  felt  as  if  he  had 
to  drag  a great  weight  along  with  them,  and,  especially  in  the  right 
leg,  a trembling,  so  that  the  perspiration  broke  out  all  over  his  body 
(aft.  11  h.).  [Zr.] 

Drowsiness  and  disinclination  for  intellectual  work.  \_Gn. ] 

220.  Restless  sleep,  he  tosses  from  one  side  to  the  other  (aft.  30  h.). 

IBbg.l 

Very  vivid,  anxious  dreams. 

Extremely  vivid,  but  not  anxious,  dreams,  which  gradually  become 
so  excessively  vivid  that  he  wakes  up  with  them. 

At  night  sleep  disturbed  by  many  dreams  (aft.  29  h.).  [Zr.] 

He  dreams  much,  and  of  many  different  things.  \_Hbg.~\ 

225.  When  lying  on  the  back  lascivious  dreams  and  emission  of  semen, 
without  erection  of  the  penis.  [ Gn. ] 

At  night  sleep  interrupted  by  voluptuous  dreams,  without  pollu- 
tion (aft.  20  h.),  [Zr.] 

Lascivious  dreams,  with  uncontrollable  erection  of  penis,  without 
seminal  emission.  [ Gn .] 

Voluptuous  dreams  and  seminal  emission  (aft.  8 h.).  \_Hbg.~\ 

In  his  sleep  he  lies  almost  always  on  his  back,  with  one  hand 
under  the  occiput,  and  the  other  arm  laid  above  the  head. 

230.  When  he  lies  still  he  feels  the  beating  of  his  heart  and  arteries 
through  the  whole  body.  [Z.  Rkt .] 

Slow,  but  full  pulse,  from  the  commencement  until  the  tenth 
hour.  \_Hbg.~\ 


1 Poisoning.  This  desquamation  occurred  during  convalescence, 

2 Not  found. 


COLOCYNTHIS. 


523 


Quick,  full  pulse.  [Schneider,  1.  c.] 

Violent  thirst.  [Hoffmann,  1.  c. — Brest.  Samml.j  1.  c.] 

Violent  chill  (aft.  5 h.).  [Fr.  H—n .] 

235.  In  the  morning,  after  rising,  shivering  through  the  whole  body, 
with  cold  hands,  whilst  the  face  and  the  rest  of  the  body  were  hot, 
without  thirst  (aft.  \ h.).  [Lr.] 

(Feeling  of  icy  coldness  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  though  they  are 
not  cold.) 

Coldness  of  the  whole  body. 

Feeling  of  warmth  rapidly  rushing  over  the  whole  body,  but  soon 
passing  off,  without  thirst  (aft.  2 h.).  [L.  Rkt.] 

At  night  profuse  sweat  on  the  head,  hands,  legs,  and  feet,  of  a 
urinous  smell. 

240.  In  the  morning,  on  waking,  he  found  himself  perspiring  on  the 
legs  (aft.  24  h.).  [Lr.] 

Night  sweat.  [Fr.  H—n.'] 

Sensation  of  heat  in  the  interior  of  the  whole  body,  and  also 
externally  warm  to  the  touch  (aft.  10  h.).  [Hbg. ] 

In  the  morning  after  rising,  warmth  of  the  face,  whilst  the  hands 
and  especially  the  tips  of  the  fingers  were  cold  (aft.  f h.).  [ Lr .] 
Febrile  heat.  [Hoffmann,  1.  c.] 

245.  Palpitation  of  the  heart.  [Schneider,  1.  c.] 

Great  anxiety.  [Hoyer, — and  Brest.  Samml .,  1.  c.] 

All  day  long,  disinclination  to  speak.  [Lr.] 

Dejected,  joyless,  not  inclined  to  speak.  [Gn.] 

Discomfort ; he  wishes  and  asks  for  many  things.  [L.  Rkt.] 
250.  Morose  disposition  ; he  takes  everything  in  bad  part  and  does 
not  answer  willingly.  [L.  Rkt.] 


CONIUM.1 

(Hemlock.) 

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  the  Conium  maculatum  obtained  from  the  whole 
plant  at  the  commencement  of  flowering,  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.) 

Hemlock  is  one  of  those  medicines  whose  primary  and  secondary 
actions  are  most  difficult  to  be  ascertained,  and  respecting  which  it  is 
most  difficult  to  form  a judgment.  Among  its  symptoms  we  find 
several  of  a somewhat  opposite  character  which  should  only  be  regarded 
as  alternating  actions  (perhaps  as  a transient  secondary  action  sup- 
pressed for  some  time  by  the  repeated  attack  of  the  medicine).  On 
the  other  hand  the  sad  effects  resulting  from  the  long-continued 
employment  of  hemlock  in  increasing  doses,  as  we  observe  in  the 
results  of  Stoerck’s,  Lange’s,  Ehrhardt’s,  Greding’s,  Baylies’, 
Reismann’s,  Collin’s,  and  Tartreux’s  disastrous  treatments,  are 
true  secondary  actions  of  the  depressed  vitality  overpowered  by  the 
repeated  attacks  of  such  large  doses  of  hemlock  : a dissolution  of  all 
the  connexions  of  the  fibres  combined  with  asthenic  inflammation  and 
the  most  painful  sensitiveness — see  264  to  273,  276,  342  to  345,  349, 
350,  205,  207,  209.  The  opposite  of  this  seems  to  lie  in  the  primary 
action  of  hemlock,  which  appears  to  indicate  a tension,  condensation, 
contraction  of  the  fibres  (and  glandular  swellings),  with  suppression  of 
the  sensibility — compare  28,  60,  127,  147,  148,  178,  179,  2T2,  2T5, 
216,  225,  238,  249,  253,  254,  286.  These  are  primary  actions  which 
seem  to  be  corroborated  by  some  of  my  own  homoeopathic  cures 
(glandular  indurations  on  the  lip,  the  breasts,  & c.,  arising  from  a bruise , 
and  two  cases  of  cataract  produced  by  an  external  blow).  These 
recorded  primary  actions  of  hemlock  (especially  127,  286),  together 
with  the  symptoms  10,  11,  115,  117,  293,  333,  359  to  367,  point  to 
it  as  an  excellent  remedy  for  that  bad  kind  of  hypochondriasis  which  is 
sometimes  observed  in  unmarried  males  who  are  strictly  chaste,  where 
it  does  not  depend  on  a miasmatic  cachexia. 

Experience  must  decide  as  to  the  value  of  hemlock  in  the  morbid 
long-sightedness  (presbyopia)  of  elderly  persons,  as  indicated  in  38,  and 
perhaps  it  will  confirm  the  curative  power  here  hinted  at. 

The  homoeopathic  practitioner  will  know  how  to  make  use  of  the 
curative  indications  given  in  the  other  symptoms  of  the  primary  action 
of  hemlock. 

Coffee  has  been  found  to  be  the  antidote  of  hemlock. 


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


CONIUM. 


5*5 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Franz,  Langhammer,Wislicenus. 
The  following  old-school  authorities  furnished  symptoms : 

Amatus  Lusitanus,  Cent.  v. 

Andree,  Obs.  upon  a Treatment  by  Stoerck,  London,  1761. 

Andry,  ^uas t.  med.  an  cancer  ulceratus  cicutam  eludat , Paris,  1763. 

Baylies,  Essays  on  Med.  Subjects , London,  1773. 

Bierchen,  Tal  om  Kraftskador. 

Boerhave,  Prael.  ad  Instit.,  vi. 

Clark,  Essays  and  Obs.  Phys.  and  Liter.,  iii,  Edinb.,  1771. 

Collin,  Annus  med.,  iii,  Vindob.,  1764. 

Cullen,  Materia  Medic  a,  ii. 

Ehrhardt,  Diss.  de  Cicuta,  Argent.,  1763. 

Fothergill,  Med.  Obs.  and  Enq.,  iii. — Works. 

Gat aker,  Essays  on  Med.  Subj. 

Greding,  Vermischte  Sc  hr  if  ten. 

Halle,  in  Samml.f.pr.  Aerzte , xv,  iii. 

Haller,  in  Gutting.  Anzeigen , 1775. 

Kaltschmidt,  Progr.  de  Cicuta.,  Jen.,  1768. 

Landeutte,  Journal  de  Medecine , xv. 

Lange,  Dubia  cicutce,  vexata,  Helmst.,  1764. 

Limprecht,  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  i. 

Med.  Obs.  and  Enq.,  ii,  Lond.,  1771. 

Oberteuffer,  in  Hufel.  Journal,  ix. 

Paulli,  Sim.,  Quadrip.  Botan. 

Pharm.  Helv. 

Reismann  (reference  not  given). 

Rowley,  W.,  Seventy  four  cases,  London,  1779. 

Schmucker,  Chir.  Wahrnehm.,  ii. 

Stoerck,  Lib.  de  Cicuta. — Lib.  de  Colchico. — Lib.  de  Stram.  Hyos.  et  Aco?.. 
Valentini,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xxix. 

Tartreux,  Epist.  apol. 

Van  Eems,  in  Boerhave  Praelect.  de  m.  n.,  i. 

Watson,  Philos.  Transact.,  No.  473,  1744. 

Whytt,  on  Nervous  Disorders. 

Ziircher  Abhandlungen,  tom.  ii. 

The  1st  edit,  gives  373  symptoms;  only  two  more  are  added  in  this  2nd  edit.; 
the  Chr.  Kr.  gives  912  symptoms.] 

CONIUM. 

Vertigo.  [Baylies,  Essays  on  Med.  Subjects , London,  1 773-1 — 
Andry,  purest.  med.  an  Cancer  ulceratus  cicutam  eludat , Paris , 1763. 1 
— Andree,  Obs.  upon  a Treatment  by  Stoerck , Lond.,  1761. 2 — 
Watson,  Philos.  Transact .,  No.  473,  1744.3 — Lange,  Dubia  cicuta 
vexata , Helmst.,  1764,  pp.  12,  20.4 — Pharm.  Helv .,  p.  50. 5 — 
Schmucker,  Chir.  Wahrnehm .,  ii,  pp.  82,  84.6 — Whytt,  (?«  Nervous 
Disorders , p.  22.7 — Gataker,  Essays  on  Med.  Subjects,  Introd.,  p.  8. 8 
— Fothergill,  Med.  Obs.  and  Inqu .,  iii,  p.  400,  and  Works , ii,  p.  58.8 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 Symptoms  observed  in  patients  taking  conium. 

3 Case  of  poisoning. 

4 Not  accessible ; probably  as  in  note  2. 

5 General  statement  from  experience. 

6 As  in  note  2. 

7 Observed  in  self. 

8 General  statement  from  observation. 


CONIUM. 


52^6 

— Oberteuffer,  in  Hufel.  Journal , ix,  iii,  p.  77.1 2 — Cullen, 
Materia  Medica , ii,  p.  300.3] 

Vertigo  that  affects  the  head.  [Fothergill,  1.  c.] 

Vertigo  round  in  a circle,  when  he  rises  from  a seat. 

Vertigo,  so  that  all  seemed  to  go  round  in  a ring  with  him. 
[Boerhave,  Prael.  ad  Instit .,  vi,  p.  2 5 5-3] 

5.  Staggering.  [Van  Eems,  in  Boerhave  Praelect.  de  m.  n.,  i, 

p.  236.4 5]. 

Intoxication.  [Bierchen,  Tal  om  Krafts kadorA\ 

Heaviness  of  the  head.6  [Watson,  1.  c.] 

Want  of  memory. 

Loss  of  memory.  [W.  Rowley,  Seventy-four  cases , London, 
1 779-7]  . 

10.  Stupidity,  the  head  is  confused;  difficulty  of  comprehending 
what  he  reads. 

Stupefaction  ; he  understands  with  difficulty  what  he  reads. 

After  drinking  he  becomes  stupid  in  the  head. 

Apoplexy.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  20.] 

Serous  apoplexy.  [Collin,  Annus  Med.,  iii,  Vindob.,  1764, 
p.  104.8] 

1 5.  When  walking  in  the  open  air,  simple'headache  ; he  feels  stupid  ; 
also  in  the  morning  till  breakfast. 

Violent  headache,  with  vertigo,  owing  to  which  she  remains 
seated  in  one  spot,  sad  and  speechless,  for  three  or  four  days.  [Lange, 
1.  C.,p.  12.] 

Sensation  in  the  right  half  of  the  brain,  as  if  a large  foreign  body 
were  therein. 

Gradually  increasing,  semilateral  headache,  like  a pressing  down- 
wards, as  from  something  heavy  therein,  and  as  if  bruised,  aggravated 
by  moving  the  eyes  towards  the  affected  side  of  the  head  (aft.  2, 

3 h-)- 

On  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  (when  walking)  slow  tearing  (aft. 

i h.).  [f*.] 

20.  In  the  morning,  tearing  pain  through  the  temple  (4th  d.).  [T%.] 
Tearing  pain  in  the  temporal  region  and  aching  in  the  fore- 
head, after  a meal  (3rd  d.).  [Tz.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  temples  when  eating.  [Tz.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  temples  on  touching  them.  [Tz.] 

When  sitting  bent  forward,  there  occurs  from  time  to  time  a 
sensation  of  weight  in  the  occiput,  that  often  goes  off  and  recurs ; it 
went  off  every  time  he  raised  himself  up  (aft,  2g  h.).  \JVsd\ 

25.  Stitches  in  the  forehead. 

1 Observation. 

2 From  thirty  grains  of  the  powder  in  an  adult. 

3 Observed  on  self. 

4 Effects  of  Cicuta  aquatica. 

5 Observation. 

6 During  convalescence. 

7 Not  accessible. 

8 Symptoms  observed  in  patients  taking  conium.  This  occurred  in  an  old  woman 
of  8o?  ten  days  after  leaving  off  the  medicine. 


CONIUM. 


527 


(At  noon)  shooting  pain  out  at  the  forehead, 

Pressive  headache  above  the  eyes  from  within  outwards  (aft.  4 
h.).  \JVs.-\ 

Headache  (externally),  as  if  contracted,  on  the  upper  part  of  the 
frontal  bone,  which  goes  off  by  stooping  and  applying  his  own 
hand  to  the  part,  with  chilliness,  vertigo,  and  peevish  want  of  re- 
collection (aft.  1 1 h.).  [ZA.] 

Aching  pain  externally  on  the  forehead  (aft  3 h.).  [Lr.] 

30.  Aching  stupefying  pain  externally  on  the  forehead  (aft.  11, 

54  h-)-  [Lr.] 

On  the  frontal  bone  superiorly,  pressive  pain  as  from  a stone 

[Fz.] 

Sharp  pressure  on  a small  spot  of  the  integuments  of  the  head. 

A pimple  on  the  forehead  with  tensive  pain  per  se,  touching  it 
causes  tearing  pain  round  about  it  (2nd  and  3rd  d.).  [ZA.] 

Pimple  on  the  forehead  with  tensive  drawing  pain  per  se  (4th  d.). 

35.  Itching  erosion  on  the  forehead,  that  goes  off,  but  only  for  a 
short  time,  by  rubbing  (aft.  \ h.).  \Ws^\ 

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  1 h.).  [ZA.] 

Contracted  pupils  (curative  action)  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Lr.] 
Longsightedness  (in  a shortsighted  person)  : he  could  see  dis- 
tinctly objects  at  a considerable  distance  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Lr.] 

Greater  shortsightedness  than  usual : he  could  only  see  distinctly 
very  near  objects  (secondary  action)  (aft.  29  h.).  [Lr.] 

40.  (Illusion  of  vision  : objects  appear  red.)  [Greding,  Vermischte 
Schriften , p.  118.1] 

Weak  sight.  [Gataker,  1.  c.] 

Dimness  of  vision.2 3  [Baylies, — Andree,  1.  c.] 

Blindness,  immediately  after  sleeping,  exposed  to  the  sun’s  heat. 
[Amatus  Lusitanus,  Cent,  v,  Cur.  93-8] 

Red  eyes.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

45.  (Drawing  pain  in  the  eyes,  with  redness  of  the  eyes.) 

Trembling  of  the  eyes.  [Whytt, — Oberteuffer,  1.  c.] 
Projecting  eyes. 

Movement  of  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  pressed  out.  [Fother- 
gill,  1.  c.] 

(In  the  morning)  shooting  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  eyes,  the 
lids  of  which  are  stuck  together. 

50.  Itching  pricking  in  the  inner  canthus,  not  removed 
by  rubbing  (aft,  ij  h.).  [ZF>.] 

Smarting  pain  in  the  inner  canthus,  as  if  something 
corrosive  had  got  in;  the  eye  waters  (aft.  4^  h.).  [ZF.] 

Aching  in  the  eye  as  from  a grain  of  sand,  especially  in  the  fore- 
noon ; the  white  of  the  eye  is  red  and  inflamed  ; the  tears  forced  out 
make  the  eyelids  smart. 

1 Symptoms  observed  in  patients  taking  conium.  This  symptom  occurred  in  a 
case  of  cataract,  while  the  sight  was  improving  under  the  drug. 

2 In  Andree’s  case,  with  giddiness. 

3 Not  found. 


528  CONIUM. 

Burning  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  eyelids. 

Long  continued,  pricking  itching  in  the  right  cheek  and  down 
the  left  side  of  the  face,  which  only  goes  off  by  repeated  scratching 
(aft.  2\  h.).  [Fz.\ 

55.  A fine  stitch  darts  through  the  right  side  of  the  face,  near  the 
zygoma  (aft.  2\  h.).  \Ws.~\ 

Fine  stitches  dart  through  the  right  cheek,  towards  the  com- 
missure of  the  mouth  (aft.  56  h.).  [ Ws .] 

Swelling  of  the  face.  [Landeutte,  Journal  de  Medecine , xv.1] 
Bluish,  swollen  face.  [Stoerck,  Lib.  de  Cicuta , Cap.  6.2 3] 

Blue  colour  of  the  face.  [Sim.  Paulli,  ^uadrip.  Botan .,  Cicuta 
major.5] 

60.  Behind  the  ears  and  on  the  mastoid  process,  painful  tension  of 
the  skin,  even  when  not  moved  (aft.  ^ h.).  [TVs.] 

Stitches  behind  both  ears,  especially  in  the  mastoid  process, 
followed  by  obtuse  pains  in  that  part  (aft.  5 h.). 

Sharp  blows  outwards  in  the  inner  ear,  especially  and  more 
severe  when  swallowing  (aft.  f h.).  [TVs.] 

Violent  itching  in  the  external  ear  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.] 

In  the  external  ear,  pain  partly  drawing,  partly  tearing. 

65.  Noise  in  the  ear,  as  if  the  blood  rushed  through  the  brain. 

When  she  blows  her  nose,  she  feels  a dart  in  the  ears,  and  then 
they  seem  to  be  stopped  up. 

Sensation  as  if  the  inner  ear  were  forced  asunder. 

Twitching  in  the  nose. 

Formication  on  the  dorsum  of  the  nose  (aft.  1 \ h.).  [TVs.] 

70.  Itching  formication  on  the  point  of  the  nose  and  in  the  nostrils 
(aft.  3|  h.).  [Ws.] 

Itching  formication  in  the  nose  (aft.  i|  h.).  [TVs.] 

Frequent  bleeding  of  the  nose. 

Haemorrhage  from  the  nose.  [Ehrhardt,  Biss,  de  Cicuta , 
Argent.,  1763.4 — Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  15.] 

Trembling  of  the  under  lip.5  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

75.  Itching  on  the  upper  lip  (aft.  \ h.). 

Ulceration  of  the  lips  after  fever.6  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

On  the  chin,  fine  stitches  up  through  the  jaw  (aft.  \ h.). 

[**•] 

Soon  after  drinking  a drawing  from  the  jaws  towards  the  ears 
and  head,  not  exactly  painful. 

Lock-jaw  (trismus).  [Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 


1 Symptoms  observed  in  patients  taking  conium.  This,  with  S.  146,  172,  200, 
234,  336,  occurred  shortly  before  death  in  a man  convalescing  from  suppurative 
pneumonia,  and  treated  by  conium  for  splenic  cancer. 

2 Symptoms  observed  in  patients  taking  conium.  This,  with  S.  74,  103,  174, 
328,  339,  362,  arose  from  overloading  the  stomach.  All  disappeared  after  an 
emetic. 

3 Not  found. 

4 A list  of  symptoms  from  authors. 

5 See  note  to  S.  58. 

6 Should  be,  “ breaking  out  on  the  lips,  following  slight  fever.” 


CONIUM. 


5*9 

So.  Grinding  of  the  teeth.  [Medic.  Obs . and  Inq .,  iv,  Lond.,  1771, 
P-  44-1 2] 

On  moving  the  lower  jaw,  boring  needle-pricks  between  the  left 
teeth-rows  (aft.  42  h.).  [Zr.] 

When  eating  cold  food  (not  when  drinking  cold 
fluids)  drawing  in  the  hollow  tooth  and  through  the  temple 

(aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.] 

Impeded  swallowing.  [Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

Spasms  in  the  oesophagus.  [Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

85.  Pain  in  the  tongue.  [Sim.  Paulli,  1.  c.] 

Stiff,  swollen,  painful  tongue.3  [Stoerck,  1.  c.,  cap.  i.] 

Difficult  speech.  [Andree,  1.  c.] 

Speechlessness.3  [Stoerck, — Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

Dry  tongue.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

90.  Dryness  of  the  mouth.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.,  cap.  ii.] 

Thirst.4  [Baylies, — Fothergill,  1.  c.] 

Excessive  thirst,  without  heat,  all  day  (aft.  74  h.).  [Zr.] 
Ptyalism.5  [Bierchen,  1.  c.] 

Great  flow  of  saliva.  [Valentini,  in  Hufel.  Journal \ xxix,  iii.6] 
95.  Immediately  diminished  appetite  for  food  and  tobacco  smoking. 
Loss  of  appetite.  [Andry, — Pharm.  Helv. — Lange,  1.  c., 
p.  25. — Landeutte,  1.  c.] 

Complete  loss  of  appetite  and  great  weakness  of  stomach.  [Lange, 
1.  c.,  p.  9.] 

Frequent  eructation. 

Incomplete  eructation,  which  causes  pain  in  the  stomach. 

100.  Putrid  eructation.7  [Schmucker,  1.  c.] 

Eructation  and  inclination  to  vomit.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Inclination  to  vomit  and  eructation,  with  exhaustion.  [Greding, 
1.  c.] 

Nausea,  inclination  to  vomit.  [Stoerck,8 — Fothergill, — 
Schmucker,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  nausea  and  total  loss  of  appetite.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  pp.  14, 
37-] 

105.  Inclination  to  vomit.  [Cullen,  1.  c.] 

Violent  vomiting.  [Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  vomiting,  with  total  loss  of  appetite.  [Lange,  1.  c., 
P-  33-] 

Sometimes  there  occurs  spontaneously  a bitter  taste  in  the  throat 
(aft.  11  h.).  [Fz.] 


1 Symptoms  occurring  after  the  application  of  conium  to  a cancerous  breast.  The 
patient  had  attacks  of  this,  with  S.  175  and  360,  till  she  died.  The  reporter  has  no 
thought  of  ascribing  them  to  the  conium. 

2 From  touching  the  tongue  with  the  juice  of  the  root. 

3 In  Stoerck’s  case,  as  with  S.  86. 

4 According  to  Fothergill,  with  S.  121  and  346. 

5 In  cases  of  cancrum  oris. 

6 Symptoms  observed  in  patients  taking  coniurn. 

7 Not  found. 

8 See  note  to  S.  58. 


34 


53° 


CONIUM. 


After  eating,  inclination  to  vomit  and  hiccup  thereafter,  yet  he 
has  a proper  taste  and  good  appetite. 

no.  After  eating,  the  drawing  in  the  head  and  the  numbness  of  the 
brain  diminishes  (after  4^  h.).  [Tz.] 

After  eating,  oppression  and  hard  pressure  externally  on  the 
sternum  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Tz.] 

After  eating  (in  the  evening),  pain  in  the  umbilical  region,  as  if 
the  bowels  were  bruised  (aft.  12  h.).  [Tz,] 

Half  an  hour  after  eating,  drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the 
umbilical  region,  [Tz.] 

Every  time  after  eating,  pinching  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  with 
good  appetite. 

1 15.  After  dinner  drawing  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  when  sitting 
(3rd  d.).  [Fz.l 

After  drinking,  a drawing  sensation  in  the  abdomen. 

In  the  morning,  after  eating,  bellyache,  and  all  day  a great 
fulness  in  the  stomach  and  on  the  chest  (4th  d.).  [Tz.] 

Cardialgia.  \_Pharm.  Helv .,  1.  c.] 

A pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  like  a drawing  about  in  it, 
and  then  in  the  side  of  the  chest  some  stitches,  also  in  the  morning. 

120.  Fine  stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  \ h.).  \Wsd\ 
Spasmodic  pinching  in  the  stomach.  [Fothergill,  1.  c.] 
Shooting  in  the  epigastrium,  in  the  morning  on  awaking,  aggra- 
vated by  movement. 

Pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  but  not  immediately  before,  and 
not  immediately  after,  the  stool. 

Cutting  pain  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  appetite  and  sleep 
at  night. 

125.  Bellyache.  [ Zurcher  Abhandlungen , tom.  ii.1] 

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  drawing  pain  in  the  umbilical 
region  (3rd  d.).  [Tz.] 

Oppression  in  the  abdomen. 

Pressure  and  clawing  in  the  abdomen. 

When  walking  he  has  pains  above  the  hips. 

130.  When  laughing  he  has  pain  in  the  abdomen. 

When  walking  drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  3 h.).  [Tz.] 
Pain  in  the  abdomen  : drawing  bruised  pain  in  the  bowels  when 
sitting  (aft.  9^  h.).  [Tz.] 

Violent  pains  in  the  abdomen  with  chilliness.2  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 
The  most  violent  colic  pains.  [Stoerck,  Lib.  de  Cclchico , p. 

89-3] 

135.  Extremely  violent  pains  in  the  abdomen.  [Kaltschmidt,  Progr, 
de  Cicuta .,  Jan.,  1768,  p.  5«4] 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 A patient  under  treatment  by  conium  for  a mammary  scirrhus  had  a chill  in  the 
streets;  got  this  and  S.  144;  and  died  with  dysentery. 

8 A woman  could  not  take  more  than  four  grains  a day  (of  the  extract)  without 
having  this. 

4 Not  accessible. 


CONIUM. 


S31 

When  not  eating,  constant  pressure  deep  in  the  hypogastrium  as 
from  something  heavy. 

In  the  morning  when  sitting,  drawing  in  the  hypogastrium  and 
pressure  up  to  the  epigastrium. 

In  the  abdominal  muscles,  on  the  left  of  and  below  the  navel, 
sharp  stitches  dart  upwards  in  short  fits  (aft.  3 h.).  \JVs.\ 

Fine  pinching  in  the  abdominal  muscles  above  the  navel  on 
bending  the  body  forwards  (aft.  3 h.).  [ TVs .] 

140.  Tearing  in  the  pubes,  when  sitting.  [Fz.] 

Immediately  slight  discharge  of  flatus. 

Constant  call  to  stool 3 but  he  can  only  evacuate  twice  daily,  and 
the  motion  is  thin. 

Diarrhoea.  [Landeutte, — Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

Weakening  diarrhoea.1  [Stoerck,  de  Cicuta , cap.  ii.] 

145.  Constipation.2  [Andree,  1.  c.] 

Swelling  of  the  abdomen.  [Landeutte,3 — Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 
Swollen  mesenteric  glands.*  [Kaltschmidt,  1.  c.] 

An  extremely  contracted  place  in  the  colon.*  [Kaltschmidt, 

1 

(Burning  in  the  rectum  during  stool.) 

150.  Red  urine.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

(Burning  in  the  urethra,  in  the  morning,  immediately  after 
urinating  ; for  half  an  hour.) 

(Violent  stitch  in  the  urethra,  extending  forwards  to  its  orifice.) 
Burning  in  the  urethra.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.J 
Suppression  of  urine,  ischuria.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

155.  Strangury.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  16. — Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

Diuresis.  [Bierchen, — Gataker,  1.  c.] 

Cramp-like  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder, 
from  without  inwards,  with  sharp  stitches,  soon  after  urinating, 
which  lasts  many  hours,  worse  when  walking  than  when  sitting  (aft. 
48  h.).  \Ws^ 

Great  pains  in  the  urethra  when  urinating,  which  always  brings 
along  with  it  turbid,  viscid  mucus.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  pp.  28,  30.] 

(A  sharp  pressure  on  the  bladder.) 

160.  Diuresis  with  great  pains.  [Lange,  1.  c.] 

After  urinating,  a smarting  urging  to  urinate  (aft.  \ h.). 

{Fz-] 

Haematuria.4  [Haller,  in  Gotting.  Anzeigen , 1 775,  p.  62.] 
Frequent  haematuria  with  tightness  of  chest.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p. 

When  not  urinating,  tearing  through  the  penis  (4th  d.).  [Fz.] 
165.  Itching  on  the  penis,  mostly  on  the  glans. 

Pain  as  if  a knife  were  cutting  through  the  middle  of  the 

* Observed  after  death  from  a short  employment  of  hemlock  in  large  doses. 


1 See  note  to  S.  133. 

2 In  the  original,  “ irregular  stools,  attended  with  griping.” 


S32 


CONIUM. 


scrotum,  between  the  testicles  up  to  above  the  root  of  the  penis, 
often  returning  for  a short  time  (aft.  50  h.).  \Ws.'\ 

Uncontrollable  sexual  desire.  [Limprecht,1  Acta  Nat.  Cur.  i, 
Obs.  52.] 

Leucorrhoea  of  white  acrid  mucus,  which  causes  burning.* 
[Baylies,  1.  c.] 

Suppression  of  the  menses.3  [Andry, — Andree, — Greding, 
1.  c.] 

* 

170.  Frequent  sneezing,  without  coryza  (aft.  57  h.).  [Zr.] 

Frequent  discharge  of  nasal  mucus,  for  several  days,  as  in  coryza. 
Difficult  respiration.3  [Landeutte,  1.  c.] 

Slow  respiration. 

Short,  panting  respiration.4 5  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

175-  Tightness  of  chest.  [Afedic.  Obs.  and  Inquire* — Lange,  1.  c.,  p. 
21.] 

Frequent  tightness  of  chest.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  21.] 

Difficult  respiration  and  violent  pains  in  the  chest  (after  taking 
it  for  three  or  four  weeks).  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  1 1 .] 

His  breathing,  especially  inspiration,  is  very  difficult ; it  feels  as 
if  the  chest  did  not  expand  sufficiently  (aft.  4 h.).  [Fz.~\ 

In  the  evening  in  bed,  extremely  difficult  respiration,  slow,  diffi- 
cult inspiration  (after  17  h.).  [/%.] 

180.  In  the  evening,  when  lying  on  the  side  in  bed,  oppression  of  the 
breathing,  with  much  pain  in  the  chest,  a drawing  and  tearing 
through  the  whole  chest,  and  hard  pressure  on  the  upper  part  of  the 
sternum,  which  takes  away  the  breath  during  inspiration  (3rd  d.). 

[a.] 

Severe  stitches  in  the  chest,  like  knife  thrusts,  with  loud  lamen- 
tations over  it. 

All  day,  pain  in  the  chest,  pressure  on  the  sternum,  and  a pain,  at 
one  time  tearing,  at  another  shooting,  round  the  nipple  and  the 
mammae,  with  frequent  oppression  and  shortness  of  breath  (4th  d.). 

[*■*•] 

Agreeable  but  violent  itching  on  both  nipples  (aft.  4 h.). 

In  the  region  of  the  heart,  occasional  pressure  as  if  the  heart 
would  be  pressed  down,  with  oppression  of  the  breathing  (3rd  d.). 

[*•*•] 

185.  Pressive  cutting  on  both  sides  of  the  chest,  aggravated  by  inspi- 
ration (aft.  14  h.).  \WsI\ 

In  the  morning,  pressive  pain  on  the  sternum,  with  dyspnoea, 
when  standing  (3rd  d.).  [F%.] 

* Is  a very  good  remedy  for  the  same  symptom. 


1 Poisoning  by  “cicuta”  root,  but  of  what  species  is  doubtful. — Inordinate  excite^ 
ment  was  present,  but  nothing  is  said  as  to  its  being  sexual. 

2 Checked  while  on  her  in  Andree’s  case } in  Greding’s  delayed. 

8 See  note  to  S.  57. 

4 See  note  to  S.  58. 

5 See  note  to  S.  80. 


CONIUM. 


533 

Cramp-like  tearing  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  37  h.). 

[Lr.] 

Burning  in  the  sternal  region.1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

On  walking  in  the  open  air,  needle-pricks  in  the  right  side  of 
the  chest  (aft.  12  h.).  [Zr.] 

190.  Shooting  itching  all  over  the  chest,  which  was  always  removed 
fora  short  time  only  by  scratching  (aft.  1 h.).  \Ws.~\ 

On  both  sides  of  the  chest,  fine  shooting  pressure,  worst  when  he 
lies  in  the  prone  position  (aft.  9 h.).  \_TVs.~\ 

Stitch  in  the  side.2  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Violent  pains  in  the  chest.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  34.] 

Violent  pain  in  the  chest,  with  very  severe  cough.*  [Lange, 
1.  c.,  p.  16.] 

195.  (There  is  a scraping  and  crawling  in  the  chest,  that  causes  a dry 
almost  continual  cough.) 

Dry  short  cough.3  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Nocturnal  cough.4  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Violent  cough.  [Lange,  1.  c.] 

Whooping  cough,  with  tightness  of  chest.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  22.] 
200.  Nocturnal  whooping  cough.5  [Landeutte,  1.  c.] 

Whooping  cough,  with  bloody  mucous  expectoration. t [Lange, 
I.  c.,  p.  II.] 

The  most  violent  cough,  that  made  him  keep  his  bed.6  [Stoerck, 
Lib.  de  Stram.,  Hyos.  et  Aeon.,  p.  93.] 

Cough  as  from  a tickle  behind  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  with- 
out expectoration  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zr.] 

More  severe  cough,  as  from  a tickle  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum, 
with  expectoration  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zr.] 

205.  Purulent  expectoration  from  the  chest.7  [Stoerck,  Lib.  de  Cicuta , 
cap.  ii.] 

Dryness  of  the  chest.8  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

(Inflammation  of  the  scirrhous  mamma.)  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  33,] 
Fine  stitches  in  the  chest  under  the  left  axilla  (aft.  J h.).  \Wsd\ 
Caries  of  the  sternum.  [Kaltschmidt,  1.  c.] 

210.  Drawing  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck  down  to  the  shoulder- 
joint,  when  at  rest  (3rd  d.).  [Zz.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  drawing  in  the  nape  (aft.  1 h.), 

[^•] 

(Increased  swelling  of  the  goitre.) 

* Relieved  by  opium, 
f After  taking  it  for  several  weeks. 


1 From  injecting  a solution  of  conium  into  a penetrating  fistula  in  the  neck. 

2 In  a case  of  caries  of  the  ribs. 

3 In  a case  of  suppurating  mammary  scirrhus,  this  and  S.  206  coincided  with  the 
expectoration  becoming  thin. 

4 Not  found. 

5 In  the  original,  simply  “urgent  cough.”  See  note  to  S.  57. 

6 This  supervened  in  a case  of  tubercle  of  the  breast  while  taking  conium. 

' In  a case  of  mammary  scirrhus,  where  the  lungs  were  found  cancerous  after  death, 

8 See  note  to  S.  196. 


534 


CONIUM. 


Stitches  in  the  sacrum  and  drawing  through  the  lumbar  vertebrae 
when  standing  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Tz.] 

Drawing  through  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  when  standing  (aft.  | h.), 

[Ai.] 

215.  Tensive  pain  in  the  back.1 2  [Stoerck,  1.  cf| 

Under  both  scapulae,  painful  tension  in  the  muscles,  w’hen  at  rest, 
that  is  very  much  increased  by  raising  up  the  arms  (after  24  h.). 
[Ws.] 

In  the  nape  where  it  passes  into  the  right  shoulder,  throbbing 
drawing  (aft.  8 h.).  [Tz.] 

In  the  upper  arm,  paralytic  drawing  pain,  when  at  rest  (aft.  ij 

h.).  [/z.] 

Tearing  through  the  upper  arm,  in  the  evening  in  bed  (the  first 
evening).  [Tz.] 

220.  Alternate  tearing  and  shooting  in  the  upper  arm,  when  at  rest, 
which  goes  off  by  movement,  but  comes  back  again  (aft  3 d.). 

Heaviness  in  the  elbow-joints,  with  fine  stitches. 

Cutting  pain  in  the  bend  of  the  left  elbow,  from  within  outwards, 
when  at  rest  (aft.  50  h.).  [Ws.] 

Dull  drawing  in  the  forearms,  more  severe  when  at  rest  than 
when  moving  (aft.  72  h.).  [ Ws .] 

On  the  outside  of  the  left  forearm,  bruised  pain,  most  severe 
when  touched  (aft.  62  h.).  [Ws.] 

225.  In  the  muscles  of  the  forearm,  cramp-like  pain,  especially  when 
leaning  on  the  arms  (aft.  \ h.).  [/ Vs.] 

Itching  formication  on  the  forearm,  that  goes  off  only  for  a short 
time  by  rubbing  (aft.  1 h.).  [Ws.] 

In  the  wrist-joint,  paralytic  drawing  pain,  when  at  rest  (aft.  i\ 

M-  [Fz.] 

Fine  stitches  in  the  wrist-joints  (aft.  10  m.).  [Ws.] 

(Shooting  dislocation-pain  in  the  articulation  of  the  metacarpal  bone 
of  the  left  thumb  with  the  wrist,  especially  on  bending  it  inwards.) 
230.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  middle  joints  of  the  fingers  (when  at  rest), 
(aft.  8 h.).  [Ws.'] 

Cutting  blows  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  thumb  (aft  48  h.). 

. . . 

Long-continued,  deep  stitch  superiorly  at  the  insertion  of  the 

right  gluteus  maximus  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Tz.] 

While  sitting,  some  obtuse  stitches  on  the  upper  end  of  the  left 

thigh,  near  the  trochanter,  that  do  not  interfere  with  walking  (aft. 

i h.). 

Swollen  thighs.3  [Landeutte,  1.  c.] 

235.  When  sitting,  needle-pricks  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  thigh  (aft. 
26  h.).  [Lr.] 

Itching  needle-pricks  on  the  posterior  aspect  of  the  thigh,  most 
severe  when  sitting  (aft.  8 h.).  [Ws.] 


1 See  note  to  S.  188. 

2 See  note  to  S.  57. 


CONIUM. 


535 


Dull  drawing  in  the  right  thigh,  when  at  rest,  which  was  alle- 
viated by  movement  (aft.  ij  h.).  \JV r.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  cramp-like  pain  in  the  anterior 
muscles  of  the  right  thigh  (aft.  13  h.).  [Zr.] 

Fine  clawing-in  on  the  posterior  aspect  of  the  thigh  (aft.  12  h.). 

[m.] 

240.  Tearing  around  the  patella,  when  sitting  (aft.  h.).  [Fz.] 

When  walking,  and  even  when  standing  in  the  open  air,  extreme 
pain,  causing  him  to  cry  out,  round  the  whole  left  knee,  as  if  the 
patella  were  bruised  and  smashed,  from  which  when  he  makes  an 
effort  to  walk  he  became  hot  all  over,  like  the  heat  of  anguish  (aft. 
10  h.).  [Zr.] 

Tearing  pain  around  the  knee-joint. 

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  stitches  on  the  outer  tendon  of 
the  flexor  muscle  in  the  right  hough  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.] 

Tearing  on  the  tibia,  in  the  evening  in  bed  (the  first  evening). 

[#*.] 

245.  Cramp-like  tearing  now  on  the  right,  now  on  the  left  tibia,  when 
walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  37  h.).  [Zr.] 

The  tibia  pains  as  if  bruised  (4th  d.).  [Zz.] 

On  stretching  out  the  leg,  when  sitting,  a throbbing  pressure  on 
the  tibia  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Zz.] 

A spot  on  the  leg  that  had  been  injured  (twelve  days  before  by  a 
blow),  and  was  hitherto  painless,  becomes  blue  and  spotted,  and  on 
the  slightest  movement  gets  pain  like  knife  thrusts,  but  when  walking 
and  when  touched  it  pains  as  if  bruised. 

Tensive  stiff  pain  in  the  calves. 

250.  Drawing  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  calf,  and  on  the  dorsum  of 
the  right  foot  (aft.  8 h.).  [Zz.] 

At  first  a fine,  then  a severe,  shooting  on  both  ankles  of  the  right 
foot,  which  lasted  two  days,  and  woke  him  up  at  night ; it  went  at 
last  to  the  calf  also ; when  sitting  they  were  slower,  when  walking 
more  frequent  and  severer  stitches. 

At  night  a twitching  and  uneasiness  in  the  feet,  and,  after  every 
twitch  in  them,  shivering. 

Numbness  and  insensibility  of  the  feet. 

Numbness  and  insensibility  of  the  feet.  [Halle,  in  SammL  f 
pr . Aerzte , xv,  iii.] 

255.  Brings  on  podagra.  [Clark,  in  Essays  and  Obs . Phys.  and  Liter. , 
iii,  Edin.,  1 77 1 A] 

Tearing  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  in  the  evening  in  bed  (the 
first  evening).  [Zz.]  ' 

In  the  morning  tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,  when  standing 
and  sitting  (third  day).  [Zz.] 

On  treading  the  sole  of  the  foot  is  painful  like  formication ; on 
walking  the  pain  is  more  shooting. 

Tearing  in  the  soles  when  walking. 

260.  Itching  on  the  limbs.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 


1 Observation. — In  gouty  subjects,  the  author  says. 


536 


CONIUM. 


Bruised  sensation  in  all  the  joints,  when  at  rest,  but  little  or  not 
at  all  when  moving. 

Formication  and  disagreeable  itching  in  the  glands.1  [Stoerck, 

1.  c.] 

Formication  in  the  affected  part.  [Collin,  1.  c.] 

In  the  evening  the  glands  are  painful.2  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

265.  Increased  intolerable  pains  in  the  affected  part.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  pp. 

9,  25,  33-1 

Foetid  ichor  from  the  ulcer.3  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

The  borders  of  the  ulcer  become  blackish  and  discharge  a foetid 
ichor.3  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Bleeding  of  the  ulcer.4  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Increased  pain  in  the  ulcer.3  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

270.  Tensive  pain  in  the  ulcer.3  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Coughing  causes  pain  in  the  ulcer.5  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Sphacelus  of  a part  of  the  ulcer.6  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

In  the  bones,  especially  in  the  middle  of  the  bone  shafts,  concealed 
caries,  with  burning,  gnawing  pain.7  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Here  and  there  on  the  body,  slow,  itching,  smarting  (burning) 
stitches. 

275.  In  the  evening  in  bed,  an  eroding  itching,  always  commencing 
with  a prick,  only  on  the  right  half  of  the  body,  especially  when  he 
lies  on  it,  which  causes  a restlessness  in  all  the  limbs,  is  readily  allayed 
by  scratching,  but  soon  reappears  on  another  spot. 

Inflammation  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body,  with  burning  pain. 
[Baylies,  1.  c.] 

Tearing  through  various  parts  of  the  body  (4th  d.).  [F%.] 

Blue  colour  of  the  whole  body.  [Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

Dropsy.  [Tartreux,  Epis.  Apnl .,  p.  51.8] 

280.  Petechiae.  [Sim.  Paulli,  1.  c.] 

Putrid  dissolution  of  the  juices.  [Reismann,  1.  c.9] 

Consumption.  [Reismann, — Collin,  1.  c.10] 

The  pains  from  hemlock  mostly  occur  when  at  rest  and,  only  as 
a rare  alternating  action,  during  movement.  [F%.] 

Nervous  weakness.11  [Schmucker,  1.  c.] 

285.  Illusion  of  sensation  : when  walking  he  feels  as  if  something 
opposed  his  steps,  and  yet  he  walked  very  quickly  (aft.  8 h.).  [F%.] 
A kind  of  stiffness  of  the  body ; moving  the  joints  of  the  nape, 
&c.,  causes  a disagreeable  sensation. 

Great  exhaustion. 

1 Not  found. 

2 In  a case  of  scirrhous  mamma. 

3 Variations  of  an  open  cancer  of  the  face  while  the  patient  took  conium. 

4 In  mammary  cancer. 

• See  note  to  S.  205. 

6 Not  found;  but  if  there,  probably  as  in  note  4. 

^ Not  found. 

8 Observations  on  patients. — This  was  the  end  of  a case  of  mammary  cancer. 

9 Not  traceable  for  want  of  reference. 

10  In  Collin’s  case  the  end  of  mesenteric  disease. 

U After  taking  conium  for  seven  months. 


CONIUM. 


537 

In  the  evening  and  morning,  a remarkable  exhaustion  in  the  whole 
body. 

In  the  morning  on  waking,  exhaustion,  that  goes  off  after  get- 
ting up. 

290.  Weakness  of  the  whole  body.  [Whytt,  1.  c.] 

Sinking  of  all  the  forces.*1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Paralysis.  [Andry,— Andree,  1.  c.] 

After  a short  walk  he  feels  very  exhausted  and  fatigued,  and  is  as  if 
paralysed,  whereupon  the  peevish,  hypochondriacal  humour  comes 
on  again  (aft.  10  h.).  [Fz.] 

Syncopes.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  9. — Pharm.  Helv .,  1.  c.] 

295.  Pulselessness.  [Sim.  Paulli,  1.  c.] 

The  strongest  and  most  active  persons,  when  taking  hemlock  for 
a length  of  time,  lost  all  strength  and  had  to  keep  their  bed.  [Lange, 
1.  c.,  p.  9.] 

Loss  of  all  strength  (even  to  death).  [Lange,  1.  c.] 

Laziness  combined  with  insensibility  (torpor).  [Sim.  Paulli, 
1.  c.] 

Obtuseness  of  all  the  senses.  [Sim.  Paulli,  1.  c.] 

300.  Frequent  yawning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  (aft.  72  h.). 
[Lr.] 

When  he  gets  up  in  the  morning,  he  is  sleepy. 

Sleepiness  by  day : he  cannot  keep  awake  while 
8 h.).  [Ws.] 

Somnolence.2  [Watson, — Sim.  Paulli,  1.  c.] 

Drowsiness  (in  the  afternoon)  : with  all  his  efforts  he 
could  not  keep  off  sleep,  he  must  lie  down  and  sleep 
(aft.  54  h.).  [£r.] 

305.  In  the  evening  great  drowsiness  and  disinclination  for  everything 
(the  3rd  evening).  [Fz.] 

In  the  evening  in  bed,  tearing  now  in  one  now  in  another  limb 
(the  first  evening).  [Fz.] 

Dreams  of  serious  diseases. 

Dream  full  of  being  made  ashamed. 

In  sleep,  vivid,  voluptuous  dream  pictures  (the  first  night).  [Zr.] 
310.  Vivid  anxious  dreams  (the  second  night).  [Zr.] 

Sleep  at  night  full  of  frightful  dreams  (the  third  night).  [Fz.] 
Sleep  towards  morning  full  of  frightful  dreams  (the  first  night). 

[A:.] 

Sleep.  [Cullen,  1.  c. — (immediately)  Amatus  Lusitanus,  1.  c.] 
Stupefied,  too  deep  sleep,  after  which  the  headache,  which 
previously  was  scarcely  noticed,  becomes  always  increased  (aft.  2 h.). 
315.  Sleep  quiet,  especially  in  the  morning  very  profound  and  longer 
than  usualf  (the  second  night).  [Fz.] 

* For  which  Stoerck  found  cinchona  bark  useful, 
f Curative  reaction  ? 


1 In  case  described  in  note  to  S.  196.  This  and  S.  334  supervened  on  free  purulent 
discharge  setting  in. 

? In  Watson’s  case  this  represents  “coma”  in  the  original, 


reading  (aft.  3, 


538 


CONIUM 


Interrupted  sleep. 

He  only  gets  to  sleep  after  midnight. 

He  wakes  up  earlier  in  the  morning. 

She  becomes  peevish  and  falls  asleep  (aft.  \ h.). ; during  sleep 
twitchings  in  the  arms  and  hands,  the  eyes  are  staring  open  and  roll 
about. 

320.  Sleeplessness.  [Reismann, — Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  9.] 

Trembling.  [Baylies, — Cullen, — Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

Trembling  of  all  the  limbs.1  [Fothergill, — Schmucker,*  1.  c.] 
Constant  trembling.  [Andry,  1.  c.] 

Subsultus  tendinum.  [Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

325.  Convulsions.  [Andry, — Watson, — Cullen,  1.  c.] 

Convulsions  of  the  affected  part  and  of  all  the  body,  with  danger 
of  suffocation.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  14.] 

Shivering  (immediately). 

Shivering.2  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Chilliness,  with  trembling  in  all  the  limbs,  so  that  she  must  always 
remain  in  the  sun. 

330.  On  several  successive  days,  in  the  morning  (about  8 o’clock), 
shivering  for  half  an  hour. 

Rigor  all  over  the  body,  without  either  accompanying  or  subse- 
quent heat  (aft.  15  h.).  [Zr.] 

Rigor  all  over  the  body,  without  heat  or  thirst  (aft.  50  h.).  [Zr.] 
In  the  morning,  coldness  and  chilliness  of  the  body,  with  giddy 
constriction  of  the  brain,  and  indifferent,  dejected  humour  (aft.  2,  3 

!>■)•  I7*-]  . 

From  time  to  time  shivering  all  over  the  body,  followed  by 
quick  pulse  with  heat  and  thirst.3  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

335.  Fever.  [Andree, — Collin,  1.  c.] 

Fever  for  one  day.  [Landeutte,  1.  c.] 

Large,  slow  pulse,  betwixt  which  several  small  quick  beats  follow 
without  regularity. 

Slow,  weak  pulse.  [Sim.  Paulli,  1.  c.] 

Pulse  irregular  as  to  strength  and  rapidity.4  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

340.  Quick  pulse.  [Ehrhardt,  1.  c.] 

Several  fits  of  fever.5  [Tartreux,  1.  c.] 

Lingering  fever  with  complete  anorexia.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  25.] 
Acute  (fatal)  fever.  [Lange,  1.  c.,  p.  32.] 

Fever  : great  heat,  with  profuse  sweat  and  thirst,  with  loss  of 
appetite,  diarrhoea,  and  vomiting.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

34 5.  In  the  afternoon  flush  of  warmth  all  over  the  body,  without 
thirst.  [Ziz.] 

* Sometimes  life-long. 


1 Not  found  in  Schmucker. 

2 See  note  to  S.  58. 

3 See  note  to  S.  291. 

4 See  note  to  S.  58. 

5 See  note  to  S.  279.  The  words  of  the  original  are,  “ after  various  fevers  the 
woman  died  dropsical.” 


CONIUM. 


539 


Heat.  [Baylies, — Fothergill,  1.  c.] 

Sensation  of  internal  and  external  heat  (after  sleep.) 

Continual  heat. 

Great  heat.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

350.  Internal  heat,  especially  in  the  face,  and  redness  of  it,  without 
thirst  (aft.  i h.).  [TVs.-] 

He  became  red  in  the  face  and  all  over  the  body,  without  parti- 
cular heat,  but  perspired  all  over,  especially  on  the  forehead. 
Excessive  heat.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

In  the  afternoon  (5  to  6 hours  after  rigor  and  coldness)  a feeling 
comes  over  him  of  glowing  heat  in  all  the  limbs,  whereupon  the 
numbness  of  the  head  and  the  indifferent  sad  humour  goes  off,  and  in 
place  thereof  he  takes  the  liveliest  interest  in  all  around  him  (aft.  7 
8 h.).  [ Fz .] 

Transpiration.1  [Gataker,  1.  c.] 

355*  Night  sweat. 

On  awaking  from  sleep  he  finds  himself  in  a gentle  perspiration 
all  over  the  body  (the  third  night).  [Lr.] 

Profuse  sweat  after  midnight. 

Local,  foetid,  pungent  perspiration,  with  eruption  of  white,  trans- 
parent papules,  which,  filled  with  an  acrid  fluid,  change  into  a scab, 
like  scabies.2  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety.3  [Schmucker,  1.  c.] 

360.  Hysterical  anxiety.4  [Medic.  Obs.  and  Inquir .,  1.  c.] 

Attack  of  hysteria,  with  chilliness  and  a kind  of  spasmodic 
movements.5  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis.6  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 
Extremely  peevish  and  anxious  thoughts  after  a meal,  in  the 
with  confusion  of  the  head  in  the  forehead  (aft.  29  h.). 

1  walking  in  the  open  air,  hypochondriacal  indifference  and 
dejection  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.] 

365.  Sunk  in  deep  thought,  he  cogitated  timorously  about  the  present 
and  the  future  and  sought  solitude.  [Lr.] 

Cross  temper  : everything  about  him  made  a disagreeable  impres- 
sion on  him.  [Lr.] 

Peevish  disposition ; he  knows  not  what  to  occupy  himself  with, 
the  time  appears  to  pass  too  slowly  (aft.  8 h.).  [TFs.] 

Constant  ill-humour  and  crossness. 

Disposition  devoid  of  all  agreeable  feelings. 

370.  Cheerful  disposition  ; he  was  inclined  to  speak*  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.] 

* The  previous  opposite  state  of  the  disposition  went  off  by  the  curative  reaction  of 
the  organism. 


morning 

[Fz.] 

Whe 


1 i.e.  Slight  perspiration. 

2 Critical,  in  a gouty  patient. 

3 Not  found. 

4 See  note  to  S.^80. 

5 Not  found. 

6 See  note  to  S,“58. 


540 


CONIUM. 


In  the  morning,  well,  cheerful  and  strong*  (aft.  24  h.). 
Disposition  cheerful  and  freef  (3rd,  4th  d.).  [Ez.] 
Confused  thoughts.  [Van  Eems,  1.  c.] 

Delirium.  [Andry,  1.  c.] 

375.  Mania,  delirium.  [Cullen,  1.  c.] 

# Alternating  curative  reaction  of  the  organism, 
f Curative  reaction  of  the  vitality. 


CYCLAMEN  EUROPAEUM.1 

( Sowbread .) 

(The  expressed  juice  of  the  fresh  root,  obtained  in  autumn,  mixed  with  equal  parts 
of  alcohol.) 

From  the  earliest  times  this  valuable  plant  has  lain  under  the  unfounded 
suspicion  of  acting  violently  and  uncertainly.  Even  should  we  grant  that 
Discorides  really  referred  to  this  plant,  still  all  he  says  about  it  was  only 
from  hearsay.  The  Arabians  employed  this  root  under  the  name  of 
Arthanita  as  one  of  the  ingredients  of  a purgative  ointment  for  rubbing 
in  ( unguentum  de  Arthanita) , which  contains  a number  of  the  most 
powerful  purgative  remedies,  and  in  this  dangerous  combination  they 
brought  it  into  the  unmerited  reputation  of  a drastic  purgative  medi- 
cine, which  it  is  far  from  being. 

Modern  physicians  know  nothing  more  respecting  it,  scarcely  as 
much  as  the  ancients  romanced  about  it. 

But  as  our  new  (homoeopathic)  medical  art  takes  nothing  on  the 
authority  of  unintelligent  tradition,  and  neither  accepts  anything  because 
it  has  been  praised,  nor  rejects  it  because  it  has  been  contemned,  with- 
out having  first  subjected  it  to  impartial  trial,  I undertook  the 
investigation  of  this  much  decried  root. 

Just  as  the  virtue  of  a man  cannot  be  determined  by  the  deceptive 
appearance  of  his  outward  form,  nor  by  the  colour  of  his  coat,  nor  by 
the  shallow  gossip  of  the  multitude,  but  as  it  assuredly  displays  itself  in  no 
doubtful  manner  to  the  honest  observer  in  the  goodness  of  his  conduct,  so, 
truly,  the  real  value  of  a medicine  can  be  determined  neither  by  its  out- 
ward appearance,  nor  by  any  unfounded  reputation  it  may  have  obtained. 
It  is  only  by  our  own  careful  proving  of  medicines  on  healthy  persons  that 
we  can  truly  learn  what  are  the  peculiar  qualities  of  a medicine,  what 
changes  it  can  produce  in  the  health,  and  thence  the  similar  changes  in 
the  sick  it  can  cure. 

And  so  from  the  following  few  pure  symptoms  we  may  learn  that 
cyclamen  is  one  of  the  most  excellent  remedies  in  the  most  desperate 
morbid  states. 

Hitherto  I have  given  it  in  a very  small  portion  of  a drop  of  the 
million-fold  dilution  of  the  juice,  but  even  this  I have  found  to  be  a too 
strong  homoeopathic  dose  for  many  cases. 

[Hahnemann  (who  only  contributed  five  symptoms)  was  aided  in  this  proving  by 
Franz,  Hartung,  Herrmann,  Langhammer. 

He  only  cites  one  old-school  authority  for  one  symptom. 

Abano,  Petrus  de,  De  Venenis. 

The  i st  edition  has  200  symptoms,  only  two  more  appear  in  this  2nd  edition.] 


From  vol.  v>  2nd  edit.,  1826. 


544 


CYCLAMEN. 


45.  Nausea  and  running  of  water  out  of  the  mouth,  like  water-brash 
(aft.  5 h.).  [Lr.] 

In  the  evening  great  dryness  in  the  palate,  with  thirst  and 
hunger,  [Fz.] 

In  the  mouth  a continual  rough,  slimy  feeling,  as  if  he  had  not 
rinsed  his  mouth  out  in  the  morning,  [Fz.] 

Empty  eructation,  soon  after  a meal  (aft.  7J  h.).  [Lr.] 
Frequent,  sometimes  acid,  eructation.  [Hm.] 

50.  Eructation,  in  the  morning  after  a meal,  that  always  ended  with 
a hiccup,  and  during  which  a fluid  with  burnt  taste  rises  up  into  the 
fauces,  [Fz.] 

In  the  morning  after  the  (accustomed)  tobacco  smoking,  nausea 
and  fulness  in  the  chest,  attended  by  unusual  hunger  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Fz.] 

Little  hunger  and  little  appetite.  [ Hm.] 

No  appetite  for  breakfast.  [ Hm .] 

If  he  takes  but  a small  quantity  of  food,  the  re- 
mainder is  repugnant  to  him  and  excites  loathing,  and 
he  feels  nausea  in  the  palate  and  throat  (aft.  27  h.). 
[Hm.] 

55-  Complete  anorexia;  he  has  no  relish  especially  for 
breakfast  and  supper ; as  soon  as  he  commences  to  eat 
at  these  times  he  is  immediately  satiated.  [Hm.] 

Fulness  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  overloaded,  and  six  hours 
after  a meal,  incomplete  eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  food.  [Fz.] 
For  eight  days  he  could  eat  but  little  and  felt  always  satiated. 
[Hm.] 

Sudden  bad,  putrid  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Fz.] 

He  has  dislike  to  bread  and  butter;  warm  food  goes 
down  better.  [Hm.] 

60.  His  food  has  a good  taste,  but  whilst  eating  and  some  time 
thereafter  he  gets  hiccup — a hiccupping  eructation.  [Fz.] 

Food  has  for  him  a flat,  almost  no,  taste.  [Hm.] 
Adipsia,  for  four  days.  [Hm.] 

After  four  days  the  thirst  returned  and  was  sometimes  more 
intense  than  in  his  normal  condition.  [Hm.] 

After  dinner  and  supper  nausea  with  inclination  to  vomit, 
squeamishness  and  qualmishness  in  the  gastric  region,  as  from  eating 
too  much  fat. 

65.  Drowsiness  after  a meal  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Lr.] 

After  dinner  great  drowsiness  and  weariness.  [Fz.] 

Hiccup  after  a meal  (aft.  14J  h.).  [Lr.] 

All  day  long,  pressure  and  fulness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as 
from  overloaded  stomach.  [Fz.] 

Tearing  stitches  penetrating  through  and  through  in  the  epi- 
gastrium below  the  stomach,  on  moving.  [Fz.] 

70.  Immediately  after  a meal  rumbling  in  the  hypo- 
gas  trium,  and  this  recurred  every  day  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hm.] 
Discomfort  in  the  hypogastrium  with  some  nausea 
therein.  [Hm.] 


CYCLAMEN. 


545 


Bellyache  (aft.  14  h.).  [Zr.] 

Pinching  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  J h.).  \_Hrni\ 

Pinching,  cutting  pain  in  the  hypogastrium ; it  comes  on 
suddenly  at  various  periods  and  goes  off  quickly  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zfrw.] 
75.  Obtuse  shooting  pains  in  the  bowels  under  the  hepatic  region. 
[Htg.]  . 

In  the  epigastrium  a paralytic,  aching  sensation,  as  if  one  portion 
of  the  bowels  were  loose  and  a tension  occurred  in  the  neighbouring 
parts.  [Zz.] 

Squeezing  and  pressive  pain  from  without  inwards  in  the  hypo- 
gastrium. \_HtnF] 

Single  stitches  dart  through  the  abdomen,  when  he  moves 
(4th  d.).  [Fz.] 

Pinching  in  the  epigastrium,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue,  and 
shortly  afterwards  a yellow,  soft  stool,  with  recurring  persistent 
pinching  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  \ h.),  whereupon  constipation  lasting 
three  days  ensued,  [Zz.] 

80.  The  right  side  of  the  abdomen  beneath  the  navel  seems  to  him 
swollen  and  distended  in  the  morning  ; an  illusory  sensation.  [Zz.] 
The  hypogastrium  is  painful  on  the  slightest  touch,  sometimes 
with  an  aching  sometimes  a pinching  pain,  sometimes  with  a mixture 
of  the  two.  [ZZtz.] 

After  discharge  of  flatus,  rumbling  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft. 
1 h.).  [Zr. J 

Pappy  stool  (aft.  15  h.).  [Zr.] 

Frequent  evacuation  of  hard  stool  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 

85.  No  stool  the  second  day.  [Zz.] 

Inside  and  outside  the  anus  and  in  the  perinaeum  drawing  aching 
pain,  as  if  a part  there  were  gathering,  when  walking  and  sitting. 

[**•] 

Frequent  call  to  urinate,  without  pains  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.] 
Frequent  copious  discharge  of  a whitish  urine  (aft.  4 h.).  [Zz.] 
The  second  day  he  only  urinated  twice.  [Fz.] 

90.  Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  scanty  flow  of  urine  (aft.  15  h.). 
[Lr.] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  front  of  the  urethra  when  urinating  (aft. 

7h  h.)»  I >.] 


[Lr 

95- 


Sneezing  from  the  smell  of  the  juice  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.] 
Sudden  violent  fluent  coryza  (aft.  xj  h.).  [Zr.] 

Fluent  coryza  and  several  times  sneezing  therewith  (aft, 


7 *>.)• 


hort  cough  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.] 

Oppression  of  chest  with  difficult  respiration.  [ZZg-.] 

Suffocation,  strangulation.  [Petrus  de  Abano,  de  Venenis , 
cap.  22.3] 


1 In  original  “ Hartmann"  but  this  is  apparently  a misprint  for  Hartung  or  Herr- 
mann, as  Hartmann  is  not  credited  with  any  other  symptom. 

2 Statement  from  observation. 


35 


544 


CYCLAMEN. 


45.  Nausea  and  running  of  water  out  of  the  mouth,  like  water-brash 
(aft.  5 h.).  [Lr .] 

In  the  evening  great  dryness  in  the  palate,  with  thirst  and 
hunger.  [Fz.] 

In  the  mouth  a continual  rough,  slimy  feeling,  as  if  he  had  not 
rinsed  his  mouth  out  in  the  morning,  [Fz.] 

Empty  eructation,  soon  after  a meal  (aft.  7J  h.).  [Lr.] 
Frequent,  sometimes  acid,  eructation.  [ Hrn .] 

50.  Eructation,  in  the  morning  after  a meal,  that  always  ended  with 
a hiccup,  and  during  which  a fluid  with  burnt  taste  rises  up  into  the 
fauces.  [Fz.] 

In  the  morning  after  the  (accustomed)  tobacco  smoking,  nausea 
fulness  in  the  chest,  attended  by  unusual  hunger  (aft.  3 h.). 

Little  hunger  and  little  appetite.  [ Hm .] 

Ho  appetite  for  breakfast.  [Hm.] 

If  he  takes  but  a small  quantity  of  food,  the  re- 
mainder is  repugnant  to  him  and  excites  loathing,  and 
he  feels  nausea  in  the  palate  and  throat  (aft.  27  h.). 
[Hrn.] 

55.  Complete  anorexia;  he  has  no  relish  especially  for 
breakfast  and  supper ; as  soon  as  he  commences  to  eat 
at  these  times  he  is  immediately  satiated.  [Hm.] 

Fulness  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  overloaded,  and  six  hours 
after  a meal,  incomplete  eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  food,  [Fz.] 
For  eight  days  he  could  eat  but  little  and  felt  always  satiated. 
[Hm.] 

Sudden  bad,  putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  [Fz.] 

He  has  dislike  to  bread  and  butter;  warm  food  goes 
down  better.  [Hrn.] 

60.  His  food  has  a good  taste,  but  whilst  eating  and  some  time 
thereafter  he  gets  hiccup — a hiccupping  eructation,  [Fz.] 

Food  has  for  him  a fiat,  almost  no,  taste.  [Hm.] 
Adipsia,  for  four  days.  [Hrn.] 

After  four  days  the  thirst  returned  and  was  sometimes  more 
intense  than  in  his  normal  condition.  [Hrn.] 

After  dinner  and  supper  nausea  with  inclination  to  vomit, 
squeamishness  and  qualmishness  in  the  gastric  region,  as  from  eating 
too  much  fat. 

65.  Drowsiness  after  a meal  (aft.  6\  h.).  [Lr.] 

After  dinner  great  drowsiness  and  weariness,  [Fz.] 

Hiccup  after  a meal  (aft.  14!  h.).  [Lr.] 

All  day  long,  pressure  and  fulness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as 
from  overloaded  stomach,  [Fz.] 

Tearing  stitches  penetrating  through  and  through  in  the  epi- 
gastrium below  the  stomach,  on  moving.  [Fz.] 

70.  Immediately  after  a meal  rumbling  in  the  hypo- 
gastrium,  and  this  recurred  every  day  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hm.] 
Discomfort  in  the  hypogastrium  with  some  nausea 
therein.  [Hm.] 


and 

[Fz 


CYCLAMEN. 


545 


Bellyache  (aft.  14  h.).  [Lr.] 

Pinching  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  ^ h.).  [L/r«.] 

Pinching,  cutting  pain  in  the  hypogastrium ; it  comes  on 
suddenly  at  various  periods  and  goes  off  quickly  (aft.  2 h.).  \Hrn.] 
75.  Obtuse  shooting  pains  in  the  bowels  under  the  hepatic  region. 

[«*•] 

In  the  epigastrium  a paralytic,  aching  sensation,  as  if  one  portion 
of  the  bowels  were  loose  and  a tension  occurred  in  the  neighbouring 
parts.  [Lz.] 

Squeezing  and  pressive  pain  from  without  inwards  in  the  hypo- 
gastrium. [HtnF] 

Single  stitches  dart  through  the  abdomen,  when  he  moves 
(4th  d.).  [Fz.) 

Pinching  in  the  epigastrium,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue,  and 
shortly  afterwards  a yellow,  soft  stool,  with  recurring  persistent 
pinching  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  \ h.),  whereupon  constipation  lasting 
three  days  ensued,  [Fz.] 

80.  The  right  side  of  the  abdomen  beneath  the  navel  seems  to  him 
swollen  and  distended  in  the  morning  ; an  illusory  sensation.  [Tz.] 

The  hypogastrium  is  painful  on  the  slightest  touch,  sometimes 
with  an  aching  sometimes  a pinching  pain,  sometimes  with  a mixture 
of  the  two.  [LTrw.] 

After  discharge  of  flatus,  rumbling  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft. 
1 h.).  [Lr. ] 

Pappy  stool  (aft.  15  h.).  [Lr.] 

Frequent  evacuation  of  hard  stool  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.] 

85.  No  stool  the  second  day.  [Lz.] 

Inside  and  outside  the  anus  and  in  the  perinaeum  drawing  aching 
pain,  as  if  a part  there  were  gathering,  when  walking  and  sitting. 
[Fz.] 

Frequent  call  to  urinate,  without  pains  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.] 

Frequent  copious  discharge  of  a whitish  urine  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lz.] 

The  second  day  he  only  urinated  twice.  [Fz.] 

90.  Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  scanty  flow  of  urine  (aft.  15  h.). 
[Lr.] 

Shooting  pain  in  the  front  of  the  urethra  when  urinating  (aft. 
71  h.).  [Lr.] 


i h.] 


[Lr.] 


Sneezing  from  the  smell  of  the  juice  (aft. 

Sudden  violent  fluent  coryza  (aft.  1^  h.).  [Lr.] 

Fluent  coryza  and  several  times  sneezing  therewith  (aft,  7 h.). 
[Lr.] 

95.  Short  cough  (aft.  \ h.).  [Lr.] 

Oppression  of  chest  with  difficult  respiration.  [iLfg-.] 

Suffocation,  strangulation.  [Petrus  de  Abano,  de  Venenis , 
cap.  22.1  2] 


1 In  original  “ Hartmann but  this  is  apparently  a misprint  for  Hartung  or  Herr- 

mann, as  Hartmann  is  not  credited  with  any  other  symptom. 


Statement  from  observation. 


35 


5+6 


CYCLAMEN. 


In  the  evening  great  exhaustion  and  shortness  of  breath  ; he  feels 
as  if  he  had  not  strength  enough  to  draw  a full  breath  (aft.  8J  h.). 
[*■*•] 

Pressive  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  especially  about  the 
precordial  region,  as  if  too  much  blood  had  accumulated  there,  with 
perceptible  palpitation  of  the  heart.  \_Htg.~\ 
ioo.  When  sitting  still,  paralytic  pressure  on  the  chest,  upper  arm  and 
tibia  (aft.  8 h.).  [Tz.] 

On  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum  sharp,  broad  stitches,  recurring 
at  irregular  intervals  (aft.  32  h.).  [Hrn.'] 

On  the  chest,  while  moving  and  when  at  rest,  tearing  stitches, 
with  tightness  of  the  chest  and  dyspnoea,  the  second  day.  [#z.] 

Tearing  stitches  on  the  last  true  rib  on  bending  the  body 
forwards.  [^%.] 

Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  left  side  of  the  nape,  only  whenever 
he  bends  back  his  head  (aft.  \ h.).  [Tz.] 

105.  Externally  and  internally  on  the  nape,  sore  excoriated  sensation. 

[Fz.-] 

Aching  paralytic  pain  in  the  nape,  which  goes  off*  on  bending 
back  the  head,  [^z.] 

In  the  evening,  drawing  (rheumatic)  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the 
neck,  on  moving  the  head,  whilst  there  was  a sensation  of  heat  in 
the  cervical  muscles  and  on  the  left  ear.  [Tz.] 

Some  deep  penetrating,  pinching,  obtuse  stitches  which  recur 
in  equal  periods  of  a few  seconds  (on  the  right  side  near  the  spine, 
betwixt  the  os  innominatum  and  the  last  false  rib),  in  the  renal 
region,  more  severe  on  inspiration,  which  is  impeded  by  the  exces- 
sive pain  (aft.  28  h.).  \_Hrn. ] 

When  sitting  stitch-like  pains  in  the  back  on  the  left  side  in  the 
region  of  the  false  ribs,  which  go  off*  on  touching  (aft.  15  h.).  [Zr.] 
no.  Drawing  down  the  back,  which  is  alleviated  by  drawing  back  the 
scapulae,  but  increased  by  drawing  the  shoulders  forwards  (aft.  7 h.). 

[**.] 

Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  left  gluteus  maximus,  at  its  superior 
insertion  in  the  os  ilii  towards  the  sacrum,  when  sitting,  which 
goes  off*  on  standing  up  (aft.  7 h.).  [Zz.] 

Tearing  ending  in  a stitch  over  the  scapulae  with  paralytic  pain 
in  the  arm.  [Tz.] 

A kind  of  paralytic,  hard  pressure  on  the  right  upper 
and  fore-arm,  feeling  as  if  in  the  periosteum  and  quite  in 
the  interior  of  the  muscles ; it  extends  thence  into  the 
fingers  and  hinders  him  in  writing  (aft.  37  h.).  [Hrn.] 

Drawing  pain  on  the  left  arm  extending  into  the  fingers. 

1 15.  Pain  over  the  outer  aspect  of  the  elbow-joint,  as  from  a blow,  or 
contusion,  or  as  if  bruised,  still  more  painful  when  moving  the  arm 
and  when  touching  the  part,  for  three  days  (aft.  25  h.).  [Zr.] 

Painful  drawing  in  the  inner  aspect  of  the  shaft  of 
the  ulna  and  in  the  wrist-joint  (aft.  38  h.).  [ Hm .] 

A kind  of  paralytic,  hard  pressure,  which  commences 
only  feebly  in  the  forearm,  but  thence  extends  into  the 


CYCLAMEN. 


547 


fingers,  where  it  becomes  so  violent  that  it  is  only  with 
the  greatest  effort  he  can  write.  [Hm.\ 

Stitch-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  forearm,  during  rest 
and  motion  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

Fine  tearing  on  the  left  radius  near  and  in  the  wrist-joint, 
feeling  as  if  in  the  periosteum  (aft.  § h.).  [Hrn^\ 

120.  Aching  on  the  back  of  the  left  hand.  [Zz.] 

Tearing  in  the  little,  middle  and  ring  fingers  of  the  left  hand, 
feeling  as  if  in  their  periosteum  (aft.  J h.).  \_Hrn.'] 

Spasmodic  slow  bending  of  the  right  thumb  and  index,  the 
points  of  which  approach  one  another,  and  which  must  be  extended 
by  force  (aft.  h.).  [Zr.] 

Between  the  fingers  a quick  and  fine  pricking  itching  as  with 
needles,  which  goes  off  immediately  by  scratching  entirely  and 
without  any  after  sensation  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zz.] 

After  severe  itching  a red  vesicle  appears  on  the  middle  joint 
of  the  little  finger  of  the  left  hand  (aft.  15  J h.).  [Zr.] 

125.  After  violent  itching  that  compelled  him  to  scratch,  there  ap- 
peared a red  pimple  on  the  proximal  joint  of  the  ring  finger, 
which  soon  became  white  like  a blister,  surrounded  by  a red  areola 
(aft.  i \ h.).  [Zr.] 

Weakness  in  the  thighs  and  legs ; on  standing  a long  time  they 
totter  hither  and  thither  (aft.  ^ h.).  [iZr/z.] 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  thigh  posteriorly  above  the 
right  hough  (aft.  8 h.).  [Hm.] 

Spots  half  an  inch  in  diameter  of  deep  red  colour,  like  burns,  on 
both  thighs  (aft.  ioj  h.).  [Zr.] 

Internal  twitching  under  the  left  knee.  [Zz.] 

130.  Sometimes  on  one  knee,  sometimes  on  the  other,  a pressive 
bruised  pain,  which  goes  off  on  moving  the  knee  (aft.  11  h.).  [Zz.] 
In  the  ligaments  of  the  knee-joint  a stretching,  aching  drawing, 
when  sitting  and  standing.  [Zz.] 

In  the  evening,  heat  in  the  whole  of  the  left  leg  and  drawing 
pain  in  it  when  sitting.  [Zz.] 

Stitch-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  calf,  when  at  rest  and 
when  moving  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

Itching  in  the  skin  of  the  calf  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.] 

1 35.  Severe  itching  in  the  skin  of  the  right  calf,  so  that  he  must 
scratch  till  the  blood  came,  whereupon  the  part  had  hot  burning 
pains,  in  the  evening  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Zr.] 

In  the  morning,  great  itching  of  the  right  calf,  with  swelling  of 
its  blood-vessels  down  to  the  foot;  he  must  scratch  till  the  blood 
came,  whereupon  the  part  remained  red  and  bloody  (aft.  23  h.). 
[■*>•] 

When  moving,  tearing,  aching,  paralytic  pain  on  the  tibiae,  with 
powerlessness  and  unsteadiness  in  the  kness  (2nd  d.).  [Zz.] 

Drawing  pressure  in  the  tibiae,  sometimes  when  sitting,  some- 
times when  walking  ; it  goes  off  by  walking  if  it  came  on  when 
sitting,  and  goes  off  by  sitting  if  it  came  on  when  walking  ; but  the 
pain  is  more  frequently  felt  when  sitting  (aft.  9 h.).  [Zz.] 


54-8 


CYCLAMEN. 


Drawing  pressure  on  the  dorsum  of  the  feet  when  sitting,  which 
goes  off  on  rising  up. 

I4°-  A pain,  like  dislocation,  in  the  foot,  especially  beside  the 
heel  and  in  the  ankles,  when  sitting  and  standing,  but  increased 
when  walking  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Lr.] 

In  the  ankle-joint,  aching,  dislocation  pain,  when  walking  and 
standing,  which  goes  off  on  sitting  down  (aft.  h.).  [#2.] 

Dislocation  pain  in  the  right  foot,  which,  however,  goes 
off  when  touched  and  when  walking  (aft.  h.).  [Lr.] 

A dislocation  pain  in  the  foot  only  when  walking  (aft.  6 h.). 
[Zr.] 

Itching  above  the  ankles  and  on  the  toes,  which  recommences 
suddenly  with  a fine  prick,  is  sometimes  stronger,  sometimes  weaker, 
and  when  it  has  ceased  leaves  behind  it  a sensation . sometimes  of 
warmth,  sometimes  of  numbness  of  the  skin  on  the  part  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Fz.-] 

145.  Violent  itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  big  toe,  which 
compels  him  to  scratch,  after  which  white  pustules  break  out  that 
itch  still  more  violently ; the  itching  only  declines  when  he  has 
rubbed  the  toe  raw  (aft.  5 h.).  [Hrn^] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  a burning  sore  pain  on  the  heels, 
which  was  also  still  perceptible  when  standing  and  when  sitting 
(aft.  24  h.).  [Lr.] 

Violent  itching,  not  only  on  the  skin,  but  also  as  it  were  on  the 
bones  of  the  toes  of  the  left  foot,  in  the  evening  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Lr .] 
After  walking  the  toes  are  as  if  dead,  and  yet  when  walking,  and 
still  more  when  leaping,  he  feels  a spre  pain  on  them.  [-#2.] 

Ill-smelling  perspiration  between  the  toes  of  the  left  foot,  for 
several  successive  days  (aft.  16  h.).  [Lr.] 

150.  Hard  pressure  on  the  left  big  toe.  [ Hrn .] 

Drawing  pain  on  the  big  toe.  [Tz.] 

Hard,  drawing  pressure  on  the  left  little  toe,  towards  the  outside 
- — feeling  as  if  in  the  periosteum.  [Hrn.] 

A drawing  from  without  inwards  where  the  left  big  toe  is  con- 
nected to  the  metatarsal  bone  (aft.  30  h.).  [Hrn.] 

Itching  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  consisting  of  a rapidly 
occurring,  sharp,  throbbing  continued  prick,  and  when  it  went  off  a 
numb  sensation  remained  for  some  time,  [i'z.] 

155.  Itching  erosion  on  many  parts  of  the  body  ; it  excites  scratching, 
whereby  it  is  removed  for  some  time,  but  then  recurs.  [ Hrn .] 

On  various  parts  of  the  body,  where  the  bones  are  immediately 
covered  by  the  skin,  e.  g.  on  the  tibiae  and  clavicles,  pressive,  drawing 
or  tearing  pains,  more  when  moving  than  when  at  rest.  [jFz.] 

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  he  can  scarcely  bear  the  pricking  itching 
on  all  parts  of  the  body.  [Fz.] 

Itching  (sometimes  in  the  forenoon)  on  various  parts  of  the  body, 
consisting  of  coarse  pricks,  which  then  changes  into  drawing  and 
tearing  pain  there  (2nd  d.).  [i^z.] 

The  child  always  wants  to  go  to  bed  and  lie  down. 

160.  As  long  as  he  is  moving  he  feels  nothing  but  exhaustion  ; but  on 


CYCLAMEN. 


549 


sitting  down  there  occurs  an  itching  and  many  other  sufferings 
(towards  evening).  [ Fz .] 

Sometimes  great  peevishness  and  lethargy  of  the  mind,  with 
bodily  exhaustion,  which  latter  only  goes  off  as  soon  as  he  moves 
about,  [Fz.] 

Great  weakness  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  knees,  though  he 
feels  strong  in  his  mind  and  is  lively  (aft.  i \ h.).  [Fz,] 

He  is  fatigued  in  all  his  limbs,  as  if  their  mobility  were  hindered. 
[Fz.] 

Relaxed  feeling  of  the  whole  body  ; it  was  a trouble  to  him  to 
move  even  one  limb.  \_Htg.] 

165.  In  the  evening  extraordinary  fatigue;  he  must  lie  down  and 
slumber  ; on  rising  up  again  the  lower  extremities  are  as  if 
bruised  and  stiff,  with  drawing  aching  pains  in  the  thighs  and  knees. 
[Fz.] 

Drowsiness  when  sitting  (aft.  3^  h.).  [. Lr .] 

Great  inclination  to  slumber  all  the  forenoon.  [Fz.] 

In  the  evening  great  inclination  to  sleep  ; he  cannot  resist  it. 
[Fz.] 

In  the  evening,  he  had  scarcely  fallen  asleep  when  he  had  night- 
mare ; he  could  not  cry  out  even  when  he  was  awake,  [Fz.] 

170.  Restless  sleep,  dreams  about  money  (aft.  22  h.).  [Lr.] 

Frequent  waking  at  night,  as  from  sleeplessness.  [Lr.] 

Sleep  towards  morning,  with  slight  dreams.  [Fz.] 

The  sleep  at  night  is  broken,  only  towards  morning  many  dreams 
and  a seminal  emission  (3rd  night).  [Fz.] 

In  the  morning  he  awakes  very  early  ; he  cannot  get  to  sleep 
again,  and  when  he  wishes  to  get  up  he  cannot  do  so  on  account  of 
weariness  and  sleepiness.  [Fz.] 

175.  In  the  evening  he  cannot  refrain  from  sleep,  with  constant  chilly 
feeling.  [Fz.] 

All  the  forenoon  continued  chilliness  and  coldness  of  the  whole 
body,  renewed  by  every  dose  ; after  the  chill  had  passed  off  and  the 
normal  warmth  had  ensued,  at  first  only  the  nose  still  remained  cold, 
but  when  it  again  got  warm  the  hands,  which  had  previously  got 
warm,  became  again  cold  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Hrn.] 

In  the  evening  sometimes,  along  with  chilly  feeling,  sudden 
shuddering.  [Fz.] 

Shivering  all  through  the  body,  with  yawning,  without  coldness 
or  goose-skin,  in  the  morning  (aft.  24  h.).  [Lr.] 

Towards  evening,  great  chill,  without  thirst ; at  the  same  time 
great  sensitiveness  to  cold,  during  which  he  often  shakes  and  shivers, 
then  heat  on  various  parts,  with  anxiety,  as  if  some  misfortune 
threatened  him.  [Fz.] 

180.  Coldness  of  the  hands,  whilst  the  face  and  hands  were  warm, 
without  thirst,  in  the  morning  (aft.  | h.).  [Lr.] 

Towards  evening,  first  for  some  minutes  chilliness  and  great 
sensitiveness  to  cold,  then  heat  in  some  parts  of  the  body,  the  backs 
of  the  hands  and  the  nape,  but  not  in  the  face.  [Fz.] 

In  the  morning  hot  reeling  on  the  hands,  face  and  whole  body 


S6  0 


CYCLAMEN. 


without  particular  elevation  of  temperature,  and  without  thirst  (aft. 
fh.).  [Zr.] 

Heat  of  single  parts  of  the  hands,  nape,  and  neck  under  the  jaw, 
and  an  hour  afterwards  dryness  of  the  palate  and  thirst.  [Zz.] 

Feeling  of  heat,  and  externally  perceptible  heat  of  the  hands,  with 
swelling  of  the  veins  ; whilst  the  rest  of  the  body  and  the  forehead  are 
only  warm,  the  cheeks  are  cold  (aft.  15!  h.).  [Zr.] 

185.  Each  time  he  wakes  from  sleep  at  night,  slight  sweat  all  over  the 
body  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 

Out  of  the  febrile  chill  and  coldness,  gradually  occurring  thirstless 
heat  all  over  the  body,  especially  in  the  face,  with  redness,  that  was 
increased  after  a meal  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Hrn. ] 

All  day  long  he  had  no  thirst,  but  in  the  evening,  when  the  face 
and  hands  became  warm,  thirst  came  on.  [Zz.] 

He  is  always  in  a reverie,  and  not  inclined  to  speak.  [ZZWz.] 

In  fits  of  two  hours  and  longer,  disinclination  to  speak ; talking  is 
a trouble  to  him.  [iZr/z.] 

190.  Disinclination  for  all  work,  until  towards  evening;  he  cannot 
make  up  his  mind  to  do  the  least  thing.  [Zz.] 

In  fits  of  two  hours  and  longer,  disinclination  to  work,  and  then, 
again,  inclination  for  it.  \Hrn.\ 

Previously  cheerful,  he  suddenly  became  very  grave,  and  to  a 
certain  degree  peevish  (aft.  2 h.)  ; after  some  time  he  again  became 
cheerful,  and  then  again  peevish.  [Z/r«.] 

Peevish,  morose  disposition  ; he  easily  takes  every  trifle  in  bad 
part,  and  gets  angry  over  it.  [Zr.] 

Sunk  in  deep  thought,  he  sought  solitude  and  thought  about  his 
future  fate  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.] 

195.  Deep  thought  about  the  present  and  future,  so  that  he  almost 
wept  (aft.  12  h.).  [Zr.] 

Inward  grief  and  anxiety  of  conscience,  as  if  he  had  not  done  his 
duty  or  had  committed  a crime  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.] 

Excessive  sadness,  as  if  he  had  done  something  bad  and  had 
neglected  his  duty  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 

Calm,  contented  with  himself*  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 

Tranquillity  of  mind.*  \_Htg.] 

200.  Sometimes  he  is  quite  peevish  and  ill-humoured  ; but  soon  there 
occurs  again  a strange  happy  feeling,  which  shows  itself  by  a slight 
trembling  in  the  joints.  [Zz.] 

All  day  long  he  is  peevish,  not  disposed  to  talk,  and  insensible,  so 
that  he  feels  little  in  his  body.  [Zz.] 

Towards  evening  there  suddenly  occurs  a strange  happy  feeling 
and  lively  fancy,  which  conjures  up  agreeable  pictures.  [Zz.] 

* Secondary  and  curative  action. 


DIGITALIS.1 

(Foxglove.} 

(The  fresh  expressed  juice  of  the  leaves  of  Digitalis  purpurea  mixed  with  equal 
parts  of  alcohol.) 

From  the  following  symptoms,  which  are  by  no  means  complete  as 
to  their  number,  it  is  undeniably  evident  that  the  morbid  conditions  of 
a chronic  character,  physicians  have  sometimes  hitherto  cured  with 
foxglove,  were  all,  without  exception,  cured  homoeopathically,  although 
they  were  unaware  of  the  fact.  But  the  much  more  numerous 
instances  of  unsuccessful  treatment  with  this  extremely  powerful 
plant,  belong  to  those  employments  of  foxglove  which  were,  as  is 
usually  the  case,  directed  against  mere  pathological  names  (not  the 
totality  of  the  symptoms),  and  were  effected  with  a medicine  (fox- 
glove), which  was  estimated,  in  hap-hazard  fashion,  only  in  accord- 
ance with  conjectures  respecting  its  general  mode  of  action  deduced 
from  hypothesis  (not  known  from  its  pure  effects,  i.e.  from  the 
morbid  states  it  developed  in  the  healthy  body).  As  long  as  this 
theoretical  blindness  is  persisted  in,  much  more  harm  than  good  will 
be  done  with  this  great  gift  of  God.  The  true  physician,  who 
selects  his  remedy  homoeopathically  in  accordance  with  its  pure  patho- 
genetic effects  for  very  similar  cases  of  disease,  will  never  give  foxglove 
except  where  it  can,  will,  and  must  do  good,  and  will  never  fail  to 
prescribe  it  in  such  suitable  cases.  Such  treatment  is  immensely 
superior  to  the  deplorable  treatment  of  the  ordinary  practitioner.  The 
homoeopathic  practitioner,  besides,  will  find  in  the  following  few  sym- 
ptoms the  means  of  affording  homoeopathic  relief  for  many  more 
morbid  states  than  have  hitherto  been  cured  by  it. 

A very  small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  quintillion-fold  or,  still  better, 
the  decillion-fold  dilution  of  the  juice,  will  often  be  found  to  be  a too 
powerful  dose  for  homoeopathic  treatment. 

The  action  of  such  a small  dose  lasts  several  days,  that  of  an  exces- 
sively large  dose  several  weeks. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Becher,  Franz,  Gross,  Horn- 
eurg,  Langhammer,  J.  G.  Lehmann,  Meyer,  E.  F.  Ruckert,  Staff, 
Teuthorn. 

Symptoms  are  borrowed  from  the  following  old-school  authorities  : 

Baidon,  in  Edinb.  Med.  and  Surg.  Journal , vol.  iii,  pt.  1 1,  No.  4. 

Baker,  in  Med.  Essays  of  the  London  Coll,  of  Phys pt.  iii. 

Baylies,  Practical  Essays  on  Medical  Subjects.  London,  1773. 

Beddoes,  in  Med.  Facts  and  Obs.,  v.  London,  1794. 

Boerhave,  Hortus  Lugd.  Batav. — Rar.  Morb.  Historic.  Jense,  1771. 

Brandis,  in  Schiemann , Diss.  de  Digit,  purp.  Gott.,  1786. 


From  vol.  iv,  and  edit.,  1825. 


552 


DIGITALIS. 


Drake,  in  Phys.  Med.  Journ .,  1802,  Feb. 

Edinburgh  Med.  Comment .,  vol,  x. 

Haller,  von,  in  Vicafs  Mat.  Med.,  i. 

Henry,  W.,  in  Med.  and  Chir.  Journ . Edinb.,  1811. 

Horn,  Neues  Archie,  v. 

Kinglake,  Rob.,  in  Beddoes ’ Med.  Facts  and  Obs .,  vol.  v.  London,  1794. 
Lentin,  Beobachtungen  einiger  Krankheiten , 1774. 

Lettsom,  Mem.  of  the  Med.  Soc.  of  London , vol.  ii. 

Maclean,  in  Phys.  Med.  Journ.,  1800,  Aug.,  1802,  Feb. 

Mangold,  in  Horn's  Archie  f.pr.  Med.,  iii. 

Meyer,  in  Richter's  Chir.  Bibl.,v. 

Monro,  Don.,  in  Samml.  f.  pr.  Aerzte,  xiii. 

Mossmann,  G.,in  Phys.  Med.  Journ.,  1801,  July. — Essay  to  Elucidatethe  Scrophula. 
London,  1800. 

Penkivil,  J.,  in  Phys.  Med.  Journal , 1801. 

Quarin,  Animad<vers.  pract. 

Remer,  Annalen  der  Klin.  Anstalt , i. 

Sackreuter,  in  Annalen  der  Heilkunde,  1811,  March. 

Schiemann,  in  Diss.  de  Digit,  purp.  Gott.,  1786. 

Warren,  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.f.  pr.  Aerzte , vol.  xi. 

Withering,  Abhan.  iiber  den  Fingerhut.  Lpz.,  1786. 

The  1 st  edit,  gives  418  ; 10  additional  symptoms  appear  in  the  2nd  edit,  ; in  the 
Chr.  Kr.  the  symptoms  are  increased  to  702.] 


DIGITALIS. 

Vertigo.  [Quarin,  Animadvers.  pract.,  pp.  118 — 120.1 — Mac- 
lean,  in  the  Phys.  and  Med.  Journ.,'  Lpz.,  1800,  Aug.,  p.  585. 2 — 
Withering,  Abh.iib . den  Fingerhut , Lpz.,  1786. 2 — J.  Penkivil,  in 
Phys.  and  Med.  Journ.,  1801,  Aug.3 — Lettsom,  Mem.  of  the  Med. 
Soc.  of  London , vol.  ii.4] 

Vertigo  so  that  she  fell  when  going  upstairs.  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

Vertigo  and  trembling.  [Drake,  in  Phys.  and  Med.  Journ., 
1802,  Febr.5] 

Confusion  of  the  whole  head  and  sensation  as  if  the  brain 
beat  like  water  on  both  sides  of  the  skull  and  would  burst  it,  in  a 
pulsating  manner.  [TWz.] 

5.  Undulating  headache,  like  the  beating  of  waves,  from  within 
towards  both  sides,  that  is  relieved  by  lying  and  stooping  forwards, 
but  increased  when  standing  and  bending  back  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Trn.~\ 

Painful  confusion  of  the  head.  [$//!] 

Gloomy  in  the  head,  as  if  hypochondriacal. 

He  is  at  first  quite  unable  to  collect  his  thoughts  and  giddy  in 
the  head.  \_Fzd] 

Weakness  of  memory.  [Lettsom,  1.  c.] 

10.  The  head  is  affected.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 


1 Effects  of  digitalis  when  given  for  scrofula. 

2 Effects  on  patients. 

3 Effects  of  digitalis  when  given  for  phthisis. 

4 Effects  of  digitalis  when  given  to  dropsical  patients. 

5 Effects  of  digitalis  when  given  for  phthisis.  This  symptom  occurred  after  each 
dose. 


DIGITALIS. 


553 


Headache.  [Quarin, — Lettsom,  1.  c.] 

Headache  for  several  days.*  [Schiemann,  Diss.  de  Digit,  purp ., 
Gott.,  1786,  pp.  34,  4-1  Tj 

Headache,  pressure  and  heaviness,  as  from  rush  of  blood  to  the 
head. 

Giddy  drawing  in  the  sides  of  the  head.  [G^.] 

15.  Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  head.  [(?«.]! 

Tearing  in  the  right  temporal  region,  close  to  the  ear. 
[Gss.] 

Pressure  and  stretching  in  the  sides  of  the  head  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gr*.] 
Contractive  and  pressive  pain  in  the  forehead  and  temples  which 
is  increased  by  thinking.  [Tz.] 

Anteriorly  in  the  forehead,  pressive  tensive  pain.  [ Hbg .]  || 

20.  In  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  superiorly,  pressure  as  from  a hard 
weight  on  exerting  the  thoughts.  [Tz.] 

Sharp  pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,  on  a small  spot  above  the 
eye  (aft.  g h.).  [£(/:] 

In  the  evening  and  at  night  in  sleep,  single  obtuse  stitches  in 
the  left  temple,  which  darted  through  the  whole  brain. 

Shooting  now  in  the  right,  now  in  the  left  temporal  region,  but 
transient.  [Myr.] 

Aching  headache  in  jerks,  now  in  the  temples,  now  in  the  whole 
head.  [Rkt.] 

25.  Throbbing  pain  in  the  forehead  or  in  the  fundus  of  the  orbits. 
[Maclean,  1.  c.] 

When  he  turned  the  eyes  to  the  right  or  left  side,  in  order  to 
look  to  right  or  left,  without  moving  the  head,  there  occurred  an 
uncomfortable  tensive  sensation  in  the  sinciput  (aft.  30  h.).  [Bch.] 
For  several  hours,  every  time  he  stooped  forward,  in  the  side  of 
the  brain,  on  a small  spot,  a stitch-like  tension,  which  extended 
to  a left  upper  tooth,  but  which  went  off  every  time  he  raised  him- 
self up. 

On  bending  the  head  forward,  sensation  as  if  something  fell 
forwards  in  it,  frequently  recurring,  [i2£/.] 

Headache  on  one  side,  like  an  internal  itching.  [Ln.] 

30.  At  the  occipital  protuberance  an  aching  pain  as  from  a blow  or 
fall  (aft.  h.).  [Hbg.] 

Aching  stitches  externally  on  the  left  side  of  the 
forehead  (aft.  4 h.).  [ Lr .] 

Tearing  stitches  externally  on  the  left  temple  (aft. 
34  h.).  [Lr.] 

On  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  a red  pimple  with  burning 
smarting  pain,  increased  by  touch.  [Hbg.] 

Single  stitches  in  the  left  frontal  region  (aft.  84  h.).  [Lr,] 

35.  Swollen  head.3  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

Heat  in  the  whole  head,  externally  and  internally  ; thinking  was 
* From  the  emanations  from  the  juice. 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 This  was  only  a sensation  as  of  being  swollen. 


554 


DIGITALIS. 


difficult  for  him,  and  he  forgot  everything  immediately  (aft.  i h.). 
[Myr.] 

The  head  always  falls  backwards,  when  sitting  and  walking,  as 
* if  the  anterior  cervical  muscles  had  no  power  (as  if  paralysed). 
[Trn.] 

Paleness  of  face.1  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Convulsions  on  the  left  side  of  the  face.  [G.  Mossmann,  in 
Phys.  and  Med.  Journ .,  1801,  Jul.2] 

40.  Burning  pain  in  the  right  eyebrow,  with  dimness 
of  vision,  as  if  a veil  were  before  the  eyes  (aft.  5 and 
more  h.).  [ Myr.] 

Pressive  pain  on  the  right  eyebrow,  towards  the  external  canthus 
of  the  eye  (aft.  52  h.).  [Lr.] 

Tendency  of  both  eyes  to  turn  towards  the  left  side  ; when  he 
forced  them  to  turn  to  the  right  they  were  painful,  and  he  then  saw 
all  near  objects  double  or  threefold ; at  the  same  time  the  face  was 
puffed  (aft.  29  h.).  [Bch.] 

Pain  of  the  eyes,  excessi  ve  pain  in  the  eyeballs  on  touching  them. 
Aching  pain  in  the  eyeballs. 

45.  An  aching  in  the  right  eyeball,  ra 
(aft.  2 h.).  [St/.] 

Violent  inflammation  of  the  eyes. 

(Very  contracted  pupils)  (aft.  h.).  [St/] 

Great  dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  1 h.).  [Trn.] 

Dimness  of  vision.  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

50.  Weak  sight,  imperfect  vision.  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

Slight  dimness  of  vision.  [Mossmann,  Essay  to  elucidate  the 
Scrophula , London,  1800.3] 

He  sees  objects  only  darkly.4  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Dimness  of  vision.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Blindness.5  [Lettsom,  1.  c.] 

55.  Blindness,  amaurosis,  for  three  days.  [Remer,  Annalen  d.  Klin. 
Anstalt , B.  i.6] 

Imperfect  vision,  as  if  a cloud  or  a mist  hung  before  the  eyes. 
[Maclean,  1.  c.] 

When  he  wishes  to  look  at  distant  objects,  dark  bodies  hover 
before  his  eyes,  like  flies.  [Baker,  in  Medical  Essays  0/  the  London 
College  0/  Physicians , iii.7] 

All  sorts  of  figures  hover  before  the  eyes.  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 
Appearances  before  the  eyes.8  [Lettsom,  1.  c.] 


pidly  coming  and  going  off 


1 Not  found. 

* Effects  of  digitalis  given  in  pneumonia. 

3 Not  accessible. 

4 Not  found. 

5 Lasting  for  a month  after  omitting  the  medicine,  with  throbbing  pain  and  sense 
of  fulness  in  the  eyeballs. 

6 Not  accessible. 

7 Effects  of  digitalis  in  a case  of  anasarca.  The  “dark  bodies  like  flies”  represent 
“ muscae  volitantes  ” in  the  original. 

8 “ Fiery  appearances  ” in  the  original. 


DIGITALIS. 


555 

60.  When  he  covers  up  the  eyes,  bright  bodies  seem  to  dance  before 
his  eyes.1  [Baker,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  all  objects  seem  as  if  covered  with 
snow.  [Mossmann,  in  Phys . Med . Journ .,  1.  c.] 

The  flame  of  the  candle  appears  to  him  larger  and  brighter2  than 
natural.  [Baker,  1.  c.] 

In  the  dusk  he  saw  glittering  colours,  red,  green  and  yellow, 
before  his  eyes,  like  flickering  light  (aft.  8 h.).  [Z^.] 

The  faces  of  persons  coming  into  the  room  appeared  to  him 
deadly  pale.  [Baker,  1.  c,] 

65.  Illusion  of  vision : objects  appear  of  a green  or  yellow 
colour.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Objects  appear  yellow  to  him,  even  silver.  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

The  eyes  water.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

The  tears  running  from  his  eyes  smart. 

In  a moderately  warm  room,  less  in  the  open  air,  the  eyes  become 
full  of  water ; they  are  dim,  hot,  full  of  red  blood-vessels,  with 
aching  pain,  and  the  canthi  are  full  of  mucus  (as  in  severe  coryza). 

im 

70.  In  the  inner  canthus  a painful  scraping  sensation,  as  if  coarse 
dust  had  got  into  it.  [HbgJ\ 

(Swelling  of  the  lower  eyelid,  which  interferes  with  his  looking 
down.) 

The  edges  of  the  eyelids  are  painful,  as  if  excoriated,  when  they 
are  shut  (in  the  evening  in  bed).  \_Rkt .] 

Inflammation  of  the  Meibomian  glands  on  the  borders  of  the 
eyelids. 

Paralytic  drawing  beneath  the  left  zygomatic  process  in  front  of 
the  ear.  [Gw.] 

75.  Cramp-like  drawing  pain  on  the  zygoma,  which  goes  off  by  strong 
pressure.  [Tz.] 

Cramp  under  the  right  zygomatic  arch  on  moving  the  lower  jaw, 
which,  when  he  bites,  is  closed  spasmodically,  and  more  strongly 
than  he  wished.  [Tz.] 

An  erosion  and  itching  on  the  cheek  and  chin,  worst  at  night. 

In  the  ears  a sensation  as  if  they  were  contracted  internally  he 
hears  the  pulse  in  them  (the  hearing  remained  good).  [Tz.] 

A tensive  pressure  in  the  left  ear.  [£//'.] 

80.  Hissing  before  both  ears,  like  water  boiling.  [7r».] 

Single  stitches  behind  the  ear,  externally.  [Tr«.] 

A large  pimple  with  smarting  pain  under  the  left  nostril. 

Epistaxis ; bright  blood  from  both  nostrils  (aft.  1 h.).  [7r«.] 
Drawing  pain  in  the  muscles  under  the  mastoid  process.  [Tz.] 
85.  Under  the  right  mastoid  process,  a drawing,  which  goes  off  by 
strong  pressure,  [Tz.] 

Aching  drawing  on  the  occiput  at  the  seat  of  the  insertion  of 
the  cervical  muscles,  on  bending  back  the  head.  [Tz.] 


1 The  muscae  of  S.  57  become  these  when  the  eyes  are  covered  and  pressed  upon, 

2 In  the  original  “ whiter.” 


556 


DIGITALIS. 


Stiffness  of  the  posterior  and  lateral  cervical  muscles,  with  pressive 
pain  like  blows  (aft.  io  h.).  \_Hbg.] 

Shooting  pains  externally  in  the  cervical  muscles  on  moving  the 
neck.  [Bch.] 

A painful  stiffness  and  tension  in  the  cervical  muscles  and  nape, 
especially  on  moving.  [6y.] 

90.  Eruption  on  the  neck. 

Swelling  of  the  lips  and  tongue.*  [W.  Henry,  in  Med.  and  Chir. 
Journal,  Edinb.,  1811.] 

In  the  morning,  white  coated  tongue  (aft.  48  h.).  [ Lr .] 
Excoriation  internally  in  the  mouth,  on  the  tongue  and  gums, 
with  flow  of  saliva,  for  three  days.  [Baylies,  Practical  Essays  on 
Med.  Subjects , London,  1773,  pp.  39,  41.1 2] 

Excoriation  of  the  inside  of  the  mouth,  fauces,  oesophagus, 
stomach.  [Boerhave,  Hortus  Lugd.  Batav .,  p.  308.3] 

95.  Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  (aft.  J h.).  [Bch.] 

Flow  of  saliva. 

Flow  of  saliva.  [Withering,  1.  c. — Lentin,  Beobachtungen 
einiger  Krankheiten , 1774,  p.  167.3] 

Accumulation  of  saliva,  as  after  vinegar.  [Hbg.] 

Collection  of  watery  saliva  in  the  mouth,  which  at  first  tastes 
sweet,  but  afterwards  very  salt,  in  frequent  fits  (aft.  \ h.).  [Stf.] 

100.  Collection  of  very  sweet  saliva.  [Schiemann,  1.  c.] 

Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  with  spitting  of  it  out,  and 
great  nausea  on  swallowing  the  saliva  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Bch.] 

Profuse  flow  of  saliva  of  a foetid  smell.4 5  [Henry,  1.  c.] 

Bad  smell  from  the  mouth  (aft.  4 h.). 

Flat,  slimy  taste,  and  a soft  flossy  feeling  in  the  mouth,  as  if 
it  were  lined  inside  with  velvet.  [Trn.] 

105.  Rough  palate,  as  if  he  had  smoked  too  much  tobacco,  without 
thirst.  [Fz.] 

A scrapy,  rough  feeling  in  the  palate.  [St/.] 

(Painfulness  of  the  front  teeth.)  [St/.] 

After  smoking  tobacco,  taste  in  the  mouth  as  from  sweet  almonds. 
[*•*■] 

Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  throat.  [Lentin,  1.  c.] 
no.  Sore  throat ; shooting  (also)  when  not  swallowing. 

Stitches  in  the  back  part  of  the  palate  and  in  the  commencement 
of  the  gullet,  not  observable  when  swallowing.  [Rkt.] 

Little  appetite,  he  is  immediately  satiated.  [£*/".] 

* In  a woman  from  an  ounce  of  the  decoction,  in  whom  the  swelling  of  the  lips 
and  tongue  was  accompanied  by  foetid  salivation  and  suppression  of  urine.^ 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 Observed  effects.  This  ascribed  by  the  owner  to  the  acrimony  of  the  plant. 

3 From  an  overdose. 

4 For  “foetid  smell  ” read  <£  viscid  consistence.” 

5 The  patient  was  ascitic.  There  is  no  mention  in  the  original  of  foetor  about  the 
salivation.  (See  S.  102.) 


DIGITALIS. 


557 


Very  little  appetite  on  account  of  nausea.  [Bch .] 

Anorexia,  with  indescribable  emptiness  in  the  stomach.  [Rob. 
Kinglake,  in  Beddoes ’ Med.  Facts  and  Obs .,  vol.  v,  Lond.,  1794.1 2] 
11 5.  Anorexia,  with  clean  tongue.  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

With  good  appetite  bread  tastes  bitter.  [ Trn .] 

Appetite  for  bitter  food.  [Bch.~\ 

Thirst  for  sour  drinks.  [ Trn.'] 

Sour  eructation  after  eating.  [7r».] 

120.  Nausea. 

Nausea.  [Baylies,  1.  c.] 

Nausea  in  the  gastric  region,  without  retching  and  vomiting  (aft. 
11  h.).  [Bch.] 

Nausea  after  a meal.  [Ln.~\ 

Nausea  for  three  days  without  cessation.  [Maclean,  1.  c.,  1802, 
Febr.] 

125.  Deadly  nausea.  [Warren,  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.  p.  fr.  Aerzte , 
vol.  xi,  p.  1.] 

In  recurring  fits,  deadly  sickness,  with  extreme  depression  of  the 
mind  and  anguish.*  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Vomiting. 

Nausea  of  the  worst  kind  and  vomiting.  [Maclean,  1.  c.,  1800, 
Aug.,  p.  585.] 

Excessive  nausea,  with  inordinate  vomiting,  coldness  of  the  limbs, 
and  cold  sweats,  for  two  days.  [Baker,  1.  c.] 

130.  With  excessive  nausea,  vomiting  of  green  bile.  [Baker,  1.  c.] 
Increased  nausea,  with  vomiting  of  the  food  he  had  eaten,  which 
was  enveloped  in  white  tasteless  mucus,  whereupon  the  bellyache 
that  was  present  went  off  (aft.  8-J  h.).  [. Bch .] 

Violent  vomiting,  for  four  hours.  [Baylies,  1.  c.'] 

Nocturnal  vomiting.3  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

Morning  vomiting.  [Mossmann,  1.  c.,  1801,  Jul. — Penkivil, 

1.  c.] 

135.  Excessive  vomiting.  [Lentin,  1.  c.] 

Long-continued  vomiting.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Uncontrollable  vomiting,  for  six  days,  until  death  ensued.  + 
[. Edinburgh  Med.  Comment .,  vol.  x.] 

Bilious  vomiting  for  several  days.  [Beddoes,  in  Med.  Facts  ana 
Obs.y  v,  London,  1794.3] 

Hiccup,  that  did  not  rise  quite  up  into  the  throat,  six  or  seven 
times  (aft.  21  h.).  [Bch.~\ 

* This  lasted  every  time  several,  often  four,  hours,  and  came  on  sometimes  before, 
sometimes  after  the  diuresis. 

f In  a woman  who  in  two  days  had  taken  twelve  leaves  in  six  doses  ; she  died  the 
seventh  day.  In  the  ileum  was  found  inflammation,  and  an  almost  complete  adhesion 
and  union  of  the  walls  of  some  parts  of  this  intestine. 


1 Not  found. 

2 This  and  the  following  symptom  do  not  mean  vomiting  recurring  each  night  or 
morning,  but  simply  that  the  vomiting  caused  by  the  drug  came  on  on  the  following 
night  or  morning. 

3 From  overdosing. 


5 58 


DIGITALIS. 


140.  Hiccup.  [Lentin,  1.  c.] 

Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  gastric  region.  [Mossman,  Essay , 

c<] 

A weakness  of  the  stomach,  like  a sinking  of  the  stomach,  as  if 
life  would  be  extinguished.*1  [Maclean,  1.  c.,  1800,  Aug.] 

Cardialgia.2  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Weight  in  the  stomach.  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

145.  A feeling  of  constriction  over  the  gastric  region,  towards  the 
liver.  [Hbg.] 

(Anxious  tension  and  constriction  under  the  short  ribs.) 

After  a meal  the  food  presses  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  when  he 
is  seated,  but  not  when  he  is  standing,  [F%.] 

Weight  in  the  stomach,  alternating  with  exhaustion.  [Mossmann, 
in  Phys.  and  Med . Jour.,  1.  c.] 

Pressure,  as  from  a hard  weight,  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  on 
raising  up  the  body,  [Fz.] 

150.  Cutting  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  with  feeling  of  nausea 
there.  [Glt.] 

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis  squeezing  stitches,  unaffected  by 
breathing,  increased  by  touching,  only  when  standing  not  when 
sitting  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gjj.] 

Aching  and  burning  in  the  gastric  region.  [Horn,  Neues  Archiv , 
v.  i,  p.  104.2] 

Stomachache,  and  at  the  same  time  sensation  of  great  heat  in 
the  stomach  and  bowels.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Sensation  in  the  bowels  as  if  they  were  twisted  together  and  the 
gastric  region  were  retracted.3  [Drake,  1.  c.] 

155.  Pinching  contraction  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a severe  chill, 
when  sitting,  but  of  which  he  feels  nothing  when  walking  (aft.  3,  4 
d.).  \_Fz.] 

Sharp  stitches  in  the  navel.  [Glt.] 

A persistent  stitch  in  the  left  infracostal  region,  with  a sensation, 
especially  during  expiration,  as  if  the  surrounding  parts  were  gone 
asleep,  [Fz.] 

(While  eating)  above  and  to  the  right  of  the  navel  obtuse,  as  it 
were,  squeezing  stitches.  [Gw.] 

Single  stitches  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  sometimes  with 
paroxysms  of  sick  feeling  (aft.  24  h.).  \Rkt.~\ 

160.  Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium,  as  from  a purgative  (aft.  J h.). 
\_Myr.~\ 

Flying  needle-pricks  in  the  whole  abdomen.  [Gw.] 

Fine  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  on  expiration, 
when  standing  and  walking  (aft.  58  h.).  [Fr.] 

Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  during  expiration, 
while  sitting,  in  the  morning  (aft.  75  h.).  [Fr.] 

* All  the  patients  complained  of  this  in  the  same  terms. 

1 Literally,  “ a faintness  or  sinking  at  the  stomach,  as  if  life  were  going  from  them.” 

2 Not  found. 

3 Literally,  “ sensation  of  twisting  in  the  bowels  after  each  dose,  and  of  much 
sinking  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach.” 


DIGITALIS. 


$59 


Single  fine  shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  when  at  rest 
and  during  movement,  which  was  increased  on  expiration  (aft.  88  h.). 
[Lr.] 

165.  Just  above  the  umbilical  region  digging,  aching,  shooting 
internally  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gjj.] 

Shooting  in  the  bend  of  the  groin  when  walking.  [Tz.] 

Tearing  pains  about  the  navel,  in  the  morning  (aft.  8 h.). 

When  walking  shooting  tearing  in  the  umbilical  region,  [Tz.] 

In  the  evening  cutting  tearing  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a chill, 
especially  when  rising  up  from  a seat,  with  aching  pain  in  the 
vertex.  \_Fz.~\ 

170.  Cutting  in  the  whole  of  the  epigastrium  and  hypogastrium. 

Under  the  third  left  false  rib  a part  that  is  painful,  as  if  all  inside 
were  lacerated,  [Tz.] 

Twitching  tearing  from  the  pubes  to  the  left  groin,  on  leaning 
the  body  backwards,  [Tz.] 

Simple  pain,  as  from  excoriation,  in  the  left  inguinal  ring,  as  if  a 
hernia  would  come  out  (aft.  6 h.). 

In  the  bend  of  the  groin  (in  the  tendon  of  the  psoas  muscle  that 
becomes  prominent  on  moving),  almost  only  when  walking,  pressive 
tension  ; when  pressed  on  it  is  painful,  as  if  a hard  body  lay  under 
the  skin,  which  increased  the  pressure.  [Tz.] 

175.  Drawing  cramp  anteriorly  in  the  bend  of  the  right  groin,  which 
after  moving  the  tendon  of  the  psoas  muscle  is  increased,  and 
becomes,  as  it  were,  throbbing,  and  then  continues  even  when  sitting. 
[Fz.] 

Aching,  rumbling,  gurgling  in  the  abdomen.  [Gjr.] 

Colic-like  rumbling  and  rolling  in  the  abdomen,  for  half  an  hour. 
Flatulence  and  discharge  of  flatus. 

Noises  in  the  abdomen,  without  sensation  of  flatulence  therein, 
and  without  discharge  of  flatus.  \Bch.'\ 

180.  Tension  of  the  skin  on  the  abdomen  when  he  raises  himself  up. 

[*•] 

The  abdomen  is  painful,  as  if  ulcerated,  when  moving,  but  not 
when  touched.  [Tz.] 

Forcing  downwards  and  boring  anteriorly  in  the  left  side  of  the 
abdomen.  [Tz.] 

In  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  sensation  as  if  something  were 
forcing  itself  through.  [Tz.] 

Urging  to  stool.  \_Hbg. ] 

185.  Before  stool,  chilliness. 

After  constipation  for  forty-eight  hours  there  occurred  a quite 
soft,  yellow  stool,  without  suffering.  [Tz.] 

Ash-coloured  diarrhoea,  as  in  jaundice.  [Schiemann,  1.  c.] 

After  vomiting  four  times,  faintness,  followed  by  violent  diarrhoea 
of  an  ash-coloured,  pappy  matter,  as  in  jaundice.  FMeyer,  in  Richter's 
Chir.  BibL , v,  p.  532.1] 


1 Effect  of  digitalis  given  for  mammary  scirrhus. 


DIGITALIS. 


560 


Jaundice.1  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

190.  Diarrhoea. 

Purging.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Thin  stool.  \_Hbg.] 

First  two  or  three  thin  stools  (aft.  24  h.),  then  constipation  in 
the  morning  ; and  only  in  the  evening  evacuation  with  many  thread- 
worms (aft.  55  h.).  [Stf.] 

After  seventy-two  hours  the  stool  became  quite  soft  and  liquid 
and  also  much  more  frequent.  [T%.] 

195.  For  several  days  two  or  three  stools.  [Zr.] 

Violent  diarrhoea.  [Lentin,— Baylies,  1.  c.] 

Painful  purging  for  three  or  four  days.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 
Bellyache,  more  tearing  than  shooting,  in  the  morning  in  bed, 
followed  by  two  attacks  of  diarrhoea  and  thereafter  urging  to  stool  in 
the  rectum. 

Diarrhoea  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen.  [. Bch.] 

200.  Several  diarrhoeic  stools,  preceded  by  cutting  in  the  abdomen 
(aft.  8 h.  and  longer).  [Bch.] 

Diarrhoea  of  faeces  mixed  with  mucus,  preceded  by 
bellyache,  sometimes  pressive,  sometimes  cutting  (aft.  6 
— 8 h.),  which  went  off  each  time  he  went  to  stool.  [Bch.] 

Almost  incurable  dysenteries.2  [Boerhave,  Rar.  Morb.  Histories, 
Jenae,  1771,  hist.  308.] 

He  passes  stool  and  urine  involuntarily. 

In  the  left  renal  region  a fine  shooting,  when  sitting.  [Hbg.] 
205.  Urging  to  urinate  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hbg.] 

Retention  of  urine.3  [Henry,  1.  c.] 

Straining,  ineffectual  urging  to  pass  urine.  [Mangold,  in  Horn’s 
Archiv  f.  pr.  Med.,  iii,  1,  p.  14 1.4] 

A contractive  pain  in  the  urinary  bladder,  whilst  urinating  ; the 
urine  was  evacuated  with  difficulty  owing  to  this  pain.  [Ln.] 

The  first  day  he  only  passes  urine  twice  and  but  little,  but  with- 
out suffering  ; after  forty-eight  hours  the  urine  becomes  much  more 
copious  and  accompanied  by  cutting  drawing  in  the  bladder.  \_Fz .] 
210.  Diuresis. 

She  must  get  up  every  night  to  pass  urine. 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate ; the  urine  only  comes  away  by 
drops,  with  burning  sensation  in  the  urethra  and  the  region  of  the 
glans  ; the  urine  had  a reddish  appearance  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Myr .] 

The  urine  commences  to  be  passed  less  frequently,  but  in  greater 
quantity  and  with  less  burning  (aft.  20  h.).  [. Myr .] 

At  night  constant  urging  to  urinate,  and  when  he  got  up  to 
make  water,  he  had  dizziness  and  vertigo  (aft.  12  h.  and  beyond  till 
morning) . [Myr.] 


1 This  indeed  occurred  in  several  of  Withering’s  patients,  but  always  in  the 
natural  sequence  of  their  maladies,  and  never  traceable  to  digitalis. 

5 As  in  note  to  S.  94. 

3 Rather,  “ suppression.”  It  lasted  nearly  three  days. 

4 Not  accessible. 


DIGITALIS. 


561 


215.  Without  urging  to  urinate,  dark  urine,  which  on  standing  grew 
redder  and  cloudy  (aft.  14  h.).  \_Bch.'] 

After  the  diuresis,  retention  of  urine,  then  nausea,  vomiting  and 
diarrhoea*  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  passing  of  a watery  urine. 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  and  he  passed  much  water  of  a 
healthy  colour  (aft.  8,  9,  10  h.).  [. Bch.~] 

Increased  discharge  of  urine,  with  increased  urging  thereto,  and 
inability  to  retain  it.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

220.  Inability  to  retain  the  urine.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

After  the  diuresis,  nausea.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

While  urinating,  in  the  middle  of  the  urethra,  a pressing  (burning) 
sensation,  as  if  the  urethra  were  too  narrow,  which,  however,  goes 
off  on  continuing  to  urinate. 

During  the  diuresis  and  diarrhoea  small  quick  pulse,  whilst  the 
hands  and  feet  are  icy  cold.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

The  urine  is  acrid.1  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

225.  Inflammation  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder.  [Don.  Monro,  in 
Samml.f.  pr.  Aerzte , xiii,  p.  2.2] 

Several  times  in  the  night  sensation  as  if  pollutions  would  occur, 
but  none  came  ; in  the  morning  a sticky  moisture  at  the  mouth  of 
the  urethra. 

In  the  right  testicle  a pain  as  if  contused. 

* 

* 

In  the  morning,  with  some  coryza,  stoppage  of  the  nose  (aft  73 
h.).  [Lr.-] 

Coryza  and  cough  to  a great  degree  ; he  could  scarcely  speak 
for  coryza. 

230.  In  the  morning  he  is  hoarse. 

After  a night  sweat,  in  the  morning  such  great  hoarseness,  that 
he  could  not  speak. 

In  the  morning  mucus  adheres  in  the  larynx,  which  is  easily 
detached,  but  when  he  wishes  to  cough  it  up  it  generally  gets  into 
the  fauces,  so  that  he  must  swallow  it.  [Gjj.] 

In  the  morning  expectoration  of  mucus  by  voluntary  hacking 
cough  (aft.  73  h.).  [Zr.] 

The  irritation  to  cough  extends  to  the  palate. 

235.  A dry  dull  cough,  as  from  tickling  in  the  trachea.  [5^/T] 

* This  is  a very  rare  alternating  action  of  foxglove,  and  only  happens  from 
excessive  doses.  Much  more  frequent  and  usual  is  the  difficulty  of  urinating  in  the 
primary  action  of  this  medicine,  see  205 — 209,  212,  and  222,  owing  to  which  it 
can  be  not  unfrequently  of  great  use  homoeopathically  in  dropsical  diseases,  which 
are  accompanied  by  similar  difficulty  with  regard  to  the  urinary  secretion  and  other 
symptoms  of  a similar  character  only  observed  in  the  primary  action  of  foxglove. 
The  copious,  often  involuntary,  passing  urine  occurring  during  the  use  of  foxglove, 
see  213,  214,  217,  to  220,  and  diuresis  210,  are  only  secondary  action  and  reaction  of 
the  organism  after  the  above-mentioned  primary  action. 


1 Not  found. 

2 Effect  of  digitalis  given  for  dropsy, — Literally,  lt  urging  to  urinate  even  to 
inflammation  of  the  bladder.” 


562 


DIGITALIS. 


(After  a meal  the  cough  is  so  severe  that  he  vomits  his  food.) 
(About  12  p.m.  cough  and  sweat.) 

Dry  cough  which  excites  tensive  aching  pains  in  the  arm  and 
shoulder  (aft.  36  h.).  [6’*/'.] 

Pain  in  the  chest,  which  makes  the  cough  difficult.  [Brandis, 
in  Schiemann , 1.  c.,  p.  61.] 

240.  In  the  morning,  after  rising,  tightness  of  the  chest,  with  dry 
cough.  [Hbg.] 

Haemoptysis. 

Expectoration  from  the  lungs  coloured  with  blood.1 

[Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

At  every  breath  sensation  as  if  he  were  electrified.  [Sacken- 
reuter,  in  Annalen  der  Heilkunde , 1811,  March.2] 

Palpitation  of  the  heart. 

245.  Almost  audible,  strong 'heart’s  beats,  with  anxiety  and  contrac- 
tive pains  under  the  sternum.  [ Bch.~\ 

Aching  (pressing  contractive)  heart’s  beats,  with  anxiety  and 
spasmodic  pains  in  the  sternum  and  under  the  ribs,  which  are 
increased  by  bending  forward  the  head  and  upper  part  of  the  body 
(aft.  *h.).  [Bch,] 

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest  a strong  perceptible  beating  as  from 
an  artery  synchronous  with  the  pulse  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hbg7\ 

Painful  suffocating  constriction  of  the  chest,  as  if  its  internal 
parts  were  all  grown  together,  especially  in  the  morning  on  awaking, 
owing  to  which  he  must  quickly  sit  upright. 

Contractive  pains  in  the  sternum  itself ; they  are  increased  by 
bending  forward  the  head  and  upper  part  of  the  body  (aft.  2^  h.). 
[Bch.] 

250.  Sensation  as  if  raw  in  the  chest  and  stitches  in  it. 

When  raising  up  the  body  tension  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest, 
as  if  that  part  were  contracted.  [FzJ] 

When  sitting  in  a bent  position  pressure  on  the  lower  part  of  the 
chest ; the  breathing  is  shorter  and  not  enough  ; he  cannot  hold  his 
breath  long  but  must  quickly  breathe  again.  [Fz.~\ 

Breath  drawn  with  difficulty,  slowly  and  deeply.  [Rkt."\ 

Tension  on  the  chest  and  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which 
often  forces  him  to  take  a deep  inspiration.  \_Rkt.] 

255.  For  many  days  a painful  tightness  of  chest ; he  must  often  draw 
a deep  breath,  and  yet  he  felt  as  if  he  had  not  breathed  in  sufficient 
air,  especially  when  sitting.  [Stf.~\ 

Drawing  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum  when  walking.  [T%.] 
Pressive  drawing  on  the  chest  when  coughing.  [Fz.~\ 

From  violent  exertion  of  the  arm  he  gets  immediately  cutting 
pressure  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  chest,  anteriorly  in  the  region  of 
the  third  rib,  externally.  [Fz.] 

Great  heat  on  the  chest,  as  if  he  stood  undressed  in  front  of  the 
warm  stove,  soon  followed  by  coldness  about  the  chest.  [Hbg. ] 


* A standing  symptom  with  the  patient. 

2 Not  accessible. 


DIGITALIS. 


563 


260.  On  the  right,  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  sharp  stitches.  [Ghj.] 
Eroding,  itching  pricking  synchronous  with  the  pulse  in  the  left 
side,  close  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gjj.] 

Below  the  right  axilla,  under  the  ribs,  obtuse  (squeezing)  stitches. 

[<?*.]  . • 

On  blowing  the  nose,  pain  in  the  sacrum  as  if  bruised. 

In  the  left  side  of  the  loins  eroding  itching,  compelling  him  to 

scratch.  [Gj.t.] 

265.  In  the  left  side,  in  the  region  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  drawing 
cutting  pain,  which  is  relieved  by  pressing  on  it  with  the  hand. 

Drawing  in  the  spine,  the  limbs,  and  fingers  as  sometimes  after 
a chill.  [Rkt.] 

In  the  first  dorsal  vertebrae  a sensation  like  a blow  (aft.  2 h.). 

In  the  junction  of  the  first  dorsal  and  last  cervical  vertebrae,  the 
joint  pains  as  if  excoriated  on  bending  forward  the  neck,  but  not  on 
touching. 

(Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  back.) 

270.  Cutting  pain,  with  numbness  of  the  skin,  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
nape,  whfch  compels  the  head  to  be  drawn  backwards,  whereby  it 
appears  to  him  as  if  a soft  dead  part  were  jammed  in  between  the 
joint,  that  did  not  allow  the  head  to  be  bent  quite  backwards.  [Tz.] 
Tearing  under  the  right  scapula.  [Gtj.] 

Obtuse  stitches  betwixt  the  scapulae. 

Voluptuous  itching  in  the  axilla.  [Tz.] 

On  moving  the  armsi  tensive  aching  pain  of  the  muscles  of  the 
arm  and  shoulder.  \_Stf.~\ 

275.  Paralytic  weakness  in  the  left  arm  ; he  could  scarcely  raise  it  up 
or  close  the  fingers  to  make  a fist  without  pain.  \_Hbg.~\ 

On  the  right  arm  a sore  burning. 

Heaviness  in  the  left  arm,  also  felt  when  at  rest. 

In  the  left  upper  arm  a burning  shooting  sensation.  \_Hbg.~\ 

A painful  twitching  beating  in  the  flesh  of  the  upper  arm  and 
thigh. 

280.  Tearing  stitches  on  the  right  upper  arm  when  walking  (aft.  74 

h.).  [Lr.] 

Needle-pricks  on  the  lower  part  of  the  left  upper  arm,  continuing 
on  moving  it.  [ Rkt .] 

Tingling  sensation  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  elbow-joint,  as 
if  the  arm  would  go  to  sleep,  and  as  if  the  nerve  were  somewhat 
pressed  (aft.  | h.),  and  the  same  sensation  there  on  touching  this 
part  (aft.  18  h.).  [Rkt.~\ 

In  the  middle  of  the  shaft  of  the  ulna  paralytic  pain,  on  extend- 
ing the  arm  and  when  it  lies  outstretched.  \_Fz.~] 

The  right  hand,  together  with  the  fingers,  greatly 
swollen  at  night ; the  swelling  lasted  three  hours  (aft.  20, 
22  h.).  [Myr.~\ 

285.  Above  the  right  wrist-joint  on  the  back  of  the  ulna,  a pinching 
and  squeezing  sharp  shooting.  [Gts.] 


564 


DIGITALIS. 


Severe  stitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  forearm  (aft.  i h.). 

i>.]  . . „ 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  right  wrist.  [Gw.j 

Severe  tearing  on  the  right  forearm,  more  externally, 
when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  32  h.).  [Lr.] 

On  the  back  of  the  hand  a kind  of  miliary  eruption  without 
sensation. 

290.  An  itching  on  the  back  of  the  hand,  mostly  at  night. 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  right  metacarpal  bones  (aft.  8 h.). 
[Gss.~\ 

Spasmodic  stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  left  thumb,  when  at  rest 
and  when  moving  (aft.  h.).  [Zr.] 

Twitching  paralytic  tearing  in  the  right  index,  front  and  back. 

[<?«.] 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  finger-joints,  when  at  rest  and  when 
moving.  [Gw.] 

295.  Involuntary  twitching  of  the  left  index,  which  is  drawn  outwards 
by  it.  [Zz.] 

Burning  shooting  on  the  left  thumb  just  above  the  nail,  which  is 
much  aggravated  by  pressing  on  it.  [ Fz.~\ 

The  nates  go  to  sleep  in  the  evening  when  sitting,  and  become 
as  if  quite  dead.  [/%.] 

Slow  drawing  above  the  nates.  [Zz.] 

After  sitting  (in  a carriage)  great  stiffness  in  the  joints  of  the 
lower  extremities,  which  went  off  by  walking. 

300.  On  the  upper  and  anterior  part  of  the  thigh  an  eroding  itching. 
[Gss.-] 

On  the  thigh,  somewhat  above  the  left  knee  towards  the  outside, 
sharp  stitches  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gw.] 

Aching  drawing  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  thigh.  [Zz.] 
Drawing  on  the  inside  of  the  thigh,  when  sitting,  and  on  the 
inner  side  of  the  left  foot,  when  it  hangs  free  and  is  not  supported. 
[*■*.] 

Pressure  in  the  right  thigh  on  its  anterior  aspect  of  a pressive 
drawing  character,  that  gradually  increased  and  then  diminished. 

['%•] 

305.  On  crossing  the  lower  extremities  one  over  the  other,  cutting 
sensation  in  the  thigh,  which  goes  off  on  uncrossing  them.  [/%.] 
Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  muscles  above  the  hough  when  sitting, 
which  goes  off  after  walking  a little.  [Zz.] 

When  he  moves  the  knees  after  lying,  on  commencing  to  move, 
the  thighs  and  legs  and  sacrum  are  painful,  as  if  bruised. 

Painless  stiffness  on  the  outer  condyle  of  the  knee-joint,  as  from 
internal  swelling,  with  sensation  of  coldness.  \_Fz .] 

On  going  upstairs  a sensation  in  the  knees  as  from  great  fatigue. 
[Bch.] 

310.  Under  the  left  knee,  on  the  outer  side  of  the  tibia,  sharp  stitches, 
during  movement  and  when  at  rest  (aft.  1 h.).  [Gw.] 

When  walking  tired  pain  in  the  knees  and  tibiae,  as  after  a 
long  walk.  [Bch.'] 


DIGITALIS. 


5^5 


Prostration  in  all  the  limbs,  especially  the  feet,  in  the  joints,  as 
after  a long  journey. 

Twitching  of  the  muscles  under  the  left  hough  synchronous  with 
the  pulse,  which  goes  off  on  touching.  [Tz.] 

Tension  in  the  houghs,  which  does  not  permit  them  to  be 
straightened.  [Tz.] 

315.  In  the  left  leg  a heaviness,  just  as  if  it  were  in  the  shaft  of  the 
tibia,  that  hinders  him  in  walking. 

Drawing  on  the  shaft  of  the  left  tibia,  as  if  a part  were  torn  out 
there.  [Tz.] 

Constant  stretching  of  the  legs,  compelled  by  the  weariness. 

IHbg.-] 

When  standing  the  left  leg  has  sore  pain,  and  as  if  shattered. 
[*■*•] 

Burning  in  the  right  calf  as  soon  as  he  lays  it  over  the  other  leg. 

[**•] 

320.  The  ankle-joint  pains  on  extending  it,  as  if  over-stretched. 

[**•] 

Eroding  itching  above  the  outer  ankle  of  the  foot.  [Gw.] 

An  itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  chiefly  at  night. 

In  the  evening  painful  sharp  stitches  in  the  right  sole,  so  that  the 
whole  lower  extremity  twitches.  [Tz»] 

Penetrating  pain  in  the  joints. 

325.  After  the  midday  sleep  all  the  joints  are  painful,  as  if  broken  on 
the  wheel. 

General  soreness  of  the  whole  body.  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

(In  the  warm  room  the  sufferings  seem  to  be  increased.)  [*S7/\] 
The  epidermis  of  the  body  scales  off.  [Von  Haller,  in  Vicars 
Mat.  Med .,  i,  p.  112.1] 

Tearing,  burning  (and  slightly  itching),  slow  stitches  on  various 
parts  of  the  body. 

330.  Eroding  itching  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  which  compelled 
him  to  scratch,  whereby  it  remits  somewhat,  but  soon  recurs.  [Gw.] 

When,  during  the  eroding  itching  on  almost  all  parts 
of  the  body  he  does  not  scratch,  it  usually  becomes  ever 
more  severe,  and  at  last  develops  to  intolerable  burning 
needle-pricking,  that  at  one  time  declines,  at  another 
returns  in  greater  intensity.  [Gw.] 

Pain  on  the  affected  part.  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

Tickling  on  the  affected  part.  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

Weakness  and  weariness  of  the  lower  extremities,  with  a 
trembling  sensation.  \_Rkt.'\ 

335.  Exhustion,  powerlessness,  and  paralytic  weakness  of  the  lower 
extremities,  without  pain.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Laziness  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs.  [Mossmann,  Essay , 1.  c.] 

On  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning,  lazy  and  tired.  [ Ln.\ 

Sinking  of  the  vital  powers. 

Weakness,  sinking  of  the  strength.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 


1 Statement  from  authors. 


566 


DIGITALIS. 


340.  Sudden  sinking  of  the  strength,  with  general  sweat,  and,  some 
hours  afterwards,  cough. 

Sudden  extreme  exhaustion,  as  if  he  should  lose  consciousness 
(after  the  midday  meal),  with  general  heat  and  perspiration,  without 
thirst. 

All  his  muscles  are  relaxed ; he  feels  as  if  he  had  not  slept 
enough.  [F%.] 

Frequent  exhaustion ; she  must  go  to  bed  because  sitting  up 
fatigues  her.  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

Extreme  languor.  [Maclean,  1.  c.] 

345.  Considerable  degree  of  languor  and  vertigo,  with  intermitting 
pulse.  [Drake,  1.  c.,  p.  132. 

Exhaustion  and  weakness,  which  the  patient  thinks  he  cannot  bear 
without  dying.1  [Drake,  1.  c.,  p.  136.] 

General  loss  of  power.  [Lettsom,  1.  c.] 

General  weakness,  as  if  all  parts  of  the  body  were 
exhausted  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Hbg.~] 

(Fatal)  apoplexy.  [Sherwin,2  in  Phys.  Med.  Jour.,  1801,  Jul.] 
350.  Weakness  almost  to  death.*3  [Maclean,  1.  c.,  1802,  Febr.] 

Constant  inclination  to  syncopes.  [Maclean,  1.  c.,  1800,  Aug.] 
Great  inclination  to  syncopes.  [Drake,  1.  c.,  p.  126.] 

Tendency  to  faint,  and  relaxation  of  the  vital  power.  [Drake, 
].  c.,  p.  124.] 

Syncopes.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

355,  Syncope  during  the  sickness.4  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

He  feels  as  if  the  body  were  very  light  (aft.  4 h.).  [F%.] 

Frequent  yawning  and  stretching.  \_Stf.'] 

Frequent  drowsiness  to  a considerable  degree.  [Maclean,  1.  c.] 
Drowsy  fatigue,  slumber  (aft.  8 h.). 

360.  Frequent  drowsiness.  [Drake,  1.  c.,  p.  128.] 

A deep  sleep.5  [Maclean,  1.  c.] 

Sleep  with  many  not  disagreeable  dreams.  \_Hbg.~] 

At  night  sleep  disturbed  by  disagreeable  dreams  of 

miscarriage  of  his  projects  (aft.  23  h.).  [Zr.] 

At  night  merely  slumber  in  place  of  sleep,  half  consciousness, 
without  being  able  to  get  to  sleep. 

365.  Restless  sleep  with  tossing  about  in  bed  at  night,  and  comical 
dreams.  \_Frn.] 

At  night  restless  sleep  on  account  of  constant  urging  to  urinate. 
\_Myrd\ 

* Opium  proved  to  be  the  antidote. 


1 Literally,  “ much  languor  and  sense  of  faintness ; the  patient  says  he  would 
rather  die  than  endure  it.” 

2 From  an  overdose.  The  reporter  writes  : t(  he  was  suddenly  and  unexpectedly 
carried  off  with  all  the  dreadful  distress  and  jactitation  which  an  overdose  of  digitalis 
sometimes  produces.  His  death  was  pretty  generally  ascribed  to  apoplexy,  and  was 
indeed  truly  apoplectic.” 

3 Rather,  “ as  if  to  death.” 

4 Rather,  between  the  attacks  of  sickness. 

5 Curative  effect. 


DIGITALIS.  567 

Nocturnal  restlessness  and  tossing  about,  half  awake  and  not 
fully  conscious.  \_Rkt.] 

He  woke  up  frequently  at  night  as  from  anxiety,  and  with  the 
impression  that  it  was  time  to  get  up. 

At  night  frequent  waking,  as  from  fright  (aft.  47  h.).  [Lr.] 

370.  At  night  frequent  waking  in  a fright,  as  from  a dream, 
as  if  he  fell  from  a height  or  into  the  water  (aft.  24,  72 
h.).  [Zr.] 

Restless  sleep ; he  could  not  lie  on  one  spot,  and  could  only  lie 
on  his  back.  [Z«.] 

At  night  violent  pain  in  the  left  shoulder  and  elbow-joints,  in 
half  sleep,  in  which  the  consciousness  was  not  quite  clear,  whilst  he 
lay  on  his  back  with  the  left  arm  above  the  head.  [ Rkt .] 

Convulsions.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Epileptic  convulsions,  then  blindness  and  amaurosis,  for  three 
days.  [Remer,  1.  c.] 

375.  Febrile  state.1  [Quarin,  1.  c.] 

Slow  pulse.1  [Lentin,  1.  c.] 

The  pulse  for  twenty-four  and  even  forty-eight  hours  was  much 
slower,  but  thereafter  all  the  quicker  and  suppressed.2^  [Lettsom, 
l.c.,  p.172.] 

Pulse  40  beats  per  minute.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Pulse  slower,  but  stronger.  [HbgJ] 

380.  Along  with  weakness  and  laziness  of  the  whole  body,  diminution 
of  the  pulse  beats  from  82  to  39  beats  ; in  longer  or  shorter  intervals 
it  made  short  pauses  ; the  beats  were  feeble.  \_Bch.~] 

The  pulse  at  first  slow,  then  suddenly  commences  to  make  a 
couple  of  beats,  or  the  finger  placed  on  it  now  and  then  loses  a whole 
beat.3  [Maclean,  1.  c.] 

The  pulse  sank  from  65  to  50  beats,  which  were  quite  irregular, 
always  between  three  or  four  soft  beats  a fuller  and  harder  one,  on 
the  first  day;  on  the  third  day  it  was  75.  [T%.] 

Diminution  of  the  pulse  from  100  beats  down  to  40.  [Moss- 
mann,  Essay , 1.  c.) 

The  pulse  sinks  to  50  and  finally  to  35  beats.  [Withering, 
1.  c.] 

385.  Pulse  slower  by  one  half,  for  several  days. 

Pulse  beats  diminished  to  almost  half  their  number.  [Baker, 
1-  c.] 

When  the  pulse  has  become  slow,  it  is  increased  in  quickness  by 
the  slightest  corporeal  exertion.  [Maclean,  1.  c.,  1800,  Aug.] 

* This  is  the  most  usual  phenomenon  from  foxglove,  that  after  the  preliminary 
slowness  of  the  pulse  (primary  action),  after  some  days  it  is  the  reverse  (reaction  or 
secondary  action),  a much  quicker  and  smaller  pulse  is  permanently  induced $ see 
also  383.  From  this  we  see  how  wrong  the  ordinary  physicians  are  who  endeavour 
to  produce  a permanently  slower  pulse  by  means  of  foxglove. 


1 Not  found. 

2 Rather,  “ but  thereafter  quicker  and  proportionately  weaker.” 

3 Literally,  “ pulse  suddenly  quickened  for  a few  beats,  then  slow  again ; or  it 
loses  a whole  beat.” 


568 


DIGITALIS. 


Irregular  pulse,  from  40  to  58  beats.1  [Baker,  1.  c.] 

The  number  of  the  pulse  beats  diminishes  scarcely  at  all  when 
standing,  little  when  sitting,  most  when  lying,  when  the  number 
sinks  to  60, 2 whereas  it  is  100  when  he  stands.  [Baidon,  in  Ed'inb. 
Med . and  Surg.  Journal , vol.  iii,  pt.  nth,  No.  iv.] 

390.  Hard,  small,  quick  pulse. 

Before  death,  100  pulse  beats  in  a minute.3  [Withering,  1.  c.] 
Frequent  yawning  and  stretching  with  chilliness.  [6V/i] 

Internal  coldness  in  the  whole  body  (aft.  5 m.).  [Grr.] 

Shivering  all  over  the  back  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Myr.~] 

395.  In  the  afternoon,  three  or  four  times  shivering,  and  in  the  night, 
profuse  sweat,  even  on  the  head  and  in  the  hair. 

Slight  rigor  in  the  back  (aft.  30^  h,).  [Bek.] 

By  day,  internal  chilliness  without  shivering  ; when  walking  in 
the  open  air  he  was  chilly  so  that  he  could  not  get  warm. 

Constant  chilliness,  chiefly  in  the  back.  [*S7/i] 

Coldness  first  of  the  fingers,  hands  and  feet,  then  of  the  palms 
and  soles,  then  of  the  whole  body,  especially  the  limbs. 

400.  Feeling  of  coldness  and  actual  coldness,  first  in  the  hands  and 
arms,  then  through  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  body  down  into  the 
feet  (aft.  § h.).  [Bch.] 

Coldness  of  the  body  with  sticky  sweat.  [Maclean,  1.  c.] 

Cold  sweats.  [Withering,  1.  c.] 

Coldness  and  chill  internally  and  externally  in  the  whole  body 
(aft.  36  h.).  [ Gss .] 

Internal  chill  in  the  whole  body  with  unusual  warmth  per- 
ceptible externally  (aft.  14  h.).  [Gjj.] 

405.  Cold  feeling  through  the  whole  body  at  once  ; the  body  felt 
cooler,  the  face  excepted,  which  had  no  sensation  of  coldness  and 
remained  warm  (aft.  J h.).  \_Bch.'\ 

One  hand  was  cold,  the  other  warm.  [Ln.~\ 

A suddenly  arising  warmth  through  the  whole  body,  which  just 
as  suddenly  went  off  again,  and  left  behind  a weakness  of  all  the 
parts  (aft.  25  h.).  [Bch.'\ 

Fever:  succession  of  shivering,  heat  and  strong  transpiration. 
[Mossmann,  in  Phys.  Med.  Journ .,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  warmth  all  over  the  body,  but  in  the  forehead  cold 
sweat — thirteen  or  fourteen  hours  after  the  coldness.  \_Bch.~\ 

410.  Along  with  slight  chilliness  in  the  back,  burning  of  the  head, 
face  and  ears,  with  red  cheeks  ; at  the  same  time  the  left  eye  seems 
much  smaller  (after  a meal  in  a moderately  warm  room).  [St/'.'] 
Redness  and  heat  of  the  whole  face,  with  chilliness  over  the  rest 
of  the  body  (aft.  3 h.).  [Trn.] 

The  inner  surface  of  the  hands  is  warm  and  perspiring.  [Hbg.] 

In  the  morning  on  waking  he  found  himself  in  slight  perspiration 

(aft.  24  M-  [Lr.-]  __ 

1 Rather,  “ from  48  to  56.” 

2 Should  be  “40.”  This  is  a statement  from  observation. 

3 Subsequent  to  S.  384. 

4 Accompanying  purulent  expectoration. 


DIGITALIS. 


569 


Perspiration  in  sleep  at  night. 

415.  Great  desire  for  work  (aft.  h.). 

Disposed  for  mental  work  and  for  all  kinds  of  business.*  \_Hbg.~\ 
Indisposed  to  speak.  \_Hbg.\ 

Gloominess  and  peevishness.  \_Hbg.~\ 

Gloomy,  morose  humour  ; he  scolds  about  everything.  [Rkt.] 

420.  Lachrymose  sadness  about  many  things  in  which  he  has  been 
unsuccessful  (aft.  | h.). 

He  is  sad  and  has  a feeling  of  being  very  ill  ; all  objects  appear 
to  him  as  in  fever,  just  as  if  he  had  a perversion  of  the  visual  faculty 
as  in  fever. 

Dejection  of  the  mind  and  apprehensiveness.1  [Withering,  1.  c.] 
Dispirited.* 3  [Penkivil,  1.  c.] 

Fear  of  death. 

425.  An  anxious  feeling  as  if  he  had  done  something  bad.  [Z«.] 

(Secret  mania  with  disobedience  and  obstinacy  ; he  tries  to  run 
away). 

Mind  indifferent,  as  insensible  to  surroundings,  as  if  he  had  not 
slept  enough,  but  without  sleepiness.  [ Trn.\ 

The  disposition  is  sociable  and  in  other  respects  tranquil,  except 
that  he  has  very  lively  fancies. t [F%.] 

* Curative  action. 

f Mostly  secondary  and  curative  action. 


1 Not  found. 

3 On  account  of  the  apparent  inefficiency  of  the  medicine. 


DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.1 

(Sundew.) 

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  this  lowly  plant,  which  grows  on  peaty  soil  [Hb. 
Rorellae,  Roris  Solis],  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.) 

This  plant,  one  of  the  most  powerful  medicinal  herbs  in  our  zone, 
was  used  by  the  older  physicians  mostly  as  an  external  remedy — in 
cutaneous  eruptions — but  not  with  the  best  effects.  They  also  gave 
it  internally,  and  sometimes,  as  it  would  seem,  with  advantage.  The 
moderns  who,  guided  by  tradition,  had  no  knowledge  of  any  other  than 
large  doses,  knew  not  how  to  employ  this  uncommonly  heroic  plant 
without  endangering  the  life  of  their  patients,  hence  they  rejected  it 
altogether. 

I first  employed  it  in  the  trillion-fold  dilution  of  the  juice,  but 
latterly  in  still  higher  potency,  and  at  last  in  the  30th  (decillion-fold) 
dilution  (each  diluting  phial  getting  only  two  succussions),  and  of  this  I 
gave  as  a dose  only  the  smallest  portion  of  a drop,  to  wit,  one,  or  at 
most  two,  globules  the  size  of  a poppy-seed  (of  which  from  200  to  300 
can  be  completely  moistened  with  a drop  of  the  dilution)  in  morbid 
conditions  similar  to  the  characteristic  effects  produced  by  the  plant  on 
healthy  persons. 

Thus,  for  example,  a single  such  dose  is  quite  sufficient  for  the 
homoeopathic  cure  of  epidemic  whooping-cough,*  according  to  the 
indications  given  by  symptoms  135,  137,  144,  149,  but  especially  145 
and  the  second  part  of  symptom  143. 

Allopathy,  as  may  easily  be  understood,  could  hitherto  do  nothing 
for  this  formidable  disease,  which  does  not  pass  off  by  itself  like  other 
acute  diseases,  without  terminating  fatally  or  tormenting  its  victim  for 
twenty  or  twenty-two  weeks.  In  consequence  it  allowed  many 
children  to  die  of  the  disease  where  it  did  not  hasten  death  by  large 
doses  of  unsuitable  drugs. 

He  who  fails  to  perceive  that  in  this  as  in  other  similar  cases  homoeo- 
pathy is  the  only  perfect,  true  medical  art,  let  him  continue  blindly  to 
employ  unknown  drugs  to  the  injury  of  sick  mankind  ! 

Drosera  requires  further  provings  of  its  pure  effects  on  the  healthy 
human  subject. 

Camphor  alleviates  and  antidotes  its  effects. 

* The  cure  takes  place  with  certainty  in  from  seven  to  nine  days,  under  a non- 
medicinal  diet.  Care  should  be  taken  not  to  give  a second  dose  (or  any  other 
medicine)  immediately  after  the  first  dose,  for  that  would  inevitably  not  only  prevent 
the  good  result,  but  do  serious  injury,  as  I know  from  experience. 


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827. 


DROSERA.  57i 

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Gutmann,  Friedrich  Hahne- 
mann, Langhammer,  Wislicenus. 

A few  symptoms  are  derived  from  : 

Bonfigli,  in  Vicafs  Matiere  Medic  ale,  i. 

Haller,  Ibid. 

Nicolaus,  Ibid. 

In  the  Fragmenta , Drosera  has  40  symptoms,  in  the  1st  edit,  of  the  1 R.  A.  M.  L.,5 
279,  and  in  this  2nd  edit.,  287.] 


DROSERA. 


When  walking  in  the  open  air,  vertigo  (aft.  4 d.). 

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  attack  of  vertigo ; he  felt  always 
as  if  he  would  fall  to  the  left  side  (aft  9 h.).  [Z>.] 

Whirling  and  giddy,  with  disinclination  for  work  (aft.  33  h.). 

[<?*•] 

The  head  is  confused  and  heavy. 

5.  Aching  pain  in  the  head. 

Out-pressing  pain  in  the  right  temple.  [Gw.] 

On  stooping,  headache  above  the  orbits,  which  goes  off  on 
walking. 

After  strong  exercise  and  when  walking,  a headache  in  the  fore- 
head, like  the  confusion  of  the  head  that  comes  from  much  speaking. 

Out-pressing  pain  in  forehead  and  zygomatic  pro- 
cesses (aft.  7i  h.).  [Gw.] 

10.  Aching  pain  above  the  right  temple  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Gw.] 

Pain  boring  out  at  the  forehead,  only  on  stooping  while  writing 
(aft.  7 h.).  [Gw.] 

A dull  drawing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  brain  towards  the 
temple  (aft.  28  h.).  [Gw.] 

In  the  right  half  of  the  brain,  drawing  pain  towards  the  occiput 
(aft.  9 h.).  [Gw.] 

Tearing  tensive  pain  in  the  forehead,  more  violent  on  stooping 
(aft.  11  h.).  [Gw.] 

15.  Sharp  cutting  needle-pricks  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead 
(aft.  33  h.).  [ir.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  brain,  more  towards  the  forehead,  worse  on 
moving  the  eyes,  but  relieved  by  supporting  the  head  on  the  hand 
(aft.  10  h.).  [Gw.] 

Heaviness  of  the  head  when  held  upright,  but  not  when  stooping 
(aft.  37  h.).  [G».] 

Painfulness  of  the  whole  brain  ; he  feels  every  step  in  it  (aft. 
8 h.).  [Gw.] 

Burning  sore  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  hairy  scalp  ; it  went  off 
each  time  it  was  touched  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Gw.] 

20.  Smarting  burning  pain  in  the  hairy  scalp  at  the  crown  (aft. 
10  h.).  [Gw.] 

Sore  pain  on  the  hairy  scalp,  above  the  right  side  of  the  forehead 
(aft.  32  h.).  [Gw.] 

Sore  pain  on  the  left  frontal  protuberance.  [Gw.] 


572 


DROSERA. 


Sore  sensation  in  the  skin  of  the  right  temple. 

[<?».] 

Itching  gnawing  on  the  hairy  scalp  anteriorly,  which  went  off  on 
rubbing.  [TVs.] 

25.  Eroding  itching  on  the  whole  hairy  scalp,  but  especially  on  the 
sides,  which  compelled  scratching  (aft.  12  h.)  [Lr.] 

Aching,  sometimes  combined  with  gnawing,  externally  on  the 
top  of  the  head  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.] 

Obtuse  boring  pain  externally  on  the  crown  (aft.  10  h.).  [TVs.] 
Aching  gnawing  pain  externally  over  the  eyebrows,  with 
drawing  thence  into  the  cerebellum,  in  the  morning  (aft.  28  h.). 
\Ws.1 

On  pressing  on  the  left  eyebrow  and  eyelid,  they  pain  as  if 
festering  (aft.  3 d.).  [Gn.~\ 

30.  Drawing  burning  pain  on  the  superciliary  arch,  more  towards  the 
temple  (aft.  25  h.).  [Gn.] 

Contracted  pupils. 

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  1,  2 h.).  [Lr.] 

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  25  h.).  [Lr.] 

Long  sight  (presbyopia)  and  weakness  of  the  eyes  ; when  he  tries 
to  see  small  objects,  he  has  flickering  before  the  eyes. 

35.  Like  a veil  before  the  eyes  ; on  reading  the  letters  run  together. 
In  the  evening  (7  o’clock),  when  he  comes  from  a walk  in  the 
open  air  into  the  room,  he  is  affected  with  dimness  of  vision,  with- 
out vertigo,  and  there  is  flickering  before  the  eyes. 

Bright  glittering  playing  before  the  right  eye,  rather  above  and 
to  the  side ; if  he  directs  his  sight  towards  the  glittering,  it  recedes 
always  more  out  of  the  line  of  sight ; it  hinders  him  in  reading  (aft. 
48  h.).  [TVs.] 

Tensive  burning  transversely  across  in  the  left  eye  and  eyelids 
(aft.  13  h.).  [Gn.] 

The  eyelids  stick  together  as  if  with  matter. 

40.  His  eyelids  itch  (aft.  24  h.). 

Sore  pain  in  the  right  lower  lid,  worse  when  touched  (aft.  11  h.). 

[G».] 

A cutting  pain  transversely  across  the  whole  of  the  left  eye.  [Gn.] 
Obtuse  tearing  transversely  across  the  left  eyeball  (aft.  32  h.). 
[Gn.] 

Severe  stitches  out  at  the  eyes,  especially  when  stooping. 

45.  A sharp  stitch  in  the  left  eyeball,  when  at  rest.  [Gn.] 

When  he  strains  the  eyes  to  look,  he  gets  a pain  in  them,  which 
is  more  smarting  than  aching. 

Burning  pain  in  the  right  eyeball,  and  fine  stitches  in  the  left 
internal  ear  (aft.  9 h.).  [ Gn .] 

Broad,  slow  stitches  through  the  left  ear  inwards  (aft.  2 h.). 

im.] 

Squeezing  and  shooting  in  the  left  middle  ear  (aft.  30  h.).  [Gn.] 
50.  Obtuse  stitch  in  the  right  ear,  not  quite  externally  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Gn.] 

A tickling  prick  in  the  innermost  part  of  the  right  ear.  [Gn.] 


DROSERA.  573 

A pain  in  the  right  inner  ear,  as  if  all  were  compressed,  almost 
cramp-like  (aft.  7J  h.).  [Gw.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  right  ear-lobe  and  in  a portion  of  the 
cartilage  (aft.  31  h.).  [Gw.] 

Sharp  gnawing  beneath  both  aural  cartilages  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVs.] 

55.  Tearing  and  twitching  pain  anteriorly  in  the  orifice  of  the  left 
ear  (aft.  35  h.).  [Gw.] 

Tensive  shooting  in  the  left  ear,  more  externally  than  inter- 
nally (aft.  1 2 h.).  [Gw.] 

Pecking  and  burning  pain  externally  in  the  whole  right  ear ; 
soon  followed  by  a dull  drawing  from  without  inwards  (aft.  57  h.). 
[Gn.] 

(Behind  and  beneath  the  left  ear,  a pimple  painful  when  touched.) 

Roaring  and  buzzing  before  the  ears,  or  like  a distant  drum, 
which  continues  when  moving  and  when  at  rest. 

60.  Hardness  of  hearing  with  increased  buzzing  before  the  ears. 

Prickling  burning  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  cheek, 
below  the  left  eyelid  (aft.  J h.).  [Gw.] 

Drawing  pressure  on  the  upper  jaws  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.] 

Sudden,  fine  twitching  in  the  left  cheek,  which  makes  him 
start  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.] 

Digging  aching  in  the  right  maxillary  joint,  and  in  the  neigh- 
bouring bones,  persisting  when  at  rest  and  when  moving — aggravated 
every  time  the  mouth  is  opened  (aft.  52  h.).  [Gw.] 

65.  Severe  aching  pain  in  the  right  maxillary  joint,  when  at  rest  and 
when  moving  (aft.  26  h.).  [Gw.] 

Prickling  on  the  left  side  of  the  nose  and  formication  in  the  left 
ear.  [Gw.] 

Bleeding  from  the  nose  when  stooping. 

Bleeding  from  the  nose  in  the  morning  and  evening. 

When  washing  his  face  in  the  morning  he  blows  blood  from  his 
nose  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gw.] 

70.  Great  sensitiveness  to  sour  smells  (aft.  3 d.).  [Gw.] 

The  lower  lip  chapped  in  the  centre. 

Red  pimple  in  the  middle  of  the  chin,  close  below  the  lower  lip, 
its  apex  covered  with  a white  scaly  skin,  without  sensation  even  when 
touched  (aft.  27  h.).  [Lr.] 

Here  and  there  in  the  face  small  pimples  with  fine  shooting  pain 
only  when  touched,  in  the  centre  of  which  a pustule  is  formed, 
which  dries  up  after  some  days.  [ TVs.] 

Shooting  tearing  on  the  left  lower  jaw  as  if  in  the  periosteum 
(aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.'] 

75.  Burning  pain  in  the  skin  before  the  right  oral  commissure. 

[<?».] 

Causes  pain  in  the  teeth.  [Haller,  in  Vicafs  Matiere.  Med .,  i, 
PP-  3!3>  3H-1]. 

Shooting  pain  in  the  teeth,  in  the  morning,  after  warm  drinks. 

(Looseness  of  the  teeth.) 


1 From  its  acridity. 


574 


DROSERA. 


Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  crown  of  an  incisor  (aft.  56  h.).  [Gn.'\ 
80.  Fine  pecking  pricks  on  the  dorsum  of  the  tongue  (aft.  35  h.). 
[Gn.] 

On  the  tip  of  the  tongue  there  appears  a whitish  ulcer. 

Shooting  smarting  pain  in  right  side  and  tip  of  the  tongue.  \_Gn,~\ 

A small,  round,  painless  swelling  in  the  middle  of  the  tongue 
(aft.  48  h.). 

Smarting  pain  on  the  inside  of  the  left  cheek  (as  from  pepper) 
(aft.  2 h.).  [(?«.] 

85.  Copious  discharge  of  watery  saliva— water-brash. 

Lips  always  dry  and  little  taste. 

Thirst. 

Food  is  quite  without  any  taste  for  him. 

Bread  tastes  bitter. 

90.  In  the  morning,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  until  he  dines. 

On  the  soft  palate  and  deep  down  in  the  fauces,  a rough,  scraping 
dry  sensation,  which  causes  short  cough.  [IVs.~\ 

Creeping,  smarting  sensation  in  the  fauces,  on  the  right  side, 
when  not  swallowing  (aft.  35  h.).  \Gn.'\ 

(Frequently  during  the  day  ravenous  hunger,  without  appetite; 
when  he  thought  he  had  appeased  it,  it  returned  after  one  and  a half 
or  two  hours.) 

(Frequent  hiccup  (aft.  28  h.).  [ Lr .] 

95.  Something  bitter  rises  from  the  stomach  and  comes  into  his 
mouth. 

Something  bitter  and  sour  rises  from  the  stomach  and  comes 
into  his  mouth. 

(Nausea  comes  on  by  mere  imagination.) 

After  a meal  nausea  with  inclination  to  vomit. 

Nausea  with  aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  head,  especially  in  the 
forehead  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.] 

100.  Nocturnal  vomiting. 

Vomiting  before  dinner. 

In  the  morning,  vomiting,  mostly  bile. 

Vomiting  of  blood. 

Shooting  and  throbbing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

105.  Squeezing  tension  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  all  were  drawn 
inwards  there,  especially  on  inspiring  deeply  (aft.  10  h.).  \JVs.~\ 

Fine,  transient  clutching  together  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft. 

4h .).  [/T*.] 

The  region  below  the  ribs  (hypochondria)  is  painful  on  being 
touched  and  when  coughing,  and  when  he  coughs  he  must  press  on 
the  spot  with  his  hand,  in  order  to  mitigate  the  pain. 

Tensive  pain  in  the  epigastrium  before  and  after  stool,  when  he 
kept  in  his  breath  ; he  felt  nothing  when  inspiring  and  expiring ; 
when  sitting  and  stooping  the  pain  in  the  epigastrium  becomes  very 
violent  ; the  stool  is  softer  than  usual  (aft.  50  h.).  [ Gn.\ 

From  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  an  obtuse  drawing  stitch 
darted  across  to  the  left  side,  which  almost  took  away  his  breath, 
when  walking  (aft.  5 d.).  [Gtz.] 


DROSERA. 


575 


no.  Pinching  and  clawing  in  the  abdomen,  with  diarrhoea. 

A twisting  pain  in  the  abdomen. 

A shooting  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  when  sitting. 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  3 h.). 

Nipping,  cutting  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  caused  by  dis- 
placed flatulence  (aft.  13  h.).  [Lr.] 

1 15.  Cutting  blows  in  the  abdominal  and  pectoral  muscles,  more 
severe  when  sitting  than  when  moving  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.] 

Boring  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdominal  integuments 
(aft.  13  h.).  [Gn.] 

Obtuse  stitch  in  the  right  iliac  fossa  (aft.  51  h.).  [ Gn .] 

Out-pressing  pain  in  the  rectum,  independent  of  stool  (aft.  6 
h.).  [Gn.] 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  not  followed  by  stool  (aft.  5 h.).  [Gn.] 
120.  Frequent  stools,  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen. 

Bloody  mucus  comes  away  with  the  stool,  followed  by  pains  in 
the  abdomen  and  pain  in  the  sacrum. 

The  first  days  thin  stool,  then  somewhat  harder,  but  after  the 
evacuation  there  remained  still  fruitless  call  to  stool. 

A stool  always  becoming  softer  as  it  passes  (aft.  1 h.).  [Gn.] 

Stool  consisting  of  much  pappy  faeces  (aft.  14  h.).  [ Lr .] 

125.  Scanty  stool  of  hard  faeces,  with  pressing  (aft.  38  h.).  [Lr.] 

Watery,  inodorous  urine,  with  white,  slimy  foetid  stools  (aft. 
24  h.). 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  very  scanty  urine, 
often  only  passed  by  drops  (aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.] 

Diuresis.  [Nicolaus,1  in  Vicat^  1.  c.] 

Frequent  copious  flow  of  urine,  all  day  (aft,  48  h.).  [Lr.] 

130.  Itching  obtuse  prick  in  the  glans  penis,  lasting  some  minutes 
(aft.  33  h.).  [Gn.] 

* 

Crawling  sensation  in  the  right  nostril,  provoking  sneezing  (aft. 
26  h.).  [Gn.] 

Frequent  sneezing,  with  or  without  fluent  coryza  (aft. 
x3,  24  h-)- 

Painful  sneezing  and  a cough,  during  which  he  must  support  the 
chest  with  his  hand  laid  on  it. 

Severe  fluent  coryza,  especially  in  the  morning.  [Lr.] 

133.  When  coughing,  pain  in  the  hypochondria,  as  if  that  region  were 
forcibly  constricted. 

Pain  across  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  and  hypochondria. 

Across  the  chest  a violent  pain  when  sitting,  also  independently 
of  the  cough,  which  is  composed  more  of  pressure  than  shooting,  and 
goes  off  on  moving  ; the  part  also  aches  when  touched. 

The  region  beneath  the  short  ribs  (hypochondria)  suffers  from  a 
contractive  pain,  which  hinders  the  cough  ; he  cannot  cough  on 
account  of  pain  unless  he  presses  his  hand  on  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Deep  breathing. 


1 Observation, 


DROSERA. 


576 

140.  Dyspnoea. 

Tightness  of  chest,  especially  whenever  he  speaks,  even  at  every 
word— the  throat  was  contracted  ; he  felt  no  tightness  of  chest  when 
walking. 

Crawling  in  the  larynx,  which  provokes  coughing, 
with  sensation  as  if  a soft  body  was  located  there,  with 
fine  shooting  therein  to  the  right  side  of  the  gullet  (aft.  4 
d.).  [<?*.] 

Deep  down  in  the  fauces  (and  on  the  soft  palate)  a 
rough,  scraping  sensation  of  dryness  exciting  short 
cough,  with  yellow  slimy  expectoration  and  hoarseness 
of  the  voice,*  so  that  it  is  only  with  an  effort  that  he  can 
speak  in  a deep  bass  tone ; at  the  same  time  he  feels  an 
oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if  something  there  kept  back 
the  air  when  he  coughed  and  spoke,  so  that  the  breath 
could  not  be  expelled  (lasting  several  days).  \TVs.] 

Cough  coming  from  quite  deep  down  in  the  chest. 

145.  Cough,  the  impulses  of  which  follow  one  another  so  violently, 
that  he  can  hardly  get  his  breath. 

Cough  in  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down. 

Nocturnal  cough. 

He  wakes  up  at  night  (about  2 a.m.)  for  a short  time  to  cough 
and  then  falls  asleep  again. 

In  the  evening,  while  lying  in  bed,  when  he  breathes  out,  a 
sudden  contraction  of  the  hypogastrium,  which  makes  him  heave  as 
though  he  would  vomit,  and  excites  coughing. 

150.  The  cough,  when  expectoration  did  not  properly  occur,  affected 
the  abdomen,  like  a clawing  together  and  retching. 

The  cough  makes  him  like  to  vomit. 

On  coughing,  he  vomits  water,  mucus  and  food. 

On  coughing,  the  breath  he  brings  up  from  his  lungs  has  a smell 
of  burning. 

Cough  in  the  morning  with  expectoration. 

155.  (The  taste  of  what  he  coughs  and  hawks  up  is  salt.) 

What  is  coughed  up  in  the  morning  tastes  bitter. 

What  is  coughed  up  has  a disgusting  taste  in  the  morning — not 
during  the  day. 

Shooting  in  the  chest  when  coughing. 

From  the  morning  onwards,  intolerable  stitches  when  coughing 
and  breathing  deeply  in  the  upper  part  of  the  side  of  the  chest,  near 
the  axilla,  which  is  somewhat  alleviated  only  by  pressing  the  hand 
on  the  painful  part — with  expectoration  intimately  mixed  with 

* Very  similar  to  this  must  be  the  state,  where,  in  some  kinds  of  so-called  laryngeal 
phthisis  (provided  that  no  specific  cachexy  of  a syphilitic,  psoric,  &c.  kind  is  at  the 
bottom  of  it),  sundew  is  so  peculiarly  useful.  This  plant  also  excites  a very  violent 
cough  in  sheep  (see  Borrichius,  in  Act.  Hafne .,  vol.  iv,  p.  162).  Several  of  the 
older  physicians  found  this  plant  useful  in  some  kinds  of  malignant  cough,  and  in 
phthisical  persons,  thus  confirming  its  (homoeopathic)  medicinal  power ; but  the 
moderns  (vide  Murray,  Apparat.  Med.,  vol.  iii,  p.  501),  in  conformity  with  their 
antipathic  theories,  warned  against  its  use  on  account  of  its  supposed  acridity. 


DROSERA. 


577 

blood,  and  coloured  red ; but  the  part  is  not  painful  to  external 
touch  (aft.  24  h.). 

160.  Haemoptysis. 

When  coughing  and  breathing,  stitches  in  the  pectoral  muscles. 

A burning  rough  sensation  deep  down  in  the  throat,  immediately 
after  dinner  (aft.  29  h.).  [(?».] 

Tensive  pain  in  the  pectoral  muscles,  lasting  several  hours,  when 
inspiring  and  expiring  (aft.  8 h.).  \Gn.'] 

Burning  sensation  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  without  thirst  (aft. 
4 h.).  [Gnf] 

165.  Creeping  sensation  in  the  left  costal  muscles,  with  a 
pressing  headache  in  both  temples,  especially  the  right  (aft.  8^-  h.). 
[G».] 

A hot,  obtuse  stitch  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  true  ribs, 
continuing  on  inspiration  and  expiration.  [Gn .] 

Obtuse  stitches  in  the  left  costal  muscles,  so  violent  that  they 
almost  take  away  his  breath,  continuing  on  inspiration  and  expiration 
(aft.  3 d.).  [Gn.] 

Itching  stitch  in  the  coccyx,  when  sitting  (aft.  29  h.).  [Gnf] 

On  walking  quickly,  a clawing-together  pinching  in  the  left 
lumbar  region,  which  tightens  the  breath,  relieved  by  pressing  with 
the  hand  (aft.  1 h.). 

170.  I 
n. 

Shooting  tearing  from  the  spine  to  the  anterior  process  of  the  left 
os  ilii,  when  sitting  (aft.  8 h.).  \Wsf\ 

An  obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  dorsal  muscles  (aft.  12  h.).  [Gnf] 

Here  and  there  pain  in  the  back  as  if  bruised. 

The  back  is  painful  as  if  it  were  beaten  (broken  on  the  wheel), 
in  the  morning  (aft.  12  h.). 

175.  Drawing  pain  in  the  back  and  shoulders,  when  at  rest  and  when 
moving  (aft.  6 h.).  [_Fr.  H — n.] 

During  movement,  rheurnatism  felt  between  the  scapulae,  which 
extends  to  the  sacrum. 

The  nape  is  stiff,  and  painful  on  movement. 

Quivering  on  the  right  shoulder,  only  when  at  rest 

(aft.  52  h.),  [ Gn.~\ 

In  the  shoulder-joint  pain  as  if  bruised,  when  he  bends  the  arm 
backwards,  or  raises  it,  or  lies  on  it,  or  only  touches  the  joint. 

180.  Pain  in  the  shoulder-joint,  as  if  the  arm  would  go  to  sleep,  and 
were  tired  and  weak — it  goes  off  on  continuing  to  move. 

When  walking  or  standing  dislocation  pain  in  the  left  axilla, 
which,  however,  is  alleviated  by  touching  (aft.  n h.).  [Zr.] 

Sharp  pressure  from  within  outwards  in  the  axilla,  when  at  rest 
(aft.  7 h.).  \m.} 

The  arm  is  painful  on  movement,  as  if  the  flesh  of  the  muscles 
were  detached  from  the  bones. 

Shooting  in  the  right  arm,  and  there  occurs  a pain  from  the 
shoulder  to  the  elbow,  even  when  at  rest  the  elbow-joint  is  painful 
when  touched,  as  if  gathering. 


LG 


)rawing  stitch  in  the  left  loin  down  into  the  penis  (aft.  6 h.). 


37 


57*  DROSERA. 

,u  : 23  ’ zz~-~*ec,  hm  : ~ the  region  of  the  elbow- :oint,  then  i 

that  of  the  shoulder-kxnt. 

tesj  r.  . a the  bend  of  the  elbow  on  flexing  the  anr 
fc  ' bat  *ttle  or.  estcndm?  ::  aft  24  h.\  'IF}.] 

5e  ere,  Terr  actrte.V  painful  stitches  through  the  middle  of  th 

left  firearm  aft.  12  L).  [iFi.] 

' 'he  wT3f-ja ~ % w'-ere  the  heads  of  the  ulna  and  radius  touc 

‘ - 1 tier,  cr  rerc  “2  and  turning  the  hand,  2nd  on  touching 
Par.  as  * teaser,  and  coerased  in  the  hands,  up  to  the  el bov- 

.. 

1 . : 2*.  :oee  curt-  g behind  the  wrist-ioint,  between  the  shafts  of  hot 

-*  * * - -ne  : re  * th  rmirtx:  weakness  of  the  arm  aft.  4 
* 7 : 

*'  ‘ ' ~ - £ “ - ‘ 1 ’ : . - : 1 : .v:  :c, 

nmed  spues  tk  nt  of  lrwrik,  at  fine  piafid,  afterwards,  in  ooa 
' te-r,  ::t  *:  . cea,  wbxh  irr  more  rioiert  on  be  in  2 rubbe. 

[*  . ] 

t : teres  r:_  racers  arc  oat  iz  their  tips,  also  when  at  rest. 
>:  r^t  c • the  £r^er?  ta  draw  thetnsebes  spasmodical 
: sgrther,  ini  w*te  rr*Sfr-ig  irTthlsg  2 >:  rfr.ess  in  the  midee 
‘ ' r - '■  ti,  u * the  tndii  w:  J i not  t rid.  sometimes  in  te 

icsso.'dc  coctractxc  :£  the  dextr  tenet  ns  of  the  lingers,  0 
that  hr  c.  _ . . r t catena  them  with  dmcokr,  when  he  held  som- 
thrag  a the  hard  a~  S IlJ.  [JTa] 

195  A :.t;  t c x:;  rric  alcer  oe  :he  back  of  the  right  hand,  wih 
a*  itchiag  w marina,  which  aw  ratting  changes  into  burning,  whet* 
upc.  a t cxxiv  wi.err  discharge  cocoes  oct  art.  24  h.\  [/>.] 

He  fee  < poisarce  r 2 Kccc- vessel  of  the  rack  of  the  left  had, 
together  w th  an  oat -pcessm  2 pair,  in  the  forehead  aft.  7 h). 

[®*-] 

lr.  the  Oaii  or  the  .eft  thumb  a :<yrmg  pa:n,  lasting  some  minuts, 
* hen  at  rest  and  when  mo  ring  (aft.  28  h.).  [G*.] 

A violent,  sharp  stitch  in  the  tuberosity  of  the  ischium,  on  risig 
from  a seat  aft.  55  h.),  [G*.J 

Paralytic  pain  in  the  right  hip-joint  and  thigh,  aid 
in  the  aiikle-joint.  but  in  tie  latter  rather  as  if  diso- 
cated.  when  walking,  when  he  must  limp  on  aceountof 
the  pain  1 1 b.\  [tf*.] 

(After  a meal  tear  r 2 pain  in  the  thi^h,  with  heaviness  of  he 

At  night  aching  pain  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  left  th*h, 
increased  by  pressing  on  it  and  stooping ; he  could  not  lie  on  i at 
night ; it  went  otF  after  getting  up. 

Acute  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  right  thigh  and  leg,  coming  o.  at 
night  during  sleep,  so  that  on  waking  she  must  stretch  out  the  lnb 
immediately  in  order  to  allay  the  pain,  for  18  hours,  [/r.  H — n. 

A single  cutting  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  anteior 
aspect  of  the  left  thigh,  recurring  from  time  to  time  aft. 

24V).  [/*.] 


DROSERA. 


579 


Cutting  pinching  on  the  posterior  aspect  of  the  left  thigh  (aft. 
2 h.).  [TVs.] 

205.  Pain  in  the  left  thigh  and  in  the  knee-joint,  as  if  both  were 
broken,  only  when  walking  (aft.  h.).  [Gn.] 

Painful  stiffness  of  the  houghs ; he  could  scarcely  bend  the  knees. 

Trembling  of  the  knees  when  walking,  even  in  the  room,  chiefly 
when  going  up  stairs. 

Stitches  in  the  shaft  of  the  fibula  upwards  towards  the  calf,  when 
at  rest ; the  pain  woke  her  up  at  night  from  sleep. 

A fine  cutting  stitch  in  the  right  calf,  which  comes 
on  when  sitting,  and  goes  off  on  walking.  [Gn.] 

210.  He  cannot  extend  the  leg  without  great  pain,  and  must  limp. 

Paralytic  tearing  in  both  ankle-joints,  worst  when  keeping  the 
feet  at  rest  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.] 


Tearing  pain  in  the  right  ankle-joint,  as  if  it  were 
dislocated,  only  when  walking  (aft.  34  h.).  [Gn.] 

Tearing  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  right  big  toe  on  one  point,  when  at 
rest  (aft.  26  h.).  [Gn.] 

Fine  stitch-like  pains  in  the  three  middle  toes,  so  violent  that  he 
must  limp,  only  observable  when  walking  (aft.  4-J  d.).  [Gn.] 

215.  Staggering  unsteady  gait  from  weakness  of  the  feet,  on  com- 
mencing to  walk,  which  goes  off  on  continuing  to  walk. 

Inflexibility  of  the  ankle-joints — they  are  very  stiff. 

(Shooting  and  throbbing  about  the  right  ankle-joint,  worst  when 
lying,  at  night.) 

Drawing  pain  up  and  down  in  the  feet  to  the  calves. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  heel  during  movement  (when  walking). 

220.  An  itching  prick  in  the  left  sole,  in  the  balls  of  the  toes,  when 
sitting  (aft.  ij  h.)  [Gn.] 

A pain  compounded  of  gnawing  and  shooting  in  the 
shafts  of  the  bones  of  the  arms,  thighs  and  legs,  par- 
ticularly severe  in  the  joints,  with  severe  stitches  in 
the  joints,  less  felt  when  moving  than  when  at  rest. 
[TVs.] 

Cramp-like  pressure  now  in  the  upper,  and  now  in  the  lower 
extremities,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  18  h.).  [Lr.] 

Painful  shooting  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper 
and  lower  extremities  at  the  same  time,  in  every  posi- 
tion (aft.  4i,  30  h.).  [Lr.] 

On  turning  the  head  and  trunk,  in  order  to  look  about  him, 
painful  cramp  in  the  dorsal  and  abdominal  muscles,  which  lasted  a 
long  time. 

225.  (A  twitching  or  twitching  sensation  in  the  limbs.) 

All  the  limbs  are  as  if  bruised  and  are  also  painful 
externally. 

All  his  limbs  feel  paralyzed. 

Pain  in  all  the  limbs— he  feels  as  if  all  were  para- 
lyzed. 

Soreness  of  all  the  limbs  on  which  he  lies,  as  if  the  bed  were  too 
hard,  and  he  had  not  enough  mattresses  under  him. 


580 


DROSERA. 


230.  When  applied  externally  the  plant  erodes  the  skin.  [Haller,  in 
Vicat .,  1.  c.] 

He  is  weak  in  the  whole  body,  with  sunken  eyes  and 
cheeks  (aft.  8 h.).  [Gn.] 

Frequent  stretching  and  yawning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough 
(aft.  30  h.).  [Ar.] 

At  night  she  often  starts  up  in  sleep,  as  from  fright  or  fear,  but 
when  awake  she  is  not  anxious. 

Frequent  waking  from  sleep,  as  if  he  had  already  slept  enough 
and  it  were  time  to  get  up.  [Ar.] 

235.  Frequent  violent  starting  up  in  affright,  in  the  evening,  in  sleep. 

At  night  anxious  dreams. 

Sleeplessness. 

In  the  morning,  extreme  weariness,  he  is  unwilling  to  get  out 
of  bed. 

So  exhausted,  in  the  morning  on  waking,  that  he  can  scarcely 
open  his  eyes. 

240.  He  snores  in  his  sleep  when  lying  on  his  back.  [Ar.] 

Vivid  dreams,  sometimes  pleasant,  sometimes  anxious.  [Ar.] 

Vivid  vexatious  dream  about  the  ill-treatment  of  others. 
[Zr.] 

Frequent  nocturnal  waking,  each  time  on  the  commencement  of 
a breaking  out  of  perspiration  (the  first  night).  [Ar.] 

He  dreamt  of  thirst  and  drinking  and  awoke  thirsty  and  must 
drink  (the  second  night).  [ Gn.'] 

245.  Fever:  confused  heavy  head,  constant  chilliness,  he  cannot  get 
warm,  food  has  no  taste — then  comes  on  thirst  and  heat  of  head, 
with  flow  of  watery  saliva. 

Quotidian  intermittent  fever : in  the  forenoon  before  9 o’clock, 
chilliness  with  icy  cold  hands  and  blue  nails  (he  must  lie  down) 
until  noon,  after  the  chill,  thirst — thereafter  heaviness  in  the  head, 
throbbing  pain  in  the  occiput  and  heat  in  the  face,  with  normal 
temperature  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  until  3 p.m. — in  the  evening 
well ; at  night  profuse  sweat,  especially  on  the  abdomen ; after  the 
heat,  inclination  to  vomit. 

Fever,  qualmish  nausea,  which  seemed  to  arise  out  of  the  stomach, 
with  feeling  of  heat  in  the  face  and  rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  icy 
cold  hands  (aft.  27J  h.).  [Ar.] 

When  at  rest,  shivering  ; when  moving,  no  shivering. 

While  at  rest  and  though  the  body  is  normally  warm  to  the 
touch,  still  he  shivers,  and  even  in  bed  he  cannot  keep  off'  of  the 
shivering  and  feeling  of  coldness. 

250.  He  always  feels  too  cold  ; he  cannot  get  warm. 

He  has  a feeling  of  coldness  at  night  in  bed,  but  without 
shivering. 

Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  body,  without  heat  or  thirst  (aft. 
\2\  h.).  [Lr°] 

Face,  nose  and  hands  are  cold. 

Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  heat  in  the  face, 
but  icy  cold  hands,  without  thirst  (aft.  3,  27  h.).  [Ar.] 


DROSERA.  581 

255.  (Coldness  of  the  left  half  of  the  face,  with  shooting  pains  in  it, 
whilst  the  right  side  of  the  face  is  hot  and  dry,  after  midnight.) 

(In  the  evening,  cold  cheeks  and  hot  hands.) 

In  the  afternoon,  frequent  attacks  now  of  chilliness,  now  of  heat, 
accompanied  by  inclination  to  vomit. 

Rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  warm  forehead,  hot  cheeks,  but 
cold  hands,  without  thirst  (repeated  the  following  day)  (aft.  34  h.). 
[Lr.l 

During  the  febrile  chill  vomiting,  when  at  last  bile  is  thrown  up. 

260.  All  day,  chilliness  ; all  night,  heat  (aft.  36  h.). 

Warmth  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  towards  evening. 

Heat  in  the  head. 

Heat  and  redness  in  the  face  (aft.  5 h.). 

For  three  successive  nights,  sweat  only  on  the  face. 

265.  (Heat  and  sweat  on  the  chest,  thighs  and  houghs,  with  thirst, 
all  day  and  night.) 

Night-sweat. 

Sweat,  immediately  after  midnight. 

Sweats.1  [Bonfigli,  in  Vicat , 1.  c.] 

Anxiety  with  feeling  of  heat  quickly  running  all  over  the  body, 
but  especially  all  over  the  face,  as  though  he  were  about  to  receive 
bad  news  (aft.  3^  h.),  and  again  (aft.  27  h.)  rigor  all  over  the  body, 
without  heat  and  without  thirst.  [£r.] 

270.  Restlessness;  when  reading  he  could  not  stick  long 
to  one  subject— he  must  always  go  to  something  else 

(aft.  36  h.).  [Gtz.] 

All  day  long,  uneasiness  of  disposition  and  anxiety,  full  of  mis- 
trust, as  if  he  had  to  do  with  none  but  false  people  (aft.  38  h.). 

LLr.-\ 

Extremely  uneasy,  sad  disposition,  all  day — be  imagined  he  was 
being  deceived  by  spiteful,  envious  people.  [Zr.] 

Silent  and  reserved,  with  anxiety — he  always  feared  he  was 
about  to  learn  something  disagreeable.  [£r.] 

Anxiety,  as  if  his  enemies  would  not  leave  him  quiet,  envied  and 
persecuted  him.  [Zr.] 

275.  He  is  sad  and  dejected  about  the  ills  of  life,  which  people  cause 
one  another  and  himself,  respecting  which  he  is  anxious  and  con- 
cerned ; at  the  same  time  want  of  appetite  (aft.  5 h.).  [(?«.] 

He  is  dejected  about  the  malice  of  others  on  all  hands, 
and  at  the  same  time  disheartened  and  concerned  about 
the  future  (aft.  4 d.).  [G».] 

Anxiety,  especially  in  the  evening  (about  7 or  8 o’clock),  as  if  he 
were  impelled  to  jump  into  the  water  in  order  to  take  his  own  life 
by  drowning — he  was  not  impelled  to  any  other  mode  of  death. 
[Lr. 

Anxiety  in  solitude — he  wished  to  have  someone  always  near 
him,  could  not  bear  to  be  without  companions,  and  was  quieter  when 
he  had  someone  to  speak  to ; but  when  they  again  left  him  in  soli- 


1 Observation. 


582 


DROSERA. 


tude,  he  was  all  the  more  anxious,  until  he  fell  asleep  ; on  awaking 
the  anxiety  returned  (for  six  successive  evenings).  [Zr.] 

The  anxiety  appeared  to  rise  up  from  the  subcostal  region.  [Zr.] 
280.  Very  peevish  ; a trifle  puts  him  out  of  humour. 

He  takes  insults  very  resentfully,  not  without  vexation. 

Unhappy,  obtuse  of  sense  and  disinclined  for  manual  and  intellec- 
tual work  (aft.  33  h.).  [ Gn. ] 

An  unimportant  circumstance  excited  him  so  much,  that  he  was 
beside  himself  with  rage  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Gn. ] 

Obstinate  prosecution  of  resolutions  he  had  formed. 

He  feels  an  inner  tranquillity  and  cheerfulness-*  (aft.  12  h.). 

Tranquillity  of  disposition.*  \_Lr.~\ 

Happy,  stedfast  disposition  ; he  dreaded  no  evil,  because  he  was 
conscious  of  having  acted  honourably.*  [Zr.] 

# Reaction  of  the  vital  power,  secondary  action,  curative  action. 


DULCAMARA.1 

(JSolanum  dulcamara , Woody  Nightshade.') 

(The  juice  freshly  expressed  from  the  young  stalks  and  leaves  of  this  shrub-like 
plant  before  its  flowering  time,  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  spirits  of  wine.  Two  drops 
of  the  clear  fluid  lying  over  the  sediment  are  added  to  98  drops  of  spirits  of  wine,  the 
phial  shaken  with  two  strokes  of  the  arm,  and  in  this  way  diluted  through  29  phials 
(filled  two  thirds  full  with  100  drops  of  spirits  of  wine),  and  each  potentized  with 
twro  succussions  up  to  the  decillion-fold  development  of  power  j one  or  two  smallest 
globules  moistened  with  this  serve  for  a dose.) 

It  is  very  probable,  as  experiments  have  indeed  partly  proved,  that 
this  very  powerful  plant  belongs  to  the  antipsorics , as  the  following  pure 
effects  of  it  seem  also  to  show  ; still,  I shall  try  to  obtain  more  accurate 
corroboration  of  this. 

It  will  moreover  be  found  specific  for  some  epidemic  fevers,  as  also 
for  various  acute  diseases  the  result  of  a chill. 

Its  long  duration  of  action  is  shown  in  its  trials  on  healthy  persons. 

[Ahner,  Cubitz,  Gross,  Muller,  of  Treuen,  Nenning  (in  Hartlaub  and 
Trinks’  Mat.  Med.),  E.  F.  Ruckert,  Stapf,  Trinks  and  Hartlaub  (in  their 
Mat.  Med.),  Gust.  Wagner,  Wahle,  aided  Hahnemann  in  this  proving. 

Symptoms  quoted  from  the  following  old-school  authorities  : 

Althof,  in  Murray , Appar.  Med. 

Carrere,  Ueber  das  Bitter  suss,  1789. 

Fritze,  Annal  d.  Klin.  Ins.  in  Berlin , iii. 

Gouan,  Memoires  de  la  Soc.  de  Montpellier. 

Haen,  de,  Ratio  Medendi. 

Linn^us,  Diss.  de  Dulcamara.  Upsal.,  1753. 

PiquoT,  Samml.  br.  A'bh.f.  pr.  A .,  ii. 

Starcke,  in  Carrere , 1.  c. 

Tode  (reference  not  given). 

In  the  1 st  edit,  of  the  ( R.A.M.L.’  dulcamara  had  123  symptoms,  in  the  2nd  edit. 
349,  and  in  this  last  edit.  401  5 the  Chr.  Kr.  gives  409.] 


DULCAMARA. 

A transient  slight  vertigo.  [A^.] 

At  noon  before  eating,  whilst  walking,  giddy,  as  if  all  objects 
remained  standing  before  him,  and  as  if  it  became  black  before  his 
eyes. 

Momentary  vertigo.  [Piquot,1  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.f.  pr.  A .,  ii,  4.] 
Vertigo.  [Althof,3  in  Murray , Appar.  Med.,  i,  p.  621.] 

5.  When  he  wanted  to  get  up  out  of  bed  in  the  morning,  he  almost 


From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830. 
Statement  from  observation, 


58+ 


DULCAMARA. 


fell  from  vertigo,  general  weakness  and  trembling  of  all  the  body 
(aft.  24  h.).  [Mr.] 

Stupefaction.  [Carrere,1 2  Ueber  das  Bittersuss , v.  Starcke , Jen., 
1786.] 

Great  stupefaction  of  the  head.  [Starcke,3  in  Carrere , 1.  c.] 

Dull  stupefying  headache. 

Headache  in  the  morning  in  bed,  aggravated  by  rising.  [Mrd] 

10.  Headache,  lassitude,  icy  coldness  of  all  the  body,  and  inclination 
to  vomit.  [Mrd] 

Heaviness  of  the  head.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Heaviness  in  the  forehead  (aft.  12  h.).  [Wed] 

Heaviness  in  the  forehead  for  several  days,  at  the  same  time 
frequent  darts  from  within  outwards  in  the  temporal  region.  [Wed] 
Heaviness  in  the  occiput,  for  three  days.  [Wed] 

15.  Heaviness  of  the  whole  head  all  day,  as  if  the  integuments  of  the 
head  were  stretched,  especially  in  the  nape,  where  the  sensation 
becomes  a kind  of  formication.  [, Wed] 

Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  out-boring  pain  in  the  temple  and 
forehead,  as  after  a debauch  over  night.  [Wrd] 

Stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  as  after  intoxication,  which  went  off 
in  the  open  air.  [Wrd] 

Stupid  and  empty  in  the  head,  in  the  afternoon  about  6 o’clock. 

Stupid  feeling  in  the  head  and  slight  drawing  in  the  left  frontal 
protuberance.  [A^.] 

20.  The  stupid  headache  lasted  for  10  days.  [A£\] 

Giddiness  in  the  head  with  warmth  rising  up  into  the  whole  face. 

[*&•] 

Heat  in  the  head.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Digging  aching  in  the  whole  of  the  forehead.  [Gjj.] 

Violent  headache  like  a digging  in  the  middle  of  the  brain  in  the 
sinciput,  like  dulness,  and  a sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  swollen, 
a pain  that  came  on  early  in  bed,  and  was  not  diminished  or  in- 
creased either  by  rest  or  movement 3 but  it  was  worse  on  getting  up. 
[Mr.] 

25.  Out-boring  headache  at  one  time  in  the  forehead,  at  another  in 
the  temples  (aft.  15  h.).  [Wrd] 

Before  midnight  boring  headache  from  within.  [Wed] 

Boring  headache  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  23  h.).  [Wed] 

The  headache  never  involves  the  whole  head,  but  only  quite  a 
small  spot,  where  it  shows  itself  as  pressure  as  with  a blunt  instru- 
ment. [Gtt.] 


1 Carrere’s  original  work  is  “Traite  des  proprietes,  usages,  et  effets  de  la  Douce- 
amere,”  Paris,  1789.  The  citations  have  been  corrected  from  this  treatise.  They 
consist  of  effects  of  dulcamara  when  given  for  chronic  rheumatism,  suppressed 
secretions,  and  cutaneous  diseases.  The  author  says  that  he  has,  after  seventeen 
years’  experience  with  the  drug,  seen  no  inconvenience  result  from  full  doses  save 
those  described  in  S.  88  and  278  ; 199  ; 395,  358  (sometimes  the  precursors  of  a new 
eruption,  and  then  associated  with  341  and  342)  j 11  and  65  j and  94. 

2 Carrere’s  German  translator,  Additional  observations  (of  the  same  kind)  by  him, 


DULCAMARA. 


585 


All  the  afternoon  a dull  headache,  especially  in  the  left  frontal 
protuberance.  [Aif.] 

30.  In  the  evening  the  dull  pressive  headache  became  more  severe, 
with  increasing  coryza.  [Ag\] 

Painful  stupefying  aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  vertex  (aft.  3 h.). 

[*&•] 

Aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  occiput,  from  the  nape  upwards. 

[. Rkt .] 

In  the  temples  a pressure,  as  with  a blunt  instrument,  at  one 
time  on  the  right,  at  another  on  the  left  side.  [Gw.] 

Dull  feeling  in  the  forehead  and  root  of  the  nose,  as  if  he  had  a 
board  in  front  of  the  head.  [GW] 

35.  Towards  evening,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  headache  like  a 
pressing  outwards.  [We.] 

Quite  late  in  the  evening  out-pressing  pain  in  the  left  frontal 
protuberance.  [A^.] 

Out-pressing  pain  in  jerks  in  the  sinciput,  worse  when  moving. 
Drawing  pressure  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance  (6th  d.). 

[m 

Aching  drawing  in  the  left  temporal  region,  in  the  afternoon. 
[A£.] 

40.  Headache,  drawing  from  both  temples  inwards.  \JVe.\ 

Aching  tearing  in  the  temples  in  fits.  [Gw.] 

Aching  beating  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  with  whirling 
feeling.  [A^.] 

Tearing  compression  in  the  top  of  the  head.  [Gw.] 

Intermitting  tearing  in  the  left  temple.  [Gw.] 

45.  Stitches  in  the  head,  so  that  she  got  angry  over  it,  mostly  in  the 
evening  ; relieved  when  lying. 

A very  slow  pricking  in  the  occiput,  as  with  a needle,  that  was 
always  drawn  back  again.  [We.] 

Deep  in  the  brain  violent  shooting  in  the  sinciput,  with  nausea. 
[Mr.] 

Intermitting  pressure  on  the  left  of  the  crown,  as  if  a blunt  in- 
strument were  pressed  into  the  head.  [Gw.] 

Sensation  as  if  the  occiput  were  enlarged.  [We.] 

50.  Pressing  pain  in  the  left  occipital  bone.  [We.] 

Headache  in  the  occiput,  in  the  evening  in  bed.  [We.] 

Slow  drawing  pain  through  the  whole  brain,  especially  in  the 
evening  (aft.  J h.). 

In  the  evening  when  eating  a drawing  pain  on  the  skull  to  the 
nasal  bones,  where  it  became  contractive.  [We.] 

From  the  frontal  protuberance  there  is  a drawing  down  to  the  tip 
of  the  nose  in  rapid  jerks.  [Gw.] 

55.  A slight  drawing  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance,  especially  on 
stooping  forwards.  [A^.] 

On  the  head,  just  over  the  left  ear,  a stupefying  pain,  as  if  some 
one  pressed  with  a blunt  instrument  into  the  head.  [Gw.] 

On  the  forehead  lumps,  touching  which  causes  shooting  pain. 


586 


DULCAMARA. 


Aching  tensive  pain  over  the  right  eye  (aft.  3 h.).  [Wr.] 

Boring  pain  over  the  right  palpebral  arch  from  within  outwards. 
60.  Contractive  pain  at  the  supra-orbital  border.  [Gw.] 

Aching  in  the  eyes  when  reading  and  at  other  times,  but  aggra- 
vated by  reading.  [Rkt.] 

When  she  walks  in  the  sun  it  is  as  if  fire  flew  out  of  the  eyes,  as 
also  in  the  room. 

Sparks  before  the  eyes.  [Piquot,  1.  c.] 

Commencement  of  amaurosis  and  such  weakness  of  the  eyes  that 


he  saw  all  objects,  both  near  and  distant,  as  if  through  a veil ; 
upper  lid  was  as  if  half  paralysed,  as  if  it  would  fall  down.  [ Mr .] 


the 


65. 


1.  c.] 


as  if 


Dim  vision.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Inflammation  of  the  eyes  (chemosis).  [Tode,2 — Starcke, 
Painless  pressure  on  the  left  zygoma  (immediately).  [Gw.] 

Ringing  in  the  ears.  [Rkt.] 

Ringing  in  the  ears. 

70.  Clear  ringing  in  the  ears  (aft.  4 to  8 d.).  [*SV/'.] 

A kind  of  prickling  in  the  left  ear  and  then  in  the  right, 
very  cold  air  had  penetrated  into  the  ear.  [We.] 

Tearing  in  the  left  ear  intermingled  with  shootings  from  within 
outwards  ; a drumming  and  bubbling  before  the  ear,  he  does  not  hear 
well  afterwards ; on  opening  the  mouth  a crackling  in  the  ear  as  if 
something  broken  were  in  it.  [ Ts.  Hb .] 

Squeezing  pain  in  the  left  ear,  at  the  same  time  great  nausea. 
[Ts.  Hb.] 

Frightful  earache  all  night,  he  cannot  sleep  on  account  of  it.  In 
the  morning  the  pain  ceased  all  at  once,  but  there  remained  a roar- 
ing before  the  ear  for  some  time.  [Ts.  Hb.] 

75.  In  the  left  ear,  a pinching  stitch  towards  the  membrana  tympani. 
[We.] 

Fine  pricks  in  the  meatus  auditorious  and  parotid  gland,  [■£/., 
senr.] 

Squeezing,  accompanied  by  small  pricks,  in  the  right  ear. 
[We.] 

Transient  drawing  in  the  external  meatus.  [Gw.] 

Below  the  left  ear,  towards  the  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw,  a cramp- 
like contraction.  [Gw.] 

80.  There  occurred  such  a violent  bleeding  of  the  nose  that  the 
blood  lost  amounted  to  four  ounces  ; it  was  bright  red,  flowed  very 
warm  out  of  the  left  nostril,  with  a pressure  in  the  region  of  the 
longitudinal  sinus,  which  pressure  continued  after  the  profuse  haemor- 
rhage.  [.%] 

Epistaxis.  [Starcke,  1.  c.] 

In  the  inside  of  the  left  ala  nasi,  a pimple  with  ulcerative  pain. 
[We.] 

Eruption  in  both  angles  of  the  nose,  a pimple. 

Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  whole  cheek. 


1 With  S.  11. 

2 Cannot  be  traced  for  want  of  reference, 


DULCAMARA. 


587 


85.  Itching  on  the  cheeks,  close  to  the  alae  nasi  (aft.  \ h.). 

A humid  eruption  on  the  cheek.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

On  the  inside  of  the  upper  lip,  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  palate, 
also  externally  round  the  mouth,  pimples  and  small  ulcers,  which  on 
moving  give  rise  to  tearing  pain. 

Twitching  movements  of  the  lips  and  eyelids  (in  cold  air). 
[Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Under  the  chin,  a pinching  on  a small  spot.  [Gjx.] 

90.  Itching  pimples  on  the  chin. 

A drawing  pain  in  the  right  cervical  muscles.  [Tfr.] 

Obtuseness  of  the  teeth,  as  if  they  were  insensible.  [Tfr.] 
Pressure  in  the  throat,  as  if  the  uvula  were  too  long. 

Pains  in  the  throat.  Car.rere,  1.  c.] 

95.  Flow  of  saliva.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Flow  of  saliva  with  loose,  spongy  gums.  [Starcke,  1.  c.] 

Flow  of  saliva,  what  is  called  waterbrash. 

Flow  of  much  viscid,  soapy  saliva,  [Starcke,  1.  c.] 

Itching  crawling  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue.  \Wed\ 

100.  Dry  tongue.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Dry  rough  tongue.2  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Paralysis  of  the  tongue,  which  hindered  her  in  speaking  (when 
using  dulcamara  in  cold  wet  weather).  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Paralysis  of  the  tongue  after  taking  it  for  a long  time.  [Linnaeus,3 
Dis.  de  Dulcamara , Upsal.,  1753-] 

Paralysis  of  the  tongue.  [Gouan,4  Memoires  de  la  Soc.  de  Mont- 
pellier.] 

105.  Much  eructation.  [Mrl] 

Very  scrapy  fauces,  with  constant  hawking  up  of  very  viscid 
mucus.  [A^-.] 

Four  times  eructation,  with  scratching  in  the  oesophagus  and 
heartburn  (aft.  9 h.).  [ATg-.] 

Empty  eructation,  with  shuddering  as  from  disgust.  [A(g\] 
Frequent  empty  eructation.  [Gat.] 
no.  Eructation  combined  with  hiccup.  [Gjj.] 

Flat,  soapy  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  hence  want  of  appetite. 
[Starcke,  1.  c.] 

While  eating  repeated  eructation,  so  that  the  soup  comes  up 
again  into  the  throat  immediately  after  it  is  swallowed.  [Gat.] 
Hunger,  with  repugnance  to  all  kinds  of  food. 

He  has  a good  appetite  and  eats  with  relish,  yet  he  soon  becomes 
satiated  and  full,  with  much  rolling  and  rumbling  in  the  bowels. 
[Gw.] 

1 15.  While  eating  repeated  pinching  in,  and  distension  of,  the  abdo- 
men. [Gw.] 


1 Not  found. 

2 See  note  to  S.  34.3. 

3 Not  accessible.  According  to  Murray,  Linnaeus  is  only  citing  Gouan  (see  next 
symptom) . 

4 Not  accessible. 


588 


DULCAMARA. 


Nausea.  [Althof,  in  Murray , Appar.  Med.,  i,  p.  621. — Linnaeus, 
1.  c.] 

Nausea  and  disgust.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Nausea,  vomiting,  heat,  and  anxiety.  [Starcke,  1.  c.] 

Disgust  with  shuddering,  as  though  about  to  vomit.  [A^.] 

120.  Great  nausea,  as  if  he  would  vomit,  with  rigor.  \_Ts.  Hb.~\ 

Actual  vomiting  of  nothing  but  viscid  mucus,  but  not  of  the 
medicine  (aft.  \ h.).  [A£.] 

Warmth  rises  up  and  there  then  occurs  vomiting  of  mucus,  in 
the  morning. 

Retching.  [Althof,  1.  c.] 

Feeling  of  increased  warmth  in  the  fauces.  [. Rkt.~\ 

125.  Vomiting.  [Linnjeus,  1.  c.] 

After  a moderate  meal,  distension  of  the  abdomen  as  if  it  would 
burst.  [Gss.~\ 

Feeling  of  distension  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  a disagree- 
able feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen.  [A(g\] 

In  the  left  side,  below  the  short  ribs,  sudden  contraction,  almost 
like  cutting.  [Gw.] 

On  going  to  sleep  continual  pinching  in  the  region  of  the  stomach, 
until  he  fell  asleep  (2nd  d.).  [A7g\] 

130.  Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  like  flatulent  distension,  with  fre- 
quent eructation  only  of  air  (3rd.  d.).  [A^.] 

Tensive  pain  on  the  right  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  he  had 
strained  and  injured  himself.  \_We.~\ 

An  acute  aching  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  he  had 
received  there  a blow  with  a blunt  instrument,  which  becomes  more 
painful  by  pressing  on  it  (aft.  35  h.).  [yfr.] 

To  the  left  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  an  obtuse  stitch,  that  rapidly 
went  off,  returned  again  soon,  and  then  went  off*  gradually  (aft.  £ h.). 

o.] 

A shooting  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  9J  h.).  [Ar."] 

135.  In  the  umbilical  region  a shooting  pain,  that  did  not  go  off  by 
pressure  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Ar.~] 

Under  the  ribs  on  the  right  side,  obtuse  stitches  that  take  away 
the  breath.  [Gw.] 

In  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  intermittent  obtuse  stitches  ; 
pressing  with  the  finger  just  upon  the  painful  spot  causes  pain,  and 
the  shooting  becomes  worse.  [Gw.] 

Short  obtuse  stitches  to  the  left  of  the  navel,  in  the  evening. 

[*&•] 

Obtuse  stitches  outwards  in  rapid  succession  on  a small  spot  on 
the  left  of  the  abdomen,  which  take  away  his  breath  ; when  he 
presses  on  it  with  the  finger,  the  place  is  painful ; he  feels  as  if  some- 
thing would  force  itself  through  from  within.  [Gw.] 

140.  Single  pulsating  stitches  under  the  left  short  ribs,  when  sitting, 
which  went  off*  on  rising  up  (aft.  6 d.).  \_Ar.~] 

Pinching  shooting  pain  to  the  right  of  the  navel,  which  did  not  go 
of?  by  pressure  (aft.  4^  d.).  \Ar.~] 


DULCAMARA.  589 

On  the  left  above  the  navel  a fine  pinching  in  a small  spot  of  the 
abdomen.  [Gjj.] 

Violent  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  a long  worm  crept  about 
and  gnawed  and  pinched  in  the  bowels  (aft.  31  h.).  | _Ar.~\ 

Obtuse  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  were  about  to 
come  on  (aft.  2 h.).  [Ag-.] 

145.  Just  under  the  navel,  a pinching  pain  on  sitting  in  a bent-forward 
attitude,  but  on  stretching  himself  out  it  diminished,  and  soon  after- 
wards ceased  (aft.  4^  d.).  [Vfr.] 

Quite  early,  a pinching  pain  around  about  the  umbilical  region, 
as  if  he  must  go  to  stool,  but  without  urging.  \_Ar.~] 

Transient  pinching  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  chest,  as 
from  incarcerated  flatulence.  [Gjj.] 

Bellyache  (immediately). 

Bellyache  as  from  a chill. 

150.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  (immediately). 

Each  time  he  leans  forward  a gushing  round  about  in  the  bowels 
as  if  he  had  taken  a purgative.  [A^.] 

Rumbling  in  the  bowels,  as  if  a stool  would  ensue,  with  some 
sacral  pain.  [Ag-.] 

Bellyache  as  though  he  had  caught  cold  (aft.  23  h.).  \WeI\ 
Bellyache  such  as  usually  occurs  during  cold  wet  weather.  \We'.\ 
155.  He  has  pinching  and  cutting  and  digging  round  about  in  the 
abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  were  coming  on.  [Gjj.] 

In  the  morning,  without  having  eaten  anything,  flying  pinching 
and  cutting  in  the  bowels,  with  distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Gjj.] 
Twitching  cutting  and  pinching  here  and  there  in  the  abdomen, 
that  soon  goes  off.  [ Gss .] 

A twisting,  digging  pinching  pain  round  about  the  umbilical 
region  (aft.  10  h.).  \_Ar.\ 

A forcing  out  pain  on  the  left  above  the  navel,  as  if  a rupture 
would  occur  there.  [Mr.] 

160.  A gnawing  beating  pain  just  above  the  navel.  [Gjj.] 

Aching  pain  now  in  the  left,  now  in  the  right  inguinal  gland. 
Swelling  of  the  left  inguinal  gland  as  large  as  a walnut. 

(In  the  inguinal  swelling,  severe  burning  (mingled  with  shooting) 
on  the  slightest  movement  ; also  on  touching  it  burning  mingled 
with  shooting.) 

Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  groin.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

165.  Swollen  hard  inguinal  glands  of  the  size  of  a haricot-bean,  but 
without  pains.  \JVe.~\ 

Pinching  pain  in  the  umbilical  region  and  above  the  left  hip,  that 
compels  him  to  go  to  stool ; after  the  passage  of  some  flatus,  in 
spite  of  strong  straining,  there  only  passes  a little  hard  faeces,  but  the 
pain  after  this  was  somewhat  lessened  (aft.  d.).  \_Ar.~] 

Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  were  about  to  ensue;  after 
the  passage  of  some  flatus  the  bellyache  ceased.  [ JVe.~\ 

1 During  treatment  of  scrofula  by  D.,  there  supervened  S.  378  going  on  to  376, 
and  followed  by  this  swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands,  and  also  of  those  of  the  neck 
and  axillae.  The  continued  use  of  the  medicine  removed  all. 


DULCAMARA. 


59° 

In  the  evening,  in  the  whole  abdomen,  pinching  with  call  to 
stool ; after  having  previously  had  in  the  afternoon  his  usual  stool, 
though  it  was  very  hard  and  difficult,  he  had  a large  moister  stool, 
and  at  last  a copious,  quite  thin,  sour-smelling  motion,  whereupon 
he  felt  relieved  but  exhausted.  [Gw.] 

Very  slight  sensation  of  cold  on  the  back,  with  rumbling  in  the 
bowels  and  pain  in  the  left  groin,  not  increased  by  touch  (aft.  12  h.), 

im 

170.  T.  ension  in  the  region  of  the  os  pubis  on  rising  up  from  the  seat. 
Soft  stool  in  small  pieces.  \JVe?\ 

Mucous  diarrhoea,  alternately  yellow  and  greenish.1 2 

[Carrere,  1.  c.] 

White  mucous  diarrhoea.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Mucous  diarrhoea  with  prostration.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

175.  Soft  stool  (immediately). 

Several  successive  afternoons  thin  evacuations  with  flatus  (aft. 

3 d0- 

Normal  stool,  but  with  some  straining  (aft.  ^ h.).  [iVg-.] 

He  had  a rapid  call  to  stool  which  he  could  scarcely  retain, 
although  only  little  and  hard  faeces  came  away  (aft.  J h.).  \_Jr.~\ 
Along  with  nausea  he  had  frequent  call  to  stool,  and  yet  all  day 
long  he  could  pass  nothing  (aft.  2 h.).  [Mr.~] 

180.  He  has  pinching  in  the  bowels  and  must  go  to  stool,  but  he  is 
costive  and  but  little  passes  with  much  straining  (aft.  8 h.).  \_Ar.~\ 
Pressure  in  the  abdomen  and  colic  before  the  stool,  not  during 
the  evacuation,  afterwards  recurring  with  rumbling  in  the  bowels. 
[Rkt.] 

Difficult,  dry,  rare  stools.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Suddenly  a dreadful  pressing  on  the  rectum,  so  that  he  can 
scarcely  keep  back  the  motion,  and  when  he  gets  to  the  night- 
stool,  there  comes  away  slowly,  after  a while,  with  some  straining, 
very  hard  faeces,  along  with  transient  pinching  and  cutting  here  and 
there  in  the  abdomen.  [Gw.] 

Rare,  slow  and  hard  stool ; even  when  he  wants  to  go  there 
is  no  urging  in  the  rectum,  and  it  is  only  by  a great  effort  that  a 
very  large  hard  motion  comes  slowly  away.  [Gw.] 

185.  Great  discharge  of  flatus.  \We!\ 

Flatus  smelling  of  asafoetida.  [ Mr.~\ 

Turbid  whitish  urine.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Copious  discharge  at  first  of  clear  and  viscid,  then  of  thick  and 
milk-white  urine.1  2 [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Urine  at  first  clear  and  viscid,  then  white,  then  turbid,  then  clear, 
with  white  sticky  sediment.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

190.  Turbid,  ill-smelling  urine  and  ill-smelling  perspiration,1  [Car- 
rere, 1.  c.] 

Urine  reddish  and  scalding.3  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

1 All  these  symptoms  are  critical  discharges,  coinciding  with  improvement  in  the 
patient’s  malady. 

2 For  “ viscid  ” read  “ limpid.” 

3 See  note  to  S.  343. 


DULCAMARA. 


59* 

Urine  with  mucous  sediment,  at  one  time  red  at  another  white.1 
[Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Turbid  urine.2  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Turbid  whitish  urine.3  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

195.  Pulsating4  outwards  in  the  bladder.  [0^e.\ 

Strangury,  painful  micturition.  [Starcke,  1.  c.] 

Burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  while  urinating. 

Tetter-like  rash  on  the  labia  majora.5  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Heat  and  itching  on  the  genitals,  and  inclination  for  coitus. 
[Carrere,  1.  c.] 

200.  Increase  and  anticipation  of  the  menses.6  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 
Increased  menstrual  flux.6  [Carrere,  L c.] 

Diminished  menstruation.6  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Menstruation  delayed  several,  even  as  many  as  25,  days.7 
[Carrere,  1.  c.] 

* * 

* 

Stuffed  coryza,  with  confusion  of  head  and  a single  sneeze.  [Ag\] 
205.  Very  dry  nose,  in  the  evening.  [Ag-.] 

Sneezing.  \We^\ 

Short  hacking  cough,  that  seems  to  be  produced  by  deep  inspira- 
tion. [Gjj.] 

Haemoptysis.8  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

A very  acute  undulatory  pain,  almost  like  tearing 
pressure,  darts  through  the  left  side  of  the  chest  in 
fits.  [Gss.] 

210.  Numbing,  obtuse  stitch  under  the  right  clavicle  into  the  chest. 

To  the  left  above  the  xiphoid  cartilage  (when  sitting  bent  for- 
ward) a painful  pressure,  as  with  a blunt  instrument,  afterwards  it 
comes  even  in  an  erect  posture  of  the  body  in  long  fits,  and  develops 
into  blows  penetrating  deep  into  the  chest.  [G^.] 

External  tension  and  drawing  on  the  front  of  the  chest.  [A^.] 
Intermittent  pain  in  both  sides  below  the  shoulders,  as  though 
the  fists  were,  knocked  violently  in  there  from  both  sides.  [G^.] 

A twitching  pain  in  the  right  axilla  (aft.  3 d.).  [/fr.] 

215.  A pulsating  pain  in  the  left  axilla,  going  off  by  movement 
(aft.  9 h.).  \ArI\ 

Twitching  and  drawing  under  the  sternum.  [Gjj.] 

Intermitting  aching  under  the  whole  extent  of  the  sternum. 

[<?*•] 

On  breathing  deeply  tension  on  the  chest. 


1 This  symptom  is  a critical  discharge,  coinciding  with  improvement  in  the 
patient’s  malady. 

2 Critical  phenomenon. 

3 Repetition  of  S.  187. 

4 The  corresponding  symptom  in  the  Chr.  Kr.  stands  thus  : <£  Pulsating  (stitches  ?) 
in  the  urethra.” 

5 During  treatment  of  “ dartrous  ” vagina  and  uterus  by  D. 

6 Curative  effect. 

7 Ascribed  to  abundant  evacuations. 

8 Not  found. 


592 


DULCAMARA. 


Under  the  sternum  superiorly,  on  a small  spot,  intermitting 
squeezing.  [Gjj.] 

220.  Oppression  of  the  chest.  [We.] 

Painful  shooting  on  the  sternum  (aft.  \ h.).  [Ar.] 

On  the  sternum  a thrust-like,  rather  obtuse  stitch  (aft.  8 h.) . [Ar.] 
Obtuse  shooting  pain  in  the  right  side  in  the  region  of  the  third 
rib,  especially  when  pressing  on  it ; then  the  pain  spread  to  the 
sacrum,  and  then  mounted  upwards  to  between  the  shoulders  : a 
on  the  inner  border  of  the  left  scapula  on  inspiring.  [ Ts. 

In  the  left  side  of  the  ribs  slow,  intermitting,  obtuse  stitches.  [Gh.] 

225.  On  the  middle  of  the  sternum  a shooting  tearing  pain  that  went 
through  the  whole  chest  to  the  spine,  when  sitting,  and  went  off  on 
rising  up  (aft.  7 d.).  [Ar.] 

A digging  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  going  off  when 
pressed  upon  (aft.  8^  h.).  [Ar.] 

Pain  in  the  chest,  like  digging  or  as  if  he  had  hurt  (sprained) 
himself.  [Gtt.] 

In  the  right  side,  between  the  fourth  and  sixth  ribs,  a suddenly 
coming,  and  rapidly  departing,  painful  shoot  (aft.  8§  h.).  [Ar.] 

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the  fifth  and  sixth 
ribs,  a painful  stab  as  from  a rather  blunt  knife  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Ar.] 

230.  Shooting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  in  the  region  of  the 
sixth  rib.  [Ar.] 

Violent  shooting  in  the  chest,  now  on  the  right,  now  on  the  left 
side  ; he  must  cough  much,  and  expectorate  a viscid  mucus  (aft.  4 
d.).  [Jr.] 

A deep  cutting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  close  under  the 
clavicle,  that  went  off  on  pressure  (aft.  30  h.).  [Ar.] 

Pinching  pain  in  the  whole  chest,  increased  by  inspiration  (aft. 
14  h.).  [Jr.] 

Oppression  of  the  chest,  as  after  sitting  bent  forwards.  [We.] 

235.  Great  oppressive  pain  in  the  whole  chest,  especially 
on  inspiration  and  expiration.  \Ar.\ 

He  feels  as  something  were  forced  out  on  the  left  side  of  the 
chest.  [Gjj.] 

Palpitation  of  the  heart ; strong  beating  of  the  heart,  felt  exter- 
nally, especially  at  night. 

Strong  palpitation  of  the  heart ; it  seemed  as  though  he  felt  the 
heart  beating  outside  the  thoracic  cavity.  [St/.] 

A digging  shooting  pain  on  the  left  side  near  the  sacrum  (aft.  10 
h.).  [Ar .] 

240.  Sacral  pains,  as  after  stooping  long.  [We.] 

Under  the  left  crista  ilii  a digging  pain,  that  went  off  by  pressing 
on  it  (aft.  6 h.).  [Ar.] 

On  sitting  in  a bent  position  (after  a short  walk)  every  time  he 
inspires,  an  obtuse  stitch  outwards — a kind  of  forcing  out — in  both 
lumbar  regions.  [Gss.] 

Above  the  left  hip,  quite  close  to  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  pain  as  if 
he  had  previously  received  a blow  there  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Ar.] 


shooting 
Hb.  1 


DULCAMARA. 


593 


In  the  loin,  over  the  right  hip,  a deep  cutting  pain,  that  went  off 
by  pressure,  but  soon  afterwards  returned,  and  then  went  off  gra- 
dually of  its  own  accord  (aft.  4 d.).  [Jr.] 

245.  Pain  as  if  the  body  were  cut  off  in  the  lumbar  region  above  the 
hips ; owing  to  the  pain  he  moved  to  and  fro,  unable  to  sit  still,  but 
this  gave  him  no  relief.  [Gw.] 

In  the  loin,  above  the  left  hip,  a digging  shooting 
pain,  that  went  off  on  walking,  but  came  again  when  sitting  (aft. 
4i  d.).  [Jr.] 

Close  to  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  above  the  right  hip,  severe  single 
stabs  in  jerks,  as  with  a fork  (aft.  6 d.).  [Jr .] 

Posteriorly  on  the  left  side  in  the  loin,  just  above  the  hip,  an 
obtuse  stitch  outwards  at  every  breath.  [Gw.] 

Single  painful  stitches  on  inspiring  in  the  middle  of  the  spine 
(aft.  29  h.).  [Jr.] 

250.  Intermittent,  obtuse  stitches,  like  a painful  beating,  in  the  left 
side  of  the  back  near  the  spine.  [Gw.] 

Intermittent  pressure  on  the  left  side  close  to  the  spinal  column, 
at  the  commencement  of  the  back  up  near  the  nape,  in  the  morning 
in  bed  when  lying  on  the  back.  [Gw.] 

An  agreeable  tickling  sensation  on  the  outer  border  of  the  right 
scapula.  [Jr.] 

In  the  middle  of  the  right  scapula  a tickling  prick.  [Jr.'] 

Drawing  tearing  pain  on  the  outer  border  of  the  right  scapula 
(aft.  6 d.).  [Jr.] 

255.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,  above  the  right  hip- 
joint,  and  above  and  below  the  right  knee-joint.  [Ts.  Hb.] 

Intermitting  tearing  blows  on  the  outer  side  of  the  left  scapula. 

[G«.] 

Stiff  pain  in  the  nape-muscles  on  turning  the  head  to  one  or  both 
sides.  [Gw.] 

Stiffness  in  the -nape-muscles.  [Rkt.] 

Pain  in  the  nape,  as  if  the  head  had  been  in  a wrong  position. 

[#*.] 

260.  In  the  nape-muscles  contractive  pain  as  if  the  neck  were  twisted 
round.  [Gw.] 

In  the  whole  of  the  right  arm  a dull  violent  pain,  as  from  an 
apoplectic  attack,  combined  with  heaviness  like  lead,  immobility, 
and  cold  feeling ; the  arm  was  icy  cold  to  the  touch,  the  muscles  felt 
as  if  stretched,  even  when  at  rest ; the  arm  was  almost  completely 
paralysed,  he  could  not  bend  it  voluntarily,  nor  lift  it  up,  nor  hold  a 
pen  ; on  trying  to  do  so  he  felt  a sharp  pain  as  if  bruised  in  the 
elbow-joint,  which  is  also  painful  to  the  touch  as  if  bruised  (aft.  \ 
h.),  the  same  icy  coldness  of  the  right  arm  came  again  next  morning 
(aft.  24  h.).  [Mr.] 

When  she  wishes  to  bring  the  arms  forward  or  backwards  she 
cannot  do  it,  as  that  brings  on  jerks  in  the  arms. 

When  she  bent  the  arm  and  moved  it  backwards  she  had  twitch- 
ings  in  the  flesh  of  the  upper  arm ; when  she  extended  it  it  did  not 

38 


594 


DULCAMARA. 


twitch,  but  the  fingers  then  became  stiff  so  that  she  could  not  close 
them. 

In  the  evening  in  bed  and  in  the  morning  after  rising,  pain  in  the 
upper  arm. 

265.  Burning  itching  externally  on  the  right  upper  arm,  that  com- 
pelled  him  to  scratch  ; the  part  was  red  and  had  a vesicle  on  it,  with 
burning  sensation. 

The  left  arm  pains  as  if  paralysed,  as  from  a bruise,  almost  only 
when  at  rest,  little  when  moving,  it  is  not  painful  to  the  touch  ; but 
the  arm  had  its  proper  strength. 

A paralytic  sensation  in  the  right  upper  arm,  which  went  off  on 
moving  it  strongly  (aft.  4-J  d.). 

On  the  outside  of  the  right  elbow  an  eroding  gnawing  pain  in 
short  fits.  [Gjj.] 

A drawing  pain  in  the  right  forearm  (aft.  3J  d.). 

270.  Dull  drawing  from  the  left  elbow  to  the  wrist,  especially  noticed 
on  pronation,  in  the  evening  (aft.  9 d.).  [A7jr.] 

In  the  shaft  of  the  left  ulna  a repeated  acute  drawing.  [Gr.r.] 

A sudden,  jerking,,  pinching  tearing  in  the  middle  of  the  left  fore- 
arm (aft.  12  h.).  [y/r.] 

In  the  right  forearm,  from  the  elbow-joint  to  the  wrist,  a slow, 
down-drawing,  twisting,  boring  pain,  which  went  off  by  moving  the 
arm,  but  immediately  returned  when  at  rest  (aft.  4 h.).  [y/r.] 

The  left  forearm  powerless,  as  if  paralysed,  with  a paralytic  feeling 
in  the  elbow-joint  (aft.  36  h.).  \JVe.~\ 

275.  Disagreeable  itching  on  the  middle  of  the  right  forearm  that  com- 
pelled scratching,  whereby  it  was  removed,  but  it  soon  returned  (aft. 
36  h.).  [Ar.] 

In  the  bend  of  the  elbow  eruption  of  red  pimples,  visible  morning 
and  evening  in  the  warm  room,  that  caused  a fine  pricking  itching, 
and  burning  after  scratching,  for  twelve  days. 

On  the  right  wrist  a prick,  as  with  a blunt  point,  which  went 
off  by  movement  (aft.  1 h.).  [y/r.] 

Trembling  of  the  hands  (in  cold  wet  weather  when  taking  dulca- 
mara) . [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Tetter-like  eruption,  especially  on  the  hands.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

280.  Much  perspiration  of  the  palms.  [W'e.'] 

The  hands  are  covered  with  a kind  of  warts,  such  as  he  had 
never  had  before  (aft.  21  d.).  [*SV/~.] 

On  the  back  of  the  hand  a redness,  which  causes  burning  pain, 
when  he  becomes  warm  by  walking  in  the  open  air. 

In  the  ball  of  the  left  thumb  cramp-like  drawing,  so  that  he 
scarcely  dares  to  move  the  thumb.  [Grj.] 

Cramp-like  twitching  pain  in  the  first  joint  of  the  right  middle 
finger.  [Gjj.] 

285.  Single  small  stitches  on  the  right  buttock  (aft.  8J  d.).  [yfr.] 
Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  left  hip  (aft.  14  h.).  [y/r.] 

Drawing  pinching  pain  in  the  right  hip  (aft.  26  h.).  \Ar.\ 


1 Critical  eruption. 


DULCAMARA. 


595 


Drawing  shooting  pain  in  the  left  hip-joint  extending  to  the 
groin,  only  when  walking,  at  every  step,  with  the  sensation  as  if  the 
head  of  the  hip-bone  would  be  dislocated;  stretching  it  out  forcibly 
diminished  the  pain,  and  caused  the  feeling  as  if  the  femur  were 
thereby  put  into  place  ; but  a bruised  pain  remained  for  some  time 
in  the  parts,  which  made  him  limp  (for  14  d,).  [ Ctz .] 

Pain  in  the  thigh. 

290.  Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  whole  right  thigh,  that  did  not  go  off 
by  pressure,  [Ar.~\ 

Fine  pricking  pain  as  with  needles  in  the  back  of  the  left  thigh 
close  to  the  knee  (aft.  81  h.).  [Ar.~\ 

Continued  sometimes  shooting,  sometimes  beating,  sometimes 
pinching  pain  in  both  thighs,  which  went  off  on  walking,  but  then 
developed  into  weariness  ; when  sitting  it  immediately  returned 
(aft.  3I  d.).  [Ar.~\ 

A drawing  tearing  pain  in  both  thighs,  which  went  off 
on  walking,  but  changed  into  weariness  and  returned  immediately 
when  sitting  (aft.  12,  14  h.).  [Ar.] 

Here  and  there  drawing  in  the  flesh  of  the  thighs.  The  parts 
were  painful  to  the  touch.  [iVg-.] 

295.  A drawing  sensation  on  the  front  of  the  right  thigh  (aft.  36  h.). 

[>•] 

A drawing  tearing  pain  on  the  back  of  the  right  thigh,  ex- 
tending from  its  middle  into  the  knee-joint  (aft.  f h.).  \Ar.~\ 

A drawing  paralytic  sensation  on  the  front  of  the  right  thigh 
(aft.  8Jd [Ar.) 

Shooting  tearing  pain  from  the  knee-joint  up  into  the  thigh,  when 
walking  in  the  open  air.  \_Rkt.'\ 

Burning  itching  sensation  externally  on  the  thighs,  that  compels 
scratching  (aft.  7 h.).  \Wr.~\ 

300.  Falling  asleep  and  weakness  of  the  lower  limbs.  [Carrere, 
1.  c.] 

Great  weakness  of  the  knees,  as  after  a long  walk  (3rd  day.). 

im 

Twitching  of  the  inferior  extremities.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Tearing  in  the  knee-joint,  when  sitting.  [ Rkt. ] 

On  the  inside  of  the  knee  regularly  recurring  undulatory  aching 
pain.  [Gjj.] 

305.  On  the  outside  of  the  right  leg,  itching,  ending  in  an  itching 
prick  (aft.  \ h.).  [ We.] 

On  the  outside  of  the  left  leg,  itching,  going  off  on  scratching, 
but  soon  recurring  (aft.  J h.).  \JVe.'\ 

Cramp-like  drawing  (almost  cutting)  pain  down  through  the  left 
leg.  [Gm.] 

Pufliness  and  swelling  of  the  leg  and  calf  (but  not  of  the 
foot)  with  tensive  pain  and  feeling  of  extreme  weariness  towards 
evening. 

Slight  tearing  upwards  in  the  right  tibia  (2nd  d.).  [Ar^.] 


1 Not  found. 


596 


DULCAMARA. 


310.  Pain  in  the  tibia,  as  from  being  tired  by  a long  walk  (aft.  36  h.). 
[fFe.] 

A pain  draws  downwards  from  the  back  of  the  left  calf,  as  if 
some  one  slit  him  inwardly  (aft.  \ h.).  \Ar.~\ 

Tearing  pain  in  the  back  of  the  left  calf,  that  went  off  on 
moving  the  foot  (aft.  | h.).  \_Ar.~] 

A sudden  prick  as  from  a needle  in  the  left  calf  followed  by  the 
sensation  as  if  warm  blood  or  water  flowed  down  out  of  the  part.  \Ar.~\ 
Numb  sensation  in  the  calf,  in  the  afternoon  and  evening. 

315.  Painful  cramp  in  the  left  calf  when  walking  (aft.  9 h.).  \_JVr.'] 
Burning  in  the  feet. 

He  woke  up  at  night  from  severe  cramp  on  the  inner  right  ankle, 
he  must  get  up  out  of  bed  and  walk  about,  whereupon  it  went  off. 

Drawing  tearing  near  the  inner  ankle  of  the  right  foot  (aft. 

iah.).  [Ng.] 

Tearing  in  the  left  leg  from  the  outer  ankle  to  the  front  of  the 
foot.  [A^-.] 

320.  A cutting  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  right  sole,  that  did  not  go  off 
by  treading  (aft.  27  h.).  [Ar.~\ 

Pulsating  tearing  pain  in  the  big  and  second  toes  of  the  left 
foot.  \JVe.~] 

On  the  toes,  intermitting,  shooting  burning. 

Slight  twitchings  on  the  hands  and  feet.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 
Convulsions  first  in  the  facial  muscles,  then  in  the  whole  body. 
[Fritze,1 2  Annal.  d.  Klin.  Inst,  in  Berlin , iii,  p.  45.] 

325.  Cramp-pain  here  and  there  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  fingers. 

[<?».] 

The  symptoms  appear  to  occur  by  preference  chiefly  towards 
evening.  [iVg\] 

Violent  trembling  of  the  limbs.3  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Obtuse  stitches  here  and  there  in  the  limbs  and  on  the  rest  of  the 
body,  generally  outwards.  [Gtt.] 

Pain  in  the  limbs. 

330.  On  various  parts  of  the  body  pains  as  if  these  parts  had  caught 
cold.  [We.] 

Burning  itching  here  and  there,  running  quickly  to  and  fro,  like 
vermin  ; he  must  scratch  violently,  after  which  it  at  first  increased, 
and  then  declined  ; by  day  the  itching  is  but  slightly  felt ; only  at 
night  and  then  worst  from  12  till  3 o'clock ; after  a short  sleep  he  is 
wakened  by  this  sensation  (aft.  14  d.).  [*S7/'.] 

Itching  pinching  pricks  on  various  parts  of  the  body.  [We.] 
Violent  itching  all  over  the  body.3  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Pricking  itching  on  various  parts  of  the  body.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

335.  A violently  itching  eruption  of  red  spots  with  vesicles.4  [Car- 


rere. 


I.  c.] 


1 Statement  from  observation. 

2 Not  found. 

3 See  note  to  S.  343. 

4 On  parts  affected  by  “ dartres.” 


DULCAMARA. 


597 


Eruption  on  the  arms  and  thighs,  like  white  lumps  (wheals) 
surrounded  by  a red  areola ; there  was  itching  pricking  only  in  the 
wheals  and,  after  rubbing,  burning  in  them. 

Eruption  of  small  papules  on  the  chest  and  abdomen,  with 
moderate  itching.  [St/.] 

Eruption  of  a tetter-like  scab  all  over  the  body.1 2  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 
Bright  red  pointed  elevations  on  the  skin  which  filled  with  pus 
after  five  or  six  days.  [Starcke,  1.  c.] 

340.  Red  elevated  spots  as  from  nettles,3  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Red  places  on  the  body.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Red,  fleabite-like  spots.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Dryness,  heat  and  burning  in  the  skin.3  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 
Dryness  and  heat  of  the  skin,  constipation  and  painful  retention 
of  urine,  with  soft,  full,  slow  pulse  with  jerking  beats.  [Carrere, 
1.  c.] 

345.  Sudden  swelling  of  the  body  and  puffiness  of  the  limbs,  some- 
times painful  or  accompanied  by  a feeling  of  being  asleep.  [Starcke, 

I.C.] 

Emaciation. 

Lassitude  ; he  shuns  movement. 

Weariness. 

Lassitude,  heaviness  and  weariness  in  all  the  limbs  which  compels 
him  to  sit  or  lie  down  (aft.  12  h.).  [Wr.] 

350.  In  all  the  limbs  a feeling  of  great  bruisedness,  lasting  almost  all 
day.  [Ar.] 

Heaviness  in  the  thighs  and  arms.  [Rkt.] 

Great,  persistent  weakness.4  [Carrere,  I.  c.] 

Attack  of  sudden  weakness,  like  faintness. 

He  must  lie  down. 

355.  All  day  long  he  is  very  drowsy  and  must  yawn  much.  [Ar.] 
Great  sleepiness,  laziness,  yawning.  [Mr.] 

Frequent  great  yawning.  [Gjj.] 

Restlessness,  twitching,  sleeplessness.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 
Sleeplessness.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

360.  Restless  sleep,  disturbed  by  confused  dreams,  with  profuse  per- 
spiration during  sleep.  [Wr.] 

Restless,  disturbed,  anxious  sleep,  full  of  heavy  dreams.  [Starcke, 
1.  c.] 

In  the  evening,  just  when  going  to  sleep,  he  leapt  up  high  as  if 
from  fright.  [GssJ] 

Sleep  with  loud  snoring  with  open  mouth  (immediately). 

After  midnight,  anxiety  and  fear  of  the  future. 

365.  Frightful  dreams  that  compelled  him  to  jump  out  of  bed  (the  first 
night).  [Wr.] 


1 Critical.  See  note  to  S.  343. 

2 On  seat  of  vanished  “ dartres.” 

3 A youth,  hereditarily  “dartrous,”  and  in  bad  health,  after  taking  D.,  had  S.  395, 
333?  I9I>  1 ° 1 , with  hard  and  tense  pulse.  Then  came  S.  338,  with  relief  to  all 
symptoms.  The  medicine  was  continued,  and  he  got  well. 

4 After  much  sweating. 


598 


DULCAMARA. 


After  4 a.m.  the  sleep  becomes  very  restless,  whatever  way  be 
lies.  {Jr.] 

Tossing  about  in  bed  all  night,  with  stupid  feeling  in  the  head. 
{We.] 

Unquiet  sleep;  he  tossed  about  uncomfortably  in  bed. 

He  woke  very  early  and  could  not  go  to  sleep  again  ; he  stretched 
himself  with  great  weariness,  and  lay  first  on  one  side  and  then  on 
the  other,  because  the  muscles  at  the  back  of  the  head  were  as  if 
paralysed  and  he  could  not  lie  on  it.  {We.] 

370.  She  wakes  early  as  if  she  had  been  called,  sees  a ghostly  figure 
that  always  grows  bigger  and  seems  to  vanish  upwards. 

Towards  morning  a kind  of  wakefulness  with  closed  eyes.  {We.] 
Towards  morning  no  sleep,  and  yet  in  all  the  limbs  tired  as  if 
paralysed,  as  after  exposure  to  great  heat.  {We.] 

Sleeplessness,  ebullition  of  blood,  shooting  and  itching  in  the 
skin.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

(At  night,  no  sleep,  on  account  of  itching  in  the  front  of  the 
body,  from  the  chest  over  the  abdomen  and  thighs,  like  flea-bites  ; 
at  the  same  time  he  was  hot  and  transpired,  without  being  wet  ; the 
transpiration  had  a disagreeable  smell.) 

375.  Shivering  as  from  nausea  and  chilliness  combined,  with  cold 
feeling  and  coldness  all  over  the  body  ; he  could  not  get  warm  at  the 
hottest  stove  ; at  the  same  time  occasional  shuddering  and  shaking 
(immediately).  {JUr.] 

Double  tertian  fever.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

He  is  chilly  and  uncomfortable  in  all  his  limbs.  {We.] 

Frequent  rigor,  heaviness  of  head,  general  prostration1  (after  a chill 
when  taking  dulcamara).  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

In  the  open  air,  especially  when  exposed  to  a draught,  chilliness 
on  the  back  without  thirst.  [A(g.] 

380.  Towards  evening  chilliness  over  the  back,  the  nape,  and  the 
occiput,  with  a feeling  as  if  the  hair  of  the  head  stood  on  end 
(3rd  d.).  [Afr.] 

For  several  evenings  slight  but  disagreeable  chilliness  from  the 
back  over  the  occiput.  [A^g.] 

The  chilliness  on  the  back  towards  evening  lasted  for  more  than 
ten  days,  recurring  daily.  [A^.] 

Dry  heat  at  night. 

Hot,  dry  skin,  ebullition  of  blood.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

385.  Burning  in  the  skin  all  over  the  back,  as  if  he  were  sitting  near 
a hot  stove,  with  perspiration  on  the  face  and  moderate  heat.  {We.] 
Heat,  restlessness.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Violent  fever,  with  great  heat,  dryness  of  skin  and  delirium 
daily;  recurring  every  15,  16  hours.2  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Heat  and  feeling  of  heat  all  over  the  body,  especially  in  the 
hands,  the  pulse  equable,  slow,  but  full ; at  the  same  time  thirst, 
afterwards  rigor.  {Rkt.] 


1 See  note  to  S.  1 64. 

2 Critical.  S.  384  and  386  probably  belong  to  this  observation, 


DULCAMARA. 


599 


Heat  of  the  body,  burning  in  the  face,  constipation.  [Carrere, 
!•  c-] 

390.  General  perspiration,  especially  in  the  back. 

Perspiration  for  five  days  and  more.1  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 
Perspiration  all  over  at  night,  by  day  under  the  shoulders  and  in 
the  palms.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning  profuse  perspiration  all  over,  but  chiefly  over  the 
whole  head  (aft.  20  h.). 

Ill- smelling  perspiration,  and  at  the  same  time  copious 
discharge  of  clear  urine.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

395.  Restlessness.  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 

Talking  nonsense.  [De  Haen,2  Ratio  Medendi , iv,  p.  228.] 
Increased  pain  at  night  with  delirium.3  [Carrere,  1.  c.] 
Wandering,  delirium,  a kind  of  insanity.  [Starcke,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  very  impatient \ he  stamped  his  feet,  wished  to 
throwaway  everything,  commenced  to  wander  in  his  mind  3 followed 
by  weeping.  [Starcke,  1.  c.] 

400.  Very  much  out  of  humour,  inclined  for  nothing,  for  several 
days.  [Ag\] 

In  the  afternoon  a peculiar  humour,  he  must  quarrel  with  every 
one,  but  he  is  not  angry.  [Ag-.] 


1 Critical,  in  rheumatism.  S.  392  and  394  cannot  be  found,  but  they  are  probably 
of  the  same  nature. 

2 Observation  in  disease. 

3 Not  found. 


EUPHRASIA  OFFICINALIS.1 2 

( Eyebright .) 

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  the  whole  plant  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol. 
The  juice  in  the  latter  part  of  summer  is  often  so  viscid,  that  after  pounding  the  plant 
to  a fine  pap  of  uniform  consistence,  it  must  generally  be  mixed  up  and  diluted  with 
some  of  this  alcohol,  in  order  to  allow  of  the  juice  being  expressed.) 

From  the  following  few  observations,  it  may  be  seen  that  the 
ancients  did  not  give  it  either  its  German3  or  its  Latin  name  without 
reason,  and  that  this  plant  does  not  merit  the  neglect  with  which 
modern  physicians  treat  it. 

The  homoeopathic  physician,  who  for  the  cure  of  a case  of  disease 
only  selects  a medicine  proved  to  cause  similar  symptoms  in  the  healthy, 
will  find  the  smallest  portion  of  a drop  of  this  juice  generally  too 
strong  a dose. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Langhammer, 

WlSLlCENUS. 

Symptoms  were  obtained  from  the  following  old-school  authorities : 

Bonnet,  Merc.  Compile  1 3 . 

Lobelius,  Adders.,  210. 

Paulli,  Sim.,  Quadripart.  Bot.,  class.  3. 

In  the  1 st  edit,  of  the  ‘ R.  A.  M.  L.’  euphrasia  had  115  symptoms,  in  this  2nd  edit. 


EUPHRASIA. 

(Confusion  and  pressure  externally  on  the  top  of  the  head.) 

Much  heat  in  the  head,  with  aching. 

Heat  in  the  forehead  with  headache  in  the  temple. 

In  the  evening  such  violent  dazed  and  bruised  headache  (with 
fluent  coryza)  that  he  was  compelled  to  go  to  bed  earlier  than  usual, 
and  yet  the  headache  was  increased  by  lying  (aft.  14  h.).  [Lr.] 

5.  A long-continued,  penetrating  needle-prick  in  the  right  temple 
(aft.  7 h.).  [Lr.] 

Fine  needle-pricks  externally  on  the  left  temple  (aft.  J h.).  [Lr.] 

Some  sharp  stitches  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  \ h.). 

[Lr.-] 

Sharp  tearing  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  when  at  rest 
and  when  moving,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  h.).  [Lr.] 

A pressive  pain  externally  on  the  head,  but  especially  on  the  fore- 
head (aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.] 


1 From  vol.  v,  2nd  edit.,  1826. 

2 Augentrost,  angl.,  eye-comfort. 


EUPHRASIA. 


601 


io.  On  blowing  the  nose  a sensation  of  painful  dazedness  in  the 
head  and  painfulness  of  the  interior  of  the  nose,  so  that  he  can  only- 
blow  his  nose  gently  (aft.  15  h.).  [Zr.] 

The  candle  appeared  to  him  dimmer. 

The  candle  seemed  to  be  unsteady,  and  to  burn  at  one  time 
more  brightly,  at  another  more  dimly. 

The  eyes  are  painful  from  the  glare  of  light,  as  though  he  had  not 
slept  enough. 

Dimness  of  vision  on  looking  at  distant  objects  (short  sight)  all 
day.  [Zr.] 

15.  On  walking  in  the  open  air  dimness  of  vision  for  distant  objects 
(short  sight),  for  three  days  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Zr.] 

Vessels  in  the  sclerotic  run  close  up  to  the  cornea.*  [Zr.] 

Painful  aching  in  the  left  inner  canthus ; the  eye  waters  (aft.  24 

h.).  \_m.] 

Aching  in  both  eyes,  as  if  he  would  go  to  sleep.  [Zr.  H — «.] 
Aching  sensation  in  both  eyes,  as  if  he  were  trying  to  keep 
awake  (aft.  2 h.),  [Zr.  H — «.] 

20.  Sleepy  dry  aching  in  both  eyes,  not  aggravated  by  the  brightest 
daylight  nor  by  looking  at  the  fire.  [Zr.  H—n .] 

Tiresome  dryness  in  the  eyes,  just  as  if  he  had  had  no  sleep. 
[Zr.  H—n.] 

In  the  evening  a sensation  of  contraction  from  both  sides  in  the 
eyes,  especially  in  the  upper  eyelids,  which  compelled  him  to  wink 
frequently  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 

Contractive  aching  in  the  eye,  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 
Sometimes  a smarting  in  the  eyes ; scalding  water  runs  from  them. 

25.  Very  fine  pricks  in  the  eyeball  (aft.  n h.).  [Zr.  H — ».] 

In  the  inner  canthi  eyegum,  even  during  the  day. 

Eyegum  in  the  canthi  (aft.  13  h.).  [Zr.] 

Twitching  together  of  the  upper  and  lower  lids. 

Flux  of  the  eyes,  so  that  he  almost  became  blind. f [Lobelius, 
Advers.J-  210.] 

30.  Sore  eyes  \ he  almost  became  blind.  [Bonnet,1 2 3  Merc.  Compile 
13. — Sim.  Paul li,3  ghiadripart.  Bot .,  class.  3.] 

Very  violent  boring  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear,  in  the 
region  of  the  membrana  tympani,  as  from  within  outwards  (aft.  7 h.). 

Painful  tension  in  the  interior  of  the  left  ear  (aft.  6 h.).  \JVs.\ 
Stiffness  of  the  left  cheek  when  speaking  and  chewing,  with 
sensation  of  heat  and  single  flying  stitches  in  it  (aft.  6 h.).  \Ws.] 
Eruption  of  pimples,  containing  pus,  in  the  alae  nasi  (aft.  h.)f 
[Zr.] 

* At  the  same  time  an  aching  he  had  long  felt  in  the  eyes  and  dark  spots  on  the 
cornea  disappeared  in  two  days.  [Lr.] 

f After  using  the  plant  for  a quarter  of  a year. 


1 From  three  months’  internal  use  of  euphrasia  for  an  ophthalmia  with  lachrymation. 

2 Not  accessible. 

3 Only  a citation  of  Lobelius  (S.  29). 


602 


EUPHRASIA. 


35.  A drawing  pain  transversely  across  in  the  upper  jaw  (aft.  h.). 

[*>•] 

At  noon,  when  eating,  needle-pricks  penetrating  forwards  in  the 
left  lower  jaw,  which  even  prevented  chewing  (aft.  7 h.).  [Zr.] 

Violent  stitches  from  behind  forwards,  under  the  right  lower  jaw 
near  the  neck,  which  quickly  went  off  on  touching  (aft.  81  h.). 

[*>•]. 

Fine  stitches  on  the  chin,  with  sensation  of  internal  heat  on  that 
part  (aft.  ± h.).  \Ws^ 

Shooting  in  the  lower  teeth. 

40.  (A  throbbing  in  two  teeth,  after  eating  and  at  other  times.) 

Great  bleeding  of  the  gums  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.  H — n.~\ 

He  repeats  frequently  when  speaking,  both  at  the  first  word  (a 
kind  of  stuttering),  and  also  often  repeating  sentences  frequently  in 
order  to  express  himself  differently — whereas  he  formerly  spoke 
correctly.  [Zr.  H — n. ] 

Insipid  taste  in  the  mouth. 

In  the  morning  bitter  taste  from  tobacco-smoking  (aft.  52  h.). 

[>•] 

45.  He  became  qualmish  and  sick  from  (accustomed)  tobacco-smoking, 
which  tastes  to  him  bitter  pungent  (aft.  14  h.).  [Zr.] 

At  noon  hunger  without  appetite  (aft.  54  h.).  \Lr.  1 
Hiccup  (aft.  5 m.).  [Zr.] 

Eructation  with  the  taste  of  food. 

During  inspiration  and  expiration  some  fine  pricks  beneath  the 
scrobiculus  cordis,  in  the  evening,  when  sitting  (aft.  15  h.).  [Zr.] 

50.  Distension  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  without  flatulence,  before 
dinner. 

Painless  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  when  hungry  and  empty 
(aft.  h.).  [Zr.] 

A kind  of  oppression  in  the  abdomen,  a burning  pressing  pain 
going  across  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  5J  h.).  [Zr.] 

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  in  short  fits  (aft.  3,  4 h.).  [Fr. 
H — r.] 

Bellyache  for  seven  hours  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.  H — n.] 

55.  Stool  every  day,  but  only  hard  and  scanty. 

A pressure  on  the  anus,  when  sitting. 

Frequent  micturition  (aft.  f h.).  [Zr.] 

Frequent  discharge  of  clear  urine  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Ws7\ 

A voluptuous  itching  on  the  seam  of  the  prepuce  compelling 
scratching,  after  the  scratching  and  on  pressing  on  it  the  part  is 
painful  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

60.  Several  needle-pricks  on  the  point  of  the  glans  penis  (aft.  h.). 

When  sitting  voluptuous  itching  needle-pricks  on  the  glans  penis, 
which  is  painful  after  scratching  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.] 

(In  the  condylomata  a shooting,  even  when  sitting,  still  more 
severe  when  walking ; on  touching  them  they  pain  as  if  sore  and 
burning.) 

(In  the  condylomata  an  itching  sensation.) 


EUPHRASIA.  603 

The  testicles  are  drawn  up,  and  there  is  formication  in  them 
(aft.  12  h.).  [Ws.] 

65.  Spasmodic  retraction  of  the  genitals,  with  aching  above  the  os 
pubis,  in  the  evening  in  bed.  \Ws.'\ 

* 

Sneezing  with  severe  fluent  coryza,  during  which  much  mucus 
passes  through  the  nostrils  anteriorly  and  also  through  the  posterior 
nares  (aft.  9 h.).  [Ar.] 

In  the  morning  copious  fluent  coryza,  and  severe  cough  with 
expectoration  (aft.  46  h.).  [Ar.] 

For  several  days,  copious  mucous  expectoration  by  voluntary 
hacking  cough.  [Ar.] 

Cough  most  severe  by  day,  with  phlegm  on  the  chest,  which 
can  not  be  detached. 

70.  Cough  only  during  the  day  ; at  night  he  has  no  cough. 

During  the  cough  he  loses  his  breath,  almost  as  in  whooping- 
cough. 

Laboured  breathing,  even  in  the  room. 

He  has  difficulty  in  drawing  a deep  breath,  even  when  sitting. 
Single  fine  stitches  under  the  sternum,  especially  during  inspi- 
ration (aft.  10  h.).  [Ws.~\ 

75.  Cramp-like  backache  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Fr.  H — 77.] 

Continued  aching  pains  in  the  back  when  sitting  and  walking 

(aft.  54  h.).  [Zr.] 

Intermittent  cramp-like  backache,  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  1 h.). 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

Sensation  in  the  arms  as  if  they  had  gone  asleep. 

A numbing  stitch  in  the  left  upper  arm  (aft.  J h.).  [Ar.] 

80.  Single  obtuse  stitches  anteriorly  on  the  left  forearm,  close  to  the 
wrist  (aft.  13  h.).  [Ar.] 

In  the  right  forearm  and  in  the  hand,  pain  as  if  gone  asleep  (aft. 
1^  h.).  [Fr.  H—n.~\ 

Dull  tearing  in  the  elbow  and  wrist  joints  (aft.  2 h.).  [JVs.~\ 

Pain  like  cramp  in  the  wrists  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  24  h.).  [. Fr . 
H—  «.] 

Cramp-pain  in  the  metacarpus.  [Ar.  H — 77.] 

85.  In  the  metacarpus,  pain  like  cramp,  alternately  stronger  and 
weaker  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fr.  H — 77.] 

Cramp-like  aching  pain  in  the  left  hand,  after  which  the  squeezing 
aching  pain  went  into  the  fingers.  [Fr.  H — 77.] 

Very  penetrating  pinching  pain  on  the  back  of  the  hand  (aft. 
3 h.).  [Fr.  H — 77.] 

Pinching  pain  in  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  index  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Fr.  H—n .] 

In  the  knuckles  of  the  fingers  and  finger-joints,  more  towards 
their  outer  side,  pain  as  if  gone  asleep  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Fr.  H — 77.] 

90.  Cramp-pain  in  the  fingers,  especially  the  finger-joints  of  the  left 
hand  (aft.  i^h.).  [Fr.  H — 77.] 

Shooting  in  the  left  hip-joint,  when  walking. 


604 


EUPHRASIA. 


A violent  needle-prick  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  right  thigh, 
only  when  standing  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.] 

Violent  needle-pricks  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  right  thigh, 
when  standing  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.] 

Shooting  drawing  from  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh  to  the  groin, 
most  severe  when  sitting  (aft.  48  h.).  \JVs.~\ 

95.  Only  when  walking  in  the  open  air  a voluptuous  itching  on  the 
front  of  the  thigh,  that  compels  scratching,  whereupon  the  part  is 
painful  (aft.  9!  h.).  [Zr.] 

Twitching  shooting  in  the  left  knee,  when  walking. 

Weariness  in  the  knees,  as  from  a long  walk  (aft.  4 h.).  [/ZT] 
Whilst  walking,  painful  tension  in  the  tendons  of  the  hough,  as 
if  they  were  too  short,  whereby  walking  is  difficult  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zr.] 
Continued  boring  stitches  upwards  in  the  shaft  of  the  tibia, 
(aft.  ii  h.).  [Zr.] 

100.  When  sitting,  an  up-and-down  drawing  pain  anteriorly  in  the 
periosteum  of  the  shaft  of  the  left  tibia  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Zr.] 

On  standing  long,  a cramp-like  pain  in  the  calves,  with  sensation 
of  heaviness  (aft.  2\  h.).  \_Ws.~] 

In  the  evening  when  walking,  a voluptuous  itching  in  the  right 
calf,  that  compels  scratching  (aft.  12  h.).  [Zr.] 

When  walking  and  sitting,  a tension  from  the  outer  ankle  near 
the  tendo  Achillis  towards  the  calf. 

On  the  left  outer  ankle  a cracking  when  treading.  [Zr.] 

105.  A tickling  formication  on  the  left  toes  ; the  part  is  painful  after 
rubbing  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

All  through  the  night,  flying,  itching  pricks  here  and  there ; he 
tosses  about  uneasily  in  bed  and  cannot  get  warm  enough.  \Ws .] 
Such  great  exhaustion  in  the  whole  body,  especially  the  lower 
extremities,  that  he  must  make  a great  effort  to  walk — all  the 
third  day.  [Zr.] 

By  day  very  tired,  and  yet  the  ensuing  night  when  he  lay  in  bed 
he  could  not  fall  asleep  till  about  2 a.m. — for  three  successive  nights. 
Uncommon  yawning,  on  walking  in  the  open  air. 

110.  Very  sleepy  by  day,  and  yet  he  had  slept  all  through  the  previous 
night. 

Drowsiness,  which  begins  as  it  were  in  the  eyes,  for  ten  hours 
(aft.  J h.).  [Zr.  H — «.] 

Drowsy  yet  busy.  [Zr.  H — n.~\ 

Drowsiness  without  being  able  to  sleep,  with  much  yawning. 
[Zr.  H—n .] 

At  night  frequent  waking  as  if  from  fright.  [Zr.] 

1 15.  At  night  horrible  dreams  of  fire  and  burning  by  lightning  (the 
2nd  night).  [Zr.] 

Attack  for  three  successive  mornings  : he  wakes  up  at  night 
after  3 a.m.  every  instant,  then  about  6 a.m.  falls  into  a stupefied 
sleep,  without  dreams,  and  on  awaking  from  this,  he  has  pressure  on 
the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  the  head  is  giddy  and  heavy  ; at  the 
same  time  he  feels  sick  and  perspiration  breaks  out  all  over  him  ; at 
every,  even  the  slightest  movement,  the  vertigo  increases,  inclining 


EUPHRASIA. 


605 


him  to  fall  sideways  ; all  the  limbs  are  at  the  same  time  weak  and 
trembling ; the  upper  part  of  his  body  seems  too  heavy  on  rising,  as 
if  his  legs  could  not  support  him  ; the  attack  gradually  declines  till 
noon,  with  loss  of  cheerfulness. 

Paleness  of  face — for  an  hour  (immediately).  \_Fr.  H — n .] 

Always  chilly. 

All  the  forenoon,  internal  chilliness,  but  in  the  afternoon  (after  2 
o’clock),  great  chilliness  in  both  arms,  which  were  quite  cold. 

120.  Febrile  rigor  all  over  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Zr.] 

Redness  and  heat  of  the  cheeks — for  an  hour  (aft.  J,  J h.). 
[Fr.  H—n.] 

Red,  hot  face — for  an  hour  and  a half  (aft.  J h.).  \_Fr.  H — »]. 

Sudden  flush  of  heat  and  redness  of  face,  with  coldness  of  hands 
(without  thirst)  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.] 

Sweat  at  night  in  sleep,  which  went  off  on  awaking — for  two 
successive  nights. 

125.  For  three  successive  nights,  sweat  all  over,  in  sleep,  of  a strong 
smell,  chiefly  on  the  chest  (on  rising  from  bed,  chilliness). 

Silent,  wrapped  up  in  himself  and  disinclined  to  speak,  all  day. 

[Lr.) 

Lazy,  hypochondriacal ; external  objects  had  no  charm,  no  life 
for  him. 


FERRUM.1 

( Iron .) 

(Filings  of  soft  iron  are  powdered  by  sufficient  trituration  in  a cast  iron  mortar, 
then  sifted  through  linen,  and  of  this  dust-like  iron  powder  (in  the  pharmacopoeias 
called  ferrum  pulueratuni)  one  grain  is  triturated  for  three  hours  with  milk-sugar  (in 
the  manner  taught  for  arsenic)  up_to  the  million-fold  or  third  attenuation,  and  then 
brought  to  the  thirtieth  potency  (X)  through  27  dilution  phials.) 

Although  most  of  the  following  medicinal  symptoms  were  observed 
from  the  employment  of  a solution  of  acetate  of  iron,  it  is  beyond 
doubt  that  they  correspond  essentially  with  those  of  metallic  iron  as 
exactly  as  do  the  symptoms  obtained  from  dry  calcareous  earth  with 
those  of  acetate  of  lime. 

This  metal  is  said  by  ordinary  physicians  to  be  a strengthening 
medicine  per  se , and  not  only  innocuous,  but  entirely  and  absolutely 
wholesome. 

How  far  from  being  true  is  this  dictum  pronounced  without 
consideration  and  testing,  and  handed  down  by  teachers  to  their  dis- 
ciples equally  without  consideration  and  testing,  we  are  taught  by  the 
reflection  that,  if  iron  possess  medicinal  power  it  must  also  for  that 
very  reason  alter  the  health  of  human  beings,  and  make  the  healthy  ill, 
and  the  more  ill  the  more  powerfully  curative  it  is  found  to  be  in 
disease. 

Nil  prodest , quod  non  Icedere  possit  idem. 

The  actual  sanitary  condition  of  persons  residing  near  waters 
impregnated  with  iron  might  have  taught  them  that  this  metal 
possessea  strong  pathogenetic  properties.  The  inhabitants  of  chaly- 
beate * watering  places,  where  all  the  springs  and  wells  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood usually  contain  some  of  this  metal,  show  marked  signs  of  its 
morbific  influence. 

In  such  localities  there  are  few  persons  who  can  resist  the  noxious 
influence  of  the  continued  use  of  such  waters  and  remain  quite  well, 
each  being  affected  according  to  his  peculiar  nature.  There  we  find, 
more  than  anywhere  else,  chronic  affections  of  great  gravity  and 
peculiar  character,  even  when  the  regimen  is  otherwise  faultless.  Weak- 

* It  is  mere  charlatanry  to  call  solutions  of  iron  steel-drops , and  chalybeate  mineral 
waters  steel-waters,  steel-baths.  By  these  expressions  it  is  intended  to  convey  the 
notion  that  they  indubitably  possess  an  absolute  strengthening  power  in  a high  degree  ; 
for  to  steel  is  a metaphorical  expression  for  to  strengthen.  But  iron  only  becomes  steel 
when  its  peculiar  elasticity  and  hardness  are  developed.  In  its  solution  by  acids  the 
steel  disappears ; the  solution  then  only  contains  a substratum  of  iron,  and  the  oxyde 
(iron  ochre)  collected  from  chalybeate  waters,  when  smelted,  produces  nothing  but 
ordinary  iron. 


1 From  vol.  ii,  3rd  edit.,  1833. 


FERRUM. 


607 


ness,  almost  amounting  to  paralysis  of  the  whole  body  and  of  single 
parts,  some  kinds  of  violent  limb  pains,  abdominal  affections  of  various 
sorts,  vomiting  of  food  by  day  or  by  night,  phthisical  pulmonary 
ailments,  often  with  blood -spitting,  deficient  vital  warmth,  suppres- 
sions of  the  menses,  miscarriages,  impotence  in  both  sexes,  sterility, 
jaundice,  and  many  other  rare  cachexies  are  common  occurrences. 

What  becomes  of  the  alleged  complete  innocuousness,  let  alone 
the  absolute  wholesomeness  of  this  metal  ? Those  who  are  constantly 
drinking  chalybeate  waters,  called  health-springs , and  the  other  iron- 
impregnated  waters  of  the  neighbourhood,  are  mostly  in  a sickly 
state  ! 

What  prejudice,  what  carelessness  has  hitherto  prevented  phy- 
sicians from  observing  these  striking  facts,  and  referring  them  to  their 
cause,  the  pathogenetic  property  of  iron  ? 

How  can  they,  ignorant  as  they  are  of  the  action  of  iron  and  its 
salts,  determine  in  what  cases  chalybeate  waters  are  of  use  ? Which 
of  their  patients  will  they  send  thither  for  a course  of  treatment  ? 
Which  will  they  keep  away  ? What,  in  short,  seeing  that  they  know 
nothing  accurately  concerning  the  peculiar  effects  of  this  metal  on  the 
human  body,  leads  them  to  determine  the  cases  suitable  for  chalybeate 
waters  ? Is  it  blind  fancy  ? Hap-hazard  conjecture  and  guess  work  ? 
Fashion  ? Do  not,  indeed,  many  of  their  patients  come  back  from  the 
chalybeate  springs  in  a more  miserable*  and  diseased  condition, 
showing  that  iron  was  an  unsuitable  remedy  for  them  ? God  preserve 
patients  from  a doctor  who  does  not  know,  and  can  give  no  satis- 
factory reasons,  why  he  prescribes  this  or  the  other  drug,  who  cannot 
tell  beforehand  what  medicine  would  be  beneficial,  what  injurious  to 
the  patient ! 

Only  a thorough  knowledge  of  the  characteristic  primary  effects  of 
medicines,  and  whether  they  present  a great  similarity  to  the  symptoms 
of  the  disease  to  be  cured  (as  homoeopathy  teaches),  could  protect 
patients  from  such  fatal  mistakes. 

The  following  list  of  morbid  symptoms  which  iron  causes  is  far  from 
being  as  complete  as  it  might  be,  and  yet  it  will  contribute  not  a little 
to  prevent  such  mistakes  being  made  by  those  who  will  refrain  from 
prescribing  medicines  in  a haphazard  manner,  and  from  feeling  no 
scruples  of  conscience  whether  they  draw  death  or  life  for  their  patients 
in  the  lottery. 

Large  and  oft-repeated  doses  of  iron,  as  also  frequent  baths  in  chaly- 
beate waters,  have  a very  long  duration  of  action,  extending  to  months 
even.  Doses  of  even  the  thirtieth  potency  (x),  such  as  the  homoeopathic 
physician  now  gives  in  ordinary  cases,  act  for  a good  many  days. 

* The  attempt  of  the  common  run  of  practitioners  to  produce  a purely  strengthening 
effect  is  a capital  mistake.  For  why  is  the  patient  so  weak  ? Obviously  because  he 
is  ill ! Weakness  is  a mere  consequence  and  a single  symptom  of  his  disease.  What 
rational  man  could  think  of  strengthening  his  patient  without  first  removing  his  dis- 
ease ? But  if  his  disease  be  removed,  then  he  always,  even  during  the  process  of  the 
removal  of  his  disease,  regains  his  strength  by  the  energy  of  his  organism  freed  from 
its  malady.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a strengthening  remedy  as  long  as  the 
disease  continues  ; there  can  be  none  such.  The  homoeopathic  physician  alone  knows 
how  to  cure,  and  in  the  act  of  being  cured  the  convalescent  regains  his  strength. 


6o8 


FERRUM. 


Chronic  ailments  caused  by  iron  are  mostly  ameliorated  by  (calca- 
reous) hepar  sulphuris  (^th  or  ToWth  of  a grain  in  one  or  several 
doses),  and  most  of  the  remaining  sufferings  by  pulsatilla,  when  the 
symptoms  are  not  (as  sometimes  happens)  of  such  a kind  and  com- 
plexity as  to  require  some  other  medicine  according  to  the  rule  of 
similarity  of  action. 

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Gross,  Friedrich  Hahnemann, 
Rosazewsky. 

Symptoms  are  derived  from  the  following  old-school  sources : 

Harcke,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xxv. 

Lentin,  Beitr. 

Nebel  and  Wepfer,  Diss.  de  Medicamentis  Chalybeatis.  Heidelb.,  1711. 

Ritter,  in  Hufel.  Journ. , xxvi,  1. 

Scherer,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  iii. 

Schmidtmuller,  in  Horn's  Archinj , ix,  2. 

Zacchiroli,  in  Kuhn's  Magazin fur  Arzneimittellehre,  i,  St.  Chemnitz,  1794. 

In  the  1st  edition  ferrum  has  264  symptoms,  in  the  2nd  edit.  200,  and  in  this 
3rd  edit.  295.] 


FERRUM. 

Confusion  and  stupefaction  of  the  head.  [Ritter,*  in  Hufel . 
Journ. , xxvi,  1.] 

On  lying  down  a vertigo  as  if  he  were  knocked  forwards,  or 
driving  in  a carriage  (especially  when  the  eyes  are  shut). 

Vertigo  on  going  down  hill,  as  if  she  would  fall  forwards. 

When  walking  staggering  and  as  if  intoxicated,  as  if  she  would 
fall  down. 

5.  When  walking,  very  whirling  and  sick  ; he  feels  as  if  the  head 
inclined  always  to  hang  to  the  right  side. 

On  looking  at  running  water  she  becomes  reeling  and  giddy  in 
the  head,  as  if  all  went  round  with  her. 

Great  rushing  up  to  the  head. 

Intoxication.1  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Undulating  headache,  like  waves,  for  an  hour  (aft.  \ h.).  [i£%.] 
10.  Drawing  headache,  [i£z.] 

A rush  of  blood  to  the  head  ; the  blood-vessels  of  the  head  were 
swollen  for  two  hours,  with  severe  flushes  of  heat  in  the  face. 

A momentary,  giddy  blow  in  the  brain  (immediately). 

The  cool  open  air  gives  her  a peculiar  pressure  on  the  top  of  the 
head,  which  gradually  went  off  in  the  room. 

Disinclination  to  think  and  confusion  of  the  head. 

15.  Headache  every  evening;  dulness  about  the  root  of  the  nose. 

In  the  morning  very  dull  in  the  head. 

Headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  lacerated  (also  in  the  morning 
during  slumber  before  awaking). 

Empty  feeling  in  the  head. 

* Observations  referring  to  the  employment  of  the  waters  of  Pyrmont  and  Schwal- 
bach,  in  which  the  carbonic  acid  is  to  be  taken  into  account. 


1 Not  found. 


FERRUM. 


609 


The  head  is  dull  and  stupid. 

20.  The  head  is  dazed  and  stupid. 

Heaviness  of  the  head. 

(Pressive  headache  in  the  forehead,  as  if  it  would  burst.) 

A cutting  shooting  in  the  forehead. 

Violent  shooting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  in  the  after- 
noon, for  five  hours. 

25.  (Every  two  or  three  weeks,  for  two,  three,  or  four  days,  head- 
ache, hammering  and  beating,  so  that  she  must  sometimes  lie  down 
in  bed  ; then  loathing  of  food  and  drink.) 

Falling  out  of  the  hair,  whereby  the  scalp  is  painful,  with  formi- 
cation. 

A drawing  from  the  nape*  up  into  the  head,  in  which  there  is 
then  shooting,  roaring,  and  rushing. 

In  the  evening  darkness  before  the  eyes ; he  got  an  aching  pain 
over  the  orbits,  and  some  blood  dropped  out  of  the  nose. 

Pain  externally  on  the  head,  as  if  blood  were  extravasated ; the 
hairs  are  painful  to  the  touch. 

30.  Earthy  complexion,  with  blue  spots  on  the  face. 

Earthy  jaundiced  complexion. 

Paleness  of  the  face  and  lips.1  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

In  the  evening  itching  in  the  eyes  and  aching  as  from  a grain  of 
sand  in  them. 

For  five  days,  red  eyes  with  burning  pains  (aft.  3 d.). 

35.  Burning  in  the  eyes. 

The  eyes  are  painful,  as  when  one  is  very  sleepy,  and  they  tend 
to  close  ; also  burning  in  them. 

An  aching  in  the  right  eye ; the  eyelids  stick  together  at 
night. 

When  he  writes  for  only  a couple  of  hours,  he  is  unable  to  open 
the  eyes  wide ; they  become  watery,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough. 

Redness  and  swelling  of  the  upper  and  lower  eyelids;  on  the 
upper  a kind  of  stye  filled  with  pus  ; the  lower  eyelids  are  full  of 
eye-gum  (purulent  mucus). 

40.  (Shooting  in  the  left  eye.) 

The  pupils  are  only  capable  of  slight  dilatation. 

In  the  evening  on  stooping  some  bleeding  from  the  nose. 

Bleeding  from  the  left  nostril  (four  times  in  ten  hours.) 

Painfulness  of  the  left  auricle,  as  if  there  were  an  ulcer  on  it 
(aft.  12  h.). 

45.  Stitches  in  the  right  ear,  in  the  morning  (aft.  12  h.). 

Rushing  in  the  ears,  which,  as  well  as  the  disagreeable  feeling  in 
the  brain,  is  relieved  by  laying  the  head  down  on  the  table. 

Singing  before  the  ears,  as  from  crickets. 

Pale  lips. 

At  the  back  and  on  the  middle  of  the  tongue  a continued  painful- 
ness, like  fine  uninterrupted  pricks,  which  is  aggravated  by  the 
contact  of  the  food  and  drink ; when  not  eating  and  drinking 


1 Effects  of  uterine  haemorrhage  induced  by  iron,  not  of  the  metal  itself. 

39 


6io 


FERRUM. 


the  pait  has  the  feeling  as  if  it  had  been  burnt,  and  is  numb  and 
stiff. 

50.  (Swelling  of  the  gums  and  cheeks.) 

(Rough  and  sore  throat,  with  hoarseness.) 

(On  swallowing,  an  aching  with  sore  sensation  in  the  gullet,  as 
if  blisters  had  been  crushed  there  and  so  the  part  had  become  sore.) 

(Sometimes  a sensation  as  from  a plug  in  the  throat,  when  not 
swallowing,  not  whilst  swallowing.) 

On  swallowing,  aching  pain  in  the  throat,  with  heat  in  the  fauces ; 
the  cervical  muscles  feel  stiff,  and  are  painful  when  moved. 

55.  Sensation  as  of  constriction  in  the  throat. 

Chronic  glandular  swelling  in  the  neck. 

Very  great  nausea  in  the  throat,  as  if  vomiting  would  ensue  ; it 
ended  with  eructation.  [Gw.] 

As  soon  as  she  eats  something  it  is  ejected  by  vomiting. 

Vomiting  only  of  food,  immediately  after  eating,  for 

eight  days. 

60.  When  she  eats  something  she  heaves,  like  nausea  from  loathing. 

The  vomiting  is  before  midnight,  worst  when  she  is  lying,  and 
especially  when  she  lies  on  the  side. 

Vomiting  of  food,  immediately  after  midnight,  whereupon  there 
follow  dislike  to  food  and  repugnance  to  the  open  air  (aft.  6 h.). 

She  vomits  every  morning  and  after  eating,  only  mucus  and  water 
(not  food)  ; a kind  of  water-brash  ; the  water  runs  from  the  mouth 
and  the  throat  feels  as  if  drawn  together. 

She  has  always  loathing  and  nausea. 

65.  Inclination  to  vomit  for  three  hours. 

Everything  she  vomits  is  sour  and  acrid. 

She  vomits  much  after  taking  acids  and  beer. 

After  sourish  beer  (in  the  evening)  heartburn. 

Beer  gets  into  her  head. 

70.  From  beer-soup,  heat  and  anxiety. 

Anorexia  without  bad  taste  and  without  thirst. 

(She  became  pale,  had  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  ; the  chest  was 
squeezed  together,  a rushing  up  to  the  head  ; she  got  spasmodic 
violent  eructation,  then  heat  in  the  face,  especially  in  the  right 
cheek,  and  pain  in  the  crown  of  the  head  like  shooting.) 

Constant  eructation,  as  soon  as  she  has  eaten  anything. 

Little  appetite,  least  of  all  for  meat  ; he  felt  full. 

75.  He  eats  with  normal  appetite  and  taste  at  noon  ; but  after  eating 
there  comes  eructation  in  jerks  and  the  food  is  belched  up,  without 
nausea  or  inclination  to  vomit. 

After  a walk  such  a feeling  of  fulness,  as  though  he  would 
eructate  ; this  went  off  after  eating. 

As  soon  as  she  eats  anything  it  oppresses  her. 

Aching,  very  acute  pain  in  the  stomach.  [Schmidtmuller,* 
in  Horn’s  Archiv , ix,  2.] 

Violent  stomachache  and  extraordinary  tension.  [ZacchiroliT 
in  Kuhn’s  Magazin  fur  Arzneimitellehre , i,  St.,  Chemnitz,  1794.] 

* From  very  fine  iron  powder.  *j-  From  some  grains  of  iron  filings* 


FERRUM. 


6ti 


80.  Distension  of  the  gastric  region.  [Schmidtmuller,  1.  c.] 

Spasms  in  the  stomach.  [Nebel  and  Wepfer,  Diss . de  Medica- 
mentis  Chalybeatis > Heidelb.,  1711.1] 

An  aching  in  the  abdomen,  immediately  below  the  stomach,  as 
soon  as  she  has  eaten  or  drunk  anything. 

After  drinking  and  eating  violent  stomachache. 

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  stomach. 

85.  Stomachache  from  eating  butcher’s  meat. 

He  can  only  eat  bread  and  butter  ; butcher’s  meat  does  not  agree 
with  him. 

Solid  foods  taste  too  dry,  as  if  they  had  neither  juice  nor 
strength  in  them  ; they  have,  certainly,  the  natural  taste,  but  it  is 
not  pleasant ; he  prefers  thin  warm  articles  of  food. 

He  has  no  appetite,  because  he  always  feels  satiated  ; but  drinks 
taste  well,  and  are  taken  with  relish. 

Even  when  she  has  appetite,  she  can  eat  but  little ; she  is  imme- 
diately full,  and  food  oppresses  her. 

90.  After  dinner  he  is  thirsty  ; but  he  does  not  know  for  what. 
Complete  adipsia. 

He  feels  very  full. 

(In  the  morning,  sourish  taste  in  the  mouth.) 

Everything  she  eats  tastes  bitter. 

95.  Sweetish  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  of  blood.2  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 
Sometimes  an  earthy  taste  in  the  mouth. 

In  the  afternoon,  a putrid  taste  rises  up  into  the  mouth,  which 
destroys  all  his  appetite. 

When  he  has  slept  an  hour  before  midnight,  a heat  rises  as  from 
his  abdomen  ; the  mouth  becomes  dry,  and  a nauseous  vapour  and 
putrid  taste  rise  up  into  his  mouth. 

(Burning  in  the  stomach.)  j 
100.  The  scrobiculus  cordis  is  painful  when  touched. 

Some  stitches  in  the  abdomen. 

Fine  shooting  pain  in  the  abdomen. 

A severe  stitch  in  the  side,  beneath  the  ribs  (aft.  24  h.). 

Quiet  swelling  of  the  abdomen,  without  flatulent  sufferings. 

105.  Great  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  by  day  aud  night. 

Hard  distension  of  the  abdomen. 

Distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Schmidtmuller,  1.  c.] 

A quantity  of  flatus  passes  away.  [Lentin,  Beitr .,  p.  75*3] 
Violent  contractive  pains  in  the  abdomen  and  back.  [Ritter, 
1-  c.] 

no.  Colicky  pains  (immediately).  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

(On  touching  the  abdomen,  and  on  coughing,  the  bowels  are 
painful  as  if  bruised,  or  as  if  they  were  irritated  by  purgatives.)  (aft. 

36h-)- 

Especially  when  walking,  painful  heaviness  of  the  hypogastric 
intestines,  as  if  they  would  fall  down. 

Contractive  spasm  in  the  rectum,  for  some  minutes. 


1 Not  accessible. 


2 With  SSi  157  and  18 1. 


3 Symptoms  not  found» 


6 12 


FERRUM. 


Itching  and  erosion  in  the  rectum,  and  threadworms  pass  away 
in  the  slimy  stool. 

1 15.  The  threadworms  seem  to  he  increased  by  it;  he  can- 
not sleep  at  night  on  account  of  itching  in  the  rectum  ; the  worms 
crept  out  at  the  anus  at  night.* 

Obstinate  constipation.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Constipation  and  piles,  which  cause  painful  pressure  during  stool. 
Tearing  in  the  rectum. 

With  every  stool  mucus,  and  also  some  discharge  of  blood. 

1 20.  Protrusion  of  large  piles  at  the  anus. 

Violent  discharge  of  blood  from  piles.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  urging  to  stool  with  burning  at  the  anus  and  backache 
during  movement. 

Frequent  diarrhoea. 

Diarrhoeic  stool.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\ 

125.  Diarrhoea  with  nervous  spasmodic  pains  in  the  abdomen,  back 
and  anus.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Severe  diarrhoea.  [Lentin,  1.  c.] 

Frequent,  diarrhoeic  stools.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Violent  purging.  [Ritter,  1.  c.J 
Involuntary  emission  of  urine,  especially  by  day. 

130.  Erections  of  the  penis. 

Erections  of  the  penis  by  day,  almost  without  cause. 

Nocturnal  seminal  emission. 

(When  urinating,  burning  pain  in  the  urethra,  as  if  the  urine  ran 
out  hot.) 

(Clap)  discharge  of  mucus  from  the  urethra  after  a chill. 

135.  Leucorrhoea,  like  milky  water,  which  (at  first)  scalded  and 
excoriated. 

A previously  painless  leucorrhoea  became  painful,  as  if  the  parts 
were  excoriated. 

Before  the  occurrence  of  the  menses,  discharge  of  long  strings  of 
mucus  from  the  womb,  during  which  she  had  pain  going  about  in 
the  abdomen,  such  as  usually  occurred  during  the  menses. 
Painfulness  of  the  vagina  during  coitus. 

Before  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  shooting  headache  and 
singing  in  the  ears. 

140.  In  the  morning  bearing-down  pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the 
menses  were  coming  on  (aft.  12  h.). 

The  menses,  which  were  due,  came  on  immediately  after  the 
chalybeate  bath,  and  twice  as  profusely  as  usual. f 

The  menses  cease  for  two  or  three  days  and  then  reappear. 
Metrorrhagia.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

The  menses  come  on  one  day  later,  little  and  watery  blood 
comes  away  with  severe  cutting  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  6 d.). 

145.  Menses  delayed  some  days  beyond  the  proper  time. 

* From  drinking  Pyrmont  waters. 

f This  is  the  primary  action  of  iron  ; the  following  symptoms  are  secondary  actions, 

hence  it  is  only  in  those  cases  of  suppressed  menstruation,  in  which  the  other  sym- 
ptoms are  in  homoeopathic  accordance  with  iron,  that  this  metal  can  be  curative. 


FERRUM. 


613 


The  menses  are  delayed  for  eight  weeks. 

The  menses  are  absent  for  three  years.* 

Prolapsus  of  the  vagina,  only  during  pregnancy,  not  otherwise. 

Abortion. 

150.  Sterility  without  abortion. 

A hot  vapour  rises  up  from  his  windpipe.1  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Sensation  of  dryness  and  phlegm  on  the  chest ; the  dryness  is 
diminished  for  a short  time  only  by  drinking. 

On  the  chest  fulness  and  tightness. 

Oppression  on  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  constricted.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

155.  Tightness  of  the  chest.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Tightness  of  the  chest;  difficult  slow  respiration,  diminished  by 
walking  or  speaking,  or  by  being  continually  engaged  in  reading  or 
writing  ; it  is  worst  when  sitting  quietly  doing  nothing,  and  still 
worse  when  lying,  especially  in  the  evening ; he  must  take  several 
breaths  before  he  can  fill  the  lungs  with  air.  [i£z.] 

Rush  of  blood  to  the  chest.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Tightness  of  chest  and  weariness  of  the  limbs,  generally  worst 
in  the  forenoon  ; often  better  when  he  has  walked  a little ; only 
sometimes  it  becomes  intolerably  bad  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 

He  cannot  get  his  breath  ; even  when  sitting  he  has  dyspnoea. 

160.  (The  child’s  chest  is  oppressed  ; it  wheezes.) 

In  the  evening  in  bed  her  larynx  is  closed,  the  blood  rushes  to 
the  head,  she  feels  a burning  externally  on  the  neck  and  between 
the  scapulae,  and  generally  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  whilst  the 
feet  are  cold  ; in  the  morning,  sweat. 

In  the  morning  in  bed  (about  6 o’clock)  all  is  drawn  painfully 
together  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  then  there  occurs  a kind  of 
spasmodic  cough  with  mucous  expectoration. 

Tightening  of  the  chest  as  if  it  were  constricted ; severe 
anxious  asthma,  which  is  aggravated  by  walking. 

Contractive  spasm  on  the  chest. 

165.  Difficult  respiration  and  oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  were 
pressed  on  by  the  hand, 

A pressure  superiorly,  beneath  the  sternum,  with  catarrh  and 
cough. 

Sometimes  he  must  sit  up  in  bed  after  midnight,  owing  to  tight- 
ness of  the  chest. 

A kind  of  asthma ; an  anxiety  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  that 
impedes  inspiration. 

During  corporeal  exertion  heat  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis 
upwards,  like  an  anxiety  ; she  must  lie  down. 

170.  At  night  in  bed  shooting  in  the  sternum. 

During  bodily  exercise  stitches  in  the  side. 

Pain  in  the  chest  and  shooting  and  tension  between  the  scapulae  ; 
he  could  not  stir. 

* During  continued  use  of  chalybeate  water. 

1 With  SS.  157  and  18 1. 


614 


FERRUM. 


Pain  on  the  chest  as  if  it  were  beaten. 

Contractive  spasm  on  the  chest  and  COUgh,  Only  when 
moving  and  walking. 

175.  (Increased  dry  cough.)  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Dull  cough  without  expectoration,  and  when  coughing  she  feels 
as  if  she  could  get  no  air. 

In  the  evening  after  lying  down  the  cough  is  dry,  but  on  walking 
it  is  attended  with  expectoration. 

Cough  more  when  moving  than  when  at  rest. 

A burning  in  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum  after  the  cough. 

180.  Nocturnal  coughing  up  of  blood  followed  by  increased  tightness 
of  chest. 

Haemoptysis.1  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Scanty,  thin,  frothy  expectoration  with  streaks  of  blood.  [Ritter, 
].  c.] 

Coughing  up  of  blood  on  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning. 

By  hacking  cough  he  expectorates  bloody  mucus  (aft.  5 d.). 

185.  Whilst  suckling,  cough  with  expectoration  of  blood. 

Copious  white  purulent  expectoration  after  slight  coughing,  which 
is  increased  by  smoking  tobacco  and  drinking  brandy. 

In  the  morning  he  expectorates  a great  deal  of  pus  (of  a putrid 
taste). 

In  the  morning  on  waking  much  greenish  purulent  expectoration 
of  a sickly  taste. 

Cough  all  day  long,  and  some  cough  also  in  the  evening  after 
lying  down. 

190.  A kind  of  tearing  in  the  back,  even  when  sitting  and  lying. 

When  she  works  a little  with  her  arms  she  has  a shooting  in  the 
scapulae. 

Betwixt  the  scapulae  a kind  of  tearing,  even  when  sitting,  which 
becomes  worse  on  walking. 

Whilst  walking  stitch-like  jerks  in  the  sacrum,  which  extend 
more  towards  the  hips  than  upwards,  more  painful  after  sitting  or 
standing,  almost  as  if  he  had  strained  himself. 

Pains  in  the  sacrum  on  rising  from  a seat. 

195.  Bruised  pain  in  the  sacrum. 

Pain  in  her  left  clavicle  as  if  it  had  gone  to  sleep. 

Creaking  in  the  shoulder-joint,  which  pains  as  if  bruised  on 
touching  it. 

Pain,  shooting  and  tearing  from  the  shoulder-joint  into  the 
upper  arm  and  farther  down,  which  made  it  impossible  for  him  to 
lift  up  the  arm. 

Shooting  and  tearing  in  the  upper  arm  proceeding  from  the 
shoulder-joint,  so  that  he  could  not  raise  the  arm. 

200.  A kind  of  paralysis  ; inability  to  raise  the  arms  on  account  of 
painful  tension  between  the  scapulae  and  on  the  sternum. 

Drawing  in  the  arm,  from  which  it  becomes  heavy  and  as  if 
paralysed. 


1 With  SS.  151,  154,  and  157, 


FERRUM.  6ir 

He  had  no  rest  in  his  arms,  and  must  flex  and  extend  them  by- 
turns. 

He  cannot  raise  the  right  arm  up  ; there  is  shooting  and  tearing 
in  the  shoulder-joint — which  pains  as  if  bruised  when  touched — 
down  through  the  upper  arm,  with  creaking  in  the  shoulder- 
joint. 

Swelling  of  the  hands  ; afterwards  the  epidermis  desquamates. 

205.  Hands  and  legs  up  to  the  knees  swollen. 

Coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Cramp  in  the  fingers,  and  numbness  and  insensibility  of  them. 

In  the  morning,  when  she  attempts  to  work  a little,  she  feels 
trembling  in  the  hands. 

A kind  of  paralysis  ; a tearing  with  severe  stitches  from  the  hip- 
joint  downwards  to  the  tibia  and  foot  (the  ball  of  the  foot  is  always 
very  painful  to  the  touch,  as  if  bruised)  ; by  day  he  cannot  tread  for 
pains,  which,  however,  are  ameliorated  by  walking  ; in  the  evening 
after  lying  down  it  is  worst,  he  must  get  up  and  walk  about  in  order 
to  allay  the  pain,  until  midnight. 

210.  Shooting  and  tearing  in  the  hip-joint — which  pains  as  if  bruised 
on  touching — down  over  the  tibia ; in  the  evening  in  bed  it  is 
worst,  compelling  him  to  get  up  and  walk  about. 

Paralytic  pain  in  the  thigh,  also  when  sitting ; when  she  has  sat 
for  some  time  doubled  up,  she  must  extend  the  limb  in  order  to 
relieve  herself;  when  she  gets  up  from  her  seat  the  paralytic  pain  is 
worst,  but  it  is  relieved  by  walking. 

Numbness  on  the  thigh. 

After  rising  from  a seat,  relaxation  and  weariness  in  the  houghs, 
especially  when  walking*  after  standing  still. 

Weakness  of  the  knees  so  as  to  sink  down  (immediately). 

215.  Swelling  of  the  knees  and  ankle-joints,  and  pain  in  them,  especi- 
ally on  straightening  the  knee  in  bed. 

A contractive  pain  in  the  knee  and  ankle-joint. 

On  account  of  pains  as  if  they  were  over-tired,  he  must  alternately 
flex  and  extend  the  knees ; he  had  no  rest  in  them. 

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed,  painful  cramp  in  the  calf 
(aft.  16  h). 

Tonic  spasm  f of  the  thigh  and  leg.  [Scherer,  in  Hufel.  Journ 
iii.] 

220.  In  the  evening  when  walking  % contractive  pain  like  cramp  in  the 
tibia  and  calves. 

When  standing,  cramp  in  the  calves,  that  goes  off  when  walking 
(aft  28  h.) 

A painful  drawing  in  the  legs. 

Bruised  pain  of  the  legs,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  which  is  allayed 
soon  after  rising. 

* On  commencing  to  walk. 

f From  iron  applied  to  the  soles.1 

X On  commencing  to  walk. 


* In  a case  of  chorea, 


6 1 6 


FERRUM. 


The  legs  are  disposed  to  tremble,  and  on  walking  they  are  painful 
as  if  bruised. 

225.  The  thighs  feel  as  if  gone  to  sleep. 

After  resting  from  a walk,  stiffness  in  the  feet,  when  she  wishes 
to  move  again. 

Varicose  veins  on  the  feet. 

Swelling  of  the  foot  up  to  the  ankles. 

Painful  cramp  in  the  soles  of  the  feet. 

230.  Frequent  cramp  in  the  toes  and  sole  of  the  foot. 

The  cramp  draws  the  fingers  and  toes  crooked  with  great 
pain. 

Very  cold  feet,  which  he  could  hardly  drag  along  for  weari- 
ness. 

After  a meal,  weariness  in  the  feet. 

Her  feet  cannot  bear  her. 

235.  Parts  of  the  skin  ( e.g . on  the  back  of  the  thumb,  the  toes,  See.) 
have  burning  pain  when  not  touched,  but  intolerable  sore  pain 
when  touched  ever  so  slightly. 

Dark  liver-spots  (e.g.  on  the  back  of  the  hand)  inflame  and 
suppurate. 

Easily  tired  by  walking. 

He  is  very  exhausted  and  emaciated. 

Very  exhausted  and  drowsy  (aft.  2 h.). 

240.  Very  great  weakness,  like  fatigue  (immediately). 

Heaviness  of  the  limbs,  for  forty-eight  hours. 

Heaviness,  exhaustion  and  relaxation  of  the  limbs. 

A general  weakness  caused  even  by  speaking. 

Great  weakness.  [Harcke,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xxv.1] 

245.  Great  trembling  on  the  whole  body,  which  lasts  several  weeks. 
[Harcke,  1.  c.] 

Fainting  fits.  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Fainting  fits,  which  leave  weakness  all  the  rest  of  the  day. 
[Ritter,  1.  c.] 

Weakness  of  fatigue,  alternating  with  an  anxious  trembling. 

Frequent  attacks  of  trembling  all  over  the  body. 

250.  The  symptoms  are  aggravated  by  sitting,  and  ameliorated  by 
gentle  movement. 

Walking  in  the  open  air  fatigues  her. 

When  walking  feeling  of  faintness  ; it  became  black  before  her 
eyes  \ she  felt  as  if  she  were  going  to  have  a fit  of  apoplexy ; at 
every  step  roaring  in  the  ears  and  head. 

Inclination  to  lie  down. 

Irresistible  inclination  to  lie  down  (aft.  1 h.). 

255.  Constant  weariness  and  day  drowsiness  (for  which  sleep  pro- 
cures only  transient  relief). 

After  dinner,  drowsiness  and  dulness,  also  some  headache 
above  the  root  of  the  nose  ; he  could  not  engage  in  any  mental 
work. 


1 Not  found, 


FERRUM.  617 

When  sitting,  she  could  immediately  go  to  sleep,  at  any  time  of 
the  day. 

Light,  not  sound,  slumber-like  sleep. 

She  lies  long  before  going  to  sleep. 

260.  He  lies  for  half  and  a whole  hour  before  he  falls  asleep. 

She  must  lie  two  or  three  hours  before  she  falls  asleep. 

He  wakes  up  at  night  every  hour,  and  then  goes  off  only  into  a 
slumber. 

She  falls  asleep  tired,  and  sleeps  though  uneasily,  and  is  long 
awake  before  she  falls  asleep  again,  and  yet  on  rising  in 
the  morning  she  is  not  tired. 

At  night  she  must  lie  only  on  the  back,  she  cannot  sleep  on 
either  side. 

265.  Nocturnal  flatulent  colic  3 much  flatulence  is  formed  in  the 
abdomen,  which  causes  pain,  although  much  flatus  escapes. 

At  night  unquiet  sleep. 

At  night  very  vivid  dreams. 

At  night  disturbed  by  many  dreams ; in  the  morning  on  rising 
great  weariness. 

Restless,  dreamful  sleep,  accompanied  by  emissions  of  semen. 

270.  Dreams  that  he  is  in  battle,  that  he  has  fallen  into  the  water,  &c. 

Anxious  tossing  about  in  bed,  after  midnight. 

Anxiety  at  night,  as  if  she  had  done  something  bad  ; she  could 
not  sleep,  tossed  about  in  bed. 

Heavy  sleep  in  the  morning  until  9 o’clock,  from  which  he  can 
with  difficulty  rouse  himself. 

He  sleeps  with  half-open  eyes. 

275.  In  the  evening  in  bed  he  became  cold  all  over,  in  place  of 
becoming  warmer. 

After  the  midday  sleep,  heat. 

Much  perspiration  when  walking  and  sitting,  by  day. 

Perspiration  by  day,  when  walking. 

About  midnight,  frequently  perspiration  during  slumber. 

280.  Morning  perspiration,  for  a long  period. 

In  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  rigor,  without  external 
coldness  3 in  bed  he  felt  chilly  all  night. 

Nocturnal  perspiration  with  exhaustion. 

In  the  morning  at  break  of  day,  perspiration  until  about  noon,  on 
alternate  mornings,  immediately  preceded  every  time  by  headache. 

In  the  morning,  attack  of  stretching  and  yawning,  during  which 
the  eyes  fill  with  water  (aft.  8 h.). 

285.  (In  the  morning  heat  in  the  face.) 

(Chilliness,  and  during  the  chill  his  face  became  glowing  hot.) 

During  the  day  ebullition  in  the  blood,  and  heat  in  the  evening, 
especially  in  the  hands. 

Heat  on  the  body  with  redness  of  cheeks,  during  which  the  head 
is  free  (aft.  24  h.). 

Scarcely  perceptible  pulse.1  [Ritter,  1.  c.] 


1 As  S.  32. 


6i8 


FERRUM. 


290.  (Low  spirits  as  if  from  the  bowels  being  too  relaxed.) 

Violence,  quarrelsomeness,  positiveness  (aft.  4 h,). 

Alternately  one  evening  excessively  merry,  the  next  sad:  and 
melancholy. 

Anxiety.  [Nebel  and  Wepfer,  1.  c. — Ritter,  1.  c.] 

From  slight  cause,  anxiety,  with  throbbing  in  the  scrobiculus 
cordis. 

295.  Anxiety,  as  if  she  had  done  something  bad. 


GUAIACUM.1 


(The  alcoholic  solution  of  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  West  Indjan  tree  Guaiacum 
officinale,  which  consists  chiefly  of  resin.) 

The  homoeopathic  physician  will  find  even  in  these  few  symptoms 
a sufficient  guide  to  enable  him  to  make  a sure  curative  employment  of 
this  vegetable  substance  in  morbid  states  for  which  it  is  suitable  by 
similarity,  and  to  prevent  him  from  being  misguided  by  the  vague  and 
misleading  recommendations  of  it  in  gout  and  rheumatism  by  the 
ordinary  works  on  materia  medica,  into  prescribing  it  for  some  ima- 
ginary name  of  a disease,  instead  of  attending  only  to  the  similarity  of 
the  symptoms  of  the  disease  to  be  cured  on  the  one  hand,  with  those 
of  the  remedy  on  the  other. 

One  drop  of  the  alcoholic  tincture  stirred  up  in  one  ounce  of  water, 
in  which  the  small  quantity  of  resin  it  contains  is  completely  dissolved 
by  shaking,  is  quite  sufficient  for  a dose  3 in  some  cases,  indeed,  it  will 
be  found  rather  too  strong. 

[Hahnemann’s  fellow-provers  were  Hartmann,  Langhammer,  Teuthorn. 

He  obtained  a few  symptoms  from  the  following  old-school  authorities : 

Bang,  Tagebucher  des  Frid.  Krankenhauses  in  Copenhagen,  17 84,  Sept.  13. 

Matthioli,  de  Morbo  Gallico , 1537. 

White,  Will.,  in  Edinb.  Med.  Comment.,  iv. 

In  the  1st  edit,  guaiac  has  142  symptoms,  in  this  2nd  edit.  3 additional  symptoms  j 
the  Chr.  Kr.  gives  160.] 


GUAIACUM. 

Weakness  Of  memory;  what  he  has  just  read  he  knew 
nothing  about ; old  names  he  completely  forgot.  [TWz.] 

In  the  morning  when  standing  (during  breakfast)  absence  of 
thought ; he  remains  standing  at  one  spot,  and  stares  right  in  front 
of  him  without  thinking.  \_Trn.~\ 

Violent  coarse  stitches  outwards  in  the  brain  (aft,  2 h.). 

Nocturnal  headache,  like  a pressure  from  below  upwards  in  the 
brain. 

I 5.  In  the  morning  headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  loose,  and  moved 
at  every  step. 

Painless  pressure  in  the  left  temple. 

Painful  pressure,  as  with  something  broad,  in  the 
right  temple.  [Htn.] 


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825, 


620 


GUAIACUM. 


Aching  and  pressing  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  forehead.  [Htn.] 
From  the  left  side  of  the  nape  to  over  the  vertex  an  obtuse 
aching  pain  going  up  obliquely  and  terminating  superiorly  in  a 
stitch  (aft.  i h.).  [Htn.] 

io.  A dull  aching  pain  in  the  head,  that  ends  with  a sharp  stitch  in 
the  right  frontal  eminence.  [Htn.] 

Aching  headache  across  the  forehead  (aft.  io  h.).  [Lr.] 

Aching,  drawing,  tearing  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  head 
going  towards  the  frontal  bone.  [Htn^] 

Dull,  stitch-like  pressure  in  the  right  frontal  eminence.  [Htn.] 
Dull  drawing  stitches  from  the  left  parietal  bone  to  the  left 
frontal  eminence,  which  at  last  terminate  together  in  a single 
stitch,  after  having  taken  in  a greater  extent.  [Htn.] 

15.  Drawing  pain  from  the  middle  of  the  frontal  bone  down  into 
the  nasal  bones  (aft.  2g  h.).  [Htn.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  forehead. 

[Htn.] 

Drawing  tearing  in  the  occiput  and  forehead.  [ Htn.'] 

Tearing  in  the  whole  of  the  left  side  of  the  head. 

[Htn.] 

Tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput.  [Htn.] 

20.  An  external  headache,  as  if  there  were  too  much  blood  in  the 
external  blood-vessels  of  the  head,  and  the  head  were  swollen  (when 
sitting).  [Trn.] 

External  pulse-like  throbbing  headache,  with  shoot- 
ing on  the  temples,  which  goes  off  by  external  pressure, 
but  returns  afterwards,  is  relieved  by  walking,  but 
aggravated  by  sitting  and  standing  (aft.  3 h.).  [Tm.] 

A tearing  externally  on  the  left  temple  (aft.  § h.). 
[Htn.] 

Tearing  from  the  left  side  of  the  frontal  bone  downwards  into 
the  cheek  muscles.  [Htn.] 

Acute  sharp  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  head  at  the  junction 
of  the  parietal  and  frontal  bones.  [Htn.] 

25.  Obtuse  painful  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput.  [Htn.] 

In  the  right  eyebrow  a hard  pimple  with  a white  apex,  which  is 
very  painful  when  touched  as  if  sore,  and  as  when  a wound  is  touched. 
Eye-gum  in  both  canthi  of  the  right  eye  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.] 
Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  3 h.).  [7r/z.] 

Amaurosis  for  some  days.  [Will.  White,1  in  Edinb . Med. 
Comment .,  iv,  p.  327.] 

30.  All  day  long  he  felt  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough, 
combined  with  yawning  and  stretching,  and  with  sen- 
sation of  swelling  of  the  eyes,  and  as  if  the  eyes  would 
be  driven  out  of  the  head;  the  eyelids  seemed  as  if  they 
were  not  able  to  cover  the  eyes.  [Tm.] 


1 Observation. — The  writer  is  speaking  of  a hysterical  patient.  He  states  that 
any  sudden  surprise  will  make  her  speechless  for  an  hour  or  so,  and  that  guaiacurp 
always  causes  loss  of  her  sight  for  some  hours  (not  “ days  ”). 


GUAIACUM. 


621 

Single,  painful  stitches  in  the  right  zygomatic  process.  [Htn.] 
Painful,  red  swelling  of  the  face,  for  some  days.1  [Bang,  Tage - 
biicher  des  Frid.  Krankenhauses , 1784,  Sept.  13.] 

Dull,  almost  spasmodic  drawing  in  the  right  cheek  muscles  (in 
the  morning  on  rising).  [Htn.] 

Knife  thrusts  in  the  right  cheek  muscles  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Lr.] 

35.  Tearing  in  the  outer  border  of  the  left  ear  cartilage.  [Htn.] 
Tearing  in  the  left  ear.  [Htn.] 

Earache  in  the  left  ear.  [Htn.] 

In  the  nose  a pimple  with  sore  pain. 

(Dull,  aching  pain  in  the  left  lower  jaw.)  [Htn.] 

40.  On  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw,  a drawing  pain  that  ended  in  a 
stitch.  [ Htn] 

Tearing  in  the  upper  molar  teeth  of  the  left  side.  [Htn.] 

On  biting  an  aching  pain  in  the  left  upper  molars.  [Htn.] 

Great  hunger,  in  the  afternoon  and  evening  (aft.  7J,  9 h.). 
[Lr.] 

Anorexia  from  disgust  at  everything,  eructation  of 
wind,  and  flat  taste  in  the  mouth,  together  with  a 
mucous  expectoration  by  hawking  and  hacking  cough. 

[7r«.] 

45.  Eructation  (immediately).  [Htn.] 

Eructation  of  wind,  empty  eructation.  [Htn.] 

Constrictive  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  which  im- 
pedes the  breathing  and  causes  anxiety  (aft.  19  h.).  [Htn.] 

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a feeling  of  frequently  recurring  pressure, 
which  impedes  breathing  and  causes  oppression  and  anxiety  (aft.  1 
h.).  [Htn.] 

Stitches  in  the  left  subcostal  region.  \_Htn.~\ 

50.  Single  dull  stitches  in  the  left  epigastrium.  [Htn?] 

Rumbling  with  dull  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which 
always  extends  more  backwards,  whereupon  flatus  is  discharged  (aft. 
1 h.).  [Htn.] 

Grumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  emptiness,  in  the  afternoon 
(aft.  5 h.).  [Lr.] 

Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.'] 

Dull,  pinching  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  that  always  sinks 
deeper  backwards  (aft.  J h.).  [Htn.] 

55.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  displaced  flatu- 
lence, which  extended  backwards,  whereupon  flatus 
was  discharged.  [Htn.] 

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  on  the  left  side  of  the  navel,  on  a 
single  point  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Htn.] 

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  followed  by  thin,  slimy  stool  (imme- 
diately). [Htn.] 

During  inspiration,  pinching  cutting  bellyache  transversely  through 
the  abdomen.  [Htn.] 


1 In  a woman  aged  48,  affected  with  arthritis  of  hands  and  feet,  from  a table- 
spoonful of  the  aqueous  solutiop  every  3 hours  for  a month  j as  the  arthritis 
improved  this  symptom  appeared,  followed  by  S.  70. 


622 


GUAIACUM. 


A constant  quivering  in  the  inner  abdominal  muscles  of  the  right 
side,  close  to  the  os  ilii.  [Htn.] 

6 o.  Pain  in  the  groin  as  from  an  inguinal  hernia. 

The  first  day,  constipation  j the  second  and  third  days,  costive- 
ness. [Trn.] 

Rather  soft,  broken  up  stool.  [. Htn .] 

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  at 
a time  (aft.  h.).  [Lr.] 

Constant  urging  to  urinate,  and  every  time  he  passes 
much  urine.  [Htn.] 

65.  He  had  frequent  calls  to  pass  water,  and  immediately  after  doing 
so  he  had  again  urging  to  urinate,  and  after  the  urine  was  passed 
stitches  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  followed.  [ Trn .] 

He  must  urinate  every  half  hour,  and  he  passes  much  urine,  and 
when  he  has  passed  it  he  has  again  urging  to  urinate  for  fully  a 
minute,  whereby  only  a few  drops  come  away.  [Trn.] 

Cutting  during  micturition,  as  if  something  acrid  came  away. 

At  night,  emission  of  semen  without  voluptuous  dreams  (aft.  20 
h.).  [Lr.] 

Increased  flow  of  mucus  from  the  vagina. 

* * 

* 

70.  Profuse  discharge  of  a watery  fluid  from  the  nose,  for  a month. 
[Bang,  1.  c.] 

A crawling  in  the  chest. 

Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  more  towards  the  back, 
under  the  true  ribs.  [Htn.] 

Shudder  in  the  breasts. 

On  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a sort  of 
stoppage  or  stagnation  seizes  her  suddenly,  even  in  the  night  during 
sleep,  as  if  she  could  not  get  her  breath  well ; this  brings  on  an 
almost  dry  cough,  which  recurs  until  some  expectoration  is  brought 
UP- 

75.  A constant  shooting,  which  seemed  at  last  to  change  into  a single 
continuous  stitch,  close  under  the  right  scapula,  which  seemed  to 
arise  from  the  middle  of  the  right  thoracic  cavity,  considerably  aggra- 
vated during  inspiration  (aft.  36  h.).  [Htn.] 

Drawing  and  tearing  posteriorly  under  the  axilla  down  the  right 
side  of  the  spine  to  the  last  true  rib.  [Htn.'] 

Tearing  stitches  on  the  posterior  border  of  the  right  scapula  (aft. 
10  h.).  [Htn.]' 

Tearing  stitches  on  the  posteriori  border  of  both  scapulae,  fol- 
lowed by  a constrictive  sensation  in  the  dorsal  muscles  (aft.  3 h.). 
[Htn.] 

Eroding  itching  on  the  back  by  day. 

80.  In  the  left  side  of  the  nape  and  the  left  side  of  the  back  down 
into  the  sacrum,  a rheumatic  stiffness ; when  not  moving  at  all 
there  was  no  pain,  nor  yet  when  touched,  but  on  the  slightest 
movement  and  on  turning  the  parts  the  pain  was  intolerable. 

Betwixt  the  scapulae,  contractive  pain.  [Htn.] 


GUAIACUM. 


623 


Violent  long-continued  stitches  in  the  left  clavicle,  which  com- 
menced from  the  larynx  (aft.  9^  h.).  [. Htn.] 

When  moving,  as  also  when  holding  the  head  stiffly,  frequent, 
continued  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  from  the  scapula  to 
close  to  the  occiput  (aft.  h.).  [ Htn.] 

Painful  aching  in  the  cervical  vertebrae  on  the  right  and  left  sides 
(aft  4 h.).  [ Htn .] 

85.  Frequently  recurring,  sharp  stitches  on  the  top  of  the 
right  shoulder.  [Htn.] 

Severe  painful  stitches  in  the  right  upper  arm,  chiefly  in  its 
middle  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.] 

Painful  drawing  tearing  in  the  left  upper  and  forearm  into  all 
the  fingers,  but  particularly  continued  and  permanent  in  the  left 
wrist-joint  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.] 

Frequent  drawing  tearing  stitches  from  the  left  elbow  into  the 
wrist-joint.  [Htn.'] 

Tearing  in  the  right  forearm  extending  into  the  wrist- 
joint.  [Htn.]  ~ 

90.  Pressive-like  tearing  in  the  left  wrist-joint.  [Htn.] 

Single  violent  stitches  in  the  thumb  muscles  of  the  right  hand 
(aft.  i h.).  [Htn.] 

In  the  nates,  needle-pricks  when  sitting  down  (she  feels  as  if  she 
sat  on  needles),  sometimes  when  walking. 

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  bruised  pain  in  the 
left  thigh  (aft.  8 h.).  [Lr.] 

An  aching  drawing  pain  from  the  middle  of  the  femur  to  the 
knee,  when  extending  the  right  leg  ; on  drawing  up  and  flexing  it 
the  pain  goes  off  again  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.] 

95.  Formication  throughout  the  thighs  and  legs  to  the  toes,  as  if 
the  limbs  would  go  to  sleep,  when  sitting. 

In  the  right  thigh  from  its  middle  to  the  knee  a 
formicating  aching  pain  in  the  hone,  when  sitting  still 

(aft.  i h.).  [Htn.-] 

Weakness  of  the  thighs,  especially  the  right  thigh, 
when  walking,  as  if  the  muscles  were  too  short  and 
stretched;  on  touching  the  pain  was  increased,  hut 
when  sitting  it  was  allayed.  [Tm.] 

In  the  right  thigh,  pain  like  growing  pains.  [Htn.~\ 

Single  itching  pricks,  like  fleahites,  in  the  skin  of 
the  thighs,  hut  especially  on  the  sides  of  the  hough, 
which  was  removed  hy  scratching.  [Trn.] 

100.  Drawing  tearing  from  the  middle  of  the  left  thigh  to  the  knee. 
[Htn.] 

Twitching  tearing  in  the  right  thigh  from  its  middle  to  the  knee 
(aft.  ij  h.).  [Htn.] 

Obtuse  stitches  above  the  right  knee.  [Htn.] 

Single  stitches  above  the  left  knee  from  both  sides,  meeting  in 
the  middle  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.] 

A drawing  pain  in  the  knee,  which  ends  in  a stitch.  [Htn.] 

105.  Tingling  in  the  skin  of  the  whole  leg,  with  hot  feeling  in  it* 


624 


guaiacum. 


After  walking  the  legs  are  as  if  bruised,  as  if  brittle. 

Tearing  obtuse  stitches  from  the  middle  of  the  left  tibia  to  the 
toes.  [Htn.] 

Drawing  tearing  stitches  from  the  middle  of  the  right  tibia  to 
the  knee  (aft.  14  h.).  \_Htn .] 

Dull  drawing  stitches  from  the  right  ankle-joint  to  the  middle  of 
the  tibia  (aft.  h.).  [Htn.] 

no.  Violent  twitching  stitches  on  the  outer  side  of  the  calf. 

A contractive,  almost  painless  feeling  in  the  right  calf  (aft.  f h.). 

[■**»•] 

Betwixt  the  tibia  and  fibula  shooting  tearings  to  the  patella,  so 
violent  as  to  jerk  the  leg  upwards. 

Long  drawing,  tearing  stitches  from  the  right  tarsus  into  the 
knee.  [Htn.] 

A pain  ending  in  a sharp  stitch,  on  a small  spot  in  the  middle  of 
the  left  instep,  that  goes  off  on  moving.  [Htn.] 

1 1 5.  Single  sharp  stitches  in  the  right  ankle-joint,  when  sitting  (aft. 
i h.).  [Htn.] 

Weariness  of  the  lower  extremities,  especially  of  the  thighs,  as  if 
he  had  walked  far  the  previous  day,  and  a similar  weariness  of  the 
upper  arms,  as  if  he  had  done  some  hard  work.  [ Trn.\ 

(Persons  of  a dry  habit  of  body  may  get  from  it  hectic  fever  or 
marasmus.)  [P.  A.  Matthioli,1  de  Morbo  Gallico , 1537.] 

General  discomfort  of  the  whole  body  (aft.  7 h.).  [Htn.] 

(Burning  itching,  increased  by  scratching.) 

120.  The  symptoms  almost  all  occur  when  sitting;  most  of  them 
in  the  morning  immediately  after  rising,  then  from  9 till  12  o’clock, 
and  in  the  evening  shortly  before  falling  asleep.  [ Htn .] 

Yawning  and  stretching  of  the  limbs  with  comfortable  feeling 
[Htn.] 

Stretching  of  the  upper  extremities  with  yawning.  [Htn.] 

In  the  afternoon,  great  drowsiness  (aft.  4J  h.).  [Lr.] 

He  falls  asleep  later  in  the  evening,  and  wakes  earlier  than 
usual ; then  all  felt  too  narrow,  and  he  tosses  about  in  bed,  but  only 
when  awake,  not  when  asleep.  [Trn.] 

125.  Dreams  as  if  she  would  be  stabbed  with  knives. 

Dreams  of  fighting. 

Vivid  dream  about  scientific  subjects  (aft.  18  h.).  [Lr.] 

In  the  evening  in  bed  he  cannot  fall  asleep  for  two 
hours,  tosses  about  in  bed,  dreams  much  in  his  sleep ; 
and  when  he  wakes  up  in  the  morning,  he  feels  as  if  he 
had  not  slept  at  all.  [Tm.] 

In  the  evening  in  bed  (when  slumbering  ?)  he  felt  as  if  some  one 
threw  a towel  at  his  face,  so  that  he  started  up  in  affright  at  it.  [7r».] 
130.  Frequent  waking  from  sleep,  as  from  a fright  ; he  felt  as  if  he 
were  falling  (aft.  21  h.).  [Lr.] 

Whilst  he  lay  asleep  on  his  back,  he  dreamt  that  some  one  was 
lying  on  him  ; from  anxiety  he  could  not  fetch  his  breath  nor  cry 


(aft.  * h.: 


1 Observation. 


GUAIACUM.  625 

out  ; at  last  he  emitted  a cry  and  woke  up  quite  beside  himself 
(nightmare).  [Trn.~\ 

In  the  forenoon  chilliness  for  two  hours,  and  in  the  evening 
before  going  to  sleep  chilliness,  which  continued  also  in  bed  ; every 
morning  some  perspiration. 

Shivering  in  the  back,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.] 

Febrile  chill  in  the  back,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  8 h.).  [Zr.] 

135.  Internal  chilliness  in  the  whole  body,  followed  immediately  by 
heat,  especially  in  the  face,  without  thirst,  towards  evening.  \_Trn.'] 
Chilly,  even  close  to  the  warm  stove.  \_Htn.~] 

Heat  in  the  whole  face,  without  redness  and  perspiration,  with 
thirst. 

Much  thirst. 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  much  perspiration,  especially  on 
the  head  ; on  the  forehead  beads  of  sweat. 

140.  Profuse  perspiration,  at  night,  in  the  back. 

Laziness  for  work,  [Htn.^ 

Laziness  and  dislike  to  movement. 

Morose  disposition,  he  speaks  little,  [ Trn.\ 

Great  peevishness,  contemptuous  disposition. 

145.  Obstinacy. 


40 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER.1 

( Christmas  Rose.) 

(The  juice  of  the  fresh  root  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol,  and  the  alcoholic 
tincture  of  the  dry  root  of  the  Helleborus  niger.) 

The  symptoms  which  I and  some  of  my  disciples  have  observed 
from  this  root  are  but  few  in  number  $ still  they  constitute  a com- 
mencement of  the  investigation  of  its  properties.  They  serve  to  show 
that  hellebore  must  prove  useful  in  a peculiar  kind  of  fever,  some 
dropsical  affections  and  mental  derangements.  When  the  morbid 
symptoms  it  can  produce  shall  have  been  more  completely  ascertained, 
we  shall  then  be  able  to  see  what  the  diseases  were  for  the  cure  of 
which  at  their  sanatory  resorts  the  Greeks  obtained  such  renown,  for 
the  plant  they  employed  for  this  purpose  was  a species  with  pale  red 
flowers  closely  allied  to  our  hellebore.  In  large  doses  it  acts  for 
several  weeks. 

Camphor  seems  most  frequently  effectual  in  controlling  its  too 
energetic  primary  actions,  but  the  untoward  secondary  effects  yield 
most  readily  to  cinchona  bark. 

I myself  gathered  the  root  which  I used  for  my  trials,  and  hence  am 
convinced  of  its  genuineness. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Hartmann,  Hornburg,  Kummer, 
Langhammer,  Mossdorf,  E,  F.  Ruckert,  Stapf,  Wislicenus. 

Symptoms  were  obtained  from  the  following  old-school  sources : 

Alberti,  Jurisp.  Med.,  tom.  vi. 

Buchner,  in  Samml.f.  pr.  Aerzte , vol.  i. 

Bisset,  On  the  Med.  Const,  of  Great  Britain. 

Cook,  John,  Oxford  Magazine  for  March,  1769. 

Gesner,  Entdeckungen , i. 

Grew,  Anatomy  of  Plants. 

Hilden,  van,  Opera  Med.  Chir .,  Cent.  4,  Obs.  12. 

Morgagni,  de  Sedibus  et  Cans.  Morb.,  lix. 

Scopoli,  Flora  Carniolica. 

Schulze,  Materia  Medica. 

Stegmann,  Diss.  de  salut.  et  nox.  Elleb.  nigri  usu.  Halae,  1757. 

Tournefort,  Voyage  dans  le  Levant , t.  ii. 

In  the  1st  edit.  Hellebore  has  198  symptoms,  in  this  2nd  edit,  there  are  288.] 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER, 

Giddy  in  the  head.  [Alberti,  Jurisp.  Med .,  tom.  vi,  p.  719.2] 
Stupefaction  of  the  head  (immediately).  [ Mss .] 

Giddy  stupefaction  of  the  head,  in  every  position.  [Mss.] 


1 From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 

2 The  sixth  volume  of  this  work  is  not  accessible. 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER.  627 

On  bending  down  and  again  raising  the  head  vertigo,  that  passed 
off  immediately  after  raising  the  head  (aft.  10 \ h.).  [Mss.] 

5.  Stupefying  headache,  as  from  intoxication,  all  the  afternoon 
(aft.  7 h.).  [Zr.] 

Stupefaction  of  the  whole  head  during  the  fluent  coryza  (aft. 
Si  !».)•  [Lr.] 

Inability  to  think  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Mss .] 

Heaviness  and  heat  internally  in  the  head,  with  cold  fingers  and 
chilly  feeling  in  the  whole  body,  which  is  diminished  when  the 
hands  are  covered  up  and  kept  warm  (aft.  1 h.). 

Very  painful  heaviness  in  the  head,  with  tension  and  pressure  as 
from  without  inwards  in  the  temples,  but  especially  in  the  fore- 
head ; at  the  same  time  with  every  pulse  a pressing  drawing,  as  if 
the  blood  was  forcibly  propelled  through  the  head  (all  day, 
especially  in  the  fever),  diminished  in  the  open  air. 
io.  Heaviness  of  the  brain  and  sensation  as  if  it  was  compressed  by 
a tight  membrane,  with  inability  to  think  and  to  retain  anything  in 
the  memory.  [Mss.] 

Weakness  of  memory  : it  was  only  by  an  effort  that  he  could 
after  some  time  remember  what  he  wanted  to  say  and  what  he  had 
been  questioned  about  (aft.  \ h.).  [Mss.] 

Weakness  of  memory  : he  could  not  retain  what  he  had  read  one 
instant.  [Kr.] 

Confusion  which  makes  the  head  stupid,  a dull  pain  every  after- 
noon from  4 to  8 cf  clock. 

Stupidity  of  the  head,  as  if  clouded,  chiefly  in  the  forehead 
(aft.  | h.).  [Zr.] 

15.  Stupidity  and  heat  in  the  head  , burning  in  it. 

Stupid*  and  heavy  in  the  head. 

Bruised  pain  as  if  combined  with  stupidity,  now  in  one,  now  in 
another  part  of  the  brain,  worst  when  stooping.  [ Hbg.] 

Dazedness  of  the  head,  like  a bruised  sensation,  during  the  fluent 
coryza  (aft.  5 h.).  [Zr.] 

The  head  is  painful  as  if  bruised.  [ Hbg.] 

20.  Troublesome  headache.  [Schulze,  Materia  Medica , p.  152. *] 

Headache,  pressing  from  within  outwards  on  the  right  side  of  the 
forehead.  [JVs.] 

Pain  in  the  head,  as  if  the  whole  brain  were  pressed  inwards,  at 
every  step  in  the  open  air  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.] 

Penetrating  headache,  which  on  sitting  erect  becomes  a burning 
in  the  head. 

* From  various  observations,  I infer  that  stupor,  obtuseness  of  the  inner  sensibility 
( sensorium  commune ),  in  which,  though  the  sight  is  good,  one  sees  only  imperfectly, 
and  does  not  observe  what  one  sees  5 though  the  auditory  apparatus  is  good,  one  hears 
or  comprehends  nothing  distinctly  $ though  the  gustatory  organs  are  all  right,  one 
relishes  nothing  j is  always  or  often  without  thought,  remembers  little  or  not  at  all 
what  has  quite  recently  occurred,  has  no  pleasure  in  anything,  slumbers  but  lightly, 
and  does  not  sleep  soundly  or  refreshingly,  attempts  to  work  but  without  giving 
attention  or  energy  to  it— -are  primary  effects  of  hellebore. 


1 From  continued  use. 


628 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER. 


He  knows  not  how  to  hold  the  head  on  account  of  the  violent 
pain  in  it ; he  lays  it  every  instant  on  a different  place  ; it  is  most 
tolerable  when  he  forces  himself  to  lie  still,  and  with  closed  eyes  and 
in  a half-slumber  he  forgets  his  pain. 

25.  Pressure  as  with  a pointed  instrument  on  the  crown  of  the  head. 
[Hbg] 

Violent  aching  pain  in  the  head,  with  great  heaviness,  especially 
in  the  occiput,  on  awaking  (aft.  41  h.).  [Mss.] 

Uninterrupted  aching  pain  in  the  occiput  towards  the  nape. 

[**■]  ... 

Aching  pain  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,  increased  when 
walking  in  the  open  air.  [Kr.] 

After  enforced  attention  aching  pain  in  the  right  temple,  aggra- 
vated when  walking  (aft.  8 h.).  [Kr.] 

30.  In  both  temples  a compressive  pain.  [£*/'.] 

Pressure  in  the  brain,  just  as  if  it  were  compressed  from  both 
sides  towards  the  centre  and  upwards  (aft.  9 h.).  [ Mss .] 

An  aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  dazed  (aft.  11  h.).  [Zr.] 
Semilateral  headache,  a tearing,  with  chilliness. 

An  aching,  stupefying,  giddy  drawing,  at  one  time  in  one  half  at 
another  in  the  other  half  of  the  brain,  and  sometimes  in  the  whole 
brain.  [6’^/'.] 

35.  Drawing  aching  in  the  left  half  of  the  brain  from  behind  to  the 
forehead,  as  if  the  mass  of  the  brain  were  heaped  up  there  (immedi- 
ately). [Mss.] 

Drawing  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  in  the  morning 
in  bed  (aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.] 

Headache  from  the  nape  to  the  crown  of  the  head. 

Obtuse  drawing  in  the  forehead,  causing  the  skin  of  the  forehead 
to  wrinkle.  [Hbg.] 

Pulsating  throbbing  in  the  left  temple,  each  pulsation  ending  in  a 
stitch  (aft.  | h.).  [Kr.] 

40.  Stitches  as  if  rising  up  out  of  the  brain,  in  the  region  of  the 
coronal  suture,  right  side.  [Kr.] 

Boring  stitches  going  across  the  forehead  (aft.  14  h.)  [Zr.] 

In  the  morning,  several  sharp  stitches  externally  on  the  right, 
afterwards  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  3,  4 h.).  [Zr.] 

Headache,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  occiput,  especially  when  stooping 
(aft.  48  h.). 


Bruised  pain  externally  on  the  vertex  and  occiput, 
especially  during  the  febrile  chill;  at  every  move- 
ment, especially  when  stooping  and  going  upstairs,  the 
pain  changes  into  a violent  twitching  in  the  integuments 
of  the  head,  which  is  relieved  by  external  pressure  (aft. 
48  h.).  [Ws.] 

45.  Sensations,  as  if  the  integuments  of  the  occiput  were  drawn  down 
tightly  (aft.  41  h.).  [Mss.] 

The  frontal  muscles  contract  into  folds.  [Hbg.] 

Pulse-beats  on  the  forehead  and  temples,  with  heat  of  face  (aft. 
6 h.).  [Mss.] 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER.  629 

Small  swellings  in  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  which  pain  as  if 
bruised  or  as  if  from  a blow. 

A pimple  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  which  on  being  roughly- 
touched  pains  as  if  bruised.  [Mss.] 

50.  A prickly  tension  on  the  left  palpebral  arch  when  touehed,  as  if  a 
pimple  would  come  there  (aft.  46  h.).  [Mss.] 

Quivering  in  the  muscles  of  the  eyebrows  and  cheeks,  with  heat 
of  face.  [ Mss .] 

Pain  drawing  hither  and  thither  in  the  palpebral  arch,  with 
spasmodic  contraction  of  the  muscle  of  the  eyebrow  (aft.  10  h.). 
[Mss.  J 

Aching  in  the  orbits,  as  if  the  eyes  would  fall  out.  [Rkt.] 

Painful  aching  in  the  right  inner  canthus,  that  is  aggravated  by 
closing  the  eyes  (aft.  9 h.).  [ Lr. ] 

55.  Itching  in  the  canthi  (aft.  j h.).  [Lr.] 

Burning  smarting  in  the  eyes,  especially  the  inner  canthi.  [JVsf] 
Prickling  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  would  weep  (immediately). 
[Mss.'] 

In  the  eyes  sensation  as  if  they  were  closed  by  something  heavy 
pressing  on  them  from  above ; he  must  make  an  effort  to  keep  them 
wide  open  (in  the  open  air)  (aft  7,  8 h.). 

In  the  morning  after  waking,  on  shutting  the  eyes,  violent 
prickling  on  the  eyeball  and  its  coverings,  as  with  sharp  points  (aft.  9 
h.).  [Mss.] 

60.  Prickling  on  the  eyeball  from  above.  [Mss.] 

In  the  morning,  after  waking,  soreness  of  the  canthi  of  the  left 
eye,  with  some  moisture  in  them.  [$£/'.] 

In  the  morning  the  inner  canthi  are  full  of  dry  eye-gum  (aft. 
9 h.).  [Mss.] 

Quivering  of  the  eyelids. 

(Swollen,  red  eyelids.) 

65.  Daylight  is  painful  to  him  ; he  does  not  like  to  look  at  surround- 
ing objects,  and  lies  with  closed  eyes  (in  the  fever). 

Dilated  pupils. 

Dilated  pupils  (the  1st  hour).  [iSV/f] 

Drawing  pain  from  the  temple  to  the  ear  (immediately).  [Mss.] 
In  both  ears  a drawing  as  if  the  inner  ear  would  burst,  a kind  of 
earache. 

70.  Along  with  the  shooting  tearing  pains  in  the  teeth,  in  the  right 
ear  a digging  boring  shooting  all  night  long  ; in  the  morning  and 
all  day  only  the  pain  in  the  ear  remained.  [Kr.] 

Near  the  ear,  behind  the  ascending  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw,  a 
succession  of  needle-pricks  (aft.  30  h.).  [Kr.] 

Aching  in  the  depression  behind  the  lobe  of  the  ear. 

Aching  pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose. 

Constriction  of  the  nose  as  if  he  should  be  suffocated.1  [Schulz, 
!•  c.] 

75.  In  the  left  ala  nasi  an  itching  burning.  [Hbg.] 


1 With  S.  ZQ. 


6 3o 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER. 


Smarting  itching  underneath  and  about  the  nose  and  upper 
lip,  as  if  coryza  were  coming  on.  [Mss.] 

Yellowish  complexion. 

Paleness  of  the  face  during  the  heat  of  the  head. 

In  the  morning,  after  waking,  a vesicular  pimple  on  the  middle 
of  the  red  part  of  the  upper  lip.  [Hbg.] 

So.  (Ulceration  of  the  commissure  of  the  lip,  with  itching.) 

In  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed,  shooting  tearing  pain 
in  the  right  lower  and  upper  molars,  which  can  bear  neither  warmth 
nor  cold  ; the  pain  torments  him  all  night,  so  that  he  could  sleep 
but  little  ; thereafter  the  lower  molars  are  longer  ; but  little  felt  by 
day.  [Kr.] 

On  biting  the  teeth  together  a tearing  in  both  opposed  third 
molars  towards  their  roots  (immediately).  [Mss.] 

Insensible  stiffness  of  the  tongue.  [Grew,  Anatomy  of  Plants , 
p.  280.1] 

Ouite  dry,  white  tongue,  in  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed 
(aft.^24  h.).  [Kr.] 

85.  Vesicles  on  the  tongue. 

On  the  tip  of  the  tongue  a pimple  with  shooting  pain  when 
touched.  [Kr.] 

Swelling  of  the  tongue.  [Buchner,  in  Samml.  f pr.  Aerzte , 
vol.  i,  p.  3-2] 

A scraping  feeling  on  the  back  of  the  palate.  [Stf] 

Tiresome  dryness  on  the  palate  and  cutting  and 
scraping  pain  on  the  palate  on  moving  the  parts  of  the 
mouth  engaged  in  swallowing  (lasting  many  days).  [Ws7] 

90.  Sore  throat ; on  swallowing,  an  aching,  and  the  throat  feels 
excoriated. 

Dry  slimy  taste,  with  great  thirst,  for  two  hours.  [Mss.] 

Flow  of  saliva. 

Accumulation  of  watery  saliva ; he  must  spit  out  frequently. 

Much  watery  saliva  in  the  mouth.  [S^/l] 

95.  Constant  flow  of  saliva  into  the  mouth,  which  he  must  spit  out 
(aft.  if  h.).  [Hin.] 

Great  hunger;  he  is  always  hungry  and  everything  tastes  well. 

[*»•.] 

Bitterness  in  the  throat,  but  still  more  bitter  when  he  eats  any- 
thing. 

He  has  appetite,  but  when  he  eats  he  does  not  relish  it,  and  he 
gets  nausea  for  a short  time,  which  ceases  immediately  after  eating. 

Loathing  of  green  vegetables  and  sourcrout,  with  good  appetite 
for  bread  and  meat  (for  more  than  a week), 
too.  Dislike  to  food. 

Loathing  of  fat  meat  (for  more  than  a week),  whereas  bread  and 
lean  meat  taste  well. 

Adipsia  all  day  long. 


1 From  chewing  root. 

2 Observation. — “Swelling”  should  be  “trembling.” 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER.  631 

Frequent  tasteless,  dry  eructation  (the  first  hour),  then  com- 
pletely suppressed  eructation.  [»Sy.] 

Empty  eructation,  without  any  taste  (aft.  \ h.).  [ Kr .] 

105.  Hiccup.  [Buchner,— StegmanN,  Diss.  de  salut.  et  nox.  Elleb. 
nigri  usu , Halae,  1751,  p.  22. 1] 

Hiccup  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.] 

Soon  after  dinner,  discharge  of  strong,  foetid  flatus  (aft.  ij  h.). 

'•5 

Feeling  of  nausea  in  the  stomach;  he  often  feels 
hungry,  but  food  is  repugnant  to  him,  though  he  has  no 
abnormal  taste  either  in  the  mouth  or  of  food  (aft.  24  h.). 
[Mss.] 

Inclination  to  vomit. 

no.  Inclination  to  vomit,  rising  up  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Empty  eructation  and  inclination  to  vomit,  but  yet  he  cannot 
vomit. 

Continued  inclination  to  vomit. # [Gesner,  Entdeckungen , i, 
p.  1 67. 2 3] 

Vomiting.  [John  Cook,  in  Oxford  Magazine  for  March,  1769.8] 

Vomiting  of  a greenish  black  matter,  with  bellyache  ; symptoms 
which  recurred  after  ceasing  for  three  hours,  and  lasted  an  hour,  fol- 
lowed by  apparent  rest  for  two  hours,  then  a violent  cry,  followed  by 
death  (aft.  38  h.)  ; the  limbs  were  relaxed  and  flaccid,  the  blood  in  the 
veins  fluid,  on  the  left  side  of  the  oesophagus  and  stomach,  as  also  in 
the  small  intestines,  a moderate  inflammation  ; the  brain  very  soft 
and  flaccid.  [Morgagni,  de  Sed.  et  Cans.  Morb .,  lix,  15,  16.4] 

1 1 5.  Great  bruised  pain  near  and  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis  in  the 
region  of  the  portal  vein,  where  he  feels  every  step  painfully  when 
walking  ; the  pain  is  aggravated  by  speaking  aloud  and  by  touching 
the  part. 

Sensation  as  if  the  scrobiculus  cordis  were  drawn  in. 

Distension  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  of  the  epigastric  region, 
which  impedes  respiration,  and  is  painful  as  from  an  internal  ulcer. 

Every  step  causes  a painful  impression  on  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Excessive  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gesner,  1.  c.] 

120.  Pressure  in  the  precordial  region.  [Cook,  1.  c.] 

Scrapy  rough  sensation  in  the  stomach  (as  from  rubbing  with 
a woollen  cloth).  [Hbg.~\ 

A painful  burning  in  the  stomach,  which  rises  up  through  the 
oesophagus.  [Tournefort,  Voyage  dans  le  Levant , t.  ii,  p.  180.5] 

In  the  stomach,  pinching  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Hbg.'] 

Pain  in  abdomen.  [Buchner, — Stegmann, — Gesner,  1.  c.j 
125.  Heaviness  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hbg.~\ 

* From  Hel.fcetidus. 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 Statement. 

3 Poisoning. 

4 Effects  of  extract  in  a melancholic. 

5 Statement. 


632 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER. 


A pinching,  commencing  in  the  hepatic  region  and  twisting 
itself  always  deeper  downwards  and  forwards  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Htn.] 
Bellyache. 

In  the  abdomen  a couple  of  stitches  and  a tearing  pain  across  it 
(aft.  | h.). 

(After  a meal)  severe  dysentery-like  pinching  across  the  abdomen. 

IHbg.] 

130.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen  (on  going  upstairs)  (aft.  32  h.). 
[Zr.] 

Sharp  pressure  across  the  abdomen,  below  the  navel,  from  with- 
out inwards,  especially  severe  when  sitting  (aft.  24  h.).  [Ws^] 

Cold  sensation  in  the  abdomen. 

Grumbling  in  the  abdomen. 

Excessive  rumbling  and  noises  in  the  abdomen  (immediately). 

135.  Audible  painless  grumbling  below  the  umbilical  region  (aft.  1 h.). 

[*'•] 

Movement  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  bubbles  of  air  rose  up  and 
burst,  followed  by  discharge  of  foetid  flatus  (aft.  8 h.).  [Kr.] 
Flatulence  moving  about  in  the  abdomen.  \Hbg. — St/.] 
Transient  distension  of  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening  (aft.  5 d.). 
In  the  morning  after  the  accustomed  draught  of  milk,  discharge 
of  foetid  flatus  (aft.  h.).  [ Kr .] 

140.  Purging  with  nausea  and  bellyache.  [Tournefort,  1.  c.] 

Diarrhoea,  and  before  each  stool  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which 
went  off  after  each  stool.  [Rkt.] 

Diarrhoea. 

Diarrhoea.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.] 

Every  day  three  or  four  times  instead  of  the  stool,  there  passes 
white  gelatinous  matter,  like  frog’s  spawn,  with  much  pressing. 

145.  Stools  of  pure,  viscid,  white  mucus. 

Retained  stool  the  first  day,  the  next  day  in  the  morning  an 
ordinary  stool,  and  in  the  afternoon  a diarrhoeic  stool. 

Hard,  scanty  stool,  during  and  immediately  after  which  violent, 
cutting  shooting  in  the  rectum  from  below  upwards,  just  as  if  it  con- 
tracted tightly  and  as  if  a body  with  cutting  edges  stuck  there, 
(aft.  12  h ).  [Mss.] 

Hsemorrhoidal  irritation.  [Schulze,  1.  c.] 

After  an  evacuation  a burning  smarting  pain  in  the  anus  for  a 
minute.  [/Sfr/i] 

150.  In  the  right  inguinal  region  single  pressures  terminating  in  a 
stitch,  a sensation  as  if  a hernia  would  ensue.  [Kr.] 

Severe  hard  pressure  on  the  middle  of  the  os  pubis  (aft.  J h.). 

[Hbg.] 

Frequent  micturition. 

Urging  to  urinate  (micturitio). 

Copious  discharge  of  urine,  without  any  particular  urging  (aft.  24, 
26  h.).  [Lr.] 

155.  Frequent  urging  to  pass  urine,  with  scanty  discharge 
of  urine  (aft.  j,  24,  3,  54  h.).  [Lr.] 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER, 


633 


Copious  discharge  of  watery  urine.  [*S,£/r.] 

Several  itching,  fine  pricks  on  the  point  of  the  glans  penis 
(aft.  ih.).  [Lr.] 

Seems  to  suppress  powerfully  the  sexual  desire.  [Stf.] 

Production  of  the  menstrual  flux  (aft.  8 he). 

* 

*• 

160.  Sneezing.  [Van  Hilden,  Opera  Med.  Chir .,  Cent.  4,  Obs.  121.] 
In  the  morning,  when  fasting,  sneezing  (aft.  26  h.).  [Lr.] 
Spasmodic  tickling  irritation  in  the  nose,  as  if  about  to  sneeze 
(which  however  did  not  occur),  with  yawning  (aft.  1 h.).  [Kr.] 
Sneezing,  immediately  after  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning, 
causing  the  upper  lip  to  crack  in  the  middle.  [Kr.] 

Short  cough. 

165.  A suddenly  arising,  continued  short  coughing  (whilst  smoking  the 
customary  tobacco,  when  sitting)  (aft.  15  h.).  [Lr.] 

Rapid  breathing. 

Dyspnoea ; he  must  breathe  slowly  and  sometimes  deeply  (aft. 
i M.  [Mss.-] 

Constriction  of  the  glottis.  [Buchner,  1.  c.] 

Chest  quite  contracted,  so  that  he  gasped  for  breath  with  open 
mouth,  but  could  not  breathe.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

1 70.  Sharp  cutting  in  the  lowest  true  ribs  over  the  chest,  from  within 
outwards,  increased  by  inspiration.  [TVs.] 

Elevated  temperature  in  the  lower  part  of  the  thoracic  cavity. 
IHbg.] 

Scraping,  rough  sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum. 
{.Hbg.] 

When  moving  the  neck  some  of  its  muscles  are  stiff  and 
painful.  [iSy.] 

Rheumatic  stiffness  of  the  nape. 

175.  Pain  of  the  cervical  glands. 

Stiffness  of  the  muscles  of  the  nape  up  to  the  occiput,  even  when 
at  rest,  but  mostly  when  moving  the  head  (in  the  morning)  (aft.  41 
h.).  [Mss.] 

Contractive  pain  in  the  sacrum. 

A dull  pain  in  the  left  scapula,  more  acutely  painful  when 
moving.  [£//!] 

Betwixt  the  scapulae,  on  the  spine,  bruised  pain.  [ Hbg.] 

180.  Visible  twitching  of  the  muscles  in  the  left  upper  arm,  with  pain 
as  if  something  hard  knocked  violently  against  that  part.  [Hbg.] 
Itching  erosion  on  both  arms,  and  after  scratching,  smarting  as 
from  salt  water,  after  going  to  sleep,  in  the  evening  and  morning. 

Yellowish,  round  tetters  on  both  arms  from  which  water  exuded 
when  scratched. 

In  the  right  upper  arm,  sensation  as  after  a blow,  but  not  when 
touched.  [Hbg.] 

Fine  tearing  in  the  shafts  of  the  arm  bones.  [TVs.] 


From  inhaling  the  odour. 


634 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER. 


185.  Severe  drawing  from  the  middle  of  the  forearm  to  the  bend  of 
the  elbow.  [Mss.] 

Drawing  pain  from  the  right  wrist  to  the  index  finger  (aft.  10  h.). 
[Mss.] 

In  the  evening  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  severe  needle- 
pricks  in  the  left  wrist-joint  (aft.  13  h.).  [Lr.] 

Across  the  flexor  tendons  of  the  left  hand  needle-pricks  dart 
(when  walking  in  the  open  air)  (aft.  I2§  h.).  [Lr.] 

Sweat  on  the  palms  of  the  hands,  with  coldness  on  the  back  of 
the  hands  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Kr .] 

190.  Tearing  in  the  backs  of  all  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand  (in  the 
morning  in  bed)  (aft.  18  h.).  [Mss.] 

Tearing  in  the  left  middle  finger,  especially  in  its  middle  joint. 
[Mss.] 

Boring  pain  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  middle  and  index  fingers 
(aft.  20  h.).  [Mss.] 

Loss  of  power  in  both  hands,  so  that  he  could  grasp  nothing,  nor 
double  the  fingers  up  into  a fist  strongly.  [Mss.] 

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  right  little  finger  (aft.  27  h.).  [Mss.] 

195.  Paralytic  tearing  and  spasmodic  stiffening  in  the  fourth  finger  or 
the  right  hand,  going  off  when  at  rest.  [Mss. ] 

A tickling  on  the  right  index  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.] 

A painful  aching  across  the  right  thumb.  [Lr.] 

An  inflamed  spot  at  the  nails  of  the  left  index  and  right  thumb, 
with  pain  like  an  ulcer  when  touched  (aft.  20  h.)  ; the  following 
day  some  whitish  humour  escaped,  whereupon  it  healed.  [Mss.] 

Betwixt  the  proximal  joint  of  the  right  fourth  and  fifth  fingers 
several  small  vesicles,  which  are  sore  when  touched,  exude  moisture 
for  some  time,  and  then  remain  for  a long  time  covered  by  a scab. 
[Mss.] 

200.  On  the  middle  joint  of  the  fourth  right  finger  small,  exuding, 
painless  vesicles  ; on  applying  strong  pressure  the  bone  seems  to  have 
sore  pain.  [Mss.] 

A slight  drawing  pain  in  the  right  hip.  [££/’.] 

Sudden  paralytic  stiffness  in  the  left  hip-joint,  when  walking  in 
the  open  air  (aft.  23  h.).  [Mss.] 

Single  pricks  in  the  left  hip,  as  with  a needle.  [Hbg.] 
In  the  left  hip  several  violent,  rather  slow  pricks,  as 
with  several  pins.  [Hbg.] 

20 5.  Repeated  burning  aching  in  the  left  hip  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hbg.] 
Stiffness  and  tension  of  the  muscles  of  the  thigh.  [Rkt.] 
Weariness  of  the  thighs. 

Very  great  weakness  of  the  thighs  and  legs  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Htn.] 
Stiffness  in  the  houghs. 

210.  Unsteadiness  of  the  limbs,  weakness  of  the  feet,  staggering  of  the 
knees  ; he  can  walk  only  slowly. 

Digging  pain  in  the  right  patella  (aft.  J h.).  [Lr.] 

Several  times  recurring,  boring,  obtuse  stitches  through  the  left 
knee-joint,  in  the  open  air,  when  walking  and  standing  (aft.  26  h.). 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER.  635 

Stiffness  of  the  tendons  in  the  hough,  especially  of  the  outer  ones 
when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  25  h.).  [Mss.] 

On  the  right  leg,  near  the  outer  ankle,  stitches  darting  upwards 
(aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.] 

215.  In  the  inner  ankle  of  the  left  foot,  pain  as  if  after  an  external 
blow. 

Dislocated  pain  in  the  left  ankle-joint  5 he  fears  the  foot  will 
turn  over  (aft.  30  h.).  [_Kr. J 
Feet  heavy  and  tired. 

A painful  aching  feeling  on  the  right  os  calcaneum,in  every  posi- 
tion (aft.  11  h.).  [Zr.] 

A fine  painful  pressure  in  the  right  sole,  when  sitting  (aft.  5 h.). 
[Zr.] 

220.  Tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  J h.).  [Mss.] 

Shooting  twitching  in  the  left  big  toe.  [Mss.] 

The  hairs  all  over  the  body  came  out,  the  nails  fell  off.  [Cook, 
].  c.] 

The  epidermis  of  the  body  scaled  off.  [Cook,  1.  c.] 

Sharp  tearing  stitches  in  several  parts  of  the  body  at  once*  on  the 
upper  and  fore  arms,  chest,  back,  &c.  (aft.  8 h.).  [ Lr .] 

225.  Paralytic  weakness  of  the  limbs  and  unusual  stiffness.  [Scopoli, 
Flora  Carniolica , p.  557.1] 

All  the  limbs  are  so  heavy  and  painfully  sensitive  in  the  muscles, 
that  he  is  unwilling  to  move  them.  [ Ws] 

Stretching  and  straining  of  the  limbs  (aft.  1 h.).  [Kr.] 

Sudden  relaxation  of  all  the  muscles  ; cold  on  the  body  and  with 
cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  he  suddenly  falls  down  on  the  ground 
and  stammers,  but  retains  his  consciousness  ; the  pulse  is  very  slow 
and  the  pupils  quite  contracted  (aft.  1 h.). 

In  the  forenoon,  weariness  and  drowsiness,  with  yawning  (aft.  2 
h.).  [Kmr.~\ 

230.  In  the  open  air  he  feels  better,  the  inclination  to  vomit  goes  off, 
and  the  headache  is  considerably  relieved. 

In  the  open  air  he  feels  as  if  he  had  been  ill  a long  time  $ objects 
appear  to  him  altered  and  novel. 

Sudden  cedematous  swelling  of  the  skin.* 

(Sensation  in  the  swollen  parts  as  if  they  were  distended  and  too 
heavy.) 

Shooting  boring  pains  in  the  periosteum  of  the  bones. 

* This  symptom,  combined  with  symptoms  154.,  155,  156,  seems  to  promise  much 
for  some  dropsical  diseases.  These  will  certainly  be  rapidly  and  permanently  cured 
by  hellebore,  if  their  other  symptoms  correspond  homoeopathically,  i.  e.  in  similarity 
with  those  which  this  powerful  herb  can  excite  in  a peculiar  manner  in  the  healthy 
human  subject.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  occasional  curative  effect  of  Bacher’s  pills, 
which  seem  to  be  an  accidental  discovery  of  domestic  practice,  for  the  practitioners  of 
ordinary  medicine  could  know  nothing  about  the  homoeopathic  suitability  of  hellebore 
in  certain  dropsical  affections,  seeing  that  the  peculiar  morbific  effects  of  this  plant 
were  unknown  to  them,  and  tfiey  had  no  suspicion  what  curative  action  could  ensue 
from  its  employment. 


1 Observation. — In  the  original  “paralytic  weakness”  is  represented  by  “torpor.” 


636 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER. 


235.  Shooting  boring  pains  in  various  parts  of  the  body,  which  are 
aggravated  by  cool  air,  exercise,  and  after  eating  and  drinking. 
Syncopes.  [Buchner, — Stegmann, — Cook,  1.  c.] 

Convulsions,  spasms.  [Buchner, — Stegmann, — Van  Hilden, 
1.  c.] 

Spasms  and  convulsive  movements,  at  the  same  time  a blow  on 
the  brain  as  with  an  arrow.  [Tournefort,  1.  c.] 

He  slumbers  with  half  opened  eyes,  the  pupils  directed  upwards 
(immediately). 

240.  As  soon  as  he  opens  his  eyes  in  the  morning  in  bed  he  must 
stretch  himself,  whereupon  he  becomes  weary  and  his  eyes  close 
again.  [Kr.] 

Towards  morning  restless  sleep  ; he  turns  first  on  one  side,  then 
on  the  other;  in  this  slumber  dark  dream-pictures  hover  before  him. 

[*>■•] 

Towards  morning  restless  slumber  beset  with  historical  fancies, 
during  which  he  turns  from  side  to  side.  [Kr.] 

After  lying  down  in  bed,  vivid  fantasies,  hundreds  of  figures 
hovered  before  his  eyes,  which  disappeared  as  quickly  as  they  came. 
[Kr.] 

At  night  incessant  confused,  often  very  anxious,  but 
unremembered  dreams.  [Wsl\ 

245.  At  night  confused,  unremembered  dreams.  [Lr.] 

Slow  pulse  (aft.  1 and  16  h.). 

Very  small  pulse. 

He  feels  the  beat  of  the  pulse  distinctly  through  the  whole  body, 
chiefly  at  the  heart.  [Kr.] 

Strong  pulse  (aft.  J h.).  [Hbg.] 

250.  Palpitation  of  the  heart.  [Hbg.] 

Thirst.  [Buchner, — Stegmann,  1.  c.] 

Fever.  [Schulze,  1.  c.] 

Coldness  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  morning. 

On  account  of  shivering  he  wishes  to  lie  down  in  bed,  and  his 
complexion  appears  yellowish. 

255.  The  shivering  commences  in  the  arms. 

After  a thirstless  rigor  for  five  days,  thirst. 

Every  time  he  lies  down  in  the  evening,  chilliness,  and  every 
morning  perspiration  (aft.  10  d.). 

General  rigor  with  goose-skin,  painful  sensibility  of 
the  external  head  when  it  is  touched  and  when  moving, 
drawing  tearing  in  the  limbs  and  frequent  stitches  in 
the  joints,  especially  of  the  elbow  and  shoulders, 
without  thirst;  for  some  days  from  the  morning  on- 
wards (aft.  25  h.).  [Ws.] 

(In  the  evening,  cold  feet,  which  do  not  get  warm  even  in  bed.) 
[Kr.] 

260.  Coldness  of  the  hands,  whilst  the  face  and  the  rest  of  the  body 
were  warm  (aft.  J h.).  [Lr.] 

Fever  : with  excessive  internal  heat  of  head,  coldness  of  the 


HELLEBORUS  NIGER.  637 

hands  and  feet,  then  slight  sweat  all  over  the  body,  for  an  hour 
(aft.  4 h.). 

Fever  of  several  days'  duration  : when  out  of  bed  constant  thirst- 
less chill  over  the  body  (when  sitting,  standing  and  walking),  with 
cold  hands,  internal  burning  heat  and  stupidity  of  the  head  with 
great  drowsiness,  heaviness  and  weariness  of  the  feet  and  stiffness  of 
the  houghs  ; after  lying  down  in  bed,  immediately  heat  and  sweat  all 
over,  also  without  thirst. 

Fever  : constant  chill  over  the  body,  without  thirst,  heat  in  the 
head  and  headache,  like  bruised  pain,  in  the  occiput. 

In  the  evening  (about  5 or  6 o’clock),  and  especially 
after  lying  down,  burning  heat  all  over  the  body,  espe- 
cially severe  in  the  head,  with  internal  shivering  and 
chilliness,  without  thirst;  when  he  attempted  to  drink, 
it  was  repugnant  to  him,  he  could  only  drink  little  at  a 
time.  [TVs.] 

265.  Frequent  alternating  attacks  of  general  dry  heat,  then  shivering 
and  coldness,  whereupon  slight  bellyache  ensued. 

After  the  fever  a feeling  as  if  he  had  long  lain  ill. 

External  heat  of  the  face,  the  cheeks  glow  in  the  room  (aft. 
6 h.).  [Mss.] 

Slight  sweat  on  the  feet  towards  morning  (the  1st  night). 

Heat  and  perspiration  (aft.  36  h.). 

270.  General  sweat  towards  morning,  for  several  nights, 
with  only  ordinary  warmth  of  body  (aft.  48  h.).  [WsT\ 

Cold  sweats.  [Buchner,— Stegmann,  1.  c.] 

Pale,  fallen-in  face,  pulselessness,  icy  coldness  and  cold  sweat  all 
over,  so  that  a drop  hung  on  every  hair.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety.  [Buchner,— Stegmann,  1.  c.] 

Extreme  anxiety. 

275.  Dreadful  anxiety,  which,  however,  went  off  after  vomiting.'* 
[Bisset,  Essay  on  the  Med . Const,  of  Great  Britain , p.  333.1] 

Such  anxiety,  nausea  and  suffering,  that  he  thinks  he  is  going  to 
die.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

He  could  neither  sit,  stand  nor  lie,  and  always  pointed  to  his 
heart.  [Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Restless  and  anxious,  as  if  anticipating  misfortune  (aft.  5 d.). 

[j&.] 

Distraction  of  the  mind  when  studying  ; he  could  not  fix  his 
thoughts. 

280.  (Irresolution.) 

He  despairs  of  his  life. 

He  groans  and  grunts. 

Home-sickness. 

On  seeing  a happy  person  he  becomes  melancholy  and  then  only 
he  feels  very  unhappy. 

* From  Hel.fcetidus. 


1 Poisoning. 


638  HELLEBORUS  NIGER. 

285.  (He  puts  on  his  clothes  awkwardly.) 

Sad  disposition  respecting  his  present  position,  everything  seems 
to  him  so  insipid  and  nothing  interests  him.  r.] 

Wrapt  up  in  his  own  thoughts,  silent  humour,  all  the  afternoon. 
[Alberti,  1.  c.] 

Disposition  always  cheerful  and  active  (curative  action).  [Zr.] 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM.1 


(A  mixture  of  equal  parts  of  finely  powdered  oyster  shells  and  quite  pure  flowers  of 
sulphur,  kept  for  ten  minutes  at  a white  heat,  and  stored  up  in  well-corked  bottles.  I 
have  found  a very  small  portion  of  a grain  of  the  million-fold  attenuation  (by  means  of 
three  triturations,  each  of  an  hour’s  duration,  with  three  times  ioo  grains  of  fresh 
milk-sugar)  quite  sufficient,  often  too  large,  for  a dose.) 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Friedrich  Hahnemann  and 
Stapf. 

Two  symptoms  are  taken  from 

Hinze,  A.  H.,  in  HufeL  Journ.  d.  pr.  A .,  Sept.,  1815. 

In  the  1st  edit,  the  number  of  symptoms  of  hepar  is  206  ; in  this  2nd  edit.  298  ; 
in  the  Chr.  Kr.  there  are  661.] 

When  driving  in  a carriage  such  great  vertigo  that  on  getting 
out  she  could  not  stand  alone. 

Faint  vertigo  and  a staring  of  the  eyes,  as  if  he  sat  wrapped  in 
thoughts,  but  without  seeing  anything. 

On  shaking  the  head  vertigo  and  headache. 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  aching  pain  in  the  head. 

5.  In  the  morning  in  bed  dull  headache,  which  diminished  after 
rising.  [£7/1] 

Drawing  and  aching  in  the  temples  by  day. 

In  the  right  half  of  the  brain  a sharp  pressure,  varying  in 
intensity. 

Tensive  headache  above  the  nose. 

In  one  half  of  the  brain  a continued  pain  as  from  a peg  or  blunt 
nail  driven  into  the  brain. 

10.  On  rising  up  again  after  stooping  and  on  every  movement  stitches 
in  the  head,  especially  after  walking  in  the  open  air. 

A boring  pain  on  a small  spot  in  the  side  of  the  head. 

Boring  pain  in  the  right  temple  extending  into  the  upper  part  of 
the  head. 

The  hair  falls  out  very  much  (aft.  5 d.). 

The  hair  on  several  parts  of  the  head  falls  out,  and  bald  spots  are 
formed. 

15.  Eruption  of  pimples,  like  wheals,  on  the  hairy  scalp  and  nape, 
which  feel  sore  when  touched,  but  not  when  let  alone. 

Eruption  of  many  pimples  on  the  side  of  the  forehead,  worst  in 
the  room,  but  which  soon  get  better  in  the  open  air. 

Two  painless,  swollen  elevations  on  the  forehead. 

At  night  violent  headache,  as  if  the  forehead  would  be  torn  out, 
with  general  heat  without  thirst. 


1 From  vol  iv,  and  edit.,  1825. 


640 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


In  the  morning  as  soon  as  he  wakes  until  some  time  after  rising, 
pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  sore,  almost  as  if  bruised,  increased  by 
moving  the  eyes  ; at  the  same  time  a similar,  slight,  but  very  dis- 
agreeable pain  in  the  abdomen. 

20.  Internal  pain  in  the  forehead,  like  needle-pricks. 

From  midnight  onwards  (in  bed)  until  noon,  pain  like  a 
boil  in  the  forehead,  and  when  stooping  and  coughing  like  needle- 
pricks  ; externally  when  touched  the  forehead  was  also  painful  like 
a boil  and  needle-pricks,  several  mornings. 

On  lying  down  in  the  afternoon,  a spasmodic  twitching  in  the 
frontal  muscles,  which  only  went  off  on  getting  up. 

Boring  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  upper  part  of  the  orbit. 

(In  the  outer  canthus  of  the  eye  a cutting  pain.) 

25.  Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  upper  eyelids  and  below  the  eyes. 

Inflammation,  redness  and  swelling  of  the  upper  eyelid,  with 
pain  more  aching  than  shooting. 

On  waking  the  eyelids  are  closed,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  open 
them  for  a long  time. 

The  eyes  get  sore,  they  become  gummed  up  in  the  night ; 
in  the  evening  he  cannot  see  the  candle-light  well,  the  eyes  become 
dim  and  matter  is  secreted  in  them. 

One  eye  sore,  inflamed  and  swollen  ; redness  of  the  white. 

30.  The  eyes  are  red  and  have  aching  pain,  especially  on  moving. 

Aching  pain  in  the  eyeballs  and  bruised  feeling  when  touched. 

Yellowness  of  the  face,  with  blue  rings  round  the  eyes. 

Yellowish  skin  and  complexion. 

All  day  sensible  and  visible  redness  of  the  cheeks,  without  thirst 
or  shivering,  for  several  days. 

35.  In  the  evening  (about  7 o’clock)  heat  in  the  face. 

Heat  in  the  face  in  the  night  and  on  waking  in  the  morning. 

In  the  morning  erysipelatous  swelling  of  the  cheeks  (aft.  48  h.). 

Swelling  of  the  left  cheek,  for  two  days.  \_Fr.  H — n. J 

Heat,  redness  and  itching  of  the  outer  ears,  for  six  days. 

On  blowing  the  nose  violent  stitches  in  the  ear. 

40.  In  the  evening  on  going  to  sleep,  until  he  falls  asleep,  roaring 
and  beating  before  the  ears. 

Drawing  pain  in  the  nose,  which  then  goes  into  the  eyes  and 
becomes  a smarting  (in  the  morning). 

Pain  on  the  back  of  the  nose  on  touching  it,  as  if  sore. 

Bruised  pain  on  the  tip  of  the  nose. 

45.  Feeling  of  ulcerated  nostrils. 

He  blows  coagulated  blood  from  the  nose. 

Every  morning  some  drops  of  blood  come  out  of  the  nose. 

Epistaxis,  repeated  two  days. 

Loss  of  the  smell. 

50.  Very  acute  smell.* 

In  the  middle  of  the  upper  lip  a tensive  pain. 

Great  swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  which  is  very  painful  when 
grasped,  but  at  other  times  is  only  tense,  for  three  days.  [ Fr . H — «.] 
* Seems  to  be  curative  action. 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


641 


An  ulcer  on  the  commissure  of  the  lips.* 

Eruption  on  the  commissure  of  the  lips,  with  hot  feeling  there. 

55.  On  the  right  side  of  the  chin,  towards  the  under  lip,  vesicles  and 
ulcers  with  burning  sensation. 

Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  chin,  above  and  below  the  lips  and  on 
the  neck,  like  wheals,  which  are  painful  as  if  excoriated  only  when 
touched,  not  when  let  alone. 

Swelling  of  the  gums  at  the  back  molars,  with  some  out-pressing 
pain,  as  if  a new  tooth  were  about  to  come  there  > the  pain  is  worst 
when  he  touches  or  bites  on  the  teeth. 

Twitching  in  the  gums. 

In  the  evening  drawing  toothache  in  a hollow  tooth,  as  if  too 
much  blood  were  forced  upon  the  nerves. 

60.  Toothache  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Fr.  H—~n. ] 

Toothache,  especially  when  eating. 

Toothache  (at  6 p.m.)  : the  tooth  commences  to  be  loose  and 
has  drawing  pain,  a pain  that  is  worse  in  the  warm  room  and  better 
in  the  open  air,  neither  aggravated  nor  ameliorated  by  cold  water, 
nor  yet  by  applying  the  warm  hand  ; not  aggravated  by  speaking,  but 
only  by  biting  the  teeth  together,  and  then  there  is  twitching  in  it. 

A hollow  tooth  becomes  loose  and  painful  when  biting  on  it  (aft. 

3 M- 

In  the  throat  when  swallowing  and  yawning,  shooting  pain,  as  if  a 
splinter  were  sticking  in  it  ; on  yawning  the  shooting  goes  to  the  ear. 

65.  On  breathing  deeply  there  is  shooting  in  the  throat. 

On  turning  the  head  there  is  shooting  in  the  throat  extending 
to  the  ear. 

Single  fine  pricks  on  the  external  parts  of  the  neck  and  behind 
the  ears,  like  flea  bites. 

Many  small  papules  in  the  nape  and  on  both  sides  of  the  neck, 
but  not  painful.  [ Fr . 

Bruised  pain  of  the  external  cervical  muscles,  with  sore  throat ; 
there  is  pain  on  swallowing  as  from  a swelling  in  the  throat 
(aft.  24  h.)0 

70.  In  the  morning,  sensation  in  the  throat  as  from  a plug  of  mucus, 
which  will  not  come  away — a kind  of  internal  swelling  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  oesophagus. 

Immediately  after  supper  a pressure  under  the  larynx,  as  if  some- 
thing  were  sticking  in  the  throat. 

On  swallowing,  a feeling  as  if  there  were  a swelling  in  the  throat, 
over  which  he  must  swallow. 

Scraping  in  the  throat,  for  three  days.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

Rough  and  scrapy  in  the  throat,  even  per  se , but  it  feels  most 
sore  on  swallowing  solid  food. 

75.  A choking  and  scraping  feeling  in  the  throat,  as  from  burnt  lard, 
in  the  morning. 

Scraping  in  the  throat : it  is  always  so  full  of  water,  that  she 
must  be  constantly  spitting. 

* Which  belladonna  removes,  as  it  does  also  many  other  of  the  sufferings  caused 
by  hepar,  where  the  symptoms  correspond  together  in  similarity. 


41 


6 42 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


In  the  evening  after  a meal  he  must  hawk  up  much  mucus  from 
the  throat. 

She  always  felt  as  if  water  rose  up  in  the  oesophagus,  as  when 
one  has  partaken  of  something  acid. 

Flow  of  watery  saliva  from  the  mouth,  like  water-brash,  which 
recurs  next  day  at  the  same  hour. 

80.  Flow  of  saliva  from  the  mouth,  with  inclination  to  vomit. 

In  the  morning  bitter  slimy  taste  in  the  mouth. 

A bitter  taste  in  the  mouth ; the  food  also  tastes  bitter. 

Bitterness  at  the  back  of  the  throat,  but  food  tastes  all  right. 

She  has  an  earthy  taste  in  the  throat,  although  food  tastes  toler- 
ably natural. 

85.  (Loss  of  the  sense  of  taste.) 

(He  loathes  everything,  especially  fat.) 

(He  has  sometimes  an  appetite  for  something,  but  when  he  gets 
it,  he  does  not  like  it.) 

He  has  appetite  only  for  sour  and  strong  tasting  (piquant)  things. 

More  thirst  than  hunger. 

90.  Intolerable  thirst  for  wine  (which  she  usually  disliked)  ; this  thirst 
was  only  allayed  for  a short  time  by  wine  and  water  (aft.  1 h.).  [St/.] 

Uncommonly  great  thirst  from  morning  till  evening.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

Eructation. 

Burning  in  the  throat  during  eructation. 

Mansea,  frequently  during  the  day. 

95.  Qualmish,  inclined  to  vomit.  [£'£/'.] 

In  the  morning  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  when  sitting 
and  standing,  which  ceases  on  lying  down. 

Vomiting  in  the  morning. 

Sour  vomiting  in  the  afternoon. 

Aching  in  the  stomach,  after  eating  but  little. 

100.  Tension  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  : he  must  unbutton  his  clothes 
and  cannot  bear  to  sit. 

A hard  pressure  rising  up  out  of  the  abdomen,  which  remains 
fixed  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  is  only  relieved  by  the  discharge 
of  flatus. 

His  abdomen  is  as  hard  as  a stone,  and  there  is  pressure  under 
the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Abdomen  distended  by  flatulence,  tightness  of  abdomen. 

Distended,  swollen  abdomen,  without  flatulence. 

105.  Drawing  pain  in  the  epigastrium  and  at  the  same  time  over  the 
sacrum  (immediately). 

Bellyache,  like  drawing  pain. 

Contractive  pain  in  the  abdomen. 

Clawing  in  the  umbilical  region  from  both  sides  of  the  abdomen 
towards  the  middle,  which  sometimes  rises  up  to  the  scrobiculus 
cordis,  and  causes  nausea  and  anxious  heat  in  the  cheeks,  in  fits — 
almost  as  if  from  a chill  or  from  the  approach  of  the  menstrual 
period  (aft.  3 h.). 

Twisting  sensation  above  the  navel, 
no.  Spasms  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  3 d.). 


hepar  sulphuris  calcareum.  643 

Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a chi]]. 

Aver 7 disagreeable^ though shghtlepa^0^enh^'USk^n<^er  the  ribs‘ 

as  from  a bruise,  from  the  earfv  wi;  ‘ in  tbe  abdomen,  almost 
up,  accompanied  f ^ ^ 

(He  feels  much  emptiness  in  the  bowels  ) 

out  diarrhoea?  7*‘  evenin§>  c“«^  >"  the  abdomen,  with- 

Cutting  in  the  abdomen 

of  "";le“ in 

abdomen  ; a kind  of  colic.  esPec,a%  ln  the  sides  of  the 

Rumbling  in  the  abdomen. 
nn  i?'scharSe  °f .flatus  at  night. 

when  touched  ■ the^are  pahifuUsTf  th2'11^1  ^ 3nd  sti11  more 
feces.  ^ ^ cu  f evacuation  of  scanty,  not  hard 

k "Dtlte  eVaCUated>  y£t 

^^“^pa^i^lh^rb^omen)!1  * the 

of  nausea  in  a <lUalmish  feel«g 

pinching^  there  Swmes^som^ fat  ^ w°ls’  preceded  b7  some 
some  more  flatus  afterwards  before  the  IooSe  st°o1  a»d 

GreemSotr  d^C0,0Ured  «**- 

*30.  te1;  iozleu:r and  fee!ing  of  swellins there- 

deposits'!  white  sSiLenT'aft.^  “ doudP  lik^  whey,  and 

thic^Tnd  dep'iSg  “Jd£“d  ^ °"  StandinS  cI°«dy, 
wf  yelIow  urine  i it  scalds  when  passing 

■35.  ■***• 

for  it.*  * are  n0t  Unnate  my  more  at  night,  at  least  he  wakes  up 
comes,  and  then  it  flows  om^Wjy  foT  SOme  ,time  before  the  urine 

... 

~ CllratlY*  reaction  of  the  organism.  S 


644 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


A stitch  in  the  region  of  the  frenulum  glandis. 

Shooting  pain  in  the  prepuce. 

Externally  on  the  prepuce  ulcers  appear  resembling  chancres. 

* 

% 

Frequent  sneezing  (immediately). 

145.  Without  having  a cold  the  child  blows  much  from  its  nose,  of 
an  evil  odour. 

Coryza  and  spitting  of  much  saliva. 

Coryza  and  scraping  in  the  throat. 

Like  catarrhal  fever  ; internally  chilly  and  cross. 

Tickle  in  the  throat  and  suffocation  making  him  cough, 

150.  Scrapy,  scratchy  cough. 

When  the  smallest  member  becomes  cool,  there  immediately 
occurs  a cough,  as  from  a chill  and  oversensitiveness  of  the  nervous 
system. 

(The  cough  is  particularly  troublesome  when  walking.) 

Cough  day  and  night. 

Cough  ending  in  sneezing. 

J55.  Cough  evening  and  morning. 

Dry,  deep  cough,  from  tightness  of  the  breath  (suffocation)  when 
breathing ; with  this  deep  cough  there  is  pain  in  the  upper  part  of 
the  chest  as  if  sore. 

Suffocative  cough  ; cough  not  excited  by  a tickling  but  by  tight- 
ness of  breath. 

Cough,  and  on  breathing  deeply  the  most  severe  cough,  which 
makes  him  vomit. 

Dry  cough  on  going  to  bed,  in  the  evening  (aft.  4 d.). 

160.  In  the  evening  impulses  of  dry  cough. 

In  the  evening  the  cough  teases  her  much. 

Dry,  almost  uninterrupted  cough  from  an  irritation  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  left  side  of  the  throat,  which  is  worst  when  talking  and 
stooping ; late  in  the  evening  it  always  increases  and  then  suddenly 
ceases  (aft.  2 h.). 

After  going  to  bed  at  night  from  11  till  12  o’clock,  violent 
cough  (with  expectoration  of  mucus). 

Cough  with  expectoration  of  mucus,  all  day  ; a scraping  irritation 
in  the  windpipe,  but  especially  in  the  throat,  excites  it.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\ 

165.  Cough  frequently  wakes  her  early  from  sleep. 

From  time  to  time  violent  fits  of  coughing,  almost  causing 
suffocation  or  vomiting. 

Cough  which  excites  vomiting. 

Violent,  deep  cough  of  several  impulses,  which  strikes  painfully 
on  the  larynx  and  causes  retching. 

First  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  a feeling  as  of  a hard  body,  then 
coughing  of  blood,  then  foetid  perspiration — then  weakness  in  the 
head  (aft.  48  h.). 

170.  Bloody  expectoration,  with  cross  humour  and  exhaustion. 

Every  three  or  four  hours  a severe  fit  of  coughing  with  much  ex- 
pectoration ; but  the  cough  does  not  wake  him  out  of  sleep  at  night. 

Cough  with  expectoration. 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


645 


Viscid  mucus  in  the  chest  (aft.  5 d.). 

Shortness  of  breath. 

175.  Frequent  deep  breathing. 

In  the  sternum  shooting  when  breathing  and  walking. 

In  the  side  of  the  chest,  towards  the  back,  shooting  pain. 

Eruption  of  two  pimples  on  the  sternum,  which  are  acutely 
painful,  like  wounds,  and  have  pus  in  their  apices. 

A boil  on  the  last  right  rib,  which  has  stitches  in  it  per  se , and 
is  very  painful  when  touched. 

180.  Abscess  of  the  axillary  glands. 

Frequently  recurring  pain  in  the  sacrum. 

In  the  sacrum  a pain  drawing  hither  and  thither,  worst  when 
walking.  \_Fr.  H — ».] 

Severe  pain  in  the  sacrum,  like  a cutting  through  ; she  could 
neither  stand,  lie,  nor  walk,  during  movement  and  when  at  rest  (aft. 
14  d.). 

In  the  morning  in  bed  drawing  in  the  sacrum  and  in  the  whole 
back ; after  rising  the  whole  of  the  back  was  painful  on  moving,  she 
could  hardly  move  ; at  the  same  time  weakness  in  the  limbs,  disin- 
clination for  eating  and  work,  with  shivering,  chilliness,  and  adipsia. 

185.  A pain  compounded  of  bruised  sensation  and  sharp  pressure  in 
the  sacrum  and  lumbar  vertebrae,  but  especially  in  the  junction  of 
the  sacrum  with  the  pelvic  bones,  which  causes  a sort  of  limping 
when  walking ; there  is  also  pain  when  standing,  sitting,  and  lying, 
which  extends  down  into  the  lower  extremities. 

In  the  loins  and  ossa  ischii  pain  as  if  dislocated,  when  sitting  and 
turning  the  body  when  walking. 

At  night  tensive  pain  in  the  back,  worst  when  turning  the  body. 

Some  violent  stitches  in  the  back. 

Pain  between  the  scapulae. 

190.  Fine  tearing  in  the  left  shoulder. 

Some  twitching  here  and  there  in  the  left  arm. 

(At  night  the  arm  on  which  he  has  lain  goes  to  sleep.) 

Bruised  pain  in  the  shafts  of  the  humeri. 

In  the  point  of  the  elbow  pain  as  if  contused  or  aching,  only  on 
moving  after  a long  walk  ; it  went  off  in  the  open  air. 

195.  Drawing  pain  in  the  flexor  tendons  of  the  forearm  (not  in  the 
joints). 

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  extensor  tendons  of  the  fingers  and 
in  the  muscles  belonging  to  them  in  the  forearm. 

After  midnight  pain  in  the  inner  side  of  the  forearm,  and  over  the 
back  of  the  hand,  aching,  boring,  and  as  if  excoriated,  more  painful 
when  touched,  less  by  day. 

Pain  in  the  wrist. 

On  the  hand  and  wrist  a small  gritty  eruption  with  itching. 

200.  Swelling  of  the  right  hand. 

Hot  swelling  and  redness  of  one  hand,  which  causes  an  intoler- 
able sprained  pain  when  moved,  that  extends  into  the  arm. 

On  pressing  the  spread-out  fingers  against  something  they  knuckle 
up  j a sort  of  tendency  to  dislocate  readily. 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


646 

The  finger-joints  are  swollen  and  the  seat  of  gouty  pains. 

Needle-pricks  in  one  finger. 

205.  Two  boils  on  one  of  the  nates. 

A red  itching  lump  on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  natis. 

Excoriation  in  the  fold  between  the  scrotum  and  thigh. 

A formicating  pain  in  the  inferior  extremity  which  drew  it  quite 
crooked  ; most  pain  when  walking  and  standing. 

Bruised  pain  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  thigh. 

210.  All  night  long  painful  tension  in  the  thighs  and  legs  that  prevents 
sleep. 

Sudden  pain  of  exhaustion  in  the  thigh  whilst  walking,  so  that 
he  is  unable  to  walk  further. 

In  the  right  thigh  tearing  pain  (immediately). 

On  the  outer  side  of  the  knee-joint  and  in  the  thigh  and  leg 
tearing  pain,  even  when  at  rest,  as  from  excessive  fatigue  and  over- 
exertion. 

Swelling  of  the  knee. 

215.  Aching  pain  in  the  hough  on  moving. 

Great  weariness  in  the  feet,  especially  on  ascending. 

Stiff  feeling  in  the  ankle-joint,  with  a sensation  of  numbness  and 
stiffness  there. 

In  the  evening,  after  having  slept  rather  restlessly  and  tossed 
about  in  bed,  there  came  on  the  outer  side  of  the  foot,  on  which  he 
had  lain  without  feeling  pain,  a pain  for  half  an  hour  that  made  him 
cry  out  as  from  a violent  knock  or  blow ; the  pain  was  allayed  only 
by  grasping  the  foot  and  stroking  it  with  the  fingers,  but  not  by 
moving  (aft.  36  h.). 

Pain  in  the  foot,  especially  in  the  ankle-joint,  as  if  gathering. 

220.  A tearing  pain  in  the  foot  at  night. 

Drawing  burning  pain  in  the  feet  to  the  ankles,  in  the  evening 
in  bed. 

Burning  pain  in  the  feet,  especially  on  their  dorsum,  in  the 
morning  in  bed. 

Swelling  of  the  feet  about  the  ankles,  with  dyspnoea. 

When  walking,  stitch  in  the  tendo  Achillis,  and  when  lying  in 
bed  tearing  in  it. 

225.  Some  stitches  on  the  instep. 

Formication  in  the  sole  of  the  foot. 

Tearing  in  the  big  toe,  worse  when  walking  than  when  standing. 

A severe  stitch  through  the  big  toe. 

A corn  that  had  hitherto  been  free  from  pain  commences  to  have 
burning  pain  when  pressed  slightly,  mingled  with  a stitch-like  sen- 
sation. 

230.  The  nail  of  the  right  big  toe  pains  violently  (simple  or  ulcerative 
pains)  on  slight  pressure. 

On  the  toes  a burning  itching. 

Formication  in  the  toes  and  tips  of  the  fingers  (aft.  24  h.). 

Stitches  in  the  joints  when  at  rest  and  when  moving. 

Drawing  and  paralytic  pain  in  the  limbs,  namely,  in  the 
fleshy  parts  of  the  arms,  but  especially  of  the  thighs  and  legs. 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


647 


235.  Cracked  lines  and  chaps  in  the  hands  and  feet. 

Even  small  wounds  and  slight  injuries  on  the  body  suppurate, 
will  not  heal,  and  become  ulcers  (unwholesome,  festering  skin). 

The  ulcer  bleeds  on  being  merely  gently  wiped. 

The  affected  part  becomes  inflamed  (aft.  3 h.). 

Burning  and  throbbing  in  the  ulcer  at  night. 

240.  The  wart  inflames  : stitches  in  it  as  if  it  would  ulcerate. 

Single  severe  stitches  in  the  ulcer  (on  laughing)  (after  4 h.). 

(Fine  prickly  itching.) 

Burning  itching  on  the  body,  especially  in  the  morning  on 
rising ; after  scratching  white  blisters  appear  which  exude  white  drops 
and  soon  afterwards  disappear. 

Eruption  of  pimples  the  size  of  a pea  here  and  there  on  the 
body. 

245.  Nettle  rash,  e.  g.  on  the  wrist. 

Eroding  pain  in  the  ulcer. 

An  itching  erosion  in  the  ulcer. 

While  walking  in  the  open  air  a trembling  in  the  knees,  anxiety 
and  heat  in  the  whole  body  ; the  soles  of  the  feet  burned. 

After  dinner  he  was  weak  when  walking  in  the  open  air ; all  the 
limbs  were  fatigued  and  there  was  a stretching  in  them,  as  if  he  were 
about  to  have  ague  ; on  continuing  to  walk  a cold  sweat  came  over 
him  ; thereafter  in  the  evening  in  bed  he  could  not  go  to  sleep  on 
account  of  hot  feeling;  he  did  not  fall  asleep  until  2 a.m. 

250.  Excessive  excitability  and  sensitiveness  of  the  nerves,  e.  g.  on 
the  septum  of  the  nose. 

Towards  evening,  from  a slight  pain,  suddenly  severe  syncope. 

Towards  evening  great  drowsy  weariness,  with  frequent,  violent, 
almost  convulsive  yawning ; he  can  hardly  keep  from  lying  down. 

In  the  evening  so  weary  that  he  fell  asleep  while  sitting. 

In  the  morning  very  tired  on  rising  from  bed,  after  good  sleep ; 
everything  feels  very  heavy  to  her. 

255.  Restless  sleep  3 he  cannot  go  to  sleep. 

Sleeplessness  after  midnight. 

An  excess  of  thoughts  will  not  allow  him  to  sleep  after  midnight 
(from  1 to  3 a.m.). 

After  a meal  when  slumbering,  violent  starting  up  in  affright. 

Before  midnight  he  sprang  up  out  of  sleep,  full  of  anxiety,  called 
for  help,  and  he  felt  as  if  he  could  not  get  his  breath. 

260.  At  night  the  pains  are  worst. 

In  the  nocturnal  fever,  especially  during  the  chill,  the  pains  are 
worst. 

The  side  of  the  body  on  which  he  lies  at  night  becomes  gradu- 
ally insufferably  painful ; he  must  turn  round. 

Dreams  full  of  quarrels. 

Breams  of  fire  ; be  feels  tumbling,  &c. 

265.  He  dreamt  immediately  on  going  to  sleep,  and  dreamt  much 
and  anxiously,  without  waking. 

Chilliness  ; she  sought  the  heat  of  the  stove.  [StfJ] 

Rigor. 


648 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


Frequent  shivering,  up  to  the  hairy  scalp,  where  the  hairs  felt 
painful. 

Rigor  for  an  hour  (aft.  10  m.). 

270.  In  the  open  air  she  is  quite  depressed  by  a painful  sensation, 
like  a shiver ; on  account  of  chilliness  she  must  walk  all  bent 
together.  [67/1] 

Every  evening  (about  6 or  7 o’clock)  severe  chill  not  followed  by 
heat. 

In  the  evening  (8  o’clock)  severe  chill  with  chattering  of  the 
teeth,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  with  coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet, 
then  heat  with  sweat,  especially  on  the  chest  and  forehead,  with  slight 
thirst. 

In  the  morning  very  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  then  after  some 
hours  fever  first  of  chill  with  thirst,  and  after  an  hour  much  heat 
with  disturbed  sleep  ; this  fever  recurred  twice  during  the  day. 

Nocturnal  dry  warmth  (heat)  of  the  body,  with  perspiration  only 
in  the  hands,  which  do  not  bear  to  be  uncovered. 

275.  Fever  : burning  heat  with  almost  unquenchable  thirst,  tiresome 
headache  and  slight  wandering,  from  4 p.m.  onwards  through  the 
night,  for  three  successive  evenings.  [A.  H.  Hinze,1  in  Hufel. 
Journ.  d.  pr.  A 1815,  Sept.,  pp.  77,  79.] 

Fever  with  severe  oft-repeated  vomiting  of  a green,  excessively 
acrid  water  and  viscid  mucus,  with  constant  nausea.1  [Hinze,  1.  c.] 

Perspiration  in  bed  from  midnight  onwards,  then  she  was  chilly  in 
bed,  and  also  after  rising  every  morning. 

Perspiration  about  midnight,  especially  on  the  back. 

Night  sweat. 

280.  Perspiration,  from  the  evening  onwards  in  bed,  especially  on  the 
head,  so  that  beads  of  sweat  stood  on  the  face. 

Profuse,  sour  smelling  perspiration  at  night. 

Before  midnight  in  bed  perspiration. 

Profuse  clammy  night-sweat. 

Night-sweat  all  over  the  body  when  awake. 

285.  In  the  morning  profuse  sweat  all  over  the  body. 

In  the  morning  profuse,  continued  sweat  only  on  the  head. 

He  perspires  very  readily  during  every,  even  slight,  movement. 

Profuse  sweat  day  and  night.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

The  slightest  thing  put  him  into  a violent  passion,  he  could  have 
murdered  any  one  without  hesitation. 

290.  He  was  cross,  and  had  such  weakness  of  memory  that  he  required 
three  or  four  minutes  to  remember  anything,  and  when  at  his  work 
the  thoughts  often  left  him  all  at  once. 

Very  cross;  every  trifle  annoyed  him  (aft.  some  h.). 

Cross  about  trifles. 

Extremely  fretful  and  wayward. 

Disposition  sad,  for  many  hours ; she  must  weep  violently. 

295.  Sad,  dejected,  anxious. 


1 Effects  of  large  doses  of  hepar  given  for  whooping-cough. — These  two  symptoms 
occurred  together. 


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM. 


649 


In  the  evening  a frightful  anxiety  for  two  hours ; he  thought  he 
must  be  ruined,  and  was  sad  to  that  degree  that  he  could  have  killed 
himself. 

Very  hypochondriacal. 

In  the  morning  in  bed  after  waking,  when  conscious,  he  had  the 
visionary  appearance  of  a deceased  person,  which  frightened  him, 
and' he  also  imagined  he  saw  a neighbouring  house  in  flames,  which 
terrified  him. 


Sulphuretted  Hydrogen  Gas  in  Mineral  Waters. 

Violent  ophthalmia.1 2  [Waitz,  Hufel.  Journal , xvi,  ii,  p.  63.*] 
Black,  pitch-like  stools3.  [Waitz,  1.  c.,  p.  80.*] 

Flying  tearing  pains  in  the  feet.3  [Waitz,  1.  c.,  p.  3 7.*] 

Pulse  at  first  slower.4  [Kortum,  1.  c.,  iv,  p.  24.I*] 

5.  Pulse  at  first  about  eight  or  ten  beats  slower.4  [Waitz,  1.  c.,  xviii, 
i,  p.  88.*] 

Acute  fever5  (aft.  1 h.).  [Kortum,  1.  c.,  p.  25. t] 

Fever  with  ophthalmia.6  [Waitz,  1.  c.,  xvi,  p.  62.] 

Fever  with  erysipelatous  skin  eruption  all  over  the  body,7 
[Waitz,  1.  c.,  xvi,  p.  34.] 

# From  Nenndorf  water, 
f From  Aix  la  Chapelle  water. 


1 A lad  of  15,  subject  to  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  got  a very  severe  attack  of  oph- 
thalmia whilst  taking  the  baths. 

2 In  a rheumatic  patient  while  taking  the  baths  and  the  water  internally,  the  stools 
said  also  to  be  mixed  with  green  mucus. 

3 In  a man  disposed  to  rheumatism  taking  the  baths  for  vertigo  and  noises  in  the 
ears  ; t(  flying  ” should  be  “ wandering.” 

4 Statement  of  effects  observed  from  baths. 

* General  statement  of  effects  of  staying  in  bath  longer  than  an  hour  ; u fever  ” 
simply,  not  “ acute  fever.” 

6 A child  of  eight,  subject  to  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  had  an  attack  after  the  first 
baths. 

7 Sixth  day  after  commencing  baths  in  a syphilitic  subject  who  had  been  previously 
treated  with  mercurials. 


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.1 

(Henbane.) 

(The  expressed  juice  of  the  fresh  plant,  Hyoscyamus  niger , mixed  with  equal 
parts  of  alcohol.) 

When  dried  the  plant  loses  a great  portion  of  its  medicinal  powers. 

The  following  symptoms,  which  were  produced  by  this  drug  on 
healthy  persons,  show  the  mental  and  emotional  disorders  and  the 
derangements  of  the  senses  in  which  it  is  of  use. 

A dose  containing  a quadrillionth  of  a drop  of  the  juice,  or  better,  a 
small  portion  of  such  a drop,  is  more  than  sufficient  for  all  homoeopathic 
curative  purposes  when  all  other  foreign  irritants  and  drugs  are  kept 
away  from  the  patient. 

Frequent  smelling  at  a saturated  solution  of  camphor  removes  the 
troublesome  effects  of  hyoscyamus  when  it  has  been  given  in  too  large 
a dose  or  in  an  unhomoeopathic  case. 

Although  the  symptoms  of  this  plant  recorded  below  are  very 
numerous,  they  require  to  be  added  to  in  order  to  make  them 
complete. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Flaming,  Franz,  Fr.  Hahnemann, 
Langhammer,  Stapf,  Wislicenus. 

Symptoms  are  taken  from  the  following  old-school  authorities : 

Barrere,  Ob  sew  at.  cT  Anatomie , 1753. 

Barton  (same  as  Smith). 

Bernigau,  in  Hufel.  Journal , v. 

Blom,  C.  M.,  in  Kon.  Vetensk.  Acad.  Handl. , 1774,  and  in  Bergius ' Mat.  Med. 

Borelli,  Pet.,  Cent.  iv. 

Cagnion,  in  Desault's  Journal  de  Chirurgie,  tom.  i. 

Camerarius,  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,\ ol.  i. 

Clauder,  G.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  i,  Ann.  3. 

Costa,  in  Journ.  de  Medec .,  tom.  xxx,  Febr. 

Eems,  van,  in  Prcelect.  Boerha^vii  de  Morb.  New.,  ad  tom.  i. 

Faber,  J.,  in  Schenck,  lib.  vii. 

Gardane,  Gazette  de  Sante,  1773,  1774. 

Gesner,  J.  A.  Ph.,  Samml.  <von  Beobackt .,  i. 

Gmelin,  J.  F.,  Reise  durch  Sibirien,  Gott.,  1752,  vol.  iii. 

Greding,  in  Ludnjjigii  Adders.  Med.  pr.,  i. 

Grunewald,  M.,  in  Miscel.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  Ann.  9,  10,  App. 

Haller,  A.  v.,  in  Fi ’cat's  Mat.  Med.,  i. 

Hamberger,  Diss.  de  Opio. 

Hamilton,  Arch.,  in  Neue  Edinb.  Versuche .,  ii. 

Heilbronn,  Dav.,  in  Neues  Journal  der  Ausldnd.  Med.  Chir . Lit.  <v.  Hufel.  u . 
Harles,  i,  1804. 

Helmont,  J.  B.  van,  Jus  duumv. 

HuNERWolf,  J.  A.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  Ann.  2. 


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


651 


Jaskiewitz,  J.,  Diss.  Pharmaca  regni  veget .,  Vindob.,  17/5. 

Joerdens,  in  Hufel.  Journal , iv. 

Kiernander,  Utkast  til  Medicinal  Lagfar , 1776. 

Matthiolus,  Comment,  in  Diosc .,  lib.  vi. 

Navier,  in  Recueil period.  d'Obs.  de  Med.,  tom.  iv. 

Planchon,  in  Journal  de  Medecine,  tom.  xix. 

Pyl's  Neues  Magazin,  ii,  B.  iii,  St. 

Ruef,  de,  in  Nova  Acta  Natur.  Cur.,  t.  iv. 

Sauvages,  Nosol.,  ii. 

Schulze,  S.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  i,  Ann.  4,  5. 

Seliger,  Chph.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  Ann.  1. 

Serre,  J.  la,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  Ann.  5. 

Sloane,  H.,  in  Philos.  Transact .,  No.  457. 

Smith,  in  Med.  Comment.,  vol.  ii,  Dec.  ii. 

Stedman,  J.,  in  Philos.  Transact.,  vol.  xl,  vii. 

Stoerck,  Lib.  de  Stram .,  Hyos .,  Aeon.,  Vien.,  1762. 

Tozzetti,  Targ.,  Rslaz.  di  alcuni  viaggi,  vol.  vi. 

Vic  at,  Mat.  Med.,  i. 

Wedel,  G.  W.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  i,  Ann.  3. 

Wendt,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  v. 

Wepfer,  Hist.  Cicut.  aquat .,  Bas.,  1716. 

In  the  Frag,  de  Vir.  hyoscyamus  has  335  symptoms}  in  the  1st  edit.  539,  and  in 
this  2nd  edit.  582.] 


HYOSCYAMUS. 

Vertigo. 

Vertigo.  [J.  A.  Hunerwolf,1 2  in  Miscel . Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii, 
Ann.  2,  Obs.  92.—  M.  Grunewald3  (i),  in  Miscel.  Nat.  Cur., 
Dec.  iii,  Ann.  9,  10,  app.,  p.  179.* — C.  M.  Blom,3  in  Kon.  Vetensk. 
Acad.  Handl .,  1774,  p.  52. — Navier,4  in  Recueil  period.  d’Obs.  de 
Med.,  tom.  iv. — Planchon,5  in  Journal  de  Medecine,  tom.  xix, 
p.  42.-— H.  Sloane,6  in  Philos.  Transact.,  No.  429. — Greding,7 
in  Ludwigii  Advers.  Med.,  pr.,  i,  pp.  86,  91. — Wepfer,1  Hist. 
Cicutae  aquat.,  Bas.,  1716,  p.  230. — Vicat,8  Mat.  Med.,  i,  p.  185. 
— Bernigau,9  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  v,  p.  905.] 

Violent  vertigo.  [J.  Stedman,10  in  Philos.  Transact .,  vol.  xl, 
vii,  p.  194.] 

* A vertigo  lasting  14  days  from  the  exhalation  of  the  seeds. 


1 From  cooked  roots,  eaten  by  several  persons. 

2 Three  observations: — 1.  Effects  of  exhalations  from  seeds.  2.  Do.  of  a clyster 
containing  H.,  with  turpentine  and  carminatives.  3.  Do.  of  fomentations  of  it  in  the 
girls  who  had  applied  them. 

3 From  root  eaten  by  an  adult  man. 

4 From  herb  eaten  as  salad  by  an  adult. 

5 From  repeated  doses  given  to  an  adult. 

6 From  seeds  eaten  by  children. 

7 From  gr.  iij — xij  daily  given  to  patients,  Those  referred  to  pp.  73 — 78  were 
melancholico-maniacs,  those  of  pp.  79 — 87  maniacs,  of  89—99  epileptics,  103— 107 
epilepto-maniacs. 

8 General  statement. 

9 From  a clyster  of  H.  in  an  adult  man. 

10  From  leaves  boiled  in  broth,  in  several  persons. 


652 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


Vertigo,  with  obscuration  of  vision.*  [Smith,1  in  Med.  Com- 
ment.,  vol.  ii,  Dec.  ii.] 

5.  Vertigo,  as  from  intoxication  (immediately).  [‘ST/'.] 

Swaying  about  from  one  side  to  the  other.  [Stf.'] 

Staggering.  [J.  la  Serre,2  in  Mi  sc.  Nat . Car.,  Dec.  ii,  Ann.  5, 
Obs.  78. — Grunewald,  1.  c.] 

They  staggered  as  if  intoxicated. f [Cagnion,3  in  Desault’s 
Journal  de  Chirurgie , tom.  i,  p.  370.] 

Intoxication.  [Sloane,  1.  c. — J.  F.  Gmelin,4  Reise  durch 
Sibirien , Gott.,  1752,  vol.  iii,  pp.  84,  85. J] 

10.  Unconsciousness  : he  is  insensible  to  pinching  and  nipping.§ 
[Arch.  Hamilton,5  in  Neue  Edinb.  Versuche , ii,  p.  275.] 

Stupefaction.6  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Staring  at  objects  devoid  of  thought,  tendency  to  self-forgetful- 
ness (aft.  | h.).  [Fz.] 

He  involuntarily  remembers  persons  and  events,  which  he  had 
no  wish  to  think  about  (aft.  | h.).  [Fz.] 

Remembrance  of  long  forgotten  things.  || 

15.  Weak  memory. 

Complete  loss  of  memory. 

Loss  of  memory.  [J.  Jaskiewitz,7  Diss.  Pharmaca  Regni  Veget ., 
Vindob.,  1775,  p.  S3.] 

Things  he  did  not  wish  to  remember  come  back  into  his  thoughts, 
and  he  can  with  difficulty  recall  things  he  wishes  to  remember 
(aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.] 

Want  of  recollection  : he  remembers  what  he  had  thought  and 
done  the  last  few  days  only  as  if  in  a dream  (aft.  24  h.).  \_JVsJ] 

20.  Forgetfulness  of  all  he  had  previously  heard.  [Wendt,8  in 
Hufel.  Journal , v,  p.  390.] 

Forgetfulness  : he  knows  not  whether  he  really  said  what  he 
wished  to  say  (aft.  J h.).  [Fz.] 

He  complains  of  heaviness  of  the  head  and  violent  headache.9 
[Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Continued  violent  headache.  [Planchon,  1.  c.] 

Heavy,  dazed  head.  [Costa,7  in  Journ.  de  Medec .,  tom.  xxx, 
Febr.] 

* From  four  grains  of  the  resinous  extract  in  a healthy  man  24  years  old. 
f Several  children  who  had  eaten  the  roots  for  carrots. 

+ From  Hyoscyamus  physaloides. 

§ From  Hyoscyamus  albus. 
j|  Curative  action  (?). 


1 As  in  Hahnemann’s  note. 

3  From  clyster  of  H.  given  for  dysentery. 

3 From  root  in  children. 

4 General  statement. 

5 ii,  243,  of  original  English  edition,  from  which  corrections  have  been  made. — 
From  gr.  xxv  of  seeds  of  H.  albus  in  a young  man. 

6 In  original,  “ stupor,  as  if  drunk.” 

“ From  seeds  in  an  adult  man. 

8 From  a clyster  of  H.  in  an  adult  man. — This  symptom  not  found. 

9 This  occurred  24  hours  after  the  poisoning,  with  S.  467, 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


653 


the  head  with  swollen  eyelids.  [Greding,  1.  c., 

in  the  loins.  [Gre- 


25.  Heaviness  in  the  head.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  91. — Vicat,  1.  c. — 
Matthiolus,1  Comment,  in  Dios.,  lib.  vi,  p.  1064.] 

Heaviness  of 

p.  89.] 

Dulness  of  the  head,  costiveness  and  pains 
DING,  1.  C.,  p.  95.] 

The  thoughts  sometimes  refuse  to  come  (the  2nd  d.).  \_Stf.'] 

His  head  is  very  much  affected,  like  an  absence  of  thoughts  ; he 
is  troubled  about  everything,  and  hence  goes  to  sleep  for  some 
hours  in  the  afternoon  (without  dreams),  and  though  he  often  half 
awakes,  he  continues  to  sleep  on  (aft.  9 h.).  \JVsI\ 

30.  Confusion  and  dazed  state  of  the  head,  such  as  occurs  from 
excessive  bodily  weakness,  especially  in  the  morning. 

Headache  of  several  hours’  duration,*  [Gardane,2  Gazette  de 
Sante,  1773,  1774,  p.  294.] 

Headache.  [Stedman,  1.  c.— Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  73,  76,  86. — ■ 
Sauvages,3  Nosol.,  ii,  p.  242.] 

(Fine  shooting  pain  in  the  head.) 

(Shooting  tearing  headache)  (aft.  2 h.). 

35.  Obtuse  headache  in  the  base  of  the  brain. 

In  the  room  he  gets  headache,  after  having  felt  nothing  of  it  in 
the  open  air  (aft.  2 h.).  [F%.] 

Obtuse  pain  in  the  forehead,  especially  in  the  membranes  of  the 
brain. 

Aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  brain,  especially  in  the  forehead, 
with  needle-pricks,  especially  on  the  left  side,  recurring  alternately 
(aft.  4h.).  [Ar.] 

Aching  stupefying  pain,  especially  in  the  whole  forehead,  that 
at  length  changed  into  an  intermittent  tearing  (aft.  10J  h.).  [£r.] 
40.  Shooting  in  the  head  over  the  right  eye,  on  coughing. 

By  fits,  sometimes  constrictive,  dazing  headache  on  the  top  of 
the  forehead  and  general  discomfort,  sometimes  freedom  from  all 
sufferings  and  comfort  with  exalted  imagination,  the  latter  continuing 
much  longer  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.] 

(Tearing  headache  in  the  occiput.) 

Headache  as  if  the  brain  shook  and  splashed  when  walking  (aft. 

5 h-)- 

An  undulation  in  the  brain  as  from  violent  beating  of  the  arteries, 
with  aching  in  the  forehead;  worst  after  stooping  (aft.  J h.).  \JVs.~\ 
45.  Headache  with  unnatural  heat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  82.] 

Heat  and  formication  in  the  head  (aft.  24  h.). 

Formication  on  the  crown  of  the  head  (aft.  1 h.). 

Gnawing  aching  in  the  integuments  of  the  head,  increased  by 
moving  them  and  touching  them  (aft.  15  h.).  \Wsd\ 

A dull  stiff  pain  in  the  nape.  [67/1] 

* From  the  odour  and  exhalations  of  the  plant. 


1 General  statements. 

2 From  exhalations  of  H.,  in  several  persons, 

3 From  root,  in  several  persons. 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


654 


50.  Headache  alternating  with  pain  in  the  nape.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
P-  77-1 

On  turning  the  head  an  aching  in  the  crown  and  drawing  in  the 
nape  (aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.] 

Dazed  state,  dulness  of  senses.  [Gardane,  1.  c.] 

Dimness  of  vision.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

Dimness  of  vision  ; objects  appear  indistinct ; he  is  more  short- 
sighted and  must  hold  the  book  nearer  when  reading  (aft.  1 h.). 
[IVs.] 

55.  Contracted  pupils.  [‘ST/'.] 

Very  dilated  pupils  (aft.  \ h.).  [Fz.] 

Sensation  before  the  right  eye  as  if  a veil  were  drawn  before  it 
(aft.  3 h.).  _ 

Dim  vision,  as  if  a veil  were  before  the  eyes.  [Bernigau,  1.  c.] 
Glittering  before  the  eyes  ; dark  points  played  rapidly  hither  and 
thither  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Ws.~\ 

60.  Diminution  of  the  vision.  [Blom,  1.  c.] 

When  consciousness  returned  the  eyes  were  dim  and  without 
lustre,  and  the  brain  was  dazed.1  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Darkening  of  the  vision.  [Grunewald, — Jaskiewitz, — Sloane, 
— Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Weakness  of  vision.  [Stoerck,2  Lib.  de  Stram .,  Hyosc .,  Aeon., 
Vien.,  1762,  pp.  36,  39,  47,  55.] 

Transient  amaurosis.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.] 

65.  Blind  and  senseless  he  wanders  about  the  town.  [Hunerwolf, 

I.C.] 


Myopia : he  could  scarcely  recognise  objects  at  three  paces 
distance.  [Bernigau,  1.  c.] 

Longsightedness  combined  with  great  clearness  of  vision,  with 
dilated  pupils ; the  longsightedness  lasted  several  days  and  then 
declined  gradually*  (aft.  3 h.).  [Z,r.] 

Myopia  lasting  four  days.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Chronic  presbyopia.3  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

70.  Deception  of  sight : nine  persons  after  partaking  of  the  root  of 
henbane  saw  all  objects  of  a scarlet  colour.  [Dav.  Heilbronn,4  in 
Neues  yourn.  d.  Ausldnd.  Med.  Chir.  Lit.  v.  Hufel.  u.  Harles , i,  1804, 


p.  199.] 

Deception  of  sight  : objects  appear  fiery  red.  [Wendt,  1.  c.] 
Deception  of  sight  : everything  appears  made  of  gold.  [S. 

Schulze,5  in  Mi  sc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  i,  Ann.  4,  5,  Obs.  124.] 

Deception  of  sight  : small  things  appear  very  large  to  him. 
[ Grunewald, f — Gmelin,J — Wendt, § 1.  c.] 


# In  a very  myopic  person,  as  curative  reaction  of  the  body, 
f He  takes  a lark  for  a goose. 

£ He  takes  a straw  for  a beam,  and  a drop  of  water  for  a pond. 
§ The  letters  appear  to  him  unusually  large. 

1 On  the  following  morning. 

3  Observations  on  patients. 

3 In  the  original,  “ sight  for  a long  time  not  so  acute.” 

4 Not  accessible. 

5 From  cooked  roots,  in  several  persons. 


HYOSCYAMUS.  655 

False  sight  : the  flame  of  one  candle  appears  smaller,  of  the  other 
large,  although  both  flames  are  the  same  size  (aft.  10  h.). 

75.  False  sight  : when  reading  the  letters  appear  to  move,  and  look 
like  ants  running  about.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

False  sight  : when  sewing  he  stuck  the  needle  into  a wrong 
place.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Staring,  distorted  eyes.  [El  Camerarius,1  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur ., 
vol.  i,  Obs.  12.] 

Staring  look.  [La  Serre,  1.  c.] 

With  a fixed  look  he  stares  at  those  about  him.  [Hunerwolf, 
1.  c.] 

80.  Intoxicated  appearance,  for  a long  time.  [Cagnion,  1.  c.] 
Twitching  in  the  eye  (aft.  8 h.). 

Distorted  eyes.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

Open  eyes  turned  towards  different  sides.  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 
Convulsively  moved,  projecting  eyes.  [Planchon,  1.  c.] 

85.  Sparkling  eyes.2  [Stedman,  1.  c., — Blom,3  in  Bergius 9 Mat . 
Med.,  p.  128.] 

Red,  sparkling  eyes.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Inflammation  of  the  eyes.4  [Navier,  1.  c.] 

Itching  tearing  in  both  canthi,  worst  in  the  outer  canthus,  going 
off  by  rubbing  (aft.  8 h.).  \Ws.] 

Gnawing  aching  in  the  superior  orbital  border,  which  goes  off  on 
touching  the  spot  (aft.  J h.).  [Fz.] 

90.  Aching  in  the  eyes,  as  if  sand  had  got  into  them  (aft.  12  h.). 

The  eyelids  are  as  if  swollen,  the  whites  of  the  eyes  here  and 
there  reddish  ; the  eyes  look  as  if  he  had  been  crying.  [ St/] 
Inability  to  open  the  eyelids.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Heat  in  the  face,  particularly  in  the  lobes  of  the  ears,  with 
somewhat  increased  redness  of  the  face  and  very  dilated  pupils. 

[*/.] 

In  the  warm  room  burning  heat  in  the  face.  [St/.'] 

95.  Distorted  features,  bluish,  earthy  complexion,5  with  open  mouth. 
[Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

Bluish6  complexion  (aft.  2 h.).  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Cold  pale  face.*  [Hamberger,7  Diss.  de  Opio,  § 18.] 

Paleness  of  face.  [Smith,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  change  of  complexion.  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

100.  Heat  and  redness  in  the  face. 

Red,  swollen  face.  [Blom,  in  Bergius , 1.  c.] 

Brownish  red,  swollen  face.  [Bernigau,  1.  c.] 

* Before  death. 


1 From  root,  in  children. 

2 Stedman  says  “ fiery-looking,”  Blom  “glittering.” 

3 Same  case  as  Blom’s  in  S.  2. 

4 In  the  original,  “ the  eyes  appeared  inflamed.” 

6 In  the  original,  “ his  distorted  face  becomes  blue  with  a lurid  and  livid  pallor.1’ 

6 In  the  original,  “ livid.” 

7 From  root,  in  a boy  of  three. 


656 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


Twitching  in  the  cheeks. 

Smallpox-like  pustules,  chiefly  on  the  right  side  of  the  chin. 

105.  Painful  heat-papules  on  the  lip. 

Thick  eruption  of  pustules  full  of  yellow  pus  breaks  out  on  the 
cheeks  and  skin,  whereupon  the  nose  becomes  ulcerated.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  82.] 


Sharp  stitches  into  the  ears  ; aching  in  the  temples ; confusion 
of  the  head  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.] 

Towards  evening  a quick  (indescribable)  pain  in  the  right  ear. 

[*/] 

Tearing  in  the  whole  of  the  ear  cartilage,  increased  by  pressing  on 
it  (aft.  15  h.).  [TVs.] 

no.  (Noises  in  the  ears,  like  bells)  (aft.  1 h.). 

When  hawking  he  feels  as  if  something  fell  before  the  ears. 

[^.] 

Sudden  twitching  inside  the  root  of  the  nose  downwards  (aft. 
1 h.).  [TVs.] 

Heat,  also  perceptible  externally,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  nose, 
internally  and  externally  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.] 

Dryness  in  the  nose. 

1 15.  Pressive  squeezing  on  the  root  of  the  nose  and  the 

zygomatic  processes  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.] 

Epistaxis. 

Epistaxis.  [Gardane,  1.  c.] 

Distorted  neck.1  [Planchon,  1.  c.] 

Closure  of  the  jaws  with  perfect  consciousness  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fg.] 
120.  On  the  left  side  of  the  neck  a swelling  that  goes  on  to  suppura- 
tion.2 [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Stiffness  of  the  muscles  of  the  nape ; on  bending  the  head 
forwards  they  feel  stretched,  as  if  too  short,  for  some  hours  (aft. 
1 h.).  [TVs.] 

Clean,  parched  tongue.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Burning  and  dryness  of  the  tongue  and  lips,  which  look  like 
burnt  leather.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

On  the  middle  of  the  tongue,  a feeling  of  numbness  as  if  it  had 
been  burnt  with  hot  food,  very  much  increased  when  speaking  and 
drawing  in  the  breath.  [Stf.] 

125.  Dumbness.  [Targ.  Tozzetti,3  Relaz . di  alcuni  viaggi , vol.  vi, 
p.  279. — Jaskiewitz, — Sauvages,  1.  c.] 

He  does  not  answer.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  77.] 

Impeded  speech.  [Bernigau,  1.  c.] 

Unconscious ; she  lost  the  power  of  speech.  [Hunerwolf, 

[!•  c.] 

Toothache;  the  gums  on  the  left  side  seem  to  be  swollen,  and 
the  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw  are  affected  with  dull  pain.  \_Stf] 


1 In  recurring  attacks. 

2 The  abscess  was  in  the  parotid  gland.  It  never  closed,  and  the  patient  died  with 
pulmonary  disease, 

3 From  root,  in  an  adult. 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


657 


130.  Behind  the  rows  of  teeth,  betwixt  the  cheek  and  gums,  pain  of 
the  soft  parts,  as  if  they  were  gathering  (in  the  evening  during  the 
febrile  heat),  [Fz.] 

A painful  drawing  in  a single  tooth,  now  here,  now  there,  just 
as  if  a tooth  were  about  to  become  decayed.  [St/] 

Impediment  to  chewing.  [Hamberger,  1.  c.] 

Toothache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  80,  106.] 

Toothache  during  the  perspiration.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  109.] 
135.  Toothache,  especially  when  chewing,  as  if  the  teeth  would  fall 
out. 

Toothache  : tearing  in  the  gums,  especially  on  the  access  of  cold 
air. 

Tearing  toothache,  in  the  morning,  with  a rush  of  blood  to  the 
head,  as  if  an  attack  of  haemoptysis  were  coming  on. 

Aching  jerking  pain  in  a hollow  tooth  which  extends  over 
the  temple;  on  biting  on  the  tooth  it  seems  to  be  too  long  and 
loose  (not  increased  by  drawing  in  air)  (aft.  4 h.).  \JVs.~] 

Shaking  of  the  teeth  with  vibration  and  tingling  in  them. 

140.  Impediment2  to  deglutition.  [Hamberger,  1.  c.] 

He  feels  something  wrong  in  the  throat ; he  points  with  his 
finger  into  it,  just  as  if  something  were  sticking  in  it.  [Hamberger, 
l c.] 

Frequent  expectoration  of  mucus  from  the  throat  by  hawking 
(aft.  J h.).  [Ir.]_ 

Burning  heat  in  the  larynx.  [Vic at,  1.  c.] 

Dryness  causing  fine  shooting  in  the  larynx  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.] 

145.  Parched  throat  (fauces  horridae).  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

Great  dryness  in  the  throat  and  thirst.  [Fz.] 

Rough  and  scrapy  in  the  throat  and  on  the  tongue,  with  very 
moist  mouth.  [St/.] 

A scraping,  tiresome  feeling  in  the  throat  and  palate,  as  from 
speaking  too  much.  [£//\] 

Dryness  in  the  throat.  [Bernigau,  1.  c.] 

150.  Thirst  and  dryness  in  the  throat.  [Cagnion,  1.  c.] 

Thirst  from  the  shooting  dryness  in  the  throat  (aft.  2^  h.).  [Fz.] 
A smarting  sensation  in  the  back  of  the  throat. 

The  throat  is  so  contracted 3 and  dry,  that  a mouthful  of  tea 
almost  chokes  him,*  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

# When  we  take  together  symptoms  140  to  146,  149  to  151  and  153,  155  to  162, 
164,  165,  1 66,  with  the  mental  and  emotional  symptoms  513,  515,  520,  547  to  551, 
559,  565  to  572,  575,  580,  the  convulsions  441,  475,  480,  and  some  others  101,  102, 
427  to  429,  we  have  a tolerably  accurate  picture  of  the  ordinary  hydrophobia  caused  by 
the  bite  of  a mad  dog,  which  therefore  will  and  must  be  not  unfrequently  curable  by 
henbane.  The  true  histories  of  this  frightful  disease  show  us  several  varieties  of  this 
malady  in  human  beings,  for  each  of  which  there  will  be  a perfectly  suitable  remedy, 
among  which  henbane  is  one  of  the  best.  For  the  other  cases  either  stramonium  or 
belladonna  is  the  suitable  homoeopathic  remedy,  according  to  the  character  of  the 


1 Nine  days  after  leaving  off  the  medicine. 

2 In  the  original,  “ impossibility.” 

3 “ Uneasy,”  in  the  original. 


42 


658 


HYOSCYAMUS 


In  the  throat  a pressure  as  from  a tumour  when  swallowing  and 
at  other  times.  [£//!] 

155.  The  throat  feels  constricted,  with  impeded  deglutition.  [Berni- 
gau,  1.  c.] 

Constriction  of  the  throat.  [Sauvages, — -Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 
Inability  to  swallow.  [Tozzetti,  1.  c.] 

Inability  to  swallow,  the  fluids  introduced  into  the  mouth  were 
twice  spat  out.  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Hydrophobia.  [Barrere,1  Observat.  cT Anatomle,  1753.] 

160.  Intolerable  thirst.  [Blom,  1.  c.] 

Unquenchable  thirst.2  [Sloane,  1.  c.] 

Horror  of  drinks.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

After  great  thirst,  profuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  78.] 

After  drinking  tea  he  soon  fell  into  convulsions,  he  did  not  know 
those  about  him.  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

165.  He  wishes  to  drink,  but  cannot  swallow.  [Hamberger,  1.  c.] 
Frequent  spitting  of  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  87.] 

Great  collection  of  saliva.  [£//".] 

Ptyalism. 

Ptyalism.3  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

170.  The  saliva  tastes  salt. 

Collection  of  saliva  of  a salt  taste. 

Bloody  saliva  in  the  mouth,  with  bloody,  sweetish  taste  (after 
some  h.).  [£//T] 

Loss  of  appetite  with  proper  taste. 

Loss  of  appetite.  [Planchon,  1.  c.] 

175.  Appetite  and  strength  diminish  from  day  to  day.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  102.] 

Loss  of  smell  and  taste. 

totality  of  the  symptoms.  Belladonna  has  already  effected  some  perfect  cures,  and 
would  have  done  this  more  frequently,  had  not  either  other  interposing  remedies  been 
administered  at  the  same  time,  or,  and  especially,  had  it  not  been  given  in  such 
enormous  doses  that  the  patients  were  sometimes  killed  by  the  remedy.  Large 
doses  of  drugs , homoeopathic  ally  suitable , are  much  more  certainly  injurious  than  such  as 
are  given  without  any  similar  ( 'homoeopathic ) relation  to  the  disease , or  such  as  have 
an  opposite  ( antipathic ) relation  to  the  case , that  is  to  say , are  quite  unsuitable  ( allo- 
pathic).  In  the  homoeopathic  employment  of  medicines , where  the  totality  of  the  morbia 
symptoms  has  a great  similarity  to  the  action  of  a drug , it  is  really  criminal  not  to  give 
quite  small  doses , indeed  as  small  as  possible.  In  such  cases  doses  of  the  size  prescribed 
in  the  routine  practice  become  real  poisons  and  murderous  agents.  Convinced  by  a 
thousand-fold  experience,  I assert  this  of  the  homoeopathic  employment  of  medicines 
universally  and  invariably , particularly  when  the  disease  is  acute  ; and  this  is  especi- 
ally true  of  the  employment  of  belladonna,  stramonium,  and  hyoscyamus  in  hydro- 
phobia. So  let  it  not  be  said,  “ One  of  these  three  medicines  was  given  in  the 
strongest  doses,  and  not  too  seldom,  but  every  two  or  three  hours,  and  yet  the  patient 
died.”  “ That  was  precisely  the  reason ,”  I reply  with  firm  conviction,  “ that  was 
precisely  the  reason  why  the  patient  died , and  you  killed  him.  Had  you  let  him  take 
the  smallest  portion  of  a drop  of  the  quintillion-fold  or  decillion-fold  attenuation  of 
the  juice  of  one  of  these  plants  for  a dose  (in  rare  cases  repeating  the  dose  after  three 
or  four  days)  then  the  patient  would  have  been  easily  and  certainly  saved .” 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 Original  has  simply  “great  thirst.” 

3 In  original,  “ slavering.” 


HYOSCYAMUS.  659 

Bitterness  in  the  mouth,  in  the  morning  ; but  food  did  not  taste 
bitter  (aft  24  h.).  [Fg.] 

Bitterness  in  the  mouth  and  bitter  eructation.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
P-  95-]  . 

A kind  of  scurvy  in  the  mouth. 

180.  Frequent  tasteless  eructation.  [67/1] 

Frequent  empty  eructation  (aft.  1^  h.).  [ Lr .] 

Baulked  inclination  to  eructate ; half-suppressed,  imperfect  eruc- 
tation, for  10  hours,  \_Fg.~\ 

From  external  pressure  on  the  scrobiculus  cordis  he  has  nausea, 
which  then  continues  per  se , but  goes  off  on  stooping  (aft.  \ h.). 
[Fz.] 

Nausea. 

185.  Nausea.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  78.] 

Nausea  and  vertigo.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  80.] 

Nausea,  vomiting.  [Barton,  1.  c.] 

Nausea,  inclination  to  vomit.  [£//'.] 

Inclination  to  vomit. 

190.  Vomiting.  [Hunerwolf, — Grunewald, — Gardane,  1.  c. — 
Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  75,  76.] 

Frequent  vomiting.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.  (1).] 

Frequent  vomiting  of  white  but  very  viscid  mucus.  [Greding, 
1.  C.,  p.  87.] 

Watery  vomiting  with  vertigo.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  94.] 

For  some  days  he  could  only  with  difficulty  keep  down  the  food 
without  vomiting.  [Barton,  1.  c.] 

195.  After  vomiting  green  bile  and  profuse  perspiration,  his  mind 
became  tranquil.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  80.] 

Frequent  hiccup  (aft  ij  h.  and  later).  [Zr.] 

Hiccup  with  spasms  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Greding, 
I.  c..,  p.  94.]  _ 

Severe  hiccup  on  two  successive  midnights,  with  involuntary 
micturition  and  foam  before  the  mouth.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  104.] 
The  most  violent  hiccup,  with  costiveness.  [Greding,  1.  c., 

P-  95-1 

200.  At  night  extremely  violent  hiccup  with  diarrhoea.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  94.] 

After  dinner,  extremely  violent,  long-continued  hiccup.  [Gre- 
ding, 1.  c.,  p.  89.] 

After  a meal,  headache,  aching  in  the  temples  and  painfulness  of 
the  whole  external  head  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Fz.] 

Immediately  after  a meal,  as  if  drunk.  [Fg-.] 

Most  of  the  sufferings  and  the  most  severe  of  them  occur  after 
eating.  [Fz.] 

205.  Soon  after  dinner  there  occurs  great  anxiety,  as  it  some  sad 
event  was  about  to  take  place  (aft.  6 h.).  [Fz.] 

After  a meal,  frequent  and  continued  erections  of  the  penis  (aft. 

5h  .).  [Jfc.J 


1 After  rage. 


66o 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


The  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  is  sensitive  and  painful 
when  touched. 

Frequent  attacks  of  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which 
cause  dyspnoea. 

Tightness  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

210.  Weakness  of  the  stomach.1  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Pain  in  the  stomach.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  87.] 

After  eating,  quick  pressure  over  the  scrobiculus  cordis  in  the 
sternum  (aft.  J h.).  \_Fz.] 

Stomachache.2  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Burning  in  the  stomach.  [Blom,  1.  c.] 

215.  Inflammation  of  the  stomach.  [Barrere,  1.  c.] 

Fulness  in  the  gastric  region,  with  a tiresome  feeling  of  tension 
of  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening. 

Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen. 

Bellyache.3  [Stedman, — Wepfer, — Hamilton,  1.  c. — Gre- 
ding, 1.  c.,  p.  105.] 

Single  stitches  in  the  hepatic  region  (aft.  \ h.). 

220.  An  aching  in  the  umbilical  region. 

A shooting  in  the  umbilical  region  when  drawing  a breath  (aft. 

5 h.). 

Colicky  pains.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Shooting  pain  below  the  navel  when  walking.  [Tr.  H — «.] 
Drawing  pain  in  the  bowels  (aft.  9 h.).  [F^.] 

225.  Pinching  drawing  in  the  abdomen,  with  discharge  of  much  flatus 
(aft.  3 h.).  [Tz.] 

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  26  h.).  [Fg.] 

He  cries  out  about  pains  in  the  abdomen,  which  seem  like  to 
burst  the  abdomen  open,  and  he  digs  his  fists  into  his  sides.  [Wep- 
fer, 1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  on  rising  from  b^d,  horrible  flatulent  colic,  a 
pinching  down-pressing,  like  a weight,  in  the  hypogastrium,  with 
inclination  to  vomit,  and  pain  in  the  back  as  if  it  were  bruised, 
without  any  flatus  passing,  when  moving  and  when  at  rest  (aft. 

24 h-)- . 

Aching  flatulent  colic  in  the  epigastrium,  his  abdomen  is  dis- 
tended, in  the  evening  after  lying  down.  [Fg.~\ 

230.  Cutting,  deep  in  the  abdomen. 

Short  attacks  of  cutting  on  a small  spot  deep  in  the  hypogastrium, 
under  the  os  pubis  (aft.  6 h.). 

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  abdominal  integuments. 

Spasmodic  contraction  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  as  if  something 
alive  were  inside*  (aft.  3 h.). 

Pain  of  the  abdomen  (abdominal  muscles),  as  if  he  had  over- 
exerted and  strained  himself,  in  the  morning  immediately  after 
waking. 

* From  the  emanations  ot  the  plant. 

1 The  day  after. 

2 The  day  after.  Literally,  “ weight  at  the  stomach.” 

3 “ Gripes,”  in  Hatnilton. 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


661 


235.  Pains  of  the  abdominal  muscles  as  though  he  had  fallen  on  them 
(when  sitting)  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fr.  H — n .] 

Uncommonly  great  development  of  flatulence  after  a very  mode 
rate  supper ; and  frequent,  but  difficult,  discharge  of  flatus  (aft. 
14.  h.). 

Flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen,  which  is  painful  to  the 
touch.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Feeling  of  hardness  of  the  abdomen. 

Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,1 2  also  during  the  diarrhoea.  [Greding, 
l.c,p.  8t.] 

240.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  violent  diarrhoea.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  98.] 

Frequent  urging  to  stool.* 

Urging  to  stool  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.] 

Urging  to  stool  with  feeling  in  the  rectum  as  if  diarrhoea  would 
ensue  (aft.  J h.).  [Fz.] 

Urging  in  the  rectum  as  if  he  must  go  to  stool  (aft.  \ h.).  [F%.] 
245.  Stool  the  first  day  three  hours  later  than  usual,  the  second  day 
four  hours  earlier,  [i^\] 

He  must  often  go  to  stool ; but  the  stools  are  natural. 

Frequent  stools.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.  (1).— Greding,  1.  c., 
P-  7+-] 

The  stool  passes  unconsciously  in  bed  (aft.  2 h.'). 

Diarrhoea.  [Hunerwolf, — Blom,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  80.] 
250.  A single  pappy  stool,  five  hours  before  the  usual  time  (aft.  1 1 h.). 
•] 

Evacuation  ot  a large  pappy  stool,  with  scanty  flow  of  urine  (aft. 
I h.).  [Zr.] 

Soft  stool  in  small  thin  pieces.  [Stf.~\ 

Diarrhoea,  day  and  night.  \_Fr.  H — n.~] 

Moderate  diarrhoea.  [Barton,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.] 

255.  Slimy  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  84.] 

Slimy  debilitating  diarrhoea.3  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Watery  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  94.] 

Frequent  discharge  of  thread-worms.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  97.] 
Costiveness,  hard  stool  covered  with  mucus,  and  during  its  evacu- 
ation pain  in  the  anus,  for  five  successive  days.  [Fr.  H — «.] 

260.  One  very  firm  stool,  some  hours  after  the  usual  time  (aft.  6 h.). 

[««•] 

Constipation  for  four  days,  and  frequent  pressure  in  the  umbilical 

* The  calls  to  stool  and  the  frequent  evacuations  of  henbane  are  alternating  actions 
with  the  delayed  stool  and  the  absence  of  call  thereto ; but  the  former  appear  to  be 
the  principal  primary  action.  There  seems,  indeed,  to  be  a twofold  alternating 
action:  much  urging  with  rare  evacuation,  S.  242-— 244,  261,  and  more  frequent 
evacuation  with  rarer  calls,  with  little  or  no  evacuation,  S.  263,  264,  also  with  more 
frequent  evacuation,  S.  248  ; but  the  frequent  urging  with  the  scanty  and  rare 
evacuations  is  the  principal  alternating  action. 


1 In  original,  “ hypogastrium.” 

2 During  resolution  of  pulmonary  consumption : stools  compared  to  sputa,  which 

they  possibly  were. 


662 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


region,  as  from  fulness  of  the  abdomen,  during  which  he  has  often 
call  to  stool,  without  tenesmus  in  the  rectum  and  anus. 

The  bowels  are  confined  and  the  discharge  of  urine  stopped,  with 
pressing  to  urinate. 

Constipation.1  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Sluggish  action  of  the  bowels.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

265.  Haemorrhoidal  discharge  for  eight  days.  [J.  A.  Ph.  Gesner,2 
Samml.  von  Beobacht .,  i,  p.  165.] 

Yellow  urine,  clouded  at  the  time  of  discharge,  afterwards  with 
whitish-grey  sediment.  [i^.] 

(The  first  two  days,  frequent  urging  with  scanty  discharge  of 
urine  ; the  third  and  following  days,  copious  flow  of  urine.)  [Zr.] 
Copious  flow  of  urine.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  74,  76,  80.] 

Very  frequent  urination,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Gre- 
DING,  1.  C.,  p.  83.] 

270.  Frequent  discharge  of  urine  as  clear  as  water;  he  must  pass 
urine  several  times  at  night,  contrary  to  custom.  [*S,//rl] 

Copious  discharge  of  urine,  sleep,  transpiration,  diarrhoea,  fol- 
lowed by  cheerfulness  of  mind.3  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  81.] 

Diuresis.  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Dysuria.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.] 

Difficult  micturition,  performed  not  without  pressing.  [Greding, 
].  c.,  p.  79.] 

275.  Suppressed  discharge  of  urine  with  vesical  tenesmus.* 

Retention  of  urine.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Paralysis  of  the  bladder. 

Feeling  of  excoriation  and 

. 1 h.). 

Profuse  discharge  of  menses.  + [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  81.] 

280.  Profuse  discharge  of  menses,  with  delirious  chattering.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  81.] 

Catamenia  delayed  some  days. 

Suppressed  catamenia. 

Retardation  of  the  menstrual  period.  [Greding,  in  several  places.] 
Before  the  occurrence  of  the  menses,  labour-like  pains,  as  in 
child-birth,  in  the  womb,  with  drawing  in  the  loins  and  sacrum. 

285.  The  catamenia  appear  on  the  fourteenth  day. 

Hands  and  feet  tremble  violently,  almost  convulsively,  and  she  is 

* The  excitation  of  the  bladder  to  urinate  and  its  loss  of  irritability — the  scanty 
flow  of  urine  and  the  copious  diuresis  are  in  henbane  alternating  actions,  so  that  much 
urging  to  urinate  with  scanty  and  copious  flow  of  urine — as  also  inactivity  of  the 
bladder  with  scanty  and  very  copious  secretion  of  urine  may  be  present  at  the  same 
time;  but  much  urgingto  urinate  with  scanty  flow  of  urine  seems  to  be  the  principal, 
more  frequent  primary  action. 

f The  haemorrhages  of  henbane  seem  all  to  be  primary  actions,  hence  its  utility 
in  metrorrhagia  when  the  other  symptoms  of  the  disease  correspond  in  similarity  to 
those  of  henbane. 


1 Merely  a statement  that  no  stool  had  passed  from  the  ingestion  of  the  poison  at 
4.30  p.m  till  night. 

2 Observation  made  after  removal  of  a colic  by  H. 

3 Curative  effect. 


burning  at  the  entrance  of  the  vagina 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


663 


as  if  maniacal  during  the  catamenial  period.  [Greding,  1.  c , 

p-  83-1 

Diuresis  during  the  catamenia.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  83.] 

Diuresis  and  perspiration  during  the  catamenia.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  84.] 

Perspiration  during  the  catamenia.  [Greding,  I.  c.,  p.  86.] 

290.  Before  the  appearance  of  the  catamenia  hysterical  pains.  [Gre- 
ding, 1.  c.,  p.  106.] 

Almost  incessant  loud  laughter  before  the  appearance  of  the 
catamenia.  [Greding,  h c.,  p.  106.] 

The  catamenia  came  on  with  profuse  perspiration,  headache  and 
nausea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  98.] 

Excitation  of  the  sexual  organs  and  erection  of  the  penis,  without 
excitement  of  the  imagination  (aft.  h.).  [Fz.] 

Sexual  desire.* 

295.  Impotence  in  the  male.f  [de  Ruef,1  in  Nova  Acta  Natur.  Cur ., 
t.  iv,  Obs.  59.] 

* * * 

Foetid  breath  and  exhalation  from  the  mouth,  which  he  himself 
perceives,  on  rising  in  the  morning  (aft.  24  h.).  [T^-.] 

Frequent  sneezing,  without  coryza  (aft.  i|  h.),  [Lr.] 

Sensation  as  if  something  were  sticking  in  the  windpipe  and 
could  not  be  dislodged  by  coughing. 

Much  mucus  in  the  trachea  and  larynx,  which  makes 
the  voice  and  speech  not  clear  (aft.  } h.).  [Fz.] 

300.  Tightness  of  the  chest.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

A squeezing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  tiresome  and  yet  not 
painful,  not  increased  either  by  walking  or  by  speaking  (aft.  6 h.). 

[*/■] 

Dyspnoea.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  90.] 

Difficult  breathing,  with  occasional  rattling.  [Camerarius,  1.  c.] 
A tight  feeling  across  the  chest  as  from  too  great  exertion  by 
speaking  or  running.  [££/!] 

305.  Oppression  of  the  chest,  like  shortness  of  breath,  and  at  the  same 
time  strong  cardiac  impulse  (aft.  3 h.).  [TVs.] 

During  an  oppressive  aching  in  the  chest,  at  the  same  time 
internal  shooting,  worst  during  inspiration  (aft.  f h.).  [Tz.] 

Aching  inferiorly  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  which  when 
going  upstairs  is  accompanied  by  great  anxiety  and  dyspnoea  (aft. 
6 h.).  [Fz.] 

Pressure  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  near  the  ensiform  cartilage 
and  the  last  true  rib,  with  great  anxiety  and  oppression  of  the  breath 
(aft.  61  h.).  [Fz;.]  ' 

Hard  pressure  with  stitches  on  the  chest  (aft.  3 h.).  [Tz.] 

310.  (A  burning  pain  in  the  left  side,  in  the  evening.) 

Shooting  in  the  side  of  the  chest.  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Shooting  in  the  right  side.  [Fr.  H — n.] 

* See  293.  f For  two  months. 


Effect  of  inhaling  vapour  for  toothache. 


664 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


A dry  tickling  short  cough,  which  seems  to  come  from  the 
trachea.  [S//'.] 

Short  dry  cough. 

315.  Dry,  spasmodic,  continued  cough.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  96.] 

At  night,  dry  cough. 

Nocturnal  cough. 

He  coughs  often  at  night,  and  wakes  up  every  time  and  then 
goes  to  sleep  again  (aft.  30  h.) . 

Whilst  lying  almost  incessant  cough,  which  goes  off  on  sit- 
ting up. 

320.  Greenish  expectoration  with  the  cough. 

Cough,  which  is  worst  at  night.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  109.] 
Shooting  in  the  scapulae. 

(A  warm  feeling  in  the  back,  immediately.)  [*S7/".] 

(Tearing  pain  in  the  back.) 

325.  Tension  of  the  pectoral  and  dorsal  muscles  at  the  shoulder-joint, 
especially  when  raising  up  the  arm,  as  if  they  were  too  short  (aft. 
6 h.).  \Ws.\ 

Backache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  99.] 

Fixed  pains  in  the  loins. 

Repeated  pains  in  the  loins.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  106.] 

Pain  in  the  loins  and  swelling  about  the  ankles.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  108.] 

330.  Shooting  pain  in  the  loins  and  side.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  108.] 

(In  the  evening  after  bodily  exercise,  trembling  of  the  arm.) 
Externally  on  the  elbow  a couple  of  pimples  with  some  pain 
when  touched  (aft.  9 h.). 

Aching  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow  when  he  holds  the  arm  still  in 
a bent  position  (aft.  | h.).  [Fz.] 

A dull  pain  in  the  wrist-  and  elbow-joints,  which  extended 
farther,  and  was  alleviated  by  movement.  [£{/i] 

335.  Itching  pricks  on  the  flexor  side  of  the  forearm  (aft.  1 h.). 

[**•] 

Continued  prick  as  with  a needle  on  the  flexor  side  of  the  fore- 
arm (aft.  5 h.).  \Ws^\ 

Painful  numbness  (stupor)  of  the  hands.  [G.  Clauder,2  in 
Misc.  Nat.  Cur .,  Dec.  v,  Ann.  6,  Obs.  178.] 

Numbness  of  the  hands.3  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

A formication  in  the  left  hand,  as  if  gone  to  sleep.  [*S7/'.] 

340.  Drawing  aching  pain  about  the  wrist-joint  and  knuckles  of  the 
hand  (aft.  J h.).  [Fz.] 

Swelling  of  the  hands.4  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

An  aching  drawing  on  the  inner  borders  of  the  fingers  on  move- 
ment (aft.  1 \ h.).  [Fz.] 


1 After  a cold. 

2 From  preparing  a fomentation  of  H.,  therefore  local  effect. 

8 This  and  S.  341  occurred  in  one  woman  only.  Qy.  did  she  prepare  the  leaves 
for  the  broth  ? 

4 See  note  to  S.  338. 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


665 


In  the  left  gluteus  muscle,  sharp  stitches  with  cramp-pain  (aft. 

5 b.).  [IVs.-] 

Redness  of  the  nates  and  feet.  [Hamberger,  1.  C-] 

345.  A boil  on  the  left  thigh.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  106.] 

A tensive  pain  across  the  middle  of  the  thighs,  as  if  they  were 
too  short,  on  going  up-stairs. 

Shooting  drawing  in  the  thighs  ; worse  when  at  rest  (aft.  1 h.). 

[^•] 

A paralytic  drawing  in  the  thighs,  especially  when  walking. 
Gangrenous  spots  and  blisters  break  out,  chiefly  on  the  lower 
limbs  (aft.  24  h.),  [Blom,  1.  c.] 

350.  While  walking  in  the  open  air,  stiffness  and  weariness  in  the 
knee-joints  (aft.  3 h.).  [Tz.] 

Weariness  and  weakness  of  the  feet.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.— 
Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Swelling  of  the  foot.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  82.] 

On  moving  pain  in  the  calves,  like  cramp,  in  the  afternoon. 
Pinching  in  the  calves  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Ws^\ 

355.  (When  walking,  pain  in  the  left  tibia,  as  if  bruised,  especially  in 
the  evening,  whilst  the  side  of  the  calf  is  hot,  swollen,  and  covered 
with  red  miliary  rash,  but  without  pain  and  without  itching  (aft. 

72  *>•)• 

Shooting  pinching  on  the  tibia  (aft.  5 h.).  \JVs,"\ 

In  the  ankle-joint  a cutting  pain  when  walking. 

The  ankle-joint  is  painful  as  if  bruised,  in  the  afternoon. 

When  walking  and  advancing  the  feet  and  when  ascending  the 
toes  are  spasmodically  flexed,  as  if  from  cramp. 

360.  He  cries  out  from  (pinching)  twitching  pains  in  the  feet. 
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  106.] 

The  limbs  go  to  sleep. 

The  limbs  go  to  sleep.  [Navier,  1.  c.] 

Drawing  tearing  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  mostly  when  at  rest ; it 
went  off  by  walking  and  returned  when  sitting  (aft.  36  h.).  \JVs^\ 
Pain  in  the  feet. 

365.  Cold  feet. 

Rheumatic  pains.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  87.] 

Pains  in  the  limbs  and  loins.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  89,  107.] 
Sharp  continued  stitches  in  the  joints  of  the  arms  and  legs  (aft. 
1 h.).  JFs.] 

In  the  joints,  but  more  in  the  muscles  near  the  joints,  a dull 
drawing  pain.  [$£/'.] 

370.  Cutting  tearing  in  almost  all  the  joints,  especially  when  moving 
(aft.  3 h.). 

Pains  in  the  limbs.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

The  symptoms  seem  to  occur  most  severely  in  the  evening. 

[St/.] 

Itching,  compelling  him  to  scratch  the  skin  till  it  bleeds.  [Costa, 

1.  c.] 


* “ Feet  and  legs”  in  original. 


666 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


Fine  pricks  out  at  the  finger  tips  and  out  of  all  parts  of  the 
body  (aft.  a few  m.).  [Wendt,  1.  c.] 

375-  When  he  laid  the  warm  hand  on  any  part  of  the  body,  e.g.  the 
back,  arm,  &c.,  for  an  instant,  there  occurred  a long-continued,  very 
considerable  feeling  of  warmth,  like  burning,  on  that  part  (aft.  some 
h.).  [Stf.] 

Numerous,  large  boils. 

Cutaneous  eruption  of  large  pustules,  accumulated  on  several 
spots,  from  the  region  above  the  hips  to  the  knees,  in  appearance 
like  confluent  small-pox  ; they  do  not  contain  any  fluid  and  scab 
off  after  4 days  (aft.  3 d.).1  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Alternate  appearance  and  disappearance  of  brown  spots  all  over 
the  body.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  81.] 

Tettery  spots  on  the  nape.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  96.] 

380.  Bruised  pain  in  the  ulcer,  on  moving  the  part  (aft.  24  h.). 

The  ulcer  becomes  bloody  and  excessively  painful  (aft.  24  h.). 
Obstinate  dropsy.  [Barrere,  1.  c.] 

Swelling.2  [Clauder,  1.  c.] 

Weakness.  [Sauvages, — Navier, — Planchon,  1.  c. — Greding, 
1.  c.,  pp.  87,  90.] 

385.  Disinclination  for  and  dislike  to  movement  and  work,  [i^.] 
Weariness,  exhaustion  of  the  whole  body.3  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 
When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  very  soon  becomes  hot  and 
exhausted  (aft.  12  h.).  \Ws^\ 

Staggering.  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Uncommon  sinking  of  the  strength  (aft.  4 h.).  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 
390.  Weakness  : he  can  hardly  stand  on  his  feet  and  seems  always 
inclined  to  fall.  [Bernigau,  1.  c.] 

Long-continued  weakness  of  the  legs.4  [Cagnion,  1.  c.] 

General  debility  with  trembling  of  all  the  body,  and  extraordinary 
coldness  of  the  surface  of  the  limbs,  until  syncope  became  threatened. 
[Smith,  1.  c.] 

Syncope.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

Attacks  of  faintness.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

395.  Repeated  fainting.  [Navier,  1.  c.] 

Death-like  syncope.  [J.  Faber,5  in  Schenck , lib.  vii,  obs.  152.] 
Quiet  lying  down.6  [Hamberger,  1.  c.] 

Drowsiness  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hamberger,  1.  c.] 

In  the  morning,  very  over-busy,  like  a weak  wakefulness;  in  the 
afternoon,  drowsiness,  exhaustion,  and  irresolution.*  [Fz.] 

400.  Sleep.7  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

* The  over-wakefulness,  see  also  416  to  420,  422,423,  426,  515  to  518,  is  in  hen- 
bane an  alternating  action  with  drowsiness  and  sleep,  but  the  over-wakefulness  seems 
to  be  the  chief  primary  action. 

1 On  seat  of  dartres  thought  to  have  been  cured  by  mercury. 

2 Of  hands  only,  as  local  effect.  See  S.  337  and  note. 

3 In  half  an  hour.  “ General  lassitude  and  inactivity.” 

4 In  original,  “lower  extremities.” 

5 From  gr.  xxv  of  seeds  in  an  adult. 

6 Eight  hours  after. 

7 After  relief  of  condition  shown  in  S.  22  and  467  by  venesection. 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


667 


Sleep  for  two  days.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

Sleep  for  three  days.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

Profound  sleep.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  76, 
78.] 

Long,  deep  sleep.  [Sloane,  1.  c. — -Blom,  in  Bergius , 1.  c.] 

405.  Immoderate  sleep.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

Gentle  sleep.1 2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.] 

Quiet  sleep,  with  profuse  sweat  and  frequent  urination.  [Gre- 
DING,  1.  C.,  p.  79.] 

During  sleep,  perspiration.*  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  109.] 

Irresistible  inclination  to  sleep.3  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

4TO.  Drowsy  inability  to  open  the  eyelids.  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Very  profound  slumber  (aft.  5 h.).  [Fg.] 

Long-continued  slumber.  [Kiernander,3  Utkast  til  Medicinal 
Lagfar , 1776,  p.  267.] 

Coma  vigil. 

Coma  vigil.  [G.  W.  Wedel,4  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur .,  Dec.  i, 
Ann.  3,  Obs.  21.] 

415.  In  his  sleep  he  has  a comical  look. 

More  sleepless  nights.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  74.] 

He  is  late  of  falling  asleep.  [ Fr . H — -«.] 

Sleeplessness.  [Blom,  1.  c.] 

Sleeplessness  on  account  of  quiet  exhilaration  of  mind.  [£//'.] 
420.  Long-continued  sleeplessness.  [Planchon,  1.  c.] 

Anxious  sleeplessness. 

Though  he  only  fell  asleep  long  after  midnight,  he  woke  unusu- 
ally early,  and  felt  very  cheerful  and  disposed  to  engage  in  works  of 
the  fancy,  wide  awake  and  strong.  [St/'.] 

Frequent  waking  from  sleep  at  night  as  if  he  had  been  disturbed, 
or  had  already  slept  enough,  for  two  successive  nights.  [Zr.] 

In  bed  he  sometimes  raised  up  the  knees,  sometimes  stretched 
them  out,  sometimes  he  turned  about,  turned  the  head  sometimes  here 
sometimes  there,  sometimes  he  lifted  up  his  hand  and  struck  the  bed 
with  it,  sometimes  he  plucked  straw  out  of  his  bed,  crept  about  on 
it,  and  did  not  talk  while  doing  so  ; at  the  same  time  he  was  neither 
cross  nor  timorous  (aft.  3J  h.). 

425.  In  unconscious  sleep  (at  9 p.m.)  he  began  to  whine,  then  raised 
up  the  healthy  arm,  which  soon  fell  down  again,  immediately  after- 
wards the  shoulder  was  violently  jerked  upwards  ; then  the  head 
was  tossed  about , then  the  affected  leg  rose  up,  then  there  was 
rapid  jerking  in  the  healthy  leg  ; in  the  healthy  hand,  the  fingers 
were  often  quickly  extended  and  then  again  firmly  closed  ; during 
this  he  sometimes  emitted  complaining  sounds. 

All  night  long  he  could  not  sleep  ; whatever  side  he  lay  on 

* Scarcely  any  perspiration  occurred  except  when  asleep. 


1 Curative  effect. 

2 In  half  an  hour.  (e  Much  inclined  to  sleep.” 

3 Not  accessible. 

4 From  seeds,  in  a boy. 


668 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


he  could  get  no  rest ; it  was  only  when  the  day  began  to  dawn  that 
he  occasionally  slept,  but  in  the  short  sleep  he  always  sweated  all 
over,  most  profusely  in  the  neck  (aft.  5 h.).  [Zr.] 

Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  mingled  with  convulsions  and  startings 
as  from  fright.1  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Frightful  dreams.  [Planchon,  1.  c.] 

In  the  evening  soon  after  going  to  sleep  he  has  anxious  dreams 
of  mad  cats  jumping  upon  him  (aft.  46  h.).  \JVs7\ 

430.  He  wakes  up  spontaneously  out  of  sleep  with  a cry.  [Ham- 

BERGER,  1.  C.] 

Sleep  interrupted  by  grinding  of  the  teeth.  [Greding,  1.  c., 

p*  9 1 -] 

In  sleep,  suffocating  snoring  on  inspiration  (aft.  14  h.).  [Z^.] 
Starting  up  out  of  sleep.  [ Fg .] 

He  chatters  in  hi»  sleep  about  war.  [Z£.] 

435.  Lascivious  dreams,  the  first  two  nights,  without  seminal  emis- 
sion, though  the  genitals  are  excited,  f Lr.] 

Apoplexy  with  snoring.2  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Hemiplegia.  [A.  v.  Haller,3 4 5  in  Vicafs  Mat . Med.,  i,  p. 
184.] 

He  suddenly  falls  to  the  ground.  [Camerarius, — Hunerwolf, 
1.  c.] 

He  suddenly  falls  to  the  ground  with  a cry  and  convulsions.* 
[Py/\t  Neues  Magazinf  B.  ii,  St.  iii,  p.  100.] 

440.  He  is  stiff  all  over,  as  in  tetanus.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

Slight  convulsive  movements,  sometimes  of  the  upper,  sometimes 
of  the  lower  extremities.  [Planchon,  1.  c.] 

Convulsive  movements.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

In  the  convulsions  he  stamps  upon  the  ground  first  with  one  foot 
and  then  with  the  other.  [Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

Convulsions.  [Costa, — Jaskiewitz,  1.  c.] 

445.  Convulsions  for  five  days.  [Jaskiewitz,  1.  c.] 

Frequent  twitchings.  [Cagnion,  1.  c.] 

The  spasms  flex  the  limbs,  and  the  bent  body  is  thrown  up  high. 
[Camerarius,  1.  c.] 

The  body  is  thrown  about  terribly  with  convulsions.  [Camera- 
rius, 1.  c.] 

Convulsions  with  foam  before  the  mouth.  [Camerarius,  1.  c.] 
450.  In  the  convulsions  the  thumbs  are  turned  in  (upon  the  fist). 
[Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

Epilepsy.f  [Chph.  Seliger,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  Ann.  i, 
Obs.  138.] 

* From  bathing  the  head  with  a decoction  of  henbane, 
f From  eating  the  seeds,  in  two  boys,  one  of  whom  died  after  a few  hours.6 

1 Literally,  “ he  passed  the  night  after  without  sleeping,  and  was  alternately  seized 
with  convulsions,  startings,  and  catched  with  his  hands  at  everything. 

2 Literally,  “ stertorous  breathing  as  in  apoplexy.” 

3 From  seeds,  in  a male  adult. 

4 From  seeds,  in  a boy. 

5 No  such  observation  occurs  here ; but  the  author  relates  how  a fomentation  ot 

the  seeds  applied  for  menstrual  headache  caused  epileptic  symptoms  to  come  op, 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


669 


Little  attacks  of  epilepsy,  alternating  with  paroxysms  of  apoplexy.1 2 
[Planchon,  1.  c.] 

Subsultus  tendinum.  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Spasms  with  watery  diarrhoea  and  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
P-  94-] 

455.  Spasms,  diarrhoea,  and  coldness  of  the  whole  body.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  94.] 

(He  cannot  get  warm  in  bed  at  night.] 

Chilliness  and  shivering  all  over  the  body  for  half  an  hour. 
[Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  hot  face  and  cold  hands,  without 
thirst  (aft.  1 h.),  recurring  the  following  day  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zr.] 

In  the  afternoon  fever  abounding  in  coldness  and  pain,  e.  g.  of  the 
back. 

460.  In  the  evening,  violent  and  long-continued  chilliness  with  rest- 
less sleep,  followed  by  profuse  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  79.] 

After  twelve  minutes  the  number  of  beats  of  the  pulse  diminished, 
and  continued  to  do  so,  so  that  in  an  hour  it  fell  from  85  to  59  beats, 
and  was  very  small.*  [Barton,  1.  c.] 

Very  small,  low  pulse.  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Weak,  irregular  pulse.  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Hard  pulse.  [Blom,  in  Bergius , 1.  c.]  ] 

465.  Small,  quick,  intermittent  pulse.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Stronger  pulse.  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Quick,  full,  strong  pulse.3  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Heightened  circulation,  for  twelve  hours.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 
Distended  blood-vessels  all  over  the  body.  [Costa, — Matthio- 
lus,  1.  c.] 

470.  (The  blood  burns  in  its  vessels.) 

Burning  heat  internally  in  the  whole  body.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 
External  burning  heat  of  the  whole  body,  without  redness.  [Ham- 

BERGER,  1.  C.] 

In  the  evening  great  heat  all  over  the  body  with  much  thirst,  putrid 
taste,  and  much  mucus  in  the  mouth  ; the  lips  stuck  together.  [Zz.] 
The  skin  of  the  whole  body  is  inflamed3  and  of  a cinnabar  red 
colour  (soon  after  the  heat).  [Hamberger,  1.  c.] 

475.  Transpiration.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Profuse  perspiration.4  [Hamilton, — Stedman,  1.  c.,— Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  76,  78.] 

Profuse  sweats.  [Planchon,  1.  c.] 

Perspiration  growing  always  more  and  more  profuse.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  74.] 

Extremely  profuse  perspiration.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  86.] 

480.  General  perspiration,  especially  on  the  thighs  and  legs,  for  two 
days  (aft.  24  h.).  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

* From  four  grains  of  the  resinous  extract  in  a healthy  man  of  24  years. 

1 In  original,  “each  fit  followed  by  sopor.” 

2 Twenty-four  hours  after,  with  S.  22. 

3 “ As  if  inflamed.” 

4 In  Stedman’s  case,  curative  reaction  $ in  Hamilton’s,  after  bleeding. 


670 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


Sour  perspiration.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  103.] 

Perspiration  with  exhaustion  and  obtuseness  of  the  senses.  [Gre- 
ding, 1.  C.,  p.  78.] 

Cool  perspiration.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Obtuseness,  insensible  laziness.1  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

485.  He  is  in  danger  of  becoming  senseless*  [Van  Eems,  in  Praelect. 
Boerhavii  de  morb.  nerv .,  ad.  tom.  i,  p.  236.] 

He  lies  bereft  of  reason  and  lazy.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  78.] 
Complete  stupefaction.  [Wendt,  1.  c.] 

He  does  not  know  those  belonging  to  him.  [Faber, — Wedel, 
— Stedman,  1.  c.] 

Bereft  of  all  his  senses,  he  sits  in  bed  immovable,  like  a statue. 
[La  Serre,  1.  c.] 

490.  Complete  loss  of  reason.  [J,  B.  van  Helmont,2  Jus  Duumv ., 
§ 22.] 

Complete  loss  of  consciousness.  [Cagnion,  1.  c.] 

Stupidity.  [Wedel,  1.  c.] 

Stupid3  and  sunk  in  constant  sleep.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  96.] 
Imbecility,  senselessness.  [Kiernander,  1.  c.] 

495.  Senselessness  (amentia).  [Wepfer, — Stedman, — Haller, — 
Tozzetti,  1.  c.] 

Insanity  (insania).  [Blom,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  78.] 
Insanity  with  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  80.] 

Extreme  disorder  of  the  intellect.  [Faber,  1.  c.] 

He  spoke  many  incoherent  things.  [Hamilton,  1.  c ] 

500.  They  babble  out  almost  everything  a sensible  person  would  have 
kept  silence  about  all  his  life.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.  (11) .] 

Exhausted  he  rambles  on  about  things  to  himself.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  82.] 

He  speaks  more  than  ordinarily,  with  greater  liveliness  and  in  a 
more  hurried  manner.  [£//".] 

Loquacity.  [Greding,  1.  c\,  p.  75.] 

Foolish  laughter.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.] 

505.  When  reading  he  mixes  up  improper  words  and  modes  of  speech. 
[Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

He  chatters  incoherent  things.  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

He  murmurs  nonsensical  things  to  himself.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

He  murmurs  and  chatters  to  himself.  [Kiernander,  1.  c.] 
Confusion  of  the  mind  with  talk  about  various  things.4  [Mat- 

THIOLUS,  1.  C.] 

510.  Unconnected  words.  [Wedel,  1.  c.] 

Floccillation  and  murmuring  at  the  same  time.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

T alking  nonsense.  [Bernigau, — W edel,5 — Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

* Happened  to  Boerhave  himself  from  the  exhalations  from  henbane. 


1 “ Insensibility  so  that  he  did  not  know  those  about  him,”  in  original* 

2 From  of  seeds,  in  an  adult. 

3 Increase  of  previous  (morbid)  dulness. 

4 The  last  phrase  in  the  original  is  “ altercatio*” 

b In  Wedel’s  case,  with  red  face. 


HYOSCYAMUS.  671 


When  awake  he  talks  nonsense  ; says  a man  has  been  there  — 
which  was  not  the  case. 

He  is  delirious  as  in  acute  fever.  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

515.  Exalted  state  of  mind  (for  12  hours)  with  almost  incessant  deli- 
rium* [Joerdens,  in  Hufel,  Journal , iv,  p.  539.] 

Extreme  liveliness,  restlessness,  hurry.  [St/.] 

Over-busy  : he  thought  he  was  more  active  and  stronger  than  he 
actually  was  (aft.  2,  4,  8,  h.).  \_Fz.'\ 

Thousands  of  fanciful  ideas  play  about  his  mind.  [Planchon, 

!.  c0 

In  the  confusion  of  his  fancy  he  thinks  men  are  swine.  [Schulze, 
l-c.] 

520.  He  is  silently  wrapt  up  in  his  own  thoughts. 

Imbecility  (stupor),  shown  in  words  and  acts.  [Hunerwolf, 
].  c.] 

Bereft  of  reason  he  knew  not  what  he  did.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  90.] 


Foolish  acts.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.] 

He  sings  love-songs  and  street  ballads.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.  (1).] 
525.  Chattering  he  prepares  for  a journey.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.] 

Chattering  he  makes  preparations  for  a wedding.  [Greding, 
1.  c.,  p.  76.] 

A very  peculiar  feeling  of  lightness  and  mobility.  [£//!] 

He  dances.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Comical  confusion  of  mindf  : they  perform  all  sorts  of  ridiculous 
antics,  like  monkeys.  [Pet.  Borelli,  Cent,)  iv,  Obs.  45.] 

530.  He  makes  ridiculous  grimaces,  like  a dancing  fool.  [Grune- 
wald, 1.  c.] 

Ridiculous  grimaces,  like  those  of  a drunken  person.  [Grune- 
wald, 1.  c.] 

Gesticulations.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.  (1).] 

He  gesticulates  like  a harlequin,1  [Schulze,  1.  c.] 

In  his  delirium  he  acts  as  if  he  were  cracking  nuts.  [Wepfer, 

lc.] 

535.  In  his  mania,  he  acts  as  if  he  must  drive  away  peacocks  with  his 
hands.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

He  clutches  about  him,  without  knowing  at  what.  [Hamilton, 

1 c-i 

He  fumbles  about  his  head,  his  face,  his  nose,  and  grapples  the 
bedclothes,  as  in  floccillation.2  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

He  puts  his  arms  round  the  stove  and  tries  to  climb  up  it  as  if  it 
were  a tree.  [Wepfer,  1.  c.] 

They  cried  out  that  near  objects  Were  going  to  fall  and  seized  hold 
of  them.  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 


* From  a henbane  clyster, 
f From  eating  the  root,  in  a whole  family. 


1 In  original,  “ like  an  actor.1-’ 

2 “ As  patients  frequently  do  in  nervous  fevers/* 


672 


HYOSCYAMUS. 


540.  They  ran  against  all  objects  that  stood  in  their  way,  with  open, 
wild  eyes.  [Cagnion,  1.  c.] 

Mania,  as  if  possessed  by  the  devil.  [Matthiolus,  1.  c.] 

He  strips  himself  naked.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  81.] 

He  lies  naked  in  bed  and  chatters.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.] 
Naked  and  enveloped  in  a fur  cloak,  he  senselessly  wanders 
about  to  a great  distance  in  the  summer  heat.  [Grunewald,  1.  c. 
«.] 

545-  Ridiculously  solemn  acts  in  improper  clothing,*  mixed  with  fury. 
[Grunewald,  1.  c.  (11).] 

Along  with  constant  burning  heat  and  crying  out  he  breathes 
with  difficulty  and  makes  violent  movements  with  the  hands. 
[Hamberger,'  1.  c.] 

The  first  day  extremely  lively  and  very  crotchety,  the  second 
cross  and  much  disposed  to  scold.  [Zr.] 

Alternations  of  calmness  and  fury.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  85.] 
Mania,  he  can  scarcely  be  restrained.1  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

550.  He  displays  incontrollable  strength  in  his  fury.  [Greding,  1.  c., 
p.  76.] 

Extremely  furious  and  naked  he  passes  the  day  and  night  without 
sleep  and  crying  out.  [Greding,  1.  c.] 

Jealousy. 

Abusive  talk,  scolding,  noise.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.  (111).] 
Quarreling. 

555.  Quarreling.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.] 

Quarreling  and  abusive  talk.  [Schulze,  1.  c.] 

He  is  violent  and  strikes  at  people.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.] 

He  lays  violent  hands  on  others.  [Grunewald,  1.  c.  (111).] 

Fury  ; he  tries  to  inflict  injury  on  and  hurt  others. 

560.  Fury.2  [Sloane,  1.  c. — Greding,  pp.  75,  79,  8i.] 

Incontrollable  frenzy.  [Costa,  1.  c.] 

Extreme  fury  : he  rushes  at  people  with  knives.  [Kiernander, 
l.  c.] 

He  strikes  and  tries  to  murder  those  he  meets.  [Schulze,  1.  c.] 
Cross,  sad  (the  2nd  day).  \_Stf. ] 

565.  Dejection,  sadness.3  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

Restlessness.  [Hamberger,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  78.] 
Extreme  restlessness.4 *  [Stedman,  1.  c.] 

They  always  moved  from  one  place  to  another  (for  two  days). 
[Sauvages,  1.  c.] 

Anxiety.  [Hunerwolf,  1.  c.] 

570.  Anxieties.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.] 

Horrible6  anxiety.  [Wedel,  1.  c.] 

* In  a priest’s  cassock,  put  on  over  nothing  but  a shirt,  and  in  fur  boots,  he  wishes 
to  go  to  church,  in  order  to  preach  and  perform  clerical  offices  there,  and  furiously 
attacks  those  who  try  to  prevent  him. 

1 Not  found. 

2 u Ravings  ” in  Sloane’s  cases. 

3 “ Spirits  dejected,”  in  original. 

4 The  author  adds,  “ cannot  be  restrained,” 

6 In  original,  “the  utmost.” 


HYOSCYAMUS.  673 

Shocks  of  fright,  alternating  with  trembling  and  convulsions.1 
[Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

He  complains  that  he  has  been  poisoned.2  [Hamilton,  1.  c.] 

(He  considers  himself  a criminal.) 

575.  Peculiar  fear  of  being  bitten3  by  beasts.  [Cagnion,  1.  c.] 
Irritable,  morose,  despairing.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  104.] 

(He  reproaches  himself  and  has  scruples  of  conscience.) 

He  reproaches  others,  and  complains  of  injustice  that  he  imagines 
has  been  done  him. 

In  despair  he  wishes  to  take  his  life,  and  throw  himself  into  the 
water.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  104.] 

580.  Extreme  fearfulness. 

Long-continued  fearfulness.  [Cagnion,  1.  c.] 

Impatient : he  thought  he  should  die  when  he  had  to  wait  for 
something  of  quite  a trivial  nature.  [S*/'.] 


1 Literally,  “ tremors,  startings,  and  convulsions.” 

2 Merely  a statement  of  the  fact. 

3 In  original,  il  devoured.” 


43 


IGNATIA.1 

(The  seed  of  the  Ignatia  amarah) 

(One  grain  of  the  pulverised*  seed  is  first  brought  to  the  million-fold  (third) 
trituration  in  the  way  taught  in  the  introduction  to  arsenic,  and  of  this  one  grain, 
after  being  dissolved,  is  brought  by  means  of  27  diluting  phials  to  the  thirtieth 
potency  (x). 

The  characteristic  peculiarities  of  this  very  powerful  vegetable 
substance,  as  far  as  they  are  known  to  me,  are  pointed  out  in  the  foot 
notes. 

On  account  of  the  alternating  actions,  that  follow  one  another  very 
rapidly,  which  it  excites,  it  is  particularly  suitable  for  acute  diseases, 
and  for  a considerable  number  of  these,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  symp- 
toms corresponding  in  similarity  to  symptoms  of  disease  frequently  met 
with  in  daily  life.  It  is  therefore  very  properly  regarded  as  a medicine 
created  for  great  usefulness  (polychrest). 

Its  action  is  usually  exhausted  in  a few  days  ; yet  there  are  consti- 
tutions and  states  of  the  body  where  it  cannot  effect  any  evacuation,  and 
in  such  cases  I have  sometimes  observed  its  action  last  nine  days.  It  is 
suitable  for  but  few  cases  of  chronic  disease,  and  then  only  with  the 
intermediate  employment  of  some  other  suitable  medicine  of  more 
persistent  action. 

In  its  employment  it  sometimes  happens,  which  is  seldom  the  case 
with  other  medicines,  that  where  the  first  dose  has  not  done  what  was 
intended,  because  (for  some  unknown  cause)  it  first  acted  on  the  disease 
with  its  opposite  symptoms  and  consequently  soon  caused  an  aggrava- 
tion of  the  disease  in  its  secondary  action,  like  a palliative  remedy,,  then 
(without  any  intermediate  medicine  having  been  given  in  alternation) 
a second  dose  of  the  same  dilution  can  be  given  with  the  best  curative 
effect,  so  that  the  cure  is  only  obtained  by  the  second  dose.  This  is 
no  doubt  owing  to  the  directly  opposite  symptoms  (alternating 
actions)  of  this  remarkable  drug,  of  which  I shall  speak  further  on. 
But  such  cases  do  not  often  occur,  for,  as  a rule,  in  an  acute  disease, 
the  first  dose  effects  all  that  this  medicine  can  do  in  a homoeopathic 
way,  if  it  has  been  accurately  selected  according  to  similarity  of 
symptoms. 

Where  in  the  case  of  an  over-excitable  system,  perhaps  also  when  given 
in  too  large  a dose,  it  produces  too  great  sensitiveness,  or  an  anxious, 
exalted  state  of  the  sensibility,  hastiness,  &c.,  coffee  is  serviceable  as 

* If  the  mortar  is  kept  constantly  standing  in  very  hot  water,  and  thus  maintained 
at  a moderately  high  temperature,  then  this  seed  (as  is  the  case  with  nux  vomica)  may 
be  easily  reduced  to  a fine  powder  without  diminution  of  its  medicinal  power. 


1 From  vol.  ii,  jrd  edit.,  1833. 


IGNATIA. 


6 75 


a homoeopathic  antidote.  When  it  has  been  unsuitably  chosen  so  that 
its  symptoms  do  not  correspond  in  sufficient  similarity  to  those  of  the 
disease,  the  sufferings  it  causes  may,  according  to  their  character,  be 
relieved  by  the  antidotal  power  of  pulsatilla  or  chamomilla,  and  in 
rarer  cases  by  cocculus,  arnica,  camphor  or  vinegar. 

Although  its  positive  effects  have  a great  resemblance  to  those  of 
nux  vomica  (which  indeed  might  be  inferred  from  the  botanical  rela- 
tionship of  these  two  plants)  yet  there  is  a great  difference  in  their 
therapeutic  employment.  The  emotional  disposition  of  patients  for 
whom  ignatia  is  serviceable,  differs  widely  from  that  of  those  for  whom 
nux  vomica  is  of  use.  Ignatia  is  not  suitable  for  persons  or  patients  in 
whom  anger,  eagerness,  or  violence  is  predominant,  but  for  those  who 
are  subject  to  rapid  alternations  of  gaiety  and  disposition  to  weep,  or  in 
whom  we  notice  the  other  emotional  states  indicated  at  the  end  of  the 
following  list  of  ignatia  symptoms,  provided  always  that  the  other  cor- 
poreal morbid  symptoms  resemble  those  that  this  drug  can  produce. 

Even  in  a high  potency,  ignatia  is  a main  remedy  in  cases  of  vexa- 
tion in  subjects  who  have  no  tendency  to  break  out  violently  or  to 
revenge  themselves,  but  who  keep  their  annoyance  to  themselves ; in 
whom,  in  a word,  the  remembrance  of  the  vexatious  occurrence  is 
wont  to  dwell  in  the  mind,  and  so  also  especially  in  morbid  states  which 
are  produced  by  occurrences  that  cause  grief.  So  also  attacks  of  even 
chronic  epilepsy,  which  only  occur  after  mortification  or  some  similar 
vexation  (and  not  from  any  other  cause),  may  always  be  prevented  by 
the  timely  administration  of  ignatia.  Epileptic  attacks  that  come  on  in 
young  persons  after  some  great  fright,  before  they  become  very  nume- 
rous, may  also  be  cured  by  a few  doses  of  ignatia.  But  it  is  very 
improbable  that  chronic  epileptic  fits  of  other  kinds  can  be  cured,  or 
have  ever  been  cured,  by  this  medicine.  At  all  events,  the  cases 
recorded  in  medical  writings  as  having  been  cured  by  ignatia  are  not  to 
be  relied  on,  for  other  powerful  drugs  were  almost  always  administered  at 
the  same  time  or  as  intermediate  remedies,  or  there  is  no  evidence  that 
the  cure  was  permanent. 

When  a person  has,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  in  consequence  of 
some  external  disturbing  circumstance,  been  seized  with  epilepsy 
which  assumes  a serious  character  by  its  duration  or  rapid  recur- 
rence, a single  small  dose  of  ignatia-tincture  may  be  relied  upon  for 
relief  and  generally  for  permanent  cure  (as  I have  seen).  But  it  is 
otherwise  with  chronic  epilepsies.  In  these  cases  it  cannot  be  of  per- 
manent benefit  for  the  same  reason  that  it  is  of  no  use  in  other  chronic 
diseases.  For  its  peculiar  opposite  primary  actions  (alternating  actions) 
follow  one  another  in  this  opposite  way  when  it  is  given  in  diseases,  so 
that,  if  the  first  dose  has  removed  the  morbid  state,  a second  must  not 
be  given  soon  afterwards,  for  this  would  cause  a recurrence  of  the 
morbid  state,  because  its  opposite  alternating  action  comes  into  play, 
which  produces  the  injurious  effects  of  the  secondary  action  of  a pallia- 
tive.* Hence  it  is  proved  that  it  is  only  applicable  and  curative  in 
sudden  attacks  and  in  acute  diseases. 

* Thus,  also,  as  above  stated,  a second  dose  of  ignatia-tincture  only  acts  curatively 
(in  opposition)  in  those  cases  in  which  a first  dose  of  the  same  remedy,  though  homoeo- 


676 


IGNATIA. 


It  is  best  to  administer  the  (small)  dose  in  the  morning , if  there  is  no 
occasion  for  hurry.  When  given  shortly  before  bed-time  it  causes  too 
much  restlessness  at  night.  For  all  therapeutic  purposes  the  adminis- 
tration of  one  small  globule  moistened  by  the  thirtieth  attenuation  is 
sufficient,  and  still  better,  the  olfaction  of  a globule  the  size  of  a 
mustard  seed  imbibed  with  the  same  potency,  repeated  once  or  twice 
daily. 

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Gross  and  Fr.  Hahnemann.  The 
symptoms  referred  to  Hartlaub  and  Trinks  are  those  of  Jorg’s  proving,  which 
Hahnemann  took  from  their  Arzneimittellehre . 

The  old-school  authorities  whence  symptoms  were  obtained  are  : 

Bergius,  Mat.  Med. 

Camelli,  Philos.  Transact .,  vol.  xxi,  No.  250. 

Durius,  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  Ann.  9,  10,  Obs.  126. 

Grimm,  J.  C.,  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  Obs.  72. 

Valentinus,  Hist.  Simpl.  reform. 

In  the  Frag,  de  Viribus  Ignatia  has  176  symptoms,  in  the  1st  edit,  of  the  ‘R.  A. 
M.  L.’  624,  in  the  2nd  edit.  674,  and  in  this  3rd  edit.  794.] 


IGNATIA. 


Heat  in  the  head. 

Feeling  of  hollowness  and  emptiness  in  the  head. 

Weak,  fallacious  memory  (before  the  8th  and  10th  h.). 

Thinking  and  speaking  are  difficult  for  him,  towards  evening. 
[Hb.  7}.1] 

5.  He  is  unable  to  concentrate  the  thoughts  for  an  instant.  [Hb. 

Ts.] 

Vertigo.  [Bergius,2  Mat.  Med.,  p.  150.] 

Slight  vertigo  which  changed  into  aching  pain  in  the  right  half  of 
the  occiput  (all  the  1st  d.).  [Hb.  7T] 

Vertigo  with  some  stitches  in  the  head.  \Hb . Ts.] 

A kind  of  vertigo  : feeling  of  swaying  hither  and  thither. 

10.  Vertigo:  he  staggered  when  walking  and  could  only  with 

difficulty  keep  himself  upright.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Dazedness  of  the  head,  in  the  morning  after  rising  (2nd  d.). 
[Hb.  Ts.] 

Dulness  and  confusion  of  the  head.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Intoxication*  (aft.  1 h.).  [J.  C.  Grimm,  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  Cent, 
x,  Obs.  72.] 

pathically  selected  (for  some  unknown  reason)  only  acted  on  the  disease  with  its 
palliative  alternating  symptoms,  whereby  it  must  have  caused  an  aggravation  in  the 
secondary  action. 

* From  a drachm.3 


1 Proving  of  the  drug  by  Jorg  and  twelve  associates,  taking  from  10  to  200  drops 
of  the  tincture,  and  from  1 to  4 grains  of  the  powdered  bean. 

2 General  account  of  the  drug.  All  his  symptoms,  save  431,  are  evidently  taken 
r om  Camelli. 

3 Taken  by  a man.  The  symptoms  appeared  in  an  hour. 


IGNATIA.  677 

A strange  feeling  in  the  head,  a kind  of  intoxication,  as  from 
brandy,  with  burning  in  the  eyes  (immediately).  [Fr.  H—n.] 

15.  Head  is  heavy  (aft.  4,  6 h.). 

He  hangs  the  head  forwards.* 

He  lays  the  head  forwards  on  the  table. 

He  feels  as  if  the  head  were  too  full  of  blood  ; and  the  interior 
of  the  nose  is  very  sensitive  to  the  air,  as  if  epistaxis  were  coming 
on. 

Heaviness  of  the  head  as  if  it  were  too  full  of  blood  (as  after 
stooping  too  low),  with  tearing  pain  in  the  occiput,  which  is  alle- 
viated by  lying  on  the  back,f  is  aggravated  by  sitting  up,  but  is  most 
relieved  by  stooping  the  head  low  when  sitting. 

20.  Headache,  which  is  increased  by  stooping  forwards 

(aft.  1 h.). 

Headache  coming  on  immediately  after  stooping  low,  which  soon 
goes  off  on  raising  it  up  again  (aft.  18  h.). 

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  on  awaking  and  opening  the  eyes,  severe 
headache,  which  goes  off  on  rising  (aft.  40  h.). 

Confusion  of  the  head  with  pains  in  its  right  side,  especially  in 
the  occiput,  rendering  thinking  and  speaking  difficult.  [ Hb . 7}.] 
Confusion  of  the  head,  which  changed  into  aching  pain  in  the 
vertex  ; this  afterwards  extended  to  the  forehead  and  down  to  the 
left  eye.  [Hb.  Ts .] 

25.  Heaviness  and  confusion  of  the  head.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Confusion  of  the  head  like  intoxication,  lasting  all  day,  and  fre- 
quently passing  into  actual  aching  pains  in  the  forehead  and  especially 
the  right  half  thereof,  rendering  thinking  very  difficult.  [Hb.  Ts.] 
Confusion  of  the  head,  in  the  morning  on  awaking,  changing 
into  actual  aching  headache,  that  fixed  itself  particularly  in  the 
forehead,  and  affected. the  eyes  so  much,  that  the  movement  of  the 
eyelids  and  eyeballs  caused  pain  in  them  (3rd  d.),  aggravated  by  going 
upstairs  and  every  other  bodily  movement.  [Hb.  Ts. J 

Pain  in  the  frontal  region,  that  extended  sometimes  into  the 
right,  sometimes  into  the  left  eyeball,  and  was  aggravated  by  bodily 
movement.  [Hb.  7>.] 

Pain  in  the  occiput  on  the  side  above  the  mastoid  process,  which 
sometimes  was  communicated  to  the  auditory  organs,  and  then 
seemed  to  blunt  the  sense  of  hearing.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

30.  Dull  headache,  which  was  chiefly  confined  to  the  right  half  of 
the  forehead  and  thence  extended  at  the  same  time  to  the  right 
eye,  rendering  this  organ  very  sensitive  to  the  light.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Sensation  in  the  head,  as  if  suddenly  attacked  by  coryza ; a dull 
aching  in  the  sinciput  extended  markedly  down  into  the  nasal 
cavity,  and  produced  there  for  ten  minutes  the  feeling  that  a violent 
coryza  usually  causes  there  ; this  aching  went  after  ten  minutes 
into  other  parts  of  the  head  and  went  on  changing  about  in  this  way, 
came  again  and  disappeared.  [Hb.  T!y.] 

* 16,  17,  19,  47,  contrasted  with  20,  21,  22,  are  alternating  actions  of  the  primary- 
sort,  both  of  almost  equal  importance, 
f See  note  to  599. 


6;8 


IGNAT1A. 


Slight  aching  pains  in  the  frontal  region,  aggravated  by  the  light 
of  the  sun.  [Hb.  Ts.~\ 

Violent  aching  pains  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  frontal  region, 
and  round  about  the  orbits,  becoming  always  more  violent  and 
lasting  till  the  evening.  [ Hb . 7>.] 

Aching  pain  behind  and  above  the  upper  eyelids  of  both  eyes,  for 
two  hours.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

35.  Aching  pain  in  the  right  half  of  the  forehead,  going  thence  into 
the  left  side,  latterly  involving  the  whole  head.  [Hb.  7V] 

Aching  in  the  frontal  region,  that  extended  at  one  time  to  this, 
at  another  to  that  part  of  the  head,  but  was  nowhere  persistent ; this 
pain  extended  even  to  beneath  the  orbits  and  into  the  cheeks. 
[Hb.  Ts.] 

Aching  pain,  especially  in  the  right  half  of  the  forehead,  which 
extended  down  to  the  right  eye,  and  there  particularly  assumed  such 
a character,  that  it  seemed  as  if  it  would  press  out  the  right  eyeball, 
in  the  afternoon.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Aching  contractive  pain  in  the  vertex  spreading  to  the  fore- 
head. [Hb.  Ts.] 

Violent  pain  of  an  aching  character  in  the  temples.  [Hb. 
Ts. 


40.  Aching  pains  in  the  right  side  of  the  head  and  in  the  occiput. 
[Hb.  Ts.] 

Aching  pain  that  extended  from  the  forehead  to  one  side,  either 
the  right  or  the  left.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Aching  and  pressing  pain  in  the  right  half  of  the  occiput,  until  he 
went  to  sleep.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Aching  pains  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Dull  aching  pain  that  spread  all  over  the  head.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

45.  Aching  pain  in  the  head  increased  by  taking  food.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Immediately  after  the  midday  sleep  headache  : a general  pressure 
through  the  whole  brain,  as  if  there  were  too  much  brain  or  blood  in 
the  head,  gradually  increased  by  reading  and  writing  (aft.  20  h.). 

Tearing  headache  in  the  forehead  and  behind  the  left  ear,  which 
is  tolerable  when  lying  on  the  back,  increased  by  raising  up  the  head, 
with  heat  and  redness  of  the  cheeks  and  hot  hands  (aft.  5 h.). 

Lacerating  headache  after  midnight  when  lying  on  the  side, 
which  goes  off  by  lying  on  the  back.* 

Twitching  pain  in  the  head  on  ascending. 

50.  Twitching  headache,  which  is  increased  on  opening  the  eyes 
(aft.  1 h.). 

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead  above  the  root  of  the 
nose  which  compels  him  to  bend  forward  the  head,t 
followed  by  inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  5 h.). 

Extreme  aching  in  both  temples  especially  the  right  one.  [Gjj.] 


* See  note  to  599. 

f The  relief  caused  here  and  in  19  by  stooping  forwards  stands  with  the  other 
symptoms,  20,  21,  58,  where  stooping  forward  aggravates,  in  the  position  of  alternating 
action  5 but  the  latter  seems  to  be  the  best  adapted  for  homoeopathic  curative  pur- 
poses, and  is  more  frequent  and  more  strongly  marked. 


IGNATIA.  679 

An  aching  pain  deep  under  the  right  side  of  the  frontal  bone. 

[<?».] 

Under  the  left  frontal  protuberance  a stupefying  intermitting 
aching.  [Gw.] 

55.  Under  the  left  palpebral  arch  a violent  aching.  [Gw.] 

Pain  as  if  the  occipital  bone  were  pressed  in.  [Gw.] 

Cramp-like  headache  above  the  root  of  the  nose  in  the  region 
of  the  inner  canthus  (aft.  3 h.) . 

Above  the  right  orbit,  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  aching  and  some- 
what drawing  pain  in  the  head,  renewed  by  stooping  low  (aft.  10  h.). 

Headache,* * * §  like  a pressure  with  something  hard  on 
the  surface  of  the  brain,  recurring  in  fits  (aft.  6 h.). 

60.  An  aching  in  the  temples,  sometimes  accompanied  by  profound 
sleep. 

Headache  as  if  the  temples  were  pressed  outwards. f 
In  the  morning  (in  bed),  when  lying  on  one  side  or  the  other,  a 
furious  headache  as  if  it  would  force  out  at  the  temples,  relieved  by 
lying  on  the  backj  (aft.  48  h.). 

Furious  headache  ; a constant  digging  under  the  right  frontal 
protuberance  and  on  the  right  side  of  the  frontal  bone.  [Gw.] 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  aching  pain  in  one  half  of  the 
brain,  increased  by  talking  and  reflection  (aft.  2 h.). 

65.  When  talking  and  speaking  much  there  comes  on  a headache,  as 
if  the  head  would  burst,  which  goes  off  entirely  when  reading  and 
writing  quietly  (aft.  48  h.). 

Headache  increased  by  talking. 

When  reading  and  listening  very  attentively  to  a speech  the 
headache  is  aggravated,  but  not  by  mere  spontaneous  reflection  (aft. 
6 h.). 

Deep  stitches  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  £ h.).  [Gw.] 

Throbbing  headache. § 

70.  Throbbing  in  the  head,  above  the  right  supraorbital  arch. 

Headache  at  every  beat  of  the  arteries. 

Shooting  pains  in  the  forehead  and  above  the  eyebrows.  [ Hb . Ts.] 
Shooting  pains  in  the  whole  forehead  and  right  side  of  the 
occiput.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Single  stitches  dart  through  his  head.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

75.  External  headache;  the  head  is  painful  when  touched. 

External  headache  : drawing  from  the  temples  above  the  orbits  ; 
when  touched  there  is  pain  as  if  bruised. 

* Comp,  note  to  297.  This  and  almost  all  the  other  kinds  of  headache  from 
ignatia  are  soon  removed  by  coffee. 

f 61,  62,  65.  The  out-forcing  and  out-pressing  headache  in  the  temples,  as  also 
the  pain  as  if  the  head  would  burst,  is  related  to  the  bursting  feeling  in  the  bowels 
283,  and  even  to  the  sore  throat  164,  and  also  to  172  and  297;  for  the  internal 
feeling  of  compression  and  constriction  and  the  pressing  asunder  easily  become 
alternating  sensations.  At  all  events  the  pressing  asunder  is  opposed  to  the  marked 
constriction  in  hollow  organs  3 66,  368,  431,  465,  468,  472,  as  alternating  action. 

J See  note  to  599. 

§ This  kind  of  headache  is  not  unfrequently  felt  on  the  side  of  the  occiput  a few 
hours  after  taking  the  drug. 


68o 


IGNATIA. 


Pain  in  the  head  as  if  bruised  (aft.  8 h.). 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  headache  as  if  the  brain  were 
smashed  and  crushed  ; on  getting  up  it  goes  off  and  there  comes  on 
instead  a toothache  as  if  the  dental  nerve  were  smashed  and  crushed ; 
a similar  pain  then  goes  into  the  sacrum  ; this  headache  is  renewed 
on  thinking. 

(The  hair  of  the  head  falls  out)  (aft.  36  h.). 

80.  In  the  evening  the  inner  surface  of  the  upper  eyelid  is  painful,  as 
if  it  were  too  dry. 

In  the  evening  when  reading  dimness  before  one  eye,  as  if  a 
tear  were  in  it,  which  he  should  wipe  away,  and  yet  there  is  no 
moisture  in  it. 

On  closing  the  eyelids  pain  like  excoriation  in  the  outer 
canthus. 

In  the  morning  the  eyelids  are  closed  by  purulent  mucus,  and 
when  he  opens  them,  the  light  dazzles. 

In  the  outer  canthus  of  the  left  eye,  sensation  as  if  some  dust 
had  got  into  it,  which  pressed  on  the  membranes  at  intervals.* 

[<?«•] 

85.  In  the  outer  canthus  shooting  tearing;  the  eyes  are  sealed  up  in 
the  morning  and  water  in  the  forenoon. 

In  the  morning  the  eyelids  are  sealed  up  ; there  is  aching  in  the 
inside  of  the  eye,  as  if  a grain  of  sand  were  in  it ; on  opening  the 
eyelids  there  is  shooting  in  it  (aft.  36  h.). 

Gnawing  smarting  on  the  edges  of  the  eyelids  (when  reading  in 
the  morning)  (aft.  18  h.). 

Smarting  in  the  outer  canthi  (aft.  24  h.). 

Pimples  round  the  inflamed  eye  (aft.  2 h.). 

90.  Itching  in  the  interior  of  the  eye  (aft.  2 h.). 

Itching  of  the  eyeball  in  the  inner  canthus  (aft.  4 h.). 

(Stitches  in  the  right  eye.) 

Pressure  outwards  in  the  right  eye,  as  if  the  eyeball  would  come 
out  of  the  orbit.  [Hb.  7>.] 

Painful  aching  over  the  eyes  and  in  the  eyeballs  themselves, 
especially  when  looking  into  the  light.  [Hb.  Ts .] 

95.  Burning  and  weeping  of  the  eyes,  especially  the  left.  [Hb.  Ts. ] 

Inflammation  of  the  left  eye  (the  2nd  d.).  [Hb.  Ts.'] 

Swelling  of  the  eyelids  ; the  Meibomian  glands  excrete  much 
mucus.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  both  eyes  (the  2nd  d.).  [Hb. 
Ts.] 

Increased  secretion  of  tears.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

The  objects  apparently  moved  before  the  eyes.  [Hb.  TV.] 

Cannot  bear  the  light  of  the  candlef  (aft.  8 h.). 

The  light  of  the  candle  is  intolerable  to  him  (aft.  10  h.). 

After  the  midday  sleep  dimness  of  vision  of  the  right  eye,  as  if  a 
veil  were  drawn  over  it  (aft.  6 h.).  . 

A circle  of  brilliant  white,  glittering  zig-zags  beyond  the  visual 
point  when  looking  at  anything,  whereby  the  letters  on  which  the 
* Comp,  86,  4 Comp.  83. 


IOO. 


IGNATIA. 


681 

sight  is  directed  become  invisible,  but  those  at  the  side  are  more 
distinct* * * §  (aft.  16  h.). 

105.  A zig-zag-like  and  serpentine  white  glittering  at  the  side  of  the 
visual  point,  soon  after  dinner  (aft.  30  h.). 

At  first  contracts  the  pupils.f 

The  pupils  are  more  capable  of  dilatation  than  of  contraction 
(later). 

Pupils  more  easily  dilatable  and  dilated  (aft.  4 h.). 

The  pupils  are  easily  dilated  and  equally  easily  contracted. 

110.  Fine  stitches  in  the  cheeks. 

Before  going  to  sleep  pressure  in  both  zygomatic  processes. 

LGss-] 

Shooting  pressure  on  the  zygomatic  process,  in  front  of  the  left 
ear.  [Gss.~\ 

In  the  zygomatic  process  of  the  left  upper  maxilla  an  inter- 
mittent, paralytic  pressure.  [(?**.] 

(Feels  a throbbing  in  the  interior  of  the  ear.) 

1 15.  Ringing  in  the  ears. 

Roaring  in  the  ears.  \_Hb.  Ts.] 

Pain  in  the  inner  ear. 

Stitches  in  the  interior  of  the  ear  (aft.  3 h.). 

Itching  in  the  meatus  auditorius  (aft.  3 h.). 

120.  Music  causes  an  uncommon  and  agreeable  sensation J (aft. 

2 h.). 

Insensibility  to  music  (aft.  30  h.). 

Shooting  in  the  lips,  especially  when  they  are  moved  (aft. 

ih.). 

Shooting  in  the  lower  lip,  also  when  it  is  not  moved  (aft. 
8 h.). 

A very  penetrating  fine  shooting  on  the  lower  lip  on  touching  a 
hair  of  the  beard  there,  as  if  a splinter  had  stuck  in  there§  (aft. 

3 M- 

125.  The  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lip  is  painful,  as  if  it 
were  raw  and  excoriated  (aft.  8,  ioh.), 

The  internal  surface  of  the  lower  lip  is  ulcerated  (without  pain). 
On  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lip  an  elevated  cutaneous 
gland  becomes  ulcerated,  with  sore  pain  (aft.  4 h.). 

On  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lip  an  elevated  little  gland, 
which  pains  as  if  excoriated. 

The  lips  are  cracked  and  bleed. 

130.  One  of  the  commissures  of  the  lips  becomes  ulcerated  (aft.  2 h.). 
Pimple-like  lumps,  only  painful  when  touched,  just  under  the 
lower  lip  (aft.  36  h.). 

Pressure  under  both  rami  of  the  lower  jaw  as  if  the  flesh  under 

* 104,  105,  two  alternating  actions,  very  much  resembling  Herz’s  so-called  false 
vertigo. 

f 106 — 109,  alternating  actions  ; the  contraction  seems  to  he  first  in  point  of  time, 
and  thus  has  the  chief  rank. 

J 120  and  1 21,  alternating  actions. 

§ Comp.  533. 


682 


IGNATIA. 


the  lower  jaw  were  pressed  down,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving. 
[Css.]. 

The  lower  jaw  is  involuntarily  drawn  up  and  the  jaws  closed, 
which  impedes  him  in  speaking,  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  h.).  [Fr. 
H — n.] 

The  inner  side  of  the  gums  is  painful  as  if  numb,  as  though  it 
was  burnt.* 

135.  (In  the  morning)  pain  of  the  teeth,  as  from  looseness. 

One  front  tooth  is  painful  as  if  numb  and  loose,  more  painful 
whenever  it  is  touched  by  the  tongue. 

The  teeth  are  loose  and  painful. 

Immovable  sore  pain  in  the  foremost  molars,  especially  when 
reading  (aft.  3 h.). 

Toothache  in  the  molars  as  if  they  and  their  nerves  were 
smashed  and  crushed. 

140.  The  toothache  commences  towards  the  end  of  a meal  and  grows 
worse  after  the  meal. 

Routing,  digging  pains  in  the  incisors,  in  the  evening  (aft.  | h.). 
Pain  in  the  maxillary  joint,  in  the  morning  when  lying. 

The  anterior  half  of  the  tongue  when  talking,  as  if  numb — 
when  eating  as  if  burnt  or  sore. 

(In  the  morning  in  bed  after  awaking)  the  tip  of  the  tongue  is 
extremely  painful  (sore,  tearing)  as  if  it  were  burnt  or  wounded. 

145.  An  acrid  feeling  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  as  if  it  were  excori- 
ated. 

Fine  shooting  on  the  extreme  tip  of  the  tongue  (aft.  2 h.). 
Needle-pricks  at  the  frenum  of  the  tongue.  \_Fr.  H — n.] 

He  is  apt  to  bite  on  one  side  of  the  tongue  posteriorly 
when  speaking  or  chewing  (aft.  5,  8,  30  h.). 

Painful  swelling  of  the  orifice  of  the  salivary  duct. 

150.  When  chewing  he  is  apt  to  bite  on  the  inside  of  the  cheek  near 
the  orifice  of  the  salivary  duct. 

Sensation  in  the  palate  as  if  it  were  excoriated  (as  from  frequent 
swallowing  of  the  saliva). f 

Sensation  as  if  the  palate  were  swollen  or  covered  with  viscid 
mucus  (aft.  4 h.) . 

Stitches  in  the  palate  extending  into  the  internal 
ear  (aft.  h.). 

Sensation  as  if  the  whole  surface  of  the  inside  of  the  mouth  were 
about  to  become  excoriated.  [Hb.  Ts. ] 

135.  Aching  and  drawing  in  the  sublingual  glands.  [ Hb . Ts.] 
Difficulty  of  swallowing  food  and  drink.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Stitches  in  the  throat,  when  not  swallowing  ; when  swallowing 
feeling  as  if  swallowing  over  a bone,  during  which  it  jerksf  (aft. 

3 h0- 

# i34>  13 5>  136,  137  seem  to  be  secondary  action, 
f Comp.  164,  1 66,  167. 

+ If  there  is  an  alternating  action  of  ignatia,  where  it  produces  a sore  throat  with 
shooting  when  swallowing  (though  I have  never  observed  such  a symptom),  it  must 
be  of  very  rare  occurrence,  and  hence  of  very  little  use  from  a curative  point  of  view. 


IGNATIA.  683 

Needle-pricks  in  quick  succession,  deep  down  in  the  throat, 
when  not  swallowing. 

Shooting  when  swallowing  deep  down  in  the  oesophagus,  which 
goes  off  on  continuing  to  swallow  and  returns  when  not  swallowing. 
160.  Sore  throat : stitches  in  the  throat  when  not  swallowing,  and 
to  a certain  degree  when  swallowing  ; the  more  he  swallows,  the 
more  it  goes  off ; when  he  has  swallowed  something  solid,  such  as 
bread,  it  seemed  as  if  the  shooting  went  off  entirely. 

Sore  throat : stitches  that  are  not  present  whilst  swallowing. 

Sensation  as  if  a plug  were  sticking  in  the  oesophagus,  observed 
when  not  swallowing. 

(In  the  evening)  choking  (contractive)  sensation  in  the  middle  of 
the  oesophagus,  as  if  a large  morsel  or  a plug*  were  sticking  there, 
felt  more  when  not  swallowing  than  when  doing  so  (aft.  4 h.). 

Sore  throat,  like  a lump  or  knob  in  the  throat,  which  pains  as  if 
excoriated  when  swallowingf  (aft.  16  h.). 

165.  Aching  in  the  throat. 

Sore  throat : the  throat  is  painful  as  if  it  were  raw  and  excori- 
ated (aft.  1 1 h.). 

Pain  in  the  throat,  as  from  excoriation,  only  observed  when 
swallowing. 

Sore  throat  : tearing  pain  at  the  larynx,  which  is  increased  by 
swallowing,  breathing,  and  coughing  (aft.  h.). 

Formication  in  the  oesophagus  (aft.  1,  2 h.). 

170.  Shooting  in  the  throat  on  one  side,  in  the  parotid  gland,  when 
not  swallowing  (aft.  20  h.). 

Pain  in  the  neck  when  touched,  as  if  glands  were  swollen  there. 
Aching  pain  in  the  cervical  glands  (submaxillary  glands). 

In  the  anterior  submaxillary  gland  pain  as  if  it  were  compressed 
from  without,  t 

Painful  submaxillary  gland,  after  walking  in  the  open  air. 

175.  Pain  in  the  gland  beneath  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw  on  moving 
the  neck  (aft.  18  h.). 

First  aching,  then  drawing  pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands  (aft. 

4 h.). 

Drawing  pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands,  which  extends  into 
the  jaws,  whereupon  these  glands  swell  (aft  5 h.). 

Taste  in  the  mouth  as  if  the  stomach  were  deranged. 

Symptoms  of  impeded  or  weak  digestion. 

Consequently  I have  never  been  able  to  cure  a sore  throat  with  ignatia,  even  when  the 
other  symptoms  resembled  those  of  this  drug,  in  which  there  was  shooting  only  when 
swallowing j but,  on  the  other  hand,  when  stitches  in  the  throat  were  only  felt  when 
not  swallowing,  ignatia  cured,  and  that  the  more  certainly,  more  quickly  and  more 
permanently  when  the  other  morbid  symptoms  could  be  covered  by  similar  ignatia 
symptoms. 

* See  note  to  61. 

f Comp.  166.  The  ignatia  sore  throat,  in  which  there  is  felt,  when  not  swallow- 
ing, internal  swelling  of  the  throat,  like  a lump,  is  generally'attended  by  only  sore  pain 
in  this  lump  when  swallowing ; and  the  sore  throat  must  be  of  this  description  which 
ignatia  (when  the  other^symptoms  correspond)  will  remove,  and  under  such  circum- 
stances it  will  be  rapidly  and  certainly  cured  by  ignatia. 

J On  moving  the  neck  and  at  other  times.  See  also  note  to  61. 


684  IGNATIA. 

180.  The  mouth  is  always  full  of  mucus. 

The  inside  of  the  mouth  is  covered  with  ill-smelling  mucus  in 
the  morning  on  awaking. 

The  salivary  glands  excreted  a perfectly  white  frothy  saliva  in 
great  quantity.  [Hb.  Ts .] 

Increased  secretion  of  saliva.  [Hb.  Ts.'] 

Chalky  taste.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

185.  Flat,  insipid  taste,  as  if  chalk  had  been  eaten  (aft.  J h.).  [Hb.  Ts.] 

After  eating  (morning  and  noon)  watery,  flat  taste  in  the  mouth 
as  from  deranged  or  overloaded  stomach  (aft.  16  h.). 

The  taste  of  what  has  been  taken,  especially  of  beer,  is  bitter 
and  putrid. 

Beer  tastes  bitter  (aft.  8 h.). 

Beer  tastes  flat,  stale  and  flavourless  (aft.  2,  5 h.). 

190.  Beer  easily  goes  into  the  head  and  causes  intoxication  (aft.  3 h.). 

At  first  the  taste  is  bitter,  afterwards  (aft.  10  h.)  sour,  with 
sour  eructation. 

Sour  taste  of  the  saliva  (a  sour  taste  in  the  mouth) 

(aft.  1,  6 h.). 

Dislike  to  acids  (aft.  1st  h.). 

Appetite  for  sour  things*  (aft.  10  h.). 

195.  Dislike  to  wine. 

Dislike  to  fruit,  and  it  does  not  agree  (aft.  3 h.). 

Appetite  for  fruit,  and  it  agrees  very  well  (aft.  3,  10,  20  h.). 

Extreme  dislike  to  tobacco-smoking  (aft.  6 h.). 

Tobacco-smoke  tastes  bitter  to  him  (aft.  5 h.). 

200.  Tobacco-smoke  causes  smarting  on  the  fore  part  of  the  tongue 
and  produces  (obtuse  ?)  pain  in  the  incisors. 

Dislike  to  tobacco-smoking,  though  it  does  not  taste  disagree- 
ably to  him  (aft.  2,  5 h.). 

Repugnance  to  tobacco-smoking,  just  as  if  he  were  satiated  with 
it  and  had  smoked  enough. 

Hiccup  from  tobacco-smoking  in  one  accustomed  to 
smoke  tobacco. 

Nausea  from  tobacco-smoking,  in  an  accustomed  tobacco  smoker. 

205.  Complete  want  of  relish  for  tobacco,  food  and  drink,  with 
copious  flow  of  saliva  into  the  mouth,  but  without  disgust  at  these 
things  or  feeling  that  they  taste  badly  (aft.  8 h.). 

When  he  smokes  tobacco  in  the  afternoon,  he  feels  so  com- 
pletely satiated  that  he  can  eat  nothing  in  the  evening. 

Want  of  appetite  for  food,  drink,  and  tobacco-smoking  (imme- 
diately). 

Dislike  to  milk  (formerly  his  favourite  drink)  3 it  is  repugnant 
to  him  when  drinking,  although  it  tastes  quite  naturally,  and  not  at 
all  disgusting. 

When  he  has  drunk  some  boiled  milk  (his  favourite  drink)  with 
relish,  and  his  extreme  necessity  is  assuaged,  the  remainder  is  suddenly 
repulsive  to  him,  although  it  did  not  taste  disgustingly  and  he  felt  no 
actual  nausea. 

* 194,  197  are  alternating  actions  with  193,  196,  328. 


IGNATIA. 


685 


210.  He  could  not  swallow  bread,  as  though  it  were  too  dry  for  him. 

He  loathes  warm  food  and  meat ; will  only  take  butter,  cheese 
and  bread  (aft.  96  h.). 

Dislike  to  meat  and  longing* * * §  for  sour  fruit  (cranberries)  (aft. 
24  h.). 

Want  of  appetite  (from  1 to  7 h.). 

Before  taking  the  medicine  considerable  hunger,  a short  time 
after  taking  it  he  felt  quite  satiated,  without  having  eaten  anything. 
[Hb.  Ts.] 

215.  Good  appetite  ; but  on  attempting  to  eat,  he  felt  already  satiated. 
[Hb.  Ts.] 

Want  of  inclination  to  eat.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Increased  appetite.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Gnawing  ravenous  hunger,  whereby  he  often  became  qualmish 
and  sick  3 he  lay  down  after  the  lapse  of  half  an  hour,  without  having 
taken  anything  to  satisfy  himself.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Good  appetite  ; food  and  drink  are  relished. f 
220.  Great  appetite. J 

When  eating,  drinking  and  smoking,  as  soon  as  his  needs  are 
satisfied,  the  good  taste  of  all  these  things  goes  off*  suddenly,  or 
changes  into  a disagreeable  taste,  and  he  is  no  longer  capable  of 
tasting  the  smallest  quantity  of  them,  although  there  still  remains 
a sort  of  hunger  and  thirst. 

He  belches  up  a bitter  fluid  § (there  is  eructation,  and  a 
bitter  fluid  comes  up  into  the  mouth). 


What  he  has  ingested  is  belched  up  again  into  the 

mouth,  ||  comes  up  into  the  mouth  by  a kind  of  eructation  (rumi- 
natio). 

When  she  has  eaten  something  (at  noon)  she  feels  as  if  the  food 
stuck  above  the  upper  orifice  of  the  stomach  and  could  not  get  down 
into  the  stomach. 

225.  In  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  and  in  the  morning,  the 
food  seems  to  be  sticking  up  high  (aft.  2,  15  h.). 

He  wakes  up  at  night  about  3 a.m. ; he  is  hot  all  over,  and  he 
vomits  the  food  he  had  taken  for  supper. 

Unusual  and  violent  thirst,  even  in  the  night.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Loathing.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Nausea  ; the  saliva  collected  in  his  mouth.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

230.  Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Empty  ineffectual  attempts  to  vomit. 

The  inclination  to  vomit  goes  off*  after  a meal  (aft.  2 h.). 

After  breakfast  a kind  of  anxiety  rises  up  from  the  abdomen 
(aft.  20  h.). 


* Comp.  194,  197. 

f Secondary  or  curative  action  after  previous  opposite  state  (anorexia). 

J This  kind  of  bulimia  seems  to  stand  in  the  relation  of  alternating  action  with 
205,  207,  208,  209,  210,  213,  but  to  be  of  rarer  occurrence. 

§ 222,  223,  alternating  action  with  225. 

[|  Allied  to  this  is  a symptom  not  inserted  in  the  text:  “ The  taste  of  the  milk 
taken  in  the  morning  can  not  be  got  out  of  the  mouth  for  a long  time  ” (aft.  21  h.). 


686 


IGNATIA. 


During  supper  his  feet  grew  cold,  his  abdomen  distended  (and  he 
became  perfectly  hoarse). 

235.  After  a meal  the  abdomen  is  as  if  distended. 

After  a meal  the  abdomen  becomes  tense,  the  mouth  dry  and 
bitter,  without  thirst ; one  cheek  is  red  (in  the  evening). 

Anxious  painful  fulness  in  the  abdomen  after  supper  (aft.  36  h.). 

A scraping  at  the  top  of  the  larynx,  as  from  heartburn  (in  the 
evening)  (aft.  8 h.). 

Empty  eructation,  only  of  wind  (aft.  2 h.). 

240.  Repeated  eructation  (soon  after  taking  the  drug).  [Hb.  Ts.~\ 

Bitter  eructation  (the  2nd  d.).  \_Hb.  Ts.~\ 

Eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  ingesta  (immediately). 

Sour  eructation. 

Musty,  mouldy  eructation  (in  the  evening). 

245.  (Suppressed,  ineffectual  eructation  (in  the  morning  in  bed), 
which  causes  aching  pain  at  the  mouth  of  the  stomach,  in  the 
oesophagus  up  into  the  fauces)  (aft.  48  h.). 

Frequent  ejection  of  saliva.* 

Flow  of  saliva  out  of  the  mouth  during  sleep  (aft.  1 h.). 

Spitting  of  frothy  saliva  all  day. 

After  eating  and  drinking,  hiccupt  (aft.  3 and  8 h.). 

250.  In  the  evening,  after  drinking,  hiccup  (aft.  6 h.). 

Burning  on  the  tongue  (immediately). 

Coldness  in  the  stomach. 

Burning  in  the  stomach  (aft.  1 h.). 

Painful  sensations  arising  in  the  stomach  and  spreading  to  the 
spleen  and  spinal  column.  [Hb.  Ts.~\ 

255.  Aching  in  the  region  of  the  floor  of  the  stomach,  sometimes 
intermitting.  [Hb.  Ts.'] 

Fixed  and  aching  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  for  ten 
minutes.  [Hb.  Ts .] 

Aching  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  region  of  the  solar  plexus. 
[Hb.  Ts .] 

The  stomach  seemed  alternately  to  be  sometimes  as  if  over- 
loaded, sometimes  as  if  empty,  with  which  latter  feeling  ravenous 
hunger  was  always  conjoined.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Drawing  as  if  the  walls  of  the  stomach  were  distended,  some- 
times also  aching  in  the  stomach. 

260.  Pains  like  spasm  of  the  stomach. 

Burning,  aching,  and  drawing  pains  in  the  stomach,  in  the 
hepatic  and  splenic  regions.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Increased  warmth  in  the  stomach.  [Hb.  Ts.~\ 

Sensation  in  the  stomach  as  if  he  had  fasted  long,  as  from  empti- 
ness, with  flat  taste  in  the  mouth  and  exhaustion  in  all  the  limbs. % 

With  appetite  and  relish  for  food  and  drink,  qualmish  fasting 
taste  in  the  mouth. 

265.  Sensation  of  fasting  about  the  stomach  and  debility  of  the  body. 

* 246,  247,  248,  comp,  with  283,  368. 

f 249,  250,  comp,  with  203. 

J Alternating  action  with  235,  236,  237. 


IGNATIA.  687 

Flabbiness  in  the  stomach  ; the  stomach  and  bowels  seem  to  him 
to  hang  down  in  a relaxed  state  (aft.  24  h.). 

A peculiar  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  epigastric  region  and 
scrobiculus  cordis*  (aft.  2 h.). 

Aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Violent  shooting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Ghj.] 

270.  Fine  shooting  in  the  stomach. 

Slow  succession  of  shooting  twitching  pain  in  the  epigastric  region 
and  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  \ h.). 

First  strong  then  fine  shooting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft. 

ih.). 

A pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  as  if  it  were  sore  internally,  only 
felt  when  pressing  on  it. 

Painful  aching  in  the  region  of  the  spleen  and  the  floor  of  the 
stomach,  alternately  disappearing  and  recurring.  \_Hb.  7}.] 

275.  Shooting  and  burning  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  recurring 
several  times.  [ Hb . Ts.~\ 

Aching  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Hb.  Ts.~\ 

Painful  sensation  as  if  something  passed  from  the  epigastrium  up 
towards  the  thoracic  cavity.  [Hb.  7>.] 

Stretching  pains  in  the  epigastrium  (aft.  1 h.).  [Hb.  Ts.~\ 

Sensation  as  if  the  abdominal  walls  were  stretched  outwards  and 
the  diaphragm  upwards ; this  pain  was  felt  most  strongly  in  the 
splenic  region  and  posteriorly  towards  the  spinal  column,  alternately 
more  in  one  place  and  then  again  in  another  ; it  also  several  times 
extended  to  the  thoracic  cavity,  changed  there  into  a painful  burning  ; 
but  was  chiefly  and  most  violently  directed  towards  the  spinal 
column  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  solar  plexus ; eructation  of 
wind  diminished  this  pain.  [Hb.  7>.] 

280.  Pain  in  the  epigastrium  as  from  over-lifting. 

An  aching  in  both  sides  of  the  epigastrium  or  the  hypochon- 
dria. 

A sharp  pinching  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  the  right 
sub-costal  region  (aft.  \ h.). 

A colicky  pain  as  if  the  bowels  would  burst  in  the  epigastrium, 
almost  like  a gastralgia,  which  extends  into  the  throat,  in  the 
morning  in  bed,  when  lying  on  the  side  which  goes  off  by  lying 
on  the  backf  (aft.  40  h.). 

General  pressing  in  the  abdomen  towards  the  anus.  [Hb.  7>.] 
285.  Distension  in  the  umbilical  region  and  cutting  there,  for  a quarter 
of  an  hour.  [Hb.  Ts.~] 

Distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Hb.  7}.] 

Drawing  pains  in  the  left  lumbar  region,  lasting  a few  minutes. 
[Hb.  Ts.]  ' 

Cutting  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Hb.  7}.] 

Cutting  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.  [Hb.  7>.] 

290.  Cutting  and  contractive  pains  in  the  hypogastrium.  [Hb.  7>.] 

* Comp.  335  and  630.  This  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus 
cordis  is  a characteristic  symptom  of  ignatia. 

•j*  Comp.  48,  62,  and  note  to  599. 


688 


IGNATIA. 


Considerable  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  urging  him  to  go  to  stool, 
when  soft  fluid  faeces  are  evacuated.  \_Hb.  Ts.] 

Cutting  spreading  all  over  the  abdomen  ending  in  a diarrhoeic 
stool.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Shooting  that  extended  from  the  epigastrium  as  it  were  upwards 
to  the  thoracic  cavity,  but  not  involving  the  abdominal  organs. 
[Hb.  Ts.] 

Rumbling  and  rattling  in  the  abdomen.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

295.  Sensation  in  the  abdomen  as  if  a purgative  had  begun  to  act. 
[Hb.  Ts.] 

A kind  of  bellyache;  a contractive  pain  from  both  sides,  just 
beneath  the  ribs  (aft.  ~ h.). 

Constrictive  sensation  in  the  hypochondria,  as  in  constipation, 
with  a semilateral  headache,  as  from  a nail  pressed  into  the  brain,* 
in  the  morning  (aft.  20  h.). 

Spasmodic  flatulent  colic  in  the  epigastrium  in  the  evening  on 
going  to  sleep  and  in  the  morning  on  awaking  (aft.  8 h.). 

Bellyache  ; continued  bruised  pain  of  the  bowels,  in  the  morning 
in  bed. 

300.  .Sensation  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  as  if  some- 
thing alive  were  in  there  (aft.  8 h.). 

Easy  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  ^ h.).  (The  opposite  is  generally 
secondary  action.) 

Nocturnal  flatulent  colic. 

Flatulent  colic  with  stitches  towards  the  chest. 

In  the  morning  flatulent  bellyache  in  the  hypogastrium,  which 
gives  off  stitches  towards  the  chest  and  towards  the  side.f 
305.  Flatulent  colic  above  the  navel  alternating  with  copious  flow  of 
saliva  J in  the  mouth  (aft.  1 h.). 

Discharge  of  much  flatus  at  night,  even  during  sleep,  and  always 
production  of  more,  so  that  everything  in  the  abdomen  seems  to  turn 
to  flatus. 

Much  troubled  with  flatus,  which  then  presses  on  the  urine  (aft. 
96  h.). 

Unsatisfactory  discharge  of  short  interrupted  flatus  of  foetid 
odour,  passed  not  without  an  effort  of  the  abdominal  muscles  (aft. 

24>  3®  h*)* 

Flatulent  distension  immediately  after  a meal.§ 

310.  Frequent  discharge  of  flatus  immediately  after  a meal  (aft.  26  h.). 

After  a meal  loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen. 

(Rumbling  in  the  abdomen.)  ||  [Valentinus,1///^.  Simpl.  Reform , 
p.  198.] 


* The  ancients  called  this  kind  of  headache  cla<vus.  This  kind  of  pain  is 
characteristic  of  ignatia : a pressure  as  from  a sharp-pointed  body,  as  shown  in  other 
symptoms  also,  as  365,462,485,  to  which  also  “pressure  as  with  a hard  body” 
seems  to  belong,  as  59,  599. 

f Comp.  332. 

J Comp.  246,  247,  248,  368. 

§ Alternating  action  with  310. 

||  Comp.  311,  314,  315. 


1 Not  accessible. 


IGNATIA. 


689 


Grumbling  in  the  abdomen  as  in  a hungry  person  (aft.  1 h.). 

Rumbling  and  rattling  in  the  bowels. 

315-  Throbbing  in  the  abdomen. 

Itching  exactly  in  the  navel  (aft.  2j  h.). 

On  the  left  near  the  navel  a painful  pressure.  [Gw.] 

On  the  left  above  the  navel  a sharp  shooting.  [Gss.] 

Oppression  in  the  abdomen  and  cutting. 

320.  Cutting  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  2 h.). 

Immediately  after  a meal,  cutting  shooting  pain  in  the  abdomen, 
which  changed  into  flatulent  distension  (aft.  4 h.). 

A continual  pinching  on  a small  spot  in  the  right  hypogastrium, 
in  the  region  of  the  caecum,  especially  when  walking  (in  the  open 
air)  (aft.  4 h.). 

Aching  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  J h.).  [Gw.] 

Painful  aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium.  [Gw.] 

325.  Violent  aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.  [Gw.] 

A pinching  distension  in  the  whole  abdomen,  immediately  after  a 
meal,  only  when  he  is  standing,  and  worse  when  he  is  walking, 
increased  to  an  intolerable  degree  on  continuing  to  walk,  though 
flatulence  does  not  seem  to  be  the  cause  of  it ; on  sitting  still  it  soon 
goes  off,  without  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  4 h.). 

Shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium.*  [Gw.] 

An  aching  pinching  in  the  abdomen  after  eating  the  smallest 
quantity  of  fruit,  especially  when  standing  and  walking,  which  goes 
off  when  sitting. 

Pinching  colic  in  all  the  bowels,  even  long  after  a meal,  when 
walking  in  the  open  air. 

330.  Fine  shooting  pain  below  the  navel  (aft.  1 to  2 h.). 

Pain,  first  pinching,  then  shooting,  in  one  side  of 
the  abdomen  (aft.  2,  10  h.). 

Pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  just  in  the  umbilical  region, 
the  pain  afterwards  goes  into  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  where  it  is  a 
mixture  of  pinching  and  shooting. 

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.). 

Pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen  in  the  open  air,  as  if  diarrhoea 
would  come  on. 

335.  Drawing  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen  : it  came  into  the  rectum 
like  pressing,  with  qualmishness  and  weakness  in  the  scrobiculus 
cordisf  and  paleness  of  the  face  (aft.  48  h.,  two  days  before  the 
catamenia) . 

(Tearing  pain  in  the  abdomen.) 

Shooting  twitching  pain  in  the  left  groin,  in  the  evening  when 
lying  in  bed. 

Sensation  in  the  left  groin  as  if  a hernia  would  protrude. 

Above  the  left  hip  an  intermitting,  deep  internal  aching.  [Gw.] 
340.  Stool  first  of  hard  and  then  of  thin  faeces. % 

* Comp.  330. 
f Comp.  267,  630. 

J Easy  and  satisfactory  evacuation  of  faeces  is  generally  only  primary  action,  which 
comes  on  in  half  an  hour  or  one  hour. 


44 


690 


IGNATlA. 


Thin  faeces  pass  involuntarily  with  flatulence  (in  50  h.). 

Soft  stool  immediately  after  a meal. 

Three  evacuations  of  soft  faeces  in  the  afternoon.  \_Hb.  Ts.] 

Three  moderate  evacuations  of  the  bowels.  \Hb . Ts.] 

345.  Two  evacuations  of  the  bowels  of  thin  consistence  (2nd  d.). 
[ Hb . Ts.] 

Three  diarrhceic  stools  (the  ist  d.).  [Hb.  Ts.] 

After  cutting,  diarrhceic  stool.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Whitish  yellow  stools  (aft.  3 h,). 

Slimy  stools. 

350.  Acrid  stools. 

Prolapsus  of  the  rectum  during  moderate  straining  at 
stool. 

Straining  at  stool  without  result.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Frequent  almost  ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  with  bellyache, 
tenesmus,  and  tendency  to  prolapsus  of  the  rectum  (aft.  48  h.). 

In  the  evening  great  desire  and  urging  to  go  to  stool,  more  in 
the  middle  of  the  abdomen  ; but  no  stool  came,  only  the  rectum 
was  forced  out. 

355.  Yellowish-white  stool  of  a very  large  size  and  passing  through 
the  rectum  and  anus  with  great  difficulty. 

Very  large  stool  passing  with  great  difficulty  (aft.  12  h.). 

Ineffectual  urging  to  stool  in  the  rectum,  not  in  the  anus  (aft. 

Ineffectual  call  and  straining  to  stool  and  urging  in  the  intestines 
of  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen,1  chiefly  soon  after  a meal. 

Anxious  urging  to  stool,  with  inactivity  of  the  rectum  ; he  can- 
not press  out  the  faeces  without  danger  of  prolapsus  of  the  rectum. 
360,  Violent  urging  to  stool*  more  in  the  upper  bowels 
and  upper  part  of  the  abdomen ; he  has  great  desire*  and 
yet  the  stool  although  soft  does  not  pass  in  sufficient 
quantity ; the  urging  lasts  long  after  the  stool  is  passed  (aft.  20  h.). 

Ineffectual  call  and  urging  to  stool. 

After  sudden  urgent  call  an  insufficient  quantity  of  tenacious, 
clay-coloured,  but  not  hard  faeces  is  passed  with  difficulty  and  not 
without  great  straining  of  the  abdominal  muscles  (almost  as  if  there 
was  a deficiency  of  the  vermicular  movement  of  the  bowels)  (aft.  3 d.). 

Spasmodic  tension  in  the  rectum  all  day. 

Sharp  pressing  pain  deep  in  the  rectum  after  the  stool,  as  from 
incarcerated  flatus  (such  as  usually  occurs  after  a too  hasty  evacua- 
tion—-a  kind  of  proctalgia)*  (aft.  2 h.). 

365.  In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  for  two  hours,  sharp  pressing 
pain  in  the  rectum  (proctalgia),  without  relief  in  any  position,  which 
is  allayed  spontaneously  without  discharge  of  flatus. 

Painless  contraction  of  the  anus,t  a kind  of  stricture  for 
several  days  (aft.  12  h.). 

* Comp,  note  to  297. 
t 366,  368.  See  note  to  61. 


1 Hahnemann’s  “ Oberbauch,”  usually  rendered  “epigastrium,”  sometimes  means* 
as  here,  the  abdomen  above  the  navel. 


IGNATIA. 


691 

Creeping  and  burning  in  the  anus.  [ Hb . Ts .] 

Contraction  of  the  anus  (in  the  evening),  which  returns  next 
day  at  the  same  hour,  painful  when  walking,  but  most  so  when 
standing,  but  painless  when  sitting,  with  flow  of  insipid  saliva*  into 
the  mouth  (aft.  4,  12,  36  h.). 

Several  times  cutting,  rather  deep  in  the  rectum  (aft.  20  h.). 

370.  A coarse  stitch  from  the  anus  deep  into  the  rectum. 

Coarse  stitches  in  the  anus  (aft.  2 h.). 

Violent  itching  in  the  rectum  in  the  evening  in  bed. 

Creeping  in  the  rectum,  as  from  thread-worms. 

In  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum,  towards  the  anus,  disagreeable 
creeping  as  from  thread-worms  (aft.  24  h.). 

375.  An  itching  lump  at  the  anus,  which  is  not  painful  during  stool, 
but  which  causes  an  aching  when  sitting. 

Haemorrhoidal  sufferings  along  with  soft  stool  (aft.  5 h.). 

Soon  or  immediately  after  a soft  stool,  pain  in  the  anus,  as  from 
blind  piles,  and  like  sore  pain. 

Sore  pain  in  the  anus  when  not  at  stool  (aft.  1 h.). 

Pain  in  the  rectum,  as  from  haemorrhoids,  constrictive  and  sore 
as  when  a wound  is  touched  (aft.  3 h.) 

380.  From  one  to  two  hours  after  stool,  pain  in  the  rec- 
tum, as  from  blind  piles,  compounded  of  contraction  and 
sore  pain  (aft.  2 and  36  h.). 

After  straining  the  mind  with  thinking,  soon  after  a stool,  pain 
as  from  blind  piles,  aching  and  as  if  excoriated  (aft.  36  h.). 

Swelling  of  the  border  of  the  anus  round  about,  as  from  distended 
blood-vessels. 

Blind  haemorrhoids  with  pain  compounded  of  aching  and  soreness 
(at  the  anus  and  in  the  rectum),  more  painful  when  sitting  and 
standing,  slighter  when  walking,f  but  recurring  most  severely  after 
enjoying  the  open  air, 

(Flow  of  blood  from  the  anus,  with  itching  of  the  perinaeum  and 
anus.) 

385.  Thread-worms  crawl  out  at  the  anus  (aft.  16  h.). 

Itching  at  the  anus. 

Itching  in  the  perinaeum,  especially  when  walking. 

(Exhaustion  after  the  stool.) 

A sharp  pressure  on  the  bladder,  as  from  misplaced  flatulence, 
after  supper. 

390.  A scraping,  aching  pain  on  the  region  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder, 
especially  when  walking  and  after  a meal,  when  not  urinating  ; the 
urine  passes  without  pain. 

Frequent  micturition,  [j Hb.  Ts .] 

Frequent  discharge  of  much  watery  urine  (aft.  2,  6, 
20  h.). 

Lemon-coloured  urine  with  white  sediment  (aft.  16  h.). 

Cloudy  urine. 

395.  Stiffness  of  the  penis  for  some  minutes  (aft.  J h.). 

* Comp.  246,  247,  248,  305. 
f Alternating  action  with  368. 


692 


IGNATIA. 


Stiffness  of  the  penis  every  time  he  goes  to  stool. 

During  the  urging  to  stool  much  mucus  (prostatic  fluid)  escaped 
from  the  urethra  (aft.  5 d.). 

(Dark  urine  passes  with  burning  sensation.) 

Coarse  stitches  along  the  urethra  when  walking*  (aft.  5 h.). 

400.  Soon  after  dinner  a stitch  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra, 
that  ends  in  a tearing. 

In  the  middle  of  the  urethra  (when  sitting  in  the  evening)  a 
scraping  tearing  pain  (aft.  1 h.). 

In  the  middle  of  the  urethra  a scratching  scraping  and  scraping 
tearing  pain  (in  the  evening  when  lying  in  bed)  (aft.  5 h.). 

Creeping  and  burning  in  the  urethra,  especially  when  urinating, 
also  combined  with  stitches.  \Hb.  Ts.~\ 

An  itching  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra  (aft.  2 h.). 

405.  In  the  morning  scalding  of  the  urine  (aft.  12  h.). 

Violent,  intermitting,  racking,  tearing  aching  pain  in  the  root  of 
the  penis,  especially  when  walking,  which  goes  off  when  he  stands 
leaning  against  the  sacrum. 

Along  with  flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen,  burning  itching 
in  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  which  excites  the  sexual  desire. 

In  the  very  next  night  a great  pollution  (in  a young  man  who 
scarcely  ever  had  anything  of  the  sort). 

Itching  all  around  the  genitals  and  on  the  penis,  in 
the  evening  after  lying  down,  which  goes  off  by  scratch- 
ing (aft.  3 h.). 

410.  Smarting  burning  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra  when 
urinating. 

Smarting  itching  on  the  glans  penis  (aft.  4 and  20  h.). 

Smarting  itching  pain  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  prepuce  (aft. 
12  h.). 

Sore  pain  as  if  excoriated  on  the  seam  of  the  prepuce  (aft.  1 h.). 

Excoriation  and  ulcerative  pain  combined  with  itch- 
ing on  the  border  of  the  prepuce  (aft.  24  h.)  (aft.  3 and 

27  h.).1 

415.  (Spasmodic  pain  on  the  glans  penis.) 

Itching  shooting  on  the  scrotum  as  from  innumerable  fleas, 
especially  when  at  rest. 

Perspiration  of  the  scrotum. 

In  the  evening  swelling  of  the  scrotum  (aft  5 h.). 

A rigid,  strangling  sensation  in  the  testicles,  in  the  evening  after 
lying  down  in  bed. 

420.  Aching  in  the  testicles. 

Lascivious,  amorous  fancies  and  rapid  excitation  of  the  sexual 
desire,  with  weakness  of  the  genitals  and  impotence,  and  external 
disagreeable  bodily  heat. 

Irresistible  tendency  to  seminal  emission,  with  soft  penis  (aft. 
24  h.). 

* Comp.  370,  371. 

There  is  an  error  in  the  numeration  here.  This  symptom  ought  to  be  414,  and 

not  415  as  numbered  in  the  original. 


IGNATIA. 


69  3 


Lasciviousness  with  impotence  (aft.  io,  20  h.). 

Lasciviousness  with  uncommon  prominence  of  the  clitoris,  with 
weakness  and  relaxation  of  the  other  sexual  parts,  and  cool  tempera- 
ture of  the  body  (aft.  40  h.). 

425.  Impotence  in  the  male,  with  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  hips. 

The  penis  is  contracted  so  that  it  becomes  quite  small  (after 
urinating). 

The  prepuce  is  retracted  and  the  glans  penis  remains  uncovered, 
as  in  impotence  (aft.  24  h.). 

Complete  absence  of  sexual  desire.* 

Chronic  leucorrhoea. 

430.  Promotion  of  the  menstrual  period. f1  [Bergius,  1.  c.] 

Violent  spasmodic  pressing  together  in  the  uterus,  like  labour- 
pains,  followed  by  a purulent,  eroding  leucorrhoea.  J 
Menstrual  discharge  in  coagulated  masses. 

During  the  catamenia  scanty  but  black  blood  of  a putrid,  nasty 
smell  is  discharged. 

Catamenia  retarded  several  days.§ 

* * * 

435.  In  both  nostrils  a crawling  itching. 

Sensation  of  ulceration  and  soreness  on  the  inner  angle  of  one  or 
both  nostrils  (aft.  12  h.). 

The  nostrils  are  ulcerated. 

Tickling  in  the  nose. 

(Immediately  epistaxis.) 

440.  First  dropping  from  the  nose,  then  coryza  (aft.  | h.). 

Fluent  coryza.  [Gw.] 

Stoppage  of  one  nostril  as  if  a leaf  obstructed  it  internally  ; not 
as  from  stuffed  coryza. 

Catarrh,  stuffed  coryza. 

A feeling  of  catarrh  on  the  chest j his  air-tubes  are  full  of  mucus 
(aft.  I h.). 

445.  Hollow,  dry  cough,  in  the  morning  on  waking  from  sleep. 

In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  on  going  to  sleep,  irritation  to 
cough  (aft.  6 h.). 

In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  a (not  tickling)  constant  irrita- 
tion to  short  cough  in  the  larynx,  which  does  not  go  off  by  coughing, 
but  rather  by  suppressing  the  cough  (aft.  5 h.). 

Very  short,  often  quite  dry  cough,  the  irritation  to  which  is  in 

# I have  observed  this  alternating  state  with  the  lascivious  symptoms  421 — 424 
remain  for  a long  time  just  like  a secondary  action 5 cocculus  removed  it, 
f From  the  large  dose  of  a scruple.  See  note  to  434. 

£ See  note  to  61. 

§ Appears  to  be  rare  alternating  action,  if  not  secondary  action.  At  all  events, 
ignatia  has  in  many  cases  often  seemed  to  me  to  produce  the  opposite,  namely,  too 
early  occurrence  of  the  catamenia  in  its  primary  action,  and  hence  has  homoeopathi- 
cally  cured  the  too  early  (and  too  profuse)  catamenia  when  the  other  symptoms 
corresponded. 

1 Bergius  merely  says  that  the  drug  is  emmenagogue.  From  Hahnemann’s  note 
it  would  seem  that  the  latter  thought  him  to  refer  to  Camelli’s  observations,  in  which 
scruple  doses  were  used ; but  this  is  doubtful, 


694 


IGNATIA. 


the  pit  of  the  throat,  as  from  feather  dust  being  inhaled,  that  does  not 
go  off  by  coughing  but  which  is  renewed  all  the  oftener  the  more  he 
abandons  himself  to  the  cough,  especially  aggravated  towards 
evening. 

A sudden  (not  tickling)  interruption  of  the  breathing  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  trachea  above  the  pit  of  the  throat,  which  irresis- 
tibly excites  to  short  violent  cough,  in  the  evening  (aft.  i h.). 

450.  A constricting  sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,  which  excites 
coughing  as  from  sulphur  vapour.* 

(Every  impulse  of  the  cough  causes  a painful  sensation  in  the 
penis,  like  a sudden  penetration  of  blood  into  it.) 

Difficult  expectoration  from  the  chest. 

Yellow  expectoration,  smelling  and  tasting  like  old  catarrh  (aft. 
12  h.). 

Palpitation  of  the  heart.1  \Hb . Ts .] 

455.  Shooting  in  the  cardiac  region  during  expectoration  (aft.  £ h.). 
Shooting  in  the  left  side  (aft.  \ and  3 h.). 

Frequent  stitches  in  the  side  of  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the 
last  rib,  when  not  breathing,  synchronous  with  the  pulse. 

Single  coarse  stitches  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  when  not 
breathing,  also  on  the  tibia  (aft.  1 h.). 

First  aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  followed  by  fine  shooting 
in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  1 h.). 

460.  Aching  first  in  the  left,  then  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  then 
in  the  ankle-joint  (aft.  1 h.). 

Aching  in  the  thoracic  cavitv,  just  behind  the  sternum.  \Hb. 

Ts .]  ' 

A pressure  in  the  region  of  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  as  with  a 
sharp  bodyf  (aft.  20  h.). 

An  aching  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum  soon  after  a meal  (aft. 
24  h.). 

Along  with  oppression  of  the  chest  aching  in  the  scrobiculus 
cordis,  which  is  increased  by  inspiration  and  soon  changes  into 
stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  2 h.). 

465.  Oppression  of  the  chest  and  respiration  f (aft.  5 h.). 

Tightness  of  the  chest.  [Hb.  7>.] 

Feeling  of  anxiety  and  oppression  of  the  chest  wakes  him  at  12 
o’clock  at  night  from  sleep ; he  had  to  breathe  often  and  deeply,  and 
could  only  get  to  sleep  after  an  hour.  \_Hb.  Ts.~] 

Oppression  of  the  chest  after  midnight,  as  if  the  chest  were  too 
narrow,  whereby  the  respiration  was  impeded  (aft.  12  h.). 

On  stooping  forward  a pain  on  the  front  of  the  chest,  from  both 
sides  of  the  sternum,  as  if  the  ribs  pushed  together  pressed  painfully 
against  one  another  (in  the  morning)  (aft.  15  h.). 

470.  A tensive  pain  on  the  front  of  the  chest  when  he  raises  himself 
straight  up  (when  sitting)  (aft,  16  h.). 

# See  note  to  61. 
f See  note  to  297. 

J 465,  468,  472.  See  note  to  61. 


1 Other  symptoms  of  the  heart  and  circulation  will  be  found  from  741  to  748, 


IGNATIA. 


695 


A tensive  pain  over  the  chest  on  standing  upright  (aft.  24  h.). 

Aching  and  pressing  on  the  chest  (aft.  7 and  9 d.). 

When  walking  his  breath  fails  him,  and  when  he  stands  still  he 
gets  a cough. 

(When  he  shut  his  mouth  he  could  get  no  air  through  the  nose.) 

475.  Very  exhausted  in  the  whole  body  ; when  he  walks  he  feels  as  if 
his  breath  would  fail  him,  he  becomes  qualmish  in  the  scrobiculus 
cordis  and  then  he  coughs. 

Fulness  in  the  chest. 

Inspiration  is  impeded  as  by  a weight  lying  upon 
him,  expiration  is  all  the  easier. 

Slow  inspiration,  quick  expiration*  (aft.  3 h.). 

(Must  often  breathe  deeply,  and  deep  breathing  momentarily 
diminished  the  pressure  on  the  chest.) 

480.  Slow  inspiration,  for  which  he  must  heave  up  from  the  depths 
of  the  abdomen  ; (he  must  fetch  his  breath  from  low  down  in  the 
body)  (aft.  1 h.). 

Short  breathing  alternates  with  longer,  gentle  with  violent  breath- 
ing f (aft.  2 h.). 

Pain  on  the  sternum,  as  if  bruised,  also  excitable  by  touch  (aft. 

I4h.). 

A throbbing  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  1^  h.). 

On  breathing  deeply  a stitch  in  the  nipple,  with  flatulent  move- 
ments in  the  abdomen  (aft.  5 h.). 

485.  In  the  morning  in  bed,  sharp  pressive  pain  in  the  cervical  vertebrae, 
when  at  rest.J 

Shooting  in  the  nape. 

Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  nape  (aft.  2\  h.). 

Tearing  pain  in  the  nape  on  moving  the  neck,  as  from  a twist 
of  the  neck  (aft.  12  h.). 

Stiffness  of  the  nape. 

490.  Heat  and  burning  in  the  nape,  or  on  one  side  of  the  neck, 
externally. 

On  the  neck  just  above  the  left  shoulder  a painful  pressure. § 
[Gss.] 

On  the  left,  not  far  from  the  spinal  column,  where  the  true  ribs 
are  separated  from  the  false,  an  obtuse  shooting.  || 

In  the  middle  of  the  spinal  column,  rather  towards  the  left  side, 
a deep,  tearing  pain.  [Gjj.] 

Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  spinal  column  when  walking  in  the 
open  air. 

495.  Simple  pain  in  the  scapula  increased  by  moving  the  arm  and  by 
letting  it  hang  down  (aft.  20  h,). 

(In  the  morning  some  stitches  at  the  apex  of  the  scapula..) 

A throbbing  in  the  sacrum  (aft.  7 h.). 

# Alternating  action  with  656. 

f Comp.  657. 

J See  note  to  297. 

§ Comp.  485. 

||  Comp.  494, 


6g6 


IGNATIA. 


(In  the  sacrum  (and  on  the  chest)  a tensive  pain  on  standing 
upright)  (aft.  24  h.). 

Stitches  in  the  sacrum  (aft.  48  h.). 

500.  Pain  in  the  sacrum,  also  when  lying  on  the  back,  in 
the  morning  in  bed  * 

Aching  bruised  pain  in  the  sacrum  when  lying  on  the  back,  in 
the  morning  in  bed. 

In  the  shoulder-joint  pain  as  if  dislocated  when  moving  the 
arms. 

In  the  joint  of  the  humerus,  when  bending  the  arm 
back,  a pain  as  from  prolonged  hard  work,  or  as  if 
bruised. 

In  the  joint  of  the  humerus  a griping,  clutching,  beating  and 
partly  drawing  pain  when  at  rest  (which  becomes  shooting  on 
moving) .+ 

505.  In  the  joint  of  the  humerus  a rheumatic  pain,  or  as  if  bruised, 
when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  10  h.). 

Pain  in  the  humeral  joint  as  if  it  were  dislocated  (aft.  10  h.). 

In  the  deltoid  muscle  of  the  upper  arm  a quivering 
twitching  (aft.  24  h.). 

On  turning  the  arm  inwards  simple  pain  in  the  biceps  muscle 
(aft.  2 h.). 

In  the  muscles  of  the  arm  pain,  as  if  bruised,  when  the  arm  hangs 
or  is  raised  up. 

510.  The  arm  on  the  side  he  lies  on  goes  to  sleep  (aft.  8 h.). 

When  lying  on  the  right  side,  in  the  evening  in  bed,  the  head  of 
the  shoulder  of  the  left  side  is  painful  as  if  bruised,  and  the  pain  goes 
away  when  he  lies  on  the  painful  arm  (aft.  12  h.). 

Intolerable  (indescribable)  pain  in  the  shafts  of  the  bones  and  in 
the  joints  of  the  arm,  on  which  he  is  not  lying,  in  the  evening  in 
bed,  which  only  goes  off  when  he  lies  on  the  painful  arm  (aft. 
12  h.). 

Intolerable  (indescribable)  pain  in  the  shafts  of  the  bones  and  in 
the  joints  of  the  arm  on  which  he  is  lying,  in  the  morning  in  bed, 
which  only  goes  off  when  he  lies  on  the  other  painless  side J 
(aft.  20  h.). 

In  the  morning  in  bed,  pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  head  of  the 
shoulder  of  the  side  on  which  he  lies,  which  goes  off  when  he  lies  on 
the  opposite  side  or  on  the  back  (aft.  24  h.). 

515.  In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  in  one  part  of  the  muscles  of 
the  forearm,  a twitching  as  if  a mouse  were  crawling  under  the  skin 
(aft.  36  h;). 

Drawing  pain  in  the  arms. 

* 50°,  501.  An  alternating  action  with  the  disappearance  of  an  ignatia  symptom 
by  lying  on  the  back  (see  19,  47,  48,  62,  599,  600). 
f Comp.  452. 

j 51 3,  514  (and  probably  also  515)  stand  towards  the  symptoms  511,  512  as  alter- 
nating states,  and  are  both  primary  actions.  Their  difference  seems  to  depend  on 
the  different  periods  of  the  day  in  which  each  chiefly  manifests  itself,  evening  and 
morning.  Even  the  kind  of  pain  appears  to  be  different  in  each  of  these  alternating 
states.  See  also  599,  601. 


IGNATIA.  697 

From  the  upper  arm  to  the  wrist  and  as  far  as  the  fingers  a 
pulsating  drawing. 

From  cold  air  (a  chill  ?)  tearing  in  the  right  arm  and  on  the  right 
side  of  the  head  (aft.  12  h.). 

Just  above  the  right  elbow  painful  drawing*  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gjj.] 

520.  On  the  wrist  tearing  pain  in  the  morning  after  waking. 

On  the  wrist  and  in  the  fingers  tearing  pain. 

In  the  thumb-joint  tearing  pain  as  if  it  were  dislocated,  in  the 
morning  while  slumbering  in  bed. 

A stiffness  in  the  right  wrist  and  sensation  as  if  it  were  asleep. 

In  the  carpal  bones  of  the  right  hand  a drawingf  (aft.  36  h.). 

[<?"•] 

525.  On  the  left  wrist  a paralytic  pain  as  if  the  hand  were  sprained 
or  dislocated. 

Some  stitches  in  the  last  joint  of  the  thumb  (aft.  10  h.). 

Itching  pricks  on  the  thumb-joint,  which  make  him  scratch. 

In  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  index  finger  pain  as  if  it  were 
dislocated,  on  moving. 

Warm  sweat  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  hand  and  fingers  (aft. 
16  h.). 

530.  Copious  warm  sweat  of  the  hands,  in  the  evening  (aft.  8 h.). 

Warm  sweat  of  the  palms  (aft.  36  h.). 

Transient  yellowness  of  the  hands,  as  from  jaundice. 

On  touching  a hair  on  the  hand  a penetrating,  fine  prick,  as  if 
a splinter  were  sticking  there.  J 

In  the  evening  after  lying  down  spasmodic  movement  hither  and 
thither  of  the  index  finger. 

535.  On  exerting  the  fingers,  out-stretching  cramp  of  the  middle 
finger  (which  is  relieved  by  stroking). 

Shooting  in  the  hip-joint  (aft.  24  h.). 

In  the  morning  (from  4 to  8 o'clock),  in  the  hip-joint  and  knee, 
shooting  pain  when  walking  and  moving  the  legs  (aft.  8 h.). 

Almost  paralytic  immobility  of  the  inferior  extremities,  with 
single  twitchings  in  them. 

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed,  stiffness  of  the  knees  and 
ankle-joints,  of  the  thigh  and  sacrum  (aft.  38  h.). 

540.  When  sitting,  pain  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  thigh,  as  if 
they  were  bruised  (aft.  5 h.). 

On  the  centre  of  the  left  thigh  a deep  violent  pressure.  [Gjj.] 

Violent  shooting  on  the  inner  side  below  the  left  knee.§  [G^.] 

He  could  not  walk  and  is  forced  to  sit  down,  because  when 

walking  the  knees  are  involuntarily  drawn  up  (aft.  \ h.).  [Fr. 

H—n .] 

After  going  upstairs  a stiffness  in  the  knee-joint,  which  impedes 
her  movement. 

545.  Stiffness  of  the  knees  and  loins,  which  causes  pain  on  movement. 

As  if  stiff  in  the  feet,  in  the  morning  (aft.  24  and  96  h.). 

Boil  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh  (aft.  12  h.). 

* Comp.  516,  518.  £ Comp.  124. 

J Comp.  520,  521,  § Comp.  537. 


698 


IGNATIA. 


After  a meal,  when  sitting,  the  (thigh  and)  leg  goes  to  sleep 
(aft.  5 h.) . 

Formication  in  the  feet.* * * § 

550.  Formication  as  if  on  the  bones  of  the  feet,  not  as  if  asleep  (aft. 
10  h.). 

Fine  pricking  formication  on  the  legs  (the  skin  of  the  calves), 
after  midnight,  which  does  not  permit  him  to  rest  or  to  remain  in 
bed. 

The  legs  to  above  the  knee  go  to  sleep  in  the  evening  when 
sitting. 

In  the  whole  of  the  left  leg  a paralytic  pain,  excited  by  walking, 
and  continuing  afterwards  when  sitting. 

In  the  whole  of  the  left  leg  painful  drawing,  in  bed  before 
going  to  sleep ; it  sometimes  ceases,  but  returns  all  the  more 
violently.  [Gjj.] 

555.  The  leg  goes  to  sleep  when  sitting  at  dinner  (aft.  6 h.). 

A tension  in  the  legs  to  above  the  knee,  with  heaviness  of 
the  limbs. 

A stretching  f in  the  calves  on  extending  the  legs  or  walking. 
Cramp  of  the  calf  when  walking,  which  goes  off  when  standing 
and  when  at  rest  { (aft.  4 h.). 

Attacks  of  cramp  in  the  muscles  of  the  foot  and  toes,  when 
sitting. 

560.  Attacks  of  cramp  in  the  calf  when  sitting  at  dinner. 

Cramp  in  the  calf  quite  early  in  bed,  on  flexing  the  limb,  which 
goes  off  on  extending  the  limb  or  pressing  against  something  (aft. 
8 h.). 

Intermittent  shooting  on  the  inner  border  of  the  foot  (aft.  5 h.). 

[G«.] 

Above  the  right  outer  ankle  intermittent  pressure.  [G^.] 

In  the  right  foot  violent  drawing.  [Gjj.] 

565.  In  the  ball  of  the  heel  a numbness  (as  if  asleep)  when  walking. 

In  the  ball  of  the  heel  or  rather  in  the  periosteum  of  the  astra- 
galus, a pain  as  if  contused,  or  as  from  a jump  from  a great  height 
(aft.  3 h.). 

In  the  ball  of  the  heel  or  rather  in  the  periosteum  of  the  os 
calcis  pain  when  walking  as  from  internal  soreness  (aft.  4 h.). 
Aching  pain  in  the  tibia  when  walking  (aft.  2 h.). 

In  the  anterior  tibial  muscles  an  undulating,  as  it  were  griping 
and  beating,  tearing  aching  pain,  especially  on  moving. 

570.  Aching  in  the  left  ankle-joint  (with  an  internal  tickle)  which 
forced  him  to  make  a trembling  movement  of  the  left  foot  in  order 
to  get  relief. 

In  the  ankle-joint,  in  the  morning,  when  walking,  pain  as  from 
dislocation  § (but  not  shooting). 

* 549 — 551  (anA  again  548),  and  552,  555  constitute  three  different  alternating 
states. 

f A kind  of  cramp,  or,  at  least,  the  commencement  thereof. 

X 5 58  is  alternating  action  with  559 — 561  j both  apparently  of  the  same  rank. 

§ Comp.  506. 


IGNATIA. 


699 


On  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  a tearing  pain  (aft.  20  h.). 

Internally  in  the  ball  of  the  heel,  an  itching  twitching  pain, 
especially  in  the  morning  in  bed. 

Tearing  burning  pain  in  the  heel  bone,  in  the  morning  on 
waking  (aft.  8 h.). 

575.  On  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  a spot  the  seat  of  burning  itching 
pain  when  at  rest. 

Burning  pain  in  the  corn  when  sitting. 

Burning  pain  on  pressure  in  a hitherto  painless  corn  on  the  foot. 
The  shoes  press  painfully  on  the  upper  part  of  the  toes ; corns 
commence  to  have  burning  pain. 

An  itching  burning  (as  from  chilblains)  in  the  heel  and  other 
parts  of  the  foot  (aft.  8 h.). 

580.  On  the  side  of  the  foot  burning  shooting,  or  burning  cutting  pain. 
Shooting  pain  under  the  ankle  on  moving. 

Early  in  the  morning  several  stitches  in  the  heel  (aft.  20  h.). 

In  the  dusk  of  the  evening  weariness  of  the  feet  as  from  a long 
walk,  with  quiet  disposition. 

Could  not  drag  the  feet  along,  as  if  he  had  walked  a long  way. 
585.  Heaviness  of  the  feet.* 

Heaviness  of  one  foot. 

Weakness  of  the  feet. 

Creaking  and  cracking  in  the  knee  (aft.  2 h.). 

Coldness  of  the  feet  and  legs  to  above  the  knee. 

590.  Chill  about  the  knee,  that  is  not  cold  externally. 

Hot  knees  (with  tickling  itching  of  one  knee)  with  cold  nose 
(aft.  3 h.). 

(Stiffness  of  the  ankle-joint.) 

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  soles  when  walking  (aft.  4 h.). 

Feet  are  burning  hot. 

595.  A creeping  as  if  internally  in  the  bones  of  the  whole  body. 

Creeping,  gone-to-sleep  feeling  in  the  limbst  (aft.  4 h. 
several  times). 

Weariness  of  the  legs  and  arms. 

Sensation  of  weakness  and  exhaustion  in  the  arms  and  legs. 

Here  and  there  in  the  periosteum  in  the  middle  of  the  shafts  ot 
the  bones  (not  in  the  joints)  a transient  pressure,  as  with  a hard  body, 
like  contused  pain,  by  day,  but  especially  when  lying  on  one  side  or 
the  other,  in  the  evening  in  bed,  that  goes  off  by  lying  on  the  back{ 
(aft.  20,  36  h.). 

600.  At  night  on  one  or  the  other  side,  on  which  he  is  lying,  pain  as 
if  bruised,  in  the  joints  of  the  neck,  back,  and  shoulders,  which  only 
goes  off  when  lying  on  the  back  (aft.  12  h.). 

In  the  joints  of  the  shoulders,  hip  and  knees,  a pain 

as  from  a sprain  or  dislocation  (aft.  8 h.). 

* Comp.  556. 
f Comp.  548,  550,  555. 

j 599,  600,  and  comp.  19,  47,  48,  62,  in  which  the  pain  only  goes  off  when  lying 
on  the  back,  constitute  a third  alternating  action  with  513,  514,  and  with  51 1 and 
512. 


;oo 


IGNATIA. 


About  the  joints  or  somewhat  above  them,  a continued  shooting 
pain. 

A deep  shooting  burning  pain  on  various  parts,*  without  itching. 

In  the  external  elevated  parts  of  the  joints,  a burning  shooting 
pain  accompanied  by  itching  (aft.  I h.). 

605.  In  the  evening  on  going  to  sleep,  jerks  and  twitches  through  the 
whole  bodyf  (aft.  96  h.). 

Jerks  and  single  twitchings  of  the  limbs  (aft.  10,  12  h.). 

Single  twitchings  of  the  limbs  when  going  to  sleep 

(aft.  3 h.). 

After  lying  down  twitching  and  quivering  in  single  muscular 
parts,  here  and  there  on  the  body  (aft.  2 h.).1 

Innumerable  fine  stitches  here  and  there,  like  fleabites  (especially 
in  bed).f 

610.  Itching  here  and  there  on  the  body,  after  getting  somewhat 
heated  by  walking  in  the  open  air. 

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down  in  bed,  itching  here  and  there, 
which  readily  goes  off  by  scratching. § 

Itching  here  and  there  in  the  body,  under  the  shoulder,  & c.,  at 
night,  which  goes  off  by  scratching. 

Itching  on  the  wrist-joint,  on  the  elbow-joint,  and  on  the  neck. 

The  outer  skin  and  the  periosteum  are  painful  (aft.  8 h.). 

615.  Sensitiveness  of  the  skin  to  a draught  of  air  ; he  feels  in  the 
abdomen  as  if  he  should  get  a chill  (aft.  4 h.). 

Simple  violent  pain,  only  felt  when  touched,  here  and 
there,  on  a small  spot,  e.g.  on  the  ribs,  &c« 

The  symptoms  of  ignatia  are  aggravated  by  drinking  coffee  and 
smoking  tobacco. 

Burning  in  the  ulcer. 

Renewal  of  the  pains  immediately  after  dinner,  immediately 
after  lying  down  in  the  evening,  and  immediately  after  waking  in 
the  morning. 

620.  Leaves  a tendency  to  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,  toothache, 
and  looseness  of  the  teeth,  as  also  to  stomachache. 

Great  general  weariness  from  slight  movement. 

Is  unwilling  to  move,  shirks  work. 

Exhaustion,  weariness,  in  the  evening. 

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a heaviness  in  the  legs,  with 
anxiety,  which  went  off  in  the  room,  but  depression  of  spirits  came 
on  instead. 

625.  The  knees  gave  way  under  him  from  weakness. 

Exhaustion  and  lassitude  after  dinner  ; he  felt  unfit  for  his  usual 
work,  and  contrary  to  custom  fell  asleep  over  it.  \_Hb.  Tj.] 

* e.  g.  on  the  corner  of  the  mouth,  under  the  first  joint  of  the  thumb,  &c. 

-j-  605,  607,  comp,  with  608,  665,  667. 

+ Comp.  604  and  the  alternating  action  603. 

§ 61 1,  612.  Characteristic  of  ignatia  is  the  itching  'which,  is  readily  removed  from 

the  part  by  slight  scratching. 


1 Another  error  in  the  enumeration  of  the  symptoms  occurs  here  in  the  original. 


XGNATIA.  7O1 

Discomfort  in  the  morning  after  getting  up  (the  2nd  d.).  [Hb. 

Ts.] 

Exhaustion  in  the  limbs.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Great  exhaustion  and  weariness,  he  felt  as  if  he  had  had  a very 
long  walk.  [Hb.  T}.] 

630.  Exhaustion,  as  from  a weakness  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis ; he 
became  qualmish  ; he  must  lie  down.* * * § 

So  tired  that  he  has  no  wish  to  dress  himself  and  go  out ; he  has 
no  pleasure  in  anything,  prefers  to  lie  down  (aft.  4 h.). 

Staggers  when  walking,  readily  falls  and  stumbles  over  the  least 
thing  that  lies  in  his  way.j* 

Weariness  as  if  his  eyelids  would  close. 

He  becomes  very  sleepy  on  hearing  sad  news. 

635.  He  falls  asleep  when  sitting  reading  (aft.  4 h.). 

Drowsiness,  which  invites  him  to  sleep  when  sitting ; but  on 
lying  down  there  ensues  a half-waking,  dreamful  sleep  (aft.  J h.). 
Very  profound  and  yet  not  refreshing  sleep. { 

Profound  sleep§  (aft.  3 h.). 

Sleeplessness. 

640.  Frequent  yawning.  \_Hb.  Ts.] 

Inclination  to  sleep.  [Hb.  7j.] 

Early  sleepiness  in  the  evening.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Drowsiness  after  dinner,  and  deep,  sound,  unrefreshing  afternoon 
sleep  for  two  hours  ; after  waking  feeling  of  exhaustion.  [Hb.  TV] 
Sound  and  continued  sleep,  from  which  he  wakes  still  tired.  [Hb. 

Ts.] 

645.  Uncommonly  sound  but  not  refreshing  midday  sleep.  [Hb.  Ts.] 
Restless  sleep.  [Hb.  Ts.] 

Sleeplessness  ; cannot  go  to  sleep,  and  awakes  (at  night)  from  no 
perceptible  cause  (aft.  14  h.). 

Sleep  so  light  that  he  hears  everything  in  it,  e.g.  the 
striking  of  a clock  at  a great  distance. 

In  the  evening  in  bed  flatulent  colic  : a kind  of  pressure  in  the 
abdomen  here  and  there,  recurring  every  time  he  wakes  at  night. 

650.  In  the  night  in  bed  he  often  changes  his  position,  lies  sometimes 
in  one  place  sometimes  in  another. 

Moaning  talking  in  sleep  ; he  tosses  about  in  bed  ||  (aft.  2, 
5 h.). 

Stamps  with  his  feet  in  sleepH  (aft.  4 h.). 

He  moves  the  mouth  in  sleep,  as  if  he  were  eating  (aft.  3 h.). 

In  sleep  she  moves  the  muscles  of  the  open  mouth  in  all  direc- 
tions, almost  convulsively,  and  at  the  same  time  the  hands  are 
twitched  inwards  (aft.  2 h.). 

655.  In  sleep,  groaning,  grunting,  sighing  (aft.  4 h.). 

* Comp.  267,  335. 

f Comp.  754. 

£ He  thinks  he  has  not  slept  at  all  when  he  awakes. 

§ 637,  638  constitute  alternating  actions  with  639,  647,  648. 
j|  Comp.  652. 

•jf  Comp.  662. 


IGNATIA. 


702 

During  sleep  short  inspiration*  and  slow  expiration. 

During  sleep  all  kinds  of  breathing,  alternately  short  and  slow, 
violent  and  gentle,  suspended,  snoring. f 

In  the  evening  in  bed,  feeling  as  of  an  ebullition  in  the  blood,  on 
account  of  which  he  could  not  get  to  sleep. 

During  sleep  snoring  inspiration. 

660.  Lies  in  sleep  on  the  back  and  lays  the  open  hand  under  the 
occiput. 

In  the  morning  he  lies  on  the  back  and  puts  one  arm  above  the 
head  so  that  the  outspread  hand  comes  to  lie  under  the  occiput  or  in 
the  nape. 

Starts  up  suddenly  in  sleep,  moans  with  piteous  expression  of 
countenance,  kicks  and  stamps  with  the  feet,  the  hands  and  face 
being  at  the  same  time  pale  and  cold. 

Dreams  full  of  sadness  ; he  wakes  up  weeping. 

Talks  in  a lachrymose  and  complaining  manner  in  sleep;  inspi- 
ration is  snoring  with  quite  open  mouth,  and  sometimes  one  eye* 
sometimes  the  other  is  slightly  opened  (aft.  10  h.). 

665.  Startings  in  affright,  when  about  to  go  to  sleep,  on  account  of 
monstrous  visions  which  present  themselves  to  him,  and  hover  before 
him  after  waking.J 

In  the  morning  at  the  instant  of  waking  he  feels  a heaviness,  an 
accumulation,  stagnation  and  ebullition  of  blood  in  the  body,  with 
sadness. 

Starting  in  affright,  in  the  morning,  on  waking  out  of  a sleep  so 
light  that  he  hears  every  stroke  of  the  clock. 

Dreams  full  of  frightful  things. 

Awakes  with  sulky  expression. 

670.  Awakes  with  cheerful  countenance  (aft.  20  h.). 

Awakes  in  the  morning  on  account  of  horrible  dreams  (aft.  18  h,). 

On  awaking  she  rises  up  suddenly  and  talks  nonsense  before  she 
comes  to  herself  (aft.  4 h.). 

(She  dreams  she  is  standing,  but  not  standing  firmly ; when 
awake  she  examines  her  bed  to  see  if  she  is  lying  firmly,  and  curls 
herself  up,  in  order  to  be  sure  not  to  fall  ; at  the  same  time  she  is 
always  in  some  perspiration  all  over.) 

Awakes  on  account  of  horrible  dreams  ( e . g.  of  drowning)  from 
the  afternoon  sleep  (aft.  24  h.). 

675.  Dreams  at  night,  that  he  has  fallen  into  the  water  and  weeps. 

At  night  dreams  full  of  disappointed  and  miscarried  expectations 
and  endeavours. 

Fixed  idea  in  dream : dreams  all  night  of  one  and  the 
same  subject. 

Dreams  of  the  same  subject  for  several  hours. 

Dreams  with  reflection  and  consideration  (aft.  4 h.). 

680.  Slumbering  dreams  before  midnight,  with  general  heat,  without 
perspiration. 

# 656  in  alternation  with  479,  480. 

f Comp.  481. 

X 


IGNATIA. 


7°3 


At  night  general  anxious  heat  with  slight  sweat  round  about  the 
nose,  the  greatest  heat  on  the  hands  and  feet,  which  however  he 
dislikes  being  uncovered  but  will  always  have  covered,  with  cold 
thighs,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  short  breath  and  lascivious  dreams  j 
chiefly  when  he  lies  on  either  side,  less  when  he  lies  on  the  back. 

From  2 to  5 a.m.  (while  wide  awake)  heat  all  over,  especially  on 
the  hands  and  feet,  without  sweat  and  without  thirst,  and  without 
feeling  of  dryness. 

He  perspires  every  morning,  when  after  previous  waking  he  goes 
to  sleep  again,  and  when  he  gets  up  he  is  so  tired  and  unrefreshed 
that  he  feels  disposed  to  lie  down  again.1 

At  night  dreams  full  of  learned  mental  exercitations  and  scientific 
discussions. 

685.  Dreams  which  are  a strain  on  the  thinking  power,  towards 
morning  (aft.  10  h.). 

Nocturnal  phantasies  which  strain  the  thinking  power. 

In  dreams  the  thoughts  are  engaged  on  one  subject  all  night 
through  ; a fixed  idea,  which  does  not  leave  him  even  after  waking. 

Tonic  spasm  of  all  the  limbs,  like  stiffness. 

Very  frequent  yawning  (aft.  J h.). 

690.  Great  yawning,  even  during  a meal. 

Frequent  yawning  after  sleep. 

Excessive  yawning,  in  the  morning  (and  chiefly  after  the  mid- 
day sleep),  as  if  the  jaw  would  be  dislocated. 

Extreme  convulsive  yawning,  so  that  the  eyes  run  over  with 
water,  in  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  and  in  the  morning 
after  rising  from  bed  (aft.  28,  38  h.). 

Frequent  yawning  interrupted  by  a kind  of  immobility  and 
unyielding  condition  of  the  chest  (between  8 and  10  o’clock). 

695.  In  the  afternoon  and  evening  thirst. 

During  the  febrile  chill  thirst. 

Dreads  the  open  air  (aft.  6 h.). 

In  moderately  cold  though  not  open  air  he  gets  immoderate 
chilliness,  and  becomes  cold  all  over,  with  semilateral  headache 
(aft.  4h.). 

Coldness  and  chilliness ; the  pupils  dilate  but  little. 

700.  Chilliness  and  cold,  especially  on  the  posterior  part  of  the  body  ; 
but  both  can  be  dispelled  immediately  by  a warm  room  or  a warm 
stove*  (aft.  6 h.). 

Chill  in  the  back  and  over  the  arms  (aft.  J h.). 

Rigor  in  the  face  and  on  the  arms,  with  chattering  of  the  teeth 
and  goose-skin. 

Becomes  chilly  at  sunset  (heat  goes  out  of  him) . 

Shivering  with  goose-skin  over  the  thighs  and  forearms  5 after- 
wards also  on  the  cheeks  (immediately). 

705.  Chilliness,  especially  on  the  feet. 

In  the  period  of  apyrexia,  constant  shivering* 

* The  febrile  coldness  removable  by  external  warmth  of  ignatia  is  characteristic. 


1 Another  error  of  enumeration  in  the  original  occurs  here. 


7°4 


IGNATIA. 


Heat  of  the  face  with  coldness  of  feet  and  hands,* 

Chilliness  over  the  upper  arms  with  hot  ears. 

Heat  of  the  hands,  with  shivering  over  the  body  and  an  anxiety 
terminating  in  weeping. 

710.  Along  with  redness  of  the  face  in  the  evening  shaking  shivering. 
(After  a meal  chilliness  and  shaking  shivering  ; at  night  anxiety 
and  sweat.) 

Fever,  first  chilliness  over  the  arms,  especially  the  upper  arms, 
then  heat  and  redness  of  the  cheeks  and  heat  of  hands  and  feet, 
without  thirst,  whilst  lying  on  the  back. 

In  the  afternoon,  fever  : shivering  with  bellyache  ; thereafter 
weakness  and  sleep  with  burning  heat  of  the  body. 

One  ear  and  one  cheek  are  red  and  burning. 

715.  Sudden  attack  of  flying  heat  all  over  the  body. 

The  external  temperature  is  increased. 

External  heat  and  redness,  without  internal  heatt 

Feeling  of  general  heat,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  without  thirst, 
during  which  he  does  not  like  to  throw  off  the  clothes. 

Nocturnal  heat,  during  which  he  wishes  the  bed-clothes  taken  off, 
and  allows  himself  to  be  uncovered. 

720.  Heat  of  the  body,  especially  during  sleep. 

In  the  afternoon  thirstless  heat  in  the  whole  body,  with  a feeling 
of  dryness  of  the  skin,  but  with  some  sweat  on  the  face  (aft.  8 h.). 
Heat  mounts  to  the  head,  without  thirst. 

From  internal  restlessness,  increased  internal  heat  and  thirst, 
disturbed  sleep.  \Hb.  7j.] 

At  2 a.m.  groaning  from  external  heat,  desires  fewer  bed-clothes 
(aft.  15  h.). 

725.  External  warmth  is  intolerable  to  him;  then  quick 

breathing. 

Feeling  as  if  sweat  would  break  out  (anxious  feeling  of 

flying  heat)  (aft.  i|  h.). 

Feeling  as  if  sweat  would  all  at  once  break  out  over  the  whole 
body,  which  did  occur  partially,  in  the  forenoon. 

General  sweat. 

Profuse  perspiration.1  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

730.  Cold  sweats.  [Bergius,  1.  c.] 

Violent  anxiety  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  with  vertigo,  faint- 
ing, and  very  cold  sweats.  J [Camelli,2  Philos . Transact .,  vol.  xxi, 
No.  250.] 

# 707 — 710  single  alternating  states  of  the  ehief  symptoms,  namely,  the  heat  of 
particular  parts,  with  coldness,  chilliness  or  shivering  of  other  parts. 

•j-  717,  718.  The  heat  of  ignatia  is  hardly  ever  anything  but  external  5 moreover, 
there  is  hardly  ever  any  thirst  accompanying  it,  not  even  when  it  occurs  in  the  form 
of  an  intermittent  fever.  Hence  ignatia  in  the  smallest  dose  can  only  homoeopathi- 
cally  and  permanently  cure  those  agues  which  have  thirst  during  the  chill  but  none 
during  the  heat. 

\ From  a whole  bean. 


1 After  bleeding  and  antidotes. 

2 Observations  of  effects  of  scruple  doses. 


IGNATIA. 


7°5 


Trembling  for  several  hours. 

Trembling  all  over  the  body.*  [Bergius,  1.  c.] 

Trembling  of  the  whole  body  for  three  hours,  with  itching  and 
frightful  convulsive  twitchings  (vellicationibus),  so  that  he  could 
hardly  keep  up  on  his  legs  ; they  were  strongest  in  the  jaws,  so  that 
the  mouth  is  distorted  as  though  he  were  laughing  (immediately). 
[Camelli,  1.  c.]f 

735.  Constant  moving  of  the  body  (agitatio  continua)4  [Grimm, 
1.  c.] 

Convulsive  movements.  [Bergius,  1.  c.] 

Convulsions.  [Durius,1 2  Misc.  Nat . C«r.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  9,  10, 
Obs.  126.] 

Insensibility  of  the  whole  body.  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Syncope.3  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

740.  The  variety  of  pressure  on  and  in  several  parts  of  the  head  at  the 
same  time  makes  him  sullen  and  cross.  [Gjj.] 

Palpitation  of  the  heart. 

Very  moderate  acceleration  of  the  pulse.  [Hb.  7j.] 

Acceleration  of  the  circulation,  during  which,  however,  the  pulse 
had  a small  beat.  [Hb.  Ts .] 

Pulse  slower  and  smaller  than  usual  in  the  first  hours  of  the 
afternoon.  [Hb.  Ts.'] 

745.  On  thinking  deeply,  palpitation  of  the  heart. 

During  dinner,  palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  48  h.). 

After  the  (midday)  sleep,  palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  5 h.). 

In  the  morning  in  bed  he  gets  hot  and  has  palpitation  of  the 
heart. 

Anxiety  as  if  he  had  done  something  bad. 

750.  Anxiety  of  short  duration  (aft.  J h.). 

Anxiety.§  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Goes  about  quite  perplexed,  dazed,  stupefied.  ||  [Grimm,  1.  c.] 

Extreme  anxiety,  which  prevents  speaking. 

After  exertion  of  the  head,  especially  in  the  morning,  a hurry  of 
the  will ; he  cannot  express  himself  in  talking,  write,  or  do  anything 
as  quickly  as  he  wishes  ; whereby  there  occurs  an  anxious  behaviour, 
he  makes  mistakes  in  speaking  and  writing,  and  does  everything 
awkwardly^]"  and  needs  to  be  corrected  (aft.  20  h.). 

755.  Excessively  busy  : he  restlessly  sets  about  doing  first  one  thing 
then  another. 

Obtuseness  of  senses,  with  tendency  to  hurry  5 when  he  makes 
haste  the  blood  mounts  into  his  face  (aft.  6 h.) . 

* Comp.  732. 

f From  a scruple. 

J From  a drachm. 

§ Comp.  749,  750,  753. 

||  Comp.  782,  783,  786,  787,  788. 

IF  Comp.  7 57. 


1 No  mention  of  any  pathogenetic  effects  of  I.  here ; it  is  simply  reported  as  anti- 
epileptic. 

2 This  symptom  properly  belongs  to  Bergius,  and  is  not  found  in  Grimm’s  narrative. 

45 


706 


IGNAT!  A. 


He  imagines  he  cannot  get  on,  cannot  walk. 

She  fears  she  will  get  an  ulceration  of  the  stomach. 

Fearfulness,  cowardice,  cannot  trust  himself  to  do  anything,  con- 
siders all  is  lost. 

760.  On  awaking,  after  midnight,  has  fear  of  thieves  (aft.  10  h.). 

Uncommon  tendency  to  be  frightened. 

Fears  every  trifle,  is  especially  afraid  of  objects  coming  near  him* 
(aft.  1 h.). 


Audacity  (aft.  3,  5 h.). 

Slight  blame  or  contradiction  excites  him  to  quarrel,  and  he  is 
vexed  at  himself  for  doing  so  (aft.  36  h.). 

7 65.  From  slight  contradiction  he  is  irritated  and  angry  (aft.  8 h.). 

From  slight  contradiction  his  face  gets  red. 

Quickly  passing  crossness  and  anger. 

Towards  evening  he  is  discontented,  sulky,  stubborn,  no  one  can 
do  anything  right,  anything  to  please  him  (aft.  8 h.). 

Is  extremely  sulky 3 finds  fault  and  makes  reproaches. 

770.  Fickle,  impatient,  irresolute,  quarrelsome  (recurring 
every  3,  4 h.). 

Incredible  changeableness  of  disposition,  at  one  time 
he  jokes  and  jests,  at  another  he  is  lachrymose  (alter- 
nately every  3,  4 h.). 

Some  hours  after  the  angry  humour  jocularity  comes  on  (aft. 
6 h.). 

Jesting,  childish  tricks  (aft.  8 h.). 

Desires  improper  things,  and  weeps  aloud  when  they  are  denied 
him. 

775.  When  one  hesitates  in  the  least  to  do  what  she  wishes,  or  remon- 
strates much  with  her,  though  in  a mild  and  friendly  manner,  or  endea- 
vours to  persuade  her,  or  wishes  differently  from  what  she  wishes, 
she  weeps  aloud  (aft.  1 h.). 

Howling  and  crying,  and  beside  herself  about  trifles  (aft.  1 h.). 

Unreasonable  complaints  about  too  much  noise  (aft.  2 h.). 

Noise  is  intolerable  to  him,  and  then  the  pupils  dilate  more 
readily  (aft.  6 h.). 

Whispering  low  voice ; he  cannot  speak  loudly. 

780.  Loss  of  the  usual  cheerfulness  (2nd  d.).  \_Hb.  Ts.] 

Loss  of  the  usual  liveliness,  in  the  afternoon.  [Hb.  Ts .] 

Avoids  opening  the  mouth  and  speaking ; laconic  (aft.  1 to 

+ h-)- 

Is  as  if  in  slumber ; he  dislikes  opening  the  eyes  to  look,  and  the 
mouth  to  speak,  with  low,  slow  respiration. 

A kind  of  apathy  in  the  whole  body  (2nd  d.).  \_Hb . Ts.'] 

785.  Indifference  to  everything  (2nd  d.).  [ Hb . Ts.] 

Quiet,  serious  melancholy  ; cannot  be  induced  to  converse  or  be 
cheerful,  with  flat,  watery  taste  of  all  food  and  small  appetite  (aft. 
24  h0- 

Quiet  reserve,  internally  disposed  to  anger  and  irritable  (aft. 


h.: 


* 762,  763,  alternating  states. 


IGNATIA. 


707 


Sits  to  all  appearance  in  deep  thought,  and  looks  staringly  in 
front  of  him,  but  is  all  the  time  quite  destitute  of  thought*  (aft. 
2 h.). 

Fixed  ideas,  e.  g.  about  music  and  melodies,  in  the  evening, 
before  and  after  lying  down. 

790.  A fixed  idea,  which  he  follows  out  in  thought,  or  pursues  all  too 
zealously  and  completely  in  conversation  (aft.  2 h.). 

Thinks  against  his  will  of  annoying,  vexatious  things,  and  dwells 
on  them  (aft.  \ h.). 

Delicate  disposition,  with  very  clear  consciousness* 
Sensitive  disposition,  delicate  conscientiousness  (aft. 
20  h.). 

Sad  (towards  evening).1 

* 788  forms,  as  a rare  condition,  alternating  action  with  the  following  symptoms. 


1 The  number  of  the  symptoms  given  above  does  not  correspond  with  those  in  the 
original  (which  are  795  in  number).  The  reason  of  this  is  that  in  the  original  there 
are  several  errors  in  the  enumeration  from  S.  41 5 onwards.  There  are  also  a few 
clerical  errors,  which  have  been  corrected  in  the  translation.  The  second  edition  has 
been  of  use  in  enabling  these  corrections  to  be  made. 


IPECACUANHA.1 

(The  alcoholic  tincture  of  the  root  of  Cephaelis  IpecacuanhayWiLLD .,  from  Brazil.) 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  following  symptoms,  though  they  are  not 
complete,  that  this  powerful  plant  was  not  created  merely  for  the 
purpose  of  causing  a forcible  evacuation  of  the  stomach  by  vomiting 
(which  in  most  cases  is  to  be  reckoned  as  one  of  the  useless  cruelties 
of  ordinary  practice),  but  that  far  higher  and  more  important  curative 
objects  are  attainable  by  its  means.  It  was  originally  brought  to 
Europe  as  a remedy  for  autumnal  dysenteries,  and  hence  it  received  the 
name  of  the  dysentery-root.  One  hundred  and  twenty  years  have 
elapsed  since  it  was,  on  Leibnitz’s  recommendation,  misused  for  this 
purpose,  on  the  false  indication  that  because  it  relieves  some  kinds  of 
diarrhoea  it  must  therefore  cure  dysenteries,  for  these  maladies  are  the 
exact  opposite  of  diarrhoea,  i.e.  of  too  frequent  loose  motions.  It  is 
only  quite  lately  that  this  practice  has  been  abandoned,  because  an 
extensive  employment  of  it  for  many  years  in  dysenteries  has  shown 
that  it  is  of  no  use  in  these  affections.  All  these  unfortunate  trials, 
whereby  many  lives  have  been  sacrificed,  might  have  been  spared  if 
the  pure  peculiar  action  of  this  root  had  first  been  ascertained,  and  it 
had  been  learnt  what  morbid  states  it  was  capable  of  originating  in  the 
healthy  subject,  and  consequently  what  similar  states  in  the  naturally 
sick  it  could  remove  and  cure.  It  would  have  been  seen,  as  is  now 
seen  from  the  following  symptoms  of  ipecacuanha,  that  it,  by  simi- 
larity of  action,  can  only  diminish  the  excess  of  blood  in  the  dysenteric 
stools  and  allay  some  kinds  of  abdominal  pains  in  dysentery,  but  that 
it  cannot  remove  the  other  far  more  important  phenomena  of  this 
disease,  because  it  cannot  produce  anything  similar. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  may  learn  from  its  symptoms  that,  as  it  can 
relieve  some  cases  of  tendency  to  vomit  similar  to  its  own,  so  it  must, 
as  experience  has  shown,  exert  a specific  curative  action  more  particu- 
larly in  haemorrhages,  in  paroxysmal,  spasmodic  dyspnoea  and  suffo- 
cative spasms,  and  also  in  some  kinds  of  tetanus  (provided  that  in  all 
these  affections  the  other  symptoms  of  the  patient  are  met  with  of  a 
similar  character  among  those  of  ipecacuanha). 

Certain  kinds  of  agues  are  so  constituted  that  this  root  is  their  appro- 
priate remedy,  as  is  to  be  inferred  from  its  own  symptoms,  in  so  far  as 
they  present  a greater  homoeopathic  similarity  to  those  of  the  case  of  ague 
than  do  those  of  other  medicines.  If  the  selection  has  not  been  quite 


1 From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825. 


IPECACUANHA. 


709 

suitable  for  this  purpose  it  generally  leaves  the  fever  in  a state  in  which 
arnica  (in  other  cases  china,  ignatia,  or  cocculus)  is  the  remedy. 

Some  after-sufferings  from  the  unsuitable  employment  of  arsenic  and 
from  the  long-continued  abuse  of  cinchona  bark  may  be  removed  by  a 
few  doses  of  ipecacuanha. 

In  all  these  cases  of  the  homoeopathic  therapeutic  employment  of 
this  root  only  very  small  doses  are  indicated.  Hitherto  I have 
employed  the  diluted  tincture  in  the  dose  of  a drop  containing  the 
millionth  part  of  a grain  of  ipecacuanha,  but  I have  seen,  from  the 
often  unnecessarily  strong  action  of  this  dose  in  many  cases,  that  for 
homoeopathic  employment  the  dose  should  be  still  further  diminished, 
care  being,  of  course,  taken  that  all  other  foreign  and  medicinal  influ- 
ences are  avoided. 

It  is  only  when  we  have  to  treat  serious  poisoning  by  a large  dose  of 
opium  that  we  must  administer  a large  dose  of  ipecacuanha  (30,  40, 
60  drops  of  the  strong  tincture) — when  the  circumstances  do  not 
rather  demand  the  administration  of  strong  coffee  (or  camphor). 

Ipecacuanha  acts  for  but  a short  time ; in  large  doses  hardly  a 
couple  of  days,  in  quite  small  doses  about  a couple  of  hours. 

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Langhammer,  J.  G.  Lehmann, 
Staff. 

The  following  old-school  authorities  are  cited  : 

Clark,  in  Murray's  Apparat.  Med .,  i. 

Cleghorn,  Diseases  of  Minorca. 

Fothergill,  Medic.  Obs.  and  Inqu .,  vi. 

Geoffroy,  Traite  de  la  Mat.  Med.,  ii. 

Gmelin,  Eberh.,  Untersuch.  ub.  d.  Thier.  Magnetismus , Heilbr.,  1793. 

Haller,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xxvii,  1. 

Hillary,  Air  and  Diseases  of  Barbadoes. 

Lemery,  Traite  univ.  des  drog.  simpl. 

Murray,  Medic,  pr.  Biblioth .,  iii. 

Pye,  S.,  in  Medic.  Bemerk.  und  Unters .,  i. 

Scott,  W.,  in  Edinb.  Med.  Comment .,  iv. 

In  the  Frag,  de  Fir.,  Ipecacuanha  has  83  symptoms,  in  the  1st  edit.  231  ; only  two 
more  symptoms  are  added  to  this  2nd  edit.] 


IPECACUANHA. 

Vertigo  when  walking. 

Vertigo  as  if  he  would  stagger  hither  and  thither,  with  vanishing 
of  thoughts  for  instants,  only  when  walking,  and  especially  when 
turning  round  (aft.  2 h.).  [£//'.] 

(In  the  evening)  when  walking  in  the  open  air  a swaying  of  the 
body  to  and  fro  towards  both  sides,  as  from  intoxication,  with  stupe- 
faction of  the  head  (aft.  10  h.).  \_Lr.’] 

Severe  shooting  pain  in  the  crown  of  the  head. 

5.  In  short  fits  a fine  and  severe  shooting  headache,  which  in  an 
hour  changes  to  an  aching  (aft.  8 h.). 

Fine  shooting  pain  irt  the  forehead,  which  is  excited  and  increased 
by  touching. 


jio 


IPECACUANHA. 


A violent  tearing  pain  in  the  forehead,  increased  by  stooping 
(aft.  31  h.).  [Ln.] 

External  pain  on  the  parietal  bone  of  the  head  as  from  a blow 
with  a blunt  point  (aft.  J h.). 

Painful  heaviness  in  the  head  (aft.  2 h.).  [St/.~\ 

10.  Heaviness  in  the  head  with  drowsiness.  [Ln.~\ 

Headache  : shooting  and  heaviness. 

Tearing  pain  in  the  forehead  which  is  excited  and  aggravated  by 
touching  the  part. 

In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed  tearing  headache  till  noon, 
less  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  31  h.).  [Ln.~] 

Headache  as  if  the  brain  and  skull  were  bruised, 
which  penetrates  through  all  the  bones  of  the  head  down 
to  the  root  of  the  tongue,  with  nausea. 

15.  Aching  pain  in  the  head. 

Tensive  headache. 

A dull  drawing  here  and  there  in  the  head  (immediately). 

[Ln.] 

(Constrictive  pain  in  the  left  temple  and  above  the  orbit)  (aft. 
1 h-)- 

An  outpressing  and  almost  boring  pain,  sometimes  in  the  temples, 
sometimes  over  the  orbit  on  a small  spot,  which  goes  off  by  external 
pressure,  and  is  alleviated  by  shutting  the  eyes  (aft.  1 h.), 

20.  Tensive  aching  pain  in  the  occiput  and  nape,  which  extends  to 
the  shoulders  (aft.  3 h.).  [St/.'] 

Painfulness  of  the  occiput  and  nape,  excited  by  moving  the  head 
(aft.  2\  h.).  [*/.] 

On  stooping  severe  stitches  above  the  eye,  with  a feeling  as  if  it 
were  swollen  (aft.  20  h.). 

Pale  face  with  blue  rings  round  the  eyes  and  great  weakness,  as 
after  recovery  from  a severe  illness. 

(Miliary  rash  on  the  forehead  up  in  among  the  hair  and  on  the 
cheeks.) 

25.  Pupils  more  readily  dilatable  (aft.  8 h.). 

Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  2%  h.).  [Lr.] 

Dryness  of  the  eyelids  with  drowsiness  (aft.  8 h.). 

Eye-gum  in  the  outer  canthi  of  the  eyes  (aft.  71  and 
12  h.).  [Lr.] 

Red,  inflamed  eyes.  [W.  Scott,1  in  Edinb.  Med . Comment , iv, 
P-  74-] 

30.  Inflammation  of  the  eyes.  [Geoffroy,2 3  Lrait'e  de  la  Mat.  Med., 
ii,  p.  157.] 

Aching  pain  from  the  concha  of  the  ear  to  the  membrana 
tympani,  which  extends  to  the  protuberance  of  the  occiput  (aft. 
28  h.).  [Ln] 

Dulness  of  hearing  of  the  right  ear,  with  aching  in  it.  [ Ln.] 


1 Effects  of  emanations  in  a sensitive  woman.  The  original  is  “eyes  a little 

inflamed.” 

3 Accidents  liable  to  happen  to  those  who  powder  the  drug. 


IPECACUANHA. 


711 

Epistaxis.  [Murray,1 2  Medic,  pr . Biblioth .,  iii,  p.  237. — Geof- 
froy,  1.  c. — Lemery,*3  Traite  univ.  des  drog.  simply  p.  438.] 

Sensation  of  heat  in  the  cheeks,  also  perceptible  externally,  but 
without  redness  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Stf, *.] 

35.  Lips  externally  covered  with  eruption.  [Heller,3  in  Hufel. 
Journal , xxvii,  i,  p.  51.] 

Lips  covered  with  aphthae  and  eruption.  [Heller,  1.  c.] 

Smarting  on  the  borders  of  the  lips,  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  and 
the  sides  of  the  tongue,  with  flow  of  watery  saliva  into  the  mouth 
and  some  pain  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  \ h.).  [Stf.] 

A smarting  sensation  on  the  lips. 

In  the  corners  of  the  lips  sensation  as  if  they  were  excoriated,  on 
touching  and  moving  the  lips. 

40.  Very  violent  pain  in  the  hollow  tooth  when  biting,  immediately, 
as  if  it  were  pulled  out,  causing  loud  howling  and  crying  out,  and 
thereafter  constant  tearing  in  it  (aft.  1 h.). 

A pain  in  the  teeth  as  if  they  were  pulled  out,  in  fits  (aft. 
8 h.). 

Excessive  and  almost  painful  sensitiveness  of  all  parts  in  the 
mouth. 

A smarting  sensation  on  the  border  of  the  tongue. 

On  the  back  part  of  the  tongue  and  on  the  palate  a sensation  as 
from  chewing  hepatica  or  tarragon,  which  excites  great  secretion  of 
saliva. 

45.  He  must  constantly  swallow  the  saliva  (aft.  1 h.). 

Great  flow  of  saliva  for  some  hours. 

When  lying  the  saliva  pours  from  the  mouth. 

Flow  of  saliva,  [S.  Pye,4  in  Med.  Bemerk.  und  Unters .,  i,  p.  244. — 
Heller,  1.  c.] 

Great  collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  (aft.  h.).  [ Ln .] 

50.  Obtuse  stitches  across  the  throat  into  the  inner  ear. 

Spasmodic  contractive  sensation  in  the  throat  and  on  the  chest. 
[Scott,  1.  c.] 

Sore  throat.  [Geoffroy,  1.  c.] 

A fine  pricking  in  the  oesophagus  (aft.  1 h.). 

Pain  on  swallowing  as  if  there  were  a swelling  at  the  top  of  the 
gullet  (aft.  1 h.). 

55.  Dryness  and  roughness  in  the  mouth,  especially  in  the  top  of  the 
gullet  (aft.  J h.). 

* From  the  powder  snuffed  up  into  the  nose. 


1 Not  accessible. 

2 From  taking  I.  in  large  doses  of  powder,  obviated  by  moistening  it,  i.e.  local 
irritation. 

3 Effects  when  given  in  chronic  agues.  The  subject  of  nearly  all  the  symptoms 
extracted  by  Hahnemann  had  had  six  paroxysms  already 5 his  face  was  yellow,  and 
the  praecordia  tender. 

4 After  ineffectual  attempts  at  vomiting.  The  work  Hahnemann  quotes  from  is  a 
German  translation  of  the  Medical  Observations  and  Enquiries.  The  symptoms  have 
been  compared  with  the  English  original. 


712 


IPECACUANHA. 


Difficulty  of  swallowing,  as  from  . paralysis  of  the  tongue  and 
gullet  (aft.  8 h.). 

Pain  in  the  gullet,  as  if  it  were  too  dry  and  rough  and  sore, 
which  is  allayed  for  a short  time  only  by  swallowing  the  saliva  or 
ordinary  liquids  (aft.  i h.J. 

Adipsia. 

Flat  taste  in  the  mouth. 

60.  Whilst  swallowing  a taste  in  the  throat  as  from  rancid  oil  (aft. 

Jh-)- 

Beer  tastes  flat  (aft.  2 h.). 

The  (accustomed)  tobacco  tastes  nauseous  when  smoked  and 
excites  vomiting.  \_Ln.~\ 

Immediately  after  the  (accustomed)  tobacco-smoking  a nausea 
arising  from  the  stomach,  with  hiccup,  which  only  went  off  after 
several  stools,  the  last  of  which  were  pappy  (aft.  14  h.).  [Zr.] 

After  eating  yawning  and  stretching. 

65.  He  is  sick,  qualmish,  squeamish. 

Loathing,  nausea  and  heaving  as  if  he  would  vomit  (aft.  ij  h.). 
[£*•] 

Troublesome  nausea.  [Clark,1  in  Murray's  Jppar.  Med .,  i,  p. 

8140 

Sickness  and  vomiting. 

(Nausea  and  heaviness  in  the  abdomen.) 


70.  Nausea  as  from  the  stomach,  with  empty  eructation 
and  great  flow  of  saliva  (aft.  £ h.).  [Lr.] 

Eructation  every  eight  or  ten  minutes,  also  the  following  day, 
with  grumbling  in  the  abdomen.  \_Ln.~\ 

On  stooping  vomiting  and  sensation  as  if  he  must  fall  down. 

[£*•] 

On  stooping  vomiting  of  the  food  he  had  eaten,  without  previous 
eructation  (aft.  i£  h.).  [Z«.] 

Vomiting  of  a yellow  slimy  mass.  [Heller,  1.  c.,  p.  54.] 

75.  Vomiting  of  large  masses  of  mucus.  [Heller,  1.  c.,  p.  57.] 

Vomiting  of  large  foetid  lumps  of  mucus.  [Heller,  1.  c., 
P-  54-] 

Vomiting  of  green  gelatinous  mucus.  [Heller,  1.  c.,  p.  51.] 
Vomiting  of  grass-green  mucus.  [Heller,  p.  52.] 

Sensation  as  if  the  stomach  hung  down  loosely,  with  want  of 
appetite  (aft.  1 h.). 

80.  Sensation  of  emptiness  and  relaxation  of  the  stomach. 

Most  violent  pain  in  the  stomach.  [Heller,  1.  c.,  p.  53.] 
Horrible  pains  in  the  stomach.  [Heller,  1.  c.,  p.  57.] 
Indescribable  pain  about  the  heart  (scrobiculus  cordis  ?).  [Heller, 
1.  c.,  p.  54.] 

An  obtuse  shooting  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  with  a 
pointed  piece  of  wood.  [Z?z.] 

85.  Qualmishness  in  the  abdomen,  with  commencing  bellyache. 

A 


1 Effects  of  I.  when  given  in  dysentery  without  relief. 


IPECACUANHA. 


7i3 


Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  J h.). 

Contractive  sensation  under  the  short  ribs. 

Severe  stitches  in  the  left  hypochondrium  (aft.  \ h.). 

Feeling  of  extreme  distension  and  swelling  of  the  abdomen. 

90.  Flatulent  colic. 

A clutching  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  grasped  by  the  hand, 
so  that  each  extended  finger  made  a sharp  impression  on  the  bowels, 
alleviated  by  bodily  rest,  but  aggravated  to  the  highest  degree  by  the 
slightest  movement. 

Pinching  pain  in  both  hypochondria  and  in  the 
region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  3 h.). 

Cutting  pain  about  the  navel,  with  shivering. 

Cutting  pain  at  the  side  in  the  umbilical  region,  which  is  aggra- 
vated by  the  touch  and  by  external  pressure,  with  white,  frothy 
saliva  in  the  mouth  and  dilated  pupils  (aft.  J h.). 

95.  Cutting  pain  about  the  navel,  as  if  the  menses  were  about  to 
come  on,  with  chilliness  and  coldness  of  the  body,  whilst  internal 
heat  rises  to  the  head  (aft.  2 h.). 

Tearing  pains  above  the  navel. 

Violent  shooting  in  the  right  flank  of  the  abdomen  for  some 
minutes.  \Ln. ] 

‘ (Shooting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  and  burning  and  shooting  in  the 
rectum,  with  urging  to  stool.) 

(Leek-green  stools.) 

100.  Grass-green  stools.  [Heller,  1.  c.,  p.  53.] 

(Lemon-coloured  stools.) 

(Thin  stool,  with  burning  shooting  pain  in  the  rectum  and 
anus.) 

Frequent  fluid  stools,  with  qualmish  feeling  in  the  abdomen. 
[In.] 

Purging.  [Murray,  1.  c.] 

105.  Diarrhceic  and,  as  it  were,  fermented  stools  (aft.  1 h.). 

Putrid  smelling  stools. 

Faeces  covered  with  red,  bloody  mucus. 

Bloody  stool.  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

Crawling  in  the  anus,  as  if  thread-worms  would  come  out. 
[Ln.] 

no.  Shooting,  cutting,  burning  pain  on  the  border  of  the  anus,  as  in 
obstinate  haemorrhoids  (aft.  J h.). 

Severe  stitches  in  the  anus. 

Frequent  call  to  urinate  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  2, 
h.).  [ Lr .] 

(Frequent  micturition  of  straw-coloured  urine,  which,  before  the 
discharge,  is  preceded  by  great  urging  and  burning,  not  followed  by 
urinary  tenesmus)  (aft.  2 h.).  [iSY/V] 

Scanty  red  urine.* 

1 15.  Bloody  urine.  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

Urine  cloudy,  with  sediment  like  brick  dust.  [Heller, 
1.  c.,  pp.  51,  65.] 


* See  149. 


IPECACUANHA. 


7H 

(From  the  child’s  urethra  there  flows  for  several  days  a purulent 
fluid,  with  smarting  pain.) 

When  standing  a voluptuous  itching  on  the  glans  penis,  com- 
pelling scratching  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Zr.] 

A twisting,  drawing  pain  in  the  testicles  (aft.  8,  10  h.). 

120.  On  crossing  the  thighs  a shooting  in  the  testicles  (aft.  2 h.). 

An  urging  and  pressing  towards  the  womb  and  anus. 
Metrorrhagia — recurrence  of  the  catamenia  that  had  ceased  four- 
teen days  previously.1  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

The  blood  coming  away  at  the  end  of  the  catamenia  was 
suppressed.* 

* * 

* 

Violent,  repeated  sneezing.  [Z«.] 

125.  Like  dry  coryza  in  the  nose,  as  if  the  nasal  cavity  were  too  dry 
(aft.  3 h.). 

Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  nose  and  frontal  sinuses  (aft.  3 h.). 
Coryza,  with  drawing  pains  in  all  the  limbs. 

Rattling  noise  in  the  bronchial  tubes  on  drawing  breath. 

In  the  forenoon  an  oppression  on  the  chest  and  short  breath,  as  if 
he  were  in  much  dust,  on  account  of  which  he  could  not  breathe. 
130.  Tightness  of  the  chest.  [Murray,  1.  c.] 

Tightness  of  the  chest. 

Tightness  of  the  chest  for  several  hours. 

Tightness  of  the  chest  in  the  evening. 

Spasmodic  asthma  with  great  contraction  in  the  throat  and  chest, 
during  which  a peculiar  kind  of  wheezing  noise  was  heard. f [Scott, 

>• c-] 

135.  Sudden  attacks  of  troublesome  dyspnoea,  with  a wheezing  noise 
in  the  air-tubes.  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

Contraction  in  the  chest,  with  dyspnoea  and  wheezing  respira- 
tion ; she  must  go  to  the  open  window  and  gasp  for  air,  with  pale- 
ness of  face,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse,  and  danger2  of  suffocation, 
from  the  evening  until  9 a.m.  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

Recurrence  of  the  tightness  of  chest  after  twenty-four  hours, 
from  10  p.m.  until  10  a.m.,  for  eight  days.  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

Attack  of  suffocation  for  two  or  three  days.  [Scott,  1.  c.] 
Oppression  of  the  chest  after  eating. 

140.  The  chest  is  painful  internally,  as  if  sore. 

A cough,  that  impedes  the  breathing  to  suffocation. 

* By  the  secondary  action  or  antagonistic  reaction  of  the  organism  ; for  the  primary 
action  of  ipecacuanha  causes  haemorrhage  from  all  the  outlets  of  the  body,  and  it  par- 
ticularly produces  metrorrhagia,  and  cures  the  former  as  well  as  the  latter  homoeo- 
pathically,  when  the  other  symptoms  of  the  patient  resemble  those  of  ipecacuanha 
(see  95,  121,  & c.). 

f In  two  women  from  the  exhalation  from  the  powder  in  a distant  room  j the 
illness  lasted  fourteen  days. 


1 Literally,  “ a show  of  the  menses  fourteen  days  before  their  time.” 

2 “ Apparent  danger,”  Scott  says. 


IPECACUANHA. 


7i5 

Suffocative  cough,  during  which  the  child  becomes  quite  stiff  and 
blue  in  the  face  (aft.  10  h.). 

Towards  evening  a suffocative,  fatiguing,  very  debilitating  cough, 
lasting  an  hour.  [Eberh.  Gmelin,1  Untersuch.  iib.  d.  Thier.  Magne - 
tismus , Heilbr.,  1793.] 

In  the  evening,  between  6 and  7 o’clock,  extremely  violent, 
convulsive  cough.  [Gmelin,  1.  c.] 

145.  About  7 p.m.  a suffocative,  extremely  debilitating  cough  for  half 
an  hour,  with  coldness  of  the  extremities.  [Gmelin,  1.  c.] 

Dry  cough,  from  a tickle  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
larynx  (aft.  2,3,  5 h.). 

Cough  which  arises  from  a contractive  tickling 
sensation,  extending  from  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx 
to  the  lowest  extremities  of  the  bronchial  tubes  (aft.  4,  6, 
7 h0- 

A cough  which,  after  walking  in  cold  air  and  on  lying  down,  in 
the  morning  and  evening,  continues  incessantly,  excited  by  deep 
inspiration  ; at  the  same  time  with  a pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the 
navel  would  be  torn  out,  and  heat  in  the  (head)  face,  and  sweat  on 
the  forehead. 

On  coughing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  he  had  an  urging  to 
urinate  and  the  urine  could  not  pass,  as  in  retention  of  urine. 

150.  Inclination  to  vomit  without  nausea  is  caused  by  coughing  (aft. 
1 h-)- 

After  coughing  throbbing  pain  in  the  head  and  scrobiculus  cordis. 

Cough  with  expectoration  of  a thick,  disagreeably  metallic  tasting 
mucus.2  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

Haemoptysis.  [Geoffroy,— Murray, — Scott,  1.  c.] 

(Pinching  [twitching  tearing  ?]  pains  of  short  duration  in  the 
right  side  of  the  chest,  under  the  shoulder.) 

155.  (Cramp-pain  between  the  scapulae  on  moving.) 

Pinching  pains  in  the  right  arm  (aft.  3 h.). 

One  hand  is  cold. 

(Tettery  eruption  on  the  wrist  and  anus,  which  itches  most  in 
the  evening  after  lying  down  ; after  scratching  red  lumps  appear  on 
the  skin,  but  the  itching  does  not  cease.) 

Pain  in  the  knee,  as  if  the  tendons  and  ligaments  were  fatigued 
by  over-exertion. 

160.  In  the  left  knee  a pain  as  if  from  a sprain,  especially  when 
walking,  seldomer  and  less  noticed  when  sitting  (aft.  1 h.).  [St/'.] 

Weariness  of  the  thighs  and  lower  extremities  (aft.  8,9  h.). 

In  the  muscles  of  the  calf  a quivering  and  formication,  as  if  the 
limb  had  gone  to  sleep. 

Pinching  pain  in  the  right  foot  (aft.  4 h.) 

A drawing  pain  in  the  bone  of  the  upper  arm  and  thigh,  in  the 
evening  after  lying  down  (aft.  5 h.) 


1 This  edition  not  accessible.  That  of  1787  has  no  observations  regarding 
ipecacuanha. 

* As  the  asthmatic  paroxysm  of  S.  136  passed  off. 


7 16  IPECACUANHA. 

165,  Cracking  and  creaking  in  the  joints. 

(Here  and  thereon  the  body  shooting  pains  excited  by  movement, 
which  end  in  burning.) 

Fain  in  all  the  bones,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  3 h.). 

Pain  in  the  joints,  such  as  usually  occurs  when  the 
limbs  go  to  sleep  (aft.  3 h.). 

Drowsiness  and  lassitude  in  all  the  limbs  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Ln. ] 

170.  Debility.  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

Drowsiness. 

Drowsiness,  weariness  (aft.  2 h.).  [^r/i] 

Sleep  (immediately). 

Sleep  with  half-open  eyes  (aft.  6 h.). 

1 75.  Restless  sleep.  [Scott,  1.  c.] 

Sleep  full  of  restlessness  and  moaning. 

When  about  to  go  to  sleep  she  has  shocks  in  all  the  limbs. 

He  starts  up  in  his  sleep. 

Sleep  broken  by  frequent  waking  and  frightful  dreams  (aft. 
10  h,). 

180.  Vivid,  unremembered  dreams,  with  frequent  waking,  as  from 
watchfulness,  at  night.  [Zr.] 

In  the  morning  on  awaking  anxiety  in  the  blood,  as  if  he  had 
great  heat  or  had  perspired  profusely,  or  were  wakened  up  out  of 
anxious  dreams,  though  he  is  neither  hot  nor  perspiring  to  the  touch  ; 
at  the  same  time  a heaviness  in  the  head,  as  if  the  brain  were 
pressed. 

Moaning  fearfulness  in  sleep. 

Symptoms  of  emprosthotonos  and  opisthotonos*  (aft.  10  h.). 

The  body  of  the  child  is  stretched  out  stiffly. 

185.  Stiff  extension  of  the  whole  body,  followed  by  a spasmodic 
clapping  together  of  the  arms  (aft.  \ h.). 

Sudden  spasmodic  jerking  together  of  the  arms. 

Palpitation  of  the  heart. 

Palpitation,  almost  without  anxiety. 

Shivering  with  yawning  (aft.  ^ h.). 

190.  Shivering  with  eructation. 

He  has  no  warmth  in  the  body. 

Chilliness  ; he  cannot  bear  the  slightest  cold. 

Always  chilliness  under  the  skin,  and  all  the  more  when  she  sits 
near  the  warmth. 

Over-sensitiveness  to  cold  and  heat. 

195.  He  was  cold  all  night  in  bed,  and  could  not  sleep  for  chilliness. 

He  becomes  cold  on  the  body. 

(About  4 p.m.)  first  shivering,  then  chilliness  with  coldness  with- 
out thirst  (aft.  5 h.). 

Shuddering  coldness  in  the  limbs  just  as  when  one  is  terrified  at 
something.  [£«.] 

Hands  and  feet  are  icy  cold  and  dripping  with  cold  perspiration, 
at  the  same  time  one  cheek  is  red,  the  other  pale,  and  he  feels  miser- 


* See  142,  184,  185. 


IPECACUANHA. 


7*7 

able  in  disposition  and  exhausted  in  body,  with  dilated  pupils  (aft. 
10  h.). 

200.  External  cold  and  internal  heat. 

(External,  not  internal  heat)  (aft.  several  h.). 

(Heat  and  redness  in  the  face,  without  thirst.) 

In  the  evening  heat  of  the  whole  body. 

Great  increasing,  almost  burning  heat  (feeling  of  heat)  in  the 
head  and  the  whole  body,  but  with  cold  hands  and  feet ; when  the 
heat  increased  to  the  highest  degree,  there  occurred  on  the  trunk  and 
head  some  perspiration  with  a smarting  itching,  especially  on  the 
neck  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Ln.~\ 

205.  In  the  afternoon  and  evening  feeling  of  heat,  almost  burning  in 
the  head,  forehead  and  cheeks,  without  thirst  (aft.  6 h.).  [61 2//.] 

In  the  afternoon  (about  4 o’clock)  sudden  general  heat,  with 
sweat  on  the  arms  and  back  (aft.  16  h.). 

Sweat.  (Fothergill,1  Medic.  Obs.  and  Inqun  vi,  art.  18.] 

Sweat  about  midnight  (aft.  12  h.). 

Night  sweat.3  [Cleghorn,  Diseases  of  Minorca , p.  230.] 

210.  Sweat  for  some  hours.  [Hillary,3  Air  and  Diseases  of  Bar- 
ba does .] 

Sour-smelling  sweat.  [Heller,  1.  c.,  pp.  51,  54.] 

Profuse,  sour  sweat,  with  cloudy  urine.  [Heller,  1.  c.,  p.  74.] 

He  will  not  speak  a word. 

The  flow  of  his  ideas  is  very  slow. 

215.  He  has  pleasure  in  nothing,  nothing  is  agreeable  to  him. 

Everything  is  repugnant  to  him. 

Dislike  to  work.  [Z«.] 

Repugnance  to  literary  work;  thoughts  fail  him  (aft.  29  h.). 

1 Ln •] 

Sullen  unsociable  moroseness,  that  makes  him  disdain  every- 
thing. 

220.  All  day  long  ill-humour ; he  had  no  inclination  to  talk  and  was 
disposed  to  weep.  \_Lr.~\ 

Sulky  humour,  that  despises  everything,  and  he 
desires  that  others  also  should  not  esteem  or  care  for 
anything. 

Moroseness  : he  considers  himself  unfortunate. 

He  is  scrupulous,  apprehensive,  and  thinks  trifles  of  importance 
(aft.  6 h.). 

He  is  morose  and  vexed  that  his  business  is  not  performed  quick 
enough. 

225.  He  is  clumsy  and  awkward  and  knocks  against  everything. 

Extreme  impatience. 

He  lets  his  courage  sink,  and  is  greatly  given  to  be  vexed  and  to 
get  angry. 

His  disposition  is  full  of  wishes  and  longing  he  knows  not  for 
what. 


1 When  given  in  chronic  diarrhoea. 

2 Merely,  “sweat  on  the  night  after  it  was  given.” 

3 Effects  when  given  in  dysentery  ^ 


718 


IPECACUANHA. 


He  very  often  gets  angry  about  the  merest  trifle,  and  can  just  as 
easily  and  quickly  become  calm  (aft.  5 h.). 

230.  He  is  irritated  by  the  slightest  noise. 

He  is  much  inclined  to  become  cross  and  angry. 

The  child  cries  and  howls  violently  and  uninterruptedly,  and 
shoves  its  fists  into  its  mouth  ; the  face  is  pale  and  the  body  rather 
cool  (aft.  j h.). 

Cheerful  humour  : he  likes  to  talk  and  even  to  joke.*  [Lr. ] 

* Curative  secondary  action  after  a previous  opposite  state  of  the  disposition. 


END  OF  VOL.  I.
