The Chronic Diseases: Their Specific Nature and Homoeopathic Treatment, Vol. V
Samuel Hahnemann
The Chronic Diseases: Their Specific Nature and Homoeopathic Treatment, vol. V. Translated by Charles J. Hempel. Philadelphia: Dobson, 1845.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b29326515_0005).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

w


v v\  \ * \ • v.  \ \ \ \ ",  » •*, ■ v'  vv.  vf\;  v;  v.'V  V\'  \ \ ;■  v v •

\ ■ i . < ' •

v v \ v;  j . % , k . \ . ■■■.,  v“  . fcjfjs  . : .y  _

•.  . •.  v ••  v' \ , .v  v . . . •*  V ,

^ v.  \ . •.  - • . • . . •.  .

. V '•  , ■'  . ••  - v C li  T.S  . "v  '

. v.  v • ..  v.  . -•  v.  v.  *n.  v.  v.  v .^s:  v.  V-  wv  X.  -

• v]  A/  . V . s • . :

* - \ ‘ ' •*.  , • • , ' : '\  \ • " - ■ * 4 - -

- • - • , • ••  ' :

\ : k V ) . -

» r ” , v"  ' tL*  " >'  »'  i • ' ■ ’*  ■'

.

• | • • ■ * ;

■■  . ' ■

. s f • , Vl/ ’V-"

• 1 . . .„>-  ‘


• ' i 1

t 2 K , >.  V V \ *1 , X.  .>  • . ,,K.  > . > . > . -

* ■ ■ _ . : . ••••  ,^v

\ ......  ....  . . . • .

» \ _ ■.  . '*•  . - . . \ . ’<  . • . ' . . . .'  • . . .’k  „ •»  •- . ^ - . ...•  v . . '■  #

....  . • ■ .

■ . *■-  . . . . - . • . . . . r . ' . . .


...  . ' . ...


...  • . .


' v . . V t \ , .


.>»•  - *•  • -*♦  • ..#•  •


. j u


.

. • . • • -I ••  I


* ji  fr  f 1*  C • 9,  v ^ f f ' - *;  . •

• ■ * • .«•’  ..  .-  • * «.»•  .»  *1  • «»  .-«■  • -**•  ' »«•

■ J • J * J.  ■ s

f /'  ...  ...  ...  ...  I . ■ ,p  V.  .4


' ' *... . .i  ' « ,•*  ' ,r-  •/.-M  ' .f.  »•-  • * 04  m*  , ■ / s'.'  ^ y

v n } ' ' ' ' ' • • .:  ; ■ ' ' :


• * t:  yf  ■,  ■ ; \ j


••  ' y > - ? y y r -


■ ■

ii ::  % ' •'  ' C.C  : C ' c:c  £ : : . / . •:

-.  • ^ ■'  c ‘ t i ..  &

- • ' ‘ / ■■■'  . ‘ • • ••  • • 0.%-jt

; . ' . '.  L :


" . . ' r , ■ S r’  y . y f 'jtff  ■ ■ • t "■

; V't  - - ■ • . . • •

• , ’ , ■ . * ■ . - ■ ■

r • •'  y •»'  • y l -*  y..'*  . y.jS'  .,y>  «£  •

. i : • ' ^ < • ' f J ' / ' i i ■ : ..  . ,

■'  f ' ' ' ' t r t,  f iXf  * ' ■■■  ZUUl'ti  '

: k i * '..s'  n g \ y / . s.  <? : t . .<• . : t ' < c . r * . ( : e i s r.  i y a : . . t ; , : ,


h yfy  y \ u a


4


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2017  with  funding  from
Wellcome  Library


HOMCEOPATHIC  M E D I C I N E .


{jrf-  WM.  RADDE,  No.  322  Broadway,  New-YorJc,  General  Agent  for
€he  Central  Homoeopathic  Pharmacy  at  Leijisic,  for  the  United  States,  respect-
fully informs  the  Homoeopathic  Physicians  and  the  friends  of  the  system,  that
he  has  always  on  hand  a good  assortment  of  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDI-
CINES, in  complete  sets  or  by  single  vials,  in  Tinctures,  Dilutions,  and  Tri-
turations. Also,  Pocket  Cases  of  Medicines ; Physicians’  and  Family
Medicine  Chests,  to  Laurie’s  Domestic  (60  remedies,)  Epp’s  (54  remedies,)
Hering’s  (52  remedies.)  Small  Pocket  Cases  at  $3,  with  Family  Guide
and  27  remedies.  Cases  containing  415  vials  with  Tinctures  and  Tritura-
tions for  Physicians  ; Cases  with  240  vials  of  Tinctures  and  Triturations  to
Jahr’s  Manual  in  2 vols.  Pocket  Cases  with  60  vials  of  Tinctures  and  Trit-
urations. Cases  from  200  to  400  vials  with  low  and  high  dilutions  of  medi-
cated pellets.  Cases  from  50 — 80  vials  of  low  and  high  dilutions,  etc.,  etc.
Refined  Sugar  of  Milk,  pure  Globules,  etc.  ; as  well  as  Rooks,  Pamphlets,
and  Standard  Works  on  the  System,  in  the  English,  French,  and  German
languages.

HOMCEOPATHIC  BOOKS.

THE  HOMCEOPATHIC  EXAMINER,  4th  vol.,  (new  series,)  will  be
issued  on  the  15th  day  of  August,  1845,  and  thereafter  on  the  first  of  each  -
month.  The  Journal  will  hereafter  be  edited  by  Drs.  Gkay  and  IIempel,
Wm.  Radde,  publisher  and  proprietor.  $5  a year  in  advance,  or  50  cents  on
delivery  for  each  number.

THE  HOMCEOPATHIC  DOMESTIC  PHYSICIAN,  by  Charles  J.  Hem-
pel,  M.D.  1 vol.  18mo.

HAHNEMANN,  DR.  S.,  THE  CHRONIC  DISEASES,  THEIR  SPE-
cific  Nature  and  Homoeopathic  Treatment.  Translated  and  edited  by  Charles
J.  Hempel,  M.D.  With  a preface  by  Constantin  IIering,  M.D.,  Phila-
delphia. 8.  bound,  1845.  $1.

The  same  works,  second  part.  8.  bound,  1845.  $150.

The  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  volumes,  each  $1  50.

HAHNEMANN,  DR.  S.,  MATERIA  MEDICA  PURA.  Translated  and
edited  by  Charles  Julius  Hempel,  M.  D.  1845.

BtENNINGHAUSEN’S  ESSAY  ON  THE  HOMCEOPATHIC  TREAT-
ment  of  Intermittent  Fevers.  Translated  and  edited  by  Charles  Julius
Hempel,  M.D.  1845.  50  cts.

A TREATISE  ON  THE  USE  OF  ARNICA  in  cases  ofContusions,  Wounds,
Strains,  Sprains,  Lacerations  of  the  Solids,  Concussions,  Paralysis,  Rheuma-
tism, Soreness  of  the  Nipples,  etc.,  etc.  With  a number  of  cases  illustrative
of  the  use  of  that  drug.  By  Charles  Julius  Hempel,  M.D.  I8|  cts.  1845.

JAHR’S  TEN  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  HOMOEOPATHIC  REMEDIES,
bv  Edward  Bayard,  M.D.  2d  edition.  Bound,  31\  cts.

JAHR’S  NEW  MANUAL  OF  HOMCEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.  Edited,
with  Annotations,  by  A.  Gerald  Hull,  M.D.,  from  the  third  Paris  edition.

This  is  the  second  American  edition  of  a very  celebrated  work,  written
in  French,  by  the  eminent  Homoeopathic  Professor  Jahr,  and  it  is  considered
the  best  practical  compendium  of  this  extraordinary  science  that  has  yet  been
composed.  After  a very  judicious  and  instructive  introduction,  the  work  pre-
sents a table  of  the  Homoeopathic  medicines,  with  their  names  in  Latin,  Eng-
lish, and  German  ; the  order  in  which  they  are  to  be  studied,  with  their  most
important  distinctions,  and  clinical  illustrations  of  their  symptoms  and  effects
upon  the  various  organs  and  functions  of  the  human  system. — The  second
volume  embraces  an  elaborate  analysis  of  the  indications  in  disease,  of  the
medicines  adapted  to  cure,  and  a glossary  of  the  technics  used  in  the  work,
arranged  so  luminously  as  to  form  an  admirable  guide  to  every  medical  stu-
dent. The  whole  system  is  here  displayed  with  a modesty  of  pretension,  and
a scrupulosity  in  statement,  well  calculated  to  bespeak  candid  investigation.
This  laborious  work  is  indispensable  to  the  students  and  practitioners  of  Horace-


2 Homoeopathic  Books.

opathy,  and  highly  interesting'  to  medical  and  scientific  men  of  all  classes,
2 vols.,  bound.  Price  $6.

LAURIE,  DR:  J.,  HOMOEOPATHIC  DOMESTIC  MEDICINE,  with
the  treatment  and  diseases  of  females,  infants,  children  and  adults.  Sd  Ameri-
can edition,  with  additions  by  A.  G.  Hull,  M.D.  1846.  Bound  $1  25.

ON  ECLECTICISM  IN  MEDICINE : or  a critical  review  of  the  leading
medical  doctrines.  An  inaugural  thesis,  presented  at  the  New-York  Univer-
sity, on  the  first  of  March,  1845.  By  Charles  J.  Hempel,  M.D.  25  cts.

THE  HOMOEOPATHIC  EXAMINER,  by  A.  G.  Hull,  M.D.  1840, 1841,
1842,  1843-1845.  3 vols.  $15.

THE  BRITISH  JOURNAL  OF  HOMOEOPATHY.  Edited  by  J.  J.  Drys-
dale,  M.D. ; J.  R.  Russell,  M.D.j  and  Francis  Black,  M.D.  London,
1843, 1846.  No.  1-15.

RUOFF’S  REPERTORY  OF  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICINE,  nosologi-
cally  arranged.  Translated  from  the  German  by  A.  H.  Okie,  M.D.,  translator
of  Hartmans  Remedies.  2d  American  edition,  wil  h additions  and  improve-
ments by  G.  Humphrey,  M.D.,  etc.  1844.  Bound,  $1  50.

HAHNEMANN’S,  DR.,  ORGANON  OF  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICINE,
2d  American  from  the  British  translation  of  the  4th  German  edition.  With
improvements  and  editions  from  the  fifth,  by  the  North  American  Academy
of  the  Homoeopathic  Healing  Art,  New-York,  1843.  Price,  bound,  $1.

JAHR’S  PHARMACOPOEIA  and  Posology  of  the  preparations  of  Homceo-

{>athic  medicines  and  the  administration  of  the  dose.  Translated  by  F.
AITCHEN.  $2.

THE  PRACTICAL  ADVANTAGES  OF  HOMOEOPATHY,  illustrated
by  numerous  cases.  Dedicated  by  permission  to  Her  Majesty  Queen  Adelaide.
By  H.  Dunsford,  M.D.  $1.

JAHR’S  MANUAL  OF  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICINE.  Translated
from  the  German.  With  an  introduction  and  some  additions  by  C.  IIering,
M.D.  1838.  $2  50.

A POPULAR  VIEW  OF  HOMOEOPATHY.  By  Rev.  Thomas  R.  Ever-
est, Rector  of  Wickwar.  With  annotations,  and  a brief  survey  of  the  state
and  progress  of  Homoeopathia  in  Europe.  By  A.  Gerald  Hull,  M.D.  From
the  Second  London  edition.  Bound,  price  $>1.

THE  FAMILY  GUIDE  TO  THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF  IIOMCEO-
pathic  Remedies.  Third  edition,  after  the  2d  London  edition,  with  additions.
Retail  price,  25  cts.

AN  EPITOME  OF  IIOMCEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.  Compiled  chiefly
from  Jahr,  Rucckert,  Beauvais,  Boenninghausen,  etc.  By  J.  T.  Curtis,  M.D.,
and  J.  Lillie,  M.D.  1813.  Bound,  87 i cts.

C.  IIERING,  M.D.,  DOMESTIC  PHYSICIAN.  Fourth  American,  with
additions  from  the  fifth  German  edition.  1846.  Bound,  $2.

M.  CROSERIO,  M.D.,  ON  IIOMCEOPATHIC  MEDICINE.  Illustrating
its  superiority  over  the  other  medical  doctrines,  with  an  account  of  the  regi-
men to  be  followed  during  the  treatment  of  Homoeopathy.  Translated  from
the  French.  25  cts.  ^

EPPS,  DR.  J.,  DOMESTIC  HOMCEOPATHY;  or  Rules  for  the  Domestic
Treatment  of  the  Maladies  of  Infants,  Children  and  Adults,  etc.  Second
American  from  the  fourth  London  edition.  1845.  Bound,  75  cts.

W.  C.  BRYANT’S  POPULAR  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  HOMCEOPA-
thia.  Delivered  before  the  New-Yoik  Homoeopathic  Society.  131  cts.

C.  NEIDHARD,  M.D.  AN  ANSWER  OF  THE  HOMEOPATHIC  DE-
lusions  of  Dr.  O.  W.  Holmes.  181  cts.

HARTMANN,  DR.  F.,  PRACTICAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  SOME
of  the  chief  Homoeopathic  Remedies.  Translated  from  the  German  by  A.  H.
Okie,  M.D.  First  series.  Bound, $1*  «

The  2d  and  last  series  will  be  published  in  a short  time.  Bound,  $1.
MANUAL  OF  VETERINARY  HOMCEOPATHY,  comprehending  the
treatment  of  the  Diseases  of  Domestic  Animals.  Second  edition.  London,
1342.  Bound,  $1  50.

A.  H.  OKIE,  M.D,,  HOMOEOPATHY  EXPLAINED  AND  OBJEC-
tions  Answered.  12£  cts.

J.Av  M’VICKAR,  M.D  , HOMCEQPATHJA  A PRINCIPLE  IN  MEDI-


Wm»  Radde , 622  Broadway . 3


cine  and  not  an  Exclusive  System.  In  a letter  to  Alban  Goldsmith,  M.D.
25  cts.

J.  JEANES.  M.D  , HOMCEOPATHIC  PRACTICE  OF  MEDICINE.  $3.

A.  G.  HULL,  M.D.,  THE  DOMESTIC  TREATMENT  OF  THE  CON-
vulsions  of  Infants.  25  cts.

DR.  CHANNING’S  DISCOURSE  OF  THE  REFORMATION  OF  MEDI-
cal  Science  demanded  by  Inductive  Philosophy.  37-1  cts.

DR  CURIE,  ANNALS  OF  THE  LONDON  HOMCEOPATHIC  MEDI-
cal  Institution.  Reports  of  Cases.  Nos.  1-21,  1842.  $4.

DEFENCE  OF  HAHNEMANN  AND  HIS  DOCTRINES,  INCLUDING
an  Exposuse  of  Dr.  Alex.  Wood’s  “ Homoeopathy  Unmasked.”  London,
1844.  50  cts.

F.  VANDERBURGH,  M.D.,  AN  APPEAL  FOR  HOMOEOPATHY  ; or
Remarks  on  the  Decision  of  the  late  Judge  Cowan,  relative  to  legal  Rights  of
Homoeopathic  Physicians.  1844.  121  cts.

HYDRIATICS,  OR  MANUAL  OF  THE  WATER  CURE,— Especially
as  practised  by  Vincent  Priessnitz,  in  Graftenburgh  ; compiled  and  translated
from  the  writings  of  Charles  Mundie,  Dr.  Oertel,  Dr.  B.  Hirschel,  and  other
eye-witnesses  and  practitioners.  Fourth  edition,  by  Francis  Graeter.
Price  50  cts.,  with  one  plate  or  six  engravings.  1844.

ROKYTANSKY’S  PATHOLOGICAL  ANATOMY,  translated  from  the
German,  with  additions  on  diagnosis  from  Schonlein,  Skoda,  and  others.  By
Dr.  John  C.  Peters.  1841.  75  cts.

Opinions  of  the  Press. — “ Dr  Rokytansky’s  book  is  more  than  it  professes
to  be  : it  is  morbid  Anatomy  in  its  densest  and  most  compact  form,  scarcely
ever  alleviated  by  histories,  cases,  or  hypotheses.  It  is  just  such  a work  as
might  be  expected  from  its  author,  who  is  said  to  have  written  in  it  the  result
of  his  experience  gained  in  the  careful  examination  of  over  12,000  bodies,  and
who  is  possessed  of  a truly  marvellous  power  of  observing  and  amassing  facts.
In  the  course  of  our  analysis  we  have  said  comparatively  little  of  its  merits,
the  best  evidence  of  which  is  found  in  the  length  to  which  our  abstracts  have
been  carried  without  passing  beyond  the  bounds  of  what  is  novel  or  important.
Nor  would  this  fault  have  been  committed,  though  much  more  had  been  bor-
rowed, for  no  modern  volume  on  morbid  Anatomy  contains  half  so  many  genu-
ine facts  as  this  ; it  is  alone  sufficient  to  place  its  author  in  the  highest  rank  of
European  medical  observers.” — British  fy  Foreign  Medical  Review,  Jan.  1843.

‘‘Among  others  of  our  profession  at  Vienna,  who  are  ably  endeavouring  to
advance  the  reputation  of  sound  medical  science  on  the  only  secure  basis  upon
which  it  can  march,  that  of  practical  experience  at  the  bed-side,  and  in  autopsic
examinations,  we  (Dr.  Mott)  must  not  omit  to  mention  Professors  Rokytansky
and  Skoda.  Dr.  Rokytansky,  availing  himself  of  the  wide  field  of  inquiry
which  his  position  gives  him,  has,  after  years  of  the  closest  and  most  diligent
application,  recently  published  a work,  than  which  none  was  more  wanted  by
the  profession,  and  which,  being  a faithful  description  of  what  he  himself  saw
in  more  than  12.000  dead  bodies,  and  a well  digested  theory  of  the  greater
number  of  morbid  processes,  which  he  has  minutely  traced  throughout  their
stages,  will  form  a most  valuable  accession  to  Pathology.  Professor  Skoda,
after  a number  of  years  of  the  most  laborious  application  to  the  subject  of  Aus-
cultation and  Percussion,  has  brought  out  a great  work  on  those  modes  of
applying  the  principles  of  acoustics,  to  the  illustration  of  pathological  pheno-
mena, which  will  probably  give  it  the  precedence  over  all  others.  It  is  founded
wholly  on  his  own  observations  on  the  living  subject,  confirmed  by  numerous
post  mortem  examinations.” — Dr.  Mott's  Travels  in  Europe  and  the  East.

ENCHIRIDION  MEDICUM  ; or,  the  Practice  of  Medicine;  the  result  of
fifty  years’  experience,  by  C.  W.  Hufeland,  counsellor  of  State,  physician
in  ordinary  of  the  late  King  of  Prussia,  professor  in  the  University  of  Berlin.
From  the  sixth  German  edition  ; translated  by  C.  Bruchhausen,  M.D.  Re-
vised by  R.  Nelson,  M D.  Second  American  edition.  1844.  Bound,  $2  50.

Opinions  : — The  following  lines  from  Dr.  Manley,  formerly  president  of  the
Medical  Society  of  the  State  of  New  York,  contains  his  opinion  in  a few
words  of  the  merits  of  the  book  : —

I am  happy  to  have  the  opportunity  of  recommending  to  the  medical  pro-
fession, the  Manual  of  the  Practice  of  Medicine,  by  Hufeland.  It  is  not  often


4


Medical  Boohs .


tha'  books  of  this  character,  on  perusal,  make  good  the  claims  which  their
titles  assume,  but  this  is  a well  marked  exception  : its  descriptions  of diseases,
though  concise,  are  comprehensive ; its  reasonings  just  and  philosophical,
and  its  practice  as  a consequence,  intelligible  and  rational.  The  character
of  the  author,  and  his  experience  of  more  than  half  a century,  together  with
the  unexampled  popularity  of  the  work  in  its  original  language,  rendi  r,  in
my  opinion,  all  individual  recommendation  superfluous.  I hope  that  it  may
soon  be  found  in  the  hands  of  every  medical  man,  whether  pupil  or  practi-
tioner.

New-York,  September  7,  1842.  James  R.  Manley,  M.D.

Certificate  of  John  F.  Gray,  M.D.,  formerly  resident  physician  to  the
New-York  Hospital,  Lecturer  on  the  Theory  and  Practice  of  Physic,  Censor
of  the  State  and  New-York  Medical  Societies,  etc.,  etc.

I am  very  glad  to  find  the  press  engaged  in  diffusing  a knowledge  of  the
German  medical  literature  in  this  country  At  the  head  of  the  German  books
of  practice  stands  this  book  of  the  good  Hufeland.  Mr.  Bruchhausen  and  Dr.
Nelson  have  laboured  with  diligence  and  good  faith  in  rendering  the  Enchiri-
dion ; and,  so  far  as  I have  had  leisure  to  compare  their  work  with  the  origi-
nal, I find  no  error  of  magnitude.  Another  edition  will  no  doubt  be  called  tor
soon,  and  then  the  worthy  American  curators  can  dispense  with  the  somewhat
meagre  characteristic  given  to  it  by  their  too  close  adherence  to  the  letter
of  the  author.  1 heartily  wish  success  to  the  good  enterprise.

New-York,  September  8,  1842.  John  F.  Gray,  M.D.

The  reputation  of  the  venerable  eclectic  of  Germany  scarcely  requires
endorsement  even  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic.  An  independent  and  original
thinker,  Hufeland  laboured  for  the  cause  of  medical  science,  and  has  acquired
an  universal  renown,  amply  attested  to  by  his  “ Journal  of  Practical  Medi-
cine,” “ Art  of  prolonging  Life,”  “ System  of  Practical  Medicine,”  and
numerous  essays,  besides  personal  contributions  of  humane  and  necessary
innovations  in  the  treatment  of  “ Inoculation,”  “ Small  Pox,”  and  “ Signs  of
Death.”  His  last  work,  Enchiridion  Medicum , concentrates  the  experience
of  his  entire  medical  life,  and  fully  maintains  in  its  careful  and  concise  de-
scription and  diagnosis  of  diseases  all  the  evidence  of  the  discriminating
intellect  of  the  Patriarch  of  German  medical  literature.

New-York,  September  12,  1842.  A.  Gerald  Hull,  M.D.

The  writings  of  the  great  Hufeland  need  no  recommendation  of  mine.
His  name,  as  a medical  authority,  is  so  well  established,  that  I have  no  doubt
this  work  will  find  a ready  and  extensive  sale.

John  B.  Beck,  M.D.,

Professor  of  Materia  Medica  and  Medical  Jurisprudence  in  the
College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  of  New-York.

New-York,  14  Le  Roy  Place,  September  6,  1842.

I have  looked  over  the  Enchiridion  Medicum  of  Profes  or  Hufeland.  It  is
an  excellent  compendium  of  German  practice,  and  will  be  found  a valuable
vade  mecum  to  the  student  and  practitioner.  It  can  profitably  be  perused,
and  ought  to  be  in  the  hands  of  all  physicians.  The  justly  distinguished
reputation  of  the  author  will  make  it  a work  generally  sought  for.

Valentine  Mott,  M.D.

The  publishers  have  conferred  a benefit  upon  the  medical  literature  of  our
country,  by  producing  this  translation  of  the  Enchiridion  Medicum  of  Hufe-
land. Few  works  on  practice  contain  so  much  useful  matter  in  so  small  a
compass.  But  independently  of  the  value  attached  to  any  work  from  the  pen
of  Hufeland,  this  book  is  especially  useful  to  Americans,  by  furnishing  them
with  the  modes  of  thinking  and  practising,  peculiar  to  the  medical  men  of  a
large  portion  of  continental  Europe,  to  which  they  have  few  means  of  access.

Edward  Delafield,  M.D.

108  Bleecker-street,  September  5,  1842.


THE


CHRONIC  DISEASES:

THEIR

SPECIFIC  NATURE

AND

HOMOEOPATHIC  TREATMENT.


B Y

Dr.  SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN.


TRANSLATED  AND  EDITED


CHARLES  J,  HEMPEL,  M.  D.


VOLUME  V.

ANTI-PSORIC  REMEDIES.


NEW.YORK:

WM.  RADDE,  322  BROADWAY.
LONDON:

H.  BALLIERE,  219  REGENT  - STREET.

1 846,


v/


;Clc  b


/


&

HISTORICAL
MEDICAL


Entered  according  to  the  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1846,  by

WILLIAM  RADDE,

In  the  Clerk’s  Office  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York.


H.  LUDWIG,  PRINTER,
70  & 72,  Vesey  St.


THE


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE.

The  last  volume  of  the  Chronic  Diseases  is  here  laid  before
the  public.  The  nosological  portion  of  Noack  and  Trinks’
work  had  to  be  left  out,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  work  is
not  yet  completed.

It  is  needless  that  I should  say  any  thing  of  the  work
which  it  has  been  my  delight  and  my  pride  to  transfer  into
the  English  vernacular  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  I may  be
permitted,  however,  to  say  but  one  word  of  the  translation.

I am  far  from  believing  that  my  translation  is  perfect ;
I know  that  it  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  were  it  for  no  other
reason  than  the  peculiar  difficulty  which  attaches  to  the
rendering,  in  a foreign  tongue,  of  the  almost  endless  shades
of  sensation  and  emotion,  which  constitute  our  Materia
Medica.  My  constant  object  has  been  to  express  the  symp-
toms in  a simple  and  clear  manner,  in  perfect  accordance
with  the  original,  and  I trust  that  this  object  has  been  suffi-
ciently attained  to  make  the  study  of  Hahnemann’s  Materia
Medica  encouraging,  instructive,  and  profitable  to  both
physicians  and  patients.  This  study  is  absolutely  indispens-
able to  the  former.  I am  satisfied  that  a single  glance  at
the  Materia  Medica  will  be  sufficient  to  convince  every  in-
telligent practitioner  that  no  Repertory,  no  Synopsis  can  ever
be  a substitute  for  the  Materia  Medica  itself ; that  which
characterises  a symptom,  is  too  frequently  omitted  in  those


IV


translator's  preface.


auxiliary  works,  and  it  would  be  a hazardous  piece  of  enter,
prise  to  attempt  the  cure  of  an  inveterate,  complicated
chronic  disease,  without  constantly  referring  to  our  fountain-
head of  therapeutic  wisdom.

If  the  labor  which  I have  bestowed  upon  the  translation  of
this  work,  shall  do  some  good  in  spreading  our  cause,  firing
the  energies  of  our  practitioners,  leading  to  a more  intimate
study  of  our  Materia  Medica,  suggesting  new  ways  and
methods  of  popularising  our  system,  I shall  feel  doubly  happy
in  having  made  the  effort  and  in  renewing  the  pledge  which  I
have  taken  before  God  and  my  inmost  conscience,  to  devote
every  moment  of  my  life  to  the  propagation  and  final  triumph
of  our  sublime  and  saving  Art.

CHARLES  J.  HEMPEL,

93  Spring-Street.


New- York,  March  16,  1846.


PREFACE.


DILUTIONS  AND  POTENCIES;  OR,  DYNA-

MIZATIONS.


Dilutions,  properly  so  called,  only  exist  in  objects  of  taste  and
color,  A solution  of  salt  or  bitter  substances  becomes  less  salt
or  bitter  in  proportion  as  water  is  added  to  it,  until  it  finally  loses
its  taste  altogether,  no  matter  how  much  we  shake  it;  in  a similar
manner  a colored  solution  finally  loses  its  color  altogether  by  a *
sufficient  quantity  of  water  being  added  to  it.

These  solutions  are  true  dilutions,  but  no  dynamizations.

Homoeopathic  dynamizations  are  processes  by  means  of  which
the  medicinal  properties  of  drugs,  which  are  in  a latent  state  in
the  crude  substance,  are  excited  and  enabled  to  act  spiritually
(dynamically)  upon  the  vital  forces,  that  is,  upon  the  sensibility
and  irritability  of  the  fibre.  I have  been  the  first  to  discover  and
to  promulgate  this  awakening  of  the  latent  dynamic  properties  of
medicinal  drugs,  which  is  effected  either  by  the  process  of  tritu-
ration or  succussion.  It  is  therefore  improper  to  apply  the  term
“ dilution  ” to  a dynamized  drug,  although  every  new  potency  of
a drug  has  to  be  mixed  either  with  alcohol  or  sugar  of  milk  to  en-
able us  to  carry  on  those  processes  still  further,  and  to  set  free  the
very  inmost  power  of  the  drug,  which  could  not  be  done  by  simply
triturating  or  shaking  the  original  substance,  were  we  to  do  it
for  ever  so  long  a period.

We  frequently  read  in  homoeopathic  books  that  this  or  that  phy-
sician has  seen  no  effects  of  this  or  that  potency,  but  that  a lower
potency  had  answered  his  purpose  ; whereas  others  maintain  the
contrary.  The  reason  of  this  difference  in  the  results  obtained


VI


PREFACE.


by  physicians  is  not  sufficiently  investigated.  I doubt  whether  the
manufacturers  of  homoeopathic  preparations  employ  as  much  care
as  they  ought  to  do  in  potentializing  our  drugs.  The  better  way
would  be  that  every  practitioner  should  prepare  the  potencies  him-
self. What  objection  is  there  to  substitute  in  the  place  of  a few
careless  strokes,  10,  20,  50,  and  more  vigorous  strokes,  striking
the  phial  even  against  a somewhat  hard,  elastic  body]

I should  say  that  the  welfare  of  our  patients,  and  the  interest  of
our  art  are  well  worth  the  trouble  of  securing  to  our  druo-s  the  ut-
most  efficiency.

I3y  employing  proper  care  in  the  preparation  of  our  potencies,
even  the  50th  potency  (modern  wiseacres  have  even  sneered  at  the
30th,  substituting  the  crude  substances  for  it,  and  thus  depriving
themselves  of  the  means  of  doing  all  the  good  that  our  art  is  capa-
ble of  accomplishing,)  becomes  exceedingly  powerful,  so  powerful
that  a pellet  of  that  potency  has  frequently  to  be  dissolved  in  a
large  quantity  of  water,  and  has  to  be  taken  in  very  small  doses
by  susceptible  patients,  lest  the  effect  should  be  overwhelming;
for,  I repeat  that  in  those  high  potencies  almost  all  the  inmost
powers  of  the  medicinal  substance  are  fully  developed  and  set  free.

S.  HAHNEMANN.


Paris,  Dec.  19,  1838.


INDEX  OF  REMEDIES

CONTAINED  IN  THIS  VOL.

Pago.

NlTRUM,  -------  ------  1

Petroleum,  - --  --  --  --  --  -21

Phosphorus,  - --  -- -43

Phosphoric  Acid,  - --  --  --  --  --88

P LATINA,  - --  --  --  --  --  --  108

Sassaparilla,  -----  130

Sepia,  - --  --  --  --  --  --  141

Silicea,  - --  --  --  --  --  --  19G

Stannum,  - --  --  --  --  --  - 233


Sulphuric  Acid,  - --  -- 310

Zincum,  - --  --  - - 324

Arsenic,  - --  --  - 361


■


ANTI-PSORIC  REMEDIES.


NITRUM— (NITRATE  OF  POTASH.)

Dissolve  one  part  of  the  nitrate  of  potash  of  the  shops
in  6 parts  of  boiling  hot  water;  the  crystals  which  are
deposited  from  this  solution  at  a very  low  temperature,
are  the  best  for  homoeopathic  use,  inasmuch  as  they  are
almost  entirely  free  of  salt.  These  crystals  arc  dynamised
in  the  same  way  as  every  other  dry  substance.

Beside  the  blood-lettings  which  are  yet  all  the  rage
even  at  this  moment,  Nilrum  has  been  used  as  the  chief
antiphlogistic  by  physicians  of  the  old  school,  imagining
that  Nilrum  depresses  the  high  action  of  the  circulatory
system  and  diminishes  inflammatory  fever.  This  was
almost  the  only  purpose  for  which  Nilrum  was  used.
But  inasmuch  as  the  production  of  cold  in  the  system  is
the  primary  effect  of  Nilrum  and  its  action  in  inflamma-
tory fevers  must  therefore  have  been  palliative,  the  ultimate
necessary  consequence  of  Nilrum  when  given  in  the  large
doses  of  allceopathic  practice,  must  have  been  to  produce
a sinking  of  strength  and  lentescent  nervous  fevers,  which
^frequently  terminated  in  death,  as  the  experience  of  several
centuries  has  sufficiently  shown.

Nilrum  has  been  found  useful  in  affections  characterised
by  the  following  symptoms  : Want  of  appetite  with  thirst;
violent  spasms  of  the  stomach  ; incarceration  of  flatulence
in  the  afternoon;  diarrhoea,  without  colic;  cough  in  the
open  air  and  when  going  up  stairs  ; cough  at  every  arrest
of  breathing  ; haemoptysis  ; asthma , cannot  lie  in  bed
with  the  head  low  ; stitches  in  the  chest  during  a deep
inspiration;  stitches  in  the  scapula;  exhausting  sweats;
quotidian  fever  with  drawing  pains  in  the  lower  limbs.

Dr.  Schreter  has  successfully  employed  the  spirits  of
nitre  against  the  violent  effects  of  Nitrum,  especially  the
headache  ; Camphor  increases  the  ailments  caused  by
Nilrum.


1


o


NITRUM — NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Ng.  and  Drs.  Schr6tcr
and  Tielze.

Moral  Symptoms. — Frequent  anxiety,  in  the  afternoon,
(a.  20  d.)  Anxiety,  with  sweat  over  the  whole  body.
Ennui,  weeping  mood,  melancholy  appearance.  Appre-
hensive and  reflective.  Desponding.  Out  of  humor,  (1.
d.)  Out  of  humor,  badly  disposed.  Uneasy,  out  of
humor,  sensitive,  timid.

Dead. — Drowsy,  dulness  of  the  head.  Indisposed  to
thinking,  early  in  the  morning,  with  a feeling  of  warmth
in  the  face  and  hot  forehead.  Stupefaction  and  heaviness
of  ihe  head,  in  the  morning,  as  after  intoxication.  Dizzy,
in  the  morning.  The  head  feels  gloomy,  and  heavy,  he
forgets  what  he  is  about  to  do  or  say.  Vertigo,  the  head
is  affect  Co,  (immediately.)  Vertigo  and  slight  obtusion  of
the  head.  Staggering  gait,  without  vertigo.  Headache
in  the  morning,  as  from  nightly  revelling.  Heaviness  of
the  head,  (a-  2 In)  Feeling  ot  heaviness  and  aching  pain
in  the  forehead,  (1.  (I.)  Continual  heaviness  and  pain
over  the  whole  head,  (1.  2.  d.)  Obtusion  and  throbbing
in  the  forehead,  (9.  d.)  Headache  in  the  left  temple  and
forehead,  with  vertigo,  reeling,  staggering,  and  anxiety
with  sweat.  The  vertex  feels  bruised  and  sensitive,  (2.
d.)  Headache  after  dinner,  (21.  d.)  Headache  in  the
tof)  of  ihe  head,  in  the  morning  when  rising,  for  5 days.
Headache  above  the  eyebrows,  after  the  moderate  use  of
veal.  Headache,  when  waking,  fulness  in  the  abdomen,
diarrhoea  with  chilliness.  Pressure  in  the  fore-part  of  the
head,  as  if  the  eyes  would  start  from  their  sockets,  and
as  if  thev  were  surrounded  by  little  stones.  Violent
aching  pain  deep  in  the  head,  behind  the  left  eye,  (a.  10
h.)  Aching  pain  in  the  right  temple.  Pressure  on  the
top  of  the  head,  as  if  a stone  were  pressing  upon  it,  (7.  d.)
Pressure  on  the  top  of  the  head,  worse  when  laying  the
hand  upon  it,  (3.  d.)  Violent  pressing  together  in  the
occiput,  the  parts  becoming  stiff;  afterwards  pain  in  the
nape  of  the  neck,  as  if  the  hairs  were  pulled  at,  extending
down  to  the  shoulders,  with  tension  and  stitches  over  the
face  and  neck,  with  diminished  deglutition,  anxiety,  and
arrest  of  brealhing,  from  11  o’clock  in  the  forenoon  until
4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  (3.  4.  d.)  The  headache  be-


NITRUM— NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


3


came  almost  intolerable  when  stooping.  She  was  unable  to
eat,  on  account  of  headache,  (27.  d ) During  the  headache
the  eyelids  become  closed.  The  aching  in  the  occiput
is  diminished  by  tying  the  hair  up.  The  headache  and
pain  in  the  neck  last  from  evening  till  morning,  and  the
day  following  ; the  left  side  especially  is  affected.  Painful
pressure  towards  the  occiput,  gradually  changing  to  stitch-
ing, increased  by  contact,  and  felt  even  when  in  a state
of  rest  at  regular  intervals.  Frequent  feeling  of  pressure
and  heaviness  in  the  occiput,  (13.  d.)  Aching  pain  in
the  head,  in  the  evening,  (14.  d.)  Headache,  especially
in  the  afternoon,  (12.  d ) Pressure,  with  tearing,  in  the
right  side  of  the  forehead,  behind  the  eye,  towards  the
occiput,  worse  after  coffee,  when  walking,  stitching  at
regular  intervals  ; abating  when  driving  in  the  open  air.
Tensive  pain  deep  in  the  head,  after  dinner.  Pain  in  the
head,  distensive,  with  stitches  in  the  left  ear  and  the
clavicles,  whence  the  pain  extended  into  the  elbows,  (22.
d ) Contractive  pain  in  the  forehead  and  eyes,  terminating
in  the  tip  of  the  nose  as  a griping  pain.  Contractive  pain
in  the  vertex  for  two  hours.  Drawing  and  tearing  in  the
occiput,  she  was  unable  to  move  the  head,  with  stiffness
of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  for  one  hour  ; in  two  hours  draw-
ing and  tearing  in  the  scapulae,  with  great  weakness  of  the
body  ; she  was  scarcely  able  to  move  her  feet ; at  the
same  time  coldness  without  thirst,  in  the  night  heat  with-
out thirst,  without  any  subsequent  sweat,  (6.  d.)  Tearing
in  the  right  temple,  from  evening  till  morning,  relieved  by
pressing  upon  the  parts,  (30.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  left
temple,  from  time  to  time,  (8.  d.)  Stitching  and  pressing
asunder  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  when  stooping.
Stitching  pain  in  the  forehead  behind  the  eyes,  at  regular
intervals,  worst  when  walking;  single  stitches  in  long
pauses  when  at  rest,  the  whole  afternoon  and  evening.
Stinging  in  the  left  temple,  immediately  after  dinner,  (15.
d.)  Single  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  vertex.  Violent
stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  during  the  menses,
(a.  29  d.)  Feeling  of  looseness  and  stitches  in  the  brain.
Hacking  and  stitching  in  the  head,  with  pressure  around
the  eyes,  and  drowsiness,  with  increase  of  the  pains.
Headache,  on  the  top  of  the  head,  as  if  the  hairs  were


4


NITRUM-—  NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


pulled  upon.  Pain  at  one  place  on  the  right  side  and
near  the  vertex,  as  if  the  scalp  were  contracted,  early  in
the  morning  after  rising.  Jerking  pain  in  the  occiput,
apparently  in  the  bone,  in  three  quarters  of  an  hour  in  the
hip-bone,  where  it  disappeared  in  a few  hours  and  was
succeeded  by  a tensive  pain  behind  the  right  car,  con-
tinuing the  whole  night.  Burning  throbbing  on  the  left
side  ot  the  occiput,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Rush  of
blood  to  the  head,  (a.  20  m.)  Great  sensitiveness  of  the
scalp,  it  is  painful  to  the  touch,  (a.  5 d.)  Great  falling  off
of  the  hair,  (a.  30  d.)  Small  scurfy  places  on  the  hairy
scalp,  with  itching,  (a.  25  d.)  Many  pimples  on  the  nape
of  the  neck  and  occiput,  disappearing  again  the  next  day,
(a.  30  d.)

Eyes. — Painful  pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  if  sand  or  dust
had  got  in,  (a.  lbd.)  Pressure  in  the  lefi  eye,  under  the
upper  lid,  as  of  a hair.  Violent  itching  of  the  upper
margins  of  both  orbits,  frequently,  (4.  d.)  Itching  of  the
right  eye,  and  continual  secretion  of  acrid  tears.  Burning
smarting,  especially  of  the  left  eye,  as  if  salt-water  had
got  in,  (29.  d.)  Burning  smarting  in  the  right  lids  ; he  is
obliged  to  rub.  Violent  burning  of  the  eyes,  with  redness
of  the  canthh  for  three  days.  Burning  and  lachrymation,
in  the  morning,  (22.  d.)  Involuntary  lachrymation  of  the
right  eye.  Continual  tearing  of  the  inner  canthi.  Aggluti-
nation of  the  right  eye,  in  the  morning,  (19.  d.)  Coloured
wheels  before  the  eyes,  the  sight  being  very  good,  for  two
days.  Rainbow-like  circle  around  the  light,  in  the  evening.
Transitory  blindness.  After  taking  the  Nitrum,  the  smell
of  camphor  frequently  obscured  her  sight.

Ears- — Pain  in  the  ears,  a tension.  Tearing  in  the
right  meatus  auditorius,  (7.  d.)  Stitching  in  the  right  ear,
she  was  unable  to  he  upon  it  in  the  night,  (34.  d.)  Dull
stitching  pain  in  the  right  ear.  Stitching  in  the  ear,  with
headache,  (35.  d.)  Tingling  in  the  ears  (immediately,)
(also  37  d.)  Continual  deafness.  Violent  itching  in  the
internal  meatus  auditorius,  (15.  d.)  Inflammation  and
swelling  of  the  right  lobule,  with  violent  burning  and
jerking.  Tensive  pain  behind  the  right  ear,  the  whole  day,
with  stitching  when  the  pain  decreases.  Tearing  behind
the  ears,  for  two  hours,  (14,  d.)  Violent  stitches  behind


N1TRUM — NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


5


the  left  ear,  towards  the  joint  of  the  jaw.  Stitching  behind
the  right  ear,  apparently  deep  in  the  head.

Nose. — Feeling  of  swelling  in  the  right  nostril,  it  is
painful  to  the  touch.  Sore  pain  of  the  right  nostril , high
lip,  with  sensitiveness  to  external  pressure.  Burning  in
the  right  nostril,  as  if  sore,  when  blowing  the  nose,  (a.  4
d.)  Ulcer  deep  in  the  right  nostril,  becoming  covered
with  a scurf  in  a few  days,  (a.  19  d.)  The  little  scab  at
the  tip  of  the  nose  begins  to  bleed  ; next  day  the  nose
bleeds  without  the  head  being  relieved.  Bleeding  of  the
nose,  three  times  a week  ; the  blood  was  acrid  like  vine-
gar, (a.  20  d.)  Bleeding  of  the  nose,  in  the  afternoon,  (a.
20  d.)  When  blowing  the  nose,  coagulated  blood  is  ex-
pelled from  it,  (a.  17  d.)  Itching  of  the  right  side  of  the
nose,  and  afterwaids  fine  stinging  of  the  Up  of  the  nose,
towards  evening,  (5.  d.)  Itching  and  tingling  of  the  tip
of  the  nose,  (22.  d.)  Pustule  on  the  left  side  of  the  nose,
tensive  and  painful.  Griping  and  burning  around  the
wings  of  the  nose.  Pain  (4  the  tip  of  the  nose,  as  if  a
pustule  would  form  upon  it,  (6.  d.)  Burning  of  the  nose,
round  about,  with  digging-up  and  griping,  increased  by
contact,  with  swelling  of  the  right  nostril,  as  if  an  eruption
had  formed  in  it,  with  wint  of  air.  The  nasal  bones  are
painful,  especially  when  touching  them.  The  skin  of  the
nose  is  red  as  if  inflamed.  The  tip  of  the  nose  is  inflamed,
(37.  d.)

Face — Tensive  pain  in  the  cheeks,  with  redness  of  the
same,  increased  throbbing  in  the  head,  apparently  in  the
middle  of  the  brain.  'Fearing  in  the  zygomata.  'Fearing
in  the  facial  bones  of  the  left  side.  Tearing,  first  in  the
right  si  le  of  the  chin,  afterwards  below  the  outer  right
malleolus  when  sitting.  Prickings  in  the  left  cheek,  after-
wards  burning,  (38.  d.)  Gnawing  pain  in  the  left  upper
jaw,  close  to  the  wing  of  the  nose,  (5.  d.)  Jerking  pain
in  the  right  zygoma,  in  the  night.  Jerking,  intermittent
pain  in  the  zygoma,  towards  the  vertex,  the  whole  day,
sometimes  also  in  the  wrist-joint.  Jerking  pain  in  the  up-
per jaw  and  the  zygomata.  Pale  countenance,  as  after  a
long  disease.  Frequent,  violent  itching  of  the  face.  A
wart  on  the  left  cheek  becomes  larger  and  itching.

Jaws  and  Teeth.- — Vesicles  on  the  upper  lip,  with  in-


5


NITRUM — NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


flamed  circumference  and  tensive  pain,  (a.  16  h)  Pres-
suro*and  dull  stitching  in  the  right  articulation  of  the  jaw,
during  motion  and  deglut i lion,  (5.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  left
jaw  extending  into  the  head,  with  toothache  on  the  same
side,  relieved  by  pressure  and  by  lying  upon  the  part,  in
the  evening  when  in  bed.  Toothache,  drawing  and  stitch-
ing, now  on  the  right,  now  on  the  left  side,  in  the  upper
molar  teeth,  in  the  open  air  as  well  as  in  the  room.  Jerk-
ing toothache  in  the  left  upper  row,  like  an  ulcer.  Tear-  '
ing  toothache,  with  tearing  in  the  head,  from  morning  till
noon.  Stitches  in  a hollow  tooth  when  touching  it,  the
gums  being  swollen,  inflamed,  red,  painful,  readily  bleed-
ing. Boring  toothache,  with  pressure  in  the  head,  and  al-
ternate heat  and  coldness,  towards  noon  ; relieved  in  the
evening.  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  upper,  especially  the  hind
teeth,  (8.  d.)  She  is  waked  from  sleep  at  3 o’clock  in  the
morning,  and  at  midnight,  by  a throbbing  toothache,  ag-
gravated by  cold,  uninfluenced  by  warm  things.  Sensation
in  an  upper  carious  molar  tooth,  as  if  the  air  were  entering
and  rushing  out  again.  Jerking  pains  in  the  teeth,  (8.  d.)
The  toothache  becomes  more  violent  by  the  air  entering
the  tooth,  and  extends  even  as  far  as  the  incisor  teeth.
Swelling  of  the  gums  outer  and  inner,  of  the  right  upper
jaw,  scorbutic  condition.

Mouth. — Burning  of  the  tip  and  anterior  surface  of  the
tongue,  as  if  wounded,  (cut,)  in  the  evening,  (15.  16.  d.)
Small,  burning  pimples  on  t lie  tip  of  the  tongue,  increas-
ing in  the  evening,  (a.  14  d.)  Burning  blister  on  the  tip
of  the  tongue,  (a.  18  d.)  Tongue  coated  with  white  mu-
cus, without  change  of  taste  or  appetite,  the  whole  time.
Aphony.  Fetid  odor,  she  does  not  perceive  it  herself.
Coldness  from  the  mouth  to  the  stomach,  immediately,
with  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  a few  hours  after-
wards. Dryness  of  the  mouth  after  its  feeling  cool,  (5.  d.)
Unusual  dryness  of  mouth,  before  and  after  dinner;  he  is
frequently  obliged  to  drink,  (1.  d.)  Slimy  mouth  in  the
morning,  (3.  d.)  Swelling  of  the  salivary  and  sub-maxil-
lary glands,  with  hardness  and  pain  and  increased  secre-
tion of  saliva.  She  gets  easily  choked  when  swallowing
anything.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus.— Sore  throat,  day  and  night,


N1TRUM — NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


7


with  inflammation  of  the  velum  pendulum  palatiand  uvula,
for  four  days,  (a.  10  d.)  Violent  sore  throat  in  the  night,
as  if  the  throat  would  close  and  she  was  not  able  to  breathe.
Aching  pain  in  the  throat,  as  when  inflammation  com-
mences, for  twenty-four  hours,  (a.  9 h.)  Cutting  sore
throat,  apparently  in  the  larynx,  with  impeded  deglutition,
(a.  8 d.)  Prickling  pain  in  the  throat,  increased  by  deglu-
tition. Stitching  in  the  middle  of  the  throat  and  fauces
during  deglutition.  Titil lation  in  the  throat,  he  lias  to  clear
the  throat,  but  lie  does  not  throw  off  anything.  Rough
throat  (immediately-)  Roughness  and  scraping  sensation
in  the  throat  ; she  is  frequently  obliged  to  clear  her  throat,
which  causes  pain  in  the  chest,  evening  and  morning,  (a.
8 d.)  Roughness  of  the  throat,  with  hoarseness  and  burn-
ing in  the  oesophagus,  as  in  heart-burn.  Hawking  up  of
mucus  in  the  afternoon,  sweetish  and  tough.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Repugnant  taste  in  the  mouth,
the  whole  day,  (a.  18  d.)  Sour  taste  in  the  throat,  in  the
morning  after  rising.  Sourish  taste  and  increased  accu-
mutation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  until  after  dinner,  (8.  d.)
Want  of  appetite  with  increased  hunger,  (2.  d ) Dimin-
ished appelite,  with  distended  abdomen,  discharge  of  a
quantity  of  flatulence  and  tenesmus  of  the  rectum.  Di-
minished appelite.  Good  appetite,  in  spite  of  all  pains,  (a.
30  d.)  Canine  hunger,  in  the  forenoon,  every  attack  last-
irg  a quarter  of  an  hour,  alternating  with  slight  cutting
around  the  umbilicus.  Thirst,  without  much  appetite.
Thirstlessncss,  with  good  appetite,  generally.  Increase  of
thirst,  (a.  2 h.)  Violent,  continued  thirst,  (l.  d.)  Increase
of  thirst,  from  morning  till  evening,  (9.  d.)

Gastric  Symptoms. — Eructations,  (1.  d.)  Frequent
eructations  and  nausea  (immediately.)  Hiccough,  in  the
morning,  before  breakfast,  (14.  d.)  Heart-burn,  (a.  h h.)
Heart-burn,  and  canine  hunger,  without  much  appetite,  (a.
2 h.)  Nausea,  (8.  d.)  Nausea,  with  gulping  up  of  mu-
cus. Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  in  the  stomach
(shortly.)  Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  trembling  of
the  whole  body,  headache,  as  if  bruised,  choking  sensation
in  the  throat,  burning  eyes,  faintness,  tearing  and  stitching
in  the  vertex  and  occiput,  cutting  in  the  i Jeslines,  and
finally  expulsion  of  soft  faeces,  followed  by  mucus  ; in  the


8


NITRUM NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


evening,  9,  10  o’clock.  Gulping-np  of  bitter  water,  re-
lieving the  nausea,  (a.  50  d.)  Violent  vomiting.  Vomit-
ing, with  taste  of  Nilrum,  preceded  by  nausea  (immedi-
ately.) Vomiting,  first  mucus  and  water,  afterwards  bloody
mucus.  Violent  vomiting.  Bloody  vomiting.

Stomach. — Pain  in  the  stomach. — Violent  pain  in  the
stomach  and  whole  body?  (immediately.)  Qualmishness
in  the  stomach,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,
(during  the  menses.)  Pressure  in  the  stomach  and  colic,
without  evacuation,  from  afternoon  till  evening.  Inclina-
tion to  spasm  of  the  stomach.  Slight  pressure  and  burn-
ing in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  gradually  increasing  to  a
dull  boring;  half  an  hour  afterwards  cutting  pain,  follow-
ing the  course  of  the  intestines.  Sharp,  stitching  pain  in
the  stomach  and  whole  body,  so  violent  that  he  was  not
able  to  breathe  without  suffering  the  most  intense  pain.
Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  stomach,  as  if  something  in
the  stomach  would  turn  round.  Pulsation  in  the  region
of  the  orifice  of  the  stomach.  Feeling  of  coldness  in  the
stomach.  Coldness  and  pain  in  the  stomach,  (immediately.)
Jcy  coldness  in  the  stomach,  painful  to  the  touch  ; going
off  in  the  evening  after  lying  down;  accompanied  by  nau-
sea with  inclination  to  vomit,  and  by  gulping-up  of  water;
the  same  symptom  ort  the  twentieth  morning,  after  eating
milk,  but  without  inclination  to  vomit.  Burning  in  the
stomach,  with  violent  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,
(2.  d.)  Inflammation  of  the  stomach.  Aching  pain  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Pressure  and  gnawing  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  painful  to  the  touch,  (22.  d.)  Pressure  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  a button  were  pressing  into
it,  after  dinner.  (20.  d.)  Heaviness  and  fulness  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach.  Fuintish  toeakness  about  the  pit  of  the
stomach.  Cutting  stitching  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and
epigastrium,  after  breakfast.  Pain  in  the  left  hypochnn-
driurri,  ns  after  a violent  blow  ; accompanied  with  pains  in
the  small  of  the  back,  which  were  frequently  so  violent
that  she  was  unable  to  lie  down,  followed  by  leucorrhcea,
for  eight  days,  ceasing  together  with  the  pain  in  the  small
of  the  back,  after  the  menses.  Stitching  in  the  region  of
the  left  ribs,  at  regular  intervals,  after  lifting  a weight.
Colic.  Violent  colic,  especially  in  the  right  side,  after  eat-


NlTRUM — NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


9


ing  veal,  terminating  in  two  hours  in  painful  pressure  at  the
stomach,  with  a feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach  ;
afterwards  the  colic  returned  in  a few  hours,  and  remained
the  whole  night,  decreasing.  Violent  colic,  followed  by
emission  of  flatulence.  Dull,  painful  feeling  in  the  region
of  the  nerves,  (4.  d.)  Dull,  burning  pressure,  now  here,
now  there,  in  several  places  of  the  abdomen,  above  the
umbilicus.  Violent  aching  pains  in  the  lumbar  region,
worse  when  at  rest,  so  that  she  is  obliged  to  go  about,  to
find  relief;  the  pain  abates  by  slightly  stroking  the  part,
but  increases  to  such  an  extent  when  coughing,  that  she  is
obliged  to  exclaim.  Feeling  of  fulness  in  the  abdomen,
without  pain, early  in  the  morning;  in  the  afternoon  she  had
a sort  of  diarrhoea,  twice,  (5.  d.)  Distension  of  the  abdo-
men, evening.  Distension  and  stitching  in  the  leftside  of
the  abdomen,  relieved  bv  bending  double.  Considerable
distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  emission  of  a number  of
fetid  flatus,  the  stool  being  irregular,  (20.  21.  d.)  Violent
contractive  pain  in  the  left  groin,  when  walking  ; she  had
to  stand  still  frequently  ; her  breathing  was  arrested  by  the
pain  ; afterwards  stool,  half  liquid  and  mucous,  after  which
the  pain,  which  was  sometimes  stitching,  ceased,  evening,
(a.  1 1 d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  lesser  intestines,  towards
evening.  Intense  drawing  pain  in  the  lumbar  region,  in-
creased by  moving  the  body  ; with  increased  secretion  of
urine.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  now  here,  now  there,
frequently,  (5.  d.)  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  pinch-
ing extending  as  high  up  as  the  stomach,  which  is  painful
to  the  touch,  and  as  far  as  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,
where  he  feels  a stitching  pain  ; accompanied  by  disten-
sion, frequent  emission  of  flatulence  and  sensation  as  if
diarrhoea  would  come  on  ; for  two  hours,  (a.  38  d.)  Pinch-
ing, afterwards  stitching  pains  in  the  abdomen  and  small
of  the  back,  especially  morning  and  evening,  (8.  d.)  Oc-
casional cutting  in  the  umbilical  region,  frequently  with  a
sensation,  as  if  stool  would  come  on  ; stool  however  came
as  usual,  (5.  d.)  Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  morning
and  evening,  for  several  days.  Stitching  in  the  region  of
both  kidneys,  in  the  evening,  most  violent  in  the  right,  and
very  intense  during  a deep  inspiration.  Stitches  in  the  mid-
dle of  both  iliac  bones,  when  sitting.  Painful  stitching  in

1*


io


NITRUM NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


either  groin,  through  the  os  ilium,  when  walking.  Stitch-
ing and  burning  in  the  hypogastrium,  also  in  the  rectum,
alter  dinner,  aggravated  by  motion,  (10.  d.)  Sudden
shocks  in  the  lei l side  of  tiie  abdomen,  as  of  something
alive.  Painful,  choking  sensation  around  the  umbilicus,
with  nausea,  alter  dinner  when  walking.  Feeling  of  emp-
tiness in  the  region  of  the  transverse  colon.  Burning  pain
in  the  abdomen,  when  stooping  while  sitting,  as  far  as  the
small  of  the  back  ; going  off  by  raising  the  body,  (21.  d.)
Violent  tearing  with  burning,  apparently  deep  in  the  pelvis,
in  the  evening,  more  when  at  rest  than  when  m motion.
Pressing  towards  the  abdominal  ring,  (5.  d.)  Violent
rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  (9.  d.)  Copious  emission  of
flatulence,  with  scratching  m the  rectum.  Unsuccessful
desire  for  stool,  (10.  d.)  Frequent  pressing  upon  the  rec-
tum, with  stool  in  the  evening.  Tenesmus  of  the  rectum,
with  the  usual  stool.  Tenesmus,  two  hours  after  stool.
Desire  for  stool,  after  which  natural  stool,  followed  by  con-
tinual desire.  Sluggish  stool,  (4.  and  5.  d.)  Hard,  scanty
stool,  about  noo.i,  (2.  d.)  Hard,  dilficu.lt  stool,  (5  d.)
Hard  stool,  like  sheep’s  dung.  Second  hard  stool  in  the
evening,  with  stitching  in  both  groins,  afterwards  in  the
anus  ; again  next  morning.  Hard  stool,  with  violent  press-
ing, and  stitching  in  the  vagina.  Hard  stool,  followed  by
burning  at  the  anus,  (8.  d.)  Hard  stool,  with  protrusion
of  the  rectum,  (a.  15  d.)  Two  hard  evacuations  in  the
evening,  with  distension  of  the  varices,  (35.  d.)  Ordinary
stool,  preceded  by  pinching  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen.
Three  hard  stools  on  one  day,  (9.  d.)  Soft,  or  diarrhceic
stool,  the  first  days,  with  rumbling.  Soft  stool  after  din-
ner, followed  by  burning  and  stinging  at  the  anus.  Papes-
cent  stool,  three  times,  the  third  being  accompanied  by  a
cutting  in  the  whole  intestinal  canal,  continuing  even  after
the  evacuation,  (1.  d.)  Diarrhoea,  twice,  (4.  d.)  Diarrhoea
several  times,  without  colic.  Diarrhoea,  with  violent  colic.
Diarrhoea  in  the  morning,  three  times,  after  violent  colic
in  the  night,  (4.  d.)  Two  thin  stools,  preceded  by  colic
and  tenesmus,  the  tenesmus  continuing  even  after  the  evac-
uation ; emission  of  flatulence  in  the  evening,  terminating
the  colic  and  tenesmus,  (3.  d.)  Four  watery  stools,  with
colic  the  whole  day,  (8.  d.)  Slimy  evacuations  for  three


NITRUM NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


ll


days.  Bloody  stool.  Enlargement  and  stinging  pain  of
the  varices,  (5.  d.)

Urinary  Organs. — Diminished  secreiion  of  urine,  (a.
10  d.)  Frequent,  desire  lo  urinate,  continuing  until  late  at
night,  (8.  d.)  Frequent  desire  with  scanty  emission,  until
night.  Increased  desire  lo  urinate,  with  scanty  emission
at  every  urination,  the  whole  of  the  urine  voided  being
more  than  the  usual  quantity.  Increased  secretion  of  urine,
the  first  days,  (a.  16  d.)  Watery,  clear  urine,  every  two
hours  in  the  forenoon,  and  every  hour  in  the  afternoon  and
evening,  (2.  3.  d.)  Frequent  emission  of  a pale,  turbid
urine,  and  frequent  pressure  upon  the  rectum,  the  stool  re-
maining natural,  (l.d.)  The  urine  increases  everyday
and  deposits  reddish  clouds,  for  some  time.  The  urine  is
rather  profuse,  with  rapid  stream,  translucent,  clear,  a little
yellow,  depositing  a few  flocks  in  twenty-four  hours,  (l.
and  2.  d.)  Increased  urine  with  mucous  sediment,  (3.  d.)
Painful  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  prostatic  gland,  when
urinating.  Burning  in  the  urethra,  during  micturition,  (8.
d.)  Fine  stitches  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.

Genital  Organs. — Increased  sexual  desire.  Asexual
excitement,  in  the  morning,  which  had  been  left  unsatisfied,
was  followed  by  violent  drawing,  pressure  and  tension  in
both  testicles  and  along  the  spermatic  cords  as  far  as  the
abdominal  cavity,  for  several  hours;  at  the  same  time  the
testicles  were  very  painful,  the  tension  which  extended  into
the  spermatic  cords,  continuing  even  in  the  evening.  Sup-
pression of  the  menses.  The  menses  appear  a few  days
sooner  than  usual  and  are  more  profuse  ; but  the  flow  only
lasts  two  days,  the  blood  being  black  as  ink.  The  menses
which  were  near  their  termination,  became  more  profuse
after  a new  dose,  with  pain  in  the  abdomen,  small  of  the
back,  and  thighs  ; this  went  off  in  a few  hours.  The
menstrual  blood  was  more  fluid  than  usual.  Weakness
and  pain  in  the  lower  limbs  during  the  menses.  Burning
in  the  right  groin  during  the  menses,  when  sitting  crooked.
Thin,  white  leucorrhoea,  with  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back
as  if  bruised,  a whole  week,  (a.  30  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — A good  deal  of  sneezing,  (almost
immediatclyO  (also  1 9.  20.  30.  40.  d.)  Continual  coryza,
at  times  fluent,  at  limes  dry.  Violent  coryza,  with  ob-


12


KITRUM NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


struction  of  the  nose,  loss  of  smell  and  husky  voice,  (11.
12.  d.)  Obslruclion  of  the  nose  for  two  days,  followed  by
a purulent  discharge,  (a.  48  d.)  Coryza  more  dry  than
fluent,  with  burning  around  the  nose.  Some  drops  of  wa-
ter fall  out  of  his  nose,  without  coryza.

Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest. — Painful  tightness
in  the  larynx,  during  respiration,  (a.  35  d.)  Cough,  day
and  night,  with  soreness  in  the  chest  ; afterwards  coryza,
with  obstruction  and  itching  of  the  nose,  (13.  d.)  She  is
roused  from  her  sleep,  in  the  night,  by  cough  and  stupefy-
ing headache  ; the  cough  increases  when  she  raises  herself,
(22.  d.)  Cough,  caused  by  a tickling  in  the  middle  of  the
chest,  after  entering  the  room.  Cough,  from  tickling  in
the  larynx.  Dry  cough,  with  roughness  of  the  throat  and
weight  on  the  chest,  (6.  d.)  Dry,  short  and  hacking
cough,  the  whole  day,  with  audible  palpitation  of  the
heart,  (20.  d.)  Dry,  short  and  hacking  cough,  a fortnight,
with  dull  tightness,  contraction  and  pressure  in  the  chest ;
under  the  sternum  she  feels  a roughness,  inducing  cough
and  disappearing  a few  minutes  after  the  cough.  Pain  in
the  back,  when  coughing.  Cutting  under  the  sternum
when  coughing.  Sensation,  when  coughing,  as  if  some-
thing had  become  detached  in  the  chest,  (30.  d.)  Violent
burning  in  the  chest,  up  the  throat,  until  the  expectoration
becomes  loose,  early  in  the  morning,  (26.  d.)  Expecto-
ration from  the  chest,  smelling  sour.  Bloody  expectora-
tion, when  coughing  but  little.  Haemoptysis,  at  full  moon.
Expectoration  of  coagulated  blood,  after  hawking  up  mu-
cus, (during  the  menses,)  (25.  d.)  Oppressed  breathing
when  going  up  stairs,  stitching  in  the  chest,  and  cough
with  expectoration  of  light  blood,  (*'4.  d.)  Spasmodic
contraction  of  the  chest,  with  dread  of  suffocation  and  an-
guish, alternating  with  a spasmodic  drawing  in  the  left
side  of  the  occiput  and  nape  of  the  neck,  obliging  her  to
bold  her  head  backwards,  sometimes  so  violent  that  she
exclaimed,  (25.  d.)  Asthma,  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of
the  throat.  Asthma.  Tightness  about  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  as  if  produced  by  a painful  contraction,  when
walking  or  standing,  in  the  morning.  Contraction,  in
the  morning  when  lying  down,  from  the  back  into  the  chest,
as  if  the  lungs  were  constricted,  with  inability  to  breathe


NITRUM — NITRATE  OF  TOTASH.


13


deeply ; if  she  attempts  to  breathe  deeply,  she  is  pre-
viously obliged  to  gasp  for  air,  after  which  she  coughs,
(4.  d.)  Painful  sensation  in  the  pit  and  region  of
the  stomach,  when  taking  a deep  inspiration,  or  when
blowing  the  nose.  Aching  pain  in  the  chest,  of  shcrt  du-
ration. Aching  pain  at  the  lower  termination  of  the  ster-
num, (a.  38  h.)  Tensive  pain  across  the  chest,  from  after-
noon till  evening,  (1.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  upper  part  of  the
right  chest,  especially  when  lying  on  the  right  side  and
the  head  lying  low.  Stitches  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,
when  coughing  or  during  a deep  inspiration.  Stitches  in
the  middle  of  the  chest,  extending  to  both  sides  and  towards
the  axilla,  when  walking,  (during  the  menses.)  Violent
stitch  in  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum,  from  without  in-
wards, on  the  leftside,  (18.  d.)  Painful  stitches  in  the  re-
gion of  the  lowest  right  ribs,  excited  by  coughing  and
laughing,  for  two  days,  (a.  20  d.)  Pine  stinging  in  the
right  side  of  the  chest,  (shortly.)  Stitching  below  the
short  ribs  of  the  right  side,  in  the  side  towards  the  back,
apparently  behind  the  liver.  Single  stitches  in  the  left
side,  under  the  ribs,  from  afternoon  till  evening,  (l.d.)
Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  towards  the  back,  (27.
d.)  and  below  the  left  mamma,  (32.  d.)  Painful  stitch  in
the  left  side  of  the  chest,  during  an  inspiration.  Painful
stitches  in  the  region  of  the  apex  of  the  left  scapula,  dur-
ing a deep  inspiration.  Stitching  and  pain  in  the  left  side
of  the  chest,  for  a couple  of  hours,  abating  when  walking
in  the  open  air,  more  violent  towards  evening,  when  it  is
felt  as  a cutting  and  tearing  in  the  lungs,  increased  by
deep  breathing  ; half  an  hour  afterwards  chilliness  and
tearing  in  both  lower  limbs,  from  the  knees  to  the  toes  ;
she  had  to  go  to  bed  in  order  to  get  warm,  she  fell  asleep,
(7.  d.)  Violent  stitch  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  (a.  5.  h.)
Burning  and  stitching  in  the  chest,  evening,  (9.  d.)  Con-
gestion of  blood  to  the  chest.  Momentary  palpitation  of
the  heart,  at  intervals,  (a.  15  d.)  Violent  pal pitat ion  of  the
heart,  when  lying  upon  the  back,  in  the  night,  (13.  d.)  or
when  lying  upon  the  right  side,  (14.  d.)  Palpitation  of
the  heart,  when  rising  or  moving  about  quickly,  with  heat
of  the  face  and  oppression  of  the  chest.

Pain. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  in  the  morning
when  waking,  extending  into  the  left  hypochondrium,  for


14


NITRUM  — NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


some  hours,  (12.  d.)  Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
(a.  52  d ) Clawing  pressure  in  the  small  of  the  back,  the
whole  day.  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  waking
in  the  morning,  as  if  she  had  received  a blow.  Pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  night,  she  was
unable  io  turn  to  the  other  side,  from  pain,  (a.  22  d.)  Pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  in  any  position  of  the  body,  in
the  evening,  (during  the  menses.)  Sensation  over  the  left
os  ilium,  as  if  the  parts  were  pressed  upon  and  held  to-
gether, when  walking,  (6.  d.)  Stitching  in  the  right  os
ilium,  when  standing,  going  off  during  motion.  Pressure
and  burning  in  the  back,  relieved  by  motion,  increased  by
sitting  and  lying  down.  Clawing  pain  in  the  back,  even-
ing, (a.  38  h.)  Violent  cutting  between  the  shoulders,
shortening  the  breathing,  and  relieved  by  lying  on  the  right
side,  (a.  2G  d.)  Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  some-
times as  if  sprained,  (a.  33  d.)  Painful  throbbing  in  one
of  the  cervical  vertebra,  after  stooping  and  raising  the
head  again.  Many  pimples  on  the  nape  of  the  neck.
Tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  cervical  muscles,  from  the
shoulder  into  the  head.

Upper  Extremities. — Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,
extending  into  the  fingers,  in  the  night,  with  sensation  as
if  the  shoulder  were  standing  out.  Tearing  in  both
shoulders,  alternately,  in  the  night.  Painful  weariness  in
the  left  shoulder,  (a.  4 h.)  Pain  in  the  shoulder  as  if
bruised,  in  the  morning,  (a.  19  d.)  Small  pimple  on  the
shoulder,  painful  and  stinging.  Boil  on  the  right  shoulder,
with  tensive  pain.  Painless  jerking  in  arms  and  legs,  in
the  evening  when  in  bed,  (5.  d.)  Cramp-like  drawing
pain,  now  in  one,  now  in  ihe  other  arm,  at  times  in  the
lower  limbs,  especially  around  the  knees,  mostly  when  at
rest.  Drawing  pain  in  the  arms,  when  letting  them  hang
down  a long  time.  Tearing  in  the  right  arm,  especially
the  shoulder,  worse  in  the  afternoon  and  evening.  Draw-
ing tearing  in  the  arm,  from  the  shoulder  to  the  fingers,
towards  evening,  (4.  d.)  Pain  in  the  arms,  from  the
elbow  to  the  wrist-joint  ; tearing  and  breaking  sensation
in  the  wrist-joint,  as  if  the  processes  of  the  ulna  and  the
radius  were  becoming  sprained  ; from  the  wrist-joint  the
pain  extends  into  the  knuckles,  the  intervals  between  the


15


NITRUM — NITRATE  OF  POTASH.

knuckles  becoming  distended  and  swollen  ; thence  the
pain  extends  under  the  nails,  which  parts  ieel  bruised;
the  pain  is  somewhat  relieved  by  rubbing  the  hand  ; ac-
companied with  a sensation  as  if  the  parts  became  en-
larged and  woody,  the  hand  feeling  heavy  and  numb,  and
weak  as  if  paralyzed,  only  in  the  night.  Tearing  in
elbow,  wrist,  and  finger-joints,  and  under  the  nails,  in
day-time,  (a.  7 d.)  Weakness  of  the  arms.  Disappear-
ance of  numbness  and  creeping  in  the  arms,  and  pain  in
the  shoulder  ; in  the  place  of  this,  she  is  affected  with
pain  in  the  articulation  of  the  right  thumb,  when  moving
it,  for  several  weeks,  (Id.  d.)  Paralysis  of  the  arm  (from
a drachm,  daily.)  Drawing  clawing  pain  in  the  upper
arm,  (a.  3S  h.)  Drawing  tearing  in  the  deltoid  muscle  of
the  left  upper  arm,  both  when  in  motion  and  at  rest,  (5.
d.)  Violent  tearing  in  the  humerus.  Frequent  stitching
and  throbbing  in  the  right  upper  arm,  (l  7.  d.)  Paralytic
weakness  in  the  right  upper  arm.  Drawing  in  the  poste-
rior surface  of  the  right  elbow-joint,  from  below  upwards,
(2.  d.)  Drawing,  tension  and  burning  in  the  bend  of  the
left  elbow,  (a.  2 h.)  Tearing  in  the  right  fore-arm,  index
and  thumb.  Tearing  in  a tendon  of  the  outer  side  of  the
left  fore-arm,  with  paralytic  weakness  after  the  pain,  (17.
d.)  Paralytic  tearing  in  the  left  fore-arm,  as  far  as  the
wrist-joint,  (22.  d.)  Extremely  painful  gnawing  in  the
left  ulna,  a hand’s  breadth  above  the  wrist-joint,  at  short
intervals,  followed  by  a paralytic  sensation,  obliging  her  to
let  the  arm  hang  down,  in  the  afternoon  when  sitting  ;
going  off  by  friction,  pressure,  sometimes  of  itself,  but  al-
ways returning,  ( 17.  d.)  A number  of  itching  pimples  on  the
right  fore-arm  ; water  oozes  out  when  scratched.  Tear-
ing in  the  right  wrist-joint.  Pain  in  the  inner  side  of  the
right  wrist  joint,  as  if  one  part  were  forcibly  drawn  inwards,
a deepening  being  likewise  observed  on  the  outside.
Breaking  and  tearing  in  the  right  hand,  evening.  Tear-
ing in  the  hands,  with  shuddering  and  thirst,  ($.  9.  10.  d.)
Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  hand,  belter  after  fric-
tion. Intensely  painful  tearing,  in  the  evening,  in  the
outer  knuckle  of  the  right  hand,  continuing  during  motion.
Painful  digging  and  gnawing  in  the  ball  of  the  right  hand,
(17.  d.)  The  hand  feels  as  heavy  as  lead,  (a.  27  d.)


16


NITRUM NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


Weakness  of  the  hands  and  fingers  ; she  is  unable  to  hold
or  seize  any  thing  ; pain  in  llie  wrist-joint  when  making
an  effort.  Spasmodic  tearing  in  the  knuckles,  alternating
with  headache.  Clawing  tearing  in  the  left  thumb.
Prickings  under  the  nail  of  the  left  thumb,  (20.  d.)  Part-
ings in  the  right  middle  and  ring  fingers.  Pain  as  if
sprained  in  the  joint  of  the  right  thumb,  when  moving  the
thumb  backwards.  Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  right
index-finger,  and  cracking  of  the  joints  when  moving  the
hand.  Pain  in  the  fingers,  as  if  sprained,  when  holding  a
large  object ; when  stretching  the  fingers,  which  he  was
at  first  unable  to  accomplish,  they  felt  as  if  too  long  ; when
attempting  to  hold  something,  he  had  first  to  bend  them
backwards.  Pain  in  the  joint  of  the  right  thumb,  when
bending  the  thumb  backwards,  as  if  it  had  been  sprained
and  swollen,  with  cracking  in  the  joint.  Occasional  stiff-
ness of  the  fingers,  (a.  18  h.)  Boil  on  the  lower  part  of
the  thumb.

Lower  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  hip,  in  the  morning
when  waking,  increasing  after  rising,  until  noon.  Tearing
in  the  hip-joint,  afternoon  and  evening.  Stitching  in  the
right  hip  when  standing,  going  off  during  motion.  Fre-
quent stitching  and  burning  in  the  right  hip,  when  at  rest
and  in  motion,  (15.  19.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  left  glutei
muscles,  when  standing,  going  off  during  motion.  Itching
blotches  on  the  right  glutei  muscles,  after  scratching,  (a.
32  d.)  Dull  aching  pain  in  the  hones  of  the  right  lower
limb,  from  the  hip  to  the  toes,  in  the  night}  relieved  by
walking,  the  pain  only  remaining  around  the  ankles.
Intense,  contusive  pain  in  the  left  thigh,  in  the  morning
when  waking  ; when  turning  to  the  other  side,  the  pain
goes  into  the  small  of  the  back,  and  terminates  with  stitch-
ing in  the  heel,  (7.  d.)  Weakness  and  painfulness  in
the  lower  limbs,  in  the  evening,  (during  tiie  menses.)
General  weariness  and  dulness  in  the  lower  limbs,  after
dinner.  Excessive  weakness  of  the  lower  limbs,  with
yawning,  (23.  d.)  Weakness  in  the  lower  limbs,  with  draw-
ing pain  from  time  to  time.  The  muscles  of  the  thighs  feel
bruised.  Paralytic  weakness  in  the  middle  of  the  right
thigh  and  in  the  tibia  ; somewhat  relieved  when  sitting  or
standing;  but  afterwards  aggravated  when  silting,  (three


NITRUM NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


17


days  before  the  menses,)  (a.  22  d.)  Tearing  in  the  right
knee,  when  at  rest.  Tearing  in  the  lei t knee,  a long
time.  Tearing  in  the  bends  of  both  k lees,  when  walking.
Intense  pain  below  the  right  patella,  as  if  sprained  ; going
off  when  at  rest.  Painful  throbbing  in  the  left  knee,  at
intervals,  in  the  night,  when  in  bed.  Pairdess  tearing  in  the
outer  surface  of  the  right  knee,  (25.  d.)  Feeling  of  weak-
ness in  the  knee-joint,  extending  into  the  thigh,  especially
when  walking.  Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  left  calf,
when  walking.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right  leg  ; it  is  felt
more  when  laying  the  left  leg  across  it.  Tearing  and
weariness  in  the  right  leg  and  knee,  when  at  rest;  he  is
frequently  obliged  to  alter  the  position  of  the  leg;  the
pain  disappeared  when  continuing  to  walk.  Tearing  in
the  right  leg  from  above  downwards,  in  the  evening  and  the
next  morning,  (a.  19  d.)  Tearing  in  both  tibiae  and  knees,
from  above  downwards,  in  the  evening.  Cram])  in  the
left  calf,  towards  evening,  (7.  d.)  Feeling  of  great  weari-
ness and  paralytic  weakness  in  the  legs,  in  motion  and
when  at  rest,  after  a short  walk,  (a.  36  h.)  Stinging  in  ihe
upper  part  of  the  right  heel-bone,  when  at  rest.  Drawing
and  tearing  in  the  outer  ankle  of  the  right  foot,  when  stand-
ing, (17.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  round
the  metatarsal  articulations.  Jerking  tearing  in  the  soles
of  both  feet,  (during  the  menses.)  Violent  tearing  in  the
sole  of  the  left  foot,  in  the  afternoon,  (27.  30.  d.)  Tear-
ing in  the  ball  of  the  sole  of  the  left  foot,  in  the  evening,
(25.  d.)  Sudden,  jerking  tearing  in  the  left  sole,  as  in  an
ulcer.  Stitch  in  the  right  sole,  in  the  night,  with  ulcerative
pain.  Stitching  and  burning,  at  times  in  ihe  right,  at
limes  in  the  left  sole,  going  off  by  rubbing,  but  recurring
frequently.  Frequent,  griping  ulcerative  pain  in  the  right
sole,  frequently  from  afternoon  till  evening.  Burning  in
both  heels  and  balls  of  the  feet,  in  the  night,  when  in  bed.
Burning  pain  in  the  interval  between  the  os  calcis  and
the  malleolus  externus,  when  at  rest  ; feeling  as  if  sprained,
during  molion  ; ulcerative  pain  when  touching  the  parts.
Great  weakness  in  the  feet,  especially  when  standing  or
walking,  (a.  20  d.)  Tearing  in  ihe  big  loe  of  the  left
foot,  (a.  10  d.)  Jerking  stitching  in  the  right  big  ioc,  in
the  night.  Stitches  in  the  second  loe  of  the  left  foot,  at


IS


NlTRUM NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


the  place  which  was  formerly  occupied  by  a corn.  Painful
contraction  of  the  toes,  in  the  evening  when  sitting.

General  Symptoms  and  Fits. — Painless  jerking  in
the  whole  body,  now  here,  now  there.  He  is  tormented
day  and  night  by  a painful  tearing,  recurring  at  intervals,
and  going  off  only  for  a short  while  by  rubbing,  (22.  d.)
Formication  in  hands  and  feet;  afterwards  in  the  tongue.
Convulsions.  Swelling  of  the  body,  neck,  thighs,  so  sud-
den that  there  is  scarcely  time  left  to  open  her  dress.
Fainting  fit  with  vertigo,  in  the  morning  when  standing,
relieved  when  sitting  down ; afterwards  obscuration  of
sight,  with  great  weakness  and  drowsiness,  pain  in  the
small  of  the  back  and  constriction  in  the  abdomen,  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  three  attacks  occurring  in  the  forenoon  ;
when  the  fit  ceases,  the  pain  goes  down  the  lower  limbs
into  the  ankles,  where  it  remains  seated  the  whole  day  ;
in  the  afternoon  she  feels  cold,  thirsty,  more  so  when
in  bed,  until  after  midnight,  when  she  fell  asleep,  feeling
an  agreeable  warmth.  Fainting  fit,  at  10  o’clock  in  the
evening,  (while  blowing  upon  a musical  instrument  and
having  tight  clothes  < n ;)  he  felt  as  if  all  the  things  in  the
room  were  turning  round  ; he  was  on  the  point  of  falling;
but,  while  falling,  he  made  an  effort,  and  raised  himself
again  ; at  the  same  time  the  interior  of  the  head  felt  alter-
nately warm  and  cold,  and  he  vacillated  while  standing,
with  a feeling  as  if  the  fit  would  return.  Paralysis  of  the
spinal  marrow,  with  tetanus.  Paralysis  of  the  extremities.
Paralysis  of  the  organs  of  sense.  Death,  (a.  36  h.)  Chronic
cachexia.  Death  of  a boy  in  two  days,  from  six  drachms.
Death,  caused  by  one  ounce.  Fatal  inflammation  and
gangrene,  from  one  ounce  and  a half,  in  the  case  of  a
female.  The  majority  of  the  symptoms  occur  in  the
afternoon  and  evening.  The  symptoms  which  occur  dining
the  day,  generally  disappear  in  the  evening  after  lying
down.  She  feels  relieved  when  lying  down,  (a.  34  d.)
The  pains  grow  worse  when  in  bed.  She  feels  less  weak
when  walking  than  when  sitting.  The  symptoms,  espe-
cially the  headache,  are  immediately  relieved  by  smelling
of  spiritus  nitri  dulcis.  The  symptoms  grow  worse  by
smelling  of  camphor.  Itching  of  several  parts  of  the  body,


NITIIUM — NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


19


also  of  the  scalp  ; she  has  sometimes  to  scratch  the  parts,
until  they  bleed,  after  which  she  sometimes  feels  a burning
pain.  Itching,  here  and  there,  in  the  evening.  Pricking,
followed  by  burning  of  the  skin,  especially  in  the  face.
Small  red  spots  on  the  neck  and  the  left  fore-arm,  itching
when  touching  them.  Itching,  especially  of  the  thighs
and  the  parts  covering  the  tibiae  ; she  has  to  scratch  until
blood  comes,  with  small  red  spots  here  and  there,  (a.  20
d.)  Burning  vesicles  full  of  a thin,  yellowish  fluid,  here
and  there  ; they  burst  when  scratching,  the  burning  ceasing,
(a.  34  d.)  Small  pustules  in  the  face  and  on  other  places
of  the  skin.  Itching  blotches  on  the  body,  even  in  the
face,  of  the  size  of  a pea  ; there  are  none  either  on  the
hands  or  feet.  Great  weariness,  as  after  a great  exer-
tion, with  heaviness  in  the  head  ; she  stumbles  against
every  thing  when  walking.  Weakness  in  the  whole  body,
(1.  2.  d.)  She  felt  at  once  so  faint,  worn  out,  and  drowsy,
that  she  had  to  lie  down,  without  being  able  to  open  her
eyes  ; she  slumbered,  and  on  waking,  she  was  unable  to
collect  her  mind.

Sleep — Yawning,  (1.  d.)  Drowsiness  in  day-time,  also
when  walking.  Restless  nights;  frequently  her  sleep  is
a mere  slumber  with  constant  waking,  or  she  is  waked  by
pain,  for  twenty  days.  Comatose  sleep  generally,  with
ravings  which  caused  her  to  start  and  roused  her  from
sleep.  Comatose  sleep,  as  if  she  were  intoxicated  ; she
hears  every  thing  which  is  spoken  around  her,  (a.  6 d )
Sleep  full  of  fancies  ; ideas  crowd  upon  her  ; she  is  very
anxious.  She  falls  asleep  late  in  the  night.  Restless
sleep  with  frequent  waking,  (a.  10  d.)  Restless  night,
sleep  rare  and  heavy.  Restless  night,  until  a slight  sweat
breaks  out  in  the  morning.  Feels  very  warm  ; this  hinders
sleep.  Nightmare.  Oppression  of  the  chest  from  cough-
ing, in  the  night.  Stitches  under  the  right  scapula  in  the
night.  She  dreamed  she  was  travelling,  but  she  did  not
get  along;  this  vexed  her.  Anxious,  wild  dreams  during
the  heat,  with  frequent  startings  and  sweat;  short  chills  in
the  morning,  and  thirst  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  27  d.)  She
dreams  that  she  has  a swollen  cheek,  or  that  her  child  is
beaten.  She  dreams  that  one  of  her  teeth  breaks  off.
Dreams  about  danger,  water,  fire,  etc.  Dreams  about


20


NITRUM NITRATE  OF  POTASH.


rows,  vexation,  disgust,  dispute.  She  dreams  she  loses
an  acquaintance  by  death.  Voluptuous  dreams,  (a.  22  d.)

Fever. — Feels  immediately  cool  and  fresh.  Frequent
chilliness,  in  the  afternoon.  Violent  chilliness,  with  trem-
bling of  the  whole  body.  Chibs  in  the  forenoon,  in  the
open  air,  a quarter  of  an  hour,  without  any  subsequent
heat.  Chilliness  in  the  afternoon.  Chilliness  in  the  even-
ing) with  a cold  thrill  over  the  back,  going  off  when  lying
down.  Chilliness  in  the  evening,  going  off  when  lying
down,  and  recurring  when  rising,  going  off  again  alter
lying  down,  (during  the  menses.)  Short  chills,  in  the
evening.  She  feels  cold  in  the  evening,  and  cannot  get
warm  ; accompanied  by  headache,  commencing  at  the  ver-
tex. Chilliness  in  the  open  air,  in  the  evening,  with  heat
in  the  face  when  in  the  room  ; afterwards  a general  sweat.
Shuddering,  in  the  evening,  followed  by  flushes  of  heat,
and  sweat  after  lying  down,  without  any  thirst,  (9.  d.)
Forehead  and  cheeks  feel  warmer,  the  hands  being  cool,
(a.  20  min.)  Chilliness,  heat,  sweat,  in  alternation,  in  the
afternoon,  (4.  d.)  FI  eat  in  the  afternoon,  followed  by  chil-
liness ; after  lying  down,  in  the  evening,  sweat  with  thirst,
until  morning  ; during  the  chilliness  she  has  frequent
flushes  of  heat,  and  during  the  heat  frequent  chills;  dur-
ing the  sweats  she  had  thrills  of  coldness  as  soon  as  she
uncovered  herself,  (1  l.d.)  Increased  warmth  in  the  trunk,
(a.  20  m.)  Slight  heat  over  the  whole  body,  (a.  4 h.)
FTeat  and  sweat  over  the  whole  body,  no  thirst,  (in  the
evening)  Uncommon  sweat,  (5.  d ) Sweat  with  weak-
ness, at  every  exertion  and  motion,  (30.  d.)  Slight  perspi-
ration in  the  night,  without  diminution  of  pain.  Profuse
sweat  every  other  night,  especially  on  the  lower  limbs.
Profuse  sweat  all  over,  in  the  night,  especially  on  the  lower
limbs.  Sweat  in  the  morning,  especially  on  the  chest;
after  rising  she  felt  weary  as  after  a long  journey  on  foot,
(a.  30  d.)  The  pulse  goes  down  from  65  or  66  to  62,  but
in  half  an  hour  it  goes  up  again  to  the  former  number  of
beats  and  remains  so.  T he  pulse  becomes  smaller  and
softer,  (a.  2 h.)  Quick  pulse  in  ihe  afternoon,  when  at
rest,  a whole  hour.  Quick  pulse  in  the  afternoon,  with
heat  in  the  l ead,  a whole  hour,  (28.  d.)  9' he  pulse  is  full,
hard,  and  quick,  with  an  inflammatory  condition,  especially


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETREL


21


of  the  abdominal  organs.  The  pulse  becomes  quicker  by
a few  beats,  also  in  the  afternoon.  The  pulse  is  quick
and  small,  the  hands  being  warm.


PETROLEUM — OLEUM  PETRAE.

Tms  product  of  the  interior  of  the  earth  ought  to  be
fluid  and  light  yellow,  if  it  is  to  be  used  as  a remedial
agent,  its  smell,  taste  and  medicinal  virtues  are  very  pow-
erful. When  very  fluid,  it  can  scarcely  be  mixed  with  fat
vegetable  oils.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to  be  quite  sure  of
its  purity  and  genuineness,  I have  shown  in  my  work  en-
titled : Modes  of  ascertaining  the  genuineness  and,  falsifi-
cation of  remedial  agents,  (Dresden,  17^7,  p.  221,)  how
the  purity  of  petroleum  may  be  ascertained  by  adding
some  strong  sulphuric  acid,  which  leaves  the  petroleum
untouched,  acting  merely  upon  the  foreign  oily  matters  and
converting  them  to  a sort  of  sulphur.  Or,  if  this  testing
p’ocess  appear  too  troublesome,  a drop  of  petroleum  may
be  deposited  on  paper;  if  pure,  it  will  soon  evaporate  in
the  open  air,  without  leaving  a trace  behind  ; if  not  pure,
the  trace  ol  the  foreign  oily  substance  will  be  seen.  In
many  cases  the  petroleum  may  be  found  mixed  with  a vol-
atile, vegetable  oil,  the  oil  of  turpentine  for  example.  In
order  to  guard  against  this,  it  is  well  to  mix  the  petroleum,
previous  to  its  being  used,  with  double  its  quantity  of  alco-
hol, to  shake  the  mixture  several  times,  and  then  to  Alter
it  through  blotting  paper,  which  had  been  previously  moist-
ened with  alcohol.  In  this  case  the  vegetable  oil,  if  any  was
present,  is  filtered  through  together  with  the  alcohol,  and
the  pure  petroleum  remains  behind,  and  ought  to  be  pre-
served in  a vial,  the  cork  and  mouth  of  which  are  to  be  her-
metically closed  with  sealing-wax.

To  make  the  first  trituration,  one  drop  of  oil  is  used
instead  of  one  grain  of  dry  substances.

Petroleum  has  been  especially  efficacious  in  diseases
characterised  by  the  following  affections  : — ■

Anxiety;  tendency  to  start;  irritated  mood;  insulting
language ; want  of  memory ; weakness  of  memory  and


22


PETROLEUM— -OLEUM  PETRIE.


thinking  ; obtusion  of  the  head  ; vertigo,  as  if  balancing
to  and  iro  ; headache  from  vexation  ; lancinating  headache;
beating  in  the  occiput;  eruption  on  the  head  and  in  the
nape  of  the  neck  ; scabs  on  the  hairy  scalp  ; falling  off  of
the  hair;  gauze  before  the  eyes  ; long-sightedness,  is  un-
able to  read  fine  print  without  spectacles  ; short-sighted-
ness ; dryness,  and  troublesome  sensation  of  dryness  of
the  inner  ear  ; hard-hearing,  (especially  after  the  previous
use  of  nitric  acid  ;)  tingling  in  the  ears  ; roaring  and  hum-
ming before  the  ears  ; yellow  colour  of  the  face  ; swelling
of  the  sub-maxillary  glands  ; tongue  coated  white  ; bad
smell  from  the  mouth  ; aversion  to  warm,  boiled  food  ;
avidity  to  eat ; aversion  to  meat ; canine  hunger  ; loud
eructations  ; inclination  to  vomit  ; sea-sickness  ; water -
brash  ; want  of  appetite  ; the  pit  of  the  stomach  is  bloat-
ed and  painful  to  the  touch  ; dreary  and  desolate  feeling
in  the  abdomen ; colic  ; inguinal  hernia  ; knotty,  hard
stool ; frequent  stools  a day  ; diarrhoea  ; involuntary  drop-
ping of  urine  ; wetting  the  bed  ; contraction  of  the  uie-
thra ; burning  in  the  urethra  ; itching  and  humidity  of  the
scrotum  ; frequent  pollutions  ; weakness  and  nervous  irri-
tation after  an  embrace  ; discharge  of  prostatic  juice.

Dryness  of  the  nose,  and  troublesome  feeling  of  dry-
ness of  the  nose  ; obstruction  of  the  nose  ; coryza  ; hoarse-
ness ; cough,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  ; dry  nightly
cough  ; suffocative  night-cough  without  expecioralion  ;
stitches  in  the  side  of  the  chest ; palpitation  of  the  heart;
herpes  upon  the  chest;  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
which  does  not  permit  one  to  stand  ; pain  in  the  back  ;
herpes  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  ; tearing  in  the  hands  ;
brown  spots  on  the  wrist-joint  ; cracked  skin  of  the  hands
and  fingers,  covered  with  bloody  rhagades,  in  the  winter;
arthritic  stiffness  of  the  finger-joints  ; herpes  on  the  knee  ;
stitches  in  the  knee  ; cold  feet  ; swelling  of  the  feet  ;
corns  ; obstinate  ulcers  on  the  toes,  originating  in  blisters,
with  high  edges,  humid,  red,  fiat  base  ; drawing  pains  in
the  head,  forehead,  temples  and  molar  teeth  ; the  limbs
go  to  sleep ; cracking  and  stiffness  of  the  joints  ; orgasm
of  the  blood  ; aversion  to  open  air  ; painful  chilblains  ;
wild  flesh  in  the  ulcers ; vivid  dreams  ; in  the  morning


PETROLEUM — OLEUM  PETRIE.


23


one  feels  as  if  one  had  not  slept  enough  ; heat  in  the  night ;
intermittent  fevers  in  the  evening,  first  chilliness,  after-
wards heat  in  the  face  with  cold  feet ; night  sweats.

Smelling  of  a pellet  of  Nux  v.  antidotes  the  effects  of
Petroleum  in  the  most  efficacious  manner.

Moral  Symptoms. — Sadness  and  despondency,  accom-
panied with  a sick  feeling  as  of  weakness  about  the  heart,
Despondency,  (a.  12  d.)  Desponding  in  the  morning,
taciturn,  accompanied  with  dim-sightedness,  (a.  22.  23.  d.)
Anxiousness  when  surrounded  with  the  noise  of  many
men.  Restlessness,  he  knew  not  what  to  do  with  him-
self. Nervous,  inclining  to  start,  weeping  about  trifles.
Great  tendency  to  start  ; violent  starting  brought  on  by
trivial  causes.  Excessive  irresoluteness.  Absence  of
volition.  He  finds  it  difficult  to  cease  talking  about  the
same  thing.  No  desire  to  work  ; even  those  things  which
were  generally  pleasant  to  him,  give  him  no  pleasure.
Hypochondriac  mood  ; want  of  attention  to  conversation,
etc.,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Dissatisfied  with
every  thing.  Disposed  to  be  hypochondriac,  a febrile
condition,  continuing  a fortnight.  Irritable  ; every  thing
makes  him  feel  gloomy;  he  was  unable  to  calm  himself
in  regard  to  many  things  which  were  generally  indifferent
to  him.  Out  of  humor  and  indolent,  (a.  16  d ) Is  vexed
about  every  thing,  even  the  least  trifle,  does  not  want  to
answ'er.  Disposed  to  be  very  angry  every  morning.  Ill-
humored,  angry  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Out  of
humor  and  angry  ; he  becomes  vehement,  easily.  Vehe-
ment, irritable.  Whining  and  disposed  to  be  quarrelsome
and  fault-finding,  (in  a fewr  hours.)  Quarrelsome  and
vehement.  The  child  becomes  vehement  and  untameable.
Furiously  mad  and  angry.  Excessively  wild,  with  inter-
nal trembling,  followed  by  sadness  and  discouragement.
During  the  whole  day  he  is  only  half  conscious  of  him-
self, as  if  he  were  only  half  alive.  His  thinking  power  is
suppressed.  Forgetful  and  not  disposed  to  think.

Head. — Obtusion  of  the  head,  with  pain.  Obtusion  of
the  head  in  the  morning,  muddled  state  of  the  head,  heavi-
ness, heat.  The  head  feels  as  if  wrapt  up  in  fog.  Dizzi-
ness, commencing  at  dinner,  (a.  9 d.)  Gloominess  in
the  head  and  uncomforiableness,  (a.  20  h.)  Frequent


24


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETRiE.


vertigo,  when  walking.  Vertigo  and  nausea,  from  stoop-
ing. Verligo  when  stooping  and  rising  from  a seat.
Vertigo,  as  if  in  the  occiput,  as  if  she  would  fall  over,
especially  when  raising  the  eyeballs.  Verligo  and  nausea,
in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  especially  when  the  head  lies
low.  Vertigo,  obliging  him  to  stoop,  with  pale  face  and
nausea,  more  violent  when  standing  than  when  sitting  ;
going  off  when  lying  down  ; slow  pulse,  eructations  and
yawning,  want  of  appelile  and  pressure  in  the  abdomen.
Verligo,  when  rising  from  a recumbent  posture  ; heat  in
the  face  when  lying  down.  Heaviness  of  tl>e  head,  in  the
morning,  with  sensation  of  fulness  and  heat  in  that  part,
especially  when  stooping  and  sewing.  'The  occiput  feels
heavy  as  lead,  (2.  3.  d.)  Indications  of  headache,  every
morning.  Hea<lache  in  the  morning,  until  after  break-
fast.  II  eadachc  in  the  evening,  after  walking  in  the  open
air.  Headache,  in  the  right  side  of  the  head  ; she  was
unable  to  open  her  eyes,  to  keep  her  head  straight;  had
to  lie  down.  Dull  headache,  ever  since  morning,  with
drawing  towards  the  forehead,  until  evening  ; accompanied
with  violent  chilliness  until  noon.  Pressure  in  the  head,
teeth,  and  antra.  Highmoriana.  Pressure  in  the  occiput.
Pressure  in  the  forehead,  with  single  stitches  above  the
eye,  (a.  20  d.)  Pressure  and  stitching  pressure  in  the
occiput,  in  the  morning.  Violent  pressure  in  the  head,
when  stooping.  Strong  pressure  upon  the  vertex,  with
dizziness.  Pressure  and  pushing  in. the  head,  (a.  21  h.)
Pressing  sensation  about  the  head,  with  a sort  of  qualmish-
ness, (a.  2 d.)  Tension  in  the  head.  Tensive  and  pull-
ing sensation  in  the  dura  mater.  'Pensive  sensation  in  the
dura  mater,  every  day,  with  obtusion  of  the  head.  Sensa-
tion as  if  the  brain  were  being  pressed  together.  Con-
strictive, drawing  headache.  Contractive,  constrictive
headache.  Sensation  as  if  the  interior  of  the  head  were
screwed  together.  Cramp-like  headache,  in  the  left
temple.  Cramp-like,  intensely  painful  drawing  and  press-
ing in  the  left  temple,  (a.  4 d.)  Cramp-like,  transitory
drawing  in  the  temples.  Pinching  headache,  (a.  2 d.)
Pinching  in  the  occiput.  Pinching  drawing  from  below
upwards  towards  the  left  temple,  (a.  11  d.)  Drawing
headache  ; preceded  by  a drawing  pain  in  the  right  arm.
Drawing  headache  in  tire  forehead,  with  stitches  over  the


PETROLEUM OLEUxM  PETRxE.


25


eyes.  Drawing,  with  pressure,  in  the  right  temple,  per-
ceptible when  asleep,  (a.  some  h.)  Stitches  in  the  head,
accompanied  with  pressure  in  the  head,  and  nausea.
Stitches  in  the  left  half  of  the  occiput,  in  the  afternoon,
Stitching  pain  in  the  forehead,  in  the  morning  when
waking,  soon  spreading  over  the  occiput.  Stitches  and
heat  in  the  head.  Dull,  darling  stitches  in  the  vertex,  into
the  head,  followed  shortly  by  continued  pressure  in  that
part.  Excessive  darting  jerks  in  the  head,  when  stooping
or  walking  ; she  had  to  stand  still  after  walking  a few
steps.  Beating  stitches  over  the  eye,  in  one  side  of  the
head.  Throbbing  in  the  head.  Throbbing  in  the  occiput
the  whole  day.  Pulsations  in  the  occiput  when  lying
upon  it.  Strong,  pulsative  undulaiions,  especially  in  the
forehead,  as  if  the  head  would  burst,  better  during  motion.
Sensation  as  if  the  blood  rushed  to  the  head,  during  every
quick  motion  ; this  caused  a darting  through  the  brain.
Boring  in  the  head.  Disagreeable  feeling  in  the  head,  as
if  full  of  living  things,  whirling  and  turning  in  the  head,
with  aversion  to  work.  Trembling,  balancing  and  roaring
in  the  head,  but  without  any  feeling  of  heat.  The  outer
parts  of  the  head  feel  numb,  as  if  made  of  wood,  (a.  3 d.)
Ulcerative  pain  of  the  outside  of  the  head,  on  both  sides.
Ulcerative  pain  of  the  left  side  of  the  head.  Pain  of  the
integuments  of  the  head  as  if  bruised.  Pain  of  the  vertex,
as  if  bruised,  or  soft.  Single  soft  tumors  upon  the  hairy
scalp,  excessively  painful  when  touched.  Itching  of  the
hairy  scalp,  (a.  10  h.)  Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp;  sore
pain  after  scratching.  Pimples  on  the  head.  Falling  off
of  the  hair  for  three  days,  especially  after  12  days.  Pro-
fuse sweat  about  the  head,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down.
Sensation  about  the  head,  as  if  a cold  breeze  were  blowing
upon  it.

Eyes. — Pressure  in  the  eyes,  in  the  evening.  Great
pressure  in  the  eyes , especially  in  the  evening  at  candle-
light. Great  pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  of  a grain  of  sand.
Cutting  in  the  eyes,  when  exerting  them  in  reading.
Stitching  and  beating  in  the  eyebrows.  Stitches  in  the
eyes  and  lachrymation.  Stitches  extending  from  the
outer  to  the  inner  canthus.  Stitches  in  the  eyes,  both
when  pressing  upon  the  eyes,  or  when  leaving  them  alone.

2


26


PETROLEUM — OLEUM  PETR.E.


Beating  pain  in  the  right  eye.  Itching  of  the  eyelids.
Itching  and  dryness  of  the  lower  eyelids,  (a.  12  d.)
Itching  and  stinging  of  the  eyes.  Itching,  stinging  and
burning  in  the  eye.  Smarting  in  the  eyes.  Smarting  in
the  eyes,  as  if  smoke  had  got  in.  Smarting  and  heat  in
the  eyes.  Burning  in  the  eyes,  (a.  5 d.)  Burning  in  the
eyes,  with  pressure  ; and  obscuration  of  sight,  when
exerting  the  eyes.  Burning  and  pressure  in  the  inner
canthus.  Inflammatory  swelling  in  the  inner  canlhus,
resembling  an  incipient  fistula  lachrymatis,  of  the  size  of
a pigeon’s  egg  ; accompanied  with  dryness  of  the  right
side  of  the  nose,  lasting  for  several  days.  Pimples  on  the
eye-lids.  Lachrymation  for  5 days,  (a.  6 d.)  Lachryma-
tion  in  the  open  air,  which  was  not  cold.  Frequent
lachrymation,  even  in  the  room,  (a.  16  d.)  A quantity  of
water  oozes  from  both  cantht.  Weak  eyes.  The  eyes
are  easily  tired.  Jerkings  in  the  eyes.  Tremor  and
twitchings  of  the  eyelids.  Winking  of  the  eyelids.  The
eyes  frequently  feel  as  if  they  would  become  distorted.  In
the  morning  he  is  unable  to  open  his  eye-lids,  and  his  sight
is  dim  and  as  if  through  a gauze.  Great  dimness  of
sight,  (a.  22  d.)  Great  dilatation  of  the  pupils  for  many
days  ; he  is  unable  to  distinguish  letters  with  the  left  eye
at  the  usual  distance  ; when  seen  at  a greater  distance,
they  become  more  distinct,  but  at  the  same  time  smaller.
Long-sightedness.  Double-sight  on  both  eyes.  Frequent
obscuration  of  sight,  with  diplopia,  (a.  14d.)  Black  spots  be-
fore the -eyes,  hindering  reading.  Something  occasionally
hovers  and  vibrates  before  her  eyes  ; nevertheless  when
looking  at  things  steadily,  they  appear  bright  and  distinct.
Objects  appear  to  move  before  the  eyes,  scarcely.  Vibra-
tions and  black  figures  before  the  eyes,  (a.  18  d.)  Scin-
tillations before  the  eves.  Painful  sensitiveness  of  the
eyes  to  the  light  of  day  ; he  is  obliged  to  keep  them
covered.

Ears. — Pain  of  the  outer  parts  of  the  ear,  from  the  va-
por. Pressure  in  ihe  ears,  with  heat,  (a.  5 d.)  Cramp-
pain  in  the  right  ear,  (a.  16  d.)  Cramp  like  drawing  in
the  right  ear,  (a.  7 d.)  Painfid  drawing  and  jerking  in
the  outer  right  ear,  (a.  5 d.)  Painful  drawing,  as  if  the
muscles  were  strained,  from  the  mastoid  process  to  the


PETROLEUM — OLEUM  PETRiE.


27


clavicle,  on  both  sides  of  the  neck,  a tearing  every  five
minutes,  (a.  11  d.)  Jerking  pain  in  the  left  ear,  (a.  13  d.)
Tearing  in  the  right  ear.  Cutting  in  the  left  ear.  Titil-
lation  and  stitching  in  the  ear,  followed  hy  stiffness  in  the
articulation  of  the  jaw  ; as  if  it  would  crack  when  moved.
Itching  in  the  left  ear,  and  discharge  of  sanguineous  pus,
(a.  48  h.)  The  meatus  is  closed  from  swelling.  Pimple
on  the  right  ear,  bursting  open  in  the  evening,  (a.  5 cl.)
Eruptions  on  the  outer  ear,  for  thirty  days.  Redness ,
rawness , soreness  and  hvmor  behind  the  ears.  Diminish-
ed hearing,  (a.  5 d.)  Loss  of  hearing  of  the  right  ear,
which  had  become  affected  with  a pain  previously  felt  in
the  left  eye,  (a.  38  d.)  During  an  eructation  the  ears  felt
somewhat  closed  up,  hindering  hearing  momentarily.
Singing  in  the  ears.  Roaring  and  pain  in  the  ears.  Whiz-
zing before  the  ears , diminishing  hearing.  Sensation,  as
of  the  rushing  of  water  before  the  left  ear,  in  the  evening,
with  occasional  cracking  in  the  ear  ; for  three  evenings,
(a.  21  d.)  Cracking  in  the  ear,  from  time  to  time,  (a.  28
d.)  Gurgling  sensation  in  the  ears.

Nose. — Tensive  pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose  from  one
eyebrow  to  the  other,  with  ulcerative  pain  when  touching
the  part.  Itching  of  the  tip  of  the  nose.  Burning  upon
and  near  the  nose,  (in  a few  hours.)  Pimple  in  the  nose.
Pustule  in  the  nose , (a.  7 d.)  Pustule  in  the  lower  part
of  the  septum,  with  red  areolae.  Pustules  on  the  right
wing  of  the  nose,  painful  when  touched.  Ulcerated  nos-
trils. Scurf  in  the  fold  of  the  left  wing  of  the  nose,  pain-
less unless  touched.  Expulsion  of  bloody  mucus  from  the
nose  when  blowing  it.  Bleeding  of  the  nose , (in  a few
hours.)  Heat  in  the  face  and  redness  of  the  cheeks.
Sensation  of  heat  in  the  face,  (a.  3 d.)  Heat  in  the  face
and  head)  (a.  6 d.)  Burning  heat  on  the  forehead  and  in
the  face,  with  itching.  A good  deal  of  heat  in  the  face  and
eyes,  (immediately.)  Great,  continued  paleness  of  the
face.  Itching  in  the  face,  here  and  there,  (from  the  vapor.)
Pimples  in  the  face.  Pimples  around  the  eyes.  Pimples
in  the  face,  with  white  tips.  Eruption  on  the  lips.  Pim-
ple in  the  corner  of  the  mouth , stinging  and  painful.  Scurfy
pimple  over  the  upper  lip,  with  stinging  pain  except  when


28


PETROLEUM — OLEUM  TETRiE.


touched.  Chapped  lips.  Boil  on  the  lower  lip.  Pustule
on  the  chin,  painful  when  touched.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Drawing  and  tension  in  the  jaw,
below  the  ear.  Liability  of  the  articulation  of  the  right
jaw  to  being  sprained,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  very-
painful.  Swellings  on  both  the  lower  jaws,  painful  when
stooping  and  pressing  upon  them.  Swelling  of  the  sub-
maxillary  glands.  Toothache,  with  swelling  of  the
cheeks  ; she  cannot  lie  still  in  the  night  on  account  of  pain,
has  to  sit  up  in  bed.  Toothache,  when  cold  air  enters  the
teeth.  Aching  pain  in  the  right  molar  teeth.  Drawing
toothache.  Drawing  pain  in  the  upper  fore-teeth,  with
feeling  of  coldness,  (a.  10  d.)  Tearing  in  a hollow  tooth,
from  evening  till  midnight,  the  gums  feeling  sore.  Cut-
ting and  contractive  pain  in  the  teeth.  Stitch  in  the  hol-
low fore-tooth.  Cutting  toothache,  in  both  jaws,  most  vio-
lent in  the  night ; she  was  unable  to  remain  in  the  bed.
Stitch-like  jeiks  in  the  teeth,  every  evening  until  midnight.
Pain  in  ihe  teeth,  as  if  ulcerated,  with  throbbing  pressure
in  the  right  jaw,  extending  as  far  as  the  ear  and  the  poste-
rior cervical  muscles.  Boring  toothache.  Numb  feeling
of  the  teeth,  and  pain  when  biting  upon  them.  All  the
lower  and  some  of  the  upper  teeth  feel  raised  and  are  af-
fected with  an  ulcerative  pain.  Both  the  cuspidati  feel
elongated,  in  the  morning.  The  teeth  are  always  covered
with  sordes.  The  gums  feel  sore  when  chewing.  The
gums  between  the  lower  fore-teeth  look  inflamed,  with
stinging  and  burning  pain.  Swelling  of  the  gums , with
stitching  pain  when  touched.  A vesicle  on  the  gums.
Pustule  on  the  gums  covering  the  hollow  tooth,  resem-
bling a fistula  dentalis.  Black,  hollow  vesicle  on  the  gums
of  one  of  the  lowrer  molar  teeth,  sensitive  to  water  and  cold
air  ; the  tooth  is  painful  when  opening  the  mouth.

Mouth  and  Pharynx. — Ulcers  on  the  inner  side  of  the
cheek.  The  tongue  is  dotted  with  yellowish  spots.  White
tongue.  Coated  tongue,  remaining  coated  in  spite  of
scraping.  The  tongue  and  right  side  of  the  palate  in  the
region  of  the  cervical  muscles  feels  so  raw  and  painful,
that  he  is  not  able  to  eat  or  to  move  anything  hard  about
in  the  mouth  ; acid  and  saltish  things  cause  an  erosive  sen-


PETROLEUM — ’OLEUM  PETRIE.


29


sation  as  if  the  tongue  were  sore.  Fetor  from  the  mouth  ;
even  the  saliva  smelled  badly.  Smell  from  the  mouth
sometimes  like  garlick,  sometimes  putrid.  The  throat
feels  swollen.  When  swallowing,  some  parts  of  the  swal-
lowed substance  press  towards  the  posterior  nares.  Sting-
ing sore  throat,  when  swallowing.  Stinging  pain  in  the
throat  when  swallowing,  as  if  the  swallowing  were  imped-
ed by  a fish-bone.  Violent  titillaiion  in  the  throat,  extend-
ing into  the  ear,  when  swallowing.  Tingling  in  the  pha-
rynx and  the  nose,  as  if  from  snuff.  Scratching  and
scraping  in  the  throat.  Rawness  in  the  throat  when  swal-
lowing. Raw  feeling  in  the  pharynx,  extending  as  far  as
the  stomach,  (a.  6 d.)  Sore  pain  in  the  throat,  with  dry-
ness of  the  mouth.  Dryness  of  the  mouth  in  the  morning.
Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  throat  in  the  morning,  so  violent
that  it  arrests  the  breathing.  Great  dryness  in  the  throat,
causing  much  cough.  Dryness  in  the  throat,  with  eruc-
tations and  loss  of  strength.  Accumulation  of  mucus  in
the  throat.  He  is  obliged  to  hawk  up  thick  mucus,  espe-
cially in  the  morning.  Continual  hawking  up  of  mucus ,
in  the  morning,  with  headache.  Excessive  secretion  of
mucus  in  the  mouth  and  nose.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Slimy  taste  in  the  mouth , with
white  tongue.  Slimy  mouth,  for  twenty  days.  Slimy
mouth,  without  appetite.  Sourish-slimy  taste  in  mouth.
Sour  taste  in  mouth.  Bitter-sour  taste  in  the  mouth,
early  in  the  morning.  Bitterness  in  mouth , after  break-
fast, with  scraping  in  the  throat,  and  eructations.  Flat
taste  in  mouth,  and  saliva  as  from  spoiled  stomach.  Putrid
taste  in  mouth.  Rancid  taste  in  the  pharynx.  Much
thirst  the  whole  day.  Much  thirst  for  beer , a whole  week.
No  appetite,  no  thirst.  Canine  hunger,  frequently ; it
makes  her  feel  nauseated  and  wakes  her  at  night.  Cannot
eat  enough  at  dinner.  Inclines  to  nibble.

Gastric  Symptoms. — His  stomach  gets  spoiled  by  lit-
tle food,  especially  sour-krout,  brown  cabbage,  etc. ; it
gives  him  diarrhoea  day  and  night.  Smoking  occasions
cloudiness,  (intoxication,)  (a.  3 h.)  A little  wine  makes
him  feel  slightly  tipsy.  After  a,  slight  meal  he  feels  giddy
and  his  head  swims.  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head
after  a meal.  Short  flush  of  heat  on  the  left  side  of  the


30


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETRIE.


head  after  a meal,  with  continued  redness  of  the  cheeks.
Feeling  of  heat  and  sweat  after  a meal,  mostly  about  the
head.  Great  conflux  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  after  every
meal  ; she  is  obliged  to  spit  a good  deal.  Repletion  after
a moderate  dinner,  with  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
(a.  3 d.)  Painful,  cramp-like  spasm  in  the  chest,  arrest-
ing the  breathing,  immediately  after  a meal ; stooping  re-
lieved the  spasm,  but  the  arrest  of  breath  returned  when
raising  the  head.  Uncomfortableness  after  supper.  Flat-
ness and  restlessness  after  supper.  The  previously  exist-
ing weakness  disappears  after  a meal.  Toothache  after
breakfast.  Acid  eructations  at  dinner.  Sour  eructations
with  dim  sight.  Sour  eructations , setting  the  teeth  on
edge.  Gulping-up  of  a sour  fluid  after  breakfast.  Re-
peated hot,  acid  risings  and  gulpings.  Scraping  eructa-
tions even  after  a slight  meal,  (a.  4 d.)  Eructations  after
a meal,  the  whole  forenoon.  Tasteless  eructations,  the
whole  day.  Eructations,  with  oppression  in  the  abdomen.
Eructations  in  the  morning,  tasting  of  rotten  eggs,  (a.  24
h.)  Heartburn  towards  evening , and  eructations.  Hic-
cough, in  the  evening,  followed  by  much  sneezing,  (a.  36
h.)  Violent  hiccough,  sometimes  at  three  different  peri-
ods of  the  day,  for  several  days.  Nausea  with  eructations,
(a.  24  h.)  Nausea  every  morning.  Nauseated  and  quabn-
ish  the  whole  day,  (a.  6,  10  d.)  Nausea,  frequently  arrest-
ing the  breathing.  Nausea  the  whole  day,  with  loss  of
appetite,  with  sourish  taste  in  mouth,  and  white  and  dry
tongue.  Violent  nausea,  with  cold  sweat  and  stitches  in
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.  Nausea  in  the  morning,
with  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth.  Sudden  nausea
when  walking,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,
sudden  heat  in  the  face  and  vertigo;  for  a quarter  of  an
hour,  (a.  14  d.)  Momentary  attacks  of  nausea,  morning
or  evening,  with  inclination  to  vomit.

Stomach. — Qualmish  feeling  in  the  stomach,  (a.  24  h.)
Empty  feeling  in  the  stomach,  with  obtusion  of  the  head.
Great  feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach,  as  after  long
hunger.  Relaxation  of  the  stomach.  Intolerable  heavi-
ness in  the  stomach,-  relieved  by  walking.  Pain  in  the
stomach,  earl  y in  the  morning.  Oppression  of  the  stomach,
before  breakfast,  going  off  by  eating.  Pressure  in  the


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETRJE.


31


stomach  and  diarrhoea,  in  the  afternoon,  preceded  by  colic.
Pres  sure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  two  mornings  in
succession,  before  breakfast,  with  nausea.  Distension  of
the  stomach,  in  the  afternoon.  iStomach  and  abdomen
are  frequently  painful,  feeling  at  times  as  if  they  were
being  contracted,  at  times  distended.  Clawing  sensation
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (a.  2 d.)  Sudden  gripings  in
the  stomach,  as  if  occasioned  by  a cold,  with  anxiousness
in  the  evening  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.  Violent  pain  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  something  would  tear  off  in
that  part.  Cutting  around  the  stomach,  with  inclination
to  stool,  (a.  4 d.)  Stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in
the  afternoon.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver.
Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  when  making  the
least  bodily  exertion.

Abdomen.  — Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,
with  nausea.  Pressure  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  (a.  12
d.)  Stitches  in  both  hypochondria,  going  off  without
emission  of  flatulence.  Colic,  a sort  of  painful  pressure.
He  is  roused  from  his  sleep  by  pressure  and  pinching  in
the  abdomen,  as  if  occasioned  by  a cold.  Puffiness  of
the  abdomen,  especially  after  a meal,  with  pressure  below
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Distended  abdomen,  owing  to
flatulence,  or  from  a little  drink.  Painful  tension  over
the  whole  abdomen,  with  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left
side  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  something  would  break  through,
or  as  of  an  internal  wound,  in  paroxysms  of  2,  3 hours.
Tension  and  spasms  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  3 d.)  Gripings
in  both  sides  of  the  abdomen,  from  below  upwards,  with
heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs  and  great  drowsiness.  Grip-
ing and  pinching  in  the  parts  round  the  upper  half  of  the
umbilicus,  in  frequent  paroxysms.  Pinching  in  the  abdo-
men, for  several  evenings,  (a.  48  h.)  Pinching  in  the
abdomen,  every  10  minutes  ; she  has  to  bend  double  at
every  paroxysm,  (a.  13  d.)  Pinching  and  grunting  in
the  abdomen,  evening.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  and
diarrhoea  the  whole  day,  (a.  24  h.)  Cutting  in  the  epi-
gastrium with  nausea  and  diarrhoea,  at  4 o’clock  in  the
morning,  (a.  48  h.)  Cutting  colic,  late  in  the  evening;
she  had  to  bend  double.  Cutting  in  the  abdomen  as
if  occasioned  by  a cold  ; afterwards  diarrhoea  with  bear-


32


PETROLEUM — OLEUM  PETRJE.


ing  down,  (a.  3G  li.)  Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  imme-
diately, and  again  after  the  lapse  of  72  hours,  in  the
morning  when  waking  and  several  times  during  the  day.
Cutting  in  ihe  abdomen,  for  two  days,  followed  by  expul-
sion of  faeces,  after  which  bloody  stools.  Violent  cutting
in  the  abdomen,  for  two  days,  with  griping  in  the  ab-
domen ; afterwards  eructations  vomiting  of  clear  water,
diarrhoea  and  headache,  (in  a few  hours.)  Cutting  colic
in  the  morning,  followed  by  diarrhoea  having  a very  fetid,
camphor-like  smell  ; the  diarrhoea  is  succeeded  by  unsuc-
cessful tenesmus.  Drawing  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with
eructations  and  emission  of  flatulence.  Disagreeable
itching  in  the  abdomen.  Going  to  sleep  and  tingling
of  the  abdominal  muscles  extending  as  far  as  the  thighs,
when  sitting;  she  had  to  rise  and  walk  about,  (a.  21  d.)
Pimple  on  the  abdomen,  burning  when  touched.  Pressure
in  the  right  abdominal  ring,  (a.  a few  h.)  Stitching  in  the
right  groin,  after  a nightly  emission.  Cramp-pain  in  both
groins,  like  a sort  of  pressure  when  walking  or  lying
down  ; but  mostly  when  sitting.  Pain  in  the  groin  as  if
inguinal  hernia  would  press  through,  at  every  fit  of  cough.
Accumulation  and  movement  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen
(immediately.)  Grunting  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening.
Emission  of  a quantity  of  fetid  flatulence,  for  many  days.
Fetid  flatulence  preceding  the  liquid  stool.  Sensation  in
the  abdomen  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on,  without  stool.

Stool. — Frequent  desire  for  stool,  with  slight  diarrhoea,
followed  by  much  pressing,  as  if  a good  deal  of  stool
should  yet  be  expelled,  (a.  24  h.)  Inclination  to  diarrhoea
and  two  soft  stools,  (a.  24  h.)  Diarrhoea  with  colic.
Diarrhoea,  after  spoiling  the  stomach,  especially  in  stormy
weather.  Watery  stools  with  diarrhoea,  for  6 days.  Di-
arrhoea, twice  followed  by  excessive  weakness.  Mucus
with  the  stool.  Profuse  mucous  diarrhoea,  (in  a few  hours.)
Diarrhoea,  consisting  of  bloody  mucous,  (a.  4 d.)  Soft
stool,  with  tenesmus.  Soft,  difficult  stool,  as  if  from
inactivity  of  the  bowels.  The  stool  becomes  harder,
(secondary  effect,  a.  28  d.)  Stool  is  expelled  with  great
exertions,  as  if  the  rectum  lacked  power  to  expel  it.  No
stool  for  two  days,  but  much  bearing  down  ; the  rectum
appeared  too  weak  to  expel  the  fasces,  (a.  4,  5 d.)  Diffi-


FETROLEUM OLEUM  PETRIE.


qO

d<->


cult  stools  with  sore  pain  of  the  rectum.  Ascarides
are  passed  with  the  stool.  Canine  hunger  after  stool,  but
speedily  satisfied.  Flatulent  distension  after  stool.  Qualm-
ishness and  weak  feeling,  after  a second  good  stool,  (a.  24
h.)  Weak  and  dizzv  after  stool,  vanishing  of  sight  ; he
had  to  close  his  eyes  to  recover  himself.  Pressure  about
the  anus,  (a.  6 d.)  Aching  pain  in  the  rectum,  two  days
previous  to  the  menses  ; she  had  to  bend  over ; when
raising  the  body,  she  felt  stitches  in  the  rectum,  which
increased  when  walking.  Itching  of  the  anus  when  going
to  sleep.  Burning  pain  in  the  region  of  the  anus.
Burning  and  stitching  in  the  anus  and  rectum,  fa.  18  d.)
Fistula  recti.  Scurf  on  the  border  of  the  anus,  titillating
and  erosive.

Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate  ; the
urine  passes  off  in  a double  stream,  with  burning  pain,
and  with  tearing  in  the  glans.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate  ;
only  a little  urine  being  emitted.  Frequent  micturition ,
little  at  a time , (a.  4,  7 days.)  Involuntary  micturition.
He  passes  twice  as  much  urine  as  corresponded  to  the
quantity  of  liquid  he  had  drunk.  Urine  with  white  sedi-
ment, (a.  9 d.)  Dark  yellow  urine,  with  a quantity  of
red  sediment,  (a.  3,  4 d.)  The  urine  shortly  deposits  a
red  sediment,  the  surface  being  covered  with  a shining
pellicle.  Urine  turbid,  and  red  as  blood.  • Dark-brown
flocculi  in  the  urine,  after  standing  some  time.  Brown
urine,  having  a fetid  and  sour  smell.  The  urine  has  a
strong  ammoniacal  odour.  The  urine  has  a fetid  smell,
it  deposits  a reddish  sediment  adhering  to  the  vessel.
Pressure  upon  the  bladder : he  had  a desire  to  urinate  at
least  ten  times  in  the  afternoon,  and  it  was  some  time
before  the  urine  made  its  appearance,  (a.  9 d.)  Burning
urine.  Burning  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  when  urinating.
Cutting  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  botli  at  the  commence-
ment and  termination  of  micturition.  A few  drops  of
urine  flow  out  after  micturition.  Violent  contraction  in
the  region  of  the  bladder,  on  both  sides  of  the  mons
veneris,  especially  during  the  emission  of  urine  which
was  frequently  arrested  during  that  contraction.  Burning
pain  in  the  urethra , towards  evening.  Jerkings  in  the
urethra,  as  during  the  emission  of  semen.  Mucous  dis-


34


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETRIE.


charge  from  the  urethra.  Stitch  in  the  urethra  during
micturition.

Genjtal  Organs. — Tearing  in  the  glans,  (immedi-
ately.) Itching  of  the  glan's,  passing  into  a stitching.
Smooth,  red  spot  upon  the  glans,  without  sensation,  (a.  12
d.)  Reddish  eruption  upon  the  glans,  with  itching.
Cramp-pain  in  the  left  testicle,  (spermatic  cord,)  the
scrotum  contracting  during  that  pain.  Itching  pulling  in
the  right  half  of  the  scrotum,  continuing.  Itching  and
humidity  of  the  scrotum.  Redness  and  humid  soreness  of
one  side  of  the  scrotum.  Less  desire  for  an  embrace,
and  less  sexual  excitement  in  the  imagination,  (the  first
days.)  Restores  erection  and  power  for  a few  months.
Violent  desire  for  an  embrace,  in  the  morning,  in"  the
interior  of  the  genital  organs,  without  being  troubled
by  flatulence,  (a.  4 d.)  Emission  of  semen  while  dally-
ing with  a female,  (a.  1 1 cl.)  Retarded  emission  of  semen
during  an  embrace,  (a.  21  d.)  Two  emissions,  the  first
night.  Emissions,  followed  by  anxious  heat  in  the  morn-
ing, (a.  ,38  h.)  Soreness  near  the  female  organs  of  gene-
ration. Itching  in  the  female  urethra,  during  micturition,
preceded  by  violent  desire  to  urinate.  Aversion  to  an
embrace  in  a female,  (the  first  four  weeks.)  Burning  in
the  genital  organs,  with  some  discharge  of  blood,  (in  a
few  h.)  The- menses  appear  somewhat,  after  having  been
suppressed  a long  time,  (a.  6 cl.)  Premature  menses,  (a.
4.  d.)  Premature  and  scanty  menses,  (4.  d.)  Menses  de-
laying 10  days,  until  full  moon,  (a.  24  cl.)  The  menstrual
blood  causes  an  itching  of  the  genital  organs.  Heat  in  the
soles  of  the  feet,  and  in  the  hands,  during  the  menses.
Singing  and  roaring  in  the  ears,  during  the  menses.
Painful  tearing  in  the  thigh,  during  the  menses.  Places
on  the  legs,  during  the  menses,  which  are  painful  to
the  touch.  Faintness  and  bruised  feeling  in  the  body,
during  the  menses.  Leucorrhoea,  like  albumen.  Profuse
leucorrhoea  every  day,  for  several  days,  (a.  a few  hours.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — Sneezing,  with  drowsiness  in  the
evening.  Catarrhal  sensation  in  the  throat,  with  titillation
inducing  one  to  cough.  Feeling  of  obstruction  in  the
posterior  nares.  Dry  coryza,  and  ulcerated  nostrils.  Pro-
fuse coryza,  (a.  13  d.)  Cessation  of  the  discharge  of
mucus  from  the  nose  j he  is  obliged  to  blow  it  out  with


PETROLEUM — OLEUM  PETRJS.


35


force,  in  small  little  clots.  Hoarseness , in  the  afternoon.
Severe  hoarseness,  for  several  days.  Cough  from  dryness
in  the  throat , (a.  10  d.)  Cough  with  scraping  in  the
throat,  (a.  4 d.)  Cough  deep  out  of  the  chest,  (a.  3 d.)
Cough,  whenever  smoking.  Evening  cough,  fatiguing
the  chest,  occasioned  by  an  irritation  in  the  lower  part  of
the  trachea.  Night-cough.  Cough  only  in  the  night
after  going  to  sleep,  which  is  then  very  severe.  l)ry
suffocative  cough,  she  cannot  cough  deep  enough.  Vio-
lent cough,  and  profuse  expectoration,  for  8 days,  (a.  23  d )
She  feels  an  inclination  to  vomit  when  coughing.

Chest. — The  breathing  is  labored,  especially  when
going  up  stairs,  when  beginning  to  walk,  and  low  talking.
When  the  child  fell  or  knocked  himself  against  something,
his  breathing  became  immediately  arresled.  Wheezing
in  the  trachea,  during  an  inspiration,  in  the  evening  when
in  bed.  Rattling  in  the  trachea  and  dry  cough,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed  ; previous  to  falling  asleep.  Asthma
and  suffocative  heaviness  as  if  from  constriction  of  the
trachea,  with  titiliation,  inducing  dry  cough.  Asthma  in
the  evening,  for  some  hours.  Short  breathing,  (a.  18  d.)
Oppression  of  the  chest  in  the  night,  and  restless  sleep.
Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  difficulty  of  breathing,  more
when  sitting  than  when  walking.  The  chest  is  very  sen-
sitive to  cold  air  ; after  having  been  exposed  to  cold  air,
her  chest  feels  very  much  oppressed  next  day.  Pressure
and  tightness  of  the  chest,  in  the  afternoon.  Pressure  on
the  sternum,  in  the  morning.  Pressure  on  the  upper  part
of  the  sternum,  in  the  night ; going  off  by  eructations.
Pressure  upon  the  chest,  as  if  the  parts  in  front  were  held
together  with  the  hand.  Pressure  and  digging-up  in  the
chest.  Intense  drawing  pain,  with  an  aching  sensation,
in  the  region  of  the  left  short  ribs,  in  the  outer  parts  of  the
left  half  of  the  chest,  and  in  the  right  hypochondriurn.
Stitching  in  the  right;  afterwards  in  the  left  side  of  the
chest,  just  below  the  arm.  Lancinating  pain,  in  front,
from  the  right  to  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when  inclining
with  the  trunk  to  the  left  side.  Stitching  in  the  chest.
Stitching  in  the  chest,  and  conlractive  pain  in  the  head,  when
coughing.  Violent  pleuritic  stitches.  Violent  stitch  as  far  as
the  heart,  arresting  the  breathing.  Feeling  of  coldness  in  the


3G


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETRIE.


chest  in  the  region  of  the  heart.  Occasional  momentary  pal-
pitation of  the  heart.  A sort  of  palpitation  extending  as  far
as  the  umbilicus,  in  the  evening  when  sitting  still.  Vio-
lent pain,  more  tearing  than  stitching,  in  the  outer  chest,
under  the  arm  ; it  prevented  sleep  the  whole  night.  Itch-
ing of  the  nipples,  they  have  a mealy  covering.

Back. — Pam  of  the  os  coccygis  when  sitting.  Violent,
but  short  pains  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  rising  from
a seal,  (a.  14  d.)  Cutting  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
in  ihc  morning  after  rising,  and  in  the  evening,  before
falling  asleep,  only  during  motion  and  when  stooping,  not
when  silling  erect.  Painful  jerks  in  the  small  of  the  back,
when  performing  several  motions.  Pain  as  fromaspram
in  the  small  of  the  back,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  also
when  sitting.  Great  uneasiness  and  stiffness  in  the  small
of  the  back  and  os  coccygis,  in  the  evening.  Weakness
in  the  small  of  the  back,  after  a walk,  (a.  8 d.)  Pain  in
the  back,  so  violent  that  he  is  unable  to  stir.  Pain  in  the
spine  during  an  easy  drive,  as  from  concussion.  Pressure
upon  the  shoulders  and  in  the  back.  Pressure,  heaviness
and  weariness  in  the  back,  in  the  morning,  (a.  11  d.)
Weight  in  the  back.  Cramp  in  the  back  extending  as  far
as  the  ribs,  accompanied  with  drops  of  swreat,  in  the  face
and  upon  the  arms,  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour  ; after-
wards copious  diarrhoea  consisting  of  mucus,  (in  a few  h.)
Rigidity  of  the  back.  Drawing  in  the  back,  going  off
by  bending  the  back  backwards.  Frequent  drawing  in  the
trunk,  as  occurs  when  yawning.  Pain  as  if  sprained  and.
oppression  between  the  scapulae,  reaching  into  the  chest.
Tearing  in  the  back,  between  the  scapulae  ; she  is  unable
to  stir.  Painful  jerk  in  the  back,  during  every  deglutition,
sometimes  also  during  an  imperfect  eructation  ; sometimes
without  deglutition,  when  in  a slate  of  rest  ; every  one  of
such  jerks  is  followed  by  oppressed  breathing.  Sweat  in
the  back  and  on  the  chest,  in  rest,  during  the  day.  The
skin  on  the  left  side  of  the  back  is  painful  as  if  excoriated.
Aching  pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  increased  by  the
slightest  motion.  Weight  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Pain
in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Painful  drawing  in  the  nape  of
the  neck,  extending  to  the  occiput.  The  right  side  of  the
neck  feels  stiff.


PETROLEUM — OLEUM  PETRIE.


37


Upper  Extremities. — Pain  of  the  shoulder-joint,  when
raising  the  arm.  Tension  and  drawing  in  the  shoulder.
Drawing  pain  in  the  left  shoulder,  as  far  as  the  glbow.
Frequent  jerks  in  the  right  shoulder,  (a.  8 h.)  Pain  in  the
shoulder-joint  as  if  sprained,  when  raising  the  arm.  Co-
pious sweat  in  the  axilla.  Tumor  in  the  axilla,  more  tear-
ing than  stitching,  ami  threatening  suppuration.  Sudden,
cramp  like  pressure  in  various  parts  oi  the  arm.  Twitch-
ings  in  the  muscles  of  the  arms.  Involuntary  stretching
of  the  arm,  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed.  Drawing
pain  in  the  right  arm,  afterwards  in  the  head.  Stitches  m
the  whole  of  i he  right  arm,  up  and  down,  over  the  elbow,
especially  when  bending  the  arm,  but  also  when  holding  it
still.  The  left  arm  goes  to  sleep,  for  several  days.  Arms
and  hands  go  to  sleep  easily  when  lying  upon  them  in  the
night.  Great,  weakness  in  the  arms.  Tremor  in  the  in-
terior of  the  arms.  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the
arms,  with  burning  pain.  Yellow  spots  on  the  right  arm,
(a.  6 d.)  Violent  cramp  in  the  upper  arm  when  holding  a
little  thing  with  the  hand,  renewed  by  the  least  motion  ;
the  ddtoid  muscle  becomes  hard;  next  day  the  spot  is
painful  as  if  bruised.  Sharp  pressure  on  the  upper  arm,
commencing  in  the  form  of  a jerk,  (a.  16  d.)  Tearing  in
the  right  upper  arm.  Paralysis  around  the  elbow  joint,
for  two  days.  Itching  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  (a.  1-  d.)
Boil  upon  the  fore-arm,  stinging  when  touched.  Pain  of
the  wrist-joint  as  if  sprained.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right
hand  and  the  index-finger,  (3.  d.)  Stitching  in  the  right
hand  extending  into  the  fingers,  in  the  morning,  when  in
bed,  (a.  15  d.)  Her  hands  feel  chilly  all  the  lime.  Burn-
ing of  the  palms  of  the  hands,  (a.  4 d.)  Heat  of  the
hands,  then  sweat  of  the  palms  of  the  hands.  Sweaty
hands.  The  skin  of  the  hands  is  brittle  and  rough.  Chap-
ped hands,  full  of  rhagades,  (a.  13  d.)  Itching  of  the
palm  of  the  hand,  (a.  16  d.)  Momentary  drawing  in  the
fingers.  Drawing  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Ripping-up
pain  of  the  posterior  joint  of  the  right  thumb.  Stitching
pain  in  the  fore-joint  of  the  right  index-finger,  as  from  a
splinter  in  the  bone  ; itching  in  the  outer  parts.  Shoot-
ings in  the  ball  of  the  right  hand,  (a.  6 d.)  Pain  in  the
posterior  joint  of  the  thumb,  as  if  sprained.  Rigor,  first


38


PETROLEUM— -OLEUM  PETRIE.


of  one  finger,  then  of  the  others,  extending  upwards
through  the  whole  arm,  accompanied  with  inclination  to
swoon  ; this  subsided  by  walking  out  into  the  open  air,
except  the  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  the  heaviness  of  the
arm,  (a.  19  d.)  Jtching  of  the  joints  of  the  fingers.
Rough  chapped  tips  of  the  fingers , with  stitching  and  cut-
ting pains,  (a.  8 d.)  Pain  of  the  finger-nails,  as  if  bruised,
when  touching  them.  Pecking  sensation  in  the  wart  on
the  finger,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed  ; when  touching  it,
it  feels  sore.  Burning  pain  in  the  wart  on  the  finger,  as
if  it  would  ulcerate,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.

Lower  Extremities. — Pressure  in  the  hip  when  sit-
ting. Transitory  drawing  pain  in  the  left  hip-joint,  (a.  7
d.)  Pain  in  the  hip,  near  the  os  sacrum,  as  if  sprained,
during  motion.  Redness  and  humid  soreness  of  the  upper
and  inner  surface  of  the  lower  limb,  (a.  12  d.)  Small,
itching  pimples  in  the  fold  between  the  scrotum  and  thigh.
Violent  stitching  in  a painless,  soft  tumor  of  many  years’
standing,  on  the  upper  and  inner  surface. of  the  right  thigh.
Itching  of  a red  herpetic  spot,  on  the  upper  and  inner
side  of  the  thigh.  Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs.  Feeling
of  coldness  in  the  right  lower  limb,  in  the  night.  Pain
and  stiffness  in  the  lower  limbs,  (a.  5 d.)  Drawing  pain
in  the  left  lower  limb.  Uneasiness  in  the  lower  limbs  ;
he  has  to  move  them  to  and  fro  all  the  time.  Stiffness
and  heaviness  of  the  thighs  when  walking.  Pain  in  the
left  thigh  when  walking  ; it  prevented  her  from  sittings
(a.  8 d.)  Tensive  pressure  on  the  posterior  surface  of
the  thigh,  above  the  bend  of  the  knee.  Cramp  in  the
thighs  the  whole  day.  Sudden  jerking  pain  in  the  left
thigh,  (a.  25  d.)  Large  inflamed  pimple  over  the  knee.
Large  boil  on  the  thigh,  (a.  25  d.)  Tension  in  the  knee,
when  making  the  first  step,  after  rising  from  a seat.
Cramp-pain  in  the  knee-joint.  Cramp  in  the  left  knee,
when  walking.  Stretching  and  burning  in  the  bends
of  the  knees.  Stiffness  of  the  knees  and  legs.  Stiffness
in  the  bend  cff  the  knee  and  leg,  (a.  9 d.)  Stiffness  in
the  knees  and  tarsal  joints.  Pulling  pain  with  itching  of
the  knee-joints.  Tearing  in  the  left  knee,  in  the  evening;
she  was  unable  to  stretch  it.  Stitches  in  the  knees.
Stitching  in  the  right  knee-joint,  as  if  occasioned  by  a


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETRIE.


39


sprain,  in  the  evening  when  walking  or  lying  down  ; not
when  sitting.  Pain  in  the  knees  and  tibiae,  as  if  bruised.
Contusive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  patella.  Constant
paralytic,  prickling  sensation,  when  walking  or  sitting,
from  above  the  knee  down  to  the  foot.  Weakness  in  the
right  knee  when  walking,  going  off  when  continuing  to
walk.  Painful  weakness  in  the  knees,  in  the  morning
when  rising.  Cracking  in  the  knee,  as  if  one  of  the  semi-
lunar  cartilages  had  become  dislocated,  and  pain  during
motion.  Large  red  spot  on  the  left  knee,  aching  after-
wards. Frequently  a cold  spot  on  the  knee,  from  which
a cold  thrill  pervades  the  whole  limb.  The  legs,  and
especially  the  tarsal  joint,  feel  as  if  squeezed  into  an  iron
envelope.  The  tibiae  are  painful  when  walking.  Cramp
in  the  calves , thighs  and  feet , the  whole  day.  Severe
cramp  in  the  legs,  (immediately.)  Cramp-like  drawing
in  the  right  tibia.  Jerking  of  the  right  leg,  commencing
at  the  knee,  painful,  and  felt  only  when  walking.  Tear-
ing, stitching  and  pressure  in  a place  of  the  leg,  which
had  been  ulcerated  previously.  Blotches  on  both  calves,
itching  a good  deal.  Aching  pain  in  the  foot  and  weak-
ness below  the  outer  malleolus.  Pressure  in  the  right
heel.  Tension  in  the  foot  when  walking,  (a.  7 d.)  Cramp
in  the  sole  of  the  Joot  at  night , (a.  8,  11  d.)  Stiff  foot  ;
when  moving  it,  cramp  in  the  sole.  Momentary  drawing
in  the  foot,  when  walking.  Violent  drawing  and  jerking
in  the  feet,  (a.  9 d.)  Tearing  in  the  heel,  in  the  morning
when  waking.  Cracking  in  the  tarsal  joint  when  moving
the  foot.  Stitches  in  the  heel,  as  if  a splinter  were  lodged
in  it.  Throbbing  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  worst  when  at
rest.  Feeling  in  the  feet  as  if  swollen.  Swelling  of  the
foot  for  several  days.  Swelling  and  heat  of  the  fore-part  of
the  sole  of  the  foot,  two  evenings  in  succession,  for  one  hour,
accompanied  with  burning.  Burning  itching  of  the  outer
malleolus.  Blisters  on  the  heel.  Sweaty  soles.  Profuse
sweat  of  the  feet , (a.  56  d.)  In  the  evening  the  toes  are
drawn  inwards  by  a cramp.  Pressure  in  the  ball  of  the
big  toe,  as  if  it  had  been  frozen  or  as  if  tightly  surrounded
with  an  iron  band.  Tearing  drawing  in  the  ball  of  the
right  big  toe.  Prickings  in  the  toes  crossing  one  another.
Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  posterior  joints  of  the  toes,


40


PETROLEUM— OLEUM  PETRIE.


when  treading.  Eruption  between  the  toes.  Stitches  in
he  corns.  Burning  pain  in  the  corns.

General  Symptoms. — Itching  of  the  skin  with  chills.
Itching  of  the  whole  body,  in  the  morning  when  yet  half
asleep.  Itching  stinging  over  the  whole  body,  with  great
anxiousness,  at  7 o’clock  in  the  evening.  Stitches  in
various  parts  of  the  body,  (2.  2.  d.)  Painful  sensitive-
ness of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body  ; the  pressure  of  the
clothes  is  painful.  Every  thing  upon  which  she  is  silting
or  lying,  feels  hard.  Unhealthy  skin , even  small  wounds
ulcerate  and  spread.  Stitching  in  the  ulcer.  Liability
to  catching  cold,  ; a cold  makes  her  feel  fainting.  A cold
brings  on  headache,  lachrymation,  inflammation  of  the
throat,  cough  and  coryza,  (a.  2d.)  Dread  of  the  open  air.
During  an  evening  walk  the  air  appeared  to  him  chilly,
(in  July.)  The  open  air  is  unpleasant  to  him  during  a
walk.  A sort  of  nervous  weakness  in  the  whole  body
after  a short  walk.  Burning  over  the  whole  body  during
a walk.  A sort  of  swoon  at  the  approach  of  a tempest.
A slight  vexation  does  much  harm  ; the  taste  in  the
mouth  becomes  bitter,  the  appetite  disappears  ; a short
walk  exhausts  her  strength  ; brings  on  diarrhoea;  orgasm
of  the  blood  continues  when  going  to  bed ; eructa-
tion and  nausea ; restless  sleep  ; next  morning  trem-
bling through  the  whole  body,  diarrhoea  and  internal
wretchedness,  her  tears  trickling  down  all  the  while,  (a.
9 d.)  Agitation  of  the  blood,  brought  on  by  slight  motion.
Violent  orgasm  of  the  blood  in  the  evening,  and  bitter
taste.  Strong  pulse,  especially  when  walking  and  going
up  stairs,  (a.  2,  3 d.)  Strong  pulse,  when  walking,  wTith
pale  countenance  and  difficult  speech,  (a.  9 d.)  After
riding,  stepping  out  of  the  carriage  and  going  up  and  down
in  the  open  air,  she  was  attacked  with  sudden  violent
nausea  and  became  so  weak  that  she  fell  down,  with  desire
for  stool,  cold  sweat  on  the  head,  neck  and  chest,  with
pale  countenance  and  blue  margins  around  the  eyes ;
after  stool  she  had  violent  chilliness  and  next  evening
some  heat.  Jerkings  during  the  siesta  and  night-sleep.
Jerking  in  the  limbs,  in  day-time,  (a.  7 d.)  Pain  as  if
sprained,  in  arms,  chest  and  back,  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  18
d.)  Stiff  arms  and  legs,  in  the  morning  after  rising.
Trembling  tension  through  the  whole  body,  with  appre*


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETRIE.


41


hensiveness  and  discouragement.  Cracking  of  the  joints.
Weakness  in  the  joints,  (a.  15d.)  Pain  of  the  limbs,  as
if  bruised,  in  the  evening  ; he  knows  not  what  to  do  with
them,  (a.  13  d.)  Arthritic  pain  in  the  hip,  knee,  and
tarsal  joints,  in  1 he  night.  Paralytic  drawing,  with  pres-
sure, in  the  left  tibia  and  lower  arm,  on  the  extensor  sur-
face, (a.  24  h.)  Drawing  pressure  on  the  bones,  here  and
there,  not  diminished  by  walking  in  the  open  air,  (a.  3 d.)
Jerking,  sharp  pressure  on  various  parts,  (a.  16  d.)
Cramp-like  drawing  and  pressure  in  the  limbs,  (a.  5 d.)
Burning  in  the  throat,  stomach  and  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen.  The  arms  and  legs  go  to  sleep  easily.
Heaviness  in  the  feet  and  the  whole  body.  Heaviness  in
all  the  limbs,  with  laziness.  Uneasiness  in  the  limbs  ;
restlessness.  Painful  weariness  in  the  shoulders,  the
spine  and  loins.  Weakness  of  the  body  and  heaviness  in
the  lower  limbs.  Feeling  of  uncomfortableness  all  over
the  body,  as  if  threatened  by  severe  illness,  with  tremor
and  great  weakness,  (a.  3 d.)

Weakness,  Fits. — Great  weakness , without  any  appa-
rent cause,  (a.  15  d.)  Painful  weariness  of  the  limbs.
Faint  feeling,  in  the  morning,  after  a walk  ; when  back  in
his  room,  he  felt  unwell,  the  face  became  flushed  and  a
gauze  seemed  to  be  before  his  eyes,  with  compressive
sensation  in  the  temples  ; he  came  near  fainting,  but  when
he  roused  himself,  the  symptoms  went  off  in  three  minutes.
Sudden,  almost  momentary  loss  of  strength,  even  unto
swooning,  with  pale  countenance,  and  sudden  nausea  of  a
quarter  of  an  hour’s  duration,  (a.  4,  5 d.)  Visible  emacia-
tion, with  good  appetite.  Trembling  in  the  morning  when
rising.  Excessive  weariness  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,
the  limbs  feel  bruised,  (a.  11  d.)  The  whole  body  feels
weary  and  relaxed,  in  the  morning,  when  rising.

Sleep. — Drowsiness,  and  wreariness  of  the  limbs.  She
feels  so  weak  that  she  falls  asleep  on  her  chair.  Drowsi-
ness in  day-time,  (a.  17  d.)  Drowsiness  in  the  evening,
when  sitting  still  ; for  several  evenings.  He  remains
awrake  for  a long  while,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed  ; he
tosses  from  side  to  side  all  the  time.  He  tosses  from  side
to  side,  while  in  bed,  in  the  night,  sleeping  only  by  turns
of  15  minutes.  Constant  somnolence.  Wheezing  through


42


PETROLEUM OLEUM  PETR.E.


the  nose,  in  the  morning  when  asleep.  The  night’s  rest
is  interrupted  by  emission  of  semen  and  urgent  desire
to  urinate.  Urinates  a good  deal  during  the  night.  Heavi-
ness of  the  lower  limbs  and  weariness  of  the  back  in  the
night.  Cramp  in  the  calves  in  the  night.  Cramp  in  the
tendo  Achillis  in  the  night.  Cold  feet,  in  the  night,  pre-
venting sleep.  She  feels  excessively  hot  during  the  night,
under  the  bed-cover;  she  has  to  uncover  herself  from
time  to  time.  Anxious  heat  in  the  night,  with  itching  ;
he  is  beside  himself  and  knows  not  what  to  do  with  him-
self. Sweat  in  the  back  at  night,  waking  him  at  4 o’clock ;
afterwards  dry,  internal  heat  with  uncomfortable  feeling,
hindering  sleep.  Nightly  slumber  full  of  fancies.  No
night  sleep,  mere  fancies  concerning  one  and  the  same
disagreeable  object,  with  night-sweat.  He  imagines  some
one  is  lying  by  his  side.  He  raises  himself  in  his  bed
and  leaves  it.  Sleep  full  of  dreams.  Vexatious  dreams.
Confused  dreams.  Vivid  dreams  which  he  is  unable  to
recollect,  (a.  2 d.)  Restless  sleep  and  anxious  dreams,
(a.  10  d.)  Vivid,  horrid  dreams,  every  night.  Frightful
dreams  of  robbers  every  night.  Frightful  dreams  every
night,  every  dream  continuing  the  whole  night;  in  the
morning  she  feels  very  faint.  He  dreams  he  had  commit-
ted rape  and  murder  ; the  same  dream  in  the  siesta,  as  if
he  dispatched  the  same  individual  completely.  Starting
from  frightful  dreams  in  the  night.  Starting  in  the  night,
causing  the  limbs  to  shake.  She  started  when  asleep,
had  palpitation  of  the  heart,  trembling,  vomiting  and  violent
diarrhoea.  In  the  evening,  when  yet  awake,  the  whole
body  experiences  a jerk.  Cold  in  the  bed,  in  the  evening,
she  cannot  get  warm  ; followed  by  night  sweat.  Cold
feet  every  evening.

Fever. — Chilliness  in  the  evening,  followed  by  flushes
of  heat  in  the  face.  Chills,  every  evening.  Excessive
chilliness  from  morning  till  noon,  with  dull  headache  and
drawing  towards  the  forehead,  without  thirst,  for  half  an
hour  ; in  the  afternoon  heat  in  the  face,  especially  the  eyes,
with  thirst,  for  half  an  hour.  Violent,  internal  chills,  at  10
o’clock  in  the  evening,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  for  several
evenings.  Chilliness  through  the  whole  body  ; he  is  oblig-
ed to  lie  down,  (a.  72  h.)  Chilliness  every  afternoon,  for


PHOSPHORUS.


43


two  hours,  with  cold  hands  and  dryness  in  the  mouth.
Feverish  coldness,  at  6 o’clock  in  the  evening,  with  blue
nails,  (a.  7 d.)  Fever  and  chilliness,  with  complete  relaxa-
tion and  a painful  feeling  in  the  whole  body,  (a.  2 d.)
Chills,  at  7 o’clock  in  the  evening,  lasting  one  hour,  fol-
lowed by  sweat  in  the  face  and  on  the  whole  body,  except
the  lower  limbs,  which  were  quite  cold,  (a.  6 d.)  Fever,
with  full  pulse  and  burning  skin,  but  without  pain.  Heat
in  the  head,  with  cold,  moist  hands.  Heat  before  midnight,
with  burning  pain  in  the  mouth  ; chilliness  after  midnight,
(a.  4 d.)  Internal  heat,  with  heat  and  dryness  of  the
trachea;  accompanied  with  uncomfortableness,  irritation,
exhaustion.  Heat  and  chilliness  at  the  same  time,  (almost
like  chills,)  both  internally,  in  the  evening  ; accompanied
with  weeping  mood.  Heat  over  the  whole  body,  in  the
morning  when  waking.  Heat  for  several  evenings  from  5
to  6 o’clock,  (a.  9 d.)  Feeling  of  heat  over  the  whole  body,
after  36  hours.  Flushes  of  heat  over  the  whole  body,  (a.
5 d.)  Flushes  of  heat,  six  or  eight  times  a day,  she  then
sweated  over  and  over.  Flushes  of  heat  in  the  face,  burn-
ing hot  hands,  dry  tongue  and  agitated  breath,  every  even-
ing from  5 to  6 o’clock.  He  sweats  easily.  The  legs
sweat  up  to  beyond  the  knees  ; also  the  lower  arms,  espe-
cially the  wrist-joints.  Profuse  night-sweat,  (a.  6 d.)  also
after  24  hours.


PHOSPHORUS.*

Phosphorus  is  a most  powerful  anti-psoric,  but  it  can  be
seldom  used  with  advantage  when  the  genital  organs  are
weak,  or  when  the  sexual  desire  is  depressed,  or  when  the
menses  are  delaying,  or  when  the  vital  powers  are  weak
and  exhausted.  If  it  should  be  homceopathically  indicated
in  the  latter  case,  the  organism  should  be  previously  pre-

* How  entirely  chemical  agents  are  deprived  of  their  ordinary  chemi-
cal properties  by  the  processes  of  trituration  and  succussion,  is  shown  by
the  fact  that  sugar  of  milk,  moistened  wgh  the  30th  potency  of  Phospho-
rus, may  remain  enclosed  in  a paper  capsule  for  years  without  being  con-
verted into  phosphoric  acid.


•44


PHOSPHORUS.


pared  for  the  receplion  of  Phosphorus  by  raising  its  vital
energies  by  means  of  the  mesmeric  influence.  For  this
purpose  a healthy,  vigorous,  benevolent  person  may  hold
the  patient's  hands  with  a kind,  compassionate  disposition,
or  may  lay  his  or  her  hands  upon  the  most  affected  part  of
the  patient’s  body,  taking  care  to  remove  every  thing,  or
every  body  that  might  disturb  the  attention  of  the  mes-
meriser  or  that,  of  the  patient.

Phosphorus  acts  most  beneficially  when  the  patient  suf-
fers with  chronic  loose  stool  or  diarrhoea.

Jt  is  especially  indicated  when  the  following  symptoms
occur  : —

Want  of  cheerfulness ; fearfulness  when  being  alone  ;
anxiety  for  the  future  ; irritability  and  anxiety  ; tendency
to  start ; timidity  ; irritable  and  vexed  ; dread  of  labor ;
vertigo  of  various  kinds  ; stupefying  headache  ; conges-
tion of  blood  to  the  head  ; headache  in  the  morning  ;
stitching  in  the  outer  side  of  the  head  ; itching  of  the  up-
per part  of  the  head  ; falling  off  of  the  hair  ; burning  and
erosive  pain  in  the  outer  canthus  ; inflammation  of  the
eyes,  with  heat  in  the  eyes  and  pressure  in  the  same  as  of
a grain  of  sand ; lachrymation  in  the  wind  ; lachrymation  and
nightly  agglutination  of  the  eyes  ; difficulty  of  opening  the
eyelids;  dimsightedness;  shortsightedness  ; blindness  by
day,  every  thing  having  the  appearance  of  a gray  cover;  ob-
scuration of  sight,  at  candle-light;  cataract;  glaucoma;
black  appearance  before  the  face  ; black  spots  hovering  be-
fore the  face  ; beating  and,  throbbing  in  the  ear  ; humming
in  the  ears;  difficulty  of  hearing  the  human  voice-,  expulsion
of  blood  from  the  nose  when  blowing  it ; bleeding  from  the
nose  ; fetid  smell  from  the  nose  ; want  of  smell ; dirty  color
of  the  face  ; redness  and  burning  of  the  cheeks  ; tearing  in
the  upper  and  lower  jaw,  in  the  night  when  lying  down  ;
toothache,  as  if  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  in  the  morning
when  chewing;  stitching  toothache,  every  night  until  two
o’clock  ; soreness  in  the  mouth  ; mucus  in  the  mouth;  white
tongue  ; dryness  in  the  throat , day  and  night  ; scratching
and  burning  in  the  throat ; erosion  and  burning  in  the  throat;'
in  the  morning,  hawking  up  of  mucus ; slimy  taste  in  the
mouth  ; cheesy  taste  in  the  mouth;  want  of  taste;  eruc-
tations  ; spasmodic  eructations  ; sour  eructations  ; craving


phosphorus.


45


morning  nausea  ; panting  for  something  refreshing  ; crav-
ing after  a mc'al  ; canine  hunger;  water-brash  after  eating
or  drinking  sour  things  ; nausea  after  a meal  ; qualmishness
in  the  abdomen  after  breakfast;  heat  and  a sort  of  oppres-
sive anguish  after  a meal  ; burning  in  the  hands  alter  a
meal;  laziness  and  drowsiness  after  a meal;  pain  in
the  stomach  ; violent  oppression  of  the  stomach  after
a meal,  with  vomiting  of  the  ingesta;  a sort  of  con-
traction of  the  cardiac  orifice,  the  food  rises  back  again
into  the  mouth,  after  having  been  scarcely  introduced
into  the  stomach  ; painfulness  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach
when  touching  it;  digging-up  sensation  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach  ; repletion  in  the  stomach  ; puffiness  after  din-
ner ; colic,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed  ; want  of  elasticity
of  the  abdomen  ; pressing  in  the  sides  of  the  abdomen  ;
rumbling  in  the  abdomen ; grunting  in  the  abdomen  ;
trouble  from  flatulence ; incarceration  of  flatulence  ; in-
guinal hernia  ; violent  desire  previous  to  stool  ; tearing  in
the  abdomen,  with  great  and  urgent  desire  for  stool  ; dry
stool  ; chronic  looseness  ; discharge  of  blood  with  the
stool  ; expulsion  of  tsenia  ; itching  of  the  anus  ; varices  of
the  rectum  and  anus ; mucous  flux  from  the  anus,  which
is  constantly  open  ; tension  in  the  urethra  ; smarting  in  the
urethra  during  micturition  ; burning  of  the  urine  ; a sort
of  burning  jerking  in  the  urethra,  between  the  acts  of  mic-
turition ; too  powerful  evening  erections  ; continual  desire
for  an  embrace  ; excessive  frequency  of  emissions  ; stitches
in  the  vagina,  extending  into  the  womb  ; menses  too  scanty
and  watery  ; fermenting  sensation  during  the  menses  ; leu-
corrhoea.

Dry  coryza  ; troublesome  dryness  of  the  nose  ; con-
tinual discharge  of  mucus  from  the  nose;  roughness  of
the  throat ; expulsion  of  mucus  from  the  throat ; tilillation
in  the  throat,  exciting  cough  ; stitching  in  the  chest  ; cough
with  tilillation  ; chronic  cough  ; cough  excited  by  laugh-
ing ; cough  exciting  vomiting;  cough  with  rawness  and
hoarseness  of  the  chest  ; nightly  cough  with  stitches  in  the
throat;  difficult  breathing;  loud,  wheezing  breathing;
pressure  upon  the  chest ; heaviness  in  the  chest  ; stitches
in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  the  stitches  being  also  felt
when  touching  the  parts  ; chronic  stitches  in  the  side  ;
painful  soreness  in  the  chest ; pain  under  the  left  half  of


46


PHOSPHORUS.


the  chest  when  lying  upon  it ; 'palpitation  of  the  heart
when  silting  ; pain  in  the  back  as  if  broken  ; stiffness  of
the  nape  of  the  neck  ; thick  neck  ; pain  of  the  arm  when
raising  it ; tearing  stitches  in  the  arms  and  scapulas ; heat
of  the  hands  ; tremor  of  the  hands  ; drawing  pain  in  the
knees  ; jerking  in  the  calves  ; exostosis  of  the  tibiae  ;
coldness  of  the  feet  in  the  night  ; pain  of  the  soles  when
walking,  as  of  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  ; jerks  in  the  feet
in  day-time,  and  in  the  night  before  falling  asleep  ; tearing
in  the  limbs  ; numbness  of  the  tips  of  the  fingers  and  toes  ;
yellow  spots  on  the  abdomen  and  chest;  brown  spots  on
the  body  ; straining  parts  by  lifting  ; pulsations  in  the  whole
body  ; drowsiness  in  day-time  and  in  the  morning  ; falling
asleep  late  ; sleep  full  of  dreams  ; frightful  dreams  ; chil-
liness every  evening  ; flushes  of  heat  ; morning-sweat.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Drs.  Stapf,  Gross,  Hart-
laub,  Trinks,  Hering,  Schreter,  Goullon,  and  several
others.

Moral  Symptoms. — Great  despondency,  (a.  5 d.)
Gloomy,  taciturn,  reflective,  lazy,  out  of  humor,  not  dis-
posed to  anything.  Aggrieved,  disconsolate,  weeping,  (a.
5 d.)  Discouraged.  Sadness  about  twilight,  some  even-
ings in  succession.  The  world  appeared  horrid  to  him,  felt
relieved  by  weeping  ; shortly  after  complete  dulness  and
indifference.  Weeps  in  the  morning  upon,  waking  from  a
saddening  dream,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour;  could  not  be
calmed  during  that  time.  Easily  moved,  especially  liable
to  fearfulness,  (the  whole  time  of  proving.)  Anguish.
Anxiety  and  heat  in  the  head,  with  hot,  red  hands,  recur-
ring frequently,  and  visibly  relieved  when  standing.  Anx-
iety with  oppression.  Occasional  anguish  in  the  evening,
as  if  he  would  die.  Apprehensive  of  misfortune.  Anx-
ious about  her  illness.  Internal  uneasiness.  Anxiousness
and  uneasiness,  with  much  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  heat
in  the  head.  Uneasy  during  a thunder  storm.  Fearful-
ness with  horror,  as  if  a horrid  face  were  looking  out  of
every  corner.  Anxious  and  irritable  when  alone.  Fits  of
anguish,  apparently  under  the  left  mamma  ; they  torment
her  so  much  that  her  whole  body  trembles,  accompanied
with  occasional  bitter  eructations  and  palpitation  of  the
heart.  Loathing  of  life.  Excessive  sensibility  of  all  the


PHOSPHORUS.


47


senses,  especially  hearing  and  smell.  Inclines  to  start.
Discontented  and  irresolute.  Ill-humored.  Ill-humored,
the  general  health  being  excellent.  Discouraged  about  his
health.  Peevish  ; every  thing,  especially  men  and  noise
are  repulsive  to  him.  Very  much  out  of  humor,  cannot
forget  that  which  put  him  out  of  humor.  Is  greatly  vexed
about  the  least  trifle  before  dinner  ; afterwards  feeling  of
heat,  followed  by  pressure  at  the  stomach  ; afterwards
nausea  with  much  heat  in  the  face  and  total  loss  of  appe-
tite. Is  easily  put  out  of  humor,  with  cold  hands,  heat  in
the  face  and  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Capricious,  suscep-
tible. Great  irritation  of  the  mind.  Hypochondriac.
When  thinking  of  disagreeable  things,  he  is  attacked  with
a sort  of  apprehensiveness,  which  is  most  felt  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach.  When  thinking  of  a thing  very  intensely
she  is  attacked  with  a heat  as  if  hot  water  were  poured
over  her.  An  unpleasant  occurrence  gives  her  anguish,
mixed  with  fear  and  chagrin,  and  disposes  her  to  weep.
Irritable,  every  little  remark  offends  her  and  makes  her
feel  low-spirited.  Every  trifle  irritates  him.  When  she
gets  angry,  she  becomes  exceedingly  vehement.  Occa-
sionally she  becomes  very  vehement.  Obstinate.  Hatred
of  men.  Tenderness,  (secondary  effect.)  Increase  of
cheerfulness  in  the  first  days.  Good-humored , especially
in  the  afternoon.  Cheerfulness.  Spasmodic  laughing  and
weeping.  She  laughs  against  her  own  inclination,  she  be-
ing very  sad.  In  the  evening  her  fancy  is  so  vivid  that
she  shudders  even  when  merely  thinking  of  repulsive
things.  Absence  of  shame  ; she  undresses  herself,  and
wants  to  go  naked,  as  if  crazy.  Great  indifference  to
every  thing.  Iter  otherwise  beloved  child  is  indifferent  to
her.  Indisposed  to  work,  the  head  being  free.  Absence
of  mind,  in  the  morning,  although  disposed  to  work.  For-
getful and  dizzy.  Forgetful  and  stupid,  he  does  some-
thing quite  different  from  what  he  intends.  Slow  think-
ing, emptiness  of  the  mind.  Affluence  of  ideas,  which
she  finds  it  difficult  to  arrange.  Fanciful  delirium  when
slumbering  or  waking,  as  if  she  were  upon  a distant  island,
had  a great  deal  of  business,  were  a noble  lady,  etc.

Head. — General,  slight  obtusion  of  the  head.  Obtusion
of  the  head  after  a meal.  Violent  obtusion  of  the  head,


43


PHOSPHORUS.


and  vertigo,  obliging  one  to  lie  down.  Painful  dizziness ,
eight  mornings  in  succession.  So  dizzy  in  the  morning
after  waking,  that  she  has  to  be  led  out  of  her  bed.  Diz-
ziness, with  violent  headache,  chills  and  shuddering,  with-
out thirst,  heat  in  the  head  occasionally,  shuddering  and
uncomfortableness  of  the  whole  body,  (a.  3‘b  b.)  Stupid
sensation  for  many  days.  Obtusion  and  heaviness  in  the
forehead,  the  head  inclines  to  fall  over  ; diminished  in  the
open  air  and  by  knitting  the  brow,  returning  in  the  room
and  increased  by  stooping.  Gloominess  of  the  head.
Gloomy,  uncomfortable  feeling,  in  the  morning  after  rising.
In  the  morning,  when  rising,  he  is  unable  to  collect  his
senses,  his  head  feels  giddy , heavy  and  painful,  as  if  his
head  had  lain  too  low  during  the  night.  Stupid  sensa-
tion, when  waking  up  in  the  night,  inability  to  conceive
an  idea,  with  headache.  Painful  stupefaction  of  the  head,
in  the  morning  when  waking,  going  off  some  time  after  ris-
ing. Weakness  in  the  head  ; when  reflecting  upon  some
thing,  his  head  aches.  Great  weakness  of  the  head,  she
was  unable  to  bear  the  sound  of  the  piano.  Weakness  of
the  head  ; laughing,  treading  a little  too  firmly,  or  stretch-
ing the  limbs,  cause  throbbing  and  beating  in  the  head,
which  is  especially  violent  after  sitting  a long  while.  Slight
stupefaction  and  pain  between  the  eyes,  in  the  forehead,
going  off  after  dinner,  returning  an  hour  after,  and  continu-
ing until  evening.  Vertigo.  Vertigo,  when  rising  from
her  seat,  with  obscuration  of  sight.  Vertigo,  followed  by
nausea  and  an  oppressive  pain  in  the  centre  of  the  brain,
with  stupefaction  and  sensation  as  if  he  would  fall  over,
in  the  morning  and  after  dinner;  afterwards  nausea  in  the
afternoon,  heart-burn,  red  countenance  and  sensation  as  if
something  were  lodged  in  her  throat ; with  sadness  and
weeping  without  any  cause  ; gauze  before  the  eyes  in  the
evening,  and  itching  of  the  eyelids.  Giddy  feeling  in  the
afternoon,  as  if  the  chair  upon  which  he  was  sitting  were
being  raised,  and  as  if  he  were  looking  down  ; afterwards
hypochondriac  mood,  with  drowsiness  and  faintness,  until
9 o’clock  in  the  evening.  Vertigo,  unto  falling,  in  the
morning  after  rising.  Vertigo  in  the  morning,  resembling
a heavy  pressure  from  above  downwards  in  the  fore  part  of
the  head,  with  a fainting  sort  of  nausea  ; when  stooping,


PHOSPHORUS.


49


obscuration  of  sight,  with  much  sneezing,  until  even-
• ing  ; less  in  the  open  air,  (a.  7 d.)  Verligo,  in  the  fore-
noon ; when  walking,  every  thing  turned  with  her  ; she
staggered  and  had  no  firm  step.  Verligo  in  the  evening
when  lying  in  the  bed  ; she  could  not  lie  down,  but  had  to
sit  up  ; after  this  she  had  four  diarrhoeic  stools  with  violent
chills,  followed  by  great  heat  and  sweat  over  the  whole
body.  Fit  of  vertigo,  as  if  he  were  turning  about ; when
he  recovered  himself,  he  found  himself  with  his  arms
stretched,  as  if  he  had  wished  to  seize  something  for  the
purpose  of  laying  hold  of  it.  Short,  but  violent  vertigo,
in  the  evening,  for  ten  seconds.  Violent  vertigo,  in  the
evening,  when  walking  ; every  thing  turned  with  her ; the
vertigo  ceased  when  standing,  and  returned  when  walking.
Violent  vertigo  about  noon,  she  threatened  to  fall  from  her
chair.  Frequent  vertigo  about  noon,  before  or  after  a meal.
She  staggered  when  walking,  looking  at  people  as  if  she
were  intoxicated.  Vertigo  when  closing  1 he  eyes,  as  if  she
were  turning  round  all  the  time.  Vertigo  when  stooping,
with  chilliness  and  nausea  from  time  to  time.  Fit  of  ver-
tigo ; when  turning  about  once,  she  knew  not  where  she
was  ; the  same  fit.  occurred  in  the  forenoon  after  stooping.
Vertigo  with  headache  and  excessive  secretion  of  saliva.
Headache  when  lying  down,  with  nausea  ; a sort  of  ver-
tigo when  the  headache  passed  off.  Violent  headache
from  stooping,  (in  the  open  air,)  (a.  11  d.)  Headache
over  the  left  eye,  with  flying  spots  before  the  face.  Head-
ache when  thinking,  in  the  evening.  Headache  when  feel-
ing the  slightest  vexation.  Headache  in  the  morning,  at
the  commencement  of  a walk,  and  recurring  during  other
motions.  Headache  in  the  forehead  over  the  eyes,  every
morning,  rousing  her  from  sleep,  gradually  going  off  after
rising,  twenty-one  days  in  succession.  Headache,  com-
mencing immediately  after  lying  down,  two  evenings  in
succession.  Headache  in  the  night,  after  evening-nausea.
Violent,  dull  headache  with  nausea,  eructations  and  water-
brash.  Dull  pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  head.  Dull,  stu-
pefying headache.  Dull  headache,  as  after  a nightly  revelry.
Violent  feeling  of  numbness  and  dizziness,  with  oppressive
pain  in  the  head,  inability  and  want  of  disposition  to  work,
especially  to  perform  an  intellectual  labor*  accompanied

3


50


PHOSPHORUS.


with  drowsiness ; after  lying  still  for  a while  in  a sort  of
half  slumber,  that  feeling  disappears  almost  entirely,  but
recurs  shortly  after  rising  and  moving  about,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  these  parts  of  the  head  were  becoming  loose ;
some  parts  of  the  head  feeling  sore  when  touched,  for
several  days.  Headache,  with  a feeling  of  dreariness,  as
is  felt  at  the  approach  of  a catarrh.  In  the  morning  the
head  feels  heavy,  weak  and  dreary.  Heaviness  of  the
head  ; he  sees  through  a gauze.  Great  heaviness  of  the
head,  (a.  18  d.)  Fulness  of  the  head,  with  obstruction  of
the  ears  without  diminution  of  hearing,  except  when  swal-
lowing. Fulness  in  the  brain,  not  as  if  filled  with  blood,
and  without  hindering  thinking.  Pain  as  if  the  brain  were
bruised  or  dashed  to  pieces,  from  afternoon  till  bed-time  ;
going  off  while  asleep.  Oppressive  headache,  here  and
there,  increasing  to  a pain  as  if  the  brain  w7ere  dashed  to
pieces  on  the  surface.  Pressure,  moving  to  and  fro  in  the
head.  Oppressive  pain  in  the  forehead,  extending  into  the
eyes,  as  if  they  would  be  pressed  out.  Oppressive  and  pinch-
ing headache.  Oppressive  headache , in  the  forehead  over
the  eyes,  two  days  in  succession,  from  morning  till  night,
with  digging-up  in  the  upper  parts  of  the  head,  (a.  4 d.)
Oppressive  headache,  or  a muddled  feeling,  with  jerkings
in  the  head,  or  tearing  every  morning  ; increased  during
motion  after  rising.  Oppressive  headache  on  one  side,
going  off  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (immediately.)
Oppressive  headache,  here  and  there,  on  the  surface  of  the
brain.  Oppressive  headache,  alternately  in  the  temples
and  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  with  a feeling  of  fulness
in  the  brain,  but  not  as  if  there  were  too  much  blood,  (a.
2 h.)  Pressure  from  the  right  half  of  the  sinciput  over
the  eye.  Headache  over  the  eyes,  pressing  from  within
outwards,  as  if  the  forehead  would  fall  out,  more  externally,
(a.  24  h.)  Pain  as  if  the  head  would  burst,  so  violent,  that
she  cried  aloud,  from  6 o’clock  in  the  morning  until  bed-
time. Constrictive  headache  every  other  day.  Drawing
aching  in  both  temples.  Drawing  aching  pain  alternately
on  either  side  of  the  head.  Drawing  pain  at  a small  spot
of  the  right  side  of  the  head,  in  the  evening.  Drawling
headache,  in  the  morning  ; passing  towards  noon  into  a
sort  of  vertigo,  with  luminous  vibrations  before  the  eyes,


PHOSPHORUS.


51


going  off  after  dinner,  recurring  at  two  o’clock,  with  rapid
circulation  of  the  blood,  cheerfulness  and  mental  excitement,
with  inability  to  perform  any  kind  of  work.  Cramp-like
drawing  under  the  vertex,  with  stitches  in  the  temples.
Tearing  in  the  forehead.  Tearing  in  both  temples,  'hear-
ing in  the  upper  and  right  side  of  the  head,  as  if  she  were
pulled  by  a hair,  when  sitting.  Slight  tearing  in  the  head,
especially  over  the  right  eye.  Violent  tearing  in  the  right
side  of  the  head,  from  below  upwards,  in  the  evening,  when
sitting.  Frequent  jerks  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  tem-
ple, followed  by  drawing  towards  the  side  of  the  forehead,
after  dinner.  Periodical  jerking-beating  pain  in  the  root
of  the  nose,  for  eight  days  m succession,  every  day  at  nine
o’clock  in  the  morning,  also  extending  into  the  eyes  and
nose,  most  violent  about  noon  when  she  vomited.  Dig-
ging-up sensation  in  the  head  from  time  to  time,  with  dul-
ness  the  whole  day,  extending  more  towards  the  right  side
and  nose,  both  during  motion  and  when  at  rest,  and  dimin-
ished only  in  the  open  air.  Pain  in  the  sinciput,  periodi-
cally mingled  wilh  stitches,  especially  in  the  left  side,  more
in  the  afternoon  and  evening.  Stitches  in  the  forehead,
vertex,  sides  of  the  head,  into  the  left  sinciput,  in  the  tem-
ples, occasionally  burning,  sometimes  with  a sensation  as
if  pulled  by  the  hair,  or  as  if  the  head  would  burst,  some-
times after  dinner  or  in  the  morning,  mostly  when  sitting,
and  sometimes  going  off  by  friction.  Stitches  in  the  left
half  of  the  head.  Tearing  stitches  in  different  parts  of  the
head,  (a.  5 weeks.)  Stitches  in  the  right  temple,  in  the
evening,  (a.  some  h.)  Single  stitches  in  the  head,  in  the
evening,  (a.  5 h.)  Stitches  in  the  temples,  in  the  evening,
with  pain  in  the  whole  head.  Stitches  in  some  parts  of  the
head,  especially  in  the  evening.  Stitches  in  the  right  side
of  the  head,  for  several  days.  Stitches  in  the  occiput.
Prickings  in  the  vertex.  Stitching  and  pressure  in  the  oc-
ciput, afterwards  violent  beating  in  the  forehead.  Beating
in  the  vertex,  also  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  especially  at
the  back  part.  Beating  pain  in  the  temples,  frequently
lasting  half  an  hour.  Pulsations  in  the  head,  in  the  morn-
ing when  waking.  Throbbing  in  the  head,  when  lying
down.  Throbbing  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,
within  and  upon  the  part,  especially  when  chewing,  and


52


PHOSPHORUS.


painful  to  the  touch.  Beating  and  gnawing  in  the  region
of  the  right  parielal  bone,  apparently  in  the  bone  itself,  in
the  evening.  Pulsative  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,
deep  in  the  brain,  in  the  evening.  Hammering  and  stitch-
ing sensation  in  ihe  vertex,  coming  from  the  front  part.
Shootings  from  the  side  of  the  head  towards  the  root  of  the
nose  and  the  ball  of  the  right  hand.  Jerks  in  the  sinciput,
as  it  pieces  of  lead  were  shaken  in  the  brain.  Several
shoots  in  the  head,  especially  during  a difficult  expulsion
of  fasces.  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head.  Slight  rush
of  blood  to  the  head,  towards  evening.  Intolerable  rush
of  blood  to  the  head.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  with
burning  heat  and  redness  of  the  face,  when  silting.  Hum-
ming and  roaring  of  the  head,  almost  the  whole  day.
H umming  in  the  head,  (a.  2 h.)  Violent  roaring  in  the
head,  mostly  when  sitting.  Tickling  in  the  head.  Tran-
sitory titillating  headache,  in  the  forehead.  A good  deal
of  heat  and  feeling  of  heat  in  the  head,  especially  in  the
forehead  and  face,  (likewise  on  the  hands,)  sometimes  ac-
companied with  throbbing  in  the  head,  sometimes  arising
from  the  back  and  going  off  in  the  open  air.  Heat  in  the
head  and  then  in  the  whole  body.  Feeling  of  heat  in  the
head,  and  sensation  as  if  a foreign  body  were  moving
about  in  it.  Burning  headache  in  the  region  of  the  fore-
head, sometimes  with  nausea.  Burning  gain  in  the  fore-
head. Coldness  of  the  left  side  of  the  head,  with  pain  deep
in  the  car.  Frequent  alternation  of  coolness  and  heat  of  the
head  and  body,  (a.  2 b.)  Sensation,  when  remaining  in  the
open  air,  as  if  the  brain  would  become  congealed.  Her
headache,  except  a sort  of  dreary  feeling  in  the  head  and
obstruction  of  the  ears,  disappears  almost  entirely  after  din-
ner ; it  returns  in  the  warm  room.  Boring  and  beating  in
the  right  side  of  the  scalp,  when  sitting.  ' Burning  pain  in
the  outer  part  of  the  head  ; it  felt  hot,  without  the  tempera-
ture of  the  rest  of  the  body  being  increased,  accompanied
with  loss  of  appetite,  and  the  prover  is  obliged  to  lie  down,
(a.  9 d.)  Tearing-drawing  pain  on  both  sides  of  the  head,
with  pain  of  the  hairs  when  touching  them  ; the  pain  com-
mences in  the  evening  and  increases  during  the  night,  (3.
d.)  Pain  in  the  vertex,  as  if  ecchymosed.  Liability  of
the  head  to  cold.  Pressure  at  several  parts  of  the  head,


PHOSPHORUS.


52


as  if  nodosities  were  under  the  skin.  Shining,  painless,
uninflamed  tumor  on  the  forehead,  with  violent  headache
over  the  eves.  Pressure  upon  the  hairy  scalp,  in  the  face
and  on  the  neck.  Violent  itching  of  the  hairy  scalp.  A
number  of  scales  on  the  hairy  scalp,  itching  occasionally,
(a.  8 d.)  Itching  blotches  on  the  hairy  scalp , painful  like
boils  when  touched.  Smarting  of  the  eruption  upon  the
head,  although  itching  but  little.  Great  falling  off  of  the
hair , (the  first  days  ) Falling  off  of  the  hairs  ; the  roots
of  the  hairs  seem  to  be  dry.  A place  over  the  ear  be-
comes bald,  (a.  12  d.)  Sensation  as  if  the  skin  on  the
forehead  were  loo  tight,  with  anxiety  for  many  days,  (a.  3
h.)  Cramp-like  contractive  pain  on  the  head,  afiernoon
and  evening,  (a.  5 d.)  Cold  cramp-pain  on  the  whole  left
side  of  the  head.

Eyes. — Tickling  of  the  periosteum  around  the  eyes.
Digging-up  pain  in  the  eyes.  Pressure  in  the  upper  eye-
lids. Pressure  in  the  eyes.  Pressure  and  heaviness
upon  the  eyes,  as  if  one  would  go  to  sleep.  Pressure  in
the  eyes,  with  dimness.  Dull  aching  in  the  orbit.  Pres-
sure in  the  eyes,  as  of  sand.  Pressure  and  stitching  in
the  eyes,  they  are  dim  and  dull.  Pain  of  the  eye-balls,
as  if  pressed  upon,  the  pain  is  increased  by  seeing.  Pres-
sure and  burning  in  the  eyes,  for  two  days.  Tension  in
the  eyes.  Stitch  and  tearing  into  the  right  eye-ball,  in  the
afternoon  when  sitting.  Stitching  and  dryness  in  the
eyes.  Stitches  in  the  left  eye,  and  a stye  on  the  lower
lid.  Stitching  behind  the  eyes.  Fine  stitching  in  the
inner  canthi,  worse  in  the  open  air,  in  the  morning.  Fre-
quent itching  of  the  eye-lids,  in  the  day.  Itching  of  the
eyes.  Sensation  in  the  right  outer  canlhus  as  if  something
acrid,  salt  or  smarting  were  in  it,  without  redness.  Smart-
ing and  dryness  of  the  eyes,  when  reading.  Determina-
tion of  blood  to  the  eyes,  he  feels  the  eye-balls,  but  the
feeling  is  not'  unpleasant.  Burning  of  the  eye-ball  for
half  a minute.  Burning  pain  in  and  around  the  eye.
Burning  of  the  upper  eye-lids,  (a.  3 h.)  Heat  and  burn-
ing of  the  eyes,  frequently  during  the  day,  for  four  or  five
minutes.  Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  (a.  27  d.)  Inflamma-
tion of  the  eyes , with  burning  and  itching  in  the  eyes,  (a.
some  h.)  Inflammation  of  the  eyes  with  stitches.  In-


54


PHOSPHORUS.


flammation  of  the  right  eye,  the  left  being  weak.  Inflam-
mation and  redness  of  the  eye,  with  itching  and  painful
pressure.  Redness  of  the  eyes,  with  itching  and  smarting,
and  copious  discharge  of  a burning  and  smarting  fluid.
Redness  of  the  conjunctiva,  with  sensation  as  if  something
had  got  into  the  eye,  obliging  him  to  wipe  and  rub  con-
stantly. Redness,  inflammation,  swelling,  and  agglutina-
tion of  the  right  eye,  with  burning  pain,  for  two  days.
Yellowness  of  the  white  of  the  eye.  Swelling  of  the  right
upper  eye-lid,  with  itching  and  pressure.  A kind  of  puffi-
ness of  the  right  upper  lid.  Swelling  of  the  left  eye-lid,
with  pain  of  the  bone  of  the  orbit  when  touching  it.  Tumor
on  the  border  of  the  orbit.  Dryness  of  the  eyes,  going
off  soon.  Dryness  of  the  eyes,  in  the  morning  when
waking.  Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  eyes.  Lachrymation,
in  the  morning,  when  at  one’s  work,  and  dimness,  (a.  4
d.)  In  the  open  air  the  eyes  easily  run.  Violent  lachry-
mation, even  at  night.  Lachrymation,  smarting  and
mucus  in  the  right  eye,  in  the  evening.  Watery  and  dim
eyes  when  reading.  The  eyes  run  so  much  that  the  eye-
lids are  glued  to  the  eyes.  Agglutination  of  the  eye-lids
in  the  morning  when  waking,  and  difficulty  of  opening
them.  Agglutination  of  the  inner  canthi,  in  the  morning.
Agglutination  of  the  eye-lids,  in  the  morning,  with  burning
and  stitching  in  the  eyes  and  seeing  through  a gauze.
Agglutination  of  the  eye-lids  in  the  morning,  with  secre-
tion of  gum  during  the  day.  Winking  of  the  eye-lids  and
of  the  external  canthus  of  the  left  eye , recurring  fre-
quently. Contraction  of  the  pupil.  Weak,  faint,  drowsy
eyes.  Weak  eyes,  especially  in  the  morning  when  waking  ;
the  weakness  disappears  somewhat  when  rising,  (a.  5 d.)
Vanishing  of  sight  when  reading.  Inclination  to  see  only
with  one  eye.  Short-sightedness  ; the  outlines  of  distant
things  seem  effaced.  She  is  obliged  to  hold  things  close
to  her  eyes  when  desirous  of  seeing  things  clearly  ; things
at  a distance  appear  as  if  in  a smoke  or  through  a gauze  ;
even  when  holding  things  near  to  her  she  is  unable  to
look  at  things  steadily  for  a long  time  ; she  sees  better
when  dilating  the  pupils  while  shading  the  eye  with  her
hand.  Early  at  day-break  he  sees  more  distinctly  than  in
day-time.  He  sees  every  thing  through  a gauze,  with


PHOSPHORUS.


55


some  loss  of  consciousness.  The  eyes  are  very  dark,  he
sees  little.  Frequent  attacks  of  sudden  blindness,  and
sensation  as  if  a gray  cover  were  hanging  over  the  eyes.
Sensation  as  of  a black  gauze  before  the  right  eye .
Dark  bodies  and  spots  before  the  eyes.  Black,  passing
spots  before  the  eyes.  Large,  black  spots  hovering  before
the  eyes,  after  a meal.  Tremulous  vibrations  of  things
when  looking  at  them  early  in  the  morning  when  waking  ;
their  outlines  seemed  to  be  confused.  Luminous  vibra-
tions before  the  eyes,  and  whizzing  in  the  head.  Sparks
before  the  eyes,  in  the  dark.  Green  shine  around  the
light  of  a candle,  in  the  evening.  The  eyes  are  sensitive
to  candle-light,  in  the  evening.  The  eyes  are  painful  when
reading,  both  in  day-time  and  by  candle-light.  The  eyes
are  dazzled  by  the  light  of  day.

Ears. — Otalgia.  Pressure  in  both  ears.  Intense

drawing  pain  in  both  ears.  Dull  drawing  pain  in  the  lobule.
Tearing  in  the  right  ear,  also  in  the  forenoon  when  sitting.
Painful  tearing,  close  under  the  right  ear,  when  sitting,
going  off  by  friction.  Fearful  tearing  and  stitching  in  the
ear,  and  round  the  head.  'Jerking  in  the  left  ear.  Violent
darting  from  the  left  ear  into  the  lobule,  when  sitting.
Strong  stitches  deep  in  both  ears.  Stitching  in  the  right
lobule.  Frequent,  intensely  painful  prickings  in  the  right
meatus  auditorius  externus.  Stitching  in  the  ear.  Pain
in  the  right  lobule,  as  if  squeezing  it  with  the  hand,  so
sensitive  that  she  could  not  bear  it  to  be  touched  by  a hand-
kerchief, going  off  in  the  evening.  Violent  itching  of  the
ear.  Pulsations  in  the  ear,  after  a quick  walk.  Violent
stitching  beating  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  lobule.
Pleat  and  redness  of  the  ear.  Humor  in  the  ear.  Feeling
of  dryness  in  the  ear,  with  and  without  whizzing.  Pimples
in  the -ear  with  stitching.  Vesicles  in  the  concha,  with  a
burning  pain.  Vesicles  behind  the  ears.  Troublesome
tension  of  the  parotid  gland,  especially  when  stooping  ; it
is  painful  to  the  touch.  Occasional  burning  in  the  parotid
gland.  Strong  echo  in  the  ears,  in  the  morning.  One’s
own  and  other  people’s  words  resound  strongly  in  one’s
ears,  like  an  echo.  Every  tone  which  is  uttered  dis-
tinctly by  somebody,  is  re-echoed  unchanged.  A sort  of
groaning  in  the  head,  when  talking  aloud,  he  dared  not


66


PHOSPHORUS.


speak  aloud.  The  right  ear  feels  obstructed  occasionally.
Sudden  darting  into  the  left  ear,  afterwards  roaring;  fol-
lowed at  times  by  hard  hearing,  at  times  by  the  discharge
of  a yellow  fluid,  for  several  weeks  ; after  pressing  upon
the  ear,  she  hears  better  momentarily.  Loud  whizzing
before  the  ears,  (a.  23  d.)  Humming  in  the  ears , as  if
a gauze  were  stretched  across.  Ringing  in  the  left  ear.
Continual  singing  before  the  ears,  worse  when  lying  down.
Hard  hearing,  with  sensation  as  of  a foreign  body  being
in  the  ears.  Continual  sort  of  purring  in  the  ears.

Nose. — Severe  pain  in  the  nose,  in  the  forenoon.  Feel-
ing of  fulness  in  the  nose.  Feeling  of  pressure  in  the
nose,  as  in  catarrh.  Itching  and  tickling  in  and  about  the
nose.  Sore  pain  of  both  nostrils,  also  when  feeling  them.
Vesicles  in  the  right  nostril,  burning  when  feeling  them.
Dark  redness  of  one  of  the  wings  ol  the  nose,  with  smart-
ing pain  when  feeling  the  part.  Inflammation  of  the  in-
terior of  the  nose,  with  feeling  of  dryness  and  slow  bleed-
ing of  the  nose.  Swelling  of  the  nose  in  catarrh.  Ulcerated
nostrils.  Itching  and  pimples  of  the  nose.  Painful
pimple  in  the  right  wing  of  the  nose.  Vesicles  in  and
around  the  nose  ; it  looks  inflamed.  Freckles  upon  the
nose,  in  the  morning,  after  having  spent  part  of  the  night
in  performing  some  bodily  exercise  which  made  one  feel
very  warm,  (a.  12  d.)  Clots  in  the  nose.  Frequent
coagula  in  the  nose,  without  itching  or  obstruction.  Itch-
ing of  the  nose  ; it  bleeds  when  rubbing  it.  Blood  with
the  nasal  mucus.  Bleeding  of  the  nose , (immediately,
also  a.  17  d.)  Violent  bleeding  of  the  nose,  (a.  24  d.)
Bleeding  of  the  nose,  especially  when  going  to  stool.
Acute  smell,  especially  of  offensive  things.  Acute  smell,
especial ly  during  headache.

Face. — Pale  countenance.  Sudden,  striking  paleness
of  the  face,  with  chilliness,  colic,  and  headache,  (a.  12  d.)
Pale,  sickly  complexion.  Sunken  eyes,  with  blue  mar-
gins, (2.  d.)  Sunken,  livid  countenance,  with  deep,  hol-
low eyes  and  blue  margins  around,  (a.  6,  7 h.)  Hippo-
cratic countenance.  Excessive,  almost  blue  redness  of
the  cheeks,  without  feeling  hot,  in  the  morning.  Red  and
hot  countenance,  with  some  sweat  on  the  forehead,  and
some  dulncss  of  the  head,  (a.  12  h.)  Great  heat  in  the


PHOSPHORUS.


57


face  after  washing,  with  red  spots.  Flush  of  warmth  on
the  upper  part  of  the  face,  with  increased  redness  and
cloudiness  of  sight.  Glowing  heat  for  two  hours,  eveiy
evening,  on  either  cheek,  without  thirst.  Burning  in  the
face,  around  the  nose  and  upper  lip,  as  if  from  acrid  hu-
mor. Sweat  in  the  face,  with  nausea  ; the  face  feeling
cold,  in  the  forenoon.  Puffiness  of  the  face.  Puffiness
and  swelling  around  the  eyes.  Painless  swelling  of  the
cheek  and  gums.  Pimples  in  the  face  and  on  the  wing  of
the  nose.  Violent  itching  of  the  face.  Frequent  pustules
and  scurf  in  the  face,  after  the  slightest  excoriations.
Rough,  red,  marbled  and  somewhat  elevated  eruption  in
the  face.  M diary  eruption  on  forehead  and  chin.  Tension
of  the  skin  in  the  face.  The  skin  in  the  face  peels  off.
Burning  smarting  of  the  skin,  as  after  staying  in  the  cold
open  air.  Aching  of  the  bones  of  the  face.  Twitchings
of  the  malar  muscles.  Aching  of  the  malar  and  parietal
bones,  and  of  the  teeth,  especially^  when  chewing  warm
food,  and  when  entering  a warm  room  coming  out  of  the
cold  air.  Pressure  from  without  inwards  above  the  orbit
of  the  left  eye,  after  dinner.  Tension  in  the  zygomata,
as  if  violently  pressed  towards  each  other,  going  olf  by
friction.  Increasing  tearing  in  the  facial  bones  and  tem-
ples, as  if  every  part  were  being  torn  out,  until -evening.
Tearing  in  the  jaws,  in  the  evening,  when  lying  down  ;
ceasing  when  eating  and  moving  the  jaws.  Tearing  in
the  lower  border  of  the  orbit,  as  if  the  flesh  were  being
torn  off.  Tearing  in  the  zygoma.  Violent  tearing  below
the  right  ear.  Tearing  in  the  left  zygoma,  going  off  after
friction.  Violent  stitch  from  the  middle  of  the  left  lower
jaw,  through  the  cheek  and  eye,  coming  out  at  the  fore-
head. Stitch  in  the  left  cheek.  Dry  lips,  the  whole  day.
Blue  lips.  Burning  stitches  in  the  margin  of  the  upper
lip,  when  sitting.  Both  lips  burn  like  fire.  Burning
pain  in  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lower  lip,  with  white
vesicles  on  the  inner  side,  burning  and  painful,  (a.  1 1 d.)
Rhagades  in  the  middle  of  the  lower  lip.  Itching  spot
of  the  lower  jaw.  Itching  of  the  upper  lip,  with  pain
after  friction.  The  upper  lip  is  swollen  every  morning.
Eruption  on  the  vermilion-border  of  both  lips,  sometimes
with  stitches.  Pustule  on  the  corner  of  the  mouth.

3*


53


PHOSPHORUS.


Painful  vesicles  on  the  internal  surface  of  the  lower  lip,  of
the  size  of  peas,  and  filled  with  lymph.  Herpes  in  the
left  corner  of  the  mouth,  with  cutting  and  stitching.
Herpes  above  the  upper  lip.  Rough  skin  around  both
lips.  Ulcerated  corner  of  the  mouth,  (a.  Id  d.)  Pimple
in  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth.  Painful  ulcer  on
the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lip.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Pressure,  drawing,  and  tearing  in
the  lower  jaw,  towards  the  chin.  Lock-jaw.  Involuntary
grinding  of  the  teeth,  as  from  a cramp,  somewhat  painful.
Jerkings  in  the  lower  jaw,  almost  like  toothache.  Violent
drawing  in  the  lower  jaw.  Glandular  swellings  in  the
region  of  the  articulation  of  the  lower  jaw.  Toothache
with  swelling  of  the  cheeks.  Violent  toothache,  three
evenings  in  succession,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.
Violent  toothache  on  the  left  side  ; two  days  after  painful
swelling  of  the  neck,  with  five  large,  white  vesicles  in
the  mouth.  Toothache,  only  in  the  night  when  in  bed,
going  off  by  rising.  Toothache  in  a hollow  tooth,  excited
and  increased  by  the  warmth  of  the  bed,  (a.  22  d.)  Tooth-
ache when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Toothache,  (tearing  ?)
in  the  upper  incisores,  excited  by  breathing  cold  air,  by
warm  food  and  by  contact.  Violent  pain  in  the  left
molares,  when  blowing  the  nose  violently,  ending  with
chattering  of  teeth  and  subsequent  redness  of  the  cheeks.
Pressure  on  the  left  upper  and  lower  teeth,  from  behind
forwards,  (a.  8 d.)  Drawing  toothache,  with  cold  hands
and  feet.  Drawing  pain  in  the  anterior  incisores.  Draw-
ing and  digging-up  sensation  in  the  teeth.  Jerking  tearing
in  the  roots  of  the  upper  and  right  molares.  Tearing  in
the  teeth,  every  day,  evening  or  morning,  especially  in  the
open  air,  or  when  entering  the  room,  coming  out  of  it.
Tearing  in  the  upper  and  right  molares.  Tearing  in  an
empty  socket,  going  off  by  pressing  upon  it.  Tearing  in
the  upper  and  right  molares,  abating  when  pressing  upon
them.  Violent  stitching  pain  in  the  upper  foreteeth,  with
swelling  of  the  upper  lip.  Gnawing  in  a lower  left  molar
tooth.  Continual  boring  in  a right  molar  tooth.  Violent
gnawing  and  boring  in  a tooth,  morning  and  evening,
when  lying  in  the  bed.  Beating,  jerking,  and  stitching  in
the  teeth  when  exposed  to  the  least  air,  not  when  in  the


PHOSPHORUS.


59


room  or  when  covering  the  cheek.  Sore  pain  in  the  teeth.
When  biting  upon  the  teeth,  they  feel  smooth  as  if  greased
with  soap  or  fat  in  the  morning.  Bleeding  ulcer  on  the
gums  over  a hollow  molar  tooth.  A tooth  becomes  hollow,
(a.  10  d.)  Dull  teeth,  (a.  18  d.)  The  teeth  are  loose,
this  prevents  her  from  chewing.  All  the  lower  foreteeth
are  loose,  they  may  be  taken  out.  Sudden  bleeding  of  the
upper  molar  teeth,  without  any  apparent  cause.  Soreness
of  the  gums.  Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  gums,  hinder-
ing eating,  with  two  small  ulcers  on  the  gums.  Itching
and  beating  in  the  gums.  Burning  and  soreness  of  the
interior  of  the  gums  covering  the  upper  foieteeih.  Pain-
ful, sore  swelling  of  the  gums.  Inflammation  of  the  gums.
The  gums,  covering  the  carious  teeth,  are  swollen.  Swell-
ing and  itching  of  the  gums.  Ulcer  on  the  gums  after
toothache.  Ulcer  on  the  gums,  with  swelling  of  the  upper
lip,  (a.  17  d.)  Bleeding  of  the  gums  at  the  slightest  torn  h.
The  gums  bleed  easily , and  stand  off  from  the  teeth.
Blood  gets  into  the  mouth,  (a.  24  h.)

Mouth. — Painful  blotch  on  the  inner  side  of  the  cheek.
Pain  of  the  fraenulum  linguae  and  the  palate,  hindering
eating  and  talking.  White  mucus  on  the  tongue,  with
slimy  mouth.  Furred  tongue.  A number  of  small,  red,
bleeding  tips  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  tongue.  Two
small,  clear  vesicles  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  burning
when  touching  them.  Burning,  white-coated  tongue  in
the  night.  Prickling  itching  of  the  back  part  of  the
fauces,  as  in  catarrh.  Intolerable  tickling  in  the  palate.
Burning  in  the  upper  part  of  the  palate.  Blisters  on  the
palate,  bursting  and  suppurating.  Sensation  in  the  palate
as  if  the  skin  would  become  detached,  it  became  shrivelled
and  painful.  St  itch  in  the  upper  part  of  the  palate,  imme-
diately after  dinner.  Painful  sensitiveness  of  ihe  month,
gums  and  palate.  Roughness  of  the  mouth  and  sore
feeling  in  different  places.  Painful  vesicles  in  the  mouth,
with  sore  throat  when  swallowing,  and  with  thirst.
Swelling  of  the  root  of  the  tongue,  (2.  d.)  Fine  slinging
in  the  tip  of  the  tongue.  Prickling  sensation  of  the
fraenum  linguae.  Sensation  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue  as  of
being  rough  and  burnt.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus. — Sore  throat,  rawness  and


60


rHOSPHORUS.


soreness  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  with  dark  redness.
Pressure  in  the  throat,  in  the  morning.  Stitching  pressure
in  the  pit  of  the  throat.  Sore  throat  as  if  the  uvula  were
swollen.  Pain  in  the  throat  when  sneezing  and  gaping.
Swelling  of  the  tonsils.  Pressure  in  the  upper  part  of
the  throat,  in  the  direction  of  the  stomach.  Scratching  in
the  throat,  afternoon  and  evening.  Stitching  sore  throat,
when  swallowing.  Burning  in  the  pharynx.  Painful
irritation  of  the  tongue  and  oesophagus,  as  if  a pin  were
stuck  down.  Choking  sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the
oesophagus.  Troublesome,  painful  deglutition,  towards
noon.  Sensation  of  tightness  about  the  throat.  Con-
stant alternation  of  dryness  and  moisture  in  the  mouth.
Dryness  in  the  mouth , with  cold  feet.  Excessive  feeling
of  dryness  in  the  mouth,  viscid,  with  violent  thirst  ; al-
though he  drinks  much  water  the  viscidity  is  not  dimi-
nished. Dryness  in  the  pharynx  and  fauces.  Accumula-
tion of  mucus  in  the  throat.  Much  saliva  in  the  mouth,
like  bitter  soap-suds,  but  without  any  bad  taste.  Saliva
tasting  like  putrid  water  in  the  evening.  Hawking  up  of
mucus,  in  the  morning.  He  throws  off  much  less  mucus
in  the  morning  than  usual.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Gray,  salt  expectoration.  Bad,
viscid  taste  in  the  mouth,  in  the  morning  when  rising,  (a.
1 d.)  Saltish-sweet,  sourish  taste,  with  sensation  in  the
mouth  as  of  much  mucus  accumulating  in  it.  Sw'eet
taste  in  the  throat,  occasioning  accumulation  of  saliva,
(a.  W h.)  Sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  she  has  to  spit  a good
deal.  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth , the  whole  day.  Break-
fast tastes  bitter.  Acidity  in  the  throat  and  scratching  in
the  gullet.  Sour  taste  in  the  mouth , after  drinking  milk.
Acidity  after  a meal.  Increase  of  acidity  after  every
meal,  and  pulsative  headache  in  the  forehead.  Every
thing,  even  the  most  innocent,  turns  sour  with  her.  Doughy
taste  of  the  bread.  She  does  not  relish  food,  but  she  would
like  to  drink  ajl  the  time.  Loss  of  appetite  in  the  morning,
with  while  tongue,  and  repletion  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
the  nourishment  having  a good  taste.  Aversion  to  boiled
milk.  Diminished  sense  of  taste;  food  has  its  natural
taste,  but  less  of  it ; spirituous  drinks  taste  like  water.
No  appetite,  no  thirst.  Thirst  after  getting  up  in  the


PHOSPHORUS.


61


morning.  Much  thirst.  No  hunger,  the  whole  day  ; but
when  eating,  she  eats  with  appetite.  Canine  hunger.
Canine  hunger  in  the  night,  followed  by  faintness  with
heat  and  sweat,  afterwards  chilliness  with  external  cold-
ness and  chattering  of  teeth.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Comfortable  feeling  of  repletion
after  a meal,  he  never  had  it  before.  When  scarcely
satisfying  his  appetite  in  the  evening,  he  feels  an  uncom-
fortableness in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; his  sleep  is  rest-
less, and  he  has  no  appetite  next'morning.  Qualmishness
in  the  region  of  the  stomach  after  dinner,  almost  every
day,  as  if  he  would  vomit.  After  a meal  the  saliva  tastes
of  the  ingesta,  (a.  9 d.)  Repletion  as  high  up  as  the
throat  ; this  took  away  her  appetite.  Empty  eructations
after  a meal.  The  pains  always  commence  when  he  begins
to  eat , and  continue  until  he  has  done  eating  ; morning
and  evening.  -Hiccough  after  a meal,  (a.  7 d.)  Reple-
tion in  the  abdomen,  after  eating  a meal  even  with  appe-
tite. Headache  after  dinner,  every  day.  After  dinner
her  head  feels  so  dreary  that  she  is  scarcely  able  to  collect
her  senses.  Heat  in  the  face,  after  dinner.  A sort  of
vertigo  after  supper;  the  objects  appear  partially  ob-
scured and  invisible,  the  sight  being  impeded  by  zigzag-
shaped vibrations  of  light,  and  rings  before  the  eyes;  his
head  seemed  to  turn,  and  he  knew  not  whether  he  was
sitting  on  his  chair.  Drowsiness  while  eating,  or  after  a
meal.  Irresistible  sleep  after  dinner.  Pain  in  the  sto-
mach an  hour  after  dinner,  going  off  shortly.  Pressure  in*
the  stomach  after  a meal,  (4.  d.)  A few  hours  after  din-
ner she  feels  qualmish  as  if  nauseated,  she  is  obliged  to
sit  dowm.  Violent  pulsations  under  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
shortly  after  a meal,  (a.  4 d.)  Oppression  of  the  chest
and  shortness  of  breathing,  after  a meal.  Shocks  of  the
heart,  for  two  hours,  after  dinner,  obliging  her  to  cough
frequently,  and  causing  flushes  of  the  face,  (4.  d.)  Op-
pressed breathing  after  the  least  meal.  Oppression  of
the  chest  after  dinner,  with  anxiety.  Anxious  pressure  in
the  abdomen,  after  every  meal,  with  distension.  Tension
and  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  after  a meal,
with  distension  of  the  abdomen.  Anguish  and  agitation  of
the  blood,  after  a slight  meal.  Scratching  sensation  in


62


PHOSPHORUS.


the  mouth  and  great  weariness  after  a meal  ; walking  ex-
hausted him  a good  deal,  he  felt  chilly  and  out  of  humor,
(a.  25  h.)  Great  weakness  in  the  whole  body  after  a meal,
and  especially  in  the  affected  part.  Vesicles  upon  the
tongue,  an  hour  after  a meal.  Colic,  with  tension,  after
dinner  and  supper,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Violent
pressing  upon  the  rectum  after  a meal.  Frequent  eructa-
tions ; the  stomach  feels  as  if  it  were  distended  with  air.
Constant  eructations,  with  fermentation  in  the  abdomen,
(a.  24  h.)  Frequent  eructations  tasting  of  urine.  Eruc-
tations tasting  of  oranges.  During  an  eructation,  pain  in
the  upper  orifice  of  the  stomach,  as  if  something  would
tear  off.  Unsuccessful  eructations,  with  pressure  in  the
chest,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Empty  eructations , (a.  3 h.)  Frequent
unsuccessful  eructations,  with  sensation  as  if  the  hypo-
chondria were  filled  with  air,  which  could  not  be  suffici-
ently expelled.  When  eating  something,  he  has  empty
eructations,  afterwards  tasting  of  the  ingesta,  as  if  he  did
not  digest.  Eructations  with  burning.  Frequent  eructa-
tions and  yawning,  (a.  G h.)  Eructations  with  accumula-
tion of  water  and  contraction  in  the  mouth,  increasing
unto  retching,  accompanied  with  expulsion  of  mucus,  fol-
lowed by  eructations  and  yawning,  (a.  some  hours.)
Bitter  eructations.  Violent  eructations  tasting  of  the
ingesta , with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Sour  eructations
after  every  meal.  Sour  eructations  in  the  evening.  Eruc-
tations with  the  smell  and  taste  of  phosphorus,  and  blue
“fumes  from  the  mouth.  Eructations  tasting  of  phospho-
rus, with  yawning,  burning  and  roughness  in  the  throat,
expectoration  of  mucus  and  obtusion  of  the  head.  Eructa-
tions tasting  of  olive-oil,  and  rising  through  the  nose,  from
which  a white  vapour  is  seen  to  issue.  Gulping  up  of
bitter,  rancid  water.  Some  regurgitation  of  food,  with
eructations  having  a repulsive  taste,  sometimes  after  a
meal,  for  several  days.  Gulping  up  of  bile,  when  stoop-
ing. Heart-burn,  morning  and  afternoon.  Heart-burn,
after  eating  a little  fat.  Frequent  hiccough  during  the
day,  also  before  a meal,  (a.  15  d.)  Hiccough  after  a
meal,  so  violent  that  the  pit  feels  sore  and  aching.  Nausea.
Nausea,  with  expectoration  of  much  mucus,  without
cough.  Qualmishness  in  the  stomach,  in  the  forenoon.


PHOSPHORUS.


63


Nausea  in  the  stomach,  with  vertigo  and  oppression  of
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  eructations  tasting  of  phos-
phorus. Constant  nausea,  (a.  11  d.)  Nausea  almost
the  whole  day.  Nausea  with  great  thirst.  Nausea,  noon
and  afternoon,  going  off  after  drinking.  Nausea,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed,  making  her  speech  faint.  Nausea
the  whole  day,  and  vomiting  in  the  evening.  Nausea,
late  in  the  evening,  unto  fainting  and  vomiting.  Nausea
and  inclination  to  vomit,  unto  fainting,  either  in  the  fore-
noon or  evening.  Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  in  the
morning,  until  breakfast.  Nausea  unto  vomiting,  and  fre-
quent inclinations  to  faint.,  with  dull  pressure  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  making  every  external  covering  intolerable,
(a.  41  h.)  Water-brash.  Water-brash  after  a meal,
with  eructations,  nausea  and  flow  of  water  from  the  mouth.
Vomiting,  several  times.  Suffering  the  most  horrible
tortures,  he  tried  in  vain  to  vomit,  nothing  relieved  him
except  drinking  cold  water.  Empty  vomiting.  Violent
vomiting.  Vomiting,  accompanied  with  excessive  weak-
ness, small,  quick  pulse,  and  pains  in  the  abdomen  ; death.
Continual  vomiting  ; internal  spasms,  absence  of  mind,
paralysis  of  the  arm,  death.  Vomiting  and  nausea  when
riding  in  a carriage.  Vomiting  of  the  ingesta,  in  the
evening.  Vomiting  of  mucus,  with  taste  of  olive-oil,  in
the  night.  Vomiting  of  bile  several  times.  Vomiting  of
bile,  for  18  hours  ; 24  hours  after  nausea  unto  vomiting,
and  loss  of  appetite,  with  natural  taste  in  the  mouth,  (a.
18  d.)  Vomiting  of  bile,  the  whole  night.  Sour,  bilious
vomiting,  towards  evening,  preceded  by  vertigo  with
nausea  ; at  the  same  time  the  hands  and  then  the  feet
became  icy  cold  and  completely  numb  ; cold  sweat  on  the
forehead  ; after  several  attacks  of  vomiting  during  the
space  of  two  hours,  he  had  two  natural  stools  ; nausea
and  coldness  disappeared  only  after  lying  down,  (26.  d.)
Pains  in  the  stomach,  with  nausea  and  desire  to  vomit.
Qualmishness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  soon  after
shuddering.

Stomach. — The  region  of  the  stomach  is  painful  to  the
touch.  The  stomach  feels  empty  and  fasting.  Painful-
ness of  the  stomach  when  walking.  Spoiled,  weak  stom-
ach, for  a long  time.  Weak  digestion.  He  digests  with


64


PHOSPHORUS.


difficulty  those  things  which  he  used  to  eat  without  any
trouble.  Pain  in  the  stomach,  as  if  replete,  until  evening.
Violent  pain  in  the  stomach,  gradually  extending  over  the
whole  abdomen,  with  vomiting,  first  of  greenish,  then  black-
ish substances.  Pressure  at  a small  place  of  the  stomach,
and  at  the  same  time  in  the  right  temple.  Pressure  in  the
stomach . Pressure  over  the  stomach.  Pressure  in  the
region  of  the  cardiac  orifice,  especially  when  swallowing
bread,  which  appears  to  remain  lodged  there.  Continual
pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach , even  before  breakfast,
but  most  when  silling.  Pressure  over  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, as  of  a large  body,  with  coldness,  (immediately.)
Pressure  in  the  stomach,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  (a.
8 d.)  Pressure  in  the  stomach,  in  the  evening,  (a.  2 d.)
Pressure  in  the  stomach  after  a meal,  as  if  it  contained  a
load.  Excessive  pressure  in  and  over  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, afterwards  in  the  whole  sternum  and  in  the  region  of
the  ribs,  arresting  the  breathing,  equally  so  when  walking
or  sitting,  (a.  2 h ) Repletion  in  the  stomach.  Puffiness
of  the  stomach  and  abdomen.  Cramp-feeling  in  the
stomach,  pit  of  the  stomach  and  chest,  resembling  a chilly
tremulousness.  Cramps  in  the  stomach.  Pain  in  the
stomach,  as  if  pressed  together,  in  the  morning  when  in
bed,  after  sweating.  Tensive  contraction  of  the  stomach,
with  sourish  eructations.  Contractive  pinching  in  the
stomach,  (a.  6 d.)  Contraction  and  gnawing  in  the  stom-
ach. Griping  in  the  region  of  the  stomach , in  paroxysms,
lasting  some  minutes,  (22.  d.)  Drawing  and  stretching
in  the  stomach,  when  riding  in  a carriage.  Drawing
pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  extending  into  the  chest.
Cutting  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.  Stitches  over
the  stomach  and  through  the  abdomen,  which  then  be-
came enlarged.  Stitching  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  ar-
resting the  breathing,  going  off  by  eructations,  every  even-
ing. Stitch  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.  Rumbling  in
the  stomach,  or  sensation  as  if  bubbles  burst  in  the  stom-
ach. Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  stomach,  sometimes  alter-
nating with  heat.  Violent,  burning  heat  in  the  stomach,
sometimes  issuing  from  the  mouth  like  gas.  Burning  in
the  stomach , (a.  10  d.)  Violent  burning  in  the  stomach
and  bowels.  Violent  burning  in  the  stomach,  with  violent
thirst,  anguish  and  convulsions  of  the  face,  violent  thirst,


PHOSPHORUS.


G5


cold  limbs,  clear,  running  eyes,  pale  lips,  weak  pulse,  van-
ishing of  strength,  death.  Burning  and  cutting  in  the  re-
gion of  the  stomach.  Burning  in  the  stomach  and  intesti-
nal canal.  Inflammation  of  the  stomach.  Inflammation
and  gangrene  of  the  stomach  and  intestinal  canal,  with
violent  burning  and  cutting.  Burning,  and  oppressive
weight  in  the  stomach.

Abdomen. — Violent  pain  in  the  left  hypochondria,  he
was  not  able  to  stoop,  to  lie  on  the  right  side.  Anxiousness
under  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  with  bitter  eructations
every  day.  Stitches  under  the  left  chest,  with  much  anxi-
ety. Sensitiveness  of  the  region  of  the  liver  ; when  touch-
ing it,  one  experiences  a dull  pressure  in  it,  especially  when
lying  upon  the  right  side.  Stitches  in  the  region  of  the
liver.  Drawing  cutting  below  the  short  ribs,  during  a walk.
Incarceration  of  flatulence  under  the  ribs,  with  oppression
of  the  chest.  Drawing  aching  pain  in  the  epigastrium,
and  as  if  the  place  were  sore.  Tension  in  the  epigastri-
um, excited  by  every  movement  of  the  trunk.  Violent
pinching  in  the  left  l^pochondrium,  towards  the  epigastri-
um ; afterwards  sensation  in  that  place  as  of  something
living  moving  about  there,  when  sitting  or  standing.  Pinch-
ing and  cutting  in  the  epigastrium,  when  walking.  Colic,
in  the  morning.  Colic  in  cool  weather.  Violent  pain  in
the  whole  abdomen.  Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  upon  the
small  of  the  back,  as  if  caused  by  flatulence,  with  scanty
emission  thereof.  Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium .,  in  the
forenoon , and  also  after  supper,  (the  first  days.)  Pressure
in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  he  would  evacuate
the  bowels.  Spasmodic  pressure,  deep  in  the  abdomen,
near  the  genital  organs,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed.
Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  every  morning  when  waking,  as
if  upon  the  bladder.  Occasionally  a very  painful,  con-
tractive pressure  in  the  whole  abdomen,  of  short  duration.
Contractive  sensation  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.  Oc-
casional contractive  pain  in  1 he  intestines.  Burning  con-
tractive pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  menses  would  make
their  appearance  at  night ; (the  menses  had  stopped  a few
days  previous  ;)  excessively  painful,,  (a.  4 d.)  Distension
of  the  abdomen,  and  sensation  as  of  being  distended,  some-
times with  pressure,  sometimes  relieved  by  motion,  some-


66


PHOSPHORUS.


times  with  difficulty  of  drawing  a deep  breath,  or  with
pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  abdo-
men, when  touching  the  parts.  Bloated,  extremely  sen-
sitive abdomen.  Oppressive  fulness  of  the  abdomen,
towards  the  stomach,  especially  oppressive  after  mid-
night. Sensation  as  if  flatulence  were  rising  from  the
abdomen  into  the  throat;  this  rising  ceased  as  soon  as
eructations  set  in.  Incarceration  of  flatulence,  with  cold-
ness of  the  body  and  heat  in  the  face.  Distension  of  the
abdomen  from  flatulence,  notwithstanding  the  emission  of
much  flatulence.  Full , distended  abdomen.  Colic,  ex-
tending from  the  region  of  the  inguinal  hernia  to  the  stom-
ach. Flatulent  colic,  especially  in  the  sides  of  the  abdo-
men, as  if  the  flatulence  were  incarcerated  here  and  there  ;
it  passes  off  with  great  exertion  in  the  space  of  twelve
hours  in  the  shape  of  short,  broken  flatus.  Oppressive  in-
carceration of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  when  sitting  or
lying,  almost  imperceptible  when  walking  ; sensation  as  if
the  abdomen  were  being  drawn  inwards,  causing  an  un-
pleasant feeling.  Spasmodic  griping  and  contraction,  ap-
parently in  the  uterus,  in  the  evening,  when  stooping  and
afterwards.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  with  discharge  of
a brown  fluid,  followed  by  some  burning  and  cessation  of
the  colic.  Colic,  followed  by  sour-smelling  diarrhoeic  stool,
leaving  some  tenesmus  and  burning.  Violent  cutting  in
the  abdomen,  followed  by  discharge  of  liquid  stool,  jerking
out  suddenly.  Fine  stinging  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdo-
men.  Stitching  colic,  with  pale  complexion,  chilliness
and  headache,  at  noon,  (a.  12  d.)  Occasional  transverse
stitches  in  the  abdomen.  Jerking  and  stitching  in  the  hy-
pogastrium,  in  the  morning.  Occasionally  a pinching
jerk  in  the  hypogastrium,  followed  by  emission  of  flatu-
lence. Pain,  as  if  something  in  the  abdomen  had  burst.
Pain  above  the  right  hip,  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  something
were  swollen  and  injured  ; pain  as  if  bruised  when  touch-
ing the  part.  Sore  or  inflammatory  pain  in  the  abdomen,
extending  to  the  genital  organs,  especially  painful  when
touching  the  parts,  as  if  the  bowels  were  sore,  with  weak-
ness. Sore  and  stitching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  relieved  by
lying  upon  the  abdomen.  Cramp-colic,  first  in  the  right
side,  afterwards  towards  the  back,  (also  in  the  right  testi-
cle,) and  upwards  towards  the  region  of  the  stomach,  with


PHOSPHORUS.


67


sweat,  loud  moaning  and  distortion  of  the  muscles  of  the
face,  (a.  7 d.)  Colic,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on,  short
but  recurring  frequently  ; afterwards  great  soreness  above
the  ilium,  when  pressing  from  without.  Feeling  of  coldness ,
and  coldness  in  the  abdomen . Heat  in  the  abdomen  and
face,  in  the  morning.  Burning  and  pressure  in  the  abdo-
men. Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  after  emis-
sion of  much  flatulence,  (a.  9 d.)  Great  feeling  of  weak-
ness in  the  abdomen  and  back,  she  had  to  lie  down,  (a.  28
d.)  Relaxed  feeling  in  the  abdomen.  Itching  of  the  um-
bilicus, which  cannot  be  removed  by  scratching,  (a.  6 h.)
Large  yellow  spot  upon  the  abdomen,  on  the  side  of  the
umbilicus.  Two  boils  on  the  abdomen.  Aching  in  the
left  groin.  Great  pain  in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  hernia,
even  without  touching,  during  the  menses.  Swelling  of
the  inguinal  glands.  Tumor  in  the  groin,  with  burning
pain.  Painful  pressure  towards  both  inguinal  rings,  during
an  attack  of  flatulent  colic,  as  if  inguinal  hernia  would
form.  Protrusion  of  the  inguinal  hernia,  during  soft  stool ;
it  is  painful  as  if  incarcerated,  when  stooping,  touching  it,
or  when  walking,  or  even  when  lying  upon  that  side  of  the
abdomen  ; it  cannot  be  reduced  with  the  hand.  Rumbling
in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  hernia.  Painful  rumbling  in
the  abdomen.  Emission  of  a quantity  of  flatulence.

Stool. — Emission  of  flatulence,  shortly  after,  stool  in
small  pieces,  with  prickling  in  the  rectum,  leaving  the
parts  sensitive  a long  while  after.  Desire  for  stool;  how-
ever, only  flatulence  is  emitted.  No  stool,  or  else  delaying.
Constipation.  No  stool , during  the  first  days.  Constipa-
tion for  6 days  ; with  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach
after  a meal,  distension  of  the  abdomen,  and  incarceration
of  flatulence,  (a.  24  h.)  Difficult  expulsion  of  fceces.
Stool  with  violent  pressing,  only  a little  piece  being  passed
at  the  time.  Violent  pressing,  the  stool  not  being  hard.
Scanty  stool,  followed  by  discharge  of  blood  from  the  anus.
Costiveness  the  first  four  days.  Hard  stool  in  small
lumps.  Hard  stool  covered  with  mucus.  Hard  stool,
with  cutting  in  the  anus.  Four  good  stools  a day,  only  a
little  each  time.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  after  which
stool  with  contraction  of  the  rectum  ; in  two  hours  another
evacuation,  without  pinching,  preceded  by  copious  emission


68


PHOSPHORUS.


of  flatulence,  and  followed  by  contraction  of  the  anus,  (1.
d.)  Soft  stool,  with  pressing  and  cutting,  in  the  larger
intestines,  (a.  2 d.)  Flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen  ;
on  the  second  day,  when  the  flatus  move  about  in  the
abdomen,  the  intestines  feel  as  if  bruised  ; on  the  third  day
incarceration  of  flatulence  in  the  right  side,  causing  painful
pressure  ; on  the  fourth  day,  incarceration  of  flatulence  in
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  causing  a pinching  pain.
The  stool  feels  hot  when  passing.  Papescent  stool  at  an
unusual  period  (the  first  days.)  Diarrhoea  with  tenes-
mus of  the  rectum,  for  16  days,  relieved  by  coffee.
Half-liquid  stool . Diarrhoea,  with  expulsion  of  ascarides.
Green  stool  (of  a baby  whose  nurse  had  taken  phosphorus.)
Green,  rather  loose  stools.  Green  and  black  stools.
Gray  stool.  The  loose  stool  is  mixed  with  lumps  of  white
mucus.  Shining  stools.  Heat  in  the  body  previous  to
stool.  Stool  is  preceded  by  violent  chilliness.  Colic
previous  to  the  hard  stool.  Stool  is  preceded  by  violent
contractive  pain,  with  stitches  in  the  rectum  Sore  pres-
sure at  the  anus,  before  and  during  the  hard  stool.  Ting-
ling and  itching  in  the  rectum  during  the  soft  stool.
Erosive  pain  in  the  rectum  during  the  rather  loose  stool.
Darling  pain,  during  stool,  from  the  os  coccygis  through
the  spine,  as  far  as  the  vertex,  the  head  being  drawn  back-
wards by  it.  Protrusion  of  varices  during  stool,  with
burning  pain  when  touching  them,  or  when  sitting  and
walking,  (a.  some  hours.)  Blood  with  the  stool  for  two
mornings.  Hemorrhage  from  the  rectum,  (a.  some  h.)
Hemorrhage  from  the  * rectum,  during  emission  of
flatulence,  (a  1 1 a.)  Soreness  of  the  rectum  after  stool.
Sharp  scratching  and  burning  at  the  anus,  frequently,  after
stool,  with  burning  desire  to  urinate,  without  much  urine
being  passed.  Tenesmus  after  stool.  Frightful  tenesmus
of  the  rectum,  some  time  after  stool.  Pain  over  the  anus
after  making  a slight  effort  at  stool,  six  days  in  succession,
(a.  8 d.)  Violent  burning  at  the  anus  and  rectum ,
after  a soft  stool , and  great  weakness.  Great  relaxation
in  the  abdomen,  after  loose  stool,  (a.  3 d.)  Giddy  and
near  fainting  after  the  second  stool.  Sour  vomiting,  or
retching  after  stool,  some  mornings  in  succession,  (a.  14  d.)
Shortly  after  stool,  a white,  corrosive  mucus  is  discharged


PHOSPHORUS.


69


from  the  anus,  (a.  some  h.)  Tearing  in  the  rectum.
Prickling  at  the  anus,  when  walking.  Violent  pain  at  the
anus,  as  if  the  abdomen  were  being  torn  asunder,  with
cutting  and  movement  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  and
constant  unsuccessful  desire  for  stool ; heat  in  the  hands,
and  anxiety  ; the  pain  was  relieved  by  applying  warm
clothes,  (3.  d.)  Cutting  in  the  anus  and  rectum,  especially
in  the  evening,  (a.  6,  7 d.)  Prickings  in  the  rectum , be-
tween the  evacuations.  Stitching  in  the  anus.  Burning
at  the  rectum.  Tearings  in  the  rectum  and  the  ge.jital  or-
gans, so  violent  that  one  comes  near  falling  down.  Con-
tinued cramp  like  pushing  around  the  rectum.  Severe,
troublesome  cramp  in  the  rectum,  in  the  morning  when  in
bed.  Sensation  in  the  rectum  in  the  evening,  as  if  the
passage  of  the  faeces  were  prevented  by  something  ob-
structing the  rectum  ; the  stool  not  being  hard.  The
rectum  feels  contracted  ; during  the  passage  of  the  faeces,
which  are  not  hard,  an  acrid  sore  pain  is  felt  in  the  rectum,
continuing  for  several  hours  and  extending  into  the  abdo-
men. Sore  pain  of  the  varices,  for  many  days,  when  sit-
ting or  lying  down,  with  violent  pressure  and  stitches  in
the  varices  when  rising.  Gnawing  and  itching  of  the
anus , (a.  7 d.)

Urinary  Organs. — Great  desire  for  evacuating,  the
bladder  and  the  rectum,  (a.  3 d.)  Difficult  emission  of
the  urine,  as  if  the  passage  were  impeded.  The  urine
stops  every  moment,  and  refuses  to  come  off ; accom-
panied with  puffiness.  The  emission  of  urine  is  impeded
by  a dull  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  in  the  morning,  when
in  bed,  preventing  the  emission  of  urine  to  the  last  drop  ;
after  short  intervals  he  felt  again  a desire  to  emit  urine  ;
in  this  case  it  came  off  drop  by  drop  and  in  small  quantity,
(9.  d.)  Frequent  emission  of  the  ordinary  quantity  of
urine,  five  emissions  in  two  hours,  in  the  morning  after
rising,  for  some  days.  Frequent  micturition,  little  at  a
time,  (a.  40  h.)  Profuse  micturition.  Increased  emission
of  dark-brown  urine,  smelling  of  garlick  and  sulphur.
Sudden  desire  to  urinate,  in  the  morning,  (a.  3 weeks.)
He  was  unable  to  retain  his  urine,  owing  to  a violent  desire
to  urinate.  Frequent  micturition  in  the  night.  Involun-
tary emission  of  urine,  frequently.  Some  drops^of  urine


70


PHOSPHORUS.


come  off  when  coughing.  Want  of  desire  to  urinate ;
even  when  the  bladder  was  full,  she  felt  no  desire  to
urinate,  but  she  was  able  to  do  so,  whenever  she  pleased.
The  urine  has  a strong  ammoniacal  odor,  becomes  turbid
and  deposits  a white-yellowish  sediment,  (a.  6 d ) Acrid,
offensively  smelling  urine,  like  violet  root.  A good  deal
of  watery,  colourless  urine,  when  the  pain  is  felt.  Pale,
clear  urine.  White,  strongly  smelling  urine.  Brown
urine,  with  sediment  of  red  sand.  Red  urine,  smelling  of
sulphur,  depositing  a quantity  of  thick  yellow  mucus.
The  urine  when  being  emitted,  is  gold-yellow,  and  deposits
a whitish  sediment,  (a.  30  h.)  Urine  with  a sediment  of
white  flocculi.  The  urine  deposits  a brick-dust  sediment.
Greasy  pellicle  on  the  urine  with  various  colours.  Yellow
sediment.  The  pale  urine  deposits  a white  crust  on  the
walls  of  the  vessel.  After  micturition,  in  the  morning,
tired  unto  lying  down.  Stitches  in  the  urethra  and  anus.
After  micturition,  stitching  pain  in  the  fore  part  of  the
urethra.  Stitch  from  the  neck  of  the  bladder  along  the
penis.  Cutting  micturition,  with  expulsion  of  blood.
Burning  in  the  urethra , with  desire  to  urinate , in  the
evening.  Smarting  pain  in  the  glans,  at  the  end  of  mic-
turition and  afterwards,  (a.  32  h.)  When  urinating  after  an
evacuation  by  the  rectum,  some  drops  of  mucus  come  out
of  the  urethra,  with  pain  in  the  perinaeum.  Burning  in
the  urethra.  Quick  drawing  to  and  fro,  in  the  urethra,  as
far  as  the  bladder,  with  contractive  sensation,  (a.  10  d.)
Tension  over  the  bladder.

Genital  Organs. — Stitch  in  the  glans,  in  the  region
of  the  fraenulum.  Ulcer  on  the  prepuce,  healing  rapidly.
Pain  in  the  scrotum  for  several  days.  Violent  drawing
in  the  testicles.  Drawing-stretching  pain  in  the  spermatic
cords.  Swelling  of  the  spermatic  cord,  painful  together
with  the  testicle,  (the  stool  being  loose.)  Unusual  irrita-
tion of  the  genital  organs.  Violent  sexual  desire.  Sup-
pression of  the  sexual  desire  for  a few  days.  Irresistible
desire  for  an  embrace.  Erection,  without  any  sexual  fan-
cies, in  the  evening.  Powerful  erections  in  an  old  man
for  the  first  seven  days,  then  none  at  all  for  twenty-two
days,  and  again  very  violent  from  the  29th  to  the  43d  day.
Erections  day  and  night.  Aversion  to  an  embrace  in  a


PHOSPHORUS.


71


man,  (a.  25  d.)  Emissions,  soon  after  an  embrace.  Ner-
vous weakness  in  the  loins,  soon  after  an  embrace.  Dis-
charge of  prostatic  juice,  during  hard  stools.  Emissions,
without  dream.  Complete  impotence.  Aversion  to  an  em-
brace fn  a female,  (secondary  effect  ?)  (a.  25  d.)  Menses  too
late,  (a.  17,  22,  41  d.)  Delay  of  the  menses  is  a secondary
effect  of  Phosphorus.  Menses  too  early  and  scanty.  Ap-
pearance of  the  menses  which  had  been  suppressed  for
many  months.  Discharge  of  blood  from  the  uterus  be-
tween the  menstrual  periods,  (a.  9 d.)  After  a suspension
of  eighteen  months,  (in  a female  of  fifty-one  years,)  the
menses  appear  again  for  five  days  with  violence,  having  a
bad  smell.  Bleeding  of  the  ulcer  previous  to  the  appear-
ance of  the  menses.  Violent  toothache  during  the  men-
strual flow,  commencing  at  dinner.  Colic  during  the  menses.
Chilliness  during  the  menses,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.
Prickling  itching  of  the  varices  during  the  menses.  Sting-
ing itching  of  the  whole  body  during  the  menses.  Obtusion
of  the  head  during  the  menses,  and  she  feels  so  relaxed
that  she  falls  asleep  while  reading.  Violent  pain  in  the
back,  as  if  bruised,  during  the  menses.  During  the  menses
she  feels  very  sick,  especially  in  the  evening,  has  pain  in
the  back  as  if  bruised  or  torn,  drawing  in  the  whole  body,
palpitation  of  the  heart  with  anxiety,  pinching  across  the
stomach  with  contractive  pain,  felt  tired  and  faint  unto  fall-
ing, and  felt  so  nauseated  that  she  had  to  lie  down.  Sting-
ing pain  in  the  forehead  during  the  menses  ; her  eyes  close.
Fever  two  days  in  succession  during  the  menses  ; the  first
afternoon  the  fever  begins  with  chilliness,  followed  by  heat
and  headache,  without  thirst  ; on  the  second  day,  at  noon,
chilliness  for  one  hour,  followed  by  spasmodic  shaking  of
the  whole  body,  with  chattering  of  teeth,  then  heat,  espe-
cially in  the  head,  and  headache,  (a.  10  d.)  Swelling  of
the  gums  and  one  cheek  before  and  after  the  menses.  At
the  appearance  of  the  menses  violent  nausea  when  sitting
up  in  the  bed,  sour  vomiting,  oppression  of  the  chest,  cold
sweat  on  the  forehead,  and  vertigo  when  walking.  During
the  menses  cramp-like  contraction  of  the  lower  limbs.  A
few  blotches,  stinging  and  burning,  on  the  margin  of  the
labia,  for  a fortnight.  Stitches  through  the  female  pelvis.
Dull,  tearing  pain  in  the  pudendum,  as  if  ulcerated,  during


72


PHOSPHORUS.


and  after  a walk  in  the  open  air.  Milk-like  leucorrhoea.
Acrid,  excoriating  leucorrhoea,  (a.  5 d.)  Reddish  leucor-
rhoea, (in  an  old  person.)  Tenacious  leucorrhoea  instead  of
the  menstiual  discharge,  (a.  20  d.)  Profuse  leucorrhoea
for  seven  days,  (a.  9 d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — Frequent  sneezing.  Spasmodic
sneezing,  with  violent  sensation  in  the  head,  contorsion  of
the  limbs,  and  constriction  of  the  chest.  Obstruction  of
the  nose,  every  morning.  Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  nose,
with  sensation  as  if  the  walls  would  adhere  to  each  other.
Discharge  of  mucus  from  the  nose,  without  coryza.  Dis-
charge of  water  from  the  nose  in  the  open  air,  no  mucus.
Green-yellow  discharge  from  the  nose.  Clots  in  the  nose.
Feeling  of  obstruction  in  the  nose,  with  obtusion  of  the
head,  as  if  a cold  were  approaching.  Dry  coryza.  She
blows  her  nose  all  the  time.  Coryza , with  heat  in  the
head.  Fluent  coryza.  Fluent  coryza  of  one  nostril,  the
other  being  obstructed.  Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  great
obtusion  of  the  head,  want  of  appetite  and  general  sick
feeling,  (a.  48  h.)  Coryza,  with  inflammation  of  the  throat
and  great  obtusion  of  the  head.

Larynx  and  Trachea. — Tickling  of  the  larynx  two
nights  in  succession,  inducing  cough.  Roughness  of  the
larynx  and  trachea.  Roughness  of  the  chest.  Feeling  of
dryness  in  the  chest.  Hoarseness  in  the  morning.  The
larynx  seemed  furred,  he  is  unable  to  utter  a loud  word.
Violent  catarrh  with  hoarseness.  Catarrhal  mucus  in  the
chest,  in  the  morning.  Cough,  with  stitching  pain  in  the
hypochondria.  Cough,  with  stitching  pain  under  the  pit  of
the  stomach  ; she  has  to  hold  her  chest.  Sharp  pressure
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  at  every  fit  of  cough.  Sourish
vomiting  during  the  cough.  Pain  in  the  stomach  when
coughing.  Pinching  in  the  throat,  exciting  cough.  Cough
from  cold  air,  affecting  his  chest.  Cough  when  eating,
loose,  rattling,  as  in  old  people.  Cough,  with  soreness  of
the  throat,  after  dinner.  Cough  in  the  open  air,  causing
pain  in  the  chest  and  abdomen.  Cough,  especially  when
drinking.  Violent,  dry  cough  when  reading,  in  the  evening.
Violent,  dry  cough  when  sitting  or  lying  down,  not  at  all
during  motion.  Dry  and  hacking  cough.  Violent  dry
cough  with  oppressive  headache.  Dry  troublesome  cough


PHOSPHORUS.


73


wakes  her  from  sleep,  fourteen  nights  in  succession.  Dry
cough  with  headache,  as  if  the  head  would  burst,  with  co-
ryza, (a.  35  d.)  Hollow,  mostly  dry  cough,  with  pressure
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  hindering  sleep  the  whole  night.
Titillation  and  cough,  (a.  8 d.)  Cough,  with  chilliness
over  the  whole  body.  Hollow  cough,  mostly  in  the  morn-
ing and  also  at  night.  Loose  cough,  without  expectora-
tion, with  pain  and  sore  feeling  in  the  chest.  Panting
cough,  with  sensation  as  if  the  chest  was  slightly  furred,
and  some  expectoration,  (a.  8 d.)  Fatiguing  cough,  with
expectoration  of  tenacious  mucus.  Cough  wTith  while,  tena-
cious expectoration.  Cough  in  the  morning,  with  translu-
cent expectoration,  and  sensation  in  the  middle  of  the  ster-
num, as  if  something  had  been  torn  loose.

Chest. — Continual  cough  with  discharge  of  mucus  and
tensive  pain  in  the  chest.  Cough,  day  and  night,  with
expectoration  of  much  mucus ; in  a few  days  violent
stitches  supervened  in  the  chest.  Muco-sanguineous  ex-
pectoration w7hen  coughing,  (a.  24  h.)  Expulsion  of  floc-
culi  of  pus,  with  erosive  burning  behind  the  sternum.
Sensation  in  the  throat,  wrhen  coughing,  as  if  a piece  of
flesh  were  coming  off.  Short  breathing  after  coughing.
Arrest  of  breathing  during  a quick  walk , (a.  some  hours.)
Difficulty  of  breathing,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  (a.  3
d.)  Panting  breathing  when  ascending  a hill.  Loud
rattling  breathing.  Anguish  in  the  chest,  in  the  evening.
Anxiety  in  the  chest,  with  throbbing  in  the  right  side  of
the  chest.  Frequent  oppression  of  the  chest,  with  nausea.
Oppression  of  the  chest,  worse  when  sitting,  relieved  by
eructations,  (a.  22  d.)  Sensation  as  if  the  chest  were
oppressed  by  a load.  Tightness  of  the  chest  as  if  bound
by  a band.  Tension  and  tightness  in  the  chest.  Tight-
ness in  the  chest,  without  asthma.  Oppressive,  tight
feeling  in  the  chest-  Sensation  across  the  chest  as  if  the
clothes  were  too  tight.  Oppression  of  the  chest  in  the
morning,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  nausea,  for  one
hour.  Contraction  of  the  lungs.  Contraction  of  the
chest,  with  pressure  or  clawing  in  the  epigastrium.
Contractive  pressing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  chest.
Oppressed  breathing,  with  chilliness  and  violent  headache,
he  is  scarcely  able  to  collect  his  senses,  (a.  1 h.)  Op-

4


74


PHOSPHORUS,


pression  of  the  chest,  as  from  congestion  of  blood,  espe-
cially in  the  morning  when  waking.  Cramp  in  the  chest
after  taking  a drive,  in  the  evening.  Constrictive  sensa-
tion in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest.  Oppression  of  the
chest,  as  if  the  blood  were  pressing  up  in  the  throat  quite
hot;  in  the  morning,  (a.  13  h.)  Rush  of  blood  to  the
chest.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  chest,  at  every  emotion  of
the  mind,  with  cramp-like  contraction  between  the  sca-
pulae. Rush  of  blood  to  the  heart,  and  palpitation  of  the
heart,  very  violent  alter  dinner,  (a.  9 d.)  Palpitation  of
the  heart  with  anxiety,  morning  and  evening.  Palpitation
of  the  heart,  frequently  only  2 or  3 beats.  A few  strong
beats  of  the  heart,  when  moving  the  left  arm,  when  sitting
up  in  the  bed,  stretching  the  limbs,  etc.,  going  off  again
when  at  rest.  Stitches  and  stitching  in  various  parts  of
the  chest , when  sitting,  sometimes  with  burning.  Cutting
in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  as  far  as  the  right  scapula,
worse  during  an  inspiration,  less  during  motion,  (4.  d.)
Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  when  taking  an
inspiration.  Severe  stitches  in  both  sides  of  the  chest,
both  during  motion  and  when  at  rest.  Stitches  in  the
left  side , under  the  ribs,  for  five  days.  Stitching  in  the
right  side  of  the  chest  when  breathing.  Shootings  in  the
upper  part  of  the  chest.  Stitches  in  the  outer  parts  of  the
chest,  independent  of  breathing.  Burning  rising,  from  the
stomach  into  the  chest,  with  anxiety,  and  with  sweat  on
forehead  and  chest,  when  sitting,  (a.  2 h.)  Pain  in  the
chest,  especially  during  an  inspiration.  Pressure  on  the
lower  part  of  the  chest.  Pressure  on  the  upper  part  of
the  chest  from  above  downwards,  followed  by  empty
eructations.  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  upper  part  of  the
chest,  when  stooping,  moving  or  feeling  the  part.  Itching
in  the  chest.  Itching  in  the  chest  (trachea)  and  in  the
pit  of  the  throat,  with  dry  cough  which  does  not  alleviate
the  itching.  Weakness  of  the  chest.  Violent  soreness
of  the  pectoralis  major.  Soreness  of  the  clavicle,  per  se
and  when  touched.  Pain  in  the  fleshy  part  of  the  right
chest,  as  if  the  glands  where  violently  pressed  upon.
Stitches  in  the  mamma.  Pain  in  the  right  side  of  the
chest,  as  if  the  skin  were  being  raised  with  a pin.  Tap-
ping as  with  a finger  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  when


PHOSPHORUS.


75


sitting.  Warmth  on  the  chest.  Erysipelas  of  one  of
the  two  mammas  covered  with  an  eruption,  with  swelling,
redness,  burning,  stitching  and  final  suppuration.  Inflam-
mation and  swelling  of  the  left  nipple  and  the  whole  of  the
left  mamma,  with  great  pain  and  suppurating  after  the
lapse  of  10  days.

Back. — Pain  of  the  os  coccygis,  as  if  ulcerated.  Pain
in  the  os  coccygis,  hindering  motion  ; afterwards  painful
stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  (2.  d.)  Pain  in  the
small  of  the  back  when  raising  the  body  after  stooping,
and  when  standing,  less  when  walking.  Pain  in  the
small  of  the  back  after  long  sitting,  a.  (11  d.)  Pain  over
the  os  sacrum  and  the  adjacent  parts  of  the  ossa  ilia,
especially  when  stooping  while  sitting  and  after  dinner,
with  great  faintness.  Paralytic  weakness  of  the  small  of
the  back.  Weakness  of  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  gone
to  sleep,  when  sitting  and  when  rising  from  a seat.  Burn-
ing in  the  small  of  the  back,  especially  when  the  menses
were  delaying.  Violent  pain  in  the  back,  when  sitting
too  long.  Heaviness  and  weariness  of  the  back,  when
lying  down.  Periodically  returning,  intolerable  pains  in
the  back,  hindering  walking.  Unceasing  stitching  in  the
spinal  column,  the  whole  day,  at  different  hours,  (a.  22  d.)
Violent  stitch  in  the  muscles  of  the  back,  above  the  left
hip,  (a.  7 d.)  Stitches  into  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  extorting
screams.  Pressure  close  below  the  scapulae.  Pain  in
the  left  scapula  as  of  a plug  being  lodged  there.  Sensation
as  if  some  one  seized  her  on  both  scapulae,  when  lifting
and  carrying  something  with  both  hands.  Tearing  in  the
scapulae.  Stitches  in  and  under  the  scapulae.  Stitching
pain  in  the  right  scapula.  Jerking  pain  in  the  left  sca-
pula. Beating  and  tearing  in  the  right  scapula.

Neck. — Sensation  as  of  a heavy  load  in  the  nape  of  the
neck.  Pressure  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Stiffness  of  the
nape  of  the  neck.  Occiput  and  nape  of  the  neck  are  pain-
ful and  quite  stiff.  Stiff  neck.  The  anterior  cervical
muscles  are  painful  to  the  touch,  or  when  moved.  Stitches
in  a tumor  on  the  neck.  Hard  lump  on  the  neck  under
the  chin,  of  the  size  of  a hazel-nut,  painful  when  touched.
Jerkings  in  the  cervical  muscles.  Stitching  pinching  in
the  outer  parts  of  the  neck  when  walking  in  the  open  air.


76


PHOSPHORUS.


Stitching  in  the  front  part  of  the  neck  towards  the  right
ear,  and  thence  tearing  extending  into  the  vertex.

Upper  Extremities. — Violently  itching  pimples  in  the
axilla,  burning  when  scratched.  Swelling  of  the  axillary
glands,  with  burning  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  arms.  Violent
itching  in  the  right  axilla,  and  a glandular  lump  of  the
size  of  a pea.  Pressure  and  drawing  in  the  shoulders.
The  shoulder  is  painful  when  touched  or  moved.  The
shoulder-joints  are  painful  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Tearing  in  the  left  shoulder , especially  in  the  night.
Stitches  in  the  right  shoulder.  Dull  painful  stitch  in  the
left  shoulder.  Boring  in  the  right  shoulder.  Rheumatic
pain  in  the  right  shoulder,  extending  to  the  first  ribs,  for
one  hour,  (a.  7 d.)  Rheumatic  pain  in  the  right  shoulder,
in  the  morning  when  waking,  (a.  36  h.)  Pain  as  if
sprained  in  the  right  shoulder,  especially  when  raising  the
arm.  Stitches  in  the  axillae,  through  the  shoulders.  Dull
stitches  in  both  axillae,  broad  and  spreading  out.  Cracking
in  the  shoulder-joint.  Heaviness  in  the  shoulders  and
arms,  (a.  2 d.)  Drawing  stretching  in  the  muscles  of  the
arm,  from  the  shoulders  down  to  the  lower  arm.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  whole  arm,  increasing  in  the  evening.
Tearing  in  the  left  arm  and  hand.  The  left  arm  goes  to
sleep,  with  numbness  of  the  fingers  (without  coldness)  and
contraction  of  the  same,  especially  in  the  morning  ; after
which  the  arm  becomes  quite  faint.  The  arm  upon  which
his  head  leans , goes  to  sleep.  Itching  of  the  arms.
Weakness  of  the  arms,  she  was  unable  to  move  them  in
the  least,  (a.  16  d.)  Weakness  of  the  joints  of  the  arms,
with  distension  of  the  veins  of  the  hands.  Paralytic,  sore
pain  in  the  arm,  with  tremor  of  the  hand  when  holding
something.  Pain  of  the  right  arm,  as  if  sprained.  Pain,
numbness  and  weakness  of  the  right  arm,  especially
around  the  elbow-joint,  in  the  evening  when  lying
going  off  by  changing  the  position  of  the  part,  but
returning  soon  after,  and  so  on  in  frequent  repetition.
Tearing  in  the  outer  surface  of  the  right  upper  arm  ; fric-
tion makes  it  move  to  the  lower  arm,  where  subsultus  of
the  muscles  becomes  likewise  visible.  Pain  in  right
upper  arm  as  if  bruised.  Pain  in  the  left  humerus  as  if
bruised,  drawing,  upwards  and  downwards,  when  sitting,


PHOSPHORUS.


77


Rheumatic  pain  in  the  right  upper  arm,  after  a slight
cold.  Tearing  in  the  upper  arm.  Great  weariness  of
the  upper  arm.  Burning  of  the  skin  of  both  upper  arms.
Painful  pressure  in  the  periosteum  of  the  humerus  and
the  trochlea,  resembling  bone-pain,  (a.  6 h.)  Pain  of  the
elbow-joint,  as  if  broken.  Tearing  and  drawing  in  the
right  elbow-joint.  Tearing  in  the  inner  side  of  the  tore-
arm,  as  if  the  bone  were  being  torn  out,  going  off  by  fric-
tion. Tearing  and  boring  from  the  elbow  to  the  shoulder.
Tearing  and  stitching  in  the  right  elbow.  Stitches  in  the
elbow-joint  after  a fright,  afterwards  in  an  excoriated  place
of  the  foot.  Gnawing  pain  in  the  elbow,  extending  to-
wards the  shoulder.  Shock  and  jerking  in  the  olecranon
processes  of  both  arms.  Red  tips,  with  corrosive  itching
on  a space  of  the  size  of  the  hand,  in  the  bend  of  the  right
elbow.  Violent  tearing  of  the  inner  side  of  the  left  fore-
arm, as  if  the  skin  were  being  torn  off.  Tearing  in  the
fore-arms,  especially  around  the  wrist-joints.  Tearing  in
the  wrist-joint,  with  paralytic  weakness,  in  the  evening.
Pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  wrist-joint.  Tearing  in  the
metacarpal  bones.  Tearing  in  the  hand,  especially  the
knuckles,  generally  in  the  night  when  in  bed.  Darting  in
the  knuckles  and  thumb.  Drawing  in  the  hands  and
fingers,  after  moistening  them  with  tepid  water.  Creep-
ing of  the  hands  in  the  open  air,  when  yawning,  (a.  h.)

Heaviness  and  tremor  of  the  hands,  when  letting  the  arms
hang,  with  redness  and  distended  veins,  with  sensation  as
if  much  blood  were  pressing  into  the  veins.  Determina-
tion of  blood  to  the  hands  and  head,  as  if  coming  from
the  stomach,  the  veins  on  the  dorsa  of  the  hands  being
distended.  Cold  hands.  Tremor  of  the  hands.  One
hand  occasionally  feels  paralysed,  for  several  hours.  Both
hands  had  gone  to  sleep,  in  the  morning  when  waking,
(21.  d.)  Itching  of  the  hands.  The  skin  on  the  hands
was  rough  and  dry.  Warts  form  on  the  hands.  Vesicles
as  from  the  heat,  on  the  dorsa  of  both  hands,  with  itching,
worst  in  the  night.  Burning  feeling  in  the  hands,  without
any  external  heat.  Burning  feeling  in  the  palms  of  the
hands.  Intensely  painful  stitches  in  the  wrist-joint,  when
at  rest,  (a.  17  d.)  Sudden  swelling  of  the  hand  and  fin-
gers. Swelling  of  the  wrist-joint,  with  throbbing  in  the


73


PHOSPHORUS.


same  as  if  in  an  ulcer,  and  tearing  extending  into  the
fingers,  even  when  at  rest  and  still  much  worse  when
moving  the  stiff  wrist-joint,  (after  a cold?)  Pain  in  the
thumb,  as  if  sprained,  when  seizing  something.  Swelling
ol  the  posterior  joint  of  the  thumb,  painful  when  touching
it  and  experiencing  a tensive  pain  during  motion.  Pain
as  if  sprained,  or  as  if  strained,  in  the  posterior  joint  of
the  thumb,  during  motion.  Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the
finger  joints,  (a.  6 d.)  The  fingers  of  one  hand  feel  numb
and  insensible,  those  of  the  other  feeling  as  if  they  had
gone  to  sleep.  The  middle-finger  of  the  right  hand  be-
comes quite  numb,  dead,  bloodless  and  cold,  in  moderately
cold  air.  Jerking  of  single  fingers.  Paralytic  jerkings
sometimes,  in  the  right  thumb  when  writing,  he  is  unable
to  hold  his  pen.  Periodical  contraction  of  the  fingers ,
like  cramp.  Weakness  and  jerking  in  one  finger,  the
whole  day.  Violent  jerking  in  the  left  little  finger.
Heaviness  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Cramp-like  drawing
and  tearing  in  the  little  finger.  Tearing  in  the  right  little
finger.  Paralysis  of  the  fingers  ; they  are  able  to  feel,  but
scarcely  able  to  be  moved.  Tension  in  the  fingers  of  the
left  hand.  Tension  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  fingers  of  both
hands,  as  if  sprained.  Painful  swelling  of  a finger,
especially  painful  when  knocking  it  against  something.
Chronic  panaritium,  which  refuses  to  heal.  Cracked  skin
of  the  finger-joints,  as  if  by  cold.

Lower  Extremities. — Pain  of  the  nates  as  of  sub -
cutaneous  ulceration , when  sitting  too  long.  Pulsation  in
the4nates.  Twitchings  in  the  nates.  Visible,  but  painful
twitching  in  one  of  the  nates  and  in  the  thigh.  Pain  of
the  left  hip-joint.  Painful  paralytic  feeling  in  the  left  hip,
in  the  evening,  making  it  almost  impossible  for  him  to
tread  on  that  foot ; no  pain  when  sitting  or  lying  down.
Sensation  in  the  region  of  the  right  hip  as  if  held  fast,  no
pain  when  sitting.  Violent  pain  in  the  fold  of  the  left  hip.
Pain  in  the  hips  as  if  sprained.  Stitching  in  the  left  hip,
going  off  by  friction.  Violent  stitch  in  the  right  hip,  to-
wards the  chest.  Itching  of  the  hips.  Great  weakness
in  the  lower  limbs  ; she  falls  easily.  The  left  limb  goes
to  sleep,  without  any  apparent  cause.  Severe  paralytic
sensation  in  the  right  limb,  at  night.  Weariness  in  the


PHOSPHORUS.


79


limbs,  early.  The  limbs  are  painful  in  the  morning,  as
afier  a long  journey  on  foot.  Tension  in  the  left  limb  and
painful  stiffness  with  pressure.  Cramp-like  contractive
sensation  in  both  limbs  and  feet,  with  jerks.  Violent  ach-
ing in  the  left  ischium,  when  sitting  too  long.  Great  rest-
lessness in  the  limbs,  with  icy-cold  hands,  especially  in  the
evening.  Violent  drawing  to  and  fro  in  the  thigh,  during
the  siesta.  Drawing  pain  in  the  thighs,  relieved  by  walk-
ing. Momentary,  tearing  pain  in  the  left  thigh,  commenc-
ing at  the  knee.  Tearing  jerks  in  the  posterior  side  of  the
thigh,  extending  to  the  knee,  during  and  after  a walk  in  the
open  air,  every  four  minutes,  with  soreness  of  the  spot
when  touching  it.  Burning  of  the  thigh,  increased  by
contact.  Pain  as  from  bruises  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh  ;
the  spot  is  painful  to  the  touch,  the  pain  hindering  walk-
ing. Itching  of  the  thigh  and  the  region  of  the  patella.
Severe  itching  of  a small  spot  of  the  thigh,  with  smarting
after  scratching.  Large  pimples  on  the  posterior  sides  of
the  thighs,  painful  to  the  touch.  Soreness  of  the  inner
sides  of  the  thighs.  Herpes  over  the  knees  and  below  die
patella.  Continual  coldness  in  the  knees,  at  night  when
in  bed.  Trembling  of  the  knees.  Cramp-like  drawing
in  the  knee  when  walking.  Tearing  in  the  knees  in  the
open  air,  several  evenings.  Violent  tearing  along  the  in-
ner side  of  the  calf,  as  if  the  flesh  were  being  torn  loose,
going  off  by  friction  ; after  dinner.  Drawing  pain  from
the  knees  to  the  feet.  Drawing  from  the  knee  to  the  foot,
every  drawing  being  followed  by  a painful  jerk,  (a.  15  d.)
Tearing  in  the  bend  of  the  right  knee,  at  night.  Stretching
of  the  hamstrings  when  walking,  as  if  too  short.  Arthritic
stretching  in  the  knees,  as  if  sprained  ; they  feel  hot  to  the
hands.  Paralytic  feeling  in  the  left  knee.  Pain  as  if
sprained  in  the  left  knee.  Dull  pain  around  the  left  knee-
joint.  Nightly  stitching  in  the  knees,  in  paroxysms.  Stitch
in  the  inner  surface  of  the  right  knee,  at  every  step  ; pain
as  if  bruised  over  the  knee,  when  sitting  or  when  raising
the  thigh  ; the  pain  disappears  when  rising.  Tearing  from
the  knee  to  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  the  forepart  of  the  left
foot  having  gone  to  sleep,  going  off  by  friction.  Suddenly
forming,  red,  inflamed,  smarting  and  painful  excrescence
between  the  calf  and  bend  of  the  knee.  Tension  in


80


PHOSPHORUS.


the  right  calf  when  walking.  Cramp  in  the  calf.  Cramp
in  the  calf,  and  the  leg  is  jerked  upwards  when  stretching
it  while  walking.  The  leg  from  the  calf  to  the  foot  has
gone  to  sleep,  as  if  the  circulation  had  been  stopped  by
tying  the  leg  up  below  the  knee.  Violent  itching  of  the
calves  and  tibiae.  Pain  of  the  tibiae  when  walking.  Pain
in  the  tibiae  as  if  bruised.  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  peri-
osteum of  the  tibiae,  painful  when  touched.  Tearing
stitches  in  the  tibiae.  A number  of  small  spots  like  freckles
on  the  lower  part  of  the  tibiae.  A number  of  small,  brown-
red  spots  on  the  legs,  like  petechiae.-  Pain  in  the  left  tar-
sal joint,  extending  upwards  to  the  calf.  Violent  tearing
and  stitching  in  the  feet,  hindering  sleep  in  the  night.
Tearing  in  the  inner  border  of  the  left  sole.  Tearing  in
the  left  ankle,  in  the  night.  Violent  itching  of  the  soles
and  toes,  in  the  evening.  Formication  in  the  feet  and  toes.
Creeping  under  the  toes.  Tingling  in  the  feet,  at  night.
Pain  in  the  tarsal  joint  when  walking,  as  if  sprained,
stretching  w7hen  treading,  (a.  4 d.)  The  tarsal  joint  is
easily  sprained  or  bent  when  treading.  Paralytic
feeling  in  the  feet.  Icy-cold  feet,  even  when  in  bed,  (in
June.)  Paralytic  drawing  pain  in  the  ankles,  extending
into  the  knee.  Sweaty  feet.  Heaviness  of  the  feet,  asif
swollen.  Swelling  of  the  tendons  of  the  right  ankle.
Swelling  of  the  feet , in  the  evening,  (a.  7 d.)  Spots  on
the  feet.  Increase  of  vesicles  and  ulcers  on  the  feet.
Stitches  in  the  swelling  of  the  foot.  Stitching  pain  in  the
right  ankle,  the  parts  being  swollen,  very  painful  when
treading.  Pain  of  the  soles,  as  if  he  had  gone  too  far ;
they  are  red.  Troublesome  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  soles,
(a.  27  d.)  Cramp  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.  Jerks  in  the
feet,  with  tingling  cramp  in  the  soles.  Jerks  and  shootings
in  the  feet.  Tearing  stitching  in  both  soles.  Beating  pain
in  the  heels,  at  night,  she  is  obliged  to  rub  them  warm,  to
alleviate  the  pain.  The  feet  feel  weak  and  as  if  gone  to
sleep,  with  great  restlessness.  Creeping  in  both  heels.
Tension  in  the  heels,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed.  Blis-
ter on  the  heel,  bursting  open,  emitting  a humour,  and
very  painful  when  walking,  (a.  14  d.)  The  heels  and  toes
which  had  been  frozen  previously,  become  very  painful,
especially  in  the  shoes  when  walking,  (a.  48  h.)  Itching


PHOSPHORUS.


81


under  the  toes  and  feet.  Violent  stitches  in  the  ball  of
the  big  toe,  with  inflammation.  Chilblains  come  on  in
March,  (a.  9 d.)  Stil.ches  in  the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot,
mostly  during  motion  and  in  the  evening.  Tearing  in  the
toes  when  sitting,  going  off  by  friction.  Pain  of  the  big
toe  as  if  frozen.  Jerkings  in  the  left  big  toe,  when  sitting.
Violent  stitch  in  the  right  big  toe.  Pains  in  the  corns
piercing  bone  and  marrow.  Violent,  stitching  pressure  in
the  corns,  as  if  boring  into  them  with  a knife.  Stitching
in  the  corns  when  walking.  Old  corns  on  the  little  toe  be-
come painful,  the  toe  swells.

General  Symptoms. — Formication  and  itching  in  the
paralysed  parts.  General  itching  of  the  body , (22.  d.)
Itching  of  the  back  and  bends  of  the  knees.  Violent  itch-
ing, in  the  night,  of  the  arms,  legs,  back,  and  abdomen,  (a.
12  d.)  Itching  and  gnawing  of  the  abdomen,  arms  and
thighs  ; scratching  brought  on  red  streaks,  (a.  26,  27  d.)
Itching  of  the  whole  body  at  night,  with  much  heat  and
dryness  of  the  mouth,  (a.  12  h.)  Burning  itching  of  the
whole  body,  (a.  10  d.)  Frequent  prickings  in  the  skin.
Scattered  stitches,  with  pressure,  in  various  parts  of  the
body.  Itching,  large  vesicles  over  the  whole  body,  also
in  the  face.  Round  herpetic  spots  over  the  whole  body.
Blotches  and  blotch-like  spots,  brownish  and  bluish-red.
Brownish,  dark,  sometimes  elevated  spots  in  the  bends  of
the  knees,  on  the  chest,  forehead,  and  under  the  corner  of
the  mouth.  Blotches  in  the  skin  of  the  nates.  Painful
hard  blisters  in  various  spots,  not  itching.  Blisters,  burst-
ing open,  with  humor.  Itching  vesicles  between  the  fin-
gers and  in  the  bend  of  the  knee.  Small  boils  on  the  nape
of  the  neck,  chest  and  thighs.  Large  boils  on  the  thighs,
chest  and  forehead.  Sore,  excoriated  spots  upon  the  skin,
with  redness,  or  smarting  and  stinging  pain.  Scaling  off
of  the  epidermis.  Itching  of  the  wart  on  the  forehead.
Burning  in  a wart  as  in  a suppurating  wound,  in  the  even-
ing after  lying  down.  Pinching  contractive  pain  in  a cica-
trix. Black  blood  is  oozing  from  the  cicatrix  of  an  old
vesicatory.  Tensive  drawing  in  the  glands,  also  on  the
neck.  Increased  feeling  of  warmth  in  the  paralyzed  parts.
Burning  in  the  hands  and  legs.  Burning  on  the  arms  and
thighs.  Burning  of  the  whole  right  side  of  the  body.


82


PHOSPHORUS.


Stitching  in  the  chest  and  back,  also  in  the  right  arm,  dur-
ing motion,  especially  in  the  night  when  in  bed,  (a.  11  d.)
Drawing  in  arms  and  legs,  with  weeping  mood,  (a.  13  d.)
Tearing  in  the  right  fore-arm  and  knee,  as  soon  as  she  be-
comes cold.  Most  of  the  symptoms  cease  in  the  after-
noon after  dinner.  Sensitiveness  to  cool  weather.  His
pain  increases  when  a change  of  the  weather  is  approach-
ing. (hatches  cold  easily  in  the  open  air,  bringing  on  colic,
pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  stiffness  of  the  arms,  tooth-
ache, lachrymations,  hiccough,  cutting  and  stitching  in  and
above  the  pit.  of  ihe  stomach,  obtusion  of  the  head,  or  at
last  cold  and  damp-cold  feet  and  hands,  with  hot  cheek,
etc.  Sort  of  coryza  on  a walk.  Catarrhal  feeling  through
the  whole  body,  with  chilliness  and  drowsiness.  A slight
wetting  or  cojd  of  the  feet  brings  on  weariness  in  all  the
limbs,  burning  of  the  hands,  headache  ; has  to  go  to  bed  ;
next  day  coryza.  Catarrh  and  toothache  when  rising,  after
having  slightly  perspired  during  the  night,  with  slight  jerks
in  the  teeth.  Agitation  of  the  blood.  In  the  night  he  thinks
he  hears  the  blood  rush  through  the  body.  Orgasm  of  the
blood,  with  chilliness  and  trembling,  and  anxiety  in  the  in-
testines. Profuse  bleeding  of  small  wounds.  Hemorrhage
from  various  parts  of  the  body,  haemoptysis,  bleeding  of  the
gums,  varices,  etc.  Profuse  sweat  from  slight  sweating.
Heat,  in  the  head  and  chest  when  talking  animatedly.  Sen-
sation as  if  all  the  limbs  were  stretched,  when  performing
quick  motions.  Hands  and  feet  go  to  sleep.  Deadness
of  the  hands  and  feet.  Rigor  of  the  hands  and  feet  and
nose.  A sort  of  insensibility  in  the  whole  body.  Cold-
ness, want  of  warmth  in  the  whole  body.  Icy  coldness
of  the  hands  and  feet,  the  whole  day,  also  when  in  bed.
Chilliness  when  sitting,  not  when  walking.  Hysteric
weakness,  she  is  unable  to  move  a limb,  with  constant  gnawr-
ing,  gulping-up  and  torture  and  pressure  in  the  chest.  Con-
stant yawning  and  watery  urine  during  the  paroxysm  of  pain.

Weakness,  Fits. — Tremulous  in  the  morning,  with
perceptible  twitching  of  the  limbs,  (a.  8 d.)  Chattering  of
teeth  and  general  trembling,  in  the  morning  when  waking.
Tremor  of  the  hands.  Tremor  of  the  thighs,  like  shud-
dering. Trembling  of  the  chest  and  hands,  as  if  she  had
taken  too  much  coffee.  Sick  feeling  in  the  whole  body,


PHOSPHORUS.


83


especially  the  stomach.  Emaciation,  especially  of  the
hands.  Hectic  fever  and  emaciation.  Convulsions.  Death
by  gangrene  and  inflammation  ; in  one  case  the  body  shone
in  all  its  parts.  Pain  in  all  the  limbs.  The  pains  are  worst
from  afternoon  till  morning.  The  limbs  feel  bruised.  All
the  joints  are  painful,  especially  during  motion.  Faint
feeling,  as  of  being  bruised,  not  disposed  to  do  anything.
Pale,  and  bruised  all  over.  Bruised  feeling  and  heaviness
in  the  left  knee  and  elbow.  Hands  and  feet  feel  weak  as
if  not  existing.  Heaviness  of  the  hands  and  feet.  Heavi-
ness of  the  mind  and  body.  Painful  heaviness  of  the  whole
body,  now  of  the  head,  now  the  chest,  now  the  thighs  and
legs,  now  all  over,  making  him  indolent  and  putting  him
out  of  humor  ; the  heaviness  is  preceded  by  a general,  ex-
hausting sweat.  Hands  and  feet - are  heavy  as  lead.
Heaviness  of  the  limbs,  before  rising.  Faintness  and
weakness  in  the  joints,  especially  the  knee-joints,  during
motion  and  when  sitting,  (a.  14  d.)  Feeling  of  looseness
in  the  knee-joint,  he  is  scarcely  able  to  stand.  Weakness
and  faintness  in  the  limbs,  especially  the  knee-joints,  with
stinging  and  burning  ; sometimes  most  after  rising  and  ag-
gravated by  rest,  relieved  by  walking,  for  several  days.
Great  weakness  in  the  limbs,  for  upwards  of  three  weeks.
Great  weakness  in  the  morning  when  rising  and  during  the
day,  general  sick  feeling,  heart-burn, . and  after  a quick
walk  canine  hunger  and  trembling  of  the  limbs.  Walking
exhausts  him  very  much.  Frequent  and  sudden  attacks
of  great  weakness.  General,  sudden,  excessive  weakness.
Sudden,  general  weakness,  with  heat  in  the  face,  (a.  11  d.)
Faint,  oppressed  feeling  the  whole  day.  Weariness  of  the
whole  body,  especially  of  the  thighs,  in  a robust  man,  (a.
9 d.)  Relaxation  for  several  days,  especially  in  the  chest.
Sensation  in  chest  and  abdomen,  as  if  every  thing  would
break  down.  Paralytic  feeling  after  sitting,  for  some  min-
utes. Sick  and  paralytic  feeling  in  the  body.  Loss  of
strength  in  all  the  limbs,  especially  the  joints,  with  good
appetite.  The  whole  right  side  feels  paralysed,  with  nau-
sea. He  walks  like  one  paralytic,  without  noticing  it  him-
self. As  if  paralysed  mentally  and  bodily,  in  the  morning
and  the  whole  day-  As  if  paralysed  in  the  back  and  arms,
after  the  siesta.  Tired  and  drowsy,  after  drinking  a glass


84


PHOSPHORUS.


of  wine  in  the  afternoon,  had  to  sleep  a few  hours,  (a.  48
h.)  Complete  loss  of  all  strength.  Fainting  fit.

Sleep. — Tries  to  gape  all  the  time,  but  does  not  suc-
ceed. Frequent  yawning  with  chilliness.  Drowsiness  af-
ter dinner.  Sleeplessness  and  restlessness,  (a.  36  h.)
Light  sleep.  She  was  unable  to  fall  asleep,  owing  to  a
feeling  as  if  the  eyes  did  not  close,  but  had  to  be  kept
closed  with  the  hands  and  turned  about  their  axis  in  the
head,  (a.  6 d.)  After  waking  up  in  the  evening  and  at
night  he  has  great  difficulty  in  falling  asleep  again.  Is
unable  to  fall  asleep.  Can  only  rest  on  the  right  side.
Lying  upon  the  left  side  gives  him  an  anxiety,  (a.  19  d.)
A general  sick  feeling  prevents  sleep  until  2 o’clock.
Restless  sleep,  with  lascivious  dreams  and  emissions,  after
which  he  slept  but  little.  Wakes  up  in  the  evening  with
violent  vertigo  and  nausea.  Dull  pain  in  the  haunch-bones
in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  as  if  he  had  been  lying  upon
too  hard  a couch  ; he  had  to  alter  his  position  all  the  time  ;
went  off  in  the  morning.  After  the  siesta  the  back  felt
sprained  or  as  if  gone  to  sleep.  Wakes  up  in  the  night
from  pressure  as  if  upon  the  bladder.  Violent  drawing  in
the  right  upper  and  lower  limb,  in  the  [ night.  Sensation
as  if  having  spoiled  one’s  stomach  in  the  night.  Intoler-
able itching  of  the  hands,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.
Intense  prickling  itching  of  both  dorsa  of  the  hands,
preventing  him  from  sleeping  ; scratching  does  no  good.
Nightly  eructations  as  of  putrid  eggs.  Great  thirst  in  the
night.  Restless  night,  from  pressure  at  the  stomach  and
nausea.  Pain  in  the  lower  limbs  as  if  bruised,  in  the
night,  or  as  if  from  excessive  weariness.  The  external
ear  is  painful  during  the  night.  Violent  stitches  through
the  ear  and  teeth  in  the  night.  Frequent  boring  in  the
tooth,  in  the  night.  Violent  palpitations  of  the  heart  at
night,  (5  nights.)  He  wakes  up  with  colic  at  1 o’clock
in  the  night,  (a.  21  d.)  He  wakes  every  night  after  mid-
night in  a state  of  discouragement.  When  sleeping,  even
in  day-time,  the  saliva  flows  out  of  his  mouth.  Pressure
in  the  abdomen,  in  the  night.  Nightly  spasm  of  the
chest  ; he  is  near  suffocating . He  wakes  up  in  the  night
with  sensation  as  if  the  larynx  and  trachea  had  become
much  narrower,  he  feels  suffocating.  Inclination  to  vomit


PHOSPHORUS.


85


at  night,  and  continual  eructation  tasting  of  the  ingesta.
He  is  roused  from  sleep  in  the  night  by  obstruction  of  the
nose  and  difficulty  of  breathing.  A kind  of  vertigo,  in
the  evening  when  in  bed  and  turning  to  the  other  side,  as
if  all  the  blood  were  rushing  to  the  head.  Vertigo  in  the
evening  when  in  bed,  as  if  the  bed  were  turning  in  a cir-
cle. In  the  night  when  waking  up,  he  feels  stupefied,  in-
toxicated, giddy.  Drowsy,  a sort  of  giddiness,  without
being  able  to  sleep.  Sopor  in  day-time.  Starting  when
about  to  fall  asleep.  As  soon  as  he  falls  asleep,  he  has
anxious  dreams  and  then  wakes  again.  She  is  so  uneasy
in  the  evening  that  she  cannot  fall  asleep  ; she  feels  the
same  uneasiness  when  waking  up,  (a.  5 d.)  Great  anx-
iety and  restlessness  as  soon  as  she  goes  to  bed  in  the
evening.  Anxiety  the  whole  night,  no  heat,  as  if  he  had
committed  murder,  with  constant  tossing  about;.  Illusion
when  falling  asleep,  as  if  somebody  were  seizing  him  by
the  throat,  with  the  intention  of  throttling  him,  (a.  4 d.)
She  wakes  towards  morning  with  a start.  She  wakes
with  anxiety  every  morning.  Frequent  waking  in  the
night  with  chilliness.  Starting  when  asleep.  Torment-
ing dreams  about  vermine.  Tossing  about  and  moaning
the  whole  night,  with  anxious  dreams.  Anguish  during  a
state  of  sopor  with  absence  of  consciousness,  still  weep-
ing, writhing  of  the  hands,  as  if  in  despair,  lamentations,
tossing  about,  short  breathing  ; she  seizes  those  around
her  shyly  or  lays  hold  of  them  wilh  vehemence.  Heat  and
dryness  of  the  mouth  in  the  night,  she  has  to  drink  a
good  deal,  for  some  nights.  Frequent  waking  in  the
night , from  feeling  too  hot , without  sweat.  Dry  heat  in
the  night  without  thirst,  with  pain  of  the  parts  upon  which
she  had  lain.  Waking  from  anxious  dreams  in  the  night,
after  which  chilliness  and  tremor  of  the  whole  body,  espe-
cially in  the  abdomen,  violent  orgasm  of  the  blood  and
oppression  of  the  chest,  hindering  breathing  and  scarcely
permitting  him  to  breathe,  (a.  10  d.)  Uneasy  a long  time
previous  to  falling  asleep  ; after  which  she  wakes  with
oppression  of  the  chest  as  of  a load,  aggravating  the
breathing,  (a.  22  d.)  Confused  dreams.  Vexed  dreams.
Sleep  full  of  dreams.  He  sleeps  on  his  back,  with  his
left  hand  under  the  occiput.  Restless  at  night  and  dream -


86


PHOSPHORUS.


ing  constantly.  Heavy  anxious  dreams  towards  morning.
Vivid  dreams , about  affairs  with  which  he  could  not  get
along.  Anxious  dreams,  (a.  48  h.)  Dreams  full  of  care
about  something  whicli  she  had  to  attend  to,  and  for  the
sake  of  which  she  gets  up  continually.  Exclamations
and  conversations  in  her  sleep.  Anxious  dreams  about
biling  animals,  she  cries  out  and  wakes.  Dreams  she
is  stung  by  an -insect  behind  the  ears.  Dreams  that  some
one  pinches  her  back,  chest,  etc.,  and  that  he  tickles  her
soles.  Dream  about  robbers.  Dream  about  fire , with
screams  and  kicking  about.  Dream  about  a hemor-
rhage. Sad  dreams.  Frightful  dreams.  Funny  dreams.
Historical  dreams  every  night.  Dreams  about  dead  per-
sons and  quarrels.  Drowsiness  by  day,  and  even  before
dinner.  Feels  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  in  the  morn-
ing. Sleep  does  not  refresh  her.  As  if  paralysed  and
bruised  in  the  morning  after  rising , (a.  6 d )

Fever. — Cool  feeling  in  the  whole  body.  Concealed
chilly  tremulousness  in  the  whole  body,  even  near  a warm
stove.  Chilly  hands,  although  they  feel  warm  to  others
and  their  veins  are  distended.  Chilliness  in  the  evening,
and  falling  asleep  from  weakness  ; towards  midnight
wakes  up  from  heavy  dreams,  with  profuse  sweat  all
over.  Cold  limbs.  Shuddering,  cannot  be  relieved  by
the  warmth  of  the  stove.  Shuddering  over  the  whole
body,  without  chilliness.  Chill  over  the  back.  Chill
over  the  back  from  below  upwards,  in  day-time.  Fre-
quent chilliness,  the  first  days.  Chilliness,  several  even-
ings, after  going  to  bed.  Chilliness,  every  evening,  with
shuddering,  without  thirst,  but  with  dryness  in  the  throat.
Chilliness  and  shuddering,  no  appetite,  no  subsequent
heat.  Chilliness  every  afternoon,  and  faintness  for  seve-
ral days.  Chills  with  shaking,  next  night  sweat,  great
uneasiness  the  day  before,  for  two  days,  (9  d.)  Violent
chill  ; cold  thrill  over  the  back,  he  had  to  lie  down  and
cover  himself,  becoming  warm  very  gradually  ; when  put-
ting a hand  from  under  the  cover,  he  felt  a new  chill ;
the  hands  felt  rigid  with  cold,  the  head  feeling  a dull  pain  ;
no  subsequent  heat,  (a.  26  h.)  Internal  chilliness,  several
afternoons,  a whole  or  half  an  hour ; occasionally  a sen-
sation as  of  hot  water  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  back*


PHOSPHORUS.


8 1

Violent  chills  in  the  night,  with  diarrhoea  ; afterwards  great
heat  and  sweat  all  over,  and  since  then  sweat  for  several
nights  before  midnight.  Long  coldness  without  thirst,
afterwards  thirst  in  the  night,  after  the  fever  came  diar-
rhoea. Fever  in  the  afternoon  ; commencing  with  violent
chilliness,  he  could  not  get  warm,  afterwards  heat  with
thirst  and  internal  chilliness,  and  when  the  chilliness  had
passed  off,  heat  and  sweat  the  whole  night,  until  morning,
(a.  8 h.)  Warmth  through  the  whole  body,  with  obtusion
of  the  head.  Frequent  rising  of  heat  from  the  neck  to  the
head,  with  redness  of  the  face  when  sitting,  in  the  after-
noon. Heat,  and  feeling  of  heat.  Febrile  heat  and
sweat,  at  night,  with  insatiable  canine  hunger,  followed  by
chilliness  with  chattering  of  teeth  and  external  coldness  ;
the  chilliness  is  succeeded  by  internal  heat,  especially  in
the  hands,  the  coldness  continually  on  the  outside  of  the
body.  Alternation  of  heat  and  chilliness  in  the  night,
with  violent  pains  in  the  head,  abdomen  and  lower  limbs  ;
vomiting  in  the  forenoon,  for  more  than  twenty-four  hours,
causing  all  appetite  and  sleep  to  disappear,  (a.  14  d.)
Great  heat  after  midnight,  with  short  breathing,  without
any  thirst,  and  general  short-lasting  sweat,  dry  lip  and
dry  tip  of  the  tongue  ; the  mouth  is  moist.  Flushes  of
heat,  especially  in  the  evening,  with  slight  feverish  rest-
lessness and  burning  heat  in  the  palms  of  the  hands.
General  heat  in  the  evening,  with  absence  of  thirst,  with-
out any  previous  chill.  Heat  in  the  forenoon  for  two
hours,  with  thirst  for  beer,  preceded  by  a chill  and  fol-
lowed by  chilliness  ; all  these  symptoms  were  experienced
while  in  a state  of  slumber  full  of  dreams,  and  making
many  movements  with  the  hands.  Febrile  heat  in  the
afternoon  especially  in  the  face,  (a.  14  d.)  Afternoon-
fever  for  many  days,  heat  with  or  without  any  previous
chilliness.  Frequent  attacks  of  heat,  especially  in  the
face,  with  dry  mouth,  without  thirst.  Warmth  of  the
whole  body,  with  internal  itching.  Anguish  and  heat.
General  heat  and  sweat.  Fleat  and  sjveat  of  the  head  and
hands,  and  the  feet,  every  day  for  half  an  hour.  Fever
with  small,  hard,  quick  pulse.  Fever  with  thickly  coated
tongue.  Accelerated  circulation  of  the  blood.  Throb-
bing of  the  carotids.  Increase  of  pulse,  warmth  and  com-


88


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


fortable  feeling  through  the  whole  body.  Pulse  quick  and
full.  Pulse  quick  and  faint.  Sweat,  first  on  the  anterior
surface  of  the  body,  especially  ' the  abdomen,  afterwards
on  the  chest,  then  in  the  axillae  and  upon  the  back  ; going
off  during  dinner.  Sweat  during  sleep  and  at  dinner.
Increased  secretion  of  sweat  and  urine.  Shining  sweat
on  the  forehead.  Exhausting  sweats  every  morning,
(a.  24  h.)  Sweat  on  the  body  with  cold  head.  Night-
sweat.  Night-sweats  for  six  nights.  In  the  night  sweat
and  turbid  urine,  having  felt  exhausted  the  whole  day.
Sweat  and  anxious  feeling  towards  morning.  Sweat  in
the  morning  when  in  bed,  especially  on  the  feet  and  hands.
Morning-sweats  for  three  days.


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.

Add  sulphuric  acid  to  a pound  of  calcined  bones  broken
in  pieces,  and  stir  up  the  mixture  several  times  in  twenty-
four  hours  with  a glass  tube.  Add  to  this  amalgam  two
pounds  of  brandy  or  rum,  mix  it,  tie  up  the  whole  in  a
linen  bag,  and  press  it  between  two  smooth  boards,
using  heavy  weight  for  that  purpose.  The  residue  con-
tained in  the  bag,  may  again  be  mixed  with  two  more
pounds  of  brandy  to  be  pressed  out  again  as  before.  The
liquid  obtained  by  the  second  pressing,  may  then  be  mixed
with  the  former  and  may  be  left  standing  a couple  of  days
under  cover,  for  the  purpose  of  allowing  the  liquid  time  to
settle.  The  clear  liquid  which  is  poured  off,  is  inspissated
over  the  fire  in  a porcelain  cup  previously  warmed,  and  is
melted  by  a red  heat.  The  melted  phosphoric  acid  ought
to  be  clear  as  crystal.  When  yet  warm,  it  is  broken  in
pieces  and  kept  in  a well-corked  vial,  inasmuch  as  it  be-
comes converted  into  a clear,  thickish  liquid  when  expos-
ed to  the  air.

Camphor  moderates  the  effect  of  phosphoric  acid.

Phosphoric  acid  has  cured  the  following  affections  :
Headache  in  the  morning  ; intolerance  of  noise  and  con-
versation ; scurf  on  the  dorsum  of  the  nose  ; fetor  from
the  nose,  burning  of  the  cheeks  ; pimples  on  the  chin  ;


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


89


pimples  around  the  chin  and  forehead  ; burning  in  the  ab-
domen ; micturition  ; pain  in  the  liver  during  the  menses  ;
rough  throat;  scratching  in  the  larynx  inducing  cough;
shortness  of  breath  and  inability  to  talk  without  resting
from  time  to  time  ; weakness  of  the  chest  from  talking  ;
pimples  on  the  arms  ; sweaty  feet ; herpes  ; corns  ; night-
sweat.

Dr.  Hering  has  cured  with  it : Inability  to  perform
mental  or  bodily  labor ; heaviness  of  the  head  as  if  full  of
water  ; ophthalmia  with  burning;  lachrymation  ; dread  of
the  sun’s  light ; the  teeth  become  yellow  ; continual
nausea  in  the  throat ; after  a meal,  sensation  as  if  the
stomach  were  balancing  up  and  down  ; hawking  up  of
tenacious  mucus  ; gnawing  pain  in  the  testicles  ; short  and
hacking  mucous  cough,  in  the  morning  ; frequent  stool  ;
boils  on  the  nates  and  in  the  axillae  ; swelling  on  one  of
the  nates  ; swelling  of  the  foot  ; pain  in  the  testicles  when
touching  them  ; itching  of  the  ulcer  ; flat  painless  ulcers
on  the  leg,  without  redness,  with  indented,  uneven  base
and  dirty  pus ; great  weariness  after  walking ; milky
urine.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Becher  ; Franz  ; Gross  ;
Gutmann  ; F.  Hahnemann  ; Herrmann  ; Hartmann  ;
Meyer;  Stapf  ; Teuthorn  ; Wislicenus  ; Hering.

Moral  Symptoms. — Despondency.  Sadness.  Fears
she  might  fall  sick.  Is  constantly  brooding  over  his  ill-
ness. Apprehensive  on  account  of  the  future.  Weep-
ing mood  as  if  home-sick.  Sad,  serious,  low-spirited,  only
when  walking  in  the  open  air  ; the  longer  he  walks,  the
more  these  symptoms  increase  ; going  off  when  home  in
the  room,  he  then  became  more  cheerful.  Anxiety  and
uneasiness  through  the  whole  body.  Great  anxiety  ; he
has  to  lie  down  in  the  afternoon,  (3.  d.)  Anguish  as  if  the
chest  were  too  narrow,  with  internal  heat,  (a.  8 h.)  In-
ternal uneasiness  prevents  him  from  attending  to  his  busi-
ness. Hurriedness  when  talking  ; when  asking  for  some-
thing, he  cannot  get  it  fast  enough.  > Great  irritation  of
the  nerves,  the  mind  feels  oppressed,  the  body  faint.
Out  of  humor,  not  disposed  to  talk.  Not  satisfied  with
himself.  Out  of  humor,  peevish,  irritated.  He  looks
peevish  and  out  of  humor.  Headstrong.  Fie  gets  easily


90


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


angry.  Vehement  about  a trifling  vexation.  Taciturn,
indifferent,  indisposed  to  work.  Cheerful,  frequently  to
excess.  Dancing  vehemently  and  wildly,  without  reason,
for  several  days  without  resting  herself,  except  at  night.
He  is  unable  to  connect  his  ideas  properly.  He  dwells
upon  one  and  the  same  idea,  and  is  unable  to  connect  any
other  with  it.  He  is  at  a loss  to  find  the  words  he  wishes
to  use,  (a.  2 h.)  When  alone  he  becomes  thoughtless
and  unconscious  of  himself,  in  the  morning.  Want  of  ideas
and  weakness  of  mind  ; he  became  giddy  when  reflect-
ing upon  something.  Dull,  heavy  mind,  without  imagina-
tion, not  disposed  to  any  thing,  not  even  to  pleasant  intel-
lectual labor.  When  reading,  he  thought  of  a thousand
other  things,  he  was  unable  to  comprehend  anything,  he
forgot  immediately  what  he  had  been  reading,  and  had
great  difficulty  in  recollecting  that  which  he  had  known
for  a long  time  past.  Illusion  of  the  senses  ; he  imagin-
ed he  heard  the  clock  strike  or  he  saw  high  things  placed
beyond  the  sphere  of  his  vision,  move  by  his  side.  In  the
evening  when  sitting  down  he  saw  mere  figures,  his  head
feeling  at  the  same  time  dull  and  sick,  and  finally  very  hot.

Head. — Dulness  of  the  head,  (a.  4 d.)  Muddled  stale
of  the  head,  for  three  hours.  Obtusion  of  the  whole  head.
Obtusion  of  the  sinciput,  especially  the  orbits.  Inability
to  think.  Dulness  of  the  head,  as  if  one  had  indulged
sexual  excesses,  for  three  days,  (immediately.)  Sensa-
tion in  the  head  and  limbs  as  if  one  had  been  intoxicated
or  as  if  one  had  not  slept  enough.  Reeling  sensation  in
the  morning  after  rising.  Vertigo  when  standing  or  walk-
ing, as  if  intoxicated.  Vertigo  when  stooping,  or  sitting.
The  head  inclines  to  fall  backwards  and  forwards  (im-
mediately.) Vertigo  when  rising,  after  having  been  seated
for  a long  time.  Vertigo  after  reading.  Vertigo  in  the
morning,  when  in  bed  ; when  closing  his  eyes,  he  felt  as
if  the  feet  were  being  raised  and  as  if  he  stood  upon  his
head.  Frequent  vertigo  from  heat  in  the  head,  even  when
sitting  ; when  writing  he  had  to  nod  frequently  and  invol-
untarily ; the  objects  appeared  to  turn,  the  table  seemed
to  fall  over  ; and  when  walking  or  standing  he  fell  forward
and  had  to  make  a step  forward,  to  keep  himself  on  bis
feet.  Headache  when  turning  the  head  rapidly,  and  when


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


91


treading  firmly.  Aching  pain  in  the  occiput,  obliging  him
to  lie  down.  Violent  headache,  with  stiffness  of  the  nape
of  the  neck.  Headache  increased  by  the  slightest  concus-
sion. Violent  headache  over  the  eyes,  she  is  unable  to
open  them.  Headache,  as  afteran  effortin  liftingsomething.
Heaviness  of  the  whole  head,  with  violent  pressure  towards
the  left  frontal  eminence.  Heaviness  and  pressure  from
behind  forwards  in  the  occiput,  felt  only  when  stooping,  dis-
appearing when  inclining  the  head  backwards.  Dull  head-
ache in  the  forehead  and  temples,  with  tolerable  cheerful-
ness. Dull  creeping  headache  in  the  forehead,  with  sweat,,
on  the  forehead.  Dull  headache  zoith  swimming  in  the
head ; when  coughing  the  pain  increases  as  if  the  head
would  burst.  Aching  pain  in  the  right  occiput,  increased
when  pressing  upon  it  and  when  turning  the  head,  (a.  7 h.)
Pressure  in  the  brain,  behind  the  left  ear.  Painful  pressure
in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  from  within  outwards,  (a.  li
h.)  Dull,  stitching  pressure,  at  intervals,  deep  in  the  left
vertex.  Dull  painful  pressure  over  the  orbits,  witn  stitches
behind  the  ears,  in  the  afternoon.  Hard  pressure  on  the  left
side  of  the  forehead.  Violent  pressure  in  the  right  frontal
eminence,  from  within  outwards.  Pressure  in  the  forehead,
as  after  an  intoxication.  Hard  pressure  above  the  left
temple,  extending  into  the  occiput,  with  dread  of  motion.
Pressure  in  the  head,  especially  after  going  up-stairs.  Hard
pressure  in  the  forehead  or  temples,  almost  as  if  bruised,
as  on  the  surface  of  the  brain,  when  reflecting,  especially
in  the  evening,  but  not  hindering  thought.  Violent,  hard
painful  pressure  as  if  on  the  surface  of  the  brain,  and  in
the  periosteum  of  that  portion  of  the  skull  upon  which  he
is  resting,  when  waking  up  after  midnight;  the  pain
becomes  intolerable  by  remaining  lying  upon  the  same
side,  but  disappears  when  turning  to  another  side,  and  is
then  felt  in  this  one  with  the  same  degree  of  violence.
Violent  pressure  from  the  forehead  down  upon  the  nose.
Pressure  in  the  head  as  of  a load,  from  above  downwards,
or  as  if  the  upper  part  of  the  head  were  bruised.  Violent
pressure  in  the  forehead,  in  the  morning  when  waking,
she  was  stupefied  and  was  unable  to  open  her  eyes  ; the
pain  scarcely  permitted  her  to  talk  and  it  was  increased
by  the  least  motion.  Excessively  violent  pressure  in  the


92


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


head,  in  the  afternoon.  Headache,  as  if  the  brain  were
being  pressed  upwards,  with  painful  pulsative  throbbing
in  the  brain.  Aching  and  stitching  pain  in  every  part  of
the  head,  at  intervals.  Violent  pressure  in  the  right
temple  from  within  outwards.  Clawing  pressure  in  the
parietal  bones,  more  violent  during  motion.  Pressure  in
the  occiput  as  if  lying  upon  something  hard.  Clawing,
dull,  hard  pressure  in  the  left  temple,  at  regular  intervals.
Clawing  pressure  and  tearing  in  the  brain,  in  different
places.  Clawing-tearing  pressure  in  the  occiput,  in-
creased by  noise  and  the  slightest  motion.  Clawing  pres-
sure in  the  right  temple.  Compressive  pain  in  the  whole
brain.  Pain  as  if  both  parietal  bones  were  pressed  to-
wards one  another  by  a pair  of  pincers.  Pain  in  the
evening,  when  in  bed,  of  a constrictive  character,  as  if
both  temples  were  pressed  towards  one  another  in  some
parts.  Violent  pushing  and  pressing  through  the  vertex,
from  within  outwards,  for  three  days.  Jerking  through
the  head  from  behind  forwards,  at  regular  intervals  like
the  pulse.  Drawing  pressure  in  the  right  vertex  and
occipital  bone,  more  violent  during  motion.  Drawing
in  the  left  temple  and  the  anterior  cartilage  of  the  ear,
changing  to  pressure  during  motion.  Tearing  in  the
vertex  and  occiput.  Tearing  in  the  left  temple,  ex-
tending as  far  as  the  forehead,  worse  during  motion.
Stitching  over  the  left  eye,  upwards,  in  the  head.  Dull
stitching  through  the  middle  of  the  forehead.  Dull
dartings  into  the  right,  temple,  deep  into  the  brain,  at  fre-
quent intervals.  Violent  stitching  in  the  right  temple,
into  the  eye.  Stitching  with  drawing  in  the  vertex,  re-
lieved by  pressing  upon  it.  Single  sharp  shocks  in  the
right  temple.  Single  blows  in  the  head,  as  with  a hammer.
Hacking  in  the  head,  as  with  a hatchet,  (cured  by  Staphis.)
Prickling  headache,  in  the  morning  when  rising,  until
noon.  Burning  headache  in  the  upper  part  of  the  brain,
Digging-up  boring  in  the  right  occiput.  Boring  with
pressure  in  the  left  temple.  Boring  in  the  head  as  if  the
skull  were  being  perforated,  especially  in  the  vertex.
Painful  concussion  in  the  head,  when  walking.  Humming
in  the  head.  Pain  of  the  scalp,  when  touching  it,  as  if
sore,  or  as  if  the  hairs  were  pulled  at.  Dull  pain  of  the


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


93


hairy  scalp.  Pressure  in  the  occiput,  as  from  a hard
couch,  diminished  by  friction.  Aching  pain  in  the  right
temple.  Pressure  and  gnawing  in  the  forehead,  near  the
root  of  the  nose.  Itching  gnawing  of  the  forehead.  Itch-
ing of  the  scalp.  Pain  in  the  occiput  as  if  bruised,  in  the
region  of  the  insertion  of  the  cervical  muscles.  Drawing
pain  in  the  occipital  bone,  every  day.  Burning  stitch  in
the  upper  part  of  the  head.  Long-continuing  stitch  in  the
vertex,  increased  by  contact.  Burning  pain  in  the  right
side  of  the  scalp.  Burning  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  fore-
head, left  side.  Feeling  of  warmth  in  the  side  of  the
frontal  bone.  Feeling  of  coldness  of  the  hairy  scalp.
Painful  elevation  on  the  scalp,  with  sensation  as  if  he
had  been  pulled  by  the  hairs  ; pain  as  if  bruised,  when
touching  the  parts.  Great  falling  off  of  the  hair.

Eyes. — Heaviness  of  the  eye-lids,  as  if  they  w£>uld
close.  The  eyes  are  painful  in  the  morning  when  open-
ing them,  she  is  unable  to  hold  them  open  for  a long
time.  Sudden  pain  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  a grain  of
sand  were  pressing  or  as  if  a pimple  were  in  the  eye.
Pressure  on  the  left  lower  eye-lid.  Pressure  on  tiie
right  eye-lid  and  feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  same.
Constant  pressure  upon  the  eyes  as  is  felt  when  looking
too  long  at  one  object,  compelling  one  to  close  the  eye.
Pressure  of  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  too  large,  with  im-
mobility of  the  same  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,  and
dulness  of  the  head.  Pressure  under  the  lower  left  eye-
lid, increased  by  pressing  upon  it,  and  then  disappearing
immediately.  Pressure  in  both  eyes,  towards  the  back
part.  Clawing  with  pressure  in  the  upper  border  of  the
left  orbit.  Pain  as  if  the  eye-balls  were  compressed  and
pressed  into  the  head.  Sensation  as  if  the  eyes  were
being  pressed  out,  causing  frequent  winking.  Itching  in
the  eye.  Itching  and  pressure  in  the  eye.  Drawing
stitching  through  the  eyelids,  from  one  canthus  to  the
other,  with  sharp  stitches  in  the  canthi  and  in  the  circum-
ference of  the  orbits.  Pressing  of  the  right  eye-ball  into
the  outer  canthus,  owing  to  a dull,  now  stitching  now
burning  pain  ; afterwards  sensation  before  the  eye  as  of  a
long  snowy  plain  upon  which  fiery  points  descended,  and
afterwards  a fiery  plain  before  the  eyes,  upon  which
shining  white  points  descended.  Sudden  stitches  under


94


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


the  right  eye-lid,  as  from  electric  sparks,  he  had  to  close
the  eyes  firmly  afterwards.  Sharp  stitching  in  the  thin
bony  wall  of  the  orbit,  towards  the  root  of  the  nose.
Perceptible  coldness  of  the  inner  borders  of  the  orbits,
when  closing  the  eyes.  Burning  in  the  eyes,  with  burn-
ing tears.  Sudden  burning  in  the  left  eye.  Burning  and
pressure  in  the  eyes  ; she  is  unable  to  look  at  the  light
in  the  evening.  Burning  in  the  upper  eye-lids,  the  whole
day,  and  burning  itching  in  the  inner  canthus.  Burning
under  the  upper  eye-lid.  Burning  in  the  inner  canthus,
as  if  too  much  air  and  light  were  pressing  in  ; the  burning
is  less  when  closing  the  eyes  firmly.  Smarting  burning
in  the  eyes,  especially  in  the  evening,  at  candle-light.
Inflammation  of  the  eyes  and  stye  on  the  upper  eye-lid.
Swelling  and  redness  of  the  lower  eye-lids.  Smarting
lachrymation  of  both  eyes.  Dry  gum  in  the  lids,  in  the
morning,  with  smarting  when  washing  the  eyes.  Aggluti-
nation of  the  eyes.  Yellow  spot  in  the  white  of  the  eye
towards  the  inner  canthus,  but  more  towards  the  cornea,
accompanied  with  dim-sightedness  disappearing  when
dilating  the  pupil  by  holding  the  hand  before  the  eye.  Both
eyes  look  glassy,  the  eye-balls  moving  almost  involuntarily,
mostly  when  staring.  Faint,  glassy  eyes.  Eyes  without
lustre.  Faint,  sunken  eyes.  Jerking  of  the  lower  eye-lid,
towards  the  inner  canthus,  (a.  9 h.)  Staring  look.  First,
dilatation,  afterwards  contraction  of  the  pupils,  for  16
hours,  (a.  1 h.)  Contraction  of  the  pupils  for  several
days,  (a.  three-quarters  of  an  h.)  Dilatation  of  the  'pupils.
(a.  1 h.)  Excessive  dilatation  of  the  right  pupil,  increasing
in  proportion  as  he  made  an  effort  at  seeing  ; even  seven
days  after  it  was  four  times  as  large  as  the  left,  (imme-
diately.) Short-sightedness  when  sewing,  reading  or
writing,  as  if  a gauze  were  before  the  eyes  ; she  does  not
recognize  the  letters  ; things  at  a distance  are  distinct  and
clear  to  her  ; when  looking  away  from  her  work  for  one
moment,  she  then  sees  again  better  the  objects  near  her  ;
but  the  dim-sightedness  returns  immediately  when  re-
commencing to  read.  He  sees  better  at  a distance,
(curative  effect.)  Increased  short-sightedness.  He  sees
every  thing  in  a fog  beyond  the  distance  of  6 steps.  Dim-
ness of  sight,  with  quick  and  short  luminous  vibrations
before  the  eyes,  and  pressure  in  jhe  internal  canthus  when


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


95


looking  long  at  one  place  ; rubbing  brings  on  lachryma-
tion  and  the  dimness  passes  off.  Weak  eyes,  more  so  in
the  forenoon  than  afternoon  ; distant  objects  seemed  to  be
wrapt  in  mist  and  became  clearer  only  when  looking  at
them  steadily  ; every  near  but  somewhat  bright  object
dazzled  him  and  caused  a pressure  in  the  eyes  ; the  same
symptom  was  felt  when  looking  suddenly  into  the  dark.
Black  streak  before  the  eyes  ; wiping  does  not  remove  it ;
sha  imagines  she  ought  to  be  able  to  see  over  her  own
head  when  lowering  it.  Vibrations  before  the  eyes  when
reading  at  candle-light.

Ear. — Cramp-like  drawing  pain  in  the  right  ear.
Drawing  in  the  inner  and  outer  meatus  auditorius  of  the
right  side.  Fine  jerkings  in  the  right  lobule.  Jerking,
or  sometimes  simple  tearing  in  the  cartilage  of  the  left
ear.  Tearing  in  the  outer  and  inner  ear.  Almost  pain-
less stitch  in  the  left  ear,  going  off  when  inserting  the
finger  into  the  ear,  (a.  6§  h.)  Stitches  in  the  ears  when
she  hears  a musical  sound  or  the  stroke  of  a bell,  or  even
when  singing  herself.  Stitches  in  the  ears,  with  drawing
pain  in  the  jaws  and  teeth.  Stitches  in  the  ears,  with
drawing  pains  in  the  left  cheek.  Long-lasting  fine  stitch,
deep  in  the  right  ear.  Burning  stitches  in  the  ears.  Itch-
ing stitches  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear,  continuing
while  moving  the  jaw,  (a.  27  h.)  Stinging  itching  of  the
right  lobule,  (a.  2 h.)  Swelling  and  heat  of  both  ears,
with  burning  and  itching.  Large  blotch  on  the  posterior
surface  of  the  right  lobule,  sore,  especially  when  touching
it.  Every  sound  resounds  strongly  in  the  ear.  Constant
singing  in  the  ears,  stronger  when  lying  down.  Ringing
before  the  ears.  Shrill  sound  in  the  ear  when  blowing
the  nose.  Whizzing  of  the  ears,  every  day.  Whizzing
of  the  ears,  in  the  evening,  not  when  lying  in  the  bed,  but
again  in  the  morning.  Roaring  in  the  ears,  especially
the  right  one,  (a.  15  h.)  Roaring  in  the  ears,  with  hard
hearing.  He  does  not  hear  the  tick  of  a watch  when  held
at  a moderate  distance  from  the  ear;  he  hears  it  more
distinctly  at  the  distance  of  a foot  and  a half,  when  held
close  to  the  ear  he  only  hears  a hissing,  no  tick.  For  a
long  time  he  found  musical  sounds  very  disagreeable.

Nose. — The  smell  is  very  sensitive.  Itching  of  the  tip


96


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


of  the  nose,  he  had  to  scratch  it.  Creeping  and  burning
of  the  nose.  Pimple  on  the  tip  of  the  nose,  with  throbbing
in  the  nose  and  pain  when  touching  it.  Swelling  of  the
dorsutn  of  the  nose,  with  red  spots  both  on  the  dorsum
and  the  sides,  going  and  coming,  with  a tensive  sensation.
Itching  scurf  of  the  lower  part  of  the  septum.  The  mu-
cus remains  stagnant  in  the  nose.  Bitter  mucus  frequently
gets  into  the  mouth  and  fauces  from  the  posterior  nares.
Cold  nose.  Purulent  discharge  from  the  nose.  Bleeding
of  the  nose  and  frequent  expulsion  of  blood  from  the  nose
when  blowing  it.

Face. — Pale  countenance.  Pale  face  when  rising,  with
disposition  to  stare.  Blue  margins  around  the  eyes.  Sunk-
en eyes.  Heat  of  that  side  of  the  face  upon  which  he
was  not  resting.  The  face  is  frequently  dark-red,  momen-
tarily, with  flushes  of  heat.  Tension  of  the  skin  of  the
face,  as  if  albumen  were  drying  upon  it ; it  feels  hot  to  the
touch.  Formication  in  the  face  and  in  other  parts.  Fine,
sudden  drawing  through  the  left  cheek,  as  far  as  the  ear.
Burning  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  cheek,  near  the  right  cor-
ner of  the  mouth.  Burning  pain  of  a small  spot  of  the  left
cheek.  Itching  of  the  whole  face.  Large  pimples  in  the
face.  Red  pimples,  smaller  than  a lentil,  on  the  cheeks  and
nose,  filled  with  pus,  and  itching  especially  when  touched.
Small  blotches  on  the  forehead.  Violent  burning  pain  in
the  lower  lip,  continuing  even  when  moving  it.  Burning
pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  lower  lip.  Dull  stitching  and
creeping  in  one  point  of  the  vermilion-border  of  the  lip.
The  lower  lip  is  chapped  in  the  middle.  Oblique  fissure
in  the  right  side  of  the  upper  lip,  with  sore  pain,  especially
when  moving  the  lip,  for  several  days.  Burning  painful
pimples  on  the  vermilion-border  of  both  lips.  Ulcerated,
deep  places  in  the  vermilion-border  of  both  lips,  with  ten-
sive smarting,  even  when  not  touched  ; they  form  a dark
skin  which  is  easily  rubbed  off  when  washing  the  face  ;
in  this  case  the  places  bleed  and  feel  sore  and  smart  when
touched.  Yellow-brown,  crust-like  eruption  with  pus  on
the  lower  lip  towards  the  corner  of  the  mouth,  painless,
for  six  days.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Pain  of  the  lower  jaw  as  if  it  were
torn  out  of  its  joint,  more  so  when  chewing.  Pain  of  the


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


97


left  sub-maxillary  gland  when  touching  it,  like  abroad  stitch
with  pressure,  simultaneously  with  sore  throat.  Dull  draw-
ing pain  with  pressure,  in  the  angle  of  the  right  lower  jaw.
Vjo.ent  aching  in  a hollow  tooth,  when  particles  of  food
get  into  it,  going  off  after  they  had  been  removed.  Pain
of  the  wisdom-tooth.  Jerking  tearing  in  the  upper  right
molares,  independent  of  chewing.  Tearing  in  the  teeth,
extending  into  the  head,  as  if  the  tooth  were  being  pressed
asunder  and  driven  out,  aggravated  by  the  warmth  of  the
bed,  or  by  anything  hot  or  cold.  Boring-stitching  tooth-
ache, ending  with  swelling  of  the  cheek.  Feeling  of  cold-
ness in  the  roots?  especially  those  of  the  molar  teeth,  when
chewing  something  ; this  feeling  is  painful  in  the  morning;
going  off  after  a meal.  A sort  of  grumbling  burning  in
the  hollow  tooth.  Burning  pain  in  the  foreteeth,  at  night.
Dulness  of  the  teeth,  as  from  a corrosive  acidity.  Violent
bleeding  from  a hollow  tooth.  Swelling  of  the  internal
gums,  and  pain  when  eating  or  touching  it.  Soreness  of
the  gums  when  touching  it,  bleeding  when  rubbing  them.
Bleeding  of  the  gams  from  the  slightest  contact.

Mouth. — Sore  and  raw  pain  in  the  mouth,  between  the
acts  of  deglutition.  Great  dryness  in  the  mouth,  in  the
afternoon,  with  a quantity  of  tasteless,  viscid,  soap-like
mucus,  which  he  spits  out  frequently.  A quantity  of
frothy  mucus  in  the  mouth,  having  an  acrid  taste,  (a.  2 h.)
A quantity  of  sourish  saliva  in  the  mouth.  Slimy,  oily
and  thirsty  in  the  mouth,  in  the  morning.  The  tongue  is
quite  dry,  (a.  24  h.)  Feeling  of  dryness  on  the  tongue
and  in  the  palate,  without  thirst.  Stitching  in  the  tip  of
the  tongue.  Itching  stinging  in  the  tip  of  the  longue.
Stinging  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  tongue.  Itching  in
the  tongue  for  several  days.  Burning  on  the  tongue,  im-
mediately. Burning  in  several  parts  of  the  tongue,  as  of
something  corrosive.  Swelling  of  the  tongue  with  pain
when  talking.  Dryness  of  the  palate , without  thirst.
Burning  of  the  velum  pendulum  palati ; as  if  inflamed.
Painful  soreness  of  the  velum  pendulum  palati,  and  raw-
ness in  the  throat,,  especially  during  an  expiration.  Swell-
ing and  sore  feeling  of  the  posterior  nares.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus. — Pain  of  the  throat  when
swallowing,  in  the  region  of  the  thyroid  cartilage.  Raw-

5


98


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


ness  of  the  throat,  with  pain  when  talking  or  swallowing.
Sore  throat  when  swallowing.  Smarting  of  the  throat,  be-
tween the  acts  of  deglutition.  Scratching  in  the  throat
when  swallowing  bread.  Stitching  in  the  throat,' when
swallowing  food.  Stitch,  with  pressure,  in  the  throat,
when  swallowing  saliva.  Soreness  of  the  left  side  of  the
throat,  ulcerative,  beating,  tensive  and  dry,  between  the
acts  of  deglutition  ; talking  is  troublesome  ; when  swal-
lowing he  experiences  a scratching  and  sore  pain  extending
into  the  ears,  where  he  feels  likewise  a scratching  and
stitching  pain.  Inflammation  of  the  throat,  with  a smart-
ing vesicle.  Sensation  as  if  something  were  lodged  behind
the  palate,  impeding  deglutition.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Putrid,  flat  taste.  Taste  con-
stantly acid.  Putrid,  smoky  taste.  Taste  as  of  herbs,  in
the  morning  after  waking.  Tasting  the  bread  a long  while
after  eating  it,  with  some  scratching  in  the  throat.  Aver-
sion to  brown  bread,  when  merely  looking  at  it,  and  espe-
cially on  account  of  its  sour  smell,  also  when  eating  it,
causing  almost  vomiting.  Bread  tastes  like  bile,  the  taste
in  the  mouth  being  natural.  Violent  thirst.  Violent  de-
sire for  cold  milk  or  beer.  Loss  of  appetite.  The  child
wants  to  eat  all  the  time  without  eating  much.  Food  has
but  little  taste.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Obtusion  of  the  head  after  and
during  a meal.  Pressure  in  the  stomach  as  of  a load,
with  drowsiness.  Excessive  relaxation  of  the  body  after
breakfast ; she  had  to  be  carried  into  the  bed.  Oppression
in  the  stomach  after  a meal,  with  drowsiness.  Load  in  the
stomach  as  of  lead.  Repletion  and  anxiety  after  a meal.
Frequent  rising  of  air  after  a meal,  preceded  by  rumbling
in  the  stomach.  Unsuccessful,  offensive  eructations.  Sour
eructations.  Nausea,  as  if  in  the  palate.  Nausea  unto
vomiting  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.  Nausea  after  a
meal.  Vomiting  of  the  ingesta,  and  afterwards  vomiting
every  hour.  Oppression  of  the  stomach , before  and  after
dinner.  Painful  oppression  of  the  stomach  when  touch-
ing the  pit,  he  dares  not  button  up  his  clothes.  Stitching,
with  pressure,  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  something
were  being  pulled  away.  Stitching  in  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, and  a drawing  thence  to  the  small  of  the  back.  Cold-


PHOSPHORIC  ACID*


99


ness  in  the  stomach.  Burning  in  the  stomach,  under  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  then  moving  to  the  left  side.

Abdomen. — Pressing  and  pushing  in  the  hypochondria,
with  great  anguish,  as  if  he  should  be  deprived  of  his  life,
most  when  standing.  Periodical  clawing  with  pressure  un-
der the  short  ribs.  Clawing  with  pressure,  alter  walking,
above  the  liver,  and  extending  thence  to  the  umbilical  re-
gion. Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  liver.  Stitching  in  the  re-
gion of  the  liver  and  spleen.  Burning  pain  in  one  place  of
the  region  or  the  liver.  Distension  of  the  abdomen,  entirely
removed  by  the  emission  of  one  single  flatus.  Tensive
pain  in  the  epigastrium,  almost  arresting  the  breathing.
Pressure  in  several  parts  of  the  epigastrium.  Painful
pinching  in  the  abdomen,  like  flatulent  colic.  Clawing
pain  in  the  abdomen . Clawing  with  pressure  in  the  um-
bilical region.  Contraction  of  the  intestines,  in  the  morn-
ing during  stool,  and  afterwards  smarting  in  the  rectum.
Excessive  pinching  contraction  of  the  intestines,  from  both
sides  of  the  umbilical  region.  Griping  and  pinching  in
the  umbilical  region,  when  sitting.  Cutting  pinching  in
the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on.  Cutting  pain
transversely  across  the  abdomen,  in  paroxysms.  Tensive
stitching  pain  in  the  whole  right  side  of  the  abdomen  and
chest,  almost  arresting  the  breathing.  Cutting  colic,  with
drawing  in  the  pelvis.  Intermittent,  dull  stitches,  with
pressure,  around  the  umbilical  region  and  in  many  other
parts  of  the  body.  Fine  intermittent  stitches  in  the  abdo-
men, towards  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  especially  when  rais-
ing the  body  while  sitting.  Stitching  colic  under  the  last
left  rib,  more  violent  during  an  inspiration.  Boring  stitch
in  the  skin  of  the  epigastrium,  continuing  during  an  inspi-
ration and  expiration.  Stitches  above  the  groin,  when
changing  his  position,  when  beginning  to  walk,  or  when
just  sitting  down.  Prickings  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomi-
nal muscles.  Burning  and  smarting  in  the  umbilical  re-
gion, when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Cutting  pain  in  the
left  groin.  Swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands.  Pressing
from  within  outwards  in  the  right  groin,  as  if  hernia  would
form,  increased  by  pressure.  Single  gurgling  stitches  in
the  right  groin.  Incarceration  of  flatulence.  Rumbling
in  the  epigastrium  and  abdomen,  Gurgling  in  the  abdo-


100


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


men,  as  of  water,  when  bending  forward  or  backward,  also
when  touching  the  abdomen.  Emission  of  a quantity  of
flatulence.

Stool. — Stool  first  hard,  then  papescent.  No  stool  for
two  days,  with  flatulence.  Frequent  desire  for  stool.
Unsuccessful  desire,  then  difficult  stool,  next  day  no  stool.
Hard  stool,  in  pieces.  Stool  with  great  exertions,  although
not  hard.  Stool  every  day  the  first  6 days,  then  every
2,  afterwards  every  3 days.  Stool  loose  and  frequent.
Diarrhoea.  White- gray  diarrhoea . Involuntary,  light-
yellow,  papescent  stool,  coming  off  when  emitting  flatu-
lence. Protrusion  of  the  varices  during  stool.  Smarting  of
the  anus  after  difficult  stool.  Tenesmus  after  stool.
Tearing  in  the  anus  and  penis,  evening  and  morning.
Tearing  in  the  rectum,  and  sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would
come  on,  but  no  stool.  Itching  stitch  in  the  circumference
of  the  anus.  Itching  gnawing  in  the  region  of  the  os
coccygis.  Smarting  itching  of  ihe  anus.

Urinary  Organs. — Retention  of  urine  the  first  7
hours,  then  frequent  micturition,  with  burning  in  the  neck
of  the  bladder.  Desire  to  urinate,  with  scanty  emission,
(a.  2 to  3 h.)  Pressing  in  the  urethra  and  rectum,  as
when  the  emission  of  the  urine  is  cutting.  Enuresis  with
cutting  burning  in  the  urethra,  and  cramp-pain  in  the  small
of  the  back.  Frequent  micturition,  the  urine  being  either
watery  or  dark  with  clouds.  Pale  urine  forming  thick,
whitish  flocculi.  Burning  during  micturition,  followed  by
gonorrhoeal  discharge.  Sensation  towards  the  end  of  mic-
turition, as  if  a load  in  the  abdomen  were  pressing  towards
the  genital  organs,  (a.  h h.)  Great  burning  in  the  urethra,
arresting  the  urine,  and  exciting  a desire  to  urinate.  Burn-
ing during,  and  cutting  previous  to,  micturition.  Drawing
in  the  urethra,  extending  as  far  as  the  anus.  Frequent
feeling  of  rawness  in  the  urethra,  with  occasional  stitching
in  the  same.  Stitching  in  the  urethra,  between  the  acts
of  micturition,  (immediately.)  Creeping  in  the  urethra,
between  the  acts  of  micturition.  Painful  stitches  at  the
termination  of  the  urethra.  Painful  spasmodic  constriction
of  the  bladder.  Swelling  of  the  orifice  of  the  urelhra.

Genital  Organs. — Tingling  itching  of  the  back  part
of  the  penis,  externally.  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


101


glans,  especially  during  micturition.  Itching,  fine  stitch-
ing of  the  glans.  Fine  stinging  of  the  tip  of  the  glans.
Burning  cutting  of  the  glans,  with  painful  pressure  in  t tie
groins  from  within  outwards.  Itching  creeping  in  the
frenulum.  Vesicle  near  the  fraenulum,  itching  when
pressing  upon  it.  Humid,  itching  vesicles  on  the  fraenu-
lum, preceded  by  creeping.  Heat  and  burning  of  the
sycosic  excrescences.  Soreness  of  the  same,  when  walk-
ing or  sitting.  Drawing  smarting  in  the  testicles , as  if
excoriated.  Pressure  in  both  testicles,  increased  when
touching  them,  or  when  walking.  Burning  tearing  in  the
left  testicle,  and  burning  in  the  prostatic  gland,  with  fre-
quent erections.  Itching  of  the  scrotum.  Itching,  long
stitch  of  the  scrotum.  Formication  of  the  scrotum.  Sore-
ness of  the  scrotum.  Inflammation  of  the  scrotum.
Swelling  of  the  left  testicle.  Hardness  and  tension  of  the
spermatic  cord.  Swelling  of  the  spermatic  cord,  with  ob-
tusion of  the  head.  Small  red  pimples  on  the  scrotum
and  the  posterior  part  of  the  penis,  with  feeling  of  heat  in
the  same.  Falling  off  of  the  hair  of  lhe  genital  organs.
Suppression  of  the  sexual  desire.  Swelling  of  the  penis  for
several  minutes.  Inclination  to  erection,  in  the  morning
when  standing.  Violent  erection.  Frequent  emissions.
Discharge  of  the  prostatic  juice,  when  pressing  during
stool.  Sudden  relaxation  of  the  penis,  during  an  embrace
when  the  semen  is  on  the  point  of  being  emitted,  prevent-
ing the  emission.  Re-appearance  of  the  menses  at  full
moon,  after  having  been  suppressed  for  many  months.
Leucorrhoea  after  the  menses.  Profuse,  yellowish  leucor-
rhcea  with  itching,  some  days  after  the  menses.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Dryness  of  the  nose.  Catarrhal
fever;  all  his  limbs  ache,  and  no  appetite  for  any  thing.
Violent  coryza  with  red  borders  of  the  nostrils.  Con-
tractive pain  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  throat,  worse
when  bending  the  neck.  Roughness  of  the  throat,  hinder-
ing speech.  Violent,  hoarseness.  Irritation  occasioning
a few  stitches  in  the  throat,  but  no  cough.  Cough,  occa-
sioned by  a tickling  from  the  middle  of  the  chest  to  the
larynx.  Continual  cough  with  irritation.  Cough,  occa-
sioned by  burning-in  the  chest.  Cough  inducing  a desire
to  vomit.  Cough  with  vomiting  of  food.  Cough  from


102


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


tickling  in  the  chest,  the  cough  is  worst  in  the  evening
after  lying  down.  Violent  cough  with  expectoration,
causing  a pain  in  the  abdomen.  Cough  with  yellow  ex-
pectoration. Cough  with  expectoration  tasting  and  smell-
ing like  hei'hs.  The  cough  occasions  a headache,  as  if
the  skull  would  burst.  Burning  in  the  chest  and  throat,
when  coughing  or  during  the  fluent  coryza,  or  even  when
she  did  not  cough.

Chest. — Breathing  heavy  and  oppressed,  with  small
stitches  between  the  short  ribs,  mostly  on  the  left  side.
Odors  deprive  him  of  breath.  Want  of  breath,  when
waking  from  his  siesta,  with  restlessness  and  sweat.
Oppressive  anxiety  in  the  chest.  Pain  in  the  chest,  as  if
from  weakness  or  sitting  too  long,  relieved  by  walking.
Oppression  and  contraction  of  the  chest,  with  stitches.
Painful  oppression  of  the  chest,  when  beginning  to  walk.
Constrictive  pain  of  the  chest.  Painful  spasm  in  the  chest
and  diaphragm,  in  the  region  of  the  lowermost  ribs  of  the
right  side,  sudden  and  unexpected  ; she  is  obliged  to  sit
crooked,  with  stitches  in  that  side  when  breathing.  Pres-
sure in  the  chest  for  several  hours.  Violent  pressure
over  the  whole  chest,  in  the  night,  disappearing  after
emission  of  flatulence.  Pressure  behind  the  sternum,
aggravating  the  breathing.  Aching  pain  in  the  left  side
of  the  chest,  most  violent  when  breathing.  Pressure  in
the  middle  of  the  chest,  most  violent  during  an  inspiration,
as  if  the  sternum  were  being  pressed  out,  more  violent
when  pressing  upon  the  sternum,  or  when  stooping  or
coughing.  Clawing  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the
chest,  in  the  region  of  the  seventh  rib.  Clawing  pressure
in  either  side  of  the  chest  is  experienced  by  several  pro-
vers.  Cutting  pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  during
a deep  inspiration.  Stitches  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right
side  of  the  chest,  during  an  inspiration  ; going  off  while
walking.  Dull  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum.
Dull  si  itching  in  the  left  side  between  the  lowest  rib  and
the  pelvis,  through  the  whole  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  more
violent  during  an  inspiration.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  region
of  the  right  lower  rib.  Sharp  stitching  in  the  upper  part
of  the  chest,  under  the  right  arm,  arresting  the  breathing
momentarily.  Boring,  dull,  continuous  stitch  in  the  left


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


103


side  of  the  chest,  more  violent  during  an  inspiration.
Boring  pinching  in  the  left  chest,  continuing  during  an
inspiration.  Pinching  stitching  in  the  whole  chest.  Burn-
ing sore  pain  internally  in  the  region  of  the  last  rib.
Burning  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  chest.  Burning-cutting
pain  in  the  left  chest  when  sitting,  worse  when  touching
the  part.  Tingling  pain  in  the  chest  when  at  rest;  pain
on  the  sternum  when  stooping,  feeling  or  moving  about.
Sensation  as  if  the  ribs  had  been  knocked  in.  Sharp
pressure  in  the  left  mamma.  Itching  pricking  like  flea-
bites,  between  the  mammae,  obliging  her  to  rise  in  the
night.  Itching  gnawing  in  the  region  of  the  right  false
ribs.  Palpitation  of  the  heart  when  starting  from  sleep.

Back. — Itching  stitch  in  the  region  of  the  os  coccygis.
Fine  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  os  coccygis  and  sternum.
Intense  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  a sort  of  drawing
and  pressing,  sometimes  tearing,  very  perceptible  only
when  standing.  Intermittent,  quickly  drawing,  aching  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  mostly  when  standing,  less  when
walking;  going  off  by  pressing  upon  it,  sitting  down  and
stooping.  Intermittent  tearing  in  the  small  of  the  back,
when  rising  after  stooping ; when  standing,  the  pain  be-
comes a mere  quiet  drawing.  Burning  pain  in  a spot  over
the  small  of  the  back.  Violent  stitch  in  the  small  of  the
back  when  rising  after  cowering.  Itching  and  swftit  in  the
back.  Painful  drawing  in  the  dorsal  vertebrae,  as  if  bruised,
most  when  sitting.  Tearing  pain  in  the  back,  at  night.
Pinching  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  spine.  Stitch  in  the
loins  when  lifting  something,  continuing  when  sitting,  but
disappearing  at  once  when  commencing  to  walk.  Stitches
in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.  Small,  violent,  jerking
stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  spine.  Itching  gnawing
around  the  lumbar  vertebrae  and  in  other  parts  of  the  trunk,
also  in  the  thigh  ; he  is  obliged  to  scratch.  Red  pimples
on  the  back,  chest  and  neck,  especially  above  the  scapulae,
less  visible  in  the  morning  than  evening,  painful  only  when
rubbing  them  and  when  touched  by  the  clothes,  and  last-
ing a fortnight.  Eruption  on  the  scapulae,  without  itching,
painful  only  when  touched.  Painful  tearing  in  the  region
of  the  left  scapula,  when  sitting  and  stooping  with  the  body.


104  PHOSPHORIC  ACID.

9

Concealed  drawing  and  pressing  in  the  surface  of  the  bones,
like  a sort  of  gnawing,  under  the  apex  of  the  scapula.

Neck. — Drawing-stitching  pressing  in  the  nape  of  the
neck,  extending  to  the  occiput  imperceptibly  and  then  dis-
appearing. Jerking  sensation  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
when  at  rest,  but  more  frequent  when  raising  the  head.
Stiff  feeling  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  when  at  rest,  disap-
pearing by  motion.  Burning  soreness  on  the  side  of  the
nape  of  the  neck.  Pressure  on  the  neck,  in  front  and  on
the  sides.  Pinching  pain  in  a small  spot  in  the  neck.
Painful  pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  as  from  inci-
pient internal  ulceration,  neither  aggravated  by  swallowing
nor  talking.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  left  cervical  mus-
cles as  far  as  the  eye,  when  turning  the  head.  Pain  of
the  right  cervical  muscles.  Painful  stiffness  of  the  left
cervical  muscles  ; the  stretching  extends  into  the  head.

Upper  Extremities. — Swelling  of  an  axillary  gland,
going  off  of  itself.  Drawing  and  beating  in  the  shoulder-
joint.  "Fearing  in  the  shoulder  and  left  hand.  Clawing
pressure  on  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder.  Boils  on  the
right  shoulder.  Burning  as  of  red-hot  coal  in  different
parts  of  the  arm  and  on  the  shoulder.  Weakness  in  the
arm,  in  the  forenoon,  it  was  trembling.  The  (injured)  arm
becomes  stiff  and  is  painful  at  every  motion  ; the  hand  be-
comes heavy  as  lead  ; pecking  and  pricking  in  the  ulcer,
and  tearing  and  pricking  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb  and  fin-
gers ; painful  burning  in  the  interior  of  the  hands,  and  the
blood  darts  into  the  hand  when  letting  the  arm  hang.  Draw-
ing in  both  arms,  from  the  shoulder.  Itching  stitch  in  the
upper  arm,  not  removed  by  scratching.  Muscular  twitch-
ings  in  the  upper  arm,  arrested  by  moving  the  arm.  Pain-  *
ful  jerking  tearing  in  the  arms,  fingers  and  limbs  generally.
Paralytic  clawing  pressure  in  the  upper  arms,  increased
by  contact.  Feeling  of  icy-coldness  in  the  right  upper
arm.  Drawing  in  the  upper  arm,  from  the  elbow  to  the
shoulder.  Burning  sensation  in  the  elbow-points.  Pain
of  the  elbow-joint  when  feeling  it.  Drawing  cutting  in  the
elbow,  wrist,  and  posterior  finger-joints.  The  fore-arms
arc  painful  as  if  bruised,  when  laying  them  on  the  table.
Clawing  pressure  in  the  fore-arm,  from  without  inwards,


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


105


and  from  above  downwards*.  Painful  clawing  weight  in
the  right  fore-arm.  Sharp  stitching  boring  in  the  inner
side  of  the  left  fore-arm  near  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  worst
when  at  rest.  Paralytic  pain  in  the  outer  side  of  the  fore-
arm, below  the  elbow,  not  hindering  the  motion  of  the
arm.  Feeling  of  stiffness  and  clawing  in  the  wrist-joint,
increased  by  motion.  Pinching  clawing  between  the  me-
tacarpal bones  of  the  right  hand,  as  if  clawed  together.
Tearing  rolling,  upwards  and  downwards,  sometimes  with
stitches  in  the  bon^  of  the  hands,,  fingers  and  fore-arms.
Pinching  pain  above  the  right  wrist-joint.  Tearing,  trans-
versely across  the  right  wrist-joint.  Drawing  stitching  in
the  palms  of  the  hands.  Increased  warmth  in  the  palms
of  the  hands.  Trembling  of  the  hands  when  writing,  with
tingling  and  itching  in  the  hands.  Itching  in  the  dorsa  of
the  hands,  increased  by  friction.  Excrescence  between  the
metacarpal  bones,  exceedingly  painful,  especially  at  night
and  when  touching  it.  Rough,  shrivelled,  dry  skin  of  the
hands.  Stitches  in  the  finger-joints.  Tearing  in  the  fin-
gers, especially  the  joints,  with  tension  when  moving  them,
as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short.  Violent,  sharp-stitching
tearing  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  right  middle-finger.
Cramp-pain  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  uninfluenced  by-
motion.  Painful  drawing  with  pressure  in  the  little  finger,
especially  the  joint,  going  off  by  bending  the  finger  towards
the  palm  of  the  hand.  Intermittent,  dull  stitches  in  the
ball  of  the  thumb.  Fine  stinging  through  the  dorsum  of
the  right  thumb,  extending  as  far  as  under  the  nail.  In-
flammation and  suppuration  behind  the.  finger  nail.  Corro-
sive itching  of  the  left  middle-finger,  soon  recurring  after
scratching.  Deadness  of  one  side  of  the  left  index-finger,
during  the  freezing,  the  dead  part  being  marked  off  very
abruptly.  The  fingers  go  to  sleep,  become  cold,  yellow
and  shrivelled,  the  pulse  being  slow,  small  and  scarcely
perceptible.  Numbness  of  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Deep,
hard,  itching  vesicles  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb.  Pimple-
shaped, red  spots  on  the  dorsa  of  the  fingers,  without  sen-
sation. Red  pimples  of  the  size  of  a pin’s  head,  on  and
between  the  fingers  ; without  any  sensation,  for  five  days,
exhibiting  finally  a white  elevation  in  the  centre,  (a.  1 1 d.)

Lower  Extremities. — Boil  on  the  nates.  Cramp-like


5*


106


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


drawing  in  the  left  side  of  the  nates  when  walking.  Itching
jerking  in  the  glutei  muscles  of  both  sides.  Itching  of  the
right  hip.  Pain  of  the  hip-joint,  as  if  broken,  when  walking
or  when  touching  it.  Pain  in  the  hip-joint,  when  rising  from
one’s  seat.  Cramp  in  the  hip-joint,  with  tearing  extending
through  the  whole  thigh,  intolerable  when  eating  or  sit-
ting. Painful  stretching  and  pain  as  if  bruised,  in  the  hip-
joint,  worse  during  motion.  Heaviness  and  paralytic  sen-
sation in  the  hip-joint,  when  commencing  to  walk  after
sitting  ; going  off  after  having  walked  some.  Pain  of  the
thighs  and  legs  when  walking,  as  ife bruised.  Tearing,
from  the  thigh  to  the  big-toe.  Heaviness,  which  soon  be-
comes painful,  in  all  the  joints  of  the  lower  limbs.  Rheu-
matic paralytic  feeling  of  the  whole  left  lower  limb.  The
lower  limbs  go  to  sleep  when  silting.  Dull  pressure  on
the  thigh.  Cramp-pain,  with  pressure,  in  the  right  thigh.
Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh,  commencing  in  the
bend  of  the  knee.  Tearing  with  pressure  in  the  outer
side  of  the  thigh  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  region  of  the
tibia.  Burning  feeling  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the
thighs,  when  standing,  disappearing  when  walking.  Se-
vere stitches  in  the  thighs,  during  motion,  most  when  sit-
ting or  when  rising  from  a seat.  Boring,  dull  stitch  in  the
left  thigh,  near  the  abdominal  ring,  when  at  rest.  Pain  as
if  bruised,  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh.  Pain  as  if  bruis-
ed transversely  across  the  middle  of  the  thighs  ; they  feel
in  walking  as  if  they  would  break  down.  The  thighs  feel
as  if  annihilated,  is  scarcely  able  to  drag  himself  along,
worse  after  sleeping.  Painful  swelling  of  the  glands  of
the  thighs,  is  unable  to  extend  the  limbs.  Weariness  and
anxiety  in  the  thighs,  when  sitting;  is  constantly  obliged
to  move  his  feet.  Sharp  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the
thighs,  extending  as  far  as  the  knee.  Painful  pulsative
jerking  from  the  middle  of  the  thigh  as  far  as  the  knee.
Pressure  on  the  thigh,  a hand’s  breadth  above  either  knee.
Clawing  with  pressure  over  the  knee,  on  the  outer  parts
of  the  thigh.  Painful  stretching  in  the  hamstrings,  worse
during  motion  and  when  feeling  the  parts.  Painful  draw-
ing in  the  inmost  part  of  the  left  knee  and  in  the  direction
of  the  tibia,  when  walking,  but  only  when  the  body  is  sup-
ported by  the  left  foot  in  walking.  Stitching  pain  in  the


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


io?


bend  of  the  right  knee,  worst  during  motion.  Violently-
itching  pimples  on  the  knee  and  calf,  in  day-time  and
especially  in  the  evening  when  in  bed  ; scratching  brings
on  a burning  sensation  ; the  pimples  become  diffused  into
one  another,  spread  and  become  converted  into  readily
bleeding  ulcers.  Pressure  in  the  legs,  beneath  either  knee.
Dull,  clawing  pressure,  close  below*  the  left  knee,  every
five  or  six  minutes.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  leg,  also
in  the  night ; had  to  change  the  position  of  the  limb  all  the
time.  Perceptible  pulsations  in  the  left  leg,  when  at  rest.
Itching  gnawing  of  the  left  leg,  worse  after  scratching.
Weakness  of  the  legs,  when  walking.  Tingling  of  the
right  leg.  Itching  of  the  region  of  the  tibia.  Aching
pain  in  the  right  tibia,  wrhen  at  rest,  disappearing  when
walking.  Nightly  burning  tearing  in  the  tibia,  from  above
downwards.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  lower  part  of  the  tibia.
Cutting  stitches  in  the  calf,  from  above  downwards.
Cramp-like  twitching  in  the  left  calf,  abating  after  fric-
tion. Dull,  paralytic  pain  in  the  tarsal  joint,  when  at
rest,  with  cracking  in  the  joint  when  moving  it.  Pains  in
the  tarsal  joint,  as  if  sprained,  even  in  the  morning  when
in  bed.  Cramp-pains  in  the  feet,  after  motion.  Tensive,
stitching  pain  in  the  right  inner  malleolus,  extending  up  to
the  tibia.  Tension  and  going  to  sleep  of  the  fore  part  of
the  right  foot  and  toes,  when  walking.  Clawing  pressure
on  the  soles.  Violent,  jerking  stitches  in  the  right  sole.
Intermittent  pressure  in  the  left  sole,  towards  the  big  toe.
Stitching  in  the  sole  and  heel,  and  heaviness’in  those  parts
when  at  rest,  as  if  they  were  made  of  lead.  Heels  and
the  balls  of  the  toes  feel  sore  when  treading.  Smarting
' pain  in  the  outer  side  of  the  right  foot,  in  the  morning.
Burning  stinging  in  the  soles,  especially  in  the  evening,  in
the  morning  burning  without  the  stinging.  Burning  in  the
feet  and  soles.  Burning  in  the  soles  and  head.  Burning
heat  of  the  soles,  and  soreness  between  the  toes.  Con-
tinual coldness  of  the  legs  from  the  ankles  to  the  calves.
The  left  foot  is  numb,  insensible  and  dead,  only  when
walking.  Violent  itching  of  the  ankle  ; scratching  makes
the  spot  appear  red.  Itching  of  the  heels.  Tearing
stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  left  big  toe.  Clawing  pressure
on  both  of  the  two  last  toes  of  the  right  foot.  Continual
boring  stitch  in  the  left  little  toe,  both  when  at  rest  and  in


108


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


motion.  Ulcerative  pain  of  all  the  toes.  A nail  which
had  grown  into  the  flesh,  causes  inflammation  and  pain.
Swelling  of  the  knuckle  of  the  big  toe,  with  burning,  beat-
ing ; when  touching  it,  he  experiences  cuttings,  causing  a
jerking  of  the  toe  ; the  pains  are  excited  even  by  swallow-
ing or  by  the  fear  lest  some  one  should  approach  his  hand
to  the  swelling.  Blisters  on  the  balls  of  the  toes.  Stitch-
ing and  burning  in  the  corns,  for  eight  days.

General  Symptoms. — Formication  of  the  ichole  body.
Itching  creeping  of  the  body  and  hands,  in  the  evening
after  lying  down.  Sudden  itching  of  different  parts  of
the  body,  back,  arms,  genital  organs  and  scalp,  relieved
only  for  a short  while  by  scratching.  Violent,  burning
prickling  of  several  places,  increased  by  scratching.  Sore-
ness of  the  skin  all  over,  even  shaving  is  painful.  Burn-
ing. Red  spots  on  the  upper  and  lower  limbs.  Increased
redness  of  the  whole  body,  with  single  large  red  spots
upon  the  shoulders,  without  sensation,  and  with  red  streaks
over  the  patellae  and  from  the  hips  down  to  the  umbilicus,
accompanied  with  great  sensitiveness  to  the  open  air  ;
the’  warmth  of  the  bed  does  him  good.  Red,  smooth
pimples  on  the  fore-arm  and  neck,  with  red  areolae,  feeling
sore  when  touched.  Rash  over  the  whole  body,  more
burning  than  itching.  Itch-like  pustules  on  the  nates,
balls  of  the  toes  and  toes.  Sore  places  on  the  toes,  in
the  bends  of  the  thighs,  and  the  genital  organs.  Burning
pain  of  (he  ulcers.  Every  injured  spot  feels  sore.  Smart-
ing pain  in  the  calves,  even  in  the  wounds  of  bones.
Pains  caused  by  phosphoric  acid  remain  unchanged  by
external  pressure.  The  nightly  pains  may  be  relieved  by
pressure.  He  changes  his  place  constantly  ; the  pains
are  less  during  motion  than  when  at  rest.  Intense  pain
in  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones,  as  if  scraped  with  a
knife.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  hands  and  feet,  as  if
gone  to  sleep,  evening  and  morning.  The  upper  and
lower  limbs  go  to  sleep  in  ihe  night ; he  is  obliged  to  have
them  moved  by  others.  The  thighs  and  legs  feel  weak,
.with  tingling  as  if  gone  to  sleep.  All  the  joints  feel
bruised  in  the  morning,  in  the  arms,  lower  limbs  and  nape
of  the  neck.  Hands  and  feet  feel  bruised  and  paralysed
Conlractive  sensation  in  the  limbs.  Bruised  sensation  in
the  hips,  arms,  thighs  and  nape  of  the  neck,  as  if  caused


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


109


by  growth,  with  single  lancinations  in  all  these  parts  at
the  same  time,  especially  when  going  upstairs  and  when
beginning  to  walk.  Jactitation  of  the  muscles,  especially
in  the  lower  limbs.  Tumultuous  movement  in  the  blood.
Great  agitation  of  the  blood,  he  is  beside  himself.  Rest-
lessness in  the  body,  in  the  evening,  itching  of  the  canthus,
nostrils,  face  and  hairy  scalp.  Heat  in  the  head,  with  icy
cold  hands,  when  talking  a good  deal.  Sweat  over  the
whole  body,  when  sitting.  Sensitive  to  cool  air.

Weakness,  Fits. — A walk  tires  him  out,  and  makes
him  feel  faint  and  desponding  ; chilliness  when  at  home,
(a.  24  h.)  Sweat  over  the  whole  body  when  walking  in
the  open  air,  especially  on  the  genital  organs.  Emacia-
tion, with  wretched  appearance  and  deep  eyes.  Weari-
ness of  the  body,  inactivity  of  the  mind,  mental  oppres-
sion, (4.  d.)  He  imagines  he  is  staggering  when  walking.
Weakness  in  the  morning  after  rising,  with  pale  counten-
ance, she  has  to  lie  down  again  for  a time,  after  which
she  feels  well.  Weaknessall  over.  Epilepsy  (immediately.)

Sleep. — Yawning,  the  water  trickling  down  from  the
eyes.  Continual  stretching  of  the  arms.  Great  drowsiness
in  day-time;  sleeplessness  in  the  night,  heat  and  sweat  from
evening  till  midnight.  Drowsiness  after  dinner  ; he  falls
asleep  while  talking.  Deep  and  sound  sleep  coming  over
him  while  writing.  Timely  sleepiness  in  the  evening  and
great  drowsiness  in  the  morning.  Deep  sleep;  can  scarcely
be  roused  in  the  morning.  Falling  asleep  late  in  the  evening;
he  saw  nothing  but  figures  for  a few  hours,  which  passed
off  after  raising  himself  in  the  bed.  Heat  in  the  cheeks
and  ears  in  the  evening  before  falling  asleep.  Restless
sleep  with  dry  heat,  (6.  night.)  He  is  roused  from  his
night-sleep  by  canine  hunger.  Anxious  waking.  Out  of
humor,  weak  and  drowsy  in  the  morning  when  getting  up.
In  the  morning,  pressure  in  the  head  and  bitter  taste  in
the  mouth,  (5.  d.)  Moaning  when  asleep.  Jerking  of  the
hands,  and  talking  and  moaning  wdien  slumbering,  with
eyes  half  open.  When  asleep  his  features  are  at  times
laughing,  at  times  weeping,  distorting  the  half  opened  eyes.
•Singing  when  sleeping.  He  frequently  bites  his  tongue  in
the  night  when  sleeping.  Nightly  emission,  without  erec-
tion, (1.  n.)  Sleep  full  of  dreams,  with  erections.  Las-
civious dreams,  with  emission.  Vexatious  or  indifferent


110


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


dreams  ; towards  morning  he  lays  his  arms  under  his
head  ; they  go  to  sleep.  Vivid  dreams  about  a dinner.  He
dreams  every  night  of  the  things  which  he  had  last  seen,
done  or  heard  the  evening  before.  Strange  dreams.
Dreams  causing  anxiety.  Dreams  before  and  after  mid-
night, the  former  agreeable,  the  latter  terrible  ; does  not  re-
collect them.  Dreams  about  dead  persons,  with  fear  when
waking.  Dreams  full  of  quarrel  ; restless  night.  Fre-
quent starting  at  night,  as  if  he  were  falling  from  a height
or  into  water.  At  one  o’clock  in  the  night  he  wakes  with
sad,  solicitous  thoughts,  entertaining  them  for  about  half
an  hour,  with  pretty  clear  consciousness  ; after  this  he  en-
joys a calm  sleep  until  morning.

Fever. — Fits  of  shuddering  in  the  night,  followed  by
exhausting  sweat,  (2.  d.)  Frequent  cold  thrills,  with  chil-
liness and  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Chilliness  in  the  even-
ing when  lying  down,  after  which,  when  waking,  heat  over*
the  whole  body,  with  thirst,  (a.  12  h.)  Chills,  in  the  fore-
noon, with  blue  nails,  tearing  in  the  wrist-joints  and  para-
lytic weakness  of  the  arms.  Chilliness  with  trembling,
in'  the  evening  ; next  morning  heat  in  the  face,  dryness  in
the  morning  and  pricking  sore  throat  when  swallowing.
Violent  chills  from  afternoon  till  evening,  followed  by  dry
heat,  so  violent  that  he  almost  lost  his  senses  on  account  of
it.  Chilliness  of  the  whole  body,  with  drawing  in  the
limbs,  every  evening,  rousing  her  from  sleep  ; no  subse-
quent heat.  Chilliness  and  coldness  for  hours,  towards
evening,  without  any  subsequent  thirst  or  heat.  Alterna-
tion of  shiverings  and  heat,  in  the  evening.  Frequent  al-
ternation of  chilliness  and  heat,  in  the  evening  ; dry  heat
in  the  face  without  redness,  with  chilliness  ; after  the  ter-
mination of  the  heat,  the  chilliness  returns  with  more  vio-
lence, it  is  a cold  thrill  over  the  whole  body  ; profuse  sweat
towards  morning  when  he  had  fallen  asleep  again  after
waking.  Feeling  of  chilliness  in  the  face,  temples,  on  the
forehead,  as  if  a cold  breeze  blew  upon  the  parts,  with  feel-
ing of  coldness  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  feeling  also  cold
externally.  Shuddering  over  the  abdomen,  with  coldness
of  the  lips  of  the  fingers,  for  two  hours,  without  any  thirsty
most  violent  when  exposed  to  the  least  open  air  ; no  sub-
sequent heat.  Frequent  feehng  of  coldness  in  the  right
cheek,  the  left  feeling  warm,  the  external  temperature  be-


PLATINA.


in


ing  apparently  the  same.  Feeling  of  coldness,  with  chilli-
ness and  coldness  in  the  abdomen.  Chilliness,  even  when
walking  in  the  warm  room.  Chilliness  over  the  whole
body.  Chilliness  the  whole  forenoon,  coming  on  with  a
jerk,  a sort  of  general  shuddering  even  in  the  room,  with
blue,  icy-cold  hands  and  dry  palate,  without  any  particular
thirst.  Chills  over  the  whole  body,  with  icy-cold  fingers,
no  thirst,  (an  hour  after  dinner  ;)  four  hours  after  increase
of  warmth,  without  thirst.  Thrills  of  chilliness  from  time
to  time,  lasting  several  minutes,  no  thirst,  shortly  followed
by  heat,  and  then  again  chilliness  shortly  after  the  heat.
Pulse  irregular,  frequently  intermittent.  Pulse  more  full,
the  temporal  and  radial  arteries  being  distended.  Dislikes
heat.  Feverish  heat  without  thirst,  in  the  day-time.  Heat
over  the  whole  body,  in  the  evening,  succeeded  by  restless
night.  Dry  heat  when  going  to  bed,  (4.  d.)  Pleat  over
the  whole  head,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  with  cold
feet  and  moderately  warm  body.  Heat  in  the  face,  with
thirst,  in  the  afternoon,  without  redness.  Pleat  through
the  whole  body,  without  thirst,  cannot  be  felt  by  the  hand,
and  no  redness  of  the  cheeks,  deep  inspirations  and  slight
anguish.  Heat  on  the  cheeks,  and  flushes  of  heat  in  the
back,  in  the  evening  during  a walk  in  the  open  air.  Heat
and  sweat  all  over,  day  and  night,  with  violent  desire  for
water.  Profuse  night-sweat,  for  two  nights,  about  mid-
night and  when  waking,  appearing  first  about  the  head
and  being  most  profuse  on  the  chest.  Morning-sweat
with  heavy  dreams  of  dead  persons  and  as  if  he  were
chased.  Profuse  morning-sweat.  Sweat,  the  whole  night,
with  hot  feet  and  hot  forehead.  Sweat  in  the  nape  of  the
neck,  especially  during  the  siesta.


PLATINA.

Pure  platina  is  soft  and  may  be  cut  with  a knife.  It
is  dissolved  in  nitro-muriatic  acid  by  the  application  of
heat,  the  golden-yellow  solution  is  diluted  with  distilled
water,  and  a smoothly  polished  steel  rod  is  immersed,
around  which  the  platina  adheres  in  the  form  of  a crystal-
line crust.  This  crust  which  can  be  easily  triturated,  is


112


PLATINA.


then  saturated  several  times  with  distilled  water,  and  dried
between  sheets  of  blotting-paper.  Dynamise  one  grain
of  this  dried  substance.

Platina  may  be  used  for  want  of  appetite  ; eructations
after  a mebl  ; constipation  in  travelling ; discharge  of
prostatic  juice;  induration  of  the  uterus;  weakness  of
the  lower  limbs  ; cold  feet ; dry  coryza.

The  effect  of  Platina  may  be  moderated  by  Pulsatilla
and  smelling  of  spiritus  nilri  dulcis.

This  drug  has  been  chiefly  proved  by  Dr.  Gross.

Moral  Symptoms. — Desponding,  taciturn.  She  ima-
gines she  is  abandoned  by  every  body.  Anxiety,  with
trembling  of  the  hands  and  flushes  of  heat.  Anxiety  with
palpitation  of  the  heart,  especially  when  walking.  Fre-
quent and  sudden  feeling  of  anxiety  through  the  whole
body.  Great  anxiety,  with  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,
when  attempting  to  talk  in  company  ; talking  becomes
difficult  to  her.  Anguish  as  of  death , as  if  she  were
losing  her  senses , ivith  trembling  of  all  the  limbs , oppres-
sion of  breathing,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Anguish
about  the  heart  and  out  of  humor  the  whole  day.  Sensa-
tion as  if  he  would  die  soon,  being  horrified  by  this
thought.  The  same  symptoms  experienced  by  a female.
Great  uneasiness  of  the  mind  ; she  knows  not  what  to  do
with  herself ; sadness,  spoiling  even  her  most  agreeable
moments  ; she  imagines  she  is  not  fit  for  this  world,  is
tired  of  living,  but  has  great  aversion  to  death  which  she
believes  to  be  near.  Discouraged  and  lazy  in  the  morn-
ing, (a.  48  h.)  Out  of  humor  and  dissatisfied.  Taciturn,
quarrelsome,  vexed  by  the  least  trifle.  She  is  discon-
tented with  the  whole  world  ; weeping  mood.  Sensi-
tive. Taciturn,  drowsy,  sad,  peevish,  weeps  when  talked
to.  Taciturn  and  weeping  involuntarily , even  when  ad-
dressed in  the  most  friendly  manner.  Weeping  mood,
after  having  received  a mild  rebuke.  Weeping  mood  and
out  of  humor  ; she  is  f requently  obliged  to  weep  involun-
tarily ; this  relieves  her.  Sad  and  out  of  humor  the  first
morning ; next  morning  she  feels  inexpressibly  happy,
especially  in  the  open  air,  she  felt  like  embracing  every
body  and  laughing  about  the  saddest  things.  Serious  and
taciturn  the  whole  day ; next  day  every  thing  appears


PLATINA.


113


laughable  to  her.  Great  cheerfulness , she  would  like  to
dance,  half  an  hour  after  the  weeping.  Great  cheerful-
ness for  two  days,  followed  by  excessive  sadness  on  the
third ; she  cries  even  when  spoken  to,  or  when  seeing
something  merry  and  ridiculous.  Involuntary  disposition
to  whistle  and  sing.  The  body  suffers  when  the  mind  is
cheerful,  and  vice  versa  the  body  feels  well  when  the  mind
is  affected.  Sensation  of  an  increase  of  power,  intellectual
tranquillity,  and  disposition  to  think.  Easily  angry  and
vehement ; he  would  like  to  beat  innocent  people.  Vexed
and  irritated  about  innocent  things  and  words  ; she  would
like  to  beat  herself  and  friends.  Vacillating  mind.  Illu-
sion of  fancy,  upon  entering  the  room  after  a walk  of  one
hour,  as  if  every  thing  around  her  were  very  small  and
every  body  inferior  to  her  both  in  regard  to  body  and  mind,
and  as  if  she  herself  were  tall  and  elevated  ; the  room
appears  gloomy  and  disagreeable  to  her ; accompanied
with  slight  anguish,  sad  and  vexed  mood,  vertigo  and  un-
comfortable feeling  in  the  midst  of  a society  that  she  was
generally  very  fond  of ; all  this  passes  off  in  the  open  air
when  the  sun  shines.  Looking  down  contemptuously  and
pitifully  upon  otherwise  venerable  people,  against  her
will,  in  paroxysms.  During  her  contemptuous  turns  she
is  suddenly  attacked  with  canine  hunger  and  eats  in  a
greedy,  hasty  manner  ; when  the  regular  meal-time  arrived,
she  had  lost  all  her  appetite.  Proud  feelings.  Cold,
absent,  indifferent  in  company  of  friends  ; she  only  answers
when  she  must,  and  is  only  half  conscious  of  what  she
says  ; after  having  answered  she  reflects  whether  her
answer  had  been  suitable  ; she  was  constantly  absent,
without  knowing  where  her  thoughts  were  roaming.  In-
difference ; he  did  not  care  whether  his  absent  wife  should
die.  She  imagines  she  does  not  belong  to  her  family  ;
after  a short  absence,  all  things  appear  changed  to  her.
Absence  of  mind,  she  listens  to  conversations  around  her,
but  after  they  were  terminated  she  had  forgotten  what  she
heard.  Great  absence  of  mind  ; she  hears  not  what  is
said  to  her,  even  when  addressed  with  great  emphasis.
Not  disposed  to  intellectual  labor.  Obtusion  of  the  fore-
head. Dull,  stretching  sensation  as  of  a board  before  the
forehead.  Passing  attacks  of  vertigo  in  quick  succession,


114


PLATINA.


in  the  evening  when  standing,  as  if  he  would  lose  his
consciousness.  Violent  vertigo,  she  dares  not  move  her
eyes,  more  in  day  time  than  in  the  night,  generally  when
she  is  attacked  with  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Headache
after  the  vertigo,  as  if  torn  and  pulled  into  shreds.  Pass-
ing headache  over  the  left  eye-brow.  Headache,  as  if
the  head  were  jammed  in,  a dull  pain.  Tensive  numb
feeling  in  the  whole  occiput,  as  after  a blow,  extending  as
far  as  the  nasal  bone.  Numb  feeling  in  the  sinciput,  as
if  constricted,  in  a warm  room  full  of  men,  increased  after
a sort  time  to  a violent  pressing  together  with  a sensation
as  of  a dull  digging-up,  with  impatience  and  ill-humor  and
heat  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  head,
as  if  the  sweat  of  anguish  would  break  out ; in  the  even-
ing, when  in  the  cool  air,  he  feels  an  unusual  heat,  and
when  beginning  to  walk,  a painful  vibratory  shaking  of
the  brain,  as  if  knocking  against  the  skull  like  a ball ;
afterwards  the  same  sensation  is  felt  when  lying  in  the
bed,  accompanied  with  a slight  roaring  in  the  ears  ; while
the  pain  abates  he  falls  asleep.  A cramp-like  contraction
suddenly  darts  through  the  head  from  the  right  temple  to
the  left ; afterwards  feeling  of  numbness  as  if  the  head
were  tied  too  fast,  with  tremulousness  of  both  sides  of  the
head.  Cramp-pain  in  the  right  temple,  in  the  afternoon.
Cramp-pain  in  the  forehead, "as  if  between  screws.  Cramp-
like drawing  constriction  in  the  head  from  time  to  time,
especially  around  the  forehead  ; it  begins  feebly,  increases
in  violence  and  ends  feebly.  Cramp-like  pressing  in  the
temples  from  without  inwards.  Cramp-like  tension  in  the
temples,  as  if  between  screws.  Compression  in  the  fore-
head,  in  paroxysms.  Violent  pressing  in  the  forehead,  as
if  everything  in  the  forehead  would  come  out,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  a load  were  pressing  upon  the  head,  pressing
upon  the  eyes  and  closing  them,  and  pressing  out  tears  ;
increased  by  stooping  and  by  making  the  slightest  move*
ment  with  the  head  ; the  fit  is  preceded  by  anguish  about
the  heart,  and  a sensation  as  if  knocked  against  the  fore-
head, preventing  her  from  talking ; with  the  increasing
anguish  accompanied  with  burning  heat  and  bright  red-
ness of  the  face  and  violent  thirst,  the  headache  increases
likewise  until  10  o’clock  in  the  evening  ; the  pain  recurred


PLATINA.


115


for  several  days  at  the  same  hour.  Sudden  and  short
pressing  from  without  inwards  in  the  vertex.  Sudden,
dull  pressing  into  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  (a.  3 h.)
Undulating  pressing  into  the  left  temple.  Pressure  under
the  left  Irontal  eminence,  increasing  and  decreasing  in
paroxysms.  Headache,  as  if  she  had  water  in  her  head,
about  midnight,  accompanied  by  great  dryness  and  in-
tensely painful  scraping  in  the  throat,  great  ill-humor  and
large  drops  of  general  sweat,  especially  in  the  face.  Pres-
sure, with  a dull  digging-up  sensation,  on  the  left  half  of
the  forehead,  after  dinner,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,
and  continuing  in  the  room.  Sudden  attack  of  contusive
pain,  in  a small  spot  of  the  left  parietal  bone.  Dull  pres-
sure in  the  right  parietal  bone,  as  of  a plug  being  lodged
in  it.  Clawing  aching  in  the  left  temple,  first  feeble,  then
increasing  in  violence,  and  decreasing  again.  Pain  as  of  a
blow  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  and  in  front.  Quickly
passing  pain  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,  as  if  contused.
Cramp-like  drawing  from  the  left  side  of  the  occipital  bone
as  far  as  the  jaw,  through  the  head.  Jerking  drawing  in
the  right  and  left  side  of  the  head.  Drawing,  from  the
left  side  of  the  forehead  into  the  temple,  where  he  feels  a
pressure.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  in
the  evening  when  in  bed.  Single  dull  stitches  in  the
sinciput.  Dull,  corrosive  stitching  in  a small  spot  of  the
left  parietal  bone,  in  paroxysms.  Burning  pricking  in  the
left  temple,  going  off  by  scratching.  Violent  boring  in  the
centre  of  the  forehead,  decreasing  gradually  and  finally
disappearing.  Numb  pain  on  the  vertex,  as  if  the  scalp
were  being  drawn  together,  and  as  if  pressed  upon  by  a
heavy  weight,  (a.  h h.)  Formication  in  the  right  temple,
aflerwards  down  the  side  of  the  lower  jaw,  with  feeling  of
coldness.  Burning  on  the  top  of  the  head.  Painful  draw-
ing in  different  parts  of  the  head.  Pain  of  the  scalp,  in-
tolerable in  the  night,  as  if  he  were  then  lying  upon  hard
stones  ; he  had  to  sit  up.  Cold  thrill  in  the  occiput,
dowmwards  towards  the  cheek,  where  a dull  burning  pain
is  felt  ; lastly  drawing  in  a hollow  tooth.  Undulating,
stupefying  pressure  over  the  right  orbit.  Intermittent
cramp-pain  near  the  outer  border  of  the  right  orbit.  Pain
[ as  after  a blow  on  the  right  eye-brow.


116


PLATINA.


Eyes. — Sore  and  gnawing  sensation  in  the  upper  bor-
der of  the  orbit,  as  of  an  excoriation.  Tensive  pain  in  the
upper  borders  of  the  orbits,  and  in  the  eye-balls  which
feel  compressed.  Burning  sensation  in  the  eyes,  with
drowsiness,  as  if  they  would  close,  less  pain  when  closing
them  ; when  looking  steadily  at  a thing,  sensation  as  if
they  would  run  ; more  in  the  room  than  in  the  open  air.
Pressure  in  the  eyes  as  if  drowsy,  without  drowsiness,  (a.
2 h.)  Frequent  creeping  in  the  right  canthus  ; he  is
obliged  to  rub.  Smarting  and  feeling  of  coldness  in  the
right  eye.  Twitching  of  the  eye-lids.  Sensation  as  of
a grain  of  sand  having  got  into  the  right  eye.  Painless
drawing  around  the  left  eye,  seeing  as  if  through  gauze,  and
sensation  as  of  the  eyes  being  agglutinated.  The  eyes
are  painful  when  using  them  in  the  evening  at  candle-light,
and  when  exerting  them  ; they  first  itch,  obliging  her  to
rub  them  ; then  they  suppurate,  are  very  painful,  see  a
tremulous  and  twinkling  light  obliging  her  to  close  them
and  making  it  impossible  for  her  to  see  any  object.

Ears. — Otalgia,  a sort  of  crair.p-pain  in  both  ears.
Tearing,  drawing  and  dull  stitches  in  the  right  ear,  a sort
of  otalgia.  Dull  stitches  in  the  right  meatus  auditorius.
in  paroxysms.  Dull,  stitching  jerks  in  the  right  external
ear,  with  a feeling  of  numbness  or  coldness  extending
through  the  cheeks  as  far  as  the  lips.  Sensation  as  if
cold  air  were  drawing  into  the  right  ear.  Burning  heat  of
the  ears,  perceptible  to  the  touch,  with  redness.  Digging-
up  in  the  right  ear  and  jerking-drawing  in  the  left.  Cor-
rosive gnawing  of  the  left  lobule  ; he  has  to  rub.  Gnaw-
ing creeping  in  the  right  meatus  auditorius,  (a.  1 h.)
Tingling  of  the  ears.  Tingling  of  the  ears,  afterwards
tearing  in  the  same.  Whizzing  in  the  ears , with  stitches
in  the  head.  Noise  in  the  ears  as  of  the  wind  blowing  into
them,  increased  by  the  least  noise  to  such  an  extent  that
she  has  great  difficulty  in  hearing  others.  Roaring  in  the
right  ear.  Noise  in  the  right  ear,  as  if  of  the  wfing  of  a
large  bird.  Dull  roaring  and  rolling  in  the  ear,  every
morning,  and  afterwards  every  evening  after  lying  down,
at  the  same  hour  for  several  weeks.  Dull  roaring  in  the
right  ear,  with  obtusion  of  the  head  from  a sort  of  cramp-
like pressuie.  Thundering  jerks  in  the  right  ear,  like  dis-
tant thunder.


PLATINA.


117


Nose. — Gnawing  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  nose  as  of
something  acrid.  Cramp-pain  in  the  right  side  of  the
nasal  bone,  with  a feeling  of  numbness.  Cramp-like  jerks
in  the  left  nasal  wing,  coming  and  going  at  regular  inter-
vals. Pulling  sensation  in  the  nose,  above  the  left  wing,
as  if  pulled  by  a hair,  afterwards  feeling  of  numbness  as
when  a hair  had  been  pulled  out.

Face. — Face  pale  and  sunken.  Pale,  wretched  counte-
nance, for  several  days.  Violent  heat  of  the  face,  the  eyes
burnt  and  itched  a good  deal.  Burning  heat  in  the  face
with  glowing  redness , accompanied  with  great  dryness  of
the  mouth,  violent  thirst,  headache,  and  vibrations  before
the  eyes  causing  giddiness  ; lachrymation  ; for  several
evenings  from  5 to  9 o’clock.  Heat  of  the  face  and
the  whole  head  ; sultriness  and  dull  pain  in  the  fore-
head; she  knows  not  what  to  do  with  herself.  Feel-
ing  of  coldness,  creeping  and  numbness  in  the  whole  right
side  oj  the  face.  Cramp-like,  painful  feeling  of  numb-
ness in  the  left  zygoma.  Tensive  feeling  of  numbness  in
the  zygomata  and  mastoid  processes,  as  if  the  head  were
driven  betwreen  screws.  Dull,  stupefying  pressure  in  the
i right  zygoma  and  the  whole  half  of  the  nose.  Dull  pres-
i sure,  as  from  contusion,  in  the  left  mastoid  process,  when
pressing  upon  it.  Burning,  fine  stitch  in  the  left  cheek  ;

:>  he  is  obliged  to  scratch.  Itching  stitch  in  the  skin  of  the
cheek,  as  if  a splinter  had  got  in,  going  off  by  rubbing.
Gnawing  in  the  cheeks  after  scratching,  soon  recurring.
Dull  painful  feeling  of  coldness  in  the  chin,  below  the
• corner  of  the  mouth.  Cramp-like  jerking,  at  intervals,  in
the  upper  lip,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed.  Gnawing
i around  the  mouth,  as  if  sore,  as  when  shaving  with  a dull
[knife.  Vesicles  on  the  outer  border  of  the  lower  lip,
if  smarting,  (a.  6 h.)  Vesicle  on  the  inner  margin  of  the
:\  upper  lip,  with  violent  stinging  pain  when  touching  it.
'Dry  upper  lip,  as  if  burnt.  Great  dryness  and  roughness
'of  the  lips.  Peeling  off  of  the  lips  and  bleeding  of  the
nsame,  for  many  days,  with  violent  aching  pain,  and  smart-
ing in  the  open  air.  Erosive  sensation  in  the  lower  lip,
o close  below  the  vermilion  border,  as  if  the  place  had  been
irubbed  sore.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Erosive  sensation  in  the  inner  side
of  the  lip,  with  a painful  feeling  of  looseness  of  the  upper


118


FLATINA.


teeth.  Erosive  sensation  in  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower
lip,  and  in  the  gums  of  both  jaws.  Tensive  feeling  of
numbness  in  the  chin,  as  if  pressed  between  screws.  Dull
jerks  in  the  chin,  as  if  it  were  knocked  under.  Dull
shocks  under  the  chin,  slowly  going  and  coming.  Cor-
rosive gnawing  in  the  chin  as  if  sore,  he  has  to  rub  the
parts.  Small  aneurism  by  anastomosis  in  the  chin,  pain-
less, for  several  days.  Cramp-pain  in  the  left  lower  jaw.
Cramp-pain  in  the  lower  border  of  the  lower  jaw,  unin-
fluenced by  motion.  Sudden  cramp-like  drawing  through
the  lower  and  upper  row.  Numb  pain  in  the  left  lower
row  of  teeih,  in  the  morning  after  rising.  Continual
digging-up  drawing  in  both  a hollow  and  sound  incisor
tooth.  Drawing  and  throbbing  i.i  a molar  tooth,  first  in
the  upper,  then  in  the  lower  row,  as  if  it  were  hollow.
Jerking  drawing,  first  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  after-
wards in  a hollow  tooth,  lastly  in  the  ear,  where  the  prover
experiences  dull  stitches  coming  on  with  a jerk.

Mouth,  Throat,  and  Gastric  Symptoms. — Viscid  and
slimy  in  the  mouth,  the  whole  day,  especially  after  a meal,
also  in  the  morning,  with  very  bad  humor.  Occasional
conflux  of  water  in  the  mouth.  Burning  under  the  tongue,
or  in  its  right  side.  Creeping  in  the  upper  part  of  the
tongue.  Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  tongue  as  if
burnt,  increased  by  rubbing  the  teeth  over  it.  Scraping
sensation  in  the  throat,  as  if  raw,  in  the  evening  after  lying
down  and  on  the  day  following,  sometimes  accompanied
with  an  irritation  resulting  in  short  cough.  Painful  feeling
of  rawness  in  the  throat,  as  if  a piece  of  skin  were  hanging
down  in  it,  between  and  during  empty  deglutition.  Feel-
ing of  rawness  and  soreness  in  the  right  half  of  the  palate,
with  creeping  in  the  left  nostril.  Scraping  in  the  throat,
as  in  incipient  catarrh,  or  as  after  having  swallowed  smart-
ing substances  ; she  is  frequently  obliged  to  clear  her
throat,  which  causes  a stinging  pain.  A concealed  pain
in  the  throat  suddenly  disappears  and  is  succeeded  by  a
feeling  of  drawing  heaviness  through  the  head.  Cramp-
like drawing  in  the  throat,  around  the  os  hyoides,  as  if  the
parts  were  constricted.  Pressure  in  the  throat,  as  if  con-
stricted. Sensation  as  if  the  uvula  were  elongated.  Pain-
ful swelling  of  the  right  tonsil.  Mucus  in  the  throat,  occa-


PLATINA.


119


sionally.  Sour  taste  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue.  Continual
hunger.  No  appetite.  Aversion  to  eating  and  weeping
mood.  She  relishes  the  first  mouthfuls  but  she  is  soon
replete.  She  is  speedily  satisfied  at  supper,  owing  to
great  sadness.  Aversion  to  tobacco.  Pinching  in  the
umbilical  region  after  a meal,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come
on.  Empty  eructations , in  the  morning.  Loud  eructa-
tions, in  the  morning  and  after  dinner.  Sudden  gulping
up  of  a bitter-sour  fluid,  inducing  cough  and  a scraping
sensation  in  the  throat.  Nauseous  feeling  in  the  region  of
the  stomach.  Qualmishness  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,
in  the  morning.  Continual  nausea , with  great  faintness,
anxiousness  and  a trembling  sensation  through  the  whole
body , in  the  forenoon.  Desire  to  vomit,  without  vomiting,
coming  and  going  increasingly,  accompanied  with  great
qualmishness,  and  uneasiness  in  the  limbs.  Visible
twitchings  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  like  jactitation  of
the  muscles.

Stomach. — Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  also
when  touching  it.  Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach
after  eating  bread  and  butter,  as  if  he  had  eaten  something
that  had  not  been  digested.  Repletion  in  the  stomach  and
abdomen  as  if  overloaded,  in  the  morning  before  breakfast,
with  a good  deal  of  empty  eructations.  Distension  of  the
pit  of  the  stomach  and  the  stomach  itself,  with  a scratching
and  tearing  sensation  in  the  stomach.  Drawing  pain,  with
pressure,  under  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  occasioned  by
a strain.  Contractive  pain  around  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
as  if  she  had  laced  herself  too  tightly,  with  a suffocative
sensation.  Painful  sensation  around  the  pit  of  the  stomach
as  if  she  had  laced  herself  too  tightly,  with  sensation  as  if
Ji  it  would  go  off  by  eating.  Oppression  around  the  pit  of
I the  stomach,  independent  of  breathing.  Pinching  in  the
1 region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  shortly  after  sensation
I as  of  pressing  into  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  flatulence  were
c crowding  down  ; this  sensation  went  off  when  a desire  for
:e  emission  of  flatulence  made  its  appearance,  which,  hovv-
rt  ever,  took  place  with  great  difficulty  ; the  sensation  in  the
[t  groin  returned  all  the  time,  with  distension  of  the  abdomen.
3 Creeping  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  rising  into  the  throat,
u as  if  she  had  swallowed  little  particles  of  a feather  ; vomi-


120


rLATINA.


turition  ensued.  Itching  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,
going  off  by  friction.  Fermenting  sensation  in  the  region
of  the  stomach.  Dull  beating  as  with  a hammer  in  and
near  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  region  of  one  of  the
cartilages  of  the  ribs,  (immediately.)  Violent  stitches  on
the  right  side  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Dull  shocks
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Violent  dull-stitching  shocks
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  slowly  going  and  coming,  (a.  i
h.)  Gnawing  and  writhing  sensation  in  the  stomach  early
in  the  morning,  with  canine  hunger  and  accumulation  of
water  in  the  mouth  ; not  relieved  by  eating.

Abdomen. — Colic  towards  evening,  increased  by  raising
one’s  self  in  the  bed  and  then  ceasing  gradually.  Great
distension  of  the  abdomen  in  the  evening.  Spasmodic  dis-
tension of  the  abdomen  in  several  places,  causing  eleva-
tions and  depressions  on  the  surface.  Sensation  in  the
whole  of  the  abdomen  as  if  she  had  laced  herself  too
tightly.  Sensation  in  the  whole  abdomen  as  of  being
pinched  together  from  the  umbilicus  to  the  back.  Painful
pinching  under  the  left  short  ribs.  Jerking  pinching  in
various  parts  of  the  abdomen.  Jerking  drawing  in  the
right  side  of  the  abdomen,  with  some  arrest  of  breathing.
A darting  pain  through  the  abdomen,  succeeded  by  weari-
ness of  the  knees.  Drawing  through  the  abdomen,  from
the  chest  towards  both  groins ; this  drawing  terminates
in  the  genital  organs,  where  it  causes  a pain.  A writhing
sensation  around  the  umbilicus,  with  oppressed  breathing
and  a tremulous  sensation  through  the  whole  body.  V ery
painful  stitch  deep  in  the  abdomen  above  the  umbilicus,
when  suddenly  raising  one’s  self  after  cowering.  Dull
stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  umbilicus.  Dull  shocks  in
the  abdomen,  at  intervals,  below  the  short  ribs.  Stitches
in  the  abdomen,  in  the  morning.  Fine  stinging  in  the  right
side  of  the  abdomen,  moving  in  the  umbilical  region  when
lying  upon  the  affected  side,  but  increasing  when  lying
upon  the  left  side.  Anxiety  in  the  whole  abdomen,  suc-
ceeded by  a pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  after  fright ; accom-
panied with  a desire  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on.  Slight
burning  around  the  umbilicus.  Sudden  burning  darting
from  above  downwards  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.
Burning  sensation  in  a small  spot  of  the  left  side  of  the


PLATINA*


121


abdomen,  in  paroxysms.  Sudden  jerking,  resembling  a
dull  shock,  in  a small  place  of  the  abdominal  integuments.
Dull  contusive  pain  below  the  umbilicus,  in  the  integu-
ments. Dull  shocks,  a sort  of  beating,  in  the  region  of  a
true  lower  rib.  Motion  in  the  abdomen  as  of  flatulence.
Rumbling  in  the  epigastrium  before  breakfast.  Bubbling
sensation  in  the  abdomen,  before  breakfast,  with  a pinch-
ing anxiety  in  the  intestines,  (7.  d.)  Emission  of  short,  in-
terrupted flatus,  sometimes  difficult.  Copious  emission  of
flatulence.

Stool. — Constipation  for  several  days.  Frequent  de-
sire for  stool,  the  stool  coming  out  in  lumps,  and  causing
great  weakness  and  a stretching  sensation  in  the  abdomi-
nal muscles.  Difficult  stool,  with  cutting,  burning,  and
protrusion  of  the  varices.  Hard  stool  as  if  burnt,  with
slight  desire  before  and  after.  Difficult  expulsion  of  scanty
stool  cohering  like  soft  clay,  (a.  2 h.)  Papescent  stool  in
the  morning,  half  digested  and  somewhat  bloody  ; after-
wards increased  tension  in  the  left  hypochondrium  and
; small  of  the  back.  Papescent  stool  in  the  evening,  with
i expulsion  of  ascarides.  Stool  every  two  days,  with  much
! bearing  down.  Stool  rather  thin,  with  slight  tenesmus  in
the  anus  before  and  after.  Violent,  noisy  expulsion  of
fasces  after  dinner  ; first  thin,  then  hard  ; in  lumps  which
have  to  be  squeezed  out  singly  and  which  are  almost  as
dry  as  dry  soil  ; after  the  expulsion  he  experiences  a shak-
ing and  shuddering  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  and,
after  rising  from  stool,  he  feels  a slight  pain  and  weakness
about  the  umbilicus.  Even  when  the  stool  is  not  hard  he
has  to  bear  down  considerably,  after  which  he  experiences
a violent  stitch  in  the,  anus  with  subsequent  cramp-like
contraction  of  the  nates,  extending  towards  the  small  of  the
back  ; this  pain  is  so  intense  that  she  has  to  discontinue
! the  bearing  down.  Shuddering  after  stool  or  micturition.
Blood  with  stool.  Creeping  tenesmus  in  the  anus,  as  if
diarrhoea  would  set  in,  at  the  same  hour  every  evening.
Burning  in  the  rectum  during  stool,  followed  by  violent
itching.  Violent  dull  stitches  in  the  forepart  of  the  rectum.
Violent  pressing  in  the  rectum,  without  stool.

Urinary  Organs. — Slow  flow  of  urine,  but  frequent.


122


PLATINA.


Pale  yellow  urine  in  the  morning,  in  the  afternoon  clear  as
water.  Red  urine  with  white  clouds.

Genital  Organs. — Corrosion  near  the  genital  organs,
as  if  sore  and  excoriated.  A similar  sensation  in  the  scro-
tum, even  when  lying  in  the  bed,  for  many  days.  Con-
tinual erections  wdiile  asleep,  with  amorous  dreams,  (a.  6
d.)  Embrace  with  little  pleasurable  excitement.  Painful
drawing  in  both  groins,  as  if  the  menses  would  appear.
Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  qualmishness,  as  pre-
vious to  the  appearance  of  the  menses.  Painful  pressing
towards  the  genital  organs,  as  if  the  menses  would  make
their  appearance  ; sometimes  accompanied  with  desire  for
stool,  extending  through  the  groins  as  far  as  the  small  of
the  back,  where  the  pain  is  then  felt  for  §ome  time.  Pain-
ful sensitiveness  and  continual  pressure  in  the  region  of
the  mons  veneris  and  in  the  genital  organs,  with  internal
almost  constant  chills  and  coldness  perceptible  to  the  hand,
(except  in  the  face.)  Cramp  and  stitches  in  the  indurated
womb.  The  painful  pressing,  as  if  the  menses  would  appear,
disappears  in  the  evening,  but  returns  in  the  morning.  Cut-
ting in  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  the  menses  would  appear,
with  drawing  headache,  (immediately.)  Pinching  in  the
abdomen,  on  the  second  day  of  the  menses,  followed  by
pressing  in  the  groins,  alternating  with  pressure  in  the  pu-
dendum, with  increase  of  the  menstrual  blood.  Pressing
in  the  hypogastrium,  with  menorrhagia.  Menses  too  early,
with  diarrhoea.  Profuse  and  early  menses.  Expulsion  of
a quantity  of  coagulated  blood,  on  the  first  day  of  the
menses.  Voluptuous  tingling  in  the  pudendum  and  abdo-
men, with  oppressive  anxiety  and  palpitation  of  the  heart ;
afterwards  painless  pressure  in  the  lower  part  of  the  geni-
tal organs,  with  a relaxed  feeling  and  stitches  in  the  sinci-
put. Leucorrhoea,  like  albumen,  only  in  day-time,  without
sensation.

Catarrh  and  Chest. — Creeping  in  the  nose,  with  un-
successful desire  to  sneeze,  and  lachrymation.  Dry  co-
ryza in  one  nostril  ; when  walking  in  the  open  air,  violent
fluent  coryza  with  sneezing  ; afterwards  dry  coryza  in  the
other  nostril  and  then  again  fluent  coryza.  Sudden  arrest
of  breathing  in  the  throat,  as  takes  place  when  walking


PLATINA.


123


against  the  wind.  Oppressed  breathing,  with  warm  rising
from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  the  pit  of  the  throat,  she
has  to  take  deep  breath  ; accompanied  with  a hoarse  voice,
going  off  again  with  the  oppression.  Impeded  respiration
from  weakness  of  the  chest.  Deep  breathing , as  ij  a load
were  oppressing  the  chest.  Frequent  deep  breathing,  with-
out oppression  of  the  chest.  Asthma,  as  if  laced  too
tightly,  with  heavy,  slow  breathing.  Aching  pain  in  the
chest,  as  if  strained.  Cramp-pain  in  the  left  side  of  the
chest , feebly  increasing  and  decreasing.  Dull  pressure,
coming  with  a shock,  in  the  left  half  of  the  chest,  partly
below  the  axilla,  partly  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  inde-
pendent of  breathing,  (a.  3 h.  and  8 d.)  Cramp-like  pres-
sure in  the  chest,  at  intervals,  below  the  right  clavicle.
Cutting  shocks  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest  from  below
upwards.  Dull  pressure  in  a small  spot  of  the  upper  part
of  the  chest.  Sudden  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
below  the  axilla,  causing  him  to  start.  Burning  between
two  ribs  on  the  left  side,  regularly  going  and  coming.
Burning  and  stitching  in  the  lower  part  of  the  heart.  Jerk-
ing pricking  in  a spot  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  speed-
ily recurring  after  scratching.  Sensation  in  the  chest,  as
if  fasting,  as  if  one  had  got  up  too  early,  continuing  a
long  time  after  getting  up  and  gradually  increasing  until
nausea  ; going  off  towards  noon.

Back. — Numb  feeling  in  the  os  coccygis,  as  after  a blow.
Cramp-pain,  contusive,  in  the  os  ilium.  Pain  in  the  small
of  the  back,  as  if  broken,  felt  especially  when  bending
backwards.  Pain  in  the  back  and  small  of  the  b^ck,  as  if
broken,  after  a walk  of  one  hour.  Dull  pressure  as  of  a
plug,  on  the  right  side  of  the  middle  of  the  dorsal  spine  ;
pain  when  pressing  upon  the  part,  as  in  a sore.  Dull
pressure  and  dull  shocks  in  the  middle  and  left  side  of  the
spine,  slowly  going  and  coming.  Pricking  in  the  right
half  of  the  back,  as  if  excoriated,  (7.  d.)  Burning  dull
stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  back,  going  and  coming,
when  sitting,  and  as  if  excoriated.  Jerking  drawing  from
the  right  scapula  to  the  hands.  Sore  feeling  with  pres-
sure, going  and  coming,  in  the  outer  border  of  the  right
scapula,  (a.  J h.)  Pressure,  with  a feeling  of  coolness,
in  the  apex  of  the  left  scapula.


124


5PLATINA.


Upper  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  top  of  the  left
shoulder,  as  of  a blow,  feebly  increasing  and  decreasing.
Aching  pain  in  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder,  as  if  he  had
carried  a heavy  burthen  upon  it.  Weakness  of  the  nape  of
the  neck,  the  head  inclines  forward.  Tensive  numb  feel-
ing in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  close  to  the  occiput,  as  if  tied
together,  (a.  3 h)  Cramp  in  the  poslerior  cervical  mus-
cles, as  if  occasioned  by  the  hardness  of  the  couch,  worse
during  motion.  Cramp-pain  in  the  side  of  the  neck,  when
turning  it  towards  the  shoulder.  Slight  aching  and  sore-
ness in  ihe  go'ilre,  especially  when  touching  it.  Cramp-
pain  near  the  shoulder  and  chest,  as  if  constricted.  Sharp
stitches  in  the  shoulder,  causing  the  arm  to  start.  Relaxed
feeling  in  both  arms,  as  if  they  had  lifted  and  carried  heavy
weight,  diminished  by  moving  them  to  and  fro,  but  return-
ing immediately  when  at  rest,  with  a drawing  sensation
from  the  shoulder  to  the  hand,  as  when  a string  is  pulled.
Pain  in  the  arms,  as  if  beaten  to  pieces.  Sudden  para-
lysis, as  after  an  apoplectic  fit,  at  times  in  the  right,  at
times  in  the  left  arm.  Paralytic  feeling  in  the  left  arm ,
worse  when  leaning  the  arm  against  the  stool,  when  sit-
ting; felt  even  when  merely  leaning  the  shoulder  against
the  chair.  Weariness  and  weakness  of  the  left  arm,  with
drawing  in  the  same.  Burning  in  the  right  arm,  from  the
shoulder  to  the  wrist-joint.  Dull  pain  in  the  upper  arm,
as  of  a blow,  most  acute  when  moving"  or  stretching  it.
Small,  painless  blue  spot  on  the  left  upper  arm,  soon  di-
minishing and  becoming  dark-red.  Burning  in  the  elbow ,
as  if  scraped  or  rubbed  with  wool.  Undulating  pain  above
the  elbow-joint,  as  if  bruised  or  contused,  (a.  10  m.)
Cramp  pain  of  the  fore-arm  when  leaning  the  elbow  on
something.  Jerking  pain  in  the  region  in  a tendon  on  the
left  ulna  close  to  the  wrist-joint,  in  paroxysms.  Paralytic
feeling  in  the  right  fore-arm,  from  above  downward.  Pain
in  the  right  fore-arm,  which  induces  one  to  contract  the  fin-
gers when  stretching  the  arm.  Undulating  beating  pain
in  some  parts  of  the  bones  of  the  fore-arms  and  legs.
Cramp-like  rigid  feeling  in  the  left  fore-arm  and  hand.
Cramp-like  pressure,  goingand  coming,  in  the  bend  of  the
left  fore-arm.  Formication  in  the  hand,  or  as  if  cool  air
were  blowing  upon  it.  Cramp  in  the  hand,  when  exerting


PLATINA.


125


it.  Jerking  cramp  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  thumb
and  the  joints  of  the  thumb,  more  violent  when  moving  it
strongly.  Tremor  of  the  hand  and  fingers  when  holding
it  in  the  air.  Cramp-pain  in  the  hand,  behind  the  two  first
fingers.  Cramp-pain  in  the  ball  of  the  left  hand.  Cramp-
pain  of  the  hands  and  fingers,  especially  the  joints,  par-
ticularly when  grasping  something  firmly.  Cramp-like
jerking,  at  regular  intervals,  close  below  the  styloid  pro-
cess of  the  radius.  Burning,  fine  stitches  in  the  metacar-
pal joint  of  the  index-finger,  shortly  returning  after  scratch-
ing. Itching  and  gnawing  in  the  surface  of  the  right  wrist-
joint.  Itching  prickling  in  both  dorsa  of  the  hands,  going
otf  after  scratching.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  right  hand
and  the  index-finger,  coming  with  a jerk.  Contraction  of
the  fingers,  with  painful  drawing  in  the  arm  from  below
upwards,  when  bending  the  arm  upwards.  Intensely  pain-
ful feeling  of  numbness  and  tremor  of  the  right  thumb  in
the  morning,  as  if  contused.  Numbness  of  the  little  fin-
ger,  for  some  time.  Pain  in  the  last  phalanx  of  the  index-
finger,  as  if  an  ulcer  would  break  open.  Tingling  in  the
left  index-finger.  Tingling  in  the  inner  side  of  the  right
thumb.

Lower  Extremities. — Clawing,  tensive  pain  in  the
hip  close  above  the  joint,  as  afier  a blow,  increasing  and
decreasing  at  intervals.  Jactitation  of  the  muscles  of  the
lower  limbs,  after  walking,  especially  those  of  the  legs.
Inclination  to  uncover  his  lower  limbs  in  the  night,  although
he  does  not  feel  warm.  Tingling  in  the  limbs  when  lay-
ing them  across  one  another  when  sitting.  When  sitting
with  the  legs  stretched,  the  thighs  are  painful  as  if  broken,
with  undulating,  cramp-like  darting  in  the  limbs  when
drawing  them  up.  Feeling  of  weakness  with  tremulous
uneasiness  in  the  thighs,  especially  towards  the  knees,  as
when  tired  by  walking  ; only  when  sitting.  Feeling  of
weakness  in  the  thighs,  (and  the  whole  limbs,)  as  if  bruis-
ed, with  tremulous  uneasiness  in  the  thighs,  when  sitting
or  standing,  (a.  2 h.)  Tensive  sensation  in  the  skin  of  the
thighs  as  if  bandaged  too  tightly,  with  a feeling  of  weak-
ness in  them.  Cramp-pain  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh,
when  sitting,  coming  and  going  like  the  pulse.  Cramp-
like feeling  of  numbness,  as  after  a blow,  in  the  anterior


126


FLATINA.


surface  of  the  right  thigh.  Cramp-pam  in  the  posterior
surface  of  the  thigh,  when  sitting.  Cramp-pain  in  the  in-
ner side  of  the  right  thigh.  Pain  of  the  thighs  as  if  bruis-
ed. Pain  in  the  middle  of  the  thighs,  as  if  bruised,  more
when  sitting  than  when  walking.  Drawing  in  the  upper
part  of  the  left  thigh,  so  violent  when  treading,  that  her
limb  suddenly  bends.  Jerking  drawing  in  the  thighs,  above
the  knees.  Drawing  and  tearing  extending  from  the  mid-
dle of  the  groin  to  both  thighs,  increased  by  contact  and
breathing.  Dull  pain  as  after  a fall,  in  the  upper  part  of
the  left  thigh,  when  sitting,  (6.  d.)  Drawing  in  the  knee,
alterwrards  burning  and  pain  as  if  sprained,  when  treading.
Burning  prickling  in  the  right  knee.  Violent  tension  in
the  bend  of  the  left  knee,  after  a quick  walk  in  the  open
air.  Dull  pressure  on  the  inner  side  of  the  bend  of  the
left  knee,  when  sitting  with  his  limbs  drawn  up.  Pain
in  the  left  knee  as  after  a violent  blow . Contusive  pain
on  the  left  side  above  the  knee.  Tremulous  feeling  of
numbness  in  the  knees,  extending  down  to  the  foot,  as  if
tied  too  fast.  Feeling  of  numbness  and  weakness,  and
dull  pressure  on  the  inner  side  of  the  bend  of  the  left  knee,
when  sitting.  Feeling  of  great  weakness  in  and  around
the  knee-joints,  greater  when  standing  than  when  sitting,
occasioning  a vacillation  of  the  limb.  Weakness  of  the
knee-joints,  causing  them  to  bend,  greater  when  standing
than  when  walking,  most  violent  when  going  upstairs.
Weak  feeling  in  the  knees  when  walking  ; when  sitting  it
is  also  felt  in  the  thighs,  a sort  of  weariness  as  from  walk-
ing. Painful  weariness  below  the  knee,  when  treading,  or
silting.  Pulsations  with  erosive  sensation  in  the  middle  of
the  right  leg,  anteriorly.  Cramp-like  jerks  in  the  legs
from  above  downwards,  accompanied  with  a feeling  of
rigor,  which  is  likewise  felt  in  the  feet,  when  sitting,  es-
pecially in  the  evening.  Intensely  painful  shocks  in  the
region  of  the  tibiae,  from  above  downwards.  Tremulous,
tingling  uneasiness  in  the  legs,  accompanied  with  a feel-
ing of  numbness  and  rigor  when  sitting ; especially  in  the
evening  and  also  when  in  bed.  Weakness  of  the  legs,  af-
ter a short  journey  on  foot,  with  oppressed  breathing,  more
at  the  commencement  of  than  after  a walk  ; lastly  nausea.
Cramp-like  drawing  through  the  right  calf,  when  sitting


PLATINA.


127


down  after  a short  walk.  Beating  in  the  right  calf  and
tenseness  of  the  skin,  causing  the  foot  to  tremble,  when
sitting.  Weariness  of  the  feet,  with  a feeling  of  swelling
around  the  knuckles  ; when  sitting,  the  weariness  together
with  a tenseness  of  the  skin  extends  as  high  up  as  the
calves,  in  the  evening.  Pain  in  the  tarsal  joint  as  if  sprain-
ed. Feeling  of  numbness  and  weariness  in  the  feet,  as
after  long  standing,  only  when  sitting.  Painful  tearing  in
the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  with  dull  cuttings  transversely
across  it.  Tensive  pain  in  the  bend  of  the  foot,  especially
when  inclining  the  body  over  while  standing.  Smarting
sensation  over  the  tarsal  joint,  on  the  outside.  Corrosion
and  smarting  around  the  ankles  as  if  excoriated  ; when
the  parts  are  touched  by  the  dress  they  pain  her  as  if  raw
and  sore.  Stinging  corrosion  of  a small  spot  of  the  sole  ;
he  is  obliged  to  scratch.  Violent  stitch  over  the  tarsal
joint,  not  relieved  by  scratching.  Stitching  in  the  balls  of
both  feet,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  until  midnight.
Painful  pullings  in  the  right  sole  when  standing,  and  a
pressure  with  creeping  in  the  same,  when  sitting.  Hard
pressure  in  the  right  sole,  near  the  toes.  Cramp-pain  in
the  right  metatarsus.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  right
heel.  Tremulous  pain  in  one  spot  of  the  dorsum  of  the
foot,  as  if  occasioned  by  external  pressure.  Pain  in  the
big  toe,  as  if  bandaged  too  tightly.  Cramp-like,  burning
tension  in  the  left  big  toe.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  t he
toes,  especially  the  big  one.  Cramp-like  beating  in  the
left  big  toe,  at  irregular  intervals.  Painful  beating  under
the  little  toe.  Tearing  with  slight  beating  as  in  an  ulcer,
in  the  right  toes,  especially  the  big  one.  Prickling  itching
under  the  big  toe.  Itching  tingling  in  the  right  big  toe.
Burning  pricklings  under  the  big  toe.  Sore  pain  in  the
ball  of  the  toe  which  had  been  frozen  previously  ; espe-
cially when  walking.  Swelling  of  the  ball  of  the  toe,  with
nightly  tearing  pains.

General  Symptoms. — Fit  of  inclination  to  vomit,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  especially  when  walking  against
the  wind  ; diminishing  in  the  room,  when  leaning  the  head
upon  the  table  ; becoming  again  intolerable  when  raising
the  head,  with  vertigo,  aggravated  by  looking  into  the  air  ;
obscuration  of  sight,  as  if  by  smoke  ; when  laying  down


128


PLATINA.


the  head,  he  at  once  falls  into  a state  of  half  sleep  and
waking,  with  lively  dreams  ; all  these  symptoms  disappear-
ed when  raising  the  head.  Drawing  pain,  with  pressure,
across  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  increasing  and  decreasing
at  intervals,  accompanied  with  a sensation  in  the  middle  of
the  upper  arm  as  if  seized  with  violence,  with  a paralytic
and  numb  sensation  in  the  arm  ; the  pain  in  the  side  in-
creases by  laughing,  inspirations,  pressure  ; at  every  step
he  feels  a painful  concussion  in  that  place.  Burning  in
the  limbs,  in  alternate  places.  Drawing  in  various  parts
of  the  body  in  succession,  at  times  in  the  side  of  the  chest,
at  times  in  the  occiput,  at  times  in  the  abdomen,  at  times
in  the  shoulders,  etc.  Dartings  through  the  whole  body.
Itching,  gnawing,  stinging  prickling  and  burning  tickling
in  various  places,  especially  the  arms,  hands  and  scrotum,
more  violent  towards  evening  when  he  goes  to  bed.  Burn-
ing prickling  in  various  parts  of  the  body,  speedily  disap-
pearing of  itself,  (a.  1 i h.)  Itching  stinging  of  the  whole
body,  as  of  vermin,  which  cannot  be  removed  by  scratch-
ing. The  symptoms  increase  in  the  evening  before  bed-
time. Painful  numbness,  here  and  there,  as  from  a blow,
especially  in  the  head,  almost  at  small  places.  Contusive
pain  here  and  there,  going  off  speedily.  Cramp-like  jerk-
ing here  and  there  in  the  limbs,  resembling  beating  jerks.
Transitory,  cramp-like  drawing  here  and  there,  as  from  a
cold.  Pressing  upon  the  parts  affected  with  the  cramp-
pain,  they  excite  a contusive  pain  in  those  parts.

Weakness,  Fits. — Painful  tremulousness  of  the  whole
body,  with  throbbing  in  the  arteries.  Tremulous  sensation
through  the  whole  body,  occasionally.  Trembling  sensa-
tion in  the  hands  and  feet,  followed  by  chilliness  and
violent  trembling  of  the  whole  body  as  if  in  the  paroxysm
of  a chill,  with  chattering  of  teeth,  the  face  being  warm,  the
hands  cold.  Weary,  relaxed,  inclining  to  fall.  Weari-
ness of  the  whole  body,  she  staggers  when  standing.
Weariness  from  the  open  air,  unto  sleeping.  Staggering
when  standing,  as  if  the  limbs  could  not  support  the  body.
Tremulous  uneasiness  of  the  feet,  especially  when  silting.
Weakness,  with  sensation  in  the  face,  as  if  cold  sweat
would  break  out.  Excessive  relaxation  and  drowsiness
immediately  after  a meal,


PLATINA.


129


Sleep. — Great  inclination  to  violent , almost  spasmodic
yawning.  Frequent,  violent  yawning.  Stretching  the
limbs,  it  does  her  good.  Excessive  weakness  and  drowsi-
ness in  the  evening.  She  goes  to  sleep  while  talking.
Great  drowsiness  in  the  evening  ; as  soon  as  she  closes
her  eyes,  she  dreams  of  distant  things,  but  she  soon  wakes
again.  Great  drowsiness  in  the  evening,  she  goes  to
sleep  while  reading,  wakes  frequently,  asking  what  ?
because  she  hears  indistinctly  the  speech  of  those  around
her  ; she  sleeps  soundly  in  the  night.  Falls  asleep  after
midnight,  with  tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  toe.  She  wakes
in  the  night  in  a sort  of  stupor , and  is  unable  to  collect
her  senses.  Wakes  about  midnight,  ideas  which  he  is
unable  to  repel  crowding  upon  his  mind,  no  sleep  until
morning.  He  wakes  about  midnight  with  melancholy
thoughts  and  severe  thirst,  but  after  an  hour  he  goes  to
sleep  again.  Anxious  dreams,  and  gloomy  thoughts  and
sad  visions  when  waking  suddenly.  Anxious  confused
dreams  of  war  and  bloodshed.  She  dreams  that  her  dis-
tant sister  had  died  and  is  astonished  that  he  should  not
have  apprehended  such  an  event.  Incoherent  dreams.
She  dreams  of  fires,  wants  to  go  there  but  cannot  get
ready  with  her  preparations  of  toilet,  etc.  Dreams,  even
during  the  siesta.  Sleeplessness  after  three  o’clock.  He
wakes  in  the  morning  with  a peevish  and  anxious  mood,
as  if  he  had  suffered  injury  during  his  sleep.  Sound
sleep,  with  pleasant  dreams.  Drowsy,  after  a long  and
sound  sleep.  In  the  morning , when  waking,  he  lies  with
extended  limbs,  or  with  the  legs  drawn  up  and  the  knees
wide  apart,  one  or  both  hands  above  his  head,  and  always
on  his  back,  with  great  desire  to  uncover  the  limbs  and
constant  erections.  Anxiety  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  night,
as  from  a cold.  Burning  pain  in  the  toes,  at  night.  Cramp
and  contraction  of  the  soles,  at  night,  after  rising.  Violent
itching  of  the  whole  body,  at  night.

Fever.  — Chilliness,  in  the  evening  when  undressing,
with  chattering  of  teeth.  Chilliness  in  the  evening  before
bed-time,  the  coldness  continuing  even  after  having  gone
to  bed  ; restless  sleep,  waking  with  anxiety,  tremulous
feeling  through  the  whole  body  ; nausea  and  headache.
Chilly  feeling,  with  shuddering  of  the  lower  limbs  from

6*


130


SASSAPARILLA.


above  downwards,  especially  in  the  open  air,  even  when
warm.  Chilliness  through  the  whole  body,  down  to  the
feet.  Thrill  of  chilliness  over  the  back.  Chilliness  in
the  evening.  Yawning  followed  by  a feverish  thrill  of
chilliness  through  the  whole  body.  Thrill  of  chilliness
when  coming  into  the  open  air,  out  of  her  room.  Sudden
shuddering  about  the  head,  chest  and  arms  after  entering
a warmer  room.  Chilliness  in  the  forenoon,  with  drowsi-
ness. Chilliness  and  shuddering  mixed  with  flushes  of
heat  accompanied  with  ill  humor  and  taciturnity,  in  the
open  air ; afterwards  agreeable  warmth  through  the  whole
body,  the  cheerfulness  returning  likewise.  She  feels
suddenly  hot,  and  she  imagines  she  looks  very  red,  although
she  lias  her  usual  complexion.  Frequent  desire  for  water.
Great  thirst  immediately  after  supper.  Sweat  during
sleep.


SASSAPARILLA.

%

Some  three  hundred  years  ago,  when  physicians  were  in
the  habit  of  ruining  the  organism  infected  with  syphilis  by
administering  large  doses  of  mercury,  it  was  accidentally
discovered  by  non-professional  men  that  Sassaparilla
is  an  antidote  to  such  mercurial  poisonings.  Since  then
it  has  been  used  in  Europe  for  similar  purposes  but  has
always  been  administered  in  decoction.  In  order  there-
fore to  obtain  a powerful  drug  it  was  necessary  to  use
large  quantities  of  it,  frequently  an  ounce  and  more.  Al-
though having  been  in  use  for  centuries  past  it  has  never
been  suspected  that  this  root  loses  all  its  virtues  by  boil-
ing. The  patient  lost  therefore  but  little  by  a cheap  sub-
stitute, the  carex  arenaria,  being  used  in  the  place  of  the
sassaparilla  root,  although  he  paid  for  the  latter  and  thus
secured  enormous  profits  to  the  apothecaries.  Even
physicians  have  for  a long  time  been  of  opinion  that  the
root  of  the  carex  arenaria  might  be  used  in  the  place  of
that  of  the  sassaparilla,  for  this  reason,  that  both  roots  are
long  and  thin  and  ought  therefore  to  have  analagous
virtues  ; such  opinions,  however,  come  from  the  common


SASSAPARILLA.


131


manufacturers  of  materia  medica’s,  who  will  declare  salix
and  aesculus  hippocastanum  to  have  analogous  powers  to
those  of  Cinchona.

The  iruth  is,  that  the  genuine  Sassaparilla,  especially
the  brown  which  grows  in  Hayii,  is  a very  powerful  d ug
even  when  administered  in  very  small  doses,  but  in  this
case  it  must  not  be  prepared  by  boiling.

The  meiicinal  virtues  of  dry  drugs  cannot  be  com-
pletely extracted  by  alcohol.  To  prepare  Sassaparilla  you
take  the  dry  root,  scrape  off  one  grain  weight  of  it,  and
triturate  it  with  99  grains  of  sugar  of  milk  as  usual.

Sassaparilla  has  removed  the  following  affections.
Nausea  ; blood  with  stool  ; cold  feet  previous  to  going  to
bed  ; sweat  on  the  forehead,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed  ;
dry  coryza  of  many  years7  standing  ; paralytic  weariness
of  the  hands  and  feet.

Smelling  of  Camphor  antidotes  Sassaparilla.  Vinegar
appears  to  increase  the  symptoms.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Brunner,  Hartmann
Herrmann,  Teulhorn,  Schreter,  Ng.  #

Moral  Symptoms  —Desponding.  Weeping  mood  and
ill-humored,  in  the  forenoon.  The  mind  is  ve  y much
affected  by  the  pains  ; the  mind  feels  oppressed  and  the
heart  gloomy  ; he  feels  unhappy,  and  groans  involuntarily.
Dreading  labor,  awkward.  Not  disposed  to  work,  peevish,
and  hot  in  the  face,  (immediately.)  Peevish,  but  inclined
to  work.  Silent  ill-humor.  111-humor  the  whole  day.
A fly  on  the  wall  vexes  him,  he  is  exceedingly  ill-humored.
Out  of  humor,  and  is  unable  to  forget  what  made  him  ill-
humored.  Easily  offended.  Disposed  to  work,  in  the
afternoon.  More  cheerful  than  usual.  Absence  of  mind.
Inability  to  perform  mental  labor.

Hoad. — Gloominess  of  the  head,  with  trouble  from
flatulence.  Heaviness  in  the  left  forehead.  Obtusion  of
the  head,  when  sitting  a long  while,  with  fog  before  the
the  eyes,  paralytic  weariness  of  the  limbs,  obstruction  of
the  nose  and  gloomy  mind.  The  head  always  became
easy  again  towards  evening.  Dulness  and  stupid  feeling
of  the  head  the  whole  forenoon  ; in  1 he  afternoon  out  of
humor.  Weakness  in  the  head,  as  after  a fever.  Vertigo:
when  standing  near  the  window,  he  suddenly  fell  with  his


132


S ASS APARILLA.


back  on  the  floor,  without  any  consciousness  ; the  throat
was  swollen,  sour  eructations  before  and  after  the  fit  ; the
chest  afterwards  felt  oppressed,  and  in  the  night  a violent
sweat  broke  out.  Vertigo  when  sitting  or  walking  ; the
head  inclines  forward.  Headache,  a sort  of  pressure  as
from  a heavy  load  in  the  head.  Pressure  in  the  left  side
of  the  fureh.ead l.  Pressure  in  the  forehead  and  occiput.
Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  especially  in  the
temple,  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Aching  pain,  especially  in
the  sinciput,  slowly  increasing  and  decreasing.  Pressing
pain  in  the  forehead.  Pressure  and  heaviness  around  the
whole  forehead,  forenoon  and  after  dinner.  Pressure  with
frequent  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  in  the  morn-
ing. Pressure  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,  with  fine
stitches,  slowly  rising.  Strong  pressure  in  the  right
temple,  with  drawing  stitches  from  the  occiput  to  the  fore-
head. Violent  pressure  and  stitching  in  the  vertex,  on  the
right  side.  Violent  pressure,  and  afterwards  stitching  in
the  left  frontal  eminence.  Stitching  pain,  with  pressure,
in  the  region  of  the  temporal  bone,  increased  by  contact.
Sensation  as  if  both  sides  of  the  head  were  between
screws.  Cramp-like  headache  on  one  side,  commencing
with  obscuration  of  sight  and  luminous  vibrations  before
the  eyes  ; he  is  like  one  without  consciousness,  has  to  lie
down,  is  unable  to  speak,  inasmuch  as  every  word  he  utters
occasions  a sort  of  concussion  in  the  head.  Tearing  in  the
whole  frontal  region,  sometimes  deep  in  the  brain.  Tear-
ing, with  a sort  of  pressure,  in  the  whole  left  side  of  the
head.  Lancinations  in  the  left  vertex.  Lancinations  in
the  region  of  the  temporal  bone.  Stitching  pain  in  the
left  occiput.  Stitches  extending  from  the  right  temple  into
the  lower  teeth.  Dull  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,
down  to  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Violent  stitches  in  the
forehead  going  off  in  the  open  air.  Intense,  fine  stitches
in  the  middle  of  the  forehead.  Piercing  stitching  in  the
left  frontal  eminence,  in  the  evening.  Violent  lancinations,
with  pressure,  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  so  violent  that
they  will  cause  him  to  shudder.  Beating  headache,  in
the  evening  ; worse  at  night,  with  violent  nausea  and  sour
vomiting.  Beating  in  the  right,  frontal  region,  while
walking  in  the  air.  Humming  in  the  head,  sensation  in


SASSAPARILLA.


133


the  head,  as  of  the  wind  blowing  into  one’s  ear.  Pressure
and  cuttings  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  head.  Tearing
in  the  head,  with  pressure,  in  different  parts,  increased  by
motion  and  walking.  Drawing,  with  pressure  in  the  region
of  the  right  temporal  bone  and  cartilage  of  the  ear.  Stitch-
ing drawing  from  the  right  mastoid  process  to  the  left
frontal  eminence.  Stitching  drawing  in  the  region  of  the
right  parietal  and  temporal  bones.  Dull  stitching  in  the
left  frontal  eminence.  Pulsative  stitches  in  the  forehead.
Burning,  dull  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  left  temporal
bone.  The  pains  about  the  head  are  worse  when  touch-
ing them  and  when  walking.  Falling  off  of  the  hair  and
sensitiveness  of  the  scalp  when  combing  the  hair.  Itching
of  the  scalp,  posteriorly.

Eyes. — Pain  of  the  eyes  when  looking  at  something  by  .
candle  light.  In  the  morning  the  eyes  are  affected  by
whatever  she  may  look  at.  Pressure  in  the  eye-ball,  in
the  evening,  while  reading,  the  paper  having  a red  shine.
Stitching  in  the  eyes,  as  if  they  contained  dust  or  sand.
Stitching  in  the  eye,  when  closing  the  lids,  and  violent
pain  when  pressing  upon  the  closed  eyes  ; accompanied
with  a broad,  red  streak  from  the  cornea  towards  the  outer
canthus  ; the  inner  canthi  look  blue  and  puffy,  and  the
right  canthus  is  somewhat  swollen.  Continual  burning  in
the  eye-lids,  sometimes  alternating  with  aching  pain.
Violent  burning  and  agglutination  of  the  eyes,  in  the  morn-
ing when  waking.  Inflamed,  dry  eye-lids.  Lachryma-
tion  ; agglutination  in  the  morning.  Twitchings  in  the
right  upper  eye-lid.  Dilatation  of  the  pupils,  (a.  2 h.)
Dim-sightedness,  as  if  through  fog,  or  as  if  the  eye  were
covered  with  a gauze.

Ear. — Violent  pressure  in  the  ear,  extending  into  the
temple,  where  a pressing  sensation  is  experienced.  Con-
tractive sensation  in  the  right  ear.  Painful  contraction  in
the  outer  right  ear.  Tearing  with  pressure  in  the  cartilage
of  the  right  ear  and  the  outer  meatus  auditorius.  Ulcera-
tive pain  deep  in  the  left  ear  and  around  the  fore-part  of
the  same.  Violent,  dull  stitching,  deep  in  the  right  ear.
Dull  stitching  in  the  root  of  the  right  mastoid  process,
going  off  by  pressure.  Violent  itching  in  the  left  outer
meatus  auditorius.  Drawing  and  visible  pullings  in  the


134


SASSAPARILLA.


lobules.  Scurf  on  the  lobule,  first  burning,  then  itching.
Frequent  tearing  in  the  posterior  side  of  the  left  ear,  from
below  upwards,  in  the  afternoon.  Stitching  below  and  in
front  of  the  left  ear,  in  the  morning,  (6.  d.)  Tingling  in
the  lei t ear.  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  a gland  below
the  right  ear,  passing  into  suppuration.

Nose. — Prickings  in  the  tip  of  the  nose.  Itching
eruption  under  the  nose,  as  if  caused  by  an  acrid  discharge.
Itching  of  the  leftside  of  the  nose  and  around  the  eyes.
Itching  eruption  under  the  nose.  Eruption  in  the  left
nostril.  Bleeding  of  the  nose,  with  sensation  as  of  small
bubbles  bursting  inside  of  it.  Bleeding  from  the  right
nostril.  Bleeding  of  the  nose.  Short-lasting  heat  in  the
face,  with  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  heat  on  the  chest  and
back,  accompanied  with  prickings  from  within  outwards,
most  frequent  and  violent  in  the  heck.  Drawdng  lancina-
tions  in  the  muscles  of  mastication  of  the  right  side  ; they
seemed  to  have  become  convulsively  contracted.  Stiffness
and  tension  in  the  muscles  of  mastication  and  the  articula-
tions of  the  jaws,  when  moving  them.

Face. — Contusive  pain  in  the  face  in  both  of  the  lower
borders  of  the  orbits,  in  the  morning  after  waking,  but
only  when  pressing  upon  the  partsi  Fine  stinging  itching
in  the  face  and  scalp,  and  around  the  neck  and  shoulders,
with  a feeling  of  great  warmth  in  these  parts,  the  itching
being  immediately  experienced  in  some  other  place  when
removed  by  scratching.  Pale-red,  a little  elevated,  rough
spots  on  the  forehead,  of  the  size  of  lentils,  without  itch-
ing. Itching  pimple  on  the  cheek,  spreading  inflammation
far  around,  with  violent  burning,  forming  a thick  large
scurf,  and  causing  tearing  pains  in  the  open  air,  (a.  19  d.)
Pustules  in  the  face,  without  sensation.  Itching  pimples
on  the  chin.  Itching  pimples  on  the  sides  of  the  chin,
becoming  shortly  filled  with  pus.  Clear  vesicle  on  the
right  side  of  the  lower  lip.  Herpes  on  the  upper  lip,
with  pain  as  if  pricked  by  a number  of  pins.

Jaws  and  Teetii. — Pain  of  the  jaws  as  if  they  were
broken.  Pricking  pain,  with  pressure,  in  the  lower  and
inner  border  of  the  right  lower  jaw,  but  only  when  touch-
ing it,  and  when  bending  the  head  backwards.  Toothache
of  the  right  side,  with  creeping  in  the  roots  of  the  teeth  ;


SASSAPARILLA.


135


the  pain  ceases  after  picking  the  teeth  until  blood  comes
out ; in  the  evening.  Tearing  in  the  teeth,  from  a cold
draft  or  cold  drink.  Lancination  in  the  gums  and  the  root
of  the  last  right  lower  molar  tooth.  Swelling  and  sore-
ness of  the  gums  of  the  inner  side  of  the  lower  jaw.

Moutii,  Pharynx,  (Esophagus.  — Stitches  in  the
tongue.  Tongue  coated  white,  in  the  morning,  taste
natural.  Aphthae  upon  tire  tongue  and  in  the  palate.
Tenacious  mucus  in  the  mouth,  and  in  the  throat.  Con-
stant hawking  up  of  mucus,  in  the  morning.  Drawing
pain,  with  pressure,  in  the  soft  palate.  Dryness  in  the
throat  and  stinging  during  deglutition,  in  the  morning.
Pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  as  if  a barley-feather
were  lodged  there,  extending  upward  through  the  ear,  and
causing  a stinging  pain  during  deglutition.  Cramp-like
pressing  in  the  throat,  at  night.  Constrictive  sensa-
tion in  the  throat  and  chest,  with  difficult  respiration.
Roughness  and  dryness  in  the  throat,  in  the  morning  after
waking.

Taste  and  Gastric  Symptoms. — Sweet  taste  in
mouth,  for  several  days.  Bitter  taste.  Bad  taste,  like
herbs.  Metallic  taste.  Flat,  sweetish  taste.  Bad,  sour
and  slimy  taste  in  the  throat,  in  the  morning,  like  leaven.
No  appetite  and  no  hunger,  the  food  had  too  little  taste  for
him,  and  after  eating  he  felt  in  his  stomach  as  if  he  had
not  eaten  any  thing  ; the  stomach  seemed  to  be  insensible.
No  thirst,  contrary  to  his  habit.  Constant,  imperfect  eruc-
tations. Bitter-sour  eructations,  after  rising,  with  bitter
taste  in  the  mouth.  Bitter  eructations  after  drinking  and
eating  soup.  Continual  sour  eructations.  Gulping  up  of
a bitter  sour  liquid.  Constant  nausea.  Nausea  when
thinking  of  the  lood  which  he  had  taken.  Nausea  in  the
. throat.,  owing  to  the  rising  of  a disagreeable  vapor  into  the
mouth,  with  obtusion  of  the  head.  Great  nausea  in  the
morning,  unto  vomiting,  with  taste  as  of  herbs  in  the
mouth.  Nausea  and  faintness  after  dinner.  When  he  eats
ever  so  little  his  stomach  nevertheless  becomes  very  much
distended,  as  if  he  had  eaten  a good  deal.  Aching  pain
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  just  below  the  xiphoid  carti-
lage increased  by  contact.  Frequent  cramp-like  sensa-
tions in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Constriction  in  the  stom-


136


SASSAPARILLA»


ach,  with  nausea,  going  off  in  the  night.  Heat  in  the
stomach.

Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  left  hypochondrium  as  if  bruised,
with  beating.  Stitching  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.
Contractive  pain  of  the  intestines,  afterwards  violent  rum-
bling round  the  umbilicus,  or  in  the  direction  of  the  chest,
or  again  downwards  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on.  Fre-
quent cramp  feelings  in  the  abdomen.  Emptiness  and
hollowness  in  the  abdomen,  shortly  after  breakfast,  (S.  d.)
Violent  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  and  afterwards  painful
contraction  of  the  sphincter  ani.  Aching  pain  in  the  left
side  of  the  abdomen.  Drawing  in  the  abdomen,  with
pressure,  as  after  a cold.  Painful  pressure  from  without
inwards  and  pinching  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  at  a
small  place,  aggravated  only  by  deep  breathing.  Stitching
in  either  the  right  or  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  Heat  or
coldness  in  the  abdomen.  Rumbling  and  empty  feeling  in
the  abdomen.  Emission  of  flatulence  upwards  and  down-
wards. Fetid  flatulence.  Pinching  in  the  left  groin.

Stool. — Desire,  but  no  stool.  Great  desire  with  con-
traction of  the  intestines  and  excessive  pressure  from  above
downwards,  as  if  the  bowels  were  being  pressed  out,  for
some  minutes  ; after  this  some  stool  is  passed,  with  violent
tearing  and  cutting  in  the  rectum,  and  this  is  again  fol-
lowed by  desire  for  stool,  as  if  the  rectum  were  being
pressed  out,  so  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  sit  still  on
account  of  the  pain.  Feeling  of  inactivity  in  the  intes-
tines. Violent  and  constant  tenesmus  ; nevertheless  the
stool  is  very  scanty  and  soft,  passing  only  with  great  diffi-
culty through  the  rectum  which  feels  as  if  contracted.
Hard  stool  on  the  first  day  ; on  the  second  day  no  stool  at
all,  on  the  third  day,  the  first  part  of  the  stool  was  hard,
the  second  soft.  Copious  soft  stool.  Soft  stool  with
tenesmus  in  the  rectum,  (2.  d.)  Fainting  fit  during  stool
in  the  evening.  Corrosion  in  the  rectum  during  the
diarrhoeic  stool.  He  is  waked  from  his  nightly  sleep  by  a
sore  pain  in  the  rectum,  and  afterwards  passes  into  a burn-
ing itching,  continuing  the  whole  day.  Ulcer  at  the  anus,
of  the  size  of  a nut,  covered  with  a black  blister,  which
speedily  bursts,  causing  pain  and  emitting  pus.


SASSAPARILLA.


137


Urinary  Organs.— Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with
scanly  emission,  the  urine  being  dear  and  red.  Tenes-
mus of  the  bladder,  with  cutting  pain  during  micturition.
Pressure  upon  the  bladder  the  whole  day,  but  scanty
emission.  Severe  tenesmus  as  in  gravel  of  the  bladder,
with  emission  of  white,  acrid,  turbid  matter,  with  mucus.
Micturition  with  burning,  once  a day.  Frequent  mic-
turition and  more  copious  every  day.  Quantity  of  pale
urine , depositing  a sediment.  Two  or  three  micturitions
a night,  emitting  a quantity  of  urine  each  time.  The
urine  is  passed  without  any  sensation  in  the  urinary  organs.
Burning  during  micturition,  with  emission  of  oblong  flocks.
Burning  in  the  whole  urethra,  at  every  micturition.
Scraping  sensation  in  the  urethra  during  micturition.
Painful  constriction  of  the  bladder,  without  tenesmus.
After  micturition  he  feels  a burning  and  itching-tearing
pain  from  the  glans  to  the  root  of  the  penis.  Sharp  cut-
ting stitches  in  the  urethra,  (in  a few  hours.)  Discharge
of  yellow  pus  from  the  urethra,  with  redness  and  inflam-
mation of  the  glans  and  fever  in  the  evening  with  shivering.

Genital  Organs. — Intolerable  stench  about  the  geni-
tal organs.  Herpes  on  the  foreskin.  Emission,  (the  first
night.)  Painful  emissions  almost  every  night,  with  lascivi-
ous dreams.  Inclination  for  an  embrace,  for  several  days,
with  frequent  emissions.  Delaying  menses.  Scanty  and
acrid  menses,  with  burning  of  the  inner  sides  of  the  thighs.
Itching  eruption  on  the  forehead  previous  to  the  menses,
for  three  days,  burning  and  becoming  moist  after  rubbing.
Soreness  of  the  bend  of  the  right  hip  and  desire  to  urinate
at  the  appearance  of  the  menses.  Frequent  pinching  in
the  abdomen  during  the  menses.  Griping  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach  in  the  direction  of  the  small  of  the  back,  during
the  menses.  Mucous  leucorrhoea  when  walking.

Catarrh,  Chest. — Dry  coryza  without  sneezing,  no
air  through  the  nose.  Coryza  and  cough.  Violent  cough
in  day-time,  produced  by  a titillating  ulcerative  sensation
in  the  fauces.  Dry  cough  with  burning  in  the  nose  when
coughing.  Fetid  breath.  Oppression  of  breathing.  Pain-
ful constriction  in  the  chest,  frequently  alternating  with
sudden  expansion.  Pain  during  a deep  inspiration,  as  if
something  attached  to  the  back  prevented  it.  Pressure  in


133


SASSAPARILLA.


the  region  of  the  sternum,  worse  when  touching  it.  Stitch-
ing in  either  side  of  the  chest.  Violent  stitches  in  the  re-
gion of  the  left  ribs,  in  the  evening  when  sitting.  Stitches
in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  near  the  sternum,  uninfluenced,
by  breathing.  Stitches  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  un-
influenced by  breathing.  Stitching  pain  in  the  left  side  of
the  chest,  when  walking.  Tensive  pain  in  the  outer  parts
of  the  chest,  as  if  too  short,  when  laising  the  chest  and
when  walking  straight,  (a.  24  h.)  The  nipples  are  with-
ered, unexcitable.  Itching  around  the  nipples.  Frequent
palpitation  of  the  heart,  by  day.  Almost  continual  palpi-
tation of  the  heart,  with  some  anxiety.

Chest. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  extending  to-
wards the  genital  organs  around  both  sides  of  the  pelvis,
worst  in  the  night  and  during  motion.  Tensive  pain  at
the  slightest  motion,  from  the  small  of  the  back  across  the
left  hip,  hindering  walking.  Formication  in  the  small  of
the  back.  Small  violent  stitches'in  the  back  between  the
scapulae.  Stitches,  sometimes  lancinations,  near  the  spinal
column,  from  the  right  scapula  to  the  last  false  rib,  increas-
ed during  an  inspiration,  and  arresting  the  breathing  when
taking  deep  breath.  Pain  in  the  back,  increasing  to  vio-
lent pressure  when  stooping,  less  when  at  rest,  but  being
felt  as  a stitch  whenever  turning  the  body,  (4.  d.)

Neck. — Stitching  with  pressure,  in  the  cervical  mus-
cles, increased  by  contact  and  motion.  Tension  in  the
nape  of  the  neck,  with  stitches  when  moving  the  head.
Tearing  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  thence  across  the
vertex  to  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.  Violent,  continual,
drawing  stitches  in  the  right  cervical  muscles,  from  the
clavicle  to  the  os  hyoides.  Painful  stitches  with  pressure
in  the  xyphoid  cartilage,  uninfluenced  by  deglutition.
Swelling  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  with  pain  when
touched.

Upper  Extremities. — Tearing  in  either  arm,  from  the
shoulder  to  t lie  hands.  Paralytic  pain  in  the  right  shoulder-
joint.  Stitching  pain  in  the  outer  part  of  the  shoulder-
joint,  going  and  coming  like  the  pulse.  Dull  stitches  in
the  upper  and  lore  part  of  the  region  of  the  humerus.
Pain  in  the  elbow  as  if  a tendon  had  been  strained,  when
turning  the  arm  inward  rapidly.  Paralytic  weariness  in


SASSAPARILLA.


139


the  elbow-joints.  Paralytic  tearing  in  the  fore-arm,  near
the  elbow-joint,  worse  in  rest  than  motion.  Tearing  with
pressure  in  the  region  of  the  ulna,  sometimes  extending
to  the  metacarpus.  Stitches  with  pressure  in  the  muscles
covering  the  ulnae.  Drawing  lancinations  in  the  inner
side  of  the  right  fore-arm.  Lancinations  above  the  left
wrist-joint,  from  below  upwards.  Tearing  behind  the
wrist-joint,  superiorly,  with  drawing  lancinations  towards
the  finger.  The  hand  is  painful,  although  not  swollen.
Pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  extending  to-
wards the  fourth  finger.  Tearing  in  the  left  wrist-joint.
Stitching,  with  pressure,  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the
right  index-finger,  intermittent,  for  two  days.  Cold  hands,
towards  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  for  eight  days.  Itching  in
the  dorsum  of  the  hand  and  fingers.  Feeling  of  stiffness,
burning  and  itching  of  the  hands,  less  when  moving  them.
Blister  on  the  right  wrist  joint,  itching,  afterwards  burning.
Stitching  with  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  thumb,
both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Small  stitches  in  the
posterior  joint  of  the  right  little  finger.  Innumerable
prickings  in  the  first  joint  of  the  thumb  ; the  place  is  after-
wards painful  to  the  touch.  Pain  as 'of  sub-cutaneous  ul-
ceration in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  when  pressing  them
upon  something,  or  the  pain  is  as  when  salt  gets  into  a
wound.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  fourth  right
finger,  increased  by  moving  the  joints.  The  fingers  goto
sleep.  Inflammation  of  the  thumb,  beating  and  burning,
worst  in  the  night.  Herpes  upon  the  hands.  Sweaty
hands.  Rhagades  in  the  thumb.  Itching  pustules  on  the
fingers  and  on  other  parts  of  the  body.

Lower  Extremities. — Stitching,  with  pressure,  in  the
region  of  the  right  iliac  bone,  in  every  position  of  the
body.  Paralytic,  weary  and  bruised  in  the  hip-joints  ; she
has  to  sit  down,  this  does  not  afford  any  relief.  Heavi-
ness, with  pressure,  in  the  left  thigh,  when  sitting  or  walk-
ing, without  pain.  Dull  pressure  on  the  right  thigh,  a lit-
tle over  the  knee  joint,  when  sitting.  Pressure  on  the  in-
ner side  of  the  left  thigh,  near  the  knee-joint.  Tearing
with  pressure  in  the  upper  thigh,  near  the  knee-joint,
from  below  upward,  and  from  within  outward.  Stitching,
with  pressure,  in  the  left  thigh,  near  the  patella.  Single,


140


SASSAPARILLA.


intense,  fine  stitches  in  the  inner  side  of  the  knee.  Swell
ing  and  stiffness  of  the  knee,  with  stitching  pain,  so  vio-
lent that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  move  the  knee  sideways.
Tearing  in  the  knees  and  legs.  Stiffness  of  the  right
leg,  as  if  the  bend  of  the  knee  and  calf  were  contracted.
Cramp  along  the  tibia,  down  to  the  toes.  Red,  herpetic
spots  on  the  calves,  itching  violently.  Intense  pain  of  the
soles.  Violent  tearing  in  the  left  sole,  after  midnight,  from
the  heel  to  the  toes,  followed  by  violent  itching  ; after
scratching  the  parts,  he  feels  a violent  stitch  through  the
heel,  extending  to  the  dorsum  of  the  foot.  Itching  draw-
ing in  the  sole.  Painful  drawing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left
foot,  increasing  to  a jerking.  Prickings  above  the  left
outer  malleolus.  Stitching  throbbing,  with  painful  pres-
sure, in  the  inner  side  of  the  right  sole,  and  afterwards  in
the  whole  sole,  when  sitting.  Tensive  feeling  in  the  mus-
cles and  toes  of  the  left  foot,  as  if  the  toes  would  be  drawn
inward,  in  the  morning.  Tensive  feeling  in  the  right  heel,
as  if  it  were  swollen.  Swelling  and  redness  of  the  right
tarsus,  with  pain,  increasing  in  the  afternoon.  Swelling
of  the  feet.  Cold  feet.  Pressure  of  the  toes  under  the
nails,  as  if  swollen.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  big  toe  of  the
right  foot.

General  Symptoms. — Tearing  in  almost  all  the  joints
and  limbs.  Drawingpains  in  the  scapulae  and  lower  limbs.
Sudden  drawing  pains  in  various  parts  of  the  body  and
about  the  head.  Itching  of  various  parts  of  the  body.
Itching  of  the  fore-arm,  the  inner  side  of  the  knee,  over
the  bend  of  the  knee,  especially  in  the  evening  when  in
bed.  Stinging  itching  over  the  whole  body,  in  the  even-
ing and  morning.  Burning  itching  over  the  whole  body,
with  chills.  Burning  itching  of  the  abdomen  and  thighs.
Red  pimples  of  the  size  of  a pin's  head,  dry,  on  the  back
and  thighs,  itching  only  when  exposed  to  warmth.  Blotches
as  from  nettles,  on  the  neck,  chest,  eyelids,  hands,  and  the
whole  body,  intolerably  itching  and  stinging,  and  burning
violently  after  rubbing  them.  Rash,  whenever  he  goes
out  of  a warm  room  into  the  cold  air.  Herpes  on  every
part  of  the  body.  A number  of  small  warts.  The  pus-
tules when  scratched  open,  form  ulcers  suppurating  for  a
long  time.  Small  pustules  on  the  right  side  of  the  nose,


SEPIA.


141


on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  on  the  left  nates,  some-
times stinging  when  touched.

We  akness,  Fits. — Nausea  after  breakfast,  with  sour
eructations;  when  standing  near  the  open  window,  he  be-
came giddy,  lost  his  consciousness,  fell  on  his  back,  and
after  having  been  lifted  up  and  having  recovered  his  senses,
he  felt  great  tightness  across  the  chest.  Great  weakness,
especially  of  the  lower  limbs.

Sleep. — Frequent  yawning.  Drowsiness.  Starting  up,
as  from  a report.  Restless  sleep,  with  inclination  to  an
embrace,  emission,  and  jerking  in  both  fore-arms.  Rest-
less sleep,  with  dreams  about  accidents.  Frightful  dreams
in  a deep  sleep.  Dreams  about  horrid  things,  for  instance
big  spiders.  Dream  of  dead  persons,  ghosts,  vexation,
business.  Lascivious  dreams.  Profuse  sweat  in  the  joints,
at  night  when  waking*.  When  waking  he  finds  himself
on  his  back,  for  many  nights.  Is  unable  to  sleep  before
midnight,  owing  to  restlessness  in  his  body  and  uncommon
mobility  of  all  his  limbs.

Fe  ver. — Frequent  chilliness  of  the  arms,  thighs,  back
f and  abdomen.  Feverish  coldness,  frequently,  in  day-time,
' with  blue  nails  and  loss  of  all  animal  heat  in  arms  and
) legs.  Internal  chilliness  and  drowsiness.  Shuddering
( over  the  whole  body,  from  below  upwards.  Chilliness
i and  coldness  of  the  whole  body,  even  when  sitting  near
1 the  stove,  face  and  chest  being  unusually  warm.  Chilli-
r ness  in  bed,  (5.  or  9.  d.)  Chilliness  in  the  morning,  sweat
and  warmth  in  the  afternoon.  Heat  in  the  whole  body,
for  a short  while.  Heat  in  the  evening  one  hour  previous
c to  going  to  sleep  ; orgasm  of  the  blood,  throbbing  of  the
heart  and  sweat  on  the  forehead  ; two  evenings  in  succes-
sion. Constant  feverishness  of  the  whole  body.


SEPIA.

This  brown-black  juice,  which,  before  me,  had  only  been
3 used  for  drawing,  is  contained  in  a bag  in  the  abdomen  of
the  sea-insect,  ink-fish , (sepia  octopoda,)  and  is  sometimes
a jerked  forth  by  the  insect  to  darken  the  water  around,


142


SEPIA.


either  for  the  purpose  of  securing  a prey  or  opposing  an
attack.

This  insect  is  chiefly  found  in  the  Mediterranean  sea  ;
the  bag  is  dried  and  sold  in  Rome  for  purposes  of  draw-
ing*

The  sepia-juice  may  be  dissolved  in  water,  but  when  in
its  natural  state  it  is  insoluble  in  alcohol.

For  homoeopathic  purposes  the  juice  is  prepared  like  all
other  dry  medicinal  substances.

Sepia  has  been  found  useful  in  the  following  affections  :

Despondency  and  weeping  ; melancholy  ; sadness  ;
grief ; discouragement  ; anxiety  in  the  evening  when  in
bed  ; anxiety  and  apprehensiveness  with  flushes  of  heat ;
tendency  to  start  ; aversion  to  one’s  business;  indifference
to  the  members  of  one’s  own  family  ; momentary  attacks
of  vertigo  with  loss  of  consciousness  when  walking  in  the
open  air  and  w'hen  writing ; vertigo;  wreak  memory  ; dul-
ness  of  the  head  and  inability  to  perform  intellectual  la-
bor ; heaviness  of  the  head  ; headache  with  nausea  ; cepha-
lagra  with  boring  pain  forcing  one  to  exclaim,  and  with
vomiting  ; beating  headache,  especially  in  the  occiput  ;
congestion  to  the  head,  when  stooping  ; coldness  on  the
head  ; itching  in  the  top  of  the  head,  nose,  ears  ; falling
off  of  the  hair  ; the  head  is  jerked  fonvard  ; inability  to
open  the  eyelids  in  the  night  ; heaviness  and  closing  of  the
upper  eyelid  ; pressure  in  the  eyes  ; prickling  in  the  eyes,
in  the  evening  at  candle-light ; nightly  agglutination  of  the
eyes  ; evening  swelling  of  the  eyes  ; dry  scurf  of  the  mar-
gins of  the  eyelids,  in  the  morning  when  waking  ; long-
sightedness ; sensation  as  of  a gauze  before  the  eyes ;
black  points  and  fiery  streaks  before  the  eyes  ; black  spots
hovering  before  the  eyes ; amaurosis  with  contraction  of
the  pupils  ; excessive  sensitiveness  of  the  sense  of  hear-
ing in  music  ; hardness  of  hearing  ; roaring  and  whizzing
before  the  ears  ; chronic  inflammation  and  eruption  of  the
tip  of  the  nose  ; expulsion  of  blood  from  the  nose  when
blowing  it  ; frequent  bleeding  of  the  nose  ; want  of  smell  ;
yellow  face  ; itching  in  the  face  ; erysipelas  and  swelling
of  the  whole  side  of  the  face,  beginning  in  the  hollow  root
of  a tooth  ; dry,  scaly  lips  ; swelling  of  the  gums  ; bleed-
ing gums  ; sore  gums  ; stinging  gums  ; dry  mouth  ; fetor


SEPIA.


143


from  the  mouth  ; white-coated  tongue  ; soreness  of  the  tip
of  the  tongue  ; jerking  in  the  throat  ; viscidity  of  the
throat;  hawking  up  of  mucus  in  the  morning;  thirst  in
the  morning  ; canine  hunger  ; acidity  in  the  mouth  ajter  a
meal  ; aversion  to  food  ; aversion  to  meat  and  milk  ; vo-
racity ; repulsive  eructations  after  eating  fat  ; sour  eruc-
tations ; eructations  tasting  of  the  ingesla ; water-brash ,
especially  after  drinking  ; water-brash  preceded  by  qualm-
ishness and  writhing  about  the  stomach;  stitching  aching
pain  in  the  pit  and  region  of  the  stomach;  pain  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach  when  walking  ; pain  in  the  stomach  after
supper;  sweat  after  eating  ; pressure  at  the  stomach  dur-
ing a meal  ; difficult  digestion  ; scraping  and  burning  in
the  oesophagus  after  a meal ; emptiness  in  the  stomach  ;
stitching  in  the  liver  ; burning  in  the  stomach  and  abdo-
men ; boring  in  the  hypochondria;  stitching  in  the  left
hypochondrium  ; digging-up,  pressure  and  cutting  in  the
abdomen  ; pressure  in  the  abdomen  extending  up  into  the
pit  of  the  stomach  ; sensation  as  if  the  parts  in  the  abdo-
men were  fastened  and  hard  ; puffiness  of  the  abdomen,
in  mothers;  empty  feeling  in  the  abdomen;  coldness  of
the  abdomen  ; dropsy  of  the  abdomen  ; frequent  formation
and  incarceration  of  flatulence  ; rumbling  in  the  abdomen,
especially  after  a meal  ; colic  after  bodily  exercise  ; un-
successful desire  for  stool  ; delaying  stool  ; too  soft  stool ;
mucous  diarrhoea  ; blood  with  stool  ; discharge  of  mucus
from  the  rectum,  without  stool,  with  stitching  and  tearing
in  the  anus  and  rectum  ; stool  like  sheep’s-dung  ; burning
at  the  rectum  during  stool ; humor  from  the  rectum  ;
creeping  in  the  rectum  ; itching  of  the  anus  ; congestion
of  blood  to  the  anus  ; protrusion  of  the  varices  of  the  anus  ;
prolapsus  recti  during  stool ; pressure  upon  the  bladder;
involuntary  emission  of  urine  before  midnight. ; dark  urine  ;
smarting  in  the  urethra  during  micturition  ; painful  testi-
cle ; weakness  of  the  genital  organs  ; itching  about  the
genital  organs;  swelling  of  the  scrotum;  suppression  of
the  menses  ; pressing  upon  the  pudendum  ; soreness  of  the
pudendum  and  between  the  thighs  ; heat  in  and  about  the
pudendum  ; weak  menses  ; pain  during  the  menses  as  if
bruised  ; leucorrhoea  of  yellow  water.

Obstruction  of  the  nose  ; troublesome  dryness  of  the


144


SEPIA.


nose  ; coryza  ; dry  coryza  ; hoarseness ; catarrh  chang-
ing to  coryza  ; cough,  morning  and  evening,  with  salt  ex-
pectoration ; titillating  cough,  with  constipation;  difficult
expectoration  ; asthma  when  walking,  going  up  stairs  and
lying  in  the  bed  ; orgasm  of  the  blood  in  the  chest;  sore-
ness in  the  middle  of  t he  chest ; pain  in  the  chest  from
motion  ; oppression  of  the  chest ; stitching  in  the  leftside
of  the  chest ; stitches  in  the  chest  during  mental  labor  ;
pain  in  the  side  when  breathing  and  coughing;  pain  in  the
small  of  the  back;  painful  pressing  in  the  small  of  the
back  ; beating  in  the  small  of  the  back  ; weakness  in  the
small  of  the  back  when  walking  ; digging-up,  cutting  and
pressure  in  the  back;  chilliness  in  the  back;  itching  erup-
tion on  the  back  ; tearing  and  cramp  in  the  back  ; stiff
back  ; stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck  ; sweat  in  the  ax-
illae ; humid  herpes  in  the  left  axilla  ; weak  arms  ; tense-
ness in  the  arm  ; pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  shoulder-joint ;
tension  of  the  lower  arm  ; paralytic  drawing  in  the  arm  ;
stitching  in  the  wrist-joint  when  moving  it  ; burning  palms  ;
cold  sweat  of  the  hands;  distorted  nails  on  the  fingers;
lancinations  from  the  upper  brim  of  the  pelvis  around  the
bend  of  the  hip  into  the  thigh  ; paralytic  weakness  of  the
limbs  ; cold  legs  and  feet ; stitch-like  jerks  in  the  thigh,
obliging  one  to  draw  up  the  limb  ; stitches  in  the  tibias  ;
creeping  in  the  leg  as  of  a mouse  ; drawing  pain  in  the  leg
and  big  toe;  cramp  in  the  calves;  swelling  of  the  legs
and  feet  ; jerking  of  the  feet  during  the  siesta  ; sweaty
feet;  suppressed  sweat  of  the  feet ; burning  in  the  feet ;
creeping  and  tingling  of  the  soles  ; stitches  in  the  corns  ;
arms  and  hands  go  to  sleep,  especially  after  using  them  in
working;  tensive  stiffness  and  want  of  mobility  of  the
wrist,  knee,  and  tarsal  joints  ; ulcers  on  the  joints  of  the
fingers  and  toes  ; uneasiness  and  beating  in  all  the  limbs  ;
burning  pains  in  many  parts  of  the  body  ; attacks  of  fly-
ing heat ; heat  from  vexation,  and  during  important  con-
versations ; flushes  of  heat  when  sitting  or  walking  in
the  open  air;  orgasm  of  the  blood  ; palpitation  of  the  heart;
sweat  when  sitting;  copious  sweat  during  slight  exercise  ;
want  of  animal  heat ; sensitiveness  to  the  open  air ; great
liability  to  cold  ; liability  of  parts  to  being  strained  ; tearing
boring  from  the  region  of  the  stomach  to  the  lumbar  verte-


SEPIA.


145


bras  ; spasm  in  the  stomach  and  chest ; twitchings  of  all  the
muscles  ; brownish  spots  on  the  chest,  abdomen  and  back  ;
jerking  of  the  limbs  in  day-time  ; frequent  stretching  of
the  limbs  ; great  suffering  from  vexation;  tremulous  weak-
ness ; laziness  and  heaviness  of  the  body  ; want  of  strength  ;
unsteadiness  of  the  body  ; getting  tired  easily  when  walk-
ing ; stitches  in  the  arm  when  making  a bodily  effort ;
drowsiness  by  day;  timely  drowsiness  in  the  evening;
illusion  when  asleep,  as  if  he  were  called  ; raving  when
asleep  ; anxious,  terrifying  dreams  ; frequent  waking,  with-
out any  apparent  cause  ; unrefreshing  sleep  ; night  sweat ;
morning  sweat ; sour  morning-sweat.

The  most  powerful  antidote  of  Sepia  is  smelling  of  spiri-
tus  nitr.  dulc.  ; smelling  of  the  sixth  potency  of  antimo-
nium  cr.  or  of  tart.  emet.  is  likewise  an  antidote  to  Sepia,
but  less  powerful  than  the  former  ; when  the  blood  is  too
much  excited  by  Sepia,  smell  of  Aconite.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Goullon ; V.  Gersdorff ;
Gross  ; Hartlaub  ; Wahle.

Moral  Symptoms. — Desponding,  sad.  Very  sad  and
weak.  Sad  about  her  health.  Melancholy,  in  the  morn-
ing. Anxious  about  her  health,  irritated,  weak.  Imagines
she  will  have  consumption,  and  is  sad  about  her  health.
All  her  ailments  appear  to  her  very  distressing.  When
merely  thinking  of  his  past  sufferings,  his  pulse  becomes
faster  and  his  breathing  becomes  arrested.  Great  sadness,
weeps  frequently.  Irritable  and  weeping  mood.  Every
thing  made  her  sad  and  disposed  her  to  weep.  Feels  un-
happy, without  any  cause.  Dread  of  men.  Wishes  to
be  alone  and  to  lie  down  with  her  eyes  closed.  Dreads  to
be  alone  a single  moment.  Solicitous  and  apprehensive,
out  of  humor.  Trembling  with  fearfulness,  cold  sweat  on
the  forehead.  Paroxysms  of  oppressive  anxiety.  Great
anguish  in  the  blood.  Anxiety  in  the  evening,  her  face
becomes  flushed,  and  these  paroxysms  of  heat  come  and
go  from  time  to  time.  Great  internal  restlessness  for
many  days,  accompanied  with  hurriedness  ; he  would  like
his  work  to  be  finished  when  it  is  merely  begun.  Rest-
[ lessness  and  want  of  cheerfulness  for  many  days  ; she  is
) engaged  with  sad  recollections,  is  anxious,  and  cannot  re-

7


146


SEPIA;


main  long  in  one  place.  Discouraged  and  out  of  humor.
Complete  discouragement.  Extreme  loathing  of  life  ; he
felt  as  if  he  could  not  bear  such  a miserable  existence  and
as  if  he  would  sink  into  nothing,  if  he  did  not  destroy  him-
self, (a.  24  h.)  Inclines  to  start  and  is  very  fearful.  Dis-
contented. Feels  easily  offended.  Not  disposed  to  any
kind  of  work.  Mind  brooding  on  grief,  as  after  secret
chagrin.  Irritated  in  the  whole  body.  The  nerves
are  very  sensitive  to  every  noise.  Playing  on  the  piano
affects  her  very  much.  The  recollection  of  past  disagree-
able occurrences  makes  him  feel  extremely  dissatisfied.
He  involuntarily  recollects  vexatious  occurrences,  which
make  him  feel  so  angry  that  he  is  beside  himself,  accom-
panied with  anguish,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  sweat
over  the  whole  body,  (15  d.)  Pie  criticises  everything
and  wants  something  different  from  all  other  people,  with
weeping  and  heat  in  the  face.  She  criticises  every  thing.
Inclines  to  be  out  of  humor.  She  is  so  much  excited  by
anger  that  she  dreads  an  apoplectic  fit,  and  her  eyes  see
black.  Inclines  to  be  vehement.  Gets  into  a passion  about
a trifle,  with  trembling,  (especially  of  the  hands.)  Ex-
tremely sensitive  through  a slight  cause  ; fit  of  desperately
furious  gestures,  with  sobbing  ; she  throws  herself  upon
her  bed  and  remains  lying  the  whole  day  without  eating,
(immediately  before  the  menses)  Laziness  of  mind  and
despondency,  (a.  23  d.)  Great  indifference.  Apathy , (a.
6,  7,  8 d.)  Absence  of  mind,  want  of  attention.  Alter-
nately cheerful  and  sad.  Involuntary  fits  of  laughter  and
weeping  in  alternation,  without  either  resulting  from  a cor-
responding mood.  Weak  memory , (a.  20,  48  h.)  He
frequently  makes  mistakes  in  writing.  He  was  absent,
made  mistakes  in  speaking  and  used  wrong  words,  (a.  9
d.)  He  imagines  things  which  he  does  not  want  to  ima-
gine, uses  wrong  expressions  which  he  knows  to  be  wrong,
proposes  to  himself  things  which  are  contrary  to  his  inten-
tions, and  is  in  contradiction  with  himself,  and  therefore  in
a very  disagreeable  and  uneasy  mood,  (a.  24  h.)  With-
out thought  or  sense,  in  spite  of  his  desire  to  work.  Heavy
flow  of  ideas.  Gloominess,  and  inability  to  think  the
whole  forenoon  and  many  afternoons  in  succession.  Sen-


SEPIA.


147


i

.

!


r

»

l


>


[

a


sation  of  stupidity  in  the  head,  in  paroxysms,  with  shud-
dering and  momentary  arrest  of  breathing ; after  this  she
was  obliged  to  take  deep  breath.

Head. — Obtusion  of  the  head,  (a.  24  h.)  Obtusion  of
the  left  occiput,  (a.  3 h.).  Obtusion  of  the  forepart  of  the
head,  (a.  32  h.)  Obtusion  of  the  head,  as  in  catarrh,  with
a reeling  sensation.  Obtusion  of  the  head  with  pressure
in  the  eyes,  increased  by  walking  in  the  open  air.  Weak
head,  she  is  almost  unable  to  think,  especially  in  the  after-
noon. The  whole  head  feels  obtuse  and  vacillating,  with
tension  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck  and  nape  of  the  neck.
Cloudiness  of  the  head,  frequently  in  the  morning  when
rising  from  bed.  Painful  gloominess  in  the  head,  espe-
cially the  forehead.  Dimness  and  dulness  of  the  head,
with  whirling  sensation,  for  four  days.  Dizziness  and
stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  he  frequently  knows  not  what
he  is  about.  Feeling  of  stupefaction  in  the  head.  Stupe-
faction of  the  head,  with  tightness  of  the  chest  and  weak-
ness of  the  whole  body.  Every  morning,  when  rising,  the
head  feels  heavy  ; going  off  in  a few  hours.  Giddiness  of
the  head,  she  is  scarcely  able  to  keep  it  straight.  Vertigo
in  the  morning  when  raising  one’s  self  in  the  bed,  as  if  the
things  in  the  room  were  moving  about.  Vertigo  when  walk-
ing, as  if  the  objects  were  moving.  Vertigo,  he  staggers
when  walking  and  looking  up.  Vertigo  only  when  walking
in  the  open  air,  she  had  to  be  led.  Vertigo  when  seeing
a large  plain  before  her.  Veriigo  when  moving  the  arms.
Fits  of  vertigo  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  lasting  two
or  three  minutes  ; sensation  as  if  something  were  rolling
about  in  the  head,  she  staggered  ; in  the  evening  she  was
attacked  with  headache  and  roaring  in  the  ears-  Vertigo,
with  want  of  desire  to  do  anything.  Vertigo  unto  falling,
every  morning  when  rising.  Vertigo  every  afternoon  from
3 to  5 o’clock  ; every  thing  turns  with  her  when  walking,
sitting  or  lying  down.  Giddiness  every  afternoon,  from
four  to  six  o’clock,  when  walking  or  sitting.  Two  fits  of
vertigo  when  stooping,  after  supper,  as  if  the  senses  would
vanish.  Vertigo  with  cold  hands  and  feet,  (a.  34  d.)  Ver-
tigo and  vacillating  sensation,  when  taking  some  simple
drink  ; he  imagined  he  should  have  an  apoplectic  fit,  for
five  minutes  ; afterwards  flush  of  heat  for  five  minutes.


148


SEPIA.


Headache,  every  minute,  as  if  coming  from  the  back,  a
stitching  in  the  head  at  every  step.  Dull  headache  every
morning,  after  rising  from  the  bed.  Intense  headache,  in
the  morning  when  waking,  (and  after  rising.)  Headache
in  the  morning,  with  nausea.  Headache,  in  the  morning,
in  the  forehead,  as  if  catarrh  would  set  in.  Headache  in
the  forehead  and  vertex  ; afterwards  anxiety  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  with  trembling  ; afterwards  violent  bleeding
at  the  nose.  Paralytic  feeling  in  the  forehead.  Head-
ache, most  violent  towards  evening,  especially  when  shak-
ing the  head.  Headache  after  the  siesta,  as  if  from  con-
cussion of  the  head.  Concussion  of  the  brain  when  knock-
ing the  foot  against  something.  Motion  in  the  brain  when
shaking  the  head.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head)  (a.  5 d.)
Heat  in  the  head,  with  a burning  sensation  through  the
ears  ; this  causes  difficulty  of  hearing  and  dimness  of
sight.  Great  heat  in  the  head,  in  the  morning,  with  sen-
sation as  if  the  nose  would  bleed.  Painful  heat  in  the
head,  frequently  accompanied  with  suffusion  of  heat  over
the  whole  body.  Violent  heat  rising  to  the  head,  every
five  minutes.  Heat  in  the  head,  in  the  evening,  (a.  3 d.)
Violent  headache,  with  intolerance  of  external  warmth  :
nevertheless  she  froze.  Headache,  as  if  the  head  would
burst,  also  wrhen  coughing.  Beating  headache,  in  the  even-
ing. Beating  in  the  head,  in  the  side  upon  which  she  is  rest-
ing. Violently  beating  headace  in  the  temples.  Painful
beating  in  the  occiput.  Beating  headache  at  every  motion.
Beating  headache,  very  painful,  in  the  vertex,  in  the  morn-
ing shortly  after  rising,  (a.  6 d.)  Beating  in  the  upper
part  of  the  head,  very  painful,  at  the  least  motion  ; when
turning  the  eyes  and  when  moving  the  head,  the  beating
moves  upward  as  if  out  of  the  head  ; there  is  an  indistinct
beating  even  when  remaining  ever  so  still.  Pinching  jerks
in  the  head,  in  the  morning,  when  rising.  Single  parox-
ysms of  undulating  headache,  in  the  forehead,  (a.  35  h.)
Violent  painful  jerking  in  the  forehead.  Pressure,  jerk-
ing and  beating  in  the  head  with  heat,  as  if  every  thing
would  issue  from  the  forehead  and  eyes,  for  three  days.
Aching  pain  in  the  hot  forehead,  in  the  evening,  from  seven
to  eight  o’clock,  (a.  4,  5 d.)  Headache,  only  in  the  fore-
part of  the  head,  mostly  towards  the  forehead,  a pressure


SEPIA.


149


upon  the  brain,  occurring  at  least  eight  or  ten  times  in  an
hour,  and  abating  again  in  half  an  hour  ; after  the  lapse  of
such  an  hour  the  pressure  ceased  for  an  hour  or  an  hour
and  a half ; returned  a little  on  the  second  day.  (a.  22  d.)
Pressure  mostly  in  the  forehead  and  eyes  ; lastly  nausea,
with  much  spitting.  Dull  aching  pain  at  a small  spot  of
the  occiput.  Pressure  on  the  upper  part  of  the  sinciput.
Violent  pressure  in  the  head,  the  whole  day,  with  vertigo,
weeping  mood  and  profuse  coryza.  Aching  pain  in  the
right  occiput.  Aching  pain  in  the  occiput,  in  the  evening,
until  midnight.  Aching  pain  in  the  outer  part  of  the  occi-
put, as  if  the  parts  were  sore.  Deep-seated  headache,
with  aching  pain  in  the  molares,  on  one  side.  Pressure
and  tension  in  the  forehead  and  eyes,  with  burning.  Pres-
sure in  the  top  of  the  head,  after  mental  labor.  Oppres-
sive weight  of  the  head  in  the  temples  and  over  the  fore-
head, as  if  the  head  were  congested  with  blood,  as  in  vio-
lent coryza.  Heaviness  in  the  occiput,  especially  in  the
morning.  Heaviness  of  the  head,  she  was  scarcely  able
to  raise  it.  Heaviness  of  the  head,  in  the  evening,,  and
headache  of  one  side,  after  lying  down.  Pressing,  dig-
ging-up, itching  headache,  with  stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the
neck  and  sensitiveness  of  the  head  when  touching  it.  Bor-
ing digging-up  pain  in  the  forehead,  commencing  in  the
forenoon,  the  whole  day,  at  the  least  motion.  Clawing
pain  in  the  vertex  and  in  the  upper  part  of  the  occiput,
with  feeling  of  soreness  which  finally  becomes  burning.
Pressing  together  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  the  whole
day,  with  great  asthma,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Headache,  pressing  as
it  were  from  within  outward,  (a.  13  d.)  Headache,  as  if
the  eyes  would  fall  out.  Violent  headache,  as  if  the  head
should  burst.  Contractive  headache  in  the  forehead.
Contractive  pain  with  pressure,  in  the  sinciput,  (the  first
days.)  Vibratory  contractive  sensation  in  the  sinciput,  in
the  evening.  Pinching  pain  in  one  side  of  the  head,  in
paroxysms.  Headache  in  the  forenoon,  as  if  the  brain
were  crushed.  Painful  cracking  in  the  head,  as  if  some-
thing got  broke  in  it,  with  pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck
when  turning  the  head.  Stitching  headache,  continually
in  the  lower  part  of  the  forehead,  close  over  the  left  eye,
worse  during  motion  in  a room,  much  relieved  when  walk-


150


SEPIA.


ing  in  the  open  air.  Stitching  headache,  (a.  18  d.)  Stitch-
ing in  the  forehead,  now  here,  now  there.  Prickings  in
the  forehead  everyday,  when  walking  fast,  with  inclination
to  vomit.  Stitches  in  the  forehead  with  inclination  to  vo-
mit, (she  was  not  able  to  eat  anything  ;)  relieved  by  lying
down.  Pull  stitches  in  the  whole  head,  lastly  in  the  occi-
put, making  it  impossible  for  him  to  do  anything.  Severe
stitches  in  the  occiput,  towards  the  vertex.  Occasionally
a single  dart  through  the  head.  Stitching  in  the  left  tem-
ple. Stitching  in  the  outer  part  of  the  temple.  Stitching
headache  in  both  temples  in  the  evening.  Frequent  stitches
in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  in  the  afternoon  ; also  in  the
occiput,  in  the  evening.  Violent  stitching  over  the  left  or-
bit from  within  outward,  with  complete  contraction  of  the
eye,  three  days  in  succession,  in  the  morning  after  rising,
until  noon  ; somewhat  relieved  in  the  open  air.  Stitching
in  the  head  over  the  ear,  for  a few  minutes.  Stitching
headache,  through  the  eyes,  the  whole  day.  Drawing  in
the  occiput.  Frequent  drawing  pain  in  the  forepart  of  the
head.  Painful  drawing,  at  times  in  the  right,  at  times  in
the  left  occiput,  inferiorly,  (a.  5 h.)  Drawing  pain  in  the
occiput ; when  feeling  it,  a pain  as  of  sub-cutaneous  ul-
ceration is  experienced  in  it.  Drawing  pain  in  the  outer
parts  of  the  forehead,  extending  as  far  as  the  occiput,  in
separate  drawings.  Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  left  side  of
the  head.  Superficial  drawing  and  boring  in  the  head,
more  at  night,  and  being  so  violent  before  midnight
that  she  was  obliged  to  leave  her  bed  ; extending  into  the
temple,  ear  and  teeth,  (a.  6 d.)  Tearing  in  the  head,  above
the  forehead  and  in  the  eyes,  from  two  o’clock  in  the  after-
noon until  bed-time.  Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the
right  forehead,  (a.  8 h.)  Tearing  in  the  left  frontal  emi-
nence, (a.  11^  h)  Tearing  over  the  eyes.  Tearing  in
the  left  temple,  extending  into  the  upper  part  of  the  left
side  of  the  head.  Intermittent,  slight  tearing  in  the  lowest
part  of  the  left  occiput,  near  the  neck.  Tearing  in  the
occiput.  Tearing,  drawing  and  stitching,  from  the  fore-
head and  occiput  to  the  vertex.  Pain  in  the  occiput,  mostly
at  night,  and  worst  when  lying  upon  it,  as  if  hollow,  and
as  if  there  were  ulceration  under  the  scalp  and  in  the  brain,
relieved  by  pressing  upon  it  with  the  hand.  Pain  of  the


SEPIA.


151


Scalp  when  touching  it,  as  if  the  roots  of  the  hairs  were
painful,  (a.  3 d.)  Great  jailing  off  of  the  hair , (a.  1 and
8 d.)  Movement  of  the  scalp  forward  and  backward;  he
is  obliged  to  bite  the  molar  teeth  together.  A good  deal
of  itching  in  the  hairy  scaly , (a.  16  d.)  Itching  in  the
vertex,  with  great  falling  off  of  the  hair.  Itching  of  the
occiput,  in  the  evening.  Corrosive  itching  of  the  scalp.
Violent  itching  of  the  head,  when  the  headache  is  going
off.  Humid  scalp.  A number  of  scabs  on  the  scalp,  (for
forty  days.)  Small,  itching  pustules  on  the  occiput,  to-
wards the  nape  of  the  neck,  forming  into  ulcers  of  the  size
of  an  inch,  with  rough  crusts,  under  which  the  secretion  con-
tinued for  a long  time.  Swelling  above  the  temple , (a.  48
h.)  Swelling  on  the  forehead,  (a.  4,  15d.)  Small , red
pimples  on  the  forehead,  rough  forehead,  (1.  6.  d.)  Pain-
ful pimples  on  the  forehead.  Painful,  srtiall  indurations  on
the  forehead.  In  the  morning  the  head  is  jerked  forward
and  backward  six  or  seven  times,  with  full. consciousness.

Eyes. — Several  times  a pain  in  the  eyes,  with  headache
and  heat  in  the  eyes.  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  eyes.
Pressure  over  the  eyes,  when  walking  in  bright  day-
light, (a.  11  d.)  Pressure,  heat  and  twinkling  in  the
eyes  as  of  a thousand  suns.  Pain  in  the  eye-lids , when
leaking,  as  if  loo  heavy , and  as  if  he  could  not  keep  them
open.  Two  mornings  in  succession  the  feye-lids  feel
drawn  together  as  if  pressed  down  by  a heavy  weight ;
without  agglutination.  Pressure  on  the  lower  part  of  the
right  eye-ball.  Painful  pressure  on  the  upper  part  of  both
eye-balls,  especially  frequent  in  the  right.  Aching  pain
when  turning  the  eyes  to  the  right  side.  Pressure  in  the
right  eye  as  of  a grain  of  sand  which  had  got  in,  aggra-
vated by  rubbing,  felt  most  when  pressing  the  eye-lids
together.  Pressure,  with  tearing,  in  the  orbits,  especially
that  of  the  left  eye.  Creeping  in  the  inner  margin  of  the
left  orbit.  Itching  of  the  eve-lids.  Itching  of  the  eyes.
Itching  of  the  eye-balls.  Violent  itching  in  the  left  outer
canthus,  with  sore  pain  after  rubbing.  Itching  of  the
inner  canthus,  in  the  morning  after  waking ; rubbing  occa-
sions a smarting  and  violent  lachrymation,  followed  by  a
feeling  of  soreness  in  the  outer  canthus,  where  the  lids
are  somewhat  adhering  to  one  another.  Violent  itching


152


SEPIA.


smarting  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye,  with  lachry-
mal ion  and  the  conjunctiva  being  somewhat  reddened.
Smarting  in  the  right  eye,  in  the  evening,  with  inclination
of  the  lids  to  close  against  the  person’s  wish.  Stitching
in  the  left  eye.  Smarting  pain  in  both  eyes.  Burning  of
the  eyes,  in  the  morning , and  weakness  of  the  same.
Burning  in  the  outer  canthus,  frequently  during  the  day,
for  one  hour.  Burning  sensation*  in  the  margin  of  the  left
lower  eye-lid,  towards  the  outer  canthus.  Heat  in  the
left  eye,  in  the  morning,  with  swelling  in  the  inner  can-
thus. Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  redness  of  the  white
and  stitching  and  pressure  in  the  same.  Inflammation  of
the  eyes,  not  bearing  cold  water.  Inflammation  of  the
eye-lid  with  a stye  upon  it.  Swelling  and  some  redness
of  the  right  upper  eye-lid,  in  the  morning.  Swelling
below  the  eyes,  in  the  morning,  after  waking.  Violent
red  swelling  of  the  lower  eye-lid,  with  aching  and  burning
pain.  Redness  of  the  white  of  the  eye,  (a.  17  d,)  Red-
ness of  the  white  of  the  eye,  in  the  morning,  when  waking,
with  burning  smarting  and  pressure.  Swelling  of  the  eye,
with  headache  of  the  same  side.  Scabs  in  the  eye-brows
for  S weeks.  Red  herpetic  spot  on  the  upper  eye-lid,
scaly  and  peeling  off.  Glassy  appearance  of  the  eyes.
The  eyes  look  as  if  swimming,  in  the  morning  when
waking,  with  smarting  in  the  canthi.  Lachryrnation ,
morning  and  evening.  Lachryrnation  in  the  open  air.
Agglutination  of  the  lids  in  the  morning.  Agglutination
of  the  lids,  only  in  the  evening.  Jerking  in  the  eye-lids.
Twilchings  of  the  eye-lids.  Daily  twitchings  below  the
eyes.  Frequent  twitching  of  the  left  lower  eye-lid,  with
sensation  as  if  the  eye  would  run,  which  obliges  him  to
wipe  it  often.  The  eyes  are  fatigued  by  reading  and
writing,  with  pain  in  the  inner  canthus  as  if  sore.  Feeling
of  nausea  and  anxiety  when  exerting  the  eyes.  Dimness
of  sight  when  writing,  so  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  recog-
nise any  thing.  Vanishing  of  sight.  He  only  sees  one  half
of  each  of  the  things  he  looks  at ; the  other  half  is  obscure.
Sight  is  impeded  by  a fiery  zigzag  before  the  eyes.  A
number  of  black  spots  before  the  eyes.  White  luminous
vibrations  before  tiie  eyes.  Sparks  of  fire  before  the  eyes,
with  great  faintness  of  body.  Twinkling  before  the  eyes,


SEPIA.


153


when  looking  into  the  light  ; he  sees  a zigzag-shaped
wreath  of  colours.  Green  shine  around  the  candle-light.
The  light  of  day  dazzles  the  eyes  and  causes  headache.
The  light  of  the  candle  incommodes  the  eyes  by  a con-
tractive sensation  when  reading  or  writing.

Ears. — Pain  in  the  left  ear  as  if  it  were  being  torn  out.
Tearing  in  the  eminence  behind  the  right  ear.  Drawing
pain  and  heat  in  the  right  ear.  Drawing-stitching  pain  in
the  internal  ear,  from  within  outward.  Otalgia  in  both
ears,  accompanied  with  pressure  and  stitches.  Violent
pressing,  from  without  inward,  below  and  in  front  of  the
left  and  right  ear.  Otalgia,  (a.  24  d.)  Pain  in  the  ears,
in  the  evening,  resembling  otalgia,  (a.  16  d.)  Continual
otalgia  in  both  ears,  at  night.  Pressing  in  the  ear,  from
within  outward,  when  pressing  upon  the  rectum  at  stool,
(a.  3 d.)  Sore  pain  in  the  ear.  Pain  as  of  sub-cutaneous
ulceration  in  the  meatus  auditorius  internus,  when  inserting
the  finger  into  it.  Stitches  in  the  weak  ear,  causing  her
to  exclaim  in  a piteous  tone  of  voice.  Severe  stitching
in  the  left  ear  and  cheek.  Stitching  in  the  parotid
, gland,  it  swells  and  a tensive  pain  is  felt  in  it  when
! turning  the  head.  Single  fine  stitches  in  the  interior  of
] the  left  ear.  Tingling  in  the  right  ear.  Heat  and
i redness  of  the  left  ear.  Swelling  near  the  orifice  of
I the  meatus  auditorius,  with  stinging  pain  in  the  swelling
? when  pressing  upon  the  parts  next  to  the  antehelix.  A
g good  deal  of  itching  in  the  weak  ear  every  day.  A good
b deal  of  itching  in  the  good  ear,  violent  roaring  and  accu-
e mulation  of  a purulent,  white  cerumen.  A thin  pus  is  flow-
i!  ing  out  of  the  ear,  with  itching.  A good  deal  of  eruption
c on  the  ear,  emitting  pus.  Sensitive  to  noise.  Noise  be-
ll fore  the  ears  as  of  paper  when  ruffling  it  in  the  hands.
D Gurgling  in  the  ear,  when  raising  one’s-self  after  stooping.
s Frequent  tingling  in  the  ear , (a.  24  h.)  Singing  before
1;  the  ear.  Rumbling  in  the  right  ear.  Whizzing  and  beat-

i ing  in  the  ear.  Loud  sounds  and  humming  in  the  ears ,
i'  (immediately.)  Whizzing  and  roaring  in  the  ears,  with
n sensation  as  if  stopped  up  ; nevertheless  she  was  able  to

ii  hear.  Whizzing  before  the  ear,  in  the  evening  when
v writing,  mingled  with  whistling.  Deep  howling  in  the
3 ear  when  lying  upon  it,  synchronous  with  the  pulse,  for


154


SEPIA.


two  nights.  Roaring  in  the  ear;  after  that  she  heard
nothing.  Roaring  and  pulsative  blowing  as  of  a soft  wind
in  the  right  ear,  at  night.  Sudden,  short  deafness  of  the
ears,  as  if  stopped  up  with  a plug.

Nose. — Aching  pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose.  Stitching
pain  in  the  tip  of  the  nose,  when  touching  it,  as  if  a sharp
hair  were  being  stuck  in.  Itching  of  the  tip  of  the  nose.
Sore  feeling  in  the  nose,  becoming  very  painful  at  every
inspiration.  Swollen , inflamed  nose,  with  sore  and  ulce-
rated nostrils.  Painful,  inflamed  swelling  of  the  nose.
Scurfy  nostril.  Small  ulcer  in  a nostril,  lasting  a long
while.  Painless  little  induration  in  the  root  of  the  nose.
Pimple  near  the  nose,  resembling  a blister  filled  with
blood.  Pimple  near  the  right  nostril  becoming  a large
scurf.  Painful  eruption  on  the  tip  of  the  nose . Jn  the
morning  he  blows  streaks  of  blood  out  of  the  nose.  Bleed-
ing of  the  nose  and  expulsion  of  blood  from  the  nose  when
blowing  it,  (a.  6,  7,  9 d.)  Bleeding  of  the  nose  when
blowing  it,  in  the  evening.  Violent  bleeding  of  the  nose ,
(a.  12  d.)  Bleeding  of  the  nose  for  7 hours,  but  only  a
few  drops  from  time  to  time.

Face. — Paleness  of  face,  (a.  24  h.)  Sick,  pale  look
in  the  morning,  with  dim,  red  eyes.  Yellow  countenance
and  eyes,  for  one  day.  Yellow  spots  in  the  face  and  a
yellow  streak  transversely  over  the  upper  part  of  the  cheek
and  nose,  (a.  20  d.)  Redness  and  flushes  of  heat  in  the
face.  Heat  in  the  face,  every  morning  when  waking.
Heated  countenance  in  the  evening,  with  heat  in  the  head.
Great  heat  and  redness  in  the  face  at  noon,  with  cold  feet.
Heat  in  the  face,  in  the  morning,  paleness  of  face  in  the
evening.  When  talking  his  face  feels  hot  in  a moment.
Puffy  countenance,  (a.  5 and  a.  40  d.)  Considerable
swelling  of  the  face,  without  redness.  Tension  and  con-
traction of  the  skin  in  the  face,  especially  on  the  forehead.
Slight  tickling  in  the  region  of  the  left  temple,  followed  by
a sensation  as  if  the  skin  were  being  raised.  Aching
pain  in  the  malar  and  nasal  bone.  Tearing  pain  in  the
left  cheek  and  thence  extending  across  the  ear  towards  the
occiput.  Cramp-pain  in  the  facial  bones.  Drawing  pain
in  the  face,  with  swelling  of  the  cheeks.  Short,  violent
tearing  extending  from  the  forehead  down  along  the  right
wing  of  the  nose.  Slight  tearing  in  the  region  of  the  right


SEPIA.


15S


malar  bone,  below  the  temple.  Tearing  in  the  upper  jaws.
Tearing  in  the  left  articulation  of  the  jaw,  close  in  front  of
the  ear.  Itching  of  the  whole  face.  Itching  of  the  upper
part  of  the  cheeks,  and  when  rubbing  the  parts,  a burning
smarting  is  experienced  .in  them.  Pimples  on  the  right
cheek.  Pimples  in  the  face  which  itch  somewhat.  Erup-
tion in  the  face,  resembling  a red  roughness  of  the  skin.
A number  of  black  pores  in  the  face.  Hot  lips.  Violent
burning  in  the  upper  lip,  dose  below  the  nose.  Cutting
in  the  upper  lip,  as  of  a splinter.  Sore  pain  in  the  right
side  of  the  lower  lip,  near  the  corner  of  the  mouth.  Yellow-
ness around  the  mouth.  Herpetic  eruption  upon  the  lips.
Humid  pimples  along  the  margin  of  the  vermilion  border
of  the  upper  lip,  (4.  d.)  Large,  scurfy  eruption  in  the
vermilion  'border  of  both  lips,  (after  a journey  in  the  cold.)
Eruption  in  the  corner  of  the  lips,  painful  when  touched.
Painful  ulcer  in  the  internal  side  of  the  lower  lip,  the  pain
being  relieved  by  cold  water.  The  inner  side  of  the  lower
lip  felt  sore  and  was  full  of  painful  vesicles,  (a.  7 d.)
Painful  pustule  in  the  middle  of  the  lower  lip.  Tension
of  the  lower  lip.  Considerable  swelling  of  the  lower  lip,
in  the  morning.  Herpetic  blotches  around  the  mouth.
Herpes  near  the  mouth.  Pimples  on  the  chin,  with
ulcerative  pain  when  touched.  Itching  pimples  on  the
chin.  Long  lasting  scabs  on  the  chin.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Sensation,  when  chewing,  as  if  the
jaws  could  not  be  separated,  and  as  if  the  joint  would
crack.  Cramp-pain  in  the  lower  jaw,  preceded  by  pain
in  the  neck.  Swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  gland,  when
pressing  upon  it  one  feels  a pain  in  the  tooth.  Pain  in  the
sub-maxillary  glands  as  if  crushed,  also  painful  when
touched.  Stinging  pain  in  the  left  lower  jaw  and  the  sub-
maxillary glands  occasionally,  especially  when  touching
them.  Toothache,  when  biting  and  pressing  the  tongue
against  the  teeth.  The  teeth  are  very  painful  when
touched,  or  when  talking.  He  bites  his  teeth  together

) during  his  nightly  sleep,  which  gives  him  a good  deal  of
pain.  Disagreeable  feeling  of  coldness  in  the  lower  fore-
teeth. Drawing  feeling  of  coldness  in  single,  upper  inci-

8 sores.  She  cannot  bear  a draft  of  air  coming  to  her  teeth:

O 7

no  pain  in  the  bed,  only  in  the  morning  after  having  been

I

I


156


SEPIA.


up  an  hour  ; no  pain  when  touching  or  cleaning  the  teeth.
Dull  pain  in  old  roots  ; cold  things  cause  a thrill  of  pain
through  the  teeth.  All  the  teeth  are  painful,  especially
a hollow  molar  tooth,  which  feels  elongated  and  bloated,
with  swelling  of  the  gums  and  cheek  which  terminates  the
pain.  Painful  heaviness  in  the  upper  incisores.  Grum-
bling in  the  foreteeth.  Nightly  toothache,  hindering  sleep  ;
in  the  morning  when  the  pain  ceased,  she  felt  so  irritated
that  she  was  not  able  to  sleep  even  then,  although  she  felt
very  weak.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right  and  left  posterior
lower  molar  tooth.  Drawing  in  the  upper  molares.
Drawing  toothache,  when  hot  or  cold  things  get  into  the
mouth.  Drawing  in  the  teeth  as  from  a cupping-glass.
Drawing  in  the  hollow  tooth  extending  as  far  as  into  the
ear,  aggravated  by  cold  water.  Drawing  pain  in  a sound
tooth  when  the  air  got  into  the  tooth  in  a warm  room  ;
the  drawing  was  not  felt  in  the  open  cold  air.  Drawing-
cutting toothache.  Tearing  in  the  lower  jaw  below  the
incisores.  Tearing  toothache  through  the  left  ear,  during
and  after  a meal.  Rheumatic  pressure  through  the  teeth
and  forehead  in  single  jerks.  Tearings  and  jerks  in  the
teeth,  in  the  afternoon,  at  every  fourth  inspiration  ; worse
when  lying  down,  accompanied  with  profuse  ptyalism.
Tearing  and  jerking  toothache  from  6 in  the  afternoon
until  one  or  two  o’clock  after  midnight  ; four  days  in  suc-
cession. Single  jerks  in  the  teeth,  day  and  night,  when  a
draft  of  air  gets  into  the  mouth  or  ear,  followed  by  a
grumbling  in  the  teeth  which  makes  one  uneasy.  Jerks
in  the  molar  teeth  with  pressure,  especially  when  stooping.
Dull  aching  pain  in  the  molar  teeth,  with  pain  in  the  sub-
maxillary glands,  (a.  24  h.)  Digging-up  sensation  in  the
upper  teeth.  Gnawing  in  the  posterior  molares.  Stitch -
inv  toothache , she  could  have  cried.  Stitching  in  the
fore-teeth.  Stitch  extending  into  the  cuspidatus  from
below  the  right  eye-lid,  apparently  through  the  bone.
Stitching  in  the  tooth  and  jaw,  extending  into  the  ear  ;
in  the  night  it  prevented  her  from  sleeping,  and  in  day
time  she  had  to  tie  a kerchief  over  it.  Stitching  beating
in  various  roots  of  the  teeth,  with  burning  in  the  gums,
recurring  when  entering  the  room  after  walking  in  the
cold  air,  also  after  eating  and  biting,  especially  when


SEPIA.


167


coming  in  contact  with  warm  things,  for  ^8  days,  after
which  lapse  of  time  the  tooth  begins  to  turn  black  and  to
become  hollow.  Beating  toothache , becoming  stitching
on  the  third  day,  the  teeth  becoming  hollow  very  fast.
Groaning  sensation  in  an  upper  incisor.  The  teeth  become
soon  hollow.  Great  dulness  of  the  teeth , for  7 days.
An  incisor  starts  out  of  its  socket  and  feels  elongated.
Looseness  of  the  lower  incisores.  All  the  teeth  become
vacillating  and  painful,  and  the  gums  bleed  readily  when
spitting,  (6.  d.)  Violent  bleeding  of  the  teeth,  in  the
morning.  Drawing  in  the  gums,  above  the  two  upper
fore-teeth.  Stitching  in  the  gums.  Swelling  of  the  inner
gums.  Bloated,  dark-red  gums,  wiih  painful  beating,
as  in  incipient  suppuration,  so  violent  that  he  is  scarcely
able  to  endure  it.  Painful  swelling  of  the  gums.  Pain-
ful swelling  of  the  gums  of  hollow  teeth,  with  swelling  of
the  cheeks.  Swelling  of  the  gums  with  painful  soreness.
Sore  pain  and  swelling  of  the  gums  ; they  stand  off  from
the  teeth  and  bleed  when  touched  ever  so  lightly.  Sore,
ulcerated  gums.  Bleeding  of  the  gums , almost  without
; any  cause.

Mootii,  Pharynx  and  (Esophagus. — Swelling  of  the
i inner  mouth,  making  it  almost  impossible  to  introduce  any
i nourishment.  Swelling  of  the  inner  mouth  and  gums,
J with  burning  in  the  mouth,  extending  into  the  throat.
\ Swelling  of  the  skin  of  the  buccal  cavity  and  the  inner
gums,  making  the  inner  mouth  to  appear  narrower  than
j usual.  Sore  pain  of  the  tongue,  (a.  17  d.)  White  tongue.
) Coated  tongue.  Tongue  covered  with  mucus,  one  or  two
f hours  after  a meal.  Pain  of  the  tongue  as  if  burnt,  for  5
t days.  Pain  as  if  burnt  on  the  tongue,  when  smoking  to-
c!  bacco,  (to  which  he  was  hsed.)  Tearing  and  smarting
| as  of  pepper,  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  right  side  of  the
) tongue.  Acrid  smarting  in  the  fore-part  of  the  surface  of
t the  tongue,  (a.  32  h.)  Vesicles  on  the  tongue,  and  pain
f as  if  burnt.  Painful  vesicles  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,
fa  above  and  below.  Pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  tongue,

1 (being  covered  with  a thick  mucus  while  the  pain  is  felt)
ui  hindering  chewing  and  distinct  articulation.  Pimple  on
il  the  tip  of  the  tongue  and  very  sweet  saliva.  The  anterior
u part  of  the  palate  is  painful  as  if  burnt.  Pain  as  if  burnt,


158


SEPIA.


of  the  anterior  part  of  the  palate  directly  behind  the  teeth,
when  touching  the  parts  with  the  finger  or  tongue.  Pty-
alism  in  the  evening.  Accumulation  of  saltish  saliva  in
the  mouth.  He  is  obliged  to  spit  a good  deal.  Dryness
and  roughness  of  the  tongue  and  palate.  Great  dryness
of  the  tongue  when  waking  in  the  morning,  as  if  burnt.
Frequent  dryness  in  the  moulli,  as  if  her  tongue  would
stick  fast.  Dryness  of  mouth,  throat  and  tongue,  which
is  quite  rough  in  the  morning.  Dryness  in  mouth  and
throat,  in  the  morning  when  waking,  she  was  unable  to
utter  a sound,  or  to  speak,  (a.  6 d.)  Dryness  in  the
throat  the  whole  day.  Dryness  in  the  fauces,  (a.  1 1 d.)
Dryness  in  the  throat,  in  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep,
not  relieved  by  drinking,  (a.  8 d.)  Constant  dryness  and
stretching  sensation  in  the  throat.  Sore  throat,  smarting
and  scraping,  in  the  posterior  region  of  the  fauces  and
upper  part  of  the  palate,  as  if  a violent  catarrh  were  ap-
proaching. Scraping  sensation  in  the  throat,  in  the  even-
ing. Scraping  sensation  in  the  throat,  when  swallowing.
•Roughness  in  the  fauces  and  burning,  increased  by  deal-
ing the  throat.  A good  deal  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  he  is
obliged  to  clear  it  and  to  hawk  up  the  mucus.  A good
deal  of  mucus  on  the  velum  pendulum  palati.  A quantity
of  sanguineous  mucus  is  hawked  up,  (15.  d.)  Slight  creep-
ing in  the  throat,  with  a feeling  of  hoarseness  inducing
frequent  clearing  of  the  throat.  Sensation  in  the  left  side
of  the  fauces,  which  is  first  smarting,  afterwards  cutting,
sometimes  also  a mere  pressure.  Sore  throat  with  swell-
ing of  the  sub-maxillary  glands.  Aching  pain  in  the
upper  and  right  side  of  the  throat.  Pressure  in  the  throat
even  when  the  neck  is  dressed  ever  so  loosely.  Pressure
in  the  throat , in  the  region  of  the  tonsils,  as  if  the  cravat
were  tied  too  fast.  Pressure  in  the  throat  towards  the
back,  when  swallowing  food  or  drink.  Pressure  in  the
throat  as  if  he  had  swallowed  something  which  would  not
go  down.  Pressure  in  the  throat  as  of  a plug  which  he
imagined  he  had  to  swallow  ; when  clearing  the  throat  he
hawks  up  mucus.  Sensation  as  if  a lump  were  lodged  in
the  throat.  Constrictive  pain  in  the  tliroal,  with  pressure,
directly  above  and  on  1 lie  larynx.  Pinching  in  the
throat,  from  the  larynx  upward.  Painful  contraction  and


SEPIA.


159


pressure  in  the  throat.  Sore  pain  in  the  throat  when  swal-
lowing. Slinging-scraping  sore  pain  in  the  region  of  the
pharynx,  during  empty  deglutition.  Stinging  sore  throat
during  deglutition.  Numb  sensation  in  the  right,  tonsil,
(a.  4 d.)  Feeling  of  heat  in  the  throat.  Inflammation  of
the  throat.  Inflammation  and  swelling  in  the  upper  part
of  the  throat.  Inflammation,  great  swelling  and  suppura-
tion of  the  left  tonsil  ; he  was  unable  to  swallow  on  account
of  the  pain,  had  a heat  in  his  whole  body,  thirst  and  burn-
ing in  the  eyes,  (a.  11  d.)  Difficult  deglutition  ; the  mus-
cles of  deglutition  feel  paralysed  for  several  evenings,  (a.
36  d.)  Violent  pain  in  the  region  of  the  cardiac  orifice  of
the  stomach  when  swallowing  the  food.  Painful  jerk
from  the  throat  down  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the
morning  when  sitting  up  in  the  bed.  Smoking  does  not
agree  with  him,  contracts  the  fauces.  Bad  smell  from  the
mouth.

Taste  and  Appetite  — Mucus  upon  the  tongue,  having
a putrid  taste.  Taste  of  manure  in  the  mouth,  (a.  5 d.)
Sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  (a.  20  h.)  Sour  taste  in  the
mouth , with  costiveness,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Sour  taste  in  the

mouth  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Sour-bitter  taste
in  the  mouth,  (a.  5 d ) Repulsive  bitter  taste  in  ihe  mouth
in  the  morning.  Ugly  taste  in  the  month,  as  in  old  catarrh.
Bitter  taste,  only  when  clearing  the  throat.  Ugly  taste  in
the  morning,  and  dryness  and  mucus  in  the  mouth.  Pu-
trid after-taste  after  drinking  beer.  Taste  in  the  mouth
sweet  as  sugar.  Much  thirst,  (a.  13  d)  Much  thirst  in
the  evening.  Absence  of  thirst.  No  appetite,  but  thirst.
Feeling  of  satiety,  with  nausea,  and  a feeling  of  relaxa-
tion. Aversion  to  all  food,  especially  to  meat  ; he  was
only  able  to  eat  bread  and  butter,  and  soup.  The  mere
idea  of  eating  gave  him  nausea,  the  taste  in  the  mouth
being  otherwise  good.  No  appetite  ; nothing  tasted  well  to
her.  Does  not  relish  anything.  Repletion  of  the  stomach
in  the  evening.  Diminished  appetite;  every  thing  tastes
too  salt.  Little  appetite  ; nevertheless  he  relishes  what
he  eats.  Loses  his  taste  for  smoking.  Desire  for  vine-
gar. Aversion  to  meat  for  many  days,  otherwise  tolerable
; appetite.  Violent  desire  for  wine,  which  he  never  drank
otherwise.  Ravenous  hunger ; if  it  is  not  satisfied,  the


160


SEPIA.


water  accumulates  in  the  mouth.  He  gets  an  appetite  at
the  sight  of  food.  Excessive  appetite  ; after  a meal  weak-
ness and  regurgitation  of  food.  Great  appetite  for  sup-
per. He  wants  to  eat  all  the  time  ; the  mere  thought  of
food  makes  his  mouth  water.  Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the
stomach.  Emptiness  in  the  stomach,  with  nausea  as  soon
as  she  merely  thinks  of  some  food  she  wants  to  take.
Painful  feeling  of  hunger  in  the  stomach.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Eructation  after  a slight  meal.
Bitter  eructations  after  breakfast.  Rising  of  mere  air  after
a meal.  Great  bitterness  of  mouth  during  a meal.  Hic-
cough after  supper.  Intermission  of  the  beats  of  the  heart
after  dinner.  Pulsations  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  during
a meal,  increasing  in  proportion  as  he  eats  much.  Anguish
and  heat  during  a meal,  so  violent  that  her  face  becomes
quite  bloated  and  red  ; eyes,  ears  and  nose  are  affected  by
the  heat,  and  drops  of  sweat  make  their  appearance  at  the
tips  of  the  fingers.  Colic  during  supper,  followed  by  three
evacuations  with  bearing  down,  (3.  d.)  Febrile  excitement
directly  after  dinner.  The  digestion  excites  heat  and  pal-
pitation of  the  heart.  Heat  in  the  face  after  a meal.  Ver-
tigo after  a meal,  obliging  one  to  hold  one’s  self.  The  head
was  affected  after  a meal  ; it  felt  oppressed  even  by  the
slightest  covering.  Profuse  sweat  in  the  face  after  eating
warm  food.  Stitches  in  the  head  after  a meal.  Dull  tear-
ing in  the  forehead  immediately  after  a meal.  General
profuse  sweat  after  dinner,  with  feeling  of  heat.  The
pains  increase  during  and  immediately  after  a meal.
Tearing  in  the  whole  thigh,  especially  the  knees,  after
dinner  and  supper.  Directly  after  a meal,  feeling  of  sore-
ness in  the  throat,  and  as  of  a spasm  on  the  inner  side  of
the  cervical  vertebrae.  Laziness  after  a meal.  Dry  cough
after  a meal.  After  a meal,  pressure  as  of  flatulence  on
the  right  side  and  deep  in  the  abdomen,  and  afterwards  in
the  side  ; it  is  felt  only  when  moving  the  part  and  when
stooping.  Flatulent  distension  after  dinner,  relieved  by
eructations,  until  evening,  when  it  disappeared  without
emission  of  flatulence.  Great  distension  of  the  abdomen,
directly  after  eating  some  soup.  Puffiness  of  the  abdo-
men after  dinner.  Diarrhoea  after  tasting  boiled  milk.
Drawing  pain  in  the  stomach,  and  a gnawing  sensation


SEPIA.


161


extending  as  far  as  the  back,  where  it  is  most  painful,  fol-
lowed by  great  relaxation  and  weakness,  one  hour  after
dinner.  Eructations  in  the  evening,  violent  and  frequent,
preceded  by  great  distension  of  the  abdomen.  Very  fre-
quent eructations , (even  a.  24  h.)  Eructations  with  de-
sire to  vomit,  (a.  26  h.)  Frequent,  gurgling  empty  eruc-
tations. Bitter  eructations,  in  the  morning  when  rising,
with  bitter  taste  in  mouth  and  throat,  nevertheless  he  rel-
ishes his  meal,  and  after  having  done  eating  the  bitterness
disappears.  Bitter  eructations  with  nausea.  Sour  eruc-
tations after  supper.  Eructations  tasting  like  rotten  eggs.
During  an  eructation,  in  the  morning,  he  feels  a pinching
in  the  stomach  as  if  something  would  tear  loose.  Stitches
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  left  side,  and  between  the
scapulae  during  an  eructation.  Burning  at  the  stomach
after  an  eructation.  Painful  eructations;  blood  gets  into
the  mouth  (after  quick  riding,)  (a.  4 h.)  During  an  eruc-
tation (in  a very  warm  room)  blood  got  into  his  mouth.
Eructations  alternating  with  hiccough.  Hiccough  after  a
meal,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.  Hiccough  while  smoking,
(to  which  he  was  used)  and  contraction  in  the  fauces,  with
sensation  as  if  a plug  were  lodged  in  those  parts,  causing
nausea  and  discharge  of  water  from  the  mouth.  Burning,
rising  from  the  stomach.  Heartburn,  forenoon  and  after-
noon, for  several  hours,  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  into
the  throat,  where  he  experiences  an  acid  taste  and  a sen-
sation as  of  scraping.  Sort  of  waterbrash  in  the  afternoon,
going  off  by  eating.  Nausea  during  the  whole  day,  at  in-
tervals, also  after  eating,  with  conflux  of  watery  saliva  in
the  mouth,  the  taste  in  mouth  being  constantly  sour-bitter,
without  appetite,  but  the  food  having  a natural  taste,  (a.
4 d.)  Nausea  before  breakfast , for  several  mornings.
f\  Nausea,  when  waking,  in  the  evening  and  night.  Morn-
ij  ing-nausea,  as  if  all  the  viscera  were  turning  inside  out.
d Inclination  to  vomit,  in  the  morning  when  washing  her
D mouth.  Nausea  in  the  morning,  when  riding  in  a car-
ii  riage,  to  which  he  was  accustomed.  Nausea  and  weak-
>G  ness.  Nausea  (almost  immediately)  followed  by  drawing
rij  through  all  the  limbs.  Nausea  without  eructations,  at  ten
I o’clock  every  morning,  for  some  minutes.  Nausea  with
k bitterness  in  the  throat,  without  vomiting.  Nausea  every


162


SEPIA.


morning,  going  off  after  eating  a little.  Inclining  to
vomit,  anxious,  giddy.  Vomiting  after  morning-nausea
and  eating  some,  and  afterwards  retching.  The  vomiting
(during  pregnancy)  is  frequently  so  fatiguing  that  blood  is
expelled  with  it.  Violent  vomiting,  several  times  a night,
with  violent  headache,  (a.  12  h.)  Bilious  vomiting,  two
mornings  in  succession,  (a.  3 d.)  Two  attacks  a day,  of
one  hour  each,  of  contractive  griping  in  the  hypochondria,
with  nausea,  thence  extending  into  the  back,  as  a stitch-
ing, followed  by  stitching  in  the  chest  and  yawning,  until
he  vomited  bile  and  food.  Vomiting  of  a milky  water
(during  pregnancy)  although  she  had  not  drank  any  milk.

Stomach. — Pressure  at  the  stomach  after  a'meal  and
when  touching  it.  Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
Pressing  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (a.  30  h.)  Pressure
at  the  stomach,  in  the  night,  three  nights  in  succession.
Pressure  upon  the  stomach,  as  of  a stone.  Hard  pressure
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  of  a stone,  even  before  break-
fast, but  worse  when  eating  bread.  Pressure  at  the  stom-
ach, as  if  the  inside  were  sore.  Pressure  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  going  off  by  a fermenting  movement  down-
ward, (a.  3|-  h.)  Pressure  at  the  stomach  from  morning
till  noon.  Pressure  at  the  stomach  in  the  evening,  fol-
lowed by  headache.  Violent  pressure  on  the  left  side
below  the  ribs,  going  oft’  by  lying  down.  Tearing  with
pressure  around  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Heaviness  in  the
stomach,  with  dull  pain  in  the  whole  abdomen.  Cramp-
pain  m the  stomach  and  abdomen.  Contraction  in  the
region  of  the  stomach.  Stitching  pain  in  the  stomach
and  distended  abdomen,  in  the  afternoon.  The  least  pres-
sure on  the  region  of  the  stomach  causes  great  pain.
Burning  in  the  stomach  and  pit.  Heat  in  the  stomach  and
pit,  with  sensation  as  if  eating  would  relieve  it.  Sudden
stitches  in  the  pit,  when  swallowing  the  nourishment  very
fast.  Stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Fine  prickings  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Stitchings  close  below  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  during  an  inspiration.  Rumbling  in  the  stomach.

Abdomen. — Stilching-tensive  pain  in  the  hypochondria,
during  a movement  with  stooping.  Tensive  stitching
pain  around  the  hypochondria,  hindering  motion,  worst
when  walking.  Stitch  around  the  right  lower  rib,  towards


SEPIA.


163


the  pit  of  the  stomach,  continuing  for  minutes,  going  off
by  an  empty  eructation.  Frequent  darlings  below  the
hypochondria  and  transversely  through  the  abdomen  ; she
could  have  exclaimed.  Frequent  stitches  below  the  right
ribs.  Stitching  pain  under  the  short  ribs  of  the  right  side,
during  fits  of  dry,  parching  cough  in  the  evening.  Beat-
ing in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Stitches  in  both  hypochon-
dria when  coughing.  Stitches  darting  occasionally  from
the  epigastrium  close  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach  into
the  left  side,  upward.  Transverse  stitches  through  the
abdomen  from  the  right  to  the  left  side,  quick  as  lightning,
(a.  36  d.)  Stitching  pain  in  both  iliac  regions.  Violent
stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.  Stitching  in  the
side  of  the  abdomen  for  one  hour,  followed  by  difficulty
in  breathing.  Violent  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  liver,
in  the  evening,  for  ten  minutes;  the  region  is  afterwards
painful  to  the  touch,  with  costiveness.  Dull  stitch  in  the
region  of  the  liver,  (a.  3 h.)  Sore  pain  in  the  region  of
the  liver,  (a.  5 h.)  Pain  in  the  right  si  le  of  the  abdomen.
Simple  pain  in  the  liver,  when  driving  upon  an  uneven
road,  directly  below  the  last  rib,  ariesting  the  breathing.
Feeling  of  fulness  in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Violent
clawing  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  relieved  by  eructations
and  emission  of  flatulence.  Drawing  pressure  in  the  re-
gion of  the  liver,  in  the  evening.  Aching  pain  in  the  region
of  the  liver.  Aching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.
A few  jerks  in  the  liver.  Drawing  pain  in  both  sides  of
the  abdomen,  in  repealed  attacks.  Painful  feeling  in  both
sides  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  a stiff  body  or  lump  were
lodged  there,  making  stooping  either  impossible  or  pain-
ful. P ain  from  the  umbilicus  to  the  genital  organs,  espe-
cially when  touching  the  parts.  Stitches  through  the  abdo-
men, directly  above  the  hips.  Alternate  stitching  and
pinching  in  the  intestines,  in  paroxysms  of  ten  minutes.
Stitches  from  the  umbilicus  to  the  genital  organs,  when
coughing  and  throwing  off  mucus.  Stitching  pain  in  the
right  muscles  of  the  abdomen,  with  visible  twitching.
Stitches  in  the  groin.  Stitches  through  the  left  groin,  in
the  morning.  Smarting-boring  pain  in  the  right  side  of
the  umbilicus,  (a.  18  d.)  Pressure  in  the  abdomen.
Aching  pain  in  the  epigastrium  in  the  afternoon.  Pain  in


164


SEPIA..’


the  umbilical  region,  very  intense  when  coughing  or  stoop-
ing. Aching  pain  in  the  distended  epigastrium,  one  hour
after  dinner,  and  after  some  exercise  in  the  open  air.
Pressure  in  the  whole  abdomen,  increased  after  a meal,
three  days  in  succession,  with  obtusion  of  the  head  and
tenseness  of  the  skin  over  the  head.  A good  deal  of  pres-
sure and  tightness  in  the  epigastrium,  sometimes  relieved
by  internal  fermentation  ; accompanied  with  pressure  and
stitches  in  the  umbilical  region.  Pressure  in  the  abdo-
men, going  oft’ after  stool.  Weight  in  the  abdomen.  Feel-
ing as  of  a load  in  the  abdomen,  during  motion.  Pain  in
the  middle  of  the  abdomen,  from  afternoon  till  supper ;
sensation  as  of  a lump  being  lodged  there  5 towards  even-
ing the  pain  rose  towards  the  epigastrium,  with  drowsi-
ness. nevertheless  she  was  not  able  to  sleep  in  the  night.
Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  on  the  left  side  below  the  um-
bilicus, and  sometimes  entirely  in  the  left  side.  Pressure
in  the  fore-part  of  the  abdomen,  on  the  right  side.  Undu-
lating pressure  in  the  right  groin  from  within  outward.
Painful  pressure  in  the  hernial  region,  when  laughing  vio-
lently. Drawing-tensive  pressure  in  the  abdomen.  Dis-
tension of  the  abdomen,  (also  after  a few  h.)  Violent  dis-
tension of  the  abdomen.  Painful  distension  of  the  abdo-
men when  riding  in  a carriage.  Hard,  distended  abdo-
men, especially  in  the  evening,  even  the  veins  of  the  ab-
dominal integuments  are  distended ; accompanied  with
stitching  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Accumulation  of  flatulence
when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Frequent  hard  distension
of  the  abdomen,  with  cutting  in  the  intestines.  Great
distension  of  the  abdomen,  followed  by  violent  rumbling
and  movement  in  the  same.  Distension  of  the  abdomen,
with  diarrhoea  and  pinching.  Colic  in  the  morning  when
in  bed.  Colic  in  the  pelvic  cavity,  in  the  morning,  press-
ing from  within  outward,  writhing  and  contractive.  Vio-
lent cutting  transversely  over  the  abdomen,  as  if  caused
by  flatulence,  going  off  by  motion;  at  the  same  time  a
cutting  in  the  left  testicle.  Violent  colic  extending  as  far
as  the  chest,  with  movement  of  flatulence  which  does  not
find  an  issue,  (a.  4 d.)  Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
night,  with  desire  to  urinate.  Cutting  colic,  after  mid-
night. Violent  colic,  in  the  morning.  Cutting  in  the


SEPIA.


165


hypogastrium,  in  the  afternoon,  continuous  and  also  in
single  paroxysms.  Colic  with  frequent  nausea.  Fre-
quent attacks  of  colic  ; she  is  obliged  to  bend  double  for
a couple  of  minutes.  Pinching  cutting  in  the  intestines,
with  moaning  anxiety  as  if  stool  would  come  off  involun-
tarily. Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  for  one  hour  almost
every  morning,  with  nausea,  qualmishness  and  conflux  of
saliva  in  the  mouth.  Daily  pinching  in  the  abdomen  with-
out diarrhoea,  as  if  flatulence  were  forming,  relieved  by
eructation.  Frequent  pinching  in  the  abdomen  without
flatulence.  Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium  the  whole  day,
in  paroxysms  of  a quarter  of  an  hour,  with  only  one  hard
evacuation  a day,  for  three  days  in  succession,  (a.  48  h.)
Griping  in  the  intestines,  with  sensation  as  if  they  were
being  inside  out.  Spasms  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  17  d.)
Spasmodic  contraction  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.
Frequent  attacks  of  contractive  pain  in  the  right  side  of
\ the  abdomen,  worst  in  the  morning,  followed  by  violent
contractive  pain  in  the  stomach,  whence  the  pain  extended
i into  the  chest;  relieved  by  eructation.  Violent  colic,  she
had  to  bend  double.  Digging-up,  and  contraction  in  the

(abdomen,  with  emission  of  a good  deal  of  flatulence.
Digging-up  in  the  abdomen,  with  nausea.  Burning  in  the
abdomen,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Burning  pain  in
; the  left  side  and  below  the  umbilicus.  Burning,  and  feel-
i ing  of  heat  in  the  lumbar  region  (region  of  the  kidneys)

1 during  a deep  inspiration.  Burning  in  the  right  side  of
I the  abdomen,  when  walking  far.  Burning  in  the  right
t groin.  Burning  in  the  abdomen,  when  sitting,  going  off
v when  walking.  Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  bowels
;i  had  been  dashed  to  pieces.  Pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
1;  afternoon,  as  if  the  bowels  were  being  torn  out.  Beating
here  and  there  in  the  abdomen.  The  abdominal  muscles
are  painful  during  motion,  only  at  night.  Voluptuous
itching  in  the  left  groin,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  be-
coming intolerable  by  rubbing,  but  being  speedily  removed
;•  by  light  tickling  with  the  tip  of  the  fingers.  Feeling  of
emptiness  in  the  abdomen.  Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen.
Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come
i on,  going  off  by  emission  of  flatulence.  Rumbling  and
^wheezing  in  the  abdomen,  with  distension  of  this  organ.


166


sepia;


Rumbling  and  loud  grunting  in  the  abdomen.  Violent
fermentation  in  the  abdomen.  Rumbling  and  movement
of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  as  in  diarrhoea.  Rumbling
in  the  evening,  and  incarceration  of  flatulence,  movement
of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,
with  eructation,  (a.  2 d.)  Fine,  quick  gurgling  in  the
right  iliac  region.  Short  and  slight  bubbling  (gurgling)
in  the  left  iliac  region,  above  the  hip,  perceptible  to  the
hand  on  the  outside.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  when
lying  down,  (a  1 0 d.)  Loud  rumbling  and  feeling  of  emp-
tiness in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  every  day.  Pro-
fuse emission  of  fetid  flatulence,  (a.  15  d.)

Stool.' — Diarrhoea,  the  first  days.  Diarrhoea  after
drinking  milk.  Exhausting  diarrhoea,  the  first  days.  Soft,
papescent  stool,  having  a very  fetid,  sourish  smell,  being
expelled  suddenly,  and  the  whole  of  it  at  once.  Stool
having  a putrid,  sourish,  fetid  smell.  Three  thin  acrid
stools  a day,  after  which  varices  protrude,  emitting  consid-
erable humor,  and  causing  an  intense  pain  when  sitting,
(a.  1 2 d.)  A number  of  jelly-like  stools,  with  colic.  Stool
of  a whitish  color,  (3.  d.)  Slimy  diarrhoea,  with  distended
abdomen.  Stool  in  a few  days,  the  faeces  being  first  hard,
then  soft.  Constant  desire  for  stool,  only  a little  being
passed.  Unsuccessful  desire  for  stool  towards  evening,
stool  coming  on  in  the  morning,  and  being  frequently  hard
and  in  lumps.  Unsuccessful  desire  for  stool,  only  wind
and  mucus  being  passed,  with  sensation  in  the  rectum  as
of  a lump  being  lodged  in  it.  Difficult  expulsion  of  soft,
thin-shaped  faeces.  Two  stools  a day,  always  accompan-
ied with  some  tenesmus.  The  expulsion  of  stool,  which
is  brownish  and  not  hard,  requires  nevertheless  consider
able  bearing-down, 'and  the  quantity  expelled  is  very  small
In  the  succeeding  days  the  stool  becomes  hard,  sometimes
even  knotty,  and  is  insufficient.  Hard,  difficult  stool,
sometimes  mingled  with  mucus.  Hard  stool,  with  cutting
in  the  rectum.  Incipient  flatulent  stool,  previous  to  stool,
with  moaning  and  groaning.  Colic,  previous  to  stool,
which  looks  natural,  (a.  4 d.)  Nausea  previous  to  every
liquid  stool,  (a.  5 d ) Emission  of  prostatic  juice  at  every
difficult  stool.  Blood  with  stool , (a.  11,  20  d.)  Blood
with  every  stool  for  eight  days.  Blood  with  stool,  which


SEPIA,


167


is  not  hard.  Much  blood  with  stool,  after  cutting  in  the
abdomen.  Some  blood  with  the  stool,  every  day,  for  along
time.  Discharge  of  sanguineous  mucus  after  stool.  A
second  stool  is  followed  by  stiffness  and  feeling  of  hard-
ness in  the  back,  and  tightness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
with  oppressed  breathing.  Aching  pain  in  the  forehead
after  stool  which  is  not  hard.  Emptiness  and  relaxation
in  the  abdomen  after  stool.  Headache  after  a papescent
stool.  After  a thin  stool,  a sort  of  smarting  in  the  abdomen.
Great  weakness  in  the  abdomen  and  complete  want  of
appetite  after  two  difficult  and  hard  stools.  Expulsion  of
ascarvles.  Contractive  pain  in  the  rectum , extending
into  the  vagina,  (a.  6 d ) Contractive  pain  in  the  rectum,
and  thence  in  the  perinaeum  and  vagina.  Contractive  pain
in  the  anus,  and  afterwards  ascending  in  the  fore-part  of
the  abdomen,  during  stool.  Frequent  and  painful  contrac-
tion in  the  anus.  Clawing  sensation  in  the  anus,  going
off  after  fermentation  in  the  abdomen.  Tensive  pain  in
the  anus,  (and  rectum,)  (a.  4 d.)  Tension  in  the  region  of
the  anus,  after  stool.  Tenesmus  in  the  anus,  with  feeling
of  soreness,  sometimes  occurring  with  a sudden  jerk  and
at  intervals.  Pain  in  the  rectum  during  stool,  and  after-
wards for  a long  time  while  sitting,  (a.  7 d ) Excessive
> cramp-pain  in  the  rectum,  before  and  after  hard  stool,  (a.
4 d.)  Violent  cutting  in  the  anus  and  rectum,  at  night.
Cutting  in  the  rectum  during  stool,  with  discharge  of  some
blood.  Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  rectum,  in  the  even-
ing when  in  bed,  causing  an  uneasiness  which  prevents
1 him  from  falling  asleep.  Cutting  in  the  rectum,  in  the
'!  afternoon,  extending  towards  the  abdomen,  and  followed
a with  unsuccessful  pressing  and  bearing  down  upon  the
' rectum.  Stitches  in  the  anus , (a.  8 d.)  Violent  stitches
li  in  the  rectum,  at  night..  Severe  dull  stitches  in  the  anus,
i in  succession.  Stitches  in  the  anus  after  the  morning
- stool,  until  afternoon,  (a.  7 d.)  Violent  stitching  in  the
if  anus,  especially  while  receding  and  when  pressing  upon
j it  from  without.  Slow  stitch  in  the  left  groin,  from  below
upward,  during  stool.  Stitching  and  tearing  in  the  anus.

■ Stitches  in  the  perinaeum  towards  the  rectum,  when  sit-
i ting,  in  the  evening.  Stitching  and  burning  at  the  anus.
Burning  at  the  anus . Burning  at  the  anus  during  stool,


168


SEPIA.


(a.  21  d.)  Burning  at  the  anus  every  day,  during  hard
stool,  mingled  with  unsuccessful  desire  for  stool,  (the  first
days.)  Burning  in  the  rectum,  the  whole  day.  Burning
in  the  rectum,  while  expelling  the  latter  half  of  a loose
stool,  (a.  6 d.)  Heat  and  swelling  of  the  margin  of  the
anus.  Soreness  of  the  anus.  Sore  pain  of  the  rectum,
mostly  between  stool,  with  sensation,  even  when  lying
down,  as  if  it  were  being  pressed  out,  in  paroxysms  of
one  hour;  accompanied  with  varices  of  the  rectum,  pain-
ful when  touched.  Itching  and  stinging  in  the  rectum.
Itching  in  the  rectum  and  anus.  Itching  of  the  anus,  also
in  day-time.  Violent  itching  of  the  anus  and  creeping  in
the  rectum,  (1.  d.)  Scraping  sensation  in  the  anus,  during
stool.  Protrusion  of  the  rectum,  (in  a few  hours.)  Pro-
lapsus recti , (a.  30  d.)  Congestion  to  the  anus , in  the
ajternoon , shortly  after  a meal , (a.  5,  12  d-)  Profuse
sweat  directly  above  the  anus,  before  and  after  stool.
Smarting  in  the  rectum,  after  stool.  Protrusion  and  itch-
ing of  the  varices  of  the  rectum.  Protrusion  of  the  varices
during  stool,  or  when  walking.  Protrusion  of  a humid,
painless  varix  after  good  stool,  (a.  4 d.)  The  varices  be-
come painful,  (a.  2 h.)  Pain  of  the  varices  when  walk-
ing. Varices  without  costiveness.  The  varices  seem  to
be  indurated.  Bleeding  of  the  varices  when  walking.

Urinary  Organs. — Scanty  emission  of  urine,  (the  first
7 days.)  Pressure  upon  the  bladder,  in  the  morning,  and
desire  to  urinate  ; micturition,  however,  only  takes  place
in  a few  minutes.  Continual  desire  to  urinate , with
painful  hearing  down  in  the  pelvis , in  the  morning.  Fre-
quent and  great  desire  to  urinate.  He  urinates  twice  or
three  times  in  one  hour  ; he  feels  a pressure  upon  the
bladder,  but  he  is  a good  while  before  the  urine  makes
its  appearance  ; if  he  tries  to  retain  his  urine  he  is  at-
tacked with  anxiety  and  pressure  upon  the  bladder,  (a.  48
h.)  Sensation  as  if  drops  come  out  of  the  bladder ,
( which  was  not  the  case ,)  especially  when  at  rest.  After
micturition,  a little  of  the  fluid  remains  behind  in  the  ure-
thra and  afterwards  makes  its  appearaanee  at  the  orifice.
After  having  suffered  with  heat,  redness  and  puffiness  of
the  face  for  two  hours,  followed  by  paleness  lasting  for
many  hours,  he  is  attacked  with  an  inability  to  pass  his


SEPIA.


169


water  lasting  14  hours,  succeeding  by  a violent  desire  to
' urinate  every  quarter  of  an  hour,  which  results  in  the
emission  of  but  a very  slight  quantity  of  urine  ; afterwards
these  periods  of  retention  of  urine  and  desire  to  emit  it
recur  several  times  ; the  last  retention  lasting  about  20
hours,  although  he  had  been  drinking  a good  deal,  (I.  d.)
Little  micturition  with  much  thirst,  (3.  d.)  In  the  night
he  dreams  that  he  was  urinating  into  the  chamber,  whereas
he  was  wetting  the  bed,  (a.  17  d.)  He  is  obliged  to  uri-
nate as  often  as  he  was  called  up  in  the  night,  suffering
much  thirst  even  during  the  night.  Pressing  upon  the
bladder  and  frequent  micturition,  with  tension  in  the  ab-
domen. Pressure  upon  the  bladder,  in  the  evening,  with
burning  after  micturition.  He  emits  much  more  urine
than  corresponded  to  the  quantity  of  drink  he  had  swal-
lowed, (a.  36  d.)  Quantity  of  water-colored  urine.  Pale
yellow  urine  without  any  sediment,  not  even  in  24  hours.
The  urine  becomes  turbid  and  fetid  when  standing,  with
white  sediment,  (l — 4.  d.)  The  urine  is  frequently  tur-
bid and  dark  while  being  emitted,  as  if  mixed  with  mucus.
Urine  with  much  white  sediment  and  fetid.  Turbid  urine
with  brick-dust  sediment . Turbid.,  clay-colored  urine,

with  red  sediment  on  the  walls  of  the  vessel.  Blood-red
urine.  The  urine  deposits  blood  in  the  vessel.  Discharge
of  a milky  fluid  from  the  urethra  after  micturition  at  noon.
Discharge  of  prostatic  juice  after  micturition.  Pinching
pains  in  the  bladder.  Spasm  of  the  bladder.  Violent
burning  in  the  bladder , without  desire  to  urinate.  Burn-
ing in  the  urethra.  Burning  in  the  fore- part,  of  the  ure-
thra., (a.  9,  20  d.)  Smarting  in  the  urethra  during  mic-
turition. Smarting  in  the  fore-part  and  orifice  of  the  ure-
thra, (a.  13  h.)  Smarting  in  the  urethra  with  drawing
from  before  backward,  in  the  morning  when  waking.
Tearing  in  the  fore-part  of  the  urethra.  Violent  tearing  in
the  urethra.  Violent,  continual  cutting,  soon  also  stitching
in  the  urethra.  Smarting  in  the  urethra,  during  micturi-
tion. Smarting  through  the  urethra.  Itching  in  _ the
urethra.

Genital  Organs. — Copious  sweat  of  the  male  genital
organs,  (a.  3 d.)  Stitches  in  the  penis.  Burning  in  the
penis,  during  an  embrace,  (a.  10  d.)  Itching  inflamma-

8


170


SEPIA.


tion  of  the  penis,  increasing  the  excitation  during  an
embrace.  The  glans  is  hot  and  itching,  with  soreness  of
the  prepuce.  Hot  glans,  with  a pale-red,  sometimes  itch-
ing eruption.  Red  tips  upon  the  glans.  Secretion  of  a
purulent  fluid  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  glans,  having  a
sourish-salt  smell,  with  itching.  Continuil  suppuration
and  itching  of  the  prepuce.  Red,  almost  sore  little  in-
durations, going  and  coming,  on  the  inner  side  of  the  pre-
puce and  upon  the  glans,  itching  when  touched.  Con-
siderable sweating  of  the  scrotum.  Heat  in  the  testicle.
Cutting  in  the  testicle.  Pinching  tearing  in  the  testicles,
(1.  2.  d.)  Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  testicles,  sometimes
also  in  the  thigh.  Great  increase  of  the  sexual  desire,
(the  first  5 days.)  Sexual  fancies  without  erection,  (4.
d.)  Desire  for  an  embrace  with  quick  emission  of  semen  ;
afterwards  tension  in  the  hypogastrium,  extending  into  the
spermatic  cords,  (5.  d.)  Painful  erection  after  the  siesta,
after  silting.  Powerful  erections,  (2.  cl.) ; but  they  are
short  even  after  the  2(Jth  day,  with  quick  emission  of
semen  during  an  embrace.  Decreasing  number  of  erec-
tions (curative  effect,)  (the  first  days.)  Long-continuing
erections  at  night.  Want  of  erections,  (for  several  days.)
Long  erections  after  an  embrace  and  nocturnal  emissions.

O

Nightly  emission  with  sexual  dream,  (a.  12  d)  He  is
frequently  threatened  with  an  emission,  but  it  is  suppressed
every  time  by  his  waking  up',  (a.  20  h.)  Imperfect  emis-
sion while  dreaming  of  an  embrace.  Weak  and  watery
emission.  The  emission  disappears,  (secondary  effect.)
Burning  in  the  fore-part  of  the  urethra  after  an  embrace.
After  an  emission  he  feels  lazy,  faint,  is  sensitive  to  damp
air,  with  turbid  urine,  vertigo  and  constipation.  Erection
after  an  embrace,  afterwards  weakness  of  thought,  vertigo,
despondency,  relaxation  of  the  body,  low-spirited  and  in-
clining to  start  in  the  evening,  (14.  d.)  Anxious  and  rest-
less the  whole  day,  after  an  embrace.  Great  weakness  of
the  knees  after  an  embrace.  Little  pleasurable  excitation
during  an  embrace,  (2.  d.)  Embrace  with  insufficient
erection,  (a.  20  d.)  Painful  stiffness,  apparently  in  the
uterus.  Pressing  in  the  uterus,  oppressing  the  breathing,
from  above  downward  as  if  every  thing  would  come  out
of  the  vagina  accompanied  with  colic  ; she  has  to  cross


SEPIA*


171


one  limb  over  the  other  to  prevent  a prolapsus  of  the
vagina  ; however  there  was  no  prolapsus,  but  a mere  in-
crease of  jelly-like  leucorrhcea,  (a.  10,  20  h.)  Soreness
and  redness  of  the  labia,  in  the  perinaeum  and  posteriorly
between  the  thighs.  Jerking  in  the  vagina  from  below
upward,  in  the  morning  when  waking  from  a dream.
Stitching  in  the  pudendum,  (a.  3 d.)  Violent  stitches  in
the  pudendum,  almost  extending  as  far  as  the  umbilicus.
Stitches  in  the  vagina  every  3 or  4 seconds,  and  a similar
paroxysm  of  stitches  in  a quarter  of  an  hour.  Itching  of
the  pudendum,  (a.  21  d.)  Discharge  of  blood  from  the
vagina  after  an  embrace.  Pain  in  the  abdomen  as  if  the
menses  would  appear,  (a.  4 d.)  Menses  too  early  by  6
days,  (a.  4 d.  ;)  by  2 days  ; 7 days,  (a.  3 d.  ;)  14  days,
(a.  some  hours  ;)  several  days,  (a.  48  h.)  Menses  too
early  by  8 days,  and  too  scanty,  appearing  only  in  the
morning.  Discharge  of  a few  drops  of  blood  a fortnight
bej ore  the  period  of  the  menses,  (a.  8 d.)  Discharge  of
blood  from  the  vagina,  only  when  walking.  Re-appear-
ance of  the  menses  which  had  been  suppressed  for  four
months  past.,  (a.  18  d.)  The  menses  appear  7 days  too
soon,  (20.  d.)  Menses  delay  8 days,  (secondary  effect,)
(a.  28  d.)  Re-appearance  of  the  menses  of  an  elderly
female  48  days  after  taking  the  medicine  and  after  a sup-
pression of  2 months,  accompanied  with  drawing  from  the
teeth  into  the  cheek,  which  became  somewhat  swollen.
Re-appearance  of  the  menses  in  an  old  female,  afier  a
suppression  of  several  months,  (a.  20  d.)  Menses  delay
three  days , (a.  19  d.)  Menses  delay  5 days,  at  full  moon,
(a.  22  d.)  Violent  colic  with  faintishness  before  the
menses.  Shuddering  all  over  the  body,  the  whole  day,
two  days  before  the  menses.  Burning  in  the  region  of
the  pudendum,  before  the  menses.  Acrid  leucorrhoea
with  soreness  of  the  pudendum  before  the  menses.  Sen-
sation as  if  the  pudendum  were  enlarged,  before  the
menses.  Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  a few  days  before  the
menses,  and,  after  this  had  passed  off,  soreness  of  the
perinaeum  and  swelling  of  the  pudendum,  before  the  blood
makes  its  appearance.  Exhaustion  in  the  morning,  during
the  menses.  Tearing  in  the  tibia,  during  the  menses.
Toothache  and  throbbing  in  the  gums  during  the  menses.


172


SEPIA,


Obscuration  of  sight  during  the  menses,  and  great  weak-
ness going  off  while  lying  down.  Violent  pressure  in  the
forehead  during  the  menses,  with  expulsion  of  hard  fetid
matter  from  the  nose.  Drawing  in  the  teeth  during  the
menses,  extending  upward  into  the  cheek.  During  the
menses,  drawing  from  the  teeth  into  the  cheek,  which
became  bloated.  Bleeding  of  the  nose,  three  evenings  in
succession,  during  the  menses.  Melancholy  during  the
menses,  especially  in  the  morning.  During  the  whole  of
the  menstrual  period  she  is  unable  to  sleep,  owing  to  tear-
ing in  the  back,  chilliness  and  heat,  thirst  and  painful
contraction  in  the  chest.  During  the  menses  she  was
obliged  to  remain  in  her  bed  for  two  days,  on  account  of
restlessness  in  the  body?  drawing  pain  in  the  lower  limbs
and  abdomen,  with  rumbling  ; on  the  second  day  she  had
palpitation  of  the  heart  for  several  hours,  in  the  forenoon,
accompanied  with  asthma,  (a.  9 d.)  Leucorrhoea,  with
stitches  in  the  uterus,  (a.  25  d.)  Leucorrhoea  with  itching
in  the  vagina,  (a.  3 d.)  Sanguineo-mucous  discharge  from
the  vagina.  Yellowish  leucorrhoea,  (a.  24  h.)  Leucor-
rhoea clear  as  water,  (a.  22  d ) Mucous  leucorrhoea,
clear  as  water.  The  leucorrhoea  increases  when  she  is
attacked  with  frequent  eructations  and  retching  ; in  this
case  her  face  becomes  paler.  Discharge  of  a green-red
fluid  from  the  vagina,  during  her  pregnancy.  Leucorrhoea,
especially  profuse  after  micturition.  Leucorrhoea  having
the  appearance  of  pus.  Leucorrhoea  like  milk,  only  in
day-time,  with  burning  pain  and  producing  soreness  be-
teen  the  thighs.  Profuse  mucous  diarrhoea,  having  a fetid
smell,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Pains  while
walking,  on  account  of  soreness  occasioned  by  the  leu-
corrhoea.

Catarrh,  Larynx  and  Trachea. — Tenacious  mucus
in  the  nose,  (a.  24  h.)  Expulsion  from  the  nose  of  a piece
of  yellow-green  skin,  bordered  with  blood,  (a.  4 d.)  Feel-*
ing  of  dryness  in  the  nose  and  fauces.  Dryness  in  the
posterior  nares,  and  nevertheless  much  mucus  in  the  mouth,
with  involuntary  desire  to  swallow.  Dryness  in  the  nose.
The  left  nostril  is  frequently  too  dry  as  if  closed  by  swell-
ing, but  without  catarrh.  Obstruction  of  the  nose  ; expul-
sion of  indurated  mucus  from  the  nose.  Obstruction  of


SEPIA.


173


the  nose , for  seven  days,  (a.  8 d.)  Obstruction  of  the  nose
and  difficult  breathing,  (a.  11  d.)  Sudden  obstruction  of
both  nostrils,  in  the  morning.  Dry  coryza,  only  in  the
left  nostril.  Violent  dry  coryza , (a.  4,  and  6 a.)  Violent
dry  coryza,  with  roaring  in  the  head  and  ears,  (a.  24  h.)
Dry  coryza  with  prickling  headache  in  the  forehead  and
eyes,  constant  desire  to  cough  and  a good  deal  of  dry
cough  during  sleep,  without  waking.  Catarrhal  fever,
with  weakness  of  the  lower  limbs  and  drawing  in  the  arms.
Coryza,  three  days  in  succession.  Coryza  for  several
weeks,  (a.  7 d.)  He  sniffs  all  the  time.  Coryza  with
diarrhoeie  stool.  Yellow  water  from  the  nose  when  blow-
ing it,  with  cutting  headache  in  the  forehead.  Fluent  co-
ryza, (immediately.)  Frequent  sneezing , almost  without
coryza , for  several  days.  Fluent  coryza  with  sneezing,
preceded  by  tingling  in  the  nose.  Sneezing,  at  six  o’clock
every  morning.  Fluent  coryza  with  sneezing,  she  had  not
had  it  for  two  years.  Fluent  coryza,  the  nose  dropping  all
the  time.  Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  great  pain  in  the  oc-
ciput, and  painful  drawing  in  the  hips  and  thighs,  for  a cou-
ple of  weeks.  Frequent  pressure  in  the  larynx,  painless,
in  the  morning.  Dryness  of  the  larynx,  in  the  morn-
ing. Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  larynx,  (a.  3 d.)  Sud-
den hoarseness,  (a.  7 d.)  Hoarseness  and  fluent  co-
ryza, (a.  4 d.)  She  is  unable  to  sing  high  notes,  on  account
of  hoarseness.  Hoarseness , he  is  unable  to  utter  a loud
word.  Hoarseness,  with  weakness  and  chilliness,  (in  a
few  hours.  Hoarseness  with  dry  cough , from  titillation  in
the  throat,  (a.  5 d.)  Cough,  occasioned  by  titillation  in  the
larynx,  without  expectoration.  Violent  desire  to  cough,
occasioned  by  a tingling  in  the  chest,  (a.  5 d.)  Cough
and  coryza,  every  morning  until  nine  o’clock  ; she  com-
mences sneezing  even  when  yet  in  bed  Short  and  hack
ing  cough  when  going  to  bed,  (4.  d.)  Cough  in  the  even-
ing before  going  to  bed,  from  eight  till  nine  o’clock,  until
she  throws  off,  then  the  cough  disappears.  The  cough  is
worst  after  lying  down  in  the  evening.

Cuest. — Dry,  short  evening-cough,  with  intermittent
stitches  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  for  several  hours.
Cough  with  vomiting,  mostly  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.
Dry  cough  with  vomiting  of  a bitter  liquid,  in  the  evening
when  in  bed.  When  coughing  she  feels  nauseated,  is  oc-


174


SEPIA.


casionally  obliged  to  retch,  and  becomes  then  hot  and  per-
spires slightly.  Violent  cough  with  scanty  expectoration,
but  with  vomiting,  which  is  generally  bitter,  but  only  in
the  evening  when  lying  in  the  bed.  Cough,  fatiguing  the
chest  and  stomach.  The  desire  to  cough  is  frequently  so
sudden  and  violent,  that  he  is  not  able  to  breathe  fast
enough  and  that  his  chest  becomes  spasmodically  contract-
ed. Spasmodic  cough.  Dry  cough,  as  if  coming  out  of
the  stomach  and  abdomen,  or  as  if  occasioned  by  consti-
pation, or  as  if  something  had  remained  in  the  stomach
which  did  not  go  off.  Dry  cough  during  the  day,  obliging
one  to  lie  down  and  ceasing  while  lying  down  ; the  cough
ceased  during  the  night  while  lying  down,  but  he  had  dry
coryza.  Violent,  dry  cough,  with  stitches  in  the  right
side  of  the  chest.  Cough  with  stitches  in  both  sides  of
the  epigastrium.  Cough  with  stitches  in  the  back.  When
coughing  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum  is  painful.  Scrap-
ing cough  ; sensation  as  if  his  chest  had  become  suddenly
affected.  Cough,  which  is  frequently  dry,  short  and  hack-
ing, with  pain  m the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  scraping,
raw,  sore  pain  in  the  region  of  the  larynx,  not  felt  when
swallowing  food  ; the  cough  does  not  rouse  her  from  sleep,
but  after  waking  the  cough  is  very  violent  and  continuing  ;
sometimes  there  is  a slight  rattling  in  the  trachea,  result-
ing in  mucous  expectoration.  Cough  at.  night , waking
one  from  sleep.  Cough,  day  and  night ; causing  a pain  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Painful  tearing  in  a small  spot
of  the  brain,  as  if  something  had  been  torn  loose,  during
a short  fit  of  cough.  Accumulation  of  much  mucus  in  the
larynx,  which  it  is  difficult  to  cough  up,  but  easy  to  swal-
low, going  even  down  during  a deep  inspiration,  (a.  24  h.)
Violent  cough  with  expectoration  after  rattling  of  mucus
in  the  chest,  with  sore  and  raw  pain  in  the  throat,  which
continues  even  half  an  hour  after  the  cough.  Slight  ex-
pectoration when  coughing,  with  wheezing  and  slight  rat-
tling in  the  chest.  Mucous  expectoration  from  the  chest,
without  much  cough  or  asthma.  A good  deal  of  cough
with  expectoration,  only  before  midnight  as  soon  as  lie
gets  into  bed,  not  during  day,  (a.  14  d.)  Expectoration  of
white  mucus  of  the  size  of  millet  seed,  (a.  14  d.)  Violent
cough  with  much  discharge  of  white  mucus,  lasting  one


SEPIA.


1T5


hour  every  night,  for  several  weeks.  A good  deal  of  cough
with  expectoration,  day  and  night ; the  cough  wakes  her
from  sleep,  accompanied  with  a sensation  as  if  the  chest
were  hollow  and  smarting  inside,  as  if  sore.  His  chest
feels  quite  raw,  owing  to  his  coughing  and  expectorating
so  much.  Expectoration  from  the  chest,  tasting  very  salt.
Gray  and  yellow  expectoration  from  the  chest.  Yellowish
expectoration,  tasting  like  rotten  eggs.  That  which  he
coughs  up,  has  a putrid  taste,  and  the  breath  which  he  ex-
pels with  the  expectoration,  has  a fetid  smell.  Cough
with  blood-streaked  expectoration,  after  dinner.  Cough
with  bloody  expectoration,  every  morning,  without  any
pain  in  the  chest.  Short,  hacking  cough,  in  the  evening
after  lying  down,  with  profuse  expectoration  of  pure,  co-
agulated blood,  once  every  minute,  (a.  8 d.)  A good  deal
of  purulent  expectoration  with  violent  cough,  great  oppres-
sion of  the  chest  and  rattling;  the  slightest  exercise  takes
away  her  breath,  and  she  is  quite  exhausted,  (a.  23  d.)
She  has  no  breath  when  she  coughs  without  being  able  to
expectorate.  Her  breathing  is  much  shorter.  Short  breath,
(immediately.)  Short  breathing  when  walking.  Short
breathing  when  walking  as  if  her  chest  were  congested.
Asthma,  with  tenacious  mucus  in  the  chest.  Loud  wheez-
ing through  the  nose  during  an  inspiration.  Loss  of  breath
when  taking  ever  so  little  exercise.  Oppression  of  the
chest  morning  and  evening.  When  standing  still,  the
breathing  is  arrested.  Asthmatic,  especially  when  palpi-
tation of  the  heart  occurs,  after  some  emotion  of  the  inind.
Oppression  of  the  chest,  in  the  morning  when  waking.
He  wakes  up  covered  with  sweat  and  affected  with  asth-
ma, continuing  for  four  hours.  Considerable  oppression
of  the  chest  in  the.  evening,  aggravating  the  breathing  and
becoming  much  worse  when  lying  down  ; she  had  to  sit
up  in  her  bed  ; accompanied  with  luminous  vibrations  be-
fore her  eyes.  Oppression  about  the  lower  part  of  the
chest.  Difficult  rather  than  short  breathing.  Oppression
of  the  chest  wilh  stitches  during  a deep  inspiration.  He
wakes  in  the  night  with  oppression  of  the  chest;  he  had
to  breathe  heavily  and  deeply  for  one  hour  and  felt  yet
somewhat  oppressed  in  the  morning  after  waking,  (a.  2 d.)
Fit  of  asthma  in  the  night;  he  was  lying  with  his  head


176


SEPIA.


bent  over,  felt  an  oppression,  bad  to  take  deep  breath  to
get  air,  for  one  hour  ; followed  by  cough  accompanied  with
expectoration  of  tenacious  mucus,  (a.  4 d.)  Considerable
oppression  of  breathing,  towards  evening,  from  a pressure
over  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Oppression  of  breathing  in
the  evening,  lrom  a pain  under  the  short  ribs  of  the  right
side,  preventing  her  from  making  the  least  motion.  Very
violent  pressure  in  the  chest,  without  touching  it.  Pres-
sure in  the  chest,  when  stooping  and  during  a deep  inspi-
ration. Aching  pain  in  the  chest,  increased  by  certain
movements.  Aching  pain  in  the  region  of  the  lowermost
left  ribs,  also  when  touching  that  part.  Severe  pressure
in  the  chest , in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Aching  pain
in  the  region  of  the  left  lowermost  rib,  only  when  walking.
Pressure  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
towards  the  axilla,  most  violent  during  a strong  inspiration  ;
when  touching  the  part,  it  is  painful  as  if  bruised.  Pres-
sure in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  in  paroxysms,  relieved
by  empty  eructations.  Drawing,  with  pressure,  in  the
region  of  the  right  false  ribs,  towards  the  back,  going  off
by  motion  and  by  rubbing.  Pressure  on  the  upper  part
of  the  sternum,  as  of  a weight.  Feeling  of  heaviness  in
the  chest , obliging  one  to  take  deep  breath.  Fulness  in
the  chest,  and  contraction  of  the  same,  hindering  breath-
ing. Constrictive  sensation  in  the  chest,  in  the  morning,
early,  (a.  7 d.)  Tensive  pressure  in  the  chest,  rather  oil
the  left  side.  Attacks  of  tightness  in  the  chest.  Tension
from  before  backward,  in  the  region  of  the  left  ribs,  as
after  a catarrh.  Aching  of  the  whole  chest.  Stitching
in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  ivhen  coughing , (a.  6 d.)
Stitching  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  and  scapula,  during
an  inspiration  and  cough.  Stitches  in  the  right  side  of
the  side,  towards  evening,  during  an  inspiration.  Stitches
in  the  right  side,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Stitches
in  the  right  side,  in  the  morning,  after  a sort  of  half  sleep.
Stitches  deep  in  the  chest.  Stitching  pain  in  the  right
side  of  the  chest,  during  an  expiration,  (a.  1°  d.)  Vio-
lent stitching  in  the  chest,  at  every  inspiration  ; he  was
only  able  to  take  short  breath  ; this  affected  his  head,  (a.
5 d.)  Continuous  stitches  in  the  left  chest,  independent
of  breathing.  Sharp  stitch  in  the  right  chest,  (a.  4 h )


SEPIA


177


Stitch,  continuing  one  minute,  in  the  region  of  the  right
lowermost  rib,  towards  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  going  off  by-
eructations.  Stitching  in  the  heart,  in  the  afternoon,  (a.
5 d.)  Rawness  in  the  chest,  as  of  raw  flesh.  Violent
burning  in  the  sternum.  Burning  pain  in  the  sternum,
while  drinking  beer.  Burning  sore  pain  in  the  upper  part
of  the  left  chest,  also  when  touching  it.  Pressure,  with
tearing,  in  the  highest  portion  of  the  left  chest,  near  the
shoulder-joint,  shortly  recurring  after  an  eructation,  which
afforded  relief.  Violent  tearing  in  the  lower  right  ribs.
Orgasm  of  the  blood,  and  congestion  of  blood  to  the  chest,
as  if  haemoptysis  were  about  to  set  in.  Gurgling  or  bub-
bling sensation  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  Beating  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  morning,  followed  by  orgasm
of  the  blood  in  the  chest,  resembling  palpitation  of  the
heart,  afterwards  burning  heat  in  the  face  and  body,  with-
out any  heat  or  redness  being  perceptible  to  the  hand,  and
without  thirst,  but  some  sweat.  Beating  in  the  left  chest,
(a.  26  d.)  Beating  of  the  heart,  in  the  evening,  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour.  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  stitches
in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  Palpitation  of  the  heart,
with  great  anxiety,  and  trembling  of  the  fingers  and  lower
limbs.  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  feeling  of  anxiety,
obliging  one  to  take  deep  breath,  without  depressing  the
spirits,  for  several  days,  (a.  22  d.)  Intermission  of  the  beats
of  the  heart,  with  anxiety.  Intermission  of  the  beats  of
the  heart,  especially  after  a meal.  Itching  of  the  surface
of  the  chest,  (a.  4 d.)  Itching  of  the  upper  part  of  the
sternum.  Itching  of  the  left  nipple  ; it  bleeds  occasionally,
and  shows  a tendency  to  ulcerate.  Stitching  in  one  of
her  mamma.  Stitches  in  the  right  mamma,  most  violent
when  she  gets  cold  in  walking  or  driving  in  a carriage  ;
there  is  otherwise  nothing  bad  to  be  discovered  in  it.

Back — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back , (a.  5,  16  d.)
Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  walking  in  the  after-
noon, (a.  5 d.)  Painful  weariness  in  the  small  of  the
back.  Pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  small  of  the  back,  above
the  hips,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  and  in  the  afternoon,
(a.  12  d.)  Weariness  of  the  lower  part  of  the  spine,  from
walking,  as  if  it  were  broken.  Drawing,  with  pressure,
on  the  left  lower  side  near  the  small  of  the  back,  (a.  28  h.)

8*


178


SEPIA.


Frequent  sharp  pressure  on  the  os  sacrum,  and  a little  be-
low. Gurgling  on  the  right  side  of  and  near  the  small  of
the  back.  When  lifting  something  he  had  a darling  into
the  small  of  the  back,  so  painful  that  he  dared  not  move,
he  had  to  walk  crooked,  and  experienced  violent  stitches
in  that  part,  when  knocking  the  foot  against  something.
Stitches  posteriorly  above  the  right  lap , continuing  almost
uninterruptedly  for  four  days  ; the  pain  being  so  violent
that  she  was  almost  unable  to  lie  on  the  right  side  ; when
touching  the  part , it  felt  painful  as  from  sub-cutaneous
ulceration.  Intermittent  pressure  directly  above  the  right
hip,  a little  towards  the  spinal  column.  Reddish,  herpetic
spots  above  the  hips.  Pain  in  the  back,  only  when  sitting,
and  even  when  sitting  ever  so  little.  Pain  in  the  back,
only  when  walking,  arresting  the  breathing.  Pain  in  the
upper  part  of  the  back,  every  morning,  when  lacing  herself
a little  tightly.  Painfulness  of  the  whole  back,  when
stooping  while  writing.  Pressure  upon  the  spinal  column,
above  the  small  of  the  back,  with  rheumatic  drawing  in
the  nape  of  the  neck.  When  stooping,  he  is  suddenly
attacked  with  a violent  pain  in  the  back,  as  if  he  received
a blow  with  a hammer,  accompanied  with  a lancinating
pain,  so  violent  that  he  came  1 ear  falling  down  and  losing
his  breath  ; the  pain  was  relieved  by  pressing  against  a
hard  object.  Burning  pressure  in  the  small  of  the  back,
(a.  13  d.)  Stiffness  in  the  lower  part  of  the  back,  making
it  very  difficult  for  him  to  keep  himself  straight.  Stiff-
ness in  the  back , diminishing  when  walking.  Tensive
pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  back  below  the  scapula,  espe-
cially when  lying  on  the  right  side.  Drawing  pressure  near
the  spinal  column,  by  the  side  of  the  scapula,  sometimes
extending  into  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Weariness  in  the
back,  in  the  morning  when  waking,  as  if  she  could  not
turn  herself  or  raise  herself  easily,  or  as  if  she  had  been
resting  in  a forced  position,  almost  as  if  the  parts  had^gone
to  sleep.  Drawing  pressure  below  the  right  scapula,  now
in  the  back,  now  more  in  one  side  ; it  is  especially  felt
when  the  arm  is  kept  straight  while  sitting.  Pretty
severe  pressure  at  a little  spot  between  the  scapulae.  'Pen-
sive pain  in  the  left  scapula,  towards  evening.  Tensive
pain  between  the  scapulae.  Drawing  in  the  scapula,  in-


SEPIA.


179


termingled  with  jerks,  (a.  19  d.)  Tearing  in  ti  e left
scapula,  as  if  from  a cold,  (a.  4 h.)  Drawing  between  the
scapulas  and  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  (a.  23  d.)
Stitching  in  the  left  scapula.  Stitches  between  the  scap-
ulas, (a.  24  cl.)  Stitching  pressing  between  the  scapulae*
Slinging  pain  from  the  scapula  down  through  the  ribs,  on
the  right  side  of  the  back,  at  every  inspiration,  lasting  as
long  as  this  does,  in  every  position  of  the  body,  but  less
when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Stinging  in  the  scapula,
extending  as  far  as  the  side  and  chest,  only  when  sitting
and  walking  fast ; the  stitching  ceases  when  walking  mod-
erately, or  when  leaning  against  the  affected  side  ; mostly
in  the  evening  and  afternoon.  Burning  constrictive  pain
around  the  shoulders,  chest  and  neck,  in  the  evening.

Neck. — Drawing  and  stitching  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
even  when  at  rest,  arresting  the  breathing.  Feeling  as  if
the  nape  of  the  neck  were  swollen.  Stiffness  of  the  nape
of  the  neck.  Painless  swelling  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
of  the  size  of  a hazelnut.  Violent  itching  in  the  nape  of
the  neck.  Jerking  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  shaking
of  the  head.  Aching,  sore  pain  in  the  lowermost  cervical
vertebra,  in  the  evening,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Tensive  pain  of  one  side  of  the  neck,  as  if  it  were  swollen.
Stretching  of  the  neck,  straining  of  the  cervical  muscles.
Dislocation  of  the  facial  muscles,  (11.  d.)  Red,  itching
herpetic  spots  on  both  sides  of  the  neck.  Large  boil  on  the
neck,  below  the  left  jaw,  with  stinging  pain.  Jerking  of
the  head  backward,  in  the  morning  when  rising.

Upper  Extremities. — Titillating  burning  in  the  right  ax-
illa. Swelling  and  suppuration  of  one  of  the  axillary  glands.
Swelling  of  the  axillary  glands.  Itching  of  the  axillae.  Claw-
ingdrawing  in  the  rightshoulder,andinthewhole  side.  Ach-
ing pain,  as  if  sprained, directly  below  the  left  shoulder-joint,
posteriorly.  Dull,  drawing-tearing  pain,  as  if  sprained,  in
the  shoulder-joint,  (after  dinner.)  'Tension  and  drawing
in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  going  off  by  moving  it.  Tear-
ing in  the  interior  and  exterior  of  the  left  shoulder-joint.
Violent  pain  in  the  shoulder-joint,  when  raising  a small
weight,  or  when  resting  the  elbow  in  an  elevated  position  ;
it  is  a sort  of  intensely  painful  pressure,  with  trembling  of
the  hand.  Pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  shoulder-joint,  when


180


SEPIA.


resting  the  arm  upon  the  table  while  writing,  (3.  d.)
Violent  pain  in  the  shoulder-joint,  as  if  it  would  tear  off;
the  pain  is  relieved  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  by  eructations.
Pain  in  the  shoulder,  which  was  higher  than  the  other  by
malformation,  also  when  touching  it.  Stiffness  of  the  left
shoulder  ; she  is  not  able  to  raise  her  hand  up  to  her  head,
(a.  13  d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  shoulder -joint,  early  in
the  morning  when  in  bed,  until  one  hour  after  rising.
Pulling  and  drawing  in  the  top  of  the  shoulder,  when  at
rest.  Great  pain  in  both  shoulders.  Pressure  on  the
shoulder  ; at  night,  it  felt  as  if  gone  to  sleep  and  sprained.
Aching  sore  pain  in  the  top  of  the  shoulders,  as  if  excori-
ated. Pain  in  the  region  of  the  head  of  the  humerus,  and
the  tendon  of  the  pectoralis  muscle,  when  bending  the  arm
back  and  when  touching  the  part.  The  arms  feel  very
faint  and  go  to  sleep  when  at  rest.  Feeling  of  stiffness
and  coldness  in  the  arm,  as  if  there  were  no  blood  in  it,
but  without  any  coldness  being  perceptible  to  the  hand.
The  arm  goes  to  sleep  when  leaning  the  head  upon  it.
Paralytic  feeling  in  the  left  arm  ; nevertheless  it  can  he
moved  properly,  as  well  as  the  fingers.  Paralytic  sensa-
tion in  the  arm,  afterwards  throbbing  in  the  same.  Draw-
ing in  the  arms  from  above  downward , extending  into  the
fingers,  (a.  24  h.)  Jerking  in  the  right  arm  from  below
upward,  followed  by  trembling  of  the  hand,  hindering
writing.  Tearing  in  the  arm,  from  the  wrist  to  the  shoul-
der ; the  pain  scarcely  allowing  him  to  move  the  arm  ;
when  letting  the  arm  hang  down,  it  becomes  blue  and
rigid  ; the  greatest  pains  come  on  in  ihe  night,  less  in  day-
time when  at  rest.  Burning  of  the  skin  of  the  upper  arms,
on  the  outside,  directly  below  the  shoulder-joint,  as  if  a
vesicatory  had  been  applied.  Pain  in  the  upper  arm,  ting-
ling and  humming,  more  violent  when  moving  the  arm  or
when  stooping,  but  going  off  when  at  rest  and  when  lying
in  the  bed  ; the  pain  extends  as  far  as  the  shoulder-joint,
and  occasions  an  uneasiness  in  the  arm  for  three  days,
(a.  24  h.)  Jactitation  of  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm.
Violent  pain  in  the  left  upper  arm,  as  if  bruised.  Pain  as
if  bruised  in  the  right  upper  arm,  also  during  mol  ion.
Large  blister  on  both  upper  arms,  with  violent  itching.
Tearing  in  the  left  upper  arm,  at  a small  place  above  the


SEPIA.


181


elbow.  Drawing  pain  in  one,  afterwards  in  the  other  upper
arm.  Itching  in  the  bends  of  the  elbows.  Tension  in  the
elbows,  as  if  the  joint  were  too  short.  Stitches  in  the
elbow-joints.  Brown  spots  on  the  elbow  of  the  size  of
lentils,  surrounded  with  a herpetic  skin.  Itching  acridity
in  the  posterior  'part  of  each  elbow.  Cramp  in  the  fore-
arm when  walking.  Tearing  with  pressure  in  the  left
fore-arm,  in  the  interior  and  exterior  of  the  bend  of  the
elbow.  Groaning  sensation  in  the  fore-arm.  Drawing
tearing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  fore-arm.  Tearing  now  in
the  left,  now  in  the  right  fore-arm,  near  the  wrist-joint.
Tearing  drawing  from  the  outer  side  of  the  left  hand
through  the  fore-arm,  extending  as  far  as  the  elbow.  Red
swelling  on  the  fore-arm,  with  pain  as  if  pressing  upon  a
fluctuating  tumor.  Lancinations  in  the  left  wrist-joint.
Drawing  pain  in  the  right  wrist-joint.  Tearing  in  the
hand.  The  hand  feels  numb  and  goes  to  sleep,  when
holding  something  with  it,  or  carrying  something  in  it.
Weakness  of  the  muscles  of  the  hand.  Visible  twitch-
ings  and  jerkings  in  the  internal  muscles  of  the  hand,  with
stitching  pain.  Heat  in  the  hands  in  day-time  ; the  mind
being  excited  at  the  same  time.  Icy  coldness  of  both
hands  in  the  warm  room,  so  severe  that  they  spread  a
chilly  feeling  over  the  wdiole  body.  A wart  seems  to  form
on  the  outer  side  of  the  hand.  The  skin  of  the  palm  of
the  hand  peels  off.  A cicatrix  on  the  tip  of  the  index-
finger  commences  to  bleed  spontaneously.  Roundish,
bright-red  spot  in  the  ball  of  the  right  hand,  itching  vio-
lently, which  cannot  be  removed  by  scraiching,  in  the
evening.  Large  itching  blister  on  the  right  thumb.  The
thumb  becomes  bent,  towards  the  little  finger  and  remains
immoveable.  Tearing  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  right
thumb.  Tensive  pain  of  the  metacarpal  joints  of  the  fin-
gers, especially  when  bending  them.  Drawing  and  stitch-
ing in  all  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  Stitches  in  the
metacaipal  joints  of  the  fingers.  Arthritic  drawing  in
the  finger-joints.  Tingling  in  the  tips  of  the  little  fingers,
(a.  3 d.)  Numbness  of  the  right  fingers  in  the  evening.
Violent  pricking  in  the  tip  of  the  left  thumb.  Painful
tickling  under  the  nail  of  the  right  thumb.  Almost  pain-
ful tickling  under  the  nail  of  the  left  index-finger.  Tear-


182


SEPIA..


ing  under  the  nail  of  the  right  index-finger.  Panaritium
on  the  left  index-finger,  with  violent  beating  and  stitching
in  the  same,  (a.  2;}  d.)  Clenching  of  the  index-finger
since  morning  ; it  was  impossible  for  him  to  stretch  it.
Tearing  in  the  posterior  joint,  of  the  right  index-finger.

Lower  Extremities. — Soreness  with  burning  pain
between  the  nates.  Intermittent  drawing  pressure  directly
over  the  right  side  of  the  nates.  Drawing  from  the  right
hip  to  the  soles,  the  whole  day,  (a.  8 d.)  Cramp-pain  in
the  hip-joint,  she  had  to  walk  about  to  relieve  it.  Sudden
tearing  cramp-pain  in  the  region  of  the  hip,  extending  down
to  the  foot,  when  walking  about,  for  eight  or  ten  minutes.
Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  right  hip-joint,  only  when  lying
upon  this  side.  Pain  as  if  bruised,  and  weakness  in  the
hip-joint,  worst  when  rising  from  the  chair,  so  that  she
was  unable  to  get  along  without  holding  on  to  something;
the  pain  became  relieved  by  continuing  to  walk.  Tear-
ing, with  pressure,  over  the  right  hip,  from  before  back-
ward. Pressure  in  the  right  hip-joint,  close  to  the  abdo-
men, commencing  and  increasing  gradually,  and  decreas-
ing as  gradually.  Burning  tearing  in  the  inner  border  of
the  left  glutei  muscles.  Pain  in  the  nates,  scarcely  per-
mitting him  to  sit  still.  Visible,  but  painless  jerking  in
one  half  of  the  nates  and  the  corresponding  thigh.  Creep-
ing upward  and  downward  in  the  left  lower  limb,  as  of
a mouse.  The  left  lower  limb  is  jerked  upward  in  the
forenoon,  when  sitting,  (a.  4 d.)  Jerking  in  the  left  lower
limb.  The  lower  limbs  go  to  sleep  when  sitting.  Stiff-
ness of  the  lower  limbs,  exte  iding  to  the  hip-joint.  After
silting  a little,  the  limbs  become  quite  stiff  and  go  to  sleep,
with  tingling  in  the  same.  Painful  tenseness  in  the  left
thigh  and  leg,  as  if  the  parts  had  gone  to  sleep,  down  to
the  soles,  (a.  21  d.)  Numbness  and  sudden  paralytic
feeling  of  one  of  the  lower  limbs,  when  standing.  Great
uneasiness  in  one  of  the  lower  limbs,  in  the  evening,  being
a kind  of  internal  imperfect  itching.  Icy  coldness  of  the
lower  limbs,  from  forenoon  till  bed-time,  (a.  6 d.)  Tremb-
ling of  the  thighs  and  knees,  without  her  feeling  chilly,  with
jactitation  of  the  muscles  of  the  thighs.  Itching  of  the  femora
when  sitting  ; she  has  to  change  her  position  all  the  time,
(10.  d.)  The  posterior  muscles  of  the  thighs  are  very  pain-


SEPIA.


183


ful  when  sitting.  Spasmodic  jactitation  of  the  muscles  of
the  thighs  when  walking.  Tearing  in  the  right  thigh  when
walking,  the  place  where  the  tearing  is  felt  being  painful  to
the  touch.  Drawing  in  the  thighs,  (a.  48  h.)  Drawing  pain
in  the  femora  from  below  upward.  Lancinating  aching
pain  in  the  groin,  extending  into  the  thigh  while  advanc-
ing the  limb  when  walking,  (4.  d.)  Undulating  pain  in
the  upper  part  of  the  femur.  Cramp  in  the  thighs  when
walking.  Cramp  in  the  inner  side  of  the  thighs  when
walking.  Fits  of  creeping  in  the  thigh,  down  to  the  toes,
frequently  lasting  a quarter  of  an  hour,  several  days  in
succession.  Pain  of  the  thighs  as  if  bruised,  when  touch-
ing them,  with  tension  in  the  same  when  walking.  Para-
lytic tension  in  the  right  thigh  and  hip  joint  when  walking,
(11.  d.)  Lancinations  in  the  thigh,’  when  walking,  mo-
mentarily depriving  the  lower  limbs  of  all  their  power  and
almost  paralysing  them,  with  chilliness.  Lancinations  in
the  left  thigh  when  at  rest,  afterwards  ulcerative  pain  in
the  outer  parts.  Short  pain  in  the  right  thigh,  in  the  even-
ing after  lying  down,  but  so  violent  that  she  had  to  remain
quiet  without  being  able  to  move  ; for  sixteen  evenings  in
succession,  (a.  2 d.)  Boils  on  the  thigh,  (a.  17  d.)
Drawing  pain  in  the  knees.  Arthritic  drawing  in  the
knees.  Violent  drawing  pain  in  the  knees,  when
walking  and  when  rising  from  a seat.  Drawing  pain
in  the  knee-joint,  in  the  evening.  Lancinations  between
the  patella  and  the  knee-joint.  Tearing  in  the  right
knee,  as  soon  as  she  gets  cold  ; no  pain  when  touch-
ing the  parts.  Tearing  around  the  knees  and  malleoli,
only  when  sitting  and  lying  down.  Tension  in  the  ten-
dons over  the  knee,  when  going  up  stairs.  Tension  around
the  knee.  Tension  in  the  knee  when  walking  in  the  open
air.  Stitching  in  the  knee.  Stitching  and  cutting  nthe
bend  of  the  knee.  , Stitching  directly  below  the  patella,
when  walking  fast.  Boring  pain  in  the  left  knee-joint,
when  at  rest.  Cracking  in  the  knee-joint.  Great  weak-
ness in  the  knees.  Cold  knees,  in  the  night.  Painful
swelling  of  the  knee,  with  tension  in  the  knee,  both  when
at  rest  and  in  motion.  Soft,  painless  swelling  on  the  pa-
tella ; when  kneeling  a tension  and  unyielding  tightness  is
experienced  in  the  knee  ; the  swelling  feels  numb.  Un-
easiness in  the  legs  every  evening , with  creeping  in  them*


1S4


SEPIA.


Pressure  and  drawing  in  the  legs,  from  the  knees  to  the
toes,  most  violent  when  sitting  or  lying  down,  relieved
when  walking.  Slight  tearing  between  the  left  knee  and
the  calf.  Heaviness  of  the  legs  as  far  as  the  knees,  as  if
they  would  tall  off.  Pain  of  the  knees  and  tibiae  as  if
bruised,  more  when  silting  than  when  walking.  Pain  in
the  tibia  and  fibula,  but  especially  in  the  malleoli,  as  if  the
bones  were  being  distended.  Pain  of  the  tibia  as  if  bruis-
ed. Pain  in  the  tibia  as  if  bruised.  Pain  as  if  bruised
and  weariness  of  the  legs  ; she  could  not  help  falling  into
a slumber  full  of  anxious  fancies.  Sore  pain  in  the  region
of  the  tibia,  only  during  motion.  Tearing  now  above,
now  below  the  right  calf,  (a.  14  h.)  Tearing  in  front
directly  below  the.  right  knee,  (a.  32  h.)  Drawing
pain  in  the  (eg , extending  as  far  as  the  heel,  where  he  ex-
perienced stitches.  Drawing  pain  deep  in  the  right  tibia,
extending  to  beyond  the  malleoli.  Burning  in  the  lower
half  ol  the  legs,  at  night  when  in  bed  ; she  has  to  uncover
them.  Tensive  pain  in  the  calf,  (a.  14  d.)  Pain  as  if
bruised  of  the  gastrocnemii  muscles  and  hamstrings.  Swell-
ing of  both  legs,  (a.  13  d.)  Swelling  between  the  tibia
and  calf,  (a.  13  d.)  The  swelling  of  the  legs  rises  as  jar
as  the  knee  ivhcn  sitting  and  standing , and  disperses  when
walking.  Cramp  in  the  calf,  at  night,  (after  a cold.)  Ten-
sion in  the  calves.  Drawing  tension,  like  a cramp,  in
the  calves,  from  the  malleolus  to  the  knee.  Aching
pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right  calf,  as  if  a cramp  in
the  calves  would  come  on.  Violent  cramp  in  the  calves ,
at  night  when  in  bed,  when  extending  the  legs,  and  next
day  constant  tension  of  the  calves,  as  if  too  short.  Violent
itching  of  the  tibia.  Many  itching  pimples  on  the  legs.
Pointed  pimples  on  the  calves,  as  high  up  as  the  knees  ;
occasioning  an  itching  here  and  there,  and  a stinging  where
the  clothes  rub  against  the  skin.  Violent  tickling  stitch  in
the  lower  part  of  the  right  tibia.  Tensive  pain  in  the  tendo
Achillis.  After  a walk  in  the  open  air,  the  tarsal  joint
feels  painful,  as  if  compressed.  Tensive  pain  in  the  dor-
sum of  the  left  foot,  making  it  impossible  for  her  to  walk
on  the  pavement.  Pressure  in  the  left  tarsal  joint,  as  if
the  boot  were  too  light.  Pain  in  the  tendons  of  the  tarsal
joints  when  walking,  as  if  they  were  too  short.  Tension
in  the  bend  of  the  tarsal  joint,  as  if  too  short,  when  walk-


SEPIA.


185


ing,  (the  first  days.)  Pain  in  the  foot,  when  walking  in
the  open  air,  as  if  a tendon  in  the  region  of  the  malleolus
had  become  strained.  Swelling  of  the  feet,  (a.  27  d.)
The  feet  become  bloated  when  walking  long.  Heaviness
in  the  feet  extending  up  to  the  knees,  from  early  in  the
morning.  Buzzing  in  the  foot,  (a.  4 d.)  Creeping  in
the  feet  when  standing.  The  right  foot  goes  to  sleep,  (a.
2 d.)  The  feet  go  to  sleep,  frequently  when  sitting , espe-
cially in  the  morning.  Tearing  in  the  lower  part  of  the
right  foot,  (a.  11  h.)  Sweat  of  the  lower  limbs,  so  copi-
ous in  day-time  that  it  penetrates  through  drawers  and
pantaloons.  Profuse  sweat  of  the  feet,  without  smell.
Sweaty  feet,  especially  the  toes,  for  two  weeks.  Profuse
sweat  of  the  feet,  having  an  intolerable  smell  ; I he  toes
become  sore.  Burning  of  the  feet,  at  night.  Inclines  to
have  cold  feet.  Icy  cold  feet,  afternoon  and  evening  when
sitting.  Very  cold  feet , in  the  evening , especially  in  the
bed  ; and  when  the  coldness  of  the  feet  passes  off,  he  has
very  cold  hands.  Icy-cold  feet,  especially  in  the  evening  ;
they  remain  cold  for  a long  time  even  in  bed.  Fetid  smell
of  the  (generally  sweaty)  feet.  Stitching  pain  in  the  sole
also  when  touching  it  ; she  is  scarcely  able  to  walk.
Stitching  in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  especially  painful  when
walking  on  stone  pavement.  Pimples  on  the  dorsum  of
the  foot,  itching  violently.  Prickling  in  the  soles  and  pain
of  the  corns.  Creeping  or  prickling  stinging  in  the  sole
and  under  the  toes,  more  when  at  rest  than  when  walking,
(a.  4 d.)  Stitching  in  the  left  sole,  even  when  sitting.
Frequent  stitching  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  (1.  d.)
Tearing  in  the  right  sole,  close  to  the  toes.  Frequent
cramp  in  the  internal  border  of  the  sole  of  the  foot.  Long-
continuing  cramp  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  in  the  evening
when  in  bed.  Itching  of  the  outer  side  of  the  left  sole.
Stitching  in  the  heel,  only  at  night,  (a.  41  d.)  Stitching
in  the  heel  and,  corn , in  day-time.  Burning-stinging  and
smarting  sore  pain  in  the  heel,  when  sitting.  Spasmodic
stitching  in  the  heel,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  in
the  evening  when  extending  the  leg  and  taking  off  the
boots.  Stitching  and  tearing  in  the  heel,  day  and  night,
more  painful  when  treading  than  when  at  rest  ; she  was
pale  and  cold,  and  the  parts  felt  numb  when  touched,


186


SEPIA.


When  walking,  blisters  easily  form  on  her  heel.  Tearing
in  the  right  small  toe.  Tearing  in  the  big  toe.  Stitching
pressure  in  the  left  big  toe,  more  when  at  rest  than  when
walking.  Burning  slinging  in  the  tip  of  the  big  toe.
Tickling  in  the  tip  of  the  right  big  toe.  Bone-pain  in  the
ball  of  the  big  toe.  Pain  in  the  anterior  joint  of  the  left
big  toe,  first  tickling,  then  smarting,  frequently  recurring.
Cutting  in  the  toes,  as  with  a knife,  at  night,  mostly  when
lying  upon  the  back,  with  redness  of  the  tips  of  the  toes;
in  the  morning  the  pain  has  gone,  (a.  41  d.)  A nail  on  the
toe  which  had  been  distorted  for  a number  of  years,  sup-
purates, and  a new  nail  forms  in  its  place.  Pain  in  the
upper  part  of  the  toes,  sore  and  corrosive.  Itching  of  the
toes.  Cramp  in  the  toes,  recurring  for  several  days.
Cramp  in  the  second  toe.  Burning  and  aching  pain  of  the
corn,  even  when  the  shoes  are  wide.  Drawing  pain  in
the  corn,  in  the  evening.  Stitching  in  the  corns,  also  when
at  rest ; when  knocking  against  the  corn,  the  stitches  are
so  severe  that  one  would  like  to  exclaim,  (a.  48  h.)  Burn-
ing and  stitching  in  the  corn.  Inflammation  of  the  corn.

General  Symptoms. — The  pains  are  not  felt  during
violent  exercise,  as  walking  in  the  open  air,  fencing,  etc.,
(riding  on  horse-back  excepted,)  but  are  most  frequent
and  violent  when  sitting  quietly,  forenoon  and  evening.
The  symptoms  are  much  worse  in  the  evening  and  night,
than  in  day-time.  Drawing  in  all  the  limbs , (almost  im-
mediately-) Arthritic  drawing  in  the  knees  and  finger-
joints.  Drawing  all  over,  even  in  the  bones  of  the  arms.
Drawing  tearing  from  below  upward,  in  the  upper  and
lower  limbs,  the  whole  day,  only  when  at  rest,  with  great
weakness.  Tearing  in  the  knees  and  elbow-joints,  (a.  16
d.)  Drawing  and  tearing  in  that  part  of  the  skin  which
had  been  injured  some  time  ago.  Jerking  and  stitching
in  various  parts  of  the  body,  (a.  5 d.)  Paralytic  stitches
here  and  there  ; every  stitch  was  followed  by  immobility
of  the  part  lasting  a few  minutes.  Jerking  sensations  in
various  parts  of  the  body,  also  in  the  head,  right  and  left.
When  moving  a limb,  it  jerks.  The  right  leg  sometimes
jerks  in  day-time,  followed  by  trembling  of  the  right  hand,
making  it  impossible  for  him  to  write.  All  the  parts  of
the  body  upon  which  she  is  lying  or  sitting,  ache.  Pain


SEPIA.


1ST


in  all  her  limbs,  especially  the  hips,  (a.  2 d.)  Sense  as
of  purring  in  the  lower  limbs,  arms  and  hands.  The  limbs
go  to  sleep  easily,  even  when  stooping,  laying  the  limbs
across  one  another,  reaching  high  up  with  the  arms,  etc.
She  feels  as  if  she  could  easily  injure  herself,  sprain  a
joint,  etc.  She  easily  strains  herself  when  working,
which  occasions  stiffness  and  tightness  in  the  nape  of  the
neck.  Impatience  when  sitting,  a sort  of  uneasiness  in
the  bones.  Uneasiness  in  the  whole  body,  (a.  24  h.)
Uneasiness  in  the  limbs,  (a.  6 d.)  Fearfulness  when
riding  in  a carriage.  Anxiety  in  the  limbs  ; he  has  rest
nowhere.  Frequent  trembling  in  the  whole  body,  (a.  10
d.)  Tremulous  motion  in  the  whole  body.  Orgasm  of
the  blood  in  the  body,  three  days  in  succession,  (a.  27  d.)
Orgasm  of  the  blood,  with  congestion  of  blood  to  head
and  chest,  (a.  16  d.)  She  feels  pulsations  in  the  whole
body,  especially  in  the  whole  left  side  of  the  chest.  She
feels  pulsations  in  the  head  and  all  the  limbs,  day  and
night,  but  more  in  the  night.  She  becomes  very  much
heated  from  a short  walk.  Violent  heat  in  the  head  and
face  after  a walk.  Headache  and  faintness  become  much
worse  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Flushes  of  heat
after  slight  motion.  Hot,  oppressed  and  anxious  from
smoking,  (to  which  he  was  accustomed.)  Warm  and
oppressed  in  the  evening.  Heat  in  the  tip  of  the  left  toes,
darting  like  an  electric  spark  through  the  left  side  into  the
head  and  leaving  a troublesome  weakness  in  that  organ  ;
last ing  only  half  a minute.  Profuse  sweat  when  walking.
Profuse  sweat  during  motion,  smelling  almost  like  juniper-
blossom.  The  slightest  exercise  excites  sweat.  She  feels
either  too  cold,  or  else  she  is  attacked  with  heat,  resulting
in  sweat.  Warm  feet  and  icy-cold  hands,  or  vice  versa;
frequently  however,  both  extremities  are  icy-cold.  Sensi-
tiveness to  cold  air.  Cold  air  is  offensive  to  him.  Shud-
dering accompanies  the  pains.  The  pains  are  relieved  by
the  local  application  of  heat.  Unusual  catarrhal  symp-
toms after  becoming  wet  ; violent  feverish  chilliness,  in  a
few  hours  fainting  fits,  next  day  coryza.  A cold  occasions
spasm  of  the  stomach,  a sort  of  burning  contraction.
Liability  to  cold  ; after  drinking  a glass  of  water  excessive
chilliness  and  diarrhoea  of  a watery  mucus,  until  he  goes


188


SEPIA.


to  bed.  Tearing  in  the  left  scapula  after  being  slightly
exposed  to  a cause  of  cold.  Swelling  of  the  whole  body,
face,  abdomen,  legs  and  arms,  extending  down  to  the
wrist-joint,  without  thirst,  but  with  great  shortness  of
breathing,  for  three  weeks,  with  fever  every  2 or  3 days,
being  an  alternation  of  chilliness  and  heat  at  irregular
hours, even  at  night  ; during  the  heat  he  is  covered  all
over  with  sweat,  (a.  48  h.)  Jn  the  evening  swelling  in  the
wrist-joint,  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  and  around  the  tarsal
joints  ; there  is  a tension  in  the  joints  during  motion  ; in
the  morning  the  swelling  had  disappeared,  but  the  parts
felt  sore  when  touched.  The  skin  of  the  whole  body  is
painful  as  if  sore.  Intense  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  body
when  knocking  any  part  of  the  body  against  something.
Prickings  in  the  skin,  in  the  evening  when  getting  warm  in
the  bed.  Itching  in  the  face,  arms , hands , hack , hips , feet ,
abdomen  and  genital  organs , (a.  2,  20,  23,  28  d.)  The
itching  becomes  a sort  of  burning.  Itching,  and  itching
pimples  in  the  joints,  especially  in  the  bends  of  the  elbows
and  knees,  and  in  the  region  of  the  tarsal  joint,  more  in
the  evening  and  morning  than  in  day-time,  (in  a few
hours.)  Itching  vesicles  and  blotches  in  the  face,  on  the
hands  and  feet.  Itching  in  the  ulcer.  Burning  and  stitch-
ing in  the  ulcer,  in  the  night.  The  sore  spot  swells,  be-
comes hot  and  a burning  pain  is  experienced  in  it.  Peel-
ing off  of  the  cuticle,  in  more  or  less  large,  generally
roundish  spots,  especially  on  hands  and  fingers,  without
pain,  (in  a few  days.)  Claret-colored  spots  on  the  neck
and  under  the  chin,  without  sensation.  Red,  insensible
little  blotches  of  the  size  of  lentils,  on  the  hands,  emitting
some  humor  when  pricked.  The  sting  of  a bee  causes
redness  and  an  itching  red  rash  over  the  whole  body,  in-
flamed eyes  and  drops  of  sweat  in  the  face  ; all  this  in  a
few  minutes.

Weakness,  Fits. — Slight  attacks  of  vertigo  and  palpita-
tion of  the  heart  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Pressure
in  the  region  when  walking,  generally.  Distension  of
the  abdomen  with  emission  of  flatulence,  during  a walk.
All  sorts  of  pain  in  the  long  bones,  during  a walk  in  the
cold  air,  especially  in  the  extremities  of  those  bones.
During  every  movement  of  the  body  he  feels  nauseated


SEPIA.


189


as  if  lie  would  vomit,  and  so  faint  that  he  had  to  lie  down
upon  the  ground  as  soon  as  he  got  into  t he  open  air;  all
his  limbs  fe.t  relaxed  and  weak.  Flatulent  distension  of
the  abdomen  as  soon  as  he  got  into  the  open  air.  Fit  of
nausea  in  the  morning  during  a walk,  his  eyes  saw  black,
he  felt  hot  from  noon  till  evening,  with  tearing  in  all  the
limbs  and  continued  nausea ; in  the  evening  he  felt  a
weakness  even  unto  fainting,  with  melancholy  ; every
thing  affected  his  nerves,  he  inclined  to  start ; at  night  he
emitted  a quantity  of  fetid  flatulence,  (a.  4 d.)  Fit  of
drawing  aching  pain  in  the  umbilical  region,  followed
by  discharge  of  mucus  from  the  anus,  with  violent
pressing  upon  the  rectum  and  stitching;  shortly  after  con-
gestion of  blood  to  the  chest,  with  anxiety  and  uneasiness
increasing  to  a sort  of  fever  after  a meal,  alternation  of  in-
ternal heat  and  chilliness,  sweat  about  the  head  from  one
to  four  o’olock  ; after  this  a headache  which  left  a pain  in
the  nape  of  the  head  ; the  same  symptoms  recurring  on
the  day  following.  Sensation  as  of  an  icy-cold  hand  be-
tween the  scapulae,  afterwards  coldness  over  the  whole
body,  followed,  by  a suffocative  spasm  in  the  chest,  lasting
several  minutes  ; after  this  he  was  seized  with  clonic  con-
vulsions of  the  right  lower  limb,  and  jerking  in  some  of  its
parts,  also  jerking  of  the  right  arm,  while  the  lower  limb
was  being  held  fast  ; lastly  trembling  in  the  lower  limbs
lasting  the  whole  day,  (a.  10  d.)  Fit  of  nausea  after  a
walk  in  the  forenoon  ; obscuration  of  sight,  no  appetite
for  her  meal  ; heat  before  the  meal,  with  pains  in  all  her
limbs  ; the  nausea  continued,  he  was  attacked  with  head-
ache, and,  when  in  company,  he  was  seized  with  a weak-
ness unto  fainting  ; every  little  trifle  affected  him,  and  he
inclined  to  start.  Fainting  fit,  while  slowly  driving  along
in  a carnage.  He  suffers  for  a whole  week  with  spasms
as  if  originating  in  nervous  weakness,  lasting  sometimes  a
whole  day,  the  pulse  being  now  faint,  now  spasmodic.
Numb  feeling  in  all  the  nerves,  also  those  of  the  tongue,
with  obtusion  of  the  head  and  absence  of  thought,  in  the
evening.  She  felt  most  easy  while  at  rest  and  lying  down.
Obscuration  of  sight  during  the  menses,  with  weakness
obliging  her  to  lie  down  ; this  gives  her  relief.  Fie  feels
oppressed  in  sultry  weather,  but  he  feels  cheerful^and


190


SEPIA.


light  during  a thunder-storm.  A walk  of  half  an  hour  ex-
hausted  him  so  much  that  he  felt  nauseated  and  was  un-  .
able  to  breathe  ; the  trachea  appeared  to  be  closed  down
to  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  He  felt  so  weak  that  he  ima-
gined he  should  faint,  (a.  7 d.)  Very  weak  in  the  morning,
with  uneasiness  in  the  body.  Fainting  fit  in  the  forenoon,
(a.  23  d.)  Fit  of  vertigo  with  fainting,  for  two  hours,
with  verv  short  breath.  The  lower  limbs  felt  bruised  and
weak  ; every  nerve  felt  painful,  and  they  felt  likewise
painful  when  touched  ; the  pain  disappeared  after  dancing.
Great  weakness  of  the  lower  limbs.  Indolence  of  both
body  and  mind,  with  difficult  breathing,  (a.  8 d.)  Heavi-
ness in  all  the  limbs.  Heaviness  in  ike  feet,  when  walk-
ing. Weakness  of  the  knees.  One  of  the  lower  limbs
feels  paralysed  all  of  a sudden,  for  a couple  of  hours.
She  becomes  paralysed  when  vexed.  Weakness  of  all
the  limbs,  with  chilliness,  (3.  d.)  She  became  tired  and
had  to  lie  down,  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  2 h.)  Great  weari-
ness in  the  morning  when  rising.  Although  he  felt  strong
and  cheerful  when  rising,  yet  a few  hours  after  he  felt
weak  and  indisposed,  to  such  an  extent  that  he  had  rather
go  to  bed  than  do  his  business.  When  rising  from  bed
he  felt  fainting,  even  unto  falling,  with  absence  of  thought ;
afterwards  chilliness  with  goose-skin  and  yawning  for  one
hour  ; pale  tongue,  pulse  weak  and  slow.

Sleep. — In  the  afternoon,  after  a slight  meal,  he  felt
lazy  and  drowsy.  Very  drowsy  at  noon,  in  the  afternoon
wide  awake  again.  Drowsiness  in  day-time,  and  not  dis-
posed to  do  anything.  Drowsiness  in  day-time  ; she  goes
to  sleep  as  soon  as  she  sits  dozen.  Timely  drowsiness  in
the  evening,  with  oppressive  obtusion  of  the  head,  (a.  72
h.)  Slumbering  (almost  immediately)  with  sweat  in  the
face.  Drowsiness  every  three  days,  returning  four  times  ;
the  child  sleeps  almost  the  whole  day  ; whenever  he  sits
down  he  goes  to  sleep,  and  complains  of  pain  in  the  fore-
head. Excessive  yawning  and  stretching.  Remains
wide  awake  ]ate  in  the  evening . Does  not  go  to  sleep  on
account  of  uneasiness.  Restless  in  the  evening  when  in
bed,  and  waking  up  early  in  the  morning.  Wide  awake
in  the  night,  on  account  of  ideas  crowding  upon  him.  She
wakes  at  one  o’clock  in  the  night,  and  is  unable  to  fall


SEPIA.


191


asleep  again.  Wide  awake  and  excited  the  whole  night ;
nevertheless  he  feels  bright  and  strong  on  the  day  follow-
ing. Restless  sleep  for  several  \veeks,  mingled  with
dreams,  and  tossing  from  side  to  side  ; afterwards  quiet
sleep.  Great  uneasiness  in  the  limbs,  at  night.  Fre-
quent waking  in  the  nighty  many  nights  in  succession,  (a.
6 d.)  Sound  sleep,  but  mingled  with  a number  of  vivid
dreams.  Sleep  disturbed  by  many  disagreeable  dreams,
(a.  16  h.)  Loud  talking  during  sleep.  Moaning  and
groaning  in  the  night  while  asleep.  Restless  sleep  with
vexatious  dreams  ; he  exclaimed,  stamped  with  Ins  feet,
and  raised  his  arm,  which  he  then  laid  slowly  down  again.
Raises  himself  about  midnight,  as  if  delirious,  begins  to
laugh  ; when  interrogated  he  closes  his  eyes  tightly,  sits
quite  immoveable,  with  stretched  arms  and  hands  and  the
teeth  clenched  ; after  drinking  a little  water,  he  asks  what
he  is  to  do  with  that  quantity  of  water  in  the  stomach,
nevertheless  he  drank  more,  held  up  his  hand  curved  as  if
he  were  yet  holding  the  tumbler,  smiled  withal,  and  said,
“ This  is  very  fine,  the  water  has  triumphed  he  then
talked  about  three  couriers  who  had  arrived,  and  pointed
to  people  whom  he  said  were  standing  here  and  there.
Inexhaustible  dreams,  the  whole  night.  Vexatious,  hor-
rid dreams.  Anxious  dream  in  the  night,  as  if  he  wrere
chased  and  had  to  run  backward  ; when  waking  he  ima-
gined that  something  was  approaching  him  from  above,
which  oppressed  his  chest ; after  which  he  felt  a creeping
and  stitches  in  the  chest.  Anxious  dream  ; he  dreams
that  his  body  had  become  disfigured.  Frightful  dream  ;
she  dreams  that  she  is  falling  from  a high  mountain.
Frightful  dream ; she  exclaims  in  her  sleep.  Dreams
full  of  dispute.  Anxious  dreams,  driving  him  out  of  his
bed,  (a.  19  d.)  He  wakes  in  the  night  ivith  a slniek  and
start.  Exclaims  during  his  nightly  sleep.  Sleep  is  dis-
turbed by  lascivious  dreams  and  erections.  Dreams  that
she  is  threatened  with  a rape,  (a.  2 d.)  Attacks  of  anxiety
in  the  night;  he  has  to  get  up  and  to  walk  about.  A sort
of  fainting  fit  about  midnight,  lasting  a quarter  of  an  hour,
with  consciousness,  but  with  inability  to  talk  or  to  stir  a
finger;  he  had  a sort  of  dream  during  his  fainting  parox-
ysm, as  if  he  were  fighting  with  a ghost ; shortly  after


192


SEPIA.


having  recovered  from  the  first  fainting  fit,  he  fell  into  a
second,  dreaming  that  he  had  lost  himself  in  a forest.
While  falling  asleep  she  was  attacked  with  inward  tremb-
ling, and  with  itching  in  the  thigh,  going  off  after  scratch-
ing. Oppressive  orgasm  of  the  blood  when  going  to
sleep.  She  was  not  able  to  lie  still  for  five  minutes,  owing
to  h 'at  and  anxious  dreams,  (a.  7 d.)  A good  deal  of  or-
gasm of  the  blood , in  the  night.  Heat  and  consequent  un-
easiness in  the  night.  Very  much  heated  in  the  morning
when  waking.  Febrile  heat  in  the  night,  with  anxious
fancies  and  dreams,  and  sweat  about  the  head.  .Nightly
sleeplessness,  and  fanciful  ravings  while  asleep.  When
closing  his  eyes,  at  night,  his  imagination  is  filled  with
all  sorts  of  visions,  passing  off  again  as  soon  as  he  opens
his  eyes.  At  midnight  he  wakes  with  chilliness,  great
anxiety,  jerking  and  spasm<  die  drawing  in  the  thighs,
chest  and  jaws,  for  half  an  hour.  He  wakes  in  the  night
with  violent  anxiety  and  spasms  in  the  abdomen,  after-
wards in  the  mouth,  chest  and  hip  joint,  with  pal  pi  tat  ion
of  the  heart.  Little  sleep  in  the  night,  owing  to  pain  in
the  hip-joint  when  moving  it.  Violent  tearing  from  the
hip-joint  into  the  foot,  in  the  night,  hindering  sleep.  Jerk-
ing of  the  limbs,  in  the  night.  Starting  during  the  siesta.
Frequent  startings  and  jerkings  when  falling  asleep.  Great
uneasiness  in  the  body,  at  night,  which  prevented  her  from
lying  stiil  ; she  had  to  turn  constantly  from  side  to  side,
and  dared  not  close  hex  eyes  lest  she  should  feel  worse.
Great  uneasiness  of  the  body  after  a short  sleep.  Anx-
iety in  the  morning,  when  wakings  going  off  after  rising.
He  wakes  early,  and  is  unable  to  go  to  sleep  again.
Sleeplessness  before  midnight,  lying  still  in  her  bed.
Sleepless  night,  without  pain,  but  being  unable  to  lie  still,
(a.  20  d.)  Drawing  and  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, at  night,  (a.  12  h.  Painful  pressure  in  the  abdomen,
and  pain  as  if  bruised,  in  the  night,  waking  her.  Burn-
ing pricking  in  the  heels,  for  several  nights,  waking  her,
(a.  5 d.)  Violent  throbbing  headache,  at  night,  (a.  20  d.)
Pressure  in  the  eyes,  at  night,  (a.  2 d.)  Violent  itching
in  the  right  ear,  at  night,  with  dampness  of  the  ear.  Press-
ing in  the  left  ear,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  when  waking,
in  the  morning.  Drawing  pain  in  the  molar  teeth,  extend-


SEPIA.


193


ing  into  the  forehead,  and  waking  her  frequently  in  the  *
night.  Beating  in  the  molar  teeth,  extending  from  above
the  checks  towards  the  occiput..  A sort  of  moaning  sen-
sation in  the  molar  teeth,  at  night.  Drawing  in  the  corns
the  whole  night.  Stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  elbow,  at  night,
when  waking,  which  takes  place  frequently.  Vertigo  in
the  night,  when  raising  himself  in  the  bed.  Waking  in
the  night  with  violent  colic,  sometimes  aching  above  and
around  the  umbilicus,  with  a trembling  motion  of  the  heart
which  can  be  felt  on  the  outside  of  the  chest,  (no  palpita-
tion) but  full  pulse  ; accompanied  with  nausea  and  sense
of  great  weakness  ; three  nights  in  succession,  the  mouth
being  very  dry.  Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed,  and  beating  of  all  the  arteries.  Vio-
lent beating  in  the  head,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  and
sensation  as  if  the  head  were  moving.  Disturbed  night’s
rest,  with  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  (a.  12  d.)  The
arms  go  to  sleep  in  the  night,  as  far  as  the  hands,  which
is  especially  painful  when  they  are  under  the  cover  ; in
this  case  a tearing  stiffness  is  experienced  in  the  parts.
Dry  titillating  cough,  with  a sort  of  spasm  in  the  chest,  at
night,  passing  off  in  the  morning.  Sleep  is  disturbed  by
frequent  coughing,  and  aching  in  the  feet.  Unceasing
cough  the  whole  night,  (a.  40  d.)  Frequent  micturition
in  the  night.  The  hands  go  to  sleep  frequently  in  the
night,  (6.  n.)  He  wakes  in  the  night  with  inclination  to
vomit.  Great  pain  as  if  bruised,  in  the  night  while  asleep,
and  sense  of  exhaustion  in  the  thighs  and  upper  arms  ;
the  pain  disappeared  immediately  on  waking.  Want  of
strength  in  the  upper  and  lower  limbs,  in  the  morning
when  waking,  (a.  5 d.)  Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  morn-
ing when  waking,  as  if  nauseated.  Long,  unrefreshing
sleep,  (a.  23  d.)  Fatiguing  sleep,  (a.  15  d.)  Wakes  up
late,  with  weariness  of  the  limbs.  No  desire  to  get  up  in
the  morning.

Fever. — In  the  morning,  after  waking,  he  feels  faint  and
weak,  and  is  sometimes  attacked  with  feverish  shivering
and  short  breath,  and  a sensation  of  internal  heat,  although
there,  was  not  any.  Great  thirst,  in  the  morning  after
waking.  Waking  in  the  morning  with  much  chilliness
and  internal  uneasiness,  (a.  24  h.)  Slow  pulse  of  56  to

9


194


SEPIA.


. 58  beats,  (a.  32  d.)  Complete  want  of  thirsty  for  11  days.
Feverisli,  faint;  hot  urine.  Shivering,  several  times  a day,
without  any  chilliness.  Constant  febrile  shuddering,
during  the  siesta.  Constant  chilliness,  day  and  night,  with
pinching  in  the  abdomen.  Internal  chilliness,  the  whole
day,  in  a warm  room.  Chilliness  in  the  evening,  with
thirst,  sweat  in  the  night.  Chilliness  in  the  evening,  after
which  thirst.  Feverish  shuddering,  even  about  the  head,
with  icy-cold  hands,  yawning  and  great  faintness.  Shud-
dering when  going  to  bed  ; afterwards  heat  in  the  face,
when  in  the  bed.  Fever  in  the  afternoon,  at  5 o’clock  ;
thirst,  and,  after  drinking  cold  water  chilliness  and  desire
to  lie  down  ; slight  perspiration  in  the  night.  In  the  fore-
noon the  feet,  and  after  these  the  rest  of  the  body  became
cold,  with  chills  ; he  had  to  lie  down,  got  warm  ; in  the
morning,  at  4 o’clock  he  felt  hot,  after  having  been  in
slight  perspiration  over  the  whole  body,  (9.  d.)  Chilliness
in  the  afternoon,  and  heat  in  the  forehead,  for  half  an  hour.
Feverish  shiverings,  with  alternation  of  heat,  until  night.
Alternation  of  heat  in  the  head,  and  chilliness  in  the  lower
limbs,  (a.  13  d.)  Febrile  heat  mingled  with  feverish
shuddering,  accompanied  with  dulness  and  heaviness  in
the  forehead,  preceded  by  luminous  vibrations  before  the
eyes  as  of  a thousand  suns,  with  heat  and  pressure  in  the
eyes,  accompanied  with  much  nausea,  great  oppression  of
the  chest,  as  if  constricted  all  over,  but  without  any  short-
ness of  breathing  ; from  morning  till  evening,  (a.  72  h.)
Almost  uninterrupted  heat  of  the  whole  body,  with  redness
of  face  and  sweat  about  the  head  and  body,  and  violent
headache,  being  a sort  of  heaviness  ; also  accompanied
with  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  trembling  over  the  whole
body  ; after  the  heat  he  feels  a chilliness  and  coldness
with  deadness  of  the  hands  ; for  four  days.  Fever  and
ague,  at  frequent  but  indefinite  periods  of  the  day  ; first,
general  heat  with  sweat  in  the  face,  violent  thirst  and
bitterness  of  mouth  ; then  again  chilliness  with  general
coldness,  also  in  the  face,  and  with  inclination  to  vomit,
and  pressure  in  the  forehead  extending  into  the  temples  ;
during  the  heat  she  felt  a vertigo  as  if  she  would  fall  over.
Violent  chills  for  one  hour  ; followed  by  violent  heat  and
inability  to  collect  one’s  senses  ; after  which,  violent  sweat


SEPIA.


195


in  the  evening  ; the  urine  being  brown  and  having  an  acrid
smell,  (1.  d.)  Some  chilliness  in  the  morning,  followed
by  heat  in  the  face  and  hands,  lasting  the  whole  day,  al-
though the  face  looks  pale,  no  thirst  or  sweat ; in  the  fore-
noon aching  pain  in  the  stomach  and  headache  when  stoop-
ing, (a.  6 d.)  Fever,  with  pressing  in  the  temples,  at  in-
tervals of  some  minutes,  and  with  shortness  of  breath
during  the  night.,  as  if  occasioned  by  an  internal  heat,  next
morning  weakness  in  the  lower  limbs,  thirst,  want  of  appe-
tite, drowsiness  ; during  the  day  febrile  shiverings,  sore
throat  and  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands.  Con-
tinual dry  febrile  heat,  with  redness  of  the  face,  great  thirst,
painful  deglutition,  stitches  in  the  left  scapula,  arresting
the  breathing,  and  tearing  in  upper  and  lower  limbs,  (a.
13  d.)  Flushes  of  heat  as  if  hot  water  were  being  poured
over  one,  with  redness  of  the  face,  sweat  over  the  whole
body  and  anxiety,  without  thirst,  but  with  dryness  in  the
throat.  Heat  for  two  hours,  in  the  afternoon,  and  draw-
ing in  the  thighs,  as  in  fever.  Anxious  heat  morning
and  evening.  Attack  of  heat,  every  afternoon  from  one
till  six  o’clock,  for  several  days.  Flush  of  heat  in  the
evening,  afterwards  itching.  Great  heat  until  midnight,
(during  the  first  8 nights.)  Continual  exhalation  day  and
night.  Slight  sweat  in  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep.
Profuse  general  night- sweat,  from  evening  till  morning.
Night-sweat,  from  above  downwards,  to  the  middle  of  the
calves.  Cold  night- sweat  on  the  chest , hack  and  thighs ,
(a.  36  h.  and  6 d.)  Sweat  every  other  night.  Sweat
every  morning  after  waking,  mostly  on  the  lowrnr  limbs.
Morning-sweat  over  the  whole  body.  Sweat  after  waking,
continuing  the  whole  day  in  excess,  and  exhausting  him
so  much  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  stand  upon  his  legs
in  the  evening,  (a.  13  d-)  Profuse  morning-sweat , (a.  3 d.)
Sour-smelling  sweat,  (a.  30  d.)  Sourish  night-sweat,  for
five  mornings,  (a.  7 d.)  The  sweat  smells  almost  like
juniper-blossoms.


196


SILICEA  TERRA.


SILICEA  TERRA.

Take  half  an  ounce  of  mountain-crystal  and  expose  it
several  times  to  a red  heat,  or  take  pure  white  sand  and
wash  it  with  distilled  vinegar  ; when  wrashed  mix  it  with
two  ounces  of  powdered  natrum,  melt  the  whole  in  an  iron
crucible  until  effervescence  has  ceased  and  the  liquefied
mass  looks  clear  and  smooth,  which  is  then  to  be  poured
upon  a marble  plate.  The  limpid  glass  which  is  thus  ob-
tained is  to  be  pulverised  while  warm  and  to  be  filled  in
a phial,  adding  four  times  its  own  weight  of  distilled  water,
(the  phial  being  exactly  filled  to  a level  and  a stopper
being  put  in  immediately.)  This  mixture  forms  a solution
which  remains  always  clear  ; but  upon  pouring  it  into  an
open  phial  which  is  loosely  covered  with  paper,  it  becomes
decomposed,  and  the  snow-white  silica  separates  from  the
natrum  and  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the  phial  ; the  causticum
of  the  natrum  (which  has  not  yet  been  acknowledged  by  the
antiphlogistic  chemists,)  having  been  separated  from  the  na-
trum during  the  act  of  melting,  and,  uniting  instantaneously
with  the  atmospheric  air,  forming  the  so-called  carbonic
acid,*  without  which  the  causticum  could  not  have  been
neutralised,  and  the  silica  could  not  have  been  precipitated,
an  essential  condition  of  which  result  is  the  previous
neutralization  of  the  causticum.

To  lyxiviate  the  Silica  the  water  ought  to  be  mixed  with
a little  alcohol,  which  facilitates  the  precipitation  of  the
Silica.  It  is  then  spread  upon  blotting  paper,  and  the  wa-
ter contained  in  the  Silica  is  caused  to  be  absorbed  by
several  new  sheets  in  succession,  and  finally  the  sheets  are
pressed  between  heavy  weights,  in  order  to  remove  the


* This  acid  does  not  originally  exist  in  carbon,  but  is  formed  by  means
of  the  causticum  set  free  by  the  ignition  of  the  coal,  and  uniting  with  the
atmospheric  air  while  the  coal  is  cooling  in  it,  (even  when  the  carbonic
acid  of  the  air  should  have  been  previously  dissolved  from  it  by  washing
and  shaking  it  with  recently  distilled  water.)  Carbonic  acid  is  therefore
no  original  constituent  of  carbon,  and  is  therefore  improperly  called
carbonic  acid.  See  the  article  on  Causticum  in  the  third  volume  of  the
Chronic  Diseases.


SILICEA  TERRA.


197


last  trace  of  water,  after  which  the  remaining  earth  is  dried
in  the  air  or  in  a warm  place.

Silica  has  been  found  especially  useful  in  affections
characterised  by  the  following  symptoms  : —

Angriness;  want  of  cheerfulness  ; want  of  disposition
to  do  anything  ; great  irritability ; chagrin  and  anxiety
about  every  trifle,  from  great  nervous  weakness  ; discour-
agement ; uneasiness  ; want  of  memory ; feeling  of  fatigue
from  reading  and  writing  ; inability  to  think  ; gloominess
of  the  head  ; great  dizziness  in  the  evening,  as  if  intoxi-
cated ; gloomy,  dull  sensation  in  the  head  ; vertigo  ; heat
in  the  head  ; headache  from  echauffement ; headache  from
the  nape  of  the  neck  to  the  vertex , hindering  the  night’s
rest  ; headache  every  day,  a tearing  with  heat  in  the  fore-
head, in  the  forenoon;  daily  headache  from  noon  till  even-
ing, a weight  pressing  out  at  the  forehead  ; drawing  pain
in  the  head,  as  if  coming  out  at  the  forehead  ; pain  in  the
head  as  if  it  would  burst ; beating  headache  < headache  on
one  side  ; tearing  and  stitching  through  the  eyes,  from
within  outward,  and  in  the  bones  of  the  face  ; sweat  about
the  head  in  the  evening  ; itching  humid  scald-head  ; lumps
in  the  scalp;  falling  of  of  the  hair;  far-sightedness;
photophobia;  the  eyes  are  dazzled  by  the  light  of  day ;
cataract;  black  motes  before  the  eyes;  obscuration  of
sight,  as  if  a grey  cover  were  stretched  over  the  eyes  ;
amaurosis ; fiery  sparks  before  the  eyes  ; weak  eyes  ;
when  reading  at  candle-light,  the  letters  look  blurred  ; pale
face  when  reading;  attacks  of  sudden  blindness  ; has  to
use  spectacles  for  reading  and  writing  ; fistula  lachryma-
lis  ; lachrymation  in  the  open  air  ; smarting  in  the  eyes;
agglutination  of  the  eyes ; redness  of  the  eyes  with  pain
in  the  canthi  ; inflammation  of  the  eyes  ; noise  in  the  ears  ;
sounds  before  the  ears;  obstruction  of  the  ears , sometimes
opening  with  a report  ; deafness  without  noise  in  the  ears  ;
hard  hearing  ; fluttering  before  the  ears  ; boring  pain  in
the  ears  ; stitching  through  the  ears  from  within  outward  ;
pimples  upon  the  nose  ; redness  of  the  tip  of  the  nose;
pimples  in  the  nose  ; troublesome  feeling  of  dryness  in
the  nose ; obstruction  of  both  nostrils;  want  of  smell  ;
bleeding  of  the  nose  ; chapped  skin  in  the  face  ; heat  in
the  face  ; swelling  of  part  of  the  bony  jaw  ; nightly  draw-


198


SILICEA  TERRA.


ing  and  stitching  in  the  lower  jaw  ; impossibility  to  close
the  jaws,  from  a tension  in  the  neck  ; ulcer  in  the  vermilion
border  of  the  lower  lip  ; herpes  on  the  chin  ; swelling  of
tiie  sub-maxillary  glands  ; digging-up  and  stitches  in  the
teeth  ; boring  pain  in  the  teeth  ; tearing  pain  in  the  teeth
and  the  whole  cheek,  day  and  night;  jerks  in  the  tooth
when  sucking  it  with  the  tongue  ; tearing  toothache  when
eating,  through  the  ear  ; bleeding  of  the  gums  ; dryness  in
the  mouth  ; soreness  of  the  tongue  ; want  of  taste  ; mu-
cus in  the  mouth  all  the  time;  bitterness  of  mouth,  in  the
morning  ; eructations  ; sour  eructations  ; eructations  tast-
ing of  the  ingesta  ; nausea  in  the  morning ; continued
nausea  and  vomiting ; nausea  after  every  heating  exercise  ;
nausea  after  a meal ; vomiting  after  drinking  ; nausea
every  morning,  with  headache  and  pain  in  the  eyes  when
turning  them  ; wTant  of  power  to  digest  meals  ; water-
brash  with  shuddering;  great  thirst;  loathing  of  food;
aversion  to  boiled  food  ; loathing  of  meat ; the  child  re-
fuses to  take  the  breast  and  vomits  after  drinking  the
milk  ; pressure  at  the  stomach  ; pressure  at  the  stomach
from  drinking  too  fast ; painfulness  of  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach when  pressing  upon  it  ; griping  in  the  pit.  of  the
stomach , also  after  a meal ; pressure  at  the  stomach  for
many  years  ; water-brash  and  vomiting  after  every  meal  ;
fulness  after  every  meal  ; hardness  and  bloatedness  in  the
region  of  the  liver  ; hardness  and  bloatedness  of  the  abdo-
men, on  the  right  side  and  in  the  middle  above  the  umbili-
cus, with  pain  when  touching  the  part ; distended,  hard
abdomen,  (in  children  ;)  distension  or  the  hypogastrium  ;
burning  in  the  abdomen  ; grunting  in  the  abdomen,  during
exercise;  incarceration  of  flatulence  ; difficult  expulsion
of  flatulence;  painful  inguinal  hernia  ; pinching  in  the  ab-
domen ; cutting  in  the  abdomen  ; cutting  in  the  hypogas-
trium., without  diarrhoea  ; colic  from  constipation  ; colic
with  diarrhoea  ; worm-fever  in  scrofulous  persons  ; several
papescent  stools  a day  ; costiveness  ; constipation  ; de-
laying stool  ; costiveness  with  much  unsuccessful  desire
for  stool  ; itching  of  the  anus  ; frequent  micturition  ; wet-
ting the  bed  at  night ; want  of  sexual  instinct  and  weak-
ness of  the  sexual  powers  ; frequent  lascivious  thoughts,
involuntarily  ; excessive  sexual  desire  ; itching  of  the  pre-


SILICEA  TERRA.


199


puce  ; menses  too  scanty  ; suppression  of  the  menses  for
several  months  ; too  early  and  too  weak  menses  ; bloody
discharge  from  the  uterus  during  lactation  ; acrid,  corro-
sive leucorrhoea  ; leucorrhoea  while  urinating  ; milky  leu-
corrhoea, at  intervals  as  if  poured  through  the  vagina,  pre-
ceded by  cutting  in  the  umbilical  region ; itching  of  the
pudendum.

Unsuccessful  sneezing  ; excessive  or  too  frequent  sneez-
ing ; obstruction  of  the  nose  for  many  years  ; dry  coryza  ;
constant  coryza  ; frequent  fluent  coryza  ; fluent  coryza
relieving  an  obstruction  of  the  nose  of  many  years’  stand-
ing ; hoarseness ; asthma  and  short  breathing  when  at  rest ;
short  breathing  when  performing  a slight  manual  labor  ;
short  breathing  when  walking  fast  ; panting  when  walking
fast ; arrest  of  breathing  when  lying  upon  the  back  ; ar-
rest of  breathing  when  stooping  ; arrest  of  breathing  when
running  ; arrest  of  breathing  when  coughing  ; cough  with
purulent  discharge  ; cough  with  discharge  of  mucus  ;
suffocative  night-cough  ; pressure  upon  the  chest  ; pres-
sure upon  the  chest  when  coughing  and  sneezing  ; beat-
ing in  the  sternum  ; stitches  from  the  chest  to  the  back  ;
stitches  under  the  last  ribs  ; pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
per  se,  and  when  touching  the  parts  ; cramp-like  drawing
in  the  small  of  the  back,  forcing  one  to  lie  down  ; stitches
in  the  back  ; tearing  in  the  back  ; pain  in  the  trunk  as  if
broken  and  bruised  ; stitches  in  the  loin  above  the  pelvis,
when  sitting  or  lying  ; pain  as  if  bruised  between  the  sca-
pulae ; weakness  in  the  small  of  the  back,  back  and  nape
of  the  neck  ; glandular  swellings  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  ;
the  arm  upon  which  he  rests  goes  to  sleep,  which  is  pain-
ful ; heaviness  of  the  arm  ; he  is  unable  to  keep  the  arm
raised  long  ; paralytic  condition  and  trembling  of  the  arm,
from  slight  work  ; drawing  pain  in  the  arm  ; tearing  in
the  arm  ; warts  on  the  arm  ; incipient  paralysis  of  the
lower  arm,  the  hand  lets  the  things  which  are  put  into  it,
drop  ; nightly  stitches  in  the  wrist-joint,  extending  along
the  arm  ; creeping  in  the  fingers  ; soreness  of  the  finger-
joints  when  pressing  upon  them  ; stiffness , want  oj  flexi-
bility and  loss  of  strength  of  the  finger-joints  ; panari-
tium ; drawing  and  rigid  stiffness  of  the  lower  limbs  ;
pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  thighs ; swelling  of  the


200


SILICEA  TERRA.


knee  ; drawing  pain  in  the  legs  ; numbness  of  the  calves  ;
the  feet  go  to  sleep  in  the  evening;  cramp  in  the  calves,
in  the  evening,  after  bodily  labor  ; stitching  in  the  malleo-
lus when  treading  ; coldness  of  the  feet ; sweat  of  the
feet  ; repelled  sweat  and  coldness  of  the  feet ; fetor  of  the
feet;  swelling  of  the  feet ; voluptuous  tickling  of  a small
spot  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  occasioned  by  slight  scratch-
ing and  almost  driving  one  to  madness  ; painful  hard  thick-
ening of  the  skin  in  various  parts  of  the  bottom  of  the
feet ; corns  ; stitches  in  the  corns  ; ulcerated  big  toe  with
stitching  pain  ; orgasm  of  the  blood  and  thirst,  after  drink-
ing a very  small  quantity  of  wine  ; liability  of  parts  to  be-
ing slrained;  sweat  during  moderate  exercise  ; liability  to
catching  cold  when  uncovering  one’s  feet ; chilliness  ; ex-
ostosis ; fetor  of  the  ulcers  ; itching  of  the  whole  body;
ulcers  on  the  legs  with  sickly  color  of  the  face  ; itching
ulcer  on  the  thigh  and  malleolus  ; carbuncle  ; nightly
stitching  in  all  the  joints;  difficulty  of  learning  to  walk  ;
jerking  of  the  limbs,  day  and  night  ; epilepsy  ; tearing  in
upper  and  lower  limbs  ; cramp  in  upper  and  lower  limbs  ;
the  limbs  goto  sleep;  evening  paralysis  of  the  limbs;
bruised  feeling  of  the  limbs,  in  the  evening ; nervous
weakness  ; general  loss  of  strength  ; faint  feeling  when
lying  on  the  side  ; drowsiness,  in  the  evening  ; frequent
yawning  ; falling  asleep  late  in  the  evening  ; light  sleep
in  the  night,  a mere  slumber;  a number  of  dreams  and
frequent  waking;  a number  of  dreams,  every  night  ; anx-
ious dreams  ; snoring  when  asleep  ; starting  when  asleep  ;
jerking  of  the  body  in  the  night,  when  asleep  ; fanciful
ravings  in  the  night,  with  anxious  dreams  ; talking  when
asleep;  night-sweat;  frightful  nightly  visions  ; nightly
dryness  of  the  nose;  frequent  chills,  every  day;  sour,
acrid  night-sweats.

Hepar  s.  antidotes  Silica.  Camphor  antidotes  it
slightly.

My  co-observers  are  : Hering,  Gross,  Stapf,  Goullon,
Wahle,  Ng.

Moral  Symptoms. Desponding  and  melancholy.

Longing  for  home.  Weeping  mood  for  two  hours,  with-
out any  particular  thoughts.  The  least  remark  makes  her
weep.  He  is  frequently  seized  with  anguish,  making  it


SILICEA  TERRA.


201


impossible  for  him  to  sit  still.  He  is  frequently  attacked
with  impatience  and  restlessness,  so  that  he  knows  not
what  to  do  with  himself.  He  feels  a most  violent  com-
punction of  conscience  about  trifles,  as  if  he  had  committed
the  greatest  wrong.  Great  tendency  to  start.  Starting  with
surprise,  followed  by  great  anxiety.  Sensitive  to  noise,  it
makes  him  anxious.  He  is  inconvenienced  by  loud  conver-
sation. Unsteady  and  confused  in  his  actions.  She  was
unwilling  and  unable  to  do  anything  from  bad  humour.
Internal  loathing  of  life.  Obstinate.  Whimsical  and  fault-
finding. Dissatisfied.  Vexed  at  every  thing.  Quarrel-
some, in  the  evening.  The  child  becomes  headstrong,
resisting.  He  is  easily  put  out  of  humour,  even  when
trying  to  keep  cool.  He  becomes  angry  very  easily.
Irritable,  although  cheerful.  Forgetfulness,  want  of  me-
mory. Liable  to  use  wrong  expressions  while  talking.
Great  absence  of  mind  in  the  forenoon,  with  uneasiness  in
the  head  and  pit  of  the  stomach.  He  is  almost  always  at
two  different  places  at  the  same  time,  in  his  mind.  Diffi-
culty of  thinking,  (1.  d.)  His  head  feels  obtuse  and  the
body  relaxed,  even  after  a short  conversation,  he  has  to
break  it  off.  Intellectual  labor  is  difficult  for  him.

Head. — Obtusion  of  the  head,  and  bruised  feeling  of
the  body.  She  feels  as  if  intoxicated.  Strange  feeling  in
the  head,  as  if  she  were  falling  from  side  to  side,  with  ting-
ling in  the  ears.  Painless  dulness  of  the  head,  as  if  it  con-
tained too  much  blood.  Dizzy,  as  if  stupid,  he  was  at  a
loss  to  find  the  proper  words,  and  chose  wrong  expres-
sions almost  all  the  time  (immediately.)  Inability  to  read,
write  or  think,  increasing  from  noon  until  six  o’clock,  and
passing  off  after  supper,  (2.  d.)  Great  facility  to  think
and  to  express  one’s  self  in  fluent  style,  (7.  8.  9.  d.)  Ver-
tigo when  going  forward,  (he  imagined  he  went  backward.)
Slight  vertigo,  the  whole  day,  with  some  nausea.  Con-
stant vertigo,  as  if  moving  to  and  fro  in  the  head,  even
when  sitting,  less  when  lying  down.  Excessive  vertigo  ;
sometimes,  when  walking,  she  knows  not  where  she  is,
and  she  inclines  to  fall  from  side  to  side.  Vertigo  with
retching;  water  comes  out  of  her  mouth.  Vertigo,  as  if
he  were  being  raised.  Vertigo,  when  raising  his  eyes  for
the  purpose  of  looking  upward.  Vertigo  after  the  usual

9*


202


SILICEA  TERRA.


smoking  ; when  closing  his  eyes,  all  things  turn  with  him,
this  passes  off  when  opening  them  again.  Vertigo  in  the
evening  and  in  the  morning,  when  rising.  Constant  vio-
lent vertigo.  Stupefying  vertigo  in  the  morning,  or  vertigo
with  inclination  to  vomit.  The  fits  of  vertigo  seem  to
arise  from  the  back  through  the  nape  of  the  neck  into  the
head  ; they  are  painful,  she  knows  not  where  she  is,  and
inclines  to  fall  forward  all  the  time.  Frecjuent  vertigo,
only  when  sitting,  not  when  walking,  especially  when  rid-
ing in  a carriage,  he  suddenly  loses  his  senses  for  one  min-
ute, but  without  obscuration  of  sight.  Vertigo  every  morn-
ing, half  an  hour  after  rising.  Violent  vertigo  in  the
morning  with  nausea  ; she  inclined  to  the  right  side,  seve-
ral days  in  succession,  and  so  violently  in  the  evening
that  she  had  to  lie  down,  (12.  d.)  Vertigo  at  breakfast,  as
if  the  head  would  fall  to  the  left  side,  with  heat  in  the  face
and  sweat  on  the  forehead.  Vertiginous  stupefaction  of
the  head,  in  the  morning  when  rising,  with  nausea  unto
vomiting  ; relieved  by  riding  in  a carnage  in  the  open  air,
but  returning  after  re-entering  the  room  ; the  room  seem-
ed to  turn  with  her,  and  she  staggered  to  and  fro,  (a.  38  d.)
Gloominess  and  vertigo  in  the  head,  for  several  weeks.
Violent  headache,  with  loss  of  sense,  she  moaned  and  cried
for  help,  (a.  46  d.)  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,
with  stitches  in  the  occiput.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,
when  rising  from  a seat,  with  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  brain.
Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  beating  in  the  sinciput  and  fore-
head, with  heaviness  in  the  head.  Rush  of  blood  to  the
right  temple.  Weariness  of  the  head.  Heaviness  of  the
head.  Painful  heaviness  in  the  head,  as  if  the  head  were
full  of  lead,  increasing  from  morning  till  night.  Heavi-
ness, tearing  and  stitches  in  the  head,  especially  in  the
forehead,  the  head  feels  drawn  sideways.  She  feels  as  if
she  could  not  hold  her  head.  Heat  in  the  head  with  anxiety.
Groaning  shaking  of  the  brain , lohen  treading  firmly  or
ivhen  knocking  the  foot  against  something.  Pinching  in  the
head  when  walking.  Painless  jerks  in  the  head.  Oppres-
sive jerk  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  recurring  by  turn-
ing fast , stooping  or  talking,  (a.  10  d.)  Headache,  from
hunger.  Nightly  headache.  Oppressive  pain  in  the  fore-
head, from  a little  mental  exertion,  (a.  3 d.)  Headache,  with


SILICEA  TERRA.


203


heaviness  and  uncomfortableness  in  all  the  limbs.  Pressure
in  both  sides  ok  the  occiput.  Pressure  in  the  occiput,  soon
after  stitching  in  the  forehead,  with  chilliness  in  the  nape
of  the  neck  and  back.  Pressure  in  the  temple,  and  over
the  right  eye  after  a slight  cold.  Pressure  in  the  occiput
and  nape  of  the  neck,  early  in  the  morning.  Pressure  in
the  head,  with  weakness  of  the  body.  Pressure  over  the
nose,  in  the  morning.  Aching  pain  in  the  occiput,  dimin-
ished by  wrapping  up  the  head  in  a warm  handkerchief.
Pressure  on  the  top  of  the  head,  in  the  evening,  extend-
ing into  the  eyes,  (a.  18  d.)  Pressure  in  the  forehead,
from  morning  till  evening.  Sensation  as  of  a heavy  load
pressing  in  the  forehead,  above  the  eyes.  Pressure  in  the
right  temple,  from  noon  till  evening,  (a.  19  d.)  Aching
pain  in  the  forehead  and  eyes,  as  if  a catarrh  were  ap-
proaching. Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  in  the  morning,
a little  while  after  rising,  not  increased  by  motion.  In  the
morning  violent  aching  pain  extending  dowm  to  the  eyes  ;
accompanied  with  violent  chilliness,  and  nausea  and  faint-
ness in  the  afternoon  ; the  eyes  felt  painful  when  turning
them  to  one  side  and  closing  them,  and  the  closed  eyes
were  yet  more  painful  when  touching  them,  (11.  d.)
Pressure,  tension  and  pushing  in  the  head,  as  if  crowded
together  or  pressed  asunder.  Pain  as  if  the  anterior  lobes
of  the  brain  were  being  compressed,  from  twelve  to  two
o’clock,  (1.  d.)  Compressive  sensation  in  the  brain.
Hard  pressure,  with  a jerk,  deep  into  the  brain,  in  par-
oxysms of  one  or  two  minutes.  Tension  in  the  eyes  and
forehead,  with  faintness  of  the  body.  Headache,  as  if
the  brain  and  eyes  were  being  pushed  forward.  Head-
ache, as  if  all  the  contents  of  the  head  would  issue  through
the  burst  skull.  Violent  headache,  as  if  the  skull  were
pierced  by  violent  stitches.  Headache  rising  from  the
na,pe  of  the  neck  towards  the  vertex , (a.  21  d.)  Disagree-
able feeling , as  if  the  head  were  teeming  with  living
things , whirling  around  in  it.  Boring  headache  in  the
forehead,  for  many  days  in  succession.  Tearing  pain  as
if  the  head  would  burst,  and  beating  in  the  head  com-
mencing in  the  top,  and  as  if  simultaneously  on  the  inner
and  outer  side,  with  chilliness  ; he  had  to  lie  down  and
turned  himself  to  and  fro  in  his  bed,  for  four  hours  ; the


204


SILICEA  TERRA.


pain  was  relieved  by  tying  something  firmly  around  his
head.  Tearing  in  die  fore-part  of  the  head,  from  four  till
seven  o’clock  every  afternoon.  Tearing  headache,  in  the
forehead,  towards  the  parietal  bones,  the  whole  day,  in-
creased towards  evening,  aggravated  by  motion,  (a.  13  d.)
Tearing- beating  headache,  with  eructations,  'bearing  and
stitches  in  the  head,  in  the  afternoon.  Stitches  in  the
temples.  Stitches  in  the  occiput.  Stitches  in  the  brain
from  below  upward.  Intense  stitching  pain  in  the  fore-
head, (a.  some  hours.)  Bewildering  stitches  in  the  head,
with  great  disposilion  to  be  dissatisfied  and  ill-humoured,
(a.  11  d.)  Stitching  and  beating  in  the  forehead,  in  the
morning.  Stitching  in  the  top  of  the  head  and  over  the
eye-brow,  with  a sensation'as  of  drawing  pressure.  Beat-
ing headache,  in  the  forehead,  in  the  afternoon,  for  one
hour.  Beating  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  (4.
d.)  Obscuration  of  sight  after  the  headache.  Painful
sensitiveness  of  the  head,  as  after  violent  headache,  (a.
17  d.)  Pain  of  the  scalp  when  touching  it.  Bruised  sort
of  a pain  in  the  top  of  the  head.  The  hat  causes  an  in-
tense pain  in  the  occipital  protuberances.  Jerking  head-
ache, in  the  forehead,  mostly  in  the  night.  Itching  pain
in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput.  Thrill  over  the  hairy
scalp,  as  if  the  hair  stood  on  end,  but  without  chilliness.
His  forehead  feels  numb  and  dead.  Itching  of  the  occi-
put.  Violent  itching  of  the  left  side  of  the  head,  (a.  14
d.)  A good  deal  of  itching  in  the  hairy  scalp.  When
scratching  the  itching  places  on  the  head,  they  feel  sore.
Itching  pimples  on  the  hairy  scalp.  Itching  blotches  on
the  head  and  nape  of  the  head.  Great  falling  off  of  the
hair  when  combing  the  head.

Eyes. — Pressure  and  smarting  in  the  orbits.  Pain  in
the  eyes,  in  the  morning,  as  if  too  dry  and  full  of  sand.
Pressure  in  the  eye-lids,  (a.  8 d.)  Pressure  in  the  eyes,
every  afternoon  at  4 o’clock.  Pressure  and  pushing  in
the  left  canthus.  Pressure  in  the  upper  eye-lid,  with
violent  stitches  in  the  lid  as  from  a splinter,  and  vanishing
of  the  visual  power,  (a.  4 h.)  Tearing  and  burning  in
the  eyes  when  closing  them  and  pressing  upon  the  lids.
Burning  smarting  of  the  right  lower  lid,  in  the  morning.
Itching  of  the  upper  lid.  Itching  of  the  right  eye  in  the


SILICEA  TERRA.


205


evening.  Itching  in  the  eye-brows.  Itching  of  the  sore
eye,  immediately.  Burning  itching  of  the  eye-lids.
Smarting  in  the  canthi,  in  the  morning.  Smarting  or  heat
in  the  eyes.  Redness  of  the  whites , with  aching  pain,
(by  several  provers.)  Redness,  first  around  the  eyes,
afterwards  of  the  white,  with  inflammation  of  the  eyes  and
lachrymation.  Sensation  in  the  left  eye  as  if  full  of  water.
Lachrymation  of  the  outer  canthi.  Lachrymation  and
a sort  of  darkness  of  the  eyes.  i A good  deal  of  gum  in
the  inner  canthi.  Agglutination  of  the  eyes  in  the  morn-
ing. Agglutination  at  night , with  smarting  of  the  lids.
Swelling  in  the  region  of  the  right  lachrymal  gland  and
lachrymal  sac,  (a.  6 d.)  Twitching  oj  the  eye-lids,  (a.  4
and  10  h.)  Painful  cramp  in  both  eyes,  closing  them  so
tightly,  that  they  can  only  be  opened  with  great  trouble.
She  is  unable  to  open  her  eyes  in  the  morning,  owing  to  a
pain  excited  by  the  light  of  day.  Flying  motes.  Dreads
the  light  of  day.  The  eyes  are  dazzled  by  the  light  of
day  ; he  is  unable  to  see  for  moments,  in  paroxysms.
Attacks  of  photophobia,  alternating  with  inflammation  of
the  whites  and  lachrymation,  (a.  10  d.)  Gauze  before
the  eyes.  Things  look  blurred,  letters,  etc.  Beating  in
the  ear  concusses  the  eyes,  making  things  appear  to  go  up
and  down.

Ear. — Drawing  pain,  a sort  of  otalgia,  in  the  meatus
auditorius.  Drawing  pain  along  the  right  ear  and  neck.
Cramp-like  draioing  in  the  right  ear , (a.  24  h.)  Jerking  *
pain  in  the  left  ear.  Jerking  cutting  in  the  bone  behind
the  ear.  Tearing  in  the  inner  and  outer  parts  of  the  ear.
Tearing  behind  the  right  ear.  Painful  pressing  in  the
meatus  auditorius.  Aching  pain  in  the  left  ear,  when
blowing  the  nose.  Itching  in  the  ear,  especially  when
swrahowing.  Heat  of  the  lobules  and  about  the  head,  (a.

8 d.)  Itching  of  the  outer  ears.  Scurf  behind  the  ears.
Inflamed  humid  margins  of  the  ears.  Swelling  of  the
outer  ear,  with  humor  coming  out  of  the  inner  ear,  accom-
panied with  hissing,  which  suppresses  the  hearing.  Dis-
charge of  humor  from  the  left  ear,  (a.  5 d.)  Quantity  of
moist  wax  in  the  ear,  (a.  9 d.)  The  ears  feels  as  if  closed
on  the  outside.  Feeling  as  if  the  ear  were  obstructed , (a.

8 d.)  The  hearing  is  very  sensitive.  Exceedingly  sensi-


206


SILICEA  TERRA.


live  to  noise,  even  unto  starting.  The  ear  is  painfully
sensitive  to  loud  sounds.  Diminution  of  hearing,  from
whizzing  in  the  head.  Difficulty  of  hearing  the  human
voice.  Gurgling  sensation  in  the  right  ear.  Sensation  in
the  right  ear,  as  if  something  were  beating  on  the  tym-
panum, which  causes  a groaning  sensation  in  the  head,
and  makes  him  anxious.  Cracking  in  the  ear  when  swal-
lowing. Noise  in  the  ear  as  of  the  wind  blowing  into  it,
at  short  and  regular  intervals.  Beating  in  the  right  ear.
Beating  in  the  ear  upon  which  he  was  resting  in  the  night.
Dull  grumbling  in  the  ear,  with  hardness  of  hearing  and
sensation  as  if  something  were  in  the  ear,  especially  in  the
morning  when  rising,  for  four  days.  Thundering  roaring
and  grumbling  in  the  ear,  (a.  36  h.)  Ringing  of  bells  in
the  ears,  so  loud  that  he  has  to  get  up  in  the  night  for
quarters  of  hours  and  walk  about,  (a.  5 d.)  Whizzing  in
the  ears.  Roaring  in  the  left  ear,  before  and  after.a  meal.
Chirping  in  the  ear  as  of  crickets.  Fluttering  noise  in  the
ears.  Swelling  of  the  parotid  gland,  with  stitching  pain.
Hard  swelling  of  both  parotid  glands,  with  painful  tight-
ness in  the  swelling  when  moving  the  head  or  when  touch-
ing the  swelling.

Nose — Itching  of  the  nose.  Itching  in  the  nose.
Rash-vesicles  under  the  nostrils,  with  red  areolas  and  pain-
less. Reddish  vesicles  on  the  nose,  with  scurf.  Itching
and  small  vesicles  around  the  nasal  wings.  Sensation  as
* if  pieces  of  food  had  got  into  the  posterior  nares.  When
swallowing,  the  food  gets  into  the  posterior  nares.  Feel-
ing of  great  dryness  in  the  posterior  nares.  Beating  pain
in  the  nasal  fossae  as  if  ulcerated,  starting  into  the  brain
like  rays,  with  sensation  of  tightness  and  causing  painful
headache  in  the  forehead  ; when  touching  the  tip  of  the
nose  a pain  as  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  was  experi-
enced in  it,  for  two  days,  (a.  10  d.)  Painfulness  of  the
septum  narinum.  Burning  stitch  on  the  side  of  the  nose.
Fine,  drawing  tearing  in  the  nose.  Tearing  in  the  left
nasal  wing.  Drawing  in  the  root  of  the  nose  and  the  right
malar  bone.  Creeping  and  digging-up  in  the  tip  of  the
nose.  Itching  and  sore  pain  in  the  forehead  behind  the
wing  of  the  nose,  (no  soreness  being  present.)  Pimple
on  the  nose.  Itching  pimples  on  the  side  of  the  nose.


SILICEA  TERRA.


207


Smarting  painful  scurf  deep  in  the  right  side  of  the  nose.
Painful  soreness  in  the  lower  part  of  the  septum  narinum,
with  stinging  pain  when  touching  it.  A quantity  of  acrid
water  runs  out  of  the  nose,  making  the  inner  nose  and  nos-
trils sore  and  bleeding  ; accompanied  with  a smell  from
the  nose  as  of  blood  or  a recently  slaughtered  beast,  for  5
days.  Bleeding  of  the  nose  when  inserting  the  finger,
with  dryness  of  the  nose.  Blood  drops  occasionally  out
of  his  nose,  only  when  stooping.  Expulsion  of  sangui-
neous mucus  from  the  nose  when  blowing  it.  Violent
bleeding  of  the  nose,  (a.  20  h.)  Sensitive  smell,  (curative
effect.)  *

Face — Pale  face.  White  spots  on  the  cheeks  from
time  to  time.  Red  spots  upon  the  cheeks,  and  red  nose,
burning  and  painful,  when  making  a slight  exertion,  espe-
cially after  a meal.  Heat  and  burning  of  the  face,  alter
washing  it  with  cool  water,  for  two  hours.  Swelling  of
the  face,  and  the  glands  of  the  lips  and  glands  of  the  neck,
with  chilliness  and  icy-cold  feet.  Drawing  pain  in  the
malar  bone  and  behind  the  ear,  worse  when  touching  the
parts.  Tearing  in  either  cheek,  for  4 hours,  afterwards
dulness  of  the  left  molar  teeth.  Bruised  pain  in  front  of
the  left  ear,  in  the  articulation  of  the  jaw,  when  touching
it  or  when  chewing.  Itching  in  the  region  of  the  whiskers.
Violent  itching  of  the  forehead  down  along  the  nose.  Erup-
tion in  the  face.  Pimples  on  the  forehead  and  above  the
nose.  Pimple  near  the  eye-brow.  Large  boil  on  the
cheek,  not  very  painful,  near  the  nose,  (a.  a few  h.)
Eruption  on  the  lip*,  vesicles  on  the  margin  of  the
upper  lip , stinging  when  touched,  causing  a smarting
pain.  Pimple  on  the  margin  of  the  vermilion  border
of  the  upper  lip,  first  itching,  afterwards,  when  con-
verted into  a scab,  merely  smarting.  Two  large  pimples
on  the  upper  lip.  Painful  ulcer  in  the  corner  of  the
mouth,  (a.  37  d.)  Ulcerated  corner  of  the  mouth,
itching,  the  scurf  lasting  for  many  days,  (a.  24  h.)  Pain-
ful pimple  on  the  margin  of  the  vermilion  border  of  the
lower  lip.  Sponge-like  ulcer  on  the  inner  side  of  the
lower  lip.  Painfully  smarting  vesicles  in  the  vermilion
border  of  the  upper  lip.  Burning  itching  around  the
mouth,  without  any  eruption,  (a*  2 d.)  Swelling  of  the
lower  lip,  for  two  days,  (a.  17  d.)  Swelling  of  the  upper


208


SILICEA  TERRA.


lip  and  the  gums,  very  painful  to  the  touch.  Pimple  on
the  chin.  Red,  itching,  elevated  herpetic  spots  on  the
chin.  Roil  on  the  chin  with  stinging  pain  when  touched.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Pain  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands
when  touched , without  swelling.  Stitches  in  the  sub-
maxillary  glands,  which  are  swollen,  (a.  3 d.)  Swelling
of  the  submaxillary  glands , painful  when  touched,  with
drawing  pain  in  the  glands  and  sore  throat  when  swallow-
ing, as  if  swollen  internally,  (a.  24  h.)  Painful  contractive
cramp  in  the  left  articulation  of  the  jaw  and  afterwards  in
the  temple.  Toothache,  especially  when  eating  warm
food,  and  £old  air  gets  into  the  mouth.  Toothache  after
a meal.  The  boy  has  a kind  of  teething  fever  although
he  has  all  his  teeth  ; the  saliva  runs  out  of  his  mouth,
he  grasps  at  his  gums,  and  has  heat  in  his  head,  in  the
evening.  Darting  into  a cuspidatus  while  eating,  (a.  19
d.)  Toothache  in  the  morning,  until  after  rising.  Simple
toothache  all  the  time  except  during  a meal,  most  violent
in  the  night.  Violent  pressure  in  a hollow  tooth.  Violent
toothache,  the  whole  jaw  aches,  with  pressure  and  jerks,
hindering  sleep  the  whole  night.  Tensive  toothache.
Drawing  in  a hollow  tooth,  in  paroxysms.  Drawing  in
the  lower  cuspidati.  Tearing  toothache  when  eating,  and
a quarter  of  an  hour  after.  Lancinating  ache  in  a hollow
tooth,  only  during  a meal.  Stitching  toothache,  making
both  warm  and  cold  things  intolerable.  Stitches  in  a
sound  tooth,  from  violent  wind,  the  tooth,  when  touched,
being  painful  as  if  there  were  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,
followed  by  swelling  of  the  lower  jaw,  (a.  1 8 d.)  Burning
stitching  in  several  teeth,  becoming  painful  after  a meal  ;
the  pain  is  most  violent  in  the  night,  and  is  aggravated  by
cold  air  getting  into  the  teeth  ; with  heat  in  the  head  and
burning  in  the  chest.  Pain  of  a molar  tooth,  when  biting,
as  of  sub-cutaneous  ulceration.  The  teeth  are  loose  and
sensitive  to  pain  when  chewing.  A lower  molar  tooth  is
painful  as  if  elongated.  Dull  teeth,  for  four  weeks.  Dul-
ness  of  the  upper  teeth,  as  if  set  on  edge  by  acids.  .In-
flammation of  one  of  the  lower  molares,  with  swelling  and
soreness  of  the  gums.  Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  gums
to  cold  water.  Swelling  of  the  gums  ; warm  drink  causes
burning,  and,  when  chewing,  the  gums  feel  sore.  Painful
inflammatory  swelling  of  the  gums,  (a.  6 d.)  Sore  gums ,


SILICEA  TERRA.


209


Painfully  sore  vesicles  on  the  gums  and  the  inner  side  of
the  lips.  Small  ulcer  on  the  swollen  gums.  His  mouth
and  lips  are  dry.

Mouth. — Constant  dryness  of  the  month , (a.  30  h.)
Proluse  saliva  in  the  mouth.  Accumulation  of  water  in
the  mouth.  Sensation  on  the  fore-part  of  the  tongue  as  of
a hair  lying  upon  it.  Sore  tongue  with  painful  places  at
the  tip.  Coated  tongue.  Numb  tongue.  Swelling  of
the  right  half  of  the  tongue,  painless,  (a.  5 d.)  Heat  comes
out  of  his  mouth.  Itching  in  the  palate  and  velum  pen-
dulum palati.  Single  stitches  in  the  velum  palati.  Ulcer
in  the  palate  extending  as  far  as  the  gums.  Elongation
of  the  uvula,  with  dryness  of  the  throat.  Swelling  of  the
uvula.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus. — Throat  is  very  dry,  with
hoarseness  and  itching  in  the  meatus  auditorii.  Continual
hawking  up  of  mucus,  (a.  24  h.)  Frequent  hawking  up
of  a thickish  mucus,  (1.  d.)  Hawking  up  of  salt  mucus.
Hawking  up  of  yellow,  fetid  lumps.  Sore  throat  with
much  mucus  in  the  throat,  (a.  48  h.)  Pain  in  the  region
of  the  larynx,  when  lifting  a heavy  weight.  Aching  pain
in  the  left  side  of  the  throat,  during  deglutition.  Sore
throat  during  deglutition-,  as  if  a lump  were  lodged  in  the
left  side  of  the  throat,  (a.  4 d ) Scraping  sore  throat,  in
the  morning  ; stinging  in  the  throat  in  the  evening.  Sore
throat,  as  if  the  food  glided  over  sore  places,  with  occasional
stitches  in  those  parts.  Soreness  of  the  throat,  as  if  from
singing.  Stingingsore  throat,  only  when  swallowing,  the
neck  being  painful  when  touched.  Difficult  deglutition;
the  food  goes  down  slowly  ; there  is  a grunting  in  the  pha-
rynx, then  in  the  stomach,  in  three  seconds  after  this  the
food  is  down.  Bad  smell  from  the  mouthy  in  the  morning ,
almost  as  in  mercurial  ptyalism.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Bitterness  of  the  throat,  as  if
coming  out  of  the  stomach.  Bitter  taste  in  the  morning.
Putrid  taste  in  the  morning.  Oily  taste  in  the  mouth,  (a.
a few  h.)  Bloody  taste  in  the  morning.  Sour  taste,  with
some  bitterness.  Acidity  in  the  mouth , after  every  meaf
(a.  3,  10  d.)  Repulsive,  slimy  taste  in  the  mouth.  Feel-
ing of  loathing  in  the  throat,  in  the  afternoon.  Much
thirst,  (a.  5 d.)  Much  thirst  and  dryness  in  the  throat,  (a.


210


SILICE A.  TERRA.


10  d.)  Complete  want  of  appetite.  Aversion  to  meat-
soup.  Desires  only  cold,  raw  things.  Appetite  without
knowing  for  what,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth.
He  is  very  hungry,  eats  a good  deal,  and  nevertheless  com-
plains of  the  upper  part  of  the  throat  being  closed.  Ca-
nine hunger,  the  water  accumulating  in  her  mouth.  Ca-
nine hunger,  appeased  by  lying  down  for  a short  while.
She  is  hungry,  but  she  cannot  get  down  any  food.  Canine
hunger  before  supper,  with  complete  loss  of  appetite  and
trembling  in  all  the  limbs  ; afterwards  chilliness  and  cold-
ness over  the  whole  body,  with  heat  in  the  chest,  (2.  d.)
Canine  hunger  towards  evening,  with  feeling  of  nausea  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach  after  eating  ever  so  little.  Canine
hunger  in  the  morning.  Gnawing  hunger  which  may  be
appeased  for  a short  while  by  a bit  of  bread.  Increased
appetite  for  supper  ; he  ate  more  than  usual,  and,  never-
theless could  not  satisfy  his  appetite  ; in  a quarter  of  an
hour  his  stomach  felt  full,  (a.  15  d.)  Continual  hunger,
and  repletion  of  the  stomach  after  a meal,  the  hunger  con-
tinuing even  after  a meal.  A weakness  resembling  canine
hunger,  after  a meal,  and  passing  off  by  eating  again,
although  without  an  appetite,  (l.d.)  Weakness  in  the
stomach  after  a meal.  The  stomach  appears  to  be  inac-
tive, although  the  appetite  is  good.  Colic  after  a meal,  a
sort  of  writhing  in  the  intestines.  Pressure  at  the  stomach
after  a meal.  Expectoration  of  mucus  from  the  trachea
immediately  after  a meal.  Eructations  and  acidity  after
every  meal,  and  an  ugly  taste  from  the  stomach  which  con-
tinues to  the  next  meal.  After  a meal,  load  as  of  a stone
in  the  stomach,  with  a feeling  of  repletion.  Violent  eruc-
tations after  supper.  Violent  vertigo  at  dinner,  without
inclination  to  vomit,  and  good  appetite.  Pressure  at  the
stomach  after  every  meal.  Fits  of  cramp-pain  in  the
stomach  after  every  meal.  Sensation  as  if  the  hair  stood
on  end,  after  dinner.  Cutting  in  the  epigastrium,  after
dinner,  (a.  6 h.)  Repletion  for  a couple  of  hours,  after  a
meal  ; alleviated  by  eructations.  The  taste  of  the  food
remains  long  in  the  mouth.  Increased  hard  tearing  after
a meal.  Sweat  while  eating  and  talking.  Chilliness  after
a meal,  (24.  d.)  Palpitation  of  the  heart  with  anxiety  for
half  an  hour,  after  a meal.  Profuse  heat  in  the  face  after


SILICEA  TERRA.


211


a meal.  The  eyes  feel  dazzled  and  as  if  surrounded  with
mist,  after  a meal,  (a.  10  d.)  Drowsy  and  faint  after  a
meal  ; he  is  obliged  to  sleep.  Nausea  after  a meal,  going
off  after  lying  down.  Intense  colic  after  a slight  meal,
going  off  after  eructations.  After  a meal  he  feels  replete
and  as  if  the  clothes  were  pressing  upon  the  abdomen,  the
abdomen  being  drawn  in.  Violent  colic  even  after  some
warm  beer,  going  off  after  rumbling  and  eructations,  (a.  2
d.)  Frequent,  empty,  or  loud,  or  sour  eructations , also
with  burning  in  the  throat.  Sour  and  bitter  eructations  in
the  morning,  as  if  from  a spoiled  stomach.  Warm  rising
from  the  stomach  into  the  throat.  Heartburn  from  the
stomach , after  every  meal,  (a.  7,  20  d.)  Hiccough  before
and  after  a meal.  Nausea  as  after  tasting  an  emetic.
Nausea  without  vomiting,  even  before  breakfast,  as  if  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  good  appetite  and  relish,  (a.
20  d.)  Short  nausea  in  the  morning,  followed  by  sudden
faintness  and  chilliness  until  noon.  Nauseated,  faint  and
trembling,  when  smoking.  Nausea  as  if  in  the  hypogas-
trium  ; now  rising,  now  descending,  for  several  days  in
succession.  In  the  morning  when  getting  up,  wrrithing  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  followed  by  rising  of  nausea  into
the  throat,  accompanied  with  violent  palpitation  of  the
heart  and  violent  pressure  in  the  sternum  ; she  has  to  force
up  bitter  water  from  the  stomach,  relieved  by  eating  ; she
does  not  vomit  food.  Flatulent  food  presses  in  the  stom-
ach like  a lump,  she  has  to  throw  them  up  again.

Stomach. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,  (a.  14  d.)  Load
in  the  stomach , like  lead.  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the
stomach,  with  want  of  appetite.  Aching  pain,  followed
by  clawing  pain  in  the  stomach,  after  one  eructation.  Pres-
sure at  the  stomach  and  cutting  in  the  intestines,  every
half  hour.  Pressure  at  the  stomach,  increased  by  walking
in  the  open  air,  amid  frequent  empty  eructations.  Screw-
ing together  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  followed  bv  soft
stool.  Griping,  pinching  and  clawing  over  the  stomach
and  the  hypochondria,  in  frequent  paroxysms,  for  a week.
Griping  and  sudden  grasping  in  the  stomach,  (a.  1 h.)
Colicky  pain  and  gnawing  in  the  stomach,  with  nausea
and  coid  thrills  over  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  back,  with
audible  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  ; going  off  when  lying


212


SIL1CEA  TERRA.


on  the  back  with  his  limbs  drawn  up.  Burning  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach.  Burning  over  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
almost  like  heart-burn.  Drawing,  pinching  and  stitching
in  and  around  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  in  both  hypo-
chondria, down  to  the  hip-joints.

Abdomen. — Gradually  drawing,  dull  pain  in  both  hypo-
chondria, extending  to  the  spinal  column,  less  in  the  night.
Continuous  pressure  in  the  right  hypochondrium.  Pain
under  the  left  ribs,  as  if  something  would  tear.  Pain  un-
der the  right  ribs,  posteriorly,  (in  the  region  of  the  kid-
neys,) in  the  evening.  Continuous  stitching  pain  under
the  last  ribs,  worst  when  taking  deep  breath ; the  ribs  them-
selves are  painful  when  touched.  Stitches  in  the  hypo-
chondria. Distension  of  the  abdomen  as  far  as  the  stom-
ach, (a.  24  d.)  The  abdomen  is  large  and  heavy  as  a load.
The  abdomen  enlarges,  which  generally  increases  after  a
meal,  so  that  it  becomes  very  much  distended.  Hot,  dis-
tended abdomen,  with  grunting  in  the  abdomen  and  con-
stant diarrhoea.  Violent  distension  of  the  abdomen,  no
emission  of  flatulence,  but  eructation.  Colic  as  if  from
incarcerated  flatulence,  with  pressing  toward  the  rectum  as
if  flatulence  would  pass  off.  Violent  colic  ; the  child  cries
day  and  night  about  the  pain  in  the  abdomen.  'Fearing
in  the  abdomen,  (a.  10d.)  Writhing  pain  in  the  abdomen.
Pinching  colic,  two  hours  after  a meal,  recurring  from
time  to  time.  Violent,  but  short  pinching  in  the  abdomen,
almost  every  afternoon.  Cutting  in  the  umbilical  region
from  time  to  time,  (a.  2 d.)  Cutting  colic,  in  paroxysms,
also  in  the  night,  (a.  13  d.)  Violent  cutting  in  the  hypo-
gastrium  with  incarceration  of  flatulence  ; every  step
causes  her  a pain  in  the  abdomen,  (after  lifting  a light  load.)
Cutting  in  the  hypogastriuin,  without  diarrhoea.  Single
stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  in  the  evening,  (1.
d.)  Stitching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  more
externally,  when  walking,  (a.  6 h.)  Burning  in  the  bowels.
Stinging  burning  in  the  epigastrium,  in  the  morning  after
rising  for  an  hour,  not  entirely  to  be  removed  by  stool,
with  pressure  in  the  rectum.  Aching  pain  in  the  abdomen.
Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  after  dinner.  Pressure  in  the
whole  a»bdomen  in  the  morning,  with  rumbling  and  emis-
sion of  flatulence,  without  relief.  Pressure  in  the  umbili-


SILICEA  TERRA*


213


cal  region,  and  below  it,  -shortly  before  and  after  stool.  Vio-
lent colic,  with  sensation  as  if  she  became  rigid  ; the
hands  became  yellow  and  the  hands  bine,  as  if  dead,  (a.  5
d.)  Colic  with  much  inclination  to  extend  one’s  limbs.
Colic  with  constipation.  Oppression  in  the  abdomen,  noon
and  evening,  a sort  of  pressure  partly  towards  the  rectum,
partly  towards  the  genital  organs.  Pain  in  the  right  groin.
Tearing  in  the  groins,  in  the  evening.  Tearing  and  draw-
ing through  the  right  inguinal  canal.  Pain  in  the  inguinal
hernia,  (a.  2 d.)  Pain  in  the  region  of  the  hernia  as  if
something  were  torn  out.  Feeling  of  swelling  in  the  left
groin,  or  as  if  hernia  were  protruding.  Inflammation  of
the  inguinal  glands,  of  the  size  of  peas,  painful  to  the
touch.  Violent  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Fetid  flatu-
lence, (2.  d.)  Frequent  emission  of  flatulence.  Colic
previous  to  emission  of  flatulence.  Pinching  in  the  ab-
domen previous  to  emission  of  flatulence.

Stool. — Constipation  the  first  days,  afterwards  very
hard  stool.  Costiveness , (1.  d.)  Hard  stool  the  first
days.  Constipation  for  three  days,  (a.  14  d.)  afterwards
stool  composed  of  hard  lumps.  The  fasces  remain  long
in  the  rectum,  as  if  it  had  no  power  to  expel  them.  After
long  pressing,  making  the  abdominal  muscles  feel  sore,
the  protruding  fasces  suddenly  recede  into  the  rectum,
constantly.  Good  stool,  but  with  much  pressing.  The
color  of  the  stool  is  lighter  than  usual.  Soft  stool  for  two
days,  without  diarrhoea,  (a.  13  d)  Diarrhoea  for  several
days,  day  and  night,  without  colic,  (a.  7 d.)  Frequent  dis-
charge of  a little  fluid  having  a cadaverous  smell.  Stool
with  mucus , followed  by  itching  of  the  anus,  (19.  d )
Papescent  stool  with  fragments  of  mucous  membrane,  fol-
lowed by  smarting  burning  at  the  anus,  (6.  d.)  Almost
liquid,  slimy,  frothy  stool,  followed  by  burning  and  smart-
ing at  the  anus,  (7.  d.)  Frequent  desire  for  stool,  passing
only  mucus,  with  chilliness  of  the  body  and  qualmishness
in  the  throat.  Reddish  mucus  with  the  stool.  Stool
mixed  with  bloody  mucus  ; afterwards  smarting  at  the
anus.  Discharge  of  blood  and  mucus  from  the  anus,  with
violent  burning  at  the  latter,  (a.  1 1,  20  d ) Ascaris  with
the  stool.  Burning  pain  in  the  prepuce  after  stool.  Pres-
sure in  the  anus  after  soft  stool.  Pressure  in  the  right


214


SILICEA  TERRA.


temple,  after  a soft  stool  with  pressing  ; afterwards  empty
eructations,  (a.  16  d.)  Painful  stinging  and  itching  of  the
rectum  during  stool.  Increased  oppression  of  the  chest
after  stool.  After  stool  the  colic  decreases  some;  he  is
exhausted,  falls  into  a light  slumber,  out  of  which  he  wakes
again  with  violent  colic.  Jerking,  almost  dull  stitching
pain  in  the  rectum.  Stitching  in  the  rectum.  Long
stitch  in  the  rectum.  A iolenl  stitches  in  the  rectum,  in
the  direction  of  the  genital  organs,  when  walking,  (a.  30
d.)  Cutting  in  the  rectum.  Tension  in  the  anus.  Con-
tractive pain  in  the  anus,  from  behind  forward,  (in  the
perinseum.)  Pain  in  the  anus  as  if  constricted  during
stool.  Itching  of  the  rectum,  in  the  evening.  Itching  of
the  anus  and  varices.  Burning  at  the  ailus,  (a.  5 d.)
Burning  in  the  rectum  during  stool,  for  several  days.
Protrusion  of  the  varices  during  stool,  difficult  retroces-
sion of  the  same,  and  bloody  mucus  from  the  rectum.
Dampness  of  the  anus.  The  varices  which  had  protruded
during  stool,  become  incarcerated  in  the  anus,  (a.  21  d.)
Distension  of  a vein  in  the  rectum  to  the  size  of  a goose-
quill,  with  itching  and  pressing,  (a.  4 d.)  Intense  pain  of
the  varices  which  had  protruded  but  little,  (a.  24  h.)
Stitching  pain  in  the  varices.  Boring  cramp-pain  from
the  anus  to  the  rectum  and  testicles.  Scurfy,  elevated
spots  above  the  fold  near  the  os  coccygis.  Frequent
burning  pain  in  the  perimeum,  especially  after  an  em-
brace.

Urinary  Organs — The  urine  becomes  speedily  tur-
bid. Yellow  sediment  in  the  urine,  looking  like  gravel,
(the  first  days.)  Reddish,  sandy  sediment  in  the  urine.
The  urine  deposits  yellow  sand.  Frequent  desire  to  urin-
ate. Desire  to  urinate  with  scanty  emission,  or  also  copi-
ous emission.  Micturition , almost  every  night.  In  the
morning,  early,  he  is  obliged  to  urinate  every  quarter  of  an
hour,  for  several  days.  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine,
after  micturition,  while  sitting.  Frequent  but  unsuccess-
ful desire  to  urinate.  Copious  stool  and  urine.  Desire  to
urinate,  with  smarting  in  the  urethra.  Smarting  in  the
urethra  during  micturition.  Cutting  of  the  urine,  (a.  16
d.)  Hot,  light-yellow,  burning  urine.  Pressure  upon  the
bladder  when  urinating,  with  subsequent  burning.  Con-


SXLICEA  TERRA.


215


tinuous  fine  stitches  in  the  fore-part  of  the  urethra.  Burn-
ing in  the  urethra  while  urinating.  Troublesome  itching
in  the  genital  organs  when  urinating.

Genital  Organs. — Painful  pimples  on  the  mons  vene-
ris. Itching  and  red  spots  of  the  glans.  Pressing  from
the  prostatic  gland  forward.  Itching  under  the  prepuce.
Redness  of  the  prepuce  near  the  corona,  as  if  excoriated,
with  frequent  itching.  Swelling  of  the  prepuce,  with
itching,  humid  pimples  on  the  outside.  Pain  of  the  scro-
tum worse  in  the  night,  but  only  when  lying.  Pain  in
the  right  scrotum,  as  if  indurated.  Distensive  or  compres-
sive violent  pain  in  the  left  testicle,  as  if  swollen.  Creep-
ing in  the  scrotum.  Itching  and  humid  spot  on  the  scro-
tum. Sweat  of  the  scrotum  ; it  itches  all  over.  Hydro-
cele. Pressure  in  the  spermatic  cords,  with  relaxed  scro-
tum, (the  first  days.)  The  sexual  desire  is  very  much
excited  during  the  first  eight  days  ; night  and  day  he  lias
erections  for  half  an  hour,  with  the  testicles  drawn  up.
Sexual  fancies  in  the  day-time,  (1.  2.  d.)  Violent  erection,
with  relaxed  scrotum,  (a.  5 d.)  Violent  nightly  erection
without  sexual  desire.  Frequent  erections  in  the  day-
time, without  any  apparent  cause.  Violent  erections  with
drawing  pain  in  the  testicles.  Slow  erections.  No  trace
of  erections,  (a.  several  days.)  Weak  and  almost  extin-
guished sexual  desire,  (the  first  five  weeks.)  Increasing
sexual  desire,  (a.  21  d.)  with  erections.  Frequent  and
copious  emissions.  Emission  with  heavy  dreams,  in  a
married  man,  (1.  n.)  Discharge  of  prostatic  juice,  at  every
stool.  After  an  embrace,  paralytic  sensation  in  the  right
side  of  the  head.  After  an  embrace  the  whole  body  feels
bruised,  (a.  2,  3 d.)  She  feels  nauseated  during  an  em-
brace, (21.  d.)  Violent  motions  of  the  fetus  in  a pregnant
female.  Labor-like  feeling  in  the  vagina.  Itching  of  the
pudendum.  Menses  too  early,  (a.  7 d.)  The  menses,
which  had  been  suppressed  for  three  months,  reappear.
Some  bloody  discharge  at  new  moon,  eleven  days  before
the  regular  period,  which  appears  on  the  regular  day.
Retarded  menses.  When  taken  during  the  menses,  the
silica  seemed  to  suppress  it  for  four  days,  after  which
they  flowed  four  or  five  days,  and  then  discontinued  for
five  or  six  weeks.  Diminished  menses.  Increased  menses ,


216


SILICEA  TERRA.


(a.  13,  20  d.)  Increased  menses,  with  repeated  paroxysms
of  icy  coldness  over  the  whole  body  at  the  time  of  their
appearance.  Strong  smell  of  the  menstrual  blood.  The
menses  are  preceded  by  violent  pressure  and  oppressive
sensation  over  the  eyes,  as  if  a load  were  pressing  there.
Great  costive’ness  immediately  before  and  during  the
menses.  Icy  cold  feet,  during  the  menses.  Pale  color  of
all  things,  during  the  menses.  Melancholy  anguish  in  the
pit  ol  the  stomach,  wants  to  drown  herself.  Violent  burn-
ing and  soreness  of  the  pudendum  during  the  menses,  also
an  eruption  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thighs,  (a.  23  d.)
During  the  menses,  drawing  between  the  scapulae,  only
at  night ; she  had  to  bend  backward,  to  obtain  relief.  Im-
mediately after  the  period,  a bloody  mucus  flows  from  the
nose.  Painfully  smarting  leucorrhcea , especially  after
taking  sour  things.  Discharge  of  a quantity  of  white
water  from  the  womb,  with  violent  itching  of  the  puden-
dum.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Frequent  sneezing , (a.  36  h.)  A
good  deal  of  desire  to  sneeze,  but  generally  unsuccessful,
(a.  28,  48  h.)  When  sneezing  the  chest  is  painful  as  if
it  would  burst.  Complete  obstruction  of  the  nose  ; she
was  scarcely  able  to  talk,  and  had  to  open  her  mouth
widely  to  breathe,  (a.  12  h ) A good  deal  of  mucous  dis-
charge from  the  nose,  without  coryza.  Fluent  coryza,  (a.
5,  6,  12  d.)  Violent  catarrh,  (a.  some  h.)  Dry  coryza,
in  the  morning  when  waking.  Conlinual  coryza,  more
dry,  now  fluent.  Coryza  for  weeks.  Coryza  and  cough
with  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands,  pain  in  the
throat  during  deglutition,  great  chilliness;  she  had  to  lie
down  ; after  having  been  in  bed  for  an  hour,  she  felt  a
burning  heat  over  the  wdiole  body.  Hoarseness.

Larynx  and  Trachea. — Rough  throat,  sometimes  with
dry  and  hacking  cough.  Sore  feeling  in  the  larynx.
Cough  with  hoarseness,  (19.  d.)  Cough  from  titillation
in  the  throat.  Cough,  especially  after  a meal,  with  ex-
pectoration of  white  mucus.  Frequent  dry  and  hacking
cough.  Titillating  itching  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the
throat,  threatening  suffocation,  until  a concussive  cough
sets  in,  continuing  for  hours  without  interruption,  and
causing  a pain  in  the  abdomen  and  throat.


SILICEA  TERRA.


217


Chest. — Soreness  of  the  chest  from  the  dry  and  hack-
ing cough.  Cougli  for  five  weeks.  Great  pressure  on
the  chest  when  attempting  to  cough  deep  ; this  is  prevent-
ed by  the  pain.  Sensation  as  of  a hair  on  the  tip  of  the
tongue  down  the  trachea,  causing  a titillation  which  fre-
quently induces  a short  and  hacking  cough  and  vomituri-
tion, (a.  10  d.)  Dry  cough  from  taking  a cold  drink.  Cough
is  brought  on  by  talking.  Cough  only  when  lying  down,
night  and  morning.  Short  and  hacking  cough  from  night-
ly titillation  in  the  throat.  Fatiguing  cough  in  the  even-
ing when  lying  in  the  bed,  with  ruling.  Cough  for  two
nights,  with  fever  ; the  cough  goes  off  by  warming  the
abdomen.  Dry  spasmodic  cough,  every  quarter  of  an
hour,  with  violent  rawness  of  the  chest  and  throat.  Spas-
modic cough,  (a.  12  d.)  Cough  with  vomiting  when
throwing  up.  Cough  inducing  vomiting  of  mucus.  Ex-
cessive continual  cough  with  discharge  of  a quantity  of
translucent  mucus.  Cough  with  expectoration,  morning
and  through  the  day,  sometimes  salt,  sometimes  brownish
and  rather  putrid.  Cough  with  expectoration,  making  the
water  turbid  ; that  which  goes  to  the  bottom  has  a fetid
smell.  Hawking  up  of  greenish-yellow,  fetid  globules.
Thick,  purulent  mucous  discharge  from  the  trachea.  Vo-
miting of  quantities  of  purulent  matter,  when  coughing.
Cough  with  bloody  mucus.  Violent  cough  with  expec-
toration of  bloody  mucus  in  the  morning,  (a.  7 d.)  Dis-
charge of  clear,  pure  blood  towards  noon,  with  deep,  hol-
low cough  ; shortly  after,  fainting  fit,  (4.  d.)  Scraping
sensation  and  pain  in  the  chest,  when  coughing  and  throw-
ing up,  for  sixteen  days,  with  indisposition  to  work,  ill-
humor  and  weariness  in  the  whole  body.  Pain  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach  after  a violent  cough.  When  coughing  the  .
chest  is  painful  as  if  bruised.  Even  when  breathing  the
chest  feels  bruised.  Scraping  sensation  in  the  chest  when
breathing.  Frequent  deep  and  sobbing  breathing.  Op-
pression of  the  chest,  (a.  3 d.)  Alternate  oppression  of
the  chest  and  pain  in  the  back,  (after  a cold  ?)  Frequent
oppression  of  the  chest  and  head  with  anxiety.  Asthma
in  the  morning  when  waking,  (a.  17  d.)  Oppression  of
the  chest,  as  if  his  throat  became  constricted,  especially
'her  a meal.  Violent,  but  painless  oppression  of  the

10


218


11L1CEA  TERRA.


chest;  lie  is  unable  to  take  deep  breath.  Weakness  in
the  chest;  when  talking  he  is  obliged  to  exert  the  whole
chest  lor  the  purpose  ol  bringing  out  the  words.  Several
attacks  ot  pressure  upon  the  chest,  in  the  morning  when
in  bed.  Oppressive  tension,  especially  in  the  left  side  of
the  chest.  Pressure  in  the  lei t side  of  the  chest,  in  the
morning  when  rising.  Pressure  and  stitches  in  the  left
side  of  the  chest.  Aching  pain  in  the  sternum,  towards
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Aching  pain  in  the  left  side  of
the  chest,  towards  the  false  ribs,  (a.  10  d ) Sharp  pres-
sure in  the  left  chest.  Pressure  and  drawing  in  the  right
side  ol  the  chest,  towards  the  axilla.  Violent  pressure  on
both  sides  of  the  chest,  lasting  at  least  one  hour.  Pinch-
ing jerk  in  the  left  intercostal  muscles,  frequently  during
the  day,  independent  of  breathing  and  contact.  Tearing
pain  in  the  lelt  side  of  the  chest.  Violent  stitch  through  the
right  side  of  the  chest,  (a.  9.  d.)  Stitches  under  the  right
ribs  when  taking  an  inspiration.  Stitches  in  the  right
side , (a.  12  h.)  Stitches  in  the  left  chest.  Stitches  in
the  chest,  especially  during  a deep  inspiration.  Stitches
in  the  sternum,  especially  after  dinner.  Violent  contrac-
tive pain  when  walking,  in  the  fore-part  of  the  chest,
coming  from  the  back,  when  moving  about.  The  chest
became  oppressed,  the  "breathing  short,  and  the  pain  more
violent  ; when  quietly  leaning  against  something,  the  pain
disappeared  entirely  and  did  not  return  when  again  mov-
ing about,  (5.  d.)  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  chest,
(a.  lOd.)  Heat  in  the  chest,  with  chilliness  and  coldness
of  the  whole  body,  (2.  d.)  Burning  pain  in  the  chest.
Sudden  excitation  of  the  heart,  for  eight  days.  Palpita-
tion of  the  heart  when  sitting  still,  with  trembling  of  that
hand  in  which  lie  holds  something.  Oppressive  heavi-
ness in  the  region  of  the  heart,  (X  d.)  Pain  under  the
right  arm,  as  if  the  dress  had  made  pressure  in  that  part ;
still  nothing  is  seen.  Itching  rash  on  the  sternum.  In-
duration in  the  left  fleshy  side  of  the  chest.

Chest. — Pain  of  the  os  coccygis  as  after  a long  drive.
Violent  pain  in  the  back,  (a.  9 d.)  Desire  in  the  small  of
the  back  to  stretch  himself.  Paralysis  in  the  small  of  the
back,  (a.  15  d.)  Paralytic  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
in  the  morning  when  rising,  (a.  iH)  d.)  Pressure  and  ten-


S1L1CEA  TERRA,


219


sion  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Stitch  in  the  small  of  the
back.  Stiff  back,  after  sitting.  Pain  in  the  curved  spine.
Pinching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  back,  for  one  hour.
Beating  in  the  back.  Violent  tearing  or  beating  pressure
in  the  back,  with  chilliness,  afterwards  dull  oppressive
headache  with  heat  in  the  head,  (the  first  days.)  Burning
in  the  back  when  walking  in  the  open  air  and  getting
warm.  Chilliness  in  the  back.  Ilchingin  the  back.  Pain-
ful cutting  in  the  back,  the  whole  day,  (a.  8 d.)  Pain  be-
tween the  scapulae,  as  if  the  parts  were  being  torn  asun-
der. Tearing  pain  under  the  scapulae,  when  walking.
Tensive  drawing  in  the  right  scapula,  (a.  21  d.)  Drawing
pain  in  the  scapulae,  in  paroxysms  ; afterwards  the  pain
passes  into  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  head,  she  becomes
dizzy  as  if  she  would  fall  over.  Pressure  on  the  scapulae
as  if  supporting  a load,  more  violent  in  the  morning  when
at  rest  than  during  motion  ; they  seemed  to  him  swollen,
and  when  leaning  against  something  with  the  back,  the
pain  arrested  his  breathing.  Frequent  stitches  in  the  right
scapula , (a.  5 d ) Stitches  between  the  scapulae.  Creep-
ing in  the  left  scapula.  Vibratory  twitchings  in  the  skin
of  the  scapulae.  Burning  pain  in  the  left  scapula,  (a.  4 d.)

Neck. — Tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  (a.  a few
hours.)  Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  (2.  d.)  Violent
tearings  in  the  middle  of  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Clawing
pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  relieved  only
as  long  as  she  presses  her  hand  upon  the  part.  Stiffness
of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  headache.  Glandular  swell-
ings in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Pimples  on  the  nape  of  the
neck.  Itching  pimples  on  the  nape  of  the  neck,  like  net-
tle-rash, (a.  9 d.)  Boil  on  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Swell-
ing of  the  right  cervical  muscles.  Stiffness  of  one  side
of  the  neck  ; he  was  unable  to  turn  the  head  from  pain,
(a.  46  h.)  Pressing  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  as  if  the
veins  were  swollen.  Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,  (a.
5,  25  d.)  Swelling  of  the  thyroid  body  ; the  part  itches,
and,  when  touching  it,  a stinging  is  felt  in  the  body.
Stitches  in  the  cervical  glands.

Upper  Extremities. — Drawing  aching  pain  in  the
axillary  glands,  (a.  19  d.)  Violent  swelling  of  the  axillary
glands.  Pain  in  the  shoulder,  a sort  of  pressure  extending


220


S1L1CEA  TERRA.


into  the  hand,  with  sensation  as  if  she  were  unable  to  lift
anything  heavy,  although  she  is  able  to  use  her  hand  pro-
perly, (immediately.)  Violent  aching  pain  in  the  right
shoulder  extending  to  the  left  elbow,  as  soon  as  he  uncovers
the  parts  and  they  become  cold.  Painful  jerk  in  the  right
shoulder-joint,  in  the  evening,  jerking  the  arm  up  into  the
air,  (a.  7 d.)  Tearing  in  the  shoulder  during  motion.
Stitches  in  the  shoulder-joint,  in  the  morning.  Heaviness
of  the  arms  as  if  filled  with  lead.  Faintness  of  the  arms,
in  the  morning  when  in  bed.  Slight  jactitation  of  the  mus-
cles of  the  arms.  Rheumatic  stiffness  in  the  left  arm,
more  painful  during  motion  than  rest.  Drawing  in  the
arm,  as  far  as  the  little  finger.  Jerking  tearing  in  the  arm,
extending  as  far  as  the  thumb.  Tearing  in  both  arms.
Uneasiness  and  trembling  in  the  right  arm.  The  arm  goes
to  sleep  when  laying  it  upon  something.  Violent  pressure
in  the  left  arm,  apparently  in  the  marrow  of  the  bones.
The  skin  of  the  arms  and  hands  becomes  chapped,  (17.  d.)
Congestion  of  blood  to  the  arm,  when  working  while
stooping;  they  swelled  on  and  trembled  for  about  an  hour.
Many  boils  on  the  arm,  also  large  ones. . Beating  in  the
right  arm,  after  a meal.  Beating  in  the  right  arm  ; the
jactitation  of  the  muscles  can  be  felt  with  the  other  hand  ;
the  arm  became  paralysed  and  the  beating  returned  when
raising  the  arm  high  up,  (a.  10  d.)  Tearing  pain  in  the
upper  arm , (a.  13  d.)  Pain  in  the  upper  arm  when  press-
ing upon  it.  Jerking  pain  in  the  right  upper  arm,  (a.  10
d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  elbows,  apparently  in  the  mar-
row, (3.  d ) Paralytic  tearing  in  the  left  fore-arm.  Para-
lytic pain  in  the  extensor  tendons  of  the  fore-arms.  Jerk-
ing pain  in  the  left  lower  arm.  Twitchings  in  the  muscles
of  the  left  lower  arm,  (a.  10  d.)  A number  of  hard  blis-
ters on  the  lower  arm,  of  the  size  of  peas,  upon  a red  base,
itching  and  burning,  lasting  only  one  night,  (from  the  wrist-
joint  to  the  elbow.)  Drawing  in  the  hands,  (a.  13  d.)
Drawdng  pain  in  the  right  hand.  Tearing  in  the  wrist-
joint,  painful  when  touched,  and,  when  moving  it,  sensa-
tion as  if  it  would  break.  Pain  in  the  wrist-joint  as  if
sprained.  Paralytic  weakness  of  the  wrist-joints,  in  the
morning.  Cramp  of  the  hand,  when  writing.  Cramp-
pain  and  paralytic  weakness  of  the  hand  when  exerting  it


SILICEA  TERRA.


221


slightly . In  the  night  the  hands  go  to  sleep.  The  right
hand  goes  to  sleep  in  the  night.  Prickling  and  numbness
of  ihe  hands.  Excrescence  on  the  dorsum  of  the  hand,
between  the  third  and  fourth  metacarpal  bones  ; with  pain
as  if  sprained  when  bending  the  hand,  and  as  if  bruised
when  moving  it,  (13.  d.)  Excrescence  between  the  second
and  third  metacarpal  bones,  (1.  d ) Profuse  sweat  of  the
hands.  Violent  itching  under  the  skin  of  the  palm  of  the
hand.  Pustule  on  the  dorsum  of  the  hand.  Paralytic
drawing  in  the  fingers.  Sensation  as  if  burnt  in  the  dor-
sum of  the  finger.  Pain  in  the  flexor  side  of  a finger  as
if  a splinter  had  been  stuck  in.  Tearing  pain  in  the  mid-
dle finger.  Tearing  in  the  fingers.  Tearing  in  the  fin-
ger-joints and  in  the  thumbs.  Jerking  pain  in  the  index-
finger,  increasing  in  violence  for  five  minutes.  Numb  feel-
ing of  a finger,  as  if  enlarged  and  as  if  the  bones  had  be-
come distended.  Stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb.
Cramp-pain  in  the  joint  of  the  thumb.  Weakness  in  the
right  thumb,  making  almost  the  whole  hand  useless,  (1.  d.)
Contraction  and  stiffness  of  the  left  middle  finger  ; when
extending  it  again,  the  whole  of  the  extensor  tendon  in  the
dorsum  of  the  hand  feels  very  painful.  Great  dryness  in
the  tips  of  the  fingers,  in  the  afternoon.  Sensation  as  if
the  tips  of  the  fingers  were  ulcerated  sub-cutaneously.
Pain  in  the  left  index-finger,  as  if  a panaritium  would  form,
(a.  20  d.)  Rough,  yellow  finger  nails.  Grey?  dirty  nails,
as  if  decayed,  jumping  about  like  powder  when  cutting
them,  and  being  divided  off  into  layers.  Frequent  pana -
rilia.  A small  crack  in  the  index-finger  becomes  affected
with  a burning  pain  ; a lymphatic  vessel  becomes  inflamed,
extending  from  that  crack  to  beyond  the  wrist-joint,  and
the  sore  spot  finally  becomes  covered  with  a blister,  with
burning,  pressing,  stitching  pain.  Violently  itching  blister
on  the  posterior  joint  of  the  left  index-finger.  Blotches  on
the  fingers,  as  from  the  heat  of  the  weather,  with  tingling
itching.  Prickling  pain,  now  in  one,  now  in  another  fin-
ger, also  in  the  arms,  as  if  gone  to  sleep.  Stitches  in  the
little  finger.  Jerking  stitches  in  the  middle  finger,  (a.  2 d.)
Prickling  in  the  ring-finger,  (a.  3 d.)

Lower  Extremities. — Itching  on  the  nates.  Pain  in
the  left  hip  when  stooping,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.


222


SILICEA  TERRA.


Drawing-jerking  pain  in  the  right  hip  joint,  making  it  im-
possible to  move  the  limb,  (a.  16  d.)  Paralytic  weakness
of  the  limbs  when  rising  from  a seat,  going  off  when  walk-
ing. Tearing  in  the  left  limb.  Weakness  of  the  limbs.
Uneasiness  and  paralytic  weakness  in  the  joints  of  the
upper  and  lower  limbs,  when  sitting  or  walking.  Paralytic
sensation  of  the  whole  of  the  right  limb,  with  painful  sen-
sitiveness of  the  morbidly  affected  ball  of  the  toe,  when
walking.  Heaviness  of  the  limbs.  Great  weariness  of
the  limbs  from  a-  short  walk.  The  right  limb  goes  to
sleep.  The  leg  goes  to  sleep  while  sitting.  Jactitation
of  the  muscles  of  the  left  limb.  Itching  of  the  left  limb.
Prickling  in  many  parts  of  the  lower  limbs,  gradually  re-
moved by  violent  scratching.  Pain  of  the  femora  as  if
bruised,  when  walking,  sitting  or  lying  down,  even  in  the
morning  when  waking.  Drawing  in  the  thighs,  extending
into  the  feet.  Jerking  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right
thigh.  Tearing  from  the  pelvis  to  the  bend  of  the  knee.
Prickings  in  the  left  thigh,  when  walking.  Stitches  in  the
left,  thigh.  Itching  of  the  inner  side  of  the  thighs.  Some
boils  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  thighs.  Pain  of  the
knee  as  if  tied  too  fast.  Painful  feeling  of  stiffness  in  the
knees,  when  walking  or  standing.  Pain  in  the  left  patella.
Drawing  in  the  left  knee,  (12.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  knees
when  silting,  going  off  by  motion.  Tearing  around  the
right  knee,  extending  down  to  the  foot,  both  when  at  rest,
and  in  motion,  more  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  2 d.)  Weakness
in  the  knees.  The  legs  up  to  the  knees,  and  the  feet  are
icy-cold  in  the  evening,  and  he  has  to  lie  in  bed  for  half
an  hour  before  they  get  warm  ; for  many  days  in  suc-
cession. The  legs  are  cold  up  to  the  knees,  in  a warm
room.  Drawing  pain,  in  the  evening,  along  the  legs,  ter-
minated by  starting  or  jerking  in  the  limb  Sort  of  tremor
without  chilliness  in  the  legs,  from  the  knees  down  to  the
feet,  in  the  evening  from  6 till  7,  (a.  15  d.)  Itching  of
the  legs.  Itching  rash  of  the  calves.  Boils  on  the  calves.
Sensation , when  walking,  as  if  the  calve ? were  too  short ,
which  passed  off  when  sitting.  Painful  cramp  in  the
ri<zht  calf,  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed.  Tearing  in  die
left  calf,  with  chilliness,  afterwards  in  the  left  shoulder.
Stitching  in  the  calves,  when  advancing  the  leg  while


SXLTCEA  TEIUIA.’


223

walking.  Stitching  in  the  upper  part  of  the  calf,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  (18.  d.)  Aching  pain  in  the  left
tibia,  lor  two  hours.  Pinching  pain  in  the  front  region  of
the  left  tibia  and  knee.  Red,  intensely  painful  smarting
spot  on  the  right  tibia,  for  two  days.  Swelling  of  the
legs,  extending  only  down  to  the  feet.  The  feet  become
cold  when  beginning  to  walk.  Cold  feet  every  day,  be-
coming  warm  in  the  night.  Icy-cold  feet  in  the  day  time;
but  in  the  night,  when  in  bed,  burning  heat  in  feet  and
hands,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  feet.,  up  to  the  knees.
Cold  icet,  the  whole  day.  Icy-cold  feel  in  the  evening,
even  when  yet  in  the  bed.  Burning  feet.  Burning  soles
of  the  feet,  at  night.  Stitching  in  the  region  of  the  tnal*
leolus  externus,  also  at  night.  Pain  in  the  tarsal  joint  as
if  sprained.  The  foot  turns  easily  over  when  walking.
Tension  in  the  tarsal  joint,  even  when  sitting.  Sliflfness
and  weariness  in  the  tarsal  joint,  with  swelling  around  the
ankles.  Swelling  of  llie  left  foot , extending  Uj>  to  the
ankle.  Swelling  of  the  feet,  most  violent  in  the  morning,
when  rising,  less  in  the  evening;  tensive  when  walking.
Swelling  of  the  feet,  with  redness  ; when  pressing  upon
the  red  part,  it  leaves  a white  spot;  with  pain  from  the
toes  to  the  malleoli.  Lancinalions  in  the  left  foot  and  heel,
afterwards  in  the  right  shoulder.  'Tearing  in  the  right
sole.  Pain  in  the  dorsum  of  die  foot,  as  if  bruised.  Fetid
sweat  of  the  feet.  Cadaverous  smell  of  th  .•  leet.,  wiihout
sweat,  every  evening,  (a.  3 d.)  Sour  smell  of  the  feet,
intolerable,  no  sweat,  (a.  13  d.)  Proruse  sweat  of  the  soles
and  between  the  toes  ; he  became  quite  sore  when  walking.
Large  blister  on  the  heel,  without  itching.  Stitching  in
the  heel  and  the  big  toe,  when  standing  or  sitting.  Tear-
ing in  the  heel,  (12,  23.  d.)  Culling  in  the  solo.  Pain
in  the  ball  of  the  foot.  Stitching  in  the  soles.  Cramp  in
the  sole.  Painful  cramp  in  the  right  sole , and  especially
in  the  big  toe , during  a distant  walk,  (a.  2 d.)  'The  toes
are  stiff,  she  is  not  able  to  I) 2nd  them.  Soreness  of  the
soles,  especially  near  the  toes.  Pain  ns  if  sprained  in  the
joint  of  the  big  toe.  When  walking  two  toes  are  painful,
as  if  from  pressure  of  the  boot,  (a.  7 d.)  Continuous
violent  pain  in  the  big  toe,  he  is  scarcely  allowed  to  tread.
Tearing  in  the  big  toes}  (in  the  evening.)  Tearing  in  the


224


E1LICEA  TERRA.


right  big  toe.  Pain  under  the  nail  of  the  big  toe  and
stitches  in  the  toe.  Itching-cutting  pain  under  the  nail  of
a toe.  Cutting  stitching  in  the  right  big  toe.  Cramp-like
stitching  in  the  toes.  Violent  stitches  in  the  big  toe.
Stitches  in  the  distorted  toe.  Stitch  in  the  joint  of  the  big
toe.  Frequent  boring  in  the  big  toe.  Stitches  in  the  bi£
toe  causing  the  limb  to  jerk  up,  (6.  d.)  Ulcerative  pain  oi
the  big  toe,  which  had  been  sore  and  healed,  only  when
treading  and  walking.  Itching,  suppurating  scurf  on  the
frozen  toes.  A corn  forms  on  the  big  toe,  with  violent
burning.  The  corn  is  intensely  painful  when  touched.
Stitches  in  the  corn , causing  the  foot  to  jerk  up,  (6.  d.)
Violent  stitches  in  the  corns.

General  Symptoms. — So  much  uneasiness  in  every
part  of  the  body,  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  sit  still
or  to  continue  his  writing.  Uneasiness  in  the  body  and
headache  after  sitting  a long  while.  Ulcerative  pain  of
the  whole  side  of  the  body  upon  which  he  rests,  with  con-
stant chilliness  when  uncovering  himself  ever  so  little,  in-
sufferable thirst  and  frequent  thrills  of  heat  in  the  head.
Violent  pain  in  the  chest  and  paralytic  sensation  in  the
limbs  when  rising  after  having  been  seated  a long  while,
(a.  48  h.)  Deadness  of  the  hands  and  feet  in  the  morning.
She  feels  every  change  of  the  wreather  in  the  head  and
limbs.  The  thunder-storm,  both  when  yet  approaching  or
present,  makes  a powerful  impression  upon  him  ; when
walking,  his  strength  fails,  he  is  unable  to  get  along  and
has  to  be  led  ; he  becomes  very  faint  and  drowsy,  with
heaviness  and  heat  in  the  body.  He  is  very  chilly , the
whole  day.  Constant  chilliness  in  the  evening,  which  can
be  felt  by  others.  Constant  internal  chilliness,  with  loss
of  appetite.  Chilliness,  even  when  walking  in  the  warm
room,  and  increasing  unto  a trembling  in  the  open  air,  (a.
32  h.)  Chilliness  at  every  motion , the  whole  day  ; in  the
morning  great  weariness,  even  unto  sleeping.  She  catches
cold  easily.  After  a walk  in  the  open  air,  she  feels  a cold-
ness in  the  knees  and  arms,  the  finger-nails  become  white.
Disagreeable  feeling  of  chilliness,  in  the  afternoon,  espe-
cially on  the  arms,  in  the  warm  room.  An  icy-cold  thrill
over  the  body,  frequently.  Chilliness,  during  the  stinging
pain.  When  catching  cold,  she  has  constantly  an  internal


SILICEA  TERRA*


225


chilliness  in  the  night,  accompanied  with  want  of  appetite
and  stinging  and  burning  pain  in  the  head.  Liability  to
catarrh,  with  subsequent  cough,  (11.  d.  Now  chilliness,
now  heat,  frequently  during  the  day.  Much  heat.  Warmth
through  the  whole  body  which  is  not  unpleasant)  for  two
days.  Frequent  short  attacks  of  flushes  of  heat,  during  the
day.  Frequent  attacks  of  flushes  of  heat  in  the  face  and  over
the  whole  body,  followed  by  sweat,  even  when  resting  ;
when  moving  ever  so  little,  she  is  all  over  dripping  with
perspiration.  Heat,  without  thirst,  (22.  d.)  Cold  hands
and  feet,  with  violent  heat  and  redness  of  the  face.  Heat
of  the  cheeks  and  palms  of  the  hands,  in  the  morning.
Tearing  in  the  joints  and  soles,  with  involuntary  jerks  in
the  feet,  as  if  affected  with  St.  Vitus’  dance,  which  gave
him  a hundred  sleepless  nights.  A few  painless  shocks
through  the  whole  body.  Pustules  on  the  forehead,  occi-
put, sternum,  and  vertebras  column,  resembling  small-pox  ;
they  are  extremely  painful  and  finally  form  ulcers  sup
purating  strongly.  Jerking  of  the  limbs  followed  by  a
sensation  as  of  shaking  of  the  head,  a3  in  a chill,  the  hair
standing  on  end,  but  the  temperature  of  the  body  being
natural.  Itching  of  the  back,  scapulae  and  thighs.  Itch-
ing and  biting  of  the  whole  body  after  lying  down,  which
cannot  be  removed  by  scratching.  Quick  creeping  as  of
fleas,  in  several  parts  of  the  body  ; in  some  parts  becoming
an  intolerable  itching  ; during  the  whole  day,  but  espe-
cially in  the  evening,  when  undressing.  Creeping  itching
over  the  whole  body  and  also  upon  the  head.  Erup-
tion over  the  whole  body,  resembling  varioloid,  accompa-
nied, preceded  and  followed  by  violent  itching.  Pricking
in  the  skin  here  and  there,  resembling  flea-biles.  Sting-
ing itching  in  several  places,  especially  at  night.  Little
scratches  on  the  skin  heal  with  difficulty  and  suppurate.
Pain  in  the  ulcer  as  if  it  were  sub-cutaneous.  Smarting
in  the.  ulcers  which  w^ere  generally  painless.  Aching
pain  in  the  ulcer  upon  the  leg.  Stitching  aching  pain  in
the  spot  where  an  ulcer  had  been  formerly  on  the  leg .
Stitching  in  the  ulcer  upon  the  leg.  Stitching  and  burn-
ing in  and  around  the  ulcer  upon  the  leg.  Boring  pain  in
the  sore  place  on  the  leg,  (a.  14  d.)  Liability  to  straining
parts,  bringing  on  stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and

10*


226


SILICEA  TERRA,


frequent  vomiting  in  the  night ; sometimes  cutting  in  the
hypogastrium  with  incarceration  of  flatulence.  Her  neck,
chest,  and  headache,  even  her  whole  body,  (a.  24  h.)
Painfulness  of  the  whole  body,  in  the  morning  ; it  is  felt
even  when  yet  asleep,  and  afterwards  when  waking,
(especially  in  the  right  upper  arm  and  the  left  shoulder;)
less  after  rising.  The  whole  body  is  painful  as  if  bruised
by  blows,  (a.  48  h.)  Bruised  pain  of  the  whole  body,  in
the  morning  after  waking.  Paralytic  pain  of  the  external
condyle  of  the  humerus  and  the  internal  condyle  of  the
tibia,  when  taking  exercise.  Pain  of  all  the  muscles  during
motion.  Great  irritability  and  painful  sensitiveness  of  the
skin  when  touching  it,  (a.  4 d.)  Intense  bone-pain,  here
or  there,  especially  in  the  morning  when  rising  before  she
begins  to  move  about.  Drawing  in  the  ears,  jaws,  hands
and  in  the  front  region  of  the  tibiae.  Drawing  in  the  limbs,
partly  cramp-like,  partly  sharp.  Palpitation  of  the  heart
and  throbbing  in  the  whole  body,  when  sitting.

Weakness,  Fits. — A feeling  of  violent  coldness  in  the
whole  left  side  of  the  body,  frequent  slumbering  and  start-
ing, as  if  she  would  go  away  without  knowing  whither  ;
after  this  she  began  to  lose  her  senses,  spoke  unintelligibly,
recognised  nobody,  and  became  so  weak  that  she  was  not
able  to  turn  to  the  other  side  without  being  aided  ; next
came  violent  convulsions  with  staring  look,  distortion  of
the  eyes,  twitchings  of  the  lips,  heaviness  of  the  tongue
with  indistinct  articulation,  stretching  and  distortion  of  the
head  and  limbs,  fora  quarter  of  an  hour;  this  was  followed
by  frightful  roaring,  falling  of  tears  from  the  eyes,  foam
at  the  mouth ; afterwards  a warm  sweat  made  its  appear-
ance over  the  body,  the  breathing  became  freer,  slumber
came  on,  and  senses  and  speech  gradually  returned  in  a
couple  of  hours,  (a.  46  h.)  Fit ; she  turns  pale,  becomes
still  and  loses  her  appetite,  sheds  tears  and  complains  of
violent  stitching  in  the  ear,  vomited  and  her  hands  became
so  weak  that,  she  was  not  able  to  raise  a cup  to  her  mouth,
(a.  5 h.)  Want  of  appetite  ; pale,  wretched  countenance  ;
every  morning  sweat,  which  was  sometimes  very  profuse  ;
heaviness  and  weariness  in  the  limbs,  obliging  her  to  lie
down  ; nausea ; chilliness  every  evening  before  going  to  bed;
stitching  now  here,  now  there,  in  the  sides  of  the  chest,


&ILICEA  TERRA.


227


abdomen,  limbs,  somelimcs  so  violent  that  she  started  ;
pain  under  the  sternum  during  an  inspiration,  and  itchin
of  die  arms  and  legs,  with  sin  til  pimples.  Disagreeabl
sensation  in  the  genital  organs  ; afterwards  a sort  of  cut-
ting in  both  sides  of  the  trunk,  from  below  upward,  extend-
ing into  the  shoulders,  and  thence  into  the  arms,  which  felt
as  if  gone  to  sleep,  with  a rigidity  in  them  ; this  lit.  came
on  wnile  at  rest,  mostly  when  sitting  or  standing,  every
quarter  of  an  hour,  but  not  in  the  night,  (a.  14  d ) Epilep-
tic fit,  at  night,  about  new  moon  ; first,  the  body  becomes
stretched,  afterwards  it  is  jerked  into  the  air,  bat  without  a
cry  and  without  biting  the  tongue,  (a.  16  d.)  Most  of  the
symptoms  of  Silicea  seem  to  make  their  appearance
about  new  moon.  The  pains  are  increased  by  motion .
Great  emaciation.  Trembling  of  all  the  limbs  in  tfie  morn-
tug,  especially  of  the  arms , which  feci  paralysed.  Great
stiffness  in  the  limbs.  Stiffness  in  the  back  and  small  of
the  back  after  sitting.  When  walking  in  the  open  air,  she

was  suddenly  attacked  with  so  much  faintness  and  drow-
•/

sincss  that  she  bad  to  walk  home.  A kind  of  nausea  when
walking  in  the  open  air.  Dryness  in  the  mouth  when
walking  in  the  open  air.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  (‘20  d.)  Violent  stitching  pain  in
the  tendo  Achillis  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Heavi-
ness of  the  lower  limbs  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (1.
d.)  Faint  and  trembling  after  a walk  in  i he  open  air,  in
the  evening.  Heaviness  of  the  upper  and  lower  limbs  as
if  filled  with  lead.  Great  weakness,  (a.  28  h.)  The
whole  body  feels  bruised  and  broken,  and  so  weak  that  she
has  to  keep  her  bed  for  three  days.  Great  emaciation
while  confined  to  the  bed  for  five  days.  Careless,  heavy
gait.  Weakness  of  the  back,  and  paralytic  feeling  in  the
lower  limbs  ; be  was  scarcely  able  to  walk,  (8.  d.)  Weak-
ness in  the  joints,  they  bend  suddenly.  Laziness  in  the
afternoon,  walking  fatigues  him,  (14- d.)  Had  to  lie  down
before  dinner,  owing  to  sudden  exhaustion  JSo  weak  that
be  is  unable  to  walk,  but  without  pain,  (4.  d.)  Weariness
in  the  lower  limbs,  in  the  morning.  Very  weak,  in  the
morning  after  walking.  Great  weariness  and  dulness  when
attending  to  some  mental  labor;  he  came  near  going  to
sleep  while  teaching.


O (jq


228


SILICEA  TERRA.


Sleep. — Much  yawning.  Aching  pain  in  the  angle  of
the  lower  jaw,  extending  into  the  ear,  when  yawning.  Long
siesta,  afterwards  faintness,  (a.  5 d.)  Great  drowsiness
in  the  evening , (a.  20  d.)  Great  drowsiness  in  the  day-
time. Stiffness  of  the  whole  body,  in  the  night,  as  if  it
had  gone  to  sleep,  with  anxiety,  hindering  sleep.  She
spends  her  nights  without  sleeping, but  absorbed  in  strange
fancies  and  ravings.  Wide  awake  the  whole  night.  To-
tal sleeplessness,  for  eight  or  ten  days.  Is  unable  to  sleep
for  one  hour  and  a half,  on  two  evenings  in  succession,  ow-
ing to  ideas  crowding  upon  him,  (a.  7 d.)  He  wakes  at
two  o'clock  in  the  night , and  remains  awake  for  a long
time , oioing  to  ideas  crowding  upon  his  mind.  Uneasy
sleep,  without  pain.  Frequent  waking,  with  chilliness.
Restless  sleep,  she  starts  and  talks  in  her  sleep.  He  fre-
quently wakes  and  starts,  without  dreaming.  He  wakes
in  a perspiration,  with  desire  to  urinate.  Starting  in  the
siesta,  (a.  12  d.)  Frequent  starting  in  the  night.  Frequent
starting  in  the  afternoon,  while  feeling  drowsy . Starting
from  sleep,  the  whole  night,  with  trembling  of  the  whole
body.  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head  in  the  night.  Or-
gasm of  blood  in  the  night ; throbbing  in  all  the  arteries.
A good  deal  of  thirst  in  the  night ; her  mouth  was  dry  all
the  time,  (a.  48  h.)  Jerk  in  the  head,  in  the  evening  while
falling  asleep,  afterwards  beating  in  the  right  ear.  Nausea
in  the  night,  (the  first  night.)  He  wakes  for  several  nights
after  eleven  o’clock,  after  a sleep  of  one  hour  and  a half,
and  then  goes  to  sleep  again.  He  wakes  after  midnight,
with  burning  in  the  stomach  and  inclination  to  vomit ; fol-
lowed by  empty  eructations  tasting  of  the  supper  without
any  disagreeable  taste,  (a.  15  d.)  Roughness  and  scrap-
ing sensation  of  the  right  side  of  the  throat  at  night  when
lying  in  bed  on  the  right  side,  occasioning  a cough  for  half
an  hour,  with  mucous  expectoration  ; for  several  nights.
Stitching  in  the  leftside  of  the  chest  at  night,  down  to  the
last  rib,  at  every  inspiration.  Drv  night  cough,  occasion-
ing even  vomiting  and  a sweat  as  from  anguish  ; he  had  to
get  up.  In  the  evening,  when  on  the  point  of  going  to
sleep,  she  jerked  several  times  with  the  arms  and  the  right
lower  limb,  and  grasped  with  her  hands.  In  the  evening,
after  having  gone  to  sleep,  she  starts  with  her  whole  body,


SILICEA  TERRA.


229


and  wakes.  The  body  jerks  upward  for  an  hour  and  a
half,  while  sleeping  without  dreaming,  (a.  4 d.)  In  the
evening  after  lying  down,  (and  having  begun  to  doze,)  he
began  to  strike  with  his  hands  and  kick  with  his  feet,  with-
out knowing  about  it,  and  accompanied  with  jerking  of  the
body,  with  his  eyes  closed,  (without  exclaiming,)  and  while
snoring  loudly  ; the  foam  appeared  at  the  mouth,  after-
wards he  lay  motionless  as  if  dead,  was  quite  rigid  when
raised,  opened  his  eyes,  which  were  immoveable,  and  be-
gan  to  articulate  indistinctly  ; (epileptic  fit  ?)  (a.  16  d.)
Incarceration  of  flatulence  in  the  night,  with  consequent
constriction  of  the  chest,  (a.  12  d.)  Pain  in  the  small  of
the  back,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  night.  Jerks  through  the
head,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  ending  with  a stitch  in
the  occiput.  At  two  o’clock  in  the  night,  he  is  waked  by
a painful  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  heat  and  pricking.
Oppressive  headache,  in  the  night ; she  cannot  think  where
she  is  ; every  thing  turns  with  her,  and  her  heart  throbs,
(a.  17  d.)  Vertigo  with  nausea,  at  night,  when  dreaming.
Vertigo  about  midnight,  even  when  sleeping,  with  heat  in
the  head.  At  night,  his  little  finger  becomes  quite  stiff ;
he  was  not  able  to  bend  it.  At  night,  violent  pains  in  the
hypogastrium,  a sort  of  drawing  together,  followed  by  pro-
fuse sweat  all  over.  Exhausting  nightly  diarrhoea,  (20.
d.)  Sudden  pinching  pain  close  below  the  right  eye,  in
the  evening  when  in  bed.  At  night,  desire  to  urinate,  with
erection.  Nightly  pains  in  the  ulcer  on  the  leg.  Trouble-
some night-cough,  until  four  o’clock,  (a.  5 d.)  He  feels
chilly  at  night,  in  a sort  of  half-sleep,  without  waking.
Great  weakness  in  the  night,  unto  fainting.  Nightly  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back  and  that  shoulder  upon  which  he
is  resting.  He  frequently  wakes  in  the  night  with  a pain
in  the  stomach,  first  an  aching,  afterwards  a clawing  pain.
In  the  evening,  when  on  the  point  of  going  to  sleep,  pul-
sations in  the  head,  throbbing  in  the  heart,  and  tremor
through  the  whole  body,  for  some  minutes.  He  wakes
with  anguish  and  a stupefying  vertigo.  He  wrakes  with  a
quicker  pulse,  .palpitation  of  the  heart,  feeling  of  heat,
eructations  and  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; after-
wards retching  with  expulsion  of  bitter  mucus.  He  wakes
with  anxiety  and  incarceration  of  flatulence,  the  whole  of


230


StLTCEA  TERRA.


which  passed  off  after  walking  in  the  room,  without  emis-
sion of  flatulence,  (a.  8d.)  He  wakes  after  midnight  with
restlessness,  difficulty  of  breathing  and  dryness  of  the
skin,  (a.  9 d.)  Uneasy  sleep  and  frequent,  waking  with
chilliness.  He  dreams  that  they  attempt  his  life,  waking
from  his  dream  with  suffocative  anguish  without  being
able  to  speak,  (a.  15  d.)  Anxious  waking  at  three  o clock
in  the  morning.  In  her  nightly  fancies  her  head  appears
to  her  very  large.  When  waking  from  an  atixious  dream,
she  remains  full  of  anxiety  and  her  heart  beats  audibly.
Restless  sleep,  with  frequent  waking  and  many  dreams,
one  chasing  the  other.  Incoherent  dreams  in  the  night.
He  wakes  after  midnight,  and  remains  awake  for  a long
lime  ; when  falling  asleep  again,  he  is  haunted  by  fancies.
I le  frequently  talks  when  asleep.  Frequent  dreams  and
exclamations  during  sleep.  The  boy  exclaims  in  the
night,  and  is  restless.  'Flic  boy  wakes  in  the  night,  weep-
ing violently,  does  not  come  to  his  senses,  but  moans  and
litters  inarticulate  sounds.  Bad  dreams , with  vehement
weeping.  Dream  about  serpents  with  anxiety,  (a  5 d.)  She
dreams  that  she  is  in  the  act  of  being  choked  ; but  she  was
not  able  to  exclaim,  and  kicked  with  her  feet.  He  dreams
that  he  had  committed  murder,  and  had  been  denounced.
He  dreams  that,  he  is  being  drowned.  Dream  full  of  quarrel
and  humiliation,  (a.  1 d.)  Anxious  dream,  he  is  pursue  1.  He
dreams  that  some  one  takes  hold  of  his  finger,  this  caused
him  to  start.  He  dreams  that  he  is  fighting  with  robbers,
he  wakes  very  much  heated,  oppressed  with  anxiety  and
covered  with  sweat.  He  dreams  of  robbers  and  murder-
ers, he  wakes  up  and  says  that  he  will  overtake  them.
Dream  full  of  cruelty,  without  anger.  Frightful  dreams,
in  the  first  hours  of  the  night.  Wild  dreams  in  the  nioht,
and  frequent  waking  with  uneasiness.  Dreams  and  fan-
cies as  soon  as  she  goes  to  sleep.  He  dreams  of  the  busi-
ness of  the  day  and  of  big  dogs  that  pursue  him.  He  dreams
of  the  events  of  his  childhood.  He  dreams  of  the  events  of
his  youth,  they  are  so  vivid  in  his  imagination  that  he  has
great  trouble  to  banish  them.  Many  dreams  about  distant
journeys.  Frightful  fancies  immediately  after  going  to
sleep  ; he  starts,  and  exclaims.  Vexatious  dreams.  Con-
tinual loud  laughing  while  asleep.  He  dreams  of  tho


SILTCEA  TERRA.


231


things  he  had  done  or  heard  the  day  before,  but  confus-
edly. In  a dream,  which  is  a sort  of  somnambulism,  he
sees  very  vividly  distant  regions  which  he  had  never  seen
in  reality,  and  unknown  things  which  he  had  desired  to
have,  (a.  8 d ) While  asleep  he  acts  as  if  he  would  get
up.  She  gets  up  while  asleep,  climbs  over  chairs,  tables
and  a piano,  and  lies  down  again  without  waking.  He
dreams  a good  deal  at  night,  and  is  haunted  by  fancies,
rises,  walks  about  in  the  room,  without  knowing  for  a long
time  where  he  is.  He  dreams  that  he  is  attacked  with
epilepsy  and  that  his  head  is  drawn  to  one  side,  (a.  Id  d.)
He  dreams  half-waking  that  innumerable  spirits  are  about
to  seize  him  ; when  waking  he  was  unable  to  move  a limb,
and  he  lay  bathed  in  sweat  with  great  anguish  and  palpi-
tation of  the  heart;  afterwards  great  fearfulness,  (a.  12  d.)
He  dreams  that  he  is  pursued  by  a ghost,  (a.  13  d.)  He
dreams  that  he  is  obliged  to  die.  Nightmare  in  a state  of
half-waking,  with  great  anguish,  as  if  a smoky  beast
weighing  a hundred  weight  were  lying  upon  him,  so  that
he  was  not  able  to  stir  or  to  utter  a sound.  He  wakes  in
great  anguish  about  midnight,  was  unable  to  stir  in  spite
of  every  effort  to  do  so,  and  imagined  that  thieves  were
on  the  point  of  breaking  in  ; he  became  easy  when  rising,
but  the  anguish  returned  when  lying  down  again,  (a.  37
d.)  Disgusting  dreams.  He  dreams  less  than  usual.
When  waking  from  a dream  about  war  at  four  o’clock,
he  feels  a rheumatic  pressure  between  the  scapulas,  espe-
cially when  moving  the  left  arm.  He  dreams  of  marry-
ing a person.  Lascivious  dreams,  (5.  n.)  Lascivious
dreams  and  powerful  sexual  desire,  (a.  13  d.)  Lascivious
dreams  with  emission,  (2.  n.)  Lascivious  dream  which  is
very  disagreeable  to  her.  He  dreams  that  he  is  disturbed
in  the  act  of  enjoying  an  embrace;  on  waking  he  has  an
erection  and  sexual  fancies,  (a.  6 h.)  Sexual  ideas,  morn-
j ing  and  evening,  with  erections.  Emission  and  sweat  on
1 the  back.

Fever. — Spasmodic  chilliness,  in  the  evening  when  in
;l  bed,  he  shook,  (14  d.)  Violent  chilliness  in  the  evening,
t\  especially  in  the  shoulders.  Painful  pricking  behind  the
>1  left  breast,  during  the  chilliness,  in  the  night  and  in  the
b day-time.  Shuddering  for  half  an  hour,  frequently,  in  the


232


SILICEA  TERRA.


day-time,  followed  by  slight  heat,  mostly  about  the  bead
and  in  the  face.  Violent,  continual,  internal  chilliness,  for
several  days.  Fever  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down  ; a
violent  chilliness,  she  could  not  even  get  warm  in  bed,
which  gave  her  a pain  in  the  stomach,  (a.  16  h.)  Slight
chilliness  down  the  back,  with  icy  cold  hands,  afterwards
violent  heat  with  distension  of  the  abdomen.  Fever  in
the  evening;  heat  all  over,  with  thirst,  without  any  subse-
quent sweat.  Dry  heat  and  thirst,  for  several  evenings,  fol-
lowed by  colic  and  headache.  Fever  with  violent  heat
about  the  head,  dark  redness  of  the  face  and  thirst,  four
days  in  succession,  from  noon  till  evening  ; a headache
set  in  half  an  hour  before  the  heat.  Heat  in  the  face  and
lobule  for  many  evenings.  His  blood  is  easily  excited.
Fever  in  the  afternoon,  mere  heat,  with  horrid  thirst  and
very  short  breath.  Feverish  heat,  the  whole  night,  with
violent  thirst  and  panting  breathing.  The  whole  body  of
the  child  is  burning  hot  during  the  fever,  with  red,  bloated
countenance,  hard  glands,  of  the  size  of  peas,  around  the
neck  and  down  the  sides  of  the  shoulders,  with  distended
abdomen  and  continual  diarrhoea.  The  fever  and  ague
produced  by  Silicea,  is  characterised  by  little  sweat,
generally  sets  in  from  ten  in  the  morning  until  eight  in  the
evening,  and  from  midnight  until  early  in  the  morning.
During  the  apyrexia  the  children  are  obstinate,  and  they
cry  when  touched  or  spoken  to.  Exhalation  over  the
whole  body  every  night,  (the  first  nights.)  Profuse  sweat,
towards  morning,  every  night.  Profuse  sweat,  every
night,  with  want  of  appetite  and  debility,  as  if  he  were
threatened  with  consumption.  Nightly  sweat  on  the  chest.
Sweat  having  a strong  smell.  Morning-sweat.  Night -
sweat , especially  on  the  trunk.  Profuse,  general  night-
sweat.  General  exhalation,  at  night,  when  in  bed.  Sweat,
only  about  the  head,  trickling  down  the  face.  Profuse,
dripping  sweat  in  the  night,  especially  in  the  region  of  the
loins.


STANNUM.


233


STANNUM.

The  tin  which  is  used  for  homoeopathic  purposes  is  that
which  passes  under  the  name  of  tin-foil.

Physicians  have  almost  never  used  tin  as  a remedial
agent,  for  the  simple  reason  that  they  have  never  supposed
it  possessed  any  medicinal  properties.  The  Scotch  phy-
sician Alston  was  the  first  to  use  it  as  an  ingredient  in  a
domestic  prescription  against  tape-worm,  which  had  to  be
taken  in  large  quantities,  and  was  followed  by  a cathartic.
He  used  the  English  tin,  which  contains  about  one-twen-
tieth of  foreign  metallic  substances.  After  him,  tin-foil
was  used  in  the  place  of  tin.  The  tape-worm,  however,
was  never  killed  by  the  tin,  sometimes  stunned,  which
made  it  possible  for  the  cathartic  to  wash  it  away,  which
happened  very  seldom.  After  using  the  tin  frequently  the
tape-worm  seems  to  spread  more  widely  through  the  intes-
tines. Workers  in  tin  are  very  frequently  affected  with
taenia  solium.  Tin  palliates  its  unpleasant  movements  in
the  intestines,  but  this  palliating  effect  is  ultimately  injuri-
ous rather  than  useful.

Tfn  has  relieved  the  following  symptoms  : Oppressive
weight  in  the  forehead  ; colic  during  the  menses  ; pressure
and  stitches  in  the  left  hypochondrium  ; burning  pain  in
the  region  of  the  liver  ; excessive  irritability  of  the  nerves  ;
intolerable  uneasiness,  one  knows  not  what  to  do  with
one’s  self.

My  co-observers  are  : Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann,  Lang-
hammer,  Wislicenus,  Haynel.

Moral  Symptoms. — Sad,  hypochondriac  mood.  Inde-
scribable anguish  and  melancholy,  several  days.  Aversion
to  men,  dread  of  men.  Want  of  disposition  to  talk.  Takes
no  pleasure  in  anything,  without  being  ill-humored.  Dis-
couragement. Irritated,  with  heat  of  the  face  ; she  want-
ed to  do  all  sorts  of  things,  but  did  not  accomplish  any-
thing. Restless  and  absent,  no  perseverance  in  working.
Restlessness,  cannot  long  remain  at  the  same  place.  Very
busy,  but  does  not  accomplish  anything  ; he  is  always
thinking  of  something  else  that  he  ought  to  do.  He  did
nothing  according  to  his  desire.  Unable  to  think,  not  dis-


234


STANNUM*


posed  to  do  anything.  Dulness  of  mind,  indifference  to
tilings  around  him,  paleness  and  dimness  of  sight.  Out.  of
humor  the  whole  day,  not  in  the  open  air.  Dissatisfaction.
Apprehensive  of  the  future,  still,  taciturn.  Still  % ill-hum  n\
ha  does  not  like  to  answer , and  his  answers  are  short,  is
easily  put  out,  becomes  angry.  Quiet,  with  uncomforta-
bleness of  the  body,  ill-humor,  and  quickly-passing  sen-
sitiveness, (the  first  three  days.)  Vehement,  (4.  d.)  Vio-
lent, but  quickly-passing  anger.  Quiet,  good-hutnored.
Talkative.  Excessively  merry.

Head. — Dizziness  of  the  whole  head.  Obtusion  and
dulness  of  the  head,  as  if  catarrh  would  set  in,  with  sneez-
ing. Heaviness  and  obtusion  of  the  he  d,  worse  in  the
evening.  Heaviness  in  the  head , both  when  at  rest  and  in
motion , in  the  evening , for  two  hours , (a.  9 h.)  Stupefy-
ing vertigo,  only  when  walking  in  the  open  air;  he  stag-
gers as  if  he  were  on  the  point  of  falling.  Sudden  fit  of
vertigo,  when  silting  down.  Vertigo,  as  if  all  the  objects
were  too  far  distant.  Vertigo,  as  if  the  brain  were  turning  ;
he  loses  his  thoughts,  is  unable  to  read  on,  and  sits  on  his
chair  as  if  deprived  of  consciousness.  Headache,  almost
every  morning,  with  want  of  appetite,  nausea  and  ill-humor.
Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  from  within  out-
wards. Oppressive  heaviness,  with  feeling  of  emptiness
in  the  left  hemisphere  of  the  brain.  Painful  pressure
through  t lie  right  side  of  the  head.  Painful  pressure
through  the  right  temple,  almost  as  if  on  the  outer  side.
Pressure  in  the  left  lemple,  first  weak,  afterwards  increas-
ing and  then  decreasing  again,  as  if  the  forehead  were
being  pressed  in.  Pressure  from  the  middle  of  the  fore-
head to  the  centre  of  the  brain.  Pressure  in  the  forehead,
ten  pie  and  vertex,  diminishing  by  external  pressure.
Pressure  in  the  right  temple  when  lying  upon  it,  going  o(F
when  raising  one’s  self.  Pressure  in  the  forehead,  in-
creased by  bending  the  head  backward,  relieved  by  press-
ing upon  it.  Pressure  in  the  forehead.  Sudden  sharp
pressure  on  the  top  of  the  head,  with  sensation  as  if  the
hair  were  moved.  Dull  pressure  in  the  forehead,  from
within  outward.  Pressure  in  the  forehead  from  within,
with  drowsiness,  diminished  by  pressing  upon  the  part.
Pressing  through  the  frontal  eminences,  from  within.


STANNUM.


235


Stupefying  aching  pain  in  the  brain  over  the  eyebrows,
both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Dizzy  pressure  through
the  whole  head.  Painful  pressing  ol  the  brain  against  the
skull  and  the  occipital  bones,  in  the  evening,  even  after
going  to  bed.  Pain,  the  whole  day,  as  of  the  temples
being  crashed.  Pressure  from  without  inward  in  the  tem-
ples and  the  occiput.  Pain  as  if  the  brain  wrerc  distended
and  tight.  Pressing  together  in  the  occiput,  below'  the
vertex.  Sudden  constriction  and  pressing  in  the  whole
of  the  sinciput,  slightly  increasing  and  decreasing.  Con-
tractive pain  in  the  right  occiput.  Frequent  sensation  in
the  head  as  of  being  screws  ; with  occasional  slow  jerks
or  drawing  pressure  here  and  there.  Cramp-pain  in  the
head,  as  if  a bandage  were  lied  round  the  head  very
tightly.  Violent  jerks  through  the  fore-part  of  the  head,
alternating  with  dull  pressure.  Sudden  jerks,  with  pres-
sure, in  the  left  temple  and  left  side  of  the  forehead,  caus-
ing him  to  exclaim.  Pain  as  if  the  forehead  w'ere  crush-
ed. Boring  aching  pain  in  the  left,  temple,  the  whole  day.
Boring-aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  left  hemisphere  of
the  brain,  on  the  surface  thereof.  Boring  in  the  occipital
bones,  with  intensely  painful  heaviness.  Drawing  through
the  forehead  and  vertex,  with  a sensation  of  pressure.
Drawing  pressure  from  the  right  parietal  bone  to  the  orbit.
Drawing  pressure  in  the  upper  border  of  the  left,  orbit.
Drawing,  with  pressure,  in  one  temple  and  side  of  the
forehead,  causing  a gloomy  sensation.  Tearing  on  the
left  side  of  the  parietal  bone  and  forehead.  Pressure,
with  tearing,  in  the  right  half  of  the  head.  Pressure,  with
tearing,  in  the  right  half  of  the  forehead,  in  paroxysms,
more  violent  when  stooping.  Pressure,  witn  tearing,  in
the  left  occipital  bone.  Pressure,  with  tearing,  in  the  fore-
head. Drawdng  tearing,  as  w-ith  a jerk,  in  the  outer  parts
above  the  left,  eyebrows.  Long,  dull  stitch  in  the  left
frontal  eminence.  Stitching  headache,  in  the  forehead,
also  when  at  rest,  for  several  days;  stooping  produces  a
sensation  as  if  the  contents  of  the  head  would  issue
through  the  forehead.  Pulsative  stitching  in  the  temple,
with  he  it  in  the  head,  chilliness  in  the  body,  and  weak-
ness of  the  head,  depriving  him  almost  of  his  mind  ; ac-
companied with  slumber  and  loss  of  sense.  Beating  pain


236


STANNUM.


in  the  temples.  Heat  in  the  forehead,  can  be  felt  with
the  hand.  Burning  pain  in  half  of  the  sinciput,  like  fire,
also  in  the  nose  and  eyes,  the  parts  feeling  hot  on  the  out-
side, both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion  ; he  had  to  he  down  ;
accompanied  with  nausea  and  retching,  from  morning  till
night.  Painful  sensation,  when  shaking  the  head,  as  if
the  brain  were  loose  and  were  shaking  against  the  skull.
Humming  in  the  head  ; noise  caused  a groaning  vibration
to  be  felt,  in  the  head.  Sense  as  of  faintness  in  the  head,
and  sleepiness.  Pain  as  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  in
the  outer  parts  of  the  head.  Slinging  in  the  centre  of  the
forehead.  Sudden  dull  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the
sinciput.  Stitch-like  headache,  especially  in  the  left  side
of  the  forehead,  with  fluent  coryza.  Burning  stitches  in
the  top  of  the  scalp.  Burning  tension  in  the  fore-part  of
the  hairy  scalp,  close  above  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.

Eyes. — Pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  they*  had  been  rubbed
with  a w'oollen  cloth,  diminished  by  moving  the  lids.
Pressure  in  the  left  eye,  as  from  a stye.  Pressure  in  the
left  inner  canthus  as  from  a stye,  with  lachrymation.
Painful  pressure  in  the  right  inner  canthus.  Pressure  in
both  upper  eye  lids.  Pressure  in  the  eyes.  Sensation
behind  the  right  eye-lid,  as  if  a hard  body  were  lodged
there.  Sudden  jerks  in  the  upper  border  of  the  right
orbit,  and  in  other  parts,  with  intensely  painful  stupefaction
of  the  head.  Sudden  intensely  painful  dull  shocks  on  the
outer  side  of  the  upper  border  of  the  left  orbit.  Tensive
stitch  in  the  left  eye-ball,  most  violent  when  moving  it.
Burning  stitching  in  the  right  eye,  toward  the  external
canthus.  Slinging  burning  in  the  left  canthus.  Violent,
small,  burning  stitches  in  the  lids  of  the  right  eye,
more  toward  the  outer  canthus.  Burning  pain  in  the  left
lower  lid.  Burning  in  the  eyes.  Itching  in  the  inner
canthus.  Itching  in  the  left  eye-ball,  going  off  somewhat
by  rubbing.  Smarting  in  the  eyes  as  after  rubbing  them
with  a woollen  cloth.  Nightly  agglutination  of  the  eye-
lids, and  weakness  of  the  eyes  in  the  day-time.  A swell-
ing, containing  pus,  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye,
like  fistula  lachrymalis.  Contraction  of  the  eye-lids,  with
redness  of  the  white,  and  burning  sensation.  Twilchings
in  the  right  inner  canthus.  Winking  of  the  left  eye,  for


STANNUM*


237


a week.  Jerkings  in  the  eyes.  Protrusion  of  the  eyes,
and  painfulness  of  the  same  as  after  weeping..  Faint,
dim,  sunken  eyes,  (a.  2 d.)  The  pupils  become  first  con-
tracted, afterwards  dilated.  He  sees  a rainbow  at  candle-
light.

• Ear.-— Drawing  pain  in  the  outer  ear.  Frequent  draw-
ing in  the  left  ear.  Tearing  in  the  right  meatus.  Drawing
in  the  whole  of  the  right  ear,  internal  and  external,  worse
when  moving  the  lower  jaw.  Cramp-pain  in  the  whole
of  the  right  ear,  for  8 hours.  Pinching  tearing  in  the  car-
tilage of  the  left  lobule,  with  occasional  sensation  as  of  a
cool  wind  blowing  upon  it,  (a.  4 h.)  Drawing  stitch  in
the  upper  wing  of  the  left  ear.  Pressure  in  the  outer  part
of  the  mastoid  process.  Boring  pain  in  the  right  ear,  with
cold  feet.  Itching  in  the  left  ear.  Ulceration  of  the  ring-
hole  in  the  lobule.  Shrieking  in  the  ear  when  blowing  the
nose.  Tingling  in  the  left  ear.  Sensation  in  the  ear  as
if  blood  were  rushing  through  it.  Creaking  before  and  in
the  left  ear,  as  of  a gate,  in  the  evening.  Feeling  of  ob-
struction in  the  left  ear,  with  hardness  of  hearing,  dimin-
ished by  blowing  the  nose,  after  getting  up,  for  four  days.

Nose. — Feeling  of  heaviness  and  obstruction  in  the
upper  part  of  the  nasal  fossae.  Bleeding  of  the  nose  when
rising  in  the  morning.  Violent  bleeding  of  the  nose,  when
waking  in  the  morning.

Face. — Face  pale  and  sunken  ; the  features  looked  long
sickly.  Flushes  of  heat  in  the  face,  which  can  be  felt
internally  and  externally.  Cramp-like  pressure  in  the
muscles  on  the  left  malar  bone.  Stupefying  pain  in  the
face,  especially  in  the  forehead.  Contractive  pain  in  the
bones  of  the  face  and  teeth  of  the  right  side,  as  if  the  side
were  made  shorter  by  drawing.  Contraction  and  pressure
in  the  internal  side  of  the  right  cheek.  Drawing  pressure
in  the  facial  bones  of  the  right  side,  especially  the  malar
bone  and  the  orbit,  in  jerks.  Gnawing  pressure  on  the
left  side  of  the  face,  especially  the  malar  bone.  Tearing
extending  from  the  malar  bone  into  the  lower  jaw,  near  the
corner  of  the  mouth.  Burning-itching  stinging  in  the
malar  bones.  Burning  pain  in  the  right  cheek,  below  the
eye.  Burning  cramp-pain  in  the  left  cheek,  followed  by


233


STANNUM*


swelling  of  the  cheek,  in  the  evening;  when  drawing  the
face  to  one  side,  a pain  is  experienced  between  the  cheek
and  teeth  as  it  glass-splinters  had  been  stuck  in.  Pain
and  swelling  of  the  upper  jaw;  the  cheeks  are  red  and  a
stinging  is  lei t in  them.  Painful  swelling  of  the  left  cheek,
wiili  an  ulcer  on  the  teeth.  Itching  pimples  in  the  face,
feeling  sore  when  touching  them  or  washing  the  face.
Pimple  in  the  left  eye-brow,  with  burning  painter  se,  but
aching  when  touched.  Lancinating  pain  in  a small  spot
of  the  lower  lip.  Broad,  cutting  studies  in  the  fore-part
of  the  cl. in  A red  tumor  at  the  angle  of  the  right  lower

O ^ O

jaw,  with  drawing  pain  increased  by  contact,  for  8 days.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Painful  swelling  of  the  sub-
maxillary  glands,  (a.  8 h ) The  teeih  feel  elongated.
Jerking  pain  in  all  the  teeth,  shortly  after  a meal,  (cold  or
warm  ;)  heat  in  the  face,  relieved  only  in  the  open  air.
Looseness  of  the  teeth.  Tenacious  mucus  in  the  month.
Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth.  An  acid  saliva
flows  out  of  his  mouth,  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Yel-
Lavish  mucus  on  the  longue.  Talking  fatigues  him.

Phakynx,  (Esophagus. — Sore  throat  as  if  swollen,  with
feeling  of  dryness  and  a drawing  tensive  pain.  Pain  in
the  throat  as  if  sore  and  swollen,  independent  of  swallow-
ing ; after  hawking  up  much  mucus  the  voice  has  a higher
pilch  than  usual.  Cutting  in  the  pharynx,  as  with  knives,
when  swallowing.  Stinging  in  the  upper  part  of  the
fauces,  with  a parching  sensation,  between  the  acts  of
deglutition.  Feeling  of  dryness  and  stinging  in  the  throat,
in  the  region  of  the  right  tonsil,  somewhat  relieved  by
coughing  and  swallowing.  Scraping  below  the  pit  of  the
neck,  internally.  A good  deal  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  in
the  morning.  Scraping  in  the  throat.  Irritation  in  the
throat,  inducing  a good  deal  of  hawking,  followed  by  great
soreness.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Flat  taste  in  mouth.  Bitter-
sour  tas’e.  Every  thing,  except  water,  tastes  bitter;  no
bitter  taste  in  mouth  between  meals.  Sweetish  rising  in
the  throat.,  from  below  upwards.  Beer  has  a taste  of  herbs.
Flat,  and  sour-bitter  taste  of  the  beer.  Acrid  and  dry  taste
of  the  tobacco  when  smoking.  Bad  smell  from  the  mouth.


STANNUM.


239


Want  of  appetite,  food  having  its  natural  taste.  Great
appetite  and  hunger.  The  child  refuses  to  drink,  (the
mother  having  taken  tin.)  Increased  thirst.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Du  i grunting  in  the  abdomen,
when  die  food  lias  nearly  reached  the  orifice  of  the  sto-
mach. Frequent  hiccough.  Frequent,  empty  eructations.
Eructations  tasting  flat  and  with  much  saliva  m the  mouth.
Frequent  bitter  eructations,  after  a meal.  Sour  eructa-
tions, with  subsequent  roughness  of  the  throat,  when  walk-
ing in  the  ope.n  air.  Shaking  from  nausea,  several  times,
with  nauseating  fulness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Nausea
and  bitterness  in  the  mouth.  Nausea  after  a meal.
Retching  in  the  evening,  followed  by  sour,  and  afterwards
bitter  taste  inlhe  mouth,  (1.  d.)  Retching,  with  sensa-
tion as  of  spoiled  stomach,  (2.  3.  d.)  Bitter  bilious  vomit-
ing after  eating  some  soup.  Sour  vomiting.  Vomiting  of
undigested  food,  after  violent  retching,  (a.  2 h )

Stomach. — Haematemesis.  Haematcmcsis  was  cured
by  tin  as  by  a miracle,  (See  Alston,  Mat.  Med.  JM  p.  152.)
Pressure  at  the  stomach,  in  the  forenoon.  Pressure  and
. crowded  sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; when  touch-
ing it,  a pain  as  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  is  experi-
enced in  it.  Anxious  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
when  lying  down,  as  if  hemorrhage  would  set  in,  for  some
hours,  going  off  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Tensive  pres-
sure in  the  pit.  Dull  hard  pressure  under  the  last  carti-
lages of  the  ribs,  relieved  somewhat  by  pressing  upon  it.
Cutting  around  the  stomach.  Spasmodic  griping  in  the
stomach  and  around  the  umbilicus,  with  constant  nausea
and  with  anxious  rising  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
Long  fine  stitch  in  the  region  of  l he  xiphoid  cartilage,
shortly  after  a meal.  Sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
as  when  the  stomach  is  spoiled.  Repletion  and  distension
of  the  stomach,  with  hunger.  Sense  of  puffincss  under
the  skin  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  with  pinching  in
the  abdomen  when  walking.

Abdomen. — Quickly  passing  burning  below  the  dia-
phragm. Flysteric  and  hypochondriac  spasms  in  the  re-
gion of  the  diaphragm  and  abdomen.  Cutting  in  the  right
hypochondrium,more  violent  when  sitting  crooked.  Cramp-
pain,  with  pressure,  in  the  left  bypochondrium,  more  or


240


STANNUM.


less  violent.  Simple  pain  in  the  hypochondria,  followed
by  dull  shocks  from  the  left  to  the  right  side,  they  seem  to
become  more  violent  when  pressing  upon  the  right  side.
Sudden  painful  jerking  in  both  sides  below  the  true  ribs.
Pain  in  the  abdomen,  extending  into  the  stomach  and  in
both  sides  below  the  ribs,  when  pressing  with  the  hands
upon  the  umbilicus.  Pressure  in  different  parts  of  the
abdomen,  with  desire  for  stool.  Drawing  pressure  in  va-
rious parts  of  the  abdomen.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the
upper  part  of  the  liver.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the
liver.  Dull,  slow  pressure  on  the  right  side  of  and  near
the  umbilicus.  Burning  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen.  Tensive  pain  in  the  abdomen,  nearer  towards
the  small  of  the  back,  most  violent  when  stooping.  Re-
pletion in  the  abdomen  after  a meal.  Painful  distension
of  the  abdomen,  with  painful  sensitiveness  of  the  abdomi-
nal integuments  to  the  touch.  Puffiness  of  the  abdomen.
Cramp-pain  below  and  above  the  umbilicus,  going  off  soon
by  laying  one’s  self  across  a table,  without  emitting  flatu-
lence. Pinching  between  the  pit  and  umbilicus,  as  if
some  one  were  pinching  the  muscles  together.  Pinching
cutting  in  the  umbilical  region,  almost  the  whole  day.
Pinching  pain  close  above  the  left  os  ilium,  as  if  a tendon
had  become  strained,  when  stooping.  Pinching  in  the
umbilical  region,  as  from  a cold.  Pinching  movement  in
the  abdomen,  as  if  from  incarcerated  flatulence.  Trans-
verse cuttings  in  the  hypogastrium,  externally.  Drawing
cutting  in  the  abdomen,  near  the  right  ilium.  Digging-
up  in  the  abdomen,  before  every  stool.  Painful  digging-
up  in  the  umbilical  region  ; the  place  is  sore  to  the  touch.
Sore  feeling  in  the  whole  abdomen,  worse  when  touched.
Smarting  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Pain  of  the  abdomen,
when  touched,  as  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  with  ar-
rest of  breathing.  Stitching  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdo-
men, afterwards  drawing  in  the  right  shoulder  ; she  had  to
lie  down,  face  and  arms  being  covered  with  sweat,  after
which  she  became  chilly.  Several  violent  stitches  in  suc-
cession in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  especially  when
coughing  and  breathing.  Boring  stitch  in  the  left  side  of
the  epigastrium,  when  walking.  When  taking  an  inspi-
ration, a cutting  as  with  a knife  suddenly  darted  through


STANNUM.


241


the  abdomen  from  the  left  to  the  right  side,  making  her
start.  Dull  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,  from
without  inward.  Stinging  pain  in  the  hypogastrium.  Fine
stinging  in  the  symphisis  pubis,  on  the  left  side.  Burning
pain  in  the  abdomen.  Feeling  of  distension  in  the  abdomi-
nal muscles  of  the  right  side,  above  the  spinous  process  of
the  ilium.  Bruised  pain  under  the  left  ribs.  Feeling  of
emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  without  hunger  ; he  relished
his  food  and  ate  a good  deal ; eating  agreed  with  him,  the
body  felt  as  if  it  could  not  support  itself.  Feeling  of  emp-
tiness in  the  abdomen,  after  a meal.  Pressure  in  the  in-
guinal glands,  with  some  swelling  in  that  part.  Fine
pinching  in  the  left  groin.  Pricking  in  the  right  groin  as
if  he  had  strained  the  part  in  leaping  ; going  off  when
raising  himself.  Sensation  in  the  left  groin  as  if  hernia
would  protrude.  Gurgling  in  the  abdomen.  Loud  rum-
bling in  the  abdomen  after  every  meal.  Rumbling  in  the
abdomen,  as  from  emptiness.  Frequent  accumulation  of
flatulence  in  the  abdomen.  Incarceration  of  flatulence.
Creeping  sensation  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  if
he  had  taken  a cathartic.

Stool. — Retention  of  stool.  Frequent  desire  for  stool.
Unsuccessful  desire  for  stool.  Sudden  desire  for  stool,
the  stool  being  first  natural,  then  papescent,  lastly  thin,
with  shuddering  through  the  body  from  above  downward,
and  a drawing  extending  from  the  small  of  the  back  through
the  thighs  ; when  about  to  rise,  he  feels  all  the  time  as  if
he  had  not  yet  got  through.  Renewed  desire  for  stool,
shortly  after  stool.  Frequent  desire  for  stool,  passing
but  little,  and  sometimes  only  mucus.  Costivene^s  for
a time.  Dry  stool  in  lumps.  Dry  stool  of  large  size,
with  violent  cutting  pains.  Discharge  of  a single  hard
lump  with  pressing.  Difficult  expulsion  of  tight,  but
not  hard  stool,  as  if  the  bowels  had  not  strength  enough
to  expel  it,  (a.  24  h.)  Hard  stool,  which  felt  slippery
without  being  so.  Loose  stool  in  the  forenoon,  thin  in  the
afternoon.  Frequent  and  continuous  desire  as  if  diarrhoea
would  set  in,  in  the  evening,  with  pinching  and  painful
motion  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  caused  by  a cold,  and  with
shocks  in  the  left  side  as  from  a fetus,  with  distension  of
the  abdomen  ; afterwards  thin  stool  with  desire  remaining

11


242


STANNUM.


after  it,  and  colic  continuing  until  she  went  to  bed.  Stool
with  mucus  shaped  as  a worm.  Greenish,  scanty  stool.
Soreness  and  smarting  in  the  anus,  with  fine  stinging.
Burning  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver  afier  stool.  Dull
pressure  in  the  rectum  alter  stool.  Discharge  of  mucus
alter  stool.  Burning  at  the  anus,  between  and  immedi-
ately after  stool.  Aching  pain  in  the  rectum.  Itching
stitch  in  the  rectum.  Continual  itching  around  the  anus.
Little  blotch  on  the  lei i side  of  the  anus,  resembling  a
varix  and  sore  to  the  touch.  Corrosive  pain  round  t lie
anus,  when  walking  or  sitting.

U kin  ah  Y Organs. Retention  of  urine.  Desire  to

urinate,  as  if  the  bladder  were  full  ; the  urine  being  scanty,
fetid,  the  emissions  being  rare  and  painless.  Frequent
desire  to  urinate,  also  at  night,  for  three  days  ; after  this
lie  urinated  less  than  before  taking  the  drug.  After  mic-
turition, intensely  painful  pressure  in  the  neck  of  the  blad-
der and  along  the  urethra;  constant  sensation  as  if  urine
were  yet.  to  come  ; if  some  drops  do  come  the  pressure
becomes  much  worse.  Burning  in  the  forepart  of  die  ure-
thra, especially  when  urinating  ; he  had  a desire  every
minute  and  emitted  a good  deal  of  urine.  Vesicle  on  the
margin  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.  Soreness  of  the  tip
of  the  urethra.  Jerking  in  the  penis,  as  far  as  the  point  of
insertion  in  the  bladder,  as  if  an  emission  would  take  place.

Genital  Organs. — Burning  in  the  interior  of  the  geni-
1 al  organs,  like  a violent  desire  for  an  emission,  (a.  24  h.)
No  desire  or  power,  not  even  when  exciled,  (sec.  eff.  V)
Intolerable  voluptuous  feeling  in  the  genital  organs  and  in
the  \^iole  body,  terminating  in  emission,  (a.  40  h.)  Burn-
ing [>ain  in  the  glans,  and  shortly  after  desire  to  urinate.
Burning  stitch  in  ihc  glans.  Pricking  sensation  in  the

glans.  Erection,  immediately;  no  erection  whatsoever  the

- * •

three  days  following.  Emissions , without  any  dreams.
Prolapsus  vaginae  which  is  very  inconvenient  during  hard
stool.  Pressing  in  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  the  menses
would  make  their  appearance  ; worse  when  pressing  upon
the  parts.  The  menses  arc  more  profuse  than  usual,  (12.
d.)  Great  anguish  and  melancholy  l lie  week  previous  to
the  menses  ; they  cease  as  soon  as  the  menses  made  their
appearance.  Pain  in  the  region  of  the  malar  bone  pro-


STANNCM.


248


vious  to  the  menses,  when  touching  it ; during  the  menses
contusive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  malar  bone,  it  is  felt
even  when  moving  the  muscles  of  the  face.  Discharge  of
translucent  mucus  from  the  vagina.  Cessation  of  the  leu-
corrhoeal  discharge.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Frequent  sneezing.  Violent  dry-
coryza  ; can  breathe  only  through  the  right  nostril  ; the
nose  becomes  free  on  the  fourth  day.  Obstruction  of  the
left  nostril  ; it  is  swollen  externally,  red  and  painful  when
touched.  Violent  coryza,  (a.  4 d.)

Larynx,  Trachea  and  Chest.  — Rough  ihroat.  Hoarse-
ness ; weakness  and  emptiness  in  the  chest,  when  begin-
ning to  sing,  she  had  to  interrupt  herself  continually  and
to  breathe  ; the  hoarseness  was  sometimes  momentarily
relieved  by  a fit  of  cough.  Mucus  in  the  trachea,  in  the
forenoon,  easily  thrown  off  by  a slight  cough,  the  chest
feeling  very  weak  as  if  deadened  all  over,  with  faintness
of  the  whole  body  and  limbs,  in  which  a weak  feeling  is
moving  up  and  down  ; many  mornings  in  succession.  Ac-
cumulation of  mucus  in  the  chest,  with  rattling  breathing,
which  can  be  felt  internally,  and  heard  by  others.  Titil-
lating creeping  in  the  throat,  (larynx  ?)  with  a feeling  of
dryness,  obliging  one  to  cough.  Irritation  in  the  trachea,
during  an  inspiration,  as  if  from  mucus,  there  being  neither
mucus  nor  dry  cough  ; it  is  more  violently  felt  when  sit-
ting crooked  than  when  walking.  Short  cough  from  time
to  time,  as  if  from  weakness  of  the  chest,  with  hoarse,
weak  sound.  Short  and  hacking  cough,  three  short  fits.
Constant  desire  to  cough  as  if  owing  to  much  mucus  in
the  chest,  with  an  internal  feeling  of  panting  and  slight
rattling.  Constant  desire  to  cough,  from  a continual  con-
striction of  the  trachea.  Titillating  cough,  as  if  from  a
soreness  deep  in  the  trachea,  with  scratching  rising  up  into
the  throat.  Exhausting  fits  of  cough,  which  produced  a
briused  sort  of  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Oppression
of  the  chest  when  coughing.  Scraping  throat,  with  green-
ish expectoration  of  a disagreeably  sweetish  taste,  more
violent  in  the  evening  before  going  to  bed  ; hoarse  speech  ;
after  every  cough,  (with  irritation  in  the  lower  part  of  the
trachea,)  sore  feeling  in  the  chest  and  trachea.  Horrid
cough  with  expectoration  and  spitting  of  blood.  Yellow


244


STANNUM.


discharge  from  the  trachea,  having  a putrid  taste.  Expec-
toration having  a salt  taste.  Fit  of  asthma,  short  breath-
ing  and  anguish,  in  the  evening.  The  breathing  becomes
shorter  in  the  evening,  accompanied  with  anguish  ; he  is
obliged  to  breathe  hurriedly  for  a long  time  until  he
succeeds  in  drawing  deep  breath,  when  the  shortness
disappears.  Asthma  and  want  of  breathing , when  go-
going  up  stairs  and  when  performing  the  least  motion.
Asthma  as  if  the  clothes  were  too  tight ; he  has  to  open
them,  to  breathe  easily.  Oppressive  weight  in  the  upper
part  of  the  chest  ; he  is  frequently  obliged  to  take  deep
breath,  accompanied  with  a feeling  of  great  emptiness  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if
something  were  rising  into  the  throat  arresting  the  breath-
ing.  * Feeling  of  pleasant  lightness  when  taking  deep
breath,  frequently.  Feeling  as  if  the  chest  expanded,
when  at  rest  and  occasionally,  accompanied,  however,
with  a feeling  of  anxiety  as  in  palpitation  of  the  heart.
Short,  troublesome  breathing  from  weakness  of  the  respi-
ratory organs,  with  great  emptiness  of  the  chest,  but  with-
out want  of  breathing.  Oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if
contracted  internally,  with  sensation  as  if  the  inspired  air
were  very  dry.  Oppressive  clawing  in  the  chest,  when
sitting  ; increased  by  taking  breath.  Pressure  deep  in  the
chest,  as  of  a load.  Tension  and  pressure  across  the  up-
per part  of  the  chest,  in  the  morning  when  rising  from  the
bed.  Constriction  of  the  chest,  in  the  evening,  with  an-
guish. Contractive  pain  in  the  chest  under  the  right  arm  ;
becoming  pricking  when  moving  about.  Stitches  in  the
chest  and  the  shoulder-joint  when  taking  breath.  Violent
stitches  in  the  chest  and  sides,  hindering  breathing,  several
forenoons ; distension  of  the  abdomen  in  the  afternoon.
Tensive  stitch  in  the  sternum,  continuing  while  taking
breath.  A sudden  long  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
one  hand’s  breadth  below  the  axilla,  causing  one  to  start.
Sudden  sharp  cuttings  as  with  a knife,  in  the  left  side  of
the  chest.  Sharp,  piercing  prickings  on  the  clavicle.  Fre-
quent cuttings  through  the  chest  from  below  upward,  and
in  front  in  the  region  of  the  upper  ribs  from  within  out-
ward, independent  of  breathing.  Burning  stitches  in  the
left  side  of  the  chest,  more  violent  during  an  expiration,
when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Stitch,  resembling  a flea-


STANNUM.


245


bile,  in  the  last  true  rib  of  the  right,  and  the  false  rib  of  the
left  side.  Lancination  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when
walking  and  standing.  Cutting  pain  in  the  right  chest.
Clawing  cutting  in  the  light  ribs,  when  walking,  only  dur-
ing an  inspiration.  Pressure  in  the  chest,  below  the  right
nipple,  from  within  outward.  Aching  in  the  whole  chest,
especially  above  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  worse  during  an
inspiration.  Bruised  pain  in  the  chest , when  at  rest  and
in  motion.  Sore  pain  in  the  whole  chest , commencing  in
the  throat.  Digging-up  pain  in  the  chest  and  thence  de-
scending into  the  abdomen,  exciting  a desire  for  stool.
Drawing  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  united  cartilages  of
the  last  false  ribs.  Drawing,  from  the  clavicles  into  the
left  axilla.  Sudden  drawing  under  the  left  breast,  when
raising  one’s  self  in  the  bed,  followed  by  sharp  cuttings
extending  thence  to  the  clavicle,  in  the  direction  of  the
shoulder,  where  the  pain  remains  fixed  ; thence  it  moves
along  the  left  shoulder  into  the  abdomen,  made  worse  when
drawing  in  the  chest,  pressing  upon  the  part,  and  especially
during  an  inspiration  and  vomiturition  ; in  all  these  condi-
tions the  pain  is  felt  as  a painful  jerk.  Jactitation  of  the
muscles  of  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  near  the  left  axilla.
Violent  itching  of  the  nipple.

Back. — Violent  creeping  in  the  small  of  the  back.
Twitching  jerking  of  the  muscles  of  the  last  false  ribs.
Burning  pressure  in  the  small  of  the  back,  a little  to  the
right.  Painful  pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  back  above
the  hip,  from  above  downward.  Undulating  shock  in  the
back  above  the  left  ilium,  causing  him  to  start.  Stitching
pinching  in  the  back,  in  the  region  of  the  false  ribs.  Vio-
lent tearing  in  the  lumbar  vertebras,  extending  from  both
sides  to  the  lumbar  region,  more  violent  at  every  move-
ment of  the  trunk.  Dull  shocks  in  the  lumbar  region,
with  sensation  as  if  a coolness  were  blowing  upon  him.
Sharp,  jerking  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  back  and  at  the
same  time  in  the  left  thigh.  Burning  fine  pricking  in  a
small  spot  of  the  middle  of  the  back.  Fine  pricking
through  the  back  from  within  outward.  Digging-up
stitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the  back,  con-
tinuing while  taking  breath.  Lancination  in  the  left  side
of  the  back,  from  below  upward,  when  standing.  Draw-


240


STANNUM.


ing  pressure  in  the  spine,  below  and  between  the  scapulae,
more  violent  during  motion,  especially  when  turning  the
body.  When  lifting  a load  she  suddenly  felt  a sensation
between  the  scapulae  as  if  sprained,  more  on  the  let t side,
accompanied  with  violent  sharp  cuttings  when  making  the
least  motion,  taking  hreath'or  yawning;  when  bending
backward  she  feels  intolerable  pains.  Drawing  tearing  in
the  left  scapula,  partly  towards  the  back,  partly  towards
the  shoulder.  Slow,  intermittent  dull  stitches  between
the  scapulas,  towards  the  middle  of  the  spine.  Sharp  broad
stitches  in  1 he  spine,  between  the  scapulae,  from  within
outward.  Violent  burning  pricking  in  the  upper  part  of
the  scapula,  going  off  only  for  a short  while  by  rubbing.
Burning  pricking  in  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder.

Neck.. — Itching  prickings  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in
the  morning  when  in  bed.  Boring  dull  stitches  from  the
fauces  through  the  muscles  of  the  nape  of  the  neck.
Drawing  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  from  below  upward,  with
a feeling  of  stiffness,  she  was  not  able  to  move  her  head
easily.  Pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  when  bending  the
head  forward.  Sudden  intensely  painful  stitch  in  the
lower  part  of  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Weakness  of  the
muscles  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  as  if  she  were  not  able
to  support  her  head,  with  pain  when  moving  the  head.
Cracking  of  the  cervical  vertebrae,  which  can  be  even  heard
by  others,  when  shaking  the  head  quickly.  Red,  somewhat
elevated  spot  on  the  fore  part  of  the  neck,  with  a white
painless  pimple  in  the  middle.

Upper  Extremities. — Compressive  sensation  in  the
shoulder.  Tearing  in  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder.  Pres-
sure and  drawing,  as  of  a load,  in  the  top  of  the  left  shoul-
der, in  the  outer  parts  of  the  upper  arm,  and  likewise  in
the  deeper  muscles  of  the  fore-arm  from  the  elbow,  going
off  gradually  in  the  room.  Paralytic  tearing  in  and  below
the  right  shoulder-joint,  more  violent  during  motion.  Sud-
den, intensely  painful,  hard  knocks  on  the  right  shoulder.
Itching  prickings  in  and  below  the  axilla.  Paralytic  pain
as  if  sprained,  close  below  die  shoulder-joint,  only  when
at  rest ; going  off  only  for  a short  while  by  motion.
Weariness  in  the  arms  and  legs;  he  has  to  let  his  arms
bang  down.  Great  debility  in  arms  and  legs,  as  if  they


STANNUM.


247


had  lost  all  power,  and  as  if  the  legs  could  not  support  1 he
body.  Intensely  painiul  jerking  now  in  the  surface  of  the
arm,  now  in  that  of  the  hand,  now  m a linger,  resembling
a hard  blow.  Pain  in  the  arm-joints  as  if  sprained  ; she
was  not  able  to  bend  them  without  great  pain.  Arms  and
fingers  arc  almost  entirely  immoveable.  Paralytic  weak -
ness  and  oppressive  weight  of  the  arms , especially  tin
right  arm,  particularly  of  the  upper  arms  and  joints;  aggra-
vated by  every  motion,  and  sometimes  with  want  of  breath.
Paralytic  weakness  in  the  arms,  when  holding  a small
weight  for  a short  time  only.  The  arms  become  easily
fatigued  by  a slight  effort,  obliging  him  to  let.  the  things
which  he  holds  in  his  hands  drop.  Paralytic  tearing  in
the  left  arm,  especially  the  wrist-joint,  more  violent  during
motion.  Tearing  deep  in  the  left  arm,  especially  the  up-
per arm.  Drawing  in  the  left  deltoid  muscle,  as  from
weakness.  Transitory  drawing  from  the  elbow  towards
the  upper  arm.  Tearing  in  the  anterior  and  superior  por-
tion of  the  right  upper  arm.  Tearing,  with  pressure,  in
the  middle  of  the  right  upper  arm,  quickly  coming  and
going.  Tearing,  with  pressure,  in  the  middle  of  the  left
upper  arm,  from  before  backward  and  from  without  in-
ward. Tearing,  with  pressure  in  both  upper  arms,  in
paroxysms.  Jactitation  of  the  muscles  of  the  internal  side
of  the  left  upper  arm,  when  laying  the  arm  on  something;
going  off  by  changing  the  position  of  the  arm,  but  return-
ing when  the  arm  resumes  its  former  position.  Twilch-
ings  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm  above  the  elbow-
joint,  when  at  rest,  (a.  5 and  2H  h.)  Digging-up  stitch  in
the  right  deltoid  muscle.  Bruised  pain  in  the  lower  part
of  the  left  upper  arm.  Piercing  pain,  in  paroxysms,  in  the
left  humerus,  as  if  crushed  and  compressed,  when  at  rest
and  in  motion.  Tension  and  sore  feeling  in  the  tip  of  the
elbow,  especially  when  bending  the  arm.  Cramp-like
stiffness  in  the  right  fore-arm.  Paralytic  tearing  in  the
right  lower  arm.  Pressure  in  the  light  fore-arm,  from  be-
hind forward  and  from  within  outward.  Pain  as  if  sprain-
ed over  the  left  wrist,  in  the  region  of  the  styloid  process
of.  the  ulna.  Pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  left  wrist-joint.
Tearing  with  pressure  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  more  v j-
lent  during  motion.  Transitory  jerkings  in  the  dorsum  of


248


STANNUM.


the  left  hand,  above  the  joint.  Pinching  close  above  the
wrist-joint,  in  the  side  of  the  ulna.  Quick  drawing,  in
short  paroxysms,  from  the  ulnar  side  of  the  wrist-joint  to-
wards the  hand.  Cramp-pain  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left
hand,  between  the  index  and  middle-finger.  Cramp-like
contraction  of  the  palm  of  the  left  hand.  Jerking  tearing
in  the  hand,  coming  from  the  fingers.  Tearing  with  pres-
sure, at  intervals,  in  the  metacarpal  and  carpal  bones,  and
also  in  the  posterior  joints  of  the  fingers.  Burning  prick-
ing, with  pressure,  in  the  outer  border  of  the  metacarpal
bone  coming  from  the  left  little  finger.  Fine,  dull,  in-
tensely painful  shocks  in  the  upper  part  of  the  metacarpal
bone  of  the  left  index-finger  and  in  other  parts  of  the
hands,  as  if  a nerve,  which  had  been  put  upon  the  stretch,
were  touched  with  a little  hammer.  Weakness  and  tremb-
ling of  the  hands,  especially  when  laying  them  upon  the
table  and  writing,  which  gave  him  trouble.  Trembling
and  feeling  of  heat  in  the  left  hand.  Swelling  of  the
hands,  in  the  evening.  Burning  itching  in  the  dorsum  of
the  hand,  as  if  bit  by  mosquitoes,  not  to  be  removed  by
rubbing,  for  eight  hours.  Small,  red,  painless  spots  on
the  dorsa  of  both  hands.  Small  blotches  below  the  wrist ;
itching  through  the  day,  the  itching  being  aggravated  by
rubbing.  Chilblains  on  the  hand,  during  mild  weather.
Tearing,  with  pressure  in  the  posterior  joints  of  the  fingers
of  the  right  hand,  more  violent  during  motion.  Drawing
stitches  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  left  index-finger,  in
the  direction  of  the  tip.  Cramp  in  the  fingers,  they  remain
contracted  for  a long  while.  Cutting  in  the  ball  of  the  left
little  finger,  more  violent  when  bending  it  forward.  Prick-
ing in  the  tips  of  all  the  fingers.  Fine  prickings  in  the  tip
of  the  left  middle-finger.  Drawing  in  the  posterior  joint
of  the  left  thumb,  and  below  the  wrist.  Cramp-like  draw-
ing pain  in  the  left  middle-finger,  with  jerks  causing  the
finger  to  tremble.  Intense  jerking  pain  between  the  thumb
and  index-finger,  when  holding  the  pen  ; he  does  not  feel
anything  when  holding  the  pen  loose  or  ceasing  to  write,
but  the  jerking  soon  returns  and  continues  a long  while.
Tearing  m the  posterior  joint  of  the  index-finger,  gradu-
ally going  off  when  moving  the  hand.  Pain  of  the  whole
of  the  left  index-finger  as  if  sprained,  when  bending  it,


stannum.


249


Stretching  it,  or  when  at  rest,  frequently  recurring  for  five
days.  Painful  growing  of  the  nails  into  the  flesh.

Lower  Extremities.-— Continuous  itching  pricking  in
the  left  ham,  near  the  anus.  Jactitation  of  the  left  glutei
muscles.  Violent  pain  in  the  muscles  around  the  hip-
joint,  when  raising  the  thigh.  Transitory  dull  pressure  in
the  ossa  ischii,  when  sitting.  Pain  in  the  right  hip  as  if
sprained,  when  walking,  he  was  almost  obliged  to  limp  for
several  hours.  Drawing  in  the  left  hip.  Paralytic  pain
in  the  hip-joint  when  walking.  Pain  as  if  sprained  close
below  the  hip  joint,  in  the  thigh,  only  when  walking.  In-
quietude in  the  limbs,  lie  has  to  change  their  position  all
the  time  in  the  evening.  Paralytic  heaviness  and  weak-
ness in  the  limbs , especially  in  the  thighs  and  knee-joints  ;
le  is  scarcely  able  to  walk,  but  has  to  sit  and  lie  down.
Painful  weariness  of  the  lower  limbs  when  standing,  with
debility  and  staggering.  Bruised  pain  of  the  lower  limbs
when  going  up  stairs  ; when  going  down  stairs  they  feel
so  weak  and  powerless  that  he  is  in  danger  of  falling.
Weakness  of  the  right  limb,  especially  the  thigh,  appa-
rently the.  femur;  it  pained  him  when  standing,  he  had  to
rest  upon  the  left  limb.  Itching  pricking  in  the  upper
and  inner  side  of  the  thigh.  Stitch-like  pain  in  the  mus-
cles of  the  right  thigh,  only  when  standing.  Pricking  in
the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh.  Drawing  with  pressure,
on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh,  in  the  groin,  extending
from  the  os  ischium  to  the  posterior  side  of  the  thigh,
afterwards  from  the  hip  to  above  the  small  of  the  back
on  the  right  side ; with  occasional  grumbling  in  the
os  ischium.  Cutting  in  the  interior  of  the  left  thigh.
Pulsative  dull  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  inner  side  of
the  thigh.  Pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  thigh,  below  the
hip-joint,  when  walking.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  left
thigh,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Drawing  pres-
sure on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  thigh,  which  he  had  laid
across  the  other  when  sitting.  Pricking  itching  in  the
outer  side  of  the  thigh,  going  off  for  a time  only  by  rub-
bing, (a.  \ h.)  Itching  pimple  on  the  left  thigh.  Pres-
sure on  the  right  knee-joint.  Tensive  pain  in  the  bend  of
the  left  knee.  Stiffness  in  the  bend  of  the  right  knee.
Sudden  stiffness  of  the  knee,  she  can  only  bend  it  with

11*


250


stannum.


great  pain.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  bone,  from  the  knee
to  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  when  silting,  'hearing  with
pressure  in  1 lie  right  knee-joint,  in  front,  from  without
inward  and  below  ihe  patella,  'hearing  in  the  ligaments
ot  the  internal  side  of  the  left  knee.  Burning  scratching
in  the  outer  side  of  the  left  knee.  Dull  stitching  in  the
outer  side  of  the  right  knee,  only  when  standing;  going  off
again  when  moving  the  limb  and  when  sitting.  Fine,
painful  stitches  in  the  right  knee  and  bend  of  the  knee,
when  sitting.  Faintness  in  the  knee  joint,  he  is  scarcely
able  to  walk,  with  drowsiness.  Jerking  twitchings  below
the  patella.  Bruised  pain  in  the  bends  of  the  knees  and
calves  as  after  taking  a long  journey,  in  the  evening,  when  at
rest  and  in  motion.  Cold  knees  and  feet.  Drawing  tear-
ing  m the  leg,  when  sitting.  Cramp-like  tearing  in  the
right  leg,  when  walking.  Painful  drawing  in  the  outer
side  of  the  calf,  when  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Tension  in
the  left  leg.  Drawing,  extending  from  the  bend  of  the
light,  knee  to  the  calf.  Great  weariness  of  the  legs,  espe-
cially the  left,  extending  from  the  feet  upward  and  through
the  knees  with  a jerk,  especially  when  standing,  with
soreness  of  the  soles.  When  walking,  especially  when
walking  in  the  sun,  her  knees  threaten  to  bend,  with  faint-
ness of  the  whole  body  and  faint  sweat  in  the  face.  Pain-
ful *igid  stiffness  in  the  inner  side  of  the  left  calf  when
standing.  Violent  cramp  in  the  calf,  almost  the  whole
night.  Pressure  in  the  whole  of  the  right  calf.  Pressure
below  the  right  calf,  when  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Pinch-
ing in  the  upper  part  of  the  inner  muscles  of  the  calf.
Frequent  painful  heaviness  in  the  outer  muscles  of  the
left  calf,  when  walking.  Sensation  in  the  leg  as  if  a cord
had  been  tied  round  firmly.  Painful  feeling  of  a heavy
weight  in  the  left  leg  which  he  had  laid  across  the  other
when  sitting,  and  which  was  hanging  dowm.  Pulsative
pressure  in  the  right  tibia.  Yellow,  round  spots  on  the
left  leg,  for  two  days.  Small  swelling  on  the  tibia,  with  a
red  point  on  it  ; when  touching  that  point  a pain  is  felt  as
if  the  flesh  were  loose  from  the  bone.  Pain  of  the  feet
from  above  the  malleoli  down  to  the  soles,  when  sitting,
less  when  standing  or  walking.  Disagreeable  heat
in  the  feet,  which  can  scarcely  be  felt  by  the  hand.


STANNUM.


251


Violent  burning  in  the  feet  and  hands.  Flush  of  heat  in
the  feet.  Reddish  swelling  of  ihe  feet,  especially  around
ihe  ankles,  with  sensation  as  if  the  feet  were  tied  loo  fast.
Sudden  swelling  around  the  ankles,  in  the  evening.  Pain
under  the  ankles,  in  the  evening  when  lying  in  the  bed,
as  if  the  heel  were  torn  out.  Tearing,  with  jerks,  in  both
ankles  of  the  right  foot,  and  thence  into  the  toes  when  sit-
ting ; when  standing  the  pain  seems  less,  but  then  the
tearing  is  felt  from  the  toes  upward.  Creeping  in  ihe
feet,  as  after  a long  walk,  or  as  if  they  would  go  to  sieep,
gradually  rising  into  the  legs.  Itching  pricking  under  the
left  inner  and  outer  ankle.  Itching  in  the  dorsum  of  the
left  foot.  Tearing  with  pressure  in  the  right  heel.  Draw-
ing tearing  between  the  metatarsal  bones  of  the  last  two
toes.  When  treading  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  heel,
a dull  stitching  pressure  is  felt  as  far  as  the  calf,  only  when
walking ; disappearing  when  raising  the  foot.  Cramp-
pain  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  when  sitting.  Sharp
pressure  transversely  across  the  right  sole,  when  sitting.
Stitching  pinching,  alternately  in  various  parts  of  the  body.
Heavy  pressure  now  in  one,  now  in  another  bone.

General  Symptoms. — Heaviness  in  all  the  limbs,
faintness  in  the  chest  and  more  or  less  violent  fits  of
anxiety.  Bruised  pain  in  the  limbs,  and  especially  above
the  small  of  the  back.  Paralysis  of  the  left  arm  and  foot,
from  fright,  disappearing  in  the.  night.  Internal  heat  after
a walk  in  the  open  air,  especially  in  the  chest  and  abdo-
men, without  thirst.  Itching  burning  pricking  over  the
whole  body,  especially  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  trunk,
particularly  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  for  some  days.
Corrosive  itching  when  undressing,  over  the  whole  body,
he  was  obliged  to  scralch.  Fine  prickings  in  the  whole
left  side  of  the  body,  next  day  only  in  the  right.  Itching
eruption  over  the  whole  body.  Many  pains,  especially  the
drawing  pains  with  pressure,  commence  lightly,  increase
gradually  and  to  a very  high  degree,  and  decrease  again
as  slowly.  The  symptoms  seem  to  disappear  when  walk-
ing, they  return  immediately  when  at  rest;  the  lassitude
is  greatest  when  walking.  Causes  consumption.

We  a kness,  Fits. — Extreme  relaxation  of  body  and
mind ; lie  is  unable  to  attend  to  his  work  for  a long  time,


252


STANNUM.


has  to  lie  down  and  sleep.  Loss  of  strength,  as  if  his
lower  limbs  had  been  crushed.  Excessive  heaviness  ;
he  wants  to  sit  or  lie  down,  when  sitting  down  he  almost
falls  down  upon  his  chair,  he  has  not  strength  enough  to
sit  down  gradually.  Great  weariness  with  constant  in-
clination to  sit  down  ; he  feels  this  weariness  most  when
walking  slowly,  and  he  therefore  walks  fast  involuntarily.
He  feels  his  weariness  less  when  walking  fast,  but  so  much
more  afterwards.  Trembling  and  unsteady  in  the  whole
body  and  limbs  ; the  hand  trembles  more  when  laying  it
lightly  upon  something,  than  when  grasping  a thing  firmly.
Weariness  in  the  whole  body  for  7 days,  especially  after
going  up-stairs.  Great  weariness  in  the  day-time  ; he  has
to  lie  down,  but  he  is  unable  to  sleep  ; and,  if  he  does
sleep,  he  is  attacked  with  vertigo,  absence  of  mind,  and
dulness,  for  half  an  hour.  Faint  and  drowsy.  Great
faintness  after  going  down-stairs,  she  was  scarcely  able  to
breathe,  felt  nothing  when  going  up-stairs,  (Real  epilepsy.)

Sleep. — Stretching  of  the  arms  and  leg.  A good  deal
of  yawning  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  but  with  oppres-
sion, as  if  a hoop  were  around  the  chest.  Violent  desire
to  gape  ; nevertheless  he  was  not  able  to  gape  wide
enough  even  when  opening  the  mouth  ever  so  widely.
Drowsiness  after  a walk  in  the  open  air,  especially  when
hearing  music.  Drowsiness  in  the  evening  ; sleep  being
prevented  by  a constant  impatience  in  the  legs.  Frequent
starting  in  the  night,  when  asleep.  Impatience  in  the
whole  body,  after  waking  at  1 o’clock  in  the  night,  with
digging-up  in  the  tibiae.  Deep  sleep  for  several  nights.
(He  spoke  during  sleep  and  said  that  an  external  applica-
tion could  not  cure  an  internal  affection.)  The  child
moans  during  the  nightly  sleep,  prays  and  supplicates  in
a timid  manner.  Vivid  dreams.  Anxious  dreams,  of
quarrels,  neglected  business.  Confused,  vivid  dreams,
things  do  not  succeed  according  to  her  wishes,  she  talks
aloud,  tosses  about,  and,  when  waking,  finds  herself  sit-
ting up.  He  hears  a loud  report  in  a dream.  Pleasant
dream  of  earthly  magnificence  and  greatness.  Dream  full
of  cruelty.  Lascivious  dream  with  emission,  without  erec-
tion. Lascivious  dream  with  erection,  without  emission.
When  waking,  in  the  night,  he  lies  on  his  back,  with  the


stannum.


253


right  limb  stretched,  and  the  left  limb  drawn  up,  and  half
uncovered.  In  the  night,  after  waking,  undulating  draw-
ing jerks  deep  in  the  hand,  apparently  in  the  nerves,
he  could  have  exclaimed.  Drowsy  and  dizzy  in  the  morn-
ing, when  waking  from  a long  sleep,  as  if  he  had  not  slept
enough.  In  the  morning,  when  waking,  back  and  lower
limbs  are  painful  as  if  bruised  ; she  feels  tired  as  if  she
had  not  slept  enough  and  as  if  the  body  had  not  been
rested  long  enough ; she  feels  a little  better  a few  hours  after
rising.  While  dressing  herself,  she  is  suddenly  attacked
with  so  much  weakness  that  she  is  scarcely  able  to  breathe.
In  the  morning  when  waking,  he  feels  a pain  and  heat  in
the  head.

Fever. — Shuddering,  only  in  the  left  arm,  it  caused  the
arm  to  jerk.  Shuddering,  in  the  evening,  only  in  the  left
foot,  up  to  half  the  thigh.  Shuddering,  at  10  o’clock  in
the  forenoon,  several  days,  with  coldness  of  the  hands,
deadness  of  the  fingers  and  insensibility  in  the  tips  of  the
fingers.  Slight  feeling  of  coldness  and  moderate  shudder-
ing, with  goose-flesh  on  the  arms  and  continued  chattering
of  the  teeth,  resembling  a convulsion  of  the  masseter  mus-
cles. Chilliness  over  the  whole  body , for  half  an  hour.
Quickly  passing  chilliness,  along  the  back  especially.
Feeling  of  heat,  especially  internally.  Great  heat  in  the
head,  with  hot  forehead,  sometimes  with  redness  of  the
face,  accompanied  with  a general,  but  slight  heat  of  the
whole  body,  worse  in  the  evening,  with  much  thirst,  five
evenings  in  succession,  (a.  5 d.)  Feeling  of  heat  over  the
whole  body,  especially  on  the  thighs  and  the  back.  Violent
heat  over  the  whole  body,  especially  the  chest  and
back,  with  a feeling  as  of  hot  sweat  trickling  down,  with-
out any  heat  being  felt  by  the  hand.  He  is  now  and  then
attacked  with  anxious  heat,  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.
Anxious  heat  and  sweat  set  in  all  the  time,  even  when
making  the  least  motion.  Hot  sweat  over  the  whole  body
and  complete  exhaustion,  even  after  slight  exercise.  Heat
and  sweat  over  the  whole  body,  (from  4 to  5 in  the  after-
noon,) afterwards  a chilliness  ; thirst  during  and  after  the
heat,  returning  at  the  same  hour  for  several  afternoons.
Profuse  night-sweat,  for  two  nights,  (a.  4S  h.)  Profuse


2:4


SULPHUR*


sweat  every  morning  after  4 o’clock.  Morning-sweat,
mosily  in  the  neck,  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  on  the
forehead.


SULPHUR.

The  flowers  of  sulphur  are  used  for  homoeopathic  pur-
poses ; they  arc  washed  with  alcoho',  to  remove  the  acid
which  may  perhaps  he  mixed  with  them.

Even  as  early  as  2000  years  ago  sulphur  had  been  used
as  the  most  powerful  specific  against  the  itch,  without  any
one  ever  suspecting  that  it  cured  the  itch  on  account  of
sulphur  being  homoeopathic  to  this  disease.  The  itch,
with  which  the  workers  in  wool  are  so  much  affected,
causes  an  intoloably  agreeable , tingling- ifch ing  gnawing
as  of  vermin  ; others  designate  it  as  an  intolerably  voluptu-
ous titillating  itching,  ceasing  as  soon  as  the  parts  are
scratched  and  commencing  to  burn,  which  burning  contin-
ues after  the  scratching.  tSulphur  frequently  produces,  in
healthy  persons  burning-itching  pimples  and  vesicles  re-
sembling the  itch  vesicles,  and  especially  itching  in  the
joints,  and  in  the  night.  This  specific,  great  power  of
sulphur  to  cure  the  itch,  has  been  abused  heretofore  by
repelling  the  itch  from  the  skin  by  means  of  external  appli-
cations of  sulphur,  whereas  the  internal  itch-disease  not
only  remained  uncured,  but  became  transformed  into  a
host  of  secondary  ailments,  owing  to  the  eruption  which
was  an  external  vicarious  substitute  for  the  internal  dis-
ease, having  been  repelled;  in  a similar  manner  syphilis
does  not  break  out  till  the  chancre  has  been  violently  sup-
pressed by  local  treatment.

Some  physicians  gave  sulphur  both  externally  and  inter-
nally ; the  ointment  however  had  already  repelled  the
eruption,  and  an  acute  or  a chronic  disease  is  the  unavoid-
able consequence  of  such  a retrocession.  Besides  the  sul-
phur used  by  alloeopathic  physicians  is  crude  sulphur,  and
is  given  in  doses  large  enough  to  purge  ; such  doses  can
never  remove  the  itch,  nor  have  they  alone  ever  done  so.


SULPHUR.


255


If  the  itch  has  been  cured  by  drinking  mineral  water,  this
can  only  have  taken  place  in  a manner  similar  to  that  pur-
sued by  the  homoeopathic  practitioner.  The  sulphur  con-
tained in  that  water  is  refined  by  nature  in  the  depths  of
the  earth,  and  its  medicinal  virtues  are  developed  in  a
similar  mode  as  the  homoeopath  refines  it  by  artificial  pro-
cesses.

Sulphur  which  had  not  been  carried  up  to  very  high
degrees  of  pole  itizalion,  has  never  cured  the  itch  with
which  the  workers  in  wool  are  frequently  affected.  This
itch  is  cured  the  more  safely  and  rapidly,  the  higher  the
potencies  which  were  used  for  that  purpose.

I now  prepare  sulphur  as  all  other  dry  substances,  by
trituration.  The  tincture  of  sulphur,  prepared  by  alcohol,
only  contains  some  of  the  curative  principles  of  sulphur,
but  not  all  its  ingredients.

Sulphur  has  relieved  the  following  affections  : Irrita-
bility ; ill-humor  and  despondency;  tendency  to  start;
timorousness;  weeping  mood  ; out  of  humor;  she  is  dis-
consolate about  such  of  her  actions  as  appear  to  her
wrong;  religious  fixed  ideas;  attacks  of  anxiety  ; anxiety
obliging  one  to  open  one’s  clothes  and  to  walk  into  the  open
air  ; vehemence  ; dulness  of  the  head  and  heavy  flow  of
ideas ; weak  memory  ; frequent  tendency  to  vertigo  ;
heaviness  of  the  head,  and  loss  of  sense  from  stooping;
vertigo  after  a meal  ; congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  with
flushes  of  heat ; nightly  headache  when  making  the  slight-
est movement  in  the  bed  ; heaviness  in  the  head  ; heavi-
ness in  the  occiput ; drawing  headache  every  day,  as  if
the  skull  would  burst  ; stitching  headache;  stitching  and
buzzing  headache  ; beating  headache  in  the  vertex  ; beat-
ing, bubbling  headache  ; creeping,  humming  and  roaring
in  the  head  ; coldness  about  the  head  ; cold  spot  on  the
iiead  ; closing  of  the  eyelids  in  the  morning  ; long-sighted-
ness ; gauze  before  the  eyes  ; short-sightedness  ; drawing
pain  in  the  ears  ; closing  of  the  orifice  of  the  ears  when
eating  ; dull  hearing  ; roaring  and  noise  before  the  ears  ;
humming  and  roaring  in  the  ears  ; dryness  in  the  nose  ;
obstruction  of  one  nostril  ; inflamed  swelling  of  the  tip  of
the  nose  ; blowing  blood  from  the  nose  ; bleeding  of  the
nose ; pale,  sickly  complexion  ; rough  skin  in  the  face  ;


256


SULPHUR*


heat  in  the  face  ; hepatic  spot  on  the  upper  lip  ; toothache
in  the  evening  ; toothache  as  if  the  teeth  were  loose  and
the  gums  detached  ; swelling  of  the  gums  with  beating
pain  ; sore  throat  as  if  swollen  and  impeding  deglutition;
chronic  sensation  as  if  a plug  were  lodged  in  the  pharynx
and  throat  ; want  of  taste  of  the  food  ; too  strong  an  appe-
tite ; putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  early  in  1 he  morning  ; sour
taste  in  the  mouth  ; aversion  to  greasy  food  ; aversion  to
sweet  or  sour  things  ; aversion  to-brown  bread  ; aversion  to
wine  ; canine  hunger  ; oppression  across  the  chest  after
a slight  meal,  as  if  oppressed  by  a load  ; burning-sour
eructations  ; bitter  eructations  ; unsuccessful  eructations  ;
fetid  eructations,  in  the  night  when  asleep  ; regurgitation
of  food  and  drink  ; the  food  rises  into  the  throat  ; qualm-
ishness before  a meal  ; nausea  after  a meal ; morning-
nausea  ; waterbrash ; contractive  clawing  pain  in  the
stomach,  shortly  after  a meal ; digging-up  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach  ; stitches  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  ; prick-
ing in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen , when  walking  ; prick-
ing in  the  left  side  of  the  umbilicus  when  walking  ; stitches
in  the  abdomen  ; pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  as
if  something  were  torn  out ; contractive  pain  below  the
umbilicus  ; chronic  pressure  in  the  epigastrium  ; aching
pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  unto  crying,  with
constipation  from  incarceration  of  flatulence  ; colic  after
drinking  ; abdomen  painful  to  the  touch  ; pain  of  the  ab-
dominal muscles,  in  the  morning,  as  if  too  short ; incar-
ceration of  flatulence ; loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  ;
hard  stool  ; stool  every  two  or  three  days  ; involuntary
expulsion  of  feces  during  micturition  ; prolapsus  recti
during  difficult  stool ; stinging  in  the  anus  during  stool  ;
itching  of  the  anus  ; pressure  upon  the  bladder ; wetting
the  bed  in  the  night ; weak  sexual  powers ; too  rapid
emission  of  semen  during  an  embrace  ; fetid  sweat  about
the  sexual  organs  ; itching  and  burning  of  the  pudendum  ;
too  early  menses;  little  color  to  the  menstrual  blood;
pressing  upon  the  pudendum  ; itching  of  the  pudendum,
before  the  menses ; headache  before  the  menses  ; leucor-
rhoea.

Coryza  ; dry  coryza  ; violent  fluent  coryza  ; roughness
of  the  throat ; creeping  in  the  larynx,  exciting  cough  ;


SULPHUR


25?


nightly  cough  ; continued  feverish  cough  with  expectora-
tion of  blood  and  pricking  in  the  chest  ; difficulty  of  breath-
ing ; asthma  with  wheezing  and  slight  rattling  in  the
chest  and  visible  palpitation  of  the  heart  ; nightly  suffoca-
tive asthma  ; fulness  in  the  chest ; heaviness  in  the  chest,
in  the  morning;  weariness  of  the  chest  from  singing;
stitches  in  the  sternum  ; stitches  through  the  chest  as  far
as  the  left  scapula  ; burning  in  the  chest  from  below  up-
ward ; pressure  in  the  sternum  ; itching  of  the  nipples  ;
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ; creaking  in  the  small  of
the  back  ; pain  in  the  back  after  performing  some  manual
labor ; drawing  in  the  hack  ; tension  in  the  nape  of  the
neck  ; jerking  in  the  shoulder-joint ; drawing  in  the  elbow-
wrist  and  finger-joints  ; swelling  of  the  arms  ; sweat  of
the  palms  of  the  hands  ; trembling  of  the  hands,  when
doing  fine  work  ; deadness  of  some  fingers  ; hardened
skin  of  some  parts  of  the  fingers  ; creeping  in  the  tips
of  the  fingers  and  toes  ; red  spots  on  the  lower  limbs  ;
stitches  in  the  thigh  when  walking  fast ; heaviness  of  the
lower  limbs;  coldness  of  the  thighs,  with  sweat  on  the
legs,  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed  ; weakness  of  the  knees
and  arms  ; creeping  in  the  calves  and  arms  ; pain  in  the
tarsal  joint  as  if  sprained  ; stiffness  in  the  tarsal  joint ;
sweaty  feet;  uneasiness  in  the  feet;  erysipelas  on  the
leg  ; cold  feet ; cold  and  stiff  toes  ; cold  feet  and  hands  ;
corrosive  blotches  on  the  toes  ; chilblains  on  the  feet ;
sweaty  feet ; single  jerks  of  the  limbs,  when  sitting  or
lying  down  ; drawing  pain  in  the  knee  and  the  other  joints  ;
nettle-rash;  itching  of  the  whole  body;  yellow  spots  on
the  body  , ecchymosis  from  a moderate  blow  ; sensitive-
ness to  air  and  wind  ; flushes  of  heat ; the  limbs  go  to
sleep  ; pricking  pains  ; internal  trembling  ; jactitation  of
the  muscles  ; strains  ; fainting  fits  and  spasms  ; stooping
with  the  head  when  walking  ; fatigue  from  talking  ; drow-
siness in  the  day-time  ; too  long  night-sleep  ; sensation  as
if  one  had  not  slept  long  enough  in  the  morning  ; unre-
freshing sleep  ; drowsiness  after  dinner  ; nightly  colic  ;
jerkings  during  sleep ; starting  during  sleep  ; sleepless-
ness ; light  sleep  ; sleeplessness  from  tingling  in  the  calves
and  feet ; fanciful , anxious  dreams ; frightful,  uneasy
dreams  and  talking  during  sleep  ; in  the  morning  when


258


SULPHUR.


waking  lie  imagines  he  secs  persons  who  are  not  present;
thirst  in  the  night. ; sweat,  day  a*nd  night;  night-sweat;
sour  sweat,  every  night  ; morning-sweat ; profuse  sweat
when  working;  chilliness.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Fr.  Hahnemann  and  Ng.

Moral  Symptoms. Despondency . Sadness.  Fre-
quently during  the  day  she  feels  quite  unhappy,  without
knowing  whv,  she  wishes  to  die.  Moaning  and  lamenta-
lions,  day  and  night,  with  much  thirst  and  slight  appetite,
although  she  swallows  her  food  hastily.  Sad  about  her
disease.  Hypochondriac  sadness,  (the  first  week.)  Sad-
ness t he  whole  day.  Apprehensive  of  future  misfortunes.
Great  anguish,  in  the  evening  alter  lying  down,  she  is  un-
able to  go  to  sleep.  Anxiousness,  (2.  d.)  Anxiety,  as  if
he  had  to  lose  his  life.  Inclines  to  start.  Starts  violently,
even  when  hearing  his  name  called.  He  starts  in  the  af-
ternoon when  wide  awake,  and  a cold  thrill  rushes  through
his  body.  Great  disposition  to  weep,  without  any  appa-
rent cause.  Exceedingly  sensitive.  Inclines  to  weep.
Now  inclines  to  weep,  now  to  laugh.  During  the  nightly
cough  the  boy  weeps  for  a long  while  and  is  very  restless.
She  imagines  that  she  is  giving  wrong  things  to  the  peo-
ple, causing  their  death.  She  fears  for  others,  with  anxi-
ety, (in  a few  h.)  Anxiety  with  heat  in  the  head  and  cold
feet,  he  knows  not  what  to  do  ; he  forgets  every  moment
what  he  was  about  to  do.  Involuntary  haste  in  seizing
something.  Uneasiness  and  hurriedness  in  the  day-time  ;
he  could  not  restrain  himself.  She  has  no  rest  anywhere,
neither  day  nor  night.  He  feels  a great  desire  that  his
mind  should  be  easy,  it  is  constantly  in  a state  of  agita-
tion. Great  absence  of  mind  ; he  is  unable  to  chain  his
attention  to  the  object  before  him,  and  does  his  business
very  awkwardly.  Slow,  irresolute.  Excitement  with  in-
clination to  fritter  away  one’s  time,  almost  as  after  taking
coffee.  He  imagines  he  becomes  thin.  Low-spirited,
out  of  humor,  inclining  to  weep,  especially  morning
and  evening.  Excessively  out  of  humor;  nothing  satis-
fies her,  (a.  2 h.)  He  gets  angry  about  every  thing,  is
offended  at  every  little  remark,  thinks  he  ought  to  defend
himself,  gets  vehement.  Out  of  humor , gloomy  in  the
head,  as  when  a catarrh  sets  in.  She  was  angry  at  her-


SULPHUR.


259


self.  Irritated  and  taciturn.  Slowness  of  mind  and
body  during  the  day , and  not  disposed,  to  any  kind  of  la-
bor, (a.  7 d.)  She  becomes  impalient  at  every  tiling  she
undertakes.  He  has  no  pleasure  in  anything.  The  slight-
est occupation  is  repulsive  to  him.  He  sits  for  hours  im-
moveable and  lazv,  although  he  has  many  things  to  attend
to.  He  has  no  disposition  for  anything  in  the  evening,  be
it  business,  enjoyment,  conversation,  exercise  ;Hie  feels
very  uncomfortable,  and  he  knows  not  what  to  do  with
himself.  So  obstinate  and  peevish  that  he  does  not  an-
swer any  question  ; lie  does  not  want  any  one  to  come  near
him,  and  cannot  get  fast  enough  what  he  wants.  Impetu-
ous and  peevish.  She  is  carried  away  by  internal  discon-
tent does  not  do  anything  to  her  satisfaction,  is  ■obstinate
and  inflexible,  without  knowing  why*  Irritated  mood,  as
if  he  had  been  offended.  Quarrelsome  mood,  and  vexed
about  every  thing.  When  walking  in  the  open  air,  she
becomes  suddenly  sad  ; she  hak  nothing  but  anxious,  vex-
ed, desponding  thoughts,  that  shercamiot  get  rid  of  p this
makes  her  apprehensive  and  vexes  her  unto  tears.  She
thinks  of  a great  many  past  events  which  had  wounded
her  feelings,  (also  of  joyous  things  and  melodies  ;)  they
crowd  upon  her  one  after  the  other,  she  cannot  get  rid  of
them,  in  day-fime,  when  not  doing  anything,  but  worst  in
the  eveningwvvhen  in  bed,  when  they  hinder  sleep,  (a.  4 h.)
While  thinking  of  indifferent  things,  she  calls  up  in  her
mind  disagreeable,  offensive  occurrences  of  the  past,  add-
ing more  and  more  disagreeable  recollections  until  she  is
unable  to*  get  rid  of  them  ; accompanied  with  much  cour-
age, which  induces  her  to  takO  bold  resolutions.  Great
inclination  to  philosophical  and  religious  speculations.  She
imagines  she  has  beautiful  dresses,  looks  upon  old  rags  as
beautiful  dresses,  takes  a coat  for  a vest,  a cap  for  a bon-
net. Mania  ; she  spoils  her  things,  throws  them  away,
imagining  that  she  has  every  thing  in  abundance,  and
dwindling  down  to  a skeleton*  She  says  absurd  things
day  and  night.  Extremely  forgetful,  especially  of  proper
names.  She  forgets  what  she  was  just  saying.  So  for-
getful that  she  had  but  a confused  recollection  of  the  things
which  had  just  happened.  Dulness  of  sense,  he  is  not
collected*  is  embarrassed,  avoids  the  intercourse  of  others.


260


SULPHUR.


If  some  one  talks  to  him,  he  wakes  as  from  a dream  j he
looks  like  an  idiot,  and  had  to  make  an  effort,  to  compre-
hend and  answer  correctly.  Words  and  phrases  which
he  had  heard,  pass  involuntarily  through  his  head.  Sen-
sation as  of  a fog  being  in  his  head,  and  dizziness  which
makes  him  sad  ; vague  ideas  with  irresoluteness.  She
ran  about  the  room  for  five  minutes  without  knowing  where
she  was.  She  was  unable  to  connect  two  ideas  and  was
like  imbecile.  •

Head. — Sensation  in  the  head  as  if  she  had  not  slept
enough.  Obtusion  of  the  head , in  the  morning,  and  op-
pression of  the  forehead  until  noon.  Obtusion  of  the  head,
in  the  evening.  Obtusion  of  the  head  after  a walk  in  the
open  air.  Great  dulness  and  gloominess.  Dizziness  with
stitches  in  the  head.  Dulness  of  the  head,  as  if  from  con-
gestion of  blood  to  the  head,  especially  when  going  up
stairs.  Dizziness,  a sort  of  humming  and  buzzing  through
the  forehead,  when  walking  fast  or  when  moving  the  head
fast.  Reeling  sensation  in  the  head.  Reeling  sensation,
stupefaction  and  great  faintness,  in  the  forenoon  at  eleven
o’clock  ; she  had  to  lie  down,  and  lay  until  three  o’clock
in  a quiet  slumber,  in  which  she  heard  everything  that  was
said.  Weakness  in  the  head  like  a sort  of  stupefaction,
when  walking  in  the  open  air,  wilh  gloomy,  disagreeable
ideas,  for  several  minutes,  more  or  less  weak.  Stupefac-
tion of  the  head,  she  imagined  she  had  lost  her  senses.
Vertigo  when  sitting;  staggering  when  rising.  Vertigo
in  the  evening,  after  having  been  lying  in  bed  for  a quarter
of  an  hour,  as  if  he  would  faint  and  as  if  every  thing  in
his  head  were  turning;  two  evenings  in  succession.  Ver-
tigo when  lying  on  her  back  in  the  night.  Vertigo  in  the
morning , with  some  bleeding  at  the  nose.  Vertigo  and
weakness,  in  the  morning  when  rising,  unto  falling.  Vio-
lent vertigo  in  the  morning  when  rising  ; whenever  he
attempted  to  stand  he  fell  back  upon  the  bed,  which  lasted
about  half  an  hour,  (10.  d ) Short  vertigo,  as  if  he  would
fall  to  one  side.  Vertigo  when  walking,  a sort  of  reeling.
Vertigo,  inducing  a tendency  to  fall  forward,  when  sud-
denly rising  from  one’s  seat.  Vertigo  when  walking,  a
sort  of  cloudiness  before  the  eyes,  a staggering  to  the  left
side,  for  some  minutes,  (3.  d.)  Vertigo  when  stooping.


SL’LPIIUR.


261


Vertigo  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (after  supper  ;)  she
was  not  allowed  to  stoop,  to  look  down,  and  had  to  hold
on  to  something  in  order  not  to  fall.  Vertigo  for  eight
minutes,  when  ascending  an  elevation  ; he  was  unable  to
tread  firmly,  the  senses  being  clouded,  (a.  4 d.)  Vertigo
when  walking,  and  anxiety  when  looking  down  ; her  eyes
swim  immediately.  Vertigo,  when  crossing  a river,  she
came  near  falling  and  all  her  limbs  felt  paralysed.  Vertigo
in  the  evening,  when  standing,  with  rush  of  blood  to  the
heart.  Vertigo  with  inclination  to  vomit.  Headache  with
nausea.  Headache  as  if  from  incarceration  of  flatulence.
Headache  every  morning,  over  her  eyes,  as  if  from  dry
coryza  ; he  sneezes  continually.  Headache,  worse  in  the
open  air  than  in  a room.  Headache,  her  eyelids  are  drawn
together.  Headache  only  when  going  up  stairs.  Violent
headache  in  the  vertex,  for  twelve  hours,  returning  every
morning  like  a fever.  Pain  in  the  vertex,  when  chewing,
coughing  or  blowing  the  nose.  Violent  pain  in  the  centre
of  the  head,  from  coughing  and  sneezing.  A good  deal  of
headache,  especially  when  stooping.  Every  step  he  makes
affects  his  head  painfully.  Headache  in  the  occiput,  from
noon  ; a sort  of  stupefying  groaning  was  felt  in  the  occi-
put when  treading  ; she  had  to  sit  quietly  for  four  hours.
Headache  in  the  vertex,  as  if  pressure  were  made  on  the
brain,  (9.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  front  part  of  the  head,  as
after  nightly  revelling  ; in  a few  days  the  pain  is  felt  as  a
glowing  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  head  and  in  the
teeth,  aggravated  by  touching  the  parts  with  cold  wa-
ter. Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  mostly  in  the  fore-
noon. Pressure  in  the  head , in  the  morning , immedi-
ately after  rising.  Aching  in  the  head  ; every  step  affects
his  forehead  painfully,  with  sweat  on  the  forehead.  Head-
ache, generally  on  the  top  of  the  head,  as  if  the  eyes  were
being  pressed  down.  Aching  pain  over  the  left  eye,  in  the
afternoon.  Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  more  violent
during  motion.  Pressure  in  the  head,  from  one  temple
to  the  other,  in  the  morning  after  rising.  Sharp  painful
pressure  below  the  left  parietal  bone,  immediately  after
supper.  Pain  in  the  whole  head,  as  if  it  had  been  pressed
from  without,  for  instance,  by  a tight  hat.  Oppressive
headache  in  the  room,  when  the  head  is  covered  with  a


202


SULPHUR.


tightly  fill  ins:  hat;  the  pain  goes  off  when  uncovering  the
head.  Pressure  in  the  head,  ev'ery  other  morning,  at  8 or
9 o’clock  in  ihe  morning,  and  continuing  until  bed-time.
Violent  pressure  in  the  forehead.  Pressure  in  the  temples
and  tightness  in  the  brain,  when  reflecting  or  doing  some
other  mental  labor.  Painful  pressure  from  time  to  time  from
the  vertex  into  the  brain,  especially  late  in  the  evening
and  at  night  when  in  bed  ; the  pain  obliges  her  to  wrinkle
the  forehead  and  to  draw  the  eye-lids  together.  Nightly
headache,  and  intolerable  pressure  in  the  lower  part  of  the
occiput  and  in  the  vertex,  increasing  continually,  accompa-
nied with  pressure  upon  the  eyes,  which  she  was  obliged
to  close,  and  with  a chilliness  which  no  clothing  could
remove  ; he  was  also  covered  with  a fetid  sweat,  during
which  he  had  to  walk  up  and  down  in  his  room,  (a.  5 d.)
Headache  in  the  forehead,  pressing  from  within  outward.
Headache,  especially  in  the  forenoon,  as  if  the  head  were
drawn  forward  and  downward.  Feeling  of  fulness  in  the
head  as  if  filled  with  blood.  Feeling  of  fulness  and
heaviness  in  the  head.  Feeling  of  heaviness  on  the  top  of
the  head.  Heaviness  of  the  head , every  movement  of  the
head  becoming  disagreeable.  Heaviness  of  the  head ,
when  sitting,  lying  down,  moving  about  or  stooping.
Feeling  of  heaviness  and  dulness  in  the  head,  as  if  the
brain  would  fall  forwards,  relieved  by  walking;  afterwards
fine  pricking  in  the  head.  Headache,  like  a weight  press-
ing through  the  brain  from  the  vertex,  and  like  a hoop
around  the  head.  Headache,  as  if  a board  were  pressing
against  the  head  in  front.  Tension  in  the  forehead.  Ten-
sive pain  in  the  head.  Tensive  pain  in  the  eyes,  only
when  raising  them,  for  several  mornings,  in  bed,  when
waking.  Headache,  as  if  between  screws  in  and  above
the  forehead.  Contractive  pain  in  the  temples,  for  several
mornings.  Compressive  pinching  of  the  brain  from  side
to  side,  frequently  lasting  a whole  minute.  Drawing
through  forehead  and  temple,  intensely  painful,  as  if  a
worm  were  creeping  through  that  part,  (the  first  days.)
Drawing  pain  in  the  occiput,  so  violent  during  mastication
1 liat  lie  has  to  cease  eating.  Tearing  in  the  head,  through
the  ear.  Tearing  in  the  head  as  with  a saw.  Tearing
and  pressure  in  the  left  temple  and  eye.  Tearing  in  the


SULPHUR.


263


forehead.  Tearing  in  the  head,  more  in  the  afternoon
than  forenoon,  with  faintness  and  thirslless  heat ; lie  had
to  lay  his  head  upon  the  table  to  obtain  relief.  Tearing
in  the  head,  generally  in  the  sides  and  forehead,  sometimes
with  drawing  and  pricking,  and  with  ulcerative  pain,  re-
lieved by  moving  the  head,  by  pressing  upon  it  and  by
the  open  air.  Nightly  headache,  as  if  the  skull  were  being
torn  off.  After  waking  from  the  siesta,  when  opening  the
eyes,  he  feels  a sudden  headadie,  generally  on  one  side,
as  if  the  brain  were  torn  or  sore,  (a.  36  h.)  Stitch-like
tearings,  after  long,  unequal  ii  tervals,  now  through  differ-
ent parts  of  the  head,  now  through  the  malar  bones,  the
region  of  the  ear,  the  jaws  and  other  parts  of  the  face.  A
stitch  in  the  head.  Stitching  headache  in  the  temples,
Pricking  pain  in  the  forehead,  only  when  walking.  Stitches
in  and  over  the  forehead.  .Stitches  in  the  forehead,  in  the
evening,  becoming  more  and  more  violent  afterwards.
St  itches  through  the  forehead  when  talking  or  coughing,
obliging  her  to  hold  her  forehead  with  her  hand,  mostly
in  the  evening,  for  many  days.  Stitches  through  the
forehead,  at  every  step,  every  day  ; she  has  to  knit  her
brow  when  talking  aloud  or  when  coughing.  Stitches  in
the  head  and  through  the  eyes.  Stitches  through  the
forehead  every  day  from  morning  till  night.  Some  stitches
in  the  vertex.  Pricking  headache  at  different  times,  some-
times continuing  during  the  night,  with  tearing  in  the
lower  jaw  or  bruised  pain  in  that  side  of  the  head,  some-
times relieved  for  a short  time  by  compressing  the  head,
sometimes  obliging  one  to  lie  down.  Painful  whirling  and
creeping  in  the  temples.  Jerking  headache.  Jerking
pains  over  the  right  eye.  Beating  in  the  head,  in  the
morning.  Beating  in  the  head,  neck,  and  about  the
heart ; every  part  of  her  seemed  to  tremble.  Single
shocks  through  the  whole  head.  Hammering  head-
ache during  an  animated  conversation.  Painful  ham-
mering in  the  head.  Pulsations  in  the  left  occiput,  finally
passing  into  a jerking  sensation.  Pulsative  beating,  which
can  be  felt  by  others.  Kush  of  blood  to  the  head,  even
with  loose  stool,  and  after  riding  in  a carriage.  Rush  of
blood  to  the  head  ; pressure  in  the  head  and  through  the
eyes  ; she  was  like  one  deaf  before  the  ears.  Orgasm  of
\Avvd  in  the  head,  and  frequent  flushes  of  heat  Kush  of


264


SULPHUR.


blood  to  the  head,  resembling  a slight  pressure  on  the
head.  Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  as  if  the  blood
had  ceased  to  circulate,  after  waking  from  sleep.  Heat
in  the  head,  in  the  morning.  Heat  in  the  head,  in  the
evening,  with  cold  feet.  Violent,  dry  heat  in  the  head,
with  glowing  countenance,  in  the  morning  when  waking.
Burning  and  pricking  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput.
Buzzing  in  the  vertex.  Tingling  roaring  through  the  head
and  ears.  Pain,  when  nodding,  as  if  the  brain  were  beat-
ing against  the  skull.  Headache,  on  the  left  side,  exter-
nally ; when  feeling  the  parts,  a pain  as  from  sub-cutaneous
ulceration  was  experienced  in  them.  Sensitiveness  of  the
scalp  to  the  touch,  in  the  vertex.  Violent  pain  in  the
vertex,  in  the  evening,  as  if  the  hairs  were  being  pulled
out ; they  rise  in  that  spot  which  is  most  painful.  The
hairs  are  painful  when  scratching  the  head.  Pain  of  the
roots  of  the  hairs , especially  when  touching  the  hair.
Falling  off  of  the  hair.  Pressure  upon  the  head,  in  the
direction  of  the  forehead.  Boring  headache,  under  the  top
of  the  head  ; the  place  is  painful  to  the  touch.  Occasional
burning  aching  of  a small  place  near  the  nape  of  the  neck,
and  especially  after  scratching,  when  lying  upon  that  place.
Feeling  of  coldness  about  the  head.  A cold  spot  on  the
top  of  the  head,  continually.  Itching  in  the  top  of  the
head,  with  impatience.  Itching  in  the  occiput.  Itching
of  the  forehead.  Violent  itching  of  the  forehead.  Prick-
ing in  the  forehead,  apparently  in  the  bone.  Itching  pim-
ples on  the  hairy  scalp,  (the  first  14  d.)  Itching  pimples
on  the  forehead,  with  pricking  in  the  pimples  when  rubbing.
Small  blotches  on  the  forehead,  painful  to  the  touch.
Movement  of  ihe  scalp  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  across
the  top  of  the  head  as  far  as  the  forehead.

Eyes. — Heaviness  of  the  eyelids  in  the  evening.  Heavi-
ness in  the  eyes.  Pressure  in  the  eye-lids,  in  the  evening.
Pressure  in  both  orbits.  Pressure  in  the  upper  eye-lids.
Pressure  in  the  eye-balls  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Pressure  in  the  eyes,  every  evening,  as  if  he  would  sleep,
without  being  sleepy.  Pressure  in  the  eyes,  especially
when  working  in  the  light  of  the  sun.  Pressure  in  the
eye-brows  and  eye-ball.  Pressure  and  itching  in  the
eyes,  and  vertigo  when  stooping.  Pain  of  the  eyes  when


SULPHUR.


265


moving  them.  Painful  pressure  over  the  eye-brows.
Drawing  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  orbit.  Itching  of  the
eye-lids , as  if  they  would  become  inflamed.  A goody  deal  of
itching  in  the  eye-brows  and  tip  of  the  nose.  Itching
smarting  in  the  outer  canthus,  (a.  6 h.)  Itching  and  smart-
ing in  the  inner  canthi.  Smarting  in  the  eyes,  as  from,
spirits  of  hartshorn.  Smarting  in  the  eyes,  succeeded  by
lachrymation.  Cutting  in  the  right  eye.  Stinging  and
burning  in  the  outer  canthi  with  dim-sightedness,  in  the
evening.  Bruised  pain  of  the  eye,  when  closing  the  eye-
lids and  pressing  upon  them  with  the  finger.  Painful  dry-
ness of  the  eye-balls,  and  sensation  as  if  they  rubbed
against  the  lids.  Smarting  and  painful  dryness  of  the
margins  of  the  eye-lids.  Smarting  in  the  eyes  with  sen-
sation as  if  they  were  running.  Smarting  in  the  eyes,  in
the  evening ; the  light  of  the  candle  appeared  like  a red
wheel,  he  was  not  able  to  see  by  it.  Smarting  and  sore
pain,  after  midnight,  in  the  inner  side  of  the  eye-lids ; fol-
lowed by  a sensation  as  of  dryness  inducing  friction  in  the
inner  surface  of  the  lids.  Feeling  of  heat  in  the  eyes.
Sensation  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  were  full  of  blood.  Burn-
ing in  the  eyes.  A burning  jerk  in  the  right  eye-lid.
Sensation  as  of  a number  of  burning  little  sparks  upon  the
eye-lids,  which  closed  immediately.  Burning  in  the  outer
surface  of  the  eye-lids.  Burning  of  the  upper  eye-lids.
Burning  in  the  interior  of  the  eye-lids , they  are  inflamed
and  red,  and  a tension  is  experienced  in  them  when  touched.
When  reading  the  eyes  burn  and  get  easily  weary.  Burn-
ing in  the  eyes  without  redness.  Burning  and  pressure  in
the  eyes  ; agglutination  in  the  morning,  and  swelling  of
the  eye-lids  and  the  whole  face.  Redness  of  the  eye,
during  the  day  ; in  the  evening  they  itch  violently.  Burn-
ing pain  above  and  below  the  eye-brows,  every  afternoon.
Inflammation  of  the  lower  eye-lids,  without  any  particular
swelling.  Swelling  of  the  upper  eye-lid  and  dry  gum  in
the  eye-lashes.  Swelling  of  the  upper  eye-lid,  with  red-
ness and  burning  pain.  Swelling  and  pain  of  the  eye-lids,
with  lachrymation.  Swelling  and  redness  of  the  eyes,
with  pimples  on  the  lids.  Stye  on  the  upper  eye-lid,  in
the  inner  canthus.  Pimple  on  the  upper  eye-lid.  A wlflte
little  vesicle  in  the  white  of  the  eye,  close  to  the  cornea.

12


260


SULPHUR.


Dryness  in  the  space  within  the  eye-lids.  Dryness  of
the  eyes.  Lachrymation  of  the  eyes  ; followed  by  dry-
ness. Lachrymation,  and  burning  of  the  eyes  in  the  morn-
ing. Tears,  which  feel  greasy,  are  secreted  from  both
eyes.  Purulent,  mucus  in  the  eyes,  (a.  3 d.)  Agglutina-
tion of  the  eyes,  two  mornings  in  succession.  Agglutina-
tion of  the  eyes  in  the  morning,  the  lids  are  thick  and  red;
afterwards  dry  gum  in  the  lashes.  Jerking  in  the  eye-
lids, generally  in  the  afternoon.  Jerking  of  die  lower  eye-
lid. Almost  constant  jerking  of  the  left  lower  eye-lid.
Twitching  of  the  lower  eye-lids , every  day.  Twitching  of
the  upper  eye-lid.  Twitching  of  the  eye-lids  for  several
days.  Trembling  of  the  eyes.  In  the  morning  after
rising,  her  eye-lids  frequently  close  of  themselves.  The
pupils  arc  exceedingly  liable  to  contract.  Distortion  of
the  left  pupil.  Obscuration  of  sight  when  reading.  Sense
as  of  gauze  before  the  eyes,  and  dim-sightedness  both
when  looking  at  near  and  distant  objects.  'The  objects
appear  to  one  more  distant  than  they  are.  Dark  points
and  spots  before  the  face.  Optical  illusion  as  if  her  skin
were  yellow.  Black  motes  seem  to  hover  not  far  from
the  eyes,  (a.  12  h.)  A white  spot  before  the  eyes,  when
looking  into  the  air.  Luminous  vibrations  before  the  eyes,
(a.  48  h.)  Sensation  as  if  the  eyes  were  dazzled  when
looking  at  an  object  for  a long  while.  In  the  morning
the  eves  feel  dazzled.  Intolerance  of  the  light  of  the  sun.
The  eyes  are  painful  when  looking  in  the  flame  of  a candle.
The  eyes  are  painful  when  closing  the  lids  and  pressing
upon  them.

Ears. — Otalgia  in  the  left  ear.  Violent  pressure  in  the
ears,  when  swallowing  or  sneezing.  Drawing  in  the  left
ear,  during  on  eructation  from  the  stomach.  Tearing  in
the  left  ear , extending  into  the  head.  Stitches  in  the  left
ear , (6.  d.)  Stitching  pain  in  the  ear,  as  far  as  the  fauces.
The  outer  ear  feels  as  if  gone  to  sleep,  for  8 days.  Violent
itching  of  the  outer  ears.  Tickling  in  the  ear.  Itching
in  the  ear,  (immediately,)  afterwards  itching  and  heat  of
the  outer  ear.  Painful  creeping  and  gnawing  in  the  outer
left  meatus  auditorius.  The  internal  ear  is  painful  when
cleaning  it.  Large  boil  on  the  helix.  Severe  stitches  in
the  glandular  swelling,  for  several  days.  The  cracking  of


SULPHUR.


£67


a whip  produces  a sensation  in  the  ear  as  of  the  splashing
of  water,  the  hearing  being  exceedingly  sensitive.  Ex-
cessive sensitiveness  of  the  hearing.  Excessive  sensitive-
ness of  the  auditory  nerve  in  a person  affected  with  hard
hearing,  making  her  feel  nauseated  when  playing  on  the
piano.  Every  noise  is  disagreeable  to  him.  Contrary
feeling  of  obstruction  in  both  ears,  for  several  days.  Deaf-
ness of  both  ears,  passing  very  soon,  (a.  9 d.)  The  left
ear  has  become  closed  in  such  a manner  that  he  is  indeed
able  to  hear  every  thing,  but  he  is  not  able  to  understand
what  people  tell  him.  When  blowing  the  nose,  the  ear
becomes  closed.  Sensation,  when  blowing  the  nose,  as  if
air  were  entering  the  ear.  Humming  in  the  ear,  with
hardness  of  hearing  during  which  the  ears  did  not  seem  to
be  affected  by  the  sound  which  seemed  to  be  perceived  by
some  internal  sense,  but  very  dull.  Buzzing  before  tne
ears,  for  several  days.  Humming  before  the  ears,  now
before  one,  now  before  the  other  ear  ; she  has  trouble  to
hear  with  the  ear  affected  by  humming.  Humming  and
pulsations  in  the  ear.  Whizzing  of  the  ears.  Roaring
before  the  ears , in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  with  rush  of
blood  to  the  head.  A good  deal  oj  tingling  in  both  ears ,
when  sitting.  Violent  tingling  in  the  ears,  in  the  morning,
when  in  bed,  for  5 minutes.  Cracking  in  the  ear,  or  sense
as  of  bursting  as  of  an  air-bubble.  Cracking  before  the
ear  in  the  articulation  of  the  jaw,  when  chewing.  Fre-
quent reports  in  the  ears,  as  if  a cord  were  breaking.
Fluttering  noise  in  the  ear.

Nose. — A kind  of  spasm  in  the  nose.  Boring  above
the  root  of  the  nose.  Pressure  in  the  right  nasal  bone,
in  the  evening.  Cracking  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose,
or  sense  as  of  bursting  as  of  an  air-bubble.  Dryness  of
the  inner  nose.  Pain  of  the  lip  of  the  nose  when  touching
it.  Tearing  in  the  nose,  after  dinner,  going  off  for  a short
while  by  pressing  upon  it.  Itching  in  the  nose.  Redness
and  burning  of  the  nostrils,  as  if  sore.  Inflammation  of
the  nose,  (a.  9 d.)  Swelling  of  the  nose.  Pain  in  the
nose,  which  is  swollen  and  ulcerated  internally.  Inflamed,
swollen  wings  of  the  nose.  Black  pores  on  the  nose,
upper  lip  and  chin.  Sensation  as  if  the  blood  were  rush-
ing t<3  the  nose,  especially  in  the  open  air.  A yellowish,


2G8


SULPHUR.


viscid,  strong  smelling  fluid  drops  out  of  the  nose  for  two
evenings  and  mornings,  without  coryza.  Blowing  blood
from  the  nose.  Bleeding  of  the  nose , for  7 days,  (a.  1 1 d.)
Bleeding  of  the  nose,  two  afternoons  in  succession,  after-
wards the  nose  pains  when  touched.  Loss  of  smell.
Intolerance  of  odors.  Smell  in  the  nose  as  of  soaked
peas.  Sharp,  acrid  smell  in  the  nose,  as  of  smoke.  Smell
in  the  nose  as  of  burnt  horn.  Smell  in  the  nose  as  of  old,
fetid  coryza.  Bad  smell  of  the  nasal  mucus  when  blowing
the  nose.  Dulness  of  the  sense  of  smell.

Face. — Paleness  of  countenance.  Pale,  wretched  ap-
pearance. Blue  margins  around  the  eyes.  Deep  eyes
surrounded  wiih  blue  margins.  Dark  redness  and  heat
in  the  face,  especially  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Flushes  of  heat  in  the  left  cheek,  forenoon  and  afternoon,
one  hour.  Heat  and  burning  in  the  face,  with  a few  red  spots
between  eyes  and  ear.  Heat  in  the  face,  every  afternoon
from  5 till  9 o’clock.  Burning  painful  heat  in  the  face
and  on  the  neck,  with  red  spots  on  the  face.  Redness  and
heat  of  the  face,  with  burning,  especially  around  the  mouth.
Burning  in  the  face,  and  on  the  neck,  without  redness.
Redness  and  violent  burning  in  the  region  of  both  malar
bones.  Heat  in  the  face,  during  the  day,  with  burning  in
the  region  of  the  malar  bone,  and  redness  of  the  wdiole
nose.  Sensation  as  if  cold  water  were  poured  over  her
face  under  the  skin,  the  face  feeling  cold  to  the  hand,  in
paroxysms  of  some  minutes.  Creeping  sensation  in  the
face.  Twitchings,  sometimes  in  the  region  of  the  malar
bone,  sometimes  of  the  chin.  Pressure  and  burning  in
the  cheeks  and  malar  bones.  Painful  pressure  in  the
region  of  the  malar  bone  and  below  the  eye.  Drawing
pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  face,  apparently  in  the  skin,
above  the  eye,  in  the  region  of  the  temple  and  malar  bone,
extending  as  far  as  the  lobule,  most  violent  in  the  morning.
Tearing  in  the  right  half  of  the  face.  Tearing  in  the  malar
bone,  at  other  times  in  the  lower  jaw,  as  if  the  parts  were
being  torn  out.  Bruised  pain  in  the  right  malar  bone,  also
at  night.  Swelling  of  the  cheeks  with  pricking  pain,
and  pain  when  touched,  for  8 days.  Red  swellmg  of  the
cheeks,  painless.  White,  itching  spot  on  the  cheeks.
Violent  itching  in  the  face,  with  small,  painless  pimples,


SULPHUR.


269


emitting  a humor  after  scratching.  The  lips  are  always
hot,  pricking  and  burning.  Burning  lips.  Dry  lips.  Dry-
ness of  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lower  lip,  with  scurf
and  tensive  pain.  Chapped  lips.  Burning  rhagades  in
the  lower  lip.  Scaly,  dry,  rough  upper  lip  and  margins
of  the  nostrils.  Swelling  of  the  upper  lip , painful.
Swelling  of  the  lower  lip,  covered  with  an  eruption.
Tremor,  or  jerking  of  the  lips.  Vesicle  on  the  middle  of
the  lower  lip.  Red,  itching  tip  in  the  middle  of  the  upper
lip.  Red  blotch  on  the  margin  of  the  vermilion  border  of
the  lower  lip  ; when  touched,  it  feels  painful  and  pricking.
Elevated,  herpetic  eruption  near  the  coiner  of  the  mouth,
toward  the  cheek.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Itching  around  the  chin.  Painful
eruption  around  the  chin . Spasmodic  drawing  in  the
jaws.  Drawing  jerk  in  the  left  lower  jaw.  Jerks  in  the
lower  jaw,  when  falling  asleep.  Tearing  in  the  right  up-
per jaw,  in  the  evening.  Stitching  in  the  lower  jaw,
through  the  ear.  Painful  swelling  on  the  upper  jaw,  over
the  gums,  (a.  3 d.)  Painful  swelling  on  the  lower  jaw,  be-
low the  gums.  Large,  painless  lump  on  the  lower  jaw,
tensive  when  chewing.  Glandular  swelling  on  the  lower
jaw.  Prickings  in  the  sub-maxillary  glands,  which  are
painful,  when  touched.  Toothache  in  the  open  air.  One
of  the  molar  teeth  is  painful  when  touched.  Toothache
from  the  least  draft  of  air.  Toothache,  renewed  by
washing  the  mouth  with  cold  water.  Toothache,  termi-
nating in  swelling  of  the  cheeks.  Toothache,  in  parox-
ysms of  two,  three  hours,  succeeded  by  digging-up  ; she
bears  cold  things  rather  than  warm.  Great  sensitiveness
of  the  tips  of  the  left  upper  teeth,  worse  when  coming  in
contact  with  cold  water,  with  darting  pain.  Painful  jerk-
ing in  a hollow  tooth,  after  dinner.  Aching  pain  in  the
tooth,  with  pain  of  the  sub-maxillary  gland  underneath.
Drawing  toothache.  Violent  drawing  pain  in  an  incisor
tooth,  until  eleven  o’clock  at  night,  followed  by  sleepless-
ness lasting  until  morning.  Drawing  pain  in  the  molares,
aggravated  by  drawing  in  cold  air.  Drawing  pain  in  the
teeth  in  the  open  air.  Tearing-drawing  toothache,  now  on
the  right,  now  on  the  left  side,  lasting  whole  hours  and
i sometimes  intermitting  a half  hour  or  whole  hours ; also


270


SULPHUR.


in  the  night,  when  waking.  Drawing  and  tearing  in  the
teeth,  generally  aggravated  by  cold  water,  sometimes  re-
lieved by  warm  ; frequently  accompanied  with  jerking  in
the  tips.  Grumbling  and  drawing  in  the  teeth.  Jerks
through  single  teeth.  Jerks  and  stitches  in  the  teeth,  at
regular  intervals,  also  after  midnight  and  in  the  morning,
during  and  between  meals  ; when  drawing  in  air,  a pain-
ful dart  into  the  gums  is  experienced  ; even  when  not
touched  they  feel  sore  and  as  if  loose.  Pricking  pain  in
all  the  teeth,  day  and  night,  increased  by  mastication.
Pricking  toothache,  even  affecting  the  ear ; he  was  waked
by  it  in  the  night.  Violent  stitch  through  the  teeth,  from
every  cold  drink.  Stitching,  burning  and  beating  in  the
teeth,  extending  into  the  orbits  and  ear.  Beating,  draw-
ing  toothache.  Beating  and  boring  in  the  teeth.  Boring
in  the  teeth , as  with  a hot  iron.  Boring  pressing  in  the
teeth  and  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  head,  a few  minutes
after  eating.  Frequent  cutting  through  all  the  teeth  of  the
right  side,  resembling  the  passage  of  cold  air  through  the
teeth.  Toothache,  every  afternoon,  as  if  the  teeth  were
broken  out,  with  chilliness;  going  off  in  the  bed.  Feel-
ing of  looseness  in  the  teeth,  in  the  evening.  When  bit-
ing, the  teeth  feel  loose,  and  when  eating  as  if  paralysed.
Looseness  of  the  teeth,  and  bleeding  of  the  gums,  for  three
weeks.  One  of  the  molar  teeth  feels  as  if  elongated  and
becomes  loose,  with  simple  pain  when  knocking  the  tooth
against  something,  or  when  chewing.  The  tooth  feels
elongated  and  is  affected  with  a simple  pain,  without  biting,
or  without  touching  it.  The  teeth  felt  elongated  so  that
she  was  scarcely  able  to  bite.  The  teeth  felt  sore  as  if
elongated,  and  as  if  groaning  vibrations  were  taking  place
in  their  interior.  Dull  teeth.  Dulness  of  the  teeth  and
pain,  only  when  biting  ; he  was  not  able  to  chew  brown
bread,  on  account  of  the  pain,  (a-  5 d.)  The  teeth  become
covered  with  brown  mucus.  Red,  saltish-sour  water  oozes
from  a hollow  molar  tooth  of  the  left  side.  Bleeding  of
the  teeth.  Swelling  of  the  gums  with  throbbing  pain  in
the  gums.  Swelling  of  the  gums  around  the  old  roots.

Mouth. — Contractive  sensation  in  the  mouth.  Vesicles
in  the  mouth,  with  a burning  pain.  Small,  sore  vesicles
in  the  mouth  ; even  slightly  salted  food  causes  a smarting.


SULPHUR.


271


Peeling  off  of  the  skin  of  the  inner  cheek.  Slimy  mouth,
in  the  morning.  Dry  mouth  after  a meal.  Dry  mouth
and  scraping  in  the  throat  as  if  the  food  would  not  go
down.  Burning  in  the  mouth,  in  the  morning,  without
thirst.  Dryness  of  the  mouth,  and  taste  of  blood.  Burn-
ing in  the  -mouth,  with  eruption  around  the  mouth.  Burn-
ing in  the  mouth,  as  of  pepper,  causing  a thirst  which
cannot  be  relieved  by  drinking,  day  and  night.  A good
deal  of  heat  in  the  mouth  and  much  thirst,  at  night.  Heat
in  the  mouth,  without  thirst,  (a.  19  d.)  Spasmodic  con-
traction of  the  mouth,  at  the  first  mouthful  of  food.  Bloody
saliva.  Sanguineous  saliva,  with  sweet  taste.  Conflux  of
saliva  in  the  mouth,  sour  and  bitter.  Fetid  smell  from
the  mouth,  after  a meal.  Fetid  smell  in  the  morning,  or
evening.  Sour  smell.  Burning  pain  in  the  surface  of
the  tongue.  Smarting  on  the  tongue,  as  if  covered  with
vesicles.  Smarting  vesicle  on  the  right  side  of  the  tongue.
Red  tongue,  with  while  tip,  like  aphthae.  White-coated
tongue  in  the  morning.  Dry  tongue  in  the  morning.  Salt
lenadous  mucus  on  the  tongue  every  afternoon.  Twitch-
ings  in  the  upper  surface  of  the  tongue.  Frequent  stut-
tering when  talking.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus. — Dry  throat;  the  tongue
adheres  to  the  palate,  but  is  moist  and  covered  with  a
foamy  mucus,  (a.  6 d.)  Dryness  of  the  throat  in  the
morning,  followed  by  salt,  taste  in  the  mouth,  disappearing
after  a meal.  Dryness  of  the  throat  at  night;  a good  deal
of  mucus  upon  the  tongue,  when  waking.  Parched  dry-
ness in  the  throat.  Great  dryness  of  the  fauces  and  pal-
ate. Mucous  expectoration  without  cough.  Vesicles  on
the  palate,  hindering  eating  and  talking.  Sore  throat,  with
swelling  of  the  cervical  glands.  Painful  pressure  in  the
throat,  during  deglutition,  as  if  the  palate  were  swollen.
Pressure  in  the  throat  as  of  a lump,  during  and  between
the  acts  of  deglutition.  Pressure  in  the  fauces,  as  it  were
in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  paroxysms,  all  night,  felt  even
when  breathing.  Pressure  in  the  upper  part  of  the  throat,
during  deglutition,  and  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest.
Sensation,  when  eating,  as  if  something  pressing  had  re-
mained lodged  in  the  pharynx  ; after  eating  this  feeling
disappears.  Sore  throat  during  empty  deglutition , as  if


272


SULPHUR.


she  were  swallowing  a bit  of  meat , or  as  if  the  uvula  were
elongated.  Ulcerative  pain  the  ear  when  swallowing.
Choking  and  sore  feeling  in  the  throat  when  swallowing,
and  as  if  the  tonsils  were  swollen,  wdth  prickings  extend-
ing into  the  ears.  Sensation  as  if  a hard  ball  were  rising
into  the  throat,  contracting  the  pharynx  and  oppressing  the
breathing.  Contractive  sensation  in  the  throat,  as  when
one  swallows  astringent  things,  with  fine  prickings,  worse
when  swallowing.  Sensation  in  the  throat  as  if  it  became
distended.  Sensation  in  the  middle  of  the  oesophagus  as
if  spasmodically  contracted,  as  if  the  food  would  not  go
down.  Contraction  in  the  oesophagus,  with  sensation  as
if  she  were  unable  to  get  anything  down  ; nevertheless
this  was  possible,  (in  a few  hours.)  Sensation  as  if  the
throat  were  swollen,  with  prickings  when  eating  ; accom-
panied with  a sensation  as  if  the  sub-maxillary  glands
were  swollen.  Stitches  in  the  throat  when  swallowing.
Stitches  in  the  throat,  more  during  an  empty  deglutition
than  when  swallowing  food  ; between  the  acts  of  deglu-
tition she  experiences  a pain  as  if  a lump  were  lodged  in
the  throat.  Scraping  in  the  throat,  hawking  up.  Elon-
gation of  the  uvula.  Redness  and  swelling  of  the  tonsils.
Burning  in  the  pharynx,  in  the  evening,  with  heat  on  the
tongue.  Burning  in  the  oesophagus  from  below  upward ,
with  sour  eructations.  Fermenting  sensation  in  the  up-
per part  of  the  throat.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Pappy  taste  in  mouth,  in  the
morning.  Doughy  taste.  Flat  taste  ; putrid  taste  in  the
morning.  Sensation  in  the  throat  as  if  greasy  vapor  were
rising  from  the  stomach.  Sweet  taste  in  mouth  when
waking.  Sweet,  nauseating  taste  in  mouth  the  whole  fore-
noon. Sweetish-putrid  taste.  Copper  taste.  Sourish
taste  in  the  morning,  or  before  retiring.  Taste  of  vinegar
the  whole  day.  Bitter  taste,  accompanied  with  low  spirits
and  obtusion  of  the  head.  Bitter  taste  in  the  morning
when  waking.  Bitter,  spoiled  taste.  Taste  as  of  bile  be-
fore breakfast  ; nevertheless  the  food  has  a good  taste.
Bitter  mucus  in  mouth,  worst  in  the  morning.  Bitter
taste,  soon  after  eating.  Every  aliment  tastes  bitter  to
him.  Bitter-sour  taste,  at  dinner.  Saltish-sour  taste  in
the  mouth.  Salt  taste  of  the  food.  All  the  aliments  taste


SULPHUR.


273


like  straw.  Food  tastes  to  him  like  rotten  straw.  Does
not  relish  tobacco.  Food  smelled  like  limestone,  but  had
a good  taste.  His  dinner  had  a putrid  smell  to  him,  but
had  a good  taste.  Complete  loss  of  appetite  ; cares  only
for  sour  things.  Complete  loss  of  appetite,  as  if  the  scro-
biculus  cordis  were  constricted.  Empty  feeling  in  the
stomach.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Aversion  to  meat  ; it  nauseates
her.  Aversion  to  sour  and  sweet.  Desires  only  soft  food,
not  bread.  Sudden  aversion  to  sweet  things  and  milk.
Milk  lies  heavy  in  her  ; she  throws  it  up  again  curdled.
Sourness  in  mouth  and  sour  eructations  after  drinking
milk.  Ascetic  taste  in  the  mouth  after  drinking  milk.
Milk  produces  bitterish  scraping  eructations.  Violent
eructations  after  drinking  milk,  even  unto  vomiting  of  mu-
cus. Acids  oppress  her.  Farinaceous  food  causes  an  un-
easiness in  the  abdomen.  Irresistible  desire  for  sugar.
Feeling  of  hunger  in  the  abdomen  ; but  a little  food  sati-
ates him.  He  has  an  appetite ; but  as  soon  as  he  sees
the  food,  the  appetite  disappears  and  his  abdomen  feels  re-
plete ; when  he  begins  to  eat  he  feels  an  aversion  to  the
food.  Excessive  hunger  and  appetite.  Thirst  for  several
hours.  Increase  of  appetite,  the  first  days.  Violent
thirst  for  beer.  Great  thirst,  without  heat ; he  relishes
his  beverage,  but  it  does  not  quench  his  thirst,  and  it  seems
to  incommode  the  stomach.  Desire  for  sugar-water.  No
appetite,  but  constant  thirst.  Even  a little  beer  excites
the  blood.  Beer  has  a long  after-taste.  Canine  hunger
which  frequently  obliges  him  to  eat;  if  he  does  not  eat,
he  has  a headache,  feels  weary  and  has  to  lie  down,  (a.
10  d.)  He  can  eat  neither  meat  nor  fat  at  supper  ; it  op-
presses the  stomach,  draws  the  abdomen  up  and  hinders
stool.  Headache  after  a meal,  with  pressure  in  the  eyes.
Headache  over  the  eyes  and  nausea  after  a meal  ; follow-
ed by  heaviness  of  the  head.  Weakness  and  obtusion  of
the  head  at  dinner,  continuing  until  evening.  Sweat  in
the  face  during  a meal,  and  redness  of  the  white  of  the
eye.  After  a meal  redness  and  sweat  in  the  face.  Pain
in  almost  all  the  teeth  at  dinner.  Violent  colic,  im-
mediately after  a meal.  Loud  grunting  in  the  abdomen
after  a meal.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  after  a meal.

12*  *


274


SULPHUR.


Repletion  in  the  abdomen  after  eating  bat  little , with
oppression  of  breathing.  Pressure  in  the  stomach , im-
mediately after  eating.  Pressure  at  the  stomach,  an
hour  after  eating,  with  nausea  and  waterbrash.  Feels
worn  out  an  hour  after  dinner,  as  if  she  had  suffered  hun-
ger for  a long  while.  Laziness  in  all  the  limbs,  especi-
ally the  lower,  after  dinner.  Stool,  generally  after  every
dinner.  Several  hours  after  a meal,  great  oppression  of
breathing  succeeded  by  yawning.  Worn  out  and  physi-
cally depressed  after  ealing.  Violent  chilliness  after  eat-
ing. Sour  eructations  alter  a meal.  When  eating  a little
more  than  ordinarily,  she  has  an  ugly,  sour-fetid  taste  on
the  day  following.  Conflux  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  when
beginning  to  eat.  Troublesome  dry  coryza,  producing
duiness  of  the  head,  especially  after  a meal.  At  dinner
he  is  tormented  by  coldness  of  the  feet,  with  itching  of  the
nostrils  from  which  water  drops  out;  accompanied  with
impatience,  every  thing  being  disagreeable  to  him.  Great
coldness  of  the  feet  and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  after  din-
ner. Shuddering  and  feeling  of  coldness  after  a meal.
Chilliness  in  the  abdomen  after  a meal.  Burning  in  the
hands  after  a meal.  Sensation  after  a meal  as  if  the  pha-
rynx were  closed.  Hiccough  after  a meal  when  walking
in  the  open  air.  She  vomits  as  soon  as  she  eats  or  drinks
anything.  Sort  of  absence  of  digestion,  (a.  7 d.)  Empty
eructations  after  every  meal , and  every  morning.  Fre-
quent empty  eructations , (a.  10  d.)  Unsuccessful  eructa-
tions when  going  to  bed.  Hiccough,  with  pain  behind  the
palate.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  spleen  previous  to
the  eructation.  Eructations  tasting  of  onion.  Eructa-
tions tasting  like  rotten  eggs , with  nausea.  Sweetish
eructations,  in  the  morning.  Sour  eructations  and  much
troublesome  acidity  in  the  stomach.  Sour  eructations  after
a meal,  (2.  d.)  Sour  eructations  with  taste  of  lead.  Sour
eructations , frequently  during  the  day.  Bitter,  scraping
eructations  tasting  of  the  food.  Regurgitation  of  the  food,
an  hour  after  eating.  Regurgitation  of  undigested  food.
Heartburn , the  whole  day.  Heartburn,  in  the  morning;
creeping  and  burning  in  the  chest.  Nauwa  every  morn-
ing. Nausea  unto  fainting.  Nausea  before  the  meal.
Nausea  in  the  stomach,  with  tremor  in  the  whole  body.
Nausea  with  conflux  of' saliva  in  the  mouth,  after  break-


SULPHUR*


275


fast.  Nausea  with  eructations.  Nausea  with  desire  to
vomit , three  mornings  in  succession.  Frequent  desire  to
vomit,  even  when  she  lias  not  taken  any  food.  Frequent
desire  to  vomit,  during  the  day.  Desire  to  vomit  in  the
night,  and  sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  as  if  water-
brash  would  set  in.  Waterbrash  before  a meal.  Water-
brash  after  dinner  and  supper,  preceded  by  pressure  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Waterbrash,  with  strangulation
in  the  morning  when  washing  one’s  mouth  and  hawking
up  the  mucus.  Waterbrash  in  the  evening,  followed  by
vomiting  of  the  food  which  he  had  tasted  seven  hours  pre-
vious. Waterbrash  two  hours  after  a meal,  followed  by
vomiting  of  the  ingesta  accompanied  with  great  nausea
and  shuddering.  Vomiting.  Vomiting  with  violent  sweat,
(a.  24  h.)  Vomiting  of  a limpid,  saltish  fluid.  Sour
vomiting.  Vomiting  of  the  ingesta , in  the  morning,  with
tremor  of  the  hands  and  feet.  Vomiting  of  the  food  which
had  been  taken  at  dinner,  in  the  evening,  (1.  d.)  Vomiting
of  mucus,  with  nausea  and  strangulation,  in  the  morning.
Bitter  vomiting  in  the  afternoon,  with  nausea.  Vomiting
of  blood  and  of  a blackish,  tasteless  fluid,  accompanied  with
faintness,  at  the  appearance  of  the  menses.

Stomach. — The  region  of  the  stomach  becomes  very
painful  when  pressing  upon  it,  even  the  bed-cover  causes
a pain  ; food  causes  no  pressure  at  the  stomach.  Pres-
sure at  the  stomach,  with  nausea,  (immediately-)  Painful
pressure  at  the  stomach,  with  anxiety.  Pressure  below
the  stomach,  very  violent  when  lying  down.  Pressure
under  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Anxious  pressure  at  the
stomach.  Intolerable  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach
and  the  epigastrium,  in  paroxysms,  generally  in  the  morn-
ing, somewhat  relieved  by  pressing  upon  the  part  with  the
hand,  for  several  days,  (a.  6 d.)  Violent  pressure  at  the
stomach,  a couple  of  hours  after  a meal,  even  the  back
being  painfully  affected  by  it.  Weight  in  the  stomach.
Feeling  of  repletion  in  the  stomach , as  if  it  were  puffed
up , without  distension.  Sensation  in  the  stomach  as  if  it
were  replete.  Sensation  as  if  the  stomach  were  replete
and  soaked  like  a sponge,  with  violent,  thirst  in  the  after-
noon. Sense  of  hollowness  in  the  region  cf  the  stomach.
Swelling  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  In  the  evening  ten-


276


SULPHUR.


sion  of  the  stomach  and  chest,  extending  as  far  as  the  chest,
as  if  she  had  eaten  too  much,  with  pain  of  the  pit  when
touching  or  pressing  upon  it.  Contractive  pain  in  the
stomach.  Acrid  and  scraping  sensation  in  the  stomach  up
to  the  throat.  Contractive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stom-
ach, arresting  the  breathing.  Contractive  pain  in  the
stomach,  the  whole  day,  with  boring  in  the  nape  of  the
neck,  increasing  after  a meal,  and  accompanied  with  great
sensitiveness  of  the  scalp,  (the  day  preceding  the  menses.)
Screwing  together  and  bruised  pain  in  the  stomach,  the
same  pain  being  felt  on  the  right  side  in  one  of  the  lower
ribs  and  in  the  hip.  Cramp-like  contraction  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  before  dinner,  arresting  the  breathing.  Vio-
lent spasm  of  the  stomach,  for  several  hours  in  the  night-
Violent  spasm  in  the  stomach  before  dinner,  followed  by
profuse  sweat,  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Pinching
from  above  downward  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.  Bit-
ing pain  in  the  stomach.  Cutting  in  the  stomach,  in  the
afternoon.  Pricking  in  the  stomach.  Pricking  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach , in  the  morning  when  standing.  Prick-
ing in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  during  a violent  inspiration.
Frequent  prickings  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  A dull
stitch  from  the  right  region  of  the  stomach  to  the  lumbar
region,  occurring  frequently,  during  every  inspiration,  in
the  evening.  Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  region  of  the
stomach.  Cool  sensation  in  the  stomach.  The  region  of
the  stomach  feels  cold  on  the  outside.  Feeling  of  heat  in
the  region  of  the  stomach,  and  hacking  sensation  when
sitting  quiet.  Burning  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,  most
when  walking  or  standing.  Burning  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach  and  all  around.  Earning  in  the  stomach , seve-
ral times  during  the  day.  Burning  in  the  stomach  like
violent  heartburn.  Burning,  cutting,  and  writhing  sensa-
tion in  the  stomach.  Beating  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach
with  a faint  feeling,  or  pulsative  sensation  when  sitting,
accompanied  with  an  excitement  of  the  circulatory  system
in  the  chest,  as  if  the  breathing  should  be  arrested.

Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver  when  touch-
ing it.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  immediately
after  dinner.  He  is  roused  from  sleep  in  the  night  by  a
pressure  in  the  liver,  accompanied  with  yellowness  of  the
white.  Violent  pressure  and  contraction  in  the  region  of


SULPHUR.


277


the  liver.  Tensive  and  burning  pain  in  the  region  of  the
liver.  Drawing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver  which  ar-
rested her  breathing  ; she  had  to  walk  crooked  the  whole
day.  The  liver  seems  to  be  swollen,  this  hinders  breath-
ing. Frequent  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  liver  and  in
the  right  groin.  Stitching  in  the  right  hypochondrium.
Sudden  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  from  within  out-
ward. Stitching  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  especially
when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Stitching  pain  under  the
right  short  ribs.  Pinching  in  the  right  hypochondrium,
when  walking.  Boring  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,
after  dinner.  Beating  and  frequent  and  short  tremulous
movements  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  from  time  to  time.
Tension  and  beating  in  one  of  the  right  lower  ribs,  reliev-
ed only  for  a short  while  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Cut-
ting and  burning  in  the  region  of  the  left  lower  ribs.  Burn-
ing, and,  when  sitting  crooked,  fine,  burning  stitches  in  the
outer  parts  of  the  right  lumbar  region.  The  flatulent  move-
ments are  especially  painful  and  stitching  in  the  left  hypo-
chondrium. Stitching  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  dur-
ing a deep  inspiration  and  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Stitching  at  times  in  the  right,  at  times  in  the  left  side  of
the  abdomen.  The  left  side  of  the  abdomen  goes  to
sleep,  with  a feeling  of  chilliness.  Pressure  under  the  left
ribs.  Pain  under  the  ribs  (in  the  diaphragm)  transversely,
when  blowing  the  nose  and  when  coughing.  Sensitiveness
in  both  hypochondria,  in  the  morning,  feeling  sore  to  the
touch.  Pain  in  the  epigastrium,  directly  under  the  chest,
as  if  all  the  inward  parts  got  loose  and  became  ecchymos-
ed,  only  during  motion  and  when  breathing.  Colic  after
every  meal.  Colic  in  the  night,  as  if  the  internal  parts
were  crushed  and  ecchymosed.  Painful  sensitiveness  in
the  abdomen,  as  if  all  the  parts  in  it  were  raw  and  sore,  as
immediately  after  parturition,  there  seeming  to  be  some-
thing moving  about  in  the  abdomen,  or  sudden  stitches  be-
ing experienced  in  the  abdomen  and  thence  extending  into
the  whole  head.  Movement  in  the  abdomen  as  of  the  first
of  a child.  Colic,  obliging  one  to  bend  double.  Pressure
over  the  umbilicus  in  a transverse  direction,  with  little  ap-
petite ; he  is  unable  to  sleep  in  the  night  on  account  of
that  pressure.  Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium.  Pressure
in  the  left  iliac  region,  as  if  something  hard  were  lodged


278


SULPHUR.


there  ; the  pain  obliges  her  to  walk  crooked  and  bent  over
to  one  side.  Aching  pain  in  the  right  iliac  region,  when
standing  or  walking  against  the  wind,  or  when  turning  to
the  left  side  after  lying  on  the  back.  Sore  pressure  in  the
hypogaslrium,  after  a meal,  accompanied  with  eructations.
Repletion  and  heaviness  in  the  abdomen,  alter  a meal,  as
if  overloaded.  Repletion  of  the  abdomen  after  eating  but
little.  Frequent  distension  of  the  abdomen.  Tension  of
the  abdomen,  every  morning  when  waking.  Tension  in
the  abdomen,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence.  Tensive
sensation,  or  sensation  of  pressure  in  the  whole  abdomen,
especially  in  the  hypochondria,  accompanied  with  an  anx-
ious, hypochondriac  mood,  a few  hours  after  dinner,  (a.  4
d.)  Sensation  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  something  were  vio-
lently pressing  through  the  intestines.  Spasmodically
contractive  colic,  extending  into  the  chest,  the  groin,  and
the  genital  organs.  Clawing  contractive  pain  around  the
umbilicus,  when  sitting,  going  off  when  rising.  Colic  af-
ter midnight,  with  pain  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen.  Vio-
lent pinching  and  tension  in  the  abdomen,  from  noon  till
evening.  Pinching  around  the  umbilicus,  rising  in  the  di-
rection of  the  stomach,  going  off  by  emission  o(  flatulence,
afternoon  and  evening.  Stitching  pinching  directly  over  the
hips  and  in  the  region  of  the  last  false  rib.  Violent  pinch-
ingin  the  hypogaslrium,  preceded  by  rumbling  in  the  ab-
domen and  emission  of  flatulence  ; after  entering  the  room.
Cutting  in  the  epigastrium,  with  sensation  as  if  it  were  in
the  chest.  Violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  momentarily.
Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening,  and  weariness
when  going  up  stairs,  as  if  the  menses  were  approaching.
Cutting  colic,  after  dinner.  Violent  cutting  in  the  abdo-
men, with  great  nausea,  and  such  a profuse  sweat  that  her
shirt  and  bed  became  drenched.  Cutting  in  the  hypogas-
triurn,  when  making  an  effort  at  stool,  or  when  pressing
upon  the  hypogaslrium,  or  when  bending  backward  ; not
in  the  usual  posture.  Cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  small
of  the  back,  followed  by  diarrhoea  and  tenesmus.  Sudden
stitches  in  the  abdomen,  darting  through  the  whole  body
as  it  were.  Prickings  in  the  lesser  intestines,  for  three
quarters  of  an  hour.  Sudden  and  transitory  stitches  in  the
abdomen.  Stitching  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
morning.  Burning  pricking  in  a small  spot  near  the  urn-


SULPHUR.


279


bilious,  a quarter  of  an  hour.  Stitches  and  violent  burn-
ing in  the  hypogastrium,  with  a cramp-pain  in  the  right
lower  limb.  Constant  digging-up  in  the  abdomen,  but
only  one  stool  a day,  for  some  weeks,  bleat  in  ihe  left
side  of  the  abdomen.  Anguish  in  the  abdomen,  followed
by  a feeling  of  weakness  in  the  feet,  extending  to  beyond
the  ankles,  resembling  an  inward  tremor.  Pain  in  both
sides  of  the  abdomen,  as  of  incarcerated  flatulence,  in  the
morning  when  waking  ; with  emission  of  short  flatus,  af-
fording no  relief.  Incarceration  of  flatulence  in  the  left
hypochondrium,  with  anxiety.  When  deprived  of  stool  tor
a long  while,  the  flatulence  becomes  incarcerated  in  the
left  side  of  the  abdomen,  causing  violent  pressure,  and  ex-
torting a loud  cry  from  her  when  performing  the  least
movement.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  as  of  fermenting
beer,  followed  by  sudden  desire  for  stool,  the  first  portion
of  which  is  hard,  the  second  liquid,  without  mucus,  morn-
ing and  evening.  Rumbling  in  ,the  in/pogastrwm , as  if
empty.  Violent  rumbling  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.
Gurgling  in  the  abdomen.  Quantity  of  flatulence.  Flatu-
lence smelling  of  rotten  eggs.  The  abdominal  muscles
are  painful  when  touched,  as  if  bruised.  Relaxation  of
the  abdominal  muscles,  he  is  not  able  to  raise  himself.
Painfulness  of  the  abdomen,  when  touching  it  or  when
walking,  with  dull  pain  in  the  abdomen.  The  clothes
press  upon  the  abdomen.  A good  deal  of  itching  of  the
epigastrium  and  hypogastrium,  at  night.  Itching  about
the  abdomen  after  dinner,  when  rubbing  it,  a sensation  is
experienced  in  the  intestines  as  if  pinched  or  crowrdcd  to-
gether, especially  in  the  hypogastrium,  towards  the  cen-
tre, worst  when  stooping  or  taking  a deep  inspiration,  bet-
ter when  walking.  Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,  extend-
ing over  the  whole  pubic  region,  as  if  the  parts  were  tied
together,  continually.  Tearing  in  the  inguinal  glands  of
either  side.  Stitches  in  the  right  groin,  arresting  the
breathing.  Burning  stitches  in  the  left  groin,  in  the  even-
ing. Painful  swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands.  Pressing
in  the  abdominal  ring,  as  if  hernia  would  form.  An  in-
cipient inguinal  hernia  presses  violently  through  the  ring ,
causing  a bruised  and  contusive  pain.  and  cannot  be  kept
in  place  by  the  hand , (a.  4 h.)  Protrusion  of  a former


280


SULPHUR.


hernia  ; lie  is  obliged  to  wear  the  truss.  Drawing  pressure
in  the  right  groin  and  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.

Stool- — Constipation  for  two  days,  afterwards  one
evacuation,  coming  on  all  of  a sudden.  Occasional  cos-
tiveness. Hard  and  difficult  stool.  Hard  stool  as  if  burnt.
Hard,  scraping  stool.  Hard,  black  stool,  as  if  burnt.
Knotty,  but  not  hard  stool.  Insufficient  stool.  Stool,  with
sensation  as  if  something  had  remained  behind.  Frequent
unsuccessful  desire  for  stool.  Sudden  desire  for  stool  ;
nevertheless  he  has  to  make  an  effort  to  expel  the  feces,
although  the  stool  is  soft  and  natural.  Tenesmus  before
and  after  stool.  Pressing  upon  the  rectum,  as  if  it  would
protrude,  with  pressing  upon  the  bladder.  Tenesmus
after  stool ; she  was  unable  to  sit  still  owing  to  the
pain  in  the  anus.  Constant  desire  for  stool,  at  night  ;
she  had  to  get  up  ten  times,  was  not  able  to  lie  or  sit
down  on  account  of  the  stinging  and  the  sore  pain  in
the  anus  ; she  felt  as  if  she  had  pressed  out  all  the
inside  of  the  abdomen  ; with  excessive  pain  in  the  anus
when  drawing  it  in.  The  stool  escapes  suddenly  and  al-
most involuntarily.  Soft,  thin-shaped  stool.  Frequent,
papescent  stool,  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen.  Soft,  half-
liquid  stool,  frequently.  Soft  stool,  with  tenesmus  and
burning  of  the  anus,  followed  by  emission  of  hot,  fetid  flat-
ulence and  pinching  in  the  region  of  the  small  of  the  back.
Thin  stool,  every  morning,  with  cutting  in  the  hvpogas-
trium,  for  twenty  days.  Involuntary  discharge  of  thin,
papascent.,  bilious-looking  stool,  imagining  that  a wind  was
going  to  pass.  Diarrhoea  for  four  days,  (a.  48  h.)  Watery
darrhcea  every  half  hour,  preceded  by  grunting  in  the  abdo-
men, without  pain,  (3.  d.)  Diarrhoea,  six  times,  unto
fainting,  first  accompanied  with  heat  and  warm  sweat,
afterwards  with  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  feet,  and
with  white  tongue.  . Frequent  foamy  diarrhoea,  with  tenes-
mus, even  at  night.  Diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus  and  cut-
ting in  the  abdomen  ; the  tenesmus  goes  off  by  applying
warm  cloths.  Pale  stool.  Sour-smelling  stool.  Passage
of  undigested  food  with  stool.  Stool  covered  with  mucus.
Stool  three  times  a day,  with  mucus.  Slimy  stool.  Dis-
charges of  reddish  mucus,  with  fever,  want  of  appetite,
lying  down  and  colic.  Mucous  stools,  streaked  with  blood,


SULPHUR.


281

for  several  days,  (a.  5 d.)  Blood  with  stool,  in  the  even-
ing. Ascarides  with  stool.  The  ascarides  cause  an  itch-
ing in  the  rectum.  Passage  of  lumbrici  with  hard  stool,
and  after  violent  colic.  Discharge  of  tasnia  with  hard
stool.  Every  evacuation  is  preceded  by  colic.  Soreness
in  the  abdomen  before  stool.  Palpitation  of  the  heart,
during  stool,  disappearing  after  stool.  Obstinate  and  weep-
ing during  the  morning-stool.  Nausea  during  the  evening-
stool,  as  if  she  would  vomit.  Painful  pressure  in  the  rec-
tum during  the  loose  stool.  Sensation,  during  stool,  as  if
the  internal  parts  were  contracted.  Rush  of  blood  to  the
head  during  soft  stool.  Cutting  in  the  rectum  during  na-
tural stool.  Burning  in  the  rectum  during  stool.  Burn-
ing sensation  in  the  anus  during  stool  ; the  anus  looked
red  and  inflamed,  and  was  covered  with  varices.  Prolap-
sus recti  during  stool.  Bruised  pain  in  the  intestines  after
stool.  Great  exhaustion  after  stool.  Pressure  in  the  anus
and  rectum  after  a soft  stool.  After  a difficult  but  not
hard  evacuation,  prickings  in  the  rectum,  from  the  anus
upward,  so  violent  that  he  came  near  losing  his  senses
with  pain  ; afterwards  chilliness  and  faintness.  Beating
pain  in  the  rectum  after  stool,  the  whole  day.  Burning
at  the  anus  after  a thin  stool.  Contractive  pain  in  the  anus
after  stool.  Pressure  toward  the  anus.  Pressure  or  tear-
ing in  the  rectum.  Violent  stitches  in  the  rectum,  espe-
cially in  the  evening.  Violent  stitches  in  the  rectum , also
between  stools , arresting  the  breathing.  Burning  at  the
anus,  after  having  been  seated  for  a time,  (4.  d.)  Violent
burning  at  the  anus.  Strangulating  sore  pain  in  the  rec-
tum, when  lying  down.  Sore  pain  between  the  nates.
Itching  of  the  anus,  and  rectum . Creeping  and  biting  in
the  rectum,  as  of  ascarides,  in  the  evening  when  sitting.
Grunting  in  the  rectum.  Crowding  repletion  in  the  rec-
tum. Swelling  of  the  rectum,  with  burning  itching.  Hu-
mid varices  of  the  rectum , even  after  good  stool.  Humid
varices  of  the  rectum,  with  smarting  and  pricking,  when
walking  or  sitting.  Dull  stitch  in  the  varices  of  the  rec-
tum, causing  him  to  start.  Involuntary  discharge  of  hu-
mor from  the  anus,  followed  by  itching.  Contractive  sen-
sation in  the  perinaeum.

Urinary  Organs. — Scanty  urine , (the  first  36  h.)


282


SULPHUR.


Violent  desire  to  urinate,  with  burning  in  the  urethra,
Constant  desire  to  urinate)  with  burning;  in  the  urethra.
Constant  desire  to  urinate;  she  passes  a few  drops  invol-
untarily. impatience  previous  to  micturition.  After  hav-
ing had  an  emission  he  wakes  with  a violent  desire  to
urinate,  which  continues  even  after  micturition,  owing  to
an  irritation  in  the  inner  orifice  of  the  urethra,  (not  in  the
bladder.)  Frequent  and  sudden  desire  to  urinate.  Sen-
sation in  the  urethra  as  if  he  should  urinate  all  the  lime.
Constant  desire  to  urinate,  with  scanty  emission.  Violent
emission  of  urine.  Frequent  micturition.  Frequent  de-
sire to  urinate,  preceded  by  cutting  in  the  hypogastrium.
Urinates  every  half  hour,  with  voluptuous  pressing  extend-
ing into  the  anus.  Copious  micturition  after  midnight.
Violent  desire  to  urinate  at  night.  Discharge  of  urine
while  emitting  flatulence.  Discharge  of  urine  while
coughing.  Thin  stream  of  urine.  Intermittent,  stream.
Water-colored  urine.  Dark-brown  urine.  The  urine  is
red  in  the  evening,  and  deposits  a sediment  over  night.
The  urine  becomes  turbid  in  a few  hours.  Whitish  urine,
even  so  while  emitting  it.  Sediment  in  the  urine  resem-
bling white  flour.  Reddish  sediment  in  the  urine.  Greasy
pfdiicle  on  the  urine , for  seven  days.  Fetid  urine.  The
urine  has  a fetid  smell  like  sweaty  feet.  Blood  is  passed
with  the  urine,  the  urine  being  slimy.  Cutting  in  the
abdomen  before  micturition.  Burning  in  the  fore-part  oj
the.  urethra  ( uring  ’micturition.  At  the  termination  and
immediately  after  micturition  he  feels  a cutting  in  the
urethra,  as  if  the  urine  were  acrid  like  lye.  Burning  in
the  urethra  during  micturition.  Pressure  in  the  bladder
after  micturition.  Hard  pressure  upon  the  bladder.  Stitches
in  the  bladder  or  in  the  hypogastrium.  Cutting  in  the  ure-
thra before  and  during  stool.  Smarting  in  the  female
urethra.  Burning  in  the  foie-part  of  the  urethra,  inside
and  outside,  between  the  acts  of  micturition.  Burning  in
the  urethra  between  the  acts  of  micturition.  Itching  in
the  middle  of  the  urethra.  Stitches  in  the  fore-part  of  the
urethra.  Stitches  or  cuttings  in  the  urethra  and  in  the
hypogastrium.  Tearing  in  the  urethra.  Redness  and  in-
flammation of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.

Genital  Organs.— Frequent  itching  and  dampness  in


SULPHUR.


283


the  mens  veneris.  Stitches  in  the  penis.  Stitches  in  the
penis,  in  the  morning  during  micturition,  especially  in  the
glans,  as  if  the  urethra  were  being  pierced  ; at  the  com-
mencement of  micturition  the  urine  came  out  drop  by  drop  ;
afterwards  it  was  retained.  The  penis  looks  bluish,  is
always  cold,  and  the  prepuce  is  drawn  back.  Itching  of
the  glans.  Gians  and  prepuce  are  icy-cold.  Burning  and
redness  of  the  prepuce.  Redness  and  swelling  of  the  pre-
puce. Phimosis  with  secretion  of  fetid  pus  from  under
the  prepuce.  The  prepuce  hangs  far  over  the  glans,  and
is  fissured  into  four  or  five  flaps.  The  prepuce  becomes
stiff  and  hard  as  leather  ; it  shines  on  the  inner  surface
and  secretes  a thin  ichor  having  a disgusting  smell  Groan-
ing sensation  in  the  testes  and  genital  organs.  Pressure
and  tension  in  the  scrotum  and  spermalic  cords.  Prick-
ings in  the  scrotum.  The  scrotum  hangs  down  flaccid,
for  several  weeks.  Thickening  and  swelling  of  the  testi-
cle.  Coldness  of  the  genitals,  in  the  morning.  Male  im-
potence. The  genitals  oppose  a complete  emission  of
semen.  Almost  complete  extinction  of  the  sexual  desire.
Increased  sexual  desire,  (a.  56  h.)  Excessive  desire  for
an  embrace,  without  erection.  Excessive  voluptuous  de-
sire in  the  interior  of  the  sexual  organs,  in  the  morning
after  waking,  with  erection  lasting  an  hour  and  a half,
violent  at  first,  but  feeble  in  the  end  ; the  desire  terminated
in  a burning  pain  which  disappeared  only  on  emission,  (a.
24  h.)  Excited  sexual  desire.  Several  emissions,  (the
first  nights.)  Involuntary  emission  of  watery  semen.  In-
voluntary emission  of  semen  with  burning  pain  in  the  ure-
thra. Involuntary  emission  of  semen  in  an  old  man,  who
had  not  had  any  for  a number  of  years  past,  (6.  n.)  Emis-
sion of  semen  during  the  siesta,  in  a man  of  seventy,  who
had  not  had  any  for  twenty  years  past,  (a.  5 h.)  Discharge
of  prostatic  juice.  Discharge  of  prostatic  juice  after  mic-
turition and  stool.  Weak  feeling  in  the  genital  organs.
Itching  in  the  vagina  from  time  to  time.  Troublesome
itching  of  the  pudendum,  with  pimples  all  around.  Pain-
less vesicles  on  the  outer  parts  of  the  pudendum.  Burn-
ing in  the  vagina,  she  was  scarcely  able  to  sit  still.  Burn-
ing in  the  pudendum,  no  itching.  Infiammalion  of  one  of
the  labia,  with  burning  pain.  Sore  place  in  the  pudendum.


284


SULPHUR.


externally,  and  also  in  the  perinaeum,  for  ten  days.  Vio-
lent itching  of  the  clitoris.  Sore  feeling  in  the  vagina
during  an  embrace.  The  menses  are  too  early  by  one
day,  too  profuse,  accompanied  with  violent  colic  and  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  preceded  by  chilliness  over  the
whole  body.  The  menses  are  more  profuse  and  last
longer.  The  menstrual  blood  is  thick,  black,  and  so  acrid
that  it  makes  the  thighs  sore.  Discharge  of  blood  from  the
uterus  almost  every  day,  for  several  weeks,  after  re-appear-
ance of  the  long-suppressed  menses,  (a.  3 d.)  Menses
too  early  by  seven  days  ; two  days ; too  late  by  eight
days,  and  lasting  eight  days  ; too  early  by  eleven  days,
preceded  by  cutting  in  the  hypogastrium  ; too  late  by  three
days  ; by  two  days,  accompanied  with  oppression  and  un-
comfortableness. Menses  too  late  by  two  days,  with  con-
stipation and  distension  of  the  abdomen.  Sudden  sup-
pression of  the  menses  after  having  flowed  uninterruptedly
for  two  days  and  a half.  Menses  more  profuse,  the  blood
having  an  acid  smell.  Uneasiness  and  anxiousness  the
day  before  the  menses.  Shortly  before  the  menses  cough,
in  the  evening  when  lying  in  bed,  she  had  to  rise  to  re-
lieve it ; this  made  it  go  off.  Spasm  under  the  left  hypo-
chondria before  the  menses.  Stitching  in  the  hollow  tooth
three  days  before  the  menses,  in  the  morning  from  seven
to  eight  o’clock.  Burning  in  the  throat  like  heartburn,
immediately  before  the  menses.  Bleeding  at  the  nose
immediately  before  and  after  the  menses.  Crowded  feel-
ing in  the  chest,  shortly  before  the  menses.  Drowsiness
in  the  day-time,  during  the  menses.  During  the  menses,
pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  now  cutting,  now  contractive.
During  the  menses,  in  the  morning,  violent  colic  and  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  with  bloatedness,  the  flow  being
scanty  ; in  the  afternoon  the  flow  of  blood  was  more  pro-
fuse and  the  pain  became  less,  the  pain  was  generally  re-
lieved by  strong  exercise.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen  dur-
ing the  menses,  accompanied  with  pain  in  the  small  of  the
back  and  chilliness  of  the  whole  body.  Spasmodic  pain
in  the  hypogastrium  during  the  menses,  as  if  the  intestines
were  strung  up  in  knots  by  threads  ; she  was  neither  able
to  walk  nor  lie  down,  but  had  to  sit  straight.  Drawing
colic  during  the  menses.  Pressure  in  the  forehead  during


SULPHUR.


285


the  menses,  generally  in  the  afternoon.  Pressure  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach  during  the  menses.  Rush  of  blood
during  the  menses.  Violent  pain  in  the  abdomen  during
the  menses,  with  great  heat,  chilliness,  and  a sort  of  epi-
lepsy ; she  became  quite  stiff,  drew  her  mouth  to  one  side,
and  moved  to  and  fro  without  talking,  with  cold  forehead
and  cold  hands.  Itching  of  the  outer  parts  of  the  nose,
after  the  menses,  for  many  days.  Violent  leucorrhcea ,
(2.  d.)  Thin,  or  yellowish  leucorrhcea,  preceded  by  pinch-
ing in  the  hypogastrium.  Mucous  leucorrhcea,  a fortnight
after  the  menses.  Leucorrhcea,  smarting  like  salt.  Burn-
ing and  painful  leucorrhoea,  making  the  pudendum  sore,
(2.  d.)  Leucorrhcea  preceded  by  colic,  (13  d.)  During
the  first  movements  of  the  foetus  she  had  violent  palpitation
of  the  heart  and  heat  in  the  face,  followed  by  burning  in
the  abdomen.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Concussive  sneezing.  Frequent
sneezing.  Sneezing  preceded  by  nausea.  Painful  feel-
ing of  dryness  in  the  nose.  Creeping  in  the  nose.  Vio-
lent coryza , (a.  5,  1?  d.)  Fluent  coryza,  like  water.
Burning  fluent  coryza.  Obstruction  of  both  nostrils,  with
frequent  sneezing.  Fluent  coryza,  the  mucus  coming
through  the  posterior  nares.  Feeling  of  obstruction  in  the
upper  part  of  the  nose,  fluent  coryza  and  burning  sore-
ness, with  discharge  of  acrid  water  and  rough  base  voice,
afternoon  and  evening.  Violent  obstruction  of  the  nose
for  several  days , with  expulsion  of  bloody  lumps  when
blowing  the  nose.  Coryza  with  chilliness,  catarrh  and
cough.  Violent  coryza  with  rawness  in  the  chest,  and
cough  with  much  expectoration.  Frequent  secretion  of  a
thick,  yellow,  purulent  mucus  from  the  nose.

Larynx  and  Trachea. — Rough  throat.  Drawing  and
dryness  in  the  larynx.  Hoarseness  in  the  morning.  Ca-
tarrhal voice,  with  a feeling  of  obstruction  in  the  root  of
the  nose.  Flawks  up  pieces  of  hardened  mucus.  Cold-
ness in  the  throat  during  an  inspiration.  The  air  which
he  expires  is  hot.  Constant  secretion  of  mucus  from  the
chest.  When  eating  something  dry,  it  remains  lodged  in
his  throat,  arrests  his  breathing,  and  he  is  obliged  to  cough
it  up  again.  The  larynx  feels  swollen.  Painful  shock  in
the  larynx  when  coughing.  The  mucus  which  had  be-*


280


SULPHUR.


come  accumulated  in  the  chest  over  night,  causes  nausea
in  the  morning  when  waking.  Creeping  in  the  larvnx  ;
talking  excites  cough.  Violent  desire  to  cough,  after  a
meal  ; the  chest  became  spasmodically  constricted,  and
he  was  attacked  with  strangulation  almost  unto  vomiting.
He  wants  to  cough  but  he  is  not  able  ; his  sight  is  obscur-
ed. Cough  at  every  inspiration.  Dry  short  cough  only
when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Short  cough,  in  the  even-
ing while  sleeping  on  a chair.  A good  deal  of  coughing
when  going  to  bed,  with  heat  in  the  head  and  face,  and
cold  bands.  Dry  cough  before  retiring,  w'orse  than  in  the
day-time.  Dry  cough  at  night.  Dry  cough,  with  hoarse-
ness, dryness  in  the  throat,  and  coryza  of  clear  water.
Short  and  hacking  cough  with  burning  and  soreness  in  the
pharynx,  worse  in  the  open  air  and  going  off  after  lying
down.  Sudden  dry  cough  as  if  the  lungs  would  come
out.  Dry  cough  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  with  some
expectoration  towards  morning,  and  sensation  as  if  small
bubbles  burst  in  the  chest.  Loose  cough  with  soreness
and  pressure  in  the  chest,  and  expectoration  of  thick  mu-
cus ; also  with  .rattling  in  the  trachea  and  hoarseness.
Dry  cough  in  day-time,  with  stitches  in  the  right  side  of
the  abdomen  ; accompanied  with  dry  coryza.  Cough
with  expectoration  about  midnight,  again  in  the  morning,
and  not  in  the  day-time.

Chest. — Dry,  short,  violent  cough,  with  pain  in  the
sternum,  or  with  stitches  in  the  chest.  Expectoration
from  the  chest,  tasting  like  old  coryza.  Coughing  up
greenish  lumps,  having  a sweetish  laste.  Clearing  the
throat  at  every  deep  inspiration.  Headache,  when  cough-
ing, as  if  bruised  or  torn.  Violent  ulcerative  pain  in  the
occiput,  when  coughing,  (immediately.)  Pain  in  the  ver-
tex after  a short  cough,  a sort  of  groaning,  and  pain  under
the  right  ribs.  Pain  in  the  head  and  abdomen  from  couah-

O # t O

ing.  Stitches  in  the  parietal  and  occipital  bones  when
coughing.  Stitches  through  the  forehead  when  coughing,
she  is  obliged  to  hold  it  with  her  hands.  Painful  shocks
in  the  head,  when  coughing.  Vomiting  when  coughing.
Throat  and  chest  feel  as  if  cut,  when  coughing.  Concus-
sion of  the  chest  and  abdomen  when  coughing.  Stitches
in  the  region  of  the  xiphoid  cartilage  when  coughing.  Fe-


SULPHUR


2ST


lid  smell  of  the  breath  when  coughing.  Stitches  under
the  right,  chest  when  coughing.  Pain  in  the  right  side  of
the  chest  when  coughing ; the  place  leels  sore  when
touching  it.  Pain  in  the  scapula  when  coughing.  When
coughing,  sensation  as  if  the  lungs  touched  the  back.
Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  chest  during  dry  cough.  When
coughing,  stitching  pain  over  the  left  hip,  extending  into
the  small  of  the  back.  Asthma.  Arrest  of  breathing,  in
paroxysms,  partly  during  motion,  partly  when  sitting  or
lying;  he  is  obliged  to  take  deep  breath,  after  which  the
asthma  passes  off.  Asthma,  convulsions  and  death,  (a.  4
d.)  Asthmatic  after  a walk.  Asthmatic  during  a walk
in  the  open  air.  Asthmatic  from  long  talking.  Arrest  of
breathing  when  pressing  upon  the  chest.  Rattling  in  the
chest,  relieved  by  expectoration.  Frequent  attacks  of  suf-
focative arrest  of  breathing,  in  the  day-time.  Sudden  ar-
rest of  breathing,  in  the  night  in  bed,  when  turning  to  the
other  side  ; going  off  when  sitting  up.  Arrest  of  breath-
ing, even  when  talking.  Frequent  arrest  of  breathing
while  sleeping;  she  had  to  be  roused  to  prevent  suffoca-
tion. Nightly  suffocative  fit,  without  pain.  Scarcely  af-
ter having  fallen  asleep  in  the  evening,  the  breathing  was
arrested  and  she  was  threatened  with  suffocation ; she
started  up  with  a loud  cry  and  was  unable  to  regain  her
breath  ; toward  morningshe  had  violent  palpitation  of  the
heart,  followed  by  faint  sweat.  After  having  walked  twenty
steps  her  chest  feels  constricted,  she  would  like  to  remain
standing  from  time  to  time  to  recover  her  breath.  Not
asthmatic  but  unable  to  take  deep  breath.  When  attempt-
ing to  take  deep  breath,  his  chest  feels  contracted.  Asth-
maiic  in  the  morning,  relieved  by  taking  something;  the
difficulty  of  breathing  seems  to  be  in  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach. Tightness  and  oppression  over  the  whole  body,  more
in  the  chest,  externally  as  it  were,  with  anxiety  ; he  sweat-
ed after  lying  down,  after  which  he  felt  perfectly  relieved.
Tightness  in  the  chest,  as  if  something  had  grown  fast.
Oppressed  breathing  when  stooping.  Oppression  of  the
chest  with  stitches  in  the  left  side,  independent  of  breath-
ing. Involuntary  hurried  breathing  while  entering  into
the  bed,  and  afterwards  difficulty  of  breathing  ; he  had  to
take  deep  breath,  more  when  sitting  than  when  walking.


288


SULPHUR.


Faint  feeling  in  the  chest,  she  breathed  with  difficulty.
Weakness  in  the  chest  when  talking.  Anxiety  in  the  chest.
Tightness  of  the  whole  chest.  Painful  sensitiveness  of  the
upper  part  of  the  sternum,  also  when  touched.  Tension
in  the  right  chest  and  shoulder.  Pressure  in  the  upper
part  of  the  sternum,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  going
off  by  continuing  the  walk.  Pressure  transversely  across
the  middle  of  the  chest,  as  if  one  had  swallowed  too  large
a morsel  of  food.  In  the  morning  when  in  bed,  constantly
increasing  pressure  in  the  chest ; he  had  to  rise,  after  which
it  went  off.  Aching  pain  in  the  sternum  when  walking  ;
he  feels  no  pain  when  touching  the  part.  Pressure  in  the
chest,  with  anxiety.  Heavy  feeling  in  the  chest  for  seve-
ral days.  Contractive  pain  around  the  chest.  Painful
screwing  together  in  the  chest,  frequently,  during  motion.
Spasms  in  the  chest  in  the  evening,  in  a warm  room  ; she
breathed  with  difficulty,  had  not  air  enough,  with  palpita-
tion of  the  heart;  worse  during  motion,  relieved  by  lying
down.  Violent  spasm  in  the  chest,  occasionally.  Exces-
sive pain  in  the  chest,  in  the  evening,  as  if  some  one  seiz-
ed the  chest  internally  and  attempted  to  lift  it  out  of  its
place  or  turn  it  round,  triturate  or  dash  it  to  pieces.
Stitches  in  the  chest  extending  into  the  hack , (a.  16  h.)
Stitches  in  the  left,  chest  when  breathing.  Short  stitches
in  the  region  of  the  heart.  Stitches  in  the  region  of  the
heart,  at  night,  when  lying  upon  the  back,  during  the  least
movement.  Stitches  in  the  sternum.  Violent  stitches
from  the  right  chest  through  the  pit  cf  the  stomach  and
the  stomach.  Stitch  from  the  right  chest  to  the  scapula,
(4.  d.)  Stitching  contractive  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the
chest,  painful  when  touching  them.  Stitches  in  the  back
when  taking  an  inspiration.  Stitching  pain  in  the  os  sa-
crum during  every  expiration.  Stitches  in  the  chest  and
the  dorsal  muscles.  Painful  stitches  into  the  right  chest,
causing  one  to  start.  Continuous  stitching  into  the  left
chest,  going  off  only  for  a short  while  by  a deep  inspira-
tion. Cutting  and  burning  deep  in  the  chest,  after  a walk
in  the  open  air.  Cutting  in  the  chest  down  to  the  pit  of
the  stomach.  Beating  deep  in  the  chest.  Cracking  in
the  sternum  during  motion.  Sense  of  heat  in  the  chest  in
the  morning  when  waking.  Burning  in  the  throat  and  hot


suLPnxra,


289


breath,  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Burning  in  the  chest
and  considerable  warmth  in  the  face.  Burning  in  the  right
side  of  the  chest,  suddenly  coming  and  going.  Burning
and  contractive  sensation  in  a small  spot  of  the  sternum,
rather  externally.  Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  chest,  a sort
of  chilly  tension.  Strange  movement  in  the  region  of  the
heart.  Beating  in  the  sternum,  as  of  an  ulcer.  Shocks
in  the  left  chest,  towards  the  heart,  arresting  the  breath-
ing, accompanied  with  great  thirst.  Crackling  beating  in
the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when  sitting  or  lying,  arrested  by
continuous  inspirations.  Sudden  and  violent  palpitation
of  the  heart,  in  the  evening,  during  an  inspiration.  Pal-
pitation of  the  heart,  at  every  hour  of  the  day,  without
anxiety.  Palpitation  of  the  heart.,  without  any  apparent
cause , without  anguish,  when  lying  down,  during  the  siesta,
etc.  Anxious  beating  of  the  heart.  Pressure  in  the  re-
gion of  the  heart  toward  evening.  Sensation  as  if  the
heart  had  not  space  enough.  Hollow  sensation  in  the  re-
gion of  the  heart.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  heart.  Violent  or-
gasm of  the  blood  in  the  chest,  a sort  of  boiling,  with  qualm-
ishness unto  fainting,  and  tremor  in  the  right  arm.  Pain
in  the  chest,  as  if  sprained,  with  oppression.  Pain  in  the
chest  when  moving  the  arms.  Pain  of  the  right  ribs,  es-
pecially when  touching  them.  Pain  in  the  sternum.
Stitches  in  the  sternum,  per  se,  and  still  more  when  touch-
ing it.  Stitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest,  when  moving
the  arm.  Pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  as  if  he
had  fallen  upon  it.  Pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  outer
chest  as  if  bruised,  when  touching  it.  Burning  in  the  in-
terior of  the  right  clavicle,  as  far  as  the  sternum.  Itching
in  the  outer  parts  of  the  chest.  Erysipelas  of  the  chest;
it  becomes  inflamed,  red,  hot,  hard,  marked  with  red  ir-
radiations emanating  from  the  nipple,  and  with  siitches.
Jerking  in  a mamma,  which  became  distended  as  if  filling
with  milk.

Back. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ; she  was  not  able
to  stand  erect.  Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  only
when  stooping ; tensive,  as  if  the  parts  were  too  short ;
the  pains  moved  across  the  abdomen  into  the  pit  of  the
stomach  and  knee.  Stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back.
Stitches  transversely  across  the  small  of  th©  back.  Pu U

13


SULPHUR.


290

sative  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  loins  and  kidneys.
Violent  tearings  in  the  left  loin,  during  motion.  Burning
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  near  the  anus.  Hard  pres-
sure in  the  small  of  the  back,  diminished  when  walking.
Pressure  in  the  small  of  the  back  disappearing  when
walking,  returning  when  sitting.  Pain  above  the  small  of
the  back . Pain  above  the  small  of  the.  back , when
walking,  not  when  sitting.  Pressing  in  the  small  of
the  back,  when  standing  and  stooping.  Painful  gnaw-
ing in  a small  spot  of  the  small  of  the  back.  Bruised
pr,in  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  os  coccygis.  Painful
stiffness  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Pain  in  the  small  of
the  back,  when  rising  from  a seat.  Sudden  pain,  as  if
sprained,  under  the  ribs  and  in  the  small  of  the  back.
Drawing  and  weakness  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Cracking  in  the  small
of  the  back,  down  to  the  anus.  Sudden,  violent  pain,  as
if  sprained,  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  sneezing,  fol-
lowed by  drawing  pain  close  to  the  spine  and  extending
thence  into  the  left  groin  and  testicle,  especially  painful
when  rising  from  a seat  and  walking.  Pain  in  the  back,
as  if  spn'  Ved,  when  making  a mis-step.  Pain  as  if
sprained  i * ie  left  region  of  the  pelvis  and  between  the
scapulae,  v/he  at  rest,  with  intolerably  painful  jerks  at  the
least  movcrrant.  Pain  in  the  back  and  small  of  the  back,
as  if  bruised  by  blows.  Pain  in  the  back  when  stooping.
Violent  pain  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,  after  stooping  a
long  while.  Feeling  of  weariness  in  the  left  side  of  the
back,  when  moving  the  arm,  as  if  the  parts  had  been  ex-
erted too  much.  Heaviness  in  the  back,  in  the  morning,
as  if  he  had  been  lying  uncomfortably,  and  weariness  as
if  he  had  not  slept  enough.  Stiffness  in  the  back  and
sides,  as  after  a cold.  Stiffness  now  in  the  back,  now  in
the  hip,  painful  when  turning  in  the  bed  ; he  had  to  hold
his  breath.  Stiffness  in  the  back  after  sitting.  Aching
pain  in  the  back  below  the  scapulas,  in  the  evening.
Drawing  in  the  spine  from  below  upward,  when  stooping.
Stilching  pain  in  the  back,  when  walking.  Itching  stitches
in  the  back.  Grunting  within  the  spine  all  along.  Hot
thrill  over  the  back.  Burning  and  biting  in  the  back.
Tearing  in  the  back.  Corrosive  burning  between  the
shoulders,  below  the  right  shoulder-joint,  in  the  small  of


SULPHUR.


291


the  back  and  the  right  buttock,  in  the  evening  after  lying
down.  Tearing  in  the  left  scapula,  when  silling.  Tear-
ing or  pricking  between  the  scapulae,  in  the  evening.
Burning  pain  between  the  scapulae.  Burning  between  the
scapulae.  Tensive  aching  between  the  scapulae,  when
lying  down  or  when  moving.  Tension  and  bruised  pain
between  the  scapulae  and  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  extend-
ing into  tiie  shoulder  when  moving  the  head.  Tension
between  the  scapulae  and  in  one  side  of  the  neck.  Tensive
pain  m the  left  side  of  the  back,  when  moving  the  arms.
Drawing  pain  in  the  right  scapula,  in  the  evening  when
going  ho  bed.  Pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  right  scapula,
when  moving  the  arm.  Stitching  pain  in  the  left  scapula,
when*  leaning  upon  the  left  arm.  Several  stitches  under
the  scapulas,  arresting  the  breathing  and  not  allowing  one
to  stoop.

Neck. — Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  paralytic
pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  as  if  sprained.  Cracking  in
the  cervical  vertebras  when  bending  the  head  backward
and  pressing  it  into  the  pillow.  Tensive  pain  in  the  nape
of  the  neck  and  extending  thence  till  over  the  eye,  where
the  pain  became  pricking.  Drawing  jerking  in  the  pos-
terior cervical  muscles.  Tension  and  pinching  in  the  nape
of  the  neck,  when  sitting  crooked,  going  off  after  stretching
the  neck.  Drawing  pain  in  ti  e nape  of  the  neck  and  the
scapulae.  Tearing  and  tension  in  the  left  side  of  the  nape  of
the  neck,  before  midnight,  after  waking,  with  sensation  as
if  the  parts  were  too  short  when  moving  the  head,  the  pain
being  less  when  keeping  the  head  still.  Stitches  in  the
nape  of  the  neck  when  stooping.  Inflammation  and  swell-
ing of  a posterior  cervical  gland,  close  to  the  hair,  and
itching.  Herpes  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Continual
sweat  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  almost  the  whole  day,  some-
times accompanied  with  a feeling  of  coldness  and  shudder-
ing, for  a fortnight.  Stiffness  of  the  neck.  Pain  in  the
right  side  of  the  neck  when  bending  the  head  to  that  side.
Drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck.  Pressing  in
the  outer  parts  of  the  neck,  when  talking  much.  Pulsa-
tions in  the  left  carotid.  Painful  swelling  of  the  outer
neck  in  front.  Itching  of  the  neck.  Little  blotches  on


292


SULPHUR.


the  neck  as  from  the  heat.  Pain  of  a swollen  gland  near
the  thyroid  body,  when  touched.

1 Upper  Limbs.  — Swelling  of  the  axillary  glands.  Swol-
len, moist  gland  under  the  right  arm.  Purulent  swelling
of  the  axillary  glands.  Sweat  of  the  axillae.  Very  feiul
sweat  of  t'ie  axillae.  Pinching  alternately  in  the  left
shoulder  and  in  the  feet.  Rheumatic  pain  in  the  shoulder.
Pain  in  the  shoulder  during  an  inspiration.  Pressure  on
the  shoulder  like  a load,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Drawing  pain  in  the  shoulder-joint  and  in  the  arm.  Tear-
ing, from  the  shoulder-joint  down  along  the  humerus.
Tearing  in  the  shoulders  or  shoulder-joints,  especially  at
night,  with  gnawing  or  violent  bruised  pain  and  pricking,
at  first  exacerbated,  afterwards  relieved,  by  the  motion  of
the  arm.  Stitches  in  the  right  axilla.  Tearing  in  the
shoulder-joints  when  at  rest,  going  off  during  motion.
Stitches  from  the  shoulder  into  the  chest,  only  during
motion.  Stitches  extending  from  the  shoulder-joint  into
the  arm,  when  lying  upon  it,  and  during  inspirations  and
expirations.  Beating  in  the  left,  shoulder,  apparently  in
the  bone.  Pain  of  the  shoulder-joint,  as  if  dislocated,  es-
pecially at  night  when  lying  down.  The  arms  are  pain-
ful as  if  bruised.  The  arm  goes  to  sleep  for  24  hours.
The  arms  frequently  go  to  sleep  for  quarters  of  hours,
especially  after  working  ; he  has  to  let  them  rest.  Cramp
in  the  arms,  after  midnight.  Pressure  and  drawing  in
the  interior  of  the  arm,  more  violent  during  motion  than
when  at  rest,  especially  when  stretching  or  raising  the
arm.  Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  arms  and  hands.  Jerk-
ing drawing,  at  night  when  in  bed,  from  one  joint  of  the
arm  to  the  other,  but  more  violent  in  the  joint.  Tearing,
slow  jerks  from  the  shoulder  or  elbow-joint  through  the
limb,  most  painful  in  the  joint,  obliging  him  to  close  the
eyes  and  to  knit  the  brow.  Tearing  and  paralytic  weak-
ness in  the  right  arm.  Tearing  in  the  arm,  independent,
of  motion.  Red,  burning,  spots  on  the  upper  and  lower
arms,  (after  washing  them  with  soap-water.)  Sensation
in  the  upper  arm  as  if  something  heavy  were  hanging  on
it.  Weakness  in  the  upper  arm,  so  that  she  is  not  able  to
raise  it.  Jerking  pressure  in  the  deltoid  muscle.  Tearing


SULPHUR.


293


in  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  humerus.  Forcing  stitch-
ing in  tiie  right  upper  arm.  Bruised  pain  in  the  left  upper
arm,  which  is  likewise  painful  when  touched.  Hard,
hot  swelling  of  the  left  upper  arm,  with  pricking  in  the
swelling.  Burning  pain  below  the  bend  of  the  elbow  ; the
part  feels  pithy  or  numb  to  the  touch.  Bruised  pain
around  the  right  elbow-joint,  when  raising  the  arm,  or  when
clenching  the  fist.  Intensely  painful,  sharp  drawing  in
the  right  elbow-joint.  Pressure  in  the  elbow-joint  when
moving  it.  Tearing,  commencing  in  the  elbow-joint  and
extending  upward  and  downward  in  the  arm,  also  when  at
rest.  Tearing  in  and  above  the  right  elbow-joint,  when
at  rest,  going  off  when  moving  the  arm.  The  tendons  in
the  elbow-joint  feel  stretched.  Purulent  vesicles  in  the
bend  of  the  elbow,  itching  a good  deal.  Slow , painful
drawing  in  the  fore-arms,  as  if  in  the  nerves , extending
from  the  elbow  to  the  wrist  and  back  again.  Itching  of
the  elbow  and  wrist-joints  and  especially  of  the  hands,  in
the  evening  m particular  ; little  vesicles  full  of  a yellowish
fluid  form  here  and  there.  Tension  in  one  spot  of  the
right  fore-arm,  as  if  the  skin  were  being  raised  with  a pin,
the  part  itching  after  rubbing  it.  Tearing  in  the  bones  of
the  fore-arm,  sometimes  relieved  by  motion  and  by  press-
ing upon  the  parts.  The  right  lower  arm  feels  heavy  and
as  if  gone  to  sleep.  The  right  fore  arm  feels  paralysed
and  without  sensation,  going  off  by  friction  ; at  night,  when
lying  upon  the  left  side.  Tearing  in  the  knuckles.  Tear-
ing pain  in  the  wrist-joints.  Drawing  in  the  dorsum
of  the  hand,  with  alternate  stitches.  Painful  stitches
through  the  wrist-joint,  from  within  outward.  Sudden
burning  stitch  in  the  dorsum  of  the  hand.  Tearing
in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  hand,  sometimes  as  if  it  were
in  the  bones,  sometimes  in  the  tendons.  Pain  as  if
sprained,  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  during  rest  and  s'ight
motion,  going  off  at  last  entirely  by  violent  exercise.  Pain
in  the  wrist-joint,  as  if  sprained.  Stiffness  of  ihe  wrist-
joints,  especially  in  the  morning,  disappearing  in  the  day-
time. Burning  in  the  hands.  Disiended  veins  of  the
hands.  Frequent  swelling  of  the  hands.  Formication  in
the  hands.  The  hands  go  to  sleep,  with  tingling,  as  soon
as  they  are  dipped  in  cold  or  warm  water.  Weariness  of


294


SULPHUR.


the  right  hand,  with  tearing  in  the  thumb.  Weakness  of
the  hands  in  the  morning  after  rising  ; he  has  to  make  a
great  effort  to  hold  something  with  it.  Trembling  of  the
hand  when  writing.  Trembling  of  the  right  hand  in  the
morning.  Tremulous  feeling  in  either  hand.  A sort  of
anxiety  in  the  hands  ; he  had  to  seize  something.  In-
voluntary seizing  something  with  the  hand,  especially  in
the  afternoon.  Sweaty  hands.  Itching  in  the  palms  of
the  hands.  Itching  in  the  palms  of  the  hands  ; rubbing
produces  a burning  sensation.  Itching  prickling  burning
in  the  palms  of  the  hands.  Itching  vesicular  eruption  on
the  dorsum  of  the  hand.  Redness  and  swelling  of  the
hands  and  fingers,  as  if  frozen,  with  itching  in  the  evening
and  with  tension  during  motion.  Hard,  dry  skin  of  the
hands.  Chapped  skin  of  the  hands.  Almost  painless
chapping  of  the  hands,  especially  at  the  commencement
of  the  fingers.  Fissures  and^  rhagades  in  the  skin  of  the
hands,  especially  in  the  joints,  sore  and  painful.  The
parts  around  the  posterior  knuckles  are  chapped  and  rough,
like  a grating  iron.  A slight  injury  of  the  finger  becomes
sore,  with  pulsations  in  the  sore,  afterwards  exhibiting  a
malignant  blister,  the  whole  hand  swelling,  but  no  pain
to  the  touch.  The  tendons  in  the  palms  of  the  hands
behind  the  two  first  fingers  feel  shortened,  hard  and  ten-
sive, so  that  he  is  unable  to  spread  his  hand  fiat  upon  the
table.  Drawing  pain  in  the  fingers,  single  short  jerks,  in
the  afternoon.  Cramp  in  the  three  middle  fingers.  In-
voluntary jerking  of  the  fingers.  Tearing  in  the  fingers.
Tearing  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  thumb,  extending  as
far  as  the  metacarpal  joint  and  half  the  dorsum  of  the
hand.  Lancination  behind  the  nail  of  the  left  ring-finger,
as  if  a pin  were  stuck  in,  especially  violent  in  the  evening.
Feeling  of  cramp  bruise,  and  swelling  in  the  metacarpal
joint  of  the  third  and  fourth  fingers,  (during  the  menses.)
Pinching  and  pressure  in  the  ball  of  the  left  little  finger,
every  five  minutes,  darting  into  the  arm  when  leaning  the
elbow  on  something,  with  chilliness  ; in  the  day-time  the
pain  is  changed  to  violent  stitches,  likewise  accompanied
with  chilliness,  all  his  limbs  feeling  weary  as  after  a long
fatigue.  Continuous  burning-tearing  stitch  in  the  dorsum
of  the  middle-finger.  Burning  jerk  in  the  left  middle-


SULPHUR.


295


finger.  Burning  in  the  balls  of  the  fingers,  (forenoon.)
Burning  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Pain  as  if  sprained
in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  thumb.  Pain  in  the  flexor-side
of  the  right  middle-finger,  as  if  a splinter  had  been  stuck
in.  Stitches  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Creeping  and
prickling  in  the  lips  of  the  fingers , very  painful ; worse
when  letting  the  arms  hang  down.  The  two  last  fingers
go  to  sleep  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Numbness  of  the
little  finger,  for  a time.  Numbness  of  the  two  little  fingers,
they  go  to  sleep.  Deadness  of  the  fingers , in  the  morning  ;
the  blood  recedes  from  them,  with  numbness  and  creeping
in  the  fingers,  and  shrivelled  skin  of  the  tips,  for  two
hours,  three  days  in  succession.  Deadness  of  the  fingers,
in  the  forenoon.  Coldness  of  the  fingers.  Considerable
swelling  of  the  three  middle-fingers  of  both  hands.  Thick,
stiff,  red  finger-joints,  as  if  frozen,  with  creeping  in  them.
Swelling  of  the  fingers,  in  the  morning.  Thick , red  chil-
blains on  the  fingers,  itching  a good  deal  when  warm.
Certain  portions  of  the  epidermis  of  the  fingers  peel  off.
Profuse  sweat  between  the  fingers.  Pain  of  the  tips  of
the  fingers  in  the  morning,  as  if  he  had  cut  his  nails  too
short.  Many  of  the  finger-nails  grow  into  the  flesh.
Panaritium,  twice  in  succession.

Lower  Limbs. — Pain  of  the  right  nates.  When  sit-
ting  a long  while,  the  nates  and  ossa  ischii  become  painful.
Itching  gnawing  of  the  nates.  Tensive  pain  in  the  hip-
joint  when  walking.  Violent  pain  as  if  sprained  in  the
right  hip-joint,  during  the  least  movement,  so  that  he  was
neither  able  to  tread,  nor  to  walk  in  the  morning  ; the
parts  are  also  painful  when  touched.  Frequent  jerking,
deep  in  the  left  hip,  when  silting  down  and  when  moving
the  body  to  one  side.  Pain  in  the  hip,  only  during  mo-
tion and  when  touching  it,  as  if  the  parts  were  bruised  by
blows,  or  as  if  he  had  fallen  upon  them.  Pm  in  the  ossa
ischii,  she  was  neither  able  to  sit  nor  lie  d vn,  as  if  there
were  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  ; whenris'jg  r n the  seat
the  thigh  felt  as  if  gone  to  sleep,  with  pinebmg  in  the  re-
gion of  the  os  ischium.  Cramp-like,  sudden,  very  fainful
jerks  around  the  hip  joint.  Drawing  pain  in  the  left  hip.
Nettlerash  below  the  hip.  Drawing  pain  in  the  lower
limbs,  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  evening  when  in  bed


296


SULPHUR.


violent  tearing  in  the  lower  limb,  from  the  bee!  into  the
thigh  and  hip  joint ; when  standing  the  pain  is  worst  in  the
knee-joint ; it.  was  relieved,  and  finally  entirely  removed
by  walking.  Violent  tearing  in  the  right  lower  limb  and
lup-joint,  when  walking,  in  paroxysms  ; she  was  not  able
to  sit  long  on  a low  seat  without  stretching  the  limb,  and
without  feeling  a pain.  Pain  in  ike  lower  limbs  as  if
bruised , alter  walking  in  the  open  air.  Uneasiness  in  the
lower  limbs,  she  was  not  able  to  remain  in  the  room,  for
two  evenings,  until  bed  time.  Dry  heat  in  the  lower  limbs.
Coldness  m the  left  lower  limb.  The  right  lower  limb
feels  numb,  even  when  lying  down.  Sensation  when  lying
down  as  if  he  were  not  able  to  raise  his  own  limb  ; never-
theless he  W'as  able  to  do  so.  When  silling  he  frequently
has  no  sensation  in  his  limbs,  they  feel  as  if  they  had  gone
to  sleep.  The  lei t lower  limb  goes  to  sleep  for  a whole
hour,  tw'o  evenings  in  succession.  Both  lower  limbs  go
to  sleep  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  with  great
heaviness.  Heaviness  in  the  lower  limbs,  and  tension  in
the  knees  and  thighs,  more  in  the  night  than  in  the  day-
time. Painful  heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs.  Heaviness
and  weariness  of  the  lower  limbs,  in  the  morning  when  in
bed;  it  goes  off  immediately  after  rising.  Heaviness  and
faintness  of  the  lower  limbs  after  short  walks.  Excessive
heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs  when  walking,  almost  as  if
paralysed.  Humming  in  the  lower  limbs,  as  if  from  wea-
riness. Feeling  of  anxiety  and  weakness  in  the  whole  of
the  right  lower  limb,  when  walking.  Weakness  in  the
lower  limbs,  she  was  scarcely  able  to  walk,  and  pain  as  if
there  were  no  marrow  in  her  bones.  Sudden  weakness  of
the  lower  limbs,  especially  of  the  legs,  after  a short  walk.
A kind  of  paralysis  in  the  thigh,  apparently  in  the  hip,
above  the  nates.  Jerking  in  both  thighs,  apparently  in  ihe
bone.  Cramp  in  the  right  thigh.  Tingling  itching  of  the
inner  side  of  the  thigh.  Dry  heat  of  the  thighs  and  of
the  small  of  ihe  back,  with  coldness  of  the  back.  Pain  of
the  posterior  muscles  of  the  thigh,  when  sitting.  The
thigh  feels  as  if  constricted  with  a band.  Jerking  in  the
thigh  and  leg.  Drawing  pain  in  the  thigh.  Violent  tear-
ings  in  the  right  thigh,  from  the  knee  up  to  the  crest  of
the  ilium,  followed  by  exhaustion  and  weariness  of  the
whole  body.  Tearing  in  the  thighs  and  femora,  generally


SULPHUR.


297

relieved  by  walking.  Pricking  and  burning  in  the  inner
side  of  die  left  thigh,  relieved  by  friction.  Bruised  pain
in  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh,  also  when  touching  the  part.
Violent  pain  in  the  thigh,  at  night,  as  after  a blow.  Pain
in  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh,  as  if  wounded,  in  the  evening.
Soreness  between  the  thighs , especially  when  walking  in
the  open  air.  Itching  pimples  on  the  inner  side  of  the
thighs.  Pain  in  the  knee  as  if  stiff , when  rising  from  a
seat.  Stiffness  of  the  bends  of  the  knees.  Rigidity  of
the  knees.  Sensation  in  the  knees  as  if  they  were  seized
by  two  hands,  in  the  evening.  Tension  in  the  knees  when
rising  from  a seat,  when  walking,  and  especially  when
going  upstairs.  Rigidity  in  the  bends  of  the  knees  when
treading,  as  if  too  short.  Tension  in  the  bends  of  the
knees,  extending  down  to  the  boot.  While  in  bed,  the
knees  become  sevaral  times  spasmodically  bent  and
stretched  again.  Violent,  cramp-like  pressure  in  the  bend
of  the  knee,  down  to  the  ankles,  generally  when  sitting,
twice  an  hour,  every  day  in  the  afternoon,  with  great  wea-
riness and  painful  rigidity  in  the  head.  Pressure  in  the  re-
gion of  the  patella,  when  sitting  or  walking.  Pressure  in  the
knee-joint,  when  moving  it.  Dull  stitching  pressure  at  a
small  point  of  the  outermost  tip  of  the  knee.  Tearing  in
the  left  knee,  only  when  walking.  Tearing,  externally,  in
the  left  patella,  disappearing  by  continuing  to  walk.  Tear-
ing and  pain  as  if  sprained,  in  the  left  knee,  only  when
treading,  in  the  evening  ; the  pain  goes  off  after  lying
down,  but  returns  in  the  morning.  Stitching  in  the  right
knee.  Stitching  in  the  knee  and  the  tibia,  (:$.  d.)  Stitch-
ing in  the  right  knee,  only  when  standing,  afterwards  in
the  left  carpal  joint.  Stitching  pains  in  the  knees.  Long
stitches  in  the  knee,  causing  one  to  start  and  shudder
Stitching  in  the  knee  during  a slight  motion,  and  when
ascending  a flight  of  stairs,  but  almost  never  when  walking
upon  level  ground.  Glowing-burning  stitch  in  the  bend
of  the  left  knee.  Paralytic  weakness  in  the  knee,  when
going  down  stairs,  as  if  sprained.  Faintness  in  the  knees,
as  if  sprained.  Faintness  in  the  knees,  especially  in  the
forenoon  ; after  ascending  a flight  of  stairs,  a burning  is
experienced  in  the  joint.  Bruised  pain  of  the  knees,  when
rising  from  a seat  and  bending  the  knees.  Painful  wearP

13*


298


SULPHUR.


ness  in  the  knee-joints.  Feeling  of  weariness  in  the  knees,
early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed.  Relaxation  in  the
knees,  as  if  they  would  bend  from  weakness.  The  knees
bend  involuntarily  when  walking.  Cracking  in  the  knees,
(2.  d.)  Itching  around  the  knees.  When  rising,  the  leg
feels  as  if  gone  to  sleep,  and  a burning  tingling  is  expe-
rienced in  it.  Coldness  of  the  legs  in  the  evening  ; they
feel  cold  to  one’s  self  and  others.  Distension  of  the  veins
of  the  legs.  Tremor  and  weariness,  stitching  and  tearing
in  both  legs,  extending  from  the  knees  to  the  feet;  when
sitting,  there  is  more  tearing;  when  walking  the  stitching
and  the  tension  are  felt  most,  the  toes  being  icy  cold.
Tearing  in  the  legs  from  the  knees  down  to  the  feet,  when
walking  or  sitting.  Tearing  in  both  legs  up  to  the  middle
of  the  thighs.  Tearing,  extending  from  the  knees  down
to  the  toes,  the  feet  being  so  heavy  that  she  is  scarcely
able  to  drag  them  along.  Bruised  pain  in  the  internal
part  of  the  legs  near  the  tibiae,  when  touching  them,  as  if
the  flesh  were  loose  from  the  bones  ; in  the  evening.  The
leg  inclines  to  cramp  when  stretching  the  foot-  Great
pain  in  the  calves  when  going  up-stairs.  Pricking  pain  in
the  right  calf.  Drawing  in  the  tibia,  calf,  and  sole  of  the
foot,  in  alternation.  Griping  drawing  in  the  calves  when
sitting,  less  when  walking.  Glowdng  burning  and  boring
in  the  right  calf,  in  the  evening.  Painful  weariness  in  the
calves,  at  night.  Bubbling  in  the  right  calf,  as  of  falling
drops  of  water.  Tearing  and  twitching  to  and  fro,  in  the
evening,  from  the  calves  down  to  the  toes  ; when  standing
or  sitting  down,  there  was  a jerking  in  the  inner  sides  of  the
feet,  with  a feeling  of  trembling  in  the  whole  body,  heavi-
ness and  tearing  in  the  whole  back,  chilliness  without
thirst,  with  red  cheeks  without  heat;  after  this  the  pit  of
the  stomach  became  affected,  with  tension  and  contraction
under  the  ribs,  oppressed  breathing  and  many  stitches  in
the  whole  chest  and  epigastrium.  Contractive  pain  in  the
calf.  Tension,  rigid  stiffness  and  contractive  pain  in  the
calves,  as  if  composed  of  parts  stitched  together.  Cramp
in  the  calves  even  when  walking,  the  calf  being  painful  as
if  too  short.  Cramp  in  the  calves,  when  dancing.  Vio-
lent cramp  in  the  calves  in  the  morning  when  in  bed.
Tremulous  feeling  in  the  calves,  when  sitting.  Swelling


299


SULPHUIt.

of  the  calves.  The  feet  are  icy-cold  in  the  evening,  until
bed-time.  Coldness  in  the  bottom  of  the  feet.  Coldness
in  the  feet  all  the  time,  cannot  get  them  warm  in  the  bed.
The  soles  become  soft,  painful  and  sensitive  when  walk-
ing. When  treading  the  soles  are  oainfal  as  if  there  were
sub-cutaneous  ulceration.  Still  pain  in  the  soles.  Vio-
lent, momentary  pain  in  the  left  heel.  Contractive  sensa-
tion in  the  soles  as  if  too  short.  Tension  in  the  cavity  of
the  bottom  of  the  foot.  Tension  around  the  ankles  when
walking.  Cramp  in  the  bottom  of  the  foot  at  every  step.
Stiffness  in  the  tarsal  joint,  around  the  ankles.  Drawing
in  the  feet,  extending  up  to  the  hip,  with  cracking  of  the
joints  at  every  movement.  Drawing  pain  in  the  soles,  in
the  morning  when  in  bed  ; a violent  pain  is  experienced  in
the  soles  when  treading.  Painless  jerking  in  the  bottom
of  both  feet,  going  off  by  motion.  Tearing  in  the  bottom
of  the  right  foot,  going  off  by  rubbing.  Tearing  in  the
right  foot.  Tearing  in  the  right  heel,  for  half  an  hour.
Tearing  and  pricking  in  the  sore  foot,  at  night.  Pricking
in  the  right  foot.  Violent  stitches  in  the  tendo  Achillis,
almost  every  5 minutes.  Pricking  below  the  right  ankle,
even  during  rest,  but  more  when  extending  the  foot,  and
even  when  performing  the  least  motion.  Stitches  in  the
soles.  Stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  right  foot.  Stitching  in
the  right  heel,  as  of  a splinter.  Clawing  stitching  in  the
dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  worse  during  motion.  Prickling
tingling  in  the  right  heel.  Burning  stitch  in  the  dorsum
of  the  left  foot,  suddenly.  Cutting  in  the  heel,  extending
to  the  cavity  of  the  bottom  of  the  foot.  Burning  over  the
dorsa  of  the  feet.  Burning  and  itching  in  the  soles,  espe-
cially violent  and  intolerable  when  walking.  Burning  in
the  soles,  when  treading  after  having  been  seated  a long
while.  Burning  pinching  in  the  tarsal  joint,  rubbing  in-
creases the  burning.  Swelling  of  the  feet  in  the  warmth
of  the  bed,  going  off  when  out  of  bed.  Swelling  of  the
right  foot,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Swelling  in  the
region  of  the  ankle,  with  pain  as  if  sprained  during  motion.
Pain  as  if  sprained,  in  the  left  tarsal  joint,  when  standing
or  walking.  Sudden  bending  over  of  the  tarsal  joint,  when
treading,  as  if  the  joint  were  sprained.  Bending  over  of
the  foot  when  walking,  or  going  down  stairs.  Cracku  _


300


SULPHUR.


the  tarsal  joint,  when  walking.  Numbness  and  tingling  in
the  bottom  of  the  foot,  going  off  by  rubbing.  The  left  sole
goes  to  sleep,  in  the  evening.  Great  heav  iness  in  the  feet,
especially  in  the  tarsal  joints.  Beating  in  the  cavity  of
the  sole,  with  violent  burning,  for  one  hour.  Sweat  of
the  bottom  of  the  feet.  Cold  sweat  on  the  left  sole.  Blue
spots  and  varices  in  the  region  of  the  ankles.  Pimples
around  the  ankles.  Ulcerated  vesicles  on  the  soles.
Cramp  in  the  toes  when  extending  the  feet.  Tearing  in
the  posterior  joint  of  the  right  big  toe.  Stitches  in  the
forepart  of  the  lei t big  toe.  Stitching  in  the  tips  of  the
toes,  when  sitting  or  lying.  Fine  stitches  in  the  middle
toes  and  the  two  big  toes.  Aching  pain  and  soreness  of
the  inner  side  of  the  nail  of  the  big  toe.  The  nail  of  the
big  toe  is  painful.  Dull  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  left  toe.
Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  big  toe,  with  pain.
Swelling  of  the  toes.  Itching  in  those  toes  ivhich  had
been  frozen  formerly  (the  first  days.)  White,  painful
pimples  between  the  toes.  The  corns  are  painful  as  if
pressed  by  tight  shoes.  Frequent  and  violent  stitches  in
the  corns.  Stinging  burning  in  the  corn,  in  wide  shoes.
Painful  inflammation  of  the  corns.

General  Symptoms. — When  lying  down,  the  limbs
immediately  goto  sleep.  The  limbs,  arms,  cervical  mus-
cles, scalp, nates  and  feet  go  to  sleep  easily,  especially  when
lying  down.  Pressuie  in  the  upper  and  lower  limbs,  as  if
they  would  go  to  sleep.  Drawing  pain  in  the  limbs , in
the  evening.  Pushirg  in  the  limbs,  almost  like  drawing.
A pain  in  the  chest  which  was  now  over  and  had  occurred
six  weeks  ago  from  a contusion,  is  felt  again  as  an  aching
pain,  especially  in  the  evening.  Momentary  drawing  in
the  knee,  arm  and  shoulder.  Tearing  in  the  back,  knees
and  legs,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Sudden  tearing  or
jerking  here  and  there  in  the  body.  Drawing  pain  in  the
abdomen  and  in  all  the  limbs,  for  hours  in  the  arms,  and
for  whole  days  in  the  thighs.  Violent  drawing  and  tear-
ing through  the  knees  and  tibiae,  especially  in  the  evening.
The  drawing  (tearing)  pains  in  the  limbs  become  intolera-
ble when  they  are  covered  by  feather  beds.  The  pains
are  relieved  by  external  warmth,  increased  by  coldness.
Most  pains  come  on  during  rest  and  go  off  during  motion.


SULPHUR.


301


The  pains,  especially  those  felt  in  the  head  and  stomach,
come  on  in  the  open  air  when  walking.  The  limbs  feel
bruised,  in  the  morning  after  rising.  Bone-pain  of  the
limbs,  when  feeling  them,  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached.
She  feels  worst  when  standing.  Cracking  in  the  knees
and  elbows.  Pinching  in  the  muscles  here  and  there.
Uncomfortable  sensation  as  if  all  the  parts  of  the  body
were  pushed  out  of  their  natural  places.  Strange  feeling
of  pressure  through  the  whole  body.  Tension  in  all  the
limbs  as  if  too  short,  he  had  to  stretch  them.  Tensive
soreness  in  all  the  limbs  and  in  the  tendons  of  the  feet,  af-
ter a short  walk.  Palpitation  with  tremor  of  the  hands  af-
ter a short  walk,  at  noon.  Formication  of  the  skin  of  the
whole  body.  Prickling  in  the  skin  of  the  whole  body,  in
the  evening,  after  getting  warm  in  the  bed.  Burning  in
the  hands  and  feet,  with  weakness  and  exhaustion  of  the
whole  body.  Prickling  in  the  skin  of  the  cheeks,  shoul-
ders and  thighs.  Stinging  itching,  especially  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air.  Burning  in  the  skin  of  the  whole
body.  The  itching  place  is  painful  after  scratching.  After
slight  rubbing  the  skin  is  very  painful  for  a long  time.
Biting  as  of  fleas  in  the  evening  after  lyi  ig  down,  and  in
the  night ; when  removed  by  scratching  in  one  place,  it
immediately  comes  on  in  another.  Disagreeable  creeping
itching,  with  pain  in  the  spot  when  scratching  it.  Itching
burning  in  different  parts,  with  soreness  after  scratching.
The  itching  place  bleeds  and  smarts  after  scratching  it.
Itching,  worst  in  the  night,  and  in  the  morning  after  wak-
ing. Itching  in  the  axillae  and  bends  of  the  knees.  AfLer
scratching,  the  place  feels  as  if  hot.  Eruption  upon  the
skin.  Itching,  stinging  rash  over  the  whole  body.  Vio-
lently itching  rash  over  the  whole  body,  afterwards  the
skin  peels  off.  Nettle-rash  with  fever,  (26.  d.)  Itching
blotches  over  the  wThole  body,  on  the  hands  and  feet,  (a.  35
d.)  Burning  itching  eruption.  Red  (itching)  pimples  on
the  nose,  upper  lip,  around  the  chin  and  on  the  fore-arms  j
they  sometimes  burn  after  scratching.  Pimples  on  the
back,  without  any  sensation,  appearing  after  violent  itch-
ing in  the  evening.  Hepniic  spots  on  the  chest  and  back,
itching  in  the  evening.  The  old  herpetic  eruptions  itch
furiously  \ he  has  to  scratch  them  until  they  bleed,  (a.  9


302


SULPHUR.


d.)  A scaly  herpetic  eruption  which  had  been  repelled  by
external  means,  appears  again,  itching  violently  and  burn-
ing after  scratching.  In  an  old  wart  below  the  eye,  an
itching  stinging  is  experienced,  (a.  5 d.)  The  skin  be-
comes chapped  here  and  there,  especially  in  the  open  air.
Boils.  Ulcers  in  the  intestines.  Violent  bleeding  of  the
old  ulcers.  Tensive  pain  in  the  ulcer.  The  ulcer  near
the  nail  emits  a fetid  odor.  The  pus  of  the  ulcer,  (which
was  covered  with  a scurf,)  has  an  acid  smell.  A small
cut  becomes  painful,  smarting  at  first,  afterwards  burning,
and  then  becomes  inflamed,  a beating  pain  being  experi-
enced in  it.

Weakness,  Fits. — Single  jerks  of  a hand  and  foot,  in
the  day-time.  Jactitation  of  the  muscles,  here  and  there,
as  if  caused  by  electricity.  Frequent,  spasmodic  jerking
in  the  whole  body,  after  supper,  with  pain  in  the  back  and
afterwards  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.  Epileptic
fit,  after  fright  or  violent  running.  Epileptic  fit ; creeping
as  of  a mouse,  commencing  in  the  back  or  arm,  the  mouth
was  drawn  to  the  right  and  left,  painful  motions  in  the  abdo-
men, the  left  arm  becomes  turned  with  clenched  thumbs ; af-
terward trembling  in  the  right  arm ; after  this  the  whole  body
was  tossed  up  and  down  ; with  very  short  breath,  becom-
ing still  shorter  after  the  altack  ; she  shrieked  during  the
fit,  but  was  unable  to  talk,  (a.  12  d.)  Fit,  while  walking  in
the  street  ; sudden  obscuration  of  sight  ;*>she  walks  back
at  least  15  steps,  seats  herself  suddenly  upon  the  stones
as  if  she  would  fall  and  had  lost  iier  senses,  and  is  con-
ducted home  in  the  same  state  of  unconsciousness  ; after-
wards she  feels  stiff  in  all  her  joints.  The  child,  when
washed,  inclines  the  head  to  one  side,  and  when  raised,
the  head  inclines  to  the  other  side,  face  and  lips  become
pale,  the  eyes  become  staring  for  two  minutes  ; after  this
she  sneezes,  closes  her  eyes  and  mouth  for  one  moment
tightly  and  lets  mucus  run  out  of  her  mouth  ; this  is  fol-
lowed by  a sound  sleep,  (a.  3 d.)  Attack  of  obscuration
of  sight,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  with  violent  pres-
sure and  beating  in  the  head,  nausea  and  faintness,  (6.  d.)
Attack  of  stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back,  arresting  the
breathing,  accompanied  with  pain  in  the  head  and  nape  of
the  neck,  succeeded  by  alternate  heat  and  chilliness,  with


SULPHUR.


303


apprehensive  anxiety  about  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  until
evening.  Attack  of  eructations  toward  evening,  with  nau-
sea, relaxation  of  the  body,  violent  rumbling  in  the  abdo-
men and  emission  of  flatulence.  Chilliness,  owing  to  dis-
agreeable news  ; is  scarcely  able  to  get  warm  in  the  bed.
Talking  fatigues  her  and  gives  her  pain.  Jerking  in  all
the  limbs,  he  clenches  his  teeth  and  moans  with  a low
voice,  for  about  eight  minutes  ; this  is  followed  by  a slum-
ber of  a quarter  of  an  hour,  followed  again  by  jerking  and
cramp-like  drawing  in  the  limbs,  after  which  he  feels  very
•faint.  The  body  is  jerked  high  up,  as  when  violently  con-
vulsed. Shuddering  through  the  whole  body,  in  the  even-
ing when  in  bed,  like  a thrill  of  shuddering  through  the
skin.  Tremulous  sensation  in  the  arms  and  lower  limbs.
Desire  in  the  hands  and  toes  to  extend  and  contract  them.
Great  uneasiness,  he  cannot  sit  still  ; even  when  lying
down  he  has  to  move  his  feet  constantly.  Considerable
orgasm,  and  great  burning  in  the  hands.  Agitation  in  the
blood,  with  distension  of  the  veins  on  the  hands.  Dry  heat
in  the  body,  he  feels  too  warm  in  any  room.  Internal  heat
with  thirst.  Frequent  and  suddenly  passing  flushes  of
great  heat.  Feeling  of  heat  in  the  whole  interior  of  the
body  ; burning  in  the  chest  rising  from  the  bottom  of  the
chest ; no  thirst.  Unsteady  gait,  and  tremor  of  the  hands.
Tremor  of  the  limbs,  especially  the  hands.  Violent  tre-
mor of  the  left  scapula,  arm  and  hand,  in  the  forenoon.
Tremulous  sensation  through  the  whole  body,  in  the  morn-
ing, but  warm.  Chilliness.  Inclines  to  catch  cold.  The
child  is  exceedingly  sensitive  to  the  open  air,  (the  first
days.)  When  exerting  the  body  a little  more  than  usual,
he  feels  more  irritated  and  passionate.  Violent  palpitation
of  the  heart  after  walking  in  the  open  air.  Headache  and
weariness  in  the  afternoon  during  a walk,  changing  to
toothache  and  drowsiness  in  the  evening,  (a.  8 d.)  Nau-
sea and  debility  after  a walk,  with  trembling  of  the  limbs.
Dry,  short  cough  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  The  open
air  makes  him  feel  chilly  as  if  he  were  naked.  Sweats  a
good  deal  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Profuse  sweat
when  sitting,  no  sweat  in  the  night.  Sweats  when  mak-
ing the  least  exertion,  reading,  writing,  talking,  or  walking.
Drops  of  sweat  in  the  face  when  making  the  least  exer-


304


SULPHUR.


tion.  Sweat  in  the  face  and  nape  of  the  neck,  in  the  morn-
ing when  in  bed,  and  bruised  feeling  of  the  limbs  when
rising.  Heaviness  and  faintness  in  the  limbs  from  morn-
ing till  evening.  Lassitude  the  whole  day.  Fainting  sort
of  vanishing  of  strength  in  the  upper  and  lower  limbs,  he
came  near  losing  his  senses,  (7.  d.)  Fainting  fit,  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour.  Weary  and  faint  all  the  time.  Weary
as  after  an  illness.  Weariness  of  the  feet.  Weariness,
going  off  when  walking.  Fainting  weakness  when  lying
down.  All  the  weakness  in  the  limbs  disappears  after
walking.  Trembling  of  the  limbs  from  .weakness,  during
every  movement.  Want  of  vitality,  a sort  of  internal  cold-
ness ; heat  almost  constantly  alternating  with  chilliness  ;
pale  complexion  with  blue  margins  around  the  eyes,  dread-
ing the  heat  when  in  a cold  temperature,  and  the  cold
when  in  a warm  temperature.  After  smoking  a cigar,  and
taking  a walk  afterwards  he  feels  quite  wTeak  and  trem-
bling. Out  of  breath  and  faint  when  making  the  least  ex-
ertion, the  abdomen  being  constantly  distended  and  the
feet  swollen.  Fainting  and  vertigo  in  the  afternoon,  with
vomiting  and  sweat.  Heaviness  of  the  feet,  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air,  becoming  lighter  by  continued  walk-
ing. Sensation  as  if  she  dragged  a load  along  on  her  feet ;
with  tension  across  the  chest.  Faint  and  low-spirited,  in
the  afternoon.  Fie  became  so  faint  after  a drive  that  he
slept  the  whole  day.  Very  faint  in  the  afternoon.

Sleep. — Cramp-like,  uninterrupted  yawning  before  bed-
time. Frequent  yawning  and  stretching,  without  drowsi-
ness. A good  deal  of  yavming  and  drowsiness  the  whole
day.  Frequent  yawning  and  cold  hands.  Unconquerable
drowsiness  in  the  day.  Drowsiness  in  the  afternoon.
Very  drowsy  in  the  evening.  Constant  yawning  in  the
evening,  for  an  hour,  and  an  unconquerable  weariness.
Long  sleep  in  the  morning.  He  sleeps  much,  and  never-
theless does  not  feel  refreshed  in  the  morning.  Has  no
inclination  whatsoever  to  rise  in  the  morning.  Is  yet
drowsy  at  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  with  indisposition
to  work.  In  the  morning,  sensation  as  if  he  had  not  slept
enough,  with  his  eyes  swollen,  and  with  desire  to  stretch
himself.  For  many  mornings  he  feels  very  lazy  for  half
an  hour,  with  pain  in  the  back  and  lower  limbs ; she  had


SULPHUR.


305


to  seat  herself  frequently.  Deep  sleep  in  the  morning,
without  any  visible  inspirations.  Heat  in  t he  face  and
nausea,  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Heaviness  in  the
back  and  lower  limbs,  in  the  morning  when  rising.  She
feels  very  sleepy  in  the  night,  and  her  eye-lids  feel  heavy
and  close  ; nevertheless  she  is  not  able  to  fall  asleep.  She
does  not  full  asleep  under  an  hour , without  any  pain.
Difficulty  of  falling  asleep,  on  account  of  ideas  crowding
upon  the  mind.  She  frequently  wakes  from  a sound  sleep,
without  any  apparent  cause.  He  wakes  every  half  hoar.
Wakeful  the  whole  night.  He  frequently  wakes  in  the
night  half,  is  however  able  to  think,  and  leels  chilly.  Sleep-
lessness, as  if  from  nervous  irritation.  She  does  not
sleep  at  all,  although  she  is  tired.  Tossing  from  side  to
side  in  the  bed,  at  night.  He  frequently  turns  to  the  other
side  in  the  night,  without  waking.  Great  wakefulness  in
the  evening  ; the  blood  rose  to  his  head,  and  the  night
was  sleepless.  Involuntary  recollection,  in  the  evening,
of  a business  which  had  been  terminated.  In  the  evening,
when  performing  some  light  work,  she  perspired  for  a
short  while,  and  dreamed  afterwards  that  she  had  on  a
dress  which  she  ought  to  be  very  careful  of,  and  guard
against  stains.  Talks  loudly,  while  asleep,  of  the  business
which  he  had  done  in  the  day-time.  Restless  night;  he
wakes  with  a start,  as  if  he  had  had  a fearful  dream  ; af-
ter waking  he  was  yet  full  of  anxious  fancies,  as  of
ghosts,  etc .,  of  which  he  was  not  able  to  get  rid.  Sleep
full  of  dreams  ; he  wanders  as  if  in  delirium.  She  ima-
gines that  she  has  seen  or  done  the  ihings  she  had  merely
dreamed  of.  He  imagined  he  heard  a noise,  in  the  even-
ing when  on  the  point  of  dropping  to  sleep  ; this  caused
him  to  start  so  violently  that  the  whole  body  felt  it.  Fre-
quent startings  when  asleep.  Starting  during  the  siesta.
Jerking  with  the  foot,  when  slumbering.  Violent  head-
ache in  the  night,  disturbing  her  rest.  Waking  in  the
morning,  with  giddiness  and  dulness  of  the  head.  He  is
frequently  roused  in  the  night  by  a throbbing  of  the  blood
in  the  head,  afterwards  in  the  chest.  Violent  palpitation
of  the  heart  in  the  night,  when  turning  to  the  other  side.
Digging-up  sensation  in  the  forehead,  at  night.  Burning
in  the  mouth  at  night,  with  thirst.  Compressive  pain  in


306


SULPHUR.


the  stomach,  in  the  night  after  waking,  going  off  by  bend-
ing double.  In  the  night , pressure  at  the  stomach,  for  an
hour , relieved  by  eructations.  At  night,  pressure  at  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  causing  anxiety  and  accompanied  by
palpitation  of  the  heart;  several  nights  for  hours.  After
midnight,  pressure  at  the  stomach  and  throbbing  headache.
Vertigo  when  waking  in  the  night.  Vertigo  and  nausea
in  the  night,  while  sweating;  every  thing  turned  with  her
until  morning.  Pain  in  the  fore-teeth,  in  the  night.  Fre-
quent nausea  in  the  night.  About  midnight,  she  is  waked
by  stitching  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen.  Nightly  flatu-
lent colic,  with  retching,  anguish  and  obtusion  of  the  head.
At  night,  sharp  stitches  in  the  abdomen,  followed  by  fre-
quent emissions  of  flatulence.  At  night,  cramp-like  pres-
sure in  the  abdomen.  At  night,  contractive  colic,  all  of  a
sudden.  Pressing  in  the  abdomen  from  above  downward,
it  wakes  her.  Protrusion  of  the  umbilical  region,  as  if
caused  by  the  uterus,  in  a pregnant  female,  at  night,  when
lying  upon  the  back,  in  paroxysms  of  some  minutes,  (a.
14  d.)  Sweat  over  the  whole  abdomen,  at  night,  extend-
ing as  far  as  the  groin,  the  feet  being  cold  as  far  as  the
ankles,  and  accompanied  writh  dull  cutting  in  the  soles.
At  night,  during  sleep,  a humor  and  some  faeces  escaped
from  her  anus.  Asthmatic  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.
Attacks  of  arrest  of  breathing,  at  night.  Oppression  of
the  chest,  in  the  night,  as  if  the  chest  were  oppressed  by
a heavy  load  ; he  had  to  sit  up.  He  wakes  in  the  morning
with  rawness  of  the  chest.  At  night,  shocks  in  the  left
chest  towards  the  heart,  arresting  her  breathing,  with
great  thirst,  (a.  3 d.)  Short  and  hacking  cough  for  a
whole  hour,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  ; this  made
her  feel  hot;  again  at  three  o’clock  in  the  morning.  San-
gineous  expectoration  at  night,  with  greasy,  sweetish  taste
in  the  mouth.  Quick  beating  of  the  heart,  in  the  evening,
after  turning  from  side  to  side  for  some  time.  Violent
pain  in  the  back  for  several  nights,  with  bruised  feeling
in  the  small  of  the  back,  and  with  great  orgasm  of  the
blood.  Violent  pain  in  the  hip-joint  at  night,  also  when
touched.  Painless  jerks  in  the  small  of  the  back,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed.  Aching  pain  in  the  thigh  the  whole
night.  Tearing  in  the  thigh  and  leg,  at  night  when  in  bed,


SULPHUR.


307


she  was  not  able  to  get  warm  in  the  bed.  At  night , he
is  obliged  to  gut  his  lower  limbs  out  of  the  bed  U)  dimin-
ish the  tearing.  Tearing  in  both  feet  in  the  night,  after
which  they  felt  rigid  and  he  was  unable  to  sleep.  Stitches
in  the  corns  at  night.  Cramp  in  the  calves  when  extend-
ing the  feet.  Heat  of  the  feet,  in  the  evening  when  in
bed,  with  a feeling  of  burning,  obliging  her  to  uncover
them  several  hours  ; afterwards  uneasiness,  itching  and
creeping  in  the  feet.  Titillation  in  the  left  upper  and
lower  limb,  for  two  hours,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  A
good  deal  of  stretching  in  the  night.  When  sleeping,  he
lays  his  arms  over  his  head.  Snoring.  Palpitation  of  the
heart,  at  night.  Sleeps  with  his  eyes  half  open.  Mutter-
ing. Sensation  as  if  every  part  of  his  body  trembled  and
beat,  at  night  when  half  awake.  Great  anxiety,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed,  (about  full  moon.)  At  night,  he
wakes  with  great  anguish  and  heat  all  over,  and  with  sen-
sation of  a spasmodic  condition  in  the  body.  Restless
sleep  after  midnight  ; she  dreams  that  she  is  having  an  at-
tack of  fever  and  wakes  covered  with  sweat,  with  great
heat,  especially  in  the  face,  thirst  and  chilly  shuddering,
increasing  by  motion  unto  chattering  of  teeth.  She  ex-
claims, while  sleeping,  that  she  is  black,  etc.  Exclama-
tions while  asleep.  Moaning  while  sleeping.  Great  heat
in  the  night,  alternating  with  chilliness.  He  dreams  he
has  been  bit  by  a dog.  Anxious  dreams , as  if  fire  wrere
falling  from  Heaven.  Anxious  dream,  as  if  he  wmre  being
oppressed  and  crushed  by  something,  (nightmare.)  Dreams
that  he  is  falling  from  a height.  Frightful  dreams.  Dis-
gusting dreams,  with  nausea  when  waking.  Left  the  bed
the  first  three  nights,  like  a somnambulist,  saying  : “ My
head  ! I am  delirious  !”  and  seized  his  forehead  ; going  off
alter  walking  about.  Anxious  dream,  during  which  she
leaves  her  bed  unconsciously,  followed  by  violent  head-
ache, (a.  3,  4 d.)  Anxious  dream,  before  midnight  ; she
rises,  imagines  that  a fire  has  broken  out,  inquires  at  the
windows,  and  starts  when  perceiving  that  it  is  nothing  but
a dream  ; she  felt  bruised  and  faint  for  three  days  after.
Many  vivid  dreams.  Ludicrous  fancies  before  dropping
to  sleep,  in  a sort  of  half  dream,  she  laughed.  For  three
nights  in  succession  he  talked  aloud  of  the  things  which  he


308


SULPHUR*


saw  in  his  fancy.  Visions,  as  soon  as  he  closes  his  eyes.
Horrid  visions,  as  soon  as  she  closes  her  eyes  in  llie  even-
ing. At  night,  when  waking,  an  arithmetical  figure  was  be-
fore her  fancy,  which  gradually  extended  in  size,  until  the
lines  were  half  a foot  wide.  He  fears  he  might  catch  cold
in  the  open  air  ; he  knows  not  whether  this  is  fancy  or
physical  reality.

Fever. — Chilliness,  followed  by  heat,  in  the  evening
before  falling  asleep.  Chilliness  in  the  afternoon,  after-
wards heat  with  thirst,  cold  feet  and  sweat  in  the  face  and
on  the  hands  ; with  dry  night-cough,  as  soon  as  he  gets
into  bed.  Creeping  shuddering  over  the  skin,  without
chilliness.  Passing  chilliness,  on  the  chest,  arms  and
back.  Cold  nose,  hands  and  feet.  Feeling  of  coldness
for  several  hours,  without  chilliness  ; afterwards  heat  with
little  thirst,  slight  sweat  with  headache  and  hoarseness,
great  faintness  and  loss  of  appetite.  Feeling  of  coldness
through  all  the  limbs,  without  subsequent  heat,  in  the  fore-
noon. Chilliness  in  the  back  from  below  upward,  in  the
evening,  for  an  hour,  without  subsequent  heat.  Frequent
internal  chilliness , without  thirst.  Chilliness  in  the  night,
for  four  hours,  preceded  by  colic,  accompanied  with  heat
without  sweat  ; profuse  sweat  in  the  night  following.
Chilliness  every  evening,  which  cannot  be  removed  by  the
warm  stove  ; great  warmth  in  the  bed,  and  sour  sweat
every  morning.  Chilliness,  with  diarrhoea,  for  several
hours.  Shaking  chills  in  the  evening,  and  great  paleness
of  the  face.  Shaking,  feverish  chilliness,  frequently  in  the
evening.  Shaking  chilliness  from  seven  to  eight  o’clock,
without  thirst,  with  cold  hands  and  violent  pressure  at  the
stomach,  as  of  a load  ; afterwards  the  usual  warmth,  with
thirst.  Chilliness  and  coldness  of  the-  whole  body,  after-
noon and  evening.  Chilliness  from  morning  till  evening.
Thrill  of  chilliness  along  the  back  ; it  can  be  arrested  by
the  warmth  of  the  stove.  Chilliness , with  thirst,  even
near  the  stove,  after  dinner , until  four  o’clock.  Chilli-
ness, and  afterwards  shaking  over  the  whole  body,  com-
mencing at  the  toes,  without  heat  or  subsequent  thirst,  in
the  afternoon.  Chilliness  with  headache,  in  the  evening;
going  off  after  lying  down.  Constant  thrill  of  chilliness
along  the  back,  commencing  in  the  small  of  the  back,


SULPHUR


309


without  heat  or  subsequent  thirst,  in  the  evening  from  six
till  eight  o’clock.  Chilliness  in  the  bed,  at  night,, she  can-
not get  warm.  Chilliness  with  frequent  chilliness  and  heat
perceptible  to  the  hand,  almost  every  half  hour.  Chilli-
ness and  shaking  in  the  afternoon  ; after  lying  down  heat
in  the  hands  and  bottom  of  the  feet,  passing  off  soon,  with-
out thirst.  Shuddering,  from  the  feet  over  the  back  into
the  arms,  for  half  an  hour,  at  six  o’clock  in  the  evening.
Shuddering  in  the  whole  body,  until  bed  time,  without  suit-
sequent  heat  or  thirst.  Shuddering  in  the  evening,  fol-
lowed by  heat  in  the  face  and  hands,  with  thirst.  Wakes
in  the  night  wiih  a feverish  shuddering,  and  nevertheless
feels  warm  to  others  ; followed  by  a little  heat.  Feels  cold
in  the  afternoon  ; afterwards  she  became  warmer,  but  the
feet  remained  cold.  Chilliness  in  the  forenoon,  feeling  of
heat  in  the  afternoon,  although  she  felt  cold  to  others.
Shuddering  in  the  morning  at  eight  o’clock.  Chilliness
for  one  hour  in  the  forenoon,  followed  by  a two  hours’
heat  in  the  head  and  hands,  at  three  o’clock  in  the  af-
ternoon ; this  attack  occurred  several  days  in  succession.
Colds  hands  and  feet  in  the  afternoon,  followed  by  chilli-
ness and  shaking  for  half  an  hour,  with  blue  countenance  ;
afterwards  heat  and  sweat  until  half-past  nine  o’clock.
Chilliness  in  the  evening,  slight  sweat  in  the  night.  Vio-
lent chilliness,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  followed  by
ravings  of  the  fancy,  heat  and  violent  swreat.  Violent
chilliness,  commencing  in  the  evening,  and  lasting  through
the  night  and  the  next  day,  (a.  33  d.)  Chilliness  at  5
o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  afterwards  heat,  then  again  chilli-
ness and  some  thirst,  until  8 o’clock.  Flushesfcof  heat  in
the  face,  afterwards  coldness  of  the  whole  body  both  to
himself  and  others,  followed  by  weakness  in  the  femora,
felt  especially  when  sitting  as  if  there  were  no  marrow  in
them.  Violent  heat  in  the  face,  towards  evening,  with
chilliness  over  the  back  and  hairy  scalp.  Flushes  of  heat
in  the  face,  with  feverish  shuddering  in  the  outer  parts  of
the  abdomen.  Heat  in  the  afternoon,  mingled  with  chilli-
ness and  continued  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Heat  in  the
face  in  the  day-time,  followed  by  chilliness  of  half  an  hour
every  evening  about  5 or  6 o’clock  ; after  this  heat  all  over,
for  one  hour.  Sensation  as  if  warm  air  blew  upon  the


310


SULPHUR ICTJM  ACIDTIM.


legs,  more  or  less,  in  the  evening.  Fever  about  noon,  a
good  deal  of  internal  heat  with  redness  of  the  face  and
chilliness  at  the  same  lime  ; all  the  limbs’ felt  weary  as  if
bruised,  with  great  thirst,  until  midnight,  when  the  chilli-
ness and  heat  abated  and  she  began  lo  perspire  all  over
for  3 hours,  (19.  d.)  Feverish  heat,  first  in  the  face,  with
sensation  as  if  she  had  just  escaped  a severe  illness  ; after
the  heat  some  chilliness  with  much  thirst,  (a.  4 d.)  Fever
every  forenoon,  internal  chilliness,  increasing  every  day,
with  vertigo,  as  if  the  head  would  sink,  without  thirst ;
followed  by  faintness  which  was  so  violent  that  he  was  un-
able to  go  up-stairs,  with  sweat  day  and  night,  only  about
the  head  which  was  bloated.  Chilliness  for  two  hours
every  evening,  without  heat ; next  night,  when  waking,
heat  without  thirst.  Great  thirst  in  the  morning.  A good
deal  of  thirst. in  the  day-time.  Feverish  heat  with  thirst,
from  noon  till  evening.  Heat  with  much  thirst,  only  in  1 he
day-time,  not  in  the  night.  Dry  heat:  in  the  morning  when
in  bed.  Anxious,  disagreeable  heat  in  the  morning  when
in  bed,  with  sweat  and  dryness  in  the  throat.  Heat  to-
wards morning,  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.  Copious
morning-sweat,  only  about  the  itching  parts.  In  the
morning  while  sleeping,  sweat,  going  off  when  waking.
Sweat  of  the  hands  and  feet  in  the  morning.  Copious
morning-sweat,  setting  in  only  after  waking.  Swear,  at
night,  only  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Night-sweaty  when
waking.  Night-sweat,  having  a sour,  acrid  smell.  Sweat
before  bed-time,  especially  about  the  hands  ; after  lying
down  heat  and  difficulty  of  dropping  to  sleep.  Anxious
sweat  with  tremor,  in  the  evening  ; followed  by  vomiting  ;
during  the  anxiety  pressure  upon  the  rectum  ; afterwards
heaviness  in  the  head  and  weakness  in  the  arms.  Anxious-
ness, feverish  delirium  with  great  asthma,  burning  at  the
stomach,  vomiting,  convulsions  of  the  whole  body,  death.
Pulse  84  beats,  and  half  an  hour  after  73,  (a.  1 h.)


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.

The  concentrated  acid  is  used  for  homoeopathic  pur-
poses. Sulphuric  acid  has  cured  affections  characterised


SULPHURICUM  ACIDTJM,


311


by  tension  in  the  eye-lids  in  the  morning,  short-sightedness ;
hard  hearing  ; inguinal  hernia  ; chronic  looseness  of  the
the  bowels  ; profuse  menses  ; metrorrhagia  ; roughness
in  the  throat,  asthma ; swelling  of  the  foot ; coldness  of
the  feet.

My  co-observers  are  Fr.  Hahnemann  ; Franz  ; Gross  ;
Langhammer  and  Ng.

Moral  Symptoms. — Desponding,  peevish  mood.  Melan-
choly and  weary  of  life.  Great  apprehensiveness  from
morning  till  evening,  (13.  d.)  Sad,  gloomy,  irritable.
Weeping  mood,  without  any  apparent  cause,  (1.  d.)  Dis-
trustful. Sullen.  Exceedingly  nervous  and  starting
violently  at  the  leastnoise.  Uneasy,  (a.  12  h.)  Hurried-
ness ; she  can  do  nothing  fast  enough  to  satisfy  herself,
this  hurriedness  wears  her  out.  111-humor  the  whole  day.
she  dreaded  talking  to  any  body.  Sullen  mood  in  the
morning.  Vexed,  impatient  when  not  succeeding  in  his
work.  Exceedingly  out  of  humor.  The  anxiety  and
oppression,  and  the  low-spiritedness  alternating  with  exal-
tation of  courage  are  replaced  by  an  even  and  tranquil
disposition,  (curative  effect.)  Sedate  and  serious.  Ex-
tremely jesting.  Exaltation  of  the  mind  and  heart.  Great
absence  of  mind.  Stupefaction.

Head. — Weakness  in  the  head.  Oppressive  obtusion
of  the  head.  Feeling  of  heaviness  and  fulness  in  the  head,
she  has  to  incline  it  forward.  Heaviness  of  the  head,  and
pain  in  the  head,  as  if  the  brain  would  issue  through  the
forehead.  Sudden  obscuration  in  the  right  side  of  the
head,  as  of  smoke,  when  silting.  Sense  of  stupidity  and
fulness  in  the  head,  almost  the  whole  forenoon.  Vertigo
in  the  room,  going  off  in  the  open  air.  Vertigo  in  the
afternoon  when  sewing,  as  if  she  would  fall  from  the  chair.
Vertigo,  he  had  to  lie  down  all  the  time,  for  as  soon  as  he
raised  himself,  the  vertigo  returned.  Vertigo  when  sit-
ting ; things  turn  in  a circle.  In  the  morning,  when  waking,
the  head  felt  as  if  dashed  to  pieces.  Head  as  if  the  head
would  burst.  Aching  and  burning  pain  in  the  head,  fre-
quently, in  the  forehead  and  eyes.  Pressure  in  the  right
side  of  the  forehead,  as  from  a blow,  increasing  at  first,
afterwards  disappearing  suddenly.  Compressive  pain  in
the  side  of  the  occiput,  relieved  by  holding  the  hands  near


312


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.


the  head  even  without  touching  it.  Sensation  in  the  left
side  of  the  head,  over  the  ear,  as  of  being  pressed  upon
with  a screw.  Constriction  of  the  forehead,  increasing  at
first,  afterwards  disappearing  suddenly.  Pressure  in  both
temples  from  without  inward.  Drawing  headache,  in  the
evening.  Drawing  and  tension  in  the  head.  Drawing  in
a small’  spot  of  the  left  temple,  more  externally.  Drawing
headache,  especially  in  the  right  side,  toward  the  forehead.
Painful  tearing  in  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  towards  the
left  side.  Tearing  and  stitching  in  the  right  part  of  the
sinciput,  relieved  by  pressing  upon  the  part,  in  the  evening.
Tearing  in  the  right  temple,  towards  evening.  Painful  tear-
ing in  the  left  temple,  when  sitting,  at  breakfast.  Tearing
in  the  whole  head,  day  and  night.  Grumbling  in  the  tem-
poral bones  from  time  to  time.  A violent  jerk  from  time
to  time  below  the  left  frontal  eminence,  going  off  rapidly.
Painful,  sudden  jerking  over  the  left  frontal  eminence.
Shocks  in  the  right  temple,  as  if  a plug  were  lodged  in
that  part  and  were  pushed  in  more  and  more  deeply.
Single  shocks,  with  jerking,  in  the  right  temple.  Pain
over  the  left  orbit,  as  if  a plug  had  been  pushed  in,  in-
creasing at  first.,  afterwards  uisappearing  suddenly.  Stitches
under  the  left  frontal  protuberance,  into  the  brain,  sudden,
dull  and  intensely  painful,  resembling  shocks.  Dull  stitch
deep  into  the  brain,  below  the  left  frontal  eminence,  in-
creasing suddenly,  decreasing  afterwards  and  finally  dis-
appearing entirely.  Dull  stitches  in  the  fore-part  of  the
head,  now  on  the  right,  now  on  the  left  side,  deep  into  the
brain.  Stitching  pain,  now  in  the  forehead,  now  in  the
occiput.  Stitches  in  the  head,  now  here,  now  there,  when
walking  in  the  open  air.  Burning  pain  in  the  temple,  as
if  caused  by  a bruise  or  contusion,  in  paroxysms  going  and
coming  like  a wave.  Pain  as  from  a blow,  near  the  left
frontal  eminence,  increasing  at  first,  afterwards  disappear-
ing suddenly.  Painful  feeling  of  soreness  over  the  left
frontal  eminence,  single  paroxysms  of  which  become  more
and  more  painful.  Sensation  in  the  region  of  the  forehead,
as  if  the  brain  were  loose,  and  were  falling  to  and  fro.
Intense  pain  below  the  right  frontal  eminence,  as  if  the
brain  were  loose  and  beat  against  the  skull  with  pain,  when
shaking  the  head.  Pain  of  the  outer  parts  of  the  head , as


SULPIJUItlCUM  ACIDTJM.


313


if  there  were  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  the  parts  are  pain-
ful to  the  touch.  Violent  itching  in  the  hairy  scalp.
Violent  eruption  on  the  head,  in  the  face  and  nape  of  the
neck.  The  hair  turns  gray  and  falls  off.

Eyes. — The  eye-lids  become  lowered,  and  he  is  not  able
to  open  them.  Sensation  in  the  right  outer  canthus  as  of
a foreign  body  being  lodged  there  ; in  the  morning  when
walking  ; going  off  in  the  room.  Pressure  in  the  outer
canthus.  Stinging  itching  in  the  lower  eye  lid  ; he  is
obliged  to  rub.  Frequent  smarting  in  the  right  eye,  ( 1 . d.)
Smarting,  burning  and  running  of  the  left  eye,  when  read-
ing in  the  day-time.  Burning  and  running  of  the  eye  when
reading  in  the  twilight.  Burning  pressure  in  the  anterior
side  of  the  eyeball,  in  the  open,  air  ; the  pain  ceases  in
the  room  and  is  then  only  felt  when  looking  steadily  at  a
thing.  Red  eyes  with  photophobia  and  constant  running.
Lcichrymation.  Agglutination  of  the  eyelids  in  the  morn-
ing. Jerking  in  the  right  internal  canthus.  I)im-sightedness
in  the  morning.  Vertiginous  sensation  before  the  eyes,
with  faintness.

Ears.  — Violent  itching  in  the  concha.  Drawing  in  the
right  meatus  audilorius,  from  within  outward.  Tearing  in
front  of  the  left  ear,  and  in  the  temple  from  below  upward.
Tearing,  deep  in  the  left  ear,  afterwards  tingling  in  the
ear.  A few  violent  tearings  in  front  of  the  left  ear,  caus-
ing her  to  start,  and  extending  into  the  left  cheek,  where
a tingling  was  experienced.  Tearing  and  stitching  in  the
right  ear,  rather  externally.  Jerking  in  1 lie  right  ear,  pre-
ceded by  an  agreeable  warmth  which  comes  out  through
the  ear.  Diminution  of  hearing  as  of  a leaf  being  stretch-
ed before  the  ear.  Shrill  ringing  in  the  right  ear.  Noise
as  of  a distant  waterfall  in  the  left  ear  when  opening  the
month,  during  dinner.  Whizzing  in  the  ears,  in  the  evening.

Nose. — Fine  prickling  in  the  right  side  of  the  nose.
Bleeding  of  the  nose,  in  the  evening  when  sitting  or
standing.

Face. — Face  pale,  with  motion  in  the  stomach,  (4.  d.)
Redness  and  feeling  of  heat  in  the  right  cheek.  Cooling
burning  on  the  left  cheek.  Sensalion  as  if  the  face  were
distended,  and  as  if  albumen  were  drying  upon  the  skin.
Swelling  of  the  left  cheek.  Jerks  in  the  face,  around  the

14


314


STJLPHXJRICtJM  ACIDUM.


ear.  Tearing  in  the  left  facial  bones.  Pricking  in  the
skin  below  the  right  eye,  first  increasing,  afterwards  dis-
appearing. A violent  stitch  in  the  right  cheek,  frequently,
from  below  upward.  Bruised  pain  in  the  left  malar  bone,
increasing  at  first,  disappearing  afterwards  and  suddenly.
Small  pimples  on  the  forehead  and  the  side  of  the  nose.
The  lips  become  scaly  and  peel  off.  Pressure  as  with  a
knife,  directly  above  the  left  corner  of  the  mouth.  Sore
pain  in  both  corners.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Sore  pain  of  either  angle  of  the
mouth.  Tearing  in  the  lower  jaw,  now  here,  now  there.
Pain  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands , the  pain  affecting  even
the  tongue , which  looks  burnt.  Swelling  and  inflamma-
tion of  the  sub-maxillary  glands,  sometimes  with  stitches
in  the  glands.  Pain  in  a right  upper  incisor,  pressing  from
without  finwaTd.  Toothache  made  worse  by  cold,  milder
by  warm  things.  Tearing  in  ihe  left  lower  teeth,  from
evening  till  midnight.  Tearing  in  the  left  cuspidatus  and
lower  jawr,  the  whole  night,  during  the  menses.  Gnawing
pain  in  the  right  lower  row  of  teeth.  The  teeth  are  set  on
edge , the  whole  afternoon,  (a.  4 h.)  Gnawing  pain  in  a
molar  tooth  and  in  a cuspidatus,  when  biting  upon  some-
thing hard.  Digging-up  pain  in  a hollow  mofar  tooth.
The  gums  feel  like  fur,  and  bleed  when  touched  ever  so
lightly.  Swelling  of  the  right  lower  gums;  pus  is  dis-
charged from  the  swelling  when  pressing  upon  it.  Ulcer
on  the  gums.

Mouth. — Disagreeable  feeling  of  drvness  in  the  mouth,
for  two  days.  Accumulation  of  sweetish  saliva  in  the
mouth.  Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  month,  as  of  hun-
ger, for  several  hours.  Ptyaltsm  wilh  accelerated  pulse.
Violent  flow  of  tasteless  saliva.  Vesicles  on  the  inner
side  of  the  cheek.  Aphthae.  Dry  tongue.  Frequent
rising  of  mucus  into  the  mouth,  causing  vomiturition  and.
slight  choaking;  he  has  to  swallow  it  verv  fast.

Pharynx. — Rough  throat , almost  after  every  new  dose.
Scraping  in  the  throat.  Pricking  in  the  pharynx,  worse
during  deglutition,  a pain  is  felt  when  touching  the  part.
Contractive  sensation  in  the  throat,  especially  on  the  right
side.  Sensation  as  if  the  throat  were  swollen,  as  if  a ball
were  in  it*


BULPHUHICUM  ACIDTJM.


315


Taste  and  Appetite. — Bad  taste  in  the  mouth  afier
waking  in  the  morning.  Putrid,  flat,  pappy  taste.  Loss
of  appetite  and  uncomfortableness  ; the  lood  lias  its  natu-
ral, but  not  an  agreeable  taste.  Aversion  to  food,  disap-
pearing in  the  evening.  She  is  hungry  ; but  she  loathes
the  food  as  soon  as  she  approaches  it  to  her  lips.  The
smell  of  coffee  is  exceedingly  disagreeable  to  her;  it
makes  her  tremble  and  feel  weak.  Bread  has  a bitter,
bilious  taste,  and  oppresses  the  stomach.  Milk  causes
flatulence.  Faint  and  exhausted  after  drinking  milk.
Hunger,  but  no. appetite.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Relishes  the  food,  but  feels
qualmish  after  eating,  and  has  to  give  up  eating,  before
having  satisfied  his  appetite.  He  is  troubled  by  the  din-
ner although  he  relished  it.  Cold  sweat  breaks  out  when
eating  warm  things,  especially  on  the  forehead  and  face,
also  on  the  rest  of  the  body-  Colic  after  a meal,  and  im-
mediately  after  digging-up  and  uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,
without  diarrhoea.  Extreme  faintness  after  a meal.  After
a meal  the  region  of  the  stomach  feels  tight  as  if  it  would
burst.  Every  drink  makes  the  stomach  feel  cold,  unless
spirituous  things  are  administered.  Frequent,  long-lasting,
empty  eructations.  Sour  eructations.  Acidity  in  the
throat.  Gulping  up  of  sourish-bitter  things,  (4.  d.)  Bitter
eructations.  Gulping  up  of  sweetish  water.  Rising  of
water  from  the  stomach  into  the  mouth.  Frequent  gulp-
ing-up  of  water,  goingoff  after  dinner.  Eructations  tasting
of  onion.  Rising  of  saltish  water  in  the  mouth.  Nausea
and  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  with  a contrac-
tive sensation  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,  (8.  d.)  Nau-
sea in  the  mouth,  towards  noon,  although  food  has  a good
taste.  H iccough  when  smoking.  Nausea  with  chilliness.
Nausea  with  desire  to  vomit,  going  off  by  an  eructation.
Violent  gulping-up  from  the  stomach,  with  nausea;  she
has  to  swallow  it  again.  Vomiting  of  pure  water,  after
sudden  nausea.  Vomiting  of  pure  water,  afterwards  vom-
iting of  the  supper  of  last  night,  after  which  the  nausea
still  continues.

Stomach. — Sensitiveness  of  ihe  region  of  the  stomach
to  the  touch.  Pressure  at  the  stomach,  with  sensation  as
if  a hard  and  bitter  body  were  rising  into  the  chest.  Pres-


316


ST7LPHURICUM  ACIDTJM.


sure  at  the  stomach,  as  if  oppressed  by  a stone  ; the  pres-
sure rises  in  the  chest,  and  results  in  the  rising  of  watery
saliva  into  t he  mouth.  Pressure  at  the  stomach  with  con-
stant nausea  and  yawning.  Feeling  of  fulness  and  disten-
sion in  the  stomach.  Violent  contractive  pain  in  the
stomach  and  abdomen.  Anxious  contractive  pain  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  hindering  breathing.  Painful  constric-
tion in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  lasting  a long  while.  Sud-
den gripings  in  the  stomach,  every  evening,  as  after  a cold.
Cutting  on  the  left  side  and  near  the  stomach,  moving
toward  the  back.  Cuttings  around  the  stomach  and  pain-
ful movements  in  the  same,  both  when  sitting  and  walking,
in  short  paroxysms.  Pricking  in  the  stomach.  Stitch  in
the  stomach,  which  lasts  five  minutes.  Agreeable  feeling
of  warmth  in  the  stomach.  Burning  in  the  stomach,  with
a stupid  feeling  in  the  head.  Coolness  and  relaxed  feeling
of  the  stomach,  with  loss  of  appetite.  Pinching  directly
below  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; when  pressing  upon  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  he  feels  an  intense  pain  as  after  a
shock. '

Abdomen. — Stitch  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  near  the
stomach.  Stitching  in  the  region  of  the  right  ribs,  worse
during  an  inspiration,  during  the  menses.  Dull  pressure
from  without  inward  under  the  right  ribs,  worse  in  turns.
Curgling  pain  in  the  right  side  of  tli€  abdomen,  almost
toward  the  back.  Stitch  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  when
inclining  to  the  right  side.  Stitching  in  the  left  hypochon-
drium, going  off  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Stitching
in  the  region  of  the  left  lower  ribs,  frequently  accompanied
with  stitching  in  the  chest.  Slowly  pulsative,  gurgling
pain  under  the  left  ribs.  Burning  in  both  hypochondria,
when  sitting,  the  whole  day.  Distension  of  the  abdomen,
wilh  rumbling,  and  silent  emission  of  flatulence.  Super-
ficial, but  violent  pressure  upon  the  umbilicus.  Pinching
in  the  abdomen,  towards  the  lumbar  region,  causing  the
sweat  of  anguish  to  break  out.  Pinching  and  cutting  in
the  abdomen,  with  violent  pressing  upon  the  rectum  (at
night.)  (1.  d.)  Violent  pinching,  cutting  and  writhing  in
the  abdomen,  accompanied  with  labor-like  pains,  as  if  all
the  internal  parts  would  press  out,  with  fainting  sort  of
nausea,  (a.  30  d.)  Labor-like  pains  through  the  whole


5ULPHURICUM  ACXDUM.


317


abdomen,  as  far  as  the  hips,  followed  by  a sensation  as  if
bruised  in  the  small  ol  the  back.  Cutting  and  movement
of  flatulence  in  the  umbilical  region.  Stitching,  resembling
splenetic  stitches,  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  during
motion,  going  off  when  sitting  still.  Long,  dull  stitch  from
the  left  side  near  the  umbilicus  extendi ig  into  the  abdo-
men. Burning  and  pressure  below  the  umbilicus,  as  if  in
the  uterus.  Sensation  in  the  umbilical  region,  as  of  a
morbid  warmth,  or  as  in  heartburn,  Anxious  sensation  in
the  abdomen,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed.  Clawingpain
in  the  right  groin.  Jerking  in  the  left  groin,  and  pressure
from  within  outward,  as  with  a finger,  at  first  commencing
and  going  off  when  sitting,  afterwards  returning  when
standing  and  disappearing  when  walking,  and  finally  also
appearing  when  walking.  Tearing  in  the  left  lumbar  re-
gion, when  sitting.  Stitching  and  pinching  in  the  left
groin.  Burning  in  the  right  groin,  during  a short  and
hacking  cough.  Stitch  in  the  left  groin  during  an  inspira-
tion, followed  by  fine  stitches  in  the  upper  and  outer  part
of  the  left  chest  ; in  the  evening  after  lying  down.  Push-
ing from  within  outward  in  the  right  lumbar  region,  in  the
morning  when  in  bed,  upon  waking,  as  if  hernia  would
appear,  going  off  when  rising,  but  frequently  reluming.
Violent  pain  in  the  right  lumbar  region,  when  walking  and
standing,  as  if  hernia  were  protruding,  he  dares  neither
cough  nor  take  an  inspiration  ; afterwards  hernia  protrudes
from  time  to  time  with  great  pain,  especially  when  talking
but  also  without  any  peculiar  cause,  returning  when  sitting
or  when  otherwise  keeping  quiet  and  allowing  one  to
breathe  and  cough  without  difficulty.  Pain  in  the  right
groin,  suddenly,  pressing  from  within  outward,  when  rising
from  stool,  as  if  hernia  would  protrude,  independent  of
coughing  and  breathing.  Irresistible  pressure  of  an  exist-
ing hernia  through  the  abdominal  ring,  with  smarting  pain
of  the  ring,  even  after  the  hernia  had  been  reduced.  Beat-
ing, for  several  days,  in  the  region  of  the  hernial  sac.
Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  hernia.  Sharp,  rather
superficial,  jerking  extending  over  the  abdomen,  almost
in  paroxysms.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Grunting
around  the  umbilicus.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with
canine  hunger,  going  off  after  a meal.  Bubbling  in  the


218


SULniURICUM  ACIDUM.


abdomen  as  of  water,  when  lying  upon  the  back  and
breathing.  Short,  difficult  flatulence.

Stool. — Intermittent  stool.  Hard,  knotty  stool,  diffi-
cult, painful,  or  like  sheep’s  dung,  (4.  6.  7.  d.)  Hard
stool,  consisting  in  small,  black,  lumps,  mixed  with  blood,
and  with  such  violent  prickings  in  the  anus  that  she  had
to  rise  on  account  of  the  pain  ; during  the  menses.  Stool
at  first  hard,  then  soft.  Thick-sized  stool.  Soft,  papes-
cent  stool,  with  pressing  in  the  anus  before  and  after  the
discharge,  (a.  C h.)  Loose  stool,  followed  by  empty  feel-
ing in  the  abdomen,  (4.  d.)  Diarrhoea,  mere  frothy  mucus,
with  burning  in  the  rectum,  flatulence  and  rumbling.  Wa-
tery, green  diarrhoea.  Yellow-white  stool.  Hacked,  saf-
fron-colored stool,  in  a child,  of  tenacious  mucus.  Fetid
stool,  half  hard,  half  liquid,  mixed  with  a good  deal  of  li-
quid mucus,  and  streaked  with  blood.  Bloody  stool,  hard,
every  two,  three  days.  Pinching  in  the  upper  sides  of  the
abdomen  during  stool.  Pain,  during  stool,  as  if  the  rec-
tum were  being  torn.  The  intestines  feel  weary  and  ex-
hausted after  stool.  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  rectum.
Varices  in  the  rectum,  with  pricking  and  burning.  Violent
itching  of  the  varices.  Dampness  of  the  varices,  painful
to  the  touch.

Urinary  Organs. — Retention  of  urine  and  stool,  (pri-
mary effect.)  Diminution  of  urine,  with  burning  during
the  emission,  (2.  d.)  Constant  desire  to  urinate,  the  last
drops  being  always  preceded  by  a violent  cutting  in  the
urethra,  for  seven  days  ; afterwards  pressing  in  the  groin
and  loins.  Increased  emission  of  urine,  (a.  4 and  12  d.)
Urine  like  water.  The  urine  becomes  turbid  when  stand-
ing, and  deposits  afterwards  a loam-colored  sediment.
White  sediment  in  the  urine.  Brown-red  urine.  The
urine  deposits  a blood-colored  sediment  and  is  covered  with
a pellicle.  Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium  before,  during,
and  after  micturition.  Pain  in  the  bladder,  unless  he  sa-
tisfies the  desire  to  urinate  immediately.  Violent  pressure
upon  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  as  if  it  should  be  pressed
out,  the  pressure  being  equally  violent  when  walking,
standing  or  sitting,  obliging  him  to  press  the  thighs  against
one  another,  relieved  by  an  embrace,  (the  first  10  d.)

Genital  Organs. — Warmth  in  the  genital  organs  and


SUtPIIURICUM  ACIDUM*


319


testicles.  Relaxation  of  the  scrotum.  Itching  pain  in
the  upper  border  of  the  glans.  Erections  in  the  day-time,
without  any  amorous  desires.  Emission  without  any  thrill.
Burning  in  the  urethra,  after  an  embrace.  The  woman
has  a violent  desire  for  an  embrace,  the  desire  being  more
felt  in  the  outer  pudendum  ; however,  she  is  not  much  ex-
cited by  the  embrace.  The  female  dreams  twice  that  she
enjoys  an  embrace,  and  twice  she  discharges  mucus  from
the  vagina,  (1.  n.)  The  female  dreams  that  she  craves
an  embrace  ; when  waking,  she  has  ? violent,  furious  de-
sire for  an  embrace,  the  desire  being  concentrated  espe-
cially in  the  clitoris,  (a.  40  h.)  Sensation  in  the  abdomen,
as  if  the  menses  would  appear.  Delays  1 he  menses  by
eight  days,  without  causing  any  trouble.  Menses  too  late,
with  pam  in  the  abdomen  and  small  of  the  back.  Menses
too  early.  Nightmare  two  days  before  the  menses  ; sen-
sation as  of  a load  lying  upon  her  ; she  was  unable  to  talk,
sensation  as  if  some  one  had  strangulated  her,  she  woke
in  a perspiration.  During  the  menses,  stitches  in  the  ab-
domen and  vagina.  Thirst  and  dry  tongue  during  the
menses.  After  the  menses  gieat -desire  for  an  embrace,
(a.  11  d.)  Great  aversion  to  an  embrace  after  the  menses,
(a.  38  d.)  Frequent  discharge  of  corrosive  mucus  from
the  vagina,  (a.  lb  d.)  Acrid,  burning  leucorrhcea.(  Trans-
parent, or  milky  leucorrhoea,  without  sensation.  Dis-
charge of  sanguineous  mucus  from  the  vagina,  as  if  the
menses  would  make  their  appearance,  (a.  2 h.)

Colo,  Catarrh. — Unsuccessful  desire  to  sneeze.  A
vapor  came  through  her  nose,  followed  by  twenty  sneez-
ings, and  finally  obstruction  of  the  nose.  Coryza  and  loss
of  smell,  (4.  5.  d.)  Violent  coryza  with  sore  eyes.  Ob-
stinate dry  coryza  ; one  or  the  other  nostril  being  some-
times completely  obstructed.  Fluent  coryza,  (4.  d.)

Larynx  and  Trachea. Hoarseness,  dryness  and

roughness  in  the  larynx.  Pain  in  the  larynx,  talking  is
difficult  for  him,  the  usual  mobility  and  flexibility  of  the
cartilages  of  the  larynx  seem  wanting.  Stitching  pain  in
the  larynx.  Cough  and  coryza  with  violent  hunger,  (a.  14
d.)  In  the  morning,  when  waking,  desire  to  cough,  with-
out expectorating  ; a few  hours  after  he  throws  off  mucus
easily.  Cough,  from  the  open  air.  Short  and  hacking


320


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.


cough.  Single,  rare,  dry  starts  of  congh,  also  in  the
morning  after  rising.  Loose  cough  with  mucous  expec-
toration. Starts  of  dry,  short,  panting  cough.  At  every
start  of  cough  he  feels  a dull  shock  directly  over  the  mar-
gin i f the  lid  of  the  right  eve,  from  within  outward.  After
coughing  he  regurgitates  the  ingesta.

Chest. — Eructations  alter  the  morning  cough,  at  first
empty,  afterwards  bringing  up  bitter  mucus.  Haemopty-
sis, when  walking  slowly.  Occasional  and  momentary
asthma.  Frequent  oppression  of  breathing  and  strangula-
tion, at  night.  Oppression  of  the  chest,  in  the  morning,
with  nausea.  Weak  in  the  chest,  so  that  she  was  scarcely
able  to  talk.  Fulness  in  the  chest.  Pressure  in  the  left
chest , and  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach . Drawing  tension  in
the  left  chest.  Dull  pain  in  the  centre  of  the  sternum,  as
from  a shock.  Stitching  pressure  in  the  chest  and  throat,
arresting  the  breathing,  equally  violent  when  walking  or
standing,  improved  by  the  open  air,  in  continued  parox-
ysms. Violent  stitciies  in  the  right  chest,  frequent  and
continued  ; the  pain  is  felt  still  more  deeply  when  pressing
upon  the  part,  (5.  d.)  Violent  stitches  in  the  sternum,
wIk  n entering  into  the  room  from  the  open  air,  the  stitches
extend  into  the  other  side  of  the  chest,  deep  internally,  in
the  evening,  (1.  d.)  Dull  stitches  on  the  left  side  near  the
sternum,  in  the  region  of  one  of  the  cartilages.  Sudden,
violent  and  piercing  stitch  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left
chest,  extending  to  the  back.  Fine  stitches  deep  into  the
left  side  of  the  chest,  with  arrest  of  breathing.  Stitching  in
the  left  chest,  more  violent  during  an  inspiration  and  when
coughing,  when  walking;  less  when  at  rest.  Stitches  in
front  of  the  left  axilla,  when  removing  a heavy  weight,  fol-
lowed by  violent  pain  as  if  bruised  in  a large  portion  of
the  sternum.  Many  violent  stitches  through  the  heart,
day  and  night,  with  sore  pain  soon  after.  Palpitation  of
the  heart  without  anxiety?  when  pressing  the  upper  part  of
the  body  forward  and  leaning  both  arms  on  the  table,  with
inclination  to  take  deep  breath,  which  is  done  without  dif-
ficulty. Frequent  single  burnings  in  the  left  chest.  Fre-
quent burning  as  of  boiling  water,  in  the  outer  part  of  the
left  side  of  the  chest,  alternately  more  or  less  violent.

Back — -Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  as  if  bruised,


SXJLPHURICUM  ACIDIJM.


321


when  standing  or  sitting.  Sore  pain  or  spasmodic  draw-
ing in  the  small  of  the  back  during  motion.  Burning  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back.  Pain  in  the  back,  as  if  sore  and
bruised.  Drawing  pain  in  the  back,  during  motion  and
when  treading.  Stillness  in  the  back  for  several  mornings,
going  off  in  day-time  during  motion.  Fine  stitch  in  the
dorsal  spine,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  left  side  of  the
nape  of  the  neck.  Boils  on  the  back.  Cutting  between
the  shoulders,  with  burning,  as  if  the  parts  were  being  cut
through.

Upper  Limbs. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  left  axil-
lary glands.  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  right  axilla,  emending
as  far  as  the  chest,  especially  when  ascending  an  elevation,
but  also  when  walking,  so  violent  that  he  has  to  sit  down.
Drawing  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  below  the  ear.  Pain
as  of  an  oppressive  load  between  the  side  of  the  neck  and
the  left  shoulder.  Tremulous  pressure  in  the  lop  of  the
left  shoulder,  at  irregular  intervals.  Stitching  in  the  shoul-
der-joint, when  raising  the  arm.  Lancinating  tearing  in
the  left  shoulder.  Jerk  in  the  right  shoulder-joint  when
writing.  Cutting  pain  in  front  of  the  left  axilla.  Stitch-
ing in  front  of  and  below  the  right  axilla.  When  writing
he  occasionally  feels  in  the  right  arm  a drawing  and  spas-
modically contractive,  paralytic  pain.  Heaviness  of  the
arm.  Jerking,  fine  tearing  in  the  right  arm,  frequently  ex-
tending from  the  thumb  into  the  chest,  when  sitting.  Pain-
ful tearing  in  the  right  upper  arm,  posteriorly,  under  the
shoulder-joint  and  reaching  up  to  the  joint.  Smarting  pain,
as  if  bruised,  in  the  outer  side  of  the  left  elbow.  Every
three  seconds  a pain  like  a shock,  in  the  left  ulna,  close  to
the  wrist-joint ; the  pain  begins  of  a sudden  and  violently,
and  irradiates  into  the  arm,  becoming  weaker  and  weaker
as  it  proceeds,  and  finally  ceasing  altogether.  Tensive
pain  in  both  elbow-joints.  Bluish  spots  on  the  fore-arm,
as  if  ecchymosed.  Drawing  and  weariness  in  the  wrist-
joint.  Tensive  pain  and  heaviness  in  the  right  metacar-
pus, when  walking  in  the  open  air  with  the  arms  hanging
down,  as  if  the  blood  accumulated  in  them.  Jerking  in
the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  index-finger,  extending
into  the  arm,  intensely  painful.  Intensely  painful  shocks
in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  index-finger.  Painful

14*


322


SULPIIURICUM  ACIDUM.


jerks,  like  dull  shocks,  in  the  carpo-metacarpal  joint  of  the
thumb,  sometimes  darling  into  the  arm  through  the  wrist-
joint.  Dark-red,  small  elevations  on  the  dorsum  of  the
hand,  covered  with  a little  scab,  under  which  pus  seemed
to  be  secreted,  lasting  four  days,  but  not  painful.  Erup-
tion on  the  hands  and  between  the  fingers,  the  eruption  is
itch  ng,  especially  after  midnight.  When  sleeping  the
fingers  become  spasmodically  closed,  with  a jerk,  and  he
starts.  Jerking  pain  in  the  lips  of  the  fingers, apparently
in  the  nerves.  Burning  or  smarting  fine  stitches  in  the  side
of  the  middle  finger.  Burning  prickling  creeping  in  the  tip  of
the  little  finger,  as  if  gone  to  sleep,  also  in  a small  spot  of
the  middle  finger.  Sharp,  darting  pain  through  the  right
thumb,  beginning  in  the  lip.  Dull  stitches  in  the  middle
joints  of  the  fingers.  "Fearing  under  the  nail  of  the  index-
finger,  as  in  a panaritium,  iiureased  by  dipping  the  finger
into  cold  water.  Several  small  very  painful  chilblains  on
the  fingers.

Lower  Limbs. — Cramp  in  the  right  hip.  The  right
lower  limb  inclines  to  be  numb.  Stretching  of  the  lower
limbs.  Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs.  Tearing  in  the
varices  of  the  right  lower  limb,  in  the  morning  when  in
bed.  Cutting  pain  in  the  thigh.  Spasmodically  con-
tractive, paralytic  pain  in  the  right  thigh  and  leg.  Inter-
mittent pinching  in  a small  spot  of  the  inner  side  of  the  left
thigh.  Intermittent  pressure  in  the  upper  and  inner  side
of  the  right  thigh.  Contraction  in  the  lower  and  outer
parts  of  the  thigh,  extending  into  the  leg  at  intervals.
Burning  cutting  creeping  in  lire  thighs,  as  if  some  cor-
roding substance  had  made  the  parts  sore,  at  irregular
intervals.  Dul  1-stitching  pressure,  in  the  outer  and  middle
parts  of  the  left  thigh.  Painful  weakness  in  the  knees
when  standing,  with  intensely  painful  jerks  in  the  knees.
Tearing  up  and  down  deep  in  the  left  knee,  going  off  by
rubbing.  Intense  pain  as  of  a blow,  obliquely  over  the  left
knee,  in  undulating  paroxysms.  Painful  jerks  in  the  inner
side  of  the  left  knee,  like  dull  shocks.  Dull  stitches,  like
shocks,  in  the  middle  of  the  right  knee,  when  sitting;
a simple  pain  being  yet  felt  a long  while  after.  Burning
pricking  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  left  knee.  Intensely
painful  prickling  stitches  in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee,


STJLPHURICUM  ACIDTJM.


323


Burning  pain  in  the  bend  of  the  right  knee.  Creeping  in
the  region  of  the  left  tibia.  Burning  itching  red  spots  on
the  tibiae,  with  blotches  in  the  centre,  swelling  after  scratch-
ing, and  the  itching  continuing  again  afier  the  swelling
subsides.  Cramp  in  the  calves  when  walking,  with  creep-
ing in  the  same.  Fain  of  the  calves,  worse  when  sitting
than  when  walking.  Fine,  prickling  stitches  in  the  region
of  the  left  tendo  Achillis.  Intensely  painful  pressure  in
the  instep  of  the  right  foot,  increasing  and  decreasing.
Tearing  in  the  left  heel,  in  the  morning  when  waking.
Burning  pricking  in  the  heel.  Stiffness  of  the  ankles  when
walking.  Dull,  intensely  painful  pressure  under  the  left
ankle,  like  shocks  or  jerks.  Pain  in  the  left  sole  as  if
bruised,  increasing  at  first,  afterwards  jerking,  then  dis-
appearing suddenly-  Jerkmg  pinching  in  the  middle  toe,
in  paroxysms.  Fine,  prickling,  piercing  stitches  under
the  big  toe.  Stitches  in  the  corn.  Tearing  in  the  corn.

General  Symptoms. — Itching  over  the  body  here  and
there.  Disappearance  of  an  existing  itching  over  the  whole
body,  (curative  effect.)  Prickling  sensation  in  the  skin.
Corrosive  sensation  in  the  ulcer.  Stitching  in  the  cica-
trices of  burns.  Jaundice,  (in  the  workmen  employed  in
the  establishments  where  sulphuric  acid  is  made.)  Dull
pressure  in  certain  small  spots  of  the  body,  first  increasing,
afterwards  disappearing.  Tearing  in  all  the  limbs,  espe-
cially in  the  evening;  during  the  menses.  Rheumatic
drawing  and  tearing  in  the  whole  body,  even  in  the  face
Subsultus  tendinum.

Weakness,  Fits. — Chilliness  the  whole  day.  Sensa-
tion, when  walking,  as  if  he  would  fall  over  to  either  side.
Weakness  in  the  lower  limbs  and  in  the  small  of  the  back,
so  violent  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  stand  without  sup-
port. Faintness  of  the  whole  body,  he  scarcely  ventures
to  raise  his  arm.  Tremulous  sensation  in  the  whole  body,
without  any  trembling.

Sleep. — Frequent  yawning.  Falls  asleep  late  in  the
evening.  Rattling  in  the  chest,  in  the  evening  when  in
bed,  and  quick  pulse.  Wakeful  after  two  hours’  rest,  at
night.  Starts  and  flow  of  saliva  while  sleeping.  Asthma
at  night,  with  cough  for  two  hours.  She  feels  a pain  in


321:


ZIXCtJM.


the  joints  when  sleeping,  not  when  waking.  Vexatious
dreams.  Anxious  dreams  of  fire,  dead  people,  etc.

Fever. — Chilliness,  (20.  d.)  Chilliness  in  the  room,
less  in  the  open  air,  (a.  12  d.)  Momentary  shaking  as
from  chilliness,  with  goose-flesh.  Passing  shudder-
ing through  the  trunk,  from  time  to  time.  Constant
shuddering  down  ihe  trunk,  without  chilliness.  Super-
ficial warmth  of  the  body,  with  icy-cold  hands.  Dry  heat
in  the  evening,  after  a walk  of  10  miles,  with  thirst  and
burning  in  the  eyes.  Great  warmth  in  the  whole  body,
after  going  to  bed.  Small , quick  pulse.  Inclines  to
sweat  profusely,  on  every  exertion  of  the  body.  She
sweats  a good  deal  when  sitting,  especially  the  upper  part
of  the  body.  Copious  morning-sweat.  Sourish  morning-
sweats  and  subsequent  hoarseness.


ZINCUM.

Take  a piece  of  pure  metallic  zinc,  and,  holding  it  under
distilled  water,  rub  some  of  the  zinc  off  upon  a fine  setting-
stone,  dry  the  powder  which  falls  to  the  bottom,  upon  a
sheet  of  white  blotting  paper,  and  prepare  one  grain  of  it
in  the  manner  recommended  for  the  dry  substances.

Zinc  has  cured  affections  characterised  by  one  or  more
of  the  following  symptoms  : Want  of  disposition  to  work
and  to  walk  ; she  thinks  that  she  will  die  ; weak  memory  ;
constant  obtusion  of  the  head  ; gloominess  ; sore  pain  in
the  head  ; humming  in  the  head  ; pain  of  the  hairy
scalp,  as  if  there  were  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  ; baldness  ;
dryness  of  the  eyes  ; amaurosis  with  contraction  of  the
pupils  ; paralysis  and  falling  of  the  eye-lids  ; humming  in
the  ears  ; loose  teeth  ; painfulness  of  the  teeth  when  chew-
ing ; sore  toothache;  salt  taste  in  the  mouth  ; pressure  at
the  stomach  with  nausea  after  eating  bread  ; tensive  pain
in  the  sides  of  the  abdomen;  inguinal  hernia  ; constipa-
tion ; loose  and  liquid  stool  ; involuntary  discharge  of
fasces  ; itching  of  the  anus  ; retention  of  urine  when  he
Wants  to  urimile  ; involuntary  micturition  while  walking  ;


ZINCTJM.


325


inability  to  retain  the  urine  when  coughing,  sneezing  or
walking  ; continual  erections  in  the  night ; too  rapid  emis-
sion of  the  semen  during  an  embrace  ;.too  early  menses;
painful  menstruation  ; distension  of  the  abdomen  during
the  menses  ; leucorrhoea  ; coryza  ; cough  ; tensive  pain  in
the  sternum  ; palpitation  of  the  heart  with  anxiety  ; irregu-
lar. spasmodic  movements  of  the  heart  ; shocks  of  the
heart  arresting  the  breathing  ; intermission  of  the  beats  of
the  heart,  arresting  the  breathing  ; pain  in  the  small  of  the
back;  pain  in  die  back;  drawing  pain  in  the  arm  of  long
standing;  feeling  of  dryness  of  the  hands,  early  in  the
morning;  the  fingers  go  to  sleep,  in  the  morning  when
rising;  stiffness  of  the  tarsal  joint  after  silling;  painful
chilblains  on  the  feet ; insensibility  in  the  body  ; feeling  of
coldness  in  the  bones  ; excrescences;  drowsiness  in  the
morning  when  rising  ; drowsiness  after  a meal  ; sleep  full
of  fancies  ; frightful  dreams  ; talking  and  exclaiming  while
asleep  ; inclination  to  perspire  in  the  day-time  ; night-
sweat.

Camphor  moderates  the  effects  of  zinc  for  a short  while ;
they  are  sometimes  moderated  by  smelling  of  Ignatia  ;
Hepar.  sulp.  is  the  best  antidote.

My  co-observers  are:  Franz,  Hartmann,  Hanbold,
Ruckert,  Stapf,  Gersdorff,  Lesquereur,  Schweikert,  Rum-

el,  Hartlaub,  Ng.

Moral  Symptoms. — Desponding  and  sad.  Taciturn
and  out  of  humor , especially  in  the  evening.  Exces-
sively sullen  and  peevish.  Low-spirited.  Unconquerable
sadness.  Anxiety  caused  by  thieves  or  horrid  phantoms
which  he  sees  when  waking,  as  if  in  a state  of  feverish
fancy*  Despondency.  Thinks  calmly  of  dying,  in  the
afternoon,  feeling  exhausted.  Hypochondriac  mood,  three
hours  after  dinner,  with  pressure  under  the  last  ribs,  espe-
cially on  the  right  side  ; aversion  to  work  and  uncom-
fortableness of  the  whole  body,  but  without  a trace  of
flatulence  or  overloading  the  stomach,  (a.  5 d.)  Relaxa-
tion of  the  moral  energies.  Indifference,  (a.  13  d ) Aver-
sion to  labor.  Inclines  to  internal  rancor  and  chagrin  ;
he  is  taciturn  and  dislikes  to  speak  a single  word.  He
moans  from  chagrin , without  any  apparent  cause,  with  an
aching  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head.  Is  easily  carried


326


ZINCUM.


away  by  anger.  He  would  like  to  have  some  one  upon
whom  he  could  wreak  his  anger,  (which  breaks  forth
without  any  apparent  cause.)  Jmtable,  starts  easily.  The
talking  of  other  people  and  every  little  noise  are  intolerant
to  him.  Every  little  emotion  causes  an  inward  tremor.
After  a little  emotion  he  trembles  for  along  while,  as  with
chilliness.  His  imagination  is  excited.  Talking  of  others,
even  of  persons  who  are  dear  to  him,  makes  him  nervous
and  peevish.  Impatient,  but  without  ill-humor.  Change-
able mood,  sad  and  melancholy  at  noon,  cheerful  and  con-
tented in  the  evening,  (2.  3.  d.)  By  turns,  irritable,  in-
clining to  start,  angry,  desponding,  melancholy.  A trifle
can  excite  his  laughter  or  his  auger.  Lazy  and  out  of
humor  the  first  days,  cheerful  afterward.  Illusion  of  the
fancy,  when  holding  the  head  down,  as  if  she  had  a tall
head,  over  which  she  cannot  look.  Incoherent  ideas,  (a.
16  d.)  Absence  of  thought.,  the  mind  being  in  a sort  of
stupor.  Forgetful.

Heap. — Dizziness,  drowsiness  and  heaviness  of  the
head.  Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  head,  especially  in  the
eyes,  (a.  2,  4,  and  more  days.)  Obtusion  and  painful
heaviness  of  the  occiput,  (a.  k h.)  Stupefied  and  dizzy,
at  noon.  Vertiginous  stupefaction  in  short  paroxysms,
with  obscuration  of  sight  and  general  weakness,  especially
in  the  afternoon  and  evening,  for  several  dav^  (a.  1 1 d.)
Vertigo  when  sitting  or  standing,  going  off  when  walking.
Vertigo  with  weakness  in  the  head  and  abdomen,  she  had
to  lie  down,  (a.  3 d.)  Vertigo  in  the  whole  brain,  espe-
cially the  occiput,  he  had  to  lie  down  ; the  eyes  had  noth-
ing to  do  with  it.  Vertigo  in  the  occiput , when  walking ,
as  if  he  would  full  to  the  left  side.  Violent  vertigo  when
sitting  in  the  bed,  as  if  the  bed  were  balancing  to  and  fro,
(a.  7 d.)  Vertiginous  drawing  in  the  right  side  of  the  occi-
put, when  sitting.  Vertigo  when  waking,  as  if  the  head
were  moving  up  and  down  ; the  visions  before  his  fancy
moved  up  and  down  in  a similar  manner;  in  a state  of
half  consciousness.  Vertigo,  as  if  he  were  on  the  point  of
having  an  apoplectic  fit.,  with  dread  of  falling  over.  Faint-
ishness  with  nausea  and  a sort  of  vertigo,  when  staying
up  a little  too  long,  in  the  evening;  or  when  one  smokes
tobacco  which  is  too  strong.  Vertigo  in  the  occiput,  in


ZINCUMj


327


the  evening,  when  sitting  and  smoking  the  usual  tobacco,
with  desire  for  stool.  Violent  vertigo  when  stooping  and
raising  the  head  again,  as  if  every  thing  turned  around  her,
with  buzzing  in  the  head.  Headache  after  dinner,  in  the
region  of  the  left  frontal  eminence.  Violent  pain  in  the
head,  eyes  and  abdomen,  in  the  evening  after  going  to  bed.
Violent  pain  in  the  head  and  eyes  after  drinking  a glass  of
wine  as  usual.  Dull  pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  head.
Pain  in  the  occiput  as  if  bruised.  IStupefying  headache,
he  has  to  lie  down.  Stupefying  headache,  the  whole
morning,  as  from  the  vapor  of  coal,  (a.  10  d.)  Pres-
sure in  the  head,  with  a stupid  feeling,  (a.  5 d.)  Pres-
sure in  the  forehead , with  obtusion  of  the  head , making
it  difficult  to  think.  Aching  pain  in  the  right  frontal  emi-
nence. Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  with  general  obtu-
sion of  the  head,  drowsiness  and  pain  in  the  eyes,  fore-
noon. Violent  pressure  in  a small  spot  in  the  middle  of
the  forehead,  in  short  paroxysms.  Frequent  aching  in
the  forehead.  Sharp  aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  in  the
morning  when  waking,  becoming  afterwards  a mere  pres-
sure in  the  temples.  Pressure  in  the  sinciput  with  obtu-
sion of  the  head , extending  as  far  as  the  eyes , after  din-
ner. Aching  pain  in  the  sinciput,  worst  in  the  temples.
Pressure  in  the  left  temple.  Pressure  in  the  right  tem-
ple, darting  into  it  suddenly.  Continual  pressure,  now  in
the  temples,  now  in  the  occiput.  Continual  pressing  and
pushing  in  either  temple.  Pressure  in  the  right  side  of
the  occiput.  Sharp  pr  essure  in  a small  spot  of  the  fore-
head, in  the  evening . Dull  stitching  pressure  in  a small
spot  of  the  occiput.  Sharp,  clawing  pressure  in  the  left
temple.  Cramp-like,  dull  pressure  in  both  temples  from
without  inward.  Frequent  pain  in  both  sides  of  the  head,
as  if  between  screws,  in  the  evening.  Hard  aching  pain
in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  pulsative.  Pain  in  the  right
side  of  the  occiput,  as  if  the  parts  were  being  pressed  asun-
der. Pain  in  the  leftside  of  the  occiput,  near  the  cervical
vertebrae,  as  if  the  parts  were  being  pressed  asunder.
Drawing  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput..  Drawing  and
beating  in  the  forehead.  Drawing  in  the  occiput,  with
gnawing  in  the  forehead,  as  of  worms.  Drawingand  stitch-
ing in  the  forehead,  with  pain  as  if  the  skull  were  cleft.
Tearing  in  the  right  temple . Tearing  in  the  temples


32S


ZINCUM.


after  dinner , with  stitches  behind  tlie  ears,  (a.  2 d.)  Tear-
ingin  the  right  half  of  the  head , (2.  and  y.  d.)  'bearing  in
the  right  side  of  the  head  and  in  the  teeth,  in  the  after-
noon, (a.  16  d.)  Tearing  in  the  fore  part  of  the  left  half  of
the  head,  over  the  forehead.  Tearing  in  the  upper  part
of  the  head  over  the  forehead.  Tearing  in  the  forehead,
(4.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  left  frontal  eminence.  Tearing  in
the  right  frontal  eminence  as  far  as  the  orbit  and  the  upper
eye-lid.  'bearing  behind  the  vertex,  (9.  d.)  Tearing  in  the
left  and  right  occiput,  (3.  and  4.  cl.)  Tearing  in  the  right
side  of  the  occiput,  with  dull  stitches  in  the  upper  part  of
the  head.  Sharp  tearing  in  the  vertex  and  left  parietal
bone.  Clawing  tearing  in  the  right  and  left  temple , at
different  periods.  ' Tearing , with  pressure,  in  the  left
frontal  eminence , after  dinner.  Drawing  tearing  in  the
left  half  of  the  head.  Drawing  tearing,  with  pressure,  in
the  top  of  the  head  and  still  more  in  the  forehead,  in  fre-
quent transitory  paroxysms.  Jerking  tearing  over  the  left
temple.  Lancinations  in  the  forehead,  with  great  but  un-
successful desire  to  sneeze  ; towards  noon.  Lancinations
in  the  temple.  Lancination  in  the  left  side  of  the  integu-
ments of  the  forehead,  over  the  eye-brow.  Stitching  in  the
forehead,  with  a tearing  as  it  the  head  would  burst.
Prickings  in  the  left  temple.  Dull  stitches  in  the  right
temple  from  time  to  time.  Fine,  burning  prickings  in  the
middle  of  the  vertex.  Boring,  dull  stitch  directly  over  the
right  frontal  eminence,  (9.  d.)  Boring  in  the  left  parietal
bone,  from  without  inward.  Boring  in  the  right  parietal
bone,  from  without  inward,  with  sensation  as  if  the  parts
would  burst,  in  the  evening,  when  standing.  Beating  pain
in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  in  the  evening.  Beating  and
tearing  in  the  fore  part  of  the  head,  after  dinner.  Violent
beating  and  tearing  in  the  whole  head,  especially  in  the
right  frontal  region,  from  morning  till  evening.  Painful
tumult,  like  the  dashing  of  waves,  and  feeling  of  heat,  in  a
spot  of  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  extending  to  beyond
the  vertex,  in  the  evening.  Groaning  and  sounding  in  the
head,  when  talking  aloud.  Sensation  in  the  frontal  cavi-
ties as  if  the  open  air  were  penetrating  into  them  and
affected  the  parts  with  intense  pain.  Feeling  of  heat  in
the  head,  with  redness  of  the  face.  Ulcerative  pain  in  the


ZINCVM.


329


vertex  when  touching  it.  Painful  sore  feeling  in  a small
spot  of  the  hairy  scalp  on  the  right  side.  Painful  gnawing
in  the  right  occipital  protuberance,  as  of  a mouse.  Feel-
ing of  soreness  in  the  scalp,  independent  of  contact,  (a.  3
d ) Frequent  sore  itching  in  a small  spot  of  the  centre  of
the  scalp.  Itching  pimples  on  the  scalp,  (a.  5 d.)  Itch-
ing and  humid  eruption  in  the  region  of  and  over  both  tem-
ples. Sensation  as  if  the  scalp  were  pressed  together  in
one  place.  Sensation  as  if  the  hairs  stood  on  end,  espe-
cially over  the  left  ear.  Pain  of  the  hairs  on  the  vertex,
even  when  touched  ever  so  lightly.  Great  falling  off  of
the  hair.

Eyes. — Pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  pressed  into
the  head.  Sudden  and  painful  pressure  over  the  right
eye,  with  sensation  in  the  lids,  as  if  they  were  pressed
downward.  Pressure  in  the  eyes,  toward  evening.  Con-
tinual pressure  in  the  left  eye.  Pressure  in  the  margin  of
the  left  lower  eye  lid,  near  the  inner  canthus.  Violent
pressure  in  the  right  eye  and  temple.  Painful  pressure
in  the  right  inner  canthus,  with  redness  of  the  conjunctiva.
Tensive  pressure  in  ihe  right  eye,  rheumalic.  'Fearing,
with  pressure,  in  the  left  eye.  Lancinations  in  the  eyes
and  head.  Fine  lancinations  in  and  over  the  left  eyebrow.
Lancination  over  the  left  eye,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the
umbilical  region.  Fine  prickings  in  the  right  lower  and
the  left  upper  eye-lid.  Stiiching,  with  pressure,  in  the
right  eye-ball,  (3.  d.)  Cutting,  with  pressure,  in  the  right
eye,  (L.  and  6.  d.)  Itching  of  the  eves,  (5.  d.)  Itching  of
the  margin  of  the  left  upper  eye-lid.  Violent  itching  of
the  left  eye,  (a.  4 d.)  Smarting  in  the  inner  canthus  of
the  left  eye,  going  off  by  rubbing  Prickling  smarting  in
the  lower  part  of  the  left  eye  and  below  in  the  cheek.
Sore  smarting  of  the  eyes,  especially  the  right,  towards
evening.  Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  inner  can thi,  (9.  d.)
Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  right  upper  eye-lid.  Painful
smarting  soreness  of  the  outer  canthi.  Burning  and  smart-
ing in  the  eye,  with  lachrymation,  especially  in  the  even-
ing, and  agglutination  in  the  morning.  Continual  burning
of  the  eyes.  Burning  of  the  left  eye-lid,  as  if  too  dry.  A.
good  deal  of  burning  in  the  eyes  and  lids,  morning  and
evening,  with  feeling  of  dryness  and  pressure  in  the  eyes.


330


ZINCUM.


Burning,  with  pressure,  when  reading,  especially  in  the
left  eye-lid.  Inflammation  and  redness  of  the  conjunctiva
of  the  right  eye,  with  suppuration  of  ihe  internal  canthus  ;
the  eye  is  especially  painful  in  the  evening  and  night,  as
if  sand  were  in  the  eye,  with  frequent  lachrymation  ; that
part  of  the  upper  lid  which  is  near  the  inner  canthus,  is
likewise  red  and  swollen.  Violent  inflammation  of  the
eyes,  without  photophobia,  (during  the  menses.)  Con-
siderable dampness  of  the  eves,  in  the  day-time,  with  ag-
glutination in  the  morning.  Agglutination  of  the  inner
canthus,  in  the  morning,  with  feeling  of  soreness  and  pres-
sure, (a.  13  d)  Twitchings  in  the  left  lower  eye-lid,  and
left  eye-ball.  Jerking  in  the  left  eyebrow,  (shortly  and  a.
2 h.)  Great  uneasiness  and  intolerable  pain  in  the  left
eye,  frequently  with  great  weakness  in  the  head,  (a.  6 d.)
Constant  weariness  of  the  eyes.  Morbid  feeling  of  weak-
ness in  the  eyes.  Vanishing  of  sight,  with  lachrymation
and  burning,  after  dinner  and  frequently  when  writing,  for
a fortnight.  Vanishing  of  sight,  with  absence  of  ideas.
Obscuration  of  sight,  (a.  31  d ) Dimness  and  haziness  of
the  eyes,  in  the  morning.  Whirling  motions  before  the
eyes.  Yellow,  blue,  and  green  wheels  before  the  eyes,
with  drowsiness  and  a wretched  look.  Fiery  balls  hover
before  the  eyes  in  large  demi-circles,  when  looking  up  to
the  skies.  Dread  of  the  light  of  the  sun,  with  dun  eyes
and  lachrymation.

Ears. — Otalgia..  Tearing  in  the  ears  at  different  peri-
ods, sometimes  with  itching,  or  in  the  morning  with  creep-
ing. or  in  the  evening  with  burning.  Clawing  drawing  be-
hind the  left  ear,  extending  into  the  lower  jaw.  Painful
cramp  in  the  left  lobule.  Violent  cramp  pain  in  ihe  left
lobule,  in  the  direction  of  the  neck,  when  boring  with  the
finger  in  the  left  ear.  Stitching  in  the  right  ear,  (7.  d.)
Stitching  and  itching  in  the  ear.  Violent  stitches  in  the
ears.  Frequent  and  continued  intensely  painful  lancina-
tions  deep  in  the  right  ear , near  the  tympanum , (l.  and  2.
d.)  Itching  in  the  left  ear,  with  sensation,  when  inserting
the  finger  into  it,  as  if  fleas  were  jumping  about  in  it.
Itching  in  the  right  ear,  removed  by  boring.  Titillntion
in  the  left  ear,  not  going  off  when  rubbing  the  part.  Dis-
charge from  the  left  ear,  (a.  24  h.)  Fetid  humor  from  the


ZINCUM.


331


left  ear,  (a.  18  d.)  Purulent  discharge  from  the  left  ear,
day  and  night ; the  orifice  of  the  meatus  is  hot  and  swol-
len, with  headache  of  the  left  side,  (a.  24  h ) Hardness
of  hearing.  Buzzing  as  of  a May-bug  before  the  left  ear.
Dull  buzzing  aifd  evening-pulsations  in  the  ear,  very  trou-
blesome when  writing.  Noise  in  the  ear,  when  falling
asleep,  as  if  a window-pane  were  breaking.  Whizzing
in  the  ears.  Reports  in  the  ear,  after  breakfast.

Nose. — Stitching  pain  in  the  septum  when  touching  it.
Almost  intolerable  pressure  on  the  root  of  the  nose,  as  if
it  were  being  pressed  into  the  nose.  Clawing  in  the  root
of  the  nose,  with  obtusion  of  . the  forehead.  Clawing  in
the  root  of  the  nose,  with  stitches  in  the  jaw.  Clawing
sensation  in  the  root  of  the  nose,  extending  into  the  eye.
Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  right  nostril,  from  below  up-
ward, alter  dinner.  Jerking  tearing  in  the  right  side  of
the  nose.  Sharp  cutting  in  the  inner  margin  of  the  left
wing  of  the  nose.  Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  upper  part
of  the  nostrils,  tearing  in  the  right.  Swelling  of  the  right
side  of  the  nose,  (a.  48  h.)  Swelling  and  painfulness  of
the  left  nasal  wing.  Itching  in  the  right  nostril.  Freez-
ing  of  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  the  lobules,  although  the
weather  is  not  very  cold,  (a.  36  h.)  Red,  swollen,  hard
point  in  the  left  wing  of  the  nose,  painful  to  the  touch,  for
three  days.  Blowing  blood  from  the  nose,  the  first  davs.

Face. — Pale  face.  Livid  face.  Bruised  pain  below
and  in  front,  of  the  right  ear,  apparently  in  the  bone,  with
obtusion  of  the  forehead.  Aching  pain  in  the  upper  jaw
near  the  left  wing  of  the  nose.  Tearing  in  the  bones  in
front  of  the  left  ear.  Tearing  in  the  left  cheek.  Tearing
in  the  right  malar  bone,  with  bruised  pain  in  the  part  when
pressing  upon  it.  Bruised  pain  of  the  facial  and  orbital
bones.  Prickings  in  the  face,  at  intervals  and  suddenly.
Sudden  stitch,  with  pressure,  from  the  right  malar  bone  to
the  upper  border  of  the  orbit,  deep  in  the  bone  ; after-
wards the  place  is  very  sensitive  to  pain,  in  the  evening.
Swelling  and  itching  of  the  left  cheek.  Itching  in  the
face,  in  the  evening.  Pimples  in  the  face.  Pain  in  the
lips;  jerking  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  upper  lip.
Fine  stinging  in  the  upper  lip.  Shooting  in  the  tipper  lip.
Violent  jactitation  of  the  muscles  in  the  left  side  of  the


332


ZINC  CM.


upper  lip.  Swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  (in  a few  hours  )
Swelling  of  the  lip.  Itching  of  the  upper  lip,  chin,  and
around  the  mouth,  without  an  eruption,  (a.  24  h.)  Burn-
ing in  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth,  (1.  d.)  Pimple  on
the  upper  lip,  (a.  14  h.)  Vesicles  clear  as' water,  or  sup-
purating pimples  on  ihe  upper  lip.  Flat,  red  pimple  on  the
middle  of  the  margin  of  the  upper  lip,  painful  when  touch-
ed. Small,  white  pimples,  containing  a little  moisture,  on
the  upper  lip,  chin  and  forehead,  (after  drinking  a little
wine.)  Large,  yellowish-white  itching  pimple  on  the
lower  lip.  Thick,  viscid  humor  on  the  lips,  having  neither
taste  nor  smell,  (0.  d.)  Dry,  chapped  lips.  Sore,  ulcer-
ated corners  of  the  mouth.  Soreness  of  the  upper  lip,  ul-
cerated in  the  middle.  Yellow  little  ulcer  cn  the  internal
surface  of  the  lower  lip.  (a.  4 d.)  Tensive  painful  rhagades
in  the  lower  lip.  Burning  rhagades  in  the  inner  surface
of  the  upper  lip.  Violent  itching  of  the  chin,  and  redness
of  the  whole  of  its  prominent  part,  (a.  2 d.)  Violently
itching  pimple  almost  in  the  centre  of  the  chin.  A num-
ber of  small  pustules  under  the  chin,  set  close  to  one  an-
other, itching  violently,  (a.  8 d.)  Lancinations  in  the  chin
and  neck,  diffusing  into  one  another,  (6.  d.)

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Cramp-like  tearing  in  the  lower
jaw,  especially  in  the  chin,  (3.  d.)  Stitching  pain  in  the
articulation  of  the  jaw,  below  and  in  front  of  the  left  ear,
when  moving  the  lower  jaw  sideways,  when  biting  hard,
and  when  pressing  upon  the  joint  with  the  finger.  Swell-
ing of  the  sub-maxillary  glands.  Frequent  drawing  tooth-
ache in  the  roots  of  the  incisores.  Drawing  in  the  left
upper  incisores.  Drawing  pain  in  the  roots  of  the  upper
fore-teeth,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  fauces,  extending  as
far  as  the  cervical  muscles.  Drawing  in  the  last  lower
molar  tooth,  now  on  the  right,  now  on  the  left  side.  In-
tensely painful  drawing  in  the  upper  fore-teeth , with  sore
feeling  in  the  gums  ; towards  noon.  Drawing,  with  pres-
sure, in  the  right  lower  molares.  Beating  drawing  in  the
last  molares,  alternately  on  the  right,  and  left  side.  Jerk-
ing, sharp  drawing  in  the  turn  last  upper  molares,  at  differ-
ent periods.  Sharp  drawing  in  all  the  incisores,  coming
on  at  intervals  and  with  a jerk.  Jerking  in  the  right  lower
molares,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down.  Jerking  in  the


ZINCtJM.


333


left  teeth  from  time  to  time.  Painful  jerk  in  a tooth,  (a.
1 h.)  Jerking,  violent  tearing  in  the  last  lower  molar  tooth
of  the  right  side.  Tearings  in  the  last  lower  molar  teeth
of  the  lei t side,  in  the  evening.  Tearing  in  the  last  upper
and  lower  molar  teeth  of  the  left  side,  followed  by  tearing
in  the  cheek  in  the  region  of  the  temple,  and  extending  as
far  as  the  forehead.  Tearing  in  a hollow  molar  tooth ;
when  sucking  it,  blood  comes  out.  Tearing,  extending
from  one  of  the  upper  roots  of  the  right  side  towards  the
temple,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down.  Tearing  in  the
roots  of  the  upper  teeth  of  the  right  side.  Tearing  and
drawing  in  the  left  lower  teeth,  especially  the  incisores.
Tearing  in  the  left  upper  molares.  Sensitiveness  and
painful  soreness  of  the  upper  molares,  with  drawing  sore
pain  in  one  of  the  lower  left  molares,  which  becomes
raised  out  of  its  socket  and  vacillates,  this  is  accompanied
with  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  gland  of  the  same  side.
Continued  stitching  in  the  left  lower  molares,  in  the  even-
ing. Stitching  in  the  roots  of  the  left  upper  cuspidatus
and  the  adjoining  incisor  tooth.  Stitches  in  the  left  row
of  teeth,  in  the  lower  jaw  and  down  the  neck.  Jerking
stitches  in  the  last  left  molares,  also  in  the  evening,  and
rousing  him  from  sleep  suddenly.  Prickling  and  pecking
in  sound  teeth,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  jaws,  (a.  9 d.)
Beating  pain  in  the  hollow  tooth,  after  eating,  or  after  be-
coming heated  or  catching  cold.  Painful  burning  in  all  the
fore-teeth,  with  smarting  in  the  lower  surface  of  the  tongue.
The  teeth  feel  dull.  Ulcer  in  the  region  of  a rotten  tooth,
with  sensation  as  if  the  tooth  were  elongated.  Sore  pain
of  the  inner  surface  of  the  gums,  as  if  they  became  detach-
ed from  the  teeth.  The  gums  are  so  painful  that  he  is  no
longer  able  to  chew.  Gnawing  and  itching  in  the  inner
gums.  White  gums.  Swelling  of  the  gums,  (a.  12  d.)
Sore  and  swollen  gums,  (15.  d.)  The  gums  bleed  at  the
slightest  touch.  Violent  bleeding  of  the  gams.  Bleeding
from  the  teeth  and  gums.

Mouth. — Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  with  in-
clination to  vomit.  Increased  secretion  of  saliva,  with
metallic  taste  in  the  mouth,  (1.  d.)  Increased  secretion  of
saliva  with  metallic  taste  and  shootings  in  the  tip  of  the
tongue.  Increased  secretion  of  saliva  with  creeping  in


334


ZINCUM.


the  internal  surf  ace  of  the  clieeh  Yellow  little  ulcer  on
the  internal  surtace  of  the  left  cheek,  especially  painful
in  the  morning,  (3.  d.)  The  tongue  is  painful  as  if  sore.
Yellowish- white  coating  of  the  tongue,  especially  towards
the  root.  White-coaled  tongue,  without  taste,  but  with  a
feeling  of  icy  coldness  in  the  morning,  (4.  d.)  Dry  tongue.
Vesicles  on  the  tongue.  Vesicle  on  the  longue,  painful
when  eating.  Swelling  of  the  left  side  of  the  tongue,
hindering  talking.  Weakness  of  the  organs  of  speech,
when  reading  loud.  Stinging  smarting  in  the  palate,
close  to  the  roots  of  the  fore-teeth,  and  in  those  roots.
Swelling  of  the  prominence  of  the  palate  directly  behind
the  incisores,  with  pain  to  the  touch,  for  three  days.  Pain-
fulness of  the  palate  and  gums,  while  at  dinner  ; when
chewing.  Simple  pain  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  palate
and  the  velum  pendulum  palati,  especially  when  yawning,
(a.  48  h.)

Pharynx  and  Trachea. — Dryness  of  the  throat , in  the
evening.  Scraping  rawness  in  the  pharynx,  towards  even-
ing. Frequent  smarting  scratching  in  the  posterior  fauces,
as  in  violent  catarrh.  Sensation  in  the  posterior  part  of
the  fauces,  as  if  mucus  had  accumulated  there,  with  desire
to  clear  the  throat  from  time  to  time.  White  mucus  gets
into  the  mouth  through  the  posterior  nares  without  clear-
ing the  throat.  Hawking  up  of  greenish  mucus  which
adheres  firmly  in  the  lower  part  of  the  throat  ; the  chest
feels  sore  and  painful  while  hawking.  Aching  pain  in
both  tonsils,  when  swallowing,  in  the  evening  and  through
the  night.  Spasmodic  and  crampy  sensation  in  the  pit  of
the  throat,  or  in  the  upper  part  of  the  oesophagus,  resem-
bling a pressure  from  below  upward,  or  as  when  swallow-
ing. (shortly.)  Cramp-like  strangulating  pain  in  the  throat,
rather  externally  in  the  muscles,  when  swallowing,  even
when  swallowing  drinks.  Pain  in  the  throat  as  of  an  in-
ternal swelling,  also  during  empty  deglutition,  (a.  2 and  6
d.)  Painful  soreness  in  the  throat,  anil  sensation  as  if  the
oesophagus  were  crammed  full.  Pain  in  the  throat  when
swallowing,  with  swelling  of  the  outer  neck  and  the  ton-
sils. Tearing , drawing  pain , in  both  sides  of  the  posterior
fauces,  more  between  than  during  the  acts  of  empty  deglu-
tition. Sharp  jerking  tearing  extending  from  the  fauces


ZINCUM.


335


into  the  left  cervical  muscles,  (5.  d.)  Sort  of  heart-burn
in  ihe  throat,  also  when  swallowing.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth
and  sweetish  risings  from  the  stomach.  Taste  in  the
mouth  as  of  rotten  cheese,  going  off  during  deglutition.
Taste  of  blood  in  the  throat,  with  feeling  of  dryness  in  the
throat,  and  sensation  of  soreness  rising  from  the  chest.
Sweet  taste  in  the  anterior  and  inferior  surface  of  the
tongue.  Saltish  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  dryness  in  the
throat.  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  (in  a few  days.)  Taste
in  the  mouth  as  of  law  peas  chewed.  Burning  thirst,  (6.
d.)  \ lolent  thirst  for  water.  Thirst  at  or  after  dinner.

Thirst,  with  heat  in  the  palms  of  the  hands.  Little  appe-
tite, and  almost  no  taste.  Aversion  to  meal,  and  boiled
warm  food.  Aversion  to  fish,  he  was  generally  very  tond
of  them.  No  hunger  at  supper,  or  at  breakfast,  (a.  I \ h.)
Aversion  to  veal , of  which  she  used  to  be  fond.  Aversion
to  the  sweetness  of  sugar.  Canine  hunger;  Great
greediness  when  eating , and  hurried  definition.  Jn-
sat.iableness,  but  does  not  relish  his  food.  Insatiableness
at  dinner  or  supper,  nevertheless  feels  replete  after  a meal.
Desire  to  eat  in  the  pharynv,  even  after  a meal  ; after
havi  ng  satisfied  it,  the  stomach  feels  replete,  with  pressure
in  the  head.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Difficult  digestion.  Appears  to
favor  acidity  of  trie  stomach.  Sour  eructations  after  eat-
ing. Sour  eructations  after  taking  bread  and  milk  for  break-
fast. After  eating  sweet  things,  acridity  rises  into  the
fauces,  causing  a troublesome  scraping  in  the  larynx,  like
heartburn.  After  the  dinner  the  food  seemed  to  have  re-
mained lodged  in  the  throat.  After  the  supper  a violent
bitterness  is  perceived  in  the  mouth,  but  only  for  a short
while.  Burning  at  the  stomach,  and  eructations  with  a
desire  to  vomit,  an  hour  and  a half  after  a moderate  dinner.
Great  repletion  and  distension  of  the  abdomen,  immedi-
ately or  two  hours  after  a meal.  Two  hours  after  dinner,
disagreeable  feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen  and
stomach,  with  hunger.  After  dinner  and  supper,  nausea,
bloatedness  and  inclination  to  vomit  in  the  stomach,  with
inclination  to  eructate,  going  off  after  bringing  up  wind.
Pressure  and  gurgling  in  the  epigastrium,  after  a meal.


836


ZTNCUM.


^ Griping  in  the  epigastrium,  at  dinner.  Griping  in  the  epi-
gastrium, after  eating  soup.  Bleeding  of  the  nose  when
blowing  it,  lasting  but  a short  while,  after  dinner,  followed
by  a sense  as  of  stunning  in  the  forehead,  as  from  a blow,
the  head  swimming.  Dizziness  after  dinner.  Dizziness
after  dinner,  as  if  he  were  looking  through  a gauze.  Fre-
quent and  empty  eructations , evening  or  forenoon.  Un-
successful eructations,  with  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the
spine.  Wind  is  brought  up  by  empty  eructations,  but
with  pressure  in  the  chest,  and  not  without  an  effort.  Fre-
quent loud  eructations,  the  pulse  being  weak  and  alter-
nately quick  and  slow.  Eructations  tasting  of  milk.
Sweetish  eructations.  Sourish , empty  eructations,  after
drinking,  or  after  dinner.  Eructations  tasting  of  the  in-
gesta.  Hiccough  for  half  an  hour,  (a.  4 d.)  Hiccough,
very  violent  in  the  evening,  or  after  breakfast.  Nausea
during  breakfast.  Nausea  in  the  morning,  as  from  an
emetic.  Nausea  at  the  stomach,  with  tremor,  exhaustion
and  debility  in  the  whole  body.  Feeling  of  nausea  in  the
stomach  brought  on  by  shaking  the  body  when  washing,
and  after  stooping  when  sitting  down.  Nausea  after  a
siesta  of  half  an  hour  ; lie  was  obliged  to  spit  a good  deal,
for  a whole  hour.  Nausea,  with  retching,  and  vomiting  of
a bitter,  slimy  fluid,  and  lastly  of  the  ingesta,  with  starts  of
cough,  feeling  of  wrarmth,  especially  in  the  abdomen,
sweat,  chilliness  over  the  arms,  shaking  of  the  body,  empty
eructations,  hiccough,  rumbling  and  pinching  in  the  abdo-
men ; the  nausea  is  relieved  by  sittings  curbed  ; nausea
and  vomiting  return  immediately  when  sitting  erect,  when
moving  about,  or  when  pressing  upon  the  abdomen  (a.  10
m.  and  after  Si  h.)  Bringing  up  sanguineous  mucus  with
an  effort.

Stomach. — Pain  in  the  stomach,  as  if  empty,  and  with
nausea.  Qualmishness  in  the  stomach,  when  in  bed,
and  sometimes  after  breakfast  or  dinner.  Disagreeable
sensation  in  the  upper  orifice  of  the  stomach  and  a little
beyond  in  the  oesophagus.  Sharp  pains  in  the  stomach
and  pit  of  the  stomach.  Pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach
when  taking  an  inspiration  ; the  breath  is  retained  after
dinner.  Pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  where  a burning;
pain  is  experienced  when  pressing  upon  it,  in  the  evening.


XTNCUM.


i 337

•

Pressure  at  the  stomach,  followed  by  stitching  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  morning  after  rising.  Pressure
at  the  stomach,  with  feeling  of  coldness,  at  noon.  Pres-
sure in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Contraction  from  both
sides  of  the  stomach,  with  anxiousness  and  increased
warmth  in  the  head,  and  whole  body-  Sensation  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach  as  of  the  parts  being  screwed  together.
Pain,  before  breakfast,  as  if  the  stomach  were  being  pressed
together.  Frequent  clawing  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
Oppression  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Pinching  deep  in
the  region  of  the  heart,  increased  during  a deep  inspiration,
(a.  1 h.)  Drawing  in  and  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
(l.  and  2.  d.)  Tearing  and  'pinching  in  and  below  the
pit  of  the  stomach , frequently  repeated.  Stitches  in  the
direction  of  one  another,  and  starting  from  both  sides  of
the  stomach,  accompanied  with  a stitch  in  the  middle  of
the  sternum.  Beating  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  ap-
parently in  the  integuments  ; it  resembles  a pulsation  or
the  movement  of  a worm.  Burning  in  the  upper  part  of
the  stomach,  before  breakfast.

Abdomen. — Spasmodic  pains  in  the  hypochondria,  alter-
nating with  oppression  of  the  chest  and  difficult  breathing.
Pressure  at  a small  spot  in  the  right  hypochondrium.
Clawing  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Clawing-
pinching  pressure  in  a small  spot  o(  the  region  of  the  liver.
Clawing  in  the  right  hypochondrium  and  the  right  side  of
the  abdomen,  as  if  occasioned  by  incarcerated  flatulence,
increased  during  motion.  Tearing,  drawing  and  pressure
in  the  right  hypochondrium,  setting  in  with  a sudden  jerk.
Intermittent  tearing  in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Stitching
in  the  hepatic  region  and  the  right  hip.  Stitching  in  the
right  hypochondrium,  during  a sour  eructation  and  an  in-
spiration. Stitching  in  the  right  hypochondrium  at  various
periods,  sometimes  at  the  same  time  in  the  region  of  the
hip,  violent  or  accompanied  with  burning,  or  smarting  on
the  outside  ; sometimes  in  the  evening  or  after  dinner.
A few  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.  Sharp,
jerking  stitches  in  the  hepatic  region,  alter  supper.  Pres-
sure in  the  left  hypochondria.  Clawing,  with  pressure , in
the  left  hypochondrium,  (the  region  of  the  spleen,)  some-
times in  paroxysms.  Pressure,  with  stitching,  in  the  left

15


339


SKINCTJM.


hypochondrium.  Stitching,  with  pressure,  deep  in  the  region
of  the  spleen,  increased  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Stitch-
ing in  the  left  hypochondrium,  (the  region  of  the  spleen.)
Dull  stitching  in  the  region  of  the  spleen.  Sor^  feel-
ing in  the  left  hypochondria,  slowly  pulsalive.  The  region  of
the  left  kidney  is  sensitive  to  the  touch.  Pressure  in  the
region  of  the  left  kidney,  sometimes  violently  clawing.
Clawing  in  the  region  of  the  kidney.  Tearing  in  the
region  of  the  right  kidney,  sometimes  stitching.  Sharp,
intermittent  tearing  in  the  region  of  the  left  kidney.
Sometimes  a cutting  tearing , sometimes  a drawing  pres-
sure in  the  region  of  the  right  kidney.  Stitching  in  the
region  of  the  kidneys,  sometimes  reaching  into  the  chest,
in  the  evening,  or  after  dinner.  Stitching  in  the  region  of
the  left  kidney,  in  paroxysms.  Dull  stitching  in  the  region
of  the  right  kidney,  (9.  d.)  Stitching  pressure  in  the  re-
gion of  both  kidneys.  Stitching  and  pain  as  if  bruised,
in  the  region  of  the  left  kidney,  when  standing  or  walking.
Painful  soreness  in  the  region  of  the  left  kidney.  Colic,
if  diarrhoea  would  come  on.  Violent  colic,  sometimes,
with  nausea  and  flow  of  water  from  the  mouth,  a fetid
irucus  being  sometimes  discharged  with  the  water  and
depriving  her  of  her  appetite.  Pressure  in  the  whole  ab-
domen, (4.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  close  to  the
right  hip,  (9.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  and  puffiness
extending  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  below  the  umbili-
cus, with  sensitiveness  of  the  right  upper  eye-lid.  Pres-
sure in  the  abdomen  with  much  distension,  after  eating  but
little.  Feeling  of  pressure  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  with
tingling,  extending  as  far  as  the  commencement  of  the
uretha.  Pressure  in  the  bloated  abdomen,  which  was  not
bloated  usually,  with  emission  of  a quantity  of  inodorous
flatulence.  Pressure  extending  as  far  as  the  abdomen,
from  the  fauces  downward,  as  if  a hard  body  resisted  from
below.  Dull  pressure  in  a small  place  below  the  umbili-
cus, as  if  there  were  an  internal  induration , increased  by
external  pressure  and  by  drawing  in  the  abdomen.  Hard
pressure  in  the  sides  of  the  abdomen,  the  hypochondria
and  the  back , as  if  caused  by  flatulence,  in  the  morning
when  in  bed  ; increased  by  walking,  without  emission  of
flatulence  ; relieved  but  little  after  stool,  and  renewed


ZINCUM.


339


again  by  walking  many  days  in  succession,  (a.  2 d.)
Snarp  pressure  between  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  the
umbilicus,  especially  increased  by  drawing  in  the  abdo-
men, but  relieved  by  the  eructations  excited  by  the  pres-
sure. Pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  abdomen,  shortly
after  the  moderate  supper.  'Tension  in  both  sides  of  the
abdomen.  Tensive  sensation  above  the  umbilicus,  with
a feeling  of  qualmishness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Ten-
sive colic  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  relieved  by  eruc-
tations, (1.  d.)  Violent  distension  of  the  abdomen  in  the
evening , when  going  to  bed  without  having  eaten  any
supper,  (a.  2 d.)  Repletion  in  the  abdomen,  immediately
after  a meal,  as  if  filled  with  flatulence,  (a.  24  h.)  Weight
in  the  abdomen.  Colicky,  dull  pain  in  the  abdomen.
Constrictive  colic,  arresting  the  breathing.  Contractive
pain  in  the  left  iliac  region,  when  walking  and  pressing
upon  it;  going  off  when  sitting,  after  dinner.  Violent
colic  contracting  the  abdomen,  already  after  midnight,
when  lying  down,  still  more  when  rising,  (a.  5 d.)  Pinch-
ing in  the  abdomen,  in  the  epigastrium,  with  frequent
emission  of  flatulence.  Concealed  pinching  here  and
there  in  the  abdomen.  Pinching  with  pressure,  below
the  umbilicus,  as  if  from  flatulence.  Tensive  pinching  in
the  abdomen,  followed  by  dull  stitching  toward  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  more  sensibly  felt  when  shaking  the  abdo-
men, and  drawing  it  in.  Stitching  pinching  in  the  um-
bilical region.  Cutting  in  the  epigastrium.  Transverse
cutting  through  the  abdomen,  below  the  umbilicus.  Cut-
ting in  the  epigastrium,  during  a meal.  Cutting  in  the
whole  abdomen,  from  evening  after  lying  down,  until  morn-
ing. Violent  cutting  in  the  whole  abdomen,  after  tasting
milk,  with  rumbling  and  frequent  emission  of  flatulence.
Sharp,  cutting  stitch  in  the  left  iliac  region,  shortly  after
emission  of  flatulence.  Cutting  stitch  transversely  across
the  umbilical  region.  Stitching  in  the  abdomen  during
distension.  Prickings  in  the  hypogastrium.  Dull  stitch-
ing as  of  an  internal  ulcer,  at  a small  place  on  the  right
side  and  above  the  umbilicus,  increased  by  movement  and
contact,  (5.  9.  d.)  Sharp  stitching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if
the  intestines Were  pricked  with  fine  pins,  in  paroxysms.
Violent,  piercing,  stitch  through  the  right  os  ilium,  from


340


ZXNCUM.


above  downward,  when  bending  the  body  forward  while
the  abdomen  is  pressed  against  something  hard.  Pressure
in  the  abdomen  after  dinner  and  supper,  as  if  from  flatu-
lence; when  walking  it  becomes  a stitching,  and  is  relieved
by  emission  of  flatulence.  Burning  prickings  in  the  abdo-
men. Lancinations  in  the  umbilical  region,  (8.  d.)  Fre-
quent dull  tearing,  deep  in  the  right  iliac  region,  extending
into  the  groin,  (7.  8.  d.)  Dull  tearing  deep  in  the  left  iliac
region,  commencing  in  the  region  of  the  hip.  Writhing
pain  in  the  abdomen  preceding  every  emission  of  flatulence,
in  the  morning  when  in  bed.  Bruised  feeling  in  the  right
iliac  region,  as  if  the  part  where  that  pain  is  felt,  were
decaying.  Sensation,  when  walking,  as  if  the  psoas  mus-
cles were  too  short.  Biting  sensation  in  the  whole  of  the
epigastrium.  Sensation  in  the  left  inguinal  region  as  if  the
parts  were  screwed  together,  extending  into  the  chest.
Violent  clawing  in  the  right  groin  and  inguinal  region,  as
in  retention  of  urine,  in  rest  and  motion,  and  recurring
when  rising  from  one’s  seat.  Stitches  in  the  left  groin,  in
the  morning  after  waking.  Stitching  pressure,  a little
above  he  inguinal  region.  Prickling,  with  alternate  draw-
ing, in  the  left  inguinal  region,  at  night,  disturbing  sleep,
(1.  n.)  Frequent  drawing  in  the  left  inguinal  region,  (the
first  days.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  left  inguinal  region  when
sitting.  Drawing  and  pressing  in  the  pubic  and  inguinal
regions,  many  days  in  succession.  Pressing  and  pushing
in  the  pubic  region , for  four  days,  (a.  24  h.)  Jerking
pressure  in  the  right  inguinal  region.  Painful  strangulat-
ing sensation  in  the  left  groin,  as  if  hernia  w7oulJ  set  in.
Protrusion  of  inguinal  hernia,  (a.  37  d.)  The  inguinal
hernia  protrudes  with  violence,  (a.  5 d.)  Sensation  in  the
inguinal  gland,  as  if  it  were  swollen.  Movement  of  flatu-
lence in  the  abdomen.  A quantity  of  flatulence  in  the
abdomen  which  is  not  passed  ; afterwards  oppressive
flatulent  colic  shortly  after  a meal,  considerably  increased
by  walking  or  by  exercise.  Accumulation  and  incarcera-
tion of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  more  in  the  hypogas-
trium,  and  oppressive  flatulent  colic,  in  the  evening,  (a.
12  h.)  Accumulation  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  which
causes  the  varices  to  protrude  ; these  become  painful,
especially  when  lying  down,  (a.  some  hours.)  Incarcera -


2INCUM.


341


tion  of  flatulence,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  occasioning
a colicky  pain,  with  loud  grumbling  and  grunting  in  the
abdomen,  (a.  4 d.)  She  suffers  much  with  flatulence.
Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  painless,  but  very  disagree-
able. Movements  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen , with  fre-
quent emission  of  flatulence,  especially  in  the  evening , or
with  cutting  in  the  hypogastrium  after  dinner.  Rumbling
in  the  whole  abdomen  followed  by  painful  retraction  of  the
same,  as  if  stool  would  come  on.  Violent,  fermenting
rumbling  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  followed  by  a
noise  as  when  walking  over  a tough  soil  soaked  with  wa-
ter. Rumbling  in  the  abdomen , in  the  morning,  (a.  2d.)
Violent  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Frequent  gurgling  in
the  epigastrium  and  hypogastrium,  (7.  9.  10.  d.)  Fre-
quent emission  of  flatulence,  also  hot.  Frequent  emission
of  hot,  fetid  flatulence  from  noon  till  evening.  Flatulence
having  a putrid  smell.

Stool. — Constipation,  the  first  time.  Constipation,  but
some  slight  indications  for  stool.  Frequent,  unsuccessful
desire  for  stool,  (a.  2 d.)  Long  desire  for  stool,  which
made  its  appearance  at  last,  but  with  great  difficulty,  al-
though soft.  Dry,  insufficient  stool,  every  2 or  3 days.
Tough,  scanty  stool,  followed  by  pressing,  and  heat  and
burning  at  the  anus,  (10.  d.)  Tough,  light-yellow  stool,
with  pricking  in  the  anus,  (12.  d.)  Difficult  expulsion  of
the  soft  stool,  with  discharge  of  the  prostatic  juice.  Stool
of  a large  size,  expelled  with  great  difficulty.  Difficult,
hard  stool,  the  first  lime  of  proving.  Hard  stool,  fre-
quently in  lumps,  and  accompanied  with  pressing  in  the
anus.  Hard,  small,  dry  stool,  with  much  pressing  and
rumbling.  Hard  stool  in  the  morning,  without  pressing;
after  dinner,  soft  stool,  accompanied  and  followed  by  hum-
ming in  the  head  and  giddiness.  A little  hard  stool  at  first,
followed  by  several  small  loose  stools  in  the  evening.
Several  loose  papescent  stools,  enveloped  in  bright-red,
foamy  blood,  and  preceded  by  colic.  Diarrhceic  stool,
with  flatulence.  Papescent  diarrhoea  for  many  days,  pain-
less, but  some  tenesmus  after  stool.  Colic  at  every  stool
and  emission  of  flatulence.  Burning  at  the  anus,  during
and  after  stool.  Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,  after  dry
stool.  Stitching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  after  a good  stool,


342


ZINCUM.


(a.  5 d ) Colic  after  copious  stool.  The  rectum  feels  as  if
pressed  upon  by  wind,  but  none  is  passed.  Sensation  in
the  rectum,  in  the  evening,  as  if  t he  wind  were  pushed
towards  the  os  coccygis  and  were  retained  there.  Press-
ing and  boring  from  the  rectum  into  the  abdomen,  which
made  it  impossible  for  her  to  keep  her  seat.  Heaviness
in  the  rectum  when  standing,  going  off  by  emission  of
flatulence.  Drawing  pain  in  the  rectum,  as  far  as  the
abdomen,  (a.  24  it.)  Cutting  and  erosive  sensation  in  the
rectum.  Cutting  at  the  anus,  at  intervals.  Tearing  at
the  anus.  Stitches  in  the  anus,  (10.  d.)  Stitch  with  a
sensation  as  of  strangulation,  quick  as  lightning  and  caus-
ing one  to  start,  from' the  anus  into  the  rectum,  (a.  3 d.)
Jerking  stitches  from  the  rectum  to  the  root  of  the  penis.
Burning  stitches  in  the  anus,  in  the  evening  when  walk-
ing. Creeping  stinging  in  the  anus,  in  the  morning.
Creeping,  with  pressure,  in  the  anus,  (6.  d.)  Creeping
in  the  anus,  as  of  worms.  Itching  in  the  rectum.  Iicliing
of  the  anus,  terminating  in  a dull  stitch.  Violent  itching
of  the  anus,  after  soft  stool.  Violent  itching  of  the  anus ,
almost  every  day.  Violent  itching  of  the  anus,  and  exsu-
dation  of  a corrosive  tumor.  Soreness  and  tingling  in  the
anus.  Soreness  of  the  rectum.  Burning  sensation  of
soreness  in  the  anus,  evening,  (1.  d.)  Burning  at  the
anus , (11  d.)  Protrusion  of  the  varices,  smarting  and
painful.  Discharge  of  blood  from  the  anus,  (10.  d.)

Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  pressure  upon  the  blad-
der, at  night,  with  scanty  emission.  Diminished  secretion
of  urine.  Frequent  and  somewhat  increased  secretion  of
urine,  clear  as  water  and  sometimes  lemon-yellow,  (the
first  d.)  Excessive  desire  to  urinate,  he  urinates  a good
deal.  She  urinates  a good  deal  at  night,  without  having
taken  much  drink.  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine  when
blowing  her  nose,  (after  a difficult  evacuation  of  the  bow-
els.) Reddish  urine.  The  urine  looks  turbid  and  loam-
colored  in  the  morning , (in  2 d.  and  afterwards.)  Very
yellow  urine,  depositing  whitish  flocks  when  standing  a
good  wdiile,  (1.  d.)  Orange-colored  urine,  depositing
flocks,  (3.  d.)  Flow  of  blood  from  the  urethra,  after  a
painful  micturition.  Pressure  upon  the  bladder,  but  no
desire  to  urinate.  Colic,  followed  by  spasm  in  the  blad-


ZXNCUMo


343


der.  Intensely  painful  drawing  in  the  urethra  and  the
fore-part  of  the  penis.  Intensely  painful  drawing  and
creeping  from  the  abdomen  as  far  as  the  penis.  Drawing
and  tearing  in  the  fore-part  of  the  urethra.  Biting  sensa-
tion in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  alter  micturition,  (3.  d.)
Sharp,  tearing  cutting,  from  the  middle  of  the  urethra  to
the  fore-part,  (5.  d.)  Cutting  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,
in  the  evening,  when  sitting.  Stitching  in  the  orifice  of
the  urethra,  (11.  d.)  Stitch  in  the  urethra,  with  sensation
of  strangulation,  from  the  fore  to  the  back-part,  quick  as
lightning,  (a.  2 d.)  Itching  in  the  urethra,  (a.  3G  h.)
Burning  in  the  urethra,  after  urinating.  Tearing  burning
in  the  urethra,  (6.  d.)  Sore  pain  in  ihe  fore-part  of  the
urethra,  (betw-een  the  acts  of  micturition.)

.Genital  Organs — Great  falling  off  of  the  hair  of
the  genital  organs.  The  penis  is  very  sensitive  to  pain
when  walking,  as  if  the  shirt  were  too  rough  and  pro-
duced friction.  Jerking,  from  the  groin  towards  the
penis.  Painful  jerking  in  the  root  of  the  penis.  Dull
stitching  near  the  genital  organs  in  the  abdomen,  suc-
ceeded by  tearing  drawing  in  the  root  of  the  penis.
Tearing  in  the  tip  of  the  glans.  Dull  stitches  in  the
glans,  coming  from  the  scrotum.  Shuddering  about  the
scrotum  and  the  adjoining  parts,  as  in  goose-flesh.  Shud-
dering about  the  scrotum,  which  becomes  shrivelled.
Shrivelling  of  the  scrotum,  (2.  d.)  Violent  itching  of  the
scrotum,  almost  causing  a feeling  of  soreness,  and  which
cannot  be  removed  by  scratching,  many  evenings  in  suc-
cession. A small,  red  and  sore  pimple  surrounding  one
of  the  hairs  of  the  scrotum,  for  three  days,  (a.  5 d.)  Sore
feeling  in  one  side  of  the  scrotum  and  likewise  on  the
thigh  where  the  scrotum  touches  it.  The  right  testicle  is
painful,  especially  when  touched,  (3.  d.)  Shootings,  with
pressure,  in  the  left  testicle,  when  at  rest.  Drawing  pain
in  the  testicles.  Drawing  in  the  left,  afterwards  in  the
right  testicle.  Frequent  drawing , commencing  in  the  tes-
ticles, and  folloxoing  the  course  of  the  spermatic  cord . (2.
3.  d.)  Prickling  pain  in  the  testes,  mostly  when  sitimn
and  stooping,  for  many  days.  Either  the  right  or  the  Left
testicle  is  drawn  up , with  some  pain  and  swelling.  The
sexual  organs  are  easily  excited,  and  the  semen  is  emitted
too  rapidly  in  an  embrace.  Great  desire  for  an  embrace


314


ZINCTJM.


in  the  genital  organs  ; the  emission  of  semen  being  never-
theless difficult  and  almost  impossible,  (a.  48  h.)  Violent
and  long-lasting  erections,  (10.  d.)  Emission  without
dreams,  two  nights  in  succession,  (7.  8.  n.)  Copious  dis-
charge of  prostatic  juice,  without  any  cause,  (a.  9d.)  Sex-
ual desire  in  a female,  several  times  in  the  night,  without
lascivious  dreams,  (2.  n.)  Irresistible  desire  fot*  onanism,
in  a female,  without  any  lascivious  dreams,  (7.  n.)  Press-
ing in  the  pudendum  and  rectum,  (a.  13  d.)  Varices  of  the
pudendum.  Suppression  of  the  lochia  and  decrease  of
the  quantity  of  milk  in  the  mammae.  Re-appearance  of
the  menses,  which  had  been  suppressed  for  three  months,
with  alternate  paleness  and  redness  of  the  face.  Menses
too  early  and  more  profuse  than  usual.  Discharge  of
lumps  of  coagulated  blood  during  the  menses,  mostly  when
walking.  Menses  too  early  by  a fortnight,  (a.  1 8 d.)  The
period  of  the  menses  is  longer.  During  the  menses,  hea-
viness in  the  limbs,  with  violent  drawing  around  the  knees,
as  if  they  would  be  twisted  off.  Inflammation  of  the  eyes
during  the  menses.  During  the  menses,  sudden  tightness
and  oppression  of  the  region  of  the  stomach,  she  had  to
unloosen  her  dress.  Weakness  in  the  hands  and  feet  dur-
ing the  menses.  Chilliness  during  the  menses.  Weep-
ing mood  and  out  of  humor  during  the  menses.  Anxiety
during  the  menses.  Stitching,  biting  and  itching  of  the
pudendum  during  the  menses,  with  sensation  as  if  the
parts  were  swollen.  Discharge  of  bloody  mucus  after  the
menses,  causing  itching  of  the  pudendum.  Recurrence
of  leucorrhoea  for  one  day,  after  which  it  ceased,  (a.  15  d.)
Cutting  colic  succeeded  by  leucorrhoea.  Discharge  of
thick  mucus  for  three  days,  before  and  after  the  menses,
(18.  19.  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — Sneezing , preceded  by  a cutting
creeping  in  the  nose.  Sneezing,  morning  and  afternoon.
Itching  of  the  right  nostril.  Itching  of  the  left  nostril,  then
frequent  sneezing,  follow.ed  by  violent  bleeding  of  the
nose,  which  was  stopped  by  cold  water,  (10  d.)  Obstruc-
tion of  both  nostrils.  Violent  dry  coryza  the  whole  day,
with  pain  in  the  back.  Alternate  dry  and  fluent  coryza.
Fluent  coryza,  with  creeping  in  the  nose,  and  frequent
sneezing.  Fluent  coryza  towards  evening,  with  pressure


ZINCTJM.


345


in  the  right  tonsil  when  swallowing  or  yawning.  Increas-
ed discharge  of  mucus  from  the  nose,  without  coryza,  (a.
12  h.)

Larynx  and  Trachea. — Roughness  and  dryness  of  the
throat  and  fauces,  frequently  and  at  different  periods.
Roughness  and  rawness  in  the  chest , ivith  nightly  heat
and,  sweat , (a.  13,  14  d.)  Hawking  up  of  a quantity  of
black,  coagulated  blood,  after  mucus.  Hoarseness  of  the
chest,  as  if  full  of  mucus.  Hoarseness , with  burning  in
the  trachea.  Hawks  up  a quantity  of  mucus  from  the
chest.  Titillating  cough,  very  fatiguing,  in  day-time,  but
worse  in  the  night.  Short*  cough  produced  by  a tickling
under  the  sternum,  (4.  d.)  Suffocative  cough  ; the  ti t i 11a-
tion  takes  away  his  breath.  Dry  cough,  with  violent
stitches  in  the  chest,  and  sensation  as  if  it  would  fly  to
pieces  ; she  has  great  trouble  in  breathing  or  talking.
Cough  in  the  night,  with  pricking  in  the  chest  and  little
thirst,  (a.  22  d.)  Cough  with  stitches  in  the  head.  Dis-
charge of  tenacious  mucus  when  coughing,  with  sensation
after  the  expectoration  as  if  the  chest  were  hollow  and
cold  inside.  Discharge  of  sanguineous  mucus  when  cough-
ing, preceded  by  stitches  in  the  side,  (a.  40  d.)  ffw-
charge  of  blood  during  dry  cough , with  burning,  and  sore
pain  in  the  chest,  morning  and  evening.  Thick,  purulent
expectoration  when  coughing,  day  and  night,  (a.  18  d.)
The  breathing  is  more  oppressed  than  usual,  (1.  d.)  Chest
and  breathing  are  unusually  free  and  easy.  Constrictive
sensation  around  the  chest,  with  pain  in  the  chest,  as  if
cut  to  pieces.  Oppression  of  the  chest,  when  walking  in
the  open  air,  as  if  constricted  with  a bandage  tied  across.
Oppression  of  the  chest  two  evenings  in  succession , with
dull  stitching  and  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum ,
the  pulse  being  quick  and  small , (2.  3.  d.)  Anxiety  in  the
chest , going  off  in  the  evening,  with  headache,  (a.  13  d.)
Pain  in  the  chest,  especially  in  the  right  side,  as  if  the  blood
were  forcing  its  way  into  the  capillaries  of  the  lungs.
Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  right  extremity  of  the  left
clavicle,  in  the  morning.  Pressure  in  the  chest,  extending
into  the  throat,  as  if  a foreign  body  were  rising.  Pressure
in  the  left,  or  in  the  whole  of  the  chest,  now  here,  now
there.  Aching  pain  in  the  chest,  frequently,  (the  first  two

15*


346


ZINCUM*


days.)  Pressure  in  the  chest,  as  if  from  rheumatism  or
from  incarcerated  flatulence.  Pressure  in  the  chest,  aris-
ing from  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  going  off  by  an  cructalion,
(b.  d.)  Pressure  on  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum,  or  in
the  lower  part  of  the  chest,  after  dinner,  for  rather  a long
while,  (1.2.  d.)  Pressure  below  the  left  nipple,  (2.  d.)
Pressure,  a sort  of  rheumatic  drawing,  below  the  clavicle,
near  the  joint  of  the  upper  arm.  Pressure  in  the  region
of  the  left  clavicle.  Sharp  pressure  in  the  right  chest,  near
the  axilla.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left
chest.  Intermittent  pressure  from  without  inward,  and
drawing  tension  here  and  there  in  the  left  chest.  Ten-
sive pains  in  the  chest.  Tension  and  drawing  in  the  re-
gion of  the  left  clavicle.  Tension,  bruised  pain  and  stitch-
ing in  the  whole  right  side  of  the  chest.  Tension  and
stitching  in  the  region  of  the  heart.  Clawing  pain  in  the
chest,  intermittent,  with  qualmishness,  in  the  morning
early,  (2.  d.)  Pinching  and  hard  aching  pain  in  the  chest,
from  time  to  time.  Tearing  in  the  right  chest,  (11.  d.)
Tearing  in  the  left  chest,  below  the  axilla.  Tearing  in  the
region  of  the  right  upper  ribs,  almost  in  the  back.  Dull
tearing  pain  in  the  chest,  above  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (8.
d.)  Lancination  in  the  left  chest,  (a.  10  d.)  'Fearing
stitches  in  the  chest,  below  the  axilla,  succeeded  with  sore-
ness of  that  place.  Violent  stitches  in  the  chest,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  extending  as  far  up  as  the  left
side  of  the  neck,  with  difficult  breathing,  for  several  hours.
Stitching  pain  in  the  sternum.  Pricking  in  the  chest,  here
or  there,  during  a deep  inspiration.  Violent  stitches  into
the  sternum,  when  stooping,  followed  by  painful  pressure
extending  from  the  inmost  chest  into  the  thro  it.  Stiich  in
the  upper  part  of  the  sternum,  extending  into  the  left  lum-
bar region,  with  dread  of  stooping,  early  in  the  morning.
Stitching  in  the  right  chest,  sometimes  when  turning  the
trunk  to  one  side,  or  after  dinner,  followed  by  pressure,
or  alternating  with  stitching  in  the  right  groin  and  side  of
the  abdomen.  Stitch  under  the  right  nipple.  Dull  stitch-
ing in  the  right  chest.  Dull  stitch ing  in  the  region  of  the
right  short  ribs.  Stitch  into  the  left  chest,  when  moving
the  arm.  Stitching  in  the  region  of  the  left  ribs,  opposite
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  ulcerative  pain  per  se,  and


ZINCUM.


347


when  pressing  upon  the  part,  in  the  evening.  Stitching
pain  in  a place  of  the  size  of  the  hand  in  the  left  chest ,
with  sensation  as  if  the  place  were  decaying  and  dashed
to  pieces.  Stitching  in  the  left  chest,  which  is  sometimes
very  violent.  Stitches  in  the  left  chest,  in  the  evening
when  standing,  the  place  feeling  bruised  and  painful.
Stitches  under  the  heart,  like  pleuritic  stitches.  Stitches
over  the  heart,  in  the  evening,  (24.  d.)  Intensely  painful
stitch  in  the  left  clavicle.  Violent  stitches  in  the  left  side,
worse  during  an  inspiration,  relieved  by  stretching  one’s
self.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  inmost  of  the  right  chest.
Sharp  stitching  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  increased  by
violent  expirations,  (9.  d.)  Dull  stitching  in  the  upper
part  of  the  left  chest,  (5.  6.  d.)  Dull  stitch  under  the
sternum,  when  eating.  Stitching  and  tension  in  the
chest  below  the  right  axilla,  (7.  9.  d.)  Continuous
stitch,  with  pressure,  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  espe-
cially increased  during  a violent  expiration.  Sensation
of  weakness  and  burning  in  the  sternum,  (a.  a few  h.)
Burning  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  Burning  in  the
right  chest , (2.  d.)  The  chesi-symptoms  become  more
violent  when  she  moves  about,  or  when  she  lifts  something
or  seizes  something  with  her  lianas.  Painful  throbbing  in
the  left  chest,  near  the  axilla.  Frequent  palpitation  of
the  heart,  without  any  particular  anxiety , (a.  2d.)  Pain-
ful palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  a stitch  at  every  beat.
Pain  in  the  chest  as  if  bruised,  when  riding.  Pain  of  the
left  pectoral  muscle,  as  if  sore  or  bruised.  Sore  aching
pain  around  the  right  nipple.  Thin,  sharp  drawing  around
the  left  nipple,  with  painful  soreness  when  touching  the
part,  the  pain  soon  becoming  pulsative.  Violent  aching
pain  in  the  right  mamma.  Feeling  of  distension  in  the
left  mamma.  Dull  and  painful  stitches  into  the  left  mam-
ma. Burning  in  a small  place  of  the  chest,  on  the  right,
side  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  also  over  the  left  nipple.
Burning  in  the  right  chest,  apparently  in  the  skin,  extend-
ing as  far  as  the  back.

Back. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  walking
or  when  sitting  down.  Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the
back  when  walking,  frequently  obliging  him  to  stand  still*
nevertheless,  the  pain  diminished  more  and  more  by  con-


348


ZINCTTM.


tinued  walking.  Pains  in  the  region  of  the  os  coccygis,
which  are  sometimes  pushing-aching,  sometimes  pinching.
Pressure  over  the  small  of  the  back  in  the  lower  part  of
the  spine.  Paralytic  aching  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
when  lying  in  the  bed  in  a wrong  position,  most  violent
when  rising  from  a seat  and  when  commencing  to  walk.
Tension  and  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  small  of  the  back,
when  sitting,  with  tension  in  the  head.  Sensation  in  the
small  of  the  back,  when  rising  from  a seat,  as  if  the  parts
wrere  screwed  in.  Drawing  in  the  small  of  the  back  and
spine,  a sort  of  painful  weakness,  when  silting  or  stoop-
ing. Violent  cutting  in  the  small  of  the  back,  at  the  least
motion,  extending  into  the  calves  and  feet ; he  is  neither
able  to  walk,  stand,  nor  lie  down.  Lancinalion  in  the  os
sacrum,  (3.4.  d.)  Cracking  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when
walking.  Weak  feeling  m the  small  of  the  back,  when
walking.  Pain  in  the  back,  when  sitting.  Stiffness  and
pain  in  the  upper  dorsal  muscles,  especially  during  motion,
for  four  nights,  not  in  day-time.  Sharp  pressure  in  the
back,  close  to  the  right  scapula.  Burning  pressure  in  the
region  of  the  dorsal  spine,  a little  over  the  small  of  the
back,  (4.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  back,  under  the  left  scapula.
Pressure  on  the  right  side  and  near  the  middle  of  the  spine.
Tension,  with  pressure,  in  the  back,  in  a small  spot  in  the
margin  of  the  right  scapula.  Violent  tensive  pains,  like
rheumatic  pains,  in  the  lumbar  region  and  in  the  top  of  the
shoulders,  (8.  d.)  Tensive  pain  in  the  dorsal  spine,  sort
of  rheumatic  pain.  Tensive  pain  between  the  shoulders,
in  rest  and  molion.  Tensive  feeling,  as  from  a pitch-
plaster,  near  the  internal  border  of  the  right  scapula.
Pinching  and  burning  pain  in  single  parts  of  the  back.
Burning,  drawing  in  the  back  and  small  of  the  back.
Burning,  tearing  between  the  spine  and  right  scapula,  (11.
d.)  Tearing  in  the  right  scapula,  (11.  d.)  Violent  pain
in  the  back,  as  if  bruised,  wrhen  walking  in  the  open  air,
with  weakness,  so  that  she  was  scarcely  able  to  get  home,
(19.  d.)  Stitches  under  the  left  scapula,  extending  to  the
fore-part  of  the  left  region  of  the  chest.  Stitching  pain
in  the  back  and  small  of  the  back,  when  sitting  and  walk-
ing. Violent  stitching  in  the  middle  of  the  back,  when
standing.  Stitch  into  the  left  scapula.  Continuous  stitch-


ZINCUM.


349


ing  in  the  border  of  the  left  scapula,  towards  the  axilla,  so
violent  that  it  caused  her  to  start,  with  rising  of  heat  to  the
head.  Sharp  stitching  close  to  the  upper  part  of  the  right
scapula,  most  painful  during  an  eructation,  for  many  days.
Dull  stitches  under  the  right  scapula,  (9.  d.)  Dull  stitches
and  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  internal  border  of  the
right  scapula.  Dull,  darling  stitching  directly  under  and
by  the  side  of  the  left  scapula.  Burning  in  the  left  side
and  the  left  scapula,  (5.  ll.d.)  Burning  in  the  skin  of
the  right  scapula,  (5.  d.)  Itching  between  the  scapulae,  in
the  evening,  with  much  eruption.  Itching  spots  on  the
back,  and  little  scabs  which  are  painful  to  the  touch.  The
nape  of  the  neck  and  back  are  painful,  as  if  bruised  and
worn  out  by  too  great  fatigue.  Pain  in  the  nape  of  the
neck,  when  sitting  or  writing,  as  if  it  refused  to  carry  the
head  any  longer.

Neck. — The  nape  of  the  neck  feels  weary,  in  the  even-
ing, when  writing.  Stiffness  and  pain  of  the  posterior  cer-
vical and  upper  dorsal  muscles,  several  mornings,  not  in
the  day-time.  Cramp-like  stiffness  of  the  left  side  of  the
nape  of  the  neck,  (1.  d.)  Tension  and  drawing  in  the
right  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  rest  and  motion.  A
nodosity  in  the  right  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  painful,
like  an  ulcer  when  pressing  upon  it.  Pain  of  the  cervical
muscles,  in  the  night,  as  if  the  head  had  been  for  a long
time  in  an  inconvenient  position  ; the  pain  is  even  felt  dur-
ing sleep,  (6.  7.  8.  d.)  Tension  in  the  anterior  cervical
muscles,  (a.  ~ d.)  Rigidity  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck.
Clawing  sensation  in  both  sides  of  the  neck,  near  the  trunk.
Cramp-like  drawing  along  the  cervical  muscles,  from  above
downward,  when  chewing.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  the
right  ride  of  the  neck,  when  holding  the  head  erect,  as  if
the  neck  were  stiff.  Pain  in  the  side  of  the  neck  as  far  as
the  shoulder,  with  stiffness  of  the  parts,  several  mornings
when  in  bed  ; going  off  in  day-time.  Pressure  in  the  right
side  of  the  neck,  as  with  a finger,  when  talking.  Tear-
ing in  the  right  side  of  the  neck , posteriorly,  also  below
the  jaw,  and  behind  and  below  the  ear.  Tearing  in  the
left  side  of  the  neck,  extending  to  behind  the  left  ear.
Frequent  and  violent  tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck,
going  off  by  pressure,  in  the  morning,  (13.  d.)  Dull  tear-


350


ZINCUMo


ing  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  posteriorly.  Lancina-
tions  in  the  neck  and  chin,  diffusing  into  one  another,  (6.
d.)  Lancination  in  the  posterior  and  inferior  part  of'  the
right  side  of  the  neck,  at  a small  place.  Stitches  in  the
cervical  muscles,  (7.  d.)  Tickling  in  ihe  outer  part  of  the
larynx,  accompanied  with  stitching,  (3.  d.)  Frequent,  in-
tensely painful  tickling  in  the  region  of  the  larynx,  (3.  d.)

Upper  Limbs. — Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  axillae,  at
a small  place,  as  if  bruised.  Stitching  in  the  left  axilla,
and  in  the  fore-part  of  the  chest  from  above  downward,
with  arrest  of  breathing,  in  the  evening.  Dull  stitching
tearing  in  the  right  axilla.  Tearing  under  the  left  arm,
extending  as  far  as  the  axilla,  (5.  d.)  Burning  in  the  left
axil’a.  Rheumatic  tension  in  the  head  of  the  left  humerus.
Tension  and  tearing  in  both  shoulder-joints.  Pressure,
with  tearing,  in  the  left  side  of  the  shoulder,  where  the
neck  commences.  Tearing  in  the  top  of  the  right  shoul-
der, (2.  d.)  Violent  tearing  in  the  shoulder-joint,  upon
which  she  had  been  lying  at  night.  Lancination  in  the  top
of  the  right  shoulder.  Stitching  in  the  left  shoulder.  The
shoulder-joints  feel  as  if  gone  to  sleep.  Small  pimples
on  both  shoulders,  like  boils.  Desire  to  move  the  arms.
Jerking  of  the  left  arm.  Tearing  in  the’ arms  and  hands.
Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  arm,  mostly  morning  and  even-
ing. Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  left  arm  ; the  deltoid  mus-
cle is  so  painful  that  he  is  unable  to  raise  the  arm.  Dull
pain  in  the  right  upper  arm,  (a.  3 h.)  Rheumatic  pain  in
the  deltoid  muscles  of  the  upper  arm,  increased  by  raising
the  arm,  (2.  d.)  Drawing  in  the  left  upper  arm,  close  to
the  elbow.  Tearing  in  the  left  upper  arm , near  the  shoul-
der. Tearing  in  both  upper  arms,  from  the  deltoid  mus-
cles downwards.  Intermittent  tearing  in  the  middle  of  the
inner  side  of  the  left  upper  arm.  Stitching  in  the  right
upper  arm,  in  the  morning,  while  dressing.  Stitching  and
burning  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  upper  arm,  after
dinner.  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  right  humerus.  Gurg-
ling in  the  left  upper  arm.  Biting  burning  in  the  upper
and  posterior  portion  of  the  skin  of  the  left  upper  arm,  (10.
d.)  Large  boil  on  the  left  upper  arm,  (a.  31  d.)  Rheu-
matic pressure  in  the  elbows.  Tearing  in  the  bend  of  the
elbows.  Tearing  in  the  right  elbow -joint f going  off  by


ZINCUM.


351


friction.  Stitching  and  tension  in  the  right  elbow-joint,  in
the  evening  when  yawning.  Rash-eruption  in  the  bend
of  the  elbow.  Spasmodic  drawing,  occasionally,  in  the
lower  arms  or  fingers.  Drawing  pain  in  the  lower  arm,
apparently  in  the  bone.  Tearing  in  the  left  radius,  after-
wards in  the  knee.  Sharp  tearing  in  the  left  lower  arm,
mostly  in  the  upper  half.  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  lower
arms,  when  feeling  and  turning  the  arm,  with  occasional
tearing  in  the  fleshy  part  of  the  arm.  Gurgling,  dull  tear-
ing in  the  muscles  of  the  inner  side  of  the  right  lower
arm,  not  far  from  the  bend  of  the  elbow.  Burning  in  the
fore-arm,  over  the  right  wrist-joint,  when  moving  the  arm.
Burning  in  the  outer  part  of  the  left  lower  arm , at  night,
(a.  6 d.)  Pimples  on  the  lower  arm,  itching  violently  in
the  day-lime.  Pressure  in  the  ball  of  the  left  hand.  Stiff-
ness in  the  dorsum  of  the  hand,  and  cramp-feeling  in  the
extensor  muscles  of  the  thumb,  when  playing  on  the  piano,
(l.d.)  Tension  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  little  fin-
ger, towards  the  wrist-joint.  Tension  in  the  right  wrist,
as  if  the  muscles  were  too  short.  Rheumatic  tension
above  the  left  wrist.  Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  right
wrist-joint.  Tearing  drawing  in  the  left  palm,  between
the  thumb  and  index-finger.  Tearing  in  the  right  wrist.
Tearing  in  the  exterior  of  the  wrist.  Tearing  in  the  bend
of  the  left  wrist-joint,  with  tearing  stitches  in  the  dorsum
of  the  left  hand.  Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  hand,
in  the  fourth  and  fifth  metacarpal  bones,  and  in  the  wrist.
Tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  both  index-fingers.
Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  hand,  sometimes  alter-
nating with  tearing  in  the  right.  Frequent  tearing  in  the
palm  of  the  right  hand  near  the  fingers.  Tearing  in  the
middle  of  the  right  wrist,  followed  by  tearing  extending
toward  the  dorsa  of  the  fingers.  Sharp  tearing  in  the
right  hand,  directly  under  the  wrist-joint.  Tensive  tearing
in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand.  Tearing,  with  pressure,  in
the  wrist-joint,  in  the  region  of  the  os  pisiforme.  Lanci-
nation  in  the  right  hand,  in  the  bend  of  the  wrist  and  palm
of  the  hand,  near  the  little  finger.  Weakness  and  tremor
of  the  hands  when  writing.  Rigor  of  the  hands,  espe-
cially the  right  hand.  Paralytic  condition  of  the  right
hand , it  looks  bluish,  dead,  heavy  and  insensible,  and  the


352


ZINCUM.


pulse  is  small,  scarcely  perceptible  and  thready.  Cool
hands,  (a.  8 h.)  Burning  pain  in  the  right  wrist  and  the
palm  of  the  hand.  Burning,  at  a small  spot  of  the  left
hand.  Burning  in  the  skin  of  the  border  of  the  right  hand,
(3.  d.)  Biting  in  the  dorsum  of  the  r ight  hand,  extending
beyond  the  wrist,  as  if  an  eruption  would  break  out.  Itch-
ing pimple  in  the  dorsum  of  the  hand.  Red,  small,  round
spots  on  the  hands  and  fingers.  Sweaty  hands.  The  epi-
dermis of  the  hands  becomes  chapped  and  painful,  even  in
rather  mild  weather.  Chilblains  on  the  hands,  itching  and
swelling  violently,  (a.  10  d.)  Piercing  stitching  in  the  fin-
gers, (a.  6 d.)  Long  pricking  through  the  posterior  joint
of  the  left  thumb,  several  times.  Sharp  cutting  stitch  in
the  tips  of  both  thumbs,  (5.  7.  d.)  Lancination  in  the  upper
(anterior?)  joint  of  the  right  thumb.  Lancinations  in  the
fingers.  Lancinations  in  the  middle  joints  of  the  three
last  fingers  of  both  hands.  Tearing  hi  the  lower  ( poste-
rior ?)  joints  and  phalanges  of  the  fingers . Tearing  in  the
tips  of  the  index,  middle,  and  little  fingers.  Tearing  un-
der the  nail  of  the  right  thumb.  Tearing  and  painful  beat-
ing in  the  tip  of  the  left  thumb,  as  in  an  ulcer,  with  sen-
sation of  numbness,  and  with  heat  which  can  be  felt  by
others.  Tearing  drawing  in  the  anterior  joints  of  the  left
ring  and  middle  fingers.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  right
thumb.  Jerking  tearing,  extending  from  the  posterior
joints  of  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand  towards  the  tips,  even-
ing. Painless  jerking  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  right
thumb.  Aching  pain  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  right  in-
dex-finger, and,  at  intervals,  in  the  lower  joint  of  that  fin-
ger. Frequent  creeping  and  beating  in  the  left  thumb,
with  a feeling  of  heat  in  the  thumb,  without  any  heat  be-
ing perceived  by  others.  Burning  in  the  flexor-surface  of
the  finger.  Pricking  itching  in  a place  of  the  left-fourth
finger,  followed  shortly  by  a red  pustule  at  that  same  spot,
with  beating-burning  pain.  Nodosity  under  the  skin  in
the  bend  of  the  anterior  joint  of  the  ring-finger.  Burning-
painful  rhagades  between  two  fingers  of  the  left  hand.

Lower  Limbs. — The  left  hip  is  painful  posteriorly.
Dull  pressure  close  above  the  right  1 ip.  Drawing,  wiih
pressure,  directly  above  the  right  buttock.  Pressure  and
drawing  in  the  posterior  surface  of  the  thigh,  preventing


ZINCUM.


353


him  from  sitting ; it  disappears  gradually  when  walking.
Tearing,  with  pressure,  in  the  left  hip.  Drawing  pain  in
the  nates,  after  drinking  wine.  Drawing,  tearing  and  burn-
ing in  the  posterior  surface  of  the  left  hip.  Tearing  in
the  fore-part  of  the  crest  of  the  ilium,  when  sitting.
Tearing  in  the  ham,  under  the  left  hip.  Tearing  directly
under  both  hips  and  posteriorly  in  the  right.  Lancination
in  the  ham,  under  the  right  hip.  Pain  as  if  bruised,  with
clawing,  heat  and  burning  in  the  region  of  the  left  hip,,  ex-
tending to  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  with  faintness  of  the
limb  and  continued  sensitiveness  of  the  hip  when  walking
or  standing  ; the  pain  went  off  when  sitting.  Pain  as  if
bruised  in  the  hip-joint,  as  if  the  flesh  had  become  detached
from  the  bones/  Pain  as  if  bruised,  in  the  glutei  and  the
muscles  of  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  thigh,  for  two
days,  (5.  6.  d.)  Gurgling  in  the  right  ham.  Rheumatic
drawing  in  the  right  limb.  Heaviness  in  the  limbs , with
tearing,  she  is  scarcely  able  to  raise  them.  Weakness
and  pain  in  the  limbs,  so  that  she  is  scarcely  able  to  tread,
with  sensitiveness  to  every  little  wind  that  gets  into  the
room.  Violent  itching  of  the  whole  of  the  lower  limb.
Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  thighs.  Drawing  pain  in  the
thighs,  from  time  to  time,  in  the  evening,  (9.  d.)  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh.  Dull  jerking
pain  in  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh.  Drawing  sore  pain  in
the  external  muscles  of  the  right  thigh.  Drawing  tearing
in  the  head  of  the  left  femur  and  in  the  hip,  (5.  d.)  Tear-
ing in  the  thighs , especially  the  thick  parts,  sometimes
violent  and  continuous.  Tearing  in  the  inner  side  of  the
left  thigh,  going  off  by  motion.  Painful  tearing  of  the  left
thigh,  from  the  knee  to  the  middle  of  the  thigh.  Violent
tearing  in  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh,  apparently  in  the
femur,  from  the  hip  dowTn  to  the  middle  of  the  thigh.
Lancinations  in  the  thigh,  when  lying  and  walking.  Dull
stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  right  thigh.  Stitching  in  the
posterior  surface  of  the  thigh  when  yawning.  Pain  as  if
bruised  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  thigh  ; the  parts
are  painful  when  pressed  upon.  Heaviness  and  paralytic
pain  in  the  left  femur,  over  the  knee,  very  violent  wdien
walking,  standing  or  sitting.  Painful,  heavy  and  paralytic
feeling  in  the  right  thigh,  when^  walking.  Paralytic  pain


354


ZINCUM.


in  the  right  thigh,  in  the  upper  part  at  first,  afterwards
toward  the  knee,  when  standing  ; relieved  when  sitting,
in  the  evening.  Itching  burning  in  the  outer  side  of  the
right  thigh,  over  the  knee.  Itching  of  the  thighs  and  bend
of  the  knee  ; very  violent,  in  the  evening,  with  blotches
after  scratching,  resembling  those  produced  by  nettles.
Itching  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh,  over  the  knee,
five  evenings  in  succession,  with  pimples  in  those  parts
which  can  be  easily  scratched  open.  Varices  of  the  thigh,
as  high  up  as  the  labia.  Dull  pain  in  the  knee,  gradually
increasing  and  decreasing.  Dull,  digging-up  pain  in  the
knees,  frequently,  (2.  d.)  In  a dream  the  knee-joints  seem
to  him  heavy  and  almost  immoveable  ; indeed,  when
waking  up,  which  happens  much  more  early  than  usual,
they  are  painful  as  after  a violent  fatigue,  more  so  in  rest
than  in  motion.  Violent  pain,  at  first  in  the  right,  after-
wards in  the  left  patella  and  heel,  evening  and  night.
Tensive  pain  in  the  right  knee-joint,  when  walking.  Ten-
sion, followed  by  burning,  directly  under  the  right  knee.
Painful  tension  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,  when  walking  in
the  open  air.  Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  right  knee  and
along  the  tibia.  Tearing  in  the  right  knee  and  in  the  outer
border  of  the  bend  of  the  knee,  down  to  the  calf.  Tear-
ing in  the  outer  side  of  the  right  patella,  (a.  3 h.)  Tear-
ing, and  pain  as  if  bruised,  in  the  bends  of  both  knees,
worse  when  wralking.  Tearing  in  the  knees.  Painful
tearing  and  gnawing  in  the  left  knee,  upwards  and  down-
wards. Gnawing  and  boring  in  the  left  knee,  with  tension
in  the  upper  part  of  the  calf,  renewed  by  silting  down.
Stitches  in  the  knee,  (a.  15  d.)  Stitch  in  the  inner  side
of  the  right  knee,  like  a flea-bite.  Stitch,  with  pres-
sure, in  the  inner  side  of  the  right  knee,  at  rest.  Pain-
ful boring  in  the  knees.  Tremor  of  the  knees,  when
sitting,  after  a short  walk.  Violent  itching  in  the
right  knee-joint.  Pressure,  afterwards  tearing  of  the
inner  side  of  the  left  leg,  between  ankle  and  calf,  (3.
d.)  Alternate  drawung  and  pressure  in  both  bones  of  the
right  leg.  Rheumatic  drawing  and  tension  in  the  right
tibia.  Drawung  pain  in  the  legs,  evening.  Pain  in  the
right  tibia,  (a.  5 h.)  Drawing  in  both  calves,  from  above
downwards.  Drawing  and  contractive  sensation  in  the
right  tendo  Achillis.  Tearing  in  the  left  leg,  in  front


ZINCTJM.


355


below  the  knee  ; afterwards  a bruised  pain  is  felt  in  that
place.  Tearing  in  the  right  and  left  calf.  Tearing  in
the  region  of  the  right  tibia,  (4.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  left
leg,  between  tibia  and  ankle-joint.  Tearing  in  the  lower
end  of  the  right  tibia.  Stitch  above  the  right  foot  when
running.  Stitching  pain  in  both  tibiae,  when  walking.
Piercing  stitching  in  the  tibiae,  (a.  6 d.)  Jerking  in  the
left  calf.  Rigidity  and  stiffness  of  the  muscles  of  the  calf
when  walking.  Rigidity  and  drawing  in  the  calf,  (l.d)
Cramp-pain  in  the  left  calf  at  night.  Cramp-pain  in  the
left  calf  and  foot.  Cramp  in  the  leg  when  drawing  it  up.
Cramp  threatens  to  come  on  when  turning  the  body.  Fre-
quent sensation  in  the  left  lower  limb,  especially  the  leg,
as  if  the  circulation  were  arrested.  The  right  leg
goes  to  sleep,  at  night.  Formication  in  both  calves.
Burning  of  the  skin  below  the  right  calf.  Burning  pain
in  the  region  of  the  tibia.  Erysipelas  and  painful  swelling
of  the  tendo  Achillis.  Pulsative  tearing  in  the  tendines
Achillis.  Red  spot  on  the  leg,  becoming  covered  with
scurf,  and  itching,  Disappearance  of  the  varices  of  the
leg,  (curative  effect.)  Rheumatic  tension  in  the  left  tarsal
joint,  when  at  rest.  Pain  in  the  outer  border  of  the  right
foot  as  if  the  bones  would  break,  when  walking,  raising
the  foot,  holding  it  on  one  side  and  placing  it  upon  the  tip,
not  otherwise.  Tension  in  the  right  foot,  along  the  heel,
as  if  the  foot  had  been  sprained,  or  as  if  the  muscles  were
too  short.  Tension  in  the  right  sole,  as  if  the  tendons
were  too  short,  when  treading  and  walking,  in  the  evening.
Aching  pain  below  the  outer  ankle.  Drawing  tearing  in
the  right  foot,  as  far  as  the  ankles,  with  a feeling  of  heavi-
ness when  at  rest.  Drawing  tearing  around  both  inner
ankles  and  in  the  tendines  Achillis.  Tearing  in  the  bends  of
the  tarsal  joints,  also  in  the  border  and  in  the  dorsum  of  the
left  foot.  Tearing  in  the  soles.  Tearing  pain  in  the  outer
ankle  of  the  right  foot..  Tearing  and  creeping  in  the  dor-
sum of  the  left  foot,  with  a numb  feeling  in  the  soles,  going
off  when  walking.  Tearing  in  the  outer  border  of  the  right
foot,  towards  the  toes,  going  off  by  friction.  Tearing  from
under  the  right  inner  ankle  to  the  heel,  in  the  evening,
when  sitting.  Tearing  and  tension  in  the  borders  of  the
right  foot.  Tearing  and  pain  in  the  heels  ; the  feet  feel
as  if  knocked  off  from  the  body.  Lancination  in  the  sole


356


ZINCUM.


and  in  the  bends  of  the  joints  of  the  lesser  right  toes.
Si  itches  in  the  heel.  Piercing;  stitching  in  the  ball  of  the
foot,  (a.  6 d.)  Burning  stitching  in  the  bones  of  the  dor-
sum  of  the  foot,  here  and  there.  Burning  below  the
right  inner  ankle.  Burning  under  the  right  heel,  most
violent  when  treading.  Burning  of  the  soles.  Burning
and  ulcerative  pain  of  the  soles.  Ulcerative  pain  in  both
heels,  most  violent  when  walking.  Intolerably  boring  pain
in  the  heel,  after  drinking  wine.  Pain  as  if  sprained  in
the  tarsal  joint.  Pain  in  the  soles  when  treading  ; they
feel  as  if  swollen,  with  sensation,  as  if  the  teeth  of  an  in-
strument were  scratching  it,  for  several  days.  Violent
inflammatory  swelling  of  the  foot,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Swelling
around  the  ankles  ; (this  foot  had  been  affected  with  dis-
ease.) Cold  feet,  even  in  bed,  (II.  d.)  Fetid  sweat  of
the  feet ; his  feet  become  sore  by  walking.  The  feet  fre-
quently go  to  sleep,  which  is  painful,  in  the  evening.
Weak  feet  in  the  morning,  going  off  by  walking.  Trem-
bling of  the  foot  when  lifting  it.  Itching  of  the  soles.
Ulcerated  blister  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  as  from  a
burn,  (a.  8 d.)  Pain  of  the  toes  as  if  they  had  become
sore  by  walking.  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  right  big  toe.
Sensation  as  if  his  toes  had  become  blistered  by  walking.
Tearing  and  sore  pain  in  the  tip  of  the  big  toe  and  under
the  nail,  (9.  d.)  Pain  of  the  nail  of  the  big  toe  as  if  there
were  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  when  touching  it.  Pain
as  if  sprained  in  the  bends  of  posterior  joints  of  the  toes.
Drawing  tearing  in  the  toes  and  the  anterior  half  of  the
foot.  Tearing  in  the  two  first  toes  of  the  right  foot,  in-
feriorly.  Tearing  in  the  right  little  toe.  Lancinations  in
all  the  toes.  Lancination  in  the  posterior  joint  of  right
big  toe.  Lancination  in  the  bends  of  the  anterior  joints  of
the  two  first  right  toes.  Pulsative  stitching  in  the  tip  of
the  right  big  toe,  (2.  d.)  Prickling  in  the  left  big  toe,
(2.  d.)  Prickling  in  the  inner  side  of  the  anterior  joint  of
the  left  big  toe.  Violent  stinging  itching  in  the  anterior
ball  of  the  big  toe,  in  the  evening.  Burning  and  pricking
in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,  when  at  rest,  as  if  the  part  had
been  frozen.  Painful  itching  of  the  right  toes,  with  heat,
redness  and  swelling,  as  if  they  were  frozen  ; the  pain  is
increased  by  friction  and  scratching.  Elevation  on  the


ZINCUM.


357


right  toe  and  ball  of  the  right  foot,  with  stinging  pain  when
walking.

General  Symptoms — Itching  all  over,  sometimes  with
burning  or  redness,  and  pimples  after  scratching.  Itching
in  the  bends  of  the  joints.  Itching  of  the  extremities,  not
in  the  joints.  Violent  itching  in  all  the  joints  in  succes-
sion, and  lastly  in  the  hip-joint.  Frequent  and  violent  itching
at  night  like  flea  bites,  especially  in  the  back  and  abdomen.
Single  itching  points  in  the  skin,  especially  in  the  hands,
without  any  external  redness  and  elevation.  Sudden  itch-
ings,  now  here  now  there,  especially  in  the  evening  when
in  bed,  going  off  by  contact.  Pricking  in  the  body,  now
here,  now  there.  Prickling  itching,  in  the  evening,  when
in  bed,  in  the  forehead,  thigh,  ankle,  tarsal  joint  and  other
places.  Stinging  itching  in  the  skin,  with  nettle-rash  after
friction.  Itching  rash  in  the  bends  of  the  knees  and  el-
bows. Red  pimples  on  the  chest  and  face.  Small  pim-
ples on  the  thighs,  calves,  and  around  the  knees  ; itching
violently.  Small  boils  between  the  scapulas,  in  the  back
and  in  many  other  places.  A slight  injury  causes  a good
deal  of  bleeding.  The  externaPparts,  lobules  of  the  ears,
tip  of  the  nose,  are  chilled  easily,  even  in  a moderate  tem-
perature. Great  sensitiveness  to  the  cold,  especially  in
the  tips  of  the  fingers  and  the  feet.  The  pains  caused  by
zinc  seem  to  exist  sometimes  between  skin  and  flesh.
Wine  increases  the  sufferings  even  when  they  seemed  to
he  removed  by  camphor.  Wine  and  nux  v.  increase  the
symptoms,  (especially  the  nightly  restlessness  and  the  con-
stipation,) and  excite  them  again.  Most  of  the  symptoms
appear  after  dinner  and  towards  evening.  The  symp-
toms are  generally  felt  during  rest  and  when  sitting,  less
during  motion.  Jactitation  in  various  parts  of  the  body.
Twitchings  in  various  muscles.  Twitchings  and  jerkings
in  various  parts  of  muscles.  A good  deal  of  visible  twitch-
ing in  the  body  and  face,  (a.  5 d.)  Visible  twitching  in
both  arms  and  hands,  (a.  16  d.)

Weakness. — Violent  trembling  of  all  the  limbs.  Trem-
ulous weakness  of  the  lower  limbs,  with  great  paleness  of
the  face;  going  off  by  walking,  (5.  d.)  Cramp-pain  in
the  muscles,  here  and  there.  Cramp  in  the  extremities.
A sort  of  concealed  nausea,  with  a tremulous  feeling  in


358


ZINCUM.


the  chest,  headache  in  the  forehead,  and  diminished  power
of  comprehension,  two  hours  after  dinner.  General  ex-
haustion the  whole  day,  drowsiness,  aversion  to  noise  and,
nevertheless,  hardness  of  hearing,  dreaming,  appearance  as
if  he  had  not  been  to  bed  over  night,  accompanied  by  shud-
dering, cold  thrills,  as  one  feels  when  exposed  to  cold  after
having  been  in  perspiration.  Uncomfortable  feeling  and
pressing  upon  the  inner  walls  of  the  thorax,  as  if  the  whole
body  should  be  driven  out  of  joint,  without  any  trace  of
flatulence,  the  sensation  seeming  to  come  more  from  the
nerves  and  being  felt  more  in  the  light  than  the  left  side.
Violent  beating  through  the  whole  body.  Pressure  upon  the
chest  and  back,  here  and  there.  Aching  pain  in  the  left
groin,  on  the  left  side  near  the  umbilicus,  in  the  left  chest,
and  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  (3.  d.)  Cutting-stitching
pain  in  the  whole  of  the  right  side.  Very  violent  drawing
tearing  in  the  middle  of  almost  all  the  bones  of  joints  ;
the  pain  being  so  great  that  they  seem  incapable  of  sup-
porting one  another.  Piercing  stitching  in  the  joints,  (a.
7 d.)  Stitching  and  tearing  in  all  the  limbs,  down  to  the
tips  of  the  fingers,  worst  when  sitting  down  after  having
been  seated.  Tearing  in  all  the  limbs  after  bodily  exer-
tions and  fast  walking.  When  sitting,  an  almost  burning
heat  is  experienced  in  some  parts,  for  instance  : between
the  thigh  and  abdomen,  on  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  etc.
Violent  sweat  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Violent
aching  pain  in  the  left  eye,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Sensitive  to  the  open  air,  afternoon  and  evening.  A pierc-
ing wind  causes  a shuddering,  not  the  cold  air.  Great
heaviness  in  the  limbs,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Increased  strength  and  lightness  when  beginning  to  walk,
afterwards  greater  weakness.  Great  weakness  in  the  bend
of  the  knees,  and  small  of  the  back,  when  walking,  (a.  2
d.)  Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  small  of  the  bark  and
sudden  weakness  in  the  lower  limbs  when  commencing  to
walk.  Sudden  weakness  of  all  the  limbs  at  noon,  whth
tremor  and  sensation  of  canine  hunger,  more  when  stand-
ing than  when  silting,  (12.  d.)  Paralytic  weakness  and
heaviness  in  the  lower  limbs,  in  the  afternoon,  when  com-
mencing to  walk,  going  off  by  continued  walking.  Sud-
den feeling  of  weakness  in  the  extremities,  with  canine


ZINCUM.


359


hunger.  Great  weakness  in  all  the  limbs.  Sudden  faint-
ing sort  of  weakness  when  standing,  she  is  scarcely  able
to  go  to  a chair.  In  the  morning  when  waking,  pain  as
if  bruised  in  all  the  limbs,  and  weariness.  Excessive  wea-
riness in  the  morning  when  waking.  Involuntary  dis-
charge of  thin  stool  in  the  morning  when  rising.  In  the
morning  when  in  bed,  he  is  obliged  to  stretch  the  limb,  it
feels  so  uncomfortable  when  drawn  up.  In  the  morning
when  waking,  his  hands  have  gone  to  sleep.  In  the  morn-
ing when  waking,  his  body  feels  heavy  and  his  limbs
weary.

Sleep. — Constant  stretching  of  the  limbs,  the  face  look-
ing pale  and  wretched.  Constant  yawning.  Drowsiness
in  the  morning  and  after  dinner.  Drowsiness,  with  spas-
modic lightness  of  the  head,  she  is  unable  to  fall  asleep.
Falls  asleep  late,  owing  to  the  vivacity  of  the  mind.  Fre-
quent waking  in  the  night , (a.  5 d.)  Restless  ; he  wakes
early,  with  weariness  and  a feeling  as  if  the  eyes  were  too
deep  in  the  sockets.  Great  drowsiness,  in  spite  of  which
he  wakes  often  in  the  night,  with  violent  palpitation  of  the
, heart  and  exclamations,  owing  to  anxious  dreams  about
thieves.  Anxious  dreams,  (33.  night.)  Frequent  wak-
ing from  frightful  dreams.  Restless  sleep  with  vivid
dreams.  Deep,  fatiguing  sleep.  He  dreams  the  whole
night,  wakes  occasionally  and  is  very  tired  in  the  morn-
ing ; vivid  dreams  after  midnight ; he  sees  them  in  his
fancy  in  the  morning.  Sleep  full  of  fancies.  Her  sleep
is  interrupted  by  visions  and  ideas  which  oblige  her  to
reflect.  Disgusting  dreams,  about  dirtying  other  people
with  human  excrements  and  urine.  Quarrelsome  dreams.
Anxious  dreams,  the  anxiety  remaining  after  waking.
Dreams  about  dead  men  and  horses,  which  become  con-
verted into  hogs  while  he  rides  upon  them.  Restless
night,  when  waking  he  exclaims  that  geese  are  biting  him.
She  dreams  that  she  is  being  throttled,  and  fears,  after  wak-
ing, that  the  murderer  might  return.  In  the  evening,  after
lying  down,  she  immediately  rose  again  in  bed  and  uttered
unintelligible  words  ; her  breathing  was  short  and  trem-
bling. He  starts  from  his  night’s  rest,  with  an  involuntary
jerk  of  the  left  lower  limb,  (5.  n.)  Jerks  through  the
whole  body}  both  during  the  siesta  and  the  night’s  sleep ,


360


ZINCUM.


(a.  32  h.  and  2 d.)  Uneasiness  in  the  lower  limbs  at
night,  he  is  unable  to  hold  them  still,  (a.  10  d.)  Anxious
feeling  of  soreness,  especially  at  night.  Two  loose  stools
at  night.  Eructations,  at  night,  tasting  of  the  food  which
he  had  taken  at  dinner.  Her  feet  are  so  cold  at  night,
that  the  coldness  wakes  her,  (a.  36  h.)  Pleuritic  stitches
at  night,  (a.  8 d.)  Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back
and  colic  at  night,  with  stitching  in  the  left  side  and  draw-
ing pain  in  the  lower  limbs,  (a.  40  d.)  Drawing  pain  in
the  knee  at  night.  At  night,  sudden  violent  stitches  in  the
left  side  of  the  abdomen,  made  worse  by  breathing  and
pressing  upon  the  part.  Burning  drawing  pain  in  the
small  of  the  back  and  back  during  morning  sleep  ; also
sensation  as  of  going  to  sleep  in  the  shoulder-joint,  dis-
turbing sleep,  disappearing  when  waking.

Fever  . — Shuddering  in  the  evening.  Shuddering  and
uncomfortableness,  as  if  a thunder  storm  were  approach-
ing. Frequent  feverish  shuddering  along  the  back , (a.  3
d.)  Shaking  irom  chilliness,  in  the  evening,  when  seizing
something  cold.  Chilliness  in  the  open  air,  or  after  din-
ner. Chilliness  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Constant
chilliness,  with  increased  internal  warmth.  Chilliness
when  writing,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  with  sensation  as
if  a body,  hard  as  stone,  had  got  into  his  throat.  Chilli-
ness, with  shaking,  from  afternoon  till  evening.  Several
attacks  of  fever  a day,  fore  and  afternoon  ; chilliness  and
shuddering,  flushes  of  heat  over  the  whole  body,  violent
trembling  of  all  the  limbs , extreme  malaise  unto  fainting,
qualmish  taste,  thefood  seemingto  expand  in  the  mouth,  feel-
ing of  emptiness  in  the  stomach,  violent  throbbing  through
the  whole  body , short  and  hot,  breath , dry  mouth,  hot  and
dry  hands.  Heat  in  the  head  in  the  evening,  and  two
hours  after  chilliness.  Violent  heat  in  the  head,  in  the
evening,  his  eyes  burnt,  three  days  in  succession.  Heat
in  the  face  without  headache,  the  body  being  cool,  the
whole  forenoon.  Agreeable  warmth  with  slight  sweat
over  the  whole  body.  Increased  internal  warmth,  not
perceptible  on  the  outside.  Increased  warmth  in  the  whole
body,  except  the  interior  of  the  abdomen,  which  feels  cold.
Heat  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  with  anxiety  the
whole  night.  Feeling  of  heat,  with  cold  forehead.  Heat


ARSENICUM  ALBUM*


361


and  thirst,  with  cool  skin.  Pulse  quicker  in  the  evening .
Night  sweat,  over  the  whole  body,  but  especially  on  die
lower  limbs,  for  many  nights  in  succession,  (3.  d.)  Night
sweat  die  whole  night,  and  heal  ; she  could  not  bear  any
covering-.  Sour  smelling  sweat.  Profuse  night-sweat,
(a.  33  d.)


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

The  mentioning  of  Arsenic  calls  up  powerful  recollec-
tions  in  my  soul.

In  creadng  the  iron  the  All-Merciful  permitted  his  chil-
dren to  transform  it,  at  their  choice,  either  into  the  mur-
derous dagger  or  the  blessed  plough-share,  and  to  use  it
either  for  their  destruction  or  preservation.  How  much
more  happy  mankind  would  be,  if  they  used  God’s  gifts
only  for  the  purpose  of  accomplishing  the  good.  It  is  his
will  that  we  should  do  this,  and  for  this  end  we  have  been
created.

It  is  not  the  fault  of  Him  who  loves  us  all,  that  we  abuse
powerful  medicinal  agents,  administering  them  either  in
too  large  doses  or  in  cases  for  which  they  are  not  suitable,
being  merely  guided  by  the  caprice  of  miserable  authori-
ties, and  without  having  taken  the  trouble  to  investigate  the
inherent  curative  virtues  of  the  drug,  and  to  make  our  se-
lection depend  upon-  the  knowledge  thus  obtained.

If  one  is  found  willing  to  make  that  investigation  in  a
conscientious  manner,  those  pretended  authorities  over-
whelm him  with  their  wrath  as  the  enemy  of  their  com-
fort, and  permit  themselves  the  most  ignoble  and  malicious
calumnies.

The  most  powerful  drugs,  Arsenic,  Nitrate  of  Silver,
Muriate  of  Mercury,  Aconite,  Belladonna,  Iodine,  Digi-
talis, Opium,  Hvosciamus,  etc.,  have  been  used  heretofore
in  very  large  and  frequently  repeated  doses.  Homoeopa-
thy lias  no  means  ot  using  more  violent  drugs,  for  these
are  the  most  powerful  in  Nature.  The  alloeopathic  physi-
cians seem  to  vie  with  one  another  in  using  the  largest
possible  quantities  of  such  drugs,  and  they  frequently  pride

16


362


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


themselves  in  so  doing.  But  if  homoeopathic  physicians
undertake  to  use  them,  not  blindly  as  the  Alloeopaths  do,
but  after  having  carefully  investigated  the  properties  of
those  drugs,  and  having  thus  obtained  an  accurate  know-
ledge of  the  disturbances  for  which  they  ought  to  be  used,
and  then  only  in  extremely  reduced  quantities,  the  homoeo-
pathic art  is  cried  down  as  the  art  of  poisoning.  How
much  partiality,  injustice  and  calumny  does  this  imply  on
the  part  of  men  who  pretend  to  be  honest  and  candid.

But,  if  Homoeopathy  goes  a little  farther,  if  it  condemns,
as  it  ought  to  do,  the  excessive  doses  used  in  the  ordinary
practice,  and  if,  armed  with  the  knowledge  derived  from  ex-
perience, it  insists  upon  the  great  truth,  that,  in  cases  where
alloeopathic  physicians  use  or  even  one  or  two  grains

of  a drug,  it  is  sufficient  and  even  necessary  to  give  but
one  quadrillionth,  sextillionth  or  decillionth  part  of  a grain
at  a dose,  these  small  doses  excite  the  derision  of  alloeopa-
thic  physicians,  they  assure  the  public  that  such  small
doses  have  no  effect,  that  it  is  folly  to  suppose  that  they
can  have  the  least  effect,  and,  in  this  way,  they  deem  it
consistent  with  honor  and  reason  to  deride  in  the  same
breath  what  they  cry  down  as  the  art  of  poisoning.
Does  not  this  miserable  and  coarse  inconsistency
seem  to  be  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  assailing
unjustly  a doctrine  characterized  by  truth,  consisten-
cy, conformity  to  experience,  delicate  discretion,  and
indefatigable  precaution  in  the  selection  of  drugs  and  their
application  to  disease  ?

Some  time  ago,  a celebrated  physician*  published  the
fact  that  pounds  of  opium  were  eaten  every  month  in  his
private  hospital,  and  that  the  nurses  were  permitted  to  give
it  to  the  patients  at  discretion — imagine,  opium,  which  has
destroyed  thousands  of  lives  in  the  ordinary  practice  ;
nevertheless  the  man  continued  in  honor,  for  the  simple
reason  that  he  belonged  to  the  ruling  caste  of  Doctors  who
are  permitted  to  do  every  thing  in  medicine,  even  that
which  is  pernicious  and  absurd.  Even  a few  years  ago,
all  the  medical  practitioners,  from  the  Doctors  down  to  the
common  barbers,  in  one  of  the  most  enlightened  cities  of


* Marcus  in  Bamberg.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM*


363


Arsenic  in  almost  all  diseases  as  a fashionable  drug,  to
such  an  extent  that  the  injury  which  was  inflicted  upon
the  public,  must  have  become  evident ; and  yet,  this  was  set
down  as  honorable  practice,  although  ro  one  had  dreamed
of  investigating  the  medicinal  properties  of  that  poison,  and
it  never  occurred  to  any  one,  that  one  single  grain  of  such
doses , if  properly  potential?  sed,  would  have  sufficed  to
cure  all  the  cases  which  can  be  cured  by  Arsenic  on  the
face  of  the  whole  earth.  Which  of  the  twm  methods
ought,  after  this,  to  be  termed  the  art  of  poisoning  the
method  which  permits  and  even  teaches  to  pour  one  lentil
of  a grain  of  Arsenic  into  the  bodies  of  the  poor  patients
who,  in  many  cases,  ought  to  have  been  given  an  alto-
gether different  medicine,  or  the  homoeopathic  method
which  teaches  that  not  even  a drop  of  Rhubarb  should  be
given  without  having  previously  ascertained  whether  the
inherent  medicinal  properties  of  that  drug  correspond  to
the  case  to  be  treated,  a method  the  precepts  of  which  are
those  of  practical  wisdom,  recommending  a small  portion
of  the  decillionth  part  of  a grain  of  Arsenic  as  the  fittest
dose,  and  this  only  to  be  given  when  the  symptoms  of  the
remedy  correspond  exactly  to  those  of  the  disease.

There  is  another  sect  of  practitioners  who  might  be
styled  hypocritical  purists.  They  indeed  use  in  their  prac-
tice all  those  substances  which  have  the  power  to  do  much
harm,  but,  before  the  world  they  want  to  be  looked  upon
as  innocent  and  cautious  practitioners,  and  give  to  their
classes  such  horrid  definitions  of  poison,  that  it  would
seem  as  though  nothing  but  dandelion,  raspberry  juice,  elc.
ought  to  be  used  to  combat  the  ferocious  diseases  with
which  mankind  are  assailed.  According  to  their  definition
poisons  are  hurtful  to  the  human  organism  under  all  cir-
cumstances, and,  perhaps  in  order  to  excite  suspicion
against  Homceopaihy,  they  class  in  their  category  of  poi-
sons a quantity  of  substances  which  have  constantly  been
used  for  the  treatment  of  disease.  It  would  be  criminal
to  employ  any  of  those  poisonous  substances,  if  not  every
one  of  them  had  cured  certain  forms  of  disease.  Inasmuch


* This  was  written  in  the  year  1839. — HempeL


864


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


as  it  cannot  be  denied  that  every  one  of  those  poisons  has
effected  the  cure  of  certain  forms  of  disease,  it  follows  that
the  blasphemous  definition  of  those  purists  conlradicts
itself,  and  is  therefore  absurd.  To  clear  themselves  of  the
suspicion  of  being  inconsistent,  they  resort  to  a subterfuge,
and  state  that  those  poisons  have  been  more  frequently
hurtful  than  useful.  But  have  they  been  hurtful  in  them-
selves or  on  account  of  the  bad  use  which  has  been  made
of  them  ? They  do  not  regulate  their  own  use,  and,  if
they  have  been  useful  in  one  single  instance,  it  is  because
they  can  be  productive  of  good  in  all  cases.

To  such  teachings  the  regular  manufacturers  of  Materia
Medica’s  have  replied,  “that  Arsenic  does  harm,  even
when  corrected  by  an  alkali.”

It  is  not  the  Arsenic  which  does  harm,  but  those  who
make  a wrong  use  of  it.  And  what  is  the  alkali  to  do  ?
Is  it  to  weaken  the  Arsenic,  to  change  its  nature  ? In
this  latter  case  the  salt  of  Arsenic  ceases  to  be  Arsenic
and  has  become  something  different  from  Arsenic.  If  the
intention  is  merely  to  weaken  the  Arsenic,  is  not  this  re-
sult accomplished  more  reasonably  and  adequately  by
reducing  the  dose  ? Who  can  tell  what  change  is  wrought
in  Arsenic  by  a corrigens?  If  one  tenth  of  a grain  is  too
much,  where  is  the  objection  to  giving  less?

I hear  it  said  : one  tenth  of  a grain  is  the  smallest
out making  himself  ridiculous.

Indeed  ! one  tenth  of  a grain  sometimes  endangers  life,
and  giving  less  should  be  contrary  to  rule?  Is  not  this
deriding  common  sense  ? Have  the  rules  of  practice
been  established  for  irrational  slaves  or  for  men  endowed
with  rationality  and  free  will  ? Who  or  what  prevents
them  from  giving  a smaller  dose  when  a larger  one  would
prove  dangerous  ? Obstinacy  ? Dogmatism  ? or  what
other  fetter  of  the  mind  ?

“Yes,”  say  they,  “ arsenic  would  still  be  hurtful  even
if  we  used  only  one  hundredth  or  one  thousandth  of  a grain.
Arsenic,  even  when  used  in  a very  small  quantity,  is  never-
theless a virulent  poison;  we  proclaim  this  ex  anc:horitate”

Supposing  you  have  hit  the  truth,  it  must  likewise  be
true  that  by  diminishing  the  dose  gradually,  we  must


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


865


finally  arrive  at  a quantity  which  has  nothing  of  the  dan-
ger of  your  orthodox  dose  of  one  tenth  of  a grain.

“ Such  a dose  would  be  something  new  alloglher.  What
sort  of  a dose  would  that  be  V’

Novelty  is  indeed  a heinous  crime  in  the  eyes  of  the
orthodox  doctors,  infatuated  with  t fie  dregs  of  their  school,
and  whose  minds  have  lost  all  their  independence  in  the
tyranny  of  hoary  rules.

What  miserable  law,  or  what  anything  else,  can  prevent
the  physician,  who  ought  to  be  a scholar,  a thinking  and
free  man.  from  attenuating  a dose  by  reducing  its  quantity?

Why  should  he  not  give  TooV oo  or  one  millionth  of  a
grain,  if  experience  teaches  him  that  one  thousandth  of  a
grain  is  loo  strong?  And  if  he  should  discover  by  experi-
ence that  even  -foo’ooo  °f  a grain  is  still  too  powerful,  why
should  he  not  reduce  the  dose  to  one  millionth  or  one  bil-
lionth? And  if  even  this  dose  should  be  too  powerful,  why
not  descend  to  one  quadrillionili  or  lower  ?

But  h^re  my  opponents,  suffocating  as  it  were  in  the
bog  of  hoary  prejudice,  will  exclaim:  “ Ha  ! ha  ! ha  ! that
is  nothing !”

Why  not?  Does  a substance  which  has  been  divided
ever  so  minutely,  lose  any  of  its  original  properties?
Even  if  divided,  as  it  were,  to  an  endless  extent,  does  not
something  of  the  original  substance  remain  ? What  sound
mind  would  contradict  ibis  ?

And  if  something  of  the  original  substance  remains,  why
should  not  that  something  have  some  effect?  What  that
effect  is,  cannot  be  decided  speculatively,  but  has  to  be
learr.ed  by  experience.  Experience  alone  can  decide
whether  this  small  portion  is  loo  feeble  to  relieve  the  dis-
ease for  which  it  is  suitable.

Experience,  however,  has  decided  already,  continues  to
decide  every  day  in  the  eyes  of  every  unprejudiced  man.

Having  done  with  the  wnseacre  who  derides  the  small
doses  of  Homoeopathy  without  consulting  experience,  I
now  proceed  to  sav  a few  words  to  the  cautious  hypocrite
who  likewise  declaims  about  the  dangerous  nature  of  ho-
mceopathic  doses,  without  rhyme  or  reason.

If  one  tenth  of  a grain  of  arsenic  is  in  many  cases  a dan-
gerous dose,  is  not  then  T?Vo  much  less  so?  And  if  this


360


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


latter  dose  be  weaker  than  the  former,  must  not  the  mild-
ness^ of  the  dose  increase  in  proportion  to  the  reduction  it
undergoes ?

Well,  then,  if  a suitable  reduction  of  the  dose  will  make
the  arsenic  a harmless  drug,  all  we  have  to  do  in  that  case
is,  to  find  out  by  experiment  to  what  an  extent  the  dose
ought  to  be  reduced,  to  act  in  such  a manner  as  will  effect
the  cure  of  disease  without  affecting  the  body  medicinally.

Experience  alone,  and  not  the  narrow  speculative  and
dogmatic  science  of  theorists  can  decide,  how  far  a dose,
of  such  a heroic  remedy  as  arsenic  is,  ought  to  be  reduced
without  losing  any  of  the  curative  power  which  it  is  capa-
ble of  exercising  in  the  treatment  of  disease,  and  without
exposing  the  patient  to  the  danger  of  being  affected  by  it
medicinally.  The  dose  which  is  used  for  purposes  of  heal-
ing, ought  to  be  powerful  enough  to  cure  the  strongest  man
of  a disease  to  which  arsenic  is  homoeopathic,  and  not  so
strong  as  would  even  affect  the  organism  of  a healthy  child.

No  reasonable  physician  can  be  satisfied  with  practising
within  the  limits  of  antiquated  rules  derived  from  specula-
tive theories,  instead  of  from  pure  experiments.  His  object
is  to  cure  the  sick  ; and  the  innumerable  powers  of  nature,
without  excluding  anv,  have  been  assigned  to  him  to  effect
that  process  of  regeneration.  And  to  carry  out  such  noble
ends,  he  ought  to  have  a right  to  dispose  of  the  curative
powers  of  nature  ; for  the  preservation,  or  the  partial  re-
generation of  the  body,  is  a more  noble  deed  than  any  of
the  boasted  deeds  of  history  ; but  he  ought  to  be  likewise
permitted  to  employ  those  powers  in  that  form  and  quan-
tity, which  seem  to  him  the  most  adequate  and  the  most
conformable  to  experience  and  wisdom;  in  this  respect  no
restriction  ought  to  be  imposed  upon  him  as  a free  and  in-
dependent man,  provided  he  is  endowed  with  the  necessary
power  and  knowledge  to  preserve  human  life,  and  with  that
delicate  conscience  which  every  one  whom  God  has  ap-
pointed a guardian  of  human  life  should  possess.

Let  every  one  who  is  deficient  in  mind,  in  reflection,  in
knowledge,  in  sense  of  duty,  in  tender  sympathy  for  the
welfare  of  man,  in  one  word,  who  is  deficient  in  pure  vir-
tue, stay  away  from  the  sublimest  of  all  earthly  profes-
sions, the  profession  of  Medicine.  The  practising  Medb


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


367


cine  ought  to  be  a constant  and  pure  act  of  worship !
Away  with  the  false  doctors  who  profess  to  be  preservers
of  human  life,  but  whose  heads  are  filled  with  vain  deceit,
whose  hearts  are  bloated  with  criminal  levily,  whose  lips
scorn  and  deride  truth,  and  whose  hands  minister  to  ruin
and  death.

The  effects  of  arsenic  may  be  relieved  by  smelling  of
ipecacuanha,  hepar  s.,  or  nux  v.,  according  to  circum-
stances.

Arsenic  has  been  found  useful  in  diseases  characterized
by  one  or  more  of  the  following  affections:  Fits  of  anguish
at  night , driving  him  out  of  bed;  fear  of  death;  out  of
humor;  heaviness  in  the  forehead  ; headache  after  dinner;
scabs  on  the  hairy  scalp  ; inf  animation  of  the  eyes  and
lids;  drawing  and  pricking  in  the  face  here  and  there;
wart-like  ulcer  on  the  cheek  ; tumor  in  the  nose  ; erup-
tions on  the  lips;  bleeding  of  the  gums;  fetid  odor  from  the
mouth  ; vomiting  of  brownish  matter,  with  violent  colic;
vomiting  after  every  meal;  pressure  at  the  stomach  ; burn-
ing pain  at  the  stomach  and  pit  of  the  stomach  ; indura-
tion of  the  liver  ; burning  in  the  intestines  ; ascites  ; ulcer
over  the  umbilicus  ; swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands  ; burn-
ing stool  with  violent  colic  ; green  diarrhoeic  stools  ; con-
stipation ; paralysis  of  the  bladder  ; difficult  micturition  ;
strangury  ; swelling  of  the  sexual  organs  ; profuse  menses  ;
pains  of  various  kinds  during  the  menses ; acrid  leucor-
rhoea  making  the  parts  sore;  obstruction  of  the  nose;
haemoptysis  ; suffocative  fits,  in  the  evening  after  lying
down;  oppression  of  the  chest,  when  ascending  an  emi-
nence ; croupy  inflammation  of  the  chest ; stitches  in  the
sternum;  pressure  at  the  sternum;  nightly  drawing  and
tearing  from  the  elbow  to  the  shoulder ; ulcers  on  the  tips
of  the  fingers  with  burning  pains  ; tearing  and  stitching  in
the  hip,  thigh  and  groin  ; tearing  in  the  tibia ; pain  as  if
bruised  in  the  knee-joint;  itching  herpes  in  the  bend  of  the
knee  ; old  ulcers  of  the  legs  with  burning  and  stitching ;
weariness  of  the  feet ; ulcers  in  the  sole  of  the  foot ; cor-
rosive ulcerated  blisters  in  the  soles  and  toes  ; painful
soreness  in  the  ball  of  the  toe,  as  if  excoriated,  when  walk-
ing ; varices  ; burning  in  the  skin  ; burning  pain  in  the
ulcers;  somnolence  in  the  evening;  difficulty  of  falling


363


AttSENICUM  ALBUM.


asleep  again  in  the  night  afier  waking;  quotidian  and  in -
termittent  fevers  ; shuddering  in  the  evening,  with  stretch-
ing ol  the  limbs  and  anxiely  and  uneasiness.

My  co-observers  are  : Bahr ; Fr.  Hahnemann  ; Hartlaub
and  Trinks;  Hering;*  Hornburg;  Langhammer;  Meyer;
Staof.

Moral  Symptoms. — Sadness  and  melancholy.  Melan-
choly, sad,  afier  a meal,  with  headache,  (a.  SO  h.)  Reli-
gious melancholy  and  reserve.  He  cried  and  howled,  and
spoke  little  and  abruptly.  Piercing  lamentations,  inter-
rupted by  fainting  fits.  He  complained  in  a piteous  man-
ner that  he  suffered  with  an  extremely  unpleasant  sensa-
tion in  the  abdomen,  and  that  excessive  anguish  took  away
Ins  breath;  and  forced  him  to  bend  double  in  this  or  that
direction,  or  to  rise  again  and  walk  about.  Fits  of  anguish
for  a long  time.  Anxiety  and  restlessness  in  the  whole
body,  (a.  9 h.)  Pie  is  anxious  and  trembling,  and  is  afraid
he  shall  not  be  able  to  prevent  himself  from  killing  a per-
son with  a knife.  Anxieiy  and  heat,  not  'permitting  her  to
Jail  asleep  before  midnight , for  many  days.  Anxiety  in
the  evening  after  lying  down,  and  at  3 o’clock  after  mi<f.-
night. , when  waking.  Violent,  anxiety  at.  3 o’clock  in  the
night , he  now  felt,  hot , now  as  if  he  would  vomit.  Anguish.
Excessive  anguish  with  oppression  of  the  chest.  Internal
anguish.  Anguish  of  death.  Anxiety,  as  if  he  had  not
done  his  duty.  Anguish  about  the  heart,  interrupted  by
fainiing  fits.  Anguish,  he  had  several  fainting  fits.  An-
guish, Irembling  and  tremor,  with  cold  sweat  in  the  face.
Great  anguish,  and  tremor,  with  violent  tearing  in  the  ab-
domen. Inexpressible  anguish,  and  increasing  pain,  he
seemed  to  breathe  his  last.  Anguish,  he  tosses  in  his  bed
to  and  fro.  lie  has  no  rest  any  where , and  changes  from
place  to  place,  bed.  to  bed.  Tossing  about,  in  the  bed,  wdlh
sadness  and  unquenchable  thirst,  (a.  24  h.)  Restlessness,
with  pains  in  the  abdomen,  head  and  knees.  The  child  is
restless,  moans  and  laments.  Restlessness  and  hypochon-

* We  see  it  stited  in  the  “ Ostreichische  Ze'tschrift  fur  Homoeopathic,”
that  the  a-semc  symptoms  furnshed  by  Dr.  Hering  hnve  been  observed  on
leprous  patients ; owing1  to  Dr.  Hering’s  absence  in  Europe,  we  have  no
means  at  present  to  inquire,  of  h:m  how  far  that  statement  is  correct,  and
we  have  therefore  deemed  it  proper  to  affix  the  letter  H.  to  all  the  symp.

( toms  furnished  by  him. — Hempex,.


869


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

driac  anxiety,  as  if  corning  from  the  upper  part  of  the
chest,  without  palpitation  of  the  heart  (immediately.)
Anxiety  and  fear;  he  sees  an  absent  acquaintance  lying
dead  upon  the  sofa,  and  has  great  dread  of  him.  He  sees
nothing  but  vermin  and  bugs  crawl  about  his  bed  ; he
wants  to  escape,  and  throws  away  whole  handfuls  of  the
vermin.  He  sees  nothing  but  thieves  in  his  room,  and
therefore  hides  himself  under  the  bed.  He  imagines  that

o

his  whole  house  and  the  space  under  the  bed  are  full  of
thieves,  which  causes  a cold  sweat  to  break  out  over  his
body.  He  runs  through  the  whole  house  at  night,  seek-
ing the  thieves.  He  has  the  greatest  fear  and  anguish  all
day  ; he  sees  nothing  but  ghosts  day  and  night.  He  has
so  much  fear  that  he  jumps  out  of  his  bed  and  hides  him'
self  in  the  wardrobe,  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  induce  him
to  leave.  He  has  whims  ; he  desires  a thing,  and  when
everything  is  done  to  fulfil  his  wish,  the  least  trifle  is  suffi-
cient to  change  his  notion.  Great  seriousness.  When
alone  he  thinks  about  disease  and  similar  things,  from
which  he  finds  it  difficult  to  detach  his  mind.  He  despairs
of  his  life.  He  despairs  and  weeps,  and  imagines  that  no
one  can  help  him,  that  he  must  die;  he  is  cold  and  chilly
without,  and  faint  afterwards.  He  is  exceedingly  sensi-
tive ; the  least  trifle  fills  her  with  care  and  solicitude.
Sensitive  to  noise.  Inclines  to  start.  Weak  of  body  and
soul  ; he  speaks  nothing  without  being  peevish.  Talks  but
little,  complains  of  anguish.  He  has  no  desire  to  do  any-
thing. Impatient  and  anxious.  Dissatisfied  the  whole
day,  and  reproaching  himself  in  the  bitterest  manner  with
not  having  done  enough.  Indignation , alternating  with
mildness  ; in  her  indignation  she  looks  at  nobody,  and  does
not  want  to  hear  anything.  Indignation  in  the  morning
when  in  bed  ; he  pushes  the  cushions  indignantly  to  and
fro,  uncovers  himself  and  does  not  want  to  be  spoken  to.
Vexed  about  trifles.  He  is  vexed  about,  every  trifle,  and
constantly  talks  about  other  people's  faults.  She  finds
fault  with  everything  ; every  conversation,  noise,  even  the
light  is  disagreeable  to  her.  The  least  thing  made  him
angry.  Indignant,  capricious,  every  little  remark  offends
her  and  makes  her  very  angry.  Inclines  to  jest  in  a mali-
cious manner.  She  becomes  furiously  mad  when  offered

16*


370


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


something  to  eat,  without  her  having  an  appetite.  Her
desire  exceeds  her  want ; she  eats  and  drinks  more  than
is  good  for  her;  she  walks  farther  than  she  needed  to  do.
Great  indifference.  Indifference  to  life.  Calm  indiffer-
ence ; without  caring  about  their  approaching  death,  they
neither  expected  nor  desired  to  recover,  (secondary  effect
in  two  persons  who  had  taken  arsenic.)  Calmness  of
mind,  (in  the  case  of  a despairing  melancholy  person.)
Calm  and  even  mood  ; no  event  disturbed  his  equanimity.
He  likes  to  converse  with  others.  Rather  cheerful,  and
disposed  to  do  something.  In  the  first  minutes  great  tran-
quillity of  soul,  and  cheerfulness  ; half  an  hour  after  ex-
cessive anxiety  and  restlessness;  he  imagined  that  the
effects  of  the  poison  would  be  terrible,  and  desired  that  he
might  continue  to  live,  (in  the  case  of  a man  who  had  poi-
soned himself  with  arsenic  and  despaired  on  that  account.)

H ead. — Diminution  of  memory.  Forgetfulness.  Stu-
pid and  weak  in  the  head  towards  noon.  Stupid  and
dizzy  in  the  head,  he  was  unable  to  think.  Stupid  and
dreary  in  his  head,  as  in  violent  coryza  and  when  out  of
humor  ; the  head  feels  like  a lantern.  Stupid  feeling  in
the  head  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,  from  forenoon  till
afternoon.  Dull  head,  without  pain.  Weakness  of  the
understanding.  Chronic  weakness  of  sense.  Delirium.
Delirium  returning  from  time  to  time.  Ideas  crowd  upon
him,  he  is  too  weak  to  repel  them  that  he  may  dwell  upon
one  idea  alone.  The  organs  of  sense  are  morbidly  active.
Absence  of  the  understanding  and  of  the  external  and  in-
ternal senses  ! he  saw  nothing,  spoke  nothing  for  many
days,  heard  nothing  and  understood  nothing:  when  one
cried  into  his  ears,  he  looked  at  those  present  like  one  who
wakes  up  from  a deep  sleep.  She  lay  on  her  bed  sense-
less, muttered  unintelligible  sounds,  with  her  eyes  staring,
and  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  ; tremor  of  the  whole  body,
small  pulse,  hard  and  very  quick.  Self-consciousness  dis-
appears or  becomes  very  indistinct.  Loss  of  sensation  and
of  consciousness.  Loss  of  consciousness  and  speech.
Delirious  thoughts  with  the  eyes  open,  without  having  been
in  delirium  either  before  or  after.  Mania:  headache,  ex-
cessive anguish,  noise  before  the  ears  as  of  many  large
bells,  and  when  opening  his  eyes  he  constantly  saw  a man


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


371


who  had  hang  himself  in  the  garret,  and  who  requested  the
other  by  signs  to  cut  the  hanging  man  down  ; the  former
ran  up  to  the  latter  with  a knife,  but  not  being  able  to  cut
this  one  down,  he  became  desperate  and  attempted  to  hang
himself ; this  attempt  being  foiled,  he  became  so  restless
that  he  could  scarcely  be  kept  quiet,  he  lost  the  speech,
although  he  had  his  full  understanding,  and  when  attempt-
ing to  express  himself  in  writing,  he  was  only  able  to  write
down  unintelligible  signs,  trembling  and  weeping  all  the
while,  the  forehead  covered  with  the  sweat  of  anguish,
kneeling  down  and  raising  his  hands  as  if  praying  to  Hea-
ven. Rage  ; he  had  to  be  bound,  and  endeavoured  to
escape.  Obtusion  of  the  head.  Weakness  in  the  head
owing  to  much  pain,  and  great  qualmishness  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  so  violent  that  she  was  quite  sick.  Dizzy  in
the  head  when  going  into  the  open  air;  the  dizziness  dis-
appears again  when  re-enlering  the  room,  (a  I h.)  Gloomi-
ness in  the  head.  Strange  and  obtuse  feeling  in  the  head.
Dreariness  in  the  head.  Stupefied  feeling  in  the  head,  as
if  he  had  done  an  excessive  quantity  of  work  with  precipi-
tate haste,  accompanied  with  internal  uneasiness,  (a.  2 d)
Stupefaction  of  the  head  and  loss  of  sense,  with  vertigo.
Reeling  sensation  in  the  head.  Reeling  and  stupid  sensa-
tion in  the  head,  especially  the  forehead,  when  walking  in
the  open  air,  as  if  intoxicated,  staggering  from  side  to  side
and  threatening  to  fall  every  moment,  (a.  9J  h.)  Vertigo,
when  sitting.  Vertigo,  only  when  walking,  as  if  he  would
fall  to  the  right  side.  Vertigo  every  evening , she  has  to
hold  on  to  something  when  closing  her  eyes.  Vertigo  with
obscuration  of  sight.  Vertigo,  with  vanishing  of  thoughts
when  raising  the  head  again.  Violent  vertigo,  with  incli-
nation to  vomit  when  lying  down;  he  has  to  sit  up  to  be
relieved.  Vertigo  with  headache.  Headache  with  vertigo
for  several  days.  Excessive  headache.  Headache  in  the
occiput.  Hemicrania.  Headache  for  several  days,  re-
lieved by  applying  cold  water,  but  becoming  much  worse
immediately  after.  Headache  over  the  left  eye,  very  vio-
lent in  the  evening  and  night.  Periodical  headache.  Stu-
pefying headache,  especially  in  the  right  side  of  the  fore-
head directly  over  the  right  eye-brow,  with  sore  pain  when
knitting  the  brow'.  Stupefying  aching  pain,  especially  in


372


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


the  forehead,  with  fine  stitches  in  the  left  temporal  region
near  the  outer  canthus,  when  walking  and  standing  ; going
off  again  when  sitting,  (a.  2$  h.)  Bruised  pain  in  one  side
of  the  head,  in  the  morning  when  rising,  (a.  12  h.)  Sensa-
tion as  if  he  had  been  knocked  on  the  forehead.  Pain  as
if  bruised  or  sore,  over  the  nose  and  in  the  forehead,
going  off  for  a short  while  by  rubbing.  Heavy  and  dreary
feeling  m the  head,  obliging  him  to  lie  down.  Great  heavi-
ness m the  head,  especially  when  standing  or  sitting.  Great
heaviness  in  the  head,  with  humming  in  the  ears  ; it. goes  off
in  the  open  air , but  returns  again  as  soon  as  he  enters  the
room , (a.  1 6 h.)  Excessive  heaviness  in  the  head,  as  if  the
brain  were  being  oppressed  by  a load,  with  humming  in
the  ears,  in  the  morning  after  rising,  (a.  24  h.)  Heaviness
of  the  head,  with  aching  pain,  in  the  morning.  Aching
pain  in  the  right  temporal  region,  in  every  position  of  the
body,  (a.  d li.)  Drawing-aching  pain  in  the  right  side
of  the  forehead,  (a.  2|  h.)  Stitch-like  aching  pam  in  he
left  temple,  not  going  off  by  contact,  (a.  2 \ h.)  Tensive
headache.  Clawing  aching  pain  over  the  eyes,  going  off
soon.  Drawing  headache,  under  the  coronal  suture,  a few
hours  every  afternoon.  Tearing  pain  in  the  occiput.
Teaiing  in  the  head  and  at  the  same  lime  in  the  right  eye.
Ileadac  he,  consisting  in  tearing  and  heaviness,  with  drowsy
faintness  in  the  day-time,  (a.  4 d.)  Lancinalion  in  the  left
temple.  Stitching  pain  in  the  left  temple,  going  off  by
contact.  Beating  headache , directly  over  the  root  of  the
nose.  Violent  beating  pain  in  the  forehead,  during  motion.
Violent  beating  pain  in  the  whole  of  1 he  head,  especially
the  forehead,  with  desire  to  vomit  when  raising  himself  in
the  bed.  Sharp,  hard  beating,  with  hacking,  in  the  whole
head,  as  if  the  skull  were  being  distended,  at  night,  sweat
breaking  out.  Painful  hammering  in  the  temples,  at  noon
and  midnight,  for  half  an  hour,  after  which  her  body  feels
paralysed  for  several  hours.  Dull-heating  pain  in  one  half
of  the  heid,  extending  to  beyond  the  eye.  Sensation,  dur-
ing motion,  as  if  the  brain  moved  and  beat  against  the
skull.  When  moving  the  head,  while  walking,  the  brain
feels  as  if  shaken  like  a sail  in  the  air,  with  pressure  upon
it.  Sensation  in  the  head,  over  the  ear,  when  walking,
as  of  two  marbles  striking  one  against  the  other.  Pain  of


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


373


the  scalp , when  touched , as  of  sub -cutaneous  ulceration.
The  hairs  are  painful  when  touched.  Falling  off  of  the
hair  ot  the  head.  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  outer  head,
worse  when  touched.  Contractive  pain  in  the  outer  and
upper  part  of  the  head.  Creeping  in  the  integuments  of
the  occiput,  as  if  the  roots  of  the  hairs  were  moving.  Burn-
ing pain  in  the  scalp.  Swelling  of  the  head.  Swelling
of  the  head  and  face.  Excessive  swelling  of  the  head  and
face.  (Edema  of  the  head,  face,  eyes,  neck  and  chest,
having  a natural  color.  Itching  gnawing  in  the  top  of  the
head.  Corrosive  itching  in  the  top  of  the  head,  obliging
one  to  scratch.  Burning  itching  in  the  hairy  scalp.  Pain-
ful itching  as  of  an  ulcer,  in  the  whole  of  the  hairy  scalp,
which  is  gainful  all  over  as  if  ecchymosed,  but  mostly  in
the  region  of  the  occiput,  (a.  7 h.)  A pimple  covered
with  scurf,  in  the  left  side  of  the  hairy  scalp,  obliging  one
to  scratch  and  painful  when  rubbed,  as  if  there  were  sub-
cutaneous ulceration.  Pimples  over  the  whole  of  the  hairy
scalp,  painful,  when  rubbed  or  touched,  as  if  ecchymosed
or  as  if  there  were  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  ; the  same
pain  is  fell  in  the  whole  of  the  hairy  scalp,  (a.  1 l h.)  In-
numerable, very  red  pimples  on  the  hairy  scalp.  Pustul-
ous eruption  on  the  hairy  scalp  and  in  the  face,  with  a
burning  pain.  Pimples  in  the  region  of  the  left  temple;
when  scratched,  they  emit  a bloody  lymph,  and  they  be-
come painful  and  sore  when  rubbed.  Two  large  pimples
on  the  forehead,  between  the  eye-brows,  obliging  one  to
scratch,  emitting  bloody  water  and  becoming  hik’d  with
pus  on  ihe  day  following.  Corroding  ulceis  on  the  hairy
scalp.  Ulcerated  crust  on  the  hairy  scalp  of  the  thick-
ness of  a finger,  falling  off  in  a few  weeks.

Eves. — Deep  internal  pain  of  the  right  eye,  with  violent
stitches  when  turning  it,  so  that  she  was  scarcely  able  to
do  so.  Aching  pain  over  the  left  eve  lid  increasing  when
raising  the  eye,  and  also  in  the  upper  half  of  the  eve-ball.
Aching  pain  under  the  right  eye,  lasting  for  hours,  at  night,
causing  so  much  anguish  that  she  was  unable  to  remain  in
her  bed.  Pressure  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  sand  had  got  into
the  eye.  (a.  2 h.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  eyes,  and  twitch-
ing in  the  lids.  Jerking  in  the  left  eye.  'Fearing  in  the
eye,  occasionally.  Pulsative  throbbing  in  the  eyes,  and


374


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


at  every  pulsation  a stitch,  after  midnight.  Itching  around
the  eyes  and  temples,  as  if  pricked  with  an  innumerable
quantity  of  red-hot  needles.  Biting-gnawing  itching  in
both  eyes,  obliging  him  to  rub,  (a.  3 h.)  Burning  in  the
margin  of  the  upper  eye-lids.  Burning  in  the  eyes.
Burning  in  the  eyes,  nose  and  mouth.  Red,  inflamed
eyes.  Inflammation  of  the  conjunctiva.  Ophthalmia,
violent.  Swelling  of  the  eyes  and  eye-lids.  (Edematous,
painless  swelling  of  the  eye-lids.  Swelling  of  the  upper
and,  after  that,  of  the  lower  left  eye  lid,  afterwards  of  the
forehead,  head  and  neck,  without  pain  and  without  secre-
tion of  mucus  ; the  swelling  of  the  head  and  neck  became
excessive.  Excessive  swelling  of  the  eyes  and  lips,
closing  them.  Painless  swelling  under  the  left  eye,
closing  the  eye  partly  and  being  very  soft.  Yellow  eyes,
as  in  jaundice.  Faint  expression  of  the  eyes.  Dryness
of  the  eye-lids,  as  if  the  eye  were  rubbed  by  them,  when
reading  at  candle-light.  Pain  of  the  margin  of  the
eye-lids , during  motion , as  if  dry  and  rubbing  against
the  eye-balls , both  in  the  open  air  and  in  the  room.  La-
chrymation.  Corrosive  tears,  making  the  cheeks  sore.
Constant  watering  of  the  right  eye,  for  eight  days,  (a.  2
d.)  Watering  and  itching  of  the  eyes,  with  a little  pus
in  the  eyes  in  the  morning.  Agglutination  of  the  eye-
lids, in  the  morning.  Agglutination  of  the  outer  canthi,
in  the  morning.  Continual  trembling  of  the  upper  eye-
lids, with  lachrymation.  The  cedematous  eye-1  ids  are
firmly  and  spasmodically  closed  and  look  as  if  blown  up
with  air.  Distortion  of  t he  eyes.  Distortion  of  the  eyes
and  cervical  muscles.  Protruded  eyes.  Rigid  eye,  turn-
ed upward.  Fearfully  staring  eyes.  Staring  look,  with-
out dilatation  of  the  pupils.  Wild  look.  His  eye-lids  be-
come closed;  he  feels  tired.  Contracted  pupils,  (a.  I2  h.)
Weak  sight,  for  a long  time.  Sees  as  through  a white
gauze.  Obscuration  of  sight.  Sees  black,  (immediately.)
Darkness  and  vibrations  of  light  before  the  eyes.  Almost
total  blindness  in  the  case  of  a female  affected  wuth  weak
sight  ; she  loses  her  hearing,  and  is  for  a long  time  affect-
ed with  dulness  of  sense.  The  eyes  see  yellow,  during
the  nausea*  White  spots  or  points  before  the.  eyes,


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


375


Scirtillations  before  the  eyes.  Photophobia.  Snow  daz-
zles the  eyes,  and  makes  them  water.

Ears. — Otalgia.  Cramp-pain  in  the  outer  ears.  Tear-
ing'in  the  internal  ear.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  left  lobule.
Drawing  tearing  behind  the  ear,  along  the  neck,  extending
down  to  the  shoulder.  Lancination  through  the  left  mea-
tus auditorius  from  within  outwards,  toward  evening.
Stitching  in  the  ear,  in  the  morning.  Agreeable  creeping
deep  in  both  ears,  for  ten  days.  Voluptuous  tickling  in
the  right  meatus  auditorius.  Burning  in  the  outer  ear,  in
the  evening,  (a.  5 h.)  Sensation  as  if  the  left  meatus  au-
ditorius were  obstructed  from  without.  Hard  hearing,  as
if  the  ears  were  obstructed,  (a.  16  h.)  When  swallowing,
the  ear  becomes  closed  from  within,  causing  deafness.
He  does  not  hear  people’s  talk.  Deafness,  H.  Tingling
in  the  right  ear,  when  sitting,  (a.  h.)  Sounds  in  the

ear  and  the  whole  of  the  head.  Whizzirig  in  the  ears  at
every  new  paroxysm  of  pain.  Roaring  in  the  ears.  Con-
siderable rushing  noise  in  the  ear,  as  of  a near  waterfall.

Nose — Heaviness  in  the  nasal  bone,  in  the  root  of  the
nose.  Stitches  in  the  nasal  bones.  Violent  hemorrhage
from  the  nose,  during  ill-humor,  (a.  3 d.)  Violent  hemor-
rhage from  the  nose,  after  violent  vomiting.  Ulceraiion
of  the  upper  part  of  the  inner  nose,  secreting  a fetid  ichor,
tasting  bitter,  H.  Smell  of  pitch  and  sulphur  before  the
nose,  alternately.

Face. — Sunken  countenance.  Pale  countenance.  Dis-
figured, pale  countenance.  Sunken  eyes  and  pale  face,
Pale,  ye. low,  cachectic  look.  Deadly  paleness.  Yellow
face  and  sunken  eyes.  Bluish , badly  colored  face.
Clay  and  bad-colored  face,  with  green  and  blue  streaks
and  spots.  Cont.orslon  of  the  features,  as  if  dissatisfied.
Convulsions  of  the  facial  muscles.  Pressure  in  the  left
upper  jaw.  Itching  in  the  face,  he  scratches  it  until  it
bleeds.  Bloaled,  red  face,  with  swollen  lips.  Swelling
of  the  whole  face,  (from  the  external  application  of  arse-
nic.) Elastic  swelling  in  the  face,  especially  of  the  eye-
lids■,  and  more  particularly  in  the  morning , in  three  per-
sons. Swelling  of  the  face,  with  fainting  fits  and  vertigo.
Hard  swelling  on  both  frontal  eminences,  like  a nut ; the


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


0>*v/2
o i D

swelling  increases  in  the  evening.  Eruption  on  the  fore-
head. Litile  blotches  on  the  lorehead.  Ulcers  in  the
whole  face.  The  lips  are  bluish.  The  lips  are  spotted
black.  Blackish  color  around  the  mouth.  Clawing
twitching  or  jerking  in  one  side  of  the  upper  lip , especially
when  going  to  sleep.  Itching  in  the  upper  lip,  as  if  prick-
ed with  innumerable  burning  needles,  extending  as  far  as
the  nose  ; next  day  swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  on  the  outer
side  of  the  vermilion  border.  ►Swelling  of  the  lips.  Bleed-
ing of  the  lower  lip  after  a meal.  A brown  strip  of  shriv-
elled, almost  burnt  epidermis  extends  through  the  middle
of  the  vermilion  herder.  Red,  herpetic  skin  around  the
mouth.  Painless  eruption  on  the  marg’n  of  the  vermilion
border,  (a.  Lid.)  Eruption  around  the  mouth,  burning
and  painful.  Painful  blotches  in  the  upper  lip.  Ulcerat-
ed eruption  around  the  lips.  Eruption  on  the  lower  lip,
with  a thick  crust,  the  base  having  the  appearance  of  lard.
Corrosive  ulcer  on  the  lip,  painful  in  the  evening  after
lying  down,  a sort  of  tearing  and  smarting  pain  ; the  pain
is  worst  when  touching  the  part  and  exposing  it  to  the  air  ;
the  sleep  is  disturbed  by  the  pain,  (a.  14  d.)

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands,
with  aching  and  contusive  pain.  Hard  swelling  of  the  left
sub-maxillary  gland,  increasing  in  the  evening-  Tooth-
ache, more  aching  than  drawing.  Jerking,  continuous
toothache,  extending  as  far  as  the  temple,  relieved  or  ar-
rested by  sitting  up.  Tearing  in  the  teeth  and  head,  driv-
ing her  almost  to  frenzy  ; she  strikes  her  head  with  her
fists,  shortly  before  the  menses.  Fain  of  some  of  the  teeth
as  if  they  were  loose  and  would  fall  out ; the  pain  is  not
increased,  by  chewing,  (a.  I h.)  Painful  looseness  of  the
teeth  ; they  feel  sore  per  se  and  still  more  when  chewing  ;
the  gums  are  likewise  painful  to  the  touch,  and  the  cheek
becomes  swollen.  A tooth  becomes  loose  and  prominent,
in  the  morning;  the  gums  of  that  tooth  are  painful  to  the
touch  ; that  pirt  of  the  cheek,  behind  which  the  tooth  is
located,  is  still  more  painful  on  the  outside  ; the  tooth  is
not  painful  when  biting  the  teeth  together.  Convulsive
grinding  of  the  teeth.  Falling  out  of  all  the  teeth.  Stitch-
ing in  the  gums,  in  the  morning.  Nightly  tearing  pain  in
the  gums  of  the  cuspidatus,  being  intolerable  as  long  as  he


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


877

lies  on  the  affect ed  side,  but  which  can  be  arrested  by  the
warmth  of  the  stove;  on  t he  morning  following  the  nose
is  swollen  and  painful  to  the  touch,  (a  .*{  d )

Mouth — Bluish  tongue.  White  tongue.  Insensible
tongue,  as  if  burnt  and  dead,  and  no  taste.  Stitching  pain
in  the  root  of  the  tongue,  as  if  the  bone  of  a fish  were  lodg-
ed in  it,  when  swallowing,  or  when  turning  the  head.
Boring  pain  in  1 he  right  border  of  the  tongue,  in  a sort  of
half  sleep.  Pain  in  the  tongue,  as  if  covered  with  burn-
ing painful  vesicles.  The  tongue  feels  painful,  as  if  cor-
roded, on  the  side  of  the  tip,  (a.  14  d.)

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus  — Long-continued  feeling  of
roughness  in  the  velum  pendulum  palati.  Scraping  sensa-
tion in  the  velum  pendulum  palati,  between  the  cts  of
deglutilion.  Scraping  in  the  throat  as  of  rancid  grease,
when  swallowing  the  first  mouthful  in  the  morning.  Sen-
sation in  the  throat  as  of  a hair  being  in  it.  Sensalion  in
the  throat  as  of  a lump  of  mucus,  which  tastes  of  blood.
Tearing  pain  in  the  pharynx  and  along  the  whole  throat,
also  between  the  acts  of  deglutition.  Burning  in  the
throat.  Burning  in  the  fauces.  Inflammation  of  the
throat.  Gangrenous  croup.  Sensation  in  the  fauces  and
stomach  as  if  a thread  were  rolled  up  into  a ball.  Con-
strictive sensation  in  the  throat.  Constriction  of  the
pharynx,  (oesophagus.)  Mis  throat  feels  closed  up,  nothing
can  pass  through  the  pharynx.  Painful  deglutition.  Pa-
ralytic condition  of  the  pharynx  and  the  oesophagus  ; the
bread  went  down  with  great  difficulty,  as  if  the  oesopha-
gus had  not  strength  enough  to  swallow  it ; he  heard  it
fall  down  with  a rumbling  noise.  Feeling  or  dryness  in
the  surface  of  the  tongue.  Feeling  of  great  dryness  in  the
mouth,  with  violent  thirst;  he  drinks  little  at  a time.
Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  throat,  she  had  to  drink  all  the
time,  as  if  she  wei  e parched.  Violent  dryness  in  the  mouth
and  tongue.  He  spits  a good  deal.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Bitter  saliva.  Sanguineous
saliva.  Slimy  mouth  and  throat.  Hawks  up  gray  mu-
cus. Salt  or  bitter  expectoration.  Green  expectoration.
Bitter  mouth  with  yellow  diarrhoea.  Bitter  taste  in  the
mouth,  after  a meal.  Bitter  repulsive  taste  in  the  mouth,
after  eating  and  drinking.  Bitter  throat  after  a meal,  the


37S


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


food  having  a natural  taste  every  other  day,  {like  a tertian
fever.)  Bitter  mouth,  without  having  eaten  anything.
Dry  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  of  wood.  Putrid  and  fetid  taste
in  the  mouth.  Sour  taste  in  the  mouth  ; the  food  likewise
tastes  sour.  The  food  tastes  salt.  The  food  tastes  as  if
not  salted  enough.  Beer  has  a flat  taste.  Absence  of
thirst.  Thirst.  Excessive  thirst.  Suffocative  thirst.
Burning,  unquenchable  thirst.  Unquenchable  thirst  from
morning  till  evening;  he  had  to  drink  water  every  ten
minutes.  Excessive  thirst ; drinking  did  not  refresh  him.
Excessive  thirst ; he  drinks  much , but  little  at  a time.
Want  of  appetite,  and  violent  thirst.  Complete  loss  of
appetite.  No  appetite,  still  he  relishes  the  food  he  eats.
Aversion  to  food.  Loathing  of  food.  He  cannot  think
of  food  without  feeling  nauseated.  Impossibility  to  get
down  nourishment.  The  smell  of  boiled  meat  is  intolera-
ble to  him.  Aversion  to  butter.  Desire  for  brandy,  H.
Desire  for  sour  things.  Great  desire  for  coffee.  Great
desire  for  milk,  which  was  otherwise  repulsive  to  her.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Compressive  sensation  in  the
chest  when  eating.  Pressure  at  the  stomach  for  three
hours,  shortly  after  breakfast  and  dinner,  accompanied
with  empty  eructations,  and  a nauseating  relaxation  of  the
body.  Nausea  before  a meal  ; after  a meal,  distension,  or
pressure  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen.  Eructations  tasting
of  the  ingesta.  A quantity  of  eructations,  especially  after
a meal.  Unsuccessful  eructations.  Eructations  occa-
sioned by  flatulence  moving  upward.  Continual  eructa-
tions. Frequent  empty  eructations.  Violent  empty  eruc-
tations with  obtusion  of  the  head,  (a.  36  h.)  Sour  eructa-
tions after  dinner.  Bitter  eructations  after  a meal,  with
gulping  up  of  a greenish  bitter  mucus.  Sharp  humor  rises
into  the  mouth.  Frequent  hiccough  after  a meal,  followed
by  eructations.  Convulsive  hiccough.  Hiccough,  at  night
when  rising,  with  a scraping,  repulsive  taste  in  the  mouth.
Long-lasting  hiccough  in  the  hour  when  the  fever  ought  to
have  come.  Qualmishness  in  the  fore  and  afternoon.
Nausea.  Nausea  in  the  pharynx  and  stomach.  Nausea
with  anguish.  Long-lasting  nausea,  with  faintishness,
tremor,  heat  all  over,  and  shuddering  afterwards.  Nausea
and  desire  to  vomit,  obliging  one  to  lie  down,  in  the  fore*


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


379


noon  ; accompanied  with  tearing  around  the  knuckles  and
in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot.  Frequent  nausea  with  a sweet-
ish taste  in  the  mouth,  not  always  after  a meal.  Nausea,
which  seems  to  be  seated  in  the  throat,  with  accumulation
of  water  in  the  mouth.  Nausea,  with  imperfect  water-
brash,  shortly  before  and  after  dinner.  Nausea  when  sit-
ting ; water  got  into  the  mouth,  as  in  waterbrash  ; the  nau-
sea disappeared  when  walking  into  the  open  air,  and  was
succeeded  by  discharge  of  a quantity  of  papescent  stools,
(a.  7 h.)  Waterbrash , in  the  afternoon.  Desire  to  vo-
mit, also  in  the  open  air.  Empty  retching.  Desire  to
vomit,  and  violent  vomiting.  Desire  to  vomit,  qualmish-
ness when  sitting  up  in  the  bed,  and  frequently  sudden
vomiting.  Vomiting , immediately  after  a meal . without
nausea.  Vomiting  of  the  ingesta,  for  several  weeks.  Ex-
cessive, and  most  difficult  vomiting  of  the  beverage  he  had
taken,  and  of  yellow-green  mucus  and  water,  with  bitter
taste  in  the  mouth,  which  remained  still  a long  while  after.
Vomiting  of  thick,  glassy  mucus.  Vomiting  of  a thin,
bluish,  dirty  yellow  substance,  followed  by  great  debility.
Vomiting  of  an  alternately  thin  or  thick,  brownish  dark
substance,  with  violent  exertion  and  increase  of  the  pain
in  the  stomach,  without  any  subsequent  relief.  Vomiting
of  a brownish  substance,  frequently  mixed  with  blood,  the
body  making  violent  exertions.  Vomiting  of  sanguineous
mucus.  Hemorrhage  from  the  mouth  and  rectum.  Wa-
tery, frequent  diarrhoea  set  in  after  the  vomiting  had  ceas-
ed. Excessive  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.  Vomiting  with
diarrhoea^  directly  after  the  swoon.  Horrid  cries  accom-
pany the  vomiting,  which  continues  day  and  night.  Com-
plains of  violent  internal  heat  and  thirst  while  vomiting.
Violent  vomiting,  with  internal  burning,  thirst  and  heat.
Freouent  vomiting,  accompanied  with  apprehensions  of
death.

Stomach. — Pain  in  the  stomach.  Great  painfulness
of  the  stomach.  Pains  in  the  stomach,  causing  nausea.
Excessive  pains  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Pain  in  the  sto-
mach as  if  it  were  being  distended  in  its  whole  extent  and
torn.  Pain  of  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  full  of  flatulence  ;
becoming  worse  after  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.  Distension
of  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  hypochondria,  previous


380


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


to  stool.  The  stomach  commences  to  rise  and  is  warmer
than  the  rest  of  the  body.  Feeling  of  repletion  in  the  sto-
mach, with  aversion  to  the  food,  and  pain  in  the  stomach
after  eating;  in  the  evening.  Weight  in  the  stomach  as
of  a stone,  after  a meal.  Oppressive  feeling  of  heaviness
in  the  stomach.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach
and  pit  of  the  stomach.  Sensation  as  if  the  heart  were
pressed  clown,  (cardialgia.)  Pressure  at  the  orifice  of  the
stomach  and  in  the  fauces,  after  a meal,  as  if  the  food  were
standing  high  up  ; followed  by  empty  eructations.  Pres-
sure about  the  stomach  a little  while  after  eating.  Pres-
sure at  the  exterior  wall  of  the  stomach,  when  talking,  (a.
s h.)  Hard  pressure  over  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (imme-
diately.) Spasmodic  pain  in  i he  stomach,  two  hours  after
midnight.  Periodical  spasmodical  pains  in  the  stomach
and  bowels.  Excessively  violent  spasm  of  the  stomach,
with  thirst.  Spasm  of  the  stomach  with  violent  colic,
diarrhoea  and  fainting  fils.  Cutting  pain  in  ihe  stomach.
Drawing  pain  in  the  evening  when  sitting,  commencing  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  extending  around  the  lower
border  of  the  left  ribs,  as  if  something  were  torn  loose.
Dull  tearing,  transversely  across  the  reyion  of  the  sto-
mach, when  walking  in  the  afternoon.  Tearing,  spasmo-
dic aching  pain  in  the  stomach.  Violent,  tearing,  boring
pain  and  spasm  in  the  stomach  and  intestines.  Gnawing
and  pecking  (hard  and  fine  beating)  pain  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  with  a f eling  of  tension.  Gnawing,  corrosive
pain  in  the  stomach.  Heat , pain  and  pressure  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach.  Burning  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Burn-
ing pain  in  the  stomach.  Burning  around  the  pit  of  the
stomach.  Burning  in  the  stomach  like  fire.  Constant
burning  and  considerable  oppression  in  the  stomach  and
chest.  Burning  in  the  stomach,  with  pressure  as  of  a load.
Burning  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  aching  pain.  Anx-
iety in  the  pit  of  ihe  stomach.  Great  anxiety  about  the
pit  of  the  stomach.  Inexpressible  anguish  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  without  distension  or  colic.  Anxiety  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  rising  high  up,  at  night.

Abdomen. — Pressing  sensation  in  the  liver,  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  ail.  Swelling  of  the  spleen,  which  had
been  indurated  formerly,  H.  Stitching  in  the  side  of  the


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


381


abdomen,  under  ihe  short  ribs  ; he  is  not  allowed  lo  rest
on  that  side.  Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,  when
taking  an  inspiration  and  sneezing.  Excessive  colic.  Ex-
cessive colic  and  pain  in  the  stomach.  Excessively  un-
pleasant feeling  in  the  whole  of  the  abdomen.  Pain  in  the
abdomen,  witn  heat  in  the  face.  Violent  pain  in  the  right
hypochondriac  region.  Pain  in  the  right  hypochondriac
and  adjoining  lumbar  regions,  the  pain  extending  fr  m
those  parts  sometimes  through  the  abdomen,  sometimes
into  the  right  groin  and  side  of  the  scrotum,  like  colica
renalis  ; the  urine  is  unchanged.  Pains  in  the  abdomen,
moving  about,  accompanied  with  diarrhoea  and  pains  in  the
anus.  The  pain  in  the  abdomen  becomes  seated  in  the
left  side.  Pain  as  if  the  epigastrium  were  cut  off  from
the  hypogaslrium,  accompanied  with  great  anguish  and
lamentations  about  his  pain.  Violent  pains  in  the  abdo-
men, with  such  great  anguish  that  he  had  no  rest  any-
where, rolled  about  on  the  floor  and  despaired  of  his  life.
Repletion  in  the  epigastric  region,  with  pinching  in  the
abdomen.  Distension  and  p un  in  the  abdomen.  Violent,
painless  distension  of  the  abdomen  after  a meal  ; he  had  to
lean  with  his  back  against  something  to  be  relieved.  Bloat-
edness ev'ry  morning,  with  emission  of  flatulence  a few
hours  after.  Swollen  abdomen.  Excessive  swelling  ot
the  abdomen.  Spasms  ani  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  in
the  evening  after  lying  down,  with  breaking  out  of  sweat ;
afterwards  emission  of  flatulence  and  thin  stool.  Frequent
spasmodic  jerks  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  the  rectum,
c.ius.ng  him  to  start.  Clawing-cutting  pains  in  the  intes-
tines, in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  and  in  the  morning
after  rising  ; the  pains  sometimes  dart  through  the  abdomi-
nal ring  (as  if  hernia  would  protrude)  into  the  spermatic
chord  and  the  perinasum  ; when  this  colic  subsides,  a loud
rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen  sets  in.  Colic,
recurring  periodically.  Pinching,  increasing  unto  cutting,
deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  only  in  the  morning,  before  and
during  diarrhneic  stool,  and  continuing  even  after.  Cut -
ting  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Cutting  pain  in  the  side
of  the  abdomen,  below  the  last  ribs,  increased  bv  con-
tact. Cutting  (tearing)  and  corrosive  pains  in  the  intes-
tines and  stomach.  Cutting  and  tearing  in  the  abdomen,


382


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


with  icy  coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet,  and  cold  sweat  of
the  face.  Tearing  in  the  abdomen . Lancinations  in  the
lelt  side  of  the  abdomen,  under  the  short  ribs,  in  the  even-
ing, shortly  after  lying  down.  Drawing  colic  in  the  um-
bilical region,  (a.  2 h.)  Drawing  and  pressure  in  the  ab-
domen, as  from  incarcerated  flatulence  ; nevertheless,  no
flatulence  was  passed.  Twisting  of  the  intestines,  and
cutting  in  the  abdomen,  preceded  by  rumbling,  and  follow-
ed by  three  diarrhoeic  stools.  Twisting  of  the  intestines,
with  pinching  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  before  and  dur-
ing the  liquid  stool.  Digging-up  sensation,  with  pressure,
in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.  Writhing  colic.  Writh-
ing and  colicky  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Dysenteric  colic  in
the  umbilical  region.  Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  but
only  when  at  rest.  Anxiety  in  the  abdomen,  with  fever
and  thirst.  Constant  internal  chilliness  in  the  epigastric
region  ; he  is  never  clad  warm  enough  ; the  parts  feel
warm  when  touched.  Burning  pain  in  the  abdomen ,
noon  and  afternoon,  going  off  by  an  evacuation  taking  place.
Burning  in  the  abdomen,  with  pricking  and  cutting.  Burn-
ing in  the  abdomen,  with  heat  and  thirst.  Burning  in  the
groin.  Pain  as  if  sprained,  when  stooping,  in  the  groin
and  the  lumbar  region.  Digging-up,  burning  pain  in  the
tumor  in  the  groin,  excited  even  by  the  slightest  contact.
Single,  violent,  slow  stitches  in  both  groins.  Weakness  of
the  abdominal  muscles.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  of
a quantity  of  flatulence.  The  flatulence  rises  and  causes
eructations.  Emission  of  a quantity  of  flatulence,  preced-
ed by  loud  grumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Flatulence  having
a putrid  smell,  (a.  1 l h.)

Stool. — Constipation.  Desire  for  stool,  but  no  stool.
Tenesmus  with  burning.  Tenesmus  as  in  dysentery ;
constant  burning  with  pain  and  pressing  in  the  rectum  and
anus.  Unnoticed  discharge  of  stool,  supposing  it  was
flatulence.  Unnoticed  stools.  Expulsion  of  a consider-
able quantity  of  faeces.  Papescent  stool.  Diarrhoea.
Diarrhoea  with  violent  burning  at  the  anus.  Diarrhoea  al-
ternating with  constipation.  Yellow,  watery,  scanty  di-
arrhoeic stools,  with  subsequent  tenesmus,  as  if  more  stool
would  come,  and  intense  colic  around  the  umbilicus.
Yellow  diarrhoeic  stools,  with  tenesmus  and  burning  pain


Arsenicum  album.


383


in  the  rectum  and  anus.  Small  stools  with  tenesmus,  first
dark-green  faeces,  afterwards  dark-green  mucus,  after  colic.
Expulsion  of  pieces  of  mucus,  accompanied  with  tenes-
mus, with  cutting  pain  in  the  anus  as  of  blind  hemorrhoids.
Slimy,  thin  stools,  having  a hacked  appearance.  Slimy
and  green  mucus  stools.  Tenacious,  bilious  stools.  Green-
ish, dark-brown  diarrhoeic  stool,  smelling  like  a putrid  ul-
cer, H-  Discharge  of  a black  fluid,  burning  at  the  anus
like  fire,  after  much  uneasiness  and  pain  in  the  abdomen.
Black,  acrid,  putrid  stools.  With  his  stool  he  passed  a
ball-shaped  lump,  which  seemed  to  consist  in  raw  tallow
mixed  with  tendinous  parts.  He  discharges  watery  blood
with  the  stool,  which  is  surrounded  by  it.  Discharge  of
blood  from  the  rectum,  almost  every  moment,  with  vomit-
ing and  excessive  colic.  Dysentery.  Cutting,  and  sen-
sation in  the  intestines  as  of  being  twisted  together,  pre-
vious to  the  diarrhoeic  stool.  Sensation  as  if  he  should
burst,  previous  to  the  diarrhoea.  During  stool,  painful  con-
traction directly  over  the  anus,  towards  the  small  of  the
back.  The  colic  ceases  after  stool.  Burning  at  the  rec-
tum after  stool,  with  great  weakness  and  trembling  in  all
the  limbs.  Distension  of  the  abdomen,  after  stool.  Pal-
pitation of  the  heart  and  tremulous  weakness  after  stool  ;
he  has  to  lie  down.  Spasmodic  protrusion  of  the  rectum,
very  painful.  The  rectum  remains  protruded  after  he-
morrhage from  the  rectum.  Itching  of  the  anus.  Itching-
scraping  or  smarting  pain  in  the  anus.  Painful  soreness
of  the  anus,  when  touched.  Burning  at  the  anus.  Burn-
ing at  the  anus,  for  one  hour,  disappearing  after  hard  and
knotty  stool.  Painful  swelling  of  the  haemorrhoidal  veins,
with  tenesmus.  Blind  haemorrhoids,  painful,  the  pain  re-
sembling prickings  as  with  a hot  needle.  Varices  of  the
anus , with  pricking  pain  wThen  walking  and  sitting,  not  at
stool.  Hoernorrhoidal  tumors  of  the  anus  causing  a burn-
ing pain , especially  in  the  night , and  permitting  him  to
sleep;  in  the  day  the  pain  becomes  worse  and  increases
to  violent  stitches  ; worse  when  walking  than  when  sitting
or  lying  down.  Corrosive  itching  of  the  perinseum,  (a.

h d.)

Urinary  Organs. — Retention  of  urine.  Retention  of
urine  as  if  the  bladder  were  paralysed.  Greatdesire  to  urinate,


3S4  ARSENICUM  ALBUM*

but  does  not  pass  any  urine.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate ,
emitting  a quantity  ot  urine,  (a.  2 lo  17  h.)  Desire  to  uri-
nate, every  minute,  with  burning  at  the  bladder.  We  emit
urine  three  or  four  tunes  in  the  night,  a large  quantity
every  time,  several  days  in  succession.  Involuntary  emis-
sion of  urine,  in  the  night  when  sleeping,  H.  Involuntary
micturition  ; the  urine  flowed  from  her  before  she  was  able
to  reach  the  chamber.  Diminished  flow  of  urine.  Scanty
emission,  and  burning  during  the  emission.  Urine  copious
and  burning  hot.  Urine  almost  colourless.  Urine  turbid,
(a.  5 d.)  Greenish  dark  brown  urine,  turbid  when  emit-
ting it,  looking  like  cow’s  dung  stirred  up  with  water,  and
forming  no  sediment,  H.  Haematuria.  Burning  in  the
anterior  part  of  the  urethra,  at  the  commencement  of  mic-
turition, early  in  the  morning,  (a.  24  h.)  Burning  in  the
urethra  during  micturition.  Contractive  pain  in  the  left
groin  during  micturition.  Feeling  of  great  weakness  in
the  epigastrium;  she  trembled  from  weakness,  after  mic-
turition. Biting  pain  in  the  urethra.  Frequent  pain,  like
tearings,  deep  in  the  urethra.

Genital  Okgans.  —Itching  of  the  genital  organs.  Erec-
tion, with  burning  in  the  anterior  portion  of  the  prepuce.
Violent  itching  of  the  glans,  without  erection.  Corrosive
itching  of  the  posterior  portion  of  the  penis,  obliging  him
to  scratch.  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  genital
organs , increasing  almost  to  gangrene , excessively  pain-
ful. Sudden  mortification  of  the  male  parts  of  generation.
Excessively  painful  swelling  of  the  genital  organs.  The
glans  is  blue-red,  swollen  and  exhibiting  rhagades.  Swell-
ing of  the  testicles.  Emission  of  semen,  with  sexual
dreams.  Emission  without  dreams,  followed  by  a con-
tinued erection.  Discharge  of  prostatic  juice  with  diar-
rhneic  stool.  Sexual  furor  of  a woman  ; she  requires  an
embrace  twice  a.  day,  and  if  not  satisfied,  i he  semen  goes
off  spontaneously.  Menses  too  parly.  Profuse  menses.
During  the  menses,  pinching-stitching  cutting  from  the
scrobiculus  cordis  down  to  the  hypogastriutn,  also  in  the
back  and  the  sides  of  the  abdomen  ; the  pain  was  so  great
that  she  had  to  bend  double  when  standing  or  when  cow-
ering, with  loud  eructations,  moaning,  lamenting  and  weep-
ing. During  the  menses,  sharp  stitching  from  the  rectum


ARSENICUM  ALBUM-


385


as  far  as  the  anus  and  the  pudendum.  The  menses  did  •
not  make  their  usual  appearance ; in  their  stead  she  had
stitches  in  the  region  of  the  gluteal  region  and  the  shoul-
ders. Discharge  of  sanguineous  mucus  after  the  menses.
Leucorrhceal  discharge  while  standing,  and  emitting  flatu-
lence, (a.  24  h.)  Leucorrhoea,  a cupful  in  24  hours,  yel-
lowish and  thickly  corroding  the  parls  which  are  touched
by  it ; for  10  days.  Stitches  from  the  abdomen  down  into
the  vagina.

Cold,  Catarrh.— Frequent  sneezing.  Dryness  of  the
nasal  cavity.  Coryza  with  sneezing,  every  morning  when
waking,  and  going  off  speedily.  Fluent  coryza  with  fre-
quent sneezing,  (a.  11  h.)  Fluent  and  dry  coryza  to-
gether. Excessive  fluent  coryza,  with  hoarseness  and
sleeplessness.  The  watery  nasal  mucus  causes  a smart-
ing and  a burning  at  the  nostrils.  Discharge  of  a corro-
sive fluid  from  the  nose.

Larynx  and  Trachea. — Dryness  of  the  larynx.  The
voice  is  trembling.  Unequal  voice,  now  strong,  now  weak.
Rough  voice  with  hoarseness.  Tenacious  mucus  in  the
chest,  being  difficult  to  loosen.  Constant  titillation  in  the
larynx  inducing  cough,  also  between  the  inpirations.
Cough,  originating  in  a constrictive  sensation  in  the  upper
part  of  the  larynx,  as  from  the  vapor  of  sulphur,  the  cough
being  sometimes  quite  dry,  short,  and  accompanied  with
vomiturition.  Cough  without  expectoration,  preceded  by
jerking  in  the  hip,  which  seems  to  excite  the  cough.
Cough  especially  after  drinking.  Cough  when  moving
the  body  ; the  cough  frequently  puts  him  out  of  breath
suddenly.  Cough  when  going  into  the  open  cold  air .
When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  experiences  a suffocative
sensation  which  obliges  him  to  cough.  Violent  morning
cough.  Cough  without  expectoration,  but  with  asthma  in
the  evening.  Cough  directly  after  lying  down.  Cough
in  the  evening  directly  after  lying  down  ; sh.e  has  to  sit
up  ; afterwards  contractive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  sto-
mach and  scrobiculus  cordis ; this  pain  maintained  the
cough,  which  was  fatiguing.  Night-cough,  he  had  to  sit
up  as  soon  as  the  cough  commences.  Suffocative  fits  of
cough  in  the  night,  the  throat  became  swollen.  Deep,  dry,

17


386


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


short,  unceasing  cough  after  midnight.  Dry,  fatiguing
cough.  Dry,  violent  cough,  (a.  2 h.)

Chest. — Dry  cough  with  vomiturition,  short,  labored
breathing,  and  sore  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  as  if
there  were  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  the  pain  extending  as
far  as  the  middle  of  the  chest.  Tenacious,  short  and
hacking  cough,  causing  a smarting  pain  in  the  chest.
Short  and  hacking  cough,  with  pain  in  the  chest  and  salt
expectoration,  preceded  by  oppression  of  the  chest.  The
mucus  which  had  been  coughed  up,  is  streaked  with  blood.
Discharge  of  mucus  streaked  with  blood,  afterwards  desire
to  vomit.  When  coughing  a good  deal,  a quantity  of  water
comes  out  of  his  mouth,  resembling  waterbrash.  Pain  as
if  bruised  in  the  abdomen,  or  as  if  crushed,  during  cough.
Stitching  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  during  cough.
Drawing-stitching  pain  under  the  left  hypochondria,  ex-
tending into  the  chest,  when  clearing  the  throat.  Increased
stitches  under  the  ribs,  and  increased  headache  during
cough,  the  head  feeling  as  if  heat  were  in  it.  Heat  in  the
head  when  coughing.  Stitching  when  coughing,  first  in
the  side  of  the  chest,  and  afterwards  (in  2 days)  in  the  side
of  the  abdomen.  Stitching  pain  in  the  sternum,  from  be-
low upwards,  when  coughing.  Directly  after  coughing
the  breathing  becomes  short  as  if  the  chest  became  con-
tracted. Short  breathing.  Painful  breathing.  Difficult
breathing,  with  great  anguish.  Anxious  moaning  breath-
ing. Frequent  oppressive  shortness  of  breathing  in  every
position  of  the  body,  and  causing  anxiety.  Long-lasting
asthma.  Asthma  when  vexed.  Asthma  when  fatigued,
as  if  from  anguish.  Oppression  of  the  chest.  Oppression
of  the  chest  when  walking  fast,  coughing  on  going  up
stairs.  Oppression  in  the  region  of  the  sternum.  Pain  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach  arresting  the  breathing.  Intolerable
anguish  and  very  troublesome  sensation  in  the  abdomen,
arresting  the  breathing,  and  causing  him  to  lament.  He
immediately  loses  his  breath  in  the  evening  upon  entering
the  bed  and  laying  himself  down,  were  it  ever  so  dis-
creetly, the  trachea  becomes  constricted,  and  a fine  wheez-
ing is  heard  in  it,  resembling  the  sound  of  a fine  string.
Constriction  of  the  chest,  so  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to


AESENICUM  ALBUM,


387


speak  one  word,  and  came  near  fainting,  (3.  d.)  Continued
contraction  of  the  chest,  and  short  and  hacking  cough.  He
breathes  heavily  while  suffering  the  pain  in  the  abdomen,
as  if  the  chest  were  oppressed.  Violent  anguish,  as  if  the
whole  chest  became  constricted,  with  anxiety  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach.  Tightness  of  the  chest,  threatening  suffoca-
tion, one  hour.  Asthma:  the  breathing  becomes  more
and  more  weak  and  short,  until  finally  she  is  only  able  to
breathe  and  talk  very  lowly  by  inclining  the  head  forward.
She  imagines  she  will  suffocate  every  moment,  being  so
weak  that  she  is  not  able  to  take  deep  breath.  Sudden
oppression  of  the  chest  threatening  suffocation,  accompa-
nied with  want  of  breathing  when  walking,  with  weakness
and  extreme  exhaustion.  Sudden  catarrh , threatening
suffocation , at  night.  He  is  threatened  with  suffocation,
puts  out  his  tongue.  Suffocative  catarrh.  Pains  in  the
chest.  Pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest.  Tensive  pain
in  the  chest,  especially  when  sitting.  Pressure  at  the  chest.
Stitching  in  the  side  under  the  short  ribs  ; he  is  not  per-
mitted to  lie  on  this  side.  Stitches  in  the  upper  part  of
the  right  chest,  especially  when  taking  an  inspiration  ; the
stitches  are  a sort  of  pressure  terminating  in  a stitch,  (a.
Is  h.)  Stitches  in  the  left  chest,  during  a deep  inspira-
tion, obliging  him  to  cough.  Stitching  in  the  left  chest,
only  during  an  inspiration,  which  was  impeded  by  that
stitching.  Dull  stitches  in  the  chest  when  stooping.
Lancinating  pain  in  the  region  of  the  upper  right  rib.
Creeping  in  the  chest.  Feeling  of  soreness  and  rawness
in  the  chest.  Chilliness  in  the  interior  of  the  chest , in  the
evening,  sometimes  after  supper.  Great  heat  in  the  chest,
extending  to  the  region  under  the  diaphragm.  Burning
in  +he  chest.  Long  continued  burning  in  the  region  of  the
sternum.  Burning  in  the  right  chest,  extending  to  the  pit,
where  a pressure  was  experienced.  The  heart-beats  are
irritated.  Palpitation  of  the  heart.  Excessive,  trouble-
some palpitation  of  the  heart.  Violent,  tumultuous  palpi-
tation of  the  heart.  When  lying  on  the  back  the  heart
beats  much  faster  and  more  strongly.  Irregular  palpita-
tion of  the  heart,  but  so  violent  at  night,  that  he  imagines
he  hears  it ; accompanied  with  anguish.  Yellow  spots  on
the  chest.


388


ARSENICUM  ALBUMo


Back.— Want  of  strength  in  the  small  of  the  back.
Painful  stiffness  in  the  small  of  the  back,  the  whole  day.
Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  bruised.  Pain  in  the
back,  with  uneasiness  and  anxiety.  Stiffness  in  the  spinal
column,  beginning  in  the  region  of  the  os  coccygis.  Pain
as  if  bruised,  in  the  back  and  across  the  scapulae,  (a.  4 d.)
Drawing  pain  in  the  back,  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  6 d.)
Drawing  in  the  back  lip  and  down.  Drawing  pain  be-
tween the  scapulae,  obliging  him  to  lie  down.  Drawing
pain  in  the  back,  from  the  small  of  the  back  to  the  shoul-
ders, with  stitches  in  the  sides,  flatulence  moving  about  in
the  abdomen  and  pressing  upward  ; after  this  he  belches
and  is  relieved.  Strongly  gurgling  movements  in  the
muscles  of  the  left  side  of  the  back,  only  when  lying  on
the  right  side,  (a.  3 h.)

Neck. — Stiff  nape  of  the  neck,  as  if  bruised  or  sprain-
ed, a similar  pain  being  felt  over  the  hips  ; night  and  morn-
ing. Tensive  stiffness  in  the  neck.  Distortion  of  the  cer-
vical muscles.  Swelling  of  the  external  neck,  no  pain.
Excessive  swelling  of  the  left  carotid,  wrhen  stooping.
Itching  of  the  neck,  below  the  maxilla,.  Colourless,  bit-
ing eruption  around  the  whole  neck,  upon  the  shoulders
and  in  the  sides.

Upper  Limbs.— Soreness  in  the  axilla,  under  the  arms.
.Lancination  in  the  right  axilla.  Glandular  swelling  of  the
axilla,  H.  Drawing  pain  in  the  arms,  H.  Pain  in  the
arm  of  that  side  upon  which  one  rests , at  night.  Tearing
in  the  arm,  especially  in  the  elbow  and  wrist,  at  night
when  in  bed.  The  right  arm  goes  to  sleep  when  he  lies
upon  the  right  side.  Painful  nodosity  on  the  right  arm.
Corrosive  itching  in  the  fore-arm,  near  the  wrist.  The
hands  are  stiff  and  insensible.  Drawing  pain  in  both  sty-
loid processes  of  the  wrist,  every  evening.  Drawing
tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bones,  in  the  morning.  Lanci-
nation in  the  bones  of  the  hand  and  the  little  finger.
Cramp  in  the  hand  when  moving  it.  Cold  hands.  Pain-
ful swelling  of  the  hands.  Violent  tingling  in  the  hands
at  night.  Fine  tickling  in  the  palm  of  the  left  hand,  oblig-
ing one  to  rub.  Blotches  and  pimples  on  the  hands.
Large,  broad,  pale-red  and  excessively  violent  tumor  with
pus  in  it,  on  the  hand,  between  the  thumb  and  index-fin-


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


389


ger,  especially  in  the  evening,  H.  The  finger-joints  are
painful  when  moved.  Cramp  in  the  fingers  of  the  right
hand,  when  attempting  to  stretch  them.  Cramp  in  the
fingers,  especially  at  night  when  in  bed.  Painful  cramp
in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  from  morning  till  noon,  (a.  5 d.)
Rigidity  of  the  fingers,  as  if  they  were  stiff.  Drawing
pain  in  the  middle  fingers.  Drawing,  jerking  and  tearing
from  the  tips  of  the  fingers  into  the  shoulder.  Tilillating-
itching  of  the  right  middle  finger.  Hard  swelling  of  the
fingers,  with  pain  of  the  bones  of  the  fingers.  Badly
colored  nails.

Lower  Limbs. — Ischias.  Violent  drawing  tearing  pain
in  the  hips  and  left  foot,  in  the  morning,  after  a sleepless
night,  (3.  d.)  Violent  pains  in  the  lower  limbs,  especially
the  joints.  Intolerable  pains  in  the  lower  limbs.  Draw-
ing tearing  in  the  lower  limbs,  from  the  anterior  surface
of  the  thigh  as  far  as  the  knee  and  tarsal  joint,  when  walk-
ing.  Tearing  in  the  lower  limbs,  especially  in  the  knee
and  tarsal  joints,  only  during  motion.  Tearing  in  the
lower  limb,  from  lop  to  bottom  ; he  was  unable  to  tread,
sit,  or  lie  down,  either  in  the  bed  or  on  the  sofr,  had  to
shake  the  limb  to  and  fro  day  and  night,  or  else  to  limp
about,  and  had  no  rest ; worst  at  night.  Lancinalion , ap-
parently in  the  periosteum,  along  the  whole  lower  limb,
down  to  the  tip  of  the  big  toe.  Uneasiness  in  the  lower
limbs  ; he  cannot  lie  still  in  the  night,  and  had  to  change
the  position  of  his  feet  all  the  time  or  to  walk  about,  to
get  relief.  Uneasiness  in  the  limbs,  before  retiring,  going
off  when  lying  down.  Creeping  in  the  limbs  as  if  gone
to  sleep.  Cramp  in  the  limbs.  Painful  cramp-like  con-
traction of  bundles  of  muscles  of  the  thighs  and  calves,
in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  the  toes  being  drawn  back-
wards, after  which  he  became  very  weak.  Paroxysmal
cramp-pain  of  single  parts  of  muscles  of  the  thighs  and
legs  ; when  feeling  the  parts,  there  was  a jerking  as  of
something  alive.  Convulsions  of  the  limbs  and  knees.
Weariness  of  the  limbs.  Sensation  as  if  the  lower  limbs
would  break  down.  Paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs.  Cold-
ness of  the  lower  limbs,  especially  the  knees  and  feet,
covered  with  cold  sweat ; they  could  not  get  warm.  Ex-


390


ARSENICUM  ALB¥M.


cessively  painful  swelling  of  the  lower  limbs.  Corrosive
itching  of  the  thighs,  (a.  13  h.)  Soreness  between  the
thighs,  with  itching.  Sensation  around  the  knees  as  if
they  were  bandaged  very  tightly.  Tension  in  the  knee-
joints  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  when  sitting  or
standing,  but  not  when  walking.  Pain  as  if  bruised  on
the  side  of  the  knee,  only  when  touched,  and  when  sit-
ting, not  when  walking  ; sensation  as  if  the  flesh  were
detached.  Pain  in  the  left  knee,  as  if  bruised  and  sprain-
ed, especially  when  rising  from  a seat.  Stitching  pain  in
the  knees.  Weakness  of  the  knees  ; he  had  great  trouble
in  sitting  down.  The  right  knee  is  unable  to  support  the
body  ; it  breaks  down.  Paralysis  of  both  knees.  Draw-
ing tearing  in  the  right  leg,  from  the  bend  of  the  knee  to
the  heel,  as  if  sprained.  Drawing  pain  in  the  legs  when
resting  upon  the  floor  perpendicularly  while  sitting.
Drawing,  tearing  and  jerking  in  the  leg,  from  the  ankles
to  the  knees.  Jerking  in  the  legs,  in  the  afternoon,  when
sitting.  Sharp,  tearing  drawing  in  the  tibia.  Single
violent  tearing  in  the  tibia,  causing  one  to  exclaim.
Tearing  pain  in  the  right  calf,  when  sitting,  (a.  11  h.)
Lancination  in  the  lower  and  inner  part  of  the  leg  at
a small  place.  Boring  pain  in  the  right  tibia.  Aching,
pain  in  the  calves.  Cramp-pain  in  the  leg,  early  in  the
morning,  terminating  in  a humming  or  buzzing.  Cramp
in  the  calf,  when  walking,  (a.  2 h.)  Cramp  in  the
calves,  especially  in  the  night,  when  in  bed.  The  calf  is
hard  and  as  if  pressed  flat,  with  intolerable  pain,  resem-
bling a cramp-pain,  causing  her  to  exclaim  for  about  an
hour  and  a half;  the  whole  leg  became  cold,  insensible
and  stiff,  so  that  she  was  unable  to  move  it ; there  remain-
ed a tension  in  the  calf  and  a sort  of  paralysis  in  the  leg
behind,  (a.  50  h.)  Paralytic  condition  of  the  legs,  he  is
scarcely  able  to  walk.  The  legs  are  so  heavy  that  he  is
scarcely  able  to  lift  them.  Heaviness,  weariness  and
drawing  in  the  legs,  with  spontaneous  bending,  unsteadi-
ness and  weakness  of  the  knees,  especially  in  the  morning
early.  Dwindling  down  of  the  legs.  Swelling  of  the  legs
to  beyond  the  calves  ; preceded  by  tearing  in  the  calves,
which  went  off  by  the  application  of  warm  cloths.  Jerk-
ing pains  on  the  whole  leg.  Ulcer  on  the  left  leg,  be-


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


391


low  the  knee,  H.  Ulcer  on  the  leg,  covered  with  a gray-
crust  and  surrounded  with  an  inflamed  border ; it  is
burning  and  painful.  Pains  in  the  feet.  Painfulness  of
the  ankles  when  touched.  In  the  morning,  when  waking,
the  feet  are  painful  as  if  they  had  been  lying  on  a hard
place.  The  pains  in  the  feet  become  worse  by  motion.
Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  bend  of  the  foot,  when  treading
Pain  in  the  foot  as  if  sprained,  when  she  makes  a mis-step,
or  does  not  place  the  foot  in  a natural  position.  Drawng,
in  the  foot,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  hold  it  still ; he  is  obliged
to  be  cautious  in  treading.  Tearing  in  the  ankles.  Tear-
ing in  the  heels.  Tearing  around  the  ankles  and  in  the
dorsum  of  the  feet,  when  lying  down,  with  nausea.  Tear-
ing and  stitching  in  the  metatarsal  articulation  of  both  feet,
with  stitches  in  the  joint  when  treading  or  walking,  as  if
the  feet  were  sprained  ; the  ankles  feel  sore  and  painful
when  touched.  Stitching  pains  in  the  outer  border  of  the
foot.  Stitches  in  the  sole,  (a.  h.  h.)  Stitches  in  the  bot-
tom of  the  left  heel,  when  treading,  extending  to  the  pos-
terior surface  of  the  thigh.  Numb  pains  in  the  right  foot ;
when  sitting  she  is  not  able  to  raise  it  except  with  the
hand.  Numbness,  stiffness  and  insensibility  of  the  feet,
with  occasional  swelling  and  great  pains.  Paralysis  of  the
feet,  preceded  by  vomiting.  Continual  cold  feet  when  sit-
ting still;  he  is  scarcely  able  to  warm  them  when  in  bed.
Cold  feet,  with  contracted  pulse.  Feeling  of  coldness  in
the  soles.  Swelling  of  the  feet.  Swelling  of  the  ankle
without  redness,  with  tearing  pains  which  can  be  relieved
by  the  application  of  warmth.  Shinins,  hot  swelling  of  the
feet,  extending  beyond  the  ankles,  with  round  red  spots,
causing  a burning  pain,  (a.  3 d.)  Hard,  red-blue,  green-
yellow,  and  very  painful  swelling  of  both  feet,  (a.  28  d.)
Itching  swelling  of  the  feet.  The  skin  of  the  soles  be-
comes insensible,  thick  as  cork,  and  breaks,  H.  Blisters
form  in  the  night  over  the  whole  of  the  soles,  as  if  occa-
sioned by  drawing-plasters ; they  open  and  pour  out  a
light  yellow  fetid  water,  H.  Ulcers  of  the  heels,  filled
with  sanguineous  pus.  All  her  toes  became  stiff,  so  that
she  was  unable  to  tread,  H.  Titillating  creeping  itching
of  the  right  big  toe,  as  is  felt  in  a wound  that  is  healing,
(a,  It  h.)


392


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


General  Symptoms.* — All  her  limbs  ache.  Exces-
sive pains  in  the  limbs.  Pains  in  the  whole  body,  mostly
in  the  evening.  Inexpressibly  painful  and  disagreeable
feeling  of  sickness  in  all  the  limbs.  Pain  in  the  whole
trunk,  mostly  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  back,  especially
after  riding  on  horse-back,  (in  a practised  rider.)  Arthritic
pains  in  the  limbs,  without  inflammation.  A numb  pain
is  perceived  in  the  whole  side  of  the  body.  Drawing
pains  in  the  joints  of  the  knees,  feet  and  hands.  Drawing
pain,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  in  the  middle-finger  and
in  the  foot.  Violent  tearing  in  the  arms  and  lower
limbs  ; one  cannot  rest  upon  Jhe  affected  side  ; the  pain
is  felt  least  by  moving  the  affected  part  to  and  fro.  Tear-
ing pains  in  the  long  bones.  Sudden  tearing  jerking  or
stitching,  degenerating  into  a burning,  in  the  thumb  or  big
toe,  in  i he  morning  when  in  bed.  A morbid  sensation
was  felt  in  the  abdomen  and  thence  moved  to  the  head,
where  a beating  and  tearing  was  experienced  ; afterwards
the  left  side  was  affected,  one  or  two  sudden  stitches  being
felt  in  it.  Beating,  drawing  and  stitching  pain  in  the
back,  small  of  the  back  and  thighs,  at  night.  Beating  in
all  the  limbs  and  also  in  the  head.  Burning  pains,  espe-
cially in  the  inner  organs , skin  and  ulcers.  Burning
corrosive  pains.  Pain  in  the  affected  part,  as  if  the
bone  in  that  part  were  swollen,  and  excoriated  by
friction;  felt  when  sitting.  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  affected
part,  as  if  it  had  passed  iiflo  the  stage  of  suppuration  and
were  about  to  open ; felt  when  sitting.  The  pain  of  the
affected  part  wakes  him  in  the  night  from  time  to  time,
especially  before  midnight.  The  pains  are  felt  in  the
night,  during  sleep.  The  pains  seem  intolerable  and
drive  the  patient  mad.  Freque7it  return , at  regular
hours , of  the  pains  and  uneasiness , as  in  fever  and  ague.
Return  of  the  same  Arsenic-symptoms  at  the  same  hour,
after  a period  of  four  days.  The  paroxysm  of  pain  is
frequently  accompanied  with  other  secondary  symptoms.
Many  of  the  symptoms  are  accompanied  with  shuddering.
Chilliness  with  shaking,  during  the  pains  ; they  are  fol-
lowed by  thirst.  Heat  in  the  face  and  body,  at  the  com=
mencement  of  the  pains.  Whizzing  in  the  ears,  when


* The  skin-symptoms  see  below.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


393


the  paroxysm  of  the  pains  sets  in.*  The  slightest  pa-
roxysm of  pain  is  accompanied  with  an  excessive  sink -
ing  of  strength , obliging  one  to  lie  down.  Many  symp-
toms set  in  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  ; some  set  in
a few  hours  after  midnight ; others  in  the  morning  after
rising.  Many  Arsenic-pains  return  or  increase  after
dinner,  especially  when  sitting.  He  cannot  bear  being
talked  to,  because  this  makes  his  pain  intolerable.  Most
of  the  symptoms  appear  when  sitting  or  lying  down , and
are  diminished  by  standing  or  by  moving  about..  His
nightly  pains  can  be  made  tolerable  only  by  walking
about ; they  become  excessive  when  sitting  or  lying  down
quietly.  The  pains  com  almost  always  be  eased  by  the
application  of  warmth.  The  pains  abate  by  compressing
the  affected  part.  When  sitting  down  while  attending  to
her  business,  she  feels  so  much  uneasiness  in  her  body
that  she  has  to  rise  and  walk  about.  Violent  pressing  in
the  head  from  6 to  8 o’clock  in  the  evening,  entire  want
of  appetite,  passing  sweat  and  great  anguish.

Weakness,  Fits. — Great  faintness  and  anxiety  ; she  has
lost  the  control  of  her  senses,  is  scarcely  able  to  pay  atten-
tion to  things,  these  symptoms  are  accompanied  with  reel-
ing vertigo.  Faintness  when  discouraged  ; her  strength
returns  with  her  cheerfulness.  Weakness  and  exhaustion.
Faintingfits . Violent  swoons.  Deep  swoon.  Frequent
fainting  fits  with  weak  pulse,  (a.  3 h.)  Faintish,  anxious
and  weak  early  in  the  morning.  Fits  of  weakness.  Great
weakness,  especially  in  the  feet.  Excessive  weakness.
Failing  of  strength.  General  weakness,  especially  in  the
lower  limbs,  he  is  scarcely  able  to  move  them.  His
strength  fails  him  more  and  more.  Weakness  as  if  he
suffered  from  want  of  food.  His  hands  and  feet  seem  to
have  lost  their  power,  and  they  feel  so  trembling  early  in
the  morning.  Excessive  weakness  in  the  knees,  even
when  taking  but  a short,  walk.  Paralytic  weakness  of  the
limbs,  returning  at  a certain  hour  everyday,  like  fever  and
ague.  He  is  so  weak  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  walk,
he  feels  as  if  he  would  fall  over.  So  weak  that  he  is


* The  appearance  of  other  symptoms  accompanying  the  paroxysm  of
pain  is  characteristic  of  Arsenic.

17*


394


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


scarcely  able  to  walk  across  the  room  without  sinking
down.  So  weak  that  he  was  not  able  to  walk  alone,  before
the  vomiting  set  in.  He  falls  down,  when  he  attempted
to  walk,  (having  his  full  consciousness.)  Excessive  weak-
ness and  exhaustion  of  the  limbs,  obliging  him  to  lie  down.
Weakness  of  the  whole  body  for  several  days,  with  weak
pulse  ; he  had  to  lie  down.  He  is  obliged  to  keep  to  his
bed.  He  lies  down  all  day.  He  was  unable  to  leave  his
bed,  he  fell  so  trembling  and  weak.  For  several  days  he
felt  so  weak  in  the  morning  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to
rise  from  his  bed.  He  endeavors  to  rise,  but  he  is  unable
to  sustain  himself  on  his  feet  when  rising.  When  rising
from  her  bed,  she  falls  down  at  once,  from  weakness  and
vertigo  and  increased  headache.  He  dies  with  weakness ,
without  vomiting,  convulsions  or  pain.  Rapid  extinction
of  life,  preceded  by  excessive  weakness,  violent  vertigo,
continued  vomiting  and  hsemaluria,  (without  agony,  fever,
or  pain.)  Emaciation.  She  becomes  emaciated,  with
clay -colored  face,  blue  margins  around  the  eyes,  great
weakness  in  all  the  limbs,  want  of  disposition  to  do  any
thing,  and  constant  inclination  to  rest  himself,  (a.  8 d.)
Dwindling  down  of  the  whole  body,  with  excessive  sweats.
Consumption.  Consumptive  fever.  Gradual  consump-
tion, (died  within  a year.)  Jaundice.  Anasarca.  Com-
plete, general  anasarca.  Great  swelling  of  the  face  and
the  whole  body.  Swelling  of  the  whole  right  side  of  the
body,  extending  down  to  the  hip,  accompanied  with  swell-
ing of  the  left  leg.  Elastic  swellings  in  various  parts  of
the  body.  Swelling  of  the  face  and  feet,  dry  mouth  and
lips,  distended  abdomen,  diarrhoea,  colic,  vomiting.  Cho-
lera. Spasms.  Tetanic  spasms.  Death,  with  or  without
spasms.  Convulsions.  Convulsions  previous  to  death.
Convulsions  and  horrible  distortions  of  the  limbs.*  Con-
vulsions, occasionally  brought  on  by  violent  pains  in  the
bottom  of  the  feet.  Convulsive  fit ; first  she  jerked  her
arms  outwards,  after  this  she  lost  her  consciousness,  lay
like  one  dead,  pale  but  warm,  clenched  her  thumbs,
twisted  her  fists,  drew  her  arms  up  slowly,  lowered  them


* Most  of  the  violent  Arsenie.eonyulsions  are  a secondary  symptom  and
announce  death.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


395


again  slowly  ; after  the  lapse  of  ten  minutes  she  drew  her
mouth  to  and  fro,  as  if  her  jaws  were  vacillating;  her
breathing  could  not  be  perceived,  in  a quarter  of  an  hour
the  fit  ceased,  terminating  in  a jerk  through  the  whole  body,
a sort  of  starting  forward  of  the  arms  and  lower  limbs  ;
consciousness  returned  at  once,  but  there  was  great  weak'
ness.  Epileptic  convulsions  * Tremor  oj  the  limbs .
Trembling  of  the  limbs  even  after  a nn  derate  walk.  Tre-
mor, with  sweat  in  the  face.  Trembl  ng  over  the  whole
body.  He  trembles  in  every  part  of  the  uody.  Trembling
of  the  limbs  after  the  vomiting  was  over.  Trembling  of
the  upper  and  lower  extremities.  Stiffness  and  immobility
of  all  the  joints.  She  becomes  quite  stiff,  is  notable  to
move  or  stir,  she  is  only  able  to  stand.  Stiffness  of  all
the  joints  ; he  was  not  able  to  stretch  himself,  because  of
a tension  in  the  whole  body  ; the  knees  were  so  stiff  and
cold  that  he  tied  handkerchiefs  around  them,  otherwise
they  are  painful  and  disturb  his  sleep,  H.  Stiffness  and
immobility  of  the  joints,  with  violent,  tearing  pains.  Stiff-
ness, especially  of  the  hands  and  feet,  alternating  with
tearing  pains.  As  if  paralysed  in  all  his  limbs  ; he  is  un-
able to  tread  firmly.  Paralysed,  was  no  longer  able  to
walk.  Paralysis,  contraction  of  the  limbs.  Paralysis  of
the  lower  limbs.  Paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs,  with  loss
of  sensation.  Paralysis  of  the  feet.

Skin,-— The  skin  of  the  whole  body  peels  off  in  large
scales.  The  skin  of  the  whole  body  is  painful.  Prickings
in  the  skin.  Slow  stitches,  as  with  a red-hot  needle,  in
the  skin,  here  and  there.  Fine  stitches  over  the  whole
body.  A good  deal  of  itching  of  the  right  thigh  and  of
the  arms.  Creeping  sensation  as  of  fleas,  in  the  thighs,
extending  as  far  as  the  abdomen,  also  in  the  loins  and
nates,  obliging  one  to  scratch.  Burning  itching  of  the
body.  Burning  itching,  the  parts  being  painful  after
scratching.  Intolerable  burning  in  the  skin.  Horrid
burning  in  the  skin  of  the  finger,  as  if  the  part  had  been
burnt  with  boiling  grease,  (after  dipping  the  hands  into  a
cold  solution  of  Arsenic.)  Spots  on  the  skin,  here  and


* These  do  not  seem  to  be  genuine  epilepsy,  but  resembling  the  con°
yulsions  mentioned  by  the  other  observers.


396


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


there.  Blue  spots  on  the  abdomen,  on  the  genital  organs
and  in  the  white  of  the  eye.  Inflamed,  measle-shaped
spots  over  the  body,  especially  about  the  head,  in  the  face
and  on  the  neck.  Eruption  on  the  skin.  Eruption  resem-
bling red  petechias,  from  the  size  of  a flea-bite,  up  to  that
dry,  moist  and  burning  after  scratching.  Rash  over  the
whole  body,  falling  off  in  scales.  Red  scorbutic  rash.
Miliary  eruption,  with  tips,  over  the  whole  body,  even  the
hands  and  feet.  Small,  pointed  pimples  make  their  ap-
pearance, accompanied  with  itching,  going  off  after  scratch-
ing. Whitish,  painted  pimples,  the  tips  being  filled  with
a watery  fluid,  accompanied  with  burning  itching  as  of
mosquito-bites,  on  the  hands,  between  the  fingers  and  on
the  abdomen  ; the  fluid  flows  out  when  scratching  the
pimples  and  the  itching  goes  off.  Small  pimples  on  seve-
ral parts  of  the  body,  even  on  the  forehead  and  under  the
jaw,  causing  a burning  pain  and  not  much  itching.  Pim-
ples, burning  violently , causing  an  anguish,  which  she  is
scarcely  able  to  endure.  Itch-like  eruption,  especially  in
the  bends  of  the  knees,  H.  Fine,  sand-shaped,  itching
itch  all  over  the  body,  H.  Blotches  which  it  is  difficult
to  cure.  Thick-set  white  blotches  about  the  size  of  a
lentil,  a little  larger  or  smaller,  skin-colored,  smarting  and
painful,  the  pain  being  generally  worse  at  night.  Cuta-
neous eruptions  resembling  nettle-rash.  Black  vesicles
causing  a burning  pain.  Ulcer  which  is  especially  painful
in  the  morning,  with  dark-brown,  thin,  bloody  pus  under
a thin  scurf,  and  with  single  stitches  while  sitting,  the
stitches  being  diminished  when  standing,  and  still  more
when  walking.  Cancerous  ulcer  making  the  amputation
of  the  limb  necessary.  The  ulcer  has  very  high  edges.
Painful  sensitiveness  of  old  ulcers  which  had  been  painless
heretofore.  Tearing  pain  in  the  ulcers.  Burning  pain
in  the  ulcers . Burning  in  the  border  of  the  ulcer,  and
itching  in  the  ulcer  itself.  Burning,  like  fire,  around  the
ulcer,  which  is  fetid  and  suppurates  ; accompanied  with
faintness  and  drowsiness  in  day  time.  The  circumam-
bient parts  of  the  ulcer  become  inflamed  ; the  ulcer  bleeds
when  bandaging  it  and  becomes  covered  with  a dry,  su-
perficial crust.  A quantity  of  black,  coagulated  blood


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


397


comes  out  of  the  ulcer.  Fleshy  excrescences  shoot  up  from
the  ulcers  on  the  fingers  ; they  become  speedily  decayed,
blue  and  green,  with  viscid  ichor  spreading  an  intolerably
bad  odor,  H.

Sleep.— Great  laziness  and  dread  of  the  least  exercise.
Weariness  and  pain  of  the  joints,  in  the  forenoon,  more
when  sitting  than  when  walking.  Great  weariness  after  a
meal.  Great  weariness  after  dinner,  and  excessive  yawn-
ing. Frequent  yawning.  Frequent  attacks  of  somno-
lence, in  the  day-time,  when  sitting.  Violent  drowsiness,
he  falls  asleep  again  immediately  after  the  talking,  for  four
days.  Irresistible  desire  to  sleep,  alternating  with  great
restlessness.  Drowsiness  interrupted  by  uneasy  dreams  and
great  anxiety.  In  the  morning,  she  feels  as  if  she  had  not
slept  enough,  and  her  eyes  are  weary.  Involuntary  men-
tal excitement,  towards  morning,  hindering  sleep,  although
he  feels  very  drowsy.  Sleeplessness.  Sleeplessness,  with
fainting  fits  from  time  to  time.  Sleepless  tossing  about,
with  creeping  in  the  abdomen.  Stitching  pam  in  the  left
meatus  auditorius,  at  night,  the  stitching  being  felt  from
within  outwards.  Toothache,  at  night,  shortly  after  going
to  sleep,  it  wakes  her.  In  the  night,  when  lying  in  bed,
violent  prickling  tearing  in  the  corn.  She  cannot  get
warm  in  her  bed,  at  night.  Feeling  of  heat,  with  anxiety,
after  midnight,  with  inclination  to  uncover  herself.  Heat
and  restlessness  the  whole  night,  and  pulsations  in  the  head
hindering  sleep.  A good  deal  of  thirst,  at  night,  owing
to  dryness  in  the  throat  ceasing  in  the  morning.  Smoky
sensation  in  the  larynx,  before  going  to  bed,  as  of  the  vapor
of  sulphur.  Violent  starting*  of  the  limbs,  while  falling
asleep.  Startmgs  of  various  hinds , when  falling  asleep ,
in  the  evening.  Startings,  resembling  concussive  shocks,
in  the  affected  part,  in  the  evening,  when  falling  asleep  ;
they  are  excited  by  a slight  inconvenience  felt  in  a remote
part,  such  as  a tearing,  itching,  etc.  Sudden  starting  of  the
knee,  directly  after  lying  down  ; it  comes  on  after  dream-
ing that  he  is  going  to  knock  his  foot  against  a stone.
Spasmodic  starting  of  the  whole  body  while  asleep,  (a.  36


s This  starting  when  falling  asleep,  is  eminently  characteristic  of
Arsenic,


398


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


h.)  A good  deal  of  violent  starting  while  asleep.  Loud
moaning  in  the  evening,  while  asleep.  Moaning,  while
asleep,  with  tossing  about  in  the  bed,  especially  about  3
o’clock,  in  the  morning.  He  talks  and  quarrels  while
asleep.  Grinding  of  the  teeth,  while  asleep.  During  his
morning  slumber  he  hears  every  sound  and  every  noise,
and  continues  to  dream  withal.  He  lies  on  his  back  dur-
ing sleep,  with  his  left  hand  under  the  occiput.  He  moves
his  fingers  and  hands  during  sleep.  Burning  in  all  the
veins , when  waking  up  in  the  night,  which  happens  fre-
quently. ill-humor,  when  waking  in  the  morning  ; she
knew  not  what  to  do  with  herself  from  ill-humor,  pushes
the  pillows  and  the  bed-cover  away,  and  would  not  look
at  any  body,  or  talk  to  any  body.  Dull  headache,  in  the
morning  when  waking,  going  oft  when  rising.  In  the
morning,  when  waking,  she  feels  qualmish  and  nauseated
as  high  up  as  the  chest ; afterwards  she  vomits  wdiite
mucus  and  has  a bitterish  taste  in  her  mouth.  General
heat  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  at  sunrise,  with  sweat  in
the  face,  and  dryness  of  the  forepart  of  the  mouth,  without
thirst.  He  wrakes  while  dreaming  and  while  an  emission
is  taking  place,  without  being  able  to  remember  that  which
he  dreamed  of.  Nightly  dreams  full  of  threats,  apprehen-
sions or  repentance.  Dreams  full  of  care  ; he  wakes  and,
when  asleep  again,  he  continues  his  dream.  Dreams  full
of  care  and  danger  ; he  wakes  with  a cry,  and,  when
asleep  again,  he  dreams  of  something  else.  Frightful
dreams.  Anxious  dreams  while  falling  asleep  ; he  wants
to  exclaim,  but  he  is  not  able  to  utter  his  cry,  and  is  sud-
denly waked  by  that  cry,  which  he  hears  yet.  Heavy
dreams.  Uninterrupted  dreams  about  thunder-storms,
fire,  black  water  and  darkness.  Vivid,  vexatious  dreams.
Nightly  fancies.  Dreams  full  of  fatiguing  thoughts.

Fever. — Coldness  of  the  limbs.  In  the  evening,  cold-
ness of  the  hands  and  feet,  even  about  the  abdomen.
General  coldness,  with  profuse  sweat  of  the  skin.  Cold-
ness of  the  body  and  dryness  of  the  skin  alternate  with
cold  sweat.  Shuddering.  Feverish  shuddering.  Shud-
dering, without  thirst.  Shuddering,  after  drinking,  as  if
from  disgust.  Shuddering  and  chilliness  after  drinking ,
(immediately.)  Shuddering  after  dinner . The  shud-


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


399


dering  disappears  after  dinner  (this  is  a rare  alternate
effect.)  The  shuddering  returns  every  afternoon,  at  5
o’clock.  Shuddering,  every  evening  before  retiring.  Fe-
verish shuddering  every  evening.  Shuddering  when
walking  in  the  open  air.  Shuddering  over  the  whole
body,  with  hot  forehead,  warm  face  and  cold  hands,  or  with
warm  forehead,  hot  cheeks  and  cold  hands.  The  shud-
dering is  apt  to  he  accompanied  with  other  pains  or  ail-
ments. Tearing  in  the  legs  during  the  shuddering.  Chil-
liness in  the  external  skin,  over  the  face  and  feet.  Chilli-
ness, increasing  to  the  highest  degree.  Violent  chilliness
with  shaking.  Chilliness,  without  being  able  to  get  warm,
accompanied  with  ill  humor,  flushes  of  heat,  when  talking
or  moving  about;  she  then  became  red  in  the  face,  but
nevertheless  felt  chilly.  Chilliness,  with  cold  feet,  never-
theless he  began  to  perspire.  Chilliness,  at  3 o'clock
every  afternoon,  with  hunger  ; the  chilliness  increased  after
a meal.  Internal  chilliness  in  the  afternoon,  with  external
heat  and  red  cheeks.  Chilliness  with  coldness,  towards
evening.  Chilliness  of  the  legs,  in  the  evening,  from  the
calves  down  to  the  feet.  Violent  chilliness  in  the  evening,
after  going  to  bed.  He  cannot  get  warm  in  bed  ; he  thinks
he  has  caught  cold  in  his  bed.  No  thirst  during  the  chil-
liness. Colic  and  diarrhma  during  the  afternoon,  chilli-
ness, the  colic  continuing  after  the  diarrhoea.  She  either
feels  too  cold  in  her  whole  body,  and  nevertheless  she  is
not  cold  to  the  touch  any  where,  or  else  she  is  too  warm,
and  nevertheless  she  is  not  warm  to  the  touch,  except  per-
haps in  the  palm  of  the  hand.  Heat,  internally  and  exter-
nally, through  the  whole  body,  as  if  he  had  drank  too  much
wine,  with  thirst  for  beer.  Internal  heat.  Internal  heat
with  thirst,  after  diarrhoea.  Violent  heat.  Dry  heat  of  the
skin.  Anxious  heat.  General  anxious  heat.  Heat  in  the
face,  at  7 o’clock  in  the  evening,  for  one  hour.  Night-heaty
without  thirst  or  sweat.  Inclination  to  vomit,  after  the  heat.
Sweat.  Sweat,  with  excessive  thirst,  he  would  like  to  drink
all  the  time.  Sweat,  while  in  bed,  exhausting  him  unto
fainting.  Cold,  viscid  sweat.  Sweat,  tinging  the  skin,  and
especially  the  eyes,  yellow.  Sweat  in  the  forenoon,  with
heaviness  of  the  head,  roaring  in  the  ears  and  trembling.
Night-sweat,  three  nights  in  succession.  Profuse  sweat


400


ARSENICUM  ALBUM-


about  the  lower  limbs,  in  the  night,  especially  about  the
knees.  Itching  and  exhalation  of  the  back,  the  whole
night.  Siveat,  when  commencing  to  sleep , going  off  after
having  slept  a little.  Sweat  on  the  hands  and  thighs,  at
the  commencement  of  sleep,  going  off  after  having  slept
for  a while,  (a.  6 h.)  Morning-sweat  over  the  whole  body,
from  the  time  he  wakes  to  the  time  he  rises.  Sweat,  only
in  the  face,  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Violent  fever.
Fevers  terminating  in  death.  Fever  with  violent  thirst.
Paroxysm  of  fever  returning  at  the  same  hour  for  several
days.  Unpleasant  sensation  through  his  body,  like  a sort
of  fever  ; when  lying  down  his  head  becomes  hot,  espe-
cially the  ears,  but  the  knees  are  cold,  (a.  36  h.)  Fever  ;
coldness  morning  and  evening,  without  thirst,  emitting  a
quantity  of  urine,  little  stool,  and  stretching  in  all  the  limbs,
H.  Fever  : external  coldness  of  the  limbs,  internal  heat,
anxious  restlessness,  and  weak,  changeable  pulse.  Fever,
short-lasting  coldness,  at  night,  followed  by  violent  heat
with  delirium,  but  no  thirst,  H.  Feverish  shuddering,  in
the  morning,  alternating  with  heat.  Feverish  chilliness
and  shuddering,  heat  of  the  external  ear,  anguish  and
gnawing  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  mixed  with  nausea  and
inclination  to  vomit.  Fever,  in  the  afternoon  ; shuddering
about  the  head,  with  stretching  and  drawing  in  the  limbs,
followed  by  chilliness  and  goose-skin  ; in  the  evening,  from
eight  till  nine  o’clock,  heat  over  the  body,  especially  in  the
face,  without  sweat.,  cold  hands  and  feet.  Fever,  when
coming  out  of  the  open  air  and  entering  the  room  : first,
chilliness,  afterwards  hiccough  for  a long  while,  after  which
general  sweat,  lastly  again  hiccough.  Fever,  towards
evening  ; chilliness  with  drowsiness,  and  a disagreeable
sick  feeling  through  the  whole  body,  as  after  a paroxysm
of  fever  either  completely  or  only  half  terminated ; after
midnight,  profuse  sweat  on  the  thighs  ; returned  at  the
same  hour,  two  days  after.  Fever:  chilliness  in  the  day-
time, after  the  chilliness  thirst ; in  the  evening,  a good  deal
of  heat  in  the  face.  Feverish  chilliness,  followed  by  dry
heat  of  the  skin.  Fever,  chilliness  and  heat  in  alternation.
Fever  in  the  forenoon  ; chilliness  with  shaking,  without
thirst,  with  spasms  in  the  chest,  pains  in  the  whole  body,
and  a sort  of  want  of  ability  of  using  one’s  senses  ; after-


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


401


wards  heat  with  thirst ; followed  by  sweat  and  roaring  in
the  ears.  Fever,  every  other  day  : chilliness  at  six  o’clock
in  the  evening,  with  weariness  of  the  thighs  and  feeling  as
if  bruised ; on  the  third  afternoon,  at  5 o’clock,  inclination
to  lie  down,  afterwards  chilliness  all  over  the  body,  with
out  thirst  ; afterwards  heat  without  thirst,  and  an  oppres-
sive aching  pain  in  the  forehead.  Fever  at  ten  o’clock  in
the  evening  ; heat,  with  redness  of  the  whole  body,  after-
wards sweat.  Fever,  at  two  o’clock  in  the  night : increas-
ed warmth  over  the  whole  body,  sweat  in  the  face  and  on
the  feet,  and  tension  in  the  hypochondria  and  the  epigas-
trium, producing  colicky  pain  in  those  parts,  and  a feeling
of  anxiety.  Burning  fever,  which  cannot  be  relieved  by
cold  water;  the  heat  is  followed  by  sweat,  especially  in
the  nape  of  the  neck ; this  fever  sometimes  appears  every
fortnight,  for  a few  days.  The  sweat  appears  ivhen  the
fever  is  over.  Increased  tension  in  the  hypochondria  dur-
ing the  paroxysm  of  fever,  he  is  almost  unable  to  lie  on
one  side.  Excessive  orgasm  of  the  blood.  Sensation  as
if  the  blood  coursed  through  the  veins  either  too  rapidly,  or
were  too  hot,  with  small  rapid  pulse.  Extremely  feverish
pulse.  Pulse  irritated  and  frequent,  not  full.  Quick,
small,  rather  hard  pulse.  Quick , small  pulse . Quick,
weak  pulse.  Quick,  weak  and  intermittent  pulse.  Tight,
pulse.  Slow  pulse,  sometimes  only  thirty-eight  beats.  In-
termittent, small  pulse.  Intermittent,  unequal,  small  pulse,
finally  collapse  of  pulse.  Absence  of  pulse,  with  frequent,
irritated  beating  of  the  heart.  After  death,  the  lips  and
the  nails  of  both  the  fingers  and  toes  are  blue,  likewise  the
glans  and  scrotum  ; the  whole  body,  especially  the  limbs,
are  stiff  and  contracted,  and  the  large  intestines  are  nar-
rowed. The  corpse  was  yet  perfectly  sound  on  the  six-
teenth day  after  death.


*


•


INDEX.


A.

Abdomen,  aching  pain  in  left  side,  256.
, left  side  of,  pricking  in,

256.

■ , dropsy  of,  143.

, hard  and  distended,  198.

rumbling  in,  45.

, distressing  feeling  in,  22.

Anus,  itching  of,  256.

Anxiety,  fits  "of,  255.

Appetite,  want  of,  with  thirst,  1.
Anns,  paralytic  drawing  in,  144.

, pains  in,  of  various  kinds,  199.

Asthma,  1,  257,  311.

B.

Back,  pain  in,  as  if  broken,  46.

- — small  of,  beating  and  pressing,
144.

— - — , stitches  in,  199.

•  , small  of,  cracking  in,  257.

•  , drawing  in,  257.

C.

Cataract,  44.

Cheeks,  redness  and  burning,  44.
Chest,  stitches  in  the  side  of,  45.

, weakness  of,  from  talking,  89.

, oppression  of,  144.

, stitches  in,  l99.

Chilblains,  painful,  22.

Chin,  pimples  on,  88.

, herpes  on,  198;

Cold,  liability  to,  144.

Colic,  22,  45,  198.

, during  the  menses,  233.

Constipation,  198,  256.

Coryza,  dry,  45,  144,  256.

Cough,  22,  144.

— — — , with  bloody  expectoration,

257 .

— — — , with  purulent  discharge,  199.

, with  rawness  of  the  chest,  45.

— , with  titillation,  45.

D.

Despondency,  142.

Diarrlma , X,  22,  143.

•


E.

Ears,  noises  in,  142,  255.

, obstruction  of,  198.

, beating,  throbbing,  humming  in,

44.

, dryness  in,  22.

, tingling  and  roaring  in,  22.

Eructations,  44,  198.

— , sour,  143,  256.

Eruption  on  the  head,  22.

Eyes,  inflammation  of,  44.

Eye-lids,  tension  in,  311.

, inability  to  open  them,  at

night,  142.

F.

Face,  erysipelas  of,  142:

Fever,  intermittent,  23.

, quotidian,  1.

Feet,  sweaty,  257.

, sweat  of,  144,  200.

— — , burning  in,  144.

— — , coldness  of,  200,  257,  311.

-,  swelling  of,  22.

, cold,  22,  112.

Fits,  fainting,  257.

Finger- Joints,  stiffness  of,  22,  199
Fingers,  deadness  of,  257.

Flatxdence,  incarceration  of,  1,  45,  198.
Foot,  tickling  in  the  sole  of,  200.

G.

Genital  Organs,  weakness  of,  143.

— ■ — , soreness  of,  female,

143.

-,  itching  of,  143,  256;

Glands,  swellingof,  submaxillary,  22.

, swelling  of,  199.

Glaucoma,  44.

Gums,  affections  of,  199.

H.

Hands,  palms  of,  sweat  in,  257.

, skin  of,  rhagades  in,  22.

— -,  tearing  in,  22.

Hair,  falling  off,  44.

Hcemoptysis,  1.

Hard-hearing,  142,  311.


INDEX.


Head,  cold  spot  on,  255.

, creeping,  humming  and  roar-
ing in,  255.

Headache  in  the  morning,  44.

, lancinating,  22.

, dull,  255.

with  nausea,  142.

from  nape  of  neck  to  vertex,

197.

Hearing,  hard,  46,  197.

Heart,  palpitation  of,  22.

, palpitation  of,  when  sitting,  46.

Heat,  flushes  of,  144.

Hernia,  inguinal,  22.

Heines,  89.

, upon  chest,  22.

, in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  22.

on  knee,  22.

Hoarseness,  199.

Hunger,  canine,  22.

I.

Itching  of  the  whole  body,  257.

J.

Jerking  during  sleep,  257.

Jaw,  swelling  of,  197.

Joints,  stiffness  of,  144.

L.

Labor,  dread  of,  44.

Lachrymation,  197.

Leucorrhcea,  143.

r-,  acrid,  199.

Limbs  go  to  sleep,  22.

• , lower,  heaviness  of,  257.

, tearing  in,  46.

— , coldness  of,  144.

Lips,  dry  and  scaly,  142.

Liver,  burning  pain  in,  233.

■ , pain  in,  during  the  menses,  88.

Long-sightedness,  22.

Looseness,  chronic,  45.

„ M.

Memoi'y,  want  of,  21,

Menses  too  early,  256.

, profuse,  311.

, scanty,  199.

Mouth,  bad  smell  from,  22.

Mucus  from  throat  and  mouth,  44.
Muscce  volitantes,  44,  1-12, 197.

N.

Nape  of  neck,  stiffness  in,  46,  144.
Nausea  and  vomiting,  198.

after  a meal,  45,  256.

Nettle-rash,  257.

Night  sweats,  257.

— — — — — - -,  acrid,  200.


Noise,  intolerance  of,  88.

Nose,  bleeding  from,  44,  142,  255.

, dryness  of,  22,  197.

, fetid  smell  from,  44.

, scurf  on,  88.

, obstruction  of,  199.

p.

Prostatic  juice,  discharge  of,  22.
Pudendum,  itching  of,  199.

R.

Regurgitation  of  food,  256.

S.

Scrotum,  swelling  of,  143.

— , itching  and  dampness  of,  22.

Short-sightedness,  22,  44.

Sight,  obscuration  of,  22,  44,  142.
Smell,  want  of,  142.

Soles  painful  token  walking,  46.

Spots,  yellow  and  brown,  on  the  body,
46,  257.

Stitches  in  the  side  of  the  chest,  22.

tearing  in  arms  and  scapula ,

46.

in  the  scapula , 1.

in  the  chest,  1.

Stomach,  pit  of,  painful  when  touched,
22,  45,  198.

, oppression  of,  45,  198.

, acidity  of,  143.

, emptiness  and  burning,  143.

, spasms  of,  1.

, repletion  of,  45.

Sweats  in  the  morning,  46.

, exhausting,  1.

T.

Taste,  putrid,  256.

Tin  oat,  dryness  in,  44.

Tibia,  exostosis  of,  46.

Toes,  ulcers  on,  22.

Tongue,  soreness  of,  198.

Toothache,  44,  198,  256.

U.

Ulcers , fetid,  carbunculous,  200.
Ulceration  of  the  big  tee,  200.

Urethra,  burning  in,  45.

, affections  of,  22.

Urine,  milky,  89.

Uterus,  induration  of,  112.

V.

Vagina,  stitches  in,  45.

Vertigo,  22,  142,  255.

W.

Waterbrash,  22,  198.

Weakness,  nervous,  200,


WILLIAM  R.ADDE

HAS  JUST  IMPORTED,  AND  HAS  FOR  SALE*

M.  J.  WEBER,  M D,  LARGE  ANATOMICAL  ATLAS  OF  THE  HU*
man  Body  in  Natural  Size,  coloured.  Eighty-four  plates,  also  the  six  new-
est supplement  plates,  and  a text-book  or  explanation  of  the  Atlas.  This  is
the  original  and  correct  edition,  and  has  been  always  sold  for  $40  without
the  six  supplement  plates.  At  present,  hut  for  an  uncertain  time  only,
at  $25.

LONDON  BOOKS.

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  CUTANEOUS  DISEASE,  a series  of  delineations
of  the  Affections  of  the  Skin,  in  their  most  interesting  and  frequent  forms,
with  a practical  summary  of  their  symptoms,  diagnosis  and  treatment,  includ-
ing appropriate  formulas.  By  Robert  Willis,  M.D.,  Licentiate  of  the
Royal  College  of  Physicians,  and  physician  to  the  Royal  Infirmary  for  Chil-
dren. The  drawings  are  after  nature,  and  lithographed  by  A.  Henning.
These  illustrations  are  comprised  in  94  plates,  folio  ; the  drawings  are  origi-
nals, most  carefully  coloured,  elegantly  bound,  $30.

R.  WILLIAMS,  M D.,  ELEMENTS  OF  PRACTICAL  MEDICINE.
Morbid  Poisons,  containing  Typhus,  Scarlatina,  Morbilli,  Variolte,  Varicella,
Erysipelas,  Pertussis,  2 vols.,  Svo,  $7.

MARSHALL  HALL,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  ON  THE  DISEASES  AND
Derangements  of  the  Nervous  System,  in  their  primary  forms  and  in  their
modifications  by  age,  sex,  constitution,  hereditary  predisposition,  excesses,
general  disorder,  and  organic  diseases.  8vo.,  bound,  $3  75.

SYME  JAMES,  F.R.S.E.,  PRINCIPLES  OF  SURGERY.  3d  edition,
enlarged  and  illustrated  with  sixty-four  wood  cuts  and  fourteen  plates.
Bound,  $5  50.

GERBER,  FR.,  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  GENERAL  AND  MINUTE
Anatomy  of  Man  and  the  Mammalia,  chiefly  after  original  Researches  ; to
which  are  added,  Notes  and  an  Appendix,  comprising  Researches  on  the  An-
atomy of  the  Blood,  Chyle,  Lymph,  Thymous  Fluid,  Tubercle,  &c.,  &c.  By
G.  Gulliver,  F.R.S.  Bound,  2 vols.,  $6.

SAUNDERS,  EDWIN,  M.R.C.S.,  ADVICE  ON  THE  CARE  OF  THE
Teeth,  with  a coloured  copper  plate.  London,  1843.  62^  cents.

RYAN,  M.,  M.D.,  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  MARRIAGE,  IN  ITS  SO-
cial,  Moral,  and  Physical  Relations  ; with  an  account  of  the  Diseases  of  the
Genito-Urinary  organs,  which  impair  or  destroy  the  reproductive  function,
and  induce  a variety  of  complaints  with  the  physiology  of  generation  in  the
vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms,  &c.,  &c.  Fourth  edition.  London,  1843.
Bound,  $1  50.

MARTIN,  W.  C.  L.,  F.L.S.,  A GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE
Natural  History  of  Mammiferous  Animals,  with  a particular  view  of  the
physical  history  of  man,  and  the  more  closely  allied  genera  of  the  order  Qua-
drumana,  or  Monkeys.  Illustrated  Avith  290  anatomical,  osteological,  and
other  incidental  engravings  on  wood,  and  12  full  plate  representations  of  ani-
mals, draAvn  by  Wm.  Harvey.  Bound,  $4.

PRICHARD,  J C.,  M.D.,  F.R.S. , M.R.I.A.,TIIE  NATURAL  HISTORY
of  Man  ; comprising  inquiries  into  the  modifying  influence  of  physical  and
moral  agencies  on  the  different  tribes  of  the  human  family.  WithSfi  coloured
and  four  plain  illustrations,  engraved  on  steel,  and  ninety  engravings  on  wood.
London,  1843.  Bound,  $7.


2


French  Books <


THOMSON,  THOMAS,  M.D.,  CHEMISTRY  OF  ORGANIC  BODIES,
Vegetables.  Bound,  $6  50.

THE  ZOIST : A JOURNAL  OF  CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY  AND
Mesmerism,  and  their  applications  to  Human  Welfare.  Published  quarterly.
Each  number,  62^  cts.

LEBAUDY,  J.,  M.D.,  THE  ANATOMY  OF  THE  REGIONS  INTE-
rested  in  the  Surgical  Operations  performed  upon  the  Human  Body,  with
occasional  views  of  the  pathological  conditions,  which  render  the  interfer-
ence of  the  surgeon  necessary.  In  a series  of  plates  engraved  on  India  paper.
The  size  of  life,  $6.


FRENCH  BOOKS.

BIBLIOTHEQUE  DU  MEDECIN-PR  ATICIEN,  on  Resume  general  de
tous  les  ouvrages  de  Clinique  Medical  et  Chirurgical,  de  toutes  les  Monogra-
phies,  de  tous  les  Memoires  de  Medecine  et  de  Chirurgie  pratiques,  anciens
et  modernes  public  en  France  et  h l’Etranger,  par  une  Societe  de  Medecins
sous  la  Direction  du  Docteur  Fabre,  auteur  du  Dictionnaire  des  Dictionnaires
de  Medecine.  Tome  premier:  Maladies  des  Femmes.  Paris,  au  Bureau  de  la
Gazette  des  Iiopitaux,  1843.

TRAITE  PRATIQUE  DES  MALADIES  DES  ENFANTS,  considerees
dans  leurs  Rapports  avec  l’Organogenie  etles  Developpements  du  jeune  age  ;
par  Richard,  (de  Nancy,)  Chevalier  de  la  Legion  d’Honneur,  Dr.  en  Medecine.
Paris,  Bailli£re,  1839.

DICTIONNAIRE  DE  MEDECINE,  de  Chirurgie,  de  Pharmacie,  des
Sciences  accessoires  et  de  l’Art  Veterinaire,  de  Nysten ; revu  successive-
ment  et  considerablement  augmente  en  1824,  1833,  1839,  et  1841;  par  Briche-
teau,  par  O.  Henry,  and  par  Briand.  Neuvibme  edition;  revue  de  nou-
veau par  A.  Jourdan.  Paris,  Bailliere,  1845.

DE  LA  PUBERTE  ET  DE  L’AGE  CRITIQUE  CHEZ  LA  FEMME,
au  point  de  vue  physiologique,  hygienique  and  medical,  et  de  la  Ponte  Pe-
riodique  chez  la  Femme  et  les  Mammiftres  ; par  M.  A.  Raciborski,  Dr.  en
Med.  Paris,  Baillibre,  1844.

DE  L’ANTEVERSION  ET  DE  LA  RETROVERSION  DE  l’UTERUS  ;
par  Edward  Lacroix,  Dr.  en  Med.  Paris,  Bailliere,  1844.

PHYSIOLOGIE  PATHOLOGIQUE,  ou  Recherclies  Cliniques,  expSri-
mentales  et  microscopiques  sur  l’Inflammation,  Tuberculisation,  les  Tu-
meurs,  la  Formation  du  Cal,  etc. ; par  11.  Lebert,  Dr.  en  Med.  Paris,  Bail-
li£re,  1845.

MANUEL  DE  PHYSIOLOGIE  ; par  Muller,  Prof.  d’Anatomie,  traduit
de  l’Allemand  sur  la  quatribme  edition  ; par  Jourdan.  Paris,  Bailliere,  1845.

TRAITE  D’HYGIENE,  publique  et  privee  ; par  Dr.  Michel  Levy.
Paris,  Bailliere,  1845.

CRUVEILHIER.  ANATOMIE  PATHOLOGIQUE  DU  CORPS  HU-
main,  ou  Descriptions,  avec  figures  litliograpliiees  et  coloriees,  des  diverses
alterations  morbidesdont  le  corps  humain  est  susceptible  ; par  J.  Cruveilhier,
professeur  d’anatomie  pathologique  a la  Faculte  de  Medecine  de  Paris,  me-
decin  de  l’hopital  de  la  Charite,  president  perpetuel  de  la  Societe  anato-
mique,  etc.

L’ouvrage  complet  forme  2 forts  volumes,  rdii,  grand  in-folio  avec  233  plan-
ches coloriees.  $130.

RAYER.  TRAITE  DES  MALADIES  DES  REINS,  et  des  alterations
de  la  secretion  urinaire,  etudiees  en  ellcs-memes  et  dans  leurs  rapports  avec
les  maladies  des  uret^res,  de  la  vessie,  de  la  prostate,  de  l’urbtre,  etc. ; par
P . Raver,  medecin  de  l’hopitalde  la  Charite,  medecin  consultantdu  Roi,  mem-
bre  de  Plnstitut,  etc.  Paris,  1839-1841,  3 forts  vol.  in-8.  $6.

Le  bel  atlas  pour  cet  ouvrage,  representant  l' Anatomie pathologique  des
reins,  de  la  vessie,  de  la  prostate,  des  uret&res,  de  l’urbtre,  etc.,  a ete  public


Wm.  Radde , 322  Broadway,


3


en  12  livraisons  contenant  chacune  5 planches  grand  in-folio,  gravies  et  mag-
nifiquement  coloriees  d’apr^s  nature,  avec  un  texte  descriptif.  Ce  bel  ouvrage
compose  de  60  planches  grand  in-folio  est  complet.  Prix  $50.

RAYER.  TRAITE  THEQRETIQUE  ET  PRATIQUE  des  maladies  de
la  peau  ; par  P.  Rayer,  medecin  de  l’hopital  de  la  Charite ; deuxieme  Edition
entierement  refondue.  Paris,  1835,  3 forts  vol.  in-8,  aceompagnes  d’un  bel  atlas
de  26  planches  grand  in-4,  gravees  et  coloriees  avec  le  plus  grand  soin,  repre-
sentant,  en  400  figures,  les  differentes  maladies  de  la  peau  et  leurs  varietes.
Prix  du  texte  seul,  3 vol.  in-8.  $6.

Prix  de  P atlas  seul,  avec  explication  raisonnee,  grand  in-4  cartonne.  $20.

Prix  de  l’ouvrage  complet,  3 vol.  in-8.,  et  atlas  in— 4.  cartonne.  $25.

BOIYIN  ET  DUGES.  TRAITE  PRATIQUE  DES  MALADIES  DE
Puterus  et  de  ses  Annexes,  appuye  sur  un  grand  nombre  d’observations  clin-
iques ; par  Madame  Boivix,  docteur  en  medecine,  sage-femme,  surveillante
en  chef  de  la  Maison  royale  de  Sante,  et  A.  Duges,  prof,  a la  Fac.  de  Med.
de  Montpellier.  Paris,  1833,  2 vol.  in-8.  $3  50.

Atlas  de  41  planches  in-fol.,  gravees  et  colories,  reprdsentant  les principales
alterations  morbides  des  organes  genitaux  de  la  femme.  Paris,  1833,  in-fol.,
avec  explication.  $6.

L’ouvrage  complet  pris  ensemble,  2 vol.  in-8,  atlas  in  fol.  $20.

VELPEAU.  NOUVEAUX  ELEMENTS  DE  MEDECINE  OPERA-
toire,  aceompagnes  d’un  Atlas  de  22  planches  in-4,  gravees,  representant  les
pnneipaux  procedes  operatoires  et  un  grand  nombre  d’instruments  de  chirur-
gie,  par  A.  A.  Velpeau  chirurgien  de  l’liOpital  de  la  Cliarite,  professeur  de
elinique  chirurgicale  a la  Faculte  de  medecine  de  Paris.  Deuxieme  edition,
entierement  refondue  et  augmentee  d’un  traite  de  petite  chirurgie,  avec  191
planches  intercalees  dans  le  texte.  Paris,  1839.  4 forts  vol.  in-8,  de  chacun
800  pages  et  atlas  in-4.  $10.

Avec  les  planches  de  Patlas  coloriees.  $16.

RASPAIL.  NOUVEAU  SYSTEME  DE  CHIMIE  ORGANIQUE,
fonde  sur  de  nouveiles  methodes  d’observation  ; precede  d’un  Traite  complet
sur  Part  d’observer  et  de  manipuler  en  grand  et  en  petit  dans  le  laboratoire
et  sur  le  porte-objet  du  microscope  ; par  F.  V.  Raspail,  Deuxieme  Edition,
entibrement  refondue,  accompagnee  d’un  atlas  in-4  de  20  planches  de  figures
dessinees  d’apr£s  nature,  gravees  avec  le  plus  grand  soin.  Paris,  1838,  3 forts
vol.  in-8,  et  atlas  in-4.  $9.

ENCYCLOPEDIE  ANATOMIQUE,  comprenant  P Anatomic  descriptive,
l’Anatomie  generate,  l’Anatomie  pathologique,  l’histoire  du  Developpement
et  celle  des  Races  humaines,  par  G.  T.  Bischoff,  J.  Plenle,  E.  Huschke,  S.
T.  Scemmerring,  F.  G.  Theile,  G.  Valentin,  J.  Vogel,  R.  Wagner,  G.  et  E.
Weber,  traduit  de  l’Allemand;  par  A.  J.  L.  Jourean,  membre  de  l’Academie
royale  de  med.,  Paris,  1843, 10  volumes  in-8,  prix  de  ehaque  volume,  $1  75.

Prix  des  2 atlas  in-4.  $3.

G.  H.  G.  JAHR.— ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  UPON  IIOMCEOPA-
thia,  and  the  manner  of  its  practice,  with  some  of  the  most  important  effects
of  ten  of  the  principal  Homoeopathic  remedies.  Second  French  edition,  cor-
rected and  enlarged.  Translated  by  Edward  Bayard,  M.D.  1845.  50  cents.

NOUVEAU  MANUEL  DE  MEDECINE  IIOMGEOPATHIQUE,  divise
en  deux  parties,  lo  Mati'ere  medicale  ; 2o  Repertoire  iherapeulique  et  sympto-
matologique  ; par  G.  H.  G.  Jahr.  Paris,  1840,  4 vol.  in-12.  $5.

NOUVELLE  PHARMACOPEE  ET  POSOLOGIE  HOMtEOPA-
tliiques,  ou  de  la  Preparation  des  medicamens  homceopathiques  et  de  Pad-
ministration  des  doses  ; par  G H.  G.  Jahr.  Paris,  1841,  in-12,  relie.  $2.

HOMCEOPATHIE  DOMESTIQUE,  comprenant  Phygiifene,  le  regime  a
suivre  pendant  le  traitement  des  maladies  et  la  therapeutique  homoeopathique,
precedee  d’une  notice  sur  Phopital  homoeopathique  de  la  Charite  de  Vienne;
par  le  docteur  Bigel  ; deuxieme  edition,  entierement  refondue,  par  le  doc-
leur  Beauvais  (de  Saint  Gratien.)  Paris,  1839,  in-18,  de  624  pages.  $150.


4


French  Books.


CLINIQUE  HOMCEOPATHIQUE,  on  Recueil  de  toutes  les  observations
pratiques  publiees  jusqu’i  nos  jours  ; par  le  docteur  Beauvais  (de  Saint  Gra-
tien.)  Paris,  1836 — 1839.  Ouvragc  complet.  9 forts  volumes  in-8.  $22.

EFFETS  TOXIQUES  ET  PATHOGENETIQUES  DES  MEDICA-
mens  sur  l’economie  animale  dans  l’etat  de  sante,  recueillis  et  misen  tableaux
synoptiques,  par  le  docteur  Beauvais  (de  Saint  Gratien.)  Paris,  1S38.  Get
ouvrage  est  publie  par  livraisons  de  cinq  feuilles  in-8,  aceompagnees  de  ta-
bleaux, (6  livi'aisons  sont  en  vente.)  $4.

EXPOSITION  DE  LA  DOCTRINE  MEDICALE  HOMCEOPATHIQUE,
ou  Organon  de  Part  de  guerir,  par  S.  Hahnemann,  traduit  de  PAllemand  sur
la  cinquilme  edition  avec  divers  opuscules  de  l’auteur,  et  une  traduction  sur
la  cinquilme  edition  de  la  Pharmacopee  Homceopathique,  de  Hartmann  ; par
A.  J.  L.  Jourdan.  Seconde  edition,  avec  le  portrait  de  Hahnemann.  Paris,
1834,  in-8  de  672  pages.  $2.

MEMORIAL  DU  MEDECIN  HOMGEOPATHISTE,  ou  Repertoire  al-
phabetique  de  traitemens  et  d’experiences  homoeopathiques,  pour  servir  de
guide  dans  l1  application  de  Phomceopathie  au  lit  du  malade ; parM.  Haas.
Traduit  de  PAllemand  par  A.  J.  L.  Jourdan , Paris,  1834,  in-24.  75  cents.

HAHNEMANN.  DOCTRINE  ET  TRAIT  EMENT  HOMCEOPA-
thiques  des  maladies  chroniques  ; par  le  docteur  S.  Hahnemann  ; traduit  de
PAllemand  par  A.  J.  L.  Jourdan,  membre  de  PAcadcmie  royale  de  Medecine.
Paris,  1832,  2 vol.  in-8.  15  fr.

HAHNEMANN.  TRAITE  DE  MATIERE  MEDICALE  PURE,  ou  de
l’Action  homceopathique  des  medicamens  : par  S.  Hahnemann,  avec  des  Ta-
bles proportionnelles  de  l’influence  que  diverses  circonstances  exercent  sur
cette  action  ; par  C.  Bienninghausen  ; traduit  de  PAllemand  par  A.  J.  L.
Jourdan.  Paris,  1834,  3 forts  vol.  in-8.  24  fr.

Les  progres  que  fait  chaque  jour  la  doctrine  medicale  homceopathique,  le
grand  nombre  de  partisans  cju’elle  compte  rendaient  necessaire  la  publication
d’ouvrages  qui  missent  a meme  de  pouvoir  la  discuter  avec  connaissance  de
cause  et  impartialite.  C’est  dans  les  ouvrages  d’Hahnemann,  son  fondateur,
qu’il  faut  l’etudier  ; car  si  P Exposition  ou  Organon  de  Vart  de  guerir  contient
les  principes  generaux,  c’est  dans  la  Mati'tre  medicate  pure  et  la  Doctrine  des
maladies  chroniques  qu’il  faut  en  suivre  Papplication  pratique : ces  trois  ou-
vrages ferment  done  l’ensemble  complet,  theorique  et  pratique , de  la  doctrine
homceopathique  j la  celebrite  du  docteur  Hahnemann,  la  bonne  foi  qui  signale
ses  productions,  commandent  de  ne  le  juger  qu’apres  examen.

CLINIQUE  HOMCEOPATHIQUE  a l’usage  des  medecins  et  des  gens  du
monde,  par  L.  Malaise,  D.M.  1837,  in-8,  relie.  $2  50.

REVUE  DE  LA  MEDECINE  SPECIFIQUE,  par  MM.  les  docteurs
Charge,  Petroz  et  Roth,  (Commencee  en  janvier,  1840.)  Les  annees  1840
et  1841,  3 vol.  in-8.  $10.

JOURNAL  DE  LA  DOCTRINE  HAHNEMANNIENNE,  publie  par  le
docteur  Molin.  Paris,  1840,  2 vol.  in-8.  $5.

ARCHIVES  DE  LA  MEDECINE  HOMCEOPATHIQUE,  publiees  par
une  societe  de  medecins  de  Paris.  Collection  de  juillet  1834  et  1835,  formant
3 forts  vol.  in-8,  relie.  $6.

La  quatri£me  annee,  tomes  7 et  8,  par  MM.  Leon  Simon  et  Libert.  Paris,
1S38,  2 vol.  in-8,  relie.  $5  50.

ANNALES  DE  LA  MEDECINE  HOMCEOPATHIQUE,  publiees  par
MM.  Leon  Simon,  G.  H.  Jahr  et  Croserio,  docteurs  en  medecine.  Ce  jour-
nal est  publie  depuisle  ler  mars,  1842,  tous  les  mois,  par  caliier  de  5 feuilles
in  8.  Prix  de  l’abonnement,  pour  un  an,  $5.

On  donnera  gratis  un  Catalogue  complet  de  Livres  de  Medecine,  Chi-
rurgie,  Anatomic,  Physiologie,  Histoire  Naturelle,  Physique,  Chemie,  Phar-
macie.


V


%


Tf-  ~r- r f -/■■■ ft  - p*  f t 'J~‘.  'J  " ' ; ‘ ‘ ( ■'  f ''

•'

■■  • - ■ / e : - . ■ : ■ ■'  . ' . : . ■ . , ’OiZC'Ot  ■ ' • ' ■ ■

■ - - ; : : : . :>  —

■ ' ' / ' , .


■ , t ih.r.i  /


■ - . ' * ; ' . ■ . ■ . .

. • •

*’  i • ' • ' '

r.  ' .J,-  * . .»»  ••  ■ ■'  -


/•;  ; ' W ,


■ . ..  • • ; v r ' •:  rKjf  •

.


v-  ;s,.:  •

■ ’ * v ’’  '

. . • ; *«  '

V

...  'V


v:  X


. . i . . . ■ ■ " ...  * .


.0*-  - ■ «/  • fGr-


V.


- ..

...  ..  . ■:  . ■ . '

-v'  ■ ■ ■ : ■ ••  'v ■ ■ \ • • ••


...  - * . . ■ - .

**»  % s \ ’’V  • K -•  •’

s— , . 1

1 ' . S '**  . . ■ .

v “ \ • • \v  -»  ..  ! \ •*.  ■ '

• *».•  - . • ' •'■'*.  ' ...  - ".  *'»*•

* ' • ; • * * v * ‘ ,

: \ - ' • ..'•  . ' ■ • >•.  •.  ••

• • ' • ■ ■

i 1 . . • . ■ '.  % >

• “■  • • ' ' . ■ . ' ‘ N -5 >.>• ''

• . ",  ■.  ■ ■ ■;  ■ ' ' • ' :


• > .


. r<  ’*•  •„> *>  •.  ,\ : ^ \ '

* • s \ \ \ V \ % _S.  X,. Vi-....  «.f

‘ ■'  ■?-  ' V . V ■»  » V > a 'i  i,  f ’1  •>  ’ ’■

a • . . i.  .,  v'i  '1  ! 1 -* . < ♦ _ « : « . * - * - ’

. : , ...  i . S * - ■ ■’  ' '

••  =.'  ■-..  • • " '
