The Chronic Diseases: Their Specific Nature and Homoeopathic Treatment, Vol. II
Samuel Hahnemann
The Chronic Diseases: Their Specific Nature and Homoeopathic Treatment, vol. II. Translated by Charles J. Hempel. Philadelphia: Dobson, 1845.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b29326515_0002).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

[\  X / / \ i ( . ^


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2017  with  funding  from
Wellcome  Library


A


t


THE


CHEONIC  DISEASES:


THEIR

SPECIFIC  NATURE

AND

HOMEOPATHIC  TREATMENT.

B Y

Dr.  SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN.

TRANSLATED  AND  EDITED

B Y

CIIARLES  J.  HEMPEL,  M.  D.


VOLUME  II.

ANTIPSORIC  REMEDIES.


NEW.YORK;

W M . RADDE,  322  BROADWAY.
LONDON:

H.  BALLlERE,  219  REGENT  STREET.

1 8 4 6.


/


Entered  according  to  the  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1845,  by
WILLIAM  RADDE,

In  the  Clerk’s  Office  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  Nevr-York.


H.  LUDWIG,  PRINTER,

70  & 73  Vesey-strest.


THE  EDITOR’S  PREFACE.


In  offering  the  present  volume  to  the  public,  it  may  be  proper  for
me  to  make  a few  remarks  in  regard  to  two  or  three  expressions,
which,  on  account  of  their  double  meaning  or  their  apparent  non-
meaning, present  some  difficulties  to  the  translator.  These  ex-
pressions are  : — •

The  German  “ driickend .”  All  English  authors,  including
the  editors  of  the  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,  are  in  the  habit
of  rendering  the  term  “ driickend”  by  “ prcssive  ; ” they  constant-
ly say  “pressive  headache ” “ pressive  pain,'"’  etc.  Pressive  has
a more  passive  meaning  than  “pressing ; ” this  latter  expression
corresponds  exactly  with  the  German  “ pres  send ;”  the  term  “ pres-
send  ” has  been  constantly  translated  by  “ pressing ” in  the
present  volume.  As  regards  the  propriety  of  using  the  term
“ pressive , ” the  opinion  of  scholars  seems  to  be  divided.  Some
of  my  professional  brethren,  among  others,  Drs.  Gray  and  Curtis ,
seem  to  think  that  the  German  expression  “ driickender  Schmerz  ”
simply  means  an  ache ; “ driickender  Kopf schmerz”  a head-ache.
Other  scholars,  of  great  eminence,  whose  authority  has  great  weight
with  me,  and  would  have  with  every  body  else,  geem  to  think,  on
the  contrary,  that  the  term  “ pressive  ” is  just  as  legitimate  as  are
the  terms  u compressive ” “ contractive ” compulsive ,”  etc.  On
reflection,  I have  thought  proper,  for  the  sake  of  popularity,  to
adopt  the  view  of  my  professional  brethren,  Drs.  Gray , and  Curtis ,
and  to  use  the  term  “ache”  or  “aching”  in  all  the  subsequent
volumes  of  the  Materia  Medica.  But,  in  translating  “ driicken  ”
by  “ ache”  it  becomes  necessary  frequently  to  consider  the  Adjec-
tive Noun  and  the  Noun  Adjective.  We  frequently  meet  with  the
expression  “ driickender  stich.”  This  could  not  be  rendered  by
“ aching  stitch”  but  has  to  be  rendered  by  “ stitching  ache ” An
“ ache  ” is  a pain  which  is  perceived  by  the  whole  of  the  sentient


PREFACE.


b

IV

system  ; it  njay  have  a principal  local  seat,  and  may  there  excite  a
peculiar  sensation — which  may  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  an
Adjective — but  “ aching  ” can  never  become  an  Adjective  itself.
Dr.  Jourdan,  in  his  remarkable  translation  of  our  Materia  Medica,
has  constantly  used  the  term  “ pressive,"  “ cephalalgie  pressivc ,”
“ douleur  pressivc ,”  etc.

There  is  another  expression  which  requires  an  explanation  ; it
is  the  term  “ reissender  Bruch it  occurs  several  times  among
the  symptoms  of  Dr.  Gross,  and  once  or  twice  among  those  men-
tioned by  Dr.  Langhammer.  The  literal  translation  of  this  ex-
pression is  “ tearing  or  rending  pressured'  This  seems  to  be  a
contradiction  in  terms  ; but  as  the  same  indistinctness  prevails  in
German  as  in  English,  I have  furnished  a literal  translation  of  this
symptom ; the  idea  which  is  meant  by  this  symptom,  seems  to  be
“ pressure  ” and  “ tearing .”  How  far  these  two  apparently  con-
tradictory symptoms  may  exist  in  combination,  one  qualifying  the
other,  I must  leave  the  reader  to  decide.

We  meet  several  times  with  expressions  like  these:  “ gurgling ,
etc.  in  the  knee these  evidently  point  to  a peculiar  kind  of  vibra-
tion perceived  in  those  parts.

The  reader  will,  I trust,  be  pleased  with  finding  the  nosological
portion  of  the  recent  work  of  Drs.  Noack  and  Trinks  annexed  to
each  remedy.  The  present  translation  of  the  Materia  Medica  Pura,
and  the  Antipsorics,  may  be  regarded  as  a most  complete  exposi-
tion of  all  the  symptoms,  and  therapeutical  observations,  which
constitute  the  present  science  of  Homoeopathy.

In  speaking  of  Drs.  Noack  and  Trinks,  I may  here  remark  that  1
have  no  faith  whatsoever  in  their  theory  of  doses.  My  reasons  for
this  want  of  faith,  I shall  furnish  in  the  Homoeopathic  Examiner .
Suffice  it  here  to  lay  down  the  general  proposition  that  “ he  who
deviates  from  Hahnemann’s  principles  in  the  treatment  of  Chronic
diseases,  lacks  wisdom.”

CHARLES  J.  HEMPEL,  M.D,


New-York , August , 1845.


ANTI-PSORIC  REMEDIES.


AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS— (bug-agaric.)

This  fungus  is  surmounted  by  a scarlet  coloured  top,
which  is  studded  with  whitish  excrescences,  and  white
leaflets.  To  prepare  it  for  homoeopathic  use,  it  may  be
either  used  fresh  or  after  it  has  been  carefully  dried.  When
dry  you  take  one  grain  of  its  weight,  and  two  grains  when
it  is  fresh,  and  triturate  this  portion  with  one  hundred
grains  of  sugar  of  milk.  To  obtain  the  thirtieth  degree
of  potency,  you  resort  to  the  processes  of  trituration,  at-
tenuation, and  dynamisation,  which  have  been  pointed  out
in  the  first  volume.

Apelt  has  found  this  drug  serviceable  in  pains  of  the
upper  jaw  bone  and  the  teeth  ; also  in  pains  of  the  bones
of  the  lower  extremities  (as  well  as  in  the  marrow,)  and
finally  in  itching  eruptions  of  the  skin,  of  the  size  of  a mil-
let seed,  and  thickly  set  together.  It  has  also  been  found
useful  in  lassitude  consequent  upon  coition.

Whistling  has  cured  with  it  convulsions  and  tremor,  and
J.  C.  Bernhard  even  some  kinds  of  epilepsy.

Dr.  Woost  has  seen  the  effects  of  large  doses  of  agari-
cus  lasting  for  seven  or  eight  weeks.  Camphor  is  the
chief  antidote,  even  against  such  affections  consequent
upon  the  use  of  agaricus  as  have  assumed  a chronic  cha-
racter.

The  names  of  those  who,  besides  myself,  have  tried  this
remedy,  are  Apelt,  Dr.  Gross,  Dr.  Frederick  Hahnemann,
Dr.  Langhammer  ; name  not  known,  Seidel,  Medicinal-

1


2


AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS.


rath  Dr.  Stapf,  Dr.  Schreter ; name  not  known  ; Dr.
Woost  of  Oschatz.*


AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS— amanita.

Moral  symptoms. — Depression  of  spirits. — Discour-
agement.— Anxiety,  as  though  something  unpleasant  were
going  to  happen  to  her. — Restlessness  and  uneasiness  of
body  and  mind,  (after  the  lapse  of  half  an  hour.) — His  mind
is  uneasy  and  anxious  ; he  was  constantly  concerned  only
about  himself  and  his  present  and  future  condition. — He
does  not  feel  disposed  to  speak,  though  he  is  not  ill-hu-
moured.— He  forces  himself  to  speak  ; but  he  answers  on-
ly in  a few  words,  though  his  general  disposition  is  cheer-
ful at  the  time. — It  seems  as  though  he  were  at  a loss  to
discover  the  words  he  wishes  to  use. — Disinclination  to
speak,  combined  with  ill-humour,  peevishness  and  disincli-
nation to  work. — Fretfulness  of  mind.  Extremely  peev-
ish and  irritable. — Ill-humoured  and  indifferent. — She  who
felt  so  extremely  solicitous  about  everything,  is  now  quite
indifferent. — Indifference  and  moody  taciturnity,  repug-
nance to  work.  Disinclination  to  work. — He  trifles  with
every  thing,  to  save  himself  the  trouble  of  working.  A-
version  to  all  those  kinds  of  labor  that  occupy  the  mind  ;
if  he  undertakes  them  in  spite  of  that  aversion,  there  is  a
rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  throbbing  in  the  arteries,  flushes
of  heat  in  the  countenance,  and  the  thinking  faculty  is  dis-
turbed.— Forgetful  ; he  finds  it  difficult  to  recollect  the
things  which  he  had  heard  and  imagined  before. — Loss  of


* Note. — As  regards  the  symptoms  of  other  observers,  I have
often  found  it  necessary  for  the  convenience  of  my  readers,  to  abre-
viate  long-winded  accounts  and  to  adopt  more  intelligible  expres-
sions in  the  place  of  unknown  and  unintelligible  idioms.  I have
not  knowingly  made  any  essential  alterations.

SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN.

Note  of  the  translator  : — In  this  translation  the  following  ab-
breviations have  been  used  : a.  for  after  ; d.  for  day  ; h.  for  hour  ;
w.  for  week.  A stop  behind  a number,  means  that  this  number  is
an  ordinal  number,  for  instance,  2.  d.  means  the  second  day.


BUG-AGARIC.


3


consciousness  ; He  is  intoxicated  with  fearless  frenzy,
forming  bold  and  revengeful  projects. — Timid  craziness,
fearless  frenzy,  menacing,  mischievous  ; also  frenzy  which
causes  the  patient  to  assail  and  injure  himself,  combined
with  great  exertions  of  power.  Cheering  up.  Bright
mood  with  absence  of  care.  Bright  mood,  but  no  inclina-
tion to  speak.  Extravagantly  exalted  fancy,  ecstacy,  pro-
phecies, making  verses.  Calm,  composed,  sociable,  active,
and  glad  of  having  done  his  duty.  (Healthful  reaction  of
the  organism.)

Head. — Obtusion  of  the  head.* — Obtusion  of  the  head,
with  obtuse  pain,  (after  two  hours.)  Obtusion  and  heaviness
of  the  head,  (after  two  hours.) — Continual  heaviness  of  the
head,  (after  five  hours.)  Painful  heaviness  in  the  fore-
head, (on  the  5th  day-)  A sensation  of  heaviness  and
tugging  down  in  botli  temples  ; it  reaches  to  the  middle
of  the  ears  ; the  patient  feels  as  though  a heavy  load  were
hanging  on  both  sides  of  the  head,  more  in  day-time  than
early  in  the  morning  ; the  sensation  increases  upon  the  parts
being  touched.  Heaviness  of  the  head,  as  from  intoxica-
tion, (after  half  an  hour.)  Early  in  the  morning,  heavi-
ness of  the  head  and  a sensation  of  confusion  with  empti-
ness, as  if  he  had  been  revelling  the  day  before  ; lasting
six  hours.  Heaviness  of  mind,  imbecility,  (reaction  of  the
organism  in  old  age.  Dizziness,  stupefaction.  Giddiness  as
from  intoxication.  Pleasant  intoxication.  Intoxication.
Reeling,  and  sinking  down,  (on  the  second  day.)  Reeling
when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (after  an  hour.)  Reeling  as
from  the  immoderate  use  of  spirituous  liquors  ; when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air,  he  totters  to  and  fro.  Vertigo.  Vertigo
and  sensation  of  stupidity,  early  in  the  morning,  (after


* Note  of  the  translator  : — The  German  expression  is  “ Ein-
genommenheit.” There  is  no  entirely  adequate  expression  for  this
word  in  the  English  language.  In  the  French  idiom  “ la  tete  est
prise,”  the  term  “ prise”  means  precisely  the  same  thing  as  the
German  “ Eingenommenheit.”  Eingenommenheit  means  a dull-
ness, an  obtusion  of  the  senses  and  the  thinking  faculty,  such  as  is
sometimes  produced  by  a cold  in  the  head,  or  as  is  sometimes  con-
sequent upon  the  use  of  spirituous  drinks.  The  term  “ Eingenom-
menheit,” in  this  translation,  has  been  always  rendered  by  the  term
“obtusion  of  the  head.”


4


AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS.


three  hours.)  Vertigo  early  in  the  morning,  as  from  in-
toxication, (after  a quarter  of  an  hour.)  Vertigo,  coming
on  principally  early  in  the  morning  ; it  lasts  from  one  to
eight  minutes,  and  returns  several  times  during  the  day  at
short  intervals.  Strong  light  of  the  sun  produces,  early
in  the  morning,  a momentary  attack  of  giddiness,  even  to
falling.  Attacks  of  vertigo,  combined  with  a tottering
gait  and  indistinct  sight,  even  of  near  objects  ; these  at-
tacks come  and  go  every  five  minutes,  and  can  only  be
entirely  removed  by  diverting  the  mind.  Vertigo,  coming
on  when  he  meditates  while  walking  in  the  open  air,  (after
eight  days.)  Attack  of  vertigo  in  the  open  air  ; it  disap-
pears in  the  room,  lasting  for  several  days.  Vertigo  in  the
room,  on  turning  himself.  Vertigo  passing  off  for  some
time  by  quickly  turning  the  head.  Head-ache,  early  in
the  morning,  in  bed.  Different  kinds  of  liead-ache  in  the
left  half  of  the  occipital  bone,  when  seated.  Dali  hea.d-
ache,  especially  in  the  forehead  ; this  headache  obliged
him  to  move  the  head  constantly  to  and  fro,  and  to  close
the  eyes  as  for  sleep.  Dull,  stunning  headache,  with  thirst
and  heat,  especially  in  the  face,  (immediately.)  Dull,
pressive  headache,  which  disappears  after  a copious  eva-
cuation of  the  intestines;  this  headache  is  combined  with
flushes  of  heat.  Pressive  headache,  coming  and  going  at
short  intervals,  before  going  to  bed.  Pressure  in  the  cavi-
ties of  the  forehead.  Violently  pressive  pain  in  the  fore-
head, with  vertigo,  while  sitting.  Pressure,  coming  down
from  the  forehead,  upon  the  upper  half  of  the  eye-balls,
(after  an  hour  and  an  half.)  Violent  aching  in  the  right
temple,  or  the  temporal  bone.  Pressure  upon  the  upper
portion  of  the  left  temporal  bone,  immediately  above  the
concha  of  the  ear,  the  pressure  reaches  deep  into  the  brain  ;
it  increases  when  the  hairs  are  pressed  upon,  or  when  they
are  merely  touched,  and  is  attended  with  complete  depres-
sion of  spirits.  Aching  pain  in  the  zygoma  of  the  left
temporal  bone.  Pressure  in  the  occiput,  (on  the  first  day.)
Violently  pressive  headache,  especially  in  the  occiput ; af-
ter dinner,  (on  the  9th  day.)  Pressure  with  stitches  in  the
forehead,  above  the  eyes.  Aching  and  drawing  pain  from
the  left  side  of  the  forehead  towards  the  right,  while  sit-
ting (after  half  an  hour.)  Drawing  headache,  early,  on


BUG-AGARIC.


5


waking  up,  with  pressure  in  the  eye-balls.  Drawing  pain
in  the  forehead.  Drawing  from  both  sides  of  the  frontal
bone  as  far  as  the  root  of  the  nose.  Very  painful  draw-
ing across  the  temples,  forehead  and  eye-balls.  Drawing
in  the  head  in  all  directions,  with  a sensation  as  though  the
person  were  to  lose  his  (or  her)  senses.  Drawing  pain  in
the  occiput,  in  the  afternoon.  Drawing  pain  in  the  occiput,
early,  when  in  bed,  as  if  from  a wrong  position  ; it  in-
creases by  extending  the  arms  and  holding  in  the  breath.
Drawing  and  cutting  pain  in  the  forehead,  when  standing  ;
when  sitting,  this  pam  assumes  a pressive  and  stunning
character,  (after  an  hour  and  a half.)  Drawing  and  tear-
ing pain  in  the  forehead,  coming  and  going  at  short  inter-
vals, (after  33  hours.)  Tearing  in  the  forehead,  immedi-
ately above  the  root  of  the  nose.  Tearing  in  the  right
temporal  region.  Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,
which  returns  at  short  intervals.  Jerking  tearing  in  the
head,  most  painful  behind  the  right  ear,  where  it  stops. —
Headache  as  if  the  brain  were  torn.  Tearing  and  press'
ing  in  the  eiitire  left  circumference  of  the  brain  ; the
pain  is  most  severe  in  the  left  orbit  and  zygoma  ; it  is  ac-
companied with  a sensation  of  desolate  confusion  in  the
head,  (after  8 hours.)  Tearing  stitches  in  the  occiput  from
one  side  to  the  other,  early  in  the  morning,  (on  the  second
day.)  Violent,  lancinating  tearing  from  the  vertex  to  the
left  ear,  (after  6 hours.)  Fine  stitches  in  the  right  temple,
(after  half  an  hour.)  Grinding  pain  in  the  head  ; it  lasts
only  a few  minutes,  but  it  frequently  returns.  Violent,
grinding  pain  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,  (after  3 hours.)
Boring  pain  deep  in  the  brain,  at  the  vertex.  Pain,  as
from  a nail,  in  the  right  side  of  the  head.  Beating  pain  in
the  vertex,  with  despair  bordering  on  rage.  Tearing  and
drawing  pain  externally  in  the  integuments  of  the  head,
(skin  and  bones  ;)  it  increases  on  pressure,  especially  at  a
small  spot  in  the  vertex,  which  pains  as  if  there  were  in-
ternal festering;  at  night.,  (after  18  days.)  Sensitiveness
of  the  integuments  of  the  head  as  if  they  were  ulcerating.
Twitches  in  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  above  the  right  eye.
Frequent  painless  twitches  in  the  right  temple,  by  the  side
of  the  eye,  (on  the  7th  day.)  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left
temple,  (after  37  hours.)  Sensation  of  coldness,  as  of  ice,


6


AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS.


on  the  hairy  right  side  of  the  frontal  bone,  although,  on
touching  the  parts,  they  seem  to  feel  warm.  Icy  cold-
ness in  the  region  of  the  coronal  suture  after  the  parts  had
been  scratched  on  account  of  their  itching  ; the  coldness
frequently  returns,  approaches  more  and  more  the  forepart
of  the  head,  and  finally  reaches  that  pait  of  the  forehead
which  is  not  covered  with  hair.  Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp.
Itching  of  the  whole  of  the  hairy  scalp  ; it  is  like  the  itch-
ing of  wounds  which  are  healing,  and  invites  one  to
scratch.  Troublesome  itching  of  the  hairy  scalp,  espe-
cially early  after  getting  up  ; it  disappears  upon  the  parts
being  scratched  with  a sharp  comb.  Pimples  on  the  hairy
scalp.

Eyes. — Itching  in  the  eyebrows.  Falling  off  of  the
hairs  of  the  eyebrows.  Pressure  in  the  eyes.  Pressure
in  the  left  eyeball,  (after  ten  hours.)  Pressure  in  the
eyes,  and  inclination  to  close  them,  without  sleep  ; after
dinner.  Pressure  in  the  eyes  and  upon  the  forehead,
as  though  something  were  pressing  from  without  inward,
(after  ten  minutes.)  Pressure  in  the  corners  of  the  left
eye,  as  if  there  were  a foreign  body.  Pressing  and  draw-
ing in  the  eyeballs,  especially  in  the  left  eyeball,  reaching
as  far  as  the  inside  of  the  forehead,  (on  the  fourth  day.)
Painful  drawing  in  the  eyeballs,  (on  the  third  and  fourth
day.)  Cramplike  pain  under  the  right  eyebrows  ; it  makes
the  opening  of  the  eyes  difficult,  (after  five  hours.)  Itch-
ing and  prickling  in  the  right  eye,  (after  one  hour.)  Tick-
ling and  itching  in  the  left  eye,  which  induce  rubbing,
(after  three  hours.)  Itching  and  winking  of  the  left  lower
eyelid,  which  induce  rubbing.  Itching  and  pressing  in
the  right  eye,  relieved  by  rubbing  for  a short  time.  Burn-
ing sensation  of  the  eyes  ; there  is,  moreover,  a sensation
of  contraction,  in  the  evening,  (on  the  first  day.)  Burning
in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  eyes,  as  though  inflammation
were  going  to  set  in  ; the  pain  increases  upon  the  parts
being  touched.  Burning  sensation  of  the  inner  canthus  of
the  eyes,  upon  the  lids  being  firmly  closed.  Burning  and
aching  pain  above  the  right  eye,  with  running  of  the  eye,
(after  an  hour  and  a half.)  Redness  of  the  white  of  the
eye.  Yellow  colour  of  the  eyes,  (on  the  third  day.)  —
Swelling  of  the  left  eyelids  towards  the  inner  canthus  ;


BUG-AGARIC.


7


this  swelling  causes  the  eye  to  appear  diminished.  Con-
traction of  the  eyelids,  (after  two  hours.)  Contraction
and  narrowing  of  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye.  Sen-
sation of  contraction  of  the  right  eye,  with  increased  clear-
ness of  sight.  This  is  succeeded  by  biting  pain  in  the
eyeball,  and  running  of  the  eye;  and  lastly,  by  spasms  of
the  left  eye,  such  as  had  previously  existed  in  the  right ;
wine  relieved  the  symptoms  at  once. — Narrovnng  of  the
interval  between  the  eyelids  for  several  days , without
swelling,  and  often  with  twitching  and  winking  of  the
eyelids.  The  interval  between  the  eyelids  is  smaller  than
usual  ; it  requires  an  effort  to  increase  it.  Twitches  in
the  eyeballs ,*  in  frequent  succession  ; in  the  left  eye  they
are  often  accompanied  by  lachrymation.  While  reading,
there  is  frequent  twitching  and  pressing  in  the  left  eyeball.
Spasms , with  aching  pain  in  the  left  eyeball , at  any  time
of  the  day  and  in  any  situation  and  circumstance  ; the
eye  has  to  be  wiped,  but  the  symptoms  remain.  Fre-
quently slight  twitching  in  the  eyelids  ; it  is  generally
towards  one  corner.  Winking  of  the  right  lower  eyelid,
accompanied  by  throbbing  of  an  artery  on  the  left  side,  at
the  back  of  the  nose,  and  twitches  of  the  skin  of  the  left
side  of  the  nose.  Dryness  of  the  eyes.  The  caruncula
of  the  left  eye  increases  in  size  for  several  days.  Lach-
rymation of  the  right  eye,  (on  the  first  and  second  day.)
Lachrymation  of  the  right  eye,  (after  three  hours.) — Sen-
sation in  the  eyes  as  though  they  had  to  be  wiped  con-
stantly. The  eyelids  are  adhering  to  one  another  as  by
slimy  threads ; wiping  relieves  this  symptom  only  for  a short
time.  Gum  in  the  canthi  of  the  eyes , (after  six  hours.)  Vis-
cid  ( previously  white)  yellow  humour , which  glues  the  eye-
lids to  one  another ; the  secretion  of  this  humour  takes  place
in  the  inner  canthi,  and  continues  even  during  the  day,
but  especially  early,  and  in  the  evening. — The  pupils  first
dilate,  (after  three  quarters  of  an  hour,)  then  contract,
(after  twenty-five  hours.)  Gradual  decrease  of  sight,  on
walking  in  the  open  air,  (after  seven  hours.)  Great  wea-
riness (weakness)  of  the  eyes  ; if  she  looks  long  at  an


* Note  : The  German  is  “ zucken,”  which,  probably,  here
means  jactitation  in  the  muscles  of  the  eye.


8


aGARICUS  muscarius.


object,  the  object  appears  pale.  Shortsightedness  and
dimsightedness  of  both  eyes.  Very  indistinct  sight ; he
is  obliged  to  hold  objects  close  to  his  eyes  in  order  to  per-
ceive them  clearly. — In  reading,  he  is  obliged  to  ap-
proach the  letters  more  and  more  closely  to  his  eyes,  in
order  to  recognise  the  letters  distinctly  ; afterwards,  he
has  to  remove  them  again  to  a greater  distance,  otherwise
the  sight  becomes  dim  again.  Dimness  before  the  eyes,
with  sleepiness.  Dimsightedness ; every  thing  appears
obscured , as  if  by  turbid  water ; he  has  to  make  an  effort
to  recognise  the  thing.  Every  object  appears  surrounded
with  a mist,  and  therefore  obscured.  That  which  comes
before  the  eyes,  is  obscured  as  if  covered  with  cobweb.
A black  moth  is  hovering  before  the  left  eye,  at  the  dis-
tance of  half  an  ell  ;*  upon  winking,  the  black  spot  is  seen
flitting  to  and  fro.  In  gloomy  weather,  a brown  moth
hovers  before  the  left  eye,  towards  the  inner  canthus.
On  closing  the  right  eye,  there  is  seen  before  the  left  a
small,  oblong,  dark-brown  spot,  hovering  in  an  oblique
direction  towards  the  inner  canthus,  pretty  near  the  eye.
He  imagines  to  see  things  double.  Dread  of  light.

Ears. — Pain  in  the  ear,  tearing  pain  in  the  meatus  of  the
right  ear,  which  is  caused  and  increased  by.  cold  air  pass-
ing into  the  ear  ; the  pain  extends  to  the  upper  jaw,  and
continues  for  several  days.  Itching  in  and  behind  the
ears . Itching  in  the  external  meatus  of  the  right  ear.
Itching,  attended  with  tickling,  in  the  right  ear  ; this  in-
duces scratching,  (after  29  hours.) — Itching,  generally  in
the  left  ear  ; this  induces  the  person  to  insert  the  finger
into  the  ear  and  rub  it.  Itching  of  the  lobule  of  the  ear.
Itching  of  the  concha,  which  induces  rubbing ; rubbing
makes  the  parts  red  and  sore,  but  the  itching  continues.
Itdiing,  redness , and  burning  of  the  ears , as  if  they  had
been  frozen.  Itching  of,  and  pimples  on,  the  posterior  sur-
face of  the  concha.  Sensation  in  the  ears,  as  if  wax  were
flowing  out.  Whizzing  in  the  ears.  Tingling  in  the
right  ear,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (after  four  hours.)

Nose. — Sudden  pressure  at  the  superior  part  of  the
dorsum  of  the  nose. — Smart  stinging  in  the  left  side  of  the
root  of  the  nose.  Great  sensitiveness  of  the  inner  walls


* Note  of  the  Translator:  Three  ells  make  two  yards.


BUG-AGARIC.


9


of  the  nose.  Itching  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  nose.
Vehement  itching  of  the  wings  of  the  nose,  which  induces
rubbing.  Prickling  sensation  in  the  right  nostril  and  eye,
as  one  experiences  before  sneezing.  Tickling  itching  in
the  left  nostril,  which  induces  rubbing,  (after  14  hours.)  —
Burning  pain  in  the  nose  and  the  eyes,  (owing  to  vapour.)
Soreness  and  inflammation  of  the  inner  wall  of  the  nose.
In  blowing  the  nose , blood  comes  out  of  it , early  in  the
morning , immediately  after  rising  from  the  bed  ; this  is
followed  by  violent  bleeding  from  the  nose,  (after  33
hours.) —Bleeding  from  the  nose.  The  smell  is  finer.

Face. — Stitches  in  the  face,  in  the  left  cheek  ; they
begin  in  the  lower  jaw,  and  extend  upwards,  (after  one
hour.)  Dull  stitches  in  the  right  jugum.  Lancinating  and
drawing  pain  in  the  right  cheek,  (after  two  hours.)  Quick
throbbing  of  an  artery  in  the  left  cheek,  attended  with
shooting  stitches  extending  from  the  left  eye  as  far
as  the  upper  jaw.  Slight  twitching  in  the  right  cheek,
like  pulsating  sensation,  (after  eight  days.) — Burning  sen-
sation of  the  cheeks.  Burning  sensation  of  the  cheeks,
(after  one,  two  hours.)  Redness  of  the  face,  without  any
perceptible  heat.  Redness  of  the  face,  with  itching  and
burning,  as  is  consequent  upon  freezing  of  the  parts.)
Itching  in  the  face. — itching  in  the  whiskers.  Itching  in
the  forehead,  inducing  scratching;  there  are  pimples  on
the  forehead.  An  itching  pimple  by  the  side  of  the  mouth.
On  the  lips  and  in  the  throat,  a tearing  pain,  (owing  to
vapour  ) Dryness  and  burning  of  the  lips,  (on  the  first
day.)  The  upper  lips  are  chapped,  with  a burning  sen-
sation in  the  fissures,  (on  the  fourth  day.)  Bluish  lips,  (on
the  first  and  second  day  )

w '

Jaws  and  Teeth. — On  the  right  side  of  the  chin  a
painful  pressure.  Fine,  smart  stitches  at  a small  place  of
the  chin,  close  under  the  lower  lip.  Pricking  in  the  chin,
as  with  pins,  (immediately.) — Spasmodic  drawing  in  the
chin  and  the  lower  jaw,  (after  two  hours.)  Pricking  pain,
in  the  articulation  of  the  lower  jaw,  as  by  a pin.  Violent
tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw.  Toothache;
tearing  in  the  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw  ; it  is  increased  by
cold.  Throbbing  and  tearing  in  the  upper  molar  teeth
of  the  left  side,  in  the  afternoon.  Gnawing  pain  in  the

1*


10


AGARICU3  MUSCARIUS.


molar  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw  ; this  is  followed  by  itching
in  the  left  ear,  after  which  the  toothache  comes  on  again,
in  the  afternoon.  Dull  toothache  (the  German  text  sig-
nifies pouting  or  insidiously  threatening  toothache)  on  the
left  side  of  the  upper  jaw.  Drawing  pain  in  the  inci-
sors of  the  lower  jaw.  Lancinations,  attended  with  a
sensation  of  drawing,  in  the  incisors  of  the  lower  jaw  ; the
lancinations  are  continued  towards  the  left  angle  of  the
lower  jaw,  (after  one  hour.)  Dulness  of  the  incisors  of
the  lower  jaw.  The  fore  teeth  feel  too  long  ; they  are
very  sensitive,  in  the  evening,  (on  the  third  day.)

Mouth. — The  gums  are  painful,  and  the  saliva  tastes
acrid,  (during  the  first  ten  days.)  Painfulness  and
bleeding  of  the  gums.  Swelling  of  the  gums , attended
with  pain.  Bad  smell  from  the  mouth. — Bad  smell  from
the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning ; attended  with  a faecu-
lent  taste  in  the  mouth.  Smell  of  rotten  substances  from
the  mouth,  (on  the  eighth  to  the  tenth  day.)  Acrid  smell
from  the  mouth,  as  of  horse-radish  ; he  himself  is  not
aware  of  it.  Soreness  in  the  whole  inner  mouth,  espe-
cially of  the  palate,  (on  the  fifth  day.)  The  palate  feels
sore,  as  though  the  skin  were  drawn  off;  it  is  very  sensi-
tive to  pain,  (on  the  first  day.)  The  tongue  is  sore.  Small
painful  ulcer  by  the  side  of  the  froenum  of  the  tongue,  (on
the  ninth  day.)  The  tongue  is  coated  white  ; at  the  tip  it
is  bordered  with  dirty-yellow  aphthae,  producing  a sensa-
tion as  though  the  skin  would  peel  off’ ; immediately  after
a meal,  (after  four  hours.)  Tongue  is  coated  white.
Very  pale  tongue  ; it  is  covered  with  a thin  layer  of  white
phlegm. — Back  part  of  the  tongue  is  coated  yellow,  (on
the  seventh — tenth  day.)  Slimy  tongue.  Fine  stitches
in  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  (after  four  hours.)  Foam  at  the
mouth.  Water  accumulates  in  the  mouth,  (this  symptom
exists  simultaneously  with  pains  in  the  belly,  (on  the  se-
cond day.)  Flow  of  saliva  from  the  mouth.  Sometimes,
especially  upon  raising  the  head,  saliva  flows  into  the
larynx  ; this  induces  violent  vomiting.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Saliva  tastes  very  acrid,  (during
the  first  ten  days.)  Flat  taste  in  the  mouth,  the  tongue
being  coated  yellow,  (on  the  seventh — tenth  day.)  Insipid
taste  in  the  mouth.— Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  (on  the


BUG-AGARIC-


11


12th  day.)  Want  of  thirst;  complete  absence  of  thirst.
Thirst,  in  the  afternoon,  (on  the  second  day.)  Want  of
appetite.  No  desire  for  eating  ; desire  to  drink.  He
does  not  eat  bread  with  pleasure.  Much  hunger , but  no
appetite;  this  symptom  also  exists  early  in  the  morning.
Great  desire  to  eat,  which  often  borders  on  a ravenous
appetite,  (on  the  fourth — eighth  day.)  For  several  days  in
succession  he  has  sudden  fits  of  hunger,  during  which  he
swallows  his  food  in  a great  hurry,  and  with  greediness.
Towards  evening  his  appetite  increases  ; he  imagines  not
to  be  able  to  satisfy  it,  and  he  swallows  his  food  in  a
hurry  and  with  greediness,  as  if  he  were  attacked  with
rabid  hunger,  (after  eight  hours.)  Towards  evening  he  is
suddenly  attacked  with  rabid  hunger  ; his  whole  body  is
covered  with  sweat ; these  symptoms  are  attended  with
great  weariness  and  tremor  of  the  extremities.

(Esophagus  and  Stomach. — After  a meal,  a sensation
of  choking  in  the  oesophagus,  and  oppression  at  the  sto-
mach. After  dinner,  oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
attended  with  painful  drawing  and  pressure  in  the  balls  of
the  eyes,  reluctance  to  work,  and  indolence  of  mind,  (on
the  tenth  day.)  Horripilation  after  supper.  Frequent
rising  of  mere  air,  such  as  takes  place  when  the  stomach
is  deranged,  (after  half  an  hour.)  Empty  risings.  Fre-
quently empty  risings,  alternating  with  hiccough  ; these
symptoms  appear  while  he  smokes  tobacco,  which  he
is  in  the  habit  of  doing,  (after  one  hour.)  Risings,  with
qualmishness,  (after  three  hours.)  Risings,  tasting  of
the  ingesta.  Early  in  the  morning,  risings  : tasting  of
the  ingesta. — Heartburn.  Hiccough , immediately  after
having  taken  the  medicine.  Hiccough,  in  the  afternoon.
Frequent  hiccough,  (after  26  hours.)  A sense  of  nausea
rises  as  far  as  his  mouth.  Nausea,  shortly  after  having
taken  the  medicine. — Nausea,  with  cutting  pain  in  the
abdomen.  Nausea,  and  inclination  to  vomit,  (after  two
hours.)  Nausea,  shortly  after  a meal;  eructations  relieve
it.  Oppression  at  the  stomach,  with  inclination  to  go  to
stool.  Oppression  at  the  pyloric  orifice  of  the  stomach.
Oppressive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  upper  and  left  border
of  the  stomach  ; the  pain  is  felt  when  standing  or  walking,
(after  two  hours.)  Oppressive  weight  in  the  stomach.


12


AGARICUS  MUSCARITJS.


Oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (on  the  first  and  ninth
day.)  Oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  extending  as
far  as  the  sternum. — After  breakfast,  oppression  at  the
pit  of  the  stomach  ; in  the  afternoon,  the  pain  passes  to
the  epigastrium,  where  it  becomes  a grinding  pain  ; in  the
evening,  the  person  passes  wind,  after  which  the  pain  dis-
appears, (on  the  16th  day.)

Abdomen. — Tensive  pain  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
which  extends  to  the  left  clavicle  ; it  is  felt  towards  even-
ing during  deep  breathing,  (on  the  ninth  day.)  — Spasmodic
drawing  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  extending
as  far  as  the  chest;  towards  evening,  (on  the  ninth  day.) —
When  sitting,  cutting  colic-like  spasms,  resembling  spasms
of  the  stomach,  immediately  below  the  diaphragm,  and
extending  towards  the  vertebral  column,  (after  one  hour
and  a half.)  Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  hypochondria  and
the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  the  contents  of
the  thorax  were  compressed  ; the  pain  is  more  violent  after
dinner.  In  the  hypochondria,  upon  the  left  side  of  the
last  true  rib,  there  is  a pressive  pain  returning  every  se-
cond ; at  the  corresponding  place  of  the  right  side,  the
person  experiences  a pain  as  from  an  old  gun-shot  wound,
(after  two  hours.)  Acute  pulsative  pain  below  the  left
hypochondrium  ; it  rises  as  high  up  as  the  third  and  fourth
rib;  in  the  afternoon,  (on  the  eighth  day.)  Dull  pressure
in  the  spleen,  in  the  evening,  when  he  is  lying  in  bed  upon
the  left  side  ; the  pain  is  diminished  by  the  person  turning
to  the  right  side.  Stitches  under  the  short  ribs  of  the  left
side , when  breathing , and  especially  when  sitting  with  a
stooping  chest.  In  the  region  of  the  liver,  sharp  stitches ,
as  from  needles. — Dull  stitches  in  the  liver,  during  breath-
ing. Violent  pain  in  the  abdomen,  (after  four  hours.)
Painful  pressure  in  the  lumbar  region,  (after  two -hours.)
Violently  pressive  pain  in  the  left  splenic  region,  at  night;
the  pain  disturbs  the  sleep,  (on  the  twelfth  day.)  Pres-
sure and  sense  of  fulness  in  the  abdomen,  after  mode-
rately partaking  of  light  food. — Troublesome  fulness  of
the  whole  abdomen  ; it  makes  sitting  and  breathing  diffi-
cult. Bloated  abdomen.  Bloated  abdomen.  Sense  as  of
writhing  in  the  abdomen . Writhing  pain  in  the  abdo-
men.— Pinching  in  the  abdomen.  Pinching  below  the


bug-agaric.


13


umbilicus , attended  with  a bloated  condition  of  the  abdo-
men. Violent  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  attended  with  di-
arrhoea. Pinching  and  cutting  in  the  epigastrium,  in  the
evening,  (on  the  ninth  day.)  Cutting  pain  in  the  umbilical
region,  (after  two  hours.)  Cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,
without  going  to  stool. — Cutting  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,
as  if  diarrhoea  were  to  ensue  ; in  the  evening.  Cutting
pain,  attended  with  wind  moving  to  and  fro  in  the  bowels,
with  bloated  condition  of  the  hypogastrium  ; eructations
and  emission  of  flatulence  give  but  short  relief,  (after  one
hour.)  Cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  such  as  is  consequent
upon  a purgative  ; this  pain  is  followed  by  liquid  stools,
by  which  the  pains  are  relieved,  (on  the  second  day.)
Sensation  in  the  abdomen  as  if  diarrhoea  were  just  coming
on. — Dull  stitches,  which  hurt  very  much,  at  the  superior
anterior  process  of  the  iliac  bones.  A stitch  on  the  right
side  and  near  the  vertebral  column,  in  the  region  of  the
right  kidney,  (after  half  an  hour.)  Mild  pain  in  the  lumbar
region.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  left  groin  ; it  is
felt  only  when  walking,  (after  four  hours  and  a half.)
Troublesome  itching  of  the  hypogastrium,  with  goose-
skin  ; it  lasts  almost  the  whole  night,  and  only  disappears
in  the  morning,  after  perspiration  has  set  in.

Intestines  and  Stool. — Flatus  move  to  and  fro  in  the
abdomen  in  an  audible  manner.  Grunting  and  rumbling
in  the  abdomen.  Audible  grunting  in  the  abdomen,  early
in  the  morning,  (on  the  second  day.)  Loud  rumbling  in
the  abdomen,  (alter  half  an  hour.)  A sort  of  rumbling  in
the  epigastrium.  Loud  gurgling  in  the  bowels,  deep
down. — Loud,  painless  din  in  the  abdomen,  like  distant
thunder,  attended  with  a feeling  as  if  the  person  had  to  go
to  stool,  in  the  evening.  Motion  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the
person  had  to  go  to  stool  ; at  the  same  time  the  person
passes  a quantity  of  wind,  which  has  almost  no  smell.
Passes  a large  quantity  of  wind.  Passes  wind,  attended,
with  a sensation  similar  to  that  experienced  in  diarrhoea. —
Frequently  passes  fetid  wind.  Passes  wind  which  smells
of  garlic.  In  passing  wind,  there  is  an  acrid  pain  in  the
rectum,  (on  the  sixth  day.)  During  the  whole  day  there
is  a sensation  in  the  bowels  as  if  the  person  had  to  go  to
stool  ; howTever,  the  stools  are  not  passed  till  late  in  the


14


AGARICUS  MUSCAR1US.


evening,  after  there  had  been  copious  stools  in  the  morn-
ing. Absence  of  stool  for  two  days.  Solid  stools  after
several  days’  constipation.  Stools  are  passed  every  other
day  ; they  are  always  solid.  There  is  no  stool  for  three
days,  although  stools  generally  were  passed  every  day  ; at
the  end  of  three  days  the  person  passed  stools  which  were
hard.  Very  hard  stools.  Hard,  dark-coloured  evacua-
tions, (on  the  third  day.)  Knotty  stools,  at  night,  after
violent  colic  ; this  is  succeeded  by  violent  tenesmus,  with-
out any  more  stools  being  passed,  (on  the  third  day.)
Stools  are  first  knotty,  and  a quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards
watery,  attended  with  violent  colic,  fermentation  in  the
abdomen,  and  great  nausea.  First  hard,  then  pappy
stools  ; shortly  after  there  is  diarrhoea.  Colic  is  succeed-
ed by  knotty,  then  liquid  stools,  early  in  the  morning,  (on
the  second  day.)  Soft  stools,  after  the  stools  had  been
passed  as  usually  early  in  the  morning. — Soft . pappy
stools  every  day.  The  evacuations  become  pappy,  (on
the  sixth  day.)  Passes  a quantity  of  pappy  stools,  (after
twelve  to  thirty-eight  hours.)  Watery  stools,  attended
with  violent  colic  and  tenesmus,  early  in  the  morning,
(on  the  third  day.)  Diarrhoea.  Diarrhoea , with  violent
pinching  in  the  body , early  in  the  morning,  (on  the  second
day.)  Five  times  in  succession  the  person  passes  liquid,
yellowish  stools,  attended  with  pinching  in  the  abdomen,
and  emission  of  flatulence  which  has  no  smell.  Diar-
rhoea ; at  the  same  time  the  person  passes  a large  quantity
of  wind , (after  six  hours.)  Slimy  stools,  at  the  same
time  passing  much  wind.  Passes  mucus  by  the  rectum,
attended  with  wind. — Before  and  durinsr  the  stools  there

o

is  violent  pinching  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen.  Diar-
rhoea, attended  with  painful  constriction  of  the  stomach
and  abdomen.  During  and  after  stool,  acrid  pain  in  the
rectum,  (on  the  third  and  fourth  day.)  Colic  after  stool,
as  if  the  person  had  swallowed  poison,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, (on  the  seventh  and  ninth  day.) — After  stool,  rumbling
in  the  abdomen.  Itching  and  tickling  of  the  anus,  which
obliges  the  person  to  scratch,  (after  three  quarters  of  an
hour.)  Itching  and  prickling  in  the  rectum.  Prickling  in
the  rectum,  (after  three  hours.)  Prickling  in  the  rectum,
as  from  worms.


BUG-AGARIC.


15


Urinary  Organs. — Desire  to  urinate,  though  but  very-
little  urine  is  passed,  (after  three  quarters  of  an  hour. ) —
Frequent  desire  to  urinate  ; he  passes  much  urine,  the
penis  being  quite  relaxed,  (after  four  hours.)  Frequent
micturition.  She  frequently  passes  her  urine,  although
she  had  but  drunk  little,  (on  the  fourth  day.)  Rare  emis-
sion of  urine,  without  any  increase  of  quantity.  Rare
emission  of  urine,  with  decrease  of  quantity.  Urine  comes
out  slowly,  feebly,  sometimes  only  in  drops  ; he  is  obliged
to  bear  down  in  order  to  facilitate  the  emission  of  urine.
The  urine  sometimes  stops  flowing  for  a few  moments,
and  then  flows  again.  Retention  of  urine.  Scanty,  red-
dish urine,  (on  the  first  and  second  day.)  Clear  lemon -
coloured  urine. — Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  left  groin,
when  urinating,  (after  three  days.)  Prickling  and  itching
in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  (after  two  hours.)  A stitch
in  the  urethra  as  if  an  incandescent  steel  were  pushed
through  it,  (after  three  hours  ) Sensation  in  the  urethra,
as  if  he  had  not  entirely  done  urinating.  Sensation  in  the
urethra,  as  if  a drop  of  cold  urine  passed  through  it. —
Effusion  of  viscid,  glutinous  mucus  from  the  urethra.
Itching  of  the  hairy  parts  of  the  pudendum.  Quickly  pass-
ing, voluptuous  itching  in  the  penis.  Itching,  with  titilla-
tion,  of  the  margin  of  the  prepuce  ; these  symptoms  oblige
him  to  rub  the  parts,  (after  five  hours  ) — Drawing  in  the
testicles,  attended  with  a sense  of  uneasiness,  awkward-
ness, and  sleepiness  ; in  the  evening.  Spasmodic  drawing
in  the  left  testicle  and  spermatic  cord.

Generative  Functions. — Continual  erections,  (the
first  night.)  Erection,  early  in  the  morning.  Frequent
erections , also  at  night.  Pollutions,  (the  first  night.)
Nightly  pollutions,  without  any  lascivious  dreams.  Great
aversion  to  sexual  intercourse.  The  sexual  desire  becomes
excited.  A nap  after  dinner  is  succeeded  by  an  unbound-
ed desire,  in  the  sexual  organs,  for  an  emission  of  semen  ;
after  the  emission  of  the  semen,  there  is  a pressive  tension
below  the  ribs,  without  any  symptom  of  flatulence. — Great
desire  for  an  embrace , the  penis  being  relaxed.  In  the
evening,  when  he  was  desirous  of  enjoying  an  embrace,
he  exerted  himself  in  vain  to  have  an  erection ; he  was


16


AGARiCUS  MUSCARITJS.


therefore  obliged  to  desist;  in  the  ensuing  night  he  had
several  copious  involuntary  effusions  of  semen.  In  spite
of  strong  excitement,  there  is  no  pleasurable  sensation  in
an  embrace.  During  an  embrace,  a copious  effusion  of
semen,  which  is  followed  by  a very  long  sleep.  Tardy
effusion  of  semen  during  an  embrace. — Insufficient  effu-
sion of  semen  during  an  embrace,  which  is  succeeded  by
weariness  of  the  body.  After  every  embrace  there  is
great  weariness,  lasting  several  days.  Every  embrace  is
followed  by  copious  night-sweats,  attended  with  a general
lassitude  of  the  body,  which  lasts  for  several  days.  After
an  embrace  he  feels  very  much  exhausted  ; there  is  a
burning  itching  upon  the  skin,  and  copious  night-sweats,
for  two  nights,  the  sweat  appearing  first  upon  the  upper
part  of  the  chest  and  the  shoulders,  and  then  upon  the
abdomen  and  the  arms.  Itching  and  titillation  of  the  fe-
male organs  of  generation. — The  menses  flow  more  abun-
dantly.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Sneezing,  without  coryza.  Frequent
sneezing , without  coryza,  (after  twelve,  twenty-two  hours.)
Frequent  sneezing,  which  sometimes  comes  on  twice  in
succession,  (on  the  first  day.)  Frequent  sneezing,  imme-
diately after  having  taken  the  medicine.  Several  violent
sneezings  early  in  bed. — Dryness  of  the  nose.  Dryness
of  the  nose,  with  a sensation  of  cold  in  the  head.  Con-
tinual dryness  of  the  nose  ; only  once  or  twice,  during  the
day,  two  or  three  drops  of  water  flow  out.  Clear  water
frequently  drops  out  of  the  nose:  without  there  being  any
cold  in  the  head.  On  stooping,  clear  water  drops  out  of
the  nose.  Taking  a little  snuff  is  at  once  followed  by  an
abundant  collection  of  viscid  mucus  in  the  nose.  Upon
blowing  the  nose,  there  is  a copious  discharge  of  thick
mucus,  (after  five  days.)  Small  quantity  of  dry  white
mucus  in  the  nose  ; frequently  attended  with  a sense  as  of
much  mucus  being  in  it.  Cold  in  the  head,  in  the  after-
noon. Sudden  cold  in  the  head,  attended  with  sneezing. —
Cold  in  the  head,  the  nose  feeling  obstructed,  especially
when  stooping,  (on  the  seventh  day.)  Dry  cold  in  the
head.  Fluent  coryza.

Throat,  Respiratory  Organs. — -Roughness  and  rawT-
ness  of  the  throat. — Upon  slightly  clearing  the  throat,
small  balls  of  phlegm  become  detached.  Throws  up


BUG-AGARIC.


17


small  jlocculi , or  solid  balls  of  phlegm , almost  icithout
any  cough.  Irritation,  which  excites  coughing.  Fre-
quently returning  sensation  of  tickling  in  the  larynx,  which
induces  short  and  frequently  repeated  coughing.  Frequent
coughing  after  dinner,  without  throwing  up. — When  sit-
ting, there  is  a dry  cough,  after  dinner,  which  disturbs
the  nap.  Breath  is  very  short.  Very  short  breath  and
asthma,  even  when  walking  slowly.  When  walking,  she
is  obliged  to  stand  still  several  times,  in  order  to  be  able
to  take  breath.  Difficult  breathing,  (after  eight  days.) —
Aggravated  breathing,  as  if  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  were
filled  with  blood,  (after  four  hours.)

Chest. — Oppression  at  the  chest.  Violent  oppression
at  the  chest . She  feels  so  oppressed  at  the  chest,  that
she  is  unable  to  take  a slow  and  deep  inspiration,  and  has
to  give  it  up  again  as  soon  as  she  tries.  Total  constric-
tion of  the  chest  consequent  upon  oppression  ; she  is
obliged  to  take  frequent  and  deep  inspirations  ; this  makes
walking  difficult  for  her. — Oppression  at  the  chest  in  the
region  of  the  diaphragm,  attended  with  drawing  pain,
(after  half  an  hour.)  Oppression  at  the  chest,  attended
with  great  throbbing  of  the  • arteries  ; one  or  two  days.
Sense  of  oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  the
cavity  of  the  thorax  were  narrow'cd.  Oppressive  anxiety
in  the  chest.  Feeling  of  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the
chest,  especially  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as
if  the  contents  of  the  thorax  wTere  compressed  ; the  pain
is  most  violent  after  dinner.  Painful  pressure  at  the  mid-
dle portion  of  the  sternum,  aggravated  by  breathing,  (after
two  hours  and  a half.)  Tension  in  the  lower  part  of  the
chest,  during  motion  and  when  sitting  ; this  tension  takes
away  his  breath.  Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  lungs,
passing  off  soon.  Painful  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the
chest.  Stitches  in  the  chest,  below  the  nipples,  (after  four-
teen and  thirty  hours.) — Fine  stitch  in  he  left  side  of  the
chest,  where  the  ribs  terminate;  the  stitch  is  felt  when
sitting,  and  stooping  with  the  chest.  Stitches  in  the  left
side  of  the  chest,  where  the  ribs  terminate  ; during  an  in-
spiration. Pinching  pain  in  the  left  mamma,  descending
obliquely  as  far  as  the  navel.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in
the  chest ; it  increases  especially  upon  taking  a deep  in-


18


AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS.


spiration  ; in  the  evening,  (on  the  ninth  day.)  Burning
pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  chest,  (on  the  third  day.)  Fine
burning  and  prickling  at  different  places  of  the  chest,
especially  upon  the  sternum,  (after  one  hour.)  When
standing,  painful  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Pulsative  sore-
ness at  various  inconsiderable  places  of  the  chest.,  espe-
cially at  the  right  half  of  the  chest;  at  night  and  also
during  the  day,  (after  a fortnight.)  Itching  upon  the  chest,
which  terminates  in  burning.  Burning  itching  upon  the
chest,  (and  in  the  back.) — Violent  itching  of  the  nipples.
Burning  itching  of,  and  pimples  upon,  the  left  nipple.
Copious  sweat  upon  the  chest,  at  night.

Back. — Corrosive  itching  of  the  left  side  of  the  os  coc-
cigis.  Itching  of  the  left  tuberosity  of  the  ischium,  which
obliges  the  person  to  scratch  the  parts. — On  sitting  down,
those  parts  upon  which  he  sits  feel  bruised,  or  as  if  he  had
sat  upon  them  for  a long  while.  Violent  tearing  in  the
left  half  of  the  nates,  attended  wTith  a feeling  of  coldness  ;
the  tearing  is  very  violent  when  sitting,  less  violent  when
rising  and  walking,  (lasting  for  eight  days.)  Drawing
and  tearing  in  the  left  half  of  the  nates  ; the  pain  wakes
him  from  sleep  at  night.  Boil  on  the  right  half  of  the
nates.  Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  upon  rising
from  his  seat ; the  pain  prevents  the  body  from  being
righted,  and  the  thighs  from  being  moved. — Violent  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  sitting  or  lying  down  ; the
pain  is  relieved  by  motion,  (from  the  first  to  the  third
day.)  As  if  the  small  of  the  back  were  bruised,  espe-
cially when  standing.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  small
of  the  back,  on  the  left  side,  (from  the  sixth  to  the  eighth
day ) Violently  shooting  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
upon  raising  the  thigh  when  sitting.  Pain  in  the  back,  as
after  continual  stooping. — Upon  rising  from  his  seat  and
righting  his  body,  his  back  feels  stiff ; there  is  a violent
pain  in  the  left  loin,  which  prevents  the  body  being  right-
ed ; when  sitting,  he  feels  nothing,  and  is  able  to  turn  his
body  to  all  sides.  Spasmodic,  pressive  and  drawing  pain,
which  starts  from  the  back,  and  extends  to  the  middle  of
the  chest  and  into  the  oesophagus  ; in  the  afternoon,  (from
the  fifth  to  the  seventh  day.)  Pressive,  boring  pain  in
the  middle  of  the  back,  (on  the  second  day.)  Painful,


BUG-AGARIC.


19


spasmodic  jerks  in  the  left  side  of  the  back.  Tearing
pain,  now  extending  to  the  right,  now  to  the  left  side  of
the  lumbar  vertebrae  ; when  walking.' — Frequent  tearing
between  the  shoulders,  (on  the  fourth  day.)  Painful
stitches  between  the  shoulders,  (on  the  second  day.)  The
muscles  of  ilie  back  feel  bruised.  The  muscles  of  the
back  feel  bruised,  and  upon  bending  forwards,  seem  too
short ; this  symptom  occurs  early  in  the  morning  after  a
good  night’s  rest,  in  the  bed  as  well  as  afterwards,  when
the  person  is  sitting  ; two  days  in  succession.  Pain,  as
from  bruises,  in  the  lumbar  region,  especially  when  lying
down  and  sitting. — Pain,  as  from  bruises  and  sprains,  in
the  whole  of  the  back,  attended  with  a disposition  to
stretch  the  back,  (on  the  third  and  fourth  day.)  The
muscles  of  the  back  feel  weak ; he  finds  it  difficult  to  sit
straight  or  to  lean  against  something.  When  stooping,
the  spinal  column  experiences  pain,  as  though  it  were  too
weak  to  support  the  weight  of  the  body.  Paralytic  pain,
as  from  weakness,  in  the  back  part  of  the  loins  ; the  pain
is  aggravated  by  walking  and  standing,  (after  twelve  hours.)
Feeling  of  paralysis  near  the  lumbar  vertebras,  close  above
the  border  of  the  os  ilium  ; this  makes  it  difficult  for  him,
after  he  has  risen  from  his  seat,  to  step  forward. — Short
twitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  lumbar  region,  in  the
evening,  (on  the  ninth  day.)  Itching,  with  'titillation,  of
the  back.  Burning  itching  of  the  back.

Neck. — Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  muscles  of  the
neck  ; or,  pain,  as  from  having  bent  the  body  backwards
in  lying  down,  (after  thirty-two  hours.)  The  muscles  of
the  posterior  cervical  region  feel  bruised,  and,  upon  bend-
ing the  body  forwards,  they  feel,  as  it  were,  too  short ; this
symptom  occurs  early  when  in  bed,  and  also  afterwards
when  the  person  is  sitting. — Stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the
neck,  (after  twTo  hours.)  Suddenly  a violent  pressure
between  the  neck  and  the  shoulders.

Superior  Extremities. — Drawdng  rheumatic  pains  in
the  shoulder-joint,  attended  with  weakness  of  the  whole
arm,  (on  the  fifteenth  day.)  The  arms  feel  bruised.
Want  of  strength  in  the  arms.  Painful  weariness  of  the
arms.  On  account  of  the  pain,  he  is  obliged  to  change
frequently  the  position  of  his  arms.  Itching  of  the  arms.


20


AGAR1CUS  MUSC ARIUS.


Pimples  upon  the  arms , with  a burning  itching , of  the
size  of  a grain  of  flaxseed.  The  upper  arms  are  painful
to  the  touch. — Tearing  pain  in  the  left  upper  arm.  Fine
stinging  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  of  the  humerus  in  the
right  arm.  Burning  upon  the  upper  arm,  above  the  left
elbow.  The  upper  arm  feels  paralyzed,  in  consequence
of  much  writing.  Itching,  with  titillation,  of  the  point
of  the  left  elbow  ; this  induces  scratching,  (after  three
hours.) — Pain  in  the  fore  arms,  which  is  dull,  but  hurts  a
good  deal.  Acute  rheumatic  pains  in  the  whole  of  the  left
lore  arm,  extending  as  far  as  the  thumb  ; this  symptom
occurs  in  the  afternoon,  during  rest.  Tearing  in  the  right
fore  arm.  Tearing  in  the  left  fore  arm,  in  the  olecranon,
during  rest.  Twitches  upon  the  upper  surface  of  the  right
fore  arm,  extending  to  the  ball  of  the  thumb. — Burning
pain  upon  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  lower  arm,  just
above  the  wrist-joint,  as  if  he  had  burnt  himself.  Burning
itching  upon  the  right  fore-arm,  which  makes  it  necessary
to  scratch  the  parts  ; the  scratching  is  succeeded  by  white
eruptions  of  the  size  of  a grain  of  flaxseed  ; at  the  same
time  the  skin  scales  off,  the  scales  having  the  shape  of
bran.  Dull  pain  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  left
middle  Anger.  Drawing  pains  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of
the  left  hand.  Tearing  in  the  carpus  of  the  left  hand. —
The  left  hand  goes  to  sleep,  this  symptom  extending  as
far  as  the  middle  of  the  fore-arm  ; at  night,  (the  fifth  day.)
Tremor  of  the  hands . Tremor  of  the  hands,  as  is  wit-
nessed in  old  people  ; the  symptom  occurs  when  he  moves
the  hands  or  holds  something  with  them,  (after  one  hour
and  a half.)  Itching,  with  titillation,  of  the  right  carpus  ;
the  person  is  obliged  to  scratch  the  parts,  (after  a quarter
of  an  hour.)  Itching  and  titillation  in  the  palm  of  the
right  hand,  which  has  to  be  scratched,  after  seven  hours. — -
Itching , redness  and  burning  of  the  hands , as  occurs  when
the  parts  are  frozen.  Inflamed  pimples,  of  the  size  of  a
grain  of  flaxseed , upon  the  dorsum  of  the  left  hand.
Drawing  in  the  index-finger  of  the  right  hand.  Tearing
pain  between  the  thumb  and  the  index-finger  of  the  right
hand.  Violent  tearing  in  the  right  middle  finger,  (after
J twenty-three  hours.  Tearing  in  the  fingers  of  the  left
hand,  where  the  phalanges  join  the  metacarpal  bones  ;


BUG-AGARIC.


21


motion  has  no  modifying  influence  over  this  symptom,
(after  one  hour.)  Tearing  twitches  in  the  two  last  fingers
of  the  right  hand.  Cramp  in  the  ball  of  the  right  thumb,
when  standing  and  walking  ; it  passes  off  when  the  person
is  sitting,  (after  six  hours.)  Burning  and  prickling  in  the
index-finger  of  the  right  hand,  as  if  a paronychia  would
form  ; in  a few  days  this  symptom  is  followed  by  frequent
fits  of  numbness  of  the  finger,  and  great,  long-continued
sensitiveness  of  the  finger  to  cold. — Itching  and  titillation
of  the  ball  of  the  right  thumb,  which  obliges  the  person
to  scratch  the  parts,  (after  eight  hours.)  Itching,  with
titillation,  of  the  inner  border  of  the  right  index  finger,  as
if  the  parts  had  been  frozen,  (after  five  hours.)  Itching ,
redness  and  burning  of  the  fingers , as  when  parts  are
frozen .

Inferior  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  hip,  for  twenty-
four  hours  ; it  is  not  felt  when  sitting,  but  is  very  acute
when  walking.  In  the  legs , the  pains  {of  almost  any  kind)
occur  when  the  person  is  standing  or  sittings  more  rarely
ichen  walking ; the  pains  diminish  and  disappear  by  mo-
tion. Tearing  in  the  legs  ; it  continues  when  the  person
is  sitting,  and  is  relieved  by  motion.  Great  lassitude  of
the  legs  ; he  knows  not  where  to  lay  them.  Weakness
of  the  legs , (feet)  ; being  too  powerless  to  stand  upon
them,  the  body  is  constantly  balancing  to  and  fro.  His
legs  feel  so  tired  and  heavy,  that  he  can  scarcely  lift  them.
Great  weight  in  the  legs.  Weight  in  the  legs  ; they  feel
weary,  and  as  if  they  had  been  knocked  from  under  the
person.  The  legs  go  to  sleep  as  soon  as  he  crosses  them.
On  crossing  the  thighs , he  feels  a violent  pain  in  them.
Pressive  pain,  as  from  a plug,  on  the  external  surface  of
the  thigh,  above  the  knee.  Painful  pressure  in  the  left
thigh. — Drawing  rheumatic  pain  in  the  external  surface  of
both  thighs,  when  walking,  and  after  having  been  sitting.
Continual  paralytic  drawing  in  the  left  thigh  down  to  the
knee,  both  in  rest  and  motion  ; in  the  afternoon.  Drawing
and  tearing  in  the  right  thigh,  on  laying  it  across  the  left ;
the  pain  disappears  again  on  extending  the  limb,  (after  one
hour.)  Tearing  at  the  head  of  the  left  femur,  which  dis
turbs  his  rest.  Tearing  close  below  the  lesser  condyle  of
the  femur. — Tearing  in  the  thigh,  when  walking  or  sitting.


22


AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS.


Tearing,  attended  with  a sense  of  coldness,  on  the  poste-
rior side  of  the  left  thigh,  Tearing,  which  causes  a feel-
ing of  numbness  in  the  whole  thigh,  from  the  left  nip-joint
down  to  the  knee.  Painful  weariness  of  the  thighs.  The
thighs  are  painful,  as  after  great  journeys  on  foot.  Painful
sense  of  paralysis  in  the  left  thigh.  Paralytic  pain  in  the
right  thigh,  especially  when  walking  ; the  thigh  feels  as
if  it  were  too  heavy,  and  supported  a load,  (after  eight
hours.)  Corrosive  itching  on  the  anterior  side  of  the  left
thigh.  Biting  pimple  on  the  thigh,  above  the  left  knee ;
scratching  excites  a violent  sensation  of  burning  in  it.
The  knee-joints  are  painful  early  in  the  morning,  on  get-
ting out  of  bed,  when  sitting. — The  pain  in  the  knees  in-
creases when  sitting  ; it  decreases  and  disappears  by
walking.  Drawing  in  the  left  knee.  Simultaneous  draw-
ing in  both  knee-joints.  Tearing  in  the  right  knee-joint,
when  standing  or  sitting.  Continual  boring  and  tearing  in
the  right  knee,  when  sitting. — Twitches  on  the  internal
side  of  the  right  knee.  Pricking  as  with  pins,  above  the
bent  of  the  left  knee,  (after  thirty-six  hours.)  Sudden
bending  of  the  left  knee,  when  walking  ; in  the  afternoon.
Pain  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  left  knee,  when  walking.
Painful  sense  of  paralysis  in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee. —
When  standing,  the  pain  increases  in  the  legs  ; he  is  soon
obliged  to  walk,  or  to  sit  down  ; the  pain  comes  on  already
after  he  has  been  standing  a minute.  The  pain  in  the
tibiae  increases  and  continues  when  sitting  ; it  disappears
in  walking.  Pressure  as  from  a contusion,  on  the  internal
side  of  the  gastrocnemii,  when  sitting ; the  pain  is  some-
what lessened  by  standing,  and  by  touching  the  parts  ;
but  it  becomes  violent  again  when  the  person  sits  down,
(after  two  hours.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  leg,  extending
from  the  right  knee  as  far  as  the  toes  ; when  sitting.
Painful  drawing  on  the  posterior  side  of  the  left  leg,  ex-
tending down  along  the  calf ; it  disappears  in  walking  ; in
the  afternoon. — Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  right  tibia.
Tearing  in  the  leg  down  to  the  lower  extremity  of  the
tibia.  Tearing  in  the  left  tibia.  Tearing  on  the  external
surface  of  the  right  calf,  when  sitting,  (the  first  day.)
Violent  stitch  in  the  external  side  of  the  calf,  (after  two
hours.) — Fine  pricking  on  the  internal  side  of  the  right


BUG-AGARIC.


23


leg  and  towards  the  tibia.  Pain  in  the  legs,  as  if  they
were  bruised.  Pain  in  the  legs,  as  from  an  exhaus-
tion such  as  is  consequent  upon  typhus  fevers.  Weight
in  the  calves.  Burning,  attended  with  pressure,  at  the
upper  part  of  the  tibia,  below  the  knee. — Sensation  at  the
top  of  the  tibia  and  the  head  of  the  fibula,  as  if  a warm
hand  were  lying  upon  the  parts.  Burning  itching  of  the
legs,  on  getting  undressed  in  the  evening  ; this  itching  is
attended  with  a desire  to  scratch  ; the  scratching  produces
a burning  sensation,  and  makes  the  skin  dry,  which  easily
breaks  ; after  five  weeks  the  skin  peels  off.  Burning  itch-
ing of  the  left  leg,  which  excites  a desire  to  scratch  ; the
scratching  is  followed  by  white  eruptions  of  the  size  of  a
grain  of  flaxseed,  which  peel  off  in  the  shape  of  bran.
Tearing  pressure  upon  the  internal  malleolus  of  the  left
foot,  when  sitting,  (after  thirty-five  hours.)  Tearing  in
the  hollow  of  the  right  foot,  when  sitting. — Tearing  in  the
soles  of  the  feet,  when  walking.  Painful  stitches  in  the
external  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,  when  sitting,  (after  five
hours.)  Fine  stitches  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot.
Stitches  in  the  lower  surface  of  the  heel,  when  sitting.
Violent  stitches  in  the  middle  portion  of  the  left  foot,  be-
ginning at  the  malleoli ; when  at  rest. — Stitches  in  the
lower  surface  of  the  first  and  second  bone  of  the  metatar-
sus. Cramp  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  at  night.  Pain  in  the
heels,  as  from  a bruise,  when  standing.  Heaviness  and
want  of  tonicity  in  the  feet.  Corrosive  itching  on  the
dorsum  of  the  right  foot. — Corrosive  itching  of  the  internal
malleolus  of  the  left  foot.  Drawing  in  the  toes  of  the  left
foot.  Drawing  and  tearing  upon  the  lower  surface  of  the
big  toe  of  the  right  foot,  when  sitting.  Frequent  tearing
in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot,  (the  second  day-)
Twitches  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot,  (the  first
day.) — Painful  twitches  in  the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot.
Stitches  in  the  toes,  when  at  rest.  Sharp  stitches  in  the
toes  of  the  left  foot,  when  standing,  (after  a quarter  of  an
hour.)  Stitches  at  the  spot  where  formerly  a corn  had
been.  Painful  dull  stitches  in  the  three  last  toes  of  the
right  foot,  (after  twenty  hours.)  Grinding  pain  in  the  toes
of  the  right  foot.  Soreness  at  the  little  toe  of  the  right
foot,  as  from  the  pinching  of  tight  shoes,  (after  six  hours.)


24


AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS-


Soreness  in  the  corn  of  the  second  toe  of  the  left  foot,  as
from  tight  shoes,  (after  three  hours.)  Itching  and  titilla-
lion  of  the  toes,  as  if  the  parts  had  been  frozen  ; this  ex-
cites a desire  to  scratch,  (after  eleven  hours.)  Itching ,
burning , and  redness  of  the  toes , as  if  the  parts  had  been
frozen. — Itching  all  over  the  skin*

Common  Ailments. — Spreading  Herpes.  All  the  parts
of  the  body  are  sensitive  to  pain  ; on  applying  even  feeble
pressure  to  a spot,  it  pains  still  a long  while  after.  Cramp-
like pain  in  all  the  muscles,  erratic,  now  in  the  upper,  now
in  the  lower  extremities,  when  sitting.  Tearing  of  differ-
ent long  bones,  especially  at  their  extremities. — Pricking
as  from  pins,  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  (after  half  an
hour.)  Fine  pricking  and  burning  in  different  parts  of  the
body,  (after  one  hour.)  Drawing  pain,  now  in  the  right
upper  arm,  now  in  the  left  knee-joint.  The  pains  are  felt
simultaneously  in  several  parts  of  the  body,  especially  on
both  sides  above  the  small  of  the  back.  Pains  of  various
kinds,  when  sitting,  simultaneously  in  all  the  parts  of  the
body. — When  sitting,  there  is  a boring  pain  in  the  whole
head,  in  the  thighs,  tibiae,  and  the  bones  of  the  tarsus,  at-
tended with  somnolence,  and  relaxation  of  the  whole  body.
In  walking  slowly,  he  feels  the  most  comfortably.

Spasms,  Paralysis,  Weakness,  Fainting  Fits. — ■
Convulsions.  Several  convulsions  following  each  other
in  quick  succession,  first  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  chest,
then  in  the  epigastrium,  afterwards  in  the  hypogastrium,
especially  on  the  right  side,  attended  with  a sensation  as  if
the  whole  body  were  shaken  through  ; in  the  evening,
when  standing.  Commotion  of  the  nervous  system. — -
Convulsions.  Epilepsy.  In  a patient,  affected  with  epi-
lepsy, the  fits  come  on  at  shorter  intervals.  In  two  pa-
tients, affected  with  epilepsy,  the  fits  become  more  violent,
reappear  at  shorter  intervals,  but  afterwards  occur  more
rarely,  and  are  very  slight.  Uncomfortable  feeling  of
sickness  in  the  whole  body. — Weakness  and  sensitiveness
to  pain  in  all  the  limbs,  attended  with  pain  in  the  heels
when  standing.  Loss  of  strength  in  all  the  parts  of  the
body.  Excessive  loss  of  strength.  Great  lassitude  and
staggering  gait,  (shortly.)  Sense  of  tremor  in  the  whole
body,  (after  one  hour.)  Tremor.  Anxiety,  attended  with


BUG-AGARIC.


25


tremor  and  lassitude.  Lassitude,  (after  twelve,  sixteen
hours.)  Lassitude  and  heaviness  of  all  the  limbs.  Hea-
viness in  the  whole  body,  especially  the  calves.  Painful
lassitude  in  the  arms  and  legs.  After  a short  walk,  his
arms  and  legs  feel  bruised — the  day  after.  1 he  long  bones
of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  and  all  the  joints,  feel
bruised  after  motion,  and  the  muscles  feel  painful  on  being
touched.  Great  fatigue,  after  short  but  quick  walking.
On  ascending  a little  hill,  copious  sweat  breaks  out ; he
feels  like  fainting.  When  in  his  bed,  he  feels  so  tired  that
he  does  not  know  what  position  to  take.  Weariness,  early
in  the  morning.

Yawning,  Sleep, Dreams. — Frequent  yawning.  Yawn-
ing ; extension  and  stretching  of  the  limbs,  (after  one
hour ) Frequent  yawning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,
(after  seven  hours  and  a half.)  Frequently  repeated
yawning  ; it  is  so  violent  that  it  makes  him  giddy  ; early
in  the  morning,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (im-
mediately.) Frequent  yawning,  with  somnolence  ; he
can  hardly  help  falling  asleep  ; in  the  forenoon.  Sleepy
and  tired,  the  whole  day.  Irresistible  sleepiness,  which
makes  it  necessary  that  the  person  should  lie  down.
Sleepiness,  with  heaviness  of  the  head,  (immediately.)
Sleepiness,  early  in  the  morning,  one  hour  after  rising.
In  the  forenoon,  when  reading,  he  was  overwhelmed  with
sleep.  Irresistible  somnolence  after  dinner.  In  spite  of
great  somnolence,  he  cannot  fall  asleep  ; in  the  forenoon.
Although  he  felt  extremely  drowsy  in  day-time,  yet  he
was  prevented  from  falling  asleep  by  an  abundance  of
ideas  that  thronged  his  mind.  After  dinner , sleep  op-
pressed his  eyes  ; nevertheless , he  was  unable  to  fall  asleep
on  account  of  pain  and  uneasiness  in  his  legs.  Already,
at  eight  o’clock  in  the  evening,  he  felt  so  sleepy  that  he
was  obliged  to  go  to  bed  ; for  fear  lest  some  one  should
disturb  him,  he  only  fell  asleep  an  hour  afterwards,  after
which  he  slept  until  near  morning.  Being  very  sleepy  in
the  evening,  he  went  to  bed  ; but  he  felt  so  uncomfortable
all  over  the  body,  and  his  legs  felt  so  tired,  that  he  was
unable  to  fall  asleep  ; this  symptom  continued  after  he  had
waked  up  from  a dream.  After  a sound  sleep,  he  did  not
feel  refreshed  in  the  morning,  and  rose  from  bed  without

2


26


AGAR1CUS  MUSCARIU3.


desiring  so  to  do.  He  has  to  make  an  effort  to  rise.—
After  having  enjoyed  a siesta  of  two  hours,  he  was  not
able  to  become  wide  awake.  Uneasy  sleep,  (1  — 3 n.)
Uneasy  sleep,  several  times  interrupted  by  waking  up.
Frequent  waking  up,  at  night,  (fifth  day.)  He  frequently
wakes  up  in  the  night,  is  wide  awake,  but  falls  asleep
again  a little  while  alter,  frequent  waking  up  in  the  night,
as  though  he  had  slept  enough.  Frequent  waking  up  in
the  night,  attended  with  anxiety.  Waking  up  in  the  night,
with  a violent  desire  to  urinate  ; much  urine  being  then
emitted,  (after  nineteen  hours.)  Shortly  after  having  fallen
asleep,  she  is  roused  from  sleep  by  a spasmodic  'cough,
lasting  for  about  ten  minutes  ; attended  with  a painful
tickling  in  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx,  and  extending
down  the  throat.  In  the  night  he  is  roused  from  sleep
by  a sense  of  coldness  in  the  whole  of  the  left  leg. —
Loose  sleep,  with  many  dreams,  and  constantly  changing
images.  Sleep  interrupted  by  anxious  dreams.  Internal
uneasiness  during  a bad  dream,  the  nature  of  which  he  is
not  able  to  recollect,  and  during  which  the  body  remained
quiet ; upon  waking  up,  all  uneasiness  had  gone.  Fre-
quent waking  up  on  account  of  bad  dreams.  Disagreeable
dreams  often  wake  him  up  in  the  night.  Vivid  dreams,
partly  agreeable,  partly  disagreeable.

Fever,  Chills,  Sweat. — Chills,  all  night.  Chills  all
over  the  body,  (after  ten  minutes.)  A chill,  pervading  the
body  from  top  to  toe.  Aery  sensitive  to  cool  air. — The
slightest  contact  with  cool  air  causes  goose-skin.  Great
inclination  to  chilliness.  He  is  chilled  as  soon  as  he  goes
out  into  the  open  air,  or  raises  the  cover  of  the  bed  in  the
night.  Great  internal  chilliness.  Continual  chilliness  ;
he  cannot  get  warm  in  the  room,  especially  early  in  the
morning.  A slight  thrill  of  cold  down  the  left  leg,  as  far
as  the  foot.  Chill  in  the  back,  as  if  cold  water  were  run-
ning down  ; this  chill  occurs  when  he  leans  with  his  back
against  a chair*  Very  chilly  in  the  evening.  Shaking
chills  for  ten  minutes ; on  lying  down  in  the  evening.
Long-continued  chill  in  the  evening,  which  increases  to
shaking.  Feverish  chills  every  evening,  without  thirst,
and  without  subsequent  heat.  Chills  with  shaking,  upon
lifting  the  cover  of  the  bed.  Chills  with  yawning.  Chills  j


ALUMINA. ARGILLA.


27


face,  hands  and  feet,  however,  being  warm.  Violent
chills,  with  shaking  of  the  whole  body,  and  tremor  of  the
hands  in  writing  ; the  hands  are  cold,  the  face  naturally
warm,  without  any  thirst  or  subsequent  heat.  Frequent
thrills  of  warmth  in  the  face  and  on  the  whole  surface  of
the  upper  part  of  the  body  ; every  thrill  lasting  from  five
to  ten  minutes.  Increase  of  animal  heat,  at  night.  Vio-
lent attack  of  heat,  in  the  evening ; his  cheeks  glow,  al-
though his  hands  are  cold  ; these  symptoms  are  attended
with  long-continued  thirst,  without  any  subsequent  sweat,
(after  twelve  hours.)  Heat  in  the  night  ; she  feels  chilly
on  turning  herself  or  raising  the  cover  of  her  bed.  Con-
tinual heat  during  the  night;  afterwards,  sweat.  Repeat-
ed attacks  of  heat,  combined  with  sweat,  during  a whole
afternoon,  attended  with  dull  headache  without  thirst ; in
the  evening,  on  putting  on  his  hat,  heat  and  sweat  increase,
respiration  is  hurried,  with  great  depression  of  strength.
Sweat  consequent  upon  moderate  bodily  efforts.  Sweat
in  walking.  Night-sweats  during  an  uneasy  sleep.  Small,
quick  pulse,  eighty  beats,  early  in  the  morning.  The
pulse  becomes  slower , (after  two  hours.)  The  pulse,
which  is  generally  strong  and  full,  becomes  small,  weak,
and  scarcely  perceptible.  Weak , unequal,  intermittent
pulse.  Early  in  the  morning  the  pulse  is  less  intermittent.
After  drinking  coffee,  the  pulse  became  less  intermittent,
and  rose  from  fifty  to  sixty  beats.  Undulating,  weak,  slow
pulse.


ALUMINA,  (argilla.)

To  procure  pure  alumina,  which  is  a somewhat  difficult
i business,  the  following  process  may  be  resorted  to.  Take
: perfectly  dry  muriate  of  lime,  heat  it  in  a porcelain  cup,
i pulverize  the  hot  substance,  and  dissolve  it  in  a propor-
tionate quantity  of  alcohol.  Then  take  half  an  ounce  of
[ white  alum  of  Solfatara,  dissolve  it  in  five  parts  of  distilled
J:  water,  and  filter  it  besides,  in  order  to  remove  every  par-
[: tide  of  earth.  From  this  solution  precipitate  the  sulphuric
i; acid  in  the  form  of  plaster,  by  means  of  the  above  named


28


ALUMINA.


solution  of  the  muriate  of  lime,  and  continne  this  process
of  precipitation  until  the  alcohol  solution  of  the  muriate
ceases  to  make  the  alum  solution  turbid.  The  superin-
cumbent clear  liquid  contains  the  muriate  of  alumina,  from
which  the  earthy  constituents  should  be  carefully  precipi-
tated by  means  of  a solution  of  the  salt  of  ammonia  in
spirits  of  wine  ; this  precipitate  should  then  be  carefully
washed,  and,  whatever  remains  of  the  ammonium  should
be  driven  off  by  heating  the  precipitate.  When  this  pow-
der, which  is  the  pure  alumina,  is  yet  warm,  it  may  be
enclosed  in  a well  corked  bottle,  and  kept  for  further  use.
Mix  one  grain  of  this  substance  with  three  hundred  grains
of  sugar  ot  milk,  by  triturating  the  compound  in  the  known
fashion,  and  from  this  trituration  prepare  the  solutions  in
the  manner  which  has  been  taught  in  the  first  volume.
Alumina  is  an  important  antipsoric.

In  the  following  affections,  provided  the  remedy  was
otherwise  homoeopathically  indicated,  alumina  has  been
found  especially  useful.*

Moroseness  ; fearfulness ; apprehensiveness  ; (easily
starting  up  with  fright ;)  reluctance  to  labour ; absence  of
the  power  of  recollection  ; difficulty  of  thinking  ; vertigo;
headache,  as  if  the  hair  were  pulled  out,  attended  with
nausea;  oppression  at  the  forehead,  and  rush  of  blood  to
the  eyes  and  nose,  with  bleeding  from  the  nose  ; itching
of  the  forehead ; heaviness  of  the  face  ; (Hg. ;)  bloated
places  in  the  face,  like  bulbous  excrescences  ; (Hg.  ;)
sense  of  coldness  in  the  eyes,  when  walking  in  the  open
air;  in  the  evening,  pressure  in  the  canthus  of  the  eye
as  from  a grain  of  sand  ; the  eyes  are  closed  with  pus;


* Note  : The  affections  which  I have  indicated  in  the  preface  to
every  remedy,  are  not  to  he  considered  as  names  of  diseases,  but
merely  as  isolated  symptoms,  which  have  either  decreased  or  disap-
peared by  using  the  remedy  under  whose  head  they  are  mentioned.
These  affections  have  not  always  been  indicated  with  the  necessary
correctness.  They  should  never  be  relied  upon  as  indicating  the
affections  which  may  be  cured  by  this  special  remedy ; they  are
merely  mentioned  in  order  to  inform  the  reader  that  experience,  ob-
tained at  the  bed-side  of  the  patient,  has  proved  certain  remedies,
which  had  been  chosen  agreeably  to  their  pathogenetic  symptoms,
curative  in  the  diseases  for  which  they  had  been  administered.


ARGILLA.


29


running  of  the  eyes;  buzzing  before  the  ear;  redness  of
the  nose  ; tearing  and  lancinating  pain  in  the  malar  bone  ;
dryness  in  the  mouth  ; eructations  ; inclination  to  eructa-
tions for  years  ; sourish  risings  ; irregular  appetite,  which
is  sometimes  strong,  sometimes  wanting  \ frequent  nausea;
pain  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  in  the  hypochondria,
when  stooping  ; colic  early  in  the  morning  ; want  of  action
of  the  rectum  ; itching  of  the  anus  ; frequent  urinating  in
the  night ; difficult  stools,  attended  with  discharge  of  the
prostatic  fluid  ; excessive  sexual  desire  ; too  scanty
menses  ; painful  menstruation  ; leucorrhcea  ; disposition
to  catch  cold,  having  lasted  for  years  ; coryza  and  cough  ;
rawness  in  the  throat  ; catarrh  of  the  neck  and  chest ; dif-
ficulty of  breathing ; asthma ; cough ; itching  in  the
mammas  ; pain  at  the  thyroid  cartilage  on  touching  it ;
palpitation  of  the  heart ; shocks  of  the  heart ; pain  in  the
small  of  the  hack , during  rest ; paralytic  heaviness  in  the
arm  ; pain  in  the  arms  on  letting  them  hang  down,  or
stretching  them  in  the  bed  ; stitches  in  the  wrist  during
labour  ; chapping,  sense  of  excoriation  of  the  hands  ; pa-
ronychia ; at  night,  numbness,  stiffness,  and  insensibility  of
the  legs  ; pain,  as  from  fatigue,  in  the  articulations  of  the
foot,  when  sitting  ; cold  feet ; sense  as  of  burning  under  the
toes  ; tremor  and  twitches  of  the  limbs  ; frequent  exten-
sion of  the  limbs  when  sitting ; disagreeable  want  of  ani-
mal heat ; bad  consequences  of  chagrin  ; falling  asleep
late  ; sleep  too  loose  ; great  number  of  dreams  during
sleep  ; unrefreshing  sleep,  which  is  more  like  stupor ;
chills  in  the  evening;  fever  and  ague,  beginning  with  chills,
immediately  after  having  eaten  the  warm  soup.

According  to  Bute,  bryonia  is  an  excellent  antidote
against  the  fevers  of  alumina  ; others  consider  chamomile
and  ipecacuanha  antidotes.  (No.)

My  co-observers  are:  Dr.  Hartlaub,  sen.;  (Ng.*  ;)


* Note:  With  these  two  letters,  Doctors  Hartlaub  and  Trinks
designate  a man  who  has  furnished  the  greatest  number  of  symp-
toms for  their  Annals.  His  symptoms  are  often  indicated  in  a
careless,  diffuse,  and  vague  manner.  I have  availed  myself  of  those
portions  of  his  symptoms  which  appeared  to  me  really  useful  ;
taking  it  for  granted,  that  he  has  been  an  honest  and  cautious  ob«


30


ALUMINA.


Dr.  Schreter,  Dr.  Trinks,  Dr.  H.  G.  Bute,  of  Philadel-
phia.

Doctors  Noack  and  Trinks  have  comprised  those  affec-
tions under  the  following  technical  names  : Hysteric  irri-
tability of  the  nerves. — Hydrargyrosis  ? — Moist,  gnawing
tetters;  Herpes;  Lupus  vorax ; Prurigo  formic  ans  ; Pi-
tyriasis of  the  ancients. — Panaritia  ; Rhagades  ; frozen
limbs. — Weakness  of  memory  and  understanding. — Con-
gestive, or  nervous,  hysteric  headache,  with  vomiting. —
Blepharophthalmitis  glandulosa  seu  vetularum  ; Ptosis  ?
Strabismus?  ? — Otorrhoea. — Ozcena. — Toothache  of  preg-
nant women ; swellings  and  ulcerations  of  the  gums. —
Acute  angina. — Pains  of  the  liver. — Colica  plumbce. —
Habitual  costiveness  of  children  that  are  brought  up  with
artificial  nourishment ; costiveness  of  sucking  babies  and
pregnant  women. — Cholera  infantum. — Haemorrhoidal  af-
fections.— Fluor  albus. — Grippe. — Chronic  coryza  and
catarrh. — Incubus  ? — Podagra.

Analogous  remedies:  1.  Cham.,  Ign.,  Ipec.,  Lach.,
Lobeh,  Phosp.,  Plumb.  2.  Ars.,  Bar.,  Bell.,  Calc.  Led.
Magn.,  Merc.,  Nux  vom.,  Rhus.,  Silic.,  Sulph.

After  Alumina , Bryonia  is  often  useful.  Alumina  may
often  be  advantageously  exhibited  after  Bryonia,  Lachesis,
and  Sulphur.  It  is  often  useful  to  employ  these  remedies
in  alternation.

Duration  of  effects  : of  large  doses  in  healthy  persons,
eight,  twelve,  and  fourteen  days  ; of  small  doses  in  dis-
ease, twelve  or  twenty-four  hours.


server.  However,  it  can  scarcely  be  expected  that  the  friends  of
the  homoeopathic  system  should  have  implicit  faith  in  the  state-
ments of  an  unknown  person,  concerning  experiments  which  are
the  essential  basis  of  our  system,  and  which  require  great  caution,
acuteness  of  sense,  fine  perceptive  powers,  severe  discrimination
in  regard  to  one’s  own  sensations  and  observations,  and  a correct
choice  of  expressions.


JLRGILLA.


31


ALUMINA.

Moral  Symptoms. — -His  spirits  are  depressed  ; he
wishes  to  be  left  alone,  in  the  forenoon,  (the  eighth  day.)
(He  feels  excessively  contented.)  His  mood  changes
frequently.  He  feels  low-spirited  on  account  of  his  dis-
ease.—He  imagines  not  to  be  able  to  recover  his  health.
The  person  imagines  nothing  but  disagreeable,  sad  ima-
ges, (first  day.)  * She  is  constant^  assailed  by  sad
thoughts,  which  oblige  her  to  weep  ; at  the  same  time  she
feels  anxious  and  uneasy,  as  if  something  evil  were  to
happen  to  her ; every  thing  that  she  looks  at,  gives  her
uneasiness,  (eleventh  day.)  Involuntary  sighing  and  groan-
ing, such  as  takes  place  in  great  pain  ; he  is  not  conscious
of  it.  The  person  is  depressed  with  grief , early  in  the
mornings  on  waking  up  ; consciousness  is  not  clear. —
She  takes  every  thing  in  the  worst  sense,  and  weeps  and
howls  for  hours,  (2d  day.)  The  hoy  weeps  constantly ,
without  wishing  it,  for  half  an  hour.  * Anguish,  with  much
uneasiness,  the  whole  day,  (2d  day.)  Serious , anxious
mood.  Anxious,  sullen,  peevish  mood.  Oppressive  anx-
iety, attended  with  emptiness  and  numbness  of  the  head,
and  pressure  in  the  forehead,  (after  twelve  hours.)  Fear-
fulness, with  external  heat  and  uneasiness , as  if  she  had
done  something  had.  Anxiety  and  fearfulness,  as  if  he
had  committed  a crime,  (fifth  day.)  * Uneasiness , in
the  evening,  as  though  something  evil  were  impending
over  him . * Apprehensiveness,  with  palpitation  of  the
heart,  and  pulsations  in  some  parts  of  the  breast  and  ab-
domen, (fourth  day.)  * Anxiety,  early  in  the  morning,  as
though  he  were  threatened  with  an  epileptic  fit. — He  is
apprehensive  of  losing  his  thoughts,  his  understanding.
Upon  seeing  blood,  or  knives,  horrible  thoughts  throng
her  mind ; she  feels,  for  instance,  as  though  she  would
commit  suicide,  although  she  has  the  greatest  aversion
against  it.  The  person  is  greatly  excited,  over-fatigued,
and  nevertheless  feels  as  if  not  enough  had  been  done.
Extremely  frightful,  the  person  starts  upon  hearing  the
least  thing  fall.  Frequently  changing  mood  during  the


32


ALUMINA.


day,  sometimes  assurance,  sometimes  timidity.  Dissatis-
fied with  every  thing,  feels  despairing.  Low-spirited  and
peevish  ; she  is  grumbling  uninterruptedly.  Not  disposed
to  any  thing;  nothing  gives  him  pleasure.  Peevish,  ill-
humoured  ; she  is  conscious  of  it,  at  one  o’clock  in  the
afternoon,  (first  day.)  Peevish  and  whining  ; the  lobules
of  the  ears  are  hot,  (after  two  days.)  Extremely  peevish
and  obstinate.  Is  opposed  to  the  wishes  of  other  people.
She  is  excessively  peevish,  and  every  thing  is  offensive  to
her;  she  desires  nothing  but  to  quarrel  and  to  raise  a fuss  ;
in  the  afternoon,  (fifth  day.) — He  sneers  at  every  thing
contemptuously.  * Want  of  disposition  for  any  kind
of  labour , and  ennui  ; in  the  forenoon.  * Reluctance  to
any  kind  of  employment,  (first  day.)  Indifference,  absence
of  mind,  and  peevishness.  Great  absence  of  mind  and
irresolution,  (second  day.) — Want  of  attention  in  reading;
the  mind  does  not  remain  fixed  upon  one  object,  (first  day.)
The  mind  is  occupied  with  a variety  of  objects  ; but  not
one  of  them  leaves  a distinct  recollection  in  the  mind,
(fourth  day.)  He  constantly  speaks  wrong,  choosing  dif-
ferent expressions  from  those  which  he  intended.  Ab-
sence of  all  power  of  recollection,  and  great  weakness  of
memory.  Striking  forgetfulness. — Continual  and  great
weakness  of  memory.  Want  of  memory,  for  many  weeks.
Great  forgetfulness.  Inability  for  consistent  thinking.
Dullness  of  mind.  Inability  and  want  of  disposition  for
mental  labour.  Intolerable  ennui — an  hour  seems  to  him
half  a day.  He  feels  light-spirited ; the  intellectual  and
physical  powers  appear  to  be  excited,  (first  day.)  In-
creased animation  alternating  with  absence  of  mind,  during
which  one’s  thoughts,  sight,  and  hearing,  are  indistinct,
and  have  almost  disappeared.

Head. — Obtusion  of  the  head,  being  at  the  same  time
apprehensive  of  losing  his  consciousness. — The  head  feels
extremely  obtuse,  as  if  his  consciousness  were  outside  of
his  body  ; when  he  says  something,  it  seems  to  him  as
though  somebody  else  had  said  it ; or  when  he  sees  some-
thing, it  seems  as  though  somebody  else  had  seen  it,  or  as
if  he  saw  the  thing  through  somebody  else’s  eyes.  Early
in  the  morning,  the  head  feels  obtuse  and  dull  ; this  symp-
tom passes  off  after  rising,  (third  day.)  Early  in  the


ARGILLA.


33


morning  his  head  feels  dim  and  hot.  Obtusion  of  the
head,  attended  with  heat  in  the  face.  Occasional  weakness
of  the  head.  Great  stupor;  apprehensiveness  of  falling
over.  Bad  vertigo  in  walking  or  sitting,  as  though  he
would  fall  over  ; this  often  lasts  for  several  days,  and  is
attended  with  straining  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  extending
towards  the  head.  Vertigo  even  to  falling  ; the  ivhole
room  seems  to  turn  with  her  ; she  is  obliged  to  sit  down
at  once,  at  four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  (third  day.)
Vertigo , every  thing  turns  with  him  in  a circle  ; attended
with  nausea.  Every  thing  before  his  eyes  turns  with
him.  Vertigo,  early  in  the  morning,  as  though  she  would
turn  herself  round;  this  symptom  is  attended  with  a faint-
ing sort  of  nausea  ; after  having  breakfasted  on  wheat
bread,  her  nausea  ceased  ; but  a sour  taste  remained  in
the  mouth,  (eleventh  day.)  Vertigo  early  in  the  morning.
Staggering  walk,  such  as  is  seen  in  intoxication.  Quickly
passing  vertigo  in  the  morning.  Vertigo  increases  on
stooping.  Vertigo,  even  to  falling,  during  a walk;  she
had  to  lean  against  a wall,  (twenty-fourth  day.)  Giddiness
the  whole  day,  even  to  falling  ; in  order  to  moderate  this
symptom,  she  is  obliged  to  wipe  her  eyes,  (eleventh  day.)
Giddiness,  which  continues  for  some  days  without  almost
any  interruption  ; it  is  like  an  intoxication  produced  by
beer,  (thirty-first  day.)  The  head  always  feels  giddy,  as
soon  as  she  wakes  up,  (sixteenth  day.)  Her  head  feels  in
a state  of  obnubilation  and  intoxication  ; it  seems  to  her  as
though  she  would  turn  herself,  for  nine  days  ; this  symp-
tom alternated  with  pain  in  the  kidneys  in  such  a manner,
that  the  obnubilation  of  the  head  decreased  in  proportion
as  the  pain  in  the  kidneys  increased,  and  vice  versa,  (after
thirty  days.)  Even  the  weakest  spirituous  drink  intoxicates
him.  Headache,  increasing  by  walking  in  the  open  air.
Pain  in  the  head  and  nape  of  the  neck  ; it  increases  on
going  to  bed,  and  leaves  off  early  next  morning,  on  rising.
Headache,  which  obliges  the  person  to  lie  down  ; it  is  at-
tended with  dry  heat  and  cough  during  sleep,  the  whole
afternoon.  Headache  on  the  left  side,  (after  eighteen
hours.)  Short-lasting  dull  pain  in  the  occiput,  (a.  half  an
hour.)  Headache  in  the  occiput ; it  feels  bruised  ; the
pain  passes  off  on  lying  down.  Early  in  the  morning  the


34


ALUMINA.


head  feels  heavy,  and  hot.  Great  heaviness  of  the  head,
attended  with  paleness  of  countenance,  and  lassitude.
Heaviness  of  the  head  ; when  sitting  straight,  he  feels  as
if  he  would  fall  over  ; this  symptom  increases  on  stooping,
at  one  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  (fifth  day.)  Heaviness  of
the  head,  attended  with  obtusion  of  the  forehead,  and  sen-
sitiveness of  the  vertex  to  the  touch,  at  four  o’clock  in  the
afternoon,  (second  day.)  Intensely  pressive  headache
above  the  eyes.  Pressing  out  at  the  forehead,  after  dinner.
Screwing  pressure  at  the  head.  Compressive  headache,
above  the  eyes,  coming  from  both  temples,  in  the  evening  ;
in  the  night,  heat  when  in  bed,  followed  by  sweat,  (after
two  hours.)  Compressive  (pinching)  headache  in  the
forehead,  above  the  eyes  ; it  seems  to  come  from  the  tem-
ples, (after  three — twelve  hours.)  Headache,  tearing,  with
a sense  as  of  pressing  from  both  sides,  in  the  evening,
(after  two  hours  and  a half,)  attended  with  chills,  many
evenings  in  succession.  Sensation  as  if  the  right  side  of
the  head  were  pressed  or  screwed  towards  the  other,  and
as  if  the  vertex  were  oppressed  with  a heavy  load,  in  the
forenoon,  at  8^  o’clock,  (two  days.)  Pain,  as  if  the
parts  in  the  head  were  being  screwed  together,  attended
with  stitches  in  the  forehead,  and  such  a violent  pain  in
the  head,  that  the  head  threatens  to  tumble  down  on  stoop-
ing ; this  symptom  occurred  when  standing,  at  two  o’clock
in  the  afternoon,  (two  days.)  Sense  of  constriction  around
the  forehead,  attended  with  pain,  (after  a quarter  of  an
hour.)  Dull,  pressive  headache,  increased  in  walking,
(first  day.)  Burning  and  pressive  'pain,  with  warmth , in
the  fore  part  of  the  liead , after  dinner,  when  standing  or
sitting  ; the  pain  is  relieved  on  walking  out  into  the  air,
and  does  not  return  on  re-entering  the  room.  Headache,
as  from  bruises,  with  redness  of  cheeks.  Bad  headache
of  a peculiar  nature,  as  though  the  brain  were  dashed  to
pieces.  Stunning  tension  at  a small  spot  of  the  right
temple  ; it  passes  off  on  pressing  upon  the  spot ; when
the  pressure  ceases,  the  tension  returns  immediately  ; in
the  forenoon,  (two  days.)  Drawing  and  pulsative  tension
in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  in  the  forenoon,  (one  day.)
Headache,  painful  traction  in  the  right  side  of  the  head-
Boring  and  drawing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  left  temple  ;


ARGILLA.


35


in  the  evening,  (third  day.)  Tearing  headache  in  the  fore-
head, which  is  relieved  in  the  open  air,  in  the  evening,  (third
day.)  Tearing  in  the  whole  head,  in  the  forenoon,  (first
day.)  Tearing  in  the  right  temple ; rubbing  excites  a burn-
ing sensation  in  the  parts,  (after  half  an  hour — two  hours.)
Tearing,  and  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  in  the
forenoon  ; the  same  symptom  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,
in  the  evening,  (first  day.)  Tearing  in  the  forehead,  in  the
forenoon  ; in  the  afternoon,  this  tearing  is  changed  to
stitches,  (second  day.)  Tearing  upwards  along  the  left  tem-
ple, and  subsequent  stitches  in  the  right,  (after  two  hours.)
Headache,  tearing,  and  stitches,  in  the  ears,  somewhat
lessened  by  being  pressed  upon  with  the  hand,  lasting  four
days;  towards  evening,  (after  sixth  day.)  Headache , vio-
lent stitches  in  the  brain , with  inclination  to  vomit.  Stabs,
as  with  a knife,  now  and  then  shooting  through  the  head.
Stitches  shooting  through  the  head  at  every  step. — A
stitch  in  the  head,  going  round  the  brain.  Sharp  stitches
in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  when  stooping  during  labour,
(twenty-eighth  day.)  A stitch  in  the  right  temple,  as  with
a large,  blunt  instrument,  leaving  short  soreness  behind,
(after  thirteen  days.)  Stitches  in  the  temples,  on  sing-
ing; they  abated  as  soon  as  she  stopped  singing,  (after
thirty-three  days.)  Stitches  in  some  parts  of  the  head.
Stitches  in  the  head,  towards  the  vertex,  (second  and  third
day.)  Stitches  in  the  forehead,  with  dullness  and  heavi-
ness of  the  head,  in  the  afternoon,  (third  day.)  Stitches
in  the  forehead,  on  going  to  bed,  (tenth  day.)  Stitches  in
the  fore  and  back  part  of  the  head,  after  dinner  ; worse  to-
wards evening,  (after  thirty-seven  days.)  Stitches  in  the
head  from  within  outward,  in  the  afternoon,  (eighth  day.)
Painful  boring  into  the  right  temple,  in  the  evening,  (fifth
day.)  Continual  boring  and  tearing  in  both  temples,  in
the  forenoon,  (fourth  day.)  Pulsative  headache  in  the
vertex,  over  the  region  of  the  right  temple,  early  on  waking
up.  Beating,  and  stitches,  in  the  forehead  and  right  side
of  the  head,  in  the  afternoon,  (second  day.)  Beating  and
pressing  in  the  right  temple,  like  strong  pulsations,  ac-
companied by  pressure  upon  the  vertex,  as  from  a heavy
weight,  in  the  afternoon,  (second  day.)  Pulsative  headache
on  ascending  the  stairs,  after  dinner,  (second  day.)  Beating


36


ALUMINA.


and  wild  noises  in  the  vertex ; in  the  forenoon,  (two  days.)
Beating  and  tearing,  high  up  in  the  right  side  of  the  head  ;
in  the  afternoon,  about  one  o’clock.  Beating,  in  time,  in
the  whole  head  ; in  the  afternoon,  when  walking,  and  next
morning  in  bed,  (after  three  days.)  On  stooping,  undu-
lating motion  in  the  head,  synchronous  with  the  pulse  ;
on  righting  the  head,  the  motion  is  diminished  ; after  din-
ner.— The  headache  decreases  upon  laying  down  the  head
calmly  in  the  bed.  After  dinner,  heat  in  the  head  ; on
stooping,  there  is  a sensation  in  the  brain  as  if  it  would
fall  forwards  ; this  sensation  passes  off  on  raising  the
head,  (first  day.)  Sense  of  warmth  in  the  forehead,  which
is  not  perceptible  externally  ; attended  with  dullness  of  the
mind,  for  half  an  hour.  Heat  rises  into  her  head,  coming
out  of  the  stomach,  in  the  forenoon.  Headache,  as  if  a
worm  were  crawling  under  the  skull ; the  pain  is  also  cut-
ting, and  corrosive.  Sensation  as  if  something  were
crawling  between  skin  and  flesh,  coming  from  both  tem-
ples and  going  to  the  forehead  ; here  it  presses  outward  as
though  it  would  penetrate  through.  Over  the  head,  ex-
ternally, there  is  a sensation  as  if  the  skin  would  go  to
sleep,  (three  days.)  Pressure  at  the  occiput  and  forehead
from  without , as  from  a tight  hat.  At  the  upper  part  of
the  forehead,  a little  spot  which  is  painful  to  the  touch ;
early  in  the  morning,  (tenth  and  eleventh  day.)  External
tearing  in  the  right  temple,  followed  by  continual  internal
boring  and  beating,  (second  day.)  Stitches  on  the  outside,
as  with  an  awl,  at  a small  spot  of  the  left  side  of  the  head,
close  to  the  vertex.  External  pinching  and  griping  on  the
head,  attended  with  a sensation  as  of  freezing  towards  the
occiput,  which  increases  on  stooping,  in  the  evening.
Pain  at  the  left  region  of  the  vertex,  as  if  somebody  were
raising  her  up  by  pulling  her  by  a cluster  of  hair,  (first
day.)  On  touching  the  hair  on  the  head,  the  person  feels
pain  as  if  the  place  were  sore.  Falling  off  of  the  hair,  (after
eight  days.) — Desiccation  of  the  hair.  Itching,  formication
over  the  head,  of  an  erratic  nature.  Intolerable  itching  of
the  head  ; he  is  obliged  to  scratch  himself  until  the  parts
bleed  ; after  having  done  scratching,  the  skin  aches.  The
hairy  scalp  itches,  and  is  covered  with  white  scales.  Dry-
ness and  desiccation  of  the  hairs  on  the  head. — A cluster


ARGILLA.


37


of  pimples  on  the  hairy  scalp  behind  the  right  ear,  attended
with  a sensation  of  painful  tension.  Pimples  on  the  fore-
head and  neck.

Eyes. — Sensation  as  of  trembling  of  the  eyebrows.
Pressure  in  the  eyes ; she  was  unable  to  open  them.
Pressure  in  the  eyes,  and  sensitiveness  of  this  organ  to
the  light.  Pressure  in  the  right  eye,  in  the  evening,  when
writing  or  reading.  Pressure  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  some-
thing had  fallen  into  the  eye,  closetbelow  the  upper  eyelid;
the  whole  day,  (fiffh  day.)  Pressure  upon  the  left  eye-
ball, (a.  half  an  hour.)  Alternating  pressure  in  the  eyelids,
(one  day.)  Tension  around  the  left  eye,  (two  days.) —
Tearing  in  the  right  upper  eyelid,  on  looking  down;  on
looking  up,  the  person  feels  as  if  the  upper  lid  were  longer,
and  were  hanging  down  ; afterwards  stitches  in  the  right
side  of  the  head,  early  in  the  morning,  (two  days.)
Tearing  in  the  upper  border  of  the  orbit.  Biting  pain,  at-
tended with  a sensation  of  burning  and  stinging,  as  from
an  acrid  humour  in  one  of  the  corners  of  the  eye.
Stitches  in  the  corners  of  the  eye.  Stitches  in  the
lower  eyelid.  Frequent  and  violent  itching  of  the  eyes.
Itching  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes , and  of  the  lids.
Sensation  of  excoriation  in  the  interior  of  the  eyes,
in  the  evening  ; after  this  the  eyelids  were  irresistibly
closed.  Sensation  of  excoriation  and  dryness  in  the  in
ternal  canthus  of  the  eye.  Biting  pain  in  the  left  eye,  as
from  soap,  in  the  evening.  Tearing  and  biting  pain  in
the  eye.  Biting  and  burning  pain  in  the  eyes,  early
in  the  morning,  (second,  day.)  * Burning  sensation  of
the  eyes,  early  on  waking  up.  * Burning  sensation  of
the  eyes,  especially  on  looking  up.  * Burning  sensa-
tion and  pressure  of  the  eyes.  * Burning  sensation
and  pressure  of  the  eyes  and  nose,  as  if  she  wero  to
be  attacked  with  a cold.  Burning  sensation  in  the  cor-
ners of  the  eyes,  (two— three  days.)  * Burning  sensation
and  increased  secretion  of  mucus  of  the  eyes  ; at  night,
and  sometimes  early  in  the  morning,  attended  with  itching.
* Every  evening,  burning  and  dryness  of  the  eyelids,  ac-
companied with  pain  in  the  internal  canthus  of  the  left
eye,  and  with  a secretion  of  dry  gum,  taking  place  every
morning,  and  lasting  upwards  of  a week.  Redness  of
the  eyes,  attended  with  a sense  of  excoriation  in  the  cor-


38


ALUMINA.


ners,  and  dullness  of  sight ; in  the  evening,  when  reading,
he  sees  a halo  around  the  light ; he  is  obliged  to  wipe
his  eyes  often  ; in  the  night,  they  become  closed  with
pus  ; these  symptoms  last  long.  Redness  of  the  right
eye,  attended  with  a feeling  of  soreness  and  running
ol  the  eye,  (third  and  fourth  day.)  Inflammation  of  the
conjunctiva  of  the  right  eye,  without  any  considerable
pain,  in  the  evening,  (first  day.)  On  the  left  lower  eyelid,
a pimple,  with  a stinging  pain.  Incipient  stye,  frequently
forming  on  the  upper  eyelid.  The  eyelashes  fall  out
easily.  Weakness  of  the  eyelids  ; they  are  all  the  time
on  the  point  of  closing,  although  he  is  not  sleepy;  in  the
afternoon.  He  cannot  well  open  the  left  eye,  because  it
seems  to  him  as  if  the  upper  eyelid  were  hanging  deep
down  ; on  this  account,  he  often  wipes  the  eye,  in  order
to  see  better,  (fifth  day.)  The  upper  eyelid  feels  para-
lyzed, hangs  down,  and  covers  only  half  of  the  eye,
(twenty-ninth  day.)  On  closing  the  eyes  but  lightly,  they
are  often  spasmodically  and  suddenly  contracted,  with  a
sensation  of  pain  ; if  he  tries  to  open  his  eyes  in  the
night,  they  pain  him  as  if  they  were  oppressed  with  a
sudden  flood  of  bright  sunlight,  even  in  darkness  ; they
become  again  contracted  ; these  symptoms  are  accompa-
nied by  little  sleep,  and  by  frequent  winking,  during  the
day,  of  the  right  upper  eyelid.  Tremor  of  the  left  eye,  as
though  it  would  leap  out ; worse  towards  evening,  and  on
looking  down  ; less  violent  on  closing  the  eye,  or  on  look-
ing up,  or  on  holding  the  eye  with  her  hand  ; at  the  same
time,  the  eye  is  so  sensitive  to  the  light,  that  she  was  often
obliged  to  close  it,  for  three  days,  (after  47  days.)  * Run-
ning of  the  eyes  in  the  open  air.  * Frequent  running  of
the  eyes , without  pain.  * Running  of  the  eyes,  early  in
the  morning,  after  waking  up.  * Running,  and  burning
sensation  of  the  eyes,  attended  with  a sensation  of  swell-
ing of  the  face,  (first  day.)  * The  right  eye  constantly
secretes  a mucus  humour,  (eye-gum.)  The  eyes  secrete
much  mucus  in  the  night,  for  several  days  in  succession.
Much  dry  gum,  early  in  the  morning,  on  waking  up.
* The  eyes  are  agglutinated , on  waking  up,  early  in  the
morning ; they  burn  on  being  opened ; attended  with
dread  of  light.  * Nightly  agglutination  for  several  weeks,
attended  with  inflammation  of  the  conjunctiva,  and  secre-


ARGILLA*


39


lion  of  mucus  during  the  day  ; in  the  evening,  when  the
room  is  lighted,  the  eye  feels  as  if  it  were  covered  with  a
gauze  ; he  is  obliged  to  wipe  the  eye,  but  the  sensation  of
the  gauze  remains  ; he  sees  a halo  around  the  light,  (after
ten  days.)  The  eyes  are  agglutinated  early  in  the  morn-
ing; dim,  with  a sensation  as  of  biting,  (second  day.)  Dim -
sightedness , as  through  a fog . Dim-sightedness,  some-
times in  the  open  air,  and  passing  off  again  in  the  room.
Dim-sightedness,  as  through  mist,  in  the  evening,  (one  to
thirty  days.)  Dim-sightedness,  which  obliges  her  to  wipe
her  eye  constantly  ; there  is  a sensation  in  the  eyes  as  if
the  lids  would  adhere  to  one  another  in  the  corners,  (ele-
venth day.)  The  right  eye  is  dim,  as  if  a feather  or  a hair
were  before  it,  which  she  thinks  herself  obliged  to  take
away,  (the  sixth  and  seventh  day.)  In  the  evening,  her
eyes  are  so  dull  and  dry,  that  she  can  neither  read  nor
sew;  also,  during  the  day,  her  sight  is  dull  ; (usually  her
sight  is  very  good.)  The  eyes  become  weak  after  long
looking,  (fourth  day.)  Squinting  of  both  eyes.  Winking,
and  mist  before  the  eyes.  Short  flickering,  and  a kind  of
spots,  before  the  eyes,  attended  with  a sort  of  vertigo.
After  blowing  the  nose,  white  little  stars  sparkle  before
the  eyes,  (fourth  day.)  On  closing  his  eyes,  there  is  a light
before  them.  The  objects  she  looks  at,  appear  yellow,
(the  34th — 35th  day.)

Ears. — Tension  in  the  ears,  (the  second — third  day.)
Tearing  in,  behind,  and  below  the  ears.  Stitches  in  the
ears , especially  in  the  evening,  (after  thirty  days.)
Stitches  in  the  left  ear,  (the  seventh  day.)  Stitches
through  the  ear,  from  within  outward,  (after  four  hours.)
Lancinations  into  the  ears.  In  the  night,  stitches  deep  in
the  right  ear,  (after  four  hours.)  Frequent  stabs,  as  with
a knife,  into  the  hollow  of  the  ear.  Boring  pain  in  the
ear,  early  in  the  morning  ; and  in  the  hollow  of  the  ear,
in  the  afternoon  ; the  pain  is  also  felt  on  pressure,  (fourth
day.)  Pulsations  in  the  ear.  Bad  itching  in  both  ears  ;
rubbing  with  the  finger  increases  it,  (after  fifty  hours.)
Itching  and  tingling  in  the  internal  meatus.  On  the  right
ear,  a transparent  watery  pustule,  without  pain.  Itching
before  and  behind  the  ears,  and  of  the  lobules.  Itching
and  burning  in  the  anterior  border  of  the  right  ear,  (first


40


ALUMINA.


day.)  Heat  and  redness  of  the  ear  for  many  evenings.
Discharge  of  pus  from  the  right  ear,  (after  eleven  days.)
It  seems  to  her  as  if  something  were  lying  before  her  ear
on  the  outside.  * On  blowing  her  nose,  something  ob-
structs her  ear ; on  swallowing,  the  ear  opens  again.
* Humming  of  the  ears,  in  the  evening.  Humming  of  the
ears,  early  in  the  morning  ; at  the  same  time  the  stools  are
more  solid  than  usually.  * Humming  before  the  ears,  as
of  large  bells,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising.  * Whiz-
zing in  the  ear.  * Loud  whistling  in  the  ear.  * On
swallowing,  there  is  a sense  as  of  cracking  in  the  ear,
as  in  breaking  dry  straw.  * Snapping  of  the  tympanum
as  of  a spark  from  the  electric  machine,  especially  when
chewing.  For  an  hour  he  feels,  in  the  right  ear,  as  though
he  had  a totally  different  voice,  (fourth  day.)

Nose  — Intermittent  burning  pain  in  the  right  wing  of
the  nose  ; in  the  evening  (1.  d.)  Tearing  in  andnearthe
right  nasal  fossa  ; upon  pressing  the  part,  the  pain  passes
off’  only  for  a short  while,  (2.  d.)  Itching  of  the  dorsum,
the  side  and  around  the  orifice  of  the  nose.  Bad  itching  of
one  ala  of  the  nose,  one  hour.  Ulcerated  nostrils.  * Sore-
ness with  scabs  in  the  right  nostril,  attended  with  a dis-
charge of  a quantity  of  thick,  yellowish  mucus  from  the
nose,  (the  first,  four  weeks).  On  the  right  side  of  the  nose
there  are  two  pimples  with  a burning  and  stinging  pain.
A boil  on  the  nose.  * Bleeding  from  the  nose,  nothing  but
blood  comes  out.  * The  septum  of  the  nose  is  swollen,  red
and  painful  to  the  touch  ; in  the  evening  the  pains  are  in-
creased, with  stitches  in  the  forehead,  (1.  d.)  * Swelling

and  hardness  of  the  left  ala  of  the  nose,  with  pain  to  the
touch,  (8.  d.)  Sour  smell  in  the  nose,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, (3.  d.)  Excessively  acute  smell.  * Weakness  of
smell.

Face. — Sullen,  low  spirited  look. — * Paleness  and  red-
ness of  the  face,  alternating  in  quick  succession.  Tearing
in  the  sides  of  the  face,  especially  in  the  right  side,  in  the
zygoma  ; upon  rubbing  the  parts  the  pain  passes  off  ; it
is  sometimes  attended  with  tearing  pain  in  the  teeth  of  this
side.  The  cheeks  look  as  red  as  copper,  as  in  those  per-
sons who  drink  much  brandy.  Heat  and  tension  in  the
left  half  of  the  face,  in  the  evenings,  (1.  d.) — Tension  and


ARGILLA.


41


drawing  in  the  jaws  and  cheeks,  attended  with  an  increas-
ed secretion  of  saliva,  (2.  d.)  Drawing  and  tearing  in  the
left  cheek  and  the  gums  of  the  left  side  ; in  the  afternoon,
(a.  30.  d.)  Formication  in  the  right  side  of  the  face,  at-
tended with  stinging  pain  in  the  hollow  of  the  ear  and  tear-
ing in  the  right  knee.  The  skin  of  the  face  is  tense,  even
around  the  eyes,  as  if  the  white  of  an  egg  were  drying
upon  it  ; after  dinner,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (5.
d.)  His  face  appears  to  him  as  if  it  were  larger  or  swol-
len, and  the  eyes  were  smaller,  so  that  his  sight  is  impe-
ded ; after  dinner,  (1.  d.)  * Paleness  of  the  face.  Every

day  flushes  of  heat  in  the  face.  A painful  red  spot  upon
the  right  cheek.  Skin  of  the  face  rough,  especially  on  the
forehead.  Sensation  around  the  chin,  as  if  it  were  cover-
ed with  cobweb.  Violent  itching  in  the  face.  * Itching  of
the  forehead,  cheeks,  around  the  eyes,  and  of  the  chin.
Itching  of  the  cheeks,  with  a sensation  as  of  burning  after
the  parts  have  been  scratched.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Formication  on  the  right  side  of
the  lower  jaw.  Itching  attended  with  a violent  desire  to
scratch,  in  the  face  and  under  the  chin  ; this  is  succeeded
by  small  pimples  like  rash,  (4.  d.)  Itching  pimples  on  the
forehead,  the  right  side  of  the  nose  and  the  left  angle  of
the  mouth  ; upon  being  pressed  the  pimples  flow  into  each
other,  (6.  to  9.  d.)  Upon  the  right  cheek  a pimple  which
is  painful  to  the  touch  like  a sore.  Small  red  painless
pimples  upon  the  right  cheek,  which  feel  rough,  (12.  d.)
The  vermilion  border  of  the  lips  is  bluish  (during  and  af-
ter the  fever.)  Small  pimples  on  the  chin,  which  pass  off
again  next  morning,  (a.  8 and  13  d.)  Pimples  on  the  left
cheek  and  forehead,  (the  10.  d.)  One  boil  after  the  other
on  the  left  cheek.  Itching  of  an  already  dry  crust  of  an
uncured  boil  upon  the  forehead  ; the  itching  disappears
upon  the  part  being  scratched.  The  jaws  are  firmly  set
against  each  other,  (1.  h.)  Painful  tension  in  the  articu-
lations of  the  jaws,  when  chewing  or  opening  the  mouth. —
The  jaw  is  so  swollen  that  he  cannot  open  his  mouth  with-
out feeling  pain  ; there  are  stitches  going  up  to  the  malar
bone  and  the  temple.  Bolh  his  lips  appear  to  him  larger
and  swelled.  Swelling  of  the  lower  lip.  Swelling  of  the


42


ALUMINA.


lips  with  vesicles  upon  them.  Itching  of  the  left  angle  of
the  mouth,  and  the  zygoma  ; it  disappears  upon  the  parts
being  scratched.  On  the  internal  surface  of  the  lip  a bright
vesicle  as  large  as  a pea,  (2.  d.)  Eruptions  on  the  lower
lip  in  the  form  of  crusts  ; the  lips  peel  off,  (4.  d.)  Chap-
ped (dry)  lips . Remarkable  shortening  of  the  lower  jaw  ;
the  upper  teeth  project  over  the  lower  for  three  days. —
Drawing  pain  in  the  gums  as  if  they  were  sore.  Swell-
ing of  the  gums.  Bleeding  of  the  gums , (4.  d.)  Ulcer-
ation of  the  roots  of  all  the  teeth.  On  the  gums  of  the  left
side  of  the  lower  row  of  teeth  an  ulcer  is  forming,  which
opens  immediately  and  pours  out  blood  which  tastes  salt-
ish. Drawing  pain  extending  from  one  tooth  as  far  as  the
ear  to  the  side  of  the  head.  The  toothache  extends  down
to  the  larynx,  attended  with  irritation  of  the  nerves,  such
as  is  frequently  experienced  after  having  caught  cold,  or
used  too  much  chamomile.  Drawing  pain  in  the  teeth  of
the  right  side,  in  the  evening  ; it  disappears  after  having
laid  down.  Shooting  pain  in  one  of  the  first  molar  teeth
of  the  left  upper  row,  (1.  d ) Shooting  and  tearing  tooth-
ache wakes  her  up  after  midnight  ; it  disappears  after  ris-
ing, (5.  d.)  Drawing  and  tearing  pain  in  the  anterior  low-
er teeth,  extending  to  the  zygoma  and  the  temples.  Tear-
ing in  the  molar  teeth  at  different  times  of  the  day,  some-
times as  high  up  as  the  temple.  Gnawing  pain  in  one  of
the  anterior  molar  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw,  attended  with
tearing  behind  the  ear,  as  if  the  ear  were  to  be  torn  out ;
it  is  worst  at  9 o’clock  in  the  evening,  then  slowly  decreas-
ing, sitting  up  in  the  bed  procures  a little  relief  ; after  mid-
night there  is  only  gnawing  in  the  tooth  ; the  pain  re-
mains the  same  under  all  circumstances  ; in  day  time  the
pain  is  dull.  In  the  evening,  boring  (tearing,  grinding)  in
the  teeth,  (a.  l.h.)  Boring  in  various  hollow  teeth.  Cut-
ting toothache  in  the  open  air  and  on  lying  down  in  the
evening  in  bed,  (a.  2,  3.  h.)  Tickling  in  the  teeth  and  of
their  roots,  immediately  after  dinner,  (the  4,  5.  d.)  Sense
of  coldness  of  the  teeth,  attended  with  great  sensitiveness.
The  hollow  teeth  are  very  painful,  when  food  gets  into
them.  Pressive  pain  in  one  of  the  incisor  teeth,  both
when  chewing,  or  not.  The  teeth  are  very  painful  when
she  chews  ; she  is  afraid  of  pressing  them  against  one


ARGILLA.


43


another,  (a.  2.  d.)  In  chewing  ever  so  little,  she  suffers
the  most  violent  toothache  ; the  roots  of  the  teeth  are  then
painful  as  if  they  ulcerated.  Upon  pressing  a tooth  a-
gainst  a stump,  this  one  is  painful  as  if  it  were  violently
pushed  into  the  socket.  Upon  setting  the  teeth  against
one  another,  there  is  toothache,  as  if  the  teeth  were  loose.
Pain,  as  from  a bruise,  in  one  of  the  molar  teeth  of  the
right  upper  row  ; pressing  upon  the  tooth,  which  makes  it
feel  loose,  relieves  the  pain,  (11.  d.)  One  of  the  upper
molar  teeth  is  painful  to  the  touch.  Two  rotten  molar
teeth,  (one  above,  the  other  below)  get  hold  of  each  other
on  opening  the  mouth.  Sensation  as  if  the  teeth  were  too
long , (1.  d.)  Thick,  badly  smelling  mucus  on  the  teeth,
(5.  d.)

Mouth. — The  inner  mouth  continually  feels  as  if  it  were
burnt  (after  dinner)  (a.  48  h.)  Tingling  on  the  internal
surface  of  the  cheeks,  (a.  3 h.)  * Painfulness  of  the  in-

ner mouth,  palate,  tongue,  gums  ; these  parts  feel  so  sore
that  he  can  scarcely  eat.  Number  of  little  ulcers  in  the
mouth.  * On  waking  up,  the  mouth  is  desiccated  and  the
tongue  is  glued  to  the  palate.  Water  in  the  mouth.  In
the  morning,  spitting  of  a quantity  of  saliva  and  mucus.
Thick  mucus  running  from  the  posterior  nares  into  the
mouth.  Musty,  rotten  smell  from  the  mouth.  Tingling
in  the  tongue,  with  a sensation  as  of  stinging,  very  light  and
short,  (1.  h.)  Itching  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue  ; he  would
like  to  scratch  it  to  pieces,  (a.  5,  7.  d.)  Sense  of  roughness
upon  the  tongue,  (a.  three  quarters  of  an  hour.)  Tongue
coated  white,  with  a good  taste.  Tongue  coated  yellow-
ish white  with  bitter  taste.  Pressive  pain  in  the  left  ton-
sil, during  and  after  the  act  of  swallowing,  (1.  d.)  Early
in  the  morning,  dull  stitches  in  the  right  tonsil,  (4.  d.) —
Swelled  tonsils,  (6.  d.)  In  both  sides  of  the  neck,  sensa-
tion as  of  an  external  swelling,  with  painful  stitches.

(Esophagus  and  Stomach. — Sore  throat  in  swallow-
ing. Sore  throat,  pressure  in  the  throat,  even  when  the
person  does  not  swallow,  both  hands  being  affected  with
internal  heat,  (a.  2 h.)  Pressure  in  the  throat  as  from  a
bulbous  mass,  attended  with  soreness,  rough  voice  and  dry-
ness of  the  throat.  Aching  sore  throat  during  empty  de-
glutition, in  the  evening,  for  several  days  in  succession;


44


ALUMINA.


brought  about  by  a swelling  in  the  throat,  (4.  d.)  Ve-
hemently pressive  pain,  as  if  a portion  of  the  oesophagus
were  contracted  or  compressed  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,
especially  during  deglutition,  but  also  when  the  person
does  not  swallow,  attended  with  oppression  of  the  chest
alternating  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  especially  after
dinner,  (8,  9.  d.)  Spasmodically  pressive  pain  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  chest,  on  swallowing  food  and  drink.  Sense
as  of  squeezing  from  the  oesophagus  down  to  the  stomach,
every  time  he  swallows  a morsel  of  food.  Narrowing  of
the  oesophagus,  and  want  of  action  of  the  same,  early  in
the  morning,  on  waking  up.  Impeded  deglutition  at  night,
as  from  a spasmodic  constriction  of  the  neck,  (1.  d.)  Pain-
ful pressure  and  constriction  in  the  throat  and  pharynx,
with  much  pituita  in  the  mouth,  in  the  evening,  (1,  2.  d.)
Pressive  and  painful  tension  in  the  inner  right  side  of  the
neck,  as  far  as  the  ear,  (1.  d.)  Drawing  and  tensive  pain
in  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  especially  on  moving  the
tongue,  (9.  d.)  At  night,  spasmodically  drawing  pain  in
one  side  of  the  throat  and  in  the  ear,  disturbing  the  sleep,
and  increased  by  deglutition,  (9.  d.)  Erratic  and  light
stitches  in  the  throat ; on  swallowing,  something  pointed
seems  to  be  in  the  throat ; in  the  evening,  (2.  4.  d.)
Stinging  in  the  throat,  during  empty  deglutition.  In  the
evening,  and  at  night,  roughness  of  the  throat,  which  in-
duces a necessity  of  clearing  the  throat ; moreover,  secre-
tion of  mucus,  several  days  in  succession.  Sense  as  of
scraping  in  the  throat,  as  if  the  person  had  swallowed
pepper,  (a.  3 h.)  Continual  sense  as  of  scraping  (raw-
ness) in  the  throat,  accompanied  by  a sensation  as  of
griping,  (5.  d.)  Scraping  (rawness)  high  up  in  the  throat.
After  eructation,  scraping  in  the  throat,  which  obliges  the
person  to  clear  the  throat,  (2.  d.)  Burning  soreness  in  the
throat,  during  and  after  deglutition,  in  the  evening,  for
several  days  in  succession,  (4.  d.)  Sense  as  of  burning  in
the  throat,  in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)  Burning  in  the  throat,
like  heartburn,  with  a sense  of  roughness,  (5.  d.)  Inflam-
mation of  the  throat,  terminated  by  a marked  livid  border
round  the  buccal  cavity,  several  days,  (a.  2 d.)  Redness
of  inflammation  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  (9.  d.)
Great  dryness  of  the  throat,  mouth  and  lips,  as  if  the  parts


ARGILLA.


45


were  parched,  attended  with  torturing  thirst.  Dryness  of
the  throat  and  mouth,  (shortly  after  taking  the  medicine.)
In  the  evening,  dryness  of  the  throat,  which  induces  fre-
quent clearing  of  the  throat,  (3.  d.)  Dryness  and  sense
as  of  scraping  (rawness)  of  the  throat,  (l.  d.)  The  pain
in  the  throat  is  most  violent  in  the  evening  and  at  night ;
it  is  least  violent  in  the  forenoon  ; Warm  eating  and  drink-
ing relieves  it.  Increased  secretion  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,
attended  with  a sense  of  contraction  in  the  mouth,  or  with
continual  tingling  upon  the  inner  surfaces  of  the  cheeks,
(a.  half  an  hour.)  A large  quantity  of  saliva  accumulates
in  the  mouth,  when  in  bed  in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)  Fre-
quent collection  of  watery  saliva  in  the  mouth  ; he  is
obliged  to  spit  it  out,  the  whole  day,  and  most  frequently
in  the  afternoon;  he  never  spits  at  night,  (a.  10  minutes
and  2 d.)  The  secretion  of  saliva  becomes  real  ptyalism.
Increased  secretion  of  saliva  and  pituita,  (l.  2.  d.)  Col-
lection of  a quantity  of  pituita  in  the  mouth  ; on  spitting  it
out,  new  saliva  is  formed,  whilst  the  throat  remains  dry,
(1  d.)  Collection  of  thick,  viscid  mucus  in  the  throat,
especially  in  the  evening,  and  early  in  the  morning,  on
waking  up ; this  mucus  increases  the  soreness  of  the
throat  ; it  induces  frequent  clearing  of  the  throat,  and  can
only  be  thrown  up  in  little  lumps  with  great  efforts,  (the
first  days.)  Thick,  viscid  mucus  flows  into  the  throat  from
the  posterior  nares.  Phlegm  in  the  throat,  which  she  finds
it  very  difficult  to  throw  up ; after  clearing  the  throat,  it
feels  very  sore.  He  cannot  hawk  up  the  phlegm  in  his
throat,  on  account  of  the  phlegm  being  too  far  down.
Phlegm  comes  into  his  throat,  which  threatens  to  choke
him,  until  he  swallows  it,  (a.  10  minutes.)  Upon  clear-
ing the  throat,  he  throws  up  saltish  phlegm,  after  dinner,
(2.  d.)  Constant  collection  of  sweetish  or  sourish  water
in  the  mouth,  (5,  8.  d.)  Dryness  in  the  mouth,  although
saliva  is  not  wanting ; this  dryness  causes  the  person  to
swallow  frequently,  which  gives  much  pain.

Taste  and  Appetite — Taste  in  the  mouth  as  of  blood,
for  half  an  hour,  (seven  days.)  Sweet  taste  in  the  throat,
with  vertigo  ; this  is  succeeded  by  throwing  up  phlegm
mixed  with  blood,  early  in  the  morning,  (twenty-eight
days.)  Astringent  acrid  taste  upon  the  tongue,  as  from


46


ALUMINA.


eating  sloes,  (one — eight  days.)  Bitter  taste  in  the  even-
ing, after  having  eaten  apples.  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
shortly  after  having  taken  the  medicine.  Bitter  and  slimy
taste  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning,  on  rising,  (five
days.)  Bitter  and  insipid  taste  in  the  mouth.  Every
thing  tastes  flat.  Early  in  the  morning,  flat,  metallic  taste
in  the  mouth,  (four  and  five  days.)  Sourish  taste  appear-
ing suddenly  in  his  throat,  without  eructations,  in  the  fore-
noon, (four  days.)  Sour  liquid  comes  into  his  mouth.
Sourish  taste  in  the  throat,  afterwards  gulping  up  some-
thing tasting  bitter,  shortly  after  having  eaten  his  milk-
soup  in  the  evening,  (four  days.)  Sourish,  saltish  taste,
(one  day.)  Rancid  and  rough  in  the  throat ; this  obliges
the  person  to  clear  the  throat,  (four  days.)  Every  thing
she  eats  appears  to  be  tasteless,  and  not  salted,  especially
in  the  evening  ; bread  tastes  like  sponge,  (one  and  two
days.)  Meat,  especially,  does  not  seem  to  have  any  taste.
Beer  tastes  bitter  and  rotten  ; this  causes  retching,  (twelve
days.)  No  desire  to  eat :,  no  appetite , no  hunger  ; food
does  not  taste  badly,  but  it  does  not  taste  at  all  ; every
thing  tastes  like  straw,  or  sawings.  She  has  no  reluctance
to  food,  but  no  desire  to  eat ; on  looking  at  the  food,  she
is  already  satisfied  ; she  could  be  a whole  day  without
eating  ; this  symptom  lasts  many  days.  Little  hunger  and
no  appetite,  for  many  days  ; even  when  he  eats  nothing  at
dinner,  (one — fifteen  days.)  Diminished  appetite,  with
fullness  of  the  abdomen.  He  has  no  appetite,  and  eats
with  reluctance.  Reluctance  to  meat.  Aversion  to  meat,
even  unto  vomiting  ; for  three  days,  (after  six  days.)  Re-
luctance to  smoking,  to  which  he  is  otherwise  accustomed.
Disagreeable  sensation  of  hunger  and  emptiness  in  the
stomach  ; without,  however,  much  appetite.  She  is  hun-
gry, but  she  eats  nothing  with  appetite.  He  is  always
hungry,  could  always  be  eating.  Very  hungry.  Rabid
hunger ; he  is  panting  for  his  dinner,  and  can  scarcely
await  it.  Strong  appetite  for  vegetables,  fruit,  and  pappy
food.  Smoking  of  tobacco  does  not  agree  with  him.
Smoking  of  tobacco  does  not  give  him  any  pleasure,  and
intoxicates  him,  for  four  days.  After  having  eaten  pota-
toes, the  stomach  aches  ; sick  feeling,  nausea,  and  then
colic.  Hiccough  after  dinner,  at  noon,  and  in  the  evening.


ARGILLA.


47


Oppression  at  the  stomach  upon  eating,  although  she  eats
with  appetite.  Shortly  after  dinner,  acute  pressive  pain
in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,
after  every  dinner,  at  noon,  and  in  the  evening,  (after  twen-
ty-nine days.)  Violent  nausea  and  tremor  after  supper.
After  supper,  nausea,  loathing,  and  weariness,  for  several
evenings.

Oesophagus  and  Stomach. — After  dinner,  drawing
pain  in  the  stomach  ; this  caused  a sensation  of  tension  in
the  whole  body,  which  made  her  so  tired  that  she  was
obliged  to  lie  down.  Very  thirsty  the  whole  day,  also  at
dinner.  * Hiccough  after  dinner,  also  after  the  soup  for
breakfast,  with  previous  eructations,  (one — two  days.)
Heartburn  after  supper.  Heartburn  after  drinking  water.
Heartburn , attended  with  abundant  discharge  of  water
from  the  mouth.  Waterbrash.  * Frequently  empty
eructations,  (after  two  hours.)  * Empty  eructations  after
supper,  (two  days.)  Eructations,  with  pressive  pain  at  the
chest,  during  dinner,  (after  three  quarters  of  an  hour.)
* Frequent  eructations,  tasting  of  the  milk-soup  which  he
had  taken,  from  supper  until  the  moment  when  he  went
to  bed.  Bitter  eructations  after  having  eaten  potatoes;
he  feels  a loathing  which  causes  him  to  shake  ; in  the
evening,  (five  days.)  Rancid  eructations,  leaving  a burn-
ing sensation  in  the  throat  for  a long  while,  (one  day.)
Rancid  eructations,  especially  after  dinner,  (ten — thirteen
hays.)  Rancid  eructations,  after  having  eaten  his  soup
for  breakfast,  (Ng.)  Acrid  eructations.  * Sour  eructa-
tions, in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.  * Sour  eructations,
with  burning  in  the  throat,  like  heartburn,  (one  day.)  In
the  forenoon,  acidity  rises  into  his  mouth  ; it  continues  for
a long  time,  and  is  attended  with  a sensation  of  heat  in  the
mouth.  * Gulping  up  of  sour  phlegm  ; afterwards  burn-
ing in  the  throat  like  heartburn,  coming  on  frequently,
especially  after  the  soup  for  breakfast.  * Sweetish  risings
from  the  stomach  ; the  phlegm  which  he  throws  up  tastes
sweetish,  ana  continues  long,  early  in  the  morning,  (three
days.)  (Ng.)  Sense  of  loathing  and  qualmishness  in  the
oesophagus,  (1  hour.)  Qualmishness  at  the  stomach,  at-
tended with  a fainting  sort  of  nausea  and  vertigo  ; the
room  turns  round  with  her  ; after  this  her  head  remains


43


ALUMINA.


gloomy,  (10.  d.)  * Frequent  nausea,  especially  during  the
chills.)  * Nausea,  with  rising  of  air.  * Nausea  and  chil-
liness, the  whole  day.  * Attack  of  nausea,  attended  with
headache,  paleness  of  the  countenance,  want  of  appetite,
several  evacuations  of  the  bowels,  loathing,  subsequent
inclination  to  vomit,  and  chilliness ; after  a walk,  he  is
obliged  to  lie  down,  (11.  d.)  Early  in  the  morning,  faint-
ing sort  of  nausea  ; after  breakfast,  the  person  feels  re-
lieved, (9.  d.)  On  waking  up,  early  in  the  morning,  nau-
sea, qualmishness,  and  lassitude,  attended  with  lancinations
over  the  eyes,  and  pain  in  the  kidneys  during  motion,
(9.  d.)  When  standing,  she  feels  nausea.  Nausea,  even
to  fainting ; her  breathing  is  arrested  on  account  of  it,  at
night.  Nausea,  already  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning.
Frequent  nausea , as  if  he  would  vomit ; his  appetite  is,
nevertheless,  tolerably  good.  Inclination  to  vomit,  in  the
morning.  Early  in  the  morning,  retching,  as  if  the  person
would  vomit.  Inclination  to  vomit,  consequent  upon  rising
of  air  ; attended  with  chilliness  of  the  body,  which  begins
at  the  feet.  Nausea,  attended  with  an  inclination  to  vomit,
and  retching  ; this  caused  her  to  insert  her  finger  into  the
throat ; after  which  she  vomited  phlegm  and  water  ; but
the  breakfast,  which  she  had  eaten  two  hours  before,  re-
mained, (14.  d.)  Violent  pain  at  the  stomach,  attended
with  painfulness  to  external  pressure  in  the  region  of  the
stomach,  in  the  evening,  (b.  d.)  Oppression  at  the
stomach,  extending  up  to  the  neck,  after  having  eaten  po-
tatoes ; eructation  relieves  it,  early  in  the  morning,  (3.  d.)
Oppression  at  the  stomach,  towards  noon  or  evening.  Vi-
olent pressure  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; great  oppression
of  the  chest,  beginning  at  the  pit ; she  was  obliged  to  stand
still  every  moment,  and  was  unable  to  walk  on.  Pain  at
the  stomach;  it  feels  full,  or  bloated ; painful  to  external
touch  ; empty  eructations  and  fermentation,  or  rumbling
and  grunting  in  the  abdomen;  after  dinner,  (1.  5.  d.)
Twisting  and  constriction  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,
extending  into  the  chest  and  throat,  attended  with  aggra-
vated breathing.  Pressure  and  constriction  in  the  region
of  the  stomach,  (31.  d.)  Sensation  of  pressure  and  con-
traction at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  extending  into  the  chest
and  between  the  scapulae,  (13.  d.)  Sensation  of  cutting


ARGILLA.


49


in  the  region  of  the  stomach  ; it  is  painful  to  the  touch,  in
the  afternoon,  (2.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
up  along  the  chest.  After  dinner,  stitches  in  the  stomach
and  chest,  coming  out  at  the  shoulder,  attended  with  short
breathing  and  great  anguish  ; for  several  dayrx  in  the
evening,  (a.  12  d.)  Gnawing  in  the  region  of  the
stomach,  a little  while  after  dinner,  (2.  3.  d.)  Sensation
as  of  pinching  at  the  stomach,  in  the  afternoon,  (1.  d.)
Drawing  pain  at  the  stomach.  Drawing  pain  from  the  pit
of  the  stomach  up  to  the  pharynx,  attended  with  difficulty
of  breathing.  Pressure  and  soreness  transversely  over
the  stomach  and  at  the  epigastrium,  in  the  afternoon.
Soreness  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  from  internal  ulcera-
tion, early  in  the  morning,  on  turning  to  the  other  side,  in
the  bed.  Tearing  soreness  from  the  pit  down  to  the  ab-
domen, as  if  every  thing  were  torn  out.  Pressure  and
crawling  at  the  pit,  as  if  there  were  a worm,  (a.  2 h.)
Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  stomach,  as  if  she  had  been
drinking  cold  water,  in  the  evening;  also,  in  the  forenoon,
both  after  an  eructation  and  while  sour  eructations  are
continually  taking  place  ; in  the  afternoon,  these  eructa-
tions pass  off,  (2.  5.  d.)

Abdomen. — When  stooping,  the  liver  is  always  sensi-
tive to  pain.  Tearing  jerks  in  the  liver.  Tearing,  ex-
tending from  the  right  hypochondriac  region  into  the  hip,
in  the  forenoon,  (1.  d.)  Upon  raising  the  body  from  a
stooping  position,  the  person  experiences  violent  stitches
in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  they  were  in  the
liver  ; they  arrest  breathing,  (11.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  right
hypochondriac  region,  when  standing  ; they  disappear
when  sitting.  In  the  evening,  continually  painful  stitches
under  the  left  lower  ribs,  extending  as  far  as  the  pit,  (5.  d.)
Dull  stitches,  occurring  alternately  under  the  left  lower
ribs,  and  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  (4.  d.)  Stitches
in  both  hypochondriac  regions.  Sensation  as  if  both  hy-
pochondriac regions  were  pressed  or  screwed  towards
each  other  by  force,  in  the  forenoon,  (1.  d.)  Long-con-
tinued burning,  and  stitches  in  the  right  hypochondriac
region,  as  if  it  were  deeply  cut  into  by  a band,  in  the  af-
ternoon, (1.  d.)  Frequently  an  instantaneous  drawing  pain
under  the  right  ribs,  when  sitting  or  walking.  Both  sides


50


ALUMINA*


of  the  epigastrium  seem  to  press  against  each  other  ; the
place  is  externally  painful  to  the  touch,  (a.  2 h.)  Con-
tinual pressure  and  burning  in  the  abdomen.  Burning
and  lancinating  pain  in  the  abdomen,  after  dinner,  (5.  d.)
Pressure  into  the  umbilical  region,  attended  with  stitches,
in  the  afternoon,  when  standing.  Pressure  and  heaviness
in  the  abdomen.  His  abdomen  seems  to  hang  down  like
a load,  in  the  afternoon,  in  walking.  Early,  before  break-
fast, spasmodic  pain  from  the  bladder  to  the  chest ; disap-
pears after  breakfast.  Violent  pinching  in  the  abdomen
after  every  cold  she  takes,  or  as  soon  as  she  walks  into
the  cold  air.  Pinching  and  writhing  in  the  abdomen,  (a.
1 h.)  In  the  evening,  pinching  around  the  navel,  (1.  d.)
During  the  usual  breakfast,  there  is  pinching  below  the
navel,  with  fulness  and  distention  of  the  abdomen,  (1.  d.)
Sudden  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  of  an  erratic  character  ;
it  then  passes  to  the  small  of  the  back,  where  it  produces
a gnawing  pain  for  a long  time,  in  the  afternoon,  (16.  d.)
Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  attended  with  heat  in  the  sto-
mach, (a.  1 h.)  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening,
when  in  bed  ; it  terminates  in  a conflux  of  saliva  in  the
mouth,  (2.  and  3.  day.)  On  waking  up,  pinching  in  the
abdomen,  and  tenesmus  ; she  was  scarcely  able  to  reach
the  privy,  where  she  had  to  lean  against  the  wall  in  a
fainting  fit ; she  had  no  stool,  but  the  pain  in  the  abdomen
ceased  after  much  tenesmus,  (12.  d.)  In  the  afternoon
and  night,  pinching  pain  and  tearing  lancinations  in  the
left  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  high  up  as  the  hypochondriac
region  and  the  sternum,  (7.  d.)  Towards  evening,  colic-
like pinching  and  tearing  in  the  body,  attended  with  chil-
liness in  the  body  ; relieved  by  warm  clothes  laid  over  the
body.  Colic,  attended  with  flatulency.  After  dinner,
violent  fits  of  colic,  the  whole  afternoon ; short  sleep  re-
lieves them  ; as  soon  as  he  moves,  it  seems  as  if  the  fits
would  return,  attended  with  tenesmus  and  occasional  ex-
pulsion of  excrements  ; this  lasts  until  evening  ; the  anus
feels  sore,  with  a sensation  as  of  stinging,  so  that  he  can-
not sit  down  without  suffering  pain  ; on  the  following  day,
liquid  slime  frequently  passes  off  by  the  rectum,  without
his  desiring  it,  (a.  14  d.)  Sense  as  of  tearing  in  the  ab-
domen, early  after  rising.  Pain  in  both  sides  of  the  ab-


ARGtLLA.


51


domen,  as  if  something  would  tear  ; the  pain  extends  to
the  thighs,  and  is  felt  when  the  person  makes  bodily  exer-
tions. Frequently  cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  without
distention  or  stool,  (2.  d.)  Upon  sitting  crooked,  the  per-
son experiences  acute  cutting  pains  transversely  across  the
abdomen,  (a.  5 h.)  Violent  cutting  and  rumbling  in  the
whole  abdomen ; the  pain  rises  up  to  the  stomach  in  the
shape  of  violent  twisting;  this  is  succeeded  by  an  intense-
ly pressive  pain  in  the  chest,  which  arrests  the  breathing ;
from  four  in  the  afternoon  until  eleven  at  night..  Drawing
pain  in  the  abdomen.  Stitches  moving  about  in  the  abdo-
men and  the  hypochondria,  as  if  something  would  press
out,  (7.  d.)  Grinding  around  the  navel,  as  after  a cold,
in  the  afternoon,  (2.  d.)  Moving  to  and  fro,  and  painless
dull  rending  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  half  an  hour.)  Pain  in
the  abdomen,  as  after  a copious  evacuation,  which  leaves
a sort  of  desire  for  stool  behind,  (a.  10  d.)  Pain  in  the
epigastrium,  as  if  the  person  were  threatened  with  diar-
rhoea ; this  is  succeeded  by  soft  stool,  without  any  dimi-
nution of  the  pain,  (11.  d.)  Colic  followed  by  diarrhoea;
this  was  succeeded  by  a violent  pain  in  the  abdomen,  at
the  place  where,  when  a girl,  she  had  had  an  internal  ulcer,
which  opened  ; the  pain  was  like  that  experienced  by  a
violent  blow  ; she  had  to  move  her  hand  along  the  place
and  lay  the  hand  upon  it,  whilst  the  body  was  curved  ; this
relieved  the  pain  somewhat ; the  pain  had  lasted  uniformly
the  whole  day,  either  sitting  or  standing,  (17.  d.)  Violent
pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  an  ulcer  were
forming  ; attended  with  nausea,  (34.  d.)  The  pain  in  the
abdomen  can  be  diminished  by  the  application  of  warmth.
Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  afternoon.
Sudden  sensation  as  of  burning  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
afternoon.  Pain  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.  Pain  in
the  region  of  both  kidneys,  over  the  small  of  the  back,
as  from  a bruise,  or  after  driving  upon  rough  roads  ; it
is  worse  on  stooping  or  turning  ; she  feels  as  if  a hook
were  plunged  into  her  ; the  pain  makes  her  scream,
and  lasts  for  a few  days,  (4.  d.)  Pain  in  the  loins,  espe-
cially on  walking  and  stooping,  (10.  d.)  Early  in  the
morning,  pain  in  the  kidneys  ; better  in  the  afternoon.
Pinching  and  stitches  in  the  hypogastrium  and  the  lumbar
regions,  on  ascending  the  stairs.  Sharp  cutting  and  burn-


52


ALUMINA.


ing  in  the  lumbar  regions,  the  whole  afternoon,  until  even-
ing. Pulsative  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  abdominal  ring,  when  sitting,  (4.  d.)
Pressing  in  both  lumbar  regions  towards  the  sexual  organs,
in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)

Intestines  and  Stool. — ‘Lancinating  and  pressive  pain
in  the  region  of  the  abdominal  ring,  as  if  a hernia  would
press  out  there,  attended  with  tension  as  far  as  the  side  of
the  abdomen  ; at  the  same  time  a tumour  may  be  felt  at
the  painful  spot,  which  feels  like  a strangulated 'hernia.
Inguinal  hernia  protrudes  with  violence,  (a.  half  an  h.)
Hernia  did  not  protrude  in  the  first  days  then  it  pro-
truded every  day  until  the  twelfth  day  ; on  the  thirtieth
day  hernia  threatened  to  become  strangulated  ; then  it
protruded  every  day  until  the  fiftieth  day,  although  the
protrusion  diminished  from  day  to  day,  and  finally  ceased
for  several  months.  Hernia  protrudes  a good  deal  towards
evening,  becomes  constricted  in  the  lumbar  region  under
the  most  violent  pain,  which  obliged  her  to  bend  her  body,
and  did  not  suffer  her  to  walk  ; the  hernia  could  not  be  re-
duced ; half  an  hour  afterwards,  when  the  person  was  sit-
ting quietly,  this  reduction  took  place  of  its  own  accord,
(30.  d ) In  the  abdominal  muscles,  over  the  left  lumbar
region,  she  experiences  a drawing  pain  for  a quarter  of  an
hour,  when  she  is  dancing,  or  walking  fast.  Shootings,
causing  a sensation  of  anxious  surprise,  in  the  left  side  of
the  abdomen,  (2.  d.)  Straining  of  the  abdominal  muscles,
consequent  upon  reaching  high.  Sensation  of  distention,
as  if  the  abdomen  became  more  and  more  full,  after  sup-
per, (5.  d.)  Fulness  of  the  abdomen,  attended  with  orgasm
extending  towards  the  chest,  after  dinner,  for  several  days,
(a.  3d.)  Great  distention  of  the  abdomen,  attended  with
empty  eructations  and  two  soft  evacuations,  without  relief,
(18.  d.)  After  dinner,  a good  deal  of  distention,  attended
with  tenesmus  ; this  was  afterwards  succeeded  by  the
passage  of  two  hard  clots  of  excrements  ; afterwards  she
went  to  walk  ; during  her  walking,  the  distention  of  the
abdomen  continued  in  spite  of  her  flatulency  being  emitted
in  great  abundance  ; no  relief  was  obtained  till  a copious
evacuation  occurred  after  her  walk,  (9.  d.)  Painful  dis-
tention of  the  abdomen  at  night,  which  prevents  her  from


ARGILLA.


53


sleeping;  accompanied  with  retention  of  stools,  (11.  d.)
The  abdomen  is  distended  and  very  hard,  without  any  sen-
sation of  pain.  Grumbling  in  the  abdomen,  attended  with
anxiety,  without  any  flatulency  passing  off,  (1.  d.)  Loud
grumbling  and  shrieking  in  the  abdomen,  without  pain.
Quantity  of  grumbling  flatus  in  the  abdomen  ; however,
they  pass  off  freely,  attended  with  a feeling  of  weakness
of  the  sphincter  ani.  A good  deal  of  audible  rumbling
and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Loud  grumbling  in  the
abdomen,  also  after  dinner.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,
succeeded  by  eructations.  Frequent  desire  of  emitting
flatulence.  Emission  of  flatulence,  which  relieves  the
sense  of  fulness  of  the  stomach,  in  the  evening,  (5.  d.)
Emits  a quantity  of  flatulence.  Quantity  of  badly  smell-
ing flatus,  which  pass  off  in  the  night,  and  after  din-
ner, (1.  7.  d.)  Tenesmus,  (3.  d.)  Tenesmus,  (1.  d.)
Retention  of  stool,  (8.  11.  d.)  No  stool  during  the
first  days.  Evacuates  the  bowels  only  once  every  two
days  ; the  stools  are  firm,  sometimes  mixed  with  blood.
* Tenesmus,  lasting  a long  while,  and  succeeding  a
troublesome  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  the  evacuation
comes  on  slowly,  and  can  only  be  effected  by  straining
the  abdominal  muscles  ; the  whole  of  the  intestines  ap-
pears to  be  inactive  for  want  of  peristaltic  motion.  Stools
are  not  hard,  (a.  2 d.)  * The  rectum  is  inactive,  as  if  it

were  deficient  in  peristaltic  motion,  and  had  not  strength
enough  to  press  the  contents  out.  The  stools  are  soft  and
thin,  and  can  only  be  pressed  out  by  straining  the  abdom-
inal muscles,  (a.  16  h.)  * The  rectum  seems  paralyzed,

(2.  d.)  * Hard  and  difficult  stools,  attended  with  pain  in

the  rectum.  Involuntary  emission  of  urine,  occasioned  by
bearing  down  in  order  to  evacuate  the  intestines,  which
can  only  be  effected  with  great  difficulty,  (2.  d.)  * Bear-

ing down,  during  an  evacuation  ; the  stools  are  very  firm,
knotty,  and  scanty  ; previously  to  going  to  stool,  tenes-
mus, (2.  d.)  Firm,  hard,  scanty  stools,  attended  with
pressure  and  pain  in  the  rectum,  and  difficult  evacuation,
(the  first  days  ) Evacuation  of  a small  quantity  of  hard
faeces,  attended  with  pressure  and  a sensation  of  excoria-
tion in  the  rectum.  Stools  too  scanty.  Stools  covered  all
over  with  whitish  slime,  firm,  preceded  by  oppression  in


64


ALUMINA.


the  region  of  the  stomach  ; it  ceases  immediately  after  the
evacuation,  (a.  30  d.)  Bright-coloured  stools.  The  first
portion  of  her  stools  is  liquid,  and  is  expelled  with  a jerk  ;
the  last  portion  appears  burned,  (5.  d.)  The  evacuation
which  generally  took  place  in  the  evening,  took  place  al-
ready in  the  morning.  For  some  time  she  has  three  or
four  ordinary  evacuations  a day,  without  feeling  any  trou-
ble. Stools  almost  liquid,  attended  with  a burning  sensa-
tion in  the  rectum  ; she  has  also  an  evacuation  in  the  even-
ing, preceded  by  tenesmus  ; another  evacuation  in  the
night,  (2.  5.  d.)  Short  attacks  of  diarrhoea,  attended  with
colic,  lasting  for  about  two — three  days.  Diarrhoea,  suc-
ceeding colic.  Diarrhoea,  succeeding  a retention  of  stool
which  had  lasted  six  days  ; six  evacuations  a day,  every
evacuation  being  preceded  by  colic,  which  sometimes
continued  even  after  the  evacuation  had  taken  place.  Li-
quid stools,  preceded  by  ordinary  pain  in  the  abdomen,  or
attended  with  colic,  (3.  5.  d.)  Twice  a diarrhoea,  in  the
evening;  the  stools  at  last  become  clotty,  (2.  d.)  Diar-
rhea, attended  with  tenesmus.  Tenesmus  of  the  rectum
and  the  bladder,  passing  off  after  an  evacuation.  Dis-
agreeable pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  before  the
evacuation  had  taken  place,  (9.  d.)  Colic  preceding  an
evacuation  ; the  stools  are  sometimes  solid,  sometimes  soft,
but  always  scanty.  Tenesmus,  preceding  an  evacuation.
After  an  evacuation,  desire  for  stool  in  the  epigastrium
and  in  the  sides  of  the  abdomen,  without  tenesmus.  Dur-
ing an  evacuation,  he  felt  as  if  the  rectum  were  desic-
cated and  constricted  ; however,  the  stool  was  regular.
Chills  over  the  whole  body,  during  an  evacuation,  in  the
evening,  (5.  d.)  After  the  evacuation,  beating  in  the  small
of  the  back.  After  an  evacuation,  and  during  the  period
of  digestion,  he  experiences  a sense  as  of  scraping  in  the
stomach  and  the  mouth.  * Pricking,  as  with  pins,  in  the
orifice  of  the  rectum,  after  a difficult  evacuation.  * Sen-
sation  of  excoriation  in  the  rectum,  after  an  evacuation  at-
tended with  contraction  of  the  rectum  and  constriction  of
the  orifice.  Difficult  evacuation,  the  stools  being  hard  and
of  the  shape  of  laurel-berries,  attended  with  cutting  pain
in  the  orifice  of  the  rectum,  as  if  it  were  too  narrow.  This
is  succeeded  by  a j^f  of  blood  from  the  rectum,  followed


ARGILLA.


55


by  soreness  in  and  all  along  the  rectum,  (a.  17  d.)  During
an  evacuation,  blood  drops  out  at  the  rectum.  Blood
comes  off  during  an  evacuation  of  firm  stools,  (9.  and  30.  d.)
Bloody  mucus  comes  off  during  an  evacuation,  and  without
it.  When  walking,  dark-coloured  blood  passed  out  of  her
rectum.  Protrusion  of  a varix  of  the  rectum  ; it  distends
by  walking,  and  decreases  during  a night’s  rest.  Varices
of  the  rectum  always  distend  in  the  evening  ; they  become
moist,  and  are  affected  with  a sensation  as  of  burning.  The
varices  become  moist,  are  affected  with  a lancinating  pain.

* Bad  itching  in  the  hollow  between  the  nates,  and  of  the
orifice  of  the  rectum  ; scratching  makes  it  worse,  (1.2.  d.)

* Itching  of  the  orifice  of  the  rectum  ; this  symptom  exists
for  a good  while,  (a.  30  d.)  Itching  and  burning  of  the
orifice  of  the  rectum.  Itching,  burning,  and  stinging  of
the  rectum.  Itching  of  the  rectum,  attended  with  a pulsa-
tive  sensation  in  the  rectum,  as  of  ascarides.  Pressure  in
the  rectum,  (3.  d.)  Painful  pressure  in  the  perineum,  which
passes  off  quietly.  Momentary  pressure  in  the  perineum,
on  blowing  the  nose.  Upon  touching  the  perineum,  there
is  a pain  as  from  a bruise.  Stitches  in  the  perineum.
(Soreness  of  the  perineum  during  a common  clap,)  (a.  4.
w.)  Sensation  as  if  the  perineum  were  inflamed.  Sweat
of  the  perineum,  attended  with  an  intolerable  itching,  which
increases  and  becomes  painful  on  friction.

Urinary  Organs. Pressure  and  drawing  in  the

region  of  the  bladder,  especially  at  the  neck  of  the
bladder,  (4.  and  5.  d.)  Lancinations  and  shootings  in
the  urethra,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  ; the  lancina-
tions ascend  towards  the  hypogastrium.  Itching  and
burning  in  the  urethra.  Agreeable  and  delightfully-volup-
tuous  itching  in  the  urethra  and  between  the  testicles.
(Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  anterior  portion  of  the  urethra,  as
if  the  skin  there  were  without  any  sensibility ; especially
in  the  morning.)  Sensation  of  heat  in  the  urethra,  which
passes  off  by  lying  still.  Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  ure-
thra and  the  genital  organs  ; he  fears  that  he  will  wet  his
bed  ; in  the  evening.  Violent  tenesmus  of  the  bladder.
Tenesmus  of  the  bladder;  however,  the  urine  does  not
pass  off  in  an  increased  quantity,  (soon  after  having  taken
the  medicine.)  Tenesmus  of  the  bladder,  early  in  the


56


ALUMINA.


morning,  on  waking  up;  the  urine  passes  off  in  a thin  stream
from  the  female  urethra,  the  emission  being  difficult  and
tardy,  (7.  d.)  He  is  frequently  obliged  to  rise  during  the
night,  for  the  purpose  of  urinating,  (1.  4.  d.)  Large
quantity  of  water-coloured  urine.  Increased  secretion  of
urine  for  several  days.  Frequent  and  copious  emission  of
pale  urine,  (preceded  by  burning  in  the  urethra.)  In-
creased secretion  of  pale  (warm)  urine,  attended  with
burning.  Emission  of  a quantity  of  straw-yellow,  clear
urine,  (4.  5.  d.)  Rare,  but  copious  emission  of  urine,  (6.  d.)
Frequent  emission  of  urine  in  little  quantity,  in  the  even-
ing, (1.  d.)  Decrease  of  urine,  (early  in  the  morning,  at-
tended with  cutting  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra,)
(4.  5.  6.  d.)  For  a whole  day  there  is  no  evacuation,
either  of  urine  or  feces.  No  emission  of  urine  in  the  fore-
noon ; but,  in  the  afternoon,  the  person  frequently  emits
an  increased  quantity  of  reddish  urine,  which  becomes
turbid  during  the  night,  and  forms  a sediment,  (1.  d.)
She  emits  but  little  urine,  which  forms  a sediment  of  red
sand.  The  urine,  of  a high  yellow  colour,  soon  forms  a
large  and  loose  cloud,  (1.  5.  d.)  When  standing,  the
urine  forms  a thick  white  sediment.  Pale  urine,  with  a
turbid  sediment.  White,  turbid  urine,  as  if  chalk  had
been  stirred  with  it.  (Twisted  stream  of  urine.)  (When  he
intends  to  urinate,  he  has  a sort  of  fright.)  When  uri-
nating, there  is  a sensation  as  of  burning  by  fire,  much
worse  in  the  evening,  (1.  d.)  (After  having  been  sitting
for  a rather  long  time,  he  feels  no  uneasiness  in  urinating ;
but  as  soon  as  he  takes  a little  exercise,  he  feels  a burning
pain.)  Cutting  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra  during
micturition,  and  even  a while  afterwards,  as  if  the  urine
passed  over  an  inflamed  place,  (a.  18  d.)  After  the  ex-
pulsion of  the  urine,  the  urethra  became  hot ; this  was  suc-
ceeded by  a sensation  as  of  burning  and  tenesmus  of  both
the  rectum  and  the  bladder.  (Urinating  is  followed  by  a
sensation  as  of  burning,  which  makes  him  low-spirited  and
desponding.)  Involuntary  emission  of  urine,  at  least
twenty  times  a day ; very  little  urine  passes  off  at  a time  ;
(this  person  had  a clap,)  (a.  4 w.)

Generative  Functions. — Pressure  in  the  sexual  organs.
Tickling  of  the  sexual  organs  and  the  thighs.  Formication
upon  the  glans.  Itching  of  the  glans,  (4.  d.)  Traction,


ARGILLA.


57


from  the  glans  through  the  urethra,  (a.  5 d.)  On  moving
his  hand  along  the  penis,  he  experiences  a drawing  and
pinching  pain,  which  extends  as  far  as  the  glans;  attended
with  weak  appetite.  Sensation  as  if  the  glans  were  com-
pressed, for  two  minutes.  (Clap,  for  more  than  six  weeks,
(a.  14  d.)  attended  with  a violent  and  painful  swelling  of
the  inguinal  glands  of  the  right  side,  cutting  pain  during
micturition,  and  pain  in  the  perineum  ; these  symptoms
are  especially  violent  at  the  end  of  the  second  week  ; the
pain  in  the  perineum  is  especially  violent  when  standing,
rising,  or  sitting  down.)  Secretion  of  a quantity  of
greasy  matter  behind  the  prepuce.  Soreness  on  the  inner
surface  of  the  prepuce.  Painful  contraction  in  the  right
spermatic  cord  ; the  testicle  of  the  right  side  is  drawn  up
simultaneously,  and  is  also  very  sore  and  painful,  (2.  d.)
The  left  testicle  is  hard,  and  indescribably  painful  to  the
touch.  Itching  of  the  scrotum  ; scratching  removes  it,
(2.  d.)  At  first,  the  sexual  instinct  appears  to  be  lessened,
and  the  erections  appear  to  be  increased  ; whereas,  in  the
reaction  of  the  organism,  the  desire  for  an  embrace  in-
creases, although  erection  is  wanting.  Want  of  sexual
instinct,  (immediately,  for  several  days.)  Indifferent  to
sexual  intercourse.  During  the  first  weeks,  the  sexual
instinct  is  more  intense  ; in  the  following  weeks,  that  in-
stinct is  decreasing,  and  becomes  more  moderate.  Nu-
merous erections,  in  the  evening,  and  during  the  night
when  lying  in  bed,  and  in  the  afternoon  when  sitting,
(1.3.  d.)  (Priapism  during  the  night.)  (When  waking,
during  the  night,  he  has  constantly  painful  erections  ;
they  are  not  perfect,  but  they  cause  a sensation  as  if  the
organ  were  ulcerated  internally,  accompanied  by  short,
fine,  piercing  stitches  in  the  whole  organ,  resembling  shoot-
ings,) (a.  4 w.)  Frequent  and  violent  erections  and  in-
voluntary effusions  of  semen,  (a.  8 and  33  d.)  Involun-
tary effusions  of  semen,  two  nights  in  succession,  (a.  15  d.)
Involuntary  effusions  of  semen,  the  first  four  nights,  at-
tended with  voluptuous  dreams.  Almost  every  other  night
he  has  an  involuntary  effusion  of  semen,  accompanied  by
voluptuous  dreams.  Involuntary  effusion  of  semen  during
the  afternoon  nap.  All  the  symptoms  which  he  had  ex-
hibited heretofore,  appear  again,  and  become  aggravated

3*


68


ALUMINA.


in  consequence  of  an  involuntary  effusion  of  semen,  (2.  d.)
Violent  pressure  in  the  perineum,  at  the  commencement
of  an  embrace  and  during  erections.  Pressure  in  the  pe-
rineum, during  an  embrace.  (During  an  embrace,  the
semen  passes  off  in  the  shape  of  a thick  and  clotty  jelly.)
Jerking  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  pudendum,  extend-
ing as  far  as  the  chest.  Pain,  like  the  tick  of  a watch,  on
the  left  side  of  the  vagina;  this  is  accompanied  by  a sen-
sation as  of  beating  in  the  bag  of  pus  of  an  ulcer,  which
continues  for  two  days,  without  being  affected  by  any
change  of  conditions ; however,  nothing  could  either  be  seen
or  felt,  (36.  d.)  The  menses  are  scanty,  and  last  only  three
days.  Menses  scanty  and  pale,  (a.  3 d.)  Menses  appear
too  soon,  (by  3,  1 1 days,)  short  and  scanty.  The  period
had  already  delayed  ten  days  ; (after  52  d.  ;)  during  a
walk  and  a desire  for  urinating,  a little  dark-coloured  lymph
passed  off ; the  menses  did  not  appear  till  the  third  month,
(in  a woman  of  forty-eight  years.)  The  menses,  which
had  gradually  stopped,  appear  again,  (a.  17  d.)  Appear-
ance of  scanty  menses,  (a.  9 d.  ;)  four  weeks  later,  (a.  37
d.,)  they  flow  copiously.  The  period  came  on  five  days
loo  early  ; a copious  flow,  on  the  second  day,  lasted  eight
days,  as  usually  ; preceded  by  pain  in  the  abdomen  ; diar-
rhoea on  the  sixth  day.  Uneasy  sleep  before  the  appear-
ance of  the  menses  ; many  dreams  ; on  waking  up  from
her  dreams,  she  has  orgasm,  heat  in  the  face,  headache,
and  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Six  days  before  the  appear-
ance of  the  menses  she  has  a copious  flow  of  mucus  from
the  vagina,  accompanied  by  tremor,  lassitude,  and  a sensa-
tion as  of  every  thing  falling  out  of  her  abdomen.  A few
days  before  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  she  has  cutting
pains  in  the  abdomen  during  an  evacuation,  as  if  she  were
to  have  a diarrhoea ; attended  with  pinching,  writhing,  and
pressing,  like  labour-pains.  During  the  menses,  pinching
in  the  abdomen,  and  greater  lassitude  than  usual.  During
the  menses,  bloated  abdomen,  and  too  large  a flow  of  blood.
The  menses  appear  on  the  sixth  day,  without  any  dis-
agreeable symptoms  ; two  days  later,  a cold  comes  on,  with
pain  in  the  nose,  the  head,  and  the  forehead ; this  pain
increases  on  blowing  the  nose  ; in  the  latter  days,  diarrhoea
and  colic  supervene  besides.  During  her  menses,  she


ARGILLA.


59


was  obliged  to  urinate  frequently,  day  and  night ; this
corroded  the  genital  organs,  (6.  d.)  The  menses  appear
four  days  too  soon  ; they  are  preceded  by  violent  headache,
which  ceased  on  the  appearance  of  the  menses  ; after  they
had  flowed  for  one  day,  the  headache  came  on  again,  and
continued  during  the  whole  period,  for  five  days  ; the
menses  were  less  copious  than  generally,  (a.  22  d.)  After
the  menses  had  ceased  to  flow,  body  and  mind  felt  ex-
hausted ; a little  work  and  moderate  walking  laid  her
prostrate,  and  made  her  feel  low-spirited,  Leucorrhoea.
The  leucorrhoea  with  which  she  was  affected,  ceased.
Leucorrhoea,  succeeding  the  menses,  painless,  lasting
three  days,  (a.  27  d.)  Frequently  acrid  leucorrhoea.
Acrid  leucorrhoea,  accompanied  by  a burning  sensation  in
the  genital  organs,  and  still  more  in  the  rectum  ; these
parts  seemed  inflamed  and  corroded,  so  that  she  found
walking  difficult ; washing  the  parts  with  cold  water  re-
lieved her  ; the  leucorrhoea  was  very  abundant,  and  flowed
almost  over  her  feet ; at  the  same  time  blood,  resembling
lymph,  came  off  for  two  days,  three  days  after  the  menses,
{22.  d.)  Leucorrhoea,  looking  like  lymph,  in  the  afternoon
when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (and  when  sitting,)  also  at
night.  Abundant  leucorrhoea  of  transparent  mucus,  only
in  day-time,  without  sensation  or  pain  in  the  abdomen.
Leucorrhoea,  quite  clear,  like  water  or  transparent  mucus;
it  made  the  shirt  stiff,  (a.  8 d.)  Leucorrhoea  of  yellow
mucus,  (a.  some  d.)  Itching  in  the  vagina,  during  the
leucorrhoea.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Frequent  sneezing,  (and  hiccough,)
without  coryza,  (1.  2.  7.  d.)  The  nose  is  stopped  up , (1.  d.)
Obstruction  of  the  left  nostril,  (10.  d.)  Indisposition,  as
from  a cold  which  cannot  acquire  full  development.  Sen-
sation in  the  nose,  as  if  a cold  were  to  come  on,  in  the
evening,  for  several  days,  (4.  d.)  Cold,  accompanied  by
sneezing,  and  obstruction  of  the  nose,  the  whole  day,  (3.  d.)
Dry  cold  in  the  nose,  (9.  d.)  Violent  and  dry  cold  in  the
head,  especially  at  night,  attended  with  great  dryness  of
the  mouth.  Violent  and  running  coryza  at  the  left  nostril,
appearing  all  of  a sudden  ; the  right  nostril  being  obstruct-
ed entirely.  First,  fluent  coryza,  then  dry  cold  in  the  head


60


ALUMINA.


so  that  both  nostrils  are  entirely  obstructed.  Secretion  of
a quantity  of  thick  and  viscid  mucus  from  the  nose.  Water
runs  from  the  right  nostril,  without  there  being  a cold.
Running  coryza,  (with  impurity  of  voice,)  in  the  afternoon
and  early  in  the  morning,  (4.  6.  d.)  Running  coryza,
attended  with  frequent  sneezing  and  running  at  the  eyes.
Snoring  during  the  afternoon-nap,  (6.  d.)

Throat,  Respiratory  Organs. — Rattling  and  piping
in  the  nose,  with  impurity  of  voice,  in  the  afternoon,  (3.  d.)
Rattling  in  the  chest,  caused  by  mucus,  (5.  d.)  Sibilus
in  the  trachea,  and  sensation  as  of  smothering  in  the  chest,
during  breathing.  Phlegm  in  the  trachea,  which  is  always
adherent ; upon  clearing  the  throat,  which  is  constantly
necessary,  only  a small  portion  of  phlegm  becomes  de-
tached. On  wraking  up,  early  in  the  morning,  his  throat
is  rough,  and  his  chest  feels  oppressed  ; he  cannot  succeed
in  clearing  his  throat,  and  is  obliged  to  sneeze  a good
deal,  (a.  12  h.)  Feeling  of  dryness  in  both  sides  of  the
chest,  (15.  d.)  Hoarseness,  early  in  the  morning,  (16.  d.)
She  is  frequently  attacked  with  sudden  hoarseness,  which
caused  a loss  of  voice,  and  could  not  be  relieved  by  clear-
ing the  throat ; mostly  in  the  afternoon  and  evening.
Hoarseness  and  rancidity  of  the  throat,  the  whole  after-
noon, (a.  5 d.)  Rawness  (the  German  term,  literally,
means  scraping)  and  roughness  of  the  throat,  which  in-
duces coughing,  (in  the  evening,)  (4.  d.)  Violent  tickling
in  the  throat,  exciting  frequent  cough,  (4.  d.)  Irritation  in
the  larynx,  inducing  cough.  Irritation  to  cough,  attended
with  frequent  spitting  ol  saliva.  Cough,  with  scraping  in
the  throat.  Cough,  which  makes  the  chest  feel  sore,  in
the  forenoon,  (3.  d.)  Cough,  with  painful  pressure  in  the
occiput.  Frequently  short  and  dry  cough,  in  the  forenoon
and  evening.  Short  fits  of  cough,  attended  with  tearing
and  shooting  pain  in  the  right  temple  and  the  vertex.  Vio-
lent, short,  dry  cough,  which  lasts  a good  while,  attended
with  sneezing  ; and  tearing,  lancinating  and  pinching  pain,
extending  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  as  far  as  the  right
axilla.  Dry  cough,  at  night,  attended  with  dryness  of  the
throat,  (a.  24  h.)  Dry  cough,  coming  suddenly  early  in
the  morning,  and  passing  off  quickly,  or  else  continuing
when  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  then  also  continuing  in


ARGTLLA.


61


the  room,  (1.  6.  d.)  Continual  dry  cough , attended  with
vomiting  and  arrest  ( incarceration ) of  breath , and  lanci-
nating pain,  extending  from  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen
to  the  hypochondrium  and  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Violent
dry  cough,  during  the  day  ; every  fit  lasts  long  ; only  two
days  afterwards,  the  cough  became  less  frequent,  and
more  loose.  Violent  and  dry  cough,  early  on  waking  up  ;
a little  later  it  is  accompanied  by  a little  discharge  from
the  mouth,  (4.  6.  d.)  Cough,  with  a quantity  of  expecto-
rated matter,  especially  early  in  the  morning.  (The  morn-
ing cough  and  expectoration  ceased,  curative  effect;)  (5.  d.)
(Cough,  accompanied  by  discharge,  the  throat  being  rough
and  hoarse,  accompanied  by  a cold  in  the  head.)  Cough,
attended  with  secretion  of  loose  mucus  ; curative  effect.
Suddenly  violent,  but  short  cough  ; by  making  an  effort,
he  succeeds  in  throwing  up  a piece  of  phlegm,  mixed
with  blood,  in  the  afternoon,  (5.  d.)  Difficult  breathing,
in  the  forenoon.  His  chest  feels  oppressed.  Oppression
at  the  chest,  (1.  d.)  Sensation  in  the  throat  as  if  it  were
narrowed,  and  as  if  the  air  were  cut  off,  as  in  a violent  sore
throat,  after  a cold,  or  in  an  inflammation  of  the  throat  ;
the  symptom  always  lasts  only  a few  minutes,  (the  first
7 d.)

Chest. — Oppression  at  the  chest.  Oppression,  orgasm,
and  pulsations  in  the  chest,  (a.  2 h.)  The  chest  feels
contracted,  accompanied  by  a feeling  of  apprehension,
(11.  d.)  Sensation  of  constriction  around  the  chest,  when
stooping,  while  the  person  is  sitting  ; it  passes  off  on  right-
ing the  head,  in  the  afternoon,  (1.  d.)  When  stooping
during  some  work,  her  chest  felt  constricted,  so  that  she
was  scarcely  able  to  breathe,  as  if  she  had  been  laced  too
tightly  ; the  symptom  passed  off,  when  walking  in  the  open
air,  (9.  d.)  During  a violent  effort,  lifting,  carrying,  etc.,
there  was  a pain  in  the  chest,  on  the  left  side  of  the  ster-
num, accompanied  by  a sensation  of  soreness  in  that  place
on  being  touched,  (a.  10  d.)  Feeling  of  soreness  in  the
interior  of  the  chest,  when  moving  or  turning  the  body.
Painful  sensation,  as  if  the  chest  became  wide.  Weight
on  the  chest,  with  shortness  of  breath,  without  cough  ;
only  in  the  afternoon,  (18.  d.)  Oppressive  pain  at  the
chest  ; the  chest  feels  tight.  Oppression  at  the  chest.


62


ALUMINA,


Oppression  at  the  chest,  when  stooping  while  writing.
Sensation  of  oppressive  dryness  under  the  sternum.
Pressure  at  the  sternum,  worse  in  the  evening,  when
walking.  Sensation  of  hard  pressure  during  active  exer-
cise, high  up  on  both  sides  of  the  chest,  less  when  sitting,
completely  disappearing  on  lying  down  ; touching  the  parts
does  not  affect  this  symptom.  Erratic  pressure  in  the
chest.  Pressure  in  the  chest,  followed  by  empty  eructa-
tions, which  do  not  procure  any  relief;  the  pressure  some-
times reaches  as  far  as  the  back,  and  increases  by  walking,
in  the  forenoon,  (1.  20.  d.)  Pressure  at  the  chest,  at-
tended with  shortness  of  breath  and  irritation  to  cough  ;
the  cough  often  goes  and  comes.  Pressure  at  the  chest
during  an  already  existing  cough,  and  after  the  cough  had
gone  ; during  the  pressure,  a paralytic  pain  suddenly  ex-
tends through  the  arm,  so  that  the  arm  becomes  weary,
and  is  deprived  of  strength,  (a.  half  an  h.)  Oppressive
pain  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  alternating  with  a sensa-
tion of  tightening,  and  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  es-
pecially after  dinner,  (8.  9.  day.)  At  night , violently  op-
pressive pain  at  the  chesty  which  disturbs  the  otherwise
calm  sleep,  and  is  not  increased  by  breathing,  but  by
bending  the  head  over  ; several  days,  (a.  5.  d.)  Pressure
at  the  chest,  with  shortness  of  breath,  at  night,  when  lying
upon  the  back  ; passing  off  when  lying  upon  the  side,
(2.  d.)  Disagreeable  feeling  of  constriction  below  the
right  side  of  the  chest,  at  a small  spot,  (a.  2 h.)  Pinching
pain  in  the  superior  part  of  the  chest,  in  the  evening,  when
sitting,  (1.  d.)  Pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  cut  or  sore,
after  dinner,  until  ten  o’clock  in  the  evening  ; relieved  after
lying  down  ; next  morning  the  pain  returns,  during  a
cough,  attended  with  a feeling  of  languor  in  the  chest,  and
is  then  accompanied  by  empty  eructations  and  short  breath.
(7.  d.)  When  walking  fast,  sensation  as  of  cutting  and
pressure  in  the  chest ; relieved  by  sitting,  a fortnight,
(a.  20.  d.)  At  the  inferior  part  of  the  sternum,  pain  as
from  excoriation,  which  extends  to  the  stomach ; after-
wards, hoarseness.  Soreness  in  the  chest  and  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  accompanied  by  fatiguing  cough,  running
of  the  eyes,  and  tenacious  phlegm.  Erratic  stitches  in  the
chest,  sometimes  made  worse  by  breathing,  sometimes


ARG1LLA.


63


burning.  Lancination  passing  like  lightning  from  the  right
loin  to  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  through  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  when  breathing.  When  stooping,  a lancination
coming  out  at  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  and  reaching
the  middle  of  the  chest ; the  lancination  comes  on  at  every
inspiration  ; afterwards  also,  when  standing  straight.
Stitches  high  up  in  both  sides  of  the  chest,  during  active
exercise  ; when  sitting  or  walking,  there  are  no  stitches,
but  only  pressure  accompanied  by  arrest  (incarceralion)  of
breath.  Stitches  under  the  sternum,  augmented  by  talk-
ing ; at  the  same  time,  a feeling  of  compression  of  the
chest,  as  if  she  were  tightly  laced,  (35.  d ) Sharp  stitches
in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  (3.  d.)  Boring  pain,  some-
times in  the  middle,  sometimes  in  the  sides  of  the  chest,
made  worse  by  breathing,  sometimes  in  the  evening  ; re-
lieved by  righting  the  body,  and  walking.  Chilliness  in
the  interior  of  the  sternum.  Continual  warmth  in  the
middle  of  the  chest,  (a.  5 minutes.)  Heat  in  the  anterior
part  of  the  chest ; she  feels  the  heat  when  breathing.
Burning  in  the  whole  right  side  of  the  chest,  accompanied
by  stitches  and  straining  in  a false  rib  of  the  right  side,  in
the  afternoon,  (I.  d.)  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  every  day,
on  waking  up.  Frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart;  a few
irregular  beats,  large  and  small  ones  being  intermixed.  Fine
stitches  in  the  left  mamma,  at  nine  o’clock  in  the  morning,
(2.  d.)  External  pressure  at  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,
(diminished  somewhat  by  friction.)  Itching  upon  the
sternum,  which  goes  off  by  scratching,  (15.  d ) Formi-
cation of  the  left  clavicle,  (and  over  the  right  half  of  the
chest,  accompanied  by  a biting  titillation  ;)  the  spot  burns
upon  being  scratched  ; burning  vesicles  make  their  appear-
ance, (16.  d.)  Blister  on  the  right  half  of  the  chest  and
at  the  neck,  accompanied  by  a sensation  as  of  burning
pain  ; moreover,  glowing  heat  in  the  face,  and  chills  in
the  rest  of  the  body ; sleeps  soundly,  and  without
dreams.

Back.— -Itching  of  the  os  coccygis.  Painful  twitches  at
the  point  of  the  sacrum,  in  the  forenoon,  (2.  d.)  Sensation  in
the  right  ilium  as  of  both  sides  being  pressed  together  with
a vice,  (1.  d.)  Gnawing  pain  in  the  sacrum,  not  altered  by
walking,  relieved  by  stretching,  ( 1 . d.  in  the  evening  ) Vio-


64


ALUMINA,


lent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  like  gnawing;  the  pain  rises
up  to  between  the  shoulders,  where  it  becomes  so  violent
that  she  would  like  to  weep,  (relieved  by  chamomile,)  (32.
d.)  Lancinations  in  the  small  of  the  back,  in  the  evening
before  falling  asleep,  in  bed.  Tearing  jerkings  in  the
small  of  the  back,  especially  during  motion.  Pain  in  the
small  of  the  back,  when  walking.  Violent  pain,  as  from
a bruise,  in  the  small  of  the  back,  and  (early  in  the  morn-
ing) in  the  sacrum,  on  touching  the  part,  (4.  7.  d.)  Pain ,
as from  bruises , in  the  small  of  the  back , and  in  the  back.
Pimples  upon  the  back.  Burning  itching,  like  a flea-bite,
in  the  left  lumbar  region  ; it  makes  him  startle  ; lasted  a
good  while,  and  did  not  go  oft  till  after  long  scratching.
Itching  of,  and  between,  the  scapulae.  Formication  and
stinging  in  the  whole  of  the  back  and  of  the  sacrum,  suc-
ceeded by  groaning  (grumbling)  pain.  Violent  pressure
in  the  back,  preceding  the  protrusion  of  a varix  from  the
rectum.  Tearing  pain  in  the  left  scapula,  (a.  34.  d.)  Vio-
lent pain  all  along  the  back  ; stitches  and  twitches,  so
that  she  cannot  stoop,  and  cannot  raise  any  thing  with  her
hand  ; increased  by  breathing,  (8.  d.)  Fine  stitches,  ex-
tending from  the  back  to  the  ribs,  (a.  2 b,)  From  time  to
time,  a violent  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  back.  Pain  in
the  back,  as  if  a hot  iron  were  thrust  through  the  lower
vertebrae.  Burning  at  the  superior  part  of  the  left  scapula,
diminished  somewhat  by  friction.  Stitches  and  cutting  in
the  scapulae,  attended  with  chilliness,  two  days  in  succes-
sion. Gnawing  and  stitches  in  the  scapulae,  (2.  d.)  Stitch-
es between  the  scapulae.  Stitches  between  (and  at)  the
scapulae,  accompanied  by  arrest  (incarceration)  of  breath,
(1.  2.  3.  d.)  Painful  stiffness  between  the  scapulae,  after-
wards moving  towards  the  ribs  and  kidneys.  Painful  ten-
sion between  the  scapulae,  in  the  forenoon,  (2.  d.)  Painful
traction  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  not  altered  by  friction
or  motion  of  the  head,  in  the  forenoon,  (1.  d.)

Neck. — Violent  tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  one
hour,  in  the  afternoon,  (1.  d.)  Early  in  the  morning,  stiff-
ness of  the  neck  and  the  upper  part  of  the  back,  accompa-
nied by  drawing  pains,  passing  off  by  motion,  (4.  d.)
Stitches  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Stitches  in  the  nape  of
the  neck,  and  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  where  they


ARG1LLA.


65


disappear  only  after  long  friction.  The  nape  of  the  neck  is
painful  on  moving  the  head.  Itching  in  the  nape  of  the
neck  and  of  the  neck , (a.  18  d.)  Violent  itching  of  the
neck,  and  on  the  chest,  as  if  she  were  bitten  by  fleas,  (a.
10  d.)  Violent  itching  of  the  neck,  nape  of  the  neck,  and
of  the  chest,  without  any  visible  eruption  ; on  touching  the
skin,  a hard  granule  is  felt  here  and  there,  (14.  d.)  Ve-
sicle on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  (8.  d.)  Stitches  in  the
glands  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  and  drawing  pressure
in  those  of  the  left  side,  (a.  half  an  h.  1 h.)  Stitches  in
the  neck,  on  the  left  side,  externally,  relieved  by  pressure  ;
attended  with  tearing  in  the  head  and  stitches  in  the  ears,
(a.  12  d.)  Drawing  and  pressure  in  the  glands  of  the  left
side  of  the  neck.  Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  left  side
of  the  neck.  Stiffness  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  so  that
she  cannot  turn  her  head  to  the  left  side.

Superior  Extremities. — Pain , as  from  a sprain , in
the  shoulder- joint , especially  on  moving  the  arm.  Fre-
quent tearing,  occurring  at  intervals,  in  both  axillas,  in  the
afternoon,  (4.  d.)  Sudden  jerk  or  concussion  in  the  right
shoulder,  (a.  2 h.)  Eruption,  transversely  across  the
shoulders,  consisting  of  small  red  elevations  with  a pointed
vesicle  in  the  middle  ; they  cause  some  burning,  only  in
the  evening,  (a.  6 and  14  d.)  Stitches  in  the  shoulders,
axillae  and  arms,  also  at  night.  Tearing,  at  very  different
periods,  in  the  arms  and  all  the  parts  thereof,  in  the  shoul-
ders, axillae,  upper  arms,  elbows,  fore  arms,  etc.  Tearing
in  the  arms,  from  the  upper  arm  to  the  fingers,  and  from
the  fingers  and  wrist-joints  to  the  shoulders.  Paralytic
pain  as  from  a bruise  in  the  arms,  sometimes  over  the
small  of  the  back,  coming  out  of  the  right  upper  arm,  and
going  to  the  left  lower  arm,  and  vice  versa.  Great  lassitude
in  the  arms,  which  the  person  is  scarcely  able  to  lift,  (3.  d.)
Lassitude  of  the  arms.  Great  weariness  of  one  arm.  Sense
of  tightness  in  the  arm,  as  from  cold.  Heat  in  the  right
arm,  from  time  to  time,  which  may  be  even  felt  externally.
Burning  sensation  (and  tension)  of  the  arms  (upper  arms)
and  fingers,  and  of  the  left  elbow,  as  from  a glowing  iron.
(Soft,  red)  swelling  of  the  arm,  and  violent  stitches  in  the
arm.  Itching  of  every  part  of  both  arms,  which  disappears
by  scratching.  Pain  in  the  left  upper  arm,  as  if  it  were


66


ALUMINA.


dislocated.  Drawing  pain  in  the  left  humerus,  (2.  d.)
Tearing  pain,  at  the  back  part  of  the  upper  arm,  extending
as  far  as  the  scapula  ; the  pain  is  felt  when  sneezing  and
coughing.  Stitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm,
(after  some  hours.)  Lancinations  in  the  upper  arm  and
the  elbow ; the  pain  seems  to  be  in  the  bone,  in  the  fore-
noon. Lancinating  pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  elbow
and  wrist-joint,.  Almost  constant  and  boring  pain  in  the
point  of  the  elbow.  Pain  over  the  point  of  the  elbow,  es-
pecially on  leaning  upon  it,  as  from  a sharp  pressure  at
the  upper  arm.  Painful  drawing  in  the  lower  arm,  when
at  rest.  Drawing  and  tearing  pain  in  the  lower  arm,  extend-
ing as  far  as  the  hand,  early  in  the  morning  on  waking  up.
Painful  tearing  in  the  lower  arm,  apparently  upon  the  bone,
lasting  one  minute  and  occurring  three  times.  Tearing  in
the  fore  arms,  as  far  as  the  wrist  and  the  fingers.  Con-
tinual (visible)  twitching  in  the  right  fore  arm  and  the  pos-
terior joint  of  the  thumb  of  the  left  hand.  Excessive
heaviness  in  the  fore  arms  and  hands,  her  arms  appearing
shorter.  His  left  lower  arm  goes  to  sleep  every  day  ;
there  is  a pricking  sensation  in  it  from  the  hand  to  the  el-
bow. On  waking  up,  his  right  hand  has  gone  to  sleep.
The  left  carpus  is  so  sensitive,  that  he  cannot  lift  any  thing
with  this  hand  without,  experiencing  the  greatest  pain.
Distended  veins  of  the  hands,  in  the  afternoon  and  even-
ing. Itching  upon  the  hands,  the  dorsa  of  the  hands  and
between  the  fingers  ; it  goes  off  by  scratching.  After  vio-
lent itching  of  the  hands,  the  skin  of  the  hands  peels  off,  on
the  third  day,  like  bran  ; at  the  same  time  a small  round
spot  forms  behind  the  left  thumb  and  index,  which  burns
violently,  but  lasts  only  one  day.  Continual,  troublesome
coldness  of  the  hands.  Rough,  chapped,  readily  bleeding
hands.  Sensation  in  the  right  index  as  if  it  were  dislo-
cated. The  middle  fingers  are  painful  on  motion.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  thumb  and  index.  Tearing  in  and  between
the  fingers.  His  left  thumb  went  to  sleep  in  the  after-
noon, twice  in  succession,  attended  with  a sensation  as  of
prickling  in  the  thumb,  which  lasted  for  some  time.  For-
mication in  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  in  the  evening,
attended  with  a sensation  as  of  burning,  (6.  d.)  Gnawing
beneath  the  finger  nails , attended  with  tingling  all  along


ARGILLA.


67


the  arm,  as  high  up  as  the  clavicle.  Swelling  of  the  fin-
gers. Itching  of  and  between  the  fingers,  which  goes  off
by  scratching.  Itching  upon  the  right  fingers,  which  in-
creases by  scratching  and  rubbing.  Itching  around  the
posterior  joints  of  the  fingers,  which  increases  by  friction  ;
this  is  succeeded  by  an  insufferable  pain  in  the  bones  of
the  fingers.  Burning  itching,  with  a sensation  as  of  ting-
ling between  the  index  and  the  middle  finger  of  the  left
hand.  In  the  tips  of  the  fingers  a disposition  to  ulcerate;
there  is  formed  in  them  a white  spot,  indicating  subcuta-
neous ulceration,  attended  with  lancinating  pain  ; the  white
spot  goes  off  without  breaking  open.  An  eschar  upon  the
finger  which  was  formed  9 years  ago  in  dissecting  a body,
begins  to  itch,  (9.  12.  d.)  Extreme  brittleness  of  the  fin-
ger-nails ; they  break  on  being  cut.

Inferior  Extremities. — The  right  hip  joint  gives  him
pain.  Tearing  pain  over  both  hips  and  at  the  upper  brim
of  the  pelvis.  Tearing  in  the  os  innominatum.  Stitches
in  the  right  region  of  the  pelvis.  Stitches  in  the  left,  hip,
extending,  one  part,  to  the  small  of  the  back,  the  other,
to  the  loin  ; when  breathing  the  stitches  come  on  again.
Cutting,  as  with  a knife,  transversely  across  the  right  half
of  the  nates,  in  the  forenoon,  (2.  d.)  When  sitting,  the
nates  go  to  sleep.  Pain  in  the  left  hip  as  from  a bruise  ;
it  becomes  worse  on  pressure,  early  in  the  morning,  (4.  d.)
Tearing  and  lancinations  in  the  hip  joint,  and  close  over
the  knee,  in  paroxysms.  Boil  on  the  right  hip,  which  ter-
minates in  suppuration.  Pain  in  the  legs  and  loins,  dur-
ing motion.  After  a walk,  pain  in  the  legs  and  loins  ; this
prevents  her  from  sleeping.  Traction  in  the  legs.  Tear-
ing in  the  legs , the  thighs  and  legs,  when  sitting  and  ly-
ing down,  especially  at  night.  In  the  thighs  and  legs,  long
continued  straining,  almost  like  a cramp  ; only  a few  mi-
nutes, but  frequently  returning.  Gnawing  pain  in  the  legs.
Feeling  of  uneasiness  in  the  legs  for  several  evenings,  at
7 o’clock,  lasting  half  an  hour,  before  she  went  to  bed.
Heaviness  of  the  legs  ; she  can  scarcely  lift  them.  Great
heaviness  in  the  lower  limbs  ; he  can  scarcely  drag  them  ;
when  walking,  he  staggers  and  has  to  sit  down  ; in  the
evening,  (5.  d.)  Great  weariness  of  the  legs,  when  sit-
ting. Burning  and  biting  itching  of  the  thighs , passing  off


68


ALUMINA.


by  scratching.  Itching  of  (and  fine  eruption  on)  the  in-
side of  the  right  thigh.  Pain  in  the  bent  of  the  left  knee  ;
the  boy  cannot  well  step  upon  the  foot.  At  night,  violent
pain  in  the  bent  of  the  knee,  extending  down  to  the  heel.
Sensation  of  pressure  into  the  bent  of  the  left  knee,  when
walking,  after  having  risen  from  the  seat.  Drawing
pain  in  the  bent  of  both  knees,  on  ascending,  not  on  de-
scending the  stairs.  Drawing  pain  in  both  knees  on  ascend-
ing the  stairs  ; the  pain  is  not  felt  on  simply  bending  the
knees,  nor  is  it  felt  on  touching  them.  Pain  in  the  patella
on  pressing  the  hand  upon  it  or  upon  bending  the  knee.
Sharp,  twitching  pressure  from  without  inwards  at  the  pa-
tella. Tearing  in  the  knees  and  patellce.  Lancinating
pain  in  the  knee,  in  the  evening,  before  falling  asleep.
Dull  tearing  on  the  inside  of  the  left  knee,  in  the  evening,
(19.  d.)  Violent  tearing  beginning  at  the  knees  and  com-
ing out  at  the  toes , with  a sensation  of  swelling  of  the
knees  ; in  the  afternoon,  until  evening  (relieved  by  walk-
ing,) (21.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  left  knee,  only  when  sitting  ;
they  disappear  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Lancina-
tions  in  the  right  knee,  in  the  evening,  (1.  d.)  Painful
boring  in  the  right  knee,  (a.  2 h.)  Cracking  of  the  right
knee  in  walking;.  Trembling;  of  the  knees.  Her  knees
appear  to  her  to  be  larger  during  the  pain.  Weariness  of
the  legs  ; especially  in  the  middle  of  the  tibiae,  they  feel
bruised  when  standing  or  walking,  she  feels  as  if  she
would  sink  down,  for  then  the  pain  is  worst,  especially  in
the  evening.  Pain,  as  from  a bruise,  in  the  left  tibia,
especially  during  motion.  Stitches  in  the  right  tibia,  when
in  bed  in  the  evening.  Cramp-like  pain,  of  a lancinating
nature,  in  the  right  leg,  with  a sensation  of  numbness  ;
during  the  afternoon-nap.  when  sitting,  and  also  on  wak-
ing up.  Tearing  in  the  legs  at  different  periods.  Tear-
ing and  drawing  in  the  leg,  extending  from  the  malleolus
externus.  Tearing  in  the  tendo  Achillis  of  both  legs,  in
the  evening,  (5.  d.)  Intense  drawing  pain  in  the  tendo
Achillis,  when  at  rest ; notwhen  walking.  Painless  draw-
ing down  along  both  calves,  (a.  2 h.)  Tearing  in  the  calves.
When  walking  the  gastrocnemii  muscles  appear  too  short,
they  feel  strained,  (a.  20  h.)  Straining  pain  at  the  inside
of  the  calves,  when  walking.  Straining  and  burning,  at


ARGILLA.


69


the  external  surface  of  the  right  calf,  in  the  evening,  (2.
d.)  Before  taking  the  drug  he  had  straining  of  the
calves  (soles  of  the  feet  and  toes,  accompanied  by  spasm
and  a sensation  of  paralysis  of  the  legs  ;)  this  symptom  is
increased  by  the  drug  and  extends  over  the  knee,  so  that  he
cannot  keep  himself  straight ; afterwards  a burning,  shoot-
ing, sometimes  cutting  pain  in  the  calves  and  soles,  (the  1.
days.)  Frequent  cramps  in  the  calves.  Upon  laying  one  foot
across  the  other)  or  stepping  upon  the  toes,  she  is  attacked
with  cramps  of  the  calves^  Cramp  in  the  calves,  as  if
the  tendons  were  too  short,  after  rising  from  his  seat ;
previously  his  feet  suddenly  became  so  languid,  that  he
was  afraid  of  rising  ; in  the  afternoon,  (2.  d.)  Painless
beating  or  throbbing  in  the  left  calf,  like  pulsations,  early
in  the  morning.  (4.  d.)  Violent  formication  in  both  calves,
after  supper,  (5.  d.)  Itching  of  the  calves.  Sensation  in
the  left  heel  as  if  it  were  pressed  upon  on  both  sides,  (2.
d.)  Tearing  in  the  feet  and  malleoli,  at  different  periods.
Heaviness  in  the  feet,  attended  with  tearing.  Heaviness
of  the  feet,  with  great,  lassitude  of  the  legs,  (3.  d.)  The
right  foot  goes  to  sleep  with  a sensation  as  of  tingling  in
it.  Painful  drawing  below  the  malleoli,  (10.  d.)  Pain
in  the  bones  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  on  touching  the
parts,  accompanied  by  itching  of  those  parts,  (1.  d.)  On
trying  to  step  upon  the  foot,  he  experiences  lancinations  in
one  £>f  the  malleoli  of  the  right  foot,  and  violent  cutting  ex-
tending from  the  left  big  toe  to  the  heel,  so  that  he  is  not
capable  to  step  upon  the  foot,  (2.  d.)  Numbness  of  the
heel  on  stepping  upon  the  foot.  Stinging,  (itching)  and
titillation  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.  Itching  in  the  sole  of
the  foot.  Itching;  and  titillation  in  the  sole  of  the  foot.
Burning  stitches  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  in  the  even-
ing and  early  in  the  morning,  disappearing  by  friction.
Tension  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  in  the  forenoon,  (2.  d.) —
Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot.  Pain
in  the  sole  of  the  foot , on  stepping  upon  it , as  though  it
were  too  soft  and  swollen.  The  hard  skin  of  the  sole  of
the  foot,  is  very  sensitive  to  the  touch  ; but  even  without
being  touched,  it  is  affected  with  a violent  aching  pain.
The  old  hard  skin  of  the  feet  becomes  very  sensitive.
Stitches  in  the  corns,  attended  with  a sensation  of  excori-


70


ALUMINA.


ation.  An  ulcer  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  which  is  almost
entirely  cured,  causes  a lancinating  pain  on  stepping  upon
it ; in  the  room,  after  having  walked  in  the  open  air.
Painful  stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe.  Burning  stitch-
es in  the  left  big  toe,  close  to  the  nail,  at  night.  Cutting
in  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,  as  if  he  walked  upon  knives,
early  in  the  morning  ; when  walking,  (4.  d.)  Sensation
as  of  tingling  in  the  big  toe,  as  if  it  had  been  frozen,  (2.
d.)  Itching  of  the  toes,  after  staying  in  the  open  air.
Itching  of  the  toes  and  feet,  when  the  feet  have  become
warm  by  walking  ; after  walking  the  symptom  disappears
immediately,  (a.  30  d.)  Jtching  and  shining  redness  of
the  great  toes  ; they  are  painful  upon  external  pressure,
(a.  4 d.)  Itching  of  the  toes , with  redness , as  if  they  had
been  frozen,  worse  after  scratching,  in  the  evening,  (3.  4.
16.  d.)  Herpes  between  the  toes.  Corns  are  very  pain-
ful. Traction  in  the  extremities.  Sensation  as  of  burn-
ing, and  tension  in  the  dorsa  of  the  feet  and  hands,  as  from
a swelling.

Common  Ailments. — Continual  burning  and  stinging
in  the  rectum,  attended  with  stiffness  in  the  back,  so  that
she  cannot  well  move.  (Dull  pressive  pains  in  the  bones,
especially  of  the  legs,  the  chest  and  the  back.)  Tearing
in  the  left  scapula,  in  the  arms,  hands  and  legs,  especially
in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)  Shooting  to  and  fro  in  the  right
shoulder,  the  small  of  the  back  and  the  abdomen  ; after-
wards feels  bruised,  (2.  d.)  Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the
loins,  over  the  hips  and  in  the  gastrocnemii  muscles,  when
walking.  Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  back  and  all  the
extremities,  as  in  fever  and  ague.  Upon  entering  the
room,  after  a walk  in  the  open  air,  the  person  experiences
fearfulness  and  nausea,  when  talking.  Walking  in  the
open  air,  is  succeeded  by  excessive  cheerfulness  and  star-
ing look  ; afterwards,  at  every  motion,  cold  shiverings  and
sweat,  attended  with  chilliness  of  the  head  ; when  going
to  bed,  head,  hands  and  feet  are  hot.  During  a bodily  ef-
fort, a thrill  of  heat  suddenly  runs  over  his  whole  body  ;
this  is  succeeded  by  chills,  attended  with  burning  in  the
abdomen.  When  engaged  in  some  bodily  labor,  the  per-
son experiences  a cramplike  sensation,  like  numbness,  as-
cending the  whole  of  the  left  leg,  also  in  the  left  arm,  ac-


ARGlLLA.


71


eompanied  by  vertiginous  stupefaction  ol  the  head,  in  pa-
roxysms, (14.  d.)  All  the  muscles  feel  paralyzed.  Early
in  the  morning,  paralytic  weakness  ol  all  the  limbs,  with
stupefaction  of  the  head,  in  paroxysms  of  some  minutes,
(10.  d.)  Rigidity  of  the  hands  and  feet,  as  if  they  had
gone  to  sleep,  early,  on  waking  up  ; the  symptom  disap-
peared after  rising  and  walking  a little.  The  fourth  and
fifth  fingers,  the  right  knee,  and  at  last  the  heel,  go  to  sleep,
after  sitting.  Slow,  wavering  gait,  as  after  a violent  dis-
ease. Towards  evening,  she  feels  sick  at  the  stomach,
and  her  head  turns,  with  constant  palpitation  of  the  heart
and  great  anxiety ; this  lasted  the  whole  night,  until  the
forenoon.  Upon  entering  the  room  after  a walk  in  the
open  air,  one  feels  a sort  of  anxiety  and  nausea  when  talk-
ing. In  the  evening,  violent  pains  in  the  small  of  the  back,
and  vertigo,  followed  by  a desire  for  stool,  during  which
pure  blood  was  passed  ; feeling  of  paralysis  in  the  small
of  the  back  ; when  sitting  straight,  the  small  of  the  back
did  not  support  her.  Congestion  of  the  blood  to  the  head  ;
the  eyes  see  black;  giddiness,  tingling  before  the  ears,  and
drowsiness.  First  he  sat  still  without  answering  ; this  was
followed  by  anxious  groaning  for  five  minutes  ; after  this,
a convulsive  laugh  for  ten  minutes,  then  again  weeping ;
then  weeping  and  laughing  in  alternation.  Inclines  to  con-
vulsive laughter,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  (5.  d.)
Tremulous  irritation  of  the  whole  nervous  system.  Shaking
pulsations  through  the  whole  body.  Sense  of  contraction
in  the  right  index  and  foot,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short ;
when  he  touches  something  with  the  finger,  he  feels  as  if
he  were  being  electrified.  When  he  attempts  to  take  his
siesta  in  a sitting  posture,  he  experiences  a jerk  through
the  head  and  the  other  parts,  like  an  electric  shock,  accom-
panied by  stupefaction.  His  arm  and  head  are  pulled
backwards  with  a jerk  several  times,  accompanied  by  a
sensation  of  apprehension.  In  the  evening,  one  experi-
i ences  twitchings  in  both  of  the  lower  extremities,  especially
i in  the  legs  and  feet ; these  are  followed  by  a disposition
i of  the  arms  to  turn  and  to  extend  themselves  upwards.

* Involuntary  convulsions  here  and  there,  and  movements
i ol  one  foot,  of  the  fingers,  etc.  * Involuntary  motions  of
the  head  and  of  other  parts.  Twitchings  in  all  the  limbs.


72


ALUMINA.


Pain  in  the  limbs  as  if  the  bones  were  squeezed  into  a
narrower  space,  accompanied  by  pressure  in  the  joints.
Uneasiness,  she  constantly  had  to  move  her  feet  and  to  go
about.  Uneasiness  when  sitting  or  lying  ; she  has  to  shift
the  position  of  her  hands  and  feet.  Most  of  the  symptoms
appear  to  come  on  in  the  sitting  posture,  and  to  decrease
when  walking.  All  the  symptoms  become  aggravated  im-
mediately after  dinner.  Most  of  the  symptoms  come  on
shortly  after  dinner,  and  in  the  evening.  A great  number
of  the  symptoms  appear  after  dinner,  and  continue  until
the  evening ; they  disappear  in  the  forenoon,  and  at  night.
Potatoes  appear  to  aggravate  or  to  renew  the  symptoms.
He  feels  the  most  easy  after  dinner.  He  feels  a little  bet-
ter every  other  day.  One  feels  pretty  well  by  day  ; most
of  the  symptoms  appear  in  the  morning  and  evening.  The
symptoms  appear  to  be  relieved  in  the  open  air  and  in  the
evening.  She  catches  easily  cold , even  in  the  room;  she
gets  hoarse  ; this  symptom  decreases  by  walking  in  the
open  air.  Sweat  consequent  upon  every  motion,  followed
by  cold  thrills,  as  if  one  had  caught  cold.  Sensation  in
the  limbs  as  if  he  had  caught  cold,  accompanied  by  fre-
quent chilliness  during  the  day,  and  heat  in  the  face  in  the
evening.  Intolerable  itching  of  the  whole  body,  especially
when  he  becomes  heated,  and  when  he  is  in  bed  ; he  has
to  scratch  himself  until  the  skin  bleeds,  which  is  painful
after  the  scratching.  Itching  of  the  whole  body,  especially
in  the  face,  (7.  d.)  Erratic  itching  of  single  small  places
of  the  body,  mostly  in  the  evening,  and  not  going  off  by
scratching.  Violent  itching  of  the  whole  body,  as  if  an
eruption  would  break  out,  (a.  5 d.)  Violent  itching  and
gnawing  upon  the  skin  of  the  whole  body  ; the  symptom
is  but  little  relieved  by  scratching.  Stinging  itching  of  the  * a
back  and  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  (2.  d.)  Erratic  stingingp
of  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  evening.  The  tetters  > ■
(small  white  itching  pimples  in  clusters)  increase.  Itching?  j
of  the  tetters,  especially  towards  evening.  Itching  erup-  j
tions  of  rash  on  the  arms  and  legs,  without  any  redness;;  a
upon  scratching  the  pimples,  a watery  blood  oozes  out.
Biting  in  the  tetters.  Small  injuries  of  the  skin  became^  n
sore  and  inflamed.

Spasms,  Weakness,  Fainting  Fits.—  Great  depressions


ARGILLA.


73


of  strength,  especially  after  walking  in  the  open  air,  ac-
companied by  yawning,  stretching,  drowsiness,  and  incli-
nation to  lie  down  ; lying  down,  however,  increases  the
lassitude,  (1.  3.  d.)  Depression  of  strength  in  the  whole
body,  accompanied  by  obtusion  of  the  thinking  faculty,
flushes  of  heat,  and  anxiety,  (4.  d.)  His  strength  fails
already  after  a short  conversation  or  walk.  Great  fatigue
consequent  upon  talking.  Excessively  faint  and  tired ;
he  is  obliged  to  sit  down.  Tremulous  lassitude.  Lassi-
tude in  the  forenoon,  and  considerable  chilliness  ; in  the
afternoon,  she  felt  a chilliness  in  the  back,  which  shook
her.  Great  lassitude  of  the  whole  body,  with  chilliness
and  headache,  (33.  d.)  Lassitude  ; dizziness  ; frequently
a feverish  pulse  and  want  of  disposition  to  work,  for  several
days  ; little  appetite  ; drowsiness  after  dinner,  heaviness
in  the  body,  frequent  disposition  to  eructations,  which,
however,  either  do  not  take  place  at  all,  or  but  imperfectly,
(a.  4 w.)  Physical  depression,  lassitude,  so  that  she  can
scarcely  lift  her  feet,  accompanied  by  drowsiness  and  la-
ziness, (22.  d.)  Unconquerable  disposition  to  lie  down,
(a.  3 h.)

Sleep. — Tired  and  drowsy.  A good  deal  of  yawning,
accompanied  by  drowsiness,  (which  goes  off  only  in  the
open  air.)  Constant  yawning,  also  before  dinner,  without
drowsiness.  Drowsiness  by  day.  Great  lassitude,  accom-
panied, in  the  forenoon,  by  an  irresistible  inclination  to
sleep ; she  lies  down  and  sleeps  soundly  for  an  hour ; this
sleep  caused  the  lassitude  to  disappear,  and  made  her  feel
very  comfortable.  Great  drowsiness  in  the  evening,  even
when  standing.  Great  drowsiness  in  the  evening,  already
at  six  o’clock.  She  falls  asleep  very  early  in  the  evening.
* Early  on  rising  she  feels  as  if  she  had  not  slept  enough  ;
she  feels  yet  tired,  and  yawns.  Early  in  the  morning,
after  an  uneasy  sleep,  he  feels  yet  tired,  and  does  not  wish
to  rise.  In  the  morning,  he  would  like  to  sleep  long.  In
the  morning,  he  is  obliged  to  sleep  longer  than  usually,  and
he  cannot  wake  up  entirely  ; at  the  same  time,  however,
he  falls  asleep  later  on  going  to  bed.  In  the  evening,  he
falls  asleep  late,  on  account  of  images  crowding  upon  his
fancy,  (2.  d.)  'r  In  the  evening,  he  cannot  fall  asleep  under
an  hour,— but  afterwards  he  sleeps  well.  He  cannot  fall

4


74


ALUMINA.


asleep  before  midnight,  and  tosses  about  from  one  side  to
another,  (2.  d.)  At  night,  uneasiness  in  all  the  limbs  ; this
prevents  him  from  falling  asleep.  She  cannot  find  rest
any  where  at  night ; she  tosses  about,  and  she  feels  pain
all  over,  for  several  nights,  (a.  15  d.)  Uneasy  sleep  ; he
tosses  about  in  his  bed  ; he  feels  hot  and  anxious  ; this  is
accompanied  by  twitchings  in  the  limbs,  and  starlings,  be-
fore falling  asleep.  Uneasy  sleep  during  the  first  nights.
Uneasy  sleep  ; she  often  turned  from  one  side  to  another  ;
she  felt  hot , lay  most  of  the  time  uncovered  ; her  sleep  was
a mere  slumber,  which  did  not  afford  her  any  rest,  accom-
panied by  many  dreams,  and  frequently  interrupted  by
waking , (7.  d.)  Uneasy  sleep,  with  toothache.  Waking
up  frequently  at  night,  for  eight  days,  (12.  d.)  One
wakes  up  before  midnight,  on  account  of  a dry  cough,  first
accompanied  by  chilliness,  then  by  dry  heat.  After  mid-
night, his  sleep  is  uneasy  ; he  often  wakes  up,  and  tosses
about  in  the  bed.  At  night,  when  in  bed,  throbbing  of  the
roots  of  the  teeth  like  pulsations.  At  midnight,  one  is
roused  from  sleep  by  violent  pinching  and  rumbling  in  the
abdomen;  this  symptom  ceases  towards  morning,  (a.  12  d.)
Headache,  when  in  bed  at  night.  Griping  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.  At  night,  violent
pain  in  the  bent  of  the  knee,  extending  down  to  the  heel.
At  night,  lie  is  roused  from  sleep  by  a spasm  and  dyspnoea,
(having  walked  a good  deal  the  day  before.)  At  four
o’clock,  early  in  the  morning,  one  is  roused  from  sleep  by
chilliness  of  the  whole  body,  accompanied  by  violent
contraction  of  the  stomach  ; continual  empty  eructations,
which  afford  relief ; then  four  liquid  stools,  with  constant
chilliness,  followed  by  burning  in  the  lowrer  part  of  the
recium  ; the  chilliness  lasted  until  morning,  (32.  d.)  At
night,  when  waking  up,  there  is  anxiety,  dyspnoea,  and
copious  sweat.  Towards  four  or  five  o’clock  in  the  morn-
ing, the  person  is  waked  up  by  anxiety  about  the  heart,  as
if  sweat  would  break  out,  which,  however,  is  not  the
case ; after  rising,  the  anxiety  immediately  disappears.
Towards  morning,  one  wakes  up  with  an  anguish  of  death,
caused  by  pains  which  one  imagined  to  endure  when  sleep-
ing. Early  in  the  morning , one  wTakes  up  with  a depres-
sion of  spirits,  such  as  is  caused  by  grief,  without  any


ARGILLA.


75


clear  consciousness.  She  wakes  up  early  in  the  morning
with  nausea  and  qualmishness  at  the  stomach,  * and  phy-
sical depression  as  if  sleep  had  not  recruited  her  strength  ;
this  is  accompanied  by  a quick,  feverish  pulse,  with  in-
ternal heat,  (3.  d.)  Early  in  the  morning,  on  waking  up,
one  experiences,  while  in  bed,  a drawing  and  biting  sensa-
tion in  the  urethra.  After  midnight,  he  starts  up  from
an  anxious  dream,  (such  as, — that  a horse  is  pursuing
him,  and  intends  to  bite  him,)  (10.  d.)  Violent  startings
when  asleep,  before  midnight,  which  rouse  him  com-
pletely, (7.  d.)  When  asleep,  she  spoke  loud,  laughed
and  wept.  He  talks  much  when  asleep,  as  if  he  had  an
anxious  dream.  Great  uneasiness  during  sleep,  with  vio-
lent weeping  and  disconsolate  grief,  without  being  fully
conscious  of  those  symptoms,  for  a few  minutes,  before
midnight.  She  sobs  and  groans  at  night  as  if  she  were
weeping,  although  she  is  not  aware  of  those  symptoms,
shortly  after  falling  asleep,  (7.  d.)  At  night,  he  rises
from  his  bed  without  being  aware  of  it,  and  with  firmly
closed  eyes  ; he  goes  anxiously  from  one  room  into  another
while  lie  is  rubbing  his  eyes  ; when  brought  to  bed  again,
the  boy  fell  asleep  again  immediately.  She  sleeps  too
soundly,  and  has  to  be  wTaked  up.  Sound  sleep,  full  of
dreams,  with  erections.  * Deep  sleep  towards  morning,
with  dreams  which  fatigue  the  head,  (a.  10  h.)  Sound
sleep,  with  a quantity  of  pleasant  dreams.  Pleasant
dreams,  such  as  about  money  which  he  had  received,  etc.
Confused  dreams.  Shameful  dream.  *A  number  of
dreams, — all  of  them  of  a disagreeable  nature.  Dreams
about  quarrelling  and  vexations.  Dreams  about  falling
stars,  fires,  marriages.  Dreams  about  thieves . after  which
she  wakes  up  with  anxiety.  She  dreams  that  she  lias
committed  a theft,  or  that  she  has  got  among  robbers.
Dream  about  death  and  burial.  Tormenting  dreams,  be-
getting a fear  of  death,  which  lasts  even  after  waking  up.
Dreams  causing  anxiety , with  uneasy  sleep.  Anxious
dreams  towards  morning,  the  sleep  being  otherwise  sound,
(a.  12  d.)  Fearfully  anxious  dreams,  and  nightmare.
Anxious  dreams  : such  as  that  the  tiler  forcibly  thrusts  a
piece  of  meat  into  one’s  mouth.  In  a dream,  he  imagines
to  be  obliged  to  descend  from  a height,  he  thinks  that  he


76


ALUMINA.


will  have  to  fall.  She  dreams  that  she  is  upon  a ferry-boat
which  is  foundering  in  the  river  ; she  wakes  up  with
anxiety.  He  dreams  that  he  is  walking  about  in  a river,
in  which  he  sees  serpents  and  other  animals,  of  which  he
is  afraid.  He  dreams  about  ghosts,  and  makes  so  much
noise  that  it  wakes  him  up.

Fever. — Chilliness  and  uneasy  sleep  the  whole  night,
(33.  d.)  Chills  near  the  warm  stove,  (15.  d.)  In  the
evening,  chilliness  from  seven  to  eight  o’clock  ; she  feels
so  chilly  that  she  is  obliged  to  go  to  bed  ; but  even  there
it  takes  her  a long  while  to  get  warm,  (5.  d.)  Cold  air  is
very  disagreeable  to  her,  especially  to  her  feet.  Internal
chills , with  a desire  for  the  warm  stove,  and  stretching  of
the  limbs  ; worse  after  warm  drinks.  Chilly  in  the  open
air.  Chilliness  of  the  whole  body  ; the  feet  are  as  cold  as
ice  the  whole  day,  with  heat  in  the  head,  also  in  the  room,

( 1.  d.)  Internal  chilliness  and  external  heat,  especially  on
the  cheeks,  with  dark  redness  of  the  same,  as  is  seen  in
persons  who  drink  much  brandy.  Internal  chilliness,  with
hot  cheeks  and  cold  hands.*  Cold  thrills,  without  any
thirst  or  subsequent  heat  or  sweat,  from  four  to  six  o’clock
in  the  afternoon,  with  throbbing  pains  in  the  forehead  and
the  occiput,  which  decrease  by  pressing  upon  the  parts  with
the  hand,  (9.  d.)  Chilliness,  constant  eructations,  bitter
taste  in  the  mouth,  frequent  collection  of  saliva,  great  fail-
ing of  strength,  and  headache,  as  if  the  head  would  burst,
especially  on  the  top  of  the  head,  accompanied  by  vertigo,
(relieved  by  a dose  of  ipecacuanha,)  (34.  d.)  Frequent
repetition  of  chills  in  the  evening , (2.  d.)  Chills  over  the
whole  body,  every  other  day,  towards  evening,  without
any  thirst,  accompanied  by  want  of  appetite,  sleeplessness,
and  restless  tossing  about  in  the  bed.  In  the  evening,
one  experiences  chills,  which  increase  by  the  slightest
motion  ; sometimes  also  flushes  of  heat  in  the  face,  (1.  d.)
In  the  evening,  at  five  o’clock,  she  experienced  such  vio-
lent chilliness,  especially  of  the  back  and  feet,  that  she
could  not  even  warm  herself  near  the  warm  stove  ; in  half


Note.  Bryonia  is  an  antidote  against  the  fevers  caused  by  Alu-
mina. r


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


77


an  hour,  sweat  broke  out,  without  any  thirst,  (6.  7.  d.)  In
the  evening,  chilliness  and  warmth  often  alternate,  the
face  is  hot,  and  the  rest  of  the  body  experiences  chills.
Internal  chilliness,  with  hot  hands  and  hot  lobules  of  the
ears,  (a.  2 h.)  Chilliness  of  half  an  hour  is  followed  by
heat  of  the  body,  and  sweat  in  the  face.  Pleasant  warmth,
of  short  duration,  in  the  right  side  of  the  face,  in  the  after-
noon, (5.  d.)  Sudden  heat  in  the  face,  with  redness,  last-
ing only  for  a short  while,  (5.  d.)  Sensation  in  the  body,
as  after  having  become  violently  heated,  when  sitting,  (the
first  days.)  In  the  evening,  heat  in  the  body  for  two  hours  ;
it  appears  to  begin  at  the  head,  (5.  d.)  Feverish  faintish-
ness,  with  internal  heat.  Towards  evening,  heat  in  the
whole  body,  especially  in  the  feet ; followed  by  shaking
fits,  which  obliged  her  to  go  to  bed,  where  she  soon  fell
asleep  ; thirst  neither  during  the  hot  nor  the  cold  stage,
nor  were  there  any  other  symptoms  besides  these  men-
tioned, (1 1.  d.)  Heat  before  midnight ; it  does  not  permit
him  to  fall  asleep.  Heat , toiffi  anxiety , at  night,  accom-
panied by  sweat.  Sudden  heat,  with  sweat  and  anxious
palpitation  of  the  heart.  Early  in  the  morning,  upon  re-
maining in  bed  after  six  o’clock,  she  begins  to  sweat,  for
some  mornings,  (a.  9 d.)  Orgasm,  with  increased  pulse,
and  trembling  of  the  hands  when  writing  ; this  orgasm
also  exists  after  a meal,  and  is  combined  with  heat  of  the
whole  body,  and  sweat  of  the  face,  (1.  d.)


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  (carbonate  of  am-
monia.)

This  salt  may  be  prepared  by  mixing  one  ounce  of  the
sal  aminoniacum  and  one  ounce  of  the  crystals  of  Natrum
in  a Florence  flask,  which  should  then  be  loosely  closed
at  the  top.  Then  take  an  iron  pan  filled  with  sand,  into
which  the  flask  is  inserted  to  a level  with  the  contents.
The  pan  being  then  heated,  the  ammonium  is  sublimed
into  the  upper  part  of  the  flask,  the  top  of  which  may  be
broken  off,  in  order  to  take  out  the  salt.  Triturate  one
grain  of  this  salt ; the  dilutions  are  obtained  from  the  mil-


78


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


Month  degree  of  potency.  One  or  two  globules  of  the
degree  X.  sometimes  act  thirty-six  days.

Ammonium  carbonicum  has  been  found  useful  in  the
following  affections  : —

Fearfulness  ; disobedience  ; want  of  docility  ; loathing
of  life  ; uneasiness  in  the  evening;  attacks  of  anxiety;
anxiety,  with  weakness;  diminution  of  the  thinking  facul-
ty ; vertigo,  when  sitting  or  reading;  chronic  headache;
headache,  as  if  something  would  get  out  at  the  forehead  ;
headache,  with  nausea  ; hammering  headache  ; falling  off
of  the  hair;  dry  pus  on  the  eyelids;  burning  and  feeling
of  coldness  in  the  eyes  ; dimness  of  sight,  with  a sense  as
of  waving  before  the  eyes  ; black  points  and  streaks  of
light  hovering  before  the  eyes ; cataract  of  the  crystalline
lens ; short-sightedness  ; hardness  of  hearing,  accompa-
nied by  suppuration,  and  itching  of  the  ear  ; humming  and
tingling  before  the  ears  ; itching  of  the  nose  ; pustules  in
the  nose;  bleeding  at  the  nose,  early  in  the  morning,  when
washing  ; summer-freckles  ; tearings,  extending  from  the
left  upper  lip  across  the  cheek  as  far  as  the  ear  ; cracking
in  the  articulation  of  the  jaw,  when  chewing;  chronic
looseness  of  the  teeth  ; sore  throat,  like  rawness  of  the
throat ; soreness  of  the  throat ; swelling  of  the  inner
mouth  ; eructations  tasting  of  the  ingesta,  either  food  or
drink;  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  especially  after  a meal ;
rawness  and  burning  of  the  oesophagus  from  below  up-
wards, after  a meal  ; headache  after  a meal  ; nausea  after
a meal ; vertiginous  giddiness  during  a meal ; unconquer-
able desire  to  eat  sugar;  thirst ; want  of  appetite  in  the
morning  ; sour  eructations  ; heartburn  ; eructations  and
vomiting ; pain  at  the  stomach  ; spasm  of  the  stomach  ;
contractive  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  stretching
one’s  self ; burning  pain  in  the  liver  ; boring  stitches  in  the
liver,  in  the  evening,  when  sitting;  uneasiness  in  the  ab-
domen ; painful  concussion  in  the  hypogastrium  when  set-
ting the  foot,  down  in  walking  ; costiveness  ; difficulty  of
passing  the  stools  ; colic,  with  diarrhoea  ; blood  with  the
stools  ; discharge  of  blood  from  the  rectum,  (flowing  hae-
morrhoids ;)  itching  of  the  anus;  varices  of  the  rectum  ;
nightly  micturition  ; pollutions  ; (deficiency  of  the  sexual
desire ;)  scanty  menses ; sterility,  with  scanty  menses  ;


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


menses  too  short  and  scanty  ; menses  too  early  ; during
the  menses,  she  experiences  a pressure  upon  the  genital
organs,  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  tearing  in  the  back  and
the  genital  'organs,  these  symptoms  obliging  her  to  lie
down;  watery  discharge  from  the  uterus;  leucorrhcea ;
profuse,  acrid,  corrosive  leucorrhosa  ; chronic  dryness  of
the  nose ; chronic  coryza ; dry  coryza ; shortness  of
breath  ; asthma;  cough ; cough  with  hoarseness,  the  body
being  warm  ; cough  caused  by  titillation  in  the  throat,
with  discharge  ; cough  by  day ; cough  at  night ; stitches
in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  coughing ; burning  in  the
chest  from  below  upwards  ; tearings,  beginning  at  the
upper  left  side  of  the  chest,  and  extending  as  far  as  the
shoulder-joint ; stitches  in  the  fleshy  part  of  the  chest ;
goitre  ; swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,  accompanied  by
an  itching  eruption  of  the  face  and  body  ; pain  in  the  nape
of  the  neck;  rigidity  of  the  arms  and  fingers, — they  be-
come cold  and  insensible,  at  night,  early  in  the  morning,
and  when  closing  the  hands  in  seizing  something ; pain
of  the  wrist-joint , zohich  had  been  sprained  some  time  ago  ;
swelling  of  the  fingers,  when  letting  the  arms  hang  down  ;
the  fingers  go  to  sleep  ; great  lassitude  in  the  lower  ex-
tremities ; drawing  pain  in  the  legs,  when  sitting  ; stitches
in  the  heel ; sweating  of  the  feet ; swelling  of  the  feet ;
cramp  in  the  sole  of  the  feet ; pain  as  from  a sprain,  in  the
ball  of  the  big  toe,  at  night  when  in  bed  ; burning  in  the
hands  and  feet ; feeling  of  weakness  in  the  limbs,  when
walking  in  the  open  air ; disinclination  to  walking ; draw-
ing and  tension  in  the  small  of  the  back,  in  the  back  and
in  the  joints ; curvature  of  the  bones ; warts  ; burning
stitches  and  tearings  in  the  corns:  drowsiness  by  day ;
sleeplessness  at  night ; nightmare  on  falling  asleep  ; fever-
ish heat  in  the  head,  wih cold  feet;  evening  chills  ; sweat.

This  remedy  may  be  repeated  with  advantage,  after
some  intermediate  remedies.  Its  effects,  when  excessive,
may  be  diminished  by  smelling  of  camphor.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  myself  and  Doctors  Hart-
laub ; Ng. ; Gross;  Stapf ; Trinks  ; Schreter.

Noack  and  Trinks  have  arranged  the  above  mentioned
affections  under  the  following  technical  names:  Hysteria
and  Hypochondria. — Chlorosis. — Eclampsia. — Scrophulo-


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM,


eu

sis  ? — Nervous  Asthenic  affections. — Rheumatism  and  gout,
especially  rheumatic,  arthritic  metastases  characterised  by
torpor. — Bite  of  a serpent. — Suffocating  and  apoplectic
Jits. — Comatose  conditions. — Fainting  Jits. — Paralysis. —

Convulsions.  — Tetanus. Scurvy. — Melsena. — Morbus

maculosus  haemorrhagicus  Werlhofii. — Acute  exanthemas ,
with  disposition  to  torpor  and,  colliquation,  especially
scarlatina , when  Sphacelus  is  threatening  to  set  in  ; Mili-
aria and  Morbilli,  especially  ivhen  the  epidemic  disease  is
characterised  by  torpor  and  colliquation. — Papulous  and
squamous  eruptions  upon  the  skin,  such  as  : Strophulus,
lichen , prurigo , psoriasis  localis. — Furuncles,  pustulous
eruptions,  such  as : Porrigo  furfurans,  ecthyma , variola*
(with  a putrid  character.) — Hot  gangrene  ; gangraena  se-
nilis.-— Intermittent  fevers,  where  coldness  is  a prevailing
symptom  ; febris  intermittens  maligna. — Nervous  fevers ,
with  asthenic  affections  of  the  chest . — Putrid  fever. — *
Typhous  fevers. — Colliquative  sweats , especially  in  con-
sumptive individuals. — Megrim. — Headache,  caused  by
congestion  of  the  blood  to  the  head. — Intoxication;  deli-
rium tremens. — Pliotopsia , originating  in  plethora  abdom-
inalis,  anaemia,  threatening  apoplexy. — Ozaena. — Angina
parotidea. — Angina  gangrcenosa. — Hcematemesis. — Ner-
vous dyspepsia. Gastrodynia.  — Colic.  — Costiveness,

caused  by  want  of  tone  of  the  intestinal  canal ; haemor-
rhoidal  constipation. Biarrhcea,  with  colic.— — Dysen-

tery.— Flatulence  and  tympanitis . — Haemorrhoidal  affec-
tions, flowing  haemorrhoids.- — Atony  of  the  urinary  or-
gans ; diabetes , especially  of  hysteric  individuals. —
Haematuria. — Irregularities  of  the  menstrual  functions f
especially  ivhen  accompanied  by  nervous  erethism  ;
menstrual  colic  ; dysmenorrhcea. — Fluor  albus. — Ammo-
nium has  a specific  effect  upon  the  organs  of  respiration  ;
in  chronic  affections  of  those  organs  it  may  be  used  with
especial  advantage. — Fluent  and  dry  coryza. — Chronic
catarrh  of  the  air-passages . — Bronchitis  maligna. — Asth-
matic complaints. — Nightmare.— (Edema  pulmonum. — -
Haemaptoe. — Pneumonia  notha. — Pneumonia  hypostati-
ca? — Apoplexia  pulmonum. — Tormenting  dry  cough  of
consumptive  persons. — Erethism  in  affections  of  the  chest
and  pulmonary  phthisis. — Affections  of  the  venous  heart?
—Hydrothorax  ? — Tingling  in  parts  that  have  gone  to


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


81


sleep. — Dropsical  swellings. — Rheumatic  and  arthritic
affections  of  the  joints. — Dropsy  of  the  joints. — Sprains. —
Contusions. — Extravasations  and  exudations.

Ammonium  is  especially  suitable  to  adynamic , weak,
nervous , venous , or  lymphatic  constitutions , to  individuals
of  a torpid , phlegmatic , melancholy  temperament , to  peo-
ple leading  a sedentary  life , and  to  the  female  organism  ;
in  persons  who  are  easily  impressed,  and  react  but  slightly
and  for  a short  lime,  when  there  is  laxity  of  the  fibre,  dis-
position to  lymphatic  accumulation  of  mucus  and  fat,  and
to  nervous  affections.

P.  S.  It  is  remarkable  that  ammonium  should  be  useful
against  a tendency  to  gangrene,  and  that  cancerous  and
mortifying  ulcers  should  evolve  a large  quantity  of  ammo-
nium ; that  ammonium  should  play  an  important  part  in
the  affections  of  the  sexual  organs  of  the  female,  and  that
a considerable  quantity  of  ammonium  should  be  evolved
through  the  skin  during  the  period  of  menstruation  ; and
lastly,  that  ammonium  should  relieve  the  symptoms  of
poisoning  by  fungi,  and  that  ammonium  should  be  a charac-
teristic constituent  of  those  growths.  It  is  well  known
that  a similar  relation  exists  between  the  itch  and  sulphur  ;
that  the  itch-vesicle  smells  of  sulphur,  and  that  sulphur  is
a specific  against  the  itch.

Antidotes  : Arnica,  Camph.  Hep. — Ammonium  is  used
as  an  antidote  against  acid.  Hydroc.,  Lauroc.,  and  Laches
is,  also  Secale  ?

Analogous  remedies : Amm.caust.,  Ammon,  muriat.,  Ant.,
Arn.,  Asa.,  Ars.,  Bell.,  Bry.,  Camph  , Garb.  anim.  et  veg.,
Hep.  snip.,  Hydroc.  ac.,  Hyosc.,  Kali,  Laches.,  Laur.,
Lycop.,  Magn.  p.  aus,  etc.  Merc.,  Nux  vom.,  Phosph.,
Puls.,  Rho.,  Sulp., — 2.  Chin.,  Dole.,  Electr.,  Nux  mosch.,
Lee.,  Leneg.,  Stann.,  Si  lie., — 3.  Euphorb.,  Eerr.,  Graph.,
Tp.,  Mang.,  Mur.  ac.,  Natr.  mur.,  Nitr.  ac.,  Op.

Moral  Symptoms. — Earnest  mood.  Sad,  weeping
mood,  towards  evening,  (2.  d.)  Weeping  mood,  with
thoughts  of  death.  Morose  and  full  of  grief.  The  re-
collection of  past  disagreeable  occurrences  torments  him.
She  is  anxious  on  account  of  her  illness.  Sad,  low-spir-
ited, apprehensive  of  evil,  accompanied  by  chilliness,  in
the  forenoon.  * Every  afternoon  between  5 and  6 o’clock

4*


82


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


she  is  seized  with  anguish,  as  if  she  had  committed  the
greatest  crime  ; towards  evening  the  anguish  passes  off.

* For  many  afternoons  she  is  seized  with  a weakness  and
anxiety  ; she  knows  not  how  to  comfort  herself,  what  to
do  with  herself;  this  state  leaves  her  towards  evening.

* Great  oppression  of  the  heart ; he  knew  not  how  to  quiet

himself,  * Fearful  and  uneasy  mood , (2.  d.)  * She

has  rest  nowhere  and  succeeds  in  nothing,  (4.  d.)  * Sigh-

ing. Not  disposed  to  do  any  thing.  Dread  of  labour.
Cloudy  weather  makes  her  very  sad.  Peevishness  early
in  the  morning.  Ill  humour,  peevishness,  sometimes  ac-
companied by  headache,  in  the  forenoon.  Very  unamia-
ble,  irritated,  peevish  ; she  answers  reluctantly  (the  se-
cond day  of  her  courses.)  She  found  fault  with  every
thing.  She  could  not  bear  any  noise.  The  child  is  ex-
tremely obstinate.  Bears  no  contradiction.  Peevish  and
angry.  Peevish,  angry,  scolding,  in  the  evening,  (6.  d.)
Tiie  mood  changes  for  the  better,  after  supper ; headache
and  pain  at  the  stomach,  ceasing  at  the  same  time.  Very
easily  frightened.  Extremely  fantastic.  Occasionally  ex-
cessive mirth.  He  often  laughs,  without  moderation,  at
a trifle,  (a.  38  d.)  He  does  not  seem  to  be  in  his  senses.
Head  very  thoughtless.  Very  forgetful,  and  headache
when  reflecting  on  something.  Forgetful,  absent,  cannot
recollect,  (9.  d.)  Very  absent  ; when  telling  a story,  he
easily  loses  his  train  of  thoughts,  and  hits  upon  thoughts
and  expressions  which  he  did  not  wish  to  employ,  (8.  a.)
Absence  of  mind,  accompanied  by  anxiety  ; when  speak-
ing, he  is  at  a loss  to  finish  his  speech.  She  finds  it  hard
to  arrange  her  ideas.  He  speaks  incorrectly,  speaks  wrong
without,  wishing  it,  uses  one  word  for  another  in  speaking.
I-Ie  easily  uses  wrong  letters  and  figures  in  writing  or  cy-
phering, (9.  d.)

Head  : — Emptiness  and  sensation  as  of  closing  of  the
head , (a.  a quarter  of  an  hour.)  Stupefaction  of  the  head.
Vertigo  as  from  intoxication,  after  having  sat  still  for  some
time,  (towards  evening.)  Upon  turning  with  the  body,  the
head  feels  immediately  dizzy.  Vertigo  and  trembling  of
the  feet,  so  that  he  has  to  hold  himself  in  order  not  to  fall,
for  several  days,  (a.  3 d.)  Vertigo,  at  night  and  early  in
the  morning,  (a.  2d.)  Early  in  the  morning,  vertigo


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


83


with  a sense  as  of  waving  before  the  eyes  ; she  has  to  sit
down.  Frequent  vertigo,  early  in  the  morning  after  ris-
ing ; it  continues  the  whole  day  and  is  worse  toward  even-
ing ; he  feels  as  if  things  turned  with  him  in  a circle  ;
also  at  niffht  on  moving  his  head.  Giddiness  nausea  and
want  of  appetite,  ever  since  the  dawn  of  day.  Vertigo
with  nausea,  early  in  the  morning  ; in  walking,  that  symp-
tom soon  passes  off,  (4.  d.)  * Headache,  early  in  bed,

with  nausea,  which  rises  as  high  up  as  the  throat ; she
feels  an  inclination  to  vomit ; the  symptom  passes  off  af-
ter 2 or  3 hours.  Headache  and  pain  at  the  stomach,
accompanied  by  ill  humour,  the  whole  day,  (a.  3 d.)

* Headache  after  dinner,  (5.  d.)  Headache  with  heaviness
of  the  forehead,  early  in  the  morning,  worse  in  the  after-
noon, (3.  d.)  Pressure  at  the  top  of  the  head,  half  an
hour,  (a.  6 d.)  Pressure  over  the  wrhole  head  after  having
got  heated,  (a.  10  d.)  Erratic  headache  in  the  brain,  pres-
sure and  stinging  over  one  of  the  eyebrows.  His  head  is
very  heavy.  Heaviness  and  beating  in  the  forehead,  after
dinner.  Heaviness  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  growing
worse  in  bed,  (46.  d.)  The  right  side  of  her  head  seems
to  be  heavier  than  the  left  ; the  head  feels  as  if  it  would
fall  over  on  that  side,  (1.  d.)  Pressive  sense  of  fulness  in
the  forehead,  as  from  the  vapor  of  coal.  * Pressive  full-
ness iii  the  forehead  and  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  as
if  the  head  would  burst  there.  * On  stooping  there  is
tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  ; in  front  the  head  threat-
ens to  burst  with  pain.  * Headache,  pressive  jerkings  in
the  forehead  from  within  outwards , as  if  it  would  burst.

* Uproar  behind  the  right  frontal  eminence,  as  if  every
thing  would  come  out  there,  (2.  d.)  Clawing  pain  in  the
head.  For  several  mornings  she  is  roused  from  her  slum-
ber by  a drawing  pain  of  the  periosteum  of  the  forehead  ;
the  pain  passes  otf  after  rising.  Drawing  and  tearing  in
the  whole  head,  early  after  rising  and  during  the  whole
day,  (23.  d.)  Tearing  of  the  temples,  early  and  in  the
evenings.  Tearing  behind  the  left  ear,  as  far  as  the  ver-
tex, with  a sensation  as  if  the  head  were  cleft.  Headache
with  stitches  the  whole  day.  Erratic  stitches  in  the  head
deep  in  the  brain,  especially  in  the  right  side  ; they  pass
off  in  the  open  air,  (4.  42.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  left  temple,


84


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


increased  by  chewing.  Stitches  in  the  left  temple,  as  with
a blunt  instrument.  Prickings  over  the  right  eye.  Stitch-
es over  the  left  eye,  so  violent  that  they  cause  the  eyes  to
contract,  after  dinner,  (4.  d.)  Boring  stitches  behind  the
right  frontal  eminence,  deep  in  the  brain,  during  dinner,
(2.  d.)  Headache  resembling  a knocking  or  hacking  with
a sharp  instrument  ; pain  prevented  her  from  moving,  she
had  to  lie  still.  Painful  throbbing  and  beating  in  the  tem-
ple, in  the  left  side  of  the  head  and  the  left  side  of  the  oc-
ciput, sometimes  with  yawning.  Pain  as  from  ulceration
in  moving  the  head  and  on  pressing  upon  it,  especially  in
the  occiput,  at  one  of  the  glands  of  that  region,  for  some
time.  On  moving  his  head  there  is  a sensation  as  of  the
brain  falling  to  and  fro,  towards  the  side  where  he  stoops,
some  times  attended  with  stinging  pains ; a symptom  which
troubles  him  even  at  night,  for  several  weeks  in  succession.
Headache  as  if  water  or  something  else  were  in  his  head.
Sense  of  looseness  of  the  brain.  The  head  easily  catches
cold.  Itching  of  the  head,  accompanied  by  great  sensi-
tiveness of  the  integuments  of  the  head  when  scratching
them,  (10.  d.)  Violent  itching  of  the  hairy  scalp , espe-
cially of  the  occiput.  Sense  as  if  the  hairs  would  stand
upon  end,  with  tingling  over  the  whole  head  and  a feeling
of  coldness  there,  after  coming  out  of  the  open  air  and  en-
tering the  room.  The  hair  is  painful  when  touched.  The
scalp  and  the  hairs  are  intensely  painful  when  the  hand  is
moved  along  them  ; this  movement  made  him  shudder,
(1st  evening.)

Eyes  : — The  eyes  are  weak  ; the  child  winks  continu-
ally. Pressure  upon  the  eyelids  on  waking  up  and  when
be  is  about  falling  asleep  ; he  cannot  open  them,  although
be  is  internally  awake.  Pressure  in  the  eyes.  Pressure
and  cutting  in  the  eyes,  (4.  d.)  Pressure  and  fine  stitches
in  the  eyes,  (2.  d.)  Prickings  and  pressure  in  the  eyes.
Biting  in  the  eyes  and  itching  of  the  borders  of  the  lids.
Itching  and  biting  in  the  eyes,  which  pass  off  by  rubbing,
early  in  the  morning,)  ( 1 . 4.  1 2.  d.)  * Burning  of  the  eyes

the  whole  day,  especially  early  on  waking  up,  with  intol-
erance of  light,  and  in  the  evening  on  lying  down.  A stye
of  the  right  upper  lid  becomes  inflamed,  with  a sensation
of  tension  (2.  d.)  Inflammation  of  the  inner  canthus  of


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


86


the  right  eye,  without  pain,  (26.  d.)  The  eyes  are  inflam-
ed and  dim.  The  right  eye  is  a little  inflamed  and  dim.
The  eyes  are  agglutinated,  early  in  the  morning.  The
eyes  are  closed  with  gum,  early  in  the  morning,  after
sound  sleep  ; it  takes  her  a long  time  to  open  them.  The
eyes  are  closed  with  gum  in  the  morning  ; they  run  in  day
time.  When  reading  his  eyes  run.  Watery  eye  ; the
white  of  the  eye  is  full  of  red  veins,  as  in  an  incipient  in-
flammation of  the  eye.  The  right  eye  waters,  and  the
vessels  of  the  cornea  are  distinctly  visible.  Copious  lachry-
mation,  especially  of  the  right  eye,  as  well  in  the  open
air  as  in  the  room.  When  sneezing,  white  stars  sparkle
before  his  eyes.  A large  black  spot  hovers  before  the  eye
after  she  has  been  sewing.  When  making  an  effort,  lie
sees  the  objects  which  are  at  a distance  double,  and  also,
those  which  are  near  him.

Ears  : — Frequent  and  painful  stitches  in  the  right  ear.
Stitches  in  the  left  ear,  (2.  d.)  Throbbing  in  the  left  ear,
at  night,  when  resting  upon  it ; on  turning  to  the  other
side,  the  symptom  disappears,  (6.  d.)  Twitches  and
pinching  in  the  internal  ear.  Twitches  and  tension  around
the  left  ear,  in  the  cheek-bone  and  in  the  temples,  with
swelling  of  the  cervical  glands.  Tension  behind  the  right
ear.  Tearing  below  and  behind  the  ears,  made  worse  by
moving  the  head,  sometimes  extending  as  far  as  the  vertex,
the  occiput  and  the  nape  of  the  neck,  also  the  shoulder,
(after  dinner.)  Hard  swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  ear.
Early  in  the  morning  itching  over  the  ears,  which  spreads
over  the  whole  body,  (3.  d.)  Tingling  and  slow  and  deep
tearing  in  the  left  ear,  which  afterwards  extends  to  the
lower  jaw,  (10.  d.)  A report  in  the  ears  as  of  a distant
shot,  5 or  6 times  in  the  course  of  an  hour.  Whizzing
before  the  left  ear.  Illusion  of  hearing  ; he  imagines  to
hear  the  ringing  of  bells.  At  night,  whizzing  in  the  left
ear,  (2.  d.)  Every  day,  after  midnight,  whispering  as  of
the  wind  among  trees,  in  the  right  ear,  when  resting  upon
it  in  bed.  Buzzing  before  the  ears  as  if  the  hearing  were
dull,  and  as  if  something  were  lying  before  the  ears,  (a.  17
d.)  * Diminishing  of  hearing.  Painful  sensitiveness  of

the  deaf  ear  in  consequence  of  a strong  sound  ; this  caus-
ed her  to  tremble  over  the  whole  body.


80


AMMONIUM  CARBONIC UM.


Nose  : — Tearing  in  the  left  nasal  fossa,  and  simulta-
neously in  the  bone  of  the  left  elbow,  extending  towards
the  hand.  Slight  shootings  in  the  left  side  of  the  nose
which  seem  to  draw  up  the  wing  of  the  nose.  When  stoop-
ing, sensation  in  the  extremity  of  the  nose  as  if  the  blood
were  accumulating  there.  Upon  strongly  breathing  through
the  nose  this  organ  feels  painful.  Swelling,  sensation  of
soreness  and  itching  in  the  right  cavity  of  the  nose,  with
a tingling  in  the  nose  as  if  the  nose  were  continually  af-
fected with  cold  ; the  nose  runs,  (a.  3 d.)  Furunculus  on
the  tip  of  the  nose.  Pustule  on  the  side  of  the  nose.  On
the  septum  of  the  nose  a pustule,  in  front.  Pimple  upon
the  tip  of  the  nose.  An  acrid  fluid  runs  out  at  the  nose.
When  stooping,  water  runs  out  at  the  nose.  On  blowing
the  nose,  early  in  the  morning,  pus  drops  out  at  one  of  the
nostrils,  (5.  d.)  Blowing  bloody  mucus  out  of  the  nose ,
frequently.  On  blowing  the  nose,  blood  comes  out  at  the
left  nostril,  (2.  d.)  * Bleeding  at  the  nose , (8.  d.)  Bleed-
ing at  the  nose,  after  dinner,  (2.  d.)  * Dry  coryza,  Jahr.

Face  : — Violent  pain  in  the  face  on  the  right  side.  Pain-
ful tension  and  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  face,  (2.  d.)
Pressive  pain  in  the  zygoma.  Drawing  pain  in  the  cheek
bones.  Contraction  of  the  skin  of  the  forehead  and  the
face.  Sense  as  of  stretching  in  the  face,  she  has  to  rub
her  eyes  and  her  face,  as  if  she  were  sleepy.  Heat  in
the  face,  during  mental  exertions.  Heat  in  the  head  and
face,  with  red  cheeks.  Redness  of  the  left  cheek.  Pale-
ness of  the  face,  with  nausea  and  moral  and  physical  wea-
riness. Wretched  look.  Pale  face,  accompanied  by
headache,  pain  at  the  stomach  and  ill-humour,  (4.  d.)  Pale,
bloated  face,  for  a long  time,  (a.  30  d.)  Tension  of  the
skin  of  the  face  (the  nose  and  both  lips),  as  if  the  face
were  swollen  ; early  in  the  morning,  on  waking  up.  Hard
swelling  of  the  cheek,  * as  well  as  the  glands  of  the  ears
and  neck.  White,  herpes-like  spots  of  the  size  of  a small
pea,  which  continually  exfoliate  ; (upon  the  cheek.)  Boils
upon  the  cheek  and  around  the  ear.  Small  boils  and  in-
durations, emitting  water  and  blood,  upon  the  cheek,  at
the  corners  of  the  mouth  and  on  the  chin.  Eruptions  up-
on the  forehead  resembling  little  boils.  Pimples  and  ve-
sicles on  the  forehead.  Pimples  on  the  forehead  and  the


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


8?


tip  of  the  nose.  Miliary  eruption  around  the  chin,  with-
out sensation.  Pustules  upon  the  forehead,  temple,  cheek
and  chin.  Pustules  upon  the  cheeks,  during  the  menses.
Itching  of  the  mouth  ; both  lips  were  itching.  Pimple
on  the  lower  lip,  with  burning  pain.  Burning  vesicles  on
the  vermilion  border  of  both  lips.  Vesicles  at  the  right
corner  of  the  mouth  and  on  the  upper  lip.  Eruption  at
the  mouth.  Herpes-like,  scaly  eruption  around  the  mouth.

Jaws  and  Teeth  : — Scaly  skin  of  the  chin,  with  ve-
hement itching,  which  does  not  pass  off  by  scratching.
The  upper  lip  feels  sore,  as  if  it  were  chapped.  The
lower  lip  is  chapped  in  the  middle,  with  a sensation  as  of
burning;  it  bleeds.  Chapped  lips  and  sore  corners  of  the
mouth.  Ury,  chapped  lips  with  a sensation  of  soreness
as  from  excoriation,  and  a feeling  of  burning,  as  if  they
were  covered  with  vesicles.  Pain  and  swelling  of  the
submaxillary  glands  ; they  feel  tense  upon  the  mouth  be-
ing moved.  Under  the  gum,  upon  the  jaw,  a swelling  of
the  size  of  a pigeon’s  egg ; this  swelling  felt  very  painful
upon  moving  the  jaws  for  the  purpose  of  chewing.  The
* gums  are  so  sensitive  that  she  does  not  dare  to  touch
them  with  the  tongue,  (41.  d.)  Stitches  of  the  inner  and
upper  gums  of  the  right  side.  Itching  of  the  gums  ; they
bleed  upon  being  scratched.  Gums  incline  to  bleed.  Sen-
sation as  of  swelling,  or  also  swelling  and  inflammation
of  the  gums.  Swelling  of  the  gums  accompanied  by  swell-
ing of  the  cheek.  Abscess  of  the  gums,  attended  with
discharge  of  pus.  Pain  in  two  molar  teeth  as  when
sweets  come  into  a hollow  tooth.  Violent  toothache,  with
heat  of  the  same  side  of  the  head,  (a.  12  d.)  Violent
toothache , as  soon  as  she  enters  the  bed  in  the  evening ,
during  the  whole  night  ; it  cannot  be  relieved  in  any  po-
sition. Toothache  at  night,  and  swollen  cheek  on  the
dav  following  ; afterwards  enlarged  nose  and  red  spots  in
the  face  and  upon  the  neck.  When  a warm  liquid  gets
into  the  mouth,  the  person  experiences  painful  shootings
in  the  teeth  and  the  lower  jaw  of  one  side,  for  5 or  10
minutes.  In  chewing  almost  all  the  teeth  are  painful  ;
the  person  was  unable  to  speak  on  account  of  pain  ; upon
air  rushing  into  the  mouth,  the  pain  became  intolerable.
The  teeth  are  painful  when  set  against  one  another , in  the


68


AMMONIUM  CAUBONICUM.


act  of  biting.  An  anterior  inferior  incisor  tooth  becomes
very  painful  when  biting  upon  it,  during  the  catamenia.
Toothache  during  the  catamenia,  day  and  night,  especial-
ly during  and  after  dinner,  relieved  by  warm  cloths  and
pressing  upon  the  teeth.  Drawing  toothache  during  the
catamenia.  Drawing  toothache  during  the  catamenia  ; it
passes  off  by  eating,  (a.  6 h.)  Drawing  toothache,  which
seems  to  be  in  the  jaws,  and  extends  as  far  as  the  ear
and  the  cheek  ; only  during  eating  and  when  biting  upon
the  tooth.  Darting  in  an  infected  molar  tooth,  after  dinner ;
the  pain  ceases  upon  a toothpick  being  inserted  in  the
tooth.  Tearing  pain  in  the  upper  row  of  teeth.  Draw-
ing and  tearing  in  a molar  tooth,  after  a journey  in  damp
weather,  (a.  23  d.)  Griping  in  a hollow  molar  tooth,  with
a sensation  as  of  tearing  and  shooting,  also  at  night,  re-
lieved by  smelling  of  hepar  sulphuris.  Tearing  in  the
teeth  and  jaws  as  far  as  the  ears,  before  midnight ; she  is
obliged  to  shift  constantly  from  one  side  to  another,  the
teeth  are  very  painful  when  biting  upon  them,  (the  third
day  of  the  catamenia.)  Tearing  in  the  upper  molar  teeth
of  the  left  side,  with  frequent  collections  of  water  in  the
mouth,  and  gnawing  in  the  left  shoulder,  (10.  d.)  Tear-
ing toothache  in  the  left  upper  row,  which  seems  to  affect
the  roots  as  if  an  ulcer  would  form  there,  (3G.  d.)  Sen-
sation as  if  an  abcess  were  existing  at  the  roots  of  the
teeth,  which  threatens  to  burst  on  the  access  of  air,  or
when  the  tooth  is  pressed  upon  during  mastication.  Shoot-
ings in  a healthy  molar  tooth,  in  the  open  air.  Shooting
toothache,  uninterruptedly  for  eight  days.  Shooting  pain
in  the  molar  teeth , upon  pressing  their  edges  against  one
another  ; he  was  only  able  to  chew  with  the  incisor  teeth,
(immediately,  and  on  the  2.  d.)  On  touching  the  tooth
with  the  tongue,  a violent  stitch  occurred  in  a hollow  tooth
of  the  upper  row.  Sensation  of  soreness  in  a hollow  mo-
lar tooth,  (a.  half  an  h.)  Throbbing  and  pressive  tooth-
ache (a  3d.)  Toothache  in  the  evening,  as  if  the  teeth
were  clawed.  Sensation  in  the  teeth,  as  if  there  were  no
power  to  bite.  The  teeth  become  very  dull.  Dullness  of
the  molar  teeth,  on  setting  them  against  one  another  dur-
ing mastication  ; they  appear  to  be  loose.  The  teeth  feel


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


89


as  if  they  were  dull  and  too  long.  The  teeth  frequently
feel  as  if  they  were  too  long , as  after  having  eaten  acids.
A tooth  which,  formerly,  had  often  been  painful,  appears  to
be  longer,  and  becomes  again  sensihveto  pain.  On  suck-
ing, blood  comes  out  of  a molar  tooth.  The  decay  of  the
teeth  progresses  rapidly.  His  teeth  fall  out,  even  sound
ones.

Mouth. — Burning  vesicles  on  the  inner  side  of  the  lower
lip.  On  the  inner  side  of  the  lower  lip,  a painful,  white
vesicle.  The  inside  of  the  cheeks  is  full  of  vesicles  with-
out sensation.  Vesicles  on  the  tongue , especially  on  its
border.  Vesicles  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  which  hinder
speaking  and  eating,  with  a burning  pain.  Pustules  upon
the  tongue,  with  a burning  and  stinging  pain,  especially  on
the  border  and  under  the  tongue.  Small  ulcer  at  the  tip
of  the  tongue,  feeling  sore  whenever  the  tongue  is  moved.
Pain  at  the  palate,  as  from  an  ulcer,  on  touching  the
palate  with  the  tongue  ; the  part  exfoliates  on  the  day  fol-
lowing. The  anterior  half  of  the  tongue  feels  as  if  it  were
pithy,  early  in  the  morning,  (4.  d.)  Burning  at  the  tip  of
the  tongue,  made  worse  by  touching  it.  Redness  and  in-
flammation in  the  mouth  and  throat ; these  parts  are  pain-
ful, as  if  they  were  sore  and  excoriated.  Sensation  as  of
swelling  in  the  mouth.  The  buccal  cavity  feels  so  narrow
that  she  scarcely  dares  to  open  her  mouth  or  to  move  her
tongue,  lest  she  should  hurt  some  part  by  touching  it  with
the  tongue,  (40.  d.)  Talking  is  often  difficult  for  her,  as
if  the  organs  of  speech  were  paralyzed,  or  on  account  of
a pain,  resembling  pain  at  the  stomach,  (3.  d.)  Sore
throat  towards  evening.  Pain  in  the  throat  during  de-
glutition, as  if  the  right  tonsil  were  swollen.  Swelling  of
the  amygdalae,  with  difficult  deglutition,  especially  early  in
the  morning  and  in  the  evening.  Sensation  as  if  some-
thing were  in  her  throat,  by  which  swallowing  is  made
difficult,  accompanied  by  a sensation  of  choking  pressure  ;
(early,  and  in  the  evening.)  She  feels  as  if  something
were  in  her  throat,  on  the  right  side,  making  deglutition
difficult,  (a.  6 minutes.)  Sore  throat,  sense  as  of  scraping,
(rawness.)  Roughness  and  sense  as  of  scraping  in  the
throat.  Soreness  in  the  throat.  Burning  sensation  in  the
neck,  down  the  oesophagus,  as  from  alcohol.  Bad  sore


90


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


throat,  like  stinging  and  drawing,  or  tearing,  more  painful
when  speaking;  (3.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  throat,  with  ex-
ternal swelling  on  both  sides.  Dryness  of  the  mouth  in
the  evening,  which  cannot  be  relieved  by  drinking  ; the
mouth  feels  parched  early  in  the  morning.  Great  dryness
and  heat  of  the  mouth,  at  night,  (a.  12  d.)  Dryness  of
the  mouth  and  neck.  On  waking  up  early  in  the  morning,
dryness  of  the  mouth  and  neck,  with  thirst.  The  lips  are
constantly  dry,  and  adhere  to  one  another,  (15.  d.)

Taste  and  Appetite. — Collection  of  saltish  water  in
the  mouth.  She  has  to  spit  a good  deal,  for  several  days.
Frequent  and  copious  collection  of  watery  saliva  in  her
mouth  ; she  is  constantly  obliged  to  spit.  Bad  smell  from
the  mouth,  which  he  himself  perceives,  for  a long  time.
Sweet  taste  in  the  mouth,  with  bloody  saliva,  (5.  d.)  Taste
of  blood  in  the  mouth,  during  the  whole  time  of  proving.
Bad  taste  and  smell  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning.

* Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning,  and  at-
tacks of  nausea  the  whole  day,  (10.  d.)  Bitter  taste  in
the  mouth,  early  on  waking  up,  (2.  d.)  Nasty  and  sourish
taste  in  the  mouth.  Acid  taste  after  drinking  milk.  Sour-
ish and  metallic  taste  of  food.  Constant  eructations.
Frequent , hut  suppressed  eructations.  A good  deal  of
empty  eructations,  especially  the  first  day.  Frequent
risings  of  air,  in  the  evening  and  after  dinner,  (5.  d.)

* Eructations  tasting  of  the  ingesta.  * Eructations  tasting

of  the  ingesta,  during  and  after  supper,  (10.  d.)  * Sour

eructations.  * Frequent  heartburn.  Feverish  chilliness
early  in  the  morning,  succeeded  by  hiccough,  (2.  d.)
Nausea  and  coated  tongue,  early  in  the  morning,  (a.  8 d.)
Qualmishness,  early  after  rising,  until  the  afternoon,  ac-
companied by  chilliness  in  the  whole  body;  when  this
symptom  appears,  she  vomits  sour  water,  during  the  cata-
menia, (a.  55  d ) Qualmishness  of  the  stomach  unto
vomiting,  when  walking,  (4-  d.)  Constant  absence  of
thirst,  during  the  time  of  proving.  * Continual  thirst.

* Thirst  the  whole  afternoon,  (6.  d.)  No  appetite,  but

* continual  thirst.  She  cannot  eat  her  dinner  without

drinking,  (a.  10  d.)  Little  hunger  and  appetite,  although
he  relishes  his  meal,  (2.  8.  d.)  * Want  of  appetite,  early

in  the  morning.  Milk  becomes  offensive  to  her.  No


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


91


desire  for  meat  or  boiled  things ; she  only  desires  bread
and  cold  food,  for  several  days,  during  the  catamenia.
Increase  of  hunger  and  appetite,  (1.  2.  d.)  A good  deal
of  hunger  and  appetite , (a.  18  d.)  Rabid  hunger,  (a.  2 h.)
Increased  appetite  at  dinner;  nevertheless,  she  is  imme-
diately satiated  after  having  eaten  little , (4.  6.  d.)  Heat
in  the  face,  during  and  after  dinner.  Tearing  in  the  right
temple  during  dinner.  * Sense  of  nausea  and  lassitude
during  and  after  dinner,  (during  the  catamenia,)  (9.  d.)
Pain  at  the  stomach,  and  loathing  of  the  supper,  while  the
person  is  taking  it,  (8.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  chest,  after
supper.  * Qualmishness  after  dinner.  * Qualmishness
and  inclination  to  vomit,  every  day,  immediately  after  din-
ner, for  a whole  hour.  Uneasiness,  with  pressure  at  the
stomach  and  * the  forehead,  immediately  after  dinner,  for
several  hours,  (a.  4 h.)

Stomach. — Pressure  at  the  stomach  after  dinner.  After
eating,  great  pressure  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  succeeded
by  nausea  and  vomiting  of  the  ingesta  ; afterwards,  sour
taste  in  the  mouth — for  five  days,  (a.  16  d.)  After  dinner,
she  finds  talking  difficult.  Sensation  as  of  the  stomach
being  overloaded,  until  three  hours  after  dinner.  The
stomach  appears  full,  trembling,  (during  the  catame-
nia.) Sense  of  emptiness  at  the  stomach.  Pain  at  the
stomach,  with  disposition  to  watery  risings,  (6.  d.)  * Pain-
fulness of  the  stomach,  when  pressed  upon,  (4.  d.)  The
cloths  press  upon  the  stomach.  Pressure  at  the  stomach.
Oppression  at  the  stomach  after  dinner.  Oppression  at
the  stomach  after  supper,  (a.  12  h.)  Oppressive  weight
at  the  pit.  Pressure  at  the  stomach,  with  nausea  and  sen-
sitiveness at  the  pit.  Oppression  at  the  stomach,  with  a
sensation  of  contraction,  (also  in  the  chest,)  accompanied
by  loathing  and  nausea,  (4.  d.)  Oppression  at  the  stomach,
already  early  in  the  morning,  passing  into  nausea  and  in-
clination to  vomit.  Pinching,  and  rumbling  in  the  stomach.
Gnawing  at  the  right  side  of  the  stomach.  Tearing  and
boring  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  extending  up  to
the  first  lumbar  vertebrae.  Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  re-
gion of  the  stomach.  Burning  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.
Burning,  first  at  the  stomach,  then  also  in  the  belly,
(shortly  after  taking  the  medicine.)  Heat  at  the  stomach*


92


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


which  extends  to  the  bowels,  as  from  drinking  strong  wine,
(a.  a quarter  of  an  hour.)

Abdomen. — Pressive  pain  under  the  right  ribs,  in  the
region  of  the  liver.  Soreness  of  the  liver.  Stitches  below
the  left  ribs,  in  the  evening.  Pressure  over  the  umbilicus,
as  from  a button.  At  three  o’clock  in  the  morning  she  is
roused  from  her  sleep  by  a violent  colic,  two  days  before
the  appearance  of  the  menses,  (41.  d.)  Pressure  in  the
hypogastrium,  for  three  hours,  also  during  dinner,  (a.  2 h.)
Pressive  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  early  in  the
morning,  (a.  12  h.)  Painful  compression  on  both  sides  of
the  abdomen,  only  when  sitting,  relieved  by  motion  and
extension  of  the  limbs,  (5.  d.)  Sudden,  painful  contraction
of  the  bowels,  as  far  as  the  region  of  the  stomach,  relieved
by  compressing  the  belly  with  the  hands,  passing  off  after
lying  down,  (33.  d.)  Contractive  and  pinching  pain  in
the  belly,  first  in  the  upper,  then  in  the  lower  part,  early
in  the  morning,  so  violent,  that  it  produced  qualmishness
and  gathering  of  water  in  the  mouth,  even  unto  faintness,
accompanied  by  chilliness,  twelve  hours  before  the  appear-
ance of  the  menses,  (a.  9 d.)  Colic  in  the  left  side  of  the
abdomen,  during  dinner  ; the  pain  terminates  with  the  emis-
sion of  flatulence.  Violent  pinching,  contraction  and  rum-
bling in  the  belly,  in  the  forenoon  ; it  comes  on  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  and  can  only  be  relieved  by  lying
upon  the  belly,  and  applying  warm  cloths  to  it ; in  the
evening  it  appears  again,  also  in  the  cold  on  the  following
morning;  afterwards  it  becomes  less,  when  in  the  room,
(17.  d.)  Contractive  spasm  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  on
stooping  ; also  in  the  small  of  the  back,  (38.  d.)  Sense  as
of  clawing  and  of  obstruction  in  the  abdomen.  Cutting
pain  in  the  abdomen,  the  belly  being  very  small  during  the
pain,  (16.  d.)  Violent  colic,  at  7 o’clock  in  the  morning,
(a.  48  h.)  Cutting  and  biting  in  the  belly  as  from  worms,
with  contractive  pain  at  the  stomach  and  chilliness  and
sweat;  .the  person  cannot  fall  asleep  till  morning;  on
waking  up,  the  pain  reappears.  Stitches  in  the  abdomen,
which  make  walking  difficult.  Stitches  in  the  left  side  of
the  belly,  in  the  evening,  when  stooping.  Transverse
stitches  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  when  standing.  Burn-
ing, deep  in  the  left  side  of  the  belly,  (2.  d.)  Heaviness


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


93


in  the  abdomen.  Pinching  and  lancinations  in  the  right
side  of  the  lower  abdomen,  when  stretching  the  limbs,
(20.  d.)  Painful  pressure  in  the  groin  and  the  bent  of  the
right  knee.  Sense  of  fullness  and  distention  in  the  region
of  the  left  groin.  Elastic  swelling  in  the  left  groin,  as
large  as  a fist,  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  with  a
pain  as  from  a bruise  at  that  place;  on  account  of  this
pain,  she  cannot  rest  upon  that  side  ; the  pain  is  also  ex-
perienced upon  the  parts  being  touched  ; on  waking  up,
swelling  and  pain  had  disappeared,  (9.  d.)  A hernia  pro-
trudes in  the  left  groin,  (2.  d.)  Excessively  distended  ab-
domen. Distention  of  the  abdomen,  with  retention  of
stool.

Stool. — Rumbling,  and  moving  of  flatulence  in  the
abdomen.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  spasms  or
when  fasting,  every  time  after  she  swallows  something,
for  several  days,  (a.  16  d.)  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,
with  colic.  Griping,  with  a good  deal  of  flatulence.  Dis-
position to  colic,  with  flatulence.  Much  flatulence.  Emis-
sion of  a quantity  of  flatulence,  in  the  afternoon,  evening,
and  at  night,  the  evacuations  being  normal,  (4.  d.)  * Re-

tention of  stools  during  the  first  clays  ; this  is  succeeded
by  loose  stools ; this  symptom  is  observed  in  all  the  per-
sons upon  whom  the  drug  was  tried.  * Constipation  the
first  four  days.  * Retarded  and  hard  stools,  forming  clots
which  she  finds  it  difficult  to  press  out.  Hard,  painful
stools,  with  prickings  in  the  anus.  Hard  stools,  surrounded
with  streaks  of  blood,  (a.  22  h.)  Loose  stools,  twice  a
day,  (3.  and  4.  d.)  * Diarrhoea,  with  colic,  early  in  the

morning.  Diarrhoea,  the  stools  being  composed  of  faeces
and  slime,  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  before  and  during
the  stools,  (8.  d.)  Stools  mixed  with  slime.  Evacuations
with  constant  tenesmus.  Violent  cutting  in  the  rectum,
with  easy  evacuations.  During  the  evacuations  the  person
experiences  a pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which  moves
transversely  along  the  abdomen  towards  the  small  of  the
back  and  the  rectum  ; it  is  diminished  by  bending  the  body,
and  ceases  entirely  after  an  evacuation,  (28.  d.)  Colic
before  and  after  the  loose  stools.  After  the  evacuation,
sense  as  of  rasping,  then  burning,  at  the  anus.  After  a
copious  and  hard  evacuation,  discharge  of  a milklike  pros-


94


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


tatic  fluid.  * Discharge  of  blood  during  and  after  the
evacuation.  * The  varices  of  the  rectum  protrude  a good
deal  during  the  evacuation,  and  are  painful  a long  time
afterwards,  so  that  she  finds  it  impossible  to  walk,  (7.  d.)

* The  varices  of  the  rectum  protrude  even  when  there  is
no  evacuation, — but  they  recede  when  lying  down.  * For-
mation of  varices  of  the  rectum,  moist,  and  with  a pain  as
from  excoriation.  * At  night  he  cannot  sleep,  on  account
of  a burning  pain  at  the  rectum  ; this,  together  with  a
strong  desire  for  stool,  compelled  him  to  rise.  * Itching '
of  the  anus . The  child  becomes  sore  between  the  legs.

Urinary  Organs. — Violent  tenesmus  of  the  bladder ,
with  cutting.  Constant  tenesmus,  even  at  night,  with
diminished  emission  of  urine,  accompanied  by  burning.
At  night,  she  is  obliged  to  rise  for  the  purpose  of  urinat-
ing. * At  night,  several  successive  emissions  of  urine,
some  of  them  seem  pretty  copious.  Involuntary  emission
of  urine,  of  a.  boy,  while  at  sleep , towards  morning,  (1.  and
2.  night,  and  a.  16.  d.)  Frequent  micturition,  especially
the  first  day.  Frequent  and  copious  emissions  of  urine,
especially  in  the  evening.  Increased  and  turbid  urine.
At  noon,  the  urine  looks  pale-yellow  ; this  is  the  first  emis-
sion since  last  evening.  White  sandy  urine,  for  several
days,  (a.  9 d.)  The  urine  looks  reddish  after  dinner,  as
if  it  were  mixed  with  blood.  Blood  comes  out  of  the
urethra.  After  urinating,  there  is  a strong  traction  in  the
fore  part  of  the  urethra ; in  the  evening,  when  going  to
bed.  Violent  itching  of  the  genital  organs.  Itching  of
the  scrotum.  Sweat  of  the  scrotum.  Frequent  relaxation
of  the  scrotum.  Drawfing  pain  in  the  scrotum.  Occa-
sional drawings  in  the  scrotum,  which  are  relieved  by
raising  it.  Increased  weight  of  the  scrotum  ; he  was
obliged  to  raise  it  by  a bag.

Generative  Functions. — Choking  pain  in  the  scro-
tum and  spermatic  cords  ; the  scrotum  is  painful  to  the
touch  ; it  is  excited  by  involuntary  erections.  Involuntary
and  continual  erections,  early  in  the  morning,  (13.  d.)
Stiffness  of  the  penis,  without  any  desire  for  coition,  (6.  d.)
The  sexual  instinct  is  dormant  for  some  time,  (a.  7 d.)
Total  want  of  the  sexual  instinct.  Disinclination  to  the
other  sex.  Vehement  desire  for  coition,  without  anv  violent-

/ a/


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


95


ly  voluptuous  thoughts,  and  almost  without  any  erection,
(a.  5 d.)  Vehemently  voluptuous  desires,  with  trembling
of  the  body,  almost  without  any  erection.  * Pollutions,
almost  every  night.  Pollution,  two  days  after  an  embrace.
After  coition,  excited  circulation  and  palpitation  of  the
heart.  Violent  itching  of  the  pudendum.  Soreness  of  the
pudendum  and  the  anus  ; during  an  emission  of  urine,  the
parts  are  especially  painful.  Swelling , itching , and  burn-
ing of  the  pudendum,  (a.  12  d.)  Continual  itching  of
the  mons  veneris  ; it  constantly  reappears  after  scratching
the  parts.  The  menses  appear  too  late  by  three — five
days;  there  occurs  one  complete  interruption.  * The
courses  come  on  six  days  too  soon.  * The  courses,  which
had  always  been  regular,  appear  one  day  too  soon.  After
a long  drive  in  the  cold  air,  the  courses  come  on  four  days
too  soon  ; they  are  very  copious,  especially  at  night,  and
when  sitting  and  driving  previously,  she  experiences
griping  colic,  with  want  of  appetite.  The  courses  come
on  on  the  eighteenth  day,  (a.  7 d.)  The  menses  are
more  copious,  (immediately.)  The  menstrual  blood  is
blackish,  often  in  clots,  passing  off  with  spasmodic  pain
in  the  belly,  and  hard  stools,  with  tenesmus ; the  flow  is
abundant.  The  menstrual  blood  is  not  much  coloured.
The  menstrual  blood  is  acrid,  it  makes  the  thighs  sore  ;
this  soreness  causes  a burning  pain.  Pain  in  the  belly  and
the  small  of  the  back,  before  the  catamenia.  Paleness  of
the  face,  before  and  during  the  catamenia.  Invincible
sadness  during  the  catamenia.  Toothache  during  the
catamenia.  Colic  Souring  the  catamenia , with  griping,
pressure,  and  tension  between  the  scapulae.  Violent  tear-
ing in  the  body  during  the  catamenia,  which  appear  one
day  too  soon.  Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  during
the  catamenia.  Violent  cold  during  the  catamenia,  (9.  d.)
Great  fatigue  of  the  whole  body  during  the  catamenia,
especially  of  the  thighs,  with  yawning,  toothache,  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  and  chilliness.  * Violent , acrid
leucorrhcea , (causing  soreness,  Jahr.,)  (a.  2,  7,  8 d.)
Watery,  burning  leucorrhoea,  (13.  14.  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — Frequent  sneezing , early  in  the
morning,  when  in  bed.  Frequent  violent  sneezing,  (5.  d.)
Obstruction  of  the  ncse.  The  nose  is  very  much  obstructed,


96


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


without  any  cold.  At  night  the  nose  was  so  obstructed,  that
she  was  not  able  to  breathe,  except  through  her  mouth,  (a.  4
d.)  After  having  had  a sound  nap  in  the  forenoon,  she  wakes
up  at  one  o’clock  with  a sense  of  anxiety,  as  if  she  were
choking  ; this  was  on  account  of  the  nose  being  quite  ob-
structed, and  her  not  being  able  to  take  breath  except  with
an  open  mouth,  so  that  the  chest  was  painful  in  conse-
quence of  the  difficult  breathing,  (a.  12  d.)  Cold,  with
rattling,  in  the  nose,  accompanied  by  obstruction  of  the
nose  and  impurity  of  voice.  Cold,  with  obstruction  of  the
left  nostril.  Dry  coryza,  especially  at  night,  without  the
slightest  air  passing  through  the  nose.  Fluent  coryza ,
(4.  d.)  Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  tearing  in  the  left
cheek.  Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  cough.  Water  drops
out  at  the  nose,  without  a cold.  During  the  catamenia,
acrid  water,  which  excites  a sensation  as  of  burning  upon  the
upper  lip,  is  constantly  running  out  of  her  nose,  (43.  d.)
Constriction  of  the  larynx  from  both  sides  of  the  neck.
Drawing  and  stinging  itching  in  the  larynx.  Hoarseness
and  roughness  in  the  throat.  Rough  throat  ; he  can  only
speak  with  difficulty,  as  speaking  increases  the  roughness,
(2.  d.)  Violent  and  frequent  hoarseness.  She  is  so  hoarse
that  she  cannot  speak  a loud  word,  (a.  16  d.)

Respiratory  Organs. — His  chest  feels  so  oppressed,
that  he  can  scarcely  speak ; this  symptom  is  accompanied
by  coryza,  and  expectoration  of  a good  deal  of  mucus,
especially  early  in  the  morning.  The  chest  feels  rough  ;
when  calling  loud,  he  feels  hoarse.  Catarrh,  with  surdity
and  burning  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.  Clearing  the
throat  frequently  on  account  of  an  accumulation  of  phlegm
in  the  throat.  Rattling  in  the  larynx  as  from  mucus,  for  seve-
ral days.  He  is  obliged  to  cough  a quarter  of  an  hour,  when
in  bed,  in  the  evening.  * Nightly  cough.  The  child  coughs
violently  every  morning,  at  three — four  o’clock.  Violent
dry  cough,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  Cough,  with  asthma,
(6.  d.)  Cough , with  asthma , for  half  an  hour,  in  the  even-
ing, when  in  bed.  Cough,  deep  out  of  the  chest,  extremely
violent.  Cough,  which  contracts  the  chest.  Cough,  which
makes  the  chest  under  the  sternum  feel  sore,  as  from  ex-
coriation. Cough,  exciting  a pain  in  the  jaws,  which  is
not  felt  upon  touching  them.  Cough,  with  pain  at  the


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


97


lower  part  of  the  sternum.  Cough,  with  stitches  in  the
sternum,  (1.  d.)  Cough,  every  attack  causes  a stitch  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Cough,  with  heat  in  the  head.
Short  and  suppressed  cough,  from  an  irritation  in  the  la-
rynx, accompanied  by  a painful  sensation  of  spasmodic
asthma.  Soon  after,  a catarrhal  irritation  in  the  nose,  and
scraping  and  scratching  in  the  throat,  with  pain  as  from
excoriation,  and  difficult  hawking  up  of  a little  quantity  of
phlegm,  (a.  half  an  h.)  Dry  cough , especially  at  night ,
as  from  particles  of  dust  in  the  throat.  Cough,  with  ex-
pulsion of  phlegm  and  soreness  in  the  throat.  Cough,
during  the  whole  day,  and  early  in  the  morning,  with  ex-
pectoration of  a quantity  of  phlegm.  Continual  cough,
early,  in  bed,  with  expectoration  of  phlegm,  affecting  chest
and  head.  Cough,  with  expulsion  of  phlegm,  intermixed
with  little  globules  of  blood,  (a.  8 d.)  Cough , with  ex-
pulsion of  bloody  phlegm , heaviness  upon  the  chest,  and
short  breath,  especially  in  ascending  a hill,  (6.  18.  d.)
Bloody  expectoration  when  clearing  the  throat.  Rough-
ness, and  bloody  taste  in  the  mouth,  succeeded  by  cough
and  expectoration  of  light  red  blood,  with  burning  and
heaviness  in  the  chest,  heat  and  redness  in  the  face,  and
trembling  of  the  whole  body,  (4.  d.)  Difficult  breathing;
it  made  him  gulp  up  phlegm,  (short  cough.)  Difficult
breathing  at  night ; he  cannot  bear  the  cover  of  the  bed
to  touch  his  mouth,  for  then  he  is  afraid  of  choking,  (7.  d.)
* Asthma  and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  after  every  effort.
Contraction  of  the  middle  of  the  chest,  either  when  breath-
ing or  not;  the  place  aches  on  pressing  upon  it,  as  after  a
blow.  * Attack  of  asthma  for  eight  days  ; he  had  im-
mense trouble  in  ascending  a few  steps,  or  in  breathing;
this  was  only  possible  for  him  in  the  open  air;  he  dared
not  venture  into  a warm  room  ; he  there  turned  as  pale  as
a corpse,  and  was  not  able  to  do  any  thing  except,  to  sit
still,  (a.  21  d.)  Short  breathing,  with  stitches  in  the
chest  Short  breathing,  especially  in  going  up  stairs.
When  breathing,  frequent  stitches  in  the  hands  and  fin-
gers.

Chest.-— During  an  expiration,  the  person  feels  as  if
something  were  moving  downwards  in  the  chest,  and  did
not  permit  the  breath  being  expelled,  (7.  d.)  The  chest

5


98


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


feels  faint.  Chronic  weakness  of  the  chest  and  coryza?
(a.  4 w.)  Heaviness  on  the  chest , as  from  an  accumula-
tion of  blood,  (4.  5.  7.  d.)  Heaviness  and  tightness  of  the
chest,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Painful  oppression
at  the  chest  as  from  a hundred  weight  ; all  she  desires  is
to  cough,  in  order  to  become  more  easy,  (7.  d.)  Rush  of
blood  to  the  chest,  (after  writing.)  Heat  in  the  chest.
Great  oppression  at  the  chest,  as  from  anxiety.  When
standing,  sensation  in  the  chest  as  if  the  lungs  were  drawn
down,  (6.  d.)  Sense  of  contusion  in  the  middle  of  the
chest,  early  in  the  morning,  (4.  d.)  Painful  oppression  at
the  chest,  especially  when  lying  in  the  bed.  Compressive
oppression  at  the  chest.  Stitches  in  the  chest,  close  by  the
last  true  rib,  when  breathing  and  singing.  Stitches  upon
the  sternum,  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  and  under  the
left  nipple;  upon  touching  the  parts,  they  feel  bruised.
Stitches  in  the  chest  when  stooping,  relieved  by  righting
the  body,  (16.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  right  mamma  when
stooping.  Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  when
walking.  Twenty,  thirty  successive  stitches,  even  when
she  does  not  breathe,  under  the  right  mamma,  close  by
the  lowest  ribs,  early  in  the  morning,  when  rising  in  the
bed  ; likewise  at  other  periods  of  the  day.  Stitches  in
the  left  mamma,  during  a great  portion  of  the  night,  which
do  not  permit  her  lying  upon  the  left  side.  Violent  stitches
in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  commencing  in  the  praecordial
region,  and  then  moving  downwards  towards  the  side,  and
afterwards  move  towards  the  back,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Frequent
stitches  in  the  heart.  Frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart,
with  retraction  of  the  epigastrium  and  sense  of  weakness
in  the  praecordial  region.  Audible  palpitation  of  the  heart,
and  accelerated  beating;  upon  the  hand  being  pressed
upon  the  heart,  the  blood  seems  to  rise  to  the  neck,  with
breathing  rendered  difficult,  (at  rest.)  The  parts  of  the
sternum  crack  upon  the  chest  being  bent  backwards,  with
a pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  chest.  The  right  mamma
is  painful  to  the  touch,  (3.  d.)  Purple  rash  on  the  chest.
A small  red  furunculus  above  the  right  mamma,  which  is
only  painful  when  touched.

Back. — Stinging  at  the  sacrum,  preceded  by  itching.
Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  increased  by  motion  and


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


99


walking.  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  when  stooping  ;
she  feels  as  if  the  muscles  were  not  strong  enough  to  sup-
port the  body,  which  constantly  threatens  to  fall  forwards  ;
relief  is  obtained  by  righting  the  body,  (2.  d.)  Pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  as  from  a bruise,  (2.  d.  of  the  menses.)
Upon  walking  out  into  the  open  air,  he  had  a sudden  dart
into  the  small  of  the  back;  this  was  most  painful  when  ris-
ing after  having  been  seated  for  a long  time.  Shooting
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Drawing  pain  from  the
small  of  the  back  to  the  legs.  Drawing  and  pressive  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back  and  in  the  loin,  only  when  at  rest,
(sitting,  standing,  or  lying,)  in  day-time  ; it  disappears
when  walking.  Violently  throbbing  pain  in  the  small  of
the  back  and  in  the  loin,  when  at  rest ; upon  touching  the
parts,  the  pain  remains  the  same.  Gnawing  pain  in  the
small  of  the  back,  and  in  the  hips  ; from  these  parts  it  ex-
tends to  the  abdomen,  and  moves  again  backwards,  both
when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (16.  d.)  Sudden  stitches  in
the  right  loin.  Pain  in  the  back,  during  motion.  A jerk
in  the  back,  at  night,  when  asleep,  (7.  d.)  Pressure  in  the
back.  Burning  at  the  back,  especially  in  the  small  of  the
back,  several  times  during  the  day.  A blister  forms  upon
the  left  scapula,  with  a sensation  as  of  biting,  as  from
fleas.

Neck. — Violent  burning  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  early
in  the  morning,  (10.  d.)  Traction  all  along  the  back,  be-
ginning at  the  nape  of  the  neck,  (6.  d ) Stiff  neck  when
turning  the  head.  * Drawing  pain  at  the  nape  of  the  neck,
(with  stitches  at  the  head,  over  the  temples,  and  bloated
face.)

Superior  Extremities. — Pressure  upon  the  left  shoul-
der. The  glandular  indurations  in  the  axilla  become  pain-
ful and  enlarged.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right  shoulder-
joint,  (a.  14  d.)  Shooting  and  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder-
joint,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (37.  d.)  Tearing
in  the  joints  of  the  upper  extremities.  Tearing  in  the
shoulders.  A few  tearings  in  the  left  shoulder  towards  the
chest.  Pain  of  contusion  in  the  left  shoulder,  when  at
rest  and  in  motion.  Pain  of  contusion  in  the  left  shoulder
and  elbow-joint,  (in  the  evening.)  Small  furunculus  upon
the  left  shoulder.  Burning  at  a small  spot  of  the  upper


100


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


and  lower  arm,  (11.  d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  arms  and
hands.  Paralytic  drawing  in  the  left  arm,  coming  out  at
the  axilla  and  extending  as  far  as  the  wrist.  Sensation  of
paralysis  of  the  right  arm,  (14.  d.)  Heaviness  and  sen-
sation of  paralysis  of  the  right  arm  ; she  has  no  strength
in  it,  and  is  obliged  to  let  it  hang  down  ; at  the  same  time
the  hand  is  swollen  and  cold  for  half  an  hour,  (a.  2 h.)
The  right  arm  appeared  to  weigh  a hundred  weight,  and
to  he  without  strength.  * On  some  days  the  right  arm  is
quite  weak  and  cold,  so  that  it  appears  to  be  benumbed
and  lifeless  ; this  was  again  succeeded  by  a tingling  sensa-
tion in  it.  In  the  night,  about  three  or  four  o’clock,  she
puts  her  arm  out  of  her  bed  without  knowing  it ; the  pain
which  she  experiences  in  her  arm,  rouses  her  from  sleep ;
* the  arm  is  cold,  stiff, — and,  in  the  elbow-joint,  it  is  as
heavy  as  lead  ; the  arm  being  very  stiff,  she  has  to  use
the  other  hand,  in  order  to  bring  the  arm  back  again  into
the  bed  ; upon  moving  it,  or  when  the  arm  is  in  the  bed,  it
experiences  a tearing  pain  in  the  shoulder,  elbow,  and
wrist-joint.  Spasm  in  the  right  arm , which  drew  the  arm
backwards,  three  times  in  succession;  this  was  succeeded
by  heat  of  the  body,  and  turbid  white  urine.  Twitches
and  slight  shootings  in  the  right  upper  arm,  (4.  d.)  Crack-
ing in  the  elbow-joint,  during  motion.  Pain  in  the  elbow-
joint,  with  a sensation  as  of  groaning,  when  straightening
the  arm.  Stiffness  of  the  elbow-joint.  Boring  pain  in  the
elbow-joint,  in  the  fossa  which  receives  the  olecranon  pro-
cess. Sharp  stitches  in  the  elbow.  Tearing  in  the  elbow,
(in  the  bone,)  as  far  as  the  little  finger,  (4.  5.  d.)  Violent
pain  in  the  middle  of  the  left  fore  arm,  in  the  evening,
when  in  bed,  with  a sensation  as  if  the  bones  there  would
curb  inward  * and  break,  (2.  d.)  Itching  of  the  inside  of
the  right  fore  arm,  with  a sensation  as  of  burning  conse-
quent upon  scratching ; at  the  same  time  there  are  formed
small  red  pimples,  spots  and  granules,  which  do  not  cease
to  itch  after  being  scratched ; on  the  day  following,  they
become  highly  red,  (4.  5.  d.)  Tension  in  the  wrist-joint,
when  at  rest,  worse  during  motion  ; he  feels  as  if  he  could
not  move  his  hand,  (2.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  wrist-joints,  as
far  as  the  fingers  ; it  ceases  when  she  has  got  warm  in
her  bed.  Painful  tearing  in  the  left  wrist-joint ; the  tear-


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


101


mg  seems  to  be  in  the  marrow  towards  the  little  finger,
(6.  d.)  The  right  hand  frequently  goes  to  sleep  when  lying
upon  it  during  the  night,  (4.  d.)  Trembling  of  the  hands,
(a.  7 d.)  Distended  veins  and  blueness  of  the  hands,  after
washing  them  with  cold  water.  The  skin  of  a child’s
hands  becomes  quite  hard  and  chapped,  the  fissures  being
very  deep.  The  skin  of  the  palm  of  the  hand  peels  off,
(a.  4 d.)  Upon  stretching  the  fingers  apart,  they  experi-
ence a clawing  pain.  Cramp  in  the  posterior  joint  of  a
finger,  so  that  he  cannot  stretch  it,  with  painful  stitches  ;
from  morning  to  night,  when  staying  in  the  cold,  (2.  d.)
Drawing  pain  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers  as  far  as  the
hand,  as  from  continual  mesmerizing,  (1.  d.)  Tearing  in
the  fingers  and  in  the  articulation  of  the  thumb.  Pain,  as
from  a bruise,  in  the  left  thumb,  when  in  the  cold,  (2.  d.)
Griping  and  twitching  in  the  left  thumb,  which  seems  to
be  in  the  bone,  accompanied  by  yawning,  (11.  d.).  Visible
twitching  and  slight  shooting  in  the  left  thumb.  Swelling
of  the  middle  joint  of  the  right  middle  finger,  with  painful-
ness of  this  joint  upon  being  touched  or  bent.

Inferior  Extremities. — Burning  itching  upon  the
nates.  Acute  pain  in  the  hip-joint  when  walking.  Acute
pain  in  the  hip-joint  every  morning  in  the  bed  ; the  joint
feels  as  if  it  were  beaten  asunder,  so  that  he  cannot  turn
himself  when  lying  down  ; the  pain  decreases  after  rising,
and  still  more  when  walking ; in  the  afternoon,  the  pain
disappears  entirely  ; for  four  weeks.  Drawing  pain  de-
scending from  the  left  hip.  His  legs  are  contracted.  The
tendons  of  the  muscles  of  the  legs  feel  too  short.  Pain  in
the  left  leg,  as  from  a sprain,  when  walking.  Uneasiness
in  the  legs.  Twitches  in  the  leg,  towards  evening.  Hea-
viness in  the  legs,  so  that  he  can  scarcely  lift  them,  in  the
evening,  (8.  d.)  * Sudden  and  great  weakness  in  the

lower  extremities  ; she  finds  it  difficult  to  move  them  along,
after  dinner,  (2.  d.)  * Great  lassitude  in  the  thighs  and

legs.  Jerk-like  scraping  upon  the  bones  of  the  thighs  and
legs,  so  that  she  is  obliged  to  twitch  up  her  leg  every  mo-
ment, and  cannot  remain  lying  down,  but  has  to  walk  *
about,  (in  the  evening.)  Acute  pain  in  the  right  femur,  as
if  the  inmost  marrow  were  shaken,  increased  by  lying  and
sitting,  a quarter  of  an  hour,  (a.  some  hours.)  Great  las-


102


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


situde,  with  pain  in  the  thighs,  as  if  they  would  fall  off,  or
as  if  the  tendons  would  tear  off;  alternating  with  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back ; she  has  so  much  pain  that  she
knows  not  what  to  do  with  herself,  (on  the  third  day
of  her  menses.)  Pain  as  of  contusion  in  the  thighs.
Pain  as  of  contusion  in  the  middle  of  both  thighs,
both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (during  the  catame-
nia.) Pain  in  the  thigh,  as  if  she  had  been  beaten  blue,
which  prevents  her  from  walking,  (only  when  walking  and
taking  much  exercise.)  Pain  as  of  contusion  in  the  right
thigh,  immediately  over  the  knee,  which  passes  off  by
rubbing,  (11.  d.j  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  left  thigh,
with  a feeling  of  weakness  and  sudden  bending  of  the  legs
in  walking.  Stiffness  in  the  thighs  when  walking.  Pain,
as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  at  a place  of  the  left  thigh
over  the  bent  of  the  knee  ; only  when  the  parts  are  pressed
upon,  or  when  the  person  sits  upon  them,  otherwise  there
is  no  pain,  (3.  d.)  Blue  spot,  as  large  as  a child’s  hand,
over  the  knee,  with  a sensation  of  excessive  burning  at
that  spot.  A deep-seated,  burning  furunculus  consequent
upon  itching.  An  induration  over  the  right  knee,  deep
under  the  skin,  painful  only  when  pressed  upon.  Small
furunculus  in  the  left  instep,  painful  only  when  touched.
Tearing  in  the  knees  and  knee-joints.  Boring  pain  in  and
upon  the  patella.  Boring  and  drawing  in  the  knee,  which
causes  such  an  uneasiness  in  the  legs  that  she  is  obliged
to  move  them  constantly  ; this  motion,  however,  does  not
relieve  the  uneasiness.  Twitches  in  both  patellae,  in  the
evening,  several  times  in  succession,  (5.  d.)  Twitches  in
both  knees  and  legs.  Cracking,  when  moving  the  knee.
Pain  in  the  knee,  as  from  a sprain,  upon  sitting  down  and
turning  the  leg.  Burning  redness,  like  the  eruption  in
scarlatina,  in  the  bent  of  the  right  knee  and  along  the  leg  ;
the  pain  increases  upon  laying  the  cold  hand  upon  the
parts,  ^20.  21.  d.)  Pain,  as  from  paralysis  in  the  legs,  as
if  they  were  going  to  sleep,  relieved  by  walking,  (7.  d.)
The  legs  frequently  go  to  sleep,  when  sitting  or  lying
down,  and  at  night,  when  he  is  resting  upon  the  leg.
Tearing  below  the  knee  and  at  the  left  tibia,  (11.  d.)  Fre-
quent cramps  in  the  legs,  especially  in  the  muscles  of  the
tibiae  and  the  feet.  Cramp  in  the  leg,  when  lying  down,


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


which  became  intolerable  on  rising,  and  which  obliged  the
person  to  lie  down  again.  Violent  cramp  in  the  call,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  so  that  he  has  to  stand  suddenly
still.  Straining  in  the  calf,  (from  a cold  ?)  Violent  stitches
deep  in  the  calves,  (14.  d.)  (Stitches  over  the  right  heel )
Acute  pain  in  the  heel,  early  on  waking  up,  as  if  the  bone
were  perforated  by  ulceration.  Tingling  in  the  left  heel;
when  touching  it  with  the  hand,  it  feels  as  if  it  were  ul-
cerated, (a.  5 d.)  Tearing  twitches  in  the  right  heel,
(37.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  joints  of  the  feet  and  in  the  mal-
leoli ; it  extends  as  far  as  the  toes,  and  ceases  when  she
gets  warm  in  her  bed.  Drawing  pain  at  the  external  mal-
leolus, (4.  d.)  Cold  feet.  Chilliness  of  the  feet,  in  the  even-
ing, especially  when  going  to  bed.  Rapid  * swelling  of  the
feet,  extending  as  far  as  the  calves.  Great  lassitude  in  the
feet,  (2.  d.)  Trembling  of  both  feet,  (a.  9 h.)  Tingling
sensation  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  as  from  the  foot
having  gone  to  sleep,  (11.  d.)  Tingling  and  itching  in
the  sole  of  the  foot,  which  is  almost  unbearable,  and  so
vehement  that  she  would  like  to  scratch  off  the  skin  ; after
scratching,  there  is  a burning  sensation ; in  the  evening,
(after  lying  down.)  Tearing  in  both  soles,  (1 1.  d.)  Sharp
stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  right  foot.  Tearing  stitches  and
twitches  of  the  big  toe.  Frequent  and  painful  twitches
of  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,  (when  a child,  she  had  this  ball
frozen.)  Occasionally  acute  stitches,  and  drawing  of  the
balls  of  both  the  big  toes,  as  if  they  were  frozen,  for  seve-
ral days,  especially  in  the  evening,  on  going  to  bed.  Itch-
ing and  tingling  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,
as  from  a chilblain.  The  left  big  toe  feels  hot,  and  is
painful,  as  if  he  had  burnt  it,  especially  in  damp  weather,
and  when  the  boots  press  upon  it;  the  pain  decreases  on
.pulling  off  the  boot,  or  on  resting  the  foot  firmly  against
the  floor,  or  when  walking.  (14. — 36.  d.)  The  big  toe
becomes  red,  big,  and  painful,  especially  in  the  evening,
when  in  bed,  and  * the  whole  foot  swells.  During  walk-
ing, the  ball  of  the  big  toe  is  painful,  as  if  there  were  sub-
cutaneous ulceration.

Common  Ailments. — A good  deal  of  itching  upon  the
skin  of  the  whole  body.  Itching  over  the  whole  body,
early  in  the  morning,  for  three  hours.  Itching  of  many


104


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


places  of  the  body,  erratic,  passing  off  after  scratching,  or
painfully  burning.  Erratic  itching  over  the  whole  body  ;
the  scratching  is  followed  by  burning  vesicles  and  pimples
or  hard  granules.  Burning  pimples,  of  the  size  of  a
millet-grain,  on  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  on  the  fore  arms.
Strange  uneasiness,  every  evening  at  seven  o’clock,  which
rouses  the  child  from  its  slumber  ; it  tosses  about  in  the
bed,  and  screams,  until  it  falls  into  a sound  sleep,  towards
ten  o’clock  ; this  sleep  lasts  the  whole  night;  during  the
uneasiness,  the  head  feels  bloated  and  burning  ; next  morn-
ing  the  face  is  covered  with  spots,  as  if  scarlatina  w'ould
break  out.  The  whole  upper  part,  of  the  body  is  red>  as
if  it  w>ere  covered  with  the  eruptions  of  scarlatina .
* Rash — on  the  left  side  of  the  neck  and  the  left  lower
arm.  Around  the  elbow,  small  red  tubercles,  painfully
cutting,  only  a few  of  them  ulcerating;  the  same  upon  the
neck,  but  large.  The  warts  become  inflamed.  A herpetic
eruption,  without  sensation,  becomes  red,  itching,  and
burning,  and  disappears  in  a few  days.  The  fluid  in  the
ulcer  becomes  stinking.  Unusual  sensitiveness  of  the  skin
to  cold.  Chilliness  when  undressing.  A cold  affects  her
head,  and  makes  her  hoarse.  She  cannot  bear  the  evening
air  ; her  feet  become  heavy,  the  external  air  is  offensive  to
her,  and  every  part  of  her  body  feels  sore.  Walking  in  the
open  air  tires  him  out.  Excessive  sensitiveness  to  open  air.
Walking  in  the  open  air  makes  him  feel  hot.  Violent  head -
ache  after  walking  in  the  open  air;  it  continues  through
the  evening.  Several  symptoms  appear  to  come  out  or  to
become  worse  in  the  open  air.  Cracking  in  the  joints*
when  walking.  Tearing  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in
the  thighs.  Violent  rheumatic  pain,  with  a sensation  as
of  drawing,  through  all  the  limbs,  hands,  feet,  nape  of  the
neck,  head,  etc.  Lancinating  drawing,  sometimes  in  lheJ
right  arm,  sometimes  in  the  legs.  Fine  prickings  in  the
head,  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  and  in  the  toes.  Pain  in
the  occiput,  in  the  chest,  and  from  both  scapulae,  down
along  the  ribs.  Feeling  of  numbness  on  the  right  side,  upon
which  she  is  lying  when  in  bed  ; upon  turning  to  the  other
side,  this  feeling  passes  off,  (2.  d.)  The  hands  and  feet
go  to  sleep  when  sitting  ; this  symptom  passes  off  by
moving  about.  Cold  hands  and  feet,  even  in  a warm  room*


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


105


and  when  they  are  well  covered.  All  her  limbs  ache  in
the  forenoon,  and  at  night,  with  gnawing  pain  in  the  small
of  the  back,  more  when  at  rest  than  when  moving  about,
(41.  d.)  The  right  side  of  the  body  appears  more  affected
than  the  left.  Visible  emaciation  of  tiie  whole  body.

Spasms,  Paralysis,  Weakness,  Fainting  Fits. — To-
wards noon  his  eyes  saw  black,  the  letters  appeared  to
move,  his  breath  was  arrested,  with  previous  lassitude  ;
upon  quickly  rising  from  his  feet,  his  whole  body  felt
rigid,  the  arms  and  legs  being  stretched  out,  whilst  his  fin-
gers were  clenched  ; he  had  to  use  force  to  stretch  them
again  ; this  made  them  again  moveable,  (4.  d.)  Towards
evening,  she  became  suddenly  indisposed  ; she  thought  she
would  faint ; walking  up  and  down  in  the  open  air  gave
her  relief,  although  she  experienced  yet  a few  stitches  in
the  right  side,  (a.  10  d.)  She  is  much  incommoded  by
much  talking,  and  hearing  people  talk  ; her  hands  and  feet
become  cold  in  consequence  of  it.  The  whole  day  a slight
perspiration,  as  from  exhaustion.  Tired  and  weary  all
day,  without  being  either  sad  or  cheerful,  (a.  24  h.)  * Ex-

cessively tired.  On  leaving  her  bed,  she  is  often  unable
to  stand,  on  account  of  weariness,  (a.  48  h.)  * Extreme

lassitude  ; — often  she  cannot  sit,  and  has  to  lie  down  for
hours,  (a.  24  h.)  She  is  lying  down  for  several  hours,  as
if  she  had  become  senseless  with  fatigue.  Weariness  and
moroseness  when  walking  in  the  open  air;  he  trembled
with  weakness.  When  walking,  she  trembles  over  the
whole  body.  She  staggers  upon  rising.  * Great  lassitude
in  her  limbs — and  complete  disinclination  to  work.  Great
lassitude  and  fatigue  of  the  body,  early  in  the  morning  and
in  the  forenoon,  as  if  he  had  worked  too  much ; relieved
by  walking  in  the  open  air.  Sensation  as  oj  being  bruised
in  the  whole  body  ; lassitude,  and  whining  mood,  early
after  rising.  Sensation  as  if  the  limbs  were  bruised,  also
in  the  evening.  * Great  fatigue  and  weakness  of  the
limbs, — especially  in  the  evening  hours,  in  the  knees  and
legs,  so  that  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down,  (l.  and  2.  d.)  Great
fatigue  in  the  forenoon,  which  invites  to  sleep,  (one  hour.)

Sleep. — Frequent  stretching  of  the  body,  early,  as  if  he
had  not  slept  enough,  (2.  d.)  Disposition  to  stretch  the
arms  and  feet.  Much  yawning,  with  accumulation  of

5*


106


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM*


water  in  the  mouth,  weariness,  uneasiness  or  chilliness.
Spasmodic  yawning  in  the  evening.  * Sleepiness  during
the  day  ; — in  the  afternoon,  he  has  to  sit  down  to  sleep*
otherwise  his  eyes  feel  sore.  * Sleepiness  through  the
day  ; — he  has  to  lie  down  in  the  forenoon  and  afternoon.
She  becomes  very  sleepy  when  she  is  not  busy,  for  in-
stance, at  table  ; the  sleepiness  passes  off  when  she  is  busy
at  something.  * Sleepiness  in  the  day,  with  yawning,
(1.  4.  d.)  Unconquerable  sleepiness  after  supper;  never-
theless, he  does  not  sleep  well  in  the  night.  He  is  soon
sleepy  in  the  evening,  but  his  sleep,  at  night,  is  uneasy,
for  several  weeks.  Falling  asleep  late  at  night,  (1.  night.)
Cannot  fall  asleep  in  the  evening,  he  knows  not  why ;
afterwards,  the  person  sleeps  well,  (2.  d.)  (Nightmare  on
falling  asleep.)  The  sooner  she  goes  to  bed,  the  better
she  sleeps  ; the  later  she  goes  to  bed,  the  less  able  is  she
to  sleep.  At  night,  when  in  bed,  he  cannot  fall  asleep  be-
fore two,  three,  four  hours,  on  account  of  uneasiness,  dry
heat,  and  sometimes  burning  at  the  stomach.  He  cannot
fall  asleep  on  account  of  itching  and  stinging  of  the  skin.
He  remains  awake  until  four  o’clock  in  the  morning,  when
he  falls  into  an  oppressive  sleep,  during  which  he  sweats
until  seven  o’clock.  Light  sleep  at  night  ; every  little
noise  wakes  her  up.  Uneasy , unrefreshing  sleep , every
night ; he  tosses  about.  His  sleep  is  uneasy  and  inter-
rupted ; he  sleeps  little,  and  frequently  wakes  up.  Uneasy
sleep,  with  frequent  waking  up,  for  several  nights,  espe-
cially during  her  menses.  Frequent  waking  up,  at  night,
with  chilliness,  (1.  d.)  At  night,  she  wakes  up  every  half
hour,  and  is  very  weary  in  the  morning.  He  wakes  up
between  one  and  two  o’clock  at  night,  and  cannot  fall
asleep  again  under  two  hours,  (2.  d.)  After  midnight  she
wakes  up  with  pain  at  the  stomach,  and  cannot  fall  asleep
again  till  four  o’clock.  Frequent  waking  up,  with  groaning
and  sobbing,  for  several  weeks.  He  starts  up  from  his
sleep  as  if  by  fright,  several  times  in  succession,  after  mid-
night ; afterwards  he  cannot  fall  asleep  again  before  a long
time  has  elapsed  ; for  many  nights.  Frequent  starting  up
from  sleep  as  if  by  fright , at  night , with  subsequent  great
fearfulness.  Sleep  full  of  dreams.  He  dreams  while
awake,  at  night.  Vivid  dreams  in  a person  who  never


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


107


dreamed.  An  abundance  of  fanciful  dreams  when  asleep.
She  dreams  whole  stories.  Romantic  dreams.  Lewd
dreams,  three  nights  in  succession,  about  having  had  an
embrace,  and,  on  waking  up,  sensation  as  if  there  had  been
an  effusion  of  semen,  which  was  however  not  true.  Con-
fused dreams.  Anxious  dreams.  Dreams,  every  night,
which,  when  ending,  were  accompanied  by  a sensation  of
anxiety  ; this  woke  him  up  at  three  o’clock  in  the  morning.
Anxious  dreams  about  danger.  Anxious  dreams  about
ghosts ; he  screamed  when  asleep.  Dreams  about  death
and  dying.  Dreams  about  dying  and  corpses.  Disgusting
dreams  about  lice,  (a.  IS  d.)  Dreams  about  quarrels,  (L
and  7.  d.)  She  expresses  in  her  sleep  what  she  thought
of  when  awake.  Anxiety,  when  in  bed  in  the  evening  ; she
cannot  lie  still.  At  night,  attack  of  great  anxiety,  as  if  she
had  to  die,  accompanied  by  cold  sweat,  audible  palpitation
of  the  heart,  and  involuntary  lachrymation  ; she  was  unable
to  move  her  eyes,  or  to  speak,  accompanied  by  distinctly
difficult  breathing,  and  trembling  of  the  hands,  (a.  19  d.)
Vertigo  at  night,  every  thing  turned  with  her ; she  had  to
sit  up  in  bed.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  at  night,  and
heat  in  the  face  on  waking  up.  Boring  and  lancinating
pain  in  the  head,  at  night.  Sparks  before  her  eyes,  upon
waking  up  at  night.  Drawing  in  the  teeth,  at  night  and  on
waking  up.  Attacks  of  nausea,  the  whole  night,  so  that
she  was  unable  to  sleep,  (a.  8 h.)  Pressure  at  the
stomach , at  night.  Violent  colic,  two  nights  in  succession,
which  did  not  diminish  till  a good  deal  of  flatulence  had
passed  off.  At  night,  he  is  roused  from  sleep  by  a desire
to  urinate.  Dry  coryza,  and  obstruclion  of  the  nose,  when
lying  in  bed,  in  the  evening  and  at  night.  Hawking  up  a
good  deal  of  saltish  slime  at  night.  Heaviness  and  op-
pression at  the  sternum,  at  night.  Great  pain  on  the  dor-
sum of  the  hand,  which  roused  her  from  sleep,  at  night.
Piercing  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,  in  the  evening  when
in  bed.  Sweat  of  the  legs,  at  night.  At  three  o’clock  in
the  night,  he  felt  a jerk  in  the  upper  part  of  his  body  and
in  the  arms,  with  a tearing  pain,  in  the  full  possession  of
his  senses,  for  at  least  ten  minutes ; afterwards  he  felt
very  faint.  All  her  limbs  pain  her  at  night,  with  a gnaw-
ing pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  (41.  d.)  He  has  to  turn


108


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM


himself  slowly  in  the  bed,  because  motion  gives  him  pain.,
He  finds  it  more  easy  to  lie  upon  the  left  side  than  upon
the  right.

Fever. — Excessive  orgasm  at  night ; he  imagines  that
the  blood  will  burst  his  veins  and  his  heart.  At  night  he
often  feels  chilliness  in  his  sleep  ; on  waking  up,  he  is  im-
mediately warm  again.  At  night,  chilliness,  so  that  he
cannot  get  warm,  least  of  all  his  feet,  nor  can  he  fall  asleep.
* Frequent  chilliness,  towards  evening,  and  continuing
until  going  to  bed.  * Frequently  feverish  chilliness,  in  the
evening.  * Chills  before  falling  asleep.  Chilliness  in  the
open  air,  or  upon  coming  out  of  the  open  air  and  entering
the  room.  * Attacks  of  chilliness , in  the  evening , fre-
quently accompanied  by  the  hairs  standing  upon  end,  blue
hands,  blue  nails,  clattering  of  teeth  and  shaking ; some-
times  these  symptoms  are  followed  by  nightly  heat,  and  by
sweat  early  in  the  morning.  Chills  when  in  bed,  from
nine — twelve  o’clock  in  the  evening,  alternating  with  heat,
and  much  uneasiness,  (a.  10  d.)  Chills  and  heat  for  seve-
ral days,  mostly  shaking  chills,  followed  by  general  dry
heat ; a little  sweat  only  early  in  the  morning.  Alternate
chilliness  and  heat,  with  sensitiveness  to  cold  ; nausea,
thirst,  pressure  at  the  chest,  with  stitches  in  the  left  side
of  the  chest,  tearing  in  the  forehead,  and  obtusion  of  the
head,  alternate  redness  and  paleness  of  the  cheeks,  pres-
sure at  the  stomach,  with  disposition  to  eructations,  accom-
panied by  a violent  coryza  and  sleeplessness  ; for  several
days,  (during  the  catamenia.)  Feverish  heat  for  several
evenings  in  succession,  one  hour  and  a half,  accompanied
by  headache.  Heat  at  night,  (19.  d.)  Heat  in  the  whole
body,  especially  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  forenoon,  (11.  d.)
Always  warm,  and  oppressed  with  anxiety,  in  the  fore-
noon, previous  to  the  menses,  (42.  d.)  * Feverish  heat  in

the  head,  with  cold  feet.  Continual  night-sweats.  He
sweats  every  night,  early  in  the  morning,  and  is  then  quite
hot.  Siveat  early  in  the  morning.  Sweat  towards  morn-
ing, (1.  d.)  Sweat  in  the  joints,  early  in  the  mornings
(a.  16  d.)  * Sweat  by  day,  (Jahr.)


AMMONIUM  MURIAT1CUM*


109


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

Take  four  grains  of  the  sal  ammoniac  in  lumps,  this
kind  being  the  purest,  and  dissolve  them  in  six  grains  of
boiling  distilled  water,  filter  the  solution,  through  white
printing  paper,  and  then  set  it  in  the  cellar,  until  the  crys-
tals shall  have  formed.  From  these  crystals  the  different
degrees  of  potency  are  obtained,  by  means  of  those  pro-
cesses of  trituration  and  succussion,  which  have  been
pointed  out  in  the  first  volume.  One  or  two  globules  of
the  highest  potency,  dissolved  in  more  or  less  water,  ac-
cording as  the  medicine  is  required  to  act  more  or  less  pow-
erfully, are  sufficient  to  secure  the  proper  curative  influ-
ence of  this  remedy ; even  smelling  of  one  of  those
globules  may  be  sufficient.

This  salt  is  eminently  deserving  of  more  trials  as  regards
its  pure  effects.

In  the  following  affections  this  remedy  has  shown  itself  •
especially  efficacious  : —

Whining,  peevish,  insociable  mood  ; muscce  volitantes ,
in  day-time  and  in  the  evening  by  candlelight  ; (hard
hearing,)  tingling  and  buzzing  in  the  ears ; ulcerated
corners  of  the  mouth  ; tensive  pain  in  the  articulations
of  the  jaws,  when  masticating  or  opening  the  mouth  ;
empty  eructations  ; painful  stitches  in  the  left  hypochon-
drium,  early  on  waking  up  in  bed,  with  difficulty  of  breath-
ing, which  obliges  the  person  to  sit  up  ; the  groin,  when
touched,  feels  as  if  there  were  swelling  and  subcutaneous
ulceration  ; disposition  to  costiveness,  discharge  of  blood
during  stool  ; soreness  up  along  the  rectum,  when  sitting  ;
vomiting  and  diarrhoea  during  the  catamenia  ; pressive
and  contractive  pain  at  the  belly  and  back  during  the
catamenia  ; pain  at  the  small  of  the  back  during  the  cata-
menia ; tearing  in  the  feet  during  the  catamenia  ; lancina-
tions  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  as  far  as  the  shoulder,  when
sneezing  ; violent  cough  ; tightness  at  the  chest  when
doing  some  kind  of  labour  with  the  hands  ; stiffness  in
the  small  of  the  back  ; stitches  in  the  right  scapula,  when
breathing  ; lancinating  pain  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  left
hip ; cold  feet ; paralytic  weakness  in  the  limbs,  with


110


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


dizziness  ; sleepiness  during  the  day,  with  laziness,  and
indisposition  to  work  ; night-sweats.

This  drug  has  been  tried  by  Hahnemann,  (Ng.)  Hart-
laub,  and  Rummel.

Noaek  and  Trinks  resume  those  affections  under  the
following  heads  : (comp.  Amm.  Carb.)  The  effects  of
the  Muriate  of  Ammonia  may  be  said  to  consist  in  an
increased  secretion  of  mucus,  irritation  of  the  peripheral
action  of  the  irritable  tissues,  with  a tendency  to  fluidifi-
cation, decomposition , and  collapse.  The  Muriate  of  Am-
monia is  especially  useful  in  the  status  pituitosus.  The
doctrines  of  the  Oid  School  in  reference  to  that  fact,  are  es-
sentially based  upon  homoeopathic  ground.  Gumpert , in-
deed, asserts  that  “ the  Muriate  of  Ammonia  produces  the
most  marked  and  complete  status  pituitosus.  Is  not  all
this  homoeopathic  doctrine  and  practice  ? The  Muriate  of
Ammonia  is  especially  adapted  to  fat,  bloated,  lax  indivi-
duals, to  the  veno so -lymphatic,  or  lymphatico-scrophulous
constitution,  with  indolent  body  and  mind , livid  complex-
ion, scanty  growth  of  hair , and  weakness  of  the  osseous
structure , especially  when  accompanied  by  thinness  of  the
extremities.  In  the  following  diseases  the  Muriate  of
Ammonia  will  prove  beneficial  : Anorexia,  flat  impure
taste,  tongue  coated  with  mucus,  constipation  or  slimy
diarrhoea,  especially  in  remittent  or  intermittent  so-called
venous  fevers,  (pituitous,  saburral  gastric  fevers  ;)  acute
and  chronic  inflammations  of  the  mucous  and  serous  tis-
sues, (acute  and  chronic  catarrh;)  inflammations  of  the
glands  and  parenchymatous  organs  ; swelling  of  the  nose,
with  discharge  of  a badly  smelling,  excoriating  pus,  and
swelling  of  the  cervical  glands  ; rheumatic  swelling  of
the  tongue  ; parotitis  ; inflammatory  sore  throat ; habitual
quincy  ; rheumatic  angina ; sthenosis  of  all  the  hollow
organs,  the  oesophagus,  trachea,  rectum,  urethra  ; distention
of  the  liver  and  spleen  ; phthisis  pituitosa  of  the  intes-
tines ; peritonitis  ; enteritis  ; diarrhoea,  dysentery  ; dis-
eases of  the  kidneys  ; lithiasis  ; blennorrhoea  of  the  blad-
der and  urethra  ; gonorrhoea,  (third  stage  ;)  strictures  and
contraction  of  the  urethra  ; scirrhous  affections  of  the
prostatic  gland  ; tumefaction  of  the  ovaries  ; profuse
menstruation  consequent  upon  hypertrophy  of  the  uterus  ;


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


ill


amenorrhoea  and  menostasia  ; fluor  albus  ; inflammatory
catarrh,  laryngitis,  bronchitis,  especially  in  children,
(second  stage  ;)  haemoptoe  ; hooping-cough ; croup  ; pleu-
ritis  ; peripneumonia  notha,  pneumonia  in  the  last  stage  ;
phthisis  pituitosa  pulmonum,  with  little  fever  and  not  vio-
lent cough  ; hysteria  and  hypochondriasis,  especially  when
the  primae  vias  were  blocked  up  with  mucus,  when  there
was  flatulence  or  convulsive  fits  ; helminthiasis  ; chloro-
sis ; gout  with  status  pituitosus  ; hemorrhoidal  complaints  ;
polypous  excrescences  and  degenerations  of  the  tissues
of  the  rectum,  strictures  of  the  rectum,  hemorrhages,  as-
phyxia, fainting  fits,  concussions  of  the  brain,  paralysis,
melancholia,  epilepsy,  atrophy,  accumulation  of  mucus  in
the  mouth,  formation  of  tartarates  upon  the  teeth,  falling
off  and  whitening  of  the  hair,  chronic  eruptions  upon  the
skin,  malignant,  gangrenous,  even  cancerous  ulcers,  espe-
cially when  they  smell  badly,  necrosis,  arthritic  and  rheu-
matic excretions  and  indurations,  anchylosis,  tumours  of
the  adipose  tissue,  oedema,  hydroceles,  contusions,  extra-
vasations, sprains  ; mercurial  diseases,  scurvy,  cardialgia
from  plethora  of  the  ventricles,  aneurisms,  hypertrophy
of  the  heart  with  dilatation,  (?)  blepharophthalmitis  glandu-
losa  and  ophthalmia  angularis  in  individuals  of  a lax  and
puffy  appearance,  amblyopia  amaurotica  ; pemphigus  ?
pompholyx,  especially  when  of  long  standing , miliaria,
especially  when  accompanied  by  excessive  anguish  and
great  depression  of  spirits,  and  above  all  in  the  status
pituitosus  ; ulcers  on  the  heel,  melancholia,  haemorrhoids
of  the  rectum  and  bladder,  dysmenorrhcea,  chronic  cough,
pain  from  sprains,  glandular  swellings,  etc.

Antidotes. — Acid,  hydroc.,  Camph.,  Coff.,  Hep.,  Lau-
rocer.,  Spir.  nitr.  dulc.

Analogous  Remedies. — Comp.  Amm.  Carh.  1.  Amm.
Carb.,  Amm.  caust.,  Arn.,  Ars.,  Bell.,  Bry.,  Hep.,  Laur.,
Lycop.,  Merc.,  Nux.  vom.,  Puls.,  Phosph.,  Rhus.,  Snip.
2.  Chi.,  Con.,  Sassap.,  Sen.,  Sil.  3.  Caust.,  Ferr.,
Grap.,  Kali-,  Mang.,  Zinc.

Duration  of  Effects. — Twenty-eight  days  and  up-
wards in  healthy  persons  ; small  doses  act  from  twelve
to  twenty-four  hours  in  sick  people.

Moral  Symptoms. — Great  earnestness.  Full  of  melan-


112


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


choly  and  anxiety,  as  if  some  internal  grief  were  gnawing
at  her  heart.  She  is  overwhelmed  with  anxiety,  would
like  to  weep, — -and  does  weep  sometimes,  (the  first  days.)
Biller  taste  during  the  anxiety,  and  nauseating,  bitter  eruc-
tations. She  is  sitting  there  full  of  ill-humour,  absorbed  in
her  thoughts,  and  can  scarcely  be  induced  to  speak,  in  the
evening  (15.  d.)  Peevish,  as  if  she  had  some  internal
vexation ; and  looking  as  if  she  were  not  yet  entirely
conscious  of  herself,  as  if  she  had  not  slept  enough,  (3,
d.)  Irritable  and  peevish,  in  the  forenoon  ; the  mood
improves  after  dinner,  (8.  d.)  Very  irritable,  peevish  and
easily  frightened.  When  talking  about  some  important
subject,  he  becomes  extremely  excited.  Involuntary  an-
tipathy to  certain  persons.  The  head  feels  gloomy  as
after  intoxication,  (14.  d.)

Head.  — The  head  feels  dizzy  and  closed  up  in  the
room;  this  symptom  passes  off  in  the  open  air  ; early  in
the  morning,  (4.  d.)  Vertigo  as  if  she  would  fall  to  one
side  ; worse  during  motion,  passing  off  in  the  open  air  ;
frequently,  (3.  d.)  Giddiness  and  fulness  of  the  head  ;
the  head  feels  as  if  it  icere  too  heavy , (1.  and  25.  d.)
Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  head,  almost  daily,  after  rising.
Heaviness  in  the  forehead,  frequently  during  the  day,  ac-
companied by  a feeling  of  internal  heat,  and  a little  sweat.
Violent  headache  for  several  days.  Headache  on  the  top
of  the  head,  as  if  the  head  were  broken  in  two  pieces,  (4.
d.)  Pressure  in  the  forehead,  with  a sensation  of  heat
there,  early  in  the  morning,  after  an  uneasy  night.  Down-
ward pressure  in  the  forehead  towards  the  root  of  the
nose,  with  a sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  torn,  early
after  rising,  (25.  d.)  The  occiput  feels  as  if  it  were  com-
pressed with  a vice  ; this  symptom  afterwards  manifests
itself  in  both  sides  of  the  head,  accompanied  by  excessive
ill-humour,  (17.  d.)  Clawing  pain  in  the  occiput  at  a
small  spot,  (11.  d.)  Painful  twitches  from  below  up-
wards. in  the  left  temple,  (3.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  head ,
mostly  in  the  right  temple  ; it  reaches  down  to  the  side  of
the  face  ; (also  during  the  catamenia,  and  in  the  forehead
and  right  side  of  the  head,  when  sitting.)  (6.  7.  15.  17.
d.)  Stitches  in  the  left  temple,  side  of  the  forehead  and
of  the  head,  also  when  stooping,  and  in  the  vertex  with  a


AMMONIUM  MURIATIC UM.


113


sensation  as  if  the  head  were  bursting,  (2.  to  5.  d.)
Stitches  and  pressure  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  left  side,
in  the  room,  (2.  d.)  Boring  in  the  forehead,  early  afler
rising,  and  almost  during  the  whole  day,  (5.  d.)  Glow-
ing heat  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  every  evening.
Frequently  a thrill  of  heat  runs  over  the  skin  of  the  head,
(25.  d.)  Feeling  of  heat  and  fulness  in  the  head,  early
after  rising.  Burning  pain  and  sometimes  stitches  in  the
left  temple,  both  when  at  rest,  and  when  masticating  and
sneezing  ; no  increase  of  pain  when  the  parts  are  touched.
Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp  which  forces  one  to  scratch
constantly,  (3.  d.)  Itching  pimples  on  the  right  side  of
the  occiput  in  the  evening  ; at  night  they  pass  off,  (a.  19  d.)

Eyes. — Pain  in  the  eyes.  Sensation  as  of  hammering
over  the  margin  of  the  right  orbit,  or  as  if  a large  body
were  pushing  there,  (15.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  upper  border
of  the  right  eye,  first  made  worse,  then  improved  by  press-
ing upon  it,  (15.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  external  canthus  of
the  eye.  Tearing  in  the  eye-balls.  Burning  of  the  eyes ,
especially  of  the  corners , even  early  after  rising,  so  that
she  cannot  look  into  the  light  ; this  symptom  passes  off
after  washing,  (3.  and  4.  d.)  The  eyes  are  burning  for
several  evenings,  only  at  twilight;  the  pain  ceases  as  soon
as  light  enters  the  room.  Burning  of  the  eyes  in  the  even-
ing, and  closing  thereof  as  from  sleep  ; this  symptom
passed  off  as  soon  as  light  entered  the  room,  (15.  d.)
The  eyes  burn  at  night,  with  profuse  lachrymation.
Twitching  and  slight  pulling  in  the  eyes,  passing  off  by
rubbing,  (4.  and  14.  d.)  Slight  twitching  in  the  lower  eye-
lids, especially  the  left,  during  the  whole  time  of  proving.
Lachrymation,  early  after  rising,  (3.  d.)  Agglutination
of  the  eyes  early  on  waking  up,  with  burning  in  the
corners  after  washing,  (2.  d.)  Redness  of  the  white  of
the  eyes,  and  itching  of  the  eyes.  A vesicle  in  the  white
of  the  eye.  Mist  before  the  eye  ; in  the  open  air  she
distinguishes  nothing  either  near  or  far,  even  in  the  light
of  the  sun  ; in  the  room,  on  the  contrary,  she  sees  better.
For  several  mornings  dimness  of  the  eyes,  there  is  a mist
before  them  which  passes  off  after  washing.  Sensation
in  the  left  eye,  as  if  a body  were  rising  in  it,  which  pre-
vents her  from  seeing,  in  the  forenoon,  (14.  and  15.  d.)


\ 14


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


Yellow  spots  before  the  eyes,  when  sowing,  and  when
looking  into  the  garden  out  of  the  window,  (2,  d.)

Ears. — Stitches  in  the  ears , from  without  inwards  and
from  within  outwards,  accompanied  by  boring  or  burn-
ing mostly  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Grinding  and
tearing  pain  in  the  right  ear,  also  at  night,  when  lying
upon  it  ; there  is  a kind  of  turmoil  in  the  ear,  as  if  some-
thing would  get  out  there.  Shooting  and  boring  in  the
ears,  also  behind  the  left  ear,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a
moist  herpes.  Tickling  in  the  right  ear.  Itching  in  both
ears,  which  does  not  pass  off  by  scratching,  with  running
of  liquid  wax  for  several  days,  (a.  5 d.)  Painful  pimple
on  the  ante-helix  of  the  right  ear.  Itching  pimple  on  the
external  concha  of  the  right  ear,  which  induces  one,  con-
tinually to  scratch.  Grunting  and  thundering  noise  in  the
right  ear,  when  sitting,  also  at  night,  with  pulsative  beats
at  equal  intervals,  (6.  d.)

Nose. — Sore  nose,  on  the  inside  and  around  the  margin
of  the  nostrils.  Pain,  as  from  ulceration  in  the  left  nasal
fossa,  with  sensitiveness  to  the  touch  ; this  symptom  oc-
curs frequently  (a.  3d.)  External  swelling  of  the  left
side  of  the  nose,  with  formation  of  bloody  crusts  coming
out  at  the  nose,  (3.  d.)  Bleeding  at  the  nose  from  the  left
fossa,  after  previous  itching,  (3.  d.)

Face. — Colour  of  the  face  very  pale.  Painful  shoot-
ings in  the  right  upper  side  of  the  face,  at  a small  spot,
passing  off  by  pressing  upon  it,  but  immediately  return-
ing, (15.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  face,  especially
in  the  zygomata  and  in  the  lower  jaw,  also  in  the  evening.
Lancinations  on  the  right  side  of  the  chin.  Burning  heat
in  the  face,  passing  off  in  the  open  air,  (3.  d.)  Swelling
of  the  cheek,  with  enlargement  of  a gland  below  the  right
angle  of  the  lower  jaw,  attended  with  a throbbing  and  lan-
cinating pain.  Eruptions  in  the  face,  pimples  on  the  fore-
head, consequent  upon  itching  and  scratching,  (6.  d.)  Ve-
sicles without  any  sensation  upon  the  left  side  of  the  face,
(11.  d.)  Herpes  in  the  face,  dry  and  tetlery.  The  lips
become  contracted  and  feel  as  if  they  were  greasy.  Both
lips  burn  like  fire ; the  burning  sensation  in  the  upper  lip
is  sometimes  accompanied  by  stinging,  (2  and  22.  d.)  Ex-
coriation on  the  right  side  of  the  upper  lip,  with  burning


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


115


soreness,  (2.  d.)  Chapped  lips.  Dry,  wrinkled  lips  ;
they  became  chapped,  and  she  had  to  moisten  them  con-
stantly with  the  longue.  Itching  pimples,  around  the
upper  lip,  (2.  d.)  Blisters  on  the  upper  lip  which  become
inflamed  and  ulcerated,  (a.  22  d.)

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Swelling  of  the  gums  of  the  left
lower  row,  accompanied  by  stitches  extending  as  high  as
the  left  temple,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Tearing  toothache.  Tearing
toothache,  mostly  in  the  evening,  sometimes  passing  off
when  in  bed.  Tearing  in  the  rotten  root  of  a tooth  ; it
passes  off  by  pressing  upon  it  with  the  finger,  (15.  d.)
Stinging  pain  in  the  upper  fore-teeth,  (5.  d.)

Mouth. — Vesicles  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue  with  a burn-
ing pain.  Vesicles  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  which  burn
like  fire,  (3.  d.)

Throat. — Sore  throat,  stinging  in  the  throat,  both  during
and  between  the  acts  of  swallowing,  (a.  20  d.)  Sting-
ing in  the  throat  when  yawning  ; this  symptom  occurs
frequently,  (1.  d.)  External  and  internal  swelling  of  the
neck,  with  pressive  pain  when  swallowing,  and  drawing
and  lancinating  pains  in  the  highly  swollen  submaxillary
glands.  Sensation  as  of  throbbing  in  the  tonsils , which  are
not  swollen  ; the  throbbing  is  like  that  of  an  artery,  with
uneasiness  and  oppressive  anxiety,  (a.  12  d.)  Considerable
throbbing  in  the  glands  of  the  neck , without  the  glands
being  either  inflamed  or  swollen,  accompanied  by  flushes
of  heat  and  want  of  air  in  the  throat , (a.  24  d ) Swell-
ing of  the  cervical  glands,  (a.  12  d.)  Sore  throat  with
rawness.  Roughness  in  the  throat,  which  passes  off  after
dinner.  Sensation  of  roughness  in  the  pharynx,  with
stinging  pain,  (a.  13  d.)  Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  throat,
(15.  d.)  Phlegm  in  the  throat,  mostly  early  in  the  morn-
ing ; he  can  neither  hawk  it  up,  nor  swallow  it,  (the  first
8 — 11  d.)  Hawking  up  a quantity  of  phlegm  early  in
the  morning.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Pappy  taste  in  the  mouth,
early  after  rising,  (3.  d.)  Disagreeable  taste  and  collec-
tion of  water  in  the  mouth,  (1.  d.)  Bitterness  of  the
mouth,  the  whole  day,  (a..  7,  8 d.)  Bitter  taste  in  the
mouth,  early  in  the  morning,  with  bitter  'eructations?
which  pass  off  after  having  eaten,  (1.  d.)  Sourish  taste


116


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


in  the  mouth.  Sourish  taste  in  the  mouth  early  on  waking
up,  (14.  d.)  Rising  of  air,  (shortly  after  taking  the  medi-
cine.) Oppressive  eructations,  tasting  of  the  ingesta,  (a.  22
d.)  Bitter'  eructations,  sometimes  tasting  of  the  ingesta,  or
accompanied  by  hiccough,  (5.  11.  d.)  Gulping  up  of  the
ingesta.  In  the  afternoon  gulping  up  of  bitter,  sour  water,
the  taste  of  which  remained  in  the  mouth  until  she  ate  again
something,  (17.  d.)  Frequent  hiccough,  sometimes  accom-
panied by  stitches  in  the  left  mamma.  Attacks  of  nausea,
(l.  d.)  Nausea,  with  disposition  to  vomit,  when  walking
in  the  open  air,  or  immediately  after  dinner  ; after  dinner
that  symptom  passes  off  after  previous  eructations,  and
by  walking  in  the  open  air.  Nausea,  with  oppression  at
the  stomach  ; nevertheless,  there  is  an  inclination  to  eat.
Almost  total  loss  of  appetite  (a.  24  d.)  Neither  hunger
nor  appetite  ; nevertheless  he  takes  his  usual  meals,  espe-
cially at  noon,  and  the  food  tastes  naturally,  (a.  4 d.)
Want  of  appetite  in  the  evening;  she  does  not  wish  to  eat
any  thing,  and  frequently  yawns,  (16.  d.)  Much  thirst ,
especially  in  the  evening,  (the  first  8 d%)  and  afterwards
(the  15.  19.  d.)  Thirst  during  several  days  and  nights,
which  caused  her  to  drink  a good  deal  of  water,  (a.  24  d.)
Absence  of  thirst,  contrary  to  habit,  (1.  d.)  After  every
dinner  or  supper,  he  is  attacked  with  nausea,  water-brash
and  horripilation,  (a.  26  d.)  Beating  in  the  chest  after
dinner;  the  beating  comes  out  at  the  pharynx,  with  heat
of  the  face  and  uneasy  mood.  Diarrhoea  after  every  meal,
with  pain  in  the  back,  belly,  small  of  the  back  and  limbs.

Stomach. — Sensation  in  the  stomach,  as  of  empti-
ness or  hunger,  (shortly.)  Sensation  as  of  fasting  in  the
stomach,  which  nevertheless  feels  full,  worse  after  break-
fast, (16.  d.)  Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  stomach,  with
oppression,  without  shortness  of  breath  ; this  symptom
lasts  the  whole  afternoon,  and  is  neither  relieved  by  rest
nor  motion,  nor  eructations.  Frequent  traction  in  the
stomach.  Sensation  in  the  stomach  as  if  every  thing
would  turn  round,  with  disposition  to  water-brash,  and
great  qualmishness,  even  unto  vomiting,  relieved  by  eruc-
tations in  the  open  air.  Grinding  and  writhing  in  the
stomach,  early  in  the  morning,  passing  off  after  breakfast,
(2.  d.)  Gnawing  or  grinding  at  the  stomach , as  if  it  con-


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


tained  worms.  Burning  coming  from  the  stomach  and
reaching  up  to  the  pharynx,  like  heart-burn.  Burning  and
pressure  at  the  stomach,  terminating  in  stinging.  Burn-
ing and  stitches  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; they  thence
move  to  the  right  axilla  and  the  upper  arm.

Abdomen — Occasional  pinching  in  both  hypochon-
dria, both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (2.  d.)  Stitches  and
burning  in  the  region  of  the  right  ribs,  in  the  afternoon
when  walking,  (9.  d.)  Occasional  stitches  in  the  right
hypochondriac  region,  when  spinning.  * Splenetic  stitches,
even  when  sitting.  Colic.  Oppression  in  the  abdomen.
Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  as  with  the  hand,
(19.  d.)  Weight  in  the  abdomen  as  of  a load,  with
anxiety  as  if  the  abdomen  would  burst ; the  symptom
passes  off  while  the  person  is  asleep.  Distention  of  the
abdomen,  terminated  by  the  emission  of  flatulence  in  the
evening  before  the  menses,  (15.  d.)  Distention  and  infla-
tion of  the  belly  up  to  the  stomach,  passing  off  after  two
liquid  stools,  in  the  evening,  (1.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  left
side  of  the  abdomen,  over  the  hip,  when  sitting,  and  when
stooping  in  the  standing  position.  Cutting  and  shooting
around  the  navel,  (15.  d.)  Cutting  in  the  whole  belly,  at
seven  o’clock  in  the  evening;  this  pain  extends  as  far  as
the  groin  and  the  small  of  the  back,  and  passes  off  after  a
good  evacuation,  (19.  d.)  Pinching  in  the  belly , around
the  navel,  with  subsequent  evacuations,  or  made  worse
when  stooping  in  the  standing  position.  Bad  pinching  in
the  belly,  which  is  soon  followed  by  a loose  evacuation,
(immediately.)  Pinching  and  griping  pain  in  the  abdo-
men, with  dyspnoea.  Pinching  in  the  belly  at  every  inspi-
ration, which  passes  off  again  by  expiration,  (l3.  d.)
Pinching  all  around  in  the  abdomen,  and  in  the  groins,  as
before  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  early  after  rising,
(18.  d ) Traction  in  the  side  of  the  belty.  Sensation  as
of  grinding  at  a small  spot  near  the  navel,  (4.  d ) Burn-
ing pain  in  the  epigastrium,  at  a small  place  ; also  in  the
right  groin,  when  sitting.  Indescribably  vehement  pain  in
the  right  groin  ; it  often  extends  to  the  hip  and  the  small
of  the  back,  (15.  d.)  Feeling  of  distention  in  the  groins,
with  pain  in  the  left  groin  when  seated,  and  tension  and
grinding  in  the  right  groin.  Pressive  tension  in  the  left


118


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


side  of  the  abdomen,  near  the  ring,  as  if  something  were
pressing  out.  Tearing  and  tensive  pain  in  the  groin  when
walking.  Cutting  and  stitches  in  both  groins,  as  far  as
the  small  of  the  back,  with  tenesmus  of  the  bladder  every
half  hour  in  the  evening.  Stitches  in  the  right  groin  and
coming  out  behind  the  hip,  when  sitting,  (4.  d.)  Pain,  as
from  a sprain,  in  the  left  groin  ; it  obliges  one  to  walk
crooked,  (3.  d.)  Pain  as  from  ulceration  in  the  left  groin,
perceptible  only  when  walking.  A large  furunculus  on
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.  Grunting,  rumbling  and
moving  of  flatus  in  the  abdomen,  at  times  with  pinch-
ing, at  times  also  accompanied  by  the  emission  of  a good
deal  of  flatulence.  Rumbling  from  fermentation  in  the
sides  of  the  abdomen,  extending  as  far  as  the  chest,  early
in  the  morning,  on  waking  up  in  bed.  Frequent  emission
of  loud  or  stinking  flatus.

* Stool. — Occasional  intermission  of  stool  for  several
days,  (2.  3.  4.  13.  16.  17.  22.  23.  d.)  in  the  different
individuals  upon  whom  the  medicines  were  tried.  * No
stool  for  two  days  accompanied  by  constant  colic,  and
sensation,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on,  (22.  23.  d.)
Frequently  normal  stools,  sometimes  followed  by  burning.
Hard  stools  during  the  whole  time  of  proving.  Hard  stools
in  clots,  scanty,  which  can  only  be  expelled  by  bearing
down,  they  are  constantly  followed  by  soft  stools.  Stools,
the  first  part  of  which  was  hard,  the  other  soft,  (9.  14.  d.)
Several  soft  stools  during  the  day  sometimes  with
tenesmus  and  pain  in  the  abdomen  ; after  every  new  dose,
and  under  other  circumstances,  these  symptoms  came  on
more  frequently.  Soft  yellow  stools  ; the  person  is  in
great  haste  to  go  to  stool  ; this  is  followed  by  tenesmus
and  burning  in  the  rectum,  (5.  d.)  Diarrhoea,  followed  by
pain  in  the  abdomen,  a feeling  of  soreness  and  as  of  being
bruised,  (5.  8.  d.)  Half  liquid,  slimy  stools,  with  pain
around  the  navel,  (1.  2.  d.)  Green  slimy  stools,  early  in
the  morning,  (3.  4.  d.)  Pain  around  the  navel  preceding
the  usual  stool , (even  yet  after  twelve  days.)  Stinging  in
the  rectum  during  the  usual  stool.  A good  deal  of
burning  in  the  rectum  during,  and  after,  the  expulsion  of
soft  stools.  Itching,  * soreness  of  the  rectum,  several
pustules  being  found  by  the  side  of  it.  Tearing  in  the


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


119


perinaeum  when  walking.  Lancinating  pain  in  the  peri-
nasum  in  the  evening.  Bleeding  from  the  rectum,  (Jahr.)

Urinary  Organs. — Pinching  and  stitching  pain  in  the
bladder,  as  far  as  the  urethra,  when  lying  down.  Con-
stant tenesmus  of  the  bladder  from  four  o’clock  in  the
morning.  Desire  to  urinate,  only  a few  drops  of  urine
being  passed  ; afterwards  the  urine  was  emitted  regularly
with  the  stool.  Slow  emission  of  urine  in  a male.  Emis-
sion of  a small  quantity  of  urine,  and  occurring  less  fre-
quently than  usually,  (the  first  days.)  Increased  emission
of  urine,  even  though  the  person  drink  little,  (2.  and  9.  d.)
Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  and  frequent  micturition  early
in  the  morning.  At  night  he  is  often  obliged  to  rise  in
order  to  urinate;  he  emits  a large  quantity  of  urine,  (1.
17.  d.)  The  urine,  when  being  emitted  feels  hot;  its
quantity  is  increased,  (the  first  days.)  Reddish  bright  urine,
without  flocculi  or  sediment  during  the  catamenia.  Bright
yellow  urine,  with  a loosely  cloudy  sediment,  (6.  d.)
Clayish  sediment  in  the  urine,  after  one  hour,  (5.  d.)

Generative  Functions. — Stitches  and  beating  in  the
left  spermatic  cord,  (5.  d.)  Frequent  erections,  (a.  7 d.)
Sensation  in  the  genital  organs,  as  after  a nightly  em-
brace, early  after  waking  up.  The  menses  appear  two
days  too  soon , with  pain  in  the  belly  and  small  of  the
back  ; they  continue  during  the  night  when  the  blood
flows  more  abundantly,  (a.  17  d.)  Discharge  of  a quan-
tity of  blood  with  the  stool,  during  the  catamenia.  Leu-
corrhcea  with  distention  of  the  abdomen,  without  accumu-
lation of  flatus.  Leucorrhcea,  like  the  white  of  an  egg,
after  previous  pinching  around  the  navel.  Brown,  slimy,
painless  leucorrhcea,  after  every  discharge  of  urine,  (6.  and
7.  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — Frequent  sneezing,  during  the  day,
(13.  and  14.  d.)  Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose,
as  when  a cold  is  approaching.  Constant  itching  in  the
nose,  with  desire  to  blow  it,  and  sensation  as  if  a large  and
rough  body  were  sticking  high  up  in  the  nose,  with  ob-
struction of  the  nose,  (2.  d.)  Coryza,  with  eruptions  in
the  nostrils,  (sore  nose.)  Coryza,  with  obstruction  of  the
nose  and  loss  of  smell,  (13.  and  14.  d.)  Obstruction  of  the
nose,  with  pain  at  the  right  nasal  fossa,  at  night,  the


120


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


symptom  passing  off  again  the  next  morning.  Dry  coryza ;
however  clear  water  runs  out  of  the  nose.  Coryza,  with
a feeling  of  obstruction  in  the  nose,  during  which  a large
quantity  of  mucus  passes  off,  with  great  difficulty  how-
ever, (a.  24  d.)  Coryza  at  one  nostril,  out  of  which  runs
a quantity  of  thick,  yellow  matter  ; this  is  accompanied
by  tearing  in  the  cheek-bone  and  the  teeth  of  the  left  side.
Clear  acrid  water  runs  out  at  the  nose,  corroding  the
lips.

Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness,  with  burning  in
the  region  of  the  larynx,  the  whole  fore-noon,  (a.  3 d.)
This  chest  is  affected  as  with  a dry  cold.  Clearing  the
throat  frequently  with  expectoration  of  small  clots  of
mucus , accompanied  by  a feeling  of  roughness  and  sore-
ness behind  the  uvula.  * Violent  cough, — in  the  even-
ing when  in  bed,  during  which  water  comes  up  into  her
m outh,  (3.  and  4.  d.)  Cough  when  breathing  deeply,  espe-
cially when  lying  on  the  right  side.  * Dry  cough — (from
tickling  in  the  throat.,)  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  also  in
day-time.  Dry  cough  early  in  the  morning,  with  stitches
in  the  forepart  of  the  chest  or  in  the  left  hypochondriac  re-
gion ; in  the  afternoon  it  becomes  loose.  A dry  cough
which  had  existed  already  before  taking  the  medicine,
suddenly  passes  off,  without  any  discharge,  (a.  15  d.)
When  lying  on  the  back,  at  night,  he  had  an  attack  of  dry
cough,  with  stitches  in  the  left  hypochondriac  region,  so
that  he  was  notable  to  finish  coughing  on  account  of  the
pain  ; on  turning  to  one  side,  the  stitches  became  worse  ;
the  next  day  renewed  attack,  but  without  stitches,  (a.  21
d.)  Cough,  with  a little  discharge,  early  in  the  morning,
(first  days.)  Expectoration  of  blood  for  six  days,  after
previous  itching  in  the  throat.  Short  breath,  (a.  18  d.)
* Asthma  when  moving  the  arms  with  force  and  when
stooping.  Dyspnoea  when  walking  in  the  open  air  ; she
cannot  take  breath  in  a sufficient  quantity,  and  is  therefore
obliged  frequently  to  stand  still,  (2.  d.)

Chest. — Oppression  at  the  chest,  with  inclination  to
eructations,  which  came  on  in  the  open  air  and  relieved  the
pressure;  early  after  rising,  (a.  19  d.)  Pressure  upon
the  left  mamma,  when  taking  exercise  in  the  open  air ;
the  pressure  reaches  into  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  upon


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


121


leaving  the  warm  room  and  going  into  the  open  air,  (3o
19.  d.)  Pressure  at  the  chest , with  stitches , as  if  a mor-
sel which  had  been  swallowed,  had  been  arrested  there.
Shootings  in  the  chest,  sometimes  when  taking  an  inspira-
tion or  when  stooping  in  the  sitting  position  ; the  shootings
sometimes  come  on  at  intervals  as  regular  as  the  beats  in
music.  Sensation  of  pricking  soreness  in  the  left  side  of
the  chest,  when  sitting.  Pulsative  beating  at  a small
place  in  the  left  cavity  of  the  chest,  only  when  standing,
not  when  sitting,  early  in  the  morning,  (4.  d.)  Painful
tension  under  the  right  mamma,  in  any  position,  frequently
intermittent,  (after  dinner,)  (15.  and  16.  d.)  Tension  or
compression  as  with  a vice  in  front  at  the  lower  part  of
the  chest,  when  standing;  breathing  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  symptom,  (1.  d.)  Pain  as  from  a bruise,  under
the  right  mamma,  both  when  touched  or  left  alone,  fre-
quently intermittent,  and  often  with  shortness  of  breath,
(12.  to  16.  d.)  Burning  at.  small  spots  of  the  chest,  (when
walking  in  the  open  air,)  (shortly,  and  after  13  d ) 'Bear-
ing in  the  praecordial  region,  which  extended  thence  into
the  left  forearm,  (15.  d.)  Tearing  at  a small  spot  in  the
left  clavicle,  with  pain  as  from  a bruise,  when  pressing
upon  it,  (2.  d.)  Sensation  of  flea-bites  at  several  places
of  the  left  mamma,  which  passes  off  by  scratching,  in  the
evening,  (1 1.  d.)  Red  spots  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
with  a sensation  as  of  burning  itching,  and  turning  pale
when  pressed  upon  with  the  finger,  (10.  d.)

Back. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  with  incarcera-
tion of  flatus.  After  yawning,  a sensation  in  the  small  of
the  back  as  if  something  elastic,  like  air,  were  pressing
out  there,  (6.  d.)  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  when
walking,  so  that  she  was  unable  to  walk  straight.  Pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  raising  the  body  after
stooping.  * Painful  stiffness  in  the  small  of  the  back,
even  when  sitting,  mostly  however  when  raising  the  body.
Nightly  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back , which  always
rouses  her  from  sleep,  (a.  16  d.)  Pain  in  the  small  of
the  bach,  as  if  the  parts  were  bruised  or  dashed  to  pieces ,
both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  and  at  night  when  in
bed ; she  could  neither  lie  upon  her  side  nor  upon  her
back.  Pain  of  the  ischiatic  bones,  as  from  a bruise,  when

6


122


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


sitting  quietly,  especially  when  slumbering.  Pain  as  of
contusion  in  the  back,  so  that  she  was  unable  to  rest  upon
it,  at  night,  (a.  3 d.)  Pain  between  the  scapulae,  as  from
contusion  and  a bruise,  or,  as  if  the  muscles  of  the  back
were  pressed  asunder.  When  silting,  tension  in  the
back,  and  as  if  ihe  back  were  compressed  with  a vice  ;
this  symptom  disappears  by  motion,  (15.  d.)  Drawing
and  pressing,  from  without  inwards,  of  the  middle  lumbar
vertebrae,  which  forces  one  to  stretch  the  abdomen  for-
wards.

Neck. — Stitches  in  the  left  scapula,  especially  on  low-
ering the  shoulder,  and  turning  the  irunk  to  the  left  side.
Stitches  in  the  left  scapula,  when  at  rest,  (4.  and  9.  d.)
Pinching  in  the  flesh  of  the  right  scapula,  (15.  d.)  Icy
coldness  in  the  back,  and  between  the  shoulders,  at  the
spot  of  a previously  existing  pain,  only  internal  ; neither
feathers  nor  wool  can  warm  that  spot;  after  half  a day
the  coldness  terminates  in  itching , (a.  12  d.)  Itching  of
the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  the  evening,  when  undressing  ;
after  lying  down,  the  itching  passes  off,  (18.  d.)  Small,
inflamed,  painful  tubercle  upon  the  right  scapula,  which
dees  not  terminate  in  suppuration,  (5.  d.)  Furunculus
upon  the  left  shoulder,  with  a tensive  pain,  (a.  3 d )
Drawing  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  ; this  drawing  seems  to
be  in  the  tendons,  (3.  d.)  Tension  and  stiffness  in  the
nape  of  the  neck,  so  that  she  was  unable  to  move,  in  the
evening;  it  passes  off  after  lying  down,  (18.  d.)  Stiff
neck , with  pain  when  turning  it,  reaching  from  the  nape
of  the  neck  as  far  as  between  the  shoulders  ; for  6 days,
(a.  6 d.)  Tearing , alternately  in  the  right  and  left  side
of  the  neck,  sometimes  in  both  ; this  tearing  alternates
with  learing  in  the  cheeks,  (1 . 4.  and  17.  d.)  Lancina-
tions  in  ihe  neck  and  in  the  left,  clavicle,  at  a small  spot,
with  pain  as  from  a bruise  when  touching  that  spot  with
the  finger,  (2.  d.)

Superior  Extremities. — A swollen  gland  in  the
axilla , resembling  a hard,  red  ulcer,  which  separated  how-
ever constantly  into  parts,  like  a large  pimple,  (a.  18  d)
Blisters  of  the  size  of  peas,  upon  the  right  shoulder,  ten-
sive and  burning,  and  forming  a kind  of  surf  after  3 days,
(a.  2 d.)  Rheumatic  pain  in  the  shoulder-joints,  when


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


123


moving  them,  first  in  the  right,  then  in  the  left.  Drawing
in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  as  after  a cold  ; when  at  rest.
Beating  on  the  right  shoulder,  and  in  the  left  axilla,  early
in  the  morning,  and  frequently  during  the  day,  (12.  and
19.  d.)  Burning  and  pressure  in  the  right  axilla,  (2.  d.)
Her  right  arm  is  very  heavy  and  feels  rigid, ; the  upper
arm  seems  paralyzed,  in  the  evening,  when  spinning  and
early  in  the  morning,  (16.  17.  and  18.  d.)  Tearing  in
the  left  arm  and  foot,  (1.  d ) Tearing  in  the  left  arm,
which  seems  to  he  in  the  tendons,  and  reaches  into  the
fingers,  passing  off  during  assiduous  motion,  (9.  d.)
Compressive  pain  in  the  left  upper  arm  when  leaning  it
against  something,  passing  off  during  motion  of  the  arm,
(22.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  upper  arm,  as  if  in  the  marrow,
as  far  as  the  wrist-joint,  (13.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  upper
arm,  the  arm  being  very  sensitive  to  pressure,  (19.  d.)
Drawing  in  the  lower  arm  from  the  right  elbow  to  the  left
finger  ; it  becomes  a tearing  pain,  and  passes  off  by  mo-
tion, (2.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  left  lower  arm  when  lying
in  the  bed,  which  passes  off  by  motion,  but  is  renewed  by
leaning  the  arm  upon  the  table  when  writing,  (11.  and  12.
d.)  Itching  and  burning  in  the  left  lower  arm,  under  the
bent  of  the  elbow,  (13-d.)  Itching  of  the  inside  of  the
lower  arm,  early  in  the  morning,  and  pimples  in  the  bent
of  the  elbow.  After  scratching  the  internal  itching  side  of
the  left  lower  arm,  small  pimples  are  formed  there  which
soon  disappear  again,  (14.  and  15.  d.)  Pimples  on  the
right  lower  arm,  which  force  one  to  scratch  continually  on
account  of  violent  itching.  Heaviness  and  sense  as  of  hav-
ing gone  to  sleep  in  the  right  fore-arm,  (3.  d.)  Tearing  and
twitching  in  the  tendons  of  the  inner  side  of  the  wrist-
joint  of  the  left  arm,  as  if  the  tendons  would  be  torn  out  :
also  with  swelling  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  hand,  (1.  and
a.  25  d.)  Small  vesicles  on  the  wrist-joint,  which  first  ve-
hemently itch  and  then  burn,  when  scratched,  (a.  20  d.)
Large  blisters  and  indurations,  deep  in  the  skin  upon  a
hard  base  ; they  first  vehemently  itch,  then  burn  after  be-
ing scratched,  become  inflamed  and  form  a red  brown
scurf,  which  remains  inflamed  for  a long  time,  around  the
right  wrist-joint,  (with  swelling  of  the  spol,)  (a.  12  and  19
d.)  Violent  lancination  through  the  hands,  while  walking


124


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


in  the  open  air,  (22.  d.)  Stitches  and  beating  in  the  left
hand,  worse  when  moving  it.  Beating  in  the  palm  of  the
right  hand,  passing  off  by  moving  the  hand,  (12.  d.)
Feeling  of  paralysis  in  the  right  hand,  and  the  right  mid-
dle-finger ; when  sitting  and  knitting,  (15.  d.)  Pain  as
from  a sprain  in  the  dorsa  of  both  hands,  when  seizing
something  ; the  pain  is  not  felt  when  making  any  other
motion  ; upon  extending  the  hand,  the  pain  decreases,  and
upon  pressing  upon  the  joint  of  the  thumb,  the  pain  passes
off  with  a cracking  sound.  Itching  pimples  on  the  dorsa
of  both  hands,  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  attended  with
desquamation  of  the  skin  at  those  itching  places  on  the
following  morning,  (a.  20  d.)  Peeling  off  of  the  skin  be-
tween the  thumb  and  index  of  both  hands,  (a.  14  d.)
Shooting  and  tearing  in  the  fingers,  thumbs,  and  the  joints
thereof,  sometimes  increased  by  pressure  or  friction,  mostly
in  the  evening.  Violent  tearing  in  the  index  finger  upon
stretching  it  after  having  held  something  fast.  ; accompa-
nied by  stiffness  after  bending  it  inwards,  so  that  she  was
not  able  to  extend  it  again  (during  the  catamenia,)  (17.  d.)
Tearing  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  thumb.  Cramp-like
pain  in  the  right  middie-finger,  which  seems  to  affect  the
tendons,  and  is  experienced  upon  bending  the  fingers  in-
wards, (11.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers  and
their  joints,  sometimes  with  beating  extending  into  the
whole  hand,  and  passing  off  when  the  hand  is  moved.
Stitches  and  painful  throbbing  under  the  nail  of  the  left
thumb,  (5.  8.  d.)  Frequent  tingling  in  the  tips  of  the  fin-
gers (and  thumbs,)  as  if  the  parts  had  gone  to  sleep.  Ve-
hement long-lasting  itching  in  the  tip  of  the  index  finger,
which  cannot  be  stopped  by  scratching,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, (12.  d.)

Inferior  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  hip  of  the  left
side  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  so  that  she  is  obliged
to  limp  when  she  is  walking;  when  sitting,  there  is  a
gnawing  pain  in  the  bone.  When  sitting,  tearing  along
the  thighs  coming  from  the  left  hip  ; first  it  is  relieved  by
rising,  and  comes  on  again  when  sitting  down  ; afterwards,
motion  ceases  to  relieve  the  pain,  (Iti.  d.)  Weariness
and  weakness  of  the  legs,  the  whole  day,  (the  1st  days.)
Trembling  of  the  left  leg,  with  sensitiveness  to  the  touch,


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


125


(10.  d.)  Tearing  pain  in  the  thigh,  in  front,  when  sitting.
Painful  tearings  in  the  external  surface  of  the  right  thigh,
in  the  evening,  when  sitting  down,  (15.  d.)  Excessively
painful  stitches  in  the  knee  joints,  in  the  evening,  when
sitting,  (3.  d.)  Lancinations  in  the  left  knee,  when  walk-
ing, (11.  d.)  In  a child,  that  had  been  affected  with
swelling  of  the  knee,  and  whose  knee , after  the  swelling
had  been  cured,  remained  stiff  and  curved  from  before
backwards,  the  mobility  of  the  knee  was  very  soon  re-
stored. The  hamstrings  of  both  legs  are  painful  when
walking  ; sometimes  there  is  a twitching  ; they  feel  as  if
they  were  too  short,  not  so  when  at  rest.  Early',  when
rising,  the  thighs  were  contracted  about  the  popliteal  re-
gion, as  if  they  were  dried  up  or  too  short,  so  that  she
was  unable  to  go  down  stairs  ; this  symptom  passed  off
after  long  and  violent  exercise,  (15.  d.)  Drawing  tension
in  the  legs,  when  sitting  and  lying  ; this  obliges  one  to  lie
crooked,  after  which  the  symptom  passes  off.  Tension
and  traction  in  the  tendons  of  the  legs,  so  that  he  finds
walking  inconvenient,  with  lassitude  in  the  legs.  Spas-
modic contraction  around  the  lower  part  of  the  left  leg,
(5.  d.)  Insensibility  of  the  left  leg  when  sitting,  (it  feels
dead,)  (12.  d.)  Stinging  upon  the  inner  surface  of  the
left  leg,  also  in  the  calf,  when  sitting,  (13.  14.  d.)  Sting-
ing pain  in  the  left  calf  after  four  hours’  walk,  when  at
rest,  (3.  d.)  The  ossa  calcium  are  very  painful  when
walking,  and  bringing  the  feet  down  upon  the  ground  ; they
feel  bruised  and  contused.  Violent  tearing  (and  lancina-
tions) in  the  heels , with  pain  as  from  ulceration,  some-
times passing  off  by  friction  ; also  at  night,  when  in  bed  ;
no  position  whatsoever  procures  relief,  (4.  17.  19.  d.)
Spasmodic  contraction  in  the  right  heel,  with  pain,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed  ; also  tearing  around  the  internal
malleolus,  when  sitting,  (14.  15.  d.)  Throbbing  and  pain
as  from  ulceration,  when  walking,  in  the  right  foot,  and  the
external,  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,  (9.  11.  d.)  Tearing  at
the  external  border  of  the  foot,  when  standing  ; it  passes
off  by  motion,  (7.  d.)  Sensation  in  the  feet  as  if  they  had
gone  to  sleep,  also  at  night,  (19.  20.  d.)  Cold  feet,
in  the  evening,  when  in  bed  ; it  takes  her  a long  time
to  get  them  warm,  (14.  d.)  Pain  is  excited  in  a paralytic


126


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


foot,  (which  had  already  been  much  improved  ) Itch-
ing of  lire  sole  of  the  right  foot,  in  the  evening.  (2.  d.)
Shooting  and  tearing  in  the  toes , especially  the  big  toes,
when  silting  and  standing.  Stitches  in  the  left  small  toe,
when  standing  and  walking;  also  in  the  big  toe;  there
the  symptom  increases  and  decreases  at  slow  intervals.
Pinching  at  and  itching  of  the  forepart  of  the  right  big
toe,  (7.  d.)

Common  Ailments. — Erratic  itching  (and  biting)  over
the  whole  skin  ; she  cannot  scratch  enough;  in  the  even-
ing, mostly  before  lying  down  ; after  lying  down,  the
symptom  sometimes  passes  off.  Violent  itching  over  the
whole  body  in  the  evening  before  lying  down,  especially
upon  the  chest  and  the  fore  arms,  with  little  pimples  after
scratching,  (2.  10.  14.  15.  d.)  Violent  itching  around  the
hips,  at  night  and  early  in  the  morning,  also  of  the  thighs,
legs,  and  around  the  bent  of  the  knee,  with  rash-pimples.
Fine  rash  over  the  whole  body,  for  two  weeks,  (a.  16  d.)
Vesicular  pimples  upon  the  chest  and  the  left  leg  ; they
first  itch  and  then  burn.  All  the  bones  of  the  body  are
painful  and  feel  bruised,  when  slumbering  or  sitting  still.
Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the
back,  with  tearing  in  both  shoulders  and  in  the  back,  early
in  the  morning,  after  rising,  and  worse  during  motion,  (a.
25  d.)  Early  in  the  morning,  after  waking  up,  she  feels
contracted  in  the  whole  body,  so  that  she  was  scarcely
able  to  walk  ; the  pain  went  off'  by  long  walking,  (19.  d )
Tearing,  apparently  in  the  bone,  of  the  left  upper  arm  and
afterwards  of  the  right  thigh,  descending  from  the  hip,
when  sitting,  (10.  d.)  Erratic  tearing  and  painful  shoot-
ing in  the  limbs,  mostly  in  the  (temples,)  arms,  popliteal
spaces,  thighs,  calves,  fingers,  and  toes,  in  the  evening,
when  sitting,  relieved  after  lying  down  ; there  was  some-
times  a ihrobbing  pain  between  the  index  and  middle  fin-
gers, as  if  an  ulcer  would  form  there.  Inthe  evening , the
person  experiences  a shooting  and  tearing  in  the  tips  of
the  fingers  and  toes , then  in  the  right  upper  arm,  where
the  tearing  is  of  an  erratic  nature  ; it  is  attended  with  anx-
iety, and  passes  off  after  lying  down,  (16.  d.)  Shooting,
stinging,  and  burning  pricking  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers
and  toes)  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep,  in  the  evening,  af~


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


127


ternoon,  and  also  at  night.  Stinging  in  the  tips  of  the  fin-
gers and  toes,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (22.  d.)  Er-
ratic burning  and  stinging,  with  a feeling  of  pressure  at
several  places,  (3.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  ab-
domen, then  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  then  in  the  right
scapula,  and  lastly  in  the  small  of  the  back,  accompanied
by  chill  iness  and  sleepiness  during  the  day.  The  limbs
of  the  right,  side  appear  to  be  more  affected  than  those  of
the  left.  She  appears  to  be  belter  in  the  open  air.  He
appears  to  be  constantly  affected  with  orgasm.  Orgasm
in  the  whole  body,  with  anxiety  ; in  the  beginning  of  the
proving  period  she  feels  more  warm  than  cold.  Violent,
throbbing  headache  in  the  forehead,  towards  evening,  last-
ing one  hour;  upon  touching  the  forehead,  the  headache
got  worse  ; this  symptom  was  accompanied  by  weakness,
so  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  walk,  and  by  chills  on  go-
ing to  bed.

Spasms,  Paralyse,  Weakness. — Sudden  faintness  and
weakness  after  dinner,  when  taking  exercise  in  the  open
air,  (19.  d.)  The  person  feels  worn  out.  A good  deal  of
lassitude  in  the  morning.

Sleep. — In  the  morning,  constant  yawning  without  be-
ing sleepy,  (7-  d.)  Early  in  the  evening  great  sleepiness,
with  closing  of  the  eyes  ; this  symptom  passes  off  when
light  is  brought  into  the  room.  She  cannot  fall  asleep  be-
fore three  o’clock  in  the  morning;  she  then  sleeps  until
morning,  and  wakes  up  with  sweats.  She  cannot  fall
asleep  before  midnight,  on  account  of  cold  feet.  She  can-
not fall  asleep  before  midnight,  on  account  of  heat  in  the
head.  Starting  up,  while  one  is  falling  asleep,  (5.  d.)
Uneasy  sleep,  after  midnight,  with  frequent  waking  up,
and  turning  from  one  side  to  another,  amidst  dreams.  She
wakes  up  already  at  twelve,  three  o’clock  at  night,  and
cannot,  then,  fall  asleep  again,  (1.  17. d.)  Uneasy  nights.
Sleep  full  of  dreams,  (a.  3 d.)  Frequenl.lt/anrious , fear-
ful  dreams , which  rouse  her  from  her  sleep  with  a start ;
she  then  feels  oppressed  with  anxiety.  Dreams  about  fall-
ing into  the  water.  She  dreams  that  she  is  attacked  with
rasfi.  Lewd  dreams  about  having  had  an  embrace.  Vo-
luptuous dreams,  (a.  4,  5,  12  d.)  Violent  cutting  in  the
whole  abdomen  at  two  o’clock  at  night ; this  rouses  her


128


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


from  her  sleep,  (a.  24  d.)  Frequent  sneezing , without  a
cold,  roused  her  from  her  sleep,  with  titillution  in  the
throat,  which  caused  her  to  cough,  and  produced  a secre-
tion of  saliva,  (a.  6 d.)  Weight  upon  the  chest  when  in
bed  at  night ; he  is  half  awake  without  being  conscious  of
it ; he  is  in  a kind  of  dream  as  if  some  one  had  hung  him,
and  had  pressed  hard  upon  his  chest,  (a.  5 d.)  Immense
pain  in  the  small  of  the  hack  rouses  her  from  her  slumber,
with  a paralytic  pain  in  both  hips  and  the  thighs;  these
parts  when  touched  are  yet  painful  the  next  morning,  (a.
18  d.)  At  night  the  person  is  roused  from  sleep  on  ac-
count of  a pain  as  from  a sprain  or  bruise  in  the  right  side
of  the  back,  as  far  as  the  middle  ribs  and  the  axilla  ; this
symptom  occurs  when  turning  the  body,  stretching  the
arm,  sneezing,  yawning,  or  breathing.*  Stitches  in  the
hips,  after  midnight,  in  any  position,  relieved  by  pressing
upon  the  part  ; at  the  same  time,  a good  deal  of  flatulence,
and  sensation  as  if  the  pain  came  from  flatulence,  (19.d  )
At  night,  the  person  is  roused  from  sleep  by  tearing  pain
in  the  right  upper  arm  and  in  the  legs  ; the  pain  is  in  the
bones,  and  begins  at  the  heels,  (a.  24  d.)  Violent  itching
at  night,  between  the  shoulders  and  on  the  left  lower  arm,
so  that  he  would  like  to  scratch  the  skin  open,  (a.  2 d.)

Fever. — Chilliness,  at  night,  she  dares  not  uncover
herself.  Chilliness  (and  coldness,)  ?nostly  in  the  evening /
the  chilliness  is  sometimes  preceded  by  thirst,  or  there  is
thirst  during  the  chill;  this  is  sometimes  followed  by
sweat  in  the  night.  Chill  in  the  evening  or  after  midnight,
then  (alternating)  heat,  then  sweat,  without  any  thirst  dur-
ing these  different  symptoms,  (3.  13.  d.)  Frequent  at-
tacks of  fever,  followed  by  chills  and  heat,  with  a bloated
red  face,  and  thirst  both  during  the  chills  and  the  heat ;
the  intervals  when  there  is  no  fever,  last  about  half  an
hour.  More  heat  (warmth)  than  coldness,  during  the  last
period  of  the  trial,  (a.  17  d.)  Heat  over  the  whole  body
in  a warm  room,  and  after  quick  motion  ; this  heat  is  ac-
companied by  redness  of  the  face,  and  a sensation  of


* Note  of  the  Translator  “ Breathing  ” probably  here
means  ‘‘taking  a deep  inspiration.’5


ANACARDIUM.


129


stinging  heat,  which  is  especially  external  over  the  whole
chest.  Heat  in  the  forenoon,  thirst  early  in  the  morning,
after  rising.  Frequently  dry  heat  in  the  head,  upon  enter-
ing the  room,  followed  by  a little  thirst,  in  the  evening,
(19.  d.)  Heat  in  the  whole  bod)*,  as  if  sweat  would  break
out,  (a.  14  d.)  Frequent  flushes  of  heat,  with  subsequent
sweat,  (13.  d.)  Great  heat,  when  in  bed  at  night;  then
sweat  early  in  the  morning,  (18.  d.)  Heat  in  the  palms
of  the  hand,  soles  of  the  feet,  and  in  the  face,  in  the  even-
ing, immediately  after  lying  down  (with  thirst ;)  after-
wards sweat,  (2.  3.  4.  d.)  Early  after  rising,  sensation  of
heat,  and  a little  sweat  in  the  hands,  and  swelling  sweat
of  the  feet.  Heat  over  the  whole  body,  with  redness  of
the  face  and  sweat,  when  taking  exercise  in  the  open  air,
(a.  24  d.)  Heat  and  sweat,  in  the  afternoon  ; then  a little
thirst.  Sweat  about  midnight,  (a.  4 d.)  * Sweat  over

the  whole  body  for  several  nights.  Copious  sweat,  early
in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  (2.  d.)


ANACARDIUM.

/

This  is  the  fruit  of  a tree — Avicennia  t.omenlosa , seme-
carpus  Anacardium — which  grew  upon  the  HCtna,  in
Sicily,  at  the  time  of  the  Arabs,  and  is  now  to  be  found  in
the  forests  of  the  East  Indies.  Between  the  external,
black,  shining,  heart-shaped , hard  shell,  and  the  sweet  ker-
nel which  is  covered  with  a brown  reddish  thin  skin,  there
is  a thickly,  blackish  juice  contained  in  a cellular  tissue,
with  which  the  Indians  mark  their  linen  in  an  indelible
manner,  and  which  is  so  sharp  that  moles  may  be  etched
away  by  means  of  it.  In  the  fruit  which  we  receive  here
(in  Germany)  this  juice,  which  is  commonly  of  the  con-
sistence of  honey,  is  generally  found  dry.  One  grain  of
this  juice  is  to  be  triturated,  and  the  different  potencies
are  then  prepared  according  to  the  mode  which  has  been
pointed  out.

The  Arabs,  who  were  the  first  that  knew  the  medicinal
powers  of  that  juice,  called  that  heart-shaped  fruit  Bala -
dor . This  fruit  must  be  well  distinguished  from  another

6*


130


ANACARDIUM.


tree,  called  Anacardium  occidentale , the  fruit  of- which  is
kidney -shaped,  and  was  not  known  to  the  Arabs.

This  powerful  drug,  together  with  others  of  which  the
ancients  availed  themselves  with  great  benefit,  had  been
completely  forgotten  for  the  last  thousand  years.

Serapio,  in  his  book,  “ de  simplicibusf  C.  346,  (con-
tained in  Practiea  Serapionis,  Venet.  fob  1550,)  quotes
most  of  those  Arabian  authors  who  have  written  on  the
use  of  the  Anacardium  juice.  Aben  Mesnai  : est  bonus
corruptioni  sensus  et  memoriae.  A lciialahamen  : pro-
prietas  ejus  est , confer  re  relaxation!  nervorum  (paralysis.)
Tedigokas:  removet  oblivionem  et  acuit  serisum.  Abu-
gerig  : est  bonus  paralyticis  et  eis , quibus  timetur  ad -
ventvs  ejus.  This  last  author  recommends  caution  in  the
use  of  the  juice  : commovet — bar  as  et  lepram  et  apostemata
et  forlassis  occid.it — (nocivui)  juvenibus  et  cholericis.

The  following  symptoms  indicate  the  use  of  Anacardi-
um with  tolerable  certainty: —

Hypochondriac,  sullen  mood  ; depression  of  spirits  ;
dread  of  men  ; fearfulness  ; apprehension  of  near  death  ;
deficiency  of  moral  feeling  (depravity,  flagitiousness,  in-
humanity, hardheartedness  :)  sensation  as  if  he  had  two
wills,  one  of  which  repels  him  from  what  the  other  leads
him  to  do  ; sensation  as  if  the  spirit  were  disunited  from
the  body  ; desolate  emptiness  of  the  head  ; headache
pressing  from  the  temple  towards  the  eyes  ; headache  in
the  occiput,  arising  from  wrong  stepping  and  great  noise.
Weakness  and  dimness  of  the  eyes  : nets  and  dark  spots
before  the  eyes;  painful  swelling  of  the  ear;  itching  in
the  ears  ; running  at  the  cars;  grumbling  in  ihe  ears;
roaring  in  the  ears  ; surdity  ; bleeding  at  the  nose  ; fetid
odor  from  the  mouth,  without  his  perceiving  it ; accumu-
lation of  water  in  the  mouth  ; faeculent  taste  in  the  mouth  ;
violent  thirst  ; want  of  appetite  ; nausea  early  in  the
morning;  weakness  of  the  stomach  ; difficult  digestion  ;
oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning
on  waking  up  ; oppression  at  the  liver  ; hardness  of  the
abdomen  ; blood  with  the  stool  ; varices  of  the  rectum,
sometimes  painful  ; itching  of  the  arms  ; humour  eking
out  at  the  rectum  ; burning  in  the  glands  before  and  after
micturition  ; involuntary  erections  during  the  day ; there


ANACARDIUM.


131


is  but  little  enjoyment  in  coition  ; leucorrhosa  with  itching
and  soreness  ; feeling  of  dryness  in  ihc  nose  ; obstruciion
of  the  nose  ; chronic  coryza,  and  discharge  of  mucus  from
the  nose;  expectoration  when  coughing;  rattling  in  the
larynx,  when  lying  on  one  side  ; stitches  and  heaviness  in
the  fore-arm  ; tensive  pain  and  weakness  in  the  arm  ;
trembling  of  the  right  hand  ; burning  in  the  soles  of  the
feet ; weight  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  knees  ; tremu-
lous lassitude  ; want  of  irritability  of  the  skin,  which  can-
not be  excited  into  itching  or  becoming  moist  by  the  use
of  resins  ; sensitiveness  to  cold  and  draughts  of  air  ; catch-
ing cold  easily;  falling  asleep  late;  anxious  dreams;
chilliness  ; sweat  when  sitting.

Camphor  and  spirits  of  nitre  do  not  seem  to  act  suffi-
ciently as  antidotes  ; smelling  of  coffea  cruda  is  a power-
ful antidote  against  the  anger  and  the  vehemence  conse-
quent upon  the  use  of  anaeardium.

This  drug  has  been  tried  by  Doctors  Samuel  Hahne-
mann, Becher,  Tranz,  Gross,  Hartmann,  Herrmann,  Lang-
haminer,  Stapf.

Noack  and  Trinks  offer  the  following  remarks  on  ana-
cardium  : It  is  adapted  to  nervoso-bilious,  dry  constitu-
tions, to  the  melancholico-choleric  temperament,  io  irrita-
ble hypochondriacs.  It  may  be  employed  in  the  following
affections:  herpes  furfurans  ; warts ; catarrhal  fevers.
Depression  of  spirits,  or  moral  affections  partly  exaltation,
partly  weakness  ; moral  affections  consequent  upon  Onan-
ism. Weakness  of  mind , memory , senses;  imbecility  ;
loquacious  dementia,  originating  in  humiliation  ; Furor
uerinus?  Satyriasis?  Melancholia  simplex;  Anoia  ct
Abulia  melancholica,  Melancholia  Moria,  misanthropica,
Athymia,  Melancholia  hypocliondriaca.  Amblyopia  amau-
rotica.  Disecoia  chronica. — Anosmia.  — Paralysis  of  the
tongue. — Weakness  of  digestion , and  flatulence  of  hypo-
chondriacs.— Diseases  of  the  liver. — Asthma  ; hysteric
spasms  of  the  chest , which  go  off'  amid  floods  of  tears. —
P.  S.  The  “ Confectio  anacardina  sen  sapientium  has  been
celebrated  as  a distinguished  remedy  against  weakness  of
.mind,  memory  and  the  senses.  Nevertheless,  R.  A.  Vogel
(hist.  mat.  med.  p.  276,)  remarks  : That  “ Caspar  Hoff-
mann has  called  this  confection  cf  the  wise  a confection  of


132


ANACARDIUM.


fools  because  many  had  lost  their  memory  and  had  be-
come mad  on  account  of  using  it  too  often  and  inconside-
ratelyHence  it  was  only  the  improper  and  too  frequent
use  of  anacardfum  that  made  it  hurtful  ; if  applied  cor-
rectly, it  became  curative.

Analogous  Remedies. — 1.  Calc.,  Natr.  mur.  Plat.,
Sep.,  Sulp.  ac.  2.  Aeon.,  Ars.,  Ign.,  Nux  mosch.,  Nux  vom.,
Oenanth.  croc.,01eand.,  Petrol.,  Phos.  Rhus.,  Staphis.,Sulp.

Duration  of  Effects. — In  large  doses  from  fourteen
to  twenty  days  ; in  small  doses,  in  sick  persons,  about
twenty-four  hours.

Moral  Symptoms. — * Sadness.  * Anxiety,  apprehen-
sion of  threatening  misfortune.  In  the  evening  Tearfulness
and  * apprehension,  after  having  spent  the  day  with  a
cheerful  disposition.  Internal  anxiety  which  did  not  leave
him  any  peace  ; he  felt  solicitous  on  account  of  every
trifle,  as  if  it  would  lead  to  some  greatly  prejudicial  event ;
apprehension  as  regards  the  future.  When  walking  he
felt  anxious  as  if  some  one  were  pursuing  him  ; he  sus-
pected every  thing  around  him.  He  has  anxiety  in  all  his
arts  ; every  thing  appears  to  him  more  terrible  ; he  ima-
gines to  be  surrounded  with  enemies  ; then  he  feels  warm,
and  the  blood  seems  to  boil  within  him,  (a.  7,  8 d.)  Ap-
prehension and  thoughtfulness,  when  meditating  over  his
present  and  future  destiny.  The  future  appears  danger-
ous to  him,  as  if  nothing  but  misfortune  and  danger  were
in  expectation  for  him  ; want  of  confidence  in  his  strength,
and  * despondency.  He  is  disunited  with  the  whole  world,
and  has  so  little  confidence  in  himself  that  he  despairs  of
being  able  to  do  that  which  is  asked  of  him.  In  the  fore-
noon * he  is  extremely  hypochondriac,  low-spirited  and
desponding,  with  awkward  and  childish  manners  ; all  his
motions  are  extremely  awkward  and  indolent,  (a-  3d.)
Anxiety  and  peevishness.  Excessively  peevish , and  ill-
humoured.  Peevish  mood  all  day  long ; every  thing
which  surrounded  him,  made  a disagreeable  impression
upon  him.  Gloomy,  peevish  mood,  with  a desire  of  going
into  the  open  air.  Very  peevish  and  ill-disposed,  ex-
tremely susceptible  against  all  sorts  of  offences.  He  takes
every  thing  in  bad  part,  and  becomes  vehement.  Irrita-
ble and  contradicting . A slight  offence  makes  him  vehe-


ANACARDIUM,


133


mently  angr}q  breaking  out  in  personal  violence.  Want  of
disposition  to  do  any  thing.  Dread  of  labour  ; he  is
afraid  of  undertaking  the  least  labour  ; he  likes  nothing.
In  the  afternoon  he  is  more  cheerful  than  in  the  forenoon  ;
as  soon  as  the  sleepiness  after  dinner  is  past,  he  is  more
cheerful  and  more  disposed  to  work,  (a.  38  h.)  He  is
very  indifferent  and  unfeeling  ; neither  agreeable  nor  dis-
agreeable objects  excite  his  interest ; for  eight  days.  Ex-
cessive cheerfulness.  He  laughs  when  he  ought  to  be
serious.  When  occupied  with  serious  things  he  is  obliged
to  laugh  on  account  of  a tickling  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ;
when  occupied  with  laughable  things,  he  is  able  to  abstain
from  laughing.  He  loses  his  thoughts.  Great  weakness
of  memory  ; he  cannot  remember  any  thing,  he  forgets
every  thing  immediately.  He  remembers  with  difficulty  ;
he  retains  nothing  in  his  memory,  he  is  deficient  in  ideas,
and  he  soon  loses  his  subject  without  being  aware  of  it.
The  memory  is  quite  deficient,  early  in  the  morning,  espe-
cially as  regards  single  names.  Diminution  of  the  imagi-
nation, and  the  memory  in  the  afternoon  ; he  cannot  recol-
lect any  thing,  (a.  5,  6 h.)  In  the  afternoon  his  memory
is  better  than  in  the  forenoon , although  his  recollections
only  come  to  him  after  the  time  when  he  was  in  need  of
them  ; however,  he  easily  understands  what  he  reads,  al-
though he  does  not  entirely  remember  it,  (a.  3,  4 d.)  In-
crease and  greater  vividness  of  the  memory  ; he  sponta-
neously recollects  the  smallest  circumstances  of  times  long
past  ; he  would  be  able  to  learn  easily  by  heart,  if  his  at-
tention were  not  diverted  by  other  thoughts,  which  he,
however,  finds  it  easy  to  control,  (a.  1^  h.)  Anacardium
weakens  the  understanding,  (Matthiolus,  in  the  Commen-
tar.  in  Discorid.  M.  M.  L.  V.  Cap.  V.  p.  985.)  Obtusion  of
the  senses,  with  anxiety  ; he  scarcely  perceives  what  is  tak-
ing place  around  him.  The  mind  feels  obtuse  as  if  a cold
were  coming  on.  He  can  only  reflect  upon  a subject
which  has  been  furnished  to  him  ; he  does  not  remember
any  thing  of  himself.  Every  kind  of  intellectual  labour  is
difficult  for  him,  owing  to  a sort  of  mental  absence.  Ob-
tusion of  the  senses,  accompanied  by  obtusion  of  the  head
and  exhaustion  of  strength.  Early  in  the  morning,  after
a sound  sleep,  he  is  unable  to  comprehend  any  thing  ; his


131


ANACARDIUM.


head  feels  desolate  and  empty.  Increased  fancy  ; he  con-
stantly thinks  of  some  new  object  to  which  the  mind  for-
cibly clings.  Extreme  animation  of  the  fancy,  and  a num-
ber of  projects,  in  the  evening  from  nine — ten  o’clock  ; he
is  not  able  to  control  his  attention  ; little  by  little,  the  mind
becomes  dull,  so  that,  he  is  without  any  ideas,  (a.  16  h.)
Id  is  mind  is  much  more  animated  than  before  ; he  likes  to
enter  upon  acute  analyses  ; but  every  effort  of  this  kind
gives  him  an  acute,  pressivc  headache  in  the  forehead,  the
temples  and  the  occiput.  Any  little  effort  of  the  mind
causes  a sensation  as  of  being  bruised  in  the  brain.  Illu-
sion of  the  fancy  ; he  imagines  to  hear  his  name  called  by
the  voice  of  his  distant  mother  and  sister,  accompanied  by
an  apprehension  of  misfortune  and  anxiety.  Melancholy
illusion  ; he  imagines  to  see  a bier  in  the  side-room  upon
which  cither  his  friend  or  himself  is  lying.  He  confounds
the  present  with  the  future.

Head. — Obtusion  first  of  the  left,  then  of  the  right  side
of  the  head.  Painfully  dull  obtusion  of  the  head,  when  he
does  not  lie  in  his  bed  in  a convenient  position.  Dull,
painful  obtusion  of  the  forehead  reaching  down  to  the  root
of  the  nose.  Early  in  the  morning,  after  rising,  his  head
feels  so  obtuse  and  heavy  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  carry
it ; he  was  obliged  to  lie  down  again.  His  head  feels
very  heavy  the  whole  day.  Dizziness  of  the  head,  as  after
spirituous  drinks.  The  head  turns.  Vertigo  on  stooping,
with  a sensation  as  of  turning  round,  (a.  13  h.)  Vertigo,
the  eyes  see  black.  Great  giddiness  after  a wralk,  in  the
afternoon.  Vertigo  when  walking,  as  if  all  the  objects
were  too  far  distant.  Vertigo  as  if  all  the  objects  or  himself
were  wavering  ; he  is  obliged  to  hold  himself,  (1.  d.)  Ver-
tigo, he  almost  fell  down.  Pain  in  the  head,  especially  in
the  forehead,  stunning,  pressivc,  exciting  vertigo ; he
threatened  to  fall  to  the  left  side  when  sitting,  (a.  2,  h.)

Occasional  pressure  in  the  head.  Pressure  in  the  occiput,
on  the  right  side,  (a.  3 h.)  Pressure  in  the  forehead,
every  time  . he  wakes  up,  worse  in  wralking,  as  if  the  brain
were  shaken.  Dull  pressure  in  the  centre  of  the  forehead,
increasing  at  How  intervals,  becoming  more  and  more
deep,  and  gradually  extending  over  the  whole  anterior
part  of  the  head,  is  the  evening.  Violent  pressure  on


ANACARDIUMo


135


the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  from  within.  * Violent
pressure  in  the  region  of  the  right  temple.  Dull  pressure
coming  out  at  the  right  frontal  eminence.  Dull  pressure,
as  from  a plug,  on  the  right  side  of  the  vertex.  Pressure
from  without  inwards  at  the  right  temple.  Dull  erratic
pressure  from  without  inwards,  at  small  places  of  the  head.
Pressure  inwards,  and  sense  as  of  squeezing  in  both  tem-
ples, with  continual  constriction  of  the  upper  part  of  the
head,  increasing  towards  evening.  Compression  and  dull
pressure  below  the  left  frontal  eminence.  * Compression
simultaneously  in  both  temples.  Constrictive  headache
in  the  forehead,  with  extremely  peevish  mood,  increasing
every  hour,  accompanied  by  a violent  grinding  pain  which
is  diminished  for  a few  moments  by  strongly  pressing  upon
the  forehead  ; at  last  the  pain  takes  hold  of  the  whole
head,  with  a sensation  as  if  a tight  band  were  reaching
from  the  nape  of  the  neck  to  the  ears  ; he  is  obliged  to
lie  down,  the  pain  lasts  from  five  o’clock  in  the  afternoon
up  to  next  morning.  Violent  clawing  pain  in  the  right
side  of  the  forehead,  especially  at  the  external  border  of  the
orbit.  Pressive  clawing  headache  in  the  forepart  of  the
head,  with  a few  tearings  towards  the  forehead,  (a.  24  h.)
Tearing  pressure  in  the  left  temple.  Tearing  headache
during  hard  labour,  (a.  4 d.)  Tearing  pain  in  the  brain,
close  above  the  right  temple.  Tearing  which  commences
in  the  inferior  part  of  the  occiput  on  the  right  side  and
reaches  as  far  as  the  forehead,  (a.  35  h.)  Repeated  tear-
ings in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  face  and  neck,  and  sub-
sequent humming  before  the  left  ear.  Repeated  tearings
in  the  whole  head,  with  chills  all  over  the  body,  low  spirits
and  uneasiness  ; this  does  not  permit  her  to  remain  at  any
one  place  ; the  symptoms  always  return  every  third  day.
Tearing  headache  in  the  occiput,  in  distinct  successive  at-
tacks which  reach  as  far  as  the  temple,  (a.  half  an  h.)
Jerking  tearings  and  pain  in  the  occiput  and  temples,
mostly  when  bending  the  head  backwards,  (a.  2 h.)  Sud-
den, acute,  piercing  and  biting  tearings  in  the  temple,  as
far  as  the  brain,  (a.  3 h.)  Sharp,  pressive  tearings  in  the
left  temple.  Lancinations  in  the  forehead  over  the  right
eye.  Shootings  and  tearings  in  the  left  temple.  Sharp
stitches  through  the  left  side  of  the  head,  reaching  deep


136


ANACARDIUM.


into  the  brain.  Dull,  tremulous  stitches  on  the  left  side  of
the  superior  part  of  the  head  ; they  are  merely  incipient,
and  do  not  become  distinct.  Pressure  in  the  right  side  of
the  head,  interrupted  by  violent  stitches,  (a.  three  quarters
of  an  h.)  Headache  with  stitches  in  the  left  temple.  Se-
veral times,  when  breathing,  a long  stitch  from  the  temple
reaching  to  the  forehead,  (a.  5 h.  and  a half.)  Drawing
pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  head.  Drawing  pain  in  the
forehead,  in  the  left  vertex  and  in  the  occiput.  Shootings
in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  frequently  repeated,  close  down
along  the  ear.  Several  vehement  jerks,  at  intervals,  so
that  he  would  like  to  scream  out  loud  ; they  come  from  be-
hind and  reach  across  the  left  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the
head  and  the  forehead,  (a.  half  an  h.)  Grinding  violent
headache,  in  the  evening.  Grinding  in  ihe  right  half  of
forepart  of  the  head,  especially  along  the  border  of  the  or-
bit. ; it  is  relieved  by  strong  external  pressure  and  during
a meal ; accompanied  by  intolerable  pain,  as  if  a heavy
body  were  forced  in  at  those  parts  ; the  pain  diminishes
in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  and  lying  upon  the  arm
which  corresponds  to  the  painful  side  ; while  falling  asleep
the  pain  subsides  entirely.  Throbbing  headache.  Heat
in  the  head.  The  headache  is  worse  during  motion.
Pressure  at  the  forehead  from  without,  over  the  left  eye-
brow, (a.  2 h.)  Hard  pressure  in  the  corner  between  the
occipital  and  nasal  bone,  (a.  3 d.)  Violent  itching  of  the
hairy  scalp.  Itching  of  the  forehead.  Many  tubercles
upon  the  hairy  scalp,  of  the  size  of  a little  pea;  they  feel
sore  when  touched  or  scratched.  Painless  pimples  with
red  areolse,  at  the  top  of  the  left  temple,  (a.  9 h.)

Eyes. — Sore  eyes  without  redness.  Sensation  in  the
eyes  as  if  there  were  something  between  the  eyeball  and
the  upper  eyelid,  which  causes  friction.  There  is  some-
thing between  the  eyeball  and  the  lower  lid  which  causes
friction.  Pressure  upon  the  eyeball , from  before  back-
wards, or  from  above  downwards.  Pressure  below  the
external  canthus  of  the  left  eye,  (a.  2 h.)  Pressure  as
from  a stye,  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  right  eye,  and  the
tarsal  cartilages  in  the  vicinity.  Violent  pressure  upon
the  eyes,  especially  upon  the  left,  and  in  the  external  can-
thus of  this  eye,  when  looking  long  at  one  object,  (a.  half


ANACARDIUM.


137


an  h ) Dull  pressure  as  with  a plug , on  the  upper  border
of  the  right  orbit,  reaching  as  far  as  the  brain,  with  stu-
pefaction of  the  whole  side  of  the  head.  Pain  as  if  a plug
were  pressed  in  below  the  upper  border  of  the  orbits  and
touched  the  ball.  Rheumatic  tearing  pain  in  the  left  eye,
(more  in  the  lids,)  which  reaches  as  far  as  the  temples.
Tearing  in  the  balls  and  orbits,  early  when  walking,  (a.  24
h.)  Twitches  in  the  eyelids  ; he  imagines  that  one  must
see  them.  Great  sensitiveness  of  the  eyes  to  the  light.
The  light  appears  to  be  surrounded  with  a halo  in  the
evening.  The  flame  of  a light  appears  to  flicker,  and  to
alternately  darken  and  brighten  ; on  looking  steadily  at  the
light,  he  saw  that  it  burnt  calmly.  Frequent  sense  as  of
waving  before  the  eyes.  Contraction  of  the  pupils,  (a.
14  h.)  The  pupil  of  the  right  eye  became  smaller  for  a
short  time,  (a.  48  h.)  Great  dilatation  of  the  pupils,  (a.
13,  14,  19  hours  ; reaction.)  Short-sightedness  ; he  can-
not distinguish  any  thing  at  a distance,  whilst  he  distinctly
sees  every  thing  which  is  held  near  his  eyes.  Diminished
short-sightedness,  (a.  48  hours  ; curative  effect.)  * Dim-
ness of  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  full  of  water,  which
forces  one  frequently  to  wrink,  in  the  evening,  (a.  16  h.)

Ears. — Painful  traction  in  the  right,  meatus  auditorius.
Cramp-like  pain  in  the  meatus  auditorius  externus.  Sen-
sation of  a cramp-like  contraction  in  the  left  concha,  (a.
half  an  h.)  Cramp-like  contraction  in  the  left  meatus  au-
ditorius, with  a pressure  against  the  tympanum.  Painful
pressure  upon  the  external  ear.  Slow,  dull  thrusts  coming
from  both  sides  of  the  ears,  and  in  their  cavities,  as  if  two
blunt  plugs  were  penetrating  from  opposite  sides  to  meet
in  the  centre.  Shootings  in  the  left  meatus  auditorius,  at
short  intervals  and  very  painful,  as  if  a nerve  were  put
upon  the  stretch,  or  like  electric  shocks.  Twitches  of  the
external  ear.  Drawing  pain  behind  the  left  ear.  Painful
traction  in  the  left  meatus  auditorius  internus,  (a.  three
quarters  of  an  h.)  Tearing  in  the  left  ear,  down  the  cheek.
Violent,  tearing  along  the  upper  border  of  the  cartilage  of
the  right  ear.  Lancinating  dull  pains  in  the  tip  of  the  tra-
gus of  the  left  ear.  Violent  lancinations  in  the  left  exter-
nal ear,  (a.  24  h.)  Violent  stitches  in  the  left  ear.  Pain  as
from  ulceration  in  the  ear,  mostly  when  swallowing.  Pain


I3S


ANACARDIUM.


in  the  ear  as  from  ulceration  when  setting  the  teeth
against  one  another  in  masticating.  Pressive  teari  ng  and
throbbing  in  the  cartilage  of  die  ear,  and  in  the  internal  ear,
as  if  an  ulcer  would  form  there  ; upon  inserting  die  finger
the  pain  increases,  and  there  is  a sensation  as  if  die  mea-
tus had  become  obstructed,  (a.  10  h.)  * Itching  in  the

ears  while  a brownish  matter  is  running  out  at  the  same
time-  Sensation  behind  the  cars,  as  if  the  part  would  be-
come sore  ; he  is  obliged  to  rub  the  part.  Roaring  before
the  car.  Humming  in  the  ears.  Tingling  in  the  right  ear.
Feeling  of  obstruction  in  the  left  ear,  as  from  cotton  ; he
did  not  hear  as  well  with  this  ear  as  with  the  other,  (a-  half
an  h.)  He  sometimes  heard  so  feebly  that  he  did  not  hear
when  some  one  opened  the  door  with  a noise  ; often  his
hearing  was  so  acute  that  he  heard  people  through  double
doors  walk  in  the  anti-chamber,  (a.  54  h.)

• Nose. — Short  pain  in  the  nose,  such  as  arises  from  too
great  cold,  which  causes  his  eyes  to  run.  Contractive  pain
in  the  forepart  of  the  nose,  as  from  great  cold,  with  lachry-
mation.  Sensation  as  of  being  bruised  in  the  left  side  of
the  nose  ; the  pain  seems  to  be  in  the  bone.  Pimples
with  red  areolae  at  the  corner  of  the  right  wing  of  the  nose.
Red  pustules  on  the  septum,  in  the  right  nostril,  with  sore-
ness when  being  touched.  * Bleeding  at  the  nose, — after
vehement  blowing.  Illusory  smell,  as  if  he  smelled  lighted
linder,  early  when  rising.  Constant  smell  before  the  nose,
like  pigeon  or  chicken  dung,  especially  when  smelling  his
clothes  or  his  body,  (a.  2 h.)  Smell  seems  to  have  disap-
peared almost  completely , although  the  nose  is  not  ob-
structed, (a.  5 h.)  * Chronic  coryza,  (Jahr.)  * Obstruc-

tion of  the  nose,  (Jahr.)

Face. — Dull  pressure  in  the  face,  in  the  middle  of  the
cheeks,  as  if  the  place  were  squeezed  with  a pair  of  pin-
cers. Dull  pressure  upon  the  left  cheek-bone.  The  per-
son looks  worn  out,  hollow  eyed,  with  blue  borders  around
the  eyes,  for  several  days,  (shortly  after  taking  the  medi-
cine.) Paleness  of  the  face,  without  cold,  (immediately.)
Creat  paleness  of  the  face  shortly  after  taking  the  medi-
cine. Pale,  sick,  wan  colour  of  the  face,  without,  how-
ever, any  other  symptoms  of  indisposition.  Dry  heat  in
the  face  and  over  the  whole  head,  with  obtusion  of  the


ANACARDIUM.


139


head  and  pale  look;  at  the  same  time  he  feels  hot  upon
the  skin,  which  he  himself,  however,  does  not  perceive.
While  scaly  herpes  on  the  right  cheek,  close  by  ihe  upper
lip,  (a.  4 h.j  Itching  of  the  forehead.  Hard,  red  pustules
on  the  forehead  and  in  the  corner  of  the  left  wing  of  the
nose,  with  a feeling  of  soreness,  for  several  weeks.  Rough,
exfoliating,  herpes-like  skin  around  the  mouth,  with  titilla-
1 ion.  Dryness  of  the  lips  and  their  commissures.  Burn-
ing dryness  of  the  external  borders  of  the  lips,  as  from
pepper.

Jaws  and  Teetii. — External  burning  upon  the  chin,
and  dull  pressure,  in  an  ascending  direction,  upon  the  left
side  of  the  chin.  Burning  between  the  lower  lip  and  the
chin,  such  as  is  experienced  after  being  scraped  with  a
dull  razor.  Suppuration  and  painfulness  of  a place  under
the  chin,  where  there  was  a boil  two  years  atm.  Fre-
quently  a drawing  pain  in  the  lower  jaw,  especially  in  the
evening.  Frequently  repeated  tearings  in  the  right  ramus
of  the  lower  jaw.  Occasional  tearings  in  ihe  articulation
of  the  jaw,  (a.  42  h.)  Swelling  of  the  gums.  Bleeding
of  the  gums  consequent  upon  slight  rubbing.  Itching
pain  in  one  of  the  lower  dentes  enspidati,  as  if  a tooth-
pick had  been  stirred  about  in  it,  made  worse  by  contact
with  the  tongue  and  the  open  air,  (2.  d.)  Tooth-ache
upon  taking  something  warm  in  his  mouth,  a fewjerkings,
more  pressive  than  drawing.  Drawing  pain  in  the  gums
and  the  roots  of  the  lower  molar  teeth  of  the  left  side.
Cramp-like  traction  in  the  lower  row  of  teeth  of  the  right
side,  reaching  as  high  as  the  ear,  (shortly  after  taking  the
medicine.)  Tensive  and  drawing  pain  in  a hollow  molar
tooth,  reaching  as  high  as  the  ear,  for  several  days,  at  ten
o’clock  in  the  evening.  Tearing  in  all  the  teeth,  returning
at  intervals.

Mouth. — Painful  blisters  in  the  mouth.  The  tongue
is  white  and  rough,  like  a scraping-iron,  (a.  3 h.)
Heaviness  of  the  longue,  and  sensation  as  of  swelling,  so
that,  he  is  unable  to  continue  speaking.  When  speaking,
he  finds  it  difficult  to  utter  certain  words,  as  if  his  tongue
were  too  heavy.  In  the  afternoon  his  speech  is  firmer
and  surer  than  in  the  forenoon.  His  throat  feels  as  if  it
were  raw  and  sore.  Sensation  as  of  scrapings  (rawness)


140


ANACARDIUM.


in  the  throat.  Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  neck.  Dryness
in  the  throat,  passing  off  by  eating ; in  the  forenoon.
Phlegm  of  a firm  and  tough  consistence  comes  into  the
throat,  obstructing  at  the  same  time  the  posterior  nares,
(a.  1 h.)

Appetite. — Bitter  dryness  in  the  month  and  throat.
Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  after  smoking  tobacco.  The  to-
bacco does  not  taste  well,  it  excites  a feeling  of  biting.
Every  thing  tastes  to  him  like  herring-pickle.  Insipid
faeculent  taste  of  the  food,  also  without  eating.  Insipid
taste  of  the  beer.  Several  kinds  of  food,  of  which  he  is
otherwise  very  fond,  disgust  him  so  much,  that  he  would
like  to  vomit.  * He  has  no  appetite  for  dinner  ; — never-
theless he  takes  it  and  relishes  it,  because  it  is  dinner-
hour  ; bread,  however,  tastes  a little  bitter  to  him.  Con-
stant thirst;  however,  when  drinking,  his  breath  is  inter-
cepted, and  he  is  obliged  to  swallow  his  drink  little  by
little.  At  times  violent  hunger,  at  times  none  at  all.
Great  appetite,  with  pressure  at  the  stomach  and  nausea
unto  vomiting  after  a meal,  even  when  the  person  takes
no  exercise.  During  dinner,  almost  all  the  symptoms  dis-
appear ; they  come  on  again  two  hours  afterwards.
After  dinner,  heat  in  the  face,  with  accumulation  of  sweet-
ish saliva  in  the  mouth,  and  violent  thirst.  After  a meal,
heat  in  the  face  and  exhaustion  of  strength.

Stomach. — Shaking  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  at  every
step,  after  every  meal.  Pressure  and  tension  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach  after  every  meal.  Dull  pressure,  at  intervals,
over  and  by  the  side  of  the  pit,  during  a meal.  Pressure  at
the  stomach  after  a meal.  Pressure  at  the  stomach  after
a meal  with  a feeling  of  extreme  exhaustion  and  physical
dejection,  with  great  thirst,  (after  three  days  and  a half.)
Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  after  a slight  break-
fast, towards  the  abdomen,  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much.
Inflation  of  the  abdomen,  shortly  after  dinner,  as  if  he
had  eaten  too  much.  After  a meal,  flatus  move  about  in
the  abdomen  as  from  a purgative.  Tenesmus  after  a meal,
more  in  the  upper  part  of  the  intestines.  Hypochondriac
dejection  after  a meal  ; there  is  a pressure  in  the  abdo-
men from  below  upwards,  and  he  feels  extremely  weak
both  in  body  and  mind,  (a.  6 h.)  After  a meal,  when


ANACARDIUM.


141


standing,  the  person  feels  weak  in  the  knees  unto  falling,
at  the  same  time  sleepy  and  not  disposed  to  any  kind  of
work.  After  a meal,  sleepy  and  indisposed  to  work-  After
dinner  irresistible  desire  to  sleep.  Tussitation,  (short
and  hacking  cough,)  after  a meal,  affecting  the  throat  as
if  it  were  raw,  (a.  3 days  and  a half.)  After  a meal,
roughness  in  the  throat,  with  a deep  tone  of  voice.  Burn-
ing eructations  after  a meal.  Eructations,  after  drinks  and
liquid  food.  Empty  eructations  early  in  the  morning.
Eructations  with  spasmodic  pain  at  the  stomach.  Hic-
cough. Humid  eructations  in  frequent  succession,  the
swallowing  of  which  chokes  him  slightly.  A quantity  of
liquid  comes  into  his  mouth  and  throat,  which  caused  a
sensation  of  nausea  in  the  chest.  Heart-burn,  after  soup,
like  sour  air  in  the  oesophagus,  with  a sensation  of  contrac-
tion. Burning,  rising  out  of  the  stomach  into  the  throat.
* Nausea,  early  in  the  morning,  with  a sensation  as  of
fasting  in  the  stomach.  * A good  deal  of  nausea,  early  in
the  morning.  Violent  nausea  towards  evening,  constant
accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,  vomiting,  followed  by
a good  deal  of  acidity  in  the  mouth.  Nausea  with  retching
returning  shortly  after  drinking  cold  water,  and  then  vomit-
ing this  water  with  a sensation  as  if  the  oesophagus  were
pressed  asunder  by  a large  ball.  Qualmishness  at  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  between  the  meals,  with  anxiety  as  from  a
sprain,  without,  however,  what  might,  be  called  nausea  with
good  taste  in  the  mouth  and  good  appetile.  First  sensa-
tion as  of  fasting  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  then  pressure
at  the  pit  the  whole  day,  with  obstruction  to  the  emission
of  flatus  both  above  and  below,  and  want  of  appetite.
Pressure  at  the  stomach  from  reflection  and  intellectual
exertions.  Intensely  painful,  dull  pressure  at  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  slowly  coming  and  going.  Pressive  and  draw-
ing pain  under  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  walking,  (a.
10  h.  and  a half.)  Soft  pressure  with  traction  at  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  which  disappears  after  a meal  ; when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air,  (a.  12  h.)  Violent  contractive  pain  at
the  stomach,  relieved  by  stooping,  made  worse  by  lifting
the  arm  and  when  turning  the  body.  Stitches  on  the  left
side  of  the  praecordial  region,  increased  when  breathing
and  walking,  and  coming  on  anew,  when  the  walking  was


142


ANACARDIUM.


recommenced.  Sharp  st itches  in  the  praecordial  region,
extending  thence  to  the  small  of  1 he  back.  Severe  stitches
in  the  praecordial  region , when  breathing.  Compressive,
painful  prickings  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  inspiring  *
and  expiring,  which  cannot  be  relieved  by  any  position  of
the  body,  or  by  contact,  (a.  4 h.)  Cutting  in  the  praecor-
dial  region.  Slight  rumbling  and  fermenting  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach.

Abdomen. — Stitches  in  the  hypochondria,  when  taking
an  inspiration,  sometimes  on  the  right  side,  sometimes  on
the  left.  Stitches  in  the  left  hypochondrium.  Dull  stitches
in  the  region  of  the  spleen  ; they  seem  partly  to  be  in
the  chest,  partly  in  the  abdominal  cavity.  Pressure  in  the
region  of  the  liver,  an  hour  after  a meal.  Pain  around  the
navel,  as  if  a blunt  plug  were  squeezed  into  the  intestines.
Dull  pressure  close  beneath  the  navel,  made  worse  by
pressing  upon  it,  and  by  breathing,  shortly  after  a meal.
Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  as  if  something  hard
had  formed  there,  with  a sensation  when  breathing,  speak-
ing, and  especially  when  coughing,  as  if  the  abdomen
would  burst ; when  touching  the  part  with  the  finger,  there
was  a pain  resembling  pressure  and  tension.  Hard  pres-
sure at  a small  spot  above  and  belowr  the  navel,  and  in  the
left  side  of  the  abdomen.  Thrusts  as  from  a blunt  tool,
on  the  right  side  of  the  navel,  (a.  6 h.)  Stitches  which
are  intensely  painful  and  dull,  on  the  left  side  of  the  navel.
Dull  intermittent  stitches  at  the  navel.  Dull  stitches  in
the  abdominal  cavity,  not  far  from  the  navel.  Dull,  deeply
penetrating  stitches,  at  the  spinous  processes  of  the  left  iliac
bones.  Intensely  painful,  sharp  stitches  over  the  navel  on
the  right  side,  which  cause  him  to  start.  Single  sharp
stitches  in  the  abdomen.  A sudden  wave-like  shooting
into  his  abdomen,  like  lightning.  One  quick  shooting  in
the  abdomen,  on  the  right  side.  Cutting  and  pinching  in  the
abdomen,  as  from  flatulence,  or  cold,  with  tenesmus,  (a.  4
and  22  h.)  Attacks  of  cholic  more  cutting  than  pinching,
coming  on,  when  flatus  become  incarcerated  in  1 he  abdomen.
Pinching  and  squeezing  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  12h.)  Squeez-
ing pain  in  the  abdomen,  apparently  in  the  intestines,  (a.  7 h.)
Pinching  contraction  at  a small  spot  on  the  left  side  of  the
navel,  when  breathing,  (a.  half  an  h.)  Pain,  as  if  something


ANACARDIUM.


143


In  the  abdomen  would  become  convoluted,  with  subsequent
pressure,  (a.  32  h.)  Upon  bending  the  body  backwards,  1 he
intestines  are  painful,  and  feel  spasmodically  shortened,  in  the
forenoon.  Burning  prickings  coming  and  going  as  regularly
as  musical  beats,  externally,  on  the  right  side  of  the  abdo-
men, under  the  short  ribs.  Shootings  in  the  muscles  of
the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  close  under  the  short  ribs.
Tearing  in  the  mons-veneris.  Intermittent  dull  pressure  from
within  outwards  over  the  abdominal  ring.  Continual g rant-
ing in  the  abdomen , especially  in  the  region  of  the  navel.
Continual  grunting  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen.

Stool. — Frequent  tenesmus  during  the  day , for  many
days,  icitliout  his  ever  being  able  to  expel  any  thing.
Desire  for  stool,  three  times  a day  ; he  had  a desire,  but
upon  going  to  stool  and  sitting  down,  the  desire  had  gone  ;
the  rectum  would  not  fulfil  its  function  ; he  had  to  strain
considerably,  even  when  the  stools  were  very  soft.  Te-
nesmus ; he  cannot  expel  any  thing  ; the  rectum  seems  to
be  stopped  up  with  a plug.  Constant  tenesmus  ; the  ex-
pulsion not  taking  place  immediately,  there  is  a painful
twisting  and  turning  in  the  intestines,  transversely  across
the  abdomen.  Every  day,  two  or  three  ordinary  stools,
passing  with  great  difficulty.  He  was  frequently  obliged
to  go  to  stool  ; however,  he  expelled  but  little  every  time  ;
the  stools  were  first  soft,  then  hard.  Stools  of  a very
pale  colour,  (a.  48  h.)  Frequently  watery  diarrhoea,  the
expulsion  being  nevertheless  difficult.  Pinching  in  the
abdomen  during  stool.  During  the  act  of  expelling  the
feces,  and  especially  after  the  expulsion,  there  was  a dull
pressure  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  increased  by  inspira-
tion, close  below  the  navel.  Yawning  and  eructations  af-
ter stool.  * Frequent  itching  of  the  anus.  The  varices
of  the  rectum  become  smaller,  and  cease  to  be  painful,  ex-
cept some  soreness  when  the  person  begins  to  walk,  (cu-
rative effect.)

Urinary  Organs. — Ttching  of  the  urethra.  Constant
desire  to  urinate.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  but  little
urine  passing  off,  (the  first  4 h.)  He  is  obliged  to  rise  at
night  for  the  purpose  of  urinating;  nevertheless,  he  uri-
nates again  at  the  usual  period.  Early  in  the  morning,
before  breakfast,  the  person  frequently,  emits  urine,  which


144


ANACARDIUM.


is  as  clear  as  water.  The  person  frequently  emits  urine  as
clear  as  water,  but  in  little  quantity.  The  urine,  while  being
emitted,  is  turbid,  deposits  a dirty  sediment,  and,  when  sha-
ken, looks  like  clay.  Pain  along  the  penis  of  acutling  nature.

Generative  Functions. — Continual  voluptuous  itching
of  the  scrotum,  which  excites  the  sexual  desire,  (a.  2 h.)
Sexual  desire,  early  in  the  morning  after  waking  up,  with
erection  of  the  penis.  Extreme  sexual  desire.  Want  of
excitability  of  the  sexual  desire,  (the  first  10  d.)  Dis-
charge of  the  prostatic  juice  with  difficult  stool.  Discharge
of  the  prostatic  juice  with  good  stool.  Discharge  of  the
prostatic  juice  after  emission  of  urine.  Effusion  of  semen,
at  night,  without  any  lewd  dreams,  (a.  27  h.)  Itching  of
the  anus  after  an  embrace.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Sneezing.  Obstruction  of  the  poste-
rior nares,  as  by  much  phlegm.  Dry  coryza.  Violent
coryza,  lasting  four  weeks.  Severe  coryza,  in  the  even-
ing, (a.  48  h.)  Severe  coryza,  with  fever  ; she  was  un-
able to  get  warm,  with  heat  in  the  head,  and  icy  coldness
of  the  hands  and  feet,  in  the  warm  room  ; afterwards  dry
heat,  the  tendons  of  the  muscles  of  the  legs  appear  to  be
too  short,  cramp  of  the  calves,  and  uneasiness  about  the
heart,  (8.  d.)  Violent  fluent  coryza  after  frequent  sneez-
ing, with  lachrymation.  Roughness  of  the  throat.  Rough-
ness of  the  throat,  with  deep  tone  of  voice,  after  a meal.
Tussitation  (short  and  hacking  cough)  after  a meal,  affect-
ing the  throat,  as  if  it  were  raw,  (a.  3 d.)  * Violent

cough — after  dinner,  with  vomiting  of  the  ingesta.  Cough,
almost  exclusively  during  the  night,  and  more  severe  then
than  during  the  day.  Cough  more  severe  at  night,  than
in  day  time,  for  several  days.  Nightly  cough , with  raw-
ness of  the  throat.  Cough  early  in  the  morning.  Severe
attacks  of  cough  with  horripilation,  lasting  for  hours,  be-
ginning already  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  occur-
ring several  times  during  the  day,  (a.  14  d.)  Severe
cough,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  causing  the  blood  to
rush  to  the  head.  Cough,  with  pain  in  the  occiput.
Cough  with  stitches  in  the  forehead  or  in  the  side  of  the
head.  Pressive  pain  on  the  top  of  the  head  when  cough-
ing, or  taking  a deep  inspiration.  Cough,  with  yawning
after  the  attack.  Cough,  with  vain  desire  to  sneeze.


ANACARDIUM*


145


Cough  commencing  with  titillation  in  the  larynx  and  suffo-
cation. Periodical  attacks  of  cough,  only  in  day  time  ;
he  gets  out  of  breath  ; every  three,  four  hours.  Shaking
attacks  of  cough,  resembling  fils  of  whooping  cough,  ex-
cited whenever  he  begins  to  talk.  Shaking  cough,  which
does  not  permit  him  to  sleep  at  night.  Short  cough,
mostly  in  the  afternoon,  with  expectoration  of  a consistent,
gray-yellow  substance.  * Short  cough,  with  expectora-
tion of  pus.  He  spits  blood  when  coughing,  (4.  d.)

Respiratory  Organs. — Short  hreatli ; lie  feels  op-
pressed in  the  region  of  the  sternum.  Short  breath,  es-
pecially after  a meal  and  when  sitting.  Asthma,  dyspnoea,
(a.  10  h.)  Dyspnoea,  with  weeping  ; this  relieves  the  op-
pression. Dyspnoea,  with  internal  anxiety  and  heat.  Op-
pressive anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  sternum,  without  any
pain,  as  if  he  could  not  remain  in  his  room,  but  had  to  go
into  the  open  air,  and  had  to  be  very  busy.  Uneasiness
in  the  chest,  apparently  about  the  heart,  especially  in  the
afternoon,  (4.  d.)  Dyspnoea,  during  an  expiration,  with
pressure  upon  the  sternum,  (a.  1 h.  and  a half)  Oppres-
sion at  the  chest,  like  dyspnoea,  extending  towards  the  ax-
illae, with  difficulty  of  breathing,  (a.  24  in)  Pressure  at
the  chest,  especially  when  sittings  with  fulness;  he  would
like  to  get  rid  of  this  symptom  by  vomiting,  (a.  10  h.)
Pressure  from  without  over  the  right  nipple.  Quick
pressure  upon  the  sternum,  as  from  a blow,  when  falling
asleep  during  the  day.  Sudden  quick  pressure  in  the  right
side  of  the  chest,  close  by  the  axilla  ; he  feels  it  at  the
same  time  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  back,  without  any
influence  upon  breathing.  Dull  pressure  at  the  right  bor-
der of  the  sternum.  Dull  pressure , as  from  a plug , in
the  right, side  of  the  chest.  Wavelike  traction  in  the  left
side  of  the  chest.  Feeling  of  soreness  and  rawness  in  the
chest,  increased  by  inspiration,  (immediately.)  Sensation,
behind  the  sternum,  as  if  there  were  a sore  place  in  the
chest.  Tearing,  with  a little  pressure,  on  the  left  side  of
the  chest,  reaching  as  high  as  the  heart,  as  though  the
whole  side  were  being  dashed  to  pieces,  especially  when
stooping,  (a.  10b.)  Single  sharp  stitches  in  the  chest.  Sharp
stitches  in  the  superior  part  of  the  left  mamma,  which
prevented  her  for  a long  time  from  rising  from  her  seat ;

7


146


ANACARDITJMv


afterwards  she  experienced  a sensation  of  a pressive  weight
at  that,  place.  Dull  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  at
the  distance  of  a hand’s  breadth  below  the  axilla.  Sharp,
pulsating  stitches  in  the  chest,  above  the  heart,  (a.  80  h)
A stitch  in  the  praecordial  region,  at  night,  when  breathing.
Lancinations  in  the  heart,  short  ones,  succeeding  each
01  her  two  by  two.  Drawing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the
chest.  Quivering  sensation  in  the  pectoral  muscle,  when
raising  the  arm.  Constrictive  prick  as  from  a pin,  at  the
false  ribs  of  the  left  side,  externally,  (a.  4 h ) Corrosively
itching  prickings  as  from  pins,  at  the  last  false  rib.  Itching
upon  the  chest.

Back. — Blunt  stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Pain-
ful stiffness  in  the  back  when  raising  one’s  self  while  in  a
sitting  position  ; the  pain  disappears  when  sitting  crooked.
Pain  on  the  right  side,  near  the  vertebral  column,  in  the
shoulder-blade,  as  from  continually  sitting  crooked.
Cramp-hke  pressure  under  and  by  the  side  of  the  shoulder-
blades,  from  without,  (a.  half  an  hour.)  Violent  lanci-
nating pressure  close  under  the  left  shoulder-blade,  with-
out having  any  sort  of  influence  upon  breathing.  Sharp
stitches  in  the  external  side  of  the  left  shoulder-blade.
Tearing  stitches  by  the  side  of  the  right  shoulder-blade,
from  within.  Dull  stitches  in  the  left  shoulder-blade , re-
turning si  oudy,  and  causing  a tearing  pain  to  be  felt  all
round.  Painful  tearing  between  the  scapulae.  A sort  of
formication  in  the  shoulder  blades,  or  a sensation  as  if
they  had  gone  to  sleep.  Pain  as  from  a bruise,  frequently,
in  the  right  scapula  and  upper  arm,  so  that  she  can
scarcely  lift  up  her  arm.  Fine  and  dull  thrusts  in  the
right  half  of  the  external  surface  of  the  left  scapula,  exter-
nally, at  short  intervals.  Cracking  in  the  scapula,  upon
lifting  the  arm.

Neck. — Cracking  in  the  cervical  vertebras,  when  stoop-
ing. Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Stiffness  of  the
muscles  of  the  neck,  with  tensive  pain,  especially  when
moving  the  head  quickly  after  having  kept  it  still  ; the
siiffness  is  less  during  constant  motion,  (a.  52  h.)  Painful
stiffness  of  the  right  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  two  days
in  succession,  early  in  the  morning,  on  waking  up  ; he  had
been  lying  on  that  side ; the  pain  was  brought  on  by  the


ANACARDIUM.


147


slightest  motion,  and  especially  upon  turning  the  head
towaxds  the  painful  side,  (a.  4,  5 d.)  Stiffness  and  pressive
tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  the  occiput,  and  between
the  scapulas,  on  waking  up,  both  when  at  rest  and  in
motion.  Painful  stiffness,  with  a sensation  as  of  clawing
on  the  left  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  close  to  the  occi-
put ; the  pain  is  felt  when  at  rest  ; it  neither  interferes
with  the  motion  of  the  head,  nor  is  it  increased  by  this
motion,  (a.  2 h.)  Dull,  intermittent  pressure,  as  from  a
heavy  burden , on  the  right  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,
and  on  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder,  apparently  in  the  bone.
Rheumatic  drawing  along  the  back.  Hard  pressure  at
the  neck,  on  both  sides  of  the  larynx,  which  sometimes
interferes  with  deglutition.  Sudden,  dull  pressure,  as
from  a weight,  on  both  sides  of  the  neck.  Slowly  inter-
mittent pressure  in  the  angle  formed  by  the  neck  and  the
top  of  the  shoulder  of  the  left  side.  Erratic  prickings,  as
with  pins,  at  the  neck,  externally.  Intermittent  prickings
as  with  pins,  with  a sensation  as  of  throbbing,  on  the  left
side  of  the  chest,  close  to  the  neck,  (a.  3 hours  and  a half.)
Frequent  itching  of  the  neck.  Itching  and  titillation  in
both  axillae,  which  forces  one  to  rub,  (a.  a quarter  of  an
hour.)

Superior  Extremities. — Itching  prickings,  as  with
pins,  below  the  shoulders,  passing  off  by  rubbing.  In-
tensely painful  lancinating  tension  in  the  arms,  upon
stretching  and  extending  them  ; this  tension  commences
at  the  joints,  following  the  flexor  muscles  ; on  bending  the
arms,  afterwards,  there  is  a cracking  in  the  joints,  espe-
cially of  the  shoulders,  with  a feeling  of  pain  as  if  the
arms  were  dislocated.  The  left  arm  goes  to  sleep.  Pres-
sure in  the  left  arm,  apparently  in  the  muscles  and  bones
simultaneously,  with  lassitude  in  those  parts.  Tearing
and  traction  in  the  left  arm.  Rheumatic  drawing  pain  in
the  right  upper  arm,  from  the  shoulder  to  the  bent  of  the
elbow,  with  a feeling  of  stiffness  in  the  arm.  Spasmodi-
cally pressive  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arms,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  and  when  sitting,  in  the  evening.
Dull  pressure,  which  remains  merely  incipient,  at  the  left
upper  arm,  apparently  in  the  humerus,  intensely  painful
and  intermittent.  Painful  jerking  at  the  left  upper  arm;


148


ANACARDIUM.


Ka


above  the  bent  of  the  elbow.  Knockings , as  with  a heavy-
body,  intensely  painful,  in  the  centre  of  the  left  upper
arm,  (immediately.)  Pimples  with  red  areolas  and  pus  at
the  tip,  on  the  inferior  portion  of  the  upper  arm,  with
painful  itching  during  motion  of  the  arm,  inviting  to  scratch
(a.  12  h.)  Pressure  in  the  bent  of  the  left  elbow,  * which
draws  the  arm  down  as  with  a weight,  and  makes  the
motion  of  the  arm  difficult,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,
(a.  13  h.)  Pressure  from  without  inwards , in  the  fore
arms,  erratic,  short,  painful,  (immediately.)  Pressive  pain
in  the  muscles  of  the  right  fore  arm,  when  writing,  (after
13  h.)  Pressive  scratchings  upon  the  bone  of  the  fore
arm,  when  at  rest.  Cramp-like  pressure  at  the  left  fore
arm,  more  violent  on  pressure,  and  assuming  a tearing
character  through  motion.  Cramp-like  traction  in  the  right
fore  arm,  from  the  wrist  to  the  elbow.  Cramp-like  twitches
all  over  the  left  fore  arm,  beginning  a hand’s  breadth  above
the  left  wrist,  (immediately.)  Cramp-like  violent  pain  in
the  left  fore  arm  and  the  back  of  the  hand,  uninfluenced  by
motion,  at  night,  when  in  bed.  Twitches  in  the  tendons
of  the  flexor  muscles,  in  the  wrist.  Simple  pain  in  the
palm  of  the  hand,  on  moving  the  hand.  Cramp-like  pain
in  the  right  hand,  where  the  metacarpal  bones  join  the
phalanges,  (a.  half  an  hour.)  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  joints
of  the  left  hand,  where  the  index  finger  joins  the  meta-
carpal bone.  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  hand,  in  the  region
of  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  little  finger.  Cramp-like
twitching,  dull  pain  in  the  anterior  extremities  of  the  meta-
carpal bones,  uninfluenced  by  motion.  Intermittent,  dull,
lancinating,  cramp -like  pain  at  the  external  border  of  the
left  hand,  where  the  little  finger  unites  with  its  metacarpal
bone.  Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  left  hand,  so  that  she
cannot  make  her  finger  straight.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,
in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  little  finger  of  the  right  hand.
Grumbling  pain  between  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the
index  finger  and  middle  finger  of  the  left  hand,  immedi-
ately behind  the  knuckles.  Violent  cutting  at  the  metacarpal
bone  of  the  right  index  finger.  Pressive  spasmodic  pain
in  the  muscles  transversely  across  the  back  of  the  left
hand,  (a.  half  an  hour.)  Pressive  tearing  on  the  back  of
the  hand,  (a.  9 h.)  Prickings,  as  from  pins,  upon  the  back


ANACARDltfM.


149


of  the  left  hand.  Violent,  long,  painfully  tearing  stitch  in
the  ball  of  the  right  hand.  Sharp,  burning  stitches  at  the
external  border  of  the  left  hand,  where  the  little  finger
joins  the  metacarpal  bone,  (a.  36  h.)  Great  feeling  of
dryness  of  the  hands.  Dry,  hot  hands.  Stinging,  with  a
sensation  as  of  itching,  of  the  external  knuckle  of  the  right
hand,  which  does  not  pass  off  till  the  parts  have  been
scratched  a long  time,  until  they  become  red.  On  the
side  of  the  left  index  finger  a pimple,  which  opens  on  the
day  following  and  then  passes  off',  is  formed  after  nightly
itching  in  the  hollow  of  the  hand  and,  between  the  fingers;
violent  friction  relieves  the  disagreeable  feeling,  without
diminishing  the  violence  of  the  symptom.  The  hands,
even  the  palms  of  the  hands,  are  covered  with  warts.
Cramp-like  twitches  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  syn-
chronous with  the  pulse,  in  the  posterior  parts.  Intermit-
tent cramp-like  pain  in  the  posterior  parts.  Intermittent
cramp-like  pain  in  the  posterior  joints  of  the  right  thumb
and  index.  Contractive  lancinating  pain  in  the  muscles  of
the  left  thumb,  passing  off  by  motion  and  touch,  (a.  2 h.)
Frequently  repeated  tearings  in  the  little  finger.  Repeated
tearings  in  the  right  thumb,  ascending  as  high  as  the
elbow,  resembling  the  pain  which  is  felt  when  a panaris  is
forming.  Numbness  of  the  fingers.  Feeling  of  dryness
of  the  fingers  and  hands.  Itching  and  tickling  in  the  little
finger,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  ; relieved  only  by
strong  pressure  and  friction,  inasmuch  as  the  symptom
does  not  appear  to  be  in  the  muscle,  but  deeper.  Pustules
upon  the  index  finger,  with  red  areolae,  and  a stinging  sort
of  voluptuous  itching,  which  spreads  into  the  whole  of  the
hollow  of  the  hand  ; the  itching  forces  one  to  press  and  to
squeeze,  which  gives  origin  to  a red  and  white  lymph  ;
afterwards  a scurf  appears,  beneath  which  is  formed  a
plug  of  pus  ; in  the  evening  the  ulcer,  which  lasts  eight
days,  is  affected  with  a drawing  sore  pain.

Inferior  Extremities. — Loud  cracking  in  the  hip-joint
of  the  right  thigh,  during  a motion  of  the  part  while  sitting.
Pain  as  from  a sprain  and  a bruise  over  the  right  hip,
when  rising  from  the  seat ; the  pain  is  lasting  ; it  also
comes  on  wrhen  moving  the  trunk  while  sitting;  rising  is
then  intolerable,  and  he  has  to  walk  stooping.  Erratic


150


ANACARDIUM.


traction,  pressure,  and  sense  of  heaviness  in  the  legs,  after
a walk  ; the  sense  of  heaviness  is  diminished  by  extending
the  foot  (immediately.)  intensely  painful,  dull  pressure
in  the  thighs,  sometimes  intermittent,  with  the  regularity
o f heats  in  music.  Dull  pressure,  as  from  a plug,  in  the
glutei  muscles  of  the  left  side.  Cramp-like  pressure  in
the  left  thigh,  anteriorly  and  posteriorly.  Violent  pressure
in  the  middle  of  the  external  side  of  the  right  thigh,  syn-
ch ronous  with  the  pulse,  and  always  accompanied  by  a
lancination,  (a.  10  hours  and  a half.)  Pressure,  with  a
sensation  as  of  twitching,  at  the  internal  side  of  the  right
thigh.  Slight  twitchings  and  drawings  in  the  thighs,  es-
pecially about  and  in  the  knees,  as  after  a distant  journey
on  foot,  with  painful  uneasiness  when  sitting,  resembling  a
tremulous  agitation,  (a.  three-quarters  of  an  hour.)  Draw-
ing pain  down  the  external  side  of  the  right  thigh.  Tearing
contraction  on  the  external  side  of  the  left  thigh  at  a small
spot;  subsequently  a pain  as  from  subcutaneous  suppura-
tion, (a.  1 1 h.)  Dull  pain  in  the  left  thigh,  immediately  above
th  e knee.  Boring  stitch  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh,
in  front  and  below,  (a.  10  b.)  Burning  itching  upon  the
thighs,  in  the  evening.  Burning  prickings  as  with  pins,
which  oblige  one  to  scratch  ; they  are  of  an  erratic  nature,
in  the  muscles  of  the  thighs.  Itching  prickings  of  the  left
thigh,  which  pass  off  after  rubbing.  Long  stooping  is  fol-
lowed by  severe  pain  in  the  knees,  and  in  the  muscles
above  and  below  them.  Pressure  at  the  internal  side  of
the  knee,  when  walking.  Pressure  and  traction  at  the
internal  side  of  the  knee,  when  walking.  Dull  and  pres-
sive  traction  at  the  internal  surface  of  the  right  knee,  when
sitting.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right  knee,  apparently  be-
hind the  patella,  uninfluenced  by  position,  (a.  1 h.  and  a
half)  Painful  traction  in  the  left  knee,  when  bending  it
(while  sitting;)  passing  off  when  stretching  the  leg.
Drawing  pain  above  the  knees,  when  sitting  ; in  walking,
this  pain  is  felt,  as  mere  weakness,  (a.  half  an  h.)  Blunt
stitches  in  the  right  knee.  Dull  stitches  or  thrusts,  close
below  the  right  knee,  when  bringing  the  foot  down  upon
the  ground.  Burning,  sore  pain,  the  parts  feeling  as  if  they
were  being  scraped,  at  the  external  side  of  the  left  knee.
Dull  pain,  with  soreness,  above  the  knee,  on  lifting  up  the
feet,  with  a painful  feeling  of  weakness  around  the  knees,


ANACARDIUM.


151


and  cramp-like  pinching  between  the  bent  of  the  knee  and
the  calf.  Painless  feeling  of  weakness  above  the  knees,
when  walking,  with  aching  when  sitting,  as  after  great  fa-
tigue of  the  legs,  (a.  half  an  h.)  Painful  uneasiness
around  the  knees , with  a sensation  of  stiffness,  as  if  a
bandage  were  tied  round  these  parts,  or  as  if  they  were
surrounded  with  a band  ; this  symptom  occurs  when  sit-
ting. The  knees  feel  paralysed,  with  stiffness  and  great
lassitude,  so  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  walk.  Itching
eruption  around  the  knees,  as  far  as  the  calves  Uneasi-
ness in  the  legs,  when  sitting,  as  if  every  thing  were  alive
in  them,  and  descended  in  a turning  motion  downwards
into  the  feet,  which  appeared  heavy  to  him,  and  almost  as
if  they  would  go  to  sleep.  Heaviness  in  the  legs.  Fre-
quent traction  downwards  in  the  legs,  when  sitting.  Dull,
indistinct  traction  in  the  legs.  Painful  traction  in  the
tibia , (a.  three  quarters  of  an  h.)  Rheumatic  tensive
pressure  at  the  leg,  transversely  across  the  tibia,  but  felt
only  when  extending  the  leg  in  walking.  Pressive  pain,
like  a lancination,  sometimes  with  boring  in  the  tibia  and
in  the  muscles  of  the  legs.  Pressive  pain  upon  the  left
tibia  when  sitting,  with  uneasiness  of  the  whole  limb,
which  decreases  upon  the  leg  being  drawn  in.  Tearing
pressure  at  the  anterior  surface  of  the  tibia,  close  above
the  articulation  of  the  foot.  Cramp-like  pressure  at  both
calves,  more  towards  the  external  side,  towards  the  tibia,
(a.  3 d.)  Cramp  of  the  calf,  when  walking.  Painful
straining  in  the  left  calf.  Painful  straining  in  the  calf,
when  walking,  as  if  the  muscles  were  too  short.,  also  when
in  bed,  at  night,  with  sleeplessness.  Cramp-like,  inter-
mittent traction  in  the  legs  from  the  heels  up  into  the
calves.  Twitches  in  the  left  tibia,  close  over  the  malleo-
lus, intensely  painful,  and  occurring  at  short  periods,  re-
sembling electric  shocks.  Erratic  wave-like  twitches  in
the  legs  (when  sitting.)  Frequent  pulsations  and  twffches
in  the  muscles  of  the  legs.  Dull  stitches,  inlensely  pain-
ful, on  the  surface  of  the  tibia,  over  the  joint  of  the  right
foot.  Burning  pain  in  the  leg  with  soreness,  above  the
heel.  Burning  pain  at  a small  spot  in  the  middle  of  the
leg,  in  front  and  rather  towards  the  outside.  Burning  at
the  legs,  as  of  red-hot  sparks.  In  the  tarsal  articulation


152


ANACARDIUM-


of  the  left  leg  pain  as  from  a sprain , on  setting  the  foot
upon  the  ground.  Drawing  pain  in  the  tarsal  articulation,
when  he  seats  himself,  (a.  32  h.)  Traction  downwards
over  the  external  malleoli,  when  standing,  with  pain  in  the
soles,  so  that  standing  becomes  very  difficult  for  him.
Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot  into  a
curvature.  Dull,  intermittent  pressure  at  the  internal  bor-
der of  the  sole  of  the  foot.  Cramp-like  pressure  at  the
left  heel,  (a.  30  h.)  Tearing  and  grinding  pain  in  the
heel,  early  when  in  bed.  Painful  jerkings  internally  upon
the  back  of  the  foot.  Prickings,  as  with  pins,  on  the  back
of  the  left  foot.  # Burning  at  the  soles  of  the  feet  when
sitting.  Cold  feet,  early  in  the  morning.  The  feet,  which
Lad  been  warm,  become  intensely  cold  when  walking,  the
cold  feet  become  still  colder.  Itching,  with  a sensation
as  of  scratching,  as  if  he  were  rubbed  with  a woollen  cloth,
upon  the  back  of  the  foot,  (a.  6 h.)  Spasmodically  draw-
ing and  tearing  pains  from  the  toes  as  far  as  the  back  of
the  feet.  Tearing,  while  standing,  transversely  across
the  roots  of  the  toes,  passing  off  by  moving  them,  (a.  5 h.)
Repeated  tearings  in  the  big  toe.

Common  Ailments. — The  skin  of  the  body  is  in-
sensible to  itching  stimuli.  General  voluptuous  itching
over  the  whole  body,  which  spreads  still  more  by  scratch-
ing. Desire  to  scratch,  without  itching,  of  an  erratic  na-
ture ; after  scratching,  the  irritation  immediately  disap-
pears. Corrosively  stinging  itching  upon  the  body,  of  an  er-
ratic nature,  especially  upon  the  back  and  the  thighs,  with
desire  to  scratch  ; scratching  relieves  the  symptom  for  a
short  while.  Sensation  as  of  burning  upon  the  skin,  er-
ratic, which  induces  one  to  scratch,  and  which  passes  off
by  scratching.  In  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  heat  in  the
skin  of  the  whole  body,  with  burning  itching  and  irritation
of  the  skin  such  as  arises  from  much  scratching;  after  the
scratching,  the  burning  increases.  Burning  itching  at  the
sore  places,  increased  by  scratching.  Burning  and  sting-
ing of  the  tetters,  which  had  itched  before.  Pain,  like  a
boil,  in  the  suffering  parts  ; he  dares  not  touch  them  ;
stitches,  externally,  at  several  places  of  the  body,  for  ex-
ample, at  the  pectoral  muscles,  the  forehead,  the  wrist,  etc.
Drawing  and  pressive  pains,  almost  in  all  parts  of  the


ANACARDIUM.


153


body.  (Any  part  which  he  leaves  unmoved,  immediately
goes  to  sleep.)  The  attacks  cease  for  one  or  two  days,
and  then  continue  again  for  a couple  of  days,  so  that  a cer-
tain periodicity  may  be  observed  in  the  appearance  of
these  symptoms.  When  sitting,  he  feels  well ; but  stand-
ing causes  an  uneasiness  in  the  lower  extremities,  as  if
they  ought  to  be  drawn  up,  with  anxiety.  When  sitting
quietly  he  perceives  the  beating  of  the  pulse  in  the  arms
which  had  been  loosely  laid  upon  one  another,  yea,  in  the
whole  body  (after  some  bodily  effort.)  General  aching,
in  the  interior  of  the  whole  body.  All  the  tendons  of  the
body  ache  so  much,  that  he  cannot  walk,  and  is  forced  to
let  himself  fall.  Sensation  as  if  all  the  bones  were  bruised,
early  in  the  morning,  when  lying  quietly  in  bed,  with  stiff-
ness of  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  the  small  of  the  back,  and
headache  in  the  forehead  and  the  temples  ; all  these  symp-
toms become  relieved  on  rising.  Repeated  tearings,  in
paroxysms  simultaneously  through  the  upper  and  lower
extremities.  Heaviness  in  the  left  upper  and  lower  ex-
tremity, when  walking.  He  feels  a heaviness  and  fulness
in  the  body  from  playing  upon  the  piano.  She  grows
thin,  without,  however,  feeling  indisposed.

Spasms,  Paralysis,  Fainting  Fits. — Faint  and  worn
out ; at  first,  walking  is  inconvenient  for  him,  and  his  feet
feel  heavy  ; by  continuing  to  walk,  this  feelingof  fa:ntuess
becomes  less,  and  he  feels  better.  Faintness  in  the  oody;
he  wants  to  lie  down  or  to  sit  all  the  time.  Highest  de-
gree of  faintness,  he  can  scarcely  move  his  hands  ; * he
trembles  at  every  motion.  Very  faint  on  going  up  stairs.
During  a short  journey  on  foot,  he  becomes  so  worn  out,
that  he  can  scarcely  go  on,  and  that  even  long  after,  when
sitting,  he  is  not  able  to  recruit  himself.  * After  a short
journey  on  foot,  which  he  found  extremely  hard  to  accom-
plish, he  felt  so  worn  out,  tired  and  exhausted,  that  he  was
obliged  to  sit  down  at  once,  and  would  prefer  lying  down;
resting  the  head  upon  something,  and  closing  the  eyes,  af-
ford him  a feeling  of  comfort.  Fie  accomplishes  all  his
motions  with  greater  energy  and  perseverance  ; his  mus-
cles contract  more  vigorously  : but  the  motions  seem  as  if
the  fibres  were  put  upon  the  stretch  too  much,  or  as  if
there  were  not  a sufficient  quantity  of  synovial  fluid  in  the


154


ANACARDIUM.


joints,  (a.  1 h.)  Paralysis  of  some  parts , (Matthiolus,  a.
J. — Dacosta.)  Panting,  languishing  condition,  like  para-
lysis, as  if  he  were  obliged  to  let  himself  fall,  after  a short
journey  on  foot  in  the  afternoon  ; in  the  evening,  he  may
walk  fast  and  a good  deal,  without  feeling  tired  ; he  then
sweats  a good  deal,  (6.  d.)  Ilis  legs  totter  when  standing  ;
painful  weakness  in  the  feet,  when  sitting.  Weariness  ot
the  limbs,  as  from  walking  too  much,  and  sleepiness  as
from  great  weakness,  (a.  9 h.)

Sleep. — Tired  and  sleepy  in  the  evening  sooner  than
usually;  early  in  the  morning,  he  would  like  to  sleep  on,
without  leaving  his  bed  ; also  after  dinner,  he  would  like
to  take  a nap.  Sleepiness  and  weariness  in  the  afternoon,
when  sitting  or  reading,  as  if  he  had  exerted  himself  too
much  by  mental  or  bodily  efforts,  (a.  3 h.)  Continual  in-
dolence after  the  siesta,  he  can  scarcely  move  his  limbs,
and  he  loathes  speaking.  Uneasy  sleep,  at  night,  with
frequent  tossing  about ; his  head  lay  either  too  high  or  too
low,  which  caused  a sensation  of  obtusion  in  his  head.
Pie  feels  so  uneasy,  that  he  can  scarcely  sleep  a little  every
other  night.  He  is  without  any  sleep,  at  night,  until  two
o’clock,  early  in  the  morning  ; he  was  constantly  obliged
to  shift  his  position,  (second  night.)  Light  sleep,  with
frequent  waking  up.  At  night,  he  is  often  awake  for  half
hours  ; in  the  intermediate  periods,  he  enjoys  a sound  and
refreshing  sleep.  Sound  sleep , until  nine  o’clock  in  the
forenoon , (first  night.)  Deep  and  sound  sleep  at  night ;
he  can  scarcely  get  awake  early  in  the  morning.  Slumber,
day  and  night,  with  great  heat  and  thirst,  with  a skin  which
feels  hot,  and  with  grumbling  and  anxious  sighing  when
asleep.  Constant  stupor  without  dreams  ; after  waking
up,  he  is  quite  stupid,  the  skin  feels  frequently  hot,  with
red  cheeks  and  cold  forehead,  although  he  complains
about  heat  in  the  head  ; at  the  same  time  time  violent  thirst
and  dryness  in  the  throat,  which  causes  a feeling  of  sore-
ness. lie  lies  in  a state  of  dreaming,  night  and  day,  without
sleeping,  full  of  anxious  thoughts  about  his  daily  business.
II  e dreams  that  he  has  to  preach,  without  having  commit-
ted his  sermon  ; this  induces  a state  of  anxious  meditation  ;
nevertheless,  he  cannot  achieve  his  business.  Vivid
dreams,  accompanied  by  great  mental  exertions ; this


ANACARDItJM.


155


causes  a headache  as  from  bruises,  which  exists  already
on  waking  up.  Vivid  dreams  at  night,  which  seemed  lo
him,  when  the  day  came  on,  as  if  the  things  he  dreamed
of,  had  really  happened.  Vivid  dreams  about  old  events,
Hi  s nightly  dreams  are  mixed  with  tne  objects  which  lie  had
planned.  Dreams  about  fire , the  sleep  being  otherwise
sound.  Anxious  dreams  about  fire.  He  dreams  that  he
smells  tinder  and  sulphur  ; on  waking  up,  the  illusion  of
his  smelling  those  substances,  continues.  He  dreams  that
his  face  is  covered  full  of  white,  ugly  pustules,  (a.  21  h.)
She  is  dreaming  about  the  loathsome  diseases  of  others,
j Dreams  about  dead  bodies , about  a near  tomb,  or  a sleep
precipice.  * Anxious  dreams — full  of  danger.  He
screams  anxiously  when  asleep.  Startings,  as  if  by  fright,
when  lying  in  bed  waking,  in  the  evening,  (a.  15,  16  h.)
After  waking,  early  in  the  morning,  anxiety  drives  him  out
of  bed.  The  teeth  feel  longer,  at  night,  when  in  bed,  ac-
companied by  a pressive  pain.  Violent  traction  in  the  ab-
domen and  in  the  extremities,  with  subsequent  burning,
then  pain  in  the  bones  on  being  touched,  so  that  she  can-
not fall  asleep  in  consequence  of  the  pain.  Diarrhoea  at
night,  with  subsequent  constipation.  At  night,  he  cannot
lie  long  on  one  side,  because  his  arms,  then,  feel  a pain  as
from  bruises.  Cramp  in  the  calves,  at  night.  Twitches
of  the  mouth  and  fingers,  when  asleep.

Fever. — * Chilliness  of  several  minutes,  after  dinner,
(1.  d.)  Sensation  as  if  lie  would  feel  cold,  momentary,
and  occurring  frequently.  * Continual  freezing , — even
in  a warm  room, . The  open  air  is  offensive  to  him,  and
feels  too  rough.  Chilliness  and  want  of  appetite.  Chilli-
ness of  the  limbs,  early  in  the  morning,  for  a couple  of
hours,  which  causes  him  to  tremble.  Chills  over  the
whole  body  ; he  feels  warm  only  in  the  sun.  She  expe-
riences repeatedly  icy-cold  shiverings.  Feeling  of  chilli-
ness of  the  hands  and  feet.  Chilliness  over  the  whole
body,  as  il  he  had  caught  cold  in  the  wet.  Horripilations
over  the  whole  body,  with  heat  in  the  face,  without  any
thirst,  in  any  position  of  the  body,  (a.  1 h.  and  a half.)
Horripilations  over  the  whole  back,  as  from  cold  water  be-
ing thrown  upon  the  person.  Great  feverish  uneasiness  in
the  afternoon,  such  as  is  felt  during  a cold,  accompanied


156


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


by  faintness,  and  tremor  of  the  limbs.  Feeling  of  heat,
and  heat,  in  the  face  and  the  palm  of  the  hands,  without
th  irst.  Quickly  passing  heat  in  the  face  and  brain,  in  the
afternoon,  with  redness  of  the  cheeks,  (a.  8 h.)  Heat  in
the  face,  with  nausea  and  heaviness  in  the  whole  body,
every  afternoon  at  four  o’clock  ; she  is  obliged  to  he  down;
eating  relieves  this  symptom.  He  complains  of  feeling
great  heat,  without  the  skin,  however,  feeling  hot,  (a.  lOd.)
H eat  over  the  whole  body  ; he,  nevertheless,  complains  of
chilliness.  The  palms  of  the  hands  feel  warm,  while  the
backs  of  the  hands  are  cold.  After  supper,  heat  which
spreads  quickly  over  the  face,  without  thirst  or  chilliness,
(a.  12  h.);  thirst  comes  on  in  half  an  hour.  External
heat,  with  great  thirst,  and  dry,  burnt  lips.  Great  heat,
especially  in  the  night,  with  vehement  thirst,  without
sweat,  so  that  he  cannot  endure  this  condition.  Great
heat  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  with  thirst,  sweat,  and
hot  breaih,  however  he  complains  of  chilliness,  which
causes  him  to  shake  ; the  feet  which  were  formerly
sweaty,  feel  cold.  Internal  heat  in  the  evening  for  two
hours,  with  cool  sweat  over  and  over,  especially  in  the
head,  accompanied  by  short  breath,  thirst,  and  faintness  in
the  abdomen  and  in  the  knees,  even  unto  falling.  The  skin
over  the  whole  body  is  moist,  the  windows  being  open,  ac-
companied by  thirst  for  milk.  Warm  sweat  over  the  ab-
domen, the  back,  and  the  forehead,  in  the  evening,  the
windows  being  open,  and  the  temperature  of  the  rest  of
the  body  being  moderate.  Clammy  sweat  in  the  palms  of
the  hands,  most  violent  in  the  left  hand.  Frequent  wak-
ing up  from  sleep,  with  general  sweat,  (a.  19  h.)  Night
sweats.  At  night,  he  sweats  on  the  chest  and  the  ab-
domen.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  (stibium  sulpiiuratum

NIGRUM.)

For  homoeopathic  use  we  take  the  pure  sulphuret  of  An-
timony, found  in  nature,  in  the  shape  of  black,  parallel
needles,  having  a metallic  lustre,  composed  of  twenty-


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


157


eight  parts  of  sulphur,  and  one  hundred  parts  of
antimony.  The  different  triturations  are  prepared  accord-
ing lo  the  method  which  has  been  pointed  out  in  the  first
volume.  The  smallest  dose  is  sufficient  lo  produce  the
desired  effect,  in  chronic  diseases.  It  is  desirable  that
the  effects  of  the  pure  metal  should  also  be  carefully  in-
vestigated. Its  remedial  virtues  which,  in  many  respects,
differ  from  those  of  the  sulphuret,  are  scarcely  yet  known.
How  different  are  not  the  effects  of  arsenic  Irom  those  of
its  sulphuret,  and  those  of  quick-silver,  from  the  effects  of
vermilion,  each  substance  being  specifically  useful.

The  different  antimonial  preparations  : Kermes  miner-
ale,  sulphur  auratum,  antimonii  prirnae,  secundze,  teniae,
praecipitationis,  contain  all  of  them,  different  quantities  and
qualities  of  antimony,  according  to  their  different  modes
ot  preparation.

Antimony  is  useful  when  the  following  symptoms  are
indicated  : —

A child  cannot  bear  being  touched  or  looked  at  : rush
of  blood  to  the  head  : troublesome  itching  on  the  head  ;
with  falling  off  of  the  hair  ; redness  and  inflammation  ofl
the  eye-lids ; sore  nostrils  ; heat  and  itching  of  the  cheek  ;
pain  in  hollow  teeth  ; chronic  loss  of  appetite  ; eructa-
tations , tasting  ofl  the  ingesta  ; nausea,  loathing  disposi-
tion to  vomit  consequent  upon  spoiled  stomach  ; colic,  with
absence  of  appetite,  hard  stool,  and  red  urine,  in  a child  ;
pinching  in  the  belly  with  a sensation  as  if  diarrhoea
would  come  on  ; alternately  diarrhoea  and  constipation,  in
people  rather  advanced  in  age;  difficult  hard  stool  ; con-
stant discharge  of  a white-yellowish  slime  from  the  anus  ;
frequent  urinating,  with  discharge  of  quantity  of  mucus,
and  burning  in  the  urethra  with  pains  in  the  small  of  the
back  ; cutting  pain  in  the  urethra,  when  urinating;  ob-
struction of  the  nose  ; painful  inflammation  of  the  tendons
in  the  bent  of  the  elbow,  with  violent  redness  and  curva-
ture of  the  arm  ; the  legs  go  to  sleep  when  sitting  quietly  ;
violent  pains  in  the  lower  extremities  ; corn  on  the  sole
of  the  foot  ; large  horny  places  on  the  sole  of  the  foot,
close  by  the  toes  ; horny  excrescence  in  front  under  the
nail  of  the  big  toe  ; malformations  of  the  skin ; sensitive-
ness to  cold  ; somnolence.


158


ANTIMONIUM  CRTJDUM.


According  to  Dr.  Hartlaub,  hepar  sulphuris  and  mercury
are  antidotes  to  the  effects  of  antimony.

rl'his  drug  has  been  tried  by  me  and  Doctors  Caspar!,
II  artlaub,  Langhammer.

Noack  and  'Frinks  have  classed  the  above  named  affec-
tions under  the  following  heads  : —

Antimony  is  most  suitable  for  the  symptoms  occurring
in  the  period  of  evolution  ; it  is  adapted  to  robust  phleg-
matic, torpid,  non-irritable  constitutions,  especially  when
gastric  symptoms  prevail,  with  turgescence  from  below
upwards,  or  from  above  downwards.  Sensitiveness  to
coldness. — Convulsions , preceding  the  eruption  of  acute
exanthemas.— -Eclampsia  neonatorum. — Epilepsy. — Acute
and  chronic  rheumatisms  ; rheumatic  inflammations  and
paralysis. — Acute  gout  ivith  gastric  derangement. —
Diarrhoea  and  vomiting,  especially  of  children. — Melsena.

• — Dropsy. — Syphilis  secundaria.  — Inflammation  of  the
tendons. — Adipification . — Emaciation. — Mercurial  cache-
xia.— Chronic  eruptions  oj  the  skin  ; eruptions  with
prevailing  gastric  symptoms ; papulous  eruptions  of
the  skin  ; Strophulus,  especially  of  the  white  kind,
Lichen  simplex  and  agrius,  when  it  threatens  to  change  to
impetigo  lichen  urticatus ; acute  exanthemas , urticaria
evanida,  especially  when  complicated  by  gastric  symptoms,
urticaria  subcutanea,  when  combined  with  gastric  symp-
toms and  cramps  in  the  lower  extremities  ; erythema  in-
tertrigo (!)  ; vesicular  eruptions  upon  the  skin,  scabies
pustulosa,  varicellas  lentiformes,  herpes  phlyktaenodes,
herpes  zoster  (?),  herpes  labial  is,  eczema,  especially
eczema  solare,  impeliginodes  and  rubrum,  (mercuriale,)
miliaria ; pustulous  eruptions  upon  the  skin,  the  pustules
being  either  pustulae  phlyzazicae,  or  psydrazicae,  acharosae,
or  favosae  ; impetigo,  especially  figurata,  porrjgo  favosa  ;
ecthyma,  especially  cachecticum,  intermixed  with  blotches
and  accompanied  by  an  inclination  to  suicide  ; tuber-
culous eruptions  of  the  skin , acne,  sycosis  menti,  tubercu-
lous syphilitic  eruptions  upon  the  skin  ; maculous  erup-
tions upon  the  skin,  ephelis,  chloasma  hepaticum.
Stings  of  bees  and  insects  in  general. — Abscessus  nuclea-
tus. — Fistulous  ulcers.  Cold  gangrene. — Lethargy. — In-
termittent fevers  with  gastric  symptoms,  intermittens


ANTIMONIUM  CRXJDUM.


159


maligna,  (epileptica.) — Continued  gastric  fevers , with
disposition  to  assume  a nervous  character,  rheumatic
and  exanthematic  fevers . — Dementia,  idiocy,  with
absence  of  volition,  (?)  melancholia,  itching  upon  the
head  and  falling  off  of  the  hair.  Hydrocephalus  con-
sequent upon  a suppressed  eruption  of  the  head,  either
with  or  without  gastric  symptoms. — B l ephar ophthal-
mitis ,■  torpid,  rheumatic,  mercurial  amaurosis. — Otitis
externa  et  interna  ; catarrh  of  the  Eustachian  tube. — •
Obstruction  of  the  nose  ; ozcena  serophulosa. — 'Tooth-
ache of  carious  teeth.  Chronic  loss  of  appetite  ; de-
rangement of  the  stomach , with  eructations,  tasting  of
the  ingesta,  nausea,  and  inclination  to  vomit  ; Cardialgia;
inflammation  and  gangrene  of  the  stomach,  (?)  hyper-
trophy of  the  liver. — Difficult  hard  stool ; colic  with
want  of  appetite,  insipid  stool  and  red  urine  ; alternate
constipation  and  diarrhoea  of  old  people  ; diarrhoea  ; dys-
entry  ; lienteria  {?).  Prolapsus  recti.  Haemorrhoidal
affections , continually  accompanied  by  a slight  secretion
oj  white,  yellowish  mucus  by  the  rectum. — Haemorrhoids
of  the  bladder , accompanied  by  frequent  tenesmus , the
secretion  of  a quantity  of  mucus , burning  in  the  urethra ,
and  headache  ; cutting  and  burning  in  the  urethra  during
micturition  ; Blenorrhcea  of  both  the  male  and  female
organs  of  generation.  Too  frequent  pollutions.  Atrophy
of  the  testicles. — Complete  impotence  of  the  male. —
Whooping  cough  ; bronchitis  ; laryngitis  ; asthma
pituitosum  ; pleuropneumonia  ; pneumonia  vera. — Fun-
gus articularis. — Perniones. — Painful  corns.

Analogous  Remedies. — 1.  Amm.  carb.,  and  caust.
Ars.,  Hep.  s.  Jod.  Ipec.,  Merc.,  Puls.,  Sep.,  Sulp.,  Tartar.
— 2.  Aeon.,  Asa.,  Calc.,  Carb.  veg.,  Cham.,  Coff.,  Rhus.,
Seneg. — 3.  Alum.,  Hyosc.,  Stux.  vom.,  Stann.,  Zinc. — -
After  Ant.,  Merc,  and  Puls,  are  most  suitable.

Moral  Symptoms — Out  of  humour,  sad  in  the  evening.
Irritated  state  of  mind,  feeling  of  grief,  the  whole  fore-
noon ; the  sound  of  the  bells  as  well  as  the  sight  of  all
that  which  surrounds  him,  moves  him  to  tears  ; his  breath-
ing is  short  and  heavy.  Dejection  of  spirits  during  the
day.  He  does  not  speak,  (2.  d.)  Attacks  of  anxiety.
Uneasy,  (2.  d.)  Anxious  reflections  about  himself,  his
present  and  future  fate  during  the  day.  Decided  disposi-


160


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


tion  to  shoot  himself,  in  the  night  ; not  to  any  other  kind
of  suicide  ; he  was  forced,  on  account  of  this  thought,  to
leave  his  bed ; otherwise  he  was  unable  to  get  rid  of  it.
Disposition  to  start,  even  at  slight  noises.  Ill  humour  the
whole  day.  He  felt  discouraged,  this  made  him  feel  warm
at  the  head,  in  front ; he  is  sulky,  does  not  wish  to  speak
with  any  one.  Peevish,  vexed  without  any  cause,  (2.  d.)
Weakness  of  the  head.  Dementia.  Dementia,  idiocy;
she  did  not  leave  her  bed,  spoke  nothing  without  being
asked,  desired  neither  to  eat,  nor  to  drink,  nevertheless
ate  with  pleasure  if  something  was  offered  to  her  and  she
felt  hungry  ; she  declined  eating,  when  she  did  not  feel
hungry  ; at  the  same  time  she  was  all  the  time  pulling
her  neck-cloth,  or  she  folded  a handkerchief  and  then  un-
folded it  again,  or  she  pulled  little  feathers  out  of  the  bed,
and  then  gathered  them  in  heaps  ; she  was  so  much  with-
out any  sensation,  that  she  had  unconsciously  lain  upon
the  evacuations  which  had  passed  from  her,  without  her
being  aware  of  it  ; she  never  complained  of  any  pain.
Delirium  and  death,  in  consequence  of  an  emetic  of  croc,
metall.  Continual  condition  of  fantastic  love  and  ecstatic
longing  for  some  ideal  female  being,  which  wholly  filled
his  fancy;  more  when  walking  in  the  open,  pure  air,
than  in  the  room;  this  symptom  disappeared  after  a
few  days,  the  sexual  desire  apparently  diminishing  at  the
same  time.

r H ead. — Feeling  of  desolateness  in  the  head,  as  after  con-
tinual working  in  a cold  room,  (4.  d.)  Intoxication.  Ver-
tigo. Headache,  and  subsequently  a little  bleeding  at  the
nose,  (a.  7 h.  and  a half.)  Indistinct,  dull  headache  in  the
anterior  part  of  the  head,  and  vertigo,  increased  by  ascend-
ing a flight  of  stairs.  Violent  headache.  Violent  headache,
after  bathing  in  the  river,  with  weakness  in  the  limbs  and
repugnance  to  food.  Dull,  stunning  pain  in  the  whole
head,  with  nausea  in  the  pharynx,  when  smoking,  to  which
he  is  otherwise  accustomed.  Stunning,  dull  headache,
rather  externally  at  the  forehead,  so  vehement  that  sweat
broke  out  from  anxiety,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (a.
6 h.)  Headache,  as  if  her  forehead  would  burst;  at  the
same  time  she  felt  intoxicated,  sat  alone,  and  would  not
speak.  Pain  at  the  right  eye-brow,  within  the  skull,  as  if
the  parts  were  pressed  asunder.  Pressure  inwards,  in  the


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


161


left,  side  of  the  forehead,  with  a feeling  of  drawing,  at  in-
tervals. Momentary  drawing  pain  over  the  left  temporal
bone,  went  off  by  pressure,  and  then  returned  much  more
vehement  immediately  after.  Tearing  pain  in  the  whole
head,  erratic,  from  morning  till  night.  Violent  tearing  in
the  whole  head,  with  heat  in  the  head  towards  noon,  (6.
d.)  The  tearing  in  the  head  becomes  less  when  walking
in  the  open  air.  Continual  pain  in  the  forehead  and  the
temples,  boring  from  within  outward,  unchanged  by  touch-
ing the  parts,  (a.  5 h.)  , The  rush  of  the  blood  to  the

head  becomes  less,  (curative  effect.)  Upon  the  left  parie-
tal bone,  there  is  a small  spot,  which,  when  touched,
causes  pain  in  the  bone,  as  if  the  periosteum  were  swol-
len. Slow  pulsations  externally,  at  the  left  temple,  with
fine  prickings,  several  times  in  succession,  towards  the
eye-brows  ; this  symptom  is  strongest,  when  it  is  not
especially  attended  to.  Single  sharp  stitches  on  the  hairy
scalp,  one  minute.  Red,  hard  pimple,  painful  to  the
touch,  close  to  where  the  cartilage  of  the  ear  begins.
Small,  flat  tubercles,  here  and  there  upon  the  hairy  scalp,
of  the  size  of  small  peas,  painful  to  pressure,  and  with  a
feeling  of  titillation  all  round.  Red,  hardened,  slightly
elevated  place  on  each  side  of  the  forehead,  itching  like  a
nettle,  going  and  coming.

Eyes. — Close  above  the  eye-brows,  a white  tubercle,
which  does  not  itch  ; but  is  only  painful  to  the  touch.
Itching  in  the  external  canthus  of  the  eye,  which  obliges
one  to  rub,  (a.  2 h.)  Winking  of  the  left  eye-lids.  Fine
stitches  in  frequent,  succession,  without  pain  in  the  fore-
part of  the  eye-ball,  in  the  forenoon,  (9.  d.)  Sharp  pres-
sive  stitches  below  the  left  eye-brows.  * Reddened  eye-
lids, with  fine  stitches  in  the  eye-ball.  * Redness  of  the
left,  eye, — with  dread  of  light  on  rising  early  in  the
morning,  and  a secretion  of  mucus  in  the  inner  canthus.
* Red,  inflamed  eyes, — with  itching,  and  nightly  closing
with  pus.  * Inflammation  of  the  eyes.  Small  moist
place  at  the  outer  canthus,  very  painful  upon  sweat  coming
in  contact  with  it.  Much  mucus  in  the  right  canthus,
early  in  the  morning,  with  dry  gum  in  both  lids.  Gum
in  the  canthi  of  the  eyes,  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  3 h.  and  a


162


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDtJM.


half.)  Enlarged  opening  between  the  lids.  Incurable
blindness.

Ears. — Stitches  in  the  ears.  Drawing  pain  through
the  right  ear  into  the  Eustachian  tube,  almost  reaching  the
mouth,  after  dinner,  (16.  d ) Sensation  in  the  ears,  as  if
a heap  of  little  .animals  were  moving  all  about  there,  espe-
cially when  lying  still,  (5.  d.)  Titillation  in  the  right
meatus  auditorius,  (2.  d.)  Itching  stitches  at  the  border
of  the  right  concha,  above  the  helix,  going  off  upon  being
touched,  (a.  1 h.and  a half.)  Redness,  burning  and  swell-
ing of  the  left  ear,  as  from  the  bite  of  a mosquito.  Swell-
ing and  redness  of  the  whole  of  the  internal  concha,  with
periodica]  itching.  Swashing  in  the  ear,  as  of  a few  drops
of  water,  when  moving  the  jaws.  Tingling  before  the
ears,  (2.  d.)  * Continual  roaring  in  the  ears, — especially

when  there  is  stillness  around,  (2.  d.)  Roaring  in  the
ears,  most  in  the  afternoon.  * Painful  roaring  in  the  ears.
* An  old  roaring  in  the  ears  disappeared,  (curative  effect.)
Violent  din  in  the  ears,  as  if  some  one  wrere  beating
against  the  gate  of  the  house.  A kind  of  deafness  of  the
right  ear,  as  if  a leaflet  were  placed  before  the  tympanum ;
this  symptom  cannot  be  removed  by  boring  with  the  finger
in  the  ear,  (a.  14  h.)  In  the  evening  something  seemed  to
block  up  his  right  ear.  Loss  of  hearing.

Nose. — The  nose  is  painful  when  breathing,  as  from
inspiring  cold  air,  or  from  inhaling  acrid  vapours.  * Peel-
ing of  soreness  in  the  nostrils, — when  inspiring  air,  espe-
cially in  the  right  nostril,  which  is  a little  obstructed.
Soreness  of  the  right  nostril  in  the  anterior  angle,  with
pain  as  in  a cold.  * The  left  nostril  becomes  chapped
and  painful.  * Both  nostrils  become  chapped  and  covered
writh  crusts.  * Sore  nostril,  with  drawing  pain.  Blowing
out  blood.  Bleeding  at  the  nose,  several  days  in  succes-
sion. Bleeding  at  the  nose  every  evening.

Face. — Light  indistinct  twitches  in  the  muscles  of  the


left  side  of  the  face,  (a.  9 h.)  Red  pimple,  with  pus.  at
the  tip,  on  both  sides  of  the  nose,  painful  to  pressure,  (12.
d.)  Pimples  in  the  face  and  upon  the  nose  like  varioloid,
with  stinging  pain  on  pressure.  Flat  pimples  upon  both
cheeks,  which  are  not  red,  itching  when  touched,  with  a
yellowish  scurf.  Nettle-rash  in  the  face,  especially  upon


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


163


the  cheeks.  Several  pimples  in  the  face,  that  pain  like
mosquito-bites.  Tuber  upon  the  right  cheek,  as  from
a mosquito-bite.  Red,  burning,  suppurating  eruptions
upon  the  face.  Eruption  on  the  left  side,  upon  the  cheek
towards  the  chin,  with  a yellow  crust,  painful  to  the  touch,
and  which  may  be  easily  knocked  off.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Sensation  at,  and  below  the  chin,
when  touching  it,  as  if  the  hand  were  moved  over  many
small  sore  places,  and  small,  honey-coloured  granules  upon
the  skin  here  and  there.  Burning,  stinging,  as  from  a red-
hot  little  spark,  of  the  chin  and  the  upper  lip,  (7.  and  9.  d.)
Formication  upon  the  upper  lip,  (1  9.  and  24.  d.)  4' witches
of  the  muscles  at  the  corners  of  the  mouth.  rFlie  lips  are
dry.  Cracks  in  the  corners  of  the  mouth , painful  like
sores , returning  after  5,  8,  12  weeks.  Red  pustules  upon
the  upper  lip,  and  at  the  right  corner,  with  a dull  pain,
either  with  or  without  any  pressure,  (20.  d.)  Many  red,
little  pustules  with  white  little  tips  in  the  centre,  below  the
left  corner  of  the  mouth.  * Toothache  in  a hollow  tooth,
worse  at  night  than  in  day-time  ; a fine  stinging,  pulling
and  grinding,  as  if  the  nerves  were  affected,  which  moves
downwards  and  then  upwards  into  the  head  ; if  he  touches
the  tooth  with  the  tongue,  he  feels  pain,  as  if  the  nerve
were  split.  The  toothache  becomes  renewed  immediately
after  eating  even  soft  substances,  gets  worse  by  applying
cold  water,  and  is  relieved  in  the  open  air.  The  nightly
toothache  is  accompanied  by  great  warmth,  which  seems
to  come  from  the  chest.  Shooting  toothache,  in  the  even-
ing when  in  bed,  and  after  dinner.  Stitches  in  the  tooth,
when  inspiring  air.  Severe  bleeding  of  the  teeth.  The
gums  stand  off  from  the  teeth,  and  bleed  easily.

Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth,  at  night,  (6.  d.)  A
quantity  of  saltish  saliva  in  the  mouth.  Accumulation  of
wrat,er  in  the  mouth.  Accumulation  of  water  upon  the
tongue.  Smelling  out  of  the  mouth,  as  in  ptyalism  from
mercury.  Violent  ptyalism  from  nose  and  mouth.  Ptyalism,
without  any  fetid  odour  from  the  mouth,  and  without  loose-
ness of  the  teeth.  After  dinner,  a few,  fine,  sharp  stitches
at  the  tongue,  in  front  at  the  left  border,  following  in  suc-
cession, (a.  33  h.)  Feeling  of  soreness,  and  redness  at  a
small  place  at  the  right  border  of  the  tongue  for  several


164


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


days,  frequently  going  off  and  suddenly  returning,  (6.  d.)
Blisters  upon  the  tongue.  Tongue  coated  white  in  the
forenoon,  (a.  2 h.)  Fine  pinching  at  the  palate  the  whole
night,  especially  painful  during  deglutition  ; early  in  the
morning  the  symptom  disappeared  after  hawking  up  the
phlegm,  which  had  collected  on  the  sides  of  the  palate
during  the  night,  except  a feeling  of  roughness  which  re-
mained. Sensation,  as  of  scraping  (rawness)  at  the  velum
palati,  as  if  much  phlegm  were  upon  it,  which  could  only
be  expelled  after  clearing  the  throat  for  along  time  ; often
it  was  not  expelled  at  all  for  several  days,  (7.  d.)  Raw-
ness of  the  palate,  with  expectoration  of  a quantity  of  mu-
cus when  clearing  the  throat,  (a.  5 w.)  Much  viscid  phlegm
collects  in  the  throat  the  whole  day.  Sore  throat  on  the
left  side,  as  from  a swelling  or  a plug.  Impeded  degluti-
tion. Violent  thirst,  with  dryness  oj  the  lips . Immense
thirst.  Thirst  in  the  evening , and  desire  to  drink.  Drinks
much  only  at  night.  Much  thirst  at  night,  (a.  6 d.)

Taste  and  Appetite. — * Appetite,  extremely  little.
* Want  of  appetite.  Strong  sense  of  hunger  in  the  region
of  the  stomach,  early  on  waking  up,  without  appetite  ;
eating  does  not  remove  the  symptom  ; at  the  same  time
disagreeable  sense  of  emptiness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
and  want  of  animal  heat,  for  two  days,  (a.  4 w.)  Sensa-
tion while  taking  a moderate  dinner,  as  if  the  body  were
considerably  filled  with  a quantity  of  flatus  moving  about
in  the  belly.  Laziness  and  disposition  to  lie  down  after
dinner.  Fulness  and  inflation  after  dinner  ; often  alter-
nates with  lightness,  cheerfulness  and  activity  of  both  mind
and  body.  Lassitude,  tremulous  fatigue  and  heaviness  in
all  the  limbs  after  dinner,  as  if  coming  out  of  the  abdomen,
with  trembling  of  the  hands  when  writing,  and  subsequent
expulsion  of  much  stinking  flatulence,  the  abdomen  being
distended.  Difficulty  of  breathing  during  supper.  Eruc-
tations having  a raw  taste.  Loud  eructations,  (a.  one  quar-
ter of  an  hour,  and  one  hour  and  a half.)  * Bitter  eructa-
tions like  bile,  (a.  3 h.)  Gulping  up  of  a fluid,  * tasting
of  the  ingesta  in  the  afternoon,  (2.  and  3.  d.)  Hiccough,
(a.  1 h.)  Frequent  hiccough  when  smoking  tobacco,  (a.
10  h.  and  a half.)  Nausea,  with  vertigo.  * Nausea  after
drinking  a glass  of  wine.  * Nausea  and  vomiting.  * Vio-


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


165


lent  nausea.  Terrible  vomiting,  which  nothing  can  stop.
Violent  vomiting  with  attacks  of  anxiety.  * Vomiting  of
slime  and  bile.  Fearful  vomiting,  with  convulsions.  Vio-
lent vomiting  and  diarrhoea.  Violent  vomiting  and  diar-
rhoea, with  excessive  anguish.

Stomach. — Painful  feeling  at  the  stomach,  when  press-
ing upon  it.  Pressure  at  the  stomach,  which  is  more  like
a dull  cutting,  especially  when  drawing  in  the  abdomen.
Pressure  at  the  stomach  early  in  the  morning,  with  thirst,
(20.  d.)  * Pain  at  the  stomach,  as  from  excessive  fulness,

without  however  any  fulness,  and  accompanied  by  appe-
tite. Pain  at  the  stomach,  as  after  too  much  eating,  with
distended,  but  not  hard  body,  (a.  31  d.)  Feeling  of  tight-
ness below  the  stomach,  with  empty  eructations.  '*  Cramp-
like pains  at  the  stomach.  Cramp  of  the  stomach.
* Cramp  of  the  stomach,  in  several  persons,  during  the
whole  of  their  lives.  Burning,  spasmodic  pain,  at  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  in  attacks  of  half  an  hour,  which  drove
him  to  despair  and  to  the  resolution  of  drowning  himself.
Burning  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  like  heart-burn,  with
good  appetite.  Pinching  pain  on  the  right  side,  over  and
by  the  side  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach.

Abdomen. — Slight  tension  in  the  hypochondria.  Sen-
! sation,  as  after  a violent  diarrhoea  in  the  intestines  ; the

■ symptom  is  transitory,  but  fatiguing.  Great  inflation  of  the
! abdomen,  especially  after  a meal.  Distended,  big  abdo-

■ men.  Abdomen  very  much  distended  ; this  causes  a pain
i as  from  internal  pressure.  The  most  intolerable  pain  in
| every  part  of  the  abdomen.  Pinching  pain  on  the  left  side
I of  the  navel.  Passing  colic,  with  pinching  in  the  region
1 of  the  stomach.  Pinching  at  a small  place  of  the  left  side
1 of  the  abdomen,  deep  down,  synchronous  with  the  pulse,

1 in  the  afternoon,  (3.  d.)  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  espe-
cially on  the  right  side,  towards  the  back,  beginning  sud-

adenly  in  the  evening  and  increased  by  motion,  (a.  3 w.)
i Violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  (22.  d.)  Cutting  in  the
tjabdomen  with  a feeling  of  nausea  there,  and  accumulation
f of  water  in  the  mouth.  Sudden,  compressive  colic,  with
agulping  up  of  water.  Cutting  in  the  body  the  whole  day,
i with  a feeling  of  oppressive  anxiety  coming  out  of  the  sto-


166


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


mach,  want  of  disposition  to  work,  dry  humour,  and  pain
at  the  stomach,  during  eructations.  Several  attacks  of
cutting  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.  Sensation  of
emptiness  in  the  intestines,  going  olf  after  a meal.  The
symptoms  in  the  abdomen  recommence  again,  all  of  them,
after  2 weeks  and  a half.  Pain  in  the  groins,  as  from
swelling,  felt  on  pressure  ; the  place  felt  hard  as  from
swollen  glands.  Hard  gland  in  the  left  groin,  painful  to
pressure  ; the  gland  appears  to  lie  over  Paupert’s  ligament
and  to  run  parallel  to  it.  Hernia.  Slight  rumbling  in
the  abdomen,  as  when  bubbles  of  air  arise  in  the  water.
Loud  grunting  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  1 h.  and  a half.)  Loud
grunting  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  emptiness,  in  the  fore-
noon, (a.  3 h.)

Stool — A quantity  of  flatus  immediately  after  dinner  ;
they  move  about  audibly,  especially  in  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen,  a few  of  them  being  expelled,  (a.  6 h.)  A num-
ber of  rumbling  flatus,  bursting  forth  immediately  after  a
meal;  some  of  them  smell  badly,  others  before  they  pass
off,  move  downwards  and  amongst  each  other,  especially
in  the  right  side,  (9.  d.)  An  inconsiderable  flatus  went  off,
with  a sensation  as  of  pressing  asunder,  as  if  a copious
expulsion  of  feces  would  take  place,  (a.  5 h.  and  a half.)
Constipation  for  3 days.  Severe  tenesmus  after  dinner,
and  quick  expulsion  of  ordinary  feces,  with  straining,  (4.  d.)

* Hard  stool,  early  in  the  morning.  * Difficult  evacuation

of  hard  stools,  with  previous  straining  in  the  rectum,  2 mi-
nutes, (a.  12  h.)  * Difficult  expulsion  of  hard  stool,  with-

out previous  straining,  (a.  11  h.)  Hard  stool,  in  the  even-
ing, with  violent  straining  in  the  rectum,  and  cutting  in  the
abdomen.  Stool  first  natural,  then  several  small  loose
evacuations,  then  as  small  but  hard  evacuations,  with  vio-
lent straining  in  the  rectum  and  anus,  until  all  the  evacua-
tions are  over.  Pappy,  frequent  stool,  (a.  1 h.  and  a half.)
Very  liquid  stools.  The  stools  which  had  previously  been
very  consistent,  now  become  very  thin.  Very  thin  stools
after  taking  vinegar,  with  pain  in  the  rectum  during  stool.

* Disposition  to  diarrhoea,  which,  however,  does  not  take
place.  Diarrhoea  at  night,  and  early  in  the  morning  ;
every  time,  however,  only  one  evacuation.  * Discharge  of
slime  from  the  rectum,  with  emission  of  flatulence.  Con-


ANTIM0N1XTM  CRTJDUM.


167


tinual  discharge  of  blood  and  solid  excrements  by  the  rec*
turn.  Expulsion  of  black  blood  by  the  rectum.  Pain  in
the  rectum  during  stool  ; feeling  of  soreness,  as  if  an  ulcer
were  torn  open.  Protrusion  of  the  rectum  during  stool,
for  some  time.  Drawing  pain  in  the  anus.  Itching  of  the
anus.  Sharp  itching  in  the  rectum,  (7.  d.)  Burning  itch-
ing, and  sense  of  excoriation  in  the  anus  at  night,  (a.  3 d.)
The  varices  of  the  rectum  have  protruded  more  than  usu-
ally, (11.  d.)  Titillation  and  burning  of  the  varix  of  the
rectum,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  until  the  person  falls
asleep,  (a.  1 1 d.  and  a.  5 w.)  Boil  at  the  perinaeum,  with
a sense  as  of  burning,  and  pain  far  around.

Urinary  Organs. — Desire  to  urinate,  frequent  and  vio-
lent, expelling  much  urine  every  time,  (a.  1,  2,  2 h.  and  a
half.)  Frequent  micturition,  with  discharge  of  a small
quantity  of  watery  urine,  (4.  d.)  Frequent  tenesmus,  al-
though little  urine  is  emitted,  (a.  5 d.)  Long-continuing,
frequent  micturition,  little  urine  being  expelled  in  great
haste,  ( 1 8.  d.)  Frequent  micturition.  Frequent  micturi-
tion. Copious  micturition,  also  at  night  three  times.  Co-
pious and  frequent  micturition.  Involuntary  emission  of  a
large  quantity  of  urine,  accompanied  by  a convulsive  cough.
Gold-yellow  thin  urine,  with  a scarcely  perceptible  cloud.
Brown-red  urine.  Dark-coloured  red  urine,  (a.  7 h.)  Small
red  corpuscles  in  the  urine  after  having  stood  24  hours.

Generative  Functions. — Continual  traction  in  the
spermatic  cords,  while  there  was  a boil  at  the  perinaeum  ;

I the  pain  was  most  violent  when  standing,  and  became  less
i when  stooping.  Fine  itching  of  the  penis,  (a.  14  h.)  Vio-
lent itching  of  the  extremity  of  the  glans.  Biting  itching,
as  from  salt,  of  the  left  side  of  the  scrotum,  frequent,  last-
ing 14  days,  (a.  14  d.)  Excited  sexual  desire,  with  unea-
i siness  in  the  whole  body,  which  prevents  him  from  sitting
c long,  (a.  6 h.)  Afterwards  the  sexual  desire  appears  to  be
a less  for  several  days.  Erections,  (a.  6 h.)  Even  upon
i leaning  the  back  against  something,  there  is  an  irritation,
gj  as  if  pollution  would  come  on.  Nightly  pollutions,  with-
: out  any  voluptuous  dreams.  Pollution  at  night  with  many
• dreams,  (11.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  womb,  as  if  something
,would  out.  Discharge  of  an  acrid  water  from  the  vagina,
,which  caused  a sensation  as  of  biting  down  along  the  thighs.


168


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDTJM.


Cold,  Catarrh. — * Obstruction  of  the  nose  in  the  even-
ing, as  in  coryza,  for  several  days.  Dryness  of  the  nose
when  walking  in  the  open  air,  so  that  he  can  hardly  speak.
Cold.  Dry  coryza.  Coryza,  with  sore,  crusty  nostrils.
Fluent  coryza.  Fluent  coryza  early  in  the  morning,  for
some  hours,  without  sneezing.

Throat,  Respiratory  Organs  : He  is  obliged  the
whole  day  to  draw  a quantity  of  thick  yellowish  mucus
from  the  posterior  nares  into  the  throat,  and  then  to  expec-
torate it,  (9.  d.)  Rough  voice.  Extreme  feebleness  of
voice  ; he  can  only  speak  in  a low  tone.  Speech  and
singing  are  not.  firm,  but  weak.  Loss  of  voice,  as  often
as  he  became  hot ; the  voice  came  back  by  resting  himself
early  in  the  morning,  roughness  and  dryness  in  the  throat,
(6.  d.)  A foreign  body  seems  to  hang  in  the  throat  ; he
tries  in  vain  to  swallow  or  to  expel  it.  Violent  spasms  in
the  larynx  and  the  pharynx,  as  if  the  throat  were  filled
with  a plug  which  becomes  alternately  thicker  and  thinner,
accompanied  by  a feeling  of  soreness.  Clearing  the  throat
and  hawking  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Cough  early
in  the  morning  after  rising,  in  paroxysms  ; it  seems  to
come  out  of  the  abdomen  ; the  first  attack  is  always  the
most  violent,  the  following  become  weaker  and  weaker,  so
that  the  last  attack  resembles  a mere  hacking  cough.  Fre-
quent, dry  cough.  Dry,  convulsive  cough,  with  involun-
tary and  copious  discharge  of  urine  (in  a woman,  who  had
been  given  sulph.  aur.  against  a cough  with  much  dis-
charge.) Severe,  dry  cough,  with  a sense  as  of  scratching
in  the  larynx,  in  a sudden  short  attack.  Cough  with  dis-
charge of  viscid,  thin  phlegm  ; deep  out  of  the  chest,  early
in  the  morning.

Chest. — Burning  in  the  chest,  at  every  cough,  as  of  fire,
with  a glowing  hot  breath  out  of  the  mouth.  Deep  sigh-
ing, breathing,  as  from  fulness  at  the  chest,  for  several
days,  in  the  afternoon  and  after  dinner.  Difficulty  of
breathing  after  supper.  Dyspnoea.  Asthma.  Very  trou-
blesome asthma.  Suffocating  asthma  in  four  young  men.
Suffocating  rheum.  Oppression  at  the  chest  early  on  wak-
ing up.  Pressive  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  right  mamma
in  the  evening,  when  lying  down.  Heavy,  pressive  pain,
sometimes  in  the  chest,  sometimes  in  the  back,  sometimes


ANTITvIONIUM  CRUDUM.


169


in  both  parts  at  the  same  time.  Oppression  at.  the  chest
Half  pressive,  half  lancinating  pain  under  the  left  clavicle,
apparently  in  the  larynx,  when  breathing  Dull  stitches  in
the  chest,  when  breathing  deeply,  first  on  the  right  side,
under  the  two  first  ribs,  then  under  the  upper  part  of  the
sternum.  Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when
breathing,  with  a little  cough  and  headache.  Sharp
stitches  in  the  left  mamma  when  expiring  in  a standing  po-
sition, (a.  5 h.)  Stitches,  with  a feeling  of  constrictive
pinching  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  (3.  d ) Burning  in  the
chest,  with  dry  cough,  and  dyspnoea  almost  to  suffocation.
Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Pain  as  from  contusion,
or  as  after  too  great  an  effort,  in  the  pectoralis  major  mus-
cle, early  in  the  morning  when  rising,  and  a few  hours  af-
ter, when  extending  or  lifting  the  arm,  or  when  pressing
upon  it.  Itching  upon  the  chest,  as  if  a vesicatory  were
healing.  Severe , continual  itching  upon  the  chest  the
whole  day.  Itching  upon  the  chest  and  the  back.  At
night  he  is  roused  from  sleep  by  violent,  itching,  and  he
discovers  pimples  at  several  places.  If  he  rub  the  skin
upon  the  chest  on  account  of  the  itching,  the  place  feels
sore  ; the  skin  is  as  sensitive  as  after  vesicatories.  The
chest,  is  dotted  with  fine  red  marks,  with  violent  itching,
which  does  not  pass  off  by  rubbing.

Back. — Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when
rising  from  a chair;  the  pain  disappeared  in  walking.
Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  immediately  on  rising  and
the  whole  day,  not  at  night.  Pain  as  from  swelling,  in
the  cartilage  or  the  periosteum  of  the  upper  portion  of  the
border  of  the  ilium.  Tearing  in  the  back,  the  whole  day,
from  morning  to  night.  Spasmodic  stitches  in  the  right
scapula,  when  sitting.  Violent  itching  upon  the  backi
a fortnight.

Neck. — Small  red  pimples  on  the  top  of  the  right
shoulder,  without  any  sensation,  passing  off  for  a short
time  on  pressure,  (7.  d.)  Rash  behind  the  ears,  as  far  as
the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  over  the  scapulae.  Red  vesicles
with  yellow  dots  over  the  whole  of  the  right  shoulder  ; af-
terwards they  look  like  goose-skin,  and  scale  off.  Brown
liver  coloured  spots  on  both  shoulders.  Slraining  in  the
nape  of  the  neck,  and  between  the  scapulae,  when  stoop-

8


170


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDTJM.


ing.  Spasmodic  traction  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape  of
the  neck,  reaching  as  far  as  the  scapulas,  made  worse  in
the  evening,  after  lying  down,  and  early  in  the  morning,
by  stooping,  straining  the  arm,  and  turning  the  head  to  the
left  side,  (12.  d.)  Hard,  pea-shaped  body,  on  the  nape
on  the  neck,  on  the  left  side,  under  the  skin  ; this  body  can
only  be  felt  by  stretching  the  skin  when  bending  the  head
over.  Traction  in  the  neck  with  a feeling  as  of  pressing  from
without,  on  the  left  side  below,  (19.  d.)  Spasmodic  trac-
tion from  above  downwards  in  one  of  the  muscles  of  the
posterior  cervical  region  on  the  right  side,  in  the  evening,
when  sitting,  (8.  d.)  Single  stitches  in  the  skin  of  the
neck,  here  and  there,  (2.  and  3.  d.)  Itching  of  the  neck.
Sensitiveness  of  the  skin  of  the  neck  ; if  he  rub  hard  on
account  of  the  itching,  the  place  feels  sore.  Small  pim-
ples on  the  neck  and  under  the  chin,  painful  to  the  touch,
(13.  d.)  Hard,  long-continuing  pustules  below  the  neck,
like  small  blisters,  which  become  filled  with  pus,  not  only
at  the  tip,  but  all  round.  Many  red  marks,  with  white  lit-
tle dots  in  the  centre  ; with  a stinging  pain  upon  moving
the  hand  over  the  hairs  of  the  beard,  on  the  anterior  side
of  the  neck.

Upper  Extremities. — A stitch  under  both  arms  when
walking  in  the  open  air.  Sharp  itching  of  the  inside  of
the  left  arm.  Itching  of  the  arm,  with  reddish  blisters  like
mosquito-bites,  after  rubbing.  A quantity  of  light-brown
dots  upon  the  arms,  resembling  little  hepatic  spots.  Pim-
ples, resembling  rash,  on  the  middle  portion  of  the  upper
arms,  without  itching,  (14.  d.)  Paralytic  pain  in  the  mus-
cles of  the  upper  arms,  when  bending  the  arms,  as  if  they
were  contracted  too  much,  or  weakened  by  this  contrac-
tion. Quivering  traction  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper
arms,  which  did  not  pass  off  by  motion,  but  by  warmth,
and  returned  in  a draught  of  air.  Sudden  and  drawing
jerk,  transversely  through  the  right  upper  arm,  (a.  10,  20,
120  minutes.)  Light  twitches  in  the  deltoid  muscle  of
the  right  side,  (5.  d.)  Corrosively  itching  pimples  at  the
bent  of  the  elbow.  Cracking  in  the  elbow-joint,  on  turn-
ing it  to  and  fro.  Traction  in  the  fore-arm,  when  at  rest
and  in  motion.  Traction  down  the  right,  fore-arm,  (a.  1 h.
and  a half.)  Paralytic  traction  in  the  right  fore-arm,  (a.  2


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


171


h.)  Traction  on  the  inside  of  the  lower  part  of  the  fore-
arm, with  a sensation  of  pressure  from  without,  (19.  d.)
At  night,  a large  pimple  is  formed  on  the  styloid  process
of  the  radius  of  the  left  arm.  Itching  vesicles  on  the  left
hand.  A blister  on  the  styloid  process  of  the  ulna  of  the
right  arm.  A blister  on  the  external  border  of  the  left
hand.  Corrosively  itching  pimples  in  the  ball  of  the  hand,
on  the  flexor  brevis  pollicis  raanus.  Cracking  in  the  me-
tacarpal joint  of  the  thumb,  when  moving  it,  (9.  d.)
Drawing  pains  in  the  fingers  and  their  joints.  Gouty
pain  in  the  joints  of  the  right  ring-finger.  Fine  itching  in
the  tip  of  the  right  thumb,  (a.  14  h.)  The  finger-nails  did
not  grow  as  fast  as  formerly,  and  the  skin  beneath  the
nails  was  intensely  painful.  Red,  itch-like  pimple,  pain-
fully stinging  when  touched,  with  a brown  scurf,  on  the
carpal  joint  of  the  left  thumb,  (24.  d.)

Lower  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  right  hip-joint.
Drawing  pain  in  the  left  hip-joint. , when  walking,  espe-
cially when  drawing  the  thigh  from  before  backwards  ;
also  in  the  evening.  Drawing  pain  in  the  left  hip.  Pain-
ful drawing  from  the  hip-joint  towards  the  os  sacrum.
Drawing  in  one  of  the  nates,  all  around  the  hip-joint,  into
the  thigh,  (7.  d.)  Slight  straining  in  the  muscles  of  the
left  half  of  the  nates,  in  the  evening,  when  sitting,  (5.  d.)
Slight  rumbling  for  a few  minutes,  in  the  lower  part  of  the
i right  half  of  the  nates,*  when  standing,  (a.  4 w.)  Large,
hard  pustules  on  the  left  half  of  the  nates,  with  itching  and
i straining  pain.  Small  tuber  on  the  left  half  of  the  nates
: of  a child.  White,  hard  tubercles  on  the  leg,  of  the  size
: of  a small  pea ; they  come  on  in  consequence  of  itching,

* and  are  surrounded  by  a small  red  circle.  Blueish  spots
n upon  the  thighs.  Repeated  straining  of  the  right  thigh,
l high  up,  like  a small  spasm,  (7.  d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the
r posterior  muscles  of  the  left  thigh.  Drawing  pain  at  the
1 anterior  and  internal  sides  of  the  thigh.  Sensation  as  of  a
i spasm  at  the  external  border  of  the  left  thigh,  as  if  the
j muscle  became  slowly  contracted  and  again  extended,  in
the  afternoon,  (a.  10  h.)  Sharply  stinging  itching  of  the
i'  right  thigh,  which  does  not  go  off  by  scratching  ; after  the


* Note  : This  is  the  German,  literally;  the  meaning  is,  no
d doubt,  “ sensation  as  of.”


172


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDTJM.


itching,  a small,  flat,  yellowish  pimple  is  formed  at  that
place.  The  stinging  itching  upon  the  thighs  comes  on  every
evening.  Pain  in  the  knee,  which  prevented  him  from
stretching  the  foot,  and  forced  him  to  limp.  Stiffness  of
the  knee,  for  eight  days.  Painful  stiffness  of  the  knee  ;
the  knee  pained  her  so  much,  that  she  could  not  stretch  it,
and  was  obliged  to  limp.  Pain  close  below  the  knee,  as
if  it  had  been  tied  too  tightly,  the  whole  evening,  (a.  13d.)
A st itch  in  the  left  knee,  which  started  him,  and  caused
him  to  give  a jerk  with  the  leg,  (10.  d.)  Suddenly  violent
stitch  on  the  outside  of  the  knee.  Drawing  pain  in  the
right  knee.  Itching  of  the  right  knee,  on  the  inside,  and,
on  rubbing  it,  a large  blister,  which  is  painful  only  for  a
short  while.  Red  pimples  on  the  knee,  like  vesicles,  re-
sembling varioloid,  with  stinging  pain  when  touched.
Tuber  on  the  right  knee,  as  frotn  a mosquito-bite.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  leg,  as  high  up  as  the  knee.  Drawing
pain  at  the  lower  part  of  the  tibia.  Drawing  pain  on  the
inside  of  the  left  calf.  In  the  evening,  when  sitting,  pain-
less drawing  in  the  right  leg,  beginning  at  the  knee,  or  at
the  os  ischium,  going  down  the  thigh  and  the  tibia,  as  far
as  the  foot,  so  that  he  has  to  lift  this  foot  and  shift  its  po-
sition several  times  in  succession,  (10.  d.)  Painless
pinching,  coming  and  going,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right
calf.  Sharp  stitch  in  the  hollow  of  the  tibia,  from  within,
when  sitting,  (a.  5 h.)  Deep  stitches  descending  all  along
the  tibia.  Rumbling  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  right  leg,
immediately  after,  stitches  in  the  joint  of  the  foot,  (3.  d.)
Titil lation  along  the  left  calf,  without  itching,  (a.  14  h.)
Fine  itching  of  the  left  tibia,  (a.  4 h.  and  a half.)  On  the
outside  of  the  left  calf  a place  which  feels  bruised  when
touched,  for  a few  days,  (a.  24  h.)  Blueish  spots  upon
the  tibiag.  Her  foot  feels  so  heavy  that  she  cannot  lift  it.
When  walking,  the  right  foot  feels  benumbed,  and  goes  to
sleep.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  external  malleolus
of  the  right  foot,  when  turning  the  foot  outwards,  with
frequent  cracking  of  the  joint,  when  bending  or  stretching
it,  (5  d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  left  heel,  (a.  3 h.)  Cramp-
like drawing  at  the  external  side  of  the  left  heel,  (a.  1 h.
and  a half.)  Intolerably  burning,  lancinating  and  tearing
pains  in  a mortifying  foot,  it  being  insensible  to  touch  or  to
the  prick  of  a pin.  Sharp  fine  prickings  in  the  sole  of  the


ANTIMONIUM  CRTJDUM.


173


foot,  (10.  d.)  Intensely  painful  stinging  in  the  skin  of  the
sole  of  the  right  foot,  going  off  by  rubbing  ; in  the  evening,
when  in  bed,  after  a walk  of  three  hours,  (8.  d.)  Violent
itching  under  the  external  malleolus  of  the  right  foot,  which
does  not  at  once  pass  off  by  scatching,  and  leaves  a small
red  spot  behind.  Chilblains  on  the  feet,  with  pain  and
redness  in  the  summer  season.  Great  sensitiveness  of  the
soles  of  the  feet,  when  walking,  especially  upon  stone
pavement,  for  a long  time,  (a.  7 d.)  * Large  horny  places

on  the  skin  of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  close  to  where  the  toes
commence,  which  pained  like  corns,  and  always  returned
after  having  been  cut  out.  Mortification  of  the  foot ; the
foot  is  quite  black.  Cracking  of  the  big  toe,  at  every  mo-
tion requiring  an  effort.  Tearing  and  drawing  through  the
big  toe  of  the  right  foot.  Cutting  under  the  left  big  toe,
taking  place  with  the  regularity  of  musical  beats,  (a.  6 d.)
Burning  pain  on  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,
(6.  d.)  Fine  itching  upon  the  left  big  toe,  (a.  4 h,  and  a
half.)  A corn  upon  the  left  little  toe  becomes  painful  with-
out any  cause,  as  if  it  wTere  pressed  upon,  (7.  d.)

Common  Ailments. — Twitches  of  the  muscles  of  many
parts  of  the  body.  Single,  long-continued,  titillating  and
itching  stitches  here  and  there,  especially  in  the  upper
arm  ; not  inviting  to  scratch,  coming  from  within,  also  un-
der the  right  half  of  the  nates.  Itching  over  the  whole
body,  especially  on  the  chest  and  the  back.  Itching  of
many  parts  of  the  body,  especially  of  the  neck  and  limbs.
Pimples  coming  on  at  night.  Pimples,  that  itch  when
getting  warm  in  the  bed,  and  prevent  sleep.  Red  vesicular
pimples  like  varioloid,  with  stinging  pain  when  pressed,  at
several  places  of  the  skin.  Pustules  with  yellow  or  brown
scurfs,  here  and  there.  Red  marks  with  little  white  dots
in  the  centre,  at  several  places.  Eruptions  like  rash.
Nettle-rash  ; white  ubers  with  red  areolaa,  with  violent  bur-
ning and  fine  stinging,  in  the  face,  on  the  limbs,  except  the
fingers  that  were  swollen  ; accompanied  by  violent  thirst
and  nausea.  Tumours  and  vesicles , as  from  stings  of
insects , at  many  places  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  face
and  in  the  joints  of  the  extremities;  they  come  on  with
itching,  and  often  disappear  already  afler  a few  hours.
Brown  spots  and  dots,  like  small  liver-coloured  spots,  here
and  there,  especially  upon  the  arms.  Badly  coloured


174


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDTJM.


nails.  In  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  in  warm  air,  he  feels  in-
disposed even  when  he  walks  and  works  but  little.  Es-
pecially drinking  wine  makes  him  feel  worse.  He  feels
better  when  at  rest,  and  in  cool  air.  All  the  symptoms
came  out  again  after  the  third  week  ; however,  after  this
period,  they  appeared  more  on  the  left  side  of  the  body.
Convulsive  movements,  especially  of  the  head.  Convul-
sions and  trembling;  of  the  limbs.  Immense  swelling;  of
the  whole  body.  Dropsical  swelling  of  the  body.  In-
curable dropsy.  Excessive  hemorrhages.  Emaciation
and  exhaustion.  Getting  fat.  Apoplexy,  accompanied
by  such  a violent  flow  of  saliva,  that  he  expelled  at
least  a quart  of  watery  foam.  Death  after  a few  hours,
consequent  upon  giving  antimony,  for  cramps  of  the
stomach.  Death  produced  by  suffocating  catarrh  in  fifteen
days,  occasioned  by  a few  grains  of  antimony.  Weari-
ness, especially  of  the  feet,  with  great  peevishness,  at
seven  o’clock  in  the  evening.  Great  lassitude  early  in  the
morning,  and  disinclination  to  rise.

Sleep. — Frequent  yawning,  three  or  four  times  in  suc-
cession. * Great  sleepiness  during  the  day,  and  early  in
the  morning  after  waking  up  ; he  cannot  decide  himself  to
leave  his  bed.  Quickly  passing  sleepiness  in  the  after-
noon when  sitting.  Sleepy  and  peevish  at  six  o’clock  in
the  evening ; at  eight  o’clock,  he  cannot  refrain  from
sleeping;  sleeps  soundly  at  night;  early  in  the  morning,
he  feels  so  tired,  that  he  can  scarcely  open  his  eyes.  At
seven  o’clock  in  the  evening,  she  feels  overwhelmed  with
sleep;  she  continues  to  sleep  during  the  night;  early  in
the  morning;,  she  feels  well  ; for  six  days  in  succession.
* Somnolence  in  the  forenoon.  Slumber  with  fanciful
delusions.  Slumber,  with  delusions  of  the  fancy ; she
imagines  to  hear  some  one  knocking  outside,  or  to  be
called  by  somebody.  He  falls  asleep  late  ; he  was  un-
able to  fall  asleep  before  midnight.  He  is  wide  awake  in
bed,  in  the  evening,  so  that  he  cannot  fall  asleep  under  an
hour,  this  symptom  is  accompanied  by  frequent  shiver-
ings  over  the  whole  of  the  left  side,  upon  which  he  does
not  lie ; or  by  sexual  desire  with  erections  on  getting
warm  ; these  make  him  yet  more  awake  ; for  eight  days
in  succession,  and  again  in  five  weeks.  Little  sleep  the
first  night.  Uneasy  sleep  at  night,  on  account  of  itching


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDTJM.


175


stitches  here  and  there,  going  off  b}7  rubbing.  He  was
frequently  roused  from  sleep  by  an  intolerable  itching
upon  the  chest,  where  he  felt  pimples.  Erratic  itching,
with  perceptible  blisters,  frequently  rouses  him  from  sleep.
Waking  up  at  two  o’clock  at  night,  with  mild  warmth  all
over,  and  burnino;  itching  and  sensation  of  excoriation  of
the  anus,  (3.  d.)  Waking  up  from  the  siesta  with  and  by
dull  grinding  of  the  teeth,  (2.  d.)  Tenesmus  of  the  blad-
der rouses  him  from  sleep,  at  night.  At  night,  intermit-
tent, emission  of  a small  quantity  of  urine,  with  painful
erections.  At  night,  he  lies  upon  his  back.  At  night,
frequent  waking  up,  as  from  fright.  Anxiety  in  bed,  at
night,  from  three  to  five  o’clock.  Frequent  waking  up  at
night;  on  falling  asleep,  he  immediately  dreamed  about
solemnities.  Anxious  dreams,  as  if  he  were  to  be  hurt;
he  starts  up  from  sleep,  while  his  hands  and  feet  totter.
Horrible  dreams  about  mutilations  of  men  His  night
sleep  is  interrupted  by  dreams  about  members  of  his  fam-
ily at  his  native  place,  with  whom  he  quarrelled.  His
night-sleep  is  interrupted  by  disagreeable  dreams  about
quarrels  with  his  relatives.  Lewd  dreams,  several  nights
in  succession,  also  with  pollutions,  (a.  11  d.)  Voluptuous
dreams,  at  night,  with  pollutions.  He  dreamed  of  seeing
an  old  school-mate,  this  gave  him  much  pleasure,  (a.  23  h.)

Fevfr. — A good  deal  of  chilliness,  no  heat.  Disagree-
able feeling  of  internal  chilliness,  so  that  he  cannot  get
warm  ; returning  after  the  lapse  of  five  weeks.  Chilli-
ness, even  in  a warm  room.  Constantly  icy  cold  feet.
His  feet  do  not  get  warm  before  one  o’clock  at  night.
Shiverings  over  the  whole  back,  without  thirst,  (a.  2 h.)
Shiverings  over  the  whole  body,  early  in  the  morning,
with  heat  in  the  forehead,  without  thirst,  (a.  half  an  hour.)
Towards  noon,  violent  chills,  for  an  hour,  with  violent
thirst  for  beer  ; then  sleep  succeeded  by  heat  and  con-
stant thirst.  He  feels  quite  hot,  in  consequence  of  the
slightest  exercise,  especially  in  the  heat  of  the  sun  ; he
then  complains  of  excessive  heat  in  the  throat.  Goat’s
milk  refreshes  him  agreeably.  At  night,  when  in  bed,  he
feels  quite  hot,  and  is  drenched  with  sweat.  General  sweat
without  smell,  which  made  the  tips  of  the  fingers  soft  and
wrinkled.  Sweat  during  sleep.  Early  in  the  morning,


176


AURUM.


when  waking  up,  mild  sweat  over  the  whole  body,  (a.  21
li.)  General,  warm  sweat  in  bed  every  other  morning.
Sweat  returning  at  the  same  hour  for  three  days  in  suc-
cession. Pulse,  sometimes  a few  quick,  then  three  or
four  slow  beats,  (immediately.)


AURUM  (the  common  metal.)

In  the  same  way  as  superstition,  incorrect  observations,
credulity  and  baseless  conjectures  have  been  the  cause  of
a great  many  false  statements  as  to  the  pretended  remedial
virtues  of  certain  medicines,  that  have  been  received  into
the  old  materia  medica  ; a great  many  powerful  medici-
nal substances  have  been  set  aside  as  inefficacious  for
want  of  experiment,  and  upon  the  strength  of  frivolous
theoretical  reasonings.

I may  here  only  mention  gold  as  illustrative  of  my  as-
sertion ; not  the  gold  which  had  been  dissolved  by  acids
and  reobtained  again  from  the  solution  by  precipitation — -
these  two  kinds  of  gold  have,  both  of  them,  been  pro-
nounced dangerous  and  even  useless,  because  they  cannot,
without  danger,  be  administered  justa  dost , in  an  exces-
sive quantity  : No,  I speak  of  the  pure,  unaltered  gold.

Modern  physicians  have  pronounced  it  inefficacious,
and,  by  banishing  this  remedy  from  their  system  of  ma-
teria medica,  they  have  deprived  us  of  the  brilliant  reme-
dial virtues  of  that  drug.

Thev  said  “ that  it  could  not  be  dissolved  in  the  gastric
juice  and  that  it  was  therefore  powerless  and  useless.”
Such  theore/ical  speculations  were  received  in  the  place  of
convictions.  Bold  decisions,  empty  theoretical  conjectures,
have  almost  always,  in  medicine,  been  taken  in  the  place
of  well  founded  truth  : it  is  so  much  more  convenient ,
simply  to  assert , than  to  interrogate  experience,  which,
however,  is  the  basis  of  the  art  of  curing.

Thev  cannot  avail  ihemselves  of  the  excuse  that  goM
has  also  been  condemned  by  older  physicians,  as  by  Fa-
bricius(in  Obs.  med.)  : “ How  should  leaf-gold  be  affected
by  the  slight  degree  of  heat  of  our  stomachs,  since  the


AURUM.


177


most  violent  fire  has  no  action  upon  it  ?”  or  Nic.  Monar-
des  (de  ferro,  p.  32,  33.)  : “ Patients  may  believe  me
and  spare  their  money,  they  will  never  obtain  any  curative
action  from  gold.”  Or  Alston  (mat.  med.  I.  p.  69  ;)  ‘‘  As
metallic  gold  cannot  be  dissolved  or  changed  by  the  vital
power,  it,  therefore,  can  have  no  other  medicinal  effect  ex-
cept so  far  as  it  has  a mechanical  action  upon  the  intes-
tines by  its  heaviness,  hardness  and  form,  or  at  last,  T.
F.  Gmelin  (Appar.  med.  min.  I.  S.  445  :)  Since  gold  can-
not be  destroyed  or  dissolved  and  cannot  be  united  to  the
humours  of  the  animal  organism,  it,  therefore,  cannot  have
any  curative  action.”*

Nor  can  they  avail  themselves  of  the  fact  that  the  me-
dicinal virtues  of  gold  have  been  denied  by  many  of  the
older  physicians,  such  as  : Ant.  Musa  Brassavolus,  Fel.
Platerus,  Hier.  Cardanus,  Jo.  Bravus  Petrafit,  Franc.  Pic.
Mirandola,  Merinus  Mercenius,  Duretus,  Camerarius,
Cordosus,  Conringius,  Lernery,  Angelus  Sala,  or  Joh.
Schroeder,  who,  generally,  believes  every  thing.

They  are  all  of  them  wrong , and  all  the  modern  physi-
cians into  the  bargain.

Gold  has  great  remedial  virtues  which  cannot  be  re-
placed.

The  assertions  of  these  physicians  made  me  first  doubt-
ful about  the  medicinal  powers  of  gold.  But  as  I could
not  bring  myself  to  believe  any  one  metal  inherently  dis-
possessed of  medicinal  properties,  I first  employed  gold
in  solution.  The  symptoms  of  gold  in  solution  are  but
few.  However,  one  quintilhonth  or  sextillionth  part  of  a
grain  of  gold  in  solution  was  sufficient  to  obtain  a few  of
those  symptoms  which  I afterwards  obtained  of  the  pure
gold.

I have  an  aversion  to  employ  metals  dissolved  in  acids,
were  it  for  no  other  reason  than  simplicity.  And  then,
their  properties  must  necessarily  be  altered  by  the  acids,


* Note  : How  foolish  to  undertake  to  decide  by  theory  whether
gold  has  curative  powers  ; all  that  was  necessary  to  do,  was,  to
ascertain  by  trials  and  experiments,  whether  gold  had,  or  not,  re-
medial virtues.  If  it  was  found  to  have  any,  then  the  theoretical
assertions  to  the  contrary,  are,  all  of  them,  ridiculous.

b*


178


ATJRUM.


as  may  be  seen  by  comparing  the  medicinal  virtues  of  the
corrosive  sublimate  with  those  of  the  oxyde  of  mercury.
I therefore  was  much  pleased  on  discovering  that  many
Arabian  physicians  praised  the  remedial  virtues  of  gold
when  administered  in  the  shape  of  a fine  'powder , in  many
affections,  against  which  1 had  already  employed  the  solu-
tion of  gold  with  great  benefit.  This  circumstance  was
of  course  calculated  to  inspire  me  with  confidence  in  the
assurances  of  the  Arabian  physicians.

Already  in  the  eighth  century,  Gebcr  (de  Alchimia  tra-
ditio,  Argent,  ap.  Zetzner,  1698,  lib.  JL  p.  iii.  cap.  32.)
praises  gold  as  a “ materia  Isctificans  et  in  juventute  cor-
pus conservans.”

At  the  end  of  the  10th  century  Serapion  the  younger
(de  simplicibus  comment.  Venet.  fob  ap.  Junt.  1550,  cap.
415.  p.  192,)  praises  it  thus  : the  powdered  gold  is  useful
in  melancholy  and  weakness  of  the  heart.

Then  at  the  beginning  of  the  11th  century  Avicenna
(C  anon.  lib.  II.  cap.  79.)  : “the  powdered  gold  is  use-
ful as  a remedy  against  melancholy,  takes  away  the  fetid
odor  of  the  mouth,  may  be  used,  even  internally,  against
falling  off  of  the  hair,  fortifies  the  eyes,  is  useful  in  cardi-
algia  and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  extremely  so  in  dif-
ficulty of  breathing.”*

ration of  such  a gold  powder,  at  the  beginning  of  the  12th
century,  in  libro  servitoris  de  prasp.  med.  p.  242)  : “ Tri-
turate the  gold  upon  a piece  of  rough  linen  in  a basin  full
of  water,  and  employ  the  fine  powder  which  has  fallen  to
the  bottom  of  the  vessel.”  John  oj  St.  Amand  teaches
the  same  mode  in  the  13th  century,  in  his  appendix  to
Mesue , (Opera,  Venet.  1561,  p.  245,  4.  E.)

The  Portuguese,  Zacutus,  imitated  this  mode,  and  de-
been  tormented  by  melancholy  fancies  and  whom  he  cured,
within  a month,  by  means  of  the  gold  powder  obtained  by


* Note  : This  latter  expression  has  a double  meaning  in  the
Arabian  ; according  as  the  word  is  emphasised,  the  expression  either
means  “ talking  to  one's  self,"  or  : “ difficulty  of  breathing*"  Ex-
periments show  that  the  latter  is  the  true  meaning.


AURUM.


179


triturating  gold  upon  a stone  adapted  to  that  purpose,  (see
Histor.  Medic,  lib.  I.  obs.  3b).

I forbear  quoting  the  eulogies  which  have  been  bestow-
ed upon  the  powdered  gold  by  Jo.  Platearius  (quaest.
Therap.)  Rodericus  a Castro  (de  Meteor,  microcosmo,
cap.  3)  Abraham  a Porta  Leonis  (dialog,  de  auro),  Zac-
charias  a Puteo,  Joh.  Dan.  Mylius  (Anatotnia  Auri),  Horn,
(Ephem.  Nat.  Cur.  Dec.  11.  ann.  3,  obs.  159  ) Fr.  Baco
(Histor.  vitae  et  mortis)  Fr.  Joseph  Burrhi  (Epist.  4,  ad
Thom.  Barlhol.  de  oculis.)  Jo.  Jacob  Waldschmiedt  (i)  iss.
de  auro,  Marb.  1685.)  Chph.  Helvvig  (Diss.  de  auro  ejus-
que  in  medic,  viri bus,  Gryphisv.  1703)  Lemnius,  Pet.  Fo-
restus,  01.  Borrichius,  Rolfinck,  Andr.  Lagna,  Ettmuller,
Tackius,  Helcher  (Diss.  de  auro,  Jenae  1730.)  Poterius,
J.  D.  Horstius,  Hollerius,  Hoefer,  and  Zwelfer  (Pharm.
August.)  Suffice  it  to  say  that  I credited  the  teslimony
of  the  Arabians  more  than  the  theoretical  doubts  of  mo-
dern physicians,  and  employed  the  finest  leaf-gold,  after
having  triturated  it  for  an  hour  with  one  100  grains  of  su-
gar of  milk.

I will  not  decide  whether  the  gold  is  still  more  finely
triturated  in  this  powder  or  whether  it  has  become  slightly
oxydised.  Hundred  grains  of  this  powder,  containing  one
grain  of  gold,  or  sometimes  200  grains,  containing  2 grains,
when  dissolved  in  water,  have,  in  full  grown  persons,  pro-
duced considerable  alterations  of  their  usual  condition  and

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  Arabian  physicians,  who
were  not  without  skill  in  discovering  medicinal  substances,
have  effected,  by  means  of  gold,  homoeopathic  cures  with-
out being  aware  of  it.

I have  cured,  by  means  of  gold,  several  cases  of  melan-
choly in  persons  who  earnestly  thought  of  killing  them-
selves. They  took  in  all  about  the  J^-or  —part  of  a grain

of  gold.  I have  also  cured  several  other  important  affec-
tions which  will  be  found  enumerated  among  the  symp-
toms of  gold,  and  I doubt  not  that  much  higher  tritura-
tions than  those  which  I employed,  would  have  been  suffi-
cient for  obtaining  the  same  results.

Shortly  after  closing  these  introductory  remarks,  I had
an  opportunity  of  convincing  myself  that  part  of  a gram


180


ATJRUM.


of  gold  will  manifest  a most  powerful  curative  action,  es-
pecially in  cancer  of  the  palate  and  nasal  bones  conse-
quent upon  the  abuse  of  the  acidulated  preparations  of
mercury.  The  gold  symptoms  analagous  to  these  artifi-
cial affections  will  be  found  among  the  subsequent  symp-
toms.*

Farther  trituration  and  dilution  develops  and  dynamises
the  power  ol  gold  still  more,  so  that  I now  use,  very  often,
only  the  smallest  part  of  a grain  of  the  decillionlh  potency.

Would  our  physicians,  who,  bv  their  method  of  imagin-
ing the  remedial  virtues  of  a drug,  had  been  led  to  con-
demn gold  as  an  inefficient  agent,,  have  ever  been  led  to
suspect  the  remarkably  curative  powers  of  gold  ? Could
our  manufacturers  of  the  materia  mcdica,  who  substitute
imagined  virtues  in  the  place  of  the  real  properties  of  the
drug,  ever  have  discovered  the  medicinal  virtues  of  gold
in  any  other  way  except  that  which  the  homceopalhic  prov-
ing of  the  drug  has  revealed.

Poor,  fabulous  materia  medica,  such  as  is  commonly
used  ! how  far  hast  thou  failed  in  describing  the  true  ac-
tion of  remedies,  which  experiment  alone  has  revealed  to
the  homoeopathic  physician  !

The  action  of  gold,  in  minute  doses,  lasts  at  least  21
days.

Smelling  of  coffea  cruda,  and  especially  camphor,
has  been  found  to  be  an  antidote  against  the  effects  of  gold.

In  the  following  affections,  gold  lias  been  found  espe-
cially useful : —

Hypochondriasis;  melancholy;  loathing  of  life  ; dispo-
sition to  suicide  ; rush  of  blood  to  the  head  ; cancer  of  the
palate  bones  and  nasal  bones  ; obscuration  of  sight  by
black  spots  hovering  before  the  eyes  ; toothache  from
rush  of  blood  to  the  head , with  heat  in  the  head  ; inguinal
hernia;  induration  of  the  testes  of  long  standing;  prolap-
sus and  induration  of  the  uterus  ; rush  of  blood  to  the
chest ; falling  down  unconsciously,  with  the  face  becoming


* Note  : Ant.  Chalmetus,  in  Euchiridion  rhirug.  p.  402,  has  ob-
served the  same  curative  power  of  gold,  when  used  internally,
against  the  bad.  consequences  of  the  abuse  of  the  preparations  of
mercury.


AURUM.


lfil

blue  ; attack  of  suffocation,  with  severe  constrictive  dysp-
noea  ; injuries  inflicted  by  the  abuse  of  quicksilver;  pains
in  the  bones,  at  night ; nodosities  of  the  gout.

This  drug  has  been  tried  by  Drs.  Hahnemann,  Franz,
Gross,  Friedrich  Hahnemann,  Hempel,  Hermann,  Lang-
hammer,  Lehmann,  Michler,  Hummel,  Wislicenus.

Noaek  and  Trinks  arrange  the  affections,  in  which  gold
has  proved  curative,  under  the  following  heads  : —

Gold  is  especially  suitable  to  scrofulous  and  venous
constitutions,  to  the  melancholy  and  phlegmatic  tempera-
ment, to  individuals  with  blond  hair,  indolent  habit,  and
soft,  lax  fibres.  Gold  appears  to  be  more  suitable  to  male
persons,  whilst,  under  similar  circumstances,  platina  is
more  suitable  to  females.  Hypochondriasis. — Hysteria,
hysteric  spasms  and  convulsions. — Epilepsy. — Chlorosis,
with  whining  mood,  imagining  all  the  time  new  obstacles
and  new  losses. — Falling  down  without  any  consciousness,
the  face  becoming  blue. — Chronic  icterus. — Nightly  pains
of  the  bones  ; inflammation  and  caries  of  the  bones , espe-
cially after  the  abuse  of  mercury Injuries  from  abuse
of  mercury , especially  when  complicated  with  syphilis.
— Secondary  syphilis. — Scrof ulosis. — Tabes  meseraica  (in
this  disease,  Lobethal  ranks  gold  after  calcarea,  arsenic,
and  jodium.) — Arthritic  nodosities;  arthritic  symptoms
consequent  upon  sexual  and  mercurial  abuses. — Dropsical
affections.  — Herpes  of  the  prepuce,  complicated  with
mercurial  symptoms,  (in  this  disease,  gold  ought  to  be
used  in  alternation  with  nitric  and  phosphoric  acid.)
Rhagades  of  a syphilitic  nature. — Warts  and  condylomala
of  the  tongue,  prepuce,  and  anus.  Weakness  of  the  mind
and  memory  ; mental  fatigue,  consequent  upon  great  ex-
ertions of  the  mind- — Melancholia , with  loathing  of  life ,
and  inclination  to  commit  suicide. — Spleen  ; melancholia
of  every  kind.  (It  is  remarkable  that  gold  should  have
been  found  curative  in  the  mania  of  suicide,  which  it  is
capable  of  simulating  in  its  effects  upon  the  healthy  or-
ganism. Gold  also  holds  special  relations  to,  a depressed
stale  of  the  sexual  organs,  to  diseases  of  the  genital  organs,
and  especially  of  the  testicles.  This  latter  circumstance
is  remarkable  for  ibis  reason,  that  persons  who  had  com-
mitted suicide,  have  been  found  to  be  affected  with  dis-


182


AURTJM.


eases  of  the  genital  organs,  especially  hydatids  upon  the
ovaries  and  testes.)  Chronic  congestion  of  the  blood  to
the  head. — Hysteric  headache. — Megrim.— Headache,
consequent,  upon  mental  exertions.  — Exostoses  on  the
skull — Caries  of  the  mastoid  process. — Simple,  violent,
scrofulous  inflammation  of  the  eyes , especially  accompa-
nied by  great  intolerance  of  light. — Obscuration  of  the
sight  by  black  spots  hovering  before  the  eyes.  Visus  ne-
bulosus  ; half-sight;  apoplectic  and  abdominal  amaurosis;
amaurosis  consequent  upon  suppressed  anger. — Spots
upon  the  cornea  7 — Otorrhcea , consequent  upon  caries  of
the  ossicula  auris  and  the  mastoid  process. — Thick  tip  of
the  nose  in  scrofulous  individuals. — Ozcena , with  thick,
yellow  matter,  which  is  partly  liquid,  partly  blowm  out  in
the  shape  of  solid  clots,  and  always  accompanied  by  a
loathsome  stench  from  the  nose  ; want  of  smell,  and  con-
tinual obstruction  of  the  nose  ; Ozcena  syphilitica  et  scro-
fulosa;  Ozcena , with  caries  of  the  nasal  bones. — Carcino-
ma of  the  nose. — Swelling  and  ulceration  of  the  lips  in
scrofulous  individuals.  Inflammatory  prosopalgia  conse-
quent upon  abuse  of  mercury. — Caries  of  the  bones  of  the
face. — Congestive  toothache , toothache  consequent  upon
congestion  of  the  blood  to  the  head,  with  heat  in  the  head.
— Looseness  of  the  teeth. — Ulceration  and  caries  of  the
palate. — Syphilitic  ulcers  of  the  fauces  and  the  tongue,  (in
conjunction  with  nitric  acid.) — Scirrhous  induration  of  the
tongue. — Swelling  and  ulceration  of  the  tonsils. — Nightly
colic,  with  flatulence. — Ascites  and  anasarca,  when  origi-
nating in  a functional  disturbance  of  some  important  ab-
dominal organ. — Inguinal  hernice , both  when  hereditary
and  consequent  upon  cold,  especially  in  children. — Con-
stipation, originating  in  atony  of  the  intestinal  canal,  or
when  accompanied  by  strangulated  hernia — Hemorrhoi-
dal obstruction  of  the  rectum. — Ischuria  (consequent  upon
paralysis  of  the  bladder.) — Excited  sexual  instinct. — Too
frequent  nightly  pollutions.  Acute  and  chronic  orchitis  ;
swelling  of  the  testicles,  of  considerable  extent  and  great
hardness,  consequent  upon  removed  redness  and  painful-
ness.- — Prolapsus  and  induration  of  the  womb. — Exostoses
of  the  pelvic  bones. — Chronic  obstruction  of  the  nose. —
Chronic  catarrh  and  purulent  coryza ; ulceration  of  the


AURUM.


183


Schneiderian  membrane,  with  puriform,  ichorous,  stinking
discharge. — Influenza. — Stinking  breath. — Congestion  of
the  blood  to  the  chesty  and  congestive  asthma. — Suffo-
cating fits , with  violent  constrictive  oppression  of  the
chest. — Paralysis  and  hepatization  of  the  lungs. — Violent
palpitation  of  the  heart , occurring  in  paroxysms  several
times  during  the  day,  and  consequent  upon  congestion  of
the  blood  to  the  chest  and  heart,  accompanied  by  anxiety
and  oppression. — Arthritic  metastases  to  the  heart , espe-
cially  when  taking  the  form  of  palpitation,  suffocating  anx-
iety and  oppression  of  the  chest. — Stenocardia. — Chronic
affections  of  the  heart,  producing  hydrothorax,  especially
after  abuse  of  mercury. — Exostoses  of  the  bones  of  both
the  upper  and  lower  extremities.

Antidotes  : — Assafoetida.,  Bell.,  Camph.,  Chin.,  Coff.,
Cupr.,  Jod.,  Merc.,  Vinum.

Analogous  Remedies  : — Assafoet.,  Calc.,  Cupr.,  Jod.,
Merc.,  Puls.,  Silic.,  Snip. — 2.  Angust.,  Arg.,  Ars.,  Bell.,
Brom.,  Chin.,  Chlor.,  Coloc.,  Lycop.,  Mang.,  Mez.,  Ni-
tric ae.,  Phosph.,  Phosph.  acid.,  Plat. — 3.  Asar.

Moral  Symptoms. — * Dejected  and  full  of  grief.  He
is  dejected,  and  seeks  solitude.  He  imagines  to  have  lost
the  affection  of  his  friends  ; this  makes  him  sad,  even  unto
tears.  He  is  dissatisfied  with  every  thing ; he  imagines
to  see  everywhere  obstacles  in  his  way,  which  have  partly
been  occasioned  by  a contrary  fate,  partly  by  himself;
this  latter  makes  him  feel  very  much  dejected.  Melan-
choly ; he  imagines  not  to  be  fit  for  this  world,  and  * longs
for  death  ; thinking  of  death  gives  him  intense  joy.  Great
anguish  coming  from  the  praecordial  region,  and  driving
him  from  one  place  to  another,  so  that  he  can  remain  no-
where. Great  anguish  and  weakness,  they  think  him  near
dying.  Frequent  attacks  of  anguish  about  the  heart,  and
tremulous  fearfulness.  Excessive  anguish,  with  palpita-
tion of  the  heart,  weariness  in  all  the  limbs,  and  sleepiness.
Great  anguish,  * increasing  unto  self-destruction,  with
spasmodic  contraction  in  the  abdomen.  Uneasiness,  and
hurried  desire  for  bodily  and  mental  activity  ; he  cannot
do  any  thing  fast  enough,  and  cannot  live  so  as  to  be  sat-
isfied with  himself.  He  is  constantly  impelled  to  be  in
motion  ; and  he  is  sorry  for  his  inactivity,  although  he  can-


184


ATJRUM.


not  do  any  work.  He  feels  uneasy  and  uncertain,  without
any  orgasm  in  the  circulatory  system  ; he  imagines  to
neglect  something,  and  to  deserve  reproaches  in  conse-
quence ; he  appears  to  carry  this  uneasiness  about  him  in
his  mind,  and  it  deprives  him  of  all  energy  and  persever-
ance. Apprehensiveness  ; a mere  noise  at  the  door  made
him  apprehensive  ; he  feared  lest  some  one  should  come
in  ; dread  of  men.  Shyness.  Pusillanimity.  The  least
trifle  makes  him  feel  discouraged.  Discouragement  and
dejection  of  spirits  ; he  imagines  that  he  cannot  succeed
in  any  thing.  He  feels  discouraged  and  desponding;  he
imagines  that  he  does  every  tiling  wrong,  and  cannot  suc-
ceed in  any  thing.  Discouraged,  and  in  disunion  with
himself.  She  howls,  and  screams,  and  imagines  to  be
irretrievably  lost.  Loathing  of  life.  Constant  sullenness,
and  taciturnity.  Peevishness,  and  want  of  disposition  to
speak.  Unsociable  mood.  Some  persons  are  offensive
to  him.  Atrabilious  and  quarrelsome.  Extreme  dispo-
sition to  feel  offended  ; He  was  deeply  affected,  and  pro-
voked even  by  the  least  circumstance  which  had  the  ap-
pearance of  hurting  his  feelings.  He  becomes  angry  at  a
few  absent  persons,  while  thinking  of  them.  Peevish  and

* vehement ; the  least  contradiction  is  capable  of  exciting
his  wrath.  If  he  is  left  alone,  he  sits  still,  taciturn,  appa-
rently melancholy,  in  a corner  by  himself;  but  the  slight-
est contradiction  excites  his  wrath,  which  he  first  mani-
fests by  disputing  and  talking  a good  deal,  afterwards  by
uttering  a few,  detached  words,  (a.  3 d ) He  trembles
when  he  cannot  satisfy  his  anger.  He  seeks  every  oppor-
tunity to  quarrel,  and  say  coarse  things  to  those  around
him.  * Rash  anger  and  vehemence.  * She  alternately
weeps  and  laughs,  as  if  she  were  not  conscious  of  herself.

* Silent  peevishness  and  cheerfulness  often  alternate  one
with  another,  (a.  1 and  3 h.)  Good  humour,  the  whole
day,  with  talkativeness  and  self-content,  (reaction.)
y Cheerful,  contented  humour,  he  constantly  wishes  to
converse  with  other  people.  Tolerable  degree  of  cheer-
fulness, agreeable  ease,  (a.  2 h.)  Tremulous  agitation  of
the  nerves,  as  in  joyous  hope.  The  intellectual  faculties
are  more  acute,  and  the  memory  more  faithful,  (reaction.)
She  is  anxious,  deeply  to  reflect  over  this  or  that  subject ;


AtmUM.


1S5


this,  however,  makes  her  quite  weak,  tremulous,  cold,  and
damp  over  the  body.  In  a reverie,  he  says  something  ab-
surd to  a person.  Mental  labour  wears  him  out;  he  feels
exhausted.  Mental  labour  gives  him  a sensation  of  nau-
sea ; which  takes  hold  of  his  whole  being.

H ead. — Obtusion  of  the  head.  Obtusion  of  the  head,
early  on  rising,  with  heaviness  in  the  occiput.  A kind  of
hypochondriacal  intoxication  ; the  head  feels  full  of  com-
pressed air,  especially  towards  the  nape  of  the  neck.
When  speaking,  he  smiles  involuntarily.  Vertigo,  when
stooping,  as  if  the  person  turned  in  a circle  ; the  symptom
goes  off  on  raising  the  head.  When  standing,  vertigo,
which  forces  him  to  sit  down.  When  walking  in  the  open
air,  vertigo  as  if  he  were  drunk,  and  would  fall  to  one  side;
lie  was  forced  to  lie  down,  but  even  then  the  vertigo  re-
turned for  some  time  at  the  slightest  motion,  (a.  43  h.)
Headache  as  from  an  incipient  cold.  Stunning,  pressive
headache,  as  from  violent  wind.  Headache,  ever  since
the  morning,  as  from  a bruised  brain  ; when  reflecting  or
reading,  especially  when  talking  or  writing,  the  headache
increases  to  the  extremest  violence,  and  a perfect  confu-
sion of  ideas  ; when  ceasing  to  reflect,  to  speak,  or  to
write,  the  headache  discontinues,  until  it  disappears  en-
tirely at  seven  o’clock  in  the  evening,  (a.  6 h.)  Head-
ache sometimes  as  from  a contusion,  sometimes  like  a
painful  pressure  in  one  part  of  the  brain,  sometimes  like
tearing  ; it  has  increased  ever  since  the  morning,  and  dis-
appears at  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  (a.  24  h.)  Pres-
sive pain  in  the  temples.  Pressure  in  the  left,  side  of  the
forehead,  (a.  1 h.  and  a half.)  Pressive  tearing  in  the
head , erratic , especially  in  the  forehead,  with  a feeling  of
vertigo.  Pressive  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,
from  the  occiput  to  the  forehead,  (a.  3 h.)  Tearing  pres-
sure in  the  right  occiput.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  left
side  of  the  vertex,  more  violent  during  mol  ion.  Tearing
headache , in  front,  in  the  forehead,  and  the  temples,  deep
in  the  brain,  abating  in  the  open  air.  Tearing  in  the  left
side  of  the  vertex,  (a.  I h.  and  a half.)  Tearing  in  the
right  side  of  the  vertex,  (a.  3 h.)  Tearings  in  the  left
temple.  Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  more
violent  during  motion.  Fine  tearing  in  the  forehead.


186


ATJRUM.


Fine  tearing  from  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  through  the
brain,  as  far  as  t lie  forehead  ; more  violent  during  motion,
(a.  1 h.)  Lancinating  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  vertex,
(a.  17  d.)  Grinding,  boring,  and  slight  pulling  in  one  side
of  the  head,  early  in  the  morning,  shortly  after  waking  up,
increased  by  coughing,  and  bending  backwards  of  the
head.  Uni-lateral,  sharply  throbbing,  hacking  headache.
Tingling  sensation  in  the  fore  part  of  the  head.  * Rush
of  blood  to  the  head.  * Great  determination  of  the  blood
to  the  brain,  (a.  three  quarters  of  an  h.)  Violent  rush  of  the
blood  to  the  head,  when  stooping  ; it  passes  off  again  after
raising  the  head,  (a.  8 d.)  * Turmoil  and  roaring  in  the

head,  as  if  he  were  sitting  close  to  a roaring  water,  (a.  14
d.)  The  bones  of  the  head  pained  him  on  lying  down,  as
if  they  were  broken  ; so  that  all  his  vital  energy  seemed
paralysed.  Small  bony  tumour,  on  the  left  side  and
the  superior  part  of  the  forehead.  Small  bony  tumour  on
the  right  side  of  the  vertex , with  boring  pain,  that  grows
worse  when  the  tumour  is  touched.  Pressive  pain  on  the
forehead,  externally,  (a.  10  h.)  Pressive  pain  on  the  left
temple,  externally,  (a.  32  h.)  Pressure  on  the  left  temple,
worse  by  touch,  (a.  a quarter  of  an  h.)  Stitch  in  the  cen-
tre of  the  forehead,  where  the  hair  begins.  Prickings,  as
from  pins,  in  the  forehead,  externally,  (a.  24  h.)  A stitch
on  the  frontal  bone,  resembling  a slow  traction,  (a.  6 h.)
His  head  is  shaken  sideways,  and  up  and  down.

Eyes. — Sensation  in  his  eyes,  when  looking,  as  in  a
violent  state  of  excitement,  with  heat,  as  if  the  blood  were
pressing  upon  the  optic  nerve.  Sensation  of  weakness
and  pressure  in  the  eyes.  Pressure  upon  the  left  eve  from
without  inwards,  (a.  8 d.)  Pressive  pain  on  the  right  eye
ball,  from  without  inwards,  more  violent  during  motion,
(a.  6 h.)  Pressure  in  the  eyes , as  if  some  foreign  body
had  got  in  there.  Immense  spasmodic  pressure  in  the
posterior  segment  of  the  left  orbit.  Sensation  in  the  in-
ternal and  superior  angle  of  the  left  eye  ball,  as  if  it  were
pressed  out.  Tension  in  the  eyes , which  makes  seeing
difficult , (a.  1 h.)  Immense  tension  in  the  eyes,  with
diminution  of  sight  ; the  tension  is  more  violent  when  fix-
ing the  eyes  upon  something,  lessi  when  closing  them,  (a.
9 d.)  Fine  tearing  in  the  right  orbit,  close  to  the  external


AURTJM.


187


canthus,  (a.  5 h.)  Dull  stitch  at  the  inferior  part  of  the
left  orbit,  from  within  outwards.  Several  single  stitches
in  the  internal  canthus  and  lid  of  the  left  eye,  (a.  36  h.)
Biting  pain  in  the  left  upper  eye-lid.  A kind  of  burning
in  the  eyes.  Itching  and  burning  in  the  right  canthus.
Painless,  smooth  tubercles  upon  the  border  of  the  right
lower  lid.  Swelling  of  the  lower  lids.  Blueish  appear-
ance of  the  inner  canthi.  Distended,  protruding  eyes.
Contraction  of  the  pupils,  (a.  2,  4 h.)  Dilatation  of  the
pupils,  (a.  3 h.  and  a half.)  Indistinct  sight,  as  if  a black
crape  were  drawn  before  the  eyes,  (a.  6 d.)  His  sight  is
lost  for  a moment.  Half-sightedness,  as  if  the  upper  half
of  the  eye  were  covered  with  a dark  body,  so  that  he  can
only  see  t lie  lower  objects  with  the  inferior  half,  the  upper
objects  remain  invisible.  He  cannot  distinguish  any  thing
clearly,  because  he  sees  every  thing  double , and  one  object
is  seen  as  if  it  were  mixed  with  the  other , with  a violent
tension  in  the  eyes.  * Fiery  sparks  before  the  eyes.

Ears. — Tension  in  the  ears.  Pressive  tearing  in  the
left  meatus  auditorius  interims.  Crackling  in  the  left  ear.
Grumbling  before  the  left  ear.  * P oaring  in  the  ears,
early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed.  The  parotid  gland  is
painful  to  the  touch,  as  if  it  were  pressed  or  contused.

Nose. — The  right  nasal  bone  and  the  adjoining  part  of
the  upper  jaw  are  'painful  to  the  touch , especially  at  the
place  where  the  infra-orbital  nerve  comes  out.  Itching
of  the  nostrils.  Shootings  of  the  septum  of  the  nose,  from
above  downwards.  Biting  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the
nose.  Biting  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  nose,  so  that
the  tears  come  into  his  eyes,  as  is  the  case  when  there  is
a desire  of  sneezing,  excited  by  strong  sun  light,  or  in  ex-
alted pious  grief,  or  in  the  highest  degree  of  pity.  Itching
titillation  in  the  wings  of  the  nose,  as  in  a cold,  sometimes
with  a desire  to  scratch.  Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  nose.
Soreness  in  both  nostrils,  especially  when  touching  them.

* Painful  nostrils,  closed  by  ulcers,  so  that  he  cannot
breathe  through  the  nose.  * Ulcerative  crust  in  the  right
nostril,  yellowish,  almost  painless,  and  dry.  * Swelling
of  the  nose,  in  the  room,  after  walking  in  the  open  air.

* Swelling  and  redness  of  the  right  nostril  and  underneath.
Dark;  brown-yed,  little  elevated  spots  upon  the  nose,


188


ATJRTJM.


•which  ache  wrhen  touched,  (a.  24  h.)  Fine  smell ; every
thing  has  too  strong  a smell  for  him.  The  smoke  of  the
light  is  offensive  to  his  smell.  Frequently  a sweetish
smell  in  his  nose.  Momentary  smell  of  brandy  in  his
nose,  with  dyspnoea.  Putrid  smell  in  the  nose  when
blowing  it.

Face. — Violent,  tearing  in  the  zygoma.  Drawing  tear-
ing on  the  left  side  of  the  face.  * Tension  in  the  malar
bones  and  in  the  ears.  Painful  stitches  in  one  cheek,  (1.
d.)  Burning  stitches  in  the  zygoma.  Itching  pricking,
as  from  pins,  uj^on  the  right  side  of  the  face.  Eruption
in  the  face,  fine  pimples  with  their  tips  filled  with  pus,  for
some  hours.  Bloated  face,  shining  as  from  sweat,  with
distended,  protruding  eyes.  Swelling  of  both  cheeks,
with  swelling  of  the  lips  and  nose,  early  in  the  morning.
Swelling  of  one  cheek , with  drawing  and  tearing  in  the
upper  and  lower  jaw-bones,  and  a sensation  of  hacking,
and  of  grumbling  pain  in  the  teeth,  which  appear  too  long.
Burning  vesicle  upon  the  vermilion-border  of  the  lower
lip.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Tearing  in  the  right  half  of  the
chin.  Tearing  pressure  at  the  right  lower  jaw,  going  off
by  pressing  upon  it.  Intermittent,  dull  stitches  at  the  ex-
ternal border  of  the  lower  jaw.  Pain  in  a gland  of  the
lower  jaw,  as  if  it  were  swollen.  Dull  pressive  pain,
either  with  or  wilhout  deglutition,  in  a gland  below  the  an-
gle of  the  lower  jaw.  The  teeth  of  the  upper  anterior  row
are  very  painful  during  mastication.  During  mastication,
the  person  suddenly  experiences  a painful  dullness  in  one
of  the  upper  molar  teeth.  Hacking  and  grumbling  pain
in  the  teeth,  with  swelling  of  the  cheeks.  Shooting  pain
in  the  upper  row.  Dull  tearing  in  the  two  posterior  molar
teelh  of  the  right  upper  jaw,  excited  by  touch  and  eating,
during  a painful  swelling  of  the  gums.  Toothache  caused
by  air  entering  the  mouth.  Single  stitches  in  the  teeth.
Sensalion  of  dullness  of  the  molar  teeth,  (a.  half  an  h.)
Looseness  of  the  teeth,  even  the  anterior  teeth,  in  sudden
paroxysms.  Swelling  of  the  gums  of  the  molar  teeth  of
the  right  jaw,  with  pressive  soreness  when  the  parts  are
touched,  or  when  eating.  Painful  pustules  on  the  gums,
as  if  a fistula  dentalis  would  form.  Ulcer  on  the  gums,


189


ATTRUM.  ]

with  swelling  of  the  cheeks,  (a.  10  d.)  A kind  of  pres-
sure in  the  region  of  the  palate,  for  several  hours.

Mouth. — Attacks  of  distention  of  the  pharynx,  as  in
vomiting,  but  without  nausea.  Painful  obstacle  to  deglu-
tition in  the  left  side  of  the  pharynx.  Stinging  soreness
in  the  throat,  only  during  degluition.  Agreeably  sweetish
saliva  accumulates  in  his  mouth.  Much  phlegm  in  the
throat,  for  several  days.  Frequently  phlegm  in  the  throat
which  can  be  hawked  up,  but  which  prevents  a full  inspira-
tion, (a.  2 h.)

Taste  and  Appetite. — Fetid  odor  from  the  mouth,
in  the  evening  and  at  night,  unperceived  by  himself.
Smell  out  of  the  mouth  as  of  old  cheese.  * Putrid
smell  out  of  the  mouth.  The  taste  in  the  mouth  is  insipid.
Sweet  taste  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  tongue.  Agreeable,
milky  taste  in  the  mouth.  Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  as
of  rotten  game,  between  the  meals.  Sometimes  sourish
taste  in  the  mouth,  (a.  2 hours  and  a half)  Bitter  taste
in  the  mouth  with  sensation  of  dryness,  (a.  8 h.)  Much
thirst,  for  six  days.  He  has  no  appetite  for  any  thing  ; he
can  only  eat  milk  and  bread.  Repugnance  to  meat.
Great  longing  for  coffee.  He  is  forced  to  eat  hastily,
especially  at  the  beginning  of  the  meal.  He  relishes  his
meal  a good  deal,  but  his  appetite  is  not  appeased  ; he
might  have  wished  to  eat  again  shortly  after.  During
eating,  the  anxiety  of  mind  leaves  him.  Nausea  in  the
stomach  and  throat.

Stomach. — Sensation  of  nausea;  qualmishness  from
the  stomach  and  in  the  abdomen.  Regurgitations  as  if
the  person  would  vomit;  accompanied  by  pressure  in  the
abdomen.  Eructations  tasting  of  the  drink,  (beer.)
Pain  at  the  stomach,  as  of  hanger.  Pressure  in  the  re-
gion of  the  stomach,  at  noon.

Abdomen. — Swelling  of  the  prtecordial  region  and  the
whole  upper  part  of  the  belly,  with  a painful  stitch  when
pressing  upon  it  or  lacing  it  tightly.  Continual  pressure
in  the  hypochondria,  as  from  flatulence,  especially  after
taking  some  food  or  drink,  often  increased  by  motion  and
walking  ; this  pressure  goes  off  without  flatus.  Stitches
in  the  left  hypochondrium,  like  stitches  in  the  spleen.
Heaviness  in  the  abdomen,  with  icy-cold  hands  and  feet.


190


ATJRTJM.


Pressure  in  the  abdomen.  Tensive  pressure  in  the  abdo-
men, just  below  the  navel,  and  on  both  sides  in  the  lumbar
regions,  with  feeling  of  fulness,  (a.  53  h.)  Tensive  pres-
sure in  the  abdomen  and  the  lumbar  regions,  with  tenes-
mus, (a.  6 d.)  Pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  erratic,
(a.  12  b.)  Dull  pinching  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  then
diarrhoea,  and  after  the  diarrhoea,  distended  abdomen.
Painful  feeling  of  contraction  in  the  abdomen.  Single
tearings  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  high  up  as
below  the  ribs,  as  if  every  thing  there  were  dashed  to
pieces  ; this  forces  him  to  bend  himself  crooked,  when
sitting,  (a.  36  h.)  Pain  of  contusion  in  the  right  iliac
region,  when  sitting;  this  pain  goes  off  when  rising,  and
drawing  up  the  thigh,  (a*  24  h.)  Colic  in  the  abdomen.
Quivering  twitches  in  the  left  half  of  the  nates,  which
cause  him  to  start,  (a.  6 h.)  Pain  in  the  groin  as  from  a
swollen  gland.  Want  of  flexibility,  and  painful  stiffness
in  the  hip  and  the  tendons  of  the  quadrat i lumborum,
when  walking  or  stretching  the  legs  apart,  as  after  a long
journey  on  foot,  (a.  3 h.  and  a half.)  Traction  from  the
groin  into  the  thighs.  Drawing  pain  in  the  inons  Vene-
ris.  Burning  pain  in  the  abdominal  ring,  which  is  other-
wise healthy.  Cutting  thrusts  in  both  groins,  which  force
him  to  draw  the  abdomen  in,  and  the  feet  up.  Weakness
in  the  groin.  * Pressing  in  the  right  abdominal  ring,  as
if  a hernia  would  come  out,  when  sitting  and  stretching
the  body  ; goes  off  when  rising.  * Protrusion  of  an  in-
guinal hernia,  with  great,  cramp-like  pain  ; flatus  seem  to
get  into  the  hernia,  lie  is  much  troubled  with  flatulency  ;
it  becomes  incarcerated  under  the  left  'ribs,  with  lancinat-
ing pain.  Colic  with  flatulence,  shortly  after  the  lightest
and  most  moderate  meals.  Colic,  with  flatulence ; a
quantity  of  flatus  which  do  not  pass,  and,  therefore,  cause
painful  pressure,  squeezing  and  anxiety ; both  when  at
rest  and  in  molion.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Grunt-
ing in  the  abdomen.  Grunting  in  the  abdomen.  Rumbling
and  grunting  in  the  belly,  (a.  1 h.)  Emission  of  a quan-
tity of  flatulence,  (1.  d.)  Emission  of  a quantity  of  fetid
flatulence,  (a.  8 h.)  Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  with  a
sensation  as  if  he  would  go  to  stool,  especially  after  din-
ner, (a.  36  h.)


-ATJRIJM.


191


Stool. — Constipation  for  three  days.  Stool  very  large
in  size,  passing  otf  with  difficulty.  Very  hard,  knotty
stool  every  day.  Soft  stool  every  morning,  with  a little
pinching.  Unusually  copious  stool,  in  the  evening,  (a.  10
h-)  Copious,  but  normal  stool,  (a.  16  h.)  Diarrhoea.
Nightly  diarrhoea,  with  much  burning  in  the  rectum.

White-yellowish  stool.  The  external  border  of  the  rec-

*/  _

turn  is  painfully  swollen.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  rectum.

Urinary  Organs. — Constant  desire  for  micturition,
with  little,  but  natural  urine.  He  emits  more  urine  than
corresponds  to  the  quantity  he  drinks.  Turbid  urine ,
like  butter-milk , with  a high  sediment  of  mucus.  Dull
lancinations  in  the  urethra.  The  sexual  desire  which
had  been  dormant  in  him  for  a long  time,  is  roused.
Much  desire  for  coition,  early  after  rising,  with  violent
erections.  He  was  unable  to  sleep  the  whole  night,  on
account  of  his  sexual  desire  being  roused  ; he  finally  had
to  satisfy  it  by  an  embrace  (1.  n.)  For  twro  nights  he  is
full  of  lewd  fancies,  the  penis  being  small  and  relaxed
(2.  3.  n.)  Erections  many  nights  in  succession.  Nightly
erections,  without  effusions  of  semen,  (1.  n.)  Nightly
erections  and  pollutions . Pollutions,  at  night,  (the  first
nights.)  Nightly  pollutions  with  voluptuous  dreams,  (a.  7
d.)  Pollutions  three  nights  in  succession,  without  any
subsequent  weakness.  The  prostatic  juice  comes  out  of
the  penis,  which  is  relaxed.  Painful  twitches  in  the  penis,
from  before  backwards.  Prickings  as  from  pins,  at  the
extremity  of  the  glands  ; every  single  pricking  is  followed
by  a similar  one  above  the  navel,  towards  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  (a.  3 h.)  Tearing  stitches  at  the  glans,  when  he
is  obliged  to  urinate,  (a.  3 h.)  Itching  of  the  scrotum.
Pressive  and  tensive  pain  in  the  right  testicle,  as  from  con-
tusion, (a.  3 h.  and  a half)  * Smelling  of  the  right  tes-
ticle, — with  pressive  pain  when  touching  or  rubbing  it ;
this  symptom  came  on  for  several  evenings  at  six  o’clock,
i and  ceased  again  towards  eleven  o’clock,  (a.  5 d)  Pains
: in  the  abdomen,  as  from  labour,  as  if  the  menses  would
; make  their  appearance.

Cold,  Catarrh.  — Sense  of  obstruction  of  the  nose,  as
i in  dry  coryza  ; nevertheless  the  air  passes  freely  through
i the  nose,  (a.  2 h,  and  a half.)  This  nostril  appears  ob-


192


ATJRUM.


structed,  although  air  passes  through  it.  Coryza.  Violent
fluent.  Coryza.

Respiratory  Organs. — Sensations,  dry  catarrh  on  the
chest,  early  in  the  morning,  on  waking  up  ; it  is  only  with
great  trouble  that  he  succeeds  in  hawking  up  a little
phlegm,  but  even  this  only  after  rising  from  the  bed,  (a.
16  h.)  Viscid  phlegm  in  the  larynx,  which  it  is  difficult
to  hawk  up.  Frequently  phlegm  deep  in  the  larynx,
which  he  does  not  succeed  in  coughing  up,  even  with  the
greatest  effort.  Phlegm  deep  in  the  lungs  which  is  easily
thrown  up  in  a large  quantity  ; this  is  succeeded  by  free
and  expansive  breathing,  whereas,  generall}7,  he  was
asthmatic.  Cough.  Cough  at  night,  on  account  of  de-
ficiency of  breathing.

Chest. — Oppression  of  the  chest  and  the  abdomen

when  coughing.  Stitches  under  the  left  ribs  when  cough-
ed o o

ing.  Frequent  deep  breathing.  Intensely  painful  stitches
under  the  ribs,  when  breathing,  deep  and  yawning  ; they
prevent  breathing  and  yawning,  cease  on  going  to  bed.
Stitches  in  the  left  mamma  when  breathing.  Sharp
stitches,  when  breathing,  apparently  in  the  side  of  the
bladder.  During  an  expiralion,  grunting  in  the  top  of  the
chest,  descending  into  the  abdomen  and  the  groin  ; this  is
succeeded  by  quick  beatings  of  the  heart,  accompanied  by
fainlishness  and  anguish  ; then  slumber.  Shuddering  in
the  right  mamma,  when  yawning.  Difficulty  of  breathing.
Severe  dyspnoea.  Severe  asthma,  when  walking  in  the
open  air.  Asthma,  when  laughing  or  walking  fast,  as  if
the  chest  were  too  tight  for  breathing,  and  too  flat  in  front,
(a.  44  h.)  Immense  dyspnoea , with  difficulty  of  breathing
at  night.  Dyspnoea , also  when  at  rest,  which  cannot  be
relieved  by  any  position  of  the  body;  he  constantly  takes
deep  breath , and  cannot  inspire  air  enough.  Dyspnoea ,
with  dull  stitches  in  the  chest. , when  inspiring  air.  Tight-
ness of  the  thoracic  cavity,  with  fearfulness,  (a.  3 d.)
Pressure  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  with  extreme  an-
guish. Pressure  on  the  sternum,  with  manners  denoling
anxiety  and  eager  expectation,  as  if  something  very
agreeable  were  to  happen  to  him.  Pressure  on  the  ster-
num, as  of  something  hard,  with  drawing  tearings  towards
the  shoulders.  Pressure  on  the  left  side,  near  the  pit  of


AURUM.


193


the  stomach,  below  the  cartilages  of  the  superior  false
ribs,  more  violent  during  an  expiration,  (a.  7 d.)  Dull  op-
pressive stitches  under  the  cartilages  of  the  first  three  ribs
behind  the  right  mamma  ; they  sometimes  become  con-
tinued, and  then  produce  the  sensation  of  a plug  which  is
inserted  there  ; sometimes  they  are  slowly  intermittent,
and  are  little  felt  in  walking;  externally  the  place  is  ted,
(a.  16  h ) A few  very  violent  stitches  in  the  chest  over
the  heart,  (a.  72  h ) Sharp  stitches  in  ihe  sternum,  (a.  2
h.)  Dull  stitches  in  both  sides  of  the  chest,  with  heat  in
the  chest,  and  dyspnoea,  increased  by  inspiration.  Dull,
painful  stitches  and  lancinations,  on  die  right  side,  near  the
sternum,  under  the  last  true  ribs.  Dull,  cutting  pain  on
the  left  side,  near  the  sternum,  more  violent  during  an  in-
spiration, (a.  9 d ) When  walking,  the  heart  seems  to
shake  as  if  it  were  loose.  Sometimes  one  single  very
violent  beat  of  the  heart.  * Palpitation  of  the  heart.
(a.  half  an  hour.)  * Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,
(a.  4 d.)

Back. — Pinching  pain  on  the  internal  side  of  the  ischia*
tic  bones.  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  from  fatigue,
(a.  3 h.)  Cutting  over  the  small  of  the  back  when  sitting,
as  if  a pressure  were  made  there  with  a sharp  instrument.
Early  in  the  morning  he  felt  such  a severe  pain  in  the  dor-
sal spine,  that  he  was  unable  to  move  a limb.  Pressure
on  the  left  side,  near  the  lumbar  vertebras,  and  on  the  upper
border  of  the  os  innominatum.  Sharp  piercing  pain  in  the
right  loin,  only  during  expiration.  Fine,  tearing  stitches  on
the  right  side,  near  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  going  off  when-
ever pressure  is  made  upon  the  part.

Neck — Intensely  painful  pricking,  as  with  pins,  close
below  the  right  scapula,  near  the  dorsal  spine,  (a.  half  an
hour)  Tearing  pain  at  the  internal  side  of  the  scapula,
and  below  it,  when  bending  the  body  backwards  and  to
the  left,  (a.  1 1 h.)  Tension  in  the  neck,  as  if  a muscle
were  too  short,  even  when  at  rest,  but  more  violent  when
stooping,  (a.  10  h.)  Tearing  pressure  at  the  neck,  on  the
right  side,  lower  region,  near  the  clavicle,  (a.  14  d.)  Jerk-
ing, tearing  lancinations  in  the  left  external  muscles
of  the  neck,  (a.  7 d.)  Eruption,  consisting  of  fine  pim-
ples, with  tips  full  of  pus,  on  the  neck  and  chest,  for  some
hours.  9


194


AtIXtUM,


Upper  Extremities. — Tearing  tension  under  the  axilla.
Fine  stitches  upon  the  shoulder.  Soreness  of  the  shoul-
ders, even  without  touching  or  moving  them.  Draw-
ing pain  along  the  left  arm,  over  the  bone  ; it  goes  off  by
motion.  Pressure  on  the  left  upper  arm,  near  the  perios-
teum. (a.  48  h.)  Pressure  on  the  lower  surface  and  on  the
middle  of  the  right  upper  arm.  Tearing  pressure  on  the
anterior  surface  of  both  upper  arms,  (a.  15  d.)  Fine  tear-
ing in  the  left  upper  arm,  most  severe  on  baring  the  arm,
(a.  3 h.)  Cramp-like  tearing  in  the  elbow-joint  of  the  right
arm.  The  fore-arms  feel  heavy  when  at  rest,  but  not  in
motion,  (a.  12  h.)  Pressure  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the
fore-arm.  Pressure  on  the  external  side  of  the  right  fore-
arm, (a.  12  d.)  Intermittent,  tearing  pressure  on  the  inner
side  of  the  left  fore-arm.  Tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  wrist-
joint,  (a.  8 h.)  Tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bones.  Cramp-
like tearing  in  the  hones  of  both  wrists , deep  in  the  inte-
rior, extending  from  the  lower  to  the  upper  row  of  the  car-
Dus,  especially  at  night,  but  also  by  day.  Cramp-like
pain  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  left  hand,  especially
the  thumb,  without  interfering  with  motion.  Sense  as  of
pricking,  evanescant  and  almost  like  stitches,  between  the
thumb  and  the  index.  Itching  of  the  hand  between  the  thumb
and  the  index  finger.  Traction  in  the  joints  of  the  fingers.
Tearing  in  the  posterior  joints  of  the  right  fingers,  (a.  4 d.)
Tearing  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  left  little  finger.  Fine
tearing  in  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  Fine  tearing  in
the  anterior  joint  of  the  right  thumb.  Dull  tearing  in  the
joints  of  the  fingers  of  both  hands,  which  often  spreads  in-
to the  phalanges,  (a.  5 d.)

Lower  Extremities. — Uncommon  paralytic  pain  in
ihe  hip-joint,  only  when  rising  from  a seat  and  walking,  not
when  sitting.  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  region  of  the  hip,
on  the  inner  brim  of  the  pelvis,  increased  by  rubbing,  (a.
36  h.)  In  the  glutei  muscles,  a fine  stitch,  which  is  seve-
ral times  repeated,  winds  downwards,  (a.  16  h.)  The
thigh  feels  paralyzed,  and  the  tendon  of  the  quadratus
lamborum  is  so  painfully  stiff,  that  the  thigh  cannot  be  ele-
vated. Weakness  of  the  thigh  when  walking.  Pain  in
the  right  femur,  as  if  it  were  broken,  on  laying  the  right
thigh  across  the  left.  When  sitting,  on  laving  the  left  ex-
tremity across  the  right,  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  right


AURUM.


195


thigh  appear  to  be  twitching.  Pressive  and  tensive  pain
in  the  muscles  of  the  left  thigh,  when  walking  in  the  open
air;  relieved  when  sitting,  but  not  when  standing,  walking,
or  by  touching  the  parts.  Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  tendon
of  the  psoas-muscle,  down  into  the  thigh,  when  sitting  ; go-
ing off  when  rising.  Tearing  in  the  thigh,  as  from  growing,
only  during  motion,  not  when  sitting,  (a.  24  h.)  At  night,
there  forms  a sore  place,  when  lying  down,  on  the  external
surface  of  the  left  thigh.  Simple  pain  when  walking,  in
the  right  knee.  Painful  stiffness  and  sense  of  paralysis  of
the  knees,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Pain  in  the
knees , as  if  they  were  firmly  bandaged , when  sitting  and
walking.  The  right  knee  becomes  weak  from  walking,
so  that  a drawing  pain  may  be  felt  in  it  when  walking,  and
setting  the  foot  upon  the  floor,  (a.  24  h.)  Tottering  of  the
knees.  Pressure  on  the  left  tibia,  when  stretching  the  leg.
Dull,  gnawing  pain  in  both  sides  of  the  leg,  over  the  mal-
leoli, together  with  a few  sharp  stitches  in  the  tendo  Achil-
lis,  when  at  rest ; they  pass  off  during  motion,  (a.  14  h.)
Small  tubera  on  the  leg  and  below  the  knee  ; when  slight-
ly rubbed  they  are  changed  to  thick,  hard  nodosities  under
the  skin,  (5.  8.  d.)  Indurations  under  the  skin,  on  the
leg,  over  the  heel,  and  behind  the  knees,  with  violent  itch-
ing, which  can  hardly  be  borne  when  walking,  (1 1.  d.)
Small  and  larger  elevations  on  the  legs  and  calves,  looking
like  the  blotches  from  the  stinging  of  nettles,  burning,  and
feeling  like  hard  knots,  of  a dirty,  yellow  colour,  disappear-
ing again  after  a few  hours,  and  forming  less  in  the  room
than  in  the  open  air.  Hard,  red  swelling  of  the  leg,  from
the  malleolus  to  the  calf,  occasioned  by  the  rubbing  of  the
boot ; going  off  again  after  a short  rest.  Pressure  in  the
hollow  of  the  sole  of  the  foot,  as  from  something  hard.
Tensive  pressure  near  the  internal  malleolus  of  the  right
foot,  (a.  5 d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  feet.  Severe  drawing
in  both  heels,  in  the  evening,  when  going  to  bed.  Para-
lytic drawing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  big  toe,  as  far
as  the  extremity  of  the  toe.  Tearing  pain  in  the  posterior-
part  of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  (a.  30  h.)  Violent  stitches
on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  behind  the  toes.  The  heels
are  painful  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration,  or  as  if  an  ex-
travasation of  blood  had  taken  place  under  the  skin.  Itch-


196


AURUMv


ing  of  the  joints  and  soles  of  the  feet.  Itching  of  the  joints
of  the  feel,  especially  when  walking,  (7.  d ) Grinding
pain  in  the  formerly  existing  chilblain,  (a.  1 h.)  Pain  as
irom  a bruise  or  contusion  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  big
toe,  when  walking.  Drawing  in  the  joints  of  the  toes.
Paralytic  drawing  in  the  toes  of  the  right  foot.  All  the
joints  feel  bruised,  early  in  the  morning  and  the  whole
forenoon.  Simple  pain,  or  pain  as  from  a bruise,  early  in
the  morning,  when  in  bed,  in  all  the  joints,  especially  in  the
small  of  the  back  and  the  knees;  the  pain  increases  the
more  he  lies  still  ; after  rising,  the  pain  passes  off.  Pain
as  from  bruises  in  the  Head  and  in  all  the  limbs , early ,
when  in  bed , most  violent  when  at  rest;  passes  off  imme-
diately after  rising.  Going  to  sleep,  numbness  and  insen-
sibility of  the  arms  and  legs  early  on  waking  up,  more
when  lying  still  than  in  motion.  Shooting  and  drawing
pain  in  arms  and  legs  occasionally.  In  the  afternoon  pain-
ful traction  in  the  veins,  with  exhaustion.  Violent  orgasm
as  if  the  blood  were  boiling,  (a.  24  h.)  All  her  blood  ap-
pears to  rush  from  her  head  into  the  lower  extremities  ;
they  feel  paralyzed,  and  she  has  to  sit  down  immediately.
Internal  emptiness  and  weakness  of  the  whole  body.  Ex-
cessive sensitiveness  in  the  whole  body  ; susceptibility  for
every  sort  of  pain;  on  thinking  of  it,  he  imagines  already
to  feel  it ; everything  is  disagreeable  to  him.  All  his  sen-
sations arc  fine  and  acute.  (On  thinking  of  a motion,  he
makes  small  motions  without  knowing  it.)  Feeling  of
comfort  in  the  whole  body,  (re-action.)  Even  when  the
weather  is  ever  so  unpleasant,  he  feels  well  in  the  open
air;  it  agrees  with  him.  Erratic  formication  over  the  body.
Quickly  passing,  but  intense  itching  of  the  abdomen,  of
the  hips,  of  the  knees,  the  arms  and  the  wrists.  Itching
and  burning  shootings,  erratic,  almost  like  stitches.  Pus-
tules in  the  face,  on  the  neck  and  chest.  Early  in  the
morning  very  tired  ; her  legs  ached  so  that  she  would  have,
liked  to  lie  down  immediately.  Early  on  waking  up,  very
feeble.  Suddenly  great  lassitude,  in  the  afternoon,  when
sitting  or  lying  down  ; he  fell  asleep  by  it ; on  waking  up
the  lassitude  had  disappeared,  (a.  9 h.)

Sleep. — Drowsiness  by  day.  Slumber,  with  weakness
of  head,  when  sitting,  by  day.  Invincible  sleep  after  din-


AURUM.


197


ner  ; during  this  sleep  his  mind  was  ihronged  with  ideas,
(a.  4 h.)  One  is  awake  ihe  whole  night.  but  without  pain  ;
nevertheless  no  sleepiness  or  lassitude  in  the  morning.
Ever  since  4 o’clock  in  the  morning,  he  cannot  sleep  well  ;
he  turns  from  one  side  to  another,  because  he  cannot  long
remain  in  one  situation,  and  ihe  hand  upon  which  he  is  ly-
ing, gets  soon  tired.  At  night  he  could  neilher  lie  upon
the  left  nor  upon  the  right  side.  His  sleep  is  uneasy,  dur-
ing which  he  feels  the  pains.  At  nighl,  painful  accumula-
tion of  flatulence,  especially  in  ihe  left  hypochondriuin,
He  sohs  loud  when  asleep.  Frequent  waking  up,  at  night,
as  by  fright.  He  wakes  up  in  violent  dreams.  Frightful
dreams  about  thieves,  with  loud  screams  while  asleep.
Frightful  dreams.  Frightful  dreams  at  night.  Horrid
dream,  at  night.  He  dreams  that  he  is  to  fall  from  a great
height.  Dreams  about  dead  men.  Dreams  full  of  dis-
pute. Dreams  with  constant  erection,  every  night.  Agree-
able and  sensible  dreams,  blit  which  cannot  be  remembered.
Vivid  dreams  at  night,  which  cannot  be  remembered.  She
dreamed  much  in  the  evening,  immediately  after  falling
asleep,  as  if  some  one  were  talking  to  her  ; she  was  yet
half  awake.  She  dreamed  the  whole  night  1 hat  she  was
in  darkness.  The  child  woke  up  after  three  o’clock,  early
in  the  morning,  and  spoke  quickly,  with  a strong  voice  and
red  face,  thus  : “ Mother,  thou  art  my  jewel  of  a daughter.
What  sort  of  a dog  is  that  ? What  sort  of  a head  is  that
at  the  wall  ? What  is  running  about  there  in  the  room  ?”
And  many  other  such  foolish  questions.  Very  sensitive
to  cold , over  the  whole  body.

Fever.- — Coldness  over  the  whole  body,  early  in  the
morning,  especially  at  the  arms  and  hands,  beginning  at
the  shoulders,  with  blue  nails,  but  without  fever.  Cold-
ness of  ihe  body,  especially  of  the  hands  and  feet.  Cold-
ness of  the  hands  and  feet,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.
Coldness  of  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  patellae,  as  soon  as
he  gets  into  ihe  bed  in  the  evening.  Coldness  of  the  whole
body  and  subsequent  increase  of  temperature,  without  fever.
Coldness  in  the  body,  almost  the  whole  day,  with  blue  nails,
insipid  taste  and  inclination  to  vomit  ; ibis  is  followed  by
an  increase  of  lemperature,  but.  without  fever.  Chilliness
between  the  scapulae.  Chills  in  the  back.  Shivering


198


AURUM  MURIATIC UM.


through  the  whole  body,  with  goose-skin  upon  the  thighs,
and  with  concussion  of  the  brain  under  the  frontal  bone.
Chilliness,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  with  coldness  of
the  legs  as  far  as  the  knees  ; he  cannot  get  warm  the  whole
night,  sleeps  little,  only  half  an  hour  at  the  time,  with  anx-
ious dreams,  which  he  does  not  recollect,  (a.  16  d.)  Chills
through  the  whole  body,  as  if  he  had  caught  cold  in  a
draught  of  air  ; he  could  scarcely  get  warm  ; in  the  even-
ing before  going  to  bed,  (a.  16,  19  h.)  Horripilation  over
the  whole  body,  in  the  evening,  with  dry  coryza,  without
heat  and  without  subsequent  thirst:  In  the  evening,  shiver-
ings  and  chills  after  lying  down  ; headache  before  lying
down.  In  the  evening,  chills  over  the  whole  body,  with
coldness  of  the  hands  and  warmth  of  the  face  and  fore-
head, without  thirst.  Alternate  chilliness  and  heat.  Heat
in  the  face,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.  Slight  perspiration
at  night  ; only  between  the  thighs  there  was  real  sweat,
(a.  10  h.)  Sweat  early  in  the  morning  all  over  the  body.


AURUM  MURIATICUM.

Drawing  headache  in  the  forehead,  (a.  2 h.)  Tickling
itching  of  the  forehead,  (a.  1 h.)  Tearing  pain  in  the  left
eye.  Tingling  in  the  ears.  Tingling  of  the  ears  is  suc-
ceeded by  a kind  of  surdity,  as  if  the  ears  were  wide  and
hollow  within,  and  as  if,  therefore,  nothing  could  be  heard
distinctly.  Crawling  in  the  nose,  as  if  something  were
running  about  in  it.  Burning  and  itching  pain,  at  the  top
of  the  nose  on  the  outside.  Redness  and  itching  inflam-
mation of  the  nose,  with  subsequent  desquamation  of  the
nose.  Red  swelling  of  the  left  side  of  the  nose;  the  na-
sal cavity  is  ulcerated  far  back,  with  dry,  yellowish  scurf,
and  sense  of  obstruction,  although  the  necessary  quan-
tity of  air  passes  through  it.  Red  swelling  at  the  right
nostril,  and  underneath,  with  a painless  crust  of  ulcers  in-
ternally, and  a sense  of  obstruction,  although  air  passes
through.  Discharge  of-  a yellow-greenish  matter  out  of
the  nose,  without  any  bad  smell,  for  7 days,  (a.  10  d.)
Shooting  pain  in  the  teeth,  partly  on  one  side,  partly  in


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


199


the  upper  incisores.  Shooting  toothache,  also  in  the  an-
terior and  superior  row  of  teeth.  Distension  of  the  abdo-
men. Short  breathing  and  apparent  obstruction  of  the
larynx,  for  a few  days.  A few  stitches  immediately  over
the  heart.  Swelling  in  the  wrist,  without  pain,  if  left
alone  ; tensive  only  on  bending  the  hand  backwards  ; stitches
in  the  wrist,  upon  seizing  any  thing.  Tearing  pain  in
the  middle  finger,  after  dinner.


EXPLOSIVE  GOLD,  (aurum  fulminans.)

Colic,  especially  in  children,  and  attacks  of  anxiety.
Sinking  of  strength)  swoons,  cold  sweat  of  the  limbs,  vio-
lent vomiting,  convulsions.  Violent  diarrhoea.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.

Crystals  of  the  muriate  of  baryta  are  finely  powdered,
and  boiled  for  a few  minutes  with  6 parts  of  alcohol,  in  or-
der to  remove  the  muriate  of  Strontia  which  might  be  pre-
sent ; the  remaining  powder  is  dissolved  in  6 parts  of  boil-
ing, distilled  water,  and  then  precipitated  by  means  of
weak  ammonium — say,  a solution  of  hart’s-horn  in  water.
The  baryta  which  has  been  thus  obtained,  is  then  saturat-
ed several  times  with  distilled  water,  and  then  dried.  The
potencies  are  prepared  according  to  the  usual  method  of
trituration  and  succussion,  which  has  been  taught  for  the
dry  anti-psoric  remedies.  A few  globules  (x),  act  40,  48
days.  This  drug  may  be  advantageously  used  in  the  fol-
lowing affections,  provided  it  be  homceopathically  indicat-
ed : whining  mood ; anxiety  as  regards  domestic  con-
cerns ; dread  of  strangers,  of  company  ; headache  close
over  the  eyes ; susceptibility  of  the  head  to  cold  ; erup-
tion upon  the  head  ; baldness  ; eruption  upon  and  behind
the  ears  ; tubercles  behind  the  ears  ; eruption  upon  the
lobule  ; buzzing  and  tingling  before  the  ear  ; pressure  in  the
eyes  ; inflammation  of  the  eye-balls  and  lids,  with  dread  of


200


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


light ; agglutination  of  the  eye  lid s ; flying  webs  and  black
spots  before  i he  eyes;  dimness  of  sight,  he  cannot  read;
the  eyes  are  dazzled  by  the  light  ; scurf  under  the  nose  ;
eruption  upon  the  face  ; single  jerks  in  the  teeth  ; burning
stitches  in  the  hollow  tooth,  if  something  warm  touches
them;  dryness  of  the  mouth;  constant  thirst ; eructations
after  eating ; sour  eructations  ; wat.erhrash ; chronic  nau-
sea ; pressure  at  the  stomach , also  after  eating  ; pain  at
'ihe  stomach,  fasting  and  after  eating  ; pain  at  the  stomach
on  touching  the  pit  ; difficult,  knotty  stool  ; hard  and  in-
sufficient stool  ; tenesmus  of  the  bladder  and  frequent
micturition;  ireak'ness  of  the  sexual  powers  ; leucorrhoea
immediately  before  the  menses  ; coryza  ; troublesome  dry-
ness of  the  nose  ; night  cough  ; hoarseness  of  the  chest
with  night-cough  ; excessive  secretion  of  mucus  in  the
chest,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  perceptible  without  any
previously  exciting  cause  ; pain  in  the  small  of  the  hack  ;
•tiffness  of  the  small  of  the  back  ; stiffness  of  the  nape  of
the  neck  ; stitches  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  ; pain  in  the
deltoid  muscle,  on  raising  the  arm  ; the  arm  goes  to  sleep
when  lying  upon  it  ; the  fingers  go  to  sleep  ; traction  and
tearing  in  the  legs  ; ulcers  on  the  feet ; fetid  sweat  of  the
feet  ; painful  lymphatic  swelling  of  the  ball  of  the  big
toe  ; twitches  and  jerks  of  the  body  by  day  ; heaviness  in
the  whole  body  ; loss  of  strength  ; general  weakness  of
the  nerves  and  body  ; susceptibility  to  cold.  WARTS  ;
raving  when  asleep  ; twitches  of  the  muscles  of  the  whole
body,  at  night ; night  sweat.  This  drug  has  been  tried  by
Doctors  Hahnemann,  Adams,  Gross,  Hartlaub,  sen.,  Hart-
mann, Riickert,  Stapf,  Rummel.  The  symptoms  mark-
ed with  a line,  are  produced  by  the  acetate  of  baryta.
Smelling  of  a solution  of  camphor  alleviates  the  too  pow-
erful effects  of  baryta  ; smelling  of  the  solution  of  a high
potency  of  zink,  removes  the  troublesome  symptoms  of
baryta.

To  the  above  named  affections,  Doctors  Noack  and
Trinks  add  the  following  remarks  : —

Baryta  is  especially  suitable  for  the  affections  of  first
childhood,  and,  more  purticrdarly  still,  for  those  of  old  age ,
when  there  is  mental  or  physical  'weakness,  Marasmus
senilis,  childish  and  thoughtless  manners  (in  old  people,)


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


201


want  of  clear  recollection,  sopor,  sleep  full  of  internal  un-
easiness, with  groaning  and  murmuring,  immoveable  pu-
redness  of  the  cheeks,  cold  hands  with  blue  spots,  weak,
somewhat  accelerated  pulse,  frequent  micturition,  consti-
pation, weak  crooked  sitting  posture,  inability  to  speak  one
word,  or  to  stretch  forth  the  tongue. — Baryta  is  particu-
larly suitable  to  hysteric  persons  and  suck  as  incline  to
catching  cold. — Baryta  is  also  especially  useful  against
affections  of  drunkards  consequent  upon  colds  with  pre-
vious cchauffement,  characterised  by  distorted  mouth,  para-
lysed tongue,  aphony,  pretty  clear  consciousness,  arrest  of
spontaneous  motion  of  the  arm,  etc.  Scrophulosis ; swell -
ing  and  induration  of  the  glands,  especially  the  cervical
glands,  even  after  suppuration  has  set  in  ; Atrophia  scro-
pluilosa  ; (Bobelhal  ranks  Baryta  below  Calcarea  in  scro-
phulosis, which  appears  to  be  correct). — Apoplexy,  espe-
cially of  old  people  and  drunkards.  Tubercles  of  the
brain  ? — Coma  somnolentum. — Scarlatina  miliaris. — Tinea
humida. — Impetigo  larvalis. — Herpes  faciei. — Lupia  (Ver-
ruca mollis,  Tumor  cysticus).  Steatoma. — Consumptive
fever. — Weakness  of  memory. — Idiocy. — Alopecia. — Me-
grim.— Scropliulous  inflammations  of  the  eyes  and  eye-
lids.— Pannus. — Scrophulous  diseases  of  the  ears. — Bleed-
ing at  the  nose,  especially  in  scrophulous  individuals  with  a
florid  complexion.  Parotitis,  remaining  after  scarlet-fever.
Prosopalgia  inflammatoria. — Toolhac.he,  with  a great  dis-
position to  catch  cold  ; the  pain  returns  before  the  appear-
ance of  the  menses  ; pain  in  hollow  teeth,  after  every  cold,
accompanied  by  a pale  red  swelling  of  the  gums,  by  swell-
ing of  the  cheeks,  a drawing  pain  in  the  direction  of  the
nose,  eye  and  temporal  region,  and  violent  throbbing  in  the
ears  which  is  especially  bad  at  night. — Angince  consequent
upon  cold , even  of  the  phlegmonous  kind  ; Angina  tonsil-
laris, even  with  suppuration  ; acute  inflammation  of  the
tonsils  in  small-pox  and  scarlatina  (especially  when  Mer-
cury and  Belladonna  are  not  sufficient.) — Dyspepsia. —
Gastralgia. — Scirrhus  cardite  et  pylori  (?). — Amenorrhoea,
Menostasia  and  Chlorosis  of  young  girls,  especially  when
owing  to  scrophulous  conditions. — Hcemorrhoidcil  off-  c-
tions.— Excessive  pollutions  — Catarrh  of  the  Trachea.* —

9*


202


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


Asthma  senile,  provided  it  is  not  owing  to  Emphysema  of
the  lungs,  (especially  useful  after  Antim.  tart.) — Tubercu-
lous infiltration  of  the  lungs  (?) — Palpitation  of  the  heart,
especially  in  chlorotic  and  hysteric  females.

Analagous  Remedies. — 1 Calc.,  Sep.,  Silic. — 2 Alum.,
Bellad.,  Cham.,  Chin.,  Dulcam.,  Merc.,  Natr.,  Sulph.  Tart,
em.  Viol.  trie. — 3 Electr.  (especially  the  neg.  pole),  Ig-
nat., Lycop.,  Magn.  mur.,  Spig. — Tart.  emet.  is  especially
suitable  before  and  after  Baryta.

Moral  Symptoms. — Dejected,  he  did  not  feel  inclined
to  speak.  Dejection  and  * dread  of  men.  * Dread  of  men.
When  walking  in  the  street,  she  suspects  that  people
laughed  at  her,  and  criticised  her  to  her  disadvantage  ; this
makes  her  so  fearful  that  she  dares  not  look  up,  looks  at
nobody,  and  sweats  over  the  whole  body.  Sad  mood.  Sad
and  fearful  ; he  has  all  sorts  of  sad  notions  about  his  fu-
ture destiny,  and  he  deems  himself  lost  entirely  ; in  the
evening,  (a.  35  d.)  * He  is  suddenly  overwhelmed

with  an  evil  apprehension  ; he  imagines,  for,  instance,
that  a beloved  friend  might  have  suddenly  fallen  sick,
and  might  be  dying.  Grief  at  every  trifle.  * Great
solicitude  and  anxious  care.  She  is  very  anxious  and  so-
licitous about  insignificant  things,  which  were  entirely  in-
different to  her.  Anxious  and  easily  frightened  ; a little
noise  in  the  street  seems  to  her  like  cries  of  fire  ; it  fright-
ens him  so  that  all  his  limbs  tremble.  Highest  degree  of
irresoluteness  ; he  proposes  a little  journey  ; but  as  soon
as  he  makes  preparations,  he  changes  his  mind,  and  he  pre-
fers remaining  home.  Wavers  for  a long  time  between
-opposite  resolutions,  (a.  several  days.)  In  the  day  she  re-
solves to  undertake  a certain  business  ; but  scarcely  has
'the  time  for  it  come,  when  she  changes  her  mind,  and  she
Becomes  so  irresolute  that  she  does  not  know  what  to  do.
All  self-confidence  has  disappeared.  Great  fearfulness
and  cowardice.  Extremely  desponding  and  pusillanimous  ;
she  imagines  to  be  obliged  to  die,  and  she  weeps,  (7.-10.  d.)
Pusillanimity  and  anxiety.  Great  ennui  and  ill-humour.
Bad  mood,  peevishness.  Want  of  disposition  to  play,  in
‘children.  Peevish,  morose,  not  disposed  to  work.  Peev-
ish and  quarrelsome.  Extremely  irritated,  unsociable
mood,  becoming  vehement  on  account  of  trifles,  (very
shortly.)  Sudden,  excessive,  but  quickly  passing  burst  of


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


203


anger  and  wrath,  even  unto  rage,  through  slight  causes  ;
he  is  easily  led  to  commit  deeds  of  violence,  (a.  several  d.)
Mirth  which  becomes  wantonness.  Deficiency  of  memo-
ry, (a.  16  h.)  Great  forgetfulness,  he  knows  no  more
what  he  has  just  spoken,  (a.  27  d.)  Forgetfulness ; he
forgets  what  he  ivas  just  about  to  utter . In  the  midst  of
her  speech  she  often  is  unable  to  remember  a quite  com-
mon word.  Inattentiveness  of  the  child  in  studying  his
lesson.

Head. — Dullness  in  the  head.  Dullness  in  the  head.
Gloomy  in  the  head,  early  on  waking  up,  and  the  whole
forenoon,  (a.  27  d.)  Obtusion  of  the  head,  when  sitting  ;
going  off  in  the  open  air,  (20.  d.)  Obtusion  of  the  head,
which  spreads  towards  the  temples  and  the  forehead.  Ob-
tusion, dullness  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  in  the  evening,
with  drowsiness  ; the  head  threatens  to  incline  forwards  all
the  time  ; at  the  same  time  the  person  is  peevish  and
tired,  (a.  46  d.)  Feeling  of  dullness  in  the  head,  with  ten-
sive obtusion  of  the  forehead  and  the  eyes,  especially  the
inner  canthi.  Vertigo  in  the  head  ; he  was  obliged  to  sit
down,  and  to  hold  himself  fast,  with  nausea.  Vertigo.
Vertigo,  early  after  rising;  everything  turns  with  her,  with
nausea  and  a sense  of  fainting  at  the  stomach,  (8.-1 1.  d.)
Vertigo,  with  nausea,  * from  stooping.  Vertigo,  with  head-
ache, * from  stooping,  (a.  25  d.)  Vertigo  on  raising  the
head,  * from  stooping.  Vertigo  on  crossing  a little  bridge,
so  that  he  knew  not  where  he  was.  Vertigo  on  moving
the  body.  Sudden  vertigo  on  lifting  the  arms  ; everything
appeared  to  turn,  (12.  d.)  Headache  in  the  evening  ;
every  noise,  especially  male  voices,  affected  her  brain  very
painfully,  (5.  d.)  Pressive  pain  in  the  left  temple,  (a.  some
d.)  Pressive  pain  through  the  right  half  of  the  brain,  from
the  neck  into  the  frontal  eminences,  (a.  1 h.  and  a half.)
Pressure  in  the  brain,  under  the  vertex,  towards  the  occi-
put, on  waking  up  from  sleep,  with  stiffness  of  the  nape
of  the  neck.  Dull,  pressive  pain  at  the  occipital  bone,  on  the
right  side,  from  the  cervical  vertebras  obliquely  into  the
parietal  bone,  at  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  returning
on  the  day  following,  at  the  same  hour.  Stunning,  dull
pressure  in  the  forehead,  close  over  the  right  eye.  Pres-
sive pain  in  the  forehead,  from  within,  (12.  d.)  Pressive


204


BARYTA  CAR30NICA.


and  clawing  thrust  in  the  left  temple,  from  within,  (a.  2 h.
and  a half.)  Pressive,  clawing  pain,  from  within,  in  the
whole  forehead,  especially  in  the  orbits,  much  worse  when
holding  the  head  straight,  gradually  diminishing  when
stooping,  (a.  10  h ) Violent  squeezing  in  the  whole  head,
as  if  it  would  burst ; especially  violent  in  both  frontal  emi-
nences and  over  the  orbits,  (a.  4 h.  and  a half  ) Pressure,
with  weight,  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.  Sense  of
weight  in  the  whole  occiput,  especially  close  to  the  nape
of  the  neck,  with  tension,  uninfluenced  by  motion,  (a.  4 h.)
Sense  of  tension  around  the  whole  forehead,  in  the  skin,
as  il  it  were  too  tight,  afier  dinner.  Tension  and  burning,
at  a small  spot  on  the  left  parietal  bone,  (a.  1 It  ) Pain-
ful sense  as  of  screwing  on  both  sides  of  the  head,  then  tear-
ing at  a small  place  of  the  left  parietal  bone,  and  afterwards
in  the  occipital  bone  on  the  left  side.  Sharp  drawing  over
the  left  eye,  extending  from  the  nose  towards  the  temple,
in  the  evening.  Sudden,  intensely  painful  traction  from
the  occipital  bone  across  over  the  right  ear,  as  far  as  the
lower  jaw.  'Fearing  in  the  vertex.  Fine  tearing  at  a
small  spot  of  the  right  parietal  bone,  deep  in  the  bone.
Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  relieved  by  bending
the  head  backwards.  Tearing,  with  shootings,  deep  in  the
brain,  behind  the  right  ear,  at  short  intervals,  instantly  re-
newed by  touching  the  parts.  Rheumatic  pain  in  the  oc-
cipital bone,  with  'glandular  swellings  in  the  nape  of  the
neck.  Shooting,  deep  in  the  temple,  in  the  orbit,  and  the
ear  of  the  left  side.  Stitches  in  the  head,  commencing  im-
mediately in  a warm  room.  Violent,  dull  stitches  in  the
left  frontal  eminence,  when  stooping  while  washing.  Se-
vere stitches  in  the  whole  head,  increasing  and  decreasing,
(3.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  sides  of  the  head,  also  alter  dinner,
and  in  the  evening;  at  this  time  the  stitches  are  more  vio-
lent in  the  left  side.  Dull  stitches  over  the  right  temple,
early  in  the  morning  when  yawning.  Dull  stitches  in  the
left  side  of  the  head  from  the  occiput  to  the  frontal  emi-
nence, or  alternately,  here  or  there.  Violent  stitches  in
the  brain,  with  heat  and  tingling  in  the  head,  (a.  15  d.)
Small,  violent  stitches  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,  from
within  outwards,  (a.  9 h.)  Pressive  stitches  in  the  vertex,
which  extend  through  the  whole  head,  as  soon  as  she  walks


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


205


in  the  sun.  Stitch  producing  a sense  of  dilatation  of  the
parts,  beginning  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  traversing  the
whole  of  the  leftside  of  the  occiput,  and  terminating  at  the
cervical  vertebrae,  (a.  9 h.)  Drawing  stitches,  becoming
umrse  at  intervals,  in  the  mastoid  process  of  the  left  side,
at  a small  place,  which  is  yet  extremely  painful  even  after-
wards, especially  when  the  head  is  turned  or  touched.
Burning  stitch  in  the  right  temple.  Throbbing,  with
stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  (7.  d.)  Throbbing  in
the  occiput,  reaching  as  far  as  the  frontal  eminence,  in  the
evening,  (5.  d.)  Violent  throbbing  in  i lie  forehead,  deep
in  the  brain,  when  stooping,  (a.  30  d.)  Grinding  head-
ache in  the  forehead  and  temples.  Grinding  headache  in
the  upper  and  fore  part  of  the  head  almost  daily,  early  after
rising,  continuing  during  the  forenoon  and  discontinuing  in
the  afternoon ; when  shaking  the  head,  the  brain  feels  as
if  it  were  loose  and  detached.  Sense  of  looseness  of  the
brain,  which  feels  as  if,  during  motion,  it  fell  to  and  fro,  (a.
45  d.)  When  stooping,  sense  as  if  everything  would  fall
into  the  forehead,  (a.  16  d.)  Concussion  of  the  brain  on
knocking  the  foot  against  something.  Considerable  rush
of  blood  to  the  head  ; the  blood  seems  to  be  stagnant  in  it,
and  feels  as  if  it  could  not  circulate,  (a.  27  d.)  Whizzing
in  the  head,  as  of  boiling  water,  (a.  27  d.)  Heat  in  the
head,  early  on  rising,  and  culting  thrusts,  as  with  knives,
(17.  d.)  Early  on  waking,  first,  heaviness,  then,  after  ris-
ing, heat  in  the  head,  hands  and  feet  being  cold.  Feeling
of  icy  coldness  of  the  right  side  of  the  head,  and,  neverthe-
less, sense  as  of  burning.  Shivering  over  the  hairy  scalp,
without,  however,  any  sense  of  coldness,  as  if  the  hairs
stood  on  end.  The  skin  of  the  head  is  painful  to  every
touch.  Pain  as  if  the  hairs  were  pulled  tip,  at  a small  place
of  the  right  parietal  bone.  The  hairs  come  out  by  comb-
ing, (a.  4 d.)  Slow,  fine  stitches  on  the  hairy  scalp,  here
and  there,  which  force  one  to  scratch.  Itching  an d gnaw-
ing of  the  hairy  scalp  and  the  temples,  (a.  3 d.)  Itch-
ing tingling  over  the  head,  here  and  there,  which  passes
off  by  scratching.  Formicalion  in  the  skin  of  the  whole
head,  in  the  evening.  Pimples  on  the  sides  of  the  hairy
scalp.  Small  boils  on  the  forehead.  Eruption  on  the
forehead,  (of  the  genus  herpes  ?)  with  a more  burning  than


206


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


itching  sensation.  An  old  tumour  on  the  hairy  scalp,
which  had  been  painless  heretofore,  grows  larger,  and,
when  touched,  it  feels  painful,  as  if  there  were  subcuta-
neous suppuration.

Eyes. — Eruption  in  the  right  eye-brow,  with  a sting-
ing pain  when  touched.  The  eye-balls  are  painful.  Vio-
lent pains  in  the  left  eye,  and  thence  across  the  temples,
as  far  as  into  the  ear,  (a.  20  h.)  * Soreness — and  fatigue

of  the  eyes,  with  * pressure  in  them. — Pressure  deep  in
the  eyes,  which  grows  worse  by  her  looking  at  one  point,
or  upwards  and  sideways,  but  which  is  relieved  by  wink-
ing or  by  looking  downwards,  (a.  several  days.) — Con-
tinual pressure  in  the  eye-balls. — Dull  pressure  in  the
left  eye,  succeeding  a shooting  headache  in  the  left  temple
and  orbit,  with  a sensation  as  if  lachrvmation  would  set
in,  and  a kind  of  weakness,  which  obliges  her  to  close  the
eye  frequently  ; the  same  sensation  is  then  experienced  in
the  right  eye.  Pressure  in  the  external  canthus,  as  if  a
grain  of  sand  were  in  it.  Pressure  in  both  eyes,  with
itching  as  from  dust.  Tearing  in  the  eyes.  Shooting
and  tearing  in  the  right  upper  eye-lid.  Shooting
stitches  in  the  external  canthus.  A stitch  across  the  left
upper  eye-lid.  Itching  of  the  border  of  the  upper  eye-
lid. Itching  in  the  eyes.  Itching,  burning,  pressure,
sense  of  soreness  and  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  eyes.
Dry  heat  and  pressure  in  the  eyes.  The  eyes  burn  after
an  effort  of  sight.  Burning  of  the  eyes  in  the  inner
canthi  and  copious  lachrymation.  Sense  as  of  a burn-
ing spark  shooting  from  the  upper  border  of  the  right
orbit  as  far  as  the  root  of  the  nose.  Internal,  inflamed
redness  of  the  lids.  Redness  of  the  white  of  the  eye,
and  a wrhite  pimple  upon  it,  near  the  corner.  Reddish
white  of  the  eye,  and  lachrymation.  Swelling  of  the  lids,
early  in  the  morning.  The  eyes  are  swollen  early  in  the
morning.  Pus  in  the  lids,  externally,  especially  early
in  the  morning.  The  external  canthi  of  the  eyes,  are
closed  by  gum,  at  night.  * Agglutination  of  the  eye-lids.
The  eye-lids  open  with  difficulty,  early  in  the  morning.
The  eyes  close  in  the  evening,  at  .twilight.  Quick  suc-
cession of  ddatation  and  contraction  of  the  pupils  ; they
do  not  appear  round,  but  with  a few  obtuse  angles,  (a.  5


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


207


m.) — * She  sees  everything  as  in  a fog,  for  several  min-
utes, when  closing  the  eyes  and  pressing  a little  upon  the
eye-balls  with  the  hand  ; this  symptom  is  accompanied  by
pressive  pain  in  the  eye-balls.  Sense  as  of  a gauze  being
before  the  eyes , early  in  the  morning  and  after  dinner.
Frequent  obscuration  of  the  eyes.  * Black  spots  before
the  eyes,  (a.  24  h.)  The  light  of  the  candles  has  a halo  with
the  colours  of  the  rainbow.  Sparks  before  the  eyes  in  the
dark.  Fiery  sparks  before  the  eyes,  and  tearing  in  the  eyes.

Ears. — Drawing  pain  in  the  ears.  Tearing  coming  out
at  the  left  ear.  Tearing  with  boring  and  drawing  in  the  bone
before  the  right  ear.  Tearing  behind  the  right  ear.
Stitches  deep  in  the  left  ear.  Violent  stitches  in  the
ear,  lasting  continually  for  two  days,  (a.  28  d.) — Vio-
lent stitch  which  obliges  her  to  scream,  several  times,
during  the  day,  under  the  right  ear,  near  the  ramus
of  the  lower  jaw,  (a.  24  h.)  Such  violent  boring  in
the  right  ear,  that  she  would  like  to  scream.  * Pulsa-
tive  throbbing  in  the  left  ear,  upon  which  he  had  been
lying  during  the  night.  * Throbbing  and  hard  pres-
sure deep  in  the  right  ear,  upon  which  he  was  lying,  and
when  turning  to  the  left  side,  in  the  left  ear  ; after  mid-
night. Throbbing  before  the  left  ear,  when  lying  upon  it.
Itching  in  the  ears.  Considerable  itching  in  the  left  ear.
Tingling  and  twitching  in  the  left  ear.  Tingling  pain  in
the  bone  in  front  of  the  right  ear.  * Eruption  on  the  ears.
The  right  parotid  is  swollen  and  is  painful  to  the  touch.
Cracking  in  the  ear,  when  walking  fast,  swallowing,
sneezing,  etc.  Slight  cracking  in  one  ear,  when  swallow-
ing, as  if  the  ear  were  being  broken.  Slight  cracking  in
both  ears  when  swallowing.  When  lying  upon  the  left
ear,  then  a guggling  sound  was  heard  in  it  which  passed
into  the  right  ear  ; this  prevented  him  from  sleeping,  (a.
11  d.)  Explosions  in  the  ears,  at  night.  Stunning  noise
in  the  ears,  (a.  2 d.)  7'  Tingling  in  the  ears.  Consider-

able, long  tingling  in  the  ears.  Roaring  and  buzzing
in  the  ears,  (a.  28  d.)  Noise  in  the  ears,  in  the
evening,  like  ringing  of  bells  and  strong  wind.  Echo  in
the  ears  from  violent  blowing  of  the  nose.  Sounding  in
the  ears  even  when  breathing,  as  from  a sounding-board,
(a.  2d.)  Hard  hearing.  Hard  hearing , (the  first  days.)


208


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


Nose.— Her  nose  feels  as  if  it  were  swollen  and  closed
with  glue.  Crawling  on  both  sides.  Burning  at  a small
place  of  the  back  of  the  nose,  as  from  a drop  of  hot
grease.  Bleeding  at  the  nose  several  times  during  the
day,  (a.  24  h.)  Frequent  bleeding  at  the  nose.  Fre-
quent and  profuse  bleeding  at  the  nose,  (a.  24  h.)  Bleed-
ing at  the  nose,  early  when  in  bed,  the  blood  being  bright-
red.  On  blowing  the  nose,  blood  comes  out  with  the
mucus.  The  nose  bleeds  easily  when  blowing  or  cleans-
ing it.  Extremely  sensitive  smell.

Face. — -Sharp  stitches  in  the  face.— Painful  stitches  in
the  face.  Slight  twitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  face.
Tingling  in  the  ieft  cheek,  (1.  d.)  Sense  of  tightness
in  the  skin  of  t he  face.  Tension  in  the  face  which  draws
down  his  eye-lids,  with  inclination  to  throw  up  sputa.—
Sense  of  tension  in  the  whole  face,  with  loathing  and
diarrhoea,  (a.  1 hour  and  a half  ) — Sensation  as  if  the
whole  skin  of  the  face  were  covered  with  cobwreb. — Very
disagreeable  feeling  over  the  whole  skin  of  the  face,
the  hairy  scalp,  especially  the  temples,  as  if  something
were  tightly  drawn  over  the  parts  with  a sense  of  cold-
ness in  the  face,  (very  shortly.)  * Feeling  of  swelling  in
the  face.— Sensation,  as  if  the  whole  face  were  highly
swollen;  the  swelling,  however,  was  insignificant,  although
the  otherwise  deep  furrows  of  the  face  had  almost  entirely
disappeared,  and  the  face  appeared  smoothed  for  some
hours  (a.  half  an  h.)  * Swelling  of  the  left  cheek  and

the  region  behind  the  ear,  with  pain  in  the  temple,
(a.  30  d ) Sense  of  heat  in  the  face,  without  redness
of  the  same.  Redness  of  the  face,  in  the  evening,
(second  day.)  Considerable  redness  of  the  face,  with
purple  lips  and  considerable  orgasm  of  the  blood,  (imme-
diately-) Rough,  dry  place  on  the  right  cheek.  Small
pimples  in  the  face, — like  furunculs,  but  without  sen-
sation.

Jaws  and  Teeth. —The  lips  are  dry,  early  after  rising.
Sense  of  drvness  of  the  lips  and  the  gums  ; drinking
does  not.  relieve  it.  Burning  at  a small  spot  in  the  vermi-
lion border  of  the  lower  lip,  (17.  d.)  Sense  of  swelling
of  the  upper  lip.  Sensation  in  the  upper  lip,  as  if  it
would  swell ; on  the  internal  surface  and  in  the  palate,  sen-


BARYTA  CARBONXCA.


209


sation  as  if  the  parts  were  burnt  or  distended  with  pores.
Swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  with  a burning  pain.  Chapped
lower  lip.  Sense  of  excoriation  of  the  lower  lip.  A
cluster  of  small  itching  pimples  with  a red  base  under
the  left  corner  of  the  mouth.  Blister  on  the  lower  lip.
Large  elevated  induration  on  the  upper  lip,  behind  the
skin,  very  painful  to  the  touch  Pustule  in  the  right  cor-
ner of  the  mouth,  painful  to  the  touch.  Pressure  under
the  chin,  increased  by  touching  or  moving' the  lower
jaw  H e cannot  close  t he  lower  jaw,  without  experiencing
great  pain  in  the  articulation.  Tearing  in  the  right  lower
jaw.  A stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  lower  jaw.  Pain-
ful gnawing,  in  the  left  lower  jaw.  The  glands  of  the
lower  jaw  are  painful.  Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the
lower  jaw,  (a.  39  d.)  Tooth-ache,  in  the  evening,  when
in  bed,  not  by  day,  (a.  8 d.)  Tensive  pain  and  painful
stitches  in  the  whole  of  the  right  row  of  teeth.  Grum-
bling pain  in  a molar  tooth.  Tearing  in  the  molar  teeth.
Painful  gnawing  in  the  roots  and  the  gums  of  the  molar
teeth.  Boring  in  the  teeth,  as  if  they  were  dashed  asun-
der, as  soon  as  he  introduces  cold  or  warm  substances  in
his  mouth.  * Drawing,  jerking,  throbbing  tooth-ache,  as
if  something  were  lodged  under  the  teeth,  the  drawing
extending  as  far  as  the  ear  and  the  right  temple.  Throb-
bing pain,  with  great  sensitiveness  in  one  of  the  lower
molar  teeth,  early  after  rising.  Burning  pain,  sometimes
in  one  of  the  upper,  sometimes  the  lower  teeth  of
the  left  side,  with  conflux  of  a quantity  of  saliva  in  the
mouth  ; he  cannot  rest  upon  this  side,  because,  if  he  does,
the  side  of  the  head  feels  as  if  it  were  clawed,  and  there
is  throbbing  in  the  left  ear.  Tingling  burning  in  the  left
lower  row  of  teeth,  (a.  36  d.)  Intensely  painful  tingling
in  the  points  of  the  crowns  of  the  teeth,  in  the  evening,
(6.  d.)  Painful  toothache,  with  soreness  ; she  dared  not
touch  the  tooth.  A sound  tooth  becomes  loose  and  is
painful  during  eating,  and  even  for  some  time  after,  (a  tooth
becomes  speedily  hollow.)  Frequent  and  considerable
bleeding  of  the  teeth.  The  gums  bleed  and  seem  to  re-
cede from  the  teeth.  Swelling  and  painfulness  of  the
gums  of  a molar  tooth  of  the  tipper  jaw  ; * they  look  red-
dish, and,  at  the  top  of  the  tooth  they  are  bordered  with  a


210


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


dark-red  narrow  border  ; when  drinking  cold,  the  tooth
and  its  neighbours  are  very  painful.

Mouth. — The  buccal  cavity  feels  numb,  (three  and
four  days.)  The  whole  mouth  is  filled  with  inflamed
vesicles,  especially  the  palate  and  the  inside  of  the  cheeks.
Roughness  upon  the  tongue,  early  on  waking  up  ; if  the
tongue  touch  against  the  palate,  it  feels  like  a grating-iron,
(31.  d.)  Hardness  of  a place  on  the  middle  of  the  tongue,
with  burning,  when  touched,  for  several  days,  (a.  18  d.)
Burning  sense  of  excoriation  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  (4.
d.)  A crack  on  the  left  border  of  the  tongue  ; it  feels  sore
and  excoriated.  Pain  on  the  side  of  the  tongue,  as  from
blisters.  Pointed  vesicles  on  the  middle  of  the  tongue. —
Burning  blisters  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  of  long  duration,
(a.  6 d.)  Vesicle  under  the  tongue.  Considerably  coated
tongue.  * Dryness  of  the  tongue,  early  in  the  morning,
with  a sense  of  internal  swelling  of  the  throat.  Prickings
in  the  throat  as  from  pins,  (9.  d.)  * Dryness  in  the  mouth,

early,  after  rising.  Viscidity  in  the  mouth.  Much  phlegm
in  the  mouth.  Constant  spitting  of  saliva  for  8 days,  (a.
38  d.)  Constant  spitting  of  saliva,  without  nausea.  The
mouth  is  constantly  full  of  water,  gulped  up  from  the
stomach,  (a.  14  d.)

Throat. — Rawness  and  roughness  in  the  throat,  worse
after  swallowing,  (2.  d.)  Roughness  and  sense  of  exco-
riation in  the  throat,  preceded  by  night-sweat ; worse
during  empty  deglutition,  than  during  deglutition  of  soft
food,  (a.  48  h.)  Sore  throat  with  a sense  of  excoriation,
when  swallowing,  but  mostly  during  an  empty  deglutition ;
at  the  same  time  the  neck  is  externally  painful  on  both
sides,  when  touched.  Stinging  sore  throat,  when  swal-
lowing saliva  and  during  an  empty  deglutition.  Stinging
in  the  throat,  (a.  14  d.)  Stinging  in  the' throat,  worse  when
swallowing,  with  dryness,  in  the  evening,  (6.  d.)  Dry-
ness and  painful,  severe  stinging  and  pressing,  as  from  a
swelling,  back  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  only  when  swal-
lowing. Choking,  or  contraction  in  the  throat,  with  arrest
(interception)  of  breath,  which  obliges  him  to  unbutton
his  clothes,  during  dinner,  (26.  d.)  Attacks  of  choking  ini
the  throat,  after  dinner,  when  sitting  or  writing,  with  a sen-
sation as  if  the  thyroid  body  were  pressed  in,  and  as  if


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


breathing  were  impeded  by  it,  (a.  28  d.)  Contraction  in
the  throat,  with  a sensation,  during  deglutition,  as  if  a plug
were  lodged  in  the  region  of  the  head  of  the  larynx,  worse
in  the  afternoon.  Sense,  in  the  pharynx,  as  of  a fine  leaflet
lying  before  the  posterior  nares,  early  after  waking  up,  (2.
d.)  When  sneezing,  sensation  in  the  throat  as  if  a piece
of  flesh  had  become  detached  in  the  top  of  the  throat,  with
burning  of  the  place,  (4.  d.)  Sensation  as  of  a quantity
of  phlegm  being  in  the  throat,  and  therefore  much  desire
for  drinking  in  order  to  become  freed  from  the  sensation.
Sensation  in  the  oesophagus,  after  previous  rawness  (the
Germ,  is  scraping)  as  if  a plug  were  lodged  in  it,  or  as  if
a piece  had  remained  sticking  in  it.  Sensation  of  internal
swelling  of  the  neck,  early  in  the  morning,  during  deglu-
tition, with  dryness  of  the  tongue.  Swelling  of  the  left
tonsil.  Chilliness,  heat  and  contusion  of  all  the  limbs,
succeeded  by  * inflammation  of  the  throat  with  considera-
ble swelling  of  the  palate  and  the  tonsils,  which  pass  into
suppuration  and  prevent  him  from  opening  the  jaws,  or
speaking  and  swallowing,  with  dark  brown  urine  and  sleep-
lessness, (a.  18  d.)

Taste  and  Appetite.— Loss  of  taste  for  several  days.
Spoiled  taste  in  the  mouth,  every  morning,  with  tongue
very  much  coated.  Spoiled,  bitter  taste  and  smell  in  the
mouth.  Bitter  and  slimy  in  the  mouth,  with  coated  tongue,
(6.  d.)  Very  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  the  food  tasting
naturally.  Sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  in  the  evening.  Sour
taste  in  the  mouth,  before,  not  after  eating.  Sour  taste  in
the  mouth,  early  after  rising,  (48.  d.)  Swreet  taste,  at  the
root  of  the  tongue,  (a.  19  d.)  Saltish  taste  in  the  mouth
and  throat,  in  the  afternoon.  Scraping  taste  in  the  throat,
when  smoking  tobacco  as  usually,  (a.  three  quarters  of
an  h.)  Intolerable  fetor  from  the.  mouth,  which  he  himself
was  unconscious  of,  (5.  d.)  * Thirst , with  dryness  in  the

mouth.  Wrant  of  appetite.  Little  appetite,  for  several
days.  Absence  of  appetite,  for  3 weeks,  (a.  26  d.)  Lit-
tle appetite,  the  food  tasting  well  ; no  hunger.  Satiety  the
whole  day  ; she  eats,  whatever  she  does  eat,  wdthout  any
hunger.  Slight  appetite  ; if  he  eats  something,  it  will  not
go  down  ; the  food  tastes  naturally,  but  it  is  repugnant  to
him,  and  eating  makes  him  feel  uneasy.  Indifference  to


212


BARYTA  CARBONIOA.


sweet,  things.  Repugnance  to  fruit,  especially  to  plums.
Repugnance  to  food,  and  nevertheless  a feeling  of  hunger.
Feeling  of  hunger  in  the  stomach,  but  no  appetite,  (a.  10
d.)  Hunger,  already  early  on  rising,  (2.  d.)  Insatiability.
(Desire  to  nibble.)  Good  deal  of  appetite,  every  day  ; he
is  soon  hungry  again,  after  having  satiated  himself  mode-
rately only  ; but  if  he  eats  a quantity,  he  experiences  great
uneasiness  and  indolence  afterwards.  Several  symptoms
seem  to  abate  during  dinner.  I~le  is  attacked  with  heat
when  eating  or  drinking.  After  dinner  he  feels  worn  out,
faini ish,  uneasy  with  constant  tenesmus  and  feeling  oi  anx-
iety in  the  lumbar  region  ; he  had  these  same  symptoms
when  at  rest.  After  dinner  he  feels  very  warm  and  uneasy,
and  he  feels  a kind  of  ^pressure  in  the  right  side  over  the
stomach.  Great  laziness  and  dread  of  labor  after  dinner.
After  dinner  he  feels  as  if  he  had  gauze  before  his  eyes.
After  dinner,  tenesmus  of  the  bladder.  After  dinner,  sup-
pressed eructations,  with  subsequent  spasmodic  contrac-
tive pain  at  the  stomach,  (7.  d.)  Eructations  of  air,  with
a sense  in  ihe  region  of  the  stomach,  as  of  the  air  forcing
its  w’ay  painfully  through  it;  this  causes  a feeling  of
soreness  in  those  parts,  which  is  afterwards  succeeded  by
tasteless  eruclations.  Frequent  eructations.  Incessant
eructations.  Eructations  from  the  afternoon  until  late  at
night,  so  that  he  was  prevented  from  falling  asleep,  (a.  40
d.)  Empty  eructations  wake  him  from  his  sleep  early  in
the  morning,  (a.  42  d.)  Quantity  of  empty  eructations,  in
the  afterfioon,  (a.  25  d.)  Empty,  tasteless  eructations,  (a.
a quarter  of  an  h.)  Empty  eructations  with  insipid  taste
and  collection  of  water  in  the  mouth,  without  nausea.  Vio-
lent eructations,  with  pressure  at  the  stomach,  as  if  a stone
were  rising  and  then  falling  down  again.  Frequent  ris-
ings of  air,  with  a sensation  as  if  they  carried  up  with  them
a tubercle  of  the  size  of  a hazel-nut,  early  in  the  morning,
(19.  d ) Ritter  eructations,  frequently.  * Sourish  eruc-
tations, daily,  a few  hours  after  dinner.  Rancid  eructa-
tions. Heart-burn,  after  a few  eructations.  Gulping  up
of  sweetish  or  hitter  water  after  dinner.  Violent  hiccough
in  the  forenoon  and  after  dinner.  Hiccough.  Nausea,
early  in  ihe  morning  w’hen  fasting,  with  palpitation  of  the
heart  and  anxiety.  * Nausea,  as  from  a spoiled  stomach,
early  in  the  morning.


BARYTA  CARBONIC!*


Stomach. — * Sensation  of  nausea  about  the  stomach,
qualmishness.  * inclination  to  vomit,  a kind  of  uneasiness
with  a certain  qualmishness.  Inclination  to  vomit,  at  the
stomach,  when  walking,  increased  by  frequently  touching
the  region  of  the  stomach,  without  any  undue  secretion  of
saliva.  Frequent  vomiting  of  slime.  * Pain  at  the  sto-
mach. Sensitiveness  in  the  prsecordial  region  ; every
time  she  sets  her  foot  hard  upon  the  ground,  she  feels  a
pain  there.  Fullness  of  the  stomach,  after  dinner,  as  if  he
had  eaten  too  much.  Feeling  of  repletion  in  the  sto-
mach. * Heaviness  at  the  stomach,  with  nausea,  early
when  fasting ; going  off  after  breakfast,  (a.  several  d.)
Heaviness  at  the  prascordial  region,  as  from  a load,  aggra-
vating the  breathing,  relieved  by  deep  inspirations,  made
worse  by  carrying  a little  weight.  If  she  takes  ever  so  lit-
tle food,  she  is  nevertheless  immediately  satisfied,  and
* feels  a painful  heaviness  at  the  stomach,  as  from  a stone,
with  intensely  painful  gnawing;  the  pain  is  relieved  for  a
short  time  only  by  extending  the  body  or  bending  it  back-
wards, made  worse  by  sitting  crooked.  * Pressure  at  the
stomach,  as  from  a stone,  relieved  by  eructations.  Ex-
cessive pressure  at  the  stomach,  with  nausea,  consequent
upon  eating  bread,  not  boiled  food,  even  when  she  eats
moderately,  with  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth.
Pressure  and  choking  on  the  right  side  of  the  stomach,  as
high  up  as  the  chest,  as  if  a hard  body  were  struggling  up-
wards, from  morning  till  afternoon.  Pressure  at  the  prae-
cordial  region,  with  dyspnoea  and  a sensation  as  if  the
breath  were  arrested  there  in  a deep  inspiration  ; at  the
same  time  roughness  of  voice,  which  can  be  cleared  only
for  a short  time  by  clearing  the  throat;  the  pressive  pain
increases  by  tasting  a little  food.  Contractive  pain  at  the
stomach,  in  the  afternoon.  Pain  at  the  stomach  as  from
ulceration,  on  external  pressure.  Soreness  at  the  pit  of
the  stomach , when  pressing  upon  it,  externally,  and  when
breathing.  (1.  d.)  Painfull  writhing  sensation  at  the  sto-
machi while  eating , when  the  food  descends  into  it,  as  if
the  food  had  to  force  its  way  through  and  hurt  sore  places.
*Even  fasting  she  feels  soreness  at  the  stomach,  for  seve-
ral days.  The  sense  of  pressive  soreness  and  gnawing  at
the  stomach  is  most  violent  when  walking  or  standing)  also


214  BARYTA  CARBONIC  A.

when  sitting  crooked ; when  lying  upon  her  back,  when
stooping  * or  pressing  upon  the  stomach  with  her  hands,
she  only  feels  a painful  pressure,  not  the  gnawing.  Fine
stitches  through  the  stomach,  extending  as  far  as  the  spinal
marrow.  Intensely  painful,  dull  stitches,  close  below
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  near  the  xiphoid  cartilage ; the
stitches  continue  in  the  shape  of  a simple  pain.  Sudden
drawing  pain  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  from  time  to  time.
.Drawing  tearing  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  accompanied
by  the  sense  as  of  a heavy  body  being  lodged  there,  when
raising  the  head  after  stooping,  (a.  17  d.)  Sense  of  weak-
ness at  the  stomach,  which  passes  off  after  eating.  Burn-
ing in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  in  the  afternoon.  Sense
of  coldness  and  emptiness  in  the  stomach.

Abdomen. — Violent,  dull  stitches  in  the  hypochondrium
of  the  left  side.  Pain  under  the  right  ribs,  the  hands  and
feet  being  cold,  and  the  cheeks  hot  and  red,  (a.  2 d.)  Pres-
sive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  increasing  during
motion,  still  worse  when  touched.  Pressive  pain  at  a
small  spot  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  only  when  inspiring,
especially  when  the  inspirations  are  deep.  Also  when
pressed  upon,  the  spot  feels  painful,  (2.  d.)  Tensive  pain
coming  from  the  back  and  passing  forward  under  the
right  rib,  when  rising  from  a seat,  or  when  stooping  deep,
for  the  purpose  of  picking  up  something.  Short  stitches
below  the  right  hypochondrium,  uninfluenced  by  breathing,
(a.  half  an  h.)  Bellyache,  so  violent  that  his  navel  was
drawn  in,  and  he  had  to  curb  himself,  in  the  evenings.  He
was  unable  to  sleep  on  account  of  bellyache  ; the  pain  re-
turned on  the  slightest  motion,  (a.  27  d.)  The  bellyache
is  relieved  partly  by  eructations,  partly  by  warm  poultices.
Disagreeable  feeling  in  the  epigastrium,  such  as  precedes
vomiting.  Fulness  of  the  abdomen.  Distention  of  the
abdomen.  Painful  distention  of  the  abdomen.  Feeling
in  the  abdomen  as  if  something  were  swollen  in  it.  Tense,
distended  abdomen.  Tenseness  of  the  abdomen,  with
sensitiveness  of  the  abdominal  integuments  to  the  touch,  i
Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  over  the  ossa  pubis,  early,  when
in  bed,  lying  upon  the  back.  Pressure  in  the  right  side  of
the  abdomen,  early,  after  working  up,  when  in  bed  ; the
pressure  went  off  after  rising.  Sense  of  contraction  at  a


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


215


place  of  a hand's  breadth  in  the  left  side  of  the  epigastri-
um,  (2.  d.)  Suddenly  contractive  pain  in  the  hypogas-
trium,  over  the  genital  organs,  growing  worse  and  disap-
pearing again  at  intervals,  (a.  5 m.)  Sudden  and  violently
squeezing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  transverse  colon,  as  if
flatulence  were  forcibly  pressing  through  there.  Pinching
in  the  abdomen,  with  nausea.  Pinching  around  the  navel,
on  the  least  motion,  which  is  felt  either  at  night  when  ly-
ing down,  or  by  day,  when  sitting  ; emission  of  flatulence
relieves  the  pain,  which  ceases  entirely  when  walking,  (a.
27  d.)  Pinching  around  the  navel,  more  when  sitting  than
during  motion.  Pinching  bellyache,  extending  from  the
top  to  the  bottom  of  the  abdomen.  Pinching  in  the  left
lumbar  region,  at  a small  place  close  below  the  left  hypo-
chondrium,  increased  by  pressing  upon  it  with  the  finger,
(a.  a quarter  of  an  h.)  Cutting  colic,  at  night.  Painful
cutting  in  the  abdomen,  especially  around  the  navel,  in  the
evening,  (15.  d.)  Cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  at  night,
with  tenesmus,  pain  as  from  distension  in  the  intestines
and  fulness  over  the  ossa  pubis,  as  if  everything  were  ob-
structed, and  the  abdomen  would  burst  when  lying  straight,
this  was  followed  by  stool  in  the  shape  of  hard  balls,  then
liquid  with  much  tenesmus  ; the  colic  abating  with  sub-
sequent burning  in  the  rectum,  (2.  d.)  Violent  colic  as  if
diarrhoea  would  take  place,  moving  to  and  fro  in  the  whole
abdomen,  and  relieved  only  for  a short  lime  by  loud  rum-
bling in  the  belly.  Sense  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  she  were
to  be  attacked  with  diarrhoea,  accompanied  by  chills.  Sen-
sation  of  anguish  with  uneasiness  and  sick  feeling  in  the
lumbar  region , like  tenesmus , removed  only  for  a short
time  by  emission  of  flatulence  or  rising  of  air;  at  last
loose  stool  at  short  intervals.  Several  drawing  stitches  up-
wards in  the  left  side  of  the  epigastrium.  Drawing  pain,
deep  in  the  epigastrium,  descending  along  the  right  groin,
as  by  a string,  (2.  d.)  A stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  small  of  the  back,
(2.  d.)  Sudden  stitches  under  the  navel,  (4.  d.)  Stitches
in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  during  hiccough,  when
turning  the  body,  when  yawning  or  breathing  deeply  ; not
when  walking.  Suddenly  a few  sharp  stitches  in  the
right  side  of  the  abdomen ; she  would  like  to  scream.


BARYTA  CARBONICA*


Suddenly  a violent  stitch  from  the  right  groin  into  the  ab-
domen which  causes  her  to  start.  Feeling  of  soreness  ex-
ternally around  the  belly,  which  extends  from  the  small
of  the  back.  Pressive  pain  at  the  anterior  part  of  the  abdo-
men, as  it  were,  outside  of  the  intestines,  in  the  muscles,
especially  in  the  evening  ; increasing  to  an  insupportable
degree  when  walking  or  taking  otherwise  exercise  ; de-
creasing immediately  when  sitting  or  lying  down,  but  re-
turning instantly  on  walking,  (a.  24  h.)  Pressing  out  at
the  abdominal  ring,  during  exercise  and  stool.  The  place
where  hernia  protrudes,  itches.  (Inflammation  of  the
place  where  hernia  protrudes,)  (a.  3d)  A quantity  of
troublesome  flatulence  in  the  abdomen  ; this  causes  the
varices  to  protrude  ; they  are  painful  when  silting.  Hum-
bling in  the  abdomen.  Considerable  grunting  and  slight
rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Slight  rumbling  in  the  abdo-
men when  moving  it,  as  if  it  contained  much  liquid,  al-
though she  has  not  taken  any  drink,  in  the  afternoon.

Stool. — Emission  of  fetid  flatulence.  Frequent  te-
nesmus. She  cannot  hold  the  stools,  they  press  out  too
rapidly.  Frequent  tenesmus,  however,  she  does  not  go  to
stool  oftener  than  usually,  and  then  the  stools  are  natural.
Frequent  tenesmus , with  ‘painful  soreness  in  the  lumbar
region , and  shivering  chills  over  the  head  and  the  legs,  as
in  dysentery  : then  loose  stool , at  short  intervals,  the  pains
in  the  loins  continuing . with  renewed  tenesmus.  Tenes-
mus with  violent  pain  in  the  belly,  as  if  the  intestines  were
being  dilated  ; then  loose  stool,  with  subsequently  renewed
attacks  of  tenesmus,  (a.  1 h.)  Loose  stool  with  great
desire,  hard  stool  having  preceded,  with  subsequent
burning  and  sense  of  distension  in  the  rectum,  (1.  and  2.
d.)  Soft  granulary  stool,  without  any  pain.  Soft  stool
terminating  in  diarrhoea.  Diarrhoea,  (1.  and  30.  d.)  Diar-
rhoea, mixed  with  blood,  in  a child.  Light  colored  stool.
Firm  stool.  Hard  stool,  with  burning  in  the  rectum.  Very  !
hard  stool,  coming  out  with  difficulty,  with  pain  at  the
rectum  and  bloody  slime.  The  stool  sometimes  sets  out
for  a day.  Expulsion  of  ascarides.  Expulsion  of  an  as-  •
caris  with  the  stools.  Burning  in  the  rectum  during  the
otherwise  natural  stool.  A quantity  of  empty  eructations
after  good  stool,  (a.  some  h.)  Humid  varices  after  stool.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


217


Varices  of  the  rectum  of  the  size  of  a hazelnut,  with  sting-
ing pains  and  as  from  excoriation.  Frequent  expulsion
of  blood  from  the  rectum,  with  distension  of  the  abdomen.
Crawling  in  the  rectum.  Biting  in  the  rectum.  Burning
in  the  rectum.  Soreness  and  burning  around  the  anus,
towards  evening.  Painful  soreness  around  the  anus,  as  if
there  were  excoriation  of  the  parts,  (a.  5 d.)  Stitches  in
the  rectum  the  whole  day,  and  hard  stool.

Urinary  Organs. — * Great  desire  for  micturition;  she
cannot  retain  the  urine.  * Frequent  emission  of  urine
every  other  day,  (a.  29  h.)  Increased  discharge  of  urine  ;
she  has  to  rise  twice  every  night  for  the  purpose  of  urinat-
ing ; she  emits  a large  quantity  every  time,  (a.  19  d.)  In-
creased secretion  of  urine.  Frequent  and  abundant  dis-
charge of  urine,  without  her  having  drunk  anything,  before
breakfast.  He  is  obliged  frequently  to  emit  urine  which
is  as  clear  as  water  ; the  quantity  everytime  is  small.  Rare
and  scanty  emission  of  urine,  with  burning  in  the  urethra,
(8.  and  1 /.  d.)  Urine  with  yellow  sediment.  Burning  in
the  urethra  during  micturition,  (15.  d.)  Pinching  in  the
abdomen  during  micturition.  After  micturition  she  desires
again  to  urinate,  and  emits  a few  drops  every  time  ; the
symptom  goes  off  when  silting.

Generative  Functions. — Burning  in  the  left  testicle,
(a.  13  d.)  Violent  itching  of  the  ribs  of  the  scrotum,  so
that  he  cannot  scratch  enough.  Considerable  sweat  of  the
scrotum.  Red,  excoriated,  moist,  burning  place  between
the  scrotum  and  the  thigh.  A testicular  excrescence
which  had  been  swollen  before,  swells  anew  with  violence.
Numbness  of  the  sexual  organs,  for  some  minutes,  (a.  28
d.)  * 'The  sexual  desire  is  suppressed,  (die  first  days-)

* Diminishes  sexual  desire.  Great  increase  of  the  sexual
desire , (reaction.)  He  falls  asleep  during  the  embrace,
without  any  effusion  of  semen,  (a.  21  d.)  Slow  erection,
(a.  9,  14  d.)  Erection,  early  in  the  morning,  before  ris-
ing ; this,  generally,  happened  very  seldom,  (a.  17  d.)
Erection  every  night,  (a-  30  d ) (reaction.)  Suddenly,  in
the  evening,  an  erection,  such  as  he  had  not  had  fora  year,
with  shuddering;  the  erection  was  so  violent  that  coition
became  necessary,  (a.  10  h.)  Pollution  in  a man  ad-
vanced in  years  ; this  was  followed  by  dryness  over

10


218


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


the  whole  body ; (after  ten  days.)  Some  pollutions
take  place  in  quick  succession  in  a married  man,  with
subsequent  exhaustion,  (a.  35  d.)  Considerable  pollution
at  night,  after  coition  had  taken  place  shortly  before,  (a.
4 d.)  Continual  increase  of  the  sexual  desire  in  woman,
(reaciion.)  Greater  inclination  for  an  embrace  in  woman  ;
the  desire  is  much  more  lasting,  (reaction.)  * The  menses
are  extremely  scanty.  * 'The  menses  are  very  scanty
and  last  only  for  one  day,  whereas,  generally,  they  last
two  or  three  days.  The  menses  are  a little  more  consid-
erable and  last  a little  longer  than  usually  ; and,  this  lime,
they  are  not  accompanied  by  any  pain,  (reaction  ?)  The
menses  appear  two  days  too  soon.  The  menses  appear
too  soon,  and  are  too  abundant.  During  the  menses,
she  experiences  a kind  of  weight  over  the  ossa  pubis,
in  any  position.  Cutting  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen
during  the  menses.  Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  small
of  the  back,  during  the  menses.  Discharge  of  a little
sanguinolent  mucus  from  the  vagina,  with  anxious  beating
of  the  heart,  uneasiness  in  the  body,  pain  in  the  back  and
weakness  even  unto  fainting.  Painful  tearing,  in  the  form
of  jerks,  in  the  pudendum,  so  that  she  would  like  to  scream,
in  the  evening,  (4  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — Sneezing  so  violent  1 hat  it  shakes
the  brain  and  leaves  a feeling  of  vertigo  behind,  (1.  d.)
Frequent  sneezings,  in  quick  succession,  in  the  evening.
Obstructed  nose.  Troublesome  dryness  of  the  nose.
Constant  coryza,  with  sense  of  obstruction  of  the  nose,
(a.  15  d.)  Frequeni,  but  short  coryza,  often  lasting  only
for  an  hour.  Fluent  coryza,  appearing  shortly,  and  dis-
appearing as  soon.  Fluent  coryza,  with  hollow,  deep  tone
of  voice,  and  dry  cough,  early  in  the  morning  and  by  day,
bet  not  al  night.  Frequent  discharge  of  phlegm  from  the
nose.  Frequent  desire  to  blow  the  nose,  with  discharge
of  phlegm  from  the  nose  ; this  is  always  followed  by  a
feeling  of  dryness  in  the  nose,  (a.  8 d.)  Discharge  of  a
thick,  yellow  mucus  from  the  nose.

Throat. — Stitches  in  the  larynx,  (2.  d.)  Pressure
close  below  the  larynx,  uninfluenced  by  swallowing,  (a.  3
h.)  Tn  t lie  throat,  sense  as  if  he  inspired  nothing  but
smoke,  (a.  27  d .)  * Hoarseness  for  a fortnight.  * Hoarse-

ness, or  rather  aphony  for  some  weeks.  * Impure  voice,


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


219


on  account  of  phlegm  which  is  constantly  lodged  in  the
fauces  and  the  larynx,  for  many  days  ; he  can  only  hawk
up  a little  of  it,  which  clears  the  voice  some  for  a short
time.  Roughness  of  the  throat,  occasioning  a few  short
attacks  of  cough,  (a.  1 h.)  Tickling  in  the  throat,  occa-
sioning a continual  short  hacking  cough.  Cough  excited
by  continual  speaking,  (a.  35  d.)  * Cough,  after  midnight.

Dry  cough,  early  after  rising,  with  a sensation  afterwards,
as  if  a hard  body  were  falling  into  the  chest,  (a.  20  d.)
Dry  cough,  for  three  days,  caused  by  a tickling  in
the  larynx  and  in  the  praecordial  region,  which  abates  only
at  night,  and  also  a little  after  dinner.  Dry,  short  cough,
in  the  evening.  Violent,  dry  cough,  in  the  evening,  with
subsequent  weakness  in  the  head.  Suffocating  cough.
Cough  with  discharge  of  phlegm.  Cough  consequent
upon  incessant  irritation  to  cough,  with  discharge  of
phlegm.  A loose  cough,  with  a saltish,  starch-like  dis-
charge, having  lasted  already  four  weeks,  went  off,  (re-
action.)

Chest. — Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  chest  when  cough-
ing. Arrest  (interception)  of  breath,  when  coughing  or
not,  (9.  d.)  Fulness  in  the  chest,  with  short  breath,  espe-
cially when  ascending  a height,  and  with  stitches  in  the
chest,  when  inspiring.  Fulness  in  the  chest.,  and  pain  as
from  bruises,  in  the  left  side.  Pain  in  the  chest.  The
pain  in  the  chest  is  relieved  partly  by  eructations,
partly  by  dry,  warm  poultices.  * Pressure  on  the
chest,  and  tickling,  with  dry  cough,  going  off,  (reac-
tion.) Pressive  heaviness  across  the  chest,  increased  by
inspiration,  and  then  causing  painful  stitches  under  the
upper  extremity  of  the  sternum,  (a.  half  an  hour.)  Stitches
in  the  left  mamma,  (a.  4 h.)  Small  stiches  in  the  left  side
of  the  chest,  at  each  inspiration,  (a.  19  d.)  Violent  stitch
in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  on  raising  a heavy  load  with
both  hands,  (a  20  d.)  Sudden  stitches  and  burning,  deep
in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  ; she  got.  frightened  at  them  ;
in  the  evening,  (4.  d.)  Shootings  in  the  right  mam-
ma, which  cause  her  to  scream  in  the  evening,  (a.
2 d ) Shootings  in  the  right  mamma,  between  the
sixth  and  seventh  rib.  Dull  stitches  behind  the  ster-
num, deep  in  the  chest,  with  a subsequent  pain  as  if
the  part  were  bruised,  (1.  d.)  Stitches  from  the  chest,


220


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


and  coming  out  at  the  shoulders.  Soreness  in  the  chest,
and  externally.  Short  burning  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.
Throbbing  with  painful  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
ascending  and  commencing  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
Sometimes  violent  beatings  of  the  heart,  (in  the  first  fort-
night.) Sensation,  in  front  in  the  chest,  of  a violent  beat
of  the  heart.  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  when  lying  upon
the  left  side.  Palpitation  of  the  heart  renewed  by  think-
ing of  it  ; she  then  feels  anguish;  mostly  at  noon.  Tear-
ing and  stitches,  externally  in  the  mammas,  (a.  19  d.)
Burning  externally  at  the  whole  chest,  with  redness  of  the
skin,  Itching  of  the  chest.

Back. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  (a.  12d.)  Heavi-
ness in  the  small  of  the  back  and  the  loins,  as  from  cold.
* Painful  traction  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  a heavy
body  were  moving  downwards,  (6.  d.)  * Tensive  pain  in

the  small  of  the  back , worst  in  the  evening,  so  that  he  can
neither  rise  from  his  seat,  nor  bend  himself  backwards.
Stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back,  worse  when  sitting,
than  in  motion,  (a.  11  d.)  Violent  stitch  in  the  small  of
the  back.  * Sensation  as  of  throbbing,  (which  is  merely
grumbling)  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Pain  in  the  back,
as  if  he  had  been  lying  too  hard.  Great  pain  in  the  right
side  of  the  back,  when  lying  down.  Weakness  and
want  of  mobility  in  the  dorsal  spine  ; when  sitting  long,
it  feels  as  if  it  would  fall  in.  Pain,  as  from  bruises,  be-
tween the  shoulders,  (5.  — 10.  d.)  Pain,  as  from  dislo-
cation in  the  right  scapula.  Quickly  passing,  cramp-like
pain  at  the  left  scapula,  (a.  half  an  hour).  Dull  stitches
through  the  left  scapula,  coming  out  at  the  chest,  (3.  d.)
Shooting  stitch  on  the  left  scapula,  and  on  the  outside  of  the
right  thigh.  Burning  stitch  at  the  external  border  of  the
right  scapula,  (2.  d.)  Burning  in  the  upper  part  of  the
right  scapula.  Burning  at  the  loins  which  traverses  the
body.  Burning  at  a small  spot  on  the  left  side  of  the
lumbar  vertebrae,  and  at  the  same  time  at  the  lower  part
of  the  left,  scapula,  worse  when  rising  from  a seat,  relieved
when  walking  ; also  at  night,  so  that  he  can  lie  only  on  one
side,  (17.  — 19.  d.)  Throbbing  in  the  back,  like  a strong
pulsation,  mostly  when  at  rest  and  during  an  emotion,
(the  first  three  days.)  Throbbing,  alternating  with  tearing,
sometimes  in  the  left  shoulder,  sometimes  between  the


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


221


scapulae  ; also  at  night,  (a.  19  d.)  Violent  itching  on  the
back,  clay  and  night.  Much  itching,  with  eruption,  upon
the  back.  Itching  of  the  left  scapula,  with  small  pimples
after  scratching.  * Stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
when  waking  up  from  the  siesta,  (a.  24  li.)  Boring  pain
in  the  bones,  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  uninfluenced  either
by  touch  or  motion,  (a.  3 d.)  Pressure  and  tensive  pain
on  the  left  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  when  at  rest  and
in  motion.  Swelling  on  the  nape  of  the  neck,  which,
little  by  little,  spreads  over  the  whole  head,  with  redness
of  the  skin,  and  pain  thereof,  as  from  ulceration,  * accom-
panied by  considerable  swelling  of  the  glands  in  this  re-
gion, for  several  days,  (a.  7 d.)  * Several  glandular  swell-

ings on  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  occiput.  Itching
pimples  on  the  nape  of  the  neck,  close  to  the  hair,  (a.  3 d.)
Frequent  pain  of  the  axil1, ary  glands.  Audible  cracking  in
the  shoulder-joint,  on  every  motion  of  the  left  arm,  (a.  l&d.)

Superior  Extremities. — Grinding  pain  in  the  left
shoulder-joint.  The  arms  are  heavy  and  tremulous.
When  laying  the  arm  upon  the  table,  it  goes  to  sleep.
* The  left  arm  has  gone  to  sleep  ; only  by  considerable
friction  she  succeeded  in  reviving  it.  Intensely  painful
traction  in  all  the  hollow  bones  of  the  right  arm.  Ten-
sion of  the  arms,  here  and  there,  always  only  at  a small
spot,  (2.  d.)  Swilling'  of  the  right  arm,  the  axillary
glands  being  painful.  Intense  pain  at  a small  spot  of  the
humerus.  Pain  at  the  humerus,  as  if  an  ulcer  would  form
there.  The  left  humerus  feels  as  if  it  were  knocked
through  in  the  middle.  Pain  above  the  left  elbow,  as
from  a contusion.  Pain  of  the  elbow  as  from  a contusion.
Tearing  twitches  in  the  bend  of  the  right  elbow.  Slight
twitching,  almost  resembling  shaking,  in  the  bend  of  the
left  elbow,  reaching  the  middle  of  both  upper  and  lower
arm.  Painful  tearing  in  the  forearm  of  the  left  side,  from
the  middle  to  the  wrist.  Short,  painful  traction  in  the  left
lower  arm,  apparently  in  the  bone,  both  when  at  rest  and
in  motion,  (a.  1 hour  and  a half.)  Pain,  as  if  from
bruises,  on  the  back  of  the  lower  arm,  apparently  in  the
radius,  getting  worse  increasingly,  at  intervals,  (a.  many
days.)  Paralytic  pain  in  the  forearm  and  hand,  going  off
by  motion,  returning  when  at  rest.  Tension  or  traction


222


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


in  the  wrist-joint,  and  in  other  parts  of  the  right  arm.
Traction  in  the  left  wrist-joint,  reaching  as  high  as  the
middle  of  the  upper  arm.  Shootings  in  the  coronoid  pro-
cess of  the  ulna,  the  attacks  being  slow  and  increasing  and
decreasing  like  waves  ; early  in  the  morning,  when  lying
in  bed.  Shooting  pain,  occurring  with  the  regularity  of
musical  beats,  in  the  styloid  process  of  the  radius.  Squeez-
ing pain  in  the  hand.  Pressive  pain  in  the  right  wrist-joint,
like  a cramp,  from  within  outwards,  fa.  3 h.  and  a half.)
Tearing,  sudden  pain  in  the  wrist-joint.  Tearing  in  the
wrist-joint,  reaching  as  far  as  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Dull
stitches  in  the  left  wrist  joint,  relieved  by  motion.  Pain
on  the  back  of  the  hand,  as  from  a sprain.  The  hands
tremble  when  writing.  Dryness  of  the  skin  of  the  hands
like  parchment,  (a.  5.  d.)  Rough,  dry  skin  on  the  back
of  both  hands.  The  skin  peels  off  on  the  back  of  both
hands,  (a  20  d.)  Distended  veins  of  the  hands,  and  red-
ness of  these  parts,  (12-  d.)  Sweat  of  the  palm  of  the
hand  and  corresponding  side  of  the  fingers,  in  the  after-
noon, (a.  18  d.)  First,  titillation  in  the  hands,  * then  they
go  to  sleep.  Intolerable  titillation  and  gnawing  in  the
hollow  of  the  hand,  so  that  she  is  continually  obliged  to
rub  it.  Burning  titillation  of  the  back  of  the  hand  and
fingers,  by  day  ; scratching  suppresses  it  only  for  a short
time.  Itching  pimples  on  the  wrist-joint.  Drawing  in  the
index-finger,  as  if  it  were  paralysed  ; on  bending  or  touch-
ing it,  it  feels  pithy,  especially  in  the  tip.  Drawing  pain
in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  thumb.  Tearing  in  the  pos-
terior joint  of  the  thumb  and  also  in  the  fourth  finger,  so
violent,  as  if  the  finger  were  torn  out.  Tearing  under
the  nail  of  the  thumb.  Stitches  in  the  posterior  joint  of
the  thumb,  also  suddenly  in  the  tip  of  the  thumb,  so  vio-
lent, that  it  frightened  him.  Violent  little  stitches  in  the
posterior  joint  of  the  index-finger,  of  the  left  hand,  both
when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (a.  9 h.  and  a half.)  Beating
in  the  middle  joint  of  the  middle  finger,  as  with  a ham-
mer. Cracking  in  the  joints  of  the  thumb  and  little  finger,
when  moving  them.  Panaris  of  the  fourth  finger  of  the
left  hand,  (a.  2 d.)  The  skin  of  the  tips  of  the  fingers
becomes  chapped  and  peels  off.  Pustules  on  the  middle-
finger  of  the  left  hand,  with  soreness  when  touched.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


22S


Inferior  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  right  hip-joint,
when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Cramp-like  pain  m the
right  hip-joint,  as  if  it  were  stiff  or  compressed  with  a
screw  ; die  pain  descends  along  die  anterior  surface  of
the  thigh.  Sudden  stitches  in  the  hip-joint,  as  if  it  were
luxated,  with  pain  when  walking  as  if  it  would  break
down.  Burning  at  the  nates.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right
half  of  the  nates,  as  if  the  flesh  were  being  pulled  off.
Violent  stitches  in  the  nates.  Stinging  itching  in  the
nates.  Small  furunculi  on  the  nates.  * Tearing  down-
wards in  the  right  half  of  the  nates,  periodically  increas-
ing and  decreasing.  A good  deal  of  cramp  in  the  legs.
Tension  in  the  lower  extremities,  as  high  up  as  the  hip  as
if  all  the  tendons  were  too  short,  worst  when  standing,
abating  when  lying  down,  (37.  d.)  Tension  and  * tearing
in  the  legs,  relieved  by  walking,  (a.  Id  d.)  * Tearing  and

tension  in  the  bones  of  the  lower  extremities,  down  to  the
heel  ; relieved  a little  by  walking,  (a.  15  d.)  Tearing  in
the  legs  downwards,  which  lasts  longest  and  is  most  pain-
ful in  the  knees,  then  also  in  the  other  joints,  the  nates,  the
hips,  and  the  malleoli.  Drawing  pain,  downwards , along
the  whole  of  the  left  leg.  Faint  ishness  in  the  legs  <5? rly
in  the  morning,  so  that  he  would  like  10  let  himself  fall,
(10.  d-)  Weariness  in  the  leg  and  jerks  in  the  foot,  when
sitting,  with  painful  soreness  of  the  posterior  surface  of  the
thigh,  getting  worse  on  setting  down  the  foot,  and  shoot-
ing, downwards,  as  far  as  the  foot.  Sense  of  pressure,
from  without  inwards*,  in  the  right  popliteal  region.  Burn-
ing in  the  popliteal  region,  apparently  in  the  bone,  when
sitting.  Drawing,  downwards,  along  the  anterior  surface
of  the  thigh,  apparently  in  the  bone,  relieved  bv  walking,
(27.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  right  thigh,  early  after  rising,  re-
lieved by  the  warmth  of  the  bed,  (19.  d.)  Tearing,  down-
wards, at  the  exterior  and  anterior  side  of  the  thigh  under
the  skin,  as  far  as  the  knee,  when  walking,  (a.  7 h.)  Vio-
lent lancinations  in  the  right  thigh,  so  that  he  could  scarcly
walk,  (a.  4 d.)  Sudden  dull  stitches  on  the  internal  sur-
face of  the  thigh,  so  that  he  got  frightened  by  them,  (a.  4 d.)
A blow  in  the  thigh  over  the  right  knee,  when  standing,  so
that  she  imagined  to  be  obliged  to  fall  over.  Violent  pain,
as  from  contusion,  in  the  middle  of  the  right  thigh,  spread-


224


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


ing  little  by  little  in  the  whole  leg,  and  lasting  from  the
afternoon  till  midnight.  Slight  twitchings  in  the  thigh,
over  the  right  knee.  Violent  itching  of  the  thighs , even
at  night,  (a.  I 1 d.)  In  the  right  knee,  sometimes  a rapid,
momentary  pain,  as  if  1 he  parts  were  being  ripped  with  a
knife  ; this  makes  the  leg  (eel  paralysed.  Painful  sore-
ness of  the  inside  of  the  left  knee,  on  lifting  up  the  leg
and  bringing  it  forwards  while  walking,  (a.  several  hours.)
Pressive  pain  in  the  left  knee,  more  towards  the  inner
side,  when  sitting;  by  extending  the  foot,  the  pain  passes
into  a sensation  of  dull  pressure.  Tearing,  at  the  inner
side  of  the  knee,  down  to  the  middle  of  the  tibia  ; it  goes
off  when  walking,  it  returns  when  sitting.  Tearing,
downwards,  beginning  at  the  knee,  under  the  skin,  when
walking,  (a.  7 h.)  Painful  stitches  in  the  knee-joints.
Sharp  stitches  at  the  internal  side  of  the  left  knee,  so  sud-
den that  they  cause  her  to  start.  When  ascending  the
stairs,  violent  stitches  shoot  through  the  left  knee,  and
leave  behind  them  a painful  sensation  in  the  knee  as  of
being  paralysed.  Cutting  burning  in  the  right  patella.
Pain  in  the  leg,  especially  the  right  tibia,  as  if  the  parts
were  paralysed  ; the  pain  is  relieved  by  resting  the  leg  on
an  elevated  plane.  'Tension  in  the  tibiae,  on  descending
a bill,  (a.  16  d.)  Tension  in  the  tendons  of  the  calves,
as  if  they  were  too  short,  (15.  d.)  Cramp  in  the  calves,
when  extending  the  leg.  Drawing  pain  in  the  legs,  ap-
parently in  the  bones  ; in  the  evening,  when  sitting  down  ;
be  has  to  rise  and  to  walk  about.  Intensely  painful  trac-
tion at  a small  place  of  the  left  tibia,  (a.  three  quarters  of
an  hour.)  Slight  twitchings  in  the  right  calf.  Tit  illation
in  the  right  calf,  as  when  the  parts  have  gone  to  sleep
when  sitting.  Sensation  as  if  cold  air  came  to  the  tibiae,
down  to  the  malleoli.  Uneasiness  in  the  feet.  Uneasiness
in  the  feet  when  silling  ; he  has  to  move  his  leg  constantly,
in  order  to  relieve  the  tension  in  the  thigh  and  the  burning
close  over  the  private  parts.  Tremor  of  the  feet,  when
standing,  so  that,  he  had  to  hold  himself,  in  order  not  to
fall.  (TO.  d.)  Pain,  as  from  a sprain  in  the  joint  of  he
tarsus.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain  in  the  tarsus-joint  and  on
the  back  of  the  foot,  even  when  at  rest,  with  severe  stitches
during  motion.  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


225


Drawing  pain  in  the  foot,  only  when  walking.  Drawing
pain  in  the  sole  of  the  left  foot.  Tearing  in  the  feet,  as  far
as  the  knees,  worse  during  motion.  Deep  stitches,  in  the
ball  of  the  right  foot,  dutches  in  the  heel.  Burning  in
the  soles  of  the  feet,  the  whole  night  ; nevertheless,  cool-
ing them  is  intolerable  to  him.  Tain  in  the  ball  ol  the
foot,  as  from  ulceration,  when  setting  the  foot  down,  espe-
cially early  after  rising.  The  hard  skin  on  the  sole  of  the
foot  is  intensely  painful,  like  a corn,  when  walking.
Corns,  with  pinching  pains.  Burning  stitches  in  the  corn.
She  gets  corns  on  her  toe&.  Drawing  pain  in  the  toes,  (a.
5.  d.)  Violent  tearing  in  the  big  toe  of  the  right  fool,  to-
wards the  extremity.  A lancination  and  a stitch  in  the
big  toe  of  the  left  foot,  near  the  nail,  with  continual  sen-
sitiveness of  this  place;  accompanied  by  great  peevish-
ness, (1.  d.)  Cramp  in  the  toes,  on  extending  the  foot.

Common  Ailments. — Disagreeable  relaxation  of  the
joints.  Occasional  stitches  in  the  joints.  General  and
considerable  weariness.  Extreme  sensitiveness  of  all  the
senses.  Early,  on  waking  up,  the  whole  body  feels  bruis-
ed, (a.  1 1 d.)  * Very  faint,  and  a sensation  as  of  the  whole

body  being  bruised,  (a.  24  h.)  The  whole  bcdv  feels
bruised,  with  fatigue  and  heaviness  of  the  legs.  Dull  pres-
sure, as  from  bruises,  slowly  increasing  and  decreasing,
here  and  there,  at  a small  spot.  Drawing,  alternately  in
the  right  shoulder,  in  the  leg,  in  the  arm,  in  the  occiput,
and  m the  eyes,’ with  heaviness  of  the  occiput,  great  lazi-
ness, and  dizziness  which  occasions  drowsiness.  Draw-
ing in  the  whole  body,  of  an  erratic  nature,  especially  in
the  joints.  Tearing  in  the  whole  body,  here  and  there,  (a.
7 d.)  Squeezing  and  pressive  pain  in  several  places
of  the  , body.  Sense  of  tightness  and  tension  in  the
whom  body,  with  anguish,  in  the  forenoon.  The  foot  or  the
arm  goes  to  sleep,  when  resting  upon  it.  Orgasm  and
violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  prevent  her  from  lying  on
the  left  side  ; accompanied  by  a sensation  as  of  a wound
in  the  heart  and  great  anguish.  The  symptoms,  such  as
tearing,  drawing,  dull,  grumbling  pain  in  the  head  or  limbs
are  most  distinct  on  the  left  side.  Many  symptoms  come
on  when  sitting,  decrease  when  standing,  and  go  off  by  mo-
tion. Many  symptoms  go  off  in  the  open  air.  Pricking,

10*


226


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


as  from  pins,  over  the  whole  body.  Intensely  painful  stitch-
es in  the  skin,  here  and  there.  Tingling  and  burning
prickings , here  and  there,  often  suddenly  at  a small  spot  ;
not  relieved,  by  scratching  or  rubbing , which  became  ne-
cessary. Intolerable  tingling  over  the  whole  body,  espe-
cially of  the  back,  the  hips,  legs,  malleoli,  the  backs  of  the
feet  and  fingers  : it  wakes  him  up  at  night  and  forces  him
to  scratch  continually,  by  which  the  symptom  is  suppress-
ed only  for  a short  time,  three  nights  in  succession.  Burn-
ing  at  several  places  on  the  skin,  here  and  there,  (a.  17  d.)
Burning  itching  here  and  there.  Itching,  in  the  evening
when  in  bed,  sometimes  in  the  face,  sometimes  on  the
back,  on  the  hand.  Violent  itching  over  the  whole  body,
which  prevents  her  from  sleeping  for  several  hours  at
night,  (a.  29  d.)  Itching  here  and  there,  which  partly
goes  off  by  scratching,  partly  not.  Itching  here  and  there  ;
the  parts  become  very  painful  when  scratched . Pimples
at  many  places,  on  the  arms,  the  hips,  nose,  upper  lip,  fore-
head, etc.  A little  wound  easily  becomes  sore  ; a splin-
ter, for  instance,  having  got  into  a finger  and  having  been
pulled  out  again,  the  finger  does  not  heal;  there  is  throb-
bing and  ulceration  in  the  finger,  wThich  prevent  her  from
sleeping.  * Great  sensitiveness  to  cold,  (a.  12  d.)  * Catches
easily  cold,  with  consequent  inflammation  of  the  throat.
* Sore  throat  consequent  upon  cold  ; sharp,  stinging  sort
of  a pain  during  deglutition,  (a.  7 d.)  Walking  in  the  open
air  was  disagreeable  to  him  ; but  the  further  he  walked,
the  more  easy  it  became  for  him.  Headache  from  walk-
ing. Pain  at  the  stomach  after  the  usual  walk  ; this  was
followed  by  an  exhausting  sweat,  at  night,  (a.  5 d.)  The
right  foot  becomes  cold  when  walking  in  the  open  air  ; there
is,  moreover,  a straining  in  the  calf.

Weakness,  Paralysis. — A little  walk  fatigues  him  ; he
is  obliged  to  sleep  immediately  after.  * Great  weariness
and  relaxation  of  the  body,  so  that  he  is  almost  obliged  to
let  himself  fall  ; at  8 o’clock  in  the  evening.  The  weak-
ness which,  generally,  is  felt.,  is  a kind  of  heaviness,  is
least  insupportable  when  lying  down.  * Great  weariness;
he  would  constantly  like  to  lie  down  or  to  sit-  * Want  of
strenglh  or  support  ; the  knees  suddenly  bend  when  stand-
ing, the  dorsal  spine  is  painful,  especially  in  the  region  of


Baryta  carbonic a.


22?


tne  .oms,  as  if  he  had  taken  a long  ride  ; he  feels  uneasy
in  the  whole  body,  and  he  would  like  always  to  sit,  or  ra-
ther to  lie  down  ; he  prefers  walking  to  standing.  'Tre-
mor through  the  whole  body,  early  on  rising.

Sleep. — Much  yawning,  every  morning.  Frequent,
and  considerable  yawning.  Frequent  yawning,  which
causes  her  eyes  to  become  moist,  inconquerable  drowsi-
ness. Weariness  from  being  sleepy,  in  the  forenoon.  She
cannot  help  falling  asleep  in  the  afternoon  ; she  is  nodding
continually.  Falling  asleep,  late  in  the  evening  ; uneasy
sleep,  full  of  dreams.  She  was  prevented  the  whole  night
from  sleeping,  by  the  idea  of  having  made  up  her  mind
during  the  day,  to  have  a good  night’s  rest.  Sleepless-
ness, at  night,  on  account  of  feeling  very  hot.  Fre-
quent waking  up,  at  night,  every  hour  ; frequent  waking
up  at  night  ; the  child  called  its  parents.  Although  he
felt  tired  and  sleepy  when  going  to  bed,  yet  his  first  sleep
was  uneasv  and  frequently  interrupted ; he  frequently
woke  up,  without  any  cause.  At  night  she  wakes  up  more
frequently  than  usually  ; she  feels  too  hot,  she  often  un-
covers herself;  her  feet  feel  sore  as  if  she  had  been  stand-
ing for  days  ; this  last  symptom  disappears  after  rising  and
walking.  At  night,  frequent  drawing  in  the  ear.  At  day-
break, when  sleeping,  saliva  runs  from  the  mouth  At
midnight  he  is  roused  from  his  sleep  by  violent  colic.  Pain
in  the  legs,  at  night,  as  if  he  had  outdone  himself  by  ex-
cessive walking  or  dancing.  Faintishness.  at  night  ; she
had  to  vomit  considerably,  and  even,  on  the  day  following,
she  had  attacks  of  nausea,  (2.  night.)  She  is  oppressed
with  anguish,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed  ; she  has  to  open
her  night’s  dress.  Weeping  mood,  at  night..  * Having
and  stupefaction,  at  night,  as  in  fever.  He  feels  stunned,
early,  on  waking  up.  Unrefreshed  by  the  siesta;  heavy,
feels  bruised,  the  head  feels  stunned  with  pain  ; constant
yawning,  (a.  4 h.)  Early,  on  waking  up,  he  d d not  feel
refreshed  by  sleep  ; the  limbs  felt  weary,  as  if  bruised  ;
this  symptom  abated  after  rising.  Dreams  almost  ev  jry
night . Confused  dreams,  for  several  nights,  so  that  she
had  to  lake  some  time,  early  when  rising,  for  collecting
her  mind.  Confused  dreams,  with  uneasy  sleep,  frequent
waking  up,  and  great  fatigue,  so  that  he  soon  falls  asleep


228


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


again.  She  had  confused  dreams.  Vivid,  strange  dreams.
Anxious  dreams  almost  every  night , and  uneasy  sleep.
Anxious  dreams,  at  night,  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  early
in  the  morning.  Dreams  about  dead  persons,  which,
however,  did  not  frighten  him,  and  murmuring  during
sleep,  (1.  night.)  Terrible  dreams,  about  fire,  etc.  (a.  8 d.)
Terrible  dream,,  which  caused  her  to  wake  up  in  sweat.
Frightful  dream.  Starting  as  with  fright,  when  falling  asleep
in  the  evening,  so  that  the  whole  body  started  up.

Fever. — Chilliness  on  entering  the  room,  after  coming
out  of  the  open  air.  Chilliness  with  thirst,  in  the  after-
noon, (7.  d.)  Chilly  hands,  afterwards  they  itch.  Chilli-
ness of  the  whole  body  at  8 o’clock  in  the  evening,  with
shaking,  commencing  at  the  feet,  with  righting  of  the  hair,
(20  d.)  Sudden  chill,  with  goose-skin,  external  coldness
and  righting  of  the  hair,  in  the  forenoon.  Shivering  of
the  arms,  which  goes  off  by  the  warmth  of  the  stove,  but
winch  becomes  worse  by  the  slightest  draught  of  air,  in
the  afternoon.  Slight  chills,  especially  over  the  arms,
with  goose-skin  and  yawning,  in  repeated  attacks.  Chil-
liness of  the  head,  with  shaking,  with  dull  straining  at  the
zygomata,  as  if  goose-skin  would  form  in  the  lace,  and  as
if  ihe  hairs  became  righted.  Chilliness,  in  the  forenoon  ;
cold  rises  into  the  pit  of  the  stomach  with  painful  pressure  ;
she  imagines  as  if  the  cold  would  contract  her  hairs,  which
then  slowly  descends  into  the  arms  and  thighs  down  to
the  feet.  Chilliness  and  freezing,  downwards,  along  the
whole  body,  repeatedly,  with  cold  hands  (a.  7 h.)  Con-
stant coldness,  as  if  she  had  cold  water  constantly  poured
over  her,  worse  in  the  afternoon,  (7.  10.  d.)  Sense  of
coldness  with  burning,  on  ihe  forehead,  in  the  forenoon,
(7.  d ) Chilliness  in  the  forenoon,  towards  evening,  the
whole  body  feels  too  warm,  and  the  blood  is  pulsating  in
the  fiend.  Icy  coldness  of  the  feet,  from  afternoon  till  the
evening  ; after  lying  down,  heat  in  the  whole  body,  (?.  d )
Sometimes  chilliness,  sometimes  heat,  the  whole  night.
Towards  evening,  alternately  chilliness  and  heat.  Afler
repeated  slight  chills,  beginning  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
the  whole  body  becomes  agreeably  warm,  except  the  feet,
which  remain  cold  ; ten  minutes  later,  chilliness  comes  on
again.  Short  shiverings  mostly  over  the  back,  mingled


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


229


with  quick  flushes  of  heat  over  the  body  ; the  chills  seem
to  commence  at  ihe  face,  with  a sense  of  tension  there,
(a.  1 h.)  Alternate  heat,  by  day,  (a.  9 d.)  Flushes  of
heat  often  rise  into  her  head,  (4.  d.)  Dry  heat  of  the  face,
in  the  afternoon,  (12  d.)  Heat  at  night , and  anguish ,
which  almost  overwhelms  him,  until  early  when  rising,  (5.
d.  and  a.  14  d.)  Dry  heat  the  whole  night,  wfith  sleepless-
ness ; and,  if  she  puts  her  hands  out  from  under  the  cover
of  the  bed,  she  feels  cold,  chilly,  and  thirsty,  (a.  12  d.)
Flushes  of  heat  over  the  whole  body,  with  subsequent  ex-
haustion, so  that  she  would  like  to  let  her  hands  fall  ; face
and  hands  are,  at  the  same  time,  hot,  the  other  parts  al-
most cool.  Sense  of  heat  on  the  back.  Considerable
heat  and  sweat  about  the  head,  then  thirst,  in  the  evening
(11.  d.)  Thirst  almost  every  evening  at  six  o’clock,  (a.
16  d.)  Excessive  faintness  of  all  the  limbs,  in  the  after-
noon ; then  sweat  towards  evening,  and  vomiting  at  night;
these  symptoms  return  every  three  days.  * Sweat  after
midnight,  for  several  nights,  (a.  7 d.)  Exhausting  * night-
sweats,  (a.  13  d.)


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.

These  salt  crystals  are  used  for  souldering  and  for  cas-
tings. The  Venetians  first  imported  them,  impure,  from
the  East-Indies,  where  they  are  especially  found  in  some
of  the  lakes  of  Thibet;  hence  their  name  Borax  Veneta.
Afterwards  they  were  sold  by  the  Dutch  after  having  been
refined  by  secret  processes.  Lately  borax  has  been  pre-
pared, by  the  French,  by  means  of  an  addition  of  Nalron,
from  a kind  of  crude  boracic  acid,  found  in  some  of  the
warm  springs  and  lakes  of  Toscana,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Sasso.  In  100  parts  of  borax  there  are  22  parts  of  bo-
racic acid,  32  parts  of  natron,  and  46  parts  of  water.  Bo-
rax is,  therefore,  not  entirely  saturated  with  its  acid,  (aci-
dum  boracicum,  sal  sedativum  Hombergii.)  This  acid
forms  shining  scales,  a little  sour,  bitter,  the  symptoms  of
which  are  not  yet  known,  although  they  must  be  very  im-
portant.

Borax  has,  for  a long  time,  already,  been  used  as  a do-


230


BORAX,  NAtRON  SUBBORACICUM.


mestic  remedy,  against  the  aphthae  of  children,  and  for  the
purpose  of  facilitating  the  labor-pains  of  parturient  wombs.

Antidotes  : Coffea  Cruda  against  the  sleeplessness  and
the  head-complaints  of  borax  ; Chamomilla  against  the
painful  swelling  of  the  cheeks.  Wine  aggravates  the
symptoms,  especially  those  of  the  chest,  and  vinegar  re-
produces the  symptoms  which  had  already  been  relieved,
especially  the  stitches  in  the  chest.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Doctors  Lane,  Hahne-
mann and  Schreter,  in  Hungary.  According  to  Noack  and
Trinks,  Borax  is  especially  adapted  to  sensitive,  lax  tem-
peraments and  nervous  constitutions , especially  to  Jemales
and  children , pregnant  arid  nursing  women , and  such  in-
dividuals as  suffer  from  haemorrhoids.  Borax  is  espe-
cially suitable  for  diseases  of  the  mucous  membranes  of
the  respiratory  and  digest  ire  organs , arid-  the  diseases  of
the  female  parts.  Also  for  hysteric  complaints,  especially
megrim  with  nausea  and  vomiting.  Erysipelas  with  fever,
especially  of  face  and  legs,  particularly  in  lying-in  and
nursing  women.  Herpes  furfuraceus.  Panaritia.  Indolent
ulcers.  Plica  Polonica.  Calarrhal  inflammation  of  the
eyes  and  lids,  even  with  Entropium  Otitis  externa.  Tooth-
ache. Aphthae.  Angina  Catarrhalis.  S/omacace.  Mer-
curial ulcers  in  the  mouth.  Salivation especially  when
occurring  in  difficult  dentition,  or  simultaneously  with
rheumatic  and  calarrhal  toothache,  inflammation  of  the
fauces  and  buccal  cavity,  aphthae,  scurvy,  irregularities  of
the  digestive  functions,  haemorrhoidal  complaints,  and  an
irritated  condition  of  the  sexual  organs.  Nausea  of  preg-
nant women,  and  when  driving.  Gastric  complaints,  with
vomiting  of  mucus  and  slimy  diarrhoea.  Flatulence.  Af-
fections of  the  liver  and  spleen,  especially  in  individuals
affected  with  haemorrhoids.  Slimy  and  bloody  haemor-
rhoids. Various  kinds  of  menstrual  irregularities.  Ste-
rility. Spasmodic,  labor- like  pains  at  the  stomach,  accom-
panied by  frequent,  violent  eructations.  Leucorrhcea.  Ex-
cessive quant  ity  of  too  thick  milk  of  nursing  women.  Fe-
verish, catarrhal  affections  of  the  che  t.  Pleuritis.  espe-
cially of  the  muscles.  Pleurodyne,  especially  ahdominalis.

Analagous  Remedies. — 1.  Cham.,  Coff.,  Merc.,  Natr.,
mur.,  Sulph. — 2.  Puls.,  Sabin.— -3.  Branc.,  Lyc.


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.  231

Moral  Symptoms.-- Great  anguish,  with  great  drowsi-
ness ; the  anguish  increased  until  1 1 o’clock  at  night,  when
the  person  became  giddy  and  fell  asleep.  Anguish  with
weakness,  trembling  of  the  feet,  and  palpitation  of  the
heart,  (during  the  act  of  mesmerizing.)  (3.  d.)  An-
guish with  rumbling  in  the  body.  (a.  10  h.)  Contrary
to  his  custom,  he  feels  a good  deal  of  anguish  when
driving  down  hill  ; sensation  as  if  his  breath  were  arrested,
(first,  5 w.)  The  child  feels  anguish  when  dancing  ; when
rocked  in  the  arms,  it  has  an  anxious  countenance  during
the  downward  motion,  (first  3 w.)  Dread  of  contagion.
Easily  frightened  ; both  he  and  she  start  at  a distant  shot.
Easily  frightened  ; he  hears  some  anxious  screaming
which  causes  all  his  limbs  to  be  affected  by  the  fright,  (a.
4 w.)  The  little  child  is  much  frightened  at  hearing  peo-
ple clear  their  throats  and  sneeze.  Irritable  disposition
during  an  important  business,  (8.  d.)  Very  earnest,  (I.  d.)
Low-spirited  and  peevish,  (2-  d.)  The  child  is  peevish,
weeps  and  screams,  contrary  to  its  habit,  (first  days.)
Very  peevish  at  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  vexed,  al-
though he  was  good-humored  before  ; he  then  rebukes
people  on  account  of  trifles,  for  many  days,  (a.  8 d.)
Vehement,  vexed,  finds  easily  fault,  (first  days.)  Vehe-
ment, he  scolds  and  swears  at  trifles,  (first  days.)  He
does  not  feel  vexed,  and  is  indifferent  to  things  which  for-
merly caused  him  a good  deal  of  vexation,  (re-action,)  (a.
15  d.)  At  intervals  the  child  cries  very  hard  ; after  a few
minutes  the  child  stops  crying,  and  is  then  very  friendly
and  smiles.  Very  cheerful,  bright,  affectionate,  well  dis-
posed to  any  kind  of  labor  ; in  the  forenoon,  (6.  d ) Want
of  disposition  to  work;  he  only  does  what  he  is  obliged
to,  as  if  by  force,  (the  first  5 weeks.)  He  fritters  away  his
time  in  the  afternoon,  goes  from  one  business  to  the  oilier,
from  one  room  to  another,  does  not  adhere  to  one  object.
Finds  pleasure  in  doing  his  business,  (a.  5 w)  (re-action.)
Occasional  loss  of  ideas,  (4.  d.)  He  has  to  reflect  a good
deal,  to  know  all  that  he  has  done  through  the  day  ; it
takes  him  a long  time  to  recollect  distinctly  whether  he
had  been  at  a place  yesterday  or  to-day,  (a.  6 d.)

Head. — Attacks  of  vertigo  with  loss  of  presence  of  mind,
(3.  d.)  Vertigo  early,  when  in  bed,  (a.  5 d.)  Vertigo  in


232


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


the  evening,  when  walking,  as  if  some  one  pushed  him
from  the  right  to  the  left  side,  (5.  d.)  Giddy,  with  ful-
ness in  the  forehead  early  in  the  morning,  so  that  he
instantly  loses  his  good  humour,  (4.  d.)  Vertigo  and  ful-
ness of  the  head,  on  ascending  a mountain  or  a stair-case,
(5.  d.)  Fulness  in  the  head,  and  pressure  round  the  eyes,
as  if  the  eyes  were  held  fast,  so  that  they  can  scarcely
move.  Fulness  in  the  head  and  pressure  in  the  small  of
the  back,  when  sitting  ; at  the  same  time  sense  of  sleepi-
ness in  the  eyes,  (a.  17  d.)  Fulness  in  the  head  early  in
the  morning,  with  want  of  clear  ideas  and  presence  of  mind,
so  that  he  was  unable  to  perform  any  kind  of  mental  labor,
nor  has  he  any  desire  for  it ; after  walking  in  the  open  air
he  felt  belter  ; but  afterwards  he  felt  a great  weakness  in
the  feet  and  joints,  (2.  d.)  Heaviness  of  the  head,  (first
days.)  Light,  bright  head,  (6.  d.)  Headache  on  the  top
of  the  head,  and  in  the  forehead,  in  the  evening,  (2.  d.)
Headache,  with  obtusion  of  the  whole  head,  and  stitches  in
the  left  ear,  in  the  evening,  (1.  d.)  Headache  in  the  fore-
head, with  stitches  in  the  left  ear,  and  in  a hollow  molar
tooth  of  the  left  side,  lower  row,  in  the  evening,  (14.  d.)
Headache  all  over , with  nausea , inclination  to  vomit , and
trembling  of  the  whole  body , early  in  the  morning , at  10
o'clock  ; this  symptom  appeared  in  two  females  at  the  same
time,  (2.  d.)  Pressive  headache  over  the.  eyes,  going  off
soon,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  (4.  d.)  Pressure  over
the  eyes  from  time  to  time,  (a.  lOd.)  Dull  pressive  head-
ache early  in  the  morning,  especially  in  the  forehead,  (first
days  ) Dull  pressure  in  the  forehead,  (a.  6 d.)  Pressive
drawing  headache  in  the  forehead,  over  the  eyes  and
towards  the  root  of  the  nose,  sometimes  extending  into  the
nape  of  the  neck  ; when  stooping  there  is  a strong  pressure
on  the  frontal  bone,  when  reading  or  writing  the  pain  is
much  more  violent,  with  pressure  in  the  region  of  the
spleen,  (6.  d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the  forehead  towards  the
eyes,  (4  d.)  Shooting  pain  in  the  forehead,  with  nausea  and
tearing  in  both  eye-balls,  in  the  afternoon,  (1.  d-)  'Fear-
ing on  the  vertex,  in  the  afternoon,  with  considerable  buz-
zing of  the  ears,  (a.  8 d.)  Tearing  in  the  left  half  of  the
head,  starting  from  a hollow  tooth,  (4.  d.)  Stitches  com-
mencing at  the  right  temple,  and  extending  into  the  left
half  of  the  forehead.  Shooting  stitches  in  the  vertex,  left


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.  233

side  ; these  are  afterwards  followed  by  shooting  stitches  in
the  genital  organs,  and  in  the  subsequent  night,  by  lewd,
disgusting  dreams,  in  a married  woman,  (1.  d.)  Lanci-
nating headache  over  ihe  eyes,  and  in  the  temples,  with
heat  and  coldness  in  alternation,  so  that  she  sometimes  had
hot,  sometimes  blue  hands,  with  stitches  in  the  swollen
glands  of  the  neck,  which  then  became  softer  and  smaller,
(14  d.)  Stitches  deep  in  the  right  part  of  the  head,  with
running  ol  pus  out  of  the  left  ear,  and  such  violent  stitches
that  he  drew  back  his  head  involuntarily  ; at  the  same
time  there  was  a tickling  in  the  left  ear,  as  before  a dis-
charge,  which  was  afterwards  billowed  by  sharp  hearing,
(a.  32  d ) Pressive  stitches  in  the  right  temple,  (a.  lid.)
Pressive,  dull  stitches  into  the  right  temples,  occurring
with  the  regularity  of  musical  beats.  Boring  at  a small
place  near  the  vertex,  (a.  20  d.)  Throbbing  in  both  tem-
ples, (a.  4.  d ) Throbbing  in  the  forehead.  Throbbing
headache  in  both  temples,  especially  the  right,  (a.  16  d)
Throbbing  headache  in  the  occiput,  as  if  something  would
suppurate,  with  shivering  over  the  whole  body,  the
whole  night  and  following  day,  (a.  2 d.)  Pulsative  press-
ing upwards  of  the  blood  high  up  in  the  occiput,  (a.  16
d.)  Hot  head  of  ihe  baby , with  hot  mouth  and  hot  palms
of  the  hands,  (4.  5.  6.  7.  d.)  As  in  trichiasis,  the  hairs  of
the  child  become  entangled  at  the  extremities,  and  there
adhere  to  one  another  ; if  these  clusters  of  hair  be  cut  off,
the  remaining  hairs  become  entangled  again,  (for  10  w.)
Sensitiveness  of  the  external  head  to  cold,  and  to  changes
of  weather.

Eyes. — Sensation  in  the  eyes  as  if  something  would
press  into  them  ; going  off  by  friction,  (7.  d.)  Sensation
in  the  right  lid,  when  sitting,  as  if  something  would  squeeze
out  from  within  ; the  sensation  is  felt  behind  the  skin,  and
comes  from  the  temple  ; immediately  afterwards  pressure
around  the  eyes,  (4.  d.)  Itching  pain  in  the  upper  eye-lid,
on  opening  the  eye.  Pressure  in  the  right  eye,  very  pain-
ful, as  if  the  eye  were  pressed  into  the  orbit,  early  in  the
morning,  (a.  5 w.)  Cutting  in  the  left  eye,  lengthwise,
suddenly  coming  and  going,  (a.  37  d.)  Tearing  in  both
eye  balls,  with  shootings  in  the  forehead,  and  nausea  in  ihe
afternoon.  Stitches  in  the  left  eye  in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)
Stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  eye,  with  contraction  of  the  up-


234


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


per  lid,  (a.  8 d.)  Itching  in  the  internal  cantlms  of  the
eye,  so  that  she  is  often  obliged  to  rub,  (the  first  days.)
Itching  in  the  eyes,  sometimes  with  a feeling  as  if  sand
were  in  the  eyes,  (a.  4.  d.)  Soreness  in  the  external  can-
thi,  (a.  5 w ) Burning  in  the  eyes  and  instantaneous  con-
traction of  the  same,  as  soon  as  he  puts  on  his  glasses,  (a.
6 d.)  Pressive  burning  in  the  right  eye,  in  the  afternoon,
(a.  3.  d.)  The  baby  becomes  quite  red  around  the  eyes
when  weeping,  (a.  4 d.)  The  eye-lashes  turn  themselves
inwards  into  the  eye , inflaming  it,  especially  in  the  exter-
nal canthus,  where  the  borders  of  the  lids  are  quite  sore ,
(a.  6.  w.)  Inflammation  of  the  external  canthus  of  the
right  eye,  with  irregularity  of  the  eye-lashes,  and  nightly
closing  of  the  eye  by  gumr  (first  days.)  Inflammation  of  the
borders  of  the  eve-lids,  in  a baby  ; he  rubs  his  eyes,  which
become  closed  by  gum  during  the  night,  (first  days)  At
night  the  eyes  are  closed  with  hard,  dry  gum,  which  irri-
tates the  eyes  like  sand,  (a.  5 w.)  Early  in  the  morning,
the  eyes  are  closed  by  gum,  and  run,  (a.  5 d.)  Lachry-
mation,  (a.  8 d.)  In  the  evening  she  has  much  trouble  in
closing  her  eye-lids,  and  early  in  the  morning,  in  opening
them,  (a.  5 w.)  Wavelets  of  light  dancing  before  the  eyes,
when  writing,  so  that  he  sees  nothing  distinctly  ; the  eye
sees  bright  waves,  moving  sometimes  from  the  right,  lo  the
left  side,  sometimes  from  above  downwards  ; several  morn-
ings in  succession,  (a.  24  d.)  Obscuration  of  the  left  eye
in  the  evening;  she  had  to  make  great  efforts  in  order  to
see  something,  and  nevertheless  saw  nothing,  (9.  d.)  Sen-
sitiveness of  the  eyes  to  candle  light,  in  the  evening,
(a.  3 d.)

Ears. — Pain  in  the  ear  ; intensely  sensitive  pressure  be-
hind the  right  ear,  (a.  6 d.)  Stitches  in  the  ears,  (a.  6 w )
Stitches  in  the  ears,  when  washing  them  with  cold  water,
early  in  the  moring,  (a.  3 d.)  Stitches  in  the  left,  ear,  the
person  waking  up  very  early,  (4.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  left
ear,  in  two  persons,  (a.  14  d.)  Itchingin  the  leftear.  with
soreness  in  the  same,  after  the  wax  had  been  removed  ; in
the  evening,  when  walking;  at  the  same  time  a sort  of
stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  (19.  d.)  Soreness  in
the  ear,  when  inserting  the  fingers  into  it,  (a.  32  d ) In-
flamed and  hot  swelling  of  both  ears,  with  * discharge  of


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


235


pus  from  the  ears,  (27.  d.)  * Discharge  of  pus  from  the

ears,  with  lancinating  headache,  (a.  32  d.)  * Discharge

of  pus  from  both  ears,  after  previous  itching  of  the  occi-
put, (19.  d.)  An  existing  discharge  from  the  ears  ceases,
(re-action  ) Quagging  in  the  left  ear,  as  if  a thick  grease
were  in  it,  which  obstructs  the  ear  : afterwards  this  opens
again,  in  the  evening,  (10.  d.)  Sudden  sensation  of  ob-
struction in  the  ear,  or  as  if  the  ear  were  wrapped  up.  Hard
hearing  of  the  left  ear,  in  a child  of  five  years,  (9.  d.)
Tingling  and  whizzing  in  the  right  ear,  which  is  afterwards
changed  to  buzzing,  (a.  20  d.)  Tingling  and  buzzing  in
the  right  ear,  (8.  d.)  Roaring  in  the  ears , the  hearing  be-
ing much  harder,  (l8.  and  19.  d.)  Roaring  in  the  left  ear,
as  from  a storm,  (3.  4 d.)  Dull  drumming  in  the  left  ear,
as  above  a subterraneous  vault,  (a.  14  d.)

Nose. — Itching  and  tingling  in  the  nose;  he  has  to  in-
sert his  finger  into  it,  (a.  12  d.)  The  baby  rubs  his  nose
a good  deal  with  the  hands,  then  also  his  eyes,  (a.  15  d.)
Ulcer  in  the  left  nostril,  in  front  towards  the  tip  of  the  nose,
with  soreness  and  swelling  of  the  tip  of  the  nose,  (10.  d.)
Red  and  shining  swelling  of  the  nose,  with  a.  sensation  as
of  throbbing  and  of  tension.  A quantity  of  dry  crusts  in
the  nose,  which  are  constantly  reproduced  in  proportion  as
they  are  removed  with  the  finger,  (a.  16  d.)  When  blow-
ing the  nose  a little  blood  comes  off,  after  previous  itching
in  the  nose,  (a.  IS  d ) Bleeding  at  the  nose,  (a.  25  d.)
Bleeding  at  the  nose  early  in  the  morning,  and  pulsative
headache  in  the  evening,  (a.  6 d.)

Face. — The  face  of  the  baby  looks  miserable,  pale,
clay-colored,  (first  days  ) Dull  tearing  in  the  left  cheek,
starting  from  a hollow  tooth,  with  pressure  in  the  fore-
head and  in  both  eyeballs,  (a.  4 d.)  Sensation  on  the
right  side  of  the  face,  at  the  mouth,  as  if  cobwebs  had
been  formed  there.  Occasional  twitches  of  the  muscles
near  the  right  commissure  of  the  lips.  Burning  heat  and
redness  of  the  left  cheek,  (a.  4 d.)  Erysipelas  in  the  face,
(a.  34  d.)  Swelling,  heat  and  redness  of  the  cheek,  with
tearing  pains  in  the  zygoma,  and  great  pain  in  the  swelling
when  laughing,  (a.  31,  33  d.)  Swelling  of  the  face,  with
pimples  on  the  nose  and  t he  lips,  (first  days.)  Pimples
in  the  face,  (a.  4 d.)  Red  pimples  on  the  cheeks  and
around  the  chin,  in  a baby,  (a.  5 w.)


236  BORAX,  NATRON  STJBBORACICUM.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — The  mouth  of  the  baby  is  quite
hot.  Pain  in  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  as  if  they  would
ulcerate,  (a.  20  d.)  Crawling  upon  the  lips  as  of  beetles,
(2.  d.)  Burning  at  the  upper  lips,  going  off  soon,  in  the
evening,  (3.  d.)  Red  inflamed  swelling  on  the  lower  lips,
as  big  as  a pea,  with  burning  soreness  when  touched,  (a.
41  d.)  Large  patches,  like  herpes,  around  the  mouth;
the  upper  lips,  after  a burning  heat,  became  covered  with
porrigo.  Toothache  in  a hollow  tooth  of  the  upper  row,
with  swelling  of  the  cheek,  which  is  painful  to  the  touch,
with  a sensation  of  tension,  (a.  7 d ) Toothache  in  hollow
teeth,  dull  and,  griping , in  wet,  rainy  weather , in  five
persons  at  the  same  time.  Contractive  griping  in  a hol-
low tooth,  (a.  4 d.)  Tearing  and  griping  in  a hollow
tooth  in  the  upper  row,  which  feels  as  if  it  were  longer,  so
that  she  cannot  bite  upon  it  nor  bring  the  teeth  together  ;
at  the  same  time  the  gums  are  swollen  and  inflamed,  as  if
an  ulcer  would  form  on  the  teeth  ; in  the  evening  the  pain
also  spread  into  the  inferior  teeth,  and  only  went  off  when
falling  asleep,  (a.  4 d.)  'Fearing,  starting  out  of  the  hol-
low teeth  and  extending  into  half  the  head,  whenever  she
touches  the  teeth  with  the  tongue,  or  takes  cold  water  into
the  mouth.  Pressure  in  the  hollow  teeth  in  bad  weather,
(a.  40  d.)  Dull  pressive  boring  in  a hollow  tooth,  in  the
evening,  in  cool  air,  (the  first  days  ) Pressive  and  grind-
ing toothache,  after  every  supper  and  breakfast,  and  re-
lieved by  smoking  tobacco;  for  several  days,  (a.  10  d.)
Drawdng  pain  in  the  teeth.  Stinging  toothache  in  a hol-
low molar  tooth  of  the  lower  row,  with  stitches  in  the  left
ear,  and  headache  in  the  forehead,  in  the  evening,  (a.  14
d-)  Fine  stitches,  intermittent,  in  all  the  teeth,  mostly  in
a hollow  molar  tooth,  on  the  left  side,  lower  row,  (2.  d.)
Tingling  and  tickling  in  the  upper  and  lower  incisores,
and  afterwards  conflux  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  (a.  7 d.)  A
bit  of  a hollow  tooth  broke  off  spontaneously,  in  a female,
(a.  6 d.)  The  teeth  feel  as  if  they  were  too  long,  (first
days.)  The  gums  of  the  upper  teeth  are  bleeding,  with-
out any  pain,  (a.  6 d.)  Swelling  of  the  gums  for  three
days,  with  pressure  in  the  hollow  teeth,  in  bad  weather,
(a.  40  d.)  Inflamed,  intense  swelling  of  the  external  side
of  the  gums,  which  swelling  is  very  painful,  (ulcer  on  the


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


237


gums,)  with  dull  pain  in  a hollow  tooth,  swelling  of  the
cheek  and  the  whole  of  the  left  side  of  the  face,  as  far  as
below  the  eye  ; here  the  swelling  is  changed  to  a watery
blister.  (Smelling  of  chamomile  removed  the  pain,)  (a.
36  d.)

Mouth. — Slimy  in  the  mouth,  (the  first  days.)  Aph-
tha in  the  mouth , (a.  4 w.)  * Aphthae  on  the  inside  of  the

cheek,  it  bleeds  when  eating,  (a.  30  d.)  * Aphthae  upon

the  tongue,  (a.  33  d.)  Red  blisters  upon  the  tongue,  as
if  the  skin  w'ere  pulled  off ; they  are  painful  at  every  mo-
tion of  the  tongue,  or  if  something  salt  or  acrid  is  brought
in  contact  with  it,  (a.  5 w.)  Dryness  of  the  tongue,  in  the
afternoon,  (3.  d.)  Spasm  in  the  tongue,  like  stiffness,  or
as  if  the  tongue  had  gone  to  sleep  ; breathing  was  arrested
by  it.  The  palate  of  the  baby  seems  wrinkled,  and  it  often
screams  when  sucking,  (a.  4 w.)  The  mucous  membrane
of  the  palate,  in  front,  feels  burnt  and  wrinkled,  and  is
especially  painful  when  chewing,  for  some  days,  (a.  6 d.)
Dryness  in  the  throat,  (5.  d.)

Throat. — Roughness  of  the  throat,  as  from  a grater.
Burning  in  the  throat  which  forces  him  to  swallow  saliva,
this  being  painful,  (9.  d.)  Much  phlegm  accumulates  in
the  throat,  which  he  is  obliged  to  hawk  up.  Tenacious
phlegm  in  the  throat,  (a.  18  d.)  Tenacious  whitish
phlegm  in  the  throat,  which  can  only  be  loosened  with
great  exertions,  for  man}7'  days,  (a.  5 d.)  Much  tenacious
phlegm  in  the  throat,  which  he  finds  it  so  hard  to  hawk  up
that  it  causes  vomiting,  (a.  6 d.)  Hawking  up  of  phlegm,
early  in  the  morning  ; the  phlegm  goes  off  easily,  in  lumps.
He  h awks  up  green,  loose  phlegm,  (a.  12  d.)  A little  bit
of  phlegm,  streaked  with  blood,  is  hawked  up,  (a.  9 d.)

Taste  and  Appetite. — The  taste  in  the  mouth  is  in-
sipid and  flat,  (a.  5 d.)  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  ; every
thing  that  she  eats,  tastes  bitter  to  her  ; even  saliva,  (2.  d.)
When  eating  she  has  no  taste,  for  some  weeks,  (a.  8 d.)
Th  irst  early  in  the  morning  ; he  has  to  drink  a good  deal,
(a.  14  d.)  Appetite  to  eat  is  much  less  than  usually,  (a.  5
d.)  Little  hunger  and  appetite,  (the  first  5 w.)  Diminu-
tion of  hunger  and  appetite  ; frequently,  however,  without
any  real  appetite,  (a.  5 d.)  He  has  little  appetite,  espe-
cially for  supper,  (a.  8 d.)  In  the  evening  she  has  but


238


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


and  externally.  Short  burning  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
little  appetite,  for  some  weeks,  (a.  8 d.)  No  appetite  for
dinner,  (12  d.)  He  eats  very  little.  The  soup  at  dinner
did  not  taste  well,  and  excited  sweat,  (8.  d.)  Aversion  to
dining,  with  coldness,  drawing  headache  and  colic,  which
subsided  after  three  attacks  of  diarrhoea,  (a.  20  d.)  No
desire  for  smoking,  (2.  d.)  After  smoking,  sensation  as  if
diarrhoea  would  come  on,  (6.  d.)  Increased  appetite  for
breakfast,  (a.  4 d.)  Much  appetite,  in  the  evening.  De-
sire for  sour  drinks,  (14.  and  15.  d.)  During  the  meal,
uneasiness  of  the  whole  body,  with  nausea,  so  tiiat  he  had
to  make  an  effort  in  order  to  eat  something  ; stretching
himself  backwards  procured  him  relief,  (a.  20  d.)  Nau-
sea during  the  meal,  (19.  d.)

Stomach.  —Distension  from  flatulence  after  every
meal,  (a.  5 d.)  He  relished  his  meal  ; after  the  meal,  he
felt  distended,  uneasy,  unwell,  peevish  ; walking  in  the
open  air,  relieved  a little,  in  the  evening,  (a.  41  d.)  Dis-
tended abdomen  after  supper,  (5.  d.)  After  having  eaten
mutton  and  stewed  apples,  fulness  of  the  stomach,  with
peevishness  and  ill  humour,  and  a fulness  in  the  head,  as
if  the  blood  were  pressing  into  the  head  by  force,  (19.  d.)
Pressure  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  uneasiness,  after
eating  pears,  especially  early  in  the  morning,  or  in  the
forenoon.

Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  abdomen,  shortly  after  dinner,
as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on  ; it  goes  off  after  the  siesta,
(2.  d.)  Rumbling  in  the  body  and  diarrhoea  after  dinner,
(3.  d.)  Diarrhoea  shortly  after  dinner,  with  debility  in  the
joints  and  legs  ; after  walking,  this  symptom  improves,  (l.
d.)  Cutting  in  the  right  hypocondrium,  shortly  after
breakfast;  the  cutting  extends  transeversely  across  the
abdomen,  downwards,  afterwards  diarrhoea,  being  one  sud-
den evacuation,  (3.  d.)  Diarrhoea  after  breakfast,  four
times  in  succession,  (4.  d.)  Hiccough  after  dinner,  (a.  8
d.)  Bad  hiccough,  which  makes  the  throat  rough.  The
baby  has  frequent  hiccough.  Nausea  and  little  appetite,
(4.  d.)  Nausea  and  indisposition,  as  if  the  person  would
faint,  early  in  the  morning,  (6.  d.)  Nauseous  and  faint-
ish,  frequently  in  the  afternoon,  (a.  12  d.)  Nausea  at  the
stomach,  with  pain  at  the  sternum,  from  3 o’clock  in  the
afternoon  until  evening,  several  days  in  succession,  (a.  5


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


239


d.)  Nausea  with  periodical  inclination  to  vomit,  (5.  d.)
Nausea  early  in  the  morning,  with  inclination  to  vomit ;
going  off  after  dinner,  (6.  d.)  Nausea  unto  vomiting  when
driving,  (1.  d.)  Nausea  immediately  after  waking  up,
with  great  inclination  to  vomit  ; vomiting,  however,  does
not  take  place  till  he  drinks  a little  water,  which  is  suc-
ceeded by  the  vomiting  of  a good  deal  of  phlegm,  and  some-
times some  bitter  substances,  (a.  17  d.)  Nausea  with
subsequent  vomiting  of  phlegm,  with  heat,  and  a quick,
feverish  pulse,  (a.  23  d.)  Vomiting  of  sour  slime,  after
having  taken  cacao  for  breakfast,  (2.  d ) Pain  at  the  sto-
mach, as  from  bad  digestion,  when  pressing  externally  upon
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (2.  d.)  Pain  in  the  region  of  the
stomach,  after  lifting  a heavy  weight;  the  pain  reached  as
far  as  the  small  of  the  back,  where  it  became  lancinating,
so  that  she  was  unable  to  turn  herself  in  bed  without  pain,
the  whole  night ; early  in  the  morning  she  felt  better,  (two
days  before  the  catamenia,)  (13.  d.)  Pressure  at  the  sto-
mach, after  every  meal,  (the  first  days.)  Pressure  at  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  which  disappeared  when  walking.  Pres-
sive  stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  dyspnoea,
which  oblige  him  to  breathe  deeply  ; this,  however,  he  is
unable  to  do,  on  account  of  a sharply  pinching  pain  in  the
right  side  of  die  chest.  Contractive  pain  in  the  region  of
the  stomach,  every  day,  from  four  o’clock  in  the  morning
until  noon  ; a kind  of  winding  upwards  which  passes  into  the
dorsal  spine  and  there  produces  stitches,  for  several  days.
Contraction  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (6.  d.)  Severe  pres-
sure, as  with  the  hand,  in  the  left  hvpochondrium  ; when
driving  in  a carriage  without  springs.  After  the  siesta,  a
pressure  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  from  the  last  rib  as  far
as  the  hip,  which  increases  by  external  pressure,  until
evening,  (2.  d.)  Pressive  pain  in  the  left,  hypochondrium,
as  if  a stone  were  lying  there,  when  dancing  ; the  pressure
disappeared  by  continued  dancing,  (a.  15  d.)  Intensely
painful  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  (1.  d.)  Pres-
sure, and  sometimes  burning  in  the  left  hynochondrium,
with  a sensation  as  if  something  were  rising  into  the  chest
from  the  region  of  the  spleen,  which  descends  again,  dur-
ing an  expiration,  (a.  6 d.)  Cutting  in  the  left  hypochon-
drium, when  walking  fast,  as  if  a hard,  sharp,  moveable


240


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICTTM.


piece  were  there,  with  a sensation  in  the  abdomen,  as  if
nothing  but  hard  pieces  were  lodged  there,  which  become
intermixed  with  each  other,  (6.  d.)  Pressure  and  stitches
in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  increased  by  turning,  (a.  3d.)
Stitches  in  the  right  lumbar  region,  increased  when  stoop-
ing, early  in  the  morning,  during  a walk,  the  symptom
abated  when  sitting  down,  (1.  d.)  Colics  several  times
during  the  day,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on.  Weakness
in  the  abdomen,  (4.  d.)  Colic,  with  shuddering  and
goose-skin,  (a.  6 d.)  Pinching  in  the  abdomen  at  different
times.  Pinching,  contracting  colic  over  the  navel  ; she
had  to  curb  herself,  which  made  the  colic  disappear  ;
every  day,  early  in  the  morning,  for  5 minutes,  (a.  8 d.)
Pinching  in  the  abdomen  loith  diarrhoea , (a.  20  d.)  Form-
ation of  flatulence,  and  frequent  emission  of  flatulence.
A quantity  of  flatulence.  Considerable  rumbling  in  the
abdomen,  at  night,  relieved  by  the  emission  of  flatulence,
upwards  and  downwards.

Stool. — Frequent  tenesmus,  with  rumbling  in  the
belly,  and  diarrhoea,  (first  days.)  Frequent  tenesmus,
with  pinching  in  the  belly,  and  light  pappy  evacuations.
Tenesmus,  early  in  the  morning,  first  with  hard
evacuations,  then  diarrhoea,  with  burning  in  the  rectum,
(1.  d.)  Frequently  very  light  evacuations  every  day,
(first  days.)  Stool  every  hour,  soft  slimy,  and  without
any  pain,  (3.  d ) Soft  stools,  (first  three  days.)  Very
soft  stool  early  in  the  morning,  in  the  evening  a natural
evacuation,  (a.  7 d.)  Soft,  light-yellow , slimy  stools,
three  times  a day , with  faintness  and  weakness , (first
days.)  Diarrhoea,  two,  three  times,  without  any  pain,
(one  hour  after  taking  the  medicine.)  Diarrhoea,  six  times
from  morning  till  afternoon,  2 o’clock,  without  any  pain,
(5.  d.)  Diarrhoea,  without  any  pain,  twice  a day,  with
subsequent  evacuation  of  slime  and  blood,  (16.  d.)  Diar-
rhoea, with  rumbling  in  the  belly  (the  first  days.)  Diar-
rhoea, towards  noon,  with  rumbling  and  grunting  in  the  ab-
domen, (4.  d.)  Diarrhoea  in  the  afternoon,  with  much
flatulence  succeeding  hard  stool,  (5.  d.)  The  child  has
diarrhoea  three  times  a day,  at  last  like  yellow  water.
The  first  effect  of  borax  is  relaxation  of  the  bowels,  after-
wards no  stool  for  a couple  of  days,  then  hard  stools  once


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


241


a day.  Hard  stools  with  straining,  (a.  16  d.)  Constipa-
tion, and  stools  like  those  of  sheep,  (for  10  d.)  (after
several  days  ) Green  stools  in  a bahy,  with  previous
screamings,  (a.  6 d.)  Discharge  of  lumbrici.  The  stools
are  easily  expelled  in  the  afternoon  ; previously  peevish,
low-spirited,  lazy,  dissatisfied  ; after  the  stools  had  been
passed,  cheerful,  contented  with  one’s-self  and  the  world,
and  quietly  awaiting  the  future,  (a.  20  d.)  Early  in  the
morning  a pale  slime  went  off  four  times,  once  involun-
tarily, (14.  d.)  Tenacious,  viscid,  yellowish  slime  with
the  stools,  (18.  19.  d.)  Brown  slime  in  the  rectum,  after
the  stools,  (9.  d ) Reddish,  liquid  slime,  during  stool,  as
if  the  stools  were  tinged  with  blood,  (a.  21  d ) Dis-
charge of  blood  and  slime  from  the  rectum,  (a.  9 d.)
Distended  vein  of  the  rectum,  as  big  as  a goose-quill,  soft
to  the  touch  and  without  any  pain,  (a.  23  d.)  Itching  of  the
rectum,  in  the  evening,  (7.  d.)  Itching  of  the  rectum  as
from  the  slime  of  hemorrhoids,  (a.  16  d.)  Contraction  in
the  rectum,  with  itching,  (a.  40  d.)  Boring  and  stinging
pains  in  the  rectum  and  small  of  the  back,  (a.  15  d.)
Stilches  in  the  rectum,  in  the  evening,  (2.  d.)

Urinary  Organs. — Tenesmus  of  the  bladder,  without
her  being  able  to  expel  one  single  drop  of  urine,  with  cut-
tings in  the  genital  organs  and  distention  in  both  hips,  for
two  hours,  in  the  evening,  (1.  d.)  Violent  desire  to  uri-
nate, at  night,  several  times,  (a.  25  d.)  Violent  instan-
taneous desire  to  urinate  ; he  can,  almost,  not  hold  the
urine,  (first  days.)  Frequent  micturition,  (the  first
days.)  The  baby  urinates  almost  every  ten,  twelve
minutes  ; it  frequently  weeps  and  cries  before  the  urine  is
expelled  ; for  a considerable  length  of  time,  (a.  6 d.)  Hot
urine  in  a suckling,  (a.  4 d.)  Sharp  smell  of  urine,  (the
first  days.)  Sharp,  striking  stench  of  the  urine,  (the
first  2.  w.)  After  micturition,  burning  straining  in
the  urethra.  After  micturition,  pain  as  from  excoriation
in  the  urethra,  (15.  20.  30.  d.)  After  micturition  the  ex-
tremity of  the  urethra  feels  sore.  Along  the  urethra,
pain  as  from  excoriation,  especially  when  feeling  it,  (a.
26  d.)  Dark-blue  spot  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  as  if
the  skin  had  gone,  with  biting  pain  during  micturition  (a.
24  d.)  The  orifice  of  the  urethra  seems  closed  as  with  gum,

11


242


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORAC I CUM.


Generative  Functions. — Indifferent  to  an  embrace,
(the  first  10  d.)  Indifferent  to  an  embrace,  (the first 5 w.)
Whilst  lie  had  his  hand  upon  a sick  female,  trom  a feel-
ing of  kindness,  he  was  attacked  with  sensual  sensations,
without  any  desire  for  coition,  (3.  d ) Frequent  excite-
ment. m the  genital  parts,  without  any  desire  for  coition,
(the  first  days.)  Voluptuous  mood,  (a.  5 w.)  Straining
erection,  early  m the  morning  on  waking  up,  (4.  d.)  Pol-
lution, with  a dream  as  if  he  enjoyed  an  embrace,
the  semen  coming  out  very  fast,  which  wakes  him  up.
Cutting  pains  in  the  urethra  during  an  involuntary  effusion
of  semen,  the  semen  being  so  thin  that  he  imagines  to
urinate.  After  a pollution,  desire  to  urinate,  and  during
micturition,  he  feels  a cutting  in  the  urethra.  During  an
embrace  he  loses  his  semen  very  quickly,  and  in  the  geni-
tal organs  there  is  a constant  irritation,  (a.  5 w.)  During
an  embrace,  he  has  to  wait  a long  time  before  the  expul-
sion of  semen  takes  place,  (a.  5 w ) Lancinating  sore-
ness of  the  penis,  at  that  place  where  a chancre  had  ex-
isted before,  especially  when  touching  the  place,  (a.  24  d.)
The  courses  appeared  one  month  sooner,  without  any
pain,  (a.  4 d.)  Courses  four  days  too  soon,  without  any
pain  ; except  the  evening  and  next  morning  before  the
appearance,  heaviness  at  the  chest,  with  arrest  (intercep-
tion) of  breath,  and  more  violent  buzzing  of  the  ears,  (a,
26  d.)  Courses  three  days  too  soon,  without  any  pain,
(a.  7 w ) The  courses  wdiich  had  been  suppressed  for
six  weeks,  immediately  made  their  appearance  after
taking  borax  ; they  lasted  for  a day  and  then  disappeared  ;
however  they  were  so  copious  that  they  resembled  a he-
morrhage. Courses  four  days  too  early  and  very  copious,
with  colic,  nausea  and  pain  extending  from  the  stomach
to  the  small  of  the  back  ; this  lasted  until  midnight,  when
a copious  sweat  broke  out,  and  she  fell  asleep,  (8  d.)
Menses  very  scanty  for  two  days;  copious  on  the  third,
with  pale-red  blood,  until  the  sixth  day,  with  faintish-
ness,  so  that  she  was  scarcely  able  to  stand.  Suppres-
sion of  the  menses  fifty-four  days,  without  any  pain,
then  they  appeared  without  any  pain,  first  pale,  in  the
afternoon  redder  ai  d more  abundant,  ceased  the  third  day
at  night,  returned  the  fourth  ; (the  menses  ought  to  have


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORAC1CUM.


243


come  three  weeks  after  taking  the  drug.)  Two  months
after  taking  the  medicine  the  menses  stopped,  but  appeared
the  next  day,  after  she  had  had  another  dose  of  borax,
with  pinching  in  the  abdomen.  Beating  in  the  head  and
buzzing  in  the  ears  during  the  catamenia.  Spasmodically
pressing  and  lancinating  pain  in  the  groin,  during  the  cata-
menia. On  the  second  day  after  the  menses,  pressure  as
from  a stone  in  the  right  region  of  the  ribs,  as  far  as  the
scapula ; thence  the  pain  went,  like  a spasm,  into  the
stomach  and  the  small  of  the  back,  with  subsequent  vomit-
ing. Leucorrhoea,  white  as  mucus,  without  any  other  ail-
ments, a fortnight  after  the  menses,  (a.  5 w.)  Leucorrhoea,
like  albumen,  with  sensation  as  if  warm  water  were  flow-
ing down,  for  several  days,  (a.  12  d.)  Leucorrhoea;
thick  as  paste  and  white,  for  five  days,  (a.  4 d.)  A female
had  been  sterile  for  fourteen  years  ; on  account  of  a
chronic,  acrid  leucorrhoea,  she  received,  among  other
remedies,  borax,  after  which  she  became  pregnant,  and
the  leucorrhoea  improved.  Easy  conception , during  the
use  of  borax,  observed  in  five  women.  Stitches  in  the
region  of  the  uterus,  (2.  d.)  Sense  of  distention  and
stitches  in  the  clitoris,  at  night,  (6.  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — Sneezing,  with  great  painfulness  ;
he  is  obliged  to  try  to  suppress  it,  because,  when  sneezing,
he  experiences  violent  stitches  in  ihe  right  side  of  the
chest  ; for  three  weeks,  (a.  6 d.)  Sneezing  and  coryza,
(first  days.)  Coryza  with  violent  tingling  in  the  nose,  (a.
16  d.)  Discharge  of  a quantity  of  greenish,  thickish
mucus  from  the  nose.

Throat. — Tearing  in  the  head  of  the  larynx,  for  two
hours,  in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)  Rough  throat,  early  in  the
morning.  Roughness  in  the  pit  of  the  neck,  with  drawing
stitches  there,  when  coughing  and  sneezing  ; hawking  up
phlegm  relieves  the  symptom,  (l  1 . d.)  Tearing  extend-
ing from  the  throat  into  the  chest,  inducing  cough,
(a.  5 w.)  Tickling  in  the  throat,  inducing  a dry  cough,
(a.  9 d.)

Chest. — Dry  and  hacking  cough,  in  a child.  Dry
cough,  as  from  cachexia,  such  as  old  people  are  affected
with,  especially  early  in  the  morning,  when  rising,  and  in
in  the  evening  when  lying  down,  with  stitches  into  the


244


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


right  side  of  the  chest  and  right  groin  ; washing  the  chest
with  cold  water  procured  most  relief,  but  the  pains  in-
creased after  drinking  wine  ; for  twelve  days,  (a.  3 w.)
Cough,  with  rawness  of  the  throat  and  pressure  of  the
chest,  (1.  d.)  Hacking  cough,  and  violent  cough,  with  ex-
pectoration, at  every  cough,  of  a slight  quantity  of  matter,
tasting  and  smelling  mouldy  in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)  Night-
cough.  Cough  with  expectoration  of  mucus,  especially
early  in  the  morning,  with  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,
which  pain  continued  until  noon,  even  when  there  was  no
cough,  (4.  d.)  One  coughs  up  a white  mucus  streaked
with  blood,  which  is  loosened  with  difficulty,  (a.  18  d.)
When  coughing  he  is  obliged  to  press  the  right  side  of  the
chest  and  the  right  groin  with  his  hand  ; this  makes  the
pain  more  tolerable,  (first  three  weeks.)  Stitches  in  the
right  mamma  ; in  the  region  of  the  nipple  ; at  every  cough,
in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  chest , at  every  cough
and  deep  inspiration , (a.  7d.)  The  breathingis  moreddfi-
cult,  (a.  18  d.)  The  breathing  is  more  difficult;  he  is
obliged  to  breathe  deeply  ; this,  however,  he  cannot  do,  on
account  of  stitches  in  the  chest,  (first  days.)  Every  three
or  five  minutes  he  is  obliged  to  take  a quicker  and  deeper
inspiration  ; this  is  always  followed  by  a stitch  in  the  right
side  of  the  chest,  with  a subdued  painful  sigh,  and  slow
expiration,  (a.  7 d.)  Tightness  of  the  chest,  with  con-
strictive oppression  of  the  breathing  on  going  up  stairs  ;
he  is  then  obliged  to  take  a deep  inspiration,  which  is  al-
ways accompanied  by  an  intensely  painful  drawing  stitch
into  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  (6.  d.)  Shortness  of
breath,  after  going  up  stairs,  so  that  he  cannot  speak"  a
word,  and,  when  he  speaks,  he  has  a stitch  into  the
right  side  of  the  chest  ; he  experiences  this  same
symptom  when  running,  and  when  making  a bodily  effort
which  heats  him,  (a.  8 d.)  Arrest  (interception)  of  breath,
when  lying  in  the  bed  ; he  has  to  jump  up  and  catch
breath  ; whenever  he  does  this,  he  experiences  a stitch  into
the  right  side  of  the  chest,  (a.  7 d.)  At  every  inspiration,
stitch  into  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  as  with  a knife,  (2.  d.)
At  every  attempt  at  breathing,  her  chest  becomes  con-
tracted, (14.  15.  17.  d.)  During  a deep  inspiration  there
is  a sensation  as  if  something  rose  from  the  left  hypochon-


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


245


drium  into  the  chest  with  a burning  pressure,  and  then
moved  down  again  during  the  expiration.  A heaviness
upon  the  chest, so  that  she  sometimes  is  deprived  of  breath,
(a.  6 w.)  Oppressive  anxiety  in  the  chest,  in  the  evening,
when  in  bed,  (1.  d.)  Oppression  at  the  chest.  When
stooping  whde  sitting,  a pressive  squeezing  rises  into  the
chest  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; the  breath  becomes
intercepted  with  stitches  in  the  lungs,  (a.  7 d.)  Pressure
with  stitches  in  the  sternum,  after  dinner,  increased  by
deep  breathing,  (a.  40  d.)  Stitches  in  the  chest , when
yawning , coughing , or  breathing  deeply , (a.  7 d.)  Stitches
in  the  chest,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence,  (first  days.)
Fine  prickings,  extending  from  the  back  into  the  chest,  in
the  evening,  (a.  8 d.)  Stitches  in  the  left  region  of  the
ribs,  with  soreness  in  the  chest.  Stitches  between  the
ribs  of  the  right  side,  so  painful  that  he  cannot  lie  upon
this  side,  with  intensely  painful  drawing  and  interception
of  breath,  which  obliges  him  to  snap  for  breath  ; when  he
lies  upon  the  painful  side,  the  pain  immediately  rouses
him  from  sleep,  (the  first  four  weeks.)  Sudden  stitches
into  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  on  lifting  the  arm,  (a.  7
d.)  The  drawing  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest
descend  into  the  right  groin,  where  he  then  feels  a violent
pain  when  hiccoughing,  sneezing,  coughing,  or  gaping,  (a.
3 w.)  Drawing  pain  at  a small  place  in  the  intercostal
muscles,  which,  when  bending  over  to  the  left  side,  is
changed  to  a pain,  as  from  a violent  blow  in  the  right  in-
tercostal muscles,  when  he  bends  over  in  front,  or  to  the
right  side,  (a.  6 d.)  The  pain  in  the  chest  becomes  more
tolerable  on  pressing  the  painful  spot  with  the  hand.
H is  chest  feels  a little  relieved  when  quietly  extended
upon  the  back.  The  pain  in  the  chest  is  most  relieved
when  slowly  walking  about  in  the  room  ; he  then  feels
most  comfortable.  Weakness  of  the  chest,  with  dryness
of  the  neck,  (9.  d.)  Sensation  as  if  the  heart,  were  on
the  right  side,  and  were  being  squeezed  off,  (7.  d.)  Pain
as  from  having  lain  upon  a hard  couch,  with  soreness  to
the  touch,  at  night,  (3.  d.)  Griping,  and,  sometimes,
stitches  in  the  left  mamma,  and,  when  the  child  has
done  sucking,  she  is  obliged  to  compress  the  mamma
with  her  hand,  because  it  pains  her  on  account  of  being


246


BORAX,  NATRON  STJBBORAClCUM.


empty.  Contractive  pains  in  the  left  mamma,  whenever
the  child  sucks  at  that  which  is  on  the  right  side,  (the
first  days.)  The  milk  in  the  mamma  increases  in  quantity,
(a.  4 d.)  There  flows  much  milk  out  of  the  mamma,  so
that  the  bed  becomes  wet,  (a.  32  d.)  The  milk  which  flows
out  of  the  mammas,  becomes  caseous,  and  curdles,  (the
first  days.)

Back. — Violent  itching  and  pricking  of  the  oscoccygis;
he  cannot  endure  the  itching  without  scratching;  after-
wards discharge  of  slime  by  the  rectum,  (a.  32  d.)  Pain
in  the  small  of  the  back  when  sitting  or  stooping,  as  from
pressure,  (3-  d.)  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  when
walking,  (1.  d ) Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  with  dis-
charge of  much  slime  during  stool,  (19.  d.)  Dull  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  when  stooping,  (a.  6 d.)  Dull  pres-
sure in  the  small  of  the  back,  (7.  d.)  Burning  at  the
small  of  the  back,  while  sitting,  (5.  d.)  Pressive  pain  in
the  back  on  both  shoulders.  Rheumatic  drawing  pain  in
the  nape  of  the  neck  ; it  thence  extends  into  the  left  shoul-
der, and  then  into  the  scapula,  in  the  evening,  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air,  (a.  41  d.)

Superior  Extremities. — An  ulcer  in  the  left  axilla.
Drawing,  tearing  pain  at  the  shoulder,  and  between  the
shoulders,  so  that  she  is  not  able  to  stoop  for  8 days,  (a.  5
w.)  Pricking  in  the  right  shoulder  for  a moment.
Burning  pain  all  round  the  upper  arm,  a hand's  breadth,
(2.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  with  sensation  in
the  whole  hand  as  far  as  beyond  the  wrist,  as  if  the  arm
had  gone  to  sleep  ; in  the  evening,  (2.  d.)  Tearing  and
breaking  in  the  fore  part  of  the  right  hand,  like  rheuma-
tism, (a.  15  d.)  Sensation  on  the  skin  of  the  hands,  as  if
it  were  covered  with  cobweb.  Two  hard  wart-like  indu-
rations on  the  palm  of  the  hand,  after  it  had  been  beaten
rather  strongly  with  a stick,  (a.  30  d.)  Itching  of  the  dor-
sa  of  the  hands  here  and  there,  with  inducement  to  scratch,
as  if  the  parts  had  been  bitten  by  fleas.  Throbbing  pain
in  the  tip  of  the  thumb,  day  and  nigh  1 , frequently  rousing
the  person  from  sleep  at  night,  (2.  and  3.  d.)  Long  sup-
puration of  a place  under  the  nail  of  the  thumb,  where  she
had  pricked  herself  with  a pin,  with  painfulness  to  the
touch.  Violent  itching  of  the  joints  of  the  back  of  the  fin-


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.


247


gers  ; he  is  obliged  violently  to  scratch.  Burning  heat,
and  redness  of  the  fingers,  even  from  slight  cold,  as  if  they
had  been  frozen,  (a.  24  d.)  Pustules  with  red  areolae  up-
on ihe  middle  finger  of  the  right  hand,  with  swelling  and
stiffness  of  the  finger,  which,  even  alter  ihe  pustules  had
become  opened,  continued  for  a long  lime  suppurating  and
painful,  (a.  ,40  d ) Upon  one  of  the  nates  a corrosive  blis-
ter is  formed,  (a.  15  d.)  Herpes  upon  one  of  the  naies  < f
the  child,  (a.  4 w.)  Burning  in  the  thigh  of  the  right  leg,
near  the  pudendum,  it  increases  when  coughing,  and  laying
the  hand  upon  it,  (3.  d ) Burning  pain  round  the  left  thigh,
about  a hand’s  breadth,  (a.  8 d.)  Shooting  tearing  in  the
right  femur,  from  the  middle  of  the  bone  downwards,  and
then  again  upwards,  from  morning  till  noon,  and  then
again  in  the  evening,  ("i.d.)  In  the  left  leg  sense  of  numb-
ness, with  heat.  Erysipelatous  inflammation  and  swell-
ing of  the  left  leg  and  foot,  after  a good  deal  of  dancing,
with  tearing,  tension,  and  burning  in  the  leg,  and  increase
of  burning  pain  on  touching  it ; when  pressing  the  leg  with
the  finger,  the  redness  disappears  for  a moment,  (17.  d.)
In  the  foot  which  had  been  affected  with  erysipelas,  there
was  a tension  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  so  that  standing
became  inconvenient  for  her  ; she  is  not  incommoded  in
walking,  (a.  22  d.)  Pain  in  the  joint  and  the  toes  of  the
left  foot  when  setting  the  foot  down,  as  if  something  press-
ed upon  the  toes,  (a.  20  d.)  Stitches  in  the  sole  of  the
foot , occurring  in  the  same  manner  in  two  persons,  (2.  d.)
Sense  of  heaviness  in  the  feet  on  going  up  stairs,  in  the
evening,  (i.  d.)  Itching  of  the  malleoli,  (2  9.  10.  d.)
Pain  at  the  heel,  as  from  soreness  consequent  on  walking.
Suppuration  of  a spot  in  the  heel,  where  the  rubbing  of
the  shoe  had  occasioned  a wound.  Intensely  pressive
pain  in  the  big  toes,  especially  ihe  balls,  when  setting  the
foot  down,  (a.  41  d.)  Burning,  heat  and  redness  of  the
toes  in  slight  cold,  as  from  being  frozen,  (a.  24  d ) Inflam-
mation and  itching  of  the  ball  of  the  little  toe,  as  from  be-
ing frozen,  (a-  15  d.)  Inflamed  pimple  on  the  back  of  the
little  toe,  which  is  painful  like  a corn,  (a-  15  d.)  Frequent
stitches  in  the  corns,  relieved  by  pressing  upon  them,  (the
first.  5 weeks  )

Common  Ailments  .—  Unwholesome  skin  ; snail  wounds


248


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM*


suppurate  and  ulcerate.  Inclination  of  old  wounds  and
ulcers  to  suppurate.  Whitish  pimples  of  the  size  of  the
hemp-seed,  with  red  areolae,  on  the  chest,  the  neck  as  far
as  opposite  the  nape  of  the  neck,  (a.  6 w.)  Erysipelatous
inflammation  of  the  leg,  accompanied  first  lay  coldness,
chills  and  thirst,  with  vomiting  of  food  and  bile,  then  hea-
viness in  the  head  and  throbbing  in  the  temples,  with  un-
easy sleep  at  night,  resembling  slumber,  and  afterwards
bleeding  at  the  nose  on  the  Oth  day.  Loss  of  appetite
every  evening,  nausea,  drawing  in  the  head  from  the  ver-
tex down  into  the  temples,  and  drawing  in  the  abdomen
towards  the  groin  ; for  several  days,  (a.  5 w.)  Uneasiness
in  the  body,  which  did  not  permit  him  to  sit,  or  to  be  lying
long  on  the  same  part  of  the  body,  ( 1 . d.)  The  baby  grows
pale,  almost  livid,  the  flesh  which  was  before  hard,  becomes
relaxed  and  withering;  the  baby  cries  much,  loathes  the
mamma,  and  often  wakes  up  from  sleep  with  anxious  cries,
(the  first  2 weeks.)  Loss  of  strength  in  the  joints,  (5.  d.)
She  feels  quite  weak  and  powerless,  (a.  5 w.)  Weakness,
especially  in  the  abdomen  and  the  thighs,  (4.  d.)  Worn
out,  xoeary  and  indolent,  with  heaviness  in  the  feet,  (the
first  days.)  Formication  and  tremor  of  the  feet,  with  nau-
sea and  disposition  to  swoon  ; going  off  in  the  open  air,
(14.  d.)  After  an  animated  conversation,  uneasiness  in
the  body,  nausea  and  stupefaction  with  vertigo,  (3.  d.)
While  meditating  during  labor,  trembling  of  the  whole  bo-
dy, especially  of  the  hands,  with  nausea,  and  with  weak-
ness in  the  knees,  (8.  d.)  Faint,  lazy,  peevish,  thirsty,  af-
ter the  siesta,  with  heat  when  walking  in  the  open  air,
and  sweat  on  the  head  and  in  the  face,  with  obtusion  of
the  head,  pressure  in  the  forehead  and  the  eyes,  which
feel  sore  when  touched  ; at  the  same  time  inclination  to
deep  breathing,  during  which  there  are  stitches  in  the  in-
tercostal muscles,  with  hard,  quick  pulse.

Sleep. — Drowsiness  at  dinner,  and  deep  sleep  for  2
hours,  (8.  d.)  The  child  at  the  breast  sleeps  more  than
usually,  but  wakes  up  more  frequently,  (the  first  days.)
Sleepy  and  tired  in  the  evening.  Early  sleepiness  in  the
evening,  and  long  sleep  early  in  the  morning,  for  4 weeks,
(a.  8 d.)  Early  in  the  morning  one  feels  as  if  one  had
not  slept  enough.  Sleepy  at  twilight,  but  when  he  laid


BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICUM.  249

himself  down,  his  sleep  went  entirely  off,  although  he  had
had  a good  deal  of  exercise  during  the  day,  and  had  slept
but  little  the  night  previous,  (a.  7 d.)  Wide  awake
in  the  evening.  Falling  asleep  late,  and  waking  up  early
in  the  morning,  (a.  6 d.)  Disturbed  sleep  : she  was  un-
able to  fall  asleep,  and  tossed  about  in  bed,  (a.  21  d.)  Dis-
turbed sleep  with  thirst  and  coldness,  (1.  d.)  Disturbed
nights,  he  was  unable  to  sleep  soundly,  on  account  of  a rush
of  blood  to  the  head,  uneasiness  in  the  body,  rumbling  in
the  abdomen,  and  diarrhoea,  (the  first  days.)  During  the
night  he  is  obliged  to  rise  several  times  for  the  purpose  of
urinating,  (a.  34  d.)  He  can  sleep  only  on  the  left  side  ;
for,  as  soon  as  he  turns  himself  to  the  right  side,  he  is
roused  from  his  sleep  by  drawing  and  lancinating  pains  in
the  intercostal  muscles,  (a.  7 d.)  He  wakes  up  before
midnight,  and  can  then  fall  no  more  asleep  before  2 o’clock
in  the  morning.  He  woke  up  at  one  o’clock  at  night,  and
wTas  then  no  more  able  to  fall  asleep,  on  account  of  an
abundance  of  ideas,  until  4 o’clock  in  the  morning,  (9.  d.)
Waking  up  at  3 o’clock  early  in  the  morning;  she  was  then
no  more  able  to  fall  asleep  under  2 hours,  on  account  of
heat  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  head,  and  sweat
on  the  thighs,  (11.  and  12.  d.)  He  wakes  up  at  4 o’clock,
early  in  the  morning,  and  is  wide  awake,  so  that  he  goes
to  his  work  with  cheerfulness,  (a.  5 w.)  The  child  often
starts  from  his  sleep  with  anxious  cries,  and  throws  his
hands  about,  seizing  things.  A child  of  five  years  tosses
about,  wakes  up  with  screams  the  whole  night,  until  4
o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  morning  is  in  a whining
mood,  (4.  d.)  The  baby  often  wakes  up  with  screams,
and  clings  to  the  mother  with  anguish,  as  if  it  had  been  tor-
mented by  frightful  dreams,  (first  2 weeks.)  Vexatious
dreams.  Dream  of  sore  throat  and  other  diseases.  Vo-
luptuous dreams,  (a.  30  d.)  She  dreams  that  she  is  enjoy-
ing an  embrace,  but  without  any  pleasurable  sensation,  (a.
4 d.)

Fever. — Thrill  of  cold  over  the  whole  body,  with  throb-
bing headache  in  the  occiput,  as  from  an  ulcer,  (2  d.)
Slight  chills  over  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  back,
without  any  thirst,  with  flat  taste,  rough  throat,  stitches- in
the  chest  when  breathing,  faintishness,  paralytic  weakness,

IT


250  BORAX,  NATRON  SUBBORACICtTM.

extension  and  stretching  of  the  limbs,  with  contracted,
quick  pulse  ; at  the  same  time  heat,  heaviness  and  stupe-
faction of  the  head,  at  d burning  of  the  eyes,  with  sensitive-
ness of  the  same  to  light,  (23.  d.)  Chills  at  night,  from  2
to  4 o’clock,  with  tremor,  vomiting  of  food,  tearing  in  the
thighs  and  pain  in  the  femur,  as  if  it  were  broken  ; then  heat
and  thirst  after  sleep  ; at  half  past  9 o’clock  in  the  morn-
ing bitter  vomiting,  which  was  succeeded  by  sweat  with
diminished  thirst,  (2.  d.)  Coldness,  wilh  headache,  and
subsequent  heat  without  thirst;  when  walking  in  the  open
air,  the  headache  ceased  ; then  she  was  quite  well,  (14.
d.)  Coldness  every  other  day  in  the  afternoon,  with  thirst
and  sleep  ; then  heat  on  waking  up,  with  pressive  pain  in
the  lumbar  region,  without  any  subsequent  sweat,  (a.  38
d.)  Coldness  in  the  afternoon,  from  2 to  6 o’clock  ; pre-
viously thirst  in  the  forenoon  ; then  heat,  until  the  person
went  to  sleep,  with  pressive  pain  in  the  lefthypochondrium,
(a.  5 w.)  Coldness  immediately  after  dinner,  with  more
thirst  than  appetite  for  dinner,  retractive  tension  round
about  the  hypochondria,  and,  when  brealhing  deeply,  heat
which  quickly  rises  into  the  head  ; at  6 o’clock  in  the  even-
ing, heat,  which  forced  him  to  lie  down  until  10  o’clock  ;
then  sweat,  and  after  the  sweat,  thirst ; for  4 days,  (a.  15  d.)
Alternately  coldness  and  heat,  frequently  with  sweat  in  the
face,  whilst  he  has  thrills  of  cold  over  the  back,  with  ex-
tension and  stretching  of  the  limbs,  accompanied  by  faint-
ishness  and  drowsiness,  so  that  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down
in  the  afternoon,  without  however  being  able  to  sleep;
when  walking,  he  merely  drags  his  feet  along,  and  is  peev-
ish and  taciturn.  Frequent  flushes  of  heat,  early  in  the
morning,  with  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  (2.  d )
Heat  in  the  head  in  the  evening,  when  writing,  with  thirst
and  a sensation  as  if  sweat  would  break  out,  (a.  7 d.)
Heat  when  she  wraps  up  her  hands  in  the  cover  of  the
bed  ; but  as  soon  as  she  puts  her  hands  out,  she  feels  cold,
(a.  5 d.)  Heat  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  accompanied
by  sweat;  but  he  feels  chilly  as  soon  as  he  rises,  (a.  17
d.)  Sweat  during  the  morning-sleep  ; when  dressing  him-
self, he  feels  cold  ; he  is  then  affected  with  a dry  cough,
with  rawness  in  the  chest,  as  after  a cold,  (a.  15  d.)  Slight
perspiration  at  night.


CALCAREA  CAREONiCA.


251


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.

Take  a dean  oystershell,  somewhat  thick  ; of  the  soft,
snow-white  calcarean  substance  which  is  found  between
the  internal  and  external  hard  shell,  take  one  gram,  which
is  then  to  be  triturated  and  dynamised  in  the  usual  man-
ner.

Those  symptoms  which  are  marked  with  a line,  belong
to  calc-area  acetal  a.

'Fins  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  anti-psorics,  and  may
be  used  with  especial  benefit  m the  following  affections,  if
otherwise  indicated:  —

Depiession  of  spirits  ; weeping  mood  ; want  of  cheet-
fulness  with  heaviness  of  the  legs  ; anguish  when  sweating ;
restless  anxiety  ; anguish , shuddering  and  horror,  when
the  evening  approaches  ; anxiety  induced  by  thoughts  ;
anxiety  after  listening  to  the  recital  of  cruelties;  nervous
depression  ; fright. fulness  ; attacks  of  despondency  on  am
count  of  disordered  health;  sensitive  peevishness  ; obsti-
nacy ; indifference  ; dullness  of  the  thinking  faculties  ;
chronic  affection  of  the  head  as  if  a plank  were  before  the
head;  dizziness  and  tremor  before  breakfast;  vertigo  on
going  up  stairs;  vertigo  on  ascending  a height,  the  roof
for  instance  ; heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  forehead,
which  oblige  him  to  close  his  eyes  ; headache  on  account
of  reading  and  writing  ; headache  from  reaching  too  high  ;
boring  in  the  forehead  as  if  the  head  would  burst  ; beating
headache  in  the  occiput;  throbbing  in  the  middle  of  the
brain  ; hammering  headache  after  walking  in  the  open  air,
winch  forces  one  to  lie  down  ; headache  and  buzzing  in
the  head,  with  heat  in  the  cheeks;  icy  coldness  in  the
right  side  of  the  head  ; evening,  sweat  of  the  hea  l ; falling
off  of  the  hair  ; pressure  in  the  eyes  ; burning  of  the  eye-
lids, and  soreness,  as  if  they  were  excoriated  ; burning  and
cutting  in  the  eyes,  while  reading  by  candle-light;  111-
ting  in  the  eyelids  ; stitches  in  the  eyes  ; itching  of  the
eyes  ; agglutination  of  the  eyes;  suppuration  of  a fistula
lachrymalis  ; lachrymation , in  the  open  air,  or  early  in
the  morning  ; slight  twitches  in  the  upper  and  lower  eye-


252


calcarea  carbonica.


lid  ; closing  of  the  eyelids  every  morning  ; obscuration  of
sight  when  reading  ; obscuration  of  the  eyes  alter  eating  ;
dim-sightedness  before  the  eyes,  as  if  there  were  feaihers
before  the  eyes;  dim-sightedness,  as  through  a gauze;
mist  before  the  eyes  when  straining  the  eyes  in  looking
or  reading  ; long-sightedness,  one  cannot  see  without  con-
vex glasses  ; the  eyes  are  blinded  by  bright  light  ; stitches
in  the  ears  ; discharge  of  pus  from  the  ears  ; crackling  in
the  ear  when  swallowing;  throbbing  in  the  ears  ; tingling
in  the  ears  ; buzzing  betoie  the  ears  ; whizzing  ot  the  ears,
with  hard  hearing  ; thundering  in  the  ear;  her  hearing  is
often  impeded  ; hard  heating  ; sore  nose  ; obstruction  of
the  nose  by  yellow,  stinking  pus  ; bleeding  at  the  nose  ;
bad  smell  and  fetor  from  the  nose  ; smell  of  manure  before
the  nose  ; pain  of  the  face  ; itching  and  eruption  in  the
face ; summer  freckles  upon  the  cheeks  ; itching,  and  itch-
ing pimples,  where  the  whiskers  are  ; eruptions  about  the
mouth;  pain  of  the  glands  of  the  lower  jaw  ; toothache
after  every  cold  drink  ; drawing  toothache  with  stitches,
day  and  night,  renewed  by  cold  and  by  warmth  ; tooth-
ache like  grinding  and  soreness  ; difficult  dentition  ; pain-
ful sensitiveness  of  the  gums  ; stitches  in  the  gums  ;
swelling  of  the  gums  ; bleeding  of  the  gums  ; dryness  of
the  tongue , at  night,  or  early  on  waking  up  ; aphthae  un-
der the  tongue  ; accumulation  of  pituita  in  the  mouth  ;
hawking  up  phlegm  ; constriction  of  the  throat ; bitter
taste  in  t tie  month,  early  in  the  morning  ; want  of  appetite  ;
want  of  appetite , with  constant  thirst  ; repugnance  to  the
usual  tobacco  ; disinclination  to  warm  food  ; chronic  aver-
sion to  meat ; hunger  immediately  or  shortly  after  a meal  ;
ravenous  hunger,  early  in  the  morning  ; she  cannot  eat
sufficiently,  it  will  not  go  down  ; heat  after  eating  ; eruc-
tations after  eating;  bitter  eructations;  water-brash;
weakness  of  digestion  of  the  stcmich;  pressure  at  the
stomach  before  breakfast , and  after  a meal  ; nightly  pres-
sure at  the  pit  of  the  stomach;  stitching  pressure  at  the
stomach  after  a meal ; spasm  of  the  stomach;  pinching
and  cutting  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; simultaneously  with
pressure  at  ihe  stomach,  pressure  from  within  outward
under  the  last  rib;  one  cannot  bear  tightness  of  clothing
at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; swelling  at  the  pit  the  sto-


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


253


mach,  with  pressive  pain  ; the  pit  of  the  stomach  is  painful
to  the  touch  ; tension  across  both  hypochondria.  Pressive
and  lancinating  colic,  without  diarrhoea;  pressive  and
pinching  colic,  without  diarrhoea;  colic  in  the  epigastri-
um ; m the  afternoon  cutting  and  griping  in  the  abdomen,
with  vomiting  of  the  food  taken  for  dinner  ; coldness  in  the
abdomen  ; inflation  and  hardness  of  the  abdomen  ; incar-
cerated flatulence  ; flatulence  pressing  towards  the  abdo-
minal ring,  as  if  hernia  would  take  place  ; constipation  ;
cosliveness  ; stools  scanty  and  hard  ; two  evacuations  a
d iv  ; frequent  or  constant  looseness  of  the  bowels  ; involun-
tary discharge  of  loose  stool  intermixed  with  gas;  protru-
sion of  the  varices  of  the  rectum,  with  burning  pain,  during
stool  ; physical  depression  after  an  evacuation,  accompa-
nied by  a sensation  as  of  being  bruised,  through  the  whole
body ; itching  of  the  anus ; ascarides  in  the  rectum ;
burning  in  the  urethra;  too  frequent  micturition  ; hemor-
rhage from  the  urethra;  liaematuria ; libidinous,  lewd
thoughts;  want  of  sexual  desire  ; slight  sexual  powers  ;
want  of  pollutions  ; too  short  erections  during  an  em-
brace ; stinging  and  burning  in  the  generative  organs  of
the  male,  during  the  emission  of  semen,  in  an  embrace.
Pressive  pain  in  the  vagina;  pressure  upon  the  prolapsed
womb  ; stitches  in  the  os  tineas  ; itching  of  the  pudendum
and  the  anus  ; varices  of  the  labia  pudendi ; after-pains  or
milk-fever,  after  confinement ; haemorrhage  from  the  ute-
rus ; (suppressed  catamenia;)  catamenia  too  early  and
too  copious  ; cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  griping  in  the
small  of  the  back,  during  the  catamenia  ; leucorrhoea,  be-
fore the  catamenia  ; leucorrhcea,  like  milk,  flowing  at  in-
tervals ; burning  and  itching  leucorrhoea  ; itching  of  the
pudendum,  white  leucorrhoea  is  flowing.  Frequent  sneez-
ing ; troublesome  dryness  of  the  nose  ; constant  coryza  ;
delaying  coryza ; dry  cold  in  the  head;  dry  cold  in  the
head,  in  the  morning;  obstruction  of  the  nose  : ulceration
of  the  larynx  ; hoarseness  ; excessive  accumulation  of  pus
in  the  chest  ; cough  in  the  bed,  in  the  evening  ; night
cough , during  sleep  ; cough  early  in  the  morning  ; dry
cough;  yellow,  stinking  expectoration;  pressure  at  the
stomach  during  cough  ; interception  of  breath  when  stoop-
ing ; pressure  at  the  chest ; stitches  in  the  side  oj  the


254


calcarea  carbonica.


chest  during  motion  ; stitches  in  the  left  side,  when  stoop-
ing to  that  side  ; burning  at  the  chest  ; prickling  in  the
pectoral  muscles  ; paipita.tion  of  the  heart , also  at  night ;
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ; pain  as  lrom  a sprain,  in
the  back  ; stiffness  and  rigidity  of  the  nape  oj  the  neck  ;
swellings  of  the  cervical  glands  ; goitre  ; pressive  pain  in
the  right  upper  arm  ; nightly  drawing  and  tearing  in  the
arms  ; sudden  faintness  of  the  arms,  like  paralysis  ;
numbness,  (the  German  expression  is,  extinction,  or  dying
off)  of  the  hand  when  clutching  something  ; swelling  ol
the  hands  ; sweat  of  the  hands  ; arthrilic  nodosities  ot  the
carpal  joints,  and  those  of  the  fingers  ; prickling  of  the
fingers  as  if  they  went  to  sleep  ; numbness  of  the  fingers,
and  dying  off  of  the  same,  even  during  warm  weather;  want
of  mobility  of  the  fingers  ; the  fingers  are  frequently  para-
lyzed ; heaviness  of  the  legs  ; stiffness  of  the  legs  ; cramp
in  the  legs;  when  sitting,  the  legs  go  to  sleep  ; ulcers  of
the  legs;  stitches  in  the  thigh  when  setting  tlie  foot  down  ;
varices  of  the  thighs  ; stitches  in  the  knee,  when  standing
or  sitting  ; stitches  and  tearing  in  the  knee;  drawing  pain
in  the  knee,  when  silting  or  walking  ; swelling  of  the
knee  ; red  spots  on  the  legs  ; burning  of  the  soles  ; swell-
ing of  the  soles;  coldness  of  the  feet,  in  the  evening;
sweaty  feet ; dying  off  of  the  feet,  in  the  evening;  sensi-
tiveness of  the  big  toes  ; corns  ; pain  in  the  corns  ; the
extremities  go  to  sleep  ; cramp  of  the  arms  and  legs  ; pain
as  from  bruises,  in  the  upper  arms,  and  in  the  middle  of
the  thighs  when  going  up  stairs  ; tearing  in  the  limbs,  arms
and  legs  ; by  reaching  too  high  the  parts  are  easily
strained ; in  consequence  of  this  reaching  the  nape  of  the
neck  becomes  enlarged  and  rigid,  with  headache;  strain-
ing easily  results  from  reaching  too  high,  with  consequent
sore  throat.  Great  increase  of  fat  in  voung  men  ; physi-
cal depression  consequent  upon  talking  ; want  of  strength,
faintishness  ; faintishness  early  in  the  morning  ; great  ex-
haustion after  every  little  walk  ; attacks  of  epilepsy  in  the
night,  during  full  moon,  with  cries.  Great  fatigue  conse-
quent upon  moderate  walking  in  the  open  air  ; great
sweat  consequent  upon  moderate  exercise  ; great  sensi-
tiveness towards  cold;  one  easily  catches  cold;  visible
gurgling  in  the  skin,  succeeded  by  a sense  of  dizziness  in


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


255


the  skin.  Dryness  of  the  skin  of  the  body;  rough  skin  of
the  body,  as  if  covered  with  miliary  eruptions  ; bran-like
covering  of  the  skin.  Boils  ; warts;  drowsiness  by  day;
drowsiness  in  the  early  part  of  the  evening  ; frequent
waking  up  at  night  ; sleeplessness  ; tossing  about  in  the
bed,  at  night.  Night  thirst;  pressure  at  i he  pit  of  the
stomach  at  night,  and  a rising  from  the  pit  towards  the  la-
rynx and  the  head.  Nightly  pains  in  the  back  and  1 he
arms;  nightly  asthma;  nightly  palpitation  of  the  heart;
heat  and  anguish  at  night  ; horrid  images  of  the  fancy  be-
fore falling  asleep  ; in  the  evening  when  in  bed  ; anxious
dreams  ; raving  at  night ; night  sweat.  Chilliness  early
in  the  morning,  and  after  rising;  frequent  flushes  of  heat ;
flushes  of  heat,  with  palpitation  and  anxiety  of  the  heart;
evening-fever  for  three  days,  first,  heat  in  the  face,  then,
chilliness.

Calcarea  acts  a long  while.  Calcarea  generally  acts
well  after  nitric  acid,  when  the  action  of  this  drug,  although
apparently  homoeopathically  indicated,  had  been  rather  un-
favorable ; on  the  other  hand,  nitric  acid  relieves  the  un-
pleasant symptoms  of  the  homoeopathically  chosen  calca-
rea, and  imparts  to  its  action  a beneficent  character.  Nau-
sea consequent  upon  the  use  of  calcarea, ‘is  specifically
counteracted  by  smelling  of  the  spirits  of  nitre,  which  act
even  better  in  this  case  than  camphor.  Other  disagree-
able symptoms  of  calcarea  are  relieved  by  smelling  of  nux
vomica.  Calcarea  is  frequently  useful  after  sulphur,  es-
pecially when  the  pupils  are  prone  to  become  dilated.

Calcarea  generally  is  indispensable  and  curative  when
the  catamenia  appear  a few  days  before  the  period,  espe-
cially when  the  flow  of  blood  is  considerable.  But  if  the
catamenia  appear  at  the  regular  period  or  a little  later,  cal-
carea almost  never  is  useful,  even  if  the  catamenia  should
be  rather  profuse.

In  affections  of  persons  advanced  in  age,  calcarea,  even
after  otherintermediate  remedies,  can  scarcely  be  repeated
with  advantage  ; a dose  which  is  given  after  another  without
any  previous  intermediate  remedy,  is  almost  always  preju-
dicial ; in  cases  of  children,  however,  several  doses  may
be  given  in  succession,  provided  the  remedy  continues  to
be  indicated  ; the  younger  the  children,  the  more  frequent-
ly may  theremedy  be  repeated.


256


CALCAREA  CARBONIC A.


Those  symptoms  which  are  marked  with  a line,  belong
to  calcarea  acetata.

This  drug  has  been  observed  by  Drs.  Hahnemann,
Franz,  Gross,  Hartmann,  Langhammer,  Hummel,  Stapf,
Wislicenus,  Schreter.

A oack  and  Trinks  furnish  the  following  valuable  re-
marks on  Calcarea  : —

According  to  Koch,  Calcarea  holds  no  direct  relation  to
any  one  organ  in  particular;  but  it  exercises  a subversive
action  upon  certain  systems,  especially  the  serous  and
fibrous  tissues.  According  to  Koch,  Calcarea  acts  especial-
ly upon  the  mucous  membranes,  on  ih e fibrous  and  osseous
system,  on  the  nervous  system,  on  the  serous  tissues,  on
the  venous  and  also  the  lymphatic  system  of  the  abdomen,
and  upon  the  skin.  Calcarea  is  especially  suitable  to  the
venoso-hcemorr  hoid  al , plethoric , or  the  lymphatic,  slow  and
heavy , or  to  the  scrophulous,  ricketty  constitution , especial-
ly when  there  is  a predominant  disposition  to  fluent  co-
ryza, cold  and  diarrhoea,  or  it  is  particularly  adapted  to
frail  individuals , being  poorly  fed,  or  also  to  such  as  had ,
in  their  young  years , a marked  disposition  for  growing
fat  and  stout.  In  general,  Calcarea  is  especially  useful  to
the  young  organism  ; it  corresponds  more  than  any  other
remedy , to  diseases  of  the  reproductive  system,  which  are
the  basis  of  all  the  diseases  inherent  in  the  frst  age  of
man  ; it  may  therefore  be  used , with  especial  ben  eft,  in
all  scrophulous  diseases,  or  in  the  diseases  of  new-born
children , such  as  ophthalmia,  muscular  and  nervous  weak-
ness, acidity  of  the  stomach.  Calcarea  is  likewise  suit-
able for  the  diseases  of  females,  especially  when  the  menses
are  too  abundant  and  frequent ; according  to  Hahnemann,
Calcarea  is  indispensable,  when  the  menses  appear  too
soon  and  are  too  profuse,  whereas  Calcarea  is  almost  al-
ways prejudicial  when  the  menses  appear  at  or  after  the
proper  time  ; according  to  Lobethal,  Calcarea  is,  in  the  for-
mer case , a beneficial  remedy,  which  speedily  and  thoroughly
cures  affections  resulting  from  menstrual  irregularities,
such  as  muscular  weakness,  excessive  irritability  of  the
nervous  system,  leucorrhoea.  Calcarea  is  suitable  for
fancied  diseases , for  Hysteria,  Hypochonch  ia,  Melan-
cholia, uneasiness,  anguish,  despondency,  whining  mood,


CALCAREA  CARBONIC A.


257


peevishness,  angriness,  renouncing  all  hope  of  recovery,
nervous  weakness  resulting  from  Onanism,  muscular
weakness,  difficulty  of  children  of  learning  to  walk.  Dis-
eases of  drunkards,  delirium  tremens , affections  resulting
from  catching  cold  in  cold  water , hud  effects  of  quinine.
Calcarea  is  especially  useful  in  Scrophulosis  ; especially
when  there  are  the  following  symptoms  : incipient  indo-
lence and  apathy  of  scrophulous  children,  who  were  for-
merly healthy  and  vigorous,  and  now  become  suddenly  un-
able to  walk,  become  heavy,  show  a distended  abdomen,
pale  and  cachectic  complexion,  bloated  face,  enlarged  nose
and  lips  ; Calcarea  is  also  useful  in  scrophulous  ophthal-
mia, especially  when  morbid  metamorphoses  have  already
taken  place  upon  the  cornea  ; or  in  scrophulous  eruptions
of  scrophulous  children,  from  the  crusta  serpiginosa  up  to
general  scrophulous  ulcers  ; finally  in  Atrophia  miseraica,
when  there  is  complete  emaciation,  the  patient  appearing
like  a mere  skeleton  with  an  old-looking  wrinkled  coun-
tenance, (in  Tabes  miseraica,  Arsenic,  Aururn  and  Jo-
dium  ought  also  to  be  considered  ; however,  according  to
Lobeihal,  calcarea  is  more  efficacious  in  that  disease  than
these  other  remedies  ;)  also  in  Bubo  scrophulosus,  swell-
ing and  suppuration  of  the  glands.  Tabes  scrophulosa  ;
retarded  closing  of  the  fontanelles  of  children  ; calcarea  is
the  chief  remedy  in  rickets  ; according  to  Lobethal,  it
ranks,  in  that  affection,  higher  than  Phosph.  Ac.,
Phosp.,  and  even  Asa  foetida.  Ostearthrocace,  Paedar-
throcace,  Osteonecrosis,  caries,  fistulous  and  scrophulous
ulcers  (less  efficacious  in  ulcers  of  the  bones.)  Cal-
carea is  especially  suitable  for  rheumatismus  arthriti-
cus,  arthritis  rheumatic  a,  and  arthritis  anomala  and  vaga;
it  is  therefore  indicated  by  the  following  symptoms  which
are  considered  precursors  of  the  gout : ailments  of  the
digestive  organs,  vomiting,  cardialgia,  headache,  ailments
of  the  ears,  vertigo,  dyspepsia,  sense  in  the  face  as  of  cob-
web flying  against  it,  abdominal  sufferings,  haemorrhoids,
altered  urine,  various  kinds  of  tearing,  lancinating  , drag-
ging pains  in  the  joints,  fifintishness,  feverish  motions;  in
arthritis  anomala, , calcarea  is  indicated  when  the  foil  >w-
ing  symptoms  prevail : — headache,  ophthalmia,  dysphagia,


258


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


spasm  of  the  stomach,  vomiting,  heart-burn,  colic,  diar-
rhoea, abdominal  pulsations,  haemorrhoids,  hypochondria,
hysteria,  asthma,  affections  of  the  heart  and  the  large
vessels,  apoplexy,  mania,  pulmonary  consumption,  glau-
coma, cataract,  amaurosis,  paralytic  conditions  of  the  ex-
tremities. affections  of  the  urinary  organs,  chronic  exanthe-
mata, itch,  herpes,  rash,  ulcers,  intermittent  fevers,  neural-
gia, such  as  : — Ischias,  pain  in  the  face  ; gout  of  the
joints  ; arthritis  nodosa.  Chlorosis.  Affections  of
worms,  ascarides , lumbrici,  taenia.  Hysl  eric  spasms.
Epileptic  convulsions,  especially  when  preceded  by  ver-
tigo, and  followed  by  hunger,  (in  alternation  with  Cuprum
and  Plumb,  acet,. ; epilepsy  in  children,  (in  alternation  with
Belladonna.)  Chronic  eruptions  upon  the  skin , in  the
face.  Urticaria.  Eczema , especially  impetiginiforme,
chronicum,  furfuraceum,  (also  sulphur  and  ars,)  \ cze-
ma  of  the  hairy  scalp,  face,  joint s.  Vesicular  scabies,
(when  it  had  been  mismanaged  by  sulphur;  also  Merc.
Sep.)  ; complications  of  herpes  and  itch.  Herpes  furfura-
ceus,  cirrinatus,  (also  causticum,  sulphur.)  Porrigo  1 ir-
valis,  furfurans,  decalvans,  scutulata,  Impetigo  rodens,
and  figurata,  (also  Ars.,  Graph.,  Lye.,  Rhus.,  Snip.)  Syco-
sis menti,  with  Graphites.)  Psorias  simplex,  palmaris,
(also  Snip.,  Lvcop.)  Acne  simplex,  (also  Phosph.  ac.)
Warts  which  are  soft  at  their  base,  almost  of  the  colour
of  the  skin,  rough  on  the  surface,  hard,  whitish,  round.
Falling  off  of  the  hair,  also  after  delivery,  or  after  violent
acute  diseases.  Condylomata,  (in  case  Thuya  and  Nilr.
ac.  should  not  prove  curative.)  Excoriations  of  the  nipples.
Rhagades,  even  in  individuals  who  work  in  the  water. —

Decubitus  - - Sarcoma. — Varices. Intermittent  fevers,

and  bad  effects  resulting  from  the  suppression  of  their  type
by  Quinine. — Catarrhal  fever. — Rheumatic  fever. — Gastri-
co-catarrhal  fevers,  with  rheumatism. — Third  or  nervous
stage  of  typhus,  especially  when  there  are  spasmodic  fils,
(also  Nux.  vom.,  Verat,.,  Bryon,)  or  when  there  is  bleeding
at  the  nose — Febres  lent.ae. — Milk-fever. — Colliquative
sweats.-- Vertigo,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  before  break-
fast.— Chronic,  also  periodical  headache  ; hysteric  head-
ache ; headache  owing  to  a cold,  to  exhaustion  of  the  cere-
Ucu  activity  by  great  mental  efforts.  Caput  obstipum  (with


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.  259

Brv  , Snip.,  Lyc.,  Rhus.,  and  Grap.)  Fistula  lachrymalis.
— Ophthalmia  neonaiorum.  Scrophulous  ophthalmia.
Ophthalmia  owing  to  the  presence  of  foreign  bodies  in  the
eyes.  Arthritic  Ophthalmia , especially  when  combined
with  distortion  of  the  pupil,  or  also  sometimes  accom-
panied by  intense,  arthritic  pains  after  destruction  of  the
globe  of  the  eye.  Egyptian  ophthalmia.  Ophthalmia
angularis.  Blepharophthalmia,  especially  when  accom-
panied by  headache  in  the  forehead,  with  stupefaction
and  pressure  in  the  temples,  habitual  constipation,  de-
pression of  spirits  and  uneasiness.  Fungus  haematodes
oculi  ? Haemorrhage  from  the  eye?  Paralytical  growths
of  the  lamellae  of  the  cornea,  consequent,  upon  scrofu-
lous inflammations,  (together  with  Cannabis  and  Nitr.
Ac.)  Leucoma  of  the  cornea,  specks,  ulcers,  obscu-
ration of  the  cornea.  Photophobia  scrofulosa.  Amblyopia
amaurotica.  Parotitis.  Otitis  externa  acuta  et  chronica.
Otorrhcea  purulenta  scrofulosa,  when  resulting  from  ca-
ries of  the  ossic.ula  of  the  ears.  Polypi  in  the  meatus  au-
ditorius.  Hard  hearing,  also  when  owing  to  the  abuse  of
Quinine  in  intermittent  fevers.  Big  nose,  scrofulous
swelling  of  ihe  nose  ; scrofulous,  periodical  swelling  of  the
nose,  with  blue,  red  colour,  and  obstruction  of  the  meatus  ;
cancer  of  the  nose.  Ozczna  scrofulosa . Polypi  of  the
nose , mucus  polypi  in  both  cavities  of  the  forehead,  and  in
the  nostrils.  Biennorrhcea  of  the  nose , with  discharge  of
puriform,  thick  mucus,  or  a quantity  of  rather  lymphatic,
yellow-reddish  fluid,  the  flow  being  partly  spontaneous,
partly  the  result  of  blowing  ; it  excoriates  the  upper  lip,
and  produces  around  the  nose,  upon  the  upper  lip  and  the
cheek,  itching  pimples,  which  are  filled  with  pus  ; there  is
swelling  externally,  and  soreness  internally;  chronic  co
ryza  and  obstruction  of  the  nose  ; retarded  coryza.  Anos-
mia. Prosopalgia.  Fistulous  ulcers  on  the  gums.  Diffi-
cult dentition  of  children , even  with  convulsions  ; con-
gestive toothache,  when  depending  upon  dentition.  Tear-
ing in  hollow,  and  also  in  sound  teeth,  in  paroxysms
by  day,  and  at  night,  aggravated  by  cold,  especially  by  a
draught  of  cold  air,  the  teeth  being  very  sensitive  to  the
air,  even  when  there  is  no  pain.  Odontalgia  nervosa-  (al-
so called  Neuralgia  dentalis,)  when  the  pain  is  dragging


260


CALCAREA  CAREONICA.


and  lancinating,  or  grinding  and  throbbing,  or  gnawing  and
boring,  is  aggravated  by  drinking  something  cold  or  warm,
or  by  noise,  and  occurs  most  easily  during  and  after  the
catamenia,  or  during  pregnancy.  Odontalgia  of  pregnant
women,  and  of  those  whose  menses  are  too  profuse.  In-
flammation of  the  tonsils ; disposition  to  such  inflamma-
tion. Angina  phlegmonodes.  Vomiting.  Vomit  us  sabu-
ralis.  Anorexia  and  dyspepsia , acidity  of  the  stoma, ch  ;
Pyrosis  and  other4'  gastric  affections.  Chronic  gastritis.
Spasm  of  the  stomach , with  nausea,  sour  eructations,  sour,
bitter  vomiting,  anguish  and  oppression  of  the  chest,  palpi-
tation of  the  heart,  costiveness  and  blind  haemorrhoids,  in
persons  of  a choleric  temperament.  Colic.  Abdominal
spasms.  Chronic  affections  of  the  abdomen.  Induration
and  other  chronic  affections  of  the  liver.  Obstinate  con-
stipation. Chronic  disposition  to  looseness  of  the  bowels
and  diarrhoea;  diarrhoea , with  prolapsus  recti  ; diarrhoea
of  phthisic  patients  ; diarrhoea  of  scrofulous  children  dur-
ing dentition  : acute,  dangerous  diarrhoea  of  children ,
intestinal  canal:  diarrhoea  comes  on  without  any  percep-
tible cause,  the  copious  evacuations  which  take  place  more
or  less  frequently  in  proporlion  to  the  violence  of  the  dis-
ease, consist  of  watery,  slimy,  either  greenish  or  grayish,
flocculent  substances,  with  a cadaverous  smell,  which  also
characterises  the  flatus,  and,  being  soon  communicated  to
the  clothes  and  the  bed-clothes  of  the  child,  imparts  a pes-
tiferous smell  to  the  atmosphere,  accompanied  by  slight
fever,  burning  of  the  hands  and  soles  of  the  feet,  continual,
violent  thirst,  want  of  appetite,  rapid  emaciation  of  the
whole  body,  and  especially  the  face,  which  looks  old,  ow-
ing to  a peculiar  expression  of  suffering  and  numerous
folds  and  wrinkles,  constant  uneasiness,  tossing  about,
whimpering  and  screaming,  pale,  parched,  dry  skin,  with-
out any  elasticity,  painful  elastic  distention  of  the  abdo-
men, occasional  vomiting,  scanty,  pale  urine,  stupor  or
light  sleep,  with  half-closed  eyes,  the  other  symptoms  be-
comingworse  and  worse,  etc. ; (for  these  symptoms  Knorre
advises  especially  Calcarea  acetata.)  Lienteria,  conse-
quent upon  an  increase  of  the  peristaltic  motion  of  the  in-
testines, especially  after  a meal.  Cholera  Asiatica,  in


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


261


congestions  of  the  liver,  (also  Bryonia,  Merc , Sulph.)
Haemorrhoid  ul  complaints  and  bad  effects  of  a violent  sup-
pression of  the  hcemorrhoidul  flux,  such  as  vertigo,  with
attacks  of  falling  down,  accompanied  by  loss  of  conscious-
ness, pressive,  dull  obtusion  of  the  bead,  as  is  consequent
upon  intoxication,  violently  pressive,  stunning  headache,
weakness  of  memory,  heaviness  of  the  head,  hard  stool
at  long  intervals,  and  badly  smelling  ; profuse  sweat  of
the  feet,  with  soreness  of  the  soles  of  the  feet.  Gravel
and  stones  in  the  bladder.  Polypi  in  the  bladder
Catarrh  of  the  bladder.  Hsematuria.  Wetting  the  bed
at  night.  Hysteralgia.  Pernicious  effects  of  onanism.
Weakness  of  the  genital  organs.  Sterility.  Excited  sex-
ual desire  in  the  male  ; too  frequent  pollutions  at  night.
Dysmenorrhnea  and  amenorrhcea  of  plethoric  individuals.
Excessive  flow  of  the  menses.  (Calcarea  may  be  exhibit-
ed between  the  menses,  not  only  in  order  to  regulate  the
flow  itself,  but  also  to  remove  the  evil  effects  produced  in
the  sexual  organs  and  the  other  organs  of  the  bod)’1,  by
the  excessive  and  too  frequent  flow  of  blood  ; in  conjunc-
tion with  Nux.  vom.,  Cinch.,  and  Snip.)  Metrorrhagia  ;
Serous  Leucorrhoea  consequent  upon  Metrorrhagia.  Leu-
corrhoea , with  or  without  menstrual  irregularities,  daily,
copious  discharge  of  a mild  white  mucus,  accompanied  by
violent  itching  of  the  genital  organs,  sometimes  also  burn-
ing and  shooting  stitches,  general  lassitude  and  depression
of  strength,  especially  by  weakness  of  the  knees  and  legs,
emaciation,  paleness  of  the  face,  weakness  of  the  chest,  es-
pecially when  talking,  sometimes  oppression  at  the  chest,
pressive  pains  at  the  chest,  with  dry,  fatiguing  cough,  un-
easy sleep,  excessive  irritability,  peevishness,  vehemence
produced  by  trifling  causes,  anxiety,  depression  of  spirits,
sadness  and  apprehension  on  account  of  the  result  of  the
disease.  Abortion.  Too  long  after-pains.  Galactirrhcea
and  Agalactia.  Weakness,  falling  off  of  the  hair,  and
other  symptoms  consequent  upon  delivery.  Croup,  during
the  remission,  when  Spongia  had  been  exhibited  with  be-
nefit during:  the  night.  Calcarea  is  here  exhibited,  when
the  breathing  remains  audible  and  sibilant,  in  children
which  are  evidently  scrofulous,  or  during  the  period  of
dentition.  Haemoptysis  in  millers,  in  conjunction  with


262


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


sulphur  and  greasy  oily  food.  Cough  in  measles.  Chro-
nic cough,  with  slight,  pinching  and  griping  in  the  chest,
twitching  of  the  eye-lids,  clouds  before  the  eyes  and  en-
larged submaxillary  glands,  (Puls,  may  then  be  exhib.  first.)
Chronic  Laryngitis , with  or  without  ulceration.  Catarrh
and  Chronic  Blennorrhagia  of  the  trachea  and  the  lungs
Pituitous  and  tuberculous  phthisis  of  the  lungs  in  the  1st,
2nd,  and  3d  stage  ; Calcar ea  is  an  extremely  important
remedy  for  limiting  the  symptoms  of  the  colliquative  ac-
tion. Rheumatism  of  the  Pleura  and  the  intercostal  mus-
cles Rheumatic  affections  of  the  spinal  marrow . Pain
in  the  small  of  the  back , consequent  upon  straining  the
parts  in  lifting.  Curvature  and  ramollissp.ment  of  the  ver-
tebrae, in  children , (in  alternation  with  Phosp.  ac.  and  Sil.)
Chirargra  and  Podagra.  Luxatio  spontanea.  Ischias.
The  extremities  go  to  sleep.  Sense  of  numbness  and  pa-
ralysis of  the  hands,  being  a sort  of  rest  of  arthritic  or  rheu-
matic diseases,  or  a companion  of  diseases  of  the  heart
and  the  spinal  marrow.

Analogous  Remedies. — 1.  Anac.,'  Ars.,  Bell.,  Bism.,
Caust.,  Chi.,  Grap.,  Lyc  , Merc.,  Mur.  magn.,  Nbr.  ac.,
Nux.  vom.,  Phosp.,  Sil.,  Snip. — 2.  Alum.,  Ambr.,  Antim.
crud.,  Carb-  an.  et  veg.,  Cina.,  Ipec.,  Kali.,  Magn.  mur.,
Petr.,  Puls.,  Rhodod.,  Scill.,  Sep. — 3.  Arn.,  Bar.,  Bry.,
Cham.,  Con.,  Cupr.,  Ignat.,  Natr.  mur.,  Plumb.,  Verat.,
Zinc.  Calcar,  is  especially  suitable  after  Cinch.,  Cupr.,
Acid.  nitr.  (especially  when  this  latter  remedy  had  acted
unfavorably)  and  Sulph.  After  Calcar,  are  most  suitable
Lyc.  Acid.  nitr.  (especially  when  Calc,  had  not  acted  fa-
vorably,) Phosp.,  Silic.,  and  Sulph.  (the  latter  when  the
pupils  are  much  disposed  to  dilate.)  Calc,  and  Lyc.  may
often  be  advantageously  exhibited  one  after  another.

Moral  Symptoms. — * Depressed  in  spirits , and  melan-
choly to  the  highest  degree,  with  a sort  of  anguish.  A
feeling  about  the  heart  which  is  not  exactly  a feeling  of
sadness  ; there  is  no  cause  for  it,  accompanied  by  a kind
of  voluptuous  tremor  in  the  body.  One  is  sad  almost  to
tears  ; anxiously  concerned  about  the  present  and  the  fu-
ture. Sad,  depressed  mood,  * with  irresistible  desire  to
weep.  Weeping  mood  in  the  evening,  (a.  5 d.)  A good
deal  of  weeping  in  a baby  whose  mother  had  taken  calca-


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


263


rea.  Weeping  consequent  upon  remonstrance.  Weep-
ing on  account  of  trifles,  accompanied  by  an  easily  wound-
ed and  irritated  temper.  Grief  and  complaints  on  account
of  old  offences.  * Anxiety  on  account  of  every  trifle,  ac-
companied by  a weeping  mood.  Anxiety  in  the  afternoon,
alter  previous  nausea,  and  headache  in  the  forenoon.  He
is  anxious  about  the  present  and  the  future,  with  deep  re-
flection ; at  the  same  time  he  is  indifferent  towards  things
around  him.  but  he  is  not  disinclined  to  work.  Anxious
mind,  as  if  he  had  done  something  evil,  or  ought  to  appre-
hend reproaches,  accompanied  by  a persevering  disposition
to  labor.  Great  anguish  and 'palpitation  of  the  heart.  * A
kind  of  sweat,  from  anguish,  with  nausea.  Frequent  jerks
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  during  the  anxiety.  Anxious  un-
easiness, and  appearance  of  being  busily  engaged  in  many
kinds  of  work  ; she  intends  to  undertake  many  things,  but
accomplishes  nothing;  after  this  stir,  her  strength  is  very
much  depressed.  * Uneasiness  of  mind , with  gloom  and
anxiety.  Orgasm  of  the  blood,  and  uneasiness.  Extremely
uneasy  in  the  evening,  owing  to  nausea  in  the  afternoon,
with  great  thoughtlessness.  He  dislikes  to  be  alone;  his
face,  hands  and  feet  are  cold.  Fearful  and  uneasy,  as  if
some  accident  were  to  happen  to  her,  (a.  4 d.)  Apprehen-
sion, as  if  some  misfortune  were  to  happen  to  him,  or  to
some  one  else  ; he  cannot  succeed  in  banishing  it,  (a.  23  d.)
Sadness  and  apprehension  as  if  she  expected  some  sad-
dening news.  The  mind  is  full  of  dread  and  anxiety  of
the  future,  with  fear  of  consumption.  She  fears  to  lose
her  understanding.  She  fears  lest  people  should  observe
her  confusion  of  mind  Hypochondriasis,  she  imagines  to
be  deadly  sick,  and  cannot,  nevertheless,  complain  of  any-
thing, (the  first  days.)  * Despairing  mood,  .with  fears  of
disease  and  misery,  with  foreboding  of  sad  events.  * She
despairs  of  her  life,  and  imagines  that  she  is  obliged  to  die  ;
at  the  same  time,  she  has  a very  sad  m iod,  with  weeping,
and  frequent  attacks  of  sudden,  general  heat,  as  if  she  had
hot  water  poured  over  her.  * Frequent  attacks  of  irrita-
bility and  anguish*  Irritable,  faint  and  depressed,  early  in
the  morning,  after  little  labor.  * Noise  affects  one  a good
deal.  Every  near  noise  causes  him  to  start,  especially
early  in  the  morning.  Impatient,  desperate.  Unnaturally


264


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


indifferent,  unsociable,  taciturn,  (a.  8 d.)  Not  disposed  to
speak,  without  being  ill-humored,  (a.  6 hours  and  a half.)
Peevishness  and  unremil  ted  obstinacy,  for  3 davs,  (a.  28
d.)  * Very  peevish,  and  disinclined  to  speak  ; these  symp-

toms manifest  themselves  as  soon  as  he  enters  the  room,
coming  out  of  the  open  air,  where  he  feels  well,  with  in-
creased headache.  As  soon  as  he  sits  idle  and  quiet,  he
becomes  peevish  and  sleepy,  and  every  thing  is  disagree-
able to  him.  * Vexed,  peevish,  sullen,  and  extremely  indif-
ferent towards  the  most  important  things  ; at  the  same
time  he  did  everything  with  reluctance,  and  as  if  by  force.
* Intolerable  sulkiness  and  peevish  mood.  Repulsive  dis-
position. Repulsive,  depressed  mood.  * Everything  is
disagreeable  to  her,  with  great  peevishness.  Sorrowful
and  peevish,  she  looked  upon  everything  from  the  worst
side,  and  imagined  everything  evil.  Peevish  without  a
cause , two  successive  evenings.  Peevish,  without  a cause,
especially  early  in  the  morning.  Peevish  and  uneasy.
Very  peevish,  (a.  some  h.)  Frequently  peevish,  and  then
she  spits.  She  is  so  peevish  on  account  of  trifles,  that  she
is  giddy  the  whole  evening,  and  goes  to  bed  early,  but  is
not  able  to  sleep,  (a.  20  d.)  Very  peevish  and  irritable,
after  a cold.  Peevish  on  account  of  trifles,  and  very  irri-
table early  in  the  morning,  before  stool  ; he  gets  angry  at
everything.  The  recollection  of  former  vexations  makes
him  angry.  Repugnance,  aversion,  loathing  of  most  men.
Disinclined  to  every  kind  of  work.  Dread  and  loathing
of  work,  with  great  irritability  and  heaviness  of  the  feet.
Absence  of  volition,  accompanied,  however,  by  a sense  of
strength,  (a.  7 d ) Peevish  and  vexed  during  the  day,  in
the  evening  cheerful  and  talkative.  The  first,  part  of  the
day  he  is  anxious,  the  latter  part  he  is  cheerful  and  satis-
fied with  himself.  Fie  is  cheerful,  and  would  like  to  be
amongst  men,  in  order  to  talk  with  them,  (a.  10  h.)  He
loses  the  train  of  his  ideas;  his  memory  is  short.  Very
forgetful,  (a.  48  h.)  Great  weakness  of  the  imaginative
faculty  ; during  a slight  effort  in  talking,  he  felt  as  if  his
brain  were  paralyzed,  mostly  in  the  occiput  ; he  was  not
able  to  think  of  anything,  or  to  recollect  what  was  the  sub-
ject of  conversation,  with  obtusion  of  the  head.  She  con-


CALCAREA  CARBONIGA.


265


founds  one  word  with  another,  and  easily  chooses  a wrong
expression.

Head. — Giddiness  and  loss  of  senses,  as  after  turning
in  a circle. — Feeling  of  stupidity  in  the  head,  as  after
turning  a long  time  in  a circle,  from  3 o’clock  in  the  morn-
ing until  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  (a.  25  d.)  Loss  of
consciousness,  accompanied  by  an  illusion  in  regard  to  the
place,  as  if  the  room  were  a bower.  Jn  the  evening  two
attacks  of  loss  of  consciousness  when  walking  ; she  would
have  fallen  to  the  floor,  if  one  had  not  seized  her,  (5.  d.)
Loss  of  consciousness,  with  anxious  oppression  at  the  sto-
mach ; she  is  roused  from  it,  as  by  violent  fright.  On
stooping,  and  on  moving  the  head,  she  felt  as  if  she  knew
not  where  she  was.  Sense  of  confusion  and  tremor  in  the
head,  (1.  d.)  Sense  of  confusion  in  the  head.  Sense  of
dullness  and  giddiness  in  the  head,  every  morning  when
rising.  Great  obtusion  of  the  head,  after  the  siesta.  Dull,
continual  obtusion  of  the  head.  Painful  obtusion  of  the
head,  so  that  she  cannot  understand  that  which  she  has
read,  nor  comprehend  that  which  is  spoken.  The  head
feels  constantly  as  if  it  icere  too  full.  Insensibility  and
bluntness  of  t lie  senses,  as  in  a cold.  * Dizziness  of  the
head,  early  after  rising,  with  nausea,  and  roaring  before
the  ear,  and  a sensation  as  if  he  would  fall  down  senseless,
(a.  22  d.)  In  the  forenoon  he  felt  so  dizzy  that  he  looked
at  everything  as  if  he  were  half  dreaming.  Stupefaction,
as  if  the  person  were  unconscious  of  the  external  objects,
with  an  undulating  buzzing  on  the  top  of  the  head.  Stupe-
faction of  the  head,  like  vertigo,  the  whole  afternoon,  (a.
24  d.)  * Vertiginous  staggering  in  the  evening,  * when

walking  in  the  open  air  ; he  totters  to  and  fro.  Sense  of
giddiness,  as  if  he  were  to  be  lifted  high  up  and  then
pushed  forward.  Vertigo  unto  falling,  with  faintishness.
Vertigo,  as  if  the  body  did  not  stand  firmly,  (a.  6 it.)—
Slight  vertigo,  going  off  soon,  (a.  a quarter  of  an  h.) — At-
tack of  stunning  vertigo  ; the  head  stooped  forward  to
the  left  side,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (a.  three
quarters  of  an  h.)  Vertigo  consequent  upon  vexation.
Vertigo  when  quickly  turning  the  head,  and  also  when
at  rest.  Quickly  passing  vertigo,  mostly  when  sitting,
less  when  standing,  and  still  less  when  walking.  Vio-

12


266


CALCAREA  CARBONICA,


lent  vertigo  when  stooping,  then  nausea  and  headache.
Vertigo  unto  falling,  after  stooping,  when  walking  or
standing;  she  had  to  hold  herself.  Vertigo  after  walk-
ing, when  standing  or  looking  around,  as  if  everything
turned  with  her.  Vertigo  when  walking  in  the  open  air ,
as  if  lie  would  reel,  especially  when  turning  the  head
quickly  — Vertigo  to  hen  walking  in  the  open  air , (also  a.
20  d.)  — Vertigo  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  as  if  he
would  fall  to  the  right  side,  (a.  2 h.)  Vertigo  and  painful
turning  of  the  head,  as  in  a circle,  early  in  the  morning,
when  rising;  especially  giddy  when  walking  or  standing,
with  chilliness  and  prickings  in  the  left  side  of  the  head.
Headache,  also  with  giddiness,  * every  morning  on  wak-
ing up.  Headache  in  the  nose,  over  the  forehead.!  Head-
ache in  the  occiput,  whenever  she  ties  something  firmly
around  the  head.  Frequently  semi-lateral  headache,  al-
ways with  a quantity  of  empty  risings . Headache,  * with
nausea,  (a.  12  d-)  Headache  only  on  that  side  upon  which
lie  is  just  lying,  (burning  ?)  — Sensalion,  on  stooping,  as  if
a headache  were  beginning  in  the  right  side.  Dull  pain
in  the  forehead,  with  desola’eness  and  emptiness  of  the
head,  early  on  waking  up,  with  a dry,  slimy  tongue,  (5.  d.)
First  dull,  then  pressive  headache  in  the  temples,  early
on  waking  up,  with  a quantity  of  empty  eructations.  Vio-
lent, dull  headache,  first  in  the  fore  part,  then  in  the  back
part  of  the  head,  for  some  days,  (a.  b d.)  Stunning  pres-
sure on  the  top  of  the  head,  as  after  quickly  turning  in  a
circle,  (a.  24  d.)  Stunning,  pressive  pain  in  the  forehead 1,
as  in  vertigo,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion , (a.  1 h.  and
a half.) — Stunning  pressive  headache  in  the  forehead,  with
obnubilation  of  the  whole  head,  and  inability  to  recollect
anything  when  reading  ; he  had  to  stop  reading,  and  knew
not  where  he  was. — Stunning,  pressive  headache,  early  af-
ter rising,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,  or  had  been  revel-
ling during  the  night,  (a.  24  h.) — Stunning,  pressive  pain
in  the  forehead,  which  is  especially  augmented  by  stoop-
ing, (a.  50  h.)  Continual  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  head.

f Note  of  the  Translator  • — This  seems  to  be  a misprint,  and
should  doubtless  read  thus:  “Headache  in  the  forehead  over  the
nose.”


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


26?


Painful  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  forehead,  with  beating  in
the  temples.  * Heaviness  in  the  forehead , * increased  by-
reading  and  writing.  Heaviness  and  heat  of  the  head,  * al-
most only  in  the  forehead.  Heaviness  of  the  head,  early-
on  waking,  for  several  mornings,  (a.  20  h.)  Great  heavi-
ness of  the  head,  early  on  waking,  with  heat  in  the  head  ;
both  symptoms  increased,  by  moving  or  righting  the  head,
(a.  27  h.)

* — Great  heaviness  of  the  head,  with  violent  jerks  in  both
temples,  and  painfulness  of  the  whole  head  when  stoop-
ing, which  goes  off  again  when  the  head  is  righted,  (a.  9
h.  and  a half.)  Heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  occiput,  (a.
]3  d.) — Painful  heaviness  of  the  head,  after  stooping  for
some  time  while  standing,  with  pressure  of  the  forehead
from  within  outward,  especially  over  the  left  eye,  (a.  5 h.
and  a half.)  Pressure  in  the  head,  sometimes  on  the  top,
sometimes  in  the  temples,  (a.  12  d.)  — Pressive,  intensely
pressive,  pain  in  the  whole  head,  especially  in  both  temples,
(a.  9 h.)  Pressure  in  the  temple,  every  day  for  8 days. — -
Pressure  in  the  left  temporal  bone,  as  if  it  were  pressed
in,  at  the  same  time  internally  and  externally,  (a.  7 h.  and
a half.)-— Pressure  in  the  right  temple,  close  by  the
side  of  the  eyes,  as  if  something  pressed  upon  it  hard,
(a.  5 h.  and  a half.)  Pie  is  roused  from  his  sleep
at  five  o’clock  every  morning,  by  a violently  pressive  pain
in  the  vertex  ; the  pain  goes  off  after  an  hour. — Pressure
in  the  vertex,  which  extended  as  far  as  the  eye.  * Pressure
in  the  forehead.  Pressive  headache,  mostly  in  ihe  fore-
head, increased  in  the  open  air.  Pressive  headache  in  the
forehead,  which  produces  a sensation  as  if  the  parts  there
were  unusually  large. — Pressive  headache  in  the  forehead,
especially  over  the  left  eyebrow,  when  walking  in  the  open
air. — Pressive  headache  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,
which  extends  as  far  as  the  right  eve  and  forces  it  to  close
involuntarily,  (a.  1 h.  and  a half.) — Pressive  pain,  shooting
quickly  through  the  occiput ; the  pain  only  disappears
gradually.  Pressure  in  the  fore  part  of  the  head,  (4.  d.)
Pressure  in  the  forehead  from  within  outward,  very  con-
siderable and  resembling  vertigo,  relieved  by  pressing
upon  the  parts  with  the  cold  hand,  and  going  off  when
walking  in  the  open  air3  (a,  9 d.)— Pain  in  the  left  t euv*


268


CALCARE A CARBONICA.


poral  region  and  the  whole  left  side  of  the  head,  pressing
from  within  outward  ; the  pain  is  also  in  the  right  side  of
the  occiput. — Pressing  in  the  left  occiput  from  within  out-
ward, in  jerks  ; the  pressure  extends  as  far  as  the  nape  of
the  neck.  (a.  1 h.  and  a quarter  ) — Sensation  in  the  occi-
put as  if  it  were  pressed  asunder.  Violent,  almost  lancin-
ating pain  in  the  region  of  the  vertex,  pressing  from  with-
in outward  ; when  stooping,  (a.  14  d.)  Painful  pressing
from  within  outward,  in  the  whole  head,  with  a sensation
as  if  the  brain  were  compressed,  (a.  15  d.)  Compressive,
pinching  headache  on  the  left  side.  Tensive  sharp  pain  in
the  forehead.  Tension  across  the  top  of  the  head.  The
head  aches,  it  feels  tense.  Tension  and  pressure  in  the
right  side  of  the  head,  as  from  a blunt  instrument,  which
is  pressed  through  the  head  from  above  downwards  in
jerks.  *Cramp-hke  pain,  moving  from  the  forehead  to  the
vertex  (after  a cold,)  (a.  6 d.)  Spasmodic  drawing  be-
neath the  vertex,  with  stitches  in  the  temples,  and  heat  in
the  ears,  (a.  48  h.) — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  temple,
(a.  6 h ) — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left  temple,  (a.  8,  14  h.)
Pinching  pain  in  the  forehead.  Pinching  and  drawing
pain  in  the  left  temple,  towards  the  parietal  bone,  with  heat
of  the  face.  Drawing  pain  in  the  whole  of  the  right  side
of  the  head,  in  the  jugum  and  the  jaw,  (4.  d.) — Drawing
pain  in  the  right,  side  of  the  forehead,  over  the  eye  and  in
the  occiput,  : this  symptom  occurs  when  he  makes  a men-
tal effort,  (a.  2 d.)  Drawing  pain  on  the  top  of  the  head.
Almost  constant  drawing  pain  beneath  thevertex,  and  in  the
temples,  which  appears  to  rise  from  the  back.  Headache
rising  from  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Drawing  pain  in  the
occiput,  always  towards  the  side  to  which  he  moved  his
head  ; going  off  after  sneezing,  (a.  12  d.) — Drawing  and
pressive  headache  in  the  region  of  the  left  eyebrow,  or  in
the  temporal  bone. — Drawing  pressive  headache  in  the  left
temporal  muscle , also  in  the  evening  ; sometimes  with
pressure  on  the  upper  row  of  teeth  ; by  pressing  upon  the
temples,  the  pain  is  changed  to  a pressive  headache  in  the
forehead. — Drawing,  pressive  headache  in  the  left  occiput,
with  a sense  of  stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Draw-
ing, pressive,  sometimes  also  tearing,  headache,  sometimes
in  the  forehead,  sometimes  in  the  occiput,  sometimes  in


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


269


the  temples  ; it  diminishes  when  pressing  upon  the  parts,
and  disappears  when  exerting  the  thinking  faculty,  (a.  3
d.)  Tearing  pain,  the  whole  day,  in  the  temples,  the  bones
of  the  orbit,  and  the  cheek,  which  swells  a good  deal.
Grinding  and  pressing  in  the  head,  which  spread  towards
the  eyes,  the  nose,  the  teeth,  and  the  cheeks,  with  great
sensitiveness  to  noise,  accompanied  by  slight  attacks  of
swooning.  Sensation  as  of  gnawing  in  the  occiput.  Cut-
ting pain  in  the  occiput,  and  in  the  forehead,  as  if  a sharp
body  were  pressed  in  there,  made  worse  by  walking  and
pressing  the  hand  upon  the  parts,  (a.  3 d.)  Stitches  in  the
head.  Shooting  stitches  in  the  head,  here  and  there.
Stitches  in  the  head,  in  the  evening,  with  stitches  in  the
legs.  Stitching  pains  in  the  brain,  with  a sense  of  empti-
ness in  the  head,  lor  three  days,  ( i.  28  d.)  Single  stitches
through  the  head,  with  great  chilliness.  Lancinating  head-
ache out  at  the  eves,  (the  first  days.)  Lancinating  head-
ache on  the  right  side,  as  far  as  the  eye.  Stitch-like
headache  in  one  half  of  the  forehead  ; the  pain  is  relieved
when  lying  down.  Stitches  in  the  whole  head  for  half  an
hour,  coming  on  in  consequence  of  righting  herself  after
she  was  lying  on  the  back,  or  after  stooping.  Stitching
headache  on  the  left  side , over  the  temple,  (a.  2 d.)  Fre-
quent stitches  in  the  temples,  (a.  7 d.)  Lancinalions  pene-
trating at  the  left  temple  and  coming  out  at  the  right,  (a.
5 h.)  Stitches  on  the  top  of  the  head,  on  the  right  side,
extending  into  the  right  eye,  (a.  29  d.) — Fine  stitches  in
the  vertex,  externally,  (a.  7 h.)  Stitches  in  the  right
side  of  the  occiput,  (a.  1 1 d.) — Periodically  increasing  and
decreasing  prickings  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  when
at  rest  or  in  motion. — Violent  jerking  stitches  through  the
whole  of  the  right  half  of  the  brain  ; they  are  often  re-
newed, and  t lien  leave  behind  them  a sensation  of  tension,
and  as  of  pressing  asunder. — Dull,  stitching  ache,  when
walking  ; it  especially  extends  over  the  left  side  of  the
forehead,  and  disappears  again  through  continual  walking. —
Grinding  stitches  inlhe  left  temple,  close  by  the  eyebrow,
when  moving  the  lower  jaw,  (a.  5 h.) — Boring,  painful
stitches  in  the  left  part  of  the  forehead,  when  sitting  ; they
immediately  go  off  when  sitting,  walking,  standing,  or  touch-
ing the  parts,  (a  12  h.) — Boring  stitch  in  the  centre  of  the


270


CALC ARE A CARBONIC A*


forehead*  extending  into  the  brain,  (a.  3 h.) — Boring  lan-
cinations  in  the  left  temporal  region  from  within  outwards,
regularly  intermittent  ; they  go  off  when  sitting,  or  touch-
ing the  parts. — Pulsative  stitches  in  the  left  parietal  bone,
(immediately.)  Single  shootings  or  thrusts  across  the
brain.  Spasmodically  shooting  pain  in  the  right  temple.
Jerkings  in  the  head,  for  moments.  * Throbbing  head-
ache in  the  middle  of  the  brain,  every  morning,  and  con-
tinuing the  whole  day.  Throbbing  pain  in  the  forehead.
Stitch-like  throbbing  in  the  head,  when  walking  fast. —
Considerable  throbbing  in  the  top  of  the  head,  in  the  region
of  the  vertex,  as  of  an  artery,  with  cutting  thrusts  from
within  outwards.  * Kush  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  heat
of  the  face,  seven  hours  after  the  meal.  * Heal  in  the
head,  and  considerable  orgasm.  * Heat  in  the  left  part  of
the  head.  Heat  around  the  head,  in  the  evening.  * Icy
coldness , in  and  about  the  head,  (a.  4h.)  Snapping,  as  of
sparks  from  the  electric  machine,  which  mav  be  heard  for
several  minutes  in  the  occiput,  towards  noon  ; this  is  fol-
lowed by  a warmth  ascending  from  the  nape  of  the  neck.
Concussion  of  the  brain,  especially  in  the  right,  part  of  the
occiput,  occasioned  by  slight,  shaking  of  the  head,  and  at
every  step  — Concussion  of  the  brain  when  setting  the  foot
down,  like  an  echo  in  the  head.  Sudden  pain  in  the  left
parietal  bone,  as  if  the  bone  were  cut  to  pieces,  accom-
panied by  shuddering  all  over  the  body.  A numb  spot
externally  on  the  right  side  of  the  head.  Several  places
of  the  head  are  painful  to  the  touch,  (a.  14  d.) — The  whole
skin  of  the  head  is  intensely  painful  when  moving  the
frontalis  muscle  to  and  fro,  (a.  1 h.  and  a half.) — Soreness
of  the  occiput,  when  touching  the  part,  as  if  there  were
subcutaneous  suppuration.  Pain  about  the  head,  as  if  the
skin  became  detached,  about  the  occiput,  as  far  down  as  the
nape  of  t he  neck.  Tearing  about  the  head  and  in  the  eyes,
with  redness  of  the  whole  face,  every  afternoon  from  three
or  four  o’clock  until  nine  or  ten.  Great  liability  of  the
head  to  cold,  which  causes  headache,  as  if  a plank  were
lying  upon  the  head,  with  pressive  pain  in  the  head,  and
chilliness  of  the  body,  (a.  6 d.)  Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp.
Itching  of  the  occiput.  * Itching  behind  the  ear,  with
dizziness  in  the  head  after  scratching.  Itching  of  the


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


271


hairy  scalp,  when  walking  in  the  open  air. — Tingling  itch-
ing of  the  hairy,  scalp,  which  forces  one  to  scratch,  with
painfulness  of  the  roots  of  the  hairs  when  touched. — Prick-
ling and  itching  of  the  hairy  scalp,  which  cannot  be  re-
moved by  rubbing,  (a.  U)  h.)  Burning  itching  of  the  hairy
scalp,  (a.  13  d.)  Burning  itching,  as  from  nettles,  with
excessive  tingling  of  the  hairy  scalp,  and  the  lower
part  of  the  face,  in  the  evening  before  going  to  bed.
The  skin  of  the  head  upon  the  vertex  becomes  scaly.
* Eruption  upon  the  hairy  scalp,  * with  glandular  swell-
ings at  the  neck.  Violent  eruption  on  the  head.  Pim-
ples on  the  forehead.  * Tumour  on  the  right  side  of
the  head,  without  any  pain,  (a.  15  d.)  Tumour  under
the  left  temple,  (a.  15  d.)  Tumour  on  the  right  temple,
early  in  the  morning,  which  had  gone  otf  again  in  the
evening,  (a.  15  d.)  * Thin,  moist  prrrigo  on  the  hairy

scalp,  (a.  12  d.)  A boil  on  the  forehead,  where  the  hairs
begin,  (the  first  days.)  * The  hair  of  the  head  comes
out  when  combing  it.

Eyes. — Pustule  over  the  left  eyebrow.  The  eyes  are
so  painful  that  site  is  obliged  to  close  them  with  sensation,
as  if  she  ought  to  press  them  in.  Sensation  of  pain,  as  f
a foreign  little  body  had  got  into  the  eyes , (a.  17  d.)
Pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  pressed  in.  * Pressure
in  the  eyes , in  the  evening.  Considerable  pressure,  day
and  night,  as  if  a grain  of  sand  were  lodged  behind  the  up-
per eyelid,  (a  19  d.)  Pressure  in  the  eye,  in  the  evening,
after  going  to  bed,  and  at.  night,  as  if  a grain  of  sand  were
lodged  in  the  eye.  Pressure  and  burning  in  the  eyes,  with
lachrvmation.  Tension  in  the  muscles  of  the  eyes,  when
turning  the  eyes,  or  exerting  them  while  reading.
Twitching,  and  slight  pulling  in  the  eye,  in  jerks,  (a.  20
d.)  * Stitches  in  the  eye  and  head,  (during  the  menses,)

(a.  8 d ) Severe  stitch  in  that  eye,  which  is  affected  with
the  fistula  lachrymalis.  Stitches  and  biting  in  the  eye.
Stitches  in  the  internal  canthus  of  the  eye , then,  alternate-
ly stitches  and  throbbing  in  the  eyes  ; frequent  blowing  of
the  nose  after  the  pain  has  gone.  — Stitches  in  the  inter-
nal and  the  external  canthus. — Belting  stitches  in  the  in-
ternal cantin',  which  pass  off  by  rubbing,  (immediately.)
— Violently  tearing  si  itches  in  the  right  eye,  as  if  it  were
inflamed.— Boring  stitch  in  the  upper  border  of  the  orbit,


272


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


(a.  5 h.)  Itching  in  the  margin  of  the  eyelids.  # Itching
in  the  eyes , in  the  evening,  but  pressure  early  in  the  morn-
ing.— * Violent  itching  of  the  eyes.  Itching  in  the  canthi
of  the  eyes.  Itching  in  the  internal  canthus  of  the  right
eye.  — Itching  of  the  eyes  in  both  corners. — Tinckling  itch-
ing of  the  externa]  canthus  of  the  right  eye,  which  forces
one  to  rub,  (a.  25  h.)  * Pain,  as  from  excoriation,  in  the

lower  eyelid.  Biting  in  the  eyes,  (a.  7 d.)  Feeling  of
coldness  in  the  eyes,  (immediately  ) # Feeling  of  heat  in

the  eyes,  with  heaviness  in  the  upper  lids.  * Burning  in
the  eyes  when  he  closes  the  lids. — Burning  in  the  left,  up-
per eyelid,  towards  the  internal  canthus,  (a.  6 h ) Burn-
ing of  the  internal  canthi  of  the  eyes,  with  stitches  in  the
parts.  Burning  and  itching  in  the  eyes,  (a.  8 d.)  Itching
burning  of  the  eyes,  head  and  neck,  (a.  7 d.)  Redness  of
the  margins  of  the  eyelids.  * Redness  of  the  white  of  the
eye.  Reddish,  appearance  of  the  white  of  the  eye,  with
pressure  in  the  eyes,  (a.  20  d.)  Inflammation  and  swell-
ing of  the  canthi  of  the  left  eye,  and  of  the  lower  lid,  with
shooting  and  throbbing  pains,  and  itching  all  around,  (a.
10  d.)  — Violent  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  the  white  of  the
eyes  is  quite  red  ; in  the  eyes,  especially  in  the  external
canthi,  there  is  much  gum  the  whole  day  ; the  external
canthi  look  sore,  and  seem  to  ulcerate,  for  fourteen  days,
(2.  d.)  * Swelling  and  redness  of  the  eyelids;  they  he -

come  agglutinated  every  night ; in  day  time  the  eyes  are
full  of  gum,  with  a feeling  of  heat  and  soreness,  as  from
excoriation,  and  there  is  lachrymation,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Swell-
ing of  the  lower  eyelids,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising.
Lachrymation,  when  writing.  Lachrymation,  and  fatigue
and  weakness  of  the  eye,  (a.  7 d.)  Lachrymation
of  the  eyes  early  in  the  morning.  A biting  fluid  runs
out  of  the  left,  reddened  eye.  Sensation,  as  of  grease
being  in  the  eyes.  Gum  is  constantly  in  the  eyes  ; she
is  often  obliged  to  wipe  them.  Dry  pus  on  the  margins  of
the  eyelids,  and  in  I lie  canthi  of  the  eyes.  — Gum  in  the
canthi  of  the  eyes,  for  two  days,  (a.  10  h.) — Agglutination
of  the  eyelids,  on  moving  them,  with  pressure  in  the  cor-
ners, especially  the  outer  corners,  (a.  55  h.)  Closing  of  the
eyes  by  pus.  The  eyes  look  watery  and  their  lids  are  ag-
glutinated early  in  the  morning  ; the  eyes  are,  moreover,
painful  when  he  looks  into  the  light,  (a.  24  h.) — The  eyes


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


273


are  closed  by  pus,  early  on  waking  up,  (a.  24  li.)  The
while  of  the  eye  is  very  much  reddened  ; a little  blood  cx-
sudates  out  of  it,  without  any  pain.  * Slight  twitching  in
the  upper  eyelids , with  a sensation  as  if  the  eye  moved
spontaneously,  (a.  18  d.)  Stiffness  in  the  left  eyeball,
early  in  the  morning,  after  rising,  it  cannot  be  moved  with-
out experiencing  a disagreeable  feeling.  She  is  obliged
to  wink  when  reading  ; the  eyes  constantly  incline  to
close,  (were  red  from  lachrymation.)  Dilatation  of  the
pupils.- — The  pupils  first  dilated,  then  contracted.  * A
darkness  or  sense  of  blackness  sometimes  shoots  across
her  eves.  * Turbidness  of  the  eyes,  after  having  caught
a cold  in  the  head,  (a.  6 d.)  Turbidness  of  sight;  at  the
same  time  she  feels  a desire  of  closing  the  eyes,  without
being  sleepy,  (6.  d.)  * Sensation  as  of  feathers  being  be-

fore the  eyes.  * Sensation  as  of  a gauze  being  before  the
eyes,  in  both  their  inner  canthi  ; this  symptom  goes  off  by
lachrymation.  Sensation  as  of  a shadow  being  before  the
eyes,  with  dilated  pupils,  so  that,  on  one  side,  objects  ap-
pear to  her  dark,  or  are  invisible  ; in  man,  for  instance,
she  only  perceives  one  eye.  Sudden  blindness,  immedi-
ately after  dinner  ; he  was  even  unable  to  see  the  table,  at
which  he  was  sitting;  at  the  same  time  sweat  from  op-
pressive anxiety,  and  nausea  ; also,  simultaneously,  like  a
bright  appearance  before  the  eyes  ; the  symptom  went  off
after  an  hour’s  sleep.  In  the  dark  he  imagines  to  see  elec-
tric sparks  before  the  eyes.  * Far-sightedness  ; she  is
obliged  to  wear  convex  glasses  when  reading.  * Long-
sightedness ; whereas  she  was  generally  able  to  distin-
guish things  clearly  both  near  and  far,  she  is  now  unable
to  distinguish  anything  fine  in  her  neighborhood  ; she.  can-
not thread  a needle,  (first,  days  ) — Far-sightedness  in  a per-
son who  is  short-sighted  ; he  was  able  to  distinguish  clearly
objects  at  a considerable  distance,  the  whole  day.  She
saw  small  objects  more  distinctly  than  large  ones.  When
reading,  a black  point  accompanies  the  letters.  Some-
times he  sees  a black  spot  before  the  left  eye,  which  goes
off  again  in  a few  minutes.  She  often  sees  black  spots
before  the  eyes,  when  she  makes  a bodily  effort,  (a.  '1  1 d.)
He  sees  a halo  round  the  candle-light  and  the  moon.
The  letters  are  dancing  before  the  eyes.  Wavelets  of

12*


274


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


light  cl  anti  rig  before  the  eyes,  and  dullness  of  sight.  Danc-
ing wavelets  of  light,  and  like  fiery  sparks  before  the  eyes,
early  in  the  morning,  on  waking  up.  Light  dazzles  her
eyes.  Looking  at  candle-light  painfully  affects  both  one’s
ryes  and  head.

Ears.  — Pain  in  the  ears,  as  if  something  would  pene-
trate through.  Pressure  in  the  ears.  Cramp-like  pain  in
the  ears,  (7.  d.) — Cramp-like  feeling  on  the  posterior  sur-
face of  the  concha,  (a.  9 h.)  Twitching  in  the  right  ear,
accompanied  by  a whizzing  sort  of  whispering,  as  of  the
wind  among  leaves.  The  twitching  occurs  every  minute,
and  is  so  violent  that  the  whole  body  sometimes  twitches
tip. — Twitching  in  the  cartilage  of  the  ear,  (a.  48  h.)
Drawing,  dull  pain  in  the  ears.  * Stitches  in  the  left  ear,
and  the  temple  ; the  symptom  went  off  when  at  rest,  and
when  the  eyes  were  closed.  Stitches  and  pain  in  the
right  ear. — Stitches  in  the  ears,  'hearing  stitches  in  the
right  ear,  (a.  3 d.)  * Pulsations  in  the  ears , (the  first  days.)
Prickling  in  the  right  ear,  (a.  7 d.)  Itching  of  the  concha*
Burning  itching  in  both  ears.  Frequently  slight  chills,
externally,  on  the  ears.  Heat  in  the  interior  of  the  ears ,
like  hot  blood,  (a.  29  d.)  Heat  is,  so  to  say,  rushing  out
of  the  left  ear,  (a.  5 d.)  Burning  pain  around  the  ear.
Swelling  in  the  left  ear,  with  itching.  Extensive  swelling
of  1 he  right  ear.  Swelling  of  the  internal  ear  and  right  side
of  the  face,  with  frequent  secretion  of  wax  The  bone  be-
hind the  left,  ear  feels  swollen  and  itches  ; on  touching  the
place  it  is  painful,  as  if  it  were  ulcerated.  * Eruption  be-
hind the  right  ear;  the  eruption  becomes  moist.  Tumour
before  the  left  car  ; it  feels  like  a boil  when  touched. --Tu-
mour under  the  lobule  ; this  causes  a tensive  pain  in  the
articulation  of  the  jaw,  when  chewing.  A little  water  is
dropping  out  of  her  sound  ear,  whilst  the  other  ear,  which
is  provided  with  sound  wax,  hears  with  difficulty.  When
blowing  the  nose,  there  is  a shooting  into  the  ear.  When
blowing  the  nose  hard,  her  ear  feels  obstructed  so  that'she  is
not  able  to  hear  with  it ; this  symptom  goes  off  again  on
swallowing. — * Sensation  in  the  right  ear,  as  if  something
had  become  lodged  before  the  tympanum,  without,  how-
ever diminishing  the  hearing,  (a*  15  h.)  Worse  hearing,
(the  first  3d)  * Hard  hearing,  for  a long  lime.  Sensi-


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


275


tiveness  in  the  brain,  when  hearing  a shrill  sound-— Scn-
sitive  to  noise,  in  the  evening,  when  tailing  asleep*  * Ting-
ling before  the  ears.  * {Singing  in  the  ears,  and  after-
wards * snapping,  as  of  a spark  lroin  the  eleciric  machine*

* Alternately  buzzing,  as  ot  mosquitoes,  and  cracking,  as
in  breaking  dry  straw,  in  the  lett  ear.  Buzzing  roaring  in
the  ear.  * Ringing  in  the  left  ear  and  in  the  head.  541  Buz-
zing  in  the  left  ear.  * Considerable  humming  in  the  ears,
with  hard  hearing,  early  in  the  morning,  (a.  2 d.)  {Sense,
as  of  fanning  the  left  ear. — Low  humming,  as  of  a top,  in
both  ears,  with  obtusion  of  the  head,  (a.  half  an  h.)
Quelching  in  the  ecu  s,  when  swallowing , (the  first  d )
Flapping  in  the  ear,  as  from  a loose  skin  hanging  down  in
it.  A sort  of  grunting  in  the  ear,  when  swallowing.
Cracking  in  the  ear  when  c e wing.

Nose. — 'Twitches  of  the  external  muscles  of  the  nose,  (a.
14  d.) — Gnawing  pain  about  the  root  of  the  nose,  (a.  1 h.)
Itching  of  the  nose  externally  and  internally,  (a.  2 d.)
Soreness  of  the  margin  of  the  nostrils,  and  especially  the
septum.  Stinging  pain  in  the  nostril  which  is  almost  sore,
when  touched.  * Soreness  of  the  right  nostril.  Red  spot
on  the  lip  of  the  nose.  * Inflammation,  redness  and  swell-
ing of  the  anterior  part  of  the  nose.  Swelling  of  tiie  nose,
especially  of  the  root,  frequently  going  and  coming  (a.  6
d.)  Swelling  of  the  right  wing  of  the  nose,  with  p unful-
ness to  the  touch.  Eruption  on  the  nose.  * Painful  pim-
ple in  the  left  nostril,  with  itching,  and  stinging  pain.

* Pimple  in  the  right  nostril,  painful  only  when  the  muscles

of  the  face  and  nose  are  moved  ; the  wing  of  the  nose  is
red  and  itches  externally  and  internally. — \ i nples  in  both
nostrils,  with  scurf.  * Sore , ulcerated  nostrils  ; * some-
times preceded  by  frequent  sneezing.  The  skin  of  the
nose  feels  as  if  it  were  covered  with  oil,  (a.  25  d.)  When
blowing  the  nose,  blackish  blood  comes  out.  Consi  Jerable
bleeding  at  the  nose,  (a.  10  d.)  Some  bleeding  at  the
nose,  at  night,  (a.  18  d.)  Bleeding  at  the  nose,  early
in  the  morning,  (a.  7 d.)  Violent  bleeding  at  the  nose,
as  in  venesection,  almost  to  fainting.  Smell  is  dull.
'The  sense  of  smell  is  easily  affected,  (a.  22  d.)  * Very

bad  smell  in  the  nose,  (a.  2-5  d.)  * Smell  before  the  nos$
as  of  rotten  eggs  or  gunpowder,  (a.  I h.)


276


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


Face. — The  colour  of  the  face  is  paley  with  blue  rings
around  the  eyes,  (the  first  days.)  *Pale,  thin  face,  with
deep  dark-bordered  eyes.  (a.  14  d.) — ■*  Yellowness  of  the
face.  * Yellowness  of  the  face.  Frequently  considerable
redness  and  heat  of  the  face.  Constantly  bloated  red-
ness and  heat  of  the  iace.  Erysipelas  on  the  (enlarged)
cheek.  Pain  in  the  face,  succeeded  by  swelling  ot  the
cheeks,  which  caused  the  pain  to  go  off,  (a.  10  d.) — Dull
pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  cheek,  (a.  2 h.) — Pressive
pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  upper  jaw,  when  chewing,  (a.
3 h.)  .Her  right  cheek  is  spasmodically  drawn  sideways,
with  cramp-like,  contractive  pain,  (a.  30  d.)  Twitching
in  the  muscles  of  the  face. — Fine  twitchings  from  the  up-
per border  of  the  orbit  down  to  the  nose.  Tearing  in  the
bones  of  the  face  and  head.  Tearing  in  the  left  cheek-
bone. — Violent  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  upper  jaw,
(a.  9 h.)  Violent  stitches  in  the  right  cheek,  the  whole
day,  (a.  5 d.) — Pulsating  throbbing  on  both  cheek  bones,
(a.  2 h.)  Prickling  in  the  face  and  neck. — Fine  tingling
in  the  face,  below  the  eye,  and  on  the  side  of  the  nose.

* Violent  itching  in  the  whole  face  ; she  was  constantly
obliged  to  scratch,  (the  first.  7 d.)  Burning  in  the  whole
face.  Feeling,  as  of  swelling  in  the  face,  especially  below
the  eye  and  around  the  nose,  without  any  visible  swelling.
— Sense  of  tension  in  the  right  cheek,  as  if  it  were  swollen,
(a.  2 d.)  Swelling  under  the  left  eye,  without  pain.  Pain-
less swelling  of  the  cheeks,  early,  when  rising,  (2.  d.)
Swelling  of  the  face  without  heat,  with  prickings  here  and
there.  White  spots  in  the  face,  with  itching.  * Eruption
of  small  painless  pimples,  in  the  whole  face,  (a.  5 d.)
Rash-like  eruption  in  the  face,  near  the  eyes  and  the  nose.

* Many  pimples  in  the  whole  face,  with  violent  itching.

* Itching  pimples  on  the  fore-head,  with  itching  in  the
whole  face.  * Itching  pimples  on  both  cheeks,  about  the
zygoma,  for  some  weeks. — * Pimple  in  the  centre  of  the
cheek,  which  became  moist  when  scratched,  and  left  a
greenish  crust  behind,  (a.  48  h.) — Ulcer  upon  the  cheek,
with  a stinging  pain.

Mouth. — The  lips  and  mouth  are  spasmodically  con-
tracted, so  that  she  was  not  able  to  open  it.  First,  slight
drawing  in  the  lower  lip  ; then,  the  lip  seemed  to  die  off,


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


27?


grew  white,  numb,  with  a sensation,  as  if  it  grew  big  and
would  hang  clown,  for  five  minutes.  Stinging  itching
around  the  upper  and  lower  lip. — Itching  prickling  upon
the  upper  lip  ; when  the  lip  is  rubbed,  the  itching  ap-
pears again  at  another  near  place,  (a.  1 h.)  Rough-
ness and  dryness  of  the  lips,  especially  the  upper  lip,
as  if  they  would  become  chapped,  (a.  49  h.)  Chapped
lips,  with  fissures  in  the  tongue,  and  pain,  as  if  excoriated,
(a.  45  h.)  Chapped  upper  lip.  * Swelling  of  the  upper
lip , early  in  the  morning.  Eruption  in  the  vermilion  bor-
der of  the  lower  lip,  (a.  32  d.)  * Pimples  on  the  upper  lip.
Eruption  of  pimples  around  the  mouth,  and  in  the  corners
of  the  mouth.  Pimple  under  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth.
* Scurfy  pimple  on  the  margin  of  the  vermilion  border  of
the  lower  lip. — Large  humid  scurf  under  the  right  angle  of
the  mouth.  Ulcerated  angles  of  the  mouth,  for  a fortnight.
The  right  angle  of  the  mouth  is  closed  by  ulceration,  and
feels  painful  like  a sore.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Itching  of  the  chin.  Tingling  itching
of  the  border  of  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw,  which  in-
vites one  to  scratch.  Pimple  in  the  middle  of  the  chin.
Fine  pimples  around  the  chin  and  on  the  neck,  with  itch-
ing. On  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw,  considerable  swell-
ing with  drawing  pains,  (a.  12  d.)  Swelling  of  a submax-
illary gland.  Hard  swelling  of  a submaxillary  gland,  as
big  as  a hen’s  egg,  with  painful  tension  when  chewing,
and  stinging  pain  when  touching  it,  (a.  41  d.) — * Swelling
of  the  submaxillary  gland,  with  a sense  of  pressure  in  it.
Toothache,  only  when  eating.  Toothache,  caused  by  hot
or  cold  things,  but  mostly  by  a draught  of  air,  day  and
night,  with  flowing  of  a quantity  of  saliva,  out  of  the
mouth,  and  stitches  coming  out  at  the  ears  and  eyes,
which  prevents  her  from  sleeping  at  night,  (a.  8 d.)
Toothache  in  all  the  teeth,  like  fine  prickings,  which
is  made  worse  * by  cold  air  penetrating  into  the  teeth  ;
the  pain  wakes  him  up  at  night.  * The  teeth  cannot  bear
any  air  or  cold.  Toothache,  only  when  cold  air  or  bever-
age enters  the  mouth.  The  tooth  is  painfully  affected,
even  by  being  only  slightly  touched.  The  toothache  is
made  worse  by  external  noise.  * Drawing  in  the  teeth.
Drawing  pain  in  a fore-tooth,  continuing  for  some  minutes,


27S


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


and  returning  at  intervals,  (a.  17  d.)  Drawing  cutting  in  all
the  teeth,  (a.  I I d.)  Tearing  in  the  teeth,  as  if  the  roots  were
torn  out,  (a.  20  h.)  Tearing  in  the  teeth,  upwards  along
the  head,  as  far  as  the  temples,  mostly  at  night.  Single  tear-
ings  in  the  hollow  teeth,  in  paroxysms  of  half  an  hour  each,
worst  upon  taking  something  warm  ; also  at  night  ; tear-
ing through  the  whole  cheek.  Gnawing  toothache,  worst
in  the  evening. — Gnawing  toothache  in  the  upper  molar
teeth  of  the  right  side,  as  if  they  would  become  hollow,
in  any  position  of  the  head,  (a.  6 h.)  Biting  pain  in  the
teeth.  A good  deal  of  tingling  pain  in  a hollow  tooth.
Boring  toothache,  with  stitches  towards  the  nasal  bone,
day  and  night,  and  with  swelling  of  the  gums  and  cheek.
Boring  and  shooting  toothache  extending  into  the  eye  and
ear  ; immensely  increased  when  driving  in  a carriage,  (22.
d.)  First,  stitches  in  the  posterior  molar  tooth,  two  hours
after  dinner,  then  boring,  relieved  by  eating.  * Severe
stitches  in  a tooth, — -extending  into  the  right  eye  and
temple  ; only  by  day  ; inclining  to  touch  the  tooth  with
the  tongue;  this  touching  was  a!  ways  succeeded  by  a severe
stitch-like  jerk  in  the  tooth,  which  caused  her  to  start  and
which  shook  her,  (the  first  5 d.) — * Stitches  in  the  teeth.
Jerking  toothache,  (24  d.)  Twitchings  in  the  left  teeth
and  the  left  side  of  the  head.  The  teeth  experience  a
thrust  as  from  a fist.  Inclination  to  clatter  with  the  teeth,
as  in  a chill.  Throbbing  toothache  in  one  of  the  incisores,
only  when  eating.-— Throbbing  toothache,  the  tooth  feeling
pain  when  touched  ; there  is  also  swelling  of  the  gums,
which  is  painful  to  the  touch,  (a.  7 d.)  Looseness  of  an
old  stump  under  the  swollen  gums,  with  pains,  when
touched,  as  those  of  a wound,  lancinating.  The  teeth  are
painful  when  biting  upon  them.  The  teeth  feel  elongated.
Bad  smell  from  the  teeth.  * The  gums  itch. — * Fine
stitches  in  the  gums  of  the  whole  upper  jaw,  (a.  2 h.)
Boring  in  the  upper  gums  of  the  right  side  ; afterwards
swelling  of  the  gums,  accompanied  by  pressive  drawing
in  the  right  temporal  muscle.  Strong  pulsations  in  the
gums.  Throbbing  in  the  swollen  gums.  Soreness  of  the
gums,  with  pain  of  the  roots  of  the  teeth.  * Swelling  of
the  gums , of  a hollow  tooth.  Painful  swelling  of  the
gums,  without  toothache,  also  accompanied  by  swelling  of


CALC  ARE  A.  CARBONICA.


279


the  cheeks,  which  is  painful  to  the  touch,  (a.  3 <].)  Swell-
ing of  the  gums  (and  the  jaw  ;)  near  a stump  a little
tubercle  is  forming,  which  swells  and  becomes  painful,  the
pains  extending  into  the  ear.  Pustules  of  the  gums,
over  one  of  the  molar  teeth,  * like  a fistula  dentalis,
(after  a cold  ?)  (a.  24  d.)  Ulcers  of  the  gums,  (a.  14  d.)

* Bleeding  of  the  gums , also  at  night,  (a.  2,  3 d.)

Mouth. — in  the  mouth  there  is  a swelling  of  the  right

cheek,  forming  a big  tubercle,  with  drawing  and  tearing
pain  in  it,  every  evening.  Blisters  in  the  mouth,  which
open  and  form  ulcers,  (a.  12  d.)  (after  vexation?)  Blis-
ters in  the  mouth,  which  form  ulcers  upon  the  inner  cheek,
(after  a cold  ?)  Small  blisters  on  the  inner  cheek,  where
the  teeth  touch  the  cheek.  White-yellowish  little  ulcer  on
the  right  tonsil.  The  tongue  is  painful  on  the  border  and
upon  its  lower  surface,  especially  when  chewing,  swallow-
ing, and  spitting,  (7.  d.)  Pain  under  the  tongue,  when
swallowing,  on  the  left  side,  behind  the  os  hyoides.
Burning  pain  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  as  from  soreness  ;
she  was  not  able  to  take  anything  warm  into  her  mouth,
it  pained  her  too  much,  (a.  6 h.)  Violent  burning  upon
the  tongue  and  in  the  whole  mouth. — Sense  of  rawness
and  soreness  of  the  tongue,  which  is  coated  white.
Thick  tongue,  entirely  white,  with  a sensation  as  if  it  were
without  any  skin,  and  sore.  Swelling  of  one  side  of  the
tongue,  which  makes  deglutition  difficult,— Blisters  upon
the  tongue,  which  prevent  him  from  eating.  Little  blis-
ters upon  the  tongue,  with  burning  pain  and  heat  in  the
month.  Tongue  coated  white , (the  first  days  ) Diffi-
culty of  moving  the  tongue.  She  finds  it  difficult  to  talk.
Pie  moved  his  mouth  as  if  he  would  talk  or  scream  ; but
lie  was  unable  to  utter  a word.

Throat. — Stingingin  the  palate.— Kougliness  and  raw-
ness of  the  back  part  of  the  palate  ; these  symptoms  ex-
cite coughing,  but  are  not.  relieved  by  it,  (a.  12  d.)  Sore
throat,  with  swelling  of  the  submaxillarv  glands.  Pain  in
the  throat,  as  if  the  uvula  prevented  deglutition,  even
when  nolhing  was  swallowed  ; but  there  was  less  pain
when  talking,  and  none  whatsoever  when  lying  in  the  bed.

* Sore  throat,  like  an  internal  swelling*  extending  as  far


280


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


as  into  the  ears,  (a.  14  d.)  Sore  throat  as  from  a plug  in
the  throat,  when  swallowing.

(Esophagus.  — Sense  as  if  a foreign  body  were  lodged
in  the  pharynx,  which  constantly  obliges  one  to  swallow,
(a.  15  d.)  Sense  in  the  throat,  as  if  a pressing  body  pre-
vented deglutition.  Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  oesopha-
gus. Sense  in  the  oesophagus,  in  the  afternoon,  as  it  the
food  had  remained  lodged  there,  and  had  not  come  into
the  stomach,  with  a sort  of  nausea.  Pressure  in  the
oesophagus,  after  deglutition.  Stitches  and  pressure  in  the
throat,  during  deglutition.  Violent  stitches  in  the  throat
extending  into  the  ear,  during;  deglutition,  and  still  more
during  talking.  Stitches  in  the  throat  during  deglutition ,
she  cannot  get  any  bread  down. — Violent  stitch  on  the
right  side  of  the  top  of  the  oesophagus,  when  not  swallow-
ing, (after  three  quarters  of  an  hour.)  Roughness  and
burning  in  the  throat,  with  sensation,  as  if  the  whole
oesophagus,  as  far  as  the  orifice  of  the  stomach,  were  raw
and  sore.  Sensation  as  if  the  throat  and  the  mouth  were
sore,  and  deprived  of  the  skin.  Rawness  and  soreness
of  the  whole  oesophagus  ; he  cannot,  almost,  swallow  any-
thing, (a.  29  d.)  * Swelling  of  the  tonsils , with  elonga-

tion of  the  uvula  and  sense  of  tightness  of  the  oesophagus
when  swallowing,  also  a feeling  of  soreness  with  stitches,
(a.  5 d ) * Swelling  and  inflammation  of  the  palate  ;

* the  uvula  is  dark  red  and  fulkof  little  blisters.  * Swell  •
ing  and  dark  redness  of  the  uvula.  * Great  dryness  of  the
iiiomti  and  the  tongue,  with  a sense  of  roughness  and
stinging.- — * Dryness  in  the  mouth,  as  of  lime.  * Dry-
ness of  the  tongue,  early  on  waking  up,  (a.  13  d.)

- — ■*  Sense  of  dryness  upon  the  tongue,  (a.  5d.)  Dry  and
bitter  in  the  throat,  the  whole  dav,  mostly  early  in  the
morning.  Feeling  of  dryness  of  the  palate,  which  obliges
him  to  hawk  up  phlegm.  A quantity  of  saliva  collecting
in  the  mouth , but  which  cannot  be  spit  out.  In  the  forenoon
the  saliva  collects  several  times  in  his  mouth,  with  nausea,
(4.  d.) — An  abundance  of  saliva  collects  in  the  mouth,
there  was  more  than  he  could  swallow,  (a.  1 h.  and  a
half.)  Quantity  of  pituita  in  the  mouth,  with  a sense  of
dryness. — Sensation  as  if  there  were  much  phlegm  in  the
throat,  during  deglutition,  with  dryness  in  the  mouth,


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


2S1


(after  one  hour  and  a half.)  Slime  in  the  mouth,
early  in  the  morning  ; rinsing  the  mouth  does  not  re-
lieve it,  (a.  24  h.)  Phlegm  in  the  throat,  with  taste  of
iron.  Expectoration  of  mucus,  at  night,  with  rawness  of
the  throat.  * Hawking  up  phlegm,  early  in  the  morning.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Taste  has  become  blunt.
Everything  tastes  to  her  as  if  it  were  not  salted. — His
food,  especially  meat,  does  not  taste  sufficiently.  Fiat,
watery  taste  in  the  mouth,  the  taste  of  the  food  being  mor-
bidly keen.  Bad  taste  in  the  mouth , early  in  the  morning,
as  from  a spoiled  stomach.  Taste  of  manure  in  the
mouth  and  throat.  * Impure,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth.
* Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  early  two  hours  after  rising.
Bitter  sort  of  a taste  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  (5.d.)
Sweet  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  of  sugar,  day  and  night,  (a.
12  d.)  Metallic  taste,  taste  of  lead  in  the  morning,  early
in  the  morning,  (a.  6 d.)  Taste  of  iron  in  the  mouth.
Taste  of  ink  in  the  mouth,  early  on  waking  up.  Sour
taste  in  the  mouth.  Sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  with  much
viscid  phlegm.  Sour  taste  of  the  saliva  ; she  spits  it  out
continually  (a.  2 d.)  Sour  taste  of  all  food,  without  any
sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  (after  a cold  ?)  Saltish  taste  of
the  mouth,  and  much  thirst,  (after  some  hours.)  * Great
thirst . Great  thirst  in  the  afternoon,  (a.  3 h.)  Great
thirst  and  brown  urine.  Great  thirst  for  beer. — Thirst,
early  in  the  morning.— Unusual  thirst  and  dryness  in  the
throat.. — * Violent  thirst,  with  desire  for  cold  drinks,  espe-
cially water  ; he  was  obliged  to  drink  a good  deal,  for
eight  hours,  (a.  8 — -55  h)  The  appetite  is  less;  she
feels  an  acridity  in  the  stomach.  * Total  want  of  appe-
tite, (a-  24  h.)  Constant  fulness.  She  will  not  eat  any-
thing boiled.  Vehement  appetite,  with  great  weariness,
in  the  evening.  Ravenous  appetite , the  stomach  being
weak.  * Ravenous  appetite,  early  in  the  morning.  Great
inclination  to  saltish  food.  * She  had  much  desire  for
wine,  which  she  never  liked  before.  Desire  to  nibble.
The  usual  tobacco  does  not  taste  well  ; when  smoking,
he  has  headache  and  nausea.  Milk  does  not,  agree,  with
him , gives  him  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit. — Milk
tastes  sour  to  him,  and  is  disagreeable  to  him.  He
relishes  milk.  The  milk  which  he  had  taken  early  in  the
morning,  regurgitates  and  tastes  sour,  (a.  3 d.)


282


CALCAREA  C ARRONICA.


Gastric  Symptoms.—*  Water-brash,  consequent  upon
taking  milk. — Early  in  the  morning,  alter  taking  milk,  a
sensation  of  nausea  ascends  from  the  stomach,  as  if  the
stomach  were  spoiled.  Every  time  site  eats  something,
she  is  affected  with  a burning  sensation  ascending  along
the  throat,  which  she  can  scarcely  endure  ; with  or  with-
out any  rising.  At  dinner,  after  he  has  eaten  scarcely  half
enough,  he  feels  sick  ; the  ingesta  gulp  up  as  far  as  the
mouth,  with  nauseous  haste  ; there  are  then  constant  eruc-
tations for  3 hours,  (a.  20  d.)  * Gulping  up  of  food.  Af-

ter he  had  scarcely  eaten  enough,  he  felt  nauseous  ; but
nausea  ceased  as  soon  as  he  stopped  eating  entirely,  (a.  9,
12  d.)  Every  kind  of  food  causes  eructations  lasting  ot
the  ingesta.  * Frequent  eructations  after  eating.  Shortly
after  dinner  bloated,  hard  abdomen.  * Distention  of  the
stomach  and  abdomen,  after  little  eating  or  drinking.  Af-
ter taking  liquid  food  in  the  evening,  he  feels  as  if  he
were  stuffed,  with  much  spasmodic  pressing.  Colic  after
supper.  At  dinner,  pinching  in  1 he  belly,  extending  from
the  navel,  (a.  d.)  Loud  rumbling  at  dinner,  close  over

the  navel.  Spasmodic  pressure  in  the  stomach  after  sup-
per ; when  the  pressure  abates,  there  is  a sensation  in  the
intestines  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on.  which,  however,
is  not  the  case,  (a.  7,  8 d ) Stitches  in  the  prsecordial
region  after  dinner,  (a.  9 d.)  After  dinner,  pressure  in  the
vertex  and  forehead.— After  dinner  the  drawing  and  pres-
sive  headache  around  the  temples  is  constantly  increased  ;
the  headache  often  commences  already  during  the  dinner,
with  great,  sensitiveness  of  the  teeth  during  mastication,  as
if  they  u'ere  loose  and  w'ere  being  bent  over.  Kush  of
blood  to  the  head  two  hours  after  dinner,  with  heat  of
the  face.  Violent  beating  of  the  heart  after  dinner.  After
dinner  he  feels  the  beats  of  the  heart,  without  laying  the
hand  upon  ihc  chest.  After  dinner,  faintishness  and  feel-
ing of  weakness,  (a.  9 d.)  Sleepiness  after  dinner;  he
fell  asleep  in  nodding.  Unconquerable  sleep  after  dinner;
afterwards  chills  and  cough,  induced  by  tickling  in  the
throat,.  After  supper  violent  inclination  to  sleep.  Cold
feet  after  dinner.  During  supper,  sweat  in  the  whole
face.  Frequent,  eructations,  even  early  in  the  morning,
on  waking  up,  and  before  breakfast.— Frequent  empty


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


233


eructations.  * Frequent  eructations  tasting  of  the  in -
gesta.  Even  6 hours  after  dinner,  he  has  eructations  tast-
ing of  the  ingesta.  Gulping  up  of  the  ingesta.  * Bitter
eructations.  * Eructations  tasting  of  bile,  in  the  afternoon.
* Sour  eructations  early  in  the  morning. — Sourish , offen-
sive eructations . — Constant,  sourish  eructations.  Sour-
ness of  the  stomach  rises  up  to  the  throat ; a kind  ot  heart-
burn the  whole  day.  Gulping  up  of  an  acid,  liquid  taste
in  the  evening.  Gulping  up  of  a brownish,  sour  liquid,
with  burning,  arising  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (heart-
burn,) (a.  8,  9 d.)  Rancid  eructations,  heart  burn,  with  a
sense  as  of  scratching,  (rawness.)  Heartburn,  (i.  1 h.)
Burning  rising  up  in  the  throat,  after  every  kind  of  food,
especially  after  eating  hard,  dry  substances.  Eructations,
with  hiccough.  Hiccough  the  whole  day-  until  evening*
(a.  29  d.)  — Frequent  hiccough. — Considerable  hiccough,  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  (a.  5 h.)  Qualmishness  with  collection
of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  (a.  3 h.)  Nausea , early  in  the
morning , (a.  2 h.  and  a.  5 d.)  Nausea  every  morning,  with
diminished  appetite.  Nausea  early  in  the  morning,  before
breakfast,  with  loathing  and  horripilation.  Nausea  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning,  before  breakfast;
at  the  same  tune,  the  eyes  see  black,  so  that  he  is  obliged
to  sit  down.  Feeling  of  nausea  in  the  forenoon.  Consid-
erable nausea  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  afternoon,
as  from  great  emptiness  in  the  stomach  — Nausea  in  the
evening,  and  heat,  with  uneasy  sleep. — -Nausea,  with  cough
and  a kind  of  heart-burn  wake  him  up  about  midnight.
Nausea,  with  anguish,  (a.  8 d.)  A faint  sort  of  nausea
frequently.  Nausea  even  unto  vomiting,  with  sourish  wa-
ter running  cut  at  the  month.  At  1 l o’clock  in  the  fore-
noon, nausea,  and  inclination  to  vomit.  Inclination  to
choking,  in  1 he  oesophagus,  without  nausea,  with  collection
of  water  in  the  mouth,  resembling  waterbrash.  Water-
brash  with  colic,  (a.  24  h.)  — Inclination  to  vomit,  with
eructation  and  collection  of  water  in  the  mouth,  and  accom-
panied by  a sort  of  vertigo  in  the  head,  (immediately.)
Nausea,  with  vomiting  of  the  ingesta,  accompanied  by
faintishness,  swoons  and  loss  of  consciousness.  Vomit-
ing early  in  the  morning,  succeeded  by  nausea  the  whole
day,  with  grinding  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Vomiting  of  sour
water  at  night.  Vomiting  of  black  substances,  (a.  9 d.)


284


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


Stomach. — The  region  of  ihe  stomach  is  painful  to  the
touch.  Sudden  pain  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  should  be
distended.  Fulness  of  the  stomach  in  the  afternoon.  In-
flation of  the  region  of  the  stomach,  towards  the  left  side.
Pressure  at  the  stomach  the  whole  day,  (a.  7 d.)  * Pres-

sure at  the  stomach,  even  before  breakfast.  Pressure  trans-
versely across  the  stomach.  Pressure  at  the  stomach  ;
sense  as  of  a weight  being  firmly  lodged  in  it.  Pressure
at  the  stomach,  as  if  a lump  were  in  it,  after  a moderate
supper,  for  an  hour.  Pressure  at  the  stomach  with  collec-
tion of  saliva  in  the  mouth.  Pressure  at  the  stomach  in  the
evening,  before  lying  down,  resembling  a choking.  Pain-
ful pressure  at  the  stomach,  like  a spasm,  for  two  hours  ;
this  made  it  impossible  for  her  to  remain  in  the  bed  ; she
had  to  rise.  Spasm  of  the  stomach,  with  nausea,  eruc-
tations and  yawning,  (a.  three  fourths  of  an  h.)  * Violent

spasms  of  the  stomach,  in  the  afternoon,  until  sweat  broke
out  all  over  the  body.  Spasm  in  the  stomach  and  abdo-
men, of  a cutting  and  compressive  kind.  Contractive
pain  in  the  stomach,  for  several  days,  sometimes  with
pressure  after  the  meal.  Griping  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
Gnawing,  and  sense  as  of  jerking,  at  the  stomach.  Stitch-
like  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  pressing  upon  it,
especially  severe  after  stool.  Stitches  transversely  across
the  region  of  the  stomach.  Soreness  at  the  stomach.
Burning  at  the  stomach. — Anguish  in  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach, (a.  6 h.) — Anguish  apparently  coming  from  the  sto-
mach, when  sitting,  with  burning  in  the  abdomen,  soon  go-
ing off  again  when  walking  or  standing,  (a.  26  h.

Abdomen. — Tension  in  the  hypochondria.  Sense  as  of
constriction  below  ihe  hypochondria,  with  trembling  and
throbbing  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.— Tensive  and  claw-
ing pain  in  the  whole  region  of  the  hypochondria,  and  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (a.  10  h.) — Dull,  pinching  choking
close  under  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (immediately  ) — Sense
as  of  pinching  and  nipping  in  the  whole  region  of  the  hy-
pochondria, which  extends  as  far  as  below  the  sternum  ;
here  it  becomes  lancinating  and  excites  eructations,  (a.
three  quarters  of  an  h.) — Violent,  pinching  in  the  hypo-
chondriac region  and  ihe  chest,  which  terminates  here  and
there  in  a little  stitch,  (a.  half  an  h.) — Griping  in  the  hypo-


CALC ARE A CARBONICA.


2S5


chondriac  region,  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  accompa-
nied by  chilliness  over  the  whole  body.  * She  cannot  bear
any  tight  fitting  of  clothes  around  the  hypochondria.  Ten-
sive pains  in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Tension  and  pressure
in  the  region  of  the  liver,  as  if  the  parts  were  very  much
enlarged  there,  even  unto  bursting.  Bigness  and  eleva-
tion of  the  right  side  of  the  belly,  (in  the  region  of  the
liver  ?)  ; she  there  constantly  feels  a pressure,  especially
when  sitting,  and  a heaviness  ; she  dares  not  rest  upon
this  side  ; this  is  accompanied  by  interception  of  breath.
Pressive  pain  in  the  liver,  especially  at  night  ; at  this  time
the  hardness  is  more  easily  felt.  Pressure  in  the  region
of  the  liver,  at  every  step,  when  walking.  * Drawing  pain
in  the  posterior  part  of  the  region  of  the  liver,  towards  the
back,  like  tearings.  Drawing  pain  extending  from  the
right  hypochondrium  to  the  symphisis  pubis.  Twitching
pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  (7.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  re-
gion of  the  liver , during  or  after  stooping.  Shootings  in
the  right  hypochondriac  region,  in  the  forenoon,  for  an
hour.  Stitches  in  the  right  hypochondriac  region,  which
extended  thence  into  the  back,  in  the  evening,  (a.  30  d.)-—
Long  stitches  in  the  right  side  below  ihe  ribs,  (a.  13  h.)
Shaking  stitch  from  the  region  of  the  liver  into  the  chest,
(a.  10  h ) Stitching  pain,  as  from  excoriation,  in  the  re-
gion of  the  liver,  near  the  last  false  rib.  Pain  as  of  raw-
ness in  the  liver.  Frequently  during  the  day,  attacks  of
pressive  throbbing  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  lasting  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Sharp
pinching,  compressing  the  parts  in  the  left  hypochondriac
region.  In  the  middle  of  the  belly  excessive  feeling  of
soreness  from  nausea,  without  inclination  to  vomit,  a quar-
ter of  an  hour,  (a.  27  d.)  Pain  in  the  belly,  over  the  hips,
when  walking  and  breathing,  (a.  6 d.)  Soreness  in  the.
hypogastrium,  already,  after  having  walked  a few  steps,
with  a sense  of  heat  through  the  whole  body,  (a.  5 d.)
* Pressure  in  the  abdomen , from  the  pit  of  the  stomach
downwards.  Pressive  pain  in  the  belly  below  the  navel,
early  after  rising,  as  if  a pressure  were  made  upon  the  ab-
domen, with  constipation,  (a.  12  d.)  Violent  pressure  in
the  hypogastrium,  and  hard  stool,  (the  first  days.)  Pres-
sure in  the  hypogastrium,  during  strong  bodily  exercise.


286


CA.LCA.EEA  CARB0N1CA.


Pressive  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  nausea,  (for  8
d.)  * Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  with  stitches  in  the  pit  of

the  stomach  downwards. — Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,
which  causes  obtusion  of  the  iiead. — Fulness  in  the  ab-
domen, especially  after  a meal.  Inflation  of  the  belly  only
after  dinner,  not  after  supper,  when,  however,  she  eats  a
good  deal.  Considerably  distended  abdomen.  Conside-
rable distention  of  the  abdomen,  with  colic,  frequently  dur-
ing the  day.  Fulness  in  the  belly,  in  the  evening,  so  that
he  was  scarcely  able  to  move,  with  violent  colic.  Distend'
ed,  hard  abdomen.  Tense,  full  abdomen,  with  contrac-
tion of  the  rectum,  which  prevents  the  emission  of  flatu-
lence. Tension  and  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  the  whole
afternoon,  without  any  feeling  of  flatulence  ; the  symptom
went  off  after  emission  of  flatulence,  (a.  20  d.)  Tension
of  the  abdomen,  (the  first  days.) — Tension  of  the  abdomen,
when  s i 1 1 i n o-  down  after  violent  exercise.  Tension  and

O

a cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  (a.  15  d.)  Squeezing  and
pressing  close  below  the  navel,  after  supper,  increased  by
walking,  and  afterwards  changed  to  distention  of  the  abdo-
men. Contractive  pains  in  the  abdomen,  towards  the
small  of  the  back,  (a.  40  d.)  Contractive  pain  in  the  epi-
gastrium, so  that  she  was  obliged  to  walk  crooked,  espe-
cially excited  by  deep  breathing,  (a.  some  d.)  Sense  as  of
contraction  in  the  abdomen  and  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the
appetite  being  sometimes  too  great,  sometimes  too  little.
Contraction  of  the  abdomen,  upwards  towards  the  chest,
early  in  the  morning,  for  an  hour,  (a.  lb  d.)  * Gnawing,

griping  in  the  abdomen,  and  at  the  stomach,  coming  from
the  chest.  * Frequently  a severe  spasm  in  the  intestinal
canal,  especially , however , in  the  evening  and  at  night ,
with  coldness  of  the  thighs , (a.  8,  19  d.)  Spasmodic  turn-
ing and  twisting  around  the  navel,  (a.  4 d.)  Sense  as  of
suddenly  snatching  the  parts  in  the  hypogastrium,  in  the
direction  of  the  uterus,  for  several  days,  with  discharge  of
bloody  mucus,  with  the  stool,  (a.  17  d ) Twisting  in  the
bowels.  * Winding,  cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Colic
frequently  during  the  day,  for  some  minutes,  like  pinching,
afterwards  nausea.  Pinching  in  the  belly,  (the  first  days.)
Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium,  (a.  8 d.)  Pinching  deep
in  the  hypogastrium,  in  the  region  of  the  bladder,  with


CALCAREA  CARBONICA*


287


pain  at  every  step,  as  if  the  internal  parts  were  drawn
down  by  a weight.— Pinching  in  a small  spot  below  tiic
navel,  which  is  changed  to  a sense,  as  of  gurgling,  by  rub-
bing the  parts  with  a finger,  (a.  half  an  h.)  — Pinching  deep
in  the  hypogastrium,  apparently  in  the  region  of  the  blad-
der, frequently  repealed,  and  constantly  accompanied  by
the  emission  of  some  flatulence.  Cutting  in  the  left  side
of  the  belly,  which  went  off  by  the  passage  of  soft  stools.
Violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morning,  on
waking  up.  Fi  equent,  attacks  of  colic,  succeeding  a bad
cold  which  had  lasted  two  days  ; the  colic  was  accompa-
nied by  great  faint ishness  and  a wretched  complexion  ior
many  days;  afterwards  it  was  suddenly  completely  relieved
by  diving  into  cold  water,  (a.  19  d.) — -Culling  in  the  abdo-
men every  morning,  also  in  the  evening,  and  at  night ; di-
rectly after  a meal  the  pain  ceases  ; but  afterwards  there  is
a grunting  in  the  bell v.  — Cutting  pain  in  the  right  lumbar
region,  pressing  from  within  outwards;  upon  touching  the
parts,  the  pain  ceases  only  for  a short  time.  Transverse
stitches  across  the  abdomen,  when  breathing,  below  the
navel.  Stitches  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  17  d.)  Stitches  in
the  belly,  extending  as  far  as  the  back,  with  interception
of  breath.  Shooting  stitches  in  the  abdomen,  especially
when  breathing.  Stitches  in  the  hypogastrium.  Stitches
in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  towards  the  small  of  the
back,  more  frequently  in  the  evening,  and  after  turning  the
body,  or  when  stooping.  Drawing  in  the  abdomen , with
uneasiness  in  it,  earlv  on  waking  up.  Tearing,  down-
wards, along  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  in  jerks,  (a.  66  d )
Soreness  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  painful  lension  when
keeping  the  body  straight,  or  when  bending  it  backwards,
(a.  16  d.)  Burning  in  the  abdomen  frequently.  Burning
pain  below  the  navel,  for  some  hours,  in  the  afternoon.
Pain  below  the  navel,  someiimes  burning,  sometimes  lan-
cinating; the  pain  extends  as  far  as  the  groin,  which  is  dis-
tended more  towards  the  left  side.  Pam  in  the  groin  as
from  concussion,  (a.  24  h.) — Pressive  lension  in  the  left
iliac  region,  (a.  8 h ) Heaviness  and  drawing  pain  in  the
groin.  Shooting  pain  in  the  right  groin,  when  sitting,  (a.
IS  d.)  Cutting  pain  in  the  groin  around  the  os  pubis,  (a.
21  d.)  Pressure  in  the  groin,  in  the  hernia,  in  the  rec-


2SS


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


turn,  and  the  back,  with  stitches  in  the  chest.  Stitches
in  the  region  of  the  groin,  as  if  inguinal  hernia  would
protrude.  Pain,  as  from  excoriation,  in  the  right  iliac  re-
gion.— Soreness  in  both  groins,  as  if  a swelling  of  the
glands  would  take  place;  it  is  especially  felt  when  walking  ;
when  touching  the  part,  an  elevation  of  the  gland  might  be
felt,  (a.  10  h.)  Straining  in  the  glands  of  the  groin,  also
when  sitting,  (a.  40  d.) — Tearing  in  the  inguinal  glands,
when  sitting  and  walking,  (a.  9 h ) Sense  as  of  swelling
in  the  inguinal  glands.  Small  glandular  swellings  in  both
groins.  Painful  glandular  swelling  in  the  groin,  of  the
size  of  a large  bean,  (a.  20  d.) — Swelling  of  the  glands  in
the  left  groin,  (a.  22  d.)  Twitches  in  the  muscles  of  the
abdomen,  during  stool. — Tearing  in  the  abdominal  mus-
cles, increased  by  breathing. — Pinching,  almost  spasmodic
pain  in  the  integuments  of  the  right  groin,  in  a small  spot,
only  when  speaking  ; also  painful  when  louching  the  parts
with  1 lie  finger,  (a.  8 h.)  Tension  in  the  muscles  of  the
epigastrium,  when  bending  the  body  backwards,  with  pain,
when  moving  the  hand  along  the  epigastrium,  as  if  the
skin  were  sore,  (a.  10  d.)  Prickings  in  the  abdominal
muscles  below  the  ribs,  from  within  outward,  especially
during  an  inspiration.  A good  deal  of  rumbling  in  the  ab-
domen.— Loud  rumbling  and  grunting  in  the  abdomen,  as
from  emptiness.  Grunting  in  the  abdomen,  when  inspir-
ing and  expiring.  Continual  grunting  in  the  left  part  of
the  epigastrium,  (a.  4 d.)  Grunting  in  the  abdomen,  and
then  eructations.  Constant  gurgling  in  the  abdomen .
Gurgling  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  with  uneasiness
in  the  abdomen,  without  any  pain. — Audible  gurgling  in
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  take
place. — Frequent  audible  rumbling,  and  a tingling  sort
of  straining,  from  below  upwards,  in  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen,  as  if  caused  by  flatulence,  which  wrns  indeed
emitted.  Much  fermenting  in  the  abdomen.  * Frequent
incarceration  of  flatulence,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdo-
men, (a.  19  d.)  Incarceration  of  flatulence,  with  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  (a.  19  d.)  Incarceration  of  flatu-
lence, with  great  vertigo,  (a.  0 d.)

Stool. — The  flatus  smell  badly.  * Constipation , the
first  days  : she  has  no  stool  without  taking  an  enema.


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


289


* Constipation  increased  from  day  to  day.  * Constipation.
* — Constipation  having  lasted  for  2 days,  (a.  7 d.)— -He
has  no  stool  the  second  day.  No  stool,  with  constant
tenesmus  ; accompanied  by  gloominess  in  the  head,
Tenesmus,  without  any  stool,  (8.  d.)  Decrease  of  stool,
(a.  24  h.)  * Costiveness,  (a.  7,  18,  24  d.)  * Hard,  un-

digested stool , and  not  every  day.  Hard,  black  stool,  (a.
4 d.)  Hard  stool,  with  slime,  burning  when  passed.
Stool  which  is  of  an  unusually  large  size.  Frequent  pas-
sage of  stool,  which  is  first  firm,  then  pappy,  lastly  liquid.
— Frequently  stool  which  is  first  firm,  then  pappy,  then
liquid,  without  any  pain  ; costiveness  the  two  days  follow-
ing. Painful  tenesmus,  day  and  night.  Constant  tenes-
mus ; she  passes  the  stools  with  great  difficulty,  and  they
are  very  scanty,  (a.  24  h.)  Tenesmus,  as  if  diarrhoea
would  ensue,  nevertheless,  the  stools  are  natural.  Stool,
first  liquid,  then  in  clots,  without  colic.  * Diarrhoea,  (1.
3.  5.  d.)  Diarrhoea,  the  first  8 days. — Diarrhoea  which
does  not  weaken  one,  2,  3,  4 times  daily,  for  many  days,
(a.  2 d.)  t Undigested  stool , rather  loose,  (a.  6 d.)  Un-
digested, hard,  intermittent  stool.  Stinking  stool,  like  rot-
ten eggs.  A fluid  which  smells  like  herring-pickle,  oozes
out  of  the  rectum.  White  stool.  Stools  are  white,
streaked  with  blood,  with  great  despondency,  and  colic
produced  by  breathing  and  touching.  Stool,  mixed  with
blood,  scanty,  (a.  26  d.)  Great  loss  of  blood  from  the
rectum,  during  stool,  in  the  evening.  Discharge  of  blood
from  the  rectum.  The  varices  of  the  rectum  are  distend-
ed, are  painful  when  sitting,  and  emit  blood.  The  varices
of  the  rectum  become  suddenly  distended.  The  varices
of  the  rectum  become  suddenly  distended  and  first  protrude
every  day,  then  no  more.  Protrusion  of  a large  varix  of
the  rectum.  The  distended  varices  of  the  rectum  pro-
trude, and  make  even  the  loose  stool  painful.  * The  va-
rices of  the  rectum  protrude  and  are  very  painful  when
walking,  less  during  stool.  * The  rectum  and  its  varices
protrude  during  stool.  *Ascarides  of  the  rectum.  * As-


t Note:  Calcarea  increasing  in  its  primary  action  the  action  of
the  intestines  and  the  bladder,  the  homoeopathic  physician  will  know
how  to  avail  himself  of  this  indication.

13


290


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


carides  of  the  rectum  cause  trouble.  An  ascaris  crawls
out  of  the  rectum  and  causes  itching  and  tingling.  Asca-
rides  during  stool.  Nausea  preceding  stool.  * Burning
in  the  rectum  during  stool.  Pain  in  the  rectum,  as  if  it
were  torn  open,  during  soft  stool. — During  stool,  straining
at  the  extremity  of  the  rectum,  with  loud  rumbling  in  the
abdomen.  Tenesmus  is  yet  followed  by  pressure  upon
the  rectum,  and  dyspnoea.  Dyspnoea  after  stool.  The
forenoon-evacuation  is  followed  by  severe  stitches  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  when  pressing  upon  it.  Feeling  of
faintishness  after  stool.  After  stool  drawing,  cutting  in
and  about  the  rectum.  After  a good  stool,  drawing  and
cutting  in  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum,  with  a feeling  of
heat  there.  After  a copious  evacuation,  burning  in  the
rectum,  early  in  the  morning.  After  stool,  * burning  itch-
ing in  the  rectum.  Sense  of  weight  in  the  rectum,  in  the
lower  part.  Grunting  in  the  rectum.  Pressure  in  the
rectum,  in  the  evening  when  sitting,  (a.  22  d.)  Violent
pressure  in  the  rectum,  (a.  some  h.) — Pressure  in  the  rec-
tum. Pressure  in  the  rectum  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come
on.  Tenesmus,  and  painful  straining  in  the  rectum.
Tenesmus  of  the  rectum,  painful,  bearing  down  with  a
sense  as  of  cutting,  shortly  after  dinner.  Spasm  of  the
rectum,  the  whole  forenoon,  a pinching  together,  stinging,
accompanied  by  great  anguish,  so  that  she  was  not  able  to
sit  still,  but  had  to  walk  about,  (a.  10  d.)  Twitchings  of
the  rectum.  Tensive  shooting  pain  in  the  rectum,  be-
tween the  evacuations,  in  the  evening.  Stitches  towards
the  rectum,  (a.  13  d.)  Stinging  soreness  at  the  external
orifice  of  the  rectum.  Shooting  pain  in  the  rectum  as
from  excoriation,  (a.  16  d.)  Burning  in  the  rectum.  Burn-
ing in  the  rectum , even  in  the  siesta.  Burning  and  feel-
ing of  dryness  of  the  lower  rectum.  * Tingling  in  the
lower  rectum.  * Prickling  in  the  rectum  as  of  ascarides.
— * Violent  itching  of  the  lower  rectum . Grape-like  erup-
tion of  the  rectum,  inflamed,  burning,  painful,  (a.  19  d.)
Soreness  of  the  lower  rectum  and  between  the  thighs.
— Soreness  between  the  nates,  when  walking.

Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  the  urinary  passages,  af-
ter the  feet  have  become  a little  wet.  Pain  in  the  bladder,
and  cutting  micturition  during  the  night,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Stitches


GALCAREA  CARBONICA.


291


in  the  female  urethra.  Cutting  stitches  in  the  urethra,
with  unsuccessful  desire  to  urinate.  Desire  to  urinate,
especially  when  walking.  The  boy  has  a desire  to  urinate,
but  the  urine  is  not  emitted  at  once  ; at  other  times  he  is
not  able  to  hold  ,the  urine  and  lets  a few  drops  escape.
Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  shortly  after  micturition,  only
a slight  quantity  of  urine  being  emitted. — Frequent  desire
to  urinate,  very  little  urine  being  emitted,  (a.  26  h.)  De-
sire to  urinate,  he  feels  as  if  he  could  not  hold  his  urine.
Wetting  the  bed,  (a.  3d.)  * Frequent  micturition  at  night.

Nightly  micturition  with  burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  ure-
thra. * Frequent  micturition,  the  whole  night.  Frequent
micturition,  in  a baby  whose  mother  had  taken  calcarea.
Frequent  micturition,  (a.  8 h.)  Frequent  and  abundant
micturition,  in  the  fore  and  afternoon.  The  whole  day  she
emits  a quantity  of  watery  urine. — Frequent  desire  to  uri-
nate, with  an  abundance  of  urine  being  emitted.  Sensation
as  if  he  could  not  stop  urinating,  and  as  if  some  urine  re-
mained yet  in  the  bladder.  When  urinating  there  always
remains  something  behind,  which  drops  off,  when  he  ima-
gines to  have  done.  After  micturition  single  drops  of  urine
fall  yet  out.  Dark,  coloured  urine , without  a sediment.
— The  urine,  after  having  stood  a while,  looks  turbid,  like
clay-water.  There  passes  much  mucus  with  the  urine,
like  leucorrhoea  ; this  mucus  is  only  seen  when  urinating.
Frequent  deposition  of  a white,  flour-like  powder  in  the
urine,  (a.  1 1 d.)  Stinking , dark-brown  urine , with  a ivhite
sediment.  Badly  smelling  urine,  (a.  2 d.)  Stinking,  bit-
ing smell  of  the  urine,  which,  however,  is  very  clear  and
pale,  (25.  d.)  Acrid  smell  of  the  urine.  Urine  smelling
sour,  at  night.  Cutting  in  the  urethra  during  micturition,
(the  first  days.)  * Burning  in  the  urethra  during  mictu-
rition. Burning  and  soreness  in  the  urethra  during  mic-
turition. Burning  in  the  urethra  before  and  after  micturi-
tion. Burning  in  the  urethra  and  constant  desire  to  urin-
ate, after  micturition.

Generative  Organs. — Disagreeable  twitching  in  the
penis,  early  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.
Violent  stitches  in  the  glans,  (3.  d.)  Cutting  pain  in  the
tip  of  the  glans,  (4.  d.)  Violent  burning  in  the  tip  of  the
glans,  (a.  10  d.)  Itching  of  the  tip  of  the  glans,  especially
after  micturition,  (a.  28  d.) — Titillating  itching  of  the  tip


292


CALCABEA  CARBONICA*


of  the  glans,  which  forces  one  to  rub  the  parts,  (a.  10  h.)— -
Titillating  itching  of  the  prepuce,  which  forces  one  to  rub
the  parts,  (a.  9 h.)  The  prepuce  is  red  and  inflamed,  and
is  painfully  burning  when  urinating  or  when  touched,  (4,
d.)  Pressive  pain  in  the  right  testicle.  ( Pressive  pain,  or
pain  as  from  contusion,  in  the  left  testicle,  (a.  12  d.)  Pain,
as  from  contusion,  in  the  testicles. — Painful  pressure  and
pain  in  the  left  groin,  whilst  the  left  testicle  is  spasmodi-
cally drawn  up  to  the  abdomen,  and  is  also  painful  to  the
touch.  Cutting  pain,  as  from  excoriation,  in  the  testicles,
commencing  at  the  groins.  Stitches  in  the  (formerly  in-
durated) testicle,  in  periods  of  2 minutes.  The  scrotum
is  hanging  down  relaxed.  Violent  itching  of  the  scrotum.
A sore  spot  on  the  scrotum.  Pain  in  the  spermatic  cord,
as  if  it  were  contracted.  The  sexual  desire  is  very  much
increased.  Sexual  desire  very  much  excited,  (a.  21  d.)
Great  desire  for  an  embrace,  especially  when  walking,  in
the  forenoon,  (a.  17  d.)  * Violent  sexual  desire  originat-

ing in  lewd  fancy  ; the  penis  not  being  stiff  enough  to  pro-
cure an  erection,  he  had  to  squeeze  the  penis  ; but  scarcely
had  the  penis  entered  the  vagina  when  the  semen  was
emitted  ; this  was  succeeded  by  excessive  weakness
with  great  irritation  of  the  nerves  ; he  was  dissatisfied  and
angry,  the  knees  seemed  to  break  down  from  weakness,
(4.  d.)  Erections  early  in  the  morning,  with  much  incli-
nation for  an  embrace,  (6.  d.)  Pollutions  very  frequent
in  the  first  days , then , less  and  less.  Frequent  pollutions
in  the  first  11  days,  in  a man  of  43  years,  who  had  not  had
any  for  18  years  past.  Pollution  the  next  night,  and  then
improved  health. — Frequent  pollutions. — Pollution,  (the
first  night.) — Two  pollutions  the  next  night,  with  volup-
tuous dreams. — Two  pollutions  in  one  night,  without  any
voluptuous  dreams.  The  prostatic  juice  flows  out  after
micturition.  After  stool  and  after  micturition  the  prostatic
juice  flows  out.  Retarded  emission  of  semen  during  an
embrace,  (a.  7 d.)  During  an  embrace,  the  semen  does
not  jerk  forth,  but  flows  out  slowly.  Sufficient  effusion  of
semen  during  an  embrace,  but  without  any  thrill  of  delight,
(a.  5 d.)  During  an  embrace  he  experienced  such  a vio-
lent itching  at  the  tip  of  the  glans,  that  he  had  to  draw  the
penis  back.  Stitches  in  the  rectum  after  an  embrace.


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


293


Great  depression  of  the  head  after  an  embrace,  the  day  fol-
lowing. After  an  embrace  he  feels,  for  some  days,  faint-
ish  and  depressed.  Weakness  and  trembling  of  the  legs
after  an  embrace,  especially  above  and  below  the  knees.
* Itching  and  stitches  in  the  female  parts.  Itching  of  the
internal  and  external  labia. — Itching  of  the  pudendum.
Burning  in  the  vagina,  2 days  before  the  menses,  (a,  39  d.)
Burning  soreness  of  the  organs  of  generation.  Burning

o o o o

biting,  with  soreness,  in  the  female  organs  of  generation.
Inflammation,  redness  and  swelling  of  the  pudendum  of  a
little  girl,  with  puriform  discharge,  without  any  pain  dur-
ing micturition.  Stinging,  burning  tubercle  on  the  margin
of  the  labia,  (a.  8 d ) Moistness,  like  copious  sweat,  in
the  fold  between  the  pudendum  and  the  thigh,  with  biting.
Voluptuous  sensation  in  the  female  organs  of  generation,
(in  the  afternoon,  without  any  apparent  cause)  followed  by
a voluntary  effusion,  which  was  succeeded  by  great  lassi-
tude, (a.  7 d.)  Discharge  of  blood  between  the  menses,
(9  days  before  the  period)  for  2 days,  (a.  12d.) — * He-
morrhage from  the  uterus  of  an  old  woman,  who  had  ceas-
ed menstruating  for  many  years  ; in  the  last  quarter  of  the
moon,  (a.  7 d.)  Discharge  of  bloody  water  from  the  va-
gina, in  an  old  woman,  with  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
as  if  the  menses  would  appear  again.  The  long  suppress-
ed menses  appear  again  in  a woman  of  32  years,  at  the
commencement  of  the  new  moon,  (a.  6 d.)  The  menses
which  had  been  long  suppressed,  in  a woman  of  52  years,
appear  at  the  commencement  of  the  new  moon,  (a.  6 d.)
The  menses  first  appear  2 days  too  soon,  (a.  14  d.)  The
next  menses  appear  on  the  32d  day,  (a.  46  d.)  * The

menses  appear  three  days  too  soon,  (a.  17  d.)  The  men-
ses appear  4 days  too  soon  and  last  8 days.  * The  menses
which  had  been  always  regular,  appear  7 days  too  soon
immediately  after  taking  calcarea.  * There  was  an  exces-
sive menstrual  flow  twice  in  succession  ; this  occasioned
the  expulsion  of  a small  foetus  with  a sort  of  labor-pains,  vio-
lent desire  for  stool  and  cutting  and  bearing  down  in  the  by-
pogastrium.  The  menses  which  are  generally  too  copious,
become  diminished,  (reaction.)  Voluptuous  dream  previous
to  the  menses,  at  night.  Headache  the  day  previous  to
the  menses.  Great  depression  and  nervousness  the  day


294


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


before  the  menses  ; a trifle  causes  her  to  start  with  fright.
The  evening  before  the  menses,  after  supper,  considerable
chilliness,  followed,  by  colic  which  lasts  the  whole  night.
Vertigo  during  the  menses,  when  stooping  and  then  right-
ing the  head  again.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head , during
the  menses , and  heat  in  the  head.  Pressive  pain  on  the
vertex  during  the  menses.  Early  in  the  morning,  during
the  menses,  her  eyes  were  closed  with  pus,  accompanied
by  lachrymation  ; at  the  same  time  the  head  was  heavy
and  she  found  it  difficult  to  keep  her  thoughts.  Sore  throat
during  the  menses;  when  swallowing,  soreness  of  the  pha-
rynx, of  the  uvula,  and  soreness  behind.  During  the  men-
ses, violent  burning  in  the  throat,  with  hoarseness.  * At-
tack of  toothache  during  the  menses.  Boring  in  the  hol-
low tooth  during  the  menses,  which  becomes  pulsating  on
stooping,  (16.  d ) Nausea  and  unsuccessful  desire  for
stool  during  the  menses.  Drawing  and  pressive  pains
during  the  menses,  with  stitches  in  the  abdomen  and  in
other  parts  of  the  body,  of  an  erratic  nature,  with  uneasi-
ness even  unto  falling,  (a.  10  d.)  Contractive  pinching
colic  during  the  menses,  when  the  blood  had  ceased  to
flow  for  a couple  of  hours.  During  the  menses  there  is
an  involuntary  emission  of  urine  whenever  she  takes  ex-
ercise. Immediately  after  the  menses,  toothache,  drawing
and  lancinating,  day  and  night,  worse  upon  bending  the
head  either  left  or  right  or  backwards  ; this  prevents  her
from  sleeping  and  she  wakes  up,  (a.  50  d.)  * Leucor-

rhcea , like  mucus,  (a.  5,  16  d.)  Leucorrhoea,  like  milk ,
(the  first  3 d.)  Milk-like  leucorrhoea,  which  is  mostly  dis-
charged during  micturition. — The  leucorrhoea  with  which
she  was  already  affected,  increases.

Cold  Coryza. — Frequent  sneezing  without  coryza.
Several  sneezings  every  day.  A good  deal  of  sneezing,
early  in  the  morning. — Frequent  sneezing  without  coryza.
Dryness  of  the  nose,  (a.  22  d.)  Dry  nose,  at  night;  moist
during  the  day.  Stoppage  of  the  nose,  (a.  18  d.)  Total
obstruction  of  the  nose,  early  on  rising.  Obstruction  of
the  nose,  and  coryza.  Dry  coryza,  (l.  and  a.  12  d.)  Dry
coryza  with  much  sneezing , (the  first  7 d.)  For  some
weeks  the  person  is  frequently  threatened  with  dry  coryza.
- — Dry  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing,  (a.  72  h.)  Violent


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


295


dry  coryza,  with  headache,  (a.  32  d.)  Coryza,  heaviness
in  all  his  limbs.  Violent  coryza^  for  eight  days,  (a.  36  d.)
Violent  coryza,  with  pain  in  the  hypogastrium.  Violent
fluent  coryza , (almost  immediately,  and  a.  4 d.)  Coryza
flows  in  abundance.  Excessive  fluent  coryza,  previously
sneezing, which  is  often  unsuccessful. — Fluent  coryza, with
much  sneezing,  (a.  27  h.)  Fluent  coryza,  lasting  three
days,  with  ulceration  of  the  left  nostril,  (a.  9 d.)  Coryza,
with  painfulness  of  the  nose,  and  heat  in  the  head,  (a.  72
h.)  Violent  coryza,  with  heat  in  the  head,  and  with
cough,  (a*  13  d.)  Violent  coryza , luith  headache  and
dyspnoea,  (a.  10,  16  d.) — Fluent  coryza,  with  headache,
(relieved  by  camphor,  immediately,)  (a.  5 d.)  Violent
coryza,  which  went  off  in  2 days,  and  was  changed  to  a
violent  colic,  which  lasted  several  days,  (a.  17  d.)  Flu-
ent coryza,  with  great  faintishness.  Violent  coryza,  with
discharge  of  blood  from  the  rectum.  Violent  discharge  of
mucus  from  the  nose,  with  obstruction  of  the  same,  (a.  14
d.)  The  throat  is  rough , especially  early  in  the  morning.
Roughness  of  the  larynx,  with  pain  when  swallowing.
* Painless  hoarseness , so  that  she  is  unable  to  speak,
especially  early  in  the  morning,  (a.  1 1 d.) — Hoarse  rough
throat,  for  three  days,  (a.  24  h.)  Titillating  irritation  in
the  trachea,  which  obliges  one  to  cough.  Hacking,  hoarse
cough,  which  seems  to  the  ears  as  if  it  left  the  mucous
membrane  unaffected.  Phlegm  in  the  larynx,  which  be-
comes loose  by  clearing  the  throat.  Phlegm  in  the  chest ,
without  cough,  (a.  some  h.)  Sibilus  in  the  trachea,  in  the
evening,  after  having  gone  to  bed. — Loud  rattling  in  the
trachea,  during  an  expiration,  as  if  there  were  much
phlegm  in  the  chest,  (a.  37  h.)  Cough,  with  coryza.
Tickling  cough,  as  from  particles  of  dust  in  the  throat.
Cough,  excited  by  a sensation,  as  of  a plug  being  lodged
in  the  throat,  which  is  moving  up  and  down.  Irritation,  in-
ducing almost  a cough,  during  an  inspiration.  Cough  is
excited  by  eating.  Cough  is  always  excited  by  playing
on  the  piano.  * Dry,  hacking  cough,  in  the  evening,
especially  when  in  bed,  (a.  2 d.)  * Nightly  cough , (a.  6

d.)  Constant  nightly  cough,  with  hoarseness,  (a.  39  d.)
Violent  cough  on  waking  up  at  night,  for  two  minutes.
Continual,  violent  raw  cough  at  night , when  in  bed,  after


£96  ' CALCAREA  CARBONICA*

the  first  sleep,  about  ten  o’clock,  (7.  d.)  * Dry  cough  at

night,  after  midnight,  so  that  his  heart  and  arteries  were
beating.  Nightly  cough  without  waking  up.  Cough,
mostly  when  asleep  ; accompanied  first,  by  dry,  then,
fluent  coryza.  Constant  short  hacking  cough,  in  single
paroxysms.  * Convulsive  cough,  in  tiie  evening.  Dry
cough,  especially  at  night.  Cough,  with  expectoration  dur-
ing the  day,  but  none  at  night.  * Cough  and  expectora-
tion the  whole  day.  Cough,  with  a quantity  of  viscid  ex-
pectoration, without  taste  or  smell,  early  in  the  morning,
and  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.  Much  cough  with  ex-
pectoration of  phlegm,  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down,
and  at  night;  during  the  day,  little  and  dry  cough.  Cough,
with  expectoration  of  mucus,  from  time  to  time.  Expec-
toration of  mucus,  early  in  the  morning,  with  a short
hacking  cough.  Cough,  with  expectoration  of  a quantity
of  thick  mucus,  at  night.  Coughing  up  sweetish  mucus.
Cough  early  in  the  morning,  * with  yellow  discharge,  (a.
5 d ) — Cough  becomes  loose,  and  whole  masses,  resem-
bling pure  mucus,  are  thrown  up.  Expectoration  of  blood
by  coughing  and  hawking,  with  a sense  of  rawness  in  the
chest.  Expectoration  of  blood  by  a short  hacking  cough,
with  vertigo,  and  unsteadiness  of  the  thighs,  when  moving
them  quickly.  Early  in  the  morning  he  choked  himself
by  swallowing  too  fast;  he  was  obliged  violently  to  cough,
during  which  he  threw  up  blood  several  times,  with  subse-
quent stitches  in  the  palate.  When  coughing,  he  experi-
ences painful  shootings  into  the  head,  like  tearings.  When
coughing  there  are  stitches  in  the  head.  During  every  fit  of
coughing,  the  head  is  painfully  shaken,  as  if  it  would  burst.
In  the  evening,  during  a violent  cough  there  is.  a rising,
and  he  throws  up  sweet  substances.  Violent  cough,  first
drv,  afterwards  accompanied  by  frequent,  saltish  discharge,
with  pain,  as  if  something  were  torn  loose  in  the  throat.

Chest. — During  cough,  pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  it  were
raw,  in  the  evening,  and  at  night.  * Interception  of  breath,
when  walking  in  the  wind  ; then  in  the  rooms  dyspnoea,
which  increases  as  soon  as  she  walks  a few  steps.  Want
of  breath  in  going  to  bed,  and  then  sibilant  breathing.
Frequent  necessity  of  deep  breathing.  He  is  obliged  to
take  a deep  inspiration  ; at  the  same  time  he  experiences


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


297


stitches,  sometimes  in  the  right,  sometimes  in  the  left  side
of  the  chest,  and  below  the  ribs.  Violent  desire  for  a
deep  inspiration,  with  considerable  distention  and  con-
traction of  the  abdomen,  and  pain  in  both  belly  and  chest,
(a.  3 d.)  Desire  to  hold  in  the  breath.  Difficult,  loud
breathing  through  the  nose,  when  walking.  Difficult
breathing,  (a.  7 d.) — Difficult  breathing,  which  is  made
more  easy  by  bending  the  shoulders  backwards.  Short-
ness of  breath,  worse  when  sitting  and  in  motion.  The
breath  becomes  short  upon  ascending  the  least  height.
Short  breath,  almost  sobbing,  when  asleep,  after  previous
weeping.  Tightness  of  the  chest  ; she  is  lacking  breath.
Tightness  of  the  chest , as  if  it  were  too  fall  and  filled  with
blood.  Tightness  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  too  full,  early
in  the  morning  ; the  lungs  do  not  seem  to  have  sufficient
space  to  expand  in  breathing  ; this  symptom  goes  off  after
some  expectoration. — Sense,  as  of  tightness  and  anguish,
the  whole  day,  as  if  there  were  not  room  enough  in  the
chest  for  breathing  ; accompanied  by  obstruction  of  the
nose,  (a.  13  d.)  Dyspnoea,  with  stitches  in  the  chest.
Tightness  of  the  chest,  shortly  after  rising  in  the  morning  ;
he  could  hardly  make  two  steps,  without  being  obliged  to
sit  down,  (a.  24  d.)  Asthma  in  the  forenoon,  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air,  (a.  48  h.)  — Considerable  asthma,  with
anguish  and  difficult  inspiration,  as  if  the  lower  part  of  the
chest  were  tense  ; this  took  away  his  breath  in  motion,  and
when  sitting,  for  an  hour,  almost  choking  him,  (a.  30  h.)
Dyspnoea,  with  tension  of  the  chest.  Hot  breath,  with  heat
in  the  mouth,  but  without  any  thirst.  The  whole  chest  is
intensely  painful  when  touched  or  during  an  inspiration.
Pressure  in  the  chest,  especially  below  the  right  niople.
Pressure  in  front  on  the  chest,  also  when  not  breathing.
Pressure  in  the  right  mamma  ; it  comes  like  a push,  after
exercise,  for  an  hour.  Pain  in  the  sternum,  as  if  it  wrere
pressed  upon.  Cramp  in  the  intercostal  muscles  of  the
left  side  ; he  is  obliged  to  bend  over  to  one  side,  in  order
to  find  relief.  Cutting  in  the  chest,  during  breathing,  (a.
some  h.) — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  last,  ribs,  cutting  from
within  outwards,  increased  by  inspiration.  * Stitches  in
the  chest,  towards  the  throat,  for  some  hours.  * Stitches
in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  especially  in  the  evening,  (a.

13*


298


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


11  d.)  * Stitches  across  the  chest,,  from  the  left  to  the

right  side,  with  a sensation,  as  of  constriction  of  the  chest ;
his  breathing  was  difficult,  and. during  breathing  the  stitches
became  more  violent,,  (a.  4 d.)  Stitches  in  the  left
mamma , almost  at  every  inspiration,  and  going  off  by  rub-
bing, (a.  some  h.)  Stitches  in  the  left  mamma,  during  an
inspiration,  and  when  moving  the  body.  Stitches  deep  in
the  right  mamma,  in  the  evening,  especially  during  an  in-
spiration. Stitches  and  drawing  in  the  left  chest,  spread-
ing as  far  as  the  left  submaxillary  gland.  Shooting  stitches
in  the  chest,  mostly  on  the  left  side. — Itching  stitches  in
the  chest,  most  violent  during  an  inspiration,  going  off  by
rubbing,  (a.  48  h.) — Sharp  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the
chest,,  from  within  outwards,  without  being  influenced  by
breathing,  (a.  7 h.) — Sharp  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
chest,  below  the  axilla,  from  within  outwards,  most  violent
during  an  inspiration,  (a.  2 h.) — Broad  stitch  from  below
upwards,  in  the  pectoral  muscles,  at  every  beat  of  the
heart.  Dull  pushes  from  the  posterior  wall  of  the  thoracic
cavity,  up  to  between  the  scapulae,  synchronous  with  the
pulsations  of  the  heart,  with  great  oppressive  anguish,  (a.
8 h.)  Gnawing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  appa-
rently external,  upon  the  ribs  and  on  the  sternum,  a little
increased  by  inspiration,  (a.  1 h.)  Soreness  in  the  chest ,
especially  daring  an  inspiration.  Rawness  in  the  chest,
after  much  talking  and  walking,  also  when  coughing.
Weakness  .of  the  chest,  after  some  loud  talking.  Oppres-
sive anguish  inthe  chest , (the  first  days.) — Oppressive  an-
guish in  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  too  tight,  with  shortness
of  breath,  especially  when  sitting,  and  pressure  on  the
chest,  especially  during  an  inspiration  ; anxious  and  trem-
bling beating  of  the  heart.  Anguish  about  the  heart.
* Palpitation  of  the  heart.  Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart.
Excessive  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  unequal  pulse.
Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart ; at  the  same  time  he  is  tor-
mented by  the  fear  of  having  an  organic  affection  of  the
heart.  Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  excessive  an-
guish and  uneasiness,  dyspnoea  and  pain  in  the  back  ; at
every  inspiration  she  utters  a violent  sound,  as  if  the  air
would  all  rush  out ; the  body  being  at  the  same  time  cold,


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


299


and  there  being  a cold  sweat.  Painful  pressure  in  the
praecordial  region.  Spasmodic,  breath-checking  contraction
in  the  prcecordial  region,  with  subsequent  violent  pushes,
(a.  16  d.)  Stitches  in  the  heart,  causing  interception  of
breath,  and  leaving  behind  a pressive  pain  in  the  heart. — •
Lancinating  drawing  pain  in  the  praecordial  region,  (a.  9
h.  and  a half.)  Itching  on  the  chest,  (a.  10  d.)  Pimples
below  the  chest,  with  pain,  as  from  excoriation,  when  rub-
bing the  chest.  The  mammae  are  painful,  as  if  there  were
subcutaneous  ulceration,  especially  when  touched.  Sore-
ness of  the  right  nipple,  on  the  slightest  touch.  Swelling
and  inflammation  of  the  left  nipple,  with  fine  stitches  in  it,
(4.  d.)  Swelling  and  external  heat  of  the  right  mamma.
Glandular  swelling  in  the  right  mamma,  painful  when
touched.  Desiccation  of  the  mammae  of  a nursing  woman,
(a.  48  h.)

Back. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  hack,  (a.  6,  8 d.)  In-
tolerable pain  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Violent  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  which  prevents  her  from  sitting  or
lying  down.  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  hack , so  that  he
teas  scarcely  able  to  rise  again  from  his  seat.  Pain  in  the
small  of  the  back,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising.

* Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  from  a sprain,  in  con-
sequence of  lifting.  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  in
consequence  of  lifting  a heavy  load.  Constant  bearing
down  in  the  small  of  the  back,  towards  the  rectum.  Draw-
ing in  the  small  of  the  back,  (a.  4 h ) Drawing  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  when  sitting.  Spasmodically  shooting
pain  from  the  small  of  the  back  towards  the  rectum. — -
Shooting  stitches  in  the  os  sacrum,  and,  at  the  same  time,
in  the  leg,  over  the  tarsal  joint,  (a.  2 h.) — Stitches  in  a
spot  over  the  small  of  the  back,  when  touched.  Pimples
on  the  small  of  the  back  and  the  nates.  Pain  in  the
region  of  the  kidneys  and  loins,  when  driving.  Pres-
sive pain  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.  The  spinal
column  is  painful  when  bent  backwards.  Pain,  as  from  a
bruise,  in  the  back  and  the  chest.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,
in  both  sides  of  the  back.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the
spinal  column,  when  extending  it  ; the  pain  is  in  the  re-
gion of  the  kidneys.  Painful  stiffness  in  the  spinal
column,  with  laziness  and  heaviness  of  the  legs,  early  on


300


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


waking  up,  and  after  rising,  (a.  17  d.)  Pressive  pain  in
the  middle  of  the  back  and  below  the  scapulae,  (a.  27  d.)
Pressive  pain  in  the  spinal  column,  between  the  scapulae,
accompanied  by  shortness  of  breath  and  increased  by  re-
spiration, with  pain  of  the  vertebrae,  when  touched.  Pres-
sure betiveen  the  scapulas  during  motion,  occasioning  in-
terception of  breath.  Pressure  upwards,  below  the  right
scapula.  Stitches  in  the  back.  Single,  violent  slitches
in  the  upper  part  of  the  back,  when  breathing. — Violent
prickings  in  the  middle  of  the  spinal  column,  which  al-
most cause  one  to  scream  ; they  are  experienced  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  diminished  a little  when  standing.
• — Violent  stitches  from  the  thoracic  cavity,  extending
through  the  spinal  column,  and  coming  out  between  the
scapulas.  Stitches  in  the  left  scapula,  in  the  praecordial
region,  (2.  d ) Itching  stitches  in  the  right  scapula — -
Sharp  stitches  within  the  scapula.  Pinching  and  contrac-
tive drawings  between  the  scapulae,  (a.  30  d.)  Drawing
pain  between  the  scapulae.  Shootings  in  both  scapulas
and  on  the  chest.  Tearing  between  the  scapulae,  (a.  3 h.)
Cutting  pain  between  the  scapulae,  when  at  rest,  (a.  6 o'.)
Painful  jerks  in  the  right  side  of  the  back,  when  breath-
ing, with  chilliness  ancl  a thrill  of  cold,  (a.  7 d.)  Coldness
and  sense  of  numbness  on  that  side  of  the  back,  upon
which  he  had  been  lying  during  the  siesta.  Itching,
and  itching  pimples  on  the  back.  Pustules  upon  the
back.

Neck. — The  neck  feels  as  if  it  were  stiff.  * Stiffness
of  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  of  the  neck.  Feeling  of
stiffness  in  the  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck.  When  stoop-
ing, the  nape  of  the  neck  feels  rigid.  Tension  in  the
neck,  so  that  she  cannot  turn  her  head.  Stitches  in  the
nape  of  the  neck  and  the  scapulae,  with  gloominess  of  the
head.  Stinging  burning,  with  a sense  as  of  itching,  in  the
nape  of  the  neck  and  between  the  scapulae,  with  heart-
burn, (a.  5 d ) Swelling  and  painfulness  of  the  vertebra,
prominent  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  * Painless  glandular
swelling,  as  large  as  a filbert,  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
close  to  the  border  of  the  hair,  (a.  5 d.)  Pain  in  the
neck,  when  turning  the  head,  as  if  a tumour  or  hernia
would  protrude  there.  Sudden  pain  in  the  neck,  as  from


CALCAREA  CARB0N1CA.


301


a sprain,  when  turning  the  head.  Swelling  of  a cervical
gland  on  the  left  side,  of  the  size  of  a hen’s  egg,  with  a
stinging  sore  throat  when  swallowing.  Swelling  of  the
neck  on  the  left  side,  with  pain  when  touching  and  turn-
ing the  head,  and  with  sore  throat.  The  cervical  glands
are  painful.  * Hard  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,  (a.
13  d.)

Superior  Extremities. — The  shoulder-joint  is  painful,
in  the  evening  and  at  night. — Pain  in  both  shoulders.
Pain  in  both  shoulders  and  the  elbow-joint,  as  after  a great
fatigue.  Pressure  on  the  shoulder,  (a.  24  h.)  Pressive
pain  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  only  when  at  rest,  not
when  raising  or  moving  the  arm.  Tearing  in  the  left
shoulder  and  elbow-joint,  (a.  14  d.)  Stitches  in  the  left
shoulder- joint,  the  whole  day,  (a.  4 d.) — Violent  stitches
in  both  axillae,  (a.  4 d.)  The  arms  are  painful,  as  if
bruised,  when  moving  them  or  seizing  something.  Cramp
in  one  or  the  other  entire  arm,  a quarter  of  an  hour,  (a.  5
d.)  Shooting  pain  in  the  right  arm  in  the  evening,  (13.
d.)  * Drawing  tearing  in  the  right  arm,  from  the  shoulder
as  far  as  the  hand,  (a.  3 h.)  Tearing  in  the  right  arm,
from  one  extremity  to  the  other.  Paralytic  pain,  with  a
sense  as  of  burning,  in  the  whole  right  arm,  from  the
joints  of  the  fingers,  as  far  as  the  shoulder,  (a  6 d.)  Un-
easiness and  a feeling  of  anxious  agitation  in  the  articula-
tions of  the  arms  and  hands.  The  arm  upon  which  he  is
lying,  has  gone  to  sleep,  with  pain.  * Weakness  and  a
kind  of  paralysis  of  the  left  arm  ; he  finds  it  difficult  to
move  or  to  raise  it  ; the  arm  falls  down  again  sponta-
neously. Burning  itching  of  the  left  arm,  from  morning
till  evening.  The  upper  arm  is  painful,  close  below  the
shoulder-joint,  so  that  he  cannot  raise  it  high  up,  and  can-
not carry  it  upon  the  back.  Pain  in  the  middle  of  the
upper  arm,  as  if  the  flesh  were  drawn  tight  to  the  bones.

■ — Cramp-like  pains,  (with  tearing)  in  the  muscles  of  the
upper  arms,  (when  walking  in  the  open  air.)  Di awing
pain  in  the  left  upper  arm,  when  sitting,  (and  sewing.) — -
Fine  twitchings  in  the  left  upper  arm.  Bearing  pain  in  the
middle  of  the  upper  arm,  at  a small  point. — Tearing  twitch-
ings  in  the  upper  arm,  (a.  7 h.) — Tearing  lancination  in
the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm,  when  sitting.  Painful


302


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  arm,  when  walking  ;
the  pressure  went  off  immediately  when  touching  the
parts,  or  when  standing  or  sitting,  (a.  a quarter  of  an  h.)
— Tearing  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  lower  arm,

when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (a.  3 h.)  Drawing  pain

in  the  left  lower  arm.  Drawing  pain  in  the  lower

arm,  from  the  bent  of  the  elbow  as  far  as  the  wrist-

joint,  mostly  when  at  rest.  Spasmodically  tearing  pain ,
externally,  in  the  lower  arm,  extending  from  the  elbow  as
far  as  the  wrist,  it  is  felt  when  he  touches  something  with
the  hand. — Cramp-like  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left
lower  arm,  (a.  40  h.) — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  lower  arm ,
in  front  of  the  elbow-joint,  (a.  1 h.) — Cramp-like  pain  at
the  external  side  of  the  lower  arms,  close  to  the  wrist-
joint.,  (a.  1,  13,  29  h.) — Fine  tearing  and  boring  stitches
in  the  muscles  of  the  left  lower  arm.  Swelling  of  the
fore-arm  and  the  back  of  the  hand,  with  tension  during
motion.  The  hands  are  painful  early  in  the  morning  and
are  quite  relaxed.  Violent  pain  in  the  knuckles  of  the
hand,  as  if  caustic  had  been  applied  to  them.  * Pain  as
from  a sprain,  in  the  left  wrist-joint.  * Pain , as  from  a
sprain  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  or  as  if  something  in  the
joint  had  been  contused  or  sprained  by  seizing  wrong  or  by
pushing  against  something.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain  oc-
casioned by  seizing  wrong,  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  with
stitches  and  tearing  in  the  same,  during  motion.  * Cramp
in  the  hands , at  night,  until  early  when  rising.  * Cramp
in  the  left  hand.  Shooting  thrusts  in  the  wrist-joint.
Drawing  pain  in  the  wrist  joint  and  the  metacarpus.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  hand.  Drawing  in  the  wrist-joints,  like
thrusts  ; thence  they  rise  up  along  the  arms,  even  early
when  in  bed.  Tearing  pain  in  the  flat  hand.  Stitches  in
the  palm  of  the  hand,  early  when  in  bed,  for  two  minutes.
— Sharp  stitches  in  the  outer  knuckle  of  the  hand.  Trem-
bling in  the  hands , for  several  hours,  in  the  afternoon,  (2.
d.)  * Sweat  of  the  palms  of  the  hands,  even  when  the

body  is  scarcely  moved.  The  veins  of  the  hands  become
enlarged,  with  a sense  as  of  burning,  upon  the  backs  of
the  hands. — Tingling  and  stinging  in  the  wrist-joint.—
Itching,  stinging  titillation  in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand,
inviting  one  to  scratch. — Itching  titillation  on  the  border  of


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


303


the  left  hand,  which  invites  scratching.  A boil  upon  the
back  of  the  left  hand,  with  lancinating  pain  when  touched.
When  extended,  the  lingers  appear  strained  and  clenched,
as  if  they  were  glued  to  each  other.  Cramp-like  con-
tractive drawing  of  the  fingers.  Cramp  in  the  fingers,
without  clenching  them.  Cramp-like  pain  of  the  last
joints  of  the  index  finger.  Cramp-like  pain  between  the
fourth  and  third  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  Shooting  pain
in  the  fingers.  Involuntary  twitching  of  the  left  thumb.
Tearing  in  the  joints  of  the  fingers,  (a.  28  d.)  Shootings
in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Dying  off  of  the  finger's.
Dying  off  of  the  three  middle  fingers  ; they  become  white,
cold,  and  insensible  ; previously  a slight  drawing  in  the
fingers,  (a.  3 h.)  Pain  of  the  finger-joints,  as  if  they
were  swollen,  when  waking  up  from  the  evening  sleep,
without  any  visible  swelling.  Burning  itching  of  the
fingers  of  the  left  hand,  (a.  13  d.)  Large  painful  boil  on
the  back  joint  of  the  ring-finger , (caused  twice  by  differ-
ent doses.)  Suppuration  around  the  nail  of  the  mid-
dle-finger. Incipient  panaris  of  the  right  index-finger,  (a.
6 d.)  Several  panaritia.

Inferior  Extremities. — Sense  as  of  pinching  on  the
border  of  the  iliac  bone.  Pain  in  the  nates,  when  touched,
as  if  there  were  subcutaneous  ulceration  ; it  is  less  when
sitting  than  when  walking,  (a.  48  h.)  Drawing,  cramp-
like pain  in  the  right  half  of  the  nates,  towards  the  orifice
of  the  rectum.  Painful  twitches  of  the  glutei  muscles  of
both  sides,  when  sitting  or  standing.  Burning  itching  of
one  of  the  nates.  Tension  in  the  hip-joint,  wdth  drawing
pain  in  the  os  innominatum,  during  the  evening  walk.
— Drawing  pain,  as  from  a sprain  in  the  hip-joint,  when
walking. — Pinching  twitches  of  the  posterior  side  of  the
hip-joint,  more  violent  when  at  rest  than  in  motion.  Stitches
over  the  right  hip.  Stitches  in  the  hip-joint,  when  stooping.
Stitches  in  the  hip-joint,  ascending  from  the  patella,
when  setting  down  the  foot  at  the  commencement  of  a
walk. — Cutting  in  the  acetabulum,  when  sitting,  (a.  3 h.)
Tearing  in  the  hip-joint,  and  around  the  anterior  crest  of
the  ilium,  as  far  as  the  groin,  during  motion.  Pain,  as
from  subcutaneous  ulceration,  in  both  hip-joints,  when  walk-
ing in  the  room.  Feeling  of  numbness  in  the  right  hip


304


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


and  thigh,  with  a sense  as  of  these  parts  being  brittle
and  broken  to  a great  many  pieces.  Twitches  of  the
muscles  of  the  lower  extremities,  and  around  the  pelvis.
Drawing  pain  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  lower
extremities,  in  the  evening,  (after  thirty-six  hours.) —
Drawing  in  the  lower  extremities,  as  far  as  the  tips  of  the
toes.  Tearing  in  both  lower  extremities,  from  the  hip
down  to  the  tarsal  joint,  (a.  14  d.)  A lancinating  jerk  into
the  right  lower  extremity,  so  that  it  is  suddenly  raised  high
up,  (a.  30  d.)  Uneasiness  in  the  lower  extremities,  with  fre-
quent eructations.  * Heaviness  of  the  lower  extremities,  (a.
8 d.)  * Painful  weariness  of  the  lower  extremities , espe-

cially of  the  thighs,  as  after  a fatiguing  walk,  (a.  17,  19  d.)
Faintishness  of  the  lower  extremities,  and  sensation  as  if
they  were  bruised,  especially  in  the  joints,  (a.  20  d.)  Pain
in  the  medullary  bones  of  the  lower  extremities,  as  if  they
were  bruised.-— Pain  of  the  lower  extremities,  as  if  they
were  bruised,  especially  the  legs  when  lying  down.  * The
lower  extremities  go  to  sleep,  in  the  evening,  when  sitting.
Sense  of  numbness  in  the  left  lower  extremity,  (a.  7 d.)
Painful  twitchings  of  the  right  thigh,  at  a small  spot.  Cut-
ting pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  thigh,  as  if  a muscle
had  been  over-strained,  especially  during  motion. — Tear-
ing pain  on  the  inside  of  the  thigh,  during  motion.
* Stitches  in  the  thigh,  knee,  and  heel,  only  at  night. — -
Pressive  stitches  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh,  when
silting,  (a.  3 h.) — Cramp-like  stitches  in  the  muscles  of
the  right  thigh,  when  standing  or  walking  ; they  go  off
when  sitting.  Sharp  stitch  in  the  external  side  of  the
thigh,  over  the  left  knee,  (a.  3 h.) — Tearing  stitches  on  the
internal  side  of  the  thigh,  over  the  knee,  when  sitting,  (a.
12  h.)  Weariness  and  feeling  of  rigidity  in  the  anterior
muscles  of  the  thighs,  early  in  the  morning,  when  begin-
ning to  walk. — Pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh,  as
if  they  were  bruised,  after  walking,  when  at  rest.  Pain
in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh,  as  if  they  were  bruised,
when  walking.  Itching  of  the  thighs , (a.  12  d.)  Violent
itching  of  the  lower  part  of  the  thigh,  at  night.  Stinging
itching  of  a small  spot  of  the  left  thigh,  (a.  20  d.)  Finely
stinging  itching  of  the  thighs.  Burning  itching  of  the  left
thigh,  from  morning  till  evening.  Pimples  on  the  thighs,


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


305


(a.  1 1 d.)  Sensation  in  the  knee,  as  if  she  could  not  stretch
the  leg  sufficiently,  (a.  16  d.)  Pain  in  the  patella,  when
rising  from  one’s  seat,  (4.  d.) — Pain  of  the  knees,  when
turning  and  touching  them. — Pain  in  the  bent  of  the  left
knee,  even  when  at  rest.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the
right  knee,  (a.  14  d.) — Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  on  the  left
patella,  when  sitting,  which  disappeared  when  walking  or
standing,  (a.  12  h.)  Tension  below  the  knees,  when  cow-
ering. Pressive  pain  in  the  knees.  Dull  pressive  pain  in
the  patella.  Drawing  pain  around  the  knee,  close  over
the  patella. — Drawing,  cramp-like  pain  on  the  patella,  (a.
2 d.)  Tearing  and  tension  at  the  inner  side  of  the  knee,
when  rising  from  the  seat.  Shooting  tearings  in  the  knees.
Lancinating  and  throbbing  pain  in  the  left  knee,  early  in
the  morning,  more  when  sitting  than  when  walking  ; he
was  obliged  to  limp. — * Sharp  stitches  in  the  right  knee-
joint,  (a.  4 h.)  * Stitches  in  the  left  knee,  half  an  hour,

(5.  d ) Pain  in  the  knee,  as  if  it  were  bruised,  (10.  d.)
— Pain,  as  from  a bruise,  close  below  the  patella,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  (a.  13  h.)  Sense  of  numbness  in
the  knees,  during  the  siesta  ; it  went  off  again  on  waking
up.  Sweat  of  the  knees.  * Swelling  of  the  knees. — In-
flamed swelling  below  the  knees.  The  calf  of  the  leg  is
painful  when  ivalhing  and  setting  dozen  the  foot , when
touching  or  bending  the  foot.  Pain,  as  from  a sprain  in
the  anterior  muscles  of  the  tibia,  when  walking,  (a.  21  d.)
Tension  in  the  calf.  Straining  in  the  leg,  from  the  foot
up  to  the  knee,  as  if  the  leg  had  gone  to  sleep,  (during  a
pressive  spasm  of  the  stomach.)  Cramp  in  the  right  leg,  for
an  hour,  the  foot  being  turned  inward  and  curved,  (a.  4 d.)
Cramp  in  the  muscles  near  the  tibia,  at  night.- — Cramp-like
pain,  close  by  the  tibia,  when  sitting.  * Violent  cramp  in
the  calf  , at  night.  Cramp  in  the  calves  and  bends  of  the
knees , when  extending  the  legs , (in  pulling  on  the  boot ;)  it
abates  when  bending  the  legs,  but  it  returns  on  extending
the  legs  again.  Cramp  in  the  calf  and  foot,  when  he
takes  much  exercise,  with  painful  stitches.  Dull  pressive
pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  tibia,  when  walking. — Pressive
pain  at  the  left  tibia,  near  the  tarsal  joint,  when  walking  in
the  open  air,  (a.  52  h.) — Intermittent  pressive  pain  in  the
calf.  Drawing  and  crushing  pain  in  the  tibia. — Tearing


306


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


drawing  in  the  calf.  Tearing  twitches  of  the  leg,  in
front,  below  the  knees,  when  at  rest.  The  leg  twitches
lip.  Cutting  over  the  tibia.  Stitches  and  weakness  in  the
calf. — Pain  of  the  legs,  as  if  they  were  bruised  and  over-fa-
tigued ; he  is  often  obliged  to  shift  from  one  place  to  another,
when  sitting.  Stinging  prickling  of  the  legs.  Considerable
itching  of  the  legs  and  feet. — Itching  below  both  calves .
Burning  itching  of  the  right  tibia.  Erysipelatous  inflam-
mation and  swelling  of  the  leg,  with  chilliness  of  the  body.
* Large,  dark,  itching  patches  on  the  legs,  with  a little
swelling  of  these  parts.  Red  band  on  the  tibia,  formed
by  rash-like  elevations,  with  violent  itching,  and  burning
after  the  parts  had  been  rubbed,  (a.  7 d.)  * Several  ul-

cers on  the  legs,  (a.  7 d.)  Pain  in  the  tarsal  joints,  as  if
they  were  broken  ; when  walking,  especially  in  the  after-
noon. Pain  in  the  malleolus  of  the  right  side,  when  set-
ting the  foot  down,  as  if  the  foot  would  become  dislocated.
Pain,  as  from  a sprain,  in  the  left  foot,  (a.  13  d.)  Pain
over  the  left  tarsal  joint,  as  if  it  were  bandaged  too  tightly.
Tension  in  both  internal  malleoli.  Cramp  in  the  sole  of
the  left.  foot. — Cramp  in  the  soles,  after  some  walking  ;
by  walking  a little  longer  the  cramp  diminishes,  and  then
goes  off  entirely  when  sitting  down. — Cramp  in  the  soles
and  toes,  at  night,  and  also  by  day,  when  pulling  on  the
boots,  (a.  1 1 d.) — Cramp-like  pain,  in  the  sole  of  the  left
foot,  (a.  5 h.)  Violent  tearing  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.
Violent  cutting  in  the  external  side  of  the  sole  of  the  right
foot,  in  the  evening,  and  the  whole  night,  (a.  10  h.)  Pain-
ful sensitiveness  of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  even  in  the  room,
as  if  softened  by  hot  water,  with  great  pain  when  walking.
Pain  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  as  from  subcutaneous  ulce-
ration. * Burning  in  the  soles  oj  the  feet.  Burning  of  the
feet,  in  the  evening.  Suddenly  a feeling  of  heat  on  the
back  of  the  left  foot,  and  on  the  leg,  as  if  hot  air  were
breathed  upon  those  parts.  * Sweating  of  the  feet.  Sweat
of  the  feet,  in  the  evening.  Inflamed  swelling  on  the  dor-
sum of  the  left  foot,  with  burning  pain,  and  violent  itching
all  around.  Swelling  of  the  feet,  eleven  days. — Swelling
of  the  external  malleolus  of  the  left  foot.  Itching  around
the  tarsal  joints,  and  below  the  calves,  (a.  13  d.)  Itching
in  the  malleolus  of  the  sick  foot.  Violent,  burningi  itching


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


307


of  the  malleoli  of  the  right  foot,  from  morning  till  evening,
(a.  15  d.)  Blisters  are  formed  on  the  left  heel,  when
walking,  which  are  changed  to  a kind  of  large  boils,  with
stinging  and  itching  pain,  (a.  8 h.)  The  toes  are  painful,
as  from  the  pinching  of  boots.  Violent  pain  in  the  tip  of
the  right  big  toe,  (a.  21  d.)  Cramp  in  the  toes.  Visible
twitching  in  the  left  big  toe,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.
Tearing  in  the  toes.  Tearing  in  the  big  toe.  Shooting
tearings  in  the  toes.  Stitches  in  the  big  toe. — Violent
stitch  in  the  left  small  toe,  as  if  it  were  outside  of  the  toe,
(a.  14  h.) — Sharp  stitches  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  big
toe,  when  at  rest,  (a.  24  h.) — Intermittent,  cramp-like  prick-
ings in  the  toes  of  the  right  foot,  when  sitting  or  standing,
but  disappearing  in  walking,  (a.  half  an  h.)  Violent  burn-
ing in  the  tip  of  the  big  toe,  (a.  21  d.)  Burning  pressure
under  the  nads  of  the  big  toes.  A sore  kind  of  a burning
pain  in  the  corns.

Common  Ailments. — A feeling  of  painful  tension  over
the  whole  body.  Slight  twitchings  of  the  muscles.  Pain-
less twitchings  of  single  joints,  by  day.  Single,  spontane-
ous movements  and  twitches  in  the  right  thigh,  in  the  left
shoulder  and  the  left  arm.  Drawing  pressure  in  the  joints.
Painless  drawing  in  the  limbs,  in  the  afternoon.  Tearing
in  the  limbs.  Tearing  in  arms  and  legs,  but  always  only
in  a small  place.  Burning  in  the  palms  of  the  hands,  and
soles  of  the  feet.  Stitches  in  the  upper  arms,  under
the  arms,  in  the  back  and  lower  extremities.  * Hands  and
feet  go  to  sleep.  Those  parts  upon  which  he  had  been  sit-
ting during  the  siesta,  go  to  sleep.  Pain,  as  from  bruises,
and  causing  a feeling  of  paralysis,  in  the  medullary  bones,
and  the  joints  of  the  lower  extremities,  and  the  small  of  the
back,  during  motion  ; also  when  sitting  or  standing,  the
small  of  the  back  aches  as  if  it  were  bruised,  and  the  mus-
cles of  the  legs  are  painful  to  the  touch.  * Sprains  readily
produced  by  lifting  ; pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  immedi-
ately follows  the  raising  of  heavy  loads.  The  pains  are
intense,  but  quickly  passing.  The  chronic  affection  im-
proves and  gets  worse  again,  every  other  day.  * The  symp-
toms get  worse,  and  are  renewed  by  labor  and  washing
with  cold  water.  * Orgasm  of  the  circulatory  system.
Twice,  sense  as  of  an  effusion  of  warm  blood  having


308


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


taken  place  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  far  as  the  head.
Very  much  heated,  early  in  the  morning,  after  rising.

* Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head  and  the  chest,  after
painful  stiffness  of  the  spinal  column.  Congestion  of
blood  to  the  head,  with  discharge  of  blood  from  the  rec-
tum, several  days  in  succession.  He  feels  the  want  of
walking  a good  deal.

Uneasiness  which  obliged  her  to  move  hands  and  feet.
Great  uneasiness  in  the  evening,  especially  in  the  legs  ;
he  cannot  let  them  lie  still.  Uneasy  motions  in  the  whole
body,  caused  by  suppressed  eructations.  Trembling  early
in  the  morning.  * Anxious  trembling  with  faintishness.
Continual  trembling  of  the  whole  body,  which  became
worse  upon  going  out  into  the  open  air.  Great  heaviness
of  the  body.  Sick  feeling  in  the  whole  body  ; she  is
obliged  to  spit  a good  deal  and  dreads  the  open  air,  (a.  22
d.)  Great  desire  to  be  magnetized.  Uncomfortable  feel-
ing in  the  evening,  as  before  an  attack  of  the  ague.

* Great  physical  depression  ; hands  and  feet  are  often
cold,  paleness  of  the  face,  and  frequent  palpitation  of  the
heart  ; all  these  symptoms  disappeared  by  taking  exercise.
Attack  of  general  exhaustion,  with  obtusion  of  the  head,
vertigo,  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  and  chilliness  of
the  whole  body,  for  6 hours,  (a.  22  d.)  A little  prick  of
the  pin  in  a finger  frightened  her  so  much  that  she  felt  sick
in  consequence  of  it  ; tongue,  lips  and  hands  were  quite
pale  and  cold,  with  coldness  of  the  forehead  and  face,  ob-
scuration of  sight,  uneasiness,  thrill  of  heat  and  trembling;
she  was  obliged  to  lie  down  ; (mesmerising  relieved  her
promptly,)  (a.  18  d.)  From  7 to  9 o’clock  in  the  evening,
he  had  four  consecutive  attacks  of  a mild  sleep,  with  nau-
sea, accompanied  by  a sense  as  of  black  darkness  before
the  eyes;  the  nausea  continued  even  when  lying  down,  but
without  any  vomiting.  Attack  of  fainting  in  the  evening,
with  black  darkness  before  the  eyes  ; when  sitting  down.
Attack  of  fainting,  with  coldness  and  indistinct  sight,  (a.
3 cl.)  Attack  of  fainting,  with  large  drops  of  sweat  in  the
face.  * Exhaustion  and  weariness  of  the  limbs,  especially
the  knees.  Very  weak.  Weakness  of  the  thighs  and
groins,  when  walking.  He  is  easily  tired  by  bodily  exer-
tions. After  a walk  he  feels  tired  and  feverish,  and  is  then


CALCAKEA  CAUBONICA,


309


attacked  with  chilliness  and  thirst.  During  a walk,  * great
weakness,  especially  in  the  lower  extremities,  with  sweat
and  faintishness.  * She  was  unable  to  go  up  stairs  ; this
exhausted  her  completely,  (a.  14  d.)  Talking  makes  her
weak  ; she  has  to  stop  it.  * Weakness  by  day,  so  that
she  could  hardly  bear  the  anguish  with  which  she  w'as
oppressed  ; inspiring  the  fresh,  open  air  refreshed  and
strengthened  her,  (a.  12  d.)  * For  10  days  she  was  at-

tacked with  excessive  weakness,  so  that  she  was  neither
able  to  move  about,  nor  do  anything;  at  the  same  time  she
had  the  most  violent  attacks  of  convulsive  laughter.  At-
tack of  epilepsy  ; when  standing,  and  performing  some
manual  labor,  he  suddenly  fell  to  the  floor  over  one  side,
without  consciousness  ; when  consciousness  returned,  he
found  himself  lying  upon  the  floor  with  extended  arms  ;
this  attack  was  succeeded  by  heat  and  a little  swreat,  (a.
9 d.)  * Great  sensitiveness  to  cold  air;  in  the  evening

the  feet  seem  to  have  died  off.  When  exposed  to  a slightly
cold  air,  his  thighs  and  legs  wrere  violently  attacked  with
goose-skin,  which  was  painful  to  him.  Damp,  open  air  does
not  agree  with  her  ; her  skin  is  immediately  affected  by
it.  * Great  liability  to  cold.  Symptoms  of  cold  ; stiffness
of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  the  muscles  of  the  neck  ;
stinging  in  the  throat  and  head,  above  the  eyes,  and  cough,
(shortly.)  Every  wralk  in  the  open  air  makes  her  sad,
and  she  wreeps.  When  walking  in  the  open  air,  pressive
headache  in  the  vertex,  which  continues  until  he  goes  to
bed.  When  walking  in  the  open  air,  visible  inflation  of
the  abdomen.  When  walking,  palpitation  of  the  heart,
and  pain  in  the  chest,  (a.  19  d.)  Sense  as  of  drawing
through  the  whole  body  when  walking  ; the  sensation  ex-
tends into  the  head,  and  forces  one  to  sit  down,  (a.  30  d.)
Boring  pain,  externally  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  after
walking  in  the  open  air.  Indisposed,  hoarse  after  a walk,
with  dyspnoea.  The  whole  skin,  especially  that  of  the
feet,  is  painfully  affected  when  touched.  Itching  of  the
whole  body,  (a.  23  d.)  Violent  itching  of  those  parts
which  sweat,  especially  between  the  scapula.  In  the
evening,  when  in  bed,  violent  itching,  of  the  back,  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  neck,  chin,  left  eye,  the  hairy  scalp,  the
mons  veneris  and  the  scrotum.  Itching  of  the  mouth.


310


CALCAREA  CARBONICA,


nose  and  nates.  Itching  upon  a dry,  hot  skin,  as  if  it  were
covered  with  salt  and  ashes.  Burning  in  the  skin,  with
itching,  rising  up  to  the  middle  of  the  back,  on  the  nates
and  the  posterior  surface  of  the  thighs,  (a.  10  d.)  Prick-
ings in  the  skin.  * Nettle  rash  which  constantly  goes  off
in  cool  air.  Itching , vesicular  eruption  over  the  whole
body,  especially  the  hips.  * Eruption  of  large,  elevated
patches  of  the  size  of  a small  pea,  and  even  larger,  mostly
on  the  cheeks  and  elbows,  with  great  heat,  much  thirst  and
little  appetite  ; they  disappeared  on  the  third  day,  and  left
behind  them  dark  patches,  which  seemed  as  if  they  had
been  streaked  with  blood,  (in  a baby  whose  mother  had
taken  calcarea.)  Scurfy  places  on  the  thigh,  with  burn-
ing during  the  night,  (a.  24  h.)  * Herpes  speedily  re-ap-

pears.  Herpes,  which  had  formerly  been  below  both  ax-
illae, in  the  bend  of  the  left  elbow  and  the  knee,  comes  out
again  in  20  days. — Itching  of  that  spot  which  had  been  co-
vered with  herpes  years  ago,  (a.  5 d.)  An  old  ulcer  on
the  leg  begins  to  become  painful,  with  throbbing,  and  with
tearing  all  around  ; and  it  begins  to  smell  like  rotten  eggs,
(a.  7 d.)  * Unwholesome  readily  idcerated  skin  ; even

small  wounds  suppurate , and  do  not  heal.  * A number
of  quite  small  warts  is  forming  here  and  there.  Wart-like
excrescences  (behind  the  ears,)  become  inflamed  and  ulce-
rated. A wart  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow  became  inflamed,
it  became  painful  like  a boil,  then  it  dried  up  and  disap-
peared. Unusual  faintishness  which  was  relieved  by  walk-
ing-

Sleep. — Great  general  faintishness  in  the  evening,  for
half  an  hour.  Weariness  with  yawning,  (a.  4 d.)  Fre-
quent yawning.  Long-continued,  almost  endless  yawn-
ing, succeeded  by  a shaking  throbbing  in  the  head,  abdo-
men and  chest,  with  great  heat  in  the  face.  Continual
yawning  with  sleepiness,  (a.  4 d.) — Frequent  yawning,
as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,  (a.  56  h.)  Inclination  to
stretch  oneself  early  in  the  morning.  Sleepiness  early
in  the  morning.  Early  in  the  morning  when  he  is  to  rise,
he  feels  yet  sleepy  and  tired,  and  can  scarcely  become
awake.  Idarly  on  waking  up  he  finds  it  difficult  to  become
awake. — Great  sleepiness,  early  in  the  morning,  with  pee-
vishness and  pressive  headache  around  the  whole  forehead,


CALCAREA  CARBONICA*


311


(a.  2 d.)  * Drowsiness  by  day  and  weariness  ; he  fell

several  times  asleep  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  9 d.)  Long  siesta.

* Tired  and  sleepy  the  whole  day , (a.  1 1 d.)  Sleepy  and
faintish  during  the  day,  with  chilliness  and  headache. — •
Weary  and  drowsy  by  day  ; however,  he  does  not  succeed
in  falling  asleep.  * Sleepiness  early  in  the  evening,  (a.  3
h.)  In  the  evening,  weariness  in  all  the  limbs,  with  drow-
siness and  chilliness  ; he  was  unable  to  keep  off  sleep  ;
however,  he  did  not  sleep  fast,  but  he  constantly  woke  up
again,  for  16  hours  ; a good  deal  of  sweat  early  in  the
morning,  and  dryness  in  the  throat,  without  thirst,  (a.  4 d.)
— In  the  evening,  great  drowsiness  and  peevishness.  * Fre-
quently one  falls  asleep  late  in  the  evening . He  cannot  fall
asleep  before  2 or  3 o’clock  at  night.  She  is  unable  to  fall
asleep  at  night,  and,  having  fallen  asleep,  she  soon  wakes
up  again.  If  she  goes  to  bed  late,  she  cannot  succeed  in
falling  asleep  ; she  feels  as  if  it  were  impossible  for  her
to  get  rested.  It  takes  him  a long  time  before  he  falls
asleep  in  the  evening  ; he  feels  too  hot,  although  he  is  but
slightly  covered,  in  a cold  room,  (a.  11  d.) — He  could  not
fall  asleep  almost  the  whole  night,  he  tossed  about  a good
deal,  and  sweated  almost  over  the  whole  body,  (a.  10  h.)

* He  tosses  about  in  his  bed  almost  the  whole  night.  * He
cannot  fall  asleep  before  midnight,  on  account  of  the  ex-
cited state  of  his  mind.  * He  finds  it  difficult  to  fall
asleep  on  account  of  many  thoughts  involuntarily  throng-
ing his  mind.  He  cannot  fall  asleep  till  late  in  the  even-
ing, nor  can  he  succeed  in  keeping  off  either  lewd  or  vexing
thoughts  ; they  pursue  him  yet  even  early  after  waking  up.

* Uneasy  waking  in  bed  in  the  evening;  the  fancy  being
full  of  horrid  images,  (6.  night.) — Anxious  thoughts  before
falling  asleep,  in  the  evening  ; they  went  and  came  again  ;
at  the  same  time  he  mistook  the  objects  which  surrounded
him,  he  dreaded  darkness  and  endeavored  to  see  into  the
light;  all  these  symptoms  went  off  after  the  emission  of
flatulence.  Illusions  of  the  fancy  when  falling  asleep  ; she
imagines  to  hear  a rumbling  and  clapping  over  her  bed,
which  caused  her  to  shudder.  In  the  evening,  as  soon  as
she  closes  her  eyes,  her  fancy  is  filled  with  all  sort  of  reve-
ries. Upon  closing  the  eyes,  the  person  sees  frightful  vis
ions.  Dull  toothache,  for  an  hour?  when  lying  down  in  the


312


CALCAItEA  CARBONICA.


evening,  (as  soon  as  she  has  laid  down  her  head  ;)  this  is
succeeded  by  sleep.

* Palpitation  of  the  heart  ; and  anguish  before  falling
asleep,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  In  the  evening,  when
falling  asleep,  the  upper  part  of  the  body  suddenly  twitches
up,  accompanied  by  jerking  which  extends  into  the  head ;
afterwards,  buzzing  and  whizzing  in  the  ear.  *Full  of  an-
guish and  raving  at  night,  she  starts  with  fright  in  a dream  ;
on  waking  up,  the  anxiety  caused  by  the  dream  is  yet  con-
tinuing, with  trembling,  (a.  20  d.)  At  night,  she  appre-
hends becoming  crazy  ; then  she  experiences  chills  for  a
few  minutes,  which  are  followed  by  a sensation  as  if  the
body  were  dashed  to  pieces.  * At  night,  horrid  things
crowd  upon  her,  she  is  unable  to  keep  them  off.  At  night,
shortly  after  falling  asleep,  he  rises  in  his  bed,  and,  with
open  eyes,  he  works  with  his  hands  without  being  con-
scious of  it.  At  night,  orgasm  of  the  blood  and  frequent
dreams.  At  night,  orgasm  with  uneasy  sleep,  especially
during  the  catamenia.  At  night,  palpitation  of  the  heart,
with  uneasy  sleep.  * Internal  heat  at  night , especially  in
the  feet  and  hands;  dry  tongue  in  the  morning,  without
thirst,  with  external  hetff  of  the  head,  (6.  7.  d.)  Violent
vertigo  at  night,  with  sense  as  of  wavelets  of  light  dancing
before  the  eyes,  which  continued  until  noon.  Stupefac-
tion of  the  head,  at  night ; this  stupor  wakes  him  up  and
increases  even  to  fainting;  it  is  followed  by  tremor  of  the
limbs  and  continual  faintishness,  which  prevent  him  from
falling  asleep  again.  Itching  upon  the  head  every  night
on  waking  up.  Tearing  pain  in  the  gums  at  night.,  and
sense  as  of  the  teeth  being  loose  when  biting  upon  them.
Boring  and  drawing  pain  in  most  of  the  molar  teeth  at
night.  Nightly  toothache,  or  rather  congestion  of  blood
to  the  teeth,  coming  on  immediately  after  going  to  bed,
(the  first,  3 nights.)  Violent  eructations  at  night,  when
lying  down  ; she  had  to  rise,  in  order  to  become  relieved.
Eructations  at  night,  on  waking  up.  Spasm  of  the  stomach,
which  rouses  him  from  sleep.  A good  deal  of  colic  at
night,  without  diarrhoea,  (a.  12  d.)  Accumulation  of  flat-
ulence in  the  abdomen  for  several  nights,  (a.  5 d.)  At
night,  when  beginning  to  sleep,  his  shoulder-joints  become
affected  in  such  a way  as  induces  him  to  lay  his  arms  above


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


313


his  head.  Shooting  or  stinging  pain  in  the  arm  and  in
the  wrist-joint,  at  night ; this  pain  prevents  one  from  sleep*
ing.  At  night,  faintishness  in  the  knees.  At  night,  burn-
ing in  the  soles  of  the  feet.  Drawing  pain  in  the  feet,  at
night,  which  wakes  her  up.  When  sleeping,  she  stretches
her  arms  above  her  head.  Snoring  groans  the  whole  night,
in  a slumber-like  stupor,  from  which  she  cannot  be  waked
up,  with  constant  tossing  about ; before  falling  asleep,
there  is  violent  sweat  in  the  face.  He  often  chews  when
asleep  and  then  swallows.  In  the  siesta,  when  sitting,
palpitation  of  the  heart,  which  wakes  him  up.  Talking,
when  asleep,  and  full  of  dreams.  Talking  when  asleep;
he  talks  in  a sort  of  giddy  confusion,  while  dreams  and
heat  make  him  feel  uneasy.  Screaming  in  the  night,  his
sleep  being  uneasy.  Uneasy  sleep  with  sweat. — Uneasy
sleep  towards  morning,  (a.  15  d.)  Uneasiness  in  the  body
prevents  her  from  lying  long  on  one  side.  Sort  of  an  un-
easy half-sleep,  at  night,  with  dry  heat,  confusion  in  the
head,  as  in  a fever,  and  constant  waking  up.  — Uneasy
sleep,  with  talking  and  frequent  waking  up.  Frequent
waking  up  from  sleep. — In  tossing  about  he  frequently
wakes  up;  he  imagined  to  lie  in  his  bed  wrong. — Fre-
quent waking  up  from  his  sleep,  as  if  he  were  disturbed.
- — Frequent  waking  up  from  his  sleep,  as  if  he  had  al-
ready slept  enough.  Short  sleep,  she  cannot  sleep  after
midnight,  but  she  tosses  about  with  great  uneasiness.
She  sleeps  from  li  until  2 or  3 o’clock  ; after  this  hour
she  remains  wide  awake.  Waking  up  with  anguish,  after
midnight,  with  difficult  breathing,  (a.  12d.)  Waking  up
with  anguish,  in  the  night,  frequently  from  anxious  dreams,
(a.  36  h.)  Starting  up  from  anxious  dreams  amid  screams,
Starting  up  with  fright,  in  the  evening,  shortly  after  having
fallen  asleep  ; he  becomes  wide  awake  in  consequence.
The  child  raises  itself  up  in  its  bed  after  midnight,  and
calls  out : Father ! it  begins  to  scream  and  wants  to  jump
up  ; the  more  one  tries  to  assuage  it,  the  more  it  screams
and  opposes  one  ; it  rolls  upon  the  floor  and  does  not  wish
to  be  touched.  Early,  when  waking  up,  the  person’s
head  feels  confused  and  desolate.  Obtusion  of  the  head,
early  on  waking  up,  with  tremor  through  the  whole  body
and  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head.  Orgasm  of  the  blood

14


CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


314

on  waking  up  early  in  the  morning,  after  an  uneasy  sleep  ;
for  several  mornings,  (the  first  days.)  On  waking  up,  ear-
ly in  the  morning,  from  an  uneasy  sleep,  the  person  feels
the  blood  flowing  in  all  the  veins,  which  swell  on,  accom-
panied by  a sense  as  if  the  whole  body  were  bruised.
Unrefreshed  early  in  the  morning,  after  waking  up.  One
feels  very  much  exhausted , on  leaking  up , early  in
the  morning , from  a deep  sleep . so  that  one  conti-
nues slumbering  even  after  having  risen  from  the  bed.
Nightly  sleep  full  of  dreams. — Vivid  dreams,  every  night.
\ ivid,  confused  dreams  which  cannot  be  recollected. — V ivid
dreams  full  of  dispute  and  quarrel.  Frequently  vivid
dreams  about  past  events,  with  a long,  deep  morning-sleep.
Confused  dreams  which  cause  anxiety.  Half  waking
dreams  in  the  evening,  shortly  after  falling  asleep,  with
great  anxiety.  Anxious  and  frightful  dreams  ; he  cannot
get  rid  of  them  on  waking  up.  Anxious  dreams  ; he
dreams  that  he  is  bitten  by  a dog;  this  wakes  him  up  ;
then  he  falls  asleep  again  and  is  again  roused  from  sleep
by  an  equally  anxious  dream  ; and  so  on  several  times,
every  night.  Several  anxious  dreams  in  one  night , seven
nights  in  succession.  Anxious  dream,  towards  morning,
about  fire  and  murder.  * Frightful  dreams  the  whole
night , accompanied,  at  last,  by  a voluptuous  dream,  with
a pollution,  these  are  otherwise  very  rare,  (a.  lOd.)  Fright-
ful dream,  as  if  he  fell  down  or  were  being  thrown  down. —
* Horrid,  fearful  dreams. — Dreams  about  dead  persons  and
cadaverous  smell.  Dreams  about  sick  people  and  cada-
vers, with  violent  weeping  when  asleep,  (this  woman  gene-
rally never  dreamed.)

Fever. — Quick  pulse,  without  any  feverish  sensation.
Great  internal  chilliness  ; she  has  to  wrap  up  her  cold
hands  ; her  feet  are  warm.  Great,  constant  chilliness,
with  much  thirst.  She  is  freezing,  when  she  gets  out  of
her  bed.  Very  chilly,  in  the  evening.  Internal  chilliness,
with  uneasiness  and  tremulous  anguish. — Frequent  chilli-
ness, with  yellow  colour  of  the  skin.  Chilliness  in  the
evening , for  several  hours,  (a.  10  h.  and  Id  d.)  For  two
evenings,  chilliness  of  a quarter  of  an  hour,  without  sub-
sequent heat  or  without  sweat.  Chilliness,  in  the  evening
when  in  bed  ; even  when  covered  with  feather-beds,  he


CALCARUA  CARBONICA.


315


was  unable  to  get  warm,  as  if  he  had  been  deficient  in
animal  heat,  (a.  30  d.)  Chills,  at  night.  A thrill  of  cold,
first  over  the  face,  with  righting  of  the  hairs  of  the  head,
then  over  the  whole  body,  with  a feeling  of  cold  through-
out.— Thrill  of  cold  over  the  whole  back,  (a.  24  h.) — Thrill
of  cold  over  the  whole  body,  as  if  he  had  caught  cold,
with  frequent  yawning. — Thrill  of  cold  over  the  whole
body,  with  warmth  or  heat  of  the  forehead  and  the  face,
and  cold  hands,  (a.  3 and  48  h.)  Feeling  of  heat  in  the
body.  Frequently  flushes  of  heat.  Flushes  of  heat  2,  3
times  every  day,  all  over,  but  mostly  in  the  face  and  upon
the  hands  ; the  heat  assails  her  when  silting,  overwhelms
her,  as  it  were,  with  anguish,  with  swelling  of  the  face  and
the  hands,  for  10  or  15  minutes.  Heat,  several  evenings,
from  6 to  7 o’clock. — In  the  evening,  when  lying  down,
external  heat  with  internal  chilliness,  (a.  72  h.)  At  night,
dry  heat,  (a.  12  h.)  Dry  heat  towards  morning,  (a.  6 d.)
Heat  in  the  chest  and  the  head,  the  remainder  of  the  body
feeling  chilly,  the  whole  day,  (a.  24  d.) — Glowing  heat  and
redness  of  the  face,  with  hot  forehead,  cold  hands  and  vio-
lent thirst,  for  several  hours.  Heat  almost  constantly,
which  first,  makes  one  faintish  and  gives  one  anguish,  un-
til sweat  breaks  out.  Sweat  often  breaks  out  by  day.
Sweat  almost  constantly.  Much  sweat , by  day , when
walking , and  at  night , when  in  bed . — Exhausting  sweat,
day  and  night,  for  3 days.  Violent  sweat  by  day,  the  air
being  cold.  * Sweat  by  day , during  the  slightest  exercise.
In  the  evening  when  in  bed,  he  immediately  feels  warm
and  he  sweats  the  whole  night.  Night  sioeat , mostly  be-
fore midnight,  with  cold  legs.  * Nightly  sweat  on  the
back.  Nightly  sweat,  only  on  the  legs,  feels  viscid,  (a.
some  d.)  Violent  sweat , early  for  many  mornings  in
succession.  Sweat  early  in  the  morning,  (the  morning
after  having  taken  the  medicine.)  Sweat  early  in  the  morn-
ing, three  mornings  in  succession. — Sweat , every  morn -
ing,  (a.  7 d.)  Fever,  alternately  chills  and  heat,  she  is
obliged  to  lie  down.  Fever,  in  the  forenoon  ; alternately
chills  and  heat.  Feverish  heat  and  burning  thirst,  alter-
nating with  chilliness.  Evening-fever:  externalchilliness,
with  internal  heat  and  violent  thirst  ; he  felt  chilly  even  in
bed,  and  sweated  at  the  same  time,  was  also  able  to  get


316


CALCAREA  CARBONIC A.


warm  ; at  last  violent  sweat  broke  out,  (a.  10  h.)  In  the
forenoon,  first  headache,  which  constantly  increased,  with
sudden  sinking  of  strength,  so  that  he  was  scarcely  able
to  go  home  ; * accompanied  by  great  heat  in  the  forehead
and  the  hands,  much  thirst  for  sourish  water  ; then,  after
lying  down,  icy  cold  hands,  with  quick  pulse,  (a.  21  d.)
Every  forenoon  at  1 1 o’clock,  feverish  heat,  without  pre-
vious thirst  or  chilliness,  for  an  hour  ; she  felt  hot  and  her
skin  felt  hot,  with  a somewhat  red  face  ; afterwards  an-
guish and  mild  sweat,  especially  on  hands  and  feet,  and  in
the  face  ; 4 days  in  succession,  (before  the  catamenia.)
Fever  from  morning  until  noon  or  afternoon  ; first  tearing
in  the  joints  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  then  faintishness
which  scarcely  permitted  her  to  raise  herself  up  in  her  bed,
with  heaviness,  extension  and  stretching  of  the  limbs,  heat
and  a sensation  as  if  she  would  always  sweat,  accompan  •
ied  b}r  trembling  and  uneasiness  in  all  the  limbs;


INDEX.


A.

Abdomen. — Morbid  distention  of  the
Tympanitis,  80.

Abortion,  261.

Abscessus  nucleatus,  158

Acne. — Redness  of  the  nose  and
cheeks,  in  drunkards,  158,  258.

Agalactia. — Retention  of  milk,  261.

Alopecia. — Falling  off  of  the  hair,  200,

Amaurosis,  182,  258.

Amblyopia,  amaurotica. — Weakness
of  sight,  a precursor  of  Amaurosis,
111,  131,  259.

Amenorrhcea — Stoppage  of  the  men-
strual discharges,  111,  200,  261

Anasarca  — Dropsy,  80,  158,  182.

Anchylosis . — Stiff- j oint,  111.

Aneurisms. A pulsating  tumour

formed  by  the  dilatation  of  an  ar-
tery, 111.

Angina. — A sore  throat,  (difficulty
of  swallowing,')  30,  40,  80,  200.  230,
260.

Anorexia. — Loss  of  appetite,  110,  260.

Anosmia. — Loss  of  the  sense  of  smell-
ing, 131,  259.

Anus,  warts  and  condylomata  of,  181.

Appetite,  loss  of. — Anorexia,  110,  260.

Aphthce. — Thrush,  230.

Apoplexy,  200,  258.

Apoplexia,  pulmonum,  80.

Arthritis. — Gout,  30,  80,  81,  111,  158,
257  258.

Ascites. — Dropsy,  80,  158,  182.

Asphyxia,  111.

Asthma,  80,  131,  159,  183,258.

Asthma  senile,  201.

Atrophia  miseraica. — Atrophy,  111,
257.

B.

Back,  small  of  the,  pain  in,  262.

Bite,  of  a serpent,  80.

Black  vomit. — Melaena,  80,  158.

Bladder,  urethra,  Blennorrhcea  of. —
Excessive  secretion  of  mucus,  110.

Blennorrhcea  of  the  nose,  259.

Blephar  ophthalmitis. Inflammation

of  the  eyelids,  p.  30,  159.

Blepharophthalmitis  glandulo.sa.~-~~
Purulent  eye,  ILL


Brain,  concussion  of,  111.

Brain,  tubercles  of,  200.

Breath,  stinking,  183.

Bronchitis. — Inflammation  of  the  air
tubes,  80,  111,  159.

C.

Cachexia. Sickly  constitution ,

158.

Caput  obstipum. — Wry-neck,  258.

Cardialgia  — Spasm  of  the  stomach,
80,  111,  159,  200,  257,  258,  260.

Caries,  257.

Caries,  of  bones  of  face  , 182.

Caries,  of  mastoid  process,  182.

Cataract  and  cataract  of  crystalline
lens. — Glaucoma,  258.

Catarrh  or  Co'd — Express  inflam-
mation of  the  mucous  membrane,
30,  80.

Catarrh,  of  bladder,  261.

Catarrh,  chronic,  182.

Catarrh,  inflammatory,  111.

Catarrh,  of  lungs  and  of  trachea,
262.

Cauliflower  excrescence. Condylo-

mata, 258.

Chicken-pox , err  pimples,  quickly  f min-
ing pustules,  seldom  passing  into
suppuration,  but  bursting  at  the
point  and  drying  into  scabs. — Vari-
ed] se,  158.

Chilblains. — Verniones,  159.

Chiragra. — Gout  of  the  hands,  262.

Cholera,  p.  SO,  260.

Chloasma  hcpaticum,  158.

Chlm'osis. — Green-sickness,  79,  111,
181,  200,  258.

Cobweb,  sense  of,  in  the  face,  257.

Cold,  used  also  to  express  inflamma-
tions of  the  mucous  membrane. — -
Catarrh,  30,  80.

Cold,  in  the  head. — Coryza,  30,  80.

Cold , sensitiveness  to,  158.

Colic,  30,  80,  159,  258,  260.

Colic,  nightly,  182.

Coma  somnolentum. — Lethargy  with-
out fever,  200.

Condylomata. — Cauliflower  excres-
cence, 181,  258.

Congestion , of  blood  to  the  head,  182,


818


IKDEX


Constipation,  or  costiveness,  30,  80,

110,  132.

Constipation,  obstinate,  260.
Constitution,  sickly,  153.
Consumption,  pulmonary,  25S.
Contusions. — Injuries  mechanical,  81,

111.

Convulsions,  80.

Convulsions  of  new  bom  children. —
Eclampsia  neonatorum,  158.
Coryza,  (Cold  in  the  head,)  30,  80.
Coryza,  purulent,  132.

Corns,  painful,  159.

Cornea,  spots  upon,  1S2.

Cough,  chronic,  111,  292.

Cough,  dry,  80.

Cough,  in  measles,  262.

Cough,  with  blood. — Haemoptoe,  80.

111.

Croup,  118.

Curvature,  of  vertebrae,  262.

D.

Decubitus. — Involuntary  passage  of
faeces,  253.

Dementia,  159.

Dentition,  difficult,  259.

Depression,  of  spirits,  111,  131.
Diabetes. — Incontinent  flow  of  urine,
80.

Diarrhoea,  80,  110,  158,  159,  258.
Diarrhoea,  of  children,  260.
Diarrhoea,  chronic,  260.

Diarrhoea,  where  the  food  passes  off
undigested. — Lienteria,  159.
Digestion,  weakness  of,  131.

Disecoia,  chronic,  131.

Dropsical  affections,  181.

Dropsy. — Anasarca,  Ascites,  80,  158,
182.

Dropsy  of  the  Wain. — Hydrocepha-
lus, 159.

Dropsy  of  the  chest . — Hydrothorax,  80.
Dropsy  of  the  lungs.— -CEdema  pul-
monum,  80.

Dropsy,  partial,  of  the  cellular  tissue.

— CEdema,  111.

Dysentery,  80,  110,  159.

Dysmenorrhcca . — Painful  menstrua-
tion, 80,  111,  261.

Dyspepsia,  80,  200,  257.

Dysphagia. — Difficulty  of  swallow-
ing, 257.

E.

Ears,  ailments  of,  257.

Ear,  inflammation  of  the  internal.

Otitis,  159,  230,  259,

Ear,  running  of  the  — Otorrhcea,  30,
182.

Ears , scrofulous  diseases  of,  200.


Eclampsia  neonatorum. — Convulsions
of  new-born  children,  158.

Eclampsia — (Scintillation,  a flashing
of  light,  which  frequently  strikes
the  eyes  of  epileptic  persons,)  79.

Ecthyma — A pustule,  80,  158.

Ectroyixm. -Inversion  of  eye-lids,  280.

Eczema. — Humid  tetter,  158,  258.

Emaciation  — (A  falling  off  in  the
flesh,)  158.

Emaciation,  with  exhaustion. — Ma-
rasmus senilis,  200.

Enteritis. — Inflammation  of  the  intes-
tines, 110.

Ephelis. — Freckles,  158.

Epilepsy,  111,  158,  181,  258.

Emption  of  small  vesicles  on  the  skin,
resembling  millet  seed.  — Miliary
eruption  or  Strophulus,  peculiar  to
infants,  80,  153.

Emption,  a cutaneous. — Impetigo  or
Herpes,  30,  131,  158,  200,  230,  258.

Emptions  of  the  skin. — Exanthemata,
80,  153.

Eruptions , chronic,  upon  skin. — Pem-
phigus or  Pompholix,  111.

Exudations,  81.

Erysipelas,  230.

Exanthemata,  acute. — Eruptions  of
the  skin,  80,  153.

Exanthemata,  chronic,  258.

Excretions,  arthritic  and  rheumatic,

111.

Exostosis  of  bones. — Excresence,  tu-
mour, 183.

Exostosis  upon  the  skull  or  of  pelvic
bones,  182.

Extravasations,  81.

Extremities,  numbness  of,  go  to  sleep,
262.

Eyelids,  inflammation  of  the. — Bleph-
arophthalmia,  159.

Eyes,  catarrhal  inflammation  of,  230.

Eyes,  inflammation  of,  182.

Eyes,  scrophulous  inflammations  of,

200.

F.

Faintishness,  257.

Fceces,  involuntary  passage  of.— -Dec-
ubitus, 258.

Fevers,  80,  158, 159,  200.

Fevers,  catarrhal,  intermittent,  rheu-
matic and  slow,  258.

Fissures,  chaps,  or  cracks  in  the  skin.
— Rhagades.  30,  258.

Fistula  lachrymalis,  259.

Fits,  fainting,  80,  111.

Fits,  suffocating  and  apoplectic,  80.
183.

Flatulence,  80,  230,


IND7.X.


319


Flatulence,  of  hypochondriacs,  131.

Fluor  albus. — Whites,  30,  80,  111.

Freckles,  (see  Ephelis.)

Fungus  articularis,  haematodes. —
(Tumour,  a bleeding,)  159.

Fungus  haematodes  of  the  eye,  259.

Furuncles,  80.

G.

Galadirrhcea.  — Excessive  flow  of
milk,  261.

Gangrene,  80,  158.

Gangrene  of  the  bones. — Necrosis  or
Osteonecrosis,  111,  257.

Gastralgia. — Pains  or  spasm  of  the
stomach,  80,  111,159,200,257,260.

Gastric  complaints,  230.

Gastritis,  chronic. — Inflammation  of
the  stomach,  260.

Gastrodynia. — Oppression  or  spasm
of  the  stomach,  80.

Glands,  swelling  of  cervical,  110.

Glands,  swelling  and  induration  of,

200.

Glaucoma. —Cataract  of  crystalline
lens,  258.

Gonorrhcea  or  clap,  110.

Gout. — Podagra,  30,  80,  81,  111,  158,
262.

Gravel,  261.

Greensickness.  — Chlorosis,  79,  111,
181,  200,  258.

Grippe,  30.

Gums,  swelling  and  ulceration  of,  30.

H.

Hair,  falling  off  of.-— Alopecia,  111,
200,  261.

Hair,  agglutination  of  the,  by  means
of  a sort  of  lymph. — Plica  Polonica,
230.

Hard-hearing,  259.

Hcematemesis . — Vomiting  ofblood,  80.

Hcemaluria.— Voiding  of  blood  with
urine,  80,  261.

Hcemoptoe,  80,  111.

Haemoptysis. — Spitting  of  blood,  261.

Hcemorrhage,  30,  111.

Heemorrhoidal  affections  and  com-
plaints, 200,  261.

Haemorrhoids  -"-Piles,  30,  80,  111,  159,
230, 257,  258.

Headache,  30,  80,  182,  257,  258.

Heart,  affections  of,  258.

Heart,  disease  of  the,  anguish,  ossi-
fication of  the  coronary  arteries,
&c. — Stenocardia,  183.

Heart,  chronic  affection  of,  183.

Heart,  hypertrophy  of. — Morbid  en-
largement, 111.

Heart,  palpitation  of,  183,  201.


Heart-burn,  253.

Helminthiasis. — Condition  of  the  sys-
tem which  favours  the  existence
of  worms,  111.

Hemiia,  182.

Herpes. — A species  of  eruption,  SO,
131, 158,  230,  258.

Herpes. — A cutaneous  eruption,  200.

Hooping  cough,  111,159.

Ilydrargyrosis. — Mercurial  disease,
30,  111.

Hydrocele. — Swelling  of  the  testes,
caused  either  by  effusion  or  infiltra-
tion of  water,  111.

Hydrocephalus,  159.

Hydrothorax. — Dropsy  of  the  chest,
80.

Hxjpochcmdria,  256,  258.

Hypochondriasis,  79,  111,  181.

Hysteria. — Nervous  affection  ; pecu-
liar to  females,  30, 79,  111,  181,  230,
256,  258.

Hysteralgia. — Pain  in  the  uterus,  261,

I.

Icterus,  181.

Idiocy,  200.

Impetigo  — A eutaneous  eruption,  158,
200,  258.

Impotence,  159.

Incubus  — Nightmare,  30,  80.

Indurations,  arthritic  and  rheum,  111.

Inflammations,

Inflammation  of  the  air-tubes Bron-
chitis,  80,  111,  159.

Inflammation  of  the  brain. — ■

Inflammation  of  the  eye-lids. — Elepha-
ropthalmitis,  30, 159.

Inflammation  of  the  intestines. — Enter-
itis, 110.

Inflammation  of  the  larynx.—  Laryn-
gitis, 110, 159.

Inflammation  of  the  pleura. — Pleuritis
or  Pleurisy,  110,  230.

Inflammation  of  the  stomach. — Gastri-
tis, 260.

Influenza,  182.

Injuries,  mechanical.  — Contusions,
81,  111.

Intestines,  inflammation  of  the. — En-
teritis, 110.

Irregularities , menstrual,  230.

Ischias. — Neuralgia  of  the  hip,  258,
262.

Ischuna. — Retention  of  urine,  182.

Itch,  the. — Scabies,  80,  158,  258.

Itching,  upon  head,  159.

J.

Jaundice. — Icterus,  181.

Joints,  pain  in,  257.


820


INDEX.


L.

Laryngitis.  — Inflammation  of  the
larynx,  110,  159.

Laryngitis,  chronic,  282.

Lethargy  without  fever. — Coma  som-
nolentum,  158,  200.

Leucoma. — White  speck  upon  the  !
cornea, 132, 259.

Leucorrhoea,  (whites,)  30,  80,  111,  !
230,281.

Lichen  — Moss,  a species  of  tetters,  (
80,  153.

Lienteria. — Diarrhoea,  where  the  food
passes  off  undigested,  159,  280.

Light , dread  of. — Photophobia,  259.

Lips,  swelling  and  ulceration  of,  132.

Limbs,  frozen,  30.

Lithiasis  — Stone,  110.

Liver,  affections  of,  230.

Liver,  diseases  of,  131.

Liver,  distention  of,  110.

Liver,  hypertrophy  of,  159.

Liver,  induration  of,  280.

Liver,  pains  of,  30.

Lock-jaw. — Tetanus,  89.

Lungs,  inflammation  of  the. — Pneu-
monia, 80,  111,  159.

Lungs,  paralysis  of,  133.

Lungs,  tuberculous  infiltration  of,

201.

Lupia. — Encysted  tumour,  200.

Lupus. — Gnawing  tetters,  30.

Luxation,  spontaneous,  282.

M.

Mviia,  253.

Marasmus  senilis. — Emaciation,  with
exhaustion,  200.

Measles,  the. — Morbilli,  80.

Megrim,  a pain  affecting  only  one
side  of  the  head.  ,182,  200,  230.

Milana  — Black  vomit,  80,  153.

Melancholia,  111,  131, 159,  131,  258.

Memory,  weakness  of,  30,  200.

Menorrhagia. — Excessive  flow  of  |
menses,  261.

Menostasia  — Suppression  of  the  men-  i
ses,  111,  200.

Menses,  excessive  flow  of. — Menor-
rhagia, 281.

Menses,  suppression  of  the. — Menos-
tasia,  111,  200.

Menses,  retention  of  the. — Amenor-
rhtea,  111,200,  261.

Menstrual  f unctions , irregularties  of,
80.

Menstruation,  profuse,  110.

Menstruation,  painful.  — Dysmenor-
rhoea,  80,  111,  281.

Mercurial  affections,  181.


Mercurial  disease. — Hy drargyr osis ,
30,  111.

Mercurial  ulcers  in  mouth,  230.

Metastasis. — The  passing  of  a disease
from  one  organ  to  another  ; arthri-
tic, to  the  heart,  183.

Metrorrhagia . -XJ t e r ine  h ae  morrhage ,
231.

Milk,  excessive  flow  of. — Galactir-
rhcea,  261.

Milk,  excessive  quantity  of,  too
thick,  of  nursing  women,  230.

Milk-fever,  253.

Miliaria. — Eruption  of  small  vesicles
on  the  skin,  resembling  millet  seed,
(milium,)  hence  the  name,  80,  111,
153.

Morbid  affection  of  the  lining  mem-
brane of  the  nose. — Ozasna,  30,  80.

Morbid  enlargement. — Hypertrophy
of  the  heart,  111.

Moss,  a species  of  tetter. — Lichen,
80,  153.

Morbilli. — (Measles,  the,)  80.

Mouth,  accumulation  of  mucus  in,

111.

N.

Nausea,  230.

Necrosis. — Gangrene  of  the  bones,
111,  257.

Nervous  affection,  peculiar  to  fe-
males, 79, 131.

Nettle-rash. — Urticaria,  258.

Neuralgia,  pain  in  a nerve,  253.

Neuralgia  of  hip — Ischias,  258,  262.

Nipples,  excoriations  of,  258.

Night-mare,  (see  Incubus.)

Nodosities,  arthritic,  181.

Nose,  bleeding  at,  200.

Nose,  carcinoma  of,  182.

Nose,  chronic  obstruction  of,  182.

Nose,  obstruction  of,  159.

Nose,  swelling  of,  110,  259.

Nose,  thick  tip  of,  182.

O.

Odontalgia.  — Tooth-ache,  30,  159,
132,  200,  230,  260.

Oedema. — Partial  dropsy  of  the  cel-
lular tissue,  111.

Oedema  pulmonum. — Dropsy  of  the
lungs,  80.

Onanism,  pernicious  effects  of,  281.

Ophthalmia,  257,  259.

Ophthalmia  angularis,  111.

Orchitis. — Inflammation  of  the  testes,
182.

Organic  activity,  increase  of. — Sthen-
osis,  110.

Organs  of  generation,  blennorrhcea  of,
159.


INDEX.


321


Ostearthrocace. — Spina  ventosa,  257.

Osteonecrosis.  — Gangrene  of  the
bones,  111,  257.

Oton'hcea. — Running  of  the  ear,  80,
132.

Otitis. — Inflammation  of  the  ear,  159,
230,  259.

Ovaries,  tumefaction  of,  110.

Ozcena  — Morbid  affection  of  the  lin-
ing membrane  of  the  nose,  30,  80,
132,  259.

P.

Pcedarthrocace. — Spina  ventosa,  257.

Palate,  ulceration  and  caries  of,  182.

Palsy. — Paralysis,  80,  111.

Pannus. — Varicose  excrescence  of
the  conjunctiva,  200.

Panaritia,  30,230.

Paralysis. — Palsy,  80,  111.

Paralytic  conditions  of  extremities,
258.

Parotitis. — Inflammation  of  the  paro-
tid gland,  110,  200,  259.

Pemphigus . — A pustulous  eruption  of
the  skin,  111.

Peripneumonia  notha,  111.

Peritonitis.  110.

Pemiiones. — Chilblains,  159.

Photophobia  — Dread  of  light,  259.

Photopsia,  Seeing  of  sparks,  80.

Phthisis,  110,  111.

Phthisis  of  the  mesentery. — Tabes
meseraica,  181.

Phthisis,  tuberculous,  202.

Piles. — Haemorrhoids,  30,  80,  111,  159,
2-30,  257,  258.

Pleuritis,  110.

Pleuritis,  of  the  muscles. — Inflamma-
tion of  the  pleura,  230.

Pleurodynia. — Pain  in  pleura  or  side,
230.

Pleuropneumonia. — Inflammation  of
the  lungs  and  pleura,  159.

Plica  Polonica. — Agglutination  of  the
hair  by  means  of  a sort  of  lymph,
230.

Pneumonia.  — Inflammation  of  the
lungs,  80,  111,  159.

Podagra.— Gout,  30, 80,  81,  111,  158,
262.

Pollutions,  200.

Pollutions,  too  frequent,  159,  182.

Polypi,  in  the  bladder,  261.

Polypi,  in  the  ear,  259.

Polypi,  in  the  nose,  259.

Pompholix. — A pustulous  eruption  of
the  skin,  111.

Poimigo. — Scalp,  a disease  of  the  hair,
80,  158,  200, 258.


Prepuce,  warts  and  condylomata  of,
181.

Prosopalgia. — Tic  douloureux,  182,
200,  259.

Prostatic  glands,  scirrhous  affections
of,  110.

Pnirigo. — Itching  pustules,  SO,  80.

PsoHasis,  258.

Psoriasis  locaiis. — (Scabies,  a spe-
cies of,)  80.

Ptosis. — Palsy  of  upper  eye-lid,  30.

Pulsations,  abdominal,  258.

Purulent  eye. — Blepharophthalmitis
glandulosa,  111.

Pustules,  itching. — Prurigo,  30,  80.

Pyrosis. — Water-brash,  260.

Q.

Quincy  or  sore  throat. — Angina,  110.

R.

Ramollissement  of  vertebrae,  262.

Rash,  258.

Rectum,  haemorrhoidal  obstruction
of,  182.

Rectum,  polypous  excrescences  of,

111.

Rectum,  prolapsus  of,  159.

Retention  of  milk. — Agalactia,  261.

Rhagades. — Tissues  or  cracks  in  the
skin,  30,  258.

Rhagades,  syphilitic,  181.

Rheumatism,  80,  81,  158.

Rheumatism  of  intercostal  muscles,
262.

Rheumatism  of  pleura,  262.

S.

Salivation,  230.

Sarcoma  — Tumour  of  the  adipose  tis-
sue, 258.

Scabies. — The  itch,  80,  158,  258.

Scald-head.—' Tinea,  SO,  158,  200,  258.

Scarlatina,  80,  200.

Scintillation;  a flashing  of  light  which
frequently  strikes  the  eyes  of  epi-
leptic persons. — Eclampsia,  79.

Scirrhus  cardiae,  200.

Scorbutus . — Scurvy,  80,  111.

Scrophulosis,  79,  181,  200,  257.

Scuimy. — Scorbutus,  80,  111.

Scurvy,  affection  resembling. — Sto-
macace,  230.

Secretion,  excessive,  of  the  bladder,
urethra  — Blennorrhcea  of  the  blad-
der, 110.

Sexual  desire,  excited,  in  males,  261.

Sexual  instinct,  excited,  182.

Sickly  constitution—  Cachexia,  mer-
curial, 158.

Side  or  pleura,  pain  in  the.-— Pleuro-
dynia, 230.


322


INDEX.


Sight,  obstruction  of,  182.

Skin,  disease  of  the. — Impetigo,  158.

Small-pock. — Variola,  80.

Smelling,  loss  of  the  sense  of. — Anos-
mia, 131,  259.

Sparks,  seeing  of. — Photopsia.  80.

Spasms,  abdominal,  260.

Spasms  of  the  chest,  hysteric,  131.

Spasm  of  the  Stomach. — Gastralgia  or  j
Cardialgia,  80,  111,  159,  200,  257,
260.

Spinal  marrow , rheumatic  affections
of,  262.

Spina  ventosa.  — Ostearthrocace  or
Paedarthrocace,  257.

Spitting  of  Blooi. — Haemoptysis,  261.

Spleen,  great  depression  of  spirits  j
with  general  functional  derange-  |
ment. — Hypochondriasis,  79, 181.

Spleen,  affections  of,  230.

Spleen,  distention  of,  110.

Sprains,  pain  from,  81,  111.

Squinting  — Strabismus,  30.

Stcatoma  — A tumour  of  the  adipose
tissue,  200.

Stenocardia. — A disease  of  the  heart,  ;
anguish,  ossification  of  the  coronary  i
arteries,  etc.  183.

Slhenosis. — Increase  of  organic  acti-
vity, 110.

Sterility,  230,  261.

Stiff-joint  — Anchylosis,  111.

Stings  of  bees  and  insects,  153.

Stool,  difficult,  hard,  159.

Stomacace.  — Affection  resembling  1
scurvy,  230.

Stomach,  derangement  of,  159.

Stomach,  inflammation  and  gangrene  !
of,  159.

Stomach,  pain  at,  labour-like,  230.

Slone  — Lithiasis,  110.

Strabismus. — Squinting,  30.

Strophulus . — Eruption,  and  peculiar
to  infants,  80,  153.

Sweat,  80.

Sweats,  colliquative,  258.

Swallowing,  difficulty  of. — dyspha-
gia, 257.

Swellings,  glandular,  111.

Swelling  of  the  testes,  caused  either
bv  effusion  or  infiltration  of  water.
Hydrocele,  111.

Sjcosis  menti. — Cauliflower  excre-
scence, 153.

Syphilis,  153,  131.

T.

Tabes  scrophulosa,  257.

Tabes  meseraica. — Phthisis  of  the
mesentery,  181.


Teeth,  formation  of  tartarates  upon,

111.

Teeth,  looseness  of,  182.

Tendons,  inflammation  of,  the  white
and  shining  extremity  of  a muscle,

153.

Tetanus. — Lock-jaw,  80.

Tetters,  30.

Tetters,  humid. — Eczema,  158,  258.

Tetters,  gnawing, — Lupus,  30.

Testicles,  inflammation  of  the. — Or-
chitis, 182.

Testicles,  atrophy  of. — Dwindling,
159.

Testicles,  swelling  of,  182.

Throat,  a sore,  difficulty  of  swallow-
ing.— Angina,  30,  40,  80,  200,  230,
261.

Throat,  inflammatorjr  sore,  110.

Thrush,  230.

Tic  douloureux . — Prosopalgia,  182,
200,  259.

Tinea  — Scald-head,  200.

Tingling,  in  parts  that  have  gone  to
sleep,  80.

Tissue,  adipose,  tumours  of.  111.

Tongue,  paralysis  of,  131.

Tongue,  rheumatic  swelling  of,  110.

Tongue,  scirrhous  induration  of,  182.

Tongue,  warts  and  condvlomata,  181.

Tonsils,  inflammation  of,  260.

Tooth-ache. — Odontalgia,  30, 159, 182,
200,  230,  260.

Tooth-ache,  tearing,  259.

Trachea,  catarrh  of,  200.

Tumour  of  the  adipose  tissue. — Sarco-
ma or  Steatoma,  200,  253.

Tumours,  encysted, — Lupia,  200.

Tympanitis. — Morbid  distention  of
the  abdomen,  80.

U.

Ulcers,  111.

Ulcers,  fistulous,  153.

Ulcers,  fistulous,  on  gums,  259.

Ulcers,  fistulous  and  scrophulous,  257.

Ulcers,  indolent,  230.

Ulcers,  mercurial,  in  mouth,  230.

Ulcers,  syphilitic,  182.

Understanding,  weakness  of,  30.

Urethra,  cutting  and  burning  in,  159.

Urethra,  strictures  and  contraction
of,  110.

Urinary  organs,  affections  of,  258.

Urinary  organs,  atony  of,  80.

Urine,  bloody. — Haematuria,  80.

Uterine  haemorrhage. — Metrorrhagia,
261.

Urine,  incontinent  flow  of. — Diabetes,
80.

Urine,  retention  of. — Ischuria,  182.


INDEX.


323


Urticaria.' — Nettle-rash,  258.

Uterus , pain  in  the. — Hysteralgia,
261.

y.

Varicella. — Pimples  quickly  forming
pustules,  seldom  passing  into  sup-
puration, but  bursting  at  the  point
and  drying  into  scabs. — Chicken-
pock,  158.

Varices,  258.

Varicose  excrescence  of  the  conjunc-
tiva — Pannus,  200.

Variola  — Small-pock,  80.

Venous  heart,  affections  of,  80.

Vertigo,  257,  258.

Fesse/s,  large,  affections  of,  258.

Vomiting,  257,  258,  260.

Vomiting  of  blood. — Haematemesis,  80.

Vomit,  the  black. — Melaena,  80,  158.


W.

Warts  of  the  anus,  (see  Anus.)

Water-brash. — Pyrosis,  260.

Weakness,  261.

Weakness  of  sight;  a precursor  of
amaurosis — Amblyopia  amauroti-
ca,  111,131,259.

Werlhofii  morbus  hcnnorrh. — Purple
spots  over  the  whole  body,  80.

Wetting  the  bed,  at  night,  2ol.

Whites. — Fluor  albus,  30, 85,  111,  230,
261.

White  speck  upon  the  coimea. — Leuco-
ma,  259.

Worm  affections,  258.

Worms,  condition  of  the  system
which  favours  the  existence  of.—
Helminthiasis,  111.

Womb,  prolapsus,  a falling  down  of
the,  and  induration  of,  182.

Wry-neck. — Caput  obstipum,  258.


ERRATA.

Page  105,  line  9,  for  “feet,”  read  “seat.”

In  two  or  three  instances,  the  verb  “imagine,”  in  this  volume,  has  been
used  with  the  preposition  “to,”  instead  of  the  conjunction  “that.”  The
reader  will  please  excuse  this  oversight.

The  reader  is  also  requested  to  correct  the  following  mistake  in  vol.  i,  p.
41: — instead  of  “Diabetes,  {suppression  of  urine,”)  read  “Diabetes. — Sup-
pression, fyc.”


The  first  number  of  the  Homoeopathic  Examiner  will  be  for  sale  on
the  loth  of  August.  The  first  10  numbers,  besides  a variety  of  interest-
ing essays,  will  contain  a complete  translation  of  Riickert’s  Therapeutics
of  Homoeopathy . Terms,  $5  per  annum,  in  advance,  or  50  cents  each
number.


WILLIAM  RADDE,

IMPORTER,  BOOKSELLER,  AND  PUBLISHER,

322  BROADWAY,  WEW-YORK.


Importation  of  Books,  English  and  Foreign,  for  Colleges,  Public  and  Private

Libraries,  etc.  etc.

SINGLE  BOOKS  IMPORTED  TO  ORDER.

Orders  forwarded  by  every  Steamer,  and  also  by  the  Liverpool  Packets,
and  answered  promptly  by  the  return  of  the  first  steamer  after  the  receipt,
if  desired.

W.  R.  would  invite  attention  to  his  facilities  for  procuring  English  and
Foreign  Books  for  Colleges , Public  and  Private  Libraries , Booksellers,  and  the
Public  generally,  on  at  least  as  good  terms,  and  with  greater  despatch  than
they  have  ever  before  been  imported  into  this  country  by  any  other  estab-
lishment.

Books  for  Incorporated  Institutions  pay  no  duty.

All  the  German  Journals,  Monthlies,  Quarterlies,  and  Newspapers,  received


HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICINE.


WM.  RADDE,  No.  322  Broadway,  New-York,  General  Agent  for  the
Central  Homoeopathic  Pharmacy  at  Leipsic,  for  the  United  States,  respect-
fully informs  the  Homoeopathic  Physicians  and  the  friends  of  the  system,  that
he  has  always  on  hand  a good  assortment  of  HOMCEOPATHIC  MEDICINES,
in  complete  sets  or  by  single  vials,  in  Tinctures,  Dilutions,  and  Triturations;
also  Pocket  Cases  of  Medicines  ; Physicians’  and  Family  Medicine  Chests,  to
Laurie’s  Domestic  (59  remedies)  Epp’s  (54  remedies,)  Hering’s  (46  reme-
dies.) Small  pocket  cases  at  $3,  with  Family  Guide  and  27  remedies.
Cases  containing  415  vials  with  Tinctures  and  Triturations  for  Physicians  ;
cases  with  176  vials  of  Tinctures  and  Triturations  to  Jahr’s  Manual  in  2 vols.
Pocket  cases  with  60  vials  of  Tinctures  and  Triturations.  Cases  from  200-
400  vials  with  low  and  high  dilutions  of  medicated  pellets ; cases  from  50-80
vials  of  low  and  high  dilutions,  etc.  etc.  Refined  Sugar  of  Milk,  pure
Globules,  etc.;  as  well  as  Books,  Pamphlets,  and  Standard  Works  on  the
System,  in  the  English,  French,  and  German  languages.


2


Homoeopathic  Booh a*


H O SVS CEO  PATH  I C BOOKS.


THE  HOMOEOPATHIC  EXAMINER,  4th  vol.,  (new  series,)  will  be
issued  on  the  15th  day  of  August,  1845,  and  thereafter  on  the  first  of  each
month.  The  Journal  will  hereafter  be  edited  by  Drs.  Grav  and  Hempel,
Wm.  Radde,  publisher  and  proprietor.

HAHNEMANN,  DR.  S.,  THE  CHRONIC  DISEASES,  THEIR  SPE-
eific  Nature  and  Homoeopathic  Treatment.  Translated  and  edited  by  Charles
J.  Hempel,  M D.  With  a preface  by  Constantin  Hering,  M.D.,  Phila-
delphia. 8.  bound,  1845.  $1.

The  same  works,  second  part.  8.  bound,  1845.  §1  50.

{jrj=>  The  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  volumes  are  in  press.

HAHNEMANN,  DR.  S.,  MATERIA  MED1CA  PURA.  Translated  and
edited  by  Charles  Julius  Hempel,  M.  D.  1845.

BCENNINGHAUSEN’S  ESSAY  ON  THE  HOMOEOPATHIC  TREAT-
ment  of  Intermittent  Fevers.  Translated  and  edited  by  Charles  Julius
Hempel,  M.D.  1845.  50  cts.

A TREATISE  ON  THE  USE  OF  ARNICA  in  cases  of  Contusions,  Wounds,
Strains,  Sprains,  Lacerations  of  the  Solids,  Concussions,  Paralysis,  Rheuma-
tism, Soreness  of  the  Nipples,  etc.  etc.  With  a number  of  cases  illustrative
of  the  use  of  that  drug.  By  Charles  Julius  Hempel,  M.D.  18$  cts.  1845.

JAHR’S  NEW  MANUAL  OF  HOMOEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.  Edited,
with  Annotations,  by  A.  Gerald  Hull,  M.D.,  from  the  third  Paris  edition.

This  is  the  second  American  edition  of  a very  celebrated  work,  written
in  French,  by  the  eminent  Homoeopathic  Professor  Jahr,  and  it  is  considered
the  best  practical  compendium  of  this  extraordinary  science  that  has  yet  been
composed.  After  a very  judicious  and  instructive  introduction,  the  work  pre-
sents a table  of  the  Homoeopathic  medicines,  with  their  names  in  Latin,  Eng-
lish, and  German  ; the  order  in  which  they  are  to  be  studied,  with  their  most
important  distinctions,  and  clinical  illustrations  of  their  symptoms  and  effects
upon  the  various  organs  and  functions  of  the  human  system. — The  second
volume  embraces  an  elaborate  analysis  of  the  indications  in  disease,  of  the
medicines  adapted  to  cure,  and  a glossary  of  the  technics  used  in  the  work,
arranged  so  luminously  as  to  form  an  admirable  guide  to  every  medical  stu-
dent. The  whole  system  is  here  displayed  with  a modesty  of  pretension,  and
a scrupulocity  in  statement,  well  calculated  to  bespeak  candid  investigation.
This  laborious  work  is  indispensable  to  the  students  and  practitioners  of  Homoe-
opathy, and  highly  interesting  to  medical  and  scientific  men  of  all  classes.
2 vols.,  bound.  Price  $6.

LAURIE,  DR.  J.,  HOMOEOPATHIC  DOMESTIC  MEDICINE,  with
the  treatment  and  diseases  of  females,  infants,  children  and  adults.  2d  Ameri-
can edition,  with  additions  by  A.  G.  Hull,  M.D.  1844.  Bound  75  cts.

ON  ECCLECTICISM  IN  MEDICINE  : or  a critical  review  of  the  leading
medical  doctrines.  An  inaugural  thesis,  presented  at  the  New-York  Univer-
sity, on  the  first  of  March,  1845.  By  Charles  J.  Hempel,  M.D.  25  cts.

THE  HOMOEOPATHIC  EXAMINER,  by  A.  G.  Hull,  M.D.  1840,  1841,
1842,  1843-1845.  3 vols.  $15.

THE  BRITISH  JOURNAL  OF  HOMCEOPATHY.  Edited  by  J.  J.  Drys-
dale,  M.D. ; J.  R.  Russell,  M.D.;  and  Francis  Black,  M.D.  London,
1343, 1344.  No.  1-11.


Wm.  Radde , 322  Broadway.


RUOFF’S  REPERTORY  OF  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICINE,  nosologi-
cally  arranged.  Translated  from  the  German  by  A H.  Okie,  M D , translator
of  Hartman’s  Remedies.  2d  American  edition,  with  additions  and  improve-
ments by  G.  Humphrey,  M.D. , etc.  1844.  Bound,  $1  50.

HAHNEMANN’S,  DR  , ORGANON  OF  HOMCEOPATHIC  MEDICINE.
2d  American  from  the  British  translation  of  the  4th  German  edition.  With
improvements  and  additions  from  the  fifth,  by  the  North  American  Academy
of  the  Homoeopathic  Healing  Art,  New- York,  1843.  Price,  hound,  $1.

JAHR’S  PHARMACOPOEIA  and  Posology  of  the  preparation  of  Homoeo-

Sathic  medicines  and  the  administration  of  the  dose.  Translated  by  F.
litchen.  $2.

THE  PRACTICAL  ADVANTAGES  OF  HOMOEOPATHY,  illustrated
by  numerous  cases.  Dedicated  by  permission  to  Her  Majesty  Queen  Adelaide.
By  H.  Dunsford,  M.D.  $1.

JAHR’S  MANUAL  OF  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICINE.  Translated
from  the  German.  With  an  introduction  and  some  additions  by  C.  Hering,
M.D.  1833.  $2  50.

A POPULAR  VIEW  OF  HOMCEOPATHY.  By  Rev.  Thomas  R.  Ever-
est, Rector  of  Wickwar.  With  annotations,  and  a brief  survey  of  the  state
and  progress  of  Homoeopathia  in  Europe.  By  A.  Gerald  Hull,  M.D.  From
the  second  London  edition.  Bound,  price  $1.

THE  FAMILY  GUIDE  TO  THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF  HOMCEO-
pathic  Remedies.  Third  edition,  after  the  2d  London  edition,  with  additions.
Retail  price,  25  cts.

AN  EPITOME  OF  HOMCEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.  Compiled  chiefly
from  Jahr,  Rueckert,  Beauvais,  Bcenninghausen,  etc.  By  J.  T.  Curtis,  M.D.,
and  J.  Lillie,  M.D.  1843.  Bound,  87 £ cts.

C.  HERING,  M D.,  DOMESTIC  PHYSICIAN.  Third  American,  with
additions  from  the  fourth  German  edition.  1844.  Bound,  $ 2 .

M.  GROSERIO,  M D , ON  HOMCEOPATHIC  MEDICINE.  Illustrating
its  superiority  over  the  other  medical  doctrines,  with  an  account  of  the  regimen
to  be  followed  during  the  treatment  of  Homceopathy.  Translated  from  the
French.  25  cts.

EPPS,  DR.  J , DOMESTIC  HOMCEOPATHY;  or  Rules  for  the  Domestic
Treatment  of  the  Maladies  of  Infants,  Children  and  Adults,  etc.  Second
American  from  the  fourth  London  edition.  1845.  Bound,  75  cts.

W.  C.  BRYANT’S  POPULAR  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  HOMCEOPA-
thia.  Delivered  before  the  New-York  Homoeopathic  Society.  18|  cts.

C.  NSIDH ARD,  M.D.  AN  ANSWER  OF  THE  HOMCEOPATHIC
Delusions  of  Dr.  O.  W.  Holmes.  18$  cts.

HARTMANN,  DR.  F.,  PRACTICAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  SOME
of  the  chief  Homoeopathic  Remedies.  Translated  from  the  German  by  A.  H.
Okie,  M.D.  First  series.  Bound,  $1.

The  2d  and  last  series  will  be  published  in  a short  time.  Bound,  $1.

MANUAL  OF  VETERINARY  HOMCEOPATHY,  comprehending  the
treatment  of  the  Diseases  of  Domestic  Animals.  Second  edition.  London,
1342.  Bound,  #1  50.

A.  H.  OKIE,  MD,  HOMCEOPATHY  EXPLAINED  AND  OBJEC-
tions  Answered.  12|  cts.


4


Medical  Books .


J.  A.  M‘VICKAR,  M.D.,  HOMCEOPATHIA  A PRINCIPLE  IN  MEDI-
cine  and  not  an  Exclusive  System.  In  a letter  to  Alban  Goldsmith,  M.D.
25  cts.

J.  JEANES,  M.D.,  HOMOEOPATHIC  PRACTICE  OF  MEDICINE.  $3.

A.  G.  HULL,  M.D.,  THE  DOMESTIC  TREATMENT  OF  THE  CON-
vulsions  of  Infants.  25  cts.

DR.  C HANNING’S  DISCOURSE  OF  THE  REFORMATION  OF
Medical  Science  ^demanded  by  Inductive  Philosophy.  37£  cts.

DR.  CURIE,  ANNALS  OF  THE  LONDON  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDI-
cal  Institution.  Reports  of  Cases.  Nos.  1-21,  1842.  $4.

DEFENCE  OF  HAHNEMANN  AND  HIS  DOCTRINES,  INCLUDING
an  Exposure  of  Dr.  Alex.  Wood’s  “Homoeopathy  Unmasked.”  London,
1844.  50  cts.

F.  VANDERBURGH,  M.D.,  AN  APPEAL  FOR  HOMOEOPATHY;  or
Remarks  on  the  Decision  of  the  late  Judge  Cowen,  relative  to  legal  Rights  of
Homoeopathic  Physicians.  1844.  12£  cts.

HYDRIATICS,  OR  MANUAL  OF  THE  WATER  CURE,— Especially
as  practised  by  Vincent  Priessnitz,  in  Graffenberg ; compiled  and  translated
from  the  writings  of  Charles  Mundie,  Dr.  Oertel,  Dr.  B.  Hirschel,  and  other
eye-witnesses  and  practitioners.  Fourth  edition,  by  Francis  Graeter.  Price
50  cts.,  with  one  plate  or  six  engravings.  1844.

ROKYTANSKY’S  PATHOLOGICAL  ANATOMY,  translated  from  the
German,  with  additions  on  diagnosis  from  Schonlein,  Skoda,  and  others.  By
Dr.  John  C.  Peters.  1844.  75  cts.

Opinions  of  the  Press. — “ Dr.  Rokytansky’s  book  is  no  more  than  it  professes
to  be : it  is  morbid  Anatomy  in  its  densest  and  most  compact  form,  scarcely
ever  alleviated  by  histories,  cases,  or  hypotheses.  It  is  just  such  a work  as
might  be  expected  from  its  author,  who  is  said  to  have  written  in  it  the  result
of  his  experience  gained  in  the  careful  examination  of  over  12,000  bodies,  and
who  is  possessed  of  a truly  marvellous  power  of  observing  and  amassing  facts.
In  the  course  of  our  analysis  we  have  said  comparatively  little  of  its  merits,
the  best  evilence  of  which  is  found  in  the  length  to  which  our  abstracts  have
been  carried  without  passing  beyond  the  bounds  of  what  is  novel  or  important.
Nor  would  this  fault  have  been  committed  though  much  more  had  been  bor-
rowed, for  no  modern  volume  on  morbid  Anatomy  contains  half  so  many  genu-
ine facts  as  this  ; it  is  alone  sufficient  to  place  its  author  in  the  highest  rank  of
European  medical  observers.” — British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review,  January,
1843.

“ Among  others  of  our  profession  at  Vienna,  who  are  ably  endeavouring  to
advance  the  reputation  of  sound  medical  science  on  the  only  secure  basis  upon
which  it  can  march,  that  of  practical  experience  at  the  bed-side,  and  in  autopsic
examinations,  we  (Dr.  Mott)  must  not  omit  to  mention  Professors  Rokytansky
and  Skoda.  Dr.  Rokytansky,  availing  himself  of  the  wide  field  of  inquiry
which  his  position  gives  him,  has,  after  years  of  the  closest  and  most  diligent
application,  recently  published  a work,  than  which  none  was  more  wanted  by
the  profession,  and  which,  being  a faithful  description  of  what  he  himself  saw
in  more  than  12,000  dead  bodies,  and  a well  digested  theory  of  the  greater
number  of  morbid  processes,  which  he  has  minutely  traced  throughout  their
stages,  will  form  a most  valuable  accession  to  Pathology.  Professor  Skoda,
after  a number  of  years  of  the  most  laborious  application  to  the  subject  of  Aus-
cultation and  Percussion,  has  brought  out  a great  work  on  those  modes  of
applying  the  principles  of  acoustics,  to  the  illustration  of  pathological  pheno-
mena, which  will  probably  give  it  the  precedence  over  all  others.  It  is  founded


Wm.  Radde , 322  Broadway .


5


wholly  on  his  own  observations  on  the  living;  subject,  confirmed  by  numerous
post  mortem  examinations.” — Dr.  Mott’s  Travels  in  Europe  and  the  East.

ENCHIRIDION  MEDICUM,  or  the  Practice  of  Medicine  ; the  result  of  50
years’  experience,  by  C.  W.  Hufeland,  counsellor  of  State,  physician  in  ordi-
nary of  the  late  King;  of  Prussia,  professor  in  the  University  of  Berlin.  From
the  sixth  German  edition  ; translated  by  C.  Bruchhausen,  M.D.  Revised  by
R.  Nelson,  M D.  Second  American  Edition.  1844.  Bound,  $2  50.

Opinions: — The  following  lines  from  Dr.  Manley,  formerly  president  of  the
Medical  Society  of  the  State  of  New-York,  contains  his  opinion  in  few  words
of  the  merits  of  the  book  : —

I am  happy  to  have  the  opportunity  of  recommending  to  the  medical  profes-
sion the  Manual  of  the  Practice  of  Medicine,  by  Hufeland.  It  is  not  often  that
books  of  this  character,  on  perusal,  make  good  the  claims  which  their  titles
assume,  but  this  is  a well  marked  exception : its  descriptions  of  diseases,
though  concise,  are  comprehensive  ; its  reasonings  just  and  philosophical,  and
its  practice,  as  a consequence,  intelligible  and  rational.  The  character  of  the
author,  and  his  experience  of  more  than  half  a century,  together  with  ihe
unexampled  popularity  of  the  work  in  its  original  language,  render,  in  my
opinion,  all  individual  recommendation  superfluous.  I hope  that  it  may  soon
be  found  in  the  hands  of  every  medical  man,  whether  pupil  or  practitioner.

New-York,  September  7,  1842.  James  R.  Manley,  M.D.

Certificate  of  John  F.  Gray,  M.D.,  formerly  resident  physician  to  the
New-York  Hospital,  Lecturer  on  the  Theory  and  Practice  of  Physic,  Censor
of  the  State  and  New-York  Medical  Societies,  etc  , etc.

I am  very  glad  to  find  the  press  engaged  in  diffusing  a knowledge  of  the
German  medical  literature  in  this  country.  At  the  head  of  the  German  books
of  practice  stands  this  book  of  the  good  Hufeland.  Mr.  Bruchhausen  and  Dr.
Nelson  have  laboured  with  dilligence  and  good  faith  in  rendering  the  Enchiri-
dicni;  and,  so  far  as  I have  had  leisure  to  compare  their  work  with  the  original,
I find  no  error  of  magnitude.  Another  edition  will,  no  doubt,  be  called  for
soon,  and  then  the  worthy  American  curators  can  dispense  with  the  somewhat
meagre  characteristic  given  to  it  by  their  too  close  adherence  to  the  letter
of  the  author.  I heartily  wish  success  to  the  good  enterprise.

New-York,  September  8,  18-12.  John  F.  Gray,  M.D.

The  reputation  of  the  venerable  eclectic  of  Germany  scarcely  requires
endorsement  even  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic.  An  independent  and  original
thinker,  Hufeland  laboured  for  the  cause  of  medical  science,  and  has  acquired
a universal  renown,  amply  attested  to  by  his  “ Journal  of  Practical  Medi-
cine,” “ Art  of  prolonging  Life,”  “ System  of  Practical  Medicine,”  and
numerous  Essays,  besides  personal  contributions  of  humane  and  necessary  in-
novations in  the  treatment  of  “ Inoculation,”  “Small  Pox,”  and  “Signs  of
Death.”  His  last  work,  Enchiridion  Medicum,  concentrates  the  experience
of  his  entire  medical  life,  and  fully  maintains  in  its  careful  and  concise  descrip-
tion and  diagnosis  of  diseases  all  the  evidence  of  the  discriminating  intellect
of  the  Patriarch  of  German  medical  literature.

New-York,  September  12,  1842.  A.  Gerald  Hull,  M.D.

The  writings  of  the  great  Hufeland  need  no  recommendation  of  mine.  His
name,  as  a medical  authority,  is  so  well  established,  that  I have  no  doubt  this
work  will  find  a ready  and  extensive  sale.

John  B.  Beck,  M.D.,

Professor  of  Materia  Medica  and  Medical  Jurisprudence  in  the
College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  of  New-York.

New-York,  14  Le  Roy  Place,  September  6,  1842.


6


London  Books ,


I hare  looked  eves'  the  Enchiridion  Msdicum  of  Professor  Hufeland.  It  is
an  excellent  compendium  of  German  practice,  and  will  be  found  a valuable
vade-mecum  to  the  student  and  practitioner.  It  can  profitably  be  perused,
and  ought  to  be  in  the  hands  of  all  physicians.  The  justly  distinguished  repu-
tation of  the  author  will  make  it  a work  generally  sought  for.

Valentine  Mott,  M.D.

The  publishers  have  conferred  a benefit  upon  the  medical  literature  of  our
country,  by  producing  this  translation  of  the  Enchiridion  Medicum  of  Hufe-
land. Few  Works  on  practice  contain  so  much  useful  matter  in  so  small
compass.  But  independently  of  the  value  attached  to  any  work  from  the  pen
of  Hufeland,  this  book  is  especially  useful  to  Americans,  by  furnishing  them
with  the  modes  of  thinking  and  practising,  peculiar  to  the  medical  men  of  a
large  portion  of  continental  Europe,  to  which  they  have  few  means  of  access.

Edward  Delafield,  M.D.

103  Bleecker-street,  September  5,  1842.


JUST  IMPORTED:

M.  J.  WEBER,  M.D.,  LARGE  ANATOMICAL  ATLAS  OF  THE  HU-
man  Body  in  Natural  Size,  coloured.  Eighty-four  plates,  also  the  six  newest
supplement  plates,  and  a text-book  or  explanation  of  the  Atlas.  This  is  the
original  and  correct  edition,  and  has  been  always  sold  for  $>40  without  the
six  supplement  plates.  At  present,  but  for  an  uncertain  time  only,  at  $25.


LONDON  BOOKS.

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  CUTANEOUS  DISEASE,  a series  of  delineations
of  the  Affections  of  the  Skin,  in  their  most  interesting  and  frequent  forms,
with  a practical  summary  of  their  symptoms,  diagnosis  and  treatment,  inclu-
ding appropriate  formulae.  By  Robert  Willis,  M.D.,  Licentiate  of  the  Royal
College  of  Physicians,  and  physician  to  the  Royal  Infirmary  for  Children.
The  drawings  are  after  nature,  and  lithographed  by  A.  Henning.  These  illus-
trations are  comprised  in  94  plates,  folio;  the  drawings  are  originals,  most
carefully  coloured,  elegantly  bound,  $30.

R.  WILLIAMS,  M.D.,  ELEMENTS  OF  PRACTICAL  MEDICINE.
Morbid  Poisons,  containing  Typhus,  Scarlatina,  Morbilli,  Variolae,  Varicella,
Erysipelas,  Pertussis,  2 vols.,  Svo.,  $>7.

MARSHALL  HALL,  M.D. , F.R.S.,  &c.,  ON  THE  DISEASES  AND
Derangements  of  the  Nervous  System,  in  their  primary  forms  and  in  their
modifications  by  age,  sex,  constitution,  hereditary  predisposition,  excesses,
general  disorder,  and  organic  diseases.  8vo.,  bound,  $3  75.

SAME  JAMES,  F.R  S.E.,  PRINCIPLES  OF  SURGERY.  3d  edition,
enlarged  and  illustrated  with  sixty-four  wood  cuts  and  fourteen  plates.  Bound,
$>5  50.

GERBER,  FR.,  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  GENERAL  AND  MINUTE
Anatomy  of  Man  and  the  Mammalia,  chiefly  after  original  Researches ; to
wrhich  are  added,  Notes  and  an  Appendix,  comprising  Researches  on  the  An-
atomy of  the  Blood,  Chyle,  Lymph,  Thymous  Fluid,  Tubercle,  &c.  &c.  By
G.  Gulliver,  F.R.S.  Bound,  2 vols.,  $6.


Wm.  Radde , 822  Broadway.


7


SAUNDERS,  EDWIN,  M.R.C.S,  ADVICE  ON  THE  CARE  OF  THE
Teeth,  with  a coloured  copper  plate.  London,  1843.  62£.

RYAN,  M.,  M.D.,  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  MARRIAGE,  IN  ITS  So-
cial, Moral,  and  Physical  Relations ; with  an  account  of  the  Diseases  of  the
Genito-Urinary  organs,  which  impair  or  destroy  the  reproductive  function,
and  induce  a variety  of  complaints  with  the  physiology  of  generation  in  the
vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms,  &c.  &c.  Fourth  edition.  London,  1843.
Bound,  $1  50.

MARTIN,  W.  C.  L.,  F.L.S.,  A GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE
Natural  History  of  Mammiferous  Animals,  with  a particular  view  of  the
physical  histoip  of  man,  and  the  more  closely  allied  genera  of  the  order  Qua-
drumana,  or  Monkeys.  Illustrated  with  296  anatomical,  osteological,  and
other  incidental  engravings  on  wood,  and  12  full  plate  representations  of  ani-
mals,  drawn  by  Wm.  Harvey.  Bound,  $4.

PRICHARD,  J.C.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.M.R.I.A.,  THE  NATURAL  HISTORY
of  Man;  comprising  inquiries  into  the  modifying  influence  of  physical  and
moral  agencies  on  the  different  tribes  of  the  human  family.  With  36  coloured
and  four  plain  illustrations,  engraved  on  steel,  and  ninety  engravings  on  wood.
London,  1843.  Bound,  $7.

THOMSON,  THOMAS,  M.D.,  CHEMISTRY  OF  ORGANIC  BODIES,
Vegetables.  Bound,  $6  50.

THE  ZOIST : A JOURNAL  OF  CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY  AND  MES-
merism,  and  their  applications  to  Human  Welfare.  Published  quarterly.  Each
number,  62|  cts.

LEBAUDY.,  J.,  M.D.,  THE  ANATOMY  OF  THE  REGIONS  INTE-
rested  in  the  Surgical  Operations  performed  upon  the  Human  Body,  with
occasional  views  of  the  pathological  conditions,  which  render  the  interfe-
rence of  the  surgeon  necessary.  In  a series  of  plates  engraved  on  India  paper.
The  size  of  life,  $6,


FRENCH  BOOKS.


CRUVE1LHIER.  ANATOMIE  PATHOLOGIQUE  DU  CORPS  HU-
main,  ou  Descriptions,  avec  figures  lithographiees  et  coloriees,  des  diverses
alterations  morbides  dont  le  corps  humain  est  susceptible  ; par  J.  Cruvetlhier
professeur  d’anatomie  pathologique  a la  Faculte  de  Medecine  de  Paris,  mede-
cin  de  l’hdpital  de  la  Charite,  president  perpetuel  de  la  Societe  anatomique,
etc.

L’ouvragecomplet  forme  2 forts  volumes,  relit,  grand  in- folio  avec  233  planches
coloriees.  $130.

RAYER.  TRAITE  DES  MALADIES  DES  REINS,  et  des  alterations
de  la  secretion  urinaire,  etudiees  en  elles-memes  et  dans  leurs  rapports  avec
les  maladies  des  uret^res,  de  la  vessie,  de  la  prostate,  de  1’uretre,  etc. ; par  P.
Raver,  medecin  del’hopitalde  la  Charite,  medecin  consultant  du  Roi  mem-
bre  de  l’Institut,  etc.  Paris,  1839-1841,  3 forts  vol.  in-8.  $6.

Le  bel  atlas  pour  cet  ouvrage,  representant  I’Anatomie  pathologique  des
reins,  de  la  vessie,  de  la  prostate,  des  uret^res,  de  l’ur6tre,  etc.,  a ete  publie
en  12  livraisons  contenant  chacune  5 jflanches  grand  in-folio,  gravees  et  mag-
nifiquement  coloriees  d’apres  nature,  avec  un  texte  descriptif.  Ce  bel  ouvrag’e
compose  de  60  planches  grand  in-folio  est  complet.  Prix  $50,


s


French  Boohs.


RAYER.  TRAITE  THEORETIQUE  ET  PRATIQUE  des  maladies  de
la  peau  ; par  P.  Raver,  medecin  de  l’hopital  de  la  Charite  ; deuxi'eme  Edition
entibrement  refondue.  Paris,  1835,  3 forts  vol.  in-8,  aecompagnes  d’un  bel  atlas
de  23  planches  grand  in-4,  gravees  et  coloriees  avec  le  plus  grand  soin,  repre-
sentant,  en  400  figures,  les  difierentes  maladies  de  la  peau  et  leurs  variet£s.
Prix  du  texte  seul,  3 vol.  in-8.  $6.

Prix  de  l’atlas  seul,  avec  explication  raisonnee,  grand  in-4  cartonne.  $'20.

Prix  de  l’ouvrage  complet,  3 vol.  in-8,  et  atlas  in-4,  cartonne.  $25.

BOIVIN  ET  BUGES.  TRAITE  PRATIQUE  DES  MALADIES  DE
Puterus  et  de  ses  Annexes,  appuye  sur  un  grand  nombre  d’observations  cli-
niques ; par  Madame  Boivin,  docteur  en  medecine,  sage-femme,  surveillante
en  chef  de  la  Maison  royale  de  Sante,  et  A.  Duges,  prof,  a la  Fac.  de  Med.  de
Montpellier.  Paris,  1833,  2 v.  in-8.  $3  50.

Atlas  de  41  planches  in-fol.,  gravees  et  coloriees,  reprhentant  les  principales
alterations  morbides  des  organes  genitaux  de  la  femme.  Paris,  1833,  in-fol.,  avec
explication.  $6.

L’ouvrage  complet  pris  ensemble,  2 vol.  in-8,  atlas  infol.  $20.

VELPEAU.  NOUVEAUX  ELEMENTS  DE  MEDECINE  OPERA-
toire,  aecompagnes  d’un  Atlas  de  22  planches  in-4,  gravees,  representant  les
principaux  procedes  operatoires  et  un  grand  nombre  d’instruments  de  chirur-
gie,  par  A.  A.  Velpeau,  chirurgien  de  l’hopital  de  la  Charite,  professeur  de
clinique  chirurgicale  a la  Faculte  de  medecine  de  Paris.  Deuxi'eme  edition ,
entibrement  refondue  et  augmentee  d’un  traite  de  petite  chirurgie,  avec  191

glanches  intercalees  dans  le  texte.  Paris,  1839.  4 forts  vol.  in-8,  de  chacun

00  pages  et  atlas  in-4.  $10.

Avec  les  planches  de  l’atlas  coloriees.  $16,

RASP  AIL.  NOUVEAU  SYSTEME  DE  CHIMIE  ORGANIQUE,  fonde
sur  de  nouvelles  methodes  d’observation ; precede  d’un  Traite  complet  sur
Part  d’observer  et  de  manipuler  en  grand  et  en  petit  dans  le  laboratoire  et  sur
le  porte-objet  du  microscope  ; par  F.  V.  Raspail,  Deuxi'eme  edition,  entibre-
ment refondue,  accompagnee  d’un  atlas  in-4de  20  planches  de  figures  dessinees
d’apr^s  nature,  gravees  avec  le  plus  grand  soin.  Paris,  1838,  3 forts  vol.  in-8,
et  atlas  in-4.  $9.

ENCYCLOPEDIE  ANATOMIQUE,  comprenant  l’Anatomie  descriptive,
1’Anatomie  generale,  l’Anatomie  pathologique,  l’histoire  du  Developpement
et  celle  des  Races  humaines,  par  G.  T.  Bischoff,  J.  Henle,  E.  Huschke,  S.  T.
Soemmerring,  F.  G.  Theile,  G.  Valentin,  J.  Vogel,  R.  Wagner,  G.  et  E.  We-
ber, traduit  de  l’Allemand,Par  A.  J.  L.  Jourdan,  membre  de  1’ Academic  roy-
ale de  medecine,  Paris,  1843, 10  volumes  m-8.  prix  de  chaque  volume,  $1  75.
Prix  des  2 atlas  in-4.  $3.

G.  H.  G.  JAHR.— ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  UPON  HOMCEOPA-
thia,  and  the  manner  of  its  practice,  with  some  of  the  most  important  effects
of  ten  of  the  principal  Homoeopathic  remedies.  Second  French  edition,
corrected  and  enlarged.  Translated  by  Edward  Bayard,  M.D.  50  cents.


1


s


'


J


-


Y Y


: ; f / i f ' - fjj  f ■»■  /■  * -t  ? " £ t f V f

I f?  *'  1 ' ■.  '■  . t • ■ f ft  . / . .■  ./  ■

Y . ' J J J it  , ; . t J Y J J 'J  J J :f  J J J J J )i  J :r  , ; .t  . •

■ i .5  r > .s'  r " >/  < *>  f . fig  if  j f a -5  •»  V . . / ..  ,7

' . ■'  . , , $ . • . • , . . . . . • . • . . .

!•'  «!»>  «*»'  •ift'Y  ■-l*'  -«»*>■  ••***.  ’TV  -1C'  ~ ■**.*'  '■  -ur  ,;r  - ■ . ■ • ■ • •

- . Y Y . . . Y . ■ • . Y . .

' 7 t ’ ■ " 7'y  y' : r 7-  7 77  77'  y . r'j


-ex'-  ■


• . ? .'r  f?  ’ /•


.


'■  N


v : V'


■ ■;>  <r.


V ■ • »->  't  \ > ' v “ \ >■  % ‘i  1.  f


’ X • . ■

X-


X’.'  V ‘X'"  V


- . - - ‘ \ ‘ ‘ Y


■ - - • \v;-.  ■-  ,>  ;>  ,$.s: ' " . ' ’■  ■ - '■  ■ \ - - ■

> X ’ ]S  3 ' • ' X -■  \ ' \ ' r • . : -


^ ‘ -V  V *>  \ ■ \ " \ V • v ‘ \ Sl  \ ' S

■ v ‘ , '.s  "■  %*■  ■ • s ; > - ' • ' ■ ‘

■ §<*  \ ' - - ' ‘ ' ‘ \ j y


■X  -;n\  ' \\\  Y-


Y ■ “v  ;v  \ \ ' \ \ \ '■  \

, -■  ' ' ; : 7;-y.'  - v "v  ■ y ■ x ■>,  X - ,,  ' '7  \ 1

‘ - ‘ ■ . ..  ' ^ *>  ■ ■ ' . ''  v ' "•  1 • •
YY  % ' 7'  7 ■ ’ ' ■ -Y'Y-  ' X Y ji  <4


V \ V\.  v

i , - i


'Y  ‘ Y . . '•v.,\  ' Y i'N  '>  Y \ ‘ , X ’ - x \ V\,-.;

*•  *»•  ■ ■—  V--  ' - • «•«-  an’.  . N • ' . .

■ - ■ ' - - V ' - ' x % ■-  • ; ■ ■ ” '

| ;Y  ' " > •>?  \ Y " % " Y Y?  " i.  ■ i.  -y  ‘v:>Y>  ' < ‘ 1 . \ V'X

"Y  <->  Vv^'>\7y'^  s ‘Y  'Y  X’Y  X X Y '•%  Y Y Y > Y-Y  Y Y Y '

5;  Y.Y.YYY  :v  Y":  Y , y , -Y  V Y.  ■ >,  Y ‘ ‘YY  Y Y ,'Y  Y \ Y . Y.  s.YY  V'v  Y.  •
Ti\  Y _■  v Y Ye . : i x Y.  Y Y . -V  . \ - i . Y \ . •,  \ \ . > \ 5»  - c . • H \ V ' v-

c . Y V Y „ vY  v,Y  Y 1 . \ h . | \ kXiV.  % ...  \ S \
