The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 5 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 5 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  Traffiques  and

Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume V

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND COMPANY FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOXJGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMIV

SIR EDWARD OSBORNE

The Principal

Navigations  Voyages
Traffiques  (^  DisGoveries

of  the  English Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within the

compasse  of  these 1600  Yeeres

By

RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church  in  Oxford

VOLUME V

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University
New  York : The  Macmillan  Company

MCMIV

I  0  1S40

5

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages  of  this  fifth  volume
made  to  the  South  and  South-east  quarters  ;
with  the  Ambassages,  Treatises,  Priviledges,
Letters,  and  other  observations,  depending
upon  the  Voyages  of  this  fifth  Volume  :

A  relation  of  the  siege  and  taking  of  the  citie  of  Rhodes,  by
Sultan  Soliman  the  great  Turke  :  Wherein  honorable
mention  is  made  of  divers  valiant  English  knights,
Anno  1522.  ......  I

An  ambassage  from  Don  Ferdinando,  brother  to  the  Em-
perour  Charles  the  fift,  unto  King  Henry  the  eight,
craving  his  ayde  against  Soliman  the  great  Turke,
An.  1527. .......  61

The  antiquitie  of  the  trade  of  English  marchants  unto  the

remote  parts  of  the  Levant  seas.  Anno  1511,  15 12,  &c.  62

A  letter  of  Henry  the  eight,  king  of  England,  to  John  the
third  king  of  Portugale,  for  a  Portugale  ship  fraighted
at  Chio,  with  the  goods  of  John  Gresham,  William
Lok,  and  others,  and  wrongfully  unladen  in  Portugale,
Anno  1 53 1.  .  .  .  .  .  .  63

A  voyage  made  with  two  ships  called  The  holy  Crosse,
and  The  Matthew  Gunson,  to  the  Isles  of  Candia
and  Chio,  about  the  yeere 1534.  ,  .  .  d"]

V

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

Another  voyage  unto  Candia  and  Chio  made  by  the  foresayd

ship  called  The  Matthewe  Gunson,  Anno  1535.  .  68

The  voyage  of  the  valiant  Esquire  M,  Peter  Read  to  Tunis

in  Barbarie  1538,  recorded  in  his  Epitaph. .  ,  69

The  voyage  of  Sir  Thomas  Chaloner  to  Alger, with  the

Emperour  Charles  the  fift,  Anno  154.1.  ...  70

The  voyage  of  M.  Roger  Bodenham,  with  the  great  barke

Aucher,  to  Candia  and  Chio,  Anno  1550. .  . 71

The  voyage  of  M.  John  Lok  to  Jerusalem,  Anno  1553. .  76

The  maner  of  the  entring  of  Soliman  the  great  Turke,  with
his  army,  into  Alepo  in  Syria,  as  hee  was  marching
toward  Persia,  against  the  great  Sophi,  Anno  1553. . 105

A  note  of  the  presents  that  were  given  at  the  same  time  in
Alepo,  to  the  Grand  Signer,  and  the  names  of  the
presenters. .  .  .  .  .  ,  .108

The  safe  conduct  granted  by  Sultan  Soliman  the  great
Turke,  to  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson  at  Alepo  in  Syria,
Anno  1553.  .  .  .  .  .  .109

A  discourse  of  the  trade  to  Chio  written  by  Gaspar  Cam-
pion, in  the  yeere  1569. .  .  .  .  .111

A letter of  the sayd Gaspar Campion, to M. William

Winter,  in  the  yeare  1569.  .  .  .  .115

A  report  of  the  siege  and  taking  of  Famagusta  the  strongest
citie  in  al  Cyprus,  by  Mustafa  Bassa  Generall  of  the
great  Turkes  army.  Anno  1571..  .  .  . 118

A  briefe  description  of  the  Isle  of  Cyprus. .  .  . 1 24.

The  voyage  of  John  Foxe,  to  the  Streit  of  Gibraltar,  in  a
ship  called  The  three  halfe-moones,  Anno  1563.
And  his  worthy  enterprize  in  delivering  266  Christians
from  the  captivitie  of  the  Turkes  at  Alexandria,  Anno

1577 153

vi

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  renewing  and  great  increasing  of  an  ancient  trade
unto  divers  places  in  the  Levant  seas,  and  to  the
chiefest  parts  of  all  the  great  Turkes  dominions,
Anno  1575,  1578. .  .  ...  . 167

The  letters  of  Zuldan  Murad  Can  the  great  Turke,  to  the

sacred  Majestic  of  Queene  Elizabeth,  Anno  1579. . 169

The  answere  of  her  Majestie  to  the  foresaid  letters  of  the
great  Turke,  sent  by  M.  Richard  Stanly,  in  the
Prudence  of  London,  Anno  1579.  -  .  . 171

The  charter  of  privlledges  granted  to  the  English,  and  the
league  of  the  great  Turke  With,  the  Queenes  Majestie,
for  traffique  onely.  Anno  1580. .... 178

Her  Majesties  letter  to  the  great  Turke,  promising  redresse
for  the  disorders  of  Peter  Baker  of  Radcliffe,  committed
in  the  Levant,  Anno  1581.  .  .  .  . 189

The  letters  Patents  or  Privileges  granted  by  her  Majestie
to  Sir  Edward  Osborne,  M.  Richard  Staper,  and
certaine  other  marchants  of  London,  for  their
trade  into  the  dominions  of  the  great  Turke,  Anno
1581.  ....... 192

The  voyage  of  M.  Laurence  Aldersey  to  the  cities  of  Jerusa-
lem, and  Tripolis,  in  the  yeere  1 581. .  .  . 202

The  Pasport  made  by  the  great  Master  of  Malta  unto  the

English  men  in  the  Barke  Rainolds,  Anno  1582.  . 215

The  Queenes  commission  given  to  her  servant  M.  William
Hareborne,  to  bee  Her  Majesties  Ambassador  or  Agent
in  the  parts  of  Turkie,  Anno  1582. .  .  . 221

Her  Majesties  letter  to  the  great  Turke,  written  in  com-
mendation of  M.  William  Hareborne,  when  he  was
sent  Ambassador,  Anno  1582. .  .  .  . 224

vii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  letter  of  the  Queenes  Majestic  to  AUi  Bassa,  the  Turkes
high  Admiral,  sent  by  her  Ambassador  M.  William
Hareborne,  and  delivered  unto  him  aboord  his  Galley
in  the  Arsenal. ...... 228

A  briefe  remembrance  of  things  to  bee  indevoured  at  Con-
stantinople, and  at  other  places  in  Turkic,  touching
our  Clothing  and  Dying,  and  touching  the  ample  vent
of  our  naturall  commodities,  &c.  written  by  M.
Richard  Hakluyt  of  the  middle  Temple,  Anno  1582.  . 229

Certaine  other  most  profitable  and  wise  instructions  penned
by  the  sayd  M.  Richard  Hakluyt,  for  a  principall
English  Factor  at  Constantinople.  .  .  . 231

The  voyage  of  The  Susan  of  London  to  Constantinople,
wherein  M.  William  Hareborne  was  sent  first  Am-
bassadour  unto  Zuldan  Murad  Can  the  great  Turke.
Anno  1582,  ...... 243

A  letter  of  Mustafa  Chaus  to  the  Queenes  Majestic,  Anno

1583 258

A  letter  of  M.  William  Hareborne,  to  M.  Harvie  Millers,
appointing  him  Consul  for  the  English  nation,  in
Alexandria,  Cairo,  &  other  places  of  Egypt,  in  the
yeare  of  our  Lord  1583. ..... 259

A  commission  given  by  M.  William  Hareborne  the  English
Ambassador,  to  M.  Richard  Forster,  authorizing  him
Consul  of  the  English  nation,  in  the  partes  of  Alepo,
Damasco,  Aman,  Tripolis,  Jerusalem,  &c.  together
with  a  letter  of  directions  to  the  sayd  M.  Forster,
Ann.  1583.  ....... 260

A  letter  sent  from  Alger to  M. William  Hareborne her

Majesties  Ambassador  at  Constantinople,  Anno  1583.  263

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  letter  of  M.  Hareborne  to  Mustafa,  chalenging  him  for
his  dishonest  dealing  in  translating  three  of  the  Grand
Signors  commandements.  .  .  .  .  .265

A  Pasport  graunted  to  Thomas  Shingleton  by  the  king  of

Alger,  in  the  yeare  1583.  ..... 266

A  letter  written  in  Spanish  by  Sir  Edward  Osborne  in  his
Maioraltie,  to  the  king  of  Alger,  on  the  behalfe  of
certaine  English  captives,  An.  1584. ,'  .  . 268

Notes  concerning  the  trades  of  Alger  and  Alexandria.  . 270

A  letter  of  M.  William  Hareborne  the  English  Ambassa-

dour,  to  M.  Edward  Barton,  Anno  1584.  .  . 274

A  commandement  obtayned  of  the  Grand  Signor  by  her
Majesties  Ambassadour  M.  William  Hareborne,  for
the  quiet  passing  of  her  subjects  to  and  from  his  do-
minions, sent  to  the  Viceroyes  of  Alger,  Tunis,  and
Tripolis  in  Barbary,  An.  1584. .  .  .  .275

A  letter  of  the  hon.  M.  William  Hareborne,  her  Majesties
Ambassadour  with  the  Grand  Signor,  to  M.  Tipton,
appointing  him  Consul  of  the  English,  in  Alger,  Tunis,
and  Tripolis  in  Barbary,  Anno  1585. .  .  . 276

A  Catalogue  or  register  of  the  English  ships,  goods,  and
persons  wrongfully  taken  by  the  Galleys  of  Alger,  with
the  names  of  the  English  captives,  delivered  to  Hassan
Bassa  the  Beglerbeg  of  Alger,  &c.  .  .  . 280

A  letter  of  M.  William  Hareborne  her  Majesties  Ambassa-
dor &c.  to  Assan  Aga,  Eunuch  and  treasurer  unto
Hassan  Bassa  king  of  Alger  :  which  Assan  Aga  was
Sonne  to  Francis  Rowly  merchant  of  Bristol,  and  was
taken  in  an  English  ship  called  the  Swallow. .  . 282

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  petition  exhibited  to  the  Viceroy  of  the  Turkish  empire
for  reformation  of  sundry  injuries  offered  our  nation  in
Morea,  as  also  for  sundry  demaundes  needefuU  for  the
establishing  of  the  trafficke  in  those  parts.  .  . 283

A commandement of  the Grand Signer to Patrasso in

Morea,  on  the  behalfe  of  the  English, .  .  .285

The  Grand  Signors  commandement  to  Chio  on  the  behalfe

of  the  English  merchants.  .  .... 286

Two  of  his  commandements  sent  to  Baliabadram  and  to

Egypt,  for  the  same  purpose. .  .  .  .287

A  commandement  of  the  Grand  Signor  to  the  Cadi  of
Alexandria,  for  the  restoring  of  an  Englishmans  goods
wrongfully  taken  by  the  French  Consul.  .  . 288

Another  commaundement  to  the  Bassa  of  Alexandria,  for

the  very  same  purpose. .  .  .  .  .289

A  commandement  to  the  Byes  and  Cadies  of  Metelin  and
Rhodes,  and  to  all  the  Cadies  &  Byes  in  the  way  to
Constantinople,  for  the  courteous  and  just  usage  of  the
English  merchants.  ..... 290

A  commandement  sent  to  Alepo  concerning  the  goods  of

M.  William  Barret  deceased. .... 290

The voyage of  a ship called the Jesus, to Tripolis in

Barbary,  Anno  1583.  ..... 292

The  Queenes  letters  to  the  great  Turke  for  the  restitution
of  an  English  ship  called  the  Jesus,  and  of  the  English
captives  detained  at  Tripolis  in  Barbary,  &  for  certaine
other  English  men  which  remained  prisoners  at  Alger,
Anno  1584.  .  .  .  .  .  •3'"

The  great  Turkes  letters  to  the  king  of  Tripolis  in  Barbary,
commanding  the  restitution  of  an  English  ship  called
The  Jesus,  with  the  men  and  goods  &c.  Anno  1584. . 314

X

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  letter  of  M.  William  Hareborne  her  Majesties  Am-
bassadour  to  Bassa  Romadan  the  Beglerbeg  of  Tripolis
in  Barbary,  for  the  restoring  of  the  sayd  ship  called
The  Jesus,  Anno  1585. ..... 316

The  voyage  of  M.  Henry  Austel  by  Venice  to  Ragusa,  and
thence  over-land  to  Constantinople  :  and  from  thence
through  Moldavia,  Polonia,  Silesia,  and  Germany  into
England,  Anno  1586. ..... 320

The great  Turkes Pasport of  safeconduct, for Captaine

Austel,  and  Jacomo  Manuchio. .... 328

A Pasport  of  the  Erie  of  Leicester,  for  Thomas  Forster

gent,  travelling  to  Constantinople,  Anno  1586.  . 329

A  description  of  the  yearely  voyage  or  pilgrimage  of  the

Mahumetans,  Turkes  and  Moores  to  Mecca  in  Arabia. 329

The  voyage  of  Master  Cesar  Frederick  into  the  east  India,

and  beyonde  the  Indies,  Anno  1563. .  .  . 365

A  letter  written  from  the  Queenes  Majestic  to  Zelabdim
Echebar  king  of  Cambaia,  and  sent  by  M.  John  New-
bery.  Anno  1583. ...... 450

A  letter  written  from  her  Majestic  to  the  king  of  China,

in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  1583. .  .  .  . 451

A  letter of  M. John Newbery  sent from Alepo to M,

Richard  Hakluyt  of  Oxford.  Ann.  1583.  .  . 452

Another  letter  of  the  sayd  M.  Newbery  written  from  Alepo

to  M.  Leonard  Poore  at  London,  Anno  1583.  . 453

A  second  letter  of  the sayd M.  Newbery,  written from

Babylon  to  the  aforesayd  M.  Poore,  Anno  1583.  . 455

M.  Newbery  his  letter from  Ormuz  to  M.  John  Eldred,

and  William  Shales,  at  Balsara,  Anno  1583. .  . 457

xi

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

His  third  letter  written  to  M.  Leonard  Poore  from  Goa,  in

the  yeare  1584. .  .  .  .  .  .458

A letter  written from Goa by M. Ralph Fitch,  to M.

Leonard  Poore  abovesayd,  Anno  1584. .  .  .463

The  long,  dangerous,  and  memorable  voyage  of  M.  Ralph
Fitch  marchant  of  London,  by  the  way  of  Tripolis  in
Syria,  to  Ormuz,  to  Goa  in  the  East  India,  to  Cambaia,
to  the  river  of  Ganges,  to  Bengala,  to  Bacola,  to
Chonderi,  to  Pegu,  to  Siam,  &c.  begunne  in  the  yeere
1583,  and  ended  in  the  yeere  1591. .  .  . 465

The  report  of  John  Huighen  van  Linschoten  of  the  im-
prisonment of  M.  Newbery  and  M.  Fitch  at  Goa,  and
of  their  escape  from  thence,  which  happened  while
himselfe  was  in  Goa.  ..... 505

ILLUSTRATIONS

Sir  Edward  Osborne, ..... Frontispiece

Sir  Edward  Osborne  was  born  about  1530,  and  was
apprenticed  to  Sir  William  Hewett,  clothworker  in
London.  According  to  tradition  Osborne,  while  an
apprentice,  leapt  into  the  Thames  and  saved  the  life
of  Hewett's  infant  daughter,  who  had  fallen  from
her  nurse's  arms  into  the  river  at  London  Bridge.
He  afterwards  married  her  in  1562,  and  on  Sir
William  Hewett's  death  succeeded  to  his  business
and  estates.  Sir  Edward  Osborne  became  Lord
Mayor  in  1583,  was  knighted  in  1584,  and  elected
Member  of  Parliament  for  the  City  of  London  in
1586,  He  traded  to  the  Mediterranean  and  the
Levant,  and  In  1 5  8 1  (with  three  other  merchants)
was  granted  letters  patent  by  Queen  Elizabeth  to
trade  '  into  the  dominions  of  the  great  Turke.'
On  the  incorporation  of  the  Levant  or  Turkey
Company,  Sir  Edward  Osborne  was  appointed  its
first  governor.  He  died  in  1591.  The  portrait
here  reproduced  is  from  the  original  at  Hornby
Castle,  by  permission  of  the  Duke  of  Leeds.

Philip  de  Villiers  de  L'Isle  Adam,  .  .  .  .16

Philip  de  Villiers  de  L'Isle  Adam,  Hospitaller  and  Grand

Prior of France, was elected Grand Master 01

Rhodes  on 22nd January, 1521, when absent in

France. He had, in 15 10, come prominently

xiii

ILLUSTRATIONS

before  the  Order  by  his  defeat  of  an  Egyptian  fleet
in  the  Levant.  On  his  election  as  Grand  Master
he  hastily  collected  stores  and  munitions  of  war
in  France,  and  embarked  at  Marseilles  for  Rhodes,
already  threatened  by  the  Turks.  Off  Nice  fire
broke  out  on  his  ship,  and  the  crew  were  only
prevented  from  deserting  her  by  his  exertions.
Shortly  afterwards  in  a  storm  the  ship  was  struck
by  lightning,  which,  entering  the  stern  cabin,  killed
nine  men,  and  broke  the  Grand  Master's  sword  by
his  side  without  damaging  the  scabbard.  After  the
loss  of  Rhodes,  Villiers  returned  to  Europe,  and
in  1525  obtained  the  grant  of  Malta,  Gozo,  and
Tripoli,  from  Charles  V.,  for  the  Order.  He  died
on  2 1  St  August,  1534.  The  portrait  is  reproduced
from  that  in  the  British  Museum  copy  of  The  History
of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  by  Monsieur  V  Abbi  de  Vertot,
published  in  London  in  1728.

Solyman  the  Magnificent, ..... 48

Solyman  the  Magnificent,  fourth  Emperor  of  the  Turks,
succeeded  to  the  throne  on  the  death  of  his  father
Selim  L  in  1520,  being  then  about  twenty-eight
years  old.  During  his  reign  the  area  of  the  Turkish
Empire  was  extended  by  his  conquests  of  the  greater
part  of  Hungary,  large  portions  of  Armenia  and
Persia,  and  the  whole  of  Northern  Africa,  except
Morocco.  He  besieged  Vienna  in  1529  but  was
repulsed.  He  died  on  the  4th  September,  1566,
while  besieging  Sigeth  or  Szigeth  on  the  Drave.
Richard  KnoUes,  in  his  Generall  Historie  of  the
Turkes,  describes  him  as  '  of  stature  tall,  of  feature
slender,  long  necked,  his  colour  pale  and  wan,  his
nose  long  and  hooked,  of  nature  ambitious  and
bountifull,  more  faithfull  of  his  word  and  promise
than  were  for  most  part  the  Mahometan  Kings  his
progenitors.' The  portrait  is taken  from  the  rare

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

manuscript  Kiyafet-ul-Insaniyyeh  (personal  descrip-
tions of  the  Osmanli  Sultans)  in  the  Oriental
Department  of  the  British  Museum.  This  manu-
script was  composed  in  a.h.  997  (a.d.  1589)  by
Lukman  Shahnameji  (royal  poet  annalist),  and  illus-
trated with  portraits  after  contemporary  originals.

A  Turkish  Carramuzzal, .  .  .  .  • JS^

The  *  Carramuzzal '  or  *  Brigandine '  was  a  favourite  craft
with  the  Turkish  pirates  who  infested  the  Mediter-
ranean in  the  i6th  and  17th  centuries.  Hakluyt
says  they  were  vessels  *  like  unto  ye  French
Gabards,  sailing  daily  upon  the  river  of  Bordeaux,
which  sail  with  a  misen  or  triangle  saile.'  In  order
that  the  extent  and  variety  of  armament  may  be
clearly  seen,  the  illustration  shows  the  carramuzzal
without  mast  or  rigging.  It  is  taken  from  the
Architectura  Navalis  of  Joseph  Furttenbach  printed  at
Ulm  in 1629.

Plan  of  Alexandria, .  .  .  .  .  .160

From  G.  Braun  and  F.  Hohenberg's  Chitates  Orbis
Terrarum,  1573,  in  the  British  Museum.  The
*  roade '  or  dock,  '  made  very  fencible  with  strong
wals,'  in  which  the  galleys  wintered^  and  from  which
John  Fox  carried  off  the  galley  '  Captain  of  Alex-
andria,' is  shown  to  the  right  of  the  main  harbour.

Plan  of  Constantinople,  .  .  .  .  .256

From  G.  Braun  and  F.  Hohenberg's  Civitates  Orbis
Terrarum, 1573.

AiVenetian  Merchantman, ..... 368

This  and  the  two  succeeding  illustrations  are  taken  from
the  Architectura  Navalis  of  Joseph  Furttenbach,  Ulm,
1629.  In  the  sectional  plan  the  internal  arrange-
ments of  a  '  great  ship '  of  the  period  are  seen,  and
it  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  fore  and  mizzen

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

masts  are  stepped  on  the  main  deck,  and  not  like
the  mainmast,  on  the  keel.  The  measurements  are
given  in  '  palmi,'  or  spans  of  about  nine  and  a-half
inches  each.

A  Venetian  Merchantman  (section), ...  . 376

A  Venetian  Merchantman  (measurements), .  .384

Sailing  Chart  of  the  Mediterranean, .  .  . 512

Reproduced  by  permission  of  Prince  Trivulzio  from  the
original  in  his  collection  at  Milan.  The  chart  bears
the  inscription,  '  Jacobus  Russus  Messanensis  me
fecit  in  nobili  civitate  Messane,  Anno  Domini
1564.'  These  charts  were  drawn  on  sheepskin  or
vellum,  and  many  of  them  were  beautifully  illumi-
nated.

THE FIFTH VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  Traffiques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Made  to  the  South  and  South-east  quarters  of  the

World,  with  the  directions,  letters,  privileges

discourses,  and  observations  incident

to  the  same

A  briefe  relation  of  the  siege  and  taking  of  the
Citie  of  Rhodes,  by  Sultan  Soliman  the
great  Turke,  translated  out  of  French  into
English  at  the  motion  of  the  Reverend
Lord  Thomas  Dockwray,  great  Prior  of  the
order  of  Jerusalem  in  England,  in  the  yeere,
1524.

Tiling  faithfully  to  write  and  reduce  in
veritie  Historiall,  the  great  siege,  cruel
oppugnation,  and  piteous  taking  of  the
noble  and  renowmed  citie  of  Rhodes,  the
key  of  Christendome,  the  hope  of  many
poore  Christian  men,  withholden  in  Tur-
kie  to  save  and  keepe  them  in  their  faith  :
the  rest  and  yeerely  solace  of  noble  pilgrimes  of  the
holy  sepulchre  of  Jesu  Christ  and  other  holy  places  :  the
refuge  and  refreshing  of  all  Christian  people  :  having
course  of  marchandise  in  the  parties  of  Levant,  I  promise
to  all  estates  that  shall  see  this  present  booke,  that  I
have  left  nothing  for  feare  of  any  person,  nor  preferred
it  for  favour.  And  first  I  shall  shewe  the  occasions
that  mooved  this  cruell  bloodshedder,  enemie  of  our
holy  Christian  faith,  Sultan  Soliman,  now  being  great
Turke,  to  come  with  a  great  hoste  by  sea  and  by
lande,  to  besiege  and  assayle  the  space  of  sixe  moneths,
night  and  day,  the  noble  and  mightie  citie  of  Rhodes,
The  yere  of  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,
1522.

[The  occasions

V  I  A

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

The  occasions  why  the  great  Turke  came  to
besiege  the  Citie  of  Rhodes.

THe  first  and  principal!  cause  was  that  he  did  con-
sider and  sawe  by  experience,  that  there  was  none
other  Towne  nor  place  in  Levant  that  warred  against
him  nor  kept  him  in  doubt,  but  this  poore  rocke  of
Rhodes.  And  hearing  the  continual!  complaintes  of  his
subjectes  aswell  of  Syria,  as  of  Turkie,  for  the  domages
and  prises  dayly  done  of  their  bodies  and  goods  by
Christian  men  of  warre  received  into  Rhodes  :  And  also
of  the  shippes  and  gallies  of  the  religion,  he  tooke  con-
clusion in  himselfe,  that  if  he  might  put  the  sayde
Towne  in  his  power  and  subjection,  that  then  he  should
be  peaceable  lord  of  all  the  parties  of  Levant,  and  that
his  subjects  should  complaine  no  more  to  him.

The  second,  that  he  might  foUowe  the  doings  of  his
noble  predecessours,  and  shewe  himselfe  very  heire  of  the
mightie  and  victorious  lord  Sultan  Selim  his  father,
willing  to  put  in  execution  the  enterprise  by  him  left  the
yeere  one  thousand  five  hundred  twentie  and  one.  The
which  Selim  the  great  Turke  put  in  all  redinesse  his
armie  to  the  number  of  three  hundreth  sayles  purposing
for  to  send  them  against  Rhodes,  if  mortalitie  had  not
happened  in  his  host,  and  he  afterwarde  by  the  will  of  our
lorde  was  surprised  and  taken  with  death  :  wherefore
he  being  in  the  latter  ende  of  his  dayes,  (as  some  Turkes
and  false  christian  men  that  were  at  this  siege  shewed
me)  did  charge  by  his  testament,  or  caused  to  charge  his
Sonne  now  being  great  Turke,  that  after  his  death  hee
should  make  his  two  first  enterprises,  the  one  against
Bellegrado  in  Hungarie,  and  the  other  against  Rhodes,
[II.  i.  73.]  for  to  get  him  honour,  and  to  set  his  Countries  and
subjectes  in  rest  and  suretie.  The  which  fatherly  motion
easilie  entered  into  him  and  was  imprinted  in  the  heart
and  yoong  will  of  the  sayde  Solyman,  his  sonne,  the
which  soone  after  the  death  of  his  father  put  in  effect
the  first  enterprise, and raised  an huge  hoste both  by

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522,

water  and  by  land,  and  went  himselfe  in  person  against
Bellegrado,  a  right  strong  place  in  Hungarie.  And  after  The  taking  of
that  hee  had  besieged  it  the  space  of  two  moneths  or  ^^w^^e.
thereabout,  for  fault  of  ordinance  and  vitailes,  it  was
yeelded  to  him  by  composition  the  eight  day  of  Septem-
ber, in  the  yeere  of  our  lord,  one  thousand  five  hundred
twentie  and  one.  The  sayd  Solyman  having  this  victory,
being  swollen  and  raised  in  pride  and  vaineglory,  turned
his  heart  agaynst  Rhodes.  Neverthelesse,  he  not  igno-
rant of  the  strength  of  it,  and  considering  the  qualities
of  the  people  that  were  within  it,  of  whom  he  should
be  well  received  as  his  predecessours  had  bene  afore-
times,  doubted  much,  and  knew  not  how  to  furnish  his
enterprise.  For  his  capitaines  and  Bashas  turned  him
from  it  as  much  as  they  might  by  many  reasons,  they
knowing  the  force  of  it,  save  onely  Mustofa  Basha  his
brother  in  lawe,  the  which  counselled  and  put  him  in
minde  to  goe  thither.  Finally,  hee  purposed  entirely  to
have  it  by  treason  or  by  force.  And  also  for  the  same
cause  and  purpose,  his  father  in  his  dayes  had  sent  a
Jewe  physician  into  Rhodes  as  a  spie,  to  have  the  better  Forren  physi-
knowledge  of  it  :  the  sayd  Solyman  was  informed  that  "f*^  become
he  was  there  yet,  wherfore  he  sent  him  worde  that  he  fijg/
should  abide  there  still  for  the  same  cause.  And  gave
in  charge  to  one  of  the  chiefe  men  in  Sio,  to  send  unto
the  sayd  Jewe  all  things  needefuU  to  maintaine  him.
And  the  same  Jewe  wrote  to  him  of  Sio,  under  privie
wordes,  all  that  was  done  in  Rhodes  to  give  knowledge
thereof  to  the  great  Turke  :  and  the  better  to  hide  his
treason,  the  sayde  Jewe  made  himselfe  to  bee  baptised.
And  to  bee  the  more  named  to  be  expert  in  Physike,
he  did  some  faire  cures  to  such  as  were  diseased,  whereby
he  began  to  bee  well  trusted,  and  came  in  favour  with
many  substantial!  folkes  of  the  towne.  Among  all  other
things  whereof  hee  advertised  the  great  Turke,  one  was
of  a  wall  that  was  taken  downe  for  to  be  new  builded
at  the  bulwarke  of  Auvergne,  certifying  him  that  if  hee
came  hastely  with his hoste, hee  might easilie and  at

3

A.D.
1522.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

unawares  surprise  the  towne  in  such  estate  as  it  was  at
that  time.  Many  other  advertisements  and  warnings  hee
shewed  the  Turke,  which  shall  bee  declared  hereafter.
But  beside  his  advertisement,  the  sayd  great  Turke  stirred
A  Portingale  and  provoked  by  a  false  traitour,  a  Portingale  knight  of
traitor.  ours,  that  time  Chanceller  of  the  sayd  holy  Religion,  a

man  of  great  authoritie,  dignitie,  and  understanding,,
and  one  of  the  principall  lordes  of  the  counsell  of  the
same,  named  Sir  Andrew  de  Merall,  by  little  and  little
was  mooved  and  kindled  to  the  sayd  enterprise  of
treason,  whereof  was  no  marvell,  for  it  was  a  great  hope
and  comfort  to  have  such  a  person  for  him,  that  knew
all  the  estate  and  rule  of  the  religion  and  of  the  towne.
And  for  to  declare  the  occasions  of  the  cursed  and  un-
happy will  of  the  said  traitor  that  had  bene  occasion  of
so  great  losse  and  damage,  and  shall  be  more  at  the  length,
if  the  divine  power  set  not  to  his  hand.

And  here  it  is  manifestly  to  bee  understood  of  all
men,  that  after  the  death  of  the  noble  and  right  prudent
lord,  Fabrice  of  Cacetto,  great  master  of  Rhodes,  the  sayd
Sir  Andrew  enflamed  with  ambition  and  covetousnesse  to
bee  great  master,  and  seeing  himselfe  deceived  of  his
hope,  by  the  election  made  the  two  and  twentieth  day  of
Philip  de  January,  of  the  right  reverend  and  illustrate  lord,  Philip
Villiers  great  ^^  Villiers  Lisleadam,  before  him  :  from  that  time  hee
tooke  so  great  envie  and  desperation,  enmitie  and  evill
will,  not  onely  against  the  sayde  lord,  but  against  all  the
holy  religion,  that  hee  set  all  his  studie  and  purpose,  to
betray  and  sell  his  religion  and  the  citie  of  Rhodes  to  the
cursed  misbeleevers,  forgetting  the  great  honours  and
goodnesse  that  hee  hath  had  of  the  religion,  and  hoped  to
receive,  with  many  other  particuler  pleasures  that  the  sayd
lord  master  had  done  to  him.  But  the  devill,  unkind-
nesse,  and  wickednesse  had  so  blinded  the  eyes  of  his
thought,  that  hee  in  no  wise  could  refraine  him,  but  at
every  purpose  that  was  spoken  afore  him,  hee  was  short
and  might  not  dissemble.  And  one  day  among  other
hee  sayde  before  many  knights,  that  hee  would  that  his

4

master.

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522,
soule  were  at  the  devill,  and  that  Rhodes  and  the  religion
were  lost.  And  many  other  foolish  and  dishonest  pur-
poses and  wordes  hee  uttered,  whereat  none  tooke  heed,
nor  thought  that  hee  had  the  courage  to  doe  that  thing
that  hee  hath  done.  Howbeit,  obstinate  as  Judas,  hee
put  in  execution  his  cursed  will  :  for  soone  after  that  the
tidings  of  the  election  was  sent  Westward  to  the  sayde
noble  lord,  the  sayd  de  Merall  did  send  a  Turke  prisoner
of  his  to  Constantinople,  under  shadowe  to  fetch  his  ran-
some.  By  whom  hee  advertised  the  great  Turke  and  his
counsell,  of  the  maner  and  degree  of  Rhodes,  and  in
what  state  and  condicion  the  towne  was  in  of  all  maner
of  things  at  that  time,  and  what  might  happen  of  it,
provoking  and  stirring  him  to  come  with  a  great  hoste
to  besiege  the  towne.  And  after  the  comming  of  the
sayd  reverend  lord  great  master,  he  gave  other  advise  to
the  great  Turke,  shewing  him  that  hee  could  never  have
better  time  to  come,  seeing  that  the  great  master  was  [II.  i.  74.]
new  come,  and  part  of  the  wall  taken  downe,  and  that
all  Rhodes  was  in  trouble  by  occasion  of  some  Italian
knights,  rebels  agaynst  the  lord  great  master  :  of  the  which
rebellion  he  was  causer,  the  better  to  bring  his  cursed
mind  to  passe  :  and  also  gave  the  sayde  great  Turke
knowledge  that  all  Christian  princes  were  busie,  warring
each  upon  other,  and  that  he  should  not  doubt  but  if
the  rebellion  lasted  among  them,  the  towne  should  be  his
without  faile,  as  it  is  seene  by  experience.  And  for
lacke  of  succours  of  every  part,  and  especially  of  such
as  might  easily  have  holpen  us  beyng  our  neighbours,
with  their  gallies  and  men  of  warre,  wherefore  it  is  now
in  the  handes  of  the  enemies  of  the  christian  faith.  The
which  monitions  and  reasons  of  the  false  traitor  being
understood  and  pondered  by  the  great  Turke  and  his
counsell,  it  was  considered  of  them  not  to  loose  so  good
occasion  and  time.  Wherefore  hee  made  most  extreme
diligence  to  rigge  and  apparell  many  ships  &  vessels  of
divers  sorts,  as  galliasses,  gallies,  pallandres,  fustes,  and
brigantines,  to  the  number  of  350.  sailes  and  moe.

5

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

When  the  prisoner  that  the  sayd  de  Merall  did  send
into  Turkie  had  done  his  commission,  hee  returned  into
Rhodes,  whereof  every  man  had  marvell.  And  many
folkes  deemed  evil  of  his  comming  againe,  as  of  a  thing
unaccustomed,  but  none  durst  say  any  thing,  seeing  the
sayd  de  Merall  of  so  great  authoritie  and  dignitie,  and
he  cherished  the  sayd  prisoner  more  then  he  was  woont
to  doe.  Therefore  belike  hee  had  well  done  his  message,
and  had  brought  good  tidings  to  the  damnable  and
shamefuU  mind  of  the  sayd  traitor  de  Merall.

How  the  great  Turke  caused  the  passages  to  be
kept,  that  none  should  beare  tidings  of  his
hoste  to  Rhodes.

THe  great  Turke  intending  with  great  diligence  to
make  readie  his  hoste  both  by  sea  and  by  land,  the
better  to  come  to  his  purpose,  and  to  take  the  towne  un-
warily as  hee  was  advertised,  thought  to  keepe  his  doings
as  secret  as  hee  might,  and  commaunded  that  none
of  his  subjects  should  goe  to  Rhodes  for  any  maner  of
thing.  And  likewise  he  tooke  all  the  barkes  and  brigan-
tines  out  of  the  havens  and  portes  in  those  coastes,
because  they  should  give  no  knowledge  of  his  armie.
And  also  hee  made  the  passages  by  land  to  bee  kept,
that  none  should  passe.  Howbeit,  so  great  apparell  of
an  armie  could  not  bee  long  kept  close  :  for  the  spies
which  the  lord  great  master  had  sent  into  Turkie,  brought
tidings  to  the  castle  of  saint  Peter,  and  to  Rhodes,  of  all
that  was  sayd  and  done  in  Turkie.  Neverthelesse,  the
sayd  lord  gave  no  great  credence  to  all  that  was  brought
and  told,  because  that  many  yeeres  before,  the  predeces-
sours  of  the  great  Turke  had  made  great  armies  :  and
alway  it  was  sayd  that  they  went  to  Rhodes,  the  which
came  to  none  effect.  And  it  was  holden  for  a  mocke  and  a
by-word  in  many  places,  that  the  Turke  would  goe  to
besiege  Rhodes.  And  for  this  reason  doubt  was  had  of
this  last  armie,  and  some  thought  that  it  should  have
gone  into  Cyprus  or  to  Cataro,  a  land  of  the  lordship  of

6

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.
Venice.  Howbeit  the  great  master  not  willing  to  bee
taken  unwarily,  but  the  meane  while  as  carefuU  and
diligent  for  the  wealth  of  his  towne,  &  his  people,  under-
standing these  tidings  of  the  Turkes  armie,  did  all  his
diligence  to  repaire  and  strengthen  the  towne.  Amongst
all  other  things  to  build  up,  and  raise  the  bulwarke  of
Auvergne,  and  to  cleanse  and  make  deeper  the  ditches.
And  the  more  to  cause  the  workemen  to  haste  them  in
their  businesse,  the  sayd  lord  oversawe  them  twise  or
thrise  every  day.

How the  lord  great master counselled  with the
lordes  for  provision  for  the  towne.

THen  the  sayd  reverend  lord  thought  to  furnish  and
store  the  towne  with  more  vitailes  for  the  sustenance
thereof,  and  for  the  same  many  times  hee  spake  with  the
lordes  that  had  the  handling  and  rule  of  the  treasurie,  and
of  the  expenses  thereof  in  his  absence,  and  since  his  com-
ming  :  That  is  to  wit,  with  the  great  Commander  Gabriel
de  pommerolles,  lieutenant  of  the  sayd  lord  :  The  Tur-  Si?-  Joh.
coplier  Sir  John  Bourgh  of  the  English  nation  :  and  the  ^°^^f\  ^^
Chanceller  Sir  Andrew  de  Meral,  of  whom  is  spoken  ^J|^"
afore,  and  of  his  untruth  agaynst  his  religion.  The
which  three  lordes  sayd,  that  hee  should  take  no  thought
for  it,  for  the  towne  was  well  stored  with  vitailes  for  a
great  while,  and  that  there  was  wheate  ynough  till  new
came  in  :  Notwithstanding  it  were  good  to  have  more,  or
the  siege  were  laied  afore  the  towne,  and  therefore  it  were
behoovefuU  to  send  for  wheate  and  other  necessaries  into
the  West  for  succours  of  the  towne,  and  at  that  time  to
purvey  for  every  thing.

Of  the  provision  for  vitailes  and  ordinance [ii.  ii.  75.]
of  warre.

AS  touching  the  store  and  ordinance  of  warre,  the  sayd
lordes  affirmed  that  there  was  ynough  for  a  yeere
and  more,  whereof  the  contrary  was  found,  for  it  failed  a
moneth  or  the  citie  was  yeelded. It is of  trueth that

7

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1522.

there  was  great  store,  and  to  have  lasted  longer  then  it
did.  But  it  was  needful!  to  spend  largely  at  the  first
comming  of  the  enemies  to  keepe  them  from  comming
neere,  and  from  bringing  earth  to  the  ditches  sides  as  they
did.  And  moreover  you  are  to  consider  the  great  num-
ber of  them,  and  their  power  that  was  spred  round  about
the  towne,  giving  us  so  many  assaults  and  skirmishes  in
so  many  places  as  they  did,  and  by  the  space  of  sixe  whole
moneths  day  and  night  assailing  us,  that  much  ordinance
and  store  was  wasted  to  withstand  them  in  all  points.
And  if  it  failed,  it  was  no  marvell.  Howbeit  the  noble
lord  great  master  provided  speedily  for  it,  and  sent  Bri-
gantines  to  Lango,  to  the  castle  of  saint  Peter,  and  to  the
castels  of  his  isle  Feraclous  and  Lyndo,  for  to  bring
powder  and  saltpeter  to  strength  the  towne,  but  it
suffised  not.

And  for  to  speake  of  the  purveiance  of  vitailes,  it  was
advised  by  the  lord  great  master  and  his  three  lords,  that
it  was  time  to  send  some  ships  for  wheat  to  places  there-
about, before  the  Turks  hoste  were  come  thither.  And
for  this  purpose  was  appointed  a  ship  named  the  Gal-
lienge,  whose  captaine  hight  Brambois,  otherwise  called
Wolfe,  of  the  Almaine  nation,  an  expert  man  of  the  sea,
the  which  made  so  good  diligence,  that  within  a  moneth
he  performed  his  voiage,  and  brought  good  store  of
wheat  from  Naples  and  Romania,  which  did  us  great
comfort.

How  a  Brigantine  was  sent  to  Candle  for  wine,
and  of  divers  ships  that  came  to  helpe  the
towne.

AFter  this,  a  motion  was  made  to  make  provision  of
wine  for  the  towne,  for  the  men  of  Candie  durst
not  saile  for  to  bring  wine  to  Rhodes  as  they  were  woont
to  doe  for  feare  of  the  Turkes  hoste  :  and  also  they  of
the  towne  would  send  no  ship  into  Candie,  fearing  to  be
taken  and  enclosed  with  the  sayd  hoste  by  the  way.
Howbeit some merchants of  the towne, were willing

8

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

to  have  adventured  themselves  in  a  good  ship  of  the
religion,  named  the  Mary,  for  to  have  laden  her  with
wine  in  Candie.  But  they  could  not  agree  with  the  three
lordes  of  the  treasure,  and  their  let  was  but  for  a  little
thing:  and  all  the  cause  came  of  the  sayd  traitour  de
Merall,  faining  the  wealth  of  the  treasure;  for  he  in-
tended another  thing,  and  brake  this  good  and  profitable
enterprise  and  will  of  the  sayd  merchants,  seeing  that  it
was  hurtfull  to  the  Turke,  whose  part  the  said  traitour
held  in  his  divelish  heart :  that  notwithstanding,  the
reverend  lord  great  master,  that  in  all  things  from  the
beginning  to  the  ende,  hath  alway  shewed  his  good  will,
and  with  all  diligence  and  right  that  might  bee  requisite
to  a  soveraigne  captaine  and  head  of  warre,  found  other
expedience,  and  sent  a  Brigantine  into  Candie,  in  the
which  he  sent  a  brother  sergeant  named  Anthonie  of
Bosus,  a  well  sprighted  man  and  wise,  that  by  his  wise-
dome  wrought  so  well,  that  within  a  small  time  he
brought  fifteene  vessels  called  Gripes,  laden  with  wine,
and  with  them  men  of  warre  the  which  came  under
shadow  of  those  wines,  because  the  governours  of  Candie
durst  let  none  of  their  men  goe  to  the  succour  of  Rhodes
for  feare  of  the  Turke.  And  beside  those  fifteene
Gripes  came  a  good  ship  whose  capitaine  and  owner  was
a  rich  yong  gentleman  Venetian,  Messire  John  Antonio
de  Bonaldi,  which  of  his  good  will  came  with  his  ship
laden  with  700.  buts  of  wine  to  succour  the  towne  with
his  person  and  folkes,  whose  good  and  lowable  will  I
leave  to  the  consideration  of  the  readers  of  this  present
booke.  For  hee  being  purposed  to  have  had  his  wines
to  Constantinople,  or  he  was  enformed  of  the  busines  of
Rhodes,  and  was  in  the  porte  du  Castell  in  Candie,  would
not  beare  his  vitailes  to  the  enemies  of  the  faith,  but
came  out  and  returned  his  way  toward  Rhodes,  forgetting
all  particular  profite  and  advantage.  He  being  arrived
at  Rhodes,  dispatched  and  sold  his  wine,  which  was  a
great  encrease  and  comfort  for  the  towne.  And  when
he  had  so  done,  he  presented  his  person,  his  ship,  and

9

D^

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

his  folke,  to  the  reverend  great  master,  the  which
retained  him,  and  set  him  in  wages  of  the  Religion.
And  during  the  siege,  the  sayd  capitaine  behaved  him
woorthily  in  his  person,  and  put  himselfe  in  such  places
as  woorthy  men  ought  to  be,  spending  his  goods  largely
without  demanding  any  paiment  or  recompense  for  his
doing,  of  the  Religion.

How  the  corne  was  shorne  downe  halfe  ripe
and  brought  into  the  towne  for  feare  of  the
Turkes  hoste.

kUring  these  things,  the  reverend  lord  great  master

carefuU and busie to have every  thing necessary,

as  men  and  other  strengths,  sent  vessels called  brigan-

tines,  for  to  cause  the  wafters  of  the  sea  to  come into

Rhodes  for  the  keeping  and  fortifying  of  the  towne,  the

[II.  i.  76.] which at the first sending came and presented their

persons  and  ships  to  the  service  of  the  religion.
Harvest  in  After  that  the  sayd  lord  caused  to  shere  downe  the
^n  an  j^-^  ^£  j^-^  -^j^^  ^^^^  caused  it  to  bee  brought  into  the
towne,  which  was  done  in  Aprill :  and  then  in  May  in
some  places,  he  made  to  shere  the  wheate  halfe  ripe,
howbeit  the  most  part  was  left  in  the  fields,  because  the
Turkes  hoste  was  come  out  of  the  streights  of  Constanti-
nople. And  doubting  that  any  number  of  ships  should
come  before  to  take  the  people  of  the  sayd  Isle  unawares,
the  sayd  lord  made  them  to  leave  shering  of  wheate,
and  caused  the  people  of  the  furthest  part  of  the  Isle
to  come  into  the  towne.

While  that  the  great  master  provided  for  all  things
after  the  course  of  time  and  tidings  that  hee  had,  there
arrived  a  Carak  of  Genoa  laden  with  spicerie  from
Alexandria,  the  which  passed  before  the  port  of  Rhodes
the  eight  day  of  Aprill,  and  rid  at  anker  at  the  Fosse,
7.  or  8.  miles  from  the  towne,  for  to  know  and  heare
tidings  of  the  Turkish  hoste.  Then  the  lord  willing  to
furnish  him  with  people  as  most  behoovefull  for  the
towne,  sent a knight of  Provence named sir Anastase

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad

1522.

de  sancta  Camilla,  commander  de  la  Tronquiere  to  the
captaine  of  the  Carak,  praying  him  to  come  into  the
haven  with  his  ship  for  the  defence  of  the  towne,  profer-
ing  him  what  he  would,  assuring  him  his  ship.  The
captaine  excused  him,  saying,  that  the  merchandise  was
not  his  owne,  but  belonged  to  divers  merchants  to  whom
he  must  yeeld  account.  Howbeit  at  the  last  after  many
words  and  promises  to  him  made,  hee  came  into  the
haven,  the  which  captaine  was  named  messire  Domingo
de  Fournati,  and  hee  in  his  person  behaved  him  valiauntly
in  the  time  of  the  sayd  siege.

How  the  great  master  caused  generall  musters
to  be  made,  and  sent  a  vessell  to  the  Turkes
navie,  of  whom  he  received  a  letter.

AFter  the  moneth  of  April  the  lord  master  seeing
that  the  Turkes  hoste  drew  neere,  and  that  he  had
the  most  part  of  the  wafters  within  the  towne,  he  caused
generall  musters  of  men  of  armes  to  be  made.  And
began  at  the  knights,  the  which  upon  holy  Rood  day
in  May  made  their  musters  before  the  Commissioners
ordained  by  the  sayd  lord  in  places  deputed  to  each  of
them  called  Aulberge.  The  which  Commissioners  made
report  to  the  lordes  that  they  had  found  the  knights  in
good  order  of  harnesse  &  other  things  necessary  for
warre,  &  their  araie  faire  &  proper,  with  crosses  on  them.
When  the  muster  of  the  knights  was  done,  the  lord
master  thought  to  make  the  musters  of  them  of  the
towne,  and  strangers  together :  but  his  wisedome  per-
ceived that  harme  should  come  thereby,  rather  then  good,
doubting  that  the  number  of  people  should  not  bee  so
great  as  he  would,  or  needed  to  have,  whereof  the  great
Turke  might  have  knowledge  by  goers  and  commers  into
Rhodes,  and  therefore  he  caused  them  of  the  towne  to
make  their  musters  severall  by  bandes  and  companies,
and  the  strangers  also  by  themselves,  to  the  end  that  the
number  should  not  bee  knowen,  notwithstanding  that
there  was  good quantitie  of  good  men  and  well  willing

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

to  defend  themselves.  And  the  more  to  hearten  and
give  them  courage  and  good  will,  some  knights  of  the
Crosse,  decked  their  men  with  colours  and  devises,  and
tooke  with  them  men  of  the  towne  and  strangers,  and
with  great  noyse  of  trumpets  and  timbrels,  they  made
many  musters,  as  envying  each  other  which  should  keepe
best  aray  and  order,  and  have  the  fairest  company.  It
was  a  great  pleasure  to  see  them  all  so  well  agree,  and
so  well  willing.

The  number  of  the  men  of  the  towne  amounted  and
were  esteemed,  three  or  foure  thousand,  beside  men  of
the  villages,  that  might  be 1500.  or  2000.

The  eight  day  of  the  same  moneth,  the  Turkes  hearing
of  those  tidings,  made  a  fire  for  a  token  in  a  place  called
le  Fisco,  in  the  maine  land  right  against  Rhodes.  And
certaine  dayes  afore  they  had  made  another,  that  is  to
weet,  when  the  ship  of  a  knight  named  Menetow  went
thither,  and  had  with  him  the  clarke  of  the  gallies  named
Jaques  truchman,  the  which  under  shadow  to  speake  with
him,  was  withholden  of  the  Turkes.  For  the  great
Turke  had  commanded  to  take  him  or  some  other  man
of  the  Rhodes  to  have  perfect  knowledge  in  what  estate
the  towne  was  then  in  every  thing.  And  they  of  the
towne  weening  that  the  second  fire  was  for  to  deliver
Jaques,  the  reverend  lord  great  master  sent  one  of  his
galliasses,  whose  patron  was  called  messire  Boniface  of
Provence,  to  know  the  cause  thereof.  And  when  hee
arrived  at  the  sayd  place  of  le  Fisco,  he  demaunded  of  the
Turkes  wherefore  they  had  made  the  token  of  fire.  And
they  said  that  it  was  because  their  lord  had  sent  a  letter
to  the  great  master,  but  as  yet  it  was  not  come,  and
desired  him  to  tary  till  it  were  brought.  The  patron  as
warie  &  wise  in  the  businesse  of  the  sea,  thought  in
himselfe  that  the  Turkes  made  such  prolonging  to  some
evill  intent,  or  to  surprise  his  vessell  being  alone,  where-
fore hee  bade  them  give  him  the  letter  speedily,  or  els
he  would  goe  his  way,  and  neither  tary  for  letter  nor
other  thing :  and  told them of  the  evill and  dishonest

12

THE LOSS OF RHODES  a.d.

1522.
deed  that  they  had  done  the  dayes  afore,  to  withhold  the  [II.  i.  77.]
clarke  under  their  words  and  safeconduct :  and  therewith
he  turned  his  galHasse  to  have  gone  away.  The  Turkes
seeing  that,  gave  him  the  letter,  the  which  he  tooke,  and
when  he  was  arrived  at  Rhodes,  he  presented  it  to  the
lord  great  master,  which  assembled  the  lordes  of  his
counsell,  and  made  it  to  be  red :  The  tenor  whereof  was
such  as  foloweth.

The  copie  of  the  letter  that  the  great  Turke  sent
to  the  lord  great  master,  and  to  the  people
of  the  Rhodes.

Sultan  Solyman  Basha  by  the  grace  of  God,  right
mightie  emperor  of  Constantinople,  and  of  himselfe
holding  both  the  lands  of  Persia,  Arabia,  Syria,  Mecha,
and  Jerusalem ;  of  Asia,  Europe,  ^gypt,  and  of  all  the
Sea,  lord  and  possessor :  To  the  reverend  father  lord
Philip,  great  master  of  Rhodes,  to  his  counsailors,  and  to
all  the  other  citizens  great  and  small,  greeting.  Sending
convenient  and  worthy  salutations  to  your  reverences,
wee  give  you  to  weet,  that  we  have  received  your  letters
sent  unto  our  imperiall  majestie  by  George  your  servant,
the  tenor  whereof  we  doe  well  understand ;  and  for  this
occasion  we  send  unto  you  this  our  present  commaunde-
ment,  to  the  end  that  we  will  that  ye  know  surely  how
by  our  sentence  we  will  have  that  Isle  of  Rhodes  for
many  damages  and  evill  deeds  which  we  have,  and  heare
from  day  to  day  of  the  sayd  place  done  to  us  and  our
subjects,  and  ye  with  your  good  will  shall  hold  it  of  us
&  doe  us  obeisance,  and  give  the  citie  to  mine  imperiall
majestie.  And  we  sweare  by  God  that  made  heaven
and  earth,  and  by  26000.  of  our  prophets,  and  by  the
4.  Misafi  that  fell  from  the  skies,  and  by  our  first  prophet
Mahomet,  that  if  ye  doe  us  homage,  and  yeeld  you  with
good  will  upon  these  othes,  all  you  that  will  abide  in  the
sayd  place,  great  and  small,  shall  not  need  to  feare  perill
nor  damage  of  mine  imperiall  majestie,  neither  you,  your
goods,  nor  your  men  :  and  who  so  will  goe  to  any  other

13

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

place  with  his  goods  and  houshold,  may  so  doe,  and
who  so  will  dwell  and  inhabite  in  any  other  places  under
mine  Imperiall  majestic,  may  remaine  where  they  like
best,  without  feare  of  any  person.  And  if  there  bee
any  of  the  principals  and  woorthy  men  among  you  that
is  so  disposed,  wee  shall  give  him  wages  and  provision
greater  then  hee  hath  had.  And  if  any  of  you  will  abide
in  the  sayd  isle,  yee  may  so  doe  after  your  auncient  usages
and  customes,  and  much  better.  And  therefore  if  that
yee  will  accept  these  our  othes  and  intreatings,  send
unto  us  a  man  with  your  letters  to  mine  Imperiall
majestic,  or  els  know  yee  that  wee  will  come  upon  you
with  all  provisions  of  warre,  and  thereof  shall  come  as  it
pleaseth  God.  And  this  wee  doe,  to  the  end  that  ye
may  know,  and  that  ye  may  not  say,  but  we  have  given
you  warning.  And  if  ye  doe  not  thus  with  your  good
will,  wee  shall  vault  and  undermine  your  foundations  in
such  maner,  that  they  shalbe  torne  upside  downe,  and
shall  make  you  slaves,  and  cause  you  to  die,  by  the  grace
of  God,  as  we  have  done  many,  and  hereof  have  ye  no
doubt.  Written  in  our  court  at  Constantinople  the  first
day  of  the  moneth  of  June.

How  the  Turkes  came  to  land  in  the  Isle  of
Lango,  and  were  driven  to  their  ships  againe
by  the  Prior  of  S. Giles.

'Hen  the  lord  great  master  and  his  counsell  had
heard  the  tenor  of  the  letter,  they  would  give
none  answere  to  the  great  Turke,  but  that  he  should
be  received  with  good  strokes  of  artillerie.  So  that  to
a  foolish  demaund  behooved  none  answere.  And  it  was
very  like  that  he  would  have  nothing.  For  sixe  dayes
after,  that  was  the  14.  day  of  the  said  moneth  of  June,
the  Brigantines  that  went  toward  Sio  to  know  of  the
said  armie,  came  againe  and  sayd,  that  of  a  trueth  the
said  armie  was  comming,  and  that  nigh  to  Lango  an  Isle
of  the  religion,  an  100.  mile  from  Rhodes,  they  had
scene  and  told  30.  sailes  that  were  most  part  gallies  and

14

w

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

fustes  :  the  which  vessels  set  men  on  land  in  ye  isle  of
Lango.  Then  the  prior  of  S.  Giles,  Messire  pre  John
de  Bidoux  commander  of  the  sayd  place,  taried  not  long
from  horsebacke  with  his  knights  and  people  of  the  isle,
and  he  met  so  well  with  the  Turkes,  that  he  drove  them
to  their  ships,  and  slew  a  certaine  number  of  them  :  and
of  the  side  of  Pre  John  some  were  hurt,  and  his  horse
was  slaine.  When  the  enemies  were  entered  into  their
gallies,  they  went  to  a  place  called  castle  Judeo  on  the
maine  land,  betweene  the  sayd  isle  of  Lango  and  the
castle  of  S.  Peter.

How^  part of  the navie and armie  of  the great
Turke  came  before  the  citie  of  Rhodes.

THe  18.  day  of  the  said  moneth  of  June,  these  30-
gallies  went  from  the  sayd  place,  and  passed  by  the
Cape  of  Crion,  entering  the  gulfe  of  Epimes  beside
Rhodes,  and  were  discovered  from  the  shade  of  the  hill
of  Salaco,  a  castle  in  the  isle  of  Rhodes.  On  the  morow
they  came  out  of  the  gulfe  by  plaine  day,  and  sailing
along  by  the  coasts,  they  entered  into  a  haven  on  maine
land  called  Malfata,  where  they  abode  three  dayes.  Then  [II.  i.  78-]
they  went  from  thence,  and  returned  to  the  gulfe  of
Epimes,  where  they  abode  two  dayes  and  two  nights.

The  24  day  of  the  same  moneth  they  issued  out  of
Epimes,  and  traversing  the  chanell,  they  came  to  the  yle
of  Rhodes  in  a  place  before  a  castle  called  Faves,  and  they
went  to  land,  and  burnt  a  great  field  of  corne  the  same
day,  which  was  the  feast  of  S.  John  Baptist  our  patron.
The  guard  of  a  castle  named  Absito  in  the  yle  of  Rhodes
discovered  and  spied  the  great  hoste,  and  in  great  haste
brought  word  to  the  lord  master,  and  sayd  that  the  sayd
hoste,  that  was  in  so  great  number  of  sailes  that  they
might  not  be  numbred,  was  entred  into  the  gulfe  of
Epimes.  The  30  sailes  that  lay  in  the  yle  arose  in  the
night,  and  went  to  the  sayd  hoste  in  the  gulfe.

The  26  day of  June  the  sayd  great  hoste  arose  and
went  out  of  Epimes  an houre after  the  sun  rising, &

15

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

traversing  the  chanell,  they  came  to  a  place  called  the
Fosse,  eight  miles  from  the  towne.  And  the  30  first
sailes  turned  backe  toward  the  cape  of  S.  Martin  and
other  places  to  watch  for  ships  of  Christian  men,  if  any
passed  by  to  Rhodes.  The  great  hoste  abode  still  till
noone  or  one  of  the  clocke,  and  then  arose,  not  all,  but
about  80  or  100  ships,  as  gallies,  galliasses,  and  fusts  :
and  passed  one  after  another  before  the  towne  and  haven
of  Rhodes  three  miles  off,  and  came  to  shore  in  a  place
nigh  to  land,  called  Perambolin,  sixe  miles  from  the
towne.  In  the  which  place  the  sayd  hoste  abode
from  that  time  to  the  end  of  that  unhappy  siege.

The  number  and  names  of  the  vessels  that  came  to
besiege  Rhodes.

THe  number  of  the  ships  were  these  :  30  galliasses,
103  gallies,  aswell  bastards  as  subtill  mahonnets,  15
taffours,  20  fusts,  64  great  ships,  sixe  or  seven  gallions,
&  30  galleres,  beside  the  navy  that  waited  for  Christian
men,  if  any  came  to  succour  us.  These  were  the  vessels
that  came  at  the  first  to  lay  the  siege.  And  sith  that  the
sayd  host  came  out  of  Perambolin,  there  came  from
Syria  20  other  sailes,  aswell  gallies  as  fusts.  And  many
other  ships  came  sith,  and  joyned  with  the  sayd  army
in  the  time  of  the  sayd  siege.  And  it  was  sayd  that
there  were  400  sailes  and  moe.

The  same  day  that  part  of  the  host  came  to  the  sayd
place,  the  reverend  lord  great  master  ordeined  a  great
brigandine  to  send  into  the  West,  to  certifie  our  holy
father  the  pope,  and  the  Christian  princes  how  the  Turks
army  was  afore  Rhodes.  And  in  the  sayd  vessell  he  sent
two  knights,  one  a  French  man  named  Sir  Claude
dansoyville  called  Villiers,  and  Sir  Loys  de  Sidonia  a
Spaniard  :  and  they  went  to  the  pope  and  to  the
emperour.

After  the  comming  of  the  Turks  navy  into  the  sayd
place,  it  was  14  or  15  dayes  or  they  set  any  ordinance
on  land,  great  or  small,  or  any  quantity  of  men came

16

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.
on  shore,  whereof  we  marvelled.  And  it  was  tolde  us
by  some  that  came  out  of  the  campe,  and  also  by  the
spies  that  the  lord  great  master  had  sent  abroad  arayed
as  Turks,  that  they  abode  the  commandement  of  their
great  lord,  untill  the  hoste  by  land  were  come  into  the
campe.  Howbeit  there  came  some  number  for  to  view
the  towne,  but  they  went  privily,  for  the  ordinance  of  the
towne  shot  without  cease.

All  this  while  the  gallies  and  galliasses  went  and  came
to  land,  bringing  vitaile  and  people.  At  the  which  ships
passing  nigh  the  town,  were  shot  many  strokes  with  bom-
bards, which  made  some  slaughter  of  our  enemies  :  and
when  the  most  part  of  them  was  past,  they  began  to  set
ordinance  on  the  land  with  great  diligence.  Then  the
lord  great  master  departed  from  his  palace,  and  lodged
him  nigh  a  church  called  The  victory,  because  that  place
was  most  to  be  doubted  :  and  also  that  at  the  other  siege
the  great  businesse  and  assault  was  there.

How  the  lord  great  master  made  his  petition
before  the  image  of  S.  John,  and  offered  him
the  keyes  of  the  towne.

THe  day  before  were  made  many  predications  and
sermons,  and  the  last  was  in  the  church  of  S.  John
Baptist.  When  the  sermon  was  done,  a  pontificall  Masse
was  celebrate  with  all  solemnities,  and  all  the  reliques
taken  downe,  and  the  lord  great  master  and  all  his
knights  with  great  devotions  and  reverence  heard  it.
And  when  the  Masse  was  ended,  the  lord  great  master
made  a  pitious  oration  or  prayer  before  Saint  John  Bap-
tist his  protectour  :  and  above  all  other  words,  which
were  too  long  to  tell,  he  besought  him  meekly  that  it
would  please  him  to  take  the  keyes  of  that  miserable
city.  The  which  keyes  he  presented  and  layed  upon  the
altar  before  the  image,  beseeching  S.  John  to  take  the
keeping  and  protection  thereof,  and  of  all  the  religion,  as
by  his  grace  he  had  given  to  him  unworthy,  the  govern-
ing unto  that  day  :  and  by  his  holy  grace  to  defend  them
V  17  B

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

from  the  great  power  of  the  enemies  that  had  besieged
them.

T

[11.  i.  79-1 How  the  women  slaves  would  have  set  fire

in  the  towne.

^He  eight  day  of  July  it  was  knowen  that  the  Turkish
women  being  slaves  and  servaunts  in  many  houses  of
the  towne,  had  appointed  to  set  fire  in  their  masters
houses  at  the  first  assault  that  should  be  made,  to  the
end  that  the  men  should  leave  their  posterns  &  defenses
to  go  and  save  their  houses  and  goods.  And  it  was  found
that  a  woman  of  Marchopota  being  a  slave,  was  first
moover  thereof,  the  which  was  taken  and  put  to
execution.

The  same  day  some  of  our  men  went  out  for  to
skirmish  with  the  Turkes,  and  many  of  them  were  slaine
with  shot  of  our  artillerie,  and  of  our  men  but  one.

How  the  Turkes  layd  their  artillerie  about  the
towne,  and  of  the  maner  and  quantitie  of
their  pieces  and  gunshot.

THe  18.  day  of  July,  for  the  beginning  and  first  day
they  set  up  a  mantellet,  under  the  which  they  put
three  or  foure  meane  pieces,  as  sacres,  wherewith  they
shot  against  the  posterns  of  England  and  Provence.  But
the  mantellet  was  soone  broken  and  cast  downe,  and  their
pieces  destroyed  with  the  shot  of  the  wall,  and  they  that
shot  them  were  most  part  slaine.  As  this  first  mantellet
was  broken,  by  the  great  and  innumerable  people  that
they  had  they  set  all  their  ordinance  on  land,  and  caried
it  to  the  places  where  it  should  be  bent,  or  nigh  thereby.
And  the  29.  day  of  the  same  moneth,  they  set  up
two  other  mantellets.  One  beside  a  church  of  saine
Cosme  and  Damian,  and  another  toward  the  West.  And
from  these  mantellets  they  shot  great  pieces,  as  Culver-
ings,  double  gunnes,  and  great  bombards  agaynst  the
wals  of  England  and  Spaine,  to  the  which  mantellets  the
ordinance of  the towne gave many  great strokes, and

18

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

often  brake  them.  And  the  more  to  grieve  the  towne
and  to  feare  us,  they  set  up  many  other  mantellets  in
divers  places,  almost  round  about  the  towne,  and  they
were  reckoned  foure  score :  the  which  number  was  well
lessened  by  the  great  quantitie  of  strokes  of  artillerie
shot  out  of  the  towne  from  many  places.

The artillerie of  the  Turkes was such as
followeth.

First  there  were  sixe  great  gunnes,  cannons  perriers  of
brasse,  that  shot  a  stone  of  three  foote  and  a  halfe :
also  there  were  15.  pieces  of  iron  that  shot  stones  of  five
or  sixe  spannes  about.  Also  there  were  14.  great  bom-
bards that  shot  stones  of  eleven  spans  about.  Also  there
were  twelve  basiliskes,  whereof  they  shot  but  with  8 .  that
is  to  weet,  foure  shot  agaynst  the  posterns  of  England
and  Spaine,  and  two  against  the  gate  of  Italy :  the  other
two  shot  sometime  against  Saint  Nicholas  tower.  Also
there  were  15.  double  gunnes  casting  bullets  as  basiliskes.
The  meane  shot,  as  sacres  and  pasvolans,  were  in  great
number.  The  handgunshot  was  innumerable  and  in-
credible. Also  there  were  twelve  potgunnes  of  brasse
that  shot  upward,  whereof  eight  were  set  behind  the
church  of  S.  Cosme  and  Damian,  and  two  at  saint  John
de  la  Fontaine  toward  the  port  of  Italy,  and  the  other
two  afore  the  gate  of  Auvergne,  the  which  were  shot
night  and  day :  and  there  were  three  sorts  of  them,
whereof  the  greatest  were  of  sixe  or  seven  spannes  about.
And  the  sayd  stones  were  cast  into  the  towne  to  make
murder  of  people,  which  is  a  thing  very  inhumane  and
fearefuU,  which  maner  of  shooting  is  little  used  amongst
christian  men.  Howbeit  by  evident  myracle,  thanked
be  God,  the  sayd  pieces  did  no  great  harme,  and  slew  not
past  24.  or  25.  persons,  and  the  most  part  women  and
children,  and  they  began  to  shoot  with  the  said  pieces
from  the  19.  day  of  the  same  moneth,  unto  the  end  of
August,  &  it  was  accounted  that  they  shot  2000.  times,
more  or  lesse.

19

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

Then  the  enemies  were  warned  by  the  Jewe  that  wrote
letters  to  them  of  all  that  was  done  and  sayd  in  the
towne,  that  the  sayd  potgunnes  did  no  harme :  wherefore
they  were  angry,  for  they  thought  that  they  had  slaine
the  third  part  of  our  people :  and  they  were  counselled
by  him  to  leave  that  shooting,  for  it  was  but  time  lost,
and  pouder  wasted,  and  then  they  shot  no  more  with
them.  It  is  of  a  trueth  that  they  shot  with  the  sayd
potgunnes  12.  or  15.  times  with  bullets  of  brasse  or
copper,  full  of  wild  fire,  and  when  they  were  in  the  ayre,
they  flamed  foorth,  and  in  falling  on  the  ground,  they
brake,  and  the  fire  came  out  and  did  some  harme.  But
at  the  last  wee  knew  the  malice  thereof,  and  the  people
was  warie  from  comming  neere  to  them,  and  therefore
they  did  hurt  no  more  folke.

How  the  captaine  Gabriel  Martiningo  came  to
the  succor  of  Rhodes,  and  all  the  slaves  were
in  danger  to  be  slaine.

THe  24.  day  of  the  same  moneth  a  brigantine  arrived
that  was  sent  afore  into  Candie,  wherein  came  a
worthy  captaine  named  Gabriel  Martiningo  with  two
[II.  i.  80,]  other  captains.  And  there  went  to  receive  him  messieur
prou  John  prior  of  S.  Giles,  and  the  prior  of  Navarre.
Then  after  his  honourable  receiving  as  to  him  well  apper-
tained, they  brought  him  before  the  lord  great  master,
that  lovingly  received  him,  and  he  was  gladly  scene  and
welcommed  of  the  people,  as  a  man  that  was  named  very
wise  and  ingenious  in  feats  of  warre.  Then  came  a
Spaniard  renegado  from  the  host,  that  gave  us  warning
of  all  that  was  done  in  the  field,  and  of  the  approching
by  the  trenches  that  our  enemies  made.

And  in  likewise  there  arose  a  great  noise  in  the  towne,
that  the  slaves  Turks  that  wrought  for  us  in  the  diches
had  slaine  their  keepers,  and  would  have  fled,  which  was
not  so.  Neverthelesse,  the  rumour  was  great,  and  they
rang  alarme :  wherefore  the  sayd  slaves  comming  to
prison,  as  it  was  ordeined  in  al  the  alarmes,  were  met  of

THE LOSS OF RHODES  a.d.

1522.

the  people,  which  in  great  anger  put  them  to  death  : so

that  there  were  slain  an  hundred  &  moe  the  same  day.

And  if  the  lord  great  master  had  not commanded that

none should hurt them, they  had bene all slaine,  and

there  were  fifteene  hundreth  of  them :  which  slaves  did

great  service  in  time  of  the  siege  :  for  they  laboured  dayly

to make our defences, and to cast earth out of  the

ditches, and in all  works  they were necessary at our

needs.

How the great Turke arrived in person
before  Rhodes.

THe  25  day  of  the  sayd  moneth  many  of  our  men
went  out  for  to  skirmish  in  the  field  and  made  great
murder  of  Turks,  and  in  likewise  did  our  artillery.  And
it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  28  day  of  the  same  moneth  the
great  Turke  in  person  passed  le  Fisco  a  haven  in  the
maine  land  with  a  galley  and  a  fust,  and  arrived  about
noone,  where  his  army  lay,  the  which  day  may  be  called
unhappie  for  Rhodes.  For  his  comming,  his  presence
and  continuall  abiding  in  the  fielde  is  and  hath  beene
cause  of  the  victorie  that  he  hath  had.  When  the  gallie
that  he  came  in  was  arrived,  all  the  other  shippes  of  the
hoste  hanged  banners  aloft  in  their  toppes  and  on  their
sayle  yerdes.

Soone  after  that  the  Turke  was  arrived,  he  went  to
land,  and  mounted  on  his  horse,  and  rode  to  his  pavilion
which  was  in  a  high  place  called  Megalandra,  foure  or
five  miles  fro  the  towne  out  of  the  danger  of  the  gunne
shot.  And  on  the  morow,  as  it  was  reported  to  us,  hee
came  to  a  Church  nigh  the  towne  called  Saint  Steven,  for
to  viewe  the  Towne  and  fortresses,  whereas  they  had  set
up  mantellets  for  to  lay  their  ordinance.

THe  last  day  of  July,  one  of  our  brigandines  went
out  with  a  good  company  of  men  arayed  as  Turkes,
and  some  of  them  could  speake  Turkish,  and  went  by
night  to  lande  through  the  Turkes  hoste,  and  demaunded

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

if  there  were  any  that  would  passe  over  into  Turkie,  that
they  should  haste  them  to  come.  The  Turkes  weening
that  they  had  beene  of  Turkie,  there  entred  a  12.  persons,
the  which  were  carried  to  Rhodes,  by  whom  we  knew
what  they  did  in  the  campe.

The  first  day  of  August  the  Captaine  Gabriel  Martin-
ingo  was  made  knight  of  the  order  of  the  religion  by  the
lord  great  Master,  and  was  made  the  first  auncient  of  the
Italian  nation,  of  the  first  baliage  or  priorie  that  should
be  vacant.  And  in  the  meane  season  the  religion  should
give  him  twelve  hundred  ducates  for  pension  every  yeere,
and  the  same  day  he  was  received  to  the  Councell  in  the
roome  of  a  baylife.

The  fift  day  of  the  sayd  moneth  our  master  gunner
was  slaine  with  a  gunne,  which  was  great  losse  for  us
at  that  time.

The  15.  day  of  the  sayd  moneth  was  knowen  and
taken  for  a  traitor,  Messire  John  Baptista,  the  physicion
aforesayd,  which  confessed  his  evill  and  divelish  doings,
and  had  his  head  striken  of.

Of  the  marveilous  mounts  that  the  Turks  made
afore  the  towne,  and  how  the  capitaines  were
ordered  in  the  trenches.

AFter  the  comming  of  the  great  Turke,  the  enemies
began  to  shoote  with  ordinance  of  another  sort  then
they  did  before,  and  specially  with  harquebushes  and
handguns,  and  also  to  make  their  trenches  and  approches.
And  also  they  did  more  diligence  then  afore,  to  bring  ye
earth  nigh  the  towne  with  spades  and  pickaxes.  And  it  is
to  weet,  that  they  mooved  the  earth  from  halfe  a  mile  off,
and  there  were  shot  out  of  the  towne  innumerable  strokes
with  ordinance  against  the  sayd  earth,  and  innumerable
quantitie  of  people  hid  behind  the  sayd  earth,  were  slaine.
Neverthelesse  they  never  left  working  till  they  had
brought  it  to  the  brimmes  of  the  ditches  :  and  when  it
was  there,  they  raised  it  higher  and  higher  in  strengthning
it  behind. And  in  conclusion  the  sayd  earth  was  higher

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

then  the  wals  of  the  towne  by  10.  or  12.  foote,  and  it
seemed  a  hill.  And  it  was  agaynst  the  gate  of  Auvergne
and  Spaine,  and  beat  our  men  that  were  at  the  gates  &
bulwarks,  in  such  wise,  that  none  durst  be  seene  till
certaine  defences  and  repaires  were  made  of  plankes  and
boards  to  cover  our  people  and  keepe  them  from  the  shot.
And  at  the  gate  of  Italy  was  made  such  another  heape,
and  in  none  other  part.

When  the  trenches  were  thus  made  to  the  ditches,  the
enemies  made  holes  in  the  wals  of  the  ditch  outward  :  [II.  i.  81.]
wherethorow  they  shot  infinitely  with  handgunnes  at  our
men  aswell  on  the  walles  as  on  the  bulwarks,  and  slew
many  of  them.  Then  the  bashas  and  captaines  entred  into
the  trenches,  ech  to  his  place  after  their  order  and  dignity :
that  is  to  wit,  Mustafa  Basha  as  chiefe  captaine  entred  the
trench  direct  to  the  bulwarke  of  England  with  his  people
&  captaines  under  him.  Pery  Bassha  went  to  the  trenches
against  the  gate  of  Italy  with  his  folkes  and  captaines
under  him.  Acmek  Bassha  was  in  the  trenches  of
Auvergne  and  Spaine  with  the  Aga  of  the  Janizaires  and
the  Beglarby  of  Romany  with  him.  The  Beglarby  of
Natolia  was  in  the  trenches  of  Provence.  Allibey  was
with  his  company  against  the  gardins  of  saint  Anthony  on
the  North  side,  and  divers  other  captaines  with  him,  and
set  his  ordinance  against  the  wall  of  the  gate  of  Almaine,
which  was  but  weake,  and  set  up  seven  mantellets  by  the
milles  toward  the  West  :  and  by  the  space  of  eight  or
nine  dayes  they  beat  upon  the  same  wall ;  which  put  us
in  great  feare,  if  they  had  continued.  Howbeit  the  noble
lord  great  master  forthwith  caused  repaires  to  be  made
within,  and  planks  &  tables  to  be  set  to  fortifie  the  sayd
weake  wall  :  and  abode  there  from  the  morning  til  night,
to  cause  it  to  be  the  more  hasted.  The  artillery  of  the
gate  of  Almaine,  and  the  Massif  of  the  gate  of  the  campe
and  of  the  palais  beat  so  sore  and  so  often  upon  the  sayd
mantellets  that  it  wearied  the  enemies  to  make  and  repaire
them  so  often  :  and  they  tooke  up  the  pieces,  and  bare
them  away. And  also  they  could  not  well  beat  the  sayd

23

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

wall  because  the  brimmes  of  the  ditch  without  were  almost
as  hie  as  the  wall  that  they  beat.  But  or  they  bare  the
artillery  away,  they  beat  the  steeple  of  S.  Johns  church  so,
that  the  most  part  was  broken  and  cast  downe.  The  fore-
sayd  mantellets  were  appointed  to  beat  S.  Nicholas  tower,
and  by  the  space  of  ten  or  twelve  dayes  they  shot  sore
against  it  :  but  they  had  so  sharpe  and  vigorous  answere,
that  there  was  not  one  mantellet  that  abode  whole  an
houre.  The  captaine  of  the  sayd  tower  and  his  folke
did  such  diligence  and  businesse  in  shooting  off  their
pieces,  that  the  enemies  durst  set  up  no  more  mantellets
by  day,  nor  shoot  no  more  but  onely  by  night,  while  the
Moone  did  shine,  which  is  a  thing  worthy  of  memory,
of  marvaile,  and  of  praise.  At  the  last  when  they  had
beaten  against  the  sayd  tower  a  certaine  time,  seeing  that
it  furthered  nothing,  they  tooke  their  ordinance  from
thence,  and  bare  it  where  they  thought  best.

During  the  shot  in  the  sayd  place,  the  other  captaines
were  not  idle  nor  in  a  sleepe,  but  without  cease  night
and  day  they  beat  the  wall  of  England  and  Spaine,  and
set  foureteene  mantellets  against  it,  shooting  great  bom-
bards, whereof  some  of  the  stones  were  five  or  sixe
spannes  about,  and  some  other  of  nine  or  ten  :  and  within
a  moneth  and  lesse  they  cast  downe  the  wall  almost  even
smooth  with  the  Barbican.  And  when  the  sayd  wall
was  so  beaten,  they  set  to  beat  the  bulwarke  of  Spaine
for  to  raise  the  defences  :  and  in  their  trenches  they  set
three  great  bombards,  which  shot  stones  of  eleven  spannes
in  compasse,  and  with  the  sayd  pieces  they  beat  the
sayd  bulwarke  and  wall  in  such  wise,  that  they  made
great  bracks,  and  the  stones  and  earth  that  fell,  served
the  enemies  for  ladders,  so  that  they  might  come  upon
the  plaine  ground.  In  like  sort  they  raised  the  defences
from  the  height  of  the  bulwarke  at  the  posterne  of
Provence,  and  set  three  great  pieces  on  the  brimme  of
the  ditch,  which  shot  stones  of  eleven  spannes  against  the
wall,  and  within  a  while  they  made  a  breach  as  at  the
posterne  of  Spaine. The  artillery  of  the  towne  did  shoot

24

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

without  cease  against  the  mantellets,  and  brake  many  of
them,  but  they  made  other  as  it  is  sayd  in  the  nights.
For  they  had  all  things  that  belonged  to  them,  &  needed.
And  out  of  the  posterne  of  England  was  shot  a  gunne
that  brake  downe  one  of  the  sayd  mantellets,  and  hit
upon  one  of  the  pieces,  and  slew  foure  or  five  men,  and
bare  away  both  the  legs  of  the  master  of  the  ordinance,
which  died  soone  after :  whereof  the  great  Turke  was
very  ill  content,  and  sayd  that  he  had  rather  have  lost
one  of  his  basshas  or  captaines  then  the  sayd  master.
Also  it  is  to  knowen  that  there  were  three  or  foure  man-
tellets addressed  against  the  plain  ground  of  Italy,  and
by  continuall  beating  of  shot  that  they  made,  there  was
also  a  breach,  and  by  the  earth  and  stones  that  were
fallen,  they  might  come  up  to  it.

Of  the  politike  repaires  and  defences  that  the
ingenious  captaine  Gabriel  Martiningo,  made
within  the  tovs^ne  against  the  breaches  in  the
walles.

THe  captaine  Gabriel  Martiningo,  prompt,  diligent,
and  expert  to  give  remedies  to  the  needfull  places,
foorthwith  caused  to  make  the  traverses  upon  the  wall
whereas  the  breach  was,  with  good  repaires,  and  gunnes
small  and  great  which  were  set  in  the  sayd  traverses,  the
which  shot  not  onely  at  the  breaches  but  to  the  trenches,
and  made  great  murder  of  enemies  aswell  at  the  assaults
that  they  made  as  otherwhiles.  And  beside  the  traverses,
the  sayd  captaine  planted  small  artillery,  as  harquebushes,
and  handgunnes  upon  certaine  houses  within  the  towne,
that  stood  open  against  the  breach,  with  good  repaires :  [ll.  i.  82,]
and  from  that  place  great  slaughter  of  Turks  was  made
at  the  assaults.  Also  it  is  of  trueth  that  beside  the  sayd
mantellets  that  shot  against  the  wall  of  England  and
Spaine  with  great  bombards,  were  two  mantellets  in  an
hie  place  toward  the  way  to  the  gardin  of  Maupas,  in
the  which  were  certaine  double  gunnes,  as  basilisks  with

25

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

holow  stones  and  wilde  fire  in  them,  which  shot  against
the  wall  into  the  towne  at  all  aventures  for  to  make
murder  of  people :  howbeit,  thanked  be  God,  they  did
no  great  harme  but  to  the  houses.

After  these  great  &  terrible  beatings,  and  that  the
enemies  had  way  to  mount  upon  the  towne  walles,  and
come  to  hand  with  us  by  traversing  of  their  trenches  to
the  fallen  earth  within  the  breach  more  surely,  and  with-
out hurt  of  our  gunshot,  shooting  thorow  holes  that
they  made  in  the  walles  of  the  ditch  without,  they  cast
up  much  stone  and  earth,  because  it  should  cover  them
from  the  shot  of  the  bulwarke  of  Auvergne.  And  also
they  shot  fervently  against  the  bulwarke  of  Spaine,  for
to  raise  the  defences,  of  the  which  at  the  last  they  raised
the  most  part,  reserving  only  a  few  gunners  below  in
the  mine  of  the  sayd  bulwarke,  which  litle  or  nothing
damaged  them.  And  this  is  touching  the  gunshot,
whereof  I  say  not  the  third  part,  because  it  is  a  thing
incredible  to  them  that  have  not  scene  it.  For  some
dayes  they  shot  with  those  great  bombards  that  were
on  the  brimme  of  the  ditch,  and  from  the  mantellets
bent  against  the  wall  of  England  and  Spaine  20  or  30
times  and  more.  And  I  beleeve  verily  that  since  the
creation  of  the  world  such  artillery,  and  so  great  quantity
was  never  bent  and  layed  before  any  towne  as  hath  bene
against  Rhodes  at  this  siege.  Wherfore  it  is  no  marvell
if  the  walles  be  and  have  bene  beaten  downe,  and  if  there
be  breaches  and  clifts  in  many  places.

Of  the  mines  that  the  Turks  made  :  and  how
they  overthrew  part  of  the  bulwarke  of  Eng-
land.

ANd  because  as  it  is  sayd  before,  that  the  greatest
hope  that  the  enemies  had  to  get  the  towne  of
Rhodes,  was  by  mining,  therefore  now  after  that  I  have
spoken  of  the  gunshot  and  beatings,  I  shall  shew  of  the
mines  that  the  Turks  made,  the  which  were  in  so
great  quantity,  and  in  so  many  places,  that  I  beleeve  the

26

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad

1522.
third  part  of  the  towne  was  mined  :  and  it  is  found  by-
account  made,  that  there  were  about  60  mines,  howbeit,
thanked  be  God,  many  of  them  came  not  to  effect,  by
occasion  of  the  countermines  that  they  within  made,  and
also  trenches  that  the  right  prudent  lord  the  great  master
caused  to  be  made  deepe  within  the  ditches,  unto  two
or  three  foot  of  water.  The  which  trenches  and  certaine
pits  that  he  had  caused  in  the  sayd  ditches  to  be
wrought,  or  the  host  arrived,  served  right  well  since  :
for  night  and  day  there  were  men  in  them  to  watch  and
hearken  when  the  enemies  mined,  for  to  meet  them,  and
cut  their  way,  as  was  done  many  times.

And  for  to  speake  of  the  mines  that  had  effect,  and
damaged  us,  it  is  to  wit,  that  the  fourth  day  of  Sep-
tember, about  foure  houres  after  noone,  the  enemies
put  fire  in  two  mines,  one  was  betweene  the  posterne
of  Spaine  and  Auvergne,  which  did  no  hurt  but  to  the
Barbican.  The  other  was  at  the  bulwarke  of  England,
which  was  so  fell  and  strong,  that  it  caused  most  part
of  the  town  to  shake,  and  cast  down  a  great  part  of  the
sayd  bulwarke  at  the  spring  of  the  day  :  and  by  the
earth  and  stones  that  fell  into  the  ditches,  the  enemies
came  upon  the  bulwarke  with  their  banners,  and  fought
sore  and  mightily  with  our  men,  not  with  hands,  but
with  shot  of  handgunnes.  The  lord  great  master  that
was  come  15  dayes  or  more  with  his  succours  to  the
sayd  bulwarke,  went  with  his  company  to  helpe  them
that  fought.  After  that  they  had  fought  the  space  of
two  or  three  houres,  the  enemies  repelled  and  driven
backe  by  our  men  from  the  sayd  bulwarke,  and  beaten
with  ordinance  on  every  side,  withdrew  them  with
their  losse,  shame,  and  damage.  And  this  was  the  first  A  thousand^
victory  that  our  lord  gave  us,  and  there  abode  of  ^°'''.^  Turkes
our  enemies  a  thousand  and  more.  ^^  Endish

When  this  assault  was  done,  they  made  another  at  the  bulwarke.
breach in the wall of Spaine, and mounted upon  it,
but  the  ordinance  of  the  traverses  of  the  walles  and  of
the  houses  made  so  faire  a  riddance,  that  they  were  very

27

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

willing  to  withdraw  themselves  :  for  at  the  retreat,  and
also  at  their  comming  the  sayd  ordinance  of  the  bul-
warke  did  them  great  damage,  albeit  that  they  had  made
some  repaire  of  earth.  Of  our  men  died  that  day  25
or  thereabout,  aswell  knights  as  other.  And  the  same
day  in  the  morning  departed  out  of  this  world  Gabriel
de  PomeroUes  lieutenant  to  the  lord  master,  which  on
a  certaine  day  before  fell  from  the  wall  as  he  went  to
see  the  trenches  in  the  ditches,  and  hurt  his  breast,  and
for  fault  of  good  attendance  he  fell  into  a  fever,  whereof
he  died.

How  the  Turks  assailed  the  bulwarke  of  England,
and  how  they  were  driven  away.

THe  ninth  day  of  the  sayd  moneth,  at  seven  in  the
morning  the  enemies  put  fire  in  two  mines  ;  one
at  the  posterne  of  Provence,  which  had  none  effect  :  the
other  was  at  the  bulwarke  of  England,  which  felled
another  piece  nigh  to  that  that  was  cast  downe
[II.  i.  83.]  afore.  And  the  sayd  mine  was  as  fierce  as  the  other,
or  more,  for  it  seemed  that  all  the  bulwarke  went  downe,
and  almost  all  they  that  were  in  it  ranne  away.  And
when  the  standerd  of  the  religion  came  into  the  sayd
bulwarke,  the  enemies  were  at  the  breach  ready  to  have
entred  :  but  when  they  saw  the  sayd  standerd,  as  people
lost  and  overcome,  they  went  downe  againe.  Then  the
artillery  of  the  bulwarke  of  Quosquino,  and  of  other
places,  found  them  well  enough,  and  slew  many  of  them.
Howbeit,  their  captaines  made  them  to  returne  with  great
strokes  of  swordes  and  other  weapons,  and  to  remount
upon  the  earth  fallen  from  the  sayd  bulwarke,  and  pight
seven  banners  nigh  to  our  repaire.  Then  our  men
fought  with  morispikes  and  fixed  speares  against  them
the  space  of  three  whole  houres,  till  at  the  last  they
being  well  beaten  with  great  ordinance  and  small  on
every  side,  withdrew  themselves.  And  of  their  banners
our  men  gate  one,  for  it  was  not  possible  to  get  any
more  :  for  assoone  as  any  of  our  men  went  up  on  our

28

THE LOSS OF RHODES  a.d.

1522.

repaires,  he  was  slaine  with  small  gunnes  of  the  trenches,

and  holes  made  in  the  walles  of  our  ditches. And  there  Two  thousand

was  slaine  of  our  enemies  that day  at  the  assault  2000  Turks  «^^«^

of  meane  men, and three persons of  estate,  which lay  \j^i^arke ^

dead  along  in  the  ditch, with faire and rich harnesse.

And  it  was  reported  to  us  from the campe, they  were

three saniacbeis, that is to say, great seneshalles or

stuards. And  of  Christian  men  of  our  part  abode  about

thirty  persons. And  this  was  the  second  victory  given

to  us  by  the  grace  divine.

How  Sir  John  Bourgh  Turcoplier  of  England
was  slaine  at  an  assault  of  the  English  bul-
warke.

THe  17  day  of  the  same  moneth,  about  midday,  the
enemy  came  againe  to  give  another  assault  to  the
sayd  bulwarke,  at  the  same  place  aforesayd,  without
setting  of  fire  in  mines,  and  brought  five  banners  with
them,  nigh  to  the  repaires.  Then  was  there  strong
fighting  on  both  parts,  and  there  were  gotten  two  of
their  banners,  of  the  which  sir  Christopher  Valdenare,
that  time  Castelaine  of  Rhodes,  gate  one  :  the  other  was
in  the  hands  of  sir  John  Bourgh  Turcoplier  of  England,
chiefe  captaine  of  the  succours  of  the  sayd  posterne  of
England,  a  valiant  man  &  hardy  :  and  in  holding  of  it
he  was  slaine  with  the  stroke  of  a  handgunne,  which
was  great  damage.  The  sayd  banner  was  recovered  by
one  of  our  men.  And  after  long  fighting  on  both  sides,
the  enemies  seeing  that  they  got  nothing  but  stripes,
returned  into  their  trenches.  At  the  sayd  fray  the  lord
prior  of  S.  Giles  pre  John  was  hurt  thorow  the  necke
with  a  handgun,  and  was  in  great  danger  of  death,  but
he  escaped  and  was  made  whole.  The  same  day,  and
the  same  houre  of  the  sayd  assault,  the  enemies  mounted
to  the  breach  in  the  wall  of  Spaine,  and  came  to  the
repaires  to  the  handes  of  our  men,  and  fought  a  great
while  :  but  the  great  quantity  of  artillery  that  was  shot
so  busily  and  so  sharply  from  our  traverses  on  ech  side,

29

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

and  out  of  the  bulwarks  of  Auvergne  and  Spaine,  skir-
mished them  so  well,  that  there  abode  as  many  at  that
assault  as  at  the  other  of  England,  well  neere  to  the
number  of  5000.  And  they  withdrew  themselves  with
their  great  losse  and  confusion,  which  was  the  third
time  that  they  were  chased  and  overcome  :  thanked  be
our  Lord,  which  gave  us  the  force  and  power  so  to
doe,  for  they  were  by  estimation  a  hundred  against
one.

Also  the  22  day  of  the  same  moneth  of  September
they  fired  a  mine  betweene  Italy  and  Provence,  which
did  no  harme.

Of  the  terrible  mine  at  the  posterne  of
Auvergne.

ANd  the  23  day  of  the  same  moneth  they  fired  two
mines,  one  at  the  posterne  of  Spaine,  and  the  other
by  the  bulwarke  of  Auvergne,  the  which  mine  by
Auvergne  was  so  terrible,  that  it  made  all  the  towne  to
shake,  and  made  the  wall  to  open  from  above  to  beneath
unto  the  plaine  ground  :  howbeit,  it  fell  not,  for  the
mine  had  vent  or  breath  in  two  places,  by  one  of  the
countermines,  and  by  a  rocke  under  the  Barbican,  the
which  did  cleave,  and  by  that  cleft  the  fury  and  might
of  the  mine  had  issue.  And  if  the  sayd  two  vents  had
not  bene,  the  wall  had  bene  turned  upside  downe.
And  for  truth,  as  it  was  reported  to  us  out  of  the
campe,  the  enemies  had  great  hope  in  the  sayd  mine,
thinking  that  the  wall  should  have  bene  overthrowen,
and  then  they  might  have  entred  into  the  towne  at  their
pleasures  :  but  when  they  saw  the  contrary,  they  were
very  ill  pleased.  And  the  captaines  determined  to  give
assault  at  foure  places  at  once,  to  make  us  the  more
adoo,  and  to  have  an  entrance  into  the  towne  by  one
of  the  foure.  And  the  sayd  day  and  night  they  ceased
not  to  shoot  artillery  :  and  there  came  in  hope  of  the
mine  threescore  thousand  men  and  moe  into  the
trenches.

30

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

How  the  bulwarke  of  Spaine  was  lost,  and [II.  i.  84
woonne  againe.

THe  24  day  of  the  same  moneth,  a  little  before  day,
they  gave  assault  at  the  breach  of  Spaine,  to  the
bulwarke  of  England,  to  the  posterne  of  Provence,  and
at  the  plaine  ground  of  Italy,  all  at  one  houre  &  one
time.  The  first  that  mounted  to  the  breach  of  Spaine,
was  the  Aga  of  the  Janissaries,  a  valiant  man,  and  of
great  courage  with  his  company,  and  bare  three  score
or  three  score  and  tenne  banners  and  signes,  and  pight
them  in  the  earth  of  the  breach,  and  then  fought  with
our  men,  and  mounted  on  our  repaires,  making  other
maner  of  fray  and  more  rigorous  then  the  other  that
were  passed,  and  the  sayd  skirmish  lasted  about  sixe
houres.  And  forthwith,  as  the  assault  was  given,  a  great
sort  of  Turks  entred  into  the  bulwarke  of  Spaine,  and  set
up  eight  or  nine  signes  or  banners  upon  it,  and  drove
our  men  out,  I  can  not  tell  how,  unwares  or  otherwise.
And  they  were  lords  of  it  three  houres  and  more.  How-
beit  there  were  of  our  men  beneath  in  the  mine  of  the
sayd  bulwarke,  the  which  bulwarke  so  lost,  gave  us  evill
hope.  But  incontinently  the  lord  great  master  being  at
the  defence  of  the  posterne  of  England,  having  know-
ledge of  the  sayd  losse,  and  that  there  was  great  fighting
and  resistance  on  both  sides  at  the  breach  of  Spaine,
marched  thither  with  the  banner  of  the  crucifix,  leaving
the  charge  of  the  sayd  bulwarke  in  the  hands  of  the
bailife  de  la  Moree  messieur  Mery  Combant.  And  the
lord  mounted  on  the  wall  of  Spaine,  whereas  then  began
a  great  skirmish,  and  every  man  layed  his  handes  to
worke,  as  well  to  put  the  enemies  out  of  the  breach,  as
to  recover  the  bulwarke  that  was  lost.  And  the  sayde
lord  sent  a  company  of  men  into  the  bulwarke  by  the
gate  of  the  mine,  or  by  the  Barbican,  the  which  entred  at
the  sayd  gate,  and  went  up,  where  they  found  but  few
Turkes.  For  the  artillery  of  the  posterne  of  England,
right  against  the  bulwarke  of  Spaine,  had  so  well  met  and

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

scattered  them,  that  within  a  while  our  men  had  slaine  all
them  that  were  left.  And  thus  the  sayde  bulwarke  was
gotten  and  recovered  againe,  and  with  all  diligence  were
made  new  repaires  and  strengths  to  the  sayd  place.  And
in  like  sort,  the  enemies  were  put  from  the  breach,  and  few
of  them  escaped,  and  all  their  banners  and  signes  were  left
with  us.  Surely  it  may  be  sayd,  that  after  the  grace  of
God  (the  traverses  of  Spaine  and  Auvergne,  and  the  small
artillery  set  on  the  houses  right  against  the  sayd  breaches,
as  it  is  sayd,  with  the  comming  and  presence  of  the  lord
great  master)  hath  given  us  this  dayes  victory.

As  touching  the  murder  of  the  people,  done  by  the
artillery  of  the  bulwarkes  of  England  and  Spaine,  the
quantity  was  such  that  a  man  could  not  perceive  nor  see
any  ground  of  the  ditches.  And  the  stench  of  the  mastifs
carions  was  so  grievous,  that  we  might  not  suffer  it  seven
or  eight  dayes  after.  And  at  the  last,  they  that  might
save  themselves  did  so,  and  withdrew  themselves  to  the
trenches :  and  the  reverend  lord  great  master  abode
victorious  of  the  sayd  place,  and  in  like  sort  of  the  other
three  assaults,  the  which  were  but  little  lesse  then  that  of
Spaine,  for  they  fought  long.  But  in  conclusion,  the
enemies  beaten  on  all  sides,  and  in  so  many  sorts,  with
artillery  were  put  backe,  and  vanquished,  that  there  died
that  day  at  all  the  foure  places  fifteene  or  sixteene
thousand.  And  the  slaughter  was  so  great  at  the  plaine
Italy,  of  the  cursed  enemies,  that  the  sea  was  made  redde
with  their  blood.  And  on  our  side  also  died  to  the
number  of  an  hundred  men  or  more.  And  of  men  of
dignity  in  the  towne,  having  charge,  died  Sir  Francis  de
Frenolz  commander  of  Romania,  which  Sir  Francis  was
chiefe  captaine  of  the  great  ship  of  Rhodes,  and  he  was
slaine  at  the  plaine  of  Italy,  wounded  with  two  strokes  of
harquebushes :  it  was  great  dammage  of  his  death,  for  he
was  a  worthy  man,  perfect,  and  full  of  vertues.  There
died  also  messieur  Nastasy  de  sancta  Camilla  aforenamed,
having  two  hundred  men  under  him  of  the  lord  great
masters  succours. There  died  also  divers  other  worthy

32

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.
men  that  day,  and  many  were  maimed. Among  all  other
that  lost  any  member,  messieur  John  de  le  Touz  called
Pradines,  being  at  the  sayd  bulwarke,  with  a stroke  of
artillery  had  his  arme  smitten  away,  in  great  danger  to
have  lost  his  life ;  howbeit  by  the  helpe  of  God  he  died
not. In  like sort  the  same  day  was hurt Sir  William  ^^^  ^i^^-
Weston  abovesayd,  captaine  of  the  posterne  of  England, fstoncap-
and  had  one  of  his  fingers  stricken  away  with  an  harque-  English  pos-
bush : which  knight  behaved  himselfe  right  woorthily  at  term  hurt.
all  the  assaults. Of  the  Turkes  part,  of  great  men,  were
two principall captaines slaine under the Aga of  the
Janissaries,  and  another  captaine that  was come out  of
Surey to the campe certaine dayes before,  with sixe
hundred  Mamelukes,  and  two  or  three  thousand  Moores.
And  of  them  that  were  hurt  of  great  men  the  Beglarby
of  Natolia  had  a  stroke  with  an  arrow  as  he  was  in  the
trench of  Provence. And many  other  were wounded,
whose  names  be  not  rehearsed  here,  because  of  shortnesse.

How  the great  Turke for anger that he could  [H.  i.  85.]
not  get  the  towne,  w^ould  have  put  his  chiefe
captaine to death, and how they made 1 1
mines  under  the  bulwarke  of  England.

DUring  this  assault,  the  great  Turke  was  by  his  pavil-
lion  in  a  place  that  he  had  caused  to  be  made,  and
saw  all  the  businesse,  and  how  his  people  were  so  sharpely
put  backe,  and  the  victory  lost  on  his  side,  &  was  very
sore  displeased,  and  halfe  in  despaire :  and  he  sent  for
Mustafa  Basha  with  whom  he  was  angry,  and  chid  him
bitterly,  saying  that  he  had  caused  him  to  come  thither,  and
had  made  him  to  beleeve  that  he  should  take  the  towne
in  fifteene  dayes,  or  a  moneth  at  the  furthest ;  and  he  had
beene  there  already  three  moneths  with  his  army,  and
yet  they  had  done  nothing.  And  after  these  wordes  he
was  purposed  to  put  him  to  death  in  the  campe  :  but  the
other  Bashas  shewed  him  that  he  ought  not  to  do  justice
in  the  land  of  his  enemies,  for  it  would  comfort  them
^  33  c

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

and  give  them  courage.  Wherby  he  did  moderate  his
anger,  and  left  him  for  that  time,  and  thought  to  send
him  to  Cairo,  least  the  people  there  would  rebell,  by-
occasion  of  the  captaine  of  Cairo  which  died  a  few  dayes
before.  Howbeit  he  departed  not  so  suddenly,  and  or  he
went  he  thought  to  assay  if  he  might  do  some  thing  for
to  please  the  Turke,  aswell  for  his  honour  as  for  to  save
his  person,  and  was  marvellous  diligent  to  make  mines  at
the  bulwarke  of  England  for  to  overthrow  it.  And  by
account  were  made  1 1  mines  aswell  to  the  sayd  bulwarke
as  elswhere,  beside  them  spoken  of  before,  and  that  they
had  fired.  But  the  most  part  of  the  sayd  mines  came  to
no  proofe  though  they  put  fire  in  them,  and  many  were
met  with  countermines,  and  broken  by  our  men  by  the
good  diligence  and  sollicitude  of  sir  Gabriel  Du-chef
steward  of  the  house  of  the  lord  great  master,  which  had
the  charge  of  the  sayd  countermines  at  the  same  bulwarke.
In  the  which  businesse  he  behaved  himselfe  well  and
worthily,  and  spared  not  his  goods  to  cause  the  people  to
worke  and  travell,  but  spent  thereof  largely.

How  the  Turks  were  minded  to  have  gone  their
way,  and  of  the  traitours  within  the  towne,
and  of  many  great  assaults.

THe  Turks  seeing  that  by  mining  they  were  nothing
furthered,  nor  might  not  come  to  their  intentions,
and  having  but  small  store  of  gunpowder,  were  in  de-
liberation and  minde  to  have  raised  the  siege,  and  gone
their  way.  And  in  deed  some  of  them  bare  their  cariages
toward  the  shippes :  and  also  certaine  number  of  people
went  out  of  the  trenches  with  their  standards  straight  to
the  ships.  And  it  was  written  unto  us  from  the  campe
how  the  Janissaries  and  other  of  the  host  would  fight  no
more :  and  that  they  were  almost  all  of  one  opinion  for
to  go  away,  save  some  of  the  captaines  of  the  foresayd
Mustafa  Bassha  or  Acmek  Bassha.  And  in  the  meane
season  the  false  traitours  that  were  in  the  towne  wrote
letters  to  the  campe,  giving  them  knowledge  of  all  that

34

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

was  sayd  and  done  among  us.  And  also  an  Albanese
fled  to  the  enemies  campe,  and  warned  them  not  to  go,
for  the  gunshot  was  nigh  wasted,  and  that  the  most  part
of  the  knights  and  people  should  be  theirs  shortly.

In  like  sort  then  wrote  the  abovesayd  Chanceller  Sir
Andrew  de  Merall,  whose  treason  as  then  was  not
knowen :  but  when  it  commeth  to  the  effect  of  his
treason,  I  shall  shew  the  knowledge  that  he  gave  to  the
enemies  at  divers  times.

When  the  bashas  and  captaines  of  the  hoste  understood
the  sayd  warnings,  they  all  purposed  for  to  tary,  and
caused  those  tidings  of  the  towne  to  be  knowen  over  all
the  army.  And  beganne  againe  to  shoot  artillery  faster
then  ever  they  did,  for  new  shot  was  come  into  the
campe.  Then  Mustafa  Bassha  being  in  despaire  that  he
could  do  nothing  by  mines,  by  gunshot,  nor  by  assaults,
he  being  ready  to  depart  for  to  goe  into  Surey  by  the
great  Turkes  commandement,  before  his  departing  hee
thought  once  againe  to  assay  his  adventure,  and  made
three  assaults  three  dayes  together.  The  first  was  on  a
Saturday  the  fourth  day  of  October  an  houre  before
night.  The  other  on  Sunday  in  the  morning.  And  the
third  on  Munday  after  dinner.  And  the  sayd  three
assaults  were  made  to  the  bulwarke  of  England.  And  it
was  assailed  but  with  stones  and  bagges  full  of  artificiall
fire.  And  at  these  three  assaults  many  of  our  men  were
hurt  with  the  sayd  fire,  and  with  the  stones  that  came  as
thicke  as  raine  or  haile.  But  in  the  end  the  enemies  got
nothing  but  strokes,  and  returned  into  their  trenches  evill
contented,  and  murmuring,  and  sware  by  their  Mahomet
that  Mustafa  Bassha  shoulde  not  make  them  to  mount
any  more  to  the  sayd  bulwarke.  And  that  it  was  great
folly  for  them  to  cause  them  to  be  slaine  at  the  will  and
fantasie  of  one  man.  These  wordes  sayd  in  Greeke  by
some  of  the  enemies  were  heard  of  our  men  as  they  went
downe  from  the  bulwarke.  And  because  (as  it  is  sayd)
that  the  enemies  at  the  assaults  that  were  made,  came
up  by  the  earth  and  stones  that  fell  from  the  breaches,

35

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.
[II.  i.  86.]  some  of  our  men  advised  to  dense  the  barbican,  and  take
the  earth  out  of  the  ditch,  to  the  end  that  the  enemies
should not  easily  come upon the  wall. And in effect
weening  that  it  were  well  and  behoovefull to  be done,
by  great diligence  night  and day  by  mines they  voided
the  barbican,  and  the  most  part  of  the  earth  that  lay  in
the ditch was brought  into the towne, the  which was
hurtfull  afterward,  and  was  cause  that  the  enemies  got  the
foot of the wall. Notwithstanding, they had it but
scarsely. But this cleansing furthered the time, and
caused  them  to  get  it  sooner  then  they  should  have  done
if  the  earth  had  lien  still :  but  their  finall  intent  was  to
raise the defence of  the bulwarks, and then passe at
their pleasure, and enter into the barbican, as they
have done : for the enemies seeing that the barbican
was  clensed,  thought  to  get  into  it  by  trenches,  and  so
they  did,  howbeit  they  were  certaine  dayes  letted  by  our
handgun  shot. The  enemies  seeing  that  they  might  not
come  neere  it,  covered  their  trenches  with  tables  to  save
themselves :  and  then  they  made a mine  whereby  they
might  goe to  the barbican. So by  these two meanes,
afterward they were repaired with earth and with a
certaine  wall  that  they  made  for  to  eschew  the  shot  of
the  bulwarks  of  Auvergne  and  Spaine :  and  in  the  mine
they  found but  two  gunners,  which  they  slew  by  force
of  men. By  this  maner  they  being  covered  on  all  parts
and  without  any  danger,  passed  thorow  and  lept  into  the
barbican,  and  got the foot of  the  wall ;  which  was the
17 day of  October, an unhappy day for the poore
towne,  and occasion of  the  ruine thereof,  and  winning
of  the  same.

At  this  point  they  slept  not,  but  lightly  and  with
great  delight  they  began  to  picke  and  hew  the  wall.
And  weening  to  make  remedy  therefore,  and  to  finde
meanes  to  drive  them  from  the  sayde  barbican  with
engins  of  fire  and  barrels  of  gunpowder,  wee  slew  many
of  them,  but  it  availed  nothing:  for  the  quantitie  and
multitude of  people that  travelled there  was so great;^

36

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

that  they  cared  not  for  losse  of  them.  And  if  we  had
had  men  enow  within  the  towne,  there  might  have  bene
remedy  to  have  raised  them  from  thence :  but  consider-
ing that  our  force  and  totall  hope  was  in  people,  wee
left  to  doe  many  things  that  might  have  beene  done,  and
that  should  have  bene  good  then  and  other  times  also,
for  fault  of  men  of  warre.  At  the  last  it  was  pondred
by  Sir  Gabriel  Martiningo,  that  there  was  no  remedy  but
to  hew  the  wall  for  to  meet  them,  and  beat  them  with
ordinance  and  with  engins  of  fire  to  burne  and  undoe
them.  Then  our  men  began  to  hew  the  wall,  and  made
some  holes  to  shoot  at  the  enemies  that  slept  not,  but
did  as  wee  did,  and  shot  at  us,  and  indeed  they  slew  &
hurt  many  of  our  men.  Then  Sir  Gabriel  Martiningo
ordeined  to  make  repaires  within  the  towne  at  the  front
where  they  did  cut  the  wall,  to  the  end  that  after  the
walles  were  cut,  the  enemies  should  know  with  whom  to
meet.  The  traverses  were  made  on  ech  side  with  good
artillery  great  and  small :  and  the  sayd  traverses  and
repaires  were  of  the  length  that  the  enemies  had  cut  the
wall,  and  beganne  at  the  massife  of  Spaine  made  by  the
reverend  lord  great  master  Mery  d'Amboise,  &  ended
at  the  church  of  S.  Salvador.  The  which  traverses
and  repaires  the  vulgar  people  call  the  Mandra,  that
is  to  say,  the  field.

The  meane  time  that  the  repaires  and  traverses  were
made  with  all  diligence.  Sir  Gabriel  Martiningo  never
ceased  going  to  every  place  to  purvey  for  all  things :  and
he  being  on  the  bulwarke  of  Spaine  to  ordeine  all  things
that  were  needfull,  there  came  a  stroke  of  a  handgun
from  the  trenches  that  smote  out  his  eye,  and  put  him  in
danger  of  his  life,  but  thanked  be  God,  he  recovered  his
health  within  a  moneth  and  a  halfe.  His  hurt  came  ill  to
passe,  for  the  need  that  we  had  of  him  that  time  in  all
things,  and  specially  to  the  repaires  of  the  breaches,
Nevertheles  the  lord  priour  of  S.  Giles  (not  ignorant  in
all  such  things)  with  other  men  expert  in  warre,  attended
to the sayd repaires and traverses,  there and elswere.

37

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

The  enemies  on  the  other  side  night  and  day  without
rest  (for  the  great  number  of  labourers  that  they  had
hourely  and  newly  ready)  hewed  and  undermined  the
sayd  wall.

And  the  20  day  of  October  they  put  fire  in  the
undermines,  weening  to  have  cast  downe  the  wall,  but
they  could  not :  then  they  would  have  pulled  it  downe
with  great  ropes  and  ancres,  but  the  artillery  of  the
bulwarke  of  Auvergne  brake  their  ropes,  and  sent  them
away  lightly.

At  the  last  they  made  a  mine  under  the  sayd  wall  and
breach  :  and  the  26  day  of  the  same  moneth  they  did
put  fire  to  the  same  mine,  weening  to  have  overthrowen
the  wall,  which  it  did  not,  but  raised  it,  and  made  it  to
fall  almost  straight  upright,  which  was  more  disadvantage
to  the  enemies  then  profit.  Then  they  shot  artillery  at
it,  which  in  fewe  dayes  beat  it  downe,  and  they  had
opening  and  way  to  come  into  the  Towne.  Neverthe-
lesse  it  was  not  necessary  for  them  as  then  to  enter :  for
the  artillery  of  our  repaires  beat  them  in  the  forepart,  and
the  artillery  lying  at  the  two  milles  at  the  posterne  of
Quosquino,  and  in  that  of  England,  whereas  was  a
basiliske  that  beat  right  upon  the  breach  with  other
pieces :  and  therefore  the  enemies  sought  other  meanes,
and  beganne  to  raise  the  earth  betweene  our  two  walles,
drawing  toward  the  bulwarke  of  England  on  the  one  side,
and  toward  Auvergne  on  the  other  side,  and  would  have
[II.  i.  87.]  cut  the  wall  further  then  our  traverses  were  for  to  come
in  unbeaten  of  our  artillery.  Then  were  the  repaires
inlarged  and  made  greater  with  the  wall  that  was  cut,
of  the  height  of  twelve,  &  16  foot  in  bredth  :  and  so
the  enemies  might  goe  no  further  forward,  but  shot  great
artillery  against  our  repaires,  for  to  breake  and  cast  them
downe,  and  also  they  made  trenches  for  to  come  right
to  the  breach,  and  unto  the  repaires :  and  certeinly  we
looked  day  by  day,  and  houre  by  houre  for  to  have  some
assault.  The  reverend  lord  great  master,  the  which,  as
it  is  sayd,  had  left  the  bulwarke  of  England  the  day  that

38

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

the  great  assault  was  made,  and  since  that  time  he  moved
not  from  thence  while  they  hewed  the  wall,  &  where  as
the  breach  was,  because  that  they  were  most  dangerous  &
most  unquiet  places.  And  continually  the  sayd  lord  kept
him  behinde  the  sayd  repaires  with  his  knights  and  men
of  succours,  intentively  ready  and  prepared  to  live  and
die,  and  to  receive  his  enemies  as  they  ought  to  bee
received.  And  he  abode  three  or  foure  dayes  at  the
sayd  breach,  continuing  since  it  was  made,  unto  the  end,
fighting  with  his  enemies  every  day  in  great  perill  of  his
body :  for  oftentimes  hee  put  himselfe  further  in  the
prease  then  needed  for  the  danger  of  his  person,  but
he  did  it  for  to  hearten  and  strengthen  the  courage
of  his  people,  being  so  well  willing  to  defend  and  die
for  the  faith.

How  the  enemies  assailed  the  posternes  of
Provence  and  Italy,  and  how  they  were  driven
away.

BY  the  will  of  our  Lord,  the  enemies  alway  in  feare
and  dread,  would  give  none  assault,  but  continually
shot  against  our  repaires,  and  made  trenches  for  to  passe
forward  into  the  towne :  by  the  which  trenches  they  shot
infinitely  with  harquebushes  and  handgunnes,  and  slew
many  of  our  folke,  and  specially  of  them  that  wrought
and  made  the  repaires  that  were  broken  and  erased.  And
they  put  us  in  such  extremity,  that  we  had  almost  no
more  slaves  nor  other  labouring  people  for  to  repaire  that
which  they  brake  night  and  day,  which  was  a  great
hinderance  for  us,  and  the  beginning  of  our  perdition.
And  if  we  had  much  to  doe  in  that  place,  there  was  not
lesse  at  the  gate  of  Provence,  and  at  the  plaine  of  Italy :
for  dayly  they  were  doing  either  with  assault  or  skirmish,
and  most  at  the  plaine  of  Italy.  Howbeit  by  the  helpe
of  our  Lord  with  the  good  conducting  of  the  captaine
of  succours  of  the  same  place,  the  priour  of  Navarre,  that
was  prompt  and  intentive,  and  could  well  incourage
his men,  the enemies had  alway  the  woorst,  and  were

39

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

driven  from  the  sayd  plaine,  and  from  the  breach  of
Provence.

How  the  treason  of  Sir  Andrew  de  Merall  was
knowen,  and  of  the  marvellous  assaults  that
the  Turks  made.

UPon  these  termes  and  assaults,  the  treason  of  the
chancellour  Sir  Andrew  de  Merall,  of  whom  I  spake
before,  was  perceived :  for  a  servaunt  of  his,  named
Blasie,  was  found  shooting  a  quarrell  of  a  crossebow  with
a  letter,  whereof  he  was  accused  to  the  lord  great  master,
which  commanded  to  take  him  and  examine  him  by-
justice,  and  he  confessed  the  shot  of  that  letter  &  of
other  before,  at  the  commandement  of  his  master :  and
sayd  that  he  had  great  acquaintance  with  the  Turks
bashas,  and  that  it  was  not  long  since  he  had  written  a
letter  to  them,  warning  them  that  they  should  not  go,
for  gunshot  began  to  faile,  and  the  men  were  wasted  by
slaying  and  hurting  at  the  assaults  in  great  quantity :  and
if  they  abode  still  and  gave  no  more  assaults,  at  the  last
the  towne  should  be  theirs. And  divers  other  things  the

o

servant  sayd  of  his  master,  of  the  which  I  have  spoken
part  before  at  the  beginning,  and  of  the  warning  that
he  gave  to  the  great  Turke  for  to  come.

But  to  returne  to  the  plaine  of  Italy.  After  many
battels  and  assaults  done  in  the  sayd  place,  by  continuall
shot  of  seventeene  great  gunnes  that  beat  the  sayd  plaine,
the  repaires  and  traverses  were  almost  broken  and  lost.
And  by  trenches  the  enemies  were  come  joyning  to  the
breach,  and  never  ceased  to  grate  the  earth  and  scrape  the
earth  to  cause  the  repaires  &  traverses  to  fall  :  and  at
the  last  the  most  part  fell  downe,  &  our  men  were  con-
strained to  leave  the  sayd  plaine,  save  a  cantell  that  was
toward  the  sea,  as  it  were  the  third  part  thereof.  Cer-
taine  dayes  afore  the  enemies  came  to  the  foot  of  the
plaine,  and  did  cut  it,  and  rased  the  earth,  &  at  the  last
they  passed  thorow  unto  the  towne  wall  :  and  anon
began to  hew  and  cut  as  they did at that of  Spaine.

40

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

The  lord  great  master  seeing  that,  anon  cast  down  a  part
of  the  church  of  our  Lady  de  la  Victoria,  and  of  an  other
church  of  S.  Panthalion.  And  within  they  began  to
make  the  repaires  and  traverses  as  at  the  place  of  Spaine,
whereto  was  made  extreme  diligence,  but  not  such  as
the  lord  would,  and  as  was  needfull,  because  there  were
no  labourers  for  to  helpe.  After  that  the  enemies  had
woon  the  most  part  of  the  bulwarke  of  England  &  the
plaine  of  Italy,  they  purposed  to  make  assault  to  the  sayd  [11.  i.  88
plaine,  and  to  the  breach  of  Spaine,  and  to  enter  into  our
repaires  to  winne  them  for  to  make  an  end  of  us.  And
for  ever  to  afFeeble  the  repaires  and  for  to  abash  us,  the
28  day  of  November  all  along  the  day  and  night  they
ceased  not  to  shoot  great  artillery,  both  from  the  brimmes
of  the  ditches  with  those  great  pieces,  casting  stones  of
nine  &  eleven  foot  about,  and  from  the  mantellets  with-
out. And  as  it  was  reckoned,  they  shot  the  same  day
and  night  150  times  or  more  against  our  repaires  and
traverses  of  the  wall.

And  in  the  morning  the  29  day  of  the  same  moneth,
the  vigill  of  S.  Andrew  at  the  spring  of  the  day,  the
enemies  went  thorow  the  breach  with  their  banners,  and
entred  into  the  repaires  with  greater  number  of  people
then  they  did  at  the  great  battell  in  September,  hardily
and  furiously  for  to  fight  with  us.  But  at  their  comming
in,  the  artillery  of  the  traverses,  and  the  handgunnes,  and
the  gunshot  of  the  milles  found  them  so  well  and  so
sharply,  that  he  that  came  in,  was  anon  dispatched  and
overthrowen,  and  there  abode  above  2000  of  the  Turks
slaine.  The  other  that  came  after  seeing  their  fellowes
so  evill  welcommed,  as  people  that  were  astonied  and  lost,
they  turned  againe  to  their  trenches  :  at  whome  the
artillery  of  the  milles  shot  victoriously,  and  hasted  them
to  go  apace  :  and  by  report  from  the  campe  there  died
sixe  thousand  or  mo  that  day  :  the  which  day  might  be
called  very  happy,  and  well  fortunate  for  us,  thanked  be
God,  for  there  was  none  that  thought  to  escape  that  day,
but  to  have  died  all,  and  lost  the  towne  : howbeit,  the

41

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

pleasure  of  our  Lord  was  by  evident  miracle  to  have  it
otherwise,  and  the  enemies  were  chased  and  overcome.
And  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  same  day  the  raine  was  so
great  and  so  strong,  that  it  made  the  earth  to  sincke  a
great  deale  that  they  had  cast  into  the  ditches,  for  to
cover  them  from  the  shot  of  Auvergne.  And  the  sayd
earth  being  so  suncken,  the  artillery  of  the  sayde  bul-
warke  (unwares  to  them)  smote  them  going  and  com-
ming,  and  made  great  murder  of  the  sayd  dogges.
The  sayd  day  also  the  enemies  came  to  the  plaine  of
Italy  for  to  assault  it  ;  but  when  they  understood  that
their  fellowes  had  bene  put  backe  so  rudely,  and  with  so
great  slaughter,  they  were  afrayd,  and  so  they  returned
againe  to  their  trenches.

How  the  Turks  got  the  plaine  ground  of  Spaine.

ANd  that  done,  Acmek  Basha  seeing  their  businesse
every  day  goe  from  woorse  to  woorse,  and  that  at
the  assaults  were  but  losse  of  people,  without  doing  of
any  good,  and  that  there  was  no  man  that  willingly
would  go  to  it  any  more,  he  intended  to  give  no  more
assaults,  but  to  follow  his  trenches,  and  by  them  enter
covertly  without  losse  of  a  man  from  the  breach  to  the
other  end  of  the  towne.  Semblably  he  intended  for  to
winne  the  plaine  earth  beside  Spaine  :  the  which  to  get,
he  came  at  pleasure  to  the  foot  of  the  wall,  &  began  to
beat  downe  the  plaine  ground,  and  to  give  many
skirmishes  and  conflicts  to  our  folke  that  kept  it.  And
there  were  slaine  many  good  men.  And  at  the  last,  for
default  of  more  helpe  and  of  gunshot,  it  was  left  and
given  up  of  our  men,  and  so  lost.  That  done,  the
enemies  came  thither  as  in  other  places.  And  this  is
the  third  place  where  they  came  nere  to  the  foot  of  the
wall.  And  whoso  wel  considered  in  what  estate  the  poore
towne  was  at  that  time,  seeing  their  enemies  have  so
great  advantage,  might  well  say,  and  judge,  that  at  length
it  should  be  taken,  and  a  lost  towne.

42

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad

1522,

How  a  Genouois  came  to  the  gate  of  the  towne
for  to  speake  for  a  treaty,  and  deliverance  of
the  same.

A  Few  dayes  after  the  saide  journey  a  Christian  man
that  was  in  the  campe,  the  which  by  his  speech  was  a
Genouois  or  Siotis,  came  to  the  gate  of  Auvergne,  and
demanded  to  parle,  and  after  that  he  was  demanded  what
he  would  have,  he  sayd  that  he  had  marvell  of  us  why  we
would  not  yeeld  our  selves,  seeing  the  pitious  estate  the
towne  was  in :  and  he  as  a  Christian  man  counselled  us  to
yeeld  our  selves  with  some  agreement  :  and  that  if  we
would  looke  thereto,  that  some  should  be  found  expe-
dient to  do  somewhat  for  our  safegard.  And  it  is  very
like  that  he  sayd  not  such  words,  nor  spake  so  farforth  in
the  matter,  without  commission  from  some  of  the  chiefe
of  the  campe,  or  of  the  great  Turke  himselfe.  To  the
which  Siotis  was  answered,  that  he  should  go  away  with
an  evill  hap,  and  that  it  needed  not  to  speake  of  appoint-
ment :  and  that  though  the  enemies  had  great  advantage,
there  was  yet  enough  wherewith  to  receive  and  feast  them,
if  they  made  any  assault.  These  words  heard,  he  went
away :  and  two  dayes  after  he  came  againe,  and  demanded
to  speake  with  a  marchant  Genouois  of  the  towne,  named
Matthew  de  Ura,  and  he  was  answered  that  he  which  he
demanded,  was  sicke,  and  might  not  come,  but  that  he
should  deliver  the  letter,  and  it  should  be  given  to  him.
The  sayd  Siotis  sayd  nay,  and  that  he  would  give  it  him-
selfe, and  speake  with  him  :  and  sayd  that  he  had  also  a
letter  of  the  Grand  signior,  for  the  lord  master.  Upon
this  he  was  bidden  to  go  his  way  :  and  to  set  him  pack-
ing, they  shot  after  him  a  piece  of  artillery.  The  next  [II.  i.  89
day  after  Ballantis  Albanese  that  was  fled  thorow  the
breach  of  Spaine  to  the  campe,  came  from  the  sayd
Genouois  proposing  such  words,  or  like  as  the  other
had  sayd,  saying  likewise  that  the  Grand  signior  had
sent  a  letter  to  the  lord  master.  To  whom  no  words
were  spoken,  nor  answere  made,  for  the  lord  great  master

43

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

as  wise  and  prudent  considering  that  a  towne  that  will
heare  intreatings  is  halfe  lost,  defended  upon  the  paine  of
death  sith  that  Siotis  had  spoken  these  two  times,  that
none  should  be  so  hardy  to  speake  nor  answere  them  of
the  campe,  without  his  knowledge  &  commandement :
but  seeing  they  were  such  ambassadors,  they  reported  the
words  of  the  sayd  Albanese,  or  ever  the  sayd  lord  had
knowledge  of  the  words  of  the  Siotis.  The  which  words
spread  thorow  the  towne  put  many  folke  in  thought,  and
would  have  undone  that  that  the  Siotis  said  :  the  which  is
no  marvell  whereas  is  much  people,  for  with  good  will
and  most  often  they  regard  sooner  to  save  the  lives  of
them  and  their  children,  then  they  doe  to  the  honour  of
the  residue.  Howbeit  not  one  durst  speake  a  word
openly  of  that  businesse,  but  all  secretly  :  and  some  came
and  spake  to  certaine  lords  of  the  great  crosse  for  to
speake  to  ye  lord  great  master.  And  in  effect  some  lords
spake  therof  to  him,  persuading  him  that  it  should  be
good  to  thinke  thereon,  seeing  that  the  towne  went  to
losse.  To  whom  the  sayd  lord  shewed  many  things  for
his  honor  and  the  Religion  :  and  that  no  such  things
ought  to  be  done  or  thought  for  any  thing  in  the  world,
but  rather  he  and  they  to  die.  The  lords  hearing  this
answere,  went  their  wayes,  and  then  returned  againe  to
the  sayd  lord,  advising  him  more  to  thinke  well  on  all
things,  and  to  the  salvation  of  his  towne  and  of  his  reli-
gion. And  they  sayd  moreover,  that  they  doubted  that
the  people  would  rather  have  a  peace  then  to  die  them-
selves, their  wives  and  children.  The  lord  seeing  that
such  words  were  as  things  inforced,  as  who  should  say,
if  thou  do  it  not,  we  shall  do  it  as  wise  men  and  prudent,
willing  to  make  remedies  of  needfull  things  by  counsell,
called  the  lords  of  his  Councell  for  to  have  advise  in  these
doings,  and  other.  And  when  they  were  assembled,  the
lord  proposed  the  words  that  were  to  him  denounced,
and  sayd  :  With  these  termes  and  wordes  came  two  or
three  marchants  and  citizens  of  the  towne  that  knocked  at
the  doore  of  the  Councell,  and  presented  a  supplication

44

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

to  the  great  master,  and  lords  of  the  Councel,  whereby
they  required  and  besought  meekely  the  sayd  reverend
lord  to  have  respect  to  them  and  their  poore  housholds,
and to make some  appointment  with  the  great  Turke,
seeing  that  the  sayd  matter  was  already  forward  in  pur-
pose, that  he  would  do  it ;  and  that  it  would  please  him
to  consider  the  pitious  &  sorowful  estate  that  the  towne
was  in  ;  &  that  there  was  no  remedy  to  save  it  :  and  at
the  lest  way,  if  the  lord  would  not  make  appointment,
to  give  them  leave  (of  his  goodnesse)  to  have  their  wives
and  their  children  out  of  the Rodes  to  save  them,  for
they  would  not  have  them  slaine  nor  made  slaves  to  the
enemies. And  the  conclusion  was,  that  if  the  sayd  lord
would not  purvey therefore,  they  would  purvey  for  it
themselves. And  there  was  written  in  the  said  request
the  names  of  eight  or  ten  of  the  richest  of  the  towne.
Which  words  of  the  sayd  supplication  being  heard,  the
sayd  lord  and  his  councell  were  abashed  and  ill  content
as  reason  would,  seeing  that  it  was  but  a  course  game,
and  thought  on many  things to make answere  to the
sayd  citizens,  for  to  content  and  appease  them  :  and  also
to  see  if  they  should  intend  to  the  appointment,  as  they
required,  and  after  as  the  Genouoys  had  reported  :  and
the  better  to  make  the  sayd  answere,  and  to  know  more
plainly  in  what  estate  the  towne  was  in  all  things  :  that
is  to  wit,  first  of  gunpowder,  and  then  of  men  of  warre,
and  of  the  batteries. Also  were  demanded  and  asked  the
lord  of  S.  Giles  pre  John,  which  had  the  charge  of  the
gunpowder,  and  then  the  captaine  Sir  Gabriel  Martiningo,
for  being  over  their  men  of  warre  (as  it  is  said)  as  to  him
that  knew  the  truth  ;  if  the  towne  might  holde  or  not,  or
there  were  any  meanes  to  save  it. The  sayd  lord  of  S.
Giles  arose, saying  and  affirming  upon  his  honour  and
his  conscience  that  almost  all the slaves and  labourers
were dead  and hurt,  and  that  scantly  there  were  folke
enow  to  remove  a  piece  of  artillery  from one place to
another, and that it  was unpossible without folke  any
more  to  make  or  set  up  the  repaires  the  which  every  day

45

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

were  broken  and  crushed  by  the  great,  furious,  and  con-
tinuall  shot  of  the  enemies  artillery.  As  for  gunpowder
the  sayd  lord  sayd,  that  all  that  was  for  store  in  the
towne,  was  spent  long  agone,  and  that  which  was  newly
brought,  was  not  to  serve  &  furnish  two  assaults.  And
he  seeing  the  great  advantage  of  the  enemies  being  so
farre  within  the  towne,  without  power  to  put  or  chase
them  away,  for  default  of  men,  was  of  the  opinion  that
the  towne  would  be  lost,  and  that  there  was  no  meanes
to  save  it.  The  words  of  the  sayd  lord  finished,  the  cap-
taine  Gabriel  Martiningo  for  his  discharge  sayd  and
declared  to  the  reverend  lord  and  them  of  the  Councell,
that  seeing  and  considering  the  great  beatings  of  the  shot
that  the  towne  had  suffered,  and  after  seeing  the  entring
which  the  enemies  had  so  large,  and  that  they  were  within
the  towne  by  their  trenches  both  endlong  and  overthwart ;
seeing  also  that  in  two  other  places  they  were  at  the  foot
of  the  wall,  and  that  the  most  part  of  our  knights  and
men  of  warre  and  other  were  slaine  and  hurt,  and  the
[11.  i.  90.]  gunpowder  wasted,  and  that  it  was  unpossible  for  them  to
resist  their  enemies  any  more,  that  without  doubt  the
towne  was  lost  if  there  came  no  succors  for  to  helpe  and
resist  the  siege.  The  which  opinions  and  reasons  of
these  two  woorthy  men  and  expert  in  such  feats,  under-
stood and  pondered  by  the  lord  great  master  and  the
lords  of  the  Councell,  they  were  most  part  advised  for  to
accept  and  take  treaty  if  it  were  offered,  for  the  savegard
of  the  common  people,  and  of  the  holy  reliques  of  the
church,  as  part  of  the  holy  crosse,  the  holy  throne,  the
hand  of  St.  John,  and  part  of  his  head,  and  divers  other
reliques.  Howbeit  the  lord  great  master  to  whom  the
businesse  belonged  very  neere,  and  that  tooke  it  most
heavily,  and  was  more  sorrowfull  then  any  of  the  other,
as  reason  required,  was  alway  stedfast  in  his  first  purpose,
rather  willing  to  die  then  to  consent  to  such  a  thing,  and
sayd  againe  to  the  lordes  of  the  Councell  :  Advise  you,
and  thinke  well  on  every  thing,  and  of  the  end  that  may
happen,  and  he  proposed  to  them  two  points  : that  is  to

46

THE LOSS OF RHODES  a.d.

1522.

wit,  Whether  it  is  better  for  us  to  die  all,  or  to  save  the
people  and  the  holy  reliques.  The  which  two  points  and
doubts  were  long  time  disputed,  and  there  were  divers
opinions  :  neverthelesse,  at  the  last  they  sayd  all,  that
howbeit  that  it  were  well  and  safely  done  to  die  for  the
faith,  and  most  honor  for  us,  notwithstanding  seeing  and
considering  that  there  is  no  remedy  to  resist  against  our
enemies,  and  meanes  to  save  the  towne ;  and  on  the  other
part,  that  the  great  Turke  would  not  oppresse  us  to  for-
sake our  faith,  but  only  would  have  the  towne,  it  were
much  better  then,  and  tending  to  greater  wealth  to  save
all  the  jewels  abovesayde,  that  should  be  defiled  and  lost
if  they  came  in  the  handes  of  the  enemies  of  the  faith.
And  also  to  keepe  so  much  small  people,  as  women  and
children,  that  they  would  torment  and  cut  some  in  pieces,
other  take,  and  perforce  cause  them  to  forsake  their  faith,
with  innumerable  violences,  and  shamefull  sinnes  that
should  be  committed  and  done,  if  the  towne  were  put
to  the  sword,  as  was  done  at  Modon,  and  lately  at  Belle-
grado.  Whereby  they  did  conclude,  that  it  were  better,
and  more  agreeable  to  God,  for  to  take  the  treaty,  if  it
were  proffered,  then  for  to  die  as  people  desperate,  and
without  hope.

How  the  great  Turke  sent  two  of  his  men  to
the  towne,  to  have  it  by  intreating.  And
how  the  lord  great  master  sent  two  knights
to  him,  to  know  his  assurance.

UPon  these  consultations  and  words  almighty  God  that
saveth  them  which  trust  in  him,  and  that  would  not
that  so  many  evils  and  cruelties  should  come  to  the  poore
city  &  inhabitants  of  it,  and  also  that  the  great  Turke
might  not  arise  in  over  great  pride  and  vaineglory,  put
him  in  minde  to  seeke  to  have  the  sayd  towne  by  treaty,
which  he  ought  not  to  have  done  for  his  honour,  nor  by
reason,  for  the  towne  was  in  a  maner  his.  And  in  like
sort  he  ought  not  to  have  let  us  goe  as  he  did,  seeing  that

47

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

we  were  his  mortall  enemies  ever,  and  shall  be  still  in  the
time  comming,  considering  the  great  slaughter  of  his
people  that  we  have  made  in  this  siege.  Howbeit,  the
eternall  goodnesse  hath  blinded  him,  and  hath  pleased
that  these  things  should  be  thus,  for  some  cause  un-
knowen  of  us.  And  for  conclusion,  the  great  Turke
sent  to  have  a  communication  and  parle  in  following  the
words  of  the  Genouese  aforesayd.  Then  was  a  signe  set
upon  the  churche  of  the  abbey  without  the  towne,  to  the
which  was  made  answere  with  another  at  the  milles  of
Quosquino.  And  forthwith  came  two  Turks  to  speake
with  them  of  the  towne.  Then  the  lord  great  master
sent  the  Priour  of  S.  Giles  pre  John,  and  the  captaine
Gabriel  Martiningo  to  know  the  cause  of  their  comming.
And  when  they  came  to  them,  without  holding  of  long
speech,  the  two  Turkes  delivered  them  a  letter  for  to
beare  to  the  lord  great  master  from  the  great  Turke,  and
then  returned  safely  into  their  tents.  When  the  two
lords  had  received  it,  they  bare  &  presented  it  to  the
reverend  lord  great  master,  which  caused  it  to  be  read.
By  the  which  the  great  Turke  demanded  of  the  lord  great
master  to  yeeld  the  towne  to  him,  and  in  so  doing  he  was
content  to  let  him  go  &  all  his  knights,  and  all  the  other
people  of  what  condition  soever  they  were,  with  all  their
goods  &  jewels  safe  without  feare  of  any  harme  or  dis-
pleasure of  his  folks.  And  also  he  sware  and  promised
on  his  faith  so  to  do.  The  sayd  letter  was  sealed  with
his  signet  that  he  useth,  that  is  as  it  were  gilded.  And
he  sayde  afterward,  that  if  the  lord  great  master  would
not  accept  the  sayde  treaty,  that  none  of  the  city,  of  what
estate  soever  he  were,  should  thinke  to  escape,  but  that
they  all  unto  the  cats  should  passe  by  the  edge  of  the
sword,  and  that  they  should  send  him  an  answere  forth-
with, either  yea  or  nay.  After  the  sight  of  the  contents
of  the  sayd  letter  of  so  great  weight,  and  the  time  so  short
for  to  give  so  great  an  answere,  and  with  demand,  the
sayd  lord  great  master  and  all  the  lords  of  the  Councell
were  in  great  thought,  howbeit  they  determined  to  give

48

\:Cyo\(  ^'^  '\

o\cUj\U-'i)Jj^j^^

^^

'.  '*  .  " ^'  f  "5  'i  *'y  "  i  "^  *7  ♦  '}  '»^-  *  V  »  V  •»  .J  .
■■  ■ '  , ^ ■* *  :'v  ■»  •6  «  -y  f  '^  *  6  »  V  *  f-  ♦  /  « •,»'.»•'  T
•*  .  ^  ^  » •';  *  <^  *  /'  ^  X  ^  A  *  A  ,»  /,  «• >  «T  »  T  *  -  *  ■  ^  I

SULTAN SOLYMAN THE GREAT

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.
an  answere,  seeing  the  estate  of  the  towne  so  ill  that  it
could  be  no  woorse.  Hearing  the  report  and  opinions  a
day  or  two  before  of  the  two  lords  ordeined  to  view  the
defects  of  the  towne,  saying  that  the  towne  was  lost  with-
out remedy  :  considering  also  that  the  principalles  of  the
towne  would  have  appointment.  And  in  likewise,  at  the  [II.  i.  91.]
other  counsell  all  the  lordes  had  already  willed  and  de-
clared, that  it  were  better  to  save  the  towne  for  respect  of
the  poore  people,  then  to  put  it  all  whole  to  the  fiirie  of
the  enemies,  whereupon  they  agreed  and  concluded  to
take  the  foresayd  treatie.  After  the  conclusion  taken,
answere  was  made  readily  for  a  good  respect ;  that  is  to
weet,  to  take  the  Turke  at  his  worde,  to  the  ende  that  he
should  not  repent  him  of  it,  nor  change  his  opinion.
For  every  houre  his  people  wanne  and  entered  further
and  further  into  the  towne.  And  for  to  goe  unto  the
great  Turke  were  ordained  these  two  knights,  sir  Passin
afore  named,  and  he  bare  the  token  of  the  White  crosse  :
and  another  of  the  towne  named  Robert  de  Perruse  judge
Ordinarie.

When  these  two  ambassadours  had  made  them  readie,
they  went  out  at  the  gate  of  Quosquino,  and  went  to  the
tent  of  Acmek  basha,  capitaine  generall.  And  because  it
was  late,  and  that  they  might  not  goe  that  day  to  the
great  Turke,  on  the  next  day  in  the  morning  the  foresaid
captaine  Acmek  led  and  conveied  our  sayd  ambassadours  to
the  great  Turkes  pavillion,  that  they  might  have  the  more
knowledge  plainely,  and  for  to  heare  his  will  as  touching
the  wordes  which  were  reported  to  the  reverend  lord  great
master,  and  after,  the  contents  of  his  letter  and  writings.

When  the  sayd  two  ambassadours  were  departed  out  of
the  towne,  there  did  enter  two  men  of  authoritie  of  the
campe  ;  one  was  nephew  or  kinsman  of  the  sayd  Acmek,
the  other  was  the  great  Turkes  truchman,  which  the  lord
master  caused  to  be  well  received,  and  they  were  lodged
nigh  the  sayd  gate  of  Quosquino.  And  then  truce  was
taken  for  3.  dayes,  and  the  enemies  came  to  our  repaires,
and  spake  with  our  folke  and  dranke  one  with  another.
V  49  D

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

How  the  ambassadours  of  Rhodes  spake  with  the
great  Turke,  and  what  answere  they  had.

WHen  our  ambassadours  had  made  reverence  to  the
great  Turke,  they  sayd  that  the  lord  great  master
of  Rhodes  had  sent  them  to  his  Imperiall  majestie  to
know  what  he  requested,  and  desired  that  they  might
talke  together,  and  how  the  great  master  had  received  his
letter.  The  great  Turke  answered  them  by  his  truch-
man,  that  of  demanding  to  speake  together,  nor  writing
of  letter  to  the  great  master  he  knew  nothing.  Howbeit,
sith  the  great  master  had  sent  to  him  for  to  know  his
will,  he  bade  say  to  them  that  the  great  master  should
yeeld  him  the  towne.  And  in  so  doing  he  promised  by
his  faith  for  to  let  him  goe  with  all  his  knights,  and  all
other  that  would  goe  with  their  goods,  without  receiving
any  displeasure  of  his  people  of  the  campe.  And  if  he
accepted  not  the  sayd  treatie,  to  certifie  him  that  he
would  never  depart  from  Rhodes  till  he  had  taken  it,  and
that  all  his  might  of  Turkie  should  die  there,  rather  then
hee  would  faile  of  it,  and  that  there  should  neither  great
nor  litle  escape,  but  unto  the  cats  they  should  be  all  cut
in  pieces,  and  sayd  that  within  3.  dayes  they  should  give
him  an  answere,  for  hee  would  not  that  his  people  should
loose  time,  and  that  during  the  sayd  truce  they  should
make  no  repaires  nor  defences  within  the  towne.

When  the  great  Turke  had  ended  his  wordes,  our  am-
bassadours tooke  their  leave  of  him,  and  returned  to  the
towne,  and  there  was  given  to  each  of  them  a  rich
garment  of  branched  velvet,  with  cloth  of  gold  of  the
Turkish  fashion.  Then  Acmek  basha  tooke  sir  Passin,
and  led  him  to  his  pavillion,  and  intreating  him  right
well,  caused  him  to  abide  all  that  day  and  night :  and  in
eating  and  drinking  they  had  many  discourses  of  things
done  at  the  siege,  questioning  each  with  other.  And
among  all  other  things  our  ambassadour  demaunded  of
Acmek,  and  prayed  him  to  tell  for  trueth  how  many  men
died  of  the  campe  while  the  siege  was  laied. The  said

50

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.
Basha  sware  upon  his  faith  and  certified,  that  there  were
dead of  the  campe  of  violent  death,  that  is  to say,  of
gunshot  and  other  wayes,  64000.  men  or  more,  beside  ^\ooo.Turks
them  that  died  of  sicknesse,  which  were  about  40.  or  50.  \^^^^ ^f
thousand.  Rhodes.

How  one  of  the  ambassadours  made  answere  of
his  message,  and  how  the  Commons  would
not  agree  to  yeeld  the  towne.

REturne  we  now  to  our  purpose  and  to  the  answere
that  our  ambassadours  brought  to  the  lord  great
master.  The  sayd  Robert  Perruse  made  the  answere,
and  told  what  the  great  Turke  had  sayd,  certifying  that
he  would  have  an  answere  quickly  either  yea  or  nay.
The  which  answere  after  the  demaund  of  the  great  Turke
hath  bene  purposed  and  concluded  by  the  whole  counsel,
and  his  offer  &  treatie  accepted,  howbeit  the  sayd  am-
bassadours had  it  not  to  do  so  soone  nor  the  first  time
that  they  went  for  good  reasons,  but  yet  they  would  not
deferre  it,  for  feare  least  he  should  repent  him.  And  [II.  i,  92.]
upon  these  determinations  that  they  would  have  sent  the
sayd  Peruse  to  beare  the  answere,  came  some  of  the
common  people  of  the  towne  to  the  lord  great  master,
that  was  with  the  lordes  of  the  counsell,  and  sayd  that
they  were  advertised  of  the  appointment  that  he  had  made
with  the  great  Turke,  and  that  he  would  yeeld  the  towne
with  covenaunts  by  him  taken,  which  they  supposed
ought  not  to  be  done  without  calling  of  them.  And
because  they  were  not  called  to  it,  they  sayd  that  they
would  not  agree  thereto,  and  that  it  were  better  for
them  to  die,  for  the  great  Turke  by  some  way  would  put
them  all  to  death,  as  was  done  in  Bellegrado  in  Hungarie.

How  the  lord  great  master  sent  two  ambassadors
for  the  Commons  to  the  great  Turke.

WHen the reverend lord  great  master had  heard
their  wordes,  he  sayd  graciously  to  them,  that  as
touching  the  acceptation  of  the  great  Turks  offer,  it  was

SI

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

needful  so  to  do  in  the  degree  that  the  towne  was,  and
the  causes  wherefore  he  had  done  it  the  counsell  had
seene  and  discussed,  and  that  it  was  a  thing  that  might
not,  nor  ought  not  to  be  sayd  nor  published  in  common,
for  reporting  of  it  to  the  enemies  by  traitours,  but  be
kept  still  and  secret.  And  moreover,  that  it  was  con-
cluded to  make  an  answere  shortly,  for  to  take  the  great
Turke  at  his  word,  least  he  repented  him.  For  if  they
had  bene  called,  or  the  answere  had  bene  given,  it  had
bene  overlong  businesse,  and  in  the  meane  time  the
Turke  might  have  changed  his  mind,  and  that  that  he
had  done  and  concluded  with  the  great  Turke,  the  lordes
of  the  counsell  had  well  regarded  and  considered  in  all
things,  and  for  their  profite  and  advantage,  as  much  or
more  as  for  that  of  the  Religion.  And  that  they  would
send  to  the  great  Turke  againe  other  ambassadours,  the
better  to  know  his  will,  and  to  be  surer  of  his  promise.
Then  the  lord  great  master  ordained  two  other  am-
bassadours for  to  goe  to  the  great  Turke,  which  were  two
Spaniardes,  the  one  named  sir  Raimon  Market,  and  the
other  messire  Lopez,  at  whose  issuing  entered  Sir  Passin
the  first  ambassadour,  and  the  other  two  went  to  the  tent
of  Acmek  basha,  for  to  leade  them  to  the  great  Turke.
And  when  they  were  within  the  Turkes  pavillion,  and
had  done  him  reverence  as  appertained,  our  ambassadours
sayd  that  the  great  master  had  heard  and  seen  his
demaund  to  yeeld  the  towne.  And  for  y'  it  is  a  thing
of  great  weight,  and  that  he  had  to  doe  and  say  with
many  men  of  divers  nations,  and  because  the  time  of
answere  was  so  short,  hee  might  not  doe  that  that  hee
demaunded  so  soone.  Howbeit  hee  would  speake  with
his people,  and then hee  would  give him  an answere.

How^  the  Turke  began  the  assault,  and  how  the
Commons  agreed  to  yeeld  the  tow^ne.

WHen the  great  Turke heard the  answere  of  our
ambassadours,  he  sayd  nothing,  but  commaunded
his  Bashas  that  they  should begin  the  battell  againe  to

52

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.
the  towne,  the  which  was  done,  and  then  the  truce  was
broken,  and  the  shot  of  the  enemies  was  sharper  then  it
was  afore.  And  on  the  other  side  nothing,  or  very  litle
for  fault  of  pouder :  for  that  that  there  was  left,  was  kept
for  some  great  assault  or  neede.  Howbeit  the  sayd
Amek  Basha  kept  one  of  the  ambassadours,  and  messire
Lopez  onely  entered.  The  great  master  seeing  the  warre
begun,  and  the  shot  thicker  then  it  was  afore,  and  the
enemies  entred  hourely  by  their  trenches  further  into  the
towne,  called  them  that  before  had  sayde  to  him,  that
they  would  not  the  towne  should  be  yeelded,  but  had
rather  for  to  die.  And  therefore  the  sayd  lord  sayd  that
he  was  content  for  to  die  with  them,  and  that  they  should
dispose  them  to  defend  themselves  well,  or  to  doe  their
endevour  better  then  they  had  done  in  times  past.  And
to  the  ende  that  each  one  of  them  should  have  knowledge
of  his  will  (for  as  then  he  spake  but  to  foure  or  five  of
them  that  gainesayd  him)  he  made  a  cry  through  all  the
towne,  that  all  they  that  were  holden  to  be  at  the
posternes  or  gates  should  give  attendance,  and  not  to
come  away  day  nor  night  on  payne  of  death :  for  afore,
the  Rhodians  came  but  litle  there.  And  that  the  other
that  were  not  of  the  posternes,  or  that  were  of  his  suc-
cours, should  goe  to  the  breach  of  Spaine  where  the  sayd
lord  was  continually,  and  not  to  goe  away  day  nor  night
on  "the  abovesayd  payne.  The  sayd  cry  made,  each  one
were  obedient  for  a  day  or  twaine,  howbeit  a  yoong
Rhodian  left  his  posterne  and  went  to  his  house,  which
on  the  next  day  was  hanged  for  breaking  of  the  lordes
commaundement.  Notwithstanding  that,  by  litle  and
litle  the  people  annoyed  them,  and  their  heartes  failed,
and  left  the  posternes  and  breaches :  in  such  wise,  that
the  enemies  might  come  in  without  finding  great  resist-
aunce,  but  of  a  fewe  that  the  lord  master  caused  to  abide
there  (that  is  to  weet)  knightes  of  his  succours.  And  in
the  night  he  sought  out  moe  people  for  to  keepe  ye
watch  at  the  said  breach,  and  paied  to  them  as  much  as  [IL  i.  93.]
they  would. The sayd  lord  seeing  himself  thus  aban-

53

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

doned  and  left  of  his  people,  he  sent  to  aske  them  againe
wherefore they  did not their endevour, and why  they
came not to day, as they sayd before. Which made
answere  that  they  sawe  and  knew  well  that  the  towne  was
lost  for  certaine  reasons  that  were  told  them  :  by  occasion
whereof  they had  gainesaid the ordinance of  the  sayd
lord,  and  sayd  that  they  had  bene wrong  enformed  of
divers  things : and on the  other  side,  that  they  feared
that  the  Turke  would  not  hold  his  word. But  sithens
they sawe that there  was none other remedie but to
abide  the  adventure  and  fortune,  they  sayd  that  they  put
all  to  the  sayd  lord  to  doe  what  he  thought  good,  and
that hee would see what were best for them. And
required the  lord to doe them so much favour  as  to
let them choose one or two among  them  for  to  goe
to  the  great  Turke  with  his  ambassadours  for  to have
suretie of him. The which was granted, and two
ordinarie ambassadours were chosen for them ; one
Nicholas  Vergotie,  and  the  other  Piero  of  saint  Cretice,
and the foresayd Passin should returne  with  them for
to make  the sayd answere. Then  the  great  master  or
they  departed  (prolonging  the  time  as  much  as  he  might)
advised  to  send  a  letter  to  the  great  Turke,  the  which
his  grandfather  had  written  or  caused  to  be  written. In
the  which  letter  he  gave  his  malediction  or  curse  to  his
children  and successours,  if  they  enterprised to  besiege
Rhodes. The  sayd  Robert  Perruse  bare  the  sayd  letter,
and  as  he  was  accustomed,  he  went  to  Acmek  Basha  for
to  cause  him  to  have  audience,  and  to  present  the  sayd
letter. And the  Basha  sayd  hee  would  see  the  letter :
for  it  is  the  guise  in  the  great  Turkes  court,  that  none
may speake to him nor  give  him a  letter,  but he  be
advertised  first  what  shall  be  said,  or  what  shall  be  written.
When the Basha  had  scene the  wordes written  in  the
said  letter,  he  brake  it  and  cast  it  on  the  ground,  and
did  tread  upon  it, saying  many  injurious  and  villanous
words  to  the  sayd  judge. And  bade  him  returne  apace
to his great master, and bid him to thinke on his

54

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.
businesse,  and  to  make  answere  to  the  great  lord  (as
he  had  sent  and  commaunded)  or  els  it  should  not  be
long  or  he  sawe  his  dolorous  and  wofull  ende.  And  that
same  day  were  taken  two  men  of  ours  that  bare  earth
toward  the  bulwarke  of  England.  Of  whom  the  sayd
Acmek  caused  an  officer  to  cut  off  their  noses,  fingers
and  eares,  and  gave  them  a  letter  to  beare  to  the  lord
great  master,  wherein  were  great  wordes  and  threatnings.
After  the  sayd  Perruse  was  returned,  messire  Passin  was
sent  againe  to  the  sayde  Basha,  for  to  know  of  him  if
the  great  Turke  would  be  content  with  any  summe  of
money  for  his  costes  and  expenses,  that  he  had  made
for  his  armie.  The  which  answered  that  such  words  or
offers  of  silver  were  not  to  bee  sayd  nor  presented  to
the  great  lord  on  paine  of  life,  and  that  hee  set  more
by  honour  then  by  silver.  And  therefore  hee  bade  him
returne  and  say  to  the  great  master  that  hee  should  make
answere  to  the  great  lord  after  his  demaund,  to  yeeld
or  not  yeeld  the  towne.  The  sayd  Passin  made  relation
of  the  wordes  of  the  Basha  to  the  great  master :  the
which  for  the  great  sorrow  that  hee  had  deferred  alwayes,
saw  himselfe  in  such  pitious  estate.  Notwithstanding,
the  sayd  lord  putting  all  to  the  wil  of  our  lord,  &  con-
sidering that  there  was  no  remedie  to  do  otherwise,  nor
to  resist  any  more  his  enemies :  and  being  constrained
on  all  sides  to  make  the  appointment,  with  great  heavi-
nesse,  inestimable  dolours  and  bewailings,  at  the  last
gave  his  voyce  to  yeeld  the  towne  (with  the  treatise  or
offers  to  him  presented)  which  was  the  20.  day  of  De-
cember, the  yeere  of  our  lord  a  thousand  five  hundreth
and  two  and  twentie.

An answere  to such as will make question for
the  deliverance  of  the  citie  of  Rhodes.

ANd  if  by  any  it  were  demaunded  wherefore  the  sayde
lord  great  master  hath  yeelded  the  towne  to  the  great
Turke,  requesting  it  with  treatie  and  covenaunts,  which
was  a  signe  that  he  feared  and  would  no  more  fight,  but

55

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

goe  his  way.  To  this  I  answerer  Notwithstanding  that
the  great  Turke  was  advertised  by  some  traitours,  and
by  other  that  fled  into  the  campe,  that  the  powder  almost
failed,  and  that  there  were  but  fewe  men  of  warre  within
the  towne,  yet  he  beleeved  not,  nor  gave  credence  of  all
that  was  reported  to  him,  but  thought  verily  that  wee
had  ynough  for  a  great  while,  and  considered  that  hee
must  tary  till  they  were  wasted  and  spent,  whereto  be-
hooved time.  And  seeing  all  his  estate  entered  into
strange  places,  and  into  the  lands  of  his  enemies,  and
had  bene  there  alreadie  sixe  moneths,  (and  not  without
great  danger  of  his  owne  person)  thinking  on  the  other
side,  that  taking  the  towne  by  assault,  he  should  lose
many  of  his  folke ;  and  yet  when  hee  had  overcome  and
wonne  the  towne,  they  should  fall  each  upon  other  in
departing  of  the  bootie  or  pillage,  doubting  finally  the
hazard  of  warre.  For  these  reasons  and  other  that  may
be  alleaged,  the  great  Turke  had  much  rather  to  have
the  towne  by  composition  and  treatie,  then  otherwise.
And  it  suffised  him  to  drive  his  olde  enemies  out  of
the  countreys  of  Levant,  and  set  the  subjects  of  his
[11.  i.  94.]  countreys  in  rest  and  suretie.  And  we  of  the  towne  that
knew  our  weaknesse,  &  that  we  might  do  no  more,  it
seemed  better  to  save  so  much  small  people,  then  we
and  they  to  fall  into  the  furie  of  our  enemies,  for  other-
wise could  we  not  have  done,  but  tempt  God,  and  died
as  in  dispaire.

How  the  citie  of  Rhodes  was  yeelded  to  the  great
Turke,  and  of  the  evil  behaviour  of  certaine
Turkes.

BUt  to  returne  to  our  principall :  After  that  the
reverend  great  master  had  given  his  voyce  to  the
yeelding  of  the  towne,  he  sent  the  said  Passin  againe  for
to  beare  it  to  the  great  Turke.  And  with  him  went  the
two  men  that  were  chosen  of  the  Commons,  and  they
went  all  three  together  to  the  tent  of  Acmek  Basha.  To
whom  the  sayd Passin first  made  this  pitious answere

56

THE LOSS OF KHODES  ad.

1522.
and  conclusion  to  yeeld  the  towne.  Notwithstanding,  he
sayd  the  people  had  ordained  two  men  among  them  for
to  goe  to  the  great  Turke,  to  speake  of  their  particular
doings,  and  to  have  some  suretie  of  their  persons,  wives,
and  children,  to  the  ende  that  it  were  not  done  to  them,
as  to  those  of  Bellegrado.  The  sayd  Acmek  led  the
three  ambassadours  toward  the  great  Turke.  And  when
they  were  entered  into  the  pavillion,  the  sayde  messire
Passin  made  the  report  of  his  ambassade  to  the  sayd  lord,
and  sayd  that  the  great  master  yeelded  him  the  towne
under  the  promise  made  by  his  Imperiall  majestic,  with
the  treatie  promised.  Of  the  which  promise  hee  held
him  sure  and  certaine,  and  that  hee  would  doe  no  lesse :
howbeit,  the  people  had  required  him  to  give  them
licence  to  goe  to  his  majestie  for  to  aske  some  request
of  him.  Then  the  two  citizens  besought  the  great  Turke
that  he  would  for  suretie  remoove  his  campe  from  the
towne,  to  the  ende  that  they  should  have  no  maner  of
harme  to  their  bodies  nor  goods,  and  that  they  that
would  goe,  should  goe,  and  that  they  that  would  abide
still,  might  be  well  entreated.  The  great  Turke  answered
by  his  interpreter  to  messire  Passin,  that  hee  accepted  the
towne,  and  promised  agayne  upon  his  faith,  and  on  his
honour  to  the  lord  great  master,  that  he  would  performe
that  he  had  promised,  and  sent  to  him  by  the  same
Passin  that  he  should  not  doubt  of  the  contrary :  and  if
he  had  not  ships  ynough  for  to  carie  his  people  and  their
goods,  that  hee  would  let  them  have  of  his,  and  that
he  would  deliver  the  artillerie  that  was  woont  to  be  in
the  ships  of  ye  Religion.  And  as  touching  the  request
of  the  people,  he  sayd  that  he  would  remoove  the  campe,
and  that  they  that  would  abide,  might  abide,  and  they
should  bee  well  entreated,  and  should  pay  no  tribute  in
five  yeeres,  and  their  children  should  not  be  touched,
and  who  so  would  goe  within  the  sayd  space  of  five
yeeres,  they  should  goe  in  good  time.  These  wordes
ended,  our  ambassadours  tooke  leave  of  him,  &  when
they were  departed,  they spake  againe with the sayd

57

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

Acmek  Basha  for  to  have  a  letter  of  the  contents  of  the
promise  of  the  sayd  lord.  And  by  his  commandement
the  sayd  letter  was  made,  whereby  he  promised  to  let
go  the  great  master  with  all  his  knights,  strangers  and
men  of  the  towne  that  would  go  with  their  goods,  with-
out having  displeasure  of  any  of  his  people  of  the  campe,
or  by  the  wayes.  When  the  letter  was  made,  it  was
delivered  to  messire  Passin.  And  as  touching  with-
drawing of  the  campe,  the  sayd  Basha  promised  againe
that  he  would  do  it,  since  the  great  lord  would  so :  how-
beit  he  remooved  but  from  the  trenches,  and  some  of  his
people  went  a  litle  way  off.  And  the  sayd  Basha  de-
maunded  in  the  Turkes  behalfe,  that  they  should  send
to  him  in  hostage  foure  and  twentie  knights,  whereof
two  should  bee  of  the  great  Crosse,  and  two  and  twentie
citizens.  And  the  sayd  lord  should  send  onely  a  captaine
with  three  or  foure  hundred  Janissaries,  for  to  keepe  the
towne  when  the  campe  were  withdrawen.  And  so  it  was
done ;  and  beside  this  hee  gave  twelve  dayes  respite  to
the  lord  great  master,  to  prepare  him  and  depart  out
of  Rhodes.  And  in  conclusion  all  this  done,  our  am-
bassadours  returned  and  made  the  report  to  the  reverend
great  master  of  all  that  they  had  done  and  practised  with
the  great  Turke,  and  the  sayd  Basha,  and  gave  him  the
letter  for  to  goe  surely.  Then  the  great  master  with
his  counsell  ordained  the  foure  and  twentie  persons,  and
other  of  the  towne.  When  they  were  readie,  they  went
to  the  campe,  where  they  were  well  intreated  foure  dayes.
During  this  time,  Ferra  Basha  passed  from  the  maine
land  to  the  campe,  with  foure  and  twentie  or  five  and
twentie  thousand  Janissaries,  which  by  the  commaunde-
ment  of  the  great  Turke  was  gone  upon  the  borders  of
the  countreis  of  the  Sophie.  For  the  Turke  seeing  the
people  of  the  campe  discouraged  and  willing  no  more
to  goe  to  the  assaults,  sent  to  the  sayde  Basha  to  come
to  Rhodes  with  his  people,  which  would  have  withstood
us  sore,  as  fresh  men.  And  it  was  the  worke  of  God
and  a  wonderfull  myracle,  that  they  came  after  that  the

58

THE LOSS OF RHODES  ad.

1522.

appointment  was  made : for  if  they  had  come  afore,  it
is  to  be  supposed  that  the  deed  had  gone  otherwise,  and
there  had  bene  many  strokes  given  : but  I  beleeve  that
the  ende  should  have  bene  pitious  for  us,  but  God  would
not  that  the  Turke  should  have  victory  upon  us  as  hee
might  have  had,  seeing  the  great  advauntage  that  he  had
in all  things, but he  blinded him and  would  not  that
he  should  know  his  might. And  on  the other part  it
may  be  said  and  marveiled how  it  was possible  alway  [II.  i.  95-]
to  have  overcome  our  enemies  in  all  assaults  &  skirmishes,
and  at  the  end  to  loose  the  towne,  it  was  the  will  of  God
that so hath pleased for some cause  to us  unknowen.
It  is  to  bee  thought,  that  lacke  of  men  and  gunshot,  and
the  enemies  so  farre  within  the  towne,  and  ready  to  enter
at  other  places,  with  the  treasons,  have  caused  the  towne
to  be  lost. Two  or  three  dayes  after  the  comming  of
the  sayd  Basha,  his  Janissaries  and  other  of  the  campe
entred into the Towne, which was on Christmas day,
within  the  time  given  to  us,  and  then  the  Turkes  word
was broken, if  it were his will or not,  I cannot  tell.
Neverthelesse  there  was no  sword drawen,  and  in  that
respect  promise  was  kept. But  they  made  pillage,  and
entered  by  force  into  the  houses  of  the  castle,  and  tooke
all that they might  and  would. After that they had
ransacked  the  houses,  they  entered  into  the  churches,  and
pilled  all  that  they  found,  and  brake  the  images. And
there  was  no  crucifix,  nor  figure  of  our  lady,  nor  of  other
saints,  that  were  left  whole. Then  with  great  inhumanitie
they  went  into  the  hospitall  of  poore and sicke folke,
called  the  Fermorie,  and  tooke  all  the  silver  vessell  that
the  sicke  folke  were  served  with,  and  raised  them  out  of
their  beds,  and  drove  them  away,  some  with  great  strokes
and  staves,  and  some  were  cast  downe  from  the  galleries.
When  these  hounds  had done that  acte,  they  went to
the  church  of  saint  John  and  tooke  downe  the  tombes
of  the great masters, and sought if there were any
treasure  hid  in them,  and they forced certaine women
and  maidens. And  all  they  that  were  christened  and  had

59

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1522.

bene  Turkes  afore,  were  they  men,  women  or  children,
and  children  that  the  sayd  men  had  made  christians,  they
led  into  Turkie,  which  thing  is  of  greater  importance
then  any  of  the  other.  The  morrow  after  Christmas
day,  the  reverend  lord  great  master  went  to  the  great
Turkes  pavillion  for  to  visite  him,  and  to  be  better
assured  of  his  promise,  the  which  lord  he  made  to  be
wel  &  graciously  received.  And  he  signified  unto  him
by  his  interpreter,  that  the  case  so  happened  to  him  was
a  thing  usuall  and  common ;  as  to  loose  townes  and  lord-
ships, and  that  hee  should  not  take  overmuch  thought
for  it  :  and  as  for  his  promise,  he  bade  that  he  should
not  doubt  in  any  thing,  and  that  he  should  not  feare
any  displeasure  to  his  person,  and  that  he  should  goe
with  his  people  without  feare.  With  these  wordes  the
sayd  lord  thanked  him,  and  tooke  his  leave  and  departed.

FINIS.

Lenvoy  of  the  Translator.

GOe  little  booke,  and  woefull  Tragedie,
Of  the  Rhodian  feareful  oppugnation.
To  all  estates  complaining  ruthfully
Of  thine  estate,  and  sudden  transmutation :
Excusing  me  if  in  thy  translation
Ought  be  amisse  in  language  or  in  werke,
I me  submit  with  their  supportation,
To  be  correct,  that  am  so  small  a  clerke.

60

AMBASSAGE  FROM  DON  FERDINAND

A.D.

1527.

An  ambassage  from  Don  Ferdinando,  brother  to
the  emperor  Charles  the  5.  unto  king  Henry
the  8.  in  the  yere  1527.  desiring  his  aide
against  Solyman  the  great  Turke.  HoHn-
shed. pag. 894.

N  the  14.  day  of  March,  1527.  were  con-
veied  from  London  to  Greenwich  by  the
earle  of  Rutland  and  others,  the  lord
Gabriel  de  Salamanca,  earle  of  Ottonburge,
John  Burgrave  of  Sylverberge,  and  John
Faber  a  famous  clerke,  after  bishop  of
Vien,  as  ambassadours  from  Don  Ferdi-
nando, brother  to  Charles  the  emperor,  newly  elect  king
of  Hungarie  and  Beame,  after  the  death  of  his  brother
in  law  king  Lewes,  which  was  slaine  by  Solyman  the
Turke  the  last  Sommer.  This  company  was  welcommed
of  the  high  officers,  and  after  brought  into  the  kings
presence,  all  the  nobilitie  being  present;  and  there  after
great  reverence  made,  M.  Faber  made  a  notable  oration,
taking  his  ground  out  of  the  Gospell,  Exiit  seminator
seminare  semen  suum :  and  of  that  hee  declared  how
Christ  and  his  disciples  went  foorth  to  sowe,  and  how
their  seed  was  good  that  fel  into  the  good  ground,  and
brought  foorth  good  fruite,  which  was  the  Christian  faith.
And  then  he  declared  how  contrary  to  that  sowing,
Mahomet  had  sowen  seed,  which  brought  foorth  evill
fruit.  He  also  shewed  from  the  beginning,  how  the
Turkes  have  increased  in  power,  what  realmes  they  had
conquered,  what  people  they  had  subdued  even  to  that
day.  He  declared  further  what  actes  the  great  Turke
then  living  had  done ;  and  in  especiall,  he  noted  the
getting  of  Belgrade  and  of  the  Rhodes,  and  the  slaying
of  the  king  of  Hungarie,  to  the  great  rebuke  (as  he  [II.  i.  96.]
sayd)  of  all  the  kings  christened.  Hee  set  foorth  also
what  power  the  Turke  had,  what  diversities  of  companies,
what  capitaines  he  had,  so  that  he  thought,  that  without

61

A.D.

1527.

He  meaneth

y  the  French
king.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

a  marvellous  great  number  of  people,  hee  could  not  be
overthrowen.  Wherefore  he  most  humbly  besought  the
king  as  S.  Georges  knight,  and  defender  of  the  faith,
to  assist  the  king  his  master  in  that  godly  warre  and
vertuous  purpose.

To  this  oration  the  king  by  the  mouth  of  Sir  Thomas
Moore  answered  ;  that  much  hee  lamented  the  losse  that
happened  in  Hungarie,  and  if  it  were  not  for  the  warres
which  were  betweene  the  two  great  princes,  he  thought
the  Emperor  ^^X  the  Turke  would  not  have  enterprised  that  acte  :
wherefore  he  with  all  his  studie  would  take  paine,  first,
to  set  an  unitie  and  peace  throughout  all  Christendome,
and  after  that,  both  with  money  and  men  he  would  be
readie  to  helpe  toward  that  glorious  warre,  as  much  as
any  other  prince  in  Christendome.  After  this  done,  the
ambassadours  were  well  cherished,  and  divers  times
resorted  to  the  court,  and  had  great  cheere  and  good
rewards,  and  so  the  third  day  of  May  next  following,
they  tooke  their  leave  &  departed  homeward.

The antiquitie of  the trade with English ships
into  the  Levant.

N  the  yeeres  of  our  Lord,  1511.  1512.
&c.  till  the  yeere  1534.  divers  tall  ships
of  London,  namely.  The  Christopher
Campion,  wherein  was  Factor  one  Roger
Whitcome ;  the  Mary  George,  wherein
was  Factor  William  Gresham ;  the  great
Mary Grace, the Owner whereof, was

William  Gunson,  and  the  master  one  John  Hely;  the
Trinitie  Fitz-williams,  whereof  was  master  Laurence
Arkey ;  the  Mathew  of  London,  whereof  was  master
William  Capling,  with  certaine  other  ships  of  South-
ampton and  Bristow,  had  an  ordinarie  and  usuall  trade
to  Sicilia,  Candie,  Chio,  and  somewhiles  to  Cyprus,  as
also  to  Tripolis  and  Barutti  in  Syria.  The  commodities
which  they  caried  thither  were  fine  Kersies  of  divers
colours,  course  Kersies,  white  Westerne  dozens,  Cottons,

62

ANTIQUITY  OF  THE  LEVANT  TRADE  ad.

certaine  clothes  called  Statutes,  and  others  called  Cardinal-
whites,  and  Calveskins  which  were  well  sold  in  Sicilie,
&c.  The  commodities  which  they  returned  backe  were
Silks,  Chamlets,  Rubarbe,  Malmesies,  Muskadels  and
other  wines,  sweete  oyles,  cotten  wooll,  Turkie  carpets,
Galles,  Pepper,  Cinamom,  and  some  other  spices,  &c.
Besides,  the  naturall  inhabitants  of  the  foresayd  places,
they  had,  even  in  those  dayes,  traffique  with  Jewes,
Turkes,  and  other  forreiners.  Neither  did  our  mer-
chants onely  employ  their  owne  English  shipping  before
mentioned,  but  sundry  strangers  also  :  as  namely,
Candiots,  Raguseans,  Sicilians,  Genouezes,  Venetian
galliasses,  Spanish  and  Portugale  ships.  All  which
particulars  doe  most  evidently  appeare  out  of  certaine
auncient  Ligier  bookes  of  the  R.  W.  Sir  William
Locke  Mercer  of  London,  of  Sir  William  Bowyer
Alderman  of  London,  of  master  John  Gresham,  and  of
others  ;  which  I  Richard  Hakluyt  have  diligently  per-
used and  copied  out.  And  here  for  authorities  sake  I
doe  annexe,  as  a  thing  not  impertinent  to  this  purpose,
a  letter  of  king  Henry  the  eight,  unto  Don  John  the
third,  king  of  Portugale.

A  letter  of  the  king  of  England  Henry  the  eight,
to  John  king  of  Portugale,  for  a  Portingale
ship  with  the  goods  of  John  Gresham  and
Wil.  Locke  with  others,  unladen  in  Portu-
gale from  Chio.

Erenissimo  Principi,  domino  Joanni  Dei
gratia  Regi  Portugallise,  &  Algarbiorum
citra  &  ultra  mare  in  Africa,  ac  domino
Guineae,  &  conquistae,  navigationis,  &
commercii  ^thiopiae,  Arabiae,  Persiae,
atque  Indiae,  &c.  Fratri,  &  amico  nostro
charissimo.

Henricus Dei gratia. Rex Anglias & Franciae, fidei
defensor, ac dominus Hiberniae, Serenissimo Principi  ;

63

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1531-

domino  Joanni  eadem  gratia  Regi  Portugalliae,  &  Algar-
biorum  citra  &  ultra  mare  in  Africa,  ac  domino  Guineas,
&  conquistas  navigationis,  &  commercii  jSlthiopias,
Arabiae,  Persiae,  atque  Indiae,  &c.  Fratri,  &  amico
nostro  charissimo,  salutem.  Tanto  libentius,  promptius-
que  justas  omnes  causas  vestrae  Serenitati  commendandas
suscipimus,  quanto  apertiori  indies  nostrorum,  qui  in
ejusdem  vestrae  Serenitatis  regno  ac  ditione  negotiantur,
subditorum  testimonio  cognoscimus,  ipsam  ex  optimi
principis  officio  ita  accurate,  exacteque  jus  suum  cuique
praebere,  ut  ad  earn  nemo  justitiae  consequendae  gratia
frustra  unquam  confugiat.  Cum  itaque  dilectus  ac  fidelis
subditus  noster  Joannes  Gresham  mercator  Londoniensis
nuper  nobis  humiliter  exposuerit,  quod  quidam  Williel-
mus  Heith  ipsius  Factor,  &  negotiorum  gestor  navim
quandam  Portugallensem,  cui  nomen  erat  Sancto
[II.  i.  97.]  Antonio,  praeeratque  Diego  Peres  Portugallensis  superi-
oribus  mensibus  in  Candia  conduxerit,  cum  navisque
pr^fecto  convenerit,  ut  in  insulam  Chium  ad  quasdam
diversi  generis  merces  onerandas  primo  navigaret,  in  Can-
diamque  mox  aliarum  mercium  onerandarum  gratia
rediret,  omnes  quidem  in  hoc  nostrum  regnum  post-
modum  advecturus  ad  valorem  circiter  duodecim  millium
ducatorum,  quemadmodum  ex  pactionis,  conventionisque
instrumento  apertius  constat,  accidit,  ut  praefatus  Diego
vestras  Serenitatis  subditus,  dictis  susceptis  mercibus,  &
jam  in  itinere  parum  fideliter,  &  longe  praster  initas
conventiones,  gravissimo  certe  nostrorum  subditorum
detrimento,  ubi  in  Portugalliae  portum  divertisset,  sen-
tentia  hue  navigandi  mutata,  in  eodem  portu  commoretur,
nostrorumque  etiam  subditorum  merces  detineat  :  quam
injuriam  (quum  subditis  nostris  in  vestrae  Serenitatis
regno,  &  ab  ejus  subdito  illata  sit)  ex  aequitate,  ac  justitia
ab  ipsa  corrigi,  emendarique  confidimus,  nostro  quoque
potissimum  intuitu,  qui  vestrae  Serenitatis  ipsiusque  sub-
ditorum causas,  mercesque,  si  quando  in  hoc  nostrum
regnum  appulerint,  semper  commendatissimas  habemus,
id quod superior! anno testati sumus  : proinde ipsam

64

LETTER FROM KING HENRY VIII  a.d.

I53I'
vehementer  rogamus,  ut  Joannem  Ratliffe  praesentium
latorem,  &  dicti  Johannis  Gresham  novum  constitutum
procuratorem,  hujus  rei  causa  istuc  venientem,  velit  in
suis  agendisj  in  dictisque  bonis  recuperandis,  impuneque
asportandis  remittendisque  vectigalibus  (quod  nos  in
vestros  subditos  fecimus)  quum  per  navis  prasfectum
fraude,  ac  dolo  istuc  merces  fuerint  advectae,  nisi  istic
vendantur,  ac  toto  denique  ex  aequitate  conficiendo
negotio,  sic  commendatum  suscipere,  sicque  ad  suos,
quos  opus  fore  intellexerit  magistratus  missis  literis  rem
omnem  juvare,  &  expedire,  ut  perspiciamus  ex  hac  nostra
commendatione  fuisse  nostrorum  subditorum  juri,  &
indemnitati  quam  maxime  consultum.  Quod  nobis
gratissimum  est  futurum,  &  in  re  consimili,  aut  graviori
vestra  Serenitas  nos  sibi  gratificandi  cupidissimos  ex-
perietur,  quae  foeliciter  valeat.  Ex  Regia  nostra  de
Waltham,  Die 15.  Octobr. 1531.

The  same  in  English.

TO  the  high  and  mighty  prince,  John  by  the  grace
of  God,  king  of  Portugale,  and  of  Algarve  on  this
side  and  beyond  the  sea  in  Africa,  lord  of  Ghinea,  and
of  the  conquest,  navigation,  and  traffique  of  Ethiopia,
Arabia,  Persia,  India,  &c.  our  most  deere  and  welbeloved
brother.

Henry  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England  and  of
France,  defender  of  the  faith,  and  lord  of  Ireland  :  to
John  by  the  same  grace,  king  of  Portugale  and  Algarve,
on  this  side  and  beyond  the  sea  in  Africa,  and  lord  of
Ghinea,  and  of  the  conquest,  navigation,  and  traffique  of
Aethiopia,  Arabia,  Persia,  India,  &c.  our  most  deare  and
welbeloved  brother,  sendeth  greeting.  So  much  ye  more
willingly  and  readily  we  undertake  the  recommending  of
all  just  causes  unto  your  highnesse,  because  by  the  daily
testimonie  of  our  subjects  which  traffike  in  your  king-
doms and  dominions,  we  are  informed,  that  according  to
the  dutie  of  a  most  worthy  prince,  so  carefully  and
exactly  you  minister  justice  unto  every  man,  that  all  men
V  65  E

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

most  willingly  repaire  unto  your  highnesse,  with  full
trust  to  obtaine  the  same.  Whereas  therefore  our  wel-
beloved  and  trustie  subject  John  Gresham  merchant  of
London,  of  late  in  humble  maner  hath  signified  unto  us,
that  one  William  Heith  his  Factor  and  Agent,  certaine
moneths  agoe  had  hired  in  Candie  a  certaine  Portugale
ship  called  Santo  Antonio,  (the  patrone  whereof  is  Diego
Perez)  and  covenaunted  with  the  patrone  of  the  sayd
ship,  that  he  should  first  saile  to  the  Isle  of  Sio,  to  take
in  merchandize  of  sundry  sortes,  &  then  eftsoones
returne  to  Candie,  to  be  fraighted  with  other  goods,  all
which  he  was  to  bring  into  our  kingdome  of  England,
to  the  value  of  12000  ducats,  as  by  their  billes  of  cove-
nant &  agreement  more  plainly  appeareth  :  it  so  fel  out,
that  ye  aforesaid  Diego  your  highnes  subject  having
received  the  said  goods,  very  trecherously  &  much  con-
trary to  his  covenant,  to  the  exceeding  great  iosse  of
our  subjects,  putting  in  by  the  way  into  an  haven  of
Portugale,  &  altering  his  purpose  of  comming  into  Eng-
land, he  remaineth  still  in  that  haven,  &  likewise
detaineth  our  subjects  goods.  Which  injury  (seeing  it
is  done  in  your  Highnes  kingdome)  we  hope  your
Highnes  will  see  reformed  according  to  equity  &  right,
the  rather  at  our  request,  which  alwayes  have  had  a
speciall  care  of  the  causes  &  goods  of  your  Highnes,
&  of  your  subjects  whensoever  they  come  into  our  king-
dome,  wherof  we  made  proofe  the  last  yeere.  Wherefore
we  instantly  request  your  Highnes,  y'  you  would  so
receive  John  Ratcliffe  the  bearer  of  these  present  letters,
&  the  new  appointed  agent  of  John  Gresham,  which
cummeth  into  your  dominions  about  this  busines,  being
thus  commended  unto  you  in  this  busines,  &  recovering
&  freely  bringing  home  of  the  said  goods,  &  in  remitting
of  the  customs,  unlesse  they  were  sold  there  (the  like
whereof  we  did  towards  your  subjects)  seeing  by  the
fraud  &  deceit  of  the  patron  of  the  ship,  the  wares  were
brought  thither,  &  finally  in  dispatching  ye  whole  matter,
according  to  justice,  &  so  further  the  same  by  directing

66

JOHN WILLIAMSON  a.d.

C.1534

your  highnes  letters  to  your  officers  whom  it  may  con-

cerne,  that  we  may  perceive,  that  our  subjects  right  and

liberty  hath especially beene maintained  upon  this  our

commendation. Which we  will  take  in  most  thankfull

part, and your highnes  shal  find  us  in  the  like or a

greater  matter  most  ready  to  gratifie  you,  whom  we  wish

most  heartily  well  to  fare. From  our  Court  at  Waltham

the 15.  of  October 1531.

A  voyage  made  with  the  shippes  called  the  Holy  [II.  i.  98.]
Crosse,  and  the  Mathev^  Gonson,  to  the  lies  of
Candia  and  Chio,  about  the  yeere  1534,
according  to  a  relation  made  to  Master
Richard  Hackluit,  by  John  Williamson,
Cooper  and  citizen  of  London,  w^ho  lived  in
the  yere  1592,  and  v\^ent  as  cooper  in  the
Mathev^  Gonson  the  next  voyage  after.

He shippes  called  the Holy  Crosse, and  "^he  Holy

the  Mathew  Gonson,  made  a  voyage  to  ^["f."^"/
the llandes or Candia and L^hio m  ^^^^^^  depart
Turkic,  about  the  yeere 1534. And  m  for  Turkie.

the  Mathew  went  as  Captaine  M.  Richard
Gonson,  Sonne  of  old  Master  William
Gonson,  paymaster  of  the  kings  navie.
In  this  first  voyage  went  William  Holstocke  (who  after-
wards was  Controuller  of  her  Majesties  Navie,  lately
deceased)  as  page  to  M.  Richard  Gonson  aforesaid,  which
M.  Gonson  died  in  Chio  in  this  his  first  voyage.  The
ship  called  the  Holy  Crosse  was  a  short  shippe,  and  of
burden  160  tunnes.  And  having  beene  a  full  yeere  at
the  sea  in  performance  of  this  voyage,  with  great  danger
she  returned  home,  where,  upon  her  arrivall  at  Black-
wall,  in  the  river  of  Thames,  her  wine  and  oyle  caske
was  found  so  weake,  that  they  were  not  able  to  hoyse
them  out  of  the  ship,  but  were  constrayned  to  draw
them  as  they  lay,  and  put  their  wine  and  oyle  into  new
vessels,  and  so  to  unlade  the  shippe. Their  chiefe  fraight,

67

A.D.

C.I534-

The  Mathezv
Gonson  goeth
into  Turkic.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

was  very  excellent  Muscatels  and  red  Malmesie,  the  like
whereof  were  seeldome  scene  before  in  England.  They
brought  home  also  good  quantitie  of  sweete  oyles,  cotton
woolles,  Turkic  Carpets,  Galles,  Cynamon,  and  some  other
spices.  The  saide  shippe  called  the  Holy  Crosse  was  so
shaken  in  this  voyage,  and  so  weakened,  that  she  was  layd
up  in  the  docke,  and  never  made  voyage  after.

Another  voyage  to  the  lies  of  Candia  and  Ohio
made  by  the  shippe  the  Mathew  Gonson,
about  the  yeere  1535,  according  to  the  relation
of  John  Williamson,  then  Cooper  in  the  same
ship,  made  to  M.  Richard  Hackluit  in  the
yeere 1592.

He  good  shippe  called  the  Mathew  Gon-
son, of  burden  300  tunnes,  whereof  was
owner  old  M.  William  Gonson,  pay-
master of  the  kings  Navie,  made  her
voyage  in  the  yere  1535.  In  this  ship
went  as  Captaine  Richard  Gray,  who  long
after  died  in  Russia.  Master  William
Holstocke  afterward  ControuUer  of  the  Queenes  Navie
went  then  as  purser  in  the  same  voyage.  The  Master
was  one  John  Pichet,  servant  to  old  M.  William  Gonson,
James  Rumnie  was  Masters  mate.  The  master  cooper
was  John  Williamson  citizen  of  London,  living  in  the
yeere  1592,  and  dwelling  in  Sant  Dunstons  parish  in
the  East.  The  M,  Gunner  was  John  Godfrey  of  Bris-
toU.  In  this  ship  were  6  gunners  and  4  trumpetters,  all
which  foure  trumpetters  at  our  returne  homewards  went
on  land  at  Messina  in  the  Hand  of  Sicilia,  as  our  ship
road  there  at  anker,  &  gat  them  into  the  Gallies  that
lay  neere  unto  us,  &  in  them  went  to  Rome.  The
whole  number  of  our  companie  in  this  ship  were  about
100.  men,  we  were  also  furnished  with  a  great  bote,
which  was  able  to  cary  10  tunnes  of  water,  which  at  our
returne homewards we towed all the  way from Chio

68

PETER READ  ad.

^538.

untill  we  came  through  the  straight  of  Gibraltar  into
the  maine  Ocean.  We  had  also  a  great  long  boat  and
a  skiff.  We  were  out  upon  this  voyage  eleven  moneths,
yet  in  all  this  time  there  died  of  sicknesse  but  one  man,
whose  name  was  George  Forrest,  being  servant  to  our
Carpenter  called  Thomas  Plummer.

In  a  great  lygier  booke  of  one  William  Eyms,  servant
unto  Sir  William  Bowyer  Alderman  of  London,  bearing
date  the  15  of  November  1533,  and  continued  untill
the  4  of  July  1544.  I  find  that  he  the  said  William
Eyms  was  factor  in  Chio,  not  only  for  his  Master,  but
also  for  the  duke  of  Norfolkes  grace,  &  for  many  other
worshipful  marchants  of  London,  among  whom  I  find
the  accompts  of  these  especially,  to  wit,  of  his  said
Master,  sir  W^illiam  Bowyer,  of  William  &  Nicholas
Wilford  Marchant-taylors  of  London,  of  Thomas  Curtis
pewterer,  of  John  Starky  Mercer,  of  William  Ostrige
Marchant,  &  of  Richard  Field  Draper.  And  further
I  find  in  the  said  ligier  booke,  a  note  of  the  said  Eyms,
of  all  such  goods  as  he  left  in  the  hands  of  Robert
Bye  in  Chio,  who  became  his  Masters  factor  in  his
roome,  and  another  like  note  of  particulers  of  goods
that  he  left  in  the  hands  of  Oliver  Lesson,  servant  to
William  and  Nicholas  Wilford.  And  for  proofe  of  the
continuance  of  this  trade  untill  the  end  of  the  yeere
1552.  I  found  annexed  unto  the  former  note  of  the
goods  left  with  Robert  Bye  in  Chio,  a  letter  being  dated
the  27  of  November 1552  in  London.

The Epitaph of  the valiant Esquire M. Peter  [ii.  i.  99.]
Read  in  the  south  He  of  Saint  Peters  Church
in  the  citie  of  Norwich,  which  was  knighted
by  Charles  the  fift  at  the  winning  of  Tunis  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lord 1538.

HEre  under  lyeth  the  corpes  of  Peter  Reade  Esquire,
who hath  worthily served, not onely his Prince
and  Countrey, but  also  the  Emperour  Charles  the  fift,

69

A.D.
1538.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

both  at  his  conquest  of  Barbaric,  and  at  his  siege  at
Tunis,  as  also  in  other  places.  Who  had  given  him  by
the  sayd  Emperour  for  his  valiant  deedes  the  order  of
Barbary.  Who  dyed  the  29  day  of  December,  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord  God 1566.

The  voyage  of  Sir  Thomas  Chaloner  to  Alger
w^ith  Charles  the  fift  1541,  drav^en  out  of  his
booke  De  Republica  Anglorum  instauranda.

ilHomas  Chalonerus  patria  Londinensis,
studio  Cantabrigensis,  educatione  aulicus,
religione  pius,  vereque  Christianus  fuit.
Itaque  cum  juvenilem  aetatem,  mentem-
que  suam  humanioribus  studiis  roborasset.
Domino  Henrico  Knevetto  a  potentis-
sim.o  rege  Henrico  ejus  nominis  octavo
ad  Carolum  quintum  imperatorem  transmisso  legato,  una
cum  illo  profectus  est,  tanquam  familiaris  amicus,  vel
eidem  a  consiliis.  Quo  quidem  tempore  Carolo  quinto
navali  certamine  a  Genua  &  Corsica  in  Algyram  in  Africa
contra  Turcas  classem  solvente  ac  hostiliter  proficiscente,
ornatissimo  illo  Knevetto  legato  regis,  Thoma  Chalo-
nero,  Henrico  Knolleo,  &  Henrico  Isamo,  illustribus
viris  eundem  in  ilia  expeditione  suapte  sponte  sequenti-
bus,  pariterque  militantibus,  mirifice  vitam  suam  Chalo-
nerus tutatus  est.  Nam  triremi  ilia,  in  qua  fuerat,  vel
scopulis  allisa,  vel  gravissimis  procellis  conquassata,
naufragus  cum  se  diu  natatu  defendisset,  deficientibus
viribus,  brachiis  manibusque  languidis  ac  quasi  enervatis,
prehensa  dentibus  cum  maxima  difficultate  rudenti,  quae
ex  altera  triremi  jam  propinqua  turn  fuerat  ejecta,  non
sine  dentium  aliquorum  jactura  ac  fractura  sese  tandem
recuperavit,  ac  domum  integer  relapsus  est.

The  same  in English.

THomas  Chaloner  was  by  birth  a  Londiner,  by  studie
a  Cantabrigian,  by  education  a  Courtier,  by  religion
a devout and true Christian. Therfbre after he^  had

70

ROGER BODENHAM

confirmed  his  youth  and  minde  in  the  studies  of  good
learning,  when  Sir  Henry  Knevet  was  sent  ambassadour
from  the  mighty  Prince  Henry  the  8.  to  the  Emperour
Charles  the  lift,  he  went  with  him  as  his  familiar  friend,
or  as  one  of  his  Councell.  At  which  time  the  said
Charles  the  5.  passing  over  from  Genoa  and  Corsica  to
Alger  in  Africa  in  warlike  sort,  with  a  mighty  army  by
sea,  that  honorable  Knevet  the  kings  ambassadour,
Thomas  Chaloner,  Henry  KnoUes,  and  Henry  Isham,
right  worthy  persons,  of  their  owne  accord  accompanied
him  in  that  expedition,  &  served  him  in  that  warre,
wherin  Thomas  Chaloner  escaped  most  wonderfully  with
his  life.  For  the  gaily  wherein  he  was,  being  either
dashed  against  the  rockes,  or  shaken  with  mighty
stormes,  and  so  cast  away,  after  he  had  saved  himselfe
a  long  while  by  swimming,  when  his  strength  failed  him,
his  armes  &  hands  being  faint  and  weary,  with  great
difficulty  laying  hold  with  his  teeth  on  a  cable,  which
was  cast  out  of  the  next  gaily,  not  without  breaking
and  losse  of  certaine  of  his  teeth,  at  length  recovered
himselfe,  and  returned  home  into  his  countrey  in  safety.

The  voyage  of  M.  Roger  Bodenham  with  the
great  Barke  Aucher  to  Candia  and  Chio,  in  the
yeere 1550.

A.D.
1550.

N  the  yeere 1550.  the 13  of  November
I Roger Bodenham Captaine of the
Barke Aucher  entered the said ship  at
Gravesend,  for  my  voiage  to  the  Hands
of  Candia  and  Chio  in  the  Levant. The
master of my ship was one William
Sherwood. From  thence  we  departed  to  The  Barke
Tilbery  hope,  and  there  remained  with  contrarie  windes  -^^i^her  goeth
untill  the  6.  of  January  1551. The  6  of  Januarie,  the  •^'"
M.  came  to  Tilbery,  and  I  had  provided  a  skilfull  pylot
to  cary  me over  the lands  end, whose name was  M.
Wood,  and  with  all speede I valed downe that night

71

A.D.
I551.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Mallorca.

Messina.

10  miles  to  take  the  tide  in  the  morning,  which  happily
I  did,  and  that  night  came  to  Dover,  and  there  came
to  an  anker,  and  there  remained  untill  tuesday,  meeting
with  the  worthy  knight  sir  Anthony  Aucher  owner  of
the  saide  ship.
[II.  i.  100.]  The  II  day  we  arrived  in  Plimoth,  and  the  13  in
the  morning  we  set  forward  on  our  voyage  with  a  pros-
perous winde,  and  the  1 6  we  had  sight  of  Cape  Finister
on  the  coast  of  Spaine.

The  30  we  arrived  at  Cades,  and  there  discharged
certaine  marchandise,  and  tooke  others  aboord.

The  20  of  February  we  departed  from  Cades,  &
passed  the  straights  of  Gibraltar  that  night,  and  the  25
we  came  to  the  He  of  Mallorca,  and  staied  there  five
daies  with  contrary  windes.

The  first  of  March,  we  had  sight  of  Sardenna,  and  the
fift  of  the  said  month  wee  arrived  at  Messina  in  Sicilia,
and  there  discharged  much  goods,  and  remained  there
untill  good  Fryday  in  Lent.

The  chiefe  marchant  that  laded  the  sayd  Barke  Aucher
was  a  marchant  stranger  called  Anselm  Salvago,  and
because  the  time  was  then  very  dangerous,  and  no  going
into  Levant,  especially  to  Chio,  without  a  safe  conduct
from  the  Turke,  the  said  Anselm  promised  the  owner
Sir  Anthony  Aucher,  that  we  should  receive  the  same
at  Messina.  But  I  was  posted  from  thence  to  Candia,
and  there  I  was  answered  that  I  should  send  to  Chio,
and  there  I  should  have  my  safe  conduct.  I  was  forced
to  send  one,  and  hee  had  his  answere  that  the  Turke
would  give  none,  willing  me  to  looke  what  was  best
for  me  to  doe,  which  was  no  small  trouble  to  me,  con-
sidering I  was  bound  to  deliver  the  goods  that  were  in
the  ship  at  Chio,  or  send  them  at  mine  adventure.  The
marchants  without  care  of  the  losse  of  the  ship  would
have  compelled  me  to  goe,  or  send  their  goods  at  mine
adventure,  the  which  I  denied,  and  sayd  plainely  I  would
not  goe,  because  the  Turkes  gallies  were  come  forth  to
goe  against  Malta,  but  by  the  French kings  means,  he

72

The  Turkr
prepareth  en
army  to  be-
siege Malta.

ROGER BODENHAM  ad.

1551.

was  perswaded  to  leave  Malta,  and  to  goe  to  Tripoly
in  Barbary,  which  by  the  French  he  wan.  In  this  time
there  were  in  Candia  certaine  Turkes  vessels  called
Skyrasas,  which  had  brought  wheat  thither  to  sell,  and
were  ready  to  depart  for  Turkic.  And  they  departed
in  the  morning  be  times,  carying  newes  that  I  would
not  goe  foorth  :  the  same  night  I  prepared  beforehande
what  I  thought  good,  without  making  any  man  privie,
untill  I  sawe  time.  Then  I  had  no  small  businesse  to
cause  my  mariners  to  venture  with  the  ship  in  such  a
manifest  danger.  Neverthelesse  I  wan  them  to  goe  all
with  me,  except  three  which  I  set  on  land,  and  with  all
diligence  I  was  readie  to  set  foorth  about  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night,  being  a  faire  moone  shine  night,  &  went
out.  Then  my  3  marriners  made  such  requests  unto  the
rest  of  my  men  to  come  aborde,  as  I  was  constrained  to
take  them  in.  And  so  with  good  wind  we  put  into  the
Archipelago,  &  being  among  the  Hands  the  winde  scanted,
&  T  was  forced  to  anker  at  an  Hand  called  Micone,  where  ^'^^  Barke
I  taried  10  or  12  daies,  having  a  greeke  Pilot  to  carrie  -^^^  ^^ '^^
the  ship  to  Chio.  in  this  meane  season,  there  came
many  small  botes  with  mysson  sayles  to  goe  for  Chio,
with  diverse  goods  to  sell,  &  the  Pilot  requested  me  that
I  would  let  them  goe  in  my  company,  to  which  I  yeelded.
After  the  sayde  dayes  expired,  I  wayed  &  set  saile  for
the  Hand  of  Chio,  with  which  place  I  fel  in  the  after
noone,  whereupon  I  cast  to  seaward  againe  to  come  with
the  Hand  in  the  morning  betimes.  The  foresaid  sraal
vessels  which  came  in  my  company,  departed  from  me
to  win  the  shore,  to  get  in  ye  night,  but  upon  a  sudden
they  espied  3  foystes  of  Turkes  comming  upon  them
to  spoyle  them.  My  Pilot,  having  a  sonne  in  one  of
those  small  vessels,  entreted  me  to  cast  about  towards
them,  which  at  his  request  I  did,  and  being  some  thing
farre  from  them,  I  caused  my  Gunner  to  shoot  a  demy-
colvering  at  a  foyst  that  was  readie  to  enter  one  of  the
botes.  This  was  so  happy  a  shott,  that  it  made  the
Turke  to  fall  a sterne of  the bote and to leave him,

73

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1551-

by  the  which  meanes  hee  escaped. Then  they  all  came
to  me,  and  requested  that  they  might  hang  at  my  sterne
untill  day  light,  by  which  time  I  came  before  the  Mole
of  Chio, and sent  my bote on land to  the  marchants
of  that  place  to  send for  their  goods out  of  hand, or
else I  would  returne  back  with all to Candia,  & they
should fetch  their  goods there. But in fine, what by
perswasion  of  my  merchants  English men, & those  of
Chio,  I  was  entreated  to  come  into  the  harbour,  and  had
a  safe  assurance  for  20  dayes  against  the  Turkes  army,
The  towne  of  with  a  bond  of  the  citie  in  the  summe  of  12000  ducats.
Chto  IS  bound  g^  j  j^^de  hast  &  solde  such  goods  as  I  had  to  Turkes
^duxau'^^r  the  ^^^^  came  thither,  &  put  all  in  order,  with  as  much  speede
safegard  0/" as I could,  fearing the comming of  the  Turkes  navie,
the  Barke of  the which, the chiefe of  the citie knew right wel.
Aucher.  5q  upon  the  sudden  they  called  me  of  great  friendship,

&  in  secret  told  me,  I  had  no  way  to  save  my  selfe  but
to  be  gone,  for  said  they,  we  be  not  able  to  defend  you,
that  are  not  able  to  help  our  selves,  for  the  Turke  where
he  commeth,  taketh  what  he  will,  &  leaveth  what  he
list,  but  the  chiefe  of  the  Turkes  set  order  y'  none  shal
do  any  harme  to  the  people  or  to  their  goods.  This  was
such  news  to  me,  that  indeed  I  was  at  my  wits  end,  &
was  brought  into  many  imaginations  how  to  do,  for  that
the  winde  was  contrarie.  In  fine,  I  determined  to  goe
foorth.  But  the  marchants  English  men  and  other  re-
garding more  their  gaines  then  the  ship,  hindered  me
very  much  in  my  purpose  of  going  foorth,  and  made
the  marriners  to  come  to  me  to  demaund  their  wages
to  be  payed  them  out  of  hande,  and  to  have  a  time
[II.  i.  loi.]  to  employ  the  same  there.  But  God  provided  so  for
The  compame  ^  ^.j^^^  j  -^^  ^^^  ^^^^  money  that  ni^ht,  and  then
doe  murmure ,  , . ^ . ■  r \  11  ii-r 1

amimt  their charged  them,  that  ir  they  would  not  set  the  ship  roorth,

Captaine.  I  would  make  them  to  answere  the  same  in  England,
with  danger  of  their  heads.  Many  were  married  in
England  and  had  somewhat  to  loose,  those  did  sticke
to  me.  I  had  twelve  gunners :  the  Master  gunner  who
was  a  madde  brayned  fellow,  and  the  owners  servant  had

74

ROGER BODENHAM  ad.

1551.

a  parlament  betweene  themselves,  and  he  upon  the  same

came up to me with his sword drawen,  swearing  that

hee  had  promised  the  owner  Sir  Anthony  Aucher,  to  live

and  die  in  the  sayde  shippe  against  all  that  should  offer

any  harme  to  the  shippe,  and  that  he  would  fight  with

the  whole  armie  of  the  Turkes,  and  never  yeelde :  with

this  fellow  I had much  to  doe,  but  at  the  last  I  made

him confesse  his  fault  and  followe  mine  advise. Thus

with  much  labour  I  gat  out  of  the  Mole  of  Chio,  into

the  sea  by  warping  foorth,  with  the  helpe  of  Genoueses

botes,  and a French bote that  was in the Mole, and

being  out  God  sent  mee  a  speciall  gale  of  winde  to  goe

my  way. Then I caused  a peece  to  be  shotte  off  for

some  of  my  men that  were  yet  in  the  towne,  &  with

much  a  doe  they  came  aboord,  and  then I set  sayle  a

little  before  one  of  the  clocke,  and  I  made  all  the  sayle

I  could,  and  about  halfe  an  houre  past  two  of  the  clocke

there  came  seven  gallies  into  Chio  to  stay  the  shippe :  "^^^  Turkes

and  the  admirall  of  them  was  in  a  great  rage  because  she  ^^f'^^/"j^^f°

sccrb  thctjCivk^
was  gone. Whereupon they put some of  the best  in  jucher.

prison,  and  tooke  all  the  men  of  the  three  ships  which

I  left  in  the  port,  and  put  them  into  the  Gallies, They

would  have  followed  after  mee,  but  that  the  townes  men

found  meanes  they  did  not. The  next  day  came  thither

a  hundred  more of  Gallies,  and  there taried for their

whole  companie,  which  being together  were about two

hundred  &  50  sayle,  taking  their  voyage  for  to  surprise

the  Hand  of  Malta. The  next  day  after  I departed,  I

had  the  sight  of  Candia,  but I was  two  dayes  after  or

ever  I  could  get in,  where I thought my  selfe  out  of

their daunger. There I continued untill the Turkes

armie  was  past,  who  came  within  the  sight  of  the  towne.

There  was preparation  made  as  though the  Turks  had

come  thither. There  be  in that  Hand  of  Candia  many  Five  thousand

banished men,  that  live continually  in the  mountaines,  b^^^hedinen

they  came  downe  to serve, to  the  number  of  foure  or

five  thousand,  they  are  good  archers,  every  one  with  his

bowe  and  arrowes,  a  sword  and  a  dagger,  with  long  haire,

75

A.D.
1551-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  bootes  that  reach  up  to  their  grine,  and  a  shirt  of
male,  hanging  the  one  halfe  before,  and  the  other  halfe
behinde,  these  were  sent  away  againe  assoone  as  the  armie
was  past.  They  would  drinke  wine  out  of  all  measure.
Then  the  armie  being  past,  1  laded  my  shippe  with  wines
and  other  things :  and  so  after  I  had  that  which  I  left
in  Chio,  I  departed  for  Messina.  In  the  way  I  found
about  Zante,  certaine  Galliots  of  Turkes,  laying  abord
of  certaine  vessels  of  Venice  laden  with  Muscatels  :  I
rescued  them,  and  had  but  a  barrell  of  wine  for  my
powder  and  shot :  and  within  a  few  dayes  after  I  came
to  Messina.  I  had  in  my  shippe  a  Spanish  pilot  called
Noblezia,  which  I  tooke  in  at  Cades  at  my  comming
foorth  :  he  went  with  me  all  this  voyage  into  the  Levant
without  wages,  of  good  will  that  he  bare  me  and  the
shippe,  he  stoode  me  in  good  steede  untill  I  came  backe
againe  to  Cades,  and  then  I  needed  no  Pilot.  And  so
from  thence  I  came  to  London  with  the  shippe  and  goods
in  safetie,  God  be  praysed.  And  all  those  Mariners  that
were  in  my  sayd  shippe,  which  were,  besides  boyes,  three-
score and  tenne,  for  the  most  part  were  within  five  or
w^/^Lf.^f'  sixe  yeeres  after,  able  to  take  charge,  and  did.  Richard
Chanceller,  who  first  discovered  Russia,  was  with  me  in
that  voyage,  and  Mathew  Baker,  who  afterward  became
the  Queenes  Majesties  chiefe  ship-wright.

The  voyage  of  M.  John  Locke  to  Jerusalem.

N  my  voyage  to  Jerusalem,  I  imbarked
my  selfe  the  26  of  March  1553  in  the
good  shippe  called  the  Mathew  Gonson,
which  was  bound  for  Livorno,  or  Legorne
I  and  Candia.  It  fell  out  that  we  touched
in  the  beginning  of  Aprill  next  ensuing  at
Cades  in  Andalozia,  where  the  Spaniardes,

ard  Chancel-
lour.
Master
Mathezv
Baker.

according  to  their  accustomed  maner  with  all  shippes  of
extraordinarie  goodnes  and  burden,  picked  a  quarrell
against  the  company,  meaning  to  have  forfeited,  or  at
the least to have arrested the said shippe. And  they

76

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-
grew so malicious in their wrongfull purpose, that I

being  utterly  out  of  hope  of  any  speedie  release,  to  the

ende  that  my  intention  should  not  be  overthrowen,  was

inforced  to  take  this  course  following. Notwithstanding

this  hard  beginning, it  fell  out  so  luckily,  that  I  found

in  the  roade  a  great  shippe  called  the  Cavalla  of  Venice,

wherin  after  agreement  made  with  the  patron,  I  shipped

my  selfe  the  24.  of  May  in  the  said  yere  1553,  and  the

25  by  reason  of  the  winde  blowing  hard  and  contrary,  we

were  not  able  to  enter  the  straits  of  Gibraltar,  but  were

put to  the coast of  Barbarie,  where  we  ankered  in  the

maine  sea  2.  leagues  from  shore,  and  continued  so  untill

two  houres  before  sunne  set,  and  then  we  weighed  againe,

and  turned  our  course towards the Straits, where we

entered  the  26  day  aforesayd,  the  winde  being  very  calme,  [II.  i.  102.]

but  the  current  of  the  straites  very  favourable. The  same

day  the winde  beganne  to rise  somewhat, and blew a

furthering  gale,  and  so  continued  at  Northwest  untill  we

arrived  at  Legorne  the  third  of  June. And  from  thence

riding  over  land  unto  Venice,  I  prepared  for  my  voyage

to  Jerusalem  in  the  Pilgrimes  shippe.

I  John  Locke, accompanied  with Maister Anthony
Rastwold,  with  divers  other, Hollanders,  Zelanders,  Al-
maines and French pilgrimes  entered  the  good shippe  The  ship  Fila
called  Fila  Cavena  of  Venice,  the 16  of  July  1553.  and  (^^^^^'^
the 1 7  in  the  morning  we  weighed  our  anker  and  sayled  jgrLllem
towardes  the  coast  of  Istria,  to  the  port  of  Rovigno,  and  Rovtgnio  a
the  said  day  there  came  aboard  of  our  ship  the  Percevena  port  in  Istria.
of  the shippe  named  Tamisari, for to  receive the rest
of  all  the  pilgrimes  money,  which  was in all  after  the
rate  of  55.  Crownes  for  every  man  for  that  voyage,  after
the rate of  five  shillings  starling  to the  crowne  : This
done,  he  returned  to  Venice.

The  1 9  day  we  tooke  fresh  victuals  aboard,  and  with
the bote that brought the fresh provision we went
on  land  to  the  Towne,  and  went  to  see  the  Church  of
Sancta Eufemia,  where  we  sawe the  bodie  of  the  sayd  ^ancta
Saint.  Eufemia.

77

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

The  20  day  wee  departed  from  Rovignio,  and  about

Monte  de noone  we  had  sight  of  Monte  de  Ancona,  and  the  hilles
ncona.  ^£  Dalmatia,  or  else  of  Sclavonia  both  at  one  time,  and  by

report  they  are 100.  miles  distant from  ech  other,  and
more.

The  2 1  we  sayled  still  in  sight  of  Dalmatia,  and  a  litle
before  noone,  we  had  sight  of  a  rocke  in  the  midst  of  the

11  porno.  sea,  called  in  Italian, il Pomo, it  appeareth  a  farre  off

to  be  in  shape  like  a  sugarloafe. Also  we  sawe  another

Sunt  Andrea,  rocke  about  two  miles  compasse  called  Sant  Andrea  :
on  this  rocke  is  onely  one  Monasterie  of  Friers  :  we
sayled  betweene  them  both,  and  left  S.  Andrea  on  the
left  hand  of  us,  and  we  had  also  kenning  of  another  Hand

Lissaanlland.  called  Lissa,  all  on  the  left  hande,  these  three  Hands  lie
East  and  West  in  the  sea,  and  at  sunne  setting  we  had
passed  them.  II  pomo  is  distant  from  Sant  Andrea  18
miles,  and  S.  Andrea  from  Lissa  10  miles,  and  Lissa  from

Lexina  Hand,  another  Hand  called  Lezina,  which  standeth  betweene
the  maine  of  Dalmatia  and  Lissa,  tenne  miles.  This
Hand  is  inhabited,  and  hath  great  plentie  of  wine  and
frutes  and  hereagainst  we  were  becalmed.

The  22  we had  sight  of  another small Hand called

Catxa.  Catza,  which  is  desolate  and  on  the left  hand,  and on

Pelagosa.  the  right  hand,  a  very  dangerous  Hand  called  Pelagosa,
this  is  also  desolate,  and  lyeth  in  the  midst  of  the  sea
betweene  both  the  maines  :  it  is  very  dangerous  and  low
land,  and  it  hath  a  long  ledge  of  rockes  lying  out  sixe
miles  in  to  the  sea,  so  that  many  ships  by  night  are
cast  away  upon  them.  There  is  betweene  Catza  and
Pelagosa  30  miles,  and  these  two  Hands  are  distant  from
Venice  400 miles. There is also about twelve miles

Augusta.  eastward,  a  great  Hand  called  Augusta,  about  14  miles
in  length,  somewhat  hillie,  but  well  inhabited,  and  fruit-
full  of  vines,  corne  and  other  fruit,  this  also  we  left  on
the  left  hand  :  &  we  have  hitherto  kept  our  course
from  Rovignio  East  southeast.  This  Hand  is  under  the
Signiorie  or  governement  of  Ragusa,  it  is  distant  from
Ragusa  50  miles,  and  there  is  by that Hand  a  greater,

78

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-

named  Meleda,  which  is  also  under  the  governement  of  Meleda.

Ragusa, it  is about  30  miles  in length,  and  inhabited,

and  hath  good  portes,  it  lyeth by East  from Augusta,

and  over  against  this  Hand  lyeth  a  hill  called  Monte  S.  Monte  Sant

Angelo,  upon  the  coast  of  Puglia  in  Italy,  and  we  had  '^W''^-

sight  of  both  landes  at  one  time.

The  23 we sayled all the  day  long  by the bowline
alongst  the  coast  of  Ragusa,  and  towardes  night  we  were
within  7  or  8 miles  of  Ragusa,  that  we  might  see  the
white  walles, but because it  was night,  we  cast  about
to  the  sea,  minding  at  the  second  watch,  to  beare  it  againe
to  Ragusa,  for  to  know  the  newes  of  the  Turkes  armie,
but  the  winde  blew  so  hard  and  contrary,  that  we  could
not. This  citie  of  Ragusa  paieth  tribute  to  the  Turke  Ragusa  paleth
yerely  fourteene  thousand  Sechinos, and every Sechino V<^'^°^'
is  of  Venetian  money  eight  livers  and  two  soldes,  besides  ^^^  Turke
other presents which they give to the Turkes Bassas  yerely.
when  they  come  thither. The  Venetians have a rocke
or  cragge  within  a  mile  of  the  said  towne,  for  the  which
the Raguseos  would  give  them  much  money,  but  they
doe keepe it more  for the  namesake,  then for  profite.
This  rocke  lieth  on  the  Southside  of  the  towne,  and  is
called II cromo, there is nothing on it but onely a  //  Cromo.
Monasterie called Sant Jeronimo. The maine of  the
Turkes  countrie  is  bordering  on  it  within  one  mile,  for
the  which  cause  they  are  in  great  subjection. This  night
wee were  put backe by  contrarie windes, and ankered
at  Melleda.

The  24  being  at  an  anker  under  Melleda,  we  would
have  gone on land, but the  winde came  so faire that
we  presently set sayle and went our  course, and left
on the  right  hand  of  us the forenamed Hand,  and  on
the left hand  betweene  us  and  the  maine  the  Hand of
Zupanna, and within a mile of  that under the maine  Zupanna.
by  East,  another  Hand  called  Isola  de  Mezo. This  Hand  1^°^^  de
hath  two Monasteries  in it,  one  called  Santa Maria  de  ^^^°-
Bizo,  and  the  other  Sant  Nicholo. Also  there  is  a  third
rocke  with  a  Frierie  called  Sant  Andrea  :  these  Hands  are  Sant  Andrea.

79

A.D.

1553-
[11.  i.  103.]

Castle  novo.

Boca  de
Cataro.
The  towne
Cataro.
Budoa.
Antiverl.
Marchevetti.
The  end  of
Sclavonia  and
the  beginning
of  Albania.

PugRa.

Cape
Chimera.
Cape  Otranto.

II  fano.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

from  the  maine  but  two  miles,  and  the  channell  betweene
Melleda  and  Zupanna  is  but  foure  or  five  miles  over
by  gesse,  but  very  deepe,  for  we  had  at  an  anker  fortie
fathoms.  The  two  Hands  of  Zupanna  and  Mezo  are
well  inhabited,  and  very  faire  buildings,  but  nothing
plentie  save  wine  onely.  This  night  toward  sunne  set
it  waxed  calme,  and  we  sayled  little  or  nothing.

The  24  we  were  past  Ragusa  14  miles,  and  there
we  mette  with  two  Venetian  ships,  which  came  from
Cyprus,  we  thought  they  would  have  spoken  with  us,
for  we  were  desirous  to  talke  with  them,  to  knowe  the
newes  of  the  Turkes  armie,  and  to  have  sent  some
letters  by  them  to  Venice.  About  noone,  we  had  scant
sight  of  Castel  novo,  which  Castell  a  fewe  yeeres  past  the
Turke  tooke  from  the  Emperour,  in  which  fight  were
slaine  three  hundred  Spanish  souldiers,  besides  the  rest
which  were  taken  prisoners,  and  made  gallie  slaves.
This  Castell  is  hard  at  the  mouth  of  a  channell  called
Boca  de  Cataro.  The  Venetians  have  a  hold  within  the
channell  called  Cataro,  this  channell  goeth  up  to  Budoa,
and  further  up  into  the  countrey.  About  sunneset  we
were  over  against  the  hilles  of  Antiveri  in  Sclavonia,  in
the  which  hilles  the  Venetians  have  a  towne  called
Antiveri,  and  the  Turkes  have  another  against  it  called
Marchevetti,  the  which  two  townes  continually  skirmish
together  with  much  slaughter.  At  the  end  of  these  hils
endeth  the  Countrey  of  Sclavonia,  and  Albania  beginneth.
These  hilles  are  thirtie  miles  distant  from  Ragusa.

The  27  we  kept  our  course  towards  Puglia,  and  left
Albania  on  the  left  hand.  The  28.  we  had  sight  of  both
the  maines,  but  we  were  neerer  the  coast  of  Puglia,  for
feare  of  Foystes.  It  is  betweene  Cape  Chimera  in  Albania
and  Cape  otranto  in  Puglia  60  miles.  Puglia  is  a  plaine
low  lande,  and  Chimera  in  Albania  is  very  high  land,  so
that  it  is  seene  the  further.  Thus  sayling  our  course
along  the  coast  of  Puglia,  we  saw  diverse  white  Towers,
which  serve  for  sea-markes.  About  three  of  the  clocke  in
the  after  noone,  we  had  sight  of  a  rocke  called  II  fano,  48

80

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-
miles  from  Corfu,  and  by  sunne  set  we  discovered  Corfu. Corfu.

Thus  we  kept  on  our  course  with  a  prosperous  winde,  and

made  our  way  after  twelve  mile  every  houre. Most  part

of  this  way  we  were  accompanied with certaine fishes

called  in  the  Italian  tongue  Palomide,  it  is  a  fish  three  Palomide.

quarters  of  a  yard  in  length,  in  colour,  eating,  and  making

like  a  Makarell,  somewhat  bigge  and  thick  in  body,  and

the  tayle  forked  like  a  halfe  moone,  for  the  which  cause

it  is  said  that  the  Turke  will  not  suffer  them  to  be  taken

in  all  his  dominions.

The  29  in  the  morning  we  were  in  sight  of  an  Hand,
which  we  left  on  our  left  hande  called  Cephalonia,  it  is  Cephahnia
under  the  Venetians  and  well  inhabited,  with  a  faire
towne  strongly  situated  on  a  hill,  of  the  which  hill  the
Hand  beareth  her  name,  it  hath  also  a  very  strong  fortresse
or  Castle,  and  plentie  of  corne  and  wine,  their  language
is  Greeke,  it  is  distant  from  the  maine  of  Morea,  thirtie  Morea.
miles,  it  is  in  compasse  80  miles.  One  houre  within
night  we  sayled  by  the  towne  standing  on  the  South  cape
of  Cephalonia,  whereby  we  might  perceive  their  lights.
There  come  oftentimes  into  the  creekes  and  rivers,  the
Turkes  foystes  and  gallies  where  at  their  arrivall,  the
Countrey  people  doe  signifie  unto  their  neighbours  by
so  many  lights,  as  there  are  foistes  or  gallies  in  the  Hand,
and  thus  they  doe  from  one  to  another  the  whole  Hand
over.  About  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  the
winde  scanted,  and  wee  minded  to  have  gone  to  Zante,  Zante.
but  we  could  not  for  that  night.  This  Iland  of  Zante
is  distant  from  Cephalonia,  12  or  14  miles,  but  the  towne
of  Cephalonia,  from  the  towne  of  Zante,  is  distant  fortie
miles. This  night  we  went  but  little  forward.

The  30  day  we  remained  still  turning  up  and  downe
because  the  winde  was  contrary,  and  towards  night  the
winde  mended,  so  that  we  entered  the  channell  betweene
Cephalonia,  &  Zante,  the  which  chanell  is  about  eight
or  tenne  miles  over,  and  these  two  beare  East  and  by
South,  and  West  and  by  North  from  the  other.  The
towne  of  Zante  lieth  within  a  point  of  the  land,
V  81  F

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

where we came to  an anker,  at  nine of  the clocke  at

night.
John  Locke,  The  3 1 about  sixe of  the clocke  in the morning,  I

and  five  Hoi-  ^-^^  £^g  Hollanders  went on land,  and hosted at  the
knders  goe  on  ^^^^^  ^^  p^^^^  ^^  Venetia. After breakfast we went
to  see  the  towne,  and  passing  along  we  went  into  some
of  the  Greeke  churches,  wherein  we  sawe  their  Altares,
Images,  and  other  ornaments. This  done,  wee  went  to
Banta  Maria a  Monasterie  of  Friers  called  Sancta  Maria  de  la  Croce,
de  la  Croce. ^hese  are  westerne  Christians,  for  the  Greekes  have  noth-
ing to  doe  with  them, nor  they  with the  Greekes,  for
they  differ  very much in religion. There are but 2.
Friers  in this Friery. In this Monasterie  we saw  the
The  tomhe  of  tombe  that  M.  T.  Cicero,  was  buried  in,  with  Terentia
M.  T.  Cicero.  Antonia,  his  wife. This  tombe  was founde about  sixe
yeeres  since,  when the  Monastery  was built,  there  was
in  time  past  a  streete  where  the  tombe  stoode. At  the
finding  of  the  tombe  there  was  also  found  a  yard  under
ground, a square stone somewhat longer than broad,
upon  which  stone was  found  a  writing  of  two  severall
handes  writing,  the  one  as  it  seemed,  for himselfe,  and
the  other for his  wife, and  under  the  same stone  was
[II.  i.  104.] found  a  glasse somewhat proportioned like an urinall,
but  that  it  was eight square and very thicke,  wherein
were  the  ashes  of  the  head  and  right  arme  of  Mar.  T.
Cicero,  for  as stories  make mention he was  beheaded
as  I  remember  at  Capua,  for  insurrection. And  his  wife
having  got  his  head  and  right  arme,  (which  was  brought
to  Rome  to  the  Emperour)  went  from  Rome,  and  came
to  Zante,  and  there  buried  his  head  and  arme,  and  wrote
*  Or,  y^ve. upon  his  tombe  this  style  M.  T,  Cicero.  *  Have. Then
followeth  in  other  letters,  Et  tu  Terentia  Antonia,  which
difference  of  letters  declare that they  were not  written
The  descrip- both  at  one  time. The  tombe  is  long  and  narrowe,  and
Hon  of  the Jeepe,  walled  on  every  side  like  a  grave,  in  the  botome
whereof  was  found  the  sayd  stone  with the  writing  on
it, & the  said  glasse of  ashes, and also another  litle
glasse  of  the  same  proportion,  wherein,  as  they  say,  are

82

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553*

the  teares  of  his friendes, that  in those  dayes  they  did

use  to  gather  and  bury  with  them,  as  they  did  use  in

Italy  and  Spaine  to  teare  their  haire,  to  bury  with  their

friendes. In  the  sayde  tombe  were  a  fewe  bones. After

dinner we rested untill it drew towards evening by

reason  of  the  heat. And  about  foure  of  the  clocke  we

walked  to  another  Frierie  a  mile  out  of  the  towne  called

Sant  Elia,  these  are  white  Friers, there  were two,  but  S^^^  E/ia,  but

one  is  dead,  not  sixe  dayes  since. This  Frierie  hath  a  ""^  f^rier.

garden  very  pleasant,  and  well  furnished  with  Orenges,

Lemons,  pomegranates, and divers other  good fruites.

The  way  to  it  is  somewhat  ragged,  up  hill  and  downe,

and  very  stonie,  and  in  winter  very  durtie. It  standeth

very  plesantly  in  a  clift  betweene  two  hilles,  with  a  good

prospect. From thence we ascended the hill to the

Castle, which  is  situated on the very toppe of  a  hill.

This  Castle  is  very strong, in compasse a large mile  ^•^^  descrip-

and  a  halfe, which being  victualed,  (as  it  is  never  un-  *^^^  f? f

furnished)  and  manned  with  men  of  trust,  it  may  defend  Zante.

it  selfe  against  any  Princes  power. This  Castle  taketh

the  just  compasse  of  the hill, and no other hill  neere

it,  it  is  so  steepe  downe,  and  so  high  and  ragged,  that

it  will  tyre  any  man  or  ever  he  be  halfe  way  up. Very

nature  hath  fortified  the  walles  and  bulwarkes  :  It  is  by

nature  foure  square,  and  it  commandeth  the  towne  and

porte. The Venetians have alwayes their  Podesta,  or

Governour,  with  his  two  Counsellours  resident  therein.

The  towne  is  well  inhabited,  & hath  great  quantitie  of

housholders. The Hand by report is threescore and

tenne  miles  about,  it  is  able  to make twentie  thousand

fighting  men. They  say  they  have  alwayes  five  or  sixe

hundred horsemen  readie  at  an  houres  warning. They  27^^  Turke

say  the Turke hath assayed it with loo. Gallies,  but  ^f^f'^^f
, -^  1 J  ,...■'  , . ^  the  Hand  of

he  could  never  bnng  his  purpose  to  passe. It  is  strange Zante.

to  mee  how  they  should  maintaine  so  many  men  in  this

Hand,  for  their  best  sustenance  is  wine,  and  the  rest  but

miserable.

The  first  of  August  we  were warned  aboord  by the

83

A.D.

1553-

The  Castle  of
Torneste.

Twelve  turks
gaU'tes  at
Modon  and
Coron,  and
Candla.

Modon.
Coron.

Cava  Matta-
pan.

Candid.

Gozi.

Candia.
Cape  Spada.
C.  Salomon.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

patron,  and  towards  evening  we  set  sayle,  and  had  sight
of  a  Castle  called  Torneste,  which  is  the  Turkes,  and  is
ten  miles  from  Zante,  it  did  belong  to  the  Venetians,  but
they  have  now  lost  it,  it  standeth  also  on  a  hill  on  the
sea  side  in  Morea.  All  that  night  we  bare  into  the  sea,
because  we  had  newes  at  Zante  of  twelve  of  the  Turkes
gallies,  that  came  from  Rhodes,  which  were  about
Modon,  Coron,  and  Candia,  for  which  cause  we  kept
at  the  sea.

The  second  of  August  we  had  no  sight  of  land,  but
kept  our  course,  and  about  the  third  watch  the  winde
scanted,  so  that  we  bare  with  the  shore,  and  had  sight
of  Modon  and  Coron.

The  third  we  had  sight  of  Cavo  Mattapan,  and  all
that  day  by  reason  of  contrary  windes,  which  blew  some-
what hard,  we  lay  a  hull  untill  morning.

The  fourth  we  were  still  under  the  sayd  Cape,  and
so  continued  that  day,  and  towardes  night  there  grewe
a  contention  in  the  ship  amongst  the  Hollanders,  and  it
had  like  to  have  bene  a  great  inconvenience,  for  we  had
all  our  weapons,  yea  even  our  knives  taken  from  us
that  night.

The  lift,  we  sayled  by  the  Bowline,  and  out  of  the
toppe  we  had  sight  of  the  Hand  of  Candia,  and  towardes
noone  we  might  see  it  plaine,  and  towards  night  the
winde  waxed  calme.

The  sixt  toward  the  breake  of  day  we  saw  two  small
Hands  called  Gozi,  and  towards  noone  we  were  betweene
them  :  the  one  of  these  Hands  is  fifteene  miles  about,
and  the  other  lo  miles.  In  those  Hands  are  nourished
store  of  cattell  for  butter  and  cheese.  There  are  to  the
number  of  fiftie  or  sixtie  inhabitants,  which  are  Greeks,
and  they  live  chiefly  on  milke  and  cheese.  The  Hand
of  Candia  is  700  miles  about,  it  is  in  length,  from  Cape
Spada,  to  Cape  Salomon,  300  miles,  it  is  as  they  say,
able  to  make  one  hundred  thousand  fighting  men.  We
sayled  betweene  the  Gozi,  and  Candia,  and  they  are  dis-
tant from  Candia  5  or  6  miles. The  Candiots  are  strong

84

JOHN LOCKE  A.D.

1553-
men,  and  very  good  archers,  and  shoot  neere  the  marke.

This  Ilande  is  from  Zante  300  miles.

The  seventh  we  sayled  all  along  the  sayd  Hand  with
little  winde  and  unstable,  and  the  eight  day  towards  night
we  drew  to  the  East  end  of  the  Hand.

The  9  and  10  we  sayled  along  with  a  prosperous
winde  and  saw  no  land.

The 1 1 in the morning, we had sight  of  the  Hand
of  Cyprus,  and  towards  noone  we  were  thwart  the  Cape
called  Ponta  Malota,  and  about  foure  of  the  clocke  we  Ponta,
were  as  farre  as  Baffo,  and  about sunne  set  we passed  Malota.
Cavo  Bianco, and towards  nine of  the  clocke  at  night  J'""'  „.
we  doubled  Cavo  de  la  gatte,  and  ankered  afore  Limisso,  rii_  i_  505.]*
but  the wind blew so hard, that we could not come  Cavo  de  la
neere the  towne,  neither durst  any  man goe on  land.  <?^^^^-
The towne is from Cavo de le gatte twelve miles
distant.

The  12.  of  August  in  the  morning  wee  went  on  land
to  Limisso  : this towne is ruinated and nothing  in  it  Limisso.
worth writing, save onely in the mids of  the  towne
there  hath bene  a  fortresse,  which  is  now  decayed,  and
the  wals  part  overthrowen,  which  a  Turkish Rover  with
certaine  gallies  did  destroy  about 10.  or  12.  yeeres  past.
This  day  walking  to  see  the  towne,  we  chanced  to  see
in  the  market  place,  a  great  quantitie  of  a  certaine  vermine
called  in  the  Italian tongue Cavalette. It is  as  I  can  Cavaktte,  is
learne,  both  in  shape  and  bignesse  like  a  grassehopper,  for  ^  '^^^ f^'"{
I  can  judge  but  little  difference. Of  these  many  yeeres  the  Island  of
they  have  had  such quantitie y' they destroy  all  their  Cyprus.
corne. They  are  so  plagued  with  them,  y'  almost  every
yeere  they  doe  well  nie  loose  halfe  their  corne,  whether
it  be  the  nature  of  the  countrey,  or  the  plague  of  God,
that  let  them  judge  that  best  can  define. But  that  there
may no default be laied to their negligence for the
destruction  of  them, they have throughout  the whole
land  a  constituted  order,  that  every  Farmor  or  husband-
man (which  are  even  as  slaves  bought  and  sold  to  their
lord)  shall  every  yeere  pay  according  to  his  territorie,  a

85

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

measure  full  of  the  seede  or  egges  of  these  forenamed
Cavalette,  the  which  they  are  bound  to  bring  to  the
market,  and  present  to  the  officer  appointed  for  the  same,
the  which  officer  taketh  of  them  very  straight  measure,
and  writeth  the  names  of  the  presenters,  and  putteth
the  sayd  egges  or  seed,  into  a  house  appointed  for  the
same,  and  having  the  house  full,  they  beate  them  to
pouder,  and  cast  them  into  the  sea,  and  by  this  policie
they  doe  as  much  as  in  them  lieth  for  the  destruction
of  them.  This  vermine  breedeth  or  ingendereth  at  the
time  of  corne  being  ripe,  and  the  corne  beyng  had  away,
in  the  clods  of  the  same  ground  do  the  husbandmen  find
ye  nestes,  or,  as  I  may  rather  terme  them,  cases  of  the
egges  of  the  same  vermine.  Their  nests  are  much  like
to  the  keies  of  a  hasel-nut  tree,  when  they  be  dried,  and
of  the  same  length,  but  somewhat  bigger,  which  case
being  broken  you  shall  see  the  egges  lie  much  like  unto
antes  egges,  but  somewhat  lesser.  Thus  much  I  have
written  at  this  time,  because  I  had  no  more  time  of  know-
ledge, but  I  trust  at  my  returne  to  note  more  of  this
island,  with  the  commodities  of  the  same  at  large.
The  ftlgrimes  The  13.  day  we  went  in  the  morning  to  the  Greekes
^mngtothe  church,  to  see  the  order  of  their  ceremonies,  &  of  their
churches.  Communion,  of  the  which  to  declare  the  whole  order  with

the  number  of  their  ceremonious  crossings,  it  were  to
long.  Wherefore  least  I  should  offend  any  man,  I  leave
it  unwritten  :  but  onely  that  I  noted  well,  that  in  all  their
Communion  or  service,  not  one  did  ever  kneele,  nor  yet
in  any  of  their  Churches  could  I  ever  see  any  graven
images,  but  painted  or  portrayed.  Also  they  have  store
of  lampes  alight,  almost  for  every  image  one.  Their
women  are  alwayes  seperated  from  the  men,  and  generally
they  are  in  the  lower  ende  of  the  Church.  This  night
we  went  aboord  the  ship,  although  the  wind  were  con-
trary, we  did  it  because  the  patrone  should  not  find  any
lacke  of  us,  as  sometimes  he  did  :  when  as  tarying  upon
his  owne  businesse,  he  would  colour  it  with  the  delay  of
the  pilgrimes.

86

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-

The  14.  day  in  the  morning  we  set  saile,  and  lost  sight
of  the  Island  of  Cyprus,  and  the  15.  day  we  were  like-
wise at  Sea,  and  sawe  no  land  :  and  the  16.  day  towards
night,  we  looked  for  land,  but  we  sawe  none.  But
because  we  supposed  our  selves  to  be  neere  our  port,
we  tooke  in  all  our  sailes  except  onely  the  foresaile  and
the  missen,  and  so  we  remained  all  that  night.

The  17.  day  in  the  morning,  we  were  by  report  of
the  Mariners,  some  sixe  miles  from  Jaffa,  but  it  prooved
contrary.  But  because  we  would  be  sure,  wee  came  to
an  anker  seven  miles  from  the  shore,  and  sent  the  skiffe
with  the  Pilot  and  the  master  gunner,  to  learne  the  coast,
but  they  returned,  not  having  seen  tree  nor  house,  nor
spoken  with  any  man.  But  when  they  came  to  the  sea
side  againe,  they  went  up  a  little  hill  standing  hard  by
the  brinke,  whereon  as  they  thought  they  sawe  the  hill
of  Jerusalem,  by  the  which  the  Pilot  knew  (after  his
judgement)  that  wee  were  past  our  port.  And  so  this
place  where  we  rode  was,  as  the  mariners  sayd,  about
50.  mile  from  Jaffa.  This  coast  all  alongst  is  very  lowe,
plaine,  white,  sandie,  and  desert,  for  which  cause  it  hath
fewe  markes  or  none,  so  that  we  rode  here  as  it  were
in  a  gulfe  betweene  two  Capes.

The  18.  day  we  abode  still  at  anker,  looking  for  a  gale  A  great  cur-
to  returne  backe,  but  it  was  contrary  :  and  the  19.  we  '''^"'•
set  saile,  but  the  currant  having  more  force  then  the
winde,  we  were  driven  backe,  insomuch,  that  the  ship
being  under  saile,  we  cast  the  sounding  lead,  &  (not-
withstanding the  wind)  it  remained  before  the  shippe,
there  wee  had  muddie  ground  at  fifteene  fadome.  The
same  day  about  4.  of  the  clocke,  wee  set  saile  agame,
and  sayled  West  alongst  the  coast  with  a  fresh  side-winde.
It  chanced  by  fortune  that  the  shippes  Cat  lept  into  the  A  Cat  fallen

Sea, which being:  downe,  kept  her  selfe  very  valiauntly  ^^^'> /^e  sea

1  ^  -ii and vecoveved,

above water, notwithstanding the great waves, still

swimming, the  which the master knowing, he caused

the  Skiffe  with  halfe  a  dosen men  to  goe  towards  her

and  fetch  her  againe,  when  she  was  almost  halfe  a  mile

87

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

[II.  i.  1 06.]  from  the  shippe,  and  all  this  while  the  shippe  lay  on
stales.  I  hardly  beleeve  they  would  have  made  such
haste  and  meanes  if  one  of  the  company  had  bene  in
the  like  perill.  They  made  the  more  haste  because  it
was  the  patrons  cat.  This  I  have  written  onely  to  note
the  estimation  that  cats  are  in,  among  the  Italians,  for
generally  they  esteeme  their  cattes,  as  in  England  we
esteeme  a  good  Spaniell.  The  same  night  about  tenne
of  the  clocke  the  winde  calmed,  and  because  none  of  the
shippe  knewe  where  we  were,  we  let  fall  an  anker  about
6  mile  from  the  place  we  were  at  before,  and  there  wee
had  muddie  ground  at  twelve  fathome.

The  20  it  was  still  calme,  and  the  current  so  strong  still
one  way,  that  we  were  not  able  to  stemme  the  streame  :
moreover  we  knew  not  where  we  were,  whereupon
doubting  whither  wee  were  past,  or  short  of  our  port,
the  Master,  Pilot,  and  other  Officers  of  the  shippe
entered  into  counsell  what  was  best  to  doe,  whereupon
they  agreed  to  sende  the  bote  on  lande  againe,  to  seeke
some  man  to  speake  with  all,  but  they  returned  as  wise  as
they  went.  Then  we  set  sayle  againe  and  sounded  every
mile  or  halfe  mile,  and  found  still  one  depth,  so  we  not
knowing  where  we  were,  came  againe  to  an  anker,  seven
or  eight  miles  by  West  from  the  place  we  were  at.  Thus
still  doubting  where  we  were,  the  bote  went  on  land
againe,  and  brought  newes  that  wee  were  short  80  miles
of  the  place,  whereas  we  thought  wee  had  beene  overshot
by  east  fiftie  miles.  Thus  in  these  doubts  we  lost  foure
dayes,  and  never  a  man  in  the  shippe  able  to  tell  where
we  were,  notwithstanding  there  were  diverse  in  the  shippe
They  met  with  ^-^at  had  beene  there  before.  Then  sayd  the  Pylot,  that
^  J  T  ^  at  his  comming  to  the  shore,  by  chance  he  saw  two  way-
faring men,  which  were  Moores,  and  he  cryed  to  them
in  Turkish,  insomuch  that  the  Moores,  partly  for  feare,
and  partly  for  lacke  of  understanding,  (seeing  them  to
be  Christians)  beganne  to  flie,  yet  in  the  end  with  much
a  doe,  they  stayed  to  speake  with  them,  which  men  when
they came together, were not able  to understand ech

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-
other, but our men made to them the signe of  the

Crosse  on the  sande,  to  give  them  to  understand  that

they  were  of  the  shippe  that  brought  the  pilgrims. Then

the  Moores knowing  (as  al  the  country  else  doth)  that

it  was  the  use  of  Christians  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  shewed

them  to  be  yet  by  west  of  Jaffa. Thus  we  remained  all

that  night  at  anker,  and  the  farther  west  that  we  sayled,

the  lesse  water  we  had.

The  21  we  set  sayle  againe,  and  kept  our  course
Northeast,  but  because  we  would  not  goe  along  the
shore  by  night,  wee  came  to  an  anker  in  foure  and
twentie  fathome  water.  Then  the  next  morning  being
the  22  we  set  sayle  againe,  and  kept  our  course  as  before,
and  about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  wee  had
sight  of  the  two  towers  of  Jaffa,  and  about  five  of  the  T^^e  two
clocke,  wee  were  with  a  rocke,  called  in  the  Italian  ^°^"'^  ^
tongue,  Scolio  di  Santo  Petro,  on  the  which  rocke  they  Scoli'odi  Saruo
say  he  fished,  when  Christ  bid  him  cast  his  net  on  the  Petro.
right  side,  and  caught  so  many  fishes.  This  rocke  is
now  almost  worne  away.  It  is  from  Jaffa  two  or  three
mile  :  here  before  the  two  towers  we  came  to  an  anker.
Then  the  pilgrimes  after  supper,  in  salutation  of  the
holy  lande,  sang  to  the  prayse  of  God,  Te  Deum  laud-
amus,  with  Magnificat,  and  Benedictus,  but  in  the  shippe
was  a  Frier  of  Santo  Francisco,  who  for  anger  because  he
was  not  called  and  warned,  would  not  sing  with  us,  so
that  he  stood  so  much  upon  his  dignitie,  that  he  forgot
his  simplicitie,  and  neglected  his  devotion  to  the
holy  land  for  that  time,  saying  that  first  they  ought
to  have  called  him  yer  they  did  beginne,  because  he
was  a  Fryer,  and  had  beene  there,  and  knewe  the
orders.

The  23  we  sent  the  bote  on  land  with  a  messenger  to  ^  messenger
the Padre Guardian of Jerusalem. This day it was  departethfor
notified  unto  mee  by  one  of  the  shippe  that  had  beene  Mahomet  is
a  slave  in  Turkie,  that  no  man  might  weare  greene  in  clothed  in
this  land,  because  their  prophet  Mahomet  went  in  greene.  greene.
This  came  to  my  knowledge  by  reason  of  the  Scrivanello,

89

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

who  had  a  greene  cap,  which  was  forbidden  him  to  weare
on  the  land.

The  24.  25.  and  26  we  taryed  in  the  shippe  still  look-
ing for  the  comming  of  the  Padre  guardian,  and  the  26
at  night  we  had  a  storme  which  lasted  all  the  next  day.
The  Guardian  The  27  in  the  morning,  came  the  Cadi,  ye  Subassi,
of  Jerusalem  ^  ^-j^g  Meniwe,  with  the  Padre  guardian,  but  they  could
Jaffa  with  "°^  come  at  us  by  reason  of  the  stormy  weather  :  in
the  Cad%and  the  afternoone  we  assayed  to  send  the  bote  on  land,
Subassi.  but the weather would not suffer us. Then  againe

toward  night  the  bote  went  a  shore,  but  it  returned  not
that  night. The  same  day  in  the  afternoone  we  sawe  in
the  element,  a  cloud  with  a  long  tayle,  like  unto  the  tayle
J  cloud  called  of  a  serpent,  which  cloud  is  called  in  Italian Cion,  the
of  the  Italians  tayle  of  this  cloud  did  hang  as  it  were  into  the  sea :  and

J „-  we  did  see  the  water  under  the  sayde  cloude  ascend,  as  it

dangerous.  1  1  • 1 1  • /-i-  j

were  like  a  smoke  or  myste,  the  which  this  Cion  drew

up  to  it. The Marriners  reported to us that it had

this  propertie,  that  if  it  should  happen  to  have  lighted  on

any  part of  the shippe, that it would rent  and  wreth

sayles,  mast,  shroudes  and  shippe  and  all  in  manner  like

a  wyth  : on  the  land, trees, houses, or  whatsoever  else

it  lighteth on, it  would rent  and wreth. These mar-

A conjuration,  riners  did  use  a  certaine  conjuration  to  breake  the  sayd

[II.  i.  107.] tayle,  or  cut  it  in  two,  which  as  they  say  doth  prevaile.

They  did  take  a  blacke  hafted  knife,  and  with  the  edge

of  the  same  did  crosse  the  said  taile  as  if  they  would  cut

it  in twain, saying these  words. Hold thou Cion, eat

this, and then they stucke the knife  on  the ship  side

with the edge towards the said cloude, and I saw it

therewith  vanish  in  lesse  then  one  quarter  of  an  houre.

But  whether  it  was  then  consumed,  or  whether  by  vertue

of  the  Inchantment  it  did  vanish I knowe not,  but  it

was  gone. Hereof  let  them  judge  that  know  more  then

I. This  afternoone  we  had  no  winde,  but  the  Sea  very

stormy,  insomuch  that  neither  cheste,  pot,  nor  any  thing

else  could  stand  in  the  shippe,  and  wee  were  driven to

keepe  our  meate  in  one  hand,  and  the  pot  in  the  other,

90

JOHN LOCKE  A.D.

1553-

and  so  sit  downe  upon  the  hatches  to  eate,  for  stand  we

could  not,  for  that  the  Seas  in  the  very  port  at  an  anker
went  so  high  as  if  wee  had  bene  in  the  bay  of  Portugall
with  stormy  weather.  The  reason  is,  as  the  Mariners
said  to  me,  because  that  there  meete  all  the  waves  from
all  places  of  the  Straights  of  Gibraltar,  and  there  breake,
and  that  in  most  calmes  there  go  greatest  seas,  whether
the  winde  blow  or  not.

The  28.  the  weather  growing  somewhat  calme,  wee
went  on  land  and  rested  our  selves  for  that  day,  and  the
next  day  we  set  forward  toward  the  city  of  Jerusalem.

What  I  did,  and  what  places  of  devotion  I  visited  in
Jerusalem,  and  other  parts  of  the  Hoi 7  land,  from  this
my  departure  from  Jaffa,  untill  my  returne  to  the  said
port,  may  briefly  be  seene  in  my  Testimoniall,  under  the
hand  &  seale  of  the  Vicar  generall  of  Mount  Sion,  which
for  the  contentment  of  the  Reader  I  thought  good  here
to  interlace.

UNiversis  &  singulis  praesentes  litteras  inspecturis
salutem  in  Domino  nostro  Jesu  Christo.  Attestamur
vobis  ac  aliis  quibuscunque,  qualiter  honorabilis  vir
Johannes  Lok  civis  Londoniensis,  Alius  honorabilis  viri
Guilhelmi  Lok  equitis  aurati,  ad  sacratissima  terras  sanctae
loca  personaliter  se  contulit,  sanctissimum  Domini  nostri
Jesu  Christi  sepulchrum,  e  quo  die  tertia  gloriosus  a
mortuis  resurrexit,  sacratissimum  Calvariae  montem,  in
quo  pro  nobis  omnibus  cruci  affixus  mori  dignatus  est,
Sion  etiam  montem  ubi  coenam  illam  mirificam  cum
discipulis  suis  fecit,  &  ubi  spiritus  sanctus  in  die  sancto
Pentecostes  in  discipulos  eosdem  in  linguis  igneis  de-
scendit,  Olivetique  montem  ubi  mirabiliter  coelos  ascendit,
intemerats  virginis  Mariae  Mausoleum  in  Josaphat  vallis
medio  situm,  Bethaniam  quoque,  Bethlehem  civitatem
David  in  qua  de  purissima  virgine  Maria  natus  est,  ibique
inter  animalia  reclinatus,  pluraque  loca  alia  tam  in  Hier-
usalem  civitate  sancta  terre  Judaeae,  quam  extra,  a
modernis peregrinis  visitari solita, devotissime visitavit,

91

A.D.

1553-

The  pilgrimes
returne  from
Jerusalem.

Mount
Carmel.

Pesce  coluiii-
bint.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

pariterque  adoravit.  In  quorum  fidem,  ego  frater
Anthonius  de  Bergamo  ordinis  fratrum  minorum  regu-
laris  observantiae,  provinciae  divi  Anthonii  Sacri  conventus
montis  Sioii  vlcarius  (licet  indignus)  necnon  aliorum
locorum  terrae  Sanctae,  apostolica  authoritate  comissarius
&  rector,  has  Sigillo  maiori  nostri  officii  nostraque  sub-
scriptione  muniri  volui.  Datum  Hierosolymis  apud
sacratissimum  domini  coenaculum  in  saepe  memorato
monte  Sion,  Anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo,
quinquagesimo  tertio,  die  vero  sexto  mensis  Septembris.

Frater  Antonius  qui  supra.

THe  15.  of  September  being  come  from  our  pil-
grimage, we  went  aborde  our  shippe,  and  set  saile,
and  kept  our  course  West  toward  the  Island  of  Ciprus,
but  al  that  night  it  was  calme,  and  the  16.  the  winde
freshed,  and  we  passed  by  Mount  Carmel.

The  17.  the  winde  was  very  scant,  yet  we  kept  the
sea,  and  towards  night  wee  had  a  guste  of  raine  whereby
wee  were  constrained  to  strike  our  sailes,  but  it  was  not
very  stormie,  nor  lasted  very  long.

The  18.  19.  20.  and  21.  we  kept  still  the  sea  and
saw  no  land  because  we  had  very  litle  winde,  and  that
not  very  favourable.

The  22.  at  noone  the  Boatswaine  sent  some  of  the
Mariners  into  the  boat,  (which  we  toed  asterne  from
Jaffa)  for  certaine  necessaries  belonging  to  the  ship,
wherein  the  Mariners  found  a  certaine  fish  in  proportion
like  a  Dace,  about  6.  inches  long  (yet  the  Mariners  said
they  had  scene  the  like  a  foote  long  and  more)  the  which
fish  had  on  every  side  a  wing,  and  toward  the  taile  two
other  lesser  as  it  were  finnes,  on  either  side  one,  but  in
proportion  they  were  wings  and  of  a  good  length.  These
wings  grow  out  betweene  the  gils  and  the  carkasse  of
the  same  fish.  They  are  called  in  the  Italian  tongue
Pesce  columbini,  for  in  deede,  the  wings  being  spred  it
is  like  to  a  flying  dove,  they  say  it  will  flie  farre,  and
very  high. So  it  seemeth  that  being  weary  of  her  flight,

92

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-
she  fell  into  the  boate,  and  not  being  able  to  rise  againe

died  there.

The  23.  24.  and  25.  we  sailed  our  direct  course  with
a  small  gale  of  winde,  and  this  day  we  had  sight  of  the
Island  of  Cyprus.  The  first  land  that  we  discovered
was  a  headland  called  Cavo  de  la  Griega,  and  about  mid-  Cam  de  la
night  we  ankered  by  North  of  the  Cape.  This  cape  is  Cnega.
a  high  hil,  long  and  square,  and  on  the  East  corner  it
hath  a  high  cop,  that  appeareth  unto  those  at  the  sea,
like  a  white  cloud,  for  toward  the  sea  it  is  white,  and
it  lieth  into  the  sea  Southwest.  This  coast  of  Cyprus
is  high  declining  toward  the  sea,  but  it  hath  no  cliffes.

The  26.  we  set  saile  againe,  and  toward  noone  we
came  into  the  port  of  Salini,  where  we  went  on  land
and  lodged  that  night  at  a  towne  one  mile  from  thence
called  Arnacho  di  Salini,  this  is  but  a  village  called  in
Italian,  Casalia.  This  is  distant  from  Jalra  250.  Italian
miles.

The 27.  we  rested,  and  the  28.  we hired horses to  [II-  i-  108.]

ride  from  Arnacho  to  Salina,  which  is  a  good  mile. The  '^f"'"-

1^ . •  ^  -1 •  1 • Arnacho  at

salt  pit  is  very  neere  two  miles  in  compasse,  very  plaine  ^^n^^i

and  levell,  into  the  which  they  let  runne  at  the  time  of  Casalia.

raine  a  quantitie  of  water  comming  from  the  mountaines,

which  water  is  let  in  until  the  pit  be  full  to  a  certaine

marke,  which when it is full,  the rest is  conveyed  by

a  trench  into  the  sea. This  water  is  let  runne  in  about

October,  or  sooner  or  later,  as  the  time  of  the  yeere  doth

afforde. There they  let  it remaine  untill the ende of

July  or  the  middest  of  August,  out  of  which  pits  at  that

time,  in  stead  of  water  that  they  let  in  they  gather  very

faire white  salt,  without  any  further  art or  labour,  for

it  is  only  done  by  the  great  heate  of  the  sunne. This

the  Venetians  have, and doe maintaine to the use of

S.  Marke,  and  the  Venetian  ships  that  come  to  this  Hand

are  bound  to  cast  out  their  ballast,  and  to  lade  with  salt

for  Venice. Also  there  may  none  in  all  the  Hand buy

salt but  of  these  men,  who  maintaine  these  pits  for  S.

Marke. This  place  is  watched  by  night  with 6.  horse-

93

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

Sixe  horsemen  men  to  the  end  it  be  not  stolne  by  night. Also  under
to  watch  the ^}^g  Venetians  dominions  no  towne  may  spende  any  salt,
^  '  but  they  must  buy  it  of  Saint  Marke,  neither  may  any

man  buy  any  salt  at  one  towne  to  carie  to  another,  but
every  one  must  buy  his  salt  in  the  towne  where  he
dwelleth.  Neither  may  any  man  in  Venice  buy  more
salt  then  he  spendeth  in  the  city,  for  if  he  be  knowen
to  carie  but  one  ounce  out  of  the  citie  and  be  accused,
hee  looseth  an  eare.  The  most  part  of  all  the  salt  they
have  in  Venice  commeth  from  these  Salines,  and  they
have  it  so  plentifull,  that  they  are  not  able,  never  a  yeere
to  gather  the  one  halfe,  for  they  onely  gather  in  July,
August,  and  September,  and  not  fully  these  three
monethes.  Yet  notwithstanding  the  abundance  that  the
shippes  carie  away  yeerely,  there  remaine  heapes  like
hilles,  some  heapes  able  to  lade  nine  or  tenne  shippes,  and
there  are  heapes  of  two  yeeres  gathering,  some  of  three
and  some  of  nine  or  tenne  yeeres  making,  to  the  value
of  a  great  summe  of  golde,  and  when  the  ships  do  lade,
they  never  take  it  by  measure,  but  when  they  come  at
Venice  they  measure  it.  This  salt  as  it  lyeth  in  the  pit
is  like  so  much  ice,  and  it  is  sixe  inches  thicke :  they
digge  it  with  axes,  and  cause  their  slaves  to  cary  it  to
the  heapes.  This  night  at  midnight  we  rode  to  Fama-
gusta,  which  is  eight  leagues  from  Salina,  which  is  24
English  miles.

The  29  about  two  houres  before  day,  we  alighted  at
Famagusta.  Famagusta,  and  after  we  were  refreshed  we  went  to  see
the  towne.  This  is  a  very  faire  strong  holde,  and  the
strongest  and  greatest  in  the  Hand.  The  walles  are  faire
and  new,  and  strongly  rampired  with  foure  principall
bulwarkes,  and  betweene  them  turrions,  responding  one
to  another,  these  walles  did  the  Venetians  make.  They
have  also  on  the  haven  side  of  it  a  Castle,  and  the  haven
is  chained,  the  citie  hath  onely  two  gates,  to  say,  one
for  the  lande  and  another  for  the  sea,  they  have  in  the
towne  continually,  be  it  peace  or  warres,  800  souldiers,
and fortie and sixe gunners, besides Captaines, petie

94

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-
Captaines, Governour and Generall. The lande gate
hath  alwayes  fiftie  souldiers,  pikes  and  gunners  with  their
harnes,  watching  thereat  night  and  day. At  the  sea  gate
five  and  twentie,  upon  the  walles  every  night  doe  watch
fifteene  men  in  watch  houses,  for  every  watch  house  five
men,  and  in  the  market  place  30  souldiers  continually.
There  may  no  soldier  serve  there  above  5.  yeres,  neither
will  they  without  friendship  suffer  them  to  depart  afore
5.  yeres  be  expired,  and  there  may  serve  of  all  nations
except  Greekes. They  have every pay, which is  45.
dayes, 15 Mozenigos, which is 15 shillings sterling.  Mozenigo.
Their  horsemen  have  onely  sixe  soldes  Venetian  a  day,  Solde  of
and  provender  for  their  horses,  but  they  have  also  cer-  ^'?^^<^^-
taine  lande  therewith  to  plow  and  sowe  for  the  mainten-
ance of  their  horses,  but  truely  I  marvell  how  they  live
being  so  hardly  fed,  for  all  the  sommer  they  feede  onely
upon  chopt  strawe  and  barley,  for  hey  they  have  none,
and  yet  they  be faire,  fat  and  serviceable. The  Vene-
tians send  every  two  yeeres  new  rulers,  which  they  call
Castellani. The  towne  hath  allowed  it  also  two  gallies  Castellanl
continually  armed  and  furnished.

The  30  in  the  morning  v/e  ridde  to  a  chappell,  where
they  say  Saint Katherin was borne. This Chappell  is  Saint  Kathe-
in  olde  Famagusta,  the  which  was  destroyed  by  Enp-lish-  ^f^^  yJ^PP^
men,  and  is  cleane  overthrowne  to  the  ground,  to  this  o.^j^^_
day  desolate  and not inhabited by any person, it  was
of  a  great  circuit,  and  there  be  to  this  day  mountaines
of  faire,  great,  and  strong  buildings,  and  not  onely  there,
but  also  in  many  places  of  the  Hand. Moreover  when  Divers  coines
they  digge,  plowe,  or  trench  they  finde  sometimes  olde  ^^»"' S^°"^^
antient  coines,  some  of  golde,  some  of  silver,  and  some
of  copper,  yea  and  many  tombes  and  vautes  with  sepul-
chers  in  them. This  olde  Famagusta  is  from  the  other,
foure  miles,  and  standeth  on  a  hill,  but  the  new  towne
on  a  plaine. Thence we returned to new Famagusta
againe  to  dinner, and toward evening  we went about
the  towne,  and  in  the  great  Church  we  sawe  the  tombe
of  king  Jaques,  which  was  the  last  king  of  Cyprus,  and

95

A.D.

1553-

[II.  i.  109.]
Coniari,  a
familie  of
Venice  mar-
led to  ki?ig
Jaques,

No  z'itaiks
must  be  sold
out  of  the  city
of  Famagusta.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

was  buried  in  the  yere  of  Christ  one  thousand  foure
hundred  seventie  &  three,  and  had  to  wife  one  of  the
daughters  of  Venice,  of  the  house  of  Cornari,  the  which
family  at  this  day  hath  great  revenues  in  this  Island,  and
by  means  of  that  mariage  the  Venetians  chalenge  the
kingdom  of  Cyprus.

The  first  of  October  in  the  morning,  we  went  to  see
the  reliefe  of  the  watches.  That  done,  we  went  to  one
of  the  Greekes  Churches  to  see  a  pot  or  Jarre  of  stone,
which  is  sayd  to  bee  one  of  the  seven  Jarres  of  water,
the  which  the  Lord  God  at  the  mariage  converted  into
wine.  It  is  a  pot  of  earth  very  faire,  white  enamelled,
and  fairely  wrought  upon  with  drawen  worke,  and  hath
on  either  side  of  it,  instead  of  handles,  eares  made  in
fourme  as  the  Painters  make  angels  wings,  it  was  about
an  elle  high,  and  small  at  the  bottome,  with  a  long
necke  and  correspondent  in  circuit  to  the  bottome,  the
belly  very  great  and  round,  it  holdeth  full  twelve
gallons,  and  hath  a  tap-hole  to  drawe  wine  out  thereat,
the  Jarre  is  very  auncient,  but  whether  it  be  one  of  them
or  no,  I  know  not.  The  aire  of  Famagusta  is  very
unwholesome,  as  they  say,  by  reason  of  certaine  marish
ground  adjoyning  unto  it.  They  have  also  a  certaine
yeerely  sicknesse  raigning  in  the  same  towne,  above  all
the  rest  of  the  Island  :  yet  neverthelesse,  they  have  it
in  other  townes,  but  not  so  much.  It  is  a  certaine
rednesse  and  paine  of  the  eyes,  the  which  if  it  bee  not
quickly  holpen,  it  taketh  away  their  sight,  so  that  yeerely
almost  in  that  towne,  they  have  about  twentie  that  lose
their  sight,  either  of  one  eye  or  both,  and  it  commeth
for  the  most  part  in  this  moneth  of  October,  and  the  last
moneth  :  for  I  have  met  divers  times  three  and  foure
at  once  in  companies,  both  men  and  women.  Their
living  is  better  cheape  in  Famagusta  then  in  any  other
pjace  of  the  Island,  because  there  may  no  kinde  of
provision  within  their  libertie  bee  solde  out  of  the  Citie.

The  second  of  October  we  returned  to  Arnacho,  where
wee  rested  untill the sixt day. This  towne  is  a  pretie

96

JOHN LOCKE  A.D.

1553-

Village, there are thereby toward the Sea side  divers  Great  ruines
monuments, that there hath bene great overthrow  of  "'  Cyprus.
buildings,  for  to  this day there is no yere when  they
finde  not,  digging under ground, either coines,  caves,
and sepulchres of  antiquities, as we walking, did see
many,  so  that  in  effect,  all  alongst  the  Sea  coast,  through-
out the  whole  Island,  there  is  much  ruine  and  overthrow
of  buildings  : for as  they say, it was  disinhabited sixe  Cyprus  36.
and  thirtie  yeres,  before  Saint  Helens  time  for  lacke  of  ^^^f^!  ^"^^~
water. And  since  that  time it  hath  bene  ruinated  and  lacke  of  water
overthrowen  by  Richard  the  first  of  that  name,  king  of  Cypr.  ruln-
England,  which he  did  in  revenge  of  his  sisters  ravish-  ^t^d  by  Rich.
ment  comming  to  Jerusalem,  the  which  inforcement  was  ^^^  ^•
done  to  her  by  the  king  of  Famagusta.

The  sixt  day  we  rid  to  Nicosia,  which  is  from  Arnacho  Nicosia.
seven  Cyprus miles,  which are  one  and  twentie  Italian
miles. This  is the ancientest  citie of  the Island,  and
is  walled about,  but  it  is not strong neither  of  walles
nor  situation  :  It  is  by  report  three  Cyprus  miles  about,
it is not throughly inhabited, but hath many great
gardens  in  it,  and  also  very  many  Date  trees,  and  plentie
of  Pomegranates  and  other  fruites. There  dwell  all  the
Gentilitie  of  the  Island,  and  there  hath  every  Cavallier  or
Conte  of  the Island an habitation. There is in this  A fountaine
citie one fountaine rented by saint Marke, which is  ^^^^ ^^^^^reth
bound  every  eight  dayes  once,  to  water  all  the  gardens  i^  ^^^  f^-^^-^
in  the  towne,  and  the  keeper  of  this  fountaine  hath  for
every  tree  a  Bizantin,  which  is  twelve  soldes  Venice,  and  A  Bizatitinis
six  pence  sterling. He  that  hath  that  to  farme,  with  a •  ^^^''^^"S-
faire  and  profitable  garden  thereto  belonging,  paieth  every
yeere  to  saint  Marke, fifteene hundred crownes. The
streetes  of  the  citie  are  not  paved,  which  maketh  it  with
the  quantitie  of  the  gardens,  to  seeme  but  a  rurall  habi-
tation. But  there  be  many  faire  buildings  in  the  Citie,
there  be  also Monasteries both of  Franks  & Greekes.
The  Cathedrall  church  is  called  Santa  Sophia,  in  the  which  %^°l^^^j ""
there  is an  old  tombe  of  Jaspis  stone,  all  of  one  piece,  church  'of
made  in  forme  of  a  cariage  coffer,  twelve  spannes  long,  Nicosia.

V  97  G

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

sixe  spannes  broad,  and  seven  spannes  high,  which  they
say  was  found  under  ground.  It  is  as  faire  a  stone  as
ever  I  have  seene.

The  seventh  day  we  rid  to  a  Greeke  Frierie  halfe  a
mile  without  the  towne.  It  is  a  very  pleasaunt  place,
and  the  Friers  feasted  us  according  to  their  abilitie.
These  Friers  are  such  as  have  bene  Priests,  and  their
wives  dying  they  must  become  Friers  of  this  place,  and
never  after  eate  flesh,  for  if  they  do,  they  are  deprived
from  saying  masse  :  neither,  after  they  have  taken  upon
them  this  order,  may  they  marry  againe,  but  they  may
keepe  a  single  woman.  These  Greekish  Friers  are  very
continent  and  chast,  and  surely  I  have  seldome  seen
(which  I  have  well  noted)  any  of  them  fat.

The  8.  day  we  returned  to  Arnacho,  and  rested  there.
The  9.  after  midnight  my  company  rid  to  the  hill  called

Monte  de  la Monte  de  la  Croce  (but  I not  disposed  would  not  go)

Croce.  which  hill  is  from  Arnacho  15.  Italian  miles. Upon  the

sayd  hill  is  a  certaine  crosse,  which  is,  they  say,  a  holy
Crosse.  This  Crosse  in  times  past  did  by  their  report
of  the  Island,  hang  in  the  ayre,  but  by  a  certaine  earth-
quake, the  crosse  and  the  chappell  it  hung  in,  were
overthrowen,  so  that  never  since  it  would  hang  againe
in  the  aire. But  it  is  now  covered  with  silver,  and  hath

[II.  i.  no.]  3.  drops  of  our  lordes  blood  on  it  (as  they  say)  and
there  is  in  the  midst  of  the  great  crosse,  a  little  crosse
made  of  the  crosse  of  Christ,  but  it  is  closed  in  the
silver,  you  must  (if  you  will)  beleeve  it  is  so,  for  see
it  you  cannot.  This  crosse  hangeth  nowe  by  both  endes
in  the  wall,  that  you  may  swing  it  up  and  downe,  in
token  that  it  did  once  hang  in  the  aire.  This  was  told
mee  by  my  fellow  pilgrimes,  for  I  sawe  it  not.

The  10.  at  night  we  went  aboord  by  warning  of  the
patron:  and  the  11.  in  the  morning  we  set  saile,  and
crept  along  the  shore,  but  at  night  we  ankered  by  reason
of  contrary  windes.

Litnisso,  The 12.  we  set saile  toward  Limisso,  which  is  from

Salines  50.  miles,  and  there  we  went  on  land  that  night.

98

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-
The 13. and 14.  we remained  still  on  land,  and  the

15.  the  patrone  sent  for  us  ;  but  by  reason  that  one  of

our  company  was  not  well,  we  went  not  presently,  but

we  were  forced  afterward  to  hire  a  boate,  and  to  overtake

the ship tenne miles into the sea. At this Limisso

all  the  Venetian  ships  lade  wine  for  their  provision,  and

some  for  to  sell,  and  also  vineger. They  lade  also  great

store  of  Carrobi  :  for  all  the  countrey  thereabout  adjoin-  Carrobl.

ing,  and  all  the mountaines are full of  Carrobi  trees,

they  lade  also  cotton  wooll there. In the  sayd towne

we  did  see  a  certaine  foule  of  the  land (whereof  there

are  many in this Island) named  in  the Italian tongue

Vulture. It is a fowle that is as big as a Swanne,  Vulture.

and it liveth upon carion. The skinne is full of

soft doune, like to a fine furre, which they use to

occupie  when  they  have evill  stomacks,  and it  maketh

good digestion. This bird (as they say) will  eate  as

much  at  one  meale  as  shall  serve  him  fortie  dayes  after,

and  within  the  compasse  of  that  time  careth  for  no  more

meate. The  countrey  people,  when  they  have  any  dead '

beast, they  cary  it  into  the  mountaines, or  where  they

suppose  the sayd Vultures to haunt, they seeing the

carion  doe  immediately  greedily  seaze  upon  it,  and  doe

so  ingraft  their talents, that they cannot speedily rise

agayne, by reason whereof  the people come and kill '

them  :  sometimes  they  kill  them  with  dogs,  and  somtimes

with  such weapons  as they have. This foule is very

great  and hardy, much like  an Eagle in the feathers

of  her  wings and backe, but under  her  great feathers

she  is onely doune, her necke also long  and full of

doune. She hath on the necke bone, betweene the

necke  and  the  shoulders,  a  heape  of  fethers  like  a  Tassell,

her  thighs  unto  her  knees  are  covered  with  doune,  her '

legs  strong  and  great,  and  dareth  with  her  talents  assault

a  man. They  have  also  in  this  Island  a  certaine  small Great  plenty

bird,  much  like  unto  a  Wagtaile  in  fethers  and  making,  °t'^.^^'^  -^^

these  are  so  extreme  fat  that you  can  perceive  nothing

els  in  all their  bodies : these  birds  are  now  in season.

99

A.D.
1553

The  Famagus-
tans  observe
the  French
statutes.

Caz'O  Bianco,

Another  Cmt,
A  ship  called
el  Bonn  a.

A  great  tem-
pest.

Candia,  Gozi.

Antonie  Gel-
ber  departeth
this  life.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

They  take  great  quantitie  of  them,  and  they  use  to  pickle
them  with  vineger  and  salt,  and  to  put  them  in  pots  and
send  them  to  Venice  and  other  places  of  Italy  for  presents
of  great  estimation.  They  say  they  send  almost  1200.
Jarres  or  pots  to  Venice,  besides  those  which  are  con-
sumed in  the  Island,  which  are  a  great  number.  These
are  so  plentifull  that  when  there  is  no  shipping,  you  may
buy  them  for  10.  Carchies,  which  coine  are  4.  to  a
Venetian  Soldo,  which  is  peny  farthing  the  dozen,  and
when  there  is  store  of  shipping,  2.  pence  the  dozen,  after
that  rate  of  their  money.  They  of  the  limites  of  Fama-
gusta  do  keep  the  statutes  of  ye  Frenchmen  which  some-
times did  rule  there.  And  the  people  of  Nicosia  observe
the  order  of  the  Genoueses,  who  sometimes  also  did  rule
them. All  this  day  we  lay  in  the  sea  with  little  wind.

The  16.  we  met  a  Venetian  ship,  and  they  willing  to
speake  with  us,  and  we  with  them,  made  towards  each
other,  but  by  reason  of  the  evil  stirrage  of  the  other
ship,  we  had  almost  boorded  each  other  to  our  great
danger.  Toward  night  we  ankered  under  Cavo  Bianco,
but  because  the  winde  grew  faire,  we  set  saile  againe
presently.

The  17.  18.  19.  and  20.  we  were  at  sea  with  calme
sommer  weather,  and  the  20.  we  had  some  raine,  and
saw  another  Cion  in  the  element.  This  day  also  we
sawe,  and  spake  with  a  Venetian  ship  called  el  Bonna,
bound  for  Ciprus.

The  21.  we  sailed  with  a  reasonable  gale,  and  saw  no
land  until  the  4.  of  November.  This  day  we  had  raine,
thunder,  lightening,  and  much  wind  and  stormie  weather,
but  God  be  praised  we  escaped  all  dangers.

The  4.  of  November,  we  had  first  sight  of  the  Island
of  Candia,  and  we  fell  with  the  Islands  called  Gozi,  by
South  of  Candia.  This  day  departed  this  present  life,,
one  of  our  company  named  Anthonie  Gelber  of  Prussia,
who  onely  tooke  his  surfet  of  Cyprus  wine.  This  night
we  determined  to  ride  a  trie,  because  the  wind  was  con-
trary, and  the  weather  troublesome.

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-

The  5.  we  had  very  rough  stormie  weather.  This
day  was  the  sayd  Anthonie  Gelber  sowed  in  a  Chavina
filled  with  stones  and  throwen  into  the  sea.  By  reason
of  the  freshnes  of  the  wind  we  would  have  made
toward  the  shore,  but  the  wind  put  us  to  the  sea,
where  we  endured  a  great  storme  and  a  troublesome
night.

The  6,  7.  and  8.  we  were  continually  at  the  sea,  &
this  day  at  noone  the  wind  came  faire,  whereby  we
recovered  the  way  which  we  had  lost,  and  sailed  out
of  sight  of  Candia.

The  9.  we  sailed  all  day  with  a  prosperous  wind  after  [II.  i.  m.]
14.  mile  anhoure:  and  the  10.  in  the  morning,  wee  had
sight  of  Cavo Matapan,  and  by noone of  Cavo Gallo, Cam  Mata-
in  Morea,  with  which  land  we  made  by  reason  of  contrary  ^J^^  ^^^^^
wind,  likewise  we  had  sight  of  Modon,  under  the  which  Modon.
place  we  ankered. This  Modon  is  a  strong  towne,  and
built  in  the  sea,  and  joineth on  the  North  side  to  the
land. It  hath  a  litle castle built  into the sea,  with a
peere  for  litle  ships  and  galleis  to  harbour  in. It  hath
on  the  South  side  of  the  chanell,  the  Island  of  Sapientia,  Sapientia.
with  other  litle  Islands  all  disinhabited. The  chanell  lieth
Southwest and Northeast betweene the Islands and
Morea, which is firme  land. This Modon  was built
by the Venetians, but as  some say it  was  taken  from
them  by  force  of  the  Turke,  and  others  say  by  composi-
tion :  in  like  case  Coron,  and  Napolis  de  Romania,  which  Coron.
is  also  in Morea. This  night  the Flemmish pilgrimes  ^"^^^^^^-J^
being  drunke  would  have  slaine  the  patrone  because  he
ankered  here.

The  T I .  day  we  set  saile  againe,  and  as  we  passed  by
Modon,  we  saluted  them  with  ordinance,  for  they  that
passe  by  this  place,  must  salute  with  ordinance,  (if  they
have)  or  els  by  striking  their  top  sailes,  for  if  they  doe
not,  the  towne  will  shoot  at  them.  This  day  toward
2.  of  the  clocke  wee  passed  by  the  Island  of  Prodeno,  Prodeno.
which  is  but  litle,  and  desert,  under  the  Turke.  About
2. houres  before night,  we  had  sight  of  the  Islands  of

A.D.

1553-

Tjcnte  and
Cephalotiia.

Castle  Tor-
neste  under
the  Turke.

Cava  S.
Maria  on  the
coast  of
Albania.
Corfu  Island.

The  descrip-
tion of  the
force  of  Corfu.

The  Island  of
Co}fu  is  very
plentifull.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Zante and Cephalonia, which are from Modon one
hundreth  miles.

The  12.  day  in  the  morning,  with  the  wind  at  West,
we  doubled  between  Castle  Torneste,  and  the  Island  of
Zante.  This  castle  is  on  the  firme  land  under  the  Turke.
This  night  we  ankred  afore  the  towne  of  Zante,  where
we  that  night  went  on  land,  and  rested  there  the  13.
14.  and  15.  at  night  we  were  warned  aboord  by  the
patrone.  This  night  the  ship  tooke  in  vitailes  and  other
necessaries.

The  16.  in  the  morning  we  set  saile  with  a  prosperous
wind,  and  the  17.  we  had  sight  of  Cavo  de  santa  Maria
in  Albania,  on  our  right  hand,  and  Corfu  on  the  left
hand.  This  night  we  ankered  before  the  castles  of
Corfu,  and  went  on  land  and  refreshed  our  selves.

The  18.  by  meanes  of  a  friend  we  were  licenced  to
enter  the  castle  or  fortresse  of  Corfu,  which  is  not  onely
of  situation  the  strongest  I  have  seene,  but  also  of
edification.  It  hath  for  the  Inner  warde  two  strong
castles  situated  on  the  top  of  two  high  cragges  of  a  rocke,
a  bowe  shoot  distant  the  one  from  the  other :  the  rocke
is  unassaultable,  for  the  second  warde  it  hath  strong
walles,  with  rampiers  and  trenches,  made  as  well  as  any
arte  can  devise.  For  the  third  warde  and  uttermost,  it
hath  very  strong  walles  with  rampires  of  the  rocke  it  selfe
cut  out  by  force,  and  trenched  about  with  the  Sea.  The
bulwarkes  of  the  uttermost  warde  are  not  yet  finished,
which  are  in  number  but  two:  there  are  continually  in
the  castle  seven  hundred  souldiours.  Also  it  hath  con-
tinually foure  wardes,  to  wit,  for  the  land  entrie  one,
for  the  sea  entrie  another,  and  two  other  wardes.
Artillerie  and  other  munition  of  defence  alwayes  readie
planted  it  hath  suflScient,  besides  the  store  remaining  in
their  storehouses.  The  Venetians  hold  this  for  the  key
of  all  their  dominions,  and  for  strength  it  may  be  no
lesse.  This  Island  is  very  fruitfull  and  plentifull  of  wine
and  corne  very  good,  and  olives  great  store.  This  Island
is parted from Albania with a chanell, in some  places

102

JOHN LOCKE  AD.

1553-

eight  and ten, and  in other but three miles. Albania

is  under  the  Turke,  but  in  it  are  many  Christians.  All
the  horsemen  of  Corfu  are  Albaneses ;  the  Island  is  not
above  80.  or  90.  miles  in  compasse.

The  19.  20.  and  21.  we  remained  in  the  towne  of
Corfu.

The  22.  day  wee  went  aboord  and  set  saile,  the  wind
being  very  calme  wee  toed  the  ship  all  that  day,  and
toward  Sunne  set,  the  castle  sent  a  Fragatta  unto  us,
to  give  us  warning  of  three  Foistes  comming  after  us,
for  whose  comming  wee  prepared  and  watched  all  night,
but  they  came  not.

The  23. day  in  the  morning  being  calme,  wee toed
out  of  the  Streight,  untill  wee  came  to  the  olde  towne,
whereof  there  is  nothing  standing  but  the  walles. There
is  also  a  new  Church  of  the  Greekes  called  Santa  Maria
di  Cassopo,  and  the  townes  name  is  called  Cassopo. It  Cassopo.
is  a  good  porte. About  noone  wee  passed  the  Streight,
and  drew  toward  the  ende  of  the  Island,  having  almost
no  wind. This  night  after  supper,  by  reason  of  a  certaine  A  dangerous
Hollander  that  was  drunke,  there  arose  in  the  ship  such  tumult  In  the
a  troublesome disturbance,  that  all the ship was  in  an  ^  ^^'
uprore with weapons, and had it not bene rather by
Gods helpe, and the wisedome and patience of the
patrone,  more  then  by  our  procurement,  there  had  bene
that  night  a  great  slaughter. But  as  God  would,  there
was no hurt, but onely the beginner was put under
hatches,  and  with  the  fall  hurt  his  face  very  sore. All
this night the wind blew at Southeast, and sent us
forward.

The  24.  in  the  morning  wee  found  our  selves  before
an  Island  called  Saseno,  which  is  in  the  entrie  to  Valona,  ^aseno.
and  the  wind  prosperous.  Valona.

The  25.  day  we  were  before  the  hils  of  Antiveri,  and
about sunne set  wee passed Ragusa,  and  three houres  [II.  i.  112.]
within  night  we  ankered  within  Meleda,  having  Sclavonia  Meleda.
or Dalmatia on the right  hand  of  us, and the  winde
Southwest.

103

A.D.

1553-

Curzola  a
fruitfulllland.

In  the  Hand
of  Le sin  a,  are
taken  store  of
Sardinas.

The  gulfe  of
Quernero.

Rovignio.

Parenzo.

S.  Nico/o  an
Hand.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  26  in  the  morning  we  set  sayle,  and  passed  the
channell  between  Sclavonia  and  Meleda,  which  may  be
eight  mile  over  at  the  most.  This  Hand  is  under  the
Raguses.  At  after  noone  with  a  hard  gale  at  west  and
by  north  we  entered  the  channell  betweene  the  Hand
Curzola  and  the  hilles  of  Dalmatia,  in  the  which  channell
be  many  rockes,  and  the  channell  not  past  3  miles  over,
and  we  ankered  before  the  towne  of  Curzola.  This  is
a  pretie  towne  walled  about  and  built  upon  the  sea  side,
having  on  the  toppe  of  a  round  hill  a  faire  Church.  This
Hand  is  under  the  Venetians,  there  grow  very  good  vines,
also  that  part  toward  Dalmatia  is  well  peopled  and  hus-
banded, especially  for  wines.  In  the  said  Hand  we  met
with  the  Venetian  armie,  to  wit,  tenne  gallies,  and  three
foystes. All  that  night  we  remained  there.

The  27  we  set  sayle  and  passed  along  the  Hand,  and
towards  afternoone  we  passed  in  before  the  Hand  of
Augusta,  and  about  sunne  set  before  the  towne  of  Lesina,
whereas  I  am  informed  by  the  Italians,  they  take  all
the  Sardinas  that  they  spend  in  Italy.  This  day  we  had
a  prosperous  winde  at  Southeast.  The  Hand  of  Lesina
is  under  the  Venetians,  a  very  fruitfuU  Hand  adjoyning
to  the  maine  of  Dalmatia,  we  left  it  on  our  right  hand,
and  passed  along.

The  28  in  the  morning  we  were  in  the  Gulfe  of
Quernero,  and  about  two  houres  after  noone  we  were
before  the  cape  of  Istria,  and  at  sunne  set  we  were  at
anker  afore  Rovignio  which  is  also  in  Istria  and  under
the  Venetians,  where  all  ships  Venetian  and  others  are
bound  by  order  from  Venice  to  take  in  their  Pilots  to
goe  for  Venice.  All  the  sommer  the  Pilots  lie  at  Rovig-
nio, and  in  winter  at  Parenzo,  which  is  from  Rovignio  1 8
miles  by  West.

The  29  we  set  sayle  and  went  as  farre  as  Parenzo,  and
ankered  there  that  day,  and  went  no  further.

The  30  in  the  morning  we  rowed  to  Sant  Nicolo  a
litle  Hand  hard  by  uninhabited,  but  only  it  hath  a
Monastery, & is full  of  Olive  trees, after masse wee

104

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1553-
returned  and  went  aboord.  This  day  the  patron  hired
a  Barke  to  imbarke  the  pilgrims  for  Venice,  but  they
departed  not.  In  the  afternoone  we  went  to  see  the
towne  of  Parenzo,  it  is  a  pretie  handsome  towne,  under
the  Venetians.  After  supper  wee  imbarked  our  selves
againe,  and  that  night  wee  sayled  towardes  Venice.

The  first  of  December  we  past  a  towne  of  the  Vene-  Caork  stand-
tians,  standing  on  the  entery  to  the  Palude  or  marshes  ^"S  ^^  ^^^
of  Venice  :  which  towne  is  called  Caorle,  and  by  contrary  „iarskes  of
windes  we  were  driven  thither  to  take  port. This  is  60  Venice.
miles  from  Parenzo,  and  forty  from  Venice,  there  we  re-
mayned  that  night.

The  second  two houres  before day,  with the  winde
at  Southeast,  we  sayled  towards  Venice,  where  we  arrived  Oar  arrlvall
(God  be  praysed)  at  two  of  the  clocke  after  dinner,  and  ^^  Venice
landed  about  foure,  we  were  kept  so  long  from  landing,
because  we durst not  land untill we  had  presented  to
the  Providor  de  la  Sanita,  our  letter  of  health.

The  manner  of  the  entring  of  Soliman  the  great
Turke,  with  his  armie  into  Aleppo  in  Syria,
marching  towards  Persia  against  the  Great
Sophie,  the  fourth  day  of  November,  1553,
noted  by  Master  Anthony  Jenkinson,  present
at  that  time.

Here  marched  before the Grand Signior,  other-
wise called the Great Turke, 6000 Esperes,
otherwise  called  light  horsemen  very  brave,  clothed
all  in  scarlet.

After,  marched  loooo  men,  called  Nortans,  which  be
tributaries  to  the  Great  Turke,  clothed  all  in  yellow
velvet,  and  hats  of  the  same,  of  the  Tartary  fashion,  two
foote  long,  with  a  great  role  of  the  same  colour  about
their  foreheads,  richly  decked,  with  their  bowes  in  their
hands,  of  the  Turkish  fashion.

After  them  marched  foure  Captaines,  men  of  armes,
called  in  Turkish  Saniaques,  clothed  all  foure  in  crimson

105

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

velvet,  every  one  having  under  his  banner  twelve
thousand  men  of  armes  well  armed  with  their  morrions
upon  their  heads,  marching  in  good  order,  with  a  short
weapon  by  their  sides,  called  in  their  language,  Simiterro.

After  came  16000  Janizaries,  called  the  slaves  of  the
Grand  Signior,  all  a  foote,  every  one  having  his  harque-
bush,  who  be  his  gard,  all  clothed  in  violet  silke,  and
apparelled  upon  their  heads  with  a  strange  forme,  called
Cuocullucia,  fashioned  in  this  sort  :  the  entering  in  of
the  forehead  is  like  a  skull  made  of  white  velvet,  &
hath  a  traine  hanging  downe  behind,  in  manner  of  a
French  hoode,  of  the  same  colour,  and  upon  the  forepart
of  the  said  skull,  just  in  the  middes  of  his  forehead
there  is  standing  bolt  upright  like  a  trunke  of  a  foote
[II.  i.  113.]  long  of  silver,  garnished  most  richly  with  Goldsmiths
worke,  and  precious  stones,  and  in  the  top  of  the  said
trunke  a  great  bush  of  fethers,  which  waveth  up  and
downe  most  bravely  when  he  marcheth.

After  this,  there  cam  1000.  pages  of  honour,  all  clothed
in  cloth  of  gold,  the  halfe  of  them  carying  harque-
bushes,  and  the  other  halfe  Turkish  bowes,  with  their
trusses  of  arrowes,  marching  in  good  order.

Then  came  three  men  of  armes  well  armed,  and  upon
their  harnesse  coates  of  the  Turkes  fashion,  of  Libard
skinnes,  and  murrions  upon  their  heads,  their  speares
charged,  and  at  the  end  of  their  staffe  hard  by  ye  head
of  the  speare,  a  horse  taile  died  in  a  bloody  colour,  which
is  their  ensigne  :  they  be  the  chalengers  for  the  Turkes
owne  person.

After  them  came  seven  pages  of  honour  in  cloth  of
silver,  upon  seven  white  horses,  which  horses  were
covered  with  cloth  of  silver,  all  embrodered  and  gar-
nished with  precious  stones,  emerauds,  diamonds,  and
rubies  most  richly.

After  them  also  came  sixe  more  pages  of  honour,
clothed  in  cloth  of  gold,  every  one  having  his  bowe  in
his  hand,  and  his  fawchine  of  the  Turkes  fashion  by  his
side.

106

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad

1553-

Immediately  after  them  came  the  great  Turke  himselfe
with  great  pompe  &  magnificence,  using  in  his  counten-
ance and  gesture  a  wonderfull  majestic,  having  onely  on
each  side  of  his  person  one  page  clothed  with  cloth  of
gold  :  he  himselfe  was  mounted  upon  a  goodly  white
horse,  adorned  with  a  robe  of  cloth  of  gold,  embrodered
most  richly  with  the  most  precious  stones,  and  upon
his  head  a  goodly  white  tucke,  containing  in  length  by
estimation  fifteene  yards,  which  was  of  silke  and  linnen
woven  together,  resembling  something  Callicut  cloth,  but
is  much  more  fine  and  rich,  and  in  the  top  of  his  crowne,
a  litle  pinnach  of  white  Ostrich  feathers,  and  his  horse
most  richly  apparelled  in  all  points  correspondent  to  the
same.

After  him  folowed  sixe  goodly  yong  ladies,  mounted
upon  fine  white  hackneis,  clothed  in  cloth  of  silver,
which  were  of  the  fashion  of  mens  garments,  embrodered
very  richly  with  pearle  and  precious  stones,  and  had  upon
their  heads  caps  of  Goldsmiths  worke,  having  great
flackets  of  haire,  hanging  out  on  each  side,  died  as  red
as  blood,  and  the  nailes  of  their  fingers  died  of  the  same
colour,  every  of  them  having  two  eunuches  on  each  side,
and  litle  bowes  in  their  hands,  after  an  Antike  fashion.

After  marched  ye  great  Basha  chiefe  conductor  of  the
whole  army,  clothed  with  a  robe  of  DoUymant  crimson,
and  upon  the  same  another  short  garment  very  rich,
and  about  him  fiftie  Janizaries  afoote,  of  his  owne  gard,
all  clothed  in  crimson  velvet,  being  armed  as  the  great
Turks  owne  Janizaries.

Then  after  ensued  three  other  Bashas,  with  slaves
about  them,  being  afoote,  to  the  number  of  three  thou-
sand men.

After  came  a  companie  of  horsemen  very  brave,  and
in  all  points  well  armed,  to  the  number  of  foure
thousand.

All  this  aforesayd  army,  most  pompous  to  behold,
which  was  in  number  foure  score  and  eight  thousand
men,  encamped  about  the  citie  of  Aleppo,  and  the  Grand

107

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

Signior  himselfe  was  lodged  within  the  towne,  in  a
goodly  castle,  situated  upon  a  high  mountaine  :  at  the
foote  whereof  runneth  a  goodly  river,  which  is  a  branch
of  that  famous  river  Euphrates.

The  rest  of  his  armie  passed  over  the  mountaines  of
Armenia  called  now  the  mountaines  of  Camarie,  which
are  foure  dayes  journey  from  Aleppo,  appointed  there  to
tary  the  comming  of  the  Grand  Signior,  with  the  rest
of  his  armie,  intending  to  march  into  Persia,  to  give
battel  to  the  great  Sophie.  So  the  whole  armie  of  the
Grand  Signior,  containing  as  well  those  that  went  by  the
mountaines,  as  also  those  that  came  to  Aleppo  in  com-
pany with  him,  with  horsemen  &  footemen,  and  the
conductors  of  the  camels  and  victuals,  were  the  number
of  300000.  men.

The  camels  which  caried  munition  and  vitailes  for  the
said  army,  were  in  number  200000.

A  note  of  the  presents  that  were  given  at  the
same  time  in  Aleppo,  to  the  grand  Signior,
and  the  names  of  the  presenters.

4rst  the Basha of  Aleppo, which is as a Viceroy,
presented 100.  garments  of  cloth  of  gold, and  25.
horses.

The  Basha  of  Damasco,  presented  100.  garments  of
cloth  of  gold,  and  twentie  horses,  with  divers  sorts  of
comfits,  in  great  quantitie.

The  Basha  of  Aman  presented  100.  garments  of  cloth
of  gold,  20.  horses,  and  a  cup  of  gold,  with  two  thousand
duckets.

The  Saniaque  of  Tripolis  presented  six  camels,  charged
all  with  silkes,  20.  horses,  and  a  little  clocke  of  gold,
garnished  with  precious  stones,  esteemed  worth  two
hundred  duckets.
[II.  i.  114.]  The  Consul  of  the  company  of  the  Venetians  in
Tripolis,  came  to  kisse  the  grand  Signiors  hand,  and
presented  him  a  great  basin  of  gold,  and  therein  4000.
duckets  Venetians.

108

F'

ANTHONY  JENKINSON'S SAFECONDUCT ad.

1553-

The  safeconduct  or  priviledge  given  by  Sultan
Solyman  the  great  Turke,  to  master  Anthony
Jenkinson at Aleppo in Syria, in the yeere

1553-

Ultan  Solyman,  &c.  to  all  Viceroyes,
Saniaques,  Cadies,  and  other  our  Justicers,
Officers,  and  subjects  of  Tripolis  in  Syria,
Constantinople,  Alexandria  in  JEgypt,  and
of  all  other  townes  and  cities  under  our
dominion  and  jurisdiction :  We  will  and
commaund  you,  that  when  you  shall  see
Anthony  Jenkinson,  bearer  of  these  present  letters,
merchant  of  London  in  England,  or  his  factor,  or  any
other  bearing  the  sayd  letter  for  him,  arrive  in  our  ports
and  havens,  with  his  ship  or  ships,  or  other  vessels
whatsoever,  that  you  suffer  him  to  lade  or  unlade  his
merchandise  wheresoever  it  shall  seeme  good  unto  him,
traffiking  for  himselfe  in  all  our  countreys  and  dominions,
without  hindering  or  any  way  disturbing  of  him,  his  ship,
his  people  or  merchandise,  and  without  enforcing  him  to
pay  any  other  custome  or  toll  whatsoever,  in  any  sort,
or  to  any  persons  whatsoever  they  be,  save  onely  our
ordinarie  duties  contained  in  our  custome  houses,  which
when  he  hath  paied,  we  will  that  he  be  franke  and  free,
as  well  for  himselfe  as  for  his  people,  merchandise,  ship
or  ships,  and  all  other  vessels  whatsoever :  and  in  so
doing  that  he  may  traffike,  bargaine,  sell  and  buy,  lade
and  unlade,  in  all  our  foresayd  Countreys,  lands  and
dominions,  in  like  sort,  and  with  the  like  liberties  and
priviledges,  as  the  Frenchmen  and  Venetians  use,  and
enjoy,  and  more  if  it  bee  possible,  without  the  hinderance
or  impeachment  of  any  man.  And  furthermore,  wee
charge  and  commaund  all  Viceroyes,  and  Consuls  of  the
French  nation,  and  of  the  Venetians,  and  all  other  Consuls
resident  in  our  Countreys,  in  what  port  or  province
soever  they  be,  not  to  constraine,  or  cause  to  constraine

109

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

by  them,  or  the  sayd  Ministers  and  Officers  whatsoever
they  be,  the  sayd  Anthony  Jenkinson,  or  his  factor,  or
his  servaunts,  or  deputies,  or  his  merchandise,  to  pay
any  kind  of  consullage,  or  other  right  whatsoever,  or  to
intermeddle  or  hinder  his  affaires,  and  not  to  molest  nor
trouble  him  any  maner  of  way,  because  our  will  and
pleasure  is,  that  he  shall  not  pay  in  all  our  Countreys,
any  other  then  our  ordinarie  custome.  And  in  case  any
man  hinder  and  impeach  him,  above,  and  besides  these
our  present  letters,  wee  charge  you  most  expresly  to
defend  and  assist  him  agaynst  the  sayd  Consuls,  and  if
they  will  not  obey  our  present  commandement,  that  you
advertise  us  thereof,  that  we  may  take  such  order  for  the
same,  that  others  may  take  example  thereby.  Moreover,
we  commaund  all  our  Captaines  of  our  Gallies,  and  their
Lieutenants,  be  they  Foistes  or  other  Vessels,  that  when
they  shall  finde  the  sayd  Jenkinson,  or  his  factor,  his
ship  or  ships,  with  his  servaunts  and  merchandise,  that
they  hurt  him  not  neither  in  body  nor  goods,  but  that
rather  they  assist  and  defend  him  agaynst  all  such  as
seeke  to  doe  him  wrong,  and  that  they  ayde  and  helpe
him  with  vitailes,  according  to  his  want,  and  that  whoso-
ever shall  see  these  presents,  obey  the  same,  as  they  will
avoyd  the  penaltie  in  doing  the  contrary.  Made  in
Aleppo  of  Syria,  the  yeere  961.  of  our  holy  prophet
Mahomet,  and  in  the  yeere  of  Jesus,  1553.  signed  with
the  scepter  and  signet  of  the  grand  Signior,  with  his  owne
proper  hand.

JASPER CAMPION  ad.

1569.

A  discourse  of  the  trade  to  Chio,  in  the  yeere
1569.  made  by  Caspar  Campion,  unto  master
Michael  Locke,  and  unto  master  WilHam
Winter,  as  by  his  letters  unto  them  both
shall  appeare. Written the 14. of  February.

Orshipfull  Sir,  &c.  As  these  dayes  past  1569.
I  spake  unto  you  about  the  procurement
of  a  safe  conduct  from  the  great  Turke,
for  a  trade  to  Chio :  The  way  and  maner
how  it  may  be  obtained  with  great  ease
shall  plainly  appeare  unto  you  in  the
lines  following.  Sir,  you  shall  under-
stand that  the  Island  of  Chio  in  time  past  hath  bene  a
Signiorie  or  lordship  of  it  selfe,  and  did  belong  unto  the
Genowaies.  There  were  24.  of  them  that  governed  the
island  which  were  called  Mauneses.  But  in  continuaunce
of  time  the  Turke  waxed  so  strong  and  mightie,  that
they,  considering  they  were  not  able  to  keepe  it,  unlesse
they  should  become  his  tributaries,  because  the  Island
had  no  corne,  nor  any  kind  of  vitailes  to  sustaine  them-
selves, but  onely  that  which  must  of  necessitie  come  out
of  the  Turkes  dominions,  and  the  sayd  island  being
inclosed  with  the  Turks  round  about,  and  but  12.  miles
from  the  Turks  Continent,  therefore  the  said  Genowaies
did  compound  and  agree  to  be  the  Turkes  tributaries,
and  to  pay  him  14000.  thousand  ducates  yeerely.
Alwayes  provided,  that  they  should  keep  their  lawes
both  spirituall  and  temporall,  as  they  did  when  the  Hand  [II.  i.  115.]
was  in  their  owne  hands.  Thus  he  granted  them  their
priviledge,  which  they  injoyed  for  many  yeeres,  so  that
all  strangers,  and  also  many  English  men  did  trade
thither  of  long  continuance,  and  went  and  came  in  safety.  The  Prince
In  this  meane  time,  the  prince  Pedro  Doria  (being  a  P^dro  Doric
Genouois)  became  a  captaine  to  serve  the  Emperour  with  ^^  captame  of
30  or  40  gallies  against  the  Turke.  And  since  that  time  ^underlhe
divers  other  captaines  belonging  to  Genoa  have  bene  in  Emperor.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569-

the  service  of  king  Philip  against  the  Turke.  Moreover,
whensoever  the  Turke  made  out  any  army,  he  perceived
that  no  nation  did  him  more  hurt  then  those  Genouois,
who  were  his  tributaries.  Likewise  at  the  Turkes  siege
of  Malta,  before  which  place  he  lay  a  great  while,  with
losse  of  his  men,  and  also  of  his  gallies,  he  found  none  so
Juanette  troublesome unto his force, as one Tuanette Doria a

ona.  Genouois,  and  divers  others  of  the  Hand  of  Chio,  who

were  his  tributaries. At  which  sight,  he  tooke  such  dis-
pleasure against  them  of  Chio, that  he  sent  certaine  of
his  gallies  to  the  Hand,  for  to  seise  upon  all  the  goods
TheMauneses  of  the  24  Mauneses,  and  to  turne  them  with  their  wives
11  °j  r  r-t and  children  out  of  the  Hand,  but  they  would  let  none

Hand  oj  Chto  i ti j 1 1  1  1  1 i

^y  thg  Turke.  Other  depart,  because  the  Jland  should  not  be  unpeopled.

So  that  now  the  Turke  hath  sent  one  of  his  chiefe  men

to  rule  there :  whereby  now  it  will  be  more  easie  for  us

to  obtaine  our  safeconduct  then  ever  it  was  before. For

if  the  townesmen  of  Chio  did  know  that  we  would  trade

thither  (as  we  did in  times past)  they  themselves,  and

also  the  customer  (for the  Turke in  all  his  dominions

doth  rent  his  customes)  would  be  the  chiefest  procurer

of  this  our  safeconduct  for  his  owne  gaine  :  which  is  no

The  custome small  matter : for  we  can  pay  no  lesse  then  ten  in  the

ihorowout  all hundred  thorowout  the Turks  whole dominion. Inso-

in^even ^^ rnuch, that if  one of  our  shippes  should  go  thither,  it

hundreth. would  be  for  the  customers  profit  4000  ducats  at  least,

whereas if  we  should not  trade  thither,  he  should  lose

so  much. Also  the  burgesses,  and  the  common  people

English  men would  be  very  glad of  our trade  there,  for the Com-

do  buy  more niunalty do get more by our countreymen then they

^CMothenam  ^^  ^7  ^^7  Other  nation  whatsoever: for  we  do use  to

other  nation, buy  many  of  their  silke  quilts,  and  of  their  Scamato  and

Dimite,  that  the  poore  people  make  in  that  towne,  more

then  any  other  nation,  so  that  we  would  not  so  gladly

trade, but  the people of  the countrey  would be twise

so willing. Wherefore they themselves would be a

meanes  unto  their  governour,  by  their  petition  to  bring

this  trade  to  passe : giving  him to  understand that of

JASPER CAMPION  ad.

1569.
all  nations  in  the  world  we  do  him  least  hurt,  and  that
we  may  do  his  countrey  great  good  in  consuming  those
commodities  which  his  countrey  people  make.  Further-
more, it  were  farre  more  requisite  that  we  should  cary
our  owne  commodities,  then  to  suffer  a  stranger  to  cary
them  thither,  for  that  we  can  affoord  them  better  cheape
then  a  stranger  can.  1  write  not  this  by  hearesay  of
other  men,  but  of  mine  own  experience,  for  I  have  traded
in  the  countrey  above  this  30  yeres,  and  have  bene
maried  in  the  towne  of  Chio  full  24  yeres,  so  that  you
may  assure  yourselfe  that  I  will  write  nothing  but  truth.
Now  I  will  declare  unto  you  the  wares  and  commodities
that  are  in  the  countreyes  neere  about  Chio.  There  are  Great  store  of
very gfood dalles, the best sort whereof are sold in  ^^ndp':om-

TtlOuttlBS to OB

England  five  shillings  deerer  then  any  other  countrey  ^^^  ^-^  qj^^^
galles.  There  is  also  cotten  wooU,  tanned  hides,  hides
in  the  haire,  waxe,  chamlets,  mocayares,  grogerams,  silke
of  divers  countreyes,  cordovan  skinnes  tanned  white,  to
be  made  blacke,  of  them  great  quantity,  and  also  course
wooll  to  make  beds.  The  naturall  commodities  growing
in  the  Hand  it  selfe  are  silke  rawe,  and  masticke.  Of
these  commodities  there  are  laden  yeerely  ten  or  twelve
great  ships  of  Genoa,  besides  five  or  sixe  that  do  belong
to  the  towne  of  Chio,  which  ships  are  fraughted  for
Genoa,  Messina,  and  Ancona.  And  now  that  the
Mauneses  and  the  chiefe  merchants  of  Genoa  are
banished,  the  trade  is  cleane  lost,  by  reason  whereof
merchandise  must  now  of  necessity  be  better  cheape  then
they  have  bene  in  times  past.  But  yet  when  all  those
ships  did  trade  to  the  countrey,  &  also  our  ships,  we
never  had  lesse  then  three  kintals  of  galles  for  a  carsie,
and  in  England  we  sold  them  for  2,S  ^'^'^  3^  shillings
the  hundred.  And  whereas  now  they  are  brought  by
the  Venetians,  they  sell  them  unto  us  for  three  pound
tenne  shillings,  and  foure  pound  the  hundred.  Also  we
had  three  kintals  of  cotten  wooll  for  a  carsie,  and  solde
the  wooll  in  England  for  50  shillings  or  3  pound  at
the  most,  whereas  now  the  Italians  sell  the  same  to  us
V  113  H

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

for  4  pound  10  shillings  and  5  pound  the  hundred.  In
like  maner  chamlets,  whereas  we  had  three  pieces,  and
of  the  best  sort  two  and  a  halfe  for  a  carsie,  and  could
not  sell  them  above  20  shillings  and  22  shillings  the  piece,
they  sell  them  for  30  and  1,5  shillings  the  piece.  Also
grogerams,  where  we  had  of  the  best,  two  pieces  and  a
halfe  for  a  carsie,  they  sell  them  for  foure  shillings  and
foure  shillings  and  sixe  pence  the  yard.  Carpets  the
smaller  sort  which  serve  for  cupboords,  we  had  three
for  a  carsie  :  whereas  we  at  the  most  could  not  sell  them
but  for  20  shillings  the  piece,  they  sell  them  for  35
shillings  the  piece.  And  so  all  other  commodities  that
the  Venetians  do  bring,  they  sell  them  to  us  for  the
third  part  more  gaines  then  we  our  selves  in  those  dayes
that  we  traded  in  those  parts.  Likewise  the  barrels  of
oile  that  they  bring  from  Candia,  we  never  could  sell
them  above  foure  nobles  the  barrell,  where  they  sell  them
alwayes  for  50  shillings  &  3  pound  the  barrell.  What
[II.  i.  116.]  great  pity  is  this,  that  we  should  lose  so  good  a  trade,
and  may  have  it  in  our  owne  hands,  and  be  better
welcome  to  that  countrey  then  the  Venetians.  More-
over, the  Venetians  come  very  little  to  Chio,  for  their
most  trade  is  into  Alexandria.  And  for  to  assure  you
that  we  had  these  commodities  in  barter  of  our  carsies,
looke  into  your  fathers  books,  and  the  books  of  Sir  John
Gresham,  and  his  brethren,  and  you  shall  finde  what  I
have  sayd  to  be  true.
Divers  places  Also  you  know,  that  we  are  forced  to  seeke  oiles  out
where  we  may  q£  Spaine,  and  that  for  these  many  yeeres  they  have  bene
oiles  for  our  solde  for  25  pound  and  30  pound  the  tunne  :  whereas,
clothing  farre  if  we  Can  obtaine  the  foresayd  safeconduct  from  the
cheaper  then  Turke,  there  are  divers  places  in  his  dominions,  where
out  of  spaine.  ^g  j^^^  j^^^  ^qq  tunnes,  at  5  pound  sterling  the  tunne.
The  places  are  Modon,  and  Coron,  which  are  but
twelve  miles  distant  the  one  from  the  other,  and  do
stand  in  our  way  to  Chio,  as  you  may  plainly  see  by
the  Card.  Also  these  are  places  where  we  may  utter
our  owne  commodities,  and  not  onely  these  two  places,

114

JASPER CAMPION

but  many  others,  where  we  may  have  oiles,  and  be  better
used  then  we  are  in  Spaine,  where  we  pay  very  deare,
and  also  are  very  evill  intreated  many  wayes,  as  to  you
is  not  unknowen.  So  that  by  these  meanes  (if  the
marchants  will)  we  may  be  eased,  and  have  such  a  trade
as  the  like  is  not  in  Christendome.  Now,  as  for  getting
the  safeconduct,  if  I  were  but  able  to  spend  one  hundred
pounds  by  the  yeere,  I  would  be  bound  to  lose  it,  if
that  I  did  not  obtaine  the  foresayd  safeconduct.  For
I  know  that  if  the  inhabitants  of  Chio  did  but  thinke
that  wee  would  trade  thither  againe,  they  at  their  owne
cost  would  procure  to  us  a  safeconduct,  without  any
peny  of  charges  to  the  marchants.  So  that  if  the  mar-
chants  will  but  beare  my  charges  to  solicit  the  cause,
I  will  undertake  it  my  selfe.  Wherefore  I  pray  you
speake  to  M.  Winter  and  the  other  marchants,  that  this
matter  may  take  effect.  And  let  me  have  your  answere
herein  assoone  as  conveniently  you  may,  for  that  the
time  of  the  yeere  draweth  nigh  that  this  businesse  must
be  done.  Thus  I  commit  you  to  God,  and  rest  alwayes
yours  to  command.

Yours  as  your  servant  Caspar  Campion.

To  the  v^orshipfull  M.  William  Winter.

T  may  please  your  worship  to  understand,
that  as  concerning  the  voyage  to  Chio,
what  great  profit  would  be  gotten,  both
for  marchants,  and  also  for  owners  of
shippes  (as  it  was  well  knowen  in  those
dayes  when  the  Matthew  Gonson,  the
Trinitie  Fitzwilliams,  and  the  Saviour  of
Bristow,  with  divers  other  ships  which  traded  thither
yerely,  and  made  their  voyage  in  ten  or  twelve  moneths,
and  the  longest  in  a  yeere)  M.  Francis  Lambert,  M.
John  Brooke,  and  M.  Drauer  can  truely  informe  you
heereof  at  large.  And  by  reason  that  wee  have  not
traded  into  those  parts  these  many  yeeres,  and  the  Turke
is  growen  mighty,  whereby  our  ships  doe  not trade  as

115

A.D.
1569.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

they  were  woont, I finde  that  the  Venetians  doe  bring
those  commodities  hither,  and  doe  sell  them  for  double
the  value  that  we  our  selves  were  accustomed  to  fetch
them. Wherefore,  as  I  am  informed  by  the  above  named
men,  that  there  is  none  so  fit  to  furnish  this  voyage  as
your  selfe  : my  request  is  that  there  may  be  a shippe
of convenient burthen prepared for this voyage, and
then  I will satisfie you at large what is to be done
therein. And  because  the  Turke,  as  I sayd before,  is
waxen  strong, and hath  put  out the Christian rulers,
and  placed  his owne  subjects, we may doubt whether
we  may  so  peaceably trade thither  as  we  were  woont  :
therefore  I dare undertake to  obtaine  a  safeconduct,  if
my  charges  may be  borne to  goe and come. Of  the
way  how  this may  be  done,  M. Locke  can  satisfie  you
at large. Moreover, I can informe  you more of  the
trade  of  that  countrey,  then  any other,  for  that  I  have
bene  in  those  parts  these  thirty  yeeres, and have  bene
Caspar  Cam-  married  in  the  very  towne  of  Chio  full  foure  and  twenty
pion  married yeres. Furthermore,  when  one  of  our ships commeth
^\eres°  ^^ thither,  they  bring  at  the  least  sixe or eight thousand
carsies,  so  that the  custome  thereof  is  profitable  for  the
prince, and the returne of  them is profitable to the
common  people  : for  in  barter  of  our wares,  we  tooke
the  commodities  which  the  poore  of  that  towne  made  in
their  houses  :  so that one of  our shippes  brought  the
prince  and  countrey  more  gaines  then  sixe  ships  of  other
nations. The want  of  this our trade thither  was  the
onely  cause  why  the  Christian  rulers  were  displaced  :  for
when  they  payd  not  their  yerely  tribute,  they  were  put
out  by force. Touching the ship that must go, she
must  observe  this  order,  she  must  be  a  ship  of  counten-
ance, and she must not touch in any  part  of  Spaine,
for  the times are dangerous, nor take in any lading
there  :  but  she  must lade in  England,  either  goods  of
our owne, or  els of  strangers, and go to Genoa or
Legorno, where we may be wel intreated, and from
thence  she  must  make  her  money  to  buy  wines,  by  ex-

116

JASPER CAMPION  a.d.

1569.
change  to  Candia,  for  there both  custome  & exchange
are  reasonable  : and not do as the Math. Gonson  &
other ships did  in time past, who made sale  of  their  [II.  i.  117.]
wares  at  Messina  for  the  lading  of  their  wines,  and  payed
for  turning  their white money into golde after foure
and  five  in  the  hundreth,  and  also  did  hazzard  the  losse
of shippe and goods by carying away their money.
Thus  by  the  aforesayd course we shall trade quietly,
and  not  be  subject  to  these  dangers. Also  from  Legorno  ^^"^'^  "f  ^""P^
to  Castilla  de  la  mar,  which  is  but  16  miles  from  Naples, ^  j'" ^^  ^^s-
and  the  ready way to Landia, you may  lade noopes,  mare  for
which  will  cost carolins of  Naples 27 and  a  halfe  the  Candia.
thousand, which  is  ducats two  and a halfe  of  Spaine.
And  in  Candia  for every  thousand  of  hoops you  shall
have  a  but  of  Malmesey cleare of  all charges. Inso-
much that  a  ship  of  the  burden  of  the  Mathew  Gonson
will  cary  foure hundreth thousand hoops,  so that  one
thousand  ducats  will  lade  her,  and  this  is  an  usual  trade
to  Candia,  as  M.  Michael  Locke  can  testifie. Further-
more, it  is  not  unknowen  to  you,  that  the  oiles  which
we  do  spend  in  England  for  our  cloth,  are  brought  out
of  Spaine,  and  that  very  deare,  and  in  England  we  can-
not sell  them  under  28  pound  and  30  pound  the  tunne  :
I say we may have good oile, and better cheape in
divers places within the streights. Wherefore if  you
thinke  good  to  take  this  voyage  in  hand,  I  will  informe
you  more  particularly  when  you  please. In  the  meane
time  I  rest  your  worships  to  command.

Yours  at  your  pleasure  Jasper  Campion.

[The  true
117

A.D.
1571.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  true  report  of  the  siege  and  taking  of  Fama-
gusta,  of  the  antique  writers  called  Tamassus,
a  city  in  Cyprus  1571.  In  the  which  the
whole  order  of  all  the  skirmishes,  batteries,
mines,  and  assaults  given  to  the  sayd  fortresse,
may  plainly  appeare.  Englished  out  of  Italian
by  William  Malim.

To  the  right  honourable  and  his  singular  good
Lord,  and  onely  Patron  the  Earle  of  Leicester,
Baron  of  Denbigh,  Knight  of  the  honourable
order  of  the  Garter,  one  of  the  Queenes
Majesties  most  honourable  privy  Councell  &c.
William  Malim  wisheth  long  health  with  in-
crease of  honour.

T  hath  bene  a  naturall  instinct  (right
honourable  and  mine  especiall  good
lord)  ingraffed  in  noble  personages
hearts,  much  approved  and  confirmed
also  by  custome,  for  them  to  seeke  from
time  to  time,  by  some  meanes  in  their
life,  by  the  which  they  after  their  death
might  deliver  over  their  name  to  their  posteritie  :  least
otherwise  with  their  body,  their  fame  also  altogether
might  perchance  be  buried.  Upon  the  which  considera-
tion we  reade  many  notable  and  famous  things  to  have
bene  erected  in  time  past  of  noble  personages  (having
had  wealth  at  will)  in  such  sort,  that  not  onely  certaine
ruines  of  the  same  sumptuous  works  builded  so  many
hundred  yeres  past,  do  still  remaine,  but  also  the  most
part  of  those  princes,  the  authours  of  them,  do  continually
by  them  dwell  in  our  memories.  As  the  Pyramides  made
at  Memphis,  or  neere  the  famous  river  of  Nilus,  by  the
great  expenses  of  the  kings  of  Egypt :  the  tower  called
Pharia,  made  in  the  Hand  of  Pharos  by  king  Ptolomee :
the  walles  of  Babylon,  made  or  at  the  least  reedified  by

118

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  ad.

queene  Semiramis :  Dianas  church  at  Ephesus  builded  by
all  the  noble  persons  of  Asia :  Mausolus  toome  or
sepulchre,  made  by  his  wife  queene  of  Caria :  Colossus
Solis  placed  at  Rhodes,  I  remember  not  by  what  Princes
charge,  but  made  by  the  hands  of  Cares  Lindius  scholar
to  Lysippus :  and  the  image  of  Jupiter,  made  of  Yvory
by  the  hands  of  the  skilfull  workman  Phydias.  The
which  monuments  made  of  barbarous  and  heathen  Princes
to  redeeme  themselves  from  oblivion  deserved  both  for
the  magnificence,  and  perfect  workmanship  of  the  same,
to  be  accounted  in  those  dayes  as  the  seven  woonders  of
the  world.  Since  the  which  time,  an  easier,  readier,  and
lighter  way,  being  also  of  more  continuance  then  the
former,  hath  bene  found  out,  namely,  Letters,  which  were
first  invented  by  the  Caldies  and  Egyptians,  as  we  reade,
and  augmented  since  by  others,  to  our  great  benefit,  and
now  last  of  all  (no  long  time  past)  the  same  to  have  bene
committed  to  Printers  presses,  to  the  greatest  perfection
of  the  same :  men  being  first  inforced  to  write  their  actes
and  monuments  in  beasts  skinnes  dried,  in  barkes  of
trees,  or  otherwise  perchance  as  unreadily.  By  the  which
benefit  of  letters  (now  reduced  into  print)  we  see  how
easie  a  thing  it  is,  and  hath  bene  for  noble  persons,  to
live  for  ever  by  the  helpe  of  learned  men.  For  the
memory  of  those  two  woorthy  and  valiant  captaines
Scipio  and  Hannibal  had  bene  long  before  this  present  [ILL  118.]
quite  forgotten,  except  Titus  Livius,  or  some  such  learned
Historiographer  had  written  of  them  in  time.  And
Alexander  Magnus  himselfe  that  great  conquerour  had
nothing  beene  spoken  of,  had  not  Q.  Curtius,  or  some
other  like  by  his  learned  stile  revived  the  remembrance
of  him,  and  called  backe  againe  his  doings  to  his  pos-
teritie.  For  the  which  cause  we  see  commonly  in  all
ages  learned  men  to  be  much  made  of  by  noble  person-
ages, as  that  rare  paterne  of  learning  Aristotle  to  have
bene  greatly  honoured  of  that  former  renowmed  Monarch
Alexander :  who  affirmed  openly,  that  he  was  more  bound
to  his  Master  Aristotle,  then  to king  Philip  his  father,

119

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

because  the  one  had  well  framed  his  minde,  the  other
onely  his  body.  Many  other  like  examples  I  could
alledge  at  this  present,  if  I  knew  not  unto  whom  I  now
wrote,  or  in  what :  for  your  honour  being  skilfuU  in
histories,  and  so  familiarly  acquainted  with  the  matter
it  selfe,  that  is  in  still  entertaining  learned  men  with  all
curtesie,  I  should  seeme  to  light  a  candle  at  noone  tide,
to  put  you  in  remembrance  of  the  one,  or  to  exhort  you
to  doe  the  other,  dayly  being  accustomed  to  performe
the  same.  Crassus  sayth  in  Tullies  first  booke,  De
Oratore :  that  a  Lawyers  house  is  the  oracle  of  the  whole
citie.  But  I  can  justly  witnesse,  that  for  these  five  yeeres
last  past,  since  my  returne  from  my  travell  beyond  the
seas,  that  your  lodging  in  the  Court  (where  I  through
your  undeserved  goodnesse  to  my  great  comfort  do  dayly
frequent)  hath  bene  a  continuall  receptacle  or  harbour
for  all  learned  men  comming  from  both  the  eyes  of  the
realme,  Cambridge,  and  Oxford  (of  the  which  University
your  lordship  is  Chanceller)  to  their  great  satisfaction  of
minde,  and  ready  dispatch  of  their  sutes.  Especially  for
Preachers  and  Ministers  of  true  religion  :  of  the  which
you  have  beene  from  time  to  time  not  onely  a  great
favourer,  but  an  earnest  furtherer,  and  protectour :  so
that  these  two  nurseries  of  learning  (in  one  of  the  which
I  have  before  this  spent  part  of  my  time,  that  I  may
speake  boldly  what  I  thinke)  should  wrong  your  honour
greatly,  and  much  forget  themselves,  if  by  all  meanes
possible  they  should  not  heerafter  (as  at  this  present  to
their  smal  powers  many  well  learned  gentlemen  of  them
do)  labour  and  travell  in  shewing  of  themselves  thanke-
full,  to  reverence  and  honour  your  lordship,  and  honest
their  owne  names  :  whose  studies  certeinly  would  suddenly
decay  and  fall  flat,  if  they  were  not  held  up  by  such
noble  proppes,  and  had  not  some  sure  ankerholds  in  their
distresse  to  leane  unto.  How  ready  dayly  your  travell
is,  and  hath  long  beene  besides  to  benefit  all  other
persons,  in  whom  any  sparke  of  vertue  or  honesty  re-
maineth, I need not labour to expresse, the world

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  a.d.

1571.
knowing  already  the  same.  But  whosoever  they  be,  that
in  all  their  life  time  have  an  especiall  care  by  all  meanes
to  profit  as  many  as  they  be  able,  and  hurt  none,  do  not
onely  a  laudable  act,  but  leade  a  perfect  and  very  godly
life.  Whereupon  Strabo  affirmeth  this  most  truely  to
be  spoken  of  them  :  Mortales  tum  demum  Deum  imitari,
cum  benefici  fuerint.  That  is,  Mortall  men  then  specially
to  follow  the  nature  of  God,  when  they  are  beneficiall
and  bountifull  to  others.  Great  commendation  un-
doubtedly it  bringeth  to  any  noble  personage,  that  as
the  Moone,  that  light  and  brightnesse  which  she  receiveth
of  the  Sun,  is  wont  presently  to  spread  abroad  upon  the
face  of  the  earth,  to  the  refreshing  and  comforting  of  all
inferiour  and  naturall  things  bearing  life  :  so  for  him,
to  bestow  all  that  favour  and  credit,  which  he  hath  gotten
at  the  princes  handes,  to  the  helpe  and  reliefe  of  the
woorthy  and  needy.  Great  is  the  force  (my  right
honourable  lord)  of  true  vertue,  which  causeth  men,  as
TuUy  writeth  in  his  booke  De  Amicitia,  to  be  loved  &
honored  oft  of  those  persons,  which  never  saw  them.
Whereof  I  never  had  better  proofe  (I  take  God  &  mine
one  conscience  to  witnesse,  the  which  I  declared  also  to
certaine  of  my  friends  assoone  as  I  returned)  then  at
my  last  being  at  Constantinople,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  Master
1564,  whereas  I  oft  resorting  (as  occasion  served)  to  the  Mahm  at

• 1,1  11 /^i • ,•  1  J  1  -1 T  J  Constantinople

right  honorable  Christian  ambassadors,  while  1  made  my j-^ ^

abode  there  (namely  unto  Monsieur  Antonio  Petrimol,

lieger  there  for  the  French  king,  Sig.  M.  Victor  Braga-

dino,  for  the  segniory  of  Venice,  Sig.  Lorenzo  Giustiniano,

for  the  state  of  Scio,  or  Chios,  and  Sig.  Albertacio  delli

Alberti, for the duke of  Florence) heard them often

report  and  speake  very  honorably  of  your  lordship,  partly

for  your  other  good  inclinations  of  nature,  but  especially

for  your  liberality, &  courteous  intreating  of  divers  of

their  friends  &  countrymen,  which  upon  sundry  occasions

had  bene  here  in  this  our  realme. So  that  to  conclude,

all men  justly favour your honourable dealings and

deserts :  and  1  for  my  part  have  reverenced  and  honoured

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

the  same  evermore  both  here  at  home,  and  elswhere
abroad,  wishing  often  to  have  had  some  just  occasion  to
pay  part  of  that  in  good  will,  which  my  slender  abilitie
will  never  suffer  me  fully  to  discharge.  For  unto  whom
should  I  sooner  present  any  thing  any  way,  especially
concerning  matters  done  abroad,  then  unto  your  lordship,
by  whom  I  was  much  cherished  abroad  in  my  travell,
and  mainteined  since  my  returne  here  at  home  ?  For
the  which  cause  1  have  enterprised  (hoping  greatly  of
your  lordships  favour  herein)  to  clothe  and  set  forth  a
few  Italian  newes  in  our  English  attire,  being  first  mooved

[II.  i.  119.]  thereunto  by  the  right  worshipfull  M.  D.  Wilson  Master
of  her  Majesties  Requests,  your  honours  assured  trusty
friend,  a  great  &  painfull  furtherer  of  learning,  whom  I,
and  many  other  for  divers  respects  ought  to  reverence :
who  remembring  that  I  had  bene  at  Cyprus,  was  willing
that  my  pen  should  travell  about  the  Christian  and
Turkish  affaires,  which  there  lately  have  happened :  per-
swading  himselfe,  that  somewhat  thereby  I  might  benefit
this  our  native  countrey.  Against  whose  reasonable
motion  I  could  not  greatly  wrestle,  hazzarding  rather  my
slender  skill  in  attempting  and  performing  this  his  re-
quested taske,  then  he  through  my  refusall  should  seeme
to  want  any  jot  of  my  good  will.  In  offering  up  the
which  newes,  although  I  shall  present  no  new  thing  to
your  honour,  because  you  are  so  well  acquainted  with
the  Italian  copy,  as  I  know :  yet  I  trust  your  lordship
will  not  mislike,  that  the  same  which  is  both  pleasant
to  reade,  and  so  necessary  to  be  knowen  for  divers  of  our
captaines  and  other  our  countreymen,  which  are  ignorant
in  the  Italian  tongue,  may  thus  now  shew  it  selfe  abroad,
covered  under  the  wing  of  your  lordships  protection.
Certeinly  it  mooveth  me  much  to  remember  the  losse
of  those  three  notable  Hands,  to  the  great  discomfort  of
all Christendome, to  those  hellish  Turkes, horseleeches

Rhodes  lost.  of  Christian  blood  :  namely  Rhodes  besieged  on  S.  John
Baptists day, and taken on Johns day  the Evangelist,

Scio  kst.  being  the  27  of  December 1522. Scio  or  Chios  being

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  ad.

1571-
lost  since  my  being  there,  taken  of  Piali  Basha  with  80
gallies,  the  17  of  April 1566. And  now  last  of  all  not
only  Famagusta  the  chiefe  holde  &  fortresse  in  Cyprus  Cyprus  lost.
to  have  bene  lost  of  the Venetians the 15 of  August
last  past  1 5  7 1  (the  chiefe  governors  &  captaines  of  them
being  hewen in  sunder  by  the commandement  of  that
tyrant Mustafa  Basha) but  all the  whole  Hand  also to
be  conquered by  those  cruell  Turks,  ancient professed
enemies to all Christian religion. In the which evill
successe  (comming  to us  as  I  take  it  for  our  oiFences)
as  I  lament  the  generall  losse : so  I  am  surely  pensive
to  understand  by  this  too  true  a  report  of  the  vile  death
of  two  particular noble  gentlemen of  Venice,  Sig. M.
Lorenzo  Tiepolo,  and  Sig.  M.  Giovanni  Antonio  Querini :
of  both  the  which  I  in  my  travaile  was  very  courteously
used, the former  of  them  being  then  (as  now  also he
was in this  overthrow) governour  of  Baffo  in  Cyprus,
the other  captaine  of  one  of  the  castels  at Corcyra in
Greece, now called Corfu. But things past are past
amendment,  and  they  could  never  die  more  honourably,
then  in  the  defence  of  their  countrey. Besides  that  the
late blowes,  which the Turks  have received since this
their fury, in token of  Gods  wrath  against them, do
much comfort every Christian heart. Moreover this
uniforme preparation  which  is  certainly  concluded, and
forthwith looked for, by  very many Christian Princes
(would God by all generally) against these barbarous
Mahometists : whose cruelty and beastly behaviour I
partly  know,  and  am  able  to  judge  of,  having  bene  in
Turky  amongst  them  more  then  eight  moneths  together.
Whose  unfaithfulnesse  also  and  breach  of  promise,  as  the
Venetians  manly  courage  in  defence  of  themselves,  and
their fortresse, your honour may easily  reade in this
short  treatise  and  small  handfull  of  leaves,  I  having  set
downe  also  a  short  description  of  the  Hand  of  Cyprus,
for  the  better  understanding  of  the  whole  matter. The
which I not  onely  most  humbly  beseech your honour
now  favourably  to  accept  as  an  earnest  peny  of  more  to

123

A.D.

1571.

[II.  i.  120.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

come,  and  of  my  present  good  will :  but  with  your
accustomed  goodnesse  towards  me,  to  defend  the  same
against  such  persons,  whose  tongues  too  readily  roule
sometime  against  other  mens  painfull  travels,  perswading
themselves  to  purchase  the  sooner  some  credit  of  learning
with  the  ruder  sort,  by  controlling  and  overdaintie  sifting
of  other  mens  laboured  tasks.  For  I  know  in  all  ages
to  be  found  as  well  Basilisks  as  Elephants.  Thus  nothing
doubting  of  your  ready  ayd  heerein,  as  I  assuredly  trust
of  your  honours  favourable  acceptation  of  this  my  poore
present,  wishing  long  life  with  the  increase  of  Gods  holy
spirit  to  your  lordship  and  to  all  your  most  honourable
familie  (unto  whom  I  have  wholly  dedicated  my  selfe  by
mine  owne  choise  and  election  for  ever)  I,  craving  pardon
for  my  former  boldnesse,  most  humbly  thus  take  my
leave.  From  Lambhith  the  23  of  March.  Ann.  1572.
Your  honours  most  humble  and  faithfull
servant  for  ever,  William  Malim.

A  briefe  description  of  the  Hand  of  Cyprus  :  by
the  which  not  onely  the  Venetians  title  why
they  have  so  long  enjoyed  it,  but  also  the  Turks,
whereby  now  he  claimeth  it,  may  plainly
appeare.

He  Hand  of  Cyprus  is  invironed  with  divers  seas  :
for  Westward  it  is  washed  with  the  sea  called
Pamphilium  :  Southward,  with  the  sea  ^gyptium  :

on  the  East  part,  with  the  sea  Syrium  :  and  Northward,
with  the  sea  called  Cilicium.  The  which  Hand  in  time
past  had  divers  names  :  called  once  Acamantis,  as  Sabel-
licus  witnesseth.  Philonides  maketh  mention,  that  it
was  called  sometime  Cerasis.  Xenogoras  writeth,  that
it  was  named  Aspelia,  Amathusa,  &  Macaria.  There
were  in  times  past  fifteene  cities  or  famous  townes  in
it, :  but  now  very  few,  amongst  the  which  Famagusta  is
the  chiefest  &  strongest,  situated  by  the  sea  side.
There  is  also Nicosia,  which  was  woont,  by  the  traffike

124

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  ad.

1571.

of  Marchants,  to  be  very  wealthy  :  besides  the  city  of
Baffo,  Arnica,  Saline,  Limisso,  Melipotamo,  &c  Episcopia.
Timosthenes  affirmeth,  that  this  Hand  is  in  compasse  429
miles  :  and  Arthemidorus  writeth  the  length  of  the  same
to  be  162  miles,  measuring  of  it  from  the  East  to  the
West,  betwixt  two  promontories  named  Dinaretta  and
Acamanta.  This  Hand  is  thought  to  be  very  rich,
abundant  of  Wine,  Oile,  Graine,  Pitch,  Rozin,  Allum,
Salt,  and  of  divers  precious  stones,  pleasant,  profitable,
and  necessary  for  mans  use,  and  much  frequented  of
Marchants  of  Syria,  unto  the  which  it  lieth  very  nere.
It  hath  bene,  as  Plinie  writeth,  joyned  sometime  with
Syria,  as  Sicilia  hath  beene  also  with  Italy.  It  was  a
long  time  subject  unto  the  Romans,  after  to  the  Per-
sians, and  to  the  Soldan  of  JEgypt.  The  selfesame
Hand  was  sometime  also  English,  being  conquered  by
king  Richard  the  first,  in  his  voyage  to  Hierusalem  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1192.  Who  (as  Polydore  writeth
in  his  fourteenth  booke  of  our  English  historie)  being
prohibited  by  the  Cypriottes  from  arrivall  there,  invaded
and  conquered  the  same  soone  after  by  force  :  and
having  left  behinde  him  sufficient  garrisons  to  keepe  the
same,  departed  from  thence  to  Ptolemayda  :  who  after-
ward exchanged  the  same  with  Guy  of  Lusignan,  that
was  the  last  christened  king  of  Hierusalem,  for  the  same
kingdome.  For  the  which  cause  the  kings  of  England
were  long  time  after  called  kings  of  Hierusalem.  And
last  of  all,  the  Venetians  have  enjoyed  it  of  late  a  long
time,  in  this  order  following.  In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
1470,  John  king  of  the  sayd  Hand,  sonne  to  Janus  of
Lusignan,  had  by  Helen  his  wife,  which  was  of  the
Emperiall  house  of  Paleologus,  one  daughter  only  called
Charlotta,  and  a  bastard  called  James  :  the  which  James
was  afterward  consecrated  Bishop  of  Nicosia.  This
Charlotta  was  married  first  to  the  king  of  Portingall,
of  whom  he  had  no  issue,  so  that  he  being  dead,  Lewes
Duke  of  Savoy  (to  whom  shee  was  the  second  time
married)  sonne  to  Lewes  the  second  of  that  name  (unto

125

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571-

whom  the  said  Hand  by  the  right  of  this  his  wife
Charlotta  did  appertaine)  had  the  possession  of  the  same.
James  the  bastard  assoone  as  his  father  was  dead,  of  a
Bishop  became  a  souldiour,  and  with  an  army  wanne  the
Hand,  making  it  his  owne  by  force.  This  Duke  of
Savoy  hearing  these  newes,  with  a  number  of  well
appointed  souldiers,  arrived  shortly  after  in  Cyprus,  and
recovering  againe  the  Hand,  compelled  the  bastard  to  flie
foorthwith  over  to  the  Soldan  of  TEgypt.  Who  making
himselfe  his  subject,  in  time  so  wrought  and  tempered
the  matter,  that  the  Soldan  in  person  at  his  request
passed  over  into  Cyprus,  besieged  Duke  Lewes  in  the
castle  of  Nicosia,  and  at  length  compelled  him  to  depart,
leaving  his  kingdome.  So  that  this  Bishop  became
againe  King  of  this  Hand  :  who  shortly  after  cleaving
to  the  Venetians  having  made  a  league  of  friendship
with  them,  married  by  their  consent  one  Catherina  the
daughter  of  Marco  Cornaro,  which  Catherin  the  Senate
of  Venice  adopted  unto  them  soone  after  as  their  daugh-
ter. This  Bishop  not  long  after  sickened,  and  died,
leaving  this  his  wife  with  child,  who  lived  not  long
after  his  fathers  death.  By  the  which  meanes  the  Vene-
tians making  themselves  the  next  heires  to  Catherina
by  the  law  of  adoption,  tooke  unto  them  the  possession
of  this  kingdome,  and  have  kept  and  enjoyed  the  same
almost  this  hundred  yeeres.  Now  this  great  Turke
called  Sultan  Selim  in  the  right  of  the  Soldan  of  iEgypt,
whom  his  grandfather  (called  also  Sultan  Selim)  con-
quered, pretendeth  a  right  title  unto  it,  and  now,  as
you  may  understand  by  reading  of  this  short  Treatise,
hath  by  conquest  obtained  the  same.  Whom  I  pray
the  everliving  God,  if  it  be  his  holy  will,  shortly  to
root  out  from  thence.

126

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA

A.D.
1571.

To  the Reader.

Am  not  ignorant  (gentle  Reader)  how
hard  a  matter  it  is  for  any  one  man  to
write  that,  which  should  please  and
satisfie  all  persons,  we  being  commonly
of  so  divers  opinions  and  contrary  judge-
ments :  againe  Tully  affirmeth  it  to  be
a  very  difficult  thing,  to  finde  out  any
matter  which  in  his  owne  kinde  may  be  in  all  respects
perfect.  Wherefore  I  trust  by  your  owne  judgement  I
ought  of  reason  to  be  the  sooner  pardoned  (my  trans-
lation being  precisely  tied  to  mine  authours  meaning)
if  any  thing  heerein  besides  be  thought  to  be  wanting  :
I  have  learned  by  the  way  how  comberous  a  thing  it
is  to  turne  the  selfesame  matter  out  of  the  Italian
language  into  our  countrey  speech.  But  who  so  doeth
what  he  possibly  can  is  bound  to  no  more.  And  I
now  at  the  request  of  others  (who  put  me  in  minde,
that  I  was  not  onely  borne  unto  my  selfe)  have  accom-
plished that  in  the  ende,  which  I  promised  and  was
required.  With  what  paine  and  diligence,  I  referre  me  [II,  i.  121,]
to  them  which  are  skilfull  in  the  Italian  tongue,  or
may  the  better  judge,  if  it  please  them  to  trie  the  same,
casting  aside  this  exampler.  I  speake  it  not  arrogantly,
I  take  God  to  witnesse  :  but  mens  painefull  travels
ought  not  lightly  to  be  condemned  :  nor  surely  at  any
time  are  woont  to  be  of  the  learned,  or  discreet.  By
whose  gentle  acceptation  if  these  my  present  doings  be
now  supported,  I  will  perswade  my  selfe  that  I  have
reaped  sufficient  fruit  of  my  travell.  Unto  whome  with
all  my  heart  I  wish  prosperous  successe  in  all  their
affaires.

Ann.  Dom. 1572. W.  M.

[In  Turchas

127

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

In  Turchas  precatio.

Umme  Deus,  succurre  tuis,  miseresce  tuorum,

Et  subeat  gentis  te  nova  cura  tuae.
Quern  das  tantorum  finem.  Rex  magne,  laborum  ?

In  nos  vibrabit  tela  quousque  Sathan  ?
Ante  Rhodum,  mox  inde  Chium,  nunc  denique  Cyprum,

Turcharum  cepit  sanguinolenta  manus.
Mustafa  foedifragus  partes  grassatur  in  omnes,

Et  Veneta  Cypriam  strage  cruentat  humum.
Nee  finem  imponit  sceleri,  mollitue  furorem,

Nee  nisi  potato  sanguine  pastus  abit.
Qualisj  quae  nunquam  nisi  plena  tumensque  cruore

Sanguisuga  obsessam  mittit  hirudo  cutem.
Torturam  sequitur  tortura,  cruorque  cruorem,

Et  caedem  admissam  casdis  alius  amor.
Saevit  inops  animi,  nee  vel  se  temperat  ipse,

Vel  manus  indomitum  nostra  domare  potest.
At  tUj  magne  Pater,  tumidum  disperde  Tyrannum,

Nee  sine  mactari  semper  ovile  tuum.
Exulet  hoc  monstrum,  ne  sanguine  terra  redundet.

Excutiantque  novum  Cypria  regna  jugum.
Et  quod  Christicolae  foedus  pepigere  Monarchae,

Id  faustum  nobis  omnibus  esse  velis.
Tu  pugna  illorum  pugnas,  &  bella  secundes.

Captivosque  tibi  subde  per  arma  Scythas.
Sic  tua  per  totum  fundetur  gloria  mundum,

Unus  sic  Christus  fiet,  &  una  fides.

Gulielmus  Malim.

128

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA

A.D.

I57I.

The  true  report  of  all  the  successe  of  Famagusta,
made  by  the  Earle  Nestor  Martiningo,  unto
the  renowmed  Prince  the  Duke  of  Venice.

He  sixteenth  day  of  February,  *  1571,  the
fleet  which  had  brought  the  ayde  unto
Famagusta,  departed  from  thence,  whereas
were  found  in  all  the  army,  but  foure
thousand  footmen,  eight  hundred  of  them
chosen  souldiers,  and  three  thousand
(accounting  the  Citizens  and  other  of
the  Villages)  the  rest  two  hundred  in  number  were
souldiers  of  Albania.  After  the  arrivall  of  the  which
succour,  the  fortification  of  the  City  went  more  diligently
forward  of  all  hands,  then  it  did  before,  the  whole  gari-
son,  the  Grecian  Citizens  inhabiting  the  Towne,  the
Governours  and  Captaines  not  withdrawing  themselves
from  any  kinde  of  labour,  for  the  better  incouragement
and  good  example  of  others,  both  night  and  day  searching
the  watch,  to  the  intent  with  more  carefull  heed  taking
they  might  beware  of  their  enemies,  against  whom  they
made  no  sally  out  of  the  City  to  skirmish  but  very
seldome,  especially  to  understand  when  they  might
learne  the  intent  of  the  enemies.  Whilest  we  made
this  diligent  provision  within  the  Citie,  the  Turks  with-
out made  no  lesse  preparation  of  all  things  necessary,  fit
to  batter  the  fortresse  withall,  as  in  bringing  out  of
Caramania  and  Syria  with  all  speed  by  the  Sea,  many
woollpacks,  a  great  quantitie  of  wood  and  timber,  divers
pieces  of  artillery,  engins,  and  other  things  expedient  for
their  purpose.

At  the  beginning  of  April  Halli  Basha  landed  there
with  fourscore  gallies  or  thereabout  in  his  company,  who
brought  thither  that,  which  of  our  enemies  was  desired,
who  soone  after  departing  from  thence,  and  leaving
behinde  him  thirty  gallies,  which  continually  transported
souldiours,  munition,  fresh  victuals,  and  other  necessaries,
V  129  I

'^  ///  Italy  and
other  places
the  date  of  the
yere  of  ye
Lord  is
alwayes
changed  the
first  of  Janu-
ary, or  on
New  yeres
day,  and  from
that  day  reck-
oned upon  :
although  wee
heere  in  Eng-
land, especial^
the  temporall
lawyers  for
certaine  causes
are  not  woont
to  alter  the
same  untill  the
Annunciation
of  our  Ladie.

[II.  i.  122.]

A.D.

1571-

*  Carumusa-
linl  be  vessels
like  unto  ye
French  Ga-
bards,  sailing
daily  upon  the
river  of  Bor-
deaux, which
saile  w^  a
misen  or  tri-
angle saile.

*  Maone  be
vessels  like
unto  ye  great
hulks,
ivhich  come
hither  from
Denmarke,
some  of  the
which  cary  7
or  8  hundred
tunnes  a  piece,
flat  and  broad,

which  saile
some  of  them
with  seven
misens  a  piece.

*  Palandrie
be  great  flat
vessels  made
like  Feriboats
to  transport
horse.

Nicosia,  other-
wise called
Licosia.

Sig.  Braga-
dino  was  Pro-
veditore,  that
is,  Governour,
and  Sig.  Bag-
Hone  Generall
of  the  Chris-
tian armie.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

besides  a  great  number  of  *  Caramusalins,  or  Brigandines,
great  Hulkes  called  *  Maones,  and  large  broad  vessels
termed  of  them  *  Palandrie,  which  continually  passed  to
and  fro  betweene  Cyprus  and  Syria,  and  other  places
thereabout,  which  they  did  with  great  speed,  standing
in  feare  of  the  Christian  army.  And  about  the  middest
of  the  same  moneth  the  Turkes  caused  to  be  brought
out  of  the  Citie  of  Nicosia,  which  they  had  woone  a  little
before,  fifteene  pieces  of  artillery,  and  raising  their  army
from  whence  they  were  before,  making  ditches  and
trenches  necessary,  incamped  themselves  in  gardens,  and
toward  the  West  part  of  Famagusta  neere  a  place  called
Precipola.

The  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  same  moneth  they
raised  up  mounts  to  plant  their  artillery  upon,  and  caused
trenches  to  be  made  for  harquebuzers,  one  very  nigh
another,  approching  still  very  neere  the  Citie,  in  such
order,  as  was  almost  impossible  to  stay  the  same,  fortie
thousand  of  their  Pioners  continually  labouring  there  the
most  part  of  all  the  night.  The  intent  of  the  enemie
being  then  knowen,  and  in  what  part  of  the  Citie  he
minded  most  to  plant  his  battery,  we  tooke  diligent  heed
on  the  other  part,  to  repaire  and  fortifie  all  places  neces-
sary within.  For  the  which  cause  wee  placed  a  great
watch  in  that  way,  which  was  covered  with  a  counter-
scharfe,  and  in  the  sallies  of  their  privy  Posternes,  for  the
defence  of  the  said  counterscharfe,  there  were  new
flanckers  made,  also  Traverses  called  Butterisses  made
upon  the  Cortaine,  with  one  trench  of  Turves  two  foot
high  and  broad,  the  which  was  made  on  that  side  of  the
wall  of  the  Citie,  which  was  already  battered  with  the
shot  of  the  Turkes,  with  certaine  loope  holes  for  our
Harquebuzers,  by  the  which  they  defended  the  counter-
scharfe. Two  noble  personages  Bragadino  and  Baglione
personally  tooke  this  charge  on  them,  by  the  which
meanes  the  Christian  affaires  passed  in  very  good  order.
All  the  bread  for  our  Souldiers  was  made  in  one  store-
house, of the which the noble gentleman Lorenzo

130

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  a.d.

1571.
Tiepolo  captaine  of  *  BafFo  had  charge,  who  refused  no  *  ^^ffo  of  the
paine,  where  he  thought  his  travell  might  prevaile. In  ^^'^\^^^
the castle was placed that famous gentleman Andrea  namedPathos
Bragadino,  who  with  a  diligent  gard  had  charge  on  that  in  the  which  '
part of  the castle principally, next unto the sea side, Citie  there
trimming  and  digging-  out  new  flanckers  for  the  better  ^^-^  a  sump-

j r  r  ^1 *  A  11  tuous  Church

defence  of  the  *Arsenall.  _  _  dedicated  to

A  valiant  knight  named  Foito  was  appointed  Master  Venus.

of  the  Ordinance,  who  was  slain  within  few  dayes  after  in  ^ ArsenaUin

a  skirmish,  whose  garrison  the  noble  Bragadino  Provedi-  Constantinople

tore  before  named  presently  delivered  over  to  me. Three , Venice  ts

1  ,.  ^  < ■,  1  -iir  -1 the  place  for

other  captames  were  appomted over the  wilde-nre  with  munition  and

twentie  footmen  for  every  one  of  them,  chosen  out  of  the  artillery  to

armie,  to  use  and  execute the  same  as  occasion  should  ^^'^  ^«-

serve. The  best  pieces  of  Ordinance  were  brought  foorth

unto that side of  the  Towne, where the battery was

looked  for  to  be  made  :  and  they  made  privy  fences  to

cover  the  better  their  cannon  shot  withall. There  was

no want in the Christians  to annoy their enemies in

issuing  often  out  of  every  side  against  them,  aswell  to

hinder  their  determinations,  as  to  hurt  them  otherwise  at

divers  times. They  also  rendered  to  us  the  like. For

three  hundred  of  the  inhabitants  of  Famagusta  one  time

issuing  out  of  the  citie,  armed  onely  with  their  swords

and  targets,  with  so  many  Italian  Harquebuzers  also  in

their company, received great dammage, because the

trenches of  the enemies were made about so thicke,

although at the same present  wee compelled them to

flie, and slew also many  of  them  : yet they  increased

to such number, that they  killed presently  thirty,  and

hurt  there  threescore of  our  company. For  the  which

cause order  was taken,  that our men  should no  more

come forth of  their holde, committing themselves to

manifest  perill  to  bid  their  enemies  the  base.

The  Turkes  in  processe  of  time  by  little  and  little  with

their  trenches,  came  at  length  to  the  toppe  of  the  counter-

scharfe,  and  having  furnished  their  forts  the  nineteenth

day  of  May,  began  their  battery  with  ten  forts,  having

131

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

threescore  and  foureteene  pieces  of  great  artillary  within
their  custody,  amongst  the  which  there  were  foure
Basiliskes  (for  so  they  terme  them)  of  an  immeasurable
greatnesse,  and  began  to  batter  from  the  gate  Limisso
unto  the  Arsenall,  and  layed  five  batteries  against  the
towne,  the  one  against  the  great  high  Turret  of  the
Arsenall,  which  was  battered  with  five  pieces  of  Ordinance
mounted  upon  that  fort  of  the  rocke,  the  other  against
the  Cortaine  it  selfe  of  the  Arsenall,  battered  by  one
fort  with  eleven  pieces  :  another  against  the  Keepe  of
Andruzzi  with  two  commanders,  or  cavaliers,  which  were
above  with  one  fort  of  eleven  other  pieces  :  another
battery  against  the  Turret  of  S.  Nappa,  the  which  was
battered  with  foure  Basilisks.  The  gate  of  Limisso,
which  had  one  high  commander  or  cavalier  alone,  and
a  Brey  and  Cortaine  without  was  battered  by  the
forts  with  three  and  thirty  pieces  of  artillery,  whereas
Mustafa  himselfe  Generall  of  the  Turkes  army  tooke  the
charge  in  person.  At  the  first  they  seemed  not  to  care
much  to  spoile  the  walles,  but  shot  still  into  the  city,
[II.  i.  123.]  and  against  our  Ordinance,  which  greatly  galled  them.
Whereupon  they,  who  were  within  the  city,  aswell  our
souldiours,  as  the  Grecians,  assoone  as  the  battery  began,
withdrawing  themselves,  came  and  dwelt  by  the  walles
of  the  citie,  whereas  they  continued  from  that  time  to
the  end  of  the  siege.  The  noble  Bragadino  lodged  in
the  Keepe  of  Andruzzi,  Baglioni  in  that  ward  of  S.
Nappa.  The  honourable  Tiepolo  in  that  which  was
called  Campo  Santo.  Wherefore  they  being  present  at
all  that  was  done,  both  encouraged,  and  punished  the
souldiers  according  to  their  deserts.  The  right  worship-
full  Luigi  Martiningo  was  appointed  chiefe  over  the
Ordinance,  who  answering  all  mens  expectation  of  him,
with  great  courage  divided  the  charge  thereof  unto  sixe
other  inferiour  captaines,  who  tooke  order  and  care  for
that  company,  and  for  the  provision  of  things  necessary
for  the  gunners  :  one  company  of  the  Grecians  being
appointed  to  every  gate  of  the  Citie  for  to  attend  upon

132

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA

the  service  of  the  artillery. The  valiant  captaine  Fran-
cesco Bagone  warded at the Keepe, and at the great
Commander of the Arsenall. Captaine Pietro Conte
attended  upon  the Cortaine,  at the  Commander  of  the
Voltij and  at the Keepe of  Campo Santo. I  for  my
part  attended  upon the Commander of  Campo Santo,
and upon the Commander of  Andruzzi, and of  the
Cortaine,  unto  the  Turret  of  Santa  Nappa. The  Earle
Hercole  Martiningo  attended upon the  Commander  of
Santa  Nappa,  and  to  the  whole  Cortaine,  unto  the  gate
of  Limisso. Horatio  Captaine  of  Veletri  attended  upon
the Brey and Cortaine toward the Bulwarke. Upon
the high Commander of Limisso, which was more
troubled  then  all  the  rest,  attended  the  Captaine  Roberto
Malvezzi. At the same  time,  when  the  battery  began
(by  the  commission  of  the  honourable  Bragadino)  victuals
were  appointed, and given to all  the souldiers,  aswell
Grecians,  as  Italians,  and  Gunners  : namely  Wine,  Pot-
tage, Cheese, and Bakon  : all the which things were
brought  to  the  walles  as  need  did  require  in  very  good
order,  so  that  no  souldier  there  spent  any  more  in  bread
then  two  souses  a day. They were  payed at  the  end
of  every  thirty  dayes  with  the  great  travell  of  that  right
worshipfull  Venetian gentleman M. Giovanni Antonio
Querini,  who  besides  this  his  ordinary  charge  was  found
present  in  all  weighty  and  dangerous  affaires  to  the  great
incouragement of our souldiours. And wee made a
counterbattery  against  our  enemies  for  ten  dayes  space,
with  so  great  rage,  that  we  choked  and  destroyed  fifteene
of  their  best  pieces, also we killed and dispatched of
them  about  thirty  thousand  at  that  season,  so  that  they
were  disappointed  at that time  of  their  battery  in  that
place,  and  were  greatly  dismayed. But  we  foreseeing  that
we  had  no  great  store  of  powder  left,  there  was  made  a  re-
straint, and  such  order  taken,  that  thirty  pieces  should  not
shoot  off  but  thirty  shot  a  piece  every  day,  and  that  in  the
presence  of  the  Captaines,  who  were  still  present,  because
the  Souldiers  and  Gunners  should  not  shoot  off  in  vaine.

133

A.D.
157I.

Two  Venetian
souses  or  Soldi
amount  but  to
one  peny  Eng-
lish.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

The  nine  and  twentieth  day  of  May  there  came
towards  us  from  Candia  a  Fregat  or  Pinnace,  the  which
giving  us  great  hope  and  lightening  of  ayde,  encreased
marvellously  every  mans  courage.  The  Turks  with  great
travell  and  slaughter  of  both  sides,  had  woonne  at  the
last  the  counterscharfe  from  us,  with  great  resistance  and
mortalitie  on  both  parts.  Whereupon  they  began  on  the
other  side  of  the  fift  battery  to  fill  up  the  ditch,  with
the  earth  that  they  threw  downe,  which  was  taken  neere
the  wall  of  the  counterscharfe.  But  all  that  earth  and
falling  downe  of  the  wall  made  by  the  shot  of  their
artillery,  was  caried  away  of  us  within  the  city,  all  our
company  labouring  continually  aswell  by  night  as  day,
untill  our  enemies  had  made  certaine  loope-holes  in  the
wall,  thorow  the  which  they  flancking  and  scouring  all
the  ditch  with  their  harquebussie,  stopped  our  former
course  of  carying,  or  going  that  way  any  more,  without
certaine  and  expresse  danger.  But  M.  Giovanni  Mar-
mori,  a  fortifier,  had  devised  a  certaine  kinde  of  joyned
boords,  the  which  being  caried  of  the  souldiers,  defended
them  from  the  shot  of  the  Harquebuzers,  so  that  some
other  quantity  of  earth,  but  no  great  store,  was  caried
also  away  :  in  the  which  place  this  foresayd  fortifier  was
slaine,  who  had  done  especiall  good  service  in  all  our
necessary  affaires.  And  our  enemies  having  cast  so  much
earth  into  the  ditch,  as  filled  it  up  againe,  and  made  it
a  firme  way  to  the  wall  of  the  counterscharfe,  and  casting
before  them  the  earth  by  little  and  little,  they  made  one
traverse  even  unto  the  wall  on  two  sides  in  all  their
batteries,  the  which  they  made  thicke  and  strong  with
woolpacks,  and  other  fagots,  to  assure  themselves  the
better  of  our  flanckers.

When  they  had  once  possessed  the  ditch,  that  they
could  not  be  hurt  of  us  but  by  chance,  they  began  foorth-
with  to  cast  and  digge  out  undermines  to  undermine
the  Brey,  the  Turret  of  Santa  Nappa,  the  Commander
of  Andruzzi,  the  Keepe  of  Campo  Santo,  the  Cortaine,
and  the  Turrion  of  the  Arsenall  :  so  that  being  able  no

134

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  ad.

1571.
longer  to  serve  our  turne  injoy  those  fewe  flanckers,  we
threw downe wilde-fire into our enemies campe, the
which  annoj^ed them very sore, because it fired their
woolpacks, & also their fagots. And for the better
encouragement of  the souldiers, the right honorable
Bragadino  gave  to  every  souldier  one  duckat,  ye  which
could  gaine  or  recover any of  the  former  woolpackes,  [II.  i.  124.]
making  countermines  in  all  places. To  the  which  charge
Maggio  the  fortifier knight was appointed, who  in  all
our  businesse  served with such diligence  and  courage,
as  he  was  able,  or  was  requisite. But  the  countermines
met  not,  saving  those  of  the  Commander  of  S.  Nappa,
of  Andruzzi,  and that of  Campo Santo, because  they  *  jn^anois
were  open,  and  our  men  sallied  out  often  both  by  day  souldiers,  soul-
and  night  into  the ditch to perceive  better  the  way  of  diers  of
the  mines,  and to fire the  fagots and  wooll. Nor  we  ■^^^^^^^■>
ceassed  at  any  time  through  the  unspeakable travell  of  called  Epirus
the  Lord  Baglione  (who had  the  oversight  of  all  these  zvho  commonly
matters)  to  trouble  our  enemies  intents,  by  all  maner  of  serve  the

wit  and  policie,  dividing  the  companies  for  the  batteries,  Venetians  both

■i \ ^-  • 11 1  •  c Lv. on  horsebacke

joynmg and plantmg m all places a garrison of  the  ^^^^^^^^  ^^^^

*  Albanois  souldiours,  who  aswell  on  foot  as  on  horse-  skllfull  y

backe,  shewed  alwayes  notable  courage  and  manhood. painfull

The  first  assault.

THe  one  and  twentieth  day  of  June  they  put  fire
to  the  mine  of  the  Turret  of  the  Arsenall,  whereas
Giambelat  Bey  tooke  charge,  who  with  great  ruine  rent
in  sunder  a  most  great  and  thicke  wall,  and  so  opened
the  same,  that  he  threw  downe  more  then  halfe  thereof,
breaking  also  one  part  of  the  vaimure,  made  before  to
upholde  the  assault.  And  suddenly  a  great  number  of
the  Turkes  skipping  upon  the  ruines  thereof,  displayed
their  Ensignes,  even  to  the  toppe  of  the  same.  Captaine
Pietro  Conte  with  his  company  was  in  that  ward,  the
which  was  much  shaken  and  terrified  by  that  sudden
ruine.  I  with  my  company  came  first  thither,  so  that
they  shortly tooke the repulse, and  although  they  re-

135

A.D.
157I,

Of  this  noble
13  painfull
Venetian
gentleman  M.
Gio.  Jntonio
Querini  (who
zvas  after-
wardes  hewen
in  sunder  by
the  commande-
ment  of  Mus-
tafa) I  zvas
entertained
very  cour-
teousl"^  in  my
travell  at
Corcyra,  now
called  Corfu,
he  being  then
there  Mag.
Castellano  or
Capitaine  of
one  of  the
Castles.

In  extremities
men  have  no
regard  to
spare  trifles.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

freshed  themselves  with  new  supplies  five  or  sixe  times,
yet  they  failed  of  their  purpose.  There  fought  person-
ally the  Lord  Baglione  :  Bragadino  and  Querini  being
armed  stood  not  farre  off  to  refresh  and  comfort  our
Souldiours,  and  the  Captaine  of  the  Castell  with  the
Ordinance,  that  was  planted  upon  the  Butteries  destroyed
many  of  our  enemies,  when  they  gave  ye  assault,  the
which  endured  five  houres  together  :  so  that  of  Turkes
were  slaine  very  many,  and  of  our  side  betweene  them
that  were  slaine  and  hurt  one  hundred  :  most  part  of
the  which  number  were  cast  away  by  a  mischance  of
our  wilde-fire,  the  which  being  unadvisedly  and  negli-
gently handled,  burnt  up  many  of  our  owne  company.
There  died  at  that  present  the  Earle  Gio.  Francesco
Goro,  the  Captaine  Barnardino  Agubio  :  and  by  the
throwing  of  stones  Hercole  Malatesta,  Captaine  Pietro
Conte,  with  other  Captaines  and  Standerdbearers,  were
very  sore  hurt.

The  night  following  arrived  in  Cyprus  a  Pinnasse
from  Candia,  which  bringing  newes  of  most  certaine
ayde,  greatly  increased  both  the  mirth  and  courage  of
us  all,  so  that  we  made  soone  after,  with  the  helpe  of
the  Captaine  Marco  Crivellatore,  and  Maggio  the  knight,
certaine  retreats  flancked  to  all  the  places  beaten  downe,
and  whereas  they  suspected  that  the  enemy  had  digged
up  any  mines,  with  Hogsheads,  Chests,  Tikes,  and  Sacks
stuffed  full  of  moist  earth  (the  Grecians  with  all  speed
having  already  brought  almost  all  that  which  they  had)
because  they  having  dispatched  their  Canveis  about
necessary  uses,  they  brought  their  hangings,  cortaines,
carpets,  even  to  their  very  sheets,  to  make  and  stuffe
up  their  foresayd  sacks,  a  very  good  and  ready  way  to
make  up  againe  their  vaimures,  the  which  were  throwen
downe  with  the  fury  of  the  artillery,  which  never
stinted,  so  that  we  made  up  againe  still  that  in  the
night,  the  which  was  throwen  downe  and  broken  in
the  day,  sleeping  very  seldome  :  all  the  souldiers  stand-
ing alwayes  upon  the  walles, visited continually  of  the

I -.6

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  ad.

1571-
Governors  of  the Citie,  which  slept  at  no  time,  but  in  Provident
the  extreame  heat of the day, having no other time ^  carefull
to take their rest,  because the enemie was at hand,  ^^'^alistrltes^
giving  us  continually  alarmes,  not  suffering us  long  to  seUome  skepe
breath.  ^l^  the  night

at  any  time,

The  second  assault.  much  ksse  in

dangerous

THe  nine  and  twentieth  day  of  the  same  moneth  seasons.
they  set  the  mine  made  towards  the  Brey  on  fire,
the  which  mine  was  digged  in  stone,  which  brake  and
cleft  all  things  in  pieces,  and  caused  great  ruine,
making  an  easie  way  for  the  enemy  to  assault  us,  who
with  an  outragious  fury  came  to  the  toppe,  whereas
Mustafa  their  Generall  was  altogether  present,  which
assault  was  received,  and  stayed  at  the  beginning  of  ^  ^^^^^  ^^"'S
the Earle Hercole Martininffo  with his garrison, and  ^{^^^%^«-

-. . ,  °  1 r 1  •  1 ntng,  or  in  due

SO were repulsed by our company,  who rought with-  fi^g  jg„g

out any advantage of covert, the vaimure being  helpeth  much.

throwen downe by the mine. There were slaine of

our  company Captaine Meani the Sergeant  Major of

our armie,  Captaine  Celio  de  Fuochi,  Captaine  Erasmo

da Fermo : and Captaine Soldatello,  Antonio d'Ascoli,

Captaine Gio. d'Istria, Standerd bearers, with many

other  officers, were sore  wounded,  there died also 30

other  of  our  common  souldiers. At  the  Arsenall  they

were beaten backe with greater dammage of our

enemies, and small hurt to us. Five onely of  our  [11.  i.  125.]

part  being  slaine there, whereas Captaine Giacomo  de

Fabriano also was killed,  and I was  wounded in my

left  legge  with  an  harquebush  shot. The  which  assault  That  certalne

continued  sixe  houres,  the  Bishop  of  Limisso standing  t^omen  in-

up there, incouraging the Souldiours. Where also  \^^^^\^fif^"

^ r ^  1'  1-1 Ilandbevira-

were iound present stout women, who came thither  ^^^  ^^.  ^^^_
with weapons,  stones, and water, to helpe the Soul-  kind,  I  saw
diours. Our enemies understanding how great hin-  sufficient  triall
derance they had received at these two assaults,  f  J^^  ^'"^
changed their mindes, and began  againe with  greater  iZVityZhd
fury then ever they had before accustomed to lay  Saline.

^37

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

battery to all places, and into our retreats, so that
they  labouring  more  speedily  then  ever  they  did,  made
seven other forts more,  under the castle,  and taking
away  the artillery  from them which were farther off,
planting of it somewhat neerer, to the number of
iburescore,  they  battered  the  holde  with so  great  rage,
that on  the eighth  day  of  July,  with the  same  night
also  were  numbred  five  thousand  Canon  shot,  and  after
that  sort  they  overthrew  to the ground the  vaimures,
that scarsely with great travell and paine we could
repaire them againe, because our men that laboured
about  them  were  continually  slaine  by  their  Ordinance,
and  by  reason of  the endlesse  tempest  of  the shot  of
their Harquebuzers. And our men beganne to de-
It  is  accounted  crease. For  the  Turkes caused  us  to  retire  from our
a  good  warlike  gj-gyes, by  the violence of their  artillery and  mining,
\hatto  our ^^ ^^^^ 's>ort^  that there  being no more standing left
enemies  with for our Souldiours,  because  we  making our vaimures
hinderance, more  thicke,  our  standing  began  to  waxe  narrower,  the
which  we  can  ^  which  presently  we  of  necessitie enlarged with boords
^keepPanTuse  ^^  ^ scaffolde to  the  vaimure,  whereby  we  might  have
to  our  owne more  elbow  roome  to  fight. Captaine  Maggio  also  made
commodity. one  mine  under  the said Brey,  to the intent, that  we
being  not  able  any  longer  to keepe  it,  the  same  might
be  left  to  our  enemies  to  their  great  hinderance.

The  third  assault.

O  the  said  Brey  the  ninth  day  of  July  they  gave
the  third  assault,  to  the  Turrion  of  Santa  Nappa,
to  that  of  Andruzzi,  to  the  Cortaine,  to  the  Keepe  of
the  Arsenall  :  the  which  assault  having  continued  more
then  sixe  houres,  they  were  beaten  backe  in  foure
places,  but  we  left  the  Brey  to  their  great  losse,  and
ours  also  :  because  we  being  assaulted,  our  company
being  not  able  to  mannage  their  Pikes  in  good  order,
by  reason  of  the  narrownesse  of  the  standing  where
they  were,  being  willing  to  retire  in  that  order,  as  the
L.  Baglione  had prescribed  unto them,  and could  not,

138

T

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  a.d.

1571.

cast themselves  at the last hito a confuse order, and

retired, they  being mingled amongst the Turkes  : so

that  fire  being given to our mine, the same (with a

terrible sight to beholde) slew presently of our

enemies more then one thousand, and above one

hundred of  us. There was slaine Roberto Malvezzi,

and Captaine Marchetto de Fermo was grievously

wounded. At the  assault of  the Arsenall was slaine

Captaine David Noce master of  the Campe, & I my

selfe  was  hurt by  the racing  of  a Cannon  shot. This

assault continued five houres, and the Citizens of

Famagusta  shewed  great courage in every place, with

their women also, and yoong striplings. The Brey

was so  defaced  by  reason  of  this  mine  set  on  fire,  that

no body any more attempted to recover the same  :

because there was no apt place remaining to stay

upon. The left  flancker onely  remained  still, whereas

another mine was made. The gate of  Limisso was

over against  this foresayd Brey, and somewhat lower,

which  was  alwayes open, having made to  the same a

Portall, with a Percollois annexed to it, the which

Percollois by the cutting of a small cord, was a

present  defence to the  gate, and  our Souldiours gave

their  attendance  by that  gate to bring in the battered

earth, which fell in the ditches from the rampaire  :

and  when  they  saw that  their enemies in foure  dayes

came not thither,  they  beganne  to  entrench  above the

Brey, and by the flanckers above they suffered no  2'/™''^"

person to passe out of the gate, the which thing  captaine  at

brought  great suspition  unto  our  enemies,  because  they  dangerous

were  often  times  assailed  of  our  company.  t^^^^  ^°^  °^h

much  com-

The  fourth  assault.  firteththe

common  soul-

WHerefore  they  came  the  foureteenth  day  of  July  dier,  but  also
to assault the  gate  of  Limisso,  and laying  their  increaseth
battery  to all other  places,  they  came  and  planted  their  i^^^JJ "

. ^  r  '  /  r  _  credit  ci*  com-

Ensignes  even  before  the  gate,  whereas  the  L.  Baglione,  mendation  w^
and  Sig,  Luigi  were  in  readinesse,  who  had  taken  upon  all  men.

139

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

them  to  defend  that  gate  of  the  Citie.  Who  assoone
as  they  had  encouraged  their  Souldiours,  sallying
swiftly  foorth,  killed,  and  put  to  flight  the  greater
part  of  them,  and  at  the  last  giving  fire  to  the  mine
of  the  flancker  slew  foure  hundred  Turkes,  and  Sig.
Baglione  at  the  same  time  woon  an  Ensigne  of  our
enemies,  wrasting  it  violently  out  of  one  of  the
Ensigne  bearers  hands.  The  day  following  they  gave
fire  to  the  mine  of  the  Cortaine,  the  which  thing  not
[II.  i.  126.]  falling  out  greatly  to  their  purpose,  they  followed  not
their  prepared  assault.  Wherefore  they  beganne  to
fortifie,  and  advance  higher  their  traverses  in  the
ditches,  for  their  better  assurance  against  they  should
give  the  assault  :  and  they  had  emptied  and  carried
away  all  the  earth  neere  unto  the  counterskarfe,  where
they  lodged  in  their  pavillions,  so  that  we  could  not
descrie  them.  They  shot  seven  pieces  of  artillery
upon  the  wall  of  the  counterscharfe  so  covertly,  that
they  were  not  scene  :  two  from  the  Brey  of  the
Turrion  of  Santa  Nappa,  one  from  Andruzzi,  and  two
other  all  along  the  battery  of  the  Cortaine,  And  they
came  with  certaine  boordes  covered  with  rawe  and
greene  hides,  under  which  they  brought  their  men  to
digge  in  the  vaimures,  we  being  nothing  behinde  or
forgetfuU  to  cast  wilde-fire  amongst  them,  and  some-
time to  issue  foorth  of  our  sallies  called  Posternes,  to
offend  their  Pioners,  although  to  our  great  hinderance.
And  we  still  repaired  the  vaimures  by  all  meanes
possible,  with  BufFe  skinnes,  being  moist  and  wet,
throwing  in  also  earth,  shreads,  and  cotton  with  water,
being  well  bound  together  with  cordes  :  all  the  women
of  Famagusta  gathering  themselves  together  into  com-
panies in  every  street  (being  guided  of  one  of  their
Monkes  called  Caloiero)  resorted  dayly  to  a  certaine
place  appointed,  to  labour,  gathering  and  providing  for
the  souldiers,  stones  and  water,  the  which  was  kept
for  all  assaults  in  halfe  buts  to  quench  the  fire,  which
the  Turks  threw  amongst  them.

140

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  a.d.

1571-
Having  had  no  great  successe  in  taking  of  the  gate,

they  found  out  a  newe  way,  never  heard  of  before,  in

gathering together a great quantitie of certaine  wood

called  Teglia,  which  easily  burned,  and  smelt  very  evill,  T'eg^}'^  i"

the  which  they  throwing  before  the former  gate  of  the  ^^f^/^^-^^'^'

^.  .  1 r  r  J  1  -1  • ledatsacer-

Citie, and ragots rastened to the same,  with certame  f^ine  wood
beames besmeered with Pitch, kindled suddenly so  which  bumeth
great  a  fire, as  was  not  possible for us to  quench  the  e^^ih->  ^^^
same,  although  we  threw  upon  it  whole  Buts  of  water,  -^^^"^^^^  «»-

't>l6ClSCltttL'^ of

which  were throwen  downe from  an  high  Commander,  "^^^  a/y^zvi'
which  Buts  presently  brake  in  sunder.  there  is  great

This fire continued foure  dayes, wherefore  we  were  store  in  Sicilia:
inforced  by  reason  of  the extreame  heat  and  stinch,  to  ^°^^J^^^  ^^ "
withdraw  our  selves  further inward,  and they  descend-  /o;^^
ing  towardes  their  lower  flanckers,  beganne  other  mines,
so  that  the  gate  was  shut up,  because  it  could be  no
longer kept  open, and suddenly (a thing marvellous  ^0  necessarie
to  be  spoken) the standing  of  the  Brey  being  repaired,  ^^^"S^o^^^
and made up agame, they planted one piece over  unattempted
against the gate,  the which of us with stones,  earth  on  either  part.
and  other  things,  was  suddenly  buried  up. By  this  time
we  were  driven  to  an  exigent,  all  our  provision  within  the
Citie  stooping  very  lowe,  saving  onely  hope,  the noble  ^^^^  courage
courage  of  the  Governours  and  Captaines,  and  the  stout  "fi^^^^J^^^^^
readinesse  of  the  Souldiours :  our  wine,  and  flesh  as  well  ffrsaketh^^
powdered  as  unpowdered  was  spent,  nor  there  was  any  Saguntifm
Cheese  to  be  gotten,  but  upon  an  unreasonable  price,  our  fames.
company  having  eaten  up  their  Horses,  Asses,  and  Cats,
for  lacke of  other  victualls :  there  was nothing  left to
be  eaten,  but  a  small  quantitie  of  Bread,  and  Beanes,  and
we  dranke  water  and  Vineger  together,  whereof  was  not
much left. When  that  we  perceived that our enemies
had  digged  and  cast  up  three  mines  in  the  Commander  of
the  gate,  they  labouring  in  all  places  more  diligently  then
ever  they  did  before,  bringing  into  the  ditch,  over  against
the  battery  of  the  Cortaine,  a  hill  of  earth,  as  high  as  the
wall  : and already they came to the wall above the
Counterscharfe  over  against  the  Turrion  of  the  Arsenall,

141

A.D.

I57I.

In  July  the
heat  is  so  ex-
treme in  this
Hand,  that  the
inhabitants
thereof  are  not
woont  to
travel!,  but  by
night  onley.
A  letter  or
supplication
exhibited  by
the  Cypriot-
tes  unto  Sig.
Bragadino.

The  answere
of  the  former
letter.

[II.  i.  127.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  had  made  one  Commander  complete,  fenced  with
shares,  like  unto  plough  shares,  in  proportion  and  height
correspondent  to  ours.

Within the Citie  were remaining but five hundreth
Italian  Souldiours,  who  were  not  hurt,  yet  very  faint  and
weary  by  their  long  watching  and  paines  in  fighting  in
those fervent and burning  heates, which are in those
parts. And the greater and better part also of the
Grecians  were  by  this  time  slaine,  whenas  the  chiefe  of
those  Citizens  remaining  did  fully  resolve  themselves  (the
which  was  about  the  twentieth  day  of  July)  to  present  a
supplication  in  writing  fo  that  noble  gentleman  Bragadino
Proveditore,  desiring and beseeching him, that seeing
their  Citie  and  Fortresse  was  thus  battered  and  brought
to  extremitie,  without  sufficient  ayde  to  defend  the  same,
without substance or sustenance, having no hope of
succour,  or  any  newe  supply,  they  having  spent  and  con-
sumed not  onely  their  goods,  but  also  their  lives  for  the
defence  of  them,  and  in  testifying  of  their  dutifull  service
towardes  the  noble  and  royall  state  of  the  Segniorie  of
Venice,  that  it  might  nowe  please  him,  and  the  rest  of  the
honourable Governours,  that  were present,  and put in
trust,  having  a  carefull  eye  unto  some  honourable  con-
ditions, to  have  now  at  the  last  a  respect  to  the  credit  and
honour  of  their  long  travelled  wives,  and  the  safegard  of
their  poore  children,  which  otherwise  were  shortly  very
like to be  a  pray  to  their  bloudthirsting  and  ravening
enemies. To the which letter or supplication speedy
answere  was  made  by  the  forenamed  honourable  Braga-
dino, comforting  them,  that  they  should  by  no  meanes
abate their courage, and that shortly he looked for
succour  from  the  Segniorie,  diminishing  as  much  as  hee
might,  the  feare  which  they  had  conceived  in  their  hearts,
dispatching  and  sending  away  suddenly  from  Cyprus  into
Candia,  a  Pinnesse  to  certifie  the  duke  and  governours
there,  in  what  extremitie  they  were. The  Turkes  by  this
time  had  ended  their  mines,  and  set  them  on  fire,  the  29.
of  July :  in  the  which  space  our  men,  according  as  they

142

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  a.d.

1571.

were  woont to doe,  renued and made up againe the
vaimures  ruined  before  by  the  Ordinance,  and  having  no
other  stuffe  left  to  advaunce  them  with,  made  sackes  of
Kersie, unto the which the noble Tiepolo diligently
looked. The  three  mines  of  the  Commander  did  great  It  standeth
damage  to  us,  having  throwen  downe  the  greater  part  of  '^^\^^^l^f'
the  earth,  whereas  the  governour  Randacchi  was  slaine.  saving  the
The  mine  of  the  Arsenall  overthrew  all  the  rest  of  the  greater,  to  let
Turrion, having smoldered and choked one whole  the  lesser  go.
garrison of  our  souldiers,  the two  flanckers  onely  still
remaining.

The  fift  assault.

THe  enemies  travelled  much  to  become  masters  of
those  foresayd  flankers,  and  to  sally  foorth  by  the
other  batteries,  and  this  assault  lasted  from  three  of  the
clocke  in  the  after  noone  until  night,  where,  and  at  what
time  were  slaine  very  many  of  our  enemies.  In  this
assault  Sig.  Giacomo  Strambali,  amongst  the  rest,  shewed
much  worthinesse,  as  hee  had  done  before  in  other
conflictes.

The  sixt  and  last  assault.

THe next morning following, at the breake of  the
day,  they  assailed  all  places,  the  which  assault  con-
tinued more then  sixe  houres,  with  very  little  hurt  on
our side,  because  our  enemies  fought  more  coldly  then
they  were  wont  to  doe,  annoying  of  us  continually  on
the  Sea  side with their Gallies,  shooting in all their
assaults and batteries continually Cannon shot in all
parts  of  the Citie,  as  neere as they  might. After we  Necessitie  oft
had  defended  and  repulsed this assault, and perceived  times  presseth
things brought to a  narrower straite then they  were  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^-^^
wont  to  be  at, wee  having  left  in all the  whole  Citie  our  will  con-
hut seven barrels of pouder, the governours of  the  tlnually
Citie  fully  determined  to yeelde  up  themselves  and  the  ^P^^^^^h
Citie, with honourable  conditions. Wherefore  the  first  ^•^'^^"^ '
of  August  in the  after noone,  they  tooke  a  truce,  one

143

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

being  come  for  that  purpose  from  Mustafa  the  Generall,
with  whom  they  concluded  the  next  morning  following
to  give  two  hostages a piece,  untill  such  time  as  both
armies  were  agreed. For  our  hostages  (by  the  appoint-
ment of the right honourable Bragadino) were sent
foorth the earle Hercole Martinengo, and Signior
Matteo Colsi a Citizen of  Famagusta, and from our
enemies  came  into  the  Citie  the  Lieutenant  of  Mustafa,
Giannezeribe  and  the Aga of  the  Giannizzers, the  which were  met,
thegardofthe  gygn unto the  gate of  the  Citie,  of  Signiour  Baglione
wl  /  ^A  '^d ^^^^ ^^°  hundreth  harquebusers  : ours also  were met
Giannizeri  is  in like  maner with great pompe  with horsemen and
the  captaine  of  harquebusers,  with  the  sonne  also  of  Mustafa  in  person,
the  Turkes ^]^q  made  very  much  of  them.

^^''  '  The Lord Baglione imparld with these hostages,

which  were  then  come for  that  purpose  of  the  articles

of  peace, requiring by them of their Generall, their

lives, armour, and goods, five peeces of Ordinance,

three  of  the best  horses,  and  safe  passage  from  thence

unto Candia accompanied  with their Gallies, and last

of  all, that  the Grecians inhabiting the  Island, might

dwell there still quietly, and enjoy peaceably their

owne goods and possessions, living still Christians

Just  Turkish hereafter, as they had done before. All the which

dealing,  to requests and articles were agreed upon,  granted, and

speakeandnot  subscribed unto  by  the  hand  of  Mustafa."  Foorthwith

ddnhlo  pro-  Were  sent  Gallies,  and  other  vessels  into  the  haven,  so

mise,  and that our souldiers  immediatly began to  imbarke  them-

never  to  per- selves,  of  the  which  the  greater  part  were  already  gone

form  the  same,  ^boorde, the Nobilitie and our chiefe Captaines also

being  likewise  very  desirous  to  depart.

The  15.  of  August  in  the  morning,  the  worthy
Bragadino  sent  me  with  a  letter  unto  Mustafa,  by  the
which  hee  signified,  that  the  same  night  hee  would  come
unto  him  to  deliver  up  the  keyes  of  the  Citie,  and  that
he  would  leave  in  the  holde  the  honourable  gentleman
Tiepolo,  praying  him  therefore,  that  whilest  hee  should
have  just  cause  thus  to  bee  abroad,  that  there  might  be

144

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  ad

1571-
no  harme  done  at  home,  and  in  the  Citie. The  Turkes

from  our  truce  taking  untill  that  time,  practised  with  us
all  familiarly,  and  without  any  suspition  of  sinister  or
double  dealing,  they  having  shewed  us  much  courtesie
both  in  word  and  deede.  Mustafa  himselfe  by  worde  of
mouth  presently  answered  me  to  this  letter,  in  this  sort,
that  I  should  returne,  and  make  relation  to  this  noble
man  Bragadino,  who  had  sent  mee,  that  he  should  come
over  to  him  at  his  owne  pleasure,  for  hee  was  very
desirous  both  to  see  and  know  him,  for  his  great  worthi-
nesse  and  prowesse,  that  hee  had  tried  to  be  in  him,  and
in  the  other  of  his  Captaines  and  Souldiers,  of  whose
manhood  and  courage  he  would  honourably  report,  where
soever  he  came,  as  occasion  should  serve  thereunto :  and
to  conclude,  that  hee  should  nothing  doubt  of  any  thing :
because  in  no  maner  of  condition  hee  would  suffer  any  [II.  i.  128.]
violence  to  be  done  to  those,  which  remained  behind
within  the  Citie.  So  I  speedily  returning  made  true
report  of  the  same  :  and  towards  night  about  foure  of  the
clocke,  the  right  honourable  Bragadino  accompanied  with
the  L.  Baglione,  with  Signior  Aluigi  Martinengo,  with
the  right  worshipfull  Signior  Gio.  Antonio  Querini,  with
the  right  worshipfull  Signior  Andrea  Bragadino,  with  the
knight  of  Haste,  with  the  captaine  Carlo  Ragonasco,  with
captaine  Francesco  Straco,  with  captaine  Hector  of
Brescia,  with  captaine  Girolomo  di  Sacile,  and  with  other
gentlemen  and  fiftie  souldiours,  the  Governours  and
Noble  men  with  their  swordes,  and  the  souldiours  with
their  harquebuzes  came  foorth  of  their  hold,  and  went
unto  the  pavillion  of  Mustafa,  of  whom,  all  they  at  the
beginning  were  curteously  received,  and  caused  to  sit
downe  by  him,  he  reasoning  and  discoursing  with  them
of  divers  things,  a  certaine  time,  and  drawing  them  from
one  matter  to  another,  at  the  last  upon  a  sudden  picked  a
quarell  unto  them,  especially  burdening  that  noble
Bragadino  with  an  untrueth,  laying  to  his  charge  y'  he
had  caused  certaine  of  his  slaves  in  the  time  that  the  truce
continued  betweene  them,  to  be  put  to  death.  The
V  145  K

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

which  thing  was  most  false.  So  that  hee  being  angry
therewith,  suddenly  stept  foorth,  and  commaunded  them
to  bee  bound.  Thus  they  being  unarmed  (not  suffered
at  that  time  to  enter  into  his  pavillion,  with  their  former
weapons)  and  bound,  were  led  one  by  one  into  the  market
place,  before  his  pavillion,  being  presently  cut  and  hewen
in  sunder  in  his  presence,  and  last  of  all  from  that
woorthy  and  noble  Bragadino  (who  being  bound  as  the
rest,  and  being  commaunded  twise  or  thrise  to  stretch
The  propertie  foorth  his  necke,  as  though  h^e  should  have  bene
oftruefortt- beheaded, the  which  most  boldly  hee did  without any

tude  ts,  not  to  ,  ^  r n 1  •  \. cc  j  •  l  •

be  broken  with  sparke  of  teare)  his  eares  were  cut  oft,  and  causmg  him
sudden  ter-  to  bee  stretched  out  most  vilely  upon  the  ground,  Mus-
rors.  tafa  talked  with  him,  and  blasphemed  the  holy  name  of

Mustafa,cosin  ^^^  Saviour,  demaunding  him,  where  is  now  thy  Christ,
fhiefT^whi/h  ^^^^  ^^^  helpeth  thee  not }  To  all  the  which  no  answere
hong  'on  the  at  all  was  given  of  that  honourable  gentleman.  The  earle
left  side  of  our  Hercole  Martinengo,  which  was  sent  for  one  of  the
Saviour  at  his  Postages,  who  was  also  bound,  was  hidden  by  one  of
Mustafas  eunuches  untill  such  time  as  his  furie  was  past,
afterward  his  life  being  graunted  him,  hee  was  made  the
eunuches  slave.  Three  Grecians  which  were  under  his
pavillion  were  left  untouched.  All  the  souldiers  which
were  found  in  the  campe,  and  all  sortes  of  Christians  to
the  number  of  three  hundred,  were  suddenly  slaine,  they
nothing  mistrusting  any  such  treason,  or  tirannie.  The
Christian  souldiers  which  were  embarked  a  litle  before,
were  linked  and  fettered  with  iron  chaines,  made  slaves,
all  things  being  taken  from  them,  and  stripped  into  their
shirtes.

The  second  day  after  this  murther  was  committed,
which  was  the  17.  of  August,  Mustafa  entred  the  first
time  into  the  Citie,  and  caused  the  valiant  and  wise
governour  Tiepolo  to  bee  hanged,  who  remained  behind,
waiting  the  returne  of  Signior  Bragadino.  I  being  in  the
citie  at  that  present,  when  other  of  my  countreymen  were
thus  miserably  slaine  and  made  slaves,  hid  my  selfe  in
certaine  of  the  Grecians  houses  the  space  of  five  dayes,

146

Passion.

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  a.d.

1571.
and  they  not  being  able  to  keepe  mee  in  covert  any-
longer  for  feare  of  the  great  penaltie,  which  was  pro-
claimed agaynst  such  transgressors  and  concealers,  I
offred,  and  gave  my  selfe  slave  to  one  Sangiaccho  del
Bir,  promising  him  five  hundred  *  Zechins  for  my  ran-  *1echini,be
some,  with  whom  I  remained  in  the  Campe. The  Friday  "j;^^^^  P^f^^^

„  ,  of tlTtC  S'Old

folowing (being the Turkes  sabboth  day)  this  woorthy  ^^^-^^^  ^^  ^^_

and pacient  gentleman Bragadino was led still in the  nice,  ez>ery  one

presence of that unfaithfull tirant Mustafa, to the  of  the  which  is

batteries made  unto the Citie, whereas he  being  com-  ^^J'f^^"^^

pelled  to  cary two  baskets  of  earth,  the one  upon his  .^^^^  ^^J^

backe,  the  other  in  his  hand  slave-like,  to  every  sundry  mony,lfSsome-

battrie,  being  enforced  also  to  kisse  the  ground  as  oft  as  "^^^^  better  :

he  passed  by  him,  was  afterward  brought  unto  the  sea ,  ^^  ,
•  ^  ^ 1  11-  1 1 •  1 •  1  1  altogether  to  a

Side,  where  he  bemg  placed  m  a  chaire  to  leane  and  stay  7-^°^^-^^

upon,  was  winched  up  in  that  chaire,  and  fastened  unto  Byraltom.
the  maineyard  of  a  galley,  and  hoisted  up  with  a  crane,
to  shew  him  to  all  the  Christian  souldiours and  slaves
(which were in  the haven already  shipped) hee being
afterward  let  downe,  and  brought  to the market  place,
the  tormenters  tooke  of  his  clothes  from  him,  and  tacked
him  unto  the  pillorie,  whereas  he  was  most  cruelly  flaied
quicke  ;  with  so  great  constancie  and  faith  on  his  part,
that he never lost or abated any  jot of  his stedfast
courage, being so  farre  from any  fainting, that  hee  at  His  death
that  present  with  most  stout  heart  reproched  them,  and  ^"J'^^rable  to
spake  much shame of  his most traiterous dealing in -^ -^ '
breaking of  his  faithfull promise. At  the  last  without
any  kind  of  alteration  of  his  constancie,  he  recommending  *  j  foist  is  as
his  soule  unto  almightie  God,  gave  up  the  ghost. When  itwereaBri-
hee  had  thus  ended  his  life  (thanks  be  to  God)  his  skin  gandine,  being
being taken and filled  with strawe, was commaunded  ^°^^'^"-^^
foorthwith  to  be  hanged  upon  the  bowsprit  of  a  *Foist,  ^^/^  ^  galley,
and  to  be  caried  alongst  the  coast  of  Syria  by  the  sea  side,  much  used  of
that  all  the  port  townes  might  see,  and  understand  who  the  Turkish
he was.  Cursaros,oras

,T-,,  . .  IT  1  1  J 1  ^^  '^<^"  them

1  his  IS  now  so  much  as  1  am  able  to  declare  to  your  pi^-^tes  or

highnesse  by  that I sawe my  selfe, and  can  remember  Rovers.

147

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

whilest  that  I  was  in  the  Fortresse  :  that  also  which  by

true  relation  of  others  I  could  understand,  and  sawe  also

my  selfe  in  the  campe,  whilest  I  was  slave,  I  will  likewise

briefly  utter  unto  you. The  enemies  armie  was  in  num-

[II.  i.  129.] ber two hundred thousand persons of all sortes and

qualities. Of  souldiers  which  tooke  pay  there  were  80.

thousand, besides the which number, there were 14.

thousand  of  Giannizzers  taken  out  from  all  the  holdes

of  Syria,  Caramania,  Natolia,  and  part  of  them  also  which

*  The  gate  of  came  from  the  *  gate  of  the  great  Turke. The  venturers

the  great ^fi\\}ci the sword were 60. thousand in number. The

much)o\a^- reason,  why  there  were  so  many  of  this  sort,  was  because

as  Constantin-  Mustafa had dispersed a rumour through  the  Turkes

ople :  the dominion,  that  Famagusta  was  much  more  wealthy  and

which  they rxciti^  then  the  citie  of  Nicosia  was  : so  for  that  cause,  and

% ^k' h^ by  the  commodious  and  easie  passage  from  Syria over

language  into  Cyprus,  these  venturers  were  easily  induced  to  come

Stanboli.  thither. In 75. dayes  (all  the  which time  the batterie

GliVenturieri  still  continued)  1 40.  thousand  iron  pellets  were  shot  of,

da  spada,  are numbred,  and  scene. The  chiefe  personages  which  were

a  in of  ven-  . ^|^  • ^iXrmQ  neere  unto  Mustafa,  were  these  foUowinsr  :

diers  who the  Bassa  of  Aleppo,  the  Bassa  or  Natolia,  Musarer  Bassa

commonly  are of  Nicosia, the Bassa of Caramania, the Aga of the

wont  to  follow  Giannizzers,  Giambelat  *  Bey,  the  Sangiaccho  of  Tripolis,

^hlToFtlle ^^^ *Begliarbei of Greece, the Bassa of Scivassi and

stoile.  of Marasco, Ferca Framburaro, the *  Sangiaccho of

Aleppo,  a  fa- Antipo, Soliman Bey, three Sangiacchos of Arabia,

mous  citie Mustafa  Bey  generall of  the Venturers, Fergat  gover-

neereunto j-^q^j. ^f Malathia, the Framburaro of Diverie, the

»zorz^, Sangiaccho of  Arabia and other Sangiacchos of lesser
otherwise  &  .  , ,  ,  r  r  1  j

called  in  credite.  With  the  number  or  tourescore  thousand  persons

Greeke,  rjXLo-  besides,  as  by  the  muster  made  by  his  Commission  might
TToXts,  the  city  ^g^  appeare.

0/ 1  e  tinne.  ^j^^  Framburaro  which  was  at  Rhodes,  was  appointed
Turkish  "^'^  ^"^  ^^^^  governour  at  Famagusta,  and  the  report  was  that
language,  there  should  bee  left  in  all  the  Island  of  Cyprus,  twentie
signifieth  thousand  persons,  with  two  thousand  horses,  many  of  the

knightwithus.  y^rhich  I saw,  being  very  leane  and evill  appoynted  for

148

zvits,  y  caiis-
eth  boldnes.

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  ad.

1571-
service. It  seemeth  also  a  thing  not  impertinent  to  the  *  Begliarbci
matter,  to  signifie  to  you,  how  I,  by  the  especiall  grace  of  ^^S^^fi^^th ^°rd
God, was  delivered  out  of  their  cruel hands,  I  having  ^ .  *
paied  within  two  &  fortie  dayes  (all  the  which  time  I  was  is  that  person
slave) five hundred Zechins for my ransome to him,  w*  the
whose  prisoner  I  was,  by  the  meanes  of  the  Consul  for  Turkes,  that
the French merchants,  a  ligier  then  at  Tripolis,  who  a  SP'^"J^^^'^  ^
litle  before  came  from  Tripolis  in  Syria  unto  Cyprus,  into  countrey.
the Turkes  campe. Yet for  all  that I had paied this  God  suffereth
summe  of  money  to  him,  hee  would  not  so  set  me  at  much  to  be
libertie,  but  fed  mee  up  still  with  faire  wordes,  and  pro-  ^°^^  ^°  ^"
mised mee that hee  would first bring mee unto his  ^^^'^^^p

o  never  for-

governement,  which  abutted  upon  a  piece  of  the  famous  saketh  them.
river  of  Euphrates,  and  afterward  dismisse  me.  The  isiecessitie  oft
which  malice  and  falsehood  of  his  I  perceiving,  deter-  times  sharp-
mined  with  my  selfe  to  give  him  the  slip,  and  to  flie  ;  so  ^^^-^  ^^'"
I  waiting  my  time,  and  repairing  often  to  the  Citie,  at
length  met  with  a  small  Fisher  boate,  of  the  which  a
poore  Grecian  was  Owner  and  master,  with  whom  in  one
night  with  two  onely  oares  and  a  small  saile  made  of  two
shirts,  I  passed  over  from  Cyprus  unto  Tripolis,  being  in
very  great  danger  of  drowning,  whereas  I  remained  in
covert  in  the  house  of  certaine  Christians,  untill  the  five
and  twentie  of  September,  at  what  time  I  departed  from
thence  in  a  little  French  shippe  called  Santa  Vittor,  which
came  into  these  partes,  and  as  wee  rode,  wee  touched  at  a
part  of  Cyprus  Westward,  called  Capo  delle  Gatte,  where
as  I  came  on  land,  and  talking  with  certaine  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  Villages,  who  were  then  by  chaunce  a
Hauking,  demaunded  of  them,  how  they  were  intreated
of  the  Turkes,  and  after  what  sort  the  Island  was  tilled  :
to  the  which  they  answered,  that  they  could  not  possiblie  „,  _ -

bee  in  worse  pickle  then  they  were  at  that  present,  not  ^^^™  commo-
enjoying  that  quietly  which  was  their  owne,  being  made  ditie  is  sooner
villaines  and  slaves,  and  almost  alwayes  carying  away  the  understood  by
Bastonados,  so  that  now  (they  sayd)  they  knew  by  triall  ^f^^^S^^  ^^"l
too perfectly  the pleasant  and  peaceable  government  of  gnjoYingof
the  Christians,  wishing  and  praying  God  that  they  might  the  same.

149

A.D.

157I.

*  Candia,  of
the  old  writers
called  Creta
in  latin,

^KaTOfJiTToXtS

in  Greek,  be-
cause it  had
tnce  a  \oo.
Cities  in  it,
now  there  re-
maining but
onely  4.  thus
commonly
named,  Can-
dia, la  Cania,
Retima,  and
Scythia.

[II.  i.  130.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

shortly  returne.  And  concerning  the  tillage  of  the  Island
they  made  answere  moreover,  that  no  part  of  it  was
plowed  or  laboured,  saving  onely  that  mountaine  which
was  towards  the  West,  and  that  because  they  were  litle
troubled  with  the  crueltie  of  the  Turkes,  but  as  for  the
plaine  and  East  part  of  the  Island,  there  was  small  seede
sowen  therein,  but  became  in  a  maner  desert,  there  being
left  but  few  inhabitants,  and  lesse  store  of  cattell  there.
Afterward  wee  departing  from  thence  arrived  in  *  Candia,
I  for  my  part  being  clothed  in  sackecloth,  whereas  soone
after  by  the  great  curtesie  of  the  right  honourable  Signior
Latino  Orsino,  I  was  new  apparelled  accordingly,  friendly
welcommed,  and  my  necessitie  relieved.  From  whence  I
shortly  after  sayling  in  a  Cypriottes  ship  (thankes  be  to
almightie  God)  arrived  in  this  Citie  in  health,  and  am
safely  come  home  now  at  the  honorable  feete  of  your
highnesse.

The  Captains  of  the  Christians  slaine  in
Famagusta.

THe  lord  Estor  Baglione.
The  lord  Aluigi  Martinengo.
The  lord  Federico  Baglione.
The  knight  of  Asta  Vicegovernor.
The  capitaine  David  Noce  Master  of  the  Campe.
The  capitaine  Meani  of  Perugia  Serjeant  Major.
The  earle  Sigismond  of  Casoldo.
The  earle  Francesco  of  Lobi  of  Cremona.
The  captaine  Francesco  Troncavilla.
The  captaine  Hannibal  Adamo  of  Fermo.
The  captaine  Scipio  of  the  citie  of  Castello.
The  captaine  Charles  Ragonasco  of  Cremona.
The  captaine  Francesco  Siraco.
The  captaine  Roberto  Malvezzo.
The  captaine  Caesar  of  Adversa.
The  captaine Bernardin  of  Agubio.
The  captaine  Francesco  Bugon  of  Verona.
The  captaine  James  of  Fabiano.

150

THE LOSS OF FAMAGUSTA  ad

1571,
The  captaine  Sebastian  del  Sole  of  Florence.
The captaine  Hector of  Brescia, the  successour to  the

captaine  Caesar  of  Adversa.
The captaine Flaminio of Florence, successor unto

Sebastian  del  Sole.
The captaine Erasmus of Fermo, successor to the

captaine  of  Cernole.
The  captaine  Bartholomew  of  Cernole.
The  captaine  John  Battista  of  Rivarole.
The  captaine  John  Francesco  of  Venice.

The  names  of  Christians  made  slaves.

THe  Earle Herocles  Martinengo,  with  Julius  Caesar
Ghelfo  a  Souldiour  of  Bressa.

The  earle  Nestor  Martinengo,  which  fled.

The  captaine  Marco  Crivellatore.

The  lord  Herocles  Malatesta.

The  captaine  Peter  Conte  of  Montalberto.

The  captaine  Horatio  of  Veletri.

The  captaine  Aluigi  Pezano.

The  Conte  James  of  Corbara.

The  captaine  John  of  Istria.

The  captaine  Soldatelli  of  Agubio.

The  captaine  John  of  Ascoli.

The  captaine  Antonie  of  the  same  towne.

The  captaine  Sebastian  of  the  same  towne.

The  captaine  Salgano  of  the  citie  of  Castello.

The  captaine  Marcheso  of  Fermo.

The  captaine  John  Antonio  of  Piacenza.

The  captaine  Carletto  Naldo.

The  captaine  Lorenzo  Fornaretti.

The  captaine  Barnardo  of  Brescia.

The  captaine  Barnardino  Coco.  [David  Noce.

The  captaine  Simon  Bagnese,  successour  to  the  captaine

The captaine Tiberio Ceruto, successor unto Conte
Sigismond.

The  captaine  Joseph  of  Lanciano,  successour  unto cap-
taine Francesco  Troncavilla.

151

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1571.

The  captaine  Morgante,  successor  to  captain  Hannibal.

The  Lieutenant,  successour  unto  the  captaine  Scipio.

The  Standerdbearer,  successour  to  captaine  Roberto.

The  captaine  Ottavio  of  Rimini,  successour  to  the
captaine  Francesco  Bugon.

The  captaine  Mario  de  Fabiano,  successour  to  captaine
Jacomo.

The  captaine  Francesco  of  Venice,  successour  unto  cap-
taine Antonio.

The  captaine  Matteo  of  Capua.

The  captaine  John  Maria  of  Verona.

The  captaine  Mancino.

The  Fortifiers.

John  Marmori,  slaine.
The  knight  Maggio,  slave.

Turkish  Captaines  at  Famagusta.

Ustafa  Generall.
The  Bassa  of  Aleppo.
The  Bassa  of  Natolia,  slaine.
Musafer  Bassa  of  Nicosia.
The  Bassa  of  Caramania.
The  Aga  of  the  Giannizers.
Giambelat  Bey.

The  Sangiaccho  of  Tripolis,  slaine.
The  Begliarbei  of  Greece.
[11.  i.  131.]  The  Bassa  of  Scivassi  and  Marasco.
Ferca  Framburaro.
The  Sangiaccho  of  Antipo,  slaine.
Soliman  Bey,  slaine.
Three  Sangiacchos  of  Arabia, slaine.
Mustafa  Bey,  General  of  the  Venturers,  slain.
Fergat,  ruler  of  Malathia,  slaine.
The  Framburaro  of  Diverie,  slaine.

152

M'

THE ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX  ad

1563-

The  woorthy  enterprise  of  John  Foxe  an  English-
man in  delivering  266.  Christians  out  of  the
captivitie  of  the  Turkes  at  Alexandria,  the  3.
of  Januarie 1577.

Mong  our  merchants  here  in  England,
it  is  a  common  voiage  to  traffike  into
Spaine  :  whereunto  a  ship,  being  called
The  three  halfe  Moones,  manned  with
38.  men,  and  well  fensed  with  munitions,
the  better  to  encounter  their  enemies
withall,  and  having  wind  &  tide,  set  from
Portsmouth,  1563.  and  bended  her  journey  toward
Sivill  a  citie  in  Spaine,  intending  there  to  trafique  with  John  Foxe
them.  And  falling  neere  the  Streights,  they  perceived  ^^^^^  ^563-
themselves  to  be  beset  round  with  eight  gallies  of  the
Turkes,  in  such  wise,  that  there  was  no  way  for  them
to  flie  or  escape  away,  but  that  either  they  must  yeeld
or  els  be  sunke.  Which  the  owner  perceiving,  manfully
encouraged  his  company,  exhorting  them  valiantly  to
shew  their  manhood,  shewing  them  that  God  was  their
God,  and  not  their  enemies,  requesting  them  also  not
to  faint  in  seeing  such  a  heape  of  their  enemies  ready
to  devour  them  ;  putting  them  in  mind  also,  that  if  it
were  Gods  pleasure  to  give  them  into  their  enemies
hands,  it  was  not  they  y*  ought  to  shew  one  displeasant
looke  or  countenance  thereagainst  ;  but  to  take  it
patiently,  &  not  to  prescribe  a  day  and  time  for  their
deliverance,  as  the  citizens  of  Bethulia  did,  but  to  put
themselves  under  his  mercy.  And  againe,  if  it  were  his
mind  and  good  will  to  shew  his  mighty  power  by  them,
if  their  enemies  were  ten  times  so  many,  they  were  not
able  to  stand  in  their  hands  ;  putting  them  likewise  in
mind  of  the  old  and  ancient  woorthinesse  of  their
countreymen,  who  in  the  hardest  extremities  have  alwayes
most  prevailed  and  gone  away  conquerors,  yea,  and  where
it hath  bene  almost  impossible. Such (quoth  he)  hath

153

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563.

bene  the  valiantnesse  of  our  countreymen,  and  such  hath
bene  the  mightie  power  of  our  God.

With  other  like  incouragements,  exhorting  them  to
behave  themselves  manfully,  they  fell  all  on  their  knees
making  their  prayers  briefly  unto  God  :  who  being  all
risen  up  againe  perceived  their  enemies  by  their  signes
and  defiances  bent  to  the  spoyle,  whose  mercy  was  nothing
els  but  crueltie,  whereupon  every  man  tooke  him  to  his
weapon.

Then  stood  up  one  Grove  the  master,  being  a  comely
mafi,  with  his  sword  and  target,  holding  them  up  in
defiance  agaynst  his  enemies.  So  likewise  stood  up  the
Owner,  the  Masters  mate,  Boateswaine,  Purser,  and  every
man  well  appointed.  Nowe  likewise  sounded  up  the
drums,  trumpets  and  flutes,  which  would  have  encouraged
any  man,  had  he  never  so  litle  heart  or  courage  in
him.

Then  taketh  him  to  his  charge  John  Foxe  the  gunner
in  the  disposing  of  his  pieces  in  order  to  the  best  eff^ect,
and  sending  his  bullets  towards  the  Turkes,  who  like-
wise bestowed  their  pieces  thrise  as  fast  toward  the
Christians.  But  shortly  they  drew  neere,  so  that  the
bowmen  fel  to  their  charge  in  sending  forth  their  arrowes
so  thicke  amongst  the  Gallies,  &  also  in  doubling  their
shot  so  sore  upon  the  gallies,  that  there  were  twise  so
many  of  the  Turkes  slaine,  as  the  number  of  the
Christians  were  in  all.  But  the  Turks  discharged  twise
as  fast  against  the  Christians,  &  so  long,  that  the  ship
was  very  sore  stricken  &  bruised  under  water.  Which
the  Turkes  perceiving,  made  the  more  haste  to  come
aboord  the  Shippe  :  which  ere  they  could  doe,  many
a  Turke  bought  it  deerely  with  the  losse  of  their  lives.
Yet  was  all  in  vaine,  and  boorded  they  were,  where  they
found  so  hote  a  skirmish,  that  it  had  bene  better  they
had  not  medled  with  the  feast.  For  the  Englishmen
shewed  themselves  men  in  deed,  in  working  manfully
with  their  browne  bils  and  halbardes  :  where  the  owner,
master, boateswaine,  and their  company  stoode  to  it  so

154

THE ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX  a.d.

1563.
lustily,  that  the  Turkes  were  halfe  dismaied.  But  chiefly  The  valour^
the  boateswaine  shewed  himself  valiant  above  the  rest  :  '^^^^'^  of  their
for  he  fared  amongst  the  Turkes  like  a  wood  Lion  :  for  °^^^'^^^^^-
there  was  none  of  them  that  either  could  or  durst  stand
in  his  face,  till  at  the  last  there  came  a  shot  from  the
Turkes,  which  brake  his  whistle  asunder,  and  smote  him
on  the  brest,  so  that  he  fell  downe,  bidding  them  fare-
well, &  to  be  of  good  comfort,  encouraging  them  likewise
to  winne  praise  by  death,  rather  then  to  live  captives
in  misery  and  shame.  Which  they  hearing,  in  deed
intended  to  have  done,  as  it  appeared  by  their  skirmish  :
but  the  prease  and  store  of  the  Turkes  was  so  great,
that  they  were  not  able  long  to  endure,  but  were  so
overpressed,  that  they  could  not  wield  their  weapons  :
by  reason  whereof,  they  must  needs  be  taken,  which  none  [II.  i.  132.]
of  them  intended  to  have  bene,  but  rather  to  have  died :
except  onely  the  masters  mate,  who  shrunke  from  the
skirmish,  like  a  notable  coward,  esteeming  neither  the
valure  of  his  name,  nor  accounting  of  the  present  example
of  his  fellowes,  nor  having  respect  to  the  miseries,  where-
unto  he  should  be  put.  But  in  fine,  so  it  was,  that  the
Turks  were  victors,  whereof  they  had  no  great  cause  to
rejoyce,  or  triumph.  Then  would  it  have  grieved  any
hard  heart  to  see  these  Infidels  so  violently  intreating  the
Christians,  not  having  any  respect  of  their  manhood
which  they  had  tasted  of,  nor  yet  respecting  their  owne
state,  how  they  might  have  met  with  such  a  bootie,  as
might  have  given  them  the  overthrow :  but  no  remorse
hereof,  or  any  thing  els  doth  bridle  their  fierce  and
tirannous  dealing,  but  that  the  Christians  must  needs  to
the  gallies,  to  serve  in  new  offices :  and  they  were  no
sooner  in  them,  but  their  garments  were  pulled  over
their  eares,  and  torne  from  their  backes,  and  they  set  to
the  oares.

I  will  make  no  mention  of  their  miseries,  being  now
under  their  enemies  raging  stripes.  I  thinke  there  is
no  man  wil  judge  their  fare  good,  or  their  bodies  unloden
of  stripes,  and  not pestered with too much  heate,  and

155

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563.

also  with  too  much  cold :  but  I  will  goe  to  my  purpose,
which  is,  to  shew  the  ende  of  those,  being  in  meere
miserie,  which  continually  doe  call  on  God  with  a  stedfast
hope  that  he  will  deliver  them,  and  with  a  sure  faith  that
he  can  doe  it.

Nigh  to  the  citie  of  Alexandria,  being  a  haven  towne,
and  under  the  dominion  of  the  Turkes,  there  is  a  roade,
being  made  very  fensible  with  strong  wals,  whereinto  the
Turkes  doe  customably  bring  their  gallies  on  shoare  every
yeere,  in  the  winter  season,  and  there  doe  trimme  them,
and  lay  them  up  against  the  spring  time.  In  which  road
there  is  a  prison,  wherein  the  captives  &  such  prisoners
as  serve  in  the  gallies,  are  put  for  all  that  time,  untill
the  seas  be  calme  and  passable  for  the  gallies,  every
prisoner  being  most  grievously  laden  with  irons  on  their
legges,  to  their  great  paine,  and  sore  disabling  of  them
The  English-  to  any  labour  taking.  Into  which  prison  were  these
men  caned  Christians  put,  and  fast  warded  all  the  Winter  season.
^Inulvennere  ^^^  ere  it  was  long,  the  Master  and  the  Owner,  by
Alexandria,  meanes  of  friends,  were  redeemed :  the  rest  abiding  still
by  the  miserie,  while  that  they  were  all  (through  reason
of  their  ill  usage  and  worse  fare,  miserably  starved)
saving  one  John  Fox,  who  (as  some  men  can  abide  harder
and  more  miserie,  then  other  some  can,  so  can  some
likewise  make  more  shift,  and  worke  more  devises  to
helpe  their  state  and  living,  then  other  some  can  doe)
being  somewhat  skilfull  in  the  craft  of  a  Barbour,  by
reason  thereof  made  great  shift  in  helping  his  fare  now
and  then  with  a  good  meale.  Insomuch,  til  at  the  last,
God  sent  him  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper  of  the
prison,  so  that  he  had  leave  to  goe  in  and  out  to  the
road,  at  his  pleasure,  paying  a  certaine  stipend  unto  the
keeper,  and  wearing  a  locke  about  his  leg :  which  libertie
likewise,  sixe  more  had  upon  like  sufferance :  who  by
reason  of  their  long  imprisonment,  not  being  feared  or
suspected  to  start  aside,  or  that  they  would  worke  the
Turkes  any  mischiefe,  had  libertie  to  go  in  and  out
at the sayd road, in such maner, as this John Fox

156

THE ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX  ad.

1577-
did,  with irons  on  their legs,  and  to  returne  againe  at
night.

In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1577.  in  the  Winter  season,
the  gallies  happily  comming  to  their  accustomed  harborow,
and  being  discharged  of  all  their  mastes,  sailes,  and  other
such  furnitures,  as  unto  gallies  doe  appertaine,  and  all
the  Masters  and  mariners  of  them  being  then  nested  in
their  owne  homes :  there  remained  in  the  prison  of  the
said  road  two  hundred  threescore  and  eight  Christian
prisoners,  who  had  bene  taken  by  the  Turks  force,  and
were  of  sixteen  sundry  nations.  Among  which  there  were
three  Englishmen,  whereof  one  was  named  John  Foxe
of  Woodbridge  in  Suifolke,  the  other  William  Wickney
of  Portsmouth,  in  the  Countie  of  Southhampton,  and  the
third  Robert  Moore  of  Harwich  in  the  Countie  of
Essex.  Which  John  Fox  having  bene  thirteene  or  foure-
teene  yeres  under  their  gentle  entreatance,  and  being  too
too  weary  thereof,  minding  his  escape,  weighed  with
himselfe  by  what  meanes  it  might  be  brought  to  passe :
and  continually  pondering  with  himself  thereof,  tooke  a
good  heart  unto  him,  in  hope  that  God  would  not
be  alwayes  scourging  his  children,  and  never  ceassed
to  pray  him  to  further  his  pretended  enterprise,  if  that
it  should  redound  to  his  glory.

Not  farre  from  the  road,  and  somewhat  from  thence,
at  one  side  of  the  Citie,  there  was  a  certaine  victualling
house,  which  one  Peter  Unticaro  had  hired,  paying  also
a  certaine  fee  unto  the  keeper  of  the  road.  This  Peter
Unticaro  was  a  Spaniard  borne,  and  a  Christian,  and  had
bene  prisoner  about  thirtie  yeeres,  and  never  practised
any  meanes  to  escape,  but  kept  himselfe  quiet  without
touch  or  suspect  of  any  conspiracie :  untill  that  nowe
this  John  Foxe  using  much  thither,  they  brake  one  to
another  their  mindes,  concerning  the  restraint  of  their
libertie  and  imprisonment.  So  that  this  John  Fox  at
length  opening  unto  this  Unticaro  the  devise  which  he
would  faine  put  in  practise,  made  privie  one  more  to
this their intent. Which three  debated of  this  matter

157

A.D.

1577-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  last  of
December.

at  such  times  as  they  could  compasse  to  meete  together:
insomuch,  that  at  seven  weekes  ende  they  had  sufficiently
concluded  how  the  matter  should  be,  if  it  pleased  God
[II.  i.  133.]  to  farther  them  thereto:  who  making  five  more  privie
to  this  their  devise,  whom  they  thought  they  might  safely
trust,  determined  in  three  nights  after  to  accomplish  their
deliberate  purpose.  Whereupon  the  same  John  Fox,  and
Peter  Unticaro,  and  the  other  sixe  appointed  to  meete
all  together  in  the  prison  the  next  day,  being  the  last
day  of  December:  where  this  John  Fox  certified  the  rest
of  the  prisoners,  what  their  intent  and  devise  was,  and
how  and  when  they  minded  to  bring  their  purpose  to
passe :  who  thereunto  perswaded  them  without  much  a
doe  to  further  their  devise.  Which  the  same  John  Fox
seeing,  delivered  unto  them  a  sort  of  files,  which  he  had
gathered  together  for  this  purpose,  by  the  meanes  of
Peter  Unticaro,  charging  them  that  every  man  should  be
readie  discharged  of  his  yrons  by  eight  of  the  clocke
on  the  next  day  at  night.

On  the  next  day  at  night,  this  said  John  Fox,  and  his
sixe  other  companions,  being  all  come  to  the  house  of
Peter  Unticaro,  passing  the  time  away  in  mirth  for  feare
of  suspect,  till  the  night  came  on,  so  that  it  was  time
for  them  to  put  in  practise  their  devise,  sent  Peter
Unticaro  to  the  master  of  the  roade,  in  the  name  of  one
of  the  Masters  of  the  citie,  with  whom  this  keeper  was
acquainted,  and  at  whose  request  he  also  would  come  at
the  first :  who  desired  him  to  take  the  paines  to  meete
him  there,  promising  him,  that  he  would  bring  him
backe  againe.  The  keeper  agreed  to  goe  with  him,
willing  the  warders  not  to  barre  the  gate,  saying,  that
he  would  not  stay  long,  but  would  come  againe  with
all  speede.

In  the  meane  season,  the  other  seven  had  provided
them  of  such  weapons,  as  they  could  get  in  that  house :
and  John  Fox  tooke  him  to  an  olde  rustie  sword  blade,
without  either  hilt  or  pomell,  which  he  made  to  serve  his
turne,  in  bending  the  hand  ende  of  the  sword,  in  steed

158

Janmrie.

THE ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX  a.d.

1578.

of  a  pomell,  and  the  other  had  got  such  spits  and  glaives
as  they  found  in  the  house.

The  keeper  now  being  come  unto  the  house,  and
perceiving  no  light,  nor  hearing  any  noyse,  straightway
suspected  the  matter :  and  returning  backward,  John  Fox
standing  behind  the  corner  of  the  house,  stepped  foorth
unto  him  :  who  perceiving  it  to  be  John  Fox,  saide,  O
Fox,  what  have  I  deserved  of  thee,  that  thou  shouldest
seeke  my  death  ?  Thou  villaine  (quoth  Fox)  hast  bene
a  bloodsucker  of  many  a  Christians  blood,  and  now  thou
shalt  know  what  thou  hast  deserved  at  my  handes :
wherewith  he  lift  up  his  bright  shining  sword  of  tenne
yeeres  rust,  and  stroke  him  so  maine  a  blowe,  as  there-
withall  his  head  clave  a  sunder,  so  that  he  fell  starke  dead
to  the  ground.  Whereupon  Peter  Unticaro  went  in,  and
certified  the  rest  how  the  case  stood  with  the  keeper :
who  came  presently  foorth,  and  some  with  their  spits
ranne  him  through,  and  the  other  with  their  glaives
hewed  him  in  sunder,  cut  off  his  head,  and  mangled  him
so,  that  no  man  should  discerne  what  he  was.

Then  marched  they  toward  the  roade,  whereinto  they
entered  softly,  where  were  six  warders,  whom  one  of
them  asked,  saying,  who  was  there  ?  quoth  Fox  &  his
company,  all  friendes.  Which  when  they  were  all  within,
proved  contrary :  for,  quoth  Fox,  my  masters,  here  is
not  to  every  man  a  man,  wherefore  looke  you  play  your
parts.  Who  so  behaved  themselves  in  deede,  that  they
had  dispatched  these  sixe  quickly.  Then  John  Fox
intending  not  to  be  barred  of  his  enterprise,  and  minding
to  worke  surely  in  that  which  he  went  about,  barred  the
gate  surely,  and  planted  a  Canon  against  it.

Then  entred  they  into  the  Gailers  lodge,  where  they
found  the  keyes  of  the  fortresse  &  prison  by  his  bed
side,  and  there  had  they  all  better  weapons.  In  this
chamber  was  a  chest,  wherein  was  a  rich  treasure,  and
all  in  duckats,  which  this  Peter  Unticaro,  &  two  more,
opening,  stuffed  themselves  so  full  as  they  could,  be-
tweene  their  shirts and their  skinne : which  John  Fox

159

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

i57«.

would  not  once  touch,  and  sayde,  that  it  was  his  and  their
libertie  which  he  sought  for,  to  the  honour  of  his  God,
&  not  to  make  a  marte  of  the  wicked  treasure  of  the
Infidels.  Yet  did  these  words  sinke  nothing  into  their
stomakes,  they  did  it  for  a  good  intent :  so  did  Saul  save
the  fattest  Oxen,  to  offer  unto  the  Lord,  and  they  to
serve  their  owne  turne.  But  neither  did  Saul  scape  the
wrath  of  God  therefore,  neither  had  these  that  thing
which  they  desired  so,  and  did  thirst  after.  Such  is
Gods  justice.  He  that  they  put  their  trust  in,  to  deliver
them  from  the  tyrannous  hands  of  their  enemies,  he
(I  say)  could  supply  their  want  of  necessaries.

Nowe  these  eight  being  armed  with  such  weapons  as
they  thought  well  of,  thinking  themselves  sufficient
champions  to  encounter  a  stronger  enemie,  and  com-
ming  unto  the  prison.  Fox  opened  the  gates  and  doores
thereof,  and  called  forth  all  the  prisoners,  whom  he  set,
some  to  ramming  up  the  gate,  some  to  the  dressing  up
of  a  certaine  gallie,  which  was  the  best  in  all  the  roade,
and  was  called  the  captaine  of  Alexandria,  whereinto  some
caried  mastes,  sailes,  oares,  and  other  such  furniture  as
doth  belong  unto  a  gallie.

At  the  prison  were  certaine  warders,  whom  John  Fox
and  his  companie  slewe  :  in  the  killing  of  whom,  there
were  eight  more  of  the  Turkes,  which  perceived  them,
and  got  them  to  the  toppe  of  the  prison  :  unto  whom
John  Fox,  and  his  company,  were  faine  to  come  by
[II.  i.  134.]  ladders,  where  they  found  a  hot  skirmish.  For  some
of  them  were  there  slaine,  some  wounded,  and  some  but
scarred,  and  not  hurt.  As  John  Fox  was  thrise  shot
through  his  apparell,  and  not  hurt,  Peter  Unticaro,  and
the  other  two,  that  had  armed  them  with  the  duckats,
were  slaine,  as  not  able  to  weild  themselves,  being  so
pestered  with  the  weight  and  uneasie  carying  of  the
wicked  and  prophane  treasure  :  and  also  diverse  Christians
were  aswell  hurt  about  that  skirmish,  as  Turkes  slaine.

Amongst  the  Turkes  was  one  thrust  thorowe,  who  (let
us  not  say  that  it  was  ill  fortune)  fell  off  from  the  toppe

160

[II.

THE ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX  ad.

1577-
of  the  prison  wall,  and  made  such  a  lowing,  that  the
inhabitants  thereabout  (as  here  and  there  scattering
stoode  a  house  or  two)  came  and  dawed  him,  so  that
they  understood  the  case,  how  that  the  prisoners  were
paying  their  ransomes  :  wherewith  they  raised  both
Alexandria  which  lay  on  the  west  side  of  the  roade,  and
a  Castle  which  was  at  the  Cities  end,  next  to  the  roade,
and  also  an  other  Fortresse  which  lay  on  the  Northside  of
the  roade  :  so  that  nowe  they  had  no  way  to  escape,  but
one,  which  by  mans  reason  (the  two  holdes  lying  so  upon
the  mouth  of  the  roade)  might  seeme  impossible  to  be
a  way  for  them.  So  was  the  red  sea  impossible  for  the
Israelites  to  passe  through,  the  hils  and  rockes  lay  so  on
the  one  side,  and  their  enemies  compassed  them  on  the
other.  So  was  it  impossible,  that  the  wals  of  Jericho
should  fall  downe,  being  neither  undermined,  nor  yet
rammed  at  with  engines,  nor  yet  any  mans  wisedome,
poUicie,  or  helpe  set  or  put  thereunto.  Such  impossi-
bilities can  our  God  make  possible.  He  that  helde  the
Lyons  jawes  from  renting  Daniel  asunder,  yea,  or  yet
from  once  touching  him  to  his  hurt  :  can  not  he  hold
the  roring  canons  of  this  hellish  force  .?  He  that  kept
the  fiers  rage  in  the  hot  burning  Oven,  from  the  three
children,  that  praised  his  name,  can  not  he  keepe  the  fiers
flaming  Wastes  from  among  his  elect  ?

Now  is  the  roade  fraught  with  lustie  souldiers,  laborers,
and  mariners,  who  are  faine  to  stand  to  their  tackling,  in
setting  to  every  man  his  hand,  some  to  the  carying  in  of
victuals,  some  munitions,  some  oares,  and  some  one  thingj
some  another,  but  most  are  keeping  their  enemie  from
the  wall  of  the  road.  But  to  be  short,  there  was  no  time
mispent,  no  man  idle,  nor  any  mans  labour  ill  bestowed,,
or  in  vaine.  So  that  in  short  time,  this  gaily  was  ready
trimmed  up.  Whereinto  every  man  leaped  in  all  haste,,
hoyssing  up  the  sayles  lustily,  yeelding  themselves  to  his
mercie  and  grace,  in  whose  hands  are  both  winde  and
weather.

Now  is  this  gaily  on  flote,  and  out  of  the  safetie  of  the
V  i6i  L

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

roade  :  now  have  the  two  Castles  full  power  upon  the
gaily,  now  is  there  no  remedy  but  to  sinke  :  how  can  it
be  avoided  ?  The  canons  let  flie  from  both  sides,  and
the  gaily  is  even  in  the  middest,  and  betweene  them  both.
What  man  can  devise  to  save  it  ?  there  is  no  man,  but
would  thinke  it  must  needes  be  sunke.

There  was  not  one  of  them  that  feared  the  shotte,
which  went  thundring  round  about  their  eares,  nor  yet
were  once  scarred  or  touched,  with  five  &  forty  shot,
which  came  from  the  Castles.  Here  did  God  hold  foorth
his  buckler,  he  shieldeth  now  this  gaily,  and  hath  tried
their  faith  to  the  uttermost.  Now  commeth  his  speciall
helpe  :  yea,  even  when  man  thinks  them  past  all  helpe,
then  commeth  he  himselfe  downe  from  heaven  with  his
mightie  power,  then  is  his  present  remedie  most  readie
prest.  For  they  saile  away,  being  not  once  touched  with
the  glaunce  of  a  shot,  and  are  quickly  out  of  the  Turkish
canons  reach.  Then  might  they  see  them  comming
downe  by  heapes  to  the  water  side,  in  companies  like  unto
swarmes  of  bees,  making  shew  to  come  after  them  with
gallies,  in  bustling  themselves  to  dresse  up  the  gallies,
which  would  be  a  swift  peece  of  worke  for  them  to  doe,
for  that  they  had  neither  oares,  mastes,  sailes,  gables,  nor
any  thing  else  ready  in  any  gaily.  But  yet  they  are  cary-
ing  them  into  them,  some  into  one  gaily,  and  some  into
another,  so  that,  being  such  a  confusion  amongst  them,
without  any  certaine  guide,  it  were  a  thing  impossible  to
overtake  them  :  beside  that,  there  was  no  man  that  would
take  charge  of  a  gaily,  the  weather  was  so  rough,  and
there  was  such  an  amasednes  amongst  them.  And  verely
I  thinke  their  God  was  amased  thereat  :  it  could  not  be
but  he  must  blush  for  shame,  he  can  speake  never  a  word
for  dulnes,  much  lesse  can  he  helpe  them  in  such  an
extremitie.  Well,  howsoever  it  is,  he  is  very  much  to
blame,  to  suffer  them  to  receive  such  a  gibe.  But  howso-
ever their  God  behaved  himselfe,  our  God  shewed  him-
selfe a  God  indeede,  and  that  he  was  the  onely  living
God  :  for  the  seas  were  swift  under  his  faithful!,  which

162

THE ENTERPRISE OF  JOHN FOX  ad.

1577.
made  the  enemies  agast  to  behold  them,  a  skilfuller  Pilot
leades them,  and their mariners bestirre them lustily  :
but the Turkes had neither mariners,  Pilot, nor any
skilfull  Master,  that  was  in  a  readinesse  at  this  pinch.

When  the  Christians  were  safe  out  of  the  enemies
coast,  John  Fox  called  to  them  all,  willing  them  to  be
thankfuU  unto  almighty  God  for  their  deliverie,  and  most
humbly  to  fall  downe  upon  their  knees,  beseeching  him
to  aide  them  unto  their  friends  land,  and  not  to  bring
them  into  an  other  daunger,  sith  hee  had  most  mightily
delivered  them  from so  great  a  thraldome  and  bondage.

Thus  when  every  man  had  made  his  petition,  they  fell
straight  way  to  their  labour  with  the  oares,  in  helping  one  [II.  i.  135.]
another,  when  they  were  wearied,  and  with  great  labour
striving  to  come  to  some  Christian  land,  as  neere  as  they
could  gesse  by  the  starres.  But  the  windes  were  so
divers,  one  while  driving  them  this  way,  another  while
that  way,  that  they  were  now  in  a  new  maze,  thinking
that  God  had  forsaken  them,  and  left  them  to  a  greater
danger.  And  forasmuch  as  there  were  no  victuals  now
left  in  the  gaily,  it  might  have  beene  a  cause  to  them  (if
they  had  beene  the  Israelites)  to  have  murmured  against
their  God  : but  they  knew  how  that  their  God,  who  had  ,

delivered  them  out  of  -/Egypt,  was  such  a  loving  and
mercifull  God,  as  that  hee  would  not  suffer  them  to  be
confounded,  in  whom  he  had  wrought  so  great  a  wonder  :
but  what  calamitie  soever  they  sustained,  they  knew  it
was  but  for  their  further  triall,  and  also  (in  putting  them
in  mind  of  their  farther  miserie)  to  cause  them  not  to
triumph  and  glory  in  themselves  therefore.  Having
(I  say)  no  victuals  in  the  gaily,  it  might  seeme  that  one
miserie  continually  fel  upon  an  others  neck  :  but  to  be  Extremity  of
briefe,  the  famine  grew  to  be  so  great,  that  in  28  dayes,  fi^^^^-
wherein  they  were  on  the  sea,  there  died  eight  persons,  to
the  astonishment  of  all  the  rest.

So  it  fell  out,  that  upon  the  29  day,  after  they  set  from
Alexandria,  they  fell  on  the  Isle  of  Candie,  and  landed  at
Gallipoli,  where  they  were  made  much  of  by  the  Abbot

163

a  monument  in
Gallipoli

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

-1577-

and  Monks  there,  who  caused  them  to  stay  there,  while
John  Fox  his they  were  well  refreshed  and  eased. They  kept  there  the
sword  kept  as sworde, wherewith John Fox had killed the keeper,
esteeming  it  as  a  most  precious  Jewell,  and  hung  it  up  for
a  monument.

When  they  thought  good,  having  leave  to  depart  from
thence,  they  sayled  along  the  coast,  till  they  arrived  at
Tarento,  where  they  solde  their  gallie,  and  devided  it,
every  man  having  a  part  thereof.  The  Turkes  receiving
so  shamefull  a  foile  at  their  hand,  pursued  the  Christians,
and  scoured  the  seas,  where  they  could  imagine  that  they
had  bent  their  course.  And  the  Christians  had  departed
from  thence  on  the  one  day  in  the  morning,  and  seven
gallies  of  the  Turkes  came  thither  that  night,  as  it  was
certified  by  those  who  followed  Fox,  and  his  companie,
fearing  least  they  should  have  bene  met  with.  And  then
they  came  a  foote  to  Naples,  where  they  departed  a
sunder,  every  man  taking  him  to  his  next  way  home.
From  whence  John  Fox  tooke  his  journey  unto  Rome,
where  he  was  well  entertayned  of  an  Englishman,  who
presented  his  worthy  deede  unto  the  Pope,  who  rewarded
him  liberally,  and  gave  him  his  letters  unto  the  king
of  Spaine,  where  he  was  very  well  entertained  of  him
there,  who  for  this  his  most  worthy  enterprise  gave  him
in  fee  twentie  pence  a  day.  From  whence,  being
desirous  to  come  into  his  owne  countrie,  he  came  thither
at  such  time  as  he  conveniently  could,  which  was  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lorde  God,  1579.  Who  being  come
into  England,  went  unto  the  Court,  and  shewed  all  his
travell  unto  the  Councell  :  who  considering  of  the  state
of  this  man,  in  that  hee  had  spent  and  lost  a  great
part  of  his  youth  in  thraldome  and  bondage,  extended  to
him  their  liberalitie,  to  helpe  to  maintaine  him  now  in
age,  to  their  right  honour,  and  to  the  incouragement  of
all  true  hearted  Christians.

164

THE ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX  ad.

1577-

The  copie  of  the  certificate  for  John  Fox,  and  his
companie,  made  by  the  Prior,  and  the  brethren
of  GaUipoH,  where  they  first  landed.

WE  the  Prior,  and  Fathers  of  the  Covent  of  the
Amerciates,  of  the  city  of  Gallipoli,  of  the  order
of  Preachers  doe  testiiie,  that  upon  the  29  of  January
last  past,  1577,  there  came  in  to  the  said  citie  a  certaine
gaily  from  Alexandria,  taken  from  the  Turkes,  with  two
hundreth  iiftie  and  eight  Christians,  whereof  was  prin-
cipal Master  John  Fox,  an  Englishman,  a  gunner,  and
one  of  the  chiefest  that  did  accomplish  that  great  worke,
whereby  so  many  Christians  have  recovered  their  liberties.
In  token  and  remembrance  whereof,  upon  our  earnest
request  to  the  same  John  Fox,  he  hath  left  here  an
olde  sworde,  wherewith  he  slewe  the  keeper  of  the
prison  :  which  sword  we  doe  as  a  monument  and  memo-
rial! of  so  worthy  a  deede,  hang  up  in  the  chiefe  place
of  our  Covent  house.  And  for  because  all  things  afore-
said, are  such  as  we  will  testifie  to  be  true,  as  they  are
orderly  passed,  and  have  therefore  good  credite,  that  so
much  as  is  above  expressed  is  true,  and  for  the  more
faith  thereof,  we  the  Prior,  and  Fathers  aforesaide,  have
ratified  and  subscribed  these  presents.  Geven  in  Galli-
poly,  the  third  of  Februarie 1577.

I  Frier  Vincent  Barba,  Prior  of  the  same  place,
confirme  the  premisses,  as  they  are  above
written.

I  Frier  Albert  Damaro,  of  Gallipoly,  Subprior,  con-
firme as  much.

I  Frier  Anthony  Celleler  of  Gallipoly,  confirme  as
aforesaid.

I  Frier  Bartlemew  of  Gallipoly,  confirme  as  above
said.

I  Frier  Francis  of  Gallipoly,  confirme  as  much.

[The  Bishop
165

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

B^

[II.  i.  136.] The  Bishop  of  Rome  his  letters  in  the  behalfe

of  John  Fox.
lE  it  knowen  unto  all  men,  to  whom  this  writing
shall  come,  that  the  bringer  hereof  John  Fox  Eng-
lishman, a  Gunner,  after  he  had  served  captive  in  the
Turkes  gallies,  by  the  space  of  fourteene  yeeres,  at  length,,
thorough  God  his  helpe,  taking  good  oportunitie,
the  third  of  Januarie  last  past,  slew  the  keeper  of  the
prison,  (whom  he  first  stroke  on  the  face)  together  with
foure  and  twentie  other  Turkes,  by  the  assistance  of
his  fellow  prisoners  :  and  with  266.  Christians  (of  whose
libertie  he  was  the  author)  launched  from  Alexandria,
and  from  thence  arrived  first  at  Gallipoly  in  Candie,
and  afterwardes  at  Tarento  in  Apulia  :  the  written  testi-
mony and  credite  of  which  things,  as  also  of  others,
the  same  John  Fox  hath  in  publike  tables  from  Naples.
Upon  Easter  eve  he  came  to  Rome,  and  is  now  deter-
mined to  take  his  journey  to  the  Spanish  Court,  hoping
there  to  obtaine  some  reliefe  toward  his  living  :  where-
fore the  poore  distressed  man  humbly  beseecheth,  and
we  in  his  behalfe  do  in  the  bowels  of  Christ,  desire  you,
that  taking  compassion  of  his  former  captivitie,  and  pre-
sent penurie,  you  doe  not  onely  suffer  him  freely  to
passe  throughout  all  your  cities  and  townes,  but  also
succour  him  with  your  charitable  almes,  the  reward
whereof  you  shall  hereafter  most  assuredly  receive,  which
we  hope  you  will  afford  to  him,  whom  with  tender  affec-
tion of  pitie  wee  commende  unto  you.  At  Rome,  the
20  of  Aprill 1577.

Thomas  Grolos  Englishman  Bishop  of  Astraphen.
Richard  Silleum  Prior  Angliae.

Andreas  Ludovicus  Register  to  our  Soveraigne  Lord
the  Pope,  which  for  the  greater  credit  of  the
premises,  have  set  my  seale  to  these  presents.
At  Rome,  the  day  and  yeere  above  written.
Mauricius  Clement  the  governour  and  keeper  of  the
English  Hospitall  in  the  citie.
166

THE LEVANT TRADE  ad.

1577-

The  King  of  Spaine  his  letters  to  the  Lieutenant,
for  the  placing  of  John  Fox  in  the  office  of
a  Gunner.

TO  the  illustrious  Prince,  Vespasian  Gonsaga  Colonna,
our  Lieutenant  and  Captaine  Generall  of  our  Realme
of  Valentia.  Having  consideration,  that  John  Fox
Englishman  hath  served  us,  and  was  one  of  the  most
principall,  which  tooke  away  from  the  Turkes  a  certaine
gallie,  which  they  have  brought  to  Tarento,  wherein  were
two  hundred,  fiftie,  and  eight  Christian  captives  :  we
licence  him  to  practise,  and  give  him  the  office  of  a
Gunner,  and  have  ordained,  that  he  goe  to  our  said
Realme,  there  to  serve  in  the  said  office  in  the  Gallies,
which  by  our  commandement  are  lately  made.  And  we
doe  commaund,  that  you  cause  to  be  payed  to  him  eight
ducats  pay  a  moneth,  for  the  time  that  he  shall  serve
in  the  saide  Gallies  as  a  Gunner,  or  till  we  can  other-
wise provide  for  him,  the  saide  eight  duckats  monethly
of  the  money  which  is  already  of  our  provision,  present
and  to  come,  and  to  have  regarde  of  those  which  come
with  him. From  Escuriall  the  tenth  of  August,  1577.

I  the  King.

Juan  del  Gado.
And  under  that  a  confirmation  of  the  Councell.

The  renuing  and  increasing  of  an  ancient  and  com-
modious trade  unto  diverse  places  in  the  Levant
seas,  and  to  the  chiefest  partes  of  all  the  great
Turks  dominions,  by  the  meanes  of  the  Right
worsh.  citizens  Sir  Edward  Osburne  Alderman,
and  M.  Richard  Staper  marchant  of  London.

His  trade  into  the  Levant  (as  is  before  mentioned,
page  96  of  this  present  volume,  whereunto  I
referre the Reader) was very usuall and much

frequented from  the yeere of  our Lord 151 1,  till the
yeere  1534,  and  afterward  also,  though  not  so  commonly,

167

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

untill  the  yeere  1550,  when  as  the  barke  Aucher  under
the  conduct  of  M.  Roger  Bodenham  made  a  prosperous
voyage  unto  Sicilia,  Candia,  Sio,  and  other  places  within
the  Levant. Since  which  time  the  foresaid  trade  (not-
withstanding the  Grand  Signiors  ample  privilege  granted
[II.  i.  137.] to M. Anthony  Jenkenson 1553, and the strong  and
weighty  reasons of  Gaspar Campion for that purpose)
was  utterly  discontinued,  and  in  maner  quite  forgotten,
as  if  it  had  never  bene,  for  the  space  of  20  yeares  and
more. Howbeit the discreete and  worthy  citizens  Sir
Edward  Osborne  and  M. Richard  Staper  seriously  con-
sidering what benefite might grow to the common
wealth  by  renuing  of  the  foresaid  discontinued  trade,  to
the  inlarging  of  her  Majesties  customes,  the  furthering
of  navigation,  the  venting  of  diverse  generall  commodi-
ties  of  this Realme,  and the inriching of  the citie  of
London,  determined to  use  some effectuall meanes for
the  reestablishing  and  augmenting  thereof.
The  vo'^ age  of Wherefore  about  the  yeere 1575  the  foresaid  R.  W.
John  Wight, niarchants  at  their  charges  and  expenses  sent  John  Wight
Clements  to ^'^'^  Joseph Clements by the way of  Poland to  Con-
Constantin- stantinople,  where  the  said  Joseph  remained  1 8  monethes
ople.  to  procure  a  safe  conduct from the  grand Signior,  for

M. William Harborne, then factor for Sir Edward
Osborne,  to  have  free  accesse  into  his  Highnes  dominions,
and  obtained  the  same.
The  first  Which  businesse  after  two  yeres  chargeable  travell  and

voyage  ofM.  g^j|-  bgi^g  accomplished,  the  sayd  M.  Harborne  the  first
born^to  Con-  ^^  J^^X  ^57^  departed  from  London  by  the  sea  to  Ham-
stantinople.  burgh,  and  thence  accompanied  with  Joseph  Clements  his
guide  and  a  servant,  he  travailed  to  Leopolis  in  Poland,
and  then  apparelling  himselfe,  his  guide,  and  his  servant
after  the  Turkish  fashion  (having  first  obteyned  the  king
of  Poland  his  safe  conduct  to  passe  at  Camienijecz  the
frontier  towne  of  his  dominions  next  unto  Turky)  by
good  means  he  obteined  favour  of  one  Acmet  Chaus
the  Turks  ambassadour  then  in  Poland,  and  readie  to
returne  to  Constantinople,  to  bee  received  into  his  com-

168

SULTAN MURAD'S LETTERS

panic  and  carovan.  And  so  the  fourth  of  September
1578  he  departed  with  the  said  Acmet  from  Leopolis  in
Poland,  and  travelling  through  Moldavia,  Valachia,  Bul-
garia, and  Romania,  gratifying  the  Voiavodes  with
certaine  courtesies,  he  arrived  at  Constantinople  the  28
of  October  next  insuing.  Where  he  behaved  himselfe
so  wisely  and  discreetely,  that  within  few  moneths  after
he  obtained  not  onely  the  great  Turkes  large  and  ample
priviledge  for  himselfe,  and  the  two  worshipfull  persons
aforesaid,  but  also  procured  his  honourable  and  friendly
letters  unto  her  Majestie  in  maner  following.

The  letters  sent  from  the  Imperiall  Musulmanlike
highnesse  of  Zuldan  Murad  Can,  to  the  sacred
regall  Majestie  of  Elizabeth  Queene  of  Eng-
land, the  fifteenth  of  March  1579,  conteyning
the  grant  of  the  first  privileges.

N  greatnes  and  glory  most  renowmed
Elizabeth,  most  sacred  Queene,  and
noble  prince  of  the  most  mightie  wor-
shippers of  Jesus,  most  wise  governor  of
the  causes  and  affaires  of  the  people  and
family  of  Nazareth,  cloud  of  most  plea-
sant raine,  and  sweetest  fountaine  ot
noblenesse  and  vertue,  ladie  8z:  heire  of  the  perpetuall
happinesse  &  glory  of  the  noble  Realme  of  England
(whom  all  sorts  seeke  unto  and  submit  themselves)  we
wish  most  prosperous  successe  and  happie  ends  to  all
your  actions,  and  do  offer  unto  you  such  pleasures  and
curtesies  as  are  worthy  of  our  mutuall  and  eternall  fami-
liaritie  :  thus  ending  (as  best  beseemeth  us)  our  former
salutations.

In  most  friendly  maner  we  give  you  to  understand,
that  a  certaine  man  hath  come  unto  us  in  the  name  of
your  most  excellent  Regall  Majestie,  commending  unto
us  from  you  all  kindnesse,  curtesie  and  friendly  offices  on
your  part,  and did humbly require that our  Imperiall

169

A.D.

1579-

A.D.

1579-

II  These  tzoo
were  Sir  Ed-
ward Osborne
and  M.  Rich-
ard Staper.

[II.  i.  138.]

II  He  calleth
the  Germaine
emperor  but
king  of  Ger-
manic.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

highnesse  would  vouchsafe  to  give  leave  and  libertie  to
him  and  unto  11  two  other  merchants  of  your  kingdome,  to
resort  hither  and  returne  againe,  and  that  by  way  of
traffike  they  might  be  suffered  to  trade  hither  with  their
goods  and  merchandizes  to  our  Imperiall  dominions,  and
in  like  sort  to  make  their  returne.

Our  stately  Court  and  Countrey  hath  beene  ever  open
for  the  accesse  both  of  our  enemies  and  friends.  But
because  we  are  informed  that  your  most  excellent  Regall
Majesty  doth  abound  with  good  will,  humanitie,  &  all
kind  of  loving  affection  towards  us,  so  much  the  rather
shall  the  same  our  Countrey  be  alwayes  open  to  such  of
your  subjects,  as  by  way  of  merchandize  shall  trade
hither  :  and  we  will  never  faile  to  aide  &  succor  any  of
them  that  are  or  shal  be  willing  to  esteeme  of  our  friend-
ship, favour,  &  assistance :  but  will  reckon  it  some  part
of  our  dutie  to  gratifie  them  by  all  good  meanes.  And
forasmuch  as  our  Imperiall  highnesse  is  given  to  under-
stand that  your  most  excellent  Regall  Majestie  doth
excell  in  bountie  &  curtesie,  we  therfore  have  sent  out
our  Imperiall  commandement  to  all  our  kings,  judges,
and  travellers  by  sea,  to  all  our  Captaines  and  voluntarie
seafaring  men,  all  condemned  persons,  and  officers  of
Ports  and  customes,  straightly  charging  and  commanding
them,  that  such  foresaid  persons  as  shall  resort  hither  by
sea  from  the  Realme  of  England,  either  with  great  or
small  vessels  to  trade  by  way  of  marchandize,  may  law-
fully come  to  our  imperiall  Dominions,  and  freely  returne
home  againe,  and  that  no  man  shall  dare  to  molest  or
trouble  them.  And  if  in  like  sort  they  shall  come  into
our  dominions  by  land,  either  on  foote  or  on  horsebacke,
no  man  shall  at  any  time  withstand  or  hinder  them  :  but
as  our  familiars  and  confederates,  the  French,  Venetians,
Polonians,  and  the  II  king  of  Germany,  with  divers  other
our  neighbours  about  us,  have  libertie  to  come  hither,  &
to  returne  againe  into  their  owne  countreys,  in  like  sort
the  marchants  of  your  most  excellent  Regall  Majesties
kingdome shall  have  safe  conduct  and  leave  to  repayre

170

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S REPLY

hither  to  our  Imperlall  dominions,  and  so  to  returne  againe
into  their  own  Country  :  straightly  charging  that  they  be
suffered  to  use  and  trade  all  kind  of  marchandize  as  any
other  Christians  doe,  without  let  or  disturbance  of  any.

Therefore  when  these  our  Imperiall  letters  shall  be
brought  to  your  most  excellent  Regall  Majestic,  it  shall
be  meet,  according  to  our  benevolence,  humanity,  and
familiarity  towards  your  most  excellent  Majesty,  that
you  likewise  bethinke  your  selfe  of  your  like  benevo-
lence, humanitie  and  friendshippe  towards  us,  to  open
the  gate  thereof  unto  us,  and  to  nourish  by  all  good
meanes  this  kindnesse  and  friendship  :  and  that  like
libertie  may  be  granted  by  your  Highnesse  to  our
subjects  and  m.erchants  to  come  with  their  merchan-
dizes to  your  dominions,  either  by  sea  with  their  ships,
or  by  land  with  their  wagons  or  horses,  and  to  returne
home  againe  :  and  that  your  most  excellent  Regall
Majestic  do  alwayes  declare  your  humanitie,  good  will,
and  friendship  towards  us,  and  alwayes  keepe  open  the
dore  thereof  unto  us.

Given  at  our  citie  of  Constantinople  the  fifteenth  day
of  March,  and  in  the  yeere  of  our  most  holy  Prophet
Mahomet  II  987.

The  answere  of  her  Majestie  to  the  aforesaid
Letters  of  the  Great  Turke,  sent  the  25  of
October  1579,  in  the  Prudence  of  London  by
Master  Richard  Stanley.

LIZABETHA  Dei  ter  maximi,  &  unici
coeli  terraeque  Conditoris  gratia,  Anglias,
Franciae  &  Hiberniae  regina,  fidei  Chris-
tianae  contra  omnes  omnium  inter
Christianos  degentium,  &  Christi  nomen
falso  profitentium  Idololatrias  invictis-
sima  &  potentissima  Defensatrix,  augus-
tissimo,  invictissimoque  principi  Sultan  Murad  Can,
Turcici regni dominatori potentissimo, Imperiique

171

A.D.

1579-

The  Turke
demandeth  like
privileges  for
his  subjects  in
the  Queenes
dominions.

11  With  us  the
yeere  1579.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

orientis,  Monarchas  supra  omnes  soli  &  supremo,  salutem,
&  multos  cum  rerum  optimarum  affluentia  fceiices,  &
fortunatos  annos.  Augustissime  &  invictissime  Caesar,
accepimus  invictissimae  Caesareae  vestras  celsitudinis  literas,
die  decimoquinto  Martii  currentis  anni  ad  nos  scriptas
Constantinopoli,  ex  quibus  intelligimus  quam  benigne
quamque  clementer,  literae  supplices  quae  Caesareae  vestrae
celsitudini  a  quodam  subdito  nostro  Guilielmo  Hareborno
in  Imperial!  Celsitudinis  vestrae  civitate  Constantinopoli
commorante  ofFerebantur,  literae  profectionis  pro  se  &
sociis  ejus  duobus  hominibus  mercatoribus  subditis  nos-
tris  cum  mercibus  suis  ad  terras  ditionesque  Imperio
vestro  subjectas  tam  per  mare  quam  per  terras,  indeque
reversionis  venise  potestatisque  humillimam  complexae
petitionem,  ab  invictissima  vestra  Caesarea  celsitudine,
acceptae  fuerunt.  Neque  id  solum,  sed  quam  mira  cum
facilitate,  dignaque  augustissima  Caesarea  dementia,  quod
enit  in  dictis  literis  supplicibus  positum,  ei  sociisque  suis
donatum  &  concessum  fuit,  pro  ea,  uti  videtur,  solum
opinione,  quam  de  nobis,  &  nostra  amicitia  vestra  cel-
situdo  concepit.  Quod  singulare  beneficium  in  dictos
subditos  nostros  collatum  tam  grate  tamque  benevole
accepimus  (maximas  celsitudini  vestrae  propterea  &
agentes,  &  habentes  gratias)  nullo  ut  unquam  patiemur
tempore,  pro  facultatum  nostrarum  ratione,  proque  ea
quam  nobis  insevit  ter  maximus  mundi  monarcha  Deus
(per  quem  &  cujus  auspiciis  regnamus)  nature  bonitate,
qua  remotissimas  nos  esse  voluit,  &  abhorrentes  ab
ingratitudinis  omni  vel  minima  suspitione,  docuitque
nullorum  unquam  ut  principum,  ullis  in  nos  meritis  nos
sineremus  vinci,  aut  superari,  ut  apud  ingratam  principem
tantum  beneficium  deposuisse,  se  vestra  Celsitudo
existimet.  Proptereaque  animum  nostrum  inpr^sen-
tiarum  vestras  celsitudini  emetimur,  bene  sentiendo  &
prasdicando,  quantopere  nos  obstrictas  beneficii  hujus  in
subditos  nostros  collati  putemus  memoria  sempiterna  :
longe  uberiorem,  &  ampliorem  gratitudinis  erga  vestram
celsitudinem  nostras  testificationem  datura:,  cum  tempora

172

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S REPLY  a.d.

1579-
incident,  ut  possimus  &  a  nobis  desiderabitur.  Quoniam
autem  quae  nostris  paucis  subditis,  eaque  suis  ipsorum
precibus,  sine  ulla  intercessione  nostra  concessa  donatio
est,  in  aeque  libera  potestate  sita  est  ad  omnes  terras
ditionesque  Imperio  vestro  subjectas,  cum  mercibus  suis
tarn  per  mare  quam  per  terras  eundi  &  redeundi,  atque
invictissimae  Caesareae  vestrae  celsitudinis  confoederatis,
Gallis,  Polonis,  Venetis,  atque  adeo  regis  Romanorum
subditis  largita  unquam  aut  donata  fuit,  celsitudinem  [II.  i.  139.]
vestram  rogamus  ne  tarn  singularis  beneficentias  laus  in
tam  angustis  terminis  duorum  aut  trium  hominum  con-
cludatur,  sed  ad  universos  subditos  nostros  diffusa,
propagataque,  celsitudinis  vestrae  beneficium  eo  reddat
augustius,  quo  ejusdem  donatio  latius  patebit,  &  ad
plures  pertinebit.  Cujus  tam  singularis  in  nos  beneficii
meritum,  eo  erit  celsitudini  vestras  minus  poenitendum,
quo  sunt  merces  illae,  quibus  regna  nostra  abundant,
&  aliorum  principum  ditiones  egent,  tam  humanis
usibus  commodae  tamque  necessariae,  nulla  gens  ut
sit,  quae  eis  carere  queat,  proptereaque  longissimis,
difficillimisque  itineribus  conquisitis  non  vehementer
gaudeat.  Carius  autem  distrahunt  aliis,  quo  ex  labore
suo  quisque  victum  &  quaestum  quasritat,  adeo  ut  in
earum  acquisitione  utilitas,  in  emptione  autem  ab  aliis
onus  sit.  Utilitas  celsitudinis  vestrae  subditis  augebitur
libera  hac  paucorum  nostrorum  hominum  ad  terras  ves-
tras profectione  :  onus  minuetur,  profectionis  quorum-
cunque  subditorum  nostrorum  donatione.  Accedet
praeterea  quae  a  nobis  in  celsitudinis  vestras  subditos
proficiscetur,  par,  aequaque  mercium  exercendarum  libertas,
quoties  &  quando  voluerint  ad  regna  dominiaque  nostra
mercaturse  gratia  accedere.  Quam  celsitudini  vestra;
pollicemur  tam  amplam  lateque  patentem  fore,  quam
est  ulla  a  confoederatorum  vestrorum  ullis  principibus
antedictis,  regibus  videlicet  Romanorum,  Gallorum,
Polonorum,  ac  republica  Veneta,  celsitudinis  vestrae
subditis  ullo  unquam  tempore  concessa  &  donata.  Qua
in re si honestae petitioni  nostrae invictissima Caesarea

173

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

vestra  celsitudo  dignabitur  auscultare,  facietque  ut  acceptis
nostris  Uteris  intelligamus  gratum  ne  habitura  sit  quod
ab  ea  contendimus  &  rogamus,  ea  proposita  praestitaque
securitate,  quae  subditos  nostros  quoscunque  ad  dominia
sua,  terra,  marique  proficiscentes,  indeque  revertentes
tutos  &  secures  reddat  ab  omni  quorumcunque  subdi-
torum  suorum  injuria,  efficiemus,  ut  quae  Deus  opt.  max.
in  regna  dominiaque  nostra  contulit  commoda  (quae  tarn
singularia  sunt,  omnium  ut  principum  animos  pelliceant
ad  amicitiam,  summaeque  necessitudinis  conjunctionem
nobiscum  contrahendam,  stabiliendamque  quo  liberius
tantis  summi  Dei  beneficiis  fruantur,  quibus  carere  ne-
queunt)  nostri  subditi  ad  regna  dominiaque  Celsitudinis
vestrae  advehant  tam  affluenter  tamque  cumulate,  ut
utrique  incommodo  prasdicto  necessitatis  &  oneris  plenis-
sime  succurratur.  Facit  praeterea  singularis  ista  Celsi-
tudinis vestrae  in  nos  Gentemque  nostram  summae
benevolentiae  significatio  ac  fides,  ut  eandem,  in  causam
quorundam  subditorum  nostrorum,  qui  captivi  triremibus
vestris  detinentur,  interpellemus,  rogemusque,  ut  quoniam
nuUo  in  celsitudinem  vestram  peccato  suo,  sive  arma  in
eam  ferendo,  sive  iniquius  praeter  fas  &  jus  gentium  se
gerendo  in  suos  subditos,  in  banc  calamitatem  inciderint,
soluti  vinculis,  &  libertate  donati,  nobis  pro  sua  fide  &
obsequio  inservientes,  causam  uberiorem  praebeant  vestrae
Celsitudinis  in  nos  humanitatem  praedicandi  :  &  Deum
ilium,  qui  solus,  &  supra  omnia  &  omnes  est  acerrimus
idololatrias  vindicator,  suique  honoris  contra  Gentum  &
aliorum  falsos  Deos  Zelotes,  praecabimur,  ut  vestram
invictissimam  Caesaream  Celsitudinem  omni  beatitate
eorum  donorum  fortunet,  quae  sola  &  summe  jure  merito
habentur  desideratissima.

Datae  e  Regia  nostra  Grenovici,  prope  civitatem  nos-
tram Londinum,  quintodecimo  Mensis  Octobris,  Anno
Jesu  Christi  Salvatoris  nostri  1579,  Regni  vero  nostri
vicesimo  primo.

174

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S REPLY  a.d.

1579-

The  same  in  English.

ELizabeth  by  the  grace  of  the  most  mightie  God,  and
onely  Creatour  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  England,
France  and  Ireland  Queene,  the  most  invincible  and
most  mighty  defender  of  the  Christian  faith  against  all
kinde  of  idolatries,  of  all  that  live  among  the  Christians,
and  falsly  professe  the  Name  of  Christ,  unto  the  most
Imperiall  and  most  invincible  prince,  Zuldan  Murad
Can,  the  most  mightie  ruler  of  the  kingdome  of  Turkic,
sole  and  above  all,  and  most  sovereigne  Monarch  of  the
East  Empire,  greeting,  and  many  happy  and  fortunate
yeeres,  with  abundance  of  the  best  things.

Most  Imperiall  and  most  invincible  Emperour,  wee
have  received  the  letters  of  your  mightie  highnesse
written  to  us  from  Constantinople  the  fifteenth  day  of
March  this  present  yere,  whereby  we  understand  how
gratiously,  and  how  favorably  the  humble  petitions  of
one  William  Hareborne  a  subject  of  ours,  resident  in
the  Imperial  citie  of  your  highnes  presented  unto  your
Majestie  for  the  obteining  of  accesse  for  him  and  two
other  Marchants  more  of  his  company  our  subjects  also,
to  come  with  marchandizes  both  by  sea  and  land,  to  the
countreis  and  territories  subject  to  your  government,  and
from  thence  againe  to  returne  home  with  good  leave  and
libertie,  were  accepted  of  your  most  invincible  Imperiall
highnesse,  and  not  that  onely,  but  with  an  extraordinarie
speed  and  worthy  your  Imperiall  grace,  that  which  was
craved  by  petition  was  granted  to  him,  and  his  company
in  regard  onely  (as  it  seemeth)  of  that  opinion  which
your  highnesse  conceived  of  us  and  our  amitie  :  which
singular  benefit  done  to  our  aforesaid  subjects,  wee  take
so  thankefully,  and  in  so  good  part  (yeelding  for  the
same  our  greatest  thanks  to  your  highnesse)  that  we  will  [ii.  i.  14.0.]
never  give  occasion  to  your  said  highnesse  (according
as  time,  and  the  respect  of  our  affaires  will  permit)  once
to  thinke  so  great  a  pleasure  bestowed  upon  an  ungratefull
Prince. For  the  Almighty  God,  by  whom,  and  by  whose

175

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

grace  we  reigne,  hath  planted  in  us  this  goodnesse  of
nature,  that  wee  detest  and  abhorre  the  least  suspition
of  ingratitude,  and  hath  taught  us  not  to  suffer  our  selves
to bee overmatched with the  orood demerits  of  other

o

Princes,  And  therefore  at  this  time  wee  doe  extende  our
good  minde  unto  your  highnesse,  by  well  conceiving,
and  publishing  also  abroad,  how  much  we  repute  our
selfe  bound  in  an  everlasting  remembrance  for  this  good
pleasure  to  our  Subjects,  meaning  to  yeelde  a  much  more
large  and  plentifull  testification  of  our  thankefulnesse,
when  time  convenient  shall  fall  out,  and  the  same  shall
bee  looked  for  at  our  handes.

But  whereas  that  graunt  which  was  given  to  a  fewe
of  our  Subjects,  and  at  their  onely  request  without  any
intercession  of  ours,  standeth  in  as  free  a  libertie  of
comming  and  going  to  and  from  all  the  lands  and
kingdoms  subject  to  your  Majestie,  both  by  land  &
sea  with  marchandizes,  as  ever  was  granted  to  any  of
your  Imperiall  highnesse  confederates,  as  namely  to  the
French,  the  Polonians,  the  Venetians,  as  also  to  the
subjects  of  the  king  of  the  Romanes,  wee  desire  of  your
highnesse  that  the  commendation  of  such  singular
courtesie  may  not  bee  so  narrowly  restrained  to  two  or
three  men  onely,  but  may  be  inlarged  to  all  our  subjects
in  generall,  that  thereby  your  highnesse  goodnesse  may
appeare  the  more  notable,  by  reason  of  the  graunting  of
the  same  to  a  greater  number  of  persons.  The  bestowing
of  which  so  singular  a  benefit  your  highnesse  shall  so
much  the  lesse  repent  you  of,  by  howe  much  the  more
fit  and  necessary  for  the  use  of  man  those  commodities
are,  wherewith  our  kingdomes  doe  abound,  and  the
kingdomes  of  other  princes  doe  want,  so  y'  there  is  no
nation  that  can  be  without  them,  but  are  glad  to  come  by
them,  although  by  very  long  and  difficult  travels  :  and
when  they  have  them,  they  sell  them  much  deerer  to
others,  because  every  man  seeketh  to  make  profite  by
his  labour  :  so  that  lin  the  getting  of  them  there  is  profit,
but  in the  buying  of  them from  others there  is  losse.

176

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S REPLY

But  this  profite  will  be  increased  to  the  subjects  of  your
highnesse  by  this  free  accesse  of  a  few  of  our  subjects
to  your  dominions,  as  also  the  losse  and  burden  wilbe
eased,  by  the  permission  of  generall  accesse  to  all  our
people.  And  furthermore  we  will  graunt  as  equall  and
as  free  a  libertie  to  the  subjects  of  your  highnesse  with  us
for  the  use  of  traffique,  when  they  wil,  and  as  often  as
they  wil,  to  come,  and  go  to  and  from  us  and  our
kingdomes.  Which  libertie  wee  promise  to  your  high-
nesse shalbe  as  ample,  and  as  large  as  any  was  ever  given
or  granted  to  your  subjects  by  the  aforesaide  princes  your
confederats,  as  namely  the  king  of  the  Romanes,  of
France,  of  Poland,  and  the  common  wealth  of  Venice.
In  which  matter,  if  your  most  invincible  Imperiall  high-
nesse shall  vouchsafe  to  incline  to  our  reasonable  request,
and  shall  give  order  upon  these  our  letters,  that  wee  may
have  knowledge  how  the  same  is  accepted  of  you,  and
whether  it  wilbe  granted,  with  sufficient  securitie  for  our
subjects  to  go,  and  returne  safe  and  secure  from  all
violences  and  injuries  of  your  people,  we  on  the  other
side  wil  give  order,  that  those  commodities  which
Almighty  God  hath  bestowed  upon  our  kingdomes
(which  are  in  deed  so  excellent,  that  by  reason  of  them
all  princes  are  drawen  to  enter,  and  confirme  leagues  of
amitie  and  good  neighborhood  with  us,  by  that  meanes
to  enjoy  these  so  great  blessings  of  God,  which  we  have,
and  they  can  in  no  case  want)  our  subjects  shall  bring
them  so  abundantly  and  plentifully  to  the  kingdomes
and  dominions  of  your  highnesse,  that  both  the  former
inconveniences  of  necessitie,  and  losse,  shall  most
sufficiently  be  taken  away.

Moreover  the  signification  and  assurance  of  your
highnesse  great  affection  to  us  and  our  nation,  doeth
cause  us  also  to  intreat  and  use  mediation  on  the  behalfe
of  certaine  of  our  subjects,  who  are  deteined  as  slaves
and  captives  in  your  Gallies,  for  whom  we  crave,  that
forasmuch  as  they  are  fallen  into  that  misery,  not  by  any
offence  of  theirs,  by  bearing  of  armes  against  your  high-
V  177  M

A.D.

1579-

A.D.

^579-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

nesse,  or  In  behaving  of  themselves  contrary  to  honestie,
and  to  the  law  of  nations,  they  may  be  delivered  from
their  bondage,  and  restored  to  libertie,  for  their  service
towardes  us,  according  to  their  duetie  :  which  thing
shall  yeeld  much  more  abundant  cause  to  us  of  com-
mending your  clemencie,  and  of  beseeching  that  God
(who  onely  is  above  all  things,  and  all  men,  and  is  a
most  severe  revenger  of  all  idolatrie,  and  is  jelous  of
his  honour  against  the  false  gods  of  the  nations)  to
adorne  your  most  invincible  Imperiall  highnesse  with
all  the  blessings  of  those  gifts,  which  onely  and
deservedly  are  accounted  most  worthy  of  asking.

Given  at  our  palace  of  Greenwich,  neere  to  our
Citie  of  London,  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  October,
in  the  yeere  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour  one  thousand,
five  hundreth,  seventie  and  nine,  and  of  our  reigne
the  one  and  twentieth.

[11.  i.  141.]  The  charter  of  the  privileges  granted  to  the
English,  &  the  league  of  the  great  Turke
with  the  Queenes  Majestie  in  respect  of
trafhque,  dated  in  June 1580.

Mmensa & maxima ex potestate poten-
tissimi, terribilibusque verbis & nun-
quam finienda innumerabilive dementia
& ineffabili auxilio sanctissimi & pura
mente colendissimi tremendissimique
universitatum creatoris, princeps tem-
porum praesentium, unicus modernas
aetatis  monarcha,  totius  orbis  terrarum  potentibus  sceptra
dividere potens, dementias, gratiseque divinas umbra,
regnorum provinciarumve, & urbium civitatumve dis-
tributor permultarum  : Nos  sacratissimus  Cassar  Muzul-
manicus, Mecchae, id est domus divinae, Medinas,
gloriosissimae & beatissimae Jerusalem, Aegypti fer-
tilissimae, Jemen & Zovan, Eden & Canan, Sami
paciferae  & Hebes,  Jabza & Pazra, Zeruzub & Hale-

178

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1580.
piae,  Caramariae  &  Diabekirvan,  &  Dulkadiriae,  Baby-
loniae,  &  totius  triplicis  Arabise,  Euzorum  &  Georgian-
orum,  Cypri  divitis,  &  regnorum  Asiae,  Ozakior,
Camporum  Maris  albi  &  nigri,  Graeciae  &  Mesopo-
tamias,  Africas  &  Goletas,  Algeris  &  Tripolis  occiden-
talis,  selectissimaeque  Europae,  Budae,  &  Temeswar,  &
regnorum  transalpinorum,  &  his  similium  permultorum
princeps  Caesarve  sacerrimus,  potentissimus  Murad  Can,
filius  principis  Zelim  Can,  qui  fuit  Zoleiman  Can,  qui
fuit  Zelim  Can,  qui  fuit  Paiezid  Can,  qui  fuit
Mehemed Can,  &c.

Nos  princeps  potentissimus  Murad  Can  hoc  in
signum  nostrae  Caesareae  amicitiae  significamus,  mani-
festamus,  quod  in  temporibus  modernis  Regina  Anglise,
Franciae,  &  Hiberniae  Elizabetha  in  Christianitate
honoratissima  Regina  (cujus  mercatorum  exitus  sit
fcelicissimus)  ad  nostram  excelsam,  &  justitias  plenam,
fulgidissimamve  portam,  quae  omnibus  principibus
mundi  est  refugium  &  requies,  per  egregium  GuHel-
mum  Harebornum  literas  misit  suas,  quibus  sua
majestas  significavit,  quod  tempore  praeterito  quidam
subditi  sui  venissent  ad  nostram  portam  excelsam,  &
suam  obedientiam  erga  eam  demonstravissent,  &  ob
eam  causam  illis  quoque  ad  nostras  ditiones  mercandi
gratia  venire  &  redire  poscerent,  venia  &  potestas
fuisset  data  :  &  quod  in  locis  &  hospitiis  eorum  per
mare  &  terram  nemo  auderet  impedire  &  illis  damnum
facere,  mandatum  Cassareum  fuisset  datum  :  &  quod
hanc  nostram  gratiam,  quam  paucis  hominibus  suae
majestatis  demonstravissemus,  universis  suis  subditis
concederemus,  petebat.  Quare,  quemadmodum  cum
serenissimis  benevolentiam  &  obedientiam,  servitiave
sua  demonstrantibus  erga  nostram  portam  excelsam
regibus &  principibus confoederatis (ut sunt rex Gal-  Faedus

lorum, Veneti,  & rex  Polonorum,  &  cseteri) pacem  & Turcialm-

f' J  ^' •  • •  •  ■  r teratorts  cum

cedus  sanctissimum  pepigimus : sic etiam cum  praerata  \goi„„

Regina  amicitiam custodiendam, pacem  & foedus con-  initum.

junximus. Illius  igitur  homines,  &  universi  mercatores,

179

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

sine  aliquo  impedimento  cum  suis  mercibus  &  oneribus
cunctis  ad  nostras  ditiones  Cassareas  pacifice  &  secure
veniant,  &  suam  exerceant  mercaturam,  maneant  in
suis  statibus,  &  secundum  suos  mores  negocientur.
Et  adhaec,  sua  majestas  significabat  ex  hominibus  suis
aliquos  jamdudum  captos  fuisse,  &  in  captivitate
detineri,  &  quod  hi  dimitterentur  petebat,  &  quod
sicut  aliis  principibus  nobiscum  confoederatis  privilegia
&  mandata  C^sarea  super  fcedus  sanctissimum  dedisse-
mus,  sic  praefatae  quoque  Reginae  privilegium  &  man-
data  Caesarea  ut  daremus,  nostrae  Cassareae  celsitudini
placeret.  Quare  secundum  nostram  benevolentiam  &
gratiam  innatam,  optata  suae  majestatis  apud  nos  grata
fuere  :  Et  hoc  nostrum  privilegium  justitiis  plenum
dedimus  majestati  suae  :  Et  Beglerbegis,  Zanziacbegis
famulis  nostris,  &  Kaziis,  id  est,  judicibus,  &:  omnibus
teloniatoribus  omnium  locorum,  portuum,  &  vadorum
firmiter  mandamus,  ut  donee  ex  parte  pr^fat^  reginae
fcedus,  &  pax,  &  eorum  conditiones  articulique  (ut
convenit)  custodiuntur  &  servantur,  nostrae  quoque
Caesareae  celsitudinis  mandata  sunt :
Articuli  hujus  i  "Qt  praefat^  Reginas  homines,  &  subditi  ejus  qui-
prwtlegn.  busvis  rebus  &  mercibus,  oneribus  &  suppellectilibus
per  mare  in  magnis  &  parvis  navibus,  per  terram  autem
homines  cum  oneribus  &  pecoribus,  secure  &  pacific^
ad  nostras  ditiones  Caesareas  veniant,  &  nemo  illis
noceat,  sed  secure  &  sine  aliquo  impedimento  nego-
cientur, &  in  suis  statibus  &  conditionibus  permaneant.

2  Item,  si  praefati  homines  &  mercatores  in  suis
rectis  viis  &  negociationibus  aliquo  modo  caperentur,
sine  aliqua  tergiversatione  dimittantur  liberenturque.

3  Item,  si  naves  eorum  ad  aliquos  portus  &  loca
venire  voluerint,  pacifice  omni  in  tempore,  &  sine
impedimento  veniant,  &  discedant  in  sua  loca.

4  Item,  si  in  tempestatibus  maris  naves  eorum  essent  in
periculo  &  auxilio  opus  esset  illis,  naves  nostras  Caesareae
celsitudinis,  earumque  homines,  &  aliorum  naves  homines-
que  statim  auxilium  &  opem  ferant  illis,  mandamus.

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTER  a.d.

1580.

5  Item,  si  edulia  suis  pecuniis  emere  voluerint,  nemo  [II.  i.  142.]
resistat illis, sed  sine impedimento  edulia  emant.

6  Item,  si  infortunium  maris  naves  eorum  in  terram
projecerit,  Begi  &  judices,  &  casteri  nostri  subditi  sint
auxilio  illis,  merces  &  res  eorum  quae  remanserint
iterum reddantur illis,  &  nemo  impediat  illos.

7  Item,  si  praefatas  reginae  homines,  eorum  inter-
pretes,  &  mercatores,  sive  per  terram,  sive  per  mare
mercandi  gratia  ad  nostras  ditiones  venire  velint,
legitimo  telonio,  &  vectigali  reddito,  pacifice  vagentur,
capitanei  &  reges  maris  &  navium,  &  aliud  genus
hominum  per  mare  vagantium  in  personis,  &  rebus
eorum,  pecoribusque,  ne  noceant  illis.

8  Item,  si  aliquis  ex  Anglis  debitor,  aut  sre  alieno
esset  obstrictus,  invenirique  non  possit,  ratione  debit-
orum  alterius  nullus  nisi  esset  fidejussor  capiatur  aut
impediatur.

9  Item,  si  Anglus  testamentum  fecerit,  &  sua  bona
cuicunque  legaverit,  illi  dentur  bona  illius,  &  si  sine
testamento  moreretur,  consul  eorum  cuicunque  sociorum
mortui  hominis  dixerit  debere  dari,  illi  dentur  bona
mortui  hominis.

10  Item,  si  Angli,  &  ad  Angliam  pertinentium
locorum  mercatores  &  interpretes,  in  vendendis  &
emendis  mercibus  fidejussionibus  &  rebus  aliquid
negocii  habuerint,  ad  judicem  veniant,  &  in  librum
inscribi  faciant  negotium,  &  si  voluerint,  literas  quoque
accepiant  a  judice,  propterea  quod  si  aliquid  incident,
videant  librum  &  literas,  &  secundum  tenorem  eorum
perficiantur  negocia  eorum  suspecta  :  si  autem  neque
in  librum  inscriberentur,  neque  literas  haberent,  judex
falsa  testimonia  non  admittat,  sed  secundum  justitiam
legem  administrans  non  sinat  illos  impediri.

1 1  Item,  si  aliquis  diceret,  quod  isti  Christiani
nostras  fidei  Muzulmanicae  male  dixerint,  &  earn
vituperiis  aifecerint,  in  hoc  negocio  etiam  &  aliis,
testes  falsi  minime  admittantur.

12  Item,  si aliquis eorum aliquod facinus patraret,

181

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

& fuglens non possit inveniri, nuUus nisi esset fide-
jussor pro  alterius  facto  retineatur,

13  Item,  si  aliquod  mancipium  Anglicum  inveniretur,
&  consul  eorum  peteret  illud,  examinetur  diligenter
mancipium,  &  si  inventum  fuerit  Anglicum,  accipiatur,
&  reddatur  Anglis.

14  Item,  si  aliquis  ex  Anglis  hue  venerit  habitandi
aut  mercandi  gratia,  sive  sit  uxoratus,  sive  sit  sine
uxore,  non  solvat  censum.

15  Item,  si  in  Alexandria,  in  Damasco,  in  Samia,  in
Tunis,  in  Tripoli  occidentali,  in  Aegypti  portubus  &
in  aliis  omnibus  locis,  ubicunque  voluerint  facere  Con-
sules,  faciant  :  Et  iterum  si  voluerint  eos  mutare,  &  in
loco  priorum  consulum  alios  locare,  libere  faciant,  &
nemo  illis  resistat.

16  Item,  si  illorum  interpres  in  arduis  negotiis
occupatus  abesset,  donee  veniret  interpres,  expectetur,
&  interim  nemo  illos  impediat.

17  Item,  si  Angli  inter  se  aliquam  litem  haberent  &
vellent  ad  suos  consules  ire,  nemo  resistat  illis,  sed  libere
veniant  ad  Consules  suos,  ut  secundum  mores  eorum
finiatur  lis  orta.

18  Item,  si  post  tempus  aut  datum  hujus  privilegii,
piratas,  aut  alii  aliqui  liberi  gubernatores  navium  per
mare  vagantes,  aliquem  ex  Anglis  ceperint,  &  trans  mare
vel  cis  mare  venderint,  secundum  justitiam  examinetur :
&  si  Anglus  inventus  fuerit,  &  religionem  Muzulmani-
cam  assumpserit,  libere  dimittatur :  si  autem  adhuc  esset
Christianus,  Anglis  reddatur,  &  emptores  suam  pecuniam
ab  illo  petant,  a  quo  emerant.

19  Item,  si  nostrae  Caesareae  Celsitudinis  naves  armatse
exiverint  ad  mare,  &  ibi  invenerint  naves  Anglicas  merces
portantes,  nemo  impediat  illas,  imo  amice  tractentur,  &
nullum  damnum  faciant  illis :  Quemadmodum  Gallis,
Venetis,  &  caeteris  nobiscum  confoederatis  regibus,  &
principibus  privilegium,  &  articulos  privilegiis  dedimus,
&  concessimus,  simili  modo  his  quoque  Anglis  privi-
legium &  articulos  privilegiis  dedimus & concessimus,

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1580.
& contra legem divinam, & hoc privilegium, nemo
unquam  aliquid  audeat  facere.

20  Item,  si  naves  magnas,  &  parvae  in  itinere  &  loco
ubi  stant  detinebuntur,  nemo  illos  audeat  impedire,  sed
potius  auxilio  sint  illis.

21  Item,  si  latrones  &  fures  vi  raperent  naves  illorum,
naviiamque  merces,  magna  diligentia  quaerantur  latrones
&  fures,  &  severissime  puniantur.

2  2  Ad  extremum,  Beglerbegii,  &  Zanziacbegi,  Capitanei
nostri,  Mancipia,  &  per  mare  navigantes  servi  Capitan-
eorum,  &  Judices,  &  Teloniatores,  &  Gubernatores
navium  Reiz  dicti,  &  liberi  Reiz,  omnes  isti  prasfati,
secundum  tenorem  hujus  privilegii,  tenoremve  articulorum
ejus,  omnia  facere  teneantur,  &  debeant.  Et  donee  hoc
ih  privilegio  descriptum  foedus,  &  pax  illius  Majestatis
ex  parte  sancte  servabitur,  &  custodietur,  ex  parte  etiam
nostra  Caesarea  custodiri,  &  observari  mandamus.

Datum  Constantinopoli,  anno  nostri  prophetae  Sanctis-
simi  988,  in  principio  mensis  Junii,  anno  autem  Jesu  1580.

The  interpretation  of  the  letters,  or  privilege  of  [II.  i.  143.]
the  most  mightie  and  Musumanlike  Emperour
Zuldan  Murad  Can,  granted  at  the  request  of
Elizabeth  by  the-  grace  of  the  most  mightie
God,  and  only  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,
of  England,  France  and  Ireland  Queene,  con-
firming a  peace  and  league  betwixt  both  the
said  Princes  and  their  subjects.

E  most  sacred  Musulmanlike  Emperour,
by  the  infinite  and  exceeding  great  power,
by  the  everlasting  and  wonderfull  clem-
encie,  &  by  the  unspeakable  helpe  of  the
most  mighty  &  most  holy  God,  creator
of  all  things,  to  be  worshipped  and  feared
with  all  purenesse  of  minde,  and  rever-
ence of  speech.  The  prince  of  these  present  times^
the  onely  Monarch  of  this  age,  able  to  give  scepters  to

183

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

the  potentates  of  the  whole  world,  the  shadow  of  the
divine  mercy  and  grace,  the  distributer  of  many  kingdoms,
provinces,  townes  and  cities,  Prince,  and  most  sacred
Emperour  of  Mecca,  that  is  to  say,  of  Gods  house,  of
Medina,  of  the  most  glorious  and  blessed  Jerusalem,  of
the  most  fertile  Egypt,  Jemen  and  Jovan,  Eden  and
Canaan,  of  Samos  the  peaceable,  and  of  Hebes,  of  Jabza,
and  Pazra,  of  Zeruzub  and  Halepia,  of  Caramaria  and
Diabekirvan,  of  Dulkadiria,  of  Babylon,  and  of  all  the
three  Arabias,  of  the  Euzians  and  Georgians,  of  Cyprus
the  rich,  and  of  the  kingdomes  of  Asia,  of  Ozakior,  of
the  tracts  of  the  white  and  blacke  Sea,  of  Grecia  and
Mesopotamia,  of  Africa  and  Goleta,  of  Alger,  and  of
Tripolis  in  the  West,  of  the  most  choise  and  principall
Europe,  of  Buda  and  Temeswar,  and  of  the  kingdomes
beyond  the  Alpes,  and  many  others  such  like,  most
mightie  Murad  Can,  the  sonne  of  the  Emperour  Zelim
Can,  which  was  the  sonne  of  Zoleiman  Can,  which  was
the  sonne  of  Zelim  Can,  which  was  the  sonne  of  Paiizid
Can,  which  was  the  sonne  of  Mehemed  Can,  &c.

We  most  mightie  prince  Murad  Can,  in  token  of  our
Imperiall  friendship,  doe  signifie  and  declare,  that  now
of  late  Elizabeth  Queene  of  England,  France  and  Ireland,
the  most  honourable  Queene  of  Christendom  (to  whose
marchants  we  wish  happy  successe)  sent  her  letters  by
her  worthy  servant  William  Hareborne  unto  our  stately
and  most  magnificent  Porch  replenished  with  justice,
which  is  a  refuge  and  Sanctuary  to  all  the  princes  of
the  world,  by  which  letters  her  Majestic  signified,  that
whereas  heretofore  certaine  of  her  subjects  had  repaired
to  our  saide  stately  Porche,  and  had  shewed  their
obedience  to  the  same,  and  for  that  cause  had  desired
that  leave  and  libertie  might  also  be  granted  unto  them,
to  come  and  goe  for  trafiiques  sake  too  and  from  our
dominions,  and  that  our  Imperial  commandement  might
be  given,  that  no  man  should  presume  to  hurt  or  hinder
them,  in  any  of  their  abodes  or  passages  by  sea  or  land,
and  whereas  shee  requested  that  we  would  graunt  to  all

184

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHAliTER  a.d.

1580.

her  subjects  in  generall,  this  our  favour,  which  before
wee  had  extended  onely  to  a  fewe  of  her  people :  there-
fore as  wee  have  entred  into  amitie,  and  most  holy  league
with  the  most  excellent  kings  and  princes  our  confederats,
shewing  their  devotion,  and  obedience  or  services  towards
our  stately  Porch  (as  namely  the  French  king,  the  Vene-
tians, the  king  of  Polonia  and  others)  so  also  we  have
contracted  an  inviolable  amitie,  peace  and  league  with
the  aforesaid  Queene.  Therefore  wee  give  licence  to  all
her  people,  and  marchants,  peaceably  and  safely  to  come
unto  our  Imperiall  dominions,  with  all  their  marchandise
and  goods  without  any  impeachment,  to  exercise  their
traffique,  to  use  their  owne  customes,  and  to  buy  and
sell  according  to  the  fashions  of  their  owne  countrey.

And  further  her  Majestie  signified  unto  us,  that  certaine
of  her  people  had  heretofore  bene  taken  prisoners,  and
were  detained  in  captivitie,  and  required  that  they  might
bee  set  at  libertie,  and  that  as  we  had  graunted  unto  other
Princes  our  confederats,  priviledges,  and  Imperiall  decrees,
concerning  our  most  inviolable  league  with  them,  so  it
would  please  our  Imperial  Majesty  to  graunt  and  con-
firme  the  like  priviledges,  and  princely  decrees  to  the
aforesaid  Queene.

Wherefore  according  to  our  humanitie  and  gracious
ingraffed  disposition,  the  requests  of  her  Majestie  were
accepted  of  us,  and  we  have  granted  unto  her  Majestie
this  privilege  of  ours  agreeable  to  reason  &  equitie.
And  we  straightly  command  all  our  Beglerbegs,  and
Zanziacbegs  our  servants,  and  our  Reyz,  that  is  to  say,
our  Judges,  and  all  our  customers  in  all  places,  havens
and  passages,  that  as  long  as  this  league  and  amitie  with
the  conditions,  and  articles  thereof,  are  kept  and  observed
on  the  behalfe  of  the  aforesaid  Queene.  i  Our  Imperiall
commandement  and  pleasure  is,  that  the  people  and  sub-
jects of  the  same  Queene,  may  safely  and  securely  come
to  our  princely  dominions,  with  their  goods  and  mar-
chandise, and  ladings,  and  other  commodities  by  sea,  in
great  and  smal  vessels,  and  by  land  with  their  carriages

185

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

and  cattels,  and  that  no  man  shall  hurt  them,  but  they
may  buy  and  sell  without  any  hinderance,  and  observe
the  customes  and  orders  of  their  owne  countrey.
[II.  i.  144.]  2  Item,  if  the  aforesaid  people  and  marchants  shalbe
at  any  time  in  the  course  of  their  journeis  and  dealings
by  any  meanes  taken,  they  shall  be  delivered  and  inlarged,
without  any  excuse  or  cavillation.

3  Item,  if  their  ships  purpose  to  arive  in  any  of  our
ports  and  havens,  it  shalbe  lawfuU  for  them  so  to  do  in
peace,  and  from  thence  againe  to  depart,  without  any  let
or  impediment.

4  Item,  if  it  shall  happen  that  any  of  their  ships  in
tempestuous  weather  shall  bee  in  danger  of  losse  and
perishing,  and  thereupon  shall  stand  in  need  of  our  helpe,
we  will,  and  commaund  that  our  men  and  ships  be  ready
to  helpe  and  succour  them.

5  Item,  if  they  shalbe  willing  to  buy  any  victuals  for
their  money,  no  person  shall  withstande  them,  but  they
shall  buy  the  same  without  any  disturbance  to  the
contrary.

6  Item,  if  by  any  casualtie  their  shippes  shall  bee
driven  on  shoare  in  perill  of  shipwracke,  our  Begs  and
Judges,  and  other  our  Subjects  shall  succour  them,  and
such  wares,  and  goods  of  theirs  as  shall  bee  recovered
from  the  losse,  shall  bee  restored  to  them,  and  no  man
shall  wrong  them.

7  Item,  if  the  people  of  the  aforesayd  Queene,  their
interpreters  and  marchants,  shall  for  trafique  sake,  either
by  lande  or  Sea  repaire  to  our  dominions  paying  our
lawfull  toll  and  custome,  they  shall  have  quiet  passage,
and  none  of  our  Captaines  or  governours  of  the  Sea,  and
shippes,  nor  any  kinde  of  persons,  shall  either  in  their
bodies,  or  in  their  goods  and  cattels,  any  way  molest  them.

8  Item,  if  any  Englishman  shall  grow  in  debt,  and  so
owe  money  to  any  other  man,  and  thereupon  doth  absent
himselfe  that  he  can  not  be  found,  let  no  man  be  arrested
or  apprehended  for  any  other  mans  debt,  except  he  be  the
surety.

186

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTER  a.d.

1580.

9  Item,  if  any  Englishman  shall  make  his  will  and
testament,  to  whom  soever  by  the  same  hee  shall  give  his
goods,  the  partie  shall  have  them  accordingly,  and  if  hee
die  intestate,  hee  to  whom  the  Consull  or  governour  of
the  societie  shall  say  the  goods  of  the  dead  are  to  bee
given,  hee  shall  have  the  same.

10  Item,  if  the  Englishmen  or  the  marchants  and
interpreters  of  any  places  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Eng-
land shall  happen  in  the  buying  and  selling  of  wares,  by
promises  or  otherwise  to  come  in  controversie,  let  them
go  to  the  Judge,  and  cause  the  matter  to  be  entred  into  a
booke,  and  if  they  wil,  let  them  also  take  letters  of  the
Judge  testifying  the  same,  that  men  may  see  the  booke
and  letters,  whatsoever  thing  shall  happen,  and  that
according  to  the  tenour  thereof  the  matter  in  controversie
and  in  doubt  may  be  ended :  but  if  such  things  be  neither
entred  in  booke,  nor  yet  the  persons  have  taken  letters
of  the  Judge,  yet  he  shall  admit  no  false  witnesse,  but
shall  execute  the  Law  according  to  justice,  and  shall  not
suffer  them  to  be  abused.

1 1  Item,  if  any  man  shall  say,  that  these  being
Christians  have  spoken  any  thing  to  the  derogation  of  our
holy  faith  and  religion,  and  have  slandered  the  same,  in
this  matter  as  in  all  others,  let  no  false  witnesses  in  any
case  be  admitted.

12  Item,  if  any  one  of  them  shall  commit  any  great
crime,  and  flying  thereupon  cannot  bee  found,  let  no  man
be  arrested,  or  detained  for  another  mans  fact,  except  he
be  his  suretie.

13  Item,  if  any  slave  shall  be  found  to  be  an  English-
man, and  their  Consull  or  governour  shall  sue  for  his
libertie,  let  the  same  slave  be  diligently  examined,  and  if
hee  be  found  in  deed  to  be  English,  let  him  be  discharged
and  restored  to  the  Englishmen.

14  Item,  if  any  Englishman  shall  come  hither  either
to  dwel  or  trafique,  whether  hee  be  married  or  unmarried,
he  shall  pay  no  polle  or  head  money.

15  Item, if  either in Alexandria, Damasco, Samos,

187

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

Tunis,  Tripolis  in  ye  west,  the  port  townes  of  ^gypt,
or  in  any  other  places,  they  purpose  to  choose  to  them-
selves Consuls  or  governours,  let  them  doe  so,  and  if
they  will  alter  them  at  any  time,  and  in  the  roome  of  the
former  Consuls  place  others,  let  them  do  so  also,  and  no
man  shall  restraine  them.

16  Item,  if  their  interpreter  shalbe  at  any  time  absent,
being  occupied  in  other  serious  matters,  let  the  thing
then  in  question  bee  stayed  and  differred  till  his  com-
ming,  and  in  the  meane  time  no  man  shall  trouble  them.

17  Item,  if  any  variance  or  controversie  shall  arise
among  the  Englishmen,  and  thereupon  they  shall  appeale
to  their  Consuls  or  governours,  let  no  man  molest
them,  but  let  them  freely  doe  so,  that  the  contro-
versie begunne  may  be  finished  according  to  their
owne  customes.

1 8  Item,  if  after  the  time  and  date  of  this  privilege,
any  pirats  or  other  free  governours  of  ships  trading  the
Sea  shall  take  any  Englishman,  and  shall  make  sale  of
him,  either  beyonde  the  Sea,  or  on  this  side  of  the  Sea,  the
matter  shalbe  examined  according  to  justice,  and  if  the
partie  shalbe  found  to  be  English,  and  shall  receive
the  holy  religion,  then  let  him  freely  be  discharged,  but
if  he  wil  still  remaine  a  Christian,  let  him  then  be  restored

[II.  i.  145.] to  the  Englishmen,  and  the  buyers  shall  demaund  their
money  againe  of  them  who  solde  the  man.

19  Item,  if  the  ships  of  warre  of  our  Imperiall  high-
nesse  shal  at  any  time  goe  forth  to  Sea,  and  shall  finde
any  English  ships  laden  with  marchandise,  no  man  shall
hinder  them,  but  rather  shall  use  them  friendly,  and  doe
them  no  wrong,  even  as  wee  have  given  and  granted
articles,  and  privileges  to  the  French,  Venetians,  and
other  Kings  and  princes  our  confederats,  so  also  wee  have
given  the  like  to  the  English :  and  contrary  to  this  our
divine  lawe  and  privilege,  let  no  man  presume  to  doe  any
thing.

20  Item,  if  either  their  great  or  small  ships  shall  in  the
course of  their  voyage, or in any  place  to  which they

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  a.d.

158T.

come,  bee  stayed  or  arrested,  let  no man continue  the
same  arrest,  but  rather  helpe  and  assist  them.

2 1  Item,  if  any  theeves  and  robbers  shall  by  force  take
away  any  of  their  ships,  and  marchandise,  let  the  same
theeves  and  robbers  be  sought,  and  searched  for  with  all
diligence,  and  let  them  be  punished  most  severely.

22  Last  of  all  the  Beglerbegs,  and  Zanziacbegs,  our
Captaines,  our  slaves  and  servants  of  Captaines  using  the
sea,  and  our  Judges,  customers  and  governours  of  ships
called  Reiz,  and  free  Reiz,  all  these,  according  to  the
tenor  of  this  privilege  and  articles,  shalbe  bound  to  doe
accordingly :  and,  as  long  as  the  Queene  of  England  on
her  part  shall  duely  keepe  and  observe  this  league  and
holy  peace,  expressed  in  this  privilege,  we  also  for  our
Imperial  part,  do  charge  and  commaund  the  same  so
long  to  be  straightly  kept  and  observed.

Given  at  Constantinople,  in  the  988.  yeere  of  our  most
holy  prophet,  in  the  beginning  of  the  moneth  of  June,
And  in  the  yeere  of  Jesus 1580.

Her  Majesties  letter  to  the  Turke  or  Grand
Signior  1581.  promising  redresse  of  the  dis-
orders of  Peter  Baker  of  Ratcliffe,  committed
in  the  Levant.

iLizabeth  by  the  divine  grace  of  the  eternall
God,  of  England,  France  and  Ireland
most  sacred  Queene,  and  of  the  most
Christian  faith,  against  all  the  prophaners
of  his  most  holy  Name  the  zealous  and
mightie  defendour,  &c.  To  the  most
^  renowned  and  Emperious  Caesar,  Sultan
Murad  Can,  Emperour  of  all  the  dominions  of  Turkie,
and  of  all  the  East  Monarchie  chiefe  above  all  others
whosoever,  most  fortunate  yeeres  with  the  successe  of  al
true  happinesse.  As  with  very  great  desire  we  wish  and
embrace  the  love  and  amitie  of  forreine  Princes,  and  in
the  same  by  al  good  dueties  and  meanes  we  seeke  to  be

180

A.D.
I581.

This  was
Baker  of  Rat-
cliffe,  zvho
with  the  barke
called  the  Roe,
rohbed  cer-
taine  Grecians
in  the  Levant.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

confirmed  :  so  to  us  there  may  bee  nothing  more  grievous
and  disliking,  then  that  any  thing  should  happen  through
the  default  of  our  Subjects,  which  any  way  might  bring
our  faith  and  fidelitie  into  suspition :  Although  wee  are
not  ignorant  how  many  good  princes  by  the  like  mis-
adventure be  abused,  where  the  doings  of  the  Subjects
are  imputed  to  the  want  of  good  government.  But  such
matters  of  importance  and  so  well  approved  we  may  not
omit  :  such  is  to  us  the  sacred  estimation  of  our  honour,
and  of  our  Christian  profession,  as  we  would  the  same
should  appeare  aswell  in  the  concluding  of  our  promises
and  agreements,  as  in  the  faithful  performing  of  the  same.
The  matter  which  by  these  our  letters  wee  specially
beholde,  is  a  most  injurious  and  grievous  wrong  which  of
late  came  unto  our  understanding,  that  should  be  done
unto  certaine  of  your  subjects  by  certaine  of  our  Subjects,
as  yet  not  apprehended :  but  with  all  severitie  upon  their
apprehension  they  are  to  be  awarded  for  the  same.  And
as  the  deede  in  it  selfe  is  most  wicked,  so  is  it  much  more
intollerable,  by  how  much  it  doeth  infringe  the  credit  of
our  faith,  violate  the  force  of  our  authoritie,  and  impeach
the  estimation  of  our  word  faithfully  given  unto  your
Imperiall  dignitie.  In  which  so  great  a  disorder  if  wee
should  not  manifest  our  hatred  towardes  so  wicked  and
evil  disposed  persons,  we  might  not  onely  most  justly  be
reproved  in  the  judgement  of  all  such  as  truely  favour
Justice,  but  also  of  all  Princes  the  patrones  of  right  and
equitie,  might  no  lesse  be  condemned.  That  therefore
considered,  which  of  our  parts  is  ordained  in  this  cause
which  may  be  to  the  good  liking  of  your  highnesse,  we
are  most  especially  to  request  of  your  Imperiall  Majestic,
that  through  the  default  and  disorder  of  a  sort  of  evill
and  wicked  disposed  persons,  you  wil  not  withdraw
your  gratious  favour  from  us,  neither  to  hinder  the
trafique  of  our  Subjects,  which  by  vertue  of  your  high-
nesse sufferance,  and  power  of  your  licence  are  permitted
to  trade  into  your  dominions  &  countreys,  or  that  either
in their persons or goods they  be  prejudiced in  their

190

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  a.d.

1581.

traveyling by  land  or  by  water, promising unto your

greatnesse  most  faithfully,  that  the  goods  whereof  your

subjects  by  great  wrong  and  violence  have  bene  spoyled,

shall  wholy  againe  be  restored,  if  either  by  the  lives  or

possessions  of  the  robbers  it  may  any  way  be  brought  to

passe : And  that  hereafter  (as  now  being  taught  by  this  [II.  i.  146.]

evill  example)  wee  will  have  speciall  care  that  none  under

the  title  of  our  authoritie  shall  be  suffered  to  commit  any

the  like  wrongs  or  injuries.

Neither  they  which  have  committed  these  evil  parts
had  any  power  under  your  highnesse  safeconduct
graunted  unto  our  subjects,  but  from  some  other  safe-
conduct,  whether  it  were  true  or  fained,  we  knowe  not,
or  whether  they  bought  it  of  any  person  within  the
government  of  Marseils  :  but  under  the  colour  thereof
they  have  done  that,  which  the  trueth  of  our  dealing
doeth  utterly  abhorre.  Notwithstanding  howsoever  it  be,
wee  will  surely  measure  their  evill  proceedings  with  most
sharpe  and  just  correction,  and  that  it  shall  repent  them
of  the  impeachment  of  our  honours,  as  also  it  shalbe  an
example  of  our  indignation,  that  others  may  dread  at  all
times  to  commit  the  like  offence.  Wherefore  that  our
amitie  might  be  continued,  as  if  this  unfortunate  hap  had
never  chanced,  and  that  the  singuler  affection  of  our
Subjects  towardes  your  Imperiall  Majestie  vowed,  and
dayly  more  and  more  desired,  might  be  conserved  and
defended,  we  thereunto  do  make  our  humble  suite  unto
your  greatnesse :  And  for  so  great  goodnesse  towardes  us
and  our  people  granted,  doe  most  humbly  pray  unto  the
Almightie  creatour  of  heaven  and  earth,  ever  to  maintaine
and  keepe  your  most  renowmed  Majestie  in  all  happi-
nesse  and  prosperitie.

Dated  at  our palace  of  Greenewich  the  26.  of  June,
Anno  158 1.

[The  letters
191

A.D.
I581.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  letters  patents,  or  privileges  graunted  by  her
Majestie  to  Sir  Edward  Osborne,  Master
Richard  Staper,  and  certaine  other  Marchants
of  London  for  their  trade  into  the  dominions
of  the  great  Turke,  in  the  yeere 1581.

Lizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of
England,  France  and  Ireland,  defender
of  the  faith,  &c.  To  all  our  Officers,
ministers,  and  Subjects,  and  to  all  other
people  asw  ell  within  this  our  Realme  of
England,  as  else  where  under  our  obey-
sance,  jurisdiction,  or  otherwise,  unto
whom  these  our  letters  shall  be  scene,  shewed  or  read,
greeting.  Where  our  welbeloved  Subjects  Edward
Osborne  Alderman  of  our  Citie  of  London,  and  Richard
Staper  of  our  sayde  City  Marchant,  have  by  great  adven-
ture and  industrie,  with  their  great  costes  and  charges,  by
the  space  of  sundry  late  yeeres,  travailed,  and  caused
travaile  to  bee  taken,  as  well  by  secret  and  good  meanes,
as  by  dangerous  wayes  and  passages  both  by  lande  and
Sea,  to  finde  out  and  set  open  a  trade  of  Marchandize  and
trafique  into  the  Lands,  Islands,  dominions,  and  territories
of  the  great  Turke,  commonly  called  the  Grand  Signior,
not  heretofore  in  the  memory  of  any  man  nowe  living
knowen  to  be  commonly  used  and  frequented  by  way  of
marchandise,  by  any  the  Marchants  or  any  Subjects  of  us,
or  our  progenitours  ;  and  also  have  by  their  like  good
meanes  and  industrie,  and  great  charges  procured  of  the
sayde  Grand  Signior  (in  our  name,)  amitie,  satetie,  and
freedome,  for  trade  and  trafique  of  Marchandise  to  bee
used,  and  continued  by  our  Subjects  within  his  sayde
Dominions,  whereby  there  is  good  and  apparant  hope  and
likelyhoode  both  that  many  good  offices  may  bee  done
for  the  peace  of  Christendome,  and  reliefe  of  many
Christians  that  bee  or  may  happen  to  bee  in  thraldome
or  necessitie  under  the  sayde  Grand  Signior,  his  vassals  or

192

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTEE  ad.

1581.
Subjects,  and  also  good  and  profitable  vent  and  utterance
may  be  had  of  the  commodities  of  our  Realme,  and
sundry  other  great  benefites  to  the  advancement  of  our
honour,  and  dignitie  Royall,  the  increase  of  the  revenues
of  our  Crowne,  and  generall  wealth  of  our  Realme  :
Knowe  ye,  that  hereupon  wee  greatly  tendering  the
wealth  of  our  people,  and  the  incouragement  of  our
Subjects  in  their  good  enterprises  for  the  advancement  of
the  Common  weale,  have  of  our  speciall  grace,  certaine
knowledge  and  meere  motion,  given  and  graunted,  and
by  these  presents  for  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  doe
give  and  graunt  unto  our  sayd  trustie,  and  welbeloved
Subjects  Edward  Osborne,  and  unto  Thomas  Smith  of
London  Esquier,  Richard  Staper,  and  William  Garret  of
London  Marchants,  their  executors,  and  administrators,
and  to  the  executours  and  administratours  of  them,  and
of  every  of  them,  that  they,  and  every  of  them,  and  such
other  person  and  persons  Englishmen  borne,  not  exceeding
the  number  of  twelve,  as  they  the  sayde  Edward,  and
Richard  shall  appoint,  nominate,  or  admit  to  be  parteners,
adventurers,  or  doers  with  them  the  sayde  Edward,
Thomas,  Richard  and  William,  in  their  societie  by  them-
selves, their  servants,  Factours  or  deputies,  and  to  such
others  as  shall  bee  nominated  according  to  the  tenour  of
these  our  letters  Patents,  shall  and  may  during  the  terme
of  seven  yeeres  from  the  date  of  these  Patents,  freely
trade,  trafique,  and  use  feates  of  Marchandise  into,  and
from  the  dominions  of  the  sayde  Grand  Signior,  and  every
of  them,  in  such  order,  and  maner,  forme,  liberties  and
condition  to  all  intents  and  purposes  as  shalbe  betweene
them  limitted  and  agreed,  and  not  otherwise,  without  any
molestation,  impeachment,  or  disturbance,  any  Lawe,  [II.  i.  147,]
statute,  usage,  diversitie  of  religion  or  faith,  or  other
cause  or  matter  whatsoever  to  the  contrary  notwith-
standing.

And  that  it  shalbe  lawful  to  the  said  Edward  and
Richard  their  executors  and  administrators,  (during  the
said terme) to appoint or admit to be  parteners and

V  193  N

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

adventurers  with  them  the  sayde  Edward,  Thomas,
Richard  and  William,  such  persons  not  exceeding  the
number  of  twelve  (as  afore  is  said)  to  trafique  and  use
the  said  trade  &  feate  of  marchandise  according  to  our
saide  graunt.  And  that  all  and  every  such  person  and
persons,  as  shall  hereafter  fortune  to  bee  appointed  or
admitted  as  parteners  in  the  said  trade  or  trafique  accord-
ing to  these  our  letters  patents,  shall  and  may  from  the
time  of  such  appointment  or  admittance,  have  and  enjoy
the  freedome  and  libertie  of  the  said  trade  and  trafique,
during  the  residue  of  the  said  terme  of  seven  yeeres,
according  to  such  limitation  and  agreement  as  is  afore-
saide,  and  that  it  shall  and  may  be  lawfull  to  and  for
the  saide  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and  William,  their
executours  and  administratours,  servants,  factours  and
deputies,  and  all  such  as  shall  be  so  appointed,  nominated
or  admitted,  to  bee  parteners  or  adventurers  in  the  saide
trade,  or  so  many  of  themi  as  can  and  will,  to  assemble
themselves  for  or  about  any  the  matters,  causes,  affaires
or  businesse  of  the  saide  trade  in  any  place  or  places  for
the  same  convenient,  from  time  to  time  during  the  said
terme  of  7.  yeres,  within  our  dominions  or  elsewhere,  and
to  make,  ordeine,  and  constitute  reasonable  lawes  and
ordinances,  for  the  good  government  of  the  said  Com-
pany, and  for  the  better  advancement  and  continuance
of  the  said  trade  and  trafique,  not  being  contrary  or
repugnant  to  the  lawes,  estatutes  or  customes  of  our
Realme,  and  the  same  lawes  or  ordinances  so  made  to
put  in  use,  and  execute  accordingly,  and  at  their  pleasures
to  revoke  the  same  lawes  and  ordinances,  or  any  of  them,
as  occasion  shall  require.

And  in  consideration  that  the  said  Edward  Osborne
hath  bene  the  principall  setter  foorth  and  doer  in  the
opening,  &  putting  in  ure  of  the  said  trade,  we  do
therfore  especially  ordeine,  constitute,  and  provide  by
these  patents,  that  the  saide  Edward  Osborne  shall  be
governour  of  all  such  as  by  vertue  of  these  our  letters
patents,  shall  be  parteners,  adventurers,  or  trafiquers  in

194

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1581.

the  said  trade,  during  the  said  terme  of  seven  yeeres,  if
hee  so  long  live  :  And  that  if  the  said  Edward  shall
happen  to  decease  during  the  saide  terme,  the  saide
Richard  Staper  then  living,  then  the  sayd  Richard  Staper
shall  likewise  be  governour  during  the  residue  of  the
said  terme  (if  he  so  long  live)  and  that  if  the  said  Edward
and  Richard  shall  both  happen  to  decease  during  the  said
terme,  then  the  partners  or  adventurers  for  the  time
being,  or  the  greatest  part  of  them,  shall  from  time  to
time  as  necessitie  shall  require,  choose  and  elect  a
governour  of  the  said  Company.

Provided  alwayes,  that  if  there  shall  happen  any  great
or  urgent  occasion  to  remoove  or  displace  any  person
that  shall  be  governour  of  the  saide  fellowship,  that  then
it  shall,  and  may  be  lawfull  for  us,  our  heires  and  succes-
sours,  to  remoove,  and  displace  every  such  governour,
and  to  place  another  of  the  said  fellowship  in  the  same
office,  during  such  time  as  such  person  should  have
enjoyed  the  same,  according  to  this  our  graunt,  if  there
had  bene  no  cause  to  the  contrary.

And  we  further  for  us,  our  heires,  and  successors,  of
our  especiall  grace,  certaine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion,
do  graunt  to  the  said  Edward  Osborne,  Thomas  Smith,
Richard  Staper,  and  William  Garret,  their  executors  and
administrators,  that  nothing  shall  bee  done  to  be  of  force
or  validitie  touching  the  sayde  trade  or  trafique,  or  the
exercise  thereof,  without  or  against  the  consent  of  the
said  Edward,  during  such  time  as  hee  shall  bee  Governour
as  afore  is  saide.  And  after  that  time  without  the  consent
of  the  Governour  for  the  time  being,  and  the  more  part
of  the  said  Company.

And  further,  wee  of  our  more  ample  and  abundant  grace,
meere  motion  and  certaine  knowledge,  have  graunted,
and  by  these  patents  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors,
doe  graunt  to  the  saide  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and
William,  their  executors  and  administrators,  that  they,
the  saide  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and  William,  their
executors and administrators, and the said person and

195

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581

persons,  by  them  the  said  Edward  and  Richard  to  be
nominated,  or  appointed  as  afore  is  said,  together,  with
such  two  other  persons,  as  wee  our  heires  or  successors
from  time  to  time  during  the  sayd  terme  shall  nominate,
shall  have  the  whole  trade  and  trafique,  and  the  whole
entire  onely  libertie,  use  and  privilege  of  trading,  and
trafiquing,  and  using  feate  of  marchandise,  into,  and  from
the  said  dominions  of  the  said  Grand  Signior,  and  every
of  them.  And  when  there  shall  be  no  such  persons
so  nominated  or  appointed  by  us,  our  heires  or  successors,
that  then  the  said  Edward  Osborne,  Thomas  Smith,
Richard  Staper,  and  William  Garret,  their  executors  and
administrators,  and  such  persons  by  them  so  to  be
appointed,  shall  have  the  saide  whole  trade  and  trafique,
and  the  whole  entire,  and  onely  libertie,  use,  and  privilege
of  trading  and  trafiquing  aforesaid.  And  that  they  the
said  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and  William,  their  execu-
tors &  administrators,  and  also  al  such  as  shal  so  be
nominated  or  appointed  to  be  partners  or  adventurers  in
the  said  trade,  according  to  such  agreement  as  is  above-
said,  and  every  of  them,  their  servants,  factors  and
deputies,  shal  have  ful  and  free  authoritie,  libertie,
[II.  I.  148.]  facultie,  licence  and  power  to  trade  and  trafique  into
and  from  all  and  every  the  saide  dominions  of  the  saide
Grand  Signior,  and  into,  and  from  all  places  where,  by
occasion  of  the  said  trade,  they  shall  happen  to  arrive
or  come,  whether  they  be  Christians,  Turkes,  Gentiles
or  other,  and  into,  and  from  all  Seas,  rivers,  ports,
regions,  territories,  dominions,  coastes  and  places  with
their  ships,  barks,  pinnesses  and  other  vessels,  and  with
such  mariners  and  men,  as  they  will  lead  with  them  or
send  for  the  said  trade,  as  they  shall  thinke  good  at
their  owne  proper  cost  and  expenses,  any  law,  statute,
usage,  or  matter  whatsoever  to  the  contrary  notwith-
standing. And  that  it  shalbe  lawful  for  the  said  Edward,
Thomas,  Richard  and  William,  and  to  the  persons  afore-
said, and  to  and  for  the  mariners  and  seamen  to  bee
used  and  employed  in  the  said  trade  and  voyage  to  set

196

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad

1581.
and  place  in  the tops of  their ships  and  other  vessels
the armes of England with the red crosse over the
same,  as  heretofore  they  have  used  the  red  crosse,  any
matter  or  thing  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.

And  we  of  our  further  royal  favor,  and  of  our  espe-
ciall  grace,  certaine  knowledge  and  meere  motion  have
graunted,  and  by  these  presents  doe  graunt  to  the  said
Edward  Osburne,  Thomas  Smith,  Richard  Staper,  and
William  Garret,  their  executors  and  administrators  by
these  presents,  that  the  said  lands,  territories,  and  domi-
nions of  the  said  Grand  Signior,  or  any  of  them,  shall
not  be  visited,  frequented,  nor  haunted  by  way  of  mar-
chandise  by  any  other  our  subjects  during  the  said
terme,  contrary  to  the  true  meaning  of  these  patents.

And  by  vertue  of  our  high  prerogative  royall  (which
wee  will  not  have  argued  or  brought  in  question)  we
straightly  charge  and  commaund,  and  prohibite  for  us,
our  heires,  and  successours,  all  our  subjects  (of  what
degree  or  qualitie  soever  they  be)  that  none  of  them
directly,  or  indirectly,  do  visite,  haunt,  frequent  or  trade,
trafique,  or  adventure  by  way  of  marchandise  into,  or
from  any  of  the  Dominions  of  the  sayde  Grand  Signior,
or  other  places  abovesayde  by  water  or  by  lande  (other
then  the  said  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and  William,
their  executours  or  administrators,  or  such  as  shalbe
admitted,  and  nominated  as  is  aforesaide)  without  ex-
presse  licence,  agreement,  and  consent  of  the  said
Governour,  and  company  or  the  more  part  of  them,
whereof  the  said  Governour  alwayes  to  be  one,  upon
paine  of  our  high  indignation,  and  of  forfeiture  and
losse,  as  well  of  the  ship  and  shippes,  with  the  furniture
thereof,  as  also  of  the  goods,  marchandizes,  and  things
whatsoever  they  be  of  those  our  Subjects  which  shall
attempt,  or  presume  to  saile,  trafique,  or  adventure,  to
or  from  any  the  dominions,  or  places  abovesaid,  contrary
to  the  prohibition  aforesaid  :  the  one  halfe  of  the  same
forfeiture  to  be  to  the  use  of  us,  our  heires  &  suc-
cessors, and the other halfe to the use of  the said

197

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and  WilHam,  and  the  said
companie,  and  further  to  sujfFer  imprisonment  during  our
pleasure,  and  such  other  punishment  as  to  us,  for  so  high
contempt,  shal  seeme  meete  and  convenient.

And  further  of  our  grace  speciall,  certaine  knowledge,
and  meere  motion  we  have  condescended  and  graunted,
and  by  these  patents  for  us  our  heires  and  successors,
doe  condescend  and  grant  to  the  said  Edward,  Thomas,
Richard  &  William,  their  executors  and  administrators,
that  we  our  heires  &  successors  during  the  said  terme,
will  not  grant  liberty,  licence  or  power  to  any  person  or
persons  whatsoever,  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  these  our
letters  patents,  to  saile,  passe,  trade,  or  trafique  into  or
from  the  said  dominions  of  the  said  Grand  Signior  or
any  of  them,  without  the  consent  of  the  said  Edward,
Thomas,  Richard  &  William,  and  such  as  shalbe  named
or  appointed  as  afore  is  said,  or  the  most  of  them.  And
that  if  at  any  time  hereafter  during  the  said  terme,  ye
said  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and  William,  or  the  sur-
vivors of  them,  shal  admit  or  nominate  any  of  our
subjects  to  be  partners  &  adventurers  in  the  said  trade
to  the  number  of  12.  or  under  as  afore  is  said,  that
then  we  our  heires  and  successors  at  the  instance  and
petition  of  the  said  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and
William,  or  the  survivors  of  them  in  our  Chauncerie
to  be  made,  and  upon  the  sight  of  these  presents,  will
grant  and  make  to  the  said  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard
and  William,  or  to  the  survivors  of  them,  and  to  such
persons  as  so  shall  be  nominated  or  appointed  by  their
speciall  names,  surnames,  &  additions  as  is  aforesaid,  new
letters  patents  under  the  great  scale  of  England  in  due
forme  of  law  with  like  agreement,  clauses,  prohibitions,
provisoes  and  articles  (mutatis  mutandis)  as  in  these  our
letters  patents  are  conteined,  for,  and  during  the  residue
of  the  said  terme  of  seven  yeres  then  remaining  un-
expired. And  that  the  sight  of  these  presents  shalbe
sufficient  warrant  to  the  Lord  Chancellour,  or  Lord
keeper  of  the  great seale for the time being, for the

198

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1581.

making,  sealing  and  passing  of  such  new  letters  patents,
without  further  writ  or  warrant  for  the  same  to  be  re-
quired, had,  or  obtained.

And  the  said  Edward  Osburne,  Thomas  Smith,  and
Richard  Staper,  and  William  Garret  and  such  others  as
shalbe  so  nominated  and  appointed,  as  is  aforesaid,  to  be
of  their  trade  or  companie,  shall  yeerely  during  6.  of  the
last  yeres  of  the  said  7.  yeres,  lade  out  of  this  our
Realme,  and  bring  home  yeerely,  for,  and  in  the  feate
and  trade  of  marchandizing  aforesaid,  so  much  goods  and
marchandizes,  as  the  custome,  and  subsidie  inwards  and
outwards,  shall  amount  in  the  whole  to  the  summe  of  [II.  i.  149.]
500.  li.  yeerely.  So  that  the  said  Edward  Osborne,
Thomas  Smith,  Richard  Staper,  and  William  Garret  and
the  said  persons  so  to  be  nominated  as  is  aforesaid,  or
any  of  them,  or  their  ship  or  shippes  be  not  barred,
stayed,  restrained  or  let  by  any  reasonable  occasion  from
the  sayde  trade  or  trafique,  and  so  that  the  said  ship  or
ships  do  not  perish  by  any  misfortune,  or  bee  spoyled
by  the  way  in  their  voyage.

And  further,  the  said  Edward  Osborne,  Thomas  Smith,
Richard  Staper,  and  William  Garret,  and  such  others
as  shall  be  appointed  as  aforesaide  to  be  of  their  saide
trade  or  Company,  shall  give  notice  unto  the  Lord
Admirall  of  England,  or  to  some  of  the  principall  officers
of  the  Admiraltie  for  the  time  being,  of  such  ship  or
shippes  as  they  shall  set  foorth  in  the  same  voyage,  and
of  the  number  of  Mariners  appointed  to  goe  in  the
same  ship  or  shippes,  by  the  space  of  fifteene  dayes
before  the  setting  or  going  foorth  of  the  same  ship  or
shippes.  And  also  the  said  Edward  Osborne,  Thomas
Smith,  Richard  Staper  and  William  Garret,  and  such
other  as  shall  be  by  them  the  saide  Edward  and  Richard,
nominated  to  be  of  the  said  trade,  shall  and  will  at
the  setting  foorth  of  their  ship,  or  shippes,  for  the
same  voyage,  permit  and  suffer  the  Master  of  the
Ordinance  of  us,  our  heires  and  successors,  or  some
others,  our  or  their  principall  officers  of  the  Ordinance,

199

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

to  take  a  view  of  the  number  and  quantitie  of  such
Ordinance,  powder,  and  munition  as  shall  be  caried  in
the  said  ship,  or  shippes,  and  shall  also  at  the  returne
of  the  same  ship,  or  shippes,  suffer  a  view  to  be  taken,
and  upon  request  made,  make  an  accompt  to  the  saide
officers  of  our  Ordinance,  of  the  expenses,  and  wastes
of  the  said  Ordinance,  powder,  and  munition,  so  to  bee
caried  in  the  same  ship,  or  shippes.

Provided  alwayes,  that  if  any  of  the  said  trade  or
Company,  or  their  servants,  factors,  or  sailers,  in  any  ship
by  them  laden,  shall  commit  any  piracie  or  outrage  upon
the  seas,  and  that,  if  the  said  Company  or  societie  shall
not,  or  do  not,  within  reasonable  time,  after  complaint
made,  or  notice  given  to  the  said  Company,  or  to  any
of  them,  either  satisfie  or  recompense  the  parties  that  so
shall  fortune  to  be  robbed,  or  spoiled  by  any  of  the
said  Company,  or  sailers,  in  the  said  ships,  or  els  shall
not  do  their  endevour  to  the  uttermost  of  their  reason-
able power,  to  have  the  parties  so  offending  punished
for  the  same  their  offences,  that  then,  and  from  thence-
foorth,  these  present  letters  patents  shall  be  utterly  voyd,
cease,  and  determine.

Provided  likewise,  that  if  it  shall  hereafter  appeare
unto  us,  our  heires,  or  successors,  that  this  grant,  or
the  continuance  thereof  in  the  whole,  or  in  any  part
thereof,  shall  not  be  profitable  to  us,  our  heires,  our
successors,  or  to  this  our  Realme,  that  then,  and  from
thencefoorth,  upon,  and  after  one  full  yeeres  warning,
to  be  given  unto  the  said  Company,  or  to  the  Governour
thereof,  by  us,  our  heires,  or  successors,  this  present
grant  shall  cease,  be  voyd,  and  determine,  to  all  intents,
constructions,  and  purposes.

Provided  also,  that  we,  our  heires  and  successors,  from
time  to  time,  during  the  said  7.  yeeres,  may  lawfully
nominate,  appoint,  and  authorise  two  persons,  being  fit
men,  to  be  of  the  saide  company,  and  for  want  or  lacke
of  them,  two  others  to  be  adventurers  in  the  said  trade,
for  such  stocke  and  summe  of  money,  as  they  shall  put  in.

THE LEVANT COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1581.

so  that  the  said  persons  to  bee  nominated,  or  authorised,
shall  be  contributorie  to  all  charges  of  the  said  trade  &
adventure  indifferently,  according  to  their  stockes  :  and
as  other  adventurers  of  the  said  trade  shall  doe  for  their
stockes,  and  so  that  likewise  they  doe  observe  the  orders
of  the  said  Company,  allowable  by  this  our  graunt,  and
that  such  persons  so  to  be  appointed  by  us,  our  heires  or
successors,  shall,  and  may,  with  the  saide  Company,  and
fellowship,  use  the  trade  and  feate  of  marchandise  afore-
saide,  and  all  the  liberties  and  privileges  herein  before
granted,  according  to  the  meaning  of  these  our  letters
patents,  any  thing  in  these  our  letters  patents  contained
to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.

And  further  of  our  speciall  grace,  certaine  knowledge,
and  meere  motion,  we  have  condescended  and  granted,
and  by  these  presents  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors,
doe  condescend,  and  grant  to  the  said  Edward  Osborne,
Thomas  Smith,  Richard  Staper,  and  William  Garret,
their  executors,  and  administrators,  that  if  at  the  ende  of
the  said  terme  of  seven  yeeres,  it  shall  seeme  meete,  and
convenient  unto  the  said  Edward  Osborne,  Thomas
Smith,  Richard  Staper,  and  William  Garret,  or  the  sur-
viver  of  them,  that  this  present  grant  shall  be  continued  :
and  if  that  also  it  shall  appeare  unto  us,  our  heires,  or
successors,  that  the  continuance  thereof  shall  not  be
prejudicial!,  or  hurtfull  to  this  our  Realme,  that  then  we,
our  heires,  or  successors,  at  the  instance  and  petition  of
the  said  Edward  Osborne,  Thomas  Smith,  Richard  Staper,
and  William  Garret,  or  the  surviver  of  them,  to  be  made
to  us,  our  heires,  or  successors,  wil  grant  and  make  to  the
said  Edward,  Thomas,  Richard  and  William,  or  the  sur-
viver of  them,  and  to  such  other  persons,  as  so  shal  be
by  the  said  Edward  and  Richard  nominated  and
appointed,  new  letters  patents,  under  the  great  scale  of
England,  in  due  forme  of  lawe,  with  like  covenants,
grants,  clauses,  and  articles,  as  in  these  presents  are  con-
tained, or  with  addition  of  other  necessary  articles,  or
change  of  these,  in  some  part, for  and  during the full  [II.  i.  150.]

A.D.
I581.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

terme  of  seven  yeeres  then  next  following.  Willing,  and
straightly  commanding,  and  charging  all  and  singuler  our
Admirals,  Viceadmirals,  Justices,  Maiors,  Sheriffes,
Escheaters,  Constables,  Bailiffes,  and  all  and  singuler
our  other  officers,  ministers,  liege  men,  and  subjects
whatsoever,  to  be  aiding,  favouring,  helping,  and  assist-
ing unto  the  said  Governour,  and  company,  and  their
successors,  and  to  their  Deputies,  officers,  servants,
assignes,  and  ministers,  and  every  of  them,  in  executing
and  enjoying  the  premisses,  as  well  on  land  as  on  sea,
from  time  to  time,  and  at  all  times  when  you,  or  any  of
you,  shall  be  thereunto  required,  any  statute,  act,  ordi-
nance, proviso,  proclamation,  or  restraint  heretofore  had,
made,  set  forth,  ordained,  or  provided,  or  any  other
matter,  cause  or  thing  to  the  contrary,  in  any  wise
notwithstanding.

In  witnesse  whereof  we  have  caused  these  our  letters
to  be  made  patents,  witnesse  our  selfe,  at  Westminster,
the  II.  day  of  September,  in  the  23.  yeere  of  our  raigne.

The  first  voyage  or  journey,  made  by  Master
Laurence  Aldersey,  Marchant  of  London,  to
the  Cities  of  Jerusalem,  and  Tripolis,  &c.  In
the  yeere  1581.  Penned  and  set  downe  by
himselfe.

Departed  from  London  the  first  day  of
April,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1581,
passing  through  the  Nether-land  and  up
the  river  Rhene  by  Colen,  and  other  cities
of  Germanic.  And  upon  Thursday,  the
thirde  day  of  May,  I  came  to  Augusta,
where  I  delivered  the  letter  I  had  to
Master  Jenise,  and  Master  Castler,  whom  I  found  very
willing  to  pleasure  me,  in  any  thing  that  I  could  or  would
reasonably  demaund.  He  first  furnished  me  with  a  horse
to  Venice,  for  my  money,  and  then  tooke  me  with  him
a walking,  to  shew  me  the  Citie,  for  that  I had  a  day

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  ad

1581.

to  tary  there,  for  him  that  was  to  be  my  guide.  He  The  descrip-
shewed  me  first  the  State-house,  which  is  very  faire,  and  '^°^  °f  .
beautiful!  :  then  he  brought  mee  to  the  finest  garden,  and  q^^^^^i^
orchard,  that  ever  I  sawe  in  my  life  :  for  there  was  in  it
a  place  for  Canarie  birdes,  as  large  as  a  faire  Chamber,
trimmed  with  wier  both  above  and  beneath,  with  fine
little  branches  of  trees,  for  them  to  sit  in,  which  was  full
of  those  Canarie  birdes.  There  was  such  an  other  for
Turtle  dooves  :  also  there  were  two  pigeon  houses  joyn-
ing  to  them,  having  in  them  store  of  Turtle  dooves,  and
pigeons.  In  the  same  garden  also  were  sixe  or  seven
fishponds,  all  railed  about,  and  full  of  very  good  fish.
Also,  seven  or  eight  fine  fountaines,  or  water  springs,  of
divers  fashions  :  as  for  fruite,  there  wanted  none  of  all
sorts,  as  Orenges,  figges,  raisons,  wallnuts,  grapes,  besides
apples,  peares,  fiUbirds,  small  nuts,  and  such  other  fruite,
as  wee  have  in  England.

Then  did  hee  bring  mee  to  the  water  tower  of  the
same  Citie,  that  by  a  sleight  and  devise  hath  the  water
brought  up  as  high,  as  any  Church  in  the  towne,  and  to
tel  you  the  strange  devises  of  all,  it  passeth  my  capacitie.
Then  he  brought  me  to  another  faire  garden,  called  the
Shooters  hoose,  where  are  buts  for  the  long  bowe,  the
crosse  bowe,  the  stone  bowe,  the  long  peece,  and  for
divers  other  exercises  more.

After  this,  we  walked  about  the  walles  of  the  Citie,
where  is  a  great,  broade,  and  deepe  ditch,  upon  one  side
of  the  towne,  so  full  of  fish,  as  ever  I  sawe  any  pond  in
my  life,  and  it  is  reserved  onely  for  the  States  of  the
Citie.  And  upon  the  other  side  of  the  Citie  is  also  a
deepe  place  all  greene,  wherein  Deere  are  kept,  and  when
it  pleaseth  the  States  to  hunt  for  their  pleasure,  thither
they  resort,  and  have  their  courses  with  grayhounds,
which  are  kept  for  that  purpose.

The fift of  May, I departed  from Augusta towards  Venice.
Venice,  and came thither  upon Whitsunday, the thir-
teenth of  the  same  moneth. It is  needlesse to speake
of  the  height  of  the  mountaines  that  I  passed  over,  and

203

A.D.
I581.

[II.  i. 151.]

The  number
of  J  ewes  In
Venice.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  the  danger  thereof,  it  is  so  wel  knowen  already  to  the
world  :  the  heigth  of  them  is  marveilous,  and  I  was  the
space  of  sixe  dayes  in  passing  them.

I  came  to  Venice  at  the  time  of  a  Faire,  which  lasted
foureteene  dayes,  wherein  I  sawe  very  many,  and  faire
shewes  of  wares.  I  came  thither  too  short  for  the  first
passage,  which  went  away  from  Venice  about  the  seventh
or  eight  of  May,  and  with  them  about  three  score  pil-
grims, which  shippe  was  cast  away  at  a  towne  called
Estria,  two  miles  from  Venice,  and  all  the  men  in  her,
saving  thirtie,  or  thereabout,  lost.

Within  eight  dayes  after  fell  Corpus  Christi  day,  which
was  a  day  amongst  them  of  procession,  in  which  was
shewed  the  plate  and  treasure  of  Venice,  which  is  esteemed
to  be  worth  two  millions  of  pounds,  but  I  do  not  accompt
it  woorth  halfe  a  quarter  of  that  money,  except  there  be
more  than  I  sawe.  To  speake  of  the  sumptuousnesse  of
the  Copes  and  Vestments  of  the  Church,  I  leave,  but  the
trueth  is,  they  bee  very  sumptuous,  many  of  them  set  all
over  with  pearle,  and  made  of  cloth  of  golde.  And  for
the  Jesuits,  I  thinke  there  be  as  many  at  Venice,  as  there
be  in  Colen.

The  number  of  Jewesis  there  thought  to  be  1000,  who
dwell  in  a  certaine  place  of  the  Citie,  and  have  also  a  place,
to  which  they  resort  to  pray,  which  is  called  the  Jewes
Sinagogue.  They  all,  and  their  offspring  use  to  weare
red  caps,  (for  so  they  are  commaunded)  because  they  may
thereby  be  knowen  from  other  men.  For  my  further
knowledge  of  these  people,  I  went  into  their  Sinagogue
upon  a  Saturday,  which  is  their  Sabbath  day  :  and  I  found
them  in  th^eir  service  or  prayers,  very  devoute  :  they
receive  the  five  bookes  of  Moses,  and  honour  them  by
carying  them  about  their  Church,  as  the  Papists  doe  their
crosse.

Their  Synagogue  is  in  forme  round,  and  the  people
sit  round  about  it,  and  in  the  midst,  there  is  a  place
for  him  that  readeth  to  the  rest  :  as  for  their  apparell,
all of them weare a large white lawne over their

204

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  ad.

1581.
garments, which reacheth from their head, downe to
the  ground.

The  Psalm es  they  sing  as  wee  doe,  having  no  image,
nor  using  any  maner  of  idolatrie  :  their  error  is,  that  they
beleeve  not  in  Christ,  nor  yet  receive  the  New  Testa-
ment. This  Citie  of  Venice  is  very  faire,  and  greatly  to
bee  commended,  wherein  is  good  order  for  all  things  :
and  also  it  is  very  strong  and  populous  :  it  standeth  upon
the  maine  Sea,  and  hath  many  Islands  about  it,  that
belong  to  it.

To  tell  you  of  the  duke  of  Venice,  and  of  the
Seigniory  :  there  is  one  chosen  that  ever  beareth  the
name  of  a  duke,  but  in  trueth  hee  is  but  servant  to  the
Seigniorie,  for  of  himselfe  hee  can  doe  litle :  it  is  no
otherwise  with  him,  then  with  a  Priest  that  is  at  Masse
upon  a  festival  day,  which  putting  on  his  golden  garment,
seemeth  to  be  a  great  man,  but  if  any  man  come  unto
him,  and  crave  some  friendship  at  his  handes,  hee  will
say,  you  must  goe  to  the  Masters  of  the  Parish,  for  I
can  not  pleasure  you,  otherwise  then  by  preferring  of  your
suite :  and  so  it  is  with  the  duke  of  Venice,  if  any  man
having  a  suite,  come  to  him,  and  make  his  complaint,  and
deliver  his  supplication,  it  is  not  in  him  to  helpe  him,
but  hee  will  tell  him.  You  must  come  this  day,  or  that
day,  and  then  I  will  preferre  your  suite  to  the  Seigniorie,
and  doe  you  the  best  friendship  that  I  may.  Further-
more, if  any  man  bring  a  letter  unto  him,  hee  may  not
open  it,  but  in  the  presence  of  the  Seigniorie,  and  they
are  to  see  it  first,  which  being  read,  perhaps  they  will
deliver  it  to  him,  perhaps  not.  Of  the  Seigniory  there
be  about  three  hundreth,  and  about  fourtie  of  the
privie  Counsell  of  Venice,  who  usually  are  arayed  in
gownes  of  crimsen  Satten,  or  crimsen  Damaske,  when
they  sit  in  Counsell.

In  the  Citie  of  Venice,  no  man  may  weare  a  weapon,
except  he  be  a  souldier  for  the  Seigniorie,  or  a  schoUer
of  Padua,  or  a  gentleman  of  great  countenance,  and  yet
he  may  not  do  that  without  licence.

205

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581,

The  excesse  of As  for  the  women  of  Venice,  they  be  rather  monsters,
the  women  of then women. Every Shoomakers or Taylors  wife  will
enice.  have  a  gowne  of  silke,  and  one  to  carie  up  her  traine,

wearing  their  shooes  very  neere  halfe  a  yard  high  from
the  ground :  if  a  stranger  meete  one  of  them,  he  will
surely  thinke  by  the  state  that  she  goeth  with,  that  he
meeteth  a  Lady.

I  departed  from  this  Citie  of  Venice,  upon  Mid-
sommer  day,  being  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  June,
and  thinking  that  the  ship  would  the  next  day  depart,
I  stayed,  and  lay  a  shippeboord  all  night,  and  we  were
made  beleeve  from  time  to  time,  that  we  should  this
day,  and  that  day  depart,  but  we  taried  still,  till  the
His  embark-  fourteenth  of  July,  and  then  with  scant  winde  wee  set
ingat  Venue  gayle,  and  sayled  that  day  and  that  night,  not  above
fiftie  Italian  miles  :  and  upon  the  sixteene  day  at  night,
the  winde  turned  flat  contrary,  so  that  the  Master
knewe  not  what  to  doe :  and  about  the  fift  houre  of  the
night,  which  we  reckon  to  be  about  one  of  the  clocke
after  midnight,  the  Pilot  descried  a  saile,  and  at  last
perceived  it  to  be  a  Gallic  of  the  Turkes,  whereupon
we  were  in  great  feare.

The  Master  being  a  wise  fellowe,  and  a  good  sayler,
beganne  to  devise  howe  to  escape  the  danger,  and  to
loose  litle  of  our  way :  and  while  both  he,  and  all  of  us
were  in  our  dumps,  God  sent  us  a  merry  gale  ot  winde,
that  we  ranne  threescore  and  tenne  leagues  before  it
was  twelve  a  clocke  the  next  day,  and  in  sixe  dayes  after
we  were  seven  leagues  past  Zante.  And  upon  Munday
morning,  being  the  three  and  twentie  of  the  same
moneth,  we  came  in  the  sight  of  Candia  which  day  the
winde  came  contrary,  with  great  blasts,  and  stormes,  untill
the  eight  and  twentie  of  the  same  moneth :  in  which
time,  the  Mariners  cried  out  upon  me,  because  I  was
an  English  man,  &  sayd,  I  was  no  good  Christian,  and
wished  that  I  were  in  the  middest  of  the  Sea,  saying,
that  they,  and  the  shippe,  were  the  worse  for  me.  I
answered,  truely  it  may  well  be,  for  I  thinke  my  selfe  the

206

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  ad.

1581.

worst  creature  in  the  worlde,  and  consider  you  your  selves

also,  as I doe  my  selfe,  and then use your discretion.

The Frier  preached,  and  the  sermon  being  done,  I  was

demaunded  whether  I  did  understand  him  : I answered,

yea,  and  tolde  the  Frier  himselfe,  thus  you  saide  in  your

sermon, that  we  were not all  good Christians,  or else

it  were not  possible for us to have such  weather :  to

which I answered, be you well assured, that we are

not indeede all good Christians,  for  there are in the  [II.  i.  152.]

ship some that hold  very  unchristian opinions : so for

that time I satisfied him,  although (they said) that I

would not see, when they said the procession, and

honoured their images,  and prayed to our Lady,  and

S. Marke.

There  was  also  a  Gentleman,  an  Italian,  which  was
a  passenger  in  the  ship,  and  he  tolde  me  what  they  said
of  me,  because  I  would  not  sing.  Salve  Regina,  and  Ave
Maria,  as  they  did:  I  told  them,  that  they  that  praied
to  so  many,  or  sought  helpe  of  any  other,  then  of  God
the  Father,  or  of  Jesus  Christ  his  onely  sonne,  goe  a
wrong  way  to  worke,  and  robbed  God  of  his  honour,
and  wrought  their  owne  destructions.

All  this  was  told  the  Friers,  but  I  heard  nothing  of
it  in  three  daies  after :  and  then  at  evening  prayer,  they
sent  the  purser  about  with  the  image  of  our  Lady  to
every  one  to  kisse,  &  I  perceiving  it  went  another  way
from  him,  and  would  not  see  it :  yet  at  last  he  fetched  his
course  about,  so  that  he  came  to  me,  &  offered  it  to
me  as  he  did  to  others,  but  I  refused  it :  whereupon
there  was  a  great  stirre :  the  patron  and  all  the  friers
were  told  of  it,  and  every  one  saide  I  was  a  Lutheran,
and  so  called  me :  but  two  of  the  friers  that  were  of
greatest  authoritie,  seemed  to  beare  mee  better  good  will
then  the  rest,  and  travelled  to  the  patron  in  my  behalfe,
and  made  all  well  againe.

The  second  day  of  August  we  arrived  in Cyprus,  at  Cyprus.
a  towne  called  Missagh :  the  people  there  be  very  rude,  ^"'^S^-
and  like  beasts,  and  no  better,  they  eat  their  meat  sitting

207

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

upon  the  ground,  with  their  legges  a  crosse  like  tailors,
their  beds  for  the  most  part  be  hard  stones,  but  yet
some  of  them  have  faire  mattraces  to  lie  upon.

Joppa.  Upon  thursday  the  eight  of  August  we  came  to  Joppa

in  a  small  barke,  which  we  hired  betwixt  Missagh  and
Salina,  and  could  not  be  suffered  to  come  on  land  till
noone  the  next  day,  and  then  we  were  permitted  by  the

The  Basha  of  great  Basha,  who  sate  upon  the  top  of  a  hill  to  see  us

Joppa.  ggj^^ away. Being  come  on land,  we might not enter

into  any  house  for  victuals,  but  were  to  content  our
selves  with  our  owne  provision,  and  that  which  we
bought  to  carie  with  us  was  taken  from  us.  I  had  a
paire  of  stirrops,  which  I  bought  at  Venice  to  serve  me
in  my  journey,  and  trying  to  make  them  fit  for  me,  when
the  Basha  saw  me  up  before  the  rest  of  the  companie,  he
sent  one  to  dismount  me,  and  to  strike  me,  whereupon
I  turned  me  to  the  Basha,  and  made  a  long  legge,  saying.
Grand  mercie  Signior :  and  after  a  while  we  were  horsed
upon  litle  asses,  and  sent  away,  with  about  fiftie  light
horsemen  to  be  our  conduct  through  the  wildernesse,
called  Deserta  foelix,  who  made  us  good  sport  by  the
way  with  their  pikes,  gunnes,  and  fauchins.

Rama.  That  day  being  S.  Laurence  day,  we came  to  Rama,

which  is  tenne  Italian  miles  from  Joppa,  and  there  we
stayed  that  night,  and  payed  to  the  captaine  of  the  castell
every  man  a  chekin,  which  is  seven  shillings  and  two
pence  sterling.  So  then  we  had  a  new  gard  of  souldiers,
and  left  the  other.

The  house  we  lodged  in  at  Rama  had  a  doore  so  low
to  enter  into,  that  I  was  faine  to  creepe  in,  as  it  were
upon  my  knees,  &  within  it  are  three  roomes  to  lodge
travellers  that  come  that  way :  there  are  no  beds,  except  a
man  buy  a  mat,  and  lay  it  on  the  ground,  that  is  all
the  provision,  without  stooles  or  benches  to  sit  upon.
Our  victuals  were  brought  us  out  of  the  towne,  as
hennes,  egges,  bread,  great  store  of  fruite,  as  pom-
granates,  figges,  grapes,  oringes,  and  such  like,  and
drinke  we drue out  of  the well. The towne  it selfe

208

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  ad

1581.
is  so  ruinated,  that  I take  it  rather  to be  a  heape of
stones  then  a  towne.

Then  the  next  morning  we  thought  to  have  gone
away,  but  we  could  not  be  permitted  that  day,  so  we
stayed  there  till  two  of  the  clocke  the  next  morning,  and
then  with  a  fresh  gard  of  souldiers  we  departed  toward
Jerusalem.  We  had  not  ridde  five  English  miles,  but  we
were  incountred  with  a  great  number  of  the  Arabians,  Troopes  of
who  stayed  us,  and  would  not  suffer  us  to  passe  till  they  ^^f^""'"^  '^^^-
had  somewhat,  so  it  cost  us  for  all  our  gard  above
twentie  shillings  a  man  betwixt  Joppa  and  Jerusalem.
These  Arabians  troubled  us  oftentimes.  Our  Truchman
that  payed  the  money  for  us  was  striken  downe,  and  had
his  head  broken  because  he  would  not  give  them  as
much  as  they  asked :  and  they  that  should  have  rescued
both  him  and  us,  stood  still,  and  durst  doe  nothing,
which  was  to  our  cost.

Being  come  within  sight  of  Jerusalem,  the  maner  is  His  arrwall
to  kneele  downe,  and  give  God  thankes,  that  it  hath  '^^  ^^^  ^jg^^  "f
pleased  him  to  bring  us  to  that  holy  place  where  he
himselfe  had  beene :  and  there  we  leave  our  horses,  and
go  on  foote  to  the  towne,  and  being  come  to  the  gates,
there  they  tooke  our  names,  and  our  fathers  names,  and
so  we  were  permitted  to  go  to  our  lodgings.

The  governor  of  the  house  met  us  a  mile  out  of  the
towne,  and  very  curteously  bade  us  all  welcome,  and
brought  us  to  the  monasterie.  The  gates  of  the  citie  are
all  covered  with  yron,  the  entrance  into  the  house  of  the
Christians  is  a  very  low  &  narrow  doore,  barred  or
plated  with  yron,  and  then  come  we  into  a  very  darke
entry :  the  place  is  a  monastery :  there  we  lay,  &  dieted
of  free  cost,  we  fared  reasonable  well,  the  bread  and  wine
was  excellent  good,  the  chambers  cleane,  &  all  the  meat  [II.  i.  153.]
well  served  in,  with  cleane  linnen.

We  lay  at  the  monasterie  two  dayes,  friday  and
Saturday,  and  then  we  went  to  Bethlem  with  two  or
three  of  the  friers  of  the  house  with  us:  in  the  way
thither  we  saw  many  monuments,  as  :

V  209  o

about  Jeru-
salem

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.
The  monu-  The  mountaine  where the  Angell tooke  up  Abacuck

ments  in  and \y^  ^^  haire,  and  brought  him  to  Daniel  in  the  Lions
denne.

The  fountaine  of  the  prophet  Jeremie.

The  place  where  the  wise  men  met  that  went  to
Bethlem  to  worship  Christ,  where  is  a  fountaine  of
stone.

Being  come  to  Bethlem  we  sawe  the  place  where
Christ  was  borne,  which  is  now  a  chappell  with  two
altars,  whereupon  they  say  masse  :  the  place  is  built
with  gray  marble,  and  hath  bene  beautifull,  but  now
it  is  partly  decayed.

Neere  thereto  is  the  sepulchre  of  the  innocents  slaine
by  Herod,  the  sepulchres  of  Paul,  of  Jerome,  and  of
Eusebius.

Also  a  litle  from  this  monasterie  is  a  place  under
the  ground,  where  the  virgine  Mary  abode  with  Christ
when  Herod  sought  him  to  destroy  him.

We  stayed  at  Bethlem  that  night,  and  the  next  day
we  went  from  thence  to  the  mountaines  of  Judea,
which  are  about  eight  miles  from  Jerusalem,  where  are
the  ruines  of  an  olde  monasterie.  In  the  mid  way
from  the  monasterie  to  Jerusalem  is  the  place  where
John  Baptist  was  borne,  being  now  an  olde  monasterie,
and  cattell  kept  in  it.  Also  a  mile  from  Jerusalem  is
a  place  called  Inventio  sanctae  crucis,  where  the  wood
was  found  that  made  the  crosse.

In  the  citie  of  Jerusalem  we  saw  the  hall  where
Pilate  sate  in  judgement  when  Christ  was  condemned,
the  staires  whereof  are  at  Rome,  as  they  told  us.  A
litle  from  thence  is  the  house  where  the  virgin  Mary
was  borne.

There  is  also  the  piscina  or  fishpoole  where  the
sicke  folkes  were  healed,  which  is  by  the  wals  of
Jerusalem. But  the  poole  is  now  dry.

The  mount  of  Calvaria  is  a  great  church,  and  within
the  doore  therof,  which  is  litle,  and  barred  with  yron,
and  five great holes  in  it to looke in, like the holes

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  ad.

1581.
of  taverne  doores  in  London,  they  sit  that  are  appointed
to  receive  our  money  with  a  carpet  under  them  upon
a  banke  of  stone,  &  their  legs  a  crosse  like  tailors  :
having  paid  our  money,  we  are  permitted  to  go  into
the  church  :  right  against  the  church  doore  is  the
grave  where  Christ  was  buried,  with  a  great  long  stone
of  white  marble  over  it,  and  rayled  about,  the  outside  of
the  sepulchre  is  very  foule,  by  meanes  that  every  man
scrapes  his  name  and  marke  upon  it,  and  is  ill  kept.

Within  the  sepulchre  is  a  partition,  &  in  the  further
part  thereof  is  a  place  like  an  altar,  where  they  say
masse,  and  at  the  doore  thereof  is  the  stone  where-
upon the  Angell  sate  when  he  sayde  to  Marie,  He  is
risen,  which  stone  was  also  rowled  to  the  doore  of  the
sepulchre.

The  altar  stone  within  the  sepulchre  is  of  white
marble,  the  place  able  to  conteine  but  foure  persons,
right  over  the  sepulchre  is  a  devise  or  lanterne  for
light,  and  over  that  a  great  louer,  such  as  are  in
England  in  ancient  houses.  There  is  also  the  chappell
of  the  sepulchre,  and  in  the  mids  thereof  is  a  canopie
as  it  were  of  a  bed,  with  a  great  sort  of  Estridge
egges hanging  at it, with tassels of  silke and lampes.

Behinde  the  sepulchre  is  a  litle  chappell  for  the
Chaldeans  and Syrians.

Upon  the  right  hand  comming  into  the  church  is
the  tombe  of  Baldwine  king  of  France,  and  of  his
Sonne  :  and  in  the  same  place  the  tombe  of  Mel-
chisedech.

There  is  a  chappell  also  in  the  same  church  erected  ^-  Hekns
to  S.  Helen,  through  which  we  go  up  to  the  place  ^'^^Z^^'^-
where  Christ  was  crucified  :  the  stayres  are  fiftie  steps
high,  there  are  two  altars  in  it  :  before  the  high  altar
is  the  place  where  the  crosse  stood,  the  hole  whereof
is  trimmed  about  with  silver,  and  the  depth  of  it  is
halfe  a  mans  arme  deepe  :  the  rent  also  of  the  moun-
taine  is  there  to  be  scene  in  the  crevis,  wherein  a  man
may  put  his  arme.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

Upon  the  other  side  of  the  mount  of  Calvarie  is
the  place  where  Abraham  would  have  sacrificed  his
Sonne.  Where  also  is  a  chapell,  and  the  place  paved
with  stones  of  divers  colours.

There  is  also  the  house  of  Annas  the  high  Priest,
and  the  Olive  tree  whereunto  Christ  was  bound  when
he  was  whipt.  Also  the  house  of  Caiphas,  and  by  it
the  prison  where  Christ  was  kept,  which  is  but  the
roome  of  one  man,  and  hath  no  light  but  the  opening
of  the  doore.

Without  Jerusalem  in  the  vally  of  Josaphat  is  a
church  under  the  ground,  like  to  the  shrouds  in
Pauls,  where  the  sepulchre  of  the  virgin  Mary  is  :  the
staires  be  very  broad,  and  upon  the  staires  going
downe  are  two  sepulchres  :  upon  the  left  hand  lieth
Josaphat,  and  upon  the  right  hand  lieth  Joachim  and
Anna,  the  father  and  mother  of  the  virgin  Mary.

Going  out  of  the  valley  of  Josaphat  we  came  to
mount  Olivet,  where  Christ  praied  unto  his  father
before  his  death  :  and  there  is  to  be  seene  (as  they
[II.  i.  154.]  tolde  me)  the  water  &  blood  that  fell  from  the  eyes
of  Christ.  A  litle  higher  upon  the  same  mount  is  the
place  where  the  Apostles  slept,  and  watched  not.  At
the  foot  of  the  mount  is  the  place  where  Christ  was
imprisoned.

Upon  the  mountaine  also  is  the  place  where  Christ
stood  when  he  wept  over  Jerusalem,  and  where  he
ascended  into  heaven.
His  departure  Now  having  seene  all  these  monuments,  I  with  my
from  Jerusa-  company  set  from  Jerusalem,  the  20  day  of  August,
and  came  againe  to  Joppa  the  22  of  the  same  moneth,
where  wee  tooke  shipping  presently  for  Tripolis,  and
in  foure  dayes  we  came  to  Mecina  the  place  where  the
ships  lie  that  come  for  Tripolis.
Tripolis  in  The citie  of  Tripolis is  a  mile  and a halfe  within

Syria.

the  land,  so  that  no  ship  can  come  further  then
Mecina  :  so  that  night  I  came  thither,  where  I  lay
nine daies for passage, and at last  we  imbarked our

town  tn
Cyprus.

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  ad.

1581.
selves  in  a  good  ship  of  Venice  called  the  new  Nave
Ragasona.  We  entred  the  ship  the  second  of  Septem-
ber, the  fourth  we  set  saile,  the  seventh  we  came  to
Salina,  which  is  140  miles  from  Tripolis :  there  we
stayed  foure  dayes  to  take  in  more  lading,  in  which
meane  time  I  fell  sicke  of  an  ague,  but  recovered
againe,  I  praise  God.

Salina  is  a  ruinated citie, and  was  destroyed  by  the  Salina.
Turke ten  yeeres  past  : there  are  in  it  now  but  seven-
teene persons,  women  and  children. A  litle  from  this
citie  of  Salina  is  a salt piece of ground, where the
water  groweth  salt  that  raineth  upon  it.

Thursday  the  2 1  of  September,  we  came  to  Missagh,  Missagh  a
&  there  we  stayed  eight  dayes  for  our  lading  :  the  18
of  September  before  we  came  to  Missagh,  and  within  ten
miles  of  the  towne,  as  we  lay  at  an  anker,  because  the
winde  was  contrary,  there  came  a  great  boat  full  of  men
to  boord  us,  they  made  an  excuse  to  seeke  for  foure  men
which  (they  said)  our  ship  had  taken  from  theirs  about
Tripolis,  but  our  captaine  would  not  suffer  any  of  them
to  come  in  to  us.

The  next  morning  they  came  to  us  againe  with  a  great
gaily,  manned  with  500  men  at  ye  least,  whereupon  our
captaine  sent  the  boat  to  them  with  twelve  men  to  know
their  pleasure  :  they  said  they  sought  for  4  men,  and
therfore  would  talke  with  our  maister  :  so  then  the
maisters  mate  was  sent  them,  and  him  they  kept,  and
went  their  way  :  the  next  morning  they  came  againe  with
him,  &  with  three  other  gallies,  and  then  would  needes
speake  with  our  captaine,  who  went  to  them  in  a  gowne
of  crimson  damaske,  and  other  very  brave  apparell,  and
five  or  sixe  other  gentlemen  richly  apparelled  also.  They
having  the  Turks  safe  conduct,  shewed  it  to  the  captaine
of  the  gallies,  and  laid  it  upon  his  head,  charging  him  to
obey  it :  so  with  much  adoe,  and  with  the  gift  of  100
pieces  of  golde  we  were  quit  of  them,  and  had  our  man
againe.

That  day  as  aforesaid,  we  came  to  Missagh,  and  there  Candle.

213

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

stayed  eight  dayes,  and  at  last  departed  towards  Candie,
with  a  scant  winde.

The  1 1  day  of  October  we  were  boorded  with  foure
gallieSj  manned  with  1200  men,  which  also  made  a  sleeve-
lesse  arrant,  and  troubled  us  very  much,  but  our  captaines
pasport,  and  the  gift  of  100  chekins  discharged  all.
Zante,  The  27  of  October  we  passed  by  Zante  with  a
merrie  winde,  the  29  by  Corfu,  and  the  third  of
November  we  arrived  at  I  stria,  and  there  we  left  our
great  ship,  and  tooke  small  boates  to  bring  us  to
Venice.

The  9  of  November  I  arrived  again  at  Venice  in  good
health,  where  I  staied  nine  daies,  and  the  25  of  the  same
moneth  1  came  to  Augusta,  and  staied  there  but  one
day.

The  27  of  November  I  set  towards  Nuremberg  where
I  came  the  29,  and  there  staied  till  the  9  of  December,
and  was  very  well  interteined  of  the  English  marchants
there  :  and  the  governors  of  the  towne  sent  me  and
my  company  sixteene  gallons  of  excellent  good  wine.

From  thence  I  went  to  Frankford,  from  Frankford  to
Collen,  from  Collen  to  Arnam,  from  Arnam  to  Utreight,
from  Utreight  to  Dort,  from  Dort  to  Antwerpe,  from
Antwerpe  to  Flushing,  from  Flushing  to  London,  where
I  arrived  upon  Twelfe  eve  in  safetie,  and  gave  thanks
to  God,  having  finished  my  journey  to  Jerusalem  and
home  againe,  in  the  space  of  nine  moneths  and  five
dayes.

214

A PASSPORT TO ENGLISHMEN

A.D.

1582.

The  passeport  made  by  the  great  Maister  of
Malta  unto  the  Englishmen  in  the  barke
Raynolds. 1582.

[Rere  Hugo  de  Loubeux  Verdala,  Dei
gratia  sacr^  domus  hospitalis  sancti
Joannis  Hierosolymitani  magister  humilis,
pauperumque  Jesu  Christi  custos,  uni-
versis  &  singulis  principibus  ecclesiasticis
&  secularibus,  archiepiscopis,  episcopis,
ducibus,  marchionibus,  baronibus,  no-
bilibus,  capitaneis,  vicedominis,  prsfectis,  castellanis,
admiraliis,  &  quibuscunque  triremium  vel  aliorum
navigiorum  patronis,  ac  civitatum  rectoribus,  potestatibus
ac  magistratibuSj  CEeterisque  officialibus,  &  quibuscunque
personis  cujusvis  dignitatis,  gradus,  status  &  conditionis  [II.  i.  155.]
fuerint,  ubilibet  locorum  &  terrarum  constitutis,  salutem.
Notum  facimus  &  in  verbo  veritatis  attestamur,  come
nel  mese  di  Maggio  prossime  passato  le  nostre  galere
vennero  dal  viaggio  di  Barberia,  dove  havendo  mandato
per  soccorrere  a  un  galionetto  de  Christiani  che  havea
dato  traverso  in  quelle  parti,  essendo  arrivati  sopra
questa  isola  alia  parte  de  ponente  trovarono  una  nave
Inglesa,  sopra  cargo  de  essa  il  magnifico  Giovanni
Keale,  &  David  Filly  patrono,  volendo  la  reconoscere
che  nave  fosse,  han  visto,  che  se  metteva  in  ordine  per
defendersi,  dubitando  che  dette  nostre  galere  fossero  de
inimici  :  &  per  che  un  marinaro  rivoltose  contra  la
volonta  de  detti  magnifico  Giovani  Keale  &  David
Filly,  habbi  tirato  un  tiro  di  artiglieria  verso  una  de
dette  galere,  &  che  non  se  amangnava  la  vela  de  la
Majestra  secondo  la  volonta  de  detti  magnifico  Giovanni
Keale  &  David  Filly  patrono,  furimensata  detta  nave  nel
presente  general  porto  di  Malta,  secondo  I'ordine  del
venerando  Generale  de  dette  galere,  &  essendo  qua,
monsignor  Inquisitore  ha  impedita  quella  per  conto  del
sancto  officio,  & si  diede parte alia santita di nostro

215

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

signer  Gregorio  papa  xiii.  A  la  fin  fu  licenciata  per
andarsene  al  suo  viaggio.  Han  donque  humilmente  sup-
plicato  detti  magnifico  Giovanni  Keale  &  David  Filly
per  nome  &  parte  delli  magnifici  Edwardo  Osborn  sena-
tore  &  Richardo  Staper  merchanti  Inglesi  della  nobile
citta  di  Londra,  &  anco  di  Thomaso  Wilkinson  scrivano,
piloti,  nocheri,  &  marinari,  gli  volessimo  dare  le  nostre
lettere  patente  &  salvo  condutto,  accioche  potranno
andare  &  ritornare  quando  gli  parera  commodo  con  alcuna
roba  &  mercantia  a  loro  benvista  :  si  come  noi,  essendo
cosa  giusta  &  che  retornera  commoda  a  nostra  relligione
&  a  questi  forrestieri,  per  tenor  de  li  presenti  se  gli
habiamo  concesse  con  le  conditione  pero  infra  scritte.
videlicet :

Che  ogni  volta  che  detti  mercadanti  con  sopradetta
nave  o  con  altra  non  porteranno  mercantie  de  contra-
bando,  &  che  constara  per  fede  authentica  &  con  lettere
patente  de  sanita,  poteran  liberalmente  victualiarse  de
tutte  le  victuarie  necessarie,  &  praticare  in  questa  isola
&  dominii,  &  poi  partirsene  &  seguire  suo  viaggio  per
dove  volessero  in  levante  o  altrove,  come  tutti  altri  vaselli
&  specialmente  de  Francesi  &  altri  nationi,  &  di  vendere
&  comprare  qual  si  voglia  mercantia  a  loro  benvista.

Item,  che  potera  portare  polvere  de  canone  &  di
archibuso,  salnitro,  carboni  di  petra  rosetta,  platine  de
rame,  stagno,  acciale,  ferro,  carisee  commune,  tela  grossa
bianca  per  far  tende  de  galere,  balle  de  ferro  de  calibro,
petre  de  molino  fine,  arbore  &  antenne  de  galere,  bas-
tardi  &  alteri.  Et  in  conclusione,  havenda  visto  che
loro  per  il  tempo  che  restarano  qua,  si  portorno  da  fideli
&  Catholici  Christiani,  &  che  sua  sanctita  habbia  trovato
bono  il  salvo  condutto  del  gran  Turko  a  loro  concesso,
per  il  timor  della  armata  Turkesca  &  di  altri  vaselli  de
inimici,  inherendo  alia  volonta  di  sua  sanctita,  &  massime
per  che  havera  de  andare  &  passare  per  diversi  lochi  &
tanto  lontani  come  Ingilterra,  Flandra,  &  tutti  parti  di
ponente,  &  in  altrove,  a  noi  ha  parso  farle  le  presente
nostre  lettere  patente  come fidele conversatore nostro,

216

A PASSPORT TO ENGLISHMEN  ad.

1582.
accio  piu  securamente  &  sensa  obstaculo  possa  andare
&  ritornare  quando  li  parera  con  detta  nave  o  con  altre,  a
loro  benvlsta.  Per  tanto  donque  tutti  &  ciascun  di  voi
sudetti  affectuosamente  pregamo,  che  per  qual  si  voglia
de  vostra  jurisditione,  alia  quale  detto  magnifico  Giovani
Keale  &  David  Filly  a  nome  quo  supra  con  la  nave  &
marinari  de  detti  loro  principali  o  altri  caschera,  navigare,
passare,  &  venire  sicuramente,  alia  libera,  sensa  alcuno
disturbo  o  altro  impedimento  li  lasciate,  &  facciate
lasciare  stare,  &  passare,  tornare,  dz  quando  li  parera
partire,  talmente  che  per  amore  &  contemplatione  nostra
il  detto  magnifico  Giovanni  Keale  a  nome  quo  supra  con
le  nave,  marinari,  &  mercantia  non  habbi  difficulta,  fastidio
&  ritentione  alcuna,  anzi  se  gli  dia  ogni  agiuto  &  favore,
cosa  degnadi  voi,  giusta,  &  a  noi  gratissima,  de  recom-
pensarvila  con  uguale  &  maggior  servitio,  quando
dall'occasione  ne  saremo  rechiesti.  Et  finalmente  com-
mandammo  a  tutti  &  qual  si  voglia  relligiosi  &  frati  de
nostra  relligione  di  qual  si  voglia  conditione,  grado  &
stato  che  siano,  &  a  tutti  ricevitori  &  procuratori  nostri
in  tutti  &  qual  si  voglia  priorati  nostri  deputati  &  depu-
tandi  in  vertu  di  santa  obedientia,  &  a  tutti  nostri  vassalli
&  alia  giurisditione  di  nostra  relligione  sogetti,  che  in
tale  &  per  tale  tenghino  &  reputino  il  detto  magnifico
Giovanni  Keale  a  nome  ut  supra,  nave,  marinari,  &
mercantia,  sensa  permittere,  che  nel  detto  suo  viaggio,
o  in  alcun  altro  luogo  sia  molestato,  o  in  qual  si  voglia
manera  impedito,  anzi  tutte  le  cose  sue  &  negotii  loro  sian
da  voi  agioutati  &  continuamente  favoriti.  In  cujus  rei
testimonium  Bulla  nostra  magistralis  in  cera  nigra
praesentibus  est  impressa.  Datae  Melitae  in  conventu
nostro  die  duodecimo  Mensis  Julii. 1582.

The  same  in  English.

FRier  Hugo  of  Loubeux  Verdala,  by  the  grace  of
God,  master  of  the  holy  house,  the  hospital  of  S.
John  at  Jerusalem,  and  an  humble  keeper  of  the  poore  of
Jesus  Christ,  to  all  &  every  prince  ecclesiastical  &  secular,

217

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

archbishops,  bishops,  Dukes,  Marqueses,  Barons,  Capteines,
Vicelords,  Maiors,  Castellanes,  Admirals,  and  whatsoever
patrons  of  Gallies,  or  other  greater  shippes,  and  governors
of  cities,  potentates  and  magistrates,  and  other  officers  and
[II.  i.  156.]  persons  whatsoever,  of  what  dignitie,  degree,  state  and
condition  soever  they  be,  dwelling  in  all  places  and  landes,
greeting.

We  make  it  knowne,  and  in  the  word  of  truth  do
witnesse,  that  in  the  moneth  of  May  last  past,  our  gallies
came  on  the  voyage  from  Barbarie,  where  having
commandement  to  succour  a  little  ship  of  the  Christians
which  was  driven  over  into  that  part,  being  arrived  upon
this  Hand  on  the  West  part  they  found  one  English  ship
under  the  charge  of  the  worshipfuU  John  Keele,  and
David  Fillie  master  :  and  our  men  willing  to  know  what
ship  it  was,  they  seemed  to  put  themselves  in  order  for
their  defence,  doubting  that  the  said  our  gallies  were  of
the  enemies,  &  therefore  one  mariner  attempted  contrary
to  the  will  of  the  worshipfuU  John  Keele,  and  David
Fillie  maister,  and  had  shot  off  a  piece  of  artillerie  against
one  of  the  said  gallies,  and  because  she  would  not  strike
amaine  her  sayle,  according  to  the  will  of  the  saide
worshipful!  John  Keele,  and  David  Fillie  master,  the  said
ship  was  brought  backe  again  unto  the  present  port  of
Malta,  according  to  the  order  of  the  reverend  generall  of
the  said  gallies  :  and  in  being  there,  maister  Inquisitor
staid  it  by  authoritie  of  the  holy  office,  and  in  that  behalfe
by  the  holinesse  of  our  Lord  pope  Gregorie  the  thirteenth,
in  the  end  was  licenced  to  depart  on  her  voyage.  They
therefore  the  said  worshipfuU  John  Keele  and  David
Fillie,  in  the  name  and  behalfe  of  the  worshipfuU  master
Edward  Osborne  Alderman,  and  Richard  Staper,  English
marchants  of  the  noble  citie  of  London,  have  humbly
besought  together  with  Thomas  Wilkinson  the  purser,
pilots,  master  and  mariners,  that  we  would  give  our
letters  patents,  and  safe  conducts,  that  they  might  goe
and  returne,  when  they  shall  see  opportunitie,  with  their
goods  and  merchandizes  at  their  pleasure  :  whereupon  the

A PASSPORT TO ENGLISHMEN  ad.

1582.
thing  seeming  unto  us  just,  and  that  it  might  be  for  the
profite  of  our  rehgion, and of  these strangers,  by  the
tenor  of  these  presents  we have granted the  same to
them  :  yet,  with  the  conditions  hereunder  written,  viz.

That  every  time  the  said  marchants  of  the  said  ship,
or  with  any  other,  shall  not  bring  such  marchandize  as
is  forbidden,  and  that  by  sufficient  proofe  and  letters
testimoniall  it  appeareth  that  they  are  free  from  the
infections  of  the  plague,  they  may  victuall  themselves  with
all  necessarie  victuals,  and  traffike  with  us,  and  in  this
Hand  and  dominion,  and  afterwarde  may  depart  and
follow  their  voyage  whither  they  will  into  the  Levant
or  else  where,  as  all  other  vessels,  and  especially  of
France  and  other  nations  do,  and  sell  and  buy  whatsoever
marchandize  they  shal  thinke  good.

Item,  that  they  may  bring  powder  for  cannon  and
harquebush,  saltpeeter,  cole  of  Newcastle,  plates  of  lattin,
tinne,  Steele,  yron,  common  karsies  white,  course  canvas
to  m.ake  saile  for  the  gallies,  balles  of  yron  for  shot,  fine
milstones,  trees  &  masts  for  gallies,  litle  and  others,  and
in  conclusion,  having  scene  that  they  for  the  time  of  their
abode  here,  did  behave  themselves  like  faithfull  and
catholike  Christians,  &  that  his  holines  hath  allowed  the
safeconduct  of  the  great  Turke  to  them  granted  for  feare
of  the  Turkish  armie,  and  other  vessels  of  the  enemie,
submitting  our  selves  to  the  pleasures  of  his  holinesse,
and  especially  because  our  people  have  occasion  to  passe
by  divers  places  so  farre  off,  as  England,  Flanders,  and
all  parts  Westwards,  and  in  other  places,  we  have  vouch-
safed to  make  these  our  letters  patents,  as  our  faithfull
assistant,  so  as  more  surely,  and  without  let  they  may
go  and  returne  when  they  shall  thinke  good,  with  the
said  ship  or  with  others  at  their  pleasure.  We  therefore
pray  all  and  every  of  your  subjects  effectually  that  by
what  part  soever  of  your  jurisdiction,  unto  the  which  the
said  worshipfuU  John  Keele  and  David  Fillie  by  name
abovesaid,  with  the  ship  and  mariners  of  the  said
principall place or other, shall have accesse, saile, &

219J

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1582.

passe,  and  come  safely  with  libertie  without  any  disturb-
ance or  other  impediment,  that  you  give  leave,  and  cause
leave  to  be  given  that  they  may  passe,  stay  and  returne,
and  when  they  please,  depart,  in  such  sort,  that  for  our
love  &  contentation  the  said  worshipfull  John  Keele,
with  the  ship  and  mariners  have  no  let,  hinderance,  or
retention,  also  that  you  give  all  helpe  and  favour,  a  thing
worthy  of  your  justice,  and  to  us  most  acceptable,  to
be  recompenced  with  equall  and  greater  service,  when
upon  occasion  it  shalbe  required.

And  finally,  we  command  all,  and  whatsoever  religious
people,  and  brothers  of  our  religion,  of  whatsoever  con-
dition, degree,  and  state  they  be,  and  all  other  receivers
and  procurators,  in  all  and  whatsoever  our  priories
deputed,  and  to  be  deputed  by  vertue  of  the  holy
obedience,  and  all  our  people,  and  all  that  are  subject
to  the  jurisdiction  of  our  religion,  that  in,  and  by  the
same  they  hold,  and  repute  the  said  worshipfull  John
Keele  in  the  name  as  abovesaid,  the  ship,  mariners,  and
marchandize,  without  let  in  the  same  their  voyage,  or
in  any  other  place,  that  they  be  not  molested,  nor  in  any
wise  hindered,  but  that  in  all  their  causes  and  businesse
they  be  of  you  holpen,  and  furthered  continually.  In
witnesse  whereof,  our  scale  of  government  is  impressed
to  these  presents  in  blacke  waxe.  Given  at  Malta  in
our  Convent,  the  twelfth  of  the  moneth  of  July,  in  the
yeere 1582.

COMMISSION  TO  WILLIAM  HAREBORNE

A.D.
1582.

The  Queenes  Commission under  her  great  seale,  [11.1.157.]
to  her  servant  master  William  Hareborne,  to
be her majesties Ambassadour or Agent, in
the  partes  of  Turkie. 1582.

LIZABETHA,  Dei  optimi  Maximi,  con-
ditoris,  &  rectoris  unici  dementia,  Angliae,
Franciae,  &  Hiberniae  Regina,  verae  fidei
contra  Idololatras  falso  Christi  nomen
profitentes  invicta  &  potentissima  propug-
natrix,  universis,  &  singulis  praesentes  has
literas  visuris,  &  inspecturis,  salutem.
Cum  augustissimus,  &  invictissimus  princeps,  Zuldan
Murad  Can,  Turcici  regni  Dominator  potentissimus,
imperiique  Orientis  Monarcha,  foedus,  amicitiamque
nobiscum  percusserit,  juraveritque,  (quam  nos  perpetuis
futuris  temporibus,  quantum  in  nobis  erit,  inviolate
servare  destinamus)  ad  eamque  magis  ornandam,  illus-
trandamque  concesserit  idem  augustissimus  Imperator
subditis  nostris  liberam  suas  merces  excercendi  rationem
in  omnibus  Musulmanici  imperii  sui  partibus,  cum  tam
ampla  privilegiorum  concessione,  quam  aliis  bonis  prin-
cipibus,  sociis,  &  foederatis  nostris  largitus  est,  quorum
privilegiorum  donationem  nos  gratam,  acceptamque
habentes,  pari  cum  animi  gratitudine  colere  certum
habemus,  deliberatumque,  nihil  in  votis  habentes  potius,
quam  bonorum  erga  nos  principum  animos  benevolos
honoratissima  mente  fovere,  promererique :  Sciatis,  nos
de  singulari  erga  nos,  obsequiumque  nostrum,  fide,
observantia,  prudentia,  &  dexteritate  multum  nobis  chari
Guilielmi  Hareborne,  e  custodibus  corporis  nostri  unius,
plurimum  confidentes,  eum  Oratorem,  Nuntium,  Procura-
torem,  &  Agentem  nostrum  certum  &  indubitatum
ordinamus,  facimus,  &  constituimus,  per  praesentes  :
dantes  ei,  &  concedentes  potestatem,  &  authoritatem,
nomine  nostro,  &  pro  nobis  praedictum  amicitiae  foedus
confirmandi, privilegiorum  concessionem in  manus  suas

221

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

capiendi,  ratamque  habendi,  omnibus  &  singulis  subditis
nostris,  Musulmanicis  oris  terrisque  negotiantibus,  pro
Majestatis  nostrae  authoritate  prascipiendi,  mandandique,
ut  sint  in  suis  commerciis,  quamdiu,  quotiesque  cum
Mansulmanicis  versantur,  dictorum  privilegiorum  prae-
scripto  obtemperantes  in  omnibus,  ac  per  omnia,  ad
obsequia  tanta  amicitia  digna  se  componentes,  ac  in
delinquentes  in  foedus  nostrum  justitiam  exequatur.
Potestatem,  &  authoritatem  ei  damus  in  omnes,  &
singulos  subditos  nostros  in  quibuscunque  &  locis,  &
partibus  Musulmanici  Imperii  dominationi  subjectis
negotiantes,  constituendi  emporiorum  suorum  sedes  in
quibus  voluerit  portubus,  &  civitatibus,  in  aliis  vetandi,
in  constitutis  autem  emporiorum  sedibus,  consules
curandi,  leges  prasceptionesque  ferendi,  condendique,
quarum  ex  prsscripto  dicti  nostri  subditi,  &  eorum
quilibet  sese  publice,  &  privatim  gerant,  eorum  violatores
corrigendi,  castigandique,  omnia  denique  &  singula
faciendi,  perimplendique,  quae  ad  dictorum  subditorum
nostrorum  honestam  gubernationem,  &  commercii  exer-
cendi  in  illis  partibus  rationem  pertinent :  promittentes
bona  fide,  &  in  verbo  Regio,  nos  ratum,  gratum,  &
firmum  habituras,  quaecunque  dictus  Orator,  &  Agens
noster,  a  legibus  nostris  non  abhorrentia  in  praemissis  aut
praemissorum  aliquo  fecerit.  In  cujus  rei  testimonium,
has  literas  nostras  fieri  fecimus  patentes,  &  sigilli  nostri
impressione  jussimus  muniri.  Datum  e  castro  nostro
Windesoriae,  20.  die  Mensis  Novembris,  Anno  Jesu
Christi 1582.  regni  vero  nostri,  vicesimo  quarto.

The  same  in  English.

ELizabeth,  by  the  clemencie  of  the  most  good  and
most  great  God,  the  only  creator  and  governour  of
all  things,  Queene  of  England,  France,  and  Ireland,  in-
vincible, and  most  mightie  defender  of  the  true  faith,
against  all  Idolaters  falsly  professing  the  name  of  Christ,
to  all  and  singuler  persons,  to  whose  sight  and  view  these
our present letters may come, greeting. Whereas the

COMMISSION  TO  WILLIAM  HAREBORNE ad.

1582.

most  renowmed,  and  most  invincible  Prince  Zuldan
Murad  Can,  the  most  mighty  governour  of  the  kingdom
of  Turkic,  and  Monarch  of  the  East  Empire,  hath  entered
into  league  and  friendship  with  us,  (which  we  for  our
part,  as  much  as  lieth  in  us,  doe  purpose  solemnly,  and
inviolablie  to  keepe  in  all  times  to  come)  and  whereas  for
the  better  countenancing  and  authorizing  of  the  same,  the
foresayd  renowmed  Emperour  hath  graunted  unto  our
subjects  free  libertie  of  traffique,  in  all  the  partes  of  his
sacred  Empire,  with  as  ample  and  large  a  grant  of  privi-
leges, as  is  given  to  other  good  Princes  our  neighbours
and  confederates,  the  grant  of  which  privileges,  we  taking
very  thankfully,  and  acceptably,  are  certainely,  and
throughly  determined  to  keepe  and  mainetaine,  with  the
like  goodnesse  and  curtesie  of  minde,  desiring  nothing
more,  then  with  an  honourable  respect  to  nourish,  and
deserve  the  benevolent  affections  of  good  Princes  toward
us:  Know  ye,  that  wee  thinking  well,  and  having  good  [II.  i.  158.]
confidence  in  the  singular  trustinesse,  obedience,  wisedome,
and  disposition  of  our  welbeloved  servaunt  William  Hare-
borne,  one  of  the  Esquiers  of  our  body,  towards  us,  and
our  service,  doe  by  these  presents,  make,  ordaine  and
constitute  him  our  true  and  undoubted  Orator,  Messenger,
Deputie,  and  Agent.  Giving  and  granting  unto  him
power  and  authoritie,  in  our  name,  and  for  us,  to  confirme
the  foresaid  league  of  friendship,  to  take  into  his  hands,
and  to  ratifie  the  grant  of  the  privileges,  and  to  com-
maund,  and  enjoyne  by  the  authoritie  of  our  Majestic,
all  and  singular  our  Subjects  trading  and  dealing  in  any
of  the  coastes  and  kingdomes  of  that  Empire,  that  as
long  as  they  remaine  in  traffique  with  his  subjects,  they
be  obedient  to  the  prescription  and  order  of  the  foresayd
privileges,  applying  themselves  in  all  things,  and  through
all  things,  to  such  dueties  and  services  as  appertaine  to
so  great  a  league  and  friendship,  and  the  offenders  agaynst
this  our  league  to  receive  justice,  and  punishment
accordingly.  We  further  give  unto  him  power  and
authoritie  over  all  and  singuler  our  Subjects,  dealing,  and

223

A.D.
1582.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

using  traffique  in  any  place  or  part  whatsoever,  subject  to
the  governement  of  that  Empire,  to  appoint  the  places
of  their  traffiques,  in  what  Haven  or  Citie  it  shall  please
him,  and  to  prohibite  them  from  all  other  places,  and
wheresoever  their  traffiques  are  appointed  to  bee  kept,
there  to  make  and  create  Consuls  or  Governours,  to
enact  lawes  and  statutes,  by  the  vertue  and  tenor  whereof
all  our  foresayd  subjects,  and  every  one  of  them,  shall
both  publikely  and  privately  use  and  behave  themselves,
to  correct  and  punish  the  breakers  of  those  lawes  :  and
last  of  all,  to  doe  and  fulfill  all  and  singular  things  what-
soever, which  shall  seeme  requisite  and  convenient  for
the  honest  and  orderly  government  of  our  said  subjects,
and  of  the  maner  of  their  traffique  in  those  parts.  Pro-
mising assuredly,  and  in  the  word  of  a  Prince,  that
whatsoever  shall  be  done  of  our  sayd  Orator  and  Agent,
in  all,  or  in  any  of  the  premisses,  not  repugnant  and
contrary  to  our  lawes,  shall  be  accepted,  ratified,  and
confirmed  by  us.  In  witnesse  whereof,  we  have  caused
these  our  letters  to  be  made  patents,  and  our  seale  there-
unto to  be  appensed.  Given  at  our  Castle  of  Windsore,
the  20.  day  of  November,  in  the  yeere  of  Christ  1582.
and  of  our  raigne  the  24.

The  Queenes  Letter  to  the  great  Turke  1582.
written  in  commendation  of  Master  Hare-
borne,  when  he  was  sent  Ambassadour.

LIZABETH  &c.  Augustissimo  invic-
tissimoque  principi,  &c.  Cum  ad  postu-
latum  nostrum  Caesarea  vestra  Majestas,
anno  salvatoris  nostri  Jesu  1580.  pacis
fcedus  nobiscum  pepigerit,  conjunctum
cum  liberalissima  privilegiorum  quorun-
dam  concessione,  quorum  beneficio  sub-
diti  nostri  cum  omni  securitate  tutissime  liberrim^que  ad
universas  &  singulas  Musulmanici  imperii  vestri  partes  terra
marique proficisci,  in iisque  commercii  exercendi  gratia,

224

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  ad.

1582.
negotiari,  habitare,  manere,  exindeque  Ire  &  redire  cum
volent  queant,  ab  ils  qui  sub  Caesarea  vestra  Maj estate  in
magistratu  sunt  ubique  locorum  protegendi  defendendique
sine  ulla  vel  corporum,  vel  bonorum  laesione :  nos  tantae
concessionis  beneficium  gratum  acceptumque  habentes,
quantum  in  nobis  est,  approbamus  confirmamusque :
pollicentes  in  verbo  regio,  quod  nos  eandem  pacem  sine
ulla  violatione  sartam  tectamque  conservabimus :  facie-
musque  ut  subditi  nostri  privilegiorum  sibi  indultorum
concessione  ita  utantur,  ut  Caesaream  vestram  Majestatem
magnificentissimae  suae  liberalitatis  nunquam  poenitere
queat.  Quoniam  autem  concessionis  hujus  virtus  in  usu
potius  quam  verbis,  Majestatis  utriusque  nostrum  sen-
tentia,  ponenda  videtur,  voluimus  hunc  mandatarium
virum  Guilielmum  Hareborne,  ex  satellitibus  quibus  ad
corporis  nostri  tutelam  utimur  unum,  virum  compluribus
virtu tibus  ornatum,  ad  Caesaream  vestram  Majestatem
ablegare,  qui  tum  nomine  nostro  vobis  gratias  ageret,  tum
ut  ejus  opera  uteremur  ad  eam  subditorum  nostrorum
mercimoniorum  rationem  stabiliendam,  tarn  in  Imperiali
vestra  civitate  Constantinopoli,  quam  aliis  imperii  vestri
Musulmanici  locis,  quae  ex  praescripto  privilegiorum,
Csesareae  vestrae  Majestatis  benignitate,  conceditur,  &  ex
usu  subditorum  utridsque  nostrum  erit.  Ad  quam  rem
quoniam  opus  illi  erit  Caesareae  vestrae  Majestatis,  authori-
tate,  summa  contentione  ab  eadem  rogamus,  velit  id  agere
apud  omnes  qui  sub  se  in  magistratu  sunt,  ut  quibus-
cunque  poterunt  melioribus  modis  huic  nostro  mandatario
in  Caesareae  vestrae  Majestatis  placito  exequendo,  adjutores
sint  &  esse  velint.  Ei  enim  banc  curam  demandavimus,
in  qua  quam  fidem  suam  sit  honeste  liberaturus  erga
Majestatem  utriusque  nostrum  neutiquam  dubitamus :
cui  etiam,  ut  in  omnibus  sint  obtemperantes  nostri  sub-
diti, quantum  Caesareae  vestrae  Majestatis  concessio
patitur,  volumus.  Praeterea,  cum  praeclarus  vir  Mustafa  Mustafa
sacrae  Caesareae  vestrae  Majestatis  Musulmannorum  in-  ^'"^^^P^'^^-
terpres  egregiam  navarit  operam  ut  hoc  inter  nos  fcedus
fieret,  rogamus  summopere  ut  in  nostram  gratiam  eum  in
V  225  p

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

[II.  i.  159,]  Mustafaracarum  ordinem  Caesarea  vestra  Majestas  recipere
dignetur.  Si  in  his  aliisque  omnibus  honestis  causis  hie
noster  agens  subditique  nostri  Imperatoriae  vestrae  sub-
iimitatis  asquanimitatem  senserint,  florebit  inter  has  gentes
nobile  commercium,  &  nos  omnibus  officiis  huic  vestrai
Majestatis  favori  &  benevolentiae  (si  ulla  ratione  rebus
vestris  commodare  poterimus)  respondere  libentissime
semper  paratae  erimus.  Deus  optimus  maximus  mundi
opifex,  &c.

The  same  in  English.

ELizabeth  by  the  grace  of  the  most  mightie  God  and
only  creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  England,
France,  and  Ireland  Queene,  the  most  invincible  and
most  mighty  defender  of  the  Christian  faith  against  all
kind  of  idolatries  of  all  that  live  among  the  Christians
and  falsly  professe  the  name  of  Christ,  unto  the  most
Imperiall  and  most  invincible  prince.  Sultan  Murad  Can,
the  most  mighty  ruler  of  the  kingdom  of  Turkic,  sole
above  all,  and  most  soveraigne  Monarch  of  the  East
Empire,  greeting.

Whereas  at  our  request  your  Imperiall  Majestic  in  the
yeere  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  1580.  hath  entered  into  a
league  of  peace  with  us,  whereunto  was  united  a  most
large  &  bountiful  grant  of  certaine  privileges,  by  benefite
whereof  our  subjects  may  with  all  securitie  most  safely
and  freely  travell  by  Sea  and  land  into  all  and  singular
parts  of  your  Musulmanlike  Empire,  and  in  the  same
exercising  the  trade  of  merchandise,  may  traffique,  dwell,
remaine,  depart  from  thence,  and  returne  thither  at  their
pleasure,  and  in  all  places  be  maintained  and  defended
from  all  damage  of  bodies  and  goods,  by  such  as  arc  in
authoritie  under  your  Imperiall  Majestic :  we  thankfully
and  gratefully  receiving  the  benefite  of  so  great  a
privilege,  as  much  as  in  us  lieth  doe  approove  and  con-
firme  the  same,  promising  in  the  worde  of  a  Prince,  that
wee  will  keepe  the  said  league  perfect  and  inviolable,  and
will cause our subjects so to use the grant of the

226

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  a.d.

1582.

privileges given  unto  them,  as  your Imperiall  Majestic

shall  never have occasion to  repent  you of  your  most

princely  liberalitie. And  because  the  force  of  this  grant,

in  the  judgement  of  both  our  majesties,  seemeth  rather  to

consist  in  the  use  thereof,  then  in  the  wordes,  we  thought

good to send unto your Imperiall majestie this our

ambassadour  William  Hareborne,  one  of  the  Esquiers  of  ^-  ^^'^-

our  body,  which  both  on  our  behalfe  should  yeeld  thanks  ^^^^^^'"'^^
•'' ..  J,  ,  .,•',.  J sent  ambas-

unto  your  majestic,  and  also  that  we  might  use  his  good  j^^^^.  ^^  ^^^

indevour  for  the  establishing  of  such  order  in  our  subjects  Turke,

trade  of  merchandise,  as  well  in  your  Imperiall  citic  of

Constantinople,  as  in  other  places  of  your  Musulmanlike

Empire,  as  according  to  the  prescript  of  the  privileges  is

granted  by  your  princely  majesties  goodnesse,  and  shall

be  for  the  benefite  of  both  our  subjects. For  performance

whereof,  because  hee  standcth  in  nccde  of  your  Imperiall

Majesties  authoritie,  wee  earnestly  beseech  the  same,  that

you  would  cause  all  those  which  bee  in  authoritie  under

your Highnesse,  by  all their  best  mcanes  to aide and

assist this our Ambassadour in executing this your

Imperiall Majesties pleasure, for unto him wee have

committed this charge : wherein how  honestly  hee  will

discharge his  credite toward both our Majesties,  I no

whit  stand  in  doubt :  to  whom  also  our  pleasure  is,  that

all  our  subjects  shall  bee  obedient,  as  farre  as  the  grant  of

your  Imperiall  majestie  doeth  permit. Moreover,  whereas  ^  request  for

that  woorthie  personagre  Mustafa,  your  Imperiall  majesties  the  preferring'

T ^  *. \.\.\. ^  \  •  n •  r  ^u  ■ of  Mustafa

Interpretor,  hath  taken  speciall  paines  tor  the  procuring  ^ -^

of  this  league  betweene  us,  wee  earnestly  beseech  you
that  for  our  sakes  your  Imperiall  Majestie  would  vouch-
safe to  advance  him  unto  the  degree  of  the  Mustafaraks
or  chiefe  pensioners.  If  in  these  and  in  all  other  honest
causes,  our  aforesayde  Agent  and  our  subjectes  shall  finde
your  Imperiall  Higncsses  favour,  a  noble  traffique  will
flourish  betweene  these  nations,  and  wee  (if  by  any  way
wee  may  stand  your  State  in  steade)  will  alwayes  most
willingly  be  readie  to  requite  this  your  Majesties  favour
and  good  will  with  all  kinde  of  good  offices. Almightie

227

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

God the  maker  of  the  world preserve  and  keepe  your
Imperiall  Majestic,  &c.

A  Letter  of  the  Queenes  Majestic  to  AUi  Bassa
the  Turkes  high  Admirall,  sent  by  her
ambassadour  M.  WilUam  Hareborne,  and  de-
livered unto  him  aboord  his  gallie  in  the
Arsenal.

LIZABETHA,  &c.  Illustrissimo  viro  Alii
Bassa,  magni  Musulmanici  Caesaris  Ad-
miralio,  salutem  &  successus  fortunatos.
Non  ignotum  esse  Excellentiae  vestrae
arbitramur,  privilegia  quaedam  a  potentis-
simo  Caesare  Musulmanico  domino  vestro
clementissimo  subditis  nostris  Anglicis
concessa  esse,  ut  illis  liceat  in  omnibus  imperii  Musul-
manici provinciis  tuto  &  secure  manere  ac  negotiari :  non
[II.  i.  160.]  aliter  quam  hoc  ipsum  Francis,  Polonis,  Venetis,  Ger-
manis  an  tea  indultum  est.  Qua  ex  causa  nos  Gulielmum
Hareborne  nobis  dilectum,  e  corporis  custodibus  unum,
ac  multis  nominibus  ornatum  ad  inclytam  Constantino-
polis  civitatem  pro  agente  misimus  :  qui  ex  privilegiorum
praedictorum  praescripto  nostras  &  subditorum  nostrorum
res  in  illis  locis  constitueret.  Facere  igitur  non  potuimus,
quin  Excellentiae  vestrae  Guilielmum  hunc,  pro  ea  qua
apud  magnum  Caesarem  polles  authoritate,  commendar-
emus  :  petentes  summopere  ut  tuto  in  mari  sine  Classi-
ariorum  vestrorum  violentia,  &  secure  in  portibus  absque
ministrorum  rapinis  &  injuria,  tam  ipse  quam  omnes
Angli  subditi  nostri  possint  versari  :  uti  pro  tenore  liter-
arum  patentium  a  magno  Caesare  concessarum  illis  licere
ex  illarum  conspectione  perspicuum  esse  potest.  Gratis-
simum  ergo  nobis  excellentia  vestra  fecerit,  si  portuum
omnium,  aliorumque  locorum,  qui  vestras  jurisdictioni
parent,  custodibus,  item  classium  &  navium  praefectis
omnibus  mandare  velit,  ut  Guilielmus  iste,  ililque  Angli
subditi  nostri  cum  in illorum  erunt  potestate,  amice  &

228

A REMEMBRANCE FOR DYEING

humaniter  tractarentur.  Quemadmodum  nos  vicissim
omnes  magni  Caesaris  subditos  omni  humanitatis  genere
tractabimus,  si  in  Oceani  maria,  aliave  loca  venerint,  quae
nostro  parent  imperio.  Postremo  excellentiam  vestram
pro  eo  quern  in  nostros  extendet  favore  iis  omnibus
officiis  prosequemur,  quae  a  gratissima  principe  in  optime
de  se  merentes  debent  proficisci.  Bene  &  foeliciter  valeas.
Datum  e  castro  nostro  Windesorii  die  vicessimo  mensis
Novembris,  Anno  Jesu  Christi  salvatoris  nostri  1582.
Regni  vero  nostri  vicessimo  quarto.

A  briefe  Remembrance  of  things  to  be  indevoured
at  Constantinople,  and  in  other  places  in
Turkic,  touching  our  Clothing  and  our  Dying,
and  things  that  bee  incident  to  the  same,  and
touching  ample  vent  of  our  naturall  commodi-
ties, &  of  the  labour  of  our  poore  people
withall,  and  of  the  generall  enriching  of  this
Realme  :  drawen  by  M.  Richard  Hakluyt  of
the  middle  Temple,  and  given  to  a  friend  that
was  sent  into  Turkic 1 582.

Nile  wherewith  we  colour  Blew  to  be
brought  into  this  realme  by  seed  or
roote.

2  And  the  Arte  of  compounding  of
the  same.

3  And  also  all  other  herbes  used  in
dying  in  like  maner  to  bee  brought  in.

A.D,

1582.

4  And  all  Trees,  whose  Leaves,  Seedes,  or  Barkes,  or
Wood  doe  serve  to  that  use,  to  be  brought  into  this
realme  by  Seed  or  Roote.

5  All  little  Plants  and  Buskes  serving  to  that  use  to
be  brought  in.

6  To  learne  to  know  all  earths  and  minerals  forren
used  in  dying,  and  their  naturall  places,  for  possible  the
like  may  here  be  found  upon  sight.

229

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

7  Also  with  the  materials  used  in  dying,  to  bring  in
the  excellencie  of  the  arte  of  dying.

8  To  procure  from  Muhaisira  a  citie  in  JEgjpt  to
Constantinople,  the  seed  of  Sesamum  the  herbe,  and  the
same  into  this  realme.  Common  trade  is  betweene
Alexandria  and  Constantinople,  and  therefore  you  may
easily  procure  the  seeds.  Of  this  seed  much  oyle  is
made,  and  many  mils  set  on  worke  about  the  same  in
the  sayd  Muhaisira,  and  if  this  seede  may  prosper  in
England,  infinite  benefite  to  our  Clothing  trade  may
rise  by  the  same.  This  citie  is  situate  upon  Nilus
the  river,  and  thence  this  is  brought  to  Venice  and  to
divers  other  Cities  of  Italic,  and  to  Antwerpe.

9  To  note  all  kindes  of  clothing  in  Turkic,  and  all
degrees  of  their  labour  in  the  same.

10  To  endevour  rather  the  vent  of  Kersies,  then
of  other  Clothes  as  a  thing  more  beneficiall  to  our  people,

1 1  To  endevour  the  sale  of  such  our  clothes  as  bee
coloured  with  our  owne  naturall  colours  as  much  as  you
can,  rather  then  such  as  be  coloured  with  forren
colours.

12  To  seeke  out  a  vent  for  our  Bonettos,  a  cap
made  for  Barbaric,  for  that  the  poore  people  may  reape
great  profite  by  the  trade.

1 3  To  endevour  vent  of  knit  Stocks  made  of  Norwich
yarne,  &  of  other  yarne,  which  brought  to  great  trade>
may  turne  our  poore  people  to  great  benefite,  besides  the
vent  of  the  substance,  of  our  colours,  and  of  our  divers
labour.

14  To  endevor  a  vent  of  our  Saffron  for  the  benefit
of  our  poore  people  :  for  a  large  vent  found,  it  setteth
manv  on  worke.

REMEMBRANCES FOR A FACTOR  a.d.

1582.

Remembrances  for  master  S.  to  give  him  the  better  [n.  i.  161.]
occasion  to  informe  himselfe  of  some  things  in
England,  and  after  of  some  other  things  in
Turkie,  to  the  great  profite  of  the  Common
weale  of  this  Countrey.  Written  by  the  fore-
sayd  master  Richard  Hakluyt,  for  a  principall
English  Factor  at  Constantinople 1582.

Ince  all  men  confesse  (that  be  not  bar-
barously bred)  that  men  are  borne  as
well  to  seeke  the  common  commoditie
of  their  Countrey,  as  their  owne  private
benefite,  it  may  seeme  follie  to  perswade
that  point,  for  each  man  meaneth  so  to
doe. But  wherein  men  should  seeke  the

common  commoditie,  and  what  way,  and  by  what  meane
that  is  to  bee  brought  about,  is  the  point  or  summe  of
the  matter,  since  every  good  man  is  ready  to  imploy
his  labour.  This  is  to  bee  done  by  an  infinite  sort  of
meanes,  as  the  number  of  things  bee  infinite  that  may
bee  done  for  common  benefite  of  the  Realme.  And
as  the  chiefe  things  so  to  bee  done  be  divers,  so  are
they  to  bee  done  by  divers  men,  as  they  bee  by  wit
and  maner  of  education  more  fit,  or  lesse  fit,  for  this
and  for  that.  And  for  that  of  many  things  that  tend
to  the  common  benefite  of  the  State,  some  tend  more,
and  some  lesse,  I  finde  that  no  one  thing,  after  one
other,  is  greater  then  Clothing,  and  the  things  incident
to  the  same.  And  understanding  that  you  are  of  right
good  capacitie,  and  become  a  Factor  at  Constantinople,
and  in  other  partes  in  Turkie,  I  finde  no  man  fitter  of  all
the  English  Factors  there,  then  you.  And  therefore  I
am  so  bold  to  put  you  in  minde,  and  to  tell  you  wherein
with  some  indevour  you  may  chaunce  to  doe  your  Coun-
trey much  good,  and  give  an  infinite  sorte  of  the  poore
people  occasion  to  pray  for  you  here  throughout  the
Realme  :  this  that  I  meane  is  in  matter  of  Cloth,  &c.

231

FIl
t

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

[rst,  you  cannot  denie  but  that  this  Realme  yeeldeth
the  most  fine  Wooll,  the  most  soft,  the  most
strong  Wooll,  the  most  durable  in  Cloth,  and  most
apte  of  nature  of  all  other  to  receive  Die,  and  that
no  Island  or  any  one  kingdome  so  small  doeth
yeeld  so  great  abundance  of  the  same  :  and  that
no  Wooll  is  lesse  subject  to  mothes,  or  to  fretting
in  presse,  then  this,  as  the  old  Parliament  robes
of  Kings,  &  of  many  noble  Peeres  to  be  shewed
may  plainly  testifie.
2  There  is  no  commoditie  of  this  Realme  that  may  set
so  many  poore  subjects  on  worke,  as  this  doeth,
that  doeth  bring  in  so  much  treasure,  and  so  much
enrich  the  merchant,  and  so  much  employ  the
Navie  of  this  Realme,  as  this  commoditie  of  our
Wooll  doeth.

Ample  and  full  Vent  of  this  noble  and  rich  com-
moditie is  it  that  the  common  weale  of  this  realme  doeth
require.

Spaine  nowe  aboundeth  with  Wools,  and  the  same
are  Clothed.  Turkic  hath  Wools,  and  so  have  divers
provinces  of  Christendome  and  of  Heathenesse,  and
cloth  is  made  of  the  same  in  divers  places.

I  But  if  England  have  the  most  fine,  and  the  most
excellent  Wools  of  the  world  in  all  respects  (as  it  cannot
bee  denied,  but  it  hath)  2  If  there  may  bee  added  to
the  same,  excellent  artificiall,  and  true  making,  and
excellent  dying,  3  Then  no  doubt  but  that  we  shall
have  vent  for  our  Clothes,  although  the  rest  of  the  world
did  abound  much  more  with  Wool  then  it  doeth,  and
although  their  workemanship  and  their  dying  were  in
every  degree  equal  with  ours  of  England,  unlesse  the
labour  of  our  people  imployed  that  way,  and  the  mate-
rials used  in  dying  should  be  the  cause  of  the  contrary
by  dearth.

But  if  Forren  nations  turne  their  Wools,  inferiour
to  ours,  into  truer  and  more  excellent  made  cloth,  and

232

REMEMBRANCES FOR A FACTOR  aid.

1582.

shall  die  the  same  in  truer,  surer,  and  more  excellent
and  more  delectable  colours,  then  shall  they  sell  and
make  ample  vent  of  their  Clothes,  when  the  English
cloth  of  better  wooll  shall  rest  unsold,  to  the  spoyle  of
the  Merchant,  of  the  Clothier,  and  of  the  breeder  of
the  wooll,  and  to  the  turning  to  bag  and  wallet  of  the
infinite  number  of  the  poore  people  imploied  in  cloth-
ing in  severall  degrees  of  labour  here  in  England.

Which  things  wayed,  I  am  to  tell  you  what  things  I
wish  you  in  this  Realme,  and  after  in  Turkie,  to  indevour
from  time  to  time,  as  your  laisure  may  permit  the  same.

Before  you  goe  out  of  the Realme,  that  [n.  i.  162.]

you  learne:

I  nr^O  know  wooll,  all  kind of  clothes made in this

-L  realme,  and  all  other  employments  of  wooll,
home  or  forren,  be  ye  same  in  Felt  clokes,  felt  hats,  in
the  red  knit  cap  for  Barbaric,  called  Bonettos  rugios
colorados,  or  whatsoever,  &c.

All  the  deceits  in  Clothmaking  ;  as  the  sorting  together
of  Wools  of  severall  natures,  some  of  nature  to  shrinke,
some  to  hold  out,  which  causeth  cloth  to  cockle  and  lie
uneven.

The  evill  sorting  of  threed  of  good  or  bad  wooll,  some
tootoo  hard  spun,  some  tootoo  soft  spun  delivered  to  be
woven.

The  faults  in  Weaving.

The  faults  in  Walking,  Rowing,  and  Burling,  and  in
Racking  the  Clothes  above  measure  upon  the  Teintors  :
all  which  faults  may  be  learned  of  honest  men,  which
faults  are  to  be  knowen  to  the  merchant,  to  be  shunned
and  not  to  be  used.

2  Then  to  learne  of  the  Diers  to  discerne  all  kind  of
colours  ;  as  which  be  good  and  sure,  and  which  will  not
hold  :  which  be  faire,  which  not ;  which  colours  by  the
dearth  of  the  substances  bee  deare,  and  which  by  reason
of  the  cheapenesse  of  the  Materials  with  which  they  be
died,  be  cheape  colours.

233

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

3  Then  to  take  the  names  of  all  the  materials  and  sub-
staunces  used  in  this  Citie  or  in  the  realme,  in  dying  of
cloth  or  silke.

To  learne  to  know  them,  as  which  be  good,  which
bad.

And  what  colours  they  die.

And  what  prices  they  be  of.

And  of  them  which  bee  the  Naturals  of  this  Realme,
and  in  what  part  of  the Realme  they  are  to  be  had.

And  of  all  the  forren  materials  used  in  dying  to  know
the  very  naturall  places  of  them,  and  the  plentie  or  the
scarcenesse  of  each  of  them.

These  things  superficially  learned  in  the  realme  before
you  goe,  you  are  the  fitter  in  forren  parts  to  serve  your
Countrey,  for  by  this  meanes  you  have  an  enteric  into  the
thing  that  I  wish  you  to  travell  in.

What  you  shall  doe  in  Turkic,  besides  the  busi-
nesse  of  your  Factorship.

I  XpOrasmuch  as  it  is  reported  that  the  Woollen
J?  clothes  died  in  Turkic  bee  most  excellently  died,
you  shall  send  home  into  this  realme  certaine  Mowsters  or
pieces  of  Shew  to  be  brought  to  the  Diers  hall,  there  to  be
shewed,  partly  to  remoove  out  of  their  heads,  the  tootoo
great  opinion  they  have  conceived  of  their  owne  cunning,
and  partly  to  moove  them  for  shame  to  endevour  to
learne  more  knowledge  to  the  honour  of  their  countrey
of  England,  and  to  the  universall  benefit  of  the  realme.
2  You  shall  devise  to  amend  the  Dying  of  England,  by
carying  hence  an  apte  yoong  man  brought  up  in  the  Arte,
or  by  bringing  one  or  other  from  thence  of  skill,  or  rather
to  devise  to  bring  one  for  Silkes,  and  another  for  Wool!
and  for  Woollen  cloth,  and  if  you  cannot  worke  this  by
ordinarie  meanes,  then  to  worke  it  by  some  great  Bassas
meane,  or  if  your  owne  credite  there  be  not  sufficient  by
meane  of  your  small  abode  in  those  parties,  to  worke  it  by
the  helpe  of  the  French  ambassador  there  resident,  for
which purpose  you may insinuate your selfe into his

234

REMEMBRANCES FOR A FACTOR  ad.

1582.
acquaintance,  and  otherwise  to  leave  no  meane  unsought
that  tendeth to this end,  wherein you are to doe  as
circumstances  may  permit.

3  Then  to  learne  to  know  all  the  materials  and  sub-
stances that  the  Turkes  use  in  dying,  be  they  of  Herbes,
simple  or  compound,  be  they  Plants,  Barkes,  Wood,
Berries,  Seedes,  Graines,  or  Minerall  matter,  or  what  els
soever.  But  before  all  other,  such  things  as  yeeld  those
famous  colours  that  carrie  such  speciall  report  of  excel-
lencie,  that  our  Merchaunts  may  bring  them  to  this
realme  by  ordinarie  trade,  as  a  right  meane  for  the  better
vent  of  our  clothes.

4  To  know  the  use  of  those,  and  where  the  naturall
place  of  them  and  of  ech  of  them  is,  I  meane  the  place
where  ech  of  them  groweth  or  is  bred.

5  And  in  any  wise,  if  Anile  that  coloureth  blew  be  a
naturall  commodity  of  those  parts,  and  if  it  be  com-
pounded of  an  herbe,  to  send  the  same  into  this  realme
by  seed  or  by  root  in  barrell  of  earth,  with  all  the  whole
order  of  sowing,  setting,  planting,  replanting,  and  with
the  compounding  of  the  same,  that  it  may  become  a
naturall  commodity  in  this  realme  as  Woad  is,  to  this  end
that  the  high  price  of  forreine  Woad  (which devoureth

yeerely  great  treasure)  may  be  brought  downe.  So  shall  [II.  i.  163.]
the  marchant  buy  his  cloth  lesse  deare,  and  so  he  shalbe
able  to  occupy  with  lesse  stocke,  be  able  to  afoord  cloth
cheaper,  make  more  ample  vent,  and  also  become  a
greater  gainer  himselfe,  and  all  this  to  the  benefit  of
this  realme.

6  To  do  the  like  with  herbe  &  plant,  or  tree  that  in
dying  is  of  any  excellent  use,  as  to  send  the  same  by  seed,
berry,  root,  &c  :  for  by  such  meanes  Saffron  was  brought
first  into  this  realme,  which  hath  set  many  poore  on
worke,  and  brought  great  wealth  into  this  realme.  Thus
may  Sumack,  the  plant  wherewith  the  most  excellent
blacks  be  died  in  Spaine,  be  brought  out  of  Spaine,  and
out  of  the  Hands  of  the  same,  if  it  will  grow  in  this  more
colde climat. For thus was Woad brought into this

235

A.D.  THE ENGLISH A^OYAGES

1582.

realme,  and  came  to  good  perfection,  to  the  great  losse
of  the  French  our  olde  enemies.  And  it  doth  mar-
vellously import  this  realme  to  make  naturall  in  this
realme  such  things  as  be  special  in  the  dying  of  our
clothes.  And  to  speake  of  such  things  as  colour  blew,
they  are  of  greatest  use,  and  are  grounds  of  the  most
excellent  colours,  and  therefore  of  all  other  to  be  brought
into  this  realme,  be  it  Anile  or  any  other  materiall  of  that
quality.

7  And  because  yellowes  and  greenes  are  colours  of
small  prices  in  this  realme,  by  reason  that  Olde  and
Greenweed  wherewith  they  be  died  be  naturall  here,  and
in  great  plenty,  therefore  to  bring  our  clothes  so  died  to
common  sale  in  Turkie  were  to  the  great  benefit  of  the
marchant,  and  other  poore  subjects  of  this  realme,  for  in
sale  of  such  our  owne  naturall  colours  we  consume  not
our  treasure  in  forren  colours,  and  yet  we  sell  our  owne
trifles  dearely  perhaps.

8  The  wooUes  being  naturall,  and  excellent  colours  for
dying  becomming  by  this  meanes  here  also  naturall,  in  all
the  arte  of  Clothing  then  we  want  but  one  onely  speciall
thing.  For  in  this  so  temperate  a  climat  our  people  may
labor  the  yere  thorowout,  whereas  in  some  regions  of  the
world  they  cannot  worke  for  extreme  heat,  as  in  some
other  regions  they  cannot  worke  for  extreme  colde  a  good
part  of  the  yere.  And  the  people  of  this  realme  by  the
great  and  blessed  abundance  of  victuall  are  cheaply  fed,
and  therefore  may  afoord  their  labour  cheape.  And
where  the  Clothiers  in  Flanders  by  the  flatnesse  of  their
rivers  cannot  make  Walkmilles  for  their  clothes,  but  are
forced  to  thicken  and  dresse  all  their  clothes  by  the  foot
and  by  the  labour  of  men,  whereby  their  clothes  are
raised  to  an  higher  price,  we  of  England  have  in  all  Shires
store  of  milles  upon  falling  rivers.  And  these  rivers
being  in  temperate  zones  are  not  dried  up  in  Summer
with  drought  and  heat  as  the  rivers  be  in  Spaine  and  in
hotter  regions,  nor  frozen  up  in  Winter  as  all  the  rivers
be  in  all  the  North  regions  of  the  world  :  so  as  our  milles

236

REMEMBRANCES FOR A FACTOR  ad.

1582.
may  go  and  worke  at  all  times,  and  dresse  clothes  cheaply.
Then  we  have  also  for  scowring  our  clothes  earths  and
claies,  as  Walkers  clay,  and  the  clay  of  Oborne  little
inferior  to  Sope  in  scowring  and  in  thicking.  Then  also
have  we  some  reasonable  store  of  Alum  and  Copporas
here  made  for  dying,  and  are  like  to  have  increase  of  the
same.  Then  we  have  many  good  waters  apt  for  dying,
and  people  to  spin  and  to  doe  the  rest  of  all  the  labours
we  want  not.  So  as  there  wanteth,  if  colours  might  be  S«///y  of  the
brought  in  and  made  naturall,  but  onely  Oile  :  the  want  "^^^^  ofotle.
whereof  if  any  man  could  devise  to  supply  at  the  full
with  any  thing  that  might  become  naturall  in  this  realme,
he  whatsoever  he  were  that  could  bring  it  about,  might
deserve  immortall  fame  in  this  our  Common  wealth,  and
such  a  devise  was  offered  to  the  Parliament  and  refused,
because  they  denied  to  endow  him  with  a  certaine  liberty,
some  others  having  obtained  the  same  before,  that  prac-
tised to  worke  that  effect  by  Radish  seed,  which  onely
made  a  triall  of  small  quantity,  and  that  went  no  further,
to  make  that  Oile  in  plenty  :  and  now  he  that  offered
this  devise  was  a  marchant,  and  is  dead,  and  withall  the
devise  is  dead  with  him.

It  is  written  by  one  that  wrote  of  Afrike,  that  in  Egypt  L^o  Africanus
in  a  city  called  Muhaisira  there  be  many  milles  imployed
in  making  of  Oile  of  the  seed  of  an  herbe  called  Sesamum.
Pena  and  Lobell,  Physicians,  write  in  our  time,  that  this
herbe  is  a  codded  herbe  full  of  oily  seed,  and  that  there  is
plenty  of  this  seede  brought  out  of  Egypt  to  divers  Cities
in  Italy.  If  this  herbe  will  prosper  in  this  realme,  our
marchants  may  easily  bring  of  it,  &c.

9  Having  heerein  thus  troubled  you  by  raising  to
your  minde  the  consideration  of  certaine  things,  it  shall
not  be  impertinent  to  tell  you  that  it  shall  not  be  amisse
that  you  note  all  the  order  of  the  degrees  of  labour  used
in  Turky,  in  the  arte  of  Clothing,  and  to  see  if  any  way
they  excell  in  that  profession  our  people  of  these  parts,
and  to  bring  notice  of  the  same  into  this  realme.

10  And  if  you  shall  finde  that  they  make  any  cloth  of

237

lib.  8.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

any  kind  not  made  in  this  realme,  that  is  there  of  great
use,  then  to  bring  of  the  same  into  this  reaime  some
Mowsters,  that  our  people  may  fall  into  the  trade,  and
prepare  the  same  for  Turkie  :  for  the  more  kinds  of  cloth
we  can  devise  to  make,  the  more  ample  vent  of  our
commoditie  we  shall  have,  and  the  more  sale  of  the  labour
of  our  poore  subjects  that  els  for  lacke  of  labour  become
idle  and  burdenous  to  the  common  weale,  and  hurtfull  to
many  :  and  in  England  we  are  in  our  clothing  trade  to
frame  our  selves  according  to  the  desires  of  forren
nations,  be  it  that  they  desire  thicke  or  thinne,  broad
[II.  i.  164.]  or  narowe,  long  or  short,  white  or  blacke.  11  But  with
this  proviso  alwayes,  that  our  cloth  passe  out  with  as
much  labour  of  our  people  as  may  be,  wherein  great
consideration  ought  to  be  had  :  for  (if  vent  might  so
admit  it)  as  it  were  the  greatest  madnesse  in  the  world
for  us  to  vent  our  wool!  not  clothed,  so  were  it  madnesse
to  vent  our  wooll  in  part  or  in  the  whole  turned  into
broad  cloth,  if  we  might  vent  the  same  in  Kersies  :  for  there
is  great  difference  in  profit  to  our  people  betweene  the
clothing  of  a  sacke  of  wooll  in  the  one,  and  the  like  sacke
of  wooll  in  the  other,  of  which  I  wish  the  marchant  of
England  to  have  as  great  care  as  he  may  for  the  universall
benefit  of  the  poore  :  and  the  turning  of  a  sacke  of  wooll
into  Bonets  is  better  then  both  8z:c.  And  also  not  to  cary
out  of  the  realme  any  cloth  white,  but  died  if  it  may  be,
that  the  subjects  of  this  realme  may  take  as  much  benefit
as  is  possible,  and  rather  to  seeke  the  vent  of  the  clothes
died  with  the  naturall  colours  of  England,  then  such  as  be
died  with  forren  colours.

12  And  if  of  necessity  we  must  be  forced  to  receive
certaine  colours  from  forren  parts,  for  that  this  climat
will  not  breed  them,  I  wish  that  our  marchants  procure
Anile  and  such  other  things  to  be  planted  in  like  climats
where  now  it  growes,  in  divers  other  places,  that  this
realme  may  have  that  brought  in  for  as  base  prices  as  is
possible,  and  that  falling  out  with  one  place  we  may
receive  the same from another,  and  not buy  the  same

238

REMEMBRANCES FOR  A FACTOR  ad.

1582,

at  the  second  or  the  third  hand  &c.  For  if  a  commodity
that  is  to  be  had  of  meere  necessity,  be  in  one  hand,  it  is
dearely  purchased.

1  How  many  severall  colours  be  died  is  to  be  learned
of  our  Diers  before  you  depart.

2  Then  how  many  of  those  colours  England  doth  die
of  her  owne  naturall  home  materials  and  substances,  and
how  many  not.

3  Then  to  bring  into  this  realme  herbs  and  plants  to
become  naturall  in  our  soiles,  that  may  die  the  rest  of  the
colours,  that  presently  of  our  owne  things  here  growing
we  can  not  yet  die,  and  this  from  all  forren  places.

4  There  is  a  wood  called  Logwood  or  Palo  Campechio,
it  is  cheape  and  yeeldeth  a  glorious  blew,  but  our  work-
men can  not  make  it  sure.  This  wood  you  must  take
with  you,  and  see  whether  the  Silke  diers  or  Wooll  diers
in  Turky  can  doe  it,  with  this  one  you  may  inrich  your
selfe  very  much,  and  therefore  it  is  to  be  endevoured
earnestly  by  you.  It  may  bring  downe  the  price  of
Woad  and  of  Anile.

Other  some  things  to  be  remembred.

IF  you  can  finde  out  at  Tripoly  in  Syria  or  elsewhere  a
vent  for  the  Cappes  called  in  Barbaric,  Bonettos
colorados  rugios,  which  is  a  red  Scottish  cap  as  it  were
without  brims,  you  should  do  your  countrey  much  good  :
for  as  a  sacke  of  wooll  turned  into  fine  Devonshire  kersies
doth  set  many  more  people  on  worke  then  a  sacke  spunne
for  broad  cloth  in  a  grosser  threed,  so  a  sacke  of  wooll
turned  into  those  Bonets  doth  set  many  more  poore
people  on  worke,  then  a  sacke  turned  into  Kersies,  by
reason  of  the  knitting.  And  therefore  if  you  can  in-
devour  that,  you  worke  great  effect.  And  no  doubt  that
a  marvellous  vent  may  be  found  out  of  them  into  Afrike
by  the  way  of  Alexandria,  and  by  Alcayer  Southeast  and
Southwest  thence.

2  And  by  the  vent  of  our  knit  hose  of  Woollen  yarne,
Woorsted  yarne,  and  of  Linnen  thred,  great  benefit  to

239

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

our  people  may  arise,  and  a  great  value  in  fine  Kersies
and  in  those  knit  wares  may  be  couched  in  a  small
roome  in  the  ship.  And  for  these  things  our  people
are  growen  apt,  and  by  indevour  may  be  drawen  to
great  trade.

3  Saffron  the  best  of  the  universall  world  groweth  in
this  realme,  and  forasmuch  as  it  is  a  thing  that  requireth
much  labour  in  divers  sorts,  and  setteth  the  people  on
worke  so  plentifully,  I  wish  you  to  see  whether  you  can
finde  out  ample  vent  for  the  same,  since  it  is  gone  out  of
great  use  in  those  parts.  It  is  a  spice  that  is  cordiall,  and
may  be  used  in  meats,  and  that  is  excellent  in  dying  of
yellow  silks.  This  commodity  of  Saffron  groweth  fifty
miles  from  Tripoli  in  Syria,  on  an  high  hill  called  in  those
parts  Garian,  so  as  there  you  may  learne  at  that  port  of
Tripoli  the  value  of  the  pound,  the  goodnesse  of  it,  and
the  places  of  the  vent.  But  it  is  sayd  that  from  that  hill
there  passeth  yerely  of  that  commodity  fifteene  moiles
laden,  and  that  those  regions  notwithstanding  lacke
sufiiciencie  of  that  commodity.  But  if  a  vent  might  be
found,  men  would  in  Essex  about  Saffronwalden  and  in
Cambridge  shire  revive  the  trade  for  the  benefit  of  the
setting  of  the  poore  on  work.  So  would  they  doe  in
Hereford  shire  by  Wales,  where  the  best  of  all  England
is,  in  which  place  the  soile  yeelds  the  wilde  Saffron
commonly,  which  sheweth  the  naturall  inclination  of  the
same  soile  to  the  bearing  of  the  right  Saffron,  if  the  soile
be  manured  and  that  way  employed.

Leo  Africanus ^  There is  a  walled  towne  not farre from Barbaric,

^'  called  Hubbed,  toward  the  South  from  the  famous  towne

Telensin,  about  six  miles  :  the  inhabitants  of  which  towne

[II.  i.  165.]  in  effect  be  all  Diers.  And  it  is  sayd  that  thereabout
they  have  plenty  of  Anile,  &  that  they  occupy  that,  and
also  that  they  use  there  in  their  dyings,  of  the  Saffron
aforesayd.  The  trueth  whereof,  in  the  Southerly  ports
of  the  Mediteran  sea,  is  easily  learned  in  your  passage  to
Tripoli,  or  in  returne  from  thence  homeward  you  may
understand it. It is reported at Saffronwalden that  a

240

REMEMBRANCES FOR A  FACTOR  ad.

1582.

Pilgrim  purposing  to  do  good  to  his  countrey,  stole  an
head  of  Saffron,  and  hid  the  same  in  his  Palmers  staffe,
which  he  had  made  hollow  before  of  purpose,  and  so  he
brought  this  root  into  this  realme,  with  venture  of  his
life  :  for  if  he  had  bene  taken,  by  the  law  of  the  countrey
from  whence  it  came,  he  had  died  for  the  fact.  If  the
like  love  in  this  our  age  were  in  our  people  that  now
become  great  travellers,  many  knowledges,  and  many
trades,  and  many  herbes  and  plants  might  be  brought
into  this  realme  that  might  doe  the  realme  good.  And
the  Romans  having  that  care,  brought  from  all  coasts  of
the  world  into  Ttalie  all  arts  and  sciences,  and  all  kinds  of
beasts  and  fowles,  and  all  herbs,  trees,  busks  and  plants
that  might  yeeld  profit  or  pleasure  to  their  countrey  of
Italic.  And  if  this  care  had  not  bene  heretofore  in  our
ancesters,  then  had  our  life  bene  savage  now,  for  then  we
had  not  had  Wheat  nor  Rie,  Peaze  nor  Beanes,  Barley
nor  Oats,  Peare  nor  Apple,  Vine  nor  many  other  profit-
able and  pleasant  plants.  Bull  nor  Cow,  Sheepe  nor  Swine,
Horse  nor  Mare,  Cocke  nor  Hen,  nor  a  number  of  other
things  that  we  injoy,  without  which  our  life  were  to  be
sayd  barbarous  :  for  these  things  and  a  thousand  that  we
use  more  the  first  inhabitors  of  this  Hand  found  not  here.
And  in  time  of  memory  things  have  bene  brought  in  that
were  not  here  before,  as  the  Damaske  rose  by  Doctour
Linaker  king  Henry  the  seventh  and  king  Henrie  the
eights  Physician,  the  Turky  cocks  and  hennes  about  fifty
yeres  past,  the  Artichowe  in  time  of  king  Henry  the
eight,  and  of  later  time  was  procured  out  of  Italy  the
Muske  rose  plant,  the  plumme  called  the  Perdigwena,
and  two  kindes  more  by  the  Lord  Cromwell  after  his
travell,  and  the  Abricot  by  a  French  Priest  one  Wolfe
Gardiner  to  king  Henry  the  eight :  and  now  within  these
foure  yeeres  there  have  bene  brought  into  England  from
Vienna  in  Austria  divers  kinds  of  flowers  called  Tulipas,
and  those  and  other  procured  thither  a  little  before  from
Constantinople  by  an  excellent  man  called  M.  Carolus
Clusius.  And  it  is  sayd  that  since  we  traded  to  Zante
V  241  Q

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

that  the  plant  that  beareth  the  Coren  is  also  brought  into
this  realme  from  thence  ;  and  although  it  bring  not  fruit
to  perfection,  yet  it  may  serve  for  pleasure  and  for
some  use,  like  as  our  vines  doe,  which  we  cannot  well
spare,  although  the  climat  so  colde  will  not  permit  us
to  have  good  wines  of  them.  And  many  other  things
have  bene  brought  in,  that  have  degenerated  by  reason
of  the  colde  climat,  some  other  things  brought  in  have
by  negligence  bene  lost.  The  Archbishop  of  Canter-
burie  Edmund  Grindall,  after  he  returned  out  of
Germany,  brought  into  this  realme  the  plant  of
Tamariske  from  thence,  and  this  plant  he  hath  so
increased  that  there  be  here  thousands  of  them  ;  and
many  people  have  received  great  health  by  this  plant :
and  if  of  things  brought  in  such  care  were  had,  then
could  not  the  first  labour  be  lost.  The  seed  of
Tabacco  hath  bene  brought  hither  out  of  the  West
Indies,  it  groweth  heere,  and  with  the  herbe  many
have  bene  eased  of  the  reumes,  &c.  Each  one  of  a
great  number  of  things  were  woorthy  of  a  journey  to
be  made  into  Spaine,  Italy,  Barbarie,  Egypt,  Zante,
Constantinople,  the  West  Indies,  and  to  divers  other
places  neerer  and  further  off  then  any  of  these,  yet
forasmuch  as  the  poore  are  not  able,  and  for  that  the
rich  setled  at  home  in  quiet  will  not,  therefore  we  are
to  make  sute  to  such  as  repaire  to  forren  kingdomes,
for  other  businesses,  to  have  some  care  heerein,  and
to  set  before  their  eyes  the  examples  of  these  good
men,  and  to  endevour  to  do  for  their  parts  the  like,
as  their  speciall  businesses  may  permit  the  same.  Thus
giving  you  occasion  by  way  of  a  little  remembrance,
to  have  a  desire  to  do  your  countrey  good,  you  shall,
if  you  have  any  inclination  to  such  good,  do  more
good  to  the  poore  ready  to  starve  for  reliefe,  then
ever  any  subject  did  in  this  realme  by  building  of
Almeshouses,  and  by  giving  of  lands  and  goods  to
the  reliefe  of  the  poore.  Thus  may  you  helpe  to
drive idlenesse the mother of most mischiefs out

242

WILLIAM  HAREBORNE'S  AMBASSAGE

of  the  realme,  and  winne  you  perpetuall  fame,  and
the  prayer  of  the  poore,  which  is  more  woorth  then
all  the  golde  of  Peru  and  of  all  the  West  Indies.

The  voyage  of  the  Susan  of  London  to  Con-
stantinople, wherein  the  worshipfull  M.
William  Harborne  was  sent  first  Ambassadour
unto  Sultan  Murad  Can,  the  great  Turke,
with  whom  he  continued  as  her  Majesties
Ligier  almost  sixe  yeeres.

He  14  of  November  1582,  we  departed
from  Blackewall,  bound  for  the  Citie
of  Constantinople,  in  the  tall  shippe
called  the  Susan  of  London  :  the
Master  whereof  was  Richard  Parsons,
a  very  excellent  and  skilfull  man  in
his  facultie.  But  by  occasion  of  contrary
weather  we  spent  two  moneths  before  we  could  recover
the  Kowes  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.  Where  the  14  of
January  following  we  tooke  in  the  worshipfull  M.
William  Hareborne  her  Majesties  Ambassadour  to  the
Turke,  and  his  company,  and  sailed  thence  to  Yarmouth
in  the  foresayd  Isle  of  Wight.  The  19  we  put  from
Wight.  The  26  we  did  see  Cavo  de  Sant  Vincente.
The  same  day  we  were  thwart  of  Cavo  Santa  Maria.
The  27  we  passed  by  Tariffa,  and  Gibraltar.  The  28
in  the  morning  we  passed  by  Velez  Malaga  :  and  that
night  were  thwart  of  Cavo  de  Gates.  The  29  at  night
we  had  sight  of  Cavo  de  Palos.  The  30  in  the
morning  we  did  see  the  high  land  of  Denia,  in  the
kingdome  of  Valentia,  and  that  night  we  had  sight  of
the  Hand  Formentera.  The  31  in  the  morning  ap-
peared the  Hand  of  Cabrera.  The  first  of  February
we  put  into  a  Port  in  Mallorca,  called  Porto  de  Sant
Pedro  :  where  they  would  have  evill  intreated  us  for
comming  into  the  Harbour  :  we  thought  we  might
have  bene  as  bolde  there  as  in  other  places  of  Christen-

243

A.D.
1583.

[II. i.  166.]

January  the
foureteenth.

C.  Vincente.
C.  Santa
Maria.
Tariffa.
Felez
Malaga.
C.  de  Gates.
C.  de  Palos.
Denia.

Formentera,
Cabrera.
February  the
first.
Mallorca.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.
The  shippci dome,  but it  proved farre otherwise. The first man
men  spr  on ^^ ^^^ q,^  j^,^^  ^y^s ^  simple  Shepheard,  of  whom  we
^"saZpell demanded  whether we might have a sheepe or such
like  to refresh our  selves,  who  tolde  us yea. And  by-
such conference had with him, at the last he came
aboord once or twise, and had the best cheare that
we  could make him  : and our Ambassadour  himselfe
talked  with him, and still he made  us faire promises,
but  nothing  at  all  meant  to performe  the  same,  as  the
end shewed. In the  meane time  came  in a  shippe  of
Marseils, the Master  whereof  did know  our  Ambassa-
dour very well, with whom our Ambassadour had
conference, and with his Marchants  also. They came
from  Alger in Barbarie,  which is under the governe-
ment of the Great Turke. They did present our
Ambassadour with an Ape,  wherefore he made very
TheAmbassa-  much of  them, and  had them often  aboord. By  them
dour  betrayed.  \ suppose,  he  was  bewrayed  of  his  purpose  as  touching
his  message,  but  yet  still  we  had  faire  words  of  the  Shep-
heard aforesayd,  and  others. So  that  upon  their  words,
our  Purser  and another man  went to a  Towne  which
was three or foure miles from the port, and there
were  well  entertained,  and  had  of  the  people  very  faire
speeches, and such small things as could be gotten
upon the sudden, and  so returned to  the  shippe that
day. Then  wee  were  emboldened,  and  thought  all  had
bene well, according to their talke. The next day,
Frbrunry  the being the sixth day of  Februarie, two  of  our Gentle-
j'lxth.  men,  with one  of  our  Marchants,  and  the  Purser,  and

one  of  the  Ambassadours  men  went  to  the  Towne
aforesayd,  thinking  to  doe  as  the  Purser  and  the  other
had  done  before,  but  it  prooved  contrary  :  for  at  their
comming  thither  they  had  faire  wordes  a  while,  and
had  bread  and  wine,  and  such  necessaries  for  their
money,  untill  such  time  as  they  were  beset  with  men,
and  the  Majorcans  never  shewed  in  their  countenance
any  such  matter,  but  as  the  maner  of  all  the  people
in  the dominions  of Spaine is,  for the most part to

344

WILLIAM  HAREBORNE'S  AMBASSAGE  a.d

1583-
be  trecherous  to  us,  if  they  thinke  they  have  any
advantage.  For  upon  the  sudden  they  layed  handes  The  English
on  them,  and  put  them  in  holde,  as  sure  as  might  be  ^^^^  ^J''^
in  such  a  simple  Towne.  Then  were  they  well  guarded  ^"'^^•^
with  men  both  day  and  night,  and  still  deluded  with
faire  words,  &  they  sayd  to  our  men  it  was  for  no
hurt,  but  that  the  Viceroy  of  the  Hand  would  come
aboord  to  see  the  shippe.  But  they  presently  sent  the
Purser  to  the  Towne  of  Majorca,  where  he  was
examined  by  the  Viceroy  very  straightly,  what  their
shippe  and  captaine  were,  and  what  voyage  they  in-
tended, but  he  confessed  nothing  at  all.  In  the  meane
time  they  in  the  Towne  were  likewise  straightly
examined  by  a  Priest  and  other  officers  upon  their
othes  :  who  for  their  othes  sake  declared  the  whole
estate  of  their  voyage.  The  Ambassadours  man  was  a
French  man,  and  therefore  was  suffered  to  goe  to  the
shippe  on  a  message,  but  he  could  tell  the  Ambassa-
dour  none  other  newes,  but  that  the  Viceroy  would
come  aboord  the  shippe,  and  that  our  men  should
come  with  him,  but  they  had  another  meaning.  For
the  Marseilian  Marchants  were  stayed  in  like  maner
in  the  Towne,  onely  to  make  a  better  shew  unto  us.
But  in  the  meane  time,  being  there  three  or  foure
dayes,  there  came  men  unto  us  every  day,  more  or
lesse,  but  one  day  especially  there  came  two  men  on
horsebacke,  whom  we  tooke  to  be  officers,  being  lusty
men,  and  very  well  horsed.  These  men  desired  to
speake  with  our  Captaine  (for  all  things  that  passed
there  were  done  in  the  name  of  our  Captaine  John
Gray)  for  it  was  sayd  by  us  there,  that  he  was  Cap-
taine of  one  of  her  Majesties  shippes  :  wherefore  all
things  passed  in  his  name  :  and  the  Ambassadour  not
seene  in  any  thing  but  rather  concealed,  and  yet  did
all,  because  of  his  tongue  and  good  inditing  in  that
language.  For  he  himselfe  went  on  land  clothed  in
Velvet,  and  talked  with  these  men,  and  with  him  ten
or  twelve  lusty  fellowes  well  weaponed,  ech  one  having

245

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

rhe  Spaniards  a Boarespeare or a Caliver, the Captaine John Gray

come  to  the  sea  being  one  of  them,  and  our  boat  lying  by  very  warely

side  to  speake  j^ ^^^ ready. For then wee be^an to suspect,

with  the  cap-  ,1  .  -  ^  .  1 •  1  1

taine.  because the  place  was  more  frequented  with  men then

it  was  woont.  The  men  on  horsebacke  were  in  doubt
to  come  neere,  because  hee  came  so  well  weaponed.
But  they  bade  him  welcome,  and  gave  him  great
salutations  in  words  as  their  maner  is  :  and  demanded
why  he  came  so  strong,  for  they  sayd  he  needed  not
to  feare  any  man  in  the  Hand.  Answere  was  made,
that  it  was  the  maner  of  English  Captaines  to  goe  with
their  guard  in  strange  places.  Then  they  tolde  our
[II.  i.  167.]  Ambassador  (thinking  him  to  be  the  Captaine)  that
they  were  sent  from  the  Viceroy  to  know  what  they
did  lacke,  for  they  promised  him  beefe  or  mutton,  or
any  thing  that  was  in  the  Hand  to  be  had,  but  their
purpose  was  to  have  gotten  more  of  our  men  if  they
could,  and  they  sayde  that  wee  should  have  our  men
againe  the  next  day  :  with  such  prety  delusions  they
fed  us  still.  Then  our  Ambassadour  did  write  a  letter
to  the  Viceroy  in  her  Majesties  name,  and  in  our  Cap-
taine John  Grayes  name,  and  not  in  his  owne,  and
sent  it  by  them,  desiring  him  to  send  his  men,  and
not  to  trouble  him  in  his  voyage,  for  he  had  given
him  no  such  cause,  nor  any  of  his.  So  these  men
departed  with  great  courtesie  in  words  on  both  parts.
And  in  all  this  time  we  did  see  men  on  horsebacke
and  on  foot  in  the  woods  and  trees  more  then  they
were  accustomed  to  be,  but  we  could  perceive  nothing
thereby.  The  next  day,  or  the  second,  came  either
foure  or  sixe  of  the  best  of  them  as  wee  thought  (the
Viceroy  excepted)  and  very  many  men  besides  in  the
fieldes,  both  on  foot  and  on  horse,  but  came  not  neere
The  Spaniards  the  water  side.  And  those  in  like  order  desired  to
come  againe  to  speake  with  the  Captaine,  and  that  when  he  came  on
^  land the  trumpets  might  sound  : but  then  the  Ambas-

sadour, whom  they  thought to be  Captaine,  would  not
goe, nor suffer the  trumpets to be sounded (for that

246

WILLIAM  HAREBORNE'S  AMBASSAGE  a.d.

i5«3.
he  thought  it  was a  trappe  to  take  himselfe,  and  more
of  his  company. But  did  send  one  of  the  principall  of
the  Marchants  to  talke  with them. And  the  Captaine
John Gray  went  also  with him,  not being  knowen of
the  Spaniards,  for  he  went  as  a  souldiour. Thus they
received of  those men  the  like  wordes  as  they  had  of
the  other  before  mentioned,  who  sayd  we should  have
our  men  againe,  for  they  meant  us  no  hurt. Then  our  TheAmbassa-
Ambassadour did write another letter, and sent it  fj^^f^^^^ff^
by  them  to  the  Viceroy,  in  like  order  as  he  did  before,
but he  received no  answere of  any of  them. In all
this  time  they  had  privily  gathered  together  the  principall
men  of  the  Hand,  and  had  laboured day  and  night to
bring downe  ordinance, not  making  any  shew  of  their
trecherie  towards  us. But  the  same  night  following,  we
saw very  many  lights passe  in  the woods among the
trees. And  in  the  morning  when  the  watch  was  broken
up,  being  Saturday  the  ninth  of  Februarie,  at  faire  day  ^'^^  ^^^^^  "f
light,  one  of  our  men  looked  foorth,  and  saw  standing ^  ^^^n-
on  land  the  cariage  of  a  piece  :  then  was  one  commanded
to  goe  into  the  toppe,  and  there  he  did  descrie  two  or
three  pieces, and  also many  men  on  the shoare, with
divers  weapons  that  they  brought. Then  they  suddenly
tooke  foure or  five  brasse pieces,  and  placed them  on
either  side  of  the  harborough  where  we  should  go  out,
and  hid  them  with  stones  and  bushes  that  we  should  not
see  them. Now  I  thinke  the  harborough  not  to  be  above
the  eight part of  a  mile  over. Thus  perceiving their
meaning  which  was most plaine  : wee agreed to take
up  our  anker  and  goe  out,  and  leave our men there,
having  none  other  way  to  take. Then  our  Ambassadour
intreated  the  Master  of  the  Marseilian,  his  friend,  to  goe
on  land  with  his  boat,  and to  know the trueth  : who
satisfied  his  request. And  at  his  returne  he  tolde  us  that
it  was  very  true,  that  they  would  lay  holde  of  us  if  they
could. Then  we  weighed  our  ankers  :  but  having  little
winde,  we  towed  the  shippe  forward  with  the  boat. The
Viceroy  himselfe  was at  the  water  side  with  more  then

247

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

■1583.

five hundred  men  on  both sides  of  the  harbour  as  we

thought. And  when  we  came out  with  our  shippe  as

The  skip jP^j.  ^g  ^-j^eij.  ordinance,  our  Ambassadour  and  the  Captaine

usanpie- y^^^^^n  in  their  armour,  the  Master  commanding  of  the

pareth  to  de-  &  , .  . ' _ ,  .,  1 -n-i ^  ,•

fend  her selfe.  company,  and  trimmmg  or  the  sailes,  the  Jrilot  standing
on  the  poope,  attending  to  his  charge,  with  other  very-
well  furnished,  and  every  man  in  order  about  their
businesse  very  ready,  they  on  land  on  the  contrary  part
having  a  very  faire  piece  mounted  on  the  North  side
openly  in  all  our  sights,  as  the  shippe  passed  by,  they
traversed  that  piece  right  with  the  maine  mast  or  after-
quarter  of  the  shippe,  and  a  Gunner  standing  by,  with  a
lint-stocke  in  his  hand,  about  foureteene  or  fifteene  foot
long,  being  (as  we  thought)  ready  to  give  fire.  Our
whole  noise  of  trumpets  were  sounding  on  the  poope
with  drumme  and  flute,  and  a  Minion  of  brasse  on  the
summer  decke,  with  two  or  three  other  pieces,  alwayes  by
our  Gunners  traversed  mouth  to  mouth  with  theirs  on
land,  still  looking  when  they  on  land  should  shoot,  for  to
answere  them  againe.  The  Pilot  standing  on  the  poope,
seeing  this  readinesse,  and  the  shippe  going  very  softly,
because  of  the  calmenesse  of  the  winde,  he  called  to  them
on  the  South  side,  where  the  Viceroy  was,  and  sayd  unto
him  :  Have  you  warres  with  us  }  If  you  have,  it  is  more
then  we  know  ;  but  by  your  provision  it  seemeth  so  :  if
you  have,  shoot  in  Gods  name,  and  spare  not,  but  they
held  all  fast  and  shot  not.  Then  the  Viceroy  himselfe
held  up  a  paper,  and  sayd  he  had  a  letter  for  our  Cap-
taine, and  desired  us  to  stay  for  it.  Then  we  answered
and  sayd  we  would  not,  but  willed  him  to  send  it  by  the
Marseilians  boat,  and  our  men  also.  All  this  while,
our  trumpets,  drum  and  flute  sounded,  and  so  we  passed
out  in  the  face  of  them  all.  When  they  perceived  that
they  could  lay  no  holde  on  us,  they  presently  sent  to  the
The  effect  of  Towne  for  our  men,  whom  within  lesse  then  three  houres
the  Viceroys ^fter  they  sent  aboord  with  the  sayd  letter,  wherein  he

etter  to  t  e ^^gij-ed  our  Captaine  and  his  company  not  to  take  it  in  ill
Laptaine  oj  /- ,  ^  1  1  111

the  Susan. part,  for  he  meant  them  no  harme,  but  would  have  seene

248

WILLIAM  HAREBORNE'S  AMBASSAGE  a.d.

1583-
our  shippe.  His  letter  did  import  these  and  such  like
faire  speeches  :  for  it  altogether  contained  courteous  salu-
tations, saying  that  he  might  boldly  come  into  any  port  [II.  i.  168.]
within  his  Hand,  and  that  he  and  his  would  shew  him
what  friendship  they  might  :  and  that  the  injury  that  was
offered  was  done  at  the  request  of  the  Shepheards  and
poore  people  of  the  countrey,  for  the  more  safegard  of
their  flockes,  and  because  it  was  not  a  thing  usuall  to
have  any  such  shippe  to  come  into  that  port,  with  many
other deceitfull words in the sayd letter. Then our  The  effect  of

Ambassadour  wrote  unto  him  another  letter  to  answere  ^f^  ^mbassa-
,  ,  ....-,.  1111  "'"'■f  answere.

that,  and  gave  him  thanks  tor  his  men  that  he  had  sent

him,  and  also  for  his  good  will,  and  sent  him  a  present.

This  done,  we  shot  off  halfe  a  dozen  pieces,  hoised  our

sailes,  and  departed  on  our  voyage. Then  the  Purser  and

the  rest  of  our  men  that  had  beene  in  holde,  tolde  us  that

they  did  see  the  Captaine,  and  other  gentlemen  of  the

Hand,  having  their  buskins  and  stockings  torne  from  their

legges,  with  labouring  in  the  bushes  day  and  night  to

make  that  sudden  provision. The 12 of  February  we

saw  an  Hand  of  Africa  side  called  Galata,  where  they  use  Galata.

to  drag  out  of  the  Sea  much  Corall,  and  we  saw  likewise

Sardinia,  which  is  an  Hand  subject  to  Spaine. The 13  Sardinia.

in  the  morning  we  were  hard  by  Sardinia. The 15  we

did  see  an  Hand  neere  Sicilia,  and  an  Hand  on  Africa  side  Fauagniana.

called  Cysimbre. The  same  day  likewise  we  saw  an  Hand  Cisimbri.

called Pantalaria, and that night we were thwart  the  Pantalaria.

middle  of  Sicilia. The 16  at  night  we  were  as  farre  as  Sicilia.

Capo  Passaro,  which  is  the  Southeast  part  of  Sicilia. The  C.  Passaro.

24  we  were  put  into  a  port  called  Porto  de  Conte,  in  an  Porto  deConte

Hand called Cephalonia  : it is an out Hand in the  '"^  Cephalonia.

dominions  of  Grecia,  and  now  at  this  present  governed

by  the  Signory  of  Venice,  as  the  rest  of  Grecia  is  under

the  Turke,  for  the most part. The  27  we  came  from

thence,  and  that day  arrived  at Zante  which  is  also  in  Xante.

Grecia  :  for  at  this  present  wee  entred  the  parts  of  Grecia.

The  second of  March  we  came from Zante  ; and the

same  day  were  thwart  of  an  Hand  called  Prodeno  :  and  Prodem.

249

A.D.

1583.

Sapiefitia.
Modon.

C.  Matapan.

Cerigo.
C.  Malio.
Menelaus.

Bellapola.
Both  M'llos.

Falconara.

Antemila.

Fermenia,

Zea.

Negroponte.

Andri.

Psara.  Sarafo.

Sigra,  a  port
in  Metelin.

Porto  Delfin.
The  city  of
Chio.

A  By.

Erntin,  or
Customer.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  4  we  were  thwart  of  an  Hand  called  Sapientia.  There
standeth  a  faire  Towne  and  a  Castle  on  the  maine  over
against  it,  called  Modon.  The  same  day  by  reason
of  contrary  windes  we  put  backe  againe  to  Prodeno,
because  we  could  not  fetch  Sapientia.  The  ninth  we
came  from  thence,  and  were  as  farre  as  Sapientia  againe.
The  tenth  we  were  as  farre  shot  as  Cavo  Matapan  ;  and
that  day  we  entred  the  Archipelago,  and  passed  thorow
betweene  Cerigo  and  Cavo  Malio.  This  Cerigo  is  an
Hand  where  one  Menelaus  did  sometimes  reigne,  from
whome  was  stollen  by  Paris  faire  Helena,  and  carried
to  Troy,  as  ancient  Recordes  doe  declare.  The  same
day  we  had  sight  of  a  little  Hand  called  Bellapola,  and  did
likewise  see  both  the  Milos,  being  Hands  in  the  Archi-
pelago. The  II  in  the  morning  we  were  hard  by  an
Iland  called  Falconara,  and  the  Hand  of  Antemila. The

12  in  the  morning  we  were  betweene  Fermenia  and  Zea,
being  both  Hands.  That  night  wee  were  betweene
Negroponte and Andri, being likewise Hands. The

13  in  the  morning  we  were  hard  by  Psara  and  Sarafo,
being  Hands  nine  or  tenne  miles  from  Chio,  and  could
not  fetch  Chio.  So  we  put  roome  with  a  port  in  Metelin
called  Sigra,  and  about  nine  of  the  clocke  at  night  we
ankered  there.  The  15  we  came  from  thence,  the  six-
teenth we  put  into  Porto  Delfi.  The  port  is  9  English
miles  to  the  Northward  of  the  City  of  Chio,  (and  it  may
be  twelve  of  their  miles)  this  night  we  stayed  in  the  sayd
port,  being  in  the  Hand  of  Chio.  Then  went  our  Mar-
chant  and  one  or  two  with  him  to  the  City  of  Chio.  And
when  the  By,  who  is  the  governour  of  the  Hand  (and  is
in  their  language  a  Duke)  had  communed  with  the
Marchant,  and  those  that  were  with  him,  and  understood
of  our  arrivall  within  his  dominion,  the  day  following  he
armed  his  gallies,  and  came  to  welcome  our  Ambassadour,
accompanied  with  the  Ermine,  that  is,  the  Kings
Customer,  and  also  the  French  Consull,  with  divers  of
the  chiefs  of  the  City,  and  offered  him  as  much  friendship
as  he  could  or  would  desire  :  for  he  did  offer  to  attend

250

WILLIAM  HAREBORNE'S  AMBASSAGE  ad.

1583.
upon  us,  and  towe  us  if  need  were  to  the  Castles. The
21 we departed from  thence,  and that day  passed by-
port  Sigra  againe. This  Hand  of  Metelin  is  part  of  Asia,
and  is  neere  to  Natolia. The  22  we  passed  by  a  head
land  called  Baberno,  and  is  also  in  Asia. And  that  day  at  Babemo.
night  we  passed  by  the  Isle  of  Tenedo,  part  of  Asia,  and  Te?iedo.
by  another  Hand  called  Maure. And  the  same  day  we  Maure.
passed thorow the straights of Galipoli, and by the  GalipoH.
Castles,  and  also  by  the  Towne  of  Galipoli  it  selfe,  which
standeth  in  Europa. And  that  night  we  were  in  sight  of
Marmora  which  is  neere  Natolia,  and  part  of  Asia. The  Marmora.
23 in  the  morning  we  were  thwart  of  Araclia,  and  that  Aradia.
night  we  ankered  in Silauria. The  24  in  the  morning  Silauria.
the  Marchant  and  the  Pilot  were  set  on  land  to  goe  to
the  City  about  the  Ambassadours businesse, but  there
they could  not  land because we had the winde faire.
That  place  of  some  is  called  Ponte  grande,  and  is  foure  Pontegrande.
and twenty  miles on this side of  Constantinople,  and
because  of  the  winde,  they  followed  in  the  skiffe  untill
they came to a place called Ponte picola, and there  Ponte  picola.
is a little bridge, it standeth eight Turkish miles
from Constantinople,  there  the  Marchant  and  the  Pilot
landed. At  this  bridge  is  an  house  of  the  great  Turkes
with  a  faire  Garden  belonging  unto  it,  neere  the  which
is a point called Ponta S. Stephano, and there the  ^°^^^  ^^
shippe ankered that day. The 26 day  the ship came  ^^^P^^""-
to  the  seven  Towers,  and  the  27  we  came  neerer. The
29 there came three  gallies to bring  us up further  :  [II.  1.  169.]
and  when the shippe came against the great Turks  1"^^  arrivdl
palace,  we shot  off  all  our  ordinance  to  the  number  of  '>f^h^  ^"^<^n at
foure and thirty pieces. Then landed our Ambassa-  ^^/^_
dour,  and then  we  discharged foure  and  twenty  pieces,
who  was received with more then fifty or threescore
men on  horsebacke. The ninth  of  April  he  presented  The  Jmbassa-
the  great  Bassa  with  sixe  clothes,  foure  Cannes  of  silver  '^o^^  g^'^^^'^ f-
double  gilt,  and  one  piece of  fine  holland,  and  to  three  great  Bassa
other  Bassas, that is to say, the second Bassa, which
is a  gelded man, and his name is  Mahomet  Bassa,  to

251

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

the third  who maried the  great Turks sister, and to
the fourth whom they  call Abraham Bassa,  to every-
one  of  these he  gave foure  clothes. Now, before the
great Bassa, and  Abraham  Bassa,  at  their returne  from
the Court (and as we  thinke at other  times, but at
A  man  halfe that  time  for a certaine) there came  a  man in maner
naked  goeth q£  ^ foole, who gave a great shout three or foure
Bassa  times, crying  very  hollowly, the  place rebounded  with

the  sound,  and  this  man,  say  they,  is  a  prophet  of
Mahomet,  his  armes  and  legges  naked,  on  his  feet  he
did  weare  woodden  pattens  of  two  sorts,  in  his  hand,  a
flagge,  or  streamer  set  on  a  short  speare  painted,  he
carried  a  mat  and  bottels,  and  other  trumpery  at  his
backe,  and  sometimes  under  his  arme,  on  his  head
he  had  a  cappe  of  white  Camels  haire,  flat  like  an
helmet,  written  about  with  letters,  and  about  his  head  a
linnen  rowle.  Other  servingmen  there  were  with  the
sayd  Bassas,  with  red  attire  on  their  heads,  much  like
French  hoods,  but  the  long  flappe  somewhat  smaller
towardes  the  end,  with  scufFes  or  plates  of  mettall,
like  unto  the  chape  of  an  ancient  arming  sword,  stand-
ing on  their  foreheads  like  other  Janisaries.  These
The  Ambassa-  Bassas  entertained  us  as  foUoweth  :  First,  they  brought
dours  enter- ^g into a hall, there to stand on one  side,  and our

ainmentwt Ambassadour and gentlemen on the other side, who
the  Bassas.  .  ,  o , ,  1 •  i  1

sate  them downe  on  a bench  covered  with  carpets,  the

Ambassadour  in  the  midst  ;  on  his  left  hand  sate  our
gentlemen,  and  on  his  right  hand  the  Turkes,  next  to
the  doore  where  their  master  goeth  in  and  out  :  the
common  sort  of  Turkes  stayed  in  the  Court  yard,  not
suffered  to  come  neere  us.  When  our  Ambassadour
had  sitten  halfe  an  houre,  the  Bassas  (who  sate  by
themselves  in  an  inner  small  roome)  sent  for  him  ;  to
whom  the  Ambassadour  and  his  gentlemen  went :  they
all  kissed  his  hand,  and  presently  returned  (the  Am-
bassadour onely  excepted,  who  stayed  there,  and  a
Turks  chaus  with  him)  with  the  Ambassadour  and  his
gentlemen went  in  also so many of  our  men  as  there

252

WILLIAM  HAREBORNE'S  AMBASSAGE  ad.

^583.
were  presents  to  cary  in,  but  these  neither  kissed  his
hand  nor  taried.  After  this  I  went  to  visit  the  church
of  Santa  Sophia,  which  was  the  chiefe  church  when  it  Santa  Sophia.
was  the  Christians,  and  now  is  the  chiefe  see  and
church  of  primacie  of  this  Turke  present :  before  I
entred  I  was  willed  to  put  off  my  shoes,  to  the  end
I  should  not  prophane  their  church,  I  being  a  Christian.
The  pillers  on  both  sides  of  the  church  are  very  costly  A  discription
and  rich,  their  Pulpets  seemely  and  handsome,  two  are  °f^^^^^<^^^^*'<^^-
common  to  preach  in,  the  third  reserved  onely  for
their  Paschall.  The  ground  is  covered  with  Mats,  and
the  walles  hanged  with  Tapistry.  They  have  also
Lamps  in  their  churches,  one  in  the  middle  of  the
church  of  exceeding  greatnesse,  and  another  in  another
part  of  the  church  of  cleane  golde,  or  double  gilded,
full  as  bigge  as  a  barrel.  Round  about  the  church  .
there  is  a  gallery  builded  upon  rich  and  stately  pillers.
That  day  I  was  in  both  the  chappels,  in  one  of  the
which  lieth  the  Turkes  father,  and  five  of  his  sonnes
in  tombes  right  costly,  with  their  turbents  very  white
and  cleane,  shifted  (as  they  say)  every  Friday,  they  be
not  on  their  heads,  but  stand  on  mouldes  made  for
that  purpose.  At  the  endes,  over,  and  about  their
tombes  are  belts,  like  girdles,  beset  with  jewels.  In
the  other  chappell  are  foure  other  of  his  sonnes,  and
one  daughter,  in  like  order.  In  the  first  chappell  is  a
thing  foure  foot  high,  covered  with  greene,  beset  with
mother  of  pearle  very  richly.  This  is  a  relique  of
Mahomet,  and  standeth  on  the  left  side  of  the  head
of  the  great  Turks  tombe.  These  chappels  have  their
floores  covered,  and  their  walles  hanged  with  Tapistrie
of  great  price,  I  could  value  the  covering  and  hangings
of  one  of  the  chappels,  at  no  lesse  then  five  hundred
poundes,  besides  their  lamps  hanging  richly  gilded.
These  chappels  have  their  roofes  curiously  wrought
with  rich  stone,  and  gilded.  And  there  lie  the  bookes
of  their  Lawes  for  every  man  to  reade.  The  1 1  day  ntethtot}^'
of  April the  shippe  came to  the Key of  the  Custome  custome  house.

253

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

TheAmbassa-  house. The 1 6 the Ambassadour and we his men

dorpresenteth  ^^^^ ^^  ^j^^ Captaine Bassa,  who is Admirall of the
the  Admirall  ^  •  'ttiti  u ^  •  • ^

Uchali  seas,  his  name is Uchah,  he  would  not  receive  us  into

his house, but  into  his gallie, to  deliver our  present,
which was as followeth  : Foure pieces of cloth, and
two  silver  pots  gilt  &  graven. The poope or sterne
of  his  gaily  was  gilded  both within and without,  and
under  his feet,  and  where  he  sate  was  all  covered  with
very  rich  Tapistry. Our  Ambassadour  and  his  gentle-
men kissed his hand, and then the gentlemen were
commanded out, and  our  Ambassadour sate  downe  by
him  on  his  left  hand,  and  the  chaus  stood  before  him.
Our men might walke in the gaily fore and after,
some of  us taried,  and some went  out againe. The
gaily  had seven pieces  of  brasse in her  prowe, small
and great, she had thirty  bankes or oares on either
side,  and  at every banke  or oare seven men  to  rowe.
The  Susan The 1 8 day  the  shippe  went  from  the  Key. And  21
goeth from  the the Admirall tooke his leave of the great Turke,
Customhouse,  ^ging  bound to the Sea with sixe and thirty gallies,
detarteth  to very fairely  beautified  with gilding and painting,  and
the  sea.  beset with flags and streamers,  all the which gallies

[II.  i.  170.]  discharged  their  ordinance  :  and  we  for  his  farewell
gave  him  one  and  twenty  pieces.  Then  he  went  to
his  house  with  his  gallies,  and  the  22  he  went  to  the
Sea,  and  the  Castle  that  standeth  in  the  water  gave
him  foureteene  or  sixteene  pieces  :  and  when  he  came
against  the  Turks  Seraglio  he  shot  oflf  all  his  calivers
and  his  great  pieces,  and  so  hee  went  his  way.  The
TheAmbassa-  24  our  Ambassadour  went  to  the  Court,  whose  enter-
dours  repaire  tainement  with  the  order  thereof  followeth.  When
to  the  gi eat  ^^^  came  first  on  land  there  was  way  made  for  us
by  two  or  three  Bassaes  and  divers  chauses  on  horse-
backe  with  their  men  on  foot,  to  accompany  our
Ambassadour  to  the  Court.  Also  they  brought  horses
for  him  and  his  gentlemen  for  to  ride,  which  were
very  richly  furnished  :  and  by  the  way  there  met  with
us other chauses to accompany us to the Court.

254

WILLIAM  HAREBORNE'S  AMBASSAGE  ad.

1583.
When we came there  wee passed thorow two gates,

at  the  second  gate  there  stood  very  many  men  with
horses  attending  on  their  masters.  When  we  came
within  that  gate  we  were  within  a  very  faire  Court
yard,  in  compasse  twise  so  bigge  as  Pauls  Church-
yard. On  the  right  hand  of  the  sayd  Court  was  a
faire  gallerie  like  an  Alley,  and  within  it  were  placed
railes  and  such  other  provision.  On  the  left  side  was
the  like,  halfe  the  Court  over  :  it  was  divided  into
two  parts,  the  innermost  fairer  then  the  other.  The
other  part  of  that  side  is  the  place  where  the  Councell
doe  usually  sit,  and  at  the  inner  end  of  that  is  a  faire
place  to  sit  in,  much  like  unto  that  place  in  Pauls
Church-yard,  where  the  Maior  and  his  brethren  use  to
sit,  thither  was  our  Ambassadour  brought,  and  set  in
that  place.  Within  that  sayde  place  is  another  like
open  roome,  where  hee  did  eate.  Assoone  as  wee  came  The  enter-
in^  wee  were  placed  in  the  innermost  alley  of  the  ^^^^^^^^
second  roome,  on  the  left  side  of  the  Court,  which  jmlasmdours
was  spread  with  carpets  on  the  ground  fourescore  or  men.
fourescore  and  tenne  foot  long,  with  an  hundred  and
fiftie  severall  dishes  set  thereon,  that  is  to  say.  Mutton
boiled  and  rosted.  Rice  diversly  dressed.  Fritters  of  the
finest  fashion,  and  dishes  daintily  dight  with  pritty
pappe,  with  infinite  others,  I  know  not  how  to  ex-
presse  them.  We  had  also  rosted  Hennes  with  sundry
sorts  of  fowles  to  me  unknowen.  The  gentlemen  and
we  sate  downe  on  the  ground,  for  it  is  their  maner
so  to  feede.  There  were  also  Greekes  and  others  set
to  furnish  out  the  roome.  Our  drinke  was  made  with
Rose  water  and  Sugar  and  spices  brewed  together.
Those  that  did  serve  us  with  it  had  a  great  bagge
tied  over  their  showlders,  with  a  broad  belt  like  an
arming  belt  full  of  plates  of  copper  and  gilt,  with
part  of  the  sayd  bagge  under  his  arme,  and  the  mouth
in  his  hand  :  then  he  had  a  devise  to  let  it  out  when
he  would  into  cuppes,  when  we  called  for  drinke.  The
Ambassadour  when hee  had eaten,  passed  by us,  with

255

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

the  chauses  aforesayd,  and  sate  him  downe  in  an  inner

roome. This place  where  he  sate  was  against  the  gate

where  we came  in,  and  hard  by  the  Councell  chamber

end,  somewhat  on  the  left side of  the  Court,  this  was

at  the East  end of  the  Court,  for we  came  in  at the

West. All  this time  our presents stood by us  untill

we  had dined, and diner once ended, this was their

order  of taking up the dishes. Certaine were called

in, like those of  the Blacke gard in the Court of

England, the Turks call them Moglans. These came

in like rude and ravening Mastifs, without order

or fashion,  and made cleane riddance  : for he whose

hungry  eye one dish could not fill turned two, one

into the other, and thus even on the sudden was

made  a cleane riddance of all. Then came certaine

chauses and brought our gentlemen to sit with the

Ambassadour. Immediatly came officers & appointed

Janisers to beare from us our presents, who caried

them  on  the  right  side  of  the  Court,  and  set  them  hard

by  the  doore  of  the  Privy  chamber,  as  we  call  it  :  there

all  things  stoode  for  the  space  of  an  houre. Thus  the

Ambassadour  and his  gentlemen  sate  still, and to the

Southward  of  them  was  a  doore  whereas  the  great  Turke

himselfe  went  in  and  out  at,  and  on  the  South  side  of  that

doore  sate  on  a  bench  all  his  chiefs  lordes  and  gentlemen,

and  on  the  North  side  of  the  West  gate  stood  his  gard,

in  number  as  I  gesse  them  a  thousand  men. These  men

have  on  their  heads  round  cappes  of  mettall  like  sculles,

but  sharpe  in  the  toppe,  in  this they  have  a  bunch  of

Ostridge  feathers,  as  bigge  as  a  brush,  with  the  corner  or

edge forward  : at the  lower  end of  these  feathers  was

there a smaller feather, like those  that  are  commonly

worn  here. Some  of  his  gard  had  smal  staves,  &  most

of  them  were  weaponed  with  bowes  and  arrowes. Here

they  waited,  during  our  abode  at  the  Court,  to  gard  their

Lord. After  the  Ambassadour  with  his  gentlemen  had

sitten an houre and  more, there came three or foure

chauses, and brought them into the great Turkes

256

WILLIAM HAREBORNE'S AMBASSAGE  ad

1583.

presence. At  the  Privy  chamber  doore  two  noble  men

tooke  the  Ambassadour  by  ech  arme  one,  and  put  their

fingers within his sleeves,  and so  brought  him to the

great Turke where he sumptuously sate alone. He

kissed his hand  and  stood  by untill  all  the  gentlemen

were  brought  before  him  in  like  maner,  one  by  one,  and

ledde backewards  againe his  face towards the Turke  ;

for  they  might  neither  tarry  nor  turne  their  backs,  and  in

like  maner  returned the Ambassadour. The  salutation

that  the  Noble  men  did,  was  taking  them  by  the  hands.

All  this  time  they  trode  on  cloth  of  golde,  most  of  the

Noble men  that  sate on the South side  of  the  Privy

chamber  sate  likewise  on  cloth  of  golde. Many  officers  [11.  i.  171.]

or  Janisaries  there  were  with  staves,  who  kept  very  good

order,  for  no  Turke  whatsoever  might  goe  any further

then they  willed him. At our Ambassadours entring

they  followed  that  bare  his  presents,  to  say,  twelve  fine  "^^^  Turke  u

broad  clothes,  two  pieces  of  fine  holland,  tenne  pieces  of  f^^^f\  f  ^^

1  111-1  r  11 • 1  1  a  rich  present.

plate double gilt, one case or candlesticks, the case

whereof  was  very  large,  and  three  foot  high  and  more,

two very  great Cannes or pots, and one lesser, one

basin and ewer, two poppinjayes of silver, the one

with two heads :  they  were to  drinke in  : two  bottles

with  chaines,  three  faire  mastifs  in  coats  of  redde  cloth,

three  spaniels,  two  bloodhounds,  one common  hunting

hound,  two  greyhounds, two  little dogges in coats of

silke  :  one  clocke  valued  at  five  hundred  pounds  sterling  :

over it  was a  forrest  with trees of  silver,  among the

which  were  deere  chased  with  dogs,  and  men  on  horse-

backe  following,  men  drawing  of  water,  others  carrying

mine  oare  on  barrowes  :  on  the  toppe  of  the  clocke  stood

a castle,  and on the castle a mill. All these  were of

silver. And the clocke  was round beset with jewels.

All the time  that  we stayed at the Councell chamber

doore they  were  telling  or  weighing  of  money  to  send

into  Persia  for  his  Souldiours  pay. There  were  carried  out

an  hundred  and  three  and  thirty  bags,  and  in  every  bagge,

as  it  was  tolde  us,  one  thousand  ducats,  which  amounteth

V  257  R

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

to  three  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  *  ,  and  in  sterling
English  money  to  fourescore  and  nineteene  thousand
pounds.  The  Captaine  of  the  guard  in  the  meane  time
went  to  the  great  Turke,  and  returned  againe,  then  they
of  the  Court  made  obeisance  to  him,  bowing  downe  their
heads,  and  their  hands  on  their  breasts,  and  he  in  like
order  resaluted  them  :  he  was  in  cloth  of  silver,  he  went
and  came  with  two  or  three  with  him  and  no  more.
Then  wee  went  out  at  the  first  gate,  and  there  we  were
commanded  to  stay  untill  the  Captaine  of  the  guard  was
passed  by  and  all  his  guard  with  him,  part  before  him  and
part  behinde  him,  some  on  horsebacke  and  some  on  foot,
but  the  most  part  on  foot  carrying  on  their  shoulders  the
money  before  mentioned,  and  so  we  passed  home.  There
was  in  the  Court  during  our  abode  there,  for  the  most
part  a  foole  resembling  the  first,  but  not  naked  as  was  the
other  at  the  Bassas  :  but  he  turned  him  continually,  &
cried  Hough  very  hollowly.  The  third  of  May  I  saw
the  Turke  go  to  the  church  :  he  had  more  then  two
hundred  and  fifty  horses  before  and  behinde  him,  but
most  before  him.  There  were  many  empty  horses  that
came  in  no  order.  Many  of  his  Nobilitie  were  in  cloth
of  golde,  but  himselfe  in  white  sattin.  There  did  ride
behinde  him  sixe  or  seven  youthes,  one  or  two  whereof
carried  water  for  him  to  drinke  as  they  sayd.  There  were
many  of  his  guard  running  before  him  and  behinde  him,
and  when  he  alighted,  they  cried  Hough  very  hollowly,
as  the  aforesayd  fooles.

A letter of Mustapha Chaus to the Queenes
most  excellent  Majestie.

Erenissima,  prudentissima,  &  sacra  Regia  Majestas,
domina  mihi  semper  clementissima,  meorum
fidelium officiorum promptam paratissimamque

commendationem.  Generosus  &  virtuosus  Gulielmus
Hareborne  legatus  vestrae  Majestatis  venit  ad  portam
excelsissimam  potentissimi  &  invictissimi,  &  semper
Augustissimi  Caesaris  Sultan  Murad  Can,  cui  Deus  omni-

258

A LETTER TO HARVIE MILLERS  a.d.

1583.
potens  benedicat.  Et  quanto  honore,  quanta  dignitate,
quantaque  humanitate  aliorum  confoederatorum  legati
accipiuntur,  praefatus  quoque  legatus  vaster  tanta  re-
verentia,  tantaque  amplitudine  acceptus  &o  coUocatus  est
in  porta  excelsissima.  Et  posthac  subditi  &  homines
vestrse  sacrae  Majestatis  ad  ditiones  omnes  Caesareas
venire,  &  sua  negocia  tractare,  &  ad  suam  patriam  redire
sine  impedimento,  ut  in  literis  excelsissimi,  potentissimi,
&  invictissimi,  &  semper  Augustissimi  Caesaris  ad  ves-
tram  sacram  Regiam  Majestatem  datis  facile  patet,
tranquille  &  pacific^  possunt.  Ego  autem  imprimis
diligentem  operam  &  fidele  studium  &  nunc  eodem
confirmando  navavi,  &  in  futurum  quoque  usque  in
ultimum  vitae  spiritum  in  negotiis  potentissimi  &  in-
victissimi Cassaris,  &  vestrae  sacrae  Regias  Majestatis
egregiam  navabo  operam.  Quod  Deus  omnipotens  ad
emolumentum  &  utilitatem  utridsque  Reipublicae  se-
cundet.  Amen.  Sacram  Regiam  Majestatem  fcelicissime
valere  exopto.  Datum  Constantinopoli  anno  1583,  die
octavo  Maii.

A  letter  of  the  English  Ambassadour  to  M.  Harvie
Millers,  appointing  him  Consull  for  the
English  nation  in  Alexandria,  Cairo,  and  other
places  of  Egypt.

Aving  to  appoint  our  Consull  in  Cayro,  Alexandria,
Egypt,  and  other  parts  adjacent,  for  the  safe
protection of  body  and  goods  of  her Majesties

subjects  ;  being  well  perswaded  of  your  sufficient  abilitie  ;
in  her  Majesties  name  I  doe  elect  and  make  choise  of
you,  good  friend  Harvie  Millers,  to  execute  the  same  [II.  i.  172.]
worshipfull  office,  as  shall  be  required  for  her  Majesties
better  service,  the  commodity  of  her  subjects,  and  my
contentation  :  having  and  injoying  for  merit  of  your
travell  in  the  premisses  the  like  remuneration  incident
to  the  rest  of  ours  in  such  office  in  other  parts  of  this
Empire. Requiring  you  (all  other  affaires  set  aside)  to

259

A.D.
1583.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

repaire  thither  with  expedition,  and  attend  upon  this  your
charge,  which  the  Almighty  grant  you  well  to  accomplish.
For  the  due  execution  whereof,  we  heerewith  send  you
the  Grand  Signiors  Patent  of  privilege  with  ours,  and
what  els  is  needful!  therefore,  in  so  ample  maner,  as  any
other  Consull  whosoever  doeth  or  may  enjoy  the  same.
In  ayd  whereof,  according  to  my  bounden  duety  to  her
Majesty  our  most  gracious  Mistresse,  I  will  be  ready
alwayes  to  employ  my  selfe  to  the  generall  benefit  of
her  Majesties  subjects,  for  your  maintenance  in  all  just
causes  incident  to  the  same.  And  thus  eftsoones  re-
quiring and  commanding  you  as  above  sayd,  to  performe
my  request,  I  bid  you  most  heartily  well  to  fare,  and
desire  God  to  blesse  you.  From  my  mansion  Rapamat
nigh  Pera  this  25  of  April 1583.

Commission  given  by  M.  William  Hareborne  the
English  Ambassadour,  to  Richard  Forster,
authorising  him  Consul  of  the  English  nation
in  the  parts  of  Alepo,  Damasco,  Aman,  Tripolis,
Jerusalem,  &c.

William  Harborne,  her  Majesties  Am-
bassadour, Ligier  with  the  Grand  Signior,
for  the  affaires  of  the  Levant  doe  in  her
Majesties  name  confirme  and  appoint
Richard  Forster  Gentleman,  my  Deputie
and  Consull  in  the  parts  of  Alepo,
Damasco,  Aman,  Tripolis,  Jerusalem,  and
all  other  ports  whatsoever  in  the  provinces  of  Syria,
Palestina,  and  Jurie,  to  execute  the  office  of  Consull  over
all  our  Nation  her  Majesties  subjects,  of  what  estate
or  quality  soever  :  giving  him  hereby  full  power  to
defend,  protect,  and  maintaine  all  such  her  Majesties
subjects  as  to  him  shall  be  obedient,  in  all  honest  and
just  causes  whatsoever  :  and  in  like  case  no  lesse  power
to  imprison,  punish,  and  correct  any  and  all  such  as  he
shall  finde  disobedient  to  him  in  the  like  causes,  even  in

260

DIRECTIONS TO RICHARD FORSTER  ad.

1583.
such  order  as  1  my  selfe  might  doe  by  vertue  of  her
Majesties  Commission  given  me  the  26  of  November
1582,  the  copie  whereof  I  have  annexed  to  this  present
under  her  Majesties  Scale  delivered  me  to  that  use.
Straightly  charging  and  commanding  all  her  Majesties
subjects  in  those  parts,  as  they  will  avoid  her  Highnesse
displeasure  and  their  owne  harmes,  to  honour  his
authoritie,  and  have  due  respect  unto  the  same,  aiding
and  assisting  him  there  with  their  persons  and  goods  in
any  cause  requisit  to  her  Majesties  good  service,  and
commoditie  of  her  dominions.  In  witnesse  whereof  I
have  confirmed  and  sealed  these  presents  at  Rapamat  my
mansion  house  by  Pera  over  against  Constantinople,  the
20  of  June 1583.

A  letter  of  directions  of  the  English  Ambassadour
to  M.  Richard  Forster,  appointed  the  first
English  Consull  at  Tripolis  in  Syria.

Ousin  Forster,  these  few  words  are  for
your  remembrance  when  it  shall  please
the  Almighty  to  send  you  safe  arrivall
in  Tripolis  of  Syria.  When  it  shall  please
God  to  send  you  thither,  you  are  to
certifie  our  Nation  at  Tripolis  of  the
certaine  day  of  your  landing,  to  the  end
they  both  may  have  their  house  in  a  readinesse,  and
also  meet  you  personally  at  your  entrance  to  accompany
you,  being  your  selfe  apparelled  in  the  best  maner.  The
next,  second,  or  third  day,  after  your  comming,  give  it
out  that  you  be  crazed  and  not  well  disposed,  by  meanes
of  your  travell  at  Sea,  during  which  time,  you  and  those
there  are  most  wisely  to  determine  in  what  maner  you
are  to  present  your  selfe  to  the  Beglerbi,  Cadi,  and
other  officers  :  who  every  of  them  are  to  be  presented
according  to  the  order  accustomed  of  others  formerly
in  like  office  :  which  after  the  note  of  John  Blanke,  late
Vice-consull of  Tripolis for the French, delivered  you

I

261

AD  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1583.

heerewith,  is  very  much  :  and  therefore,  if  thereof  you
can  save  any  thing,  I  pray  you  doe  it,  as  I  doubt  not
but  you  will.  They  are  to  give  you  there  also  another
Janizarie  according  as  the  French  hath  ;  whose  outward
proceedings  you  are  to  imitate  and  follow,  in  such  sort
as  you  bee  not  his  inferiour,  according  as  those  of  our
Nation  heeretofore  with  him  resident  can  informe  you.
Touching  your  demeanour  after  your  placing,  you  are
wisely  to  proceede  considering  both  French  and  Venetian
will  have  an  envious  eye  on  you  :  whome  if  they  per-
ceive wise  and  well  advised,  they  will  feare  to  offer  you
any  injurie.  But  if  they  shall  perceive  any  insufficiencie
in  you,  they  will  not  omitte  any  occasion  to  harme  you.
They  are  subtile,  malicious,  and  dissembling  people,
wherefore  you  must  alwayes  have  their  doings  for  sus-
pected, and  warily  walke  in  all  your  actions  :  wherein  if
[II.  i.  173.]  you  call  for  Gods  divine  assistance,  as  doth  become
every  faithfuU  good  Christian,  the  same  shall  in  such  sort
direct  you  as  he  shall  be  glorified,  your  selfe  preserved,
your  doings  blessed,  and  your  enemies  confounded.
Which  if  contrarywise  you  omit  and  forget,  your  enemies
malice  shalbe  satisfied  with  your  confusion,  which  God
defend,  and  for  his  mercies  sake  keepe  you.  Touching
any  outlopers  of  our  nation,  which  may  happen  to  come
thither  to  traffike,  you  are  not  to  suffer,  but  to  imprison
the  chiefe  officers,  and  suffer  the  rest  not  to  traffike  at
any  time,  and  together  enter  in  such  bonds  as  you  thinke
meete,  that  both  they  shall  not  deale  in  the  Grand
Signiors  dominions,  and  also  not  harme,  during  their
voyage,  any  his  subjects  shippes,  vessels,  or  whatsoever
other,  but  quietly  depart  out  of  the  same  country  without
any  harme  doing.  And  touching  those  there  for  the
company,  you  are  to  defend  them  according  to  your
priviledge  &  such  commandements  as  you  have  had
hence,  in  the  best  order  you  may.  In  all  and  every  your
actions,  at  any  hand,  beware  of  rashnesse  and  anger,  after
both  which  repentance  followeth.  Touching  your  dealings
in their  affaires  of  marchandise,  you are not  to deale

262

A LETTER  FROM ALGIERS

otherwise  then  in  secret  and  counsell.  You  are  carefully
to  foresee  the  charge  of  the  house,  that  the  same  may  be
in  all  honest  measure  to  the  companies  profit  and  your
owne  health  through  moderation  in  diet,  and  at  the  best
hand,  and  in  due  time  to  provide  things  needfuU,  to  save
what  may  be  :  for  he  that  buyeth  every  thing  when  he
needeth  it,  harmeth  his  owne  house,  and  helpeth  the
retailer.  So  as  it  is,  in  mine  opinion,  wisdome  to  foresee
the  buying  of  all  things  in  their  native  soile,  in  due  time,
and  at  the  first  hand  every  yeere,  as  you  are  to  send  the
company  the  particular  accounts  of  the  same  expenses.
Touching  your  selfe,  you  are  to  cause  to  be  employed
fifty  or  threescore  ducats,  videlicet,  twenty  in  Sope,  and
the  rest  in  Spices,  whereof  the  most  part  to  be  Pepper,
whereof  we  spend  very  much.  The  Spices  are  to  be
provided  by  our  friend  William  Barrat,  and  the  Sope  buy
you  at  your  first  arrivall,  for  that  this  shippe  lading  the
same  commodity  will  cause  it  to  amount  in  price.  From
our  mansion  Rapamat,  the  fift  of  September  1583.

A  letter  to  the  right  honourable  William  Hare-
borne  her  Majesties  Ambassadour  with  the
Grand  Signior  from  Alger.

Ight  honorable,  we  have  received  your
honors  letters  dated  in  Constantinople
the  5  of  November,  and  accordingly
delivered  that  inclosed  to  the  king  of
this  place,  requiring  of  him,  according  as
you  did  command  us  in  her  Majesties
name,  that  he  would  vouchsafe  to  give
order  to  all  his  Captaines  &  Rajes  that  none  of  them
should  meddle  with  our  English  shippes  comming  or
going  to  or  from  these  parts,  for  that  they  have  order
not  to  passe  by  the  Christian  coast,  but  upon  the  coast  of
Barbary,  and  shewing  him  of  the  charter  given  by  the
Grand  Signior,  requiring  him  in  like  case  that  for  the
better  fulfilling  of  the  amity,  friendship  and  holy  league

263

A.D.

1583.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

betweene  the  Grand  Signior  and  her  Majesty,  he  would
give  us  five  or  six  safe-conducts  for  our  ships,  that
meeting  with  any  of  his  gallies  or  galliots,  they  might  not
meddle  with  them  neither  shoot  at  them  :  who  made  me
answere  he  would  neither  give  me  any  safe  conduct  nor
commission  to  his  men  of  war  not  to  meddle  with  them,
for  that  he  trusted  to  take  some  of  them  this  yere,  and
made  good  account  thereof.  In  like  maner  I  spake  to
the  chiefe  of  the  Janisers  and  the  Levents,  who  made  me
answere,  the  best  hope  they  had  this  yere  was  to  take
some  of  them,  and  although  they  have  the  Grand  Signiors
commandement  we  care  not  therefore :  for  we  will  by
policy,  or  one  meanes  or  other  provoke  them  to  shoot
some  ordinance,  which  if  they  do  but  one  piece,  the  peace
is  broken,  and  they  be  good  prizes.  And  some  of  them
say  further,  we  care  not  for  their  safeconduct,  for  if  they
shew  it  us,  we  will  convey  it  away,  we  are  sure  the  dogs
cannot  be  beleeved  against  us.  The  premisses  con-
sidered, your  honor  is  with  all  speed  to  procure  the
Grand  Signior  his  favorable  letters  directed  to  Hazan,  the
Cady,  Captaines,  Janisers,  &  Levents,  &  another  like  to
Romadan  Bassa,  king  of  Tripolis,  commanding  them  in
no  maner  whatsoever  to  deale  with  our  English  ships
bound  into  those  parts  or  returning  thence  with  their
commodities,  although  they  should  shoot  one  at  another  :
for  when  our  ships  shall  meet  them,  for  that,  as  your
honor  is  advertised,  the  gallies  of  Carthagena,  Florence,
Sicilia  and  Malta  have  made  a  league  to  take  all  our
ships  comming  in  or  going  out  of  the  Grand  Signiors
dominions,  therefore  if  they  meet  with  any  of  these
gallies  of  Alger  or  Tripolis,  thinking  they  be  of  them,
and  not  knowing  them  a  far  off,  they  may  shoot  at  them,
which  if  therefore  they  should  make  them  prizes,  were
against  Gods  lawes,  the  Grand  Signior  his  league,  all
reason  and  conscience,  considering  that  all  the  world  doth
know  that  Marchants  ships  laden  with  marchandise  do
not  seeke  to  fight  with  men  of  warre,  but  contrariwise
to  defend  themselves  from them,  when they  would  do

264

A LETTER TO MUSTAPHA

A.D.
1583.

them  harme.  Wherefore  if  your  honor  do  not  get  out  [H.  i.  174.]
two  letters  of  the  Grand  Signior  as  aforesayd,  &  send
them  hither  with  all  speed  by  some  one  of  your  gentle-
men accompanied  with  a  chaus  of  the  Court,  or  some
other  of  the  Grand  Signiors  servants,  it  is  impossible  that
our  English  ships  can  escape  freely  from  these  or  the
Christians :  for  either  they  must  of  force  go  on  the
Christian  coast,  and  so  fall  into  their  hands,  or  els  on
this  coast,  and  fall  into  the  kings  of  this  towne,  or
Tripolis,  their  hands,  which  if  they  should,  will  never  be
recovered.  And  if  your  honor  cannot  obtaine  this  thing,
I  beseech  your  honor  in  the  behalfe  of  all  the  English
marchants  (who  sent  me  hither  to  follow  such  order  as
your  honor  should  give  me)  to  certifie  her  Majesty,  to
the  end  that  they  may  be  commanded  to  leave  off
traffique,  and  not  to  lose  their  goods,  and  her  poore
subjects  the  Mariners,  And  thus  humbly  taking  my
leave,  I  desist  from  troubling  your  honor.  From  Algier
the  tenth  of  February  1583.

A  letter  of  M.  Harborne  to  Mustapha,  challenging
him  for  his  dishonest  dealing  in  translating  of
three  of  the  Grand  Signior  his  commande-
ments.

Omine  Mustapha,  nescimus  quid  sibi  velit,
cum  nobis  mandata  ad  finem  utilem  con-
cessa  perperam  reddas,  quae  male  scripta,
plus  damni,  quam  utilitatis  adferant  :
quemadmodum  constat  ex  tribus  receptis
mandatis,  in  quibus  summum  aut  prin-
cipale  deest  aut  aufertur.  In  posterum
noli  ita  nobiscum  agere.  Ita  enim  ludibrio  erimus
omnibus  in  nostrum  &  tuum  dedecus.  Cum  nos  mult-
arum  actionum  spem  Turcice  scriptarum  in  tua  prudentia
reponimus,  ita  providere  debes,  ut  non  eveniant  hujus-
modi  mala.  Quocirca  deinceps  cum  mandatum  aut
scriptum  aliquod  accipias,  verbum  ad  verbum  convertatur

265

A.D.
1583-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

in  Latinum  sermonem,  ne  damnum  Insequatur.  Nosti
multos  habere  nos  inimicos  conatibus  nostris  invidentes,
quorum  malitiae  vestrae  est  prudentiae  adversari.  Hi
nostrij  Secretarius  &  minimus  interpres  ex  nostra  parte
dicent  in  tribus  illis  receptis  mandatis  errata.  Ut  deinceps
similes  errores  non  eveniant  precamur.  Ista  emendes,  &
caetera  Serenissimae  regiae  Majestatis  negocia,  uti  decet
vestras  conditionis  hominem,  melius  cures.  Nam  uni-
cuique  suo  officio  strenue  est  laborandum  ut  debito
tramite  omnia  succedant :  quod  spero  te  facturum.
Bene  vale.

The  Pasport  in  Italian  granted  to  Thomas  Shingle-
ton  Englishman,  by  the  king  of  Algier. 1583.

Oi  Assan  Basha  Vicere  &  lochotenente
e  capitan  della  jurisditione  de  Algier
doniamo  e  concediamo  libero  salvo  con-
dutto  a  Thomas  Shingleton  mercadante,
che  possi  con  suo  vassello  e  marinari  de
che  natione  se  siano,  e  mercadantia  di
qual  si  voglia  natione,  andare  &  venire,
e  negotiare,  e  contrattare  liberamente  in  questa  citta  de
AJgier  &  altri  lochi  de  la  nostra  jurisditione  cosi  di
ponente  comi  di  Levante :  &  cosi  anchora  commandiamo
al  capitan  di  mare  di  Algier  &  d'  altri  lochi  de  nostra
jurisditione,  Rais  de  Vasselli  &  capitani  de  Levante,  &
altri  capitani  di  vasselli  tanto  grossi  como  picholi,  si
commanda  a  qual  si  voglia,  che  trovando  il  sopradetto
Thomas  Shingleton  Inglese  nelli  mari  di  Genua,  Francia,
Napoli,  Calabria,  e  Sardigna  con  suo  vassello  e  mercantia,
&  homini  de  che  nationi  si  siano,  non  gli  debba  molestare,
ne  piggliare,  ne  toccare  cosa  de  nessuna  manera  tanto  di
denare,  como  di  qual  si  voglia  altra  robba,  sotto  la  pena
e  disgratia  di  perdir  la  vita  &  la  robba :  Et  per  quanto
havete  a  caro  la  gratia  del  Gran  Signor  nostro  patrone
Soltan  Murates  Ottomano,  lo  lasciarete  andare  per  suo
camino senza dargli nessuno impediment©. Dato in

266

THOMAS SHINGLETON'S PASSPORT  ad.

1583.

Algieri  in  nostro  reggio  Palazzo,  sigillato  del  nostro
regglo  sigillo,  e  fermato  della  gran  ferma,  &  scritto  del
nostro  reggio  Secretario,  il  di  23 de  Jenaro, 1583.

The  same  in  English.

WE  Assan  Bassha  Viceroy  and  lieutenant,  and
captaine  of  the  jurisdiction  of  Algier,  give  and
grant  free  safeconduct  to  Thomas  Shingleton  marchant,
that  with  his  ship  and  mariners,  of  what  nation  soever
they  be,  &  with  his  marchandize  of  what  countrey  soever,
he  may  go  and  come,  and  trade  &  traffique  freely  in  this
city  of  Algier,  and  other  places  of  our  jurisdiction,  as
well  of  the  West  as  of  the  East.  And  in  like  sort
we  further  command  the  captaine  of  the  sea  of  Algier,
and  other  places  of  our  jurisdiction,  the  Reiz  of  vessels
&  captaines  of  the  Levant,  &  other  captaines  of  vessels
aswell  great  as  small,  whosoever  they  be,  we  do  com-
mand them,  that  finding  the  foresayd  Thomas  Shingleton
Englishman  in  the  seas  of  Genua,  France,  Naples,
Calabria,  and  Sardinia,  with  his  ship  and  merchandize,  [II.  i.  175.]
and  men  of  what  nation  soever  they  be,  that  they  molest
them  not,  neither  take  nor  touch  any  kind  of  thing  of
theirs,  neither  money  nor  any  other  kind  of  goods,  under
paine  and  peril  of  loosing  of  their  lives  and  goods :  and
as  you  make  account  of  the  favour  of  the  Grand  Signor
our  lord  Sultan  Murates  Hottoman,  so  see  you  let  him
passe  on  his  way  without  any  maner  of  impediment.
Dated  at  Alger  in  our  kingly  palace,  signed  with  our
princely  Signet,  and  sealed  with  our  great  seale,  and
written  by  our  Secretarie  of  estate,  the  23.  of  Januarie,

[A  letter
267

A.D.
1584.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  letter  written  in  Spanish  by  Sir  Edward  Osborne,
to  the  king  of  Alger,  the  20.  of  July,  1584.
in  the  behalfe  of  certaine  English  captives
there  detained.

Uy  alto  y  poderoso  Rey,

Sea  servida  vostra  alteza.  Como  la
muy  alta  y  potentissima  magestad  del
Gran  Senor  tiene  hecho  articulos  de
privilegios  con  la  Serenissima  Magestad
de  nuestra  Reyna  d'Inglatierra,  para  los
vassallos  della  poder  libremente  yr  y
bolver,  y  tratar  per  mar  y  tierra  en  los  dominios  de  su
potentissima  Magestad,  Como  a  la  clara  paresce  por  los
dichos  articulos,  de  che  embiamos  el  tractado  al  Senor
Juan  Tipton  nuestro  commissario,  para  le  muestrar  a
vostra  Alteza.  Contra  el  tenor  de  los  quales  articulos
por  dos  galeras  de  su  ciudad  de  Alger  ha  sido  hechado
al  fondo  en  la  mar  un  des  nuestros  navios  que  venia
de  Patras,  que  es  en  la  Morea,  cargado  de  corintes  y
otras  mercaderias,  que  alia  se  compraron,  y  las  mas  de
la  gente  del  la  matados  y  ahogados  en  la  mar,  y  el  resto
est  an  detenidos  por  esclavos :  cosa  muy  contraria  a  los
dichos  articulos  y  privilegios.  Que  es  occasion,  que  por
esto  supplicamos  a  vostra  Alteza  muy  humilmente,  que,
pues  que  la  potentissima  magestad  del  Gran  Sennor  es
servida  nos  favorescer  por  los  dichos  articulos,  tambien
sea  servida  vostra  Alteza  assistirnos  en  ellos,  otorgan-
donos  por  vostra  autoridad  su  ajuda  y  favor,  segun  que
esperamos,  para  que  puedan  estar  libres,  y  bolver  para
aca  aquellos  pobres  hombres  ansi  hechos  esclavos,  como
dicho  es.  Y  ansi  mismo,  que  mande  vostra  Alteza  dar
orden  a  los  capitanes,  maestres  y  gente  de  las  galeras,
que  nos  dexen  de  aqui  adelante  hazer  nuestro  trafico  con
seys  naos  cada  anno  para  Turquia  a  los  dominios  del
gran  Sennor  a  paz  y  a  salvo,  por  no  contrariar  a  los
dichos  nuestros  privilegios,  Llevando  cada  una  de  nuestras

268

SIR  EDWARD OSBORNE'S LETTER  a.d.

1584.
dichas  naos  por  se  conoscer  un  salvo  condutto  de  su  alta
&  potentissima  magestad.  Y  con  esta  vostra  tan  senal-
lada  merced  y  favor  que  en  esso  reciberemos,  quedaremos
nosotros  con  grandissima  obligation  a  vostra  Alteza  de
servir  la  por  alio,  segun  que  el  dicho  Sennor  Juan  Tipton,
a  quien  nos  reportamos  de  todo  lo  demas,  mejor  informera
vostra  Alteza :  Cuya  serenissima  persona  y  estado  suppli-
camos  y  pidimos  a  Dios  omnipotente  prospere  y  accres-
cente  con  toda  felicitad  y  honra.  De  la  ciuidad  de
Londres  a  los  veynte  dias  de  Julio  del  mil  y  quinientos
y  ochenta  y  quatro  annos.

Al  servito  de  vuestra  Alteza  por  y  en  nombre
de  todos  los  tratantes  en  Turquia,  lo  el
Mayor  de  Londres,

Edward  Osborne.

The  same  in  English.

Right  high  and  mightie  king.
May  it  please  your  highnesse  to  understand,  that
the  most  high  and  most  mightie  majestic  of  the  Grand
Signor  hath  confirmed  certaine  articles  of  privileges  with
the  most  excellent  majestic  of  our  Queene  of  England,
that  her  subjects  may  freely  go  and  come,  and  traffique
by  sea  and  land  in  the  dominions  of  his  most  mighty
majesty,  as  appeareth  more  at  large  by  ye  said  articles,
whereof  we  have  sent  the  copy  unto  M.  Joh.  Tipton  our
Commissarie,  to  shew  the  same  unto  your  highnes.
Against  the  tenor  of  which  articles,  one  of  our  ships  ^f  English
which  came  from  Patras  which  is  in  Morea,  laden  with  ^^^^  ^^"^/  ^^
corants  and  other  merchandizes  which  were  bought  in  ^w
those  parts,  was  sunke  by  2.  gallies  of  your  citie  of  Alger,
and  the  greatest  number  of  the  men  thereof  were  slain
and  drowned  in  the  sea,  the  residue  being  detained  as
slaves :  An  acte  very  contrary  to  the  meaning  of  the
aforesaid  articles  and  privileges :  which  is  the  occasion
that  by  these  presents  we  beseech  your  highnesse  very
humbly,  that  since  it  hath  pleased  the  most  mightie
majestie  of  the  Grand  Signor  to  favour  us  with  the  sayd

269

A.D.
1584.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

privileges,  it  would  please  your  Highnesse  in  like  maner
to  assist  us  in  the  same,  graunting  us  by  your  authoritie,
your  ayde  and  favour,  according  as  our  hope  is,  that
these  poore  men  so  detained  in  captivitie,  as  is  aforesaid,
may  be  set  at  libertie,  &  returne  into  their  countrey.
And  likewise  that  your  highnesse  would  send  to  give
order  to  the  captaines,  masters  and  people  of  your  gallies,
that  from  hencefoorth  they  would  suffer  us  to  use  our
traffique  with  sixe  ships  yerely  into  Turkie  unto  the
dominions  of  the  Grand  Signor  in  peace  and  safetie,
[II.  i.  176.]  that  they  do  not  withstand  those  our  said  privileges,
every  one  of  our  foresaid  ships  carying  with  them  a
passeport  of  his  most  high  and  most  mightie  majestie
to  be  knowen  by.  And  for  that  your  so  singular  favour
and  curtesie  which  in  so  doing  we  shall  receive,  we  on
our  part  with  all  bounden  duetie  unto  your  highnesse,
will  seeke  to  honour  you  in  that  behalfe,  according  as  the
sayd  master  John  Tipton  (to  whom  wee  referre  our  selves
touching  all  other  circumstances)  shall  more  at  large  en-
forme  your  highnesse,  whose  most  excellent  person  and
estate,  we  pray  and  beseech  almighty  God  to  prosper  and
increase  with  all  felicitie  and  honour.  From  the  Citie
of  London,  the  20.  of  July, 1584.

At  the  service  of  your  highnesse,  for  and  in
the  name  of  our  whole  company  trading
into  Turkie,  I  Maior  of  London,  Edward
Osburne.

The  money  of
Alger.

Notes  concerning  the  trade  of  Alger.

He  money  that  is  coined  in  Alger  is
a  piece  of  gold  called  Asiano,  &
Doublaes,  and  two  Doublaes  make  an
Asiano,  but  the  Doubla  is  most  used,
for  all  things  be  sold  by  Doublaes,
which  Doubla  is  fiftie  of  their  Aspers
there.

The Asper  there is  not  so  good by  halfe & more,
as that in  Constantinople  ; for the  Chekin of  gold of

270

THE TRADE WITH ALGIERS  a.d.

1584.
the Turkes  made  at  Constantinople is at  Alger  worth
an 150. Aspers, and at Constantinople it is but 66.
Aspers.

The  pistolet  and  roials  of  plate  are  most  currant
there.

The  said  pistolet  goeth  for  130.  Aspers  there  :  &
the  piece  of  4.  roials  goeth  for  40.  Aspers,  but  often-
times is  sold  for  more,  as  men  need  them  to  cary  up
into  Turkic.

Their  Asianos  and  Doublaes  are  pieces  of  course
gold,  worth  here  but  40.S.  the  ounce,  so  the  same  is
currant  in  no  place  of  Turkic  out  of  the  kingdom  of
Alger,  neither  the  Aspers,  for  that  they  be  lessc  then
others  be,  for  they  coinc  them  in  Alger.

The  custome  to  the king  is  inward 10.  per  centum.  The  custome.
to the  Turke,  to be paid  of the  commoditie  it sclfe,
or  as  it  shall  be  rated.

There  is  another  custome  to  the  Ermine,  of  one  &
an  halfe  per  centum,  which  is  to  the  Justice  of  the
Christians  :  the  goods  for  this  custome  are  rated  as
they  are  for  the  kings  custome.

Having  paid  custome  inwards,  you  pay  none  out-
wards for  any  commoditie  that  you  doe  lade,  more
then  a  reward  to  the  gate  keepers.

The  waight  there  is  called  a  Cantare  for  fine  wares,  as  The  waights.
mettals  refined,  and  spices  &c.  which  is  here  i2o.li.  subtil.

Mettall  not  refined,  as  lead,  iron,  and  such  grosse
wares,  are  sold  by  a  great  Cantare,  which  is  halfe  as
big  againe  : so  it  is iBo.li.  subtil  of  ours  here.

The measure of corne is by a measure called a  The  measure.
Curtia,  which  is  about  4.  bushels  of  our  measure,  and
corne is plentiful  there  and  good  cheape,  except  when
there  hapneth  a  very  dry  yeere.

The surest lodging for a Christian there is in a  The  surest
Jewes house  : for  if  he have any  hurt,  the Jew and  ^°^&^M  ^
his  goods  shall  make  it  good,  so  the  Jew  taketh  great  ^  ^"  ^^^'
care  of the Christian  and his  goods  that lieth in his
house,  for  feare  of  punishment.

271

A.D.
1584.

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

An  Englishman  called  Thomas  Williams,  which  is
M.  John  Tiptons  man,  lieth  about  trade  of  mer-
chandize in  the  streete  called  The  Soca  of  the  Jewes.

Notes  concerning  the  trade  in  Alexandria.

Lexandria in Egypt is a free  port, and
when a man commeth within the
castles, presently the Ermyn sends
aboord to have one come and speake
with him, to know what goods are
aboord  : and then hee will set guards
aboord the ship to see all the goods
discharged. And then from the Ermin you goe to
This  is  another  the  *  Bye,  onely  for  that  he  will  inquire  newes  of  you,
officer.  2Mdi so from thence to the Consuls  house  where  you

lie.  The  Venetians  have  a  Consul  themselves.  But
all  other  nations  goe  to  the  French  nations  Consul,
who  will  give  you  a  chamber  for  your  selves  apart,  if
you  will  so  have  it.

The  customs  inward  of  all  commodities  are  ten  in
the  hundred,  &  the  custome  is  paid  in  wares  also  that
you  buy  :  for  the  same  wares  in  barter  you  pay  also
ten  in  the  hundred,  at  the  lading  of  the  wares.  But
if  you  sell  for  mony,  you  pay  no  more  custome  but
the  ten  aforesaid,  and  one  and  a  half  in  the  hundred,
which  is  for  the  custome  of  the  goods  you  lade  for
the  sayd  mony,  for  more  custome  you  pay  not.  But
for  all  the  money  you  bring  thither,  you  pay  nothing
for  the  custome  of  the  same.  And  if  you  sell  your
wares  for  mony,  and  with  the  same  money  buy  wares,
you  pay  but  two  in  the  hundred  for  the  custome
thereof.  And  if  you  steale  any  custome,  if  it  be
taken,  you  pay  double  custome  for  that  you  steale.
[II.  i.  177.]  The  weight  of  Alexandria  is  called  Pois  Forforeine,
which  is  a  kintal  in  that  place,  which  maketh  at
Marseils  I09.1i.  of  Marseils  waight,  at  15  ounces  the
pound,  which  is io3.1i.  of  16.  ounces  to  the  li. There

272

Other  smal
customs  you
pay  besides,
which  may  be
at  two  in  the
hundred:  and
for  Consullage
you  pay  two  in
the  hundred..

THE TRADE WITH ALEXANDRIA  ad

1584.
is  another  waight called Pois Gerrin,  which is i5o.li.
of Marseils waight, by which are sold  all things to
eate  : but  spice  is  sold  by  the  former  waight.

From Alexandria to Cairo is three daies journey,  Cairo  three
but you must take  a Tanissarie  with you  : &  to go  ^f"J°Y"^y
up  thither by  water  it  is 8.  dayes  journey. Roials  ^^  dria  b-i  land.
Spaine  are currant  mony  there,  and  are  the  best  money
you  can  cary. And 4. roials are  woorth 13. Medins,
and 2. Medins,  are  3.  Aspers. Pistolets and crownes
of  France  and DoUers  will  goe, but of  all Roials are
best.

Rice  is  not  permitted  to  goe  out  of  the  land,  but
is  kept  for  a  victuall.  But  with  a  present  to  the  Bye
and  Ermine  some  may  passe.

All  sortes  of  spices  be  garbled  after  the  bargaine  is
made,  and  they  be  Moores  which  you  deale  withall,
which  be  good  people  and  not  ill  disposed.  And  after
you  be  searched  &  have  leave  to  passe,  you  must
presently  depart  out  of  the  port,  and  if  you  doe  not,
they  will  search  you  againe.  And  you  must  depart  in
the  day,  for  in  the  night  the  castles  will  not  suffer
you  to  depart.  The  duetie  to  the  Consul  is  2.  in  the
hundred,  for  his  aide,  and  meate  and  drinke  and  all.
And  the  port  of  Alexandria  is  good  when  one  is
within  it  with  good  ankers  and  cables.  Silver  is
better  currant  then  gold  in  Alexandria,  but  both  are
good.

Commonly  the  Caravans  come  thither  in  October
from  Mecca  to  Cairo,  and  from  thence  to  Alexandria,
where  the  merchants  be  that  buy  the  spices,  and
therfore  the  spices  are  brought  most  to  Alexandria,
where  each  Christian  nation  remaineth  at  the  Consuls
houses.  Yet  oftentimes  the  christians  go  up  to  Cairo
to  buy  drugs  &  other  commodities  there,  as  they  see
cause.  And  the  commodities  there  vendible  are  all
sorts  of  kersies,  but  the  most  part  blewes,  and  of
clothes  all  colours  except  mingled  colours  and  blacks.
Pepper  is  usually  sold  for  24.  ducats  the  quintal,
V  273  s

A.D.
1584.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Ginger  for  14.  ducats.  You  must  take  canvas  to  make
bags  to  put  your  commoditie  in  from  Alexandria,  for
there  is  none.  There  is  also  fine  flaxe,  and  good  store
of  Buffe  hides.

A  letter  of  the English  ambassador  to
M. Edward Barton.

Aster  Barton  I  send  you  3.  commande-
ments  in  Turkish,  with  a  copy  thereof
in  English,  to  the  ende  our  ships
might  not  come  in  danger  of  breach
of  league,  if  they  should  shoote  at  the
gallies  of  those  of  Algier,  Tunis,  and
Tripolis  in  the  West  :  which  after  you
have  shewed  the  Bassas,  receive  againe  into  your  hands,
and  see  them  registred,  and  then  deliver  one  of  them
to  our  friend  M.  Tipton,  &  the  like  you  are  to  do
with  the  privilege  which  you  cary  with  you,  and  see
them  jointly  registred  in  the  Cadies  booke,  delivering
the  copy  of  the  said  privilege  sealed  by  the  Cadi,
also  to  the  sayd  our  friend  M.  Tipton,  taking  a  note
of  his  hand  for  the  receipt  thereof,  and  for  deliverie
at  all  times  to  us  or  our  assignes.  And  require  them
in  her  majesties  and  the  grand  Signors  name,  that
they  will  have  our  ships  passing  too  and  fro  under
licence  and  safeconduct  for  recommended  in  friendly
maner.  Touching  your  proceedings  in  Tripolis  with
Romadan,  as  I  have  not  received  any  advise  thereof,
since  your  departure,  so  must  I  leave  you  to  God  and
my  former  direction.  The  ship  patronised  of  Hassan
Rayes,  which  you  wrote  to  be  ours,  prooved  to  be  a
Catalonian.  As  for  ours,  by  report  of  that  Hassan
and  other  Jewes  in  his  ship,  it  was  affirmed  to  be
sold  to  the  Malteses,  which  with  the  rest  you  are  to
receive  there.  And  having  ended  these  affaires  and
registred  our  privilege,  and  these  three  commande-
ments,  in  Tripolis,  Tunis,  and  Alger,  I  pray  you  make

274

A COMMANDMENT FOR ALGIERS  a.d.

1584.
speedy  returne,  and  for  that  which  may  be  recovered,
make  over  the  same  either  to  Richard  Rowed  for
Patrasso  in  Morea,  or  otherwise  hither  to  John  Bate
in  the  surest  maner  you  may,  if  the  registring  of  that
your  privilege  and  these  commandements  will  not  suffer
you  in  person  to  returne  with  the  same.  From  my
Mansion  Rapamat  in  Pera  this  24.  of  June 1584.

The  commaundement  obtained  of  the  Grand
Signior  by  her  Majesties  ambassador  M.  Will.
Hareborne,  for  the  quiet  passing  of  her  sub-
jects to  and  from  his  dominions,  sent  in
An.  1584.  to  the  Viceroyes  of  Algier,  Tunis
&  Tripolis  in  Barbary.

To  our  Beglerbeg  of  Algier.

E  certifie  thee  by  this  our  commandement,
that  the  right  honorable  Will.  Hareborne
ambassador  to  the  Queenes  majestie  of
England  hath  signified  unto  us,  that  the
ships  of  that  countrey  in  their  comming
and  returning  to  and  from  our  Empire,
on  the  one  part  of  the  Seas  have  the
Spaniards,  Florentines,  Sicilians  and  Malteses,  on  the
other  part  our  countreis  committed  to  your  charge :
which  abovesaid  Christians  will  not  quietly  suffer  their
egresse  and  regresse,  into,  and  out  of  our  dominions,  but
doe  take  and  make  the  men  captives,  and  forfeit  the  [II.  i.  178.]
shippes  and  goods,  as  the  last  yeere  the  Malteses  did  one,
which  they  tooke  at  Gerbi,  and  to  that  end  do  continually
lie  in  wait  for  them  to  their  destruction,  whereupon  they
are  constrained  to  stand  to  their  defence  at  any  such  time
as  they  might  meet  with  them.  Wherefore  considering
by  this  means  they  must  stand  upon  their  guard,  when
they  shall  see  any  gallie  afarre  off,  whereby  if  meeting
with  any  of  your  gallies  and  not  knowing  them,  in  their
defence  they  do  shoot  at  them,  and  yet  after  when  they
doe  certainly  know  them,  do  not  shoote  any  more,  but

275

A.D.
1584.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

require  to  passe  peaceably  on  their  voiage,  which  you
would  deny,  saying,  the  peace  is  broken  because  you  have
shot  at  us,  and  so  make  prize  of  them  contrary  to  our
privileges,  and  against  reason :  for  the  preventing  of
which  inconvenience  the  said  ambassador  hath  required
this  our  commaundement.  We  therefore  command  thee,
that  upon  sight  hereof  thou  doe  not  permit  any  such
matter  in  any  sort  whatsoever,  but  suffer  the  sayd
Englishmen  to  passe  in  peace  according  to  the  tenour
of  our  commandement  given,  without  any  disturbance  or
let  by  any  means  upon  the  way,  although  that  meeting
with  thy  gallies,  and  not  knowing  them  afarre  off,  they
taking  them  for  enemies  should  shoote  at  them,  yet  shall
you  not  suffer  them  to  hurt  them  therfore,  but  quietly  to
passe.  Wherefore  looke  thou  that  they  may  have  right,
according  to  our  privilege  given  them,  &  finding  any  that
absenteth  himself,  &  wil  not  obey  this  our  commande-
ment, presently  certify  us  to  our  porch,  that  we  may  give
order  for  his  punishment,  and  with  reverence  give  faith-
full  credite  to  this  our  commandement,  which  having
read,  thou  shalt  againe  returne  it  unto  them  that  present  it.
From  our  palace  in  Constantinople,  the  i.  of  June,  1584.

A  letter  of  the  honorable  M.  Wil.  Hareborne
her  majesties  ambass.  with  the  grand  Signior
to  M.  Tipton,  appointing  him  Consul  of  the
English  in  Algier,  Tunis,  &  Tripolis  of
Barbarie.

Aster  Tipton,  I  have  received  among
others,  yours  of  the  10.  of  November
1584.  by  Soliman  Sorda,  certifying  the
receipt  of  mine  of  the  24.  of  June
1584.  with  the  3.  commandements,  which
not  being  registred,  let  it  now  be  done.
Where  you  write  the  force  of  the  privi-
lege to  be  broken  by  our  ships  in  shooting,  &  therfore
be  lawfully  taken,  you  are  deceived,  for  of  those  taken

276

A LETTER TO JOHN TIPTON  a.d.

^584.
in  them,  hath  the  grand  Signior  now  delivered  us  free,
Wil.  Moore,  and  Rob.  Rawlings,  &  further  promised
the  rest  in  like  case,  wheresoever  they  be,  &  that  here-
after no  violence  shalbe  shewed,  considering  ours  be
merchants  ships  which  go  peaceably  in  their  voiage,  &
were  ignorant  of  the  orders  of  Algier,  neither  knew  afar
off,  whether  they  were  friends  or  the  Christians  gallies
in  league  against  us,  of  whom  they  most  doubted,  who
not  suffring  our  ships  to  come  into  these  parts,  wil
make  prize  of  the  goods  &  captive  the  men,  so  as  they
are  not  to  let  them  come  nigh  them :  &  since  ours
have  not  done  contrary  to  the  articles  of  the  same
privilege,  wherein  is  no  order  for  Algier  prescribed  us,
as  both  by  the  originall  now  sent  us,  &  also  by  the
copy  now  sent  you  from  London  you  may  perceive,
they  according  to  right  are  as  abovesaid  to  be  set  free,
and  their  goods  restored,  which  if  it  be  not  there
accomplished  as  the  grand  Signior  hath  now  commanded
&  most  faithfully  promised,  neither  yet  in  case  of  their
denial,  those  offenders  punished  here,  and  our  injuries
redressed,  we  are  to  demand  our  Congie,  &  command
our  merchants  her  majesties  subjects,  to  end  their  traffike
here,  which  in  our  countrey  commodities  is  prooved
&  found  by  the  grand  Signior  to  be  so  beneficial  to  his
countries  as  we  are  assured  so  well  thereof,  as  also  for
the  honor  which  his  ancestors  never  had  of  friendship
w'  so  mighty  a  prince  as  is  her  majesty,  he  wil  not  but
maintaine  ye  faith  promised  her,  &  the  intercourse  in  due
force.  And  where  you  say  y'  the  grand  Signor  his
letters,  in  the  behalf  of  the  French,  were  no  more  accepted
there,  then  of  a  mean  man,  nor  tooke  no  place,  that  is
not  material  to  us,  our  letters  are  after  another  sort  much
more  effectuall.  For  our  case  &  theirs  be  found  far
different,  in  y'  they  be  not  onely  now  out  of  favour  with
him,  but  also  the  commodities  which  they  bring  hither,  as
suger,  paper,  bracelets,  ropes  of  bast  almonds,  &c.  all
which  may  be  here  wel  spared,  &  we  contrarily  so  wel
esteemed, as he  never denied us any  thing since our

277

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

comming  demanded,  which  neither  their  ambassador,  nor
the  Venetian  could  have  here,  &  therfore  we  rest  per-
swaded,  knowing  the  wisdom  of  the  Beglerbeg,  who  is
advised  by  his  friends  from  hence,  of  this  our  credite
w'^  his  master,  he  wil  so  respect  his  commandements,  as
to  accomplish  ye  tenor  therof  according  to  our  desire.
And  where  you  say  y'  the  Janizers  rule  all  there,  I  know
right  wel  y'  if  things  be  not  done  as  the  grand  Signior
commandeth,  his  lieutenant  must  answer  it.  And  there-
fore I  am  fully  perswaded  if  he  doe  what  he  may  they
dare  not  resist  him,  for  if  they  should,  those  rebels
should  not  be  unpunished  of  ye  grand  Signior.  And
though  they  speake  their  pleasures  among  themselves
there,  yet  they  be  not  so  brutish,  but  they  wel  consider
that  their  master  ye  grand  Signior  may  not  be  gainsaid  or
mocked  of  any.  For  upon  his  word  dependeth  the  life
or  death  even  of  the  chiefest,  as  I  have  seene  since  my
comming  hither.  So  whatsoever  these  Janizaries  say,
they  will  be  better  advised  in  their  deedes  then  to  with-
stand their  Viceroy,  if  he  himselfe  wil  use  his  lawfuU
power,  which  if  hee  doe  not,  hee  cannot  purge  himselfe
here  of  their  evill  proceedings  against  the  grand  Signiors
friends :  for  the  feet  may  not  rule  the  bodie,  but  con-
[II.  i.  179.]  trarywise,  the  head,  the  feete,  and  all  the  rest  of  the
members.  And  for  that  neither  for  feare,  affection  or
otherwise  you  omit  as  a  faithfuU  true  subject  to  her
majestic  to  do  your  dutie,  I  do  by  my  warrant  going
herewith  charge  you,  &  in  her  majesties  name,  to  the
uttermost  to  use  your  good  and  faithful  endevour,  as
becommeth  a  true  subject,  &  in  all  things  that  may
concerne  her  majesties  good  service,  assisting  the  Chaus
with  the  rest  of  our  messengers  in  counsel,  travel,  &
what  els  shall  be  thought  requisite  for  your  good  dis-
charge of  your  dutie.  And  to  ye  end  you  may  boldly
proceed  herein  as  also  for  the  good  opinion  sir  Edward
Osborne  &  the  company  have  of  you,  and  I  no  lesse
perswaded  of  youre  wisedom,  upright  dealing,  &  good
experience  in  those  parts,  do  send  you  herewith  the  grand

278

A LETTER TO JOHN TIPTON  ad

1584.
Signiors  &  our  patents  for  exercising  the  office  of  Consul
there,  in  Tripolis  &  Tunis :  by  vertue  of  which  authoritie
you  may  without  feare  proceed  as  the  office  doeth
chalenge  in  defence  of  our  privilege,  to  redresse  all
injuries  offi-ed  our  nation.  Which  if  you  cannot  get
reformed  there  of  ye  Beglerbies  upon  your  complaint,  I
thereof  advertised,  shal  doe  it  here,  and  to  the  uttermost
maintaine  you  in  al  rightful  causes  whatsoever,  doubt  you
not.  And  hereafter  according  to  your  advise,  I  wil  and
do  give  our  ships  order  not  to  fight  with  any  gallies
of  Alger,  but  to  hoise  out  their  skifFe  and  go  aboord  to
shew  them  their  safeconduct,  &  to  present  the  captain
with  a  garment,  &  you  there  in  such  like  case  are  to  take
order  that  they  do  not  forceably  take  any  thing  from
them.  Nothing  doubting  but  the  Viceroy  (whose
friendship  in  her  majesties  behalfe  I  desire)  will  not
onely  performe  the  same  your  just  request,  &  according
to  right,  restore  to  libertie  our  men  since  the  privilege
taken,  but  also  cause  those  y*^  tooke  &  sunke  our  ships  to
answere  the  value,  which  I  have  set  downe  truly,  and
rather  with  the  least  in  the  Inventorie  translated  into  ^'^^  Inven-
Turkish,  whereof  the  inclosed  is  the  copy  in  English,  ^"l^l/'^^T
which  I  send  to  the  end  you  may  be  the  better  informed  goods  sunke
of  my  demand  by  this  our  Chaus  Mahomet,  with  whom  and  taken  by
in  all  things  you  are  to  conferre  of  matters  expedient,  for  ^^^  ^^//z-?/  of
the  honor  of  her  majesties  country,  &  the  commoditie,  ^^''
and  libertie  of  poore  captives,  which  if  the  Viceroy  do  wel
consider,  according  to  his  wisedom,  as  the  grand  Signior
doeth  thereof,  he  shal  wel  perceive  it  not  onely  a  great
honour  to  his  master  as  aforesaid,  to  continue  this  amitie
with  her  majestic,  but  chiefly  to  the  whole  estate  of  his
kingdom  exceeding  profitable,  which  by  this  means  shall
be  abundantly  served  with  the  chiefest  commodities  they
want,  with  many  other  things  of  more  importance  to  the
grand  Signior  his  contentation,  not  herein  to  be  men-
tioned. For  I  know  the  Viceroies  experienced  wisdom
can  wel  consider  thereof,  in  such  sort  as  he  wil  not  deny
to  accomplish  his  masters  commandement,  &  our  earnest

279

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

request  in  so  smal  a  matter  as  this  we  require,  whereof  I
expect  no  refusall  :  for  thereby  he  shall  increase  his  honor
with  the  grand  Signior,  be  in  credite  with  her  majestie,
be  void  of  trouble  which  hereafter  by  future  suite  against
him  may  happen,  and  his  gallies  free  of  such  doubtful
issue  as  doeth  chance,  fighting  with  our  ships.  Which,  as
it  is  well  knowen  to  all  the  world,  have  so  great  hearts  as
never  cowardly  to  yeeld  to  their  enemies.  And  that
therefore  in  that  respect  (after  the  proverbe,  like  esteeme
of  their  like)  they  are  the  more  of  such  a  valiant  prince
as  is  their  Viceroy  and  his  couragious  souldiers  to  be  in
all  friendship  cherished  and  better  esteemed.  If  the  cap-
taine  Bassa  had  bene  returned  from  Capha,  I  would  in
like  maner  have  procured  his  letters,  which  for  that  he
is  not,  I  doubt  nothing  but  that  the  grand  Signiors  will
suffise.  Thus  commending  your  selfe  and  these  proceed-
ings to  the  almighty  his  merciful  direction,  I  bid  you
most  heartily  wel  to  fare.  From  my  mansion  Rapamat
nigh  Pera,  this  30.  of  March 1585.

Series  vel  registrum  valoris  navium,  bonorum,  &
hominum  per  triremes  Argerienses  ereptorum,
una  cum  captivorum  hominumL  nominibus,
Beglerbego  Argeriensi  Hassano.

I  OAlomon de Plimmouth habuit 36. homines,
O  onerata cum sale, onere trecentorum doliorum,
valore  Florenorum  5600.

2  Elizabetha  de  Garnesey  cum  decem  hominibus
Anglis,  reliquis  Britonibus,  valore  Florenorum  2000.

3  Maria  Martin  de  London  onere  centum  &  triginta
doliorum,  rectore  Thoma  More  cum  triginta  quinque
hominibus,  revertens  de  Patrasso  cum  mandato  Caesareo,
valore  Florenorum 1400.

4  Elizabeth  Stokes  de  London,  rectore  David  Fillie  de
London,  Patrassum  veniens  cum  mandato  Caesareo  :
hujus  praecipuus  valor  erat  in  talleris  numeratis,  quos
habuit  Richardus  Gibben,  qui  adduxit  etiam  Serenissimae

A LETTER TO JOHN TIPTON  a.d.

1584.
Regineae majestatis literas Caesari & oratori. Valor
reliquus  in  mercibus  una  cum  superiori in  talleris  effecit
Florenorum 21500.

5  Nicolaus  de  London,  rectore  Thoma  Forster,  onerata
cum  uvis  siccis,  valore  Florenorum  4800.

In  tempore  Romadan  Beglerbegi  Argirae  spoliatae  &  [ll.  i.  180.]
erepts  naves,  merces,  &  homines.

I  TUdith  de  London,  rectore  ijacobo  Beare,  cum
J  hominibus  24.  valore  Florenorum  3100.
2  Jesus  de  London,  rectore  Andraea  Dier,  cum  21.
hominibus.  Valorem  hujus  &  14.  homines,  reliquis
mortuis,  reddidit  Romadan  Bassa  Tripolitanus  Secretario
legati,  Edwardo  Barten,  valore  Florenorum  9000.

Nomina  hominum  mancipatorum  &  viventium
tunc  temporis,  quando  Caesar  illustrissimus,  &
dominus  Orator  Chauseum  Mahumetem  mis-
erunt  Algiram.

1  Ante  foedus  initum in nave Peter  J  John  Winter.

de  Bristow.  (  Robert  Barton.

I  Rich.  Crawford.

2  In  nave  Swallow  de  London.  <  Anthony  Elvers.

(Wil.  Rainolds.
Post  foedus  initum  in  nave  Britona. James  Yoong.

1  In  nave  Rabnet  de  Hampton.  Thomas  Lisney.

rjohn  Tracie.

2  In  nave  Salomon.  <  Wil.  Griffith.

[V^il.  Cocke.

1  In  nave  Elizabeth.  John  Woodward,  Giles  Naper,
Leonard  James,  Oliver  Dallimore,  and  Richard  Maunsell.

2  In  nave  Maria  Martin.  Thomas  Moore,  Wil.
White,  Wil.  Palmer,  Nich.  Long,  Peter  March,  Rich.
Haslewood,  Wil.  Dewly,  Wil.  Cowel,  John  Franke,
Henry  Parker,  John  Cavendish,  Moises  Robinson,  James
Sotherich,  Henry  Howel,  Nich.  Smith,  Henry  Ragster,
Rich.  Davison,  Rich.  Palmer.

281

A.D.

1584.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

3  In  nave  Elizabeth  Stokes.  David  Fillie,  Walter
Street,  Laurence  Wilkins,  Morgan  Davis,  John  Quinte,
Ambrose  Harison,  John  Peterson,  Tristram  Vois,  Roger
Ribbe.

4  In  nave  Nicholas,  Thomas  Forster  rector  navis  &
ejus  nautae.

To  Assan  Aga,  Eunuch  &  Treasurer  to  Hassan  Bassa
king  of  Alger,  which  Assan  Aga  was  the  sonne
of  Fran.  Rowlie  of  Bristow  merchant,  taken  in
the Swalow.

Received  your  letters  of  Will.  Hamor
gentleman  my  servant  very  thankfully,
aswel  for  the  fervent  faith  that  by  his
report  I  heare  you  have  in  our  lord  Jesus
Christ,  by  whose  onely  merits  and  blood-
shedding,  you  together  with  us  and  all
other  good  Christians  so  truly  beleeving,
shalbe  saved,  as  also  for  your  faithfuU  obedience  like  a  true
subject  to  her  Majestie,  naturally  loving  your  countrey  &
countreymen,  declared  in  your  favourable  furtherance  of
the  said  Wil.  Hamore,  procuring  their  redemption.  Of
which  your  good  &  vertuous  actions,  as  I  rejoice  to
understand,  so  wil  I  impart  the  same  to  your  singuler
commendation,  both  to  our  mistresse  her  Majestie,  &  her
most  honorable  counsellers  the  nobilitie  of  England,  to
whom  assure  your  selfe  the  report  shalbe  very  welcome.
And  now  this  second  time  I  am  inforced  by  duetie  to  God
&  her  majesty,  as  also  by  the  smal  regard  your  master  had
of  the  Grand  Signors  former  commandements,  to  com-
plaine  unto  him,  though  not  so  vehemently  as  I  had
occasion  by  his  most  unworthy  answer.  But  I  hope,  &
the  rather  by  your  means,  he  will  not  contrary  this
second  commandement,  threatning  him,  not  observing
the  same,  losse  of  office  &  life.  The  due  execution
whereof  by  your  vertuous  &  careful  industry  procured,
wil  manifest  to  all  the  world,  especially  to  her  majesty,  &

282

INJUSTICE IN MOREA  ad.

1584.
me  her  ambassador,  your  true  christian  mind  &  English
heart,  intentively  bent  to  Gods  honor,  &  the  libertie  of
the  poore  men,  for  which  I  trust  you  be  ordained  another
Joseph,  to  folow  his  example  in  true  pietie,  in  such
sort  that  notwithstanding  your  body  be  subject  to  Turkish
thraldom,  yet  your  vertuous  mind  free  from  those  vices,
next  under  God  addict  to  ye  good  service  of  your  liege
Lady  &  soveraigne  princes,  her  most  excellent  majesty,
wil  continually  seeke  by  all  good  means  to  manifest  ye
same  in  this  &  the  like  faithful  service  to  your  singuler
commendation,  wherby  both  my  selfe  &  others  in  that
place  having  found  you  in  all  good  offices  faithfully
afFectionated,  may  in  like  case  performe  the  like  towards
you,  when  &  where  you  may  have  occasion  to  use  me  :
which  as  I  for  my  part  do  assuredly  promise,  &  wil  no
lesse  faithfully  performe  :  so  accordingly  I  expect  herein,
and  hereafter  the  like  of  you,  whom  most  heartily  saluted
I  commend  to  the  divine  tuition  and  holy  direction.
From  my  house  Rapamat,  this  28.  of  June 1586.

Your  loving  and  good  friend  her  Majesties
Ambassador  with  the  Grand  Signor,

Will.  Hareborne.

A  petition exhibited to  the  Viceroy  for  reforma-  [il.  i.  181.]
tion of  sundry  injuries offered  our  nation in
Morea,  as  also  for  sundry  demaundes  needefull
for  the  establishing  of  the  traffike  in  those  parts.

Irst  that  our  people  may  be  freed  of
such  wonted  molestation,  as  the  Janisers
of  Patrasso  have  alwayes  from  time  to
time  offered  them,  not  regarding  the
kings  commandements  to  the  contrary.
That  they  be  removed  and  called  away
from  thence,  and  none  other  remaine
in  their  place.

2  That where heretofore the kings commandements
have  beene  graunted  to  ours,  that  no  person  whatsoever

283

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

shall  forceably  take  from  them  any  of  their  commodities,
otherwise  then  paying  them  before  the  deliverie  thereof,
for  the  same  in  readie  money,  at  such  price  as  they  them-
selves will,  and  sell  ordinarily  to  others,  as  also  that  no
officer  whatsoever,  of  the  kings  or  any  other,  shall  force
them  to  buy  any  commodities  of  that  countrey,  otherwise
then  the  needfull,  at  their  owne  will  and  pleasure,  that  the
said  commandements  not  heretofore  obeyed  may  be
renued  with  such  straight  charge  for  the  execution  of
the  same,  as  is  requisite  for  their  due  effect.

3  That  whereas  sundry  exactions  and  oppressions  be
offered  ours  by  such  Byes,  Sanjacbies,  justices  and  Cadies,
Janizaries,  Capagies,  and  others,  officers  of  the  kings
comming  downe  into  those  parts,  who  finding  there
resident  no  other  nation  but  only  ours,  will  under  the
name  of  presents  forceable  take  from  them  what  they
please :  We  do  require  to  obvent  these  harmes,  it  may  be
specified  by  a  commandement  from  the  king  to  which
of  such  his  officers,  presents  may  be  given,  and  their
sundry  values,  whereby  both  they  and  ours  may  rest
contented,  severely  prohibiting  in  the  said  commande-
ment, that  they  take  no  more  then  that  appointed  them,
and  that  no  other  officers  but  those  onely  specified  in  that
commaundement,  doe  forcibly  require  of  them  any  thing
whatsoever.

4  That  the  Nadir  and  Customer  of  the  port,  having
permitted  our  ship  to  lade,  doe  not  after  demand  of  the
marchants  any  other  then  the  outward  custome  due  to
the  king  for  the  same  goods.  And  being  so  laden,  may
by  them  and  the  Cadie  with  other  their  inferiour  officers
be  visited,  requiring  for  the  visiting  no  more  then
formerly  they  were  accustomed  to  pay  at  their  first
comming.  After  which  the  said  ship  to  depart  at  the
Consuls  pleasure,  without  any  molestation  of  them,  or
any  other  officer  whatsoever.

5  That  Mahomet  Chaus,  sometime  Nadir  of  Lepanto,
and  Azon  Agon  his  substitute  being  with  him  may  be
severely  punished to  the example of  others,  for  often

A COMMANDMENT TO PATRAS  ad.

1584.
and  unjustly  molesting  our  nation,  contrarie  to  the  kings
commandement,  which  they  disdainefuUy  contemned,  as
also that  the  said Mahomet  restore  and  pay  unto  ours
thirtie  for 300 sackes of currants nowe taken

forcibly  out  of  a  barke,  comming  thither  from  the  hither
partes  of  Morea,  to  pay  the  king  his  custome,  and  that
from  hence  forth,  neither  the  said  Mahomet,  Azon  Agon,
nor  any  other  officer  or  person  whatsoever  doe  hinder  or
trouble  any  of  ours  going  thither  or  to  any  other  place
about  ther  aifaires.

6  That  whereas  certaine  Jewes  of  Lepanto  owing
money  to  our  marchants  for  commodities  solde  them,
have  not  hitherto  satisfied  them,  notwithstanding  ours
had  from  the  king  a  commandement  for  the  recovery  of
the  same  debts,  but  fled  and  absented  themselves  out  of
the  Towne  at  the  comming  of  the  same,  another  more
forcible  commaundement  may  be  graunted  ours,  that  for
nonpaiment,  whatsoever  may  be  found  of  theirs  in  goods,
houses,  vineyards,  or  any  other  thing,  may  be  sold,  and
ours  satisfied  of  their  said  debt,  according  to  equitie  and
reason.

A  commandement  to  Patrasso  in  Morea.

WHen  this  commandement  shall  come  unto  you,
know  you,  that  the  Consull  of  the  English  Nation
in  our  port  of  Patrasso,  hath  given  us  to  understand,  that
formerly  we  granted  him  a  commandement  that  having
paied  once  custome  for  the  currants  bought  to  lade  in
their  ships,  they  shall  not  pay  it  againe :  according  to
which  they  bringing  it  to  the  port  of  Petrasso,  informing
thereof  Mahomet  the  Nadir  of  Lepanto,  he  contrary  to
the  tenor  thereof  and  former  order,  doth  againe  take
another  custome  of  him,  and  requiring  him  to  know  why
he  so  did  contrary  to  our  commandement,  he  answered
us,  he  tooke  it  not  for  custome,  but  for  a  present.
Moreover  the  sayd  Consull  certified  us  how  that  the  said
Nadir  contrary  to  ancient  custome  doth  not  take  for  the
kings  right  as  he  ought  currents,  but  will have  of  the

285

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

poore  men  money  at  his  pleasure,  and  therewith  buyeth
currents  at  a  very  low  price,  which  after  he  doth  forcibly
sell  to  us  at  a  much  higher  price,  saying  it  is  remainder
of  the  goods  of  the  king,  and  by  this  meanes  doth  hurt
the  poore  men  and  do  them  wrong.  Wherefore  I  com-
[II.  i.  182.]  mand  you  by  this  my  commandement,  that  you  looke  to
this  matter  betweene  this  ConsuU,  the  Nadir,  and  this
people,  and  do  therein  equally  according  to  right.  And
see  that  our  commandement  in  this  matter  be  observed
in  such  sort,  as  they  having  once  in  the  port  paied  full
custome,  do  not  pay  it  againe,  neither  that  this  Nadir
do  take  any  more  money  of  them  by  the  way  of  present,
for  that  therein  it  is  most  certaine  he  doth  them  injurie
contrary  to  the  Canon.  And  if  with  you  shall  be  found
to  the  value  of  one  Asper  taken  heretofore  wrongfully  of
them,  see  it  presently  restored  to  them,  without  any
default.  And  from  hencefoorth  see  that  he  doe  neither
him  nor  his  people  wrong,  but  that  he  deale  with  them
in  all  things  according  to  our  Canon,  that  the  ConsuU
and  his  hereafter  have  no  occasion  any  more  to  complaine
here  in  our  Court,  and  that  the  Nadir  proceed  in  gather-
ing corants  of  the  people  after  the  old  order  and  not
otherwise.  This  know  you  for  certaine,  and  give  credit
to  this  my  commaundement,  which  having  read  deliver
againe  into  the  Consuls  handes.  From  Constantinople
the  yeere  of  Mahomet  993.

A  commandement  for  Ohio.

VObis,  Beg  &  Cadi  &  Ermini,  qui  estis  in  Chio,
significamus :  quod  serenissimae  Reginae  Majestatis
Angliae  orator,  qui  est  in  excelsa  porta  per  literas  signifi-
cavit  nobis,  quod  ex  navibus  Anglicis  una  navis  venisset
ad  portum  Chio,  &  illinc  Constantinopolim  recto  cursu
voluisset  venire,  &  contra  privilegium  detinuistis,  &  non
sivistis  venire.  Haec  praedictus  orator  significavit  nobis :
&  petivit  a  nobis  in  hoc  negocio  hoc  mandatum,  ut
naves  Anglicae  veniant  &  redeant  in  nostras  ditiones
Caesareas. Privilegium  datum  &  concessum  est  ex  parte

286

COMMANDMENT FOR BALIABADRAM  ad.

1584.
Serenitatis  Caesareae  nostras  :  &  hujus  privilegii  copia  data
est  sub  insigni  nostro :  Et  contra  nostrum  privilegium
Caesareum  quod  ita  agitur,  quae  est  causa  ?  Quando  cum
hoc  mandate  nostro  homines  illorum  ad  vos  venerint  ex
prasdicta  Anglia,  si  navis  venerit  ad  portum  vestrum,  &
si  res  &  merces  ex  nave  exemerint,  &  vendiderint,  &
tricessimam  secundam  partem  reddiderint,  &  res  quae
manserint  Constantinopolim  auferre  velint,  patiantur :  Et
si  aliquis  contra  privilegium  &  articulos  ejus  aliquid
ageret,  non  sinatis,  nee  vos  facite :  &  impediri  non  sinatis
eos,  ut  recta  Constantinopolim  venientes  in  suis  negotia-
tionibus  sine  molestia  esse  possint.  Et  quicunque  contra
hoc  mandatum  &  privilegium  nostrum  aliquid  fecerit,
nobis  significate.  Huic  mandato  nostro  &  insigni  fidem
adhibete. In  principio  mensis  Decembris.

A  commandement  for  Baliabadram.

SErenissimae  Reginas  Angliae  orator  literis  supplicatoriis
in  porta  nostra  fulgida  significavit,  quod  Baliabadram
venientes  mercatores,  naves  &  homines  eorum,  contra
privilegium  impedirentur  &  molestarentur.  Inter  nos
enim  &  Reginam  cum  fcedus  sit,  ut  mercatores,  homines
&  naves  eorum  contra  privilegium  impediantur  aut
molestentur,  nullo  unquam  pacto  concedimus.  Mandamus
igitur,  ut  literae  nostrae  Caesareae,  quam  primum  tibi  ex-
hibitae  fuerint,  has  in  persona  propria  cures,  secundum
quod  convenit,  videasque  ex  Anglia  Baliabadram  cum
mercibus  venientibus  mercatoribus,  &  alias  ob  causas
venientibus  hominibus,  in  summa  Angliensibus  &  navibus
eorum,  &  in  navibus  existentibus  mercibus  &  rebus
contra  foedus  &  privilegium,  injuria,  vis  aut  damnum
non  inferatur :  sed,  ut  convenit,  defendas,  ut  naves,
mercatores,  &  homines,  nostri  velut  proprii  subditi,
liberi  ab  omni  vi  &  injuria  permaneant,  &  negotiis
suis  incumbant.  Et  quod  iUius  loci  Janisseri  illos
impedirent,  significatum  est :  ut  illi  illis  nocumento
sint  nullo  modo  concedimus.  Juxta  tenorem  mandati
hujus illos conimonefacias, ut nihil quicquam contra

287

s<

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

foedus  faciant,  ita  ut  nunquam  hujusmodi  querela  hue
veniatj  quia  quicquid  accident,  a  te  expostulabimus.
Negligentiam  postponito,  &  insigni  Caesareo  fidem  ad-
hibeto.

A  commaundement  for  Egypt.

'Cito  quod  orator  Reginae  Angliae  in  porta  mea  existens
'  libellum  supplicem  ad  portam  nostram  mittens  signi-
ficavit,  quod  cum  ex  JEgypto  Consul  eorum  abesset,
Consul  illic  Gallicus  existens,  Vento  nuncupatus,  quamvis
ante  base  tempora  ne  manus  in  Anglos  mitteret  mandatum
nostrum  fuerit  datum,  Angli  sub  vexillo  &  tutela  nostra
sunt  inquiens,  mandatum  Caesareum  vili  existimans,  non
cessavit  perturbare  Anglos.  Quare  scito  quod  Reginae
Angliae  privilegium  nostrum  est  datum.  Juxta  illud
privilegium  Anglis  nulla  ratione  Consul  Gallicus  Con-
sulatum  agat,  neve  manus  immittat,  mandatum  nostrum
postulavit  ejus  legatus.  Quare  mando,  ut  contra  privi-
legium nostrum  Consul  Gallicus  Anglis  injuriam  non
inferat,  neve  Consulatum  agat.  Judici  ^gypti  literae
nostras  sunt  datae  :  banc  ob  causam  mando  tibi  quoque,
ut  juxta  illud  mandatum  nostrum,  contra  privilegium
nostrum  Anglis  Galium  Consulatum  agere  nunquam
patiare. Sic  scito,  &  insigni  meo  fidem  adhibeto.

[11.  i.  183.]  A  commaundement  of  the  Grand  Signior  to  the
Cadie  or  Judge  of  Alexandria.

THe  Embassadour  for  the  Queenes  most  excellent
Majestie  of  England  certified  us  howe  that  at  the
death  of  one  of  their  marchants  in  Alexandria  called
Edward  Chamberlaine,  the  French  Consul  Vento  sealing
up  his  fondego  and  chamber,  tooke  under  his  seale  al
his  goods  and  marchandise  into  his  power,  and  required
our  commandement  that  all  the  goods  might  be  restored
againe  according  to  justice  unto  the  Englishmen  :  where-
fore we  commaund  you  that  having  received  this  our
commandement,  you  assemble  those  of  the  one  part  and
of  the  other  together,  and  if  it  be  not  passed  five  yeeres,  if

A COMMANDMENT FOR ALEXANDRIA  ad.

1584.

you  have  not  looked  to  it  heretofore,  now  carefully  looke
to  it,  &  if  it  be  according  to  their  Arz  or  certificate
presented  unto  us,  that  the  foresaid  French  Consull  Vento
hath  wrongfully  taken  into  his  power  the  goods  of  the
deceased  English  marchant  under  his  seale,  that  then  you
cause  him  to  restore  all  the  said  goods  and  marchandise
sealed  by  him,  and  make  good  that  which  is  thereof
wanting  unto  the  English  marchants  :  doe  in  this  matter
according  to  justice,  and  credite  this  our  seale.

A  commandement  to  the  Bassa  of  Alexandria.

THe  Embassadour  for  the  Queenes  most  excellent
Majesty  of  England  by  supplication  certified  us,
how  that  notwithstanding  our  privilege  granted  them
to  make  Consuls  in  al  parts  of  our  dominions  to  governe
their  nation  according  to  their  owne  custome  &  law,  to
defend  them  against  all  wrongs  and  injuries  whatsoever  :
yet  that  the  French  Consull  affirming  to  thee  that  art
Bassa,  that  they  were  under  his  banner,  and  that  he
should  governe  them,  and  oversee  their  businesse,  and
having  got  a  new  privilege,  mentioning  therein  the
English  men  to  be  under  his  banner,  did  by  all  meanes
molest  &  trouble  them,  insomuch  that  their  Consull
oppressed  with  many  injuries  fled  away,  and  that  thou
which  art  Beglerbie  didst  maintaine  the  French  Consul
herein  ;  whereupon  the  Embassadour  required  our  com-
mandement, that  they  might  have  justice  for  these
injuries  :  wherefore  we  command  thee  that  having  re-
ceived this  our  commandement,  you  examine  diligently
that  his  privilege,  and  send  the  copie  thereof  hither,  and
if  it  be  found  that  the  French  Consull  Vento  hath  by
subtiltie  got  the  aforesaid  privilege  written,  that  you  then
see  him  punished,  and  suffer  not  hereafter  the  French  or
Venetian  Consuls  to  intermeddle  with  their  businesse.
Obey  this  our  commaundement,  and  give  credite  to
the  seale.

[A  commaundement
V  280  T

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

A  commaundement  to  the  Byes,  and  Cadies  of
Metelin  and  Rhodes,  and  to  all  the  Cadies
and  Byes  in  the  way  to  Constantinople.

TO  the  Sanjakbies  of  Rhodes  and  Metelin,  to  the
Sanjacbies  bordering  on  the  sea-coast,  and  to  the
Cadies  in  Rhodes  and  Metelin,  and  to  the  Ermins  in
the  other  ports  and  coastes.  This  commaundement
comming  to  you,  know  that  the  Embassadour  of  England
required  of  us  our  commaundement  that  their  ships
comming  to  Chio,  &  from  thence  to  Constantinople,  no
man  should  hurt  them  or  offer  any  violence,  either  in
the  way  on  the  sea  or  on  the  land,  or  in  the  portes.  I
have  commaunded,  that  their  ships  comming  to  any  of
the  said  places  or  ports  with  marchandise,  if  they  them-
selves will,  they  may  sell  their  commodities,  &  as  much,
and  as  litle  as  they  will,  and  if  it  be  in  a  place  where
custome  was  not  woont  to  be  taken,  having  taken  the
custome  due  by  the  olde  Canon  you  suifer  them  not  to
bee  injuried,  either  in  the  way,  portes,  or  other  places,
but  that  they  may  come  in  quietnesse  to  Constantinople,
and  certifie  us  of  those  that  be  disobedient  to  our
commaundement,  and  give  credite  to  our  seale.  And
having  read  this  our  commandement,  give  it  to  them
againe.

A  commaundement  for  Aleppo.

WHen  my  letters  shal  come  unto  you,  know  that
the  Queene  of  England  her  Embassador  by  sup-
plication certified  how  that  before  this  time  we  had  given
our  commandement  that  the  summe  of  70  ducats,  &
other  marchandize  belonging  to  one  William  Barret  in
Aleppo,  now  dead,  saying  he  was  a  Venetian,  should  be
given  to  the  Venetians.  And  if  they  did  find  that  he
was  not  a  Venetian,  my  will  was  that  they  should  send
all  his  goods  and  marchandize  to  our  port  into  my
treasurie.  But  because  that  man  was  an  Englishman,  the
Embassadour  required  that  the  sayde  goods  might  not  be

290

A COMMANDMENT FOR  ALEPPO  ad.

1584-
diminished,  but  that  they  might  be  restored  to  one  of
their  Englishmen.  This  businesse  was  signified  unto
us  in  the  nine  hundred  ninety  &  fourth  yere  of  Mahomet,
and  in  the  moneth  of  May  the  10  day.  This  businesse  [II.  i.  i8z
pertaineth  to  the  Englishmen,  who  have  in  their  handes
our  privilege,  according  to  which  privilege  being  in  their
hands  let  this  matter  be  done.  Against  this  privilege
do  nothing,  aske  nothing  of  them,  but  restore  to  every
one  his  goods.  And  I  command  that  when  my  com-
mandement  shall  come  unto  you,  you  doe  according  to  it.
And  if  it  be  according  as  the  Ambassadour  certified,  and
that  they  have  the  privilege,  peruse  the  same,  looke  that
nothing  be  committed  against  it  and  our  league,  and  let
none  trouble  them  contrarie  to  it,  restore  them  their
goods  according  to  justice,  and  take  heede  diligently  in
this  businesse  :  if  another  strange  marchant  be  dead,  and
his  goods  and  marchandize  be  taken,  if  he  be  neither
Venetian,  nor  Englishman,  let  not  his  goods  perish
among  you.  Before  this  time  one  of  our  Chauses  called
Cerkes  Mahomet  chaus  was  sent  with  our  commaunde-
ment  to  sende  the  money  and  marchandize  of  a  dead
marchant  to  our  port,  and  hitherto  no  letters  or  newes  is
come  of  this  matter,  for  which  you  shall  be  punished.
Wherefore  beware,  and  if  he  that  is  dead  be  neither
Venetian  nor  Englishman  in  veritie,  doe  not  loose  the
goods  of  the  said  dead  marchant,  under  the  name  of  a
Venetian  or  Englishman,  doe  not  to  the  discommoditie
of  my  treasurie,  for  after  it  will  be  hard  to  recover  it.

[The  voyage
291

A.D.
1583.

Man  doth
purpose,  and
God  doth
dispose.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  voyage  made  to  Tripolis  in  Barbaric,  in
the  yeere  1583.  with  a  ship  called  the  Jesus,
wherein  the  adventures  and  distresses  of  some
Englishmen  are  truely  reported,  and  other
necessary  circumstances  observed.  Written  by
Thomas  Sanders.

iHis  voyage  was  set  foorth  by  the  right
worshipfuU  sir  Edward  Osborne  knight,
chiefe  merchant  of  all  the  Turkish  com-
pany, and  one  master  Richard  Staper,  the
ship  being  of  the  burden  of  one  hundred
tunnes,  called  the  Jesus,  she  was  builded
at  Farmne  a  river  by  Portsmouth.  The
owners  were  master  Thomas  Thomson,  Nicholas  Carnaby,
and  John  Oilman.  The  master  was  one  Aches  Hellier  of
Black-wall,  and  his  Mate  was  one  Richard  Morris  of  that
place  :  their  Pilot  was  one  Anthonie  Jerado  a  Frenchman,
of  the  province  of  Marseils  :  the  purser  was  one  William
Thomson  our  owners  sonne  :  the  merchants  factors  were
Romane  Sonnings  a  Frenchman,  and  Richard  Skegs
servant  unto  the  said  master  Staper.  The  owners  were
bound  unto  the  merchants  by  charter  partie  thereupon,  in
one  thousand  markes,  that  the  said  ship  by  Gods  per-
mission should  goe  for  Tripolis  in  Barbarie,  that  is  to  say,
first  from  Portsmouth  to  Newhaven  in  Normandie,  from
thence  to  S.  Lucar,  otherwise  called  Saint  Lucas  in
Andeluzia,  and  from  thence  to  Tripolie,  which  is  in  the
East  part  of  Africa,  and  so  to  returne  unto  London.  But
here  ought  every  man  to  note  and  consider  the  workes  of
our  God,  that  many  times  what  man  doth  determine  God
doth  disappoint.  The  said  master  having  some  occasion
to  goe  to  Farmne,  tooke  with  him  the  Pilot  and  the
Purser,  and  returning  againe  by  meanes  of  a  perrie  of
winde,  the  boat  wherein  they  were,  was  drowned,  with
the  said  master,  the  purser,  and  all  the  company  :  onely
the  said  Pilot  by  experience  in  swimming  saved  himselfe  :

292

THOMAS SANDERS  a.d.

1584
these  were  the  beginnings  of  our  sorrowes. After  which  the
said  masters  mate  would  not  proceed  in  that  voiage,  and
the  owner  hearing  of  this  misfortune,  and  the  unwilling-
nesse  of  the  masters  mate,  did  send  downe  one  Richard  ^  ^^"^  master
Deimond,  and shipped  him  for  master, who  did  chuse  '^"■°^^^-
for his Mate one  Andrew Dier,  and so  the  said ship
departed  on  her  voiage  accordingly :  that  is  to  say,  about
the 16 of  October, in  An. 1583. she  made  saile from
Portsmouth, and the 18 day  then  next following she
arrived  at  Newhaven,  where  our  saide  last  master  Dei-  "^^^  ^^'"^ _
mond by a surfeit died. The factors then appointed  ^^^  ^^
the said Andrew Dier, being then masters mate, to
be their master for that  voiage, who did chuse to
be his Mates the two quarter masters of  the same
ship, to wit, Peter Austine, and Shillabey, and for
Purser was shipped one Richard Burges. Afterward
about  the  8  day  of  November  we  made  saile  forthward,
and  by  force  of  weather  we  were  driven  backe  againe  into
Portesmouth,  where  we  renued  our  victuals  and other
necessaries,  and  then  the  winde  came  faire. About  the
29  day  then  next  following  we  departed  thence,  and  the
first  day  of  December  by  meanes  of  a contrarie  winde,
wee  were  driven  to  Plimmouth. The  18  day  then  next
following, we made foorthward  againe, &  by force of
weather  we  were  driven  to  Falmouth,  where  we  remained
untill  the  first  day  of  January :  at  which  time  the  winde
comming  faire,  we  departed  thence, and  about the 20
day  of  the  said  moneth  we arrived  safely  at  S.  Lucar.
And  about  the  9  day  of  March  next  following,  we  made
saile from thence, and about  the 18 day of  the same
moneth  we  came  to  Tripolis  in  Barbarie,  where  we  were  ^-^^  ■^^^^^
verie  well  intertained  by  the  king  of  that  countrey,  and  rj^^^^.i-^
also  of  the  commons. The  commodities  of  that  place  are
sweete  oiles  :  the  king  there  is  a  merchant,  and  the  rather
(willing to preferre himselfe  before his commons) re-
quested our said factors to traffique with him, and
promised  them  that  if  they  would  take  his  oiles  at  his  [ii.  i.  185.]
owne  price,  they  should  pay  no  maner  of  custome,  and

293

A.D.

Another  ship
of  Bristoio
came  to
Trtpolis.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

they  tooke  of  him  certaine  tunnes  of  oile :  and  after-
warde  perceiving  that  they  might  have  farre  better  cheape
notwithstanding  the  custome  free,  they  desired  the  king
to  licence  them  to  take  the  oiles  at  the  pleasure  of  his
commons,  for  that  his  price  did  exceede  theirs  :  where-
unto  the  king  would  not  agree,  but  was  rather  contented
to  abate  his  price,  insomuch  that  the  factors  bought  all
their  oyles  of  the  king  custome  free,  and  so  laded  the
same  aboord.

In  the  meane  time  there  came  to  that  place  one  Miles
Dickenson  in  a  ship  of  Bristow,  who  together  with  our
said  Factors  tooke  a  house  to  themselves  there.  Our
French  Factor  Romane  Sonnings  desired  to  buy  a  com-
modity in  the  market,  and  wanting  money,  desired  the
saide  Miles  Dickenson  to  lend  him  an  hundred  Chikinoes
untill  he  came  to  his  lodging,  which  he  did,  and  after-
ward the  same  Sonnings  mette  with  Miles  Dickenson  in
the  streete,  and  delivered  him  money  bound  up  in  a
napkin :  saying,  master  Dickenson  there  is  the  money
that  I  borowed  of  you,  and  so  thanked  him  for  the
same :  hee  doubted  nothing  lesse  then  falshoode,  which
is  seldome  knowne  among  marchants,  and  specially  being
together  in  one  house,  and  is  the  more  detestable  be-
tweene  Christians,  they  being  in  Turkie  among  the
heathen.  The  said  Dickenson  did  not  tell  the  money
presently,  untill  he  came  to  his  lodging,  and  then  finding
nine  Chikinoes  lacking  of  his  hundred,  which  was  about
three  pounds,  for  that  every  Chikino  is  woorth  seven
shillings  of  English  money,  he  came  to  the  sayde  Romane
Sonnings  and  delivered  him  his  handkerchiefe,  and  asked
him  howe  many  Chikinoes  hee  had  delivered  him  }
Sonnings  answered,  an  hundred :  Dickenson  said  no :
and  so  they  protested  and  swore  on  both  parts.  But
in  the  end  the  sayd  Romane  Sonnings  did  sweare  deepely
with  detestable  othes  and  curses,  and  prayed  God  that
hee  might  shewe  his  workes  on  him,  that  other  might
take  ensample  thereby,  and  that  he  might  be  hanged  like
a  dogge,  and  never  come  into  England  againe,  if  he  did

294

THOMAS SANDERS  ad.

1584.
not  deliver  unto  the  sayde  Dickenson  an  hundred  Chi-
kinoes.  And  here  beholde  a  notable  example  of  all
blasphemers,  cursers  and  swearers,  how  God  rewarded
him  accordingly :  for  many  times  it  commeth  to  passe,
that  God  sheweth  his  miracles  upon  such  monstrous
blasphemers,  to  the  ensample  of  others,  as  nowe  hereafter
you  shall  heare  what  befell  to  this  Romane  Sonnings.

There  was  a  man  in  the  said  towne  a  pledge,  whose
name  was  Patrone  Norado,  who  the  yere  before  had  done
this  Sonnings  some  pleasure  there.  The  foresaid  Patrone
Norado  was  indebted  unto  a  Turke  of  that  towne,  in  the
summe  of  foure  hundred  and  fiftie  crownes,  for  certain
goods  sent  by  him  into  Christendome  in  a  ship  of  his
owne,  and  by  his  owne  brother,  and  himselfe  remained
in  Tripolis  as  pledge  untill  his  said  brothers  returne  :
and,  as  the  report  went  there,  after  his  brothers  arrivall
into  Christendome,  he  came  among  lewde  companie,  and
lost  his  brothers  said  ship  and  goods  at  dice,  and  never
returned  unto  him  againe.

The said Patrone Norado being voyde  of  all  hope,  A  conspirade
and finding now opportunitie,  consulted with the  said  P^^'^^"^'^  h
Sonnings  for  to  swimme  a  seaboorde  the  Islands,  and  the  p^^^g^  f^
ship  being  then  out  of  danger,  should  take  him  in  (as  deceive  a
after was confessed) and so to goe to Tolon in the  Turkish  mar-
province of  Marseilis with this Patrone Norado, and  <:hant  of  \^o
there  to  take  in  his  lading.  ^'"'"^"'•

The  shippe  being  readie  the  first  day  of  May,  and
having  her  sayles  all  aboorde,  our  sayde  Factors  did  take
their  leave  of  the  king,  who  very  courteously  bidde  them
farwell,  and  when  they  came  aboorde,  they  commaunded
the  Master  and  the  companie  hastily  to  get  out  the  ship :
the  Master  answered  that  it  was  unpossible,  for  that  the
winde  was  contrary  and  overblowed.  And  he  required
us  upon  forfeiture  of  our  bandes,  that  we  should  doe
our  indevour  to  get  her  foorth.  Then  went  wee  to
warpe  out  the  shippe,  and  presently  the  king  sent  a  boate
aboord  of  us,  with  three  men  in  her,  commaunding  the
saide  Sonnings  to  come  a  shoare :  at  whose  comming,  the

295

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

king  demaunded  of  him  custome  for  the  oyles : Sonnings

answered  him  that  his  highnesse  had  promised  to  deliver

them custome free. But notwithstanding the king

weighed not his said  promise, and as an infidell that

hath  not  the  feare  of  God  before  his  eyes,  nor  regarde

of  his  worde,  albeit  hee  was  a  king,  hee  caused  the  sayde

Sonnings to pay the custome to  the uttermost penie.

And  afterwarde  willed  him  to  make  haste  away,  saying,

that  the  Janizaries  would  have  the  oyle  ashoare  againe.

These  Janizaries  are  souldiers there  under  the  great

Turke,  and  their  power  is  above  the  Kings. And  so  the

saide  Factor departed from the king,  and  came  to  the

waterside,  and  called  for a  boate  to  come  aboorde,  and

The  beginning  he  brought  with  him  the  foresaid  Patrone  Norado. The

oftketr  companie inquisitive to know what man that was,

troubles,  and o  •  j^i^i  u*  ^

occasion  of  all  ^onnmgs  answered,  that  he  was  his  countreyman,  a
their  miserie.  passenger  :  I  pray  God  said  the  companie,  that  we  come
not  into  trouble  by  this  man.  Then  said  Sonnings
angerly,  what  have  you  to  do  with  any  matters  of  mine  }
if  any  thing  chance  otherwise  then  well,  I  must  answere
for  all.

Nowe  the  Turke  unto  whom  this  Patrone  Norado  was
[II.  i.  186.]  indebted,  missing  him  (supposed  him  to  be  aboorde  of
our  shippe)  presently  went  unto  the  King,  and  tolde  him
that  hee  thought  that  his  pledge  Patrone  Norado  was
aboord  of  the  English  ship,  whereupon  the  King  presently
sent  a  boat  aboord  of  us,  with  three  men  in  her,  com-
manding the  said  Sonnings  to  come  a  shoare,  and  not
speaking  any  thing  as  touching  the  man,  he  saide  that
hee  would  come  presently  in  his  owne  boate,  but  assoone
as  they  were  gone,  he  willed  us  to  warpe  foorth  the  ship,
and  saide  that  he  would  see  the  knaves  hanged  before
he  would  goe  a  shoare.  And  when  the  king  sawe  that
he  came  not  a  shoare,  but  still  continued  warping  away
the  shippe,  he  straight  commaunded  the  gunner  of  the
bulwarke  next  unto  us,  to  shoote  three  shootes  without
ball.  Then  we  came  all  to  the  said  Sonnings,  and  asked
of  him  what  the  matter  was  that  we  were  shot  at,  he  said

296

THOMAS SANDERS  ad.

1584.
that  it  was  the  Janizaries  who  would  have  the  oyle  a
shoare  againe,  and  willed  us  to  make  haste  away,  and
ifter  that  he  had  discharged  three  shots  without  ball,
he  commaunded  all  the  gunners  in  the  towne  to  doe
their  indevour  to  sinke  us,  but  the  Turkish  gunners
could  not  once  strike  us,  wherefore  the  king  sent  presently
to\the  Banio :  (this  Banio  is  the  prison  wheras  all  the
cap\ives  lay  at  night)  and  promised  if  that  there  were  any
that\  could  either  sinke  us,  or  else  cause  us  to  come  in
agaii\e,  he  should  have  a  hundred  crownes,  and  his  libertie.
With  that  came  foorth  a  Spaniard  called  Sebastian,  which
had  b^ne  an  old  servitour  in  Flanders,  and  he  said,  that
upon  the  performance  of  that  promise,  hee  would  under-
take either  to  sinke  us,  or  to  cause  us  to  come  in  againe,
and  theivto  he  would  gage  his  life,  and  at  the  first  shotte
he  split  Our  rudders  head  in  pieces,  and  the  second  shotte
he  strake  us  under  the  water,  and  the  third  shotte  "he
shotte  us\through  our  foremast  with  a  Colvering  shot,
and  thus  he  having  rent  both  our  rudder  and  maste,
and  shot  us  under  water,  we  were  inforced  to  goe  in
againe.  \

This  Sebastian  for  all  his  diligence  herein,  had  neither
his  liberty,  nC|-  an  hundred  crownes,  so  promised  by  the
said  king,  but  after  his  service  done  was  committed  againe
to  prison,  whereby  may  appeare  the  regard  that  the  Turke
or  infidell  hath  of  his  worde,  although  he  be  able  to  per-
forme  it,  yea  more,  though  he  be  a  king.

Then  our  merchants  seeing  no  remedie,  they  together
with  five  of  our  Companie  went  a  shoare,  and  then  they
ceased  shooting :  they  shot  unto  us  in  the  whole,  nine
and  thirtie  shootes,  without  the  hurt  of  any  man.

And  when  our  rr\archants  came  a  shoare,  the  King
commaunded  presentW  that  they  with  the  rest  of  our
companie  that  were  with  them,  should  be  cheined  foure
&  foure,  to  a  hundred  waight  of  yron,  and  when  we  came
in  with  the  ship,  there  came  presently  above  an  hundred
Turks  aboord  of  us,  and  they  searched  us,  and  stript  our
very  clothes  from  our  backes,  and  brake  open  our  chests,

297

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

and  made  a  spoyle  of  all  that  we  had  :  and  the
Christian  caitifes  likewise  that  came  a  boord  of  us
made  spoyle  of  our  goods,  and  used  us  as  ill  as  the
Turkes  did.  And  our  masters  mate  having  a  Geneva
Bible  in  his  hand,  there  came  the  kings  chiefe  gunner,
and  tooke  it  out  from  him,  who  shewed  me  of  it,
and  I  having  the  language,  went  presently  to  the  kiigs
treasurer,  and  tolde  him  of  it,  saying,  that  sith  it  was
the  will  of  God  that  we  should  fall  into  their  handes,
yet  that  they  should  grant  us  to  use  our  consciences
to  our  owne  discretion,  as  they  suffered  the  Spaiiards
and  other  nations  to  use  theirs,  and  he  graunted  us  :
then  I  told  him  that  the  maister  gunner  had  taken
away  a  Bible  from  one  of  our  men  :  the  Treasurer
went  presently  and  commaunded  him  to  deliver  up
the  Bible  againe,  which  he  did  :  &  within  a  Ktle  after
he  tooke  it  from  the  man  againe,  and  I  shewed  the
Treasurer  of  it,  and  presently  he  commaund-d  him  to
deliver  it  againe  :  saying,  thou  villaine,  wilt  thou
turne  to  Christianitie  againe  ?  for  he  was  2  Renegado,
which  is  one  that  first  was  a  Christian,  and  afterwards
becommeth  a  Turke,  and  so  he  delivered  Tie  the  Bible
the  second  time.  And  then  I  having  it  in  my  hand,
the  gunner  came  to  me,  and  spake  these  wordes,
saying,  thou  dogge,  I  wil  have  the  booke  in  despight
of  thee,  and  tooke  it  from  me,  saying  :  If  thou  tell
the  kings  treasurer  of  it  any  more,  by  Mahomet  I
will  be  revenged  of  thee.  Notwithstanding  I  went  the
third  time  unto  the  kings  Treasurer,  and  tolde  him  of
it,  and  he  came  with  me,  saying  thue"  unto  the  gunner  :
by  the  head  of  the  great  Turke,  i:  thou  take  it  from
him  againe,  thou  shalt  have  an  hundred  bastonadoes.
And  foorthwith  he  delivered  mc  the  booke,  saying,
he  had  not  the  value  of  a  pin  of  the  spoyle  of
the  ship,  which  was  the  better  for  him,  as  hereafter
you  shall  heare  :  for  there  was  none,  neither  Christian
nor  Turke  that  tooke  the  value  of  a  peniworth  of
our  goods from us,  but  perished  both  bodie  and  goods

298

THOMAS SANDERS  ad.

1584.
within  seventeene moneths  following,  as  hereafter  shall
plainely  appeare.

Then  came  the  Guardian  Basha,  which  is  the  keeper
of  the  kings  captives,  to  fetch  us  all  a  shoare,  and
then  I  remembring  the  miserable  estate  of  poore  dis-
tressed captives,  in  the  time  of  their  bondage  to  those
infidels,  went  to  mine  owne  chest,  and  tooke  out  thereof
a  Jarre  of  oyle,  and  filled  a  basket  full  of  white
Ruske  to  carie  a  shoare  with  me,  but  before  I  came
to  the  Banio,  the  Turkish  boyes  had  taken  away
almost  all  my  bread,  and  the  keeper  saide,  deliver  me
the  Jarre  of  oyle,  and  when  thou  commest  to  the  [II.  i.  187.]
Banio  thou  shalt  have  it  againe,  but  1  never  had  it
of  him  any  more.

But  when  I  came  to  the  Banio,  and  sawe  our  Mar-
chants  and  all  the  rest  of  our  company  in  chaines,
and  we  all  ready  to  receive  the  same  reward,  what
heart  in  the  world  is  there  so  hard,  but  would  have
pitied  our  cause,  hearing  or  seeing  the  lamentable
greeting  there  was  betwixt  us  :  all  this  happened  the
first  of  May, 1584.

And  the  second  day  of  the  same  moneth,  the  King  The  Englisk-
with  all  his  counsell  sate  in  judgement  upon  us.  The  ^^^  araigned.
first  that  were  had  forth  to  be  arraigned,  were  the
Factors,  and  the  Masters,  and  the  King  asked  them
wherefore  they  came  not  a  shoare  when  he  sent  for
them.  And  Romaine  Sonnings  answered,  that  though
he  were  king  on  shoare,  and  might  commaunde  there,
so  was  hee  as  touching  those  that  were  under  him  :
and  therefore  said,  if  any  offence  be,  the  fault  is
wholy  in  my  selfe,  and  in  no  other.  Then  foorthwith
the  king  gave  judgement,  that  the  saide  Romaine
Sonnings  should  be  hanged  over  the  Northeast  bul-
warke  :  from  whence  he  conveyed  the  forenamed
Patrone  Norado,  and  then  he  called  for  our  Master
Andrew  Dier,  and  used  fewe  wordes  to  him,  and  so
condemned  him  to  be  hanged  over  the  walles  of  the
Westermost  bulwarke.

299

A.D.
1584.

Master  D'ter
condemned  to
be  hanged  over
a  bulwarke.

A  Frenchman
turned  Turke,
In  hope  of  his
life,  and  after-
ward was
hanged.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Then  fell  our  other  Factor  (named  Richard  Skegs)
upon  his  knees  before  the  king,  and  said,  I  beseech
your  highnesse  either  to  pardon  our  Master,  or  else
suffer  me  to  die  for  him,  for  he  is  ignorant  of  this
cause.  And  then  the  people  of  that  countrey  favour-
ing the  said  Richard  Skegs  besought  the  king  to
pardon  them  both.  So  then  the  king  spake  these
wordes  :  Beholde,  for  thy  sake,  I  pardon  the  Master.
Then  presently  the  Turkes  shouted,  and  cried,  saying :
Away  with  the  Master  from  the  presence  of  the  king.
And  then  he  came  into  the  Banio  whereas  we  were,  and
tolde  us  what  had  happened,  and  we  all  rejoyced  at  the
good  hap  of  Master  Skegs,  that  hee  was  saved,  and  our
Master  for  his  sake.

But  afterward  our  joy  was  turned  to  double  sorrow,  for
in  the  meane  time  the  kings  minde  was  altered :  for  that
one  of  his  counsell  had  advised  him,  that  unlesse  the
Master  died  also,  by  the  lawe  they  could  not  confiscate
the  ship  nor  goods,  neither  captive  any  of  the  men :
whereupon  the  king  sent  for  our  Master  againe,  and  gave
him  another  judgement  after  his  pardon  for  one  cause,
which  was  that  hee  should  be  hanged.  Here  all  true
Christians  may  see  what  trust  a  Christian  man  may  put  in
an  infidels  promise,  who  being  a  King,  pardoned  a  man
nowe,  as  you  have  heard,  and  within  an  houre  after
hanged  him  for  the  same  cause  before  a  whole  multitude :
and  also  promised  our  Factors  their  oyles  custome  free,
and  at  their  going  away  made  them  pay  the  uttermost
penie  for  the  custome  thereof.

And  when  that  Romaine  Sonnings  saw  no  remedy  but
that  he  should  die,  he  protested  to  turne  Turke,  hoping
thereby  to  have  saved  his  life.  Then  saide  the  Turke,  If
thou  wilt  turne  Turke,  speake  the  words  that  thereunto
belong :  and  he  did  so.  Then  saide  they  unto  him.  Now
thou  shalt  die  in  the  faith  of  a  Turke,  and  so  hee  did,
as  the  Turkes  reported  that  were  at  his  execution.  And
the  forenamed  Patrone  Norado,  whereas  before  he  had
libertie  and  did  nothing,  he  then  was  condemned  slave

THOMAS SANDERS  a.d.

1584.
perpetuall,  except  there  were  paiment  made  of  the  fore-
said sum  me  of  money.

Then  the  king  condemned  all  us,  who  were  in  number
sixe  and  twentie,  of  the  which,  two  were  hanged  (as
you  have  heard)  and  one  died  the  first  day  wee  came  on
shoare,  by  the  visitation  of  Almightie  God :  and  the
other  three  and  twentie  he  condemned  slaves  perpetually
unto  the  great  Turke,  and  the  ship  and  goods  were
confiscated  to  the  use  of  the  great  Turke:  and  then  we
all  fell  downe  upon  our  knees,  giving  God  thankes  for
this  sorrowfuU  visitation,  and  giving  our  selves  wholy  to
the  Almightie  power  of  God,  unto  whom  all  secrets  are
knowen,  that  he  of  his  goodnesse  would  vouchsafe  to
looke  upon  us.

Here  may  all  true  Christian  hearts  see  the  wonderfuU
workes  of  God  shewed  upon  such  infidels,  blasphemers,
whoremasters,  and  renegate  Christians,  and  so  you  shall
reade  in  the  ende  of  this  booke,  of  the  like  upon  the
unfaithfuU  king  and  all  his  children,  and  of  as  many  as
tooke  any  portion  of  the  said  goods.

But  first  to  shewe  our  miserable  bondage  and  slaverie.  Every  Jive
and  unto  what  small  pittance  and  allowance  wee  were  ^^^  allowed
tied,  for  every  five  men  had  allowance  but  five  aspers  of  o%,^a/a7a
bread  in  a  day,  which  is  but  two  pence  English :  and  our
lodging  was  to  lye  on  the  bare  boords,  with  a  very  simple
cape  to  cover  us,  wee  were  also  forceably  and  most
violently  shaven,  head  and  beard,  and  within  three  dayes
after,  I  and  sixe  more  of  my  fellowes,  together  with
fourescore  Italians  and  Spaniards  were  sent  foorth  in  a
Galeot  to  take  a  Greekish  Carmosell,  which  came  into
Africa  to  steale  Negroes,  and  went  out  of  Tripolis  unto
that  place,  which  was  two  hundred  and  fourtie  leagues
thence,  but  wee  were  chained  three  and  three  to  an  oare,
and  wee  rowed  naked  above  the  girdle,  and  the  Bote-
swaine  of  the  Galley  walked  abaft  the  maste,  and  his
Mate  afore  the  maste,  and  eche  of  them  a  bulls  pissell
dried  in  their  handes,  and  when  their  divelish  choller
rose,  they  would  strike  the  Christians  for  no  cause:  And  [ll.  i.  188.]

301

A.D.

1584.

The  Chris-
tians sent  3.
times  a  weeke
30.  miles  to
fetch  wood.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

they  allowed  us  but  halfe  a  pound  of  bread  a  man  in  a
day  without  any  other  kinde  of  sustenance,  water  ex-
cepted. And  when  we  came  to  the  place  whereas  wee
saw  the  Carmosell,  we  were  not  suffered  to  have  neither
needle,  bodkin,  knife,  or  any  other  weapon  about  us,  nor
at  any  other  time  in  the  night,  upon  paine  of  one
hundred  bastonadoes :  wee  were  then  also  cruelly
manackled  in  such  sort,  that  we  could  not  put  our  handes
the  length  of  one  foote  asunder  the  one  from  the  other,
and  every  night  they  searched  our  chaines  three  times,  to
see  if  they  were  fast  riveted :  Wee  continued  fight  with
the  Carmosell  three  houres,  and  then  wee  tooke  it,  and
lost  but  two  of  our  men  in  that  fight,  but  there  were
slaine  of  the  Greekes  five,  and  foureteene  were  cruelly
hurt,  and  they  that  were  sound,  were  presently  made
slaves,  and  chained  to  the  oares  :  and  within  fifteene
dayes  after  we  returned  againe  into  Tripolis,  and  then
wee  were  put  to  all  maner  of  slaverie.  I  was  put  to
hewe  stones,  and  other  to  cary  stones,  and  some  to  draw
the  Cart  with  earth,  and  some  to  make  morter,  and  some
to  draw  stones,  (for  at  that  time  the  Turkes  builded  a
church :)  And  thus  we  were  put  to  all  kinde  of  slaverie
that  was  to  be  done.  And  in  the  time  of  our  being
there,  the  Moores  that  are  the  husbandmen  of  the
countrey,  rebelled  against  the  king,  because  he  would
have  constrained  them  to  pay  greater  tribute  then  hereto-
fore they  had  done,  so  that  the  Souldiours  of  Tripolis
marched  foorth  of  the  towne  to  have  joyned  battell
against  the  Moores  for  their  rebellion,  and  the  King  sent
with  them  foure  pieces  of  Ordinance,  which  were  drawen
by  the  captives  twentie  miles  into  the  Countrey  after
them,  and  at  the  sight  thereof  the  Moores  fled,  and  then
the  Captaines  returned  backe  againe.  Then  I  and
certaine  Christians  more  were  sent  twelve  miles  into
the  countrey  with  a  Cart  to  lode  timber,  and  we  returned
againe  the  same  day.

Nowe  the  king  had  18.  captives,  which  three  times  a
weeke  went  to  fetch  wood  thirtie  miles  from  the  towne :

302

THOMAS SANDERS  ad.

1584.
and  on  a  time  he  appointed  me  for  one  of  the  18.  and
wee  departed  at  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  night,  and  upon
the  way  as  wee  rode  upon  the  camels,  I  demaunded  of  one
of  our  company,  who  did  direct  us  the  way  ?  he  sayd,
that  there  was  a  Moore  in  our  company  which  was  our
guide  :  and  I  demaunded  of  them  how  Tripolis  and  the
wood  bare  one  off  the  other  ?  and  hee  said.  East  North-
east, and  West  Southwest.  And  at  midnight  or  neere
thereabouts,  as  I  was  riding  upon  my  camel,  I  fell
asleepe,  and  the  guide  and  all  the  rest  rode  away  from
me,  not  thinking  but  I  had  bene  among  them.  When  I
awooke,  and  finding  my  selfe  alone  durst  not  call  nor
hallow  for  feare  least  the  wilde  Moores  should  heare  me,
because  they  holde  this  opinion,  that  in  killing  a  Christian
they  do  God  good  service  :  and  musing  with  my  selfe
what  were  best  for  me  to  do,  if  I  should  goe  foorth,  and
the  wilde  Moores  should  hap  to  meete  with  mee,  they
would  kill  mee  :  and  on  the  other  side,  if  I  should
returne  backe  to  Tripolis  without  any  wood  or  company,
I  should  be  most  miserably  used :  therefore  of  two  evils,
rather  I  had  to  goe  foorth  to  the  loosing  of  my  life,  then
to  turne  backe  and  trust  to  their  mercie,  fearing  to  bee
used  as  before  I  had  seene  others  :  for  understanding  by
some  of  my  company  before,  howe  Tripolis  and  the  saide
wood  did  lie  one  off  another,  by  the  North  starre  I  went
forth  at  adventure,  and  as  God  would  have  it,  I  came
right  to  the  place  where  they  were,  even  about  an  houre
before  day:  there  altogether  wee  rested  and  gave  our
camels  provender,  and  assoone  as  the  day  appeared,  we
rode  all  into  the  wood  :  and  I  seeing  no  wood  there,  but
a  sticke  here  and  a  sticke  there,  about  the  bignesse  of  a
mans  arme  growing  in  the  sand,  it  caused  mee  to  marveile
how  so  many  camels  should  be  loden  in  that  place.  The
wood  was  Juniper,  we  needed  no  axe  nor  edge  toole  to
cut  it,  but  pluckt  it  up  by  strength  of  hands  rootes  and
all,  which  a  man  might  easily  do,  and  so  gathered  it
together,  a  little  at  one  place  and  so  at  another,  and  laded
our  camels,  and  came  home  about  seven  of  the  clocke  that

303

A.D.
1584.

Eighteene  cap-
tives runaway
from  Tripolis.

The  judge-
ment of  God
upon  blas-
phemers.

[II,  i.  189.]

The  Greene
Dragon.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

night  folowing :  because  I  fell  lame,  and  my  camel was
tired, I  left  my  wood  in  the  way.

There  was  in  Tripolis  that  time  a  Venetian,  whose
name  was  Benedetto  Venetiano,  and  seventeene  captives
more  of  his  company,  which  ranne  away  from  Tripolis  in
a  boate,  and  came  in  sight  of  an  Island  called  Malta,
which  lieth  fourtie  leagues  from  Tripolis  right  North,
and  being  within  a  mile  of  the  shoare,  &  very  faire
weather,  one  of  their  company  said.  In  dispetto  de  dio
adesso  venio  a  pilliar  terra,  which  is  as  much  to  say  :  In
the  despite  of  God  I  shall  now  fetch  the  shoare,  and  pre-
sently there  arose  a  mighty  storme,  with  thunder  and
raine  and  the  wind  at  North,  their  boate  being  very  small,
so  that  they  were  inforced  to  beare  up  roome,  and  to
sheare  right  afore  the  winde  over  against  the  coast  of
Barbarie  from  whence  they  came,  and  rowing  up  and
downe  the  coast,  their  victuals  being  spent,  the  21.  day
after  their  departure  they  were  inforced  through  the  want
of  food  to  come  ashoare,  thinking  to  have  stolne  some
sheepe  :  but  the  Moores  of  the  countrey  very  craftily
perceiving  their  intent,  gathered  together  a  threescore
horsemen,  and  hid  themselves  behinde  a  sandie  hill,  and
when  the  Christians  were  come  all  a  shoare,  and  past  up
halfe  a  mile  into  the  countrey,  the  Moores  rode  betwixt
them  and  their  boate,  and  some  of  them  pursued  the
Christians,  and  so  they  were  all  taken  and  brought
to  Tripolis,  from  whence  they  had  before  escaped  :
and  presently  the  king  commaunded  that  the  foresaide
Benedetto  with  one  more  of  his  company  should  lose
their  eares,  and  the  rest  should  be  most  cruelly  beaten,
which  was  presently  done.  This  king  had  a  sonne  which
was  a  ruler  in  an  Island  called  Gerbi,  whereunto  arrived
an  English  shippe  called  the  Greene  Dragon,  of  the  which
was  Master  one  M.  Blonket,  who  having  a  very  unhappy
boy  in  that  shippe,  and  understanding  that  whosoever
would  turne  Turke  should  be  well  enterteined  of  the
kings  sonne,  this  boy  did  runne  a  shoare,  and  voluntarily
turned  Turke. Shortly  after the kings sonne  came  to

304

THOMAS SANDERS  a.d

I5B4-
Tripolis  to  visite  his  father,  and  seeing  our  company,  hee
greatly  fancied  Richard  Burges  our  Purser,  and  James
Smith  :  they  were  both  yong  men,  therefore  he  was  very
desirous  to  have  them  to  turne  Turkes,  but  they  would
not  yeeld  to  his  desire,  saying  :  We  are  your  fathers
slaves,  and  as  slaves  wee  will  serve  him.  Then  his  father
the  king  sent  for  them,  and  asked  them  if  they  would
turne  Turkes  ?  And  they  saide  :  If  it  please  your  high-
nesse,  Christians  we  were  borne,  and  so  we  will  remaine,
and  beseeched  the  king  that  they  might  not  bee  inforced
thereunto. The  king  had there before in his house a  ^^^ ,  <^f

r  r  r>t.  j i  ^i sontie  had  a

Sonne  or  a  yeoman or our (Jueenes guard,  whom  the  ^^.^^-^^  ^^^^

kings  Sonne  had  inforced  to  turne  Turke,  his  name  was  was  sonne  to

John  Nelson  :  him the king caused to be brought to  one  of  the

these  yonff  men,  and  then  said  unto  them  :  Wil  not  you  ^^^f^^-f
1  ',1  •  °  ,  J u T-" 1  Majesties

beare  this  your  countreyman  company,  and  be 1  urke  as ^^^.^  ^^^^

hee  is  ?  And  they  saide,  that  they  would  not  yeeld  was  forced  to
thereunto  during  life.  But  it  fell  out,  that  within  a  turne  Turke.
moneth  after,  the  kings  sonne  went  home  to  Gerbi  againe,
being  sixe  score  miles  from  Tripolis,  and  caried  our  two
foresaid  yong  men  with  him,  which  were  Richard  Burges,
and  James  Smith  :  and  after  their  departure  from  us,
they  sent  us  a  letter,  signifying  that  there  was  no  violence
shewed  unto  them  as  yet,  but  within  three  dayes  after
they  were  violently  used,  for  that  the  kings  sonne
demaunded  of  them  againe,  if  that  they  would  turne
Turke  }  Then  answered  Richard  Burges,  a  Christian  I
am,  and  so  I  will  remaine.  Then  the  kings  sonne  very
angerly  said  unto  him  :  By  Mahomet  thou  shalt  pre-
sently be  made  Turke.  Then  called  he  for  his  men,  and
commanded  them  to  make  him  Turke,  and  they  did  so,
and  circumcised  him,  and  would  have  had  him  speake  the
wordes  that  thereunto  belonged,  but  he  answered  them
stoutly  that  he  would  not :  and  although  they  had  put  on
him  the  habite  of  a  Turke,  yet  sayd  he,  A  Christian  I  was
borne,  and  so  I  will  remaine,  though  you  force  me  to  doe
otherwise.

And  then  he called  for  the  other,  and  commaunded
V  305  u

A.D.
1584.

Thefirst
motion  for
those  English-
mensdeliverie.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

him  to  be  made  Turke  perforce  also  :  but  he  was  very
strong,  for  it  was  so  much  as  eight  of  the  kings  sonnes
men  could  doe  to  holde  him,  so  in  the  ende  they  circum-
cised him,  and  made  him  Turke.  Now  to  passe  over  a
litle,  and  so  to  shewe  the  maner  of  our  deliverance  out  of
that  miserable captivitie.

In  May  aforesaid,  shortly  after  our  apprehension,  I
wrote  a  letter  into  England  unto  my  father  dwelling  in
Tavistoke  in  Devonshire,  signifying  unto  him  the  whole
estate  of  our  calamities  :  and  I  wrote  also  to  Constantin-
ople to  the  English  Embassadour,  both  which  letters
were  faithfully  delivered.  But  when  my  father  had
received  my  letter,  and  understood  the  trueth  of  our  mis-
hap, and  the  occasion  thereof,  and  what  had  happened  to
the  offenders,  he  certified  the  right  honourable  the  earle  of
Bedford  thereof,  who  in  short  space  acquainted  her  high-
nesse  with  the  whole  cause  thereof,  and  her  Majestic  like
a  most  mercifull  princesse  tendering  her  Subjects,  pre-
sently tooke  order  for  our  deliverance.  Whereupon  the
right  worshipful  sir  Edward  Osborne  knight  directed  his
letters  with  all  speed  to  the  English  Embassadour  in
Constantinople,  to  procure  our  delivery  :  and  he  obteined
the  great  Turkes  Commission,  and  sent  it  foorthwith  to
Tripolis,  by  one  Master  Edward  Barton,  together  with  a
Justice  of  the  great  Turkes,  and  one  souldiour,  and
another  Turke,  and  a  Greeke  which  was  his  interpretour,
which  could  speake  besides  Greeke,  Turkish,  Italian,
Spanish  and  English.  And  when  they  came  to  Tripolis,
they  were  well  interteined.  And  the  first  night  they  did
lie  in  a  Captaines  house  in  the  towne  :  all  our  company
that  were  in  Tripolis  came  that  night  for  joy  to  Master
Barton  and  the  other  Commissioners  to  see  them.  Then
master  Barton  said  unto  us,  welcome  my  good  countrey-
men,  and  lovingly  interteined  us,  and  at  our  departure
from  him,  he  gave  us  two  shillings,  and  said.  Serve  God,
for  to  morrow  I  hope  you  shall  be  as  free  as  ever  you
were ;  We  all  gave  him  thankes  and  so  departed.

The next day in the morning  very early,  the  King

306

THOMAS SANDERS  a.d.

1585.
having  intelligence  of  their  comming,  sent  word  to  the
keeper,  that  none  of  the  Englishmen  (meaning  our  com-
pany) should  goe  to  worke.  Then  he  sent  for  Master
Barton  and  the  other  Commissioners,  and  demaunded  of
the  saide  Master  Barton  his  message  :  the  Justice
answered,  that  the  great  Turke  his  Sovereigne  had  sent
them  unto  him,  signifying  that  he  was  informed  that  a
certaine  English  shippe,  called  the  Jesus,  was  by  him  the
saide  king  confiscated,  about  twelve  moneths  since,  and
nowe  my  saide  Sovereigne  hath  here  sent  his  especiall
commission  by  us  unto  you,  for  the  deliverance  of  the
saide  shippe  and  goods,  and  also  the  free  libertie  and
deliverance  of  the  Englishmen  of  the  same  shippe,  whom
you  have  taken  and  kept  in  captivitie.  And  further  the
same  Justice  saide,  I  am  authorized  by  my  said  soveraigne  [II.  i.  190.]
the  great  Turke  to  see  it  done  :  And  therefore  I  com-
maund  you  by  vertue  of  this  commission,  presently  to
make  restitution  of  the  premisses  or  the  value  thereof:
and  so  did  the  Justices  deliver  unto  the  King  the  great  ^-^^  English-
Turkes  commission  to  the  effect  aforesaide,  which  com-  ^^^  released.
mission  the  king  with  all  obedience  received  :  and  after
the  perusing  of  the  same,  he  foorthwith  commanded  all
the  English  captives  to  be  brought  before  him,  and  then
willed  the  keeper  to  strike  off  all  our  yrons,  which  done,
the  king  said,  You  Englishmen,  for  that  you  did  offend
the  lawes  of  this  place,  by  the  same  lawes  therefore  some
of  your  company  were  condemned  to  die  as  you  knowe,
and  you  to  bee  perpetuall  captives  during  your  lives  :
notwithstanding,  seeing  it  hath  pleased  my  soveraigne
lord  the  great  Turke  to  pardon  your  said  offences,  and  to
give  you  your  freedome  and  libertie,  beholde,  here  I  make
delivery  of  you  to  this  English  Gentleman  :  so  hee
delivered  us  all  that  were  there,  being  thirteene  in  num-  •
ber,  to  Master  Barton,  who  required  also  those  two  yong
men  which  the  Kings  sonne  had  taken  with  him.  Then
the  king  answered  that  it  was  against  their  lawe  to  deliver
them,  for  that  they  were  turned  Turkes  :  and  touching
the  ship  and  goods,  the  king  said,  that  he  had  solde  her,

307

A.D.

1585.

The  plagues
and  punish-
ments that
happened  to
the  King  and
his  people.

The  king  lost
150.  Camels,
taken  by  the
wilde  Moores.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

but  would  make  restitution  of  the  value,  and  as  much  of
the  goods  as  came  unto  his  hands,  and  so  the  king  arose
and  went  to  dinner,  and  commaunded  a  Jew  to  goe  with
Master  Barton  and  the  other  commissioners,  to  shew  them
their  lodging,  which  was  a  house  provided  and  appointed
them  by  the  said  king.  And  because  I  had  the  Italian
&  Spanish  tongues,  by  which  their  most  traiique  in  that
countrey  is.  Master  Barton  made  me  his  Cater  to  buy  his
victuals  for  him  and  his  company,  and  delivered  me
money  needfull  for  the  same.  Thus  were  wee  set  at
hbertie  the  28.  day  of  April, 1585.

Nowe  to  returne  to  the  kings  plagues  and  punishments,
which  Almighty  God  at  his  will  and  pleasure  sendeth
upon  men  in  the  sight  of  the  worlde,  and  likewise  of  the
plagues  that  befell  his  children  and  others  aforesaide.
First  when  wee  were  made  bondmen,  being  the  second
day  of  May  1584.  the  king  had  300.  captives,  and  before
the  moneth  was  expired,  there  died  of  them  of  the  plague
150.  And  whereas  there  were  26.  men  of  our  company,
of  whom  two  were  hanged,  and  one  died  the  same  day
that  wee  were  made  bondslaves  :  that  present  moneth
there  died  nine  more  of  our  company  of  the  plague,  and
other  two  were  forced  to  turne  Turkes  as  before  is
rehearsed  :  and  on  the  fourth  day  of  June  next  following
the  king  lost  150.  camels,  which  were  taken  from  him
by  the  wilde  Moores  :  and  on  the  28.  day  of  the  saide
moneth  of  June,  one  Geffrey  Maltese,  a  renegado  of
Malta,  ranne  away  to  his  countrey,  and  stole  a  Brigandine
which  the  king  had  builded  for  to  take  the  Christians
withall,  and  caried  with  him  twelve  Christians  more
which  were  the  kings  captives.  Afterward  about  the
tenth  day  of  July  next  following,  the  king  road  foorth
upon  the  greatest  and  fairest  mare  that  might  be  scene,  as
white  as  any  swanne  :  hee  had  not  ridden  fourtie  paces
from  his  house,  but  on  a  sudden  the  same  mare  fell
downe  under  him  starke  dead,  and  I  with  sixe  more  were
commaunded  to  burie  her,  skinne,  shoes  and  all,  which
we  did. And about  three  moneths  after  our  deliverie,

308

THOMAS SANDERS  ad.

1585.
Master Barton, with  all the residue of  his company,
departed  from Tripolie to Zante, in  a  vessell,  called  a  ■

Settea,  of  one  Marcus  Segoorus,  who  dwelt  in  Zante,  and
after  our  arrivall  at  Zante  wee  remained  fifteene  dayes
there  aboorde  our  vessell,  before  wee  coulde  have  Platego
(that  is,  leave  to  come  a  shoare)  because  the  plague  was  in
that  place,  from  whence  wee  came  :  and  about  three
dayes  after  we  came  a  shoare,  thither  came  another  Settea
of  Marseils  bound  for  Constantinople.  Then  did  Master  ^'^^  English-
Barton,  and  his  company,  with  two  more  of  our  company,  ^^^  ^f^^PP^d  to
shippe  themselves  as  passengers  in  the  same  Settea,  and  ^,ifj^  ^_
went  to  Constantinople.  But  the  other  nine  of  us  that  Barton.
remained  in  Zante,  about  three  moneths  after,  shipt  our
selves  in  a  shippe  of  the  said  Marcus  Segoorus,  which
came  to  Zante,  and  was  bound  for  England.  In  which  T'he  souMiers
three  moneths,  the  souldiers  of  Tripolie  killed  the  said  "(-ifi^-
king.  And  then  the  Kings  sonne,  according  to  the
custome  there,  went  to  Constantinople,  to  surrender  up
all  his  fathers  treasure,  goods,  captives,  and  concubines,
unto  the  great  Turke,  and  tooke  with  him  our  saide
Purser  Richard  Burges,  and  James  Smith,  and  also  the
other  two  Englishmen,  which  he  the  said  kings  sonne
had  inforced  to  become  Turkes,  as  is  aforesayd.  And
they  the  said  Englishmen  finding  now  some  opportunitie,
concluded  with  the  Christian  captives  which  were  going
with  them  unto  Constantinople,  being  in  number  about
one  hundred  and  fiftie,  to  kill  the  kings  sonne,  and  all  the
Turkes  which  were  aboorde  of  the  Galley,  and  privily  the
saide  Englishmen  conveyed  unto  the  saide  Christian
captives,  weapons  for  that  purpose.  And  when  they  came
into  the  maine  Sea,  towarde  Constantinople  (upon  the
faithfuU  promise  of  the  sayde  Christian  captives  (these
foure  Englishmen  lept  suddenly  into  the  Crossia,  that  is,
into  the  middest  of  the  Galley,  where  the  canon  lieth,  and
with  their  swordes  drawne,  did  fight  against  all  the  fore-
said Turkes,  and  for  want  of  helpe  of  the  saide  Christian
captives,  who  falsly  brake  their  promises,  the  said  Master
Blonkets  boy  was  killed,  and  the  sayde  James  Smith,  and

309

A,D.
1585.

[II.  i. 191.]

Two  Gallies
of  Venice  tooke
the  king  of
Tripolie  his
galley,  and
killed  the
kings  Sonne,
and  all  the
Turkes  in  it,
and  released
all  the  Chris-
tians being  in
number  150.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

our  Pursser  Richard  Burges,  and  the  other  Englishman,
were  taken  and  bound  into  chaines,  to  be  hanged  at  their
arrivall  in  Constantinople  :  and  as  the  Lordes  will  was,
about  two  dayes  after,  passing  through  the  gulfe  of
Venice,  at  an  Island  called  Cephalonia,  they  met  with  two
of  the  duke  of  Venice  his  Gallies,  which  tooke  that
Galley,  and  killed  the  kings  sonne,  and  his  mother,  and
all  the  Turkes  that  were  there,  in  number  1 50.  and  they
saved  the  Christian  captives,  and  would  have  killed  the
two  Englishmen  because  they  were  circumcised,  and
become  Turkes,  had  not  the  other  Christian  captives
excused  them,  saying,  that  they  were  inforced  to  be
Turkes,  by  the  kings  sonne,  and  shewed  the  Venetians
also,  how  they  did  enterprise  at  sea  to  fight  against  all  the
Turks,  and  that  their  two  fellowes  were  slaine  in  that
fight.  Then  the  Venetians  saved  them,  and  they,  with
all  the  residue  of  the  said  captives,  had  their  libertie,
which  were  in  number  150.  or  thereabouts,  and  the  saide
Gallie,  and  all  the  Turkes  treasure  was  confiscated  to  the
use  of  the  state  of  Venice,  And  from  thence  our  two
Englishmen  traveiled  homeward  by  land,  and  in  this
meane  time  we  had  one  more  of  our  company,  which
died  in  Zante,  and  afterward  the  other  eight  shipped
themselves  at  Zante,  in  a  shippe  of  the  said  Marcus
Segorus,  which  was  bound  for  England  :  and  before  we
departed  thence,  there  arrived  the  Assension,  and  the
George  Bonaventure  of  London  in  Cephalonia,  in  a
harbour  there,  called  Arrogostoria,  whose  Marchants
agreed  with  the  Marchants  of  our  shippe,  and  so  laded
al  the  marchandise  of  our  shippe  into  the  said  ships
of  London,  who  tooke  us  eight  in  as  passengers,  and  so
we  came  home,  and  within  two  moneths  after  our  arrivall
at  London,  our  said  Purser  Richard  Burges,  and  his
fellow  came  home  also  :  for  the  which  we  are  bound  to
praise  Almightie  God,  during  our  lives,  and  as  duetie
bindeth  us,  to  pray  for  the  preservation  of  our  most
gracious  Queene,  for  the  great  care  her  Majestie  had  over
us,  her  poore  Subjects,  in  seeking  and  procuring  of  our

310

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER

deliverance  aforesaide  :  and  also  for  her  honourable  privie
Counsell,  and  I  especiall  for  the  prosperitie  and  good
estate  of  the  house  of  the  late  deceased,  the  right  honour-
able the  Earle  of  Bedford,  whose  honour  I  must  confesse,
most  diligently  at  the  suite  of  my  father  now  departed,
traveiled  herein  :  for  the  which  I  rest  continually  bounden
to  him,  whose  soule  I  doubt  not,  but  is  already  in  the
heavens  in  joy,  with  the  Almightie,  unto  which  place  he
vouchsafe  to  bring  us  all,  that  for  our  sinnes  suffered
most  vile  and  shameful  death  upon  the  Crosse,  there  to
live  perpetually  world  without  ende,  Amen.

The  Queenes  letters  to  the  Turke  1584.  for  the
restitution  of  the  shippe  called  the  Jesus,  and
the  English  captives  detained  in  Tripolie  in
Barbarie,  and  for  certaine  other  prisoners  in
Argier.

LIZABETHA,  Dei  ter  maximi  &  unici
coeli  terraeque  conditoris  gratia,  Anglias,
Franciae,  &  Hibernias  Regina,  fidei
Christians  contra  omnes  omnium  inter
Christianos  degentium,  Christique  nomen
falso  profitentium  idololatrias,  invictissima
&  potentissima  defensatrix  :  augustissimo.

A.D.
1584.

invictissim6que  principi,  Zultan  Murad  Can,  Musulmanici
regni  dominatori  potentissimo,  imperiique  Orientis
Monarchae,  supra  omnes  soli  &  supremo  salutem,  &
multos  cum  summa  rerum  optimarum  affluentia  foelices
&  fortunatos  annos.

Augustissime  &  potentissime  Imperator,  biennio  jam
peracto,  ad  Cassaream  vestram  Majestatem  scripsimus,  ut
dilectus  noster  famulus  Guilielmus  Harebornus,  vir  orna-
tissimus  pro  legato  nostro  Constantinopoli,  aliisque
Musulmanici  imperii  ditionibus,  sublimi  vestra  autho-
ritate  reciperetur :  simul  etiam  Angli  subditi  nostri
commercium  &  mercaturam,  in  omnibus  illis  provinciis
exerceant,  non  minus  libere,  quam  Galli,  Poloni,  Veneti,

3"

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

Germani,  caeterique  vestri  confoederati,  qui  varias  Orientis
partes  peragrant,  operam  navantes,  ut  mutuis  commerciis
conjungatur  Oriens  cum  Occidente.

Quae  privilegia,  cum  nostris  subditis  Anglis  invictissima
vestra  Majestas  Uteris  &  diplomate  suo  liberalissime  in-
dulserit,  facere  non  potuimus,  quin  quas  maximas  animus
noster  capere  potest  gratias,  eo  nomine  ageremus :
sperantes  fore,  ut  haec  instituta  commerciorum  ratio
maximas  utilitates,  &  commoda  utrinque,  tam  in  imperii
vestri  ditiones,  quam  regni  nostri  provincias  secum
adferat.

Id  ut  plane  fiat,  cum  nuper  subditi  nostri  nonnulli
Tripoli  in  Barbaria  &  Argellas  ab  ejus  loci  incolis
voluntatem  vestram  forte  nescientibus  male  habiti  fuerint,
&  immaniter  divexati,  Cassaream  vestram  Majestatem
benevole  rogamus,  ut  per  Legatum  nostrum  eorum
causam  cognoscas,  &  postremo  earum  provinciarum  pro-
regibus  ac  prasfectis  imperes,  ut  nostri  libere  in  illis
locis,  sine  vi  aut  injuria  deinceps  versari,  &  negotia
gerere  possint.

Et  nos  omni  opera  vicissim  studebimus  ea  omnia
praestare,  quae  Imperatori^  vestrae  Majestati  uUo  pacto
grata  fore  intelligemus :  quam  Deus  unicus  mundi
conditor  optimus  maximus  diutissime  incolumem  &
florentem  servet.  Datae  in  palatio  nostro  Londini,
[II.  i.  192.]  quinto  die  Mensis  Septembris :  anno  Jesu  Christi
Servatoris  nostri,  1584.  Regni  vero  nostri  vicessimo
sexto.

The  same  in  English.

Lizabeth,  by  the  grace  of  the  most  high  God,  and
onely  maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  England,
France  and  Ireland  Queene,  and  of  the  Christian

faith,  against  all  the  Idolaters  and  false  professors  of  the
Name  of  Christ  dwelling  among  the  Christians,  most
invincible  and  puissant  defender :  to  the  most  valiant  and
invincible  Prince,  Zultan  Murad  Can,  the  most  mightie
ruler  of  the  kingdome  of  Musulman,  and  of  the  East

312

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  ad.

1584.
Empire the onely and highest Monarch above all,
health,  and  many  happy  and  fortunate  yeres,  with  great
aboundance  of  the  best  things.

Most  noble  and  puissant  Emperour,  about  two  yeeres
nowe  passed,  wee  wrote  unto  your  Imperiall  Majestie,
that  our  welbeloved  servant,  William  Hareborne,  a  man
of  great  reputation  and  honour,  might  be  received  under
your  high  authoritie,  for  our  Ambassadour  in  Constanti-
nople, and  other  places,  under  the  obedience  of  your
Empire  of  Musulman :  And  also  that  the  Englishmen,
being  our  Subjects,  might  exercise  entercourse  and
marchandize  in  all  those  Provinces,  no  lesse  freely  then
the  French,  Polonians,  Venetians,  Germanes,  and  other
your  confederats,  which  traveile  through  divers  of  the
East  parts :  endevouring  that  by  mutuall  trafique,  the
East  may  be  joyned  and  knit  to  the  West.

Which  privileges,  when  as  your  most  puissant  Majestie,
by  your  letters  and  under  your  dispensation  most  liberally
and  favourably  granted  to  our  Subjects  of  England,  wee
could  no  lesse  doe,  but  in  that  respect  give  you  as  great
thankes,  as  our  heart  could  conceive,  trusting  that  it
wil  come  to  passe,  that  this  order  of  trafique,  so  well
ordeined,  will  bring  with  it  selfe  most  great  profits  and
commodities  to  both  sides,  as  well  to  the  parties  subject
to  your  Empire,  as  to  the  Provinces  of  our  kingdome.
Which  thing  that  it  may  be  done  in  plaine  and  effectuall
maner,  whereas  some  of  our  Subjects  of  late  at  Tripolis  in
Barbaric,  and  at  Argier,  were  by  the  inhabitants  of  those
places  (being  perhaps  ignorant  of  your  pleasure)  evill
intreated  and  grievously  vexed,  wee  doe  friendly  and
lovingly  desire  your  Imperiall  Majestie,  that  you  will
understand  their  causes  by  our  Ambassadour,  and  after-
ward give  commaundement  to  the  Lieutenants  and  Presi-
dents of  those  Provinces,  that  our  people  may  henceforth
freely,  without  any  violence,  or  injurie,  traveile,  and  do
their  businesse  in  those  places.

And  we  againe  with  all  endevour,  shall  studie  to
performe  all those things,  which we shall in any  wise

3^3

A.D.
1584.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

understand  to  be  acceptable  to  your  Imperiall  Majestie,
which  God,  the  onely  maker  of  the  world,  most  best  and
most  great,  long  keepe  in  health,  and  flourishing.  Given
in  our  pallaice  at  London,  the  fift  day  of  the  moneth
of  September,  in  the  yeere  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,
1584.  And  of  our  raigne,  the  26.

The  Turkes  letter  to  the  King  of  Tripolis  in
Barbarie,  commanding  the  restitution  of  an
English  ship,  called  the  Jesus,  with  the  men,
and  goods,  sent  from  Constantinople,  by
Mahomet  Beg,  a  Justice  of  the  Great  Turkes,
and  an  English  Gentleman,  called  Master
Edward  Barton. Anno  1584.

Onourable,  and  worthy  Bassa  Romadan
Beglerbeg,  most  wise  and  prudent  Judge
of  the  West  Tripolis,  wee  wish  the  ende
of  all  thy  enterprises  happie,  and  pros-
perous. By  these  our  highnesse  letters,
wee  certifie  thee,  that  the  right  honour-
able, William  Hareborne,  Ambassadour
in  our  most  famous  Porch,  for  the  most  excellent
Queenes  Majestie  of  England,  in  person,  and  by  letters
hath  certified  our  highnesse,  that  a  certaine  shippe,  with
all  her  furniture,  and  artillerie,  worth  two  thousand
duckets,  arriving  in  the  port  of  Tripolis,  and  discharged
of  her  lading  and  marchandize,  paide  our  custome  accord-
ing to  order,  and  againe,  the  marchants  laded  their  shippe
with  oyle,  which  by  constraint  they  were  inforced  to  buy
of  you,  &  having  answered  in  like  maner  the  custome  for
the  same,  determined  to  depart :  a  Frenchman  assistant  to
the  Marchant,  unknowen  to  the  Englishmen,  caried  away
with  him  another  Frenchman  indebted  to  a  certaine
Moore  in  foure  hundred  duckets,  and  by  force  caused
the  Englishmen,  and  shippe  to  depart :  who  neither
suspecting  fraude,  nor  deceite,  hoised  sailes.  In  the
meane  time,  this  man,  whose  debter  the  Frenchman  had

314

THE SULTAN'S LETTER  ad.

1584.
stollen  away,  went  to  the  Bassa  with  the  supplication,  by
whose  meanes,  and  force  of  the  Castle,  the  Englishmen
were  constrained  to  returne  into  the  port,  where  the
Frenchman,  author  of  the  evill,  with  the  Master  of  the
ship  an  Englishman,  innocent  of  the  crime  were  hanged,  [II.  i.  193.]
and  sixe  and  twentie  Englishmen  cast  into  prison,  of
whom  through  famine,  thirst,  and  stinke  of  the  prison,
eleven  died,  and  the  rest  like  to  die.  Further,  it  was
signified  to  our  Majestie  also,  that  the  marchandise  and
other  goods,  with  the  shippe,  were  worth  7600.  duckets :
which  things  if  they  be  so,  this  is  our  commandement,
which  was  granted  and  given  by  our  Majestie,  that  the
English  shippe,  and  all  the  marchandize,  and  whatsoever
else  taken  away  bee  wholy  restored,  and  that  the  English-
men be  let  goe  free,  and  suffered  to  returne  into  their
Countrey.  Wherefore  when  this  our  commaundement
shall  come  unto  thee,  wee  straightly  commaund,  that  the
foresaid  businesse  be  diligently  looked  unto,  and  dis-
charged. And  if  it  be  so,  that  a  Frenchman,  and  no
Englishman  hath  done  this  craft,  and  wickednesse  un-
knowen  to  the  Englishmen,  and  as  authour  of  the
wickednesse  is  punished,  and  that  the  Englishmen  com-
mitted nothing  against  the  peace  and  league,  or  their
articles :  also  if  they  payd  custome  according  to  order,
it  is  against  lawe,  custome  of  Countreys,  and  their
privilege,  to  hinder  or  hurt  them.  Neither  is  it  meete,
their  shippe,  marchandise,  and  all  their  goods  taken,
should  be  withholden.  Wee  will  therefore,  that  the
English  shippe,  marchandize,  and  all  other  their  goods,
without  exception,  be  restored  to  the  Englishmen :  also
that  the  men  bee  let  goe  free,  and  if  they  will,  let  none
hinder  them,  to  returne  peaceably  into  their  Countrey :
do  not  commit,  that  they  another  time  complaine  of  this
matter,  and  how  this  businesse  is  dispatched,  certifie  us
at  our  most  famous  porche.

Dated  in  the  Citie  of  Constantinople,  in  the  992.  yeere
of  Mahomet,  and  in  the  ende  of  the  moneth  of  October ;
and  in  the  yeere  of  Jesus  1584.

315

A.D.
1585.

Edoardo
Barton  y
Mahumed
Beg.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  letter  of  Master  William  Hareborne,  the
English  Ambassadour,  Ligier  in  Constanti-
nople, to  the  Bassa  Romadan,  the  Beglerbeg
of  Tripolis  in  Barbarie,  for  the  restoring  of
an  English  shippe  called  the  Jesus,  with  the
goods, and men, detained as slaves. Anno

1585.

Olto  magnifico  Signer,

Noi  ha  state  significato  per  diverse
lettere  di  quanto  ha  passato  circa  di  una
nave  nostra  chiamata  Jesus,  sopra  il  quale
in  agiuto  di  Ricciardo  Skegs,  uno  de  gli
nostri  mercanti  di  essa  gia  morto,  veniva
un  certo  Francese  per  sopra  cargo,
chiamato  Romano  Sonings,  il  quale  per  non  esser  ben
portato  secondo.  che  doveva,  volendo  importar  seco  un
altro  Francese  debitore  a  certi  vostri  sensa  pagarcene,  per
giusticia  era  appiccato  col  patron  Inglese  Andre  Dier,  che
come  simplice  credendo  al  detto  Francese,  senza  aveder-
cene  de  la  sua  ria  malitia,  non  retornava,  quando  da
vostra  magnifica  Signoria  gli  era  mandato.  La  morte  del
detto  tristo  Francese  approviamo  como  cosa  benfatta.
Ma  al  contrario,  dove  lei  ha  confiscato  la  detta  nave  e
mercantia  en  essa,  &  fatto  sciavi  li  marinari,  como  cosa
molto  contraria  a  li  privilegii  dal  Gran  Signor  quattro
anni  passati  concessi,  &  da  noi  confirmati  di  parte  de  la
Serenissima  Magesta  d'Ingilterra  nostra  patrona,  e  molto
contraria  a  la  liga  del  detto  Gran  Signor,  il  quale  essendo
dal  sopra  detto  apieno  informato,  noi  ha  conceduto  il  suo
regale  mandamento  di  restitutione,  la  qual  mandiamo  a
vostra  magnifica  Signoria  col  presente  portator  Edoardo
Barton,  nostro  Secretario,  &  Mahumed  Beg,  droguemano
di  sua  porta  excelsa,  con  altre  lettere  del  excellentissimo
Vizir,  &  invictissimo  capitan  di  mar :  chiedendo,  tanto  di
parte  del  Gran  Signor,  quanto  di  sua  Serenissima  Magesta
di  V.  S.  M.  che  gli  huomini,  oglii,  nave  col  fornimento,

316

WILLIAM HAREBORNE'S LETTER  a.d.

1585.

danari,  &  tutti  altri  beni  qualconque,  da  lei  &  per  vestro
ordlne  da  gli  nostri  tolti  siano  resi  a  questo  mio  Secretario
liberamente  senza  empacho  alcuno,  como  il  Gran  Signer
da  sua  gratia  noi  ha  conceduto,  specialmente  per  esser
detti  oglii  comprati  per  ordine  di  sua  Serenissima
Magesta,  per  provisione  della  Corte  sua.  II  qual  non
facendo,  protestiamo  per  questa  nostra  al  incontra  di  esso
tutti  futuri  danni  che  puono  succedere  per  questa  cagione,
como  authore  di  quelli,  contrario  a  la  Santa  liga  giurata
de  li  duoi  Rei,  patroni  nostri,  como  per  li  privilegii,  che
lei  mostrera  il  nostro,  consta :  per  observatione  de  gli
quali  noi  stiamo  di  fermo  en  questa  excelsa  Porta.  Et
cosi  responderete  nel  altro  mondo  al  solo  Iddio,  &  qua  al
Gran  Signor  questo  massimo  peccato  commesso  da  lei  al
incontra  di  tanti  poveracchi,  che  per  questa  crudelta  sono
in  parte  morti,  in  parte  retenuti  da  esso  en  duro  catti-
verio.  Al  contrario,  piacendo  lei  evitar  questo  incom-
mode &  restarcene  en  gratia  del  Signor  Iddio,  &  li  nostri
patroni,  amichevolmente,  (como  convien  a  par  vostro  di
mostrarsi  prudente  governatore,  &  fidel  servitor  al
patrono)  adimpirete  questa  nostra  giustissima  domanda,
per  poter  resultarvi  a  grand  honore  &  commodo
per  la  tratta  di  marchantia,  che  faronno  a  ladvenire
li  nostri  in  quella  vostra  provincia.  Li  quali  general-
mente,  tanto  quelli,  como  tutti  altri  che  nel  mar  riscon-
trarete,  siano,  secondo  che  manda  il  Grand  Signor,  de
vostra  Signoria  magnifica  amichevolmente  recolti  &
recevuti :  Et  noi  non  mancharemo  al  debito  di  ottimo
amico  en  qualconche  occurrenza  vostra,  piacendo  lei
amicitia  nostra,  como  desideramo,  II  Signor  Iddio  lei  [II.  1.  194
conceda  (adimpiendo  questa  nostra  giusta  rechiesta,  per
cavar  noi  di  piu  futura  fatica  in  questo  negocio,  &  lei  di
disgratia)  ogni  vera  felicita,  &  supremo  honore.  Data  in
palazzo  nostro  che  fu  da  Rapamat  appresso  Pera  di  15.
di  Genero 1585.

II Ambassiatore de la Majesta Serenissima

d'Ingilterra, amico de vostra Signoria

magnifica,  piacendo  lei.
317

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

The  same  in  English.

Right  honourable  Lord,  it  hath  bene  signified  unto  us
by  divers  letters,  what  hath  fallen  out,  concerning  a
certaine  shippe  of  ours,  called  the  Jesus,  into  which,  for
the  helpe  of  Richard  Skegs,  one  of  our  Marchants  in  the
same,  nowe  deceased,  there  was  admitted  a  certaine
Frenchman  called  Romaine  Sonnings,  which  for  his  ill
behaviour,  according  to  his  deserts,  seeking  to  cary  away
with  him  another  Frenchman,  which  was  indebted  to
certaine  of  your  people,  without  paying  his  creditours,
was  hanged  by  sentence  of  justice,  together  with  Andrew
Dier,  the  Master  of  the  said  ship,  who  simply  and  with-
out fraude,  giving  credite  to  the  said  Frenchman,  without
any  knowledge  of  his  evil  fact,  did  not  returne  when  hee
was  commaunded,  by  your  honourable  Lordship.  The
death  of  the  said  lewde  Frenchman  we  approove  as  a
thing  well  done,  but  contrarywise,  whereas  your  Lordship
hath  confiscated  the  said  ship  with  the  goods  therein,
and  hath  made  slaves  of  the  Mariners,  as  a  thing  al-
together contrary  to  the  privileges  of  the  Grand  Signior,
granted  foure  yeeres  since,  and  confirmed  by  us  on  the
behalfe  of  the  most  excellent  the  Queenes  Majestie  of
England  our  Mystresse,  and  altogether  contrary  to  the
league  of  the  saide  Grand  Signior,  who  being  fully
informed  of  the  aforesaid  cause,  hath  granted  unto  us  his
royall  commandement  of  restitution,  which  we  send  unto
your  honourable  Lordship,  by  the  present  bearer  Edward
Barton  our  Secretarie,  and  Mahomet  Beg,  one  of  the
Justices  of  his  stately  Court,  with  other  letters  of  the
most  excellent  Admirall,  and  most  valiant  Captaine  of
the  Sea,  requiring  your  honourable  Lordship,  as  well  on
the  behalfe  of  the  Grand  Signior,  as  of  the  Queenes  most
excellent  Majestie  my  Mystresse,  that  the  men,  oyles,
shippe,  furniture,  money,  and  all  other  goods  whatsoever,
by  your  Lordship,  and  your  order  taken  from  our  men,
be  restored  unto  this  my  Secretary  freely,  without  delay,
as the Grand Signior of  his  goodnesse  hath  graunted

318

WILLIAM HAREBORNE'S LETTER  ad.

1585.
unto  us,  especially  in  regard  that  the  same  oyles  were
bought  by  the  commaundement  of  our  Queenes  most
excellent  Majestie,  for  the  provision  of  her  Court.
Which  if  you  performe  not,  wee  protest  by  these  our
leters  against  you,  that  you  are  the  cause  of  all  the
inconveniences  which  may  ensue  upon  this  occasion,  as
the  authour  thereof,  contrary  to  the  holy  league  sworne
by  both  our  Princes,  as  by  the  privileges,  which  this  our
servant  will  shewe  you,  may  appeare.  For  the  seeing  of
which  league  performed,  wee  remaine  here  as  Ligier  in
this  stately  Court.  And  by  this  meanes  you  shall  answere
in  another  world  unto  God  alone,  and  in  this  world  unto
the  Grand  Signior,  for  this  hainous  sinne  committed  by
you  against  so  many  poore  soules,  which  by  this  your
cruelty  are  in  part  dead,  and  in  part  detained  by  you  in
most  miserable  captivitie.  Contrarywise,  if  it  shall  please
you  to  avoyd  this  mischiefe,  and  to  remaine  in  the  favour
of  Almighty  God,  and  of  our  Princes,  you  shall  friendly
fulfill  this  our  just  demaund  (as  it  behoveth  you  to  shew
your  selfe  a  prudent  Governour,  and  faithfull  servant
unto  your  Lord)  and  the  same  may  turne  to  your  great
honour,  and  profite,  by  the  trade  of  marchandize,  which
our  men  in  time  to  come,  may  use  in  that  government
of  yours :  which  generally,  as  well  those  poore  men,  as  all
others,  which  you  shall  meete  at  the  sea,  ought  to  be
according  to  the  commandement  of  the  Grand  Signior,
friendly  entertained  and  received  of  your  honourable
Lordship,  and  we  will  not  faile  in  the  dueties  of  a  speciall
friend,  whensoever  you  shal  have  occasion  to  use  us,  as
we  desire.  Almighty  God  grant  unto  your  Lordship  (in
the  fulfilling  of  this  our  just  request,  whereby  wee  may
be  delivered  from  further  trouble  in  this  matter,  and  your
selfe  from  further  displeasure)  all  true  felicitie,  and
increase  of  honour.

Given  in  our  PaUace  from  Rapamat  in  Pera,  the
15,  of  Januarie  1585.

[The  voyage

319

A.D.
1585.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  voyage  of  Master  Henry  Austell  by  Venice
and  thence  to  Ragusa  over  land,  and  so  to
Constantinople  :  and  from  thence  by  Mol-
davia, Polonia,  Silesia  and  Germanie  to
Hamburg,  &c.

He  9.  of  June  we  tooke  shipping  at
Harewich  and  the  next  day  landed  at  the
Ramekins  in  the  Isle  of  Walcheren  with
very  stormy  weather,  and  that  night
went  to  Middleburch  in  the  same
Island.

The  twelft  we  tooke  shipping  for
Holland,  and  the  13.  we  landed  at  Schiedam:  and  the
same  day  went  to  Delft  by  boat,  and  so  that  night  to  the
Hage.

The  17.  we  tooke  shipping  at  Amsterdam,  and  the  18.
we  landed  at  Enckhuysen.

The 19.  we  tooke  shipping  and  by  the  Zuydersee  we
[II.  i.  195.] passed  that  day  the  Ulie,  and  so  into  the  maine  sea;  And
the  next  day  we  entred  into  the  river  of  Hamburg  called
the  Elbe.

The  21.  we  came  to  anker  in  the  same  river  before  a

towne  of  the  bishop  of  Breme  called  Staden,  where  they

pay  a certaine toll,  and specially  for  wine,  and so that

Hamburg. night  wee  landed  at Hamburg,  where  we  stayde three

dayes.

The  24.  wee  departed  from  Hamburg  in  the  company
of  Edward  Parish  Marchant,  and  that  day  wee  baited  at
Wyntson,  and  so  over  the  heathes  we  left  Lunenburg  on
the  left  hand,  and  travailed  all  that  night.

The  25.  we  met  with  Master  Sanders  upon  the  heathes,

and  passed  by  a  towne  of  the  duke  of  Lunenborg  called

GefFherne,  and  from thence through many  waters,  wee

Brunswig. lay  that  night  within  an  English  mile  of  Brunswig.

Halberstat.  The  27.  we  lay  at  Halberstat,  which  is  a  great  towne

subject  to  the  bishop  of  that  towne.

320

HENRY AUSTELL  ad.

1585.

The 28. we baited at Erinsleiben : and there  wee
entred into  the duke  of  Saxon his  countrey : and  the
same night  we lay  at a towne called Eisleben,  where  Eisleben.
Martine  Luther  was  borne.

The 29.  we passed by Mansfield,  where there  are
many Copper mines  : and so that night went to  CopperMines.
Neuburg upon  the river of Sala ; and at that time
there  was  a  great  faire.

The  30. we baited at a proper towne called  Jena  Jena.
upon the same river, and the same night  wee  lay  at
Cone  upon  that  river.

The  first  of  July  we  baited  at  Salfeld  :  and  the  same  Great  wood  of
day  we  entred  first  into  the  great  woods  of  firre  trees,  -^^^^  ^'^^^'
and  that  night  to  Grevandal  ; The  second  to  dinner  to
Neustat.

The 3. day  to dinner at  Bamberg  : and  before  wee  Bamberg.
came to the towne wee  passed the river of Mayne
that runneth towards Arnfurt, and that night to
Forchaim.

The 4. we came to Nurenberg, and there stayed  Nurenberg.
two  dayes. The  6.  to  bed  to  Blayfield.

The  7.  we  passed  without  Weissenburg  to  dinner  at
Monhaim,  and  that  night  we  passed  the  river  of
Danubius  at  Tonewertd,  and  so  to  bed  to  Nurendof.

The 8. we came to Augspurg, otherwise called  Jugspurg.
Augusta,  upon  the  river  of  Lech.

The  9.  we  lay  at  Landsberg  upon  the  said  river,
in  the  duke  of  Bavars  countrey.

The  10.  to  dinner  at  Svanego,  and  that  night  to
Hamber  against  the  mountaines,  where  the  small  toyes
be  made.

The  II.  to  dinner  to  Parcberk,  &  that  night  to
Sefelt  in  the  Archduke  of  Austria  his  countrey.

The  12.  to  dinner  at  Inspruck,  &  that  night  to  bed
at  Landeck,  where  there  is  a  toll,  and  it  is  the  place
where  Charles  the  fift  and  his  brother  Ferdinand  did
meet.  And  there  is  a  table  of  brasse  with  Latine
letters  in  memorie  thereof.

V  321  X

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

The  13.  we  passed  by  Stizen,  and  dined  at  Prisena,
and  so  that  night  to  Clusen.

The 14. to dinner at Bolsan  and to bed  at Neu-
mark, and  by  the way  we  passed the  dangerous  place,
where  so  many  murthers  have  bene  committed.
The  borders  of The 1 5. to dinner  at  Trent: That day we entred
Italy.  ^^  borders  of  Italy,  that  night  to Lenigo.

The  16.  to  dinner  at  Grigno,  where  the  last  toll  of
the  Emperour  is  :  and  so  we  came  by  Chursa,  which  is
a  streight  passage.  And  the  keeper  thereof  is  drawne
up  by  a  cord  into  his  holde.  And  that  night  we  went
to  Capana  to  bed  in  the countrey  of  the  Venetians.

The 17.  to  dinner  at  castle  Franco  : by  the  way  we
stayed at Tarviso, and there tooke coche, and that
night  came  to  Mestre  to  bed.
Venice.  The 1 8. in the morning we came to Venice, and

there  we  stayed  15.  dayes.  In  which  time  the  duke  of
Venice  called  Nicholas  de  Ponte  died,  and  we  saw  his
burial.  The  Senators  were  continually  shut  up  together,
as  the  maner  is,  to  chuse  a  newe  duke,  which  was
not  yet  chosen  when  we  departed  from  thence.

The  2.  of  August  at  night  wee  did  embarke  our  selves
upon  the  Frigate  of  Cattaro,  an  haven  neere  Ragusa.
The  3.  we  came  to  a  towne  in  Istria  called  Citta  nova.

The  4.  we  came  to  Parenzo,  and  so  that  night  to
Forcera  of  the bishop.

The  5.  we  passed  by  Rovigno  :  and  a  litle  beyond
we  met  with  3.  Galies  of  the  Venetians  :  we  passed  in
the  sight  of  Pola  ;  and  the  same  day  passed  the  gulfe
that  parteth  Istria  from  Dalmatia.

The  6.  of  August  we  came  to  Zara  in  Dalmatia,  a
strong  towne  of  the  Venetians  :  and  so  that  night  to
Sebenico,  which  standeth  in  a  marveilous  goodly  haven,
with  a  strong  castle  at  the  entrie  thereof.

The  7.  we  came  to  Lezina,  and  went  not  on  shoore,
but  traveiled  all  night.

The  8.  we  passed  by  a  very  wel  seated  towne  called
Curzola,  which standeth in  an  island  of  that  name.

322

HENRY AUSTELL  ad.

1585.

The  9.  in  the  morning  betimes  we  landed  at  Ragusa,  Ragusa,
and there stayed three daies, where we found many-
friendly  gentlemen.

The 1 1 .  being  provided of  a  Janizarie  we departed
from Ragusa in  the company of halfe a  dosen Mar-
chants  of  that  towne  : and  within 6.  miles we entred
into the countrey  of Servia. So  traveiling in barren  Servia.
and  craggie  mountaines for the space of  foure dayes,  [II.  i.  196.]
wee came by a small Towne of the Turkes called
Chiernisa, being the 14. of the moneth  ; and there  Chiernisa.
wee  parted  from  the  Marchants.

The  16.  we  dined  in  a  Cavarsara  in  a  Towne  called
Focea,  being  then  greatly  infected  with  the  plague.  Or,  *  Fochia.

The 17.  we  lay by  a  Towne  called  Taslizea.

The  20.  we  came  to  Novibazar.  Novibazar.

The  21.  we  parted  from  thence,  travailing  stil  in  a
countrey  very  ill  inhabited,  &  lying  in  ye  fields.

The  22.  we  passed  within  sight  of  Nicea.  Or,  Nissa.

The  23.  we  passed  in  sight  of  another  towne  called
Circui  :  and  about  those  places  wee  began  to  leave  the
mountaines,  and  to  enter  into  a  very  faire  and  fertile
countrey,  but  as  evill  inhabited  as  the  other,  or  worse.

The  27.  we  came  to  Sophia,  where  wee  stayed  three  So/>Ma.
dayes,  being  our  Janizaries  home  :  and  by  good
chance  we  lay  in  a  Marchants  house  of  Ragusa,  that
came  in  company  with  us  from  Novibazar  ;  and  also
wee  had  in  company,  ever  since  wee  came  from  Focea,
a  Turke  which  was  a  very  good  fellow,  and  he  kept
company  with  us  till  we  came  very  neere  Constantinople.

The first of September we came to Philippopoli,  PhlRppopoli.
which  seemeth to be an ancient towne,  and standeth
upon  the  river  of  Stanuch.

The  4. we came to Andrinopoli,  a very  great and  Andrhopolls.
ancient towne, which standeth in a very large and
champion countrey,  and  there  the  great  Turks mother
doth lye,  being  a  place,  where  the Emperours of  the
Turkes  were  wont  to  lye  very  much.

The 5. we lay  in one  of  the  great  Cavarzaras,  that

323

A.D.
1585.

Silweri.

Constantin-
ople.

Pompeys
plller.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

were built  by Mahomet Bassha  with  so many goodly
commodities.

The  6.  we  lay  in  another  of  them.

The  8.  we  came  to  Siliveri,  which  by  report  was  the
last  towne  that remained Christian.

The  9.  of  September  wee  arrived  at  the  great  and
most  stately  Citie  of  Constantinople,  which  for  the
situation  and  proude  seate  thereof,  for  the  beautifuU  and
commodious  havens,  and  for  the  great  and  sumptuous
buildings  of  their  Temples,  which  they  call  Moschea,
is  to  be  preferred  before  all  the  Cities  of  Europe.
And  there  the  Emperour  of  the  Turkes  then  living,
whose  name  was  Amurat,  kept  his  Court  and  resi-
dence, in  a  marveilous  goodly  place,  with  divers
gardens  and  houses  of  pleasure,  which  is  at  the  least
two  English  miles  in  compasse,  and  the  three  parts
thereof  joyne  upon  the  sea  :  and  on  the  Northeast
part  of  the  Citie  on  the  other  side  of  the  water  over
against  the  Citie  is  the  Towne  of  Pera,  where  the
most  part  of  the  Christians  do  lye.  And  there  also
wee  did  lye.  And  on  the  North  part  of  the  saide
Towne  is  the  Arsenal,  where  the  Galies  are  built  and
doe  remaine  :  And  on  the  Southside  is  all  the  Ordi-
nance, artilerie,  and  houses  of  munition.  Note  that  by
the  way  as  wee  came  from  Ragusa  to  Constantinople,
wee  left  on  our  right  hand  the  Countreys  of  Albania,
and  Macedonia,  and  on  the  left  hande  the  countreys
of  Bosnia,  Bulgaria,  and  the  river  of  Danubius.

The  14.  of  September  was  the  Turkes  Beyram,  that
is,  one  of  their  chiefest  feastes.

The  15.  we  went  to  the  blacke  Sea  called  Pontus
Euxinus,  and  there  upon  a  rocke  we  sawe  a  piller  of
white  Marble  that  was  set  up  by  Pompeius  :  and  from
thence  we  passed  to  the  other  side  of  the  water,  upon
the  shore  of  Asia  and  there  we  dined.

The  25.  we  departed  from  Constantinople.

The  29.  we  came  to  an  ancient  Towne  called  Cher-
chisea,  that is to  say, fourtie Churches,  which in the

324

HENRY AUSTELL  ad.

1585.
olde  time  was  a  very  great  City,  now  full  of  scattered
buildings.

The  4.  of  October  wee  came to  Prouaz,  one dayes  Prouaz.
journey  distant  from  Varna  upon  the  Blacke  Sea.  Varjta.

The  9.  we  came  to  Saxi  upon  the  river  of  Danubius.

The 10.  we  passed  the  said  river  which  in  that  place
is about a  mile over,  and then we entred into the
countrey  of  *  Bogdania  : they are Christians but sub-  Or, Moldavia.
jects  to  the  Turke.

The  12.  we  came  to  Palsin  upon  the  river  Prut.  Palsin  upon

The 14. wee  came  to Yas the principall Towne q{  ^he  nver  of
Bogdania, where Peter the Vayvoda prince of that  Yas'
Countrey  keepeth  his  residence,  of  whom  wee received
great  courtesie,  and  of  the  gentlemen  of  his  Court  :  And
he  caused  us  to  be  safe  conducted  through  his  said  Coun-
trey, and  conveyed  without  coste.

The 17.  we  came  to  Stepanitze.

The  19.  we  came  to  Zotschen,  which  is  the  last  towne  Sotschen.
of  Bogdania  upon  the  river  of  Neister,  that  parteth  the
said  countrey  from  Podolia.

The  20.  we  passed  the  river  of  Nyester  and  came  to  [H.  i.  197.]
Camyenetz in the countrey of  Podolia, subject  to the  ^_y^^^^^  ^
king  of  Poland  :  this  is  one  of  the  strongest  Townes  by  ^c^menetz
nature  and  situation  that  can  be  scene.

The  21.  we  came  to  Skala.  ^kala.

The  22.  to  Slothone,  or  Sloczow.

The  24.  to  Leopolis  which  is  in  Russia  alba,  and  so  is  LeopoHs,  or
the  most  part  of  the  countrey  betwixt  Camyenetz  and  it.  Leunpurg.
And  it  is  a  towne  very  well  built,  well  governed,  full  of
trafique  and  plentifull  :  and  there  we  stayed  five  dayes.

The  30. we baited at Grodecz, and that night at  Grodecz.
Vilna.  Filna.

The 31. we dined at Mostiska, and that night at
Rodmena.

The  first  of  November  in  the  morning  before  day  wee
passed  without  the  Towne  of  Jaroslaw,  where  they  say  is  Jaroslaw.
one  of  the  greatest  faires in  all Poland, and  chiefly  of
horses,  and  that  night  to  Rosdnoska.

325

A.D.
1585.

Lanczut.

Cracovia.

Leade  Mines,

Bendzin.

Salt  digged  out
of  mountaines
in  Poland.

Bitom.

Oppelen,

Schurgasse.
Brigk.

Breslaw.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  second  to  dinner  at  Lanczut,  at  night  to  Retsbou.

The  thirde  to  Sendxizow,  at  night  to  Tarnow,  and  that
night  wee  mette  with  the  Palatine  Laski.

The  fourth  to  Vonuez,  and  that  night  to  Brytska.

The  fift  to  Kuhena.

The  6.  to  Cracovia  the  principall  Citie  of  all  Poland  :
at  which  time  the  King  was  gone  to  Lituania  :  for  he
doeth  make  his  residence  one  yeere  in  Poland,  and  the
other  in  Lituania.  Cracovia  standeth  on  the  river  of
Vistula.

The  9.  wee  departed  from  Cracovia,  and  that  night  wee
came  to  a  village  hard  by  a  Towne  called  Ilkusch,  where
the  leade  Mines  are.

The  10.  wee  passed  by  a  Towne  called  Slawkow  :  where
there  are  also  leade  Mines,  and  baited  that  day  at  Bendzin,
which  is  the  last  towne  of  Poland  towards  Silesia  ;  and
there  is  a  toll.

Note  that  all  the  Countreys  of  Poland,  Russia  alba,
Podolia,  Bogdania,  and  divers  other  Countreys  adjoyning
unto  them,  doe  consume  no  other  salt  but  such  as  is
digged  in  Sorstyn  mountaine  neere  to  Cracovia  which  is
as  hard  as  any  stone  ;  it  is  very  good,  and  goeth  further
then  any  other  salt.  That  night  we  lay  at  Bitom,  which
is  the  first  Towne  of  Silesia.

The  12.  we  passed  by  a  great  towne  called  Strelitz,
and  that  night  we  lay  at  Oppelen  upon  the  river  of
Odera.

The  13.  we  passed  by  Schurgasse,  and  that  night  wee
lay  without  the  towne  of  Brigk  :  for  wee  coulde  not  bee
suffered  to  come  in  by  reason  of  the  plague  which  was  in
those  partes  in  divers  Townes.

The  14.  we  passed  by  Olaw,  and  that  night  wee  came  to
the  Citie  of  Breslaw,  which  is  a  faire  towne,  great,  well
built  and  well  seated  upon  the  river  of  Odera.

The 16.  we  baited  at  Neumargt.

The  17.  wee  passed  by  Lignizt  and  by  Hayn,  and  that
night  to  Buntzel.

The 18.  wee passed by  Naumburg through Gorlitz

326

HENRY AUSTELL  ad

1585.
upon the river of  Neiss, and that night lay  without
Reichenbach.

The  19.  we  passed  by  Baudzen  and  Cannitz,  and  that
night  to  Rensperg.

The  20.  we  passed  by  Hayn,  by  Strelen,  where  we
should  have  passed  the  river  of  Elbe,  but  the  boate  was
not  there,  so  that  night  we  lay  at  a  towne  called
Mulberg.

The  21.  we  passed  the  said  river,  wee  went  by  Belgern,
by  Torga, by  Dumitch  ;  and  at  night  to  Bretsch.

The  22.  wee  passed  the  Elbe  againe  at  Wittenberg,
which  is  a  very  strong  towne,  with  a  good  Universitie  :
and  that  day  we  passed  by  Coswig.

The  23.  wee  passed  through  Zerbst  in  the  morning,
and  that  night  to  Magdeburg,  a  very  strong  Towne,  and  Magdeburg.
well  governed  as  wee  did  heare.  The  most  part  of  the
Countrey,  after  wee  were  come  one  d^yes  journey  on  this
side  Breslawe  to  this  place,  belongeth  to  the  Duke  of
Saxon.

The  24.  wee  passed  by  a  castle  of  the  Marques  of
Brandenburg  called  Wolmerstat,  and  that  night  we  lay  at
Garleben.

The  25.  wee  lay  at  Soltwedel.

The  26.  at  Berg.

The  27.  we  baited  at  Lunenborg,  that  night  we  lay  at  Lunenburg.
Winson.

The  28.  we  came  to  Hamborg,  and  there  stayed  one  Hamborg.
weeke.

The  5.  of  December  wee  departed  from  Hamborg,  and
passed  the  Elbe  by  boate  being  much  frosen,  and  from
the  river  went  on  foote  to  Boxtchoede,  being  a  long
Dutch  mile  off,  and  there  we  lay  ;  and  from  thence  passed
over  land  to  Emden.

Thence  having  passed  through  Friseland  and  Holland,  [II.  i.  198.]
the  25.  being  Christmas  day  in  the  morning  we  came  to
Delft  :  where  wee  found  the  right  honourable  the  Earle  of
Leicester with a goodly company of  Lords, knights,
gentlemen,  and  souldiers.

327

A.D.
1585.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  28.  at  night  to  Roterodam.

The  29.  to  the  Briel,  and  there  stayed  eight  dayes  for
passage.

The  fifth  of  January  we  tooke  shipping.

The  7,  we  landed  at  Gravesend,  and  so  that  night  at
London  with  the  helpe  of  almightie  God.

The  Turkes  passeport  or  safeconduct  for  Captaine
Austell,  and  Jacomo  Manuchio.

Now  thou  which  art  Voyvoda  of  Bog-
dania,  &  Valachia,  &  other  our  officers
abiding  and  dwelling  on  the  way  by
which  men  commonly  passe  into  Bog-
dan  ia,  and  Valachia,  that  the  Embassador
of  England  having  two  English  gentle-
men desirous  to  depart  for  England,
the  one  named  Henry  Austel,  and  the  other  Jacomo
de  Manuchio,  requested  our  highnesse  letters  of  Safe-
conduct  to  passe  through  our  dominions  with  one
servant  to  attende  on  them.  Wherefore  wee  straightly
charge  you  and  all  other  our  servants  by  whom  they
shall  passe,  that  having  received  this  our  commande-
ment,  you  have  diligent  care  and  regard  that  they  may
have  provided  for  them  in  this  their  journey  (for  their
money)  all  such  necessary  provision  as  shalbe  necessary
for  themselves  and  their  horses,  in  such  sort  as  they  may
have  no  cause  hereafter  to  complaine  of  you.  And  if  by
chaunce  they  come  unto  any  place,  where  they  shal
stand  in  feare  either  of  their  persons  or  goods,  that  then
you  carefully  cause  them  to  bee  guarded  with  your  men,
and  to  be  conducted  through  all  suspected  places,  with
sufficient  company  ;  But  have  great  regard  that  they
convey  not  out  of  our  countrey  any  of  our  serviceable
horses.  Obey  our  commandement,  and  give  credite  to
this  our  Seale.

328

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA

A  Passeport  of  the  Earle  of  Leicester  for  Thomas
Forster  gentleman  travaiHng  to Constantinople.

Obertus  Comes  Leicestrise,  bare  de  Den-
bigh, ordinum  Garterii  &  Sancti  Mich-
aelis  eques auratus,  Serenissims Reginas

A.D.

c.  1580.

\  Angliae  a  Secretioribus  consiliis,  &  magis-
ter  equorum,  dux  &  capitaneus  generalis
exercitus  ejusdem  Regiae  majestatis  in
Belgio,  &  gubernator  generalis  Hol-
landiae,  Zelandiae,  &  provinciarum  unitarum  &  associa-
tarum,  omnibus  ad  quos  prassentes  literas  pervenerint,
salutem.  Cum  later  praesentium  Thomas  Forster  nobilis
Anglus  necessariis  de  causis  hinc  Constantinopolim  pro-
fecturus  sit,  &  inde  ad  nos  quanta  potest  celeritate
reversurus  :  petimus  ab  omnibus  &  singulis  Regibus,
principihus,  nobilibus,  magistratibus,  &  aliis,  mandent
&  permittant  dicto  Thomae  cum  duobus  famulis  liberum
transitum  per  eorum  ditiones  &  territoria  sine  deten-
tione  aut  impediment©  injusto,  &  provideri  sibi  de
necessariis  justum  precium  reddenti,  ac  aliter  conveni-
enter  &  humaniter  tractari,  ut  occasiones  ejus  eundi  &
redeundi  requirent  :  Sicut  nos  Maj estates,  Serenitates,
Celsitudines,  &  dominationes  vestrae  paratos  invenietis,  ut
vestratibus  in  similibus  casibus  gratum  similiter  faciamus.
Datum  in  castris  nostris  Duisburgi,  decimo  die  Septem-
bris,  anno 1586.  stylo  veteri.

A  description  of  the  yeerely  voyage  or  pilgrimage
of  the  Mahumitans,  Turkes  and  Mo  ores  unto
Mecca  in Arabia.

Lexandria  the  most  ancient  citie  in  Africa  situated
by  the  seaside  containeth  seven  miles  in  circuite,
and  is  environed  with  two  walks  one  neere  to
the  other  with  high  towers,  but  the  walks  within  be
farre  higher  then  those  without,  with  a  great  ditch
round about the same: yet is not this Citie very

329

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

strong  by  reason  of  the  great  antiquitie,  being  almost
halfe  destroyed  and  ruinated.  The  greatnesse  of  this
Citie  is  such,  that  if  it  were  of  double  habitation,  as
it  is  compassed  with  a  double  wall,  it  might  be  truely
said,  that  there  were  two  Alexandrias  one  builded
upon  another,  because  under  the  foundations  of  the
saide  City  are  great  habitations,  and  incredible  huge
pillers.  True  it  is,  that  this  part  underneath  remaineth
[II.  i.  199.]  at  this  day  inhabitable,  because  of  the  corrupt  aire,  as
also  for  that  by  time,  which  consumeth  all  things,  it  is
greatly  ruinated.  It  might  well  be  sayd,  that  the  founder
hereof,  as  he  was  worthy  in  all  his  enterprises,  so  likewise
in  building  hereof  he  did  a  worke  worthy  of  himselfe,
naming  it  after  his  owne  name.  This  Citie  hath  one
defect,  for  it  is  subject  to  an  evill  ayre,  which  onely
proceedeth  of  that  hollownesse  underneath,  out  of  the
which  issueth  infinite  moisture :  and  that  this  is  true  the
ayre  without  doth  evidently  testifie,  which  is  more  subtile
and  holesome  then  that  beneath.  The  waters  hereof  be
salt,  by  reason  that  the  soile  of  it  selfe  is  likewise  so.
And  therefore  the  inhabitants,  at  such  time  as  the  river
Nilus  floweth,  are  accustomed  to  open  a  great  ditch,  the
head  wherof  extendeth  into  the  said  river,  and  from
thence  they  conveigh  the  same  within  halfe  a  mile  of
Alexandria,  and  so  consequently  by  meanes  of  conduct-
pipes  the  water  commeth  unto  the  cesternes  of  Alexandria,
which  being  full  serve  the  citie  from  one  inundation  to
another.  Within  the  citie  is  a  Pyramide  mentioned  of
in  Histories,  but  not  of  great  importance.  Without  the
citie  is  La  colonna  di  Pompeio,  or  the  pillar  of  Pompey,
being  of  such  height  and  thicknesse,  that  it  is  supposed
there  is  not  the  like  in  the  whole  world  besides.  Within
the  citie  there  is  nothing  of  importance  save  a  litle  castle
which  is  guarded  with  60  Janizaries.  Alexandria  hath
three  portes,  one  towardes  Rossetto,  another  to  the  land
ward,  &  the  third  to  the  sea  ward,  which  is  called
Babelbar,  without  which  appeareth  a  broad  Hand  called
Ghesira  in  the  Moores  tongue,  which is  not  wholy  an

330

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.
Hand,  because  a  litle  point  or  corner  thereof  toucheth
the  firme  lande,  and  therefore  may  be  called  Peninsula,
that  is  to  say,  almost  an  Hand.  Hereupon  are  builded
many  houses  of  the  Jewes,  in  respect  of  the  aire.  This
Peninsula  is  situate  betweene  two  very  good  ports,  one
of  them  being  much  more  safe  then  the  other,  called  The
old  port,  into  the  which  only  the  vessels  of  Barbarie,  and
the  sixe  Gallies  of  the  Grand  Signior  deputeth  for  the
guard  of  Alexandria  doe  enter.  And  this  port  hath  upon
the  right  hand  at  the  mouth  or  enterance  thereof  a  casde
of  small  importance,  and  guarded  but  with  fifteene  men
or  thereabouts.  On  the  other  side  of  this  Hand  is  the
other  called  The  new  port,  which  name  is  not  unfitly
given  unto  it,  for  that  in  all  mens  judgement  in  times
past  there  hath  not  beene  water  there,  because  in  the
midst  of  this  port,  where  the  water  is  very  deepe,  there
are  discovered  and  found  great  sepulchres  and  other
buildings,  out  of  the  which  are  dayly  digged  with  engines
Jaspar  and  Porphyrie  stones  of  great  value,  of  the  which
great  store  are  sent  to  Constantinople  for  the  ornament
of  the  Mesquitas  or  Turkish  Temples,  and  of  other
buildings  of  the  Grand  Signior.  Into  this  port  enter
all  such  vessels  as  traffique  to  this  place.  This  port  hath
on  ech  side  a  castle,  whereof  that  upon  the  Peninsula  is
called  Faraone,  upon  the  toppe  whereof  every  night  there
is  a  light  set  in  a  great  lanterne  for  direction  of  the  ships,
and  for  the  guard  thereof  are  appointed  200  Janizaries :
the  other  on  the  other  side  is  but  a  litle  castle  kept  by
1 8  men.  It  is  certaine,  that  this  haven  of  Alexandria  is
one  of  the  chiefest  havens  in  the  world  :  for  hither  come
to  traffique  people  of  every  Nation,  and  all  sorts  of  vessels
which  goe  round  about  the  citie.  It  is  more  inhabited
by  strangers,  marchants,  and  Christians,  then  by  men  of
the  countrey  which  are  but  a  few  in  number.  Within  Fontecho signi-
the  citie  are  five  Fontechi,  that  is  to  say,  one  of  the  -^^^^  ^^  ^°^^^
Frenchmen,  where  the  Consul  is  resident,  &  this  is  the  f^g^stiFar/^
fairest  and  most  commodious  of  all  the  rest.  Of  the
other foure, two belong to the  Venetians,  one to the

331

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

Raguseans,  and  the  fourth  to  the  Genoueses.  And  all
strangers  which  come  to  traffique  there,  except  the
Venetians,  are  under  the  French  Consull.  It  is  also  to
be  understood,  that  all  the  Christians  dwell  within  their
Fontechi,  and  every  evening  at  the  going  downe  of  the
sunne,  they  which  are  appointed  for  that  office  goe  about
and  shut  all  the  gates  of  the  saide  Fontechi  outward,  and
the  Christians  shut  the  same  within :  and  so  likewise
they  doe  on  the  Friday  (which  is  the  Moores  and  the
Turkes  Sabboth)  till  their  devotions  be  expired.  And
by  this  meanes  all  parties  are  secure  and  voide  of  feare :
for  in  so  doing  the  Christians  may  sleepe  quietly  and
not  feare  robbing,  and  the  Moores  neede  not  doubt
whiles  they  sleepe  or  pray,  that  the  Christians  should
make  any  tumult,  as  in  times  past  hath  happened.

Of  the  Coast  of  Alexandria.

^N  the  side  towardes  Barbaric  along  the  sea-coast  for
a  great  space  there  is  founde  neither  hold,  nor  any
thing  worthy  of  mention :  but  on  the  other  side  towards
Syria 13 miles from Alexandria standeth a litle  castle

Bkhiei:  called  Bichier  kept  by  fiftie  Turkes,  which  castle  is  very

olde  and  weake,  and  hath  a  port  which  in  times  past  was
good,  but  at  this  present  is  utterly  decayed  and  full  of
sand,  so  that  the  vessels  which  come  thither  dare  not
come neere the shoare, but ride far off  into the sea.

Rosetto.  Fortie  miles further  is  Rossetto,  which  is  a  litle  towne

without  walles,  and  is  situate  upon  the  banke  of  Nilus
three  miles  from  the  sea,  at  which  place  many  times  they
build  ships  and  other  vessels,  for  governement  whereof

[II.  i.  200.]  is  appointed  a  Sanjacbey,  without  any  other  guard  :  it
is  a  place  of  traffique,  and  the  inhabitants  are  very  rich,
but  naughtie  varlets  and  traytours.  Further  downe  along
the  sea-side  and  the  river  banke  is  another  litle  castle
like  unto  the  abovesayde,  and  because  the  Moores
beleeve,  that  Mecca  will  in  short  time  be  conquered  by
the  Christians,  they  holde  opinion,  that  the  same  being
lost  shall  be renued  in  this place  of  Rossetto,  namely,

332

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.
that  all  their  prayers,  vowes,  and  pilgrimages  shall  be
transported  to  Rossetto,  as  the  religious  order  of  Saint
John  of  the  Rhodes  is  translated  thence  to  Malta.
Further  forwarde  thirtie  miles  standes  another  castle  of
small  importance  called  Brulles,  kept  continually  by
fourtie  Turkes,  which  hath  a  good  and  secure  port,  in
forme  like  to  a  very  great  lake  or  ponde,  wherein  is  taken
great  quantitie  of  fish,  which  they  salt,  and  the  marchants
of  Candie  and  Cyprus  come  thither  to  lade  the  same,
and  it  is  greatly  esteemed,  especially  of  the  Candiots,  who
having  great  abundance  of  wine  adventure  abroad  to
seeke  meate  fitte  for  the  taste  of  the  sayd  wine.  Distant
from  Brulles  five  and  thirtie  miles  there  is  another  castle
like  unto  the  abovesayd  kept  by  an  Aga  with  fourtie
men  or  thereabout.  More  within  the  lande  by  the  rivers
side  is  Damiata  an  auncient  citie  environed  with  walles
contayning  five  miles  in  circuit,  and  but  of  small  strength.
For  the  governement  of  this  place  is  a  Sanjaco  with  all
his  housholde  and  no  other  companie.  This  citie  is  very
large,  delightfull,  and  pleasant,  abounding  with  gardens
and  faire  fountaines.  Other  fortie  miles  further  is  Latma,
a  castle  of  very  small  importance,  and  kept  as  other  with
fortie  Turkes  under  an  Aga.  In  this  place  is  no  port,
but  a  roade  very  daungerous,  and  without  other  habita-
tion. Passing  this  place  we  enter  Judea.  But  because
our  intent  is  to  reason  simply  of  the  voyage  to  Mecca,
we  will  proceede  no  further  this  way,  but  returning  to
our  first  way,  let  it  suffice  to  say,  that  from  Alexandria
to  Cairo  are  two  hundred  miles,  in  which  way  I  finde
nothing  woorthie  of  memorie.

Of  the  mightie  Citie  of  Cairo.

CAiro  containeth  in  circuit  eighteene  miles,  being  so
inhabited  and  replenished  with  people,  that  almost  it
cannot  receive  more  ;  and  therefore  they  have  begunne
to  builde  newe  houses  without  the  citie  and  about  the
walles.  In  Cairo  are  people  of  all  Nations,  as  Christians,
Armenians, Abexins, Turkes, Moores, Jewes, Indians,

333

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

Medians,  Persians,  Arabians,  and  other  sortes  of  people,
which  resort  thither  by  reason  of  the  great  traffique.
This  citie  is  governed  by  a  Basha,  which  ministreth
justice,  together  with  the  Cadie  throughout  the  whole
kingdome.  Also  there  are  two  and  twentie  Sanjackes,
whose  office  is  onely  to  oversee  and  guarde  the  kingdome
for  every  good  respect.  There  are  also  seven  thousand
Turkes  in  pay,  to  wit,  three  thousand  Janizaries,  and
foure  thousand  horsemen  :  The  rest  of  the  people  in
Cairo  are  for  the  most  part  marchants  which  goe  and
come,  and  the  remnant  are  Moores  and  other  base  people.
About  two  miles  from  Cairo  there  is  another  little  Cairo
called  The  olde  Cairo,  which  containeth  in  circuit  litle
more  then  tenne  miles,  and  the  better  halfe  is  not  in-
habited, but  destroyed,  whereof  I  neede  not  make  any
other  mention.  The  new  Cairo  answereth  every  yeere
in  tribute  to  the  grand  Signior,  600000  ducates  of  golde,
neat  and  free  of  all  charges  growing  on  the  same,  which
money  is  sent  to  Constantinople,  about  the  fine  of  Sep-
tember, by  the  way  of  Aleppo,  alwayes  by  lande,  under
the  custodie  of  three  hundred  horsemen  and  two  hundred
Janizaries  footmen.  The  citie  of  Cairo  is  adorned  with
many  faire  Mesquitas  rich,  great,  and  of  goodly  and
gorgeous  building,  among  which  are  five  principall.  The
first  is  called  Morastano,  that  is  to  say.  The  hospitall,
which  hath  of  rent  five  hundred  ducats  of  golde  every
day  left  unto  it  by  a  king  of  Damasco  from  auncient
times ;  which  king  having  conquered  Cairo,  for  the
space  of  five  dayes  continually  put  the  people  thereof
to  the  sword,  and  in  the  end  repenting  him  of  so  great
manslaughter,  caused  this  cruelty  to  cease,  and  to  obtaine
remission  for  his  sinne  committed,  caused  this  hospitall
to  be  built,  enriching  it  as  is  abovesaid.  The  second
famous  monument  of  Cairo  is  called  Neffisa,  of  one
Neffisa  buried  there,  who  was  a  Dame  of  honour,  and
mooved  by  lust,  yeelded  her  body  voluntarily  without
rewarde,  to  any  that  required  the  same,  and  sayde  she
bestowed  this  almes  for  the  love  of  her  Prophet  Maho-

334

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.
met,  and  therefore  at  this  day  they  adore  her,  reverence
her,  and  finally  have  canonized  her  for  a  Saint,  affirming
that  shee  did  many  miracles.  The  third  is  called  Zavia
della  Innachari,  who  was  one  of  the  foure  Doctors  in  the
law.  The  fourth  is  called  Imamsciafii,  where  is  buried
Sciafii  the  second  Doctor  of  this  law.  Of  the  other  two
Doctors  one  is  buried  in  Damasco,  the  other  in  Aleppo.
The  fift  &  last  famous  monument  is  Giamalazar,  that
is,  the  house  of  Lazarus  :  and  this  is  the  generall  Uni-
versity of  the  whole  kingdome  of  Egypt.  In  this  place
Anno  1566  in  the  moneth  of  January  by  misfortune  of  1566.
fire  were  burned  nine  thousand  bookes  of  great  value,
as  well  for  that  they  were  written  by  hand,  as  also  [II.  i.  201.]
wrought  so  richly  with  golde,  that  they  were  worth  300
and  400  ducats  a  piece,  one  with  another.  And  because
it  could  never  be  knowen  yet  how  this  fire  beganne,
they  have  and  doe  holde  the  same  for  a  most  sinister
augurie,  and  an  evident  and  manifest  signe  of  their
utter  ruine.  The  houses  of  Cairo  without  are  very
faire,  &  within  the  greater  number  richly  adorned  with
hangings  wrought  with  golde.  Every  person  which
resorteth  to  this  place  for  traffiques  sake,  is  bound  to
pay  halfe  a  duckat,  except  the  gentlemen  Venetians,
Siotes,  and  Rhaguseans,  because  they  are  tributarie  to
the  Grand  Signior.  Cairo  is  distant  from  the  river  Nilus  The  descrlp-
a  mile  and  more,  being  situate  on  a  plaine,  save  that  ^'^°'^  of  Cairo.
on  the  one  side  it  hath  a  faire  little  hill,  on  the  toppe
whereof  stands  a  faire  castle,  but  not  strong,  for  that
it  may  be  battered  on  every  side,  but  very  rich  &  large,
compassed  about  with  faire  gardens  into  the  which  they
conveigh  water  for  their  necessitie  out  of  Nilus,  with
certaine  wheeles  &  other  like  engines.  This  magnificent
citie  is  adorned  with  very  fruitfull  gardens  both  pleasant
and  commodious,  with  great  plenty  of  pondes  to  water  the
same.  Notwithstanding  the  great  pleasures  of  Cairo  are
in  the  moneth  of  August,  when  by  meanes  of  the  great
raine  in  Ethiopia  the  river  Nilus  overfloweth  and  watereth
all  the  countrey, and then they open  the  mouth  of  a

335

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

great  ditch,  which  extendeth  into  the  river,  and  passeth
through  the  midst  of  the  citie,  and  entring  there  are
innumerable  barkes  rowing  too  and  fro  laden  with  gallant
girles  and  beautifull  dames,  which  with  singing,  eating,
drinking  and  feasting,  take  their  solace.  The  women  of
this  countrey  are  most  beautifull,  and  goe  in  rich  attire
bedecked  with  gold,  pretious  stones,  and  jewels  of  great
value,  but  chiefely  perfumed  with  odours,  and  are  very-
libidinous,  and  the  men  likewise,  but  foule  and  hard
favoured.  The  soile  is  very  fertile  and  abundant,  the
flesh  fat  which  they  sell  without  bones,  their  candles
they  make  of  the  marowe  of  cattell,  because  the  Moores
eate  the  tallow.  They  use  also  certaine  litle  furnaces
made  of  purpose,  under  the  which  they  make  fire,  putting
into  the  furnace  foure  or  five  hundred  egges,  and  the
said  fire  they  nourish  by  litle  and  litle,  until!  the  chickens
be  hatched,  which  after  they  be  hatched,  and  become
somewhat  bigger,  they  sell  them  by  measure  in  such
sort,  as  we  sell  and  measure  nuts  and  chestnuts  and  such
like.

Of  certaine  notable  monuments  without  the  citie
of  Cairo.

Without  the  Citie,  sixe  miles  higher  into  the  land,
are  to  be  seene  neere  unto  the  river  diverse  Pira-
mides,  among  which  are  three  marveilous  great,  and  very
artificially  wrought.  Out  of  one  of  these  are  dayly
digged  the  bodies  of  auncient  men,  not  rotten  but  all
whole,  the  cause  whereof  is  the  qualitie  of  the  Egyptian
soile,  which  will  not  consume  the  flesh  of  man,  but
rather  dry  and  harden  the  same,  and  so  alwayes  con-
serveth  it.  And  these  dead  bodies  are  the  Mummie
which  the  Phisitians  and  Apothecaries  doe  against  our
willes  make  us  to  swallow.  Also  by  digging  in  these
Pyramides  oftentimes  are  found  certaine  Idoles  or  Images
of  golde,  silver,  and  other  mettall,  but  under  the  other
piramides  the  bodies  are  not  taken  up  so  whole  as  in
this,  but  there  are  found  legges  and  armes  comparable  to

336

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.
the  limmes  of  giants.  Neare  to  these  piramides  ap-
peareth  out  of  the  sand  a  great  head  of  stone  somewhat
like  marble,  which  is  discovered  so  farre  as  the  necke
joyneth  with  the  shoulders,  being  all  whole,  saving  that
it  wanteth  a  little  tippe  of  the  nose.  The  necke  of  this
head  contayneth  in  circuit  about  sixe  and  thirty  foot,
so  that  it  may  be  according  to  the  necke  considered,
what  greatnesse  the  head  is  of.  The  river  Nilus  is  a
mile  broad,  wherein  are  very  many  great  Croccodiles
from  Cairo  upward,  but  lower  then  Cairo  passeth  no
such  creature  :  and  this,  they  say,  is  by  reason  of  an
inchantment  made  long  since  which  hindereth  their  pas-
sage for  comming  any  lower  then  Cairo.  Moreover  of
these  creatures  there  are  sometimes  found  some  of  an
incredible  bignesse,  that  is  to  say,  of  fourtie  foot  about.
The  males  have  their  members  like  to  a  man,  and  the
females  like  to  a  woman.  These  monsters  oftentimes
issue  out  of  the  water  to  feede,  and  finding  any  small
beasts,  as  sheepe,  lambes,  goates,  or  other  like,  doe  great
harme.  And  whiles  they  are  foorth  of  the  water,  if  they
happen  at  unwares  upon  any  man,  woman  or  childe,
whom  they  can  overcome,  they  spare  not  their  lives.
In  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde  one  thousand  five  hundred
and  sixtie  it  happened,  that  certaine  poore  Christians
travelling  by  Cairo  towardes  the  countrey  of  Prete  Janni
to  rescue  certaine  slaves,  were  guided  by  a  Chaus,  and
journeyed  alongst  the  banke  of  the  said  river.  The
Chaus  remained  lingering  alone  behinde  to  make  his
prayers  (as  their  custome  is)  at  a  place  called  Tana,
whom  being  busie  in  his  double  devotion  one  of  these
Crocodiles  ceazed  by  the  shoulders,  and  drew  him  under
water,  so  that  he  was  never  after  seene.  And  for  this
cause  they  have  made  in  sundry  places  certaine  hedges
as  bankes  within  the  water,  so  that  betwixt  the  hedge
and  banke  of  the  river  there  remaineth  so  much  water,
that  the  women  washing  may  take  water  without  danger
at  their  pleasure.  This  countrey  is  so  fruitful!,  that  it  [ll.  i.  202,]
causeth the women as also other creatures to bring

V  337  Y

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c,  1580.

foorth  one,  two,  and  oft-times  three  at  a  birth.  Five
miles  southwarde  of  Cairo  is  a  place  called  Matarea,
where  the  balme  is  refined  :  and  therefore  some  will
say,  that  the  trees  which  beare  the  balme  growe  in  the
said  place,  wherein  they  are  deceived  :  for  the  sayde  trees
growe  two  dayes  journey  from  Mecca,  in  a  place  called
Bedrihone,  which  yeeldeth  balme  in  great  plenty,  but
salvage,  wilde,  and  without  vertue,  and  therefore  the
Moores  carying  the  same  within  litle  chests  from  Bedri-
hone to  Matarea,  where  the  trees  being  replanted  (be
it  by  vertue  of  the  soyle,  or  the  water,  aire,  or  any  other
thing  whatsoever)  it  sufficeth  that  here  they  beare  the
true  balme  and  licour  so  much  in  these  dayes  esteemed
of.  In  this  place  of  Matarea  there  are  certaine  little
houses,  with  most  goodly  gardens,  and  a  chappell  of
antiquity,  where  the  very  Moores  themselves  affirme,  that
the  mother  of  the  blessed  Christ  fleeing  from  the  fury  of
wicked  Herode  there  saved  her  selfe  with  the  childe,
wherein  that  saying  of  the  Prophet  was  fulfilled.  Ex
^gypto  vocavi  filium  meum.  The  which  Chappell  in
the  yeare  of  our  Lorde  one  thousand  five  hundred  and
foure,  the  Magnifico  Daniel  Barbaro  first  ConsuU  of  that
place  went  to  visite,  and  caused  it  to  be  renued  and
reedified,  so  that  in  these  dayes  there  resort  thither  many
Christians,  who  oftentimes  bring  with  them  a  Priest,  to
say  masse  there.  Also  about  an  Harquebuz-shotte  from
Matarea  is  a  spire  of  great  height  like  to  that  at  Rome,
and  more  beautifuU  to  beholde.  Neere  unto  the  olde
Cairo  are  yet  twelve  storehouses  of  great  antiquitie,  but
now  very  much  decayed,  and  these  till  late  dayes  served
to  keepe  corne  for  behoofe  of  the  kingdome,  concerning
which  many  are  of  opinion,  that  the  founder  hereof  was
Joseph  the  sonne  of  Jacob,  for  consideration  of  the  seven
deare  yeeres.  Also  passing  higher  up  by  the  banke  of
Nilus,  there  is  to  bee  seene  a  fayre  Citie  overflowed  with
water,  the  which  at  such  time  as  Nilus  floweth  lyeth  under
water,  but  when  the  water  returneth  to  the  marke,  there
plainely  appeare  princely  palaces,  and  stately  pillars,  being

338

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.
of  some  called  Thebes,  where  they  say  that  Pharao  was  Olde  Thebes.
resident.  Moreover  three  dayes  journey  higher  up  are
two  great  images  of  speckled  marble,  all  whole,  and
somewhat  sunke  into  the  earth,  being  things  wonderfull
to  consider  of,  for  the  nose  of  either  is  two  spannes  and
an  halfe  long,  and  the  space  from  one  eare  to  the  other
conteineth  tenne  spannes,  the  bodies  being  correspondent
to  their  heads,  and  graven  in  excellent  proportion,  so  that
they  are  shapes  of  marvellous  hugenesse,  and  these  they
call  The  wife,  and  The  daughter  of  Pharao.

Of  the  patriarke  of  Greece.

IN  Cairo  are  two  Patriarkes,  one  of  the  Greekes,  and
another  of  the  Jacobites.  The  Greeke  Patriarke  called
Gioechni,  being  about  the  age  of  one  hundred  and
thirteene  yeeres,  was  a  very  good  and  holy  man.  They
say,  that  when  Soldan  Gauri  of  Egypt  reigned,  there  was
done  this  miracle  following  :  this  good  patriarke  being
envied  at  by  the  Jewes  of  the  countrey,  for  none  other
cause,  but  for  his  good  workes,  and  holy  life,  it  happened
(I  say)  that  being  in  disputation  with  certaine  of  the
Hebrewes  in  presence  of  the  Sultan,  and  reasoning  of
their  lawe  and  faith,  it  was  sayd  unto  him  by  one  of  these
Miscreants  :  sith  thou  beleevest  in  the  faith  of  Christ,
take  and  drinke  this  potion  which  I  will  give  thee  ;  and
if  thy  Christ  be  true  Messias  and  true  God,  he  will  (sayd
he)  deliver  thee  from  daunger.  To  whom  the  auncient
patriarke  answered,  that  he  was  content  :  whereupon  that
cursed  Jewe  brought  him  a  cuppe  of  the  most  venemous
and  deadly  poyson  that  could  be  found,  which  the  holy
Patriarke  having  perceived,  said  :  In  the  name  of  the
father,  of  the  sonne,  and  of  the  holy  Ghost  :  and  having
so  sayde  he  dranke  it  quite  up  ;  which  done,  he  tooke
a  droppe  of  pure  water,  putting  it  into  that  very  cup,  and
gave  it  unto  the  Jewe,  saying  unto  him,  I  in  the  name
of  my  Christ  have  drunke  thy  poyson,  and  therefore  in
the  name  of  thy  expected  Messias,  drinke  this  water  of
mine  within  thine  owne  cuppe. Whereupon the  Jewe

339

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

tooke  the  cup  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Patriarke,  and
having  drunke  the  water,  within  halfe  an  houre  burst  a
sunder.  And  the  Patriarke  had  none  other  hurt,  save
that  he  became  somewhat  pale  in  sight,  and  so  remained
ever  after.  And  this  miracle  (which  meriteth  to  be  called
no  lesse)  was  done  to  the  great  commendation  of  the  holy
Patriarke  in  the  presence  of  a  thousand  persons,  and
namely  of  the  Soldan  of  Egypt  :  who  seeing  the  despight
of  the  Jewes,  unto  their  owne  cost  and  confusion  com-
pelled them  to  make  the  conduct,  which  with  so  many
engines  commeth  into  the  castle  from  Nilus  above
mentioned.  And  this  triumphant  Patriarke  not  long
since  was  alive,  and  in  perfect  health,  which  God  continue
long  time.

[II.  i.  203.] Of  the  preparation of  the  Carovan to  goe  to

Mecca.

AS  touching  the  Carovan  which  goeth  to  Mecca,  it
is  to  be  understoode,  that  the  Mahumetans  observe
a  kinde  of  lent  continuing  one  whole  moone,  and  being
a  moveable  ceremonie,  which  sometimes  falleth  high,
sometimes  lowe  in  the  yeere  called  in  their  tongue
Ramazan,  and  their  feast  is  called  Bairam.  During  this
time  of  lent  all  they  which  intende  to  goe  unto  Mecca
resort  unto  Cairo,  because  that  twentie  dayes  after  the
feast  the  Carovan  is  readie  to  depart  on  the  voyage  :  and
thither  resort  a  great  multitude  of  people  from  Asia,
Grecia,  and  Barbaria  to  goe  on  this  voyage,  some  mooved
by  devotion,  and  some  for  traffiques  sake,  and  some  to
passe  away  the  time.  Nowe  within  fewe  dayes  after  the
feast  they  which  goe  on  the  voyage  depart  out  of  the  citie
two  leagues  unto  a  place  called  Birca,  where  they  expect
the  Captaine  of  the  Carovan.  This  place  hath  a  great
pond  caused  by  the  inundation  of  Nilus,  and  so  made,
that  the  camels  and  other  beastes  may  drinke  therein  :
whereof,  namely,  of  Mules,  Camels,  and  Dromedaries
there  are  at  least  fortie  thousand,  and  the  persons  which
followe  the  Carovan  everie  yeere  are  about  fiftie  thousand,

340

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.

fewe  more  or  lesse,  according  to  the  times.  Moreover
every  three  yeeres  they  renue  the  Captaine  of  the
Carovan,  called  in  the  Arabian  tongue  Amarilla  Haggi,
that  is,  the  Captaine  of  the  Pilgrimes,  to  whom  the  Grand
Signior  giveth  every  voiage  eighteene  purses,  conteyning
each  of  them  sixe  hundred  twentie  and  five  ducates  of
golde,  and  these  be  for  the  behoofe  of  the  Carovan,  and
also  to  doe  almes  unto  the  needfull  pilgrimes.  This  Cap-
taine, besides  other  servingmen  which  follow  him,  hath
also  foure  Chausi  to  serve  him.  Likewise  he  hath  with
him  for  the  securitie  of  the  Carovan  foure  hundred
souldiers,  to  wit,  two  hundred  Spachi  or  horsemen
mounted  on  Dromedaries,  and  two  hundred  Janizaries
riding  upon  Camels.  The  Chausi  and  the  Spachi  are
at  the  charge  of  the  Captaine,  but  the  Janizaries
not  so,  for  their  provision  is  made  them  from  Cairo.
The  Spachi  weare  caps  or  bonnets  like  to  the  caps  of
Sergeants,  but  the  Janizaries  after  another  sort,  with  a
lappe  falling  downe  behinde  like  a  French-hoode,  and
having  before  a  great  piece  of  wrought  silver  on  their
heads.  The  charge  of  these  is  to  cause  the  Carovan  to
inarch  in  good  array  when  neede  requireth  ;  these  are  not
at  the  commaundement  of  any  but  of  the  Captaine  of
the  Carovan.  Moreover  the  Captaine  hath  for  his  guide
€ight  pilots,  the  office  of  whom  is  alwayes  stable  and  firme
from  heire  to  heire,  and  these  goe  before  guiding  the
Carovan,  and  shewing  the  way,  as  being  well  experienced
in  the  place,  and  in  the  night  they  governe  them  as  the
mariners,  by  the  starre.  These  also  use  to  sende  before  Pieces  of  dr'^
foure  or  five  men  carrying  pieces  of  dry  wood  which  give
light,  because  they  should  not  goe  out  of  the  way,  and  if
at  any  time  through  their  ill  hap  they  wander  astray  out
of  the  way,  they  are  cast  downe  and  beaten  with  so  many
bastonadoes  upon  the  soles  of  their  feete,  as  serve  them
for  a  perpetuall  remembrance.  The  Captaine  of  the
Carovan  hath  his  Lieutenant  accompanied  continually
with  fifteene  Spachi,  and  he  hath  the  charge  to  set  the
Carovan  in  order,  and  to  cause  them  to  depart  on  their

341

wood  in  stead
of  t07xhes.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

journey  when  neede  requireth  :  and  during  the  voyage
their  office  is  some  whiles  to  goe  before  with  the  fore-
warde,  sometimes  to  come  behinde  with  the  rereward,
sometimes  to  march  on  the  one  side,  and  sometimes  on
the  other,  to  spy,  that  the  coast  be  cleare.  The  Carovan
carrieth  with  it  sixe  pieces  of  ordinance  drawen  by  12
camels,  which  serve  to  terrific  the  Arabians,  as  also  to
make  triumph  at  Mecca,  and  other  places.  The  mar-
chants  which  followe  the  Carovan,  some  carry  for
marchandise  cloth  of  silke,  some  Corall,  some  tinne,
others  wheat,  rise,  and  all  sorts  of  graine.  Some  sell
by  the  way,  some  at  Mecca,  so  that  every  one  bringeth
something  to  gaine  by,  because  all  marchandise  that  goeth
by  land  payeth  no  custome,  but  that  which  goeth  by
sea  is  bound  to  pay  tenne  in  the  hundred.

The  beginning  of  the  voyage.

THe  feast  before  the  Carovan  setteth  forth,  the
Captaine  with  all  his  retinue  and  officers  resort  unto
the  castle  of  Cairo  before  the  Basha,  which  giveth  unto
every  man  a  garment,  and  that  of  the  Captaine  is  wrought
with  golde,  and  the  others  are  served  according  to  their
degree.  Moreover  he  delivereth  unto  him  ye  Chisva
Talnabi,  which  signifieth  in  the  Arabian  tongue,  The
garment  of  the  Prophet  :  this  vesture  is  of  silke,  wrought
in  the  midst  with  letters  of  gold,  which  signifie  :  La  ilia
ill'  alia  Mahumet  Resullala  :  that  is  to  say.  There  are  no
gods  but  God,  and  his  ambassadour  Mahumet.  This
garment  is  made  of  purpose  to  cover  from  top  to  botome
a  litle  house  in  Mecca  standing  in  the  midst  of  the
Mesquita,  the  which  house  (they  say)  was  builded  by
Abraham  or  by  his  sonne  Ismael.  After  this  he  de-
livereth to  him  a  gate  made  of  purpose  for  the  foresaid
[II  i.  204,]  house  of  Abraham  wrought  all  with  fine  golde,  and
being  of  excellent  workmanship,  and  it  is  a  thing  of  great
value.  Besides,  he  delivereth  unto  him  a  covering  of
greene  velvet  made  in  maner  of  a  pyramis,  about  nine
palmes  high,  and  artificially  wrought  with  most  fine  golde,

342

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c,  1580.
and  this  is  to  cover  the  tombe  of  their  prophet  within
Medina,  which  tombe  is  built  in  manner  of  a  pyramis  :
and  besides  that  covering  there  are  brought  many  others
of  golde  and  silke,  for  the  ornament  of  the  sayde  tombe.
Which  things  being  consigned,  the  Basha  departeth  not
from  his  place  ;  but  the  Captaine  of  the  Carovan  taketh
his  leave  with  all  his  officers  and  souldiers,  and  departeth
accompanied  with  all  the  people  of  Cairo  orderly  in
manner  of  a  procession,  with  singing,  shouting  and  a
thousand  other  ceremonies  too  long  to  recite.  From  the
castle  they  goe  to  a  gate  of  the  citie  called  Bab-Nassera,
without  the  which  standes  a  Mosquita,  and  therein  they
lay  up  the  sayd  vestures  very  well  kept  and  guarded.
And  of  this  ceremony  they  make  so  great  account,  that
the  world  commeth  to  see  this  sight,  yea  the  women
great  with  childe,  and  others  with  children  in  their  armes,
neither  is  it  lawfull  for  any  man  to  forbid  his  wife  the
going  to  this  feast,  for  that  in  so  doing  the  wife  may
separate  her  selfe  from  her  husband,  and  may  lie  with  any
other  man,  in  regard  of  so  great  a  trespasse.  Now  this
procession  proceeding  from  the  castle  towardes  the  Mos-
quita, the  Camels  which  bring  the  vestures  are  all  adorned
with  cloth  of  golde,  with  many  little  belles,  and  passing
along  the  streete  you  may  see  the  multitude  casting  upon
the  said  vestures  thousands  of  beautifull  flowers  of  divers
colours,  &  sweete  water,  others  bringing  towels  &  fine
cloth  touch  the  same,  which  ever  after  they  keepe  as
reliques  with  great  reverence.  Afterward  having  left  the
vesture  in  the  Mosquita,  as  is  aforesaid,  they  returne
againe  into  the  citie,  where  they  remaine  the  space  of  20
dayes,  and  then  the  captaine  departeth  with  his  company,
and  taking  the  vestures  out  of  the  Mosquita,  carieth  the
same  to  the  foresaid  place  of  Birca,  where  the  Captaine
having  pitched  his  tent  with  the  standard  of  the  grand
Signior  over  the  gate,  &  the  other  principall  tents  stand-
ing about  his,  stayeth  there  some  tenne  dayes  and  no
more  :  in  which  time  all  those  resort  thither  that  meane
to  follow  the  Carovan  in  this  voyage  to  Mecca. "Where

343

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

you  shall  see  certaine  women  which  intend  to  goe  on  this
voiage  accompanied  with  their  parents  and  friends  mounted
upon  Camels,  adorned  with  so  many  tryfles,  tassels,  and
knots,  that  in  beholding  the  same  a  man  cannot  refraine
from  laughter.  The  last  night  before  their  departure
they  make  great  feasting  and  triumph  within  the  Carovan,
with  castles  and  other  infinite  devises  of  fireworke,  the
Janizaries  alwayes  standing  round  about  the  tent  of  the
Captaine  with  such  shouting  and  joy,  that  on  every  side
the  earth  resoundeth,  and  this  night  they  discharge  all
their  ordinance,  foure  or  sixe  times,  and  after  at  the  breake
of  the  day  upon  the  sound  of  a  trumpet  they  march  for-
ward on  their  way.

What times the Carovan travelleth, and when

it  resteth.

IT  is  to  be  noted,  that  from  Cairo  to  Mecca  they  make
40  dayes  journey  or  thereabout,  &  the  same  great
dayes  journeies.  For  the  custome  of  the  Carovan  is  to
travell  much  and  rest  little,  and  ordinarily  they  journey  in
this  maner  :  They  travell  from  two  a  clocke  in  the  morn-
ing untill  the  sunne  rising,  then  having  rested  till  noone,
they  set  forward,  and  so  continue  till  night,  &  then  also
rest  againe,  as  is  abovesaid,  till  two  of  the  clocke  :  and
this  order  they  observe  untill  the  end  of  the  voiage,
never  changing  the  same,  except  in  some  places,  whereof
we  will  hereafter  speake,  where  for  respect  of  water  they
rest  sometimes  a  day  and  an  halfe,  and  this  they  observe
to  refresh  themselves,  otherwise  both  man  and  beast
would  die.

In  what  order  the  Carovan  travelleth.

THe  maner  and  order  which  the  Carovan  observeth  in
marching  is  this.  It  goeth  divided  into  three  parts,
to  wit,  the  foreward,  the  maine  battell,  and  the  rereward.
In  the  foreward  go  the  8  Pilots  before  with  a  Chaus,
which  hath  foure  knaves,  &  ech  knave  carrieth  a  sinew  of
a  bul,  to  the  end  that  if  occasion  requireth,  ye  bastonado

344

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  a.d.

c.  1580.
may  be  given  to  such  as  deserve  the  same.  These  knaves
cast  offendours  downe,  turning  up  the  soles  of  their  feete
made  fast  to  a  staffe,  giving  them  a  perpetual!  remem-
brance for  them  &  the  beholders.  This  Chaus  is  as  the
Captaine  of  the  foreward,  which  commandeth  lights  to  be
carried  before  when  they  travell  in  the  night.  Also  there
go  in  this  foreward  6  Santones  with  red  turbants  upon
their  heads,  &  these  eat  and  ride  at  the  cost  of  the  Cap-
taine of  the  Carovan.  These  Santones  when  the  Carovan
arriveth  at  any  good  lodging,  suddenly  after  they  have
escried  the  place,  cry  with  an  horrible  voyce  saying,  good
cheare,  good  cheare,  we  are  neere  to  the  wished  lodging.
For  which  good  newes  the  chiefe  of  the  company  bestow
their  benevolence  upon  them.  In  this  foreward  goeth  very
neere  the  third  part  of  the  people  of  the  Carovan,  behind
whom  go  alwayes  25  Spachi  armed  with  swords,  bowes  &
arrowes  to  defend  them  from  thieves.  Next  unto  the  [II.  i.  205.]
foreward,  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  foUoweth  the  maine
battell,  and  before  the  same  are  drawen  the  sayd  sixe
pieces  of  ordinance,  with  their  gunners,  and  fifteene
Spachi  Archers.  And  next  unto  these  commeth  the  chiefe
physicion,  who  is  an  olde  man  of  authoritie,  having  with
him  many  medicines,  oyntments,  salves,  and  other  like
refreshings  for  the  sicke,  having  also  camels  with  him  for
the  sicke  to  ride  on,  which  have  no  horse  nor  beast.
Next  unto  him  goeth  one  Camell  alone,  the  fairest  that
can  be  found  :  for  with  great  industrie  is  sought  the
greatest  and  fairest  which  may  be  found  within  the
dominions  of  the  Grand  Signior.  This  camell  also  is
decked  with  cloth  of  golde  and  silke,  and  carieth  a  litle
chest  made  of  pure  Legmame  made  in  likenesse  of  the
arke  of  the  olde  Testament  :  but,  as  is  abovesayd,  made
of  pure  Legmame,  without  golde  or  any  other  thing  of
cost.  Within  this  chest  is  the  Alcoran  all  written  with
great  letters  of  golde,  bound  between e  two  tables  of
massie  golde,  and  the  chest  during  their  voyage  is
covered  with  Silke,  but  at  their  entring  into  Mecca  it  is
all  covered  with  cloth  of  golde,  adorned  with  iewels,  and

345

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

the  like  at  the  enterance  into  Medina.  The  Camell  afore-
sayd  which  carrieth  the  chest,  is  compassed  about  with
many  Arabian  singers  and  musicians,  alwayes  singing-
and  playing  upon  instruments.  After  this  folow  fifteene
other  most  faire  Camels,  every  one  carying  one  of  the
abovesayd  vestures,  being  covered  from  toppe  to  toe  with
silke.  Behind  these  goe  twentie  other  Camels  which
carrie  the  money,  apparell,  and  provision  of  the  Amir  el
Cheggi  captaine  of  the  Carovan.  After  foloweth  the
royall  Standard  of  the  grand  Signior,  accompanied  con-
tinually with  the  musicians  of  the  captaine,  and  five
and  twentie  Spachi  archers,  with  a  Chaus  before  them,
and  about  these  marveilous  things  goe  all  the  people
and  Camels  which  follow  the  Carovan.  Behind  these,
lesse  then  a  mile,  foloweth  the  rereward,  whereof  the
greater  part  are  pilgrimes  :  the  occasion  whereof  is,  for
that  the  merchants  seeke  alwayes  to  be  in  the  foreward
for  the  securitie  of  their  goods,  but  the  pilgrimes  which
have  litle  to  loose  care  not  though  they  come  behind.
Behind  these  alwayes  goe  five  and  twentie  other  Spachi
well  armed  with  another  Chaus  their  captaine,  and  fortie
Arabians  all  Archers  for  guard  of  the  rereward.  And
because  the  Carovan  goeth  alwayes  along  the  red  sea
banke,  which  in  going  forth  they  have  on  their  right
hand,  therfore  the  two  hundred  Janissaries  parted  into
three  companies  goe  upon  their  left  hand  well  armed  and
mounted  upon  Camels  bound  one  to  another,  for  upon
that  side  is  all  the  danger  of  thieves,  and  on  the  other  no
danger  at  all,  the  captaine  of  the  Carovan  alwayes  going
about  his  people,  sometimes  on  the  one  side,  and  some-
times on  the  other,  never  keeping  any  firme  place,  being
continually  accompanied  with  a  Chaus  and  25.  Spachi,
armed  and  mounted  upon  Dromedaries,  and  8.  musicians
with  violes  in  their  handes,  which  cease  not  sounding
till  the  captaine  take  his  rest,  upon  whom  they  attend,
till  such  time  as  he  entreth  his  pavillion,  and  then
licencing  all  his  attendants  and  folowers  to  depart,  they
goe  each  man  to  their  lodging.

346

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad

c.  1580.

Of  things  notable  which  are  scene  in  this  voyage
by  the  way.

BEcause  in  the  way  there  are  not  many  things  found
woorthie  memorie,  for  that  the  Carovan  seldome
resteth  in  places  of  habitation,  of  which  in  the  way  there
are  but  fewe,  yea  rather  the  Carovan  resteth  altogether  in
the  field  :  therefore  in  this  our  voyage  wee  will  onely
make  mention  of  certaine  Castles  found  in  the  way,  which
bee  these,  namely,  Agerut,  Nachel,  Acba,  Biritem,  Muel,
and  Ezlem.  Of  which  five,  the  two  first  are  kept  of
Moores,  and  the  other  three  of  Turkes,  and  for  guard
they  have  eight  men  or  tenne  at  the  most  in  every  Castle,
with  foure  or  five  Smerigli,  which  serve  to  keepe  the  water
from  the  Arabians,  so  that  the  Carovan  comming  thither,
may  have  wherewithall  to  refresh  it  selfe.  Agerut  is  dis-
tant from  Suez  a  port  of  the  red  Sea  eight  miles,  where
are  alwayes  resident  five  and  twentie  gallies  of  the  Grand
Signior  for  the  keeping  of  that  Sea.  Nachel  is  distant
from  the  Sea  a  dayes  journey.  The  walles  of  Acba  are
founded  upon  the  red  Sea  banke.  Biritem  and  Muel
likewise  are  dashed  by  the  waves  of  the  Sea.  Ezlem  is
distant  from  thence  above  a  dayes  journey.  These  five
Castles  abovesayd  are  not  of  force  altogether  to  defend
themselves  agaynst  an  hundred  men.  The  Carovan
departing  from  Birca  untill  Agerut  findeth  no  water  by
the  way  to  drinke,  neither  from  Agerut  till  Nachel,  nor
from  Nachel  till  Acba,  but  betweene  Acba  and  Biritem
are  found  two  waters,  one  called  Agium  el  Cassap,  and
the  other  Magaraxiaibi,  that  is  to  say,  the  river  of  Jethro
the  father  in  lawe  of  Moses,  for  this  is  the  place  men-
tioned in  the  second  chapter  of  Exodus,  whither  it  Is  sayd
that  Moses  fledde  from  the  anger  of  Pharao,  who  would
have  killed  him,  because  hee  had  slaine  the  -/Egyptian,  [II.  i.  206.]
which  fought  with  the  Hebrew,  in  which  place  stoode  the
citie  of  Midian ;  and  there  are  yet  the  pondes,  neere  unto
the  which  Moses  sate  downe.  And  from  that  place
forward  they  finde  more  store  of  water  by  the  way,  and

347

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

in  more  places,  though  not  so  good.  It  is  also  to  bee
noted,  that  in  this  voiage  it  is  needfull  and  an  usuall
thing,  that  the  captaine  put  his  hand  to  his  purse,  in  these
places,  and  bestow  presents,  garments,  and  turbants  upon
certaine  of  the  chiefe  of  the  Arabians,  to  the  ende  they
may  give  him  and  his  Carovan  free  passage :  who  also
promise,  that  their  followers  likewise  shall  doe  no  damage
to  the  Carovan,  and  bind  themselves  to  accomplish  the
same,  promising  also  by  worde  of  mouth,  that  if  the
Carovan  bee  robbed,  they  will  make  restitution  of  such
things  as  are  stollen  :  but  notwithstanding  the  Carovan  is
by  them  oftentimes  damnified,  and  those  which  are
robbed  have  no  other  restitution  at  the  Arabians  handes
then  the  shewing  of  them  a  paire  of  heeles,  flying  into
such  places  as  it  is  impossible  to  finde  them.  Nowe  the
Carovan  continuing  her  accustomed  journeys,  and  having
passed  the  abovesayd  castles,  and  others  not  woorthie
mention,  at  length  commeth  to  a  place  called  Jehbir,
which  is  the  beginning  and  confine  of  the  state  and
realme  of  Serifo  the  king  of  Mecca :  where,  at  their
approching  issueth  out  to  meete  them  the  governour  of
the  land,  with  all  his  people  to  receive  the  Carovan,  with
such  shouting  and  triumph,  as  is  impossible  to  expresse,
where  they  staie  one  whole  day.  This  place  aboundeth
with  fresh  and  cleare  waters,  which  with  streames  fall
downe  from  the  high  mountaines.  Moreover,  in  this
place  are  great  store  of  dates,  and  flesh  great  store  and
good  cheape,  and  especially  laced  muttons  which  willingly
fall  downe,  and  here  the  wearie  pilgrimes  have  com-
moditie  to  refresh  themselves,  saying,  that  this  wicked
fact  purgeth  them  from  a  multitude  of  sinnes,  and  besides
increaseth  devotion  to  prosecute  the  voiage.  Touching
the  building  in  these  places,  it  is  to  bee  judged  by  the
houses  halfe  ruinated,  that  it  hath  bene  a  magnificent
citie  :  but  because  it  was  in  times  past  inhabited  more
with  thieves  then  true  men,  it  was  therefore  altogether
destroyed  by  Soldan  Gauri  king  of  -(Egypt,  who  going  on
pilgrimage  unto  Mecca,  and passing  by  this  place,  there

348

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.
was  by  the  inhabitants  hereof  some  injurie  done  unto  his
Carovan,  which  hee  understanding  of,  dissembled  till  his
returned  from  Mecca,  and  then  caused  it  to  bee  burned
and  destroyed  in  pitifull  sort  for  revenge  of  the  injurie
done  unto  the  Carovan.  The  Carovan  having  rested  and
being  refreshed  as  is  abovesayd,  the  next  day  departeth
on  the  way,  and  the  first  place  they  arrive  at  woorthy
mention  is  called  Bedrihonem,  in  which  place  (as  is  afore-
sayd)  grow  those  little  shrubbes  whereout  Balme  issueth.
And  before  the  Carovan  arriveth  at  this  place,  a  mile
from  the  citie  is  a  large  and  great  field  environed  about
with  most  high  and  huge  mountaines.  And  in  this  field,
according  to  the  Alcoran,  their  prophet  Mahomet  had  a
most  fierce  and  cruell  battell  given  by  the  Christians  of
the  countrey  and  other  people  which  set  themselves
agaynst  them,  and  withstood  his  opinion,  so  that  hee  was
overcome  and  vanquished  of  the  Christians,  and  almost
halfe  of  his  people  slaine  in  the  battell.  Whereupon,  the
prophet  seeing  himselfe  in  such  extremitie,  fell  to  his
prayers,  and  they  say,  that  God  having  compassion  upon
his  deare  friend  and  prophet,  heard  him,  and  sent  him
infinite  thousands  of  angels,  wherewith  returning  to  the
battell,  they  conquered  and  overcame  the  conquerour.
And  therefore  in  memorie  of  this  victorie,  the  Carovan
lodgeth  every  yeere  one  night  in  this  place,  making  great
bonefires  with  great  mirth.  And  they  say  that  as  yet
there  is  heard  upon  the  mountaines  a  litle  drumme,  which
while  the  Carovan  passeth,  never  ceaseth  sounding.  And
they  say  further,  that  the  sayd  drumme  is  sounded  by  the
angels  in  signe  of  that  great  victory  graunted  of  God  to
their  prophet.  Also  the  Mahumetan  writings  affirme,
that  after  the  ende  of  the  sayd  battell,  the  prophet  com-
maunded  certaine  of  his  people  to  goe  and  burie  all
the  Mahumetans  which  were  dead  in  the  fields,  who
going,  knew  not  the  one  from  the  other,  because  as  yet
they  used  not  circumcision,  so  they  returned  unto  him,
answering,  that  they  had  bene  to  doe  his  commaunde-
ment, but they knew not the Musulmans from the

349

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

Christians.  To  whom  the  prophet  answered,  saying  :
Turne  againe,  and  all  those  which  you  shall  finde  with
their  faces  downeward,  leave  them,  because  all  they  are
misbeleevers  ;  and  the  other  which  you  shall  finde  with
their  faces  turned  upward,  them  burie,  for  they  are  the
true  Musulmani,  and  so  his  commaundement  was  done.
The  next  morning  by  Sunne  rising,  the  Carovan
arriveth  at  Bedrihonem,  in  which  place  every  man
washeth  himselfe  from  toppe  to  toe,  as  well  men  as
women,  and  leaving  off  their  apparell,  having  each  one  a
cloth  about  their  privities,  called  in  their  tongue  Photah,
and  another  white  one  upon  their  shoulders,  all  which  can
goe  to  Mecca  in  this  habite,  do  so,  and  are  thought  to
merite  more  then  the  other,  but  they  which  cannot  doe
so  make  a  vowe  to  sacrifice  a  Ramme  at  the  mountaine  of
pardons :  and  after  they  bee  washed,  it  is  not  lawfull  for
[II.  i.  207.]  any  man  or  woman  to  kill  either  flea  or  lowse  with  their
handes,  neither  yet  to  take  them  with  their  nailes,  untill
they  have  accomplished  their  vowed  orations  in  the
mountaine  of  pardons  abovesayd :  and  therefore  they  cary
with  them  certaine  stickes  made  of  purpose  in  maner  of
a  File,  called  in  their  language  Area,  Cassah  Guch,  with
which  they  grate  their  shoulders.  And  so  the  Carovan
marching,  commeth  within  two  miles  of  Mecca  where
they  rest  that  night.  In  the  morning  at  the  breake  of
day,  with  all  pompe  possible  they  set  forward  toward
Mecca,  and  drawing  neere  thereunto,  the  Seripho  issueth
foorth  of  the  citie  with  his  guard,  accompanied  with  an
infinite  number  of  people,  shouting,  and  making  great
triumph.  And  being  come  out  of  the  citie  a  boweshoote
into  a  faire  field,  where  a  great  multitude  of  tents  are
pitched,  and  in  the  middest  the  pavillion  of  the  captaine,
who  meeting  with  the  Serifo,  after  salutations  on  each
side,  they  light  from  their  horses  and  enter  into  the
pavillion,  where  the  king  of  Mecca  depriveth  himselfe  of
all  authoritie  and  power,  and  committeth  the  same  to
the  above-named  captaine,  giving  him  full  licence  and
authoritie to commaund,  governe,  and minister  justice

350

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  a.d.

c.  1580.
during  his  aboad  in  Mecca  with  his  company,  and  on  the
other  side  the  captaine  to  requite  this  liberaHtie  used
toward  him  by  the  Serifo  giveth  him  a  garment  of  cloth
of  gold  of  great  value,  with  certaine  jewels  and  other  like
things.  After  this,  sitting  downe  together  upon  carpets
and  hides  they  eate  together,  and  rising  from  thence  with
certaine  of  the  chiefest,  and  taking  with  them  the  garment
and  gate  abovesayd,  they  goe  directly  to  the  Mosquita,
attended  on  but  with  a  fewe,  and  being  entered,  they
cause  the  olde  to  be  pulled  downe,  and  put  the  newe
coverture  upon  the  house  of  Abraham,  and  the  olde
vesture  is  the  eunuchs  which  serve  in  the  sayde
Mosquita,  who  after  sell  it  unto  the  pilgrimes  at  foure
or  five  serafines  the  pike :  and  happy  doth  that  man
thinke  himselfe,  which  can  get  never  so  litle  a  piece
thereof,  to  conserve  ever  after  as  a  most  holy  relique :
and  they  say,  that  putting  the  same  under  the  head  of  a
man  at  the  houre  of  his  death,  through  vertue  thereof  all
his  sinnes  are  forgiven.  Also  they  take  away  the  old
doore,  setting  in  the  place  the  new  doore,  and  the  old  by
custome  they  give  unto  the  Serifo.  After  having  made
their  praiers  with  certaine  ordinarie  and  woonted  cere-
monies, the  Serifo  remaineth  in  the  citie,  and  the  captaine
of  the  pilgrimage  returneth  unto  his  pavillion.

Of  the  Serifo  the  king  of  Mecca.

THe  Serifo  is  descended  of  the  prophet  Mahomet
by  Fatma  daughter  of  that  good  prophet,  and  AUi
husband  to  her,  and  sonne  in  lawe  to  Mahumet,  who
had  no  issue  male,  save  this  stocke  of  the  Serifo,  to  the
eldest  Sonne  whereof  the  realme  commeth  by  succession.
This  realme  hath  of  revenues  royall,  every  yeere  halfe
a  million  of  golde,  or  litle  more :  and  all  such  as  are
of  the  prophets  kinred,  or  descended  of  that  blood  (which
are  almost  innumerable)  are  called  Emyri,  that  is  to  say,
lordes.  These  all  goe  clothed  in  greene,  or  at  the  least
have  their  turbant  greene,  to  bee  knowen  from  the  other.
Neither  is  it  permitted  that  any  of  those  Christians  which

351

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

dwell  or  traffique  in  their  Countrey  goe  clothed  in
greene,  neither  may  they  have  any  thing  of  greene  about
them :  for  they  say  it  is  not  lawful!  for  misbeleevers
to  weare  that  colour,  wherein  that  great  friend  and
prophet  of  God  Mahomet  was  woont  to  be  apparelled.

Of  the  citie  of  Mecca.

THe  Citie  of  Mecca  in  the  Arabian  tongue  is  called
Macca,  that  is  to  say,  an  habitation.  This  citie  is
invironed  about  with  exceeding  high  and  barren  moun-
taines,  and  in  the  plaine  betweene  the  sayde  mountaines
and  the  citie  are  many  pleasaunt  gardens,  where  groweth
great  abundaunce  of  figges,  grapes,  apples,  and  melons.
There  is  also  great  abundance  of  good  water  and  fleshe,
but  not  of  bread.  This  citie  hath  no  walles  about  it,  and
containeth  in  circuite  five  miles.  The  houses  are  very
handsome  and  commodious,  and  are  built  like  to  the
houses  in  Italic.  The  palace  of  the  Serifo  is  sumptuous
and  gorgeously  adorned.  The  women  of  the  place  are
courteous,  jocund,  and  lovely,  faire,  with  alluring  eyes,
being  hote  and  libidinous,  and  the  most  of  them  naughtie
packes.  The  men  of  this  place  are  given  to  that
abhominable,  cursed,  and  opprobrious  vice,  whereof  both
men  and  women  make  but  small  account  by  reason  of  the
pond  Zun  Zun,  wherein  having  washed  themselves,  their
opinion  is,  that  although  like  the  dog  they  returne  to
their  vomite,  yet  they  are  clensed  from  all  sinne  whatso-
ever, of  which  sin  we  will  hereafter  more  largely
discourse.  In  the  midst  of  the  city  is  ye  great  Mosquita,
[II.  i.  208.]  with  the  house  of  Abraham  standing  in  the  very  middest
thereof,  which  Mosquita  was  built  in  the  time  when  their
prophet  lived.  It  is  foure  square,  and  so  great,  that  it
containeth  two  miles  in  circuit,  that  is  to  say,  halfe  a  mile
each  side.  Also  it  is  made  in  maner  of  a  cloister,  for
that  in  the  midst  thereof  separate  from  the  rest,  is  the
abovesayd  house  of  Abraham,  also  the  galleries  round
about  are  in  maner  of  4.  streetes,  and  the  partitions  which
divide  the  one  street  from  the  other  are  pillars,  whereof

352

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad

c.  1580.
some  are  of  marble,  and  others  of  lime  and  stone.  This
famous  and  sumptuous  Mosquita  hath  99.  gates,  and  5.
steeples,  from  whence  the  Talismani  call  the  people  to
the  Mosquita.  And  the  pilgrimes  which  are  not  pro-
vided of  tents,  resort  hither,  and  for  more  devotion  the
men  and  women  lie  together  aloft  and  beneath,  one  upon
another,  so  that  their  house  of  praier  becommeth  worse
sometimes  then  a  den  of  thieves.

Of  the  house  of  Abraham.

THe  house  of  Abraham  is  also  foure  square,  and  made
of  speckled  stone,  20.  paces  high,  and  40  in  circuit.
And  upon  one  side  of  this  house  within  the  wall,  there
is  a  stone  of  a  span  long,  and  halfe  a  span  broad,  which
stone  (as  they  say)  before  this  house  was  builded,  fell
downe  from  heaven,  at  the  fall  whereof  was  heard  a
voyce,  that  wheresoever  this  stone  fell,  there  should  be
built  the  house  of  God,  wherein  God  will  heare  sinners.
Moreover,  they  say  that  when  this  stone  fell  from  heaven,
it  was  not  blacke  as  now,  but  as  white  as  the  whitest
snow,  and  by  reason  it  hath  bene  so  oft  kissed  by  sinners,
it  is  therewith  become  blacke :  for  all  the  pilgrimes  are
bound  to  kisse  this  stone,  otherwise  they  cary  their  sinnes
home  with  them  again.  The  entrance  into  this  house  is
very  small,  made  in  maner  of  a  window,  and  as  high  from
the  ground  as  a  man  can  reach,  so  that  it  is  painful  to
enter.  This  house  hath  without  3 1 .  pillars  of  brasse,  set
upon  cubike  or  square  stones  being  red  and  greene,  the
which  pillars  sustaine  not  ought  els  save  a  threed  of
copper,  which  reacheth  from  one  to  another,  whereunto
are  fastened  many  burning  lampes.  These  pillars  of
brasse  were  caused  to  be  made  by  Sultan  Soliman  grand-
father to  Sultan  Amurath  now  Emperor.  After  this,
having  entred  with  the  difficultie  abovesayd,  there  stand
at  the  entrance  two  pillars  of  marble,  to  wit,  on  each  side
one.  In  the  midst  there  are  three  of  Aloes-wood  not
very  thicke,  and  covered  with  tiles  of  India  of  1000.
colours  which  serve  to  underproppe  the  Terratza.  It  is
V  353  z

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

so  darke,  that  they  can  hardly  see  within  for  want  of
light,  not  without  an  evill  smell.  Without  the  gate  five
pases  is  the  abovesayd  pond  Zun  Zun,  which  is  that
blessed  pond  that  the  angell  of  the  lord  shewed  unto
Agar  whiles  she  went  seeking  water  for  her  sonne  Ismael
to  drinke.

Of  the  ceremonies  of  the pilgrimes.

IN  the  beginning  we  have  sayd  how  the  Mahumetans
have  two  feasts  in  the  yeere.  The  one  they  call
Pascha  di  Ramazaco,  that  is  to  say.  The  feast  of  fasting,
and  this  feast  of  fasting  is  holden  thirtie  dayes  after  the
feast,  wherein  the  Carovan  travelleth  to  Mecca.  The
other  is  called  the  feast  of  the  Ramme,  wherein  all  they
which  are  of  abilitie  are  bound  to  sacrifice  a  Ramme,  and
this  they  call  Bine  Bairam,  that  is  to  say.  The  great  feast.
And  as  the  Carovan  departeth  from  Cairo  thirtie  dayes
after  the  little  feast,  so  likewise  they  come  hither  five  or
sixe  dayes  before  the  great  feast,  to  the  ende  the  pilgrimes
may  have  time  before  the  feast  to  finish  their  rites  and
ceremonies,  which  are  these.  Departing  from  the  Caro-
van, and  being  guided  by  such  as  are  experienced  in  the
way,  they  goe  unto  the  citie  twentie  or  thirtie  in  a
company  as  they  thinke  good,  walking  through  a  streete
which  ascendeth  by  litle  and  litle  till  they  come  unto  a
certaine  gate,  whereupon  is  written  on  each  side  in  marble
stone.  Babel  Salema,  which  in  the  Arabian  tongue  signi-
fieth,  the  gate  of  health.  And  from  this  place  is  descried
the  great  Mosquita,  which  environeth  the  house  of
Abraham,  which  being  descried,  they  reverently  salute
twise,  saying,  Salem  Alech  Jara  sul  Alia,  that  is  to  say.
Peace  to  thee,  ambassadour  of  God.  This  salutation
being  ended,  proceeding  on  the  way,  they  finde  an  arche
upon  their  right  hand,  whereon  they  ascend  five  steps,
upon  the  which  is  a  great  voyd  place  made  of  stone :
after,  descending  other  five  steps,  and  proceeding  the
space  of  a  flight-shoot,  they  finde  another  arche  like  unto
the  first,  and  this  way  from  the  one  arche  to  the  other

354

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.
they  go  and  come  7.  times,  saying  alwaies  some  of  their
prayers,  which  (they  say)  the  afflicted  Agar  sayd,  whiles
she  sought  and  found  not  water  for  her  sonne  Ismael  to
drinke.  This  ceremonie  being  ended,  the  pilgrimes  enter
into  the  Mosquita,  and  drawing  neere  unto  the  house  of
Abraham,  they  goe  round  about  it  other  seven  times,
alwayes  saying  :  This  is  the  house  of  God,  and  of  his
servant  Abraham ;  This  done,  they  goe  to  kisse  that
blacke  stone  abovesayd.  After  they  go  unto  the  pond
Zun  Zun,  and  in  their  apparell  as  they  be,  they  wash  [II.  i.  209.]
themselves  from  head  to  foote,  saying,  Tobah  Allah,
Tobah  Allah,  that  is  to  say.  Pardon  lord,  Pardon  lord,
drinking  also  of  that  water,  which  is  both  muddie,  filthie,
and  of  an  ill  savour,  and  in  this  wise  washed  and  watered,
every  one  returneth  to  his  place  of  abode,  and  these
ceremonies  every  one  is  bound  to  doe  once  at  the  least.
But  those  which  have  a  mind  to  overgoe  their  fellowes,
and  to  go  into  paradise  before  the  rest,  doe  the  same
once  a  day  while  the  Carovan  remaineth  there.

What  the  Carovan  doeth after  having  rested  at

Mecca.

THe  Carovan  having  abode  within  the  citie  of  Mecca
five  dayes,  the  night  before  the  evening  of  their
feast,  the  captaine  with  all  his  company  setteth  forward
towards  the  mountaine  of  pardons,  which  they  call  in  the  The  mountain
Arabian  tongue,  Jabel  Arafata.  This  mountaine  is  distant  of  pardons.
from  Mecca  15.  miles,  and  in  the  mid  way  thereto  is  a
place  called  Mina,  that  is  to  say.  The  haven,  and  a  litle
from  thence  are  4.  great  pillars,  of  which  hereafter  we
will  speake.  Now  first  touching  the  mountaine  of
Pardons,  which  is  rather  to  be  called  a  litle  hill,  then  a
mountain,  for  that  it  is  low,  litle,  delightful  and  pleasant,
containing  in  circuit  two  miles,  and  environed  round
about  with  the  goodliest  plaine  that  ever  with  mans  eie
could  be  seen,  and  the  plaine  likewise  compassed  with
exceeding  high  mountains,  in  such  sort,  that  this  is  one
of  the  goodliest  situations  in  the  world : and  it  seemeth

355

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

verily,  that  nature  hath  therein  shewed  all  her  cunning,
in  making  this  place  under  the  mountaine  of  pardons  so
broad  and  pleasant.  Upon  the  side  towards  Mecca  there
are  many  pipes  of  water  cleare,  faire,  and  fresh,  and  above
all  most  wholesome,  falling  down  into  certaine  vessels
made  of  purpose,  where  the  people  refresh  and  wash
themselves,  and  water  their  cattel.  And  when  Adam  and
Evah  were  cast  out  of  paradise  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord,
the  Mahumetans  say,  they  came  to  inhabite  this  litle
mountaine  of  pardons.  Also  they  say,  that  they  had  lost
one  another,  and  were  seperated  for  the  space  of  40.
yeeres,  and  in  the  end  met  at  this  place  with  great  joy
&  gladnesse,  and  builded  a  litle  house  upon  the  top  of
this  mountaine,  the  which  at  this  day  they  call  Beyt
Adam,  that  is  to  say,  the  house  of  Adam.

Of  the  three  Carovans.

THe  same  day  that  the  Carovan  of  Cairo  commeth
to  this  place,  hither  come  2.  Carovans  also,  one  of
Damasco,  the  other  of  Arabia,  and  in  like  maner  all  the
inhabitants  for  ten  dayes  journey  round  about,  so  that
at  one  time  there  is  to  be  seen  above  200000.  persons,
and  more  then  300000.  cattell.  Now  all  this  company
meeting  together  in  this  place  the  night  before  the  feast,
the  three  hostes  cast  themselves  into  a  triangle,  setting
the  mountaine  in  the  midst  of  them:  and  all  that  night
there  is  nothing  to  be  heard  nor  seene,  but  gunshot  and
fireworkes  of  sundry  sortes,  with  such  singing,  sounding,
shouting,  halowing,  rumors,  feasting,  and  triumphing,  as
is  wonderfull.  After  this,  the  day  of  the  feast  being
come,  they  are  all  at  rest  and  silence,  and  that  day  they
attend  on  no  other  thing,  then  to  sacrifice  oblations  and
prayers  unto  God,  and  in  the  evening  all  they  which
have  horses  mount  thereon,  and  approch  as  nigh  unto
the  mountaine  as  they  can,  and  those  which  have  no
horses  make  the  best  shift  they  can  on  foote,  giving  ever
unto  the  captaine  of  Cairo  the  chiefe  place,  the  second
to  the  captaine  of  Damasco,  and  the  third  to  the  captaine

356

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.
of  Arabia,  &  being  all  approched  as  is  abovesayd,  there
commeth  a  square  squire,  one  of  the  Santones,  mounted
on  a  camell  well  furnished,  who  at  the  other  side  of  the
mountain  ascendeth  five  steps  into  a  pulpit  made  for
that  purpose,  and  all  being  silent,  turning  his  face  towards
the  people,  he  maketh  a  short  sermon  of  the  tenour
folowing.

The  summe  of  the  Santones  sermon.

THe  summe  of  this  double  doctors  sermon  is  thus
much  in  briefe.  He  sheweth  them  how  many  and
how  great  benefits  God  hath  given  to  the  Mahumetan
people  by  the  hand  of  his  beloved  friend  and  prophet
Mahomet,  having  delivered  them  from  the  servitude  of
sinne  &  from  idolatry,  in  which  before  time  they  were
drowned,  and  how  he  gave  unto  them  the  house  of
Abraham  wherein  they  should  be  heard,  and  likewise  the
mountaine  of  pardons,  by  meanes  whereof  they  might
obtaine  grace  and  remission  of  their  sinnes :  adding,  that
the  mercifuU  God,  who  is  a  liberall  giver  of  all  good
things,  commaunded  his  secretarie  Abraham  to  build  him
an  house  in  Mecca,  where  his  successours  might  make
their  prayers  unto  him  and  bee  heard,  at  which  time  all
the  mountains  in  the  world  came  together  thither  with
sufiftciencie  of  stones  for  building  hereof,  except  that  litle
and  low  hill,  which  for  povertie  could  not  go  to  dis-
charge this  debt,  for  the  which  it  became  sorrowfull,  [II.  i.  210.]
weeping  beyond  all  measure  for  the  space  of  thirtie  yeeres,
at  the  ende  whereof  the  eternall  God  having  pitie  and
compassion  upon  this  poore  Mountaine,  saide  unto  it :
Weepe  no  more  (my  daughter)  for  thy  bitter  plaints  have
ascended  up  into  mine  eares,  therefore  comfort  thy  selfe :
for  I  will  cause  all  those  that  shall  goe  to  visite  the  house
of  my  friend  Abraham,  that  they  shall  not  be  absolved
from  their  sinnes,  unlesse  they  first  come  to  doe  thee
reverence,  and  to  keepe  in  this  place  their  holiest  feast.
And  this  I  have  commanded  unto  my  people  by  the
mouth  of  my  friend  and  prophet  Mahumet. This  said,

357

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

he  exhorteth  them  unto  the  love  of  God,  and  to  prayer
and  almes.  The  sermon  being  done  at  the  Sunne-setting
they  make  3.  prayers,  namely,  the  first  for  the  Serifo,  the
second  for  the  Grand  Signior  with  his  hoste,  and  the
third  for  all  the  people  :  to  which  prayers  all  with  one
voyce  cry  saying ;  Amni  Ja  Alia,  Amni  Ja  Alia,  that  is
to  say.  Be  it  so  Lord,  be  it  so  Lord.  Thus  having  had
the  Santones  blessing  and  saluted  the  Mountaine  of
pardons,  they  returne  the  way  they  came  unto  Mina,
whereof  wee  have  made  mention.  In  returning  at  the
end  of  the  plaine  are  the  abovesaid  4.  pillers,  to  wit,  two
on  ech  side  of  the  way,  through  the  midst  whereof  they
say  it  is  needfull  that  every  one  passe,  saying,  that  who
so  passeth  without  looseth  all  that  merit  which  in  his
pilgrimage  he  had  gotten.  Also  from  the  mountaine  of
pardons  until  they  be  passed  the  said  pillers  none  dare
looke  backward,  for  feare  least  the  sinnes  which  he  hath
left  in  the  mountains  returne  to  him  againe.  Being  past
these  pillers  every  one  lighteth  downe,  seeking  in  this
sandy  field  50.  or  60.  litle  stones,  which  being  gathered,
and  bound  in  an  handkerchiffe  they  carry  to  the  above-
said  place  of  Mina,  where  they  stay  5.  dayes,  because  at
that  time  there  is  a  faire  free  and  franke  of  al  custome.
And  in  this  place  are  other  3,  pillers,  not  together,  but
set  in  divers  places,  where  (as  their  prophet  saith)  were
the  three  apparitions  which  the  divel  made  unto  Abraham,
and  to  Ismael  his  sonne ;  for  amongst  them  they  make
no  mention  of  Isaac,  as  if  he  had  never  bene  borne.  So
they  say,  that  the  blessed  God  having  commanded  Abra-
ham his  faithfull  servant  to  sacrifice  his  first  begotten
Ismael,  the  old  Abraham  went  to  do  according  to  Gods
wil,  and  met  with  the  infernal  enemie  in  the  shape  of  a
man,  and  being  of  him  demanded  whither  he  went,  he
answered,  that  he  went  to  sacrifice  his  sonne  Ismael,  as
God  had  commanded  him.  Against  whom  the  divel
exclaiming  said :  Oh  doting  old  man,  sith  God  in  thine
old  age  hath  marveilously  given  thee  this  son  (in  whom
all  nations  shalbe  blessed)  wherefore  giving  credite  unto

358

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.

vaine  dreames,  wilt  thou  kill  him  whom  so  much  thou
hast  desired,  and  so  intirely  loved.  But  Abraham  shaking
him  off  proceeded  on  his  way,  whereupon  the  divel  seeing
his  words  could  not  prevaile  with  the  father  attempted
the  Sonne,  saying ;  Ismael,  have  regard  unto  thy  selfe
betimes  in  this  thing  which  is  so  dangerous.  Where-
fore ?  answered  ye  childe.  Because  (saith  the  divel)  thy
doting  father  seeketh  to  take  away  thy  life.  For  what
occasion,  said  Ismael?  Because  (saith  the  enemie)  he
saith,  that  God  hath  commanded  him.  Which  Ismael
hearing  hee  tooke  up  stones  and  threw  at  him,  saying,
Auzu  billahi  minal  scia  itanil  ragini,  which  is  to  say,  I
defend  me  with  God  from  the  divel  the  offender,  as  who
would  say,  wee  ought  to  obey  the  commandement  of  God
and  resist  the  divel  with  al  our  force.  But  to  returne  to
our  purpose,  the  pilgrimes  during  their  aboad  there  goe
to  visite  these  three  pillers,  throwing  away  the  little  stones
which  before  they  gathered,  whiles  they  repeat  the  same
words  which  they  say,  that  Ismael  said  to  the  divell,  when
hee  withstoode  him.  From  hence  halfe  a  mile  is  a  moun-
taine,  whither  Abraham  went  to  sacrifice  his  sonne,  as
is  abovesaid.  In  this  mountaine  is  a  great  den  whither
the  pilgrims  resort  to  make  their  prayers,  and  there  is  a
great  stone  naturally  separated  in  the  midst ;  and  they
say,  that  Ismael,  while  his  father  Abraham  was  busie
about  the  sacrifice,  tooke  the  knife  in  hand  to  proove
how  it  would  cut,  and  making  triall  divided  the  stone
into  two  parts.  The  five  dayes  being  expired,  the  captaine
ariseth  with  all  the  Carovan,  and  returneth  againe  to
Mecca,  where  they  remaine  other  five  dayes.  And  while
these  rest,  we  will  treat  of  the  city  and  port  of  Grida
upon  the  Red  Sea.

Of  Grida.

THerefore  wee say that from Mecca to Grida  they  Grida  a  port
make  two  small  dayes  journey  :  and  because  in  those  ^^^^'^  Mecca.
places  it  is  ill  traveiling  in  the  day-time  by  reason  of  the
great heat of  the Sunne, therefore they depart in the

359

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

evening  from  Mecca,  and  in  the  morning  before  Sunne-
rising  they  are  arrived  halfe  way,  where  there  are  certaine
habitations  well  furnished,  and  good  Innes  to  lodge  in,
but  especially  women  ynough  which  voluntarily  bestowe
their  almes  upon  the  poore  pilgrims :  likewise  departing
the  next  evening,  the  morning  after,  they  come  unto
Grida.  This  citie  is  founded  upon  the  Red  Sea  banke,
environed  with  wals  &  towers  to  the  land-ward,  but
through  continuance  of  time  almost  consumed  and
wasted :  on  the  side  to  sea-ward  it  stands  unwalled.
Grida  hath  three  gates,  one  on  eche  side,  and  the  thirde
in  the  midst  towarde  the  land,  which  is  called,  The  port
of  Mecca,  neere  unto  which  are  6.  or  7.  Turks  upon
[II.  i.  211.]  the  old  towers  for  guard  thereof  with  foure  faulcons
upon  one  of  the  corners  of  the  city  to  the  land-ward.
Also  to  sea-ward  where  the  wall  joyneth  with  the  water,
there  is  lately  made  a  fort  like  unto  a  bulwarke,  where
they  have  planted  25  pieces  of  the  best  ordinance  that
might  be  had,  which  are  very  well  kept  and  guarded.
More  outward  towards  the  sea  upon  the  farthest  olde
tower  are  other  five  good  pieces  with  30  men  to  guard
them.  On  the  other  side  of  the  city  at  the  end  of  the
wall  there  is  lately  builded  a  bulwarke  strong  and  well
guarded  by  a  Sanjaccho  with  150  Turks  wel  provided
with  ordinance  and  all  other  necessaries  and  munition,
and  all  these  fortifyings  are  for  none  other  cause  then
The  Portugals  for  feare  and  suspition  of  the  Portugals.  And  if  the
greatly  fiared  ^^^^  were  good  all  this  were  in  vaine  :  but  the  port  can-
^^^  not  be  worse  nor  more  dangerous,  being  all  full  of  rocks

and  sands, in such wise, that the ships cannot come
neere,  but  perforce  ride  at  the  least  two  miles  off. At
Forty  or  fifty this  port  arrive  every yeere  forty  or  fifty  great  shippes
rich^  skips laden  with  spices  and  other  rich  marchandize  which  yeeld
^at  Grida ^^  custome  1 50000  ducats,  the  halfe  whereof  goeth  unto
the  Grand  Signior, and the other halfe to the  Serifo.
And  because  there  is  none  other  thing  worthy  mention
in Grida  we wil returne to our Carovan which hath
almost  rested  enough.

360

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad.

c.  1580.

Of  their  going  to  Medina.

THe  Carovan  departeth  for  Medina  returning  the
same  way  they  came  unto  Bedrihonem  abovesayd,
where  they  leave  their  ordinance  and  other  cariages,
whereof  they  have  no  need,  with  the  pilgrims  which
have  seene  Medina  aforetime,  and  desire  not  to  see  it
againe,  but  stay  in  that  place,  expecting  the  carovan,  and
resting  untill  the  carovan  go  from  Bedrihonem  to  Medina,
where  they  alwayes  finde  goodly  habitations,  with  abun-
dance of  sweet  waters,  and  dates  enough,  and  being  within
foureteene  miles  of  Medina  they  come  unto  a  great  plaine
called  by  them  Jabel  el  salema,  that  is  to  say,  the  moun-
taine  of  health,  from  which  they  begin  to  descry  the  city
and  tombe  of  Mahomet,  at  which  sight  they  light  from
their  horses  in  token  of  reverence.  And  being  ascended
up  the  sayd  mountaine  with  shouting  which  pierceth  the
skies  they  say,  Sala  tuua  salema  Alaccha  Jarah  sul  Allah.
Sala  tuua  Salema  Alaccha  Janabi  Allah,  Sala  tuua  Salema
Allaccha  Jahabit  Allah  :  which  words  in  the  Arabian  tongue  1

signifie  :  Prayer  and  health  be  unto  thee,  oh  prophet  of
God  :  prayer  and  health  be  upon  thee,  oh  beloved  of  God.
And  having  pronounced  this  salutation,  they  proceed
on  their  journey,  so  that  they  lodge  that  night  within
three  miles  of  Medina  :  and  the  next  morning  the
captaine  of  the  pilgrimage  ariseth,  &  proceeding  towards
the  city,  and  drawing  neere,  there  commeth  the  governour
under  the  Serifo,  accompanied  with  his  people  to  receive
the  Carovan,  having  pitched  their  tents  in  the  midst  of  a
goodly  field  where  they  lodge.

Of  Medina.

MEdina  is  a  little  city  of  great  antiquity,  containing
in  circuit  not  above  two  miles,  having  therein  but
one  castle,  which  is  olde  and  weake,  guarded  by  an  Aga
with  fifty  pieces  of  artillery,  but  not  very  good.  The
houses  thereof  are  faire  and  well  situated,  built  of  lime
and  stone,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  city  stands  a  foure-

361

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

square  Mosquita,  not  so  great  as  that  of  Mecca,  but
more  goodly,  rich,  and  sumptuous  in  building.  Within
the  same  in  a  corner  thereof  is  a  tombe  built  upon  foure
pillers  with  a  vault,  as  if  it  were  under  a  pavement,  which
bindeth  all  the  foure  pillers  together.  The  tombe  is  so
high,  that  it  farre  exceedeth  in  heighth  the  Mosquita,
being  covered  with  lead,  and  the  top  all  inamelled  with
golde,  with  an  halfe  moone  upon  the  top  :  and  within  the
pavement  it  is  all  very  artificially  wrought  with  golde.
Below  there  are  round  about  very  great  staires  of  yron
ascending  up  untill  the  midst  of  the  pillers,  and  in  the
very  midst  thereof  is  buried  the  body  of  Mahomet,  and
not  in  a  chest  of  yron  cleaving  to  the  adamant,  as  many
affirme  that  know  not  the  trueth  thereof.  Moreover,
over  the  body  they  have  built  a  tombe  of  speckled  stone
a  II  brace  and  an  haife  high,  and  over  the  same  another  of
Legmame  fouresquare  in  maner  of  a  pyramis.  After  this,
round  about  the  sepulture  there  hangeth  a  curtaine  of
silke,  which  letteth  the  sight  of  those  without,  that  they
cannot  see  the  sepulture.  Beyond  this  in  the  same
Mosquita  are  other  two  sepulchres  covered  with  greene
cloth,  and  in  the  one  of  them  is  buried  Fatma  the
daughter  of  Mahomet,  and  AUi  is  buried  in  the  other,
who  was  the  husband  of  the  sayd  Fatma.  The  attendants
upon  these  sepulchres  are  fifty  eunuches  white  and  tawny,
neither  is  it  granted  to  any  of  them  to  enter  within  the
tombe,  saving  to  three  white  eunuches  the  oldest  and  best
of  credit ;  unto  whom  it  is  lawfull  to  enter  but  twise  in
the  day,  to  light  the  lamps,  and  to  doe  other  services.
All  the  other  eunuchs  attend  without  to  the  service  of  the
Mosquita,  and  the  other  two  sepulchres  of  Fatma,  and
Alii,  where  every  one  may  go  and  touch  at  his  pleasure,
and  take  of  the  earth  for  devotion,  as  many  do.

212.]  Of  things  without  the  City.

Without  the  city  and  on  every  side  are  most  faire
gardens, with many fountaines of most sweet
water, infinite pondes, abundance of  fruit, with much

362

THE PILGRIMAGE TO MECCA  ad

c.  1580.
honest  living,  so  that  this  place  is  very  pleasant  and
delightfull.  This  city  hath  three  gates,  one  of  which
is  an  hospitall  caused  to  be  built  by  Cassachi,  called  the
Rose,  who  was  wife  to  Sultan  Soliman  grandfather  to
this  emperour.  The  sayd  hospitall  hath  nought  els
woorthy  mention,  save  that  it  is  fairely  built,  and  hath
large  revenues  belonging  thereunto,  and  nourisheth  many
poore  people.  A  mile  from  the  city  are  certaine  houses
whereof  they  affirme  one  to  be  the  same,  where  Mahumet
in  his  lifetime  dwelt.  This  house  hath  on  every  side
very  many  faire  date  trees,  amongst  which  there  are  two
which  grow  out  of  one  stocke  exceeding  high,  and  these,
they  say,  their  Prophet  graffed  with  his  owne  hand  :
the  fruit  thereof  is  alwayes  sent  to  Constantinople,  to
be  presented  unto  the  Grand  Signior,  and  is  sayd  to  be
that  blessed  fruit  of  the  Prophet.  Nere  unto  the  date
trees  is  a  faire  fountaine  of  cleere  and  sweet  water,  the
which  by  a  conduct  pipe  is  brought  into  the  city  of
Medina.  Also  there  is  a  little  Mosquita,  wherein  three
places  are  counted  holy,  and  greatly  reverenced  :  the  first
they  affirme,  that  their  Prophet  made  his  first  prayer  in,
after  he  knew  God  :  the  second  is  that  whither  he  went
when  he  would  see  the  holy  house  of  Abraham,  where
when  he  sate  downe  to  that  intent,  they  say  the  moun-
taines  opened  from  the  toppe  to  the  bottome  to  shew
him  the  house,  and  after  closed  againe  as  before  :  the
third  holy  place  is  in  the  midst  of  the  sayd  Mosquita,
where  is  a  tombe  made  of  lime  and  stone  fouresquare,
and  full  of  sand,  wherein,  they  say,  was  buried  that
blessed  camell  which  Mahumet  was  alwayes  woont  to
ride  upon.  On  the  other  side  of  the  city  are  other
tombes  of  holy  Mahumetans,  and  every  one  of  them
hath  a  tombe  built  upon  foure  pillers,  amongst  which
three  were  the  companions  of  Mahumet,  to  wit,  Abu-
bacar,  Ottoman,  and  Omar  ;  all  which  are  visited  of  the
pilgrims  as  holy  places.

[The  off^ering
3^3

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1580.

The  offering  of  the  vestures  unto  the  sepulchres.

THe  Carovan  being  come  to  Medina  two  houres  before
day,  and  resting  there  till  the  evening,  the  captaine
then  with  his  company  and  other  pilgrims  setteth  forward,
with  the  greatest  pompe  possible  :  and  taking  with  him
the  vesture  which  is  made  in  maner  of  a  pyramis,  with
many  other  of  golde  and  silke,  departeth,  going  thorow
the  midst  of  the  city,  untill  he  come  to  the  Mosquita,
where  having  praied,  he  presenteth  unto  the  tombe  of  his
prophet  (where  the  eunuchs  receiving  hands  are  ready)
the  vesture  for  the  sayd  tombe  :  and  certaine  eunuchs
entring  in  take  away  the  old  vesture,  and  lay  on  the  new,
burning  the  olde  one,  and  dividing  the  golde  thereof  into
equall  portions.  After  this  are  presented  other  vestures
for  the  ornament  of  the  Mosquita.  Also  the  people
without  deliver  unto  the  eunuchs  ech  man  somewhat  to
touch  the  tombe  therewith,  which  they  keepe  as  a  relique
with  great  devotion.  This  ceremony  being  ended,  the
captaine  resteth  in  Medina  two  dayes,  to  the  end  the
pilgrims  may  finish  their  devotion  and  ceremonies  :  and
after  they  depart  to  Jambor.  A  good  dayes  journey
thence  is  a  steepe  mountaine,  over  which  is  no  passage,
saving  by  one  narrow  path  called  Demir  Capi,  which  was
in  times  past  called  the  yron  gate.  Of  this  gate  the
Mahumetans  say,  that  Aly  the  companion  and  sonne  in
law  of  Mahumet,  being  here  pursued  by  many  Christians,
and  comming  unto  this  mountaine,  not  seeing  any  way
whereby  to  flee,  drew  out  his  sword,  and  striking  the  said
mountaine,  divided  it  in  sunder,  and  passing  thorow  saved
his  life  on  the  other  side.  Moreover,  this  Alii  among
the  Persians  is  had  in  greater  reverence  then  Mahumet,
who  affirme,  that  the  sayd  Alii  hath  done  greater  things
and  more  miraculous  then  Mahumet,  and  therefore  they
esteeme  him  for  God  almighty  his  fellow.  But  to  re-
turne  to  our  matter,  the  captaine  with  the  carovan  within
two  dayes  after  returneth  for  Cairo,  and  comming  to
Ezlem, findeth  there  a  captaine  with threescore horses

364

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d

1563-81.
come  thither  to  bring  refreshments  to  the  said  captaine  of
the  pilgrimage,  as  also  to  sell  unto  the  pilgrims  some
victuals.  From  thence  they  set  forward,  and  comming
to  Birca  within  two  leagues  of  Cairo,  there  is  the  master
of  the  house  of  the  Bassha  of  Cairo  with  all  his  horsemen
come  thither  to  receive  him,  with  a  sumptuous  and  costly
banket  made  at  the  cost  of  the  Basha  for  the  captaine  and
his  retinue,  who  after  he  is  well  refreshed  departeth  toward
the  castle  of  Cairo  to  salute  the  Basha,  who  receiving  him
with  great  joy  and  gladnesse  in  token  of  good  wil  pre-
senteth  him  with  a  garment  of  cloth  of  golde  very  rich  :
and  the  captaine  taking  the  Alcaron  out  of  the  chest
presenteth  it  to  the  Basha,  who  having  kissed  it,  com-
mandeth  to  lay  it  up  againe.  Some  there  are  which
affirme,  that  being  arrived  at  Cairo,  they  kill  that  goodly
camell  which  carried  the  Alcaron,  and  eate  him  ;  which
is  nothing  so  :  for  they  are  so  superstitious  to  the  con-
trary, that  to  gaine  all  the  world  they  would  not  kill  him.  [II.  i.  213.]
But  if  by  casualty  he  should  die,  in  this  case  happy  and
blessed  they  thinke  themselves,  which  can  get  a  morsell
to  eat.  And  thus  much  concerning  the  voyage  of  the
captaine  of  the  carovan  of  Cairo.

The  voyage  and  travell  of  M.  Cccsar  Fredericke,
Marchant  of  Venice,  into  the  East  India,
and  beyond  the  Indies.  Wherein  are  con-
teined  the  customes  and  rites  of  those  countries,
the  merchandises  and  commodities,  aswell  of
golde  and  silver,  as  spices,  drugges,  pearles,
and  other  jewels  :  translated  out  of  Italian  by
M.  Thomas  Hickocke.

Cssar  Fredericke  to  the  Reader.

Having  (gentle  Reader)  for  the  space  of  eighteene  Caesar  Frede-
yeeres  continually  coasted  and  travelled,  as  it  were,  ^'^^^e travelled
all  the  East  Indies,  and  many  other  countreys  be-  ^^^.^^  ^^  ^^^

yond  the  Indies,  wherein  I  have  had  both  good  and  ill  East  Indies.

successe  in  my  travels  :  and  having  scene  &  understood

365

A.D.

1563-81.

l^he  authours
^oingfroni
Venice  to
Cyprus  and
Triply.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

many  things  woorthy  the  noting,  and  to  be  knowen  to
all  the  world,  the  which  were  never  as  yet  written
of  any  :  I  thought  it  good  (seeing  the  Almighty  had
given  me  grace,  after  so  long  perils  in  passing  such
a  long  voyage  to  returne  into  mine  owne  countrey,
the  noble  city  of  Venice)  I  say,  I  thought  it  good,
as  briefly  as  I  could,  to  write  and  set  forth  this
voyage  made  by  me,  with  the  marvellous  things  I  have
seene  in  my  travels  in  the  Indies  :  The  mighty
Princes  that  governe  those  countreys,  their  religion  and
faith  that  they  have,  the  rites  and  customes  which  they
use,  and  live  by,  of  the  divers  successe  that  happened
unto  me,  and  how  many  of  these  countreys  are  abounding
with  spices,  drugs,  and  jewels,  giving  also  profitable
advertisement  to  all  those  that  have  a  desire  to  make
such  a  voyage.  And  because  that  the  whole  world  may
more  commodiously  rejoyce  at  this  my  travell,  1  have
caused  it  to  be  printed  in  this  order  :  and  now  I  present
it  unto  you  (gentle  &  loving  Readers)  to  whom  for  the
varieties  of  things  heerein  conteined,  I  hope  that  it  shall
be  with  great  delight  received.  And  thus  God  of  his
goodnesse  keepe  you.

A  voyage  to  the East  Indies,  and  beyond  the
Indies,  &c.

N  the  yere  of  our  Lord  God  1563,  I
Cffisar  Fredericke  being  in  Venice,  and
very  desirous  to  see  the  East  parts  of  the
world,  shipped  my  selfe  in  a  shippe
called  the  Gradaige  of  Venice,  with  cer-
taine  marchandise,  governed  by  M.
Jacomo  Vatica,  which  was  bound  to
Cyprus  with  his  ship,  with  whom  I  went  :  and  when  we
were  arrived  in  Cyprus,  I  left  that  ship,  and  went  in  a
lesser  to  Tripoly  in  Soria,  where  I  stayed  a  while.  After-
ward I  tooke  my  journey  to  Alepo,  and  there  I  acquainted
my  selfe  with  marchants  of  Armenia,  and  Moores,  that

366

CAESAR  FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
were  marchants,  and  consorted  to  go  with  them  to  Ormus,
and  wee  departed  from  Alepo,  and  in  two  dayes  journey
and  a  halfe,  wee  came  to  a  city  called  Bir.

Of  the  city  called  Bir.

BIr  is  a  small  city  very  scarse  of  all  maner  of  victuals,
and nere unto the walles of  the city runneth the
river  of  Euphrates. In this  city  the  marchants divide
themselves  into  companies,  according  to  their  merchandise
that they  have, and  there either  they buy or make a
boat  to  carry  them  and  their  goods  to  Babylon downe
the  river  Euphrates,  with  charge  of  a  master  and  mariners  T^he  river
to  conduct  the  boat  in  the  voyage  : these  boats  are  in  ^^phrates.
a maner  flat bottomed, yet they  be  very strong  : and
for  all  that  they  are  so  strong,  they  will  serve  but for
one  voyage. They  are  made  according  to  the  sholdnesse
of  the  river,  because  that  the  river  is  in  many  places  full
of  great  stones,  which  greatly  hinder  and  trouble  those
that  goe  downe  the river. These boats serve  but for
one  voyage  downe  the  river  unto  a  village  called  Felu-
chia,  because  it  is  impossible  to  bring  them  up  the  river
backe againe. At  Feluchia  the  marchants plucke their
boats  in pieces,  or  else sell  them  for  a  small  price,  for
that  at  Bir  they  cost  the  marchants  forty  or  fifty  chickens
a piece, and they sel them  at Feluchia for seven or  Feluchia  a
eight  chickens  a  piece,  because  that  when  the  marchants  ■^^ ';  "^-^  °^
returne from Babylon backe  againe,  if  they  have  mar-
chandise  or  goods  that  oweth  custome,  then  they  make
their returne in forty dayes thorow the wildernesse,
passing  that  way  with  a  great  deale  lesser  charges  then
the  other  way. And  if  they  have  not  marchandise  that
oweth  custome, then they goe by the  way  of  Mosul,  Mosul.
where it  costeth  them great  charges  both the  Carovan
and  company. From  Bir  where  the  marchants  imbarke  [II.  i.  214.]
themselves  to  Feluchia  over  against  Babylon,  if  the  river
have  good  store  of  water,  they  shall  make  their  voyage
in fifteene or eighteene dayes downe  the river,  and  if
the water be  lowe, and  it  hath not rained, then it  is

367

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

much  trouble,  and  it  will  be  forty  or  fifty  dayes  journey
downe,  because  that  when  the  barks  strike  on  the  stones
that  be  in  the  river,  then  they  must  unlade  them,  which
is  great  trouble,  and  then  lade  them  againe  when  they
have  mended  them  :  therefore  it  is  not  necessary,  neither
doe  the  marchants  go  with  one  boat  alone,  but  with
two  or  three,  that  if  one  boat  split  and  be  lost  with
striking  on  the  sholdes,  they  may  have  another  ready
to  take  in  their  goods,  untill  such  time  as  they  have
mended  the  broken  boat,  and  if  they  draw  the  broken
boat  on  land  to  mend  her,  it  is  hard  to  defend  her  in
the  night  from  the  great  multitude  of  Arabians  that
will  come  downe  there  to  robbe  you :  and  in  the  rivers
every  night,  when  you  make  fast  your  boat  to  the
banckeside,  you  must  keepe  good  watch  against  the
The  Arabian  Arabians  which  are  theeves  in  number  like  to  ants,  yet
theeves  are  tn  ^j^gj^  ^|^ey  come  to  robbe,  they  will  not  kill,  but  steale

fltlfTlhP7'  LIkP  to  1

jjjf^  & run away. Harquebuzes are very good weapons

against  them,  for  that  they  stand  greatly  in  feare  of
the  shot.  And  as  you  passe  the  river  Euphrates  from
Bir  to  Feluchia,  there  are  certein  places  which  you  must
passe  by,  where  you  pay  custome  certaine  medines  upon
a  bale,  which  custome  is  belonging  to  the  sonne  of
Aborise  king  of  the  Arabians  and  of  the  desert,  who
hath  certaine  cities  and  villages  on  the  river  Euphrates.

Feluchia  and  Babylon.

Eluchia  is  a  village  where  they  that  come  from  Bir
doe  unbarke  themselves  and  unlade  their  goods,  and
The  olde  it  is  distant  from  Babylon  a  dayes  journey  and  an  halfe

Babylon  hath by  land  :  Babylon  is  no  great  city,  but  it  is  very  popu-
great  trade Iqus, and of  great trade of  strangers because  it is a

w^  marchants  ' ,  r  r -n • --r 1  •  j a u*  j

still  great thorowrare tor rersia, 1  urkia, and  Arabia  : and

very  often  times  there  goe  out  from  thence  Carovans
into  divers  countreys  :  and  the  city  is  very  copious  of
victuals,  which  comme  out  of  Armenia  downe  the  river
of  Tygris,  on  certaine  Zattares  or  Raffes  made  of  blowen
hides  or  skinnes  called  Utrii. This  river  Tygris  doeth

368

F^

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

wash  the  walles  of  the  city.  These  Raffes  are  bound
fast  together,  and  then  they  lay  boards  on  the  aforesayd
blowen  skinnes,  and  on  the  boards  they  lade  the  com-
modities, and  so  come  they  to  Babylon,  where  they
unlade  them,  and  being  unladen,  they  let  out  the  winde
out  of  the  skinnes,  and  lade  them  on  cammels  to  make
another  voyage.  This  city  of  Babylon  is  situate  in  the
kingdome  of  Persia,  but  now  governed  by  the  Turks.
On  the  other  side  of  the  river  towards  Arabia,  over
against  the  city,  there  is  a  faire  place  or  towne,  and  in
it  a  faire  Bazarro  for  marchants,  with  very  many  lodgings,
where  the  greatest  part  of  the  marchants  strangers  which
come  to  Babylon  do  lie  with  their  marchandize.  The
passing  over  Tygris  from  Babylon  to  this  Borough  is
by  a  long  bridge  made  of  boates  chained  together  with  ^  i'^'^dge
great  chaines  :  provided,  that  when  the  river  waxeth  ^^^'^^  of  boats.
great  with  the  abundance  of  raine  that  falleth,  then  they
open  the  bridge  in  the  middle,  where  the  one  halfe  of
the  bridge  falleth  to  the  walles  of  Babylon,  and  the
other  to  the  brinks  of  this  Borough,  on  the  other  side
of  the  river  :  and  as  long  as  the  bridge  is  open,  they
passe  the  river  in  small  boats  with  great  danger,  because
of  the  smalnesse  of  the  boats,  and  the  overlading  of
them,  that  with  the  fiercenesse  of  the  streame  they  be
overthrowen,  or  els  the  streame  doth  cary  them  away,
so  that  by  this  meanes,  many  people  are  lost  and
drowned :  this  thing  by  proofe  I  have  many  times
seene.

Of  the  tower  of  Babylon.

THe  Tower  of  Nimrod  or  Babel  is  situate  on  that
side  of  Tygris  that  Arabia  is,  and  in  a  very  great
plaine  distant  from  Babylon  seven  or  eight  miles  :  which
tower  is  ruinated  on  every  side,  and  with  the  falling
of  it  there  is  made  a  great  mountaine  :  so  that  it  hath
no  forme  at  all,  yet  there  is  a  great  part  of  it  standing,
which  is  compassed  and  almost  covered  with  the  afore-
sayd fallings  :  this  Tower  was  builded  and  made  of
V  369  2  A

A.D.

[563-81.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

These  bricks
be  in  thicknes
six  or  seven
inches,  and  a
foot  13  a  halfe
square.

fouresquare  Brickes,  which  Brickes  were  made  of  earth,
and  dried  in  the  Sunne  in  maner  and  forme  following  :
first  they  layed  a  lay  of  Brickes,  then  a  Mat  made  of
Canes,  square  as  the  Brickes,  and  in  stead  of  lime,  they
daubed  it  with  earth  :  these  Mats  of  Canes  are  at  this
time  so  strong,  that  it  is  a  thing  woonderfuU  to  beholde,
being  of  such  great  antiquity  :  I  have  gone  round  about
it,  and  have  not  found  any  place  where  there  hath  bene
any  doore  or  entrance  :  it  may  be  in  my  judgement
in  circuit  about  a  mile,  and  rather  lesse  then  more.

This  Tower  in  effect  is  contrary  to  all  other  things
which  are  seene  afar  off,  for  they  seeme  small,  &  the
more  nere  a  man  commeth  to  them  the  bigger  they  be  :
but  this  tower  afar  off  seemeth  a  very  great  thing,  and
the  nerer  you  come  to  it  the  lesser.  My  judgement  &
[II.  i.  215.]  reason  of  this  is,  that  because  the  Tower  is  set  in  a  very
great  plaine,  and  hath  nothing  more  about  to  make  any
shew  saving  the  ruines  of  it  which  it  hath  made  round
about,  and  for  this  respect  descrying  it  a  farre  off,  that
piece  of  the  Tower  which  yet  standeth  with  the  moun-
taine  that  is  made  of  the  substance  that  hath  fallen  from
it,  maketh  a  greater  shew  then  you  shall  finde  comming
neere  to  it.

Babylon  and  Basora.

FRom  Babylon  I  departed  for  Basora,  shipping  my
selfe  in  one  of  the  barks  that  use  to  go  in  the  river
Tigris  from  Babylon  to  Basora,  and  from  Basora  to
Babylon  :  which  barks  are  made  after  the  maner  of  Fusts
or  Galliots  with  a  Speron  and  a  covered  poope  :  they
have  no  pumpe  in  them  because  of  the  great  abundance
of  pitch  which  they  have  to  pitch  them  with  all  :  which
pitch  they  have  in  abundance  two  dayes  journey  from
Babylon.  Nere  unto  the  river  Euphrates,  there  is  a  city
called  Heit,  nere  unto  which  city  there  is  a  great  plaine
full  of  pitch,  very  marvellous  to  beholde,  and  a  thing
almost  incredible,  that  out  of  a  hole  in  the  earth,  which
continually  throweth out pitch into the aire  with  con-

370

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

tinuall  smoake,  this  pitch  is  throwen  with  such  force,  This  hole
that  being  hot  it  falleth  like  as  it  were  sprinckled  over  'thereout
all the plaine, in such abundance that the plaine is  ^".ff^

1  riir-i  iTV/r  jiai-  pitch  IS  most

alwayes  rull  or  pitch  : the Mores and  the  Arabians  or  tyue  md  the
that  place  say,  that  that  hole  is  the  mouth  of  hell  :  and  zvater  y
in  trueth,  it  is  a  thing  very  notable  to  be  marked  : and  P^^'^^  runneth
by  this  pitch  the  whole  people  have  great  benefit  to  pitch  ^^^If^/^  ^■^

/ _  1  _  r r  o  r  OTllcindtoheTe

their  barks, which barks they call Daneck  and Safiin.  the  pitch
When the river of Tygris is well replenished with  resteth,  'i^  the
water,  you  may  passe  from  Babylon  to  Basora  in  eight  "^i^ater  runneth

1  1  .  1  '  1  into  ths  TtVBT

or  nine  dayes,  and  sometimes  more  and  sometimes  lesse  : r, , .
we  were  halfe so  much  more which is 14  or 15  daies,  and  it  maketh
because  the waters were low: they may saile day  &  all  the  river  to
night,  and  there  are  some  places  in  this  way  where  you  ^^  ^^  [^  ^^/'^
pay  so  many  medins  on  a  baile  :  if  the  waters  be  lowe,  "^^'^'^^^"■^y
it  is 18 dayes  journey.  ^pitchlnd

-r,  brimstone.

Joasora.

BAsora  is  a  city  of  the  Arabians,  which  of  olde  time
was  governed  by  those  Arabians called  Zizarii,  but  'Z^izarii,  an
now  it  is  governed  by  the  great  Turke  where  he  keepeth  ^^"^^^^ P^^P^^-
an  army  to  his  great  charges.

The Arabians called Zizarii have the possession of
a  great  countrey,  and  cannot  be  overcome  of  the  Turke,
because  that the  sea hath divided their countrey  into
an  Hand by  channels with the ebbing and flowing of
the  sea,  and  for that  cause  the  Turke  cannot  bring  an
army against them, neither by sea nor by land,  and
another  reason  is,  the  inhabitants  of  that  Hand  are  very
strong  and  warlike men. A dayes  journey before  you
come  to  Basora, you shall have  a little castle  or  fort,
which  is  set  on  that  point  of  the  land  where  the  rivers
of  Euphrates  and  Tygris meet  together, and the  castle  At  the  castle
is  called  Corna  : at  this point, the two rivers  make  a  of  Coma  the
monstrous  great  river,  that  runneth  into  the  sea,  which  "^^^ -^^"
is  called  the  gulfe  of  Persia,  which  is  towards  the  South : Xygris  do
Basora  is distant from the  sea  fifteene  miles,  and  it  is  meet.
a  city  of  great  trade  of  spices  and drugges  which  come

371

A.D.
1563-81.

Ormus  is  the
barrennest
Hand  in  all
the  world.

Carichii  an
Hand  in  ye
gulfeofPersia.

Ormus  is
alwayes  re-
plenished with
abundance  of
victuall,  and
yet  there  is
none  that
groweth  in  the
Hand.

Great  trade
of  merchandise
in  Ormus,
[II.  I.  216.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

from  Ormus.  Also  there  is  great  store  of  corne,  Rice,
and  Dates,  which  the  countrey  doth  yeeld.  T  shipped
my  selfe  in  Basora  to  go  for  Ormus,  and  so  we  sailed
thorow  the  Persian  sea  six  hundred  miles,  which  is  the
distance  from  Basora  to  Ormus,  and  we  sailed  in  small
ships  made  of  boards,  bound  together  with  small  cords
or  ropes,  and  in  stead  of  calking  they  lay  'betweene
every  board  certaine  straw  which  they  have,  and  so
they  sowe  board  and  board  together,  with  the  straw
betweene,  wherethorow  there  commeth  much  water,  and
they  are  very  dangerous.  Departing  from  Basora  we
passed  200  miles  with  the  sea  on  our  right  hand,  along
the  gulfe,  until  at  length  we  arrived  at  an  Hand  called
Carichii,  fro  whence  we  sailed  to  Ormus  in  sight  of
the  Persian  shore  on  the  left  side,  and  on  the  right  side
towards  Arabia  we  discovered  infinite  Hands.

Ormus.

ORmus  is  an  Hand  in  circuit  five  and  twenty  or  thirty
miles,  and  it  is  the  barrenest  and  most  drie  Hand
in  all  the  world,  because  that  in  it  there  is  nothing  to
be  had,  but  salt  water,  and  wood,  all  other  things  neces-
sary for  mans  life  are  brought  out  of  Persia  twelve
miles  off,  and  out  of  other  Hands  neere  thereunto  ad-
joyning,  in  such  abundance  and  quantity,  that  the  city
is  alwayes  replenished  with  all  maner  of  store  :  there  is
standing  neere  unto  the  waters  side  a  very  faire  castell,
in  the  which  the  captaine  of  the  king  of  Portugall
is  alwayes  resident  with  a  good  band  of  Portugalles,
and  before  this  castell  is  a  very  faire  prospect  :  in  the
city  dwell  the  maried  men,  souldiers  and  marchants  of
every  nation,  amongst  whom  there  are  Moores  and
Gentiles.  Hi  this  city  there  is  very  great  trade  for  all
sorts  of  spices,  drugges,  silke,  cloth  of  silke,  brocardo,
and  divers  other  sorts  of  marchandise  come  out  of
Persia  :  and  amongst  all  other  trades  of  merchandise,  the
trade  of  Horses  is  very  great  there,  which  they  carry
from  thence  into  the  Indies. This  Hand  hath  a  Moore

372

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

king  of  the  race  of  the Persians, who is created and

made  king  by  the  Captaine  of  the  castle,  in  the  name  of

the  king  of  Portugal!. At  the  creation of  this  king  I T'he  election  of

was  there,  and  saw  the  ceremonies  that  they  use  in  it,  ^' <^  °J

which  are  as  followeth. The  olde  King  being  dead,  the

Captaine  of  the  Portugals  chuseth  another  of  the  blood

royall,  and  maketh  this  election  in  the  castle  with  great

ceremonies, and when hee is elected, the Captaine

sweareth  him  to  be true and faithfull to  the King  of

Portugal!,  as his Lord and Governour, and then he

giveth  him the Scepter regall. After this with great

feasting  &  pompe,  and  with  great  company,  he  is  brought

into  the  royall  palace  in the city. This King keepeth

a  good  traine,  and  hath  sufficient  revenues  to  maintaine

himselfe  without  troubling  of  any,  because  the  Captaine

of  the  castle  doeth  mainteine  and  defend  his  right,  and

when that the Captaine and he ride together, he is

honoured as a king, yet he cannot ride abroad  with

his  traine,  without  the  consent  of  the  Captaine  first  had  :

it behooveth them to doe this, and it is necessary,

because  of  the  great trade that is in the city  : their

proper  language  is  the  Persian  tongue. There  I  shipped

my  selfe  to  goe for Goa, a city in the Indies, in a

shippe  that had fourescore horses in her. This  is  to

advertise  those  Marchants  that  go  from Ormus  to  Goa

to  shippe  themselves  in  those  shippes  that  carry  horses,

because every shippe that carrieth twenty horses or

upwards  is  privileged, that all  the  marchandise  whatso-  A  privilege

ever  they  carry  shall  pay  no  custome,  whereas  the  shippes  fi^'  -^^^~

that  carry  no  horses  are  bound  to  pay  eight  per  cento

of  all  the  goods  they  bring.

Goa,  Diu,  and  Cambaia.

GOa  is  the  principal!  city  that  the  Portugals  have
in  the  Indies,  where  is  resident  the  Viceroy  with
his  Court  and  ministers  of  the  King  of  Portugal!.  From
Ormus  to  Goa  is  nine  hundred  foure  score  and  ten  miles
distance,  in  which  passage  the  first  city  that  you  come  to

373

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

Diu.  in  the Indies, is called Diu, and is situate  in  a  little

Hand  in  the  kingdome  of  Cambaia,  which  is  the  greatest
strength  that  the  Portugals  have  in  all  the  Indies,  yet  a
small  city,  but  of  great  trade,  because  there  they  lade
very  many  great  ships  for  the  straights  of  Mecca  and
Ormus  with  marchandise,  and  these  shippes  belong  to
the  Moores  and  Christians,  but  the  Moores  can  not
trade  neither  saile  into  those  seas  without  the  licence
of  the  Viceroy  of  the  king  of  Portugall,  otherwise  they
are  taken  and  made  good  prises.  The  marchandise  that
they  lade  these  ships  withall  commeth  from  Cambaietta
a  port  in  the  kingdome  of  Cambaia,  which  they  bring
from  thence  in  small  barks,  because  there  can  no  great
shippes  come  thither,  by  reason  of  the  sholdnesse  of  the
water  thereabouts,  and  these  sholds  are  an  hundred  or
fourescore  miles  about  in  a  straight  or  gulfe,  which  they
call  Macareo,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  a  race  of  a
tide,  because  the  waters  there  run  out  of  that  place  with-
out measure,  so  that  there  is  no  place  like  to  it,  unlesse
it  be  in  the  kingdome  of  Pegu,  where  there  is  another
Macareo,  where  the  waters  run  out  with  more  force  then
these doe. The principall city in Cambaia is called

Cambaietta.  Amadavar,  it  is  a  dayes  journey  and  an  halfe  from  Cam-
baietta, it  is  a  very  great  city  and  very  populous,  and  for
a  city  of  the  Gentiles  it  is  very  well  made  and  builded
with  faire  houses  and  large  streets,  with  a  faire  place  in  it
with  many  shippes,  and  in  shew  like  to  Cairo,  but  not  so
great :  also  Cambaietta  is  situate  on  the  seas  side,  and  is  a
very  faire  city.  The  time  that  I  was  there,  the  city  was
in  great  calamity  &  scarsenesse,  so  that  I  have  scene  the
men  of  the  countrey  that  were  Gentiles  take  their
children,  their  sonnes  and  their  daughters,  and  have
desired  the  Portugals  to  buy  them,  and  I  have  scene
them  sold  for  eight  or  ten  larines  a  piece,  which  may  be
of  our  money  x.s.  or  xiii.s.  iiii.d.  For  all  this,  if  I  had
not  scene  it,  I  could  not  have  beleeved  that  there  should
be  such  a  trade  at  Cambaietta  as  there  is :  for  in  the
time of  every  new  Moone  and every  full Moone,  the

374

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.
small  barks  (innumerable)  come  in  and  out,  for  at  those
times  of  the  Moone  the  tides  and  waters  are  higher  then
at  other  times  they  be. These  barkes  be  laden  with  all
sorts  of  spices,  with  silke  of  China,  with  Sandols,  with
Elephants teeth,  Velvets of  Vercini,  great quantity of
Pannina,  which  commeth from  Mecca,  Chickinos  which
be  pieces  of  golde  woorth  seven  shillings  a  piece  sterling,
with  money,  and  with  divers  sorts  of  other  marchandize.
Also  these  barks  lade  out,  as  it  were,  an  infinite  quantity
of  cloth  made  of  Bumbast  of  all  sorts,  as  white  stamped
and  painted,  with  great  quantity  of  Indico,  dried  ginger
&  conserved,  Myrabolans drie and condite,  Boraso in
paste,  great store of  sugar,  great quantity of  Cotton,
abundance of  Opium,  Assa  Fetida,  Puchio, with many
other  sorts  of  drugges,  turbants  made  in  Dui,  great  stones
like to  Corneolaes,  Granats,  Agats,  Diaspry, Calcidonii,
Hematists,  and  some  kinde  of  naturall  Diamonds. There
is in  the  city  of  Cambaietta  an  order,  but no man is
bound to keepe it,  but they that will  ; but all the  [II.  i.  217.]
Portugall  marchants  keepe  it,  the  which  is  this. There
are  in  this  city  certain  Brokers  which  are Gentiles and
of  great  authority,  and  have  every  one  of  them  fifteene
or twenty  servants, and the Marchants that use that
countrey  have  their  Brokers,  with  which  they  be  served :
and  they  that  have  not  bene  there  are  informed  by  their
friends  of  the  order,  and  of  what  broker they  shall  be
served. Now  every  fifteene dayes (as abovesayd)  that
the fleet of  small shippes entreth into the port, the
Brokers come to the  water side,  and these Marchants
assoone  as  they  are  come  on  land,  do  give  the  cargason
of  all  their  goods  to  that  Broker  that  they  will  have  to
do  their  businesse for  them,  with  the marks  of  all  the
fardles  and  packs  they  have  : and  the  marchant  having  marchants
taken  on  land  all  his  furniture  for  his  house,  because  it  that  travell  to
is needfuU  that  the Marchants  that  trade  to  the  Indies  the  Indies  must
cary  provision  of  housholde  with  them,  because  that  in  ^'^-'^phetrpro-
every place where they come they  must have a new  '^^"iJ^Jiffi  °^'^'
house,  the  Broker  that  hath  received  his  cargason,  com-  them.

375

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

mandeth  his  servants  to  carry  the  Marchants  furniture
for  his  house  home,  and  load  it  on  some  cart,  and  carry
it  into  the  city,  where  the  Brokers  have  divers  empty
houses  meet  for  the  lodging  of  Marchants,  furnished
onely  with  bedsteds,  tables,  chaires,  and  empty  jarres  for
water :  then  the  Broker  sayth  to  the  Marchant,  Goe  and
repose  your  selfe,  and  take  your  rest  in  the  city.  The
Broker  tarrieth  at  the  water  side  with  the  cargason,  and
causeth  all  his  goods  to  be  discharged  out  of  the  ship,
and  payeth  the  custome,  and  causeth  it  to  be  brought
into  the  house  where  the  marchant  lieth,  the  Marchant
not  knowing  any  thing  thereof,  neither  custome,  nor
charges.  These  goods  being  brought  to  this  passe  into
the  house  of  the  Marchant,  the  Broker  demandeth  of  the
Marchant  if '  he  have  any  desire  to  sell  his  goods  or
marchandise,  at  the  prises  that  such  wares  are  worth  at
that  present  time  ?  And  if  he  hath  a  desire  to  sell  his
goods  presently,  then  at  that  instant  the  Broker  selleth
them  away.  After  this  the  Broker  sayth  to  the  Marchant,
you  have  so  much  of  every  sort  of  marchandise  neat  and
cleare  of  every  charge,  and  so  much  ready  money.  And
if  the  Marchant  will  imploy  his  money  in  other  com-
modities, then  the  Broker  telleth  him  that  such  and  such
commodities  will  cost  so  much,  put  aboord  without  any
maner  of  charges.  The  Marchant  understanding  the
effect,  maketh  his  account  ;  and  if  he  thinke  to  buy  or
sell  at  the  prices  currant,  he  giveth  order  to  make  his
marchandise  away :  and  if  he  hath  commodity  for  20000
dukets,  all  shalbe  bartred  or  solde  away  in  fifteene  dayes
without  any  care  or  trouble  :  and  when  as  the  Marchant
thinketh  that  he  cannot  sell  his  goods  at  the  prise
currant,  he  may  tary  as  long  as  he  will,  but  they  cannot
be  solde  by  any  man  but  by  that  Broker  that  hath  taken
them  on  land  and  payed  the  custome :  and  perchance
tarying  sometimes  for  sale  of  their  commodity,  they  make
good  profit,  and  sometimes  losse :  but  those  marchandise
that  come  not  ordinarily  every  fifteene  dayes,  in  tarying
for  the  sale  of  them,  there is  great  profit. The  barks

376

<

<
X
u

Pi

DC
O

o

h

O
I— <

H
O

M

t* t/

-I 1_

10*.  Jkifu

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

that  lade  in  Cambaietta  go  for  Diu  to  ade  the  ships  that
go  from  thence  for  the  streights  of  Mecca  and  Ormus,
and  some  go  to  Chaul  and  Goa :  and  these  ships  be  very
wel  appointed,  or  els  are  guarded  by  the  Armada  of  the
Portugals,  for  that  there  are  many  Corsaries  or  Pyrats  Great  store  of
which  goe  coursing;  alongst  that  coast,  robbing  and  spoil-  ^^^^,  y'^"^^'''^

^ . ~ ^  ^  p ,  ,  . °  .  ^ ^ and  rovers  on

mg :  and  tor  reare  or  these  theeves  there  is  no  sate  ^j,^  ^^^^^  ^r
sailing  in  those  seas,  but  with  ships  very  well  appointed  Cambaia.
and  armed,  or  els  with  the  fleet  of  the  Portugals,  as  is
aforesayd.  In  fine,  the  kingdome  of  Cambaia  is  a  place
of  great  trade,  and  hath  much  doings  and  traffique  with
all  men,  although  hitherto  it  hath  bene  in  the  hands  of
tyrants,  because  that  at  75  yeeres  of  age  the  true  king
being  at  the  assault  of  Diu,  was  there  slaine ;  whose  name
Sultan  Badu.  At  that  time  foure  or  five  captaines  of
the  army  divided  the  kingdome  amongst  themselves,  and
every  one  of  them  shewed  in  his  countrey  what  tyranny
he  could  :  but  twelve  yeeres  ago  the  great  Mogol  a
Moore  king  of  Agra  and  Delly,  forty  dayes  journy
within  the  land  of  Amadavar,  became  the  governour  of
all  the  kingdome  of  Cambaia  without  any  resistance,
because  he  being  of  great  power  and  force,  devising  which
way  to  enter  the  land  with  his  people,  there  was  not  any
man  that  would  make  him  any  resistance,  although  they
were  tyrants  and  a  beastly  people,  they  were  soone
brought  under  obedience.  During  the  time  I  dwelt  in  A  marvellous
Cambaietta  I  saw  very  marvellous  things :  there  were  fi'^'^  dehght
an  infinite  number  of  artificers  that  made  bracelets  called
Mannii,  or  bracelets  of  elephants  teeth,  of  divers  colours,
for  the  women  of  the  Gentiles,  which  have  their  armes
full  decked  with  them.  And  in  this  occupation  there
are  spent  every  yeere  many  thousands  of  crownes :  the
reason  whereof  is  this,  that  when  there  dieth  any  whatso-
ever of  their  kindred,  then  in  signe  and  token  of  mourn-
ing and  sorrow,  they  breake  all  their  bracelets  from  their
armes,  and  presently  they  go  and  buy  new  againe,
because  that  they  had  rather  be  without  their  meat  then
without  their  bracelets.

377

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

H

Daman. Basan. Tana.

"Aving  passed Diu,  I  came to  the  second  city  that

the  Portugals have,  called  Daman, situate in the

territory  of  Cambaia,  distant  from  Diu  an  hundred  and

[II.  i.  218.] twenty  miles  : it  is  no  towne  of  merchandise,  save  Rice

and  corne, and hath  many  villages under  it, where  in

time  of  peace the  Portugals  take  their  pleasure,  but  in

time of  warre the enemies have the spoile of  them  ;

in such  wise that the  Portugals have little benefit by

them. Next unto Daman  you  shall  have  Basan,  which

is  a  filthy  place in  respect  of  Daman  : in  this  place  is

Rice, Corne,  and Timber to make  shippes  and  gallies.

And  a  small  distance  beyond  Basan  is  a  little  Hand  called

Tana  an  Tana,  a place very  populous  with Portugals, Moores,

Hand  whereof  2,wdi  Gentiles: these have nothing  but Rice,  there are

°[^[f^  many  makers of  Armesine,  and weavers of  girdles of

to  rite  tu  pa°.  •'  .  ^  .

.  i_ ' ^' wooll  and  bumbast  blacke  and  redde  like  to  Moocharies.

Of  the  cities  of  Chaul,  and  of  the  Palmer  tree.

BEyond  this  Hand  you  shall  finde  Chaul  in  the  firme
land ;  and  they  are  two  cities,  one  of  the  Portugals,
and  the  other  of  the  Moores :  that  city  which  the  Portu-
gals have  is  situate  lower  then  the  other,  and  governeth
the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  and  is  very  strongly  walled  :
and  as  it  were  a  mile  and  an  halfe  distant  from  this  is  the
city  of  Moores,  governed  by  their  king  Zamalluco.  In
the  time  of  warres  there  cannot  any  great  ships  come  to
the  city  of  the  Moores,  because  the  Portugals  with  their
ordinance  will  sincke  them,  for  that  they  must  perforce
passe  by  the  castles  of  the  Portugals :  both  the  cities  are
ports  of  the  sea,  and  are  great  cities,  and  have  unto  them
great  traifique  and  trade  of  merchandise,  of  all  sorts  of
spices,  drugges,  silke,  cloth  of  silke,  Sandols,  Marsine,
Versine,  Porcelane  of  China,  Velvets  and  Scarlets  that
come  from  Portugall,  and  from  Meca :  with  many  other
sortes  of  merchandise.  There  come  every  yeere  from
Cochin,  and  from  Cananor  tenne  or  fifteene  great  shippes

378

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1563-81.
laden  with  great  Nuts  cured,  and  with  Sugar  made  of  the
selfe  same  Nuts  called  Giagra  :  the  tree  whereon  these
Nuts  doe  grow  is  called  the  Palmer  tree  :  and  thorowout
all  the  Indies,  and  especially  from  this  place  to  Goa
there  is  great  abundance  of  them,  and  it  is  like  to  the
Date  tree.  In  the  whole  world  there  is  not  a  tree
more  profitable  and  of  more  goodnesse  then  this  tree  is,
neither  doe  men  reape  so  much  benefit  of  any  other  tree
as  they  do  of  this,  there  is  not  any  part  of  it  but
serveth  for  some  use,  and  none  of  it  is  woorthy  to  be
burnt.  With  the  timber  of  this  tree  they  make  shippes
without  the  mixture  of  any  other  tree,  and  with  the
leaves  thereof  they  make  sailes,  and  with  the  fruit  thereof,
which  be  a  kinde  of  Nuts,  they  make  wine,  and  of  the
wine  they  make  Sugar  and  Placetto,  which  wine  they
gather  in  the  spring  of  the  yeere  :  out  of  the  middle  of  the
tree  where  continually  there  goeth  or  runneth  out  white
liquour  like  unto  water,  in  that  time  of  the  yeere  they
put  a  vessell  under  every  tree,  and  every  evening  and
morning  they  take  it  away  full,  and  then  distilling  it
with  fire  it  maketh  a  very  strong  liquour  :  and  then
they  put  it  into  buts,  with  a  quantity  of  Zibibbo,  white
or  blacke  and  in  short  time  it  is  made  a  perfect  wine.
After  this  they  make  of  the  Nuts  great  store  of  oile :  of
the  tree  they  make  great  quantity  of  boordes  and  quarters
for  buildings.  Of  the  barke  of  this  tree  they  make
cables,  ropes,  and  other  furniture  for  shippes,  and,  as
they  say,  these  ropes  be  better  then  they  that  are  made
of  Hempe.  They  make  of  the  bowes,  bedsteds,  after
the  Indies  fashion,  and  Scavasches  for  merchandise.  The
leaves  they  cut  very  small,  and  weave  them,  and  so
make  sailes  of  them,  for  all  maner  of  shipping,  or  els
very  fine  mats.  And  then  the  first  rinde  of  the  Nut
they  stampe,  and  make  thereof  perfect  Ockam  to  calke
shippes,  great  and  small  :  and  of  the  hard  barke  thereof
they  make  spoones  and  other  vessels  for  meat,  in  such
wise  that  there  is  no  part  thereof  throwen  away  or  cast
to  the  fire. When  these  Mats  be  greene  they  are  full

379

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

of  an  excellent  sweet  water  to  drinke  :  and  if  a  man  be
thirsty,  with  the  liquour  of  one  of  the  Mats  he  may
satisfie  himselfe  :  and  as  this  Nut  ripeneth,  the  liquor
thereof  turneth  all  to  kernell.  There  goeth  out  of
Chaul  for  Mallaca,  for  the  Indies,  for  Macao,  for  Por-
tugall,  for  the  coasts  of  Melinde,  for  Ormus,  as  it  were
an  infinite  number  and  quantity  of  goods  and  merchandise
that  come  out  of  the  kingdome  of  Cambaia,  as  cloth  of
bumbast  white,  painted,  printed,  great  quantity  of  Indico,
Opium,  Cotton,  Silke  of  every  sort,  great  store  of
Boraso  in  Paste,  great  store  of  Fetida,  great  store  of
yron,  corne,  and  other  merchandise.  The  Moore  king
Zamalluco  is  of  great  power,  as  one  that  at  need  may
command,  &  hath  in  his  camp,  two  hundred  thousand
Great  ordi-  men  of  warre,  and  hath  great  store  of  artillery,  some  of
nance  made  in  x}aQm.  made  in  pieces,  which  for  their  greatnesse  can  not
^seTvllelbk^^  bee  carried  to  and  fro  ;  yet  although  they  bee  made  in
pieces,  they  are  so  commodious  that  they  worke  with
them  marvellous  well,  whose  shotte  is  of  stone,  and
there  hath  bene  of  that  shot  sent  unto  the  king  of
Portugall  for  the  rarenes  of  the  thing.  The  city  where
the  king  Zamalluco  hath  his  being,  is  within  the  land  of
Chaul  seven  or  eight  dayes  journey,  which  city  is  called
Abneger.  Threescore  and  tenne  miles  from  Chaul,
towards  the  Indies,  is  the  port  of  Dabul,  an  haven  of
the  king  Zamalluco  :  from  thence  to  Goa  is  an  hundred
and  fifty  miles.

[II.  i.  219.]  Goa.

The  chiefe  /^  Oa  is  the  principall  city  that  the  Portugals  have  in
place  the  For-  V_J  the  Indies,  wherein  the  Viceroy  with  his  royall
tugah  have  in  Qq^j.^. jg  resident,  and is in an Hand  which  may  be  in

thf I V nip ^  '  ,

circuit  five  and  twenty  or  thirty  miles  :  and  the  city
with  the  boroughs  is  reasonable  bigge,  and  for  a  citie  of
the  Indies  it  is  reasonable  faire,  but  the  Hand  is  farre
more  fairer  :  for  it  is  as  it  were  full  of  goodly  gardens,
replenished  with  divers  trees  and  with  the  Palmer  trees
as is aforesayd. This city is of  great  trafique for all

380

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

sorts  of  marchandise  which  they  trade  withall  in  those
parts  :  and  the  fleet  which  commeth  every  yeere  from
Portugall,  which  are  five  or  sixe  great  shippes  that  come
directly  for  Goa,  arrive  there  ordinarily  the  sixth  or
tenth  of  September,  and  there  they  remaine  forty  or
fifty  dayes,  and  from  thence  they  goe  to  Cochin,  where
they  lade  for  Portugall,  and  often  times  they  lade  one
shippe  at  Goa  and  the  other  at  Cochin  for  Portugall.
Cochin  is  distant  from  Goa  three  hundred  miles.  The
city  of  Goa  is  situate  in  the  kingdome  of  Dialcan  a
king  of  the  Moores,  whose  chiefe  city  is  up  in  the
countrey  eight  dayes  journey,  and  is  called  Bisapor  :  this
king  is  of  great  power,  for  when  I  was  in  Goa  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord  1570,  this  king  came  to  give  assault
to  Goa,  being  encamped  neere  unto  it  by  a  river  side
with  an  army  of  two  hundred  thousand  men  of  warre,
and  he  lay  at  this  siege  foureteene  moneths  :  in  which
time  there  was  peace  concluded,  and  as  report  went
amongst  his  people,  there  was  great  calamity  and  mor-
tality which  bred  amongst  them  in  the  time  of  Winter,
and  also  killed  very  many  elephants.  Then  in  the  yeere
of  our  Lord  1567,  I  went  from  Goa  to  Bezeneger  the
chiefe  city  of  the  kingdome  of  Narsinga  eight  dayes
journey  from  Goa,  within  the  land,  in  the  company  of
two  other  merchants  which  carried  with  them  three
hundred  Arabian  horses  to  that  king  :  because  the  horses
of  that  countrey  are  of  a  small  stature,  and  they  pay
well  for  the  Arabian  horses  :  and  it  is  requisite  that  the
merchants  sell  them  well,  for  that  they  stand  them  in
great  charges  to  bring  them  out  of  Persia  to  Ormus,
and  from  Ormus  to  Goa,  where  the  ship  that  bringeth
twenty  horses  and  upwards  payeth  no  custome,  neither
ship  nor  goods  whatsoever  ;  whereas  if  they  bring  no
horses,  they  pay  8  per  cento  of  all  their  goods  :  and  at
the  going  out  of  Goa  the  horses  pay  custome,  two  and
forty  pagodies  for  every  horse,  which  pagody  may  be  of
sterling  money  sixe  shillings  eight  pence,  they  be  pieces
of  golde  of  that  value. So  that  the  Arabian  horses  are

381

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

ji  very  good of  great value in those countreys,  as 300, 400, 500
sale  for  hones,  duckets  a  horse,  and  to 1000  duckets  a  horse.

Bezeneger.

THe  city  of  Bezeneger  was  sacked  in  the  yeere  1565,
by  foure  kings  of  the  Moores,  which  were  of  great
power  and  might  :  the  names  of  these  foure  kings  were
these  following,  the  first  was  called  Dialcan,  the  second
Zamaluc,  the  third  Cotamaluc,  and  the  fourth  Viridy  :
and  yet  these  foure  kings  were  not  able  to  overcome  this
city  and  the  king  of  Bezeneger,  but  by  treason.  This
king  of  Bezeneger  was  a  Gentile,  and  had,  amongst  all
other  of  his  captaines,  two  which  were  notable,  and  they
were  Moores  :  and  these  two  captaines  had  either  of
them  in  charge  threescore  and  ten  or  fourescore  thousand
men.  These  two  captaines  being  of  one  religion  with
the  foure  kings  which  were  Moores,  wrought  meanes
with  them  to  betray  their  owne  king  into  their  hands.
The  king  of  Bezeneger  esteem.ed  not  the  force  of  the
foure  kings  his  enemies,  but  went  out  of  his  city  to
wage  battell  with  them  in  the  fieldes  ;  and  when  the
armies  were  joyned,  the  battell  lasted  but  a  while  not  the
space  of  foure  houres,  because  the  two  traitourous  cap-
taines, in  the  chiefest  of  the  fight,  with  their  companies
turned  their  faces  against  their  king,  and  made  such  dis-
order in  his  army,  that  as  astonied  they  set  themselves
to  flight.  Thirty  yeeres  was  this  kingdome  governed
by  three  brethren  which  were  tyrants,  the  which  keeping
the  rightfuU  king  in  prison,  it  was  their  use  every  yeere
once  to  shew  him  to  the  people,  and  they  at  their
pleasures  ruled  as  they  listed.  These  brethren  were
three  captaines  belonging  to  the  father  of  the  king  they
kept  in  prison,  which  when  he  died,  left  his  sonne  very
yong,  and  then  they  tooke  the  government  to  themselves.
The  chiefest  of  these  three  was  called  Ramaragio,  and
sate  in  the  royall  throne,  and  was  called  the  king  :  the
second  was  called  Temiragio,  and  he  tooke  the  govern-
ment on  him  : the  third  was  called  Bengatre,  and  he  was

382

A  most  unkind
y  wicked
treason  against
their  prince  :
this  they  have
for  giving
credit  to  stran-
gers, rather
then  to  their
owne  native
people.

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
captaine generall of the army. These three  brethren
were  in this battell, in  the which the  chiefest  and the
last  were  never  heard  of  quicke  nor  dead. Onely  Temi-
ragio  fled in  the battel,  having lost one of  his eyes  :
when  the  newes  came  to  the  city  of  the  overthrow  in  the
battell,  the wives and children of these three tyrants,
with  their  lawfull  king  (kept  prisoner)  fled  away,  spoiled
as  they  were,  &  the  foure  kings  of  the  Moores  entred  The  sacking  of
the city Bezeneger  with great triumph, & there they  ^^^  "^■^'•
remained sixe moneths,  searching  under houses & in
all  places for  money  &  other  things that  were  hidden,
and then they departed to their owne kingdomes,  [II.  i,  220.]
because they  were  not able to maintaine such  a  king-
dome as that was,  so farre distant from their owne
countrey.

When  the  kings  were  departed  from  Bezeneger,  this
Temiragio  returned  to  the  city,  and  then  beganne  for
to  repopukte  it,  and  sent  word  to  Goa  to  the  Mer-
chants, if  they  had  any  horses,  to  bring  them  to  him,
and  he  would  pay  well  for  them,  and  for  this  cause  the
aforesayd  two  Merchants  that  I  went  in  company  with-
all,  carried  those  horses  that  they  had  to  Bezeneger.
Also  this  Tyrant  made  an  order  or  lawe,  that  if  any  An  excellent
Merchant  had  any  of  the  horses  that  were  taken  in  the  <?''^^Mo'  ^^
aforesayd  battell  or  warres,  although  they  were  of  his  '^  ^
owne  marke,  that  he  would  give  as  much  for  them  as
they  v/ould  :  and  beside  he  gave  generall  safe  conduct
to  all  that  should  bring  them.  When  by  this  meanes
he  saw  that  there  were  great  store  of  horses  brought
thither  unto  him,  hee  gave  the  Merchants  faire  wordes,
untill  such  time  as  he  saw  they  could  bring  no  more.
Then  he  licenced  the  Merchants  to  depart,  without  giving
them  any  thing  for  their  horses,  which  when  the  poore
men  saw,  they  were  desperate,  and  as  it  were  mad  with
sorrow  and  griefe.

I  rested  in  Bezeneger  seven  moneths,  although  in  one
moneth  I  might  have  discharged  all  my  businesse,  for
it was necessary to rest there untill the wayes were

383

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

cleere  of  theeves,  which  at  that  time  ranged  up  and
downe.  And  in  the  time  I  rested  there,  I  saw  many
strange  and  beastly  deeds  done  by  the  Gentiles.  First,
when  there  is  any  Noble  man  or  woman  dead,  they
burne  their  bodies  :  and  if  a  married  man  die,  his  wife
must  burne  herselfe  alive,  for  the  love  of  her  husband,
and  with  the  body  of  her  husband  :  so  that  when  any
man  dieth,  his  wife  will  take  a  moneths  leave,  two  or
three,  or  as  shee  will,  to  burne  her  selfe  in,  and  that  day
being  come,  wherein  shee  ought  to  be  burnt,  that  morn-
ing shee  goeth  out  of  her  house  very  earely,  either  on
horsebacke  or  on  an  eliphant,  or  else  is  borne  by  eight
men  on  a  smal  stage  :  in  one  of  these  orders  she  goeth,
being  apparelled  like  to  a  Bride,  carried  round  about
the  City,  with  her  haire  downe  about  her  shoulders^
garnished  with  jewels  and  flowers,  according  to  the
estate  of  the  party,  and  they  goe  with  as  great  joy  as
Brides  doe  in  Venice  to  their  nuptials  :  shee  carrieth
in  her  left  hand  a  looking  glasse,  and  in  her  right  hand
an  arrow,  and  singeth  thorow  the  City  as  she  passeth,
and  sayth,  that  she  goeth  to  sleepe  with  her  deere  spowse
and  husband.  She  is  accompanied  with  her  kindred
and  friends  untill  it  be  one  or  two  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone,  then  they  goe  out  of  the  City,  and  going
along  the  rivers  side  called  Nigondin,  which  runneth
under  the  walles  of  the  City,  untill  they  come  unto  a
A  discription  place  where  they  use  to  make  this  burning  of  women,
of  the  burning  being  widdowes,  there  is  prepared  in  this  place  a  great
^  square cave,  with  a  little pinnacle  hard  by  it,  foure  or

five  steppes  up  :  the  foresayd  cave  is  full  of  dried  wood.
The woman being come thither, accompanied with a
great number  of  people  which come  to see  the thing.
Feasting  and then they make  ready  a great banquet, and she that
dancing  when g]^^||  ^g  burned  eateth  with  as  great  joy  and  gladnesse,

^■^  ^  ''" as  though  it  were  her  wedding  day  :  and  the  feast  beina:
moiirne.  i i ,  j ■  1 • •  ■

ended,  then  they  goe  to  dancmg  and  singing  a  certeine

time,  according  as she  will. After  this,  the  woman of

her  owne accord, commandeth them to make the fire

384

5.H

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.

in the square  cave  where  the  drie  wood  is,  and when

it  is  kindled,  they  come and certifie her  thereof, then

presently she  leaveth  the  feast, and taketh the  neerest

kinseman  of  her  husband  by the  hand, and  they both

goe  together  to  the  banke  of  the  foresayd  river,  where

shee  putteth off  all her  jewels and  all  her  clothes,  and

giveth  them to  her  parents  or  kinsefolke,  and  covering

herselfe  with a cloth, because  she  will  not  be  seene  of

the  people  being  naked,  she  throweth  herselfe  into  the

river, saying  : O wretches, wash away your sinnes.

Comming out  of  the water, she rowleth herselfe  into

a yellow cloth of  foureteene braces  long  : and  againe

she taketh  her husbands kinseman by the hand, and

they  go  both  together  up  to  the  pinnacle  of  the  square

cave wherein the fire is  made. When she  is  on the

pinnacle, shee talketh and reasoneth with the people,

recommending unto them her children and kindred.

Before  the  pinnacle  they  use  to  set  a  mat,  because  they

shall not  see the fiercenesse of  the fire,  yet there are

many  that  will  have  them  plucked  away,  shewing  therein

an  heart not  fearefuU,  and  that  they  are  not  affrayd  of

that  sight. When  this  silly  woman  hath  reasoned  with

the  people  a  good  while  to  her  content,  there  is  another

woman that  taketh  a pot  with  oile,  and  sprinckleth it

over  her  head,  and  with  the  same  she  anoynteth  all  her

body,  and  afterwards  throweth  the  pot  into  the  fornace,

and  both  the  woman  and  the  pot  goe  together  into  the

fire,  and  presently  the  people  that  are  round  about the

fornace throw after her into  the cave great pieces of

wood, so by  this  meanes,  with the fire  and with the

blowes  that  she  hath  with  the  wood  throwen  after  her,

she  is  quickly  dead,  and after  this  there  groweth  such

sorrow and such lamentation among the people, that

all their mirth is  turned  into  howling  and  weeping,  in  Mourning

such wise, that  a  man  could scarse beare the hearing  -^henthey^

c  ■  -I \  1  , • ^1  •  1  should  remce.

or  It. 1  have  seene  many  burnt  m  this  maner,  because  ■"

my house was neere  to  the  gate  where they  goe out
to the place of  burning  : and when  there dieth any

V  385  2B

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

great  man, his  wife  with all  his  slaves  with  whom  hee

[II.  i.  221.] hath  had  carnall  copulation, burne themselves  together

with  him. Also  in  this  kingdome  I  have  seene  amongst

the  base  sort  of  people  this  use  and  order,  that  the  man

being  dead,  hee  is  carried  to  the  place  where  they  will

make  his  sepulchre,  and  setting  him  as  it  were  upright,

then  commeth  his  wife  before  him  on  her  knees,  casting

her  armes  about  his  necke,  with  imbracing  and  clasping

him,  untill  such  time  as  the  Masons  have  made  a  wall

round about  them,  and when the wall is as high as

their  neckes,  there  commeth  a  man  behinde  the  woman

and  strangleth  her  : then  when  she  is  dead,  the  worke-

men finish the  wall over  their heads,  and so they  lie

buried  both  together. Besides  these,  there  are  an  infinite

number  of  beastly qualities amongst  them, of  which I

The  cause  zvhj  have no  desire  to  write. I  was  desirous  to  know  the

/  e  zLomen 0 ^^^^^  ^|^y  these  women  would  so  wilfully  burne  them-

so  oume  ■'.  .  ■'

themselves. selves  against  nature  and  law,  and  it  was  told  mee  that

this  law  was  of  an  ancient  time,  to  make  provision  against

the slaughters which women made of  their  husbands.

For  in  those  dayes  before  this  law  was  made,  the  women

for  every  little  displeasure  that  their  husbands  had  done

unto  them,  would  presently  poison  their  husbands,  and

take other men, and now by  reason  of  this  law they

are  more  faithfuU  unto  their  husbands,  and  count  their

lives  as  deare  as  their  owne,  because  that  after  his  death

her  owne  followeth  presently.

In the yeere of  our Lord God 1567, for the ill

successe  that  the  people  of  Bezeneger  had,  in  that  their

City  was  sacked  by  the  foure  kings,  the  king  with  his

Court  went  to  dwell  in a  castle  eight  dayes  journey  up

Penegonde. in the  land from Bezeneger, called Penegonde. Also

sixe  dayes  journey  from Bezeneger,  is  the place where

they  get Diamants  :  I  was not  there,  but it  was  tolde

me  that  it  is a great  place,  compassed  with  a  wall,  and

that  they  sell  the  earth  within  the  wall,  for  so  much  a

squadron,  and  the  limits  are  set  how  deepe  or  how  low

they  shall  digge. Those  Diamants  that  are  of  a  certaine

386

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
sise  and  bigger  then  that  sise,  are  all  for  the  king,  it
is  many  yeeres  agone,  since  they  got  any  there,  for  the
troubles  that  have  beene  in  that  kingdome.  The  first
cause  of  this  trouble  was,  because  the  sonne  of  this
Temeragio  had  put  to  death  the  lawfull  king  which  he
had  in  prison,  for  which  cause  the  Barons  and  Noblemen
in  that  kingdome  would  not  acknowledge  him  to  be  their
King,  and  by  this  meanes  there  are  many  kings,  and
great  division  in  that  kingdome,  and  the  city  of  Beze-
neger  is  not  altogether  destroyed,  yet  the  houses  stand
still,  but  empty,  and  there  is  dwelling  in  them  nothing,
as  is  reported,  but  Tygers  and  other  wilde  beasts.  The
circuit  of  this  city  is  foure  &  twentie  miles  about,  and
within  the  walles  are  certeine  mountaines.  The  houses
stand  walled  with  earth,  and  plaine,  all  saving  the  three
palaces  of  the  three  tyrant  brethren,  and  the  Pagodes
which  are  idole  houses  :  these  are  made  with  lime  and
fine  marble.  I  have  scene  many  kings  Courts,  and
yet  have  I  scene  none  in  greatnesse  like  to  this  of  Beze-
neger,  I  say,  for  the  order  of  his  palace,  for  it  hath  nine
gates  or  ports.  First  when  you  goe  into  the  place  where
the  king  did  lodge,  there  are  five  great  ports  or  gates  :
these  are  kept  with  Captaines  and  souldiers  :  then  within
these  there  are  foure  lesser  gates  :  which  are  kept  with
Porters.  Without  the  first  gate  there  is  a  little  porch,
where  there  is  a  Captaine  with  five  and  twentie  souldiers,
that  keepeth  watch  and  ward  night  and  day  :  and  within
that  another  with  the  like  guard,  wherethorow  they  come
to  a  very  faire  Court,  and  at  the  end  of  that  Court
there  is  another  porch  as  the  first,  with  the  like  guard,
and  within  that  another  Court.  And  in  this  wise  are
the  first  five  gates  guarded  and  kept  with  those  Captaines :
and  then  the  lesser  gates  within  are  kept  with  a  guard
of  Porters  :  which  gates  stand  open  the  greatest  part
of  the  night,  because  the  custome  of  the  Gentiles  is  to
doe  their  businesse,  and  make  their  feasts  in  the  night,
rather  then  by  day.  The  city  is  very  safe  from  theeves,
for  the  Portugall  merchants  sleepe  in  the  streets,  or  under

387

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

porches,  for  the  great  heat  which  is  there,  and  yet  they
never  had  any  harme  in  the  night.  At  the  end  of  two
moneths,  I  determined  to  go  for  Goa  in  the  company
of  two  other  Portugall  Marchants,  which  were  making
ready  to  depart,  with  two  palanchines  or  little  litters,
which  are  very  commodious  for  the  way,  with  eight
Falchines  which  are  men  hired  to  cary  the  palanchines,
eight  for  a  palanchine,  foure  -at  a  time  :  they  carry  them
Men  ride  on  as  we  use  to  carry  barrowes.  And  I  bought  me  two
bullocks,  and b^Uocks,  one  of  them  to  ride  on,  and  the  other  to  carry

travell  with  . ^ •,  ,  .  .  ~ . .  ,  .  ,•'

them  on  the ^X  Victuals  and  provision,  tor  m  that  countrey  they  ride
way.  on  bullocks  with  pannels,  as  we  terme  them,  girts  and

bridles,  and  they  have  a  very  good  commodious  pace.  From
Bezeneger  to  Goa  in  Summer  it  is  eight  dayes  journey,  but
we  went  in  the  midst  of  Winter,  in  the  moneth  of  July,
and  were  fifteene  dayes  comming  to  Ancola  on  the
sea  coast,  so  in  eight  dayes  I  had  lost  my  two  bullocks :
for  he  that  carried  my  victuals,  was  weake  and  could  not
goe,  the  other  when  I  came  unto  a  river  where  was  a
little  bridge  to  passe  over,  I  put  my  buUocke  to  swim-
ming, and  in  the  middest  of  the  river  there  was  a  little
Hand,  unto  the  which  my  bullocke  went,  and  finding
pasture,  there  he  remained  still,  and  in  no  wise  we  could
come  to  him :  and  so  perforce,  I  was  forced  to  leave
him,  and  at  that  time  there  was  much  raine,  and  I  was
[II.  i.  222.]  forced  to  go  seven  dayes  a  foot  with  great  paines :  and
by  great  chance  I  met  with  Falchines  by  the  way,  whom
I  hired  to  carry  my  clothes  and  victuals.  We  had  great
trouble  in  our  journey,  for  that  every  day  wee  were
taken  prisoners,  by  reason  of  the  great  dissension  in  that
kingdome :  and  every  morning  at  our  departure  we  must
pay  reseat  foure  or  five  pagies  a  man.  And  another
trouble  wee  had  as  bad  as  this,  that  when  as  wee  came
into  a  new  governours  countrey,  as  every  day  we  did,
although  they  were  al  tributary  to  the  king  of  Bezeneger,
yet  every  one  of  them  stamped  a  several  coine  of  Copper,
so  that  the  money  that  we  tooke  this  day  would  not
serve  the  next :  at  length,  by  the  helpe  of  God,  we  came

38S

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.

safe to Ancola, which is a  country  of  the queene of

Gargopam, tributary to the king of  Bezeneger. The  The  mankan-

marchandise  that  went  every  yere  from  Goa  to  Bezeneger ^^f  "^^

TTi  T-k  1  JO  tn  and  out  to

were Arabian irlorses, Velvets, JJamasks, and battens,  Bezeneger

Armesine  of  Portugall,  and  pieces  of  China,  Saffron,  and  every  yere.

Skarlets : and from Bezeneger they  had  in Turky  for

their  commodities,  jewels,  and  Pagodies  which  be  ducats

of  golde : the apparell that they use in Bezeneger is  The  apparell

Velvet, Satten, Damaske, Scarlet, or white Bumbast  '^f^hose people.

cloth,  according to  the  estate of  the  person with long

hats  on  their  heads,  called  Colae,  made  of  Velvet,  Satten,

Damaske, or Scarlet, girding themselves in stead of

girdles  with some  fine  white  bombast  cloth  :  they  have

breeches  after  the  order  of  the  Turks : they weare  on

their  feet  plaine  high  things  called  of  them  Aspergh,  and

at  their  eares  they  have hanging  great  plenty  of  golde.

Returning  to  my  voyage, when  we  were together  in

Ancola,  one  of  my  companions  that  had  nothing  to  lose,

tooke  a  guide, and  went to  Goa, whither  they  goe in

foure  dayes,  the  other  Portugall not being  disposed to

go,  taried  in  Ancola  for  that Winter. The  Winter in  T^^^'^^  Winter

those  parts  of  the  Indies  beginneth  the  fifteenth  of  May,  ^'°''''^''^^^^-

and  lasteth  unto  the  end  of  October :  and  as  we  were  in

Ancola, there came another Marchant of  horses in a

palanchine, and two Portugall souldiers which came

from Zeilan, and two cariers of letters, which were

Christians borne in the Indies  ; all these  consorted to

goe  to Goa together, and I determined to goe with

them,  and  caused  a  pallanchine  to  be  made  for  me  very

poorely  of  Canes  ; and in one of  them Canes I hid

privily  all  the  jewels  I  had,  and  according  to the  order,

I  tooke  eight  Falchines  to  cary  me :  and  one  day  about

eleven  of  the  clocke  wee  set  forwards  on  our  journey,  and

about  two  of.  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  as  we  passed

a  mountaine  which  divideth  the  territory  of  Ancola  and

Dialcan, I being a little behinde my company, was

assaulted  by  eight  theeves,  foure of  them had  swordes

and  targets,  and  the  other  foure  had  bowes  and  arrowes.

389

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

When  the  Falchines  that  carried  me  understood  the  noise

of  the  assault,  they  let  the  pallanchine  and  me  fall  to  the

ground,  and ranne  away and left me alone, with my

clothes  wrapped  about me : presently  the theeves  were

on my  necke  and  rifeling me, they  stripped me starke

naked,  and  I  fained  my  selfe  sicke,  because  I  would  not

leave  the  pallanchine,  and  I  had  made  me  a  little  bedde

of  my  clothes  ;  the  theeves  sought  it  very  narrowly  and

subtilly,  and  found  two  pursses  that  I  had,  well  bound

up  together,  wherein  I  had  put  my  Copper  money  which

I had changed for foure pagodies in Ancola. The

theeves  thinking  it  had  beene  so  many  duckats  of  golde,

searched  no  further :  then  they  threw  all  my  clothes  in

a  bush,  and  hied  them  away,  and  as  God  would  have  it,

at  their  departure  there  fell  from  them  an  handkercher,

and  when I  saw  it,  I  rose  from  my  pallanchine  or  couch,

and tooke  it up, and wrapped it together within my

pallanchine. Then  these  my  Falchines  were  of  so  good

condition, that they returned to seeke mee, whereas

I  thought  I  should  not  have  found  so  much  goodnesse

in  them  :  because  they  were  payed  their  mony  aforehand,

as  is  the  use,  I  had  thought  to  have  scene  them  no  more.

Before  their  comming I was  determined to plucke  the

Cane  wherein  my  jewels  were  hidden,  out  of  my  coutch,

and  to  have  made  me  a  walking  stafFe  to  carry  in  my  hand

to  Goa,  thinking  that  I  should  have  gone  thither  on  foot,

but  by  the  faithfulness  of  my  Falchines,  I  was  rid  of  that

trouble,  and  so in  foure  dayes  they  carried  me  to  Goa,

in  which  time  I  made  hard  fare,  for  the  theeves  left  me

neither money,  golde,  nor  silver,  and that  which  I  did

eat  was  given  me  of  my  men  for  Gods  sake :  and  after  at

my comming to Goa I payed them for every thing

royally  that  I  had  of  them. From Goa I departed  for

Cochin,  which  is  a  voyage  of  three  hundred miles, and

betweene  these  two  cities  are  many  holdes  of  the  Portu-

Foure  small gals,  as  Onor,  Mangalor, Barzelor,  and  Cananor. The

fortes  of  the Holde  or  Fort  that  you  shall  have  from  Goa  to  Cochin

ottugas. ^j^^^ belongeth to  the  Fortugals,  is  called  Onor,  which

390

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.

is  in  the  kingdome  of  the  queene  of  Battacella,  which
is  tributary  to  the  king  of  Bezeneger  :  there  is  no  trade
there,  but  onely  a  charge  with  the  Captaine  and  com-
pany he  keepeth  there.  And  passing  this  place,  you
shall  come  to  another  small  castle  of  the  Portugals
called  Mangalor,  and  there  is  very  small  trade  but  onely
for  a  little  Rice :  and  from  thence  you  goe  to  a
little  fort  called  Barzelor,  there  they  have  good  store  of
Rice  which  is  carried  to  Goa:  and  from  thence  you
shall  goe  to  a  city  called  Cananor,  which  is  a  harquebush
shot  distant  from  the  chiefest  city  that  ye  king  of  Cananor
hath  in  his  kingdome  being  a  king  of  the  Gentiles :  and
he  &  his  are  very  naughty  &  malicious  people,  alwayes
having  delight  to  be  in  warres  with  the  Portugales,  and  [II.  i.  223.]
when  they  are  in  peace,  it  is  for  their  interest  to  let  their
merchandize  passe :  there  goeth  out  of  this  kingdom
of  Cananor,  all  the  Cardamomum,  great  store  of  Pepper,
Ginger,  Honie,  ships  laden  with  great  Nuts,  great  quan-
titie  of  Archa,  which  is  a  fruit  of  the  bignesse  of  Nutmegs,
which  fruite  they  eate  in  all  those  partes  of  the  Indies
and  beyond  the  Indies,  with  the  leafe  of  an  Herbe  which
they  call  Bettell,  the  which  is  like  unto  our  Ivie  leafe,  Bettellisa
but  a  litle  lesser  and  thinner :  they  eate  it  made  in  "^^^jf/ij^ fj^J
plaisters  with  the  lime  made  of  Oistershels,  and  thorow  countrey.
the  Indies  they  spend  great  quantitie  of  money  in  this
composition,  and  it  is  used  daily,  which  thing  I  would
not  have  beleeved,  if  I  had  not  scene  it.  The  customers
get  great  profite  by  these  Herbes,  for  that  they  have  cus-
tome  for  them.  When  this  people  eate  and  chawe  this
in  their  mouthes,  it  maketh  their  spittle  to  bee  red  like
unto  blood,  and  they  say,  that  it  maketh  a  man  to  have
a  very  good  stomacke  and  a  sweete  breath,  but  sure  in
my  judgement  they  eate  it  rather  to  fulfill  their  filthie
lustes,  and  of  a  knaverie,  for  this  Herbe  is  moyst  and
hote,  &  maketh  a  very  strong  expulsion.  From  Cananor
you  go  to  Cranganor,  which  is  another  smal  Fort  of  the
Portugales  in  the  land  of  the  king  of  Cranganor,  which  is
another king  of  the  Gentiles, and a  countrey  of  small

391

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

importance,  and  of  an  hundreth  and  twentie  miles,  full
of  thieves,  being  under  the  king  of  Calicut,  a  king  also
Enimies  to  the  of  the  Gentiles,  and  a  great  enemie  to  the  Portugales,
ktngofPortu-  ^hich  when  hee  is  alwayes  in  warres,  hee  and  his
countrey  is  the  nest  and  resting  for  stranger  theeves,
and  those  bee  called  Moores  of  Carposa,  because  they
weare  on  their  heads  long  red  hats,  and  these  thieves
part  the  spoyles  that  they  take  on  the  Sea  with  the  king
of  Calicut,  for  hee  giveth  leave  unto  all  that  will  goe
a  roving,  liberally  to  goe,  in  such  wise,  that  all  along
that  coast  there  is  such  a  number  of  thieves,  that  there
is  no  sailing  in  those  Seas  but  with  great  ships  and  very
well  armed,  or  els  they  must  go  in  company  with  the
army  of  the  Portugals.  From  Cranganor  to  Cochin  is
15  miles.

Cochin.

WlthinCochin  /^Ochin  is,  next  unto  Goa,  the  chiefest  place  that  the
IS  the  kingdom  \^  Portugales  have  in  the  Indies,  and  there  is  great  trade
°J epper. ^^  Spices,  drugges, and  all  other  sortes  of  merchandize
for the kingdome  of  Portugale, and there within the
land  is  the  kingdome  of  Pepper,  which  Pepper  the  Por-
tugales lade  in  their  shippes  by  bulke,  and  not  in  sackes :
The  Pepper the  Pepper that  ffoeth  for  Portugale  is  not  so  Pfood  as
^  ,  f  .  '". that  which  goeth for Mecca,  because  that  in  times  past
not  so  good 'as ^^^  officers  of  the king  of  Portugale made  a contract
that  which with  the  king  of  Cochin, in the  name of  the  king  of
goeth  for Portugale, for  the  prizes of  Pepper, and by  reason of
Mecca,  which  ^^^  agreement betweene them at that time made,  the
hither  by  ye pi*ice  Can  neither  rise  nor  fall,  which  is  a  very  lowe  and
streights.  base  price,  and  for  this  cause  the  villaines  bring  it  to  the

Portugales,  greene  and  full  of  filthe.  The  Moores  of
Mecca  that  give  a  better  price,  have  it  cleane  and  drie,
and  better  conditioned.  AH  the  Spices  and  drugs  that
are  brought  to  Mecca,  are  stoUen  from  thence  as  Contra-
banda.  Cochin  is  two  cities,  one  of  the  Portugales,  and
another  of  the  king  of  Cochin  :  that  of  the  Portugales  is
situate neerest unto the Sea,  and that of  the  king  of

392

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
Cochin  is  a  mile  and  a  halfe  up  higher  in  the  land,  but
they  are  both  set  on  the  bankes  of  one  river  which  is
very  great  and  of  a  good  depth  of  water  which  river
commeth  out  of  the  mountaines  of  the  king  of  the
Pepper,  which  is  a  king  of  the  Gentiles,  in  whose  king-
dome  are  many  Christians  of  saint  Thomas  order :  the
king  of  Cochin  is  also  a  king  of  the  Gentiles  and  a
great  faithful!  friend  to  the  king  of  Portugale,  and  to
those  Portugales  which  are  married,  and  are  Citizens  in
the  Citie  Cochin  of  the  Portugales.  And  by  this  name
of  Portugales  throughout  all  the  Indies,  they  call  all
the  Christians  that  come  out  of  the  West,  whether  they
bee  Italians,  Frenchmen,  or  Almaines,  and  all  they  that
marrie  in  Cochin  do  get  an  office  according  to  the
trade  he  is  of:  this  they  have  by  the  great  privileges
which  the  Citizens  have  of  that  city,  because  there  are
two  principal  commodities  that  they  deale  withal  in  that  Great privl-
place,  which are these. The srreat store of  Silke that  ^^^^.^  that  the

•  CttfZiBflS  of

commeth  from  China,  and  the  great  store  of  Sugar  Cochin  have
which  commeth  from  Bengala  :  the  married  Citizens  pay
not  any  custome  for  these  two  commodities :  for  all
other  commodities  they  pay  4.  per  cento  custome  to
the  king  of  Cochin,  rating  their  goods  at  their  owne
pleasure.  Those  which  are  not  married  and  strangers,
pay  in  Cochin  to  the  king  of  Portugale  eight  per  cento
of  all  maner  of  merchandise.  I  was  in  Cochin  when  the
Viceroy  of  the  king  of  Portugale  wrought  what  hee
coulde  to  breake  the  privilege  of  the  Citizens,  and  to
make  them  to  pay  custome  as  other  did :  at  which  time
the  Citizens  were  glad  to  waigh  their  Pepper  in  the
night  that  they  laded  the  ships  withall  that  went  to
Portugale  and  stole  the  custome  in  the  night.  The
king  of  Cochin  having  understanding  of  this,  would
not  suffer  any  more  Pepper  to  bee  weighed.  Then
presently  after  this,  the  marchants  were  licensed  to  doe
as  they  did  before,  and  there  was  no  more  speach  of
this  matter,  nor  any  wrong  done.  This  king  of  Cochin  [II.  i.  224.]
is of  a  small power in respect of  the other kings of

393

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

the  Indies,  for  hee  can  make  but  seventie  thousand
men  of  armes  in  his  campe :  hee  hath  a  great  number
of  Gentlemen  which  hee  calleth  Amochi,  and  some  are
called  Naifi :  these  two  sorts  of  men  esteeme  not  their
lives  any  thing,  so  that  it  may  be  for  the  honour  of
their  king,  they  will  thrust  themselves  forward  in  every
danger,  although  they  know  they  shall  die.  These  men
goe  naked  from  the  girdle  upwardes,  with  a  clothe
rolled  about  their  thighs,  going  barefooted,  and  having
their  haire  very  long  and  rolled  up  together  on  the  toppe
of  their  heads,  and  alwayes  they  carrie  their  Bucklers
or  Targets  with  them  and  their  swordes  naked,  these
Nairi  have  their  wives  common  amongst  themselves,  and
when  any  of  them  goe  into  the  house  of  any  of  these
women,  hee  leaveth  his  sworde  and  target  at  the  doore,
and  the  time  that  hee  is  there,  there  dare  not  any  bee
so  hardie  as  to  come  into  that  house.  The  kings
children  shall  not  inherite  the  kingdome  after  their
father,  because  they  hold  this  opinion,  that  perchance
they  were  not  begotten  of  the  king  their  father,  but
of  some  other  man,  therefore  they  accept  for  their  king,
one  of  the  sonnes  of  the  kings  sisters,  or  of  some  other
woman  of  the  blood  roial,  for  that  they  be  sure  they
are  of  the  blood  roiall.
A  very  The Nairi and their wives use for a braverie to

strange  thing  j^ake  great  holes  in  their  eares,  and  so  bigge  and  wide,
bel  I'  d  ^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^  incredible,  holding  this  opinion,  that  the  greater
the  holes  bee,  the  more  noble  they  esteeme  themselves.
I  had  leave  of  one  of  them  to  measure  the  circum-
ference of  one  of  them  with  a  threed,  and  within  that
circumference  I  put  my  arme  up  to  the  shoulder,  clothed
as  it  was,  so  tihat  in  effect  they  are  monstrous  great.
Thus  they  doe  rhake  them  when  they  be  litle,  for  then
they  open  the  eare,  &  hang  a  piece  of  gold  or  lead
thereat,  &  within  the  opening,  in  the  hole  they  put  a
certaine  leafe  that  they  have  for  that  purpose,  which
maketh  the  hole  so  great.  They  lade  ships  in  Cochin
for Portugale and for Ormus, but they  that  goe for

394

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
Ormus  Carrie  no  Pepper  but  by  Contrabanda,  as  for
Sinamome  they  easilie  get  leave  to  carrie  that  away,  for
all  other  Spices  and  drugs  they  may  liberally  carie  them
to  Ormus  or  Cambaia,  and  so  all  other  merchandize
which  come  from  other  places,  but  out  of  the  kingdom
of  Cochin  properly  they  cary  away  with  them  into
Portugale  great  abundance  of  Pepper,  great  quantitie  of
Ginger  dried  and  conserved,  wild  Sinamom,  good
quantitie  of  Arecca,  great  store  of  Cordage  of  Cairo,
made  of  the  barke  of  the  tree  of  the  great  Nut,  and
better  then  that  of  Hempe,  of  which  they  carrie  great
store  into  Portugale.

The  shippes  every  yeere  depart  from  Cochin  to  goe  ^ot^  fhe  de-
for  Portugall,  on  the  fift  day  of  December,  or  the  fift  ]lf'V{j^'
day  of  January.  Nowe  to  follow  my  voyage  for  the  cochin
Indies :  from  Cochin  I  went  to  Coulam,  distant  from
Cochin  seventie  and  two  miles,  which  Coulam  is  a  small
Fort  of  the  king  of  Portugales,  situate  in  the  kingdom
of  Coulam,  which  is  a  king  of  the  Gentiles,  and  of
small  trade :  at  that  place  they  lade  onely  halfe  a  ship
of  Pepper,  and  then  she  goeth  to  Cochin  to  take  in  the
rest,  and  from  thence  to  Cao  Comori  is  seventie  and
two  miles,  and  there  endeth  the  coast  of  the  Indies :
and  alongst  this  coast,  neere  to  the  water  side,  and  also
to  Cao  Comori,  downe  to  the  lowe  land  of  Chialo,  which
is  about  two  hundred  miles,  the  people  there  are  as  it
were  all  turned  to  the  Christian  faith :  there  are  also
Churches  of  the  Friers  of  S.  Pauls  order,  which  Friers
doe  very  much  good  in  those  places  in  turning  the
people,  and  in  converting  them,  and  take  great  paines
in instructing  them  in  the  law  of  Christ.

The  fishing  for  Pearles.

THe Sea that lieth betweene the coast which de-  The  order  how
scendeth from Cao Comori,  to the lowe land of  they  fish  fir
Chilao, and the Hand Zeilan, they  call the fishing  q^  P^^^  "•
Pearles,  which  fishing  they  make  every  yeere,  beginning
in March  or  Aprill,  and  it  lasteth fiftie  dayes,  but  they

395

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

doe  not  fishe  every  yeere  in  one  place,  but  one  yeere
in  one  place,  and  another  yeere  in  another  place  of  the
same  sea.  When  the  time  of  this  fishing  draweth  neere,
then  they  send  very  good  Divers,  that  goe  to  discover
where  the  greatest  heapes  of  Oisters  bee  under  water,
and  right  agaynst  that  place  where  greatest  store  of
Oisters  bee,  there  they  make  or  plant  a  village  with
houses  and  a  Bazaro,  all  of  stone,  which  standeth  as
long  as  the  fishing  time  lasteth,  and  it  is  furnished  with
all  things  necessarie,  and  nowe  and  then  it  is  neere  unto
places  that  are  inhabited,  and  other  times  farre  off,
according  to  the  place  where  they  fishe.  The  Fishermen
are  all  Christians  of  the  countrey,  and  who  so  will  may
goe  to  fishing,  paying  a  certaine  dutie  to  the  king  of
Portugall,  and  to  the  Churches  of  the  Friers  of  Saint
Paule,  which  are  in  that  coast.  All  the  while  that  they
are  fishing,  there  are  three  or  foure  Fustes  armed  to
defend  the  Fishermen  from  Rovers.  It  was  my  chance
to bee there one time in my  passage,  and I saw  the

[II.  i.  225.]  order  that  they  used  in  fishing,  which  is  this.  There
are  three  or  foure  Barkes  that  make  consort  together,
which  are  like  to  our  litle  Pilot  boates,  and  a  litle  lesse,
there  goe  seven  or  eight  men  in  a  boate :  and  I  have
seene  in  a  morning  a  great  number  of  them  goe  out,
and  anker  in  fifteene  or  eighteene  fadome  of  water,  which
is  the  Ordinarie  depth  of  all  that  coast.  When  they
are  at  anker,  they  cast  a  rope  into  the  Sea,  and  at  the
ende  of  the  rope,  they  make  fast  a  great  stone,  and
then  there  is  readie  a  man  that  hath  his  nose  and  his
eares  well  stopped,  and  annointed  with  oyle,  and  a  basket
about  his  necke,  or  under  his  left  arme,  then  hee  goeth
downe  by  the  rope  to  the  bottome  of  the  Sea,  and  as
fast  as  he  can  hee  filleth  the  basket,  and  when  it  is  full,
he  shaketh  the  rope,  and  his  fellowes  that  are  in  the
Barke  hale  him  up  with  the  basket :  and  in  such  wise
they  goe  one  by  one  untill  they  have  laden  their  barke
with  oysters,  and  at  evening  they  come  to  the  village,
and then every company maketh their mountaine or

396

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
heape  of  oysters  one  distant  from  another,  in  such  wise
that  you  shall  see  a  great  long  rowe  of  mountaines  or
heapes  of  oysters,  and  they  are  not  touched  untill  such
time as  the  fishing  bee  ended,  and  at  the  ende  of  the
fishing  every  companie  sitteth  round  about  their  moun-
taine  or  heape  of  oysters,  and  fall  to  opening  of  them,
which  they  may  easilie  doe  because  they  bee  dead,  drie
and  brittle :  and  if  every  oyster  had  pearles  in  them,  it
would bee a  very  good purchase, but there  are very
many  that  have no pearles in them :  when  the  fishing
is  ended,  then  they  see  whether  it bee  a  good gather-
ing or  a  badde :  there  are  certaine  expert  in  the  pearles  ^^^-^^  pearles
whom they  call Chitini,  which set  and  make the price  ^^^Z"'"^^^^-
of  pearles  according  to  their  carracts,  beautie,  and  good-  caracts  which
nesse, making foure sortes of them. The first sort  they  weigh,
bee  the  round  pearles,  and  they  be  called  Aia  of  Portu-  ^^^'3'  '^^^^'^t
gale,  because  the  Portugales  doe  buy  them. The  second  "  4-  gratnes,
sorte  which are not round,  are called  Aia of  Bengala.  ^aatprislthem
The  third sort which are not so good as the second,  have  an  in-
they  call  Aia of  Canara, that is to say,  the kingdome  strument  of
of  Bezeneger. The  fourth  and  last  sort,  which  are  the  ^^//"?'' ^/^'^
least  and  worst  sort,  are  called  Aia  of  Cambaia. Thus  ^[idYemade
the  price  being  set,  there  are  merchants  of  every  countrey  by  degrees  for
which are readie with their money in their handes,  to  sort  ye
so  that  in  a  fewe  dayes  all  is  bought up at the prises  ^^^'^^^  tvttkall.
set according to the goodnesse and caracts of the
pearles.

In  this  Sea  of  the  fishing  of  pearles  is  an  Hand
called  Manar,  which  is  inhabited  by  Christians  of  the
countrey  which  first  were  Gentiles,  and  have  a  small  hold
of  the  Portugales  being  situate  over  agaynst  Zeilan :  and
betweene  these  two  Hands  there  is  a  chanell,  but  not
very  big,  and  hath  but  a  small  depth  therein :  by  reason
whereof  there  cannot  any  great  shippe  passe  that  way,
but  small  ships,  and  with  the  increase  of  the  water  which
is  at  the  change  or  the  full  of  the  Moone,  and  yet  for
all  this  they  must  unlade  them  and  put  their  goods  into
small  vessels  to  lighten  them  before  they  can  passe  that

397

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

way  for  feare  of  Sholdes  that  lie  in  the  chanell,  and  after
lade  them  into  their  shippes  to  goe  for  the  Indies,  and
this  doe  all  small  shippes  that  passe  that  way,  but  those
shippes  that  goe  for  the  Indies  Eastwardes,  passe  by  the
coast  of  Coromandel,  on  the  other  side  by  the  land  of
Chilao  which  is  betweene  the  firme  land  and  the  Hand
Manor :  and  going  from  the  Indies  to  the  coast  of  Coro-
mandel, they  loose  some  shippes,  but  they  bee  emptie,
because  that  the  shippes  that  passe  that  way  discharge
their  goods  at  an  Hand  called  Peripatane,  and  there  land
their  goods  into  small  flat  bottomed  boates  which  drawe
litle  water,  and  are  called  Tane,  and  can  run  over  every
Shold  without  either  danger  or  losse  of  any  thing,  for
that  they  tarrie  in  Peripatane  untill  such  time  as  it  bee
faire  weather.  Before  they  depart  to  passe  the  Sholdes,
the  small  shippes  and  flat  bottomed  boates  goe  together
in  companie,  and  when  they  have  sailed  sixe  and  thirtie
miles,  they  arrive  at  the  place  where  the  Sholdes  are,
and  at  that  place  the  windes  blowe  so  forciblie,  that  they
are  forced  to  goe  thorowe,  not  having  any  other  refuge
to  save  themselves.  The  fiat  bottomed  boates  goe  safe
thorow,  where  as  the  small  shippes  if  they  misse  the  afore-
sayd  chanell,  sticke  fast  on  the  Sholdes,  and  by  this
meanes  many  are  lost :  and  comming  backe  from  the
Indies,  they  goe  not  that  way,  but  passe  by  the  chanell
of  Manar  as  is  abovesayd,  whose  chanell  is  Oazie,  and
if  the  shippes  sticke  fast,  it  is  great  chance  if  there  be
any  danger  at  all.  The  reason  why  this  chanell  is  not
more  sure  to  goe  thither,  is,  because  the  windes  that
raigne  or  blowe  betweene  Zeilan  and  Manar,  make  the
chanell  so  shalow  with  water,  that  almost  there  is  not
any  passage.  From  Cao  Comori  to  the  Hand  of  Zeilan
is 120.  miles  overthwart.

Zeilan.

ZEilan is an  Hand, in  my  judgement, a  great deale
bigger  then  Cyprus : on  that  side  towards  the  Indies
lying  Westward  is  the  citie  called  Columba,  which  is  a

398

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
hold  of  the  Portugales,  but  without  walles  or  enimies.
It  hath  towards  the  Sea  a  free  port,  the  lawfull  king  of  [II.  i.  226.]
that  Hand  is  in  Columbo,  and  is  turned  Christian  and
maintained  by  the  king  of  Portugall,  being  deprived  of
his  kingdome.  The  king  of  the  Gentiles,  to  whom  this
kingdome  did  belong,  was  called  Madoni,  which  had  two
sonnes,  the  first  named  Barbinas  the  prince ;  and  the
second  Ragine.  This  king  by  the  pollicie  of  his  yoonger
Sonne,  was  deprived  of  his  kingdome,  who  because  hee
had  entised  and  done  that  which  pleased  the  armie  and
souldiours,  in  despight  of  his  father  and  brother  being
prince,  usurped  the  kingdome,  and  became  a  great
warriour.  First,  this  Hand  had  three  kings ;  the  king
of  Cotta  with  his  conquered  prisoners :  the  king  of
Candia,  which  is  a  part  of  that  Hand,  and  is  so  called
by  the  nam^e  of  Candia,  which  had  a  reasonable  power,
and  was  a  great  friend  to  the  Portugals,  which  sayd  that
hee  lived  secretly  a  Christian ;  the  third  was  the  king
of  Gianifampatan.  In  thirteene  yeeres  that  this  Ragine
governed  this  Hand,  he  became  a  great  tyrant.

In  this  Hand  there  groweth  fine  Sinamom,  great  store
of  Pepper, great store of  Nuttes and Arochoe : there
thev make  great store of  Cairo to make Cordage : it  ^^'^^°  '" ^
bringeth foorth great store of  Christall Cats eyes, or  '^^£  ^.f  J/''-^
Ochi  de  Gati,  and  they  say  that  they  finde  there  some  ^i^^  ^^^
Rubies,  but  I  have  sold  Rubies  well  there  that  I  brought  lukkh  is  the
with  me  from  Pegu. I  was  desirous  to see how they  ^^^'^^  °f  ^
gather the Sinamom, or take it from the tree that it  '^^^"
groweth  on,  and  so  much  the  rather,  because the time
that  I  was  there,  was the season  which they  gather it
in,  which  was  in  the  moneth  of  Aprill,  at  which  time  the
Portugals  were  in  armes,  and  in  the  field,  with  the  king
of  the  countrey ; yet  I  to  satisfie  my  desire,  although  in
great  danger,  tooke  a  guide  with  mee and  went  into  a
wood three  miles  from the Citie, in which wood was
great  store  of  Sinamome  trees  growing  together  among
other  wilde  trees ;  and  this  Sinamome  tree  is  a  small  tree,
and  not  very  high,  and  hath  leaves  like  to  our  Baie  tree.

399

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

The  cutting^  In  the  moneth  of  March  or  Aprill,  when  the  sappe  goeth

gathering  of ^p  |-q  ^}^q  toppe  of  the  tree,  then  they  take  the  Sinamom

tnamom. from  that  tree  in  this  wise. They  cut  the  barke  of  the

tree  round  about  in  length  from  knot  to  knot,  or  from

joint  to  joint,  above  and  belowe, and then easilie  with

A  rare  tkinge. their  handes they  take  it  away, laying  it  in  the  Sunne

to  drie,  and  in  this  wise  it  is  gathered,  and  yet  for  all

this the  tree dieth not,  but  agaynst the next yeere it

will  have  a  new  barke,  and  that  which  is  gathered  every

yeere  is  the  best  Sinamome :  for  that  which  groweth  two

or  three  yeeres  is  great,  and  not  so  good  as  the  other

is ; and  in  these  woods  groweth  much  Pepper.

Negapatan.

FRom  the  Hand  of  Zeilan  men  use  to  goe  with  small
shippes  to  Negapatan,  within  the  firme  land,  and
seventie  two  miles  off  is  a  very  great  Citie,  and  very
populous  of  Portugals  and  Christians  of  the  countrey,
and  part  Gentiles :  it  is  a  countrey  of  small  trade,  neither
have  they  any  trade  there,  save  a  good  quantitie  of  Rice,
and  cloth  of  Bumbast  which  they  carie  into  divers  partes  :
it  was  a  very  plentifuU  countrey  of  victuals,  but  now  it
hath  a  great  deale  lesse ;  and  that  abundance  of  victuals
caused  many  Portugales  to  goe  thither  and  build  houses,
and  dwell  there  with  small  charge.

This  Citie  belongeth  to  a  noble  man  of  the  kingdome
of  Bezeneger  being  a  Gentile,  neverthelesse  the  Portugales
and  other  Christians  are  well  intreated  there,  and  have
their  Churches  there  with  a  monasterie  of  Saint  Francis
order,  with  great  devotion  and  very  well  accommodated,
with  houses  round  about :  yet  for  all  this,  they  are
amongst  tyrants,  which  alwayes  at  their  pleasure  may
doe  them  some  harme,  as  it  happened  in  the  yeere  of
our  Lord  God  one  thousand  five  hundred,  sixtie  and
five :  for  I  remember  very  well,  how  that  the  Nayer,  that
is  to  say,  the  lord  of  the  citie,  sent  to  the  citizens  to
demaund  of  them  certaine  Arabian  horses,  and  they
having denied them unto him, and gainesayd his  de-

400

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.
maund,  it  came  to  passe  that  this  lord  had  a  desire  to
see  the  Sea,  which  when  the  poore  citizens  understood,
they  doubted  some  evill,  to  heare  a  thing  which  was  not
woont  to  bee,  they  thought  that  this  man  would  come  Afoolhhfeare
to  sacke  the  Citie,  and  presently  they  embarked  them-  "fPo^^^S^l^-
selves  the  best  they  could  with  their  mooveables,  mar-
chandize,  jewels,  money,  and  all  that  they  had,  and
caused  the  shippes  to  put  from  the  shore.  When  this
was  done,  as  their  evill  chance  would  have  it,  the  next
night  following,  there  came  such  a  great  storme  that  it
put  all  the  shippes  on  land  perforce,  and  brake  them  to
pieces,  and  all  the  goods  that  came  on  land  and  were
saved,  were  taken  from  them  by  the  souldiours  and  armie
of  this  lord  which  came  downe  with  him  to  see  the  Sea,
and  were  attendant  at  the  Sea  side,  not  thinking  that
any  such  thing  would  have  happened.

Saint  Thomas  or  San  Tome.  [H.  i.  227.]

FRom  Negapatan  following  my  voyage  towards  the
East  an  hundred  and  fiftie  miles,  I  found  the  house
of  blessed  Saint  Thomas,  which  is  a  Church  of  great  ^'  Thomas  his
devotion,  and  greatly  regarded  of  the  Gentiles  for  the  ^^^^^  ''^"
great  miracles  they  have  heard  to  have  bene  done  by  that
blessed  Apostle :  neere  unto  this  Church  the  Portugals
have  builded  them  a  Citie  in  the  countrey  subject  to  the
king  of  Bezeneger,  which  citie  although  it  bee  not  very
great,  yet  in  my  judgement  it  is  the  fairest  in  all  that
part  of  the  Indies :  and  it  hath  very  faire  houses  and  faire
gardens  in  vacant  places  very  well  accommodated :  it  hath
streetes  large  and  streight,  with  many  Churches  of  great
devotion,  their  houses  be  set  close  one  unto  another,
with  little  doores,  every  house  hath  his  defence,  so  that
by  that  meanes  it  is  of  force  sufficient  to  defend  ye
Portugals  against  the  people  of  that  countrey.  The
Portugals  there  have  no  other  possession  but  their
gardens  and  houses  that  are  within  the  citie :  the  cus-
tomes  belong  to  the  king  of  Bezeneger,  which  are  very
small  and  easie,  for  that  it  is  a  countrey  of  great  riches

V  401  2  0

A.D.

1563-81.

J  fainted
kind  of  cloth
y  died
of  divers
colours  which
those  people  de-
light much  in,
and  esteeme
them  of  great
price.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  great  trade :  there  come  every  yeere  two  or  three
great  ships  very  rich,  besides  many  other  small  ships :
one  of  the  two  great  ships  goeth  for  Pegu,  and  the  other
for  Malacca,  laden  with  fine  Bumbast  cloth  of  every  sort,
painted,  which  is  a  rare  thing,  because  those  kinde  of
clothes  shew  as  they  were  gilded  with  divers  colours,  and
the  more  they  be  washed,  the  livelier  the  colours  will
shew.  Also  there  is  other  cloth  of  Bumbast  which  is
woven  with  divers  colours,  and  is  of  great  value  :  also
they  make  in  Sant  Tome  great  store  of  red  Yarne,  which
they  die  with  a  roote  called  Saia,  and  this  colour  will
never  waste,  but  the  more  it  is  washed,  the  more  redder
it  will  shew  :  they  lade  this  yarne  the  greatest  part  of  it
for  Pegu,  because  that  there  they  worke  and  weave  it
to  make  cloth  according  to  their  owne  fashion,  and  with
lesser  charges.  It  is  a  marvelous  thing  to  them  which
have  not  scene  the  lading  and  unlading  of  men  and
merchandize  in  S.  Tome  as  they  do  :  it  is  a  place  so
dangerous,  that  a  man  cannot  bee  served  with  small
barkes,  neither  can  they  doe  their  businesse  with  the
boates  of  the  shippes,  because  they  would  be  beaten  in
a  thousand  pieces,  but  they  make  certaine  barkes  (of
purpose)  high,  which  they  call  Masadie,  they  be  made
of  litle  boards  ;  one  board  being  sowed  to  another  with
small  cordes,  and  in  this  order  are  they  made.  And
when  they  are  thus  made,  and  the  owners  will  embarke
any  thing  in  them,  either  men  or  goods,  they  lade  them
on  land,  and  when  they  are  laden,  the  Barke-men  thrust
the  boate  with  her  lading  into  the  streame,  and  with
great  speed  they  make  haste  all  that  they  are  able  to
rowe  out  against  the  huge  waves  of  the  sea  that  are  on
that  shore,  untill  that  they  carie  them  to  the  ships  :  and
in  like  maner  they  lade  these  Masadies  at  the  shippes
with  merchandise  and  men.  When  they  come  neere  the
shore,  the  Barke-men  leap  out  of  the  Barke  into  the  Sea
to  keepe  the  Barke  right  that  she  cast  not  thwart  the
shore,  and  being  kept  right,  the  SufFe  of  the  Sea  setteth
her  lading  dry  on  land  without  any  hurt  or  danger,  and

402

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

sometimes  there  are  some  of  them  that  are  overthrowen,
but  there  can  be  no  great  losse,  because  they  lade  but
a  litle  at  a  time.  All  the  marchandize  they  lade  out-
wards, they  emball  it  well  with  Oxe  hides,  so  that  if  it
take  wet,  it  can  have  no  great  harme.

In my  voyage,  returning in the yeere of  our Lord
God  one  thousand,  five  hundred,  sixtie  and  sixe,  I  went
from Goa  unto Malacca,  in  a  shippe  or  Gallion  of  the
king  of  Portugal,  which went unto Banda  for to  lade  In  the  Hand  oj
Nutmegs & Maces  : from Goa to Malacca are one  f  f  t  ^^'^
thousand eight  hundred miles, we passed without the  ^^  ^^^^.^  ^^^„
Hand  Zeilan,  and  went  through  the  chanell  of  Nicubar,  grow.
or  els  through  the  chanell  of  Sombrero,  which  is  by  the
middle of  the Hand of  Sumatra,  called in olde time
Taprobana  :  and  from  Nicubar  to  Pegu  is  as  it  were  a
rowe  or  chaine  of  an  infinite  number  of  Hands,  of  which
many  are  inhabited  with  wilde  people,  and  they  call  those
Hands  the  Hands  of  Andemaon,  and  they  call  their  people  1^  ^he  Hands

savage or wilde, because they  eate one another  : also  °f^^"-emaon
, "  Ti 1 1  -1  1  r 1 1  ihe'^  eate  one

these  Hands  have  warre  one  with  another,  ror  they  have  ^„^/^^;.^

small  Barkes,  and  with  them they  take  one  another,  and

so  eate  one  another  : and  if  by  evil  chance  any  ship  be

lost on those  Hands,  as many  have  bene,  there is not

one  man  of  those  ships  lost  there  that  escapeth  uneaten

or unslaine. These people have not  any  acquaintance

with  any  other  people,  neither  have  they  trade  with  any,

but  live  onely  of  such  fruites  as  those  Hands  yeeld  :  and

if  any  ship  come  neere  unto  that  place  or  coast  as  they

passe  that  way,  as  in  my  voyage  it  happened  as  I  came

from Malacca through the chanell of  Sombrero, there

came  two  of  their  Barkes  neere  unto  our  ship  laden  with

fruite, as with Mouces  which wee call Adams apples,

with  fresh  Nuts,  and  with a  fruite called Inani,  which

fruite is like to our Turneps,  but  is  very  sweete  and

good  to  eate  :  they  would  not  come  into  the  shippe  for

any  thing  that  wee  could  doe  : neither  would  they  take

any  money  for  their  fruite,  but they  would trucke for

olde shirtes or pieces of olde linnen breeches, these

403

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

ragges  they  let  downe  with  a  rope  into  their  Barke  unto
[II.  i.  228.]  them,  and  looke  what  they  thought  those  things  to  bee
woorth,  so  much  fruite  they  would  make  fast  to  the
rope  and  let  us  hale  it  in  :  and  it  was  told  me  that  at
sometimes  a  man  shall  have  for  an  old  shirt  a  good  piece
of  Amber.

T

Sumatra.

^His  Hand  of  Sumatra  is  a  great  Hand  and  devided
and  governed  by  many  kings,  and  devided  into  many
chanels,  where  through  there  is  passage  :  upon  the  head-
land towardes  the  West  is  the  kingdom  of  Assi  governed
by  a Moore king  : this king is of great force and
strength, as he that beside his great kingdom, hath
The  commodi-  many Foists and Gallies. In his kingdom groweth
ties  that  grow  gj-g^t  store  of  Pepper,  Ginger,  Benjamin  :  he  is  an  utter
^^f  A  '^^^  "^^  enemy  to  the  Portugals,  and  hath  divers  times  bene  at
Malacca  to  fight  against  it,  and  hath  done  great  harme
to  the  boroughes  thereof,  but  the  citie  alway  withstood
him  valiantly,  and  with  their  ordinance  did  great  spoile
to his campe. At length I came to the citie of
Malacca.

The  Citie  Malacca.

The  great  1\  yTAlacca  is  a  Citie  of  marveilous  great  trade  of  all
trade  that  is  at  J_yj^  kind  of  marchandize,  which  come  from  divers
partes,  because  that  all  the  shippes  that  saile  in  these
seas,  both  great  and  small,  are  bound  to  touch  at  Malacca
to  paie  their  custome  there,  although  they  unlade  no-
thing at  all,  as  we  doe  at  Elsinor :  and  if  by  night  they
escape  away,  and  pay  not  their  custome,  then  they  fall
into  a  greater  danger  after  :  for  if  they  come  into  the
Indies  and  have  not  the  seale  of  Malacca,  they  pay
double  custome.  I  have  not  passed  further  then  Malacca
towards  the  East,  but  that  which  I  wil  speake  of  here
is  by  good  information  of  them  that  have  bene  there.
The  sailing  from  Malacca  towards  the  East  is  not
common for all men, as to China and  Japan,  and so

404

CAESAR  FREDERICK  a.d.

1563-81.
forwards to go  who will, but  onely for the king of
Portugall  and  his  nobles,  with  leave  granted  unto  them
of  the  king  to  make such voiages,  or to the  jurisdic-
tion of  the captaine  of  Malacca,  where  he  expecteth  to
know  what  voiages  they  make  from  Malacca thither,  &
these are the kings  voiages,  that  every  yere  there de-
parteth from Malacca 2.  gallions of  the kings,  one of
them goeth to ye Moluccos to lade  Cloves,  and the  ^^  ^^^  Mohc-
other goeth to Banda to lade Nutmegs and Maces.  "1/qII^J^
These two  gallions  are  laden  for  the  king,  neither  doe
they  carie  any  particular  mans  goods,  saving  the  portage
of  the  Mariners  and  souldiers,  and for  this cause  they
are  not  voiages  for  marchants,  because  that  going  thither,
they  shal  not  have  where  to  lade  their  goods  of  returne ;
and  besides  this,  the  captaine  will  not  cary  any  marchant
for  either  of  these  two  places. There  goe  small  shippes
of  the Moores  thither,  which come from the coast  of
Java,  and  change  or  guild  their  commodities  in  the  king-
dom of  Assa, and these be the Maces, Cloves, and  The  kingdome
Nutmegs, which  go for the streights of  Mecca. The  of  Assa.
voiages  that  the  king  of  Portugall  granteth  to  his  nobles
are these, of  China and Japan,  from China to  Japan,
and  from  Japan  to  China,  and  from  China  to  the  Indies,
and the  voyage of  Bengala, Maluco, and Sonda,  with
the  lading  of  fine  cloth,  and  every  sort  of  Bumbast  cloth.
Sonda  is  an  Hand  of  the  Moores  neere  to  the  coast  of
Java,  and  there  they  lade  Pepper  for  China. The  ship  The  ship  of
that  goeth  every  yeere  from  the  Indies  to  China,  is  called  drugs,  so
the  ship  of  Drugs,  because  she  carieth  divers  drugs of  /J^^o^a
Cambaia,  but the greatest  part  of  her lading  is  silver.
From  Malacca  to  China  is  eighteene  hundred  miles :  and
from  China  to  Japan  goeth  every  yeere  a  shippe  of  great
importance  laden  with  Silke,  which  for  returne  of  their
Silke bringeth barres of silver which they trucke in
China. The  distance  betweene  China  and  Japan  is  foure
and twentie hundred miles,  and in this  way  there are
divers Hands not  very bigge, in which the Friers of
saint  Paul,  by  the  helpe  of  God,  make  many  Christians

405

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.
Hands  not  dis-  there  like  to  themselves. From  these  Hands  hitherwards
covered.  |-}^g  place  is  not  yet  discovered  for  the  great  sholdnesse

of  Sandes  that  they  find. The  Portugals have  made  a
small  citie  neere  unto  the  coast  of  China  called  Macao,
whose church and houses are  of  wood,  and it hath a
bishoprike,  but  the  customs  belong  to  the  king  of  China,
and  they  goe  and  pay  the  same  at  a  citie  called  Canton,
which  is  a  citie  of  great  importance  and  very  beautifull
two  dayes  journey  and  a  halfe  from  Macao. The  people
of  China  are  Gentiles,  and  are  so  jealous  and  fearefull,
that they  would not  have a stranger  to  put  his foote
within  their  land  :  so  that  when  the  Portugals  go  thither
to pay their custome, and to buy their marchandize,
they  will  not  consent  that  they  shall  lie  or  lodge  within
the  citie,  but  send  them  foorth  into  the  suburbes. The
Chinahunder  countrey  of  China  is  neere  the  kingdom  of  great  Tartaria,
the  govern- ^^^  -^  ^  very  great  countrey  of  the  Gentiles  and  of  great
mat  Tartar importance,  which  may  be  judged  by  the  rich  and  pre-
cious marchandize  that  come  from  thence,  then  which  I
beleeve  there  are  not  better  nor  in  greater  quantitie  in
the  whole  world  besides.
[II.  i.  229.] First, great store of  golde,  which they  carie to the
Indies, made in plates like to little shippes, and in
value three and twentie caracts a peece, very great
aboundance  of  fine  silke,  cloth  of  damaske  and taffata,
great quantitie of  muske,  great quantitie of  Occam  in
barres,  great  quantitie  of  quicksilver  and  of  Cinaper,  great
store  of  Camfora,  an  infinite  quantitie  of  Porcellane,  made
in  vessels  of  diverse  sortes,  great  quantitie  of  painted  cloth
and  squares,  infinite store  of  the  rootes  of  China : and
every  yeere there commeth from China to the Indies,
two or three great shippes,  laden  with most rich and
precious marchandise. The Rubarbe commeth from
thence over lande, by  the way  of  Persia,  because that
every  yeere  there  goeth  a  great  Carovan  from  Persia  to
J  yeerely China,  which is in going thither  sixe moneths. The
Perlia^to^  Carovan arriveth  at  a Citie called Lanchin, the place
China.  where  the  king  is  resident  with  his  Court. I  spake  with

406

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
a  Persian  that  was  three  yeeres  in  that  citie  of  Lanchin,
and  he  tolde  me  that  it  was  a  great  Citie  and  of  great
importance.  The  voiages  of  Malacca  which  are  in  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Captaine  of  the  castle,  are  these:
Every  yeere  he  sendeth  a  small  shippe  to  Timor  to  lade
white  Sandols,  for  all  the  best  commeth  from  this  Hand :
there  commeth  some  also  from  Solor,  but  that  is  not  so
good :  also  he  sendeth  another  small  ship  every  yere
to  Cauchin  China,  to  lade  there  wood  of  Aloes,  for  that
all  the  wood  of  Aloes  commeth  from  this  place,  which  is
in  the  firme  land  neere  unto  China,  and  in  that  kingdome
I  could  not  knowe  how  that  wood  groweth  by  any
meanes.  For  that  the  people  of  the  countrey  will  not
suffer  the  Portugales  to  come  within  the  land,  but  onely
for  wood  and  water,  and  as  for  all  other  things  that  they
wanted,  as  victuals  or  marchandise,  the  people  bring
that  a  boord  the  ship  in  small  barkes,  so  that  every  day
there  is  a  mart  kept  in  the  ship,  untill  such  time  as  she  A  market  kept
be  laden :  also  there  goeth  another  ship  for  the  said  ^"°''^"'  v^"-^
Captaine  of  Malacca  to  Sion,  to  lade  Verzino :  all  these
voiages  are  for  the  Captaine  of  the  castle  of  Malacca,
and  when  he  is  not  disposed  to  make  these  voiages,
he  selleth  them  to  another.

The  citie  of  Sion,  or  Siam.

Slon  was  the  imperiall  seat,  and  a  great  Citie,  but  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  God  one  thousand  five
hundred  sixtie  and  seven,  it  was  taken  by  the  king  of
Pegu,  which  king  made  a  voyage  or  came  by  lande  foure
moneths  journey  with  an  armie  of  men  through  his
lande,  and  the  number of  his armie was  a  million  and  A  prince  of

foure  hundreth  thousand  men  of  warre  : when  hee  came ^^'^'  [,  ^^  ,
.  .  ....  strength  and

to  the  Citie,  he  gave  assault  to  it,  and  besieged  it  one  power.
and  twentie  monethes  before  he  could  winne  it,  with
great  losse  of  his  people,  this  I  know,  for  that  I  was  in
Pegu  sixe  moneths  after  his  departure,  and  sawe  when
that  his  officers  that  were  in  Pegu,  sent  five  hundreth
thousand  men of  warre  to  furnish  the places  of  them

407

A.D.

1563-81.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  were  slaine  and  lost  in  that  assault :  yet  for  all  this,
if  there  had  not  beene  treason  against  the  citie,  it  had
not  beene  lost :  for  on  a  night  there  was  one  of  the
gates  set  open,  through  the  which  with  great  trouble
the  king  gate  into  the  citie,  and  became  governoiir  of
Sion  :  and  when  the  Emperour  sawe  that  he  was
betrayed,  and  that  his  enemie  was  in  the  citie,  he
poysoned  himselfe :  and  his  wives  and  children,  friends
and  noblemen,  that  were  not  slaine  in  the  first  affront  of
the  entrance  into  the  citie,  were  all  caried  captives  into
Pegu,  where  I  was  at  the  comming  home  of  the  king
with  his  triumphs  and  victorie,  which  comming  home  &
returning  from  the  warres  was  a  goodly  sight  to  behold,
to  see  the  Elephants  come  home  in  a  square,  laden  with
golde,  silver,  jewels,  and  with  Noble  men  and  women
that  were  taken  prisoners  in  that  citie.

Now  to  returne  to  my  voyage :  I  departed  from
Malacca  in  a  great  shippe  which  went  for  Saint  Tome,
being  a  Citie  situate  on  the  coast  of  Coromandel  :  and
because  the  Captaine  of  the  castles  of  Malacca  had  under-
"^OrJchem.  Standing  by  advise  that  the  king  of  *Assi  would  come
with  a  great  armie  and  power  of  men  against  them,
therefore  upon  this  he  would  not  give  licence  that  any
shippes  should  depart  :  Wherefore  in  this  ship  wee  de-
parted from  thence  in  the  night,  without  making  any
provision  of  our  water  :  and  wee  were  in  that  shippe
foure  hundreth  and  odde  men  :  we  departed  from  thence
with  intention  to  goe  to  an  Hand  to  take  in  water,  but
the  windes  were  so  contrary,  that  they  would  not  suffer
us  to  fetch  it,  so  that  by  this  meanes  wee  were  two  and
fortie  dayes  in  the  sea  as  it  were  lost,  and  we  were  driven
too  and  fro,  so  that  the  first  lande  that  we  discovered,
was  beyonde  Saint  Tome,  more  then  five  hundreth  miles
which  were  the  mountaines  of  Zerzerline,  neere  unto  the
kingdome  of  Orisa,  and  so  wee  came  to  Orisa  with  many
sicke,  and  more  that  were  dead  for  want  of  water :  and
they  that  were  sicke  in  foure  dayes  dyed :  and  I  for  the
space  of  a  yeere  after  had  my  throat  so  sore  and  hoarse,

408

The  moun-
taines of  Tjer-
zerline.

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

^563-81.
that  I  could  never  satisfie  my  thirst  in  drinking  of  water  :
I  judge  the  reason  of  my  hoarsenesse  to  bee  with  soppes
that  I  wet  in  vineger  and  oyle,  wherewith  I  susteyned
my  selfe  many  dayes.  There  was  not  any  want  of  bread
nor  of  wine  :  but  the  wines  of  that  countrey  are  so  hot  [II.  i.  230,]
that  being  drunke  without  water  they  will  kill  a  man  :
neither  are  they  able  to  drinke  them  :  when  we  beganne
to  want  water,  I  sawe  certaine  Moores  that  were  officers
in  the  ship,  that  solde  a  small  dish  full  for  a  duckat,
after  this  I  sawe  one  that  would  have  given  a  barre  of
Pepper,  which  is  two  quintalles  and  a  halfe,  for  a  litle
measure  of  water,  and  he  could  not  have  it.  Truely  I
beleeve  that  I  had  died  with  my  slave,  whom  then  I  had
to  serve  mee,  which  cost  mee  verie  deare  :  but  to  provide
for  the  daunger  at  hand,  I  solde  my  slave  for  halfe  that
he  was  worth,  because  that  I  would  save  his  drinke  that
he  drunke,  to  serve  my  owne  purpose,  and  to  save  my
life.

Of  the  kingdome  of  Orisa,  and  the  river  Ganges.

ORisa  was a  faire  kingdome  and  trustie,  through  the
which a man  might  have gone  with golde in  his
hande  without  any  daunger  at  all,  as  long  as  the  lawefuU
King  reigned  which  was  a  Gentile,  who  continued  in  the
citie  called  Catecha,  which  was  within  the  land  sixe  dayes
journey. This king loved strangers marveilous well,
especially  marchants  which had traffique in  and  out  of
his kingdome, in such wise that hee would take no
custome of  them, neither any other grievous thing.
Onely  the  shippe  that  came  thither  payde  a  small  thing
according to her portage,  and every  yeere  in  the port
of  Orisa  were  laden five and  twentie or thirtie ships  ^^^  commodi-
great  and  small,  with  ryce  and  divers  sortes  of  fine  white  ^^^^^ ^'^_^  S°  ""^
bumbaste  cloth,  oyle  of  Zerzeline  which  they  make  of  a  '
seed,  and  it  is  very  good  to  eate  and  to fry  fish  withal,
great  store  of  butter,  Lacca,  long  pepper.  Ginger,  Mira-
bolans dry  and  condite,  great store  of  cloth of  herbes,  ^  ui^ettl  ^
which  is  a kinde of  silke  which groweth amongst the  cloth.

409

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

woods  without  any  labour  of  man,  and  when  the  bole
thereof  is  growen  round  as  bigge  as  an  Orenge,  then
they  take  care  onely  to  gather  them.  About  sixteene
yeeres  past,  this  king  with  his  kingdome  were  destroyed
by  the  king  of  Patane,  which  was  also  king  of  the  greatest
part  of  Bengala,  and  when  he  had  got  the  kingdome,
he  set  custome  there  twenty  pro  cento,  as  Marchants
paide  in  his  kingdome :  but  this  tyrant  enjoyed  his  king-
dome  but  a  small  time,  but  was  conquered  by  another
tyrant,  which  was  the  great  Mogol  king  of  Agra,  Delly,
and  of  all  Cambaia,  without  any  resistance.  I  departed
from  Orisa  to  Bengala,  to  the  harbour  Piqueno,  which  is
distant  from  Orisa  towardes  the  East  a  hundred  and
seventie  miles.  They  goe  as  it  were  rowing  alongst  the
coast  fiftie  and  foure  miles,  and  then  we  enter  into  the
The  river  of  river  Ganges :  from  the  mouth  of  this  river,  to  a  citie
Ganges.  called  Satagan,  where  the  marchants  gather  themselves
together  with  their  trade,  are  a  hundred  miles,  which  they
rowe  in  eighteene  houres  with  the  increase  of  the  water :
in  which  river  it  floweth  and  ebbeth  as  it  doth  in  the
Thamis,  and  when  the  ebbing  water  is  come,  they  are
not  able  to  rowe  against  it,  by  reason  of  the  swiftnesse
of  the  water,  yet  their  barkes  be  light  and  armed  with
oares,  like  to  Foistes,  yet  they  cannot  prevaile  against
that  streame,  but  for  refuge  must  make  them  fast  to  the
banke  of  the  river  untill  the  next  flowing  water,  and  they
call  these  barkes  Bazaras  and  Patvas :  they  rowe  as  well
as  a  Galliot,  or  as  well  as  ever  I  have  scene  any.  A  good
tides  rowing  before  you  come  to  Satagan,  you  shall  have
a  place  which  is  called  Buttor,  and  from  thence  upwards
the  ships  doe  not  goe,  because  that  upwardes  the  river
is  very  shallowe,  and  litle  water.  Every  yeere  at  Buttor
they  make  and  unmake  a  Village,  with  houses  and
shoppes  made  of  strawe,  and  with  all  things  necessarie
to  their  uses,  and  this  village  standeth  as  long  as  the
ships  ride  there,  and  till  they  depart  for  the  Indies,  and
when  they  are  departed,  every  man  goeth  to  his  plot  of
houses,  and  there  setteth  fire  on  them,  which  thing  made

410

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
me  to  marvaile.  For  as  I  passed  up  to  Satagan,  I  sawe
this  village  standing  with  a  great  number  of  people,  with
an  infinite  number  of  ships  and  Bazars,  and  at  my  returne
comming  downe  with  my  Captaine  of  the  last  ship,  for
whom  I  tarried,  I  was  al  amazed  to  see  such  a  place  so
soone  razed  and  burnt,  &  nothing  left  but  the  signe  of
the  burnt  houses.  The  small  ships  go  to  Satagan,  and
there  they  lade.

Of  the  citie  of  Satagan.

IN  the  port  of  Satagan  every  yeere  lade  thirtie  or  five
and  thirtie  ships  great  and  small,  with  rice,  cloth  of
Bombast of diverse sortes, Lacca, great abundance  of  "^^^  conmodi-
sugar,  Mirabolans  dried  and  preserved,  long  pepper,  oyle  ^l^\ ^^^
of  Zerzeline,  and  many  other  sorts  of  marchandise. The  Satagan.
citie  of  Satagan  is  a  reasonable  faire  citie for  a  citie  of
the  Moores,  abounding  with  all  things,  and  was  governed
by  the  king  of  Patane,  and  now  is  subject  to  the  great
Mogoi. I  was  in  this  kingdome  foure  moneths,  whereas
many marchants did buy or fraight boates for their
benefites,  and  with  these  barkes  they  goe  up  and  downe
the  river  of  Ganges  to faires, buying their  commoditie  [II.  i.  231.]
with  a  great  advantage, because that every day  in  the
weeke  they  have  a  faire,  now  in  one  place,  and  now  in
another,  and I also hired a barke and went up and
downe  the  river  and did my  businesse,  and so in  the
night  I saw many strange things. The kingdome of
Bengala  in  times  past  hath  bene  as  it  were  in  the  power
of  Moores, neverthelesse there is great store of  Gen-
tiles among  them  ; alwayes whereas I have spoken of
Gentiles, is to be understood Idolaters, and wheras I
speak  of  Moores  I  meane  Mahomets  sect. Those  people  ^°°^'^^  ^^^  ?/
especially  that  be  within the  land  doe greatly worship  ^^^^^f
the river of Ganges  : for when any is sicke, he is
brought  out  of  the  countrey  to  the  banke  of  the  river,
and  there  they  make  him  a  small  cottage  of  strawe,  and
every  day  they  wet  him  with  that  water,  whereof  there
are  many  that  die,  and  when  they  are  dead,  they  make

411

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

A  ceremony  of  a  heape  of  stickes  and  boughes  and  lay  the  dead  bodie
^\  ^^^^f"  thereon,  and  putting  fire  thereunto,  they  let  the  bodie
w^^en^  ey  are  ^^^^  untill  it  be  halfe  rested,  and  then  they  take  it
off  from  the  fire,  and  make  an  emptie  Jarre  fast  about
his  necke,  and  so  throw  him  into  the  river.  These
things  every  night  as  I  passed  up  and  downe  the  river
I  saw  for  the  space  of  two  moneths,  as  I  passed  to  the
fayres  to  buy  my  commodities  with  the  marchants.  And
this  is  the  cause  that  the  Portugales  will  not  drinke  of
the  water  of  the  river  Ganges,  yet  to  the  sight  it  is
more  perfect  and  clearer  then  the  water  of  Nilus  is.
From  the  port  Piqueno  I  went  to  Cochin,  and  from
Cochin  to  Malacca,  from  whence  I  departed  for  Pegu
being  eight  hundred  miles  distant.  That  voyage  is
woont  to  be  made  in  five  and  twentie  or  thirtie  dayes,
but  we  were  foure  moneths,  and  at  the  ende  of  three
moneths  our  ship  was  without  victuals.  The  Pilot  told
us  that  wee  were  by  his  altitude  not  farre  from  a  citie
called  Tanasary,  in  the  kingdome  of  Pegu,  and  these
his  words  were  not  true,  but  we  were  (as  it  were)  in
the  middle  of  many  Hands,  and  many  uninhabited
rockes,  and  there  were  also  some  Portugales  that  affirmed
that  they  knew  the  land,  and  knewe  also  where  the  citie
of  Tanasari  was.

This  citie  of  right  belongeth  to  the  kingdome  of  Sion,
which  is  situate  on  a  great  rivers  side,  which  commeth
out  of  the  kingdome  of  Sion  :  and  where  this  river
runneth  into  the  sea,  there  is  a  village  called  Mirgim,
Marchandtse  \^  whose  harbour  every  yeere  there  lade  some  ships  with
commtngjtom  YcvTAWd.,  Nypa,  and  Benjamin,  a  few  cloves,  nutmegs
and  maces  which  come  from  the  coast  of  Sion,  but  the
greatest  marchandise  there  is  Verzin  and  Nypa,  which
is  an  excellent  wine,  which  is  made  of  the  floure  of  a
tree  called  Nyper.  Whose  liquour  they  distill,  and  so
make  an  excellent  drinke  cleare  as  christall,  good  to  the
mouth,  and  better  to  the  stomake,  and  it  hath  an  ex-
cellent gentle  vertue,  that  if  one  were  rotten  with  the
french  pockes,  drinking  good  store of  this, he  shall  be

412

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
whole  againe,  and  I  have  seene  it  proved,  because  that
when  I  was  in  Cochin,  there  was  a  friend  of  mine,
whose  nose  beganne  to  drop  away  with  that  disease,
and  he  was  counselled  of  the  doctors  of  phisicke,  that
he  should  goe  to  Tanasary  at  the  time  of  the  new  wines,
and  that  he  should  drinke  of  the  nyper  wine,  night  ^¥^^  ^^'«^
and  day,  as  much  as  he  could  before  it  was  distilled,  ^^  ^"^^^^  ^  ^
which  at  that  time  is  most  delicate,  but  after  that  it  is  disease.
distilled,  it  is  more  strong,  and  if  you  drinke  much  of
it,  it  will  fume  into  the  head  with  drunkennesse.  This
man  went  thither,  and  did  so,  and  I  have  seene  him
after  with  a  good  colour  and  sound.  This  wine  is  very
much  esteemed  in  the  Indies,  and  for  that  it  is  brought
so  farre  off,  it  is  very  deare  :  in  Pegu  ordinarily  it  is
good  cheape,  because  it  is  neerer  to  the  place  where
they  make  it,  and  there  is  every  yeere  great  quantitie
made  thereof.  And  returning  to  my  purpose,  I  say,
being  amongst  these  rockes,  and  farre  from  the  land
which  is  over  against  Tanasary,  with  great  scarcitie  of
victuals,  and  that  by  the  saying  of  the  Pylot  and  two
Portugales,  holding  then  firme  that  wee  were  in  front
of  the  aforesayd  harbour,  we  determined  to  goe  thither
with  our  boat  and  fetch  victuals,  and  that  the  shippe
should  stay  for  us  in  a  place  assigned.  We  were  twentie
and  eight  persons  in  the  boat  that  went  for  victuals,
and  on  a  day  about  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  went
from  the  ship,  assuring  our  selves  to  bee  in  the  har-
bour before  night  in  the  aforesaid  port,  wee  rowed  all
that  day,  and  a  great  part  of  the  next  night,  and  all  the
next  day  without  finding  harbour,  or  any  signe  of  good
landing,  and  this  came  to  passe  through  the  evill  coun-
sell  of  the  two  Portugales  that  were  with  us.

For  we  had  overshot  the  harbour  and  left  it  behind
us,  in  such  wise  that  we  had  lost  the  lande  inhabited,
together  with  the  shippe,  and  we  eight  and  twentie  men
had  no  maner  of  victuall  with  us  in  the  boate,  but  it
was  the  Lords  will  that  one  of  the  Mariners  had  brought
a  litle rice  with him in the boate to barter  away for

413

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

some  other  thing,  and  it  was  not  so  much  but  that
three  or  foure  men  would  have  eaten  it  at  a  meale  :  I

Great  ex-  tooke  the  government  of  this  Ryce,  promising  that  by
the  helpe  of  God  that  Ryce  should  be  nourishment
for  us  until  it  pleased  God  to  send  us  to  some  place
that  was  inhabited  :  &  when  I  slept  I  put  the  ryce  into
my  bosome  because  they  should  not  rob  it  from  me  :
we  were  nine  daies  rowing  alongst  the  coast,  without
finding  any  thing  but  countreys  uninhabited,  &  desert
Hands,  where  if  we  had  found  but  grasse  it  would  have

[II.  i.  232.]  seemed  sugar  unto  us,  but  wee  could  not  finde  any,
yet  we  found  a  fewe  leaves  of  a  tree,  and  they  were  so
hard  that  we  could  not  chewe  them,  we  had  water  and
wood  sufficient,  and  as  wee  rowed,  we  could  goe  but  by
flowing  water,  for  when  it  was  ebbing  water,  wee  made
fast  our  boat  to  the  banke  of  one  of  those  Ilandes,
and  in  these  nine  dayes  that  we  rowed,  we  found  a  cave
or  nest  of  Tortoises  egges,  wherein  were  one  hundred
fortie  and  foure  egges,  the  which  was  a  great  helpe  unto
us  :  these  egges  are  as  bigge  as  a  hennes  eggQ,  and
have  no  shell  about  them  but  a  tender  skinne,  every
day  we  sodde  a  kettle  full  of  those  egges,  with  an  hand-
full  of  rice  in  the  broth  thereof:  it  pleased  God  that
at  the  ende  of  nine  dayes  we  discovered  certaine  fisher
men,  a  fishing  with  small  barkes,  and  we  rowed  towardes
them,  with  a  good  cheare,  for  I  thinke  there  were  never
men  more  glad  then  we  were,  for  wee  were  so  sore
afflicted  with  penurie,  that  we  could  scarce  stande  on
our  legges.  Yet  according  to  the  order  that  we  set
for our ryce, when we sawe those fisher men,  there

Tavay  under y^^iS  left  sufficient  for  foure  dayes. The  first  village  that

Pesu"^  we  came  to  was  in  the  gulfe  of  Tavay,  under  the  king

of  Pegu,  whereas  we  found  great  store  of  victuals  :  then
for  two  or  three  dayes  after  our  arrivall  there,  we  would
eate  but  litle  meate  any  of  us,  and  yet  for  all  this,  we
were  at  the  point  of  death  the  most  part  of  us.  From
Tavay  to  Martavan,  in  the  kingdome  of  Pegu,  are
seventie  two miles. We laded our  bote  with victuals

414

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
which  were  aboundantly  sufficient  for  sixe  moneths,
from  whence  we  departed  for  the  port  and  Citie  of
Martavan,  where  in  short  time  we  arrived,  but  we  found
not  our  ship  there  as  we  had  thought  we  should,  from
whence  presently  we  made  out  two  barkes  to  goe  to
looke  for  her.  And  they  found  her  in  great  calamitie,
and  neede  of  water,  being  at  an  anker  with  a  contrary
winde,  which  came  very  ill  to  passe,  because  that  she
wanted  her  boat  a  moneth,  which  should  have  made  her
provision  of  wood  and  water,  the  shippe  also  by  the
grace  of  God  arrived  safely  in  the  aforesaid  port  of
Martavan.

The  Citie  of  Martavan.

WE  found  in  the  Citie  of  Martavan  ninetie  Portu-  Martavan  a
gales of  Merchants  and  other base men, which  f}'"^^^^^'
had  fallen  at  difference  with  the  Retor  or  governour  of
the  citie,  and  all  for  this  cause,  that  certaine  vagabondes
of  the  Portugales  had  slaine five falchines  of  the  king
of  Pegu,  which  chaunced  about  a  moneth  after  the  king
of  Pegu  was  gone with a million and foure hundred
thousand  men  to  conquere  the  kingdome  of  Sion. They  ^  custom  that
have  for  custome in  this Countrey and kingdome, the  jj^Je  when  the
king  being  wheresoever his pleasure is to bee  out  of  king  is  in  the
his kingdome, that every fifteene dayes there goeth  warres.
from  Pegu  a  Carovan of  Falchines, with every  one  a
basket  on  his  head  full  of  some fruites or other  deli-
cates  of  refreshings,  and  with  cleane  clothes  :  it  chaunced
that this Carovan passing by Martavan, and resting
themselves  there  a  night,  there happened betweene  the
Portugales and them wordes of despight, and from
wordes  to  blowes,  and  because  it  was  thought  that  the
Portugales  had  the  worse,  the  night  following,  when  the
Falchines  were a  sleepe with their companie, the  Por-
tugales went and cut off five of their heads. Now  ^l^'^v'^nPegu

there  is  a  lawe  in  Pesfu,  that  whosoever  killeth  a  man,  ■'"^ ^  ^'^^°^

o J  _  _ J men.

he  shall  buy  the  shed  blood  with  his  money,  according
to the estate of  the person that is slaine, but these

415

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

Falchines  being  the  servants  of  the  king,  the  Retors
durst  not  doe  any  thing  in  the  matter,  without  the  con-
sent of  the  king,  because  it  was  necessarie  that  the  king
should  knowe  of  such  a  matter.  When  the  king  had
knowledge  thereof,  he  gave  commaundement  that  the
malefactors  should  be  kept  until!  his  comming  home,
and  then  he  would  duely  minister  justice,  but  the  Cap-
taine  of  the  Portugales  would  not  deliver  those  men,
but  rather  set  himselfe  with  all  the  rest  in  armes,  and
went  every  day  through  the  Citie  marching  with  his
Drumme  and  ensignes  displayd.  For  at  that  time  the
Citie  was  emptie  of  men,  by  reason  they  were  gone  all
to  the  warres  and  in  businesse  of  the  king  :  in  the
middest  of  this  rumour  wee  came  thither,  and  I  thought
Great  pride  of  it  a  Strange  thing  to  see  the  Portugales  use  such  in-
the Portugales.  solencie  in  another  mans  Citie.  And  J  stoode  in  doubt
of  that  which  came  to  passe,  and  would  not  unlade  my
goods  because  that  they  were  more  sure  in  the  shippe
then  on  the  land,  the  greatest  part  of  the  lading  was  the
owners  of  the  shippe,  who  was  in  Malacca,  yet  there
were  diverse  marchants  there,  but  their  goods  were  of
small  importance,  all  those  marchants  tolde  me  that  they
would  not  unlade  any  of  their  goods  there,  unlesse  I
would  unlade  first,  yet  after  they  left  my  counsell  and
followed  their  owne,  and  put  their  goods  a  lande  and
lost  every  whit.  The  Rector  with  the  customer  sent  for
mee,  and  demaunded  why  I  put  not  my  goods  a  lande,
and  payed  my  custome  as  other  men  did  }  To  whom
I  answered,  that  I  was  a  marchant  that  was  newly  come
thither,  and  seeing  such  disorder  amongst  the  Portugales,
I  doubted  the  losse  of  my  goods  which  cost  me  very
deare,  with  the  sweate  of  my  face,  and  for  this  cause  I
[11.  i.  233.]  was  determined  not  to  put  my  goods  on  lande,  untill
such  time  as  his  honour  would  assure  me  in  the  name
of  the  king,  that  I  should  have  no  losse,  and  although
there  came  harme  to  the  Portugales,  that  neither  I  nor
my  goods  should  have  any  hurt,  because  I  had  neither
part nor  any  difference  with them in  this  tumult  : my

416

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

reason  sounded  well  in  the  Retors  eares,  and  so  pre-
sently he  sent  for  the  Bargits,  which  are  as  Counsellers
of  the  Citie,  and  there  they  promised  mee  on  the  kings
head  or  in  the  behalfe  of  the  king,  that  neither  I  nor
my  goods  should  have  any  harme,  but  that  we  should
be  safe  and  sure  :  of  which  promise  there  were  made
publike  notes.  And  then  I  sent  for  my  goods  and  had
them  on  land,  and  payde  my  custome,  which  is  in  that
countrey  ten  in  the  hundreth  of  the  same  goods,  and
for  my  more  securitie  I  tooke  a  house  right  against  the
Retors  house.  The  Captaine  of  the  Portugales,  and  all
the  Portugall  marchants  were  put  out  of  the  Citie,  and
I  with  twentie  and  two  poore  men  which  were  officers  in
the  shippe,  had  my  dwelling  in  the  Citie.  After  this,
the  Gentiles  devised  to  be  revenged  of  the  Portugales  ;
but  they  would  not  put  it  in  execution  untill  such  time
as  our  small  shippe  had  discharged  all  her  goods,  and
then  the  next  night  following  came  from  Pegu  foure
thousand  souldiers  with  some  Elephants  of  warre  ;  and  ^  revenge  on
before  that  they  made  any  tumult  in  the  citie,  the  ^^^P°^^^S^^^^-
Retor  sent,  and  gave  commaundement  to  all  Portugales
that  were  in  the  Citie,  when  they  heard  any  rumour  or
noyse,  that  for  any  thing  they  should  not  goe  out  of
their  houses,  as  they  tendered  their  owne  health.  Then
foure  houres  within  night  I  heard  a  great  rumour  and
noyse  of  men  of  warre,  with  Elephants  which  threw
downe  the  doores  of  the  ware-houses  of  the  Portugales,
and  their  houses  of  wood  and  strawe,  in  the  which
tumult  there  were  some  Portugales  wounded,  and  one
of  them  slaine  ;  and  others  without  making  proofe  of
their  manhoode,  which  the  day  before  did  so  bragge,
at  that  time  put  themselves  to  flight  most  shamefully,
and  saved  themselves  a  boord  of  litle  shippes,  that  were
at  an  anker  in  the  harbour,  and  some  that  were  in  their
beds  fled  away  naked,  and  that  night  they  caried  away
all  the  Portugalles  goods  out  of  the  suburbes  into  the
Citie,  and  those  Portugales  that  had  their  goods  in  the
suburbes also. After this the Portugales that were

V  417  2D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

fledde  into  the  shippes  to  save  themselves,  tooke  a
newe  courage  to  themselves,  and  came  on  lande  and  set
fire  on  the  houses  in  the  suburbes,  which  houses  being
made  of  boorde  and  strawe,  and  the  winde  blowing  fresh,
in  small  time  were  burnt  and  consumed,  with  which  fire
halfe  the  Citie  had  like  to  have  beene  burnt ;  when  the
Portugales  had  done  this,  they  were  without  all  hope
to  recover  any  part  of  their  goods  againe,  which  goods
might  amount  to  the  summe  of  sixteene  thousand
duckats,  which,  if  they  had  not  set  fire  to  the  towne,
they  might  have  had  againe  without  any  losse  at  all.
Then  the  Portugales  understanding  that  this  thing  was
not  done  by  the  consent  of  the  king,  but  by  his
Lieutenant  and  the  Retor  of  the  citie  were  very  ill
content,  knowing  that  they  had  made  a  great  fault,  yet
the  next  morning  following,  the  Portugales  beganne  to
bende  and  shoot  their  ordinance  against  the  Citie,  which
batterie  of  theirs  continued  foure  days,  but  all  was  in
vaine,  for  the  shotte  never  hit  the  Citie,  but  lighted  on
the  top  of  a  small  hill  neere  unto  it,  so  that  the  citie
had  no  harme.  When  the  Retor  perceived  that  the
Portugales  made  battery  against  the  Citie,  hee  tooke  one
and  twentie  Portugales  that  were  there  in  the  Citie,  and
sent  them  foure  miles  into  the  Countrey,  there  to  tarry
untill  such  time  as  the  other  Portugales  were  departed,
that  made  the  batterie,  who  after  their  departure  let
them  goe  at  their  owne  libertie  without  any  harme  done
unto  them.  I  my  selfe  was  alwayes  in  my  house  with
a  good  guard  appointed  me  by  the  Retor,  that  no  man
should  doe  me  injurie,  nor  harme  me  nor  my  goods  ;
in  such  wise  that  hee  perfourmed  all  that  he  had  pro-
mised me  in  the  name  of  the  king,  but  he  would  not
let  me  depart  before  the  comming  of  the  king,  which
was  greatly  to  my  hinderance,  because  I  was  twenty  and
one  moneths  sequestred,  that  I  could  not  buy  nor  sell
any  kinde  of  marchandize.  Those  commodities  that  I
brought  thither,  were  peper,  sandols,  and  Porcellan  of
China  : so  when  the  king  was  come  home,  I made  my

418

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

supplication unto him, and I was licenced to depart
when  I  would.

From  Martavan  I  departed  to  goe  to  the  chiefest
Citie  in  the  kingdome  of  Pegu,  which  is  also  called  after
the  name  of  the  kingdome,  which  voyage  is  made  by  sea
in  three  or  foure  daies  ;  they  may  goe  also  by  lande,
but  it  is  better  for  him  that  hath  marchandize  to  goe
by  sea  and  lesser  charge.  And  in  this  voyage  you  shall
have  a  Macareo,  which  is  one  of  the  most  marveilous
things  in  the  world  that  nature  hath  wrought,  and  I
never  saw  any  thing  so  hard  to  be  beleeved  as  this,
to  wit,  the  great  increasing  &  diminishing  of  the  water  ^  thing  most
there  at  one  push  or  instant,  and  the  horrible  earthquake  '^^^rvetkus,

1  1  1-1TV/T  111  that  at  the

and  great noyse that the  said Macareo  maketh where  commingof  a
it commeth. We  departed from Martavan in barkes,  tide  the  earth
which are like  to our Pylot boates, with  the increase  should  quake.
of  the water, and  they  goe as  swift  as  an arrowe out
of  a  bow, so long  as  the  tide  runneth  with them,  and
when  the  water  is  at  the  highest,  then  they  drawe  them-
selves out of  the  Chanell towardes some banke, and
there they come to anker, and when the water is
diminished,  then  they  rest  on  dry  land  : and  when  the  [H.  i.  2  34-1
barkes  rest  dry,  they  are  as  high  from  the  bottome  of  the
Chanell,  as any house top is high from the ground.
They  let  their  barkes  lie  so high  for  this  respect,  that
if  there  should  any  shippe  rest  or  ride  in  the  Chanell,

with such force  commeth in the water, that  it would T?"  ^^f  ^/,

,  ,  .  1 ,  r 11 ^1  • ^1 ^ ^L Like  to  the  tides

overthrowe shippe  or barke  : yet ror  all  this,  that the  i„  gur  river  of

barkes  be  so  farre  out  of  the  Channell,  and  though  Severne.
the  water  hath  lost  her  greatest  strength  and  furie  before
it  come  so  high,  yet  they  make  fast  their  prowe  to  the
streme,  and  oftentimes  it  maketh  them  very  fearefull,
and  if  the  anker  did  not  holde  her  prow  up  by  strength,
shee  would  be  overthrowen  and  lost  with  men  and  goods.
When  the  water  beginneth  to  increase,  it  maketh  such
a  noyse  and  so  great  that  you  would  thinke  it  an  earth-
quake, and  presently  at  the  first  it  maketh  three  waves.
So  that  the  first washeth  over  the  barke,  from  stemme

419

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

These  tides to  Sterne,  the  second  is  not  so  furious  as  the  first,  and

make  their  just  ^^  thirde  rayseth  the  Anker,  and  then  for  the  space  of

^^^  sixe  houres  while the  water  encreaseth,  they  rowe  with

such  swiftnesse  that  you  would  thinke  they  did  fly  :  in

these tydes there must be lost no  jot of  time,  for  if

you  arrive  not  at  the  stagions  before  the  tyde  be  spent,

you must turne backe from whence you came. For

there  is  no  staying  at  any  place,  but  at these stagions,

and  there  is  more  daunger  at  one  of  these  places  then

at  another,  as  they  be  higher  and  lower  one  then  another.

When  as  you  returne  from  Pegu  to  Martavan,  they  goe

but  halfe  the  tide  at  a  time,  because  they  will  lay  their

barkes  up  aloft  on  the  bankes,  for  the  reason  aforesayd.

I  could  never  gather  any  reason  of  the  noyse  that  this

water maketh in the increase of  the  tide, and in de-

This  Macareo  minishing  of  the  water. There is another Macareo  in

is  a  tide  or  a Cambaya, but that is nothing in comparison of  this.

cuirant.  g^.  ^j^^  helpe  of  God  we  came  safe  to  Pegu,  which  are

two  cities,  the  olde  and  the  newe,  in  the  olde  citie  are

the  Marchant  strangers,  and  marchantes  of  the  Countrey,

for  there  are  the  greatest  doings  and  the  greatest  trade.

This citie is not very  great, but it hath very great

Houses  made suburbes. Their  houses  be  made  with  canes,  and  covered

oj  canes  X3 with  leaves,  or  with  strawe,  but  the  marchants  have  all

COVBTCd  Wltfl  •

leaves  of  trees.  °^^ house or Magason,  which house they call Godon

Godon  is  a  which  is  made  of  brickes,  and  there they  put  all their

place  or  house  goods  of  any  valure,  to  save  them  from  the  often  mis-

for  marchants  chances  that  there  happen  to  houses  made  of  such  stuffe.

to  lay  their  ^n  the  new  citie  is  the  pallace  of  the  king;,  and  his  abidinp-

9'OOuS tit  .  .

place  with  all  his  barons  and  nobles,  and  other  gentlemen ;
and  in  the  time  that  I  was  there,  they  finished  the  build-

The  forme  of  {^ig  of  the  new  citie  :  it  is  a  great  citie,  very  plaine  and
e ui  mgoj  ^. ^^^ foure square,  walled round about and with

of  Pegu.  ditches  that  compasse  the  wals  about  with  water,  in  which

diches  are  many  crocodils,  it  hath  no  drawe  bridges,  yet
it  hath  twentie  gates,  five  for  every  square  on  the  walles,
there  are  many  places  made  for  centinels  to  watch,  made
of  wood and covered or guilt  with gold, the streetes

420

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

thereof  are the fayrest that I have seene, they  are  as
streight  as  a  line  from  one  gate  to  another,  and  standing
at  the  one  gate  you  may  discover  to  the  other,  and  they
are  as  broad  as  10  or  12  men  may  ride  a  breast  in  them  :
and  those  streetes  that  be  thwart  are  faire  and  large,  these
streetes, both on the one side and on the other,  are
planted  at  the  doores  of  the  houses,  with  nut  trees  of
India, which make a very commodious shadowe, the
houses  be  made  of  wood  and covered with  a  kind of
tiles  in  forme  of  cups,  very  necessary  for  their  use,  the
kings  palace  is  in  the  middle  of  the  citie,  made  in  forme  A  rich  and
of  a  walled  castle,  with  ditches  full  of  water  round  about  ^^^^^b  palace.
it,  the  lodgings  within  are  made  of  wood  all  over  gilded,
with  fine  pinacles,  and  very  costly  worke,  covered  with
plates  of  golde. Truely  it  may  be  a  kings  house  :  within
the  gate  there  is  a  faire  large  court,  from  the  one  side
to the other, wherein there are made places for the
strongest  and  stoutest  Eliphants  appointed  for  the  service
of  the  kings  person,  and  amongst  all  other  Eliphants,  he
hath  foure  that  be  white,  a  thing  so  rare  that  a  man  shall  ^°":^^  ^^^'^^
hardly  finde  another  king  that  hath  any  such,  and  if  this ^^  ^^^  ^'
king knowe  any other that hath white Eliphantes, he
sendeth  for  them as for  a  gift. The time  that  I  was
there,  there  were  two  brought  out  of  a  farre  Countrey,
and  that  cost  me  something  the  sight  of  them,  for  they  Th"mmey
commaund  the  marchants  to  goe  to  see  them,  and  then  ^^  ^^/^  ^
they  must  give  somewhat  to  the  men  that  bring  them :  duckat  which
the  brokers  of  the  marchants  give  for  every  man  halfe  may  be  three
a  duckat,  which  they  call  a  Tansa,  which  amounteth  to  ^^^^^^J^^  ^
a  great  summe,  for  the  number  of  merchants  that  are  in  -^ ^
that  citie  ;  and  when  they  have  payde  the  aforesayde  Tansa,
they  make  chuse  whether  they  will  see  them  at  that  time
or  no,  because  that  when  they  are  in  the  kings  stall,  every
man  may  see  them  that  will :  but  at  that  time  they  must
goe  and  see  them,  for  it  is  the  kings  pleasure  it  should
be  so. This  King  amongst  all  other  his  titles,  is  called
the  King  of  the  white  Eliphants,  and  it  is  reported  that
if  this  king  knewe  any  other  king  that  had  any  of  these

421

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

white  Eliphantes,  and  would  not  send  them  unto  him,
that  he  would  hazard  his  whole kingdome  to conquer
them,  he  esteemeth  these  white  Eliphants  very  deerely,
and they  are had in great regard,  and kept  with  very
meete  service,  every  one  of  them  is  in  a  house,  all  guilded
over,  and  they  have  their  meate  given  them  in  vessels  of
silver  and  golde,  there  is  one  blacke  Eliphant  the  greatest
that  hath  bene  seene,  and  he  is  kept according to his
bignesse,  he  is  nine  cubites  high,  which  is  a  marveilous
[II.  i.  235.] thing. It  is  reported  that  this  king  hath  foure  thousand
A  warlike Elephants  of  warre,  and  all  have  their  teeth,  and  they  use
poiicie.  ^Q  p^^  Qj^  their  two  uppermost  teeth  sharpe  pikes  of  yron,

and  make  them  fast  with  rings,  because  these  beastes
fight,  and  make  battell  with  their  teeth ;  hee  hath  also
very  many  yong  Eliphants  that  have  not  their  teeth
An  excellent  sprowted  foorth :  also  this  king  hath  a  brave  devise  in
evise  0  unt  j^^j^^-jj^p-  to  take  these  Eliphants  when  hee  will,  two  miles
Eliphants.  from  the  Citie.  He  hath  builded  a  faire  pallace  all
guilded,  and  within  it  a  faire  Court,  and  within  it  and
rounde  about  there  are  made  an  infinite  number  of  places
for  men  to  stande  to  see  this  hunting :  neere  unto  this
Pallace  is  a  mighty  great  wood,  through  the  which  the
hunts-men  of  the  king  ride  continually  on  the  backs  of
the  feminine  Eliphants,  teaching  them  in  this  businesse.
Every  hunter  carieth  out  with  him  five  or  sixe  of  these
feminines,  and  they  say  that  they  anoynt  the  secret  place
with  a  certaine  composition  that  they  have,  that  when
the  wilde  Eliphant  doeth  smell  thereunto,  they  followe
the  feminines  and  cannot  leave  them  :  when  the  hunts-
men have  made  provision,  &  the  Eliphant  is  so  entangled,
they  guide  the  feminines  towards  the  Pallace  which  is
called  Tambell,  and  this  Pallace  hath  a  doore  which  doth
open  and  shut  with  engines,  before  which  doore  there
is  a  long  streight  way  with  trees  on  both  the  sides,  which
covereth  the  way  in  such  wise  as  it  is  like  darkenesse  in
a  corner :  the  wilde  Eliphant  when  he  commeth  to  this
way,  thinketh  that  he  is  in  the  woods.  At  end  of  this
darke  way  there  is  a  great  field,  when  the  hunters  have

422

CAESAR  FREDERICK  a.d.

1563-81.

gotten  this  praye,  when  they  first  come  to  this  field,  they

send  presently  to  give  knowledge  thereof  to the  Citie,

and  with  all  speed  there  go  out  fiftie or  sixtie  men  on

horsebacke,  and  doe  beset  the  fielde  rounde  about :  in  the

great fielde  then the females which are  taught in this

businesse goe  directly  to  the  mouth  of  the  darke  way,

and  when  as  the  wilde  Eliphant  is  entred  in  there,  the

hunters  shoute and make  a  great  noyse, asmuch as  is

possible,  to  make  the  wilde  Eliphant  enter  in  at  the  gate

of  that  Pallace,  which  is  then  open,  and  assoone  as  hee

is in, the gate is shut  without any noyse, and  so  the

hunters  with  the  female  Eliphants  and  the  wilde  one  are

all  in  the  Court  together,  and  then  within  a  small  time

the  females  withdraw themselves  away  one by  one  out

of  the  Court,  leaving  the  wilde  Eliphant  alone :  and  when  ^»  excellent

he  perceiveth  that  he  is  left  alone,  he  is  so  madde  that  /ff ^f^  '^f  ^^^
r ^  11  ,  .  . . ,  Eliphants.

tor  two  or  three  houres to see  him, it  is the  greatest

pleasure in the world : he weepeth, hee flingeth, hee

runneth, he  justleth, hee thrusteth under the places

where  the  people  stand  to  see  him,  thinking  to  kil  some

of  them,  but  the  posts  and  timber  is  so  strong  and  great,

that hee cannot hurt any body, yet hee oftentimes

breaketh  his  teeth  in  the  grates ; at  length  when  hee  is

weary  and  hath  laboured  his  body  that  hee  is  all  wet  with

sweat,  then  he  plucketh  in  his  truncke  into  his  mouth,

and  then  hee  throweth out so much  water  out of  his

belly,  that  he  sprinckleth  it  over  the  heades  of  the  lookers

on,  to  the  uttermost  of  them,  although  it  bee  very  high  :

and then when they see him very weary, there goe

certaine officers  into the  Court  with  long  sharpe canes  These  canes

in  their  hands,  and  prick  him  that  they  make  him  to  gfoe  ^f^ . /"  .

. ^  rii  1-  11  \ r^  them  in  bpatne

into  one  or  the  houses  that  is  made  alongst  the  Court  ^hlch  the'i  call
for  the  same  purpose  :  as  there  are  many  which  are  made  Joco  de  tore.
long  and  narrow,  that  when  the  Eliphant  is  in,  he  cannot
turne  himself  to  go  backe  againe.  And  it  is  requisite
that  these  men  should  be  very  wary  and  swift,  for  although
their  canes  be  long,  yet  the  Eliphant  would  kill  them  if
they  were  not  swift  to  save  themselves :  at  length  when

423

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

they have  gotten him into one of  those houses, they

stand  over  him  in  a  loft  and  get  ropes  under  his  belly

and about his necke, and about  his legges, and binde

him  fast,  and  so  let  him  stand  foure  or  five  dayes,  and

A  strange give him neither meate nor drinke. At the ende of

thing  that  a thegg  foure  or  five  dayes,  they  unloose  him  and  put  one

should  in  so °^  ^^^  females  unto  him,  and  give  them  meate  and  drinke,

short  time  be and  in  eight  dayes  he  is  become  tame. In  my  judgment

made  tame. there  is  not  a  beast  so  intellective  as  are  these  Eliphants,

nor  of  more  understanding  in  al  the  world  :  for  he  wil

do all things that his keeper  saith, so that  he  lacketh

nothing  but  humaine  speech.

The  greatest It  is  reported  that  the  greatest  strength  that  the  king

strength  that ^f  Pegu hath is  in  these  Eliphants,  for  when  they  goe

P^ezu^hath ^^ battell,  they set on their backes  a  Castle of  wood

bound thereto,  with bands under their  bellies : and  in

every  Castle  foure  men  very  commodiously  set  to  fight

with hargubushes,  with bowes and arrowes,  with darts

and pikes, and other  launcing  weapons :  and they  say

that the skinne of this Eliphant is so hard, that an

harquebusse  will  not  pierce  it,  unlesse  it  bee  in  the  eye,

A  goodly  order  temples,  or  some  other  tender  place  of  his  body. And

in  a  barbarous  besides  this,  they  are  of  great  strength,  and  have  a  very

pops-  excellent order in their  battel,  as  I  have  seene  at  their

feastes  which  they  make  in  the yeere,  in  which feastes

the  king  maketh  triumphes,  which is  a  rare thing  and

worthy  memorie,  that in so barbarous a people there

The  order  of should be such goodly orders as they  have in their

their  weapons armies,  which be distinct in squares of Eliphants,  of

his  men " horsemen,  of  harquebushers  and  pikemen,  that  truly  the

number of them are infinite : but their armour and

weapons  are  very  nought  and  weake  as  well  the  one  as

the other : they  have  very  bad pikes,  their  swords  are

worse  made,  like  long  knives  without  points,  his  harque-

bushes  are most excellent,  and alway  in his warres  he

hath  eightie  thousand  harquebushes,  and  the  number  of

them encreaseth dayly. Because the king will have

[II.  i.  236.] them  shoote  every  day  at  the  Plancke,  and  so  by  con-

424

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

tinuall exercise they become most excellent shot : also

hee hath great  Ordinance  made  of  very  good mettall ;

to  conclude  there  is  not  a  King  on  the  earth  that  hath

more  power  or  strength  then  this  king  of  Pegu,  because

hee hath twentie and  sixe crowned kings at his  com-  26.  Crowned

maunde. He  can  make  in  his  Campe  a  million  and  an  ^^»<?f  ^^ «"

,,--  ~  .,-1,^.  ,.  . command.

halre  or  men  or  warre  m  the  nelde  agamst  his  enemies,  fify^ng  j^^^.
The state of his kingdome and maintenance of his  dreth  thousand
army,  is a thing incredible to consider,  & the  victuals  »?^«  '^n  one
that  should  maintaine  such  a  number  of  people  in the  ^^''^P^-
warres :  but  he  that  knoweth the  nature  and  qualitie  of
that  people,  will  easily  beleeve it. I have scene with
mine  eyes,  that  those people and souldiers have  eaten
of  all  sorts  of  wild  beasts  that  are  on  the  earth,  whether
it bee  very  filthie or otherwise all serveth for their
mouthes  : yea,  I have scene them eate Scorpions and  Eating  oj  ser-
Serpents,  also  they  feed  of  all  kinde  of  herbes  and  grasse.  P^^^^-
So  that  if  such  a  great  armie  want  not  water and  salt,
they  wil maintaine  themselves a long time  in a bush
with  rootes,  flowers  and  leaves  of  trees,  they  cary rice
with  them  for  their  voyage,  &  that  serveth  them  in  stead
of  comfits,  it is  so  daintie  unto them. This king  of
Pegu hath not any  army  or power by  sea,  but  in  the
land,  for  people,  dominions,  golde and silver,  he  farre
exceeds  the power of  the great  Turke  in  treasure  and
strength. This king hath divers Magasons ful of
treasure,  as  gold,  &  silver,  and  every  day  he  encreaseth
it  more  and  more,  and  it  is  never  diminished. Also  hee
is Lord of  the Mines of  Rubies, Safires & Spinels.
Neere unto his royal pallace there is an inestimable  '^^^  ^^'^^^^  °f
treasure  whereof  hee maketh no accompt, for that it  1,^ -^  '^
standeth  in  such  a  place  that  every  one  may  see  it,  and
the  place  where  this  treasure  is,  is  a  great  Court  walled
round  about  with  walls  of  stone,  with  two  gates  which
stand  open  every  day. And  within  this place  or  Court
are  foure  gilded  houses  covered  with  lead,  &  in  every
one of these are certaine heathenish idoles of  a  very
great  valure. In  the  first  house  there  is  a  stature  of  the

425

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

image of  a man of  gold  very  great, & on his  head  a

crowne  of  gold  beset  with  most  rare  Rubies  and  Safires,

and  round  about  him  are  4.  litle  children  of  gold. In

the  second  house  there  is  the  stature  of  a  man  of  silver,

that  is  set  as  it  were  sitting  on  heapes  of  money  : whose

stature in height, as hee sitteth, is so high, that his

highnesse  exceedes  the height  of  any  one  roofe of  an

house  ;  I  measured  his  feete,  and  found  that  they  were

as  long  as  all  my  body  was  in  height,  with  a  crowne  on

his  head  like  to  the  first. And  in  the  thirde  house,  there

is a  stature  of  brasse  of  the  same  bignesse,  with  a  like

crowne  on  his  head. In  the  4.  and  last  house  there  is

a  stature  of  a  man  as  big  as  the  other,  which  is  made  of

Gansa,  which is  the metall  they  make  their  money of,

& this metall is made of  copper & leade mingled

together. This  stature  also  hath  a  crowne  on  his  head

like  the  first  :  this  treasure  being  of  such  a  value  as  it  is,

standeth  in  an  open  place  that  every  man  at  his  pleasure

may  go  &  see  it  : for  the keepers  therof  never  forbid

any  man  the  sight  thereof. I  say  as  I  have  said  before,

that  this  king  every  yere  in  his  feastes  triumpheth  : &

because it is  worthy  of  the noting, I thinke it meet

The  great ^^  write therof,  which  is  as  foloweth. The  kina;  rideth
pompe  of  the  .  ,  „.,,,'='.,.

J^ins:  on a triumphant cart or  wagon all gilded, which is

drawen  by  16.  goodly  horses  :  and  this  cart  is  very  high

with  a  goodly  canopy  over  it,  behind  the  cart  goe  20.  of

his  Lordes  &  nobles,  with  every  one  a  rope  in  his  hand

made  fast to  the  cart  for  to  hold  it  upright  that  it  fal

not. The king  sitteth in the middle  of  the  cart  ; &

upon  the  same  cart  about  the  king  stande  4.  of  his  nobles

most favored of  him,  and  before this  cart  wherein  the

king  is,  goeth  all  his  army  as  aforesaid,  and  in  the  middle

of  his  army  goeth  all  his  nobilitie,  round  about  the  cart,

there  are  in his  dominions,  a  marveilous  thing it is  to

see  so many  people,  such  riches  &  such  good  order  in

a  people  so  barbarous  as  they  be. This  king of  Pegu

hath one  principal  wife  which is kept  in  a Seralio,  he

hath  300  concubines,  of  whom  it  is  reported  that  he  hath

426

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

90.  children. This  king  sitteth  every  day  in  person  to

heare  the  suites  of  his subjects,  but  he  nor  they  never

speake one to another,  but by supplications made in

this  order. The  king  sitteth  up  aloft  in  a  great  hall,  on  The  order  of

a  tribunall  seat,  and  lower  under  him  sit  all  his  Barons  •^«■'^^^^•

round about,  then  those that demaund audience enter

into  a  great  Court  before  the  king,  and  there  set  them

downe  on  the  ground  40.  paces  distant  from  the  kings

person,  and  amongst  those  people  there  is  no  difference  ^°  di^erence

in  matters  of  audience  before  the  king,  but  all  alike,  and  %„JJlTi,[vu.,r

1  1  .  ....  ,..&'.  1 • 1 1 before  the  King

there they  sit  with their supplications in their nands,  i„  conmver-
which  are made  of  long leaves of  a tree,  these leaves  sies  or  in
are  3.  quarters  of  a  yard  long,  &  two  fingers  broad,  which  justice.
are  written  with  a  sharpe  iron  made for  y*  purpose, &
in  those  leaves  are  their supplications  written, & with
their  supplications,  they  have  in  their hands  a present
or gift, according to the waightines of  their matter.
Then  come  ye  secretaries  downe  to  read  these  supplica-
tions,  taking  them &  reading  them  before  the  king,  &
if  the  king  think  it  good  to  do  to  them  that  favour  or
justice  that  they  demaund,  then  he  commandeth  to  take
the  presents  out  of  their  hands : but  if  he thinke  their
demand  be  not  just  or  according  to  right,  he  commandeth
them  away  without  taking  of  their  gifts  or  presents. In
the  Indies  there  is  not  any  marchandise  that  is  good  to
bring to  Pegu,  unlesse  it  bee  at  some  times  by  chance
to  bring  Opium  of  Cambaia,  and  if  he  bring  money  he
shall  lose by  it. Now  the  commodities  that  come  from
S.  Tome  are  the  onely  marchandize  for  that  place,  which  [II.  i.  237.]
is  the  great  quantity  of  cloth made there, which they  ^.^^  commodi-
use  in  Pegu  ; which  cloth  is  made  of  bombast  woven  ^^^^^^^^  ■^^
and painted, so that the more that kinde  of  cloth  is  pggu,
washed,  the  more  livelie  they  shewe  their  colours,  which
is  a  rare  thing,  and  there  is  made  such  accompt  of  this
kinde of  cloth  which  is  of  so  great  importance,  that  a
small bale of  it  will  cost  a thousand or  two thousand
duckets. Also  from S. Tome  they  layd  great  store  of
red  yarne,  of  bombast  died  with  a  roote  which  they  call

427

A.D.

1563-81,

'Note  the  de-
parture of  the
ships  from  S.
Tovie  to  Pegu.

Commodities
brought  into

The  Chikinos
are  pieces  of
gold  worth
sterling  7.
shillings.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Saia,  as  aforesayd,  which  colour  will  never  out.  With
which  marchandise  every  yeere  there  goeth  a  great  shippe
from  S.  Tome  to  Pegu,  of  great  importance,  and  they
usually  depart  from  S.  Tome  to  Pegu  the  11.  or  12.  of
September,  &  if  she  stay  until  the  twelfth,  it  is  a
great  hap  if  she  returne  not  without  making  of  her
voiage.  Their  use  was  to  depart  the  sixt  of  September,
and  then  they  made  sure  voyages,  and  now  because  there
is  a  great  labour  about  that  kind  of  cloth  to  bring  it
to  perfection,  and  that  it  be  well  dried,  as  also  the
greedinesse  of  the  Captaine  that  would  make  an  extra-
ordinary gaine  of  his  fraight,  thinking  to  have  the  wind
alwayes  to  serve  their  turne,  they  stay  so  long,  that  at
sometimes  the  winde  turneth.  For  in  those  parts  the
windes  blow  firmely  for  certaine  times,  with  the  which
they  goe  to  Pegu  with  the  winde  in  poope,  and  if  they
arrive  not  there  before  the  winde  change,  and  get  ground
to  anker,  perforce  they  must  returne  backe  againe :  for
that  the  gales  of  the  winde  blowe  there  for  three  or  foure
moneths  together  in  one  place  with  great  force.  But
if  they  get  the  coast  &  anker  there,  then  with  great
labour  they  may  save  their  voyage.  Also  there  goeth
another  great  shippe  from  Bengala  every  yeere,  laden
with  fine  cloth  of  bombast  of  all  sorts,  which  arriveth  in
the  harbour  of  Pegu,  when  the  ship  that  commeth  from
S.  Tome  departeth.  The  harbour  where  these  two  ships
arrive  is  called  Cosmin.  From  Malaca  to  Martavan,
which  is  a  port  in  Pegu,  there  come  many  small  ships,
and  great,  laden  with  pepper,  Sandolo,  Porcellan  of  China,
Camfora,  Bruneo  and  other  marchandise.  The  ships
that  come  from  Mecca  enter  into  the  port  of  Pegu  and
Cirion,  and  those  shippes  bring  cloth  of  Wooll,  Scarlets,
Velvets,  Opium,  and  Chickinos,  by  the  which  they  lose,
and  they  bring  them  because  they  have  no  other  thing
that  is  good  for  Pegu  :  but  they  esteeme  not  the  losse  of
them,  for  that  they  make  such  great  gaine  of  their  com-
modities that  they  cary  from  thence  out  of  that  king-
dome. Also the king of  Assi his  ships  come thither

428

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
into  the  same  port  laden  with  peper  ;  from  the  coast  of
S.  Tome  of  Bengala  out  of  the  Sea  of  Bara  to  Pegu  are
three  hundreth  miles,  and  they  go  it  up  the  river  in  foure
daies,  with  the  encreasing  water,  or  with  the  flood,  to  a
City  called  Cosmin,  and  there  they  discharge  their  ships,
whither  the  Customers  of  Pegu  come  to  take  the  note
and  markes  of  all  the  goods  of  every  man,  &  take  the
charge  of  the  goods  on  them,  and  convey  them  to  Pegu,
into  the  kings  house,  wherin  they  make  the  custome  of
the  marchandize.  When  the  Customers  have  taken
the  charge  of  the  goods  &  put  them  into  barks,  the
Retor  of  the  City  giveth  licence  to  the  Marchants  to  take
barke,  and  goe  up  to  Pegu  with  their  marchandize ;  and
so  three  or  foure  of  them  take  a  barke  and  goe  up  to
Pegu  in  company.  God  deliver  every  man  that  hee  give  Great  rigour
not  a  wrong  note,  and  entrie,  or  thinke  to  steale  any  jW- //5^  j/^^/zw^
custome  :  for  if  they  do,  for  the  least  trifle  that  is,  he  is
utterly  undone,  for  the  king  doeth  take  it  for  a  most
great  afiront  to  bee  deceived  of  his  custome  ;  and  there-
fore they  make  diligent  searches,  three  times  at  the  lading
and  unlading  of  the  goods,  and  at  the  taking  of  them
a  land.  In  Pegu  this  search  they  make  when  they  goe
out  of  the  ship  for  Diamonds,  Pearles,  and  fine  cloth
which  taketh  little  roome  :  for  because  that  all  the  jewels
that  come  into  Pegu,  and  are  not  found  of  that  countrey,
pay  custome,  but  Rubies,  Safyres  and  Spinels  pay  no
custome  in  nor  out :  because  they  are  found  growing
in  that  Countrey.  I  have  spoken  before,  how  that  all
Marchants  that  meane  to  goe  thorow  the  Indies,  must
cary  al  maner  of  houshold  stuff^e  with  them  which  is
necessary  for  a  house,  because  that  there  is  not  any
lodging  nor  Innes  nor  hostes,  nor  chamber  roome  in  that
Countrey,  but  the  first  thing  a  man  doth  when  he
commeth  to  any  City  is  to  hier  a  house,  either  by  the
yeere  or  by  the  moneth,  or  as  he  meanes  to  stay  in
those  parts.

In  Pegu their  order  is  to hire  their  houses  for  sixe
moneths. Nowe from Cosmin to the Citie of Pegu

429

A.D.

1563-81,

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Description  of
the  fruitful-
nesse  of  that
soyle.

Deling  is  a
small  litter
caried  with
men  as  is
aforesaid.

they  goe  in  sixe  houres  with  the  flood,  and  if  it  be
ebbing  water,  then  they  make  fast  their  boate  to  the
river  side,  and  there  tary  until  the  water  flow  againe.
It  is  a  very  commodious  and  pleasant  voyage,  having  on
both  sides  of  the  rivers  many  great  vilages,  which  they
call  Cities  :  in  the  which  hennes,  pigeons,  egges,  milke,
rice,  and  other  things  be  very  good  cheape.  It  is  all
plaine,  and  a  goodly  Countrey,  and  in  eight  dayes  you
may  make  your  voyage  up  to  Macceo,  distant  from
Pegu  twelve  miles,  &  there  they  discharge  their  goods,
&  lade  them  in  Carts  or  waines  drawen  with  oxen,
and  the  Marchants  are  caried  in  a  closet  which  they  call
Deling,  in  the  which  a  man  shall  be  very  well  accommo-
dated, with  cushions  under  his  head,  and  covered  for
the  defence  of  the  Sunne  and  raine,  and  there  he  may
sleepe  if  he  have  wil  thereunto  :  and  his  foure  Falchines
cary  him  running  away,  changing  two  at  one  time  and
two  at  another.  The  custome  of  Pegu  and  fraight
thither,  may  amount  unto  twentie  or  twentie  two  per
cento,  and  23.  according  as  he  hath  more  or  lesse  stolen
from  him  that  day  they  custome  the  goods.  It  is  requi-
site that  a  man  have  his  eyes  watchfull,  and  to  be
[II.  i.  238.]  carefull,  and  to  have  many  friendes,  for  when  they
custome  in  the  great  hall  of  the  king,  there  come  many
gentlemen  accompanied  with  a  number  of  their  slaves,
and  these  gentlemen  have  no  shame  that  their  slaves
rob  strangers :  whether  it  be  cloth  in  shewing  of  it  or
any  other  thing,  they  laugh  at  it.  And  although  the
Marchants  helpe  one  another  to  keepe  watch,  &  looke
to  their  goods,  they  cannot  looke  therto  so  narrowly
but  one  or  other  wil  rob  something,  either  more  or
lesse,  according-  as  their  marchandise  is  more  or  lesse :
and  yet  on  this  day  there  is  a  worse  thing  then  this  :
although  you  have  set  so  many  eyes  to  looke  there  for
your  benefit,  that  you  escape  unrobbed  of  the  slaves,
a  man  cannot  choose  but  that  he  must  be  robbed  of  the
officers  of  the  custome  house.  For  paying  the  custome
with  the  same  goods  oftentimes  they  take  the  best  that

430

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.
you  have,  &  not  by  rate  of  every  sort  as  they  ought  to
do,  by  which  meanes  a  man  payeth  more  then  his  dutie.
At  length  when  the  goods  be  dispatched  out  of  the  cus-
tome  house  in  this  order,  the  Marchant  causeth  them
to  be  caried  to  his  house,  and  may  do  with  them  at
his  pleasure.

There  are  in  Pegu  8.  brokers  of  the  kings,  which
are  called  Tareghe,  who  are  bound  to  sell  all  the  mar-
chandize  which  come  to  Pegu,  at  the  common  or  the
currant  price :  then  if  the  marchants  wil  sell  their  goods
at  that  price,  they  sel  them  away,  and  the  brokers  have
two  in  the  hundreth  of  every  sort  of  marchandise,  and
they  are  bound  to  make  good  the  debts  of  those  goods,
because  they  be  sold  by  their  hands  or  meanes,  &  on
their  wordes,  and  oftentimes  the  marchant  knoweth  not
to  whom  he  giveth  his  goods,  yet  he  cannot  lose  any
thing  thereby,  for  that  the  broker  is  bound  in  any  wise
to  pay  him,  and  if  the  marchant  sel  his  goods  without
the  consent  of  the  broker,  yet  neverthelesse  he  must
pay  him  two  per  cento,  and  be  in  danger  of  his  money :
but  this  is  very  seldom  scene,  because  the  wife,  children,
and  slaves  of  the  debtor  are  bound  to  the  creditor,  and
when  his  time  is  expired  and  paiment  not  made,  the
creditor  may  take  the  debtor  and  cary  him  home  to  his
house,  and  shut  him  up  in  a  Magasin,  whereby  presently
he  hath  his  money,  and  not  being  able  to  pay  the
creditor,  he  may  take  the  wife,  children,  and  slaves  of  ^  lawe  for
the  debtor,  and  sel  them,  for  so  is  the  lawe  of  that  king-  Banckrupts.
dome.  The  currant  money  that  is  in  this  city,  and
throughout  all  this  kingdom  is  called  Gansa  or  Ganza,
which  is  made  of  Copper  and  leade :  It  is  not  the  money  Every  man
of  the  king,  but  every  man  may  stamp  it  that  wil,  because  ^^-^  stamps
it  hath  his  just  partition  or  value :  but  they  make  many  ^-^  ^^"^-^
of  them  false,  by  putting  overmuch  lead  into  them,  and
those  will  not  passe,  neither  will  any  take  them.  With
this  money  Ganza,  you  may  buy  golde  or  silver.  Rubies
and  Muske,  and  other  things.  For  there  is  no  other
money  currant  amongst them. And  Golde, silver  and

431

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

other  marchandize  are  at  one  time  dearer  then  another,
as  all  other  things  be.

This  Ganza  goeth  by weight of  Byze, & this  name
of  Byza  goeth  for  ye  accompt  of  the weight,  and  com-
monly a  Byza  of  a  Ganza  is  worth (after  our  accompt)
halfe  a  ducat,  litle  more  or  lesse :  and  albeit  that Gold
and  silver  is  more  or  lesse  in  price,  yet  the  Byza  never
changeth : every Byza maketh a hundreth Ganza of
weight,  and  so  the  number  of  the  money  is  Byza. He
that  goeth to Pegu  to buy  Jewels,  if  he  wil  do well,
it  behoveth  him  to  be  a  whole  yere  there  to  do  his  busi-
How  a  man nesse. For  if  so  be  that  he  would  return  with  the  ship
may  dispose j^^  came  in,  he  cannot  do  any  thing  so  conveniently  for
thelradetn ^^  brevitie  of  the  time,  because  that  when  they  custome
their  goods  in  Pegu  that  come from S. Tome in their
ships,  it  is  as  it  were  about  Christmas :  and when  they
have  customed their  goods, then  must they  sell  them
for  their  credits  sake  for a  moneth  or two  : and then
at  the  beginning  of  March  the  ships  depart. The  Mar-
chants that  come from S.  Tome take for the  paiment
of  their  goods,  gold,  and  silver,  which  is  never  wanting
Good instruc- there. And  8.  or  10.  dayes  before  their  departure  they
ttons.  ^j-g  ^YY  satisfied :  also  they  may  have  Rubies  in  paiment,

but  they  make  no  accompt  of  them :  and  they  that  will
winter  there  for  another  yere,  it  is  needfull  that  they  be
advertized,  that  in  the  sale  of  their  goods,  they  specifie
in  their  bargaine,  the  terme  of  two  or  3.  moneths  pai-
ment, &  that  their  paiment  shalbe  in  so  many  Ganza,
and  neither  golde  nor  silver :  because  that  with  the
Ganza  they  may  buy  &  sel  every  thing  with  great  advan-
tage. And  how  needful  is  it  to  be  advertized,  when
they  wil  recover  their  paiments,  in  what  order  they  shal
receive  their  Ganza  ?  Because  he  that  is  not  experienced
may  do  himselfe  great  wrong  in  the  weight  of  the  Gansa,
as  also  in  the  falsenesse  of  them  :  in  the  weight  he  may
be  greatly  deceived,  because  that  from  place  to  place  it
doth  rise  and  fall  greatly :  and  therefore  when  any  wil
receive  money  or  make  paiment,  he  must  take  a  publique

432

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.
wayer  of  money,  a  day  or  two  before  he  go  about  his
businesse,  and  give  him  in  paiment  for  his  labour  two
Byzaes  a  moneth,  and  for  this  he  is  bound  to  make  good
all  your  money,  &  to  maintaine  it  for  good,  for  that
hee  receiveth  it  and  scales  the  bags  with  his  seale :  and
when  hee  hath  received  any  store,  then  hee  causeth  it
to  bee  brought  into  the  Magason  of  the  Marchant,  that
is  the  owner  of  it.

That  money  is  very  weightie,  for  fourtie  Byza  is  a
strong  Porters  burden ;  and  also  where  the  Marchant
hath  any  payment  to  be  made  for  those  goods  which  he
buyeth,  the  Common  wayer  of  money  that  receiveth  his
money  must  make  the  payment  thereof.  So  that  by  this
meanes,  the  Marchant  with  the  charges  of  two  Byzes  a  [11.  i.  239.]
moneth,  receiveth  and  payeth  out  his  money  without
losse  or  trouble.  The  Marchandizes  that  goe  out  of  TheMarchan-
Pegu  are  Gold,  Silver,  Rubies,  Saphyres,  Spinelles,  great  ^^f^ fp  ^°^
store  of  Benjamin,  long  peper,  Leade,  Lacca,  rice,  wine,
some  sugar,  yet  there  might  be  great  store  of  sugar  made
in  the  Countrey,  for  that  they  have  aboundance  of  Canes,
but  they  give  them  to  Eliphants  to  eate,  and  the  people
consume  great  store  of  them  for  food,  and  many  more
doe  they  consume  in  vaine  things,  as  these  following.
In  that  kingdome  they  spend  many  of  these  Sugar  canes
in  making  of  houses  and  tents  which  they  call  Varely
for  their  idoles,  which  they  call  Pagodes,  whereof  there
are  great  aboundance,  great  and  smal,  and  these  houses
are  made  in  forme  of  little  hilles,  like  to  Sugar  loaves  or
to  Bells,  and  some  of  these  houses  are  as  high  as  a
reasonable  steeple,  at  the  foote  they  are  very  large,  some
of  them  be  in  circuit  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  The  saide
houses  within  are  full  of  earth,  and  walled  round  about
with  brickes  and  dirt  in  steade  of  lime,  and  without
forme,  from  the  top  to  the  foote  they  make  a  covering
for  them  with  Sugar  canes,  and  plaister  it  with  lime  all
over,  for  otherwise  they  would  bee  spoyled,  by  the  great
aboundance  of  raine  that  falleth  in  those  Countreys.
Also  they  consume about  these Varely  or idol houses

V  433  2  E

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

Idol  houses  great  store  of  leafe-gold,  for  that  they  overlay  all  the
covered  with  x.o'^^  of  the  houses  with  gold,  and  some  of  them  are
covered  with  golde  from  the  top  to  the  foote  :  in  cover-
ing whereof  there  is  great  store  of  gold  spent,  for  that
every  10.  yeeres  they  new  overlay  them  with  gold,  from
the  top  to  the  foote,  so  that  with  this  vanitie  they  spend
great  aboundance  of  golde.  For  every  10.  yeres  the
raine  doeth  consume  the  gold  from  these  houses.  And
by  this  meanes  they  make  golde  dearer  in  Pegu  then
it  would  bee,  if  they  consumed  not  so  much  in  this
vanitie.  Also  it  is  a  thing  to  bee  noted  in  the  buying
of  jewels  in  Pegu,  that  he  that  hath  no  knowledge  shall
have  as  good  jewels,  and  as  good  cheap,  as  he  that  hath
bene  practized  there  a  long  time,  which  is  a  good  order,
and  it  is  in  this  wise.  There  are  in  Pegu  foure  men  of
good  reputation,  which  are  called  Tareghe,  or  brokers  of
Jewels.  These  foure  men  have  all  the  Jewels  or  Rubies
in  their  handes,  and  the  Marchant  that  wil  buy  commeth
to  one  of  these  Tareghe  and  telleth  him,  that  he  hath
so  much  money  to  imploy  in  Rubies.  For  through
Rubles  exceed-  the  hands  of  these  foure  men  passe  all  the  Rubies:  for
pfp-a  ^'^^^  "^  ^^^y  have  such  quantitie,  that  they  knowe  not  what  to
doe  with  them,  but  sell  them  at  most  vile  and  base
prices.  When  the  Marchant  hath  broken  his  mind  to
one  of  these  brokers  or  Tareghe,  they  cary  him  home
to  one  of  their  Shops,  although  he  hath  no  knowledge
in  Jewels  :  and  when  the  Jewellers  perceive  that  hee
will  employ  a  good  round  summe,  they  will  make  a
bargaine,  and  if  not,  they  let  him  alone.  The  use
generally  of  this  Citie  is  this  ;  that  when  any  Mar-
chant hath  bought  any  great  quantitie  of  Rubies,  and
hath  agreed  for  them,  hee  carieth  them  home  to  his
house,  let  them  be  of  what  value  they  will,  he  shall
have  space  to  looke  on  them  and  peruse  them  two  or
three  dayes  :  and  if  he  hath  no  knowledge  in  them,  he
shall  alwayes  have  many  Marchants  in  that  Citie  that
have  very  good  knowledge  in  Jewels  ;  with  whom  he
may  alwayes  conferre  and take  counsell,  and  may  shew

434

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
them  unto  whom  he  will  ;  and  if  he  finde  that  hee
hath  not  employed  his  money  well,  hee  may  returne
his  Jewels  backe  to  them  whom  hee  had  them  of,
without  any  losse  at  all.  Which  thing  is  such  a  shame
to  the  Tareghe  to  have  his  Jewels  returne,  that  he  had
rather  beare  a  blow  on  the  face  then  that  it  should  be
thought  that  he  solde  them  so  deere  to  have  them
returned.  For  these  men  have  alwayes  great  care  that
they  affoord  good  peniworths,  especially  to  those  that
have  no  knowledge.  This  they  doe,  because  they
woulde  not  loose  their  credite  :  and  when  those  Mar-
chants  that  have  knowledge  in  Jewels  buy  any,  if  they
buy  them  deere,  it  is  their  own  faults  and  not  the
brokers  :  yet  it  is  good  to  have  knowledge  in  Jewels,
by  reason  that  it  may  somewhat  ease  the  price.  There  An  honest  care
is  also  a  very  £ood  order  which  thev  have  in  buying:  ^  he^ithen
of  Jewels,  which  is  this  ;  There  are  many  Marchants
that  stand  by  at  the  making  of  the  bargaine,  and
because  they  shall  not  understand  howe  the  Jewels  be
solde,  the  Broker  and  the  Marchants  have  their  hands
under  a  cloth,  and  by  touching  of  fingers  and  nipping  Bargames
the  ioynts they  know what is done, what is bidden,  ^^^f.  ^^  . ^

J J  ^ J  '  ^ nipping  oj

and  what is asked. So that the standers by knowe  fingers  under  a

not  what  is  demaunded for  them,  although  it  be  for  a  doth.

thousand  or  10.  thousand  duckets. For  every  joynt  and

every  finger  hath  his  signification. For  if  the  Marchants

that  stande  by  should  understand  the  bargaine,  it  would

breede  great controversie amongst them. And at  my

being in Pegu in the moneth of August, in Anno

1569. having gotten well by my endevour, I was

desirous to  see  mine  owne  Countrey,  and  I thought  it

good to goe by the way of S. Tome, but then I

should  tary  until  March.

In  which  journey  I  was  counsailed,  yea,  and  fully
resolved  to  go  by  the  way  of  Bengala,  with  a  shippe
there  ready  to  depart  for  that  voyage.  And  then  wee
departed  from  Pegu  to  Chatigan  a  great  harbour  or
port, from whence there goe smal ships to Cochin,

435

A.D.
1563-81.

This  Touffon
is  an  extra-
ordinary
storme  at  Sea.
[II.  i.  240.]

The  Toufon
commeth  but
every  10.  or
12.  yee}'es.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

before  the  fleete  depart  for  Portugal!,  in  which  ships  I
was  fully  determined  to  goe  to  Lisbon,  and  so  to
Venice.  When  I  had  thus  resolved  my  selfe,  I  went  a
boord  of  the  shippe  of  Bengala,  at  which  time  it  was
the  yeere  of  Touffon  :  concerning  which  Touffon  ye
are  to  understand,  that  in  the  East  Indies  often  times,
there  are  not  stormes  as  in  other  countreys  ;  but  every
10.  or  12.  yeeres  there  are  such  tempests  and  stormes,
that  it  is  a  thing  incredible,  but  to  those  that  have
seene  it,  neither  do  they  know  certainly  what  yeere
they  wil  come.

Unfortunate  are  they  that  are  at  sea  in  that  yere  and
time  of  the  Touffon,  because  few  there  are  that  escape
that  danger.  In  this  yere  it  was  our  chance  to  be  at
sea  with  the  like  storme,  but  it  happened  well  unto  us,
for  that  our  ship  was  newly  over-plancked,  and  had  not
any  thing  in  her  save  victuall  and  balasts,  Silver  and
golde,  which  from  Pegu  they  cary  to  Bengala,  and  no
other  kinde  of  Marchandise.  This  Touffon  or  cruel
storme  endured  three  dayes  and  three  nights  :  in  which
time  it  caried  away  our  sailes,  yards,  and  rudder  ;  and
because  the  shippe  laboured  in  the  Sea,  wee  cut  our
mast  over  boord :  which  when  we  had  done  she  laboured
a  great  deale  more  then  before,  in  such  wise,  that  she
was  almost  full  with  water  that  came  over  the  highest
part  of  her  and  so  went  downe  :  and  for  the  space  of
three  dayes  and  three  nights  sixtie  men  did  nothing  but
hale  water  out  of  her  in  this  wise,  twentie  men  in  one
place,  and  twentie  men  in  another  place,  and  twentie  in
a  thirde  place  :  and  for  all  this  storme,  the  shippe  was
so  good,  that  shee  tooke  not  one  jot  of  water  below
through  her  sides,  but  all  ran  downe  through  the
hatches,  so  that  those  sixtie  men  did  nothing  but  cast
the  Sea  into  the  Sea.  And  thus  driving  too  and  fro  as
the  winde  and  Sea  would,  we  were  in  a  darke  night
about  foure  of  the  clocke  cast  on  a  sholde  :  yet  when
it  was  day,  we  could  neither  see  land  on  one  side  nor
other,  and  knew  not  where  we  were. And  as  it  pleased

436

CAESAR  FREDERICK  a.d.

1563-81.
the  divine  power, there  came  a  great  wave  of  the  Sea,
which drave us beyonde  the  should. And when wee
felt  the  shippe  aflote,  we  rose  up  as  men  revived,  because  ^  manifest
the  Sea  was  calme  and  smooth  water,  and  then  sounding  ''^'7"  '^^'^
we  found  twelve  fadome  water,  and  within  a  while  after  p^-^g.  i„
wee had  but sixe  fadome,  and  then presently  we  came  those  Com-
to anker  with a small  anker that  was left us at the  ^reis.
Sterne,  for  all our  other  were  lost in  the  storme  : and
by  and by  the  shippe  strooke  a  ground,  and  then  wee
did  prop  her  that  she  should  not  overthrow.

When  it  was  day  the  shippe  was  all  dry,  and  wee
found  her  a  good  mile  from  the  Sea  on  drie  land.  This
ToufFon  being  ended,  we  discovered  an  Island  not  farre  This  Island  is
from  us,  and  we  went  from  the  shippe  on  the  sands  to  '^^^^^^S°^^^^^-
see  what  Island  it  was  :  and  wee  found  it  a  place
inhabited,  and,  to  my  judgement,  the  fertilest  Island  in
all  the  world,  the  which  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  a
chanell  which  passeth  betweene  it,  &  with  great  trouble
we  brought  our  ship  into  the  same  chanel,  which
parteth  the  Island  at  flowing  water,  and  there  we  deter-
mined to  stay  40.  dayes  to  refresh  us.  And  when  the
people  of  the  Island  saw  the  ship,  and  that  we  were
comming  a  land  :  presently  they  made  a  place  of  bazar
or  a  market,  with  shops  right  over  against  the  ship
with  all  maner  of  provision  of  victuals  to  eate,  which
they  brought  downe  in  great  abundance,  and  sold  it  so
good  cheape,  that  we  were  amazed  at  the  cheapenesse
thereof.  I  bought  many  salted  kine  there,  for  the
provision  of  the  ship,  for  halfe  a  Larine  a  piece,  which
Larine  may  be  12.  shillings  sixe  pence,  being  very  good
and  fat ;  and  4.  wilde  hogges  ready  dressed  for  a
Larine  ;  great  fat  hennes  for  a  Bizze  a  piece,  which  is
at  the  most  a  pennie  :  and  the  people  told  us  that  we
were  deceived  the  halfe  of  our  money,  because  we  bought
things  so  deare.  Also  a  sacke  of  fine  rice  for  a  thing
of  nothing,  and  consequently  all  other  things  for
humaine  sustenance  were  there  in  such  aboundance,  that
it  is  a  thing  incredible  but  to  them  that  have  seene  it.

437

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

Sondiva  is  the  This Island  is called  Sondiva belonging to the king-

fruitfullest^ dome  of  Bengala,  distant  120.  miles  from Chatigan,  to

th^V^^ld" ^ which  place  wee  were  bound. The  people  are  Moores,

and the  king  a  very  good  man  of  a Moore  king,  for

if  he  had bin a  tyrant as others be, he might have

robbed us of all, because the Portugall captaine of

Chatigan  was in  armes  against  the  Re  tor  of  that  place,

& every day  there were  some slaine, at which newes

we  rested  there  with  no  smal  feare,  keeping  good  watch

and  ward aboord every night  as the use is, but the

governour  of the  towne did comfort us, and bad us

that  we  should  feare  nothing,  but  that  we  should  repose

our selves securely without any  danger,  although the

Portugales  of  Chatigan  had  slaine  the  governour  of  that

City, and  said that  we  were not  culpable in  that  fact :

and moreover  he did  us every  day  what pleasure he

could,  which  was  a  thing contrary  to our expectations

considering  that they  & the people  of Chatigan  were

both  subjects  to  one  king. We  departed  from  Sondiva,

Chatigan  is  a  ^  came  to  Chatigan  the great  port  of  Bengala,  at the

sak^whither ^^^^ time when the Portugales had made peace and

the  Portugales  taken  a  truce  with  the  governours  of  the  towne,  with  this

go  with  their condition that the chiefe Captaine of  the Portugales

ships.  with his ship should depart without any lading : for

there  were then at that time 18. ships of  Portugales

great  and  small. This  Captaine  being  a  Gentleman  and

of good courage, was notwithstanding contented to

depart  to  his  greatest  hinderance,  rather  then  hee  would

seeke  to  hinder  so  many  of  his  friends  as  were  there,  as

also  because  the  time  of  the  yeere  was spent  to  go to

the Indies. The  night  before  he departed,  every  ship

that  had  any  lading  therein,  put  it  aboord  of  the  Captaine

to helpe to ease his charge and to recompence his

The  King  of courtesies. In  this time  there came  a  messenger from

Rachim,  or the king of Rachim to this Portugal Captaine,  who

Aracam,  saide  in  the  behalfe  of  his  king,  that hee  had  heard  of

Bene-ala  ^^^  Courage  and  valure  of  him,  desiring  him  gently  that

[II.  i.  241.] he  would  vouchsafe  to  come  with  the  ship  into  his  port,

438

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1563-81.

and  comming thither he should be very  wel  intreated.

This  Portugal  went thither  and  was  very  well  satisfied

of  this  King.

This  King  of  Rachim hath his  seate in the middle

o

coast betweene Bengala and Pegu, and the greatest

enemie he  hath is  the king of Pegu  : which king of

Pegu  deviseth night  and day  how to  make this king

of  Rachim  his subject, but  by no meanes  hee  is able

to  doe it  : because  the king  of  Pegu hath no power

nor  armie by  Sea. And this king  of  *  Rachim may  Or,  Aracam.

arme two  hundreth Galleyes  or Fusts  by  Sea,  and by

land he  hath certaine  sluses  with the  which  when  the

king  of  Pegu pretendeth  any harme  towards  him,  hee

may  at  his  pleasure  drowne  a  great  part  of  the  Countrey.

So  that  by  this  meanes  hee  cutteth  off  the  way  whereby

the  king  of  Pegu  should  come  with  his  power  to  hurt

him.

From the  great port of  Chatigan they  cary for the  ^}^  cummodi-
Indies  great  store  of  rice,  very  great  quantitie  of  Bom-  ^^'^^i^ff?^
bast  cloth  or  every  sort,  ouger,  corne,  and  money,  with  fg  ^^^  Indies.
other marchandize. And by reason of  the warres in
Chatigan,  the  Portugall  ships  taried  there  so  long,  that
they  arrived  not  at  Cochin  so  soone  as  they  were  wont
to  doe  other  yeeres. For  which  cause  the  fleete  that  was  '^^f  Portugal
at  Cochin  was  departed  for  Portugal  before  they  arrived  ^"-^P^  ^^P^^^
there,  and  T  being  in  one  of  the  small  shippes  before  the  p-aii  out  of  the
fleete,  in  discovering  of  Cochin,  we  also  discovered  the  harbor  of
last  shippe  of  the  Fleete  that  went  from  Cochin  to  Portu-  Cochin.
gall,  where  shee  made  saile,  for  which  I  was  marveilously
discomforted,  because  that  all  the  yeere  following,  there
was no going  for Portugale, and when we  arrived at
Cochin  I  was  fully  determined  to  goe  for  Venice  by  the
way  of  Ormus,  and  at  that  time  the  Citie  of  Goa was Goa  was  be-
besieged  by  the  people  of  Dialcan,  but  the  Citizens  forced  ^^^S.^^-
not  this  assault,  because  they  supposed  that  it  would  not
continue long. For all this  I  embarked  my  selfe  in  a
Galley  that  went  for  Goa,  meaning  there  to  shippe  my
selfe  for  Ormus  :  but  when  we  came  to  Goa,  the  Viceroy

439

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

would  not  suffer  any  Portugal  to  depart,  by  reason  of  the
warres.  And  being  in  Goa  but  a  small  time,  I  fell  sicke
of  an  infirmitie  that  helde  mee  foure  moneths  :  which
with  phisicke  and  diet  cost  me  eight  hundreth  duckets,
and  there  I  was  constrained  to  sell  a  smal  quantitie  of
Rubies  to  sustaine  my  neede :  and  I  solde  that  for  five
hundreth  duckets,  that  was  worth  a  thousand.  And
when  I  beganne  to  waxe  well  of  my  disease,  I  had  but
little  of  that  money  left,  every  thing  was  so  scarse :  For
every  chicken  (and  yet  not  good)  cost  mee  seven  or
eight  Livers,  which  is  sixe  shillings,  or  sixe  shillings
eight  pence.  Beside  this  great  charges,  the  Apothe-
caries with  their  medicines  were  no  small  charge  to
me.  At  the  ende  of  sixe  moneths  they  raised  the  siege,
and  then  I  beganne  to  worke,  for  Jewels  were  risen  in
their  prices  :  for,  whereas  before  I  sold  a  few  of  refused
Rubies,  I  determined  then  to  sell  the  rest  of  all  my
Jewels  that  I  had  there,  and  to  make  an  other  voyage
to  Pegu.  And  for  because  that  at  my  departure  from
Opium  a  good  Pegu,  Opium  was  in  great  request,  I  went  then  to  Cam-
mnmo  ihe  in  \^^j^  ^q  imploy  a  good  round  summe  of  money  in
Opium,  and  there  I  bought  60.  percels  of  Opium,  which
cost  me  two  thousand  &  a  hundreth  duckets,  every
ducket  at  foure  shillings  two  pence.  Moreover  I
bought  three  bales  of  Bombast  cloth,  which  cost  me
eight  hundred  duckats,  which  was  a  good  commoditie
for  Pegu :  when  I  had  bought  these  things,  the  Viceroy
commanded  that  the  custome  of  the  Opium  should  be
paide  in  Goa,  and  paying  custome  there  I  might  cary  it
whither  I  would.  I  shipped  my  3.  bales  of  cloth  at
Chaul  in  a  shippe  that  went  for  Cochin,  and  I  went  to
Goa  to  pay  the  aforesaid  custome  for  my  Opium,  and
from  Goa  I  departed  to  Cochin  in  a  ship  that  was  for  the
voyage  of  Pegu,  and  went  to  winter  then  at  S.  Tome.
When  I  came  to  Cochin,  I  understood  that  the  ship  that
had  my  three  bales  of  cloth  was  cast  away  and  lost,  so
that  I  lost  my  800.  Serafins  or  duckats  :  and  departing
from  Cochin to goe for  S.  Tome,  in  casting  about  for

440

CAESAR  FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.
the  Island  of  Zeilan  the  Pilote  was  deceived,  for  that  the
Cape  of  the  Island  of  Zeilan  lieth  farre  out  into  the  sea,
and  the  Pilot  thinking  that  he  might  have  passed  hard
aboord  the  Cape,  and  paying  roomer  in  the  night ;  when
it  was  morning  we  were  farre  within  the  Cape,  and  past
all  remedy  to  go  out,  by  reason  the  winds  blew  so
fiercely  against  us.  So  that  by  this  meanes  we  lost  our
voyage  for  that  yere,  and  we  went  to  Manar  with  the
ship  to  winter  there,  the  ship  having  lost  her  mastes,  and
with  great  diligence  we  hardly  saved  her,  with  great
losses  to  the  Captaine  of  the  ship,  because  he  was  forced
to  fraight  another  ship  in  S.  Tome  for  Pegu  with  great
losses  and  interest,  and  I  with  my  friends  agreed  together
in  Manar  to  take  a  bark  to  cary  us  to  S.  Tome ;  which
thing  we  did  with  al  the  rest  of  the  marchants  ;  and
ariving  at  S.  Tome  I  had  news  through  or  by  the  way
of  Bengala,  that  in  Pegu  Opium  was  very  deare,  and  I
knew  that  in  S.  Tome  there  was  no  Opium  but  mine  to
go  for  Pegu  that  yere,  so  that  I  was  holden  of  al  the
marchants  there  to  be  very  rich  :  and  so  it  would  have
proved,  if  my  adverse  fortune  had  not  bin  contrary  to
my  hope,  which  was  this.  At  that  time  there  went  a
great  ship  from  Cambaya,  to  the  king  of  Assi,  with
great  quantitie  of  Opium,  &  there  to  lade  peper :  in
which  voyage  there  came  such  a  storme,  that  the  ship
was  forced  with  wether  to  goe  roomer  800.  miles,  and  [11.  i.  242.]
by  this  meanes  came  to  Pegu,  whereas  they  arived  a  day
before  mee  ;  so  that  Opium  which  was  before  very  deare,
was  now  at  a  base  price  :  so  that  which  was  sold  for
fiftie  Bizze  before,  was  solde  for  2.  Bizze  &  an  halfe,
there  was  such  quantitie  came  in  that  ship  ;  so  that  I
was  glad  to  stay  two  yeres  in  Pegu  unlesse  I  would
have  given  away  my  commoditie  :  and  at  the  end  of  two
yeres  of  my  2100.  duckets  which  I  bestowed  in  Cambaya,
I  made  but  a  thousand  duckets.  Then  I  departed  againe
from  Pegu  to  goe  for  the  Indies  and  for  Ormus  with
great  quantitie  of  Lacca,  and  from  Ormus  I  returned
into  the Indies for  Chaul,  and from  Chaul to  Cochin,

441

A.D.

1563-81.

Peper  tree.

Ginger.

Cloves.

'Nutmegs  and
Maces.

White  Sandol.
Canfora.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  from  Cochin  to  Pegu.  Once  more  I  lost  occasion
to  make  me  riche,  for  whereas  I  might  have  brought
good  store  of  Opium  againe,  I  brought  but  a  little,
being  fearefuU  of  my  other  voyage  before.  In  this
small  quantitie  I  made  good  profite.  And  now  againe
I  determined  to  go  for  my  Countrey,  and  departing
from  Pegu,  I  tarried  and  wintered  in  Cochin,  and  then
I  left  the  Indies  and  came  for  Ormus.

I  thinke  it  very  necessary  before  I  ende  my  voyage,
to  reason  somewhat,  and  to  shewe  what  fruits  the  Indies
do  yeeld  and  bring  forth.  First,  in  the  Indies  and  other
East  parts  of  India  there  is  Peper  and  ginger,  which
groweth  in  all  parts  of  India.  And  in  some  parts  of
the  Indies,  the  greatest  quantitie  of  peper  groweth
amongst  wilde  bushes,  without  any  maner  of  labour  :
saving,  that  when  it  is  ripe  they  goe  and  gather  it.
The  tree  that  the  peper  groweth  on  is  like  to  our  Ivie,
which  runneth  up  to  the  tops  of  trees  wheresoever  it
groweth  :  and  if  it  should  not  take  holde  of  some  tree,
it  would  lie  flat  and  rot  on  the  ground.  This  peper
tree  hath  his  floure  and  berry  like  in  all  parts  to  our
Ivie  berry,  and  those  berries  be  graines  of  peper  :  so
that  when  they  gather  them  they  be  greene,  and  then
they  lay  them  in  the  Sunne,  and  they  become  blacke.

The  Ginger  groweth  in  this  wise  :  the  land  is  tilled
and  sowen,  and  the  herbe  is  like  to  Panizzo,  and  the
roote  is  the  ginger.  These  two  spices  grow  in  divers
places.

The  Cloves  come  all  from  the  Moluccas,  which
Moluccas  are  two  Islands,  not  very  great,  and  the  tree
that  they  grow  on  is  like  to  our  Lawrell  tree.

The  Nutmegs  and  Maces,  which  grow  both  together,
are  brousfht  from  the  Island  of  Banda,  whose  tree  is
like  to  our  walnut  tree,  but  not  so  big.

All  the  good  white  Sandol  is  brought  from  the  Island
of  Timor.  Canfora  being  compound  commeth  all  from
China,  and  all  that  which  groweth  in  canes  commeth
from Borneo, & I thinke that this Canfora  commeth

442

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.
not into these parts  : for that in India they  consume

great  store,  and  that  is  very  deare. The  good  Lignum  Lignum  Aloes.
Aloes  commeth  from  Cauchinchina.

The  Benjamin  commeth from the  kingdome  of  Assi  Benjamin.
and  Sion.

Long  peper  groweth  in  Bengala,  Pegu,  and  Java.  Longpeper.

Muske commeth from  Tartaria,  which  they  make  in  This  Muske

this order, as by  ffood information I have  bene told.  ^^^  Je-^es  doe

T->,  .  J.  • \. J. • T^ ^ •  i-i- -ij  J counterfeit  and

1  here  is  a  certame  beast  m 1  artaria,  which  is  wilde  and  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^/^
as  big  as  a  wolfe,  which beast they  take  alive,  &  beat  the  good  muske
him to death with small staves y' his blood may  be  and  beat  the
spread through his whole body, then they cut it in  P^hofanasse
pieces,  &take  out  all  the  bones,  &  beat  the  flesh  with  ^^g^^gofif
the  blood  in  a  morter  very  smal,  and  dry  it,  and  make
purses  to  put it  in  of  the  skin,  and  these  be  the  cods
of  muske.

Truely  I  know  not  whereof  the  Amber  is  made,  and
there  are  divers  opinions  of  it,  but  this  is  most  certaine,
it  is  cast  out  of  the  Sea,  and  throwne  on  land,  and
found  upon  the  sea  bankes.

The Rubies,  Saphyres,  and  the  Spinels  be  gotten  in  Rubies,  Sa-
the kingdome of Pegu. The Diamants come from  My/'^^^  ^"d
divers places  ; and I know but three sorts of  them. ^^"^  ^'
That  sort  of  Diamants  that  is  called  Chiappe,  commeth
from  Bezeneger. Those  that  be  pointed  naturally  come
from the land of Delly, and from Java, but the
Diamants of  Java are more waightie then the other.
I could never understand from whence they that are
called  Balassi  come.  The  Balassi

Pearles they fish in divers places,  as before in this  §['''["^  "^
booke  is  showne.

From  Cambaza  commeth  the  Spodiom  which  congeleth  ^P^^°/"-

,  - - ^  • -n  1  On  the  coast  oj

in  certaine  canes,  whereor  1  round  many  in  -regu,  when  yigi^^de  in
I made  my  house there, because that (as  I have said  Ethiopia,  in
before)  they make their houses there of  woven canes  the  land  of
like  to  mats. From  Chaul  they  trade  alongst  the  coast  ^^fr^^'^^^ Jhe
of  Melinde  in  Ethiopia,  within  the  land  of  Cafraria  :  on  °^^^  J^^  p^^._
that  coast  are  many  good  harbors  kept  by  the  Moores.  tugals  have.

443

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

Thither  the  Portugals  bring  a  kinde  of  Bombast  cloth
of  a  low  price,  and  great  store  of  Paternosters  or  beads
made  of  paltrie  glasse,  which  they  make  in  Chaul  accord-
ing to  the  use  of  the  Countrey  :  and  from  thence  they
cary  Elephants  teeth  for  India,  slaves  called  Cafari,  and
some  Amber  and  Gold.  On  this  coast  the  king  of
Portugall  hath  his  castle  called  Mozambique,  which  is
of  as  great  importance  as  any  castle  that  hee  hath  in
all  his  Indies  under  his  protection,  and  the  Captaine  of
this  castle  hath  certaine  voyages  to  this  Cafraria,  to  which
places  no  Marchants  may  goe,  but  by  the  Agent  of  this
Captaine  :  and  they  use  to  goe  in  small  shippes,  and
Buying  and  trade  with  the  Cafars,  and  their  trade  in  buying  and
selling  without  selling  is  without  any  speach  one  to  the  other.  In  this
r«(?//  ^  ^'^^^  ^h^ Portugals bring their  goods  by  litle  and  litle

[II.  i.  243.1  alongst  the  Sea  coast,  and  lay  them  downe  :  and  so
depart,  and  the  Cafar  Marchants  come  and  see  the  goods,
&  there  they  put  downe  as  much  gold  as  they  thinke
the  goods  are  worth,  and  so  goe  their  way  and  leave
their  golde  and  the  goods  together,  then  commeth  the
Portugal,  and  finding  the  golde  to  his  content,  hee
taketh  it  and  goeth  his  way  into  his  ship,  and  then
commeth  the  Cafar  and  taketh  the  goods  and  carieth
them  away  :  and  if  he  finde  the  golde  there  still,  it  is
a  signe  that  the  Portugals  are  not  contented,  and  if
the  Cafar  thinke  he  hath  put  too  little,  he  addeth  more,
as  he  thinketh  the  thing  is  worth  :  and  the  Portugales
must  not  stand  with  them  too  strickt  ;  for  if  they  doe,
then  they  will  have  no  more  trade  with  them  :  For  they
disdaine  to  be  refused,  when  they  thinke  that  they  have
offered  ynough,  for  they  be  a  peevish  people,  and  have
Golden  trades  dealt  SO  of  a  long  time  :  and  by  this  trade  the  Portugals
that  the  For-  change  their  commodities  into  gold,  and  cary  it  to  the
tugals  have.  Q^g^-jg  of  Mozambique,  which  is  in  an  Island  not  farre
distant  from  the  firme  land  of  Cafraria  on  the  coast  of
Ethiopia,  and  is  distant  from  India  2800.  miles.  Now
to  returne  to  my  voyage,  when  I  came  to  Ormus,  I
found  there  Master  Francis  Berettin  of  Venice,  and  we

444

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1563-81.

fraighted a bark together to goe for Basora for 70.

duckets,  and  with  us  there  went  other  Marchants,  which

did  ease  our  fraight,  and  very  commodiously  wee  came

to Basora  and  there  we  stayed  40.  dayes  for  providing

a  Carovan  of  barks  to  go  to  Babylon,  because  they  use

not to goe two  or 3. barkes at once,  but 25. or 30.

because in the night they cannot  go, but must  make

them  fast  to  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  then  we  must

make  a  very  good  &  strong  guard,  and  be  wel  provided

of  armor,  for  respect  &  safegard  of  our  goods,  because

the  number  of  theeves  is  great  that  come  to  spoile  and

rob  the  marchants. And  when  we depart for Babylon

we  goe  a  litle  with  our  saile,  and  the  voyage  is  38,  or

40.  dayes  long,  but  we  were  50.  dayes  on  it. When  we

came to Babylon we stayed there 4. moneths, until

the Carovan was ready to go over the wildernes, or

desert  for  Alepo  ; in this citie we  were 6. Marchants

that  accompanied  together,  five  Venetians  and  a  Portugal ;

whose names  were as folioweth,  Messer  'Florinasa  with

one  of  his  kinsmen,  Messer  Andrea  de  Polo,  the  Portugal

&  M.  Francis  Berettin  and  I,  and  so  wee  furnished  our  ^«  order  how

selves  with victuals  and beanes for our  horses  for 40.  ^°  P^^"^^  ^ !°

/•  ^OC  OV$V  tfl€

dayes  ;  and  wee  bought  horses  and  mules,  for  that  they  Dg^ert  from
bee  very  good  cheape  there,  T  my  selfe  bought  a  horse  Babylon  to
there  for  11.  akens,  and  solde  him  after  in  Alepo  for  ^l^po-
30.  duckets.  Also  we  bought  a  Tent  which  did  us
very  great  pleasure  :  we  had  also  amongst  us  32.  Camels
laden  with  marchandise  :  for  the  which  we  paid  2.
duckets  for  every  camels  lading,  and  for  every  10.  camels
they  made  11,  for  so  is  their  use  and  custome.  We  take
also  with  us  3.  men  to  serve  us  in  the  voyage,  which  are
used  to  goe  in  those  voyages  for  five  D  d.  a  man,  and
are  bound  to  serve  us  to  Alepo  :  so  that  we  passed  very
well  without  any  trouble  :  when  the  camels  cried  out
to  rest,  our  pavilion  was  the  first  that  was  erected.  The
Carovan  maketh  but  small  journeis  about  20.  miles  a
day,  &  they  set  forwards  every  morning  before  day  two
houres,  and  about  two  in  the  afternoone  they  sit  downe.

445

A.D.

1563-81.

36.  Dayes
journey  over
the  zoildernes.

An  order  how
to  provide  for
the  going  to
Jerusalem.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

We  had  great  good  hap  in  our  voyage,  for  that  it  rained  :
For  which  cause  we  never  wanted  water,  but  every  day
found  good  water,  so  that  we  could  not  take  any  hurt
for  want  of  water.  Yet  we  caried  a  camel  laden  alwayes
with  water  for  every  good  respect  that  might  chance  in
the  desert,  so  that  wee  had  no  want  neither  of  one  thing,
nor  other  that  was  to  bee  had  in  the  countrey.  For
wee  came  very  well  furnished  of  every  thing,  and  every
day  we  eat  fresh  mutton,  because  there  came  many
shepheards  with  us  with  their  flocks,  who  kept  those
sheepe  that  we  bought  in  Babylon,  and  every  marchant
marked  his  sheepe  with  his  owne  marke,  and  we  gave
the  shepheards  a  Medin,  which  is  two  pence  of  our
money,  for  the  keeping  and  feeding  our  sheep  on  the
way,  and  for  killing  of  them.  And  beside  the  Medin
they  have  the  heads,  the  skinnes,  and  the  intrals  of  every
sheepe  they  kil.  We  sixe  bought  20.  sheepe,  and  when
we  came  to  Alepo  we  had  7.  alive  of  them.  And  in
the  Carovan  they  use  this  order,  that  the  marchants  doe
lende  flesh  one  to  another,  because  they  will  not  cary
raw  flesh  with  them,  but  pleasure  one  another  by  lending
one  one  day,  and  another  another  day.

From  Babylon  to  Alepo  is  40.  dayes  journey,  of  the
which  they  make  36.  dayes  over  the  wildernes,  in  which
'^d.  dayes  they  neither  see  house,  trees,  nor  people  that
inhabite  it,  but  onely  a  plaine,  and  no  signe  of  any  way
in  the  world.  The  Pilots  go  before,  and  the  Carovan
followeth  after.  And  when  they  sit  downe  all  the
Carovan  unladeth  and  sitteth  downe,  for  they  know
the  stations  where  the  wells  are.  I  say,  in  36.  dayes
we  passe  over  the  wildernesse.  For  when  wee  depart
from  Babylon  two  dayes  we  passe  by  villages  inhabited
until  we  have  passed  the  river  Euphrates.  And  then
within  two  dayes  of  Alepo  we  have  villages  inhabited.
In  this  Carovan  there  goeth  alway  a  Captaine  that  doth
Justice  unto  all  men  :  and  every  night  they  keepe  watch
about  the  Carovan,  and  comming  to  Alepo  we  went  to
Tripoli,  whereas  Master  Florin,  and  Master  Andrea  Polo,

446

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-81.

and  I,  with  a  Frier,  went  and  hired  a  barke  to  goe  with
us  to  Jerusalem.  Departing  from  Tripolie,  we  arrived
at  Jaffa  :  from  which  place  in  a  day  and  halfe  we  went
to  Jerusalem,  and  we  gave  order  to  our  barke  to  tary
for  us  untill  our  returne.  Wee  stayed  in  Jerusalem  14.
dayes,  to  visite  those  holy  places  :  from  whence  we  re-
turned to  Jaffa,  and  from  Jaffa  to  Tripolie,  and  there
wee  shipped  our  selves  in  a  ship  of  Venice  called  the  [II.  i.  244.]
Bagazzana  :  And  by  the  helpe  of  the  divine  power,  we  The  author  re-
arrived  safely  in  Venice,  the  fift  of  November 1581. If  ^«^«^^^^  f  ^'-

11  111  1 •  -1  ^^<^^  1 5  8 1 .

there be any that hath any desire to goe into those
partes  of  India,  let  him  not  be  astonied  at  the  troubles
that I have passed  : because I  was intangled in  many
things  : for that I went very  poore from Venice with
1200. duckets imployed in marchandize, and when I
came  to Tripolie,  I fell sicke  in the house of  Master
Regaly  Oratio,  and  this  man  sent  away  my  goods  with
a  small  Carovan  that  went  from  Tripolie  to  Alepo,  and
the Carovan was robd, and all my  goods lost saving
foure  chests  of  glasses  which  cost me  200.  duckets,  of
which  glasses  I  found  many  broken  :  because  the  theeves
thinking  it  had  bene  other  marchandize,  brake  them  up,
and seeing they  were glasses they let them all alone.
And with this onely stocke I adventured to goe into
the Indies : And thus with change  and rechange, and
by  diligence in my  voyage,  God did blesse and helpe
mee,  so  that I got  a  good  stocke. I  will not be un-  ^  ^^0'  ^""^
mindfuU  to  put  them  in  remembrance,  that  have  a  desire  J^J'  in  those
to  goe  into  those  parts,  how  they  shall  keepe  their  goods, Countreys  for
and  give  them  to  their  heires  at  the  time  of  their  death,  the  recovering
and howe  this  may  be  done  very  securely. In all the  °f^^^  S°°^^  <f
cities  that the Portugales have in the Indies, there is  ^  ^ ^^  '
a  house  called  the  schoole  of  Sancta  misericordia  comis-
saria  : the governours whereof, if  you give them for
their  paines,  will  take  a  coppy  of  your  will  and  Testament,
which you must alwayes cary about you  ; and chiefly
when you  go'  into the  Indies. In  the  countrey  of  the
Moores and Gentiles, in those  voyages alwayes there

447

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563-81.

goeth  a  Captaine  to  administer  Justice  to  all  Christians
of  the  Portugales.  Also  this  captaine  hath  authoritie  to
recover  the  goods  of  those  Marchants  that  by  chance
die  in  those  voyages,  and  they  that  have  not  made  their
Wills  and  registred  them  in  the  aforesaide  schooles,  the
Captaines  wil  consume  their  goods  in  such  wise,  that
litle  or  nothing  will  be  left  for  their  heires  and  friends.

o

Also  there  goeth  in  these  same  voyages  some  marchants
that  are  commissaries  of  the  schoole  of  Sancta  miseri-
cordia,  that  if  any  Marchant  die  and  have  his  Will  made,
and  hath  given  order  that  the  schoole  of  Misericordia
shall  have  his  goods  and  sell  them,  then  they  sende  the
money  by  exchange  to  the  schoole  of  Misericordia  in
Lisbone,  with  that  copie  of  his  Testament,  then  from
Lisbon  they  give  intelligence  thereof,  into  what  part
of  Christendome  soever  it  be,  and  the  heires  of  such
a  one  comming  thither,  with  testimoniall  that  they  be
heires,  they  shall  receive  there  the  value  of  his  goods  :
in  such  wise  that  they  shall  not  loose  any  thing.  But
they  that  die  in  the  kingdome  of  Pegu  loose  the  thirde
part  of  their  goods  by  ancient  custome  of  the  Countrey,
that  if  any  Christian  dieth  in  the  kingdome  of  Pegu,
the  king  and  his  officers  rest  heires  of  a  thirde  of  his
goods,  and  there  hath  never  bene  any  deceit  or  fraude
used  in  this  matter.  I  have  knowen  many  rich  men
that  have  dwelled  in  Pegu,  and  in  their  age  they  have
desired  to  go  into  their  owne  Countrey  to  die  there,
and  have  departed  with  al  their  goods  and  substance
without  let  or  trouble.
Order  of  J^  Pegu  the  fashion  of  their  apparel  is  all  one,  as
appanl  in  ^^  ^^  Noble  man,  as  the  simple  :  the  onely  differ-
ence is  in  the  finenes  of  the  cloth,  which  is  cloth  of
Bombast  one  finer  then  another,  and  they  weare  their
apparell  in  this  wise  :  First,  a  white  Bombast  cloth  which
serveth  for  a  shirt,  then  they  gird  another  painted  bom-
bast cloth  of  foureteene  brases,  which  they  binde  up
betwixt  their  legges,  and  on  their  heads  they  weare  a
small  tock  of  three  braces, made  in guize  of  a  myter,,

448

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1581.
and  some  goc  without  tocks,  and  cary  (as  it  were)  a
hive  on  their  heades,  which  doeth  not  passe  the  lower
part  of  his  eare,  when  it  is  lifted  up  :  they  goe  all  bare
footed,  but  the  Noble  men  never  goe  on  foote,  but  are
caried  by  men  in  a  seate  with  great  reputation,  with  a
hat  made  of  the  leaves  of  a  tree  to  keepe  him  from  the
raine  and  Sunne,  or  otherwise  they  ride  on  horsebacke
with  their  feete  bare  in  the  stirops.  All  sorts  of  women  ^■^^  '>^der  of
whatsoever  they  be,  weare  a  smocke  downe  to  the  girdle,  '^"'^mens
and  from  the  girdle  downewards  to  the  foote  they  weare  p}„^
a  cloth  of  three  brases,  open  before ;  so  straite  that
they  cannot  goe,  but  they  must  shewe  their  secret  as
it  were  aloft,  and  in  their  going  they  faine  to  hide  it
with  their  hand,  but  they  cannot  by  reason  of  the
straitnes  of  their  cloth.  They  say  that  this  use  was  in-
vented by  a  Queene  to  be  an  occasion  that  the  sight
thereof  might  remove  from  men  the  vices  against  nature,
which  they  are  greatly  given  unto  :  which  sight  should
cause  them  to  regard  women  the  more.  Also  the
women  goe  bare  footed,  their  armes  laden  with  hoopes
of  golde  and  Jewels  :  And  their  fingers  full  of  precious
rings,  with  their  haire  rolled  up  about  their  heads..
Many  of  them  weare  a  cloth  about  their  shoulders  in
stead  of  a  cloake.

Now  to  finish  that  which  I  have  begunne  to  write,  I
say,  that  those  parts  of  the  Indies  are  very  good,  be-
cause that  a  man  that  hath  litle,  shall  make  a  great
deale  thereof;  alwayes  they  must  governe  themselves
that  they  be  taken  for  honest  men.  For  why  }  to  such
there  shal  never  want  helpe  to  doe  wel,  but  he  that
is  vicious,  let  him  tary  at  home  and  not  go  thither,
because  he  shall  alwayes  be  a  begger,  and  die  a  poore
man.

[Letters
449  2  F

A.D.
1583.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[II.  i.  245.]  Letters  concerning  the  voyage  of  M.  John  New-
bery  and  M.  Ralph  Fitch,  made  by  the  way
of  the  Levant  Sea  to  Syria,  and  overland  to
Balsara,  and  thence  into  the  East  Indies,  and
beyond,  In  the  yeere 1583.

A  letter  written  from  the  Queenes  Majestic,  to
Zelabdim  Echebar,  King  of  Cambaia,  and  sent
by  John  Newbery. In  February  Anno 1583.

Lizabeth  by  the  grace of  God, &c. To
the  most invincible, and most mightie
prince,  lord Zelabdim Echebar king  of
Cambaya. Invincible  Emperor,  &c. The
great  affection  which  our  Subjects  have,
to  visit  the most distant places of  the
world, not without good will and in-
tention to introduce the trade of  marchandize of  al
nations  whatsoever  they  can,  by  which  meanes  the  mutual
and  friendly  trafique  of  marchandize  on  both  sides  may
come,  is  the  cause  that the bearer  of  this letter  John
Newbery,  joyntly  with those  that be in his company,
with  a curteous and honest boldnesse, doe repaire  to
the  borders  and countreys  of  your Empire, we  doubt
not  but  that  your  imperial  Majestic  through  your  royal
grace, will favourably and friendly accept him. And
that  you  would  doe  it  the  rather  for  our  sake,  to  make
us  greatly  beholding  to  your  Majestic  ;  wee  should  more
earnestly,  and  with  more  wordes require  it, if  wee  did
think  it  needful. But  by  the  singular  report  that  is  of
your imperial Majesties humanitie in these uttermost
parts  of  the  world,  we  are  greatly  eased  of  that  burden,
and  therefore  we  use  the  fewer  and  lesse  words :  onely
we  request  that  because  they  are  our  subjects,  they  may
be  honestly  intreated  and  received. And  that  in  respect
of the hard journey which they have undertaken to
places  so  far  distant,  it  would  please  your  Majestie  with

450

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  a.d.

'583.
some  libertie  and  securitie  of  voiage  to  gratifie  it,  with
such  privileges  as  to  you  shall  seeme  good :  which  cur-
tesie  if  your  Imperiall  majestic  shal  to  our  subjects  at
our  requests  performe,  wee,  according  to  our  royall
honour,  wil  recompence  the  same  with  as  many  deserts
as  we  can.  And  herewith  we  bid  your  Imperial  Majestie
to  farewel.

A  letter  written  by  her  Majestie  to  the  King  of
China,  in  Februarie 1583.

Lizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of  England,
&c.  Most  Imperial  and  invincible  prince,  our
honest  subject  John  Newbery  the  bringer  hereof,

who  with  our  favour  hath  taken  in  hand  the  voyage
which  nowe  hee  pursueth  to  the  parts  and  countreys  of
your  Empire,  not  trusting  upon  any  other  ground  then
upon  the  favour  of  your  Imperiall  clemencie  and  humani-
tie,  is  mooved  to  undertake  a  thing  of  so  much
difficultie,  being  perswaded  that  hee  having  entred  into
so  many  perils,  your  Majestie  will  not  dislike  the  same,
especially,  if  it  may  appeare  that  it  be  not  damageable
unto  your  royall  Majestie,  and  that  to  your  people  it
will  bring  some  profite  :  of  both  which  things  he  not
doubting,  with  more  willing  minde  hath  prepared  him-
selfe  for  his  destinated  voyage  unto  us  well  liked  of.
For  by  this  meanes  we  perceive,  that  the  profit  which
by  the  mutual  trade  on  both  sides,  al  the  princes  our
neighbors  in  ye  West  do  receive,  your  Imperial  majestie
&  those  that  be  subject  under  your  dominion,  to  their
great  joy  and  benefit  shal  have  the  same,  which  con-
sisteth  in  the  transporting  outward  of  such  things
whereof  we  have  plenty,  &  in  bringing  in  such  things
as  we  stand  in  need  of.  It  cannot  otherwise  be,  but
that  seeing  we  are  borne  and  made  to  have  need  one
of  another,  &  that  wee  are  bound  to  aide  one  another,
but  that  your  imperial  Majestie  wil  wel  like  of  it,  &
by  your  subjects  w'  like  indevor  wil  be  accepted.  For
the increase whereof, if  your imperial Majestie shall

451

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-

adde  the  securitie  of  passage,  with  other  privileges  most
necessary  to  use  the  trade  with  your  men,  your  majestie
shall  doe  that  which  belongeth  to  a  most  honorable  &
liberal  prince,  and  deserve  so  much  of  us,  as  by  no
continuance  or  length  of  time  shalbe  forgotten.  Which
request  of  ours  we  do  most  instantly  desire  to  be  taken
in  good  part  of  your  majestie,  and  so  great  a  benefit
towards  us  &  our  men,  we  shall  endevor  by  diligence
to  requite  when  time  shal  serve  thereunto.  The  God
Almighty  long  preserve  your  Imperial  majestie.

A  letter  of  M.  John  Newbery,  written  from  Alepo,
to  M.  Richard  Hakluit  of  Oxford,  the  28.  of
May,  Anno 1583.

light  welbeloved,  and  my  assured  good  friend,  I
heartily  commend  me  unto  you,  hoping  of  your
good  health,  &c.  After  we  set  saile  from  Graves-
end,  which  was  the  13.  day  of  February  last,  wee
remained  upon  our  coast  untill  the  1 1 .  day  of  March,
and  that  day  we  set  saile  from  Falmouth,  and  never
ankered  till  wee  arrived  in  the  road  of  Tripolie  in  Syria,
which  was  the  last  day  of  Aprill  last  past,  where  wee
[II.  i.  246.]  stayed  14.  dayes  :  and  the  twentie  of  this  present  we
came  hither  to  Alepo,  and  with  Gods  helpe,  within  five
or  sixe  dayes  goe  from  hence  towards  the  Indies.  Since
my  comming  to  Tripolis  I  have  made  very  earnest  in-
quirie  both  there  and  here,  for  the  booke  of  Cosmo-
graphie  of  Abilfada  Ismael,  but  by  no  meanes  can  heare
of  it.  Some  say  that  possibly  it  may  be  had  in  Persia,
but  notwithstanding  I  will  not  faile  to  make  inquirie
for  it,  both  in  Babylon,  and  in  Balsara,  and  if  I  can
finde  it  in  any  of  these  places,  I  wil  send  it  you  from
thence.  The  letter  which  you  delivered  me  for  to
copy  out,  that  came  from  M.  Thomas  Stevens  in  Goa,
as  also  the  note  you  gave  mee  of  Francis  Fernandes
the  Portugal,  I  brought  thence  with  me  among  other
writings  unawares,  the  which  I  have  sent  you  here  in-
closed. Here is great preparation for the warres in

452

Abilfada  Is-
maei  his  Cos-
mographie.

LETTERS FROM JOHN NEWBERY  a.d.

1583-
Persia,  and  from  hence  is  gone  the  Bassa  of  a  towne
called  Rahemetj  and  shortly  after  goeth  the  Bassa  of
Tripolis,  and  the  Bassa  of  Damasco,  but  they  have  not
all  with  them  above  6000.  men  from  hence,  and  they
goe  to  a  towne  called  Asmerome,  which  is  three  dayes
journey  from  Trapezunde,  where  they  shal  meete  with
divers  captaines  and  souldiers  that  come  from  Constanti-
nople and  other  places  thereabout,  which  goe  altogether
into  Persia.  This  yeere  many  men  goe  into  the  warres,
and  so  hath  there  every  yeere  since  the  beginning  thereof,
which  is  eight  yeeres  or  thereabouts,  but  very  fewe  of
them  returne  againe.  Notwithstanding,  they  get  of  the
Persians,  and  make  castles  and  holds  in  their  countrey.
I  pray  you  make  my  hearty  commendations  to  master
Peter  Guillame,  and  master  Philip  Jones,  and  to  M.
Walter  Warner,  and  to  all  the  rest  of  our  friends.
Master  Fitch  hath  him  heartily  commended  unto  you :
and  so  I  commit  you  to  the  tuition  of  the  Almightie,
who  blesse  and  keepe  you,  and  send  us  a  joy  full  meet-
ing. From  Alepo,  the  28.  of  May  1583.

Your  loving  friend  to  command  in  all  that  I  may.

John  Newberie.

Another  letter  of  the  said  M.  Newberie,  written
to  Master  Leonard  Poore  of  London,  from
Alepo.

Ight  welbeloved, my  very  heartie  commendations
9  G^ unto  you,  and  the  rest  of  my  friends  remembred.
'  My last I sent you was the 25. of  February

last,  from  Dele  out  of  the  Downes,  after  which  time
with  contrary  windes  wee  remained  upon  our  owne  coast,
untill  the  11.  day  of  March,  and  then  wee  set  saile  from  March  11.
Falmouth,  and  the  thirteenth  day  the  winde  came  contrary
with  a  very  great  storme,  which  continued  eight  dayes,
and  in  this  great  storme  wee  had  some  of  our  goods
wette,  but  God  bee  thanked  no  great  hurt  done.  After
which  time  we  sailed  with  a  faire  wind  within  the
Streights, and so remained  at Sea,  and ankered  at no

453

A.D.
1583.

The  last  of
April.

Currall.
Amber  greese.
Sope.
Broken  glasse.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

place  until  our  comming  into  the  roade  of  Tripolis  in
Syria,  which  was  the  last  day  of  April,  This  was  a
very  good  passage.  God  make  us  thankfuU  for  it.  The
foureteenth  day  of  this  present  wee  came  from  Tripolis,
and  the  twentieth  day  arrived  here  in  Alepo,  and  with
the  helpe  of  God  to  morrowe  or  next  day,  wee  beginne
our  voyage  towards  Babylon  and  Balsara,  and  so  into
India.  Our  friend  Master  Barret  hath  him  commended
to  you,  who  hath  sent  you  in  the  Emanuel  a  ball  of
Nutmegs  for  the  small  trifles  you  sent  him,  which  I
hope  long  since  you  have  received.  Also  hee  hath  by
his  letter  certified  you  in  what  order  hee  solde  those
things,  whereof  I  can  say  nothing,  because  I  have  not
seene  the  accompt  thereof,  neither  have  demaunded  it :
for  ever  since  our  comming  hither  hee  hath  bene  still
busie  about  the  dispatch  of  the  shippe,  and  our  voyage,
and  I  likewise  in  buying  of  things  here  to  cary  to  Balsara,
and  the  Indies.  Wee  have  bought  in  currall  for  1200.
and  odde  ducats,  and  amber  for  foure  hundreth  ducates,
and  some  sope  and  broken  glasse,  with  all  other  small
trifles,  all  which  things  I  hope  will  serve  very  wel  for
those  places  that  wee  shall  goe  unto.  All  the  rest  of
the  accompt  of  the  Barke  Reinolds  was  sent  home  in
the  Emanuel,  which  was  3600.  ducats,  which  is  200.
pound  more  then  it  was  rated.  For  master  Staper  rated
it  but  1 100.  li.  and  it  is  1300.  pound,  so  that  our  part
is  200.  pound.  Besides  such  profit  as  it  shall  please
God  to  sende  thereof:  wherefore  you  shall  doe  very
well  to  speake  to  M.  Staper  for  the  accompt.  And  if
you  would  content  your  selfe  to  travell  for  three  or
foure  yeeres,  I  would  wish  you  to  come  hither  or  goe
to  Cairo,  if  any  goe  thither.  For  wee  doubt  not  if  you
had  remained  there  but  three  or  foure  moneths,  you
would  like  so  well  of  the  place,  that  I  thinke  you  would
not  desire  to  returne  againe  in  three  or  foure  yeeres.
And,  if  it  should  be  my  chance  to  remaine  in  any  place
out  of  England,  I  would  choose  this  before  all  other
that  I know. My  reason  is,  the  place  is  healthfull  and

454

LETTERS FROM JOHN NEWBERY  ad

1583.
pleasant,  and  the  gaines  very  good,  and  no  doubt  the
profit  will  bee  hereafter  better,  things  being  used  in  good
order :  for  there  should  come  in  every  ship  the  fourth
part  of  her  Cargason  in  money,  which  would  helpe  to
put  away  our  commodities  at  a  very  good  price.  Also
to  have  two  very  good  ships  to  come  together,  would
doe  very  well :  for  in  so  doing,  the  danger  of  the  voyage
might  be  accompted  as  little  as  from  London  to  Antwerpe.
Master  Giles  Porter  and  master  Edmund  Porter,  went  [II.  i.  247.]
from  Tripolis  in  a  small  barke  to  Jaffa,  the  same  day
that  we  came  from  thence,  which  was  the  14  day  of  this
present,  so  that  no  doubt  but  long  since  they  are  in
Jerusalem  :  God  send  them  and  us  safe  return  e.  At  this
instant  I  have  received  the  account  of  M.  Barret,  and
the  rest  of  the  rings,  with  two  and  twentie  duckats,  two
medines  in  readie  money.  So  there  is  nothing  remaining
in  his  hands  but  a  few  bookes,  and  with  Thomas
Bostocke  I  left  certaine  small  trifles,  which  I  pray  you
demaund.  And  so  once  againe  with  my  hearty  com-
mendations I  commit  you  to  the  tuition  of  the  almightie,
who alwayes preserve us. From Aleppo the 29 of

^ ^ ^'  Yours  assured,  John  Newberie.

Another  letter  of  Master  Newberie  to  the  afore-
saide  M. Poore,  written  from  Babylon.

Y  last  1  sent  you,  was  the  29  of  May
last  past  from  Aleppo,  by  George  Gill
the  purser  of  the  Tiger,  which  the  last
day  of  the  same  moneth  came  from
thence,  &  arrived  at  Feluge  the  19  day
of  June,  which  Feluge  is  one  dayes
journey  from  hence.  Notwithstanding
some  of  our  company  came  not  hither  till  the  last  day
of  the  last  moneth,  which  was  for  want  of  Camels  to
cary  our  goods :  for  at  this  time  of  the  yeere,  by  reason
'of  the  great  heate  that  is  here.  Camels  are  very  scant
to  be  gotten. And  since  our  comming  hither  we  have

455

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

found  very  small  sales,  but  divers  say  that  in  the  winter

our  commodities  will  be  very  well  sold,  I  pray  God  their

words may  proove true. I thinke cloth, kersies &

tinne, have never  bene here  at so low prices  as they

are  now. Notwithstanding,  if  I  had  here  so  much  readie

money  as  the  commodities  are  woorth,  I  would  not  doubt

to make a very good profite of this voiage hither,

and to Balsara, and so by Gods helpe there will be

reasonable profite  made  of  the  voiage. But  with  halfe

The  best  sort money  &  halfe  commoditie,  may  be  bought  here  the  best

ff^f  T^  ^^ ^°^^  °^  spices,  and  other  commodities  that  are  brought

'  from  the Indies,  and without  money there is here  at

this  instant  small  good  to  be  done. With  Gods  helpe

Balsam. two  dayes  hence,  I  minde  to  goe  from  hence  to  Balsara,

Ormus.  and  from  thence  of  force  I  must  goe  to  Ormus  for  want

of  a  man  that  speaketh  the  Indian  tongue. At  my  being

in Aleppo I hired two Nazaranies, and one of  them

hath bene  twise in the Indies, and hath  the language

very  well,  but  he  is  a  very  lewde  fellow,  and  therefore

I  will  not  take  him  with  me.

Here follow the prices of wares as they are worth
here  at  this  instant.

The  prices  of /^Loves  and  Maces,  the  bateman, 5 duckats.
^^"^ f  V><  Cynamom 6  duckats,  and  few  to  be  gotten.

Nutmegs,  the bateman, 45 medins, and 40 medins
maketh  a  duckat.
Ginger  40  medins.
Pepper,  75  medins.
Turbecta,  the  bateman, 50  medins.
Neel the churle, 70 duckats, and a churle is 27
rottils  and  a  halfe  of  Aleppo.

Silke,  much  better  then  that  which  commeth  from
Persia,  11  duckats  and  a  halfe  the  bateman,  and  every
bateman  here  maketh  7  pound  and  5  ounces  English
waight. From  Babylon  the  20  day  of  July, 1583.

Yours,  John  Newberie.

456

LETTERS FROM JOHN NEWBERY

A.D.
1583.

Master Newberie  his  letter  from  Ormus, to M.
John  Eldred  and  William  Shals  at  Balsara.

Ight  welbeloved  and  my  assured  good
friends,  I  heartily  commend  me  unto
you,  hoping  of  your  good  healths,  &c.
To  certifie  you  of  my  voiage,  after  1
departed  from  you,  time  wil  not  permit  :
but  the  4  of  this  present  we  arrived
here,  &  the  10  day  I  with  the  rest  were
committed  to  prison,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  next
moneth,  the  Captaine  wil  send  us  all  in  his  ship  for  Goa.
The  cause  why  we  are  taken,  as  they  say,  is,  for  that
I  brought  letters  from  Don  Antonio.  But  the  trueth
is,  Michael  Stropene  was  the  onely  cause,  upon  letters
that  his  brother  wrote  him  from  Aleppo.  God  knoweth
how  we  shall  be  delt  withall  in  Goa,  and  therfore  if  you
can  procure  our  masters  to  send  the  king  of  Spaine  his
letters  for  our  releasement,  you  should  doe  us  great
good :  for  they  cannot  with  justice  put  us  to  death.  It
may  be  that  they  will  cut  our  throtes,  or  keepe  us
long  in  prison :  Gods  will  be  done.  All  those  com-  [I^-  i-  248.]
modities  that  I  brought  hither,  had  beene  very  well  sold,
if  this  trouble  had  not  chanced.  You  shall  do  well  to
send  with  all  speed  a  messenger  by  land  from  Balsara
to  Aleppo,  for  to  certifie  of  this  mischance,  although  it
cost  thirtie  or  forty  crownes,  for  that  we  may  be  the
sooner  released,  and  I  shalbe  the  better  able  to  recover
this  againe  which  is  now  like  to  be  lost :  I  pray  you
make  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.  From  out  of  the
prison  in  Ormuz,  this 21 of  September, 1583.

[His  second

457

A.D.

1583-

Michael  Stro-
pene  an
Italian  accused
our  men  to
be  spies.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

His second Letter to  the foresaid Master  John
Eldred  and  William  Shales.

He  barke  of  the  Jewes  is  arrived  here
two  daies  past,  by  whom  I  know  you
did  write,  but  your  letters  are  not  like
to  come  to  my  handes.  This  bringer
hath  shewed  me  here  very  great  cour-
tesie,  wherfore  I  pray  you  shew  him
what  favor  you  may.  About  the  middle
of  the  next  moneth  I  thinke  we  shall  depart  from  hence,
God  be  our  guide.  I  thinke  Andrew  will  goe  by  land
to  Aleppo,  wherein  I  pray  you  further  him  what  you
may :  but  if  he  should  not  goe,  then  I  pray  you
dispatch  away  a  messenger  with  as  much  speede  as  pos-
sible you  may.  I  can  say  no  more,  but  do  for  me  as
you  would  I  should  do  for  you  in  the  like  cause,  and
so  with  my  very  hearty  commendations,  &c.  From  out
of the prison in Ormuz,  this 24 day  of September,

Yours,  John  Newberie.

His third Letter to Maister Leonard Poore,
written  from  Goa.

Y  last  1  sent  you  was  from  Ormuz,
wherby  I  certified  you  what  had  hap-
pened there  unto  me,  and  the  rest  of
my  company,  which  was,  that  foure
dayes  after  our  arrivall  there,  we  were
all  committed  to  prison,  except  one
Italian  which  came  with  me  from
Aleppo,  whom  the  Captaine  never  examined,  onely
demaunded  what  countryman  he  was,  but  I  make
account  Michael  Stropene,  who  accused  us,  had  informed
the  Captaine  of  him.  The  first  day  we  arrived  there,
this  Stropene  accused  us  that  we  were  spies  sent  from
Don  Antonio,  besides  divers  other  lies : notwithstanding

458

LETTERS FROM JOHN NEWBERY  ad

1584.
if  we  had  beene  of  any  other  countrey  then  of  Eng-
land, we  might  freely  have  traded  with  them.  And
although  we  be  Englishmen,  I  know  no  reason  to  the
contrary,  but  that  we  may  trade  hither  and  thither  as
well  as  other  nations,  for  all  nations  doe,  and  may  come
freely  to  Ormuz,  as  Frenchmen,  Flemmings,  Almains,
Hungarians,  Italians,  Greekes,  Armenians,  Nazaranies,
Turkes  and  Moores,  Jewes  &  Gentiles,  Persians,  Mos-
covites,  and  there  is  no  nation  that  they  seeke  for  to
trouble,  except  ours :  wherefore  it  were  contrary  to  all
justice  and  reason  that  they  should  suffer  all  nations  to
trade  with  them,  and  to  forbid  us.  But  now  I  have
as  great  liberty  as  any  other  nation,  except  it  be  to  go
out  of  the  countrey,  which  thing  as  yet  I  desire  not.
But  I  thinke  hereafter,  and  before  it  be  long,  if  I  shall
be  desirous  to  go  from  hence,  that  they  wil  not  deny
me  licence.  Before  we  might  be  suffered  to  come  out
of  prison,  I  was  forced  to  put  in  suerties  for  2000
pardaus,  not  to  depart  from  hence  without  licence  of
the  viceroy :  otherwise  except  this,  we  have  as  much
libertie  as  any  other  nation,  for  I  have  our  goods
againe,  &  have  taken  an  house  in  the  chiefest  streete  in
the  towne,  called  the  Rue  drette,  where  we  sell  our
goods.

There were  two  causes  which  moved  the  captaine  of  Two  causes  of
Ormus  to  imprison  us,  &  afterwards  to  send  us  hither.  "^'^  ^^"^  ^^~
The  first  was,  because  Michael  Stropene  had  accused  us  PJ""""^^"

r  '  1  . 1  r  A  All ^fJflUS.

or  many  matters,  which  were  most  raise.  And  the
second  was  for  that  M.  Drake  at  his  being  at  Maluco,
caused  two  pieces  of  his  ordinance  to  be  shot  at  a
gallion  of  the  kings  of  Portugall,  as  they  say.  But  of
these  things  I  did  not  know  at  Ormus :  and  in  the
ship  that  we  were  sent  in  came  the  chiefest  justice  in
Ormus,  who  was  called  Aveador  generall  of  that  place,
he  had  beene  there  three  yeeres,  so  that  now  his  time
was  expired :  which  Aveador  is  a  great  friend  to  the
captaine  of  Ormus,  who,  certaine  dayes  after  our  com-
ming from thence,  sent  for  mee  into  his  chamber,  and

459

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

there  beganne  to  demaund  of  me  many  things,  to  the
which  I  answered :  and  amongst  the  rest,  he  said,  that
Master  Drake  was  sent  out  of  England  with  many  ships,
and  came  to  Maluco,  and  there  laded  cloves,  and  finding
a  gallion  there  of  the  kings  of  Portugall,  hee  caused
two  pieces  of  his  greatest  ordinance  to  be  shot  at  the
same  :  and  so  perceiving  that  this  did  greatly  grieve
them,  I  asked,  if  they  would  be  revenged  of  me  for
that  which  M.  Drake  had  done  ?  To  the  which  he
answered,  No  :  although  his  meaning  was  to  the  con-
trary.
[II.  i.  249,]  He  said  moreover,  that  the  cause  why  the  captaine
of  Ormus  did  send  me  for  Goa,  was,  for  that  the
Viceroy  would  understand  of  mee,  what  newes  there
was  of  Don  Antonio,  and  whether  he  were  in  England,
yea  or  no,  and  that  it  might  be  all  for  the  best  that
I  was  sent  hither,  the  which  I  trust  in  God  wil  so
fall  out,  although  contrary  to  his  expectation :  for  had
it  not  pleased  God  to  put  into  the  minds  of  the  arch-
bishop and  other  two  Padres  or  Jesuits  of  S.  Pauls
colledge  to  stand  our  friends,  we  might  have  rotted  in
prison.  The  archbishop  is  a  very  good  man,  who  hath
two  yong  men  to  his  servantes,  the  one  of  them  was
borne  at  Hamborough,  and  is  called  Bernard  Borgers :
and  the  other  was  borne  at  Enchuysen,  whose  name  is
The  author  of  John  Linscot,  who  did  us  great  pleasure  :  for  by  them
the  book  of  the  ^^  archbishop  was  many  times  put  in  minde  of  us.
And  the  two  good  fathers  of  S.  Paul,  who  travelled
very  much  for  us,  the  one  of  them  is  called  Padre
Marke,  who  was  borne  in  Bruges  in  Flanders,  and  the
II  This  is  he  other  was  borne  in  Wiltshire  in  England,  and  is  called
lihhthT^'  II  Padre  Thomas  Stevens.

from  Goa  are  Also  I  chanced  to  iinde  here  a  young  man,  who  was
before  put  borne  in  Antwerpe,  but  the  most  part  of  his  bringing
downe,andhe  up  hath  beene  in  London,  his  name  is  Francis  de  Rea,
was  somettmes  ^j^^  sNxXh  him  it  was  my  hap  to  be  acquainted  in
ledsie  in  Aleppo,  who  also  hath  done  me  great  pleasure  here.

Oxford.  In  the prison at Ormus we remained  many  dayes,

460

LETTERS FROM JOHN NEWBERY  ad

^584.
also  we  lay  a  long  time  at  sea  comaning  hither,  and
forthwith  at  our  arrivall  here  were  caried  to  prison,
and  the  next  day  after  were  sent  for  before  the  Aveador,
who  is  the  chiefest  justice,  to  be  examined :  and  when
we  were  examined,  he  presently  sent  us  backe  againe
to  prison.

And after  our being  here  in  prison 13 daies,  James  James  Storie
Storie  went  into the  monastery  of  S. Paul, where he  ^^^^^' P^^^^^^'-
remaineth,  and  is  made  one  of  the  company,  which  life
he  liketh  very  well.

And upon S. Thomas day (which was 22 dayes  ^%  arrived
after  our  arrivall  here) I came  out  of  prison,  and the  ^1?/^ ,  ^°

.  , ,  of  Vi  OVCfUuBY

next  day  after  came  out  Ralph  Fitch,  and  William  Bets. jrg^.

If  these  troubles  had  not  chanced,  I  had  beene  in
possibility  to  have  made  as  good  a  voyage  as  ever  any
man  made  with  so  much  money.  Many  of  our  things
I  have  solde  very  well,  both  here  and  at  Ormus  in
prison,  notwithstanding  the  captaine  willed  me  (if  I
would)  to  sell  what  I  could  before  we  imbarked  :  &
so  with  officers  I  went  divers  times  out  of  the  castle
in  the  morning,  and  solde  things,  and  at  night  returned
againe  to  the  prison,  and  all  things  that  I  solde  they
did  write,  and  at  our  imbarking  from  thence,  the  cap-
tain gave  order  that  I  should  deliver  all  my  mony  with
the  goods  into  the  hands  of  the  scrivano,  or  purser  of
the  ship,  which  I  did,  and  the  scrivano  made  a  remem-
brance, which  he  left  there  with  the  captaine,  that  my
selfe  and  the  rest  with  money  &  goods  he  should  deliver
into  the  hands  of  the  Aveador  generall  of  India  :  but
at  our  arrivall  here,  the  Aveador  would  neither  meddle
with  goods  nor  money,  for  that  he  could  not  prove
any  thing  against  us  :  wherefore  the  goods  remained  in
the  ship  9  or  10  daies  after  our  arrivall,  and  then,  for
that  the  ship  was  to  saile  from  thence,  the  scrivano
sent  the  goods  on  shore,  and  here  they  remained  a  day
and  a  night,  and  no  body  to  receive  them.  In  the  end
they  suffered  this  bringer  to  receive  them,  who  came
with me from Ormus,  and put them into an house

461

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

which  he  had  hired  for  me,  where  they  remained  foure
or  five  daies.  But  afterward  when  they  should  deliver
the  money,  it  was  concluded  by  the  justice,  that  both
the  money  and  goods  should  be  delivered  into  the
positors  hands,  where  they  remained  fourteene  dayes
after  my  comming  out  of  prison.  At  my  being  in
Aleppo,  I  bought  a  fountaine  of  silver  and  gilt,  sixe
knives,  sixe  spoones,  and  one  forke  trimmed  with  corall
for  five  and  twentie  chekins,  which  the  captaine  of
Ormus  did  take,  and  payed  for  the  same  twentie  par-
daos,  which  is  one  hundred  larines,  and  was  worth
there  or  here  one  hundred  chekins.  Also  he  had  five
emrauds  set  in  golde,  which  were  woorth  five  hundred
or  sixe  hundred  crownes,  and  payed  for  the  same  an
hundred  pardaos.  Also  he  had  nineteene  and  a  halfe
pikes  of  cloth,  which  cost  in  London  twenty  shillings
the  pike,  and  was  worth  9  or  10  crownes  the  pike,
and  he  payed  for  the  same  twelve  larines  a  pike.  Also
he  had  two  pieces  of  greene  Kersies,  which  were  worth
foure  and  twentie  pardaos  the  piece,  and  payd  for  them
sixteene  pardaos  a  piece  :  besides  divers  other  trifles,
that  the  officers  and  others  had  in  the  like  order,  and
some  for  nothing  at  all.  But  the  cause  of  all  this  was
Michael  Stropene,  which  came  to  Ormus  not  woorth  a
penie,  and  now  hath  thirtie  or  fortie  thousand  crownes,
and  he  grieveth  that  any  other  stranger  should  trade
thither  but  himselfe.  But  that  shall  not  skill,  for  I
trust  in  God  to  goe  both  thither  and  hither,  and  to
buy  and  sell  as  freely  as  he  or  any  other.  Here  is
very  great  good  to  be  done  in  divers  of  our  commodi-
ties, and  in  like  manner  there  is  great  profite  to  be
made  with  commodities  of  this  countrey,  to  be  carried
to  Aleppo.

It  were  long  for  me  to  write,  and  tedious  for  you  to
read  of  all  things  that  have  passed  since  my  parting  from
you.  But  of  all  the  troubles  that  have  chanced  since
mine  arrivall  in  Ormus,  this  bringer  is  able  to  certifie
you. I  mind  to  stay  here  :  wherefore  if  you  will  write

462

A LETTER FROM RALPH FITCH

A.D,

1584.

unto  me,  you  may  send  your  letters  to  some  friend  at
Lisbone,  &  from  thence  by  the  ships  they  may  be  con-
veyed hither.  Let  the  direction  of  your  letters  be  either  [II.  i.  250.]
in  Portuguise  or  Spanish,  whereby  they  may  come  the
better  to  my  hands.  From  Goa  this  20  day  of
Januarie. 1584.

A Letter written from Goa by Master Ralph
Fitch to Master  Leonard Poore  abovesaid.

Oving  friend  Master  Poore,  &c.  Since  my
departure  from  Aleppo,  I  have  not  writ-
ten unto  you  any  letters,  by  reason  that
at  Babylon  I  was  sicke  of  the  fluxe,  and
being  sicke,  I  went  from  thence  for  Bal-
sara,  which  was  twelve  dayes  journey
downe  the  river  Tygris,  where  we  had
extreame  hot  weather,  which  was  good  for  my  disease,
ill  fare,  and  worse  lodging,  by  reason  our  boat  was  pes-
tered with  people.  In  eight  daies,  that  which  I  did  eate
was  very  small,  so  that  if  we  had  stayed  two  dayes  longer
upon  the  water,  I  thinke  I  had  died :  but  comming  to
Balsara,  presently  I  mended,  1  thanke  God.  There  we
stayed  14  dayes,  and  then  we  imbarked  our  selves
for  Ormuz,  where  we  arrived  the  fifth  of  September,
and  were  put  in  prison  the  ninth  of  the  same  moneth,
where  we  continued  untill  the  11  of  October,  and
then  were  shipt  for  this  citie  of  Goa  in  the  captaines
ship,  with  an  114  horses,  and  about  200  men:  and
passing  by  Diu  &  Chaul,  where  we  went  on  land  to  Diu.
water  the  20  of  November,  we  arrived  at  Goa  the  29  <^'^'^*^-
of  the  said  moneth,  where  for  our  better  intertainment
we  were  presently  put  into  a  faire  strong  prison,  where
we  continued  untill  the  22  of  December.  It  was  the
will  of  God  that  we  found  there  2  Padres,  the  one  an
Englishman,  the  other  a  Flemming.  The  Englishmans
name  is  Padre  Thomas  Stevens,  the  others  Padre  Marco,
of  the  order  of  S.  Paul.  These  did  sue  for  us  unto
the  Viceroy  and  other  officers,  and  stood  us  in  as  much

463

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

stead,  as  our  lives  and  goods  were  woorth  :  for  if  they
had  not  stucke  to  us,  if  we  had  escaped  with  our  lives,
yet  we  had  had  long  imprisonment.

After 14 dayes imprisonment  they  offered  us,  if  we
could  put  in  suerties  for  2000  duckats,  we  should  goe
abroad  in  the  towne  :  which  when  we  could  not  doe,  the
said Padres  found suerties  for us,  that  we should not
depart the  countrey  without  the  licence  of  the  Viceroy.
The  Italians \i  doth  spite  the  Italians  to  see  us  abroad : and  many
our  great  ene-  ^a^XY^  at our  delivery. The  painter  is  in  the  cloister
trade  in  the °^ ^- P^^l, and is of their order,  and  liketh there
East.  very  well. While  we were in prison, both at Ormuz

and  here,  there  was  a  great  deale  of  our  goods  pilfered
and  lost,  and  we  have  beene  at  great  charges  in  gifts  and
otherwise,  so  that  a  great  deale  of  our  goods  is  consumed.
There  is  much  of  our  things  which  wil  sell  very  well,  &
some  we  shall  get  nothing  for.  I  hope  in  God  that  at
the  returne  of  the  Viceroy,  which  is  gone  to  Chaul  and
to  Diu,  they  say,  to  winne  a  castle  of  the  Moores,  whose
returne  is  thought  will  be  about  Easter,  then  we  shall
get  our  libertie,  and  our  suerties  discharged.  Then  I
thinke  it  wil  be  our  best  way,  either  one  or  both  to
returne,  because  our  troubles  have  bene  so  great,  &  so
much  of  our  goods  spoyled  and  lost.  But  if  it  please
God  that  I  come  into  England,  by  Gods  helpe,  I  will
returne  hither  againe.  It  is  a  brave  and  pleasant  coun-
trey, and  very  fruitfull.  The  summer  is  almost  all  the
yeere  long,  but  the  chiefest  at  Christmas.

The  day  and  the  night  are  all  of  one  length,  very  litle
difference,  and  marveilous  great  store  of  fruits.  For  all
our  great  troubles,  yet  are  we  fat  and  well  liking,  for
victuals  are  here  plentie  and  good  cheape.  And  here  I
will  passe  over  to  certifie  you  of  strange  things,  untill  our
meeting,  for  it  would  be  too  long  to  write  thereof.  And
thus  I  commit  you  to  God,  who  ever  preserve  you  and
us  all.  From  Goa  in  the  East  Indies  the  25  of  Januarie
1584.

Yours  to  command,  Ralph  Fitch.
464

RALPH FITCH

A.D.
1583-91.

The  voyage  of  M.  Ralph  Fitch  marchant  of  Lon-
don by  the  way  of  Tripolis  in  Syria,  to  Ormus,
and  so  to  Goa  in  the  East  India,  to  Cambaia,
and  all  the  kingdome  of  Zelabdim  Echebar  the
great  Mogor,  to  the  mighty  river  Ganges,  and
downe  to  Bengala,  to  Bacola,  and  Chonderi,  to
Pegu,  to  Imahay  in  the  kingdome  of  Siam,  and
backe  to  Pegu,  and  from  thence  to  Malacca,
Zeilan,  Cochin,  and  all  the  coast  of  the  East
India:  begunne  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1583,
and  ended  1591,  wherein  the  strange  rites,
maners,  and  customes  of  those  people,  and  the
exceeding  rich  trade  and  commodities  of  those
countries  are  faithfully  set  downe  and  diligently
described,  by  the  aforesaid  M. Ralph Fitch.

N  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1583,  I  Ralph
Fitch  of  London  marchant  being  desirous
to  see  the  countreys  of  the  East  India,  in
the  company  of  M.  John  Newberie  mar-
chant (which  had  beene  at  Ormus  once
before)  of  William  Leedes  Jeweller,  and
James  Story  Painter,  being  chiefly  set  [II.  i.  251,]
foorth  by  the  right  worshipful!  Sir  Edward  Osborne
knight,  and  M.  Richard  Staper  citizens  and  marchants
of  London,  did  ship  my  selfe  in  a  ship  of  London  called
the  Tyger,  wherein  we  went  for  Tripolis  in  Syria  :  &  from
thence  we  tooke  the  way  for  Aleppo,  which  we  went  in
seven  dayes  with  the  Carovan.  Being  in  Aleppo,  and
finding  good  company,  we  went  from  thence  to  Birra,
which is  two  dayes  and  an  halfe  travaile  with Camels.

Birra  is  a  little  towne,  but  very  plentifull  of  victuals :  Birra.
and  neere  to  the  wall  of  the  towne  runneth  the  river
of  Euphrates.  Here  we  bought  a  boate  and  agreed  with
a  master  and  bargemen,  for  to  go  to  Babylon.  These
boats  be  but  for  one  voiage  ;  for  the  streame  doth  runne
V  465

2G

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

so  fast  downewardes  that  they  cannot  returne.  They
carie  you  to  a  towne  which  they  call  Felugia,  and  there
you  sell  the  boate  for  a  litle  money,  for  that  which  cost
you  fiftie  at  Birra  you  sell  there  for  seven  or  eight.
From  Birra  to  Felugia  is  sixteene  dayes  journey,  it  is
not  good  that  one  boate  goe  alone,  for  if  it  should  chance
to  breake,  you  should  have  much  a  doe  to  save  your
goods  from  the  Arabians,  which  be  alwayes  there  abouts
robbing :  and  in  the  night  when  your  boates  be  made
fast,  it  is  necessarie  that  you  keepe  good  watch.  For  the
Arabians  that  bee  theeves,  will  come  swimming  and  steale
your  goods  and  flee  away,  against  which  a  gunne  is  very
good,  for  they  doe  feare  it  very  much.  In  the  river  of
Euphrates  from  Birra  to  Felugia  there  be  certaine  places
where  you  pay  custome,  so  many  Medines  for  a  some
or  Camels  lading,  and  certaine  raysons  and  sope,  which
is  for  the  sonnes  of  Aborise,  which  is  Lord  of  the  Arabians
and all  that  great  desert, and  hath  some  villages  upon

Felugia.  the  river.  Felugia  where  you  unlade  your  goods  which
come  from  Birra  is  a  little  village :  from  whence  you  goe
to  Babylon  in  a  day.

Babylon.  Babylon  is  a  towne  not  very  great  but  very  populous,
and  of  great  traffike  of  strangers,  for  that  it  is  the  way  to
Persia,  Turkia  and  Arabia :  and  from  thence  doe  goe
Carovans  for  these  and  other  places.  Here  are  great
store  of  victuals,  which  come  from  Armenia  downe  the
river  of  Tygris.  They  are  brought  upon  raftes  made  of
goates  skinnes  blowne  full  of  winde  and  hordes  layde
upon  them  :  and  thereupon  they  lade  their  goods  which
are  brought  downe  to  Babylon,  which  being  discharged
they  open  their  skinnes,  and  carry  them  backe  by  Camels,
to  serve  another  time.  Babylon  in  times  past  did  belong
to  the  kingdome  of  Persia,  but  nowe  is  subject  to  the
Turke.  Over  against  Babylon  there  is  a  very  faire  vil-
lage from  whence  you  passe  to  Babylon  upon  a  long
bridge  made  of  boats,  and  tyed  to  a  great  chaine  of
yron,  which  is  made  fast  on  either  side  of  the  river.
When  any  boates  are  to passe up  or  downe  the  river,

466

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
they take away  certaine of the boates untill they be
past.

The  Tower  of  Babel  is  built  on  this  side  the  river  The  mcer  of
Tygris,  towardes  Arabia  from  the  towne  about  seven  or  '^^'^'^''•
eight  miles,  which  tower  is  ruinated  on  all  sides,  and  with
the  fall  thereof  hath  made  as  it  were  a  litle  mountaine,
so  that  it  hath  no  shape  at  all :  it  was  made  of  brickes
dried  in  the  sonrie,  and  certaine  canes  and  leaves  of
the  palme  tree  layed  betwixt  the  brickes.  There  is
no  entrance  to  be  scene  to  goe  into  it.  It  doth  stand
upon  a  great  plaine  betwixt  the  rivers  of  Euphrates  and
Tygris.

By the river Euphrates two dayes journey from  Boy  ling  pitch
Babylon  at  a  place  called  Ait,  in  a  fielde  neere  unto  it,  is  ^^"^["''^^h

J  ,  .  ^  1111  -11 issuing  out  of

a  strange  thing  to  see :  a  mouth  that  doth  contmually  ^^^  ^°^^^_
throwe  foorth  against  the  ayre  boyling  pitch  with  a  filthy
smoke :  which  pitch  doth  runne  abroad  into  a  great  fielde
which  is  alwayes  full  thereof.  The  Moores  say  that  it
is  the  mouth  of  hell.  By  reason  of  the  great  quantitie
of  it,  the  men  of  that  countrey  doe  pitch  their  boates  two
or  three  inches  thicke  on  the  out  side,  so  that  no  water
doth  enter  into  them.  Their  boates  be  called  Danec.
When  there  is  great  store  of  water  in  Tygris  you  may
goe  from  Babylon  to  Basora  in  8  or  9  dayes :  if  there  be
small  store  it  will  cost  you  the  more  dayes.

Basora  in  times  past  was  under  the  Arabians,  but  now
is  subject  to  the  Turke.  But  some  of  them  the  Turke
cannot  subdue,  for  that  they  holde  certaine  Ilandes  in  the
river  Euphrates  which  the  Turke  cannot  winne  of  them.
They  be  theeves  all  and  have  no  setled  dwelling,  but
remove  from  place  to  place  with  their  Camels,  goates,  and
horses,  wives  and  children  and  all.  They  have  large
blew  gownes,  their  wives  eares  and  noses  are  ringed  very
full  of  rings  of  copper  and  silver,  and  they  weare  rings
of  copper  about  their  legs.

Basora  standeth  neere  the  gulfe  of  Persia,  and  is  a
towne  of  great  trade  of  spices  and  drugges  which  come
from  Ormus. Also  there  is  great  store  of  wheate,  ryce,

467

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

and  dates  growing  thereabout,  wherewith  they  serve
Babylon  and  all  the  countrey,  Ormus,  and  all  the  partes
of  India.  I  went  from  Basora  to  Ormus  downe  the  gulfe
of  Persia  in  a  certaine  shippe  made  of  boordes,  and  sowed
together  with  cayro,  which  is  threede  made  of  the  huske
of  Cocoes,  and  certaine  canes  or  strawe  leaves  sowed  upon
the  seames  of  the  hordes  which  is  the  cause  that  they
leake  very  much.  And  so  having  Persia  alwayes  on  the
left  hande,  and  the  coast  of  Arabia  on  the  right  hande
we  passed  many  Ilandes,  and  among  others  the  famous

[II.  i.  252.]  Hande  Baharim  from  whence  come  the  best  pearles  which
be  round  and  Orient,

Ormus.  Ormus  is  an  Island  in circuit  about  five  and  twentie

or  thirtie  miles,  and  is  the  driest  Island  in  the  world :
for  there  is  nothing  growing  in  it  but  onely  salt ;  for  their
water,  wood,  or  victuals,  and  all  things  necessary  come
out  of  Persia,  which  is  about  twelve  miles  from  thence.
All  the  Hands  thereabout  be  very  fruitfull,  from  whence
all  kinde  of  victuals  are  sent  unto  Ormus.  The  Portu-
gales  have  a  castle  here  which  standeth  neere  unto  the
sea,  wherein  there  is  a  Captaine  for  the  king  of  Portugale
having  under  him  a  convenient  number  of  souldiers,
wherof  some  part  remaine  in  the  castle,  and  some  in  the
towne.  In  this  towne  are  marchants  of  all  Nations,  and
many  Moores  and  Gentiles.  Here  is  very  great  trade  of
all  sortes  of  spices,  drugs,  silke,  cloth  of  silke,  fine  tapes-
trie  of  Persia,  great  store  of  pearles  which  come  from  the
Isle  of  Baharim,  and  are  the  best  pearles  of  all  others,  and
many  horses  of  Persia,  which  serve  all  India.  They  have
a  Moore  to  their  king,  which  is  chosen  and  governed  by
the  Portugales.  Their  women  are  very  strangely  attyred,
wearing  on  their  noses,  eares,  neckes,  armes  and  legges
many  rings  set  with  jewels,  and  lockes  of  silver  and  golde
in  their  eares,  and  a  long  barre  of  golde  upon  the  side
of  their  noses.  Their  eares  with  the  weight  of  their
jewels  be  worne  so  wide,  that  a  man  may  thrust  three  of
his  fingers  into  them.  Here  very  shortly  after  our  arrivall
wee  were  put  in  prison,  and  had  part  of  our  goods  taken

468

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
from  us  by  the  Captaine  of  the  castle,  whose  name  was
Don  Mathias  de  Albuquerque ;  and  from  hence  the
eleventh  of  October  he  shipped  us  and  sent  us  for  Goa
unto  the  Viceroy,  which  at  that  time  was  Don  Francisco
de  Mascarenhas,  The  shippe  wherein  we  were  imbarked
for  Goa  belonged  to  the  Captaine,  and  carried  one  hundred
twentie  and  foure  horses  in  it.  All  marchandise  carried
to  Goa  in  a  shippe  wherein  are  horses  pay  no  custome
in  Goa.  The  horses  pay  custome,  the  goods  pay  nothing  ;
but  if  you  come  in  a  ship  which  bringeth  no  horses,  you
are  then  to  pay  eight  in  the  hundred  for  your  goods.
The  first  citie  of  India  that  we  arrived  at  upon  the  fift
of  November,  after  we  had  passed  the  coast  of  Zindi,  is
called  Diu,  which  standeth  in  an  Hand  in  the  kingdome  Diu.
of  Cambaia,  and  is  the  strongest  towne  that  the  Portugales
have  in  those  partes.  It  is  but  litle,  but  well  stored  with
marchandise ;  for  here  they  lade  many  great  shippes  with
diverse  commodities  for  the  streits  of  Mecca,  for  Ormus,
and  other  places,  and  these  be  shippes  of  the  Moores  and
of  Christians.  But  the  Moores  cannot  passe,  except  they
have  a  passeport  from  the  Portugales.  Cambaietta  is  the
chiefe  citie  of  that  province,  which  is  great  and  very
populous,  and  fairely  builded  for  a  towne  of  the  Gentiles :
but  if  there  happen  any  famine,  the  people  will  sell  their
children  for  very  little.  The  last  king  of  Cambaia  was
Sultan  Badu,  which  was  killed  at  the  siege  of  Diu,  and
shortly  after  his  citie  was  taken  by  the  great  Mogor,
which  is  the  king  of  Agra  and  of  Delli,  which  are  fortie
dayes  journey  from  the  country  of  Cambaia.  Here  the
women  weare  upon  their  armes  infinite  numbers  of  rings
made  of  Elephants  teeth,  wherein  they  take  so  much
delight,  that  they  had  rather  be  without  their  meate  then
without  their  bracelets.  Going  from  Diu  we  come  to
Daman  the  second  towne  of  the  Portugales  in  the  countrey  Daman.
of  Cambaia  which  is  distant  from  Diu  fortie  leagues.
Here  is  no  trade  but  of  corne  and  rice.  They  have  many
villages  under  them  which  they  quietly  possesse  in  time
of  peace,  but  in  time  of  warre  the  enemie  is  maister  of

469

A.D.
1583-91

Basaim.

Tana.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

them.  From  thence  we  passed  by  Basaim,  and  from
Basaim  to  Tana,  at  both  which  places  is  small  trade  but
only of  corne and rice. The tenth of  November  we

ChauJ.  arrived  at  Chaul  which  standeth  in  the  firme  land. There

be  two  townes,  the  one  belonging  to  the  Portugales,  and
the  other  to  the  Moores.  That  of  the  Portugales  is
neerest  to  the  sea,  and  commaundeth  the  bay,  and  is
walled  round  about.  A  little  above  that  is  the  towne  of
the  Moores  which  is  governed  by  a  Moore  king  called
Xa-Maluco,  Here  is  great  traffike  for  all  sortes  of  spices
and  drugges,  silke,  and  cloth  of  silke,  sandales,  Elephants
teeth,  and  much  China  worke,  and  much  sugar  which  is
made  of  the  nutte  called  Gagara :  the  tree  is  called  the
palmer :  which  is  the  profitablest  tree  in  the  worlde :  it
doth  alwayes  beare  fruit,  and  doth  yeeld  wine,  oyle,  sugar,
vineger,  cordes,  coles,  of  the  leaves  are  made  thatch  for
the  houses,  sayles  for  shippes,  mats  to  sit  or  lie  on  :  of
the  branches  they  make  their  houses,  and  broomes  to
sweepe,  of  the  tree  wood  for  shippes.  The  wine  doeth
issue  out  of  the  toppe  of  the  tree.  They  cut  a  branch  of
a  bowe  and  binde  it  hard,  and  hange  an  earthen  pot  upon
it,  which  they  emptie  every  morning  and  every  evening,
and  still  it  and  put  in  certaine  dried  raysins,  and  it  be-
commeth  very  strong  wine  in  short  time.  Hither  many
shippes  come  from  all  partes  of  India,  Ormus,  and  many
from  Mecca :  heere  be  manie  Moores  and  Gentiles.
They  have  a  very  strange  order  among  them,  they  wor-
shippe  a  cowe,  and  esteeme  much  of  the  cowes  doung  to
paint  the  walles  of  their  houses.  They  will  kill  nothing
not  so  much  as  a  louse :  for  they  holde  it  a  sinne  to  kill
any  thing.  They  eate  no  flesh,  but  live  by  rootes,  and
ryce,  and  milke.  And  when  the  husbande  dieth  his  wife
is  burned  with  him,  if  shee  be  alive :  if  shee  will  not,  her

[II.  i.  253.]  head  is  shaven,  and  then  is  never  any  account  made  of
her  after.  They  say  if  they  should  be  buried,  it  were
a  great  sinne,  for  of  their  bodies  there  would  come  many
wormes  and  other  vermine,  and  when  their  bodies  were
consumed,  those  wormes  would  lacke  sustenance,  which

470

RALPH FITCH  ad

1583-91.

were  a  sinne,  therefore  they  will  be  burned.  In  Cambaia
they  will  kill  nothing,  nor  have  any  thing  killed :  in  the
towne  they  have  hospitals  to  keepe  lame  dogs  and  cats,
and  for  birds. They  will  give  meat  to  the  Ants.

Goa  is  the  most  principal  citie  which  the  Portugals  Goa.
have  in  India,  wherin  the  Viceroy  remaineth  with  his
court.  It  standeth  in  an  Hand,  which  may  be  25.  or  30.
miles  about.  It  is  a  fine  citie,  and  for  an  Indian  towne
very  faire.  The  Hand  is  very  faire,  full  of  orchards  and
gardens,  and  many  palmer  trees,  and  hath  some  villages.
Here  bee  many  marchants  of  all  nations.  And  the  Fleete
which  commeth  every  yeere  from  Portugal,  which  be
foure,  five,  or  sixe  great  shippes,  commeth  first  hither.
And  they  come  for  the  most  part  in  September,  and
remaine  there  fortie  or  fiftie  dayes ;  and  then  goe  to
Cochin,  where  they  lade  their  Pepper  for  Portugall.
Oftentimes  they  lade  one  in  Goa,  the  rest  goe  to  Cochin
which  is  from  Goa  an  hundred  leagues  southward.  Goa
standeth  in  the  countrey  of  Hidalcan,  who  lieth  in  the
countrey  sixe  or  seven  dayes  journey.  His  chiefe  citie
is  called  Bisapor.  At  our  comming  we  were  cast  into  the  ^■^^  ^^^  ^^^
prison,  and  examined  before  the  Justice  and  demanded  f °;  ^  '''^^'^^'
for  letters,  and  were  charged  to  be  spies,  but  they  could
proove  nothing  by  us.  We  continued  in  prison  untill
the  two  and  twentie  of  December,  and  then  we  were  set
at  libertie,  putting  in  sureties  for  two  thousand  duckats
not  to  depart  the  towne ;  which  sureties  father  Stevens
an  English  Jesuite  which  we  found  there,  &  another
religious  man  a  friend  of  his  procured  for  us.  Our
sureties  name  was  Andreas  Taborer,  to  whom  we  paid
2 1 50.  duckats,  and  still  he  demaunded  more :  whereupon
we  made  sute  to  the  Viceroy  and  Justice  to  have  our
money  againe,  considering  that  they  had  had  it  in  their
hands  neere  five  moneths  and  could  proove  nothing  against
us.  The  Viceroy  made  us  a  very  sharpe  answere,  and
sayd  we  should  be  better  sifted  before  it  were  long,  and
that  they  had  further  matter  against  us.  Whereupon  we
presently  determined  rather  to  seeke  our  liberties,  then

471

A.D.
1583-91.

Bellergan  a
towne.

Bisapor.

Gulconda.

Masulipatan.

Servidore.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  bee  in  danger  for  ever  to  be  slaves  in  the  country,  for
it  was  told  us  we  should  have  ye  strapado.  Wherupon
presently,  the  fift  day  of  April  1585.  in  the  morning  we
ranne  from  thence.  And  being  set  over  the  river,  we
went  two  dayes  on  foote  not  without  feare,  not  knowing
the  way  nor  having  any  guide,  for  we  durst  trust  none.
One  of  the  first  townes  which  we  came  unto,  is  called
Bellergan,  where  there  is  a  great  market  kept  of
Diamants,  Rubies,  Saphires,  and  many  other  soft  stones.
From  Bellergan  we  went  to  Bisapor  which  is  a  very  great
towne  where  the  king  doeth  keepe  his  court.  Hee  hath
many  Gentiles  in  his  court  and  they  bee  great  idolaters.
And  they  have  their  idols  standing  in  the  Woods,  which
they  call  Pagodes.  Some  bee  like  a  Cowe,  some  like  a
Monkie,  some  like  Buffles,  some  like  peacockes,  and
some  like  the  devill.  Here  be  very  many  elephants
which  they  goe  to  warre  withall.  Here  they  have  good
store  of  gold  and  silver :  their  houses  are  of  stone  very
faire  and  high.  From  hence  wee  went  for  Gulconda,  the
king  whereof  is  called  Cutup  de  lashach.  Here  and  in
the  kingdome  of  Hidalcan,  and  in  the  countrey  of  the
king  of  Decan  bee  the  Diamants  found  of  the  olde  water.
It  is  a  very  faire  towne,  pleasant,  with  faire  houses  of
bricke  and  timber,  it  aboundeth  with  great  store  of  fruites
and  fresh  water.  Here  the  men  and  the  women  do  go
with  a  cloth  bound  about  their  middles  without  any  more
apparell. We  found  it  here  very  hote.

The  winter  beginneth  here  about  the  last  of  May.  In
these  partes  is  a  porte  or  haven  called  Masulipatan,  which
standeth  eight  dayes  journey  from  hence  toward  the
gulfe  of  Bengala,  whether  come  many  shippes  out  of
India,  Pegu,  and  Sumatra,  very  richly  laden  with  Pepper,
spices,  and  other  commodities.  The  countrie  is  very
good  and  fruitfull.  From  thence  I  went  to  Servidore
which  is  a  fine  countrey,  and  the  king  is  called,  the  king
of  Bread.  The  houses  here  bee  all  thatched  and  made
of  lome.  Here  be  many  Moores  and  Gentiles,  but  there
is  small  religion  among  them. From  thence  I  went  to

472

RALPH FITCH  a.d.

1583-91.
Bellapore,  and  so  to  Barrampore,  which  is  in  the  country  Belkpore.
of  Zelabdim  Echebar. In  this  place  their  money  is  made
of  a  kind  of  silver round and thicke,  to the  value  of
twentie pence, which is very  good silver. It  is mar-
veilous  great  and  a  populous  countrey. In  their  winter
which  is  in  June,  July,  and  August,  there  is  no  passing
in the streetes but  with  horses,  the  waters  be  so  high.
The houses  are made  of  lome  and  thatched. Here is
great  store  of  cotton  cloth  made,  and  painted  clothes  of
cotton wooll : here groweth great  store of  corne and
Rice. We found manages great  store both in  townes  Strange
and  villages  in  many  places  where  wee  passed,  of  boyes  ^^^^'^^i^^-
of  eight or  ten  yeeres,  and  girles  of  five  or  six  yeeres
old. They  both do rijde upon  one  horse  very trimly
decked,  and are caried through the towne  with great
piping  and  playing,  and  so  returne  home  and  eate  of  a
banket  made  of  Rice  and  fruits,  and  there  they  daunce
the  most  part  of  the  night  and  so  make  an  ende  of  the
marriage. They  lie  not  together  untill  they  be  ten  yeeres
old. They say they marry their children so yoong,
because it is an order that when the man dieth,  the
woman  must  be  burned  with  him  : so  that  if  the  father  [II.  i.  254.]
die,  yet  they  may  have  a  father  in  lawe  to  helpe  to  bring
up  the  children  which  bee  maried : and also that  they
will not leave their sonnes without wives, nor their
daughters  without  husbands. From  thence  we  went  to
Mandoway, which is a very strong towne. It was  Mandoway  a
besieged  twelve  yeeres  by  Zelabdim  Echebar  before  hee  "^^^^  ^^^°^^
could  winne  it. It  standeth  upon  a  very  great  high  rocke
as  the  most  part  of  their  castles  doe,  and  was  of  a  very
great circuite. From hence wee went to Ugini and  Ugini.
Serringe,  where  wee  overtooke  the  ambassadour  of  Zelab-
dim Echebar  with  a  marvellous  great  company  of  men,
elephants, and camels. Here is  great trade of  cotton
and cloth made of  cotton,  and great store of  drugs.
From  thence  we  went  to  Agra  passing  many  rivers,  which
by  reason  of  the raine  were  so  swollen,  that  wee  waded  j^^^  ^  ^^.^^^
and swamme oftentimes  for our  lives. Agra  is  a  very  dtie.

473

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

great  citie  and  populous,  built  with  stone,  having  faire
and  large  streetes,  with  a  faire  river  running  by  it,  which
falleth  into  the  gulfe  of  Bengala.  It  hath  a  faire  castle
and  a  strong  with  a  very  faire  ditch.  Here  bee  many
Moores  and  Gentiles,  the  king  is  called  Zelabdim
The  great  Echebar :  the  people  for  the  most  part  call  him  The
Mogor.  great  Mogor. From  thence  we  went  for  Fatepore,  which

is  the  place  where  the  king  kept  his  court.  The  towne
is  greater  then  Agra,  but  the  houses  and  streetes  be  not
so  faire.  Here  dwell  many  people  both  Moores  and
Gentiles.  The  king  hath  in  Agra  and  Fatepore  as  they
doe  credibly  report  1000.  elephants,  thirtie  thousand
horses,  1400.  tame  Deere,  80c.  concubines:  such  store  of
Ounces,  Tigers,  Buffles,  Cocks  &  Haukes,  that  is  very
strange  to  see.  He  keepeth  a  great  court,  which  they
call  Dericcan.  Agra  and  Fatepore  are  two  very  great
cities,  either  of  them  much  greater  then  London  and  very
populous.  Betweene  Agra  and  Fatepore  are  12.  miles.
The  like  is  re-  and  all  the  way  is  a  market  of  victuals  &  other  things,
ported  of  the ^g  £^ll  ^^  though  a  man  were  still  in  a  towne,  and so

CttlP s  of

C/iina  many  people  as  if  a  man  were  in  a  market. They  have

many  fine  cartes,  and  many  of  them  carved  and  gilded
with  gold,  with  two  wheeles  which  be  drawen  with  two
litle  Buls  about  the  bignesse  of  our  great  dogs  in
England,  and  they  will  runne  with  any  horse,  and  carie
two  or  three  men  in  one  of  these  cartes :  they  are  covered
with  silke  or  very  fine  cloth,  and  be  used  here  as  our
Coches  be  in  England.  Hither  is  great  resort  of  mar-
chants  from  Persia  and  out  of  India,  and  very  much
marchandise  of  silke  and  cloth,  and  of  precious  stones,
both  Rubies,  Diamants,  and  Pearles.  The  king  is
apparelled  in  a  white  Cabie  made  like  a  shirt  tied  with
strings  on  the  one  side,  and  a  litle  cloth  on  his  head
coloured  oftentimes  with  red  or  yealow.  None  come  into
his  house  but  his  eunuches  which  keepe  his  women.
Here  in  Fatepore  we  staied  all  three  untill  the  28.  of
September  1585.  and  then  master  John  Newberie  tooke
his  journey  toward  the  citie  of  Labor,  determining  from

474

RALPH FITCH  ad

1583-91.
thence  to  goe  for  Persia  and  then  for  Aleppo  or  Con-
stantinople, whether  hee  could  get  soonest  passage  unto,
and  directed  me  to  goe  for  Bengala  and  for  Pegu,  and
did  promise  me,  if  it  pleased  God,  to  meete  me  in
Bengala  within  two  yeeres  with  a  shippe  out  of  England.
I  left  William  Leades  the  jeweller  in  service  with  the  ^i^-  Leades
king  Zelabdim  Echebar  in  Fatepore,  who  did  entertaine  ^^rved  the  king

,.°  111  1-  iri  of  Lambaia.

him  very  well,  and  gave  him  an  house  and  nve  slaves,  an

horse,  and  every  day  sixe  S.  S.  in  money. I  went  from

Agra to Satagam in Bengala,  in the companie of  one

hundred  and  fourescore  boates  laden  with  Salt,  Opium,

Hinge, Lead, Carpets, and divers other commodities

downe the river Jemena. The chiefe marchants are

Moores and Gentiles. In these countries they have

many strange ceremonies. The Bramanes which are  ^^^  supersti-

their  priests,  come  to  the  water  and  have  a  string  about  ^^°^\  "^^.t
r  '  .  Ill  monies  of  the

their necks made with great  ceremonies,  and lade up  Bramanes.

water  with  both  their hands,  and  turne  the  string  first

with both  their  hands  within,  and  then  one  arme  after

the other  out. Though  it  be  never  so  cold,  they  will

wash themselves in cold water or in warme. These

Gentiles will eate no flesh  nor kill  any  thing. They

live  with rice,  butter,  milke,  and  fruits. They  pray  in

the  water  naked,  and  dresse  their  meat  &  eate  it  naked,

and  for  their  penance they  lie  flat  upon  the  earth,  and

rise  up and turne  themselves  about 30. or 40.  times,

and use to  heave  up  their  hands to the sunne, & to

kisse  the  earth,  with  their  armes  and  legs  stretched  along

out,  and  their  right  leg  alwayes  before  the  left. Every

time  they  lie  downe,  they  make  a  score  on  the  ground

with their  finger  to know  when  their  stint  is  finished.

The  Bramanes  marke  themselves  in  the  foreheads,  eares

and throates  with a kind of  yellow  geare  which they

grind, & every  morning they  do it. And they have

some  old  men  which  o^o  in  the  streetes  with  a  boxe  of

yellow  pouder,  and  marke  men  on  their  heads  &  necks

as they  meet  them. And  their  wives  do  come  by 10.

20. & 30.  together  to  the  water side  singing,  &  there

475

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^583-91-

do  wash themselves,  & then use their ceremonies,  &

marke  themselves  in  their  foreheds  and  faces,  and  cary

some  with  them,  and  so  depart  singing. Their  daughters

be  maried,  at,  or  before  the  age  of  10.  yeres. The  men

may  have  7.  wives. They  be  a  kind  of  craftie  people,

worse  then  the  Jewes. When  they  salute one  another,

they  heave  up  their  hands  to  their  heads,  and  say  Rame,

Rame. From  Agra I came  to Prage,  where  the  river

Ganges.  Jemena entreth into the mightie river Ganges, and

Jemena  looseth  his  name. Ganges  commeth  out  of  the

[II.  i.  255.]  Northwest,  &  runneth  East  into  the  gulfe  of  Bengala.
In  those  parts  there  are  many  Tigers  and  many  partriges
&  turtle-doves,  and  much  other  foule.  Here  be  many
beggers  in  these  countries  which  goe  naked,  and  the
people  make  great  account  of  them :  they  call  them
Schesche.  Here  I  sawe  one  which  was  a  monster  among
the  rest.  He  would  have  nothing  upon  him,  his  beard
was  very  long,  and  with  the  haire  of  his  head  he  covered
his  privities.  The  nailes  of  some  of  his  fingers  were  two
inches  long,  for  he  would  cut  nothing  from  him,  neither
would  he  speake.  He  was  accompanied  with  eight  or
tenne,  and  they  spake  for  him.  When  any  man  spake
to  him,  he  would  lay  his  hand  upon  his  brest  and  bowe
himselfe,  but  would  not  speake.  Hee  would  not  speake
to  the  king.  We  went  from  Prage  downe  Ganges,
the  which  is  here  very  broad.  Here  is  great  store  of
fish  of  sundry  sorts,  &  of  wild  foule,  as  of  swannes,
geese,  cranes,  and  many  other  things.  The  countrey  is
very  fruitfull  and  populous.  The  men  for  the  most  part
have  their  faces  shaven,  and  their  heads  very  long,  ex-
cept some  which  bee  all  shaven  save  the  crowne:  and
some  of  them  are  as  though  a  man  should  set  a  dish  on
their  heads,  and  shave  them  round,  all  but  the  crowne.
In  this  river  of  Ganges  are  many  Hands.  His  water
is  very  sweete  and  pleasant,  and  the  countrey  adjoyning

.Bannaras.  very  fruitfull.  From  thence  wee  went  to  Bannaras  which
is  a  great  towne,  and  great  store  of  cloth  is  made  there
of  cotton,  and  Shashes  for  the Moores. In this place

476

RALPH FITCH  ad

1583-91.
they  be  all  Gentiles,  and  be  the  greatest  idolaters  that
ever  I  sawe.  To  this  towne  come  the  Gentiles  on  pil-  A  pilgrimage
grimage  out  of  farre  countreys.  Here  alongst  the  waters  V"^^^^"^"^^-
side  bee  very  many  faire  houses,  and  in  all  of  them,  or
for  the  most  part  they  have  their  images  standing,
which  be  evill  favoured,  made  of  stone  and  wood,
some  like  lions,  leopards,  and  monkeis,  some  like  men
&  women,  and  pecocks,  and  some  like  the  devil  with
foure  armes  and  4.  hands.  They  sit  crosse  legged,  some
with  one  thing  in  their  hands,  &  some  another,  &  by
breake  of  day  and  before,  there  are  men  &  women
which  come  out  of  the  towne  and  wash  themselves  in
Ganges.  And  there  are  divers  old  men  which  upon
places  of  earth  made  for  the  purpose,  sit  praying,  and
they  give  the  people  three  or  foure  strawes,  which  they
take  &  hold  them  betweene  their  fingers  when  they
wash  themselves :  and  some  sit  to  marke  them  in  the
foreheads,  and  they  have  in  a  cloth  a  litle  Rice,  Barlie,
or  money,  which,  when  they  have  washed  themselves,
they  give  to  the  old  men  which  sit  there  praying.  After-
wards they  go  to  divers  of  their  images,  &  give  them
of  their  sacrifices.  And  when  they  give,  the  old  men
say  certaine  prayers,  and  then  is  all  holy.  And  in  divers
places  there  standeth  a  kind  of  image  which  in  their
language  they  call  Ada.  And  they  have  divers  great
stones  carved,  whereon  they  poure  water,  &  throw  there-
upon some  rice,  wheate,  barly,  and  some  other  things.
This  Ada  hath  foure  hands  with  clawes.  Moreover,
they  have  a  great  place  made  of  stone  like  to  a  well
with  steppes  to  goe  downe ;  wherein  the  water  standeth
very  foule  and  stinketh :  for  the  great  quantitie  of
flowers,  which  continually  they  throwe  into  it,  doe
make  it  stinke.  There  be  alwayes  many  people  in  it :
for  they  say  when  they  wash  themselves  in  it,  that  their
sinnes  be  forgiven  them,  because  God,  as  they  say,  did
wash  himselfe  in  that  place.  They  gather  up  the  sand  in
the  bottome  of  it,  and  say  it  is  holy.  They  never  pray
but in the  water, and  they  wash  themselves  overhead,

477

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

and  lade  up  water  with  both  their  handes,  and  turne
themselves  about,  and  then  they  drinke  a  litle  of  the
water  three  times,  and  so  goe  to  their  gods  which  stand
in  those  houses.  Some  of  them  will  wash  a  place  which
is  their  length,  and  then  will  pray  upon  the  earth  with
their  armes  and  legs  at  length  out,  and  will  rise  up
and  lie  downe,  and  kisse  the  ground  twentie  or  thirtie
times,  but  they  will  not  stirre  their  right  foote.  And
some  of  them  will  make  their  ceremonies  with  fifteene
or  sixteene  pots  litle  and  great,  and  ring  a  litle  bel
when  they  make  their  mixtures  tenne  or  twelve  times :
and  they  make  a  circle  of  water  round  about  their
pots  and  pray,  and  divers  sit  by  them,  and  one  that
reacheth  them  their  pots :  and  they  say  divers  things
over  their  pots  many  times,  and  when  they  have  done,
they  goe  to  their  gods,  and  strowe  their  sacrifices  which
they  thinke  are  very  holy,  and  marke  many  of  them
which  sit  by,  in  the  foreheads,  which  they  take  as  a
great  gift.  There  come  fiftie  and  sometime  an  hundred
together,  to  wash  them  in  this  well,  and  to  offer  to
these  idols.

They  have  in  some  of  these  houses  their  idoles  stand-
ing, and  one  sitteth  by  them  in  warme  weather  with  a
fanne  to  blowe  winde  upon  them.  And  when  they  see
any  company  comming,  they  ring  a  litle  bell  which
hangeth  by  them,  and  many  give  them  their  almes,  but
especially  those  which  come  out  of  the  countrey.
Many  of  them  are  blacke  and  have  clawes  of  brasse
with  long  nayles,  and  some  ride  upon  peacockes  and
other  foules  which  be  evill  favoured,  with  long  haukes
bils,  and  some  like  one  thing  and  some  another,  but
none  with  a  good  face.  Among  the  rest  there  is  one
which  they  make  great  account  of:  for  they  say  hee  giveth
them  all  things  both  foode  and  apparell,  and  one  sitteth
alwayes  by  him  with  a  fanne  to  make  wind  towards  him.
Here  some  bee  burned  to  ashes,  some  scorched  in  the
fire  and  throwen  into  the  water,  and  dogges  and  foxes
doe presently eate them. The wives here doe burne

478

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.

with  their  husbands  when  they  die,  if  they  will  not,  their
heads  be  shaven,  and  never  any  account  is  made  of  them
afterward.  The  people  goe  all  naked  save  a  litle  cloth  [II.  i.  256.]
bound  about  their  middle.  Their  women  have  their
necks,  armes  and  eares  decked  with  rings  of  silver,
copper,  tinne,  and  with  round  hoopes  made  of  Ivorie,
adorned  with  amber  stones,  and  with  many  agats,  and
they  are  marked  with  a  great  spot  of  red  in  their  fore-
heads, and  a  stroke  of  red  up  to  the  crowne,  and  so  it
runneth  three  maner  of  wayes.  In  their  Winter,  which
is  our  May,  the  men  weare  quilted  gownes  of  cotton  like
to  our  mattraces  and  quilted  caps  like  to  our  great
Grocers  morters,  with  a  slit  to  looke  out  at,  and  so
tied  downe  beneath  their  eares.  If  a  man  or  woman
be  sicke  and  like  to  die,  they  will  lay  him  before  their
idols  all  night,  and  that  shall  helpe  him  or  make  an  ende
of  him.  And  if  he  do  not  mend  that  night,  his  friends
will  come  and  sit  with  him  a  litle  and  cry,  and  after-
wards will  cary  him  to  the  waters  side  and  set  him  upon
a  litle  raft  made  of  reeds,  and  so  let  him  goe  downe
the  river.  When  they  be  maried  the  man  and  the
woman  come  to  the  water  side,  and  there  is  an  olde
man  which  they  call  a  Bramane,  that  is,  a  priest,  a  cowe,
and  a  calfe,  or  a  cowe  with  calfe.  Then  the  man  and
the  woman,  cowe  and  calfe,  and  the  olde  man  goe  into
the  water  together,  and  they  give  the  olde  man  a  white
cloth  of  foure  yards  long,  and  a  basket  crosse  bound
with  divers  things  in  it:  the  cloth  hee  laieth  upon  the
backe  of  the  cowe,  and  then  he  taketh  the  cowe  by  the
ende  of  the  taile,  and  saieth  certaine  wordes  :  and  she
hath  a  copper  or  a  brasse  pot  full  of  water,  and  the  man

doeth  hold his hand by  the  olde  mans  hand,  and the  ^,. .

1111111  1 n 1  1  u ■^■^^•f  0'"^^  '^J

wives  hand  by  her  husbands,  and  all  nave  the  cowe  by  ^^^^  maried

the  taile,  and  they  poure  water  out  of  the  pot  upon  the  folks  together

cowes  taile,  and  it  runneth  through  all  their  hands,  and  h  ^^^

they  lade  up  water  with  their  handes,  and  then  the  olde  ^^"'^^J  "^f

man  doeth  tie him and her together by  their clothes,  ^g^i^ans  in

Which  done,  they  goe  round  about  the  cowe  and  calfe,  old  time.

479

A.D.

1583-91.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  then  they  give  somewhat  to  the  poore  which  be
alwayes  there,  and  to  the  Bramane  or  priest  they  give
the  cowe  and  calfe,  and  afterward  goe  to  divers  of  their
idoles  and  offer  money,  and  lie  downe  flat  upon  the
ground  and  kisse  it  divers  times,  and  then  goe  their  way.
Their  chiefe  idoles  bee  blacke  and  evill  favoured,  their
mouthes  monstrous,  their  eares  gilded,  and  full  of  jewels,
their  teeth  and  eyes  of  gold,  silver,  and  glasse,  some
having  one  thing  in  their  handes,  and  some  another.
You  may  not  come  into  the  houses  where  they  stand,
with your shooes on. They have continually lampes

Patenaw.  burning  before  them.  From  Bannaras  I  went  to  Patenaw
downe  the  river  of  Ganges :  where  in  the  way  we  passed
many  faire  townes,  and  a  countrey  very  fruitfull :  and
many  very  great  rivers  doe  enter  into  Ganges,  and
some  of  them  as  great  as  Ganges,  which  cause  Ganges
,  to  bee  of  a  great  breadth,  and  so  broad  that  in  the  time

of  raine  you  cannot  see  from  one  side  to  the  other.
These  Indians  when  they  bee  scorched  and  throwen  into
the  water,  the  men  swimme  with  their  faces  downewards,
the  women  with  their  faces  upwards,  I  thought  they  tied
something  to  them  to  cause  them  to  doe  so  :  but  they
say  no.  There  be  very  many  thieves  in  this  countrey,
which  be  like  to  the  Arabians :  for  they  have  no  certaine
abode,  but  are  sometime  in  one  place  and  sometime  in
another.  Here  the  women  bee  so  decked  with  silver
and  copper,  that  it  is  strange  to  see,  they  use  no  shooes
by  reason  of  the  rings  of  silver  and copper  which  they

Goldfou7id.  weare  on  their  toes.  Here  at  Patanaw  they  finde  gold
in  this  maner.  They  digge  deepe  pits  in  the  earth,  and
wash  the  earth  in  great  bolles,  and  therein  they  finde
the  gold,  and  they  make  the  pits  round  about  with
bricke,  that  the  earth  fall  not  in.  Patenaw  is  a  very
long  and  a  great  towne.  In  times  past  it  was  a  king-
dom, but  now  it  is  under  Zelabdim  Echebar  the  great
Mogor.  The  men  are  tall  and  slender,  and  have  many
old  folks  among  them :  the  houses  are  simple,  made  of
earth  and  covered  with  strawe,  the  streetes  are  very  large.

480

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
In  this  towne  there  is  a  trade  of  cotton,  &  cloth  of
cotton,  much  sugar,  which  they  cary  from  hence  to  Ben-
gala  and  India,  very  much  Opium  &  other  commodities.
He  that  is  chiefe  here  under  the  king  is  called  Tipper-
das,  and  is  of  great  account  among  the  people.  Here
in  Patenau  I  saw  a  dissembling  prophet  which  sate  upon
an  horse  in  the  market  place,  and  made  as  though  he
slept,  and  many  of  the  people  came  and  touched  his
feete  with  their  hands,  and  then  kissed  their  hands.
They  tooke  him  for  a  great  man,  but  sure  he  was  a
lasie  lubber.  I  left  him  there  sleeping.  The  people  of
these  countries  be  much  given  to  such  prating  and  dis-
sembling hypocrites.

From  Patanaw  I  went  to  Tanda  which  is  in  the  land  Tanda  in
of  Gouren.  It  hath  in  times  past  bene  a  kingdom,  but  ^°^^'^''^-
now  is  subdued  by  Zelabdim  Echebar.  Great  trade  and
traffique  is  here  of  cotton,  and  of  cloth  of  cotton.  The
people  goe  naked  with  a  litle  cloth  bound  about  their
waste.  It  standeth  in  the  countrey  of  Bengala.  Here  be
many  Tigers,  wild  Bufs,  and  great  store  of  wilde  foule :
they  are  very  great  idolaters.  Tanda  standeth  from  the
river  Ganges  a  league,  because  in  times  past  the  river
flowing  over  the  bankes,  in  time  of  raine  did  drowne
the  countrey  and  many  villages,  and  so  they  do  remaine.
And  the  old  way  which  the  river  Ganges  was  woont
to  run,  remaineth  drie,  which  is  the  occasion  that  the
citie  doeth  stand  so  farre  from  the  water.  From  Agra
downe  the  river  Jemena,  and  downe  the  river  Ganges,
I  was  five  moneths  comming  to  Bengala,  but  it  may  be
sailed  in  much  shorter  time.

I went from Bengala into the country of  Couche,  [H.  i.  257.]
which  lieth 2C. dayes iourny  Northwards  from  Tanda.  ^°^^^^'  ^^/^

r^. .  . .-^  ^ ■'.,■{  . J  • o 1 1 r-  u- seemeth  to  be

1  he  kmg  is  a  Gentile,  his  name  is  buckel  L-ounse : nis  Q^i^-i^g^
countrey  is  great,  and  lieth  not  far  from  Cauchin  China :  accounted  by
for  they  say  they  have  pepper  from  thence. The  port  some  among
is  called  Cacchegate. All  the  countrie  is  set  with  Bambos  the  provinces
or  Canes  made  sharpe  at  both  the  endes  &  driven  into  ^
the  earth,  and  they  can  let  in  the  water  &  drowne  the

V  481  2H

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

ground  above  knee  deepe,  so  that men  nor  horses  can

passe. They  poison  all  the  waters  if  any  wars  be. Here

they  have  much  silke  &  muske,  and  cloth  made  of  cotton.

The people  have eares  which  be  marveilous  great  of  a

span  long,  which  they  draw  out  in  length  by  devises  when

Pure  Gen- they  be  yong. Here  they  be  all  Gentiles,  and  they  will

tilisme.  jj-ji  nothing. They  have hospitals for sheepe, goates,

dogs,  cats,  birds,  &  for  all  other  living  creatures. When

they be old &  lame,  they keepe them  until they  die.

If  a  man  catch  or  buy  any  quicke  thing  in  other  places  &

bring  it  thither,  they  wil  give  him  mony  for  it  or  other

victuals,  &  keepe  it  in  their  hospitals  or  let  it  go. They

In  Mexico wil  give  meat  to  the  Ants. Their  smal  mony  is  almonds,

thej  use  like-  -y^rhich  oftentimes  they  use  to  eat. From  thence  I  returned

Imlinthefruit  ^^  Hugeli,  which  is  the  place  where  the  Portugals  keep

Cacaoy  which in  the  country  of  Bengala  which  standeth  in  23.  degrees

aie  like  of  Northerly  latitude,  and  standeth  a  league  from  Sata-

almonds.  g^j^  . ^[^gy  ^^^l  it  Porto  Piqueno. We  went  through  the

^S^y-  wildernes, because the right  way was full of  thieves,

where  we  passed  the  countrey  of  Gouren,  where  we  found

but  few  villages,  but  almost  all  wildernes,  &  saw  many

bufFes, swine  & deere, grasse  longer  then  a  man,  and

very  many  Tigers. Not  far  from  Porto  Piqueno  south-

Porto  Angeli. westward, standeth  an  haven  which  is  called  Angeli, in

the  countrey  of  Orixa. It  was  a  kingdom of  it selfe,

&  the  king  was  a  great  friend  to  strangers. Afterwards

it was taken  by the king of Patan which was their

neighbour,  but  he  did  not  enjoy  it  long,  but  was  taken

by Zelabdim Echebar,  which is king  of Agra, Delli,

& Cambaia. Orixa standeth 6. daies journey from

Satagan, southwestward. In this place is very much

The  Itke  cloth  Rice,  and  cloth  made  of  cotton,  &  great  store  of  cloth

^Pthe^lom  ^ which is made of  grasse, which they call  Yerva, it is

grasse  in  Fir-  li^e  a silke. They  make  good  cloth of  it  which  they

ginia.  send  for India & divers other places. To  this  haven

of  Angeli  come every  yere many ships out  of  India,

Negapatan, Sumatra, Malacca, and divers  other  places ;

&  lade  from  thence  great  store  of  Rice,  &  much  cloth

482

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
of  cotton  wooll,  much  sugar,  &  long  pepper,  great  store
of  butter  &  other  victuals  for  India.  Satagam  is  a  faire  Satagam.
citie  for  a  citie  of  the  Moores,  and  very  plentifull  of
all  things.  Here  in  Bengala  they  have  every  day  in
one  place  or  other  a  great  market  which  they  call
Chandeau,  and  they  have  many  great  boats  which  they
cal  pericose,  wherewithal!  they  go  from  place  to  place
and  buy  Rice  and  many  other  things :  these  boates  have
24.  or  26.  oares  to  rowe  them,  they  be  great  of  burthen,
but  have  no  coverture.  Here  the  Gentiles  have  the
water  of  Ganges  in  great  estimation,  for  having  good
water  neere  them,  yet  they  will  fetch  the  water  of  Ganges
a  great  way  oif,  and  if  they  have  not  sufficient  to  drinke,
they  will  sprinkle  a  litle  on  them,  and  then  they  thinke
themselves  well.  From  Satagam  I  travelled  by  the
countrey  of  the  king  of  Tippara  or  porto  Grande,  with  Tippara  or
whom  the  Mogores  or  Mogen  have  almost  continuall  ^''^^°  Grande.
warres.  The  Mogen  which  be  of  the  kingdom  of  Recon
and  Rame,  be  stronger  then  the  king  of  Tippara,  so
that  Chatigan  or  porto  Grande  is  oftentimes  under  the
king  of  Recon.

There  is  a  country  4.  daies  journie  from  Couche  or  Bottanter  a
Cfuicheu before mentioned, which is called Bottanter  S?'^'^t^°^'ihren
and  the citie  Bottia, the king is called Dermain ; the ^
people  whereof  are very  tall  and  strong,  and  there  are
marchants  which come  out of China, &  they say  out  ^'^rchants  of
of  Muscovia  or  Tartarie. And  they  come  to  buy  muske, !^^'  ,  °^~

J  J  ' covtB  end

cambals,  agats,  silke,  pepper  and  saffron  like  the  saffiron  Tartarie.
of  Persia. The countrey is very great, 3. moneths
journey. There are very high mountains in this
countrey, &  one  of  them so  steep  that  when  a  man  is
6. daies  journey  off  it,  he  may  see  it perfectly. Upon  These  seeme  to
these  mountains  are  people  which  have  eares  of  a  spanne //  e  mun-

-.  -r 1 •  11  1  11 1  tarns  of  Lmaui

long  : ir  their  eares be  not  long,  they  call them  apes.  ^^//^^  i„  ^^^
They  say  that  when  they  be  upon  the  mountaines,  they  people  Cumao.
see  ships  in  the  Sea  sayling  to  and  fro  ;  but  they  know
not  from  whence  they  come,  nor  whether  they  go. There
are marchants which  come  out of  the  East,  they say,

483

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

from  under  the  sunne,  which  is  from  China,  which  have
no  beards, and they say there it  is  something  warme.
But  those  which  come  from  the  other  side  of  the  moun-
tains which  is  from  the  North,  say  there  it  is  very  cold.
The  apparel These Northren merchants  are  apparelled  with  woollen
of  the  Tar- (.Jq^}^  and  hats,  white  hosen  close,  and  bootes  which  be
chants.  ^^  Moscovia or Tartaric. They report that in their

countrey  they  have  very  good  horses,  but  they  be  litle  :
some  men  have  foure,  five,  or  sixe  hundred  horses  and
kine  : they  live  with  milke  and fleshe. They  cut the
Cowe  talks  hi  tailes  of  their  kine,  and  sell  them  very deere,  for  they
great  request. ^^^^  -^^  great  request,  and  much  esteemed  in  those  partes.
The haire  of  them  is  a  yard  long,  the  rumpe  is  above
a spanne long  : they  use to hang them for braverie
upon  the  heades of  their Elephants  : they bee much
used  in  Pegu  and  China  :  they  buie  and  sell  by  scores
upon the ground. The people be very swift on
foote.
Bacola.  From  Chatigan  in  Bengala,  I  came  to  Bacola ;  the  king

whereof  is  a  Gentile,  a  man  very  well  disposed  and
delighteth  much  to  shoot  in  a  gun.  His  countrey  is
very  great  and  fruitful,  and  hath  store  of  Rice,  much
cotton  cloth,  and  cloth  of  silke.  The  houses  be  very
faire  and  high  builded,  the  streetes  large,  the  people
naked,  except  a  litle  cloth  about  their  waste.  The  women
weare  great  store  of  silver  hoopes  about  their  neckes
and  armes,  and  their  legs  are  ringed  with  silver  and
copper,  and  rings  made  of  elephants  teeth.
Serrepore.  From  Bacola  I  went  to  Serrepore  which  standeth  upon

the  river  of  Ganges,  the  king  is  called  Chondery.
They  be  all  hereabout  rebels  against  their  king  Zelab-
dim  Echebar :  for  here  are  so  many  rivers  &  Hands,
that  they  flee  from  one  to  another,  whereby  his  horse-
men cannot  prevaile  against  them.  Great  store  of
cotton  cloth  is  made  here.
Sinnergan.  Sinnergan is a towne sixe leagues from Serrepore,

where  there  is  the  best  and  finest  cloth  made  of  cotton
that  is in all India. The chiefe king of  all these

484

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.

countries  is called Isacan,  and he is chiefe  of  all the

other  kings,  and  is  a  great  friend  to  all  Christians. The

houses  here,  as  they  be  in  the  most  part  of  India,  are

very litle,  and covered with strawe,  and have a fewe

mats  round  about  the  wals,  and  the  doore  to  keepe  out

the Tygers and the  Foxes. Many of  the people are

very  rich. Here  they  will eate no  flesh, nor kill no

beast : they  live  of  Rice,  milke,  and  fruits. They  goe

with  a  litle  cloth  before  them,  and  all  the  rest  of  their

bodies  is  naked. Great  store  of  Cotton  cloth  goeth  from

hence, and  much  Rice,  wherewith  they  serve  all  India,

Ceilon,  Pegu,  Malacca,  Sumatra,  and  many  other  places.

I went from Serrepore the  28. of  November 1586.

for  Pegu  in  a  small  ship  or  foist  of  one  Albert  Caravallos,

and  so  passing  downe  Ganges,  and  passing  by  the  Island  Smdiva

of  Sundiva,  porto  Grande,  or the countrie  of  Tippera,  ^"^^'^^

the kingdom of  Recon and Mogen, leaving them on

our  left  side  with  a  faire  wind  at  Northwest :  our  course

was  South  &  by  East,  which  brought  us  to  the  barre  of

Negrais  in  Pegu  :  if  any  contrary  wind  had  come,  we  had

throwen  many of  our  things over-boord : for  we  were

so  pestered  with  people  &  goods, that  there  was  scant

place  to  lie  in. From  Bengala  to  Pegu  is  90.  leagues.

We  entred  the  barre  of  Negrais,  which  is  a  brave  barre  Negrais.

&  hath  4. fadomes  water  where it hath least. Three

dayes  after we  came  to  Cosmin,  which  is  a  very  pretie  Cosmin.

towne,  and  standeth  very  pleasantly,  very  well  furnished

with  all  things. The  people  be  very  tall  &  well  disposed ;

the women white, round faced, with litle eies: the

houses  are  high built, set upon  great high postes, &

they  po  up  to  them  with  Ions:  ladders  for  feare  of  the  Ladders  used
,T-. •' ° f. , 1  -T-i  J.  •  io  avoyd  the

Tygers which be very many. The countrey is very  ^^^^/..f^n^

fruitful  of  all  things. Here  are  very  great  Figs,  Orenges,  i^gasts.

Cocoes,  and  other fruits. The  land  is very  high  that

we  fall  withall,  but  after  we be entred  the  barre,  it  is

very  lowe and  full  of  rivers,  for  they  goe  all  too  and  Dwelling  in

fro in  boates, which  they  call paroes,  and keepe their

houses  with  wife  and  children  in  them.

485

A.D.
1583-91.

Medon.

Dela.

Cirion.

Macao.

Caches  carted
on  mens
shoulders.
Pegu.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

From  the  barre  of  Nigrais  to  the  citie  of  Pegu  is
ten  dayes  journey  by  the  rivers.  Wee  went  from  Cos-
min  to  Pegu  in  Paroes  or  boates,  and  passing  up  the
rivers  wee  came  to  Medon,  which  is  a  prety  towne,
where  there  be  a  wonderfull  number  of  Paroes,  for  they
keepe  their  houses  and  their  markets  in  them  all  upon
the  water.  They  rowe  too  and  fro,  and  have  all  their
marchandizes  in  their  boates  with  a  great  Sombrero  or
shadow  over  their  heads  to  keepe  the  sunne  from  them,
which  is  as  broad  as  a  great  cart  wheele  made  of  the
leaves  of  the  Coco  trees  and  fig  trees,  and  is  very
light.

From  Medon  we  went  to  Dela,  which  is  a  very  faire
towne,  and  hath  a  faire  port  into  the  sea,  from  whence
go  many  ships  to  Malacca,  Mecca,  and  many  other
places.  Here  are  18.  or  20.  very  great  and  long
houses,  where  they  tame  and  keep  many  elephants  of
the  kings :  for  there  about  in  the  wildernesse  they  catch
the  wilde  elephants.  It  is  a  very  fruitfuU  countrey.
From  Dela  we  went  to  Cirion,  which  is  a  good  towne,
and  hath  a  faire  porte  into  the  sea,  whither  come  many
ships  from  Mecca,  Malacca,  Sumatra,  and  from  divers
other  places.  And  there  the  ships  staie  and  discharge,
&  send  up  their  goods  in  Paroes  to  Pegu.  From
Cirion  we  went  to  Macao,  which  is  a  pretie  towne,
where  we  left  our  boats  or  Paroes,  &  in  the  morning
taking  Delingeges,  which  are  a  kind  of  Coches  made
of  cords  &  cloth  quilted,  &  caried  upon  a  stang  be-
tweene  3.  or  4.  men:  we  came  to  Pegu  the  same  day.
Pegu  is  a  citie  very  great,  strong,  and  very  faire,  with
walles  of  stone,  and  great  ditches  round  about  it.
There  are  two  townes,  the  old  towne  and  the  newe.
In  the  olde  towne  are  all  the  marchants  strangers,  and
very  many  marchants  of  the  countrey.  All  the  goods
are  sold  in  the  olde  towne  which  is  very  great,  and  hath
many  suburbes  round  about  it,  and  all  the  houses  are
made  of  Canes  which  they  call  Bambos,  and  bee  covered
with  strawe. In your house you have a Warehouse

486

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
which  they  call  Godon,  which  is  made  of  bricke  to  put
your  goods  in,  for  oftentimes  they  take  fire  and  burne
in  an  houre  foure  or  five  hundred  houses :  so  that  if
the  Godon  were  not,  you  should  bee  in  danger  to  have
all  burned,  if  any  winde  should  rise,  at  a  trice.  In
the  newe  towne  is  the  king,  and  all  his  Nobilitie  and
Gentrie.  It  is  a  citie  very  great  and  populous,  and  is
made  square  and  with  very  faire  walles,  and  a  great
ditch  round  about  it  full  of  water,  with  many  croco-
diles in  it :  it  hath  twenty  gates,  and  they  bee  made  [II.  i.  259.]
of  stone,  for  every  square  five  gates.  There  are  also
many  Turrets  for  Centinels  to  watch,  made  of  wood,
and  gilded  with  golde  very  faire.  The  streets  are  the
fairest  that  ever  I  saw,  as  straight  as  a  line  from  one
gate  to  the  other,  and  so  broad  that  tenne  or  twelve
men  may  ride  a  front  thorow  them.  On  both  sides  of
them  at  every  mans  doore  is  set  a  palmer  tree  which  is
the  nut  tree :  which  make  a  very  faire  shew  and  a  very
commodious  shadow,  so  that  a  man  may  walke  in  the
shade  all  day.  The  houses  be  made  of  wood,  and
covered  with  tiles.  The  kings  house  is  in  the  middle
of  the  city,  and  is  walled  and  ditched  round  about  :
and  the  buildings  within  are  made  of  wood  very  sump-
tuously gilded,  and  great  workemanship  is  upon  the
forefront,  which  is  likewise  very  costly  gilded.  And  the
house  wherein  his  Pagode  or  idole  standeth  is  covered
with  tiles  of  silver,  and  all  the  walles  are  gilded  with
golde.  Within  the  first  gate  of  the  kings  house  is  a
great  large  roome,  on  both  sides  whereof  are  houses
made  for  the  kings  elephants,  which  be  marvellous  great
and  faire,  and  are  brought  up  to  warres  and  in  service
of  the  king.  And  among  the  rest  he  hath  foure  white  Foure  white
elephants,  which  are  very  strange  and  rare :  for  there  is  ^'^P^^^^^-
none  other  king  which  hath  them  but  he :  if  any  other
king  hath  one,  hee  will  send  unto  him  for  it.  When
any  of  these  white  elephants  is  brought  unto  the  king,
all  the  merchants  in  the  city  are  commanded  to  see  them,
and  to  give  him  a  present  of  halfe  a  ducat,  which  doth

487

phants.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91-

come  to  a  great  summe :  for  that  there  are  many  mer-
chants in  the  city.  After  that  you  have  given  your
present  you  may  come  and  see  them  at  your  pleasure,
although  they  stand  in  the  kings  house.  This  king  in
The  king  of  his  title  is  called  the  king  of  the  white  elephants.  If
t.  e  w  t e  ee-  ^^^  other  king  have  one,  and  will  not  send  it  him,  he
will  make  warre  with  him  for  it :  for  he  had  rather
lose  a  great  part  of  his  kingdome,  then  not  to  conquere
him.  They  do  very  great  service  unto  these  white
elephants  ;  every  one  of  them  standeth  in  an  house
gilded  with  golde,  and  they  doe  feede  in  vessels  of
silver  and  gilt.  One  of  them  when  he  doth  go  to  the
river  to  be  washed,  as  every  day  they  do,  goeth  under
a  canopy  of  cloth  of  golde  or  of  silke  carried  over  him
by  sixe  or  eight  men,  and  eight  or  ten  men  goe  before
him  playing  on  drummes,  shawmes,  or  other  instru-
ments :  and  when  he  is  washed  and  commeth  out  of
the  river,  there  is  a  gentleman  which  doth  wash  his  feet
in  a  silver  basin :  which  is  his  office  given  him  by  the
king.  There  is  no  such  account  made  of  any  blacke
elephant,  be  he  never  so  great.  And  surely  there  be
woonderfull  faire  and  great,  and  some  be  nine  cubites
in  height.  And  they  do  report  that  the  king  hath
above  five  thousand  elephants  of  warre,  besides  many
other  which  be  not  taught  to  fight.  This  king  hath  a
very  large  place  wherein  he  taketh  the  wilde  elephants.
It  standeth  about  a  mile  from  Pegu,  builded  with  a
faire  court  within,  and  is  in  a  great  grove  or  wood :
and  there  be  many  huntsmen,  which  go  into  the
wildernesse  with  she  elephants :  for  without  the  she
they  are  not  to  be  taken.  And  they  be  taught  for  that
purpose:  and  every  hunter  hath  five  or  sixe  of  them:
and  they  say  that  they  anoint  the  she  elephants  with  a
certaine  ointment,  which  when  the  wild  elephant  doth
smell,  he  will  not  leave  her.  When  they  have  brought
the  wilde  elephant  neere  unto  the  place,  they  send  word
unto  the  towne,  and  many  horsemen  and  footmen  come
out and cause the she elephant to enter into  a  strait

488

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.

way  which  doeth  goe  to  the  palace,  and  the  she  and
he  do  runne  in :  for  it  is  like  a  wood :  and  when  they
be  in,  the  gate  doth  shut.  Afterward  they  get  out  the
female :  and  when  the  male  seeth  that  he  is  left  alone,
he  weepeth  and  crieth,  and  runneth  against  the  walles,
which  be  made  of  so  strong  trees,  that  some  of  them
doe  breake  their  teeth  with  running  against  them.
Then  they  pricke  him  with  sharpe  canes,  &  cause  him
to  go  into  a  strait  house,  and  there  they  put  a  rope
about  his  middle  and  about  his  feet,  and  let  him  stand
there  three  or  foure  dayes  without  eating  or  drinking :
and  then  they  bring  a  female  to  him,  with  meat  and
drinke,  and  within  few  dayes  he  becommeth  tame.  The
chiefe  force  of  the  king  is  in  these  elephants.  And
when  they  go  into  the  warres  they  set  a  frame  of  wood
upon  their  backes,  bound  with  great  cordes,  wherein
sit  foure  or  sixe  men,  which  fight  with  gunnes,  bowes
and  arrowes,  darts  and  other  weapons.  And  they  say
that  their  skinnes  are  so  thicke  that  a  pellet  of  an  har-
quebush  will  scarse  pearce  them,  except  it  be  in  some
tender  place.  Their  weapons  be  very  badde.  They
have  gunnes,  but  shoot  very  badly  in  them,  darts  and
swords  short  without  points.  The  king  keepeth  a  very
great  state  :  when  he  sitteth  abroad  as  he  doth  every
day  twise,  all  his  noble  men  which  they  call  Shemines
sit  on  ech  side,  a  good  distance  off,  and  a  great  guard
without  them.  The  Court  yard  is  very  great.  If  any
man  will  speake  with  the  king,  he  is  to  kneele  downe,
to  heave  up  his  hands  to  his  head,  and  to  put  his  head
to  the  ground  three  times,  when  he  entreth,  in  the
middle  way,  and  when  he  commeth  neere  to  the  king:
and  then  he  sitteth  downe  and  talketh  with  the  king:
if  the  king  like  well  of  him,  he  sitteth  neere  him  within
three  or  foure  paces :  if  he  thinke  not  well  of  him,  he
sitteth  further  off.  When  he  goeth  to  warre,  he  goeth
very  strong.  At  my  being  there  he  went  to  Odia  in  Odia  a  city
the  countrey  of  Siam  with  three  hundred  thousand  men,  '^^'^'^•
and  five  thousand  elephants. Thirty  thousand  men  were

489

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

[II.  i.  260.] his  guard. These people  do  eate  roots,  herbs, leaves,
dogs,  cats,  rats,  serpents,  and  snakes ;  they  refuse  almost
nothing. When  the  king  rideth  abroad,  he  rideth  with
a  great  guard,  and  many  noblemen,  oftentimes  upon  an
elephant  with  a  fine  castle  upon  him  very  fairely  gilded
with  gold ;  and  sometimes  upon  a  great frame like  an
horsliter, which hath a little house uDon it covered
over  head,  but open on  the sides,  which is  all  gilded
with  golde,  &  set  with  many  rubies  &  saphires,  whereof
he  hath  infinite  store  in  his  country,  and  is  caried  upon
This  maner  of  sixteene or eighteene mens shoulders. This  coach  in
cartage  on their lanp:uaffe is called Serrion. Very great feasting
is  used  in '^'^^  triumphing  is  many  times  before  the  king  both  of
Peru,  and  in men  and  women. This king hath little  force  by  Sea,
Florida.  because  hee  hath  but  very  few  ships. He  hath  houses

full  of  golde  and  silver,  and  bringeth  in  often,  but
spendeth  very  little,  and  hath  the  mines  of  rubies  and
saphires,  and  spinelles.  Neere  unto  the  palace  of  the
king,  there  is  a  treasure  woonderfuU  rich ;  the  which
because  it  is  so  neere,  he  doth  not  account  of  it :  and
it  standeth  open  for  all  men  to  see  in  a  great  walled
court  with  two  gates,  which  be  alwayes  open.  There
are  foure  houses  gilded  very  richly,  and  covered  with
leade :  in  every  one  of  them  are  Pagodes  or  images  of
huge  stature  and  great  value.  In  the  first  is  the  picture
of  a  king  in  golde  with  a  crowne  of  golde  on  his  head
full  of  great  rubies  and  saphires,  and  about  him  there
stand  foure  children  of  golde.  In  the  second  house  is
the  picture  of  a  man  in  silver  woonderfuU  great,  as
high  as  an  house  ;  his  foot  is  as  long  as  a  man,  and
he  is  made  sitting,  with  la  crowne  on  his  head  very  rich
with  stones.  In  the  third  house  is  the  picture  of  a  man
greater  then  the  other,  made  of  brasse,  with  a  rich  crowne
on  his  head.  In  the  fourth  and  last  house  doth  stand
another,  made  of  brasse,  greater  then  the  other,  with  a
crowne  also  on  his  head  very  rich  with  stones.  In
another  court  not  farre  from  this  stand  foure  other
Pagodes  or  idoles,  marvellous  great,  of  copper,  made  in

490

RALPH FITCH  ad

1583-91

the  same  place  where  they  do  stand ;  for  they  be  so  great

that  they  be  not  to  be  remooved : they  stand in foure

houses  gilded  very faire,  and are  themselves  gilded  all

over save their heads, and they shew like a blacke

Morian. Their  expences  in  gilding  of  their  images  are

wonderfull. The  king  hath  one  wife and above three

hundred  concubines,  by  which  they say he  hath  foure-

score or fourescore and ten children. He sitteth in

judgement  almost  every  day. They  use  no  speech,  but

give  up  their  supplications  written  in  the  leaves  of  a  tree  Paper  of  the

with  the  point  of  an  yron  bigger  then  a  bodkin. These ^^"^'^^  "J"

/  Da  _  tvee

leaves  are  an  elle  long,  and  about  two  inches  broad ;  they

are  also  double.  He  which  giveth  in  his  supplication,
doth  stand  in  a  place  a  little  distance  off  with  a  present.
If  his  matter  be  liked  of,  the  king  accepteth  of  his
present,  and  granteth  his  request :  if  his  sute  be  not
liked  of,  he  returneth  with  his  present ;  for  the  king
will  not  take  it.

In  India there are  few commodities  which serve  for
Pegu, except Opium of  Cambaia, painted cloth of  S.
Thome,  or  of  Masulipatan,  and  white  cloth  of  Bengaia,
which is spent there in great quantity. They bring  ^^  excellent
thither  also  much  cotton,  yarne  red  coloured  with  a  root  '^°^°^^'  ^,^^^  '^
which  they  called  Saia,  which  will  never  lose  his  colour :  ^^i^^
it  is  very  wel  solde  here,  and  very  much  of  it  commeth
yerely  to Pegu. By  your  mony  you  lose  much. The
ships  which  come  from  Bengaia,  S.  Thome,  and  Masu-
lipatan, come  to  the  bar  of  Nigrais  and  to  Cosmin. To
Martavan a port of  the sea  in  the  kingdome  of  Pegu
come  many  ships  from  Malacca  laden  with  Sandall,  Por-
celanes,  and other wares  of  China,  and  with  Camphora
of  Borneo, and Pepper from Achen in  Sumatra. To  Woollen  cloth
Cirion a port of  Pegu come ships from Mecca  with  ^^^^^f^^^^^
woollen cloth. Scarlets, Velvets,  Opium,  and  such  like.
There are in Pegu eight Brokers, whom they call
Tareghe, which are bound to sell your goods at the
price  which  they  be  woorth,  and  you  give  them  for  their
labour  two  in  the  hundred  :  and  they  be  bound  to  make

491

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

your  debt  good,  because  you  sell  your  marchandises  upon
their  word.  If  the  Broker  pay  you  not  at  his  day,  you
may  take  him  home,  and  keepe  him  in  your  house :
which  is  a  great  shame  for  him.  And  if  he  pay  you  not
presently,  you  may  take  his  wife  and  children  and  his
slaves,  and  binde  them  at  your  doore,  and  set  them  in
the  Sunne ;  for  that  is  the  law  of  the  countrey.  Their
The  money  of  current  money  in  these  parts  is  a  kinde  of  brasse  which
Pegu-  l-hgy  (^^11 Gansa,  wherewith  you  may  buy  golde,  silver,

rubies, muske, and all other things. The golde and
silver  is  marchandise,  and  is  worth  sometimes  more,  and
sometimes  lesse,  as  other  wares  be. This  brasen  money
doeth  goe  by  a  weight  which  they  call  a  biza ;  and  com-
monly this  biza  after  our  account  is  worth  about  halfe  a
The  severall crowne or  somewhat  lesse. The  marchandise  which  be
marc  andises -^^ Pegu, are golde, silver, rubies, saphires, spinelles,
muske, benjamin  or frankincense, long pepper, tinne,
leade, copper,  lacca  whereof  they  make  hard  waxe,  rice,
and  wine  made  of  rice,  and  some  sugar. The  elephants
doe  eate  the  sugar  canes,  or  els  they  would  make  very
much. And they consume many canes likewise in
making  of  their Varellaes or Idole temples, which are
The  forme  of in  great  number  both  great  and  small. They  be  made
their  Temples  round  like  a  sugar  loafe,  some  are  as  high  as  a  Church,

1/11  O  ^  O  '

are  aes.  y^j-y  broad  beneath,  some  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  com-
passe :  within  they  be  all  earth  done  about  with  stone.
They  consume  in  these  Varellaes  great  quantity  of  golde ;
for  that  they  be  all  gilded  aloft :  and  many  of  them  from
the  top  to  the  bottome :  and  every  ten  or  twelve  yeeres
[II.  1.  261.]  they  must  be  new  gilded,  because  the  raine  consumeth  off
the  golde :  for  they  stand  open  abroad.  If  they  did  not
consume  their  golde  in  these  vanities,  it  would  be  very
plentifull  and  good  cheape  in  Pegu.  About  two  dayes
journey  from  Pegu  there  is  a  Varelle  or  Pagode,  which
is the pilgrimage of  the  Pegues :  it  is  called  Dogonne,

„,  „  ,,. . and  is  of  a  woonderfull  bignesse, and all  gilded from
ihelalltpoies , r  1  a 1 i  •  1  1

or  Priests  of ^^^ ^°°^ ^° ^""^ toppe. And there is an house by
Pegu.  it  wherein the Tallipoies which are their Priests doe

492

RALPH FITCH  ad

1583-91.
preach.  This  house  is  five  and  fifty  paces  in  length,
and  hath  three  pawnes  or  walks  in  it,  and  forty  great
pillars  gilded,  which  stand  betweene  the  walks ;  and  it
is  open  on  all  sides  with  a  number  of  small  pillars,  which
be  likewise  gilded  :  it  is  gilded  with  golde  within  and
without.  There  are  houses  very  faire  round  about  for
the  pilgrims  to  lie  in :  and  many  goodly  houses  for  the
Tallipoies  to  preach  in,  which  are  full  of  images  both  of
men  and  women,  which  are  all  gilded  over  with  golde.
It  is  the  fairest  place,  as  I  suppose,  that  is  in  the  world  :
it  standeth  very  high,  and  there  are  foure  wayes  to  it,
which  all  along  are  set  with  trees  of  fruits,  in  such  wise
that  a  man  may  goe  in  the  shade  above  two  miles  in
length.  And  when  their  feast  day  is,  a  man  can  hardly
passe  by  water  or  by  land  for  the  great  presse  of  people ;
for  they  come  from  all  places  of  the  kingdome  of  Pegu
thither  at  their  feast.  In  Pegu  they  have  many  Talli-
poies or  priests,  which  preach  against  all  abuses.  Many
men  resort  unto  them.  When  they  enter  into  their
kiack,  that  is  to  say,  their  holy  place  or  temple,  at  the
doore  there  is  a  great  Jarre  of  water  with  a  cocke  or  a
ladle  in  it,  and  there  they  wash  their  feet ;  and  then
they  enter  in,  and  lift  up  their  hands  to  their  heads
first  to  their  preacher,  and  then  to  the  Sunne,  and  so  sit
downe.  The  Tallipoies  go  very  strangely  apparelled  with  Tke  apparell
one  camboline  or  thinne  cloth  next  to  their  body  of  a  of  their  priests.
browne  colour,  another  of  yellow  doubled  many  times
upon  their  shoulder :  and  those  two  be  girded  to  them
with  a  broad  girdle :  and  they  have  a  skinne  of  leather
hanging  on  a  string  about  their  necks,  whereupon  they
sit,  bare  headed  &  bare  footed  :  for  none  of  them  weareth
shooes ;  with  their  right  armes  bare  and  a  great  broad
sombrero  or  shadow  in  their  hands  to  defend  them  in
the  Summer  from  the  Sunne,  and  in  the  Winter  from
the  raine.  When  the  Tallipoies  or  priests  take  their
Orders,  first  they  go  to  schoole  untill  they  be  twenty
yeres  olde  or  more,  and  then  they  come  before  a  Talli-
poie  appointed  for  that  purpose,  whom  they  call  Rowli :

493

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

he  is  of  the  chiefest  and  most  learned,  and  he  opposeth
them,  and  afterward  examineth  them  many  times,  whether
they  will  leave  their  friends,  and  the  company  of  all
women,  and  take  upon  them  the  habit  of  a  Tallipoie.
If  any  be  content,  then  he  rideth  upon  an  horse  about
the  streets  very  richly  apparelled,  with  drummes  and
pipes,  to  shew  that  he  leaveth  the  riches  of  the  world  to
be  a  Tallipoie.  In  few  dayes  after,  he  is  caried  upon
a  thing  like  an  horsliter,  which  they  call  a  serion,  upon
ten  or  twelve  mens  shoulders  in  the  apparell  of  a  Talli-
poie, with  pipes  and  drummes,  and  many  Tallipoies  with
him,  and  al  his  friends,  and  so  they  go  with  him  to  his
house  which  standeth  without  the  towne,  and  there  they
leave  him.  Every  one  of  them  hath  his  house,  which  is
very  little,  set  upon  six  or  eight  posts,  and  they  go  up
to  them  with  a  ladder  of  twelve  or  foureteene  staves.
Their  houses  be  for  the  most  part  by  the  hie  wayes  side,
and  among  the  trees,  and  in  the  woods.  And  they
go  with  a  great  pot  made  of  wood  or  fine  earth,  and
covered,  tied  with  a  broad  girdle  upon  their  shoulder,
which  commeth  under  their  arme,  wherewith  they  go  to
begge  their  victuals  which  they  eate,  which  is  rice,  fish,
and  herbs.  They  demand  nothing,  but  come  to  the
doore,  and  the  people  presently  doe  give  them,  some  one
thing,  and  some  another :  and  they  put  all  together  in
their  potte :  for  they  say  they  must  eate  of  their  almes.
Observation  of  and  therewith  content  themselves.  They  keepe  their
neto  moones.  f^^gts  by  the  Moone :  and  when  it  is  new  Moone  they
keepe  their  greatest  feast :  and  then  the  people  send  rice
and  other  things  to  that  kiack  or  church  of  which  they
be ;  and  there  all  the  Tallipoies  doe  meete  which  be  of
that  Church,  and  eate  the  victuals  which  are  sent  them.
When  the  Tallipoies  do  preach,  many  of  the  people  cary
them  gifts  into  the  pulpit  where  they  sit  and  preach.
And  there  is  one  which  sitteth  by  them  to  take  that
which  the  people  bring.  It  is  divided  among  them.
They  have  none  other  ceremonies  nor  service  that  I  could
see,  but  onely  preaching.

494

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
I went from Pegu to Jamahey, which is in the  Jamaheyjive
countrey  of  the  Langeiannes,  whom  we  call  Jangomes ; ^  twenty
it  is  five  and  twenty  dayes  journey  Northeast  from  Pegu, ^y^^  J°"^^y
In  which  journey I passed many  fruitfuU  and pleasant  ward  from
countreys. The  countrey  is  very  lowe,  and  hath  many  Pegu.
faire rivers. The houses are  very  bad,  made  of  canes,
and covered  with straw. Heere  are  many  wilde  buffes
and  elephants. Jamahey  is  a  very  faire  and  great  towne,
with  faire  houses  of  stone,  well  peopled,  the  streets  are
very  large, the men very  well  set  and strong,  with  a
cloth  about them,  bare  headed  and  bare  footed :  for  in
all  these  countreys  they  weare  no  shooes. The  women
be  much  fairer  then  those  of  Pegu. Heere  in  all  these
countreys  they  have  no  wheat. They  make  some  cakes
of  rice. Hither to Jamahey  come  many  marchants  out
of  China,  and  bring  great  store  of  muske,  golde,  silver,
and  many  other  things  of  China  worke. Here  is  great
store of  victuals :  they have such  plenty  that  they  will
not  milke  the  buffles, as  they  doe in all other places.  [II.  i.  262.]
Here  is  great  store  of  copper  and benjamin. In these
countreys  when the  people  be  sicke they  make a vow
to  oifer  meat  unto  the  divell,  if  they  escape :  and  when
they  be  recovered  they  make  a  banket  with  many  pipes
&  drummes  and  other  instruments,  and  dansing  all  the
night,  and  their  friends  come  and  bring  gifts,  cocos,  figges,
arrecaes,  and  other  fruits,  and  with  great  dauncing  and
rejoycing they oifer to the divell, and say, they  give
the divel to eat, and drive him out. When they be
dancing  and  playing  they  will  cry  &  hallow  very  loud ;
and in this sort they  say  they  drive  him  away. And
when  they  be  sicke  a  Tallipoy  or  two  every  night  doth
sit  by  them  &  sing,  to  please  the  divell  that  he  should
not hurt them. And if  any  die he is caried upon a  They  bume
great  frame  made  like  a  tower,  with  a  covering  all  gilded  ^^^'^  '^^^'^•
with golde made of canes caried with foureteene or
sixteene  men,  with  drummes  and  pipes  and  other  instru-
ments playing  before  him to  a  place  out  of  the  towne
and there is burned. He is accompanied  with all his

495

A.D.
1583-91.

Caplan  is  the
place  where
the  rtib'tes  and
other  precious
stones  are
found.

Anthony  Gal-
vano  writeth
of  these  bals.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

friends  and  neighbours,  all  men :  and  they  give  to  the
tallipoies  or  priests  many  mats  and  cloth :  and  then
they  returne  to  the  house  and  there  make  a  feast  for
two  dayes :  and  then  the  wife  with  all  the  neighbours
wives  &  her  friends  go  to  the  place  where  he  was  burned,
and  there  they  sit  a  certaine  time  and  cry  and  gather  the
pieces  of  bones  which  be  left  unburned  and  bury  them,
and  then  returne  to  their  houses  and  make  an  end  of
all  mourning.  And  the  men  and  women  which  be  neere
of  kin  do  shave  their  heads,  which  they  do  not  use
except  it  be  for  the  death  of  a  friend :  for  they  much
esteeme  of  their  haire.

Caplan  is  the  place  where  they  finde  the  rubies,  saphires,
and  spinelles :  it  standeth  sixe  dayes  journey  from  Ava
in  the  kingdome  of  Pegu.  There  are  many  great  high
hilles  out  of  which  they  digge  them.  None  may  go
to  the  pits  but  onely  those  which  digge  them.

In  Pegu,  and  in  all  the  countreys  of  Ava,  Langeiannes,
Siam,  and  the  Bramas,  the  men  weare  bunches  or  little
round  balles  in  their  privy  members :  some  of  them
weare  two  and  some  three.  They  cut  the  skin  and  so
put  them  in,  one  into  one  side  and  another  into  the
other  side;  which  they  do  when  they  be  25  or  30  yeeres
olde,  and  at  their  pleasure  they  take  one  or  more  of
them  out  as  they  thinke  good.  When  they  be  maried
the  husband  is  for  every  child  which  his  wife  hath,  to
put  in  one  untill  he  come  to  three  and  then  no  more :
for  they  say  the  women  doe  desire  them.  They  were
invented  because  they  should  not  abuse  the  male  sexe.
For  in  times  past  all  those  countries  were  so  given  to
that  villany,  that  they  were  very  scarse  of  people.  It
was  also  ordained  that  the  women  should  not  have  past
three  cubits  of  cloth  in  their  nether  clothes,  which  they
binde  about  them ;  which  are  so  strait,  that  when  they
go  in  the  streets,  they  shew  one  side  of  the  leg  bare
above  the  knee.  The  bunches  aforesayd  be  of  divers
sorts :  the  least  be  as  big  as  a  litle  walnut,  and  very
round : the  greatest  are  as  big  as  a  litle hennes  ^^^'^ :

496

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.

some  are  of  brasse  and  some  of  silver :  but  those  of
silver  be  for  the  king  and  his  noble  men.  These  are
gilded  and  made  with  great  cunning,  and  ring  like  a
litle  bell.  There  are  some  made  of  leade,  which  they
call  Selwy  because  they  ring  but  Htle :  and  these  be  of
lesser  price  for  the  poorer  sort.  The  king  sometimes
taketh  his  out,  and  giveth  them  to  his  noblemen  as  a
great  gift :  and  because  he  hath  used  them,  they  esteeme
them  greatly.  They  will  put  one  in,  and  heale  up  the
place  in  seven  or  eight  dayes.

The  Bramas  which  be  of  the  kings  countrey  (for  the
king  is  a  Brama)  have  their  legs  or  bellies,  or  some
part  of  their  body,  as  they  thinke  good  themselves,  made
black  with  certaine  things  which  they  have :  they  use
to  pricke  the  skinne,  and  to  put  on  it  a  kinde  of  anile
or  blacking,  which  doth  continue  alwayes.  And  this  is
counted  an  honour  among  them  :  but  none  may  have
it  but  the  Bramas  which  are  of  the  kings  kinred.

These people weare no beards : they  pull out the  The  people  of
haire on their faces  with little pinsons made for that  Pegu  weare  no
purpose. Some  of  them  will  let 16  or  20  haires  grow ^^^  ^"
together,  some in one place of  his face and some  in
another, and puUeth out all the rest: for he carieth
his pinsons alwayes with him to pull the haires out
assoone as they appeare. If  they see a man with a
beard they wonder at him. They have their teeth
blacked both men and  women, for they say  a dogge
hath  his  teeth  white,  therefore  they  will  blacke  theirs.

The  Pegues  if  they  have  a  sute  in  the  law  which  is
so  doubtfull  that  they  cannot  well  determine  it,  put  two
long  canes  into  the  water  where  it  is  very  deepe :  and
both  the  parties  go  into  the  water  by  the  poles,  and
there  sit  men  to  judge,  and  they  both  do  dive  under
the  water,  and  he  which  remaineth  longest  under  the
water  doth  winne  the  sute.

The 10 of  January 1 went from Pegu to Malacca,  Malacca.
passing  by many of  the ports of  Pegu, as Martavan,
the  Hand  of  Tavi,  from  whence  commeth  great  store  of
V  497  21

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

tinne which serveth all India, the Hands  of  Tanaseri,

Junsalaon,  and many  others ; and so  came  to  Malacca

the 8 of  February,  where the Portugals have a  castle

which standeth nere the sea. And the countrey  fast

without  the  towne  belongeth  to  the  Malayos,  which  is

a  kinde  of  proud  people. They  go  naked  with  a  cloth

about  their  middle,  and  a  litle  roll  of  cloth  about  their

heads. Hither come many ships from China  & from

the  Malucos,  Banda,  Timor,  and  from  many  other  Hands

[II.  i.  263.] of  the  Javas,  which  bring  great  store  of  spices  and  drugs,

and  diamants  and  other  jewels. The  voyages  into  many

of  these Hands belong unto the captaine of  Malacca :

so  that  none  may  goe  thither  without  his  licence :  which

yeeld  him  great summes of  money every  yeere. The

Portugals  heere  have  often  times  warres  with  the  king

of  Achem  which  standeth  in  the  Hand  of  Sumatra :  from

whence  commeth  great  store  of  pepper  and  other  spices

every  yeere  to  Pegu  and  Mecca  within  the  Red  sea,  and

other  places.

The  voyage  to When the Portugals go from Macao in China to

Japan.  Japan,  they  carry  much  white silke,  golde,  muske,  and

porcelanes : and they bring from thence nothing but

silver. They  have  a  great  caracke  which  goeth thither

every  yere, and she bringeth from thence every  yere

Eight  hundred  above sixe hundred thousand crusadoes : and all this

/  ousan au- gQ^^j. ^jp Japan, and two hundred thousand crusadoes

sadoes tn stiver  . -i  1  • 1 1  1 •  1  r t j-

imployed  more m silver  which  they bring  yeerely out or India,

yerely  by  the they  imploy  to  their  great  advantage  in  China :  and  they
Portugals  in bring  from  thence  golde,  muske,  silke,  copper,  porcelanes,
'  and  many  other  things  very  costly  and  gilded. When

the  Portugals  come  to  Canton  in  China  to  traffike,  they
must  remaine  there  but  certaine  dayes :  and  when  they
come  in  at  the  gate  of  the  city,  they  must  enter  their
names  in  a  booke,  and  when  they  goe  out  at  night  they
must  put  out  their  names.  They  may  not  lie  in  the
towne  all  night,  but  must  lie  in  their  boats  without
the  towne.  And  their  dayes  being  expired,  if  any  man
remaine  there,  they  are  evill  used  and  imprisoned. The

498

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
Chinians  are  very  suspitious,  and  doe  not  trust  strangers.
It  is  thought  that  the  king  doth  not  know  that  any
strangers  come  into  his  countrey.  And  further  it  is
credibly  reported  that  the  common  people  see  their  king
"very  seldome  or  not  at  all,  nor  may  not  looke  up  to  that
place  wh<ere  he  sitteth.  And  when  he  rideth  abroad  he
is  caried  upon  a  great  chaire  or  serrion  gilded  very  faire,
wherein  there  is  made  a  little  house  with  a  latise  to
looke  out  at :  so  that  he  may  see  them,  but  they  may  not
looke  up  at  him  :  and  all  the  time  that  he  passeth  by
them,  they  heave  up  their  hands  to  their  heads,  &  lay
their  heads  on  the  ground,  and  looke  not  up  untill  he  be
passed.  The  order  of  China  is  when  they  mourne,  that
they  weare  white  thread  shoes,  and  hats  of  straw.  The
man  doth  mourne  for  his  wife  two  yeeres,  the  wife  for
her  husband  three  yeeres :  the  sonne  for  his  father  a
yeere,  and  for  his  mother  two  yeres.  And  all  the  time
which  they  mourne  they  keepe  the  dead  in  the  house,
the  bowels  being;  taken  out  and  filled  with  chownam
or  lime,  and  coffined :  and  when  the  time  is  expired
they  carry  them  out  playing  and  piping,  and  burne
them.  And  when  they  returne  they  pull  off  their
mourning  weeds,  and  marry  at  their  pleasure.  A  man
may  keepe  as  many  concubines  as  he  will,  but  one  wife
onely.  All  the  Chineans,  Japonians,  and  Cauchin  The  writing
Chineans  do  write  right  downwards,  and  they  do  write  ofthfP^°p}^°f
with  a  fine  pensill  made  of  dogs  or  cats  haire.

Laban  is  an  Hand  among  the  Javas  from  whence  come  Laban.
the  diamants  of  the  New  water. And  they  finde  them  Diamants.
in  the  rivers :  for  the  king  will  not  suffer  them  to  digge
the  rocke.

Jamba  is  an  Hand  among  the  Javas  also,  from  whence  Jamba.
come  diamants.  And  the  king  hath  a  masse  of  earth
which  is  golde ;  it  groweth  in  the  middle  of  a  river :
and  when  the  king  doth  lacke  gold,  they  cut  part  of  the  Golde.
earth  and  melt  it,  whereof  commeth  golde.  This  masse
of  earth  doth  appeare  but  once  in  a  yere ;  which  is  when
the  water  is  low :  and  this  is  in  the  moneth  of  April.

499

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

Bima.  Bima is another Hand among the  Javas, where the

women  travell  and  labour  as  our men  do in England,
and  the  men  keepe  house  and  go  where  they  will.

He  returneth The  29  of  March 1588,  I  returned  from  Malacca  to

fromMalaaa.  Martavan,  and  so  to  Pegu,  where  I  remained  the  second
time  untill  the  17  of  September,  and  then  I  went  to
Cosmin,  and  there  tooke  shipping ;  and  passing  many
dangers by  reason  of contrary  windes,  it  pleased God

Bengala.  that  we  arrived  in  Bengala  in  November  following :
where  I  stayed  for  want  of  passage  untill  the  third  of
February  1589,  and  then  I  shipped  my  selfe  for
Cochin.  In  which  voyage  we  endured  great  extremity
for  lacke  of  fresh  water :  for  the  weather  was  extreme
hote,  and  we  were  many  marchants  and  passengers,  and
we had very  many calmes,  and hote  weather. Yet it

Ceylon.  pleased God that we arrived in Ceylon the sixth of

March,  where  we  stayed  five  dayes  to  water,  and  to
furnish  our  selves  with  other  necessary  provision.  This
Ceylon  is  a  brave  Hand,  very  fruitfuU  &  faire ;  but  by
reason  of  continuall  warres  with  the  king  thereof,  all
things  are  very  deare :  for  he  will  not  suffer  any  thing
to  be  brought  to  the  castle  where  the  Portugals  be :
wherefore  often  times  they  have  great  want  of  victuals.
Their  provision  of  victuals  commeth  out  of  Bengala
every  yere.  The  king  is  called  Raia,  and  is  of  great
force :  for  he  commeth  to  Columbo,  which  is  the  place
where  the  Portugals  have  their  fort,  with  an  hundred
thousand  men,  and  many  elephants.  But  they  be  naked
people  all  of  them ;  yet  many  of  them  be  good  with
their  pieces  which  be  muskets.  When  the  king  talketh
with  any  man,  he  standeth  upon  one  legge,  and  setteth
the  other  foot  upon  his  knee  with  his  sword  in  his
hand :  it  is  not  their  order  for  the  king  to  sit  but  to
stand.  His  apparell  is  a  fine  painted  cloth  made  of
cotton  wooll  about  his  middle :  his  haire  is  long  and
bound up with a  little fine cloth about his head : all

[II.  i.  264.]  the  rest  of  his  body  is  naked.  His  guard  are  a  thousand
men, which stand round about him, and he in the

500

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
middle ;  and  when  he  marcheth,  many  of  them  goe
before  him,  and  the  rest  come  after  him.  They  are
of  the  race  of  the  Chingalayes,  which  they  say  are  the
best  kinde  of  all  the  Malabars.  Their  eares  are  very
large ;  for  the  greater  they  are,  the  more  honourable
they  are  accounted.  Some  of  them  are  a  spanne  long.
The  wood  which  they  burne  is  Cinamom  wood,  and  it
smelleth  very  sweet.  There  is  great  store  of  rubies,
saphires,  and  spinelles  in  this  Hand :  the  best  kinde  of
all  be  here ;  but  the  king  will  not  suffer  the  inhabi-
tants to  digge  for  them,  lest  his  enemies  should  know
of  them,  and  make  warres  against  him,  and  so  drive
him  out  of  his  countrey  for  them.  They  have  no
horses  in  all  the  countrey.  The  elephants  be  not  so
great  as  those  of  Pegu,  which  be  monstrous  huge :  but
they  say  all  other  elephants  do  feare  them,  and  none
dare  fight  with  them,  though  they  be  very  small.
Their  women  have  a  cloth  bound  about  them  from
their  middle  to  their  knee :  and  all  the  rest  is  bare.  All
of  them  be  blacke  and  but  little,  both  men  and  Blacke  people.
women.  Their  houses  are  very  little,  made  of  the
branches  of  the  palmer  or  coco-tree,  and  covered  with
the  leaves  of  the  same  tree.

The eleventh  of  March  we  sailed from  Ceylon,  and
so  doubled the  cape  of  Comori. Not  far  from  thence,  C"^/*^  de
betweene Ceylon and the maine land of Negapatan,  ^'"^^'*^-
they  fish for  pearles. And  there  is fished every yere
very  much  ; which doth serve  all India,  Cambaia,  and
Bengala,  it  is  not  so  orient  as  the  pearle  of  Baharim  in
the  gulfe  of  Persia. From  cape  de  Comori  we  passed
by Coulam, which is a fort  of the Portugals : from Coukm.
whence  commeth  great  store  of  pepper,  which  commeth
for  Portugall : for  oftentimes there  ladeth one of the
caracks  of  Portugall. Thus  passing  the  coast  we  arrived
in Cochin the 22 of March, where we found the  Cochin.
weather warme, but scarsity of victuals : for here
groweth neither corne  nor rice : and the  greatest  part
commeth  from  Bengala. They  have  here  very  bad  water,

501

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-91.

People  with  for  the  river  is  farre  off. This  bad  water  causeth  many

swollen  legges  ^f  ^^  people  to  be  like  lepers,  and  many  of  them  have

menttoned  also  i-in  i--"-  • ^  o

b-j  Joh.  their  legs  swollen  as bigge as  a  man m the  waste,  &

Huygen.  many  of  them  are  scant  able  to  go. These  people  here

be  Malabars,  and  of  the  race  of  the  Naires  of  Calicut :
and  they  differ  much  from  the  other  Malabars.  These
have  their  heads  very  full  of  haire,  and  bound  up  with
a  string :  and  there  doth  appeare  a  bush  without  the
band  wherewith  it  is  bound.  The  men  be  tall  and
strong,  and  good  archers  with  a  long  bow  and  a  long
arrow,  which  is  their  best  weapon :  yet  there  be  some
calivers  among  them,  but  they  handle  them  badly.
How  pepper  Heere  groweth the  pepper; and it  springeth up by

gioweth.  ^ ^j,gg  Qj.  ^  pole,  and is  like  our ivy  berry,  but  some-

thing longer  like  the  wheat  eare :  and  at  the  first  the
bunches  are  greene,  and  as  they  waxe  ripe  they  cut
them  off  and  dry  them.  The  leafe  is  much  lesser  then
the  ivy  leafe  and  thinner.  All  the  inhabitants  here
have  very  little  houses  covered  with  the  leaves  of  the
coco-trees.  The  men  be  of  a  reasonable  stature ;  the
Blacke  people  women  litle ;  all  blacke,  with  a  cloth  bound  about  their
middle  hanging  dowiic  to  their  hammes ;  all  the  rest  of
their  bodies  be  naked :  they  have  horrible  great  eares
with  many  rings  set  with  pearles  and  stones  in  them.
The  king  goeth  incached,  as  they  do  all ;  he  doth  not
remaine  in  a  place  above  five  or  sixe  dayes :  he  hath
many  houses,  but  they  be  but  litle :  his  guard  is  but
small  :  he  remooveth  from  one  house  to  another  accord-
ing to  their  order.  All  the  pepper  of  Calicut  and
course  cinamom  groweth  here  in  this  countrey.  The
best  cinamom  doth  come  from  Ceylon,  and  is  pilled
from  fine  yoong  trees.  Here  are  very  many  palmer  or
coco  trees,  which  is  their  chiefs  food :  for  it  is  their
meat  and  drinke :  and  yeeldeth  many  other  necessary
things,  as  I  have  declared  before.
II  Or  Calicut,  The  Naires  which  be  under  the  king  of  II  Samorin,
or  Cananor.  -^J^ich  be  Malabars,  have  alwayes  wars  with  the  Portu-
gals. The  king  hath  alwayes  peace  with  them ; but  his

502

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
people  goe  to  the  sea  to  robbe  &  steale.  Their  chiefe
captaine  is  called  Cogi  Alii ;  he  hath  three  castles  under
him.  When  the  Portugals  complaine  to  the  king,  he
sayth  he  doth  not  send  them  out :  but  he  consenteth
that  they  go.  They  range  all  the  coast  from  Ceylon
to  Goa,  and  go  by  foure  or  five  parowes  or  boats
together ;  and  have  in  every  one  of  them  fifty  or
threescore  men,  and  boord  presently.  They  do  much
harme  on  that  coast,  and  take  every  yere  many  foists
and  boats  of  the  Portugals.  Many  of  these  people  be
Moores.  This  kings  countrey  beginneth  twelve  leagues
from  Cochin,  and  reacheth  neere  unto  Goa.  I  remained
in  Cochin  untill  the  second  of  November,  which  was
eight  moneths ;  for  that  there  was  no  passage  that  went
away  in  all  that  time :  if  I  had  come  two  dayes  sooner
I  had  found  a  passage  presently.  From  Cochin  I  went
to  Goa,  where  I  remained  three  dayes.  From  Cochin  Goa.
to  Goa  is  an  hundred  leagues.  From  Goa  I  went  to
Chaul,  which  is  threescore  leagues,  where  I  remained  CAau/.
three  and  twenty  dayes :  and  there  making  my  pro-
vision of  things  necessary  for  the  shippe,  from  thence  I
departed  to  Ormus ;  where  I  stayed  for  a  passage  to  Omus.
Balsara  fifty  dayes.  From  Goa  to  Ormus  is  foure
hundred  leagues.

Here  I  thought  good,  before  I  make  an  end  of  this
my  booke,  to  declare  some  things  which  India  and  the
countrey  farther  Eastward  do  bring  forth.

The  pepper  groweth  in  many  parts  of  India,  espe-  ^^'  ^-  ^^5-]
cially  about  Cochin :  and  much  of  it  doeth  grow  in  ^^^/^^^^^
the  fields  among  the  bushes  without  any  labour:  and
when  it  is  ripe  they  go  and  gather  it.  The  shrubbe
is  like  unto  our  ivy  tree :  and  if  it  did  not  run  about
some  tree  or  pole,  it  would  fall  downe  and  rot.  When
they  first  gather  it,  it  is  greene ;  and  then  they  lay  it
in  the  Sun,  and  it  becommeth  blacke.

The ginger  groweth like unto  our  garlike, and the  Ginger.
root  is  the  ginger: it  is  to  be  found in  many  parts  of
India.

503

A.D.
1583-91.

Cloves.

Nutmegs  tff
maces.

Camphora.

Lignum  Aloes.

Long  pepper.
Muske.

Rubles,
saphires  and
spinels.
Diamanis.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  cloves  doe  come  from  the  lies  of  the  Moluccoes,
which  be  divers  Hands :  their  tree  is  like  to  our  bay-
tree.

The  nutmegs  and  maces  grow  together,  and  come
from  the  He  of  Banda :  the  tree  is  like  to  our  walnut
tree,  but  somewhat  lesser.

The  white  sandol  is  wood  very  sweet  &  in  great
request  among  the  Indians ;  for  they  grinde  it  with  a
litle  water,  and  anoynt  their  bodies  therewith :  it  com-
meth  from  the  Isle  of  Timor.

Camphora  is  a  precious  thing  among  the  Indians,  and
is  solde  dearer  then  golde.  I  thinke  none  of  it  commeth
for  Christendome.  That  which  is  compounded  commeth
from  China :  but  that  which  groweth  in  canes  and  is
the  best,  commeth  from  the  great  Isle  of  Borneo.

Lignum  Aloes  commeth  from  Cauchinchina.

The  benjamin  commeth  out  of  the  countreys  of  Siam
and  Jangomes.

The  long  pepper  groweth  in  Bengala,  in  Pegu,  and
in  the  Hands  of  the  Javas.

The  muske  commeth  out  of  Tartaric,  and  is  made
after  this  order,  by  report  of  the  marchants  which
bring  it  to  Pegu  to  sell ;  In  Tartarie  there  is  a  little
beast  like  unto  a  yong  roe,  which  they  take  in  snares,
and  beat  him  to  death  with  the  blood :  after  that  they
cut  out  the  bones,  and  beat  the  flesh  with  the  blood
very  small,  and  fill  the  skin  with  it :  and  hereof
commeth  the  muske.

Of  the  amber  they  holde  divers  opinions ;  but  most
men  say  it  commeth  out  of  the  sea,  and  that  they  finde
it  upon  the  shores  side.

The  rubies,  saphires,  and  spinelles  are  found  in  Pegu.

The  diamants  are  found  in  divers  places,  as  in  Bisnagar,
in  Agra,  in  Delli,  and  in  the  Hands  of  the  Javas.

The  best  pearles  come  from  the  Hand  of  Baharim  in
the  Persian  sea,  the  woorser  from  the  Piscaria  neere  the
Isle  of  Ceylon,  and  from  Aynam  a  great  Hand  on  the
Southermost  coast  of  China.

504

LINSCHOTEN'S REPORT

Spodium  and  many  other  kindes  of  drugs  come  from
Cambaia.

Now  to  returne  to  my  voyage ;  from  Ormus  I  went
to  Balsara  or  Basora,  and  from  Basora  to  Babylon  :  and
we  passed  the  most  part  of  the  way  by  the  strength  of
men  by  hailing  the  boat  up  the  river  with  a  long  cord.
From  Babylon  I  came  by  land  to  Mosul,  which  standeth
nere  to  Ninive,  which  is  all  ruinated  and  destroyed;  it
standeth  fast  by  the  river  of  Tigris.  From  Mosul  I
went  to  Merdin,  which  is  in  the  countrey  of  the
Armenians ;  but  now  there  dwell  in  that  place  a  people
which  they  call  Cordies,  or  Curdi.  From  Merdin  I  went
to  Orfa,  which  is  a  very  faire  towne,  and  it  hath  a  goodly
fountaine  ful  of  fish ;  where  the  Moores  hold  many  great
ceremonies  and  opinions  concerning  Abraham :  for  they
say  he  did  once  dwell  there.  From  thence  I  went  to
Bir,  &  so  passed  the  river  of  Euphrates.  From  Bir  I
went  to  Aleppo,  where  I  stayed  certaine  moneths  for
company ;  and  then  I  went  to  Tripolis ;  where  finding
English  shipping,  I  came  with  a  prosperous  voyage  to
London,  where  by  Gods  assistance  I  safely  arrived  the
29  of  April  1 59 1,  having  bene  eight  yeeres  out  of  my
native  countrey.

The  report  of  John  Huighen  van  Linschoten
concerning  M.  Newberies  and  M.  Fitches
imprisonment,  and  of  their  escape,  which
happened  while  he  was  in  Goa.

i|N  the  moneth  of  December,  Anno  1583,
there  arrived  in  the  towne  and  Iland
of  Ormus  foure  English  men,  which  came
from  Aleppo  in  the  countrey  of  Syria,
having  sailed  out  of  England,  &  passed
thorow  the  straights  of  Gibraltar  to
Tripoli  a  towne  and  haven  lying  on  the
coast  of  Syria,  where  all  the  ships  discharge  their  wares
&  marchandises,  &  from  thence  are  caried  by  land  unto

505

A.D.

1583-

Spodium.

Basora.
Babylon.

Mosul.

Merdin.

Orfa.

Bir.

Aleppo.
Tripolis.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

Aleppo,  which  is  nine  dayes  journy.  In  Aleppo  there
are  resident  divers  marchants  &  factours  of  all  nations,  as
Italians,  French  men,  English  men,  Armenians,  Turks
and  Moores,  every  man  having  his  religion  apart,  paying
tribute  unto  the  great  Turke.  In  that  towne  there  is
great  traffique,  for  that  from  thence  every  yeere  twise,
there  travel!  two  Caffyls,  that  is,  companies  of  people  and
-  camels,  which  travell  unto  India,  Persia,  Arabia,  and  all
the  countreys  bordering  on  the  same,  and  deale  in  all
[11.  i.  266.]  sorts  of  marchandise,  both  to  and  from  those  countreys,
as  I  in  another  place  have  already  declared.  Three  of
the  sayd  English  men  aforesayd,  were  sent  by  the
company  of  English  men  that  are  resident  in  Aleppo,
to  see  if  in  Ormus  they  might  keepe  any  factours,  and  so
traffique  in  that  place,  like  as  also  the  Italians  do,  that
is  to  say,  the  Venetians  which  in  Ormus,  Goa,  and
Malacca  have  their  factours,  and  traffique  there,  aswell
for  stones  and  pearles,  as  for  other  wares  and  spices  of
those  countreyes,  which  from  thence  are  caried  over  land
JohnNewbery  into  Venice.  One  of  these  English  men  had  bene  once
had  beenetn  before  m  the  sayd  towne  of  Ormus,  and  there  had  taken
Anno  11:81  good  information  of  the  trade,  and  upon  his  advise  and
advertisement,  the  other  were  as  then  come  thither  with
him,  bringing  great  store  of  marchandises  with  them,
as  Clothes,  Saffion,  all  kindes  of  drinking  glasses,  and
Haberdashers  wares,  as  looking  glasses,  knives,  and  such
like  stuffe :  and  to  conclude,  brought  with  them  all
kinde  of  small  wares  that  may  be  devised.  And  although
those  wares  amounted  unto  great  summes  of  money,
notwithstanding  it  was  but  onely  a  shadow  or  colour,
thereby  to  give  no  occasion  to  be  mistrusted,  or  seene
into :  for  that  their  principal!  intent  was  to  buy  great
quantities  of  precious  stones,  as  Diamants,  Pearles,
Rubies,  &c.  to  the  which  end  they  brought  with  them
a  great  summe  of  money  and  golde,  and  that  very
secretly,  not  to  be  deceived  or  robbed  thereof,  or  to
runne  into  any  danger  for  the  same.  They  being  thus
arrived  in  Ormus,  hired  a  shoppe,  and beganne  to  sell

506

LINSCHOTEN'S REPORT  ad.

1583.
their  wares :  which  the  Italians  perceiving,  whose  factours
continue  there  (as  I  sayd  before)  and  fearing  that  those
English  men  finding  good  vent  for  their  commodities  in
that  place,  would  be  resident  therein,  and  so  dayly
increase,  which  would  be  no  small  losse  and  hinderance
unto  them,  did.  presently  invent  all  the  subtile  meanes
they  could  to  hinder  them  :  and  to  that  end  they  went
unto  the  Captaine  of  Ormus,  as  then  called  Don  Gonsalo
de  Meneses,  telling  him  that  there  were  certaine  English
men  come  into  Ormus,  that  were  sent  onely  to  spie  the
countrey ;  and  sayd  further,  that  they  were  heretikes :
and  therefore  they  sayd  it  was  convenient  they  should
not  be  suffered  so  to  depart,  without  being  examined,
and  punished  as  enemies,  to  the  example  of  others.  The
Captaine  being  a  friend  unto  the  English  men,  by  reason
that  one  of  them  which  had  bene  there  before,  had  given
him  certaine  presents,  would  not  be  perswaded  to  trouble
them,  but  shipped  them  with  all  their  wares  in  a  shippe
that  was  to  saile  for  Goa,  and  sent  them  to  the  Viceroy,
that  he  might  examine  and  trie  them,  as  he  thought
good :  where  when  they  were  arrived,  they  were  cast  into
prison,  and  fi^rst  examined  whether  they  were  good
Christians  or  no :  and  because  they  could  speake  but
badde  Portugall,  onely  two  of  them  spake  good  Dutch,
as  having  bene  certaine  yeres  in  the  Low  countreyes,  and
there  traffiked,  there  was  a  Dutch  Jesuite  born  in  the
towne  of  Bruges  in  Flanders,  that  had  bene  resident  in
the  Indies  for  the  space  of  thirty  yers,  sent  unto  them,
to  undermine  and  examine  them  :  wherein  they  behaved
themselves  so  well,  that  they  were  holden  and  esteemed
for  good  and  Catholicke  Christians :  yet  still  suspected,
because  they  were  strangers,  and  specially  English  men.
The  Jesuites  still  tolde  them  that  they  should  be  sent
prisoners  into  Portugall,  wishing  them  to  leave  off  their
trade  of  marchandise,  and  to  become  Jesuites,  promising
them  thereby  to  defend  them  from  all  trouble.  The
cause  why  they  sayd  so,  and  perswaded  them  in  that
earnest  maner,  was,  for  that  the  Dutch  Jesuite  had  secretly

507

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

bene  advertised  of  great  summes  of  money  which  they
had  about  them,  and  sought  to  get  the  same  into  their
fingers,  for  that  the  first  vowe  and  promise  they  make
at  their  entrance  into  their  Order,  is,  to  procure  the
welfare  of  their  sayd  Order,  by  what  meanes  soever  it  be.
But  although  the  English  men  denied  them,  and  refused
the  Order,  saying,  that  they  were  unfit  for  such  places,
neverthelesse  they  proceeded  so  farre,  that  one  of  them,
being  a  Painter  (that  came  with  the  other  three  for
company,  to  see  the  countreys,  and  to  seeke  his  fortune,
and  was  not  sent  thither  by  the  English  marchants)  partly
for  feare,  and  partly  for  want  of  meanes  to  relieve
himselfe,  promised  them  to  become  a  Jesuite  :  and
although  they  knew  and  well  perceived  he  was  not  any  of
those  that  had  the  treasure,  yet  because  he  was  a  Painter,
whereof  there  are  but  few  in  India,  and  that  they  had
great  need  of  him  to  paint  their  Church,  which  otherwise
would  cost  them  great  charges,  to  bring  one  from  Portu-
gall,  they  were  very  glad  thereof,  hoping  in  time  to  get
the  rest  of  them  with  all  their  money  into  their  felloship :
so  that  to  conclude,  they  made  this  Painter  a  Jesuite,
where  he  continued  certaine  dayes,  giving  him  good
store  of  worke  to  doe,  and  entertaining  him  with  all  the
favour  and  friendship  they  could  devise,  and  all  to  winne
the  rest,  to  be  a  pray  for  them :  but  the  other  three
continued  still  in  prison,  being  in  great  feare,  because
they  understood  no  man  that  came  to  them,  nor  any  man
almost  knew  what  they  sayd :  till  in  the  end  it  was
tolde  them  that  certaine  Dutch  men  dwelt  in  the  Arch-
bishops house,  and  counsell  given  them  to  send  unto
them,  whereat  they  much  rejoyced,  and  sent  to  me  and
an  other  Dutch  man,  desiring  us  once  to  come  and  speake
with  them,  which  we  presently  did,  and  they  with  teares
in  their  eyes  made  complaint  unto  us  of  their  hard  usage,
shewing  us  from  point  to  point  (as  it  is  sayd  before)  why
.  i.  267.]  they  were  come  into  the  countrey,  withall  desiring  us
for  Gods  cause,  if  we  might  by  any  meanes,  to  helpe
them,  that  they  might  be set  at  liberty  upon  sureties,

508

LINSCHOTEN'S REPORT  a.d.

1584.
being  ready  to  endure  what  justice  should  ordaine  for
them,  saying,  that  if  it  were  found  contrary,  and  that
they  were  other  then  travelling  marchants,  and  sought  to
finde  out  further  benefit  by  their  wares,  they  would  be
content  to  be  punished.  With  that  we  departed  from
them,  promising  them  to  do  our  best :  and  in  the  end  we
obtained  so  much  of  the  Archbishop,  that  he  went  unto
the  Viceroy  to  deliver  our  petition,  and  perswaded  him
so  well,  that  he  was  content  to  set  them  at  libertie,  and
that  their  goods  should  be  delivered  unto  them  againe,
upon  condition  they  should  put  in  sureties  for  two
thousand  pardawes,  not  to  depart  the  countrey  before
other  order  should  be  taken  with  them.  Thereupon
they  presently  found  a  Citizen  of  the  towne  that  was
their  surety  for  two  thousand  pardawes,  to  whom  they
payed  in  hand  one  thousand  and  three  hundred  pardawes,
and  because  they  sayd  they  had  no  more  ready  money,
he  gave  them  credit,  seeing  what  store  of  marchandise
they  had,  whereby  at  all  times  iif  need  were,  he  might  be
satisfied :  and  by  that  meanes  they  were  delivered  out  of
prison,  and  hired  themselves  an  house,  and  beganne  to
set  open  shoppe :  so  that  they  uttered  much  ware,  and
were  presently  well  knowen  among  all  the  marchants,
because  they  alwayes  respected  gentlemen,  specially  such
as  bought  their  wares,  shewing  great  courtesie  and  honour
unto  them,  whereby  they  woon  much  credit,  and  were
beloved  of  all  men,  so  that  every  man  favoured  them,  and
was  willing  to  doe  them  pleasure.  To  us  they  shewed
great  friendship,  for  whose  sake  the  Archbishop  favoured
them  much,  and  shewed  them  very  good  countenance,
which  they  knew  well  how  to  increase,  by  offering  him
many  presents,  although  he  would  not  receive  them,
neither  would  ever  take  gift  or  present  at  any  mans  hands.
Likewise  they  behaved  themselves  so  discreetly  that  no
man  caried  an  evill  eye,  no,  nor  an  evill  thought  towards
them.  Which  liked  not  the  Jesuites,  because  it  hindered
them  from  that  they  hoped  for,  so  that  they  ceased  not
still by  this  Dutch Jesuite  to  put them in feare, that

509

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

they  should  be  sent  into  Portugall  to  the  King,  counsell-
ing them  to  yeeld  themselves  Jesuites  into  their  Cloister,
which  if  they  did,  he  sayd  they  would  defend  them  from
all troubles, saying further, that he counselled them
therin  as  a  friend,  &  one  that  knew  for  certaine  that  it
was so determined by the Viceroyes Privy councell :
which  to  effect  he  sayd  they  stayed  but  for  shipping  that
should  saile  for  Portugall,  with  divers  other  perswasions,
to  put  them  in  some  feare,  and  so  to  effect  their  purpose.
The  English  men  to  the  contrary,  durst  not  say  any  thing
to  them,  but  answered, that  as  yet they  would  stay  a
while,  and  consider  thereof,  thereby  putting  the  Jesuites
in  comfort,  as  one  among  them,  being  the  principall  of
them  (called  John  Newbery)  complained  unto  me  often
times,  saying  that  he  knew  not  what to  say  or  thinke
therein,  or  which  way  he  might  be  ridde  of  those  troubles  :
but  in  the  end  they  determined  with  themselves  to  depart
from thence,  and  secretly  by meanes of  other  friendes
they  imployed  their  money  in  precious  stones ;  which  the
better  to  effect,  one  of  them  was  a  Jeweller,  and  for  the
same  purpose  came  with  them. Which  being  concluded
among  them,  they  durst  not  make knowen  to  any  man,
neither  did  they  credite  us  so  much,  as  to  shew  us  their
mindes  therein,  although  they  tolde  us  all  whatsoever  they
knew. But  on  a  Whitsunday  they  went  abroad  to  sport
themselves about three  miles from  Goa, in  the mouth
of  the  river  in  a  countrey  called  Bardes,  having  with  them
good store  of meate and drinke. And because they
should  not  be  suspected,  they  left  their  house  and  shoppe,
with  some  wares  therein  unsolde,  in  custody  of  a  Dutch
boy,  by  us  provided  for  them,  that  looked  unto  it. This
boy  was  in  the  house  not  knowing  their  intent,  and  being
in  Bardes,  they  had  with  them  a  Patamar,  which  is  one
of  the  Indian  postes,  which  in  the  Winter  times  carieth
letters  from  one  place  to  the  other,  whom  they  had  hired
to  guide  them  : and  because  that  betweene  Bardes  and
the  firme  land  there  is  but  a  little  river,  in  a  maner  halfe
drie,  they  passed  over  it  on  foot,  and  so  travelled  by  land,

510

LINSCHOTEN'S REPORT  a.d.

1584.

being  never  heard  of  againe :  but  it  is  thought  they
arrived  in  Aleppo,  as  some  say,  but  they  know  not
certainely.  Their  greatest  hope  was  that  John  Newbery
could  speake  the  Arabian  tongue,  which  is  used  in  all  'T^^  Arabian
those  countreys,  or  at  the  least  understood ;  for  it  is  very  ^Hfj^^^^^^^f^
common  in  all  places  there  abouts,  as  French  with  us.
Newes  being  come  to  Goa,  there  was  a  great  stirre  and
murmuring  among  the  people,  and  we  much  woondered
at  it :  for  many  were  of  opinion,  that  we  had  given  them
counsell  so  to  do :  and  presently  their  surety  seised  upon
the  goods  remaining,  which  might  amount  unto  above
two  hundred  pardawes ;  and  with  that  and  the  money
he  had  received  of  the  English  men,  he  went  unto  the
Viceroy,  and  delivered  it  unto  him :  which  the  Viceroy
having  received,  forgave  him  the  rest.  This  flight  of  the
English  men  grieved  the  Jesuites  most,  because  they  had
lost  such  a  praye,  which  they  made  sure  account  of:
whereupon  the  Dutch  Jesuite  came  to  us  to  aske  us  if
we  knew  thereof,  saying,  that  if  he  had  suspected  so
much,  he  would  have  dealt  otherwise,  for  that  he  sayd,
he  once  had  in  his  hands  of  theirs  a  bagge  wherein  was
forty  thousand  veneseanders  (ech  veneseander  being  two  [II.  i.  268.]
pardawes)  which  was  when  they  were  in  prison.  And
that  they  had  alwayes  put  him  in  comfort  to  accomplish
his  desire :  upon  the  which  promise  he  gave  them  their
money  againe,  which  otherwise  they  should  not  so  lightly
have  come  by,  or  peradventure  never,  as  he  openly  sayd :
and  in  the  end  he  called  them  hereticks,  and  spies,  with  a
thousand  other  railing  speeches,  which  he  uttered  against
them.  The  English  man  that  was  become  a  Jesuite,  hearing
that  his  companions  were  gone,  and  perceiving  that  the
Jesuites  shewed  him  not  so  great  favour,  neither  used  him
so  well  as  they  did  at  the  first,  repented  himselfe ;  and
seeing  he  had  not  as  then  made  any  solemne  promise,  and
being  counselled  to  leave  the  house,  and  tolde  that  he
could  not  want  a  living  in  the  towne,  as  also  that  the
Jesuites  could  not  keepe  him  there  without  he  were
willing  to  stay,  so  they  could  not  accuse  him  of  any  thing,

511

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

he  tolde  them  flatly  that  he  had  no  desire  to  stay  within
the  Cloister.  And  although  they  used  all  the  meanes
they  could  to  keepe  him  there,  yet  he  would  not  stay,
but  hired  an  house  without  the  Cloister,  and  opened
shoppe,  where  he  had  good  store  of  worke :  and  in  the
end  married  a  Mestizos  daughter  of  the  towne,  so  that  he
made  his  account  to  stay  there  while  he  lived.  By  this
English  man  I  was  instructed  of  all  the  wayes,  trades,  and
voyages  of  the  countrey,  betweene  Aleppo  and  Ormus,
and  of  all  the  ordinances  and  common  customes  which
they  usually  holde  during  their  voyage  over  the  land,  as
also  of  the  places  and  townes  where  they  passed.  And
since  those  English  mens  departures  from  Goa,  there
never  arrived  any  strangers,  either  English  or  others,
by  land,  in  the  sayd  countreys,  but  onely  Italians  which
dayly  traffique  over  land,  and  use  continuall  trade  going
and  comming  that  way.

END OF VOLUME V.

GLASGOW  : PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE  AND CO.

to

^mm

CLAPP

3  5002  00074  2028

Hakluyt,  Richard

The  principal  navigations  voyages  Iraffi

G  240  . H2  1303  5

Hakluyt,  Richard, 1552?-
1616,

The-  principal  navigations
voyacLes  traffiQues  &
