The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 10 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 10 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  Traffiques  and

Discoveries  of  the  EngHsh  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume X

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT MACLEHOSE Gf  COMPANY LTD, FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO,  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMIV

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE,

The Principal

Navigations  Voyages
Traffiques  &  Discoveries

of  the  EngHsh Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within  the

compasse  of  these 1600  Yeeres

By
RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church  in  Oxford

VOLUME X

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMIV

j^A^'^.i-

16

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages  of  this  tenth  volume
made  to  all  the  Isles  called  Las  Antillas,
and  along  the  Coasts  of  Tierra  Firma,  and
certeine  voyages  made  for  the  discovery  of
the  large,  rich,  and  beautifuU  Empire  of
Guiana,  with  the  discourses  and  letters
pending  upon  the  voyages  of  this  tenth
volume  :

The  voyage  of  sir  Thomas  Pert,  and  Sebastian  Cabot  in
the  yere  1 5 1 6,  to  Brasil,  Santo  Domingo  and  Sant
Juan  de  Puerto  rice. .....

The  voyage  of  Thomas  Tison  an  English  man  to  the
West  Indies  before  the  yere 1526.

The  first  voyage  of  the  right  worshipful!  and  valiant
knight  sir  John  Hawkins,  sometimes  treasurer  of  her
Majesties  navy  royall,  made  to  the  West  Indies  in
the  yere 1562. ......

The  second  voyage  made  by  the  R.  W.  sir  John  Hawkins
knight  with  the  Jesus  of  Lubec,  one  of  her  Majesties
ships,  and  the  Salomon,  and  two  barks,  to  the  coast
of  Guinie,  &  from  thence  to  the  isle  of  Dominica,
all  along  the  coast  of  Tierra  firma,  &  so  homewards
about  the  cape  of  S.  Anton  upon  the  West  end  of
Cuba,  &  thorow  the  chanel  of  Bahama;  Begun  1564.

V

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  third  troublesome  voyage  of  the  right  worshipful!  sir
John  Hawkins,  with  the  Jesus  of  Lubec,  the  Minion,
and  foure  other  ships,  to  the  parts  of  Guinea,  and
the  coasts  of  Tierra  firma,  and  Nueva  Espanna,  Anno
1567,  & 1568. ......  64

The  first  voyage  attempted  and  set  foorth  by  the  valiant
and  expert  captaine  M.  Francis  Drake,  with  a  ship
called  The  Dragon,  and  another  ship  &  a  pinnesse,
to  Nombre  de  Dios  and  Dariene,  about  the  yeere
1572 75

The  voyage  of  John  Oxnam  of  Plimmouth  to  the  West
India,  and  over  the  streight  of  Dariene  into  the
South  sea.  Anno 1575.  .  .  .  .  77

The  voyage  of  M.  Andrew  Barker  of  Bristoll  with  two
shippes,  the  one  called  The  Ragged  stafte,  and  the
other  The  Beare,  to  the  coast  of  Tierra  firma,  and
the  bay  of  the  Honduras  in  the  West  Indies,  Anno
1576.  .......  82

The  opinion  of  Don  Alvaro  Bafan  marques  of  Santa  Cruz,
and  high  admirall  of  Spaine,  touching  the  fleet  of  sir
Francis  Drake  lying  at  the  isles  of  Bayona  on  the
coast  of  "Galicia,  written  in  Lisbon  the  26  of  October
1585,  after  the  account  of  Spaine. .  .  .88

The  famous  expedition  of  sir  Francis  Drake  to  the  West
Indies,  wherein  were  taken  the  cities  of  saint  lago,
saint  Domingo,  Cartagena,  with  the  Fort  and  towne
of  saint  Augustin  in  Florida,  in  the  yeers  1585?  ^"d
15^6 97

A  resolution  of  the  principall  land-captaines,  which  accom-
panied sir  Francis  Drake  in  his  memorable  voyage  to
the  West  Indies,  1585;  what  course  they  thought
most  expedient  to  be  taken.  Given  at  Cartagena
the  27  of  February 1585.  .  .  .  . 121

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  relation  of  the  surveying,  new  building,  finishing,
making,  and  meading  of  certeine  ports,  harbours,
forts,  and  cities  in  the  West  Indies :  written  by
Baptista  Antonio  the  king  of  Spaines  surveyour  in
those  parts 1587. .  .  .  .  .  .135

The  voyage  of  William  Michelson  and  William  Mace  of
RatclifFe,  master  of  a  ship  called  The  Dog,  made  to
the  bay  of  Mexico,  anno 1589.  .  .  . 156

Twelve  Spanish  letters  written  from  divers  places  of  the
islands  and  of  the  maine  land,  aswell  of  Nueva
Espanna,  as  of  Tierra  firma  and  Peru,  intercepted  by
the  ships  of  the  Worshipfull  M.  John  Wats,  disclosing
many  secrets  touching  the  aforesayd  countr^s,  and
the  state  of  the  South  sea,  and  the  trade  to  the
Philippinas.  .  .  .  .  .  .158

The  voyage  and  valiant  fight  of  The  Content^  a  ship  of
the  right  honourable  sir  George  Carey  knight,  L.
Hunsdon,  L.  Chamberlaine,  Captaine  of  the  honour-
able band  of  her  Majesties  Pensioners,  and  Governour
of  the  isle  of  Wight,  &c. 1591.  .  .  . 178

The  voyage  of  M.  Christopher  Newport  with  a  fleete  of
3.  ships  and  a  Pinnesse  to  the  Isles  of  Dominica,
Saint  Juan  de  puerto  rico,  Hispaniola,  and  to  the
Bay  of  the  Honduras,  begun  in  January 1591. . 184

The  voyage  of  M.  William  King  Captaine  (M.  Moore,
M.  How,  &  M.  Boreman  being  owners)  in  the
Salomon  of  200.  tunnes,  and  the  Jane  Bonaventure
of  40.  tunnes,  set  foorth  from  RatclifFe 1592.  . 190

The  voyage  of  Henry  May  one  of  M.  James  Lancaster
his  company,  in  his  navigation  to  the  East  Indies,
1591,  &  1592  :  who  in  his  returne  with  M.  Lancaster
by  the  yles  of  Trinidad,  Mona,  &  Hispaniola,  was
about  Cape  Tiburon  taken  into  a  French  ship  under
the  conduct  of  Capitan  de  la  Barbotiere,  which  ship

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

was  cast  away  upon  the  yles  of  Bermuda  :  where  all
the  company  that  escaped  drowning  remained  for
certain  moneths,  built  themselves  a  barke,  sailed  to
Newfoundland,  and  so  home 1593. .  .  .194.

The  voyage  of  sir  Robert  Duddeley  to  the  yle  of  Trinidad
and  the  coast  of  Paria :  with  his  returne  homeward  by
the  yles  of  Granata,  Santa  Cruz,  Sant  Juan  de  puerto
rico,  Mona,  Zacheo,  the  sholdes  called  Abre  ojos,  and
the  yle  of  Bermuda,  Anno 1594, & 1595. .  . 203

The  interpretation  of  certeine  words  of  the  language  of
Trinidad  annexed  to  the  voyage  of  sir  Robert
Duddeley. .  .  .  .  .  .  .211

The  voyage  of  sir  Amias  Preston  and  Captaine  George
Sommers  to  the  West  Indies,  begun  in  March  1595  :
wherein  divers  ylands,  cities,  townes,  and  forts  were
part  taken  and  ransomed,  and  part  burned. .  . 213

The  last  voyage  of  sir  Francis  Drake  &  sir  John  Hawkins,
intended  for  some  special  services  on  the  ylands  and
maine  of  the  West  Indies,  Anno  1595.  In  which
voyage  both  the  foresaide  knights  died  by  sicknes. . 226

A libell of Spanish lies written by Don Bernaldino
*  Or,  Villa  delgadillo de *Avellaneda, generall of the king of

nueva.  Spaines armada, concerning some part of the last

voyage  of  sir Francis Drake  : together  with  a  con-
futation thereof  by  M. Henry  Savile,  &c. .  . 246

The  voyage  of  sir  Antony  Sherley  to  S.  lago,  Dominica,
Margarita,  along  the  coast  of  Tierra  firma,  to  the
yle  of  Jamaica,  the  bay  of  the  Honduras,  30.  leagues
up  Rio  dolce,  and  homeward  by  Newfoundland,  1596. 266

The  voyage  of  M.  William  Parker  of  Plimmouth  to  Mar-
garita, Jamaica,  Truxillo,  Puerto  de  cavallos,  &c.  with
his  surprize  of  Campeche,  the  chiefe  towne  of  lucatan.
An. 1596,  1597. ...... 277

viii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

An  excellent  ruttier  for the islands  of  the  West Indies,

and  for  Tierra  firma,  and  Nueva  Espanna. .  . 280

A  principall  ruttier  conteining  most  particular  directions
to  saile  from  Saint  Lucar  in  Andaluzia,  by  the
Canaries,  the  Antillas,  and  the  other  greater  Isles
Westward  of  them,  to  Saint  Juan  de  Ullua  in  Nueva
Espanna. ....... 306

A  declaration  of  the  Capes  and  Islands  aswell  of  Madera,
the  Canaries,  and  The  west  Indies,  as  of  the  A9ores,
and  the  Isles  of  Cabo  Verde. .  .  .  .332

A  declaration  of  the  longitudes  or  Westerne  and  Easterne
distances  from  Spaine  to  New  Spaine  in  America,
and  from  thence  backe  againe  to  Spaine. .  • 33^

The  Epistle  Dedicatorie  of  sir  Walter  Ralegh  to  the  right
honourable  the  L.  Charles  Howard  knight  of  the
Garter  &c.  and  sir  Robert  Cecil,  Councellour  &c. . 338

The  Epistle  of  sir  Walter  Ralegh  to  the  reader.  . 343 ^^

The  voyage  of  sir  Walter  Ralegh  himselfe  to  the  Isle  of
Trinidad,  where  he  tooke  the  citie  of  Saint  Josepho,
and  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  the  captaine  thereof:
from  whence  with  a  barge  and  certaine  boates  he
passed  up  the  bay  of  Guanipa,  the  river  of  Amana
one  of  the  mouths  of  the  great  Orenoque,  the  maine
river  of  Orenoque  it  selfe,  and  other  rivers,  for  the
space  of  400.  miles :  and  in  his  returne  homeward
sacked  &  burnt  the  town  of  Cumana 1595.  . 348 t^~

An  advertisement  to  the  Reader  concerning  certaine  letters

of  the  Spaniards  intercepted  at  Sea. .  .  .432

Foure  severall  testimonies  concerning  the  rich  Empire  of
Guiana,  called  by  the  Spaniards,  El  Nuevo  Dorado,
collected  out  of  certaine  Spanish  letters  taken  at  sea
by  captaine  George  Popham  anno 1594. .  . 433

ix

/

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

Foure personall reports of  certaine Spaniards and  of  a

Frenchman,  concerning  El  Nuevo  Dorado. .  . 439

The  Epistle  of  master  Laurence  Keymis  to  the  reader. . 44.1

De  Guiana  carmen  Epicum. ..... 446

The  second  voyage  to  Guiana  performed  and  written  in

the  yeere 1596.  by  Laurence  Keymis  gentleman. . 452

A  table  of  the  names  of  the  rivers,  nations,  townes,  and
Caciques  or  captaines,  which  were  discovered  in  the
voyage  of  M.  Laurence  Keymis  before  mentioned. . 490

A  catalogue  of  the  names  of  those  worthy  Spaniards  that

have  sought  to  discover  and  conquer  Guiana.  . 496

An  advertisement  of  M.  Laurence  Keymis  to  the  reader. 499

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Sir  Francis  Drake, ..... Frontispiece

Sir  Francis  Drake,  son  of  Edmund  Drake,  sailor  and  after-
wards Vicar  of  Upchurch,  was  born  at  Crowndale,
near  Tavistock  about  1545,  but  the  exact  date  is
uncertain.  He  was  apprenticed  when  young  to  the
master  of  a  Channel  coaster,  and  his  master,  dying
childless,  left  the  vessel  to  him.  He  seems  to  have
followed  this  trade  for  a  short  time,  but  in  1565-6
went  on  some  voyages  to  Guinea  and  the  Spanish
Main  with  Captain  Lovell.  In  1 567  he  commanded
the  'Judith'  of  50  tons  in  Sir  John  Hawkins'  voyage
to  the  West  Indies,  and  barely  escaped  in  the  fight
at  San  Juan  de  UUoa.  Immediately  on  his  return
to  England,  Drake  was  sent  to  London  to  *  inform  Sir
William  Cecil  of  all  the  proceedings  of  the  expedition.'
In  1570  he  went  on  a  voyage  to  the  West  Indies
with  two  ships,  the  '  Dragon '  and  the  '  Swan,'  and
in  1 571  with  the  '  Swan  '  alone, '  to  gain  such  intel-
ligences as  might  further  him  to  get  some  amends
for  his  loss '  at  San  Juan  de  Ulloa.  '  And  having
in  those  two  voyages  gotten  such  certain  notice  of
the  persons  and  places  aimed  at  as  he  thought
requisite '  he  resolved  on  a  third  voyage.  He  sailed
from  Plymouth  on  24th  May  1572  with  two  small
ships,  the  *  Pasha '  and  *  Swan,'  carrying  seventy  three
men,  and  three  '  dainty '  pinnaces  '  all  in  pieces
and  stowed  aboard  to  be  set  up  again  as  occasion
served'  with  intent  to  land  at  Nombre  de  Dios.
xi

ILLUSTRATIONS

On  29th  July  they  landed  at  Nombre  de  Dios
and  after  a  sharp  fight  captured  the  town.  Drake
however  was  severely  wounded,  and  his  men  forcibly
removed  him  to  the  boats.  After  burning  Porto
Bello,  Drake  with  eighteen  men  and  a  few  Maroons
marched  across  the  Isthmus  towards  Panama.  It
was  on  this  march  that  Drake,  climbing  a  tree
pointed  out  by  his  guides,  first  saw  the  Pacific,  and

*  besought  Almighty  God  of  his  goodness  to  give
him  life  and  leave  to  sail  once  in  an  English  ship
on  that  sea.'  After  sacking  Venta  Cruz  and  acquiring
much  treasure,  he  sailed  homeward  and  arrived  in
Plymouth  on  Sunday,  9th  August  1573,  in  church
hours,  when  '  the  news  of  Drake's  return  did  so
speedily  pass  over  all  the  church  and  surpass  their
minds  with  delight  and  desire  to  see  him  that  very
few  or  none  remained  with  the  preacher.'  From
1573  to  1576  Drake  saw  service  in  Ireland.  On
13th  December  1577  he  sailed  in  the  'Pelican'  on
his  voyage  of  circum-navigation,  a  detailed  account
of  which  is  given  in  Volume  XL  On  26th  Sep-
tember 1580  he  arrived  home  'very  richly  fraught
with  gold,  silver,  silk,  pearls  and  precious  stones.'
On  4th  April  1581  he  was  knighted  by  the
Queen  on  the  deck  of  the  '  Golden  Hind '  (as  the

*  Pelican '  had  been  re-christened  on  entering
Magellan  Straits).  In  1582  Drake  was  Mayor  of
Plymouth.  In  the  Parliament  of  1584-5  he  sat
as  member  for  Bossiney,  and  was  one  of  the  Com-
mittee on  the  bill  for  supplying  Plymouth  with
water.  On  14th  September  1585  he  sailed  from
Plymouth  on  the  expedition  to  the  West  Indies,  the
account  of  which  is  given  at  page  97.  Shortly  after
his  return  home  in  July  1586  Drake  was  placed  in
charge  of  the  shipping  at  Plymouth.  In  November
1586  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  Netherlands.
On  2nd  April  1587  he  sailed  for  Spain  commissioned

*  to  impeach  the  joining  together  of  the  King  of
Spain's  fleet out of  their  several  ports.' On the

ILLUSTRATIONS

19th  April  he  attacked  Cadiz,  sank  or  burnt  thirty-
three  vessels  and  carried  away  four  (see  his  despatch
given  in  Volume  VI.,  page  440  of  this  edition).
He  next  captured  the  Castle  of  Sagres  and  held
Cape  St.  Vincent,  and  then  making  for  the  Azores
he  captured  a  great  Portuguese  Carrack  and  returned
to  England  in  the  end  of  June.  On  the  12th  July
1588  the  English  fleet  put  out  to  search  for  the
Spanish  Armada,  Drake  being  Vice-Admiral  under
Lord  Howard  of  Effingham,  but  a  summer  gale  drove
them  back  to  Plymouth.  On  the  19th  of  July  the
Armada  was  sighted,  and  from  that  day  to  the  2nd
of  August  the  fight  with  and  pursuit  of  the  Armada
was  continued.  On  18th  April  1589  Drake  put  to
sea  in  command  of  an  expedition  to  invade  Spain
and  Portugal,  with  Sir  John  Norreys  in  command
of  the  land  forces.  The  account  of  this  expedition
is  given  by  Hakluyt  (Volume  VI.,  page  470).
From  December  1590  to  April  1591  Drake  was
engaged  in  bringing  the  river  Meavy  to  Plymouth
for  the  water  supply  of  the  town  :  when  this  was
done  he  set  about  building  six  corn-mills.  In  1593
he  represented  Plymouth  in  Parliament.  During
the  winter  of  1594  and  spring  of  1595  Drake  was
preparing  for  what  proved  to  be  his  last  expedition
to  the  West  Indies.  On  the  28th  August  the  Ex-
pedition sailed,  with  Sir  John  Hawkins  as  Vice-
Admiral.  It  was  however  a  failure.  News  of  its
approach  had  reached  the  West  Indies,  and  every-
where preparations  had  been  made  to  receive  it.
Hawkins  died  off  Porto  Rico  on  the  nth  November:
the  same  evening  a  shot  from  one  of  the  batteries
'  strake  the  stoole  from  under '  Drake  as  he  sat  at
supper  *  but  hurt  him  not,'  though  it  killed  Sir
Nicholas  Clifibrd,  the  Commander  of  the  land  forces.
On  the  15  th  January  1596  off  Nombre  de  Dios
Drake  '  began  to  keepe  his  cabin  and  to  complain  of
a  scowring  or  fluxe,'  and  on  the  28th  he  died.  He
was  buried  a  league  from  shore  in  a  leaden  coffin,
xiii

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

'  For  a  last  and  fitting  honour  to  the  dead,  two
vessels  of  his  own  fleet  and  all  his  last  taken  prizes
were  sunk  near  where  he  lay,  while  ashore  the  fort
which  the  Spaniards  had  just  completed  was  given
to  the  flames.'  (Corbett,  Drake  and  the  Tudor  Navy,
Vol.  II.,  p.  430.)  The  portrait  here  reproduced
is  taken  from  that  in  a  copy  in  the  British  Museum
of  the  Dutch  Chart  published  by  Judocus  Hondius
about  1595.)

Plan  of  Santiago,  .  .  .  .  . .1x2

Reproduced  from  the  original  in  A  Sumniarie  and  True
Discourse  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's  West  Indian  Voyage
in  the  Grenville  Library  in  the  British  Museum.
The  plan  shows  the  English  fleet  at  anchor  before
the  town  ;  Drake's  ship,  the  '  Elizabeth  Bonaven-
ture'  of  600  tons,  distinguishable  by  the  admiral's
flag,  the  Cross  of  St.  George,  flown  on  the  main
mast,  is  shown  in  the  foreground.

A  Spanish  Treasure  Frigate, . .  . . i6o

The  Spanish  Treasure  Frigates  were  specially  designed  by
Pero  Menendez  Marquez  to  carry  treasure  from
the  West  Indies  to  Spain.  '  They  are  very  bigge
and  excellent  of  sayle,  which  will  carie  i  50  men  a
piece  with  souldiers  and  mariners.  And  having
good  ordinance,  there  are  fewe  or  none  of  our
enemies  that  can  offend  us.  For  wee  shall  both
leave  and  take  at  all  times  when  we  list'  (p.  158).
The  Frigate  here  represented  is  '104  foote  by  the
keele'  and  '34  foote  in  bredth '  on  the  main  deck.
Her  armament  consisted  of  culverins  (i8-pounders)
on  the  main  deck,  demi-culverins  (9-pounders)  on
the  upper  deck,  and  falcons  (3-pounders)  on  the
spar  deck.  Forward  on  a  platform  on  the  main
deck  was  '  a  place  of  muskett  defence  for  their  mus-
ketcrs  to  plaie  notwithstanding  their  great  ordnance'
— an  extremely  uncomfortable  position,  one  would

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

think,  in  a  heavy  sea.  The  legend  aft  reads :  *  The
armes  of  St.  Diago  a  special  note  to  know  them.'
The  drawing,  first  reproduced  by  Mr,  Julian  Cor-
bett  in  his  Drake  and  the  Tudor  Navy,  Volume  IL,
p.  366,  is  taken  from  the  original  (sent  home  by
an  English  spy)  in  the  Record  oihce.

The  Rich  Mines  of  Potosi,  .  .  .  .172

Reproduced  from  a  copy  of  The  Discoverie  and  Conquest  of
the  Provinces  of  Peru,  and  the  Navigation  in  the  South  Sea,
along  that  Coast,  and  also  of  the  rite  he  Mines  of  Potosi.
Imprinted  at  London  by  Richard  Jhones.  Febru.  6.
1381.,  in  the  Hunterian  Library  in  the  University
of  Glasgow.

Sir  Robert  Dudley, ...... 208

Sir  Robert  Dudley,  the  son  of  Robert  Dudley,  Earl  of
Leicester  and  Lady  Sheffield,  was  born  on  August
7th  1574,  at  Sheen  House  in  Surrey.  He  matricu-
lated at  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  in  May  1588.  He
states  that  he  held  a  colonelcy  in  the  army  assembled
at  Tilbury  under  command  of  his  father  in  the  same
year.  In  1594  he  started  on  his  expedition  to
Trinidad  and  Guiana,  his  first  intention — to  take
an  expedition  into  the  South  Seas — having  been
forbidden  by  the  Queen.  Besides  the  account  of
this  voyage  printed  by  Hakluyt  (p.  203)  two  other
accounts  have  been  preserved,  one  by  Captain  Wyatt
who  commanded  Dudley's  '  main  battle  of  pike,'
and  one  by  Abraham  Kendall,  his  sailing  master.
[Warner's  Voyage  of  Sir  Robert  Dudley  to  the  West
Indies,  Hakluyt  Society,  1899.)  In  1596  Dudley
commanded  the  '  Nonpareil '  in  the  Cadiz  expedi-
tion under  Essex  and  Nottingham,  and  was  knighted
at  Plymouth  on  the  return  of  the  expedition.  In
1603  he  began  the  lawsuit  to  prove  his  legitimacy,
but  the  judgment  given  on  May  loth  1605  went
against  him. In  the  same  year  he  obtained  a  license

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

to  travel  abroad  for  three  years,  and  left  England
accompanied  by  his  cousin,  Elizabeth  Southwell,
disguised  as  his  page,  whom  he  afterwards  married.
They  went  to  Florence,  and  Dudley  entered  into
the  service  of  the  Grand  Duke  Ferdinand  I.  for
whom  he  designed  and  constructed  several  warships.
In  1646  when  he  was  seventy-two  he  published  his
great  work  DeW Arcano  del  Mare.  He  died  at
Carbello  in  1649.  Anthony  a  Wood  says  of  him:
'This  Robert  Dudley  was  a  compleat  gentleman
in  all  suitable  employments,  an  exact  seaman,
a  good  navigator,  an  excellent  architect,  mathe-
matician, physician,  chymist,  and  what  not.  He
was  a  handsome,  personable  man,  tall  of  stature,
red-hair'd  and  of  admirable  comport,  and  above  all,
noted  for  riding  the  great  horse,  for  tilting,  and  for
his  being  the  first  of  all  that  taught  a  dog  to  sit  in
order  to  catch  partridges.'  The  portrait  is  taken
from  a  proof  engraving,  in  the  British  Museum,  of
a  copy  by  G.  P.  Harding  of  the  original  miniature
portrait  by  Nicholas  Hilliard.

Sir  Anthony  Sherley,  .  .  .  .  .  .272

Sir  Anthony  Sherley  was  born  in  1565.  He  graduated
B.A.  at  Oxford  in  1 58 1,  and  was  elected  probationer-
fellow  of  All  Souls  College.  He  took  part  in  the
wars  in  the  Low  Countries  under  the  Earl  of
Leicester  in  1586  and  was  present  at  Zutphen.
In  August  1 591  he  joined  the  Earl  of  Essex  in
his  expedition  to  Normandy  in  support  of  Henry
of  Navarre.  Henry  made  him  a  Knight  of  the
Order  of  St.  Michael,  whereupon  Queen  Elizabeth
imprisoned  him  for  accepting  the  honour  without
her  permission.  He  was  released  on  retiring  from
the  Order.  He  married  Frances  Vernon,  first  cousin
of  the  Earl  of  Essex,  but  the  marriage  proved  un-
happy, and  to  distract  his  thoughts  from  his  home
life  he  organised  his  expedition  to  the  West  Indies.
xvi

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

He  accompanied  the  Earl  of  Essex  on  his  *  Islands '
voyage  of  1597.  In  1598-9,  on  Essex's  invitation,
he  led  a  company  of  English  volunteers  to  Ferara
to  assist  Don  Cesare  d'Este.  The  dispute  was
settled  by  the  time  he  arrived  there,  and  he  received
instructions  from  Essex  to  proceed  to  Persia  to
obtain  an  alliance  with  the  Shah  against  the  Turks,
and  to  promote  commercial  intercourse.  The  enter-
prise was  not  officially  sanctioned,  and  Sherley  was
refused  permission  to  return  to  England.  He  had
a  kindly  reception  from  the  Shah  Abbas  the  Great,
and  after  Jive  months'  stay  returned  to  Europe  as  the
Shah's  envoy  in  1599.  His  appeal  for  permission  to
return  to  England  was  refused,  and  he  then  went  to
Venice  and  opened  correspondence  with  Spain.  In
April  1603  he  was  imprisoned  for  debt  in  an  island
near  Scio.  In  1605  he  went  to  Prague  and  was
employed  by  Rudolph  II.  on  a  mission  to  Morocco.
On  his  way  back  he  went  to  Madrid,  and  was  com-
missioned as  general  of  a  fleet  to  attack  the  Turks
and  the  Moors  in  the  Levant  and  to  hamper  Dutch
trade.  In  1609  his  expedition  sailed,  but  it  was  a
complete  failure,  and  he  was  dismissed  and  dis-
honoured on  his  return.  The  King  of  Spain  in
161 1  allowed  him  a  small  pension,  and  he  remained
at  Madrid  in  beggary  until  his  death.  The  por-
trait is  taken  by  permission  of  the  Earl  of  Crawford
from  a  copy,  in  the  Library  at  Haigh  Hall,  Wigan,
of  the  Atrium  Heroicum  Caesarum  Regum  Aliarumque
Summatum  ac  Procerum  by  Dominicus  Custos,  printed
at  Augsburg  in  1600.

Capture  of  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo, . . .352

This  engraving  of  the  capture  of  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo,
Governor  of  Trinidad,  by  Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  is  re-
produced from  De  Bry's  Collections  of  Travels  and
Voyages,  Grands  (America)  Voyages,  Part  VIII.,  Frank-
fort, 1599.

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Map  of  Guiana  by  Sir  Walter  Ralegh, .  . 384

This  map  is  reproduced  from  the  original  in  the
Manuscript  Room  in  the  British  Museum,  No
doubt  is  now  entertained  that  the  map  is  the  work
of  Sir  Walter  Ralegh  himself  and  is  in  his  hand-
writing. The  fabled  Lake  and  City  of  Manoa  is
shown  in  the  centre  of  the  map,  with  El  Dorado
slightly  to  the  left.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  for
convenience  of  reference  the  map  has  been  repro-
duced upside  down,  the  northern  coast  of  Guiana
and  the  Atlantic  Ocean  being  at  the  bottom  of  the
map  as  here  given.

Map  of  Drake's  West  Indian  Expedition,  1585-6,  . 502

This  map  *  newlie  come  forth  by  Baptista  B.'  serves  to
illustrate  Drake's  West  Indian  Expedition  of  1585-6,
'  the  whole  course  of  the  saide  viadge  beinge  plainlie
described  by  the  pricked  line.'  The  '  summarie  and
true  discourse'  of  the  expedition  by  Master  Thomas
Cotes  will  be  found  at  page  97.  The  map  is  repro-
duced from  the  original  in  A  Summarie  and  True
Discourse  cited  above.

THE TENTH VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  TraiBques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Made  to  all  the  Isles  called  Las  Antillas  and  along

the  coasts  of  Tierra  Firma,  and  certeine  voyages

made  for  the  discoverie  of  the  large,  rich,

and  beautiful!  Empire  of  Guiana,  with

the  discourses  and  letters  pending

upon  the  voyages  of  this

tenth  volume

The  Principal  Voyages  of  the  English  Nation  [HI.  498.]
to  the  Isles  of  Trinidad,  Margarita,  Dominica,
Deseada,  Monserrate,  Guadalupe,  Martinino,  and
all  the  rest  of  the  Antilles;  As  likewise  to  S.
Juan  de  Puerto  Rico,  to  Hispaniola,  Jamaica  and
Cuba :  and  also  to  Tierra  Firma,  and  all  along
the  coast  and  Islands  therof,  even  from  Cumana
and  the  Caracos  to  the  neckland  of  Dariene,  and
over  it  to  the  Gulfe  of  S.  Michael  and  the  Isle
of  Perles  in  the  South  sea :  and  further  to  Cabe^a
Cativa,  Nombre  de  dios,  and  Venta  de  cruzes,  to
Puerto  Belo,  Rio  de  Chagre,  and  the  Isle  of  Es-
cudo,  along  the  maine  of  Beragua,  to  the  Cape
and  Gulfe  of  the  Honduras,  to  Truxillo,  Puerto
de  Cavallos,  and  all  other  the  principall  Townes,
Islands  and  harbours  of  accompt  within  the  said
Gulfe,  and  up  Rio  dolce  falling  into  this  Gulfe,
above  30.  leagues:  As  also  to  the  Isle  of  Cogumel,
and  to  Cape  Cotoche,  the  towne  of  Campeche,
and  other  places  upon  the  land  of  lucatan ;  and
lower  downe  to  S.  Juan  de  Ullua,  Vera  Cruz,
Rio  de  Panuco,  Rio  de  Palmas,  &c.  within  the
Bay  of  Mexico :  and  from  thence  to  the  Isles  of
the  Tortugas,  the  port  of  Havana,  the  Cape  of
Florida,  and  the  Gulfe  of  Bahama  homewards.
With  the  taking,  sacking,  ransoming,  or  burning

A.D.
1516.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  most  of  the  principall  Cities  and  townes  upon

the coasts of  Tierra  firnia,  Nueva Espanna, and

all  the  foresaid  Islands ; since  the  most  traiterous

burning  of  her  Majesties  ship  the  Jesus  of  Lubec

and  murthering  of  her  Subjects  in  the  port  of  S.

Juan  de  Ullua,  and  the  last  generall  arrest  of  her

Highnesse people, with their ships and goods

throughout all the dominions of  the King

of  Spaine  in  the  moneth  of  June  1585.

Besides  the  manifold  and  tyrannicall

oppressions of  the Inquisition

inflicted  on  our  nation  upon

most  light  and  frivolous

occasions.

The  voyage  of  Sir  Thomas  Pert,  and  Sebastian
Cabot,  about  the  eight  yeere  of  King  Henry
the  eight,  which  was  the  yere  15 16.  to
Brasil,  Santo  Domingo,  and  S.  Juan  de  Puerto
rico.

Hat  learned  and  painefuU  writer  Richard
Eden  in  a  certaine  Epistle  of  his  to  the
duke  of  Northumberland,  before  a
worke  which  he  translated  out  of
Munster  in  the  yeere  1553,  called  A
treatise  of  new  India,  maketh  mention
of  a  voyage  of  discoverie  undertaken
out  of  England  by  sir  Thomas  Pert  and  Sebastian
Cabota,  about  the  8.  yere  of  King  Henry  the  eight  of
famous  memorie,  imputing  the  overthrow  thereof  unto
the  cowardise  and  want  of  stomack  of  the  said  Sir
Thomas  Pert,  in  maner  following.  If  manly  courage,
saith  he,  (like  unto  that  which  hath  bene  scene  &
proved  in  your  Grace,  as  well  in  forreine  realmes,  as
also  in  this  our  countrey)  had  not  bene  wanting  in
other in these our dayes, at such time as our

PERT AND SEBASTIAN CABOT  ad.

1516.

soveraigne  lord  of  famous  memorie  king  Henry  the  8.
about  the  same  yeere  of  his  raigne,  furnished and  sent
out  certaine  shippes  under the  governance  of  Sebastian
Cabot yet living and one Sir Thomas Pert, whose  ^''"•^  "^  ^f"-
faint heart  was  the  cause  that  the  voyage  tooke  none  almh-all of^'
eifect ; if,  I  say,  such  manly  courage,  whereof  wee  have  England,  and
spoken, had not  at  that time  beene  wanting,  it  might  dwelt  In
happily have come to passe, that that rich treasurie  P<^P^(^^  ^^
called  Perularia,  (which  is nowe  in Spaine  in the citie ^'^  ^^  '
of  Sivill, and so named, for that in it is kept the
infinite  riches  brought thither from the newfoundland
of  Peru)  might  long  since  have  beene  in  the  tower  of
London,  to  the  kings  great  honour  and  wealth  of  this
realme. Hereunto that  also is to bee  referred  which
the  worshipful!  M.  Robert  Thorne  wrote  to  the  sayde
king  Henry  the  8.  in  the  yeere 1527.  by  doctor  Leigh
his ambassadour sent into Spaine to the Emperour
Charles the fift, whose  wordes bee these. Now  rest
to  be  discovered  the  North  parts,  the  which  it  seemeth
unto me, is onely your highnes charge and dutie,
because  the situation  of  this  your realme is thereunto
neerest and aptest ot all other : and also, for that
already you have taken it in hand. And in mine
opinion it  will not seeme  well  to leave so  great  and  [HI-  499-]
profitable an enterprise, seeing it may so easily and
with so litle cost, labour and danger be followed
and  obteined. Though  hitherto  your  grace  have  made  ^°^^-
thereof  a  proofe,  &  found  not  the  commoditie  thereby
as  you  trusted,  at  this  time  it  shalbe  none  impediment  :
for there may be now provided remedies for things
then  lacked,  and  the  inconveniences  and  lets  remooved,
that  then  were  cause  your  graces desire tooke  no full
ejffect  : which is,  the courses to be changed, and to
follow the aforesayd new courses. And concerning
the mariners, ships, and provision, an order may be
devised  and  taken  meete  and  convenient, much  better
then hitherto  : by reason whereof, & by  Gods  grace,
no  doubt  your  purpose  shall  take  effect. And  whereas

3

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1516.

in  the  aforesayd  wordes  M.  Robert  Thorne  sayth,  that
he  would  have  the  old  courses  to  bee  changed,  and
the  newe  courses  (to  the  North)  to  be  followed  :  It
may  plainely  be  gathered,  that  the  former  voyage,
whereof  twise  or  thrise  he  maketh  mention,  wherein
it  is  like  that  sir  Thomas  Pert  and  Sebastian  Cabot
were  set  foorth  by  the  king,  was  made  towarde  Brasill
and  the  South  parts.  Moreover  it  seemeth  that
Gonsalvo  de  Oviedo,  a  famous  Spanish  writer,  alludeth
unto  the  sayde  voyage  in  the  beginning  of  the  13.
chapter  of  the  19.  booke  of  his  generall  and  natural
historie  of  the  West  Indies,  agreeing  very  well  with
the  time  about  which  Richard  Eden  writeth  that  the
foresaid  voyage  was  begun.  The  authors  wordes  are
these,  as  I  finde  them  translated  into  Italian  by  that
excellent  and  famous  man  Baptista  Ramusius.  Nel
1517.  Un  Corsaro  Inglese,  sotto  colore  di  venire  a
An  English  discoprire  se  ne  venne  con  una  gran  nave  alia  volta
great  shippe  at  ^^j  Brasil  nella  costiera  di  Terra  ferma,  &  indi
^  attraverso  a  questa  isola  Spagnuola,  &  giunse  presso  la
bocca  del  porto  di  questa  citta  di  S.  Domenico,  &
mando  in  terra  il  suo  battello  pieno  di  gente,  &  chiese
licentia  di  potere  qui  entrare,  dicendo  che  venia  con
mercantie  a  negotiare.  Ma  in  quello  instante  il
castellano  Francesco  di  Tapia  fece  tirare  alia  nave  un
tiro  d'artiglieria  da  questo  castello,  perche  ella  se  ne
veniva  diritta  al  porto.  Quando  gli  Inglesi  viddero
questo  si  ritirarono  fuori,  &  quelli  del  battello  tosto  si
raccolsero  in  nave.  Et  nel  vero  il  Castellan  fece
errore :  perche  se  ben  fosse  nave  entrata  nel  porto,
non  sarebbono  le  genti  potuto  smontare  a  terra  senza
San  Juan  de  volonta  &  della  citta  &  del  castello.  La  nave  adunque
Puerto  Rtco.  yeggendo  come  vi  era  ricevuta,  tiro  la  volta  dell'  isola
di  San  Giovanni,  &  entrata  nel  porto  di  San  Germano
parlarono  gli  Inglesi  con  quelli  della  terra,  &  dimanda-
rono  vettouaglie  &  fornimenti  per  la  nave,  &  si
lamentarono  di  quelli  di  questa  citta,  dicendo  che  essi
non venivano  per fare dispiacere, ma per contrattare,

4

PERT AND SEBASTIAN CABOT  ad.

1516.

&  negotiare  con  suoi  danari  &  mercantie.  Hora  quivi
hebbero  alcune  vettovaglie,  &  in  compensa  essi  diedero
&  pagarono  in  certi  stagni  lavorati  &  altre  cose.  Et
poi  si  partirono  alia  volta  d'Europa,  dove  si  crede,  che
non  gungessero,  perche  non  se  ne  seppe  piu  nuova
mai.  This  extract  importeth  thus  much  in  English,
to  wit:  That  in  the  yeere  15 17.  an  English  Rover
under  the  colour  of  travelling  to  discover,  came  with
a  great  shippe  unto  the  parts  of  Brasill  on  the  coast
of  the  firme  land,  and  from  thence  he  crossed  over
unto  this  Hand  of  Hispaniola,  and  arrived  neere
unto  the  mouth  of  the  haven  of  this  citie  of  S.
Domingo,  and  sent  his  shipboate  full  of  men  on
shoare,  and  demaunded  leave  to  enter  into  this  haven,
saying  that  hee  came  with  marchandise  to  traffique.
But  at  that  very  instant  the  governour  of  the
castle  Francis  de  Tapia  caused  a  tire  of  ordinance  to
be  shot  from  the  castle  at  the  ship,  for  she  bare  in
directly  with  the  haven.  When  the  Englishmen  sawe
this,  they  withdrew  themselves  out,  and  those  that  were
in  the  shipboate,  got  themselves  with  all  speede  on  ship-
boord.  And  in  trueth  the  warden  of  the  castle  committed
an  oversight:  for  if  the  shippe  had  entred  into  the
haven  the  men  thereof  could  not  have  come  on  lande
without  leave  both  of  the  citie  and  of  the  castle.  There-
fore the  people  of  the  ship  seeing  how  they  were  received,
sayled  toward  the  Hand  of  S.  John,  and  entring  into
the  port  of  S.  Germaine,  the  English  men  parled  with
those  of  the  towne,  requiring  victuals  and  things  needefull
to  furnish  their  ship,  and  complained  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  city  of  S.  Domingo,  saying  that  they  came  not
to  doe  any  harme,  but  to  trade  and  traffique  for  their
money  and  merchandise.  In  this  place  they  had  certaine
victuals,  and  for  recompence  they  gave  and  paid  them
with  certain  vessell  of  wrought  tinne  and  other  things.
And  afterward  they  departed  toward  Europe,  where  it
is  thought  they  arrived  not :  for  wee  never  heard  any
more  newes  of  them. Thus  farre  proceedeth  Gonsalvo

5

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1516.

de  Oviedo,  who  though  it  please  him  to  call  the  captain
of  this  great  English  ship  a  rover,  yet  it  appeareth  by
the  Englishmens  owne  words,  that  they  came  to  discover,
and  by  their  traffique  for  pewter  vessell  and  other  wares
at  the  towne  of  S.  Germaine  in  the  Hand  of  S.  John
de  puerto  rico,  it  cannot  bee  denied  but  that  they  were
furnished  with  wares  for  honest  traffique  and  exchange.
But  whosoever  is  conversant  in  reading  the  Portugall
and  Spanish  writers  of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  shall
commonly  finde  that  they  account  all  other  nations  for
pirats,  rovers  and  theeves,  which  visite  any  heathen
coast  that  they  have  once  sayled  by  or  looked  on.
Howbeit  their  passionate  and  ambitious  reckoning  ought
not  to  bee  prejudiciall  to  other  mens  chargeable  and
painefuU  enterprises  and  honourable  travels  in  discoverie.

[III.  500.]  A  briefe  note  concerning  a  voyage  of  one  Thomas
Tison  an  English  man,  made  before  the  yeere
1526.  to  the  West  Indies,  &  of  his  abode
there  in  maner  of  a  secret  factor  for  some
English  marchants,  w^hich  under  hand  had
trade  thither  in  those  dayes :  taken  out  of  an
olde  ligier-booke  of  M.  Nicolas  Thorne  the
elder,  a  worshipfull  marchant  of  Bristol.

T appeareth out of  a certaine note or

letter of  remembrance,  in the custodie

of  mee  Richard  Hakluyt,  written 1526.

by  master  Nicolas  Thorne  the  elder, a

principall marchant of  Bristol,  unto  his

friend  and  factour  Thomas  Midnall,  and

his  servant  William  Ballard  at  that  time

remaining  at  S.  Lucar  in  Andaluzia :  that  before  the  sayd

yeere  one  Thomas  Tison  an  Englishman  had  found  the

way  to  the  West  Indies,  and  was  there resident: unto

whom the aforesayd M.  Nicolas Thorne sent  armour

and  other  commodities  specified in  the  letter  aforesayd.

This  Thomas  Tison  (so  farre  as  I  can  conjecture)  may

6

THOMAS TISON

seeme  to  have  bene  some  secret  factour  for  M.  Thorne
and  other  English  marchants  in  those  remote  partes;
whereby  it  is  probable  that  some  of  our  marchants  had
a  kinde  of  trade  to  the  West  Indies  even  in  those  ancient
times  and  before  also :  neither  doe  I  see  any  reason  why
the  Spaniards  should  debarre  us  from  it  at  this  present.

The  first  voyage  of  the  right  worshipful!  and
valiant  knight  sir  John  Hawkins,  sometimes
treasurer  of  her  Majesties  navie  Roial,  made
to  the  West  Indies 1562.

Aster  John  Haukins  having  made  divers
voyages  to  the  lies  of  the  Canaries,  and
there  by  his  good  and  upright  dealing
being  growen  in  love  and  favour  with
the  people,  informed  himselfe  amongst
them  by  diligent  inquisition,  of  the  state
of the West India, whereof hee had

A.D.

1562.

received  some  knowledge  by  the  instructions  of  his
father,  but  increased  the  same  by  the  advertisments  and
reports  of  that  people.  And  being  amongst  other  par-
ticulars assured,  that  Negros  were  very  good  marchandise
in  Hispaniola,  and  that  store  of  Negros  might  easily
bee  had  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea,  resolved  with  himselfe
to  make  triall  thereof,  and  communicated  that  devise
with  his  worshipfull  friendes  of  London :  namely  with
Sir  Lionell  Ducket,  sir  Thomas  Lodge,  M.  Gunson  his
father  in  law,  sir  William  Winter,  M.  Bromfield,  and
others.  All  which  persons  liked  so  well  of  his  intention,
that  they  became  liberall  contributers  and  adventurers
in  the  action.  For  which  purpose  there  were  three  good
ships  immediatly  provided :  The  one  called  the  Salomon
of  the  burthen  of  120.  tunne,  wherein  M.  Haukins
himselfe  went  as  Generall :  The  second  the  Swallow  of
100.  tunnes,  wherein  went  for  Captaine  M.  Thomas  M.  Thomas
Hampton :  and  the  third  the  Jonas  a  barke  of  40.  ^^^P^o"-
tunnes, wherein the Master supplied the Captaines

7

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1562.

roome :  in  which  small  fleete  M.  Hawkins  tooke  with
him  not  above  100.  men  for  feare  of  sicknesse  and  other
inconveniences,  whereunto  men  in  long  voyages  are
commonly  subject.

With this  companie he put off  and departed from
the  coast  of  England  in  the  moneth of  October 1562.
and  in  his  course  touched  first  at  Teneriffe,  where  hee
received  friendly  intertainement. From  thence  he  passed
Sierra  Leona to  Sierra  Leona,  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea,  which  place
called  l^y.  ^YiQ  people  of  the  countrey  is  called  Tagarin,  where

^'  '  he  stayed  some  good  time,  and  got  into  his  possession,
partly  by  the  sworde,  and  partly  by  other  meanes,  to
the  number  of  300.  Negros  at  the  least,  besides  other
merchandises  which  that  countrey  yeeldeth.  With  this
praye  hee  sayled  over  the  Ocean  sea  unto  the  Hand
of  Hispaniola,  and  arrived  first  at  the  port  of  Isabella :
and  there  hee  had  reasonable  utterance  of  his  English
commodities,  as  also  of  some  part  of  his  Negros,  trusting
the  Spaniards  no  further,  then  that  by  his  owne  strength
he  was  able  still  to  master  them.  From  the  port  of
Isabella  he  went  to  Puerto  de  Plata,  where  he  made  like
sales,  standing  alwaies  upon  his  guard :  from  thence  also
hee  sayled  to  Monte  Christi  another  port  on  the  North
side  of  Hispaniola,  and  the  last  place  of  his  touching,
where  he  had  peaceable  traffique,  and  made  vent  of  the
whole  number  of  his  Negros :  for  which  he  received
in  those  3.  places  by  way  of  exchange  such  quantitie  of
merchandise,  that  hee  did  not  onely  lade  his  owne  3.
shippes  with  hides,  ginger,  sugars,  and  some  quantitie
of  pearles,  but  he  fraighted  also  two  other  hulkes  with
hides  and  other  like  commodities,  which  hee  sent  into
Spaine.  And  thus  leaving  the  Hand,  he  returned  and
The  lies  of  disemboqued,  passing  out  by  the  Hands  of  the  Caycos,
Caycos.  without  further  entring  into  the  bay  of  Mexico,  in  this

his  first  voyage  to  the  West  India.  And  so  with
prosperous  successe  and  much  gaine  to  himselfe  and
the  aforesayde  adventurers,  he  came  home,  and  arrived
in  the  moneth  of  September 1563.

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS

A.D,

1564.

The  voyage  made  by  M.  John  Hawkins  Esquire,  [m.  501.]
and  afterward  knight,  Captaine  of  the  Jesus  of
Lubek,  one  of  her  Majesties  shippes,  and
Generall  of  the  Salomon,  and  other  two  barkes
going  in  his  companie,  to  the  coast  of  Guinea,
and  the  Indies  of  Nova  Hispania,  begun  in
An.  Dom. 1564.

Aster  John  Hawkins  with  the  Jesus  of
Lubek,  a  shippe  of  700.  and  the  Salomon
a  shippe  of  140.  the  Tiger  a  barke  of
50.  and  the  Swallow  of  30.  tunnes,  being
all  well  furnished  with  men  to  the
number  of  one  hundreth  threescore  and
tenne,  as  also  with  ordinance  and  victuall

October  18.

requisite  for  such  a  voyage,  departed  out  of  Plymmouth
the  18.  day  of  October,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord 1564.
with  a  prosperous  winde :  at  which  departing,  in  cutting
the  foresaile,  a  marveilous misfortune  happened  to  one
of  the  officers  in  the  shippe,  who  by  the  pullie of  the
sheat  was  slaine  out  of  hand,  being  a  sorowfuU  beginning
to  them  all. And  after  their  setting  out  ten  leagues  to  the
sea,  he  met  the  same  day  with  the  Minion  a  ship  of  the  ^-^^  Mtmon,
Queenes Majestic,  whereof  was  Captaine  David  Carlet,  J/ ° ndth^'
and  also  her  consort  the  John  Baptist  of  London,  being  Merline  bound
bounde  to  Guinea  also,  who  hailed  one  the  other  after  for  Guinea.
the  custome  of  the  sea  with  certaine  pieces  of  ordinance
for  joy  of  their  meeting :  which done,  the  Minion  de-
parted from  him  to  seeke  her  other  consort  the  Merlin
of  London,  which  was  a  sterne  out  of  sight,  leaving  in
M. Hawkins companie the John Baptist her other
consort.

Thus  sayling  forwards  on  their  way  with  a  prosperous
winde  untill  the  21.  of  the  same  moneth,  at  that  time
a  great  storme  arose,  the  winde  being  at  Northeast  about
nine  a  clocke  in  the  night,  and  continued  so  23.  houres
together,  in  which  storme  M.  Hawkins  lost  the  companie

9

A.D.

1564.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Good  orders

of  the  John  Baptist  aforesayd,  and  of  his  pinnesse  called
the  Swallow,  his  other  3.  shippes  being  sore  beaten  with
a  storme.  The  23.  day  the  Swallow  to  his  no  small
rejoycing,  came  to  him  againe  in  the  night,  10.  leagues
to  the  Northward  of  Cape  Finister,  he  having  put
roomer,  not  being  able  to  double  the  Cape,  in  that  there
rose  a  contrary  winde  at  Southwest.  The  25.  the  wind
continuing  contrary,  hee  put  into  a  place  in  Galicia,  called
Ferroll,  where  hee  remained  five  dayes,  and  appointed
all  the  Masters  of  his  shippes  an  order  for  the  keeping
of  good  companie  in  this  manner :  The  small  shippes  to
bee  alwayes  ahead  and  aweather  of  the  Jesus,  and  to
speake  twise  a  day  with  the  Jesus  at  least :  if  in  the  day
forafieetein  ^^  Ensigne  bee  over  the  poope  of  the  Jesus,  or  in  the
ong  voyage,  j^-gj^^  ^^^  lights,  then  shall  all  the  shippes  speake  with
her :  If  there  bee  three  lights  aboord  the  Jesus,  then
doeth  she  cast  about :  If  the  weather  bee  extreme,  that
the  small  shippes  cannot  keepe  companie  with  the  Jesus,
then  all  to  keepe  companie  with  the  Salomon,  and  foorth-
with  to  repaire  to  the  Hand  of  TenerifFe,  to  the  Northward
of  the  road  of  Sirroes ;  If  any  happen  to  any  misfortune
then  to  shew  two  lights,  and  to  shoote  off  a  piece  of
ordinance.  If  any  lose  companie,  and  come  in  sight
againe,  to  make  three  yawes,  and  strike  the  Myson
three  times :  Serve  God  daily,  love  one  another,  preserve
your  victuals,  beware  of  fire,  and  keepe  good  companie.

The  26.  day  the  Minion  came  in  also  where  hee  was,
for  the  rejoycing  whereof  hee  gave  them  certaine  pieces  of
ordinance,  after  the  courtesie  of  the  sea  for  their  welcome :
but  the  Minions  men  had  no  mirth,  because  of  their
consort  the  Merline,  whome  at  their  departure  from
Master  Hawkins  upon  the  coast  of  England  they  went
to  seeke,  and  having  met  with  her,  kept  companie  two
dayes  together,  and  at  last  by  misfortune  of  fire  (through
the  negligence  of  one  of  their  gunners)  the  powder  in  the
gunners  roome  was  set  on  fire,  which  with  the  first  blast
strooke  out  her  poope,  and  therewithall  lost  three  men,
besides  many  sore  burned  (which  escaped  by  the  brigan-

J  dreadfull
mischance  by
Jire.

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1564.
dine  being  at  her  sterne)  and  immediady,  to the great
losse of  the owners, and most horrible sight to the
beholders,  she  sunke  before  their  eyes.

The  20.  day  of  the  moneth  M.  Hawkins  with  his
consorts  and  companie  of  the  Minion,  having  nowe  both
the  brigandines  at  her  sterne,  wayed  anker,  and  set  saile
on  their  voyage,  having  a  prosperous  winde  thereunto.

The  fourth  of  November  they  had  sight  of  the  Hand
of  Madera,  and  the  sixt  day  of  Teneriffe,  which  they
thought  to  have  beene  the  Canarie,  in  that  they  supposed
themselves  to  have  beene  to  the  Eastward  of  Teneriffe,
and  were  not :  but  the  Minion  being  three  or  foure
leagues  ahead  of  us,  kept  on  her  course  to  Teneriffe,
having  better  sight  thereof  then  the  other  had,  and  by
that  meanes  they  parted  companie.  For  M.  Hawkins
and  his  companie  went  more  to  the  West,  upon  which
course  having  sayled  a  while,  hee  espied  another  Hand,
which  hee  thought  to  bee  Teneriffe,  and  being  not  able
by  meanes  of  the  fogge  upon  the  hils,  to  discerne  the
same,  nor  yet  to  fetch  it  by  night,  went  roomer  untill  the
morning,  being  the  seventh  of  November,  which  as  yet
hee  could  not  discerne,  but  sayled  along  the  coast  the  [in.  502,]
space  of  two  houres,  to  perceive  some  certaine  marke  of
Teneriffe,  and  found  no  likelyhood  thereof  at  all,
accompting  that  to  bee,  as  it  was  in  deede,  the  He  of  The  lie  of
Palmes :  and  so  sayling  forwards,  espied  another  Hand  P^^^^^-
called  Gomera,  and  also  Teneriffe,  with  the  which  hee  'j'^^g^iffg
made,  and  sayling  all  night,  came  in  the  morning  the
next  day  to  the  port  of  Adecia,  where  he  found  his
pinnesse  which  had  departed  from  him  the  sixt  of  the
moneth,  being  in  the  weather  of  him,  and  espying  the
pike  of  Teneriffe  all  a  high,  bare  thither.  At  his  arrivall
somewhat  before  hee  came  to  anker,  hee  hoysed  out  his
shippes  pinnesse  rowing  a  shoare,  intending  to  have  sent
one  with  a  letter  to  Peter  de  ponte,  one  of  the  governours
of  the  Hand,  who  dwelt  a  league  from  the  shoare :  but  as
hee  pretended  to  have  landed,  suddenly  there  appeared
upon  the  two  points  of  the  roade,  men  levelling  of  bases

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

and  harguebuzes  to  them,  with  divers  others  to  the
number  of  fourescore,  with  halberds,  pikes,  swordes  and
targets,  which  happened  so  contrary  to  his  expectation,
that  it  did  greatly  amaze  him,  and  the  more,  because  hee
was  nowe  in  their  danger,  not  knowing  well  howe  to
avoyde  it  without  some  mischiefe.  Wherefore  hee  deter-
mined to  call  to  them  for  the  better  appeasing  of  the
matter,  declaring  his  name,  and  professing  himselfe  to  bee
an  especiall  friend  to  Peter  de  ponte,  and  that  he  had
sundry  things  for  him  which  he  greatly  desired.  And  in
the  meane  time,  while  hee  was  thus  talking  with  them,
whereby  hee  made  them  to  holde  their  hands,  hee  willed
the  marriners  to  rowe  away,  so  that  at  last  he  gat  out  of
their  danger :  and  then  asking  for  Peter  de  ponte,  one  of
his  sonnes  being  Sennor  Nicolas  de  Ponte,  came  forth,
whom  hee  perceiving,  desired  to  put  his  men  aside,  and
hee  himselfe  would  leape  a  shoare  and  commune  with  him,
which  they  did :  so  that  after  communication  had  be-
tweene  them  of  sundry  things,  and  of  the  feare  they  both
had,  master  Hawkins  desired  to  have  certaine  necessaries
provided  for  him.  In  the  meane  space,  while  these
things  were  providing,  hee  trimmed  the  maine  mast  of
the  Jesus  which  in  the  storme  aforesayd  was  sprung :  here
he  sojourned  7. dayes,  refreshing  himselfe  and  his  men.

Santa  Cruz. In  the  which  time  Peter  de  ponte  dwelling  at  S.  Cruz,  a
citie  20.  leagues  off,  came  to  him,  and  gave  him  as  gentle

J  briefe  de- intertainment  as  if  he  had  bene  his  owne  brother. To

scription  of  the  gp^^j^g  Somewhat  of  these Hands, being  called in olde
commodities  of h ^ . f.  ,,  o,,^.,.

the  Canarie ^"^"^^  Insulas  rortunatas,  by  the  meanes  or  the  nourishing

Hands.  thereof, the  fruitfulnesse  of  them doeth surely  exceede

farre  all  other  that  I  have  heard  of:  for  they  make  wine

better  then  any  in  Spaine,  they  have  grapes  of  such  big-

nesse,  that  they  may  bee  compared  to  damsons,  and  in

taste  inferiour  to  none : for  sugar,  suckets,  raisins  of  the

Sunne,  and  many  other  fruits,  abundance : for  rosine  &

raw  silke,  there  is  great  store,  they  want  neither  corne,

pullets,  cattell, nor yet wilde foule : they have many

Camels  also,  which  being  young,  are  eaten  of  the  people

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1564.
for  victuals,  and  being  olde,  they  are  used,  for  caryage  of
necessaries :  whose  propertie  is  as  hee  is  taught  to  kneele
at  the  taking  of  his  loade,  and  unlading  againe :  his  nature
is  to  ingender  backward  contrary  to  other  beastes :  of
understanding  very  good,  but  of  shape  very  deformed,
with  a  little  bellie,  long  misshapen  legges,  and  feete  very
broad  of  flesh,  without  a  hoofe,  all  whole,  saving  the  great
toe,  a  backe  bearing  up  like  a  molehill,  a  large  and  thin
necke,  with  a  little  head,  with  a  bunch  of  hard  flesh,  which
nature  hath  given  him  in  his  breast  to  leane  upon.  This
beast  liveth  hardly,  and  is  contented  with  strawe  and
stubble,  but  of  force  strong,  being  well  able  to  carrie  500.
weight.  In  one  of  these  Hands  called  Fierro,  there  is  by  Fierro.
the  reports  of  the  inhabitants,  a  certaine  tree  that  raineth
continually,  by  the  dropping  whereof  the  inhabitants  and
cattell  are  satisfied  with  water,  for  other  water  have  they
none  in  all  the  Hand.  And  it  raineth  in  such  abundance,
that  it  were  incredible  unto  a  man  to  beleeve  such  a
vertue  to  bee  in  a  tree,  but  it  is  knowen  to  be  a  divine
matter,  and  a  thing  ordeined  by  God,  at  whose  power
therein  wee  ought  not  to  marvell,  seeing  he  did  by  his
providence  as  we  read  in  the  Scriptures,  when  the  children
of  Israel  were  going  into  the  land  of  promise,  feede  them
with  Manna  from  heaven,  for  the  space  of  40.  yeeres.  Of
the  trees  aforesaid  wee  saw  in  Guinie  many,  being  of  great  Trees  drop-
height,  dropping  continually,  but  not  so  abundantly  as  P^^S  f ^^^''  ^^
the  other,  because  the  leaves  are  narrower,  and  are  like
the  leaves  of  a  peare  tree.  About  these  Hands  are
certaine  flitting  Hands,  which  have  beene  oftentimes  seene,
and  when  men  approched  neere  them,  they  vanished :  as
the  like  hath  bene  of  these  Hands  nowe  knowen  by  the
report  of  the  inhabitants,  which  were  not  found  of  long
time  one  after  the  other :  and  therefore  it  should  seeme
hee  is  not  yet  borne  to  whom  God  hath  appoynted  the
finding  of  them.  In  this  Hand  of  TenerifFe  there  is  a  hill
called  The  Pike,  because  it  is  piked,  which  is  in  heigth  by  The  pike  of
their  reports  twentie  leagues,  having  both  winter  and  Teneriffe.
summer  abundance  of  snowe  in  the  top  of  it  :  this  Pike

13

A.D.

1564.

[III. 503.]

Cape  de  las
Barbas.

Cape  Blanco.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

may  bee  seene  in  a  cleere  day  fiftie  leagues  off,  but  it
sheweth  as  though  it  were  a  blacke  cloude  a  great  heigth
in  the  element.  I  have  heard  of  none  to  be  compared
with  this  in  heigth,  but  in  the  Indias  I  have  seene  many,
and  in  my  judgement  not  inferiour  to  the  Pike,  and  so
the  Spaniards  write.

The  15.  of  November  at  night  we  departed  from
Teneriffe,  and  the  20.  of  the  same  wee  had  sight  of  ten
Caravels,  that  were  fishing  at  sea,  with  whome  we  would
have  spoken,  but  they  fearing  us,  fled  into  a  place  of
Barbarie,  called  Cape  de  las  Barbas.

The  twentieth,  the  ships  pinnesse  with  two  men  in  her,
sayling  by  the  ship,  was  overthrowen  by  the  oversight  of
them  that  went  in  her,  the  winde  being  so  great,  that
before  they  were  espied,  and  the  ship  had  cast  about  for
them,  she  was  driven  half  a  league  to  leeward  of  the
pinnesse,  and  had  lost  sight  of  her,  so  that  there  was  small
hope  of  recoverie,  had  not  Gods  helpe  and  the  Captaines
deligence  bene,  who  having  wel  marked  which  way  the
pinnesse  was  by  the  Sunne,  appointed  24  of  the  lustiest
rowers  in  the  great  boate,  to  rowe  to  the  wind-wardes,  and
so  recovered,  contrary  to  all  mens  expectations,  both  the
pinnesse  and  the  men  sitting  upon  the  keele  of  her.

The  25  he  came  to  Cape  Blanco,  which  is  upon  the
coast  of  Africa,  and  a  place  where  the  Portugals  do  ride,
that  fish  there  in  the  moneth  of  November  especially,  and
is  a  very  good  place  of  fishing,  for  Pargoes,  Mullet,  and
Dogge  fish.  In  this  place  the  Portugals  have  no  holde
for  their  defence,  but  have  rescue  of  the  Barbarians,
whom  they  entertaine  as  their  souldiers,  for  the  time
of  their  being  there  and  for  their  fishing  upon  that
coast  of  Africa,  doe  pay  a  certaine  tribute  to  the  king
of  the  Moores.  The  people  of  that  part  of  Africa  are
tawnie,  having  long  haire  without  any  apparell,  saving
before  their  privie  members.  Their  weapons  in  warres
are  bowes  and  arrowes.

The  26  we  departed  from  S.  Avis  Baye,  within
Cape  Blanco,  where  we refreshed  our selves  with fish,

14

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1564.

and other necessaries: and  the 29  wee  came  to Cape  Cape  Verde

Verde,  which  lieth  in 14 degrees, and  a  halfe. These  in 'i.\  degrees.

people  are  all  blacke, and are called Negros, without

any apparell, saving before their privities : of  stature

goodly men, and well  liking by  reason  of  their  food,

which  passeth  all  other  Guyneans  for  kine,  goats,  puUin,

rise,  fruits,  and  fish. Here  wee  tooke  fishes  with  heads

like conies, and teeth nothing varying, of a jolly

thickenesse, but not past  a foote  long,  and is not  to

be eaten  without  flaying or cutting  off  his  head. To

speake  somewhat  of  the  sundry  sortes  of  these  Guyneans  :

the people of Cape Verde are called  Leophares, and  Leophares.

counted the goodliest men of all other, saving the

Congoes,  which do inhabite on this side  the  cape de

Buena  Esperan9a. These  Leophares  have  warres  against

the  leloffes,  which  are  borderers  by  them :  their  weapons  Uloffes.

are bowes and arrowes, targets, and short daggers,

darts  also,  but  varying  from  other  Negros : for  whereas

the  other use  a  long  dart  to  fight  with  in  their  hands,

they cary five or  sixe small  ones  a  peece,  which they

cast with. These men also are more civill  then any

other,  because  of  their dayly  trafficke  with  the  French-  The  trafficke

men, and are of  nature very gentle and  loving : for  °^^^^  French
1-1  r\  ^ 1 •  ■T'  1  1 '>nen  at  Cape

while we were there, we tooke  m  a  frenchman,  who  y^j.^^

was  one  of  the 19 that  going to Brasile, in a Barke

of  Diepe, of 60 tunnes, and being a sea boord of

Cape  Verde, 200 leagues, the plankes of  their Barke

with a sea brake out upon them so suddenly, that

much  a  doe  they  had  to  save  themselves  in  their  boats :

but by Gods providence, the wind being Westerly,

which  is rarely  seene  there,  they  got  to the shore,  to

the Isle Brava, and in great penurie gotte to Cape

Verde,  where  they  remained  sixe  weekes,  and  had  meate

and  drinke  of  the  same people. The said  Frenchman

having  forsaken his  fellowes,  which were three  leagues

off  from the shore, and wandring with the Negros

too  and  fro,  fortuned  to  come  to  the  waters  side : and

communing  with  certaine  of  his  countreymen,  which  were

15

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

in  our  ship,  by  their  perswasions  came  away  with  us :
but  his  entertainement  amongst  them  was  such,  that  he
desired  it  not :  but  through  the  importunate  request
of  his  Countreymen,  consented  at  the  last.  Here  we
stayed  but  one  night,  and  part  of  the  day :  for  the
7  of  December  wee  came  away,  in  that  pretending  to
have  taken  Negros  there  perforce,  the  Mynions  men
gave  them  there  to  understand  of  our  comming,  and
our  pretence,  wherefore  they  did  avoyde  the  snares  we
had  layd  for  them.

The  8 of  December  wee  ankered  by  a  small Island

Akatrarses  or  called  Alcatrarsa,  wherein  at  our  going  a  shore,  we  found

Gmets.  nothing but  sea-birds,  as we call them  Ganets,  but  by

the  Portugals,  called  Alcatrarses,  who  for  that  cause
gave  the  said  Island  the  same  name.  Herein  halfe
of  our  boates  were  laden  with  yong  and  olde  fowle,
who  not  being  used  to  the  sight  of  men,  flew  so
about  us,  that  we  stroke  them  downe  with  poles.  In
this  place  the  two  shippes  riding,  the  two  Barkes,  with

The  Sapies.  their  boates,  went  into  an  Island  of  the  Sapies,  called
La  Formio,  to  see  if  they  could  take  any  of  them,
and  there  landed  to  the  number  of  80  in  armour,  and
espying  certaine  made  to  them,  but  they  fled  in  such
order  into  the  woods,  that  it  booted  them  not  to
follow :  so  going  on  their  way  forward  till  they  came
to  a  river,  which  they  could  not  passe  over,  they  espied
on  the  otherside  two  men,  who  with  their  bowes  and
arrowes  shot  terribly  at  them.  Whereupon  we  discharged
certaine  harquebuzes  to  them  againe,  but  the  ignorant
people  wayed  it  not,  because  they  knewe  not  the  danger
thereof:  but  used  a  marveilous  crying  in  their  fight
with  leaping  and  turning  their  tayles,  that  it  was
most strange to see, and gave us great pleasure to

[III.  504.]  beholde  them.  At  the  last,  one  being  hurt  with  a
harquebuz  upon  the  thigh,  looked  upon  his  wound
and  wist  not  howe  it  came,  because  hee  could  not  see
the  pellet.  Here  Master  Hawkins  perceiving  no
good to be  done  amongst  them,  because  we  could  not

16

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1564.
finde  their  townes,  and  also  not  knowing  how  to  goe
into  Rio  grande,  for  want  of  a  Pilote,  which  was  the  Rio  ^ande.
very  occasion  of  our  comming  thither:  and  finding  so
many  sholes,  feared  with  our  great  ships  to  goe  in,
and  therefore  departed  on  our  pretended  way  to  the
Idols.  The  Idols.

The  10  of  December,  we  had  a  Northeast  winde,
with  raine  and  storme,  which  weather  continuing  two
dayes  together,  was  the  occasion  that  the  Salomon,
and  Tygre  loste  our  companie :  for  whereas  the  Jesus,
and  pinnesse  ankered  at  one  of  the  Islands  called  Sambula,  ^^^  Island
the  twelfth  day,  the  Salomon  and  Tygre  came  not  'i^  ^^  .
thither  till  the  14.  In  this  Island  we  stayed  certaine  TheSamboses.
daies,  going  every  day  on  shore  to  take  the  Inhabitants,
with  burning  and  spoiling  their  townes,  who  before
were  Sapies,  and  were  conquered  by  the  Samboses,  Sapies.
Inhabitants  beyond  Sierra  Leona.  These  Samboses  had
inhabited  there  three  yeres  before  our  comming  thither,
and  in  so  short  space  have  so  planted  the  ground,
that  they  had  great  plentie  of  Mil,  Rise,  Rootes,
Pompions,  Pullin,  goates,  of  small  frye  dried,  every
house  full  of  the  Countrey  fruite  planted  by  Gods
providence,  as  Palmito  trees,  fruites  like  dates,  and
sundry  other  in  no  place  in  all  that  Countrey  so
aboundantly,  whereby  they  lived  more  deliciously  then
other.  These  inhabitants  have  diverse  of  the  Sapies,
which  they  tooke  in  the  warres  as  their  slaves,  whome
onely  they  kept  to  till  the  ground,  in  that  they  neither
have  the  knowledge  thereof,  nor  yet  will  worke  them-
selves, of  whome  wee  tooke  many  in  that  place,  but
of  the  Samboses  none  at  all,  for  they  fled  into  the  maine.
All  the  Samboses  have  white  teeth  as  we  have,  farre
unlike  to  the  Sapies  which  doe  inhabite  about  Rio
grande,  for  their  teeth  are  all  filed,  which  they  doe
for  a  braverie,  to  set  out  themselves,  and  doe  jagge
their  flesh,  both  legges,  armes,  and  bodies,  as  worke-
manlike,  as  a  Jerkinmaker  with  us  pinketh  a  jerkin.
These  Sapies  be  more  civill  then  the  Samboses:  for
X  17  B

A.D.
1564.

The  Samboses
man-eaters.

The  Sapies
burie  their
dead  with
golde.

The  Camas
of  Affrica.

The  forme  of
their  townes.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

whereas  the  Samboses  live  most  by  the  spoile  of  their
enemies,  both  in  taking  their  victuals,  and  eating  them
also.  The  Sapies  doe  not  eate  mans  flesh,  unlesse  in  the
warre  they  be  driven  by  necessitie  thereunto,  which
they  have  not  used  but  by  the  example  of  the  Samboses,
but  live  onely  with  fruites,  and  cattell,  whereof  they
have  great  store.  This  plentie  is  the  occasion  that  the
Sapies  desire  not  warre,  except  they  be  therunto
provoked  by  the  invasions  of  the  Samboses,  whereas
the  Samboses  for  want  of  foode  are  inforced  thereunto,
and  therefore  are  not  woont  onely  to  take  them  that
they  kill,  but  also  keepe  those  that  they  take,  untill
such  time  as  they  want  meate,  and  then  they  kill  them.
There  is  also  another  occasion  that  provoketh  the
Samboses  to  warre  against  the  Sapies  which  is  for  covet-
ousnes  of  their  riches.  For  whereas  the  Sapies  have
an  order  to  burie  their  dead  in  certaine  places  appointed
for  that  purpose,  with  their  golde  about  them,  the
Samboses  digge  up  the  ground,  to  have  the  same  treasure:
for  the  Samboses  have  not  the  like  store  of  golde,  that
the  Sapies  have.  In  this  Island  of  Sambula  we  found
about  50  boates  called  Almadyes,  or  Canoas,  which  are
made  of  one  peece  of  wood,  digged  out  like  a  trough
but  of  a  good  proportion,  being  about  8  yards  long,  and
one  in  breadth,  having  a  beakhead  and  a  sterne  very
proportionably  made,  and  on  the  out  side  artifically
carved,  and  painted  red  and  blewe :  they  are  able  to
Gary  twenty  or  thirty  men,  but  they  are  about  the
coast  able  to  cary  threescore  and  upward.  In  these
canoas  they  rowe  standing  upright,  with  an  oare  some-
what longer  then  a  man,  the  ende  whereof  is  made  about
the  breadth  and  length  of  a  mans  hand,  of  the  largest
sort.  They  row  very  swift,  and  in  some  of  them  foure
rowers  and  one  to  steere  make  as  much  way,  as  a
paire  of  oares  in  the  Thames  of  London.

Their  Townes  are  pretily  divided  with  a  maine  streete
at  the  entring  in,  that  goeth  thorough  their  Towne,
and  another  overthwart  street,  which  maketh  their  townes

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1564.

crosse  wayes  :  their  houses  are  built  in  a  ranke  very-
orderly  in  the  face  of  the  street,  and  they  are  made
round,  like  a  dovecote,  with  stakes  set  full  of  Palmito
leaves,  in  stead  of  a  wall :  they  are  not  much  more
then  a  fathome  large,  and  two  of  heigth,  &  thatched
with  Palmito  leaves  very  close,  other  some  with  reede,
and  over  the  roofe  thereof,  for  the  better  garnishing
of  the  same,  there  is  a  round  bundle  of  reede,  pretily
contrived  like  a  louer :  in  the  inner  part  they  make
a  loft  of  stickes,  whereupon  they  lay  all  their  provision
of  victuals  :  a  place  they  reserve  at  their  enterance  for
the  kitchin,  and  the  place  they  lie  in  is  devided  with
certaine  mattes  artificially  made  with  the  rine  of  Palmito
trees  :  their  bedsteades  are  of  small  staves  layd  along,
and  raysed  a  foote  from  the  ground,  upon  which  is  layde
a  matte,  and  another  upon  them  when  they  list :  for
other  covering  they  have  none.  In  the  middle  of
the  towne  there  is  a  house  larger  and  higher  then  the
other,  but  in  forme  alike,  adjoyning  unto  the  which  there
is  a  place  made  of  foure  good  stancions  of  woode,  and
a  round  roofe  over  it,  the  grounde  also  raised  round  with
claye  a  foote  high,  upon  the  which  floore  were  strawed
many  fine  mats :  this  is  the  Consultation-house,  the  like  1"}^  Consuha-
whereof  is  in  all  Townes,  as  the  Portugals  aflSrme :  in  ^'l^nZmT
which  place,  when  they  sitte  in  Counsell  the  King  or
Captaine  sitteth  in  the  midst,  and  the  Elders  upon  the  [III.  505.]
floore  by  him :  (for  they  give  reverence  to  their  Elders)
and  the  common  sorte  sitte  round  about  them.  There
they  sitte  to  examine  matters  of  theft,  which  if  a  man  be
taken  with,  to  steale  but  a  Portugal  cloth  from  another,
hee  is  sold  to  the  Portugals  for  a  slave.  They  consult
also,  and  take  order  what  time  they  shall  goe  to  warres :
and  as  it  is  certainely  reported  by  the  Portugals,  they  take
order  in  gathering  of  the  fruites  in  the  season  of  the
yeere,  and  also  of  Palmito  wine,  which  is  gathered  by  a  Palmito  is  a
hole  cut  in  the  top  of  a  tree,  and  a  gourde  set  for  the  ^^^'^^  '^'^^^•
receiving  thereof,  which  falleth  in  by  droppes,  and
yeeldeth  fresh  wine  againe  within  a  moneth,  and this

19

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

devided  part  and  portion-like  to  every  man,  by  the  judge-
ment of  the  Captaine  and  Elders,  every  man  holdeth
himselfe  contented:  and  this  surely  I  judge  to  be  a  very
good  order :  for  otherwise,  whereas  scarsitie  of  Palmito
is,  every  man  would  have  the  same,  which  might  breed
great  strife :  but  of  such  things,  as  every  man  doeth  plant
for  himselfe,  the  sower  thereof  reapeth  it  to  his  owne  use,
so  that  nothing  is  common,  but  that  which  is  unset  by
mans  hands.  In  their  houses  there  is  more  common
passage  of  Lizardes  like  Evats,  and  other  greater,  of
blacke  and  blew  colour,  of  neere  a  foote  long,  besides  their
tailes,  then  there  is  with  us  of  Mise  in  great  houses.
The  Sapies  and  Samboses  also  use  in  their  warres  bowes,
and  arrowes  made  of  reedes,  with  heads  of  yron  poysoned
A  venemous  with  the  juyce  of  a  Cucumber,  whereof  I  had  many  in
Cucumber,  j^^  handes.  In  their  battels  they  have  target-men,  with
broad  wicker  targets,  and  darts  with  heades  at  both  endes,
of  yron,  the  one  in  forme  of  a  two  edged  sworde,  a  foote
and  an  halfe  long,  and  at  the  other  ende,  the  yron  long
of  the  same  length  made  to  counterpease  it,  that  in  cast-
ing it  might  flie  level,  rather  then  for  any  other  purpose
as  I  can  judge.  And  when  they  espie  the  enemie,  the
Captaine  to  cheere  his  men,  cryeth  Hungry,  and  they
answere  Heygre,  and  with  that  every  man  placeth  himselfe
in  order,  for  about  every  target  man  three  bowemen  will
cover  themselves,  and  shoote  as  they  see  advantage :  and
when  they  give  the  onset,  they  make  such  terrible  cryes,
that  they  may  bee  heard  two  miles  off.  For  their  beliefe,
I  can  heare  of  none  that  they  have,  but  in  such  as  they
themselves  imagine  to  see  in  their  dreames,  and  so
Idoles  like  worshippe  the  pictures,  whereof  wee  sawe  some  like  unto
devils.  devils. In  this  Island  aforesayde  wee  sojourned  unto  the

one  and  twentieth  of  December,  where  having  taken
certaine  Negros,  and  asmuch  of  their  fruites,  rise,  and
mill,  as  we  could  well  cary  away,  (whereof  there  was  such
store,  that  wee  might  have  laden  one  of  our  Barkes  there-
with) wee  departed,  and  at  our  departure  divers  of  our
men  being  desirous  to  goe  on  shore,  to  fetch  Pompions,

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1564.

which having prooved, they found to bee  very  good,

certaine  of  the  Tygres  men  went  also,  amongst  the  which

there  was  a  Carpenter,  a  yong  man,  who  with  his  fellowes

having  fet  many,  and  caryed  them  downe  to  their  boates,

as  they  were  ready  to  depart,  desired  his  fellow  to  tary

while  he  might  goe up  to  fetch a few which he had  The  extreme

laved  by  for him  selfe,  v/ho  being  more  licorous then  '"'^^  ^^^f^^  °J

J  ^  ? .  °  , ,  one  of  the

circumspect,  went  up  without  weapon,  and  as  he  went  up  companie.

alone,  possibly  being  marked  of  the  Negros  that  were
upon  the  trees,  espying  him  what  hee  did,  perceaving  him
to  be  alone,  and  without  weapon,  dogged  him,  and  find-
ing him  occupyed  in  binding  his  Pompions  together,  came
behinde  him,  overthrowing  him  and  straight  cutte  his
throate,  as  hee  afterwardes  was  found  by  his  fellowes,  who
came  to  the  place  for  him,  and  there  found  him  naked.

The  two  and  twentieth  the  Captaine  went  into  the
River,  called  Callowsa,  with  the  two  Barkes,  and  the  The  river
Johns  Pinnesse,  and  the  Salomons  boate,  leaving  at  anker
in  the  Rivers  mouth  the  two  shippes,  the  River  being
twenty  leagues  in,  where  the  Portugals  roade :  hee  came
thither  the  five  and  twentieth,  and  dispatched  his  businesse,
and  so  returned  with  two  Caravels,  loaden  with  Negros.

The  27.  the  Captaine  was  advertised  by  the  Portugals
of  a  towne  of  the  Negros  called  Bymba,  being  in  the  way  '^^\T°f'^^
as  they  returned,  where  was  not  onely  great  quantitie  of  ■'
golde,  but  also  that  there  were  not  above  fortie  men,  and
an  hundred  women  and  children  in  the  Towne,  so  that
if  hee  would  give  the  adventure  upon  the  same,  hee
might  gette  an  hundreth  slaves :  with  the  which  tydings
hee  being  gladde,  because  the  Portugals  shoulde  not
thinke  him  to  bee  of  so  base  a  courage,  but  that  hee  durst
give  them  that,  and  greater  attempts :  and  being  there-
unto also  the  more  provoked  with  the  prosperous  successe
hee  had  in  other  Islands  adjacent,  where  he  had  put  them
all  to  flight,  and  taken  in  one  boate  twentie  together,
determined  to  stay  before  the  Towne  three  or  foure
houres,  to  see  what  hee  could  doe :  and  thereupon  pre-
pared his men  in  armour  and  weapon  together,  to  the

A.D.
1564.

Portugals  not
to  be  trusted.
Want  of  cir-
cumspection in
our  men.

[III.  506.]

M.  Field
Captaine  of
the  Salomon
slaine.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

number  of  fortie  men  well  appointed,  having  to  their
guides  certaine  Portugals,  in  a  boat,  who  brought  some
of  them  to  their  death :  wee  landing  boat  after  boat,
and  divers  of  our  men  scattering  themselves,  contrary
to  the  Captaines  will,  by  one  or  two  in  a  company,  for
the  hope  that  they  had  to  finde  golde  in  their  houses,
ransacking  the  same,  in  the  meane  time  the  Negros  came
upon  them,  and  hurte  many  being  thus  scattered,  whereas
if  five  or  sixe  had  bene  together,  they  had  bene  able,
as  their  companions  did,  to  give  the  overthrow  to  40
of  them,  and  being  driven  downe  to  take  their  boates,
were  followed  so  hardly  by  a  route  of  Negros,  who  by
that  tooke  courage  to  pursue  them  to  their  boates,  that
not  onely  some  of  them,  but  others  standing  on  shore,
not  looking  for  any  such  matter  by  meanes  that  the
Negros  did  flee  at  the  first,  and  our  companie  remained
in  the  towne,  were  suddenly  so  set  upon  that  some
with  great  hurt  recovered  their  boates ;  othersome  not
able  to  recover  the  same,  tooke  the  water,  and  perished
by  meanes  of  the  oaze.  While  this  was  doing,  the
Captaine  who  with  a  dosen  men,  went  through  the
towne,  returned,  finding  200  Negros  at  the  waters  side,
shooting  at  them  in  the  boates,  and  cutting  them  in
pieces  which  were  drowned  in  the  water,  at  whose
comming,  they  ranne  all  away :  so  he  entred  his  boates,
and  before  he  could  put  off  from  the  shore,  they  returned
againe,  and  shot  very  fiercely  and  hurt  divers  of  them.
Thus  wee  returned  backe  some  what  discomforted,
although  the  Captaine  in  a  singular  wise  maner  caried
himselfe,  with  countenance  very  cheerefull  outwardly,
as  though  hee  did  litle  weigh  the  death  of  his  men,
nor  yet  the  great  hurt  of  the  rest,  although  his  heart
inwardly  was  broken  in  pieces  for  it ;  done  to  this  ende,
that  the  Portugals  being  with  him,  should  not  presume
to  resist  against  him,  nor  take  occasion  to  put  him  to
further  displeasure  or  hinderance  for  the  death  of  our
men :  having  gotten  by  our  going  ten  Negros,  and
lost  seven  of  our  best  men,  whereof  M.  Field  Captaine

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1565.
of  the  Salomon,  was  one,  and  we  had  27  of  our  men
hurt.  In  the  same  houre  while  this  was  doing,  there
happened  at  the  same  instant,  a  marveilous  miracle  to
them  in  the  shippes,  who  road  ten  leagues  to  sea-ward,
by  many  sharkes  or  Tiburons,  who  came  about  the  ships :
among  which,  one  was  taken  by  the  Jesus,  and  foure
by  the  Salomon,  and  one  very  sore  hurt  escaped :  and  so
it  fell  out  of  our  men,  whereof  one  of  the  Jesus  men,
and  foure  of  the  Salomons  were  killed,  and  the  fift
having  twentie  wounds  was  rescued,  and  scaped  with
much  adoe.

The  28 they  came  to  their  ships,  the  Jesus,  and  the
Salomon,  and  the  30  departed  from  thence  to  Taggarin. Taggarin.

The first of  January the two  barkes, and both the

boates  forsooke  the  ships,  and  went  into  a  river  called  The  river  of

the  Casserroes,  and  the  6  having  dispatched  their  busi-  Casserroes.

nesse,  the  two  barkes  returned,  and  came  to  Taggarin,

where  the  two  ships  were  at  anker. Not  two  dayes  after

the  comming  of  the two  ships  thither,  they put  their

water  caske  a  shore,  and  filled  it  with  water,  to  season  the

same,  thinking  to  have  filled  it  with  fresh  water  afterward  :

and  while  their  men  were  some  on  shore,  and  some  at

their  boates,  the  Negros  set  upon  them  in  the  boates,  and

hurt  divers  of  them,  and  came  to  the  caskes,  and  cut  of

the  hoopes  of  twelve  buts,  which  lost  us  4  or  5  dayes

time,  besides  great  want  we  had  of  the  same  : sojourning

at  Taggarin,  the  Swallow  went  up  the  river  about  her

trafficke,  where  they  saw  great  townes  of  the  Negros,  and

Canoas,  that  had  threescore  men  in  a  piece :  there  they

understood  by  the  Portugals,  of  a  great  battell  betweene  ^  new  assault

them  of  Sierra  Leona  side,  and  them  of  Taggarin :  they  ^^  ^^^  Negros.

of  Sierra  Leona,  had  prepared  three  hundred  Canoas  to J/f  J'^H^^'

1  i-T'f •  -1  . y  er'j  great

mvade  the  other. The  time  was  appomted  not  past  sixe  Camas.

dayes  after  our  departure  from  thence,  which  we  would

have  seene,  to  the  intent  we  might  have  taken  some  of

them, had it not bene for the death and sickenesse  The  contagion
[. ^  1  .  ,  11  .  ~ , of  the  countre-j

or our  men,  which  came by  the  contagiousnes or  the  of  Sierra

place,  which  made  us  to  make  hast  away.  Leona.

23

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

The  18  of  Januarie  at  night,  wee  departed  from
Taggarin,  being  bound  for  the  West  Indies,  before
which  departure  certaine  of  the  Salomons  men  went
on  shore  to  fill  water  in  the  night,  and  as  they
came  on  shore  with  their  boat  being  ready  to  leape
on  land,  one  of  them  espied  an  Negro  in  a  white
coate,  standing  upon  a  rocke,  being  ready  to  have
received  them  when  they  came  on  shore,  having  in
sight  of  his  fellowes  also  eight  or  nine,  some  in  one
place  leaping  out,  and  some  in  another,  but  they  hid
themselves  streight  againe  :  whereupon  our  men  doubt-
ing they  had  bene  a  great  companie,  and  sought  to
have  taken  them  at  more  advantage,  as  God  would,
departed  to  their  ships,  not  thinking  there  had  bene
such  a  mischiefe  pretended  toward  them,  as  then  was
in  deede.  Which  the  next  day  we  understood  of  a
Portugal  that  came  downe  to  us,  who  had  trafficked
with  the  Negros,  by  whom  hee  understood,  that  the
king  of  Sierra  Leona  had  made  all  the  power  hee
could,  to  take  some  of  us,  partly  for  the  desire  he
had  to  see  what  kinde  of  people  we  were,  that  had
spoiled  his  people  at  the  Idols,  whereof  he  had  newes
before our comming,  and as  I  judge  also,  upon  other

Tangomangos,  occasions  provoked  by  the  Tangomangos,  but  sure  we
were  that  the  armie  was  come  downe,  by  meanes  that
in  the  evening  wee  saw  such  a  monstrous  fire,  made
by  the  watring  place,  that  before  was  not  scene,  which
fire  is  the  only  marke  for  the  Tangomangos  to  know
where  their  armie  is  alwayes.  If  these  men  had  come
downe  in  the  evening,  they  had  done  us  great
displeasure,  for  that  wee  were  on  shore  filling  water  :
but  God,  who  worketh  all  things  for  the  best,  would
not  have  it  so,  and  by  him  we  escaped  without
danger,  his  name  be  praysed  for  it.

[III.  507.]  The  29 of  this same moneth  we departed with all

our  shippes  from  Sierra  Leona,  towardes  the  West
Indies,  and  for  the  space  of  eighteene  dayes,  we  were
becalmed, having  nowe  and  then  contrary  windes, and

24

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1565.
some  Ternados,  amongst  the  same  calme,  which
happened  to  us  very  ill,  beeing  but  reasonably  watered,
for  so  great  a  companie  of  Negros,  and  our  selves,
which  pinched  us  all,  and  that  which  was  worst,  put
us  in  such  feare  that  many  never  thought  to  have
reached  to  the  Indies,  without  great  death  of  Negros,
and  of  themselves :  but  the  Almightie  God,  who  never
suffereth  his  elect  to  perish,  sent  us  the  sixteenth  of
Februarie,  the  ordinary  Brise,  which  is  the  Northwest
winde,  which  never  left  us,  till  wee  came  to  an  Island
of  the  Canybals,  called  Dominica,  where  wee  arrived  Dominica
the  ninth  of  March,  upon  a  Saturday :  and  because  ^•^'''^^'^•
it  was  the  most  desolate  place  in  all  the  Island,  we
could  see  no  Canybals,  but  some  of  their  houses
where  they  dwelled,  and  as  it  should  seeme  forsooke
the  place  for  want  of  fresh  water,  for  wee  could  finde
none  there  but  raine  water,  and  such  as  fell  from  the
hilles,  and  remained  as  a  puddle  in  the  dale,  whereof
wee  filled  for  our  Negros.  The  Canybals  of  that
Island,  and  also  others  adjacent  are  the  most  desperate
warriers  that  are  in  the  Indies,  by  the  Spaniardes  Canybals  ex-
report,  who  are  never  able  to  conquer  them,  and  they  "^^Ji^g  ""^^^h
are  molested  by  them  not  a  little,  when  they  are  driven  ^^^^^^^^
to  water  there  in  any  of  those  Islands :  of  very  late,  not
two  moneths  past,  in  the  said  Island,  a  Caravel  being
driven  to  water,  was  in  the  night  sette  upon  by  the
inhabitants,  who  cutte  their  cable  in  the  halser,  whereby
they  were  driven  a  shore,  and  so  taken  by  them,  and
eaten.  The  greene  Dragon  of  Newhaven,  whereof  was
Captaine  one  Bontemps,  in  March  also,  came  to  one
of  those  Islands,  called  Granada,  and  being  driven  to
water,  could  not  doe  the  same  for  the  Canybals,  who
fought  with  him  very  desperatly  two  dayes.  For  our
part  also,  if  we  had  not  lighted  upon  the  desertest
place  in  all  that  Island,  wee  could  not  have  missed,
but  should  have  bene  greatly  troubled  by  them,  by  all
the  Spaniards  reports,  who  make  them  devils  in  respect
of  me.

25

A.D.

1565.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Island.

Margarita

Island.

The  tenth  day  at  night,  we  departed  from  thence,
and  the  fifteenth  had  sight  of  nine  Islands,  called  the
The  Testigos  Testigos  :  and  the  sixteenth  of  an  Island,  called
Margarita,  where  wee  were  entertayned  by  the  Alcalde,
and  had  both  Beeves  and  sheepe  given  us,  for  the
refreshing  of  our  men  :  but  the  Governour  of  the
Island,  would  neither  come  to  speake  with  our
Captaine,  neither  yet  give  him  any  licence  to  trafficke  :
and  to  displease  us  the  more,  whereas  wee  had  hired
a  Pilote  to  have  gone  with  us,  they  would  not  onely
not  suffer  him  to  goe  with  us,  but  also  sent  word  by
a  Caravel  out  of  hand,  to  Santo  Domingo,  to  the  Vice-
roy, who  doeth  represent  the  kings  person,  of  our
arrivall  in  those  partes,  which  had  like  to  have  turned
us  to  great  displeasure,  by  the  meanes  that  the  same
Vice-roy  did  send  word  to  Cape  de  la  Vela,  and  to
other  places  along  the  coast,  commanding  them  that  by
the  vertue  of  his  authoritie,  and  by  the  obedience  that
they  owe  to  their  Prince,  no  man  should  trafficke  with
us,  but  should  resist  us  with  all  the  force  they  could.
In  this  Island,  notwithstanding  that  wee  were  not
within  foure  leagues  of  the  Towne,  yet  were  they  so
afraid,  that  not  onely  the  Governour  himselfe,  but  also
all  the  inhabitants  forsooke  their  Towne,  assembling  all
the  Indians  to  them  and  fled  into  the  mountaines,  as
wee  were  partly  certified,  and  also  sawe  the  experience
our  selves,  by  some  of  the  Indians  comming  to  see  us
who  by  three  Spaniards  a  horsebacke  passing  hard  by
us,  went  unto  the  Indians,  having  every  one  of  them
their  bowes,  and  arrowes,  procuring  them  away,  who
before  were  conversant  with  us.

Here  perceiving  no  trafficke  to  be  had  with  them,
nor  yet  water  for  the  refreshing  of  our  men,  we  were
driven  to  depart  the  twentieth  day,  and  the  2  and
twentieth  we  came  to  a  place  in  the  maine  called
Cumana,  whither  the  Captaine  going  in  his  Pinnisse,
spake  with  certaine  Spaniards,  of  whom  he  demanded
trafficke, but they  made him answere, they  were but

26

Cumana.

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565.
souldiers  newely  come  thither,  and  were  not  able  to
by  one  Negro :  whereupon  hee  asked  for  a  watring
place,  and  they  pointed  him  a  place  two  leagues  ofF,
called  Santa  Fe,  where  we  found  marvellous  goodly  Santa  Fe.
watering,  and  commodious  for  the  taking  in  thereof:
for  that  the  fresh  water  came  into  the  Sea,  and  so  our
shippes  had  aboord  the  shore  twentie  fathome  water.
Neere  about  this  place,  inhabited  certaine  Indians,  who
the  next  day  after  we  came  thither,  came  down  to  us,
presenting  mill  and  cakes  of  breade,  which  they  had
made  of  a  kinde  of  corne  called  Maiz,  in  bignesse  of
a  pease,  the  eare  whereof  is  much  like  to  a  teasell,
but  a  spanne  in  length,  having  thereon  a  number  of
granes.  Also  they  brought  down  to  us  Hennes,
Potatoes  and  Pines,  which  we  bought  for  beades,
pewter  whistles,  glasses,  knives,  and  other  trifles.

These  Potatoes  be  the  most  delicate  rootes  that  may
be  eaten,  and  doe  farre  exceed  our  passeneps  or  carets.
Their  pines  be  of  the bignes of  two fists,  the outside
whereof  is of  the making of  a pine-apple,  but it is
soft like the rinde of  a Cucomber, and the inside
eateth  like  an  apple,  but  it  is more delicious  then any  [m.  508.]
sweet apple sugred. These Indians being of  colour  The  descrlp-
tawnie  like  an Olive, having every one  of  them both  tlonofthe
men  and  women,  haire  all  blacke,  and  no  other  colour,  ^«^^»^.?/
the  women wearing  the same hanging downe to their
shoulders, and  the men rounded, and  without beards,
neither men nor  women suffering  any  haire to growe
in any  part of  their body,  but dayly  pull it off  as it
groweth. They  goe all naked, the men covering no
part  of  their  body  but  their  yard,  upon  the  which  they
weare a gourd or piece of cane, made fast with a
thrid about their loynes, leaving the other parts of
their  members  uncovered,  whereof  they  take  no  shame.
The women also are uncovered, saving with a cloth
which they  weare  a hand-breath,  wherewith they  cover
their privities both  before  and  behind. These people
be  very  small  feeders,  for  travelling  they  cary  but  two

27

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

small  bottels  of  gourdes,  wherein  they  put  in  one  the

The  use  of juice  of  Sorrell whereof  they have great store, and in

the other flowre of their Maiz, which being moist,

they eate,  taking sometime  of  the  other. These men

cary every  man his bowe and arrowes, whereof  some

arrowes are poisoned for  warres, which they keepe in

a Cane together,  which Cane is of  the bignesse of  a

mans arme, other some with broad heades of iron

wherewith  they  stricke  fish  in  the  water  :  the  experience

whereof  we  saw  not  once  nor  twise,  but  dayly  for  the

time  we  taried  there,  for  they  are  so  good  archers  that

Armour  of the Spaniards for feare thereof arme themselves and

quilted  canvas  ^^^^ horses  with quilted  canvas of  two  ynches  thicke,

two  ynches  ,,  ,^  ri-ii  ^  i-

thicke.  ^^^ leave no place or their body open to their

enemies, saving their eyes which they  may not hide,
and yet oftentimes are they hit in that so small a
The  making  of  scantling  : their poyson is of such a force, that a
their  poison. ,^^^  being  Stricken therewith dyeth within foure and
twentie  howers,  as  the Spaniards  do affirme, & in my
judgement  it  is  like there can be no stronger poyson
as  they  make  it,  using  thereunto  apples  which  are  very
faire and red  of  colour,  but  are  a  strong  poyson,  with
the  which  together  with  venemous  Bats,  Vipers,  Adders
and other serpents,  they make a medley, and there-
with anoint  the  same.
Themanersof Xhe  Indian  women  delight  not  when  they  are  yong
the  yong  -^^ bearina: of  children,  because it maketh them have

hanging  breastes  which  they  account  to  bee  great  deform-
ing in  them,  and  upon  that  occasion  while  they  bee
yong,  they  destroy  their  seede,  saying,  that  it  is  fittest
for  olde  women.  Moreover,  when  they  are  delivered
of  childe,  they  goe  straight  to  washe  themselves,  with-
out making  any  further  ceremonie  for  it,  not  lying  in
bed  as  our  women  doe.  The  beds  which  they  have
are  made  of  Gossopine  cotton,  and  wrought  artificially
of  divers  colours,  which  they  cary  about  with  them
when  they  travell,  and  making  the  same  fast  to  two
trees,  lie therein  they  and their  women. The people

28

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565.

be  surely  gentle  and  tractable,  and  such  as  desire  to
live  peaceably,  or  els  had  it  bene  unpossible  for  the
Spaniards  to  have  conquered  them  as  they  did,  and  the
more  to  live  now  peaceably,  they  being  so  many  in
number,  and  the  Spaniards  so  few.

From  hence  we  departed  the  eight  and twentie,  and

the  next day  we  passed betweene  the  maine  land,  and

the  Island called Tortuga,  a  very  lowe Island,  in  the  ?J^^  -^^^^  ^f

yeere  of  our  Lorde God  one thousande  five  hundred "^  ^Sfl-

sixty  five  aforesaide,  and sayled along the coast  untill

the  first of  Aprill,  at  which  time the Captaine sayled

along in  the  Jesus pinnesse  to  discerne  the  coast,  and

saw many Caribes on shore, and some also in their

Canoas, which made tokens unto him of friendship,

and shewed him golde, meaning thereby that they

would  trafficke  for  wares. Whereupon  he  stayed  to  see

the  maners of  them,  and so for two or three trifles

they  gave such things as they had about them,  and

departed: but the Caribes were very importunate to

have  them  come  on  shore,  which  if  it  had  not  bene  for

want of  wares to trafficke with them,  he would not

have denyed them,  because the  Indians  which  we  saw

before  were  very  gentle  people,  and  such  as  do  no  man

hurt. But  as  God  would  have  it,  hee  wanted  that  thing,

which  if  hee  had  had,  would  have  bene  his  confusion :

for  these  were no such  kinde  of  people as  wee  tooke

them  to  bee,  but  more devilish  a  thousand partes  and

are  eaters  and  devourers  of  any  man  they  can  catch,  as

it  was  afterwards  declared  unto  us  at  Burboroata,  by  a

Caravel  comming  out  of  Spaine  with  certaine  souldiers,

and a Captaine generall sent by the king for those

Eastward  parts  of  the  Indians,  who  sayling  along  in  his

pinnesse,  as  our  Captaine  did to  descry  the coast,  was

by  the  Caribes  called  a  shoore  with  sundry  tokens  made

to him of  friendshippe,  and golde shewed as though

they  desired  trafficke,  with  the  which  the  Spaniard  being

mooved,  suspecting  no  deceite  at  all,  went  ashore  amongst

them :  who  was  no  sooner  ashore,  but  with  foure  or  five

29

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.
/  more  was  taken,  the  rest  of  his  company  being  invaded

by  them,'  saved  themselves  by  flight,  but  they  that  were

The  crueltie  of  taken,  paied their ransome  with their Hves,  and  were

the  Canhes.  presently  eaten.  And  this  is  their  practise  to  toll  with
their  golde  the  ignorant  to  their  snares :  they  are  blood-
suckers both  of  Spaniards,  Indians,  and  all  that  light  in
their  laps,  not  sparing  their  owne  countreymen  if  they
can  conveniently  come  by  them.  Their  policie  in  fight
with  the  Spaniards  is  marveilous :  for  they  chuse  for
their  refuge  the  mountaines  and  woodes  where  the
Spaniards  with  their  horses  cannot follow  them,  and  if

[III,  509.]  they  fortune  to  be  met  in  the  plaine  where  one  horse-
man may  over-runne  100.  of  them,  they  have  a  devise
of  late  practised  by  them  to  pitch  stakes  of  wood  in  the
ground,  and  also  small  iron  pikes  to  mischiefe  their
horses,  wherein  they  shew  themselves  politique  warriers.
They  have  more  abundance  of  golde  then  all  the
Spaniards  have,  and  live  upon  the  mountaines  where  the
Mines  are  in  such  number,  that  the  Spaniards  have
much  adoe  to  get  any  of  them  from  them,  and  yet
sometimes  by  assembling  a  great  number  of  them,  which
happeneth  once  in  two  yeeres,  they  get  a  piece  from
them,  which  afterwards  they  keepe  sure  ynough.

Thus having escaped the  danger  of  them,  wee  kept
our  course  along  the  coast,  and  came  the  third  of  April

Burboroata.  to  a  Towne  called  Burboroata,  where  his  ships  came  to
an  ancker,  and  hee  himselfe  went  a  shore  to  speake
with  the  Spaniards,  to  whom  hee  declared  himselfe  to
be  an  Englishman,  and  came  thither  to  trade  with  them
by  the  way  of  marchandize,  and  therefore  required
licence  for  the  same.  Unto  whom  they  made  answere,
that  they  were  forbidden  by  the  king  to  trafique  with
any  forren  nation,  upon  penaltie  to  forfeit  their  goods,
therfore  they  desired  him  not  to  molest  them  any  further,
but  to  depart  as  he  came,  for  other  comfort  he  might
not  looke  for  at  their  handes,  because  they  were  subjects
and  might  not  goe  beyond  the  law.  But  hee  replied
that his  necessitie  was such,  as  he  might not so do  :

30

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1565.
for  being  in  one  of  the  Queens  Armadas  of  England,
and  having  many  souldiours  in  them,  hee  had  neede
both  of  some  refreshing  for  them,  and  of  victuals,  and
of  money  also,  without  the  which  hee  coulde  not  depart,
and  with  much  other  talke  perswaded  them  not  to  feare
any  dishonest  part  of  his  behalfe  towards  them,  for
neither  would  hee  commit  any  such  thing  to  the  dis-
honour of  his  prince,  not  yet  for  his  honest  reputation
and  estimation,  unlesse*  hee  were  too  rigorously  dealt
withall,  which  hee  hoped  not  to  finde  at  their  handes,
in  that  it  should  as  well  redound  to  their  profite  as
his  owne,  and  also  hee  thought  they  might  doe  it
without  danger,  because  their  princes  were  in  amitie  one
with  another,  and  for  our  parts  wee  had  free  trafique  in
Spain  and  Flanders,  which  are  in  his  dominions,  and
therefore  he  knew  no  reason  why  he  should  not  have
the  like  in  all  his  dominions.  To  the  which  the
Spaniards  made  answere,  that  it  lay  not  in  them  to  give
any  licence,  for  that  they  had  a  governour  to  whom  the
government  of  those  parts  was  committed,  but  if  they
would  stay  tenne  dayes,  they  would  send  to  their
governour  who  was  threescore  leagues  off,  and  would
returne  answere  within  the  space  appointed,  of  his
minde.

In  the  meane  time  they  were  contented  hee  should
bring  his  ships  into  harbour,  and  there  they  would
deliver  him  any  victuals  he  would  require.  Whereupon
the  fourth  day  we  went  in,  where  being  one  day  and
receiving  all  things  according  to  promise,  the  Captaine
advised  himselfe,  that  to  remaine  there  tenne  dayes  idle,
spending  victuals  and  mens  wages,  and  perhaps  in  the
ende  receive  no  good  answere  from  the  governour,  it
were  meere  foUie,  and  therefore  determined  to  make
request  to  have  licence  for  the  sale  of  certaine  leane  and
sicke  Negros  which  hee  had  in  his  shippe  like  to  die
upon  his  hands  if  he  kept  them  ten  dayes,  having  little
or  no  refreshing  for  them,  whereas  other  men  having
them, they  would bee recovered  well ynough. And

31

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

this  request  hee  was  forced  to  make,  because  he  had
not  otherwise  wherewith  to  pay  for  victuals  &  for
necessaries  which  he  should  take :  which  request  being
put  in  writing  and  presented,  the  officers  and  towne-
dwellers  assembled  together,  and  finding  his  request  so
reasonable,  granted  him  licence  for  thirtie  Negros,  which
afterwards  they  caused  the  officers  to  view,  to  the  intent
they  should  graunt  to  nothing  but  that  were  very
reasonable,  for  feare  of  answering  thereunto  afterwards.
This  being  past,  our  Captaine  according  to  their  licence,
thought  to  have  made  sale,  but  the  day  past  and  none
came  to  buy,  who  before  made  shewe  that  they  had
great  neede  of  them,  and  therefore  wist  not  what  to
surmise  of  them,  whether  they  went  about  to  prolong
the  time  of  the  Governour  his  answere  because  they
would  keepe  themselves  blamelesse,  or  for  any  other
pollicie  hee  knew  not,  and  for  that  purpose  sent  them
worde,  marveiling  what  the  matter  was  that  none  came
to  buy  them.  They  answered,  because  they  had  granted
licence  onely  to  the  poore  to  buy  those  Negros  of
small  price,  and  their  money  was  not  so  ready  as  other
mens  of  more  wealth.  More  then  that,  as  soone  as
ever  they  sawe  the  shippes,  they  conveyed  away  their
money  by  their  wives  that  went  into  the  mountaines
for  feare,  &  were  not  yet  returned,  &  yet  asked  two
dayes  to  seeke  their  wives  and  fetch  their  money.
Notwithstanding,  the  next  day  divers  of  them  came  to
cheapen,  but  could  not  agree  of  price,  because  they
thought  the  price  too  high.  Whereupon  the  Captaine
perceiving  they  went  about  to  bring  downe  the  price,
and  meant  to  buy,  and  would  not  confesse  if  hee  had
licence,  that  he  might  sell  at  any  reasonable  rate,  as
they  were  worth  in  other  places,  did  send  for  the
principals  of  the  Towne,  and  made  a  shewe  hee  would
depart,  declaring  himselfe  to  be  very  sory  that  he  had
so  much  troubled  them,  and  also  that  he  had  sent  for
the  governour  to  come  downe,  seeing  nowe  his  pretence
was  to  depart,  whereat  they  marveiled  much,  and  asked

32

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

him  what  cause  mooved  him  thereunto,  seeing  by  their
working  he  was  in  possibilitie  to  have  his  licence.

To  the  which  he  replied,  that  it  was  not  onely  a  [III.  510.]
licence  that  he  sought,  but  profit,  which  he  perceived
was  not  there  to  bee  had,  and  therefore  would  seeke
further,  and  withall  shewed  him  his  writings  what  he
payed  for  his  Negros,  declaring  also  the  great  charge
he  was  at  in  his  shipping,  and  mens  wages,  and  there-
fore to  countervail  his  charges,  hee  must  sell  his
Negros  for  a  greater  price  then  they  offered.  So  they
doubting  his  departure,  put  him  in  comfort  to  sell
better  there  then  in  any  other  place.  And  if  it  fell  out  that
he  had  no  licence  that  he  should  not  loose  his  labour
in  taryi ng,  for  they  would  buy  without  licence.  Where-
upon, the  Captaine  being  put  in  comfort,  promised  them
to  stay,  so  that  hee  might  make  sale  of  his  leane
Negros,  which  they  granted  unto.  And  the  next  day
did  sell  some  of  them,  who  having  bought  and  payed  for
them,  thinking  to  have  had  a  discharge  of  the  Customer,
for  the  custome  of  the  Negros,  being  the  Kings  duetie,
they  gave  it  away  to  the  poore  for  Gods  sake,  and  did
refuse  to  give  the  discharge  in  writing,  and  the  poore
not  trusting  their  wordes,  for  feare,  least  hereafter  it
might  bee  demaunded  of  them,  did  refraine  from  buying
any  more,  so  that  nothing  else  was  done  untill  the
Governours  comming  downe,  which  was  the  fourteenth
day,  and  then  the  Captaine  made  petition,  declaring  that
hee  was  come  thither  in  a  shippe  of  the  Queenes
Majesties  of  England,  being  bound  to  Guinie,  and
thither  driven  by  winde  and  weather,  so  that  being  come
thither,  hee  had  neede  of  sundry  necessaries  for  the
reparation  of  the  said  Navie,  and  also  great  need  of
money  for  the  paiment  of  his  Souldiours,  unto  whom
hee  had  promised  paiment,  and  therefore  although  hee
would,  yet  would  not  they  depart  without  it,  &  for
that  purpose  he  requested  licence  for  the  sale  of  certaine
of  his  Negros,  declaring  that  although  they  were  for-
bidden to  trafique  with  strangers,  yet  for  that  there
X  33  c

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

was  a  great  amitie  betweene  their  princes,  and  that  the
thing  perteined  to  our  Queenes  highnesse,  he  thought
hee  might  doe  their  prince  great  service,  and  that  it
would  bee  well  taken  at  his  hands,  to  doe  it  in  this
cause.  The  which  allegations  with  divers  others  put
in  request,  were  presented  unto  the  Governour,  who
sitting  in  counsell  for  that  matter,  granted  unto  his
request  for  licence.  But  yet  there  fell  out  another  thing
which  was  the  abating  of  the  kings  Custome,  being  upon
every  slave  30.  duckets,  which  would  not  be  granted  unto.
Whereupon  the  Captaine  perceiving  that  they  would
neither  come  neere  his  price  hee  looked  for  by  a  great
deale,  nor  yet  would  abate  the  Kings  Custome  of  that
they  offered,  so  that  either  he  must  be  a  great  looser
by  his  wares,  or  els  compell  the  officers  to  abate  the
same  kings  Custome  which  was  too  unreasonable,  for  to
a  higher  price  hee  coulde  not  bring  the  buyers :  There-
An  hundreth  fore  the  sixteenth  of  April  hee  prepared  one  hundred
Enghshmeyi  j^^j^  ^^jj  armed  with  bowes,  arrowes,  harquebuzes  and
pikes,  with  the  which  hee  marched  to  the  townewards,
and  being  perceived  by  the  Governour,  he  straight  with
all  expedition  sent  messengers  to  knowe  his  request,
desiring  him  to  march  no  further  forward  untill  he  had
answere  againe,  which  incontinent  he  should  have.  So
our  Captaine  declaring  how  unreasonable  a  thing  the
Kings  Custome  was,  requested  to  have  the  same  abated,
and  to  pay  seven  and  a  halfe  per  centum,  which  is  the
ordinarie  Custome  for  wares  through  his  dominions  there,
and  unto  this  if  they  would  not  graunt,  hee  would
displease  them.  And  this  word  being  caried  to  the
Governour,  answere  was  returned  that  all  things  should
bee  to  his  content,  and  thereupon  hee  determined  to
depart,  but  the  souldiers  and  Mariners  finding  so  little
credite  in  their  promises,  demanded  gages  for  the  per-
formance of  the  premisses,  or  els  they  would  not
depart.  And  thus  they  being  constrained  to  send  gages,
wee  departed,  beginning  our  trafique,  and  ending  the
same  without  disturbance.

34

in  armour.

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1565.

Thus  having  made  trafique  in  the  harborough  untill
the  28.  our  Captaine  with  his  ships  intended  to  goe
out  of  the  roade,  and  purposed  to  make  shew  of  his
departure,  because  nowe  the  common  sort  having  im-
ployed  their  money,  the  rich  men  were  come  to  towne,
who  made  no  shew  that  they  were  come  to  buy,  so
that  they  went  about  to  bring  downe  the  price,  and
by  this  pollicie  the  Captaine  knew  they  would  be  made
the  more  eager,  for  feare  least  we  departed,  and  they
should  goe  without  any  at  all.

The nine  and twentie  wee  being  at ancker without

the  road,  a  French ship called the Greene Dragon  of

Newhaven,  whereof  was  Captaine  one  Bon  Temps  came

in,  who saluted us after the maner of  the Sea,  with

certaine  pieces  of  Ordinance,  and  we  resaluted  him  with

the  like againe :  with  whom  having  communication,  he

declared  that  hee  had  bene  at  the  Mine  in  Guinie,  and  The  reports  of

was  beaten  off  by  the  Portugals  gallies,  and  inforced  to  ^^^  ^^^hap  of
^1  .1  ^ ■' 1  1 r 1  1 -i ^ the  Mtnion  m

come  thither  to  make  sale  or  such  wares  as  he  had  :  q^^i^i^
and  further  that  the  like  was  happened  unto  the  Minion :
besides  the  Captaine  Davie  Carlet  and  a  Marchant,  with
a  dozen  Mariners  betrayed  by  the  Negros  at  their  first
arrivall  thither,  and  remayning  prisoners  with  the
Portugals ;  and  besides  other  misadventures  of  the  losse
of  their  men,  happened  through  the  great  lacke  of  fresh
water,  with  great  doubts  of  bringing  home  the  ships :
which  was  most  sorrowfuU  for  us  to  understand.

Thus  having  ended  our  trafique  here  the  4.  of  May,  [III.  511.]
we departed, leaving the Frenchman behinde us,  the  '^^3'-
night before the which the Caribes, whereof  I have
made mention before,  being to the number of 200.
came  in  their  Canoas  to  Burboroata,  intending  by  night
to  have  burned  the  towne,  and  taken  the  Spaniards,  who
being more vigilant because  of  our  being  there, then
their  custome  was,  perceiving  them  comming,  raised  the
towne,  who  in  a  moment  being  a  horsebacke,  by  meanes
their  custome is  for all doubts to keepe their  horses  Horses  kept
ready  sadled,  in  the  night  set  upon  them,  &  tooke  one,  '''^^'^'^  sadled.

35

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

but  the  rest  making  shift  for  themselves,  escaped  away.
But  this  one,  because  he  was  their  guide,  and  was  the
occasion  that  divers  times  they  had  made  invasion  upon
them,  had  for  his  traveile  a  stake  thrust  through  his
fundament,  and  so  out  at  his  necke.

The  sixt  of  May  aforesaide,  wee  came  to  an  yland
called  Cura9ao,  where  wee  had  thought  to  have  anckered,
but  could  not  find  ground,  and  having  let  fal  an  ancker
with  two  cables,  were  faine  to  weigh  it  againe :  and  the
seventh  sayling  along  the  coast  to  seeke  an  harborow,
and  finding  none,  wee  came  to  an  ancker  where  we  rode
open  in  the  Sea.  In  this  place  we  had  trafique  for  hides,
and  found  great  refreshing  both  of  beefe,  mutton  and
lambes,  whereof  there  was  such  plentie,  that  saving  the
skinnes,  we  had  the  flesh  given  us  for  nothing,  the
Exceeding  plentie  whereof  was  so  abundant,  that  the  worst  in  the
plenueofcattle  gj^jp  thought  scorne  not  onely  of  mutton,  but  also  of
sodden  lambe,  which  they  disdained  to  eate  unrosted.

The  increase  of  cattell  in  this  yland  is  marveilous,
which  from  a  doozen  of  each  sort  brought  thither  by  the
governour,  in  25.  yeres  he  had  a  hundreth  thousand
at  the  least,  &  of  other  cattel  was  able  to  kill  without
spoile  of  the  increase  1500.  yeerely,  which  hee  killeth
for  the  skinnes,  and  of  the  flesh  saveth  onely  the  tongues,
the  rest  hee  leaveth  to  the  foule  to  devoure.  And  this
I  am  able  to  affirme,  not  onely  upon  the  Governours
owne  report,  who  was  the  first  that  brought  the  increase
thither,  which  so  remaineth  unto  this  day,  but  also  by
that  I  saw  my  selfe  in  one  field,  where  an  hundred  oxen
lay  one  by  another  all  whole,  saving  the  skinne  and
tongue  taken  away.  And  it  is  not  so  marveilous  a  thing
why  they  doe  thus  cast  away  the  flesh  in  all  the  ylands
of  the  West  Indies,  seeing  the  land  is  great,  and  more
then  they  are  able  to  inhabite,  the  people  fewe,  having
delicate  fruites  and  meates  ynough  besides  to  feede  upon,
which  they  rather  desire,  and  the  increase  which  passeth
mans  reason  to  beleeve,  when  they  come  to  a  great
number : for in S. Domingo an yland called by  the

-.6

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

^565.
finders thereof Hispaniola, is so great quantitie of
cattell, and such increase therof, that notwithstanding
the  daily  killing  of  them  for  their  hides,  it  is  not  possible
to  asswage  the  number  of  them,  but  they  are  devoured
by  wilde  dogs,  whose  number  is  such  by  suffering  them  Gr^^/
first  to  range  the  woods  and  mountaines,  that  they  eate  "^^^^^yf
and  destroy  60000.  a  yeere,  and  yet  small  lacke  found  ^^ ''^^'
of  them. And  no  marveile,  for  the  said  yland  is  almost
as  bigge  as  all  England,  and  being  the  first  place  that
was  founde  of  all  the  Indies,  and  of  long  time  inhabited
before  the  rest,  it  ought  therefore  of  reason  to  be  most
populous :  and  to  this  houre the  Viceroy  and  counsell
royall  abideth  there  as  in  the  chiefest  place  of  all  the
Indies, to prescribe orders to the rest for the kings
behalfe,  yet  have  they  but  one  Citie  and  13.  villages  in
all  the  same  yland,  whereby  the  spoile  of  them  in  respect
of  the  increase  is  nothing.

The  15.  of  the  foresaid  moneth  wee  departed  from
Cura9ao,  being  not  a  little  to  the  rejoycing  of  our
Captaine  and  us,  that  wee  had  there  ended  our  trafique :
but  notwithstanding  our  sweete  meate,  wee  had  sower
sauce,  for  by  reason  of  our  riding  so  open  at  sea,  what
with  blastes  whereby  our  anckers  being  a  ground,  three
at  once  came  home,  and  also  with  contrary  windes
blowing,  whereby  for  feare  of  the  shore  we  were  faine
to  hale  off  to  have  anker- hold,  sometimes  a  whole  day
and  a  night  we  turned  up  and  downe ;  and  this  happened
not  once,  but  halfe  a  dozen  times  in  the  space  of  our
being  there.

The 16.  wee passed  by  an yland called Aruba,  and  Jruba.
the 17.  at  night  anckered  sixe  houres  at  the  West  ende
of  Cabo  de  la  vela,  and in  the  morning  being  the 18.
weighed  againe,  keeping  our  course,  in  the  which  time
the Captaine sailing by the shore in the pinnesse,
came  to  the  Rancheria,  a  place  where  the  Spaniards  use  to  La  Rancheria.
fish  for  pearles,  and  there  spoke  with  a Spaniard,  who
tolde  him  how  far  off  he  was  from  Rio  de  la  Hacha,  which  Rio  de  la
because  he  would  not  overshoot,  he  ankered  that  night  ^'^'^^^•

37

A.D.
1565.

M.  Hawkins
his  letter  to
the  Treasurer
of  Rio  de  la
Hacha.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

againe,  &  the  1 9.  came  thither ;  where  having  talke  with
the  kings  treasurer  of  the  Indies  resident  there,  he  declared
his  quiet  trafique  in  Burboroata,  &  shewed  a  certificate  of
the  same,  made  by  the  governour  thereof,  &  therefore  he
desired  to  have  the  like  there  also :  but  the  treasurer
made  answere  that  they  were  forbidden  by  the  Viceroy  and
councill  of  S.  Domingo,  who  having  intelligence  of  our
being  on  the  coast,  did  sende  expresse  commission  to
resist  us,  with  all  the  force  they  could,  insomuch  that  they
durst  not  trafique  with  us  in  no  case,  alleaging  that  if  they
did,  they  should  loose  all  that  they  did  trafique  for,  besides
their  bodies  at  the  magistrates  commaundement.  Our
Captaine  replied,  that  hee  was  in  an  Armada  of  the
Queenes  Majesties  of  England,  and  sent  about  other
her  affaires,  but  driven  besides  his  pretended  voyage,  was
inforced  by  contrary  windes  to  come  into  those  parts,
where  he  hoped  to  finde  such  friendship  as  hee  should
doe  in  Spaine,  to  the  contrary  whereof  hee  knewe  no
reason,  in  that  there  was  amitie  betwixt  their  princes.
But  seeing  they  would  contrary  to  all  reason  go  about
to  withstand  his  trafique,  he  would  it  should  not  be  said
by  him,  that  having  the  force  he  hath,  to  be  driven  from
his  trafique  perforce,  but  he  would  rather  put  it  in  ad-
venture to  try  whether  he  or  they  should  have  the  better,
and  therefore  willed  them  to  determine  either  to  give  him
licence  to  trade,  or  else  to  stand  to  their  owne  harmes :
So  upon  this  it  was  determined  hee  should  have  licence
to  trade,  but  they  would  give  him  such  a  price  as  was  the
one  halfe  lesse  then  he  had  sold  for  before,  and  thus  they
sent  word  they  would  do,  and  none  otherwise,  and  if  it
liked  him  not,  he  might  do  what  he  would,  for  they  were
not  determined  to  deale  otherwise  with  him.  Where-
upon, the  captaine  waying  their  unconscionable  request,
wrote  to  them  a  letter,  that  they  dealt  too  rigorously
with  him,  to  go  about  to  cut  his  throte  in  the  price  of  his
commodities,  which  were  so  reasonably  rated,  as  they
could  not  by  a  great  deale  have  the  like  at  any  other
mans handes. But seeing they  had sent him this to

38

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565.
his  supper,  hee  would  in  the  morning  bring  them  as  good
a  breakefast. And  therefore  in  the  morning  being  the  2 1 .
of  May,  hee  shot  off  a  whole  Culvering  to  summon  the
towne,  and  preparing  one  hundred  men  in  armour,  went
a  shore,  having  in  his  great  boate  two  Faulcons  of  brasse,
and  in  the  other  boates  double  bases  in  their  noses,  which
being  perceived  by  the  Townesmen,  they  incontinent  in
battell  aray  with  their drumme  and ensigne displayed,
marched  from  the  Towne  to  the  sands,  of  footemen  to
the  number  of  an  hundred  and  fiftie,  making  great  bragges
with  their  cries,  and  weaving  us  a  shore,  whereby  they
made  a  semblance  to  have  fought  with  us  in  deed. But
our  Captaine  perceiving  them  so  bragge,  commanded  the
two  Faulcons  to  be  discharged  at  them,  which  put  them
in  no  small  feare  to  see,  (as  they  afterward  declared)  such
great  pieces  in  a  boate. At  every  shot  they  fell  flat  to
the  ground,  and  as  wee  approched  neere  unto  them,  they
broke  their  aray,  and  dispersed  themselves  so  much  for
feare  of  the  Ordinance,  that  at  last  they  went  all  away
with their ensigne. The horsemen also being about
thirtie,  made  as  brave  a  shew  as  might  be,  coursing  up
and downe  with  their  horses,  their  brave  white  leather
Targets  in  the  one  hand,  and  their  javelings  in  the  other,
as  though  they  would  have  received  us  at  our  landing.
But  when  wee  landed,  they  gave  ground,  and  consulted
what  they  should  doe,  for  little  they  thought  wee  would
have  landed  so  boldly :  and  therefore  as  the  Captaine  was
putting  his  men  in  aray,  and  marched  forward  to  have
encountred  with  them,  they  sent  a  messenger  on  horse-
backe  with  a  flagge  of  truce  to  the  Captaine,  who  declared
that  the  Treasurer  marveiled  what  he  meant  to  doe  to
come  a  shore  in  that  order,  in  consideration  that  they  had
granted  to  every  reasonable  request  that  he  did  demaund :
but  the  Captaine  not  well  contented  with  this  messenger,
marched  forwards. The  messenger  prayed  him  to  stay
his  men,  and saide,  if  hee  would come  apart  from his
men,  the  Treasurer  would  come  and  speake  with  him,
whereunto hee did  agree to commune together. The

39

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565-

Captaine  onely  with  his  armour  without  weapon,  and  the
Treasurer  on  horsebacke  with  his  javeling,  was  afraide  to
come  neere  him  for  feare  of  his  armour,  which he  said
was  worse  then  his  weapon,  and  so  keeping  aloofe  com-
muning together, granted in fine to all his requests.
Which  being  declared  by  the  Captaine  to  the  company,
they  desired  to  have  pledges  for  the  performance  of  all
things, doubting that otherwise when they  had  made
themselves stronger,  they  would  have  bene  at  defiance
with  us : and  seeing  that  now  they  might  have  what  they
would  request,  they  judged  it  to  be  more  wisedome  to  be
in  assurance  then  to  be  forced  to  make  any  more  labours
about  it. So  upon  this,  gages  were  sent,  and  we  made
our  trafique  quietly  with  them. In  the  mean  time  while
we  stayed  here,  wee  watered  a  good  breadth  off  from  the
shore,  where  by  the  strength  of  the  fresh  water  running
into  the  Sea,  the  salt  water  was  made  fresh. In  this  River
we  saw  many  Crocodils  of  sundry  bignesses,  but  some  as
bigge  as  a  boate,  with  4.  feete,  a  long  broad  mouth,  and
a  long  taile,  whose  skinne  is  so  hard,  that  a  sword  wil  not
pierce it. His  nature is  to  live  out  of  the  water  as  a
frogge doth, but  he  is  a great  devourer, and spareth
neither  fish,  which  is  his  common  food,  nor  beastes,  nor
men,  if  hee  take  them,  as  the  proofe  thereof  was  knowen
by  a  Negro,  who  as  hee  was  filling  water  in  the  River  was
by  one  of  them  caried  cleane  away,  and  never  seene  after.
His  nature  is  ever  when  hee  would  have  his  prey,  to  cry
and  sobbe  like  a  Christian  body,  to  provoke  them  to  come
to  him,  and  then  hee  snatcheth  at  them,  and  thereupon
came  this  proverbe  that  is  applied  unto  women  when  they
weepe,  Lachrymae  Crocodili,  the  meaning  whereof  is,  that
as  the  Crocodile  when  hee  crieth,  goeth  then  about  most
to  deceive,  so  doeth  a  woman  most  commonly  when  she
weepeth. Of  these  the  Master  of  the  Jesus  watched  one,
and  by  the  banks  side  stroke  him  with  a  pike  of  a  bill  in
the  side,  and  after  three  or  foure  times  turning  in  sight,
hee  sunke  downe,  and  was  not  afterward  seene. In  the
time  of  our  being  in  the  Rivers  Guinie,  wee  sawe  many

40

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1565.
of  a  monstrous  bignesse,  amongst  the  which  the  captaine  [III.  513.]
being  in  one  of  the  Barks  comming  downe  the  same,  shot
a Faulcon  at  one,  which  very  narowly  hee  missed,  and
with  a  feare  hee  plunged  into  the  water,  making  a  streame
like  the  way  of  a  boate.

Now  while  we  were  here,  whether  it  were  of  a  feare
that  the  Spaniards  doubted  wee  would  have  done  them
some  harme  before  we  departed,  or  for  any  treason  that
they  intended  towards  us,  I  am  not  able  to  say ;  but  then
came  thither  a  Captaine  from  some  of  the  other  townes,
with  a  dozen  souldiers  upon  a  time  when  our  Captaine
and  the  treasurer  cleared  al  things  betweene  them,  and
were  in  a  communication  of  a  debt  of  the  governors  of
Burboroata,  which  was  to  be  payd  by  the  said  treasurer,
who  would  not  answer  the  same  by  any  meanes.  Where-
upon certaine  words  of  displeasure  passed  betwixt  the
Captaine  and  him,  and  parting  the  one  from  the  other,
the  treasurer  possibly  doubting  that  our  Captaine  would
perforce  have  sought  the  same,  did  immediately  command
his  men  to  armes,  both  horsemen  and  footemen :  but
because  the  Captaine  was  in  the  River  on  the  backe  side
of  the  Towne  with  his  other  boates,  and  all  his  men
unarmed  and  without  weapons,  it  was  to  be  judged  he
ment  him  little  good,  having  that  advantage  of  him,  that
comming  upon  the  sudden,  hee  might  have  mischieved
many  of  his  men  :  but  the  Captaine  having  understanding
thereof,  not  trusting  to  their  gentlenesse,  if  they  might
have  the  advantage,  departed  aboord  his  ships,  and  at
night  returned  againe,  and  demanded  amongst  other  talke,
what  they  ment  by  assembling  their  men  in  that  order,
&  they  answered,  that  their  Captaine  being  come  to  towne
did  muster  his  men  according  to  his  accustomed  maner.
But  it  is  to  be  judged  to  bee  a  cloake,  in  that  comming
for  that  purpose  hee  might  have  done  it  sooner,  but  the
trueth  is,  they  were  not  of  force  untill  then,  whereby  to
enterprise  any  matter  against  us,  by  meanes  of  pikes  and
harquebuzes,  whereof  they  have  want,  and  were  now
furnished  by  our  Captaine,  and  also  3.  Faulcons,  which

41

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1565.

having  got  in  other  places,  they  had  secretly  conveyed
thither,  which  made  them  the  bolder,  and  also  for  that
they  saw  now  a  convenient  place  to  do  such  a  feat,  and
time  also  serving  thereunto,  by  the  meanes  that  our  men
were  not  onely  unarmed  and  unprovided,  as  at  no  time
before  the  like,  but  also  were  occupied  in  hewing  of  wood,
and  least  thinking  of  any  harme :  these  were  occasions  to
provoke them thereunto. And  I suppose they went
The  author  of  about  to  bring  it  to  effect,  in  that  *I  with  another  gentle-
this  storie. j^^j^  being  in  the  towne,  thinking  of  no  harme  towards  us,
and  seeing  men  assembling  in  armour  to  the  treasurers
house,  whereof  I  marveiled,  and  revoking  to  minde  the
former  talke  betweene  the Captaine  and  him,  and the
unreadinesse  of  our  men,  of  whom  advantage  might  have
bene  taken,  departed  out  of  the  Towne  immediatly  to  give
knowledge  thereof,  but  before  we  came  to  our  men  by  a
flight-shot, two horsemen riding a gallop were come
neere  us,  being  sent,  as  wee  did  gesse,  to  stay  us  least
wee  should  cary  newes  to  our  Captaine,  but  seeing  us
so  neere our men  they stayed their horses, comming
together,  and  suffring  us  to  passe, belike  because  wee
were  so  neere,  that  if  they  had  gone  about the  same,
they  had  bene  espied by  some  of  our  men  which  then
immediatly  would  have  departed,  whereby  they should
have bene  frustrate of  their  pretence :  and so  the two
horsemen  ridde  about  the  bushes  to  espie  what  we  did,
and seeing  us  gone,  to  the intent  they  might  shadow
their  comming  downe  in  post,  whereof  suspition  might
bee  had,  fained  a  simple excuse in asking  whether  he
could  sell  any  wine,  but  that  seemed  so  simple  to  the
Captaine,  that  standing  in  doubt of  their  courtesie, he
returned  in  the  morning  with  his  three  boats,  appointed
with  Bases in their noses,  and  his men with weapons
accordingly, where  as  before  he  caried  none : and thus
dissembling all injuries conceived of  both parts, the
Captaine  went  ashore,  leaving  pledges  in  the  boates  for
himselfe, and  cleared  all things betweene  the treasurer
and  him, saving  for  the  governers  debt,  which  the  one

42

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565-
by  no  meanes  would  answere,  and  the  other,  because  it
was  not  his  due  debt,  woulde  not  molest  him  for  it,  but
was  content  to  remit  it  untill  another  time,  and  therefore
departed,  causing  the  two  Barkes  which  rode  neere  the
shore  to  weigh  and  go  under  saile,  which  was  done
because  that  our  Captaine  demanding  a  testimoniall  of
his  good  behaviour  there,  could  not  have  the  same  untill
hee  were  under  saile  ready  to  depart :  and  therefore  at
night  he  went  for  the  same  againe,  &  received  it  at  the
treasurers  hand,  of  whom  very  courteously  he  tooke  his
leave  and  departed,  shooting  ofF  the  bases  of  his  boat  for
his  farewell,  and  the  townesmen  also  shot  off  foure  Faul-
cons  and  30.  harquebuzes,  and  this  was  the  first  time
that  he  knew  of  the  conveyance  of  their  Faulcons.

The  31.  of  May  wee  departed,  keeping  our  course
to  Hispaniola,  and  the  fourth  of  June  wee  had  sight
of  an  yland,  which  wee  made  to  be  Jamaica,  marveiling
that  by  the  vehement  course  of  the  Seas  we  should  be
driven  so  farre  to  leeward :  for  setting  our  course  to
the  West  end  of  Hispaniola  we  fel  with  the  middle
of  Jamaica,  notwithstanding  that  to  al  mens  sight  it
shewed  a  headland,  but  they  were  all  deceived  by  the
clouds  that  lay  upon  the  land  two  dayes  together,  in
such  sort  that  we  thought  it  to  be  the  head  land  of
the  said  yland.  And  a  Spaniard  being  in  the  ship,
who  was  a  Marchant,  and  inhabitant  in  Jamaica,  having  [III.  514.]
occasion  to  go  to  Guinie,  and  being  by  treason  taken
of  the  Negros,  &  afterwards  bought  by  the  Tangomangos,
was  by  our  Captaine  brought  from  thence,  and  had
his  passage  to  go  into  his  countrey,  who  perceiving
the  land,  made  as  though  he  knew  every  place  thereof,
and  pointed  to  certaine  places  which  he  named  to  be
such  a  place,  and  such  a  mans  ground,  and  that  behinde
such  a  point  was  the  harborow,  but  in  the  ende  he
pointed  so  from  one  point  to  another,  that  we  were
a  leeboord  of  all  places,  and  found  our  selves  at  the
West  end  of  Jamaica  before  we  were  aware  of  it,  and
being  once to  leeward,  there  was  no  getting  up  againe,

43

A.D.
1565.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  deceitfall
force  of  the
current.

SO  that  by  trusting  of  the  Spaniards  knowledge,  our
Captaine  sought  not  to  speake  with  any  of  the  inhabitants,
which  if  he  had  not  made  himselfe  sure  of,  he  would
have  done  as  his  custome  was  in  other  places :  but  this
man  was  a  plague  not  onely  to  our  Captaine,  who  made
him  loose  by  overshooting  the  place  2000.  pounds  by
hides,  which  hee  might  have  gotten,  but  also  to  himselfe,
who  being  three  yeeres  out  of  his  Countrey,  and  in
great  misery  in  Guinie,  both  among  the  Negros  and
Tangomangos,  and  in  hope  to  come  to  his  wife  and
friendes,  as  he  made  sure  accompt,  in  that  at  his  going
into  the  pinnesse,  when  he  went  to  shore  he  put  on
his  new  clothes,  and  for  joy  flung  away  his  old,  could
not  afterwards  finde  any  habitation,  neither  there  nor
in  all  Cuba,  which  we  sailed  all  along,  but  it  fell  out
ever  by  one  occasion  or  other,  that  wee  were  put  beside
the  same,  so  that  he  was  faine  to  be  brought  into
England,  and  it  happened  to  him  as  it  did  to  a  duke
of  Samaria,  when  the  Israelites  were  besieged,  and  were
in  great  misery  with  hunger,  &  being  tolde  by  the
Prophet  Elizseus,  that  a  bushell  of  flower  should  be
for  a  sickle,  would  not  beleeve  him,  but  thought  it
possible :  and  for  that  cause  Elizaeus  prophesied
should  see  the  same  done,  but  hee  should  not
thereof:  so  this  man  being  absent  three  yeeres,
not  ever  thinking  to  have  seene  his  owne  Countrey,
did  see  the  same,  went  upon  it,  and  yet  was  it  not
his  fortune  to  come  to  it,  or  to  any  habitation,  whereby
to  remaine  with  his  friends  according  to  his desire.

Thus  having  sailed  along  the  coast  two  dayes,  we
departed  the  seventh  of  June,  being  made  to  beleeve  by
the  Spaniard  that  it  was  not  Jamaica,  but  rather  His-
paniola,  of  which  opinion  the  Captaine  also  was,  because
that  which  hee  made  Jamaica  seemed  to  be  but  a  piece  of
the  land,  and  thereby  tooke  it  rather  to  be  Hispaniola,  by
the  lying  of  the  coast,  and  also  for  that  being  ignorant
of  the  force  of  the  current,  he  could  not  beleeve  he  was  so
farre  driven  to  leeward,  and  therfore  setting  his  course  to

44

sold
un-
hee
eate
and

Sm  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565.
Jamaica,  and  after  certaine  dayes  not  finding  the  same,
perceived  then  certainly  that  the  yland  which  he  was
at  before  was  Jamaica,  and  that  the  cloudes  did  deceive
him,  whereof  he  marvelled  not  a  little :  and  this  mis-
taking of  the  place  came  to  as  ill  a  passe  as  the  over-
shooting of  Jamaica :  for  by  this  did  he  also  overpasse  a
place  in  Cuba,  called  Santa  Cruz,  where,  as  he  was
informed,  was  great  store  of  hides  to  be  had  :  &  thus
being  disappointed  of  two  of  his  portes,  where  he  thought
to  have  raised  great  profite  by  his  trafique,  and  also
to  have  found  great  refreshing  of  victuals  and  water
for  his  men,  hee  was  now  disappointed  greatly,  and  such
want  he  had  of  fresh  water,  that  he  was  forced  to  seeke
the  shore  to  obteine  the  same,  which  he  had  sight  of
after  certaine  dayes  overpassed  with  stormes  and  contrary
windes,  but  yet  not  of  the  maine  of  Cuba,  but  of  certaine
ylands  in  number  two  hundred, whereof  the  most  part  ^^^  hundred

were  desolate  of  inhabitants  :  by the  which ylands the  ^^^^^^fi^  ^^^
r^ , •  • -I- •  11^1  ri ^ost  part  not

Captame passmg  m  his pinnesse,  could nnde  no  rresh  inhabited.

water  untill  hee  came  to an  yland  bigger then  all  the

rest,  called  the  yle  of  Pinas,  where  wee anckered  with

our ships the 16. of  June, and found water, which

although  it  were  neither  so  toothsome  as  running  water,

by  the  meanes  it  is  standing,  and  but  the  water  of  raine,

and  also  being  neere  the  Sea  was  brackish,  yet  did  wee

not  refuse  it,  but  were  more  glad  thereof,  as  the  time

then  required,  then  wee  should  have  bene  another  time

with  fine  Conduit  water. Thus  being  reasonably  watered

we  were  desirous  to  depart,  because  the  place  was  not

very  convenient  for  such  ships  of  charge  as  they  were,

because  there  were  many  shoales  to  leeward,  which  also

lay  open  to  the  sea  for  any  wind  that  should  blow :  and

therfore  the  captaine  made  the  more  haste  away,  which

was  not  unneedfuU :  for  little  sooner  were  their  anckers

weyed,  and foresaile  set,  but  there  arose  such  a  storme,

that  they had not  much to  spare  for  doubling  out  of

the  shoales :  for  one  of  the  barks  not  being  fully  ready

as the rest, was faine for haste to cut the cable in

45

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565-

the hawse,  and loose both ancker and cable to save
her  selfe.
The  Cape  of Thus  the  17.  of  June,  we  departed  and  on  the  20.  wee

^ubf"'"'^  '"  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^"^  °^  ^^^^'  ^^^^^^  ^^P^  ^-  Antony,
where  for  the  space  of  three  dayes  wee  doubled  along,  till

wee came beyond the shoales,  which are 20. leagues

beyond  S.  Anthony. And  the  ordinary  Brise  taking  us,

which  is  the  Northeast  winde,  put  us  the  24.  from  the

shoare,  and  therefore  we  went  to  the  Northwest  to  fetch

Florida.  wind,  and  also  to  the  coast  of  Florida  to  have  the  helpe

of  the  current,  which was  judged  to have set to the

Eastward: so  the 29. wee found our selves in 27.

degrees,  and  in  the  soundings  of  Florida,  where  we  kept

our  selves  the  space  of  foure dayes,  sailing along the

coast  as  neere  as  we  could,  in  tenne  or  twelve  fadome

water,  having  all  the  while  no  sight  of  land.

[III.  515.]  The fift  of  July  we  had  sight  of  certeine  Islands  of

ine  isies  oj sand, called  the  Tortugas (which is  lowe land) where

Great  store  of  ^^^  captaine  went  in  with  his  pinnesse,  and  found  such

birds.  a  number  of  birds,  that  in  halfe  an  houre  he  laded  her

with  them ;  and  if  they  had  beene  ten  boats  more,  they

might  have  done  the  like. These  Islands  beare  the  name

of  Tortoises, because of  the number of  them, which

there  do  breed,  whose  nature  is  to  live  both  in  the  water

and upon  land also, but  breed  onely upon  the  shore,

in making  a great  pit  wherein they  lay egges, to the

number  of  three  or  foure  hundred,  and  covering them

with sand,  they  are  hatched  by  the  heat  of  the  Sunne ;

and by this meanes commeth the great increase. Of

these  we  tooke  very  great  ones,  which  have  both  backe

and  belly  all  of  bone,  of  the  thicknes  of  an  inch  :  the  fish

whereof  we  proved,  eating  much  like  veale ;  and  finding

a  number  of  egges  in  them,  tasted  also  of  them,  but  they

did  eat  very  sweetly. Heere  wee  ankered  sixe  houres,

and  then  a  faire  gale  of  winde  springing,  we  weyed  anker,

and  made  saile  toward  Cuba,  whither  we  came  the  sixt

J  kill  called day,  and  weathered as  farre as  the Table, being  a  hill

the  Table. gQ called, because of  the forme  thereof: here we  lay

46

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1565.
off  and  on  all  night,  to  keepe  that  we  had  gotten  to
wind-ward,  intending  to  have  watered  in  the  morning,
if  we  could  have  done  it,  or  els  if  the  winde  had
come  larger,  to  have  plied  to  wind-ward  to  Havana,  The  port  of
which  is  an  harborow  whereunto  all  the  fleet  of  the  ^^'"^'^^'
Spanyards  come,  and  doe  there  tary  to  have  one  the
company  of  another.  This  hill  we  thinking  to  have
beene  the  Table,  made  account  (as  it  was  indeed)  that
Havana  was  but  eight  leagues  to  wind-ward,  but  by
the  perswasion  of  a  French  man,  who  made  the  captaine
beleeve  he  knew  the  Table  very  well,  and  had  beene
at  Havana,  sayd  that  it  was  not  the  Table,  and  that
the  Table  was  much  higher,  and  neerer  to  the  sea  side,
and  that  there  was  no  plaine  ground  to  the  Eastward,
nor  hilles  to  the  Westward,  but  all  was  contrary,  and
that  behinde  the  hilles  to  the  Westward  was  Havana.
To  which  persuasion  credit  being  given  by  some,  and
they  not  of  the  woorst,  the  captaine  was  persuaded  to
goe  to  leeward,  and  so  sailed  along  the  seventh  and
eight  dayes,  finding  no  habitation,  nor  no  other  Table;
and  then  perceiving  his  folly  to  give  eare  to  such  praters,
was  not  a  little  sory,  both  because  he  did  consider
what  time  he  should  spend  yer  he  could  get  so  far  to
wind-ward  again e,  which  would  have  bene,  with  the
weathering  which  we  had,  ten  or  twelve  dayes  worke,
&  what  it  would  have  bene  longer  he  knew  not,  and
(that  which  was  woorst)  he  had  not  above  a  dayes  water
and  therfore  knew  not  what  shift  to  make  :  but  in
fine,  because  the  want  was  such,  that  his  men  could
not  live  with  it,  he  determined  to  seeke  water,  and
to  goe  further  to  leeward,  to  a  place  (as  it  is  set  in  the
card)  called  Rio  de  los  puercos,  which  he  was  in  doubt
of,  both  whether  it  were  inhabited,  &  whether  there
were  water  or  not,  and  whether  for  the  shoalds  he
might  have  such  accesse  with  his  ships,  that  he  might
conveniently  take  in  the  same.  And  while  we  were
in  these  troubles,  and  kept  our  way  to  the  place  afore-
sayd, almighty  God  our  guide  (who would not suffer

47

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

us  to  run  into  any  further  danger,  which  we  had  bene

like to have incurred, if  we had ranged  the  coast  of

Florida  along  as  we  did  before,  which is  so  dangerous

(by reports) that no ship escapeth which commeth

thither, (as the Spanyards have  very wel proved the

same) sent  us  the eight  day at night a  faire  Westerly

winde,  whereupon  the  captaine  and  company  consulted,

determining not to refuse Gods gift, but every man

was  contented  to  pinch  his  owne  bellie,  whatsoever  had

happened ; and  taking the  sayd winde,  the ninth day

of  July got  to the Table, and  sailing  the  same  night,

unawares  overshot  Havana ;  at  which  place  wee  thought

to have  watered : but  the  next day, not  knowing  that

wee had overshot  the same, sailed along the coast,

seeking it, and the eleventh day  in the  morning, by

certeine knowen marks, we understood that we had

overshot  it  20  leagues :  in  which  coast  ranging,  we  found

no convenient watering place, whereby there was no

remedy but to disemboque, and to water upon the

coast  of  Florida : for, to go further to  the Eastward,

we  could  not  for  the  shoalds,  which  are  very  dangerous ;

and  because  the  current  shooteth to the  Northeast,  we

doubted by the force thereof  to be set upon them,

and therefore durst not approch them : so making

but  reasonable  way  the  day  aforesayd,  and  all  the  night,

the  twelfth  day  in  the  morning  we  fell  with  the  Islands

upon  the  cape of  Florida,  which  we  could  scant  double

by  the  meanes  that  fearing  the  shoalds  to  the  Eastwards,

The  state  of and doubting the current comming out of  the  West,

the  current  of  -^hich was  not  of  that force we made  account  of;  for
Florida.  ^^ ^^^ j.^^j^ ^^ j^^^g ^-jj ^^ £^jj ^-^j^ ^1^^ ^^pg^ ^^^

then  felt  such  a  current,  that  bearing  all  sailes  against
the  same,  yet  were  driven  backe  againe  a  great  pace :
the  experience  whereof  we  had  by  the  Jesus  pinnesse,
and  the  Salomons  boat,  which  were  sent  the  same  day
in  the  afternoone,  whiles  the  ships  were  becalmed,  to
see  if  they  could  iinde  any  water  upon  the  Islands
aforesaid ;  who spent  a great  part  of  the  day  in  rowing

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565.
thither,  being  further  off  then  they  deemed  it  to  be,
and  in  the  meane  time  a  faire  gale  of  winde  springing
at  sea,  the  ships  departed,  making  a  signe  to  them  to
come  away,  who  although  they  saw  them  depart,  because
they  were  so  neere  the  shore,  would  not  lose  all  the
labour  they  had  taken,  but  determined  to  keepe  their
way,  and  see  if  there  were  any  water  to  be  had,  making
no  account  but  to  finde  the  shippes  well  enough:  but  [III.  516.]
they  spent  so  much  time  in  filling  the  water  which
they  had  found,  that  the  night  was  come  before  they
could  make  an  end.  And  having  lost  the  sight  of  the
ships,  they  rowed  what  they  could,  but  were  wholly
ignorant  which  way  they  should  seeke  them  againe;
as  indeed  there  was  a  more  doubt  then  they  knew  of:
for  when  they  departed,  the  shippes  were  in  no  current ;
and  sailing  but  a  mile  further,  they  found  one  so  strong,
that  bearing  all  sailes,  it  could  not  prevaile  against  the
same,  but  were  driven  backe :  whereupon  the  captaine
sent  the  Salomon,  with  the  other  two  barks,  to  beare
neere  the  shore  all  night,  because  the  current  was  lesse
there  a  great  deale,  and  to  beare  light,  with  shooting
off  a  piece  now  and  then,  to  the  intent  the  boats  might
better  know  how  to  come  to  them.

The  Jesus  also  bare  a  light  in  her  toppe  gallant,  and
shot  off  a  piece  also  now  and  then,  but  the  night
passed,  and  the  morning  was  come,  being  the  thirteenth
day,  and  no  newes  could  be  heard  of  them,  but  the
ships  and  barkes  ceased  not  to  looke  still  for  them,
yet  they  thought  it  was  all  in  vaine,  by  the  meanes
they  heard  not  of  them  all  the  night  past ;  and  therefore
determined  to  tary  no  longer,  seeking  for  them  till
noone,  and  if  they  heard  no  newes,  then  they  would
depart  to  the  Jesus,  who  perforce  (by  the  vehemency
of  the  current)  was  caried  almost  out  of  sight ;  but  as
God  would  have  it,  now  time  being  come,  and  they
having  tacked  about  in  the  pinnesses  top,  had  sight  of
them,  and  tooke  them  up :  they  in  the  boats,  being  to  the
number  of  one  and  twenty,  having  sight  of  the  ships,
X  49  D

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

and  seeing  them  tacking  about;  whereas  before  at  the
first  sight  of  them  they  did  greatly  rejoyce,  were
now  in  a  greater  perplexitie  then  ever  they  were  r
for  by  this  they  thought  themselves  utterly  forsaken,
whereas  before  they  were  in  some  hope  to  have  found
them.  Truly  God  wrought  marvellously  for  them,
for  they  themselves  having  no  victuals  but  water,  and
being  sore  oppressed  with  hunger,  were  not  of  opinion
to  bestow  any  further  time  in  seeking  the  shippes  then
that  present  noone  time ;  so  that  if  they  had  not  at
that  instant  espied  them,  they  had  gone  to  the  shore
to  have  made  provision  for  victuals,  and  with  such
things  as  they  could  have  gotten,  either  to  have  gone  for
that  part  of  Florida  where  the  French  men  were  planted
(which  would  have  bene  very  hard  for  them  to  have
done,  because  they  wanted  victuals  to  bring  them  thither,
being  an  hundred  and  twenty  leagues  off)  or  els  to
have  remained  amongst  the  Floridians ;  at  whose  hands
they  were  put  in  comfort  by  a  French  man,  who  was
with  them,  that  had  remained  in  Florida  at  the  first
finding  thereof,  a  whole  yeere  together,  to  receive  victuals
sufficient,  and  gentle  entertainment,  if  need  were,  for
a  yeere  or  two,  untill  which  time  God  might  have  pro-
vided for  them.  But  how  contrary  this  would  have
fallen  out  to  their  expectations,  it  is  hard  to  judge,
seeing  those  people  of  the  cape  of  Florida  are  of
more  savage  and  fierce  nature,  and  more  valiant  then
any  of  the  rest ;  which  the  Spanyards  well  prooved,  who
being  five  hundred  men,  who  intended  there  to  land,
returned  few  or  none  of  them,  but  were  inforced  to
forsake  the  same :  and  of  their  cruelty  mention  is  made
in  the  booke  of  the  Decades,  of  a  frier,  who  taking
upon  him  to  persuade  the  people  to  subjection,  was  by
them  taken,  and  his  skin  cruelly  pulled  over  his  eares,
and  his  flesh  eaten.

In  these  Islands  they  being  a  shore,  found  a  dead
man,  dried  in  a  maner  whole,  with  other  heads  and
bodies of  men : so  that  these sorts of  men are  eaters

50

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1565.
of  the  flesh  of  men,  aswel  as  the  Canibals. But  to  returne
to  our  purpose.

The foureteenth day  the shippe and  barks  came  to
the  Jesus, bringing  them  newes of  the  recovery  of  the
men, which  was not a little to the rejoycing of  the
captaine,  and  the  whole  company :  and  so  then  altogether
they  kept  on  their  way  along  the  coast  of  Florida,  and
the  fifteenth  day  come  to  an  anker, and so from sixe
and  twenty  degrees  to  thirty  degrees  and  a  halfe,  where
the French men abode, ranging all the coast along,  ^-  Hawkins
seeking  for fresh water, ankering every  night,  because  ^^^S^^ ^^^  f^^^
we would overshoot no place of  fresh water,  and  in  fiorUa.
the  day  time  the  captaine  in  the  ships  pinnesse sailed
along  the  shore,  went  into  every  creeke,  speaking  with
divers  of  the  Floridians,  because  hee  would  understand
where  the  French  men  inhabited ;  and  not  finding  them
in  eight  and twenty degrees, as  it was  declared unto
him,  marvelled  thereat,  and  never  left  sailing  along  the
coast  till  he  found  them,  who  inhabited  in  a  river,  by
them  called the river of  May,  and standing in  thirty  ^^^  ^'^^^''  "f
degrees and better. In  ranging this coast alonsr,  the  ^P' ^ ,

o^  .  DO  o'_ t  lovidci  found

captaine  found it to  be  all  an  Island,  and therefore it  to  be  cut  into
is  all  lowe  land,  and  very  scant  of  fresh  water,  but  the  Islands.
countrey  was  marvellously  sweet,  with  both  marish  and
medow  ground,  and  goodly  woods  among. There  they
found  sorell  to  grow  as  abundantly  as  grasse,  and  where  ZorelL
their houses  were,  great store of  maiz and mill,  and  ^■^'^  commodi-
grapes of  great bignesse,  but of  taste  much like our  ^^^ ^ '
English  grapes. Also  Deere  great  plentie,  which  came  fiorida.
upon the sands before them. Their  houses are not
many  together,  for in  one  house an  hundred  of  them
do  lodge; they  being made much  like  a  great barne,
and in strength not inferiour  -to  ours,  for they  have
stanchions and rafters  of  whole  trees,  and  are  covered
with  palmito-leaves,  having no place divided,  but one  [III.  517.]
small  roome  for  their  king  and  queene. In  the  middest
of  this  house  is  a  hearth,  where  they  make  great  fires
all  night,  and  they  sleepe  upon  certeine  pieces  of  wood

51

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1565-

hewen  in  for  the  bowing  of  their  backs,  and  another
place  made  high  for  their  heads,  which  they  put  one
by  another  all  along  the  walles  on  both  sides.  In  their
houses  they  remaine  onely  in  the  nights,  and  in  the
day  they  desire  the  fields,  where  they  dresse  their  meat,
and  make  provision  for  victuals,  which  they  provide
onely  for  a  meale  from  hand  to  mouth.  There  is  one
The  matter  of  thing  to  be  marvelled  at,  for  the  making  of  their  fire,
hndhngoffire  ^^^  ^^^  onely  they  but  also  the  Negros  doe  the  same,
which  is  made  onely  by  two  stickes,  rubbing  them  one
against  another :  and  this  they  may  doe  in  any  place
they  come,  where  they  finde  sticks  sufficient  for  the
purpose.  In  their  apparell  the  men  onely  use  deere
skinnes,  wherewith  some  onely  cover  their  privy  mem-
bers, othersome  use  the  same  as  garments  to  cover  them
before  and  behind;  which  skinnes  are  painted,  some
yellow  and  red,  some  blacke  &  russet,  and  every  man
according  to  his  owne  fancy.  They  do  not  omit  to
paint  their  bodies  also  with  curious  knots,  or  antike
worke,  as  every  man  in  his  owne  fancy  deviseth,  which
painting,  to  make  it  continue  the  better,  they  use  with
a  thorne  to  pricke  their  flesh,  and  dent  in  the  same,
whereby  the  painting  may  have  better  hold.  In  their
warres  they  use  a  sleighter  colour  of  painting  their  faces,
thereby  to  make  themselves  shew  the  more  fierce ;  which
after  their  warres  ended,  they  wash  away  againe.  In
their  warres  they  use  bowes  and  arrowes,  whereof
their  bowes  are  made  of  a  kind  of  Yew,  but  blacker
then  ours,  and  for  the  most  part  passing  the  strength
of  the  Negros  or  Indians,  for  it  is  not  greatly  inferior
to  ours :  their  arrowes  are  also  of  a  great  length,  but
yet  of  reeds  like  other  Indians,  but  varying  in  two
points,  both  in  length  and  also  for  nocks  and  feathers,
which  the  other  lacke,  whereby  they  shoot  very  stedy :
the  heads  of  the  same  are  vipers  teeth,  bones  of  fishes,
flint  stones,  piked  points  of  knives,  which  they  having
gotten  of  the  French  men,  broke  the  same,  &  put  the
points  of  them  in  their arrowes head : some of  them

52

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565.

have  their  heads  of  silver,  othersome  that  have  want  of
these,  put  in  a  kinde  of  hard  wood,  notched,  which
pierceth  as  farre  as  any  of  the  rest.  In  their  fight,
being  in  the  woods,  they  use  a  marvellous  poUicie  for
their  owne  safegard,  which  is  by  clasping  a  tree  in
their  armes,  and  yet  shooting  notwithstanding :  this
policy  they  used  with  the  French  men  in  their  fight,
whereby  it  appeareth  that  they  are  people  of  some
policy :  and  although  they  are  called  by  the  Spanyards
Gente  triste,  that  is  to  say.  Bad  people,  meaning  there-
by, that  they  are  not  men  of  capacity :  yet  have  the
French  men  found  them  so  witty  in  their  answeres,
that  by  the  captaines  owne  report,  a  counseller  with  us
could  not  give  a  more  profound  reason.

The  women  also  for  their  apparell  use  painted  skinnes,
but  most  of  them  gownes  of  mosse,  somewhat  longer
then  our  mosse,  which  they  sowe  together  artificially,
and  make  the  same  surplesse  wise,  wearing  their  haire
downe  to  their  shoulders,  like  the  Indians.  In  this
river  of  May  aforesayd,  the  captaine  entring  with  his
pinnesse,  found  a  French  ship  of  fourescore  tun,  and
two  pinnesses  of  fifteene  tun  a  piece,  by  her,  and  speak-
ing with  the  keepers  thereof,  they  tolde  him  of  a  fort  The  French
two  leagues  up,  which  they  had  built,  in  which  their  -^'^-  .
captaine  Monsieur  Laudonniere  was,  with  certeine  soul-  j^audonniere.
diers  therein.  To  whom  our  captaine  sending  to  under-
stand of  a  watering-place,  where  he  might  conveniently
take  it  in,  and  to  have  licence  for  the  same,  he  straight,
because  there  was  no  convenient  place  but  up  the  river
five  leagues,  where  the  water  was  fresh,  did  send  him
a  pilot  for  the  more  expedition  thereof,  to  bring  in  one
of  his  barks,  which  going  in  with  other  boats  provided
for  the  same  purpose,  ankered  before  the  fort,  into  the
which  our  captaine  went ;  where  hee  was  by  the  Generall,
with  other  captaines  and  souldiers,  very  gently  enter-
teined,  who  declared  unto  him  the  time  of  their  being
there,  which  was  fourteene  moneths,  with  the  extremity
they  were  driven  to  for  want  of  victuals,  having  brought

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

very  little  with  them ;  in  which  place  they  being  two
hundred  men  at  their  first  comming,  had  in  short  space
eaten  all  the  maiz  they  could  buy  of  the  inhabitants
about  them,  and  therefore  were  driven  certeine  of  them
to  serve  a  king  of  the  Floridians  against  other  his
enemies,  for  mill  and  other  victuals  :  which  having
gotten,  could  not  serve  them,  being  so  many,  so  long
Bread  made  a  time :  but  want  came  upon  them  in  such  sort,  that
ofakorns,  ^j^^y.  ^gj-g  faine  to  gather  acorns,  which  being  stamped
small,  and  often  washed,  to  take  away  the  bitternesse
of  them,  they  did  use  for  bread,  eating  withall  sundry
times,  roots,  whereof  they  found  many  good  and  hole-
some,  and  such  as  serve  rather  for  medecines  then  for
meates  alone.  But  this  hardnesse  not  contenting  some
of  them,  who  would  not  take  the  paines  so  much  as
to  fish  in  the  river  before  their  doores,  but  would  have
all  things  put  in  their  mouthes,  they  did  rebell  against
the  captaine,  taking  away  first  his  armour,  and  after-
ward imprisoning  him :  and  so  to  the  number  of  foure-
score  of  them,  departed  with  a  barke  and  a  pinnesse,
spoiling  their  store  of  victuall,  and  taking  away  a  great
part  thereof  with  them,  and  so  went  to  the  Islands  of
Hispaniola  and  Jamaica  a  roving,  where  they  spoiled
and  pilled  the  Spanyards ;  and  having  taken  two  caravels
[III.  518.]  laden  with  wine  and  casavi,  which  is  a  bread  made  of
roots,  and  much  other  victuals  and  treasure,  had  not
the  grace  to  depart  therewith,  but  were  of  such  haughty
stomacks,  that  they  thought  their  force  to  be  such  that
no  man  durst  meddle  with  them,  and  so  kept  harborow
in  Jamaica,  going  dayly  ashore  at  their  pleasure.  But
God  which  would  not  suffer  such  evill  doers  unpunished,
did  indurate  their  hearts  in  such  sort,  that  they  lingered
the  time  so  long,  that  a  ship  and  galliasse  being  made
out  of  Santa  Domingo  came  thither  into  the  harborow,
and  tooke  twenty  of  them,  whereof  the  most  part  were
hanged,  and  the  rest  caried  into  Spaine,  and  some  (to
the  number  of  five  and  twenty)  escaped  in  the  pinnesse,
and  came  to  Florida ;  where  at  their  landing  they  were

54

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565-
put  in  prison,  and  incontinent  foure  of  the  chiefest
being  condemned,  at  the  request  of  the  souldiers,  did
passe  the  harquebuzers,  and  then  were  hanged  upon  a  "^^^  occasion
gibbet.  This  lacke  of  threescore  men  was  a  great  dis-  gl^-^f^ll^
courage  and  weakening  to  the  rest,  for  they  were  the  Floridians.
best  souldiers  that  they  had :  for  they  had  now  made
the  inhabitants  weary  of  them  by  their  dayly  craving
of  maiz,  having  no  wares  left  to  content  them  withall,
and  therefore  were  inforced  to  rob  them,  and  to  take
away  their  victual  perforce,  which  was  the  occasion  that
the  Floridians  (not  well  contented  therewith)  did  take
certeine  of  their  company  in  the  woods,  and  slew  them ;
wherby  there  grew  great  warres  betwixt  them  and  the
Frenchmen :  and  therefore  they  being  but  a  few  in
number  durst  not  venture  abroad,  but  at  such  times  as
they  were  inforced  thereunto  for  want  of  food  to  do
the  same :  and  going  twenty  harquebuzers  in  a  company,
were  set  upon  by  eighteene  kings,  having  seven  or  eight
hundred  men,  which  with  one  of  their  bowes  slew  one
of  their  men,  and  hurt  a  dozen,  &  drove  them  all
downe  to  their  boats ;  whose  pollicy  in  fight  was  to  be
marvelled  at:  for  having  shot  at  divers  of  their  bodies
which  were  armed,  and  perceiving  that  their  arrowes
did  not  prevaile  against  the  same,  they  shot  at  their
faces  and  legs,  which  were  the  places  that  the  French-
men were  hurt  in.  Thus  the  Frenchmen  returned,
being  in  ill  case  by  the  hurt  of  their  men,  having  not
above  forty  souldiers  left  unhurt,  whereby  they  might
ill  make  any  more  invasions  upon  the  Floridians,  and
keepe  their  fort  withall :  which  they  must  have  beene
driven  unto,  had  not  God  sent  us  thither  for  their
succour ;  for  they  had  not  above  ten  dayes  victuall  left
before  we  came.  In  which  perplexity  our  captaine
seeing  them,  spared  them  out  of  his  ship  twenty  barrels  The  French
of  meale,  &  foure  pipes  of  beanes,  with  divers  other  ff^^  j^/^V,
victuals  and  necessaries  which  he  might  conveniently  /^J^^/^
spare :  and  to  helpe  them  the  better  homewards,  whither
they  were  bound  before  our  comming,  at  their  request

55

A.D.
1565.

Twentie
hogsheads  of
wine  made  hi
Florida,  like
to  the  wine  of
Orleans.

Labourers
necessary  to
inhabit  new
countreys.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

we  spared  them  one  of  our  barks  of  fifty  tun.  Not-
withstanding the  great  want  that  the  Frenchmen  had,  the
ground  doth  yeeld  victuals  suflScient,  if  they  would  have
taken  paines  to  get  the  same ;  but  they  being  souldiers,
desired  to  live  by  the  sweat  of  other  mens  browes  :
for  while  they  had  peace  with  the  Floridians,  they  had
fish  sufiicientj  by  weares  which  they  made  to  catch  the
same :  but  when  they  grew  to  warres,  the  Floridians
tooke  away  the  same  againe,  and  then  would  not  the
Frenchmen  take  the  paines  to  make  any  more.  The
ground  yeeldeth  naturally  grapes  in  great  store,  for  in
the  time  that  the  Frenchmen  were  there,  they  made  20
hogsheads  of  wine.  Also  it  yeeldeth  roots  passing  good,
Deere  marvellous  store,  with  divers  other  beasts,  and
fowle,  serviceable  to  the  use  of  man.  These  be  things
wherewith  a  man  may  live,  having  corne  or  maiz  where-
with to  make  bread :  for  maiz  maketh  good  savory
bread,  and  cakes  as  fine  as  flowre.  Also  it  maketh  good
meale,  beaten  and  sodden  with  water,  and  eateth  like
pap  wherewith  we  feed  children.  It  maketh  also  good
beverage,  sodden  in  water,  and  nourishable ;  which  the
Frenchmen  did  use  to  drinke  of  in  the  morning,  and  it
assuageth  their  thirst,  so  that  they  had  no  need  to  drinke
all  the  day  after.  And  this  maiz  was  the  greatest  lacke
they  had,  because  they  had  no  labourers  to  sowe  the  same,
and  therfore  to  them  that  should  inhabit  the  land  it  were
requisit  to  have  labourers  to  till  and  sowe  the  ground :  for
they  having  victuals  of  their  owne,  whereby  they  neither
rob  nor  spoile  the  inhabitants,  may  live  not  onely  quietly
with  them,  who  naturally  are  more  desirous  of  peace  then
of  warres,  but  also  shall  have  abundance  of  victuals
profered  them  for  nothing :  for  it  is  with  them  as  it  is
with  one  of  us,  when  we  see  another  man  ever  taking  away
from  us,  although  we  have  enough  besides,  yet  then
we  thinke  all  too  little  for  our  selves :  for  surely  we
have  heard  the  Frenchmen  report,  and  I  know  it  by
the  Indians,  that  a  very  little  contenteth  them  :  for  the
Indians  with  the  head  of  maiz  rosted,  will  travell  a  whole

56

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565.
day,  and when  they  are  at  the  Spanyards  finding, they
give  them  nothing  but sodden herbs  & maiz :  and in
this order I saw  threescore of  them feed,  who were
laden with wares, and came fifty leagues off. The
Floridians  when they travell, have a kinde of herbe  Tobacco^ the
dried,  who  with  a  cane  and  an  earthen  cup  in  the  end,  ^^'^^^  ^ertue
with fire, and  the dried  herbs  put  together,  doe  sucke
thorow  the  cane  the  smoke  thereof,  which  smoke  satisfieth
their  hunger,  and  therwith  they  live  foure  or  five  dayes
without  meat or drinke,  and this all the Frenchmen
used for this purpose : yet do they holde opinion
withall,  that  it  causeth  water  &  fleame  to  void  from  their
stomacks. The  commodities  of  this  land  are  more  then
are  yet knowen to any man:  for besides the  land it  [III.  519.]
selfe,  whereof  there is more then any king Christian
is able to inhabit,  it  flourisheth with medow, pasture  The  variety  of
ground,  with  woods  of  Cedar and Cypres, and other  ^°^^[°^^^^^^  "^
sorts,  as  better  can not  be in the world. They have
for apothecary herbs, trees, roots and gummes great
store, as Storax  liquida,  Turpintine,  Gumme,  Myrrhe,
and  Frankinsence, with many others, whereof  I know
not the names. Colours  both red, blacke, yellow, &  Colours.
russet,  very  perfect,  wherewith  they  so  paint  their  bodies,
and Deere  skinnes  which  they  weare  about  them,  that
with  water it neither  fadeth away,  nor  altereth colour.
Golde  and  silver  they  want  not :  for  at  the  Frenchmens  Golde  and
first  comming thither they  had the same  offered  them  "^'^^^•
for  little or nothing, for they received for a hatchet
two pound weight of  golde, because they knew not
the estimation thereof:  but the  souldiers  being  greedy
of  the  same,  did  take  it  from  them,  giving  them  nothing
for  it :  the  which  they  perceiving,  that  both  the  French-
men did  greatly  esteeme  it,  and  also  did  rigorously  deale
with  them,  by  taking  the  same  away  from  them,  at  last
would  not  be  knowen  they  had  any  more,  neither  durst
they  weare  the  same  for  feare  of  being  taken  away :  so
that  saving  at  their  first  comming,  they  could  get  none  of
them  :  and  how  they  came  by  this  golde  and  silver  the

57

A.D.
1565.

Two  Span-
yards  lived
long  among  ye
Flortdians.

Pieces  of  Gold
graven  among
ye  Floridians.

Florida
esteemed  an
Island.

This  copper
was  found
;perfect  golde,
called  by  the
Savages,
Sycroa  phyra.

Pearles.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

French  men  know  not  as  yet,  but  by  gesse,  who  having
travelled  to  the  Southwest  of  the  cape,  having  found
the  same  dangerous,  by  meanes  of  sundry  banks,  as  we
also  have  found  the  same :  and  there  finding  masts
which  were  wracks  of  Spanyards  comming  from  Mexico,
judged  that  they  had  gotten  treasure  by  them.  For  it
is  most  true  that  divers  wracks  have  beene  made  of
Spanyards,  having  much  treasure :  for  the  Frenchmen
having  travelled  to  the  capeward  an  hundred  and  fiftie
miles,  did  finde  two  Spanyards  with  the  Floridians,  which
they  brought  afterward  to  their  fort,  whereof  one  was
in  a  caravel  comming  from  the  Indies,  which  was  cast
away  foureteene  yeeres  ago,  &  the  other  twelve  yeeres ;
of  whose  fellowes  some  escaped,  othersome  were  slain
by  the  inhabitants.  It  seemeth  they  had  estimation  of
their  golde  &  silver,  for  it  is  wrought  flat  and  graven,
which  they  weare  about  their  neckes ;  othersome  made
round  like  a  pancake,  with  a  hole  in  the  midst,  to
boulster  up  their  breasts  withall,  because  they  thinke
it  a  deformity  to  have  great  breasts.  As  for  mines
either  of  gold  or  silver,  the  Frenchmen  can  heare  of
none  they  have  upon  the  Island,  but  of  copper,  whereof
as  yet  also  they  have  not  made  the  proofe,  because  they
were  but  few  men :  but  it  is  not  unlike,  but  that  in
the  maine  where  are  high  hilles,  may  be  golde  and  silver
aswell  as  in  Mexico,  because  it  is  all  one  maine.  The
Frenchmen  obteined  pearles  of  them  of  great  bignesse,
but  they  were  blacke,  by  meanes  of  rosting  of  them,
for  they  do  not  fish  for  them  as  the  Spanyards  doe,
but  for  their  meat :  for  the  Spanyards  use  to  keepe
dayly  afishing  some  two  or  three  hundred  Indians,  some
of  them  that  be  of  choise  a  thousand :  and  their  order
is  to  go  in  canoas,  or  rather  great  pinnesses,  with  thirty
men  in  a  piece,  whereof  the  one  halfe,  or  most  part
be  divers,  the  rest  doe  open  the  same  for  the  pearles :
for  it  is  not  suffered  that  they  should  use  dragging,  for
that  would  bring  them  out  of  estimation,  and  marre
the  beds  of  them. The  oisters  which  have  the  smallest

58

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1565.
sort  of  pearles  are  found  in  seven  or  eight  fadome  water,
but  the  greatest  in  eleven  or  twelve  fadome.

The  Floridians  have  pieces  of  unicornes  homes  which  Unicomes
thev  weare about their  necks,  whereof  the  Frenchmen  ^°^'"f^^  "^^^^^

, '' . ,  .  /^r -i  •  1  1  y^  inhabitants

obtemed many pieces. Or  those unicornes they have  ^^n  Souanam-

many  ;  for  that  they  doe  affirme  it  to  be  a  beast  with  ma.

one  home,  which  comming  to  the  river  to  drinke,  putteth

the  same into the  water before  he drinketh. Of  this

unicornes  home  there  are  of  our  company,  that  having

gotten  the  same  of  the  Frenchmen,  brought  home  thereof

to  shew. It  is  therfore  to  be  presupposed  that  there  are

more  commodities  aswell  as  that,  which  for  want  of  time,

and  people sufficient to  inhabit  the  same,  can not  yet

come to  light :  but  I  trust God  will  reveale  the  same

before  it  be  long,  to  the  great  profit  of  them  that  shal

take it in hand. Of beasts in this  countrey besides  Beasts.

deere,  foxes,  hares,  polcats,  conies,  ownces,  &  leopards,

I  am  not  able  certeinly  to  say:  but it  is  thought that

there are  lions and  tygres  as  well as unicornes ; lions

especially; if  it be true that  is sayd, of  the enmity

betweene  them  and  the  unicornes : for  there  is  no  beast

but  hath his  enemy, as the cony the polcat, a  sheepe

the  woolfe,  the  elephant  the  rinoceros ;  and  so  of  other

beasts  the  like :  insomuch,  that  whereas  the  one  is,  the

other  can not be missing. And seeing I have made

mention  of  the  beasts  of  this  countrey, it  shall  not  be

from  my  purpose  to  speake  also  of  the  venimous  beasts,

as  crocodiles, whereof  there  is  great  abundance, adders

of  great  bignesse,  whereof  our  men  killed  some  of  a  yard

and  a  halfe  long. Also  I  heard  a  miracle  of  one  of  these

adders,  upon  the  which  a  faulcon  seizing,  the  sayd  adder  Faukons  in

did  claspe  her  tail  about  her ;  which  the  French  captaine  P^°^^^^-

seeing, came to the  rescue of  the faulcon,  and tooke

her  slaying the adder; and this faulcon being wilde,

he  did reclaim  her,  and  kept  her  for  the  space  of  two

moneths,  at  which  time  for  very  want  of  meat  he  was

faine  to  cast  her  off. On  these  adders  the  Frenchmen

did feed,  to  no  little  admiration  of  us,  and  affirmed  the

59

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

same  to  be  a  delicate  meat.  And  the  captaine  of  the
[III.  520.]  Frenchmen  saw  also  a  serpent  with  three  heads  and  foure
Serpents.  {q,q\_^  of  the  bignesse  of  a  great  spaniell,  which  for  want
of  a  harquebuz  he  durst  not  attempt  to  slay.  Of  fish
also  they  have  in  the  river,  pike,  roch,  salmon,  trout,
and  divers  other  small  fishes,  and  of  great  fish,  some  of
the  length  of  a  man  and  longer,  being  of  bignesse  accord-
ingly, having  a  snout  much  like  a  sword  of  a  yard  long.
Flying  fishes.  There  be  also  of  sea  fishes,  which  we  saw  comming
along  the  coast  flying,  which  are  of  the  bignesse  of  a
smelt,  the  biggest  sort  whereof  have  foure  wings,  but
the  other  have  but  two :  of  these  wee  sawe  comming
out  of  Guinea  a  hundred  in  a  company,  which  being
chased  by  the  gilt-heads,  otherwise  called  the  bonitos,
do  to  avoid  them  the  better,  take  their  flight  out  of  the
water,  but  yet  are  they  not  able  to  flie  farre,  because
of  the  drying  of  their  wings,  which  serve  them  not  to
flie  but  when  they  are  moist,  and  therefore  when  they
can  flie  no  further  they  fall  into  the  water,  and  having
wet  their  wings,  take  a  new  flight  againe.  These  bonitos
be  of  bignesse  like  a  carpe,  and  in  colour  like  a  makarell,
but  it  is  the  swiftest  fish  in  swimming  that  is,  and
followeth  her  prey  very  fiercely,  not  onely  in  the  water,
but  also  out  of  the  water :  for  as  the  flying  fish  taketh
her  flight,  so  doeth  this  bonito  leape  after  them,  and
taketh  them  sometimes  above  the  water.  There  were
some  of  those  bonitos,  which  being  galled  by  a  fisgig,
did  follow  our  shippe  comming  out  of  Guinea  500.
leagues.  There  is  a  sea-fowle  also  that  chaseth  this
flying  fish  aswell  as  the  bonito :  for  as  the  flying  fish
taketh  her  flight,  so  doth  this  fowle  pursue  to  take  her,
which  to  beholde  is  a  greater  pleasure  then  hawking,  for
both  the  flights  are  as  pleasant,  and  also  more  often  then
an  hundred  times :  for  the  fowle  can  flie  no  way,  but
one  or  other  lighteth  in  her  pawes,  the  number  of
them  are  so  abundant.  There  is  an  innumerable
yoong  frie  of  these  flying  fishes,  which  commonly
keepe  about  the  ship,  and  are  not  so  big  as  butter-flies,

60

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1565.

and  yet  by  flying  do  avoid  the  unsatiablenesse  of  the
bonito.  Of  the  bigger  sort  of  these  fishes  wee  tooke
many,  which  both  night  and  day  flew  into  the  sailes
of  our  ship,  and  there  was  not  one  of  them  which  was
not  woorth  a  bonito  :  for  being  put  upon  a  hooke
drabling  in  the  water,  the  bonito  would  leap  thereat,
and  so  was  taken.  Also,  we  tooke  many  with  a  white
cloth  made  fast  to  a  hooke,  which  being  tied  so  short
in  the  water,  that  it  might  leape  out  and  in,  the
greedie  bonito  thinking  it  to  be  a  flying  fish  leapeth
thereat,  and  so  is  deceived.  We  tooke  also  dolphins  Dolphins.
which  are  of  very  goodly  colour  and  proportion  to
behold,  and  no  lesse  delicate  in  taste.  Fowles  also
there  be  many,  both  upon  land  and  upon  sea  :  but
concerning  them  on  the  land  I  am  not  able  to  name
them,  because  my  abode  was  there  so  short.  But  for
the  fowle  of  the  fresh  rivers,  these  two  I  noted  to  be
the  chiefe,  whereof  the  Flemengo  is  one,  having  all  Fkmingo.
red  feathers,  and  long  red  legs  like  a  heme,  a  necke
according  to  the  bill,  red,  whereof  the  upper  neb
hangeth  an  inch  over  the  nether  ;  and  an  egript,  which  The  egript.
is  all  white  as  the  swanne,  with  legs  like  to  an  hearn-
shaw,  and  of  bignesse  accordingly,  but  it  hath  in  her
taile  feathers  of  so  fine  a  plume,  that  it  passeth  the
estridge  his  feather.  Of  the  sea-fowle  above  all  other
not  common  in  England,  I  noted  the  pellicane,  which  The  pellicane.
is  fained  to  be  the  lovingst  bird  that  is  ;  which  rather
then  her  yong  should  want,  wil  spare  her  heart  bloud
out  of  her  belly  :  but  for  all  this  lovingnesse  she  is
very  deformed  to  beholde  ;  for  she  is  of  colour  russet  :
notwithstanding  in  Guinea  I  have  seene  of  them  as
white  as  a  swan,  having  legs  like  the  same,  and  a
body  like  a  hearne,  with  a  long  necke,  and  a  thick  long
beake,  from  the  nether  jaw  whereof  downe  to  the
breast  passeth  a  skinne  of  such  a  bignesse,  as  is  able
to  receive  a  fish  as  big  as  ones  thigh,  and  this  her  big
throat  and  long  bill  doeth  make  her  seem  so  ougly.
Here  I  have  declared  the  estate  of  Florida,  and  the

61

A.D.

1565-

Meanes  to
reape  a  suffi-
cient profit  in
Florida  and
Virginia.

[III.  521.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

commodities  therein  to  this  day  knowen,  which
although  it  may  seeme  unto  some,  by  the  meanes  that
the  plenty  of  golde  and  silver,  is  not  so  abundant  as
in  other  places,  that  the  cost  bestowed  upon  the  same
will  not  be  able  to  quit  the  charges  :  yet  am  I  of  the
opinion,  that  by  that  which  I  have  scene  in  other
Islands  of  the  Indians,  where  such  increase  of  cattell
hath  bene,  that  of  twelve  head  of  beasts  in  five  &
twenty  yeeres,  did  in  the  hides  of  them  raise  a
thousand  pound  profit  yerely,  that  the  increase  of  cattel
onely  would  raise  profit  sufiicient  for  the  same  :  for
wee  may  consider,  if  so  small  a  portion  did  raise  so
much  gaines  in  such  short  time,  what  would  a  greater
do  in  many  yeres  ?  and  surely  I  may  this  affirme,  that
the  ground  of  the  Indians  for  the  breed  of  cattell,  is
not  in  any  point  to  be  compared  to  this  of  Florida,
which  all  the  yeere  long  is  so  greene,  as  any  time  in
the  Summer  with  us  :  which  surely  is  not  to  be
marvelled  at,  seeing  the  countrey  standeth  in  so  watery
a  climate  :  for  once  a  day  without  faile  they  have  a
shower  of  raine  ;  which  by  meanes  of  the  countrey  it
selfe,  which  is  drie,  and  more  fervent  hot  then  ours,
doeth  make  all  things  to  flourish  therein.  And  because
there  is  not  the  thing  we  all  seeke  for,  being  rather
desirous  of  present  gaines,  I  doe  therefore  affirme  the
attempt  thereof  to  be  more  requisit  for  a  prince,  who
is  of  power  able  to  go  thorow  with  the  same,  rather
then  for  any  subject.

From  thence  wee  departed  the  28  of  July,  upon  our
voyage  homewards,  having  there  all  things  as  might
be  most  convenient  for  our  purpose  :  and  tooke  leave
of  the  Frenchmen  that  there  still  remained,  who  with
diligence  determined  to  make  as  great  speede  after,
as  they  could.  Thus  by  meanes  of  contrary  windes
oftentimes,  wee  prolonged  our  voyage  in  such  manner
that  victuals  scanted  with  us,  so  that  we  were  divers
times  (or  rather  the  most  part)  in  despaire  of  ever
comming  home,  had not God of  his  goodnesse  better

62

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d,

1565.

provided  for  us,  then  our  deserving.  In  which  state
of  great  miserie,  wee  were  provoked  to  call  upon  him
by  fervent  prayer,  which  mooved  him  to  heare  us,  so
that  we  had  a  prosperous  winde,  which  did  set  us  so
farre  shot,  as  to  be  upon  the  banke  of  Newfound  land,
on  Saint  Bartholomews  eve,  and  we  sounded  therupon,
finding  ground  at  an  hundred  and  thirty  fadoms,  being
that  day  somewhat  becalmed,  and  tooke  a  great
number  of  fresh  codde-fish,  which  greatly  relieved  us :
and  being  very  glad  thereof,  the  next  day  we  departed,
and  had  lingring  little  gales  for  the  space  of  foure  or
five  dayes,  at  the  ende  of  which  we  sawe  a  couple  of
French  shippes,  and  had  of  them  so  much  fish  as
would  serve  us  plentifully  for  all  the  rest  of  the  way,
the  Captaine  paying  for  the  same  both  golde  and  silver,  to
the  just  value  thereof,  unto  the  chiefe  owners  of  the  saide
shippes,  but  they  not  looking  for  any  thing  at  all,  were
glad  in  themselves  to  meete  with  such  good  intertainement
at  sea,  as  they  had  at  our  hands.  After  which  departure
from  them,  with  a  good  large  winde  the  twentieth  of  Sep-
tember we  came  to  Padstow  in  Cornewall,  God  be  thanked,  Theirarrivall
in safetie,  with the losse  of  twentie persons  in  all  the  "\  P^^^^o^ ««

• ths  fuoftstfZ  of

voyage,  and  with  great  profit  to  the  venturers  of  the  said  September
voyage,  as  also to  the  whole  realme,  in  bringing  home 1565.
both  golde,  silver,  pearles  and  other  jewels  great  store.
His  name  therefore  be  praised  for  evermore. Amen.

The  names  of  certaine  Gentlemen  that  were  in  this  voyage.

M.  John  Hawkins.

M.  John  Chester,  {sir  William  Chesters  sonne.
M.  Anthony  Parkhurst.
M.  Fitzwilliam.
M.  Thomas  Woorley.
^  M.  Edward  Lacie, {with  divers  others.

[  The Register and true accounts of all

herein expressed hath beene approoved by

me John Sparke the younger, who went

upon  the  same  voyage,  and  wrote  the  same.

^2>

A.D.

1567-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  third  troublesome  voyage  made  with  the
Jesus  of  Lubeck,  the  Minion,  and  foure  other
ships,  to  the  parts  of  Guinea,  and  the  West
Indies,  in  the  yeeres  1567  and  1568  by  M.
John  Hawkins.

He  ships  departed  from  Plimmouth,  the
second  day  of  October,  Anno  1567
and  had  reasonable  weather  untill  the
seventh  day,  at  which  time  fortie
leagues  North  from  Cape  Finister,  there
J  storme.  ^^iZJ^^  arose  an  extreme  storme,  which  con-
tinued foure  dayes,  in  such  sort,  that
the  fleete  was  dispersed,  and  all  our  great  boats  lost,
and  the  Jesus  our  chiefe  shippe,  in  such  case,  as  not
thought  able  to  serve  the  voyage  :  whereupon  in  the
same  storme  we  set  our  course  homeward,  determining
to  give  over  the  voyage  :  but  the  eleventh  day  of  the
same  moneth,  the  winde  changed  with  faire  weather,
whereby  we  were  animated  to  foUowe  our  enterprise,
and  so  did,  directing  our  course  with  the  Hands  of  the
Canaries,  where  according  to  an  order  before  pre-
scribed, all  our  shippes  before  dispersed,  met  at  one
Gomera.  of  those  Hands,  called  Gomera,  where  we  tooke  water,
and  departed  from  thence  the  fourth  day  of  November,
towards  the  coast  of  Guinea,  and  arrived  at  Cape
Verde,  the  eighteenth  of  November  :  where  we  landed
150  men,  hoping  to  obtaine  some  Negros,  where  we
got  but  fewe,  and  those  with  great  hurt  and  damage
Envenomed  to  our  men,  which  chiefly  proceeded  of  their  en-
venomed arrowes  :  and  although  in  the  beginning
they  seemed  to  be  but  small  hurts,  yet  there  hardly
escaped  any  that  had  blood  drawen  of  them,  but  died
in  strange  sort,  with  their  mouthes  shut  some  tenne
dayes  before  they  died,  and  after  their  wounds  were
whole ; where I my  selfe had one of the greatest

64

Airows.

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1567.

woundes, yet thankes be to God, escaped. From

thence we past the time upon the coast of Guinea,

searching with all diligence the rivers from Rio

Grande,  unto  Sierra  Leona,  till  the  twelfth  of  Januarie,

in  which  time  we  had  not  gotten  together  a  hundreth

and fiftie Negros  : yet notwithstanding the sicknesse

of our men, and the late time of the yeere com-  [III.  522.]

manded  us  away  : and  thus  having  nothing  wherewith

to  seeke  the  coast  of  the  West  Indias,  I  was  with  the

rest of  our company in consultation to goe to the

coast of the Mine, hoping there to have obtained

some golde for our wares, and thereby to have

defraied  our  charge. But  even  in  that  present  instant,

there  came  to  us  a  Negro,  sent  from  a  king,  oppressed

by  other  Kings  his  neighbours,  desiring  our  aide,  with

promise that as many Negros as by these warres

might be obtained, aswell of his part as of ours,

should be at our  pleasure  : whereupon  we  concluded

to  give  aide,  and  sent 120  of  our  men,  which the 15

of  Januarie, assaulted  a towne of  the Negros of  our  ^  towne  of

Allies adversaries, which had in it 8000 Inhabitants,  JjJ°° '^^'^^^

being very strongly impaled and fenced after their

manner, but it was so well defended, that our men

prevailed not,  but lost sixe men and fortie hurt : so

that  our men sent '  forthwith to me for more helpe :

whereupon considering that the good successe of  this

enterprise  might  highly further the  commoditie  of  our

voyage, I went  my selfe, and  with the helpe of  the

king of  our side, assaulted the towne, both  by  land

and  sea, and  very  hardly  with  fire (their  houses  being

covered with dry Palme leaves) obtained the towne,

put the Inhabitants to flight, where we tooke 250

persons, men, women, &  children,  and by our friend

the  king of  our  side,  there  were  taken 600 prisoners,

whereof  we hoped to have had our choise: but the

Negro (in which nation is seldome or never found  ^0  t^^^th  in

truth) meant nothing lesse: for that night he re-  ^^S>'°^-

mooved his campe and prisoners, so that we were

X  65  E

A.D.
1568.

Dominica.

Rio  de  la
Hacha  taken.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

faine  to  content  us  with  those  few  which  we  had  gotten
our  selves.

Now  had  we  obtained  between  foure  and  five  hundred
Negros,  wherwith  we  thought  it  somewhat  reasonable
to  seeke  the  coast  of  the  West  Indies,  and  there,  for
our  Negros,  and  other  our  merchandize,  we  hoped  to
obtaine,  whereof  to  countervail  our  charges  with  some
gaines,  wherunto  we  proceeded  with  all  diligence,
furnished  our  watering,  tooke  fuell,  and  departed  the
coast  of  Guinea  the  third  of  Februarie,  continuing  at
the  sea  with  a  passage  more  hard,  then  before  hath  bene
accustomed  till  the  27  day  of  March,  which  day  we
had  sight  of  an  Hand,  called  Dominica,  upon  the  coast
of  the  West  Indies,  in  fourteene  degrees :  from  thence
we  coasted  from  place  to  place,  making  our  traffike
with  the  Spaniards  as  we  might,  somewhat  hardly,  because
the  king  had  straightly  commanded  all  his  Governors
in  those  parts,  by  no  meanes  to  suffer  any  trade  to  be
made  with  us  :  notwithstanding  we  had  reasonable  trade,
and  courteous  entertainement,  from  the  He  of  Margarita
unto  Cartagena,  without  any  thing  greatly  worth  the
noting,  saving  at  Capo  de  la  Vela,  in  a  towne  called
Rio  de  la  Hacha  (from  whence  come  all  the  pearles)
the  treasurer  who  had  the  charge  there,  would  by  no
meanes  agree  to  any  trade,  or  suffer  us  to  take  water,
he  had  fortified  his  towne  with  divers  bulwarkes  in
all  places  where  it  might  be  entered,  and  furnished
himselfe  with  an  hundred  Hargabuziers,  so  that  he
thought  by  famine  to  have  in  forced  us  to  have  put  a
land  our  Negros :  of  which  purpose  he  had  not
greatly  failed,  unlesse  we  had  by  force  entred  the  towne :
which  (after  we  could  by  no  meanes  obtaine  his  favour)
we  were  enforced  to  doe,  and  so  with  two  hundred
men  brake  in  upon  their  bulwarkes,  and  entred  the
towne  with  the  losse  onely  of  two  men  of  our  partes,
and  no  hurt  done  to  the  Spaniards  because  after  their
voley  of  shot  discharged,  they  all  fled.

Thus having the town with some circumstance, as

66

SIR  JOHN  HAWKINS  ad.

1568.

partly  by  the  Spaniards  desire  of  Negros,  and  partly
by  friendship  of  the  Treasurer,  we  obtained  a  secret
trade :  whereupon  the  Spaniards  resorted  to  us  by  night,
and  bought  of  us  to  the  number  of  200  Negros :  in
all  other  places  where  we  traded  the  Spaniards  inhabitants
were  glad  of  us  and  traded  willingly.

At  Cartagena  the  last  towne  we  thought  to  have  Cartagena.
scene  on  the  coast,  we  could  by  no  meanes  obtaine  to
deale  with  any  Spaniard,  the  governour  was  so  straight,
and  because  our  trade  was  so  neere  finished  we  thought
not  good  either  to  adventure  any  landing,  or  to  detract
further  time,  but  in  peace  departed  from  thence  the
24  of  July,  hoping  to  have  escaped  the  time  of  their
stormes  which  then  soone  after  began  to  reigne,  the
which  they  call  Furicanos,  but  passing  by  the  West  Furkams.
end  of  Cuba,  towards  the  coast  of  Florida  there  happened
to  us  the  12  day  of  August  an  extreme  storme  which
continued  by  the  space  of  foure  dayes,  which  so  beat
the  Jesus,  that  we  cut  downe  all  her  higher  buildings,
her  rudder  also  was  sore  shaken,  and  withall  was  in  so
extreme  a  leake  that  we  were  rather  upon  the  point
to  leave  her  then  to  keepe  her  any  longer,  yet  hoping
to  bring  all  to  good  passe,  we  sought  the  coast  of
Florida,  where  we  found  no  place  nor  Haven  for  our
ships,  because  of  the  shalownesse  of  the  coast :  thus
being  in  greater  dispaire,  and  taken  with  a  newe  storme  Storme.
which  continued  other  3  dayes,  we  were  inforced  to
take  for  our  succour  the  Port  which  serveth  the  citie
of  Mexico  called  Saint  John  de  UUua,  which  standeth
in  19  degrees :  in  seeking  of  which  Port  we  tooke  in
our  way  3  ships  which  carried  passengers  to  the  number
of  an  hundred,  which  passengers  we  hoped  should  be
a  meane  to  us  the  better  to  obtaine  victuals  for  our
money,  &  a  quiet  place  for  the  repairing  of  our  fleete.
Shortly  after  this  the  16  of  September  we  entered  the  \-^^}-  5^3'^,
Port  of  Saint  John  de  UUua  and  in  our  entrie  the  ^^^^^  J  p^^.^^
Spaniardes  thinking  us  to  be  the  fleete  of  Spaine,  the
chiefe  officers  of  the  Countrey  came  aboord us, which

67

A.D.

1568.

The  Spaniards
deceived.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

being  deceived  of  their  expectation  were  greatly  dis-
mayed :  but  immediatly  when  they  sawe  our  demand
was  nothing  but  victuals,  were  recomforted.  I  found
also  in  the  same  Port  twelve  ships  which  had  in  them
by  report  two  hundred  thousand  pound  in  gold  &  silver,
all  which  (being  in  my  possession,  with  the  kings
Hand  as  also  the  passengers  before  in  my  way  thitherward
stayed)  I  set  at  libertie,  without  the  taking  from  them
the  waight  of  a  groat :  onely  because  I  would  not  be
delayed  of  my  dispatch,  I  stayed  two  men  of  estimation
and  sent  post  immediatly  to  Mexico,  which  was  two
hundred  miles  from  us,  to  the  Presidentes  and  Councell
there,  shewing  them  of  our  arrivall  there  by  the  force
of  weather,  and  the  necessitie  of  the  repaire  of  our
Our  requests,  shippes  and  victuals,  which  wantes  we  required  as  friends
to  king  Philip  to  be  furnished  of  for  our  money :  and
that  the  Presidents  and  Councell  there  should  with
all  convenient  speede  take  order,  that  at  the  arrivall
of  the  Spanish  fleete,  which  was  dayly  looked  for,  there
might  no  cause  of  quarrell  rise  betweene  us  and  them,
but  for  the  better  maintenance,  of  amitie,  their  com-
mandement  might  be  had  in  that  behalfe.  This  message
being  sent  away  the  sixteenth  day  of  September  at  night,
being  the  very  day  of  our  arrivall,  in  the  next  morning
which  was  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  same  moneth,
we  sawe  open  of  the  Haven  thirteene  great  shippes,
and  understanding  them  to  bee  the  fleete  of  Spaine,  I
sent  immediatly  to  advertise  the  Generall  of  the  fleete
of  my  being  there,  doing  him  to  understand,  that  before
I  would  suff'er  them  to  enter  the  Port,  there  should
some  order  of  conditions  passe  betweene  us  for  our  safe
being  there,  and  maintenance  of  peace.  Now  it  is  to
be  understood  that  this  Port  is  made  by  a  little  Hand
of  stones  not  three  foote  above  the  water  in  the  highest
place,  and  but  a  bow-shoot  of  length  any  way,  this  Hand
standeth  from  the  maine  land  two  bow  shootes  or  more,
also  it  is  to  be  understood  that  there  is  not  in  all  this
coast any other place for ships to arrive in safety,

The  fleete  of
spaine.

The  maner
of  the  Port  S.
John  de  IJllua

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1568.
because the North winde hath there such violence,
that unlesse the shippes be very safely mored with
their  ankers  fastened  upon  this  Hand,  there  is  no  remedie
for these North windes but death : also  the  place  of  ^orth  windes
the Haven was so little, that  of  necessitie  the shippes  P^^^^°^^-
must  ride  one  aboord the  other,  so  that  we  could  not
give  place  to  them,  nor  they  to  us :  and  here  I  beganne  to
bewaile  that  which  after  followed,  for  now,  said  I,  I  am  in
two dangers, and forced to receive  the  one  of  them.
That  was,  either  I  must  have  kept  out  the  jfleete  from
entring the Port, the which with Gods helpe I  was
very  well  able to  doe, or else suffer  them  to  enter  in
with their  accustomed treason, which they never faile
to execute, where they may have opportunitie, to
compasse  it  by  any meanes : if  I had  kept  them  out,
then  had  there  bene  present  shipwracke  of  all  the  fleete
which amounted in  value  to sixe Millions,  which was
in  value  of  our  money 1800000.  li.  which  I  considered i^oothousand
I  was  not  able  to  answere,  fearing  the  Queenes  Majesties  P°^^^-
indignation in so waightie a matter. Thus with  my
selfe  revolving  the  doubts, I thought  rather bett^er to
abide the  Jutt  of  the uncertainty, then the certaintie.
The  uncertaine  doubt  I  account  was  their  treason  which
by  good  policie  I  hoped  might  be  prevented,  and  there-
fore as chusing the least mischiefe I proceeded to
conditions. Now was our first messenger come and
returned from  the  fleete  with  report  of  the  arrivall of
a  Viceroy,  so that  hee  had  authoritie,  both  in all this  J  Viceroy.
Province  of  Mexico  (otherwise  called Nueva Espanna)
and  in  the  sea,  who  sent  us  word  that  we  should  send
our  conditions,  which  of  his  part  should  (for  the  better
maintenance of  amitie betweene the Princes) be both  F^-ire  wordes
favourably  granted,  and  faithfully  performed,  with  many  %*^''^«-
faire wordes how  passing the coast of  the Indies he
had understood of  our  honest  behaviour towardes the
inhabitants  where  we had to doe, aswell elsewhere as
in  the  same  Port,  the  which  I  let  passe :  thus  following
our  demand,  we  required  victuals  for  our  money, and  Our  requests.

69

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

licence  to  sell  as  much  ware  as  might  furnish  our  wants,
and  that  there  might  be  of  either  part  twelve  gentlemen
as  hostages  for  the  maintenance  of  peace  :  and  that  the
Hand  for  our  better  safetie  might  be  in  our  owne
possession,  during  our  abode  there,  and  such  ordinance
as  was  planted  in  the  same  Hand  which  were  eleven
peeces  of  brasse  :  and  that  no  Spaniard  might  land  in
The  peace  con-  the  Hand  with  any  kind  of  weapon :  these  conditions  at
eluded.  ^j^g  £j.g^  j^g  somewhat  misliked,  chiefly  the  guard  of  the

Hand  to  be  in  our  owne  keeping,  which  if  they  had  had,
we  had  soone  knowen  our  fare :  for  with  the  first  North
winde  they  had  cut  our  cables  and  our  ships  had  gone
ashore :  but  in  the  ende  he  concluded  to  our  request,
bringing  the  twelve  hostages  to  ten,  which  with  all  speede
of  either  part  were  received,  with  a  writing  from  the
Viceroy  signed  with  his  hande  and  sealed  with  his  scale
of  all  the  conditions  concluded,  &  forthwith  a  trumpet
blowen  with  commandement  that  none  of  either  part
should  be  meane  to  violate  the  peace  upon  paine  of
death :  and  further  it  was  concluded  that  the  two  Generals
of  the  fleetes  should  meete,  and  give  faith  ech  to  other
for  the  performance  of  the  premisses  which  was  so  done.
[III.  524.]  Thus  at  the  end  of  3  dayes  all  was  concluded  &  the  fleete
entered  the  Port,  saluting  one  another  as  the  maner  of
the  sea  doth  require.  Thus  as  I  said  before,  thursday  we
entred  the  Port,  Friday  we  saw  the  fleete,  and  on  munday
at  night  they  entered  the  Port:  then  we  laboured  2.  daies
placing  the  English  ships  by  themselves  &  the  Spanish
ships  by  themselves,  the  captaines  of  ech  part  &  inferiour
men  of  their  parts  promising  great  amity  of  al  sides :
which  even  as  with  all  fidelitie  it  was  ment  on  our  part,  so
the  Spaniards  ment  nothing  lesse  on  their  parts,  but  from
the  maine  land  had  furnished  themselves  with  a  supply  of
men  to  the  number  of  1000,  and  ment  the  next  thursday
being  the  23  of  September  at  dinner  time  to  set  upon  us
on  all  sides.  The  same  Thursday  in  the  morning  the
treason  being  at  hand,  some  appearance  shewed,  as
shifting  of  weapon  from  ship  to  ship,  planting  and  bending

70

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1568.
of  ordinance  from  the  ships  to  the  Hand  where  our  men
warded,  passing  too  and  fro  of  companies  of  men  more
then  required  for  their  necessary  busines,  &  many  other
ill likelihoods, which caused us to have a vehement
suspition,  and  therewithall  sent  to  the  Viceroy  to  enquire  ^  P'keroy
what was ment by  it, which sent immediatly straight  -^{-^^  ''■f^"
commandement  to  unplant  all  things  suspicious,  and  also
sent  word  that  he  in  the  faith  of  a  Viceroy  would  be  our
defence  from  all  villanies. Yet  we  being  not  satisfied
with  this  answere,  because  we  suspected  a  great  number
of  men  to  be  hid  in  a  great  ship  of  900  tunnes,  which
was  mored  next  unto  the  Minion, sent againe  to the
Viceroy  the  master  of  the  Jesus  which  had  the  Spanish
tongue,  and  required  to  be  satisfied  if  any  such  thing  were
or  not. The  Viceroy now  seeing:  that  the  treason  must  The  treason
be discovered,  foorthwith stayed our master, blew the  '^^''^'^^ P^^^"-
Trumpet,  and  of  all  sides  set  upon  us :  our  men  which
warded a  shore being  stricken  with  sudden  feare,  gave
place,  fled,  and  sought  to  recover  succour  of  the  ships ;
the Spaniardes being before provided for the  purpose
landed  in  all  places  in  multitudes  from  their  ships  which
they  might  easily  doe  without  boates,  and  slewe  all  our
men a shore  without  mercie, a fewe of  them escaped
aboord the Jesus. The great ship  which had  by the
estimation three hundred men placed in her secretly,
immediatly fell aboord the Minion, but by Gods  The  Minion
appointment,  in  the  time  of  the  suspicion  we  had,  which  f^^^f
was  onely  one  halfe  houre,  the  Minion  was  made  readie
to  avoide,  and so  leesing  her  hedfasts,  and  hayling  away
by  the  sternefastes  she  was  gotten  out :  thus  with  Gods
helpe  she  defended  the  violence  of  the  first  brunt  of  these
three  hundred  men. The  Minion  being  past  out,  they
came  aboord  the  Jesus,  which  also  with  very  much  a  doe
and  the  losse  of  manie  of  our  men  were  defended  and  kept
out. Then  there  were  also  two  other  ships  that  assaulted  ^'^^  -^^^^^
the  Jesus  at  the  same  instant,  so  that  she  had  hard  getting  J'^'^^f
loose,  but  yet  with  some  time  we  had  cut  our  head-fastes
and  gotten out  by  the  sterne-fastes. Nowe  when  the

71

A.D,
1568.

Sharpe  war:

3.  ships  of  the

Spaniards

consumed.

A  hard  case.

Small  hope  to
be  had  of
tyrants.
A  storme.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Jesus  and  the  Minion  were  gotten  about  two  shippes
length  from  the  Spanish  fleete,  the  fight  beganne  so  hotte
on  all  sides  that  within  one  houre  the  Admirall  of  the
Spaniards  was  supposed  to  be  sunke,  their  Viceadmirall
burned  and  one  other  of  their  principall  ships  supposed  to
be  sunke,  so  that  the  shippes  were  little  able  to  annoy  us.

Then  it  is  to  be  understood,  that  all  the  Ordinance
upon  the  Ilande  was  in  the  Spaniardes  handes,  which  did
us  so  great  annoyance,  that  it  cut  all  the  mastes  and
yardes  of  the  Jesus,  in  such  sort  that  there  was  no  hope
to  Carrie  her  away :  also  it  sunke  our  small  shippes,  were-
upon  we  determined  to  place  the  Jesus  on  that  side  of
the  Minion,  that  she  might  abide  all  the  batterie  from
the  land,  and  so  be  a  defence  for  the  Minion  till  night,
and  then  to  take  such  reliefe  of  victuall  and  other  neces-
saries from  the  Jesus,  as  the  time  would  suffer  us,  and  to
leave  her.  As  we  were  thus  determining,  and  had  placed
the  Minion  from  the  shot  of  the  land,  suddenly  the
Spaniards  had  fired  two  great  shippes  which  were  comming
directly  with  us,  and  having  no  meanes  to  avoide  the  fire,
it  bredde  among  our  men  a  marvellous  feare,  so  that
some  sayd,  let  us  depart  with  the  Minion,  other  said,  let
us  see  whither  the  winde  will  carrie  the  fire  from  us.  But
to  be  short,  the  Minions  men  which  had  alwayes  their
sayles  in  a  readinesse,  thought  to  make  sure  worke,  and  so
without  either  consent  of  the  Captaine  or  Master  cut  their
saile,  so  that  very  hardly  I  was  received  into  the  Minion.

The  most  part  of  the  men  that  were  left  alive  in  the
Jesus,  made  shift  and  followed  the  Minion  in  a  small
boat,  the  rest  which  the  little  boate  was  not  able  to
receive,  were  inforced  to  abide  the  mercie  of  the  Spaniards
(which  I  doubt  was  very  little)  so  with  the  Minion
only  and  the  Judith  (a  small  barke  of  50  tunne)  we
escaped,  which  barke  the  same  night  forsooke  us  in  our
great  miserie :  we  were  now  remooved  with  the  Minion
from  the  Spanish  ships  two  bow-shootes,  and  there  rode
all  that  night :  the  next  morning  we  recovered  an  Hand  a
mile  from  the  Spaniardes,  where  there  tooke  us  a  North

72

SIR JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1568.

winde,  and  being  left  onely  with  two  ankers  and  two
cables  (for  in  this  conflict  we  lost  three  cables  and  two
ankers)  we  thought  alwayes  upon  death  which  ever  was
present,  but  God  preserved  us  to  a  longer  time.

The  weather  waxed  reasonable,  and  the  Saturday  we
set  saile,  and  having  a  great  number  of  men  and  little  [HI-  S^S-l
victuals  our  hope  of  life  waxed  lesse  and  lesse :  some  |^'^^''  ^"^^^  °f
desired  to  yeeld  to  the  Spaniards,  some  rather  desired  to
obtaine  a  place  where  they  might  give  themselves  to  the
Infidels,  and  some  had  rather  abide  with  a  little  pittance  Hard  choke.
the  mercie  of  God  at  Sea :  so  thus  with  many  sorowful
hearts  we  wandred  in  an  unknowen  Sea  by  the  space  of
14  dayes,  till  hunger  inforced  us  to  seek  the  land,  for
hides  were  thought  very  good  meat,  rats,  cats,  mice  and  Miseries.
dogs,  none  escaped  that  might  be  gotten,  parrats  and
monkeyes  that  were  had  in  great  price,  were  thought
there  very  profitable  if  they  served  the  turne  one  dinner :
thus  in  the  end  the  8  day  of  October  we  came  to  the  land
in  the  botome  of  the  same  bay  of  Mexico  in  23  degrees
and  a  halfe,  where  we  hoped  to  have  found  inhabitants  of
the  Spaniards,  reliefe  of  victuals,  and  place  for  the  repaire
of  our  ship,  which  was  so  sore  beaten  with  shot  from  our
enemies  and  brused  with  shooting  off  our  owne  ordinance,
that  our  wearie  and  weake  armes  were  scarce  able  to  defende
and  keepe  out  water.  But  all  things  happened  to  the  con-
trary, for  we  found  neither  people,  victuall,  nor  haven  of
reliefe,  but  a  place  where  having  faire  weather  with  some
perill  we  might  land  a  boat :  our  people  being  forced  with
hunger  desired  to  be  set  on  land,  whereunto  I  consented.

And  such  as  were  willing  to  land  I  put  them  apart,  and
such  as  were  desirous  to  goe  homewardes,  I  put  apart,  so
that  they  were  indifferently  parted  a  hundred  of  one  side  ^^  hundred
and  a  hundred  of  the  other  side:  these  hundred  men  we  J^^J^^  °"
set  a  land  with  all  diligence  in  this  little  place  beforesaid,  ^^g^  ca^«*
which  being  landed,  we  determined  there  to  take  in  fresh  kalfe.
water,  and  so  with  our  little  remaine  of  victuals  to  take
the  sea.

The next day  having  a  land  with me  fiftie  of  our

73

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

hundreth  men  that  remained  for  the  speedier  preparing
of  our  water  aboord,  there  arose  an  extreame  storme,  so
that  in  three  dayes  we  could  by  no  meanes  repaire  aboord

The  greatest our  ship  :  the  ship  also  was  in  such  perill  that  every  houre

miserie  of  all ^^  \oo\^q^  for  shipwracke.

But  yet  God  againe  had  mercie  on  us,  and  sent  faire
weather,  we  had  aboord  our  water,  and  departed  the
sixteenth  day  of  October,  after  which  day  we  had  faire
and  prosperous  weather  till  the  sixteenth  day  of
November,  which  day  God  be  praysed  we  were  cleere
from  the  coast  of  the  Indies,  and  out  of  the  chanell  and
gulfe  of  Bahama,  which  is  betweene  the  Cape  of  Florida,
and  the  Ilandes  of  Lucayo.  After  this  growing  neere  to
the  colde  countrey,  our  men  being  oppressed  with  famine,
died  continually,  and  they  that  were  left,  grew  into  such
weakenesse  that  we  were  scantly  able  to  manage  our  shippe,
and  the  winde  being  alwayes  ill  for  us  to  recover  England,
we  determined  to  goe  with  Galicia  in  Spaine,  with  intent
there  to  relieve  our  companie  and  other  extreame  wantes.
And  being  arrived  the  last  day  of  December  in  a  place
neere  unto  Vigo  called  Ponte  Vedra,  our  men  with
excesse  of  fresh  meate  grew  into  miserable  disseases,  and
died  a  great  part  of  them.  This  matter  was  borne  out
as  long  as  it  might  be,  but  in  the  end  although  there  were
none  of  our  men  suffered  to  goe  a  land,  yet  by  accesse  of
the  Spaniards,  our  feeblenesse  was  knowen  to  them.
Whereupon  they  ceased  not  to  seeke  by  all  meanes  to
betray  us,  but  with  all  speede  possible  we  departed  to
Vigo,  where  we  had  some  helpe  of  certaine  English  ships
and  twelve  fresh  men,  wherewith  we  repaired  our  wants
as  we  might,  and  departing  the  20  day  of  January  1568
arrived  in  Mounts  bay  in  Cornewall  the  25  of  the  same
moneth,  praised  be  God  therefore.

If  all  the  miseries  and  troublesome  affaires  of  this
sorowfull  voyage  should  be  perfectly  and  throughly
written,  there  should  neede  a  painefull  man  with  his
pen,  and  as  great  a  time  as  he  had  that  wrote  the  lives
and  deathes  of  the  Martyrs.  John  Hawkins.

74

FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1572.

The  first  voyage  attempted  and  set  foorth  by  the
expert  and  valiant  captaine  M.  Francis  Drake
himselfe,  with  a  ship  called  the  Dragon,  and
another  ship  and  a  Pinnesse,  to  Nombre  de
Dios,  and  Dariene,  about  the  yeere  1572,
Written  and  recorded  by  one  Lopez  Vaz  a
Portugall  borne  in  the  citie  of  Elvas,  in  maner
follow :  which  Portugale,  with  the  discourse
about  him,  was  taken  at  the  river  of  Plate  by
the  ships  set  foorth  by  the  Right  Honourable
the  Earle  of  Cumberland,  in  the  yeere 1586.

Here  was  a  certaine  English  man  named
Francis  Drake,  who  having  intelligence
how  the  towne  of  Nombre  de  Dios  in
Nueva  Espanna,  had  but  small  store  of
people  remaining  there,  came  on  a  night,
and  entred  the  Port  with  foure  Pin-
nesses,  and  landed  about  150  men,  &
leaving  70  men  with  a  trumpet,  in  a  Fort  which  was
there,  with  the  other  80  he  entred  the  towne,  without
doing  any  harme,  till  he  came  to  the  market  place,  and  [III.  526.]
there  discharged  his  calivers,  &  sounded  a  trumpet  very
loud,  and  the  other  which  he  had  left  in  the  Fort
answered  him  after  the  same  maner,  with  the  discharging
their  calivers,  and  sounding  their  trumpets :  the  people
hereupon  not  thinking  of  any  such  matter,  were  put
in  great  feare,  and  waking  out  of  their  sleepe  fled  all
into  the  mountaines,  inquiring  one  of  another  what  the
matter  should  be,  remaining  as  men  amazed,  not  knowing
what  that  uprore  was  which  happened  so  suddenly  in
the  towne.  But  14  or  15  of  them  joyning  together
with  their  harquebuzes,  went  to  the  market  place  to
know  what  they  were  that  were  in  the  towne,  and  in
a  corner  of  the  market  place  they  did  discover  the
Englishmen,  and  seeing  them  to  be  but  fewe,  discharged

75

A.D.

1572.

The  valiant
exploit  of  M.
Francis  Drake
betwixt
Panama  and
Nombre  de
Dios.

M.  Francis
Drake  burnt
the  house  of
Crosses,

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

their  calivers  at  those  Englishmen :  their  fortune  was
such  that  they  killed  the  Trumpetter,  and  shot  one  of
the  principall  men  thorow  the  legge,  who  seeing  himselfe
hurt,  retyred  to  the  Fort,  where  the  rest  of  their  company-
was  left:  they  which  were  in  the  Fort  sounded  their
Trumpet,  and  seeing  that  they  in  the  towne  did  not
answere  them,  and  hearing  the  calivers,  thought  that
all  they  in  the  towne  had  bene  slaine,  and  thereupon
fled  to  their  Pinnesses  :  the  English  captaine  comming
to  the  Fort,  and  not  finding  his  men  which  he  left  there,
he  and  his  were  in  so  great  feare,  that  leaving  their
furniture  behind  them,  and  putting  off  their  hose,  they
swamme,  and  waded  all  to  their  Pinnesses,  and  so  went
with  their  ships  againe  out  of  the  Port.

Thus  this  English  Captaine  called  Francis  Drake,
departed  from  Nombre  de  Dios,  &  slew  onely  one  man
in  the  towne  which  was  looking  out  of  a  windowe  to
see  what  the  matter  was,  and  of  his  men  had  onely  his
Trumpetter  slaine.

But  he  being  discontented  with  the  repulse  which  he
had  received  there,  came  to  the  sound  of  Dariene,  and
having  conference  with  certaine  Negros  which  were  fled
from  their  masters  of  Panama,  and  Nombre  de  Dios,  the
Negros  did  tell  him,  that  certaine  Mules  came  laden  with
gold  and  silver  from  Panama  to  Nombre  de  Dios,  who
in  companie  of  these  Negros  went  thereupon  on  land,
and  stayed  in  the  way  where  the  treasure  should  come
with  an  hundred  shot,  and  so  tooke  two  companies  of
mules,  which  came  onely  with  their  drivers  mistrusting
nothing,  and  he  carried  away  the  igold  onely,  for  they
were  not  able  to  carrie  the  silver  through  the  mountaines.
And  two  dayes  after  he  came  to  the  house  of  Crosses,
where  he  killed  sixe  or  seven  marchants,  but  found  no
golde  nor  silver  but  much  marchandize :  so  he  fired  the
house,  where  was  burnt  above  200000  Duckets  in  mar-
chandize, and  so  went  to  his  ship  againe :  and  within
halfe  an  houre  after  he  was  a  ship-boord,  there  came
downe  to  the  sandes  three  hundred  shot  of  the  Spaniards

76

JOHN OXENHAM  ad.

1575-
in  the  sight  of  his  ships,  of  purpose  to  seeke  him,  but
he  cared  little  for  them  being  out  of  their reach,  and
so  departed  with  his  treasure.

The  voyage  of  John  Oxnam  of  Plimmouth,  to  the
west  India,  and  over  the  straight  of  Dariene
into  the  South  sea.  Anno  1575.  Written
by  the  foresaid  Lopez  Vaz  in  the  said  dis-
course.

Here  was  another  Englishman,  who  hear-
ing of  the  spoyle  that  Francis  Drake  had
done  upon  the  coast  of  Nueva  Espanna,
and  of  his  good  adventure  and  safe  re-
turne  home,  was  thereby  provoked  to
undertake  the  like  enterprise,  with  a  ship
of  140  tunnes,  and  70  men,  and  came
thither,  and  had  also  conference  with  the  foresaide
Negros :  and  hearing  that  the  golde  and  silver  which
came  upon  the  Mules  from  Panama  to  Nombre  de  Dios,
was  now  conducted  with  souldiers,  he  determined  to
do  that  which  never  any  man  before  enterprised :  and
landed  in  that  place  where  Francis  Drake  before  had
had  his  conference  with  the  Negros.  This  man  covered
his  ship  after  he  had  brought  her  aground  with  boughes
of  trees,  and  hid  his  great  Ordinance  in  the  ground,
and  so  not  leaving  any  man  in  his  ship,  he  tooke  two
small  pieces  of  ordinance,  and  his  calivers,  and  good
store  of  victuals,  and  so  went  with  the  Negros  about
twelve  leagues  into  the  maine  land,  to  a  river  that  goeth
to  the  South  sea,  and  there  he  cut  wood  and  made  a
Pinnesse,  which  was  five  and  fortie  foote  by  the  keele,
and  having  made  this  Pinnesse,  he  went  into  the  South
sea,  carrying  sixe  Negros  with  him  to  be  his  guides,
and  so  went  to  the  Hand  of  Pearles,  which  is  five  &  ^^^  ^^^'^d.  of
twentie  leagues  from  Panama,  which  is  in  the  way  that  P^^^^^^  ^5-
they  come  from  Peru  to  Panama,  and  there  he  was  Panama°^
ten dayes without shewing  himselfe to any man, to

77

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1575.

see  if  he  might  get  any  ship  that  came  from  Peru  :  At
last  there  came  a  small  Barke  by,  which  came  from  Peru
from  a  place  called  Quito,  which  he  tooke  and  found
in  her  sixtie  thousand  pezos  of  golde,  and  much  victuals.
But  not  contenting  himselfe  with  this  prize,  hee  stayed
long  without  sending  away  his  prize  or  any  of  the  men,
and  in  the  ende  of  sixe  dayes  after,  hee  tooke  another
Barke  which  came  from  Lima,  in  which  he  tooke  an
hundred  thousand  pezos  of  silver  in  barres,  with  the
[III.  527.]  which  hee  thought  to  have  gone,  &  entred  the  river,
but  first  he  went  into  the  Islands  to  see  if  he  could
find  any  pearles :  where  he  found  a  few,  and  so  returned
to  his  pinnesse  againe,  &  so  sailing  to  the  river  from
whence  he  came,  and  comming  neere  to  the  mouth
of  the  sayd  river,  hee  sent  away  the  two  prizes  that
hee  tooke,  and  with  his  pinnesse  he  went  up  the  river.
The  Negros  that  dwelt  in  the  Island  of  pearls,  the  same
night  that  he  went  from  them,  went  in  Canoas  to  Panama,
and  the  Governour  within  two  dayes  sent  foure  barkes
100  men,  25  in  every  one,  and  Negros  to  rowe  with
the  captaine  John  de  Ortega,  which  went  to  the  Island
of  pearles,  and  there  had  intelligence,  which  way  the
English  men  were  gone,  and  following  them  he  met
by  the  way  the  ships  which  the  English  men  had  taken,
of  whom  he  learned,  that  the  English  men  were  gone
up  the  river,  and  he  going  thither,  when  he  came  to
the  mouth  of  the  river,  the  captaine  of  Panama  knew
not  which  way  to  take,  because  there  were  three  partitions
in  the  river  to  goe  up  in,  and  being  determined  to  goe
up  the  greatest  of  the  three  rivers,  he  saw  comming
downe  a  lesser  river  many  feathers  of  hennes,  which
the  Englishmen  had  pulled  to  eate,  and  being  glad
thereof,  hee  went  up  that  river  where  hee  saw  the
feathers,  and  after  that  he  had  bene  in  that  river
foure  daies,  he  descried  the  Englishmens  pinnesse  upon
the  sands,  and  comming  to  her,  there  were  no  more
then  sixe  Englishmen,  whereof  they  killed  one,  and  the
other  five  escaped away,  and  in the  pinnesse  he  found

78

JOHN OXENHAM  a.d.

1575-
nothing  but  victuals :  but  this  captaine  of  Panama  not
herewith  satisfied,  determined  to  seeke  out  the  English-
men by  land,  and  leaving  twenty  men  in  his  pinnesses,
hee  with  80  shot  went  up  the  countrey :  hee  had  not
gone  halfe  a  league,  but  hee  found  a  house  made  of
boughs,  where  they  found  all  the  Englishmens  goods,
and  the  gold  and  silver  also,  and  carying  it  backe  to
their  pinnesses,  the  Spaniards  were  determined  to  goe
away,  without  following  the  English  men  any  further.

But  at  the  end  of  three  dayes,  the  English  captaine  ^  skirmish
came  to the river with all his men, and above 200  ^^^f\  ^^^
Negros,  and set upon the Spaniards  with great  fury :  and  the '
But  the  Spaniards  having  the  advantage  of  trees  which  Spaniards.
they  stood  behind,  did  easily  prevaile,  and  killed  eleven
Englishmen, and five Negros,  and tooke other seven  .
Englishmen  alive,  but  of  the  Spaniards,  two  were  slaine
and  five  sore  hurt.

Among  other  things,  the  Spaniards  enquired  of  the
Englishmen  which  they  tooke,  why  they  went  not  away
in  fifteene  dayes  liberty  which  they  had.  They  answered,
that  their  captaine  had  commanded  them  to  carie  all  that
golde  and  silver  which  they  had,  to  the  place  where  they
had  left  their  shippe,  and  they  had  promised  him  to
carie  it,  although  they  made  three  or  foure  journeys  of
it,  for  hee  promised  to  give  them  part  of  it  besides  their
wages,  but  the  mariners  would  have  it  by  and  by,  and
so  their  Captaine  being  angry  because  they  would  not
take  his  word,  fell  out  with  them,  and  they  with  him,
in  so  much  that  one  of  the  company  would  have  killed
the  Captaine,  so  that  the  Captaine  would  not  have  them
to  carie  the  treasure,  but  sayd  hee  would  seeke  Negros
to  carie  it,  and  so  he  went  and  sought  for  Negros,
and  bringing  those  Negros  to  carie  it,  hee  met  with  the
five  English  men  that  hee  had  left  in  his  pinnesse  whith
ranne  from  the  Spaniards,  and  the  rest  also  which  ran
from  the  house,  and  they  told  him  what  the  Spaniards
had  done,  and  then  making  friendship  with  all  his  men,
hee  promised  them  halfe  of  all  the  treasure  if  they  got

*  79

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1575-

it  from  the  Spaniards,  and  the  Negros  promised  to  helpe
him  with  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  thereupon  they
came  to  seeke  the  Spaniards,  and  now  that  some  of  his
company  were  killed  and  taken,  hee  thought  it  best  to
returne  to  his  ship,  and  to  passe  backe  for  England.
The  Spanish  captaine  hearing  this,  having  buried  the
dead  bodies,  and  having  gotten  all  things  into  his  barkes,
and  taking  the  English  men  and  their  pinnesse  with
him,  he  returned  to  Panama :  so  the  voyage  of  that
English  man  did  not  prosper  with  him,  as  hee  thought
it  would  have  done.

Nowe  when  the  foure  barkes  were  come  to  Panama,

they  sent  advise  also to  Nombre de  dios,  and  they  of

Nombre  de  dios  sent  also  from  them  other  foure  barkes

which (as  the Spaniards say) found the English ship

where  she  was  hid,  and  brought  her  to  Nombre  de  dios :

and that the  Viceroy  of  Peru  not  thinking  it  good  to

suffer fiftie English men to remaine in  the  countrey,

sent a servant of  his called Diego de Frees,  with a

hundreth and fifty  shot into the mountaines to seeke

them  out,  who  found them  making  of  certalne  Canoas

to  goe  into  the  North  sea,  and  there  to  take  some  barke

The  English or  other :  some of  them were sicke, and were taken,

betrayed  to  the  and the rest fled with the Negros, who in the end

Spaniards. betrayed  them  to  the  Spaniards,  so  that  they  were  brought

to Panama. And the Justice of Panama asked the

English captaine  whether  hee  had  the  Queenes  licence,

or  the  licence  of  any  other  Prince  or  Lord  for  his  attempt.

And  he  answered  he  had  none,  whereupon  hee  and all

his  company were condemned to dye,  and  so  were  all

executed,  saving the Captaine, the Master, the Pilot,

and five boyes  which were caried  to Lima,  and there

The  death  of the  Captaine  was  executed  with  the  other  two,  but  the

John  Oxnam.  boyes  be  yet  living.

[III.  528.]  The King of Spalne having intelligence of these

matters,  sent  300  men  of  warre  against  those  Negros
which  had  assisted  those  English  men,  which  before
were slaves unto the  Spaniards,  and  as  before  is  sayd,

80

JOHN OXENHAM  ad.

1575.
fled  from  their  masters  unto  those  mountaines,  and  so
joyned  themselves  to  the  Englishmen,  to  the  ende  they
might  the  better  revenge  themselves  on  the  Spaniards.

At  the  first  comming  of  these  300  souldiers,  they
tooke  many  of  the  Negros,  and  executed  great  justice
upon  them :  But  after  a  season,  the  Negros  grew  wise
and  wary,  and  prevented  the  Spaniards,  so  that  none  of
them  could  be  taken.

The  Spaniards  of  that  country  marveiled  much  at
this  one  thing,  to  see  that  since  the  conquering  of  this
land,  there  have  bene  many  Frenchmen,  that  have  come
to  those  Countreys,  but  never  saw  English  men  there
but  onely  those  two  of  whom  I  have  spoken.  And
although  there  have  many  Frenchmen  bene  on  the  coast,
yet  never  durst  they  put  foote  upon  land,  only  those
two  English  men  adventured  it,  and  did  such  exploits,
as  are  before  remembred.

All these things comming to the hearing of the  The  English
king  of  Spaine,  he  provided  two  Gallies  well  appointed  ^""  comming
to  keepe  those coastes :  and the first  yeere  they  tooke  caused  the '
sixe or seven French ships. And after that this was  king  of  Spaine
knowen,  there  were  no  more  Englishmen  or  Frenchmen  to  build  gallies
of  warre that durst adventure to approch the coast,  ^^  ^^^^^  ^^^
untill  this  present  yeere  1586,  that  the  aforesayd  Francis
Drake, with  a  strong  fleete of  24  ships  arrived there,
and made spoile  of  Santo Domingo, Carthagena,  and
S.  Augustine,  things  that  are  knowen  to  all  the  worlde.
But it is likely that if  the King of  Spaine live, he
will in time provide sufficient remedy, to keepe his
countreys and subjects from the invasion of other
nations.

[The  voyage
81  F

A.D.
1576.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  voyage  of  Master  Andrew  Barker  of  Bristol,
with  two  ships,  the  one  called  the  Ragged
stafiFe,  the  other  the  Beare,  to  the  coast  of
Terra  firma,  and  the  Bay  of  Honduras  in  the
West  Indies,  in  the  yeere  1576.  Wherein
the  reasons  are  premised  which  mooved  him
to  set  forth  this  voyage  against  the  Spaniards :
collected  out  of  certaine  notes  and  examinations
touching  this  enterprise  by  M.  Richard
Hakluyt.

Irst  of  all  Andrew  Barker  having  abode
in  one  of  the  Canary  Islands  called
Tenerif  for  a  certaine  time,  and  returning ,
home  left  behind  him  Charles  Chester
(the  Sonne  of  Dominic  Chester  merchant
of  Bristol)  to  learn  the  language.  Now
the  sayd  Andrew  Barker  forthwith  upon
his  arrivaU  in  England,  in  November,  1574,  fraighted  a
small  ship  (named  the  Speedwell  of  Bristol)  to  goe  for
the  Canaries  with  cloth  and  other  merchandise  of  a  great
value.  He  sent  also  one  John  Drue  of  Bastable  as
his  Factor  to  make  sale  and  dispose  of  the  said  goods,
who  when  he  arrived  at  Tenerif,  landed  the  marchandize,
and  sent  home  the  barke  with  some  small  quantity  of
wine,  making  account  to  sell  the  sayd  wares  to  greater
advantage  in  providing  wines  and  sugar  for  the  lading
of  another  ship,  which  Andrew  Barker  had  appointed
to  send  thither.  Also  according  to  this  his  purpose  the
said  Andrew  in  March  following  sent  a  ship  called  the
Christopher  of  Dartmouth,  captaine  whereof  was  one
Henry  Roberts  of  Bristol :  who  when  he  had  landed
in  Tenerif,  &  was  in  good  hope  to  find  the  lading  of
his  ship  in  a  readines,  contrary  to  his  expectation,  was
suddenly  cast  into  prison :  the  Spaniards  alleaging  that
Andrew  Barker  was  accused  to  the  inquisition  by  Charles

82

ANDREW BARKER  ad.

1576.

Chester,  whereupon  his  goods  were  confiscat,  his  factor
John  Drue  was  attached,  and  he  also  (the  said  captaine
Roberts)  being  as  they  supposed  Barkers  partner,  was
in  like  sort  to  be  imprisoned.  In  fine  all  the  foresaid
commodities  appertaining  to  the  said  Andrew  and  his
brother  M.  John  Barker  and  others  to  the  value  of  1700
pound  and  upwards  (as  it  doth  appeare  by  proofes  of
record  in  the  Admiralty)  were  utterly  lost,  being  con-
fiscat to  the  said  inquisition.  Howbeit  captaine  Roberts
by  the  meanes  of  a  frier  was  delivered  out  of  prison
(which  cost  him  all  the  marchandize  he  brought  with
him  in  his  ship)  and  so  returned  with  dead  fraight  to
the  summe  of  200  pound  that  afterwards  Andrew  Barker
discharged.  In  recompense  of  which  injurie  (for  that
no  suite  prevaileth  against  the  inquisition  of  Spaine)  &
also  to  recover  his  losse  of  the  Spaniards  themselves,
at  his  owne  charge  with  the  help  of  his  friends  hee
furnished  two  barkes  for  the  West  Indies,  the  greater  of
which  barkes  was  called  the  Ragged  stalFe,  himselfe  being
captaine,  &  Philip  Roche  Master  thereof,  the  other  named
the  Beare  had  one  William  Coxe  of  Limehouse  for  her
Master  and  captaine.  And  thus  all  our  company  being
imbarked  at  Plimmoth  on  Whitsonday  in  the  beginning
of  June,  we  set  forward,  &  in  our  course  we  met  with  a
ship  of  London,  &  afterwards  with  another  ship,  but
tooke  nothing  from  either  of  them.  Our  first  arrival
was  at  one  of  the  Island  of  Cape  Verde,  named  Del  sal,
vz.  the  Isle  of  salt,  where  we  tooke  certain  fishes  Isla  del  sal.
called  Tortoises :  and  there  we  remained  one  night
and  halfe  the  day  following.  And  from  thence  wee
came  to  the  Isle  of  Maio,  being  distant  from  Isla  del  [HI.  529-]
sal,  14  or  15  leagues,  where  we  tooke  in  fresh  water  The  Isle  of
and  traffiqued  with  certaine  Portugals  inhabiting  in
that  place,  of  whom  we  had  some  victuals  for  knives
and  beades  :  and  there  we  remained  one  day  and  one
night  :  but  our  trumpetter  was  trecherously  slaine  by
those  Portugals,  in  revenge  of  which  murther  we  set  T'^o  villages
on  fire  two  of  their  small  villages. From  this  Island  ^^^^^■

83

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

wee  shaped  our  course  over  the  maine Ocean toward
The  Isle  of  the  West Indies, and arrived happily  at  the Island  of
Tnnidad. Xrinidad, and had conference with certaine Indians
inhabitants thereof, who gave us very friendly and
courteous entertainement : and here we set up a
pinnesse  which  we  caried forth in the Ragged staffe,
and traffiqued with the foresayd Indians for victuals.
And after  we had spent sixe dayes in this place we
The  Isle  of  departed, and arrived next at the Isle of Margarita,
Margarita.  ^|^gj-g ^q tooke a small Spanish ship  having in her
certaine pitch and 30 tuns of  Canarie  wines  whereof
we reserved 4 or 5 tunnes to our selves, dismissing
them without any further damage. Thence (having
The  Isle  of  remained there  a  day)  wee  set  saile to the Island of
Curazao. Curazao,  where  we  remained  a  day  &  a  night,  &  tooke
in fresh water, at what time by the inhabitants of
that  Island  (being  few  of  them  Spaniards,  &  the  most
part Indians) 14 of  our  men  were treacherously  hurt,
but none slaine. And from thence we departed for
the  maine  land  Southwards,  to  a  certain  bay,  and  there
we  abode 3 dales,  but nothing of  any  reckoning was
Cape  de  la there atchieved. From thence  we arrived at Cape de
la  Vela,  where  grewe  a  contention  betweene  our  Captame
M.  Andrew  Barker,  and  his  Master  Philip  Roche,  upon
comparisons  made  betweene  them  concerning  the  know-
ledge of  Navigation, and about other quarels, which
quarels  afterward  were  an  occasion  of  further  mischiefe.
Tulu.  Hence we sailed to the bay  of  Tulu (which is about

18  leagues  Southwestward  from  Carthagena)  where  wee
tooke  a  Frigat  and  certaine  treasure  therein  to  the
value  of  500  pound,  namely  barres  of  gold,  and  lingots
of  silver,  and  some  quantity  of  corriento  or  coyne  in
rials  of  plate,  and  certaine  greene  stones  called
Emerauds,  whereof  one  very  great,  being  set  in  gold,
was  found  tied  secretly  about  the  thigh  of  a  frier.
Here  having  stayed  three  dayes,  and  now  being
pursued  by  Spanish  men  of  warre,  wee  departed  with
the sayd treasure, and left the Frigat behind us, all

84

ANDREW BARKER

A.D.

1576.

'N ombre  de
dios.

Simerons
rebels  to  the
Spaniards.

which  treasure  at  that  instant  was  committed  to  the
keeping  of  our  captaine  Andrew  Barker.  From  thence
we  passed  to  Nombre  de  dios,  and  so  foorth  to  the
mouth  of  the  river  of  Chagre  18  leagues  distant  from
Nombre  de  dios  towards  the  Northwest.  There  wee
landed  10  of  our  men,  who  travelled  up  into  the
woods  three  or  foure  daies  to  seeke  the  Simerons,
(which  are  certaine  valiant  Negros  fled  from  their  cruel
masters  the  Spaniards,  and  are  become  mortall  enemies,
ready  to  joyne  with  the  English  and  French  against
them)  but  in  their  search  they  could  find  none  of
them.  And  though  our  men  returned  all  free  from
peril  of  the  enemie,  yet  the  most  part  of  the  sayd  ten
persons  presently  fell  sicke,  and  divers  other  of  our
company  :  so  that  within  14  dayes  8  or  9  of  our  men
died  of  a  disease  called  there  the  Calentura,  which  is
a  hote  and  vehement  fever.  And  passing  betweene
Chagre  and  Veragua,  we  tooke  a  Frigat,  and  some  Veragua
quantity  of  golde  wee  found  therein.  In  this  Frigat
were  23  Spaniards  whom  wee  set  on  shore,  and  two
Flemings,  them  wee  brought  into  England  with  us :
wee  had  therein  also  foure  cast  pieces  of  Ordinance,  3
harquebuzes  on  crocke,  16  Spanish  calivers,  and  a
booke  of  Navigation  :  and  in  this  Frigat  some  of  our
company  came  homeward  into  England,  Thus  passing
forward  in  our  course,  we  came  to  Veragua,  where
captaine  Barker,  &  Philip  Roche  his  Master,  fought
upon  the  foresayd  quarel,  in  which  combat  the  captaine
was  hurt  a  little  in  the  cheeke.  Here  we  sanke  our
Admirall  the  Ragged  staife,  because  of  her  great
leakage,  and  imbarked  part  of  our  company  in  the
Spanish  Frigat,  which  immediately  before  we  had
surprised.  From  hence  (by  the  direction  of  certain
Indians)  we  sayled  into  the  gulfe  of  the  Honduras :
there  we  tooke  a  barke  wherin  were  rials  of  plate,  to
the  value  of  100  pound,  Maiz  or  Indian  wheat,  hennes,
beefe  and  other  small  things.  In  this  barke  also  were
certaine Spaniards, whereof one was the Scrivano or

85

The  bay  of
Honduras.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

secretary  of  Carthagena,  who  (being  a  man  of  some  note)

was  put  to  his  ransome,  which  was  payd  in  gold  : the

rest  were  dismissed  freely. And  after  passing  by  divers

The  Isle  of Islands, we arrived  at an Island called S. Francisco,

S.  Francisco, b^jj^g j^ the mouth of the great bay, called the

Honduras. And within two dayes next after our

arrivall there,  William Coxe  and divers  others (which

for  certaine  causes  shalbe namelesse) came  aboord the

ship  wherein the captaine then was, and disposessed

him  as  well  of  the  sayd  ship,  as  of  the  treasure  in  the

A  conspiracie same,  and  forthwith  put  our  captaine  with  violence  on

against  the shore, where he and one Germane Weiborne fought

' together, and were both wounded. After this our

captaine  desirous  to  come  on  boord,  was  resisted  by  the

persons  aforesayd, who answered him that he should

not  come  on  boord  till  they  were  ready  to  depart. Our

men  had  appointed  ten  persons  of  their  company  for  the

keeping of this Island of S. Francisco  : but about

breake  of  the  day,  on  a  certaine  morning,  sixtie  Spaniards

arriving  secretly  in  the  Island,  surprised  our  people  on

the  sudden,  what  time  there  were  thirtie  of  our  men

[III.  530.] on shore  : in which surprise they slew our captaine,

M.  Andrew M. Andrew Barker with eight others, namely, one

Barker  and  %  Wilde  of  Bristol,  and  Michael  our  Chirurgian,  Richard

other  slaine  <7y r t>  •  ^ 1 '-ni  c  i  t"!.  t7

the  Spaniards °^ Bristol, Thomas bampoole, 1  nomas \^  reeman,

Thomas  Nightingale,  Robert  Jackson,  Walter  Newton ;

and  the  captaines  boy  and  one  other  were  hurt. Now

after that William Coxe, and the rest (which were

aboord  the  barke)  perceived  that  the  captaine,  &  some

others  were slain,  he received them that were living

into  the  ship,  having  before  that  time refused  some  of

them. After this misfortune they went to an Island

distant from thence a league, where Coxe devided a

chaine  of  gold  (which  was  found  in  the  captaines  chest

after  his  death)  amongst  the  company. After  this  Coxe

The  towne  of ^gj^^  \^  ^  pinesse  (which  wee  tooke  at  the  Isle  of  Sant

sacked  b-j  the Francisco)  with  certaine  others  of  our  men in  a  skyffe,

English.  to the towne of TruxiUio,  in the bay  of Honduras,

86

ANDREW BARKER  ad.

1576.
which  towne they  surprised,  and  had therein  wine  and
oyle  as much as they  would, and divers other good
things,  but  no  gold  nor  silver, nor any  other  treasure
which they  would confesse. But before they  could
returne  to  their  company,  those  that  were  in  the  barkes
were  had  in  chase  by  men  of  warre,  whereby  they  were
inforced  every  man  to  shift  for  himselfe  : so for haste
they  left  those  that  were  in  the  skiife  (being  8  persons)
in  the  bay  of  Honduras : what  became  of  them  after-
ward God  knoweth. Hereupon  we  determined  to  saile
for England,  and being in the maine sea homeward
bound,  about 60  leagues  from  the  Isle  of  S.  Francisco,
the  Frigat  wherein  was  the  treasure  for  the  adventurers,
and  that  which  pertained  to  the  captaine  to  the  value  of
2000 pound,  being overset  with sayle,  with a  flaw  of
wind was overthrowen, and all the goods therein
perished  : therein also  were 14 persons drowned, and
nine  saved,  whereof  William  Coxe  and  William Gillam
were two. After this Philip Roche, Master of the  The  death  of
Admirall called the Ragged staife,  died. And  thus  at  ^fJ^.f/^J
length, (by the  helpe of  God) we  arrived in the Isle  ^f^JJaje,
of  Silly  neere  Cornwall  where  we  left  our  Frigat  which  Their  arrival
we  built  new  upon  the  shore  of  the  Honduras,  having  in  the  hie  of
in  her  at  our  landing  ten  botisios  of  oyle,  and  the  foure  '^^'^'"^^•
cast  Peeces  that  were  in John Oxnams Frigat (which
the  yeere before  was taken in the streit of  Dariene)
three harquebuzes on crocke, certaine calivers, and  Certaine
certaine treasure  : Where William Cox and Andrew  j  ^,  "^qIIJI,
Browne devided the treasure amongst their company,  recovered
delivering  to  some  five  pound,  to  some  sixe  pound,  to  from  the
some seven pound, to some more, as every  man was  Spaniards^
thought  to  have  deserved. The  barke  and  the  rest  of
the Ordinance was left in the Island, to the use of
Andrew Browne. Divers  of  our  company, upon our
arrivall  at  Plimmouth  were  committed  to  prison  at  the
suite  of  M.  John Barker of  Bristol,  brother unto  our
Captaine M. Andrew Barker, as accessaries to our
captains  death,  and  betrayers of  him unto the  enemie.

87

AD  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1576.

And  after  straight  examination  of  many  of  us,  by  letters
of  direction  from  her  Majesties  privie  Counsell,  the
chiefe  malefactors  were  onely  chastised  with  long
imprisonment,  where  indeede  before  God  they  had
deserved  to  die  :  whereof  some,  although  they  escaped
the  rigor  of  mans  law,  yet  could  they  not  avoide  the
heavy  judgement  of  God,  but  shortly  after  came  to
miserable  ends.  Which  may  be  example  to  others  to
shew  themselves  faithfuU  and  obedient  in  all  honest
causes  to  their  captaines  and  governours.

Parescer  de  Don  Alvaro  Ba9an,  marques  de  Santa
Cruz,  tocante  la  Armada  de  Francisco  Draque,
estando  en  las  yslas  de  Vayona  :  Hecha  en
Lisboa  a  26  de  Otubre,  estilo  de  Espanna
de 1585.

O que paresce, que podra hazer el

Armada Inglese, en caso que quiere

passar  a  las  Indias,  y  entrar  en el mar

del Sur,  (como lo ha hecho otra vez

Francisco  Draque)  con  las  treynta  y  dos

naves y galeones,  y  muchas lanchas y

vergantines deremo que trae, y cinco

mil hombres de guerra, que  es  el numero  que a  los

de Vayona parescio que venian en el armada, es lo

siguiente.

Levera  su  derotta  al  Rio  de  Jenero,  que  es  en  la
costa  del  Brasil  en  23  grados  de  la  parte  del  Sur  de
la  Linea.  Es  puerto  capaz  de  muchos  navios  y  muy
seguro,  adonde  se  tiene  agua,  lenna,  y  carne  :  y  tarn
bien  podra  tomar  harina  de  Maiz  en  un  lugar  dos  o
San  V'lncente.  tres  leguas  del  dicho  puerto,  que  se  dize  San  Vincente.
Y  por  ser  camino  per  las  islas  de  la  Madera,  Canaria,
y  Cabo  Verde,  podra  saquear  estas  islas,  dandole  el
tiempo  lugar  a  ello.

Desde Vaiona a la  isla de Madera con los  vientos
Nortes,  que  aora  correran  (passados  los  vientos  de  Vallee,

88

Islas  de
Madera^
Canaria,  y
Cabo  Verde,

ALVARO BACAN  ad.

1585.
que  aora  reynan,  por  estar  la  costa  de  Espanna  llovida)
yra  la  Armada  en  seis  dias  ;  de  alii  a  las  Canarias  en
quatro,  y  de  las  Canarias  a  Cabo  verde  en  ocho,
que  son  per  todos  diez  y  ocho  dias:  y  tardera  mas
lo  que  se  tuviere  en  saquear  las  islas.

De  Cabo Verde al rio de Jenero tardera quarenta  RiodeJemro.
dias,  que  vernan  a  ser  todos  dos meses  : por manera,
que  estando  el  Armada  todo  este  mes  en  Galicia,  podra
ser  en  el  rio  de  Jenero  en  fin  de  Deziembre.

A  la  entrada  de  la  baia  del  Rio  de  Jenero  ay  una  baxa,  [HI-  53 1-]

adonde  con  facilidad  se  hara  un  fuerte,  en  que  pueden  ^ugarpor

estar mas que quinientos hombres : y ponendole su  ^^;y^^

artilleria,  guardera  el  puerto,  y  el  fuerte  quedara  assalado,

que  por  la  una  parte  del  sudueste  y  nordeste  tiene  los

dos  canales,  por  donde  entran  los  navios  en el puerto :

En  el  qual  podra  Francisco  Draque  concertar  su  Armada,

y  dexar  alii  alguna  gente,  y  partir  con  la  que  le  paresciere,

para entrar en el Mar del Sur, y yr  en seguimiento

de  su  viaje  al  Estrecho  de  Magallanes  (que  es  quinientas  Estrecho  de

y  cinquenta  leguas  de  a  quel  puerto,  y  esta  en  cinquenta  y  ^^S^^^^^^^-

dos  grados y  medio de parte del  Sur)  y  entrar  por  el

Estrecho  a  la  Mar  del  Sur  por  todo  el  mes  de  Febrero  ;  Mar  del  sur.

y  yr  a  la  ciudad  de  los  Reys  o  Lima,  que  esta  en  la  Limaesdudad

costa, y es de  dos  mil  vezinos  : y por no ser gente  ^^  . ^^^
j''  .  ....■' K  T_-^- vezinos.  pero

de guerra, m puesta en milicia, y lugar abierto ^^r^  fadi  atornar,

fortaleza, ni  artilleria,  le podra tomar y  saquear,  y  yr

se  apoderando  de  la  tierra ;  pues  tomando  los  navios,  que

ay  en  aquella  mar,  no  les  podra  entrar  socorro  de  Espanna.

Y  es  de  creer  que  se  preverra  a  tomar  a  Panama.  Panama.

No queriendo hazer este viaje,  repartira su armada  La  segunda
en  dos  vandas,  y  saqueare  la  isla  de  San  Domingo,  Puerto  ^iaje.
Rico, y la costa de Tierra firma, hasta Cartagena y  SanDonmgo.
Nombre de Dios. Y  desde el rio  de  Chagre,  que es  jiilffoh^as-re
XV.  leguas  de  Nombre  de  Dios,  podra  meter  la  Infanteria
en  lanchas de  remo,  y  en  las  varcas  de  carga  y  descarga
en  a  quel  rio,  que  son  mas  de  cinquenta,  y  Uegar  hasta  ,

la  Venta  de  Cruzes,  que  es  cinco  leguas  de  Panama,  que,  abierto  v  fac'il
por  ser  lugar  abierto,  sera  facil  a  saquear.  a  saquear.

89

A.D.
1585.

La  Havana.

Tomar  las
fiotas.

\y

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Y  tambien  corre  peligro  la  Havana  ;  que  aunque  tiene
fortaleza,  es  chica  y  flaca,  y  sacando  artilleria  en  tierra,  la
tomaran  con  facilidad.

Y  de  mas  de  los  dannos  que  podran  hazer,  conforme  a
este  discorso,  no  sera  el  menor,  cortar  el  hilo  a  la
navigacion  de  las  Indias,  a  tomar  las  flotas,  si  alii
fueren.

Lo  que  Convernia  hazer  para  reparar  estos
dannos.

jEspachar  caravelas  con  grandissima  diligencia  a  los
virreys  y  governadores  de  las  Indias,  avertiendo
les  de  la  Nueva  de  la  Armada  Inglese,  para  que  esten
prevenidos,  y  se  ponganen  orden.  Aunque,  segun  el
numero  de  las  Naves  que  han  salido  de  Inglatierra,
tengo  por  sin  duda,  havran  passado  de  aquellas  partes
alguna  banda  dellas,  hasta  Tierra  nueva.  Porque  la
Reyna  a  tenido  cuidado  de  embiar  y  tomar  las  naos  de
la  Pesqueria  del  Baccalao  :  Y  assi  es  de  creer  sin  duda
lo  de  las  Indias.

Y  teniendo  se  consideracion  a  que,  por  lo  que  se
intiende  de  Inglatierra,  han  solido  mas  de  ochenta  navios
con  los  de  Armada  :  Convernia  que  su  Magestad
mandasse  juntar  otra  para  buscar  la  Inglese,  y  combatir
con  elk,  ordinando  que  los  galeones  que  tiene  la  corona
deste  Reino,  y  los  que  tiene  su  Magestad  en  el  Rio  de
Sevilla  se  aderescan  de  yr  opposito,  dandoles  carena,  para
che  estubiessen  a  punto  a  qualquier  viaje,  por  largo  que
fuesse  :  y  que  assi  mismo  se  embarafe  un  galeon  del
Duque  de  Florencia,  que  esta  muy  bien  armado  y
artillado, y a partido de Alicante ara Cadiz, y

Quarentanaoi  complimiento  hasta  quarenta  naos  gruesas,  que  se  hallaran
gruesas.  gj^ Viscaia y Guiposcoa  : y que adere9adas, artilladas,

y  puestas  en  orden,  como  conviene,  se  avituallen  por
ocho  meses,  y  que  desde  luego  se  levanten  hasta  mil
marineros  de  Catalunna  y  Genoa  para  departir  en  las
naves,  y  se  trayen,  como  se  hizo  para  la  armada  de
la Ter9era : y que assi mismo se levanten seys mil

90

ALVARO BACAN  ad.

^  1585.

soldados,  dando  condutas  para  mas  gente,  que  esta,  para
que  aya  este  numero  de  servicio.

Tambien  convernia,  que  de  Viscaia  venga  para  esta
Armada  20  patazes,  y  veynte  Azabras  de  Castro.  Que
las  patazes  sean  de  50  hasta  60  toneladas  :  y  las  Azabras,
como  las  que  vinieran  a  la  Jornada  de  la  Ter9era.

Que  se  porvea  el  artilleria,  polvera,  y  cuerda,  y  plomo
necessario,  arcabuzes,  mosquetas,  y  picas  de  respito  para
la  guardia  de  la  costa.

Converne  hazer  otra  armada  de  dos  naos  cada  400
toneladas,  y  otras  quatro  de  a  dozientas,  y  quatro
patazes,  y  mil  soldados,  de  mas  de  la  gente  de  mar.

Aviendo  visto  y  considerado,  que  en  dos  meses  ban
hecho  tantos  dannos  los  Ingleses  con  los  navios  de
mercantes  que  navegan  por  estos  mares,  y  que  es  de
creer  que  haran  lo  mismo  en  las  flotas  que  fueren  y
vinieren  de  las  Indias,  convernia,  que,  como  para  la
ordenan^a  en  tiempo  de  paz,  lleva  la  armada  las  naos
Capitana  y  Almirante,  que  Uevassen  aora  otras  dos  mas
por  lo  menos  en  cada  flota  :  y  no  por  esto  se  ha  de
dexar  de  asegurar  las  con  Armada.

Todas  estas  prevenciones,  me  paresce,  se  deuen  hazer,
para  solo  lo  que  toca  la  Armada  Inglese,  y  otros  navios
que  ban  salido  de  aquel  Reyno.

Pero  en caso que Don Antonio Veniese  con la  [III.  532.]
Armada,  y  quisiese  intentar  lo d'este Reyno,
seran  menester  las  prevenciones  siguientes.

QUe  se  apercibiesen  el  conde  de  Benavente,  Marques
de  Soria,  conde  de  Altamira,  conde  de  Monte
Rey,  Marques  de  Cerraluo,  y  los  de  mas  Sennores  y
Cavalleros,  a  quien  se  dio  orden  que  estubiesen  a  punto,
quando  se  vino  a  este  Reyno.

Que  se  exercibiese  tam  bien  la  gente  de  las  Ciudades
de  Toro,  Zamora,  Salamanca,  cuidar  para  socorrer  a  la
parte  dentro  Doro  y  Minno.  Y  las  de  Estremadura
y  Sevilla  para  socorrer  esta  Ciudad  de  Lisbona,  y  su
Comarca.

91

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

Que  se  avituallen  los  castillos  desta  ciudad,  ribera,  y
comarca,  y  provean  de  polvere,  cuerda,  y  plomo,  y  lo
demas  tocante  el  artilleria,  como  lo  he  pedido  en  las
relaciones,  que  he  embiado  a  su  Magestad  en  7  de
mar^o  deste  anno  1585.  Que  se  provean  las  galeras
por  quatro  meses  :  y  vengan  otras  seys  de  Espanna  a
este  Rio  con  120  soldados  por  galera,  para  que  los
pueden  repartir,  en  las  ocho  que  estan  aca.  Y  en  caso
que  esto  se  ay,  que  le  armada  Inglesa  no  passe  a  las
Indias,  y  se  ocupen  en  lo  deste  Reyno,  porque  havre
navios  de  Ingleses,  que  acuden  a  lo  uno  y  a  lo  otro,
sera  forfoso  hazer  otra  armada  para  lo  de  las  Indias,
de  doze  naos,  quatro  patajes,  y  mil  y  quinjentos  soldados.

Todo  esto,  me  paresce,  conviene  al  servicio  de  su
Majestad,  se  prevega  y  apercibiese  con  mucha  diligencia  y
cuidado,  proveiendo  del  dinero  necessario  para  ello,  sin
que  se  aguarde  lo  uno  a  lo  otro,  sino  que  todo  se
haga  sin  deserirlo  :  Remitiendo  me  en  todo  a  mejor
parescer.  Hecha  en  Lisboa  a  26  de  Otubre  de  1585.
Annos.

The  opinion  of  Don  Alvaro  Ba^an,  Marques  of
Santa  Cruz,  and  high  Admirall  of  Spaine,
touching  the  armie  of  sir  Francis  Drake  lying
at  the  Isles  of  Bayona  in  Galicia,  written  in
Lisbon  the  26  of  October  after  the  account
of  Spaine  in  the  yere 1585.

^Hat which it seemeth unto me, that  the English

army may doe, if  they seeke to passe unto  the

West  Indies,  and  enter  into  the  South sea  (as Francis

Drake  hath  done  once  before)  with  their  thirty  ships  and

galeons, and many pinnesses and shalops with oares,

T/ie  damage which they  have  with them,  and 5000 men of  warre,

which  may  be  which they  of  Bayona  thinke to  be in  the  fleete,  is  as

done  bypassing  followeth.

ofJenerT'into They  may  take their  course  to the  river of  Jenero,
the  South  sea. which is on the coast of  Brasil in  23 degrees to the

92

T

ALVARO BACAN  ad.

^  1585.

South  of  the  Equinoctial  line.  It  is  an  haven  capable
of  many  ships  and  very  safe,  where  there  is  water,  wood
and  flesh :  and  likewise  Drake  may  have  corne  of  Maiz
in  a  towne  two  or  three  leagues  from  the  sayd  haven,
which  is  called  S.  Vincente.

And  because  the  course  is  by  the  Isles  of  Madera,  the
Canaries,  and  Cape  verde,  he  may  sacke  those  Islands,
the  time  serving  him  for  that  purpose.

From  Bayona  to  the  Isle  of  Madera,  with  the  Northerne  Madera,
winds  which  now  wil  begin  to  blow,  when  the  Westerne
winds  be  past,  which  presently  doe  blowe  because  that
it  beginneth  to  raine  on  the  coast  of  Spaine,  the  fleete
may run  in 6  daies,  and  from  thence  to  the Canaries  Canaries.
in foure,  and  from  the  Canaries  to  the Isles of  Cape  The  Isles  of
Verde  in  eight,  which  all  together  make  eighteene  dayes : ^^P^  ^^^^^•
and  he  may  stay  as  much  time  more  as  shall  serve  him  to
sacke  the  Islands  in.

He  may  saile  from  Cape  Verde  to  the  river  of  Jenero  The  river  of
in 40 dayes, which in the whole amount unto two  ^^^^^°-
moneths. So  that  the  fleete  remaining  all  this  moneth
of  October  on  the  coast  of  Galicia,  it  may  come  to  the
river  of  Jenero  in  the  end  of  December.

At  the  entry  of  the  bay  of  the  river  of  Jenero  there  Afortma^
is  a  flat  low  Island  where  a  fort  may  very  easily  be  made,  ^^'/i^llnfiT
wherein  above 500  men  may  be left : and  placing his  ^^^  j^^,^^^  ^
artillery  therein,  he may  keepe the haven,  & the fort  the  river  of
wil  be  able  to  hold  out  all  assault,  because  that  on  the  Jenero.
Southwest  and  Northeast  sides  are  two  chanels  whereby
the  ships  come  into  the  haven:  wherein  Francis  Drake
may  repaire  his  army,  and  leave  there  some  people,  and
depart  with  so  much  of  the  rest  as  shal  seeme  good  unto
him to enter into the South sea, &  go  on  upon  his  „, t ■  m
voyage  to  the  streight  of  Magelan,  which  is  550  leagues  ofMagekn.
from the foresaid haven, and standeth in 52 degrees  The  citle  of
& a halfe toward the South, and may enter by the  ^-'^^^  easle  to

streight  into  the  South  sea  all  the  moneth  of  February,  '^f  *^^^!^\
_ D  . .  . ~  ^  .  ,  .  ,.■'  \ though  It  have

&  so  may  to  goe  to  the  citie  or  Lima,  otherwise  called  ^ooo  inhabl-

the  citie  de  los  Reys,  which  standeth  on  the  sea  coast  tants.

93

A.D.
1585.

The  ships  in
the  South  sea
may  be  burnt.

Panama  may
be  taken.

The  second-
course  which
indeede  Drake
tooke.

[HI.  533-]

Panama  being
an  open  place
is  easie  to  be
taken.

Havana  easie
to  be  taken.

The  Indian
fieete  may  be
taken.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

having  two  thousand  inhabitants  in  it.  But  in  respect
that  they  be  no  warlike  people  nor  exercised  in  armes,
and  because  the  place  is  open  and  without  fortresse  &
artillery,  he  may  take  and  sacke  it,  and  make  himself
master  on  the  land,  &  afterward  taking  those  ships  which
are  in  that  sea,  our  people  can  have  no  succour  of  ships
out  of  Spaine,  but  by  the  streight  of  Magelan,  which
is  a  long  way  about.

It  is  also  very  credible  that  he  will  be  able  to  take
Panama.

If  he  seeke  not  to  take  this  course  he  may  divide
his  army  into  two  parts,  &  sacke  the  Isle  of  S.  Domingo,
Puerto  Rico,  the  coast  of  Tierra  firma  unto  Cartagena
and  Nombre  de  Dios.

And  from  the  river  of  Chagre,  which  is  fifteene  leagues
from  Nombre  de  Dios,  he  may  send  his  footemen  in
shalops  with  oares  and  in  the  vessels  which  carrie  goods
up  and  downe  the  river,  whereof  there  are  above  fiftie
there,  and  passe  up  to  the  lodging  of  the  Crosses,  called
in  Spanish  Venta  de  Cruzes,  which  is  five  leagues  from
Panama,  which  because  it  is  an  unwalled  towne  may
easily  be  taken.

And  Havana  also  will  bee  in  great  danger,  which  albeit
it  have  a  fortresse,  yet  it  is  but  little  and  weake,  and
bringing  his  great  ordinance  on  shore  hee  may  take
the  same  with  great  facilitie.

And  besides  these  domages  which  he  may  do,  accord-
ing to  this  discourse,  it  will  not  be  the  least  to  cut  off
the  navigation  of  the  Indies,  to  take  the  West  Indian
fleet,  if  they  chance  to  be  there.

What course is to be taken to prevent these

mischiefes.

TO  dispatch  Caravels  with  all  possible  diligence  to  the
viceroyes  and  governours  of  the  Indias,  advertising
them  of  the  newes  of  the  English  army,  that  they  may  be
provided,  and  make  themselves  ready  for  them.  Albeit,
considering the number of  ships which have bene set

94

ALVARO BACAN  ad.

1585.
foorth  out  of  England,  I  assure  my  selfe,  that  some  part  Sir  Barnard
of  them  are  gone  out  of  those  parts  unto  Newfoundland.  Drake  mke
For the  Queene  hath taken carefuU order to send to  IJ^  Z^Jnisf
intercept  the  ships  of  the  fishermen  that  goe  to  Baccalaos.  and  Portugall
And  it  is  likewise  to be thought that shee  hath done  fishers  re-
the  like  for  the  intercepting  of  the  fleet  of  the  Indies,  turning  from

And  considering  that  according  to  our  intelligence  out  of  /^^^"jTg  ^
England,  above  fourescore  shippes,  and  the  army  of  Drake  His^ntelli-
have  bene  set  foorth  from  thence,  it is  meete  that  his  gence  was  too
majestie  should  prepare  another  army  to  seeke  the  English  ^^^^'  ^^  ^."^^^
fleete,  and  to  fight  with  it,  commanding  that  the  Galeons  ^i-^^^/^X ^
which  belong  to  the  crowne  of  Portugall,  and  those  of  his  Admiralty.
majestie  which  lye  in  the  river  of  Sivill  bee  prepared  to
send  against  them,  and  to  give  them  the  Carena,  that  they
may  bee  in  a  readinesse  for  any  voyage  howe  long  soever
it  bee : And  likewise  to  arrest  a  Galeon  of  the  Duke
of  Florence,  which  is  very  well  armed  and  furnished  with
great  ordinance,  and  passed  lately  from  Alicante  toward
Cadiz,  and  to  make  up  the  number  of  fortie  great  shippes,  Fortie  great
which  are  to  be  had  in  Biscay  and  Guipuscoa :  and  that  ^"'^P^^^  "f
beeing  rigged, armed  and set in  good  order,  they  bee
victualled  for  eight  moneths,  and  that  foorthwith  there  bee
levied a  thousand  mariners  of  Catalunna  and  Genoa  to
bee  divided  among  the  Fleete,  and  bee  conducted,  as  they
were for  the  Fleete  of  Tercera: furthermore  that sixe 1583- 2^'^'-
thousande  souldiers  bee  levied,  givmg  commaundement  ij^i/^gM^raues
to  presse  a  greater  number,  to  the  ende  that  these  may  of  Santa  Cruz.
bee  able  men  for  service.

Moreover  it  is  needfull  for  this  armie  that  20.  pataches
be  brought  from  Biscay,  and  20.  Azabras  from  Castro.
That  the  pataches  bee  from  50.  to  60.  tunnes  :  and  that
the  Azabras  bee  like  those  which  were  in  the  expedition
to  Tercera.

That  sufficient  provision  be  made  of  artillerie,  powder,
match,  and  lead,  and  harquebuzes,  muskets,  and  chosen
pikes  for  the  keeping  of  the  coast.

It  is  also  meete  to  provide  another  army  of  two  ships  Another  army
of  400.  tunnes  apiece,  and  other  foure  of  200.  tunnes,  ^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^'

95

A.D.
1585

The  Indian
fieete  to  be
stren^hened
with  4.  ships
of  warre.

What  pro-
vision is  to  be '
made  if  Don
Antonio  should
come  with  an
army.

[III.  53+.]

Jn  armie  of
14.  gallies  to
be  provided.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  foure  pataches  and  a  thousand  souldiers,  besides
mariners.

Having  seene  and  considered  that  the  Englishmen  with
their  marchants  ships  onely  that  traverse  these  seas  have
made  such  havocke  in  two  moneths,  and  that  it  is  to  bee
thought  that  they  will  doe  the  like  against  the  fle'^es
which  goe  and  come  from  the  Indies :  it  is  expedient,
that  as  by  order  in  time  of  peace  the  fleete  hath  an
xA-dmirall  and  Viceadmirall,  that  now  it  should  have  two
more  at  the  least  in  eche  Fleete :  and  neverthelesse  they
are  to  bee  wafted  home  with  an  armie.

In  mine  opinion  all  these  provisions  ought  to  bee  made
onely  in  regard  of  the  English  army,  and  the  rest  of  the
ships  which  have  bene  set  out  of  that  kingdome.

But  in  case  that  Don  Antonio  should  come  with
an  armie,  and  should  seeke  to  invade  this
kingdome,  these  provisions  following  would  be
needefuU.

THat  warning  be  given  to  the  Conde  de  Beneventa,  to
the  Marques  de  Soria,  to  the  Conde  of  Altamira,
to  the  Conde  of  Monterey,  to  the  Marquesse  of  Zerraluo,
and  to  the  rest  of  the  Lordes  and  Knights,  which  are
to  have  order  to  bee  in  a  readinesse,  against  hee  come
unto  this  kingdome.

That  the  people  also  be  trained  of  the  cities  of  Tore,
Zamora,  and  Salamanca,  to  bee  ready  to  succour  the
countrey  betweene  the  rivers  of  Doro  and  Minno :  and
the  people  of  Estremadura  and  Sivilla  are  likewise  to  bee
trained  to  be  ready  to  succour  the  citie  of  Lisbon,  and  the
countrey  about  the  same.

Also  that  the  castles  of  this  citie,  river  and  territorie  be
victualled  and  provided  of  gunpowder,  match  and  lead,
and  all  things  else  belonging  to  the  artillerie,  as  I  have
requested  in  the  relations  which  I  sent  unto  his  majestic
the  7.  of  March  of  this  present  yeere 1585.

That  the  gallies  be  furnished  for  foure  moneths :  and

96

ALVARO BA^AN

A.D.
1585.

that  sixe  more  bee  brought  from  Spaine  to  this  river  of
Lisbon  with  an  hundred  and  twentie  souldiers  for  ech
gallie,  that  they  may  be  devided  among  the  eight  gallies
which  remaine  here.
^^^And  in  case  it  fall  out  that  the  armie  of  the  English
^^^IRflrot  for  the  Indies,  but  occupie  themselves  upon  this
kingdome,  (for  there  may  be  English  ships,  which  may
attend the  one  and  the  other)  we  shal  be  enforced  to
make  another  armie,  besides  that  for  the  Indies,  of  twelve  -Another  army
ships, foure pataches, and a thousand five hundred  ^Z'.^^.  ^r^^/
souldiers.  t"^^'  Vf '

In  mme  opmion  all  this  is  meet  tor  his  majesties  souldiers.
service  to  be  foreseene  to  be  made  ready  with  great
diligence  and  care,  and  to  provide  money  needfuU  for
the  same,  without  neglecting  the  one  or  the  other,  but
that  all  these  things  be  done  without  delay  :  Referring
my  selfe  in  all  things  to  those  of  wiser  judgement.
Written  in  Lisbon  the  26 of  October, 1585.

A  summarie  and  true  discourse  of  sir  Francis
Drakes  West  Indian  voyage,  begun  in  the
yeere  1585.  Wherein  were  taken  the  cities
of  Saint  lago,  Santo  Domingo,  Cartagena,  and
the  tov^ne  of  Saint  Augustine  in  Florida  ;
Published  by  M.  Thomas  Gates.

His  worthy  knight  for  the  service  of  his
Prince  and  countrey  having  prepared  his
whole  fleete,  and  gotten  them  downe  to
Plimmouth  in  Devonshire,  to  the  number
of  five  and  twenty  saile  of  ships  and  pin-
nesses,  and  having  assembled  of  souldiers
and  mariners,  to  the  number  of  2300.  in

the  whole,  embarked  them  and  himselfe  at  Plimmouth
aforesaid,  the  12.  day  of  September  1585.  being  accom-
panied with  these  men  of  name  and  charge,  which
hereafter  follow :

Master  Christopher  Carleil  Lieutenant  general,  a  man

X  97  G

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

of  long  experience  in  the  warres  as  well  by  sea  as  land^
who  had  formerly  caried  high  offices  in  both  kindes  in
many  fights,  which  he  discharged  alwaies  very  happily,
and  with  great  good  reputation.

Anthonie  Powel  Sergeant  Major.  ^

Captaine  Matthew  Morgan,  and  Captaine  John  Sarr^WW^W
Corporals  of  the  field.

These  officers  had  commandement  over  the  rest  of  the
land-Captaines,  whose  names  hereafter  follow.

Captaine  Anthony  Plat. ]
Captaine  Edward  Winter
Captaine  John  Goring.
Captaine  Robert  Pew.
Captaine  George  Barton.

Captaine  John  Merchant.
Captaine  William  Cecill.
Captaine  Walter  Bigs.
Captaine  John  Hannam.
Captaine  Richard  Stanton.

Captaine  Martine  Frobisher  Viceadmirall,  a  man  of  great
experience  in  sea-faring  actions,  who  had  caried  the
chiefe  charge  of  many  ships  himselfe,  in  sundry  voyages
before,  being  now  shipped  in  the  Primrose.

Captaine  Francis  KnoUes,  Reereadmirall  in  the  Galeon
Leicester.

Master  Thomas  Vennor  Captaine  in  the  Elizabeth  Bonad-
venture  under  the  Generall.

Master  Edward  Winter  Captaine  in  the  Aide.

Master  Christopher  Carleil  the  Lieutenant  generall,
Captaine  of  the  Tygar.

Henry  White  Captaine  of  the  sea  Dragon.
Thomas  Drake  Captaine  of  the  Thomas.
Thomas  Seelie  Captaine  of  the  Minion.
Baily  Captaine  of  the  Barke  Talbot.
Robert  Crosse  Captaine  of  the  Bark  Bond.
George  Fortescue  Captaine  of  the  Barke  Bonner.
Edward  Carelesse  Captaine  of  the  Hope.
James  Erizo  Captaine  of  the  White  Lyon.
Thomas  Moone  Captaine  of  the  Francis.
John  Rivers  Captaine  of  the  Vantage.
John  Vaughan  Captaine  of  the  Drake.

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1585.

John  Varney  Captaine  of  the  George.
John  Martin  Captaine  of  the  Benjamin.
Edward  Oilman  Captaine  of  the  Skout.
Richard Hawkins Captaine of the Galiot called the
Ducke.

Captaine  of  the  Swallow.  [HI.  535.]

After  our  going  hence,  which  was  the  foureteenth  of
September,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1585.  and  taking
our  course  towards  Spaine,  wee  had  the  winde  for  a  fewe
dayes  somewhat  skant,  and  sometimes  calme.  And  being
arrived  neere  that  part  of  Spaine,  which  is  called  the
Moores,  wee  happened  to  espie  divers  sailes,  which  kept
their  course  close  by  the  shore,  the  weather  being  faire
and  calme.  The  Generall  caused  the  Viceadmirall  to  goe
with  the  pinnesses  well  manned  to  see  what  they  were,
who  upon  sight  of  the  said  pinnesses  approching  neere
unto  them,  abandoned  for  the  most  part  all  their  ships
(being  Frenchmen)  laden  all  with  salt,  and  bound  home-
wards into  France,  amongst  which  ships  (being  all  of
small  burthen)  there  was  one  so  wel  liked,  which  also  had
no  man  in  her,  as  being  brought  unto  ye  general,  he
thought  good  to  make  stay  of  her  for  the  service,  meaning
to  pay  for  her,  as  also  accordingly  he  performed  at  our
returne :  which  barke  was  called  the  Drake.  The  rest  of
these  ships  (being  eight  or  nine)  were  dismissed  without
any  thing  at  all  taken  from  them.  Who  being  after-
wardes  put  somewhat  farther  ofF  from  the  shore,  by  the
contrariety  of  the  wind,  we  happened  to  meet  with  some
other  French  ships,  full  laden  with  Newland  fish,  being
upon  their  returne  homeward  from  the  said  Newfound-
land :  whom  the  Generall  after  some  speech  had  with
them  (and  seeing  plainly  that  they  were  Frenchmen)
dismissed,  without  once  suffering  any  man  to  go  aboord
of  them.

The  day  following  standing  in  with  the  shore  againe,
we  discried  another  tall  ship  of  twelve  score  tunnes  or
thereaboutes,  upon  whom  Master  Carliel  the  Lieutenant

99

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

generall  being  in  the  Tygar,  undertooke  the  chase,  whom
also  anon  after  the  Admirall  followed,  and  the  Tygar
having  caused  the  said  strange  ship  to  strike  her  sailes,
kept  her  there  without  suffering  any  body  to  go  aboord
untill  the  Admirall  was  come  up :  who  forthwith  sending
for  the  Master,  and  divers  others  of  their  principalMlBmi^
and  causing  them  to  be  severally  examined,  found  the
ship  and  goods  to  be  belonging  to  the  inhabitants  of
■  S.  Sebastian  in  Spaine,  but  the  mariners  to  bee  for  the
most  part  belonging  to  S.  John  de  Luz,  and  the  Passage.
In  this  ship  was  great  store  of  dry  Newland  fish,  com-
monly called  with  us  Poore  John,  whereof  afterwards
(being  thus  found  a  lawfull  prize)  there  was  distribution
made  into  all  the  ships  of  the  fleet,  the  same  being  so
new  and  good,  as  it  did  very  greatly  bestead  us  In  the
whole  course  of  our  voyage.  A  day  or  two  after  the
The  Isles  of  taking  of  this  ship,  we  put  in  within  the  Isles  of  Bayon,
Bayona.  ^^^  lacke  of  favourable  wind :  where  wee  had  no  sooner
ankered  some  part  of  the  fleete,  but  the  Generall  com-
manded all  the  pinnesses  with  the  shipboats  to  be  manned,
and  every  man  to  be  furnished  with  such  armes  as  were
needful  for  that  present  service ;  which  being  done,  the
Generall  put  himselfe  into  his  gallie,  which  was  also  well
furnished,  and  rowing  towards  the  city  of  Bayon,  with
intent,  and  the  favour  of  the  Almighty  to  surprise  it,
before  we  had  advanced  one  halfe  league  of  our  way,
there  came  a  messenger  being  an  English  merchant  from
the  Governour,  to  see  what  strange  fleet  we  were,  who
came  to  our  General,  conferred  a  while  with  him,  and
after  a  small  time  spent,  our  Generall  called  for  Captaine
Sampson,  and  willed  him  to  go  to  the  Governour  of  the
citie,  to  resolve  him  of  two  points.  The  first,  to  know  if
there  were  any  warres  betweene  Spaine  and  England.
The  second,  why  our  marchants  with  their  goods  were
embarged  or  arrested.  Thus  departed  captain  Sampson
with  the  said  messenger  to  the  citie,  where  he  found  the
governour  8z;  people  much  amazed  of  such  a  sudden
accident.

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE  ad.

1585.

The  Generall  with  the  advise  and  counsell  of  M.  Carleil
his  Lieutenant  generall,  who  was  in  the  galley  with  him,
thought  not  good  to  make  any  stand,  till  such  time  as
they  were  within  the  shot  of  the  citie,  where  they  might
bee  ready  upon  the  returne  of  Captaine  Sampson,  to  make
a  sudden  attempt  if  cause  did  require  before  it  were  darke.

Captaine  Sampson  returned  with  his  message  in  this
sort.  First,  touching  peace  or  warres  the  Governour  said
he  knew  of  no  warres,  and  that  it  lay  not  in  him  to  make
any,  hee  being  so  meane  a  subject  as  he  was.  And  as  for
the  stay  of  the  merchants  with  their  goods,  it  was  the
kings  pleasure,  but  not  with  intent  to  endomage  any  man.
And  that  the  kings  counter-commandement  was  (which
had  bene  received  in  that  place  some  sevennight  before)
that  English  merchants  with  their  goods  should  be  dis-
charged :  for  the  more  verifying  wherof,  he  sent  such
merchants  as  were  in  the  towne  of  our  nation,  who
traffiqued  those  parts:  which  being  at  large  declared  to
our  General  by  them,  counsell  was  taken  what  might  best
be  done.  And  for  that  the  night  approched,  it  was  .
thought  needful  to  land  our  forces,  which  was  done  in
the  shutting  up  of  the  day,  &  having  quartered  our  selves
to  our  most  advantage,  with  sufficient  gard  upon  every
strait,  we  thought  to  rest  our  selves  for  that  night  there.
The  Governour  sent  us  some  refreshing,  as  bread,  wine,
oyle,  apples,  grapes,  marmalad  and  such  like.  About
midnight  the  weather  beganne  to  overcast,  insomuch  that
it  was  thought  meeter  to  repaire  aboord,  then  to  make
any  longer  abode  on  land,  and  before  wee  could  recover
the  Fleete,  a  great  tempest  arose,  which  caused  many  of
our  shippes  to  drive  from  their  anker-hold,  and  some
were  forced  to  sea  in  great  perill,  as  the  barke  Talbot,  the
barke  Hawkins,  and  the  Speedewell,  which  Speedewel  was  [III.  536.]
onely  driven  into  England,  the  others  recovered  us
againe :  the  extremitie  of  the  storme  lasted  three  dayes,
which  no  sooner  began  to  asswage,  but  M.  Carleil  our
Lieutenant  generall  was  sent  with  his  owne  shippe  and
three others : as  also  with the gallie  and with  divers

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.  , .

''  pinnesses,  to  see  what  he  might  doe  above  Vigo,  where
hee  tooke  many  boates  and  some  caravels,  diversly  laden
with  things  of  small  value,  but  chiefly  with  houshold
stuffe,  running  into  the  high  countrey,  and  amongst  the
rest,  he  found  one  boat  laden  with  the  principal  church-^
stuff*e  of  the  high  Church  of  Vigo,  where  also  was  their
great  crosse  of  silver,  of  very  faire  embossed  worke,  and
double  gilt  all  over,  having  cost  them  a  great  masse  of
money.  They  complained  to  have  lost  in  all  kind  of
v goods  above  thirty  thousand  duckets  in  this  place.

The  next  day  the  Generall  with  his  whole  fleete  went
from  up  the  Isles  of  Bayon,  to  a  very  good  harbour
above  Vigo,  where  M.  Carleil  stayed  his  comming,
aswell  for  the  more  quiet  riding  of  his  ships,  as  also
for  the  good  commoditie  of  fresh  watering,  which  the
place  there  did  afourd  full  well.  In  the  meane  time
the  Governour  of  Galicia  had  reared  such  forces  as  hee
might,  his  numbers  by  estimate  were  some  two  thou-
sand foot,  and  three  hundred  horse,  and  marched  from
Bayon  to  this  part  of  the  countrey,  which  lay  in  sight
of  our  fleete,  where  making  a  stand,  he  sent  to  parley
with  our  Generall,  which  was  granted  by  our  Generall,
so  it  might  bee  in  boats  upon  the  water :  and  for
safetie  of  their  persons,  there  were  pledges  delivered  on
both  sides :  which  done,  the  Governor  of  Galicia  put
himselfe  with  two  others  into  our  Viceadmirals  skifFe,  tht
same  having  bene  sent  to  the  shore  for  him,  and  ir
like  sort  our  Generall  went  in  his  owne  skifFe;  whert
it  was  by  them  agreed,  we  should  furnish  our  selve;
with  fresh  water,  to  be  taken  by  our  owne  people
quietly  on  the  land,  and  have  all  other  such  necessaries
paying  for  the  same,  as  the  place  would  affourd.
When  all  our  businesse  was  ended,  wee  departed,  anc
'  tooke  our  way  by  the  Islands  of  Canaria,  which  an.
esteemed  some  three  hundred  leagues  from  this  part  o
Spaine,  and  falling  purposely  with  Palma,  with  intentior
to  have  taken  our  pleasure  of  that  place,  for  the  ful
digesting of many things into order, and the bettei

102

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1585.
furnishing  our  store  with  such  severall  good  things  as
it  affourdeth  very  abundantly,  we  were  forced  by  the
vile  Sea-gate,  which  at  that  present  fell  out,  and  by  the
naughtinesse  of  the  landing  place,  being  but  one,  and
that  under  the  favour  of  many  platformes  well  furnished
with  great  ordinance,  to  depart  with  the  receit  of  many
of  their  Canon-shot,  some  into  our  ships,  and  some
besides,  some  of  them  being  in  very  deede  full  Canon
high.  But  the  only  or  chiefe  mischiefe  was  the  dangerous
sea-surge,  which  at  shore  all  alongst  plainly  threatned
the  overthrow  of  as  many  pinnesses  and  boates,  as  for
that  time  should  have  attempted  any  landing  at  all.

Now  seeing  the  expectation  of  this  attempt  frustrated
by  the  causes  aforesaid,  we  thought  it  meeter  to  fall
with  the  Isle  Hierro,  to  see  if  we  could  find  any  better
fortune :  and  comming  to  the  Island,  we  landed  a
thousand  men  in  a  valley  under  a  high  mountaine,
where  we  stayed  some  two  or  three  houres,  in  which
time  the  inhabitants,  accompanied  with  a  yong  fellow
borne  in  England,  who  dwelt  there  with  them,  came
unto  us,  shewing  their  state  to  be  so  poore,  that  they
were  all  ready  to  starve,  which  was  not  untrue :  and
therefore  without  any  thing  gotten,  we  were  all  com-
manded presently  to  imbarke,  so  as  that  night  wee  put
off  to  sea  Southsoutheast  along  towards  the  coast  of
Barbary.

Upon  Saturday  in  the  morning,  being  the  13.  of
November,  we  fell  with  Cape  Blanke,  which  is  a  low
land  and  shallow  water,  where  we  catched  store  of  fish,
and  doubling  the  Cape,  we  put  into  the  Bay,  where  we
found  certaine  French  ships  of  warre,  whom  wee  enter-
tained with  great  courtesie,  and  there  left  them.  This
afternoone  the  whole  fleet  assembled,  which  was  a  little
scattered  about  their  fishing,  and  put  from  thence  to
the  Isles  of  Cape  Verde,  sailing  till  the  16.  of  the  same
moneth  in  the  morning,  on  which  day  we  discried  the
Island  of  S.  lago,  and  in  the  evening  we  ankered  the
ileet  between  the  towne  called  the  Playa  or  Praya,  and

103

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

S.  lago,  where  we  put  on  shore  1000.  men  or  more,
under  the  leading  of  M.  Christopher  Carleil  Lieutenant
general,  who  directed  the  service  most  like  a  wise
commander.  The  place  where  we  had  first  to  march
did  afFourd  no  good  order,  for  the  ground  was  moun-
tainous &  full  of  dales,  being  a  very  stony  and  trouble-
some passage ;  but  such  was  his  industrious  disposition,
as  he  would  never  leave,  untill  wee  had  gotten  up  to
a  faire  plain,  where  we  made  stand  for  the  assembling
of  the  army.  And  when  we  were  al  gathered  together
upon  the  plaine,  some  2  miles  from  the  town,  the
lieutenant  general  thought  good  not  to  make  attempt
til  daylight  :  because  there  was  not  one  that  could
serve  for  guid  or  giving  knowledge  at  al  of  ye  place.
And  therfore  after  having  wel  rested,  even  halfe  an
houre  before  day,  he  commanded  the  army  to  be
divided  into  3  speciall  parts,  such  as  he  appointed,
wheras  before  we  had  marched  by  several  companies,
being  therunto  forced  by  the  badnesse  of  the  way  as
is  aforesaid.
[III.  537.]  Now  by  the  time  wee  were  thus  ranged  into  a
very  brave  order,  daylight  began  to  appeare,  and  being
advanced  hard  to  the  wall,  we  saw  no  enemie  to  resist,
whereupon  the  Lieutenant  generall  appointed  Captaine
Sampson  with  thirtie  shot,  and  Captaine  Barton  with
other  thirtie,  to  goe  downe  into  the  towne  which  stood
in  the  valley  under  us,  and  might  very  plainely  bee
viewed  all  over  from  that  place  where  the  whole  Army
was  now  arrived :  and  presently  after  these  Captaines
was  sent  the  great  ensigne,  which  had  nothing  in
it  but  the  plaine  English  crosse,  to  be  placed  to-
wardes  the  Sea,  that  our  Fleet  might  see  Saint  Georges
cross  florish  in  the  enemies  fortresse.  Order  was  given
that  all  the  ordinance  throughout  the  towne  and  upon
all  the  platformes,  which  were  above  fiftie  pieces  all
ready  charged,  should  be  shot  off  in  honour  of  the
Queenes  Majesties  coronation  day,  being  the  seventeenth
\j of  November, after the yeerely  custome of England,

104

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  ad

1585.
which  was  so  answered  againe  by  the  ordinance  out  of
all  the  ships  in  the  fleete  which  now  was  come  neere,
as  it  was  strange  to  heare  such  a  thundering  noyse  last
so  long  together.  In  this  meane  while  the  Lieutenant
generall  held  still  the  most  part  of  his  force  on  the
hill  top,  till  such  time  as  the  towne  was  quartered  out
for  the  lodging  of  the  whole  Armie :  which  being  done
every  captaine  tooke  his  own  quarter,  and  in  the  even-
ing was  placed  such  a  sufficient  gard  upon  every  part
of  the  towne  that  we  had  no  cause  to  feare  any  present
enemie.

Thus we continued in the citie the space of 14.  The  dtie  of  y
dayes,  taking: such  spoiles  as  the  place yeelded,  which  ^^S^^^^^"

^ r ^  •  1  1  J  and  possessed

were tor the most part,  wme, oyle,  meale,  and some  ^^.  ^ ^
such  like  things  for  victuall,  as  vineger,  olives,  and  some
such  other  trash,  as  merchandise  for  their  Indians  trades.
But there  was not found any  treasure at all,  or any
thing  else  of  worth  besides.

The  situation  of  S.  lago  is  somewhat  strange,  in  forme
like  a  triangle,  having  on  the  East  and  West  sides  two
mountaines  of  rocke  and  clifFe,  as  it  were  hanging  over
it,  upon  the  top  of  which  two  mountaines  were  builded
certaine  fortifications  to  preserve  the  towne  from  any
harme  that  might  bee  offered,  as  in  a  plot  is  plainely
shewed.  From  thence,  on  the  South  side  of  the  towne
is  the  maine  sea,  and  on  the  North  side,  the  valley
lying  betweene  the  foresayd  mountaines,  wherein  the
towne  standeth :  the  said  valley  &  towne  both  do  grow
very  narrow,  insomuch  that  the  space  betweene  the  two
cliffes  of  this  end  of  the  towne  is  estimated  not  to  be
above 10.  or 12.  score  over.

In  the  middest  of  the  valley  commeth  downe  a  riveret,
rill,  or  brooke  of  fresh  water,  which  hard  by  the  sea
side  maketh  a  pond  or  poole,  whereout  our  ships  were
watered  with  very  great  ease  and  pleasure.  Somewhat
above  the  towne  on  the  North  side  betweene  the  two
mountains,  the  valley  waxeth  somewhat  larger  then  at
the  townes end,  which  valley  is  wholly  converted into

105

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

gardens  and  orchards  well  replenished  with  divers  sorts
of  fruites,  herbes  and  trees,  as  lymmons,  orenges,  sugar-
canes,  cochars  or  cochos  nuts,  plantans,  potato-rootes,
cucumbers,  small  and  round  onions,  garlicke,  and  some
other  things  not  now  remembered,  amongst  which  the
cochos  nuts,  and  plantans  are  very  pleasant  fruites,  the
saide  cochos  hath  a  hard  shell  and  a  greene  huske  over
it,  as  hath  our  walnut,  but  it  farre  exceedeth  in  great-
nesse,  for  this  cochos  in  his  greene  huske  is  bigger
than  any  mans  two  fistes :  of  the  hard  shell  many
drinking  cups  are  made  here  in  England,  and  set  in
silver  as  I  have  often  scene.

Next  within  this  hard  shell  is  a  white  rine  resembling
in  shewe  very  much  even  as  any  thing  may  do,  to  the
white  of  an  egge  when  it  is  hard  boyled.  And  within
this  white  of  the  nut  lyeth  a  water,  which  is  whitish
and  very  cleere,  to  the  quantitie  of  halfe  a  pynt  or
thereaboutes,  which  water  and  white  rine  before  spoken
of,  are  both  of  a  very  coole  fresh  tast,  and  as  pleasing
as  any  thing  may  be.  I  have  heard  some  hold  opinion,
that  it  is  very  restorative.

The  plantan  groweth  in  cods,  somewhat  like  to  beanes,
but  is  bigger  and  longer,  and  much  more  thicke  together
on  the  stalke,  and  when  it  waxeth  ripe,  the  meate  which
filleth  the  rine  of  the  cod  becommeth  yellow,  and  is
exceeding  sweet  and  pleasant.

In  this  time  of  our  being  there  hapned  to  come  a
Portugall  to  the  Westerne  fort,  with  a  flag  of  truce,  to
whom  Captaine  Sampson  was  sent  with  Captaine  Goring,
who  comming  to  the  said  messenger,  he  first  asked  them
what  nation  they  were,  they  answered  Englishmen,  hee
then  required  to  knowe  if  warres  were  betweene  England
and  Spaine,  to  which  they  answered  that  they  knew  not,
but  if  he  would  goe  to  their  'Generall  he  could  best
resolve  him  of  such  particulars,  and  for  his  assurance
of  passage  and  repassage,  these  Captaines  made  offer  to
ingage  ytheir  credits,  which  he  refused  for  that  he  was
not  sent  from his  Governor. Then they told him, if

106

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1585.
his  Governor  did  desire  to  take  a  course  for  the  common
benefit  of  the  people  and  countrey,  his  best  way  were
to  come  and  present  himselfe  unto  our  noble  and
mercifuU  Governour  sir  Francis  Drake,  whereby  hee
might  bee  assured  to  find  favour,  both  for  himselfe  and
the  inhabitantes.  Otherwise  within  three  dayes  wee
should  march  over  the  land,  and  consume  with  fire  all
inhabited  places,  and  put  to  the  sword  all  such  living
soules  as  wee  shoulde  chance  upon :  so  thus  much  he
tooke  for  the  conclusion  of  his  answere,  and  departing,  [III.  538.]
hee  promised  to  returne  the  next  day,  but  we  never
heard  more  of  him.

Upon  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  November,  the
Generall  accompanied  with  the  lieutenant  generall  and
sixe  hundred  men  marched  foorth  to  a  village  twelve
miles  within  the  land,  called  Saint  Domingo,  where  the
Governour  and  the  Bishoppe  with  all  the  better  sort
were  lodged,  and  by  eight  of  the  clocke  wee  came  to
it,  finding  the  place  abandoned,  and  the  people  fled
into  the  mountaines :  so  we  made  stand  a  while  to  ease
our  selves,  and  partly  to  see  if  any  would  come  to
speake  to  us.

After  we  had  well  rested  our  selves,  the  Generall
commaunded  the  troupes  to  march  away  homewards,
in  which  retreat  the  enemie  shewed  themselves,  both
horse  and  foote,  though  not  such  force  as  durst  encounter
us :  and  so  in  passing  sometime  at  the  gase  with  them,
it  waxed  late  and  towards  night  before  we  could  recover
home  to  S.  lago.

On  Munday  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  November,,/
the  Generall  commaunded  all  the  pinnesses  with  the
boates,  to  use  all  diligence  to  imbarke  the  Annie  into
such  shippes  as  every  man  belonged.  The  Lieutenant
generall  in  like  sort  commanded  Captaine  Goring  and
Lieutenant  Tucker,  with  one  hundred  shot  to  make  a
stand  in  the  market  place,  untill  our  forces  were  wholly
imbarked,  the  viceadmiral  making  stay  with  his  pinnesse
&  certaine  boats  in  the  harbour,  to  bring  the  sayd  last

107

A.D.

1585.

A  wise  course
to  be  imitated
in  all  great
actions.

THE ENGIJSH V^OYAGES

companie  aboord  the  shi|..-.,  rvso  the  Generall  willed
forthwith  the  gallie  with  ^wo  pinnesses  to  take  into  them
the  company  of  Captaine  Barton,  and  the  company  of
Captaine  Bigs,  under  the  leading  of  captaine  Sampson,
to  seeke  out  such  munition  as  was  hidden  in  the  ground,
at  the  towne  of  Praya  or  Playa,  having  bene  promised
to  be  shewed  it  by  a  prisoner,  which  was  taken  the
day  before.

The  Captaines  aforesayd  comming  to  the  Playa,  landed
their  men,  and  having  placed  the  troupe  in  their  best
strength,  Captaine  Sampson  tooke  the  prisoner,  and  willed
him  to  shewe  that  hee  had  promised,  the  which  he  could
not,  or  at  least  would  not :  but  they  searching  all  sus-
pected places,  found  two  pieces  of  ordinance,  one  of
yron,  an  other  of  brasse.  In  the  after  noone  the
Generall  ankered  with  the  rest  of  the  Fleet  before  the
Playa,  comming  himselfe  ashore,  willing  us  to  burne
the  towne  and  make  all  haste  aboord,  the  which  was
done  by  sixe  of  the  clocke  the  same  day,  and  our  selves
imbarked  againe  the  same  night,  and  so  we  put  off  to
Sea  Southwest.

But  before  our  departure  from  the  towne  of  S.  lago,
wee  established  orders  for  the  better  government  of  the
Army,  every  man  mustered  to  his  captaine,  and  othes-
were  ministred  to  acknowledge  her  Majestie  supreme
Governour,  as  also  every  man  to  doe  his  uttermost
endevour  to  advance  the  service  of  the  action,  and  to
yeeld  due  obedience  unto  the  directions  of  the  Generall
and  his  officers.  By  this  provident  counsell,  and  laying
downe  this  good  foundation  before  hand,  all  things  went
forward  in  a  due  course,  to  the  atchieving  of  our  happy
enterprise.

In  all  the  time  of  our  being  here,  neither  the
Governour  for  the  king  of  Spaine,  (which  is  a  Portugall)
neither  the  Bishop,  whose  authoritie  is  great,  neither  the
inhabitants  of  the  towne,  or  Island  ever  came  at  us
(which  we  expected  they  should  have  done)  to  intreate
us  to  leave  them  some  part  of  their  needfull  provisions,

108

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

'585.
or  at  the  least,  to  spare  the  ruining  of  their  towne  at
our  going  away. The  cause  of  this  their  unreasonable
distrust  (as  I doe  take  it) was  the  fresh  remembrance
of  the  great  wrongs  they  had  done  to  old  M.  William
Hawkins  of  Plimmouth,  in  the  voyage  he  made  4.  or  5.  ^^^  treason  of
yeeres  before,  when  as  they  did  both  breake  their  promise, Portu^h
and  murthered  many  of  his  men,  whereof  I  judge  you  wilRam
have  understood,  &  therefore  it  is  needlesse  to  be  re-  Hawkins.
peated. But  since  they  came  not  at  us,  we  left  written
in sundry  places,  as also  in the spittle house, (which
building was only appointed to be spared) the  great
discontentment  &  scorne  we  tooke  at  this  their  refraining
to  come  unto  us,  as  also  at  the  rude  maner  of  killing,
&  savage  kind  of  handling  the  dead  body  of  one  of  our
boyes  found  by  them  stragling  al  alone,  from  whom  they
had  taken  his  head  and  heart,  and  had  stragled  the  other
bowels  about  the  place,  in  a  most brutish  and  beastly
maner.

In revenge whereof  at our  departing we consumed
with fire all the  houses,  aswell  in  the  countrey  which ,/
we  saw,  as  in  the  towne  of  S.  lago.

From  hence  putting  off  to  the  West  Indies,  wee  were
not  many  dayes  at  Sea,  but  there  beganne  among  our
people  such  mortalitie,  as  in  fewe  dayes  there  were  dead  ,/
above  two  or  three  hundred  men.  And  until  some
seven  or  eight  dayes  after  our  comming  from  S.  lago,
there  had  not  died  any  one  man  of  sicknesse  in  all  the
fleete :  the  sicknesse  shewed  not  his  infection  wherewith
so  many  were  stroken,  untill  we  were  departed  thence,
and  then  seazed  our  people  with  extreme  hot  burning
and  continuall  agues,  whereof  very  fewe  escaped  with  life,
and  yet  those  for  the  most  part  not  without  great
alteration  and  decay  of  their  wittes  and  strength  for  a
long  time  after.  In  some  that  died  were  plainely  shewed
the  small  spots,  which  are  often  found  upon  those  that  [III.  539.]
be  infected  with  the  plague :  wee  were  not  above
eighteene  dayes  in  passage  betweene  the  sight  of  Saint
lago  aforesaid,  and  the  Island  of  Dominica,  being the /

109

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH V^OYAGES

1585.

first  Island  of  the  West  ^"  '"es  that  we  fell  withall,  the
same  being  inhabited  wit  .vage  people,  which  goe  all
naked,  their  skinne  coloi  ,d  with  some  painting  of  a
reddish  tawney,  very  pe  ionable  and  handsome  strong
men,  who  doe  admit  litle  conversation  with  the  Spanyards  :
for  as  some  of  our  people  might  understand  them,  they
had  a  Spaniard  or  twaine  prisoners  with  them,  neither
doe  I  thinke  that  there  is  any  safetie  for  any  of  our
nation,  or  any  other  to  be  within  the  limits  of  their
commandement,  albeit  they  used  us  very  kindly  for  those
few  houres  of  time  which  wee  spent  with  them,  helping
our  folkes  to  fill  and  carry  on  their  bare  shoulders  fresh
water  from  the  river  to  our  ships  boates,  and  fetching
from  their  houses  great  store  of  Tabacco,  as  also  a  kind
of  bread  which  they  fed  on,  called  Cassavi,  very  white
and  savourie,  made  of  the  rootes  of  Cassavi.  In  re-
compence  whereof,  we  bestowed  liberall  rewards  of
glasse,  coloured  beades,  and  other  things,  which  we  had
found  at  Saint  lago,  wherewith  (as  it  seemed)  they
rested  very  greatly  satisfied,  and  shewed  some  sorowfull
countenance  when  they  perceived  that  we  would  depart.

From  hence  wee  went  to  another  Island  Westward
of  it,  called  Saint  Christophers  Island,  wherein  we  spent
some  dayes  of  Christmas,  to  refresh  our  sicke  people,
and  to  cleanse  and  ayre  our  ships.  In  which  Island
were  not  any  people  at  all  that  we  could  heare  of.

In  which  time  by  the  General  it  was  advised  and
resolved,  with  the  consent  of  the  Lieutenant  generall,
the  Vice-admiral,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Captaines  to
'^  proceede  to  the  great  Islande  of  Hispaniola,  aswell  for
that  we  knewe  our  selves  then  to  bee  in  our  best
strength,  as  also  the  rather  allured  thereunto,  by  the
glorious  fame  of  the  citie  of  S.  Domingo,  being  the
ancientest  and  chiefe  inhabited  place  in  all  the  tract  of
Countrey  thereabouts.  And  so  proceeding  in  this  deter-
mination, by  the  way  we  mette  a  small  Frigat,  bound
for  the  same  place,  the  which  the  Vice-admirall  tooke :
and  having  duely  examined the  men  that  were  in  her,

no

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1586.

there  was  one  found,  by  whom  wee  were  advertised,  the
Haven  to  be  a  barren  Haven,  and  the  shore  or  land
thereof  to  bee  well  fortified,  having  a  Castle  thereupon
furnished  with  great  store  of  Artillerie,  without  the
danger  whereof  was  no  convenient  landing  place  within
ten  English  miles  of  the  Citie,  to  which  the  sayd
Pilot  tooke  upon  him  to  conduct  us.

All  things  being  thus  considered  on,  the  whole  forces
were  commaunded  in  the  Evening  to  embarke  themselves
in  Pinnesses,  boats,  and  other  small  barkes  appoynted
for  this  service.  Our  souldiers  being  thus  imbarked,
the  Generall  put  himselfe  into  the  barke  Francis  as
Admirall,  and  all  this  night  we  lay  on  the  sea,  bearing
small  saile  untill  our  arrivall  to  the  landing  place,  which
was  about  the  breaking  of  the  day,  and  so  we  landed,
being  Newyeeres  day,  nine  or  ten  miles  to  the  West-  ,/
wards  of  that  brave  Citie  of  S.  Domingo :  for  at  that
time  nor  yet  is  knowen  to  us  any  landing  place,  where
the  sea-surge  doth  not  threaten  to  overset  a  Pinnesse
or  boate.  Our  Generall  having  scene  us  all  landed  in
safetie,  returned  to  his  Fleete,  bequeathing  us  to  God,
and  the  good  conduct  of  Master  Carliell  our  Lieutenant
Generall :  at  which  time,  being  about  eight  of  the  clocke,
we  began  to  march,  and  about  noone  time,  or  towards  one
of  the  clocke,  we  approched  the  towne,  where  the  Gentle-
men and  those  of  the  better  sort,  being  some  hundred  and
fiftie  brave  horses  or  rather  more,  began  to  present  them-
selves ;  but  our  small  shot  played  upon  them,  which  were
so  susteined  with  good  proportion  of  pikes  in  all  parts,  as
they  finding  no  part  of  our  troope  unprepared  to  receive
them  (for  you  must  understand  they  viewed  all  round
about)  they  were  thus  driven  to  give  us  leave  to  proceed
towards  the  two  gates  of  the  towne,  which  were  the  next
to  the  seaward.  They  had  manned  them  both,  and
planted  their  ordinance  for  that  present,  and  sudden
alarme  without  the  gate,  and  also  some  troopes  of  small
shot  in  Ambuscado  upon  the  hie  way  side.  We  divided  /
our  whole  force,  being  some  thousand  or  twelve  hundred  ^'^

in

AD.  THE ENG . VOYAGES

1586.

men  into  two  partes,  to  eiterprif .;  both  the  gates  at  one
instant,  the  Lieutenant  Generall  having  openly  vowed
to  Captaine  Powel  (who  l..d  *ht  ':roope  that  entred  the
other  gate)  that  with  Godi-  good  favour  he  would  not
rest  untill  our  meeting  in  the  market  place.

Their  ordinance  had  no  sooner  discharged  upon  our
neere  approch,  and  made  some  execution  amongst  us,
though  not  much,  but  the  Lieutenant  generall  began
forthwith  to  advance  both  his  voice  of  encouragement,
and  pace  of  marching :  the  first  man  that  was  slaine  with
the  ordinance  being  very  neere  unto  himselfe :  and  there-
upon hasted  all  that  hee  might,  to  keepe  them  from  the
recharging  of  the  ordinance.  And  notwithstanding  their
Ambuscados,  we  marched  or  rather  ran  so  roundly  in  to
The  citie  of  them,  as  pell  mell  wee  entred  the  gates,  and  gave  them
S.  Domingo  j^qj-^  c^j-g  every  man  to  save  himselfe  by  flight,  then
reason  to  stand  any  longer  to  their  broken  fight.  Wee
forthwith  repayred  to  the  market  place :  but  to  be  more
truely  understood,  a  place  of  very  faire  spacious  square
ground,  whither  also  came  as  had  bene  agreed  Captaine
[III.  540.]  Powel  with  the  other  troope :  which  place  with  some
part  next  unto  it,  we  strengthened  with  Barricados,  and
there  as  the  most  convenient  place  assured  our  selves,
the  Citie  being  farre  too  spacious  for  so  small  and  weary
a  troope  to  undertake  to  guarde.  Somewhat  after  mid-
night, they  who  had  the  guard  of  the  Castle,  hearing  us
busie  about  the  gates  of  the  said  Castle,  abandoned  the
same :  some  being  taken  prisoners,  and  some  fleeing
away  by  the  helpe  of  boates  to  the  other  side  of  the
Haven,  and  so  into  the  countrey.

The  next  day  we  quartered  a  litle  more  at  large,  but
not  into  the  halfe  part  of  the  towne,  and  so  making
substantiall  trenches,  and  planting  all  the  ordinance,  that
ech  part  was  correspondent  to  other,  we  held  this  towne
the  space  of  one  moneth.

In  the  which  time  happened  some  accidents,  more  then
are  well  remembred  for  the  present,  but  amongst  other
things,  it  chanced  that  the  Generall  sent  .on  his  message

em  »d  cxplo  ran  iim  p  *«'•■'■  .  .  .

Z Ptopugnaculum :

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1586.

to  the  Spanyards  a  Negro  boy  with  a  flagge  of  white,
signifying  truce,  as  is  the  Spanyards  ordinarie  maner  to
doe  there,  when  they  approch  to  speake  to  us  :  which
boy  unhappily  was  first  mette  withall  by  some  of  those,
who  had  bene  belonging  as  officers  for  the  King  in  the
Spanish  Galley,  which  with  the  Towne  was  lately  fallen
into  our  hands,  who  without  all  order  or  reason,  &
contrary  to  that  good  usage  wherewith  wee  had  inter-
tained  their  messengers,  furiously  strooke  the  poore  boy
thorow  the  body  with  one  of  their  horsemens  staves :  with
which  wound  the  boy  returned  to  the  General,  and  after
hee  had  declared  the  maner  of  this  wrongfuU  crueltie,
died  foorthwith  in  his  presence,  wherewith  the  Generall
being  greatly  passioned,  commaunded  the  Provost  Martiall,
to  cause  a  couple  of  Friers  then  prisoners,  to  be  caried
to  the  same  place  where  the  boy  was  stroken,  accom-
panied with  sufficient  guard  of  our  souldiers,  and  there
presently  to  be  hanged,  dispatching  at  the  same  instant
another  poore  prisoner,  with  this  reason  wherefore  this
execution  was  done,  &  with  this  message  further,  that
until  the  party  who  had  thus  murdered  the  Generals
messenger  were  delivered  into  our  hands,  to  receive
condigne  punishment,  there  should  no  day  passe,  wherein
there  should  not  two  prisoners  be  hanged,  until  they
were  all  consumed  which  were  in  our  hands.

Whereupon  the  day  following,  hee  that  had  bene
Captaine  of  the  kings  Galley,  brought  the  offender  to  the
townes  end,  offring  to  deliver  him  into  our  hands  ;  but
it  was  thought  to  be  a  more  honourable  revenge  to  make
them  there  in  our  sight,  to  performe  the  execution  them-  ,
selves  :  which  was  done  accordingly.

During  our  being  in  this  towne,  as  formerly  also  at
S.  lago  there  had  passed  justice  upon  the  life  of  one  of
our  owne  company  for  an  odious  matter,  so  heere  like-
wise was  there  an  Irishman  hanged,  for  the  murthering  of
his  Corporall.

In  this  time  also  passed  many  treaties  betweene  their
Commissioners  and  us,  for  ransome  of  their  Citie ;  but
X  113  H

A.D.

1586.

Most  unsati-
able  Spanish
ambition.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

upon  disagreements  we  still  spent  the  early  mornings
in  fiering  the  outmost  houses  :  but  they  being  built  very
magnificently  of  stone,  with  high  loftes,  gave  us  no  small
travell  to  ruine  them.  And  albeit  for  divers  dayes  together
we  ordeined  ech  morning  by  day  breake,  until  the  heat
began  at  nine  of  the  clocke,  that  two  hundred  Mariners
did  nought  els  but  labour  to  fire  and  burne  the  said
houses  without  our  trenches,  whilst  the  souldiers  in  a  like
proportion  stood  forth  for  their  guard  :  yet  did  wee  not,

,  or  could  not  in  this  time  consume  so  much  as  one  third
part  of  the  towne  :  which  towne  is  plainely  described  and
set  forth  in  a  certaine  Map.  And  so  in  the  end,  what
wearied  with  firing,  and  what  hastened  by  some  other
respects,  wee  were  contented  to  accept  of  five  and  twentie

'thousand  Ducats  of  five  shillings  sixe  pence  the  peece,  for
the  ransome  of  the  rest  of  the  towne.

Amongst  other  things  which  happened  and  were  found
at  S.  Domingo,  I  may  not  omit  to  let  the  world  know  one
very  notable  marke  &  token  of  the  unsatiable  ambition  of
the  Spanish  king  and  his  nation,  which  was  found  in  the
kings  house,  wherein  the  chiefe  governour  of  that  Citie
and  Countrey  is  appoynted  alwayes  to  lodge,  which  was
this :  In  the  comming  to  the  Hall  or  other  roomes  of
this  house,  you  must  first  ascend  up  by  a  faire  large  paire
of  staires  ;  at  the  head  of  which  staires  is  a  handsome
spacious  place  to  walke  in,  somewhat  like  unto  a  gallery  :
wherein  upon  one  of  the  wals,  right  over  against  you  as
you  enter  the  said  place,  so  as  your  eye  cannot  escape  the
sight  of  it,  there  is  described  &  painted  in  a  very  large
Scutchion  the  armes  of  the  king  of  Spaine,  and  in  the
lower  part  of  the  said  Scutchion,  there  is  likewise  described
a  Globe,  conteining  in  it  the  whole  circuit  of  the  sea  and
the  earth  wherupon  is  a  horse  standing  on  his  hinder
part  within  the  globe,  and  the  other  fore-part  without  the
globe,  lifted  up  as  it  were  to  leape,  with  a  scroll  painted
in  his  mouth,  wherein  was  written  these  words  in  Latin,
Non  sufficit  orbis  :  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  the  world
sufficeth  not. Whereof  the  meaning  was  required  to  be

114

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1586.
knowen  of  some  of  those  of  the  better  sort,  that  came  in
commission  to  treate  upon  the  ransome  of  the  towne,  who
would  shake  their  heads,  and  turne  aside  their  counten-
ance in  some  smyling  sort,  without  answering  any  thing,
as  greatly  ashamed  thereof.  For  by  some  of  our  com-
pany it  was  tolde  them,  that  if  the  Queene  of  England  [III.  5+i-]
would  resolutely  prosecute  the  warres  against  the  king  of
Spaine,  hee  should  be  forced  to  lay  aside  that  proude
and  unreasonable  reaching  vaine  of  his  :  for  hee  should
finde  more  then  inough  to  doe  to  keepe  that  which  hee
had  alreadie,  as  by  the  present  example  of  their  lost
towne  they  might  for  a  beginning  perceive  well  inough.
Now  to  the  satisfying  of  some  men,  who  marvell
greatly  that  such  a  famous  and  goodly  builded  Citie
so  well  inhabited  of  gallant  people,  very  brave  in  their
apparell  (whereof  our  souldiers  found  good  store  for  their
reliefe)  should  afoord  no  greater  riches  then  was  found
there :  herein  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  Indian
people,  which  were  the  naturals  of  this  whole  Island  of
Hispaniola  (the  same  being  neere  hand  as  great  as
England)  were  many  yeeres  since  cleane  consumed  by
the  tyrannie  of  the  Spanyards,  which  was  ye  cause,  that
for  lacke  of  people  to  worke  in  the  Mines,  the  golde^
and  silver  Mines  of  this  Island  are  wholy  given  over,
and  thereby  they  are  faine  in  this  Island  to  use  Copper
money,  whereof  was  found  very  great  quantitie.  The
chiefe  trade  of  this  place  consisteth  of  Sugar  and  Ginger,
which  groweth  in  the  Island,  and  of  Hides  of  oxen  and
kine,  which  in  this  waste  countrey  of  the  Island  are
bredde  in  infinite  numbers,  the  soyle  being  very  fertile :
and  the  sayd  beasts  are  fedde  up  to  a  very  large  grouth,
and  so  killed  for  nothing  so  much,  as  for  their  Hides
aforesayd.  Wee  found  heere  great  store  of  strong  wine,
sweete  oyle,  vineger,  olives,  and  other  such  like  pro-
visions, as  excellent  Wheate-meale  packed  up  in  wine-
pipes  and  other  caske,  and  other  commodities  likewise,  as
Woollen  and  Linnen  cloth,  and  some  Silkes :  all  which
j  provisions  are  brought  out  of  Spaine,  and  served  us  for

115

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

great  reliefe.  There  was  but  a  little  Plate  or  vessel!
of  Silver,  in  comparison  of  the  great  pride  in  other
things  of  this  towne,  because  in  these  hotte  Countreys
they  use  much  of  those  earthen  dishes  finely  painted  or
varnished,  which  they  call  Porcellana,  which  is  had  out
of  the  East  India  :  &  for  their  drinking,  they  use  glasses
altogether,  whereof  they  make  excellent  good  and  faire
in  the  same  place.  But  yet  some  plate  we  found,  and
many  other  good  things,  as  their  houshold  garniture
very  gallant  and  rich,  which  had  cost  them  deare,
although  unto  us  they  were  of  small  importance.

From  Saint  Domingo  we  put  over  to  the  maine  or
firme  land,  and  going  all  alongst  the  coast,  we  came  at
Cartagena,  the  last  in  sight  of  Cartagena,  standing  upon  the  sea
side,  so  neere,  as  some  of  our  barks  in  passing  alongst,
approched  within  the  reach  of  their  Culverin  shot,
which  they  had  planted  upon  certaine  platformes.  The
Harbour  mouth  lay  some  three  miles  toward  the  West-
ward of  the  towne,  whereinto  wee  entred  about  three
or  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  without  any
resistance  of  ordinance,  or  other  impeachment  planted
upon  the  same.  In  the  Evening  we  put  our  selves
on  land  towards  the  harbour  mouth,  under  the  leading
of  Master  Carliell  our  Lieutenant  Generall,  who  after
hee  had  digested  us  to  march  forwarde  about  midnight,
as  easily  as  foote  might  fall,  expresly  commanded  us  to
keepe  close  by  the  sea-wash  of  the  shore  for  our  best
&  surest  way,  whereby  we  were  like  to  goe  through,
and  not  to  misse  any  more  of  the  way,  which  once  wee
had  lost  within  an  houre  after  our  first  beginning  to
march,  through  the  slender  knowledge  of  him  that
tooke  upon  him  to  be  our  guide,  whereby  the  night
spent  on,  which  otherwise  must  have  bene  done  by
resting.  But  as  we  came  within  some  two  miles  of  the
towne,  their  horsemen  which  were  some  hundred,  met
us,  and  taking  the  alarme,  retired  to  their  townward
againe  upon  the  first  volley  of  our  shot  that  was  given
them  : for the place where wee encountred being

116

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1586.

wooddy  and  bushy  even  to  the  water  side  was  unmeete
for  their  service.

At  this  instant  we  might  heare  some  pieces  of
Artillerie  discharged,  with  divers  small  shot  towards  the
harbour,  which  gave  us  to  understand,  according  to  the
order  set  downe  in  the  Evening  before  by  our  Generall,
that  the  Vice-admirall  accompanied  with  Captaine  Venner,
Captaine  White,  and  Captaine  Crosse,  with  other  sea
Captaines,  and  with  divers  Pinnesses  and  boates  should
give  some  attempt  unto  the  litle  Fort  standing  on  the
entrie  of  the  inner  Haven,  neere  adjoyning  to  the
towne,  though  to  small  purpose,  for  that  the  place
was  strong,  and  the  entry  very  narrow  was  chained
over :  so  as  there  could  be  nothing  gotten  by  the
attempt,  more  than  the  giving  of  them  an  alarme  on
that  other  side  of  the  Haven  being  a  mile  and  a  halfe
from  the  place  we  now  were  at.  In  which  attempt  the
Vice-admirall  had  the  rudder  of  his  skifFe  stroken
through  with  a  Saker  shot,  and  a  litle  or  no  harme
received  elsewhere.

The  troopes  being  now  in  their  march,  halfe  a  myle
behither  the  Towne  or  lesse,  the  ground  we  were  on
grewe  to  bee  streight,  and  not  above  fiftie  paces  over,
having  the  maine  Sea  on  the  one  side  of  it,  and  the
harbour-water  or  inner  sea  (as  you  may  tearme  it)  on
the  other  side,  which  in  the  plot  is  plainely  shewed.
This  streight  was  fortified  cleane  over  with  a  stone  wall
and  a  ditch  without  it :  the  sayd  wall  being  as  orderly
built  with  flanking  in  every  part,  as  can  be  set  downe.
There  was  onely  so  much  of  this  streight  unwalled,  as
might  serve  for  the  issuing  of  the  horsemen,  or  the
passing  of  caryage  in  time  of  neede  :  but  this  unwalled
part  was  not  without  a  very  good  Barricado  of  wine-  [ill,  542.]
buts  or  pipes,  filled  with  earth,  full  and  thicke  as  they
might  stand  on  ende  one  by  another,  some  part  of
them  standing  even  within  the  maine  sea.

This  place  of  strength  was  furnished  with  sixe  great
peeces, Demi-culverins, and Sakers, which shotte

117

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1586.

directly  in  front  upon  us  as  wee  approched.  Now
without  this  wall  upon  the  inner  side  of  the  streight,
they  had  brought  likewise  two  great  Galleis  with  their
prowes  to  the  shore,  having  planted  in  them  eleven
peeces  of  ordinance,  which  did  beate  all  crosse  the
streight,  and  flanked  our  comming  on.  In  these  two
Galleis  were  planted  three  or  foure  hundred  small
shot,  and  on  the  land  in  the  guard  onely  of  this  place,
three  hundred  shot  and  pikes.

They  in  this  their  full  readinesse  to  receive  us,  spared
not  their  shot  both  great  and  small.  But  our  Lieutenant
generall,  taking  the  advantage  of  the  darke  (the  day
light  as  yet  not  broken  out)  approched  by  the  lowest
ground,  according  to  the  expresse  direction  which  him-
selfe  had  formerly  given,  the  same  being  the  sea-wash
shore,  where  the  water  was  somewhat  fallen,  so  as  most
of  all  their  shot  was  in  vaine.  Our  Lieutenant  generall
commanded  our  shot  to  forbeare  shooting  untill  we
-'  were  come  to  the  wall  side,  and  so  with  pikes  roundly
together  we  approched  the  place,  where  we  soone
found  out  the  Barricades  of  pipes  or  buts,  to  be  the
meetest  place  for  our  assault,  which,  notwithstanding  it
was  well  furnished  with  pikes  and  shot,  was  without
staying  attempted  by  us  :  downe  went  the  buts  of  earth,
and  pell  mell  came  our  swordes  and  pikes  together,  after
our  shot  had  first  given  their  volley,  even  at  the  enemies
nose.  Our  pikes  were  somewhat  longer  then  theirs,
and  our  bodies  better  armed  ;  for  very  few  of  them
were  armed  :  with  which  advantage  our  swordes  and
pikes  grew  too  hard  for  them,  and  they  driven  to  give
place.  In  this  furious  entry,  the  Lieutenant  generall
slew  with  his  owne  hands  the  chiefe  Ensigne  bearer  of
the  Spaniards,  who  fought  very  manfully  to  his
lives  end.

We  followed  into  the  towne  with  them,  and  giving
them  no  leasure  to  breath,  we  wanne  the  Market-place,
albeit  they  made  head,  and  fought  a  while  before  we
got  it, and so  wee  being  once  seazed  and  assured of

118

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1586.

that, they  were content to suffer us to lodge  within

their  towne,  and  themselves  to  goe  to  their  wives,  whom

they  had  caryed  into  other  places  of  the  countrey  before

our  comming  thither.

At  every  streetes  end  they  had  raised  very  fine
Barricados  of  earth-workes,  with  trenches  without  them,
as  well  made  as  ever  we  saw  any  worke  done  :  at  the
entring  whereof  was  some  litle  resistance,  but  soone
overcome  it  was,  with  few  slaine  or  hurt.  They  had
joyned  with  them  many  Indians,  whom  they  had  placed
in  corners  of  advantage,  all  bowmen,  with  their  arrowes
most  villanously  empoysoned,  so  as  if  they  did  but
breake  the  skinne,  the  partie  so  touched  died  without
great  marvell  :  some  they  slew  of  our  people  with  their
arrowes  :  some  they  likewise  mischieved  to  death  with
certaine  pricks  of  small  sticks  sharply  pointed,  of  a
foote  and  a  halfe  long,  the  one  ende  put  into  the
ground,  the  other  empoysoned,  sticking  fast  up,  right
against  our  comming  in  the  way,  as  we  should  approch
from  our  landing  towardes  the  towne,  whereof  they  had
planted  a  wonderfuU  number  in  the  ordinarie  way  :  but
our  keeping  the  sea-wash  shore  missed  the  greatest  part
of  them  very  happily.

I overpasse many  particular  matters,  as the hurting
of Captaine Sampson at sword blowes in the first
entring,  unto  whom  was committed the  charge of  the
pikes  of  the  Vantguard by  his  lot  and turne  ; as  also
of  the  taking  of  Alonso  Bravo  the  chiefe  commander  of  ^lonso  Bravo
that place  by  Captaine Goring, after  the said captaine  ^"-^  S^'^^rnour
had  first  hurt  him  with  his  sword  :  unto  which  Captaine  ^^^^
was committed the charge of the shot of the sayd
Vantguard.

Captaine  Winter  was  likewise  by  his  turne  of  the
Vantguard  in  this  attempt,  where  also  the  Lieutenant
generall  marched  himselfe :  the  said  Captaine  Winter
through  a  great  desire  to  serve  by  land,  having  now
exchanged  his  charge  by  sea  with  Captaine  Cecil  for  his
band  of  footemen.

119

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

Captaine  Powel  the  Sergeant  maior  had  by  his  turne
the  charge  of  the  foure  companies  which  made  the
battaile.

Captaine  Morgan,  who  at  S.  Domingo  was  of  the
Vantguard,  had  now  by  turne  his  charge  upon  the
companies  of  the  Rereward.

Every  man  as  well  of  one  part  as  of  another,  came
so  willingly  on  to  the  service,  as  the  enemie  was  not
able  to  endure  the  furie  of  such  hot  assault.

We  stayed  here  sixe  weekes,  and  the  sicknesse  with
mortalitie  before  spoken  of  still  continued  among  us,
though  not  with  the  same  furie  as  at  the  first :  and  such
as  were  touched  with  the  sayde  sicknesse,  escaping
death,  very  few  or  almost  none  could  recover  their
strength  :  yea,  many  of  them  were  much  decayed  in
their  memorie,  insomuch  that  it  was  growen  an  ordinarie
judgement,  when  one  was  heard  to  speake  foolishly,  to
,,  say  he  had  bene  sicke  of  the  Calentura,  which  is  the
[III.  543.]  Spanish  name  of  their  burning  Ague  :  for  as  I  tolde
you  before,  it  is  a  very  burning  and  pestilent  ague.
The  originall  cause  thereof,  is  imputed  to  the  Evening
or  first  night  ayre,  which  they  tearme  La  serena,
wherein  they  say  and  hold  very  firme  opinion,  that
who  so  is  then  abroad  in  the  open  ayre,  shall  certainly  be
infected  to  the  death,  not  being  of  the  Indian  or  naturall
race  of  those  countrey  people :  by  holding  their  watch,
our  men  were  thus  subjected  to  the  infectious  ayre,  which
at  S.  lago  was  most  dangerous  and  deadly  of  all  other
places.

With  the  inconvenience  of  continual!  mortalitie,  we
were  forced  to  give  over  our  intended  enterprise  to  goe
with  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  so  overland  to  Panama,  where
we  should  have  strooken  the  stroke  for  the  treasure,  and
Full  recompence  of  our  tedious  travailes.  And  thus  at
Cartagena  wee  tooke  our  first  resolution  to  returne  home-
wardes :  the  forme  of  which  resolution  I  thought  good
here  to  put  downe  under  the  principal!  Captaines  hands,  as
followeth.

Sm FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1586.

A  resolution  cT  the  Land-captaines,  what  course  they
thinke  most  expedient  to  bee  taken.  Given  at
Cartagena  the  xxvij.  of  Februarie 1585.

Hereas  it  hath  pleased  the  Generall  to
demaund  the  opinions  of  his  Captaines
what  course  they  thinke  most  expedient
to  be  now  undertaken,  the  Land-
captaines  being  assembled  by  themselves
together,  and  having  advised  hereupon,
doe  in  three  points  deliver  the  same.

The  first,  touching  the  keeping  of  the  towne  against  the
force  of  the  enemie,  either  that  which  is  present,  or
that  which  may  come  out  of  Spaine,  is  answered
thus.

WE  holde  opinion,  that  with  this  troope  of  men
which  we  have  presently  with  us  in  land-service,
being  victualled  and  munitioned,  wee  may  well  keepe  the
Towne,  albeit  that  of  men  able  to  answere  present  service,
we  have  not  above  700.  The  residue  being  some  150.
men  by  reason  of  their  hurts  and  sicknesse  are  altogether
unable  to  stand  us  in  any  stead :  wherefore  hereupon  the
Sea-captaines  are  likewise  to  give  their  resolution,  how
they  will  undertake  the  safetie  and  service  of  the  Shippes
upon  the  arrivall  of  any  Spanish  Fleete.

The  second  poynt  we  make  to  be  this,  whether  it  bee
meete  to  goe  presently  homeward,  or  els  to  continue
further  tryall  of  our  fortune  in  undertaking  such  like
enterprises  as  we  have  done  already,  and  thereby  to
seeke  after  that  bountifull  masse  of  treasure  for
recompence  of  our  travailes,  which  was  generally
expected  at  our  comming  forth  of  England :  where-
in we  answere.

THat  it  is  well  knowen  how  both  we  and  the  souldiers
are  entred  into  this  action  as  voluntarie  men,  without  /
any  imprest  or  gage  from  her  Majestie  or  any  body  els :

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

and  forasmuch  as  we  have  hitherto  discharged  the  parts  of
honest  men,  so  that  now  by  the  great  blessing  and  favour
of  our  good  God  there  have  bin  taken  three  such  notable
townes,  wherein  by  the  estimation  of  all  men  would  have
bene  found  some  very  great  treasures,  knowing  that  S.
lago  was  the  chiefe  citie  of  all  the  Islands  and  traffiques
thereabouts,  S.  Domingo  the  chiefe  citie  of  Hispaniola,
and  the  head  government  not  only  of  that  Hand,  but  also
of  Cuba,  and  of  all  the  Hands  about  it,  as  also  of  such
inhabitations  of  the  firme  land,  as  were  next  unto  it,  &  a
place  that  is  both  magnificently  builded,  and  interteineth
great  trades  of  marchandise ;  and  now  lastly  the  citie  of
Cartagena,  which  cannot  be  denied  to  be  one  of  the  chiefe
places  of  most  especiall  importance  to  the  Spaniard  of  all
the  cities  which  be  on  this  side  of  the  West  India :  we
doe  therefore  consider,  that  since  all  these  cities,  with  their
goods  &  prisoners  taken  in  them,  and  the  ransoms  of
the  said  cities  being  all  put  together,  are  found  farre  short
to  satisfie  that  expectation  which  by  the  generality  of  the
enterprisers  was  first  conceived  :  And  being  further  advised
of  the  slendernesse  of  our  strength,  whereunto  we  be  now
reduced,  as  well  in  respect  of  the  small  number  of  able
bodies,  as  also  not  a  litle  in  regard  of  the  slacke  dis-
position of  the  greater  part  of  those  which  remaine,  very
many  of  the  better  mindes  and  men  being  either  con-
sumed by  death,  or  weakened  by  sicknes  and  hurts :  And
lastly,  since  that  as  yet  there  is  not  laid  downe  to  our
knowledge  any  such  enterprise  as  may  seeme  convenient
to  be  undertaken  with  such  few  as  we  are  presently  able
to  make,  and  withall  of  such  certaine  likelihoode,  as  with
Gods  good  successe  which  it  may  please  him  to  bestow
upon  us,  the  same  may  promise  to  yeeld  us  any  sufficient
contentment :  We  doe  therefore  conclude  hereupon,  that
^  it  is  better  to  hold  sure  as  we  may  the  honour  already
gotten,  and  with  the  same  to  returne  towards  our  gracious
[III.  544.]  Soveraigne  and  Countrey,  from  whence  if  it  shall  please
her  Majestie  to  set  us  foorth  againe  with  her  orderly
meanes  and  intertainment,  we  are  most  ready  and  willing

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1586.
to  goe  through  with  any  thing  that  the  uttermost  of  our
strength  and  indevour  shall  be  able  to  reach  unto ;  but
therewithal  wee  doe  advise  and  protest  that  it  is  farre  from
our  thoughts,  either  to  refuse,  or  so  much  as  to  seeme  to
be  wearie  of  any  thing,  which  for  the  present  shalbe
further  required  or  directed  to  be  done  by  us  from  our
Generall.

The  third  and  last  poynt  is  concerning  the  ransome  of
this  citie  of  Cartagena,  for  the  which,  before  it  was
touched  with  any  fire,  there  was  made  an  offer  of
some  xxvij.  or  xxviij.  thousand  pounds  sterling.

THus  much  we  utter  herein  as  our  opinions  agreeing  J
(so  it  be  done  in  good  sort)  to  accept  this  offer  afore-
sayde,  rather  then  to  breake  off  by  standing  still  upon  our
demaunds  of  one  hundred  thousand  poundes,  which
seemes  a  matter  impossible  to  bee  performed  for  the
present  by  them,  and  to  say  trueth,  wee  may  now  with
much  honour  and  reputation  better  be  satisfied  with  that
summe  offered  by  them  at  the  first  (if  they  will  now  bee
contented  to  give  it)  then  wee  might  at  that  time  with  a
great  deale  more,  inasmuch  as  we  have  taken  our  full
pleasure  both  in  the  uttermost  sacking  and  spoyling  of  all
their  householde  goods  and  marchandize,  as  also  in  that  we
have  consumed  and  ruined  a  great  part  of  their  Towne
with  fire.  And  thus  much  further  is  considered  herein
by  us,  that  as  there  bee  in  the  Voyage  a  great  many  poore
men,  who  have  willingly  adventured  their  lives  and
travailes,  and  divers  amongst  them  having  spent  their
apparell  and  such  other  little  provisions  as  their  small
meanes  might  have  given  them  leave  to  prepare,  which
being  done  upon  such  good  and  allowable  intention  as
this  action  hath  alwayes  caried  with  it,  meaning,  against
the  Spanyard  our  greatest  and  most  dangerous  enemie :
so  surely  wee  cannot  but  have  an  inward  regarde  so  farre
as  may  lye  in  us,  to  helpe  eyther  in  all  good  sort  towards
the  satisfaction  of  this  their  expectation,  and  by  procuring
them  some  little  benefite  to  incourage  them  and  to  nourish

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1586.

this  readie  and  willing  disposition  of  theirs  both  in  them
and  in  others  by  their  example  against  any  other  time  of
like  occasion.  But  because  it  may  bee  supposed  that
heerein  wee  forgette  not  the  private  benefite  of  our  selves,
and  are  thereby  the  rather  mooved  to  incline  our  selves  to
this  composition,  wee  doe  therefore  thinke  good  for  the
clearing  of  our  selves  of  all  such  suspition,  to  declare
heereby,  that  what  part  or  portion  soever  it  bee  of  this
ransome  or  composition  for  Cartagena,  which  should  come
unto  us,  wee  doe  freely  give  and  bestowe  the  same  wholy
upon  the  poore  men,  who  have  remayned  with  us  in  the
Voyage,  meaning  as  well  the  Sayler  as  the  Souldier,
wishing  with  all  our  hearts  it  were  such  or  so  much  as
might  seeme  a  sufficient  rewarde  for  their  painefull  in-
devour.  And  for  the  firme  confirmation  thereof,  we  have
thought  meete  to  subsigne  these  presents  with  our  owne
hands  in  the  place  and  time  aforesayd.

Captaine  Christopher  Carliell  Lieutenant  Generall.
Captaine  Goring.  Captaine  Sampson.

Captaine  Powell  &c.

But  while  wee  were  yet  there,  it  happened  one  day,
that  our  watch  called  the  Centinell,  upon  the  Church-
steeple,  had  discovered  in  the  Sea  a  couple  of  small  Barkes
or  Boates,  making  in  with  the  Harbour  of  Cartagena,
whereupon  Captaine  Moone  and  Captaine  Varney,  with
John  Grant  the  Master  of  the  Tyger,  and  some  other  Sea-
men, embarked  themselves  in  a  couple  of  small  Pinnesses,
to  take  them  before  they  should  come  nigh  the  shore,  at
the  mouth  of  the  Harbour,  lest  by  some  stragling  Span-
yardes  from  the  Lande,  they  might  bee  warned  by  signes
from  comming  in :  which  fell  out  accordingly,  notwith-
standing all  the  diligence  that  our  men  could  use :  for
the  Spanish  Boates,  upon  the  sight  of  our  Pinnesses  com-
ming towardes  them,  ranne  themselves  ashore,  and  so
their  men  presently  hidde  themselves  in  bushes  hard  by
the  Sea  side,  amongst  some  others  that  had  called  them
by  signes  thither. Our  men  presently  without  any  due

124

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1586.
regard  had  to  the  qualitie  of  the place,  and  seeing  no
man  of  the  Spanyards  to  shew  themselves,  aboorded  the
Spanish  Barkes  or  Boates,  and  so  standing  all  open  in
them, were suddenly shotte at by  a troope  of  Span-
yardes  out  of  the  bushes :  by  which  volley  of  shotte  there
were  slaine  Captaine  Varney,  which  dyed  presently,  and
Captaine  Moone,  who  dyed  some  fewe  dayes  after,  besides
some  foure  or  five  others  that  were  hurt : and  so  our
folkes  returned  without  their  purpose,  not  having  any
sufficient  number  of  souldiers  with  them  to  fight  on  shore.
For  those  men  they  caryed  were  all  Mariners  to  rowe,  few
of  them armed, because  they  made  account  with  their
ordinance  to  have  taken  the  Barkes  well  enough  at  sea,  [III.  545.]
which  they  might  full  easily  have  done,  without  any  losse ,
at  all,  if  they  had  come  in  time  to  the  harbour  mouth,  '"'
before the Spaniards boates had gotten so  neere the
shore.

During  our  abode  in  this  place,  as  also  at  S.  Domingo,
there  passed  divers  courtesies  betweene  us  and  the
Spaniards,  as  feasting,  and  using  them  with  all  kind-
nesse  and  favour:  so  as  amongst  others  there  came  to
see  the  Generall,  the  Governour  of  Cartagena,  with  the
Bishop  of  the  same,  and  divers  other  Gentlemen  of  the
better  sort.

This  towne  of  Cartagena  we  touched  in  the  out  parts,  i
&  consumed  much  with  fire,  as  we  had  done  S.  Domingo
upon  discontentments,  and  for  want  of  agreeing  with  us
ih  their  first  treaties  touching  their  ransome,  which  at  the
last  was  concluded  between  us,  should  be  100.  and  loooo.  -^
Ducats  for  that  which  was  yet  standing,  the  Ducat  valued
at  five  shillings  sixe  pence  sterling.

This  towne  though  not  halfe  so  bigge  as  S.  Domingo,
gives  as  you  see,  a  farre  greater  ransome,  being  in  very
deede  of  farre  more  importance,  by  reason  of  the  excel-
lencie  of  the  Harbour,  and  the  situation  thereof,  to  serve
the  trade  of  Nombre  de  Dios  and  other  places,  and  is
inhabited  with  farre  more  richer  Merchants.  The  other
is  chiefly  inhabited  with  Lawyers  and  brave  Gentlemen,

125

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

being  the  chiefe  or  highest  appeale  of  their  suites  in
law  of  all  the  Islands  about  it,  and  of  the  maine  land
coast  next  unto  it.  And  it  is  of  no  such  accompt  as
Cartagena,  for  these  and  some  other  like  reasons,  which  I
could  give  you,  over  long  to  be  now  written.

The  warning  which  this  towne  received  of  our  comming
towards  them  from  S.  Domingo,  by  the  space  of  twentie
dayes  before  our  arrivall  here,  was  cause  that  they
had  both  fortified  and  every  way  prepared  for  their
best  defence.  As  also  that  they  had  caried  and
conveyed  away  all  their  treasure  and  principall  sub-
stance.

The  ransome  of  an  hundred  &  ten  thousand  Ducats
thus  concluded  on,  as  is  aforesaid,  the  same  being  written,
and  expressing  for  nothing  more  then  the  towne  of
Cartagena,  upon  the  payment  of  the  sayd  ransome,  we
left  the  said  towne,  and  drewe  some  part  of  our  souldiers
into  the  Priorie  or  Abbey,  standing  a  quarter  of  an
English  mile  belowe  the  towne  upon  the  harbour  water-
side, the  same  being  walled  with  a  wall  of  stone,  which
we  told  the  Spaniards  was  yet  ours,  and  not  redeemed  by
their  composition  :  whereupon  they  finding  the  defect  of
their  contract,  were  contented  to  enter  into  another  ran-
some for  all  places,  but  specially  for  the  sayde  house,  as
also  the  Blockehouse  or  Castle,  which  is  upon  the  mouth
of  the  inner  harbour.  And  when  wee  asked  as  much  for
the  one  as  for  the  other,  they  yeelded  to  give  a  thousand
Crownes  for  the  Abbey,  leaving  us  to  take  our  pleasure
upon  the  Blockehouse,  which  they  sayd  they  were  not
able  to  ransome,  having  stretched  themselves  to  the
uttermost  of  their  powers  :  and  therefore  the  sayd  Blocke-
house was  by  us  undermined,  and  so  with  gunne  powder
blowen  up  in  pieces.

While  this  latter  contract  was  in  making,  our  whole
Fleete  of  ships  fell  downe  towards  the  harbour  mouth,
where  they  anchored  the  third  time,  and  imployed  their
men  in  fetching  of  fresh  water  aboord  the  ships  for  our
voyage  homewards,  which  water  was  had  in  a  great  well,

126

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1586.

that  is  in  the  Island  by  the  harbour  mouth :  which  Island  The  Island  of

is  a  very  pleasant place  as hath  bene seene,  having  in  C'^^^j.

it  many  sorts  of  goodly  and  very  pleasant  fruites,  as  the

Orenge  trees  and  others, being  set  orderly  in  walkes  of

great length  together. Insomuch as the whole Island

being  some  two  or  three  miles  about,  is  cast  into  grounds

of  gardening  and  orchards.  ,

After  sixe  weekes  abode  in  this  place,  we  put  to  sea  v
the  last  of  March,  where  after  two  or  three  dayes  a  great
ship  which  we  had  taken  at  S.  Domingo,  and  thereupon
was  called  The  new  yeeres  gift,  fell  into  a  great  leake,
being  laden  with  ordinance,  hides,  and  other  spoyles,
and  in  the  night  she  lost  the  company  of  our  Fleete ;
which  being  missed  the  next  morning  by  the  Generall,
hee  cast  about  with  the  whole  Fleete,  fearing  some  great
mischance  to  bee  happened  unto  her,  as  in  very  deede  it
so  fell  out :  for  her  leake  was  so  great,  that  her  men  were
all  tyred  with  pumping.  But  at  the  last  having  found
her  &  the  Bark  Talbot  in  her  company,  which  stayed  by
great  hap  with  her,  they  were  ready  to  take  their  men  out
of  her,  for  the  saving  of  them.  And  so  the  Generall
being  fully  advertised  of  their  great  extremitie,  made  saile
directly  backe  againe  to  Cartagena  with  the  whole  Fleete,
where  having  staied  eight  or  ten  dayes  more,  about  the
unlading  of  this  ship,  and  the  bestowing  thereof  and  her
men  into  other  Ships,  we  departed  once  againe  to  Sea,
directing  our  course  towards  the  Cape  S.  Antony,  being
the  Westermost  part  of  Cuba,  where  wee  arrived  the,/''
seven  and  twentieth  of  April.  But  because  fresh  water
could  not  presently  be  found,  we  weyed  anchor,  and
departed,  thinking  in  few  dayes  to  recover  the  Matan^as,
a  place  to  the  Eastward  of  Havana.

After  wee  had  sailed  some  fourteen  dayes,  wee  were
brought  to  Cape  S.  Anthony  againe,  through  lacke  of
favourable  wind :  but  then  our  scarcity  was  growen  such,
as  neede  made  us  looke  a  litle  better  for  water,  which  we
found  in  sufficient  quantitie,  being  indeede,  as  I  judge,
none  other then raine water  newly  fallen,  and  gathered  [III.  546.]

127

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

up  by  making  pits  in  a  plot  of  marrish  ground,  some
three  hundred  pases  from  the  sea  side.
A  most  com- \  Joe  wrong  if  I  should  forget  the  good  example  of  the

men  a  le Qenerall  at  this  place,  who  to  encourage  others,  and  to

example  of .  .  •  r  r 1  1  1 1 1  •  1

diligence  in  a  hasten  the  gettmg  or  rresh  water  aboord  the  ships,  tooke
Generall.  no  lesse  paine  himselfe  then  the  meanest;  as  also  at  S.
Domingo,  Cartagena,  and  all  other  places,  having  alwayes
so  vigilant  a  care  and  foresight  in  the  good  ordering  of
his  Fleete,  accompanying  them,  as  it  is  sayde,  with  such
wonderfuU  travel!  of  body,  as  doubtlesse  had  he  bene  the
meanest  person,  as  hee  was  the  chiefest,  he  had  yet
deserved  the  first  place  of  honour :  and  no  lesse  happy
doe  we  account  him,  for  being  associated  with  Master
Carliel  his  Lieutenant  generall,  by  whose  experience,
prudent  counsell,  and  gallant  performance  he  atchieved
so  many  and  happy  enterprises  of  the  warre,  by  whom
also  he  was  very  greatly  assisted,  in  setting  downe  the
needfull  orders,  lawes,  and  course  of  justice,  and  the  due
administration  of  the  same  upon  all  occasions.

After  three  dayes  spent  in  watering  our  Ships,  wee
departed  now  the  second  time  from  this  Cape  of  S.
Anthony  the  thirteenth  of  May,  and  proceeding  about
the  Cape  of  Florida,  wee  never  touched  any  where ;  but
coasting  alongst  Florida,  and  keeping  the  shore  still  in
sight,  the  28.  of  May  early  in  the  Morning  wee  descried
on  the  shore  a  place  built  like  a  Beacon,  which  was  in
deede  a  scaffold  upon  foure  long  mastes  raised  on  ende,
for  men  to  discover  to  the  seaward,  being  in  the  latitude
of  thirtie  degrees,  or  very  neere  thereunto.  Our  Pin-
nesses  manned,  and  comming  to  the  shore,  wee  marched
up  alongst  the  river  side,  to  see  what  place  the  enemie
held  there :  for  none  amongst  us  had  any  knowledge
thereof  at  all.

Here  the  Generall  tooke  occasion  to  march  with  the
companies  himselfe  in  person,  the  Lieutenant  generall
having  the  Vantguard ;  and  going  a  mile  up  or  somewhat
more  by  the  river  side,  we  might  discerne  on  the  other
side  of  the  river  over  against  us,  a  Fort  which  newly  had

128

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1586.
bene  built  by  the  Spaniards  :  and  some  mile  or  thereabout
above  the  Fort  was  a  little  Towne  or  Village  without
walles,  built  of  woodden  houses,  as  the  Plot  doeth
plainely  shew.  Wee  forthwith  prepared  to  have  ordi-
nance for  the  batterie ;  and  one  peece  was  a  litle  before
the  Evening  planted,  and  the  first  shot  being  made  by
the  Lieutenant  generall  himselfe  at  their  Ensigne,  strake
through  the  Ensigne,  as  wee  afterwards  understood  by  a
French  man,  which  came  unto  us  from  them.  One  shot
more  was  then  made,  which  strake  the  foote  of  the  Fort
wall,  which  was  all  massive  timber  of  great  trees  like
Mastes.  The  Lieutenant  generall  was  determined  to  passe
the  river  this  night  with  4.  companies,  and  there  to  lodge
himselfe  intrenched  as  neere  the  Fort,  as  that  he  might  play
with  his  muskets  and  smallest  shot  upon  any  that  should
appeare,  and  so  afterwards  to  bring  and  plant  the  batterie
with  him :  but  the  helpe  of  Mariners  for  that  sudden  to
make  trenches  could  not  be  had,  which  was  the  cause  that
this  determination  was  remitted  untill  the  next  night.

In  the  night  the  Lieutenant  generall  tooke  a  little
rowing  SkifFe,  and  halfe  a  dozen  well  armed,  as  Captaine
Morgan,  and  Captaine  Sampson,  with  some  others  besides
the  rowers,  &  went  to  view  what  guard  the  enemie  kept,
as  also  to  take  knowledge  of  the  ground.  And  albeit  he
went  as  covertly  as  might  be,  yet  the  enemie  taking  ye
Alarme,  grew  feareful  that  the  whole  force  was  approching
to  the  assault,  and  therefore  with  all  speede  abandoned
the  place  after  the  shooting  of  some  of  their  peeces.
They  thus  gone,  and  hee  being  returned  unto  us  againe,
but  nothing  knowing  of  their  flight  from  their  Fort,
forthwith  came  a  French  man  being  a  Phipher  (who  had  'Nicholas
bene  prisoner  with  them)  in  a  litle  boate,  playing  on  his  Borgotgnon.
Phiph  the  tune  of  the  Prince  of  Orenge  his  song ;  and
being  called  unto  by  the  guard,  he  tolde  them  before  he
put  foote  out  of  the  boate,  what  he  was  himselfe,  and  how
the  Spaniards  were  gone  from  the  Fort,  offering  either  to
remaine  in  hands  there,  or  els  to  returne  to  the  place  with  '
them  that  would  goe.

X  129  I

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

Upon  this  intelligence,  the  Generall,  the  Lieutenant
generall,  with  some  of  the  Captaines  in  one  Skiffe,  and
the  Vice-admirall  with  some  others  in  his  Skiffe,  and  two
or  three  Pinnesses  furnished  of  souldiers  with  them,  put
presently  over  towards  the  Fort,  giving  order  for  the
rest  of  the  Pinnesses  to  follow.  And  in  our  approch,
some  of  the  enemie  bolder  then  the  rest,  having  stayed
behinde  their  company,  shot  off  two  peeces  of  ordinance
at  us :  but  on  shore  wee  went,  and  entred  the  place
without  finding  any  man  there.

When  the  day  appeared,  we  found  it  built  all  of
timber,  the  walles  being  none  other  but  whole  Mastes
or  bodies  of  trees  set  up  right  and  close  together  in  maner
of  a  pale,  without  any  ditch  as  yet  made,  but  wholy
intended  with  some  more  time ;  for  they  had  not  as
yet  finished  al  their  worke,  having  begunne  the  same
some  three  or  foure  moneths  before :  so  as,  to  say  the
trueth,  they  had  no  reason  to  keepe  it,  being  subject
both  to  fire,  and  easie  assault.
[Ill,  547.]  The  platforme  whereon  the  ordinance  lay,  was  whole
bodies  of  long  pine  trees,  whereof  there  is  great  plentie,
layd  a  crosse  one  on  another,  and  some  litle  earth
amongst.  There  were  in  it  thirteene  or  fourteene  great
peeces  of  Brasse  ordinance,  and  a  chest  unbroken  up,
having  in  it  the  value  of  some  two  thousand  pounds
"sterling  by  estimation  of  the  kings  treasure,  to  pay  the
souldiers  of  that  place,  who  were  a  hundred  and  fiftie
men.

The  Fort  thus  wonne,  which  they  called  S.  Johns
Fort,  and  the  day  opened,  wee  assayed  to  goe  to  the
towne,  but  could  not  by  reason  of  some  rivers  and
broken  ground  which  was  betweene  the  two  places  :  and
therefore  being  enforced  to  imbarke  againe  into  our
Pinnesses,  wee  went  thither  upon  the  great  maine  river,
which  is  called  as  also  the  Towne,  by  the  name  of  S.
Augustin.

At  our  approching  to  land,  there  were  some  that
began  to  shew  themselves,  and  to  bestow  some  few  shot

130

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1586.
upon  us,  but  presently  withdrew  themselves.  And  in
their  running  thus  away,  the  Sergeant  Major  finding
one  of  their  horses  ready  sadled  and  brideled,  tooke  the
same  to  follow  the  chase ;  and  so  overgoing  all  his  com-
pany, was  (by  one  layd  behind  a  bush)  shotte  through
the  head :  and  falling  downe  therewith,  was  by  the  same
and  two  or  three  more,  stabbed  in  three  or  foure  places
of  his  body  with  swords  and  daggers,  before  any  could
come  neere  to  his  rescue.  His  death  was  much  lamented,
being  in  very  deede  an  honest  wise  Gentleman,  and  a
souldier  of  good  experience,  and  of  as  great  courage  as
any  man  might  be.

In  this  place  called  S.  Augustin,  we  understood  thq,
king  did  keepe,  as  is  before  said,  one  hundred  and  fiftie
souldiers,  and  at  another  place  some  dozen  leagues
beyond  to  the  Northwards,  called  S.  Helena,  he  did  there
likewise  keepe  an  hundred  and  fiftie  more,  serving  there
for  no  other  purpose,  then  to  keepe  all  other  nations  from
inhabiting  any  part  of  all  that  coast;  the  governement
whereof  was  committed  to  one  Pedro  Melendez  Mar-
quesse,  nephew  to  that  Melendez  the  Admiral,  who  had
overthrowen  Master  John  Hawkins  in  the  bay  of  Mexico
some  seventeen  or  eighteene  yeeres  agoe.  This  Gover-
nour  had  charge  of  both  places,  but  was  at  this  time  in
this  place,  and  one  of  the  first  that  left  the  same.

Heere  it  was  resolved  in  full  assembly  of  Captaines,  to
undertake  the  enterprise  of  S.  Helena,  and  from  thence
to  seeke  out  the  inhabitation  of  our  English  countrey-
men  in  Virginia,  distant  from  thence  some  sixe  degrees
Northward.

When  wee  came  thwart  of  S.  Helena,  the  sholds  S^®^^  Heknat
appearing  dangerous,  and  we  having  no  Pilot  to  under-
take the  entrie,  it  was  thought  meetest  to  goe  hence
alongst.  For  the  Admirall  had  bene  the  same  night  in
foure  fadome  and  a  halfe,  three  leagues  from  the  shore :
and  yet  wee  understood  by  the  helpe  of  a  knowen  Pilot,
there  may  and  doe  goe  in  Ships  of  greater  burthen  and
draught  then  any  we  had  in  our  Fleete.

131

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

We  passed  thus  alongst  the  coast  hard  aboord  the
shore,  which  is  shallow  for  a  league  or  two  from  the
shore,  and  the  same  is  lowe  and  broken  land  for  the
most  part.

The  ninth  of  June  upon  sight  of  one  speciall  great  fire
(which  are  very  ordinarie  all  alongst  this  coast,  even  from
the  Cape  of  Florida  hither)  the  Generall  sent  his  Skiffe  to
the  shore,  where  they  found  some  of  our  English
countreymen  (that  had  bene  sent  thither  the  yeere  before
by  Sir  Walter  Ralegh)  and  brought  them  aboord :  by
whose  direction  wee  proceeded  along  to  the  place  which
they  make  their  Port.  But  some  of  our  ships  being  of
great  draught  unable  to  enter,  anchored  without  the
harbour  in  a  wilde  roade  at  sea,  about  two  miles  from
shore.

From  whence  the  General  wrote  letters  to  master  Ralfe
Lane,  being  governour  of  those  English  in  Virginia,  and
then  at  his  Fort  about  sixe  leagues  from  the  Rode  in  an
Roanoac.  Island  which  they  call  Roanoac,  wherein  especially  he
shewed  how  ready  he  was  to  supply  his  necessities  and
wants,  which  he  understood  of,  by  those  he  had  first
talked  withall.

The  morrow  after,  Master  Lane  himselfe  and  some  of
his  company  comming  unto  him,  with  the  consent  of  his
captaines  he  gave  them  the  choice  of  two  oflFers,  that  is  to
^'  say  :  Either  he  would  leave  a  ship,  a  pinnesse,  and  certaine
boates  with  sufficient  Masters  and  Mariners,  together
furnished  with  a  moneths  victuall,  to  stay  and  make
farther  discovery  of  the  countrey  and  coastes,  and  so
much  victuall  likewise  as  might  be  sufficient  for  the
bringing  of  them  all  (being  an  hundred  and  three  persons)
into  England,  if  they  thought  good  after  such  time,  with
any  other  thing  they  would  desire,  and  that  he  might
be  able  to  spare.

Or  els  if  they  thought  they  had  made  sufficient  dis-
coverie  already,  and  did  desire  to  returne  into  England,  he
would  give  them  passage.  But  they,  as  it  seemed,  being
desirous  to  stay,  accepted  very  thankefully  and  with  great

132

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1586.

gladnesse,  that  which  was offred  first. Whereupon  the

ship  being  appointed  and  received  into  charge  by  some  of

their  owne  company  sent  into  her  by  Master  Lane,  before

they  had  received  from  the  rest  of  the  Fleete  the  provision

appoynted them,  there  arose  a  great  storme  (which  they

sayd  was  extraordinary  and  very  strange)  that  lasted  three

dayes  together,  and  put  all  our  Fleete  in  great  danger,  to

bee  driven  from  their  anchoring  upon  the  coast. For  we

brake  many  Cables,  and  lost  many  Anchors :  and  some  of

our  Fleete  which  had  lost  all  (of  which  number  was  the  [III.  548.]

ship  appointed  for  Master  Lane  and  his  company)  was

driven to put  to sea  in  great  danger,  in  avoyding the

coast,  and  could  never  see  us  againe  untill  we  mette  in

England. Many  also  of  our  small  Pinnesses  and  boates

were  lost  in  this  storme.

Notwithstanding  after  all  this,  the  Generall  offred  them
(with  consent  of  his  Captaines)  an  other  ship  with  some
provision,  although  not  such  a  one  for  their  turnes,  as
might  have  bene  spared  them  before,  this  being  unable  to
be  brought  into  their  Harbour.  Or  els  if  they  would,  to
give  them  passage  into  England,  although  he  knew  we
should  performe  it  with  greater  difficultie  then  he  might
have  done  before.

But  Master  Lane  with  those  of  the  chiefest  of  his  com-
pany which  hee  had  then  with  him,  considering  what
should  be  best  for  them  to  doe,  made  request  unto  the
General  under  their  hands,  that  they  might  have  passage
for  England :  the  which  being  graunted,  and  the  rest  sent  '^
for  out  of  the  countrey  and  shipped,  we  departed  from
that  coast  the 18.  of  June.

And  so,  God  bee  thanked,  both  they  and  wee  in  good
safetie  arrived  at  Portesmouth  the  28.  of  July  1586.  to  v
the  great  glory  of  God,  and  to  no  small  honour  to  our
Prince,  our  Countrey,  and  our  selves.

The totall value of  that  which was gotten in this
voyage is esteemed at three score thousand pounds,'
whereof  the  companies  which  have  travelled  in  the  voyage
were  to  have  twentie  thousand  pounds,  the  adventurers

^11

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

the  other  fortie.  Of  which  twentie  thousand  pounds  (as
I  can  judge)  will  redound  some  sixe  pounds  to  the
single  share.

We  lost  some  seven  hundred  and  fiftie  men in  the

voyage : above  three  parts  of  them  onely  by  sicknesse.

The  men  of  name  that  dyed  and  were  slaine  in  this

voyage,  which  I  can  presently  call  to  remembrance,  are

these.

Captaine  Powel. ) i  Captaine  Bigges.
Captaine  Varney. f J  Captaine  Cecill.
Captaine  Moone. t j  Captaine  Hannam.
Captaine  Fortescue.  ) (  Captaine  Greenefield.
Thomas  Tucker  a  Lieutenant.
Alexander  Starkey  a  Lieutenant.
Master  Escot  a  Lieutenant.
Master  Waterhouse  a  Lieutenant.
Master  George  Candish.
Master  Nicholas  Winter.
Master  Alexander  Carliell.
Master  Robert  Alexander.
Master  Scroope.
Master  James  Dier.
Master  Peter  Duke.
With  some  other,  whom  for  haste  I  cannot  suddenly
thinke  on.

The  ordinance  gotten  of  all  sorts  Brasse  and  Iron,  were
about  two  hundred  and  forty  peeces,  whereof  the  two
hundred  and  some  more  v/ere  brasse,  and  were  thus
found  and  gotten.

At  S.  lago  some  two  or  three  and  fiftie  peeces.
In S. Domingo  about  fourescore, whereof  was  very
much great  ordinance, as whole Cannon, Demi-canon,
Culverins,  and  such  like.

In  Cartagena  some  sixtie  and  three  peeces,  and  good
store  likewise  of  the  greater  sort.

In  the  Fort  of  S.  Augustin  were  foureteene  peeces.
The  rest  was  Iron  ordinance,  of  which  the  most  part
was  gotten  at  S.  Domingo,  the  rest  at  Cartagena.

134

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS

A.D.
1587.

A  relation  of  the  ports,  harbors,  forts  and  cities
in  the  west  Indies  which  have  bene  sur-
veied,  edified,  finished,  made  and  mended,
with  those  which  have  bene  builded,  in  a
certaine  survey  by  the  king  of  Spaine  his
direction  and  commandement :  Written  by
Baptista  Antonio,  surveyour  in  those  parts
for  the  said  King. Anno 1587.

Santa  Marta.

Irst Santa Marta the principall Citie of  Santa  Mam
the  Bishopricke  or  Dioces  of  the  coast  ^''f'Jl^l^^
of  Tierra  firma,  or  the  firme  land,  lieth  ^^^^
in 10. degrees and |-, the city being
situated upon a sandy bay adjoyning
unto  the  sea  side,  conteineth  in  it  about
30. housholds ; all the houses being
made  of  canes,  and  covered  over  with  Palmito  trees,  and
some  of  them  be  covered  with  tyle.

They  have  traffike  with  none,  but  with  the  Indians  of
the  said  country,  which  doe  bring  unto  the  Citie  for  to  [III.  549,]
sell  earthen  Pots  and  Pipkins,  and  Coverlits  of  Cotton
wooll,  and  great  earthen  Jarres.  Also  they  doe  traffique
to  Cartagena.  It  is  a  countrey  which  hath  but  small
store  of  cartel,  because  it  is  all  mountainous,  and
hath  small  store  of  people.  There  is  a  very  good  har-
bour before  the  said  towne,  invironed  with  mighty  hils
&  great  rocks,  which  reach  even  unto  the  sea  side,  the
which  hie  land  doth  greatly  succour  the  harbour,  as  also
two  Hands  which  lie  about  |;  of  a  league  on  the  North
side :  so  that  although  they  be  subject  to  Easterly  winds,
and  that  with  great  stormes,  yet  they  doe  no  great  harme
to  goe  on  land.  Within  this  Harbour  there  is  a  place
which  is  called  La  Caldera,  where  in  times  past  they  were
woont  to  trimme  and  carene  their  Shippes.  As  touching
the  Harbour,  there  is  no  cause  to  fortifie  it,  nor  to  make

135

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

any  account  of  it,  by  reason  there  is  no  trade  nor  traffique
to  this  place  from  any  other  places,  according  as  I  have
certified  your  Majestie  thereof. And  also  because  here  are
but  few  dwellers  or  inhabitants,  and  loosing  every  day  so
many  as  it  doeth,  by  reason  that  it  is  every  day  robbed
A  new  course and  spoyled  by  the  enemie. But  if  your  Majestie  would
to  Nofa  His- command  that  the  fleete  of  Nova  Hispania  might  direct
way  of  Santa ^^eir  course  to  this  Harbour  being  in  their  way,  and  here
Marta  /esse to  water  and  refresh  themselves, all  the  Pilots doe  say
suljeci  to that  the  Fleete  may  proceede  on  their  Voyage  from  this
danger  then pj^ce. Still going  before the  winde,  and so goe to  the
course  Cape  of  Saint  Anthony  which  lieth  on  the  Hand  of  Cuba,

and  from  thence  goe  their  direct  course  to  Nova  His-
pania; and  by  this  meanes  the  Fleete  should  have  no
occasion  to  passe  so  many  dangers  as  they  doe,  by  reason
of  the  Huricanos  or  stormy  windes  which  many  times
do  come  upon  them,  when  they  are  upon  the  coast  of
Hispaniola :  and  this  is  the  cause  that  there  are  so
many  ships  cast  away,  as  your  Majestie  doeth  well
know.

And  as  concerning  this  course  according  as  I  have
certified  your  Majestie,  they  shall  come  into  no  danger  at
all,  nor  shall  make  any  further  way  about ;  so  by  this
meanes  both  the  Fleetes  may  come  from  Spaine  in  com-
pany, and  then  come  to  S.  Marta,  and  the  Fleete  of  Nova
Hispania  may  come  into  this  Harbour,  and  the  Fleete
which  doeth  goe  unto  the  firme  land,  may  goe  directly  to
Cartagena  as  they  doe.  Then  your  Majestie  may  send  to
fortifie  the  said  Harbour,  and  the  fortification  must  be
thus :  That  on  the  morro  or  mount  which  is  in  the
entring  in  of  the  said  harbour,  there  be  built  a  litle  Fort,
and  so  to  plant  some  small  quantitie  of  ordinance.  And
hard  by  on  the  South  side,  there  to  build  a  litle  Towre,
and  another  Sconce,  where  wee  may  plant  some  more
ordinance.  So  by  this  meanes  not  onely  the  Shippes
may  ride  heere  in  securitie,  but  also  it  will  bee  a  defence
for  those  which  dwell  heere  in  the  Towne :  and  the  better
to  effect  this  purpose,  there  is  hard  by  the  Towne  great

136

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS

store  of  Lyme,  Stone,  Sande,  and  Tymber,  if  occasion
should  serve.

Cartagena.

CArtagena  is  a  Citie,  and  the  principall  place  of  the'
Bishopricke ;  it  lyeth  fourtie  leagues  from  Santa
Marta  :  it  standeth  in  scant  1 1 .  degrees.  The  sayd  Citie
is  situated  upon  a  sandy  banke  or  bay  like  unto  an  Hand :
it  hath  about  450.  dwellers  therein.  There  are  very  faire
buildings  therein :  as  concerning  their  houses,  they  are
made  of  stone,  and  there  are  three  Monasteries,  of  which
two  of  them  are  of  Friers  which  are  within  the  city,  the
one  called  Santo  Domingo,  and  the  other  called  Santo
Augustin,  and  the  other  which  is  called  Saint  Francis,
which  standeth  without  the  citie  about  30.  paces  off.
And  for  to  goe  unto  the  said  Frierie,  you  must  goe  upon
a  Causey  made  of  stone,  and  water  on  both  sides.  This
citie  hath  great  trade  out  of  Spaine,  and  out  of  The  new
kingdome  of  Granada,  and  out  of  the  Hands  there  adjoyn-
ing,  from  Peru,  and  from  all  the  coast  of  this  firme  land,
and  of  the  fishing  of  the  pearles  of  Rio  de  la  Hacha,  and
of  Margarita :  it  is  a  very  sound  countrey.

This  Citie  hath  a  very  good  Harbour,  and  sufficient  to
receive  great  store  of  Ships :  this  said  Harbour  hath  two
entrances  in,  the  one  of  them  lyeth  halfe  a  league  from
the  Citie,  where  all  the  Ships  doe  enter  into  the  sayd
Harbour :  the  mouth  or  entring  in  of  the  sayde  Harbour
is  1400.  yardes  or  paces  in  bredth,  and  very  deepe  water.
The  other  entring  in  which  is  called  La  boca  chica,  or  litle
mouth,  lieth  a  league  beyond  this  place  to  the  westwards.
It  is  900.  yards  in  bredth,  and  in  the  entring  in  thereof
there  lieth  a  channel  in  the  midst  of  it,  which  is  200.
yards  broad,  and  20.  or  15.  fadome  water,  some  places
more,  some  lesse.  And  to  enter  into  the  Harbour  you
must  go  through  this  channel,  and  the  land  doth  double
in  and  out.  And  at  the  entring  in  of  the  sayde  Harbour,
after  you  have  past  this  Channell,  you  must  beare  up  to
the  shoareward  neere  unto  the  Hand  of  Cares,  and  looke

^37

A.D.

1587.

Cartagena
situate  in  1 1
degrees  scant.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587-

how  much  is  overplus  more  than  the  two  hundred  yardes
of  the  Channell,  all  the  rest  are  certaine  ledges  of  Rockes,
covered  with  two  or  three  foote  water  upon  the  toppe  of
them,  some  places  more,  and  some  lesse.  So  the  ships
[III.  550.]  which  must  enter  in  at  the  mouth,  must  bring  very  good
Pilots  with  them,  which  must  be  very  skilful! :  yet  all
this  will  not  serve,  but  they  must  carry  their  Boate  before,
and  sound  with  their  Lead  to  know  where  the  best  place
of  the  Channell  lyeth  for  them  to  goe  in,  so  it  will  be
small  hinderance  to  any  shippe  that  shall  enter,  neither
yet  danger  at  all  of  sinking.

There  are  three  places  about  the  sayde  Citie,  where  the
Francis  Enemie  may  give  an  attempt  by  Land.  The  one  of  them
Drake,  -g  ^j^^j-g  ^-^g  enemie  did  enter  in  and  landed,  which  is  a
sandy  Bay,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  Bay  is  the  Sea,
and  on  the  other  side  a  great  Lake  which  goeth  towards
the  Harbour.  The  sandy  bay  or  banke,  on  the  one  side
is  500.  yardes  broad,  all  sandy  ground  without  any  trees.
So  that  the  enemie  which  giveth  the  assault  in  this  place
must  bee  constrayned  to  march  all  alongst  this  sandie
Bay,  the  enemie  lying  open  these  500.  yardes,  which
reach  untill  you  doe  come  to  the  trench :  And  on  the
backside  other  500.  yardes,  till  you  doe  come  unto  the
Citie.

The  sayde  sandie  bay  or  banke  is  130.  yardes  broad,
where  the  trench  is  builded.  And  in  this  place  this  Citie
hath  bene  taken  by  the  enemie  twise.  Wherefore  heere
wee  have  driven  in  a  great  many  of  woodden  stakes,
which  goe  downe  into  the  sea  50.  yardes  deepe :  and  this
wee  have  done,  because  this  is  a  very  dangerous  and
filthy  coast.  And  below  in  the  bottome  of  the  Valley
there  we  have  builded  a  little  Sconce,  where  we  may  plant
3.  or  4.  peaces  of  ordinance.  And  likewise  wee  have
made  a  deepe  ditch,  which  doeth  answere  to  both  parts  of
the  sea;  so  on  this  side  the  Citie  is  very  strong  and
sufficient.  For  this  was  the  place  whereof  the  Citizens
were  most  afrayde.

The  other  entring  is  lower  downe  by  the  sayde  sandy

138

THE WEST INDIAN  PORTS  ad.

1587.
Bay,  which  is  called  Cienaga,  or  The  fenne  del  Roreado.
This  is  another  place  which  is  on  the  sayd  sandy  bay,
which  is  300.  yardes  broad  from  the  one  place  downe  to
the  sea.  And  on  the  other  side  there  lyeth  the  Cienaga,
which  is  a  certaine  plat  of  ground  that  is  overflowen  with
water  all  the  yeere  long.  So  that  the  enemie  which  shall
come  this  way  to  winne  the  Citie,  must  come  marching
over  land  a  good  way  upon  a  sandie  banke  or  Bay,  where
the  Sea  lyeth  on  the  one  side,  and  a  grove  or  boske  of
wood  on  the  other  side,  and  through  a  plat  of  ground
which  is  overflowen  with  water,  but  not  all  covered.  So
in  this  place  wee  have  made  a  Fort  or  Sconce  with  certaine
Flanckers  belonging  therunto.  And  I  have  caused  a
deepe  ditch  to  be  digged  of  60.  foote  in  bredth,  so  that
the  Sea  doeth  come  to  that  plat  or  place  which  is  over-
flowen. And  in  this  order  we  have  stopt  this  passage,  so
that  the  Citie  standeth  in  maner  like  unto  an  Hand.
There  is  2600.  yardes  distance  from  this  place  to  the
other  trench  where  the  enemie  Francis  Drake  did  land
last.

The  entring  in  of  this  Harbour  is  by  the  bridge  and
Causey  which  doeth  goe  from  the  Citie  to  S.  Francis ;
the  sayd  Causey  is  300.  yardes  in  length,  and  12.  yardes
in  bredth :  and  the  water  is  on  both  the  sides  of  the  saide
Causey :  so  this  is  the  strongest  place  of  all  the  rest  of
the  three  places.  Also  in  this  place  there  is  order  taken
to  make  a  draw  bridge,  and  upon  the  top  of  the  said
bridge  to  build  a  platforme,  and  plant  ordinance  upon  it :
and  on  both  sides  of  the  bridge  there  are  certaine  trenches
made,  where  our  men  may  be  close  kept.

At  the  point  of  this  land  called  ycacos,  which  is  in  the
entring  in  of  the  harbour  towards  S.  Anna,  we  have  made
a  Fort  of  timber  fouresquare  of  300.  foote  every  way,  and
trencht,  where  wee  may  plant  15.  or  16.  peeces  of  ordin-
ance, and  keepe  50.  men  in  garison,  and  behinde  the
bourdes  on  the  backside  of  the  timbers,  a  Barricado  of
earth  or  mudde  wall  being  foure  foote  in  thicknesse,  and
behinde  the  mud-wall,  sand : so  this  Fort  will  bee  of

139

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

great  importance  for  safegard  of  this  Harbour,  because
all  the  Shippes  which  doe  enter  into  this  Harbour  doe
come  close  to  this  place  where  it  is  strongest,  so  that
sometimes  one  may  cast  a  stone  into  the  ships  when  they
are  comming  in :  and  when  any  ship  of  warre  or  Pirate
will  give  any  attempt  to  enter  into  this  Harbour,  there  is
The  gallies  of  order  given  that  the  two  galleys  shall  go  forth,  and  put
Lattagena.  themselves  behinde  the  Fort  with  their  prows  to  the  sea,
and  so  shooting  at  their  enemies  in  the  forepart  of  the
ship,  and  then  the  Fort  answering  likewise  with  their
ordinance  at  the  side  of  the  shippe,  and  at  their  tackling,
so  the  enemie  being  in  the  Harbour  all  unrigged,  they
must  of  necessitie  be  constrained  to  lye  hovering  within
the  Harbour,  or  els  they  must  drive  upon  the  rockes
called  the  Ismo,  or  els  upon  those  rocks  which  are  covered
with  the  sea  at  the  Hand  of  Cares.

And  put  case  that  in  this  place  we  can  doe  no  good  by
this  meanes,  and  that  the  enemie  will  venture  to  come
in  with  their  long  boates  &  Pinnesses  through  this  narrow
mouth ;  then  we  are  to  have  in  a  readinesse  4.  Frigats
to  ayde  and  helpe  the  gallies,  &  to  row  with  oares,  and
so  to  go  to  the  narrow  mouth,  and  there  to  stay  in  the
channell.  And  forasmuch  as  the  entring  in  is  so  danger-
ous, according  as  I  have  certified  your  Majestie,  there
can  no  ship  come  into  this  harbour,  but  we  must  needes
sinke  them ;  so  that  these  defences  shall  not  onely  bee
[III.  551.]  annoyance  to  the  enemie,  but  also  animate  and  encourage
the  inhabitants  of  this  citie :  for  they  have  beene  and  are
in  such  feare  of  the  enemie,  and  pirates,  that  if  wee  had
not  made  these  fortifications,  strengthened  the  citie  in
this  order,  and  put  some  souldiers  in  garison,  the
citizens  would  have  fledde,  and  forsaken  this  citie :  for
all  the  perswasions  made  to  them  by  the  governour
coulde  not  perswade  them  to  the  contrary,  but  they
would  bee  gone,  if  it  had  not  beene  for  this  fortification,
and  yet  for  all  this  wee  have  much  to  doe  to  make  them
to  stay  here :  so  nowe  by  reason  of  these  souldiers  which
shall come hither, the people of  the citie have taken

140

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS  ad.

1587.
heart  of  grasse :  so  I  have  tolde  them  that  your  majestie
will  command  that  this  citie  and  the  harbour  shall  be
better  fortified  and  made  stronger,  and  all  this  which  I
have  caused  to  be  builded,  is  with  that  money  which  I
have  borowed  of  the  citizens.

As  touching  the  safegard  and  defence  of  this  harbour,  The  poynt  of
if  your  majestie  so  please,  here  may  we  builde  a  very  ^'^^'^°^-
faire  and  strong  castle  with  foure  bulwarks,  on  the  poynt
of  the  Ycacos  which  doth  lie  on  the  side  where  the  citie
is  builded,  because  all  the  shippes  which  doe  come  to  this
harbour,  must  come  close  abord  this  shore,  so  neere,  that
wee  may  cast  a  stone  into  them,  and  so  overtake  any
ship.  So  likewise  if  the  shippes  will  goe  on  the  other
shore,  then  they  doe  goe  in  greater  danger,  because  of
those  shoalds  and  ledges  of  rockes,  and  so  are  often  cast
away.  And  forasmuch  as  those  ships  which  here  doe
arrive  are  brought  hither  by  Easterly  winds,  and  some-
times with  those  winds  which  come  out  from  the  sea,
and  therefore  perforce  must  give  a  good  birth  off,  other-
wise they  cannot  enter  into  this  harbour,  therefore  of
necessity  they  must  come  so  close  to  the  shore :  And  on
the  other  side  where  the  Island  of  Cares  standeth,  there
may  wee  builde  another  tower  foure-square,  and  plant
some  foure  or  five  pieces  of  ordinance,  and  this  will  serve
for  the  night,  if  occasion  be  offered  that  any  small  shippe
or  barke  should  come  in  here,  or  any  pinnesse  in  the
night,  to  doe  any  harme,  or  to  attempt  to  burne  any
Fleete  which  shoulde  ride  here  at  an  anker  within  this
harbour :  so  the  fort  beeing  on  the  one  side,  and  the
tower  on  the  other  side,  keeping  good  watch,  there  can
no  shippe  nor  barke  come  into  this  harbour,  but  they
will  bee  espied.

In  the  narrow  mouth  at  the  entring  in  the  other  way
towardes  the  Island  of  Cares,  where  the  channell  doth
runne  neere  the  shore,  as  I  have  already  certified  your
majestie,  there  may  another  castle  be  made,  and  there
foure  or  five  pieces  of  ordinance  planted,  and  some  sixe
or  eight  men  to  keepe  watch  and  ward :  this  being  done,

141

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

your  majestic  shall  have  this  citie  very  well  fortified,  by
reason  it  is  of  such  importance  for  the  service  of  your
majestie,  and  the  trade  of  all  Spaine  and  Peru,  and  all
the  Indies :  for  this  is  the  principall  fort  of  all  this
countrey.

Over  against  this  point  of  the  Ycacos,  in  the  Isle  of
Cares,  hard  by  the  water  side,  there  are  great  store  of
stones,  free  stones,  and  other  stones  to  make  lyme,  and
wood  to  burne  the  stones  withall  for  the  lyme,  and  great
part  of  the  stones  doe  lie  about  the  water :  so  the  wood
will  cost  but  the  cutting  of  it  downe,  and  the  working
of  it,  and  with  little  paines  taking  it  will  bee  brought  to
good  perfection,  for  wee  have  already  made  triall  thereof,
for  there  was  never  building  that  went  to  decay  after  it
hath  bene  made,  nor  perished  by  the  sea :  so  the  charge
hereof  will  be  but  litle  or  nothing.

And  for  to  put  this  in  practise  to  build  a  fort,  it  is
needefull  that  your  majestie  should  send  hither  and  to
many  other  places,  where  any  fort  shall  bee  made,  some
store  of  Negros,  and  to  this  place  would  be  sent  150
Negros  brought  from  Guyney :  and  if  the  Negros  of
Havana  are  not  to  bee  imployed  there,  nor  those  which
are  in  Sant  Juan  de  UUua,  it  may  please  your  majestie
to  cause  them  to  bee  sent  for  to  this  place,  for  most  of
them  be  artificers,  some  masons,  bricklayers,  smithes  and
sawyers,  and  to  send  some  masons  from  Spaine  to  teach
our  men  these  occupations.  And  after  these  fortifications
are  ended  and  all  furnished,  then  the  Negros  may  be
solde  to  great  profit,  for  a  Negro  that  is  of  any  occupation
is  sold  here  for  600.  and  700.  pezos.

Nombre  de  Dios.

N Ombre  de  Dios  is  builded  upon  a  sandy  Bay  hard
by  the  sea  side,  it  is  a  citie  of  some  thirtie  hous-
holdes  or  inhabitants  :  their  houses  are  builded  of  timber,
and  most  of  the  people  which  are  there  be  forreiners,
they  are  there  to  day  and  gone  to  morrow :  it  is  full
of  woods  and some  places  of  the  land  are  overflowen

142

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS  a.d.

1587.
with  water  continually  by  reason  of  much  raine  which
doth  fall  upon  the  hils.  It  is  a  very  bad  harbour,
neither  is  there  any  good  water :  and  it  is  subject  to
Northerly  winds  and  Easterly  windes,  which  continually
doe  blow  upon  this  coast :  many  of  the  great  ships  which
doe  come  to  this  place  doe  unlade  halfe  their  commodities
betweene  the  two  ledges  of  rockes,  for  that  there  is  but
little  water  in  the  harbour:  and  after  that  a  ship  hath  [III.  552.]
unladen  halfe  of  her  goods,  then  shee  goeth  to  the  second
rocke,  as  it  doth  appeare  by  the  platforme,  but  the  small
ships  come  neere  unto  another  rocke  on  the  West  side.
If  the  winde  chance  to  come  to  the  North  and  Northwest,
and  that  it  overblowe,  then  such  great  ships  as  then  be
in  the  roade  must  of  force  more  themselves  with  sixe
cables  a  head,  especially  in  a  storme,  and  yet  nevertheless
sometimes  they  are  driven  ashore  and  so  cast  away,  and
all  because  they  dare  not  vier  cable  ynough,  because  of
so  many  shelves  and  rockes  which  are  in  both  those
places :  also  the  shippes  doe  roule  very  much  in  the
harbour,  by  reason  in  foule  weather  the  Sea  will  bee
mightily  growen,  which  is  the  cause  that  their  cables  do
oftentimes  breake,  and  their  ruthers  are  unhanged,  the
cause  thereof  is  by  reason  the  shippes  doe  ride  but  in
little  water,  yet  goeth  there  a  great  sea.

The  citie  is  builded  and  situated  very  well  if  it  were  a
good  harbour,  it  standeth  upon  the  Eastside  upon  a  rocke
where  they  may  builde  a  very  good  fort,  according  to  the
platforme  for  the  safegard  of  this  harbour :  but  seeing
it  is  but  a  bad  haven  and  shallow  water,  therefore  I
doe  thinke  that  it  is  not  needefuU  for  your  majestie
to  be  at  any  charges  in  fortifying  that  place,  but  onely
a  trench  to  be  made  of  earth  or  clay,  so  that  these
townesmen  may  defend  themselves  from  danger  of  3.
or  4.  ships.

The  citie  of  Panama  is  eighteene  leagues  from  Nombre
de  Dios,  the  wayes  are  exceeding  bad  thitherwards;
yet  notwithstanding  all  the  silver  is  brought  this  way
to Nombre de Dios,  as well your majesties treasure

143

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

as  other  marchandize ;  so  likewise  the  most  part  of
those  commodities  which  are  caried  to  Peru,  and  the
rest  of  the  marchandize  are  carried  to  the  river  of
Chagre  which  is  some  1 8  leagues  from  this  citie  and  it
is  brought  up  by  this  river  within  five  leagues  of
Panama  unto  an  Inne  or  lodge  called  Venta  de  Cruzes,
and  from  this  place  afterwards  they  are  transported  to
Panama  upon  Mules.  The  high  way  which  goeth  from
Nombre  de  Dios  to  Panama  may  be  very  wel  mended,
only  to  remoove  this  way  and  to  stop  it  quite  up,  and
so  to  make  it  againe  upon  the  side  of  a  mountaine.
Nombre  de  This  citie  lieth  in  nine  degrees  and  one  tierce,  and  if
Dios  in  9.  your  majestic  will  give  order  that  this  citie  should  be
tifrcT  °"^  plucked  downe  and  newly  builded  againe  in  Puerto
Bello,  then  you  are  to  make  a  new  way  through  the
mountains  of  Capira,  by  reason  it  may  not  be  fre-
quented and  because  the  high  wayes  are  very  bad :
with  little  charges  they  may  be  broken  and  so  shut  up,
and  the  channell  of  this  harbour  may  bee  stopt  with
the  timber  of  those  old  ships  which  are  laid  up  here
every  yeere,  and  then  afterwards  may  be  cast  a  great
number  of  stones  into  the  same,  and  so  by  this  meanes
to  damme  up  the  harbour :  and  here  is  great  want  of
stones  to  ballast  the  shippes :  wherefore  they  are  faine
to  goe  to  an  Island  three  leagues  from  Cartagena  called
Isla  de  los  Bastimentos,  and  this  is  a  thing  very  neede-
full  for  this  Countrey,  as  by  experience  I  have  seene.

Puerto  Bello.

PUerto  Bello  lieth  five  leagues  from  Nombre  de  Dios
Westward :  It  is  a  very  good  harbour  and  sufficient
to  receive  great  store  of  ships,  and  hath  very  good  anker-
ing,  and  fresh  water :  for  neere  the  shore  you  shall  find
some  sixe  fathome  water,  and  in  the  middest  of  the  same
harbour  you  shall  find  twelve  fathome,  very  good  and
cleane  ground  or  sand,  without  eyther  banks  or  rockes.
There  are  twelve  small  rivers  or  brookes  of  water  which
doe  belong  to  this  harbour,  and  so  doe  meete  all  together :

144

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS  ad.

1587.
so  that  the  fleete  may  at  all  times  provide  themselves  of
fresh  water  so  much  as  shall  serve  their  turnes.  And
like  wise  there  is  in  this  place  great  store  of  timber  to
build  shippes,  and  stones  to  ballast  shippes.  Also  the
harbour  hath  no  danger  at  all  in  comming  in,  but  onely
when  the  wind  is  Westerly,  which  is  seldome  scene  upon
this  coast.  The  windes  which  doe  most  blowe  upon  this
coast  are  Northerly  windes,  and  they  are  more  dangerous
and  hurtfuU  then  the  Easterly  windes  are.  Within  this
harbour  there  lieth  a  small  creeke  safe  from  all  winds  that
can  blow.  This  creek  is  about  five  hundred  yards  long,
and  so  many  in  breadth,  and  in  the  entring  in  of  this
creekes  mouth  it  is  some  300.  yardes  broad,  and  foure
fathome  and  a  halfe  of  water :  and  entring  further  in,
sixe  fathome,  all  oaze  and  muddie  ground :  so  that  if  a
ship  should  chance  to  strike  or  come  aground,  shee  could
take  no  harme  being  soft  oaze ;  also  it  doth  ebbe  and
flow  according  as  I  have  certified  your  majestie  already.
And  likewise  the  comming  in  and  going  out  of  this
harbour  is  very  good ;  and  with  all  kinde  of  weather  a
shippe  may  set  saile  from  this  place  except  with  a
Westerly  wind :  and  all  this  coast  is  very  cleane  where
a  shippe  at  all  times  may  come  to  anker  without  the
harbours  mouth.  This  harbour  is  invironed  round  about
with  woods :  and  at  the  ende  of  this  harbour  there  is
certaine  land  which  is  overflowen  with  water :  it  may
bee  easily  dryed  up  and  walled  round  about,  so  this  land  [III.  553.]
will  serve  very  well  to  feede  cattell.  For  that  is  the
chiefest  thing  which  doth  belong  to  any  citie  or  towne,
and  of  this  pasture  ground  there  is  great  want  in  Nombre
de  Dios,  for  there  is  no  pasture  at  all  to  breede  cattell,
for  all  kinde  of  flesh  which  is  spent  in  this  place  is
brought  from  Panama :  so  towards  the  South  there  is  a
very  good  place,  where  the  citie  may  bee  newe  built  on
a  certaine  plaine  ground  which  lieth  at  the  foot  of  certaine
mountaines,  which  bee  not  very  high ;  and  in  this  place
there  runne  three  little  rivers  of  fresh  water  very  sweete
and  good,  and  here  is  good  arable  ground  to  till  and  to

X  145  K

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1587.

sow  Maiz  and  other  kinds  of  ffralne.  Also  in  this  circuite
there  are  great  stones  to  make  lyme,  and  these  stones
must  needes  proove  very  good  as  I  doe  thinke,  but  we
never  had  any  triall  thereof.

This  harbour  hath  all  things  necessary  to  builde  a
citie,  where  your  majestie  may  have  your  armies  and
fleetes  of  shippes  to  ride  at  an  anker  in  safetie  without
danger  of  loosing:  and  it  is  a  very  healthful  countrey,
and  where  the  citie  shall  be  builded  it  is  all  stony
ground :  and  forasmuch  as  the  raine  water  which  doth
fall  from  the  mountaines  may  doe  hurt  unto  the  citie,
there  at  the  foote  of  the  mountaine  wee  will  make  a  great
pond  to  receive  in  all  the  water  which  doth  fall  from  the
mountaines,  and  so  from  thence  to  goe  into  the  sea,  as
more  at large  your  majestie  may  see  by  my  platforme»

If  it  would  please  your  majestie,  it  were  good  that
the  citie  of  Nombre  de  Dios  might  bee  brought  and
builded  in  this  harbour :  it  would  not  bee  very  charge-
able unto  the  citizens  by  reason  that  all  their  houses  are
made  of  timber,  and  they  may  benefite  themselves  with
the  same  againe,  and  likewise  with  the  tyles  of  their
houses :  the  greatest  charge  will  bee  to  land  timber  and
to  cut  downe  the  mountaine  of  wood.

If  it  please  your  majestie  that  the  sayd  citie  of  Nombre
de  Dios  should  bee  builded  in  this  harbour  the  first  thing
which  must  be  finished  is  to  make  up  this  high  way,  and
so  to  pull  downe  the  Church  which  is  in  Nombre  de  Dios,
and  the  Contractation  house,  and  so  newe  build  it  in  this
harbour :  and  then  to  command  all  the  fleetes  of  shippes
from  time  to  time  to  come  and  unlade  their  goods  in  this
sayd  Puerto  Bello  :  And  that  those  marchants  and  factors
of  Spaine  which  are  lygers  in  Panama  and  Nombre  de
Dios,  shall  come  to  this  harbour  and  builde  anew  their
warehouses  for  receiving  of  their  goods.  So  by  these
meanes  in  short  time  it  will  be  greatly  inhabited  with
people :  also  the  fleete  shall  not  passe  so  many  dangers
as  they  dayly  doe  in  Nombre  de  Dios :  neither  will  there
so many  people  die  as  there  dayly  doe  in Nombre  de

146

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS  ad.

1587.
Dios :  and  the  cause  thereof  is,  that  those  labouring  men
which  doe  use  to  unlade  those  marchandize,  are  all  the
whole  day  wading  in  the  water  up  to  the  armepits  to
bring  the  packs  of  cloth  and  other  commodities  aland ;
for  there  is  no  landing  place  where  there  can  come  any
boates  to  land  any  goods  close  to  the  shore,  so  this
wading  and  the  parching  of  the  Sunne  is  the  cause  why
so  many  doe  dye  of  a  burning  fever.  There  are  but  60.
dwelling  houses  in  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  but  thirtie
dwellers  which  doe  continually  dwell  there,  and  the
rest  doe  goe  to  Panama  after  the  fleete  is  gone,  and
then  this  Towne  doeth  remayne  desolate,  every  man
forsaking  it  because  it  is  so  full  of  diseases.

In  the  entring  in  of  this  harbour  for  the  more  securitie
thereof  and  defence  of  the  towne  it  is  needefuU  to  build
upon  the  toppe  of  the  mount  which  lyeth  to  the  North-
ward, a  little  fort  fouresquare  that  will  hold  foure  or
five  pieces  of  ordinance,  and  to  appoynt  sixe  men  to
watch  and  ward ;  and  this  beeing  done  wee  shall  have
no  occasion  to  make  any  more  defence,  by  reason  the
countrey  is  full  of  rocks  and  filthy  wayes,  and  all  full
of  woods  round  about  the  harbour.

And  so  likewise  on  the  other  side  to  builde  a  little
tower  in  maner  of  a  fort,  with  eight  pieces  of  ordinance
and  five  and  twentie  souldiers  to  keepe  it.  And  this
will  bee  of  more  importance  because  it  must  be  builded
on  the  towne  side.  And  a  little  beyond  this  place  on
the  Northside  there  lyeth  a  creeke,  where  there  is  a
very  good  ankering  in  eight  fathome  water :  so  this
fort  beeing  builded  in  this  place  it  will  defend  the
harbour  and  offend  the  enemy :  and  will  defend  the
coast  along  and  a  poynt  of  the  land  which  doth  runne
from  the  East  to  the  West,  and  reacheth  to  the  Hand
of  Buena  Ventura.  And  put  case  that  the  fort  which
is  builded  on  the  other  side  doth  decay,  or  be  taken
by  the  enemy,  with  this  other  fort  wee  may  defend  the
citie  very  well,  if  the  enemy  should  chance  to  come  into
the harbour, and bee succoured and holpen by the

147

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

citizens,  and  twenty  musketters  being  planted  upon  a
mount  which  lieth  over  the  fort,  will  bee  sufficient  to
defende  us  from  a  good  many  of  our  enemies,  that
shoulde  come  to  assault  us,  because  all  the  countrey  is  full
of  rockes  and  stones,  and  full  of  mountaines.  So  from
this  wood  there  may  a  way  be  made  to  goe  to  the  citie,
and  to  joyne  with  that  way  which  shall  goe  to  Panama ;
and  this  may  bee  done  with  small  charges.  This  harbour
doth  lie  in  nine  degrees  and  one  tierce,  and  if  occasion
shoulde  serve  wee  may  stop  up  the  way  which  doth  goe
[III.  554.]  to  Capira,  and  the  rest  of  the  wayes  which  goe  from
Nombre  de  Dios  to  Venta  de  Cruzes,  according  as  it  is
certified  me  by  the  Negros  called  Simerons  ;  for  they
told  me  that  this  way  would  not  bee  very  troublesome.
Although  in  the  Winter  it  is  reported  that  here  is  good
store  of  water  in  this  place,  which  in  the  Sommer  is  all
dryed  up,  and  where  these  waters  are,  there  we  may
builde  a  causey,  to  which  purpose  there  are  great
quantities  of  stones  and  timber  very  serviceable :  so  this
way  may  bee  made  with  that  treasure  which  your  majestie
doeth  receive  of  the  averages  and  customes  of  Nombre
de  Dios  and  Panama,  which  doth  amount  unto  twelve
or  foureteene  thousand  pezos  yeerely :  and  an  order  might
be  taken  for  the  same,  that  the  sayd  money  may  serve
for  the  building  and  reparing  of  these  wayes.

Panama.

PAnama  is  the  principall  citie  of  this  Dioces :  it  lieth
18.  leagues  from  Nombre  de  Dios  on  the  South  sea,
and  standeth  in  9.  degrees.  There  are  3.  Monasteries
in  this  said  city  of  fryers,  the  one  is  of  Dominicks,  the
other  is  of  Augustines,  and  the  third  is  of  S.  Francis
fryers :  also  there  is  a  College  of  Jesuits,  and  the  royall
audience  or  chancery  is  kept  in  this  citie.

This  citie  is  situated  hard  by  the  sea  side  on  a  sandy
bay :  the  one  side  of  this  citie  is  environed  with  the  sea,
and  on  the  other  side  it  is  enclosed  with  an  arme  of  the
sea  which  runneth  up  into  the  land 1000.  yards.

148

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS  a.d.

1587-
This citie  hath three  hundred  and fiftie houses,  all  Panama  hath
built  of  timber,  and  there  are  sixe  hundred  dwellers  and  Z^"^  houses.
eight  hundred  souldiers  with  the  townesmen,  and  foure
hundred Negros of  Guyney, and some of them are
freemen  : and  there is  another  towne which is called
Santa Cruz  la  Real  of  Negros  Simerons,  and  most  of  ^egm  Sime-
them  are  imployed  in  your majesties  service,  and  they  ^°"^  mortall
are  100.  in  number,  and  this  towne  is  a  league  from  this  spamards
citie  upon  a  great  rivers  side,  which  is  a  league  from  the
sea  right  over  against  the  harbour  of  Pericos. But  there
is  no  trust  nor  confidence  in  any  of  these  Negros,  and
therefore  we  must  take heede  and  beware  of  them,  for
they  are  our  mortall  enemies.

There  are  three  sundry  wayes  to  come  to  this  citie,
besides  the  sea,  where  the  enemy  may  assault  us.  The
one  is  at  the  bridge  which  is  builded  upon  the  river  :
and  on  the  one  side  of  this,  there  lieth  a  creeke :  so  on
this  side  the  citie  is  very  strong,  because  it  is  all  soft
muddie  ground,  for  in  no  way  they  cannot  goe  upon  it.
And  right  over  against  it  there  lyeth  a  river  which  is  in
maner  like  unto  a  ditch  or  moate ;  and  on  the  other  side  of
the  River  there  lyeth  a  great  Lake  or  Pond  which  is  full
of  water  all  the  Winter,  and  part  of  the  Sommer,  so  that
on  this  side  the  city  is  very  strong,  for  with  very  small
store  of  souldiers  this  place  might  bee  kept  verie  well.

The  greatest danger for the surprising of  this  citie  "^^e  best  way

is the  wav  that  doth  come  from  Nombre  de  Dios :  for ^  ^^  ^

„ 1  . •' . 1  1 ,  ,  ,  fanama.

all  this  way  is  playne  ground  and  no woods :  and  2000

yardes  from  this  citie  there  lyeth  a  river  called  Lavanderas,

where  the  women  doe  use  to  wash  their  linnen :  and  this

river doth goe into the  creeke, according as I have

certified  your  majestie :  and being  once  past  this  river,

there  is  a  causey  which  goeth  directly  unto  them. The

other  way which doth go towards the citie is lower

downe  towards  the  sea  at  a  stone  bridge  lying  upon  the

way  which  goeth  to  the  harbour  of  Perico. These  two  P^^''^'^^-

wayes  cannot  be  kept  nor  resisted,  because  it  is  all  plaine

ground  and  medowes.

149

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1587.

Upon  the  East  side  of  this  citie  there  are  your
majesties  royall  houses  builded  upon  a  rocke  joyning
hard  to  the  Sea  side,  and  they  idoe  aswell  leane  towards
the  sea  as  the  land.  The  royall  audience  or  chancerie
is  kept  here  in  these  houses,  and  likewise  the  prison.
And  in  this  place  all  your  majesties  treasure  is  kept.
There  dwelleth  in  these  houses  your  majesties  Treasurer,
the  Lord  President,  and  3.  Judges,  and  master  Atturney.
All  these  doe  dwell  in  these  houses,  and  the  rest  of  your
majesties  officers :  which  are  sixe  houses  besides  those
of  the  Lord  President,  the  which  are  all  dwelling  houses,
and  all  adjoyning  together  one  by  another  along  upon
the  rockes.  And  they  are  builded  all  of  timber  and
bourdes,  as  the  other  houses  are.  So  where  the  prison
standeth  and  the  great  hall,  these  two  places  may  bee
very  well  fortified,  because  they  serve  so  fitly  for  the
purpose,  by  reason  they  are  builded  towardes  the  sea,
and  that  there  lye  certaine  small  rocks,  which  at  a  lowe
water  are  all  discovered  and  drie,  and  some  of  them  are
An  Island  in  seene  at  a  high  water.  Right  over  these  houses  to  the
the  harbour  of  Eastwardes  there  lyeth  an  Island  about  five  hundred
yardes  from  these  houses,  and  the  Island  is  in  forme
of  a  halfe  moone ;  and  in  this  order  it  runneth  all  alongst
very  neere  the  maine  land :  so  over  against  these  houses
[III.  555.]  there  lyeth  the  harbour  where  all  the  shippes  doe  use
to  ride  at  an  anker,  after  that  they  have  discharged  and
unladen  their  marchandize.  For  when  they  have  their
lading  aboord,  there  can  come  in  none  but  small  Barkes,
and  at  a  lowe  water  the  shippes  are  all  aground  and  drie,
and  so  is  all  the  space  some  thirtie  yardes  from  those
houses. Right  over  against  them  standeth  the  citie.

When  newes  were  brought  to  this  citie  of  those
Pirates  which  were  come  upon  this  coast,  the  Lord
President  and  Judges  commanded  that  there  should  a
sconce  bee  made,  and  trenched  round  about,  made  all  of
timber  for  the  defence  of  this  citie  against  the  enemie,
Places  good  to  and  to  keepe  your  majesties  treasure.  So  your  officers
land  in.  caused  Venta de Cruzes to  be fortified,  and likewise

150

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS  ad.

1587.

Chagre,  and  Quebrada,  and  fortified  the  garrison  of
Ballano :  for  all  these  are  places  where  the  enemy  may-
land,  and  by  this  meanes  spoyle  all  this  countrey.

There  are  three  sundry  places  where  this  citie  may
without  difficulty  be  taken,  and  spoyled  by  the  Pirates.
The  first  is  on  the  North  seas  in  a  certaine  place  which  i.  Place,
lyeth  foureteene  leagues  from  Nombre  de  Dios,  the  place
is  called  Aele  to  the  Eastwards,  where  once  before
certaine  men  of  warre  have  entred  into  those  seas.  The
other  place  is  Nombre  de  Dios,  although  this  is  a  bad  2-  f^^'^^-
place  and  naughtie  wayes,  and  full  of  waters  and  a  very  q^J^^j^^J^
dirtie  way :  for  three  partes  of  the  yeere  the  countrey
people  doe  travell  upon  those  waters,  and  an  other  very
badde  way,  which  is  the  going  up  of  certaine  rockes  and
mountaines  which  they  must  climbe,  called  the  mountaines
of  Capira,  which  are  of  height  three  quarters  of  a  league,
so  in  this  place  with  very  small  store  of  souldiers  wee
can  defend  our  selves  from  the  fury  of  the  enemie,  so
these  dwellers  doe  say  that  in  Sommer  the  wayes  are  very
good  without  either  dirt  or  water.

The other  entrance  is  up  the  river  of  Chagre,  which  3-  -P^-^^^-
rivers  mouth  lyeth  eighteene  leagues from  Nombre  de
Dios  to  the  Westwards  falling into  the  North  sea,  and
this  is  the  place  which  the  citizens  of  Panama  doe  most
feare,  for they may  come up this river to Venta  de  ^'^^  P^^'^^  °f
Cruzes,  and  so  from  thence  march  to  this  citie,  which  is  ^^^  L-^X"
but five  leagues  off. So  up  this  river  there  goe  boates  English.
and  barkes  which  doe  carry  320.  Quintals  waight. These
are  they  which  carry  the  most  part  of  the  marchandize
which doe come from Spaine to be transported to
Peru, and from Venta de Cruzes it is carried to
Limaret  which  is three  leagues  oflr  that  place,  and  the
dwellers  doe  report  that it  is  a  very  good  way :  and  if
any  men  of  warre  will  attempt  to  come  into  these  seas,
they  may  very  easily  come  up  this  river  as  farre  as  Venta
de Cruzes, and from  thence  march  unto  this  citie,  and
if  the  enemy  will,  they  may  bring  their  pinnesses  ready
made  in  foure  quarters,  and  so taken  in  sunder,  may

151

A.D.

1587.

Rebellion
feared  in  the
West  Indies.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

afterwards  set  them  together  againe :  as  it  is  reported
that  Francis  Drake  hath  used  it  once  before  when  he
came  that  voyage ;  and  so  he  may  attempt  us  both  by
sea  and  land.  And  forasmuch  as  the  most  part  of
these  people  are  marchants,  they  will  not  fight,  but  onely
keepe  their  owne  persons  in  safetie,  and  save  their
goods ;  as  it  hath  bene  sene  heretofore  in  other  places
of  these Indies.

So  if  it  will  please  your  majesty  to  cause  these  houses
to  bee  strongly  fortified,  considering  it  standeth  in  a  very
good  place  if  any  sudden  alarms  shoulde  happen,  then
the  citizens  with  their  goods  may  get  themselves  to
this  place,  and  so  escape  the  terrour  of  the  enemy  :  and
so  this  will  be  a  good  securitie  for  all  the  treasure
which  doth  come  from  Peru.  So  all  the  Pirats  and
rebels,  which  have  robbed  in  these  parts,  have  gone
about  what  they  can  to  stoppe  this  passage,  and  so  by
this  meanes  to  stoppe  the  trade  of  Spaine,  and  to  set
souldiers  in  this  place,  for  to  intercept  and  take  your
majesties  treasure,  whereby  none  might  be  caried  into
Spaine.  Therefore  it  behooveth  your  majestie  to  fortifie
these  places very strongly.

These  places  being  fortified  in  this  maner,  your
majesty  shal  have  al  your  gold  and  silver  brought
home  in  safetie  which  commeth  from  Peru.  And  all
those  commodities  which  are  laden  in  Spaine  may
come  safe  to  this  place.  And  if  perchance  any  rebels
should  rise  in  these  parts,  which  would  rebel  against
your  majesty,  which  God  forbid,  &  if  they  should  chance
to  joyn  with  any  of  these  pirats,  having  this  place  so
wel  fortified,  &  Puerto  Bello  in  ye  North  parts,  &  so  to
send  some  garrison  your  majestie  needs  not  to  feare :
for  here  in  this  harbor  are  alwayes  10  or  12  barks
of  60  or  50  tunnes  apiece,  which  do  belong  to  this
harbor.  So  if  any  of  these  places  shalbe  intercepted,
then  your  majestie  hath  no  other  place  fitter  then  this  to
land  your  majesties  souldiers,  for  then  they  have  but  18.
leagues to march by land, & presently they may be

152

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS  ad.

1587-
shipped  to  supply  these  places  which  shal  stand  in
most  need  of  them.  In  al  the  coast  of  Peru  there
is  no  harbour  that  hath  any  shipping  but  onely  this
place,  and  the  citie  of  Lima,  where  there  are  some
ships  and  barks.  The  harbour  being  thus  open  without
any  defence,  a  man  of  war  may  very  easily  come  to  this
place,  as  I  have  certified  your  majestie,  thorow  the
streits  of  Magellane,  &  arrive  at  that  instant,  when
those  barks,  do  come  from  Peru  with  your  majesties
gold  &  silver,  for  sometirnes  they  bring  5  or  6  5-  ^'"  6-  mil-
millions  in  those  barks;  so  the  enemy  may  come  and  ^">^^°fSo^'^
take  al  their  treasure,  &  not  leese  one  man,  because
here  is  not  one  man  to  resist  him,  therefore  this  place  [III.  556.]
being  thus  fortified,  the  treasure  may  be  kept  in  the
fort.  There  is  a  trench  made  round  about  your
majesties  houses  which  are  builded  of  timber :  the
President  and  Judges  did  cause  it  to  be  made,  for
that  here  was  newes  brought  that  there  were  certaine
men  of  warre,  &  pirats  comming  for  these  parts.  So
this  trench  is  thus  maintained  until  such  time  as  your
majesties  pleasure  is  to  the  contrary,  &  in  such  wise
that  your  souldiers  may  fight  lying  behind  the  trench ;
so  there  is  order  given  to  build  a  platforme  upon  the
plaine  ground,  and  so  to  plant  such  ordinance  in  those
places,  as  shall be  thought  most  convenient.

If  it  wil  please  your  majestie,  here  we  may  make  a
sconce  or  fort  toward  the  land  side,  &  so  trench  it  round
about  and  build  it  with  stone,  because  here  is  a  place
and  al  things  readie  for  the  same  purpose ;  and  by  this
meanes  the  citie  would  be  securely  kept :  as  for  the
sea  there  is  no  danger  at  al,  by  reason  that  the  water
doth  ebbe  &  flow  twise  a  day,  and  then  when  it
is  ebbing  water  it  wil  be  all  ozy  &  muddy  ground  and
rocks,  so  that  in  no  wise  at  a  low  water  the  enemy  can
wade  over  the  mud  to  come  to  this  city,  and  it
reacheth  from  the  Island  til  you  come  to  the  bridge
called  Paita.  Two  leagues  from  this  city  there  lieth  a  The  harbour
harbor  called  Perico  downe  to the Westward : this is  "fP^"'^"-

153

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

a  very  sure  harbour  by  reason  of  3.  Islands  which  do
joyne  in  maner  of  a  halfe  moone,  they  lie  halfe  a
league  from  the  maine,  the  Islands  do  enclose  the
harbor  round  about,  the  harbour  is  a  very  high  land,
&  the  Hands  are  but  reasonable  high,  there  is  good
store  of  fresh  water :  also  there  hath  never  any  ship
bene  cast  away  in  this  harbour,  for  there  is  7.  fathome
water  at  ful  sea,  and  3  or  4  fathome  at  lower  water,
and  very  good  ground  for  their  ankering,  and  when
they  will  trimme  their  ships,  they  may  hale  them  ashore.
All  those  ships  and  barks  which  come  from  Peru  with
gold,  silver  or  any  other  kind  of  commodities,  do  first
come  to  an  anker  in  this  harbour,  and  if  they  have  a
contrary  weather  they  cannot  come  into  the  harbour
of  Panama ;  and  for  so  much  as  the  harbour  hath  no
defence  for  the  safegard  of  the  ships,  if  a  man  of  warre
Nota.  should  chance  to  come  into  the  harbour,  all the barks

with  the  treasure  may  be  very  easily  taken.  And  like-
wise these  barks  &  ships  which  do  navigate  in  the
South  seas  carrie  not  so  much  as  one  piece  of  ordinance
or  a  rapier  to  defend  them  withall.  From  this  place
to  Venta  de  Cruzes  is  not  passing  5  leagues ;  so  that  if
any  pinnesse  should  happen  to  arrive  there,  no  doubt
but  they  might  robbe  and  take  al  your  treasure  which
is  in  those  barks,  by  reason  that  from  the  shore  they
cannot  be  rescued  nor  holpen,  because  it  is  an  Island
and  refuge  for  all  ships  and  barks.  If  it  would  please
your  majestie  here  might  some  fort  or  defence  bee
made  in  the  middlemost  Island,  and  some  ordinance
planted,  and  this  might  bee  made  with  little  charges,
because  in  the  said  Island  there  are  all  kinde  of  neces-
saries fit  for  that  purpose,  so  by  this  meanes  your
majestie  may  have  both  the  harbour  and  the  citie
very  well  kept.
A  new  way  And  likewise  there  is another entring  into  the  South

into  the  south-  sea  which  is  called  the river of Francisca, which  lieth
^^^'  on  this  side  of  the  Cabe9a  de  Cativa,  and  this  river  doth

come  into  another  river  which  is  called  Caracol,  and  is

154

THE WEST INDIAN PORTS  a.d.

^587.
£ve leagues from this citie ; and once before these
Simerons brought  into  this  place  certaine  Frenchmen.

The  river  of  Chagre.

THe  river of Chagre lieth  in 9. degrees and  one
tierce. The  mouth  of  this  river  is in the North
seas 18.  leagues  from  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  13.  leagues  These fve
from  Puerto  Bello :  there  is  caryed  up  this  river  certaine  ^^^^^^^  ^^
quantitie of  those merchandize which are unladen at  ground  or
Nombre  de  Dios  which  come  from Spaine. From the  champion
mouth  of  this  river  to Venta de Cruzes  are  eighteene  <:ountrey.
leagues. From  this  place  where  the  barkes  unlade  their
commodities,  they  are carried upon mules  to  Panama,
which  is  but  five  leagues  off  from  this  place.

This  river  hath  great  store  of  water  in  the  Winter.
And  the  barkes  which  belong  to  this  river  are  com-
monly of  320.  Quintals  that  is  of  16.  tunnes  in  burthen:
but  in  the  Summer  there  is  but  small  store  of  water  :
so  then  the  barkes  have  much  to  doe  to  get  up  this
river  :  and  in  many  places  these  barks  are  constrained
to  unlade  their  commodities ;  and  are  drawen  by  mens
strength  and  force  a  good  way  up  the  river,  and  there-
fore if  it  would  please  your  majestie  to  command  that
all  those  goods  may  bee  first  unladen  in  Puerto  Bello,
and  there  to  build  a  litle  castle  in  the  mouth  of  the
said  river,  and  at  the  foote  of  the  castle  to  build  a
storehouse  to  unlade  and  keepe  all  the  sayd  goods,
and  there  to  build  other  barks  of  lesse  burthen :  then
these  would  serve  for  Sommer,  and  the  great  barks
for  the  Winter.

If  it  would  please  your  majestie,  there  might  a
very  good  high  way  be  made  on  the  one  side  of  the
river,  and  so  they  might  bee  towed,  for  it  may  bee
made  and  not  with  much  cost  because  it  is  all  plaine
ground,  and  there  is  growing  upon  the  sayd  river
great  store  of  timber  and  trees  which  doe  lie  over-  [III.  557.]
thwart  the  said  River ;  so  that  they  are  very  cumbersome
and  great annoiance  unto  the  said  boates,  aswell  those

155

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that go up the said River, as also that doe come
downe  the  said  River.

And  therefore  if  it  might  please  your  majestie  to
command,  that  Puerto  Bello  might  be  inhabited,  and
the  towne  made  neerer  the  Rivers  side,  every  thing
would  be  a  great  deale  better  cheape,  if  the  commodi-
ties were  caryed  up  the  River :  for  it  is  a  great  danger
to  cary  them  up  by  land,  for  it  is  daily  scene  that  the
mules  do  many  times  fall  and  breake  their  neckes  with
their  lading  upon  their  backs,  as  well  the  treasure  as
other  kinde  of  commodities,  because  it  is  such  a  bad
way.  And  your  majestie  might  be  at  this  charges  and
spend  your  revenewes  of  Nombre  de  Dios  and  Panama,
which  do  yerely  yield  12  or  14  thousand  pezos,  &  this
being  once  done  it  would  be  a  great  ayd  and  benefit  to
those,  which  doe  trade  and  trafficke,  and  to  those  mer-
chantes  which  doe  send  their  goods  over-land,  and  ease
them  much  of  paine  and  purse,  because  the  other  is  a
most  filthy  way,  as  any  is  in  the  world.

A  briefe  remembrance  of  a  voyage  made  in  the
yeere  1589  by  William  Michelson  Captaine,
and  William  Mace  of  Ratcliffe,  Master  of  a  ship
called  the  Dogge,  to  the  Bay  of  Mexico  in  the
West  India.

He  aforesaide  ship  called  the  Dogge,  of
the  burthen  of  threescore  and  ten  tunnes
was  furnished,  and  armed  forth  with  the
number  of  fortie  men  :  it  departed  from
the  coast  of  England  in  the  moneth  of
May,  directly  for  the  West  India  :  It
fell  with  the  Bay  of  Mexico,  and  ther^e
met  with  divers  Spanish  ships  at  sundry  times,  whereof
three  fel  into  her  lapse  and  were  forced  to  yeeld  unto  the
mercie  of  the  EngHsh :  the  last  that  they  met  within  the
Bay  was  a  Spanish  man  of  warre,  whom  the  English
chased,  and  after  three  severall  fightes,  upon  three  divers

156

MICHELSON AND MACE  a.d.

1589.
dayes,  pressed  him  so  farre  that  he  entreated  a  parle,  by
putting  out  a  flagge  of  truce  :  the  parle  was  granted,  and
certaine  of  the  Spaniards  came  aboord  the  English.
Where  after  conference  about  those  matters  that  had
passed  in  the  fight  betwixt  them,  they  received  reason-
able intertainement  and  a  quiet  farewell.  The  Spanish,
as  if  they  had  ment  to  requite  the  English  courtesie,
invited  our  men  to  their  shippe,  who  perswading  them-  Spanish
selves  of  good  meaning  in  the  Spanish,  went  aboord :  but  ^^'^^^°^-
honest  and  friendly  dealing  was  not  their  purpose,  sud-
denly they  assaulted  our  men,  and  one  with  a  dagger
stabde  Roger  Kingsnod  the  English  Pilote  to  the  heart
and  slewe  him,  and  others  were  served  with  the  like  sauce,
onely  William  Mace  the  Master  &  others,  notwith-
standing al  the  prepared  trappes  of  the  enemie,  lept
overboord  into  the  sea,  and  so  came  safe  to  their  own
ship :  and  directing  his  course  for  England,  arrived  at
Plimouth  the  tenth  day  of  September,  1589,  laden  with
wines,  yron.  Roans,  which  is  a  kinde  of  linnen  cloth,  and
other  rich  commodities,  looking  for  the  arrivall  of  the  rest
of  his  consorts,  whereof  one  and  the  principall  hath  not
long  since  obtained  his  Port.  Thus  much  in  generall
termes  onely  I  have  as  yet  learned,  and  received  touching
this  voyage,  extracted  out  of  letters  sent  from  the  afore-
said William  Mace,  to  Master  Edward  Wilkinson  of
Towre-hill  in  London.  My  principall  intention  by  this
example  is  to  admonish  our  nation  of  circumspection  in
dealing  with  that  subtill  enemie,  and  never  to  trust  the
Spanish  further,  then  that  their  owne  strength  shall  be
able  to  master  them :  for  otherwise  whosoever  shall
through  simplicitie  trust  their  curtesie,  shall  by  tryall
taste  of  their  assured  crueltie.

[Certaine  Spanish

157

A.D.

1590.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

A

Certaine  Spanish  Letters  intercepted  by  shippes  of
the  worshipfull  Master  John  Wattes  written
from  diverse  places  of  the  islandes  and  of  the
maine  land  as  well  of  Nueva  Espanna,  as  of
Tierra  Firma  and  Peru,  containing  many
secrets  touching  the  aforesaid  countreys,  and
the  state  of  the  South  Sea,  and  the  trade  to  the
Philippinas.

letter  sent  from  Havana  in  Cuba  from  the
general  of  the  fleete  John  de  Orimo  to  the
king  of  Spaine  the  18  of  October  1590,
touching  the  building  of  certaine  excellent
Frigats,  &c.

T  may  please  your  majestic  that  at  the
date  hereof  one  of  the  Frigates  was
lanched :  and  three  more  will  be  ready
against  the  fleete  depart  from  hence.
They  are  very  bigge  and  excellent  of
sayle,  which  will  carie  150  men  a  piece
with  souldiers  and  mariners.  And  having
good  ordinance,  there  are  fewe  or  none  of  our  enemies  that
can  offend  us.  For  wee  shall  both  leave  and  take  at  all
[III.  558,]  times  when  we  list.  But  it  behooveth  your  majestie  to
send  both  souldiers  and  mariners  to  man  the  Frigats.  For
we  have  great  want  of  souldiers  and  mariners,  with  tackling,
ankers,  powder,  shot,  calivers,  and  all  kinde  of  furniture
for  them.  For  these  things  are  not  here  to  bee  had  for
money :  and  likewise  to  send  some  great  ordinance  for
the  Zabras.  For  the  merchants  ships  are  so  weake  and
so  unprovided,  that  they  have  almost  none  to  defend
themselves.  Also  we  shall  be  constrained  to  give  the
carena  againe  unto  al  the  ships  ;  for  they  are  very  weake
by  reason  of  the  long  voyage :  and  the  mariners  and
souldiers  are  wearie  with  their  long  travelling  and  keeping
of  them  here. Thus  if  it  would  please  your  majestie  to

158

SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED  a.d.

1590.

command  with  all  expedition  that  these  souldiers  and
mariners  with  all  kinde  of  other  furniture  might  be  sent
us,  then  the  fleete  may  set  forward  and  so  proceede  on
their  voyage.  God  preserve  your  Catholike  royal
majestie. From  Havana  the  20  of  October  1590.

Your  majesties  servant,  whose  royall  feet  I  kisse.
John  de  Orimo  General  of  your  Fleete.

A  Letter  sent  from  the  Governour  of  Havana  John
de  Trexeda,  to  the  King  of  Spaine,  the  twen-
tieth of  October  1590,  touching  the  wants  of
that  place.

Y  three  shippes  which  departed  from  this

Harbour  since  the  Fleetes  arrivall  here,  I

have given your majestie at large to

understand,  what  hath  happened  as  much

as I  can,  and what  thing  is  here  to  be

done  in  this  citie,  and  what  your  majestie

must  provide. And  now  once  againe  I

will  returne  to  put  your  majestie  in  minde  thereof. I

beseech  your  maiestie  to  command  to  be  provided  and  to  r^^.j^^^5 .
1  1-1  "^1 1 1 -VT  -r  -11  1  .1  • fortification  m

be  sent  hither  two  hundred  JNegros,  ir  you  will  have  this  ji^vana.

fortification to  goe  forwardes : because  your  majestie  is

here  at  great  charges  with  the  master  workeman  and  the

Officers. And  for  want  of  Pioners  the  worke  goeth  not

forwardes. For  as  the  worke  goeth  dayly  forward  and

increaseth  farther  and  farther,  so  we  want  men  to  worke,

and  to  garde  it,  and  likewise  to  keep  it. We  dare  not

meddle  with  those  of  the  Galies. And  likewise  it  may

please  your  majestie  to  send  new  working  tooles  of  yron,

according  to  a  remembrance  which  I  have  sent  to  your

majestie  of  late,  which  doeth  signifie  our  wants  more  at

large.

Likewise  it  is  needeful  that  your  majestie  should  send

powder  and  match  to  furnish  these  forts. And  likewise  Souldiers  sent

to  send  money  to  pay  those  souldiers  which  are  newly

come  hither,  &  for  that  companie  of  souldiers  which  were

159

to  Havana.

A.D.

1590.

A  fort  upon
an  hill.

Five  Frigais
made  at
Havana,  John
de  Orimo
General  of
the  fieete.

The  excellency
of  the  great
Frygates  built
in  Cuba.

Copper  mines
nezvly  found
in  Cuba.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

sent  from  Mexico  to  this  place.  For  it  behooveth  your
majestie  not  to  have  them  as  yet  left,  till  such  time  as
the  defences  about  the  forts  bee  finished,  and  that  which
is  in  building  upon  the  hill,  which  will  be  ended  very
shortly  if  you  send  the  Negros  and  yron  tooles.

Likewise  I  have  certified  your  majestie,  that  with  all
speed  I  am  making  ready  of  the  five  Frigates,  that  they
may  cary  all  the  treasure.  Also  John  de  Orimo  seeing
that  it  is  of  so  great  importance  to  have  them  dispatched,
doeth  furnish  mee  with  some  money,  although  somewhat
scantly,  untill  such  time  as  your  majestie  doth  send  him
some  order  therefore.  I  beseech  you  to  command  it  to
bee  done ;  considering  the  great  charges  and  expences  that
we  are  at  here,  as  by  the  accounts  your  Majestie  shall
more  at  large  perceive,  what  hath  bene  spent.  These
Frigats  will  be  made  an  end  of  without  all  doubt  by  the
moneth  of  Februarie :  but  as  yet  their  tackling  and  sayles
are  not  here  arrived :  but  I  doe  stay  the  comming  thereof
every  day,  according  as  the  Duke  of  Medina  and  John  de
Ibarra  have  written  unto  me,  that  those  ships  which
should  bring  the  same  were  ready  to  depart  from  thence.
All  these  things  it  behooveth  your  Majestie  to  send  in
time :  for  I  can  assure  your  Majestie  that  you  shall  not
have  upon  the  sea  such  good  shippes  as  these  are.  For  as
touching  the  other  ships  of  the  fieete,  which  are  in  this
harbour,  it  is  not  convenient  to  venture  the  silver  in
them.  This  counsell  your  Majestie  shall  not  take  of
mee,  for  I  am  a  souldier,  and  have  but  small  skill  in
navigation.  But  every  day  it  is  tolde  me  openly  and
in  secret  by  many  of  the  pilots,  captaines,  masters  and
mariners.

As  touching  the  copper,  1  have  put  it  in  practise  twise
more,  and  have  made  proofe  thereof:  wherein  there  hath
bene  more  spent,  then  I  was  willing  there  should  have
bene,  because  I  have  gotten  no  fruit  thereof:  I  know  not
the  cause,  but  that  it  is  not  done  efi^ectually  by  those  that
have  the  working  thereof.  Therefore  I  beseech  your
Majestie  to  send  me  that  same  founder  which  I  wrote  to

160

,?H  /r.v.

J
./

A SPANISH TREASURE-FRIGATE

SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED  ad.

1590.
your Majestic heretofore of. Our Lord keepe your
Majestic many yccrcs. From Havana the 20 of
October, 1590.

Your  Majesties  servant,  whose  royall  feete  I  kisse,
John  de  Trexeda  governour  of  Havana.

A  letter  sent  to  Don  Petro  de  Xibar  one  of  his  [in.  559.]
Majesties  privie  Counsel  of  the  West  Indies,
from  Don  Diego  Mendez  de  Valdes  Gover-
nour of  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico  the  20  of
November  1590,  touching  the  state  of  that
Citie  and Island.

Received  your  honours  letter  the  20  of
Februaric,  whereby  I  received  great  con-
tent, to  heare  that  your  honour  is  in
good  health.  As  touching  the  imprison-
ment of  our  cousin  Don  Pedro  de  Valdes,
it  doeth  grieve  me  to  the  very  soule.  I
beseech  God  to  send  him  his  libertie :
and  likewise  the  imprisonment  of  Diego  Flores  de  Valdes
grieveth  me  very  much :  I  pray  God  to  send  good
justice.  The  M.  of  the  fieldc  Juan  de  Texela,  and  the
M.  workeman  Juan  Baptista  Antonio  arrived  here  in
safetie,  and  have  viewed  this  Citie  with  all  the  circuite
round  about  and  the  situation  as  I  have  informed  his
majestic  thereof.  They  have  marked  a  place  to  build
a  strong  Fort,  whereat  the  countrey  remaineth  very  well
contente.  And  it  standeth  in  a  good  situation,  and  in  a
convenient  place  on  a  high  mount  which  doeth  lye  upon
the  entering  in  of  the  Harbour,  &  so  cutteth  over  to  a
point  of  land,  leaving  in  the  Fort  as  much  space  as  wil
containe  3000  persons,  without  joyning  thereunto  any
part  of  the  coast.  So  the  M.  del  campo  hath  named  the
fort  Citadella.  He  left  me  great  store  of  yron  workc,
tooles  eight  workemen,  and  200  Negros,  which  are  the
kings.  And  the  Island  doth  finde  400  pioncrs  which  are
continually  at  worke.  His  majestic  hath  sent  me  a
X  161  L

Valdes,
prisoner  in
England.

John  Baptista
Antonio  the
generall  Inge-
nour  of  the
West  Indies.

A  strong  fort
newly  builded
in  S.  Juan  de
puerto  Rico.

A.D.

1590.

This  fort  was
taken  by  the
Earle  of  Cum-
berland,
1598.

Copper  mines
found  neere
Havana.

200  souldiers
sent  to  S.  Juan
de  Puerto  Rico.
1500  fighting
men  in  S.Juan
de  puerio  Rico
Island.

The  boldnes  of
the  English.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

warrant  to  spend  the  provision  of  the  Island,  &  to  take
those  rents  which  his  majesty  hath  here,  &  to  certifie
his  majestic  what  there  is  wanting  for  the  maintaining  of
the  workmen  &  that  they  may  have  all  things  necessary.
So  I  have  sent  to  Nueva  Espanna,  for  such  things  as  are
here  wanting.  I  have  written  to  the  M.  of  the  field,  which
is  gone  to  Havana,  informing  him  that  it  doeth  greatly
import  that  the  worke  with  all  expedition  should  go
forward,  seeing  that  it  is  begun  for  the  defence  of  the
Island.  And  we  doe  defend  it  as  well  as  we  can  from
the  enemie,  in  respect  of  the  great  danger  which  other-
wise might  happen,  if  the  enemie  should  come  and  finde
it  begun,  and  not  ended.  And  likewise  that  his  majestie
would  send  me  that  which  I  do  request.  And  the  most
principal  thing  of  al  is,  to  send  more  Negros.  And
sending  me  all  these  things  which  be  needful,  I  trust  in
God  I  shal  in  short  time  build  up  the  fort,  to  defend
us  from  the  enemie.  The  fort  must  be  builded  triangle
wise :  for  it  will  reach  into  the  bay :  and  we  shal  be  able
to  plant  in  the  same  40  pieces  of  good  ordinance,  Canon,
Demi-canon,  and  Colverine.  The  M.  of  the  field,  hath
promised  to  send  me  some  from  Havana.  For  that  he
is  determined  to  cast  some  there,  by  reason  of  the  great
store  of  copper,  which  now  of  late  is  found  in  Havana :
for  here  we  have  as  yet  but  small  store  of  ordinance  to
defend  us.  I  looke  for  5  Canons  which  his  majestie
should  send  from  Spaine,  with  shot  and  powder  and  al
kinde  of  weapons,  because  that  here  is  great  want  in  the
Island.  His  majestie  hath  sent  the  whole  number  of
200  souldiers,  and  in  the  companie  there  came  two
capitaines.  The  corps  de  Guard  is  kept  in  the  market
place  :  and  twise  in  a  moneth  I  muster  all  the  men  in
the  Hand,  and  finde  very  neere  1500  fighting  men,  and
80  horsemen.  The  forte  when  it  is  ended  will  be  the
strongest  that  his  majestie  hath  in  all  the  Indies.  And
now  the  people  of  the  countrey  sleepe  in  security.  For
commonly  before,  the  Englishmen  would  come  and  beard
us  to the havens  mouth. God  keep  your  honour,  and

162

SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED

send you  long  health. From  Puerto  Rico the 20  of
November  1590.

The  Governour  Diego  Mendez  de  Valdes.

A.D.

1590.

1

i

A  letter  to  John  Lopez  Canavate,  Alderman  in
the  towne  of  Canavate  in  Spaine  w^ritten  from
his  servant  Juan  de  Porva  Canavates,  from
Havana  the  seventeenth  of  October  1590,
touching  the  state  of  the  said  place.

His is  to  give you to understand, that

since my departure from S. Lucar I

have written unto you twise of my

arrivall  here,  and what successe I have

had. And nowe  you shall understand

that  I  am  determined  to  goe  for  Nueva

Espanna. For  I  stay  but  opportunitie  of

time. For here  is  great  watch dayly  kept and great

looking  to  the  souldiers  in  keeping  of  them  together,  for

running  away. But neverthelesse I hope in God, to  T^he  souldiers

finde  some  friend  to  convey  mee  away  from  hence. This  ^"^^'^^JJ^^^

,  , •'  , •' .  -  ,  Havana.

countrey  is  so  close  and  narrow,  that  ir  a  man  steale  not

away  hidden  in  some  shippe,  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to

escape,  nor  to  goe  a  league  out  of  the  towne,  no way

but  by  sea. And  because  the harbour is  so  close,  it  is

the  best  harbour and the surest in the  world. The

harbour  is  made  in this  order. The entrie in  towarde

the  land  is  by  a  narrow  streight  chanel,  which  continueth

as  long  as  a  caliver  shot,  and  from  that  place  the  river

openeth  broader  and  broader :  There  are  in  the  entring

in, two  points  which make with the  lande,  whereupon

are  newly  builded  two  strong forts,  which are  fortified

with  very  great  store  of  ordinance :  besides  another  strong  [ill.  560.]

and famous  Forte  which is  in  the  Citie,  so  that it is

impossible  to  take  it. There  are  in  these  three  Fortes,

a  thousand souldiers in Garison. And likewise here

are two galies to  keepe the  coast. Yet for all this.  The  boldnes  of

the  audacious  Englishmen  being  without  all shame  are  ^^^  English.

163

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1590.

not  afraid  to  come  and  dare  us  at  our  owne  doores.
Our  journey  to  goe  for  England  is  most  certaine  in
the yeere  1592. Here  are  making  with  great  expedi-

18  ships  tion 18 ships,  which  are  called Frigats for that  effect.

u  aea  in ^ They  are  very  strong  shippes,  and  will  drawe  but  very

England.  ^^^^^  water,  whereby  they  may  enter  amongst  the  shoulds
on  the  banckes  of  Flanders :  they  are  builded  the
higher  because  here  is  great  store  of  timber  and  excel-
lent good  and  incorruptible.  It  is  reported  that  the
fleete  will  depart  from  hence  in  February,  by  reason
that  at  that  time  the  Englishmen  are  not  departed  out
of  their  owne  countrey.  And  thus  I  rest,  from  this
Island  of  S.  Christopher  in  Havana  this  present  day
on  S.  Lukes  even;  the  17  of  October  1590.
Your  Worships  servant,

John  de  Porva  Canavates.

A  letter  from  Mexico,  of  Sebastian  Biscaino  to
his  Father  Antonio  Biscaino  in  Corchio  in
Spaine,  touching  the  great  profit  of  the  trade
to  China,  and  somewhat  of  M.  Thomas
Candish. Written  the  20  of  June 1590.

Aving  written  to  your  worship  by  a  friend
of  mine  at  large,  nowe  I  will  bee  some-
what short.  And  this  is  onely  to  give  you
to  understand,  that  foure  moneths  past,  I
came  from  China,  and  landed  in  Aca-
pulco,  70  leagues  from  Mexico,  which
is  the  harbour  where  the  ships  that  goe

Acapulco  the
harbour  where
the  ships  lie
that  goe  for
China.

downe  to  China  lye:  and  all  the  marchants  of  Mexico
bring  all  their  Spanish  commodities  downe  to  this
harbour,  to  ship  them  for  that  countrey.  It  is  one  of
the  best  harbours  in  all  Nueva  Espanna;  and  where
the  ships  may  ride  most  safely  without  all  kinde  of
danger.  For  it  lyeth  under  a  necke  of  land,  and  behind
a  great  point.  And  in  this  harbour  here  are  foure  great
ships  of  Mexico  of  600  and 800 tunnes  a  piece,  which

164

SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED  ad.

1590-
onely  serve  to  cary  our  commodities  to China,  and  so
to returne backe againe. The order is thus. From  From Acapulco,
hence to  China  is  above  two thousand  leagues,  farther  ^oChimabove
than  from  hence  to  Spaine. And from  hence  their  two
first  ships  depart  at  one  time  to  China:  and  are  13  or  14
moneths  returning  backe  againe. And  when  those  two
ships  are  returned,  then  the  other  twaine  two  moneths
after  depart  from  hence. They  goe  nowe  from  hence
very strong  with souldiers. I can  certifie  you  of  one
thing ; That  200  ducates  in  Spanish commodities,  and
some Flemish  wares  which  I  caryed with  me  thither,  I  Flemish  wares
made  worth 1400  ducates  there  in  the  countrey. So  I  Soj>^^»  China
make  account  that  with  those  silkes,  and  other  commo-  p.^^-^^_
dities  which I  brought  with  me  from  thence  to  Mexico,
I  got  2500  ducates  by  the  voyage :  and  had  gotten  more,
if  one  packe  of  fine  silkes  had  not  bene  spoiled  with  salt
water. So  as  I  sayd,  there  is  great  gaine  to  be  gotten  if
that  a  man  returne  in  safetie. But  the  yeere  1588  I  had
great  mischance,  coming  in  a  ship  from  China  to  Nueva
Espanna :  which  being  laden  with  rich  commodities,  was
taken  by  an  Englishman  which  robbed  us  and  afterward  M.  Thomas
burned  our  ship,  wherein  I  lost  a  great  deale  of  treasure  C^^^^^"-.
and  commodities.

If  I  should  write  to  you  of  the  state  of  this  countrey
of  China,  and  of  the  strange  things  which  are  there,  and
of  the  wealth  of  the  countrey,  I  were  not  able  to  doe  it,
in  an  whole  quier  of  paper. Onely  I  may  certifie  you,
that  it is  the  goodliest countrey, and  the  richest, and
most  plentifull in  all the world. For here  are  great
store of  golde  mynes, silver  mynes, and pearle, great  Gold  mynes,
store  of  cotten  cloth : for  the  countrey  people  weareth  ^^^^^^J^W^^
nothing  else  but  fine  cotten  cloth,  which  is  more  accepted  ^-^  ^^^-^^ '
then  silkes. For  here  is  great  store  of  silkes,  & they  fine  limen
are  good  cheape. All  kinde  of  victuals,  as  bread,  flesh,  doth  greatly
wines  and  hennes  and  all  kindes  of  foules,  are  very  plenti-  ^^^^J^^^d.  tn
full. Here  are  great  store  of  fresh  rivers. The  people
are  very  loving. Here  are  very  faire  cities  and  townes
with  costly  buildings,  better  then  those  in  Spaine. And

165

A.D.

1590.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the countrey  people go  very richly  apparelled both  in

silkes  and  gold. But  here  we  have  order  from  the  king

of  Spaine,  that  a  Spaniard  may  not  dwell  in  China,  above

3  yeres, and  afterwards  they  must  returne againe into

Nueva  Espanna,  and  other  souldiers  must  come  in  their

places. The countrey is very unwholesome for us

Spaniardes. For  within  these  20  yeres  of  14000,  which

have  gone  to  the  Philippinas,  there  are 13000  of  them

Not  above  one  dead,  and  not  past 1000  of  them  left  alive. There  is

t  ousan pa-  ^  pl^ce  in  China  which  is  an  harbour, called Macaran,

ntards  tn  the  ^

Philippinas. which  the  king  hath  given  to  the  Spaniards  freely  :  which

shall  be  the  place  where  the  ships  shall  come  and  trafficke.

For  in  this  harbour  there  is  a  great  river  which  goeth  up

into  the  maine  land,  unto  divers  townes  and  cities,  which

are neere to  this river. And thus troubling you no

farther  1  rest. From  Mexico  the  20  of  June  1590.

Your  obedient  sonne,  Sebastian  Biscaino.

[III.  561.]  A  Letter  of  Bartholomew  Cano  to  Peter  de  Tapia
in  Sivill,  from  Mexico  the  30  of  May  1590,
touching  the  state  of  Nueva  Espanna,  and  the
Fleet  of  that  yeere.

Ecause  I  have  answered  your  letters  which  I
have  received  in  the  last  Fleet,  as  touch-
ing that  matter  I  have  no  more  to  say.
The  occasion  of  my  writing  unto  you  at
this  time,  is  to  give  you  to  understand,
that  those  commodities  which  came  in  the
last Fleet,  were  sold at the first good

cheape,  and  those  that  bought  them,  got  much  by  them.
For  now  at  this  instant  white  Roan  cloth  is  solde  for  8  or
9  reals  a  vare.  The  cause  of  this  was,  by  reason  there
came  a  caravel  of  Advise  from  Havana;  which  brought
us  newes,  how  the  armie  that  his  majestie  did  send  for
England,  was  all  spoiled  and  cast  away :  and  therefore
they  of  Spaine  did  write  that  there  would  come  no  Fleet
from  Spaine  hither  this  yeere :  And  this  is  the  cause  that

166

SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED  a.d.

1590.
all  linnen  cloth  is  very  deere  in  these  parts. Wines  also

are  very  deere :  for  they  are  sold  for  90  and  100  deminas
a  pipe.  When  the  Frigats  departed  from  hence  in  August
last  1589.  Cochinilla  was  sold  at  that  instant  for  50  pesos
the  quintall ;  and  now  it  is  sold  for  ^^  pesoes.  And
since  that  newes  came  from  Spaine  in  a  caravel  of  S.
Lucar,  that  it  was  solde  there  for  72  ducates  the  quintall,
there  are  laden  in  this  Fleet  14000  Arovas  of  Cochinilla,
and  7000  Arovas  more  were  laden  in  the  Frigats  which
departed  before  the  Fleet.  There  is  laden  in  the  Fleet
great  quantitie  of  treasure,  more  then  hath  bene  sent
to  Spaine  these  many  yeres,  both  for  the  Kings  and  the
Vice-royes  account.  And  the  marchants  and  gentlemen
of  all  these  provinces  doe  send  great  quantitie  to  supply
the  Kings  wants :  for  that  his  majestic  hath  written  to
the  Vice-roy  and  to  the  gentlemen  of  these  countreyes
to  ayde  him  with  much  money  towardes  the  maintenance
of  his  warres  against  France  and  other  places,  &  therefore
they  have  sent  good  store :  God  send  it  well  to  Spaine.
There  are  likewise  laden  aboord  the  Fleet  to  the  number
of  1 00000.  hides,  and  great  store  of  other  kindes  of  this
countrey  commodities.  So  that  the  Fleet  goeth  very
richly  laden.  Quicke  silver  is  here  very  deere,  for  here
is  almost  none  to  bee  had  for  any  money  to  worke  in  the
gold  mynes :  for  without  Quicke  silver  wee  cannot  refine
our  gold.  And  no  man  upon  paine  of  death  may  bring
any  from  Spaine  hither ;  but  all  must  come  for  the  Kings
account :  and  so  the  King  doeth  sell  it  here :  there  is
exceeding  great  gaine  therein.  And  thus  I  rest :  From
Mexico,  the  30  of  May 1590.

Bartholomew  Cano.

[A  letter
167

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1590.

A  letter  of  Frier  Alonso  new  elected  Bishop  of
Mechuacan,  to  the  king  of  Spaine,  written  in
Peru  in  the  citie  de  los  Reyes  the  first  of
March  1590,  touching  the  state  of  Arica  a
chiefe  Haven  in  Peru.

Pen Christmas even the yere 1589, I
received your majesties commission in
Potossi. For  which  I am  and shall  be
continually bound to pray for your
majesties  long  health,  for  the  great  bene-
fits which your  majestie  hath  bestowed
upon  me,  in  sending  me  to  Mechuacan :
whereby  my  great  travell  and  paines  may  be  recompenced,
which  I  have  taken  with  that  ungrateful  and  desperate
The  people  of  people  of  the  river  of  Plate,  which  they  have  bene  the
the  River  of occasion  of,  in  dealing  so  badly  with  me their  Pastour,
which  have  counselled  them,  that  they  should  have  a  great
care  to  serve  God,  and  be  dutifull  to  your  majestie,  accord-
ing as  every  good  and  true  subject  ought  to  do. Now  for
this  gift  which  your  majestie  hath  bestowed  on  me,  I  most
humbly  kisse your  majesties  handes a thousand times.
Thus  presently  I  departed  from  Potossi  somewhat  sickely,
to  accomplish  that  which  your  majestie  hath  commanded
me. So  I  arrived  at  Lima  in  safetie  the  first  of  February
by  the  way  of  Arica,  which  is  an  haven  towne,  where  they
imbarke  all  the  barres  of  silver. And  there  I  have  seene
what  is  done,  &  what  they  have  provided against the
Englishmen in that  haven : which  is ; That there is a
litle fort made  hard by the  waters  side,  with certaine
small  pieces  of  ordinance  in  the  said  fort  to  offend  the
enemie, if occasion should serve that they should
offer  to  come  into  the harbour  and  offer  any  violence.
But  the  principall  thing  of  all  that  we  want  is  to  have
souldiers,  foote  men,  and  horsemen. For  according  as  I
am  informed,  here  want  100  men  which  should  keepe  the
coast,  if  they  should  offer  to  land  and  march  up  into  the

168

Plate.

100  men
wanting.

SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED

A.D.

1590.

countrey. And  likewise  the  people  of  this  countrey  have

told  me,  that  if  upon  an  high  mount  which  is  here  in  the

harbour  neere  to  the  havens  mouth,  on  the  Southside  of

the  harbour  where  the  sea  doth  beat,  ther  were  two  or

three  great  Canons  planted  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  (where

very  good  watch  is  continually  kept)  from  that  place  they  Good  watch

may  reach  to  doe  the  enemie  great  hurt,  a  league  into  the  ^°^^^^^^^h

sea. The  new  Vice-roy  Don  Garcia  Urtado  de  Mendo9a, " '

worthy  of  that  dignitie,  is  in  great  favour  with  al  those  of

these realmes : for  that  he  is  a  great  soUiciter  both  by  [III.  562.]

sea  and land  in  all  kinde  of  diligence,  not  loosing  one

houre  in  your  service,  and  that  which  he  hath  in  charge.

With  as  much  speed  as  may  be  I  will  depart  from  hence

to  Mechuacan,  to  serve  that  church  and  your  majesty  :

and  there  I  will  remaine  according  to  your  majesties  com-

mandement,  with  the  bulles  or  indulgences. Our  Lord

keepe  your  majesty  many  yeres  in  his  holy  service. From

the  city  de  los  Reyes  the  first  of  March 1590.

Frier  Alonso  bishop  of  Mechuacan.

A  letter  of  Don  John  de  Miramontes  Suasola  to
Don  John  Garcias  de  Penalosa  from  Arica  on
the  coast  of  Peru  the  tenth  of  March 1590.

Fter  my  long  travell  and  badde  successe,
my  fortune  brought  mee  to  the  Indies;
where  being  void  of  all  hope,  and  full  of
griefe,  I  am  become  a  souldier  :  a  thing
in  this  countrey  which  is  most  hated  of
all  other  things,  not  onely  of  men,  but
of  the  wilde  beasts  :  and  is  an  occupation

which  is  chosen  of  idle persons. The  occasion  of  this
is,  that  there  have  bene  in  these  seas,  and  yet  are  certeine
English  rovers  :  and  in  seeking  of  them  I  have  travelled  English  men
these  three  yeres  :  the  one  of  the  yeres  a  souldier,  and  the '^^  ^^^ J^^^
other  two  yeeres  I  have  gone  for  captaine  and  ensigne- ^^^^  ^
bearer. And  at  this  time here  is  arrived  Don Garcias
Urtado  de  Mendo9a  viceroy  of  these  realmes :  who  hath

169

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

chosen  me  to  be  chiefe  ensigne-bearer  of  an  army  which

TMt  was  M. departed  from  hence  to  scoure  the  coast. For  here  we

Chidkys fleet,  }^^yg  iiewes  of  the  enemy,  which  is comming  upon  the

Deli/ht  was coast  :  for  wee  have  stayed  for  their  comming  these  foure

in  the  streights  moneths  the  same  way  which  they  must  come,  in  a  haven

ofMagelan  In called  Arica,  which  is  the  first  entry  of  Peru. So  I  have

January  and ^q  pezos  a  moneth,  besides  other  profits,  at  nine  reals  the

^  "■ pezo; & foure  shares  at  nine  reals  the  pezo. So  that

I have 1800  pezos  every  yere of  pay: for  the  viceroy

is  my  dere  friend,  and  maketh  great  account  of  me. And

I  have  alwayes  400  ducats  in  my  chest  to  goe  like  a  man.

I  beseech  God  send  us  quietnesse. But  yet  it  is  the  part

of  a  gentleman  to serve  the  king  his master in these

actions. And  thus  I rest. From the  harbour  of  Arica

the  tenth  of  March 1590.

I  kisse  your  worships  hands,  and  am  at  your  commande-
ment  Don  John  de  Miramontes  Suasola.

There  are  foure  great  galeons  of  350  tunnes  a  piece,

which are in Arica men of  warre, with a Generall,

Admirall, Viceadmirall, with great store of souldiers

which  keepe  this  haven :  for  the  viceroy  hath  intelligence

This  was  M. )i\y^\. there are certeine Englishmen of war comming

John  Chidkys  thither. This  haven  of  Arica  is  the  best  harbour  in  all
fleet

the  South  sea :  for  all  the silver  which commeth  from

the mines of  Potossi, is shipt in this  harbour,  and  so

brought to Lima. And likewise all the commodities

which  come  from  Spaine,  and  all  the  kings  quicksilver,

is  unladen  in  this  harbour,  and  so  caried  to  the  city  of

Lima  and  other  places,  where  the  mines  of  silver  are.

170

SPANISH  LETTERS  INTERCEPTED

A.D.
1590.

A  letter  of  the  Licentiate  Christopher  Uslano  to
Gonsalvo  de  Solana  in  the  city  of  Encisa  in
Spaine,  written  from  the  city  of  Potossi  in
Peru  the  20.  of  July  1590,  touching  a  great
plague  in  Peru,  and  the  shortnesse  of  the
passage  from  the  river  of  Plate  into  Potossi
in  Peru.

He  last  yeere  1588  I  received  letters
from  your  worship  and  from  my  sister :
and  since  that  time  I  have  received  none,
nor  in  the  fleet  which  came  to  Cartagena
1589.  And  this  yere  1590  there  hath  Famine.
bene  great  want  of  corne  in  this  kingdome
of  Potossi :  for  that  there  hath  beene  no
raine  in  this  kingdome  of  long  time.  For  in  March
the  husbandmen  use  to  sowe  their  corne :  and  in  Aprill
Winter  doth  begin.  And  if  in  April  there  be  no  raine,
the  corne  which  is  sowen  will  consume  away :  and  so  for
want  of  raine  we  have  had  two  badde  yeres  of  corne.
And  likewise  here  hath  bene  in  these  countreys  of  Potossi,
and  in  the  city  De  la  paz,  great  sicknesse  among  the  Plague.
Indians,  Mullatos,  and  Mesti90s,  called  the  small  pocks,
and  a  certeine  plague,  which  hath  destroyed  all  this
countrey.  And  there  have  no  olde  people  died,  nor
Spanyards,  but  onely  this  countrey  people,  from  one
yeere  to  30  yeeres  of  age :  so  for  want  of  Indians  we
can  not  worke  in  the  mines.  This  sicknesse  runneth
al  along  the  coast  of  Peru,  and  hath  passed  into  the
streights  of  Magalanes,  whence  we  have  newes  that  those
souldiers  which  were  sent  from  Spain  thither  to  build
those  forts  are  most  of  them  dead,  &  especially  the
workemen  which  came  to  make  the  forts.  The  Generall
Don  Diego  de  Abolos  hath  written  to  his  majesty  to
send  more  souldiers  and  more  workemen,  whereby  these
three  forts  might  be  builded  according  to  the  kings
commandement. This  sicknesse  came  first  from Carta-

171

A.D.

1590.

[III. 563.]

Peru  utterly
undone  with
the  plague.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

gena  to  this  countrey,  which  is  1000  leagues  distant:
and,  as  I  sayd,  it  hath  gone  all  Peru  over,  to  the  utter
undoing  of  this  countrey:  I  pray  God  to  cease  it.  I
pray  you  when  you  write  any  letters  to  mee,  send
them  in  those  shippes  which  come  to  Sainct  Thome,
and  take  in  Negros.  And  there  are  great  store  of  ships
which goe to Sainct Thome  for Negros,  and  it  is  but

THEMCHE

OF-POTOSSL*

15.  dayes  sailing over a gulfe to Brasill. And from

Brasill  their  shippes  bring  their  Negros  to  a  haven  called

A  short  pas- The  haven  of  Buenos  Aeres,  which  is  within  the  entrance

sage  from q£  ^^  mightie  river  of  Plate, And  from  this  harbour

tnlhe^rive7of  ^  ki^de  of  Spanish  and  Portugall  commodities  are  caried

Plate  to  Peru,  to  this  citie  of  Potossi  in  carts  and  on  horses : for  it  is

but 10.  or 12.  dayes  journey,  and  the  countrey  is  very

plaine  for  carts  to travaile. And  from  Potossi to  this

harbour  is  great  store  of  treasure brought to buy  that

countrey commodities, and so they are shipped for

172

SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED

A.D.
1590.

Portugall :  and the ships  go and come  againe  in  short
time. If  his majestic  will  consent  that  we may  have
traffique  from Spaine  to this harbour, it  will be  very-
profitable  : and in five  or sixe moneths I shall heare
from you, & you shall doe  the  like  from me. And
by  the  way  of  Cartagena  it  is  sometime  2.  yeres  before  The  tedious-
we  can receive  your  letters  from  Spaine. By  this  way  ^^"^°f^^
my  brother  may  write,  and  so  by  this  meane  the  letters -^  ^  p^^^^
may speedily come to my hand. And thus I rest.
From  this  citie  of  Potossi  the  20.  of  July 1590.

The  Licenciate  Christopher  Uslano.

A  letter  of  Steven  de  Tresio  to  Alonso  Martines
Vaca  in  Sivil  from  Panama  the  21.  of  August
1590.  touching  the  kings  desire  to  borrow
money  upon  privie  seales,  and  the  want  of
the  countrey.

T  may  please  your  worship  to  understand,
that  I  have  received  a  packet  of  letters
from  you,  wherein  you  write  unto  me  of
the  great  miseries  and  the  calamities  of
Spaine.  And  I  promise  you  that  these
countreys  are  in  no  lesse.  For  here  is
great  want  of  corne  and  other  kind  of
provision :  for  here  is  almost  none  to  be  had  for  any
money,  by  reason  that  from  Lima  there  is  no  shipping
come  with  maiz.  Here  wee  have  had  newes  from  Spaine
of  the  great  provision  which  is  making  ready  for  those
great  wars  which  his  majestie  is  in  preparing,  &  of  the
great  sums  of  money  that  his  majestie  standeth  in  neede
of:  So  that  it  doth  put  us  all  that  are  dwellers  here  in  such
a  perplexitie  and  confusion,  that  we  know  not  what  we
shall  doe.  I  pray  God  his  majestie  take  not  away  our
money  which  wee  have  sent  to  Spaine  in  the  fleete.  For
here  are  marchants  that  have  sent  some  200000.  pezos,
some  1 00000.  pezos,  some  60000.  some  more  some
lesse, to have it imployed in commodities of that

173

A.D,

1590.

Prime  scales
to  borrow
money  sent
into  Peru.

Abundance  of
money  to  come
from  Lima
and  from  The
Valles,

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

countrey.  Although  the  king  hath  sent  hither  his
scedule  or  bill  of  assignement  signed  and  sealed  by  his
majestie,  which  hath  bene  proclaimed  here :  The  contents
whereof  are,  That  what  man  soever  marchant  or  other
will  send  their  money  into  Spaine  in  that  fleete,  his
majestie  will  not  take  away  any  part  or  portion  thereof,
(which  in  so  doing  will  bee  a  great  comfort  unto  us  all)
yet  here  we  were  in  doubt  that  hee  would  take  it  from
us  all.  Newes  from  the  citie  of  Lima  as  yet  we
have  none :  But  I  can  certifie  your  worshippe,  that  all
things  are  very  deere  here,  and  that  we  stand  in  great
extremitie  for  want  of  victuals ;  and  likewise  we  have
great  want  of  money.  Also  here  is  order  come  from
the  king  with  certaine  privie  scales  for  to  lend  his
majestie  money,  for  that  hee  hath  great  neede  thereof.
This  countrey  at  this  instant  is  very  poore,  and  there
are  none  that  can  lend  the  king  at  this  time  any  money
at  all,  by  reason  that  this  lande  is  left  so  unprovided
of  money :  But  wee  are  looking  for  great  store  of  money,
which  is  to  come  from  Lima  and  from  the  Valles.
From  Panama  the 12.  of  August 1590.

Steven de  Tresio.

A  letter  of  the  Licentiate  John  de  Labera  to  the
Licentiate  Alonso  Sapata  de  Henao  in  Castile
in  Calamea  de  la  Sorengo,  written  from  S.  Fee
de  Bogota  in  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  the
10.  of  May  1590.  touching  the  rich  silver
mines  of  Marequita  newly  found  out,  and  the
long  way  thither  by  the  river  of  Magdalena.

Ith  other  letters  which  I  dispatched  from  hence
in  August  1589.  I  wrote  unto  your  worship  by
2.  or  3.  wayes :  but  I  know  not  whether  you
have  received  them  or  no.  Presently  after  I  departed
to  the  government  of  Popayan,  which  joineth  with
the  citie  of  Quito  in  the  coast  of  Peru,  in  companie
of the governors lieutenant Don Diego Ordonez de

174

SPANISH  LETTERS  INTERCEPTED ad.

1590.
Lara of  Salamanca. But I was faine to forsake his  [III.  564.]
companie,  by  reason I fell sicke  in the  citie  of  Mare-
quita,  where  they  have  discovered  the  great  silver  mines :
which citie is above 200. leagues from Cartagena :
where I remained a certaine time very sicke. And
because  this  countrey  is  extreme  hotte,  and  I  every  day
grew worse and worse, I was faine to travaile 30.
leagues  further  up  into  the  maine  land  to  a  citie  called  T^^  "^^^  °f
S.  Fee  in  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  being  on the  ^f^^"^  ^^^  ^^

.  the  TtCW

coast  of  Peru :  which is  a cold countrey :  where  I  am  /^i^^^iom  of
admitted a  procurator, for that the Royal  audience  is  Granada.
kept in  this  citie. So  I  finde  my  selfe  very  healthy  of
bodie, by  reason this  countrey is  full of  all kind of
victuals,  very  good  and  very  plentifull,  as  bread,  cheese,
bacon, beefe,  great  store  of  hennes,  and  great  store  of
comfeitures. Onely  here  is  want  of  golde :  so  that  this
countrey  will  be  utterly  undone,  if  the  mines  of  Mare-
quita  help  not  to  restore  the  same  again  :  whereof  there
is  good  hope :  for here  is  great  store  of  metall  already  Great  store  of
found,  and  the  workmen  are  in  hand  to  refine  the  said  ^^^i^U°^^^^^^
metal  :  so  that  we  are  in  good  hope  that  great  store  of  of^arequlta
silver  will  be  found  in  these  mines  of  great  value  and
profite to  his majestic. This river  is  called the  great
river  of  Magdalena. There  is  a  fish  in  the  river  called  The  great
Cayman,  which  followeth  after  the  canoas :  and  if  it  can  ^^^'^  y^^S-
reach  any  man  in  the  canoa,  it  will  haile  him  out  and
devoure  him. All  night  they  lie  in  the  sand  on  shore.
In  this  river  as  we  are going  up,  there is at certaine
seasons  great  store  of  lightning  and  thunder,  with  such
abundance of raine, as though the skies would fall
downe :  and  so  it doth continue from midnight until
morning :  so  that  we  are  faine  to  go  aboord  the  canoas,
&  with  certaine  broad  leaves  which  grow  in  the  countrey,
the mariners make a covering  to  cast over the  wares
which  are  laden  in  the  canoas :  and  it  doth  keepe  both
the  raine  &  sunne  from  us  which  are  passengers. The
canoas  are  drawen  up  this  river  of  Magdalena  by  maine
force  of  the  mariners  in  rowing  and  haling  them  with

175

A.D.

1590.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Peru

ropes.  There  are  7.  or  8.  Indians  commonly  which
guide  these  canoas,  besides  the  Master  which  keepeth
the  helme,  and  the  passengers.  We  are  commonly
two  moneths  in  going  up  this  river.  It  is  150.  leagues
to  the  landing  place.  And  there  the  marchants  unlade
their  marchandise,  which  serve  for  all  the  cities  and
townes  which  are  in  this  newe  kingdome  of  Granada.
And  the  marchants  lade  the  canoas  backe  againe  from
thence  with  great  store  of  silver  and  golde  which  is
gotten  out  of  the  mines  for  Cartagena,  and  there  it  is
shipped  for  Spaine.  And  likewise  here  is  great
quantitie  of  treasure  laden  in  the  sayd  canoas  which
is  for  the  kings  custome  and  other  dueties  which  are
paid  :  But  they  are  but  a  moneth  or  three  weekes  going

The  richest downe  the  river  to Cartagena. These are the richest

mines  in  all  j^j^es  in  all  Peru. And  thus  I  rest.

From  Santa  Fee  de  Bogota  in  the  new  kingdome  of
Granada  in  Peru  the 10.  of  May  1590.

The  Licentiate  John  de  Labera.

A  letter  of  Hieronymo  de  Nabares  to  the
licenciat  John  Alonso  dwelling  in  Valladolid,
written  from  Panama  to  Sivil  the  24.  day
of  August  1590.  touching  the  gainefulnes
of  the  trade  to  the  Philippinas,  and  the
extreme  feare  they  have  of  the  Englishmen.

Ot  long  agone  I  wrote  to  your  worship
from  Panama  by  the  way  of  Havana  :
giving  you  to  understand  of  my  being
here,  &  of  the  state  of  these  countreys.
After  I  departed  from  Spaine,  in  37.
dayes  wee  arrived  at  Cartagena :  and
from thence I tooke shipping to goe

to  Nombre  de  Dios,  which  is  80.  leagues  from
Cartagena :  and  in  4.  dayes  wee  got  thither.  And
from  thence  I  went  to  Panama  :  where  I  have  remained
these  20.  dayes,  till  the  shippes  goe  for  the  Philippinas.

176

SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED  a.d.

1590-
My  meaning  is  to  carie  my  commodities  thither  :  for  it
is  constantly  reported,  that  for  every  hundred  ducats  a  The  great
man  shall  get  600.  ducats  cleerely.  Wee  must  stay  here  ^^^^j^  "-^^^^
in  Panama  from  August  till  it  be  Christmasse.  For  phiuppinas,
in  August,  September,  October  and  November  it  is
winter  here,  and  extreme  foule  weather  upon  this  coast
of  Peru,  and  not  navigable  to  goe  to  the  Philippinas,
nor  to  any  place  else  in  the  South  sea.  So  that  at
Christmasse  the  ships  begin  to  set  on  their  voyage  for
those  places  :  and  then  in  these  parts  the  summer
beginneth  with  very  faire  weather,  and  alwayes  we
shall  have  the  windes  with  us.  For  in  July  until
October  here  is  terrible  thundering  and  lightening
with  extreme  raines,  so  that  it  is  not  possible  to  go
any  way  in  this  countrey.  Here  are  in  Panama  10.
great  ships  of  500,  400,  300,  &  200.  tuns  apiece,  &
some  15.  barkes  which  use  commonly  to  saile  in  the
South  sea  to  Lima,  to  the  Valles,  to  Arica,  and  to  the
Philippinas.  This  countrey  in  the  summer  is  so  extreme
hotte,  that  it  is  not  possible  to  travel  in  the  day  time  :  [III.  565.]
it  standeth  in  8.  deg.  &  \.  and  all  this  coast  is  in  9.
and  10.  deg.  Here  is  great  store  of  adders,  snakes
and  toades,  which  are  in  the  houses,  but  they  doe  but
small  hurt.  Here  bread,  wine,  and  bacon  are  very
deere,  by  reason  the  countrey  doth  not  yeeld  it  :  for
it  is  brought  from  Peru. A  li.  of  bread  is  worth here

2,  rials  of  plate:  a  quart  of  wine  is  solde  for  4.  rials:
for  none  groweth  here.  Here  are  very  few  sheep,  and
those extreme deere. The only food here for flesh,

are oxen,  kine,  buls  &  heffkers  :  you  may  buy  20.  li.  Twenty  11.  of

of  beefe for one rial of  plate. Their smallest money  ^^^  ^'^'3  ^^^

of  silver  is a  rial  of  plate,  &  very  few  of  them,  but  all  f  ^<?^{>«-^^
r  o r, -r>  1  -1  •  1.111 pence  tn  Peru.

pieces or  4. oc 8. ror the silver  mines  which dayly

be found in Peru be wonderfull to bee spoken of.

If  a man did not see the silver made, hee would

never beleeve it  : for the  very earth which commeth

out of  the mines, & is afterward washed, being but

3.  or 4. yeres on a mount, yeeldeth great store of

X  177  M

A.D.

1590.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

silver  afterwards  againe.  But  as  here  we  get  much,
so  our  charge  in  meat,  drinke  and  apparell  doth  cost
very  much.  As  for  fruite  here  is  none  that  is  good,
but  onely  muske  melons,  and  they  are  sold  for  6.  or
8.  rials  apeece.  I  can  certifie  your  worship  of  no
newes,  but  only,  that  all  this  countrey  is  in  such  extreme
The  English-  feare  of  the  Englishmen  our  enemies,  that  the  like  was
men  exti emely  j^^ygj.  seene  or  heard  of:  for  in  seeing  a  saile,  presently
here  are  alarmes  in  all  the  countrey.  I  pray  you  to  write
unto  me  as  touching  the  wars  that  his  Majestie  hath  with
our  enemies,  and  howe  his  Majestie  doth  prevaile.  And
thus  I  rest.  From  Panama  in  the  firme  land  the  28.
of  Aug. 1590.  HiERONYMo  de  Nabares.

A  relation  of  a  memorable  fight  made  the  13.  of
June  1 59 1,  against  certaine  Spanish  ships  &
gallies  in  the  West  Indies,  by  3.  ships  of  the
honorable  sir  George  Carey  knight,  then
marshall  of  her  Majesties  houshold,  and
captaine  of  the  He  of  Wight,  now  lord
Hunsdon,  lord  Chamberlaine,  and  captaine
of  the  honourable  band  of  her  Majesties
Pensioners.

He  13.  of  June  1591.  being  Sunday,  at  5.
of  the  clock  in  the  morning  we  descried
6.  saile  of  the  king  of  Spaine  his  ships.
Foure  of  them  were  armadas,  (viz.  the
Admirall  and  viceadmirall  of  700.  tuns
apeece,  and  the  other  2.  of  600.  apeece)
and  the  other  2.  were  smal  ships,  each  of
them  about  100.  tuns.  We  met  w'  them  off  the  Cape  de
Corrientes,  which  standeth  on  the  Hand  of  Cuba.  The
sight  of  the  foresaid  ships  made  us  joyfull,  hoping  that
they  should  make  our  voyage.  But  assoone  as  they
descryed  us,  they  made  false  fires  one  to  another  &
gathered  their  fleet  together,  lying  all  close  by  a  wind  to

178

^^.

VALIANT FIGHT OF THE 'CONTENT'  ad.

1591.

the  Southwards.  We  therefore  at  6.  of  the  clock  in  the
morning  (the  wind  being  at  East)  having  made  our
prayers  to  almighty  God,  prepared  our  selves  for  the
fight :  And  (in  hope  they  had  bene  of  the  Cartagena
fleete)  wee  bare  up  with  our  admirall  and  viceadmiral,
to  determine  of  the  combate  for  the  better  direction
thereof.  Our  parle  being  ended,  our  admiral,  vice-
admiral,  &  the  Hopewel  gave  their  admiral  the  prow,
bringing  themselves  to  leeward  of  him.  We  in  the
Content  bare  up  with  their  viceadmiral,  and  (ranging
along  by  his  broad  side  aweather  of  him)  gave  him  a
voley  of  muskets  and  our  great  ordinance :  then  comming
up  with  another  small  ship  ahead  of  the  former,  wee
hailed  her  in  such  sort,  that  shee  payd  roome.  Thus
being  in  fight  with  the  little  ship,  we  saw  a  great  smoke
come  from  our  admiral,  and  the  Hopewel  &  Swallow
forsaking  him  with  all  the  sailes  they  could  make :  where-
upon bearing  up  with  our  admiral  (before  we  could  come
to  him)  we  had  both  the  small  ships  to  windward  of  us,
purposing  (if  we  had  not  bene  too  hotte  for  them)  to
have  layd  us  aboord.  Thus  (the  fight  continuing  be-
tween us  and  them  3.  houres)  we  were  forced  to  stand
to  the  Northwards,  the  Hopewel  and  the  Swallow  not  com-
ming in  all  this  while  to  ayd  us,  as  they  might  easily
have  done.  Our  admirall  by  this  time  being  in  fight
with  their  viceadmiral,  and  another  great  ship  of  theirs,
stood  off  to  sea  with  his  topgallant  saile,  and  all  the  sailes
he  could  make :  then  might  the  Hopewel  &  the  Swallow
have  payd  roome  to  second  him,  but  they  failed  him  as
they  did  us,  standing  off  close  by  a  wind  to  the  Eastward.
All  this  time  we  were  forced  to  the  Northwards  with  2.
of  their  great  ships  and  one  of  their  small.  They  having
a  loom  gale  (wee  being  altogether  becalmed)  w'  both  their
great  ships  came  up  faire  by  us,  shot  at  us,  and  on  the
sudden  furled  their  spritsailes  &  mainsailes,  thinking  that
wee  could  not  escape  them.  Then  falling  to  prayer,  we
shipped  our  oars  that  we  might  rowe  to  shore,  &  anker
in  shallow  water  where  their  great  ships  could  not  come

179

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

nie  us,  for  other  refuge  we  had  none.  Then  i.  of  their
smal  ships  being  manned  from  i.  of  their  great,  &
having  a  boat  to  rowe  themselves  in,  shipped  her  oars
likewise  &  rowed  after  us,  thinking  w'  their  small  shot
to  have  put  us  from  our  oars,  until  ye  great  ships
might  come  up  with  us :  but  by  ye  time  she  was  within
[III.  566.]  musket  shot,  the  Lord  of  his  mercie  did  send  us  a  faire
gale  of  wind  at  the  Northwest  off  the  shore.  What
time  (they  being  all  to  leeward  of  us)  wee  stood  to
the  East.  The  small  ship  was  under  our  lee  within
Falcon  shot,  and  another  great  shippe  lay  to  the  West-
ward, so  that  wee  could  no  way  possibly  escape  them
upon  that  boord :  then  (we  thinking  to  avoyd  them  by
casting  about  to  the  Westwards)  the  other  great  shippe
gate  under  our  lee,  and  the  small  ship  on  our  weather
quarter,  purposing  to  make  us  pay  roome  with  the  great
ship,  by  force  of  her  small  &  great  shot.  Then  (we
being  lerboord  tacked,  and  they  sterboord)  we  made
her  spring  her  looffe,  and  by  a  fortunate  shot  which
our  gunner  made,  pierced  her  betwixt  winde  and
water.  Hereupon  shee  was  forced  to  lay  herselfe
upon  the  carena,  and  to  stand  with  one  of  the
other  ships  for  ayde.  Afterward  (commending  our
selves  to  almightie  God  in  prayer,  and  giving  him  thankes
for  the  winde  which  he  had  sent  us  for  our  deliverance)
we  looked  forth  and  descryed  two  saile  more  to  the  offen  :
these  we  thought  to  have  bene  the  Hopewell,  and  the
Swallow  that  had  stoode  in  to  ayde  us :  but  it  prooved
farre  otherwise,  for  they  were  two  of  the  kings  gallies.
Nowe  having  a  loome  gale  of  winde,  wee  shipped  our
oars,  and  rowed  off  the  shore :  and  our  watch  was  no
sooner  set,  but  wee  espied  one  gallie  under  our  lee  hard
by  us,  boging  up  with  us.  Then  (because  it  was  evening)
one  of  the  great  ships  discharged  sixe  great  shot  at  us,
to  the  ende  the  gallies  should  knowe  that  wee  were  the
shippe  they  looked  for.  Then  the  gallie  came  up,  and
(hayling  us  of  whence  our  shippe  was)  a  Portugall  which
wee  had with us,  made  them answere,  that  we  were of

VALIANT FIGHT OF THE 'CONTENT'  ad.

1591-
the  fleete  of  Tierra  firma,  and  of  Sivil:  with  that  they
bid  us  amaine  English  dogs,  and  came  upon  our  quarter
star-boord :  and  giving  us  five  cast  pieces  out  of  her
prowe,  they  sought  to  lay  us  aboord :  but  wee  so  galled
them  with  our  muskets,  that  we  put  them  from  our
quarter.  Then  they  winding  their  gallie,  came  up  into
our  Sterne,  and  with  the  way  that  the  gallie  had,  did  so
violently  thrust  in  the  boordes  of  our  Captaines  cabbin,
that  her  nose  came  into  it,  minding  to  give  us  all  their
prowe,  and  so  to  sinke  us.  But  wee  being  resolute,  so
plyed  them  with  our  small  shot,  that  they  could  have  no
time  to  discharge  their  great  ordinance :  and  when  they
began  to  approch,  wee  heaved  into  them  a  ball  of  fire,  and
by  that  meanes  put.  them  off:  whereupon  they  once
againe  fell  asterne  of  us,  and  gave  us  a  prowe.  Then
having  the  second  time  put  them  off,  wee  went  to  prayer,
and  sang  the  first  part  of  the  25.  Psalme,  praysing  God
for  our  safe  deliverance.  This  being  done,  we  might  see
2.  gallies  and  a  frigat  all  three  of  them  bending  them-
selves together  to  encounter  us :  hereupon  we  (eftsoones
commending  our  estate  into  the  hands  of  God)  armed
our  selves,  and  resolved  (for  the  honour  of  God,  her
Majestic,  and  our  countrey)  to  fight  it  out  till  the  last
man.  Then  shaking  a  pike  of  fire  in  defiance  of  the
enemie,  and  weaving  them  amaine,  we  bad  them  come
aboord :  and  an  Englishman  in  the  gallie  made  answer,
that  they  would  come  aboord  presently.  So  managing
ourselves  to  our  furniture,  and  every  moment  expecting
the  assault,  wee  heard  them  parle  to  this  effect,  that  they
determined  to  keepe  us  companie  till  the  morning,  and
then  to  make  an  end  with  us :  then  giving  us  another
shot  from  one  of  the  gallies,  they  fell  asterne.  Thus
our  fight  continued  with  the  shippes  and  with  the  gallies,  A  fight  from
from  seven  of  the  clock  in  the  morning  till  eleven  at  7-  ^'^/^^
night.  Howbeit  God  (which  never  faileth  them  that  ^^^^^at^Lht
put  their  trust  in  him)  sent  us  a  gale  of  winde  about  two
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  at  Eastnortheast,  which  was
for  the  preventing  of  their  crueltie,  and  the  saving  of  our

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I59I'

lives.  Also  (the  Lord  be  praised  for  it)  in  all  this
dangerous  fight,  wee  had  not  one  man  slaine,  and  but  2.
hurt :  but  our  sayles  and  ropes  were  so  rent  with  their
shot,  that  it  was  wonderfuU  to  behold :  our  maine  mast
also  was  shot  cleane  through,  whereby  wee  were  in  exceed-
ing great  danger.  Thus  our  consortes  forsooke  us,  and
left  us  in  these  extremities.  The  next  day  being  the  14.
of  June  in  the  morning,  wee  sawe  all  our  adversaries  to
lee-ward  of  us,  and  they  espying  us,  chased  us  till  10.  of
the  clocke,  and  then  seeing  they  could  not  prevaile,  gave
us  over.  So  that  day  about  5.  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  we  bare  up  to  the  Southwest,  in  hope  to  finde  our
consortes,  but  we  had  no  sight  of  them  at  that  time,  nor
afterward.  Then  stoode  we  in  all  that  night  for  the  Cape
of  S.  Anthonie,  hoping  there  to  see  our  Admirall  accord-
ing to  his  direction.  The  15.  day  of  June  early  in  the
morning,  we  descryed  the  Spanish  fleete  againe,  being
within  5.  leagues  of  Cape  S.  Anthonie.  Then  (having
no  sight  of  our  consortes)  wee  stoode  for  the  place
according  to  the  direction  of  our  owner  sir  George  Carey,
where  we  did  plie  for  the  space  of  23.  dayes,  and  never
could  see  any  sayle  but  two  frigats,  which  wee  gave  chase
unto  the  24.  of  June,  and  could  not  fet  them  up.  Thus
wee  give  God  most  humble  thankes  for  our  safe  deliver-
ance from  the  cruell  enemie,  which  hath  beene  more
mightie  by  the  providence  of  God,  then  any  tongue
can  expresse :  to  whom  bee  all  prayse,  honour,  and
glory,  both  now  and  ever,  Amen,

Appendix.

THe  barke  called  The  Content  had  but  one  Minion,
one  Falcon,  one  Saker,  &  2.  port-bases.  She  con-
tinued fight  (from  seven  in  the  morning  til  sunset)  with
[III.  567.]  3.  armadas  of  600.  and  700.  tunnes  apiece,  and  one  small
shippe  of  100.  tunnes,  not  being  above  musket  shot  from
any  of  them.  And  before  the  sunne  was  set,  there  came
up  to  her  two  of  the  kings  gallies.  Besides,  the  Armadas
shot  their  great  ordinance  continually  at  her,  not  so  few

VALIANT FIGHT OF THE 'CONTENT'

as  500.  times.  And  the  sides,  hull,  and  mastes  of  the
Content  were  sowed  thicke  with  musket  bullets.  More-
over, all  their  sheats,  tops  and  shrowdes  were  almost  cut
insunder  with  their  great  &  small  shot.  There  passed
from  the  galies  (each  whereof  came  thrise  up  to  her,  &
discharged  five  great  pieces  at  a  time,  out  of  every  their
prowes  forthright,  within  three  yards  of  her  poope)
through  her  maine  saile  19.  great  shot,  through  her  maine
top-saile  foure :  through  her  fore-saile  seven :  through
her  fore-top-saile  five :  and  through  her  maine  maste  one.
The  upper  part  of  the  Content  was  hurt  in  five  places.
Onely  13  men  continued  this  fight,  the  rest  being  in
hold.

A  ffigat  of  the  Spaniards  (being  afterward  taken)
confessed,  that  there  were  in  the  gallies  above  40.  Span-
iards slaine,  and  many  were  hurt  in  that  combate.

The  names  of  those  13  persons  that  continued  the
fight.

Nicolas  Lisle,  Captaine.
M.  Major,  Lieutenant.
William  King, Master.
John  Barwick,  Mrs.  mate.  \-
William  Clement,  gunner.
Thomas  Houldships,
Bote-swaine.

A.D.

1591-

'  Charles  Creame.
Thomas  Godfrey.
Giles  Thornton.
.^  John  Pells.
John  Bourel.
Ralph  Grey.
William  Heore.

The  names  of  the  rest  be  these  following.

John  Pie.

John  Smith.
John  White.
John  Butcher.
John  Brooke.

'  John  Towpenie.

Edmund  Giggs.

■\  William Bateman.

William  White.

Laurence  Shellie.

183

[A  true

A.D.

I59I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  true  report  of  a  voyage  undertaken  for  the
West  Indies  by  M.  Christopher  Newport
Generall  of  a  fleete  of  three  shippes  and  a
pinnesse,  viz.  The  golden  Dragon  Admirall,
whereof  was  Captaine  M.  Newport  himselfe  ;
The  Prudence  Vice-admirall,  under  the  con-
duct of  Captaine  Hugh  Merrick ;  The  Mar-
garet under  Captaine  Robert  Fred;  and  The
Virgin  our  pinnesse  under  Captaine  Henry
Kidgil:  Begun  from  London  the  25.  of
Januarie  1 591.  Written  by  M.  John  Twitt
of  Harewich,  Corporall  in  the  Dragon.  In
which  voyage  they  tooke  and  burnt  upon  the
coast  of  Hispaniola,  within  the  bay  of  Hon-
duras, and  other  places,  3.  townes,  and  19.
saile  of  shippes and frigats.

He  12.  daye  of  Februarie  An.  1591.  we
set  saile  from  Dover  roade,  and  having
a  prosperous  winde,  the  27.  day  of  the
same  moneth  wee  fell  with  Cape  Cantin
on  the  coast  of  Barbarie,  and  on  the  28.
wee  arrived  at  Santa  Cruz  roade,  where
having  refreshed  our  selves  some  3.  or  4.
dayes,  we  put  off  to  sea  againe,  and  about  the  5.  of
March  wee  passed  by  the  Hands  of  the  Canaries :  and
having  a  favourable  wind,  the  4.  of  April  An.  1592.  we
fell  with  Dominica  in  the  West  Indies :  where  making
stay  a  day  or  two,  wee  bartred  with  the  Salvages  for
certaine  commodities  of  theirs,  viz.  Tabacco,  hennes.
Potato  rootes,  &c.

Passing  from  thence  to  a  watering  place  on  the  other
side  of  the  cliffe,  wee  tooke  a  Portugal!  ship  of  Lisbone
of  300.  tuns,  which  came  from  Guinie,  and  was  bound
for  Cartagena,  wherein  were  300.  Negros  young  and  olde.
Which  ship  we  tooke  along  with  us  to  S.  Juan  de  Puerto

184

CHRISTOPHER NEWPORT

1591-

rico,  where  we  landed  the  marchant  and  one  Spaniard
more  within  a  league  of  the  towne,  and  landing  some  20.
or  30.  musketiers,  some  20.  horsemen  made  towards  us ;
but  wee  retired  to  our  boates  without  any  service  done.

The  9.  we  lay  hovering  all  day  before  the  towne,  the
castle  making  a  shot  or  two  at  us.

The  reason  why  wee  set  the  Portugall  marchant  aland
there  was,  for  that  he  hoped  to  helpe  us  to  some  money
for  his  Negros  there,  but  he  falsified  his  worde  with  us,
so  that  passing  along  to  the  Westermost  ende  of  the  sayde
Hand,  about  some  9.  or  10.  leagues  from  the  towne  wee
landed  the  Negros,  and  sunke  their  ship.

The II.  of  Aprill  we  passed  from thence  to Mona  [III.  568.}
some  15.  leagues  off,  where  we  landed  :  there  were  on  the
Hand  about  19.  soules,  the  children  of  an  olde  Portugall,
and  his  wife  who  afFourded  us  such  fruits  as  their  Hand
yeelded,  viz.  swines  flesh,  Potato  rootes,  &c.

From  thence  along  wee  passed  to  Saona,  a  long  Hand
and  very  fruitfuU,  replenished  with  store  of  wilde  beastes
and  swine,  where  we  landed,  hunted,  and  trained  our  men.

Passing  from  hence  Westward  along  the  South  coast  of
Hispaniola,  wee  descryed  a  frigat,  which  wee  chased  and
tooke :  wherein  were  22.  jarres  of  copper-money,  being
bound for S.  Juan  de  Puerto  rico,  to  buy  wine  there.

The  next  day  we  tooke  2.  small  frigats  more,  but
nothing  of  any  value  in  them.

The  15.  of  Aprill  at  night  wee  sacked  a  towne  in  the
sayde  Hand  of  Hispaniola  called  Ocoa,  where  was  an
Ingenio,  wherein  we  found  sugar  &  poultrie  great  store,
but  the  people  had  discovered  our  ships  over  night,  and
were  fled  into  the  mountaines.  This  town  standeth  a
league  from  the  seaside,  consisting  of  some  fortie  or  fiftie
houses.  They  brought  us  much  cattell,  and  two  wayne
loades  of  sugar,  to  ransome  the  towne.  While  this  action
was  perfourmed,  Robert  Freed  of  Harwich,  captaine  of
the  Margaret,  tooke  two  frigats  with  certaine  Spaniards  on
the  other  side  of  the  bay,  which  came  to  lade  sugar  there
at  an  Ingenio.

185

A.D.
I59I,

This  towne
standeth  from
the  waters  side
a  league.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

After  we  had  here  refreshed  our  selves,  wee  stode
along  for  Cape  Tiburon,  where  we  watered :  and  making
no  stay  there,  about  the  23.  of  Aprill  wee  left  our  shippes
in  a  faire  road-sted  under  an  Hand  not  inhabited,  and  with
our  frigats  which  wee  had  taken  before,  wherein  wee
shipped  all  our  strength  which  possibly  wee  could  afFourd,
leaving  onely  so  fewe  aboord  our  shippes  as  could  hardly
if  neede  had  bene,  have  wrought  them ;  we  passed  along
by  the  sayd  Hand  to  the  Northwest  part  of  Hispaniola,  to
a  towne  called  Yaguana ;  where  the  27.  in  the  morning  2.
houres  before  day  we  landed ;  but  wee  were  discovered
by  meanes  of  a  frigat  that  lay  laden  with  victuals,  bound
for  Carthagena,  the  men  of  which  frigat  recovering  on
lande  before  us,  gave  an  alarme  to  the  towne,  who  were
presently  up  in  armes  to  the  number  of  a  hundred  &
fiftie  horses.  Wee  marched  notwithstanding  along  to  the
towne,  having  a  Spaniard  for  our  guide,  where  by  that
time  the  day  brake,  we  were  before  the  towne,  where  upon
a  faire  greene  making  a  stand,  we  were  encountred  by  the
horsemen  having  no  strength  of  foote,  but  certaine  few
loose  shot  which  lay  in  a  low  valley  at  the  entrie  of  the
towne.  The  horsemen  charged  us  very  fiercely,  but
seeing  they  could  not  prevaile,  brought  in  a  drove  before
them  of  two  hundred  beastes  or  more :  and  so  forcibly
thinking  to  have  broken  our  array,  it  pleased  God  to
cause  their  cattell  to  returne  backe  upon  themselves :  and
thus  their  owne  device  sorted  out  to  their  owne  detriment.
In  this  skirmish  wee  slewe  their  governour,  a  man  very
hardy,  and  of  great  valure.

In  the  end,  by  reason  of  the  Spaniards  brags  which  they
gave  out,  (as  by  the  life  of  their  wives  and  children,  &c.
that  not  one  of  us  should  goe  aboord  againe)  a  greater
doubt  of  intercepting  of  us  and  of  our  boates  was  stroken
into  our  captaines  hearts  then  needed :  and  so  for  that
time  we  retired  to  our  boates  not  entring  the  towne,  and
so  passed  with  our  boates  to  our  ships  againe ;  where  the
same  night  our  captaine  determined  to  goe  up  with  our
shippes,  but  it  fell  so  calme,  that  all  the  next  day  untill

186

CHRISTOPHER NEWPORT  a.d.

1591.
night  we  could  not  get  up,  and  they  having  discovered
us,  baricadoed  up  their  way,  and  conveyed  all  that  they
had  into  the  mountaines,  leaving  their  houses  onely  bare
and  naked,  notwithstanding  we  landed,  and  with  great
difficultie  wee  passed  their  baricados  with  the  losse  of  two
men  at  both  conflicts,  entred  their  towne  and  fired  it,
leaving  not  an  house  unburnt,  being  a  towne  of  three
streetes  having  about 150.  housholds.

The  same  night  wee  passed  with  our  boates  to  a  small
village  called  Aguava,  where  we  found  excellent  fruites
of  the  countrey,  which  by  reason  of  their  cowardly  brags
wee  also  set  on  fire.

Being  thus  frustrated  of  our  pretended  voyage,  we
stoode  for  the  bay  of  Honduras,  and  about  the  ninth  of
May  we  discovered  in  the  afternoone  a  saile  thwart  of  the
bay  of  Truxillo,  with  whom  we  stoode,  and  having  a
Spanish  flagge  out,  they  mistrusted  us  not,  untill  we  had
almost  fet  them  up :  and  then  wee  went  off  with  our
boate,  and  tooke  them  within  shot  of  the  castle,  and  with
our  boates  wee  went  and  fet  three  or  foure  frigats  which  "T^^y  thought
rode  afore  the  towne,  the  castle  playing  upon  us  with  ^°^^  fi^^^^
their  ordmance. _  ^  ^  ^.,^  5^^^-^,^

Our  captaine  having  understanding  by  the  Spaniards,  for  so  they
that  there  were  three  shippes  more  at  Puerto  de  Cavallos,  expected.
stood  along  that  night  for  that  place,  but  it  fell  out  to
bee  so  calme,  that  it  was  the  fifteenth  day  of  May  or  ever
wee  came  there,  the  shippes  having  peradventure  dis-
covered us,  stole  alongst  the  shoare  towards  Truxillo,  so
that  being  voyde  of  that  hope,  we  landed ;  the  inhabitants
forsaking  the  towne,  fled  into  the  mountaines.  Wee  [HI-  569.]
remained  in  the  towne  all  night,  and  the  next  day  till
towards  night:  where  we  found  5.  or  6.  tuns  of  quick
silver,  16.  tuns  of  old  sacke,  sheepe,  young  kids,  great
store  of  poultrie,  some  store  of  money,  &  good  linnen,
silkes,  cotton-cloth,  and  such  like ;  we  also  tooke  three
belles  out  of  their  church,  and  destroyed  their  images.
The  towne  is  of  200  houses,  and  wealthy ;  and  that  yere
there  were  foure  rich  ships  laden  from thence :  but  we

187

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1591.

spared  it,  because  wee  found  other  contentment.  And
having  taken  our  pleasure  of  the  towne,  as  aforesayd,  wee
returned  aboord  our  ships,  standing  backe  againe  for
Truxillo,  we  discovered  one  of  the  shippes  which  was
laden  at  Puerto  de  Cavallos :  but  they  had  espied  us
before,  as  it  should  seeme ;  for  they  had  conveyed  away
as  much  as  possibly  they  could  ashore,  and  set  their  ship
on  fire ;  which  so  soone  as  we  had  discried,  we  made  to
her  with  our  boats,  and  quenched  the  fire,  and  loaded  up
with  hides  the  shippe  which  we  tooke  at  our  first
comming ;  for  she  had  but  a  thousand  hides  in  her,  and
certeine  jarres  of  balsamum :  which  being  accomplished,
wee  sunke  the  shippe  with  the  rest  of  the  goods,  and
so  stood  alongst  againe  for  Truxillo.  It  fell  out  to
be  so  calme,  that  we  were  two  and  twenty  dayes  sailing
backe  that  we  had  sailed  in  sixe  dayes,  which  was  about
forty  leagues :  so  that  when  we  came  before  Truxillo,
which  was  about  the  sixth  of  June,  we  found  another
of  the  ships  there,  but  close  under  the  castle,  her  ruther
unhanged,  her  sailes  taken  from  the  yards,  &c.  not-
withstanding we  entered  her,  but  they  had  placed  such
a  company  of  musketiers  under  a  rampire,  which  they
had  made  with  hides  and  such  like,  that  it  was  too
hote  for  us  to  abide,  and  so  betaking  us  to  our  shippes
againe,  and  standing  out  of  the  bay  into  the  sea,  wee
discovered  great  store  of  shot  intrenched  in  those  places
where  they  suspected  we  would  have  landed.  That  night
there  fell  such  a  storme  of  raine,  thunder,  lightening  and
tempestuous  weather,  that  our  ships  were  dispersed  either
from  other.  And  having  determined  all  of  us  to  meet  at
a  certeine  Island,  where  wee  purposed  to  water  and  refresh
our  selves ;  by  meanes  of  the  storme  and  other  contagious
weather  which  followed,  we  were  frustrated  of  that  hope.

We  had  lost  our  prize,  and  certeine  frigats  with  the
men.  Two  of  our  shippes  went  to  seeke  our  prize  and
our  men  :  and  other  two  of  us  came  homeward.  And  so
we  parted,  not  hearing  either  of  other  untill  we  came
into  England.

CHRISTOPHER NEWPORT  ad.

1591.

Our  place  of  meeting  should  have  beene  at  the  Tor-
tugas  neere  unto  the  point  of  Florida,  but  the  Golden
dragon  and  the  Prudence  were  put  to  leeward  of  this
place :  neverthelesse  wee  fell  with  certeine  islands  within
the  point  of  Florida,  where  the  captaine  of  the  Dragon
M.  Christopher  Newport  sent  his  pinnesse  on  shore  with
certeine  shot  to  seeke  for  fresh  water,  where  wee  found
none ;  but  found  the  Savages  very  courteous  unto  us,
who  came  brest  high  into  the  sea,  and  brought  us  a
line  to  hall  in  our  boat  on  shore,  and  shewed  us  that
up  into  the  land  Northward  was  fresh  water,  and  much
golde.  And  one  Michael  Bagge  of  Ipswich  boatswaines
mate  of  the  Dragon,  had  given  him  by  one  of  the  Savages
for  an  olde  rusty  hatchet,  a  piece  of  golde  wound  hollow,
and  about  the  bignesse  and  value  of  an  English  angell,
which  the  Savage  ware  hanging  about  his  knee,  with  two
pieces  of  fine  silver  plate,  whereof  one  the  sayd  Savage
gave  John  Locke,  masters  mate  of  the  Dragon,  being
foureteene  groats  in  value,  for  an  olde  knife :  the  other
piece  he  gave  to  one  William  Wright  a  sailer,  for  an  olde
knife  :  which  pieces  of  silver  were  in  forme  like  unto  the
bosse  of  a  bridle.  These  Savages  were  farre  more  civill
than  those  of  Dominica  :  for  besides  their  courtesie,  they
covered  their  privities  with  a  platted  mat  of  greene  straw,
about  three  handfuls  deepe,  which  came  round  about  their
waste,  with  the  bush  hanging  downe  behinde.

The  next  day  in  the  morning  very  early,  there  came  a
frigat  of  the  iland  of  Cuba  of  30  tunnes,  put  in  by
weather,  which  was  bound  for  Havana,  wherein  were  fifty
hogges ;  to  which  we  gave  chase  all  that  day,  passing  the
gulfe  of  Bahama,  and  about  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  after  a  shot  or  two  made  at  her,  shee  yeelded  unto
us :  wee  hoisted  out  our  boat,  and  went  aboord,  where
we  found  some  five  Spanyards,  five  and  fifty  hogs,  and
about  some  two  hundred  weight  of  excellent  tabacco
rolled  up  in  seynes.  We  lightened  them  of  their  hogges
and  tabacco,  and  sent  the  men  away  with  their  frigat.

In this voyage  we tooke and sacked foure townes,

189

A.D.
I59I.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

seventeene  frigats,  and  two  ships,  whereof  eight  were
taken  in  the  bay  of  the  Honduras  ;  of  all  which  we  brought
but  two  into  England  :  the  rest  we  sunke,  burnt,  and
one  of  them  we  sent  away  with  their  men.  And  to  make
up  the  full  number  of  twenty,  the  Spanyards  themselves
set  one  on  fire  in  the  bay  of  the  Honduras,  lest  we  should
be  masters  of  it.

We  shaped  our  course  from  Florida  homeward  by  the
isle  of  Flores  one  of  the  Azores,  where  we  watered,
finding  sir  John  Burgh  there,  who  tooke  us  to  be  Span-
yards,  and  made  up  unto  us  ;  with  whom  wee  joyned  in
the  taking  the  mighty  Portugall  caracke  called  Madre  de
Dios,  and  our  captaine  M.  Christopher  Newport  with
divers  of  us  was  placed  in  her  as  captaine  by  the  Generall
sir  John  Burgh  to  conduct  her  into  England,  where  we
arrived  in  Dartmouth  the  seventh  of  September  1592.

The  voyage  made  to  the  bay  of  Mexico  by  M.
William  King  Captaine,  M.  Moore,  M.  Hov^,
and  M.  Boreman  Ov^ners,  v^ith  the  Salomon
of  200  tunnes,  and  the  Jane  Bonaventure  of
40  tunnes  of  Sir  Henry  Palmer,  from  Ratcliffe
the  26  of  January 1592.

He  Salomon  was  manned  with  an  hundred
men,  all  mariners,  and  the  Jane  with  sixe
and  twenty,  all  like  wise  mariners.  Wee
came  first  to  the  Downes  in  Kent,  and
never  strooke  saile  in  passing  thence,
untill  we  came  to  Cape  S.  Vincent  on  the
coast of Portugall. From thence we

shaped  our  course  to  Lancerota  one  of  the  Canarie  islands,
where  we  landed  threescore  men,  and  fetched  a  caravell
out  of  an  harborow  on  the  South  side,  and  from  a  small
Island  we  tooke  a  demy-canon  of  brasse  in  despight  of
the  inhabitants,  which  played  upon  us  with  their  small
shot  at  our  first  landing  :  of  whom  we  slew  three  ;  and
gave  them  the  repulse. Thence  we  went  to  the  Grand

190

WILLIAM KING  a.d.

1592.

Canaria,  where  wee  boorded  a  barke  lying  at  anker :  out
of  which  wee  were  driven  by  great  store  of  shot  from  the
Island.  From  thence  wee  directed  our  course  for  the
West  Indies,  and  fell  with  the  isle  of  Dominica  about  the
tenth  of  April.  There  at  a  watering  place  we  tooke  a
shippe  of  an  hundred  tunnes  come  from  Guiny,  laden
with  two  hundred  and  seventy  Negros,  which  we  caried
with  us  to  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico,  and  there  comming
thorow  El  passaje,  we  gave  chase  to  a  frigat  which  went
in  to  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico,  and  in  the  night  we  sent
in  our  shallope  with  foureteene  men.  And  out  of  the
harborow  we  tooke  away  an  English  shippe  of  seventy
tunnes,  laden  with  threescore  tunnes  of  Canary-wines,
in  despight  of  the  castle  and  two  new  bulwarks,  being
within  caliver  shot.  These  two  prizes  we  caried  away  to
the  Westermost  part  of  the  island,  and  put  the  Negros,
except  fifteene,  all  on  land  in  a  Spanish  caravell  which  the
Jane  Bonaventure  tooke  :  and  we  caried  away  one  of  the
former  prizes,  and  set  fire  on  the  other.  We  passed
thence  by  the  isle  of  Mona,  where  we  watered,  and  re-
freshed our  selves  with  potatos  and  plantans,  and  so  came
to  the  isle  of  Saona :  and  from  thence  arrived  at  the
mouth  of  the  river  of  Santo  Domingo.  And  as  we  sailed
to  Cape  Tiburon,  three  leagues  to  the  Westward  of  Santo
Domingo  we  tooke  a  boat  of  fifteene  tunnes,  which  had
certeine  jarres  of  malosses  or  unrefined  sugar,  with  three
men ;  which  men  with  their  boat  wee  caried  with  us  to
Cape  Tiburon,  which,  in  respect  of  service  done  unto
us  in  furnishing  us  with  fresh  water,  we  dismissed.
Thus  contrary  to  other  Englishmens  courses  we  shaped
ours  to  the  Southward  of  Jamaica,  and  our  shallop  with  Jamaica.
12  men  ranged  the  coast  but  found  nothing.  Thence  we
ranged  the  three  islands  of  the  Caimanes,  and  landed  at
Grand  Caiman,  being  the  Westermost,  where  we  found  no
people,  but  a  good  river  of  fresh  water ;  and  there  we  ^  spod  river
turned  up  threescore  great  tortoises  ;  and  of  them  we  °ff^^^  J'^^^''
tooke  our  choise,  to  wit,  fifteene  of  the  females,  which  caiman,
are  the  best  and  fullest  of  egges,  whereof  two  served  an

191

A.D.
1592.

Preserz'itig  of
hogs-fiesh.

The  excellent
haven  of
Cavannas.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

hundred  men  a  day.  And  there  with  stones  we  might
kill  turtle  doves,  wilde  geese,  &  other  good  fowles  at  our
pleasures.  Thence  we  came  to  Cape  de  Corrientes  on
Cuba  to  water,  and  from  thence  to  Cape  S.  Antonio,  and
so  went  over  for  the  Tortugas,  without  taking  of  any  new
prize  :  and  thence  cut  over  to  Rio  de  puercos  on  the
coast  of  Cuba.  There  we  tooke  a  small  barke  of  twenty
tunnes,  with  foure  men  and  forty  live  hogs,  with  certeine
dried  porke  cut  like  leather  jerkins  along,  and  dried  hogs
tongues  and  neats  tongues,  and  20  oxe  hides.  Then
passing  thence,  within  foure  dayes  we  tooke  a  ship  of  80
tunnes  laden  with  hides,  indico,  &  salsa  perilla,  North  of
an  headland  called  Corugna :  thence  the  current  set  us  to
the  East  to  the  old  chanel.  There  we  tooke  a  frigat  of
20  tunnes,  having  certeine  pieces  of  Spanish  broad  cloth
&  other  small  pillage :  there  continuing  off  the  Matan9as
1 2  dayes,  with  the  winde  so  Westerly  that  we  could  hardly
recover  Havana  in  the  moneth  of  May.  Here  we  tooke
two  boats  laden  with  tortoises,  which  we  sunke,  saving
some  of  the  tortoises,  &  setting  the  men  on  shore.  Then
at  length  we  recovered  up  to  Havana,  where  we  came  so
neere  to  the  forts,  that  for  one  houres  fight  they  over-
reached us  with  their  long  ordinance.  Then  came  out
the  two  gallies,  having  27  banks  on  a  side,  and  fought
with  us  another  houre  ;  which  for  that  time  left  us  by
reason  of  the  increasing  of  the  winde.  Then  passing
alongst  nine  leagues  to  the  Westward  we  found  out  an
excellent  harbour,  having  three  fadome  water  at  the  flood,
able  within  to  receive  a  thousand  saile,  where  we  found
hog-houses,  which  they  terme  coralles,  and  tooke  away
certeine  hogs  and  pigs.  As  we  came  out  of  this  harbour,
the  weather  being  calme,  we  were  incountered  by  the
gallies,  which  had  followed  us,  and  fought  with  them
three  houres,  oftentimes  within  caliver  shot :  but  wee
made  such  spoile  of  their  men  and  oares,  that  they  beganne
to  be  weary,  and  gave  us  over,  with  their  great  losse.
Here  within  foure  dayes  after,  as  we  lay  to  the  Northward
sixe  leagues  off  this  harbour  of  Cavannas,  we  met  with

192

WILLIAM KING  ad.

1592.
master  captaine  Lane,  Generall  of  master  Wats  his  fleet,
and  captaine  Roberts,  in  the  Exchange,  a  ship  of  Bristol,  [HI.  571.]
of  an  hundred  and  forty  tunnes,  and  master  Benjamin
Wood  with  his  foure  ships  which  were  set  out  by  my  lord
Thomas  Howard  with  captain  Kenel  of  Limehouse  captaine
of  the  Cantar  of  Weymouth,  All  we  being  heere  together
espied  a  ship  of  some  50  tunne,  which  we  chased  with
their  boats  ;  but  my  shallope  first  boorded  her,  and  tooke
her  :  which  had  in  her  sacke,  Canary-wine,  muscadell,
tent  in  jarres,  and  good  store  of  oile  in  jarres.  The  ship
we  unladed  and  burned :  the  men  ran  on  shore.  Hence
wee  came  all  together,  being  about  13  sailes,  before
Havana ;  but  passing  by  we  gave  chase  to  a  ship  of  60
tun,  which  entred  into  an  harbour  a  league  to  the  North-
west of  Havana,  which  with  boats  was  boorded,  and
found  to  be  of  Puerto  de  Cavallos  in  the  bay  of
Honduras,  laden  with  tanned  hides,  salsa  perilla,  Indico,
raw  hides,  and  good  store  of  balsamum  :  and  she  had
foure  chests  of  gold,  which  they  got  on  land  before  we
could  come  to  them.  We  brought  this  ship  into  England.
Thus  spending  a  sevennight  in  lying  off  and  on  for
purchase,  and  finding  nothing  come,  I  set  saile  for
England,  and  arrived  at  Dover  about  the  tenth  of
November  1592.

[A  briefe

193  N

A.D.

I59I.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  Portugall
ship  taken.

A  briefe  note  of  a  voyage  to  the  East  Indies,
begun  the  10  of  April  1591,  wherein  were
three  tall  ships,  the  Penelope  of  Captaine
Raimond,  Admirall,  the  Merchant  royall,
whereof  was  Captaine,  Samuel  Foxcroft,  Vice-
admirall,  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  whereof
was  Captaine,  M.  James  Lancaster,  Rere-
admirall,  with  a  small  pinnesse.  Written  by
Henry  May,  who  in  his  returne  homeward
by  the  West  Indies,  sufFred  shipwracke  upon
the  isle  of  Bermuda,  wherof  here  is  annexed
a  large  description.

He  tenth  of  April  1591  we  departed  from
Plymmouth  with  the  ships  aforesayd.  In
May  following  wee  arrived  at  Grand
Canaria  one  of  the  fortunate  Islands.
Also  toward  the  end  of  this  moneth  we
tooke  a  Portugall  shippe  being  bound
for Brasil, within three degrees to the

Northward  of  the  Equinoctiall,  which served  greatly  to

our  refreshing. The  29  of  July  following  we came  to

Aguada  Saldania  a  good  harbour  neere  the  cape  of  Buona

Speranza, where we stayed about  a moneth with the

Merchant royall, which by reason of  sicknesse  in our

fleet  was  sent  home  for  England  with  divers  weake  men.

Here we bought an oxe  for  a  knife  of  three  pence,  a

sheepe  for  a  broken  knife  or  any  other  odde  trifle,  of  the

people  which  were  Negros,  clad  in  cloaks  or  mantles  of

raw  hides,  both  men  and  women. The  8  of  September

the  Penelope  &  the  Edward  Bonaventure  weyed  anker,

The^j  double and  that  day  we  doubled  the  cape  of  Buona  Speranza.

the  cape  of "Y^x^ 1 2 following we were taken with an extreame

Buena  Espe- ^  ^  u •  t'i  •

ranza  tempest or huricano. 1  his evenmg we saw a great

sea breake over our admirall the Penelope, and their

light strooke out : and after that we never saw them

194

HENRY MAY

any  more.  In  October  following  we  in  the  Edward
fell  with  the  Westermost  part  of  the  isle  of  S.  Laurence
about  midnight,  knowing  not  where  we  were.  Also
the  next  day  we  came  to  an  anker  at  Quitangone  a
place  on  the  main  land  of  Africa,  which  is  two  or  three
leagues  to  the  Northward  of  Mozambique,  where  the
Portugals  of  the  isle  of  Mozambique  fetch  all  their
fresh  water.  Here  we  tooke  a  pangaia,  with  a  Portugall
boy  in  it ;  which  is  a  vessell  like  a  barge,  with  one  mat-
saile  of  Coco  nut  leaves.  The  barge  is  sowed  together
with  the  rindes  of  trees,  and  pinned  with  woodden  pinnes.
In  this  pangaia  we  had  certeine  corne  called  millio,  hennes,
and  some  fardels  of  blew  Calicut  cloth.  The  Portugall
boy  we  tooke  with  us,  and  dismissed  the  rest.  From  this
place  we  went  for  an  island  called  Comoro,  upon  the
coast  of  Melinde,  which  standeth  about  1 1  degrees  to  the
South  of  the  equinoctial :  in  which  island  we  stayed  all
November,  finding  the  people  blacke  and  very  comly,  but
very  treacherous  and  cruell :  for  the  day  before  we
departed  from  thence  they  killed  thirty  of  our  men  on
shore,  among  whom  was  William  Mace  our  master,  and
two  of  his  mates ;  the  one  of  them  being  in  the  boat  with
him  to  fetch  water,  the  other  being  on  shore  against  our
ship ;  they  having  first  betrayed  our  boat.  From  hence
we  went  for  the  isle  of  Zanzibar,  on  the  coast  of  Melinde,
whereas  wee  stayed  and  Wintered  untill  the  beginning  of
February  following.

The  second  of  February  1592  wee  weyed  anker,  and
set  saile  directly  for  the  East  Indies ;  but  having  calmes
and  contrary  windes,  wee  were  untill  the  moneth  of  June
before  wee  could  recover  the  coast  of  India  neere  Calicut ;
whereby  many  of  our  men  died  for  want  of  refreshing.
In  this  moneth  of  June  we  came  to  an  anker  at  the
isles  of  Pulo  pinaom,  whereas  we  stayed  untill  the  first
day  of  September,  our  men  being  very  sicke,  and  dying
apace.  This  day  we  set  saile,  and  directed  our  course  for
Malaca :  and  wee  had  not  bene  farre  at  sea,  but  wee  tooke
a shippe  of  the  kingdome of  Pegu  of  some  fourescore

195

A.D.
1592.

Qidtangone
nere  Mozam-
bique.

The  hie  of
Comoro.

They  Winter
at  the  isle  of
Zanzibat:

The  isles  of
Pulo  pinaom.

A.D.
1592.

[III.  572.]

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  isle  of
Nicubar.

They  returne
homeward.

tunnes  with  wooden  ankers,  and  about  fiftie  men  in  her,
with  a  pinnesse  of  some  eighteene  tunnes  at  her  stearne,
both  laden  with  pepper.  But  their  pinnesse  stole  from  us
in  a  ffust  in  the  morning.  Here  we  mio^ht  have  taken
two  shippes  more  of  Pegu  laden  likewise  with  pepper  and
rice.  In  this  moneth  also  we  tooke  a  great  Portugall
ship  of  six  or  seven  hundred  tun,  laden  chiefly  with
victuals,  chests  of  hats,  pintados,  and  Calicut  clothes.
Besides  this  we  tooke  another  Portugall  ship  of  some
hundred  tun,  laden  with  victuals,  rice,  Calicos,  pintados,
and  other  commodities.  These  ships  were  bound  for
Malaca  with  victuals :  for  those  of  Goa,  of  S.  Thomas,
and  of  other  places  in  the  Indies  doe  victuall  it,  because
that  victuals  there  are  very  scarce.

In  the  moneth  of  November  1592  we  shaped  our
course  for  the  island  of  Nicubar  lying  certeine  leagues  to
the  Northwest  of  the  famous  island  of  Sumatra ;  whereas
within  short  time  wee  came  to  anker :  and  here  wee  had
very  good  refreshing :  for  after  wee  arrived  there,  the
people  (whom  we  found  in  religion  Mahumetans)  came
aboord  us  in  their  canoas,  with  hennes,  cocos,  plantans,
and  other  fruits :  and  within  two  dayes  they  brought  unto
us  reals  of  plate,  giving  us  them  for  Calicut  cloth  :  which
reals  they  found  by  diving  in  the  sea,  which  were  lost  not
long  before  in  two  Portugall  ships  which  were  bound  for
China,  &  were  cast  away  there.  This  was  the  furthest
place  that  we  were  at  to  the  Southeast :  and  heere  because
our  company  by  this  time  was  much  wasted  and  dimin-
ished, we  resolved  to  turne  backe  to  the  isle  of  Zeilan.
Wherfore  we  weyed  anker  in  the  moneth  of  November,
and  arrived  at  Zeilan  about  the  end  of  the  same  moneth.
In  this  island  groweth  great  store  of  excellent  cinamom,
and  the  best  diamonds  in  the  world.  Here  our  captaine
meant  to  stay  to  make  up  our  voyage :  whereof  hee
conceived  great  hope,  by  certeine  intelligence  which  wee
had  received ;  but  the  company,  which  were  in  all  but
33  men  and  boyes,  being  in  a  mutiny,  and  every  day
ready  to  go  together  by  the  eares  (the  captaine  being  sicke

196

HENRY MAY  ad.

1593-
and  like  for  to  die)  would  not  stay,  but  would  needs  go
home.

The  8  of  December  1592  we  set  saile  homeward,  but
some  1 5  dayes  before  we  had  sight  of  the  cape  of  Good
hope,  we  were  forced  to  share  our  bread,  by  reason  we  had
certeine  flies  in  our  ship,  which  devoured  most  part  of  our
bread  before  we  were  aware :  so  that  when  we  came  to
sharing,  we  had  but  31  pound  of  bread  a  man  to  cary  us
into  England,  with  a  small  quantity  of  rice  a  day.

The  last  of  March IC97  we  doubled  the  cape  of  Bona  ^j^'^  "^""^i'

o  -^  ^  the  cape  of

Speranza._  _  , .  , ^  Bona%er.

In  April  next  ensuing  we  came  to  anker  at  the  island  an%a.
of  S.  Helena,  whereas  we  found  an  English  man  a  tailer.  The  isle  of
which  had  bene  there  14  moneths  before  we  came  thither :  '^-  Helena.
so  we  sending  our  boat  on  shore  with  some  ten  men,  they
found  this  English  man  in  the  chapell ;  who  by  reason  of
the  heat  of  the  climat  was  inforced  to  keepe  himselfe  out
of  the Sun. Our company hearing one sing in the
chapell, supposing it had bene some Portugall, thrust
open  the  doore,  and  went  in  unto  him  :  but  the  poore
man  seeing  so  many  come  in  upon  him  on  the  sudden,
and thinking  them to be Portugals, was first in such
a  feare,  not  having  scene  any  man  in  14  moneths  before,  The  strange
and  afterwards knowing  them to be Englishmen, and  "^^^^^J^
some  of  them  of  his  acquaintance,  in  such  joy,  that  what  sudden  joy.
betweene  excessive  sudden  feare  &  joy,  he  became  dis-
tracted of  his wits, to our great sorowes. Here we
found  of  his  drying  some  40  goats. The  party  had  made
him  for  want  of  apparell  two  sutes  of  goats  skinnes  with
the  hairy  side  outwards,  like  unto  the  Savages  of  Canada.
Here  we  stayed  all  this  moneth. This  man  lived  untill
we  came  to  the  West  Indies,  and  then  he  died.

In  the  moneth  of  Tune  1593  we  arrived  at  the  island  of  ^-^f  \^^^  °f
Trinidad in the West Indies, hoping there to finde  ^^e^'wei'''
refreshing: but  we  could not  get  any,  by reason that  indies.
the Spanyards had taken it. Here we  were  imbayed
betweene the  island  and the  maine; and for want of
victuals the company would have forsaken the ship :

197

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1593-

whereupon  the  captaine  was  inforced  to  sweare  every
man  not  to  forsake  the  ship  untill  we  should  see  further
occasion.  Out  of  this  bay,  called  Boca  de  Dragone,  it
pleased  God  to  deliver  us ;  from  whence  we  directed  our
course  for  the  isle  of  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  rico,  but  fell
The  isle  of  vvith  the  small  isle  of  Mona,  where  we  abode  some
Mona.  fifteene  dayes,  finding  in  that  place  some  small  refreshing.

And  heere  arrived  a  ship  of  Caen  in  Normandy,  whereof
was  captaine  one  Monsieur  Charles  de  la  Barbotiere,  who
greatly  refreshed  us  with  bread  and  other  provision,  which
we  greatly  wanted.  And  so  we  tooke  our  leaves  the  one
of  the  other.

In  July  having  foule  weather  at  Mona,  we  were  forced
to  wey  anker,  and  to  set  saile,  directing  our  course  for
CapeTiburon.  Cape  Tiburon  :  and  in  doubling  of  the  cape  we  had  a  gust
from  the  shore,  which  caried  away  all  our  sailes  from  the
yards :  so  that  we  had  left  but  one  new  forecourse  to
helpe  our  selves  withall :  which  canvas  the  aforesayd
Frenchman  did  helpe  us  withall.  Also  having  doubled
the  foresayd  cape  in  the  distresse  aforenamed,  the  forsayd
capitan  de  la  Barbotiere  with  his  pinnesse  gave  chase  unto
us  againe ;  who  being  come  nere  unto  us,  I  went  aboord
him,  certifying  him  what  distresse  we  were  in.  The
gentleman  replied  to  me  againe,  that  there  was  not  any
thing  in  his  shippe,  but  what  he  could  spare  he  would
helpe  us  withall.  So  to  conclude,  we  agreed  with  him  for
canvas.  Moreover,  he  sayd  that  if  we  would  go  with
OrGuanaba.  him  to  an  harbour  called  *Gonnavy,  which  is  to  the
[ill-  573-J  Northward  of  Cape  Tiburon,  that  then  he  would  helpe
us  with  fresh  victuals  enough.  Whereupon  I  returned
aboord  our  ship,  and  certified  our  captaine  of  all :  who
made  it  knowen  unto  the  company;  which  no  sooner
heard  of  it,  but  they  would  all  go  in.  So  here  we  staied
with  the  aforesaid  Frenchman  1 5  dayes :  but  small
refreshing  we  could  get,  because  the  Spaniards  stood  in
some  feare  of  the  Frenchman  of  war,  supposing  our  ship
to  be  a  Portugal,  and  that  we  were  his  prize :  neverthe-
lesse  hee  certified  them  to  the  contrary. And  in  staying

ig8

HENRY MAY  ad.

1593-
so  long  with  him,  and  having  little  refreshing,  our  com-
pany began  to  be  in  a  mutiny,  and  made  report  that  the
captaine  &  I  went  aboord  the  Frenchman  but  to  make
good  cheere,  and  had  not  any  care  of  them :  but  I  protest
before  God,  that  our  care  was  to  get  victuals  wherby
we  might  have  bene  gone  from  him.  But  in  the  meane
time  a  great  part  of  our  company  had  conspired  to  take
away  the  Frenchmans  pinnesse,  and  with  her  to  boord
the  man  of  warre.  While  these  things  were  in  com-
plotting,  one  of  their  consorts  went  aboord  the  French-
man, and  certified  him  of  all  the  conspiracy.  Whereupon
the  captaine  of  the  French  ship  sent  for  our  captaine
and  me  to  come  aboord  to  dinner:  and  we  stayed  with
him  all  the  afternoone,  being  invited  unto  supper :  and
being  at  supper,  he  himselfe  would  not  a  great  while
come  to  us :  but  at  length  hee  came.  At  his  comming
wee  asked  of  him  what  newes.  Who  answered  us,  that
either  we  must  depart  from  him,  or  els  he  must  goe
seeke  some  other  harborow.  Whereupon  I  tolde  captaine
Lancaster ;  who  prayed  me  to  tell  him  that  rather  then
we  would  be  any  hindrance  unto  him,  we  would  be  gone.
But  in  the  mean  time,  while  we  were  thus  talking
together,  the  Frenchman  weyed  &  set  saile :  v/hich  we
perceived,  and  asked  him  what  he  meant  by  it.  He
replied  to  the  captaine  &  me,  that  he  kept  us  for  his
security,  and  that  our  men  had  purposed  as  is  aforesayd.
When  he  came  thwart  our  shippe,  it  blew  a  prety  gaile
of  winde :  the  boat  being  asterne  of  them,  having  in  her
two  Moores  &  two  men  of  Pegu,  which  we  had  given
them,  brake  away.  Then  was  the  Frenchman  worse  then
before,  &  did  threaten  us  very  sore  that  we  should  pay
his  voyage.  In  the  meane  time  the  Edward  seeing  us
past,  weyed  and  set  saile  to  go  for  England :  and  they
did  share  among  them  all  the  captaines  victuals  &  mine,
when  they  saw  the  Frenchman  keepe  us  as  prisoners.
So  the  next  morning  we  went  to  seeke  out  the  French-
mans  pinnesse :  which  being  at  Laguna  we  shot  off  a
piece,  &  so  she  came  to  us,  having  in  her  three  more  of

199

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1593-

our  company,  Edmund  Barker  our  lieutenant,  and  one
John  West,  and  Richard  Lucland  one  of  the  mutinous
crew.  The  which  I  told  the  Frenchman  of;  &  he  could
not  deny,  but  that  there  was  such  a  thing  pretended.
Then  I  was  put  into  the  French  pinnesse  to  seeke  their
boat :  and  in  the  meane  time  they  would  go  to  see  if
they  could  overtake  our  shippe.  And  the  next  day  we
should  meet  againe  at  Cape  S.  Nicolas :  so  the  next
morning  we  met  together  all  three  of  us,  but  heard  no
newes  of  his  boat.  So  he  having  Spanyards  and  Negros
aboord  of  us,  requested  to  have  them.  Our  captaine
desired  him  to  send  his  boat  aboord  our  shippe,  and  he
should  have  them  with  all  his  heart.  So  with  much  adoe
he  sent  his  boat  and  had  them.  Then  he  demanded  of
them,  if  his  boat  were  not  aboord  the  ship.  They
answered  no.  So  that  then  Monsieur  de  la  Barbotiere
was  satisfied :  and  then  we  were  great  friends  againe,
to  all  our  joyes.

The  12  of  August  1593  our  captaine  was  sent  aboord
our  ship :  but  before  his  departure  he  requested  the
captaine  of  the  French  ship  that  he  would  give  mee
passage  home  with  him,  to  certifie  the  owners  what  had
passed  in  all  the  voyage,  as  also  of  the  unrulinesse  of  the
company.  And  this  day  we  tooke  our  leaves  the  one
of  the  other ;  the  Edward  for  England :  and  we  bare
in  for  Gonnavy,  where  afterwards  we  found  the  French-
mans  boat.

The  last  of  November  1593  Monsieur  de  la  Barbotiere

departed  from  a  port  called  Laguna  in  Hispaniola. The

17  of  December  next  insuing  it  was  his  fortune  to  have

They  wracked  his  ship  cast  away  upon  the  Northwest  part  of  the  isle  of

upon  Bermuda  Bermuda  about  midnight;  the  pilots  making  themselves

\ernber\^Qk% ^^  noone  to  be to  the  Southward of  the  island twelve

leagues,  certified  the  captaine  that  they  were  out  of  all

danger. So  they  demanded  of  him  their  wine  of  heigth  :

the  which they  had. And being,  as it should  seeme,

after  they  had  their  wine,  carelesse  of  their  charge  which

they  tooke  in  hand,  being  as  it  were  drunken,  through

HENRY MAY  a.d.

1594.
their  negligence  a  number  of  good  men  were  cast  away :
and  I  being  but  a  stranger  among  50  and  odde  French-
men &  others,  it  pleased  God  to  appoint  me  to  be  one  of
them that  were  saved, I hope to his  service  &  glory.
We  made  account  at  the  first  that  we  were  cast  away  hard
by  the  shore,  being  hie  clifs,  but  we  found  our  selves  seven
leagues  off:  but  with  our  boat  and  a  raft  which  we  had
made  &  towed  at  our  boats  sterne,  we  were  saved  some  26
of  us ;  among  whom  were  no  more  English  but  my  selfe.
Now being among so many strangers, & seeing not
roome  for  the  one  halfe,  I  durst  neither  presse  into  the
boat,  nor  upon  the  raft,  for  feare  lest  they  should  have
cast  me  over  boord,  or  els  have  killed  me :  so  I  stayed
in the ship  which was almost full of  water,  untill  the
captaine  being  entred  the  boat,  called  me  unto  him  being
at  hand,  for  that  it  stood  upon  life  or  death :  and  so  I
presently  entred,  leaving  the  better  halfe  of  our  company
to  the  mercy  of  the  sea. After  this  we  rowed  all  the  day  [III,  574.]
until  an  houre  or  two  before  night  yer  we  could  come  on
land,  towing the raft  with the boat. When we  came  T^he  desaip-
on  shore,  being  all  the  day  without  drinke,  every  man  ^'^oj^^f  the  isle
tooke  his  way  to  see  if  he  could  finde  any :  but  it  was  J ^ ^ '
long before any was found. At length one of the
pilots  digging  among  a  company  of  weeds  found  fresh
water  to  all  our  great  comforts,  being  only  raine  water :
and  this  was  all  the  fresh  water  that  we  found  on  shore.
But  there  are  in  this  Island  many  fine  bayes,  wherin  if
a  man  did  dig,  I  thinke  there  might  be  found  store  of
fresh water. This Island is divided all into broken
Islands :  and  the  greatest  part  I  was  upon,  which  might
be  some  4  or  5  miles  long, and two miles & a  halfe
over ; being all woods,  as Cedar & other timber,  but
Cedar  is  the  chiefest. Now  it  pleased  God  before  our  The  saving  of
ship  did  split,  that  we saved  our carpenters tooles,  or  ^he  carpenters
els  I  thinke  we  had  bene  there  to  this  day :  and  having  L."e7vation^
recovered  the  aforesaid  tooles,  we  went  roundly  about  the  a  bark
cutting  downe of trees,  & in the end built a  small  strangely  built
barke  of  some  1 8  tun,  for  the  most  part  with  tronnels  and ^f^^rmshed.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

very few nailes. As for tackling we  made

aboord the ship before she split, and cut downe her

shrowds,  and  so  we  tackled  our  barke,  and  rigged  her.

In  stead  of  pitch  we  made  lime,  and  mixed it  with  the

oile of tortoises ; and assoone as the carpenters had

calked, I and  another,  with  ech  of  us  a  small  sticke  in

our  hands,  did  plaister  the  morter  into  the  seames,  and

being in April, when  it was warm and faire  weather,

we could no  sooner  lay it on,  but  it  was  dry,  and  as

hard as a  stone. In  this moneth of  April 1594,  the

weather being very hot, we were afrayd our water

should  faile  us ;  and  therfore  made  the  more  haste  away :

and  at  our  departure  we  were  constrained  to  make  two

great  chests,  and  calked  them,  and  stowed  them  on  ech

side of  our  maine  mast, and  so put in our  provision

of  raine-water,  and 13 live tortoises for our food,  for

our  voyage which we intended  to Newfoundland. In

Hogs  in  Ber- the  South  part  of  this  Island  of  Bermuda  there  are  hogs,

muda.  |-j^|. xh-Qj ^^Q SO  leane that  you  can not eat  them,  by

reason the Island is so barren : but it  yeeldeth  great

Good  harbors store  of  fowle,  fish  and  tortoises. And  to  the  Eastward

tnye  East  part  q£  ^j^^  Island  are  very  good  harbours,  so  that  a  shippe  of

Jn  excellent ^"-"^  ^^^  ^^7  ^^^^  there  land-locked,  without  any  danger,

fishing  for with  water  enough. Also  in  this  Island  is  as  good  fishing

pearles  in for pearles as is  any  in  the  West  Indies,  but  that  the

Bermuda. place  is  subject  to  foule  weather,  as  thundering,  lightning

and  raine :  but  in April  and  part  of  May  we  had  very

faire  and  hot  weather. The  1 1 of  May  it  pleased  God

to  set  us  cleere  of  the  Island,  to  the  no  little  joy  of  us  all,

after we had lived  in  the same  almost the  space  of  5

moneths. And the 20 of  May  we  fell with  the  land

nere  to Cape  Briton,  where  we ran  into a fresh  water

river,  whereof  there  be  many,  and  tooke  in  wood,  water.

The  people ^nd  ballast. And  here  the  people  of  the  countrey  came

nere  Cape ^^^^^  ^^ being  clothed  all  in  furs,  with  the  furred  side

Xi  t~t  to  ft  use  .  .  /-•  /*

traffikeofrich  ^"^o  their  skins,  &  brought  with  them  furres  of  sundry

furres.  sorts  to  sell,  besides  great  store  of  wild  ducks :  so  some

of  our  company  having  saved  some  small  beads,  bought

HENRY  MAY

some  of  their  ducks.  Here  we  stayed  not  above  foure
houres,  and  so  departed.  This  should  seeme  to  be  a  very-
good  countrey.  And  we  saw  very  fine  champion  ground,
and  woods.  From  this  place  we  ranne  for  the  banke  of
Newfoundland,  whereas  we  met  with  divers,  but  none
would  take  in  a  man  of  us,  untill  it  pleased  God  that
wee  met  with  a  barke  of  Falmouth,  which  received  us  all
for  a  little  time ;  and  with  her  we  tooke  a  French  ship,
wherein  I  left  capitan  de  la  Barbotier  my  deere  friend,
and  all  his  company,  and  stayed  my  selfe  aboord  the
English  barke :  and  having  passage  in  the  same,  in
the  moneth  of  August  I  arrived  at  Falmouth 1594.

A.D.

1594.

A  voyage  of  the  honourable  Gentleman  M.  Robert
Duddeley,  now  knight,  to  the  isle  of  Trinidad,
and  the  coast  of  Paria:  with  his  returne  home
by  the  Isles  of  Granata,  Santa  Cruz,  Sant  Juan
de  puerto  rico,  Mona,  Zacheo,  the  shoalds
called  Abreojos,  and  the  isle  of  Bermuda.  In
which  voyage  he  and  his  company  tooke  and
sunke  nine  Spanish  ships,  wherof  one  was  an
armada  of  600  tunnes.  Written  at  the  request
of  M. Richard  Hakluyt.

Aving  ever  since  I  could  conceive  of
any  thing  bene  delighted  with  the  dis-
coveries of  navigation,  I  fostered  in  my
selfe  that  disposition  till  I  was  of  more
yeres  and  better  ability  to  undertake
such  a  matter.  To  this  purpose  I  called
to  me  the  advise  of  sufficient  seamen,
and  principally  undertooke  a  voyage  for  the  South  seas ;
but  by  reason  that  many  before  had  miscaried  in  the
same  enterprise,  I  could  not  be  suffered  to  hazard  more
of  her  Majesties  subjects  upon  so  uncerteine  a  ground
as  my  desire :  which  made  me  by  constraint  (great
charges already by me defrayed) to prepare another

203

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594.

course  for  the  West  Indies,  without  hope  there  to  doe
any  thing  woorth  note:  and  so  common  is  it  indeed
to  many,  as  it  is  not  woorth  the  registring.  Never-
thelesse,  I  have  yeelded  to  your  former  importunity,
and  sent  you  this  my  journall  to  supply  a  vacant
roome  amongst  your  more  important  discourses.

I.  575.]  Nowe  being  provided  for  this last enterprize,  rather

to  see  some  practise  and  experience,  then  any  wonders
or  profite,  I  weighed  ancker  from  Southampton  road  the
sixth  of  November  1594.  But  the  winde  falling  scant,
it  was  the  17.  day  of  the  same  moneth  before  I  could
put  into  the  Sea.  Upon  this  day  my  selfe  in  the
Beare  a  shippe  of  200.  tunnes  my  Admirall,  and  Cap-
taine  Munck  in  the  Beares  whelpe  vice-admirall,  with
two  small  pinnesses  called  the  Frisking  and  the  Earewig
passed  through  the  Needles,  and  within  two  dayes  after
bare  in  with  Plimmouth.  My  busines  at  this  port-
towne  dispatched,  I  set  saile ;  whither  againe  by  contrary
winds  to  my  great  misfortune,  I  was  inforced  to  return e
backe.  I  might  call  it  misfortune ;  for  by  this  meanes  I
utterly  (for  all  the  voyage)  lost  my  vice-admirall ;  which
was  the  cause  likewise  of  loosing  mine  owne  pinnesse,
which  three  were  the  principall  stay  of  my  voyage.  For
at  this  last  leaving  of  England  in  a  storme  I  lost  mine
owne  pinnesse,  as  is  before  said.  Notwithstanding  all
these  crosses  all  alone  I  went  wandering  on  my  voyage,
sailing  along  the  coast  of  Spaine  within  view  of  Cape
Finister,  and  Cape  S.  Vincent,  the  North  &  South
capes  of  Spaine.  In  which  space  having  many  chases,
I  could  meet  with  none  but  my  countreymen  or  coun-
treys  friends.  Leaving  these  Spanish  shores  I  directed
my  course  the  14.  of  December  towards  the  isles  of
the  Canaries.  Here  I  lingered  12  dayes  for  two  rea-
sons :  The  one,  in  hope  to  meete  my  vice-admiral :
The  other,  to  get  some  vessel  to  remove  my  pestered
men  into,  who  being  140.  almost  in  a  ship  of  200.
tunnes,  there  grew  many  sicke.  The  first  hope  was
frustrated, because my vice-admiral was returned into

204

SIR ROBERT DUDLEY  ad.

1595-
England  with  two  prizes. The second  expectation  fell
out to our great comfort : for  I tooke  two  very  fine
Caravels under the calmes of Tenerif  and Palma,
which  both refreshed and amended  my  company, and
made me a Fleete of  3. sailes. In the one Caravel
called The Intent, I made Benjamin Wood  Captaine, ThisM.Ben-
in  the  other,  one Captaine  Wentworth. Thus  cheared  J'""''''.  ^"'^  ,
as  a  desolate traveller  with the company  of  my  small  f^f^y  ^^^^^
and  newe  erected Fleete, I continued my  purpose  for 1596.  j^w/
the  West Indies,  and first for Cape Blanco  in  Africa  fi^f^  '^^th  two
upon  the  deserts  of  Libya. My  last  hope  was  to  meete  ^h^P->^^/ <^^^-
my lost ship, and withall  to renue  my  victuals upon  ^^p^^  ^  mya?e
the Canthers, which are Portugal fishermen : but the  fo?-  the  South
Canthers had bene so frighted by Frenchmen, as I  ^£^\  and  for
could  get  none. Riding under this White Cape two  ^^^^^'  ^t  the
daies, and walking on shore  to view  the countrey,  I  jionmrable
found it a waste, desolate, barren, and sandie place,  gentleman
the  sand running  in drifts like snow and being  very  ^ir  Robert
stony ;  for  so  is  all  the  countrey  sand  upon  stone  (like  •^^'%-
Arabia  deserta,  and  Petrea)  and full  of  blacke  venemous
lizards,  with some wilde beasts and people which be  ^  description
tawny  Moores,  so  wilde,  as  they  would  but  call  to my  ofCapeBlanco
Caravels  from  the  shore,  who  road  very  neere  it. But  ^^ ■'^"'^'
not desirous to make  any  longer aboad  in this  place,
by  reason of  the  most  infectious  serenas  or  dewes  that
fall all along these coasts of  Africa, I caused my
Master Abraham  Kendall  to shape  his course directly
for the isle of  Trinidad in the West Indies; which  The ysle  of
after 22. dayes  we  descried,  and the first  of  February  -^7^^^^^  '^^'^-f-
came  to  an  anker  under  a  point  thereof  called  Curiapan,  p^^^^  ^^
in  a bay  which  was  very  full of  pelicans,  and  I  called  Curiapan.
it  Pelicans  bay. About  3.  leagues  to  the  Eastwards  of
this place we found a mine of Marcazites which
glister  like  golde  (but all is not gold that glistereth)
for so  we found  the same nothing  worth, though the
Indians  did  assure  us  it  was Calvori, which signifieth
gold  with  them. These Indians  are  a fine  shaped  and
a  gentle people, al naked & painted red, their  com-

205

A.D.

1595-

Paracoa,  or
Parico.

They  hiskonce
themselves.

A  treasonable
practize  of  the
Spaniards,

They  march
from  one  side
of  the  yland
to  the  other.

Captaine
Harpers
intelligence  of
Guiana.
[III.  576.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

manders  wearing  crownes  of  feathers.  These  people  did
often  resort  unto  my  ship,  &  brought  us  hennes,  hogs,
plantans,  potatoes,  pinos,  tobacco,  &  many  other  pretie
commodities,  which  they  exchanged  with  us  for  hatchets,
knives,  hookes,  belles,  and  glasse  buttons.  From  this
bay  I  fell  downe  lower  to  a  place  called  Paracoa,  where
I  desired  rather  to  ride,  because  it  was  a  convenient
place  to  water,  balast,  ground,  &  grave  my  Caravels.
Then  I  commanded  al  my  men  to  lye  on  shore,  after
I  had  caused  to  be  made  for  them  a  little  skonce  like
an  halfe  moone  for  their  defence,  being  jealous  of  the
Spaniards,  of  whose  estate  I  could  gather  no  certaintie,  till
from  Margarita  Antonie  Berreo  for  his  defence  had  gotten
some  300.  souldiers,  a  greater  number  then  I  was  able
to  encounter  withall,  having  then  but  50.  men,  because
my  Caravels  before  their  comming  were  sent  away.
The  Simerones  of  the  yland  traded  with  me  stil  in  like
sort.  And  the  Spaniards  now  provided  for  me,  began
to  send  messengers  to  me  in  kindnesse.  Notwithstand-
ing  though  I  had  no  reason  to  assault  them,  because
they  were  both  poore  &  strong,  yet  for  my  experi-
ence and  pleasure  I  marched  4.  long  marches  upon  the
yland,  &  the  last  from  one  side  of  the  yland  to  the  other,
which  was  some  50.  miles  :  going  and  comming  through
a  most  monstrous  thicke  wood  (for  so  is  most  part  of
the  yland)  &  lodging  my  selfe  in  Indian  townes.  The
country  is  fertile,  and  ful  of  fruits,  strange  beasts,  and
foules,  whereof  munkeis,  babions  &  parats  were  in
great  abundance.  Being  much  delighted  with  this  yland,
and  meaning  to  stay  here  some  time  about  discovering
the  maine  right  against  the  same  (the  entrance  into  the
empire  of  Guiana)  being  shewed  the  discovery  thereof
by  Captaine  Popham,  who  received  the  discovery
of  the  saide  empire  from  one  captaine  Harper,  which
being  a  prisoner  learned  of  the  Spaniards  at  the
Canaries  in  the  selfe  same  maner  almost,  as  sir  Walter
Ralegh  very  discreetly  hath  written.  The  intelligence
of Harper,  I  conceive, the Captaine hath  yet to shew

206

SIR ROBERT DUDLEY  ad.

1595.
in  Spanish. This  discovery  of  Guiana  I  greatly  desired  :
yet  least  I  should  adventure  all  occasions  upon  it  onely,
I sent my two Caravels from me the 17. day of  His  two  Car a-
February, to try their fortunes in the Indies not ^^^\  ^°
appointing  any  other  place to meet  but  England, fur-  /^^J^^
nishing  them  with  all  the  provision  that I  could spare,
and  dividing  my  victuals equally with them, knowing
they  were  able  to  do  more  good  in  the  Indies  then  greater
ships. The Caravels being gone,  I  began to enquire
privately of  the Savages concerning the maine over
against  us,  and  learned  that  the  names  of  the  kingdomes
joyning to the Sea-coast were in order these. The
kingdom of Morucca,  the kingdome of  Seawano,  the  Seawano  called
kingdome of Waliame, the kingdom of Caribes, the  P^^^^P^  ^^  ^"'
kingdome  of  Yguirie,  and  right  against  the  Northermost  ji^ig^jj^  £j_
part  of  Trinidad,  the  maine  was  called  The  high  land  of  covery  Cia-
Paria,  the  rest  a  very  lowe  land. Morucco  I  learned  to  ■^ani.
bee  full  of  a  greene  stone  called  Tacarao,  which  is  good  ^^^  Walter
for  the  stone. In Seawano  I  heard  of  a  Mine of  gold fj^^o  ■ ~

.  , „  .  ^  eth  of  Sauna,

to  be  in a  towne  called  Wackerew,  the  Captaines  name  andWikeriin
Semaracon. Of Waliame I will speake last, because  his  discovery.
therein  I  made  most  discovery. The  Caribes  I  learned  to
be man-eaters or Canibals, and great enemies to the
Islanders  of  Trinidad. The  kingdome  of  Yguiri  I  heard
to  be  full  of  a  metall  called  by  the  Indians  Arara,  which
is  either  copper  (as  I  could learne)  or very base gold.
In  the  high  land of  Paria  I was  informed  by divers  of
these  Indians,  that  there  was some Perota, which with
them is  silver, and  great  store  of  most  excellent  Cane-
tabacco. But  lastly  to  come  to  Waliame,  it  is the  first
kingdome  of  the  empire  of  Guiana. The great  wealth
which  I  understood  to  be  therein,  and  the  assurance  that  ^
I  had  by  an  Indian,  mine  interpreter,  of  a  golden  Mine  in  ^J^^  ^^^^^
a  towne  of  this  kingdome  called  Orocoa,  in  the  River  (as  Balthasar,
he  called  it) of  Owrinoicke  was  much  to  be  esteemed,  '^"ho  after-
This  Indian  spake  Spanish,  and  whatsoever  he  knew,  he  '^^^^g^'^^^  ^^''
reveiled  it  to  my  selfe  onely  by  a  private  interpreter,  not  ^their  trefteft
in  words  alone,  but  offered  upon  paine  of  life  to  be  guide  need.

207

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

himselfe  to  any  place  that  he  spake  of. This  discovery

of the Mine I mentioned to my company, who

altogether mutined against my going, because they

something feared  the  villany of  Abraham  Kendal, who

would by no meanes  go. I then wanted my lost

pinnesse,  and  was constrained to  send 14.  men in  my

ship-boat  for  this  discovery,  with  most  of  the  discreetest

men in my ship, & gave them their directions to

follow, written under mine owne hand. They went

from me, and entred into one of the mouthes by

the broken lands,  which  river  goeth  under  the  name  of

the great River Orenoque, the foreland wherof was

called Capulio bearing South & by West,  wanting  a

fourth  part,  from  the  point  of  Curiapan  aforesaid,  being

4.  leags distant. They  found  the maine (as China is

reported)  full  of  fresh  Rivers  running  one  into  another,

abounding  with fish,  and  a  land  al  woody,  seeming to

have  great store  of  strange  beasts  and foules, &  very

A  river  called  populous. They  entred  into  a  small  river  called  Cabota,

Cabota.  ^t^q  people  named  Veriotaus,  a  courteous  people. The

The  river  of next  river  they  passed  was  called  Mana  in  the  kingdome

Amana  and ^^  Tivitivas,  where  the  king  offered  to  bring  a Canoa

ofTi^Mvas ^^  °^'  ^^^^  golden  oare,  and  to  this  purpose  sent  a  Canoa,

are  both  men- which  returned  and  brought  my  men  this  answere,  that

tioned  by  Sir Armago  Captaine  of  the  towne  of  Orocoa  and  the  Mine

^<5//^r  refused them, but if they would come thither, hee

^  ^^  '  himselfe  would  make  them  answere. Upon  this  my  boat

went,  and  at  his  appointed  place  hee  met  them  with  some

100.  men  in  Canoas,  and  tolde  them  that  by  force  they

should  have  nothing  but  blowes,  yet  if  they  would  bring

him hatchets, knives, and Jewes-harps, he bid them

assure  me,  he  had  a  Mine  of  gold,  and  could  refine  it,

&  would  trade  with  me  :  for  token  whereof,  he  sent  me

3.  or 4.  Croissants or halfe  moones  of  gold  weighing

a noble  a piece or more, and two bracelets  of  silver.

A  people  ^jgQ  ]^g  ^q1^  them  of  another  rich  nation,  that  sprinkled

tlLfrtr^^  their  bodies  with  the  poulder  of  golde,  and  seemed  to  be

gol^  guilt,  and  farre beyond them  a great towne called El

208

SIR ROBERT DUDLEY

SIR ROBERT DUDLEY  ad.

1595-
Dorado,  with  many  other  things.  My  men  being
satisfied,  and  thinking  their  company  too  fewe  to  stay
among  these  Savages,  and  their  victuall  spent,  returned.
This  Balthazar  my  Indian  their  guide  ranne  from  them  :
which  distresse  caused  them  to  borrow  of  Armago  newe
guides,  who  brought  them  home  another  way  through  a
River  called  Braha  by  the  high  land  of  Paria,  and  so  to
my  ship.  They  accompted  Orocoa  150.  miles  distant,
so  they  rowed  in  my  boate  above  250.  miles.  Their
absence  from  mee  was  16.  dayes,  making  but  one  nights
aboad  any  where.  The  report  of  this  made  mee  attempt
my  company  to  goe  with  them  againe.  But  nowe  they
were  worse  then  before ;  for  unlesse  I  would  have
gone  my  selfe  alone,  not  one  man  would  goe  with  me
(no  albeit  I  had  had  commission  to  hang  or  kill  them)
for  my  men  came  home  in  very  pitifull  case  almost
dead  for  famine  ;  and  indeed  such  was  their  misery,
as  they  dranke  not  in  three  dayes,  for  so  long  they
were  out  of  the  fresh  Rivers,  before  they  recovered  the
shippe,  and  yet  the  boat  was  filled  with  as  much  victuall,
as  it  could  holde.

In  this  time  of  my  boates  absence  there  came  to  me  a
pinnesse of Plimmouth, of which Captaine Popham  CaptainePop-
before  named  was  chiefe, who gave us great comfort.  ^^^^  amval.
And  if  I  had not  lost my pinnesses,  wherein I  might  [in.  577.]
have  caried  victuals  and  some men, we  had discovered
further  the  secrets  of  those  places. Also this Captaine
and I stayed some  sixe  or eight dayes longer  for Sir
Walter  Ralegh  (who,  as  wee  surmized,  had  some  purpose
for  this  discovery)  to  the  ende,  that  by  our  intelligence
and  his  boates  we  might  have  done  some  good  :  but  it
seemed  he  came  not  in  sixe  or  eight  weekes  after. So
Captaine  Popham  and  I  helde  it  not  convenient  to  stay  They  depart
any  longer :  therefore  new  watering  our  selves  at  Paracoa,  -f^]^  ^^^.  y^^
we  set  saile  to  see  further  of  the  Indies,  leaving  the  yle "'^^  ^  '
of  Trinidad  the 12.  day  of  March. The  13.  I  tooke  a  ^ prize  taken
small  prize  of  sackes  25.  leagues  to  the  Northward  of  an  ^°^^^°f^^^
yland  which I sailed by, called Granata. This prize  "^^
X  209  o

A.D.
1595.

The  yks  of
Santa  Cruz
and  Infierno.
Cape  Roxo.

They  disem-
boque  by  the
yle  of  Zackeo.

The  sholds
called
Abreojos,
that  is.  Open
thi7ie  eyes,  or
Looke  out.
Bermuda.

Flores  and
Cuervo.

A  fight  of  tzvo
dayes  with  a
Spanish  Ar-
mada of  600
tunnes.

They  arrive
at  S.  Ives  in
Cornwall  in
May  1595.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

refreshed  us  well  :  yet  meaning  to  sel  her  at  the  yle
of  Sant  Juan  de  Puerto  rico,  and  shaping  our  course
thither  by  the  ylands  of  Santa  Cruz  and  Infierno,  I
coasted  all  the  South  side  of  the  said  yle  of  S.  John,  till
I  came  to  an  ancker  at  Cape  Roxo  :  where  riding  14.
dayes  to  expect  S.  Domingo  men,  which  oftentimes  fall
with  the  yland  of  Mona,  and  finding  none  (neither  would
the  Spaniards  of  S.  Juan  de  puerto  rico  buy  my  prize)
I  unladed  her,  tooke  in  the  goods,  and  after  burned  her.
This  ended,  I  disemboqued  (where  fewe  Englishmen  had
done  before,  by  reason  of  the  great  dangers  betweene  this
yland  of  S.  Juan  de  puerto  rico  and  Hispaniola)  by  a
little  yland  called  Zacheo.  And  after  carefully  doubling
the  shouldes  of  Abreojos,  I  caused  the  Master,  (hearing
by  a  Pilote,  that  the  Spanish  fleete  ment  now  to  put  out
of  Havana)  to  beare  for  the  Meridian  of  the  yle  of
Bermuda,  hoping  there  to  finde  the  fleete  dispersed.
The  fleete  I  found  not,  but  foule  weather  enough  to
scatter  many  fleetes  ;  which  companion  left  mee  not  in
greatest  extremitie,  till  I  came  to  the  yles  of  Flores  and
Cuervo  :  whither  I  made  the  more  haste,  hoping  to
meete  some  great  Fleete  of  her  Majestie  my  sovereigne,
as  1  had  intelligence,  and  to  give  them  advise  of  this  rich
Spanish  fleet  :  but  finding  none,  and  my  victuals  almost
spent,  I  directed  my  course  for  England.

Returning  alone,  and  worse  manned  by  halfe  then
I  went  foorth,  my  fortune  was  to  meete  a  great  Armada
of  this  fleete  of  some  600.  tunnes  well  appointed,  with
whom  I  fought  board  and  board  for  two  dayes,  being  no
way  able  in  all  possibilitie  with  fiftie  men  to  board  a  man
of  warre  of  sixe  hundreth  tunnes.  And  having  spent  all
my  powder  I  was  constrained  to  leave  her,  yet  in  such
distresse  without  sailes  and  mastes,  and  hull  so  often  shot
through  with  my  great  Ordinance  betweene  winde  and
water,  that  being  three  hundred  leagues  from  land,  I  dare
say,  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  escape  sinking.  Thus
leaving  her  by  necessitie  in  this  miserable  estate,  I  made
for  England,  where I arrived at  S. Ives in Cornewall

SIR  ROBERT DUDLEY  a.d.

1595-
about  the  latter  ende  of  May  1595,  scaping  most  danger-
ously in  a  great  fogge  the  rocks  of  Silly.

Thus  by  the  providence  of  God  landing  safely,  I  was
kindely  intertained  by  all  my  friends,  and  after  a  short
time  learned  more  certaintie  of  the  sinking  of  that  great
shippe,  being  also  reputed  rich  by  divers  intelligences  out
of  Spaine  :  which  we  then  supposed  not,  &  were  doubt-
full  whether  she  had  bin  of  Biscay  or  S.  John  de  Luz
in  France  laden  with  fish  onely  from  Newfoundland.

In  this  voyage  I  and  my  fleete  tooke,  sunke  and
burnt  nine  Spanish  ships ;  which  was  losse  to  them,
though  I  got  nothing.

Here  follow  certaine  wordes  of  the  language  of  Trinidad
which  I  observed  at  my  being  there.

Guttemock.  A  man.

Tabairo,  Dabarah.l --n, x  r  l j

r\ T~\  1, r The  heare  or  ones  head.
Ur  Dabarra.J

Dessie  The  forehead.

Dasereth,  or  Dacosi  An  eye.

Dalacoack  The  mouth.

Archeh  The  teeth.

Daria  The  gummes.

Desire  The  lips.

Dill  The  tongue.

Dudica  The  eares.

Dacan  A  hand.

Dacabbo  The  palme  of  the  hand.

Dadena  The  wrist.

Dacurle  A  knee.

Daddano  The  calfe  of  the  legge.

Dabodda  The  toes.

. Dacutti  The  feete.

Cattie  The  moone.

Tauraroth  A  rope.

Arkeano  A  paire  of  cizers.

Weevah  The  heaven.

Harowa  A  stone  good  for  the  head  ache.

A.D.

1595-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

*  //  is  before
hi  this  voyage
called
Calvorie.
[III.  578.]

*  The  name

of  the  river
O  rem  que  may
seeme  to  be
derived  from
this  word.

Mointiman

Howa

Carotta

Sakel

Techir

Bodad

Mentinie

Addehegaeno

*Calcouri

Perota

Tacorao  a  green  stone. }

Caulpiri

Casparo  A  sword. }

Marrahabo  a  bow.  }

HucuUe

Halete

Caerwoda

Maurisse  Wheat. }

Yeddola  A  knife.  }

Beyou A  pipe. }

*Oronuie

Arguecona

Heldaro

Hemachugh

Hicket  Fire.  |

Ureit Tabacco.  |

Addoth
Barrennaire

Yron  or  Steele.
Munkeis  in  generall.
A  thing  like  pappe.
It  is  well,  or  I  am  well.
A  bracelet.
A  boxe  or  chest.
A  tree.
A  glasse.
Gold.
Silver.
{ Arrara  copper,
A  white  stone.
{ Tibetebe  cockles.
I  Semaro  an  arrow.
A  bow-string.
A  Potato  roote.
A  sweete  root.
{ Queca  A  basket,
{  Sambolers  A  hat.
{ Callit  Bread.

Water.
A  paire  of  cizzers.
A  spoone.
A  bread  which  they  eate.
{ Walrowa  A  parrot.
I Barudda  A  combe.
A  sticke.
A  button,  or  beads,
but

Curaballa  &  Sibath,  for  2 sundry  stones
Sibath  in  general  signifieth  a  stone.

Tolletillero  bels.  }  {  UUasso  a  Tuny-fish.

Bohery  A  flying  fish.  }  {  Bara  Water.

Haddalle  The  Sunne.

Babage-Canoaseen  The  manner  of  the

Indians hailing of  a ship, calling it after
the  name  of  their  Canoas.

Non  quo,  Or  II  know  not,  Or

Non  quapa  J I  cannot  tell.

AMIAS  PRESTON  AND  GEORGE  SOMMERS ad.

1595.

The  victorious  voyage  of  Captaine  Amias  Preston
now  knight,  and  Captaine  George  Sommers
to  the  West  India,  begun  in  March  1595.
Wherein  the  yle  of  Puerto  Santo,  the  yle  of
Coche  neere  Margarita,  the  fort  and  towne
of  Coro,  the  stately  city  of  S.  lago  de  Leon
were  taken  sacked  and  burned,  and  the  towne
of  Cumana  ransomed,  &  Jamaica  entred.
Written  by  Robert  Davie  one  of  the  company.

Aptaine  Amias  Preston,  and  captaine
Sommers,  both  valiant  gentlemen  &
discreet  commanders,  lying  ready  with
two  tall  ships,  the  Ascension  and  the
Gift,  and  a  small  pinnesse  at  Plimmouth,
for  the  space  of  a  moneth  attending
the  comming  of  captaine  Jones  their
consort,  which  in  al  that  time,  through  the  bad  dealing  of
those  which  he  put  in  trust,  could  not  make  his  ship
in  readines,  according  to  his  appointment,  the  12.  of
March  1595.  set  forward  on  their  voyage  for  the  West
Indies.  We  with  captaine  Jones  in  the  Derling,  and
Captaine  Prowse  in  the  Angel,  followed  after  them  the
19.  of  the  said  moneth.  The  last  of  March,  captaine
Preston  by  giving  chase  to  a  saile,  was  separated  from
captaine  Sommers,  and  his  pinnesse,  so  that  they  utterly
lost  sight  ech  of  other :  whereupon  captain  Preston  in
his  ship  alone,  resolved  to  surprise  the  yle  of  Puerto
santo,  and  shortly  after  came  before  the  same.  This
yland  standeth  in  the  Northerly  latitude  of  33.  degrees,
and  lieth  to  the  Northward  of  the  yle  of  Madera,  and
is  inhabited  by  old  souldiers,  which  the  kings  of  Portugal
were  wont  to  reward  for  their  former  olde  services,
by  placing  of  them  there.  This  yland  is  rich  in  corne,
wine,  &  oile :  and  hath  good  store  of  sheep,  asses,  goats
&  kine  :  they  have  also  plenty  of  foules,  fishes,  &  fruits.

213

A.D.

1595.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  yle  of
Puerto  Santo
taken  and  the
chiefe  tozune
in  it  burnt.

Captaine  Preston  comming  before  this  yland  with  one
ship  only  sought  with  2.  long  boats  to  land  his  men
&  to  force  the  same :  but  the  people  were  on  shore
in  warlike  array,  with  baricados  &  trenches  made,  ready
to  withstand  them.  Whereupon,  considering  the  great
danger,  and  disadvantage  of  the  place,  he  caused  his
people  to  returne  abord  againe.  And  the  next  morning
3  or  4  houres  before  day,  he  landed  in  a  place  of  greater
security,  with  60  men  onely,  who  lay  closely  in  a  chapel,
to  defend  themselves  from  the  raine  til  break  of  the  day,
and  so  marched  forward  upon  the  backs  of  their  enemies,
which  kept  their  baricados  upon  the  shore.  By  this  time
the  enemie  was  500  strong.  But,  being  so  suddenly
surprised,  after  some  resistance  of  our  muskets,  when
they  saw  our  pikes  approch,  and  had  tasted  somewhat
of  their  force  they  began  to  flee  into  certaine  thickets,  &
shrubs,  thinking  from  thence  to  gall  our  men :  but  with
very  litle  or  no  losse  at  all,  our  men  dislodged  them  of
that  place  also.  Hereupon,  they  all  fled  toward  the
chiefe  towne  of  the  yland :  but  once  againe  they  thought
to  make  a  new  stand  at  a  certaine  house  by  the  way,  from
whence  they  were  repulsed  by  captaine  Roberts.  So  in
the  flight  part  of  them  were  slaine,  and  an  ensigne,
which  one  captaine  Harvey  an  English  man  had  lost
not  long  before,  was  recovered :  and  the  chiefe  towne
it  selfe  was  by  our  men  wholly  woon  and  possessed.
But  before  the  entrance  of  our  men  they  had  conveighed
their  wives,  their  children,  and  the  rest  of  their  goods
into  an  exceeding  high  hil  which  standeth  neere  the
towne,  and  could  not  be  conquered,  but  with  exceeding
losse.  Although  they  sent  divers  times  to  redeeme  their
towne,  which  was  very  faire  and  large,  yet  in  regard  of
their  crueltie  and  treachery,  which  they  used  towards
captaine  Harvey  and  his  people,  captaine  Preston  would
shew  them  no  favour,  but  utterly  burnt  their  towne  to
ashes,  and  sent  his  men  to  wast  the  rest  of  their  villages
of  the  yland,  preferring  the  honour  &  just  revenge  of
his country men, before his owne private gaine, &

214

AMIAS  PRESTON  AND  GEORGE  SOMMERS ad.

1595.
commodity. And  so  with  small  pillage  and  great  honour
he  retired  in  safetie  and  all  his  small  company  with  him,
from  the  conquered  yland  unto  his  ship. But  we  in  our
ship  met  not  with  him,  untill  the  12.  of  April  following.
We  therefore  in  the  Derling  pursuing  our  voyage,  had  [III.  579.]
sight  of  the  yles  of  the Canaries  the  6  of  April,  and
the 8 of  the  same, we  watered  on  the  Southeast  side  T'hey  water
of the grand Canaria. There we met with capt.  ^P^^^  ^hezrand
Sommers,  &  his pinnesse, & 3 ships  of  Hampton,  in
one whereof  was cap. Willis. The 9 of  April we  al
departed for Tenerif  to seeke captaine Preston : and
standing over towards Tenerif,  the 9 day  at night I
came into captaine Sommers ship. The 10 in the
morning  we  brake our maine  yard,  yet we recovered
Tenerif,  &  the  same  day  towards  night  we  ankered  under
the  southside  of  the  same. There  I  went  aland  in  our
boat,  &  found  3 or  4  fisher  boats,  and  brought  one  of
them  off. The  rest  bulged  themselves. Here  we  rode
to  mend  our  yard  til  the  1 1  at  night :  then  we  set  saile
to find  captaine  Amias  Preston : and standing  towards
Gomera,  the 12  in the  morning  we  had  sight  of  him.
Then  we  thought  to  have  landed  in  Gomera :  but  the
wind  blew  so  much,  that  we  could  not. So  we  departed
altogether  with  joy  the 13  of  April,  &  set  our  course
for  the  West  Indies. And  the  8  of  May  next  ensuing,
we  arrived  at  the  yland  of  Dominica. In  all  which  time  Dominica.
nothing  happened  unto  us  saving  this,  that  the  1 8  day  of
April at  midnight,  our admiral  lost her  long  boat in
towing. We  staied  at  Dominica  til  the  14  of  May,  to
refresh our sicke men. Here the Indians  came  unto
us  in canoas made  of  an whole  tree, in  some  wherof
were 3  men,  in  some  4  or  6,  &  in  others 12 or 14,
and  brought  in  them  plantans,  pinos,  and  potatos,  and
trucked with us, for hatchets, knives, & small  bead-
stones. Here  in  refreshing  of  our  men,  we found  an An  excellent
hot  bath  hard  ioynino:  to  a  cold  river  side :  wherein  our  ^°^^^°^^  ^°f_

• 1  1. ^1 J ^1  1  J  J bath  found  tn

sick  men bathed  themselves,  and  were  soone  recovered  d^^i^i^^
of  their  sicknesses. This  is  a  goodly  yland,  and  some-

215

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

thing  high  land, but  al  overgrowen with woods. The
14  we  departed  from thence, & the 16 sailing  South-
westward,  we  had  sight  of  Granada,  but  landed  not  there.
The yles  called  The  1 7  we  arrived  at  the  Testigos  &  ankered  there,  and
Testigos.  consorted  with  the  3  ships  of  Hampton,  wherin  captaine

Willis  was.  The  18  we  landed  our  men  &  tooke
view  and  muster  of  all,  &  the  same  night  set  saile  away.
The  19  we  had  sight  of  Margarita,  where  the  Spaniards
by  their  Indians  fish  for  pearle :  we  stood  in  very  neere
the  rode,  but  saw  nothing  there.  Therefore  we  went
no  further  in,  but  stood  from  it  againe.  The  same  day
toward  night,  we  had  sight  of  a  litle  yland,  betweene
Margarita  &  the  maine,  called  Coche.  We  came  neer
it  in  the  night  with  our  ships  within  some  3  leagues,  &
there  ankered  under  the  maine  side,  and  about  midnight
we  manned  our  pinnesses  &  boats,  and  in  the  morning
about  breake  of  day,  we  landed  on  the  yland,  wherein
are  few  or  none  inhabitants,  but  they  commonly  come
from  Margarita  in  boats  on  the  munday,  and  remaine
there  fishing  for  pearles  untill  the  Saturday,  and  then
returne  &  cary  al  that  they  have  taken  to  Margarita.
Certahie  Here we tooke some few Spaniards and Negros  their

Spaniards  and  gj^ves  with  them,  and  had  some  smal  quantitie  of  pearls.
in%e\leof  ^^  remained  on  this  iland  the  20  and  21,  in  which  time
Coche  where  we  went  a  fishing  with  our  seine,  and  tooke  good  store
they  fish  for  of  mullets  and  other  fish,  and  amongst  the  rest  drew
pearle.  ^  shore  in  the  seine  a  fish  called  by  the  Spaniards  Lagarto,

and  by  the  Indians  Caiman,  which  is  indeed  a  Crocodile,
for  it  hath  4  feete  and  a  long  taile,  and  a  wide  mouth,
and  long  teeth,  &  wil  devour  men.  Some  of  these
Lagartos  are  in  length  16  foot,  some  20  foot,  and  some
30  foot :  they  have  muske  in  them,  and  live  as  wel  on
the  land,  as  in  the  water.  The  21  of  May  we  departed
for  Cumana,  thinking  to  have  gotten  in  that  night  to
have  landed :  but  the  current  striketh  so  strong  out
of  the  bay  that  we  could  not  recover  the  towne  till
day  light.  In  the  morning  we  espied  2  sailes  before
the towne,  but  could not fetch them. Here  we  plied

216

AMIAS  PRESTON  AND  GEORGE  SOMMERS ad.

1595.
too  and  againe  in  the  sound  all  the  forenoone,  but  could

not  get  up  so  farre  as  the  towne. These  1  sailes  came
roome  to  us,  after  they  saw  that  we  were  at  an  anker,  &
came  somewhat neere  us,  and sent their  skyphs  abord
our  admiral. They were 1 flieboats of  Middleburgh  Two  Jiieboats
which traded there, & had secretly advertised the  °f'^\^j}^-
country of  our comming, to our great hinderance :  warm  the
but we  knew it not at our  first arrivall. Here they  Spaniards  of
of  Cumana  perceiving  that  we  would  land,  came  to  parle  °^''  comming.
with  us,  and  tolde  us,  if  we  would  land,  we  might  easily
take  the  towne,  for  they  ment  not  to  withstand  us,  but
that  they  had  caried  all  their  goods  into  the  mountaines,
but,  if  we  would  not  land  to  burne  and  spoile  the  towne,
they  would  give us  some  reasonable  ransome,  and  any
victuals that  we  wanted. So our general agreed  with  The  towne  of
them, received their ransome, and departed without  C'^ot^w^j  ran-
landing. But  at  our  first  arrival  in  this  bay,  our  generals
long boat was sent forth wel manned, and tooke 3 Three  Cara-
Caravels,  but  found  litle  or  nothing  of  value  in  them : taken.
saving  in  one  were  some  sides  of  bacon,  and  some  maiz
and Guiny-wheat. Here  we  staied til  the  23  of  May,
& in the evening we set saile, and departed from
thence. And  the  26 of  the  same  we  thought  to  have
landed  at  a  fort  that standeth by the sea-coast  in the
Caracos,  as  you go  for  S. lago. This  is  a  marveilous
high land, as high as the pike of Tenerif. We
could not land here over night, by reason of the
roughnes of the sea, which goeth in that place,
& there is but one litle creeke against the fort,
to come  in with your  boat. So, we  perceiving  no  fit
place  to  land, by reason of  the sea,  stood  away some
league  to  the  West-ward,  about  a  litle  head-land,  there
we  ankered  al  night:  and  the  27  in  the  morning  we  all
landed  in  safety,  none  resisting  us. Then  we  presently
set  our  selves  in  aray,  and  marched  toward  the  fort,  &  A  fort  nere
tooke  it  without  any  resistance. Here  we  remained  al  ^^^,  Caracas
the  rest  of  this  day  until  the  28,  about  three  of  the  clock  rju  "rgol
in  the  afternoone. We  found  nothing  in  this  fort  but  a

217

A.D.

1595-

Al  our  actions
betrayed  by
dangerous
spies  out  of
England.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

litle  meale,  or  2  or  3  tunnes  of  wine,  which  by  reason  of
some  disorder  amongst  the  company  overcharging  them-
selves with  the  wine,  our  general  for  the  most  part  caused
to  be  spilt.  While  we  remained  here,  some  of  our
company  ranging  the  woods,  found  the  governor  of  the
fort  where  he  lay  asleepe,  brought  him  to  our  general :
who  examined  him  touching  the  state  of  the  citie  of  S.
lago  de  Leon.  Who  declared  unto  us  that  they  had
newes  of  our  comming  a  moneth  before,  and  that  they
of  the  towne  had  made  preparation  for  our  comming :
and  that  if  we  did  go  the  common  beaten  way,  it  was
never  possible  for  us  to  passe,  for  that  they  had  made
in  the  midst  of  the  way  betweene  this  fort  and  the  said
city,  an  exceeding  strong  baricado  on  the  top  of  a  very
high  hil,  the  passage  being  not  above  25  or  30  foot  in
bredth,  &  on  each  side  marveilous  steep-upright,  and
the  woods  so  thicke  that  no  man  could  passe  for  his  life :
which  indeed  at  our  returning  backe  we  found  to  be  true.
Upon  which  speeches  our  general  demanded  of  him  if
there  were  not  any  other  way :  who  answered,  there  is
another  way  marveilous  bad  and  very  ill  to  travel,  which
the  Indians  do  commonly  use :  but  he  thought  that  the
Spaniards  had  stopt  the  same,  by  cutting  downe  of  great
trees  and  other  things,  as  indeed  they  had.  This  Spaniard
was  a  very  weake  and  sickly  man  not  able  to  travel,  so
our  generall  sent  him  abord  his  ship,  &  there  kept  him.
In  the  taking  of  our  3  small  Caravels  at  Cumana,  we
had  a  Spaniard  in  one  of  them  that  had  traveiled  these
wayes  to  the  citie  of  S.  lago.  He  told  us  he  would
cary  us  thither  by  any  of  both  these  wayes,  if
afterward  we  would  set  him  at  libertie :  the  which  was
granted.  While  we  remained  at  the  fort  by  the  waters
side,  the  Spaniards  came  downe  unto  us  by  the  great
&  beaten  way  on  horsebacke,  who  being  discovered,  our
generall  sent  out  to  meete  them  captaine  Roberts  with
some  40  or  50  musketeirs,  who  came  to  skirmish  with
them,  but  they  would  not  stay.  The  same  day  in  the
afternoone  we  marched  forth  toward  S. lago,  &  tooke

218

AMIAS  PRESTON  AND  GEORGE  SOMMERS ad.

1595-
the  Indians  way  called  The  unknowen  way.  In  our
march  we  came  to  divers  Indians  houses,  which  we  never
hurt,  but  passed  by  and  left  them  untouched :  but  the
Indians  were  all  fled  into  the  woods,  and  other  places,  we
know  not  whither.  We  marched  until  it  was  night  over
such  high  mountaines,  as  we  never  saw  the  like,  and  such
a  way  as  one  man  could  scarse  passe  alone.  Our  general
being  in  the  forward,  at  length  came  whereas  a  river  de-
scended downe  over  the  mountaines,  and  there  we  lodged
all  that  night.  Here  in  going  this  way,  we  found  the
Spanish  governours  confession  to  be  true :  for  they  had
baricadoed  the  way  in  divers  places  with  trees,  &  other
things  in  such  sort,  that  we  were  driven  to  cut  our  way
through  the  woods  by  Carpenters,  which  we  caried  with
us  for  that  purpose.  The  next  day  being  the  29  of  May
early  in  the  morning  we  set  forward  to  recover  the  tops
of  the  mountaines :  but  (God  knoweth)  they  were  so
extreeme  high  and  so  steep-upright,  that  many  of  our
souldiers  fainted  by  the  way :  and  when  the  officers  came
unto  them,  and  first  entreated  them  to  goe,  they  answered,
they  could  goe  no  further.  Then  they  thought  to  make
them  goe  by  compulsion,  but  all  was  in  vaine :  they
would  goe  a  little  and  then  lie  downe,  and  bid  them  kill
them,  if  they  would,  for  they  could  not,  nor  would  not
goe  any  further.  Whereby  they  were  enforced  to  depart,
&  to  leave  them  there  lying  on  the  ground.  To  be  short,
at  length  with  much  ado  we  gat  the  top  of  the  moun-
taines about  noone :  there  we  made  a  stand  til  all  the
company  was  come  up,  and  would  have  stayed  longer  to
have  refreshed  our  men :  but  the  fogge  and  raine  fell  so
fast,  that  wee  durst  not  stay.  So  wee  made  hast  to
descend  towards  the  towne  out  of  the  fogge  and  raine :
because  that  in  these  high  mountaines  by  report  of  the
Spaniards  themselves,  it  doeth  almost  continually  raine.
Assoone  as  we  were  descended  downe  neere  halfe  the  way
to  the  towne  the  raine  ceased,  and  going  downe  a  little
further,  on  the  toppe  of  a  hill  we  saw  the  towne  not  farre
distant  from  us. Here  we  aU  cleared  our  muskets :  and

219

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

when  our  colours  came  in  sight,  we  discharged  a  second
volee  of  shot  to  the  great  discouragement  of  the  enemie.
Thus  we  marched  on  a  round  pace.  The  enemie  was  in
readinesse  a  little  without  the  towne  to  encounter  us  on
horsebacke.  Being  nowe  fully  descended  from  the  moun-
taines  wee  came  into  a  faire  plaine  champion  fielde,
without  either  hedge,  bush  or  ditch,  saving  certaine
trenches  which  the  water  had  made,  as  it  descendeth
from  the  mountaines.  Here  we  set  our  selves  in  a
readinesse,  supposing  the  enemie  would  have  encoun-
tered us :  but  having  pitched  our  maine  battell,  and
marching  forward  a  good  round  pace,  captaine  Beling,
and  captaine  Roberts  tooke  ech  of  them  some  loose  shoot,
and  marched  in  all  hast  toward  the  enemie  before  the
maine  battell,  wherein  was  our  generall  with  capt.
Sommers  and  came  to  skirmish  with  them :  but  it
was  soone  ended :  for  the  enemie  fled.  One  Spaniard
was  slaine  in  this  skirmish,  and  not  any  one  of  our
companies  touched  either  with  piece  or  arrow,  God  be

TheCitieofS.  thanked. We  soone  marched  into  the  towne,  and had
f , '^ it  without  any  more  resistance :  but  there  we  found  not

ofMav  ^^^  wealth that  we  expected: for  they  had  conveyed  all

into  the  mountaines,  except  such  goods  as  they  could  not
easily  cary,  as  wine,  and  iron,  and  such  things. By  three

[III.  581.]  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  the  29  of  May,  we  entred
the  citie.  Here  we  remained  until  the  3  of  June  without
anie  great  disturbance,  saving  sometime  by  night  they
would  come  on  horsebacke  hard  unto  our  Corps  du
guard,  and  finding  us  vigilant,  and  readie  for  them,
would  depart  againe.

The  first  of  June,  there  came  a  Spaniard  neere  unto  us
alone :  the  Corps  du  guard  perceiving  him,  called  our
General,  who  soone  came  towards  him :  but  before  he
approched,  the  Spaniard  made  signes  that  he  should  lay
aside  his  armes :  which  he  refused  to  doe,  but  promised
as  he  was  a  souldier,  if  he  would  come,  hee  should  have
free  passage.  Upon  which  promise  hee  came  to  him  on
horse-backe, and our General brought him within the

AMIAS  PRESTON  AND  GEORGE  SOMMERS ad.

1595-
towne,  and  there  communed  with  him.  Who  demanded
what  he  ment  to  do  with  the  towne :  he  answered  that
he  meant  to  remaine  there  and  keepe  it;  or  if  he  did
depart  from  it  he  would  burne  it.  The  Spaniard  then
demanded,  what  the  ransome  of  it  should  be.  Our
General  required  30000  ducats.  Whereunto  he  replied
that  it  was  very  much.  So  having  had  some  other
conference  together,  hee  shewed  him  that  hee  had  bene
a  souldier  in  Flanders  a  long  time,  and  now  was  sent
thither  by  his  kings  commandement.  Among  other
things  our  General  demanded  of  him,  what  the  reason
was  they  had  not  walled  the  citie,  being  so  faire  a  thing  as
that  was.  The  Spaniard  replied,  that  hee  thought  it  to
bee  stronger  walled  than  anie  citie  in  the  world,  meaning,
by  those  huge  &  high  mountains  which  the  enemie  must
passe  over  before  he  can  approch  it ;  which  we  found  very
true.  Thus  with  many  other  faire  speeches,  he  tooke  his
leave  for  that  day,  and  told  our  Generall,  that  he  would  go
speake  with  the  governour  :  (but  it  might  be  himselfe,  for
any  thing  we  know)  howbeit  because  our  General  had
granted  him  free  comming  and  going,  he  suffred  him
to  depart :  who  before  his  departure,  requested  to  have
a  token  of  our  General,  that  he  might  shew  to  the  Gover-
nour how  he  had  spoken  with  us,  or  else  he  doubted,  that
he  would  not  beleeve  him.  Wherupon  our  General  gave
him  a  piece  of  1 2  pence :  so  he  departed  and  promised
the  next  day  by  ten  of  the  clocke  to  returne  unto  us  with
an  answere :  in  which  meane  time  nothing  befel.  The
next  day  being  the  2  of  June,  at  his  houre  appointed,  he
returned  with  his  Indian  running  by  his  horses  side.  So
he  was  brought  to  the  Generall,  and  there  remained  till
after  dinner,  and  dined  in  his  company  in  the  governours
house  that  was.  The  dinner  ended,  with  the  best  enter-
tainement  which  could  be  given  him,  they  communed
again  about  the  ransome  of  the  citie.  Our  General  pro-
posed his  old  demand  of  30000  ducats.  The  Spaniard
first  proffered  him  2000,  then  3000,  last  of  all  4000,  and
more  he  would not  give. Our  General  counting it a

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

small  summe  of  money  among  so  many,  did  utterly  refuse

it. So  the  Spaniard  departed. But  before  his  departure

our  general  told  him,  that  if  he  came  not  to  him  again

before  the  next  day  noone,  with  the  ransome  which  he

demanded,  he  would  set  all on  fire. That  whole  day

past,  and  the  night  also  without  any  thing  of  moment,

except  some  shew  of  assault,  by  their  approching  towards

our  Corps  du  guard,  and  retiring  backe  againe. The  3

day  being  come,  in  the  morning  some  of  our  company

went  forth,  a  league  or  more  from  the  towne,  &  some  two

Certain  v'll- leagues  and  more  unto  certaine  villages  thereabout,  &  set

ages  aoout them  on  fire :  but  the  enemy  never  came  to  resist  them,
bant  lasp  ,  i i 1  •  r •  1  i

^^^^  so  they  returned backe  agame  sate  mto  the  towne,  and

brought certaine Indian prisoners with them, among

whom  there  was  one  which  spake  broken  Spanish,  which

being examined,  confessed unto us of  his own accord,

how  the  General  had  sent  to  the  other  towns  thereabout

for  aide,  and that  he  thought  they  would  be  there  with

him  that  day. When  we  understood  this,  we  grew  into

some distrust of  the Spaniards trechery, and thought

upon  the  messenger,  how  he  had  used  long  delayes  with

us : wherupon we were commanded presently, every

man  to  make  ready  to  depart,  and  to  fire  the  citie :  which

TkecitieofS.  forthwith  was  done. And  after  we  had  scene  it  all  on

lago  burned. gj.g^ g^ burnt to ashes, we tooke our  leaves and so

departed,  &  marched  away  that  day  being  the  3  of  June,

not that way we came,  but by the great  beaten  way.

And  when  we  had  marched  halfe  the  way  towards  the

waters  side,  we  came  unto  that  strong  baricado  which  they

had  made,  and  there  lay  all  that  night. Here  we  found

the  Spanish  captaines  word  to  be  true  which  we  tooke

at  the fort  by  the  waters  side :  for this baricado  was  of

such force,  that 100 men in  it wel furnished, would

have  kept backe from passing that  way 1 00000: first

by reason of  the huge and high  mountaines,  next  the

steepenes of  them,  on  both sides,  last  of  all in regard

of  the fine  contriving  of  it  with  the  large  trenches,  and

other munitions, which I cease to recite. The fourth

AMIAS  PRESTON  AND  GEORGE  SOMMERS ad.

1595.
day  of  June  in  the  morning  wee  departed  from  thence :
but before our departure, wee overthrew on the one
side  of  the  steepe  hill  two  bases  of  yron,  which  we  found
there  planted  by  the  enemie,  and  so  set  forward  toward
our  ships,  and by 12  of  the  clocke  came  to  the  waters
side,  and  there  remayned  in  the  fort  which  wee  had  taken
before,  untill  the  fift  day  at  night :  in  which  time  we  laded
some small quantity  of  hides,  and Salsa-perilla, which
we  found there  at our  first  landing. So  the  fift  day  at
night  we  departed  from  thence,  to  goe  to  a  towne  called
Coro :  but  before  wee  departed,  wee  set  fire  in  the  fort,  Afortandcer-
and  all  the  Indians  houses  that  were  about  it,  and  burnt  ^^^^^^  . ^^^
them. Then  we  set  sayle,  and  standing  along  the  coast,  -waters  side
our Spanish guide signified unto us,  that there  were  burnt.
foure  sayles  of  ships  about  five  leagues  from  thence,  in  \P^-  S^^-]
a  place  called Checherebiche,  and  Caio,  and Maio. So
the  6  day in  the  morning  we  were  thwart  of  the place,
and there our  generall sent  away  his  long  boate  with
captaine  Sommers,  unto  those  places,  where  they  found
3  of  the  ships : but the Spaniards had conveyed their
sailes  ashore into  the  woodes, so that they could not
bring  them off,  but  set fire  in them and burnt  them.  Three  Spanish
From  hence  we  stood  along  the  shore,  sailing  untill  the  ^^^^^  '^*"'^-
ninth  day  of  June,  on  which  day  toward  the  evening  we
imbarked  our  selves  in  our  pinnesses  and  small  caravels,
to  land  at  Coros :  but  we  had  none  that  knew  the  place
certainely :  wherefore  we  ankored  that  night some two
leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  it,  and  in  the  morning  I  went
on  land, and  nine  more  with me, to see if  we  could
discover  the  towne,  but  we  could  not,  wee  went  above
a  league up into the countrey,  but  could  not  see  any
village or towne. So returning backe, wee  met  our
Generall, with divers others which came ashore with
him,  with  whom we  marched  into  the  countrey  againe,
but  could see nothing, & so returned. At the  water
side  captaine  Prowse  died. There  we  remained  all  that
day  on  land,  by  reason  the  wind  blew  so  much  that  wee
could not get aboord untill the evening. After our

223

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

comming  aboord  a  boat  which  we  sent  into  the  bay,
returned  and  brought  us  newes,  that  there  rode  a  barke
within  the  bay,  and  by  all  likelyhood  the  towne  should
be  there.  So  presently  our  Generall  went  into  the  bay
with  the  Derling  and  some  of  the  small  caravels.  The
tenth  day  in  the  morning,  the  rest  of  our  shipping  came
into  the  bay,  and  our  men  landed  the  same  day,  about
10  or  II  of  the  clocke  in  the  night,  &  so  marched  on
A  baricado  toward  the  towne :  but  in  the  way  they  had  made  bari-
'^°°^-  cados, and kept them  very strongly. Notwithstanding

the  courage  of  our  men  was  such,  as  that  they  feared
nothing,  and  forced  them  to  leave  their  forces,  and  flie.
Having  wonne  this  baricado  they  there  remained  untill
the  next  day  being  the  1 1  of  June,  and  then  early  in  the
morning  they  marched  on  towards  the  towne,  where  by
the  way,  the  enemie  often  times  came  to  skirmish  with
The  towne  of  them,  but  alwayes  fled.  In  fine  they  wan  the  towne
ST'^^f"  without  any  great  losse  of  men,  God  be  thanked.
Having  gotten  the  town,  they  found  nothing  in  it  at
all ;  for  they  had  intelligence  from  Sant  lago,  how  wee
had  used  them  before,  which  caused  them  to  convey  all
their  goods  into  the  mountaines  and  woods :  finding
nothing  in  it,  our  Generall  caused  it  to  be  set  on  fire,
thinking  it  not  good  to  remaine  there,  but  to  returne
againe,  backe  to  the  ships :  and  the  greatest  cause  was
by  reason  of  the  departure  of  captaine  Sommers :  who
the  day  before  in  a  most  furious  tempest,  being  in  the
pinnesse,  with  some  50  men  at  anker,  had  his  cables
broken  and  lost  all  his  ankers,  and  so  was  faine  to  put
to  sea  to  save  himselfe,  otherwise  they  had  bene  in
danger  of  perishing.  Thus  our  General  and  his  com-
pany, returned  backe  againe  the  twelfth  day  and  im-
barked  themselves,  and  departed  away  with  all  speede
to  seeke  captaine  Sommers.  The  13  toward  night,  hee
came  where  captaine  Sommers  was,  and  found  him  riding,
but  not  by  anie  ankers,  but  by  two  bases,  which  they
had  made  for  to  stay  their  barke  by :  at  which  meeting
the  company  was  very  glad. Then they  determined  to

224

AMIAS  PRESTON  AND  GEORGE  SOMMERS ad

1595.
go into  a  mighty  great bay,  to  a towne  called Laguna :  The  bay  of
but  the  bay  was  so  deepe  and should withall,  that  we  Laguna.
returned  backe  againe,  after  wee  had  stood  in  two  daies
& a night. So we sayled over toward the Isle of
Hispaniola  the  sixteenth  of  June :  and  the  twentieth  day  Hispaniola.
we  saw  it. The  21 we  ankored under Cape  Tiburon.
Here  we  watered,  and  stayed  untill  the  25  of  the  same.
After  our  departure  out  of  the bay  of  Laguna,  a  great
sicknes fell among our fleete, and there died about
eighty  men  of  the same. This  sicknesse  was the  fluxe
of  the  bellie,  which  is  a  common  disease  in  that  countrey.
We remayned about this Island untill the eight and
twentieth of this moneth. Then we departed from
thence,  and  the  second  of  July  arrived  at  the  Island  of  Jamaica.
Jamaica. Before  our comming hither,  the three  ships
of Hampton had forsaken us,  and left  our  company.
And the  Derling  wherein  was  captaine Jones,  was  sent  The  death  of
to discover some other secret matter,  in which dis-  captaine  J  ones.
covery  the  valiant gentleman ended his life. So our
whole fleete  was now but our generall,  with  captaine
Sommers,  and a small pinnesse. We stayed at this
Isle  of  Jamaica  until  the  sixt  of  July,  in  which  meane
time  we  landed  to  see  if  we  could  kill  any  beeves,  but
we  could not,  they  were so wild :  here  is  great store
of  them,  and great  plenty  of  fresh-fish. We  departed
hence the 6 of July, and passed by the Islands,
called  Caimanes,  and the  Isle  de Pinos,  and the 12  of
the said moneth by Cape de Corrientes where we  Cape  de  Cor-
watered,  and the  same  night,  wee  set  saile  towards  the  rientes.
cape  of S.  Anthony,  being the  westermost  part  of  the
Isle  of Cuba. The 13 day in  the morning we  were
under this  cape,  and the same  day  we met with the
honourable knight.  Sir Walter Ralegh,  returning from
his paineful,  and happie  discovery  of  Guiana,  and his
surprise  of  the  Isle  of  Trinidad. So  with  glad  hearts,
wee kept him and his  fleete  of three ships  company
till  the  twentieth  day  at  night,  what  time  we  lost  them.
In  all which time nothing of moment fell out,  save
X  225  p

A.D.

1595-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that we gave  chase to  a couple  of frigats,  but could
not  fetch  them.
[III.  583.]  Afterward  we  plyed  to  recover  Havana,  untill  the  five

and  twentieth  of  July :  then  we  set  our  course  for  the
head  of  the  Martyrs,  the  27  we  were  in  sight  of  them.
The  2  8  wee  entred  the  gulfe  of  Bahama :  then  we  set
The  Banke  of  our  course  homeward  toward  Newfoundland,  but  we
'Newfoundland  could  not  fetch  it,  but  were  on  the  Banke,  and  tooke
fish  there  the  20  day  of  August.  The  same  night  we
set  sayle  to  come  home,  by  reason  the  wind  was  contrary
to  goe  in  with  Newfoundland.  So  the  tenth  day  of
September,  we  arrived  in  safety  (God  be  thanked)  in
Milford  haven  in  Wales,  having  performed  so  long  a
voyage  in  the  space  of  sixe  moneths,  or  somewhat
lesse.

The  voyage  truely  discoursed,  made  by  sir  Francis
Drake,  and  sir  John  Hawkins,  chiefly  pre-
tended for  some  speciall  service  on  the  Islands
and  maine  of  the  West  Indies,  with  sixe  of
the  Queenes  ships,  and  21  other  shippes  and
barkes,  containing  2500  men  and  boyes,  in
the  yeere  1595.  In  which  voyage  both  the
foresayd  knights  died  by  sicknesse.

Ee  brake  ground  out  of  the  sound  of
Plimmouth  on  Thursday  the  28  of
August,  and  that  night  ankored  againe
in  Causon  bay,  where  we  rode  till
Friday.  Then  we  set  sayle  and  stoode
Southwest :  and  about  three  of  the
clocke  the  next  morning  the  Hope,
wherein  sir  Thomas  Baskervil  went,  strake  upon  the
Edy  stone,  and  shot  off  a  piece,  but  after  cleared  her-
selfe  wel  enough.

On Munday at sixe of  the clocke in the morning
the landes end bare Northwest and by North, and

226

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS ad.

1595
then  we  stoode  away  Southwest  and by  South for  the
coast  of  Spaine.

The  8  of  September  we  tooke  two  small  Flemish
fliboats  bound  for  Barbary ;  which  we  caried  a  while
with  us  and  afterward  dismissed  them  without  doing
them  any  harme  :  only  wee  learned  newes  of  them,
and  stayed  them  from  discrying  our  fleete  to  the  enemie.

The  26  we  saw  Forteventura,  being  one  of  the  Islands
of  the  Canaries.

The  27  being  Saturday  by  breake  of  day  we  had
over-shot  the  chiefe  towne  of  Grand  Canaria  to  the
Northeast,  and  then  stood  about  for  it  againe,  and  by
nine  of  the  clocke  were  at  anker  fayre  before  the  fort
to  the  Eastward  of  the  towne  some  league.  At  one
of  the  clocke  wee  offred  to  land  one  thousand  and  foure
hundreth  men  in  the  sandie  bay  betwixt  the  fort  and
the  towne  :  But  by  our  detracting  of  the  time  they
had  made  a  bulwarke  in  the  sandie  bay  and  planted
Ordinance  :  so  that  by  reason  thereof,  and  the  great
breach  of  the  sea  that  went  then  on  shore  we  were  not
able  to  land  without  endangering  our  whole  forces,  which
our  General  would  not  doe.  There  were  of  Spaniards
horsemen  and  footmen  some  900,  which  played  upon
us  out  of  their  trenches,  most  of  them  being  shot.  At
the  time  of  our  landing  there  went  by  commandement
of  our  Generals  within  musket  shot  of  the  shore,  &
rode  there  at  ankor  some  three  hours,  the  Salomon,
the  Bonaventure,  the  Elizabeth  Constance,  the  Phenix,
the  Juell,  the  Little  John,  the  Delight,  the  Pegasus,
the  Exchange,  the  Francis,  the  caravell,  and  the  two
catches  :  But  when  the  Generall  sir  Francis  Drake  gave
over  the  landing  being  in  his  barge,  the  ships  weighed
being  in  some  danger,  and  stoode  off  againe  to  the
great  ships.  Then  we  went  to  the  West  end  of  the
Island  and  there  watered  :  where  captaine  Grimston
going  up  the  hill  with  6  or  7  in  his  company  was  set
upon  by  the  herdmen,  who  with  their  dogs  and  staves
killed  the  captaine  and  three  or  foure  of  his  company  :

227

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

the  rest  were  sore  wounded  :  the  Salomons  Chirurgian
taken  prisoner,  who  disclosed  our  pretended  voyage  as
much  as  in  him  lay  :  so  as  the  Viceroy  sent  a  caravel
of  adviso  into  the  Indies,  unto  all  such  places  as  wee
y  did  pretend  to  goe  to.  Howbeit  they  had  intelligence
from  the  king  of  all  our  voyage  the  eight  of  August,
which  was  three  weekes  before  we  set  foorth  of  England  :
as  also  by  a  Fleming  that  had  seene  all  our  provision
at  London.

The  28  being  Sunday  at  ten  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee
set  saile,  and  stood  away  Southwest  and  South  southwest
some  200  leagues,  untill  we  came  in  the  height  of  the
Islands  of  Cape  Verde,  and  then  more  Westerly  for
Martinino,  one  of  the  Islands  of  the  West  Indies,
which  we  saw  the  27  of  October  :  but  the  night  before
we  had  a  storme,  in  which  sir  Francis  with  foure  or
five  other  ships  bearing  on  head  of  the  fleete  was
Dominica,  separated.  Then  we  stood  for  Dominica,  an  Island
full  of  inhabitants  of  the  race  of  the  Canibals,  not  past
ten  leagues  distant  from  Martinino.  In  it  groweth  great
store  of  Tabacco  :  where  most  of  our  English  and
French  men  barter  knives,  hatchets,  sawes,  and  such
like  yron  tooles  in  trucke  of  Tabacco.

Before  we  came  to  Dominica  our  Generall  Sir  Francis
Drake  altered  his  course,  and  went  for  Marigalante,
which  we  had  sight  of  the  28  day,  and  came  to  an
anker  on  the  Northeast  side  a  saker  shot  off  the  shore
in  13  fathomes  water  faire  sholding.  There  the  Generall
went  on  shore  in  his  barge,  and  by  chance  met  a  Canoa
of  Dominicans,  to  the  people  whereof  he  gave  a  yellow
[III.  584.]  wastcoate  of  flanell  and  an  hankerchiefe  ;  and  they  gave
him  such  fruits  as  they  had,  and  the  Dominicanes  rowed
to  Dominica  againe.  They  came  thither  to  fetch  some
fruits  which  they  sowe  and  plant  in  divers  places  of  that
Island,  which  they  keepe  like  gardens.

The  next  morning  by  breake  of  day  we  weyed  and
stoode  betweene  the  Todos  Santos,  which  are  4  or  5
little  Islands  betweene  Guadalupe  and  Dominica. There

228

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS ad.

1595-
is  nothing  upon  these  Islands  but  wood.  We  came  to
the  Southeast  side  of  Guadalupe  and  there  ankered  hard
aboord  the  shore  :  the  Southwest  side  of  the  Island  is
deepe  water  and  good  ankorage  :  where  that  day  sir
John  Hawkins  came  to  us  againe  standing  up  from  the
South  side  of  Dominica.  There  we  watered,  washed
our  ships,  set  up  our  pinnesses,  and  refreshed  our
souldiers  on  shore.

The  30  captaine  Wignol  in  the  Francis,  a  barke  of  35
tunnes,  being  the  sternmost  of  sir  John  Hawkins  fleete
was  chased  by  five  of  the  king  of  Spaines  frigats  or
Zabras  being  ships  of  200  tunnes  a  piece,  which  came
of  purpose  with  3.  other  Zabras  for  the  treasure  of  S.
Juan  de  Puerto  rico  :  The  Francis  going  roome  with
them,  supposing  they  had  bene  our  owne  fleete,  was
by  them  taken  in  sight  of  our  caravel.  They  left  the
Francis  driving  in  the  sea  with  3  or  4  hurt  and  sicke
men,  and  tooke  the  rest  of  our  men  into  their  ships,
as  the  prisoners  which  wee  tooke  at  S.  Juan  de  Puerto
rico  told  us.

The  4  of  November  we  began  to  unlade  the  Richard,
one  of  our  victuallers,  which  was  by  the  next  day  un-
laden, unrigged  and  then  sunken.  Then  we  stood
Northwest  &  by  North  :  and  the  next  morning  saw
the  Hands  of  Monserrata,  Redonda,  Estazia,  S.  Chris-
topher and  Saba.  The  biggest  of  these  Islands  is  not
past  8  leagues  long.  There  is  good  ankorage  in  8,  7,
and  5  fadomes  water  faire  white  sand.  Then  we  stood
away  Southwest,  and  on  the  8  in  the  morning  being
Saturday  came  to  an  anker  some  7  or  8  leagues  off
within  certain  broken  Hands  called  Las  Virgines,  which
have  bene  accounted  dangerous  :  but  we  found  there  a
very  good  rode,  had  it  bene  for  a  1000  sails  of  ships
in  14,  12,  and  8  fadomes  faire  sand  and  good  ankorage,
high  Islands  on  either  side,  but  no  fresh  water  that  we
could  find  :  here  is  much  fish  to  be  taken  with  hookes
and  nets  :  also  we  stayed  on  shore  and  fowled.  Here
sir  John  Hawkins  was  extreme  sicke  ;  which  his  sicknes

229

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

began  upon  newes  of  the  taking  of  the  Francis.  The
1 8  day  wee  weyed  and  stoode  North  and  by  East  into
a  lesser  sound,  which  sir  Francis  in  his  barge  discovered
the  night  before,  and  ankored  in  13  fadoms,  having
hie  steepe  hils  on  either  side,  some  league  distant  from
our  first  riding.

The  12  in  the  morning  we  weied  and  set  sayle  into
the  sea  due  South  through  a  small  streit  but  without
danger,  and  then  stode  West  and  by  North  for  S.  Juan
de  Puerto  rico,  and  in  the  after  noone  left  the  3  small
Islands  called  The  passages  to  the  Southward  of  us,
and  that  night  came  up  to  the  Eastermost  end  of  S.
The  death  of  John,  where  sir  John  Hawkins  departed  this  life  :  upon
sir  John  Hazv-  ^}^Qse  decease  sir  Thomas  Baskervil  presently  went  into
the  Garland.  At  2  of  the  clocke  we  came  to  anker  at
the  estermost  side  of  the  chiefe  towne  called  Puerto
rico  in  a  sandie  bay  2  miles  off :  where  we  received
from  their  forts  and  places  where  they  planted  Ordinance
some  28  great  shot,  the  last  of  which  strake  the  admirall
through  the  misen,  and  the  last  but  one  strake  through
her  quarter  into  the  sterage,  the  Generall  being  there
at  supper,  and  strake  the  stoole  from  under  him,  but  hurt
him  not,  but  hurt  at  the  same  table  sir  Nicholas
Clifford,  M.  Browne,  captaine  Stratford,  with  one  or
two  more.  Sir  Nicholas  Clifford  and  master  Browne
died  of  their  hurts.

Then wee set  sayle  and stood  to  the  Eastward,  and

at midnight tacked about to the West, and in the

morning  came  to  an  anker  before  the  point  without  the

towne,  a  little  to  the  Westwards  by  the  3 Islands.

The  fight  at  The 1 3 we  rode still untill night,  when in the be-

S.  Juan  de ginning with twenty  five pinnesses, boats and shallops

Puerto  rico. manned  and furnished with fire-workes and  small  shot

wee  went  into  the  rode  within  the  great  castels,  and  in

despite  of  them  fired  the  five  Zabras  of  frigats,  all  ships

of  two  hundreth  tunnes  the  piece  or  more,  quite  burning

the Rereadmirall downe to the water,  which was the

greatest shippe of  them all,  and also mightily spoiled

230

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS a.d.

1595.
the  admirall  and  viceadmlrall,  notwithstanding  the  castles
and  ships  gave  us  a  hundreth  eighty  and  five  great  shot,
besides  small  shot  abundance.  They  had  also  sunke  a
great  shippe  in  the  mouth  of  the  chanell  and  rafted  it
over  with  her  mastes  almost  to  the  very  fortes  and  castles,
so  as  they  thought  it  impregnable.  The  frigats  had  in
each  of  them  twenty  pieces  of  brasse,  and  a  hundreth
barrels  of  powder.  Their  chiefe  lading  that  they  brought
thither  was  silke,  oyle,  and  wine.  The  treasure  which
they  went  to  fetch,  which  was  brought  thither  in  a  ship
called  the  Vigonia,  was  conveyed  into  the  strongest  and
surest  castell  of  defence  ;  being,  as  one  of  the  prisoners
confessed,  three  millions  of  ducats  or  five  and  thirty
tunnes  of  silver.  Also  they  had  sent  all  the  women,
children,  and  unable  persons  into  the  woods,  and  left
none  but  souldiers  and  fighting  men  in  the  towne.  The
fight  on  our  side  was  resolute,  hote,  and  dangerous  :
wherein  wee  lost  some  forty  or  fifty  men,  and  so  many  [in.  585.]
were  hurt.  There  was  also  great  death  of  the  Spaniards
aboord  the  frigats,  with  burning,  drowning,  and  killing,
and  besides  some  taken  prisoners.

The  14  we  rode  stil,  being  within  shot  of  the  utter-
most castell  :  but  they  fearing  the  next  night  we  would
come  in  againe,  began  to  warpe  up  the  other  4  frigats,
beginning  first  with  the  Admirall  :  which  whether  by
chance  or  their  owne  willes  wee  saw  to  sinke  ;  and  as  wee
suppose  so  did  they  with  all  the  rest,  or  else  by  stealth
got  up  farther  within  their  chiefest  forces.

The  15  also  we  rode  still,  and  at  afternoone  wee
espied  a  caravell  comming  from  the  castell  point :  but
before  our  pinnesses  could  fetch  her  up,  she  ranne  on
shore,  where  our  boates  could  not  come  at  her  because  of
the  breach,  and  also  many  of  the  Islanders  came  downe
to  guard  her  with  shot.  The  beginning  of  this  night
we  weyed,  and  stoode  one  houre  to  the  East,  and
then tacked about to the  West.

The  16  being  Sunday,  and  the  17  also  we  were
becalmed.

231

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

The  1 8  we  ankered  a  little  to  the  Southward  of
the  Southwest  point  of  the  Island,  giving  the  point  a
birth  because  of  a  shoald  of  sand  that  lieth  some  two
cables  length  off:  there  we  rode  in  foure,  five,  and
sixe  fadomes  faire  white  sand,  where  wee  set  up  more
pinnesses,  washed  our  ships,  and  refreshed  our  men  on
shore.  Here  the  Generall  tooke  a  pinnesse  of  Hispaniola
with  divers  letters,  signifying  that  two  Englishmen  of
warre  had  done  great  hurt  along  their  Island.

The  20  the  Generall  rowed  to  the  Phenix,  the  De-
light and  the  caravell,  and  caused  them  to  wey  and
anker  right  against  the  mouth  of  a  fresh  river  in  two
fadomes  water  in  ozie  sand  to  the  Southward  of  the
other  ships  some  league  or  more.  The  Generall  went
into  this  river  three  or  foure  leagues  up,  and  tooke
horses  in  the  countrey.  Sir  Thomas  Baskervil  rowed
up  the  river,  and  stayed  there  all  night,  and  went  up
into  the  land  three  or  foure  leagues.

The  23  wee  discharged  a  barke  called  the  Pulpit  and
burnt  her :  and  at  three  of  the  clocke  that  afternoone,
when  we  were  ready  to  set  saile,  there  came  aboord  the
Defiance  our  Admiral,  a  Spaniard  with  his  wife,  who
feared  some  great  torment  for  not  having  repaired  to  the
towne  according  to  the  Generals  commandement  of  that
Island,  who  had  commanded  that  all  able  men  of  the
fleete  should  repaire  to  the  towne  to  defend  it  against
us.  Then  we  stood  againe  West  and  by  North  because
of  a  ledge  of  rocks  that  lie  sunke  4  or  5  leagues  off
the  Southside  of  the  Island.

The  25  we  stood  away  southwest,  and  saw  Mona
Mona.  being  a  lowe  flat  Island  betweene  Hispaniola  and  S.
Juan  de  Puerto  rico.  That  day  the  Exchange  of  cap-
taine  Winter  spent  her  boult-sprite ;  and  in  the  beginning
of  the  night  the  Phenix  was  sent  backe  to  seeke  her :
which  by  Gods  help  that  night  met  with  her,  and  kept
her  company  until  the  next  morning,  then  taking  in  a
small  cable  from  her  for  a  towe  :  but  by  9  that  morn-
ing she  spent her maine mast  and split her foreyard,

232

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS a.d.

1595.
breaking  also  her  tow :  so  as  they  were  faine  to  save
some  trifles  out  of  her  and  the  men,  and  to  sinke
the  hull.  Then  we  stood  away  South  and  South  and
by  West  after  the  fleete :  and  the  26  in  the  morning
had  sight  of  the  fleete  againe.

The  29  we  had  sight of  the Island called Curazao  The  Isle  of
within  eight  leagues  of  the  maine,  and on the North- Curasao.
west  side  came to an  anker in  very  deepe  water hard
aboord  the  shore  without  any  danger : but  the  Generall
weyed presently and stoode away Northwest and by
West,  and  Northnorthwest  for  the  maine,  and  that  night
saw  Aruba, being somewhat a lesse Island then the  Aruha.
other : we left it some three leagues to the South-
ward of us.

On  Sunday  morning  being  the  last  of  November  wee
saw  three or foure little Islands called the Monjes,  Monies,
betwixt Aruba and the next North point of the
maine. At  12  of  the  clocke  we  sawe  the  maine,  where
we  saw  a great current setting  to the  Westward,  and
also the  water  changing  very  white. The  Phenix, the
caravell, and one of  the catches kept within, and at
midnight came  under  Cape  de  la  Vela,  and  made  a  fire.  Cape  de  la
whereby the rest of  the fleete  came to anker under  ^^^'*'
the Cape,  where is a very good rode, faire sholding
and  sandie  ground,  fourteene,  twelve,  and  tenne  fadoms
neere the shore. The Cape is a bare land without
trees or shrubs, and falleth in eight or t^n leagues
Southeast and Northwest : and a saker shot off  the
point standeth a little Island like Mewestone neere
Plimmouth,  but  somewhat  bigger. In  the  morning  the
first of  December  wee imbarked all  our souldiers for
Rio de la Hacha, which is a towne twenty leagues  ^w  de  la
to  the  Westwards,  one  of  the  ancientest  in  all  the  maine,  ^^'^^^  taken.
although not  very bigge : but it standeth in  a most
fertile  and  pleasant  soyle. Our men tooke it by  ten
of  the  clocke  in the  night. The  ships  bearing  all  that
night and the day before in 5 and 6 fadomes, the
lesser ships in two fadomes  and an halfe water : the

233

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

Phenix  went  so  neere the  shore  by the  Generals  com-

mandement, that shee strake on  ground, but got off

againe. There  lieth to the Eastward of  the towne a

A  shold  of mile  or thereabout  a shold of  sand  : therefore give a

^^"^-  birth some halfe league or more before you come

right  against the town. There  wee  came  to anker in

two  fadomes,  but the  great  ships  rode  off  in five  and

[III.  586.] sixe  fadomes. There  is  a  fresh  river  about  a  bow-shot

Afresh  river,  ^q ^^ Eastward of the towne ; whereinto our pin-

nesses  could  scarse  enter by  reason of  a  barre  of  sand

in the rivers mouth,  but within it is navigable for

barkes of  twenty or thirty  tunnes some sixe or  eight

leagues  up.

The  sixth  day  the  Spaniards  came  in  to  talke  about
the  ransome  of  the  towne,  but  not  to  the  Generall  his
liking :  and  that  night  Sir  Thomas  Baskervil  marched
up  into  the  countrey  to  over-runne  those  parts :  and
the  Generall  the  same  night  with  some  hundreth  and
fiftie  men  went  by  water  sixe  leagues  to  the  Eastward,
La  Rancheria  and  tooke  the  Rancheria  a  fisher  towne,  where  they
taken.  drag  for  pearle. The  people  all  fled  except  some  sixteene

or  twenty  souldiers,  which  fought  a  little,  but  some
were  taken  prisoners,  besides  many  Negros,  with  some
store  of  pearles  and  other  pillage.  In  the  houses  we
refreshed  our  selves,  and  were  all  imbarked  to  come
away,  and  then  had  sight  of  a  brigandine  or  a  dredger,
which  the  Generall  tooke  within  one  houres  chase  with
his  two  barges :  she  had  in  her  Indie-wheat,  which  we  call
Maiz,  and  some  silver  and  pearle,  but  of  small  value.

On  Saturday  the  seventh,  master  Yorke  captaine  of
the  Hope  dyed  of  sicknes,  and  then  master  Thomas
Drake  the  Generals  brother  was  made  captaine  of  the
Hope,  and  master  Jonas  Bodenham  captaine  of  the
Adventure,  and  master  Charles  Caesar  captaine  of  the
Amitie.

The  tenth  day  the  Spaniards  concluded  for  the  ran-
some of  the  towne  for  24000  ducats,  and  one  prisoner
promised to  pay for  his  ransome  4000  ducats.

234

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS ad.

1595-

The  fourteenth  day  they  brought  in  the  townes
ransome  in  pearles,  but  rated  so  deare  as  the  Generall
after  conference  with  them,  misliking  it,  sent  it  backe
againe,  giving  them  foure  houres  respite  to  cleere  them-
selves with  their  treasure.

The  sixteenth  the  governour  came  into  the  towne
about  dinner,  and  upon  conference  with  the  Generall
told  him  plainely,  that  he  cared  not  for  the  towne,
neither  would  he  ransome  it :  and  that  the  pearle  was
brought  in  without  his  command  or  consent,  and  that
his  detracting  of  time  so  long  was  onely  to  send  the
other  townes  word,  that  were  not  of  force  to  withstand
us,  whereby  they  might  convey  all  their  goods,  cattell,
and  wealth  into  the  woods  out  of  danger.  So  the
General  gave  the  governour  leave  to  depart  according  to
promise,  having  two  houres  to  withdraw  himselfe  in
safety.

The  seventeenth  Sir  Thomas  Baskervil  with  the  Eliza-
beth Constance,  the  Phenix,  the  caravel  with  foure  or
five  pinnesses  went  some  five  leagues  to  the  Westward,
&  landing,  marched  some  foure  leagues  up  into  the
countrey  to  a  place  called  Tapia,  which  he  tooke  &  Tapla  taken.
burned  certain  villages  and  ferme  houses  about  it.  He
had  some  resistance  as  he  passed  over  a  river,  but  had
but  one  man  hurt,  which  he  brought  aboord  alive  with
him  :  he  marched  one  league  farther  and  burnt  a  village
called  Sallamca,  and  so  returned  with  some  prisoners,  Sallamca
the  souldiers  having  gotten  some  pillage.  burnt.

The  1 8  the  Rancheria,  and  the  towne  of  Rio  de  la  ^Z
Hacha  were  burnt  cleane  downe  to  the  ground,  the
Churches  and  a  Ladies  house  onely  excepted,  which  by
her  letters  written  to  the  Generall  was  preserved.  That
day  wee  set  sayle  and  fell  to  lee-ward,  to  meete  with
Sir  Thomas  Baskervil.

The 1 9 we  weighed and stood to  leeward  for Cape  Cape  de
de  Aguja,  which  the  twentieth  at  sunne rising we  saw.  -^guja.
It  is a  Cape  subject  much to  flawes,  by  reason it  is  a
very  hie  land :  and  within  the  cape  lieth  an  Island  within

235

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

the  mouth  of  the  sound,  which  hath  a  white  clijffe  or
spot  in  the  Westnorthwest  part  of  the  Island.  The
land  all  about  the  cape  riseth  all  in  homocks  or  broken
steepie  hils.  A  league  Southwest  within  that,  (for  so
falleth  the  land  thereabout)  there  standeth  on  the  top
of  a  cliffe  a  watch-house :  and  a  little  within  that  a
small  Island :  you  may  goe  in  betweene  the  maine  and
it,  or  to  leeward  if  you  lust :  and  hard  within  that  is
Santa  Martha  the  rode  and  towne  of  Santa  Martha,  which  at  1 1  of
taken.  ^^g  clocke  we  tooke,  the  people  all being  fled,  except  a

few  Spaniards,  Negros  &  Indians,  which  in  a  bravado
at  our  landing  gave  us  some  30  or  40  shot,  &  so  ran
away.

That  night  their  Lieutenant  generall  was  taken  and
some  little  pillage  brought  in  out  of  the  woods :  for  in
the  town  nothing  was  left  but  the  houses  swept  clean.
In  all  the  main  is  not  a  richer  place  for  gold :  for  the
hops  were  mixt  with  the  earth  in  every  place,  and  also
in  the  sand  a  little  to  the  leewards  of  the  towne.  In
the  bay  wee  had  a  bad  rode  by  reason  of  a  small  moone,
for  every  small  moone  maketh  foule  weather  all  the
maine  along.

The  21,  the  Generall  caused  the  towne  to  be  burnt,
and  aU  the  ships  to  wey,  and  stood  out,  many  of  the
souldiers  being  imbarked  where  the  Generall  had
appointed,  in  the  small  ships  which  rode  neerest  the
shore.  We  lost  that  night  the  company  of  the  Phenix,
captaine  Austin,  Peter  Lemond,  and  the  Garlands
pinnesse,  which  stood  along  the  shore,  and  being  chased
off  by  gallies  out  of  Carthagena  Peter  Lemond  with  nine
of  our  men  was  taken,  the  rest  came  safe  to  our
[III.  587.] fleete.

The  26  we  saw  the  Hands  some  twelve  leagues  to  the

Eastward  of  Nombre de Dios standing in toward the

shore,  but  toward  night  we  stood  to  the  offin  untill  the

next  day.

l^ ombre  de  The  27  we  came  into  the  mouth  of  Nombre  de  Dios,

Dios  taken. and  by  one  of  the  clocke  tooke  the  towne,  the  people

236

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS ad

1595.
being  all  fled  except  some  100  Spaniards,  which  kept  the

Fort,  and  played  upon  us,  having  in  the  fort  some  3  or  4

small pieces of  ordinance, and one of  them brake  in

discharging  at  us. They  gave  us  also  a  voley  of  small

shot:  but  seeing  our  resolution  in  running  upon  them

they  all  fled  and  tooke  the  woods.

The  towne  was  bigge,  having  large  streetes,  houses
very  hie,  all  built  of  timber,  but  one  Church  very  faire
and  large  wrought  all  of  timber  likewise.  Nothing  was
left  in  the  towne  of  value :  there  was  a  shew  in  their
shops  of  great  store  of  marchandises  that  had  bene  there.
There  was  a  mill  above  the  towne,  and  upon  the  toppe
of  another  hill  in  the  woods  stood  a  little  watch-house,
where  we  tooke  twentie  sowes  of  silver,  two  barres  of
gold,  some  money  in  coyne,  besides  other  pillage.

The  towne  was  situated  in  a  waterie  soile,  and  subject
much  to  raine,  very  unhealthy  as  any  place  in  the  Indies,
having  great  store  of  Orenges,  plantans,  cassavy-roots,
&  such  other  fruits ;  but  very  dangerous  to  be  eaten  for
breeding  of  diseases.  To  the  Eastwarde  of  the  towne
within  the  bay  runneth  out  a  fresh  river  of  excellent  good
water,  with  houses,  and  all  about  it  gardens :  halfe  a
league  from  hence  due  East  into  the  countrey  was  an
Indian  towne,  whither  as  we  marched  a  little  before
our  comming  away  with  an  hundred  men  they  had
broken  downe  a  bridge  to  hinder  our  passage,  where
they  lay  in  ambush  with  some  twentie  or  thirtie  small
shot,  and  bowes  and  arrowes,  set  upon  us,  and  killed
Lieutenant  Jones,  hurt  three  or  foure  and  so  fled  into
the  woods,  ranne  before  us  and  fired  their  owne  towne,  An  Indiaji
and  then  fled  farther  into  the  woods :  our  men  fired  towne  fired.
diverse  other  houses  in  pursuing  them,  and  so  returned
againe :  our  Generall  with  Sir  Thomas  being  in  the
Rivers  mouth  with  thirtie  or  fortie  men  filling  water
about  some  myle  from  us.

The  road  of  Nombre  de  Dios  is  a  faire  road :  but
on  each  side,  as  you  come  to  ride  before  the  towne,  lyeth
a  ledge  of  rockes,  but  there  is  no  danger  because  they

237

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

are  in  sight.  You  may  ride  betweene  them  in  three
or  foure  fadome  water,  and  without  if  you  will  in  eight
or  ten  fadomes,  where  neither  Castle  nor  Fort  can  annoy
you.  The  name  of  Nombre  de  Dios  was  greater  then
their  strength.  For  they  had  no  Castle  nor  Fort,  but
onely  the  little  fort  aforesaid  standing  on  the  top  of  an
hill,  although  they  might  have  made  it  stronger  if  they
would.

The  29  sir  Thomas  Baskervil  with  750  armed  men,
besides  Chirurgians  and  provand  boyes,  went  for
Panama.

The  last  of  December  the  Generall  burned  halfe  the
towne,  and  the  first  of  Januarie  burnt  the  rest,  with
all  the  Frigats,  Barks  &  Galiots,  which  were  in  the
harbour  and  on  the  beach  on  shore,  having  houses  built
over  them  to  keepe  the  pitch  from  melting.

The  second  of  January  sir  Thomas  returned  with  his
souldiers  both  weary  and  hungry,  having  marched  more
then  halfe  the  way  to  the  South  sea.  The  Spaniards
played  divers  times  upon  us  both  outward  and  homeward
in  the  woods,  the  way  being  cut  out  of  the  woods  &  rockes
both  very  narrow,  and  full  of  myre  and  water.  The
march  was  so  sore  as  never  Englishman  marched  before.
Having  marched  some  ten  leagues  in  a  marvellous  straite
way,  upon  the  top  of  an  hill,  through  which  we  must
needes  passe,  the  Spaniards  had  set  up  a  Fort  and  kept
it  with  some  80  or  90  men,  who  played  upon  us  as
we  came  up,  before  wee  were  aware  of  them,  and
so  killed  some  twentie  or  more  of  us,  amongst  whom
was  Captaine  Marchant  quarter-master  Generall,  and
Ensigne  Sampson,  Maurice  Williams  one  of  her  Majesties
guard,  besides  diverse  were  hurt,  as  M.  Captaine  Nicholas
Baskervil  a  valiant  gentleman,  with  divers  others.  Then
sir  Thomas  had  perfect  knowledge  that  they  must  passe
two  such  Forts  more,  if  he  got  that,  besides  Panama
to  be  very  strong,  the  enemie  knowing  of  our  comming
long  before.

Also  our  souldiers  had  no  victuals  left,  nor  any  meanes

238

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS ad.

1596.
to  get  more :  which  considerations  caused  sir  Thomas  to
returne and give over his attempt. As he marched
thitherward  he  tooke  an  Indian  and  sent  him  to  Nombre
de  Dios  with  letters  of  his  returne  and  proceeding.

The  5  we  set  saiie  at  12  of  the  clocke,  and  stood
to  the  Westward.

The  10  day  we  saw  an  Hand  lying  Westward  some  The  lie  of
30  leagues  called  Escudo,  where  wee  came  to  anker  ^scudo.
on  the  Southside  in  12  fadoms  water,  faire  sand  and
good  ankorage.  If  you  come  into  the  Easterne  point,
give  it  a  birth,  because  of  a  ledge  of  rockes,  that
lyeth  out  there  from  the  end  of  the  Island :  comming
to  anker  we  sawe  a  roader,  who  seeing  us,  set  sayle,  but
that  night  with  our  Pinnesses  we  tooke  him,  he  had
nothing  in  him  but  a  little  maiz.  The  men  being
examined  by  the  Generall  confessed  him  to  be  an
Advisor  sent  from  Nombre  de  Dios  to  all  the  ports
along  the  coast  Westward.  This  Hand  lyeth  9  or  10  [III.  588.]
leagues  from  the  maine,  &  is  not  past  two  leagues  long
full  of  wood,  and  hath  great  store  of  fresh  water  in
every  part  of  the  Hand,  and  that  very  good.  It  is  a
sickly  climat  also,  and  given  to  much  raine :  here
we  washed  our  ships,  and  set  up  the  rest  of  our
Pinnesses.

The  15  day  Captaine  Plat  died  of  sicknesse,  and  then
sir  Francis  Drake  began  to  keepe  his  cabin,  and  to
complaine  of  a  scowring  or  fluxe.

The  23  we  set  saile  and  stood  up  again  for  Puerto
Bello,  which  is  but  3  leagues  to  the  Westwards  of
Nombre  de  Dios.

The  28  at  4  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  our  Generall  The  death  of
sir Francis Drake departed this life, having bene  sir  Francis
extremely  sicke  of  a  fluxe,  which  began  the  night  before  ^'■^'^^•
to  stop  on  him. He  used  some  speeches  at  or  a  little
before his death, rising and  apparelling himselfe, but
being  brought to bed againe within one houre died.
He  made  his  brother  Thomas  Drake  and  captaine  Jonas
Bodenham executors, and M. Thomas Drakes sonne

239

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

his  heire  to  all  his  lands,  except  one  manor  which  he
gave  to  captaine  Bodenham.
Puerto  Bella.  The  same  day  we  ankored  at  Puerto  Bello,  being  the
best  harbour  we  found  al  along  the  maine  both  for  great
ships  and  small.  There  standeth  a  saker  shot  off  the
shore  at  the  Easterne  point  a  little  Hand :  and  there  is
betwixt  the  maine  &  that  5  or  6  fadomes :  but  the  best
comming  in  is  the  open  mouth  betwixt  that  Hand  &
another  Hand  that  lyeth  to  the  westward  with  a  range
of  rocks.

In  Puerto  Bello  were  but  8  or  10  houses,  besides  a
great  new  house  which  they  were  in  building  for  the
Governour  that  should  have  bene  for  that  place :  there
was  also  a  very  strong  Fort  all  to  the  waters  side  with
flankers  of  great  trees  and  stones  filled  with  earth
betweene :  and  had  not  our  comming  disappointed  their
pretence,  they  would  have  made  it  one  of  the  strongest
places  in  all  the  maine.  There  they  ment  to  have  builded
a  great  towne.  We  found  there  three  pieces  of  brasse
ordinance  sunke  in  the  sea,  which  we  weighed  up,  all
the  people  were  fled  and  their  goods  carried  away.

Up  within  this  bay  there  was  a  little  village  but  of  no
force,  where  we  found  a  great  fresh  river,  our  men
rowing  up  some  two  leagues  found  pillage,  as  wine  and
oyle,  and  some  small  quantitie  of  yron.  After  our
comming  hither  to  anker,  and  the  solemne  buriall  of  our
Generall  sir  Francis  in  the  sea :  Sir  Thomas  Baskervill
being  aboord  the  Defiance,  where  M.  Bride  made  a
sermon,  having  to  his  audience  all  the  captaines  in  the
fleete,  sir  Thomas  commanded  all  aboord  the  Garland,
with  whom  he  held  a  Councell,  &  there  shewing  his
Commission  was  accepted  for  General,  &  captain  Boden-
ham made  captaine  of  the  Defiance,  &  M.  Savill  captaine
of  ye  Adventure.

The  27  died  captaine  Josias  of  the  Delight,  and
captaine  Egerton  a  Gentleman  of  the  Foresight,  and
James Wood chiefe chirurgion of the fleete out of

the  Garland.

240

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS ad

1596.

The  28  died  Abraham  Kendall  out  of  the  Saker.
At  this  place  we  watered  againe,  washed  our  ships  &
made  new  sailes,  it  being  hj  the  Generall  and  all  the
captaines  agreed,  that  if  we  could  by  any  meanes  turne
up  againe  for  Santa  Martha,  we  should,  if  not,  to  goe
directly  for  England.  Here  also  we  tooke  in  some
balast  as  our  neede  required.

The  6  of  Februarie  the  Elizabeth  of  M.  Wattes  was
discharged  and  sunke,  and  that  day  the  Pegasus  jolly
was  going  on  shore  for  water,  carying  no  guarde  :  The
Spaniards  perceiving  it  came  downe  upon  them,  killed
two  of  them,  and  tooke  2  or  3  prisoners,  and  so  ranne  up
into  the  woods  againe.

The  seventh  the  Delight  and  captaine  Edens  frigat
were  discharged  and  sunke  because  they  were  old  and
leaked,  and  the  Queenes  ships  wanted  saylers.

That  day  our  men  being  mustered  we  had
sicke  and  whole  2000.  And  the  next  day  we  set
on  shore  all  our  prisoners  as  Spaniards  and  Negros.
But  before  at  our  first  comming  to  Puerto  Bello  sir
Thomas  sent  two  of  those  Spaniards  to  Nombre  de
Dios  and  to  Panama  to  fetch  ransome  for  some  of  the
chiefest  prisoners,  but  they  never  returned  againe.  As
we  were  setting  saile  there  came  one  with  a  flagge  of
truce,  and  told  the  General  that  they  had  taken  18  of
our  men,  and  that  they  were  well  used,  adding  that  if
he  would  stay  8  or  10  dayes  longer  they  should
be  brought  from  Panama.  We  supposed  this  to  have
bene  but  a  delay  to  have  kept  us  there  while  the
kings  forces  had  come  about  by  sea,  as  they  dayly  ex-
pected. We  set  saile  the  8  of  Februarie,  turning  up  for
Santa  Martha,  and  the  14  day  we  saw  the  Hands  of  Baru
some  14  leagues  to  the  Westward  of  Carthagena  :  The
Generall  that  night  told  us  he  would  stand  in  for  the
towne  of  Baru  in  the  bay  :  but  that  night  blew
so  much  winde  and  continued  that  small  moone,  that
the  same  night  we  lost  the  Foresight,  and  the  next  day
standing  againe  to  make  the  land  which  we  had  made,
X  241  Q

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596,

we  lost  companie  of  the  Susan  Parnel,  The Helpe,  and

the  Pegasus. Then  the  next  day  we  put  over  for  Cape

[III.  589.]  S.  Antonie,  and  gave  over  Santa  Martha.

The  Grand The 25  we  saw the Hand of  Grand Cayman some

Cayman. ^q leagues  to the Northwestward  of  Jamaica,  being a

low sandie  Hand,  having  many  tortoyses  about  it.

The  26  we  saw  the  hie  land  of  Cuba  to  the  East-
ward of  the  broken  Hands,  to  the  East  of  the  Hand  of
Pinos,  and  were  imbayed  in  among  those  dangerous
places.  But  perceiving  it,  we  stood  out  againe  South-
southeast  and  so  got  cleere,  and  then  stood  away  West
The  lie  of  and  by  North  for  the  He  of  Pinos,  which  we  saw  the
Pinos.  fii-st  of  March. It  is  a  low  land  with wood  and  fresh

water  to  the  Western  end.  If  you  come  in  with  the
middest  of  it  you  shall  see  rise  up  above  the  rest  of
the  land  8  or  9  round  homockes,  and  the  Westermost
hath  three  in  one.

Being  shot  foorth  with  the  West  end,  and  standing  in
for  to  water  we  espied  20  sayle  of  ships  about  one  in  the
afternoone.  This  was  a  third  part  of  the  fleete  which
the  king  sent  for  Carthagena,  the  rest  of  the  fleete
being  gone  for  the  Honduras.  They  were  in  all  60
sailes  sent  onely  to  meete  our  fleete,  being  commanded
wheresoever  they  heard  we  were,  to  come  upon  us
with  all  their  three  forces.  This  fleete  which  we  met
withall  came  standing  for  Cape  de  los  Corrientes,  and
had  bene  refreshed  at  Havana.

As  soone  as  they  discried  us,  they  kept  close  upon
a  tacke,  thinking  to  get  the  winde  of  us :  but  we
weathered  them.  And  when  our  Admirall  with  all  the
rest  of  our  fleet  were  right  in  the  winds  eye  of  them,
sir  Thomas  Baskervil  putting  out  the  Queenes  armes,  and
all  the  rest  of  our  fleete  their  braverie,  bare  roome  with
them,  and  commanded  the  Defiance  not  to  shoot,  but
to  keepe  close  by  to  second  him.  The  Viceadmirall  of
the  Spaniards  being  a  greater  ship  than  any  of  ours,
and  the  best  sayler  in  all  their  fleete  loofed  by  and  gave
the  Concord  the  two  first  great  shot,  which  she  repayed

242

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS ad.

1596.
presently  againe,  thus  the  fight  began. The  Bonaventure  The  fight  be-
bare  full  with  her,  ringing  her  such  a  peale  of  ordinance  tweem  the
and  small  shot  withall,  that  he  left  her  with  torne  sides.  ^«^^"^  ^^'^
The  Admirall  also  made  no  spare  of  powder  and  shot.  flLJ^^""
But  the  Defiance  in  the  middest of  the  Spanish fleete
thundering  of  her  ordinance  and small shot  continued
the  fight  to  the  end. So  that  the  Viceadmirall  with  3
or  4  of  her  consorts  were  forced  to  tacke  about  to  the
Eastward, leaving their admirall and  the rest of  the
fleete,  who  came  not  so  hotly  into  the  fight  as  they  did.
The fight continued  two  houres  &  better. At sunne
set  all  the  fleete  tacked  about  to  the  Eastward,  we  con-
tinued our course to the Westward for cape de los
Corrientes,  supposing  we  should  have  met  with  more  of
their  consorts. In  this  conflict  in  the  Defiance  we  had
five  men  slaine,  three  English  men,  a  Greeke  and  a  Negro.
That night  some  halfe  houre  after,  their  fleete  keeping
upon their weather  quarter,  we saw a mightie smoke  One  of  the
rise  out  of  one  of  their  great  ships  which  stayed  behind  :  Spanish  great
which happened by meanes of  powder  as we thinke, -^"^ "^'
and  presently  after  she  was all  on a  light  fire,  and so
was  consumed  and  all  burnt,  as  we  might  well  perceive.
The  next  day  being  the  second  of  March  in  the  morn-
ing by  breake  of  day  we  were  hard  aboord  Cape  de  los
Corrientes,  which  is  a  bare  low  cape,  having  a  bush  of  trees
higher  than  the  rest  some  mile  to  the  Eastward  of  the
cape. All Cuba is full of wood on  the Southside.
The  Spanish  fleete  which  then  were  but  14  no  more  than
we  were,  kept  still  upon  our  weather  quarter,  but  dared
not  to  come  roome  with  us  although  our  Admirall  stayed
for  them. Assoone  as  we  had  cleared  our  selves  of  the
Cape 3 of their best saylers came roome with the
Salomon,  which  was so neere  the  land  that she could
not  double  the  Cape,  but  tacked  about  to  the  Eastward,
&  so  was  both  a  sterne  and  also  to leeward of  all  our
fleete  : But when we saw the Spaniards working,  the
Defiance  tacked  about  to  rescue  her  :  which  the  Spaniards
seeing,  and  having not forgotten the fight which she

243

A.D.
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Cape  Sante
Antonio.

made  the  night  before,  they  loofed  up  into  the  middest
of  their  fleete  againe,  and  then  all  the  fleete  stayed
untill  the  Salomon  came  up,  and  so  stood  along  for
Cape  S.  Antonio,  which  wee  came  in  sight  of  by  two
in  the  after  noone,  being  a  low  cape  also,  and  to  the
Southwest  a  white  sandie  bay,  where  3  or  4  ships  may
very  well  water.  There  is  a  good  road  for  North  &
Easterly  windes :  there  the  Spaniardes  began  to  fall
a  Sterne.  That  night  wee  stood  away  a  glasse  or  two
Northwest,  and  Northnorthwest,  and  Northeast,  and  in
the  morning-watch  South,  and  in  the  morning  had  sight
of  Cuba  about  the  East  part  of  the  Organes,  which  are
dangerous  rocks  lying  8  leagues  off  upon  the  North
part  of  Cuba,  presently  assoone  as  you  passe  Cape
S.  Anthonie  :  then  we  stood  to  the  Eastward  of
the  land,  the  winde  at  Southsouthwest,  and  at  6  at
night  had  foule  weather,  but  after  were  becalmed  all
night.  The  5  the  winde  came  scant.  The  7  we  sawe
a  hie  land  like  a  crowne,  which  appeareth  so  13  or  14
leagues  to  the  Westward  of  Havana,  and  another  place
in  Cuba  called  The  Table,  8  leagues  to  the  Eastward
The  Crowne.  of  the  crowne.  The  land  over  Havana  maketh  two
small  mountaines  like  a  womans  breasts  or  paps.  Here
we  found  no  great  current  untill  we  came  to  the  Gulfe
of  Bahama.

The  10  we  saw  the  Cape  of  Florida  being  but
a  reasonable  low  land  and  broken  Hands  to  the  South-
ward of  the  Cape.  And  at  two  in  the  afternoone  we
lost  sight  of  the  land  12  leagues  to  the  Northward  of
the  Cape.  After  we  had  disemboqued,  we  stood  West
till  midnight,  and  were  in  28  degrees,  and  then  stood
Northeast  till  the  13  at  night,  when  we  were  in  31  degrees.
And  after  the  wind  scanted  with  a  great  storme,  in  which
we  lost  the  Bonaventure,  and  the  Little  John,  they  bearing
on  head.  Then  we  stood  with  our  larbord  tacked
Eastsoutheast.

The  19  we  were  in  29  degrees  our  course  Eastnorth-
east. The 21 we had a great stormie gale of  winde

244

The  Cape  of
Florida.

[III.  590-]

LAST  VOYAGE  OF  DRAKE  AND  HAWKINS ad.

1596.

and  much  raine  but  large.  And  then  all  the  rest  of
our  fleete  fell  a  sterne  except  the  Hope,  which  bare
a  head :  so  that  there  kept  no  more  with  the  Admirall,
but  the  Defiance,  the  Adventure,  and  the  Phenix.

The  28  we  were  in  39  degrees,  and  stood  away  for
Flores,  which  the  8  of  Aprill  we  saw,  and  the  9  came  to
an  anker  on  the  Southside,  where  we  watered  because  the
Defiance  when  we  came  in  had  but  two  buts  of  water.
We  bartered  with  the  Portugals  for  some  fresh  victuals,
and  set  here  on  shore  at  our  comming  away  out  of  the
Admirall  our  two  Portugall  Pilots  ;  which  sir  Francis
Drake  caried  out  of  England  with  him.

The  TO  being  Easter-eve  at  night  we  set  saile  the  winde
serving  us  to  lie  some  slent  in  our  course.  That  night
and  Easter  day  we  had  much  raine :  the  winde  came  up  at
Northeast,  wee  beate  it  up  some  30  leagues  to  the  East-
ward, &  then  about  to  the  West,  and  so  againe  to  the
East,  and  tryed,  and  the  next  boord  to  the  West.  On
Thursday  towards  night,  being  the  16  wee  had  sight
of  Corvo  againe,  we  tryed  all  that  night :  and  on  Friday
towards  night  we  came  to  an  anker  to  the  Westward
of  the  point  of  Santa  Cruz  under  Flores :  but  before
midnight  we  drave,  and  set  saile  the  next  day  standing
away  Northeast.  About  three  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone  the  winde  came  up  againe  at  North.  On
Sunday  the  19  by  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone
we  had  made  20  leagues  an  East  way :  and  then  the
winde  came  up  a  good  gale  at  Northwest,  and  so
Northeast  with  a  flowne  sheete  we  made  the  best
way  we  could :  but  being  dispersed  by  bad  weather
we  arrived  about  the  beginning  of  May  in  the  West
parts  of  England.  And  the  last  ships  which  came  in
together  to  Plimmouth  were  the  Defiance,  the  Garland,
the  Adventure,  and  the  Phenix,

[A  Libell

245

A.D,
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  Libell  of  Spanish  lies  written  by  Don  Bernaldino
Delgadillo  de  Avellaneda,  Generall  of  the
king  of  Spaines  Armada,  concerning  some  part
of  the  last  voyage  of  sir  Francis  Drake;
together  with  a  confutation  of  the  most
notorious  falsehoods  therein  contained,  and  a
declaration  of  the  truth  by  M.  Henrie  Savile
Esquire :  and  also  an  approbation  of  both  by
sir  Thomas  Baskervil  Generall  of  her  Majesties
Armada  after  the  decease  of  sir  Francis  Drake.

To  the  courteous  Reader.

Hereas  Don  Bernaldino  Delgadillo  de
Avellaneda,  Generall  of  the  Spanish  fleete,
hath  by  his  printed  letters  published  to
the  world  diverse  untruthes,  concerning
our  fleete  and  the  commanders  thereof,
seeking  thereby  his  owne  glorie,  and
our  disgrace ;  I  have  taken  upon  me
(though  of  many  least  able)  to  confute  the  same,  the
rather  for  that  the  printed  copie  came  first  into  my
hands,  having  my  selfe  bene  Captaine  of  one  of  her
Majesties  ships  in  the  same  voyage.  Take  this  there-
fore (gentle  Reader)  as  a  token  of  my  dutie  and  love
to  my  countrey  and  countrey-men,  and  expect  onely
a  plaine  truth,  as  from  the  pen  of  a  souldier  and
Navigator  :  Which  if  you  take  in  good  part,  you  may
draw  me  hereafter  to  publish  some  greater  labour.

Henry  Savile.

THe  true  copie  of  a  letter  found  at  the  sacking  of
Cadiz,  written  by  Don  Bernaldino  Delgadillo  de
Avellaneda,  Generall  of  the  king  of  Spaine  his  Navie
in  the  West  Indies,  sent  unto  Doctor  Peter  Florez,
President  of  the  contractation  house  for  the  Indies,  and
by  him  put  in  print  with  privilege :  wherein  are  declared

246

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES

A.D.

1596.

many  untruthes,  and  false  reports,  tending  to  the  disgrace
of  the  service  of  her  Majesties  Navie,  and  the  com-
manders thereof,  lately  sent  to  the  West  Indies,  under
the  command  of  sir  Francis  Drake,  and  sir  John  Hawkins
Generals  at  the  sea ;  and  sir  Thomas  Baskervill  Generall
at  land  :  with  a  confutation  of  divers  grosse  lies  and
untruthes,  contayned  in  the  same  letter  :  together  with
a  short  relation  of  the  fight,  according  to  the  truth. [III.  591.]

Copia  de  una  carta,  que  embio  Don  Bernaldino
Delgadillo  de  Avellaneda,  General  de  la
Armada  de  su  Magestad,  embiada  al  Doctor
Pedro  Florez  Presidente  de  la  casa  de  la
contratacion  de  las  Indias :  en  que  trata  del
sucesso  de  la  Armada  de  Ynglatierra,  despues
que  partio  de  Panama,  de  que  fue  per  General
Francisco  Draque,  y  de  su  miuerte.

E  Cartagena  di  cuenta  a  vuestra  Merced
como  sali  del  puerto  de  la  ciudad  de
Lisbona,  en  busca  de  la  armada  Ynglesa,
aunque  por  la  mucha  priessa,  no  se
pudieron  reparar  tanbien  los  Galeones
como  fuera  necessario,  y  con  el  tiempo
se  perdio  uno,  y  por  desgracia  se  quemo
un  Filibote,  y  aviendo  andado  muchos  dias  en  busca
del  enemigo,  hasta  que  Uegue  a  Cartagena,  donde  aviendo
tomado  el  parecer  de  Don  Pedro  de  Acunna  Governador
y  capitan  general  de  aquella  ciudad,  porque  tenia  mucha
necessidad  de  agua,  y  reparar  los  Navios  por  que  venian
faltos  della,  me  detuve  en  aquel  puerto,  adonde  tuve
noticia  por  un  Aviso,  que  Francisco  Draque  murio  en
Nombre  de  Dios,  de  pena  de  aver  perdido  tantos  Baxeles
y  gente,  aunque  despues  se  supo  mas  por  estenso.
Y  aviendo  dado  a  vuestro  Merced  cuenta  de  lo  que
hasta  alii  a  sucedido,  agora  la  doy  de  que  sali  de  aquel
puerto  a  dos  de  Marzo,  y  tome  la  derrota  de  la  Havana,
donde  entendi hallarlo : y  aviendo hecho  la  diligencia

'247

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

posible,  Lunes  a  onze  del  dicho  mes,  alas  dos  despues
de  medio  dia,  al  salir  de  la  Ysla  de  Pinos,  en  la  ensenada
de  Guaniguanico,  tope  con  el,  que  yva  con  catorze  Navios
muy  buenos :  fueme  arrimando  a  el,  aunque  tenia  el
viento  por  suyo,  y  el  Almiranta  que  yva  mas  al  viento
con  otros  dos  Navios  commenzo  arrimarsele,  y  aunque
vino  sobre  ella  con  todos  los  suyos  tres  vezes,  no  rue
parte  acercarsele  paraque  quisiesse  envestir :  los  que
estavamos  mas  apartados  fuymos  dando  bordos  acercan-
donos  hasta  jugar  la  artilleria,  Mosqueteria,  y  Arcabuzeria
de  los  mas  dellos,  en  lo  qual  el  recibio  muy  conocido
danno,  el  lo  hizo  con  el  artilleria  como  suele,  y  particular-
mente  el  Almiranta,  y  en  reconociendo  la  voluntad  con
que  a  el  nos  arrimavamos,  con  mas  diligencia  de  lo
que  se  puede  creer  se  desembarazo  de  todos,  poniendose
en  huyda,  dando  las  velas,  dexando  en  la  mar  todas
las  Lanchas  que  traya.  Yo  le  segui  con  nueve  Navios
toda  la  noche,  y  con  quatro  mas  todo  el  dia,  hasta  hazerle
doblar  el  cabo  de  Sant  Anton,  y  tomar  la  derrota  de  la
Canal  de  Bahama,  conforme  a  las  instruciones  de  su
Magestad :  sirvio  de  poco  el  ver  me  con  menos  numero
de  Navios,  ni  todas  las  diligencias  que  se  hizieron,  para
que  se  inclinase  a  esperar  ni  abordar,  ni  tirar  un  arcabuz,
ni  una  pieza,  porque  el  se  dio  la  diligencia  que  pudo,
porque  sus  Navios  los  avia  reduzido  a  la  mitad,  y  los
mejores,  y  estos  acabava  de  reparar  en  Puerto  Bello,
donde  se  estuvo  mas  de  quarenta  dias,  y  ansi  venian
muy  reparados ;  y  yo  saque  los  mios  desbaratados,  que
no  me  dio  el  tiempo  lugar  para  aderezarlos.  A  que
navego  dos  meses  y  medio,  y  traygo  la  capitana,  que
desde  que  parti  de  Cartagena  no  an  parado  las  bombas,
y  el  dia  que  sali  se  me  lo  arrimo  una  Zabra  con  esta
necessidad;  la  Almiranta  y  los  demas  Navios  vienen
con  el  mismo  trabajo,  pero  sin  embargo,  por  lo  que
yo  vi  en  los  enemigos ;  era  muy  conocida  la  ventaja  que
nos  hazia,  y  mucha  dicha  seria  apoderarse  del,  sino  es
hallarlo  sobre  el  Ferro.  Con  todo  esso  me  an  dexado
un Navio muy bueno en las manos con muy buena

248

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES  a.d.

1596.
gente,  la  qual  dize  como  murio  el  Draque  en  Nombre
de  Dios,  y  que  va  por  general  de  la  dicha  armada  Ynglesa
el  Coronel  Quebraran,  y  por  el  poco  lugar  que  se  a
dado  no  an  podido  tomar  Agua,  lenna,  ni  carne,  y
van  de  manera  que  no  se  como  an  de  Uegar  a  Ynglatierra.
Entre  la  gente  deven  de  ser  ciento  y  quarenta,  y  quinze
nobles  capitanes  de  lo  mejor  de  alii,  y  algunos  ricos,
segun  se  echa  de  ver  en  ellos.  No  se  ofrece  otra  cosa:
nuestro  sennor  guarde  a  vuestra  Merced,  como  puede,
y  yo  desseo.  De  la  Havana.  30  de  Marzo,  de  1596.
Annos.

Don  Bernaldino  Delgadillo  de  Avellaneda.

EL  Licenciado  Don  Juan  Bermudes  y  Figueroa,
Teniente  mayor  de  Assistente  desta  ciudad  de  Sevilla
y  su  tierra,  que  hago  officio  de  Assistente  della  por
ausencia  de  su  Sennoria  del  Conde  de  Priego,  Doy
licencia  a  Rodrigo  de  Cabrera,  para  que  pueda  imprimir
la  Relacion  de  la  muerte  de  Francisco  Draque.  La  qual
haga  por  dos  meses,  y  por  ellos  no  lo  imprima  otro
alguno.  So  pena  de  diez  mil  maravedis  para  la  camara
de  su  Magestad.  Fecha  en  Sevilla  a  quinze  de  Mayo,
de  mil  y  quinientos  y  noventa  y  seys  annos.

El  Licenciado  Don  Juan  Bermudez  y  Figueroa.

Por  su  mandado,  Gregoria  de  Gutierez,  Escrivano. [in.  592.]

[The  Spanish
249

A.D.
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Spanish  letter Englished.

The  Copie  of  a  letter  which  Don  Bernaldino
Delgadillo  de  Avellaneda,  Generall  of  the  king
of  Spaine  his  armie,  sent  unto  Doctor  Peter
Florez,  President  of  the  contractation  house
for  the  Indies,  wherein  he  maketh  mention
of  the  successe  of  the  English  armie,  after
they  departed  from  Panama,  whereof  was
Generall  Francis  Drake,  and  of  his  death.

Rom  Cartagena  I  gave  relation  unto  your
Worship  how  I  departed  from  the  citie
of  Lisbone,  in  the  pursuite  of  the
English  armie :  although  for  the  great
haste  the  Galeons  could  not  be  so  well
repaired  as  was  needfuU,  and  with  foule
weather  one  was  lost,  and  a  Fly-boat
was  burnt.  And  having  sayled  many  dayes  in  pursuite
of  the  enemie,  untill  I  arrived  at  Cartagena,  and  there
taking  the  advise  of  Don  Pedro  de  Acunna,  Governour
of  the  citie,  and  Captaine  generall  (for  wee  had  great
neede  of  water,  and  to  repaire  our  shippes)  we  stayed
in  that  port :  whereas  I  had  intelligence  by  an  Indian
that  Francis  Drake  died  in  Nombre  de  Dios,  for  very
griefe  that  he  had  lost  so  many  Barkes  and  men,  as
was  afterwards  more  manifestly  knowen.  Thus  having
given  you  a  relation  of  all  that  happened  hitherto,  now
I  let  you  understand,  that  I  left  this  Port  the  second  of
March,  and  tooke  our  course  towardes  Havana,  where
I  thought  to  have  found  the  English  fleete.  And
having  used  all  the  diligence  possible,  upon  Munday
the  eleventh  of  the  said  moneth,  about  two  of  the
clocke  in  the  afternoone,  at  the  end  of  the  He  of  Pinos,
in  the  entrance  of  Guaniguanico,  I  met  with  the  English
fleete,  being  fourteene  very  good  ships :  I  drew  towardes
them although they had the winde of us, and our

250

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES  a.d.

1596.

Admirall  who  bore  up  towards  the  winde,  with  other
two  ships  beganne  to  draw  neere  them,  and  although
we  set  thus  upon  them,  three  times  with  all  their
ships,  yet  would  they  not  set  againe  upon  us,  and
those  of  our  men  which  were  farthest  off  cryed  to
them  amaine,  being  both  within  shot  of  artillerie,  muskets,
and  calivers,  whereby  they  received  evident  hurt  by  us :
They  plyed  their  great  ordinance  according  to  their
manner,  and  especially  their  Viceadmirall,  and  seeing
our  resolution  how  sharpe  we  were  bent  towards  them,
they  with  all  expedition  and  speede  possible  prepared  to
flie  away,  hoysing  sailes  and  leaving  their  boates  for
haste  in  the  sea :  but  I  followed  them,  with  nine  ships
all  the  night  following,  and  with  foure  more  the  next
day,  till  I  made  them  double  the  Cape  of  S.  Antonie,
and  to  take  the  course  towards  the  Chanell  of  Bahama,
according  to  the  instructions  from  his  Majestie.  It
little  availed  us  to  be  scene,  with  lesse  number  of  ships,
neither  yet  all  the  diligence  we  could  use,  could  cause
them  to  stay  or  come  neere  us,  nor  to  shoot  off  one
harquebuze  or  peece  of  artillerie,  for  they  fled  away  as
fast  as  they  could,  and  their  shippes  were  halfe  dimin-
ished, and  that  the  best  part  of  them :  the  rest  they
repaired  in  Puerto  Bello,  whereas  they  were  about
fortie  dayes,  and  so  by  that  meanes  they  were  all  well
repayred ;  and  our  shippes  were  very  foule,  because
the  time  would  not  permit  us  to  trim  them :  I  have
sayled  2  moneths  and  a  halfe  in  the  Admirall,  since
we  departed  from  Cartagena,  we  have  not  repaired  their
pumpes  nor  clensed  them :  and  the  same  day  I  departed
thence,  there  came  unto  me  a  small  Pinnesse  in  the
like  distresse  :  our  Viceadmirall  and  the  rest  of  our  ships
have  the  like  impediment,  but  no  great  hinderance  unto
us,  for  ought  I  could  perceive  by  our  enemies :  It  is
manifest  what  advantage  they  had  of  us,  and  by  no
meanes  was  it  possible  for  us  to  take  them,  unlesse  we
could  have  come  to  have  found  them  at  an  anker.
Neverthelesse  they  left  us  one  good  shippe  behinde  for

251

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

our  share,  well  manned,  which  tolde  me  that  Drake
died  in  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  that  they  have  made
for  Generall  of  the  English  fleete  the  Colonel  Quebraran  :
and  also  by  meanes  of  the  small  time,  being  straightly
followed  by  us,  they  had  no  opportunitie  to  take  either
water,  wood  or  flesh,  and  they  are  also  in  such  bad
case,  that  I  know  not  how  they  will  be  able  to  arrive
in  England.  The  number  of  men  we  have  taken  are
about  an  hundred  and  fortie,  and  fifteene  noble  captaines
of  their  best  sort,  and  some  of  them  rich,  as  well  may
appeare  by  their  behaviour :  I  have  no  other  thing  to
write  at  this  time.  Our  Lord  keepe  you  who  best  can,
and  as  I  desire. From  Havana  the  30  of  March,  1596.

Don  Bernaldino  Delgadillo  De  Avellaneda.

THe  Licenciat  Don  John  Bermudes  of  Figueroa
Lieutenant  of  the  Assistants  of  the  citie  of  Sivill,
and  the  Province  thereof,  who  doth  supply  the  office
of  the  Assistant  in  the  absence  of  the  Right  honourable
the  Earle  of  Priego,  giveth  licence  to  Roderigo  de
Cabriera  to  imprint  the  Relation  of  the  death  of  Francis
Drake,  which  onely  he  may  do  for  two  moneths,  and
no  other  to  imprint  the  same  within  the  said  terme,
upon  paine  of  tenne  thousand  Maravedis  for  his  Majesties
chamber. Given  in  Sivill  the 15  of  May 1596.

The  Licenciat  Don  John  Bermudes  of  Figueroa.

By  his  Assigne  Gregorie  Gutierez  Notarie.

THis  letter  of  the  Generall  Don  Bernaldino  sent  into
Spaine  declaring  the  death  of  Sir  Francis  Drake
and  their  supposed  victorie,  was  altogether  received  for
an  undoubted  trueth,  and  so  pleasing  was  this  newes
unto  the  Spaniarde,  that  there  was  present  commande-
ment  given  to  publish  the  letter  in  print,  that  all  the
people  of  Spaine  might  be  pertakers  of  this  common
joy :  the  which  letter  printed  in  Sivill,  bearing  date  the
15 of  May,  1596 came  to the  hands  of  Henrie  Savile

252

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES  a.d.

1596.
Esquire,  who  being  employed  in  that  service  for  the
West  Indies,  and  Captaine  of  her  Majesties  good  shippe
the  Adventure,  under  the  conduct  of  sir  Francis  Drake,
and  sir  John  Hawkins,  hath  caused  the  said  printed
letter  to  be  translated  into  English.  And  that  the
impudencie  of  the  Spanish  Generall  may  the  more
plaineiy  appeare,  the  sayde  Henrie  Savile  doth  answere
particularly  to  every  untrueth  in  the  same  letter  con-
tayned,  as  hereafter  folio weth.

The  answere  to  the  Spanish  letter.

First  the  Generall  doth  say,  that  Francis  Drake  died
at  Nombre  de  Dios,  as  he  had  intelligence  by  an
Indian.

He  Generall  sent  this  newes  into  his  The  Generals
countrey  confirmed  with  his  hand  and  A'f^'^^^^^-fj  ^
seale  of  Armes : It  is  the  first  newes  in  hu  best  newes

,  . 1  J .  , ,  IS  m  part

his letter, and it was the best newes  i^ininewes.

that  he  could  send  into  Spaine.  For  it
did  ease  the  stomackes  of  the  timorous
Spaniards  greatly  to  heare  of  the  death
of  him,  whose  life  was  a  scourge  and  a  continuall  plague
unto  them :  But  it  was  a  point  of  great  simplicitie,  and
scarcely  beseeming  a  Generall,  to  tie  the  credite  of  his
report  locally  to  any  place  upon  the  report  of  a  silly
Indian  slave.  For  it  had  bene  sufficient  to  have  sayd,
that  Francis  Drake  was  certainly  dead,  without  pub-
lishing the  lie  in  print,  by  naming  Nombre  de  Dios :
for  it  is  most  certaine  sir  Francis  Drake  died  twixt  the
Hand  of  Escudo,  and  Puerto  Bello :  but  the  Generall
being  ravished  with  the  suddaine  joy  of  this  report  as
a  man  that  hath  escaped  a  great  danger  of  the  enemie,
doth  breake  out  into  an  insolent  kinde  of  bragging  of
his  valour  at  Sea,  and  heaping  one  lie  upon  another,
doth  not  cease  untill  he  hath  drawen  them  into  sequences,
and  so  doth  commende  them  unto  Peter  the  Doctor,
as  censor  of  his  learned  worke.

253

A.D.

1596.

Don  Bernal-
dino  doth  lie
impudently.

The  successe
of  the  kings
Jive  Frigats.
[III.  594.]

The  certaine
cause  whereof
sir  Francis
Drake  died.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Secondly,  The  Generall  doth  write  unto  the  Doctor,
that  Francis  Drake  died  for  very  griefe  that  he
had  lost  so  many  barkes  and  men.

A  Thing  very  strange  that  the  Generall  or  the
Indian  whom  hee  doth  vouch  for  his  lie,  should
have  such  speculation  in  the  bodie  of  him  whom
they  never  saw,  as  to  deliver  for  truth  unto  his  countrie,
the  very  cause  or  disease  whereof  hee  died :  and  this
second  report  of  his  is  more  grosse  then  the  first.  For
admit  the  mistaking  of  the  place  might  be  toUerable ;
notwithstanding,  this  precise  affirming  the  cause  of  his
death  doth  manifestly  proove  that  the  Generall  doth
make  no  conscience  to  lie.  And  as  concerning  the
losse  of  any  Barkes  or  men  in  our  Navie,  by  the
valour  of  the  Spaniard  before  Sir  Francis  Drake  his
death,  we  had  none  (one  small  pinnesse  excepted)  which
we  assuredly  know  was  taken  by  chance,  falling  single
into  a  fleete  of  five  Frigates  (of  which  was  Generall
Don  Pedro  Telio)  neere  unto  the  Hand  of  Dominica,
and  not  by  the  valour  of  Don  Bernaldino :  the  which
five  Frigates  of  the  kings  afterwardes  had  but  ill  successe,
for  one  of  them  we  burnt  in  the  harbour  of  S.  Juan
de  Puerto  rico,  and  one  other  was  sunke  in  the  same
harbour,  and  the  other  three  were  burnt  amongst  many
other  shippes  at  the  taking  of  Cadiz.  This  I  thinke
in  wise  mens  judgements,  will  seeme  a  silly  cause  to
make  a  man  sorrowe  to  death.  For  true  it  is,  sir
Francis  Drake  died  of  the  fluxe  which  hee  had  growen
upon  him  eight  dayes  before  his  death,  and  yeelded
up  his  spirit  like  a  Christian  to  his  creatour  quietly  in
his  cabbin.  And  when  the  Generall  shall  survey  his
losse,  he  shall  finde  it  more  then  the  losse  of  the
English,  and  the  most  of  his,  destroyed  by  the  bullet :
but  the  death  of  Sir  Francis  Drake  was  of  so  great
comfort  unto  the  Spaniard,  that  it  was  thought  to  be
a  sufficient  amendes,  although  their  whole  fleete  had
beene  utterly  lost.

254

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES  ad.

1596.

Thirdly,  the  Generall  doth  say  of  his  owne  credite,  and
not  by  intelligence  from  any  Indian  or  other,  that
on  the  eleventh  of  March  last  he  met  the  English
fleete  at  the  He  of  Pinos,  being  fourteene  good
shippes :  who  although  they  had  the  winde  of  him,
yet  he  set  upon  them  three  times  with  all  their
shippes:  but  the  English  Fleete  fled,  and  refused
to  fight,  shooting  now  and  then  a  shot,  but  especi-
ally the  Viceadmirall.

THis third lie of the Generall Don Bernaldino
Delgadillo de Avellaneda (whose name for the
prolixitie  thereof  may  be drawen somewhat neere the
length  of  a  cable)  hath  no  colour  of  protection,  but  it
hath a  just proportion in measure to the  lies  of  olde
Bernardino  de  Mendoza  his  countreyman,  concerning  the  J payre  of
overthrowe of  hir Majesties Navie in the yeere one  Spanish  Hers.
thousand five hundred eightie  and eight. For except
Don  Bernaldino  the  Generall  did  purpose  to  winne  the
whetstone  from  Don Bernardino  de Mendoza  the  olde
Spanish  Iyer  ;  I  cannot  conjecture  why  he  should  write
to  his  countrey  for  a  truth,  that  he  chased  the  English
Navie  with  nine shippes,  and did three  severall  times
give  the  onset  to  the  English  fleete,  who  being  fourteene
good  shippes  (as he  saith)  did  flie  and  refuse  to  fight ;
considering  that  the  Spanish  Viceadmirall  (if  he  be  living) The  Spanish
and  many  other  can  witnesse  the  contrarie :  who  fighting  Viceadmirall
like  a  true  valiant  man,  departed  from  the  fight  with a  ^^'^"^^
torne and battered shippe to save her from sinking.
Neither can I imagine that there is any one in the
Spanish  Fleete  (Don  Bernaldino  excepted)  that  will  say
they  were  lesse  then  twentie  sayle  of  shippes  when  they
met the English fleete : and the Spanish Navie can
witnesse that  they  received such store  of  bullets from
the English  fleete,  that  they  were  glad to  depart,  and
in  despight  of  them  the  English  navie  did  holde  their
determined  course  :  And taking  a  viewe  of  the  Spanish  ^plnUhsldts
fleete  the  next  day,  their  number  was  not  above  thirteene  after  the  fight.

255

A.D.
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ships,  which  did argue  that  they were  either  sunke  or
fled  to  harbour  to  save  themselves.

^The  transla-
tion of  the
Spanish  word
Lanckas  is
here  mistaken.

This  lie  was
made  in  the
Generals  own
forge.

Fourthly,  the  General  saith,  that  the  English  fleete  fled
away,  and  left  their  *oares  for  hast  behind  them  in
the  sea.

IT  was  strange  that  they  should  leave  behinde  them
oares  in  the  sea,  sithence  there  was  not  in  the  English
fleete  either  Galley  or  Galliasse,  which  required  the  use
of  oares :  as  for  the  oares  of  their  ship-boates  and  other
such  small  vessels,  they  had  stowed  them  aboord  their
shippes,  and  were  no  impediment  unto  them,  but  most
necessarie  for  them  to  use,  and  therefore  not  likely  they
would  cast  them  overboord :  But  it  is  more  likely,  that
the  Generall  fell  into  some  pleasant  dreame  at  Sea,  wherein
he  did  see  a  false  apparition  of  victorie  against  the
English,  and  for  lacke  of  matter  did  set  this  downe  in
his  letter  for  newes  to  his  countrey  :  It  is  sinne  to  belie
the  Devill,  and  therefore  the  Generall  shall  have  his
right :  the  letter  is  so  well  contrived,  and  yet  with  no
great  eloquence,  but  with  such  art,  that  there  are  not
many  more  lines,  then  there  are  lies,  which  shewed  that
there  are  wonderfull  and  extraordinarie  gifts  in  the
Generall :  but  I  am  perswaded  if  Don  Bernaldino  had
thought  that  his  letter  should  have  beene  printed,  he
would  have  omitted  many  things  conteined  in  the  letter  :
for  the  Doctor  did  use  him  somewhat  hardly  in  shewing
the  letter  openly,  and  more  in  suff^ering  it  to  bee  printed :
for  friendes  may  like  good  fellowes  send  lies  one  to  the
other  for  recreation,  and  feed  their  friends  with  some
small  taste  thereof,  so  it  be  kept  close,  without  danger
to  incurre  the  title  of  a  lying  Generall :  But  as  the
matter  is  now  handled  through  the  simplicitie  of  the
Doctor,  [  cannot  see  but  the  Generall  Don  Bernaldino
is  like  to  carrie  the  title  equally  twixt  both  his
shoulders.

256

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES  a.d.

1596.

Fiftly,  the Generall doth  say in  his  printed  letter,  that  [HI-  595-]
notwithstanding  all the diligence he could use, he
could  not  cause  the  English  fleete  to  stay  nor  come
neere  them,  nor discharge  one  harquebuze  or  peece
of  artillerie,  but  fled  away  as  fast  as  they  could.

ANd  this  lie  also  he  doth  not  receive  by  intelligence
from  any  other,  but  himselfe  was  an  eye-witnesse
in  the  action,  which  made  him  bold  to  sende  this  with
the  rest  into  his  countrey  for  current  newes :  but  here-
in Don  Bernaldino  was  more  bolde  than  wise,  for  the
torne  and  battered  sides  of  his  Galeons,  being  compared  The  torn  sides
with  her Majesties shippes,  and others that served  in  ^f f^^  Spanish

that  fiffht,  doe declare,  that  his ships  received at  least  V^^ °L  '^^^'
0 '  ^ _  r  demne  Don

two bullets for one. Neither can it be concealed  but  Bernaldino  of
his owne countreyman (if  any do favour truth) may  lying.
easily see the losse, and late  reparations, done unto
the kings fleete,  sithence they  did encounter  with  the
English  Navie,  whensoever  they  that  remaine  shall  arrive
in Spaine. But the Generall seemeth to be a very
good  proficient in  his  profession,  and  waxeth  somewhat
bold, treading the true steps of olde Bernardino de
Mendoza :  and  yet  Mendoza  was  somewhat  more  warie
in  his  lies,  for  he  had  sometime  the  colour  of  intelligence
to  shadowe  them :  but  the  Generall  growing  from  bold-
nesse  to  impudencie  maketh  no  scruple  to  say,  that  the
English Navie fled as fast  as they  could  without dis-
charging any  harquebuze or peece  of  artillerie,  when  as
the  battered sides  of  his ships  doe returne the  lie to
his  face :  For  in  this  conflict  Don  Bernaldino  did  behave
himselfe so valiantly, that he was  alwayes farthest  off
in  the  fight,  and  had  so  great  care  of  his  owne  person,
that he stoode cleare from the danger  of  musket or
any small shot, and durst not  approch ; whereas our  The  order  of
Generall was the foremost, and so helde his place,  ^^^  English
untill by order of  fight other shippes were to have  '^^'^'^^•
their turnes, according to his former direction : who
wisely and politikely had so ordered his vangarde,
X  257  R

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

and rereward,  that as  the manner  of  it  was altogether

strange to the Spaniarde, so might they have bene

without all hope of victorie, if their Generall had

bene a man  of  any  judgement in sea-fights : I knowe

no  reason  why  the  English  Navie  should  flie  from  him ;

The  Spaniard  for  the  Spaniarde  may  put  all  the  gaine  in  his  eye  that

cannot  bragge gygj-  j^g  ^■^^  winne  from  the  English  :  Peradventure  some

oj  IS  game, gjjj^ novice of  our countrey meeting the Generall in

Spaine,  and  hearing  a  repetition  of  so  many  sillables  in

one  name,  as  Don  Bernaldino  Delgadillo  de  Avellaneda,

might  thinke  them  to  be  wordes  of  conjuration,  and  for

feare  of  raysing  a  spirit,  might  flie  from  him  as  from  the

Devill : or some  simple Indian slave hearing the like

repetition  of  his  long  and  tedious  name,  might  suppose

it  to  be  an  armie  of  Spaniards,  and  for  feare  runne  away :

but  the  commanders  and  captaines  of  the  English  Navie

Spanish  brags were  men  of  such  resolution,  that  no  Spanish  bragges  could

are  of  no  value  dismay  them  (for  they  have  often  met  them  with  their

^J  //  Pikes  in  their  Spanish  beardes) nor  the  countenance  of

Don  Bernaldino  quaile  them,  although  hee  were  acowtred

in  his  gilt  leather  buskins,  and  his  Toledo  rapier.

Sixtly  the  Generall  saith  in  his  letter,  that  notwithstand-
ing their  flying  away  so  fast,  the  English  left  them
one  good  ship  well  manned,  who  tolde  him  that
Drake  dyed  in  Nombre  de  Dios  :  in  which  ship
were  one  hundred  and  fortie  men,  and  fifteene
noble  captaines  of  the  best  sort.

THe  Generall  Don  Bernaldino,  like  a  resolute
Spaniarde  having  already  gone  over  his  shooes,
maketh  no  danger  to  wade  over  his  bootes  also :  and
as  he  hath  begunne,  so  hee  doth  conclude.  I  marvaile
that  he  did  not  in  writing  his  discourse  remember  this  old
saying :  that  is,  A  liar  ought  to  have  a  good  memorie :
It  were  much  better  for  him  in  mine  opinion  to  revoke
the  testimonie  which  he  saith  he  had  from  the  EngHsh-
men,  concerning  Sir  Francis  Drake  his  death  at  Nombre
de  Dios, and stand to the intelligence received from

2:;8

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES  ad.

1596.

the  silly Indian slave,  as it  appeareth in his first  lie :

for  without  all  doubt  there  is  no  English  man  that  will

say  (if  he  have  his  right  senses)  that  he  dyed  at  Nombre

de  Dios,  for  they  all knowe  the  contrarie:  neither  can

the  General  avouch that he received intelligence  from

any English man,  that after  the death of  Sir Francis

Drake they  did elect for Generall Colonel Quebraran  Don Bemal-

(as  he  doth  most  falsely  afiirme in the latter  ende  of  dim  his  rare

his  vaine and frivolous letter) seeing that this name  ^^^  ^^  coyning

' . ^  ,.  .a  new  and

was  strange  &  unknowen  to  any  in  the  English  Navie.  strange  name.

Neither do I imagine that any of those which the

Generall  saith  he hath  taken,  were  so  forgetfuU,  as  not

to remember their Generals name. But  without all

doubt  this  addition of  so  new  and strange a name  to

the  English  Generall,  doth  proove  that  Don  Bernaldino

is  not  unfurnished of  a forge  and storehouse of  lies,

from whence as from an everflowing fountaine, he

sendeth  forth  lies  of  al  sorts  sufficient  for  his  own  store,  [III  596.]

and great plentie to furnish his friends : the Generall

was  much beholding to his  godfathers who  gave him

the  name  Bernaldino,  which  we  in  English  doe  take  to

be  plaine  Barnard,  which  name  hath  as  it  were  a  kinde

of  privilege  from  being  sharpely  reprehended,  when  the

partie is thought to erre : for it  is a common saying The  schoole-

amongst the schoolemen that Bernardus non videt  men  of  mode  st';^

omnia,  viz.  Barnard  seeth  not  all  things,  (when  he  doth  ^^^  «^^^^^^

dissent  from their  opinions)  the  which  favour  we  could  ^gnsion when

be content to yeeld to Bernaldino for the  name  sake,  they  doe  thinke

if  he  were  not  taken  with  so  many  manifest  and  impu-  i^e  author  to

dent  lies : neither  doe  I  thinke  that  Sennor  Bernaldino  ^''^^•

will say,  that he sawe all that he hath written,  be it

spoken in councell for shaming the Generall : for is

there  any  man  so  voide  of  reason  as  to  thinke,  that  any

Englishman being demanded of his Generals name,

would write or speak Quebraran for Baskervil. So The  difference

much difference there is  in the  sound  of  the  sillables,  ^ff^'^f

as there is no affinitie at all,  or likelihood of  truth.  andBasker-

But such are the Generals rare  gifts,  (be  it  spoken  to  vill.

259

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

his  small  prayse)  that  we  Englishmen  must  of  force
confesse,  that  the  Generall  hath  given  a  proud  onset  to
Carrie  the  whetstone  from  Sennor  Bernaldino  de  Men-
doza :  neither  will  the  hundred  and  fortie  men  and
fifteene  noble  Captaines  (which  he  saith  he  did  take,
of  whom  he  might  have  bene  rightly  informed  of  their
Generals  name)  acquit  him  of  lying  forgerie,  for  giving
the  name  of  Quebraran  to  the  English  Generall.  As
for  the  good  shippe  well  manned,  which  he  saith  the
English  left  them  after  the  fight,  I  am  perswaded  he
hath  no  man  to  witnesse  that  lie,  for  the  ship  was  sepa-
rated by  weather  from  the  English  fleete  in  the  night,
thirteene  dayes  before  the  fight  with  the  Spanish  Navie,
and  never  to  any  mans  knowledge  came  more  in  sight
The  Generall  of  the  English  fleete.  If  the  Spanish  ship  by  chance
maketh  great  ^ij  take  the  saide  well  manned  ship  (as  they  call  her)
bragsintakmg  j j^^^^. ^^^  y^^^  ^j^ j^^^^  ^j^^  ^j^- ^j^^  hundred  and

CI  utStVCSSBu-  ,

ship  which  is forty  men,  and the fifteene noble Captaines to shew :
supposed  not  to  But evermore 1 gesse the Spanish reckoning  will fall
strike  one short  when it is examined,  for the fifteene noble Cap-
Th'  '■ hi ^^^^"^^^  ^^ proove,  (as  I  take  it)  but  three,  whose  losse
Captaines ^  grieve  to  thinke  on : Neither  did  the  Spaniards  gaine
contrary  to  the  them by  valour, or we loose or leave them for cow-
Generals  lying  ardise,  as  most  untruely  this  bragging  Her  hath  certified.
occupation, g^^. ^j^e Generall like a provident man,  to make his
lhree°'^^  " fame  and  credite  the  greater  with  his  Prince  and  coun-
trey,  taketh  upon  him  (amongst  other  his  miracles  per-
formed before  the  English  fleete)  by  way  of  amplification
to  make  small  matters  seeme  great,  as  a  little  shooe  to
serve a great foote,  and finding that it  can hardly  be
brought to passe,  he doth so stretch the  leather  with
his teeth that  it  is  readie  to  breake : and  yet  notwith-
standing al this will not serve his purpose ; for the
printing  of  the  letter  doth  marre  the  play,  and  bringeth
such matter in question, as the Generall doth wish
might be concealed,  and  were he not of  so drie  and
cholerick a complexion,  as commonly  Spaniards  are,  he
would  blush  for  very  shame  in  publishing  so  impudently

260

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES  ad.

1596.
such  manifest  untruthes.  For  sithence  his  meeting
with  the  English  fleete  at  the  He  of  Pinos,  there  hath
bene  by  the  worthie  English  Generals  an  honourable
expedition  from  England  into  the  Continent  of  Spaine,
where  amongst  other  exploites  having  taken  the  citie
of  Cadiz,  in  the  sacke  thereof  was  found  some  of  Don  The  first
Bernaldino  his  printed  letters :  which  comming  to  the  discovery  of
handes  of  a  captaine  that  served  in  Sir  Francis  Drakes  ^^^-^^^^  /^^^^,._
last  voyage  to  the  West  Indies,  he  hath  thought  very
fit  (in  regard  of  the  slanders  to  the  English  Navie
contained  in  the  saide  letter)  to  quote  the  errors,  that
the  trueth  onely  may  appeare,  to  all  such  as  have  a
desire  to  be  rightly  informed  of  such  accidents  as  befell
them  in  this  late  voyage  to  the  West  Indies :  and  this
may  suffise  to  shew  Don  Bernaldino  Delgadillo  de
Avellaneda  his  great  judgement  in  amplifying  small
matters,  or  of  nothing  to  make  in  shewe  somewhat.
And  now  having  thus  farre  informed  you  of  the  trueth
in  reproofe  of  the  slanderous,  false,  and  untrue  reports
of  this  glorious  lying  Generall,  with  a  true  disproofe
to  some  of  the  grossest  of  his  lies,  I  will  leave  him
with  the  rest  of  his  lying  letter,  and  the  circumstances
therein  contained  to  your  censures :  who  in  discretion
may  easily  discerne  the  same :  And  have  here  following
plainely  and  truely  set  downe  the  course  and  order  of
our  whole  fight  after  we  met.

The meeting of our English Navie and the
Spanish  fleete,  and  the  order  of  our  encounter.

Unday  the  first  of  March,  according  to
our  computation,  wee  descryed  the  Hand
of  Pinos,  where  haling  in  for  the  West-
erne  part  thereof,  thinking  there  to  have
watered,  being  within  foure  leagues  off
it  Southerly,  we  sent  in  three  of  our
Pinnesses to discover the  harbour,  and

to  sound  afore  us,  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone ; the same  day  we  discovered  a  fleete  of  twentie

261

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

The  first sailes,  and  deeming  them  to  be  the  Spanish  fleete,  we
discovery  of kept  our  loofe  to  get the  winde,  but  their  Viceadmirall
the  Spanish ^-^^  divers  other  ships  went  about  to  cut  off  our  Pin-
rill.  CQ-l nesses : so that our Generall  with some other of  our
shippes, was forced to tacke  about upon the larbourd
tacke,  and so ranne  in  towardes  the  lande  keeping  the
winde,  so as  we recovered  our  Pinnesses ; which  forced
the enemies shippes to tacke about,  and to take the
aide of  their fleete,  and being  come neere unto them
they  shot at us; we still approched,  having our close
fights up,  our flags,  ensignes and streamers displayed,
our men orderly placed in each quarter, but forbare
our fight untill our Generall beganne,  and gave us
warning to  come  in  and  fight,  by  shooting  off  a  great
The  incounter  peece, according to his former directions : so being
betwixt  the within musket shot, the Viceadmirall of  the Spanish
th^lt ^'^h ^^^^^ came  neerest  unto  us,  to  whom  our  Viceadmirall
ships.  John Traughton Captaine of  the Elizabeth Bonadven-

ture  gave  fight,  betwixt  whom  there  was  the  greatest
voley  of  small  shot  changed  that  lightly  hath  bene
heard  at  Sea,  which  continued  a  long  halfe  houre.  In
which  time  the  Spanish  fleete  came  in  to  fight.  Our
Generall  Sir  Thomas  Baskervill  being  in  the  Garland
(whereof  Humphrey  Reignolds  was  Captaine,  being  the
next  shippe  unto  the  Elizabeth  Bonadventure)  bare
up  to  the  enemie,  playing  with  his  great  ordinance
hotly  untill  he  came  within  musket  shot.  Jonas  Boden-
ham  Captaine  of  the  Defiance,  and  Henrie  Savile
Captaine  of  the  Adventure,  came  likewise  in  to  fight
with  them.  After  the  Garland  being  within  musket
shot  played  her  part,  and  made  good  fight  for  the
space  of  an  houre.  The  Defiance  bare  up  likewise
and  had  her  turne :  after  came  the  Adventure  againe
within  musket  shot,  who  having  changed  many  a  great
bullet  with  them  before,  renewed  his  fight,  &  continued  it
an  houre  with  small  shot.  Then  came  Thomas  Drake
Captaine  of  the  Hope,  who  last  of  all  had  his  turne.
Thus had all the Queenes shippes their  course : The

262

A  LIBEL  OF  SPANISH  LIES  ad.

1596.
marchants  ships  with  other  small  vessels  being  without
the Queenes ships, shot  when they saw opportunitie.
After  the enemie finding no  good  to  be  done (being
well  beaten)  fell  from us,  the  Adventure  playing  upon
them  with her  great ordinance,  made three  of  the  last
shot at  them : their  Viceadmirall  with divers others  of  1'he  Spanish
their  ships,  were so  beaten that they  left off  the fight,  ^^^^^^J^^^^^^
and  were  forced  to  lie  in  the  winde,  for  that  they  durst  ^^^^^  successe
not lie of  either boord by  reason of  their many  and  they  had  in
great  leakes,  which  they  had  received  by  our  great  shot,  this  fight.
The  Generall  with  the  rest  of  their  fleete  tacking  about,
fell  in our  wake,  thinking  to  get  the  winde,  which in
the  beginning  wee  sought  to  hinder. But  our  Generall
seeing  that  in holding  the  winde  we  should  shoot  our
selves into the bay, gave them the  winde. All that  The  English
night  they  kept  themselves upon our  brode side,  not-  admirall
withstanding our Admiral carried his cresset-light all  '^^^^^"'^^f
night,  having  great  care  of  our  smallest  shippes. This  nlmithsmnd-
fight continued about foure houres till it was neere  ing  the  enemie
night, in the which fight, thankes be to God, there  ^^^-f «/"« his
were slaine so few  persons of  our English fleete,  as I  i^^'o^d.  ^^<^^-
thinke the  like conflict  hath not bene  performed  with The  English
so  little  losse  of  men  :  What  harme  befell  the  Spaniards  received  little
in their fleete I leave to your iudgements. Yet  our  ^'^^^^J^  ^^"

.  JO  confitct

eyes  can  witnesse  their  ships  were  sore  beaten  and
racked  thorough,  whereby  there  was  such  falling  backe
and  lying  by  the  lee  to  stoppe  their  leakes,  as  some  of
them  were  driven  to  haste  away,  and  rather  to  runne
on  shore  to  save  themselves  then  sinke  in  the  Sea :
besides  within  two  houres  after  our  fight  with  them,
we  sawe  one  of  their  great  shippes  on  fire  which  burnt
into  the  Sea,  and  all  the  sterne  of  another  of  their  ships
blowen  up :  And  in  the  morning  a  shippe  of  our  fleete
was  runne  so  neere  the  land,  that  to  double  the  Cape
,de  los  Corrientes  he  must  of  necessitie  tacke  about
and  fall  in  the  wake  of  the  enemie,  which  caused  our
Generall  in  the  Garland  and  the  Defiance  to  tacke
about; which two ships forced the  three ships of  the

263

A.D.
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

enemies (which were put foorth to take our shippe,

or else to cause her runne on  ground) to returne to

their  fleete  to save themselves,  hoysing  all their  sayles

The  remain-  for  haste : This  morning  they  were  faire  by  us  having

derojthe ^^ winde of us, being but thirteen sayle of their

/ "'^,  7?^^  e  ^y^gj^|-ig ^Q be seene : then  we stroke  pur toppe sayles

thirteene thinking to have fought  with  them againe,  which they

sayles.  perceiving tacked about from us,  and after that never

durst nor  would come neere us :  What  became  of  the

rest  of  their  fleete  wee  knowe  not,  but  true  it  was  that

they  were in  great  distresse  mightily  beaten  and  torne,

by  having  received  many  bullets  from  us. All  this  day

wee had sight of  them,  but they  shewed  little  will to

fight  or  come  neere  us,  so  we  keeping  our  course  West,

and  by  North,  about  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  lost  the

sight of  them. And this is a true discourse of  our

fight  with the Spanish fleete. The which the author

hereof will justifie with the adventure of his life,

against any  Spaniarde serving in that  action,  that  shall

contradict  the  same.  Henry  Savile.

[III.  598.] Thomas  Baskervil knight,  his  approbation  to  the
former  twofold  discourse  of  Captaine  Savile.

Thomas  Baskervill  knight,  Generall  ot
her  Majesties  late  Indian  armada  in
the  late  conflict  had  betweene  the  Spanish
fleete  and  us,  having  perused  the  Spanish
letter  written  by  Don  Bernaldino  Del-
gadillo  de Avellaneda, Generall of  the

king  of  Spaines  Navie,  and  also  having
perused  captaine  Henrie  Savile  his  answeres  unto  the
sixe  exceptions  in  the  Generals  letter,  with  his  discourse
of  the  manner  of  our  fight  with  the  Spanish  fleete,
doe  say  that  the  said  Henrie  Savile  hath  answered  the
letter,  and  set  downe  the  order  of  the  fight  sincerely
according  to  truth,  for  testimonie  of  which  I  have
hereunto  set  my  hand.

264

A LIBEL OF SPANISH LIES  ad.

1596.

And  if  Don  Bernaldino  Delgadillo  de  Avellaneda  the
Generall  shall  take  any  exceptions  to  this  my  appro-
bation, or  stand  in  the  justification  of  his  lying  letter
written  to  Doctor  Peter  Florez,  President  of  the
Contractation  house  for  the  Indies,  and  by  him  for
Bernaldinos  glorie  lately  put  in  print :  I  then  say  that
he  falsely  lyed,  and  that  1  will  maintaine  against  him
with  whatsoever  armes  he  shall  make  chovce  of.  And
because  the  kingdomes  wherein  we  abide  are  enemies
(by  reason  of  which  there  is  no  meanes  in  either  of
them,  to  maintaine  that  I  have  written)  let  him  make
choise  of  any  indifferent  kingdome  of  equall  distance
from  either  realme,  and  I  will  there  be  readie  to  maintaine
as  much  as  I  have  written :  But  if  by  my  imployments
into  France  I  be  so  stayed  by  her  Majesties  commande-
ments,  that  I  cannot  out  of  that  realme  meete  him  in
any  other,  I  cannot  see  why  he  should  take  any  exception
to  that,  considering  the  equalitie  of  the  place,  and  that
the  Armies  of  both  our  princes  be  there  resident.

Thomas  Baskervile.

[A  true
265

A.D.
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  true  relation  of  the  voyage  undertaken  by  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  Knight  in  Anno  1596.
intended  for  the  He  of  San  Tome,  but  per-
formed to  S.  lago,  Dominica,  Margarita,  along
the  coast  of  Tierra  firma,  to  the  He  of  Jamaica,
the  bay  of  the  Honduras,  30  leagues  up  Rio
Dolce,  and  homewarde  by  Newfoundland.
With  the  memorable  exploytes  atchieved  in
all  this  voyage.

E  departed  from  Hampton  the  23  of
Aprill  with  nine  ships  and  a  gallie.
The  Bevice  Admirall  being  300  tunnes,
the  Galeon  Viceadmirall  being  240
tunnes.  The  George  Rereadmirall  being
160  tunnes.  The  Archangel  being  250
tunnes. The Swanne 200 tunnes, the

George  Noble  being  140  tunnes,  the  Wolfe  70  tunnes,
the  Mermayde  120  tunnes,  the  Little  John  40  tunnes
the  Galley  and  a  Pinnesse.  All  which  ships  we  suffi-
ciendy  victualled  and  furnished  for  ten  monethes,  with
all  necessaries  fit  for  the  voyage.  They  were  also
manned  with  souldiers  and  saylers,  exceeding  well
appointed  with  all  furniture  necessarie  for  the  intended
purpose  of  our  Generall  to  the  full  number  of  900.
ratably  &  orderly  distributed  into  every  ship.  We
arrived  at  Plimmouth  the  29  of  Aprill,  where  wee  found
the  Right  honourable  Earle  of  Essex  readie  for  the
attempt  of  his  Cadiz  Action,  with  whom  our  Generall
left  three  ships  and  500  souldiers  well  victualed  and
furnished.  So  the  2 1  of  May  we  departed  from  Plim-
mouth with  the  Bevice,  the  Gallion,  the  George,  the
George  Noble,  the  Wolfe  and  the  Galley  and  Pinnesse,
determining  our  voyage  for  the  He  of  S.  Tome.  But
if  our  whole  force  had  remayned  with  us  our  Generals
purpose was to have first sackt the Madera He, and

266

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1596.

so  to  have  proceeded  for  S.  Tome. The 27 of  May

we  arrived upon the  coast of  Spaine, coasting all the

shore,  hoping  to meete  with some  of  the  kings  ships.

From  thence  we  past  in  sight  of  the  coast  of  Barbary,

and  came  to  Masagant,  within  shot  of  the  Fort,  which The  Fort  of

our Generall reported to be an excellent fortification,  Masagant.

where  the  Spaniard  is  in  strong  garrison. And  bending

our  course  for  the  Canarie  lies  there  purposing  to  water,

our galley lost her rudder ; so our Generall directed

the George Noble to  goe  for  the He Mogador, there

to repaire the Gallies wants. Betweene which place

and the Canarie lies we tooke a fly-bote of two  -A  Flieboat

hundred  tunnes  bound  for  Brasill,  having  nothing  aboord  ^^^"'

her  but  some  small  portion  of  victuals  for  their  reliefe.

The  Captaine  of  this  Flybote  tooke  upon  him  to  be  a

perfect Pilot of  S. Tome, and willingly consented to

stay with us, being a Fleming. Having watered at

the  Canaries,  by  the  counsell  of  this  Fleming  we  shaped

our  course  for  the  lies  of  Cape  Verde,  he  assuring us

that we should there  meet the fleete of  Saint  Tome,

for  the  yeere  was so farre past, that we knewe they

were  all  departed  from  S.  Tome.

The  first  of  July  we  fell  with  the  Isle  Maio,  where  [HI.  599.]
wee  saw  small  hope  of  any  fleete  to  bee  expected,  &  Tj^  ^  ^
therefore  departed  for  Cape  Verde,  the  appointed  place
for  the  George  noble  to  meete  us :  where  we  arrived
the  fift  of  July,  and  there  found  him.  And  so  instantly
we  proceeded  for  our  voyage,  because  the  yeere  was
farre  spent.  At  this  place  most  unfortunately  our
General  fell  exceeding  sicke,  and  we  wanting  water
were  enforced  to  goe  with  a  place  named  Pescadores
in  10  degrees  of  North  latitude,  where  we  had  many
skirmishes  with  the  barbarous  Negros.  Oar  Generall
now  hopelesse  of  life,  and  we  all  dismayed  and  comfort-
lesse  through  that  his  exceeding  extremity,  having  his
memory  very  perfit,  he  called  all  his  Captaines,  Masters,
and  officers  unto  him,  unto  whom  he  made  a  very  pithie
and  briefe  speech,  tending  to  this  purpose :  That  as  we

267

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

were  Christians  and  all  baptised  and  bred  up  under  one
and  the  true  faith,  so  wee  should  live  together  like
Christians  in  the  feare  and  service  of  God :  And  as
we  were  the  subjects  of  our  most  excellent  sovereigne,
and  had  vowed  obedience  unto  her :  so  we  should  tend
all  our  courses  to  the  advancement  of  her  dignity,  and
the  good  of  our  countrey,  and  not  to  enter  into  any
base  or  unfit  actions.  And  because  we  came  for  his
love  into  this  action  that  for  his  sake  we  would  so
love  together  as  if  himselfe  were  still  living  with  us,
and  that  we  would  follow  (as  our  chiefe  commander)
him,  unto  whom  under  his  hand  he  would  give  com-
mission to  succeede  himselfe :  all  which  with  solemne
protestation  we  granted  to  obey.  Then  for  that  the
yere  was  past,  and  finding  the  cost  of  Guynea  most
tempestuous,  hee  saw  in  reason  that  the  bay  of  i^Ethiopia
would  be  our  utter  overthrow,  and  infect  us  all  to  death :
whereupon  he  advised  us  to  be  respective  of  our  selves,
and  to  divert  our  purpose  from  S.  Tome,  either  for
Brasil  or  the  West  India,  yeelding  many  reasons  that
it  was  our  best  course :  but  we  all  with  one  voice
desired  to  proceede  for  S.  Tome.  And  so  departing  from
this  contagious  filthy  place,  we  directed  our  course  for
S.  Tome,  but  could  by  no  means  double  the  sholds
of  Madrabomba,  but  very  dangerously  ran  into  shold
water,  still  hoping  of  the  best.  In  fine  we  were  enforced
to  beare  up  &  take  some  other  course ;  for  the  time
A  most  con-  wasted,  our  men  fell  sicke,  and  the  coast  was  contagious
tagtoui  y  alwayes  raging  &  tempestuous.  The  water  falling  from
pthy  place.  ^^  heavens  did  stinke,  and  did  in  6  houres  turne  into
maggots  where  it  fell  either  among  our  clothes,  or  in
wads  of  Ocombe.

So  by  a  general  consent  it  was  held  to  be  our  best
course  to  goe  for  the  West  India ;  &  so  much  the  rather,
because  we  had  good  pilots  for  that  place,  who  undertooke
more  then  was  after  performed.  So  we  bent  our  course
for  the  Isles  of  Cape  Verde,  &  arriving  at  the  Isle  of
S.  lago  the  30  of  August,  we  presently  landed  at  Praia,

268

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

1596.

where  we  found  a smal barke in the rode  laden  with
wine  and  meale.

After  we  were  departed  from  this  vile  coast  of  Guyny
our Generall to our  great  comforts began to recover
strength ; so  that being now at Praia, he was able to The  towne  of
land  with  us. In  our  landing  the  people  made  a  shew [^■^fr"^°fo
of  great  resistance, but  we entred the towne without  ^ ^^^^^^
hindrance, being a very  pretie towne, having a small
fort  in  it,  with  6  or  8 cast  pieces.

Being  here  on  shore,  and  finding  nothing  left  in  the
towne,  divers  of  our  company  were  very  importunate
with  our  Generall,  that  he  would  go  to  the  citie  of  S.
lago  being  6  miles  off:  through  their  importunitie  he
yeelded  consent,  and  so  we  marched  towards  the  citie
with  280  souldiers.  As  we  passed  by  the  Negros  and
herdsmen,  they  would  crie  unto  us  Guarda  S.  lago.
That  night  we  lost  our  way,  &  lay  under  a  hedge.
The  next  morning  the  Ordinance  of  S.  lago  was  shot
off  to  give  us  notice  where  the  towne  was :  so  wee
marched  towards  it  at  the  breake  of  the  day.  The
countrey  then  being  all  spred  over  with  people  made
shew  of  feare  only  to  draw  us  into  the  town :  but
we  farther  marched  with  our  colours  flying  by  the
drumme.  The  gentelmen  would  come  gallopping  by
us  and  viewing  us  very  much.  But  when  we  came
in  sight  of  the  towne,  we  could  see  no  way  how  to
get  into  it,  but  by  one  little  path  downe  a  very  steepe
hill,  only  man  by  man  to  go  downe.  The  strength  A  description
and  situation  of  this  towne  was  sufficient  to  have  danted  °f^^^  ^°^^  °f
a  man  of  very  good  courage,  for  it  standeth  between  two i ^^%  ^  ^^

JO  O '  _  f?y  stf  1 7'cincis

steepe  cliffes  strongly  housed,  &  three  exceeding  good  Drake  1585.
forts  commanding  the  whole,  the  chiefest  and  best  stand-
ing upon  the  top  of  the  hill  right  over  the  towne  :  so  that
from  thence  with  muskets  they  command  every  streete,
the  other  2  forts  standing  by  the  waters  side,  all  three
commanding  the  rode,  and  these  two  every  streete  in  the
towne.  Upon  the  front  of  the  towne  the  sea  beateth,  the
rest  standeth  betweene  two  mighty  cliffes,  not  accessible

269

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

but  by  one  small  path,  by  which  wee  were  enforced  to  goe.
Our  Generall  seeing  himselfe  thus  straighted,  and  perceiv-
ing the  drift  of  the  Portugals  was  to  draw  him  into
this  trench,  and  knowing  wel  that  he  could  not  returne
as  we  came,  by  reason  of  many  straights  and  advantage-
able  places,  with  an  excellent  resolution  (like  unto  him-
selfe) cryed  out,  all  courage  my  hearts  :  assure  your  selves
that  the  device  of  the  Portugals  shall  serve  our  turne  this
day  ;  for  they  will  suffer  us  quietly  to  passe  downe
into  their  supposed  trappe,  and  then  will  pursue  us,  then
[III.  600.]  which  nothing  can  happen  better.  The  day  is  ours  now
shew  your  selves  as  I  know  you  will :  and  so  presently
we  descended  into  the  trench.  And  being  downe  the
enemy  pursued  with  a  mightie  crie,  and  all  the  cliffes
on  both  sides  were  beset  full  of  men  ;  shot,  and  stones
we  wanted  none  from  them  on  every  side  in  great  plenty  ;
for  this  naturall  trench  was  not  halfe  a  musket  shot  over.
Those  that  attempted  our  Rereward  by  our  Generals
policie  were  so  received  that  they  made  a  stand,  and
never  more  came  neere  us.  We  had  now  halfe  a  mile  to
the  towne,  into  the  which  when  wee  came,  wee  were
received  with  the  streetes  full  of  souldiers,  who  joyned
with  us  at  the  push  of  the  pike.  But  their  captaine
and  divers  of  them  being  slaine  (feare  possessing  them)
The  towne  of  they  fled  :  and  our  Generall  pursuing  with  such  furious
\'  l^^°.  ^l^^'^  speede,  did  so  dismay  them  that  they  fled  the  towne,  and
iherh'^ "  °^'^  ^^^  third  of  August  we  possessed  both  the  lower  forts.
Being  now  masters  of  the  towne,  we  presently  by
the  Generals  direction  (whose  skill,  spirit,  and  diligence
can  never  have  sufficient  commendation)  baricadoed  up  all
the  streets,  and  brought  our  selves  into  a  very  convenient
strength.  After  we  had  bene  sixe  houres  in  the  towne  the
Portugals  still  comming  in  great  multitudes  to  the
upper  fort,  began  to  sally  downe  upon  us,  and  to  assault
us  at  every  baricado  :  so  that  in  the  first  assault  they
slew  and  wounded  eighty  of  our  men,  to  our  very  great
weakening.  But  they  had  small  cause  of  triumph,  for
their losse was  thrise more then ours  : but they still

270

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1596.
prosecuted  their  assault,  not  giving  us  time  either  to
sleepe  or  eate,  so  that  we  were  in  exceeding  extremitie  ;
for  their  forces  did  dayly  increase  to  the  number  of  three
thousand  persons  :  but  we  dayly  lost  of  our  poore  number.
Whilest  we  were  thus  keeping  the  towne,  our  ships  came
about  unto  us,  who  received  many  dangerous  shot  from
the  upper  castle.  Our  Generall  finding  himselfe  thus
streighted,  &  discreetely  looking  into  the  policie  and
strength  of  the  enemy,  and  scarse  able  to  defend  any  one
assault  more,  sent  to  the  forts  and  to  his  ships  that
about  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  darke  of  the  night
they  should  shoote  at  the  upper  fort  with  all  possible
diligence,  and  send  all  the  boates  ashore,  which  was
accordingly  perfourmed.  And  wee  likewise  keeping  a
tumult  in  the  towne,  the  enemie  supposing  that  our  pur-
pose was  to  assault  the  upper  fort,  (which  God  knowes  was
most  impregnable  for  us)  retyred  from  their  plotted  purpose
for  the  defence  thereof.  So  we  in  a  souldierlike  order
with  very  good  safety  departed  the  towne,  although  the
Portugals  having  espied  our  Generals  policie  came  very
furiously  upon  the  backe  of  us,  after  we  had  kept
it  two  dayes  and  two  nights.

In  the  rode  of  S.  lago  we  tooke  a  ship  with  wine
and  cloth,  which  did  greatly  refresh  our  men.  From
hence  we  sayled  to  an  Isle  called  Fuego,  being  a  very  hladelFuego.
small  Isle,  with  a  very  high  hill  in  the  midst  of  it,
which  continually  burneth  :  this  Isle  is  invincible  by
nature,  high  cliffed  round  about,  yet  by  diligent  search
we  found  a  small  path  where  wee  landed  our  men  with
exceeding  much  difficulty,  and  so  were  masters  of  the  Isle
the  eleventh  of  September,  where  wee  tooke  in  water,  but
the  Isle  yeelded  us  nothing  but  miserable  infection.  One
night  wee  had  a  showre  of  ashes  which  fell  so  thicke  into
our  ships  from  that  burning  hill  of  Fuego,  that  you
might  write  your  name  with  your  finger  upon  the
upper  decke.

Departing from  this  place  the twentieth  of Septem-
ber, we  shaped  our  course  for  Dominica  an  Isle  in  the

271

A.D.
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

West  India  :  but  before  we  came  thither  our  men
fell  generally  downe,  so  that  the  hole  could  not  relieve
the  sicke,  the  disease  was  so  vile  that  men  grew  lothsome
unto  themselves,  franticke  and  desperately  raving,  among
whom  our  good  Generals  part  was  not  the  least ;  for
his  disease  was  vehement,  the  griefe  of  his  mind,  the
lamentation  of  his  men,  and  the  losse  of  those  whom  he
loved  were  to  him  torments  more  then  durable  :  all  which
with  patience  and  humilitie  in  prayer  he  humbled  himselfe
unto.  But  had  not  his  mind  bene  invincible  and  his
desires  above  the  ordinary  course  of  men,  it  had  bene  im-
possible that  life  should  now  have  rested  in  him  :  but
God  (I  hope)  hath  preserved  him  to  some  exceeding
good  purpose.
Dominica.  Arriving  at  Dominica  the  seventeenth  of  October,  with

Two  excellent  all  our  men  sicke  and  feeble,  wee  found  there  two  hote
hote  bathes.  bathes,  wherein  our  weake  men  washing  themselves  were
greatly  comforted  :  and  the  Indians  of  this  place  used  us
with  great  kindnesse,  so  that  we  were  all  perfectly  well
before  we  departed  from  this  place.  For  here  we  stayed
Margarita.  untiU  the  25  of  November.  From  Dominica  we  sayled  to
Margarita,  betweene  the  Isle  and  the  maine,  thinking
to  meete  with  the  perle  dredgers,  but  wee  found  them
not.  And  comming  to  the  point  of  Araia  in  the  road  of
Cumana,  we  sawe  a  Flemish  ship  riding  ;  the  marchant
and  men  whereof  came  aboord  us,  and  brought  with
them  my  lord  Admirals  passe.  By  which  meanes
our  General  would  in  no  sort  meddle  with  them,
yet  they  were  very  rich.  Departing  thence  by  Cape
Coadera,  going  for  Cape  de  la  Vela  at  the  Isle  Buenaire
our  Fliboat  was  cast  away,  &  some  of  the  men  lost,  but
the  most  part  saved.  Coasting  all  the  shore  from  Cape
de  la  Vela,  being  bound  for  S.  Martha,  we  tooke  a
small  frigat  laden  with  Guiny  corne,  the  eleventh  of
September  :  she  had  in  her  money  to  the  valew  of  500
[III.  601.]  pound,  linnen  cloth  and  China  silke,  all  which  our
General  bestowed  upon  his  company  to  comfort  them
after their long sustained miseries  : Out of which

272

AKTONIVS SCHERLEYHS ANCiLVS,  E-

ques  aurat  Magni  Sophi  Ferfarum  ad  C^iarem  6i

Chriflianos  Frincipes  cseteros,Legatus.

MNTONl Orator PcrstTf  Jnf.icc,  ir<ijs. mi ifliJ

ExccLro mw.".'s- pcfvctttx inamia  .
.1^  c/

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d

1597-
frigat  we  had  2  good  pilots  for  those  coasts  :  for  our
pilot,  that  promised  many  things  before  we  came
thither,  was  now  absent  in  the  Woolfe,  who,  we  thinke,
did  wilfully  loose  us.  Arriving  at  S.  Martha,  two  SantalMarta
leagues  West  from  the  towne  in  a  faire  bay,  we  landed  the  ^^'^^"•
12  of  September,  &  so  marched  to  the  towne  being  often
times  encountred  by  the  way,  and  in  a  narrow  way
at  our  descent  downe  a  hill,  they  had  placed  two  cast
pieces  of  brasse,  which  we  recovered,  and  so  entred
the  towne,  the  enemie  flying  before  us.  While  we  abode
in  this  towne,  there  came  one  Don  Martin  de  Castilla,  a
gentleman  of  good  education  and  a  very  great  traveller,
who  knew  the  whole  state  of  the  West  India,  Malucos,
&  Philippinas  :  he  had  bene  in  China,  and  made  many
relations  to  our  Generall,  his  purpose  was  to  save  the
towne  from  burning,  wherin  he  prevailed,  but  ransome  I
know  of  none  we  had  :  for  this  gentleman  made  many
great  protestations  of  great  poverty  to  be  in  that  place.
So  wee  departed,  onely  taking  their  ordinance,  and  a
prisoner  lost  there  by  sir  Francis  Drake,  with  some  reliefe
of  victuals.  Having  stayed  there  al  the  time  of  Christ-
mas, we  departed  thence  on  Newyeres  day,  with  termes  of
great  content  to  our  General  in  the  Spaniards  great  sub-
mission unto  him,  for  they  were  now  within  a  league
of  us  with  700  souldiers.  And  being  challenged  by  him
to  defend  their  towne  like  men  of  worth,  they  did  not-
withstanding intreat  favour  with  great  humilitie.  Whilest
we  were  at  S.  Martha,  the  Wolfe  came  againe  unto  us  :
so  wee  shaped  our  course  for  Jamaica,  and  missing  the
rode,  were  constrained  to  saile  round  about  the  Isle,  a
thing  not  before  done.  In  this  place  the  Wolfe  abso-
lutely againe  forsooke  us  with  the  smal  barke  that  we
tooke  at  S.  lago,  and  returned  for  England  with  hard
newes  of  our  ruine,  but  by  Gods  favourable  help  wee
arrived  in  the  road  of  Jamaica  the  29  of  January,  which  is
very  dangerous  to  enter  by  reason  of  the  sholds  and
rocks  that  lie  before  it.  Here  we  landed  and  marched
6  miles  into  the  countrey,  where  the  towne  standeth  ;
X  273  s

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-
The  lie  and the  people  all  on  horsebacke  made  shew  of  great  matters,
chiefs  iowne  of  but  did  nothing. Now  being  masters  of  the  towne  and
Jamaica  whole  Isle,  the  people  submitted  themselves  to  our  Generals

mercy :  and  here  they  provided  for  us  great  store
of  dried  beefe,  and  Cassavi  meale,  a  base  food,  yet
the  best  that  the  countrey  yeeldeth,  to  continue  at  sea.
This  Isle  is  a  marveilous  fertil  Isle,  &  is  as  a  garden
or  store  house  for  divers  parts  of  the  maine.  It  is
full  of  plaine  champion  ground,  which  in  the  rest  of
the  Indies  we  have  not  seene :  it  aboundeth  with  beeves
and  Cassavi,  besides  most  pleasant  fruits  of  divers  sorts.
We  have  not  found  in  the  Indies  a  more  pleasant  and
holsome  place.  During  the  time  that  we  remained  in
this  Isle  the  captaine  of  the  Isle  came  often  aboord  us,
we  having  pledges  for  the  security  of  their  promise.
They  were  in  fine  at  our  Generals  devotion,  to  dis-
pose of  al  things,  and  in  all  things  as  he  pleased,  so
that  now  we  were  as  one  people  &  in  one  peace
together.  Being  almost  ready  to  depart,  M.  captaine
Parker  of  Plimmouth  came  into  the  rode  in  his  ships
boat  the  second  of  March,  with  whom  our  Generall
consorted  to  goe  for  the  bay  of  Honduras,  where  by
his  perswasion  we  had  great  hope  of  a  very  good
voyage.  And  departing  from  Jamaica  the  6  of  March,
we  sailed  to  Cape  de  Corrientes  in  Cuba,  to  looke  for
a  barke  of  M.  Parkers  for  our  better  strength :  but
not  finding  her,  we  went  for  the  cape  of  Honduras,
where  we  purposed  to  entrap  the  watch,  &  so  to  sacke
the  towne  of  Truxillo,  but  the  watch  discovering  us,
made  great  fires,  and  the  towne  presently  shot  off  a
great  piece,  and  answered  with  fires.  Notwithstanding
the  next  day  being  the  31  of  March  we  brought  our
ships  under  the  fort,  and  landed  our  men,  but  it  was
a  vaine  purpose :  for  the  towne  is  not  to  be  taken  but
by  exceeding  multitudes,  for  it  is  invincible  by  nature.
It  standeth  upon  the  top  of  a  very  steepe  hill,  bordering
close  to  the  sea :  so  environed  with  woods  of  such
exceeding  thicknes,  that  there  is  no  passage among  the

274

SIR  ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1597-
trees,  which  if  they  were  gone,  yet  there  is  no  climbing
up  the  hill,  only  having  one  narrow  lane  to  go  into
the  towne;  at  the  end  whereof  is  a  great  gate  very
strongly  fortified,  so  that  it  is  not  to  be  approched  unto,
so  that  with  the  losse  of  some  few  men,  we  retired  from
this  enterprise,  being  altogether  impossible  to  be  atchieved
by  our  few  and  weake  men.

We  departed  from  Truxillo  the  second  of  April  and  P^terto  de
went  for  Puerto  de  Cavallos  lower  down  in  the  bay,  ^^^^^'°^
stil  nourishing  our  hope  of  good  successe :  and  com-
ming  thither  found  it  reasonably  fortified,  but  wee
presently  prevailed  and  tooke  it  the  7  of  April,  being
the  most  poore  and  miserable  place  of  all  India.  Now
our  hopes  were  all  frustrate  and  no  likelihood  remayn-
ing  how  we  could  by  any  meanes  make  a  voyage :  our
General  reserving  unto  himselfe  his  silent  inward  impa-
tience, laboured  to  doe  some  memorable  thing.  And
in  fine  concluded  by  Rio  Dolce  to  search  with  his
boats  some  narrow  passage  or  Isthmos  for  the  South
sea,  alleaging  that  if  hee  could  but  finde  a  boat  there,
it  should  serve  him  to  great  purpose ;  against  which
there  could  be  no  reasonable  contradiction.  All  his
chiefest  sea  men  consented  hereunto,  but  especially  the
Captaine  of  the  Admirall.  So  sayling  with  the  ships
to  Cape  de  tres  puntas  in  the  bottome  of  the  bay,
there  leaving  the  ships  well  mored  the  tenth  of  Aprill  [III.  602.]
he  departed  with  his  boats  for  Rio  Dolce,  which  in
many  Charts  hath  his  passage  through  the  land.  Up
this  river  by  many  uncertaine  windings  we  passed  30
leagues  and  better,  where  we  found  a  strong  built  fort,
a  towne,  and  divers  store-houses :  but  for  money  or
merchandize  we  found  none.  Wee  learned  by  the
miserable  people  that  we  tooke,  that  the  South  sea  was
20  leagues  from  the  nerest  of  that  river,  and  that  it
was  50  leagues  to  Guatimala,  40  leagues  to  Sonsonate,  Guat'mala,
and  30  leagues  to  Sacatocaluca,  being  townes  which  we  Sonsonate,  and
hoped  to  march  unto :  so  that  now  we  were  in  worse  Sacatocaluca.
case then before : for  wee  were  fallen  sicke  with  the

275

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

unholsomenesse  of  this  ayre,  and  our  victuals  so  wasted,
as  that  we  were  desperate  how  to  recover  our  countrey.
Theirretume.  Whereupon  with  most  unwilling  minds  we  returned  to
our  shipping,  and  with  all  possible  expedition  weyed,  &
so  laboured  upon  the  tacke  to  turne  out  of  this  very
deepe  bay,  being  60  leagues  within  the  point  of  land.
Being  out  of  the  bay,  wee  shaped  our  course  for  Cape
S.  Anthony.  Our  General,  whose  restles  spirit  con-
tinually laboured  to  avoide  the  frownes  of  fortune,  had
now  plotted  with  the  Bevice  and  Galeon  to  goe  for
Newfoundland,  and  there  to  revictual,  and  to  have
fresh  men,  of  which  we  stood  in  good  assurance,  &  so
to  depart  for  the  streits  of  Magellan,  and  so  by  his
very  good  policie  would  have  concluded  his  voyage  in
the  East  India,  which  plat  I  thinke  it  unnecessary  here
to  reveale,  being  put  in  principall  trust  by  him.

Being  thwart  Havana,  by  what  chance  I  know  not,
but  all  his  ships  forsooke  him  the  13  of  May,  and
here  in  a  desperate  place  hee  was  left  desperately  alone.
The  George  departed  by  consent  with  his  letters,  the
Galeon  I  know  not  how :  but  our  misery  in  the
Admirall  was  very  great,  for  there  was  not  one  in  the
ship  that  was  ever  before  in  the  Indies,  besides  our
miserable  want  of  victuals,  the  danger  of  the  place,  and
the  furious  current  of  the  chanel.  Notwithstanding  we
were  enforced  without  stay  to  disemboque :  which  happily
being  performed,  we  shaped  our  course  for  Newfound-
land. And  by  Gods  mercy  we  arrived  there  the  fifteenth
of  June,  not  having  one  houres  victuals  to  spare,  and
there  by  our  countreymen  we  were  well  refreshed  :  where
we  stayed  till  the  24  of  June,  still  expecting  the  Galeon,
for  the  execution  of  this  his  last  purpose :  but  she  not
comming,  and  that  plat  overthrowen,  we  returned  for
England,  where  we  found  the  right  honourable  the  Erie
of  Essex  bound  to  the  seas,  with  whom  wee  presently
departed  in  his  lordships  ship,  to  doe  him  our  humble
service.

276

WILLIAM PARKER

A.D.
1596.

A  voyage  of  Master  William  Parker  of  Plim-
mouth  gentleman,  to  Margarita,  Jamaica,
Truxillo,  Puerto  de  Cavallos  situate  within
the  bay  of  Honduras,  and  taken  by  sir
Anthony  Sherley  and  him,  as  likewise  up  Rio
dolce:  with  his  returne  from  thence,  and  his
valiant  and  happie  enterprize  upon  Campeche
the  chiefe  towne  of  Yucatan,  which  he  tooke
and  sacked  with  sixe  and  fifty  men,  and
brought  out  of  the  harbour  a  Frigat  laden
with  the  kings  tribute,  and  surprized  also  the
towne  of  Sebo.

N  the  yeere  1596,  Master  William  Parker
of  Plimmouth  gentleman  being  furnished
with  a  tall  shippe  and  a  barke  at  his
owne  charges,  the  ship  called  the  Pru-
dence of  one  hundreth  and  twenty  tunnes,
wherein  himselfe  went  captaine,  and  the
barke  called the  Adventure  of  five  and

twentie  tunnes,  whereof  was  captain  one  Richard  Hen,
departed  from  the  foresayd  haven  of  Plimmouth  in  the
moneth  of  November,  having  one  hundreth  men  in  his
company.

The  first  place  where  wee  touched  in  the  West  Indies  Margarita.
was  the  Isle  of  Margarita  on  the  coast  of  Tierra  firma,
where  we tooke a Spanish  gentleman and others, who  Sixe  English
for his ransome set at libertie Master James Willis,  men  redeemed.
and five other Englishmen which were prisoners in
Cumana,  who otherwise  were never  like to have  come
from thence. Thus passing from thence, wee sayled
over  to  the  Isle  of  Jamaica,  where  the  second  of  March
we met with sir Anthony Sherley, who before our
comming had taken the chiefe towne in the Island,
and  was  now  almost  in  a  readines  to  depart. And  here
consorting  our  selves  with  him,  we  departed  from  Jamaica

277

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1596.

Truxillo  the  sixt  of  March,  and  resolved  to  set  upon  the  strong
assailed.  towne  of  Truxillo  neere  the  mouth  of  the  bay  of  the
Honduras.  And  having  sayled  to  Cape  de  Corrientes
upon  Cuba,  to  seeke  a  barke  of  mine  for  our  better
strength ;  but  not  finding  her,  we  went  for  the  cape
of  Honduras,  where  wee  purposed  to  intrap  the  watch,
and  so  to  have  sacked  the  towne  of  Truxillo.  But  the
watch  discovering  us,  made  great  fires,  and  the  towne
presently  shot  off  a  great  piece,  and  answered  with
fires.  Notwithstanding,  the  next  day  being  the  one
and  thirtieth  of  March,  wee  brought  our  ships  under
the  fort,  and  landed  our  men :  but  it  was  a  vaine  pur-
[III.  603.]  pose,  for  the  towne  is  invincible  by  nature,  and  standeth
upon  the  top  of  a  very  steepe  hill  joyning  close  to  the
sea,  environed  with  woods  of  such  exceeding  thicknes,
that  there  is  no  passage  through  the  trees :  there  is  also
but  one  very  narrow  and  steepe  lane  to  goe  into  the
towne,  at  the  end  whereof  is  a  gate  very  strongly
fortified :  so  that  it  is  not  to  be  approched  unto,
unlesse  it  be  upon  the  sudden,  and  with  surprize  of  the
watch :  wherefore  with  the  losse  of  some  few  men  wee
retired  from  this  enterprize.

From  hence  we  passed  up  farther  into  the  gulfe  the
second  of  April,  with  intention  to  invade  the  towne  of
Puerto  de Puerto de  CavaUos, where  wee  arrived the seventh  of
Cavallos April,  and  tooke  the  same,  finding  it  well  fortified,  but
taken.  nothing  answering  our  expectation  for  wealth. Where-

upon  Sir  Anthony Sherley and I being hitherto frus-
trate  of  our  hopes,  resolved here to enter up to the
bottome  of  Rio dolce,  and to passe  overland  unto the
They  passe South sea. Wherefore wee set forward, and entred
above  30. above thirty  leagues  up  the sayd Rio dolce, thinking
^Toke  "^  ^^°  ^° ^"^^^ passed overland with two companies of men,
and to have caried a pinnesse in sixe quarters to be
set  together  with  skrewes,  and  therein  to  have  embarked
our  selves in the South  sea,  and there for  a  time  to
have  tried  our  fortune ;  and to  have  returned  overland
to  the  bay  of  Honduras. But  this  our  diligence  tooke

278

WILLIAM PARKER  ad.

1597-
no  effect,  because  of  the  huge  highnes  of  the  moun-
taines,  and  the  length  of  the  way,  being  more  then
was  given  out  at  the  first.  Then  with  much  griefe  we
returned  out  to  Truxillo,  where  I  departed  from  Sir
Anthony  Sherley.

After  my  departure  from  this  worthy  knight,  I  set  my
course  for  Cape  de  Cotoche  which  lieth  on  the  East  part  Cabo  dt
of  Yucatan from whence  I  ranged al the  North  coast  Cotoche.
of  the  said promontory  of  Yucatan,  untill  I  came  unto
Cape  Desconoscido,  where  I  put  56  of  my  men  into  a  Cabo  descoms-
Periago,  or long Indian Canoa ; and  leaving my ship
sixe  leagues  from  the  towne  of  Campeche  at  three  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning*  I  landed  hard  by  the  monasterie On  Easter
of  San Francisco,  and tooke the  sayd towne  of  Cam-  ^|^  towne' of
peche,  with  the  captaine  and  Alcalde,  finding  therein  five  Campeche
hundreth  Spaniards,  and in  two  townes  close  adjoyning  taken.
to the same eight thousand Indians. The multitude
of  the  Spaniards  which  fled  upon  my  first  assault  by  ten
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  assembling  together  renued
their  strength,  and  set  furiously  upon  me  and  my  small
company. In  which  assault  I  lost  some  sixe  of  my  men,
and  my  selfe  was  shot  under  the  left  brest  with  a  bullet,
which  bullet  lieth  still  in  the  chine  of  my  backe. Being
thus  put  unto  our  shifts  wee  devised  on  the  sudden  a
newe stratagem : for having divers  of  the townesmen  A  new
prisoners, we tied them arme in arme together, and  ^^''^i^S^^-
placed  them  in  stead  of  a  baricado  to  defend us  from
the fury of  the enemies shot. And so with ensigne
displayed,  taking  with  us our sixe  dead men, wee re-
tired with more safetie  to  the haven,  where we  tooke
a  frigat  which  rode  ready  fraught  with  the  kings  tribute
in silver and other good commodities,* which were  *To  the  value
presently  to  bee  transported  to  S.  Juan de UUua,  and  ?/ 5°°°
brought  the  same  and  our  Periago  or  Canoa  to  my  ship,
which lay  in two  fadome  water  sixe  leagues  from the
town,  being  not  able  to  come  any  neerer  for  the  sholds
upon  that  coast. Over  against  the  place  where  our  ship  Sebo  an  Indian
rode,  stoode  a  towne  of  300  or  400  Indians  called  Sebo,  towne  taken.

279

A.D.

'597-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  we  likewise  tooke,  where  wee  found  Champeche-
wood  good  to  dye  withall,  with  waxe,  and  hony.  This
done  we  left  this  coast,  and  turned  up  to  Cape  de
Cotoche  againe,  and  ankored  every  day  at  noone,  be-
cause of  the  brizes,  and  in  turning  up  I  lost  my  barke
called  the  Adventure,  which  was  taken  by  2  frigats  of
warre,  which  were  manned  out  from  Campeche :  wherein
Captaine  Hen  and  thirteen  of  my  men  were  taken,  and
afterward  executed,  as  since  we  understand  by  some
Spanish  prisoners  that  were  taken  in  those  parts.  After
we  had  stayed  five  weekes  on  this  coast,  wee  shaped
our  course  for  Havana,  where  finding  nothing,  we  dis-
emboqued,  and  came  along  by  the  Isle  of  Bermuda,  and
crossed  over  to  The  banke  neere  Cape  Race  in  11
fadomes :  and  from  thence  sayling  for  England,  we  fel
with  Sillie  about  the  first  of  July,  and  within  two  dayes
after  arrived  at  Plimmouth,  where  we  found  the  Right
honorable  the  Erie  of  Essex  setting  forth  with  a  great
fleet  for  the  Isles  of  the  Azores.

[III.  604.]

An  excellent  ruttier  for  the  Islands  of  the  West
Indies,  and  for  Tierra  firma,  and  Nueva
Espanna.

F  a  man  depart  from  the  barre  of  S.  Lucar
in  Summer  time,  hee  must  steere  South-
west until  hee  hath  sight  of  Punta  de
Naga,  which  is  in  the  Isle  of  Tenerif.
The  markes  to  know  it  be  these.  An
high  point  sloping  to  the  sea,  &  at  the
Easter  point  it  hath  two  down  falles
like  particions,  and  they  shew  to  be  separated  from
the  maine  of  the  Island  &  stand  in  28  degrees  &  a
halfe.  And  if  thou  wilt  have  sight  of  the  Grand  Canaria,
and  findest  thy  selfe  with  Punta  de  Naga,  thou  shalt
then  steere  Southwest  and  by  South,  and  so  thou  shalt
have  sight  of  Canaria  which  standeth  in  28  degrees.
And thou must come to ankor on  the Southeast  side

280

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

of  the  Island. But  I  advise  thee,  if  it  be  in  winter  time,
that  thou keepe  another course,  and that  as  foUoweth.

The  course  that  a  man  must  keepe  departing  in
winter  for  the  Indies  from  Sant  Lucar.

DEparting  from  Sant  Lucar  in  winter  thou  shalt  goe
West  and  by  South  keeping  along  the  coast,  because
if  thou  goe  farre  from  the  coast,  thou  shalt  meete  with
the wind  off  the sea untill thou be as high shot  as
Cape Cantin, which is a low flat cape with the sea.  Cape  Cantin.
And  thou  shalt  see  a  great  wood before  thou  come  at  J  great  wood
this  cape,  called  Casa  del  Cavallero. And  from thence  before  you
thou  shalt  steere  thy  olde  course,  that  is  Southwest  and  '^T^^^^  ^^^^
by  South  for  the  Isles  of  Alegranza,  and  Lancerota ;  and
when thou art  North  and  South  with  Alegranza,  thou
shalt  steere  thence  Southwest,  and  so  thou  shalt  see  the
Canaria,  which is a  round high land, and standeth in
twentie  eight  degrees.

What thou must doe if a contrary wind take
thee  fiftie  leagues  ofF  the  shore.

WHen  thou  art  fifty  leagues  shot  on  thy  way  into
the  sea  Southwest  off,  and  there  thou  chance  to
meete  with  a  contrary  winde  off  the  sea,  and  if  it  force
thee  to  put  roome,  then  thou  shalt  steere  Northeast  and
by  East,  and  shalt  hall  with  sight  of  Cabos  del  Plata,
which  shew  when  thou  art  a  seaboord  so  farre  as  thou
mayest  descrie  them,  to  be  like  two  points  of  white  sand :
and  if  it  be  cleere  thou  shalt  see  within  the  land  certain
high  hilles  lying  Northwest  and  by  West  called  las
Sierras  de  Zahara,  and  being  three  leagues  from  land
thou  shalt  have  thirtie  fadomes  water,  and  sand :  And
from  thence  to  the  bay  of  Cadiz  thou  shalt  goe  along  ^■^^  ^^y  °f
Northwest  by  the  coast :  and  if  thou  be  in  thirtie  or  ^^'"^•
forty  fadomes,  thou  shalt  have  oaze  ;  but  if  thou  bee
in  lesse  then  thirtie  fadomes,  thou  shalt  have  other
sounding  ;  which  if  it  chance,  then  thou  art  against  S.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

San  Pedro.
San  Sebastian.

Los  Puercos.

The  Diamant.

The  Canaries.

The  Isle  De-
seada  in  the
West  Indies
standeth  in  1 5
degrees  of
latitude.

Markes  to
know  Domi-
nica by.

Guadalupe.
Monserate.

Pedro.  And  if  it  bee  by  day  thou  shalt  see  the  Ermi-
tage  of  Sant  Sebastian,  which  seemeth  to  be  a  shippe
under  sayle.  And  thou  shalt  goe  into  the  bay  taking
heede  of  the  Puercos,  give  them  a  good  birth  off.
And  if  thou  chance  to  bee  benighted  when  thou  fallest
with  the  bay,  and  wouldest  goe  into  the  bay,  thou  shalt
carie  thy  lead  in  thy  hand,  and  be  sounding :  and  finding
thy  selfe  in  rockie  ground,  thou  shalt  steere  North  be-
cause of  shunning  the  Puercos :  and  yet  give  them  not
too  great  a  birth  because  of  The  Diamant,  and  so  thou
mayest  goe  in,  sounding  when  thou  thinkest  good.
And  being  benighted  and  then  not  East  and  West  with
the  bay,  and  if  thou  doest  not  goe  into  it,  then  make
the  largest  boord  thou  canst  keeping  off  till  day.

If  thou  be  at  the  Canaries  and  wouldest  sayle  to  Nueva
Espanna,  thou  shalt  sayle  foure  and  twenty  houres  South
because  of  the  calmes  of  Fierro.  And  from  thence  thou
shalt  goe  Westsouthwest,  untill  thou  finde  thy  selfe  in
twenty  degrees.  And  then  thou  must  goe  West  and
by  South,  which  is  the  course  for  the  Isle  Deseada.  And
from  Deseada  thou  shalt  goe  West  and  by  North,  be-
cause of  the  variation  of  the  compasse.  And  falling  with
Deseada,  thou  shalt  finde  it  to  rise  low  with  the  sea:
and  it  standeth  in  1 5  degrees.  And  the  eastermost  part
is  the  sharpest,  and  smaller  then  the  West  point.

And  if  thou  art  going  for  Tierra  firma,  thou  shalt
goe  West  and  by  South  untill  thou  come  to  Dominica,
and  there  on  the  Northwest  side  is  a  river,  where  thou
mayest  water.  The  marks  to  know  it  bee  a  certaine
high  land  full  of  hilles.  And  seeing  it  when  thou  art
farre  off  to  the  seaward,  it  maketh  in  the  middest  a
partition;  so  that  a  man  would  thinke  it  devided  the
Island  in  two  parts.  And  this  Island  standeth  in  14
degrees  and  a  halfe.

I  advise  thee  that  if  thou  wouldest  goe  for  Nueva
Espanna,  and  so  doest  passe  betweene  Guadalupe  and
Monserate  to  the  Westward,  that  being  thus  open  off
the  entrance  betwixt  them  thou  shalt  go  Westnorthwest,

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

and so  shalt  have  sight  of  Santa  Cruz,  which  standeth  Smta  Cruz.
in  seventeene  degrees  and  a  halfe. And  the  markes  to
know  it  be  these. It  is  an  Island  not  very  high,  and
lyeth  East  and  West,  and  at the  East  end  it  is  lower
then  at  the  West  end.

And going  forward  on thy  course thou shalt  runne
Westnorthwest,  and  so  thou  shalt  goe  to  have  sight  of
the  Isle  of  San  Juan  de  Puerto  rico,  which  is  an  Island  S.  Juan  de
lying  East  and  West,  and  standeth  in  eighteene  degrees.  P^i^rto  rko.
And the  markes be these. That on  the West  end it
is  lowest,  and the Eastermost is the highest. And  if
thou  fall  with  the  middest  of  the  Island,  then  thou  shalt
goe  a  long  it  to  the  West  unto  Cabo Roxo,  which is  Cape  Roxo.
the  end  of  the  Isle. And  from  thence  the  coast  runneth  [III.  605.]
North  to  Punta  Aguada. Cape  Roxo  hath  certaine  red
cliffes. Thou  must  steere  West  and  by  South  from  Cape
Roxo  to  find Mona,  and so thou shalt have sight of  Mona.
Mona. And the  marks  thereof  be these, it is a  low
land  lying  East  and  West :  and  on the East  end  it  is
highest,  it  hath  a  slope  towards  the  sea,  and standeth
in  18.  degrees,  rather  lesse  then  more. And  if  it  be  by
day,  then  thou  shalt  runne  West  and  shalt see Saona :  Saona.
which  is  an  Island  lying  without  Hispaniola,  and  lyeth
East  and  West,  and  is  full  of  trees  ;  and  hath  certaine
sandy  bayes. And  if  it  bee cleere  weather thou shalt
see  within  the  land  of  Hispaniola  certaine  hie  hils  called
las  Sierras  de  Yguey. And  being  benighted  upon  Mona,  ^^^  Sierras  de
then thou shalt  steere  West  and  by  South,  because  of  ^^*^^-
certaine  shoalds  that  lye  oif  Saona :  but  having  day  light
and no sight  of  land, thou shalt  loofe up Northwest
and so  passe  by  it,  and  as  thou  goest  along  the  coast
of  Hispaniola,  and  seest  the  sea  to  be  cast  up  into  the
aire,  then  thou  shalt  be  about  10  leagues  off  the  harbour
of  Santo  Domingo,  and these  mountings  up are  called  losBufladeros
The  SpOUtes.  orThespoutes.

But I advise thee,  that  if  thou  bee  benighted  when  Santo
thou  fallest  with  Santo  Domingo,  then  thou  must  keepe  Domingo.
the  hils  called  Sierras  de  las  minas  viejas  to  the  North-

283

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

west.  And  if  thou  wouldest  goe  into  Santo  Domingo,
and  meetest  there  with  a  forcible  Northerly  wind,  then
the  best  way  is  to  runne  East  till  it  be  day.  And  having
daylight  thou  shalt  cast  about,  and  so  thou  must  ply
to  wind-ward  untill  the  Northerly  wind  be  done :  and
when  it  is  past,  make  all  the  saile  thou  canst  to  hale
Calk  de  las  with  the  sight  of  Calle  de  las  Damas :  and  when
Damas.  thou  hast  sight  thereof  thou  shalt  lye  with  thy  stemme
with  a  sandie  Bay,  which  lyeth  on  the  other  side :  and
thou  must  take  in  thy  maine  saile,  and  go  so  till  thou
bring  thy  selfe  open  with  the  midst  of  the  river ;  and
so  having  opened  the  river,  thou  must  go  with  great
care  in  the  middest  of  the  same,  with  all  thy  sailes  up,
except  thy  maine  saile,  and  thou  must  have  thy  boat
out,  if  it  be  needefull  to  sound  or  to  tow  thy  ship,  if
she  cast  too  much  to  the  loofe,  for  the  currents
will  cast  here  to  the  loofe  :  wherefore  bee  sure  to  have
thy  boat  out  to  helpe  thy  steerage :  and  this  is  the  way
whereby  thou  must  worke.

The  course  from  Santo  Domingo  to  go  for
Nueva  Espanna.

I  Advise  thee  that  if  thou  wilt  goe  from  Santo
Domingo  for  Nueva  Espanna,  thou  shalt  goe  South-
west and  by  South,  and  so  thou  shalt  have  sight  of
Punta  de  Nizao,  which  is  a  low  point,  and  is  the  end
of  the  hilles  called  Sierras  de  las  minas  Viejas,  and
towards  the  Northwest  of  them  thou  shalt  see  a  lowe
land,  and  to  goe  into  Hocoa  thou  shalt  stirre  from  this
poynt  of  Nizao  Westnorthwest,  and  thou  shalt  see  the
point  of  Puerto  Hermoso,  and  the  Bay  that  it  maketh  :
and  thou  must  be  sure  to  keepe  neere  the  shore  to  find  a
good  road,  and  feare  not  to  go  neere  the  land :  for  all  is
deepe  water,  and  cleare  ground,  and  let  not  fall  thine
anker  til  thou  be  past  all  the  rivers ;  and  beware  of  the
land,  for  if  thou  ride  much  without,  thy  anker  wil  come
home,  because  it  is  rocky  and  flatte  ground.  And  thou
must  be ready, that  when thine  anker  commeth  home,

284

Punta  de

Nizao.

Hocoa.

Puerto
Hermoso.

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

thou  have  thy  moarings  readie  in  thy  boat  to  carry
on  shore  with  foure  or  five  men,  and  if  thou  thinke
good,  thou  mayest  let  them  fall  on  land  with  a  rope.
And  when  thou  art  come  to  anker  thou  mayest  send
on  shore  to  moare,  so  shalt  thou  be  best  moared.

The  course  from  Hocoa  to  Nueva  Espanna.

Going  from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna thou shalt
stirre  Southwest :  and  this  way  thou  shalt  find  the
Isles Beata, and Alto velo : Beata hath these marks :  Beata,  and  the
It  is a  low  land with the sea, and  full  of  trees :  and  ^^^'^^  ^^"'°f'
on  the  East  side  an  high  land  or  cliife ;  and  Alto  velo  Alto  velo,  and
hath  these  markes. A  blacke  round  land,  and  the  Easter-  '^^  "^^^'^^
most  part thereof  is  highest, and it hath a downefall. ^^^^'
When thou art North and South with  *  then

thou  shalt go West, untill thou be so farre shot as
the  Frailes :  and  from  thence  goe  West  and  by  North, Frailes.
and keeping  this  course thou  shalt  have  sight  of  Cape
Tiburon. And if  by keeping this course thou have
sight of  a  little Island, thou mayest make  account  it
is the  Isle  of  Baque :  and it  is  hard  to  the  land,  and  The  Lie  of
from thence thou shalt go West, keeping thy selfe  ^«?*^-
out  untill  thou  double  a  poynt  that  maketh  as  it  were
a  great  Bay,  and  then  thou  must  go  West  and  by  North,
till  thou  come  to  Cape  Tiburon,  that  hath  a  round  blacke  Cape  de
land,  and  in  some  part  thereof  certaine  white  cliffes. Ttburon.

I  advise thee that  when thou art against Cape  de
Tiburon,  thou  stirre  Northwest,  and  so  thou  shalt  have
sight  of  Cuba,  which  lyeth East  and  West : and thou  Cuba.
shalt  see  certaine  hilles  which  are  called  Sierras  del  Cobre,
and  in  the  highest  of  them  is  the  harbour  of  S.  lago  de  5.  lago  de
Cuba :  and  finding  thy  selfe  so,  thou  mayest  runne  West  Cuba.
unto Cape de  Cruz. And before thou seest Cape  de
Cruz  thou  shalt  see  the  hils  called  Sierras  de  Tarquino,  Sierras  de
and  from  these  hils  to  Cape  de  Cruz  the  land  waxeth  TfJ^^^^°}-
lower and  lower,  and  it  is  lowest  of  all  at  the  Cape  it  "- "
selfe. And  if  thou  chance  to  have  the  water  troubled,
as though thy ship did raise up the sand from the

285

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  nine
fathoms.

Cape  de  C7-UZ
in  19.  deg.
and  better.

ground,  be  not  afraid :  for  this  place  is  called  The  nine
fathoms :  for  thou  shalt  find  no  lesse  water  upon  it,
and  it  is  the  shallowest  water  that  thou  shalt  have.

Thou  must  marke  that  Cape  de  Cruz  maketh  an
ende  of  the  coast  that  commeth  from  the  East  to  the
West,  and  beginneth  the  course  that  goeth  North  and
South,  and  standeth  in  19.  degrees,  rather  more  then
lesse.

From  Cape  de  Cruz  thou  must  stirre  Westnorthwest :
and  this  way  thou  shalt  have  sight  of  the  Isle  de  Pinos,
and  if  thou  have  faire  weather,  then  thou  must  goe
Northwest,  and  by  West,  because  of  the  currents  that
will  set  thee  out  to  sea.  And  keeping  this  course  thou
shalt  have  sight  of  an  high  land.  I  tell  thee  it  is  the
Los  Jardines.  marke  of  the  Isles  called  los  Jardines,  and  is  commonly
called  the  land  of  Zagueio :  and  then  thou  shalt  goe
West  and  by  South  :  and  if  it  bee  by  night,  then  goe
Westsouthwest  untill  thou  have  brought  thy  selfe  out
from  The  Jardines.  And  being  by  day  thou  shalt  keepe
off  the  land,  and  shalt  goe  Westnorthwest,  and  so  thou
shalt  see  the  Isle  de  Pinos.

The  Isle  de
Pinos.

Cape  de
Corrientes.
Cape  de  Sant
Anton  in  22.
degrees.

The  markes  to  know  the  Cape  de  Santo  Antonio.

THe  headland  called  Capo  de  Santo  Antonio  is  a
lowe  land,  and  full  of  trees,  and  upon  the  Cape  it
selfe  it  hath  two  or  three  thicke  woods,  and  the  coast
lyeth  Northwest  and  Southeast.  And  thou  must  also
take  good  heed  that  thou  have  sight  on  the  same  coast
of  a  white  sandie  Bay ;  and  it  is  on  the  same  coast  that
lyeth  Northwest  and  Southeast.  And  these  be  the
markes  from  Punta  de  las  Arenas,  or  The  poynt  of  the
sands,  to  the  Cape  of  Saint  Anthonie,  and  from  the
Cape  de  Corrientes  to  Punta  de  las  Arenas  thou  shalt
have  a  great  Bay,  being  so  long,  that  if  thou  be  not
very  neere  the  shore  thou  canst  not  see  land,  it  is  so
low.  And  if  thou  see  not  the  land  well,  it  will  shew
to  be  a  tuft  of  trees.  And  the  Cape  of  S.  Anthony
standeth  in  22.  degrees.

286

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

A  ruttier  that  a  man  must  keepe  from  Dominica
to  Martinino,  and  so  to  Tierra  firma.

I  Advise  thee  that  going  from  Martinino  or  Dominica,
if  thou  wouldest  goe  for  Margarita,  that  thou  stirre
South  and  by  West,  because  of  the  great  currents  that
goe  here,  and  set  Northwest. And  by  this  course  thou
shalt  find  the  Testigos,  which be  4 or 5  Islands :  and  The  Testigos.
if  thou  wilt not  goe  so  much  to  windward,  then  thou
shalt  see Frailes,  which bee three small Islands. And  Frailes.
if  thou  wilt  goe  into the  harbour  of Manpater, it is
presently  in  doubling  of  the  point  on  the  East  side  to
the  Southward. And  being  minded  to  go  for  puerto  de  Puerto  de
Juan Griego,  which lieth on the Northside, then go  -^"^^  ^''''^''
neere  the  land, and along  the  coast  of  the  West,  and
presendy  thou  shalt  have  sight  of  puerto  de  Juan  Griego ;
it  standeth  in 11.  degrees.

I  advise  thee  that  going  from  Matalino,  which  standeth
in 13.  degrees,  if  thou  wouldest  goe  to  Cartagena,  thou
shalt  goe  West  and by South, and by  this way  thou
shalt have sight of  the Isles  of  Curazao and  Aruba,  Curazao.
which  stand in 12. degrees: from these Islands thou ^"  ^'
shalt go West;  and when thou  art North and South
with Monjes, thou shalt see them to be three  litde  Monjes  three
white  Hands,  and  they  are  white  because  of  the  multitude
of  birds  that  are  there :  they  stand  in  a  triangle. From
thence thou shalt  goe West, if  it  be by day, and  so
shalt have sight of  Coquebacoa that standeth in 12.  Coquebacoa.
degrees. And  being  by  night,  then  goe  Northwest :  and
by  day  thou  shalt  cast  to  goe  for  the  land  againe  West-
southwest. Coquebacoa  hath  a  certaine  poynt  not  very
high,  and  within  this  poynt  thou  shalt  see  in  the  inland
certain  hilles  which  bee  called  las  Sierras  de Avite.

Going  from  this  poynt  of  Coquebacoa  thou  shalt  run
West,  and shalt  run  along the  coast,  and shalt  go to
have  the  sight  of  Baya  honda  and  Portete,  which  is  a  low  ^^^^  honda.
land  even  with  the  sea.  Portete.

287

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Cape  de  la  The  Cape de la Vela lieth with a  redde shewe  not

vela.  very  high ;  and  without  this  Cape  about  a  league  there

is a little coppled rocke. A  man  may  be  bold  to  go
betwixt  this  rocke  and  the  maine.

And  going  from  this  Cape  to  have  sight  of  Cape  del
Aguja thou must stirre Southwest, and thou shalt
have  sight  of  the  Ancones  which  lye  at  the  ende  of  the
hilles  called  Sierras  Nevadas. And  then  presently  thou
Cape  del shalt  see the Cape del Aguja : the  marks  whereof  are
^^J^-  these :  It is a low  Cape,  and upon  it is  a  copple not

very high, and there beginneth the high land of  the
Sierras  Nevadas,  or  snowy  mountaines.

Take  this  for  a  warning  that  if  thou  goe  for  Cape  de

la  Vela  by  night  by  the  course  abovesayd,  and  commest

into a whitish  water,  then sound and thou shalt find

[III.  607.] 40. fathoms,  and  thy  sound  will  be  certaine  smal  sandy

white oaze, and some smal weeds. And then thou

mayest make account that thou art North and

Rio  de  Palo-  South with the  river called Rio de Palominos,  which

'^^"^^"  commeth  out  of  the  midst  of  the  Sierras  Nevadas. And

being  benighted  thou  shalt  go  Westnorthwest,  or  West

and  by  North  until  day :  and  being  day  then  thou  mayest

hale  in  with  sight  of  the  land Southwest,  because thou

mayest  be  sure  to  come  right  in  with  it.

If  thou goe from Cape del Aguja for Cartagena,

if  it  bee  by  day,  thou  shalt  goe  West  and  by  South,  and

Morro  her- shalt goe to have sight of Morro Hermoso, that is

mm.  "£\\^  faire  mountaine,  which  lyeth  to  the  Westward  of  Rio

* grande. And  being  alone,  and  with  a  good  ship  of  saile,

and drawing towards night,  then thou must  come to

anker  behind  Morro  hermoso  :  and  after  the first  watch

thou must  set  saile,  and  go out West and by  North,

because  thou  must  be  sure  to keep  a  seaboord  from  the

Isla  de  Are- Island  de  Arenas,  which  lyeth  2  leagues  to  seaward  right

nas.  • i. c u '

o 1  agamst  bamba.

^amba  or  ^  ^ ■, ■  r ,  r  ^  iia-i  -i  i

Zamba.  And  if  thou  goe  from  Cape  del  Aguja  by  night,  thou

shalt  goe West  and by North  :  and  so  thou  shalt  goe
without the force of  the water of  Rio Grande. And

288

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

being  by  day  thou  shalt  goe  along  the  coast,  and  shalt

see  Morro  hermoso,  which,  as  I  have  sayd,  lyeth  to  the

West  of  Rio  Grande,  and  hath  for  markes,  a face  of  a

blacke  land  not  very  hie,  and  it  is  round. And  if  thou

depart  by  day  from  Morro  hermoso,  thou  must  goe  West,

and  must  take  heede,as  I  sayde  before,  of  the  Isle  de  Arenas,

which  lyeth  North  and  South  of  Samba. Samba  hath  for

a  marke  as  it  were  a  gallie  towed. And  going  this  way  by

day,  thou  shalt  see  El  buio  del  Gato,  which  is  an  high  El  Buio  del

land  with  certaine  white  cliffes  to  the  seaward  :  and  also °'

more  to  the  West  thou  shalt  see  the  poynt  called  Punta  ^»»^^  ^e  la

de  la  Canoa,  which  is  a  low  land  even  with  the  water  :  '^^'^^^*

and  there  endeth  the  coast  which  lyeth East  and  West.

And the  Bay  that  goeth to  Cartagena beginneth here,  Cartagena.

and  lyeth  Northeast  and  Southwest.

And  take  this  for  a  warning,  that  if  thou  be  benighted
against  Samba,  thou  shalt  take  in  thy  sailes,  &  lye  off  to
the  offward  until  midnight  without  any  saile  abroad  until
midnight  :  and  from  midnight  forward  thou  shalt  lye  so
into  the  land  without  sayle  :  and  if  in  the  breake
of  day  thou  see  no  land,  then  goe  Southwest,  and  if
this  way  thou  have  sight  of  certaine  white  cliffes,  make
account  it  is  Buio  del  Gato.  Take  this  for  a  warning,
if  thy  ship  bee  great  come  not  nigh  the  land  in  the
Bay :  I  meane  thou  mayest  not  with  a  great  ship  come
nigh  the  land  from  the  poynt  de  la  Canoa  untill  thou
come  to  Cartagena,  because  in  many  places  there  are
not  above  3  or  4  fathoms  at  the  most.  In  all  this
Bay  there  is  no  hie  land  but  the  Gallie,  which  is  right
over  the  harbour  of  Cartagena.

And  if  it  chance  that  any  man  come  for  this  place  that  The  land
never  was here  before,  then let  him looke  for a little  ^'"'^^'^^  °-f
hill  like  a towed  gallie lying East  and West,  and all ^^  ^g^^a.
the land is low, and seemeth to be full of trees.
Having  these  sights,  then  make  account  thou  art  against
Cartagena, and to goe in thou hast nothing to be
afraid of : but keepe thyselfe hard  aboord the poynt  The  poynt  of
of  Ycacos  :  and  then  when  thou  commest  to  double  the '^'^^<^°^-

X  289  T

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  shoald.
A  shoald  halfe
a  league  to  the
sea.

The  Isle  of
Cares.

Sal  Medina.

Cabeza  de
Cat'wa.
Rio  de
Francisco.

The  Isles  of
Cativa.

Punta  de
Samblas.

Sierras  de
Santa  Cruz.

[III.  608.]

poynt  del  Judeo.  give  a  breadth  off,  because  there  is  a
shoald.

I  advise  thee  that  if  thou  be  benighted,  when  thou
art  at  The  poynt  de  la  canoa,  and  wouldest  enter  into
Cartagena  by  night,  that  thou  take  good  heede  of  a  shoald
that  lyeth  halfe  a  league  to  the  sea,  and  so  thou  shalt
goe  in  8  fathoms,  and  sandie  ground.  And  when  thou
findest  thy  selfe  in  deepe  water,  as  in  30  fathoms  and
more,  then  the  harbour  will  bee  open  before  thee.
And  if  thou  have  any  fresh  Northerne  winds,  then  loofe
up  to  the  seaward,  and  lye  with  thy  stemme  Eastsouth-
east,  and  so  thou  mayest  goe  in  East  through  the
middest  of  the  chanell  :  and  though  it  bee  by  night,
yet  thou  mayest  goe  in  safely,  because  it  is  all  cleere.
And  if  the  night  be  cleere  thou  shalt  have  sight  of  the
Island  called  Cares,  and  it  is  an  high  land.

Comming  from  Cartagena  to  goe  for  Nombre  de  Dios
in  the  time  of  the  Northerne  winds,  thou  must  bring
thy  selfe  to  the  offward  of  Sal  medina  :  and  thence
stirre  West  till  thou  bring  thy  selfe  North  and  South  with
Cabeza  de  Cativa ;  and  then  goe  Southwest  and  by  West,
and  thou  shalt  so  fall  with  Rio  de  Francisco.  It  hath  for
markes  a  certaine  land  not  very  high,  and  within  the
land  certaine  high  hils  lying  East  and  West.  And  on
the  West  of  the  river  of  Francisco  thou  shalt  see  certaine
cliffes  that  bee  sixe  leagues  from  Nombre  de  Dios,
inclining  toward  the  sea.

I  advise  thee  that  going  this  course  above  written  ;
if  thou  see  3  or  4  Isles  lying  lowe  with  the  sea,  and  also
lying  East  and  West,  thou  mayest  make  account  that
they  be  the  Islands  de  Cativa,  and  then  runne  West,  and
so  thou  shalt  go  along  the  coast.  And  if  thou  see  by  this
way  a  poynt  of  low  land,  make  account  it  is  Punta  de
Samblas  :  and  upon  it  thou  shalt  see  a  row  of  hie  rockie
hils,  and  they  be  the  mountaines  of  Santa  Cruz.

If  thou  come  from  Cartagena  to  go  to  Nombre  de
Dios  in  the  time  of  the  sea  winds,  when  thou  art  out  from
Sal  Medina,  thou  shalt  goe  West  and  by  North,  that  thou

290

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

mayest  have  sea-roome,  and  take  the  Brisas  or  Northerne
winds  when  they  come  :  and  goe  till  thou  be  North  and
South  with  the  harbour  of  Nombre  de  Dios  :  and  from
thence goe Southwest,  and  if  by this way thou see  a
row  of  high hils  on  a  coast that lyeth Northeast  and
Southwest,  make  account  they  are Sierras  de  las  minas  Sierras  de  las
Viejas,  which  minas  Viejas  lie  North  and  South  with  the  ^^'"'^^  ^tejas.
harbour  of  Velo  alto. Having  kept  this  course  abovesaid,  Puerto  de
and having sight of  the former marke,  thou mayest
account  that  thou  art  on the  West  side of  Nombre  de  Sombre  de
Dios.  ^'°'-

Furthermore  when  thou  hast  sight  of  an high  land,
and  thou  bee  North  and  South  with  it,  and  in  the  toppe
thereof  thou  seest  as  it  were  a  litle  table,  if  it  be  highest
toward  the  East,  then  make  account  that  thou  art  North
and  South  with  Nombre  de  Dios,  I  say,  with  the  harbour
of  Nombre  de Dios,  and this hill is called Sierra  de  "^^'^''f^  '^^
Capira. And if  thou wilt goe into the  harbour,  thou  ^'^P^^"-
must  keepe  thy  prow  right  against  this  hill,  and  comming
neerer  to  the  shore,  thou  shalt  see  a  ledge  of  rockes,  and  ^  ^^^S^  °f
it  is  without,  and  thou  mayest  goe  in  what  depth thou  ^
thinkest  good,  or  at  which  place  thou  findest  most  water
in. And  to  the  West  of  the  harbor  thou  shalt  see  two  or  isla  de  los
three  Islands  called  Islas  de  los  Bastimentos.  Bastmentos.

Take  this  for  a  warning,  if  thou  come  out  of  Nombre  The  course  to
de  Dios  in  the  time  of  the  Brisas  or  Northerne  winds,  and  ^^^X'^^  J°^
wouldest  goe  for  Cartagena,  thou  shalt  come  out  in  the  Dios  to
morning,  and shalt  go Northnorthwest  untill  3 of  the  Cartagena.
clocke  at  afternoone,  and then cast about to  the  land,
untill  thou  be  hard  aboord  the  shore,  and  so  thou  must  go
turning  untill  thou  hast  doubled  Cabeza  de  Cativa :  and
having  doubled it  then ply to windward all that  thou
mayest :  and  if  thou  be  Eastnortheast  off  it,  then  thou  shalt
have  sight  of  the  Hands  of  Baru,  which  are  3  or  4  Islands  Islas  de  Baru.
lying  low,  and  are  all  full  of  trees  :  and  then  presently  thou
shalt have sight of  the gallie that  is over Cartagena,
and  it  is  like  a  gallie  towed.

I  advise  thee,  that  if  thou  come  for  Cartagena  in  the

291

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

time  abovesayde,  and  commest  from  Cabeza  de  Cativa,  if

the  wind will not suffer thee to  lye but West,  then

going thus if  thou seest a great high Island full of

mountaines, and on the North side thereof  thou see

a  ledge  of  rocks  two  leagues  into  the  sea,  thou  mayest  be

Islafuerte. sure it  is Isla fuerte  : but if  thou see  not  the rocks,

A  ledge  of -^ them  a  good breadth  : and  if  thou wilt come to

anker,  thou  mayest  ride  well  on  the  West  side  of  them,

betwixt  the  maine  and  them  in  fifteene  fathomes ;  and  the

sounding  is  clay. And  if  thou  wilt  go  betweene  this  and

hlas  de  San  ^j^g  Islands  of  Saint  Barnardo  to  ffoe  into  Cartag^ena,  thou

'Q.J  O  O  '

ainar  o.  ^layest  goe  safely.  And  if  any  man  aske  thee  how  thou
knowest  the  Islands  of  Baru  and  San  Barnardo,  thou
mayest  answere  truely,  that  the  Isles  of  San  Barnardo  are
full  of  high  hilles,  and  certaine  sandie  bayes  to  seaward  ;
and  the  sayd  Isles  have  a  good  depth  two  or  three  leagues
La  Bactlla.  to  the  sea  :  and  this  depth  is  called  the  Bacilla.  And
these  are  all  the  markes  for  the  Islandes  of  San  Barnardo.
And  touching  the  Isles  of  Baru,  they  bee  3  or  4  little
Islands  and  very  even  with  the  sea,  and  full  of  trees,  and
there  is  no  good  depth  about  them,  but  hard  aboord
them.

c

A  ruttier  from  Cartagena  to  Havana  in  Cuba.

lOmming from Cartagena to goe to Havana, thou
must  goe  Northnorthwest  untill thou  be in foure-
teene  degrees  : and  then  forwardes thou shalt  goe  with
great care to anker every night,  and when it is day
set sayle. And this is to bee done in this place be-
The  shoalds  cause of  the shoalds  of  Serrana : and so  thou  mayest
ofSerrafia. pj-Qceede with a care to anker when thou commest
Seranilla. about  Seranilla,  or  neere  to  it,  which  is  in  fifteene  de-
grees and  a  halfe. And  upon  it  thou  shalt  see  a  lowe
flatte land lying Northeast and Southwest : and the
sea beateth upon it round about,  except that on the
Southeast part it hath  certaine  shelves  of  sand,  and  on
the West side it hath a certain litle copple, which
from sea seemeth to bee a shippe under sayle : and

292

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

being  Northeast  and  Southwest  off  it,  scant  a  league
from  the  shoald  commeth  out  on  the  West  side  a
certayne shoald,  whereupon  the  sea  doth  alwayes  beate.

I  advise  thee  that  if  thou  canst  not  passe  on  the
West  side,  then  thou  must  goe  betwixt  the  sayd  little
copple  that  it  is  like  a  sayle  and  the  shoald :  for  the
passage  is  good.  But  if  thou  depart  from  the  Serranilla
to  the  Northwest,  and  seest  a  lowe  land  with  the  sea,
and  certaine  white  sandy  bayes,  and  on  the  West  side
seest  a  low  land,  and  on  the  Eastside  a  little  coast  lying
East  and  West,  thou  mayest  make  account  it  is  Cape  Cape  de
de  Corrientes.  Corrlentes.

And  if  thou  goe  from  Cape  de  Corrientes  for  Cape  Cape  de  San
de  Santo Antonio, thou must  goe  Westnorthwest, and  ^"^'^^^°-
so  thou  shalt  goe  with  the  Cape. The  marks  be  a  low
land  full  of  trees  with  certaine  white  sandie  bayes  :  and
upon  the  Cape  it  selfe  thou  shalt  see  two  thicke  groves
of  great  trees,  and  they  be  upon  the  Cape  it  selfe.

To  go  from  the  Cape  de  Sant  Antonio  for  Havana  [III.  609.]
in  the  time  of  the  North  winds,  thou  shalt  goe  North-
west untill  thou  be  cleere  of  all  the  shoalds  of  the
Cape,  and  then  hale  thy  bowlines,  and  go  as  neere  the
wind  as  thou  canst  possibly,  untill  thou  bring  thy  selfe
unto  24.  degrees,  and  there  sound,  and  thou  shalt  find
it the  Tortugas,  and  thy  sounding  will  be  white sand.  The  Tortugas.

Thou must  take  heede  what  is said  in the  Chapter
before : for he that  writ  the same  hath scene it, and
bene witnesse to this : that comming from Seranilla,  Seranilla.
and stirring North and by  East he had sight  of  an  ^^  ///^«^  in
Island  standing  in 16.  degrees,  and  it  is  on  the  shoalds  16,  degrees.
of  Cape  de  Camaron. And  from  thence,  if  thou  have  ^^-wj  de
the wind large, goe Northeast and by East, because  ^^^°  ^f
of  the  variation  of  the  compasse,  and  thou  shalt  make  The  variation
thy way Eastnortheast, and thou shalt fall with Isla  of  the
de Pinos. This I say, because the currents set  compasse.
sometime West : and so it fell out to bee true in  ^jj^  ^^  ^"^°'-
March,  Anno Domini 1582. I tell thee  farther,  that  set  here  mme-
wee came out from this  aforesayd  Isle stirring  North  tivies  West.

293

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Isla  de

Coxumel.

and  by  East,  for  the  wind  would  not  suiFer  us  to  lye
nearer  the  East,  and  one  evening  at  Sunne  going
downe  we  fell  with  a  land,  that  had  the  same  markes
to  our  judgement  with  the  Cape  de  Corrientes :  and
because  night  was  at  hand,  we  wrought  to  double  Cape
de  Sant  Antonio,  stirring  West :  and  about  midnight
we  had  land  all  high  right  a  head,  &  the  coast  lying
Southwest:  and  then  we  cast  and  lay  Northeast  till
day :  And  being  day,  wee  saw  the  land  all  a  head,
and  we  plied  to  windward  to  the  East,  and  kept  it  a
larboord  till  we  had  brought  it  Southwest.  And  to  be
short,  we  went  here  on  land  in  the  same  place  that  we
first  fell  with  in  the  evening  before:  and  it  was  an  Island
called  Cozumel,  lying  on  the  coast  of  Yucatan.  And
this  Island  was  the  land  which  we  saw  first,  seeming
by  the  marks  to  be  the  Cape  de  Corrientes.  Wee
came  to  an  anker  about  the  middest  of  the  Island,
rather  to  the  Norther  then  the  Souther  part :  there  we
found  a  towne  of  Indians,  who  gave  us  all  things
which  we  needed  for  our  money :  and  wee  carried  our
Astrolabs  on  shore  and  tooke  the  height  in  19.  degrees
and  one  tierce.  A  man  may  goe  betweene  this  Island
and  the  coast  of  Yucatan,  and  the  Cape  de  Catoche
at  pleasure  Northeast;  and  the  water  wil  set  in  thy
favour:  and  thou  must  go  till  thou  be  in  24.  degrees,
Las  Tortugas.  and SO  thou  shalt  have  the  sounding  of  the  Tortugas.

The course to be kept  from  the  Cape  de  Santo
Antonio for Nueva Espanna.

F thou goe from the Cape de Santo  Antonio for

Nueva Espanna, and beeing  late, thou shalt stirre

Westnorthwest till thou be in the height of 24.

degrees : and from thence thou shalt stirre something

to the West, until thou bring thy selfe North and

The  little  Isle South with the litle Hand called  Vermeja : and when

called  ^I^Q^  ^j.(.  so, thou shalt  go Southwest,  &  by  this  way

Markslf ^h°^ ^^^-^^ ^"^ Y\\\?i Rica, which is in 19 degrees &

Villa  Rica. a halfe,  and the signes be these. Thou shalt  find  a

294

The  latitude
of  Cozumel
in  19.  deg.
and  one
tierce.

I

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

ledge of high hils lying Northeast and Southwest.

But  if  thou  chance  to  fall  with  a  coast  that  lyeth  North

and South,  then thou  mayest  account,  that  it  is  about

the low  ground of  Almeria  which hath these markes.  "^^^  ^"^

It  is  a  land  not  very  high,  and  it  is  full  of  little  copples.  ^''J!^^  .^

And  if  thou  have  cleare  weather,  thou  shalt  see  within  the

land  certaine  high  hils  which  are  called  the  hils  of  Papalo. Las  Sierras

And  I  advise  thee  that  beeing  so  farre  shotte  as  the ^ ^^
poynt called Punta delgada,  which is the ende of  all
those  hilles  of  Villa  Rica,  thou  mayest  stirre  thence  South
and  by  West,  and thou  shalt  goe  along  the  coast,  and
shalt see a lowe land,  and  with this land thou shalt
fall,  going  for  Saint  Paul,  and  being  so  farre  shotte  as  Saint  Paul.
Saint Paul, if  thou wilt goe into the harbour, thou
must stirre Southwest: and this is the course that
thou must keepe being shotte into the Bay. And
thou shalt goe along the coast of  the lowe land in
sight thereof: and keeping  this  course thou shalt see
on  the  other  side  a  blacke  hill,  and  it  is  called  Monte  ^"^^^  ^^
de  Carneros. Take this  for  a note,  that  it  lyeth  over  ^^^^^^°^'
the  house  of  Buytron : and  as  thou  doest  come  neerer  ^^^^  ^^
to  the  poynt of  rockes,  thou must bee sure  to keepe  ^"-y^^^^-
thy  lead going, and shalt have foure fathomes and a
halfe  or  five  fathomes,  and  so  thou  mayest  goe  through
the middest of the chanell. And comming against
the  castle,  thou shalt  give  it some  breadth  off  towards  '^^^  '^^^^^^  °f
the  Arrecife  or rocke: and having  doubled  the  castle, {jn^^^  ^
thou  shalt  goe  from  thence  and  shalt  bring  thy  selfe  to
an anker hard  by  the  Herreria,  which  is  a  cleane  Bay,
and  thou  shalt  ride  against  the  hospitall.  The  hospitall.

I  advise  thee  that  if  thou  be  benighted  when  thou
art  neere  to  S.  Paul,  and  meetest  with  a  Northerly
wind  after  midnight,  that  then  thy  best  way  is  to  bring
thy  selfe  into  thy  coarses,  and  lye  by,  plying  to  wind-
ward, and  to  seaward  in  20.  fathomes  which  depth
thou  shalt  have  neere  the  shore,  to  the  Northward :
and  being  day,  then  goe  in  with  the  harbour  as  thou
canst  best,  observing  what  is  abovesaid.

295

I

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

And I advise thee that if thou come from Villa

Rica,  and findest thy  selfe in 20.  degrees  and  a  halfe,

and seest  no  land,  and  seest  that  the  water  doth  alter,

[III.  610.] thou shalt sound 60. fathomes  water: and if  in this

depth thou hast oaze, make account thou art East

The  river  of  and  West  with the river of  Almeria. This  course is

Almena. ^j.^^^ ^^ Q^p^ ^f  Santo Antonio to Nueva Espanna

without  or  aseaboord  the  Alacranes  or  Scorpions,

Now foUow^eth how to worke, if  a man come
betwixt  the  Alacranes  and  the  maine.

F thou goe from the Cape de Santo Antonio and
wouldest goe for Nueva Espanna within the
Alacranes  or Alacranes, thou must stirre West and by South, and
Scorpions. ^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^ ^y^^^  bring  thy  selfe  in  20.  fathoms;
and if thou keeping this course findest lesse water,
then go  West and by  North,  and  that  way  thou  shalt
bring thy selfe into 20. fathomes againe, untill thou
have brought thy selfe North and South with the
The  tiiangle.  triangle. And  being  North  and  South  with  the  triangle,
Surta  or then thou shalt be also North and South  with  Surta :
Zar%a.  from thence thou shalt go Southwest : and by this

The  high  hih  course  thou  shalt  have  sight  of  the  high  hils  of  S.
of^.  Martin.  Martin,  which  are  certaine  high  hils  lying  Northwest
and  Southeast,  and  they  have  a  partition  in  the  midst,
and  to  the  Northwest  they  be  highest :  and  on  the
Southeast  part  within  the  land,  thou  shalt  see  some-
thing an  high  land,  called  Pan  de  Minsapa,  that  is,
the  loafe  of  Minsapa,  which  is  a  round  loafe  not  very
high.

The  hils  of  S.  Martin  stand  in  18.  degrees  lesse  one
fift  part.

I  advise  thee  that  when  thou  fallest  with  Saint
Martin,  and  wouldest  go  with  Saint  John  de  Ullua,
then  thou  shalt  goe  Westnorthwest :  and  this  is  the
course  that  thou  must  keepe,  if  thou  bee  farre  off  at
sea,  I  meane  so  farre  off  as  thou  mayest  well  descrie  the
hils  of  S.  Martin.

296

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

But if  thou be neere to the  land, then thou must
goe Northwest  and by  West,  and thou shalt so come
along the coast, and thou shalt  find the coast to bee
low land : and comming this course thou shalt have
sight  of  certaine  little  hilles  not  very  high : then  thou
shalt  fall  with  the  poynt  called  Punta  de  Antoni  Serro :
and these hilles  lye over the river of  Medelin. And  Rio  de
if  when thou art East and  West,  with  The  Volcan  or  ^^<^^^^^-
hill  that  casteth  out  fire,  any  man  doe  aske  thee,  where
the harbour of  Sant Juan de Ullua is, thou mayest  5-  •^«'^'f  <^^
truely  answere,  West  and by  South,  and it standeth in ^J^^^  ^"  ^^•
1 8.  degrees  and  a  halre.  ^j/^

The  course  to  be  kept  from Nueva Espanna to
the  maine  of  Spaine  in  Europe.

COmming  from  S.  Juan  de  Ullua  to  goe  for  Spaine,  thou
shalt  stirre  Northeast  untill  thou  be  in  24.  degrees :
and  so  beeing  thou  shalt  goe  East  untill  thou  bring  thy
selfe  in  the  soundings  of  the  Tortugas,  and  thy  ground The  Tortugas.
wil  be  white  sand. I  advise  thee,  that  if  it  be  by  night,
thou  goe  East;  and  finding  the  water  to  waxe  shoalder,
then  goe  Southwest,  with  a  care  to  keepe  thy  lead  going,
untill thou loose ground,  and come into  great depth,
because  thou  mayest  fall  to  the  North  of  the  Tortugas.
And going from this sound for Havana thou must
stirre  Southsoutheast,  because  of  the  currents  that  carrie ^-^^  currents
thee  to  the  East. And  if  by  this  way  thou  have  sight  ^°  ^^^  '^'^^^^
of  an  hie  land, that  seemeth to be  like  a  loafe,  make
account it is the  loafe  of  Cabanas. And to the East  P^^  ^^
of  this  loafe  thou  shalt see  a  land that  hath  a  plaine. ^'^^'^"''^•
It  sheweth  to  be  low,  even  with  the  sea,  and  as  smooth
as  the  sea :  and  from  this  land  to  the  East  the  land  is
lower and lower. And  from thence to Havana thou  Havana.
must  goe  East. And  if  the  wind  will  not  let  thee  go
that  course,  thou  must  turne  up  till  thou  be  upon  the
harbour  of  Havana.

The  marks  of  the  poynt  of  Havana  be  these,  that  on
the  East  side  it  hath  an  hie  blacke  land,  which  is  sloping

297

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

to  the  sea,  with  a  litle  white  tower  on  the  top  thereof:
and  as  thou  goest  into  the  port,  thou  must  keepe  neere
the  high  blacke  land,  and  when  thou  art  hard  to  it,
strike  thy  toppe  sayles  in  signe  of  peace  to  the  castle,
least  it  shoote  at  thee.

I

What course the Spaniards keepe  from Havana

to  Spaine.

F from Havana thou wouldest set thy course for
Spaine,  thou  must  goe  Northeast,  and  shalt  so  have

losMariyres.  sight  of  the  Martyres,  which  stand  in  24.  degrees  and
a  halfe.  And  the  coast  lieth  East  and  West.  The
marks  be  these,  it  sheweth  like  heads  of  trees,  and  in
some  places  certaine  rocks  with  white  sandy  bayes.
And  if  the  wind  be  large,  thou  mayest  go  East  and
by  South  untill  thou  see  the  coast  to  lye  Northeast
and  Southwest :  and  if  the  wind  be  scant,  then  go  turn-
ing up :  and  take  good  heed  that  every  evening  at  Sunne
going  downe  thou  have  sight  of  the  land,  and  so  thou
must  do  being  in  the  chanell,  untill  thou  bring  thy  selfe

[III.  611.]  into  the  middest  of  the  chanell:  and  thou  must  lye  off
from  the  going  downe  of  the  sunne,  untill  the  ende  of
the  first  watch  with  thy  coarses  alone,  without  any  more
sayle ;  and  from  midnight  forwards  cast  about,  and  lye
the  other  way  with  the  like  sayle  untill  day :  and  thus
thou  must  doe  untill  thou  bring  thy  selfe  into  the
chanel.  And  if  being  in  the  Chanel  thou  finde  the
winde  large,  thou  shalt  stirre  Northeast,  with  a  care  to

The  sholds  of goe  cleane  off  the  sholds  of  the  Mimbres  or  the  Osiars.

M'mbres.that  p^T^^  \{  being  in  the  Chanel  thou meete  with  the  wind

"'  ^  ^^'^^^'  at  North,  then  thou  must  turne  with  a  litle  saile  4.
glasses  one  way,  and  4.  another,  as  thou  thinkest  good.
And  if  thou  canst  not  beare  sayle,  then  thou  mayest
goe  with  all  thy  sayles  downe,  except  when  thou  wouldest
cast  about,  thou  mayest  loose  some  small  sayle  to  winde
thy  ship.

reachethtoz^ I advise thee,  that when thou art  come  out  of  the

degrees.  Chanel,  thou shalt be in 28. degrees. And if  it be

298

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

in  summer,  thou  shalt  goe  Northeast  untill  thou  be  in

39.  degrees  and  |-,  which  is  the height  of  Flores:  and

thou  shalt  goe  to  the  Northward  of  Bermuda. And  if  La  Bermuda.

thou  thinke  good to  go  in  more  degrees, to have  the

seawinds,  thou  shalt  goe  by  the  same  height,  as  I  have

sayd: and if  thou shalt finde  the winde off  the sea,

thou  hast  no  neede  to  goe in  more  heights : and  from

thence thou shalt  goe East and by South : and thou

must  goe  thus  because  of  the  variation  of  the  Compasse. The  variation

And  thus  thou  shalt  find  the  isles  of  Flores  and  Cuervo,  ^''^^

which  stand  in  39.  degrees  |-,  and  in  40.  large. These ^

markes  be  these.*

Thou  mayest  goe from betwixt Flores  and Cuervo, Flores  and
and  must  goe  East Southeast,  and so thou shalt  have  ^^^^'"°-
sight  of  the  Island  of  Sayles,  which  is  the  Island  of  S.  Saint  George.
George. And  beeing  at  the  land  thou  shalt  goe  along
it,  and  when  thou  hast  doubled  a  certaine  litle  Headland
that  lyeth  in  the  East  poynt,  then  thou  shalt  stirre  East
and  by  North,  and  East. And  thus  going,  thou  shalt
have  sight of  Terzera, which  is in 39. degrees. The  Terzera.
markes  bee  these.* And  behinde  a  certaine  blacke  land
something  high,  which  is  called el Brasil,  standeth the
Citie called Angra. Going from Terzera, thou shalt
runne  East  Northeast,  untill  thou  bring  thy  selfe  North-
west, and Southeast with the Cape of Saint Vincent.  The  Cape  of
And thou mayest worke thus being in summer : for  ^-  ^^'^'^'^»^-
alwayes  thou  shalt  have  the  windes  at  Northwest. And
beeing  Northwest  and Southeast  with this Cape, thou
shalt  stirre  Southeast  and  by  East,  and  thou  shalt  so  fall
with  the  land  6.  or  7.  leagues  to  the  windward  off  the  The  windes
Cape  on  the  coast,  which  lyeth  North  and  South  :  then  '';l^'j/^J//-^^
thou  shalt  goe  along  the  coast  to  the  South,  untill  thou  ^^^  summer
see  the  Cape. And  the  Cape standeth  in  37.  degrees: The  markes  of
the  markes  be  these. It  is  a  Cape  not  very  hie,  and  is  CapeS.
blacke,  sloping  to  the  sea. And  from  thence  thou  shalt  Vincent.
double  the  Asagresal Southeast:  and so running,  thou  ^'^^
shalt  then goe  East unto the Cape of  S. Mary: and  Tkfcap'e  of
from this Cape  goe  East  Northeast,  and  so  thou  shalt  Saint  Mary.

299

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  course  in
zointer  from
the  chattel  of
Bahama.

The  variation
of  the
Compasse.
Many  lost
upon  Bermuda
by  negligence.

The  Isle  of
S.  Marie.

Fatal.

The  barre  of
S.  Lucar.

Sierras  de
Monchico.

runne  to  have  sight  of  Arenas  Gordas :  and  then  thou
shalt  see  presently  a  Httle  hill  towardes  the  East  which
is  called  Cabeza  de  Pedro  Garcia.  And  if  thou  be
benighted,  and  comming  into  8.  or  9.  fathoms,  then  I
wish  thee  to  come  to  anchor,  untill  it  be  day,  and  then
call  for  a  Pilote,  that  may  by  some  meanes  carie  thee
into  harbour.

I  advise  thee,  if  in  the  Winter  time  thou  bee  shot  out
of  the  narrowest  of  the  Chanel  of  Bahama,  and  wouldest
goe  for  Spaine,  that  thou  must  goe  East  Northeast,
untill  thou  be  in  30.  degrees  rather  lesse  then  more ;
and  then  thou  mayest  goe  East  and  by  South,  because
of  the  variation  of  the  Compasse.  And  stirring  hence
East  Southeast,  thou  shalt  goe  on  the  Southside  of
Bermuda :  and  must  goe  with  great  care,  because  many
have  bene  lost  heere  about  this  Island,  because  of  their
negligence.  And  when  thou  art  sure  thou  art  past  this
Island,  then  goe  East  Northeast,  untill  thou  bee  in  the
height  of  seven  and  thirtie  degrees :  which  is  in  the
height  of  the  Island  of  Saint  Marie.  And  going  thus,
and  not  seeing  Land,  but  seeing  the  Sea  to  breake,  make
account  it  is  the  rocks  called  las  Hormigas.  And  if
thou  thinke  good  to  goe  to  Faial,  thou  shalt  goe  till
thou  be  in  38.  degrees  \  scant,  and  then  thou  shalt  goe
East,  and  so  shalt  have  sight  of  Faial.  The  markes  of
it  be  these.*

Comming  out  from  Faial,  and  leaving  all  the  Islandes,
then  all  goe  East  and  by  South  untill  thou  bring  thy
selfe  in  37.  degrees,  which  is  the  height  of  Cape  Saint
Vincent :  and  then  goe  East,  and  thou  shalt  see  the
Cape  having  the  markes  aforesayd.  And  from  Cape  S.
Vincent  thou  must  goe  East  Southeast,  till  thou  be
Northeast,  and  Southwest,  with  the  barre  of  S.  Lucar:
and  then  goe  Northeast  for  the  Barre.

Take  this  for  a  warning,  that  if  going  in  37.  degrees
thou  have  not  sight  of  Cape  S.  Vincent,  and  hast  sight
of  certaine  hie  hils,  make  accompt  they  are  Sierras  de
Monchico.

300

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

I  advise  thee, that  if  thou  stand  in  feare  of  men  of  To  avoyde
warre  about  the Cape of  S. Vincent, then  goe in 36  ^^^tf^^f^e-
degrees  J. And finding thy  selfe  within the  Cape, if
thou  see  many  signes  of  greene  weedes,  then  cast  about
to  the  North  Northeast,  and  by  this  way  finding  land,
and  the  same  shewing  white,  be  sure  it  is  the  castle  of  The  castle  of
Almonte.  ^^■^''"'^•

A  ruttier  for  the  old  Chanel  from  the  East  point  of  [Hi.  612.]
Cuba  by  the  North  side  thereof  to  Havana.

Going  from  the  Cape  of  S.  Nicolas,  thou  shalt  goe  The  cape  of
North  Northwest,  but  thou must keepe to wind-  S.  Nicolas  on
ward  off  the  poynt,  that thou mayest  weather  it,  &  it  ofQ^l^  ^^  ^
is  called  the  poynt  of  Mayaci :  and  it  is  a  very  low  land  Punta  de
and smooth : and above  up within the land about a  Mayaci.
league  it  hath  a  long  Hill,  which  is  not  very  high  but
flat. And  from  that  poynt  to  Baracoa  is  7.  leagues.

And being  disposed  to  goe into Baracoa, keepe the  Baracoa.
weather-shore  all  along,  untill thou  open  the  Harbour.
And  to  knowe  if  thou  bee  open  of  the  Harbour,  looke
upon  the  South  side ;  and  thou  shalt  see  an  Hill  by  it
selfe,  which  maketh  as  it  were  a  crowne  upon  it. And  if
thou  come  along,  it  maketh  as  it  were  a  Fort  with  Ports
about  it :  And  this is  the  marke if  thou come out  of
the Sea. And this Hill is North and South of  the
Harbour,  over  the  Harbour  of  Baracoa. And  if  thou
wilt  goe  in,  thou must  take heede  of  a  Shoald which  ^  shold  on  the
lyeth  on  the  East  side,  and  thou  must  keepe  the  West  ^^^^  "^^  ^f
side : and  goe  not  much  from  the  Shoald,  because the ^^^'^°^-
foote of  the Shoald that shooteth Westward hath 5.
fathoms  water. And  when  thou  art  within  the  Shoalds,
thou  must  goe  a  litle  within  them,  and  then  let  fall  an
anchor :  and looke that thou come not  much on the
East  side,  for  it  is  shoaldie.

And comming out from Baracoa, being to passe
through the old chanel, you shal set your course
Northwest  until  you come  with  the  Cayo  de  Moa,  or CayodeMoa.
the  shoald  of  Moa,  untill  you  thinke  you  are  Northeast

301

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

This  zuorde
Cayo  in  ike
Biskayne
tongue  signi-
fieth  a  fiat  or
a  shoald.

Pracellas.

The  Mosowes,

Camoloquea.

The  Flats  of
Mecala  to  be
avoyded.

Cropeda  a  fiat
Island.

2.  Rockes  of

stone.

Punta  de

Caucus.

Matanzas.

and  Southwest  with  it,  or  till  you  thinke  you  are  gone
12.  leagues:  and  you  shal  know  that  you  are  upon  Cayo
de  Moa.  For  before  you  come  at  it  by  2.  leagues  or
more,  you  shall  understand  that  it  hath  a  poynt  of
lowe  land,  and  upon  the  poynt  it  hath  a  Palme  tree;
which  tree  you  shall  see  alwayes,  before  you  see  the
point :  and  it  is  like  a  sayle.  From  thence  to  the
Pracellas  or  Flats  you  shall  stirre  Northwest  two  parts
of  your  way,  that  you  have  to  runne  from  Cayo  de
Moa  to  the  sayd  Pracellas  or  Flats,  and  the  one  halfe
part  of  the  way  North  Northwest  and  by  West.  And  this
way  you  shall  see  the  Pracellas  or  Flats  in  a  cleane
place  of  the  shoald  above  the  water,  for  all  the  breach
of  the  sea.  The  Mosowes  bee  from  the  Pracell  West,
and  you  shall  leave  them  to  windward.

And  if  you  will  goe  with  the  Pracellas  or  Flats,  you
shall  finde  4.  or  5.  fathomes :  and  you  may  goe  sure
without  danger  a  Northwest  course  untill  you  come  in
7.  fathomes.  And  if  you  will  goe  upon  the  Shoald,
you  shall  goe  upon  that  depth,  untill  you  have  runne
40.  or  45.  leagues:  And  from  thence  you  shall  set
your  course  Southwest,  till  you  see  the  Flattes  of  the
maine  land.  You  shall  then  see  to  the  Westward  a
rocke  divided  into  3.  partes,  which  is  called  the  Camo-
loquea. And  looke  that  when  you  come  from  the
Pracellas  Southwest,  you  have  certaine  Flats  before
you:  take  heede  of  them  that  you  fall  not  by  night
with  them  by  foure  leagues,  for  feare  of  the  Mecala:
and  you  shall  set  your  course  West  Northwest  untill
day :  and  when  it  is  day,  you  must  beare  close  aboord
the  shore,  and  then  you  shall  see  a  flat  Island  with
many  broken  sands,  which  is  called  Cropeda,  and  lyeth
but  a  little  out  of  the  trade  way,  somewhat  to  the
Northward.  Off  that  you  shall  see  2.  Rocks  of  stone,
which  are  the  poynt  of  all  the  Flats :  And  two  leagues
from  them  on  the  mayne  land  you  shall  see  a  poynt
which  sheweth  like  broken  land.  This  is  called  the
poynt  of  Caucus. And from that  poynt  to  Matanzas

302

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

on  the  Northside  of  Cuba are 12. leagues, and your

course  lieth West  and  by  North :  and  then  you  must

borrow  upon  the  land  all  that  you  can,  because  of  the

currents :  for  the  currents  will  cary  you  into  the  Chanell.

And  being  at  Matanzas,  you  must  runne  all  along  the

shore, because of  the currents. Remember that  when  The  currents.

you  see  one league  before  you  a  Rocke,  and  a  Shoald,

that hath upon it but 2. fathomes water; and your

marke  if  you  come  out  of  the  sea is an  Hill,  and the

Hil is not very hie, it standeth East  and West, and

upon it  are some  little risings and they  are not  very

high,  and  upon  these  risings  stand  two  round  homocks

close  together,  you  shall  see  the  Teates  of  Havana.  The  Teates  of

To  know  along  the  shore  when  you  are  against  the  ^'^^'^'''^•
Harbour  of  Xaroca,  the  markes  are  these. A little  to  ^^^  harbour
the  Westward  one  league,  you  shall  see  along  the  shore  °J  ■^'^^'°'^^-
a  Hill  that  is  broken,  and  that  broken  Hill  is  over  the
Harbour of Xaroca: and then a little more to the
Westward  a  league,  there  is  another  broken  Hill. And
you  shall  see  that  North  and  South  from  these  broken
hils is a Flat  off. And from that to Havana is 7.
leagues : and  it is  all  cleane  ground,  and  you  may  goe
along  the shore till  you come to Havana. To know  Markes  to
the  harbour  of  Havana,  you  shall  see  before  you  come J^"'^  ^  ^  ^
at  it  one  litle  rocke  of  stone  not  very  hie,  and  smooth  Havana.
toward  the sea : upon the  rocke standeth  a  litle  white
tower, wherein they keepe watch. And then if  you
have  the  winde  large,  you shall  see  the  harbour  open,
and  then  you  may  beare  in  with  it.

Your  shippe  being  of  great  burthen,  when  you  are
within,  then  keepe  on  the  West  side,  because  on  the  East  [III.  613.]
side,  on  the  West  end  of  the  Rocke  aforesayde,  there
lieth  a  ledge  to  the  Westward  which  hath  but  three  or
foure  fathoms  \  upon  it.  If  your  ship  be  of  small
burthen,  you  may  run  along  the  weather  shore,  untill
you  come  right  against  the  Castle;  and  then  halfe  the
Bay  over  you  may  come  to  an  anchor.

[How  to
303

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

How  to  worke  comming  through  the  olde
Chanell,  if  you  be  not  minded  to  goe  over
the Pracellas or  shoalds.

IF  you  will  come  through  the  olde  Chanel,  when  you
come as hie  as the Shoalds,  comming upon your

Caio  de  Moa.  course  from  the  Caio  de  Moa,  as  I  told  you,  keepe  2.
leagues  from  the  Pracel  or  shoald :  and  then  set  our
course  West  unto  the  low  islands  of  the  Firme  land.
And  upon  this  course  you  shal ken the Flats  on  the

Caio  Romano,  point  of  Caio  Romano  :  and  within  it  is  one  Flat  higher
then  the  other,  and  smooth  upon,  and  in  the  middest
it  maketh  as  it  were  broken  land ;  and  when  you  are
in  the  chanel  in  the  day  time,  you  must  take  heede  you
come  not  neere  the  shore  by  2.  leagues,  and  by  your
sounding  no  neerer  then  3.  fathoms.  And  you  must
take  heede  stil  when  ye  night  commeth  to  keepe  2.
or  three  leagues  oif  for  feare  of  the  shoalds.  And  in
the  night  you  must  goe  Northwest  as  is  aforesaid.
And  also  you  must  take  heed  that  you  keepe  in  the
middle  of  the  chanel,  as  nere  as  you  can  toward  the
shoald.  And  finding  much  wind  &  being  benighted,
from  midnight  till  day  stirre  West  Northwest,  and  when
it  is  towards  day,  then  you  may  edge  towards  the  Flats
as  is  aforesaid.

And  as  you  stirre  hence  one  day  and  one  night  from
Caio  Romano  to  the  inwards  of  the  Chanell,  you  shall
see  the  firme  land  of  Cuba,  and  other  markes ;  and
among  the  rest,  a  round  hamocke,  which  you  may  easily
know.  It  is  called  Alcane  de  Barasoga.  And  from
thence  to  Savano  and  to  Basquo  is  6.  leagues,  and  like-
wise Havana  6.  leagues.  And  from  thence  to  crosse
under  the  Fort  is  45.  leagues.  And  stirre  hence  upon
your  course  aforesaid.  And  if  you  have  gone  from
Barasoga  30.  leagues,  you  shall  see  none  of  the  Flats
of  Mecala :  And  give  them  a  bredth  off  two  or  three
leagues, and keepe your course West Northwest, as

304

Alcane  de
Barasoga.
Savano.
Basouo.

The  Flats  oj
Mecala.

A  RUTTIER  FOR  THE  WEST  INDIES

aforesayd,  untill  it  be  day,  and  presently  you  may  edge  Take  heede  of
round to the Flats. And thus stirrins:, keepe your  that  which  is

.„  1 1  Ml  r  r^ 1  hei-e  sa'id.jor

course  untill  you  see  the  hilles  or  Camaloqua.  it  hath  litle

And looke  that  when  you  come  from  Caio  de  Moa,  reason.

along  the Pracel or shoald by night  close  by  it, you  Sierras  de

shall  not  see  what  land  it  is,  till  it  be  day :  and  in  the  Camaloquea.

Morning  you  shall  set  your  course  as  is  aforesayd  untill  pj-acelks

you  see  the  shoald,  and  in seeing  it,  you  may stirre  on

your  course  as  is  above  mentioned,  untill  you  come  to

Havana.  Havana.

For  to  set  your  course  from the  point  of  Mance  to  Punta  de

Caio Romano, when you are North and South with  -^^'^'^^•

the point of Mance, you shall stirre thence West

Northwest, until you thinke you be Northeast and

Southwest  with  the  hill  of  Hama. And  this hill  is  an  sierra  del

high hill and smooth  to the seaside. And from this  ^^'"^■

hill to Caio Romano you shall stirre Northwest and  Caio  Romano.

by  West :  and  upon this  course you may  be  bolde  to

see  Caio  Romano. And  the  marke  of  this  Flat  is,  that  ^-^^  markes  of

it  maketh  an  hie  land  and  smooth  upon  the  top:  and  ^^ P^^ y

,  .11  f. . . .  .  ^  ,  / ,  Caio  Romano.

m the middest or it, it sheweth as it were broken.

And  when  you come to it,  you  must take  heede  you

come not neere it  by 2. leagues, because it is fowle.

And  looke  that  you bring  not  yourselfe  too neere the

hill  of  Hama  by  night. For  you  must take heede  of

Caio Romano to  keepe off  it  untill Morning : in the

Morning  you may  goe your  course  untill you see  it,

and  then  set  your  course,  as  is  abovesaid.

[A  principal
305  u

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Punta  de
Naga.

[III.  614.]

A  principal  ruttier  conteining  most  particular
directions  to  saile  from  S.  Lucar  in  Anda-
luzia  by  the  Isles  of  the  Canaries,  the  small
Isles  called  Las  Antillas,  along  the  South
parts  of  the  Isles  of  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  rico,
Hispaniola  and  Cuba :  and  from  Cabo  de
Corrientes,  or  Cabo  de  S.  Anton  without  and
within  the  litle  Isles  called  Los  Alacranes,
to  the  port  of  S.  Juan  de  Ullua  in  Nueva
Espanna :  and  the  course  from  thence  backe
againe  by  Havana,  and  through  the  Chanell
of  Bahama  to  Spaine:  together  with  the
speciall  markes  of  all  the  Capes,  Islands,  and
other  places  by  the  way ;  and  a  briefe  declara-
tion of  their  latitudes  and  longitudes.

IF  you  depart  from  the  barre  of  S.  Lucar
de  Barameda  toward  the  West  Indias
in  the  Summer  time,  you  must  stirre
away  Southwest  untill  you  come  to  the
head-land  called  Punta  de  Naga  upon
the  Isle  of  Tenerif.  But  if  your  depar-
ture be  from  the  sayd  barre  in  the
Winter,  you  must  stirre  away  Southwest  and  by  South,
untill  you  come  to  the  height  of  Cape  Cantin  on  the
coast  of  Barbarie :  the  markes  and  signes  whereof  be
these  following.

The  markes  to  know  Cape  Cantin.

CApe  Cantin  is  a  lowe  Cape  and  small  to  the  sea
ward,  and  maketh  a  snowt  like  the  nose  of  a
galley,  and  hath  upon  the  top  of  the  poynt  a  Heath
or  shrubby  place,  and  on  the  toppe  thereof  stand  two
homocks,  that  to  the  sea-ward  being  higher  then  the
other ;  but  that  on  the  Souther  side  sheweth  like  a
tower: and  his  Cape  is  in  32.  degrees  and  5-.

306

A SECOND RUTTIER

And  he  that  wil  seeke  from  this  Cape  to  discover  Punta
de  Naga  beforesayd,  must  stirre  away  Southwest  and
by  West,  untill  hee  bring  himselfe  Northeast  and  South-
west with  the  same  point,  and  then  he  must  stirre  away
South  to  fetch  the  said  point.

The signes of  Punta de Naga.

THe  said  point  or  Head-land  is  an  high  point  of
Land,  and  plaine  upon  the  toppe  like  a  table,  and
without  it  there  are  two  litle  rockie  Islands ;  and  upon
the  North  side  of  the  said  point  is  another  point  called
Punta  de  hidalgo,  and  upon  the  top  thereof  are  2.  picked  ^Jj
rockes  like  unto  the  eares  of  a  Hare.

The course from the  Canaries  to  the  West
Indies.

F  you  set  saile  from  any  of  the  Islands
of  the  Canaries  for  the  West  Indias,
you  must  stirre  away  30.  or  40  leagues
due  South,  to  the  ende  you  may  avoid
the  calmes  of  the  Island  of  Fierro  :
and  being  so  farre  distant  from  the  said
Island,  then  must  you  stirre  away  West

The  calmes  of
Fierro.

of  the
compasse.

Southwest,  untill  you  finde  your  selfe  in  20.  degrees,  and

then saile  West  and  by  South  untill  you come  to 15.

degrees  and  \. And  from  thence  stirre  away  West  and

by  North  ;  and  so  shall  you  make  a  West  way  by  reason

of the Northwesting of the Compasse  : which West  '^^^_  variation

way  will  bring  you  to  the  Island  of  Deseada.

The markes  of  the Island  of  Deseada.

THis  Island  Deseada  lieth  East  Northeast,  and  West
Southwest,  having  no  trees  upon  it,  and  it  is  pro-
portioned like  a  Galley,  and  the  Northeast  ende  thereof
maketh  a  lowe  nose  like  the  snowt  of  a  galley  ;  and
by  comming  neere  it,  and  passing  by  the  Norther  ende
thereof,  you  shall  perceive  white  broken  patches  like
heapes  of  sand  with  red  strakes  in  them :  &  the  Southwest

307

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Dcseada  hi end  of  this  Island  maketh  like  the  tilt  of  a  galley. And
'^^.  degrees ^^^  Island  standeth  in ic.  degrees  and  A-.

and  a  halfe.  j  to  ^

Markes  of  the  Island  of  Monserate.

MOnserate  is  an  high  Island,  and  round,  full  of
trees,  and  upon  the  East  side  thereof  you  shall  per-
ceive certain  white  spots  like  sheetes  :  and  being  upon  the
South  side  at  the  very  point  of  the  Island,  somewhat  off
the  land,  it  maketh  like  a  litle  Island,  and  putting  your
selfe  either  East  or  West  from  that  point,  in  the  midst
thereof  will  appeare  a  great  broken  land.

Markes  of  the  Island  of  Marigalanta.

MArigalanta  is  a  smooth  Island,  and  full  of  wood  or
trees,  and  as  it  were  of  the  fashion  of  a  galley  upon
her  decke  :  and  being  on  the  Southeast  side  about  half
a  league  off  you  shall  make  certaine  homocks  of  blacke
stones,  and  certain  white  patches  :  but  on  the  West  side
appeare  faire  white  sandy  shores  or  plaines.

Markes  of  the  Isle  of  Dominica.

THe  Island  of  Dominica  lieth  Northwest  and  South-
east, and  upon  the  Northwest  side  it  sheweth  more
high  :  and  if  you  come  neere  it  at  full  sea,  it  will  shew  like
two  Islands,  but  by  comming  neerer  unto  it,  you  shall
perceive  it  to  be  but  one  :  and  upon  the  Southeast  side
you  shall  make  or  see  a  plaine  and  long  point,  and  upon
the  same  point  appeareth  a  cliffe  like  to  the  cliffe  of  Cape
Tiburon ;  and  upon  the  North  side  a  litle  from  the  land  it
sheweth  like  a  litle  Island,  and  upon  the  top  thereof  is,  as
it  were,  an  high  steeple,  and  upon  the  Norther  side  you
shall  perceive  it  like  many  white  sheetes.

Markes  of  the  Island  of  Guadalupe.

THe  Island  of  Guadalupe  lieth  on  the  West  of
Deseada,  and  upon  the  Southwest  part  thereof  appeare
many  hie  mountaines,  but  upon  the  East  side  it  maketh
certaine  tables,  which  are  called  the  high  part  of  Guada-

308

A SECOND RUTTIER

lupe.  And  this  Island  is  cut  North  and  South  ;  so  that
the  Canoas  of  India  do  passe  from  the  North  to  the  South
of  it,  as  if  it  were  two  Islands.

Markes  of  the  Isle  of  Matalina,  or Martinino. [III.  615.]

THE  Isle  of  Matalina  is  high  and  full  of  mountaines,
having  in  the  midst  thereof  3.  homocks  :  the
middlemost  homocke  being  highest  sheweth  like  the  great
bowle  of  an  hat.  And  upon  the  North  side  it  appeareth
like  three  little  Islands.  And  in  this  Island  there  are
warlike  Indians  like  those  of  Dominica.  Warlike  and

dangerous

Markes  of  the three  small  Islands  called  Islas  de  Indians  like
Los Santos,  or  the  Islands  of  Saintes.  Dominica

LOs  Santos  are  3.  Islandes  lying  one  close  by  another
upon  the  South  side  of  Guadalupe.  For  to  goe
with  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  rico  you  must  stirre  away  North-
west, untill  you  fall  with  the  Isle  of  Saba.

These  2.  the

Markes  to  know  the  Isle  of  Saba.  niMte  and  the

Ai •  1-  1 T  1 1  1  11  •  1 11  gray  Islands

Aba  IS  a  litle  island,  and  round  about  it  you  shall  see  are  rather

the  bottome  ;  but  feare  not,  for  there  is  no  danger  but  bare  rockes  in

that  which  you  shall  see  ;  and  round  about  it,  itmaketh  as  ^^^  sea,  for  so
it  were  certaine  heapes  of  white  sand  ;  and  by  the side ";, ^[~

thereof  it sheweth  like  a  Ship  under  saile  : but follow  Spanish  word

that direction  that  I have  given,  and  you  shall  see  La  signifie. But

virgin gorda.  ^  interprete  it

Island,  because

Markes  to  know  the  Isle called  La  virgin all  the  rocks

J  separatedfrom

§°^^^-  the  bigger

LA  virgin gorda  is  an  high Island and round,  and  Islands  are
seeing  it,  you  shall  espie  all  the  rest  of  the  Virgines  ^Pf  f  !'\
which  lye  East  and  West  one  from  another,  and  are  bare  j>j^i^  ^^^^^^  y
without  any  trees. You  may  goe  about  by  them  until  bare  Island  is
you  see  the  litle  gray  Island,  which  you  shal  see  by  it  selfe  ^^de  white  by
by  the  Virgines  ;  and  comming  neere  to  the  sayd  Island,  ^ .  ,^  y

•'  1  ° 1111  11  -1  ri  1- btrdesandsea

over  that  you  shall  by  and  by  rayse  sight  or  the  white  x-^^i^^  ^^^^
litle  Island,  which  seemeth  like  a  ship  under  saile. And  if  resort  unto  it.

309

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

you  will  passe  betweene  this  litle  white  Island  or  bare
rocke,  and  the  greene  Island,  you  must  beware  that  you
leave  the  white  Island  on  the  larbourd  side  of  you,  and
come  no  neerer  it  then  a  Caliever-shot,  and  so  shall
you  passe  through  12.  fadome-water :  and  then  stirre
away  Northnorthwest,  and  so  shall  you  enter  into  the
Haven  of  Puerto  rico  :  and  if  you  chance  to  passe  the  sayd
Island  by  night,  goe  by  the  foresaid  direction,  untill  the
first  watch  be  out,  and  then  take  in  your  sayles,  and
so  drive  untill  it  bee  neere  day  :  and  then  hoise  sayles,  and
stirre  away  Southwest,  seeking  the  sayde  Port :  and  when
you  come  to  the  entring  within,  you  must  stay  till  10.  of
the  clocke  for  the  sea-4:urne.  And  know,  that  having  the
Loguilo  at  Southwest,  then  shall  the  Harbour  be  off  you
North  and  South.

Directions  from  Monserate  to  Santa  Cruz.

HE  that  departeth from Monserate to Santa Cruz,
must  stirre  away  Westnorthwest :  and  by  the  same
course  you  shall  seaze  upon  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  rico.

Markes  to  know  the  Isle  of  Santa  Cruz.

Anta  Cruz  is  an  Island  not  very  high,  all  full  of
homocks  :  and  comming  with  it  at  full  sea,  it  will
shew  like  the  Virgines  :  and  upon  the  East  side  there  are
two  homocks  higher  then  all  the  rest.  And  by  this
course  you  may  goe  to  the  Isle  of  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  rico ;
and  having  found  it,  you  may  sayle  along  the  South
coast  East  and  West,  untill  you  come  to  Cabo  Roxo.

Markes to know Cape Roxo.

CApe  Roxo  is  a  low  Cape  and  trayling  to  the  sea-ward,
having  certaine  heapes  of  broken  ground  thereon,
which  are  like  a  homocke,  and  at  full  sea  the  same  sheweth
like  a  litle  Island  from  the  land  by  it  selfe,  but  comming
neere  unto  it,  it  will  make  all  a  whole  land.

310

s

I

A SECOND RUTTIER

Directions  from  Cabo  roxo  to  the  Isle  of
Mona.

F  you  will seeke Mona from Cape  roxo,  you must
stirre  away  West  and  by  North.

Markes  of  the  Isle  of  Mona.

THe  Isle  of  Mona  is  a  low,  round,  and  smooth  Island,
lying  lowe  by  the  sea,  and  full  of  trees :  and  to  goe
from  thence  to  the  Isle  of  Saona  you  must  stirre  away
West ;  and  if  you  fall  with  it  in  the  night  season,  and
come  any  thing  neere  the  land,  then  stirre  away  West
and  by  South,  untill  it  be  neere  day,  that  you  may  keepe
your  selfe  by  the  land  ;  and  if  so  be  that  in  the  Morning
you  see  it  not,  then  stirre  away  Northwest,  and  so  shall
you  finde  it :  and  if  it  be  faire  weather,  and  you  perceive
that  the  current  hath  set  you  to  the  Southwest,  then
stirre  away  Northnorthwest,  and  so  shall  you  goe  cleare
off  the  land.

Markes  of  the  Isle  of  Saona.  [ill.  6i6.]

IF  you  chance  to  see  the  Isle  of  Saona,  it  is  an  Island
smooth  with  the  sea,  and  lyeth  Northeast  and  South-
west, and  you  shall  see  the  trees  before  you  see  the
Island :  and  on  the  Southwest  end  of  this  Island
appeareth  a  great  high  banke  of  white  sand  which  is
called  the  head  of  Saona.  And  if  you  would  come  to
an  anchor,  you  may,  for  all  is  cleare  ground.  And  to
go  from  this  Island  to  Santa  Catelina,  you  must  stirre
away  Northwest.

Markes  of  the  Isle  of  Santa  Catelina.

SAnta  Catelina  is  a  litle  lowe  Island  all  full  of  low
rockes  even  from  the  water,  and  hath  not  any  trees,
and  it  is  close  by  the  land  ;  and  if  you  doe  not  run
along  the  coast  of  Hispaniola,  you  shall  not  see  it :
and  from  that  Island  to  goe  to  Saint  Domingo,  you
shall  sayle  along  as  the  land  lyeth.  West  and  by  North :

311

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

These  rockes
are  called  Los
Buffaderos,  or
the  spoutes.
The  point  of
Causedo.

Sar  D 0 17117! m.

Sierras  de  las

viinas  viejas.

and  before  you  come  to  the  point  called  Causedo,  you
shall  see  certaine  holes  in  rockes,  which  lye  alongst  as
the  rocks  doe  that  cast  up  the  water,  which  will  shew
like  to  the  spouting  of  Whales.  And  a  litle  ahead  off
that,  you  shall  see  the  point  of  Andresa :  and  ahead
thereof  the  poynt  of  Causedo.  This  poynt  of  Causedo
lyeth  lowe  close  by  the  water,  and  passing  thereby,  the
coast  will  make  to  thee  Northwest  and  Southeast;  and
from  thence  to  S,  Domingo  are  5.  leagues.  And  if  the
winde  chop  up  at  North  upon  you,  by  meanes  whereof
you  should  be  cast  off  from  the  coast  or  Port,  and  that
you  happen  to  see  the  olde  Mines  (called  Sierras  de  las
minas  viejas)  beare  Northwest  off  you,  and  The  teates
which  are  within  the  land  be  open  of  you,  then  shal
you  be  North  and  South  with  the  harbour ;  and  if  The
old  Mines  beare  North  off  you,  then  shall  you  be  below
the  harbour.

I

Directions  from Saint  Domingo  to  Nueva
Espanna.

F  you  will  sayle  from  Saint  Domingo  in  Hispaniola
to  Nueva  Espanna,  stirre  away  Southsouthwest,  until
The  point  of  you  come  up  as  farre  as  the  point  of  Nizao :  and  from
thence  stirre  away  Westsouthwest,  and  so  you  shall  finde
the  Isle  of  Beata.  And  if  you  saile  from  this  point  of
Nizao  for  Ocoa,  you  must  passe  along  the  coast  West
and  by  North,  untill  you  come  to  Puerto  Hermoso,  or
The  beautifull  haven,  which  is  18.  leagues  distant  from
Saint  Domingo :  and  if  you  proceede  from  Puerto
Hermoso  for  Nueva  Espanna,  you  must  stirre  away
Southsouthwest,  untill  you  looke  out  for  Beata  and
Alto  velo.

Markes  of  the  Isle  of  Beata.

BEata  is  a  small  Island  and  not  very  high  :  you  may
passe  along  the  outside  thereof,  and  there  is  no
danger  but  that  you  may  see ;  and  by  and  by  you  shall
raise  Alto  velo :  and  from  thence  you  must  stirre  away

312

TSisao.

The  Isle  of

Beata.
Ocoa.

Pue7-to
hermoso.

The  Isle  of
Alto  Velo.

A SECOND RUTTIER

West  and  by  South,  to give  a  birth  from  the Islands

called Los Frailes, or The Friers. And when you  Los  Frailes.

are  as  farre  ahead  as  the  Frailes,  then  must  you  stirre

away  West  and  by  North,  and  so  shall  you goe  right

with  Bacoa,  and before  you come to  it,  you shall see Bacoa.

high  craggie  cliffes,  and  at  the  descending  of  them  white

paths  like  great  sheetes ;  these  high  craggie  mountaines

are  called  Las  sierras  de  donna  Maria. And  before  you  ^^^  sierras  de

come  to  the  sayde  point  of  Bacoa,  you  shall  discover  a °^^^^ ^^^^'

little  lowe  Island even with  the  Sea  and full  of  trees,

which  is  called  Isla  Baque.  Is^a  Baque.

Directions  from  Isla  Baque  to  Cape  Tiburon.

IF  you  will  goe  from  the  Island  Baque,  or  from  the ^^P^
point  of  Bacoa  for Cape  Tiburon,  or  to the isle  of  TJi^^'j^ r
Navaza,  you  must  stirre  away  Westnorthwest,  and  edge  j^^vaza.
in  somewhat  to  the  Northwest,  and  you  shall  passe  be-
tweene  Navaza  and  Cape  Tiburon.

MarkoS  of  Cape  Tiburon,  which  is  the Western
cape  of  Hispaniola.

CApe  Tiburon  lyeth  sliding  downe  to  the  Seaward,
and  maketh  a  sharpe  cliffe  like  the  snout  of  a
Tiburon  or  sharke-fish ;  and  upon  the  top  thereof  it
appeareth  like  white  wayes  with  certaine  gullets  or
draines  upon  it,  which  are  caused  by  the  passage  of  the
water  from  the  mountaine  in  the  Winter  time.

Markes  of  the  Isle  of  Navaza.

NAvaza  is  a  litle  round  Island  full  of  low  trees  or
shrubs,  and  it  lyeth  East  and  West  from  Cape
Tiburon,  and  from  this  small  Island  to  go  for  Sierras
de  Cobre,  or  The  mountaines  or  mines  of  Copper  upon
the  Southeast  part  of  Cuba,  you  must  stirre  away  North-
northwest.

[Directions  from
313

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Sierras  de
Cobre.

Sierras  de
Tarquino.

L • 1 7-] Directions  from  Cape  Tiburon  to  Cabo  de  Cruz

in  Cuba.

IF  you  will  saile  from  Cape  Tiburon  to  Cape  de  Cruz
in  Cuba,  you  must  stirre  away  Northwest,  and  you
shall  see  the  Sierras  or  mountaines  de  Cobre ;  and  from
thence  you  may  goe  along  the  coast  West  towardes  Cabo
de  Cruz ;  and  before  you  come  at  it  you  shall  see  The
great  Tarquino,  and  from  this  Tarquino  you  shall  have
to  Cape  de  Cruz  30.  leagues,  and  this  great  Tarquino
is  the  highest  land  upon  all  that  coast ;  and  then  by
and  by  you  shall  see  the  lesser  Tarquino,  from  whence
to  the  foresayd  Cape  you  have  12.  leagues,  and  so
shall  you  goe  discovering  the  coast,  untill  you  come  to
Cabo  de  Cruz.

Markes  of  Cabo  de  Cruz.

CApe  de  Cruz  is  a  low  Cape  full  of  shrubs ;  and  from
thence  Westward  you  shall  see  no  land ;  for  the
distance  or  bay  is  great  between  the  sayd  Cape  and  the
Isles  called  Los  Jardines.

Directions  from Cape de Cruz  to  Isla  de
Pinos.

F  you  sayle  from  Cape  de  Cruz  to  seeke  the  Island
of  Pinos,  you  must  stir  away  Westnorthwest.  And
note,  that  if  in  this  course  you  happen  to  sounde,  doe
not  feare ;  for  you  have  nine  fathoms.  If  also  going
this  course,  you  meete  with  certaine  little  Islands  upon
LosCaimanes.  the  larboord  side,  which  are  called  The  Caimanes,  or
The  crocodiles,  having  sight  of  them,  stir  away  North-
west, and  so  shall  you  finde  the  Island  of  Pinos.  And
if  by  seeing  the  sayde  Islands  called  Caimanes  you  are
amazed,  you  shall  knowe  by  the  latitude,  whither  they
bee  the  Jardines  or  no :  for  if  you  finde  your  selfe  in
one  and  twentie  degrees,  then  bee  you  sure  they  are
Los  Jardines. The  Jardines,  and  then  stir  out  againe  South,  till  you  bee

314

I

A SECOND RUTTIER

cleare  of  them ;  and  when  you  have  brought  them
North  of  you,  then  may  you  stirre  away  West,  if  it
bee  by  day ;  if  it  bee  by  night,  West  and  by  South,
till  you  see  the  Island  of  Pinos.

T

The  markes  of  Isla  de  Pinos.

'He  Island  of  Pinos  stretcheth  it  selfe  East  and  West,
and  it  is  full  of  homocks,  and  if  you  chance  to  see
it  at  full  sea,  it  will  shewe  like  3.  Islands,  as  though
there  were  divers  soundes  betweene  them,  and  that  in
the  midst  is  the  greatest ;  and  in  rowing  with  them,  it
will  make  all  a  firme  lande :  and  upon  the  East  side  of
these  three  homocks  it  will  shewe  all  ragged ;  and  on
the  West  side  of  them  will  appeare  unto  you  a  lowe
point  even  with  the  sea,  and  oftentimes  you  shall  see
the  trees  before  you  shall  discerne  the  point.

Directions from the Isle of Pinos to Cape de

Corrientes.

IF  you  saile  from  the  foresayde  Isle  of  Pinos  to  Cape
de  Corrientes,  stir  away  West  and  by  North ;  and
before  you  come  to  the  sayd  Cape  upon  the  North  side
of  you,  you  shall  see  certaine  mountaines  all  full  of
homocks,  which  are  called  Las  Sierras  de  Guanaguarico,  Las  sierras  de
and  that  upon  the  West  part  hath  more  homocks  then  ^^^^^S^^^^'^'''
that  on  the  other.

Markes  of  Cape  de  Corrientes.

CApe  de  Corrientes  is  a  lowe  Cape,  though  not  so  low
as  the  other  part  of  the  land  that  lyeth  along  by  it ;
for  it  is  more  lowe,  and  hath  upon  it  4.  or  5.  great
splats  like  unto  oxen,  and  the  very  point  of  the  Cape
is  all  white  sand :  and  from  thence  Westward  you  shall
discerne  no  lande,  for  it  maketh  a  great  bay :  and  from
hence  you  must  saile  to  Cape  de  Sant  Anton.

[Markes  of
315

I

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Markes  of  Cape  de  Sant  Anton.

THe  cape  of  Sant  Anton  is  lowe  by  the  sea,  and
all  full  of  shrubs  or  trees  ;  and  you  shall  see
A  convenient  within  the  land  a  lake  of  fresh  water  ;  and  if  you  want
watering  water,  there  you  may  water  :  and  upon  the  North  side
pace.  q£  ^j^g  g^^j^  Cape  you  shall  discerne  a  palme  tree  higher

then  the  rest  of  the  trees,  and  it  sheweth  round  like  a
bowle  at  the  top,  like  to  the  top  of  a  ship  :  and
North  from  the  Cape  are  certaine  sholdes  which  are
2.  or  3.  leagues  long.

Directions  from  the  Cape  de  S.  Anton  to  Nueva
Espanna  on  the  outside  of  the  small  Islands
called  Los  Alacranes  or  The  Scorpions.

F  you  will sayle  from Cape Sant  Anton to Nueva
Espanna with a North winde, then stirre away
Westnorthwest  from  21.  to  22.  degrees,  and  then  sound
upon the pracel or  flat ;  and  if  you  see  by  this  direc-
tion, that you holde  water,  then stir away  Northwest,
[III.  618.] untill you lose the ground  ; and then follow your
course againe,  untill you have  brought  your  selfe  into
24.  degrees and \. and then saile West untill you
The  Isle bring your selfe North and South with the Isle of
Vermeja. Vermeja, or The red Isle  : then stir  away Southwest,
Villa  rica. and  by  this  way  you  shall  finde  Villa  rica  on  the  coast
of  Nueva  Espanna. And if  by  going this  course  you
be in 19.  degrees and \.  and chance not  to  see  the
lande, then stir away  West untill you see Villa rica,
and from thence saile you South for the harbour of
5.  Juan  de S,  Juan de Ullua  : and if  you should be neere the
IJUua.  2^j^^ ^Q^ must stir South and by  West towardes the

A  volcan  or same harbour. And if  you chance  to see the  Volcan
burning  hi. ^^ burning hill to beare  west & by  South from you,
then  know,  that  the  harbour  of  S.  Juan  de  Ullua  shalbe
East  and  west  off  you.

316

A SECOND RUTTIER

Markes  of  Villa  rica.

Villa rica standeth in 19.  degres and |-.  and the
signes thereof are certaine high hilles full of
homocks of many  heads,  which have on the top of
them certain  white patches after the maner of  white
beaten  wayes  ; and  these  hils  lie  Northeast  and  South-
west. And if  you doubt  whether  these  be  the  Sierras  Sierras  de
or hils  of S.  Martin,  wet your lead  or  sound,  and  if  Sant  Mart,
you finde bottome,  they  are the Sierras  of  Villa  rica  :  Sierras  de
and  saile  you  to  the  landward,  and  looke  by  how  much  ^"'^  ''^^'^"
you come neerer the land,  so much  will they seeme
lower unto you  : but so doe not the hilles of S.
Martin  ; for the neerer  you  come  to  them,  the  higher
will they  appeare to you  : and likewise  if  they  be  the
hilles of  S.  Martin,  you shall not finde bottome,  but
even  at  land  it  selfe.

Markes of Rio de las palmas, and of  the river
of  mountaines  called Rio  de  las  montannas.

F  you  should  chance  to  fall  with  Rio  de
las  palmas,  or  The  river  of  palmes,  or
els  with  the  river  of  Mountaines,  it  is
all  a  plaine  lande,  and  full  of  trees  and
certaine  woodie  homocks,  and  among
them  certaine  heapes  of  sand,  and  all
this  along  by  the  sea  side  :  and  if  you
went  by  land  to  the  river  of  Panuco,  you  shall  have
many  mouthes  or  openings  of  plaias  or  strands,  where
also  are  many  lizas  or  oazy  places,  which  stretch  to
Rio  Hermoso.

You  must  beware  what  part  soever  you  happen  of
this  coast  to  fall  withall,  to  discover  it,  and  although
you  knowe  it,  you  must  sound  the  depth  ;  because  if
the  windes  bee  Easterly,  the  current  setteth  there  much
to  the  North  :  but  if  you  should  be  40.  leagues  at  sea,
then  this  current  setteth  to  the  Northeast.

[Markes  of
317

Rio  de  las

palmas.

Rio  de  las

montannas.

Rio  de  Panuco.
Rio  Hermoso,
or  The  beau-
tifull  river.
The  current  of
the  bay  of
Mexico  {the
winde  being  at
the  East)
setteth  to  the
North,  and
40.  leagues
from  the  shore
to  the  North-
east.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  mcun-
taines  of
Tamaclipa.

Markes  of  Rio  Hermoso  or  The  beautiful!  river.

IF  you  wil  seeke  the  river  called  Rio  Hermoso,
looking  well  within  the  land,  you  shal  see  three
homocks  of  an  high  hill,  and  those  two  which  are  to
the  landward  within,  are  rounder  then  the  other  which
is  neerest  the  sea,  for  that  it  is  longer  and  bigger,  and
lyeth  North  and  South,  and  you  shall  be  4.  leagues  at
sea  when  you  shall  see  them  :  and  they  are  called  The
sierras,  or  mountaines  of  Tamaclipa  ;  and  from  thence
to  the  river  of  Panuco  there  is  no  high  land,  but  all
lowe  and  even  with  the  sea,  and  full  of  palme  trees
and  other  trees.

I

Markes  of  the  river  of  Panuco.

F you fall with the river of Panuco (betweene

which and the foresayde Villa rica standeth the

Island called  Isla  de  Lobos  or  The  Isle  of  seales)  the

markes bee these. From the mouth of the river it

maketh a great bay  without,  and  at  the  ende  of  this

bay  upon the Northside there is oazy,  low,  and bare

ground altogether  without trees,  and at the out ende

of  the oazy  lowe place  upon  the  West  side  it  maketh

a  low  homock  like  to  a  Lizards  head  : and  when  you

see the aforesayde cliffe,  you shall bee in the  opening

of  the  mouth  of  the  sayd  river,  and  then  shall  you  see

a little low  tower having on the top  of  it  a  crosse,

which the fishermen call Marien  : and this  barre  hath

on it 2.  fathom  water,  and 2.  and \.  and  you neede

'No  tide  at  the  not to  stay  for  the  tyde,  for  that  it  floweth  not  there  :

river  of  and that you may  the better knowe  whether  you bee

Panuco.  -j^ ^j^jg l^g^y.  -^hich  I  have  mentioned,  or  not,  you  shall

see certaine hils at West Southwest, which are  called

Las  sierras  de  Las sierras de Tarquia  ; and forthwith also you shall

Tarquia. ggg  thg  oazy  place  that  I speake  of,  which  goeth  to  the

mouth of  the river  where standeth a towne called  S.

Luis de Tampice, and from thence to Panuco you

have  9.  leagues  by  land.

318

S.  Luis  de
Tampice.

A SECOND RUTTIER

The markes of Isla de lobos, or The Isle of

seales.

ISla de  lobos  is  a  small  Island  nothing  so  big  as  the
carde doth shew it, and in it is a litle grove  or
wood  of  palme  trees,  and all  the  rest  of  the  Island  is
without  trees,  and  round  about  it  are  sundry  playas  or  [III,  619.]
strandes,  and it is inclosed  round  about  with arrazifes
or shoalds,  and chiefly  toward the maine  lande. And
from thence to Cape Roxo or  The red Cape are 3. Cabo  Roxo.
leagues. And  if  you  will  come  to  anker  at  this  Island  to  J  watering
water,  for  that  there  is  water  in  it,  you  may  ride  on  all  P^^'^^-
the  South  side  close  by  the  poynt  that  stretcheth  to  the
Westward,  and  you may  passe by  the East  side  of  it,
and ride in 22.  fathom, and untill you come  to 15.
fathoms,  aU  is  cleane  ground.

Markes  of  the  river  of  Tuspa.

IF  you  fall  with  the  river  of  Tuspa,  you  must  beware
the  sholdes  which  run  5.  or  6.  leagues  into  the  sea:
and  upon  this  river  of  Tuspa  within  the  lande  there
are  high  hilles  which  lie  Northeast  and  Southwest,  and
have  their  ending  upon  the  bay  of  Cassones  :  and  The  bay  of
upon  the  river  you  shall  perceive  a  white  cliffe,  which  Cassones.
will  shew  unto  you  like  the  castle  of  S.  Juan  de  UUua.

Markes of  the  river  of  S.  Peter  and  S.  Paul.

F  you chance to fall  with the bay  of  Cassones,  and

upon  the river  of  S.  Peter  and  S.  Paul,  take  heede  :

for the sayd bay  is a deepe bay,  and the hilles of

Tuspa have their ending upon this bay. And  in  the  jn  these  are

mouth of  this river of  S.  Peter and S.  Paul are two  upon  the  coast

homockes of  white sand,  the  Westermost being  bigger  of  Tabasco.

then  that  on  the  Northeast. And  by  and  by  you  shall  h'''-jH7'''  '^^

1  ,  .  . ^  ^  .  . -I -I .  S.  Pablo,

perceive  the  water  to  change  white  which  commeth  out

of  the  river,  and  sounding  you  shall  finde  sande  mixed

with  clay  upon  your  lead  ; and  looke  upon  the  West

319

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Punid
delgada,  or
The  slender
point.

Cabezas
anegadas  are
sunken  heads
or  rocks  under
zvaler.

Comeaera  de
Pescado.

side,  and  you  shall  see  the  Sierras  or  mountaines  of  S.
Paul,  which  are  two,  and  that  on  the  North  side  is
higher  then  the  other.

Markes  of  Almeria.

IF  you  should  chance  to  fall  or  come  upon  the
plaines  of  Almeria,  it  is  a  lande  full  of  many  homocks,
some  with  tuftes  of  trees  on  them,  and  some  bare  with
white  sand,  and  in  60.  fathoms  you  shall  have  clay  or
oaze,  and  in  30.  fathom  to  the  landward  sand.  And
from  thence  to  Punta  de  hidalgo  or  Punta  delgada
the  coast  lyeth  Northeast  and  Southwest.

Soundings  of  Villa  rica.

IF  you  fall  with  Villa  Rica  in  30.  fathoms,  you  shall
finde  clay  or  oaze,  and  in  some  places  stones,  and
neere  the  lande  you  shall  have  sand :  and  upon  the
port  of  S.  Juan  de  UUua  you  shall  have  in  some  places
clay  or  oaze,  and  in  some  places  herring  bones,  and
in other places mase and  , and upon the rocks

called  Cabezas  anegadas  you  shall  have  small  blacke
sande  at  17.  fathom  two  leagues  from  land.  And  if
you  see  a  coast  that  lieth  Northeast  and  Southwest,
and  another  Northwest  and  Southeast,  you  shall  be
upon  S.  Paul :  and  if  you  should  be  upon  Cabezas
anegadas,  you  shall  finde  in  30.  fathoms  great  sand  &
blacke,  and  in  28.  fathoms  you  shall  have  the  sand
white  like  the  shavings  of  free  stone :  and  from  S.
Paul  to  the  barre  of  Vera  Cruz  it  is  clay  or  oaze,
and  from  thence  to  S.  Juan  de  Ullua  you  have  many
deeps,  which  at  one  sounding  bring  you  clay,  and  at
another  sand,  and  at  another  clay  and  mase  together,
and  herring  bones:  and  in  some  35.  or  40.  fathom  you
shal  finde  rockie  ground,  and  in  some  places  sand,  and
in  some  other  places  herring  bones :  and  we  call  this
Comedera  de  pescado,  or  The  foode  of  fishes.

320

A SECOND RUTTIER

The  course  from  Cabo  de  Corrientes  and  Cabo
de  S.  Anton  upon  the  West  end  of  Cuba,
towards  Nueva  Espanna,  within  the  Isles  called
Los  Alacranes,  or  The  Scorpions.

Cabo  de
Corrientes.

Cabo  de  S.

Anton.

F  you  saile  from  Cape  de  Corrientes
towarde  Nueva  Espanna  on  the  inside
of  The  Alacranes,  you  must  stir  West :
and  when  you  thinke  you  have  sailed
35.  or  40.  leag.  you  shall  sound  upon
the  pracel,  and  you  shall  come  upon
many  bristlings  of  waters,  which,  if  it
were  faire  weather,  would  seeme  a  skull  of  fish.  And
before  you  come  out  of  the  bristlings,  if  you  sound
you  shal  have  depth  as  I  have  sayd.  If  you  goe  from
Cape  de  S.  Anton  by  the  inside  of  The  Alacranes,  you
must  stir  away  West  and  by  South,  and  you  shall
finde  sounding  in  the  same  order  as  I  have  sayd:  you
shall  have  white  sand,  and  neere  the  land  you  shall
finde  it  like  the  shavings  and  peckings  of  free  stone,
and  white  sand  like  houre-glasse-sand,  and  sometimes
periwinkles  or  small  shelles.  Also  if  you  sound  in
deepe  water,  and  on  the  sudden  finde  rockes,  then
knowe  that  you  are  upon  The  Alacranes,  and  then  stir
away  Westsouthwest  untill  you  finde  cleane  ground,
and  til  you  bring  your  selfe  into  18.  or  20.  fathoms.
And  if  you  goe  deeping  your  water,  then  stir  away
West,  and  by  these  depths  you  shall  go  sounding ;
and  then  taking  your  heigth  by  sunne  or  starre,  you
must  beware  that  you  passe  not  21.  degrees  &  \.  or
21.  degrees  and  \.  at  the  most;  and  in  this  heigth,  and  [III.  620.]
at  18.  or  20.  fathoms  you  shall  follow  your  way:  and
if  you  deepen  water,  edge  to  the  Northwestward,  and
if  you  alter  more  your  depth,  edge  to  the  Southwestward,
untill  you  have  gotten  so  farre  ahead  as  Cape  Sisal,  and
discovered  the  coast  of  Campeche,  which  coast  lyeth
North  and  South,  and  you  shall  take  up  on  your  lead

Cape  Sisal
upon  the  coast
of  Campeche
in  Yucatan
Or  Is  la  de
Arenas.

321

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

white  sande  like  houreglasse  sand,  and  sometime  peri-
winkles or  small  shelles ;  and  by  and  by  you  shall  goe
increasing  depth,  until  you  lose  it,  and  so  shal  you
passe  between  the  Triangle  and  the  Sandy  Hand.

The  course  betweene  the  Triangle  and  the  Sandy
Island  to  S.  Juan  de  UUua.

WHen  you  have  lost  your  depth,  stirre  away  South-
west to  fetch the Sierras or  hils  of  S.  Martin :

Martin.  and  to  knowe  the  hils  of  S.  Martin,  there  are  i.  hils
stretching  Northeast  and  Southwest,  and  the  Southwest
is  greater  then  that  on  the  Northeast,  but  the  Norther-
most  hill  is  higher,  and  maketh  on  the  top  a  flat  point
and  very  high,  and  without  it,  it  hath  an  Island  which

Rocopartida.  is  called  Roca  partida,  or  The  cloven  rock:  and  if  it  be
cleare,  on  the  Southwest  side  an  high  lande  like  a  top-
saile will appeare, and then shall you bee North and

Or  Minsapa.  South  with  The  Pan  or  Loafe  of  Nisapa.  Note,  that
these  Sierras  or  Hilles  of  Sant  Martin  are  all  blacke
and  full  of  trees,  and  make  no  shewe  as  Villa  rica  doth :
And  marke  this,  that  by  how  much  you  come  neerer
them,  so  much  the  higher  will  they  shewe  unto  you :
neither  shall  you  finde  any  bottome  till  you  bee  at  the
very  shore.

I

The  course  from  Roca  partida  or  The  cloven
rocke  to  S.  Juan  de  Ullua.

F you depart from Roca partida or The cloven
rocke for Sant  Juan de  Ullua,  you must stir away
Westnorthwest, and so shall you fetch or fall with
OrAntoni- the point of  Anton Mislardo: and if  you happen to
serro.  sound  upon  The  sunken  rocks  called  Cabezas  anegadas,

you  shall  have  black  sand  and  17.  fathom  water,  and
you  shall  bee  but  a  league  from  the  land,  and  if  you
bee  2.  leagues  from  the  land,  you  shall  have  34.
fathoms.

322

A SECOND RUTTIER

The course  from  Sant  Juan  de  Ullua  in  the  bay
of  Mexico  to  Spaine  in  Europe.

F  you  depart  from  S.  Juan  de  Ullua  to
Havana,  you  must  stir  away  Northeast
until  you  bring  your  selfe  in  25.  de-
grees, and  from  thence  you  must  stir
away  East  from  the  little  Islands  called
Las  Tortugas,  untill  you  have  the  LasTortugas,
sounding of them ; and if you finde

white  sande  very  small,  you  shall  bee  East  and  West
with  them,  and  if  your  sounding  bee  shellie  ground
and  periwinkles,  or  small  shelles  or  skales,  then  shall
you  be  Northeast  and  Southwest,  and  the  shelles  or
skales  must  bee  red,  and  if  at  some  time  you  take  up
blacke  sande,  then  are  you  North  and  South  with  the
sayd  Tortugas.

Markes  of  The  Tortugas.

IF  you  chance  to  fall  with  The  Tortugas,  they  are
5.  or  6.  little  Islands  of  white  sand,  lowe  and  close
by  the  sea,  saving  one  which  hath  on  it  some  shrubs
or  bushes  of  trees: and  they  are  in  25.  degrees.

The  course  from  The  Tortugas  toward  Havana.

IF  you  depart  from  The  Tortugas  towards  Havana
with  a  fresh  winde,  you  must  stir  away  Southwest :
and  if  it  be  faire  weather,  and  a  small  gale  of  winde,
then  stir  South,  that  the  current  may  not  draw  you  in,
nor  set  you  too  much  to  the  Westward  :  and  if  you
fall  with  Los  Organos,  they  are  a  ranke  of  high  and
low  hilles  with  many  sharpe  heads  like  unto  Organ
pipes  and  at  the  entring  thereof  on  the  South  side  is
Rio  de  puercos,  or  The  river  of  hogs ;  and  at  the
further  ende  is  the  deepe  bay  called  Baya  honda,  and
there  is  the  round  loafe  or  heape  called  El  pan  de
baya  honda,  that  is  to  say.  The  loafe  of  the  deepe
bay : and from this place untill you come to Cape

323

The  Miles
called  Los
Organos  upon
Cuba  neere
Havana.
Rio  de
Puercos.
Baya  honda.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

de  sierras.

El  pan  de
Cavannas.

La  mesa  de
Marten.

[III.  621.]

de  S.  Anton  all  is  sholdes  and  flats  4.  or  5.  leagues
into  the  sea,  even  as  farre  as  the  sayde  Cape :  and  from
Baya  honda  or  The  deepe  bay  to  Havana,  all  the  coast
La  Quadrilla  is  full  of  high  and  lowe  hilles,  which  they  call  La
Quadrilla  de  sierras,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  A
companie  of  hilles  together  like  souldiers  on  a  heape ;
and  more  to  the  Eastward  you  shall  descry  an  high
hill  which  is  called  El  pan  de  Cabannas.  And  if  you
fall  with  Havana,  you  shall  see  on  the  Southwest  side
an  hill  called  La  meza  de  Marien,  or  the  Table  of
Marien ;  and  if  it  be  cleare,  you  shall  see  lower  to  the
Westwarde  the  heape  or  loafe  that  is  called  El  pan  de
Cabannas.  You  must  note,  that  about  Havana  it  is  all
lowe  land  even  with  the  sea,  till  you  come  to  Mesa
de  Marien,  and  then  looke  well  within  the  lande,  and
you  shall  see  2.  litde  round  trees  like  to  the  teates  of
womens  breasts ;  and  bringing  your  selfe  North  and
South,  you  shall  be  with  the  harborough  of  Havana,
and  then  shall  you  soone  perceive  the  tower  that  is
upon  the  cliffes  of  Havana.

Markes  of  the  haven  or  port  called  Puerto  de

Marien.

PUerto de Marien is a harbour  that  you  may  enter
into without any danger or feare, but at the
entrance thereof  you must borrow  on the  West side,
by  reason  of  the  rockes  and  shelves,  and  when  you  are
within,  then borrow  on the East  shoare,  and  leave  the
J^oie.  other side,  and  so  shall  you  enter  safe  : and  from  this

place to Havana is all  lowe  lande. Note,  that  if  you
overpasse the harborough  of  Havana to  the Eastward,
or if the current hath set you past it by  meanes of
calmes,  then shall you perceive at full sea upon the
Chtpiona  a coast  certaine broken  places  like  the  enterances  of  har-
towne  standing  bours,  because the lande is lowe  ; and  comming  neere
^/"V?/""^^^ the shoare you shall see in some places  of  the  coast
next  unto  S. Pl^-yas or strandes of sande which shewe like unto
Lucar.  Chipiona  : and  looking  Eastward along the sea coast,

324

T/ie  tower  of
Havana.

A SECOND RUTTIER

you shall  see  a  round  loafe  which  is  called  El pan de  El  pan  de
Matanzas : and also you shall perceive in certaine  ^^t'^»'^<^^-
places round white heapes of  sande called Barrancas.  ^^^^  slmifie
If  you  will  recover  Havana,  go along the coast close  creeks  or
by  the  lande,  for  the  current  runneth  very  swift  in  the  broken
chanell,  and there is no feare but  of  that which you  ^J^^^^"'^"  ^f
may  see  ;  for  all  the  coast  is  cleane  ground.

The  course  from  Havana  to  Spaine.

IF  you  will  saile  from Havana to Spaine,  you must
stirre  away  Northeast,  till you  come to  the  head of

The  Martires  called  La  Cabeza  de los  Martires. If  it  Cabeza  de  hs

chance  before  you  come  to  the  said  head,  that  the  winde  vrfy^l^^'

should  chop  up  at  North  on  you,  then  stand  to  the  East-  Martires  are

ward, untill you bring your selfe as farre ahead as  a  number  of

Matanzas  ;  then  cast  about  to  the  West,  to  discover  the  ^^'^^^  ^^^^^^

lande of  The Martires,  or  of  Florida,  that  the current  l^^f.f f,y

may  not set  you  on  The Mimbres :  and  if  by  chance  pkrida.

you see  The  Pan  de  Matanzas  at  ful  sea,  it  hath  these  Los  Mimbres.

markes  following. It  is  a  round  heape  or  loafe,  and  high  T^^^  markes  of

withall,  and  on  the  Westerne  side  thereof,  appeareth  a  rocke  ff^
like  to  the  head  of  a  Tortoise :  and  betweene  this  Pan  and
the  hilles  of  Seluco,  there  will  appeare  unto  you  a  great
broken  lande,  like  as  it  were sunken places,  and upon

the  East  side  of  this  Pan  toward  Punta  de  los  Puercos  it  P^^^^^  '^^  ^"^

is  all  lowe  lande,  and  you  shall  see  no  high  lande  at  all:  ^"^^'"^•
and being so farre shot, that this Pan de Matanzas
shall  beare  Westnorthwest  and  Southsoutheast  off  you,

and  being  desirous  also  to  avoyde  the  furie  of  the  current  The  furious

of  the  chanell  of  Bahama,  stir  away  Northnortheast,  and  ^^[^'^%  ^^  ^^^
11-  1 11  1  1 11  1-1 chanell  of

by  this  course  you  shall  passe  the chanell,  and  wm  the  Bahama.

coast  of  Florida.

Markes  of  the  head  of  The Martires called
Cabeza  de  los Martires.

THe  head  of  The  Martires  are  three  heapes  of  white
sande  full  of  trees,  and that  in  the  midst  hath  on
the  top  a  crowne,  as  it  were  of  white  sande,  and  is  higher

325

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Directions  to and  bigger  then  the  other  two  :  and  to  know  whether  you

^TJ^jfftAe ^^  ^"^^^^  ^^^°  ^^^  chanell,  marke  well  how  the  coast  lyeth

cJianeU  of ^^  7°^ »  ^"^  ^^  7°^  perceive  that  the  coast  beareth  off

Bahama orno.  you  East  and  West,  you  are  not  in the  chanell;  but  if

the  coast  should  beare  off  you  Northeast  and  Southwest,

then are you in the  chanell ;  and taking  your heigth

you shall know : for if  you finde  your  selfe in 24.

degrees  and ^,  then  are  you East and West  with the

head  of  The  Martires  :  and  if  you  see  the  coast  beare  off

you Northeast and Southwest,  (as I have  sayde) stir

away  4.  or  5.  leagues  from the  landward  right  off;  and

then  stir  away  Northeast:  and  being  in  28.  degrees  and  a

halfe,  you  shall  be  shot  out  of  the  chanell,  and  then  shall

you be  East  and  West  with  Cape de Cannaveral,  or

The  Cape  of  Reedes.

The  course  to  come  through  the  chanell  of  Bahama
homeward  for Spaine.

IF  in  Winter  you  should  passe  through  the  chanell  of
Bahama  for  Spaine,  stirre  away  the  first  Sangradura
or  course  Eastnortheast,  and  afterward  East  and  by
North,  and  so  shall  you  passe  by  the  South  side  of
Bermuda :  and  you  must  take  heede  that  you  goe  these
foure  hundred  or  five  hundred  leagues,  because  you  shall
not  come  neere  the  said  Isle  of  Bermuda;  &  when
you  are  gone  this  course,  then  put  your  selfe  in  what
heigth  you  will,  and  make  your  way  as  you  will  your
selfe.  But  if  you  passe  the  chanell  in  the  Summer  time
towards  Spaine,  stir  away  Eastnortheast,  and  you  shall
passe  by  the  North  side  of  Bermuda ;  and  when  you  have
brought  your  selfe  in  35.  degrees,  stirre  East  and  by  North
untill  you  bring  your  selfe  to  25.  degrees  and  \^  and  from
thence  stir  away  East  for  the  Isle  of  Fayal  or  of  Flores.

[III.  622.]  Markes  to  know  the  Isle  of  Fayal.

THe Island  called Fayal upon the Southwest side,
maketh an high  hill or  loafe  like to the top of
Brasilia in the Island of  Terzera ; and behinde that

326

Cabo  de

Cannaveralin
28.  deg.  and
a  halfe.

The  course  in
Winter.

The  Isle  of
Bermuda.

The  course  hi
the  Summer
more
'Northerly.

A SECOND RUTTIER

high  Pike  or  loafe  is  an  harbour  called  Puerto  Pini,  Puerto  Phi.
and  upon  the  East  side  it  maketh  a  little  plaine  Island  ;
and  upon  the  North  side  there  standeth  a  rocke  or  Island
by  it  selfe.  And  from  this  Island  being  one  of  the
Azores,  you  may  shape  your  course  to  which  of  the
Islands  you  please,  or  to  any  other  place  which  you
know.

Markes  to  know  the  Isle  of  Flores.

IF  you  happen  to  fall  with  Flores  first,  by  this  you
shall  know  it :  the  Island  lyeth  Northeast  and  South-
southwest,  and  the  West  ende  thereof  maketh  a  rocke  or
clifFe  like  the  clifFe  of  Tiburon ;  and  comming  neere  the
lande,  you  shall  see  two  little  Islands  neere  the  point
of  the  lande  ;  and  to  the  Northward  of  this  cliffe  or  rocke
a  little  from  the  land  you  may  ride  and  water  ;  and
betweene  that  and  the  village,  in  every  bay  you  may  like-
wise ride  and  water :  and  you  shall  see  the  water  run  into
the  sea  in  every  part  that  you  looke  on.

Now  followeth  the  course  and  direction  to  saile
from  Passage  on  the  Northeast  part  of  S.  Juan
de  Puerto  rico,  unto  Havana,  by  the  North  side
of  the  Isle  of  Hispaniola,  and  by  The  old
chanell.

El  Passaje  a
place  on  the
'Northeast  part
of  the  Isle  of
S.  Juan  de
Puerto  rico.

i|F  you  depart  from  S.  Juan  de  Puerto  rico
to  seeke  Cabo  del  Enganno,  you  must
stirre  away  Westnorthwest,  and  so  shall
you  see  a  round  heape  or  loafe  in  the
sea,  which  lieth  on  the  Southwest  side  of
the  gulfe  of  Semana ;  and  from  thence
it  beginneth  about  the  hill  of  the  Cape

Cabo  del  En-
ganno the
tjiost  Easterly
Cape  of
Hispaniola.
Or  Samana.

del  Enganno,  &  this  is  the  mouth  of  the  gulfe. And  if  it
should  be  neere  night  when  you  see  this  lande,  stir  away
Northwest  with  a  small  sayle,  because  of  certaine  rockes
called  Las  Ovejas,  or  The  Sheepe  :  and  in  the  morning  cast  Las  Ovejas.
about  to  see  the  land  to  the  Southwestward ;  and  if  when

327

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Cabo  Franco.

El  Puerto  de
Plata.

Baracoa.

Isla  de

Tortugas

otherwise

called

Hinagua.

The  Isle  of

Jaico.

Las  sierras  de
Cabanca.
Cayo  Romano.
This  word
Cayo  in  the
Biscaian
tongue  signi-
fieth  a  flat  or
a  shold.

Cabo  de

Cruz.

you  see  the  land,  it  seemeth  unto  you  a  small  island
at  full  sea  like  a  round  mountaine,  then  is  it  The  cape
del  Enganno :  and  from  thence  stir  away  West  and  by
North  toward  Cabo  Franco.

Markes  of  Cabo  Franco.

CAbo  Franco  is  a  low  Cape  even  with  the  sea,  and  hath
these  markes  *  And  from  thence  stir  away  West,
and  you  shall  see  an  high  mountaine,  and  on  the  top
thereof  a  cloudie  homock  like  the  top  of  a  hat :  and  at  the
foote  of  this  hill  is  the  haven  or  harbour  called  El  puerto
de  plata.  And  if  you  will  goe  into  this  port,  you  must
leave  the  Island  on  the  West  side,  and  then  take  heede  of
that  which  you  see,  and  borrow  on  the  castles  side.  And
from  thence  to  goe  with  the  olde  chanell,  you  must  stirre
away  Northwest,  untill  you  come  out  of  sight  of  lande,
and  then  stir  away  West  and  by  North,  and  so  shall  you
goe  with  the  lande  of  Baracoa,  and  here  are  hilles  very
high,  which  make  the  teats  which  looke  like  3.  crownes.
And  you  shall  passe  betweene  the  Isle  of  Tortugas,  or
Hinagua,  and  the  Island  of  Jaico  :  and  from  thence  run
alongst  the  coast  Northeast  and  Southwest ;  and  having
doubled  the  outmost  high  hill  or  mountaine,  you  shall  see
in  the  midst  thereof  a  round  hill,  and  upon  the  Southwest
side  by  the  sea  you  shall  see  a  lowe  even  lande  foure  or  five
leagues  long,  and  a  lowe  point,  and  this  point  of  the  hill  is
called  La  sierras  de  Cabanca ;  and  then  beginneth  the  bay
of  Cayo  Romano :  and  ahead  the  sierras  you  shall  see
a  rounde  loafe  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  same  bay,
and  ahead  of  that  you  shall  see  a  hill  flat  on  the  top  like  a
table  sixe  or  seven  leagues,  which  hill  is  not  very  high,  and
from  these  hilles  to  Cayo  Romano  you  have  five  and  thirtie
leagues,  and  you  must  stirre  the  one  halfe  of  the  course
Northwest,  and  the  other  halfe  Northwest  and  by  West,
and  so  shall  you  make  or  see  the  sayd  Cayo  Romano  upon
the  larboord  side  of  you.  Note,  that  from  Cayo  Romano
to  Cabo  de  Cruz  you  have  three  leagues,  and  they  lie
North  and  South  one  from  another.

328

A SECOND RUTTIER

Markes  of  Cayo  Romano.

CAyo  Romano  is  an  high  Island,  and  lyeth  Northeast  T^"  Island
and  Southwest,  and  stretcheth  it  selfe  as  it  were  4.  ^J^^^  ^°°-
leagues : and comming  on  it  Northeast  &  Southwest,  it  jjavana.
maketh  a  loafe  or  round  heape  or  homock  ;  in  the  midst
there  are  two  saddles,  as  wee  terme  them,  or  lowe  partitions,
the  one  on  the  one  side,  and  the  other  on  the  other  side  ;
and  comming  with  it  North  and  South,  it  maketh  all  one
lowe  send  or  saddle  in  the  midst. And  if  night  should
come on you at this Cayo Romano, enter not the  [HI.  623.]
chanell,  because  in  the  mid  way  is  an  Isle,  flat,  or  Cayo,
which lyeth North  and  South  with  Cayo  Romana,  and
it  is  called  Cayo  de  la  Cruz  :  and  at  full  sea  you  shall
discerne  a  heath,  which  this  Cayo  hath  in  the  midst  of
it,  which is like to a saile ; but  al night beare but
your foresaile a  glasse one  way  and  another  glasse  the
other  way  untill  it  be  day,  and  then  enter  the  chanell,
and leave these Cayos,  on the larbourd  side  of  you.
Note,  that if  you bee within sight  of  the  Parcel,  and  The  great
see two litle Islands of  white sand,  that  then  you  are  ^'^^^^'•
on the cantell of  the  Parcel  :  and  if  you goe  more  a
head coasting the Parcell, about fifteene leagues, you
shall  see  three  Islands  full  of  trees,  which  are  called  Las  LasAnguillas.
Anguillas  and all these three Islands beare North  and
South  one  from  another. Item  from Cayo  de  Cruz  to
Havana,  if  it be by  day,  stir away  West Northwest ;
but if  it be by  night,  then stir a point more to the
Westward :  and  if  in  this  course  you  chance  to  see  the
Parcell,  feare not  ; for in the lowest  water there are
sixe  fathomes  ;  then  cast  about  to  the  Southwestward  to
get out about two glasses,  and then stir  away  West-
northwest  untill  it  be  day  and  so  shall  you  goe  by  the
Cayos  : and in this course you must keepe twentie
foure leagues or thereabout. And from this Cayo de  Another  Cayo
Cruz sixe or seven leagues  lyeth another Cayo  upon "'*  i  leagues
the  Northeast  and  by  North,  which is  great  and  white,  Q^J^^  ^'^"
and all even  ; But the point on the Southwest is

329

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

El  puerto  de
Matanzas  or
The  haven  of
slaughters.

Las  Sierras  de
Guana.

Cruz,  del
Padre.

La  Bala  de

Conel.

La  Baia  de

Caos,  or

Cayos.

Or

Cameloquea.

smaller,  and  upon  the  said  point  is  a  shrub  or  bush
which  sheweth  like  a  saile  :  also  there  is  a  banke  of
white  sand  along  by  the  sea-side,  which  in  the  middest
thereof  maketh  a  cliff  full  of  trees  that  seemeth  like
a  sadle  :  and  upon  the  Northeast  side  (for  on  this
maner  the  coast  lyeth  along  from  the  Cape)  going  by
the  chanell  you  shal  see  certaine  hilles  eighteene  or
twentie  leagues  long  lying  Northeast  and  Southwest
being  all  saddle-like :  and  bringing  the  poynt  Southwest
off  you,  you  shall  be  in  the  middest  of  the  chanell  :
and  from  thence  you  have  as  farre  to  Matanzas  as  to
Cayo  Romano.  Likewise  from  thence  on  the  side  of
Havana  you  shall  see  certaine  hilles  which  shewe  to
be  three,  and  ly  Northeast  and  Southwest,  and  that
on  the  Southwest  is  highest :  they  are  called  Las  Sierras
de  Guana  :  and  North  and  South  from  them  lyeth  a
flat,  which  is  called  Cayo  de  Nicola,  which  stretched
out  two  leagues  into  the  Sea,  and  in  the  middle
of  the  sayde  flatte  there  is  a  little  Island  of  white
sand  :  and  from  thence  you  must  sayle  to  Cruz  del
Padre.

Markes  of  Cruz  del  Padre.

CRuz  del  Padre  is  a  Cape  all  broken  in  pieces  :
and  from  thence  you  must  stir  away  Northeast,
because  of  the  Bay  that  is  there,  called  the  Bay  of
Conell,  and  this  Bay  stretch  eth  to  the  Bay  of  Caos,
which  is  within  20  leagues  of  the  sayd  poynt :  and
then  stir  away  West  Northwest  to  goe  with  the  Port
of  Matanzas,  and  with  the  hilles  of  Camoniaca.

Markes of  the  hilles of  Camoniaca.

THe  hilles  of  Camoniaca  ly  Northwest  and  South-
east, and  the  Southeast  side  is  lowe  land  and
even :  also  upon  the  Northeast  side  it  is  even  land,
and  runneth  towards  the  Bay  of  Matanzas,  and  in  the
middle  of  these  hilles  there  is  one  high  hill,  and  upon
the  Northeast  side  there  appeareth  a  round  heape  :  and

330

A SECOND RUTTIER

if  you  see  this  hill  at  West  Southwest,  the  Pan  or
round  heape  of  Matanzas  will  beare  off  you  West
and  by  South.

Markes  of  the  round  hill  called  El  pan  de
Matanzas.

THis  Pan  is  a  round  heape  standing  on  a  lowe
land  and  if  you  bring  your  selfe  North  and
South  with  it,  it  will  make  you  two  saddles  ;  and  on
the  West  side  it  maketh  a  great  parted  lande  as  it
were  sinking  with  the  sea.  Note  that  wheresoever  you
shall  goe  to  seeke  the  Tortugas,  and  shall  come  with
the  coast  and  finde  it  beare  off  you  Northeast  and
Southwest,  I  advise  you  to  goe  along  the  coast  to  the
Southwestward  :  you  may  not  deepen  more  then  fortie
five  fathomes,  for  if  you  doe,  you  shall  cast  your  selfe
without  the  Tortugas.

Also  you  must  note,  that  if  by  chance  you  finde  iVo/^.
your  selfe  shotte  betweene  the  Tortugas,  and  the
Martyres,  and  that  you  cannot  goe  on  the  out-side
of  the  sayde  Tortugas,  then  cause  one  to  goe  to  the
top,  to  see  if  you  can  descry  them  ;  and  if  you  cannot
see  them,  stir  away  Southwest  untill  you  see  them ;
and  having  gotten  sight  of  them,  sounde,  and  you  shall
finde  eighteene  or  ninteene  fathomes  :  and  so  sholding
stir  away  South  and  by  West,  and  goe  by  this  course.
And  feare  you  not  the  sholding,  for  you  shall  meete
with  12  fathoms,  and  shall  have  blacke  sand  in  your
sounding.  And  going  neerer  to  the  ende  of  the  said
Tortugas  (for  hee  that  is  on  the  toppe  shall  see  them
all)  as  you  passe  by,  you  shall  finde  but  eight  fathomes,
and  stony  ground,  and  that  is  the  sholdest  water  you  [ill.  624.]
shall  have.  And  you  shall  passe  by  a  bustling  of  a
tyde,  that  shoules  out  of  the  chanel  that  way  :  but
you  neede  not  feare  any  thing  for  you  shall  have  no
lesse  then  eight  fathome  water  :  and  being  past  the
said  bustling  but  a  minion  shot,  you  shal  loose  the
ground  and  be  in  the  chanell.

33^

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

An  advertizment.

WHen  you  shall  passe  this  course,  goe  not  out  of
sight  of  the  Tortugas.  And  if  you  will  goe
from  thence  to  Havana,  having  a  faire  winde,  stir
away  Southwest  because  the  current  may  not  set  you
off :  and  if  with  a  fresh  winde  and  Northerly,  then  stir
away  Southerly.

Here  follow  the  latitudes  of  the  headlandes,
Capes,  and  Islands,  as  well  of  Madera,  The
Canaries,  and  the  West  Indies,  as  of  the
Azores  and  the Isles  of  Cabo  Verde.

Degrees  of
latitude.

THe  island  called  Puerto  santo  standeth  in  33

The  isle  of  Madera  standeth in  32 J

The isle Salvaja  in  30

The  isle  of  Alagranza  in  29I-

The  isle  Fuerte  ventura  in  2  8|-

The  Grand  Canaria  in  28^

The  isle  of  Palma,  and  the  point  called  Punta

de  Naga  in  Tenerif  in  28^^

The  isle  of  Gomera  in  27 J

The  latitudes  of  the Islands  of  the  West  Indies.

Degrees  of
latitude.

The  island  of  Fonzeca  standeth  in  11 5^

The  isle  Tabago  in  skant 1 1

The  Barbudos  in  13

The  isle  of  Trinidad  upon  the  North  side  in  10

The  isle  of  Granata  in  1I5

The  isle  of  Sant  Vincent  in  12

The  isle  of  santa  Lucia  in  12^

The  isle  of  Dominica  in  14

The  isle  of  Matalina  or  Martinino  in  I4|-

332

A SECOND RUTTIER

The  isle  of  Marigalante  in  15

The  isle  of  Deseada  in  15^

The  isle  of  Monserate  in  16

The  isle  called  La  Antigua  in  17

The  isle  called  La  Baruada  in  17

The  isle  of  S.  Bartholomew  in  17

The isle  of  S.  Martin  in  17J

The  isle  called  La  Anguilla  in  skant 1 8

The  isle  of  Sombrero  in  i8|^

The  isle  Anegada  in  i8f

The  isle  called  La  isla  de  Avez  in  15J

The  isles  called  Las  Virgines  in  18

The isle  of  Santa  Cruz  in  17

The  isle  of  S.  Juan  de  J  On  the  North  side  in  1 8  J

Puerto  rico  \  On  the  South  side  in  1 7^

Cape del Enganno upon the East part of  His-

paniola  in
The  point  of  the  isle  of  Saona  in
The Cape called Punta de Nizao neere S. Do-
mingo in  Hispaniola  in
The  isle Beata on the South  side of  Hispaniola

in
The point of  Bacao on the South side of  His-
paniola in
Cape  Tiburon  upon  the  West  part  of  Hispaniola,
and  the  isle  of  Navaza  in

rr^, .  1 r  T • f  On  the  South  side  in
The  isle  or  Jamaican  ^ ^, xt ^u -j •
•'  (On  the  North  side  in

Cape  de  Cruz  on  the  South  side  of  Cuba  in

The  3 Isles  called  Caimanes,  or  Crocodiles,  South

of  Cuba,  in
The  dangerous  isles  called  Los  Jardines  South  of

Cuba  in
The  isle  of  Pinos  in
Cape de Corrientes upon the Southwest part  of

Cuba  in
Cabo de sant Anton being the most westerly

Cape  of  Cuba  in

O  -7  -1

1 81

17

18J

i7i
1 81

20

i9i

21

21

22

[III.  625.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

large.

The  lide  isles  called  Los  Alacranes,  or  The  Scor-
pions, in

The  isles  called  Nigrillos  in

Isla  de  Lobos,  or  The  isle  of  seales  neere  the
maine  of  Nueva  Espanna,  in

The  Cape  of  Yucatan  called  Cabo  de  Catoche  in

The  island  called  Isla  de  Ranas  in

22

23f

22
21
1\\

The  latitudes  of  certaine  places  upon
the  coast  of  Nueva  Espanna,  and
of  divers  other  places  lying  in
the  w^ay  from  thence  to  Spaine.

Villa  rica  standeth  in

Sant.  Juan  de  Ullua  in

From Sant  Juan de  Ullua sayling to the  Tor-

tugas  you  must  sound  in
The  small  isles  called  Las  Tortugas  stand  in
The  Port  of  Havana  upon  the  Northwest  part  of

Cuba  in
The head of  the Martyrs lying  before  the  Cape

of  Florida  in
The  Mimbres  are  in
The  Chanel  of  Bahama  in
The Cape de Cannaveral upon the coast

Florida  in
The  Isle  of  Bermuda  in

Degrees  of
latitude.

i8i

27  J

25

23i

of

25
261

27  J

This  is  a  very  fhe  ^isle  of  John  Luis  or  John  Alvarez  in

commodious

1^

4ii

Isle  for  us  in
our  way  to
Virginia.

The  latitudes  of  the Isles  of  the
Azores.

The  isle  of  Flores  standeth  in

The  isle  of  Cuervo  in

The  isle  of  Fayal  in

The isle of  Pico and the isle  of  Sant George

both  in
The  isle  of  Terzera  in
The  isle  of  Gracioso  in

334

Degrees  of
latitude.

39i
40

38*

39
39  J

A SECOND RUTTIER

The  Isle  of  Santa  Maria  in

The  isle  of  sant  Michael  in

Cape  sant  Vincent  upon  the  coast  of  Spaine

The  Rocke  in

The  Burlings  in

Bayona  in

Cape  Finister  in

The  enterance  of  the  streights  of  Gibraltar  is  in

Cape  Cantin  upon  the  coast  of  Barbarie  in

Cape  Bojador  upon  the  coast  of  Barbarie  in

Rio  del  oro,  or  The  river  of  Gold,  in

Cabo  de  Barbas  in

Cabo  bianco,  or  the  white  Cape  in

The  latitude  of  the  isles  of  Cabo  verde.

The isles of Sant Anton, Sant Vincent, Santa

Lucia,  and  Sant  Nicolas  stand  all  in
Isla  del  Sal,  or  The  isle  of  salt,  in
The  isle  called  Buena  vista  in
The  isle  of  Sant  lago  in

The  latitudes  of  divers  Islands,  Capes,
and  other  places,  from  the  Isle  of
Margarita  upon  the  coast  of  Cu-
mana  Westward  along  the  coast
of  Tierra  Firma.

37

38

37

39
40

43i

36

32J
27*

23i

22

20S

18J

i7i
16

15

large.

[III.  626.]

Degrees  of
latitude.

The isles  of  Aruba,  Curazao,  and Buinaro stand

all  in
The  isle  of  Margarita  in
The  islandes  called  Los  Testigos  in
The coast  of  Baya Honda to Cape de  la  Vela

lyeth  East  and  West  in
Cape  del  Aguja  in
The  rockes  of  Serrana  in
The  Roncador  in
The  isle  of  Santa  Catelina  in
The  isle  of  Sant  Andrew  in

335

12
II
III

12
iij

14
13J

i3i

12I

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Seranilla  in  15^

The  isle  of  Centanilla  or  Santanilla  in  17^
Cape Camaron on the maine, South of the

enterance  of  the  Honduras  16

Ganaba  in  i6|,

Genaza  in  16^

Here  foUoweth  a  declaration  of  the  Longi-
tudes, or  Western  and  Eastern  dis-
tances, from  Spaine  to  Newe  Spaine
in  America,  and  from  thence  backe
againe  to Spaine.  Leagues.

From  Sal  Medina  upon the Coast  Andaluzia  till
you bring  your selfe  North  and  South  with

Cape  Cantin  upon  the  Coast  of  Barbary  85

From Sal  Medina  to  the  island  of  Gran  Canaria  200

From  the  Gran  Canaria  to  Deseada  850

From  Deseada  to  Monserate  20

From  Monserate  to  santa  Cruz  58
From santa Cruz to Cape Roxo the Southwest

Cape  of  Sant  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico  45

From  Cape  Roxo  to  Saona  25

From  Saona  to  sant  Domingo  25

From  sant  Domingo  to  Ocoa  1 8

From  Ocoa  to  Beata  20

From  Beata  to  the  isle  Baque  43

From  the  isle  Baque  to  Navaza  33

From Navaza  to  sant  lago  of  Cuba  32

From  sant  lago  of  Cuba  to  Cabo  de  Cruz  34

From Cabo  de  Cruz  to  the  first  Cayman  40

From  the  first  Cayman  to  the  middle  Cayman  6

From  the  middle  Cayman  to  the  great  Cayman  12

From  the  great  Cayman  to  the  isle  of  Pinos  48
From Cabo de  Cruz  to  the  isle  of  Pinos  by  the

forsaid  course  106

From  the  isle  of  Pinos  to  Cabo  de  Corrientes  19

From  Cabo  de  Corrientes  to  Cabo  de  sant  Anton  20

A SECOND RUTTIER

The  course  from
Cabo  de  sant
Anton  to  sant
Juan  de  Ullua  by  J
the  outside  or
North  of  the
Isles  called
Alacranes.

The  course  from
Cabo  de  Corrl-
entes  to  sant  Juan  i
de Ullua on the
inside  or  South  of
the  Alacranes.

From Cabo de sant Anton to

the  Nigrillos  io6

From  the  Nigrillos,  untill  you
bring  your  selfe  North  and
South  with  the  isle  Vermeja 25

From  the  isle  Vermeja  to  Villa  Rica 96

From  Villa  rica  to  Sant  Juan  de

Ullua  1 2

From Cabo  de  Corrientes  to  the

first  sounding  45

From  the  first  sounding  till  you
come  so  farre  a  head  as  the
island  called  Isla  de  Ranas  80

From  Isla  de  Ranas  unto

The  longitudes  from  New  Spaine,  backe
againe  to  Spaine.

From  Saint  Juan  de  Ullua  to  the  Tortugas.

From  the  Tortugas  to  Havana.

From  Havana  to  the  head  of  the  Martyrs.

From  the  head  of  the  Martyrs  to  the  Mimbres.

From  the  Mimbres  to  Bahama.

From the head of the Martyrs to Cabo de

Cannaveral.
From  Cabo  de  Cannaveral  to  Bermuda.
From Bermuda to the Isle of John Luis or

John  Alvarez.
From the Isle of John Luis or Alvarez to

Flores.
From  Flores  to  Fayal.
From  Fayal  to  Terzera.
From  Terzera  to  Saint  Michael.
From  Saint  Michael  to  Cape  Saint  Vincent.
From  Terzera  to  Cape  Saint  Vincent.
From  Cape  S.  Vincent to Cabo de santa Maria

upon  the  coast  of  Algarbe.
From Cabo de santa Maria to Sal Medina

in  Andaluzia.
X  337

[III.  627.]

Leagues.
280

30

22

62

350

320

300

28

28

28

218

256

22
32

A.D.
1595.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The discoverie of  the large,  rich,  and  beautifull

Empire  of  Guiana,  with  a  relation  of  the  great  and

golden  citie  of  Manoa (which  the Spaniards  call

El  Dorado)  and  the  provinces  of  Emeria,  Aromaia,

Amapaia,  and  other  countries,  with  their  rivers  ad-

joyning. Performed  in  the  yeere  1595  by  Sir  Walter

Ralegh  Knight,  Captaine  of  Her  Majesties

Guard,  Lorde  Warden  of  the  Stanneries,

and  Her  Highnesse  Leiutenant  Generall

of  the  Countie  of  Corne-wall.

To  the  right  Honourable  my  singular  good  Lord  and
kinsman  Charles  Howard,  Knight  of  the  Garter,
Baron  and  Counceller,  and  of  the  Admirals  of
England  the  most  renowmed  :  and  to  the  right
Honourable  Sir  Robert  Cecyll  knight,  Counceller
in  her  Highnesse  Privie  Councels.

Or  your  Honours  many  Honourable
and  friendly  partes,  I  have  hitherto
onely  returned  promises,  and  now  for
answere  of  both  your  adventures,  I
have  sent  you  a  bundle  of  papers,
which  I  have  devided  betwene  your
Lordship,  and  Sir  Robert  Cecyll  in
these  two  respects  chiefly  :  First  for  that  it  is  reason,
that  wastful  factors,  when  they  have  consumed  such
stockes  as  they  had  in  trust,  doe  yeeld  some  colour  for
the  same  in  their  account  ;  secondly  for  that  I  am
assured,  that  whatsoever  shall  bee  done,  or  written  by
me,  shall  neede  a  double  protection  and  defence.  The
triall  that  I  had  of  both  your  loves,  when  I  was  left
of  all,  but  of  malice  and  revenge,  makes  me  still
presume,  that  you  wil  be  pleased  (knowing  what  litle
power  I  had  to  performe  ought,  and  the  great
advantage  of  forewarned  enemies)  to  answer  that  out
of  knowledge, which others shal but object out of

338

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
malice.  In  my  more  happy  times  as  I  did  especially
Hon.  you  both,  so  I  found  that  your  loves  sought  mee
out  in  the  darkest  shadow  of  adversitie,  and  the  same
affection  which  accompanied  my  better  fortune,  sored
not  away  from  me  in  my  many  miseries  :  al  which
though  I  can  not  requite,  yet  I  shal  ever  acknowledge  :
&  the  great  debt  which  I  have  no  power  to  pay,  I  can
do  no  more  for  a  time  but  confesse  to  be  due.  It  is
true  that  as  my  errors  were  great,  so  they  have  yeelded
very  grievous  effects,  &  if  ought  might  have  bene
deserved  in  former  times  to  have  counterpoysed  any
part  of  offences,  the  fruit  thereof  (as  it  seemeth)  was
long  before  fallen  from  the  tree,  &  the  dead  stocke
onely  remained.  I  did  therefore  even  in  the  winter  of
my  life,  undertake  these  travels,  fitter  for  bodies  lesse
blasted  with  mis-fortunes,  for  men  of  greater  abilitie,
and  for  mindes  of  better  incouragement,  that  thereby,
if  it  were  possible,  I  might  recover  but  the  moderation
of  excesse,  &  the  least  tast  of  the  greatest  plenty
formerly  possessed.  If  I  had  knowen  other  way  to
win,  if  I  had  imagined  how  greater  adventures  might
have  regained,  if  I  could  conceive  what  farther  meanes
I  might  yet  use,  but  even  to  appease  so  powreful  dis-
pleasure, I  would  not  doubt  but  for  one  yeere  more  to
hold  fast  my  soule  in  my  teeth,  till  it  were  performed.
Of  that  litle  remaine  I  had,  I  have  wasted  in  effect  all
herein.  I  have  undergone  many  constructions.  I  [III.  628.]
have  bene  accompanyed  with  many  sorrowes,  with
labour,  hunger,  heat,  sickenes,  &  perill  :  It  appeareth
notwithstanding  that  I  made  no  other  bravado  of  going
to  the  sea,  then  was  ment,  and  that  I  was  never  hidden
in  Cornewall,  or  els  where,  as  was  supposed.  They
have  grosly  belied  me,  that  forejudged,  that  I  would
rather  become  a  servant  to  the  Spanish  king,  then
returne,  and  the  rest  were  much  mistaken,  who  would
have  perswaded,  that  I  was  too  easefuU  and  sensuall  to
undertake  a  journey  of  so  great  travell.  But,  if  what
I have done, receive the gracious construction of a

339

AD.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1595.

painefull  pilgrimage,  and  purchase  the  least  remission,
I  shall  thinke  all  too  litle,  &  that  there  were  wanting
to  the  rest  many  miseries.  But  if  both  the  times  past,
the  present,  and  what  may  be  in  the  future,  doe  all  by
one  graine  of  gall  continue  in  eternall  distast ;  I  doe
not  then  know  whether  I  should  bewaile  my  selfe,
either  for  my  too  much  travell  and  expence,  or
condemne  my  selfe  for  doing  lesse  then  that,  which
can  deserve  nothing.  From  my  selfe  I  have  deserved
no  thankes,  for  I  am  returned  a  beggar,  and  withered,
but  that  I  might  have  bettred  my  poore  estate,  it  shall
appeare  by  the  following  discourse,  if  I  had  not  onely
respected  her  Majesties  future  Honour,  and  riches.
It  became  not  the  former  fortune  in  which  I  once  lived,
to  goe  journeys  of  picory,  it  had  sorted  ill  with  the
offices  of  Honour,  which  by  her  Majesties  grace  I  hold
this  day  in  England,  to  run  from  Cape  to  Cape,  and
from  place  to  place,  for  the  pillage  of  ordinaries  prizes.
Many  yeeres  since,  I  had  knowledge  by  relation,  of
that  mighty,  rich  and  beautifuU  Empier  of  Guiana,  and
of  that  great  and  golden  Citie,  which  the  Spaniards  call
El  Dorado,  and  the  naturals  Manoa,  which  Citie  was
conquered,  reedified,  and  inlarged  by  a  yonger  sonne
of  Guainacapa  Emperour  of  Peru,  at  such  time  as
Francisco  Pizarro  and  others  conquered  the  said
Empire,  from  his  two  elder  brethren,  Guascar,  and
Atabalipa,  both  then  contending  for  the  same,  the  one
being  favoured  by  the  Orejones  of  Cuzco,  the  other
by  the  people  of  Caxamalca.  I  sent  my  servant  Jacob
Whiddon  the  yere  before,  to  get  knowledge  of  the
passages,  and  I  had  some  light  from  Captaine  Parker,
sometime  my  servant,  and  nowe  attending  on  your
Lordship,  that  such  a  place  there  was  to  the  Southward
of  the  great  Bay  of  Charuas,  or  Guanipa  :  but  I  found
that  it  was  600  miles  farther  oiF  then  they  supposed,
and  many  other  impediments  to  them  unknowen  and
unheard.  After  I  had  displanted  Don  Antonio  de
Berreo,  who  was  upon  the  same  enterprize,  leaving  my

340

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-
ships  at  Trinidad,  at  the  Port  called  Curiapan,  I
wandred  400  miles  into  the  said  countrey  hy  lande  and
river :  the  particulars  I  will  leave  to  the  following
discourse.  The  countrey  hath  more  quantity  of  gold
by  manifolde,  then  the  best  partes  of  the  Indies,  or
Peru  :  All  the  most  of  the  kings  of  the  borders  are
already  become  her  Majesties  vassals  :  and  seeme  to
desire  nothing  more  then  her  Majesties  protection  and
the  returne  of  the  English  nation.  It  hath  another
ground  and  assurance  of  riches  and  glory,  then  the
voyages  of  the  West  Indies,  an  easier  way  to  invade  the
best  parts  thereof,  then  by  the  common  course.  The
king  of  Spaine  is  not  so  impoverished,  by  taking  three
or  foure  Port  townes  in  America,  as  wee  suppose,  neither
are  the  riches  of  Peru,  or  Nueva  Espanna  so  left
by  the  sea  side,  as  it  can  bee  easily  washt  away  with  a
great  flood,  or  springtide,  or  left  dry  upon  the  sandes
on  a  lowe  ebbe.  The  Port  townes  are  fewe  and  poore
in  respect  of  the  rest  within  the  lande,  and  are  of  litle
defence,  and  are  onely  rich,  when  the  Fleets  are  to  receive
the  treasure  for  Spaine :  and  we  might  thinke  the
Spaniards  very  simple,  having  so  many  horses  and  slaves,
if  they  could  not  upon  two  dayes  warning  cary  all  the
golde  they  have  into  the  land,  and  farre  enough  from  the
reach  of  our  foote-men,  especially  the  Indies  being  (as
they  are  for  the  most  part)  so  mountanous,  so  full  of
woodes,  rivers,  and  marishes.  In  the  Port  townes  of  the
Province  of  Venezuela,  as  Cumana,  Coro  and  S.  lago
(whereof  Coro  and  S.  lago  were  taken  by  Captaine
Preston,  and  Cumana  and  S.  Josepho  by  us)  we  found
not  the  value  of  one  riall  of  plate  in  either :  but  the
Cities  of  Barquasimeta,  Valencia,  S.  Sebastian,  Cororo,  S.
Lucia,  Laguna,  Maracaiba,  and  Truxillo,  are  not  so  easely
invaded  :  neither  doeth  the  burning  of  those  on  the  coast
impoverish  the  king  of  Spaine,  any  one  ducat :  and  if  we
sacke  the  river  of  Hacha,  S.  Marta,  and  Cartagena,  which
are  the  Portes  of  Nuevo  reyno,  and  Popayan ;  there  are
besides within the land, which are indeed riche and

341

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

populous,  the  townes  and  Cities  of  Merida,  Lagrita,  S.
Christophoro,  the  great  Cities  of  Pamplon  S.  Fe  de
Bogota,  Tunxa  and  Mozo  where  the  Esmeralds  are  found,
the  townes  and  Cities  of  Marequita,  Velez,  la  Villa  de
Leva,  Palma,  Unda,  Angustura,  the  great  citie  of  Timana,
Tocaima,  S.  Aguila,  Pasto,  Juago,  the  great  Citie  of
Popaian  it  selfe,  Los  Remedios,  and  the  rest.  If  we  take
the  Ports  and  villages  within  the  Bay  of  Uraba,  in  the
kingdom  or  rivers  of  Dariene,  and  Caribana,  the  Cities
and  townes  of  S.  Juan  de  Roydas,  of  Cassaris,  of
Antiocha,  Caramanta,  Cali,  and  Anserma  have  gold
enough  to  pay  the  kings  part,  and  are  not  easily  invaded
by  the  way  of  the  Ocean :  or  if  Nombre  de  Dios  and
Panama  be  taken  in  the  Province  of  Castilla  del  oro,  and
[III.  629.]  the  villages  upon  the  rivers  of  Cenu  &  Chagre ;  Peru
hath  besides  those  &  besides  the  magnificent  cities  of
Quito  &  Lima  so  many  ylands,  ports,  cities,  and  mines,
as  if  I  should  name  them  with  the  rest,  it  would  seem
incredible  to  the  reader :  of  all  which,  because  I  have
A  treatise  written  a  particular  treatise  of  the  West  Indies,  I  wil  omit
°yj  ^'^  the  repetition  at  this  time,  seeing  that  in  the  said  treatise  I
have  anatomized  the  rest  of  the  sea-townes  aswel  of  Nicar-
agua, lucatan,  Nueva  Espanna,  &  the  ylands,  as  those  of
the  Inland,  &  by  what  meanes  they  may  be  best  invaded,
as  far  as  any  meane  judgement  can  comprehend.  But  I
hope  it  shal  appeare  that  there  is  a  way  found  to  answer
every  mans  longing,  a  better  Indies  for  her  Majestic  then
the  King  of  Spaine  hath  any :  which  if  it  shal  please  her
highnes  to  undertake,  I  shal  most  willingly  end  the  rest
of  my  daies  in  folowing  the  same :  if  it  be  left  to  the
spoile  &  sackage  of  common  persons,  if  the  love  &
service  of  so  many  nations  be  despised,  so  great  riches,  &
so  mighty  an  empire  refused,  I  hope  her  majesty  wil  yet
take  my  humble  desire  and  my  labor  therin  in  gracious
part,  which,  if  it  had  not  bin  in  respect  of  her  highnes
future  honor  &  riches,  could  have  laid  hands  on  &
ransomed  many  of  the  kings  &  Casiqui  of  the  country,
& have had a reasonable proportion of  gold for  their

342

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA

redemption :  but  I  have  chosen  rather  to  beare  the
burden  of  poverty,  then  reproch,  &  rather  to  endure  a
second  travel  and  the  chances  therof,  then  to  have
defaced  an  enterprise  of  so  great  assurance,  untill  I  knew
whether  it  pleased  God  to  put  a  disposition  in  her
princely  &  royal  heart  either  to  folow  or  foreslow  the
same :  I  wil  therefore  leave  it  to  his  ordinance  that  hath
only  power  in  all  things,  &  do  humbly  pray  that  your
honors  wil  excuse  such  errors,  as  without  the  defence  of
art,  overrun  in  every  part  of  the  folowing  discourse,  in
which  I  have  neither  studied  phrase,  forme  nor  fashion,
that  you  will  be  pleased  to  esteeme  mee  as  your  owne
(though  over  dearly  bought)  and  I  shall  ever  remaine
ready  to  do  you  all  honour  and  service.

W.  R.

f  To  the Reader.

Ecause  there  have  bin  divers  opinions
conceived  of  the  gold  oare  broght  from
Guiana,  and  for  that  an  Alderman  of
London  &  an  officer  of  her  Majesties
Mint,  hath  given  out  that  the  same  is  of
no  price,  I  have  thought  good  by  the  addi-
tion of  these  lines  to  give  answer  aswel  to
the  said  malicious  slander,  as  to  other  objections.  It  is  true
that  while  we  abode  at  the  yland  of  Trinidad,  I  was  in-
formed, by  an  Indian,  that  not  far  from  the  Port,  where  we
ancored,  there  were  found  certaine  mineral  stones  which
they  esteemed  to  be  gold,  &  were  thereunto  perswaded
the  rather  for  that  they  had  'seene  both  English  and
Frenchmen  gather,  &  imbark  some  quantities  therof:
upon  this  likelyhood  I  sent  40.  men  &  gave  order  that
each  one  should  bring  a  stone  of  that  mine  to  make  trial
of  its  goodnes :  which  being  performed,  I  assured  them
at  their  returne  that  the  same  was  Marcasite,  &  of  no
riches  or  value :  notwithstanding  divers,  trusting  more  to
their  owne  sence,  then  to  my  opinion,  kept  of  the  said
Marcasite,  and  have  tried  therof  since  my  returne  in  divers

343

A.D.
1595.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

places.  In  Guiana  it  selfe  I  never  saw  Marcasite,  but  al
the  rocks,  mountains,  al  stones  in  ye  plaines,  woods,  &  by
the  rivers  side  are  in  effect  throughshining,  and  seem
marvelous  rich,  which  being  tried  to  be  no  Marcasite,  are
the  true  signes  of  rich  minerals,  but  are  no  other  then  El
madre  del  oro  (as  the  Spaniards  terme  them)  which  is  the
mother  of  gold,  or  as  it  is  said  by  others  the  scum  of
gold :  of  divers  sorts  of  these  many  of  my  company
brought  also  into  England,  every  one  taking  ye  fairest
for  the  best,  which  is  not  general.  For  mine  own  part
I  did  not  countermand  any  mans  desire,  or  opinion,  &  I
could  have  aforded  them  litle  if  I  should  have  denied
them  the  pleasing  of  their  owne  fancies  therein  :  but  1
was  resolved  that  gold  must  be  found  either  in  graines
separate  from  the  stone  (as  it  is  in  most  of  the  rivers  in
Guiana)  or  els  in  a  kind  of  hard  stone,  which  we  call  The
white  spar,  of  which  I  saw  divers  hils,  &  in  sundry  places,
but  had  neither  time  nor  men,  nor  instruments  fit  for
labour.  Neere  unto  one  of  the  rivers  I  found  of  the  said
White  sparre  or  flint  a  very  great  ledge  or  banke,  which  I
endevoured  to  breake  by  al  the  meanes  I  could,  because
there  appeared  on  the  outside  some  smal  graines  of
of  gold,  but  finding  no  meane  to  worke  the  same  upon
the  upper  part,  seeking  the  sides  and  circuit  of  the  said
rocke,  I  found  a  clift  in  the  same  from  whence  with
daggers,  and  with  the  head  of  an  axe,  we  got  out  some
smal  quantitie  therof,  of  which  kind  of  white  stone
(wherin  gold  ingendred)  we  saw  divers  hils  and  rocks  in
every  part  of  Guiana,  wherein  we  traveiled.  Of  this
there  have  bin  many  trials,  and  in  London  it  was  first
assaid  by  M.  Westwood  a  refiner  dwelling  in  Woodstreet,
and  it  held  after  the  rate  of  12000.  or  13000.  pounds  a
tunne.  Another  sort  was  afterward  tried  by  M.  Bulmar
&  M.  Dimock  Assay-master,  &  it  held  after  the  rate  of
23000  li.  a  tunne.  There  was  some  of  it  againe  tried  by
M.  Palmer  comptroller  of  the  Mint,  and  M.  Dimock  in
goldsmiths  hal,  &  it  held  after  26900.  li.  a  tun.  There
was  also  at  the  same  time,  &  by  the  same  persons  a  trial

344

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-

made  of  the  dust  of  the  said  mine  which  held  8  li.  6.
ounces  weight  of  gold  in  the  lOO:  there  was  likewise  [HI.  630,]
at  the  same  time  a  triall  of  an  image  of  copper  'made  in
Guiana,  which  held  a  third  part  of  gold,  besides  divers
trials  made  in  the  countrey,  &  b|*'  others  in  London.
But  because  there  came  ill  with  the  good,  &  belike  the
said  Alderman  was  not  presented  -Hvith  the  best,  it  hath
pleased  him  therefore  to  scandall  all  the  rest,  and  to
deface  the  enterprize  as  much  as  in  him  lieth.  It  hath
also  bene  concluded  by  divers,  that  if  there  had  bin  any
such  oare  in  Guiana,  and  the  same  discovered,  that  I
would  have  brought  home  a  greater  quantitie  thereof:
first  I  was  not  bound  to  satisfie  any  man  of  the  quantitie,
but  such  onely  as  adventured,  if  any  store  had  bin
returned  thereof:  but  it  is  very  true  that  had  al  their
mountaines  bene  of  massie  gold,  it  was  impossible  for  us
to  have  made  any  longer  stay  to  have  wrought  the  same :
and  whosoever  hath  scene  with  what  strength  of  stone  the
best  gold  oare  is  invironed,  hee  will  not  thinke  it  easie  to
be  had  out  in  heapes,  and  especially  by  us,  who  had
neither  men,  instruments,  nor  time  (as  it  is  said  before)  to
performe  the  same.  There  were  on  this  discovery  no
lesse  then  100.  persons,  who  can  all  witnesse,  that  when
we  past  any  branch  of  the  river  to  view  the  land  within,
and  staied  from  our  boats  but  6.  houres,  wee  were  driven
to  wade  to  the  eyes,  at  our  returne :  and  if  wee  attempted
the  same,  the  day  following  it  was  impossible  either  to
ford  it,  or  to  swim  it,  both  by  reason  of  the  swiftnesse,
and  also  for  that  the  borders 'were  so  pestred  with  fast
woods,  as  neither  boat  nor  man  could  find  place,  either  to
land  or  to  imbarke :  for  in  June,  July,  August  and
September,  it  is  impossible  to  navigate  any  of  those
rivers :  for  such  is  the  fury  of  the  current,  and  there
are  so  many  trees  and  woods  overflowne,  as  if  any  boat
but  touch  upon  any  tree  or  stake,  it  is  impossible
to  save  any  one  person  therein :  and  yer  we  departed
the  land  it  ranne  with  such  swiftnes,  as  wee  drave
downe most commonly against the wind, little lesse

345

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

than  loo.  miles  a  day:  Besides  our  vessels  were
no  ot^er  thet^  whirries,  one  little  barge,  a  small
c^ckbo^,  and  a  U)ad  Galiota,  which  we  framed  in
hast  for  that  purpose  at  Trinidad,  and  those  little  boats
had  9.  or  lo^men^i  piece,  with  all  their  victuals,  and
armes.  It  is  further  «•  true,  that  we  were  about  400.
miles  from  our  sh?pte,  and  had  bene  a  moneth  from
them,  which  also  we  left  weakly  manned  in  an  open
road,  and  had  promised  our  returne  in  15.  dayes.
Others  have  devised  that  the  same  oare  was  had  from
Barbary,  and  that  we  caried  it  with  us  into  Guiana :  surely
the  singularitie  of  that  device  I  doe  not  well  compre-
hend :  for  mine  owne  part,  I  am  not  so  much  in  love
with  these  long  voyages,  as  to  devise,  therby  to  cozen
my  selfe,  to  lie  hard,  to  fare  worse,  to  be  subjected  to
perils,  to  diseases,  to  ill  savors,  to  be  parched  &  withered,
and  withall  to  sustaine  the  care  &  labour  of  such  an
enterprize,  except  the  same  had  more  comfort,  then  the
fetching  of  Marcasite  in  Guiana,  or  buying  of  gold
oare  in  Barbary,  But  I  hope  the  better  sort  wil
judge  me  by  themselves,  &  that  the  way  of  deceit  is
not  the  way  of  honor  or  good  opinion  :  I  have  herein  con-
sumed much  time,  &  many  crownes,  &  I  had  no  other
respect  or  desire  then  to  serve  her  Majestie  and  my  coun-
try thereby.  If  the  Spanish  nation  had  bene  of  like
beliefe  to  these  detracters,  we  should  litle  have  feared  or
doubted  their  attempts,  wherewith  we  now  are  daily
threatned.  But  if  we  now  consider  of  the  actions  both  of
Charles  the  5.  who  had  th^  maidenhead  of  Peru,  and  the
abundant  treasures  of  Atabalipa,  together  with  the  affaires
of  the  Spanish  king  now  living,  what  territories  he
hath  purchased,  what  he  hath  added  to  the  acts  of  his
predecessors,  how  many  .kingdoms  he  hath  indangered,
how  many  armies,  garisons,  &  navies  he  hath  and  doth
mainteine,  the  great  losses  which  he  hath  repaired,  as
in  88.  above  100.  saile  of  great  ships  with  their  artillery,
&  that  no  yere  is  lesse  unfortunate  but  that  many
vessels,  treasures,  and  people  are  devoured,  and  yet  not-

346

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-

withstanding  he  beginneth  againe  like  a  storme  to  threaten  ,

shipwrack  to  us  all :  we  shall  find  that  these  abilities
rise  not  from  the  trades  of  sacks,  and  Sivil  oringes,  nor
from  ought  els  that  either  Spaine,  Portugal,  or  any  of
his  other  provinces  produce :  it  is  his  Indian  gold  that
indangereth  and  disturbeth  all  the  nations  of  Europe,  it
purchaseth  intelligence,  creepeth  into  counsels,  and  setteth
bound  loyaltie  at  libertie,  in  the  greatest  Monarchies  of
Europe.  If  the  Spanish  king  can  keepe  us  from  forren
enterprizes,  &  from  the  impeachment  of  his  trades,  either
by  offer  of  invasion,  or  by  besieging  us  in  Britaine,
Ireland,  or  elsewhere,  hee  hath  then  brought  the  worke  of
our  peril  in  great  forwardnes.  Those  princes  which
abound  in  treasure  have  great  advantages  over  the  rest,  if
they  once  constraine  them  to  a  defensive  war,  where  they
are  driven  once  a  yere  or  oftener  to  cast  lots  for  their
own  garments,  and  from  such  shal  all  trades,  &  enter-
course  be  taken  away,  to  the  general  losse  and  impoverish-
ment of  the  kingdom  and  common  weale  so  reduced :
besides  when  our  men  are  constrained  to  fight,  it  hath  not
the  like  hope,  as  when  they  are  prest  &  incouraged
by  the  desire  of  spoile  &  riches.  Farther,  it  is  to  be
douted  how  those  that  in  time  of  victory  seeme  to
affect  their  neighbor  nations,  wil  remaine  after  the  first
view  of  misfortunes,  or  il  successe ;  to  trust  also  to  the
doubtfulnes  of  a  battel,  is  but  a  fearefuU  &  uncertaine  ad-
venture, seeing  therein  fortune  is  as  likely  to  prevaile,  as  [III.  631.]
vertue.  It  shall  not  be  necessary  to  alleage  all  that  might
bee  said,  and  therefore  I  will  thus  conclude,  that  whatso-
ever kingdome  shalbe  inforced  to  defend  it  selfe  may  be
compared  to  a  body  dangerously  diseased,  which  for  a
season  may  be  preserved  with  vulgar  medicines,  but  in  a
short  time,  and  by  litle  and  litle,  the  same  must  needs  fall
to  the  ground,  &  be  dissolved.  I  have  therefore  laboured
all  my  life,  both  according  to  my  smal  power,  &  per-
swasion,  to  advance  al  those  attempts,  that  might  either
promise  return  of  profit  to  our  selves,  or  at  least  be  a  let
and  impeachment  to  the  quiet  course  and  plentifull  trades

347

A.D.

1595-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  the  Spanish  nation,  who  in  my  weake  judgement  by-
such  a  warre  were  as  easily  indangered  &  brought  from
his  powerfuhies,  as  any  prince  of  Europe,  if  it  be  con-
sidered from  how  many  kingdomes  and  nations  his
revenues  are  gathered,  &  those  so  weake  in  their  owne
beings,  and  so  far  severed  from  mutual  succour.  But
because  such  a  preparation  and  resolution  is  not  to  be
hoped  for  in  hast,  &  that  the  time  which  our  enemies  em-
brace, cannot  be  had  againe  to  advantage,  I  wil  hope  that
these  provinces,  and  that  Empire  now  by  me  discovered
shal  suffice  to  inable  her  Majestie  &  the  whole  kingdome,
with  no  lesse  quantities  of  treasure,  then  the  king  of
Spaine  hath  in  all  the 'Indies  East  and  West,  which  he
possesseth,  which  if  the  same  be  considered  and  followed,
ere  the  Spaniards  enforce  the  same,  and  if  her  Majestie
wil  undertake  it,  I  wil  be  contented  to  lose  her  highnesse
favour  &  good  opinion  for  ever,  and  my  life  withall,
if  the  same  be  not  found  rather  to  exceed,  then  to  equal
whatsoever  is  in  this  discourse  promised  or  declared.
I  wil  now  referre  the  Reader  to  the  following  discourse,
with  the  hope  that  the  perillous  and  chargeable  labours  and
indevors  of  such  as  thereby  seeke  the  profit  and  honour
of  her  Majestie,  and  the  English  nation,  shall  by  men  of
qualitie  and  vertue  receive  such  construction,  and  good
acceptance,  as  themselves  would  looke  to  be  rewarded
withall  in  the  like.

W.  R.

IF  The  discoverie  of  Guiana.

N  Thursday  the  6.  of  February  in  the
yere  1595-  we  departed  England,  and
the  Sunday  following  had  sight  of  the
North  cape  of  Spaine,  the  winde  for  the
most  part  continuing  prosperous :  we
passed  in  sight  of  the  Burlin^s,  &  the
Rocke,  and  so  onwards  for  the  Canaries,
and  fel  with  Fuerte  ventura  the  17  of  the  same  moneth,
where  we  spent  two  or  three  dayes,  and  relieved  our  com-

348

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA

A.D.

1595.

The  yle  of
Trinidad.

panics  with  some  fresh  meat.  From  thence  we  coasted  by
the  Grand  Canaria,  &  so  to  Tenerif,  and  stayed  there  for
the  Lions  whelpe  your  Lordships  ship,  and  for  Captaine
Amyas  Preston  and  the  rest.  But  when  after  7.  or  8.
dayes  wee  found  them  not,  we  departed  and  directed  our
course  for  Trinidad  with  mine  owne  ship,  and  a  small
barke  of  captaine  Crosses  onely  (for  we  had  before  lost
sight  of  a  smal  Galego  on  the  coast  of  Spaine,  which  came
with  us  from  Plimmouth :)  we  arrived  at  Trinidad  the  22.
of  March,  casting  ancker  at  point  Curiapan,  which  the
Spaniards  call  punta  de  Gallo,  which  is  situate  in  8.
degrees  or  there  abouts :  we  abode  there  4.  or  5.  dayes,  &
in  all  that  time  we  came  not  to  the  speach  of  any  Indian
or  Spaniard :  on  the  coast  we  saw  a  fire,  as  we  sailed  from
the  point  Caroa  towards  Curiapan,  but  for  feare  of  the  Curiapan.
Spaniards  none  durst  come  to  speake  with  us.  I  my  selfe
coasted  it  in  my  barge  close  abord  the  shore  and  landed  in
every  Cove,  the  better  to  know  the  yland,  while  the  ships
kept  the  chanell.  From  Curiapan  after  a  few  dayes
we  turned  up  Northeast  to  recover  that  place  which  the
Spaniards  call  Puerto  de  los  Espannoles,  and  the  in-
habitants Conquerabia,  and  as  before  (revictualing  my
barge)  I  left  the  ships  and  kept  by  the  shore,  the  better  to
come  to  speach  with  some  of  the  inhabitants,  and  also  to
understand  the  rivers,  watering  places,  &  ports  of  the
yland,  which  (as  it  is  rudely  done)  my  purpose  is  to  send
your  Lordship  after  a  few  dayes.  From  Curiapan  I  came
to  a  port  and  seat  of  Indians  called  Parico,  where  we  Parico.
found  a  fresh  water  river,  but  saw  no  people.  From
thence  I  rowed  to  another  port,  called  by  the  naturals
Piche,  and  by  the  Spaniards  Tierra  de  Brea :  In  the  way  Tierra  de
betweene  both  were  divers  little  brookes  of  fresh  water  ^''^'^•
and  one  salt  river  that  had  store  of  oisters  upon
the  branches  of  the  trees,  and  were  very  salt  and  well
tasted.  All  their  oisters  grow  upon  those  boughs  and
spraies,  and  not  on*  the  ground :  the  like  is  commonly
scene  in  other  places  of  the  West  Indies,  and  else  where.
This  tree  is  described  by  Andrew  Thevet  in  his  French

349

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

Antarctique,  and  the  forme  figured  in  the  booke  as  a
plant  very  strange,  and  by  Plinie  in  his  12.  booke  of  his
naturall  historie.  But  in  this  yland,  as  also  in  Guiana
there  are  very  many  of  them.

At  this  point  called  Tierra  de  Brea  or  Piche  there  is
that  abundance  of  stone  pitch,  that  all  the  ships  of  the
world  may  be  therewith  loden  from  thence,  and  we  made
trial  of  it  in  trimming  our  shippes  to  be  most  excellent
good,  and  melteth  not  with  the  Sunne  as  the  pitch  of  Nor-
way, and  therefore  for  shippes  trading  the  South  parts
[III.  632.]  very  profitable.  From  thence  wee  went  to  the  mountaine
foote  called  Anniperima,  and  so  passing  the  river  Carone
on  which  the  Spanish  Citie  was  seated,  we  met  with
our  ships  at  Puerto  de  los  EspannoUes  or  Conquerabia.

This  yland  of  Trinidad  hath  the  forme  of  a  sheep-
hooke,  and  is  but  narrow,  the  North  part  is  very
mountainous,  the  soile  is  very  excellent  and  will  beare
suger,  ginger,  or  any  other  commoditie  that  the  Indies
yeeld.  It  hath  store  of  deare,  wilde  porks,  fruits,  fish  and
foule  :  it  hath  also  for  bread  sufficient  maiz,  cassavi,  and
of  those  rootes  and  fruites  which  are  common  every
where  in  the  West  Indies.  It  hath  divers  beastes
which  the  Indies  have  not :  the  Spaniards  confessed
that  they  found  graines  of  golde  in  some  of  the  rivers,
but  they  having  a  purpose  to  enter  Guiana  (the  Magazin
of  all  rich  mettals)  -jcared  not  to  spend  time  in  the
search  thereof  any  further.  This  yland  is  called  by  the
people  thereof  Cairi,  land  in  it  are  divers  nations :  those
about  Parico  are  called  laio,  those  at  Punta  de  Carao
are  of  the  Arwacas,  and  betweene  Carao  and  Curiapan
they  are  called  Salvajos,  betwene  Carao  and  Punta  de
Galera  are  the  Nepojos,  and  those  about  the  Spanish
citie  terme  themselves  Carinepagotes :  Of  the  rest  of
the  nations,  and  of  other  ports  and  rivers  I  leave  to
speake  here,  being  impertinent  to  my  purpose,  and  meane
to  describe  them  as  they  are  situate  in  the  particular  plot
and  description  of  the  yland,  three  parts  whereof  I  coasted
with  my  barge,  that  I  might  the  better  describe  it.

350

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595.

Meeting  with  the  ships  at  Puerta  de  los  Espannoles,
we  found  at  the  landing  place  a  company  of  Spaniards
who  kept  a  guard  at  the  descent,  and  they  offering  a
signe  of  peace,  I  sent  Captaine  Whiddon  to  speake
with  them,  whom  afterward  to  my  great  griefe  I  left
buried  in  the  said  yland  after  my  returne  from  Guiana,  The  death  of
being  a  man  most  honest  and  valiant.  The  Spaniards  ^f.^T^
seemed  to  be  desirous  to  trade  with  us,  and  to  enter
into  termes  of  peace,  more  for  doubt  of  their  owne
strength  then  for  ought  else,  and  in  the  ende  upon
pledge,  some  of  them  came  abord :  the  same  evening
there  stale  also  abord  us  in  a  small  Canoa  two  Indians,
the  one  of  them  being  a  Casique  or  Lord  of  the  people
called  Cantyman,  who  had  the  yeere  before  bene  with
Captaine  Whiddon,  and  was  of  his  acquaintance.  By
this  Cantyman  wee  understood  what  strength  the
Spaniards  had,  howe  farre  it  was  to  their  Citie,  and  of
Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  the  governour,  who  was  said
to  be  slaine  in  his  second  attempt  of  Guiana,  but  was
not.

While  we  remained  at  Puerto  de  los  Espannoles  some
Spaniards  came  abord  us  to  buy  linnen  of  the  company,
and  such  other  things  as  they  wanted,  and  also  to
view  our  ships  and  company,  all  which  I  entertained
kindly  and  feasted  after  our  maner:  by  meanes  whereof
I  learned  of  one  and  another  as  much  of  the  estate  of
Guiana  as  I  could,  or  as  they  knew,  for  those  poore
souldiers  having  bene  many  yeeres  without  wine,  a  few
draughts  made  them  merrie,  in  which  mood  they
vaunted  of  Guiana  and  of  the  riches  thereof,  and  all
what  they  knewe  of  the  wayes  and  passages,  my  selfe
seeming  to  purpose  nothing  lesse  then  the  enter-
ance  or  discoverie  thereof,  but  bred  in  them  an  opinion
that  I  was  bound  onely  for  the  reliefe  of  those  English
which  I  had  planted  in  Virginia,  whereof  the  bruite  was
come  among  them ;  which  I  had  performed  in  my
returne,  if  extremitie  of  weather  had  not  forst  me  from
the  said  coast.

351

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

I found occasions  of staying in this place  for  two
causes : the one  was to be revenged of  Berreo, who
the yere before 1594. had betraied eight  of Captaine
Whiddons men, and tooke them while he departed
from them to seeke the Edward Bonaventure, which
arrived at Trinidad the day before from the East
Indies : in whose absence Berreo  sent a  Canoa abord
the pinnesse  onely  with Indians  and dogs inviting  the
company  to goe  with them into the  woods to  kill a
8  Englishmen deare,  who  like  wise  men in  the  absence  of  their  Cap-
beirayed  by taine followed the Indians, but were no sooner one
Berreo  harquebuze  shot from the shore,  but  Berreos  souldiers

lying  in  ambush  had  them  al,  notwithstanding  that  he
had  given  his  word  to  Captaine  Whiddon  that  they
should  take  water  and  wood  safely :  the  other  cause  of
my  stay  was,  for  that  by  discourse  with  the  Spaniards
I  dayly  learned  more  and  more  of  Guiana,  of  the
rivers  and  passages,  and  of  the  enterprise  of  Berreo,
by  what  meanes  or  fault  he  failed,  and  how  he  meant
to  prosecute  the  same.

While  wee  thus  spent  the  time  I  was  assured  by
another  Casique  of  the  North  side  of  the  yland,  that
Berreo  had  sent  to  Margarita  and  Cumana  for  souldiers,
meaning  to  have  given  mee  a  cassado  at  parting,  if  it
had  bene  possible.  For  although  he  had  given  order
through  all  the  yland  that  no  Indian  should  come  abord
to  trade  with  me  upon  paine  of  hanging  &  quartering,
(having  executed  two  of  them  for  the  same,  which  I
afterwards  founde)  yet  every  night  there  came  some
with  most  lamentable  complaints  of  his  crueltie,  how
he  had  divided  the  yland  and  given  to  every  souldier
a  part,  that  hee  made  the  ancient  Casiques  which  were
Lords  of  the  countrey  to  be  their  slaves,  that  he  kept
them  in  chaines,  and  dropped  their  naked  bodies  with
burning  bacon,  and  such  other  torments,  which  I  found
afterwards  to  be  true :  for  in  the  city  after  I  entred
the  same  there  were  5.  of  ye  lords  or  litle  kings  (which
they cal Casiques in the West Indies) in one chaine

352

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad.

1595.
almost  dead  of  famine,  and  wasted  with  torments:  these  [III.  633.]
are  called in  their  owne  language  Acarewana,  and  now
of late since English, French  and Spanish are come
among them, they  call themselves Capitaines, because
they perceive that the  chiefest  of  every ship is called
by  that  name. Those  five  Capitaines  in  the  chaine  were
called Wannawanare, Carroaori, Maquarima, Tarroo-
panama, and Aterima. So  as both to be  revenged of
the former wrong, as also considering that to enter
Guiana  by  small  boats,  to  depart  400.  or  500.  miles  from
my  ships,  and  to  leave  a  garison  in  my  backe  interrested
in the same enterprize, who also dayly expected sup-
plies out  of  Spaine,  I  should  have  savoured  very  much
of  the  asse :  and  therefore  taking  a  time  of  most  advan-
tage  I set upon the Corps du  guard in the evening,
and having  put them  to  the  sword,  sent  Captaine  Cal-
field  onwards  with 60.  souldiers,  and my  selfe  followed
with 40. more and so tooke  their new City which
they  called S. Joseph by breake  of  day : they  abode T^^  Citie  of
not  any  fight  after  a  fewe  shot,  and  all  being:  dismissed  ^-  ij^^^P"-
but onely  Berreo and his companion, I brought  them  ^gj-^^go  taken
with  me  abord,  and at the instance  of  the Indians,  I  prisoner.
set  their  new  citie  of  S.  Joseph  on  fire.

The  same  day  arrived  Captaine  George  Giffbrd  with
your  Lordships  ship,  and  Captaine  Keymis  whom  I
lost  on  the  coast  of  Spaine,  with  the  Galego,  and  in  them
divers  gentlemen  and  others,  which  to  our  little  armie
was  a  great  comfort  and  supply.

We  then  hasted  away  towards  our  purposed  dis-
covery, and  first  I  called  all  the  Captaines  of  the  yland
together  that  were  enemies  to  the  Spaniards ;  for  there
were  some  which  Berreo  had  brought  out  of  other
countreys,  and  planted  there  to  eate  out  and  wast  those
that  were  naturall  of  the  place,  and  by  my  Indian  inter-
preter, which  I  caried  out  of  England,  I  made  them
understand  that  I  was  the  servant  of  a  Queene,  who
was  the  great  Casique  of  the  North,  and  a  virgine,  and
had  more  Casiqui  under  her  then  there  were  trees  in
X  353  z

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

that  yland :  that  shee  was  an  enemie  to  the  Castellani
in  respect  of  their  tyrannie  and  oppression,  and  that
she  delivered  all  such  nations  about  her,  as  were  by
them  oppressed,  and  having  freed  all  the  coast  of  the
Northren  world  from  their  servitude,  had  sent  mee  to
free  them  also,  and  withall  to  defend  the  countrey  of
Guiana  from  their  invasion  and  conquest.  I  shewed
them  her  JVIajesties  picture  which  they  so  admired  and
honoured,  as  it  had  bene  easie  to  have  brought  them
idolatrous  thereof.

The  like  and  a  more  large  discourse  I  made  to  the
rest  of  the  nations  both  in  my  passing  to  Guiana,  and
to  those  of  the  borders,  so  as  in  that  part  of  the  world
her  Majestic  is  very  famous  and  admirable,  whom  they
now  call  Ezrabeta  Cassipuna  Aquerewana,  which  is  as
much  as  Elizabeth,  the  great  princesse  or  greatest  com-
mander. This  done  we  left  Puerto  de  los  Espannoles,
and  returned  to  Curiapan,  and  having  Berreo  my  prisoner
I  gathered  from  him  as  much  of  Guiana  as  hee  knew.

This  Berreo  is  a  gentleman  wel  descended,  and  had
long  served  the  Spanish  king  in  Millain,  Naples,  the
Low  countreis  and  elsewhere,  very  valiant  and  liberall,
and  a  gentleman  of  great  assurednes,  and  of  a  great
heart :  I  used  him  according  to  his  estate  and  worth
in  all  things  I  could,  according  to  the  small  meanes
I  had.

I  sent  Captaine  Whiddon  the  yeere  before  to  get  what
knowledge  he  could  of  Guiana,  and  the  end  of  my  journey
at  this  time  was  to  discover  and  enter  the  same,  but  my
intelligence  was  farre  from  trueth,  for  the  countrey  is
situate  above  600.  English  miles  further  from  the  Sea,
then  I  was  made  beleeve  it  had  bin,  which  afterward
understanding  to  be  true  by  Berreo,  I  kept  it  from  the
knowledge  of  my  company,  who  else  would  never  have
Zir W.Ralegh  bene  brought  to  attempt  the  same:  of  which  600.
passed  400. miles  I  passed  400.  leaving  my  ships  so  farre  from  mee

m  es  towar ^^  ancker  in the Sea,  which  was  more  of  desire  to  per-
forme that discovery, then of  reason,  especially  having

354

i

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad

1595-
such  poore  and  weake  vessels  to  transport  our  selves
in ;  for  in  the  bottom  of  an  old  Galego  which  I  caused
to  be  fashioned  like  a  galley,  and  in  one  barge,  two
whirries,  and  a  shipboat  of  the  Lions  whelpe,  we
caried  lOO.  persons  and  their  victuals  for  a  moneth  in
the  same,  being  al  driven  to  lie  in  the  raine  and
weather,  in  the  open  aire,  in  the  burning  Sunne,  and
upon  the  hard  bords,  and  to  dresse  our  meat,  and  to
cary  all  maner  of  furniture  in  them,  wherewith  they  were
so  pestered  and  unsavory,  that  what  with  victuals  being
most  fish,  with  wette  clothes  of  so  many  men  thrust
together,  and  the  heat  of  the  Sunne,  I  will  undertake
there  was  never  any  prison  in  England,  that  could  bee
found  more  unsavorie  and  lothsome,  especially  to  my
selfe,  who  had  for  many  yeeres  before  bene  dieted  and
cared  for  in  a  sort  farre  more  differing.

If  Captaine  Preston  had  not  bene  perswaded  that  he
should  have  come  too  late  to  Trinidad  to  have  found
us  there  (for  the  moneth  was  expired  which  I  promised
to  tary  for  him  there  ere  hee  coulde  recover  the  coast  of
Spaine)  but  that  it  had  pleased  God  hee  might  have
joyned  with  us,  and  that  we  had  entred  the  countrey  but
some  ten  dayes  sooner  ere  the  Rivers  were  overflowen,  wee
had  adventured  either  to  have  gone  to  ..the  great  Citie
of  Manoa,  or  at  least  taken  so  many  of  thejpther  Cities  [in.  634.]
and  townes  neerer  at  hand,  as  would  have  made  a  royall
returne  :  but  it  pleased  not  God  so  much  to  favour  mee  at
this  time  :  if  it  shall  be  my  lot  to  prosecute  the  same,
I  shall  willingly  spend  my  life  therein,  and  if  any  else
shalbe  enabled  thereunto,  and  conquere  the  same,  I
assure  him  thus  much,  he  shall  perfourme  more  then  ever
was  done  in  Mexico  by  Cortez,  or  in  Peru  by  Pizarro,
whereof  the  one  conquered  the  Empire  of  Mutezuma,  the
other  of  Guascar,  and  Atabalipa,  and  whatsoever  prince
shall  possesse  it,  that  Prince  shall  be  Lord  of  more  golde,
and  of  a  more  beautifull  Empire,  and  of  more  Cities
and  people,  then  either  the  King  of  Spaine,  or  the  great
Turke.

355

A.D.
1595.

The  statelines
ofManoa.

Fran.  Lopez,
de  Gomara
hist.  gen.  cap.
120.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

But  because  there  may  arise  many  doubts,  and  how  this
Empire  of  Guiana  is  become  so  populous,  and  adorned
with  so  many  great  Cities,  townes,  temples,  and  treasures,
I  thought  good  to  make  it  knowen,  that  the  Emperour
now  reigning  is  descended  from  those  magnificent  princes
of  Peru,  of  whose  large  territories,  of  whose  policies,  con-
quests, edifices,  and  riches  Pedro  de  Cieza,  Francisco
Lopez,  and  others  have  written  large  discourses  :  for  when
Francisco  Pizarro,  Diego  Almagro  and  others  conquered
the  said  Empire  of  Peru,  and  had  put  to  death  Atabalipa
Sonne  to  Guaynacapa,  which  Atabalipa  had  formerly  caused
his  eldest  brother  Guascar  to  bee  slaine,  one  of  the  yonger
sonnes  of  Guaynacapa  fled  out  of  Peru,  and  tooke  with
him  many  thousands  of  those  souldiers  of  the  Empire
called  Orejones,  and  with  those  and  many  others  which
followed  him,  hee  vanquished  all  that  tract  and  valley  of
America  which  is  situate  betweene  the  great  river  of
Amazones,  and  Baraquan,  otherwise  called  Orenoque  and
Marannon.

The  Empire  of  Guiana  is  directly  East  from  Peru
towards  the  Sea,  and  lieth  under  the  Equinoctial  line,  and
it  hath  more  abundance  of  golde  then  any  part  of  Peru,
and  as  many  or  moe  great  Cities  then  ever  Peru  had  when
it  flourished  most  :  it  is  governed  by  the  same  lawes,  and
the  Emperour  and  people  observe  the  same  religion,  and
the  same  forme  and  policies  in  government  as  were  used
in  Peru,  not  differing  in  any  part  :  and  I  have  bene
assured  by  such  of  the  Spaniards  as  have  seene  Manoa  the
Imperial  Citie  of  Guiana,  which  the  Spaniards  call  El
Dorado,  that  for  the  greatnesse,  for  the  riches,  and  for  the
excellent  seat,  it  farre  exceedeth  any  of  the  world,  at
least  of  so  much  of  the  world  as  is  knowen  to  the  Spanish
nation  :  it  is  founded  upon  a  lake  of  salt  water  of  200.
leagues  long  like  unto  Mare  Caspium.  And  if  we  compare
it  to  that  of  Peru,  &  but  read  the  report  of  Francisco
Lopez  and  others,  it  will  seeme  more  then  credible  :  and
because  we  may  judge  of  the  one  by  the  other,  I
thought good to insert part of the 120. Chapter of

356

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad

1595.
Lopez  in  his  generall  historic  of  the  Indies,  wherein
he  describeth  the  Court  and  magnificence  of  Guaynacapa,
ancestour  to  the  Emperour  of  Guiana,  whose  very  wordes
are  these.  Todo  el  servicio  de  su  casa,  mesa,  y  cozina,
era  de  oro,  y  de  plata,  y  quando  menos  de  plata,  y  cobre
por  mas  rezio.  Tenia  en  su  recamara  estatuas  huecas  de
oro,  que  parecian  gigantes,  y  las  figuras  al  propio,  y
tamanno  de  quantos  animales,  aves,  arboles,  y  yervas
produze  la  tierra,  y  de  quantos  peces  cria  la  mar  y  aguas
de  sus  reynos.  Tenia  assi  mesmo  sogas,  costales,  cestas,  y
troxes  de  oro  y  plata,  rimeros  de  palos  de  oro,  que
pareciessen  lenna  raiada  para  quemar.  En  fin  no  avia
cosa  en  su  tierra,  que  no  la  tuviesse  de  oro  contrahecha :  y
aun  dizen,  que  tenian  los  Ingas  un  vergel  en  una  Isla  cerca
de  la  Puna,  donde  se  yuan  a  holgar,  quando  querian
mar,  que  tenia  la  ortaliza,  las  flores,  y  arboles  de  oro  y
plata,  invencion  y  grandeza  hasta  entonces  nunca  vista.
AUende  de  todo  esto  tenia  infinitissima  cantitad  de  plata,
y  oro  por  labrar  en  el  Cuzco,  que  se  perdio  por  la  muerte
de  Guascar,  ca  los  Indios  lo  escondieron,  viendo  que  los
Espannoles  se  lo  tomavan,  y  embiavan  a  Espanna.  That
is,  All  the  vessels  of  his  house,  table  and  kitchin  were
of  gold  and  silver,  and  the  meanest  of  silver  and  copper
for  strength  and  hardnesse  of  metall.  He  had  in  his
wardrobe  hollow  statues  of  gold  which  seemed  giants,  and
the  figures  in  proportion  and  bignesse  of  all  the  beasts,
birds,  trees,  and  hearbes,  that  the  earth  bringeth  foorth  :
and  of  all  the  fishes  thajiS'the  sea  or  waters  of  his  king-
dome  breedeth.  He  had  also  ropes,  budgets,  chestes  and
troughs  of  golde  and  silver,  heapes  of  billets  of  gold,  that
seemed  wood  marked  out  to  burne.  Finally,  there  was
nothing  in  his  countrey,  whereof  he  had  not  the  counter-
fait  in  gold  :  Yea  and  they  say.  The  Ingas  had  a  garden  of
pleasure  in  an  yland  neere  Puna,  where  they  went  to  recreat
themselves,  when  they  would  take  the  aire  of  the  Sea,
which  had  all  kinde  of  garden-hearbs,  flowers  and  trees  of
golde  and  silver,  an  invention,  and  magnificence  till  then
never  seene. Besides  all  this,  he  had  an  infinite  quantitie

357

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

of  silver  and  golde  unwrought  in  Cuzco  which  was  lost  by
the  death  of  Guascar,  for  the  Indians  hid  it,  seeing  that  the
Spaniards  tooke it, and sent it into Spaine.

And  in  the  117.  chapter  Francisco  Pizarro  caused  the
gold  and  silver  of  Atabalipa  to  be  weyed  after  he  had
taken  it,  which  Lopez  setteth  downe  in  these  words
following.  Hallaron  cinquenta  y  dos  mil  marcos  de  buena
plata,  y  un  millon  y  trezientos  y  veinte  y  seys  mil,  y
quinientos  pesos  de  oro.  Which  is  :  They  found  fiftie  and
[III.  635.]  two  thousand  markes  of  good  silver,  and  one  million,  and
three  hundred  twenty  and  sixe  thousand  and  five  hundred
pezos  of  golde.

Now  although  these  reports  may  seeme  strange,  yet  if
we  consider  the  many  millions  which  are  dayly  brought
out  of  Peru  into  Spaine,  wee  may  easily  beleeve  the  same :
for  we  finde  that  by  the  abundant  treasure  of  that  countrey
the  Spanish  king  vexeth  all  the  princes  of  Europe,  and  is
become,  in  a  few  yeeres,  from  a  poore  king  of  Castile,  the
greatest  monarch  of  this  part  of  the  world,  and  likely
every  day  to  increase,  if  other  princes  forslow  the  good
occasions  offered,  and  suffer  him  to  adde  this  empire  to
the  rest,  which  by  farre  exceedeth  all  the  rest  :  if  his  golde
now  indanger  us,  hee  will  then  be  unresistable.  Such  of
the  Spanyards  as  afterward  endevoured  the  conquest
thereof  (whereof  there  have  bene  many,  as  shall  be  de-
clared hereafter)  thought  that  this  Inga  (of  whom  this
emperour  now  living  is  descended)  tooke  his  way  by  the
river  of  Amazones,  by  that  branch  which  is  called  Papa-
mene  :  for  by  that  way  followed  Orellana  (by  the
commandement  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  in  the  yere  1542)
whose  name  the  river  also  beareth  this  day,  which  is  also
by  others  called  Marannon,  although  Andrew  Thevet
doeth  affirme  that  betweene  Marannon  and  Amazones
there  are  1 20  leagues  :  but  sure  it  is  that  those  rivers  have
one  head  and  beginning,  and  the  Marannon,  which  Thevet
describeth,  is  but  a  branch  of  Amazones  or  Orellana,
of  which  1  will  speake  more  in  another  place.  It  was
attempted  by  Ordas  ;  but  it  is  now  little  lesse  then  70

358

THE  DISCOVERY OF  GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
yeres  since  that  Diego  Ordas,  a  knight  of  the  order  of
Saint  lago  attempted  the  same  :  and  it  was  in  the  yeere
1 542 that Orellana discovered  the river  of  Amazones ;
but  the  first  that  ever  saw Manoa  was  Juan  Martinez  •^/'^^  ^^''-
master of  the munition to Ordas. At a port called  ^f  ^2; //5^/rj/
Morequito  in  Cjuiana  there  lieth  at  this  day  a  great  anker  Manoa.
of  Ordas  his  ship  ;  and  this  port  is  some  300  miles  within
the  land,  upon  the  great  river  of  Orenoque.

I  rested  at  this  port  foure  dayes  :  twenty  dayes  after
I  left  the  ships  at  Curiapan. The  relation  of  this  Marti-
nez (who  was  the  first  that  discovered  Manoa)  his  successe
and  ende  are  to  bee  scene  in  the  Chancery  of  Saint  Juan
de Puerto rico, wherof Berreo had a copy, which
appeared to be the greatest incouragement aswell to
Berreo  as  to  others  that  formerly  attempted  the  discovery
and  conquest. Orellana  after  he  failed  of  the  discovery  of
Guiana  by  the  sayd  river  of  Amazones,  passed  into  Spaine,
and  there  obteined  a  patent  of  the  king  for  the  invasion
and  conquest,  but  died  by  sea  about  the  Islands,  and  his
fleet  severed  by  tempest,  the action  for  that time  pro-
ceeded not, Diego  Ordas  followed the  enterprise,  and  ^^^S°  ^.e
departed  Spaine  with 600  souldiers,  and 30  horse,  who  ^'  ^!  "^f^I
arriving  on  the  coast  of  Guiana,  was  slaine  in  a  mutiny,  500  souldiers
with  the  most  part  of  such  as  favoured  him,  as  also  of  the 1531.
rebellious  part,  insomuch  as  his  ships  perished,  and  few  or
none returned, neither  was it certeinly knowen what
became  of  the  sayd  Orgas,  untill  Berreo  found  the  anker  of
his  ship  in  the  river  of  Orenoque;  but  it  was  supposed,
and  so  it  is  written  by  Lopez,  that  he  perished  on  the  ^f^^-  1-ope^
seas,  and  of  other  writers  diversly  conceived  and  reported,  j^^-  S^J-  ^^
And  hereof  it  came  that  Martines  entred  so  farre  within  g-^ '
the  land,  and  arrived  at  that  city  of  Inga  the  emperour ;
for  it  chanced  that  while  Ordas  with  his  army  rested  at
the  port  of  Morequito  (who  was  either  the  first  or  second
that attempted  Guiana)  by  some  negligence,  the whole
store  of  powder  provided  for  the  service  was  set  on  fire ;
and  Martinez  having  the  chiefe  charge,  was  condemned
by the Generall Ordas to be executed foorthwith :

359

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

Martinez  being  much  favoured  by  the  souldiers,  had  all
the  meanes  possible  procured  for  his  life ;  but  it  could
not  be  obteined  in  other  sort  then  this :  That  he  should
be  set  into  a  canoa  alone  without  any  victuall,  onely  with
his  armes,  and  so  turned  loose  into  the  great  river :  but
it  pleased  God  that  the  canoa  was  caried  downe  the
streame,  and  that  certeine  of  the  Guianians  mette  it  the
same  evening :  and  having  not  at  any  time  scene  any
Christian,  nor  any  man  of  that  colour,  they  caried
Martinez  into  the  land  to  be  woondred  at,  and  so  from
The  great  city  towne  to  towne,  untill  he  came  to  the  great  city  of
of  Mama  or  M^noa,  the  seat  and  residence  of  Inga  the  emperour.
The  emperour  after  he  had  beheld  him,  knew  him  to  be
a  Christian  (for  it  was  not  long  before  that  his  brethren
Guascar  and  Atabalipa  were  vanquished  by  the  Spanyards
in  Peru)  and  caused  him  to  be  lodged  in  his  palace,  and
well  enterteined.  Hee  lived  seven  moneths  in  Manoa,
but  was  not  suffered  to  wander  into  the  countrey  any
where.  He  was  also  brought  thither  all  the  way  blind-
fold, led  by  the  Indians,  untill  he  came  to  the  entrance  of
Manoa  it  selfe,  and  was  foureteene  or  fifteene  dayes  in  the
passage.  He  avowed  at  his  death  that  he  entred  the  city
at  Noon,  and  then  they  uncovered  his  face,  and  that  he
travelled  all  that  day  till  night  thorow  the  city,  and  the
next  day  from  Sun  rising  to  Sun  setting  yer  he  came  to
the  palace  of  Inga.  After  that  Martinez  had  lived  seven
moneths  in  Manoa,  and  began  to  understand  the  language
of  the  countrey,  Inga  asked  him  whether  he  desired  to
returne  into  his  owne  countrey,  or  would  willingly  abide
with  him.  But  Martinez  not  desirous  to  stay,  obteined
the  favour  of  Inga  to  depart :  with  whom  he  sent  divers
Guianians  to  conduct  him  to  the  river  of  Orenoque,  all
loden  with  as  much  golde  as  they  could  cary,  which  he
gave  to  Martinez  at  his  departure :  but  when  he  was
[III.  636.  -  arrived  neere  the  rivers  side,  the  borderers  which  are
called  Orenoqueponi  robbed  him  and  his  Guianians  of
all  the  treasure  (the  borderers  being  at  that  time  at
warres,  which  Inga  had  not  conquered)  save  only  of  two

360

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad

1595-
great  bottels  of  gourds,  which  were  filled  with  beads  of
golde  curiously  wrought,  which  those  Orenoqueponi
thought  had  bene  no  other  thing  then  his  drinke  or  meat,
or  graine  for  food,  with  which  Martinez  had  liberty  to
passe :  and  so  in  canoas  hee  fell  downe  from  the  river  of
Orenoque  to  Trinidad,  and  from  thence  to  Margarita,
and  also  to  Saint  Juan  de  puerto  rico,  where  remaining  a
long  time  for  passage  into  Spaine,  he  died.  In  the  time
of  his  extreme  sicknesse,  and  when  he  was  without  hope
of  life,  receiving  the  Sacrament  at  the  hands  of  his  Con-
fessor, he  delivered  these  things,  with  the  relation  of  his
travels,  and  also  called  for  his  calabazas  or  gourds  of  the
golde  beads  which  he  gave  to  the  church  and  friers  to
be  prayed  for.  This  Martinez  was  he  that  Christened  T"^^  author  of
the city  of  Manoa by the name of  El Dorado, and  ^^'/^^' f

-rt  • r  1  1  •  •  'T'l  ^^  Dorado.

as rJerreo mrormed mee, upon this occasion : i  hose

Guianians,  and  also  the  borderers,  and  all  other  in  that

tract  which  I  have  seene,  are  marvellous  great  drunkards ;

in  which  vice,  I  thinke  no  nation  can  compare  with  them  :

and  at  the  times  of  their  solemne  feasts,  when  the  em-  "^^^  substance

perour carowseth with his captaines, tributaries, and  r'  .  "J^^°^j

^  tS  tft  tfl6  €tl(i

governours,  the  maner  is  thus  :  All  those  that  pledge  him  ofthg  f-,am-
are first stripped naked, and their  bodies  anointed  all  gation  of  the
over  with  a kind of  white balsamum (by them called  great  river  of
curca)  of  which  there  is  great  plenty,  and  yet  very  deare  ^^^f^"^"^'
amongst  them,  and  it  is  of  all  other  the  most  precious,  Go?izalo  Fer-
whereof  wee  have  had  good  experience : when  they  are  nando  de
anointed all over, certeine servants of the emperour,  Oviedo  to  car-
having prepared  golde  made into fine powder,  blow  it  '^^^^^^^p-
thorow  hollow  canes  upon  their  naked  bodies,  untill  they  'ifoi,±iS.
be  all  shining  from  the  foot  to  the  head :  and  in  this  sort
they  sit  drinking  by  twenties,  and  hundreds,  and  continue
in  drunkennesse  sometimes  sixe  or  seven  dayes  together.
The  same  is  also  confirmed  by  a  letter  written  into  Spaine,
which  was  intercepted,  which  M.  Robert  Duddeley  tolde  Sir  Robert
me  he  had  seene. Upon  this  sight,  and  for  the  abundance  ^'^'^^^h-
of  golde  which  he  saw  in  the  city,  the  images  of  golde  in
their  temples, the  plates,  armours,  and  shields  of  gold

361

A.D.

1595.

Reade

Josepkus

Acosta.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

which  they  use  in  the  warres,  he  called  it  El  Dorado.
After  the  death  of  Ordas  and  Martinez,  and  after  Orel-
lana,  who  was  imployed  by  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  one  Pedro
de  Osua  a  knight  of  Navarre  attempted  Guiana,  taking
his  way  from  Peru,  and  built  his  brigandines  upon  a  river
called  Gia,  which  riseth  to  the  Southward  of  Quito,  and
is  very  great.  This  river  falleth  into  Amazones,  by  which
Osua  with  his  companies  descended,  and  came  out  of  that
province  which  is  called  Mutylonez :  and  it  seemeth  to
mee  that  this  empire  is  reserved  for  her  Majesty  and  the
English  nation,  by  reason  of  the  hard  successe  which  all
these  and  other  Spanyards  found  in  attempting  the  same,
whereof  I  will  speake  briefly,  though  impertinent  in  some
sort  to  my  purpose.  This  Pedro  de  Osua  had  among
his  troups  a  Biscain,  called  Agiri,  a  man  meanly  borne,
who  bare  no  other  office  then  a  sergeant  or  alferez :  but
after  certeine  moneths,  when  the  souldiers  were  grieved
with  travels,  and  consumed  with  famine,  and  that  no
entrance  could  be  found  by  the  branches  or  body  of
Amazones,  this  Agiri  raised  a  mutiny,  of  which  hee  made
himselfe  the  head,  and  so  prevailed,  as  he  put  Osua  to
the  sword,  and  all  his  followers,  taking  on  him  the  whole
charge  and  commandement,  with  a  purpose  not  onely  to
make  himselfe  emperour  of  Guiana,  but  also  of  Peru,  &
of  all  that  side  of  the  West  Indies :  he  had  of  his  party
seven  hundred  souldiers,  and  of  those  many  promised  to
draw  in  other  captaines  and  companies,  to  deliver  up
townes  and  forts  in  Peru  :  but  neither  finding  by  ye  said
river  any  passage  into  Guiana,  nor  any  possibility  to
returne  towards  Peru  by  the  same  Amazones,  by  reason
that  ye  descent  of  the  river  made  so  great  a  current,  he
was  inforced  to  disemboque  at  the  mouth  of  the  sayd
Amazones,  which  can  not  be  lesse  then  a  thousand
leagues  from  the  place  where  they  imbarked  :  from  thence
he  coasted  the  land  till  he  arrived  at  Margarita  to  the
North  of  Mompatar,  which  is  at  this  day  called  Puerto
de  Tyranno,  for  that  he  there  slew  Don  Juan  de  villa
Andreda,  governour  of  Margarita,  who  was  father  to  Don

362

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad.

1595-
Juan  Sarmiento,  governor  of  Margarita  when  sir  John  The  voyage  of
Burgh  landed  there,  and  attempted  the  Island.  Agiri  sirJohnBurgk
put  to  the  sword  all  other  in  the  Island  that  refused  to  ^j^^l^^^^
be  of  his  party,  and  tooke  with  him  certeine  Simerones,
and  other  desperate  companions.  From  thence  he  went
to  Cumana,  and  there  slew  the  governour,  and  dealt  in
all  as  at  Margarita :  hee  spoiled  all  the  coast  of  Caracas,
and  the  province  of  Venezuela,  and  of  Rio  de  la  hacha ;
and  as  I  remember,  it  was  the  same  yere  that  sir  John
Hawkins  sailed  to  Saint  Juan  de  Ullua  in  the  Jesus  of
Lubeck :  for  himselfe  tolde  me  that  he  met  with  such  a
one  upon  the  coast  that  rebelled,  and  had  sailed  downe  all
the  river  of  Amazones.  Agiri  from  thence  landed  about
Sancta  Marta,  and  sacked  it  also,  putting  to  death  so
many  as  refused  to  be  his  followers,  purposing  to  invade
Nuevo  reyno  de  Granada,  and  to  sacke  Pamplon,  Merida,
Lagrita,  Tunxa,  and  the  rest  of  the  cities  of  Nuevo  reyno,
and  from  thence  againe  to  enter  Peru :  but  in  a  fight  in
the  sayd  Nuevo  reyno  he  was  overthrowen,  and  finding
no  way  to  escape,  he  first  put  to  the  sword  his  owne
children,  foretelling  them  that  they  should  not  live  to  be  [III.  637.]
defamed  or  upbraided  by  the  Spanyards  after  his  death,
who  would  have  termed  them  the  children  of  a  traitour
or  tyrant ;  and  that  sithence  hee  could  not  make  them
princes,  hee  would  yet  deliver  them  from  shame  and
reproch.  These  were  the  ends  and  tragedies  of  Ordas,
Martinez,  Orellana;  Ozua,  and  Agiri.

Also  soone  after  Ordas  followed Jeronimo  Ortal de 1534.
Saragosa  with  130  souldiers,  who  failing  his  entrance  by  Go/H^r.  cap.
sea,  was  cast  with  the  current  on  the  coast  of  Paria,  & "^
peopled about S. Miguel de Neveri. It was then
attempted  by  Don  Pedro de  Silva,  a  Portugues of  the  Don  Pedro  de
family  of  Ruigomes  de  Silva,  and  by  the  favour  which  ^'^^^^•
Ruigomes  had  with  the  king,  he  was  set  out,  but  he  also
shot  wide  of  the  marke ;  for  being  departed  from  Spaine
with  his  fleet,  he  entered  by  Marannon  and  Amazones,
where  by  the  nations  of  the  river,  and  by  the  Amazones
hee was utterly  overthrowen, and himselfe and all his

363

A.D.
1595.

Pedro
Hernandez,
de  Serpa.

Don  Gonzales
Ximenes  de
Casada.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

armie  defeated,  onely  seven  escaped,  and  of  those  but
two  returned.

After  him  came  Pedro  Hernandez  de  Serpa,  and  landed
at  Cumana  in  the  West  Indies,  taking  his  journey  by  land
towards  Orenoque,  which  may  be  some  1 20  leagues :  but
yer  he  came  to  the  borders  of  the  sayd  river,  hee  was
set  upon  by  a  nation  of  the  Indians  called  Wikiri,  and
overthrowen  in  such  sort,  that  of  300  souldiers,  horsemen,
many  Indians,  and  Negros,  there  returned  but  18.  Others
affirme,  that  he  was  defeated  in  the  very  entrance  of
Guiana,  at  the  first  civill  towne  of  the  empire  called
Macureguarai.  Captaine  Preston  in  taking  S.  lago  de
Leon  (which  was  by  him  and  his  companies  very  reso-
lutely performed,  being  a  great  towne,  and  farre  within
the  land)  held  a  gentleman  prisoner,  who  died  in  his
ship,  that  was  one  of  the  company  of  Hernandez  de
Serpa,  and  saved  among  those  that  escaped,  who  wit-
nessed what  opinion  is  held  among  the  Spanyards
thereabouts  of  the  great  riches  of  Guiana,  and  El
Dorado  the  city  of  Inga.  Another  Spanyard  was
brought  aboord  me  by  captaine  Preston,  who  told  me
in  the  hearing  of  himselfe  and  divers  other  gentlemen,
that  he  met  with  Berreos  campe-master  at  Caracas,
when  he  came  from  the  borders  of  Guiana,  and  that
he  saw  with  him  forty  of  most  pure  plates  of  golde
curiously  wrought,  and  swords  of  Guiana  decked  and
inlayed  with  gold,  feathers  garnished  with  golde,  and
divers  rarities  which  he  caried  to  the  Spanish  king.

After  Hernandez  de  Serpa,  it  was  undertaken  by  the
Adelantado,  Don  Gonzales  Ximenes  de  Casada,  who  was
one  of  the  chiefest  in  the  conquest  of  Nuevo  reino,  whose
daughter  and  heire  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  maried.
Gonzales  sought  the  passage  also  by  the  river  called
Papamene,  which  riseth  by  Quito  in  Peru,  &  runneth
Southeast  100  leagues,  and  then  falleth  into  Amazones,
but  he  also  failing  the  entrance,  returned  with  the  losse
of  much  labour  and  cost.  I  tooke  one  captaine  George
a Spanyard that followed Gonzales in this enterprise.

364

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad.

1595-
Gonzales  gave  his  daughter  to  Berreo,  taking  his  oth  Antonio
&  honour  to  follow  the  enterprise  to  the  last  of  his  ^^^'i'^"-
substance  and  life,  who  since,  as  he  hath  sworne  to
me,  hath  spent  300000  ducats  in  the  same,  &  yet  never
could  enter  so  far  into  the  land  as  my  selfe  with  that
poore  troupe  or  rather  a  handful!  of  men,  being  in  all
about  100  gentlemen,  souldiers,  rowers,  boat-keepers,
boyes,  &  of  all  sorts :  neither  could  any  of  the  fore-
passed  undertakers,  nor  Berreo  himselfe,  discover  the
countrey,  till  now  lately  by  conference  with  an  ancient
king  called  Carapana,  he  got  the  true  light  thereof:
for  Berreo  came  about  1500  miles  yer  he  understood
ought,  or  could  finde  any  passage  or  entrance  into  any
part  thereof,  yet  he  had  experience  of  al  these  forenamed,
and  divers  others,  and  was  perswaded  of  their  errors  and
mistakings.  Berreo  sought  it  by  the  river  Cassamar,
which  falleth  into  a  great  river  called  Pato :  Pato  falleth
into  Meta,  and  Meta  into  Baraquan,  which  is  also  called
Orenoque.

He  tooke  his  journey  from  Nuevo  reyno  de  Granada
where  he  dwelt,  having  the  inheritance  of  Gonzales
Ximenes  in  those  parts :  he  was  followed  with  700  horse,
he  drave  with  him  1 000  head  of  cattell,  he  had  also  many
women,  Indians,  and  slaves.  How  all  these  rivers  crosse
and  encounter,  how  the  countrey  lieth  and  is  bordered,
the  passage  of  Ximines  and  Berreo,  mine  owne  discovery,
and  the  way  that  I  entred,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  nations
and  rivers,  your  lordship  shall  receive  in  a  large  Chart  or
Map,  which  I  have  not  yet  finished,  and  which  I  shall
most  humbly  pray  your  lordship  to  secret,  and  not  to
suffer  it  to  passe  your  owne  hands  ;  for  by  a  draught
thereof  all  may  be  prevented  by  other  nations :  for  I
know  it  is  this  very  yeere  sought  by  the  French,  although
by  the  way  that  they  now  take,  I  feare  it  not  much.
It  was  also  tolde  me  yer  I  departed  England,  that  Villiers  A  new  l£  rich
the  admirall  was  in  preparation  for  the  planting  of  ^[f^^^  "f^^^
Amazones,  to  which  river  the  French  have  made  divers  river  of  Ama-
voyages,  and  returned  much  golde,  and  other  rarities. I  z.ones.

365

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

spake  with  a  captaine  of  a  French  ship  that  came  from
thence,  his  ship  riding  in  Falmouth  the  same  yere  that
my  ships  came  first  from  Virginia.

There  was  another  this  yeere  in  Helford  that  also
came  from  thence,  and  had  bene  foureteene  moneths
at  an  anker  in  Amazones,  which  were  both  very  rich.
[III.  638.]  Although,  as  I  am  perswaded,  Guiana  cannot  be  entred
that  way,  yet  no  doubt  the  trade  of  gold  from  thence
passeth  by  branches  of  rivers  into  the  river  of  Amazones,
and  so  it  doth  on  every  hand  far  from  the  countrey
it  selfe ;  for  those  Indians  of  Trinidad  have  plates  of
golde  from  Guiana,  and  those  canibals  of  Dominica  which
dwell  in  the  Islands  by  which  our  ships  passe  yerely
to  the  West  Indies,  also  the  Indians  of  Paria,  those
Indians  called  Tucaris,  Chochi,  Apotomios,  Cumanagotos,
and  all  those  other  nations  inhabiting  nere  about  the
mountaines  that  run  from  Paria  thorow  the  province
of  Venesuela,  and  in  Maracapana,  and  the  canibals  of
Guanipa,  the  Indians  called  Assawai,  Coaca,  Aiai,  and
the  rest  (all  which  shall  be  described  in  my  description
as  they  are  situate)  have  plates  of  golde  of  Guiana.  And
upon  the  river  of  Amazones,  Thevet  writeth  that  the
people  weare  croissants  of  golde,  for  of  that  forme  the
Guianians  most  commonly  make  them :  so  as  from
Dominica  to  Amazones,  which  is  above  250  leagues,
all  the  chiefe  Indians  in  all  parts  weare  of  those  plates
of  Guiana.  Undoubtedly  those  that  trade  Amazones
returne  much  golde,  which  (as  is  aforesayd)  commeth  by
trade  from  Guiana,  by  some  branch  of  a  river  that  falleth
from  the  countrey  into  Amazones,  and  either  it  is  by
the  river  which  passeth  by  the  nations  called  Tisnados,
or  by  Carepuna.  I  made  inquiry  amongst  the  most
ancient  and  best  travelled  of  the  Orenoqueponi,  and  I
had  knowledge  of  all  the  rivers  betweene  Orenoque
&  Amazones,  and  was  very  desirous  to  understand  the
truth  of  those  warlike  women,  because  of  some  it  is
beleeved,  of  others  not.  And  though  I  digresse  from
my  purpose,  yet  I  will  set  downe  that  which  hath  bene

366

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad.

1595-
delivered  me  for  trueth  of  those  women,  &  I  spake
with  a  casique  or  lord  of  people,  that  told  me  he  had
bene  in  the  river,  and  beyond  it  also.  The  nations  of  The  seat  of  the
these  women  are  on  the  South  side  of  the  river  in  ^"^'^'^°"^^-
the  provinces  of  Topago,  and  their  chiefest  strengths
and  retracts  are  in  the  Islands  situate  on  the  South
side  of  the  entrance  some  60  leagues  within  the  mouth
of  the  sayd  river.  The  memories  of  the  like  women
are  very  ancient  aswell  in  Africa  as  in  Asia :  In  Africa
those  that  had  Medusa  for  queene :  others  in  Scithia
nere  the  rivers  of  Tanais  and  Thermodon :  we  finde
also  that  Lampedo  &  Marthesia  were  queenes  of  the
Amazones :  in  many  histories  they  are  verified  to  have
bene,  and  in  divers  ages  and  provinces :  but  they
which  are  not  far  from  Guiana  doe  accompany  with
men  but  once  in  a  yere,  and  for  the  time  of  one
moneth,  which  I  gather  by  their  relation,  to  be  in
April  :  and  that  time  all  kings  of  the  borders  assemble,
and  queenes  of  the  Amazones  ;  and  after  the  queenes
have  chosen,  the  rest  cast  lots  for  their  Valentines.
This  one  moneth,  they  feast,  dance,  and  drinke  of
their  wines  in  abundance  ;  and  the  Moone  being  done,
they  all  depart  to  their  owne  provinces.  If  they  conceive,
and  be  delivered  of  a  sonne,  they  returne  him  to  the
father  ;  if  of  a  daughter  they  nourish  it,  and  reteine
it :  and  as  many  as  have  daughters  send  unto  the
begetters  a  present ;  all  being  desirous  to  increase  their
owne  sex  and  kind  :  but  that  they  cut  off  the  right
dug  of  the  brest,  I  doe  not  finde  to  be  true.  It  was
farther  tolde  me,  that  if  in  these  warres  they  tooke
any  prisoners  that  they  used  to  accompany  with  those
also  at  what  time  soever,  but  in  the  end  for  certeine
they  put  them  to  death  :  for  they  are  sayd  to  be  very
cruell  and  bloodthirsty,  especially  to  such  as  offer  to
invade  their  territories.  These  Amazones  have  likewise
great  store  of  these  plates  of  golde,  which  they  recover
by  exchange  chiefly  for  a  kinde  of  greene  stones,  which
the  Spanyards  caU  Piedras  hijadas,  &  we  use  for  spleene

367

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

stones  :  and  for  the  disease  of  the  stone  we  also  esteeme
them.  Of  these  I  saw  divers  in  Guiana  :  and  commonly
every  king  or  casique  hath  one,  which  their  wives  for
the  most  part  weare  ;  and  they  esteeme  them  as  great
jewels.

But  to  returne  to  the  enterprise  of  Bereo,  who  (as
I  have  sayd)  departed  from  Nuevo  reyno  with  700
horse,  besides  the  provisions  above  rehearsed,  he
descended  by  the  river  called  Cassanar,  which  riseth
in  Nuevo  reyno  out  of  the  mountaines  by  the  city
of  Tuvia,  from  which  mountaine  also  springeth  Pato ;
both  which  fall  into  the  great  river  of  Meta :  and
Meta  riseth  from  a  mountaine  joyning  to  Pamplon  in
the  same  Nuevo  reyno  de  Granada.  These,  as  also
Guaiare,  which  issueth  out  of  the  mountaines  by
Timana,  fall  all  into  Baraquan,  and  are  but  of  his
heads ;  for  at  their  comming  together  they  lose  their
names ;  and  Baraquan  farther  downe  is  also  rebaptized
by  the  name  of  Orenoque.  On  the  other  side  of  the
city  and  hilles  of  Timana  riseth  Rio  grande,  which
falleth  in  the  sea  by  Sancta  Marta.  By  Cassonar  first,
and  so  into  Meta,  Berreo  passed,  keeping  his  horse-
men on  the  banks,  where  the  countrey  served  them
for  to  march,  and  where  otherwise,  he  was  driven  to
imbarke  them  in  boats  which  he  builded  for  the  pur-
pose, and  so  came  with  the  current  downe  the  river
of  Meta,  and  so  into  Baraquan.  After  he  entred  that
great  &  mighty  river,  he  began  dayly  to  lose  of  his
companies  both  men  and  horse ;  for  it  is  in  many
places  violently  swift,  and  hath  forcible  eddies,  many
sands,  and  divers  Islands  sharpe  pointed  with  rocks :
but  after  one  whole  yeere,  journeying  for  the  most
part  by  river,  and  the  rest  by  land,  he  grew  dayly  to
fewer  numbers  ;  for  both  by  sicknesse,  and  by  encountring
with  the  people  of  those  regions,  thorow  which  he
travelled,  his  companies  were  much  wasted,  especially
[III.  639.]  by  divers  encounters  with  the  Amapaians  :  and  in  all
this  time hee never  could learne  of  any  passage  into

368

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad.

1595-
Guiana,  nor  any  newes  or  fame  thereof,  untill  he
came  to  a  further  border  of  the  sayd  Amapaia,  eight
dayes  journey  from  the  river  Caroli,  which  was  the
furthest  river  that  he  entred.  Among  those  of
Amapaia,  Guiana  was  famous,  but  few  of  these  people
accosted  Berreo,  or  would  trade  with  him  the  first
three  moneths  of  the  six,  which  he  sojourned  there.
This  Amapaia  is  also  marvellous  rich  in  golde  (as
both  Berreo  confessed  and  those  of  Guiana  with  whom
I  had  most  conference)  and  is  situate  upon  Orenoque
also.  In  this  countrey  Berreo  lost  60  of  his  best
souldiers,  and  most  of  all  his  horse  that  remained  in
his  former  yeeres  travell :  but  in  the  end,  after  divers
encounters  with  those  nations,  they  grew  to  peace ;  and
they  presented  Berreo  wth  tenne  images  of  fine  golde
among  divers  other  plates  and  croissants,  which,  as  he
sware  to  me  &  divers  other  gentlemen,  were  so  curi-
ously wrought,  as  he  had  not  scene  the  like  either  in
Italy,  Spaine,  or  the  Low-countreys :  &  he  was  resolved,
that  when  they  came  to  the  hands  of  the  Spanish  king,
to  whom  he  had  sent  them  by  his  campmaster,  they
would  appeare  very  admirable,  especially  being  wrought
by  such  a  nation  as  had  no  yron  instruments  at  all
nor  any  of  those  helps  which  our  goldsmiths  have  to
worke  withall.  The  particular  name  of  the  people  in
Amapaia  which  gave  him  these  pieces,  are  called  Anebas,
and  the  river  of  Orenoque  at  that  place  is  above  12
English  miles  broad,  which  may  be  from  his  out  fall
into  the  sea  700  or  800  miles.

This  province  of  Amapaia  is  a  very  low  and  a  mar-
ish  ground  nere  the  river ;  and  by  reason  of  the  red
water  which  issueth  out  in  small  branches  thorow  the
fenny  and  boggy  ground,  there  breed  divers  poisonfuU
wormes  and  serpents ;  and  the  Spanyards  not  suspecting,
nor  in  any  sort  foreknowing  the  danger,  were  infected
with  a  grievous  kinde  of  fluxe  by  drinking  thereof;
and  even  the  very  horses  poisoned  therwith :  insomuch
as  at  the  end  of  the  6  moneths,  that  they  abode  there,
X  369  2  A

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

of  all  their  troups,  there  were  not  left  above  I20
souldiers,  &  neither  horse  nor  cattell :  for  Berreo
hoped  to  have  found  Guiana  by  looo  miles  nerer  then
it  fel  out  to  be  in  the  end :  by  meanes  whereof  they
susteined  much  want  and  much  hunger,  oppressed  with
grievous  diseases,  and  all  the  miseries  that  could  be
imagined.  I  demanded  of  those  in  Guiana  that  had
travelled  Amapaia,  how  they  lived  with  that  tawny  or
red  water  when  they  travelled  thither :  and  they  tolde
me  that  after  the  Sun  was  neere  the  middle  of  the
skie,  they  used  to  fill  their  pots  and  pitchers  with  that
water,  but  either  before  that  time,  or  towards  the
setting  of  the  Sun  it  was  dangerous  to  drinke  of,  and
in  the  night  strong  poison.  I  learned  also  of  divers
other  rivers  of  that  nature  among  them,  which  were
also  (while  the  Sun  was  in  the  Meridian)  very  safe  to
drinke,  and  in  the  morning,  evening,  and  night  woon-
derfull  dangerous  and  infective.  From  this  province
Berreo  hasted  away  assoone  as  the  Spring  and  beginning
of  Summer  appeared,  and  sought  his  entrance  on  the
borders  of  Orenoque  on  the  South  side ;  but  there  ran
a  ledge  of  so  high  and  impassable  mountaines,  as  he
was  not  able  by  any  meanes  to  march  over  them,  con-
tinuing from  the  East  sea  into  which  Orenoque  falleth,
even  to  Quito  in  Peru :  neither  had  he  meanes  to
cary  victuall  or  munition  over  those  craggie,  high,  and
fast  hilles,  being  all  woody,  &  those  so  thicke  and
spiny,  &  so  full  of  prickles,  thornes,  and  briers,  as  it
is  impossible  to  creepe  thorow  them :  hee  had  also
neither  friendship  among  the  people,  nor  any  interpreter
to  perswade  or  treat  with  them  :  and  more,  to  his  dis-
advantage, the  casiques  and  kings  of  Amapaia  had
given  knowledge  of  his  purpose  to  the  Guianians,  and
that  he  sought  to  sacke  and  conquer  the  empire,  for
the  hope  of  their  so  great  abundance  and  quantities  of
golde :  he  passed  by  the  mouthes  of  many  great  rivers,
which  fell  into  Orenoque  both  from  the  North  and
South,  which I forbeare to name for tediousnesse,  and

37°

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  a.d.

1595.
because they are more pleasing in describing then
reading.

Berreo affirmed that there fell an hundred rivers  Many  great
into Orenoque from the North and South, whereof  '}^^^^M'''?.
the least was as big as Kio grande, that passed
betweene Popayan and  Nuevo  reyno  de  Granada  (Rio
grande being esteemed one of the renowmed rivers
in all the  West Indies,  and  numbred  among  the  great
rivers of  the  world :) but he knew not  the names of
any of these, but Caroli onely; neither from what
nations  they  descended, neither  to  what  provinces  they
led ; for he had no meanes  to discourse  with  the in-
habitants at any  time : neither  was  he  curious  in  these
things, being utterly unlearned, and not knowing the
East from the West. But of  all these I got some
knowledge,  and of  many  more, partly by  mine owne
travell, and the rest by conference : of some one I
learned one, of others the rest, having with me an
Indian that spake many  languages,  and that  of  Guiana
naturally. I sought out all the aged men, and such
as were greatest travellers, and by the one and the
other I came to understand  the situations, the rivers,
the kingdomes from the East sea to the borders of
Peru,  and  from  Orenoque  Southward  as  farre  as  Ama-
zones or Marannon, and the religions of Maria
Tamball,  & of all the kings of provinces,  and cap-
taines of townes and villages, how they stood in
tearmes  of  peace or  warre,  and  which were  friends or  [ill.  640.]
enemies the one with the other, without  which there
can be neither entrance nor conquest in those parts,
nor  elsewhere : for  by  the  dissention  betweene  Guascar
and Atabalipa, Pizarro conquered Peru, and by the
hatred that  the  Tlaxcallians  bare  to Mutezuma,  Cortez
was  victorious over Mexico ; without  which both the
one and the other had failed  of  their  enterprise,  and
of  the  great  honour  and  riches  which  they  atteined  unto.
Now  Berreo  began  to  grow  into  dispaire,  and  looked
for  no  other  successe  then  his  predecessor  in  this  enter-

371

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1595-

The  province  prise, untill such time as hee  arrived at the province

o/Emerm  ^f Emeria towards the East  sea and mouth of  the

tnhabtied  b-o •  i  i r j  ^'  c  ^  c

zenile Indians  ^^^er,  where  he  round  a  nation  or  people  very  ravour-
able, and the countrey full of  all maner of  victuall.

Carapana.  The  king  of  this  land  is  called  Carapana,  a  man  very
wise,  subtill,  and  of  great  experience,  being  little  lesse
then  an  hundred  yeeres  olde :  in  his  youth  he  was
sent  by  his  father  into  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  by
reason  of  civill  warre  among  themselves,  and  was  bred
at  a  village  in  that  island,  called  Parico ;  at  that
place  in  his  youth  hee  had  seene  many  Christians,
both  French  and  Spanish,  and  went  divers  times  with
the  Indians  of  Trinidad  to  Margarita  and  Cumana  in
the  West  Indies  (for  both  those  places  have  ever
beene  relieved  with  victuall  from  Trinidad)  by  reason
whereof  he  grew  of  more  understanding,  and  noted
the  difference  of  the  nations,  comparing  the  strength
and  armes  of  his  countrey  with  those  of  the  Christians,
and  ever  after  temporized  so,  as  whosoever  els  did
amisse,  or  was  wasted  by  contention,  Carapana  kept
liimselfe  and  his  countrey  in  quiet  &  plenty :  he  also
held  peace  with  the  Caribes  or  Canibals  his  neighbours,
and  had  free  trade  with  all  nations,  whosoever  els  had
warre.

Berreo  sojourned  and  rested  his  weake  troupe  in
the  towne  of  Carapana  sixe  weeks,  and  from  him
learned  the  way  and  passage  to  Guiana,  and  the  riches
and  magnificence  thereof;  but  being  then  utterly  dis-
able to  proceed,  he  determined  to  try  his  fortune
another  yere,  when  he  had  renewed  his  provisions,
and  regathered  more  force,  which  hee  hoped  for  as  well
out  of  Spaine  as  from  Nueva  reyno,  where  hee  had
left  his  Sonne,  Don  Antonio  Ximenes  to  second  him
upon  the  first  notice  given  of  his  entrance,  and  so  for
the  present  imbarked  himselfe  in  canoas,  and  by  the
branches  of  Orenoque  arrived  at  Trinidad,  having  from
Carapana  sufficient  pilots  to  conduct  him.  From
Trinidad he coasted Paria, and so recovered Mar-

372

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
garita :  and  having  made  relation  to  Don  Juan  Ser-
miento  the  governour,  of  his  proceeding,  and  perswaded
him  of  the  riches  of  Guiana,  he  obteined  from  thence
fifty  souldiers,  promising  presently  to  returne  to  Cara-
pana,  and  so  into  Guiana.  But  Berreo  meant  nothing
lesse  at  that  time ;  for  he  wanted  many  provisions
necessary  for  such  an  enterprise,  and  therefore  de-
parted from  Margarita,  seated  himselfe  in  Trinidad,
and  from  thence  sent  his  camp-master,  and  his  sergeant-
major  backe  to  the  borders  to  discover  the  neerest
passage  into  the  empire,  as  also  to  treat  with  the
borderers,  and  to  draw  them  to  his  party  and  love;
without  which,  he  knew  he  could  neither  passe  safely,
nor  in  any  sort  be  relieved  with  victuall  or  ought  els.
Carapana  directed  his  company  to  a  king  called  More-  Morequito.
quito,  assuring  them  that  no  man  could  deliver  so
much  of  Guiana  as  Morequito  could,  and  that  his
dwelling  was  but  five  dayes  journey  from  Macure-
guarai,  the  first  civill  towne  of  Guiana.

Now  your  lordship  shall  understand,  that  this  More-
quito, one  of  the  greatest  lords  or  kings  of  the  borders
of  Guiana,  had  two  or  three  yeeres  before  bene  at  Cu-
mana  and  at  Margarita,  in  the  West  Indies,  with  great
store  of  plates  of  golde,  which  he  caried  to  exchange
for  such  other  things  as  he  wanted  in  his  owne  coun-
trey,  and  was  dayly  feasted,  &  presented  by  the
governours  of  those  places,  and  held  amongst  them
some  two  moneths,  in  which  time  one  Vides  governour  f^ides  the  go-
of Cumana wanne him to be his conductour into  ^^^'^°^^'  °f

r^ •  1 •  11  1 1 .1  •  ^  J •  Cumana  com-

Cjuiana, bemg allured by those croissants and images  pgfi^gj.  ^i^j^
of  golde  which hee  brought  with him  to  trade,  as  also  Berreo  in  the
by the ancient fame  and magnificence of  El Dorado :  conquest  of
whereupon  Vides sent  into  Spaine for  a  patent  to  dis-  Gmana.
cover and conquer Guiana, not knowing of  the pre-
cedence  of  Berreos patent, which,  as Berreo affirmeth,
was signed before that of  Vides  : so as when Vides
understood  of  Berreo, and  that he  had made entrance
into  that  territory,  and  forgone  his  desire  and  hope,  it

373

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

was  verily  thought  that  Vides  practised  with  Morequito
to  hinder  and  disturbe  Berreo  in  all  he  could,  and  not
to  suffer  him  to  enter  thorow  his  signorie,  nor  any  of
his  companies  ;  neither  to  victuall,  nor  guide  them  in
any  sort ;  for  Vides  governour  of  Cumana,  and  Berreo,
were  become  mortall  enemies,  aswell  for  that  Berreo
had  gotten  Trinidad  into  his  patent  with  Guiana,  as
also  in  that  he  was  by  Berreo  prevented  in  the  journey
of  Guiana  it  selfe  :  howsoever  it  was,  I  know  not,  but
Morequito  for  a  time  dissembled  his  disposition,
suffered  Spanyards,  and  a  frier  (which  Berreo  had  sent
to  discover  Manoa)  to  travell  thorow  his  countrey,
Macure-  gave  them  a  guide  for  Macureguaray,  the  first  towne
^aray.  ^f  civill  and  apparelled  people,  from  whence  they  had
other  guides  to  bring  them  to  Manoa  the  great  city
of  Inga  :  and  being  furnished  with  those  things  which
they  had  learned  of  Carapana  were  of  most  price  in
Ten  Span-  Guiana,  went  onward,  and  in  eleven  dayes  arrived  at
yards  arrive  M^noa,  as  Berreo  affirmeth  for  certaine ;  although  I
Fill.  641.1  could  not  be  assured  thereof  by  the  lord  which  now
governeth  the  province  of  Morequito,  for  he  tolde
me  that  they  got  all  the  golde  they  had,  in  other
townes  on  this  side  Manoa,  there  being  many  very
great  and  rich,  and  (as  he  sayd)  built  like  the  townes
of  Christians,  with  many  roomes.

When  these  ten  Spaniards  were  returned,  and  ready
Aromaia.  to  put  out  of  the  border  of  Aromaia,  the  people  of
Morequito  set  upon  them,  and  slew  them  all  but  one
that  swam  the  river,  and  tooke  from  them  to  the  value
of  forty  thousand  pezos  of  golde  :  and  one  of  them
onely  lived  to  bring  the  newes  to  Berreo,  that  both  his
nine  souldiers  and  holy  father  were  benighted  in  the
said  province.  I  my  selfe  spake  with  the  captaines  of
Morequito  that  slew  them,  and  was  at  the  place  where
it  was  executed.  Berreo  inraged  heerewithall,  sent  all
the  strength  he  could  make  into  Aromaia,  to  be
revenged  of  him,  his  people,  and  countrey.  But
Morequito suspecting the same, fled over Orenoque,

374

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad.

1595-
and thorow  the territories of  the Saima, and  Wikiri,  Sa'ma  and
recovered Cumana, where hee thought himselfe very ^  ^^^'
safe, with Vides the governour. But Berreo sending
for  him  in  the  kings  name,  and  his  messengers  finding
him  in the house  of  one  Fashardo  on  the  sudden  yer
he  was  suspected,  so  as  he  could  not  then  be  conveyed
away,  Vides durst  not deny  him, aswell to avoid the
suspition  of  the  practise,  as  also  for  that  an  holy  father
was slaine  by  him and  his people. Morequito offered
Fashardo the  weight  of  three  quintals in golde,  to  let
him escape  : but the poor Guianian, betrayed on all
sides, was delivered to the campe-master of Berreo,
and  was  presently  executed.  Moreqmto

After  the  death  of  this  Morequito,  the  souldiers  of  ^■^^^*^^^-
Berreo  spoiled  his  territorie,  and  tooke  divers  prisoners,
among  others  they  tooke  the  uncle  of  Morequito,
called  Topiawari,  who  is  now  king  of  Aromaia  (whose
Sonne  I  brought  with  me  into  England)  and  is  a  man
of  great  understanding  and  policy  :  he  is  above  an
hundred  yeeres  olde,  and  yet  of  a  very  able  body.
The  Spaniards  ledde  him  in  a  chaine  seventeene  dayes,
and  made  him  their  guide  from  place  to  place  betweene
his  countrey  &  Emeria,  the  province  of  Carapana
aforesayd,  and  he  was  at  last  redeemed  for  an  hundred
plates  of  golde,  and  divers  stones  called  Piedras  Hijadas,
or  Spleene-stones.  Now  Berreo  for  executing  of  More-
quito, and  other  cruelties,  spoiles,  and  slaughters  done
in  Aromaia,  hath  lost  the  love  of  the  Orenoqueponi,
and  of  all  the  borderers,  and  dare  not  send  any  of  his
souldiers  any  further  into  the  land  then  to  Carapana,  '^^^  ^°'^^^  °f
which  he  called  the  port  of  Guiana  :  but  from  thence  ^XT^/^
by  the  helpe  of  Carapana  he  had  trade  further  into  the  Guiana.
countrey,  and  alwayes  appointed  ten  Spaniards  to  reside
in  Carapanas  towne,  by  whose  favour,  and  by  being
conducted  by  his  people,  those  ten  searched  the
countrey  thereabouts,  aswell  for  mines,  as  for  other
trades  and  commodities.

They  also  have  gotten  a  nephew  of  Morequito,  whom

375

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

they  have Christened,  and named  Don  Juan, of  whom

they  have great hope, endevouring by all meanes to

establish  him  in  the  sayd  province. Among  many  other

trades, those Spaniards used canoas to passe to the

Somefewe rivers of  Barema,  Pawroma, & Dissequebe,  which are

Spaniards  are ^^  ^^^  south  side  of  the  mouth  of  Orenoque,  and  there

now  seated  in .  i i  -i  i  r  i /-• -i i  i  •  i

Dissequebe. "^7  women  and  children  rrom  the  Lambals,  which are

of  that  barbarous  nature,  as  they  will  for  three  or  foure
hatchets  sell  the  sonnes  and  daughters  of  their  owne
brethren  and  sisters,  and  for  somewhat  more,  even  their
owne  daughters.  Hereof  the  Spaniards  make  great
profit  :  for  buying  a  maid  of  twelve  or  thirteene  yeres
for  three  or  foure  hatchets,  they  sell  them  againe  at
Margarita  in  the  West  Indies  for  fifty  and  an  hundred
pezos,  which  is  so  many  crownes.

The  master  of  my  shippe,  John  Dowglas,  tooke  one
of  the  canoas  which  came  laden  from  thence  with  people
to  be  solde,  and  the  most  of  them  escaped ;  yet  of
those  he  brought,  there  was  one  as  well  favoured,  and
as  well  shaped  as  ever  I  saw  any  in  England,  and  after-
ward I  saw  many  of  them,  which  but  for  their  tawnie
colour  may  be  compared  to  any  of  Europe.  They  also
trade  in  those  rivers  for  bread  of  Cassavi,  of  which
they  buy  an  hundred  pound  weight  for  a  knife,  and
sell  it  at  Margarita  for  ten  pezos.  They  also  recover
great  store  of  Cotton,  Brasill  wood,  and  those  beds
which  they  call  Hamacas  or  Brasill  beds,  wherein  in
hot  countreyes  all  the  Spaniards  use  to  lie  commonly,
and  in  no  other,  neither  did  we  our  selves  while  we
were  there.  By  meanes  of  which  trades,  for  ransome
of  divers  of  the  Guianians,  and  for  exchange  of  hatchets
and  knives,  Berreo  recovered  some  store  of  golde  plates,
eagles  of  golde,  and  images  of  men  and  divers  birdes,
and  dispatched  his  campe-master  for  Spaine,  with  all
that  hee  had  gathered,  therewith  to  levie  souldiers,  and
by  the  shew  thereof  to  draw  others  to  the  love  of  the
enterprise.  And  having  sent  divers  images  aswell  of
men as beasts, birds & fishes, so curiously wrought

376

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad.

1595-
in  gold,  he  doubted  not  but  to  perswade  the  king  to
yeeld  to  him  some  further  helpe,  especially  for  that
this  land  hath  never  beene  sacked,  the  mines  never
wrought,  and  in  the  Indies  their  works  were  well  spent,
and  the  golde  drawen  out  with  great  labour  and  charge.
He  also  dispatched  messengers  to  his  sonne  in  Nuevo
reyno  to  levie  all  the  forces  he  could,  &  to  come  downe
the  river  Orenoque  to  Emeria,  the  province  of  Carapana,  [HI.  642,]
to  meet  him  :  he  had  also  sent  to  Saint  lago  de  Leon
on  the  coast  of  the  Caracas,  to  buy  horses  and  mules.

After  I  had  thus  learned  of  his  proceedings  past  and
purposed,  I  told  him  that  I  had  resolved  to  see  Guiana,
and  that  it  was  the  end  of  my  journey,  and  the  cause
of  my  comming  to  Trinidad,  as  it  was  indeed,  (and
for  that  purpose  I  sent  Jacob  Whiddon  the  yeere
before  to  get  intelligence  with  whom  Berreo  himselfe
had  speech  at  that  time,  and  remembred  how  inquisitive
Jacob  Whiddon  was  of  his  proceedings,  and  of  the
countrey  of  Guiana)  Berreo  was  stricken  into  a  great
melancholy  and  sadnesse,  and  used  all  the  arguments
he  could  to  disswade  me,  and  also  assured  the  gentle-
men of  my  company  that  it  would  be  labour  lost,  and
that  they  should  suffer  many  miseries  if  they  proceeded.
And  first  he  delivered  that  I  could  not  enter  any  of
the  rivers  with  any  barke  or  pinnesse,  or  hardly  with
any  ships  boat,  it  was  so  low,  sandy,  and  full  of  flats,
and  that  his  companies  were  dayly  grounded  in  their
canoas,  which  drew  but  twelve  inches  water.  Hee
further  sayde,  that  none  of  the  countrey  would  come
to  speake  with  us,  but  would  all  flie ;  and  if  we
followed  them  to  their  dwellings,  they  would  burne
their  owne  townes  :  and  besides  that,  the  way  was  long,
the  Winter  at  hand,  and  that  the  rivers  beginning  once
to  swell,  it  was  impossible  to  stem  the  current,  and
that  we  could  not  in  those  small  boats  by  any  means
cary  victuall  for  halfe  the  time,  and  that  (which  indeed
most  discouraged  my  company)  the  kings  and  lords  of
all the borders of  Guiana had decreed that none of

377

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

them  should  trade  with  any  Christians  for  golde,  because
the  same  would  be  their  owne  overthrow,  and  that  for
the  love  of  gold  the  Christians  meant  to  conquer  and
dispossesse  them  of  all  together.

Many  and  the  most  of  these  I  found  to  be  true,  but
yet  I  resolving  to  make  triall  of  all  whatsoever  happened,
directed  Captaine  George  GifFord  my  vice-admirall  to
take  the  Lions  whelpe,  and  captaine  Calfield  his  barke
The  river  of  to  turne  to  the  Eastward,  against  the  mouth  of  a  river
Lafurt.  called  Capuri,  whose  entrance  I  had  before  sent  captaine
Whiddon,  and  John  Dowglas  the  master,  to  discover,
who  found  some  nine  foot  water  or  better  upon  the
flood,  and  five  at  low  water,  to  whom  I  had  given
instructions  that  they  should  anker  at  the  edge  of  the
shoald,  and  upon  the  best  of  the  flood  to  thrust  over,
which  shoald  John  Dowglas  bwoyed  and  beckoned  for
them  before  :  but  they  laboured  in  vaine  ;  for  neither
could  they  turne  it  up  altogether  so  farre  to  the  East,
neither  did  the  flood  continue  so  long,  but  the  water
fell  yer  they  could  have  passed  the  sands  ;  as  wee  after
found  by  a  second  experience  :  so  as  now  wee  must
either  give  over  our  enterprise,  or  leaving  our  ships
at  adventure  foure  hundred  mile  behinde  us,  must  run
up  in  our  ships  boats,  one  barge,  and  two  wheries.
But  being  doubtfull  how  to  cary  victuals  for  so  long
a  time  in  such  babies,  or  any  strength  of  men,  especially
for  that  Berreo  assured  us  that  his  sonne  must  be  by  that
time  come  downe  with  many  souldiers,  I  sent  away  one
King,  master  of  the  Lions  whelpe,  with  his  shipboat,  to
trie  another  branch  of  a  river  in  the  bottome  of  the  bay  of
Guanipa,  which  was  called  Amana,  to  proove  if  there  were
water  to  be  found  for  either  of  the  small  ships  to  enter.
But  when  he  came  to  the  mouth  of  Amana,  he  found  it  as
the  rest,  but  stayed  not  to  discover  it  thorowly,  because  he
was  assured  by  an  Indian,  his  guide,  that  the  Canibals
of  Guanipa  would  assaile  them  with  many  canoas,  and  that
they  shot  poisoned  arrowes ;  so  as  if  he  hasted  not  backe,
they  should  all  be  lost.

378

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  ad.

1595-
In  the  meane  time,  fearing  the  woorst,  I  caused  all  the
carpenters  we  had,  to  cut  downe  a  Galego  boat,  which  we
meant  to  cast  off,  and  to  fit  her  with  banks  to  row
on,  and  in  all  things  to  prepare  her  the  best  they  could,  so
as  she  might  be  brought  to  draw  but  five  foot,  for  so
much  we  had  on  the  barre  of  Capuri  at  low  water.
And  doubting  of  Kings  returne,  I  sent  John  Dowglas
againe  in  my  long  barge,  aswell  to  relieve  him,  as  also
to  make  a  perfect  search  in  the  bottome  of  that  bay:
for  it  hath  bene  held  for  infallible,  that  whatsoever  ship
or  boat  shall  fall  therein,  can  never  disemboque  againe,
by  reason  of  the  violent  current  which  setteth  into  the
sayde  bay,  as  also  for  that  the  brize  and  Easterly  winde
bloweth  directly  into  the  same.  Of  which  opinion  I  have
heard  John  Hampton  of  Plymmouth,  one  of  the  greatest  JohnHampton
experience  of  England,  and  divers  others  besides  that  captaine  of  the
have  traded  to  Trinidad.  ^7?  "^^^'^

1  sent  with  John  Dowglas  an  olde  casique  or  Trmidad  kins  in  his  voi-
for  a  pilot,  who  tolde  us  that  we  could  not  returne  againe  age  to  S.  Juan
by  the  bay  or  gulfe,  but  that  he  knew  a  by-branch  which  ^^  Ul/ua.
ran  within  the  land  to  the  Eastward,  and  that  he  thought
by  it  we  might  fall  into  Capuri,  and  so  returne  in
foure  dayes.  John  Dowglas  searched  those  rivers,  and
found  foure  goodly  entrances,  whereof  the  least  was
as  bigge  as  the  Thames  at  Wolwich ;  but  in  the  bay
thitherward  it  was  shoald,  and  but  sixe  foot  water  :  so
as  we  were  now  without  hope  of  any  ship  or  barke
to  passe  over,  and  therefore  resolved  to  go  on  with  the
boats,  and  the  bottome  of  the  Galego,  in  which  we  thrust
6o  men.  In  the  Lions  whelpes  boat  &  whery  we  caried
2o.  Captaine  Calfield  in  his  whery  caried  ten  more,  and
in  my  barge  other  tenne,  which  made  up  a  hundred :  [III.  643.]
we  had  no  other  meanes  but  to  cary  victuall  for  a  moneth
in  the  same,  and  also  to  lodge  therein  as  we  could,  and  to
boile  and  dresse  our  meat.  Captaine  Gifford  had  with
him  master  Edward  Porter,  captaine  Eynos,  and  eight
more  in  his  whery,  with  all  their  victuall,  weapons,
and provisions. Captaine Calfield had with him my

379

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

cousin  Butshead  Gorges,  and  eight  more.  In  the
galley,  of  gentlemen  and  officers  my  selfe  had  captaine
Thin,  my  cousin  John  Green  vile,  my  nephew  John
Gilbert,  captaine  Whiddon,  captaine  Keymis,  Edward
Handcocke,  captaine  Clarke,  lieutenant  Hewes,  Thomas
Upton,  captaine  Facy,  Jerome  Ferrar,  Anthony  Welles,
William  Connocke,  and  above  fifty  more.  We  could
not  learne  of  Berreo  any  other  way  to  enter  but  in
branches,  so  farre  to  wind-ward,  as  it  was  impossible
for  us  to  recover :  for  wee  had  as  much  sea  to  crosse  over
in  our  wheries,  as  betweene  Dover  and  Calais,  and  in
a  great  billow,  the  winde  and  current  being  both  very
strong,  so  as  we  were  driven  to  goe  in  those  small  boats

The  bay  of directly before the winde  into the  bottome  of  the  bay

Guanipa.  q£  Guanipa,  and  from  thence  to  enter  the  mouth  of  some
one  of  those  rivers  which  John  Dowglas  had  last  dis-
covered, and  had  with  us  for  pilot  an  Indian  of  Barema,
a  river  to  the  South  of  Orenoque,  betweene  that  and
Amazones,  whose  canoas  we  had  formerly  taken  as  hee

Barema.  was  going  from the sayd Barema,  laden with Cassavi-

bread,  to  sell  at  Margarita.  This  Arwacan  promised  to
bring  me  into  the  great  river  of  Orenoque,  but  indeed  of
that  which  he  entred  he  was  utterly  ignorant,  for  he  had
not  seene  it  in  twelve  yeeres  before ;  at  which  time  he  was
very  yoong,  and  of  no  judgement :  and  if  God  had  not
sent  us  another  helpe,  we  might  have  wandred  a  whole
yere  in  that  labyrinth  of  rivers,  yer  wee  had  found  any
way,  either  out  or  in,  especially  after  wee  were  past
ebbing  and  flowing,  which  was  in  foure  dayes,  for  I  know

A  woonderfull  all the earth doeth not yeelde the like confluence of

confiuence  of g^j-eames  and  branches,  the  one  crossing  the  other  so  many
streames.  .  in  r  •  i i  i  i-i

times, and all so raire and large,  and so  like one to

another,  as  no  man  can  tell  which  to  take  :  and  if  wee  went

by  the  Sunne  or  Compasse,  hoping  thereby  to  goe  directly

one  way  or  other,  yet  that  way  wee  were  also  caried  in  a

circle  amongst  multitudes  of  Islands,  and  every  Island  so

bordered  with  high  trees,  as  no  man  coulde  see  any  further

then the bredth of  the river,  or length of  the  breach.

380

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
But  this  it  chanced,  that  entering  into  a  river,  (which
because  it  had  no  name,  wee  called  the  river  of  the  ^^^  "^^^  °f
Red  crosse,  our  selves  being  the  first  Christians  that  ever  ^  ^  ^  "''"^'
came  therein)  the  two  and  twentieth  of  May,  as  wee  were
rowing  up  the  same,  wee  espied  a  small  canoa  with  three
Indians,  which  (by  the  swiftnesse  of  my  barge,  rowing
with  eight  oares)  I  overtooke  yer  they  could  crosse  the
river,  the  rest  of  the  people  on  the  banks  shadowed  under
the  thicke  wood,  gazed  on  with  a  doubtfuU  conceit  what
might  befall  those  three  which  we  had  taken.  But  when
they  perceived  that  we  offered  them  no  violence,  neither
entred  their  canoa  with  any  of  ours,  nor  tooke  out  of  the
canoa  any  of  theirs,  they  then  beganne  to  shew  themselves
on  the  banks  side,  and  offered  to  traffique  with  us  for
such  things  as  they  had.  And  as  wee  drew  neere,  they  all
stayed,  and  we  came  with  our  barge  to  the  mouth  of
a  little  creeke  which  came  from  their  towne  into  the  great
river.

As  we  abode  there  a  while,  our  Indian  pilot,  called
Ferdinando,  would  needs  goe  ashore  to  their  village  to
fetch  some  fruits,  and  to  drinke  of  their  artificiall  wines,
and  also  to  see  the  place,  and  know  the  lord  of  it  against
another  time,  and  tooke  with  him  a  brother  of  his,  which
hee  had  with  him  in  the  iourney :  when  they  came  to  the
village  of  these  people,  the  lord  of  the  Island  offered
to  lay  hands  on  them,  purposing  to  have  slaine  them  both,
yeelding  for  reason  that  this  Indian  of  ours  had  brought  a
strange  nation  into  their  territory,  to  spoile  and  destroy
them.  But  the  pilot  being  quicke,  and  of  a  disposed
body,  slipt  their  fingers,  and  ran  into  the  woods,  and  his
brother  being  the  better  footman  of  the  two,  recovered  the
creekes  mouth,  where  we  stayed  in  our  barge,  crying  out
that  his  brother  was  slaine :  with  that  we  set  hands  on  one
of  them  that  was  next  us,  a  very  olde  man,  and  brought
him  into  the  barge,  assuring  him  that  if  we  had  not  our
pilot  againe,  we  would  presently  cut  off  his  head.  This
olde  man  being  resolved  that  he  should  pay  the  losse  of  the
other,  cried  out  to  those  in  the  woods  to  save  Ferdinando

381

A.D.

1595-

[III.  644.]
Two  nations  of
the  Twltivas,
called  Cia-
wani,  and
Waraweete.
A  description
of  the  mighty
river  of
Orenoque  or
Baraqiian.

What  maner
of  people  the
Tivitivas  are.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

our  pilot ;  but  they  followed  him  notwithstanding,  and
hunted  after  him  upon  the  foot  with  the  Deere-dogges,
and  with  so  maine  a  crie,  that  all  the  woods  eckoed
with  the  shout  they  made :  but  at  the  last  this  poore
chased  Indian  recovered  the  river  side,  and  got  upon  a
tree,  and  as  we  were  coasting,  leaped  downe  and  swamme
to  the  barge  halfe  dead  with  feare.  But  our  good  happe
was,  that  we  kept  the  other  olde  Indian  which  we  hand-
fasted  to  redeeme  our  pilot  withall ;  for  being  naturall
of  those  riverSj  we  assured  our  selves  hee  knew  the  way
better  then  any  stranger  could.  And  indeed,  but  for  this
chance,  I  thinke  we  had  never  found  the  way  either
to  Guiana,  or  backe  to  our  ships  :  for  Ferdinand o  after  a
few  dayes  knew  nothing  at  all,  nor  which  way  to  turne,
yea  and  many  times  the  olde  man  himselfe  was  in
great  doubt  which  river  to  take.  Those  people  which
dwell  in  these  broken  islands  and  drowned  lands,  are
generally  called  Tivitivas  ;  there  are  of  them  two  sorts,  the
one  called  Ciawani,  and  the  other  Waraweete.

The  great  river  of  Orenoque  or  Baraquan  hath  nine
branches  which  fall  out  on  the  North  side  of  his  owne
maine  mouth  :  on  the  South  side  it  hath  seven  other  fall-
ings into  the  sea,  so  it  disemboqueth  by  sixteene  armes  in
all,  betweene  Hands  and  broken  ground,  but  the  Hands
are  very  great,  many  of  them  as  bigge  as  the  Isle  of
Wight,  and  bigger,  and  many  lesse.  From  the  first
branch  on  the  North  to  the  last  of  the  South,  it  is  at  least
100  leagues,  so  as  the  rivers  mouth  is  300  miles  wide  at
his  entrance  into  the  sea,  which  I  take  to  be  farre  bigger
then  that  of  Amazones.  All  those  that  inhabit  in  the
mouth  of  this  river  upon  the  severall  North  branches,  are
these  Tivitivas,  of  which  there  are  two  chiefe  lords  which
have  continuall  warres  one  with  the  other.  The  Hands
which  lie  on  the  right  hand,  are  called  Pallamos,  and  the
land  on  the  left,  Horotomaka,  and  the  river  by  which
John  Dowglas  returned  within  the  land  from  Amana
to  Capuri,  they  call  Macuri.

These Tivitivas are a  very  goodly  people  and  very

382

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
valiant,  and  have  the  most  manly  speech  and  most
deliberate  that  ever  I  heard,  of  what  nation  soever.  In
the  Summer  they  have  houses  on  the  ground,  as  in  other
places :  in  the  "Winter  they  dwell  upon  the  trees,  where
they  build  very  artificiall  townes  and  villages,  as  it  is
written  in  the  Spanish  story  of  the  West  Indies,  that
those  people  do  in  the  low  lands  nere  the  gulfe  of
Uraba  :  for  betweene  May  &  September  the  river  of
Orenoque  riseth  thirty  foot  upright,  and  then  are  those
ilands  overflowen  twenty  foot  high  above  the  levell  of
the  ground,  saving  some  few  raised  grounds  in  the  middle
of  them  :  and  for  this  cause  they  are  inforced  to  live
in  this  maner.  They  never  eat  of  any  thing  that  is
set  or  sowen  :  and  as  at  home  they  use  neither  planting
nor  other  manurance,  so  when  they  come  abroad,  they
refuse  to  feed  of  ought,  but  of  that  which  nature  with-
out labour  bringeth  forth.  They  use  the  tops  of  Palmitos
for  bread,  and  kill  deere,  fish,  and  porks,  for  the  rest
of  their  sustenance.  They  have  also  many  sorts  of  fruits
that  grow  in  the  woods,  and  great  variety  of  birds
and fowle.

And  if  to  speake  of  them  were  not  tedious,  and
vulgar,  surely  we  saw  in  those  passages  of  very  rare
colours  and  formes,  not  elsewhere  to  be  found,  for  as
much  as  I  have  either  seene  or  read.  Of  these  people
those  that  dwell  upon  the  branches  of  Orenoque,
called  Capuri  and  Macureo,  are  for  the  most  part
carpenters  of  canoas,  for  they  make  the  most  and
fairest  canoas,  and  sel  them  into  Guiana  for  golde,
and  into  Trinidad  for  tabacco,  in  the  excessive  taking
whereof,  they  exceed  all  nations  ;  and  notwithstanding
the  moistnesse  of  the  aire  in  which  they  live,  the
hardnesse  of  their  diet,  and  the  great  labours  they  suffer
to  hunt,  fish  and  fowle  for  their  living  ;  in  all  my  life,
either  in  the  Indies  or  in  Europe,  did  I  never  behold
a  more  goodly  or  better  favoured  people  or  a  more
manly.  They  were  woont  to  make  warre  upon  all
nations, and especially on the Canibals, so as none

383

A.D.

1595-

The  Arwacas
on  the  South
side  of  Ore-
noque.

The  port  of
the  Ciawani.

J  river
called  The
great  Amana.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

durst  without  a  good  strength  trade  by  those  rivers :
but  of  late  they  are  at  peace  with  their  neighbours,  all
holding  the  Spaniards  for  a  common  enemy.  When
their  commanders  die,  they  use  great  lamentation,  and
when  they  thinke  the  flesh  of  their  bodies  is  putrified,
and  fallen  from  the  bones,  then  they  take  up  the  car-
case againe,  and  hang  it  in  the  caciques  house  that
died,  and  decke  his  scull  with  feathers  of  all  colours,
and  hang  all  his  golde  plates,  about  the  bones  of  his
armes,  thighs,  and  legs.  Those  nations  which  are  called
Arwacas,  which  dwell  on  the  South  of  Orenoque,  (of
which  place  and  nation  our  Indian  pilot  was)  are
dispersed  in  many  other  places,  and  doe  use  to  beat
the  bones  of  their  lords  into  powder,  and  their  wives
and  friends  drinke  it  all  in  their  severall  sorts  of
drinks.

After  we  departed  from  the  port  of  these  Ciawani,
wee  passed  up  the  river  with  the  flood,  and  ankered
the  ebbe,  and  in  this  sort  we  went  onward.  The  third
day  that  we  entred  the  river,  our  galley  came  on  ground,
and  stucke  so  fast,  as  we  thought  that  even  there  our
discovery  had  ended,  and  that  we  must  have  left  foure-
score  and  ten  of  our  men  to  have  inhabited  like  rooks
upon  trees  with  those  nations  :  but  the  next  morning,
after  we  had  cast  out  all  her  ballast,  with  tugging
and  hailing  to  and  fro,  we  got  her  aflote,  and  went
on.  At  foure  dayes  end  wee  fell  into  as  goodly  a
river  as  ever  I  beheld,  which  was  called  The  great
Amana,  which  ranne  more  directly  without  windings
and  turnings  then  the  other :  but  soone  after  the
flood  of  the  sea  left  us  ;  and  being  inforced  either  by
maine  strength  to  row  against  a  violent  current,  or
to  returne  as  wise  as  we  went  out,  we  had  then  no
shift  but  to  perswade  the  companies  that  it  was  but
two  or  three  dayes  worke,  and  therefore  desired  them
to  take  paines,  every  gentleman  &  others  taking  their
turnes  to  row,  and  to  spell  one  the  other  at  the  houres
end. Every day we passed by goodly branches of

384

\

X.

V^^h

'■^J<

-A

J

THE DISCOVER

rivers,  some  falling  from  the  ^\isst,  others  from  the
East  into  Amana,  but  those  I  leave  to  the  description
in  the  Cart  of  discovery,  where  every  one  shalbe  named
with  his  rising  and  descent.  When  three  dayes  more
were  overgone,  our  companies  began  to  despaire,  the  [III.  645,]
weather  being  extreame  hote,  the  river  bordered  with
very  high  trees,  that  kept  away  the  aire,  and  the  current
against  us  every  day  stronger  then  other  :  but  we  ever-
more commanded  our  pilots  to  promise  an  ende  the  next
day,  and  used  it  so  long,  as  we  were  driven  to  assure
them  from  foure  reaches  of  the  river  to  three,  and  so
to  two,  and  so  to  the  next  reach  :  but  so  long  we
laboured,  that  many  dayes  were  spent,  and  wee  driven
to  drawe  our  selves  to  harder  allowance,  our  bread  even
at  the  last,  and  no  drinke  at  all ;  and  our  men  and  our
selves  so  wearied  and  scorched,  and  doubtfull  withall,
whether  wee  should  ever  performe  it  or  no,  the  heat
increasing  as  we  drew  towards  the  line  ;  for  wee  were
n^  .V  in  five  degrees.  T^hey  are  In

The  further  we  went  on  (our  victuall  decreasing  and  ^^^  degrees.
the  aire  breeding  great  faintnesse)  wee  grew  weaker  and
weaker,  when  wee  had  most  need  of  strength  and  abilitie ;
for  hourely  the  river  ranne  more  violently  then  other
against  us,  and  the  barge,  wheries,  and  shippes  boat  of
captaine  Gifford  and  captaine  Calfield,  had  spent  all  their
provisions  ;  so  as  we  were  brought  into  despaire  and
discomfort,  had  wee  not  perswaded  all  the  company
that  it  was  but  onely  one  dayes  worke  more  to  atteine
the  land  where  wee  should  be  relieved  of  all  wee
wanted,  and  if  we  returned,  that  wee  were  sure  to
starve  by  the  way,  and  that  the  world  would  also  laugh
us  to  scorne.  On  the  banks  of  these  rivers  were
divers  sorts  of  fruits  good  to  eat,  flowers  and  trees
of  such  variety,  as  were  sufficient  to  make  tenne  volumes
of  herbals  :  we  relieved  our  selves  many  times  with  the
fruits  of  the  countrey,  and  sometimes  with  fowle  and
fish.  Wee  saw  birds  of  all  colours,  some  carnation,
some  crimson,  orenge-tawny,  purple,  watchet,  and  of
X  385  2  B

595

THE ETTuLlSii VOYA.GES

all  oC  ./  sorts  both  .simple  and  mixt,  ana  it  was  unto
us  a  great  good  passing  of  the  time  to  beholde  them,
besides  the  reliefe  we  found  by  killing  some  store  of
them  with  our  fovding  pieces ;  without  which,  having
little  or  no  bread,  and  lesse  drinke,  but  onely  the
thicke  and  troubled  water  of  the  river,  we  had  beene
in  a  very  hard  case.

Our  olde  pilot  of  the  Ciawani  (whom,  as  I  sayd  before,
wee  tooke  to  redeeme  Ferdinando)  tolde  us,  that  if  we
would  enter  a  branch  of  a  river  on  the  right  hand
with  our  barge  and  wheries,  and  leave  the  galley  at
anker  the  while  in  the  great  river,  he  would  bring
us  to  a  towne  of  the  Arwacas,  where  we  should
finde  store  of  bread,  hennes,  fish,  and  of  the  countrey
wine  ;  and  perswaded  us,  that  departing  from  the
galley  at  noone,  we  might  returne  yer  night,  I  was
very  glad  to  heare  this  speech,  and  presently  tooke  my
barke,  with  eight  musketiers,  captaine  Giffords  whery,
with  himselfe  and  foure  musketiers,  and  Captaine  Cal-
field  with  his  whery,  and  as  many  ;  and  so  we  entred  the
mouth  of  this  river  :  and  because  we  were  perswaded
that  it  was  so  nere,  we  tooke  no  victuall  with  us
at  all.  When  we  had  rowed  three  houres,  we  mar-
velled we  saw  no  signe  of  any  dwelling,  and  asked  the
pilot  where  the  towne  was :  he  tolde  us  a  little  further.
After  three  houres  more,  the  Sun  being  almost  set,  we
began  to  suspect  that  he  led  us  that  way  to  betray
us  :  for  hee  confessed  that  those  Spanyards  which  fled
from  Trinidad,  and  also  those  that  remained  with  Cara-
pana  in  Emeria,  were  joyned  together  in  some  village
upon  that  river.  But  when  it  grew  towards  night  ;
and  wee  demanded  where  the  place  was ;  hee  tolde  us
but  foure  reaches  more.  When  we  had  rowed  foure
and  foure  ;  we  saw  no  signe ;  and  our  poore  water-men,
even  heart-broken,  and  tired,  were  ready  to  give  up
the  ghost  :  for  wee  had  now  come  from  the  galley
neere  forty  miles.

At the last we determined to hang  the  pilot ;  and

386

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-
if  wee  had  well  knowen  the  way  backe  againe  by
night,  hee  had  surely  gone  ;  but  our  owne  necessities
pleaded  sufficiently  for  his  safety :  for  it  was  as  darke
as  pitch,  and  the  river  began  so  to  narrow  it  selfe,
and  the  trees  to  hang  over  from  side  to  side,  as  wee
were  driven  with  arming  swords  to  cut  a  passage
thorow  those  branches  that  covered  the  water.  Wee
were  very  desirous  to  finde  this  towne,  hoping  of  a
feast,  because  wee  made  but  a  short  breakefast  aboord
the  galley  in  the  morning  and  it  was  now  eight  a
clocke  at  night,  and  our  stomacks  began  to  gnawe
apace  :  but  whether  it  was  best  to  returne  or  goe  on,
we  beganne  to  doubt,  suspecting  treason  in  the  pilot
more  and  more  :  but  the  poore  olde  Indian  ever
assured  us  that  it  was  but  a  little  further,  but  this
one  turning  and  that  turning  :  and  at  the  last  about
one  a  clocke  after  midnight  wee  saw  a  light  ;  and  rowing
towards  it,  wee  heard  the  dogges  of  the  village.  When
we  landed  wee  found  few  people  ;  for  the  lord  of  that
place  was  gone  with  divers  canoas  above  foure  hundred
miles  oiF,  upon  a  journey  towardes  the  head  of  Orenoque
to  trade  for  golde,  and  to  buy  women  of  the  Canibals,
who  afterward  unfortunately  passed  by  us  as  wee  rode
at  an  anker  in  the  port  of  Morequito  in  the  darke  of
the  night,  and  yet  came  so  neere  us,  as  his  canoas  grated
against  our  barges  :  he  left  one  of  his  company  at  the
port  of  Morequito,  by  whom  wee  understood  that  hee
had  brought  thirty  yoong  women,  divers  plates  of  golde,
and  had  great  store  of  fine  pieces  of  cotton  cloth,  and
cotton  beds.  In  his  house  we  had  good  store  of
bread,  fish,  hennes,  and  Indian  drinke,  and  so  rested
that  night,  and  in  the  morning  after  we  had  traded
with  such  of  his  people  as  came  downe,  we  returned  [III.  646.]
towards  our  gaily,  and  brought  with  us  some  quan-
tity of  bread,  fish,  and  hennes.

On  both  sides  of  this  river,  we  passed  the  most  beauti-  A  most  beauti-
fuU  countrey  that  ever  mine  eyes  beheld :  and  whereas  all  f'^^^  comtrey.
that  we  had  seene  before  was  nothing  but  woods,  prickles,

387

A.D.

1595-

The  river  of
Lagartos,  or
Crocodiles.

Tzvo  canoas
taken.

Three  Span-
yards  escaped.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

bushes,  and  thornes,  here  we  beheld  plaines  of  twenty-
miles  in  length,  the  grasse  short  and  greene,  and  in
divers  parts  groves  of  trees  by  themselves,  as  if  they  had
beene  by  all  the  arte  and  labour  in  the  world  so  made  of
purpose:  and  still  as  we  rowed,  the  deere  came  downe
feeding  by  the  waters  side,  as  if  they  had  beene  used  to  a
keepers  call.  Upon  this  river  there  were  great  store  of
fowle,  and  of  many  sorts  :  we  saw  in  it  divers  sorts  of
strange  fishes,  and  of  marvellous  bignes :  but  for  lagartos
it  exceeded,  for  there  were  thousands  of  those  ugly  ser-
pents ;  and  the  people  call  it  for  the  abundance  of  them,
The  river  of  Lagartos,  in  their  language.  I  had  a  Negro
a  very  proper  yoong  fellow,  who  leaping  out  of  the  galley
to  swim  in  the  mouth  of  this  river,  was  in  all  our  sights
taken  and  devoured  with  one  of  those  lagartos.  In  the
meane  while  our  companies  in  the  gaily  thought  we  had
bene  all  lost,  (for  wee  promised  to  returne  before  night)
and  sent  the  Lions  whelps  shippes  boat  with  captaine
Whiddon  to  follow  us  up  the  river ;  but  the  next  day,
after  we  had  rowed  up  and  downe  some  fourescore  miles,
we  returned,  and  went  on  our  way,  up  the  great  river ;
and  when  we  were  even  at  the  last  cast  for  want  of
victuals,  captaine  GifFord  being  before  the  galley  and  the
rest  of  the  boats,  seeking  out  some  place  to  land  upon  the
banks  to  make  fire,  espied  foure  canoas  comming  downe
the  river ;  &  with  no  small  joy  caused  his  men  to  trie  the
uttermost  of  their  strengths,  and  after  a  while  two  of  the
foure  gave  over,  and  ranne  themselves  ashore,  every  man
betaking  himselfe  to  the  fastnesse  of  the  woods,  the  two
other  lesser  got  away,  while  he  landed  to  lay  holde  on
these ;  and  so  turned  into  some  by-creeke,  we  knew  not
whither.  Those  canoas  that  were  taken,  were  loaden  with
bread,  and  were  bound  for  Margarita  in  the  West  Indies,
which  those  Indians  (called  Arwacas)  purposed  to  cary
thither  for  exchange :  but  in  the  lesser  there  were  three
Spanyards,  who  having  heard  of  the  defeat  of  their
governour  in  Trinidad,  and  that  we  purposed  to  enter
Guiana,  came  away  in  those  canoas : one  of  them  was  a

388

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  a.d.

1595.

cavallero,  as  the  captaine  of  the  Arwacas  after  tolde  us,
another  a  souldier,  and  the  third  a  refiner.

In  the  meane  time,  nothing  on  the  earth  could  have
bene  more  welcome  to  us,  next  unto  gold,  then  the  great
store  of  very  excellent  bread  which  we  found  in  these
canoas ;  for  now  our  men  cried.  Let  us  goe  on,  we  care
not  how  farre.  After  that  captaine  Gifford  had  brought
the  two  canoas  to  the  galley,  I  tooke  my  barge,  and  went
to  the  banks  side  with  a  dozen  shot,  where  the  canoas
first  ranne  themselves  ashore,  and  landed  there,  sending
out  captaine  Gifford,  and  captaine  Thyn  on  one  hand,  and
captaine  Calfield  on  the  other,  to  follow  those  that  were
fled  into  the  woods :  and  as  I  was  creeping  thorow  the
bushes,  I  sawe  an  Indian  basket  hidden,  which  was  the  ^-^^^  Sipamsh
refiners  basket ;  for  I  found  in  it  his  quick-silver,  salt-  I"  tf&^t^  r
peter,  and  divers  things  for  the  triall  of  metals,  and  also  ^^^-^^.^  ^^^^^
the  dust  of  such  ore  as  he  had  refined,  but  in  those  canoas
which  escaped  there  was  a  good  quantity  of  ore  and  gold.
t  then  landed  more  men,  and  offered  five  hundred  pound
to  what  souldier  soever  could  take  one  of  those  three
Spanyards  that  we  thought  were  landed.  But  our  labours
were  in  vaine  in  that  behalfe ;  for  they  put  themselves
into  one  of  the  small  canoas :  and  so  while  the  greater
canoas  were  in  taking  they  escaped.  But  seeking  after
the  Spanyards,  we  found  the  Arwacas  hidden  in  the  woods,
which  were  pilots  for  the  Spanyards,  and  rowed  their
canoas ;  of  which  I  kept  the  chiefest  for  a  pilot,  and
caried  him  with  me  to  Guiana,  by  whom  I  understood
where  and  in  what  countreyes  the  Spanyards  had  laboured
for  golde,  though  I  made  not  the  same  knowen  to  all :
for  when  the  springs  began  to  breake,  and  the  rivers  to
raise  themselves  so  suddenly,  as  by  no  meanes  wee  could
abide  the  digging  of  any  mine,  especially  for  that  the
richest  are  defended  with  rocks  of  hard  stones,  which  wee  ^^^  newest
call  the  White  spar,  and  that  it  required  both  time,  men,  ^^•J|'*^^f^^/^^
and  instruments  fit  for  such  a  worke,  I  thought  it  best  not  ^par.
to  hover  thereabouts,  least  if  the  same  had  beene  per-
ceived by  the  company,  there  would  have  beene  by  this

389

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^595-

time  many  barks  and  shippes  set  out,  and  perchance  other
nations  would  also  have  gotten  of  ours  for  pilots ;  so  as
both  our  selves  might  have  beene  prevented,  and  all  our
care  taken  for  good  usage  of  the  people  bene  utterly  lost,
by  those  that  onely  respect  present  profit,  and  such
violence  or  insolence  offered,  as  the  nations  which  are
borderers  would  have  changed  their  desire  of  our  love  and
defence  into  hatred  and  violence.  And  for  any  longer
stay  to  have  brought  a  more  quantity  (which  I  heare  hath
beene  often  objected)  whosoever  had  seene  or  proved  the
fury  of  that  river  after  it  beganne  to  arise,  and  had  bene  a
moneth  and  odde  dayes,  as  we  were,  from  hearing  ought
from  our  shippes,  leaving  them  meanly  manned  400  miles
off,  would  perchance  have  turned  somewhat  sooner  then
we  did,  if  all  the  mountaines  had  bene  golde,  or  rich
stones.  And  to  say  the  trueth,  all  the  branches  and  small
rivers  which  fell  into  Orenoque  were  raised  with  such
[III.  647.]  speed,  as  if  we  waded  them  over  the  shooes  in  the  morn-
ing outward,  we  were  covered  to  the  shoulders  homeward
the  very  same  day  :  and  to  stay  to  digge  out  gold  with  our
nailes,  had  bene  Opus  laboris  but  not  Ingenii :  such  a
quantitie  as  would  have  served  our  turnes  we  could  not
have  had,  but  a  discovery  of  the  Mines  to  our  infinite
disadvantage  wee  had  made,  and  that  could  have  bene  the
best  profite  of  farther  search  or  stay :  for  those  Mines  are
not  easily  broken,  nor  opened  in  hast,  and  I  could  have
returned  a  good  quantitie  of  gold  ready  cast,  if  I  had  not
shot  at  another  marke,  then  present  profit.

This  Arwacan  Pilot  with  the  rest,  feared  that  wee  would
have  eaten  them,  or  otherwise  have  put  them  to  some
The  Spaniards  cruel  death  (for  the  Spaniards,  to  the  end  that  none  of  the
divelhh  lies,  people  in  the  passage  towards  Guiana  or  in  Guiana  it  selfe
might  come  to  speach  with  us,  perswaded  all  the  nations,
that  we  were  men-eaters,  and  Canibals)  but  when  the
poore  men  and  women  had  seen  us,  and  that  wee  gave
them  meate,  and  to  every  one  something  or  other,  which
was  rare  and  strange  to  them,  they  beganne  to  conceive
the  deceit  and  purpose  of  the  Spaniards,  who  indeed  (as

390

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad

1595-
they  confessed)  tooke  from  them  both  their  wives  and
daughters  dayly,  and  used  them  for  the  satisfying  of  their
owne  lusts,  especially  such  as  they  tooke  in  this  maner  by
strength.  But  I  protest  before  the  Majestic  of  the  living
God,  that  I  neither  know  nor  beleeve,  that  any  of  our
company  one  or  other,  by  violence  or  otherwise,  ever
knew  any  of  their  women,  and  yet  we  saw  many  hun-
dreds, and  had  many  in  our  power,  and  of  those  very
yong,  and  excellently  favoured,  which  came  among  us
without  deceit,  starke  naked.

Nothing  got  us  more  love  amongst  them  then  this
usage :  for  I  suffered  not  any  man  to  take  from  any  of
the  nations  so  much  as  a  Pina,  or  a  Potato  roote,  without
giving  them  contentment,  nor  any  man  so  much  as  to
offer  to  touch  any  of  their  wives  or  daughters :  which
course  so  contrary  to  the  Spaniards  (who  tyrannize  over
them  in  all  things)  drewe  them  to  admire  her  Majestic,
whose  commaundement  I  tolde  them  it  was,  and  also
wonderfully  to  honour  our  nation.

But  I  confesse  it  was  a  very  impatient  worke  to  keepe
the  meaner  sort  from  spoyle  and  stealing,  when  wee  came
to  their  houses :  which  because  in  all  I  coulde  not  pre-  ^  notable ^
vent,  I  caused  my  Indian  interpreter  at  every  place  when  ^!"^-^^  '>fj^^-
wee  departed,  to  knowe  of  the  losse  or  wrong  done,  and
if  ought  were  stolen  or  taken  by  violence,  either  the  same
was  restored,  and  the  partie  punished  in  their  sight,  or
else  was  payed  for  to  their  uttermost  demand.

They  also  much  wondered  at  us,  after  they  heard  that
we  had  slaine  the  Spaniards  at  Trinidad,  for  they  were
before  resolved,  that  no  nation  of  Christians  durst  abide
their  presence,  and  they  wondered  more  when  I  had  made
them  know  of  the  great  overthrow  that  her  Majesties
armie  and  Fleete  had  given  them  of  late  yeeres  in  their
owne  Countreys.

After  we  had  taken  in  this  supply  of  bread,  with  divers
baskets  of  rootes  which  were  excellent  meate,  I  gave  one
of  the  Canoas  to  the  Arwacas,  which  belonged  to  the
Spaniards  that  were  escaped,  and  when  I  had  dismissed  all

391

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

but  the  Captaine  (who  by  the  Spaniards  was  christened
Martin)  I  sent  backe  in  the  same  Canoa  the  olde  Ciawan,
and  Ferdinando  my  first  Pilot,  and  gave  them  both  such
things  as  they  desired,  with  sufficient  victuall  to  cary  them
backe,  and  by  them  wrote  a  letter  to  the  ships,  which  they
promised  to  deliver,  and  performed  it,  and  then  I  went
on,  with  my  newe  hired  Pilot  Martin  the  Arwacan  :  but
They  come  on  the  next  or  second  day  after,  wee  came  aground  againe
ground  with  ^\^\^  our  Galley,  and  were  like  to  cast  her  away,  with  all
our  victuall  and  provision,  and  so  lay  on  the  sand  one
whole  night  and  were  farre  more  in  despaire  at  this  time
to  free  her  then  before,  because  wee  had  no  tide  of
flood  to  helpe  us,  and  therefore  feared  that  all  our
hopes  would  have  ended  in  mishaps :  but  we  fastened
an  ancker  upon  the  lande,  and  with  maine  strength
drewe  her  off:  and  so  the  fifteenth  day  wee  discovered
afarre  off  the  mountaines  of  Guiana  to  our  great  joy,
and  towards  the  evening  had  a  slent  of  a  Northerly
winde  that  blewe  very  strong,  which  brought  us  in
sight  of  the  great  river  Orenoque;  out  of  which  this
River  discended  wherein  wee  were :  wee  descried  afarre
off  three  other  Canoas  as  farre  as  wee  could  descerne
them,  after  whom  wee  hastened  with  our  barge  and
wherries,  but  two  of  them  passed  out  of  sight,  and
the  thirde  entered  up  the  great  River,  on  the  right
hande  to  the  Westward,  and  there  stayed  out  of  sight,
thinking  that  wee  meant  to  take  the  way  Eastward  to-
wards the  province  of  Carapana,  for  that  way  the  Spani-
ards keepe,  not  daring  to  goe  upwards  to  Guiana,  the
people  in  those  parts  being  all  their  enemies,  and  those  in
the  Canoas  thought  us  to  have  bene  those  Spaniards  that
were  fled  from  Trinidad,  and  had  escaped  killing :  and
when  wee  came  so  farre  downe  as  the  opening  of  that
branch  into  which  they  slipped,  being  neere  them  with
our  barge  and  wherries,  wee  made  after  them,  and  ere
they  coulde  land,  came  within  call,  and  by  our  interpreter
tolde  them  what  wee  were,  wherewith  they  came  backe
[III.  648.] willingly  abord  us  :  and  of  such  fish  and  Tortugas  egges

392

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-
as  they  had  gathered,  they  gave  us,  and  promised  in  the
morning  to  bring  the  Lord  of  that  part  with  them,  and  to
do  us  all  other  services  they  could.

That  night  we  came  to  an  ancker  at  the  parting  of
the  three  goodly  Rivers  (the  one  was  the  River  of  Amana
by  which  we  came  from  the  North,  and  ranne  athwart
towards  the  South,  the  other  two  were  of  Orenoque  ^^^  branches
which  crossed  from  the  West  and  ranne  to  the  Sea  jf  ^'^^  "^^''
towardes  the  East)  and  landed  upon  a  faire  sand,  where
wee  found  thousands  of  Tortugas  egges,  which  are  very
wholesome  meate,  and  greatly  restoring,  so  as  our  men
were  nowe  well  filled  and  highly  contented  both  with
the  fare,  and  neerenesse  of  the  land  of  Guiana  which
appeared  in  sight.

In  the  morning  there  came  downe  according  to  promise
the  Lord  of  that  border  called  Toparimaca,  with  some
thirtie  or  fourtie  followers,  and  brought  us  divers  sorts
of  fruites,  and  of  his  wine,  bread,  fish,  and  flesh,  whom
wee  also  feasted  as  wee  could,  at  least  wee  dranke  good
Spanish  wine  (whereof  wee  had  a  small  quantitie  in
bottles)  which  above  all  things  they  love.  I  conferred
with  this  Toparimaca  of  the  next  way  to  Guiana,  who  Toparimaca.
conducted  our  galley  and  boates  to  his  owne  port,  and
caried  us  from  thence  some  mile  and  a  halfe  to  his
Towne,  where  some  of  our  Captaines  karoused  of  his
wine  till  they  were  reasonable  pleasant,  for  it  is  very
strong  with  pepper,  and  the  juice  of  divers  hearbes,  and
fruites  digested  and  purged,  they  keepe  it  in  great  earthen
pots  of  tenne  or  twelve  galons  very  cleane  and  sweete,
and  are  themselves  at  their  meetings  and  feastes  the
greatest  karousers  and  drunkards  of  the  world :  when
wee  came  to  his  towne  wee  found  two  Casiques,  whereof
one  was  a  stranger  that  had  bene  up  the  River  in  trade,
and  his  boates,  people,  and  wife  incamped  at  the  port
where  wee  anckered,  and  the  other  was  of  that  countrey
a  follower  of  Toparimaca :  they  lay  each  of  them  in  a
Gotten  Hamaca,  which  wee  call  brasill  beds,  and  two
women attending them with sixe cuppes and a little

393

A.D,

1595-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ladle  to  fill  them,  out  of  an  earthen  pitcher  of  wine,
and  so  they  dranke  each  of  them  three  of  those  cups  at
a  time  one  to  the  other,  and  in  this  sort  they  drinke
drunke  at  their  feastes  and  meetings.

That  Casique  that  was  a  stranger  had  his  wife  staying
at  the  port  where  wee  anckered,  and  in  all  my  life  I  have
seldome  seene  a  better  favoured  woman :  Shee  was  of
good  stature,  with  blacke  eyes,  fat  of  body,  of  an  excellent
countenance,  her  haire  almost  as  long  as  her  selfe,  tied  up
againe  in  pretie  knots,  and  it  seemed  shee  stood  not
in  that  awe  of  her  husband,  as  the  rest,  for  shee  spake
and  discoursed,  and  dranke  among  the  gentlemen  and
Captaines,  and  was  very  pleasant,  knowing  her  owne
comelinesse,  and  taking  great  pride  therein.  I  have
seene  a  Lady  in  England  so  like  to  her,  as  but  for
the  difference  of  colour,  I  would  have  sworne  might
have  bene  the  same.

The  seat  of  this  Towne  of  Toparimaca  was  very
pleasant,  standing  on  a  little  hill,  in  an  excellent
prospect,  with  goodly  gardens  a  mile  compasse  round
aboute  it,  and  two  very  faire  and  large  ponds  of  excel-
The  towne  of  lent  fish  adjoyning.  This  towne  is  called  Arowocai :  the
Jromcay.  people  are  of  the  nation  called  Nepoios,  and  are  followers
of  Carapana.  In  that  place  I  sawe  very  aged  people,  that
wee  might  perceive  all  their  sinewes  and  veines  without
any  flesh,  and  but  even  as  a  case  covered  onely  with
skinne.  The  Lord  of  this  place  gave  me  an  old  man
breadth  of  the  £qj.  YAot^  who  was  of  great  experience  and  traveile,  and
knew  the  River  most  perfectly  both  by  day  and  night :
and  it  shall  bee  requisite  for  any  man  that  passeth  it,  to
have  such  a  Pilot,  for  it  is  foure,  five,  and  sixe  miles  over
in  many  places,  and  twentie  miles  in  other  places,  with
wonderfull  eddies,  and  strong  currents,  many  great
ylands,  and  divers  sholds,  and  many  dangerous  rockes,
and  besides  upon  any  increase  of  winde  so  great  a  bilowe,
as  wee  were  sometimes  in  great  perill  of  drowning  in  the
galley,  for  the  small  boates  durst  not  come  from  the
shoare,  but  when  it  was  very  faire.

394

The  great
breadth  of  \
river  Oreno
que

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-
The  next  day  we  hasted  thence,  and  having  an  Easterly They^  enter
winde  to  helpe  us,  we  spared  our  armes  from  rowing :  for  ^^^  river  Ore-
after  wee  entred  Orenoque,  the  River  lieth  for  the  most  ^rume'thEast
part  East  and  West,  even  from  the  Sea  unto  Quito  in  and  West.
Peru. This River is  navigable  with barkes, litle  lesse
then  a  thousand  miles,  &  from  the  place  where  we  entred,
it  may  be  sailed  up  in  small  pinnesses  to  many  of  the
best  parts  of  Nuevo  reyno  de  Granada,  and  of  Popayan :
and  from  no  place  may  the  cities  of  these  parts  of  the
Indies  be  so  easily  taken  and  invaded  as  from  hence. All
that  day  wee  sailed  up  a  branch  of  that  River,  having  on
the  left  hand  a  great  yland  which  they  call  Assapana  which  The  yle  of
may conteine some five and twentie miles in length,  Assapana.
and  sixe  miles  in  breadth,  the  great  body  of  the  River
running  on  the  other  side of  this  yland. Beyond that
middle  branch  there  is  also  another  yland  in  the River
called  Iwana,  which  is  twise  as  bigge  as  the  yle  of  Wight,  The  yland  of
and  beyond  it,  and  betweene  it  and  the  maine  of  Guiana,  ^'^'^^'^•
runneth  a  thirde  branch  of  Orenoque  called  Arraroopana  :
all  three  are  goodly  branches,  and  all  navigable  for  great
ships. I iudge the  river in this place to be  at  least
thirty miles brode,  reckoning the  ylands  which devide
the branches in it, for afterwards I sought also both
the  other  branches.

After  wee reached to the head of  the yland,  called  [III.  649.]
Assapana,  a  little to  the  Westward on  the right hand
there  opened  a  river  which  came  from  the  North,  called
Europa,  and  fel  into  the  great  River,  and  beyond  it  on
the  same  side,  wee  anckered  for  that  night,  by  another
yland  sixe  miles  long,  and  two  miles  broade,  which  they
call  Ocaywita : From  hence  in  the  morning  wee  landed
two  Guianians,  which  wee  found  in  the  Towne  of  Topari-  The  yk  of
maca,  that  came  with  us,  who  went  to  give  notice  of  our  ^'^^y^^^^-
comming  to  the  Lord  of  that  countrey  called  Putyma,  a
follower  of  Topiawari,  chiefe  Lord  of  Aromaia,  who  suc-
ceeded Morequito, whom (as  you have heard before)
Berreo put  to  death  :  but  his  towne  being  farre within
the  land,  he  came  not  unto  us  that  day,  so  as  we  ankered

395

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

againe  that  night  neere  the  bankes  of  another  yland,
of  bignesse  much  like  the  other,  which  they  call  Puta-
payma,  over  against  which  yland,  on  the  maine  lande,
was  a  very  high  mountaine  called  Oecope :  we  coveted
to  ancker  rather  by  these  ylands  in  the  River,  then
by  the  maine,  because  of  the  Tortugas  egges,  which
our  people  found  on  them  in  great  abundance,  and  also
because  the  ground  served  better  for  us  to  cast  our
nets  for  fish,  the  maine  bankes  being  for  the  most  part
stonie  and  high,  and  the  rocks  of  a  blew  metalline
Steele-ore.  colour,  like  unto  the  best  steele-ore,  which  I  assuredly
take  it  to  be :  of  the  same  blew  stone  are  also  divers
great  mountaines,  which  border  this  river  in  many
places.

The next  morning towards nine of  the clocke, wee
weighed ancker, and the brize increasing, we sailed
alwayes  West  up the river,  and  after  a while opening
the  land  on  the  right  side,  the  countrey  appeared  to  bee
champaine,  and  the  bankes  shewed  very  perfect  red. I
therefore sent two of  the little barges with Captaine
Gifford,  and  with  him  Captaine  Thyn,  Captaine  Calfield,
my  cosen  Greenvile,  my  nephew  John  Gilbert,  Captaine
Eynus,  Master  Edward  Porter,  and  my  cosen  Butshead
Gorges, with some fewe souldiers, to march over the
bankes  of  that  red  land,  and  to  discover  what  maner  of
countrey  it  was  on  the  other  side,  who  at  their  returne
found  it  all  a  plaine  levell,  as  farre  as  they  went  or  could
discerne,  from  the  highest  tree  they  could  get  upon :  And
my old Pilot, a man of  great travell, brother to the
Casique Toparimica tolde mee, that  those were called
The  plaine s  of  t}\Q pkines of  the Sayma, and that the same levell
Sayma  stretch-  ^q^qY^q,^^ to Cumana, and Caracas in the West Indies,
mana  and  the  which  are  a  hundreth  and  twentie  leagues  to  the  North,
Caracas.  and  that  there  inhabited foure principall  nations. The

first  were  the  Sayma,  the  next  Assawai,  the  thirde  and
greatest  the  Wikiri,  by  whom  Pedro  Hernandez  de
Serpa  before  mentioned  was  overthrowen,  as  hee  passed
with three  hundred horse  from  Cumana  towards  Oren-

396

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595.

oque,  in  his  enterprize  of  Guiana :  the  fourth  are  called

Aroras,  and  are  as  blacke  as  Negros,  but  have  smooth  ^roras  a

haire, and these are very  valiant,  or rather desperate  ^^^f^  People
\  11  ,  •'  ^ . . ustns  vene-

people, and have the most strong poyson on their  mom  arrowes.

arrowes, and most dangerous of  all nations, of  which

poyson  I  will speake  somewhat being  a  digression  not

unnecessary.

There  was  nothing  whereof  I  was  more  curious,  then
to  finde  out  the  true  remedies  of  these  poysoned  arrowes :
for  besides  the  mortalitie  of  the  wound  they  make,  the
partie  shotte  indureth  the  most  insufferable  torment  in
the  world,  and  abideth  a  most  ugly  and  lamentable
death,  sometimes  dying  starke  mad,  sometimes  their
bowels  breaking  out  of  their  bellies :  which  are  pre-
sently discoloured  as  blacke  as  pitch,  and  so  unsavoury,
as  no  man  can  endure  to  cure,  or  to  attend  them.  And
it  is  more  strange  to  know,  that  in  all  this  time  there
was  never  Spaniard  either  by  gift  or  torment  that  could
atteine  to  the  true  knowledge  of  the  cure,  although
they  have  martyred  and  put  to  invented  torture  I
know  not  how  many  of  them.  But  every  one  of  these
Indians  know  it  not,  no  not  one  among  thousands,  but
their  soothsayers  and  priestes,  who  doe  conceale  it,  and
onely  teach  it  but  from  the  father  to  the  sonne.

Those  medicines  which  are  vulgar,  and  serve  for  the
ordinarie poyson, are made of the juice of a roote
called Tupara : the same also quencheth marveilously
the  heate  of  burning  feavers,  and  healeth  inward  wounds,
and  broken  veines,  that bleed  within  the  body. But  I
was  more beholding  to the Guianians  then  any  other : The  juke  of
for  Anthonio  de  Berreo  tolde  mee  that  hee  could  never  garlike  good
attaine to the knowledge thereof,  and  yet they  taught  '^S^^J'^^  °rdt-
mee the best  way  of  healing  as  well thereof, as  of  all  speeL  drink-
other  poysons. Some  of  the  Spaniards  have  bene  cured  ing  to  be
in  ordinary  wounds,  of  the common poysoned  arrowes  avoyded  of
with  the  juice  of garlike : but  this is  a  generall  rule  ^^'^^^  ^j  T^  •  l
for  all  men  that  shall  hereafter  travel  the  Indies  where  poisoned
poisoned  arrowes  are  used,  that  they  must  abstaine  from  arrows.

397

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

drinke,  for  if  they  take  any  licour  into  their  body,  as
they  shall  bee  marveilously  provoked  thereunto  by
drought,  I  say,  if  they  drinke  before  the  wound  bee
dressed,  or  soone  upon  it,  there  is  no  way  with  them
but  present  death.

And  so  I  will  returne  againe  to  our  journey  which
for  this  thirde  day  we  finished,  and  cast  ancker  againe
neere  the  continent  or  the  left  hand  betweene  two
mountaines,  the  one  called  Aroami,  and  the  other  Aio  :
I  made  no  stay  here  but  till  midnight,  for  I  feared
[III.  650.]  hourely  least  any  raine  should  fall,  and  then  it  had
bene  impossible  to  have  gone  any  further  up,  notwith-
standing that  there  is  every  day  a  very  strong  brize,
and  Easterly  winde.  I  deferred  the  search  of  the
countrey  on  Guiana-side,  till  my  returne  downe  the
river.

The next day we sailed by a great yland in the

The  yie  of middle of the river called Manoripano, and as wee

Manoripano. talked a while  on the yland, while the Galley got

a  head  of  us,  there  came  for  us  from  the  maine  a  small

Canoa  with seven or eight Guianians, to invite us to

ancker  at their port,  but I deferred till my  returne ;

It  was  that  Casique  to  whom  those  Nepoios  went,  which

came with  us from the  towne  of  Toparimaca : and so

The  province  the  fift day  we reached as high up  as the province  of

Aromaia. Aromaia  the  countrey  of  Morequito  whom  Berreo  exe-

The  yle  of cuted, and ankered to the West of  an yland called

Murrecottma.  Murrecotima, tenne miles long and five broad : and

that night the Casique Aramiary,  (to  whose towne we

made  our  long  and  hungry  voyage  out  of  the  river  of

Amana)  passed  by  us.

The  next  day  wee  arrived  at  the  port  of  Morequito,
and  anckered  there,  sending  away  one  of  our  Pilots
to  seeke  the  king  of  Aromaia,  uncle  to  Morequito
slaine  by  Berreo  as  aforesaid.  The  next  day  following
before  noone  hee  came  to  us  on  foote  from  his  house,
which  was  foureteene  English  miles  (himselfe  being  a
hundreth  and  tenne  yeeres  olde)  and  returned  on foote

398

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad

1595-
the  same  day,  and  with  him  many  of  the  borderers,  with
many  women  and  children,  that  came  to  wonder  at  our
nation,  and  to  bring  us  downe  victuall,  which  they  did
in  great  plentie,  as  venison,  porke,  hennes,  chickens,
foule,  fish,  with  divers  sorts  of  excellent  fruites  and
rootes,  and  great  abundance  of  Pinas,  the  princes  of
fruites,  that  grow  under  the  Sunne,  especially  those  of
Guiana.  They  brought  us  also  store  of  bread,  and  of
their  wine,  and  a  sort  of  Paraquitos,  no  bigger  then
wrennes,  and  of  all  other  sorts  both  small  and  great;
one  of  them  gave  mee  a  beast  called  by  the  Spaniards
Armadilla,  which  they  call  Cassacam,  which  seemeth  to
be  all  barred  over  with  smal  plates  somewhat  like  to  a
Rinoceros,  with  a  white  home  growing  in  his  hinder
parts,  as  bigge  as  a  great  hunting  home,  which  they  use
to  winde  in  stead  of  a  trumpet.  Monardus  writeth
that  a  little  of  the  powder  of  that  home  put  into  the
eare,  cureth  deafenesse.

After  this  olde  King  had  rested  a  while  in  a  little
tent,  that  I  caused  to  bee  set  up,  I  beganne  by  my
interpreter  to  discourse  with  him  of  the  death  of  More-
quito  his  predecessour,  and  afterward  of  the  Spaniards,
and  ere  I  went  any  farther  I  made  him  knowe  the
cause  of  my  comming  thither,  whose  servant  I  was,
and  that  the  Queenes  pleasure  was,  I  should  undertake
the  voyage  for  their  defence,  and  to  deliver  them  from
the  tyrannie  of  the  Spaniards,  dilating  at  large  (as  I  had
done  before  to  those  of  Trinidad)  her  Majesties  great-
nesse,  her  justice,  her  charitie  to  all  oppressed  nations,
with  as  many  of  the  rest  of  her  beauties  and  vertues,
as  either  I  could  expresse,  or  they  conceive  :  all  which
being  with  great  admiration  attentively  heard,  and  mar-
veilously  admired,  I  beganne  to  sound  the  olde  man  as
touching  Guiana,  and  the  state  thereof,  what  sort  of
common  wealth  it  was,  how  governed,  of  what  strength
and  policie,  howe  farre  it  extended,  and  what  nations
were  friendes  or  enemies  adjoyning,  and  finally  of  the
distance  and  way  to  enter  the  same :  hee  tolde  mee  that

399

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I595-

himselfe  and  his  people  with  all  those  downe  the  River
towards  the  Sea,  as  farre  as  Emeria,  the  province  of
Carapana,  were  of  Guiana,  but  that  they  called  them-
selves Orenoqueponi,  and  that  all  the  nations  betweene
the  river  and  those  mountaines  in  sight  called  Wacarima,
were  of  the  same  cast  and  appellation :  and  that  on  the
other  side  of  those  mountaines  of  Wacarima  there  was
a  large  plaine  (which  after  I  discovered  in  my  returne)
The  valley  of  called  the  valley  of  Amariocapana,  in  all  that  valley  the
Amarioca- people  were  also  of  the  ancient  Guianians.

I  asked  what  nations  those  were  which  inhabited  on
the  farther  side  of  those  mountaines,  beyond  the  valley
of  Amariocapana :  hee  answered  with  a  great  sigh  (as
a  man  which  had  inward  feeling  of  the  losse  of  his
Countrey  and  libertie,  especially  for  that  his  eldest
Sonne  was  slaine  in  a  battell  on  that  side  of  the  moun-
taines, whom  hee  most  entirely  loved)  that  hee  remem-
bred  in  his  fathers  life  time  when  hee  was  very  olde,
and  himselfe  a  yong  man,  that  there  came  downe  into
that  large  valley  of  Guiana,  a  nation  from  so  farre  off
as  the  Sunne  slept,  (for  such  were  his  owne  wordes)
with  so  great  a  multitude  as  they  coulde  not  bee  num
bred  nor  resisted,  and  that  they  wore  large  coates,  ana
hattes  of  crimson  colour,  which  colour  hee  expressed,  by
shewing  a  piece  of  red  wood,  wherewith  my  tent  was
Orejones  are  supported,  and  that  they  were  called  Orejones,  and
the  gentlemen  Ep^j-emei,  those  that  had  slaine  and  rooted  out  so
de  Gomar  i^^ny  of  the  ancient  people,  as  there  were  leaves  in  the
Hist.  gen.  wood  upon  all  the  trees,  and  had  nowe  made  themselves
cap.  119.  Lords  of  all,  even  to  that  mountaine  foote  called  Curaa,
saving  onely  of  two  nations,  the  one  called  Awarawaqueri,
and  the  other  Cassipagotos,  and  that  in  the  last  battell
fought  betweene  the  Epuremei,  and  the  Iwarawaqueri,
his  eldest  sonne  was  chosen  to  carry  to  the  aide  of  the
Iwarawaqueri,  a  great  troupe  of  the  Orenoqueponi,  and
was  there  slaine  with  all  his  people  and  friendes,  and
that  hee  had  now  remayning  but  one  sonne :  and  farther
tolde  mee  that  those  Epuremei  had  built  a  great  Towne

400

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  a.d.

1595.
called  Macureguarai  at  the  said  mountaine  foote,  at  the  [HI-  651.]
beginning  of  the  great plaines of  Guiana, which have  TJ!^  ^"^^^  ^
no  ende:  and  that  their  houses  have  many  roomes,  one  ^^^i"
over the other,  and that  therein the  great  King  of  the
Orejones  and  Epuremei  kept  three  thousande  men  to  de-
fend the  borders  against  them,  and  withall  dayly  to  invade
and  slay  them  : but  that  of  late  yeeres  since  the  Chris-
tians offered  to  invade  his  territories,  and  those  frontiers,
they were  all at peace, and traded one  with  another,
saving  onely  the  Iwarawaqueri,  and  those  other  nations
upon  the  head  of  the  river  of  Caroli,  called  Cassipagotos,
which  we  afterwards discovered, each one holding the
Spaniard  for  a  common  enemie.

After  hee  had  answered thus farre,  he  desired leave
to  depart,  saying that hee  had farre to  goe,  that hee
was  olde,  and  weake,  and  was  every  day  called for by
death,  which  was  also  his  owne phrase : 1  desired him
to  rest  with  us  that  night,  but  I  could  not  intreate  him,
but  hee  tolde  mee  that  at  my  returne  from  the  countrey
above,  hee  would  againe  come  to  us,  and  in  the  meane
time  provide  for us the  best  he could,  of  all  that  his
countrey  yeelded ;  the  same  night  hee  returned  to  Oroco-  Orotona  be-
tona  his  owne  towne,  so  as  hee  went  that  day  eight  and  ^^^^/^  +•  ^^j
twentie  miles,  the  weather  being  very  hot,  the  countrey  j^ortkerk
being situate betweene foure  and five degrees of the  latitude.
Equinoctial.

This  Topiawari  is  helde  for  the  prowdest,  and  wisest
of  all  the  Orenoqueponi,  and  so  hee  behaved  himselfe
towardes  mee  in  all  his  answeres  at  my  returne,  as  I
marveiled  to  finde'  a  man  of  that  gravitie  and  judgement,
and  of  so  good  discourse,  that  had  no  helpe  of  learning
nor  breede.

The  next  morning  we  also  left  the  port,  and  sailed
Westward  up  to  the  River,  to  view  the  famous  River
called  Caroli,  as  well  because  it  was  marveilous  of  it  selfe,
as  also  for  that  I  understoode  it  ledde  to  the  strongest
nations  of  all  the  frontiers,  that  were  enemies  to  the
Epuremei, which are subjects to Inga, Emperour of

X  401  2  0

A.D.

1595-

The  yle  of
Caiama.
They  arrive
at  the  mouth
of  the  river
Caroli.

Wanuretona.

Cassipagoios,
Eparagotos,
and  Arawa-
gotos  three
mighty  nations
seated  on  a
lake  at  the
head  of  the
river  Caroli.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Guiana,  and  Manoa,  and  that  night  we  anckered  at
another  yland  called  Caiama,  of  some  five  or  sixe  miles
in  length,  and  the  next  day  arrived  at  the  mouth  of
Caroli.  When  we  were  short  of  it  as  lowe  or  further
downe  as  the  port  of  Morequito  wee  heard  the  great  rore
and  fall  of  the  River,  but  when  wee  came  to  enter  with
our  barge  and  whirries  thinking  to  have  gone  up  some
fourtie  miles  to  the  nations  of  the  Cassipagotos,  wee  were
not  able  with  a  barge  of  eight  oares  to  row  one  stones
cast  in  an  houre,  and  yet  the  River  is  as  broad  as  the
Thames  at  Wolwich,  and  wee  tried  both  sides,  and  the
middle,  and  every  part  of  the  River,  so  as  we  incamped
upon  the  bankes  adjoyning,  and  sent  off  our  Orenoque-
pone  (which  came  with  us  from  Morequito)  to  give
knowledge  to  the  nations  upon  the  River  of  our  being
there,  and  that  wee  desired  to  see  the  Lordes  of  Canuria,
which  dwelt  within  the  province  upon  that  River,  making
them  know  that  we  were  enemies  to  the  Spaniards,  (for
it  was  on  this  River  side  that  Morequito  slewe  the  Frier,
and  those  nine  Spaniards  which  came  from  Manoa,  the
Citie  of  Inga,  and  tooke  from  them  fourtie  thousande
pezos  of  golde)  so  as  the  next  day  there  came  downe  a
Lord  or  Casique  called  Wanuretona  with  many  people
with  him,  and  brought  all  store  of  provisions  to  enter-
taine  us,  as  the  rest  had  done.  And  as  I  had  before
made  my  comming  knowen  to  Topiawari,  so  did  I
acquaint  this  Casique  therewith,  and  howe  I  was  sent
by  her  Majestic  for  the  purpose  aforesaide,  and  gathered
also  what  I  could  of  him  touching  the  estate  of  Guiana,
and  I  founde  that  those  also  of  Caroli  were  not  onely
enemies  to  the  Spaniards,  but  most  of  all  to  the  Epuremei,
which  abound  in  golde,  and  by  this  Wanuretona,  I  had
knowledge  that  on  the  head  of  this  River  were  three
mighty  nations,  which  were  seated  on  a  great  lake,  from
whence  this  River  descended,  &  were  called  Cassipagotos,
Eparagotos,  and  Arawagotos,  and  that  all  those  either
against  the  Spaniards,  or  the  Epuremei  would  joyne  with
us,  and  that  if  wee  entred  the  land  over  the  mountaines

402

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-

of  Curaa,  we  should  satisfie  our  selves  with  gold  and  all
other  good  things :  he  told  us  farther  of  a  nation  called
Iwarawaqueri  before  spoken  off,  that  held  dayly  warre
with  the  Epuremei  that  inhabited  Macureguarai  the  first
civill  towne  of  Guiana,  of  the  subjects  of  Inga  the
Emperour.

Upon  this  river  one  Captaine  George,  that  I  tooke  with
Berreo  tolde  mee  there  was  a  great  silver  Mine,  and  that  ^  great  silver
it  was  neere  the  banckes  of  the  saide  river. But  by  this  ^"'^•
time as well Orenoque, Caroli, as  all the rest of  the
rivers  were  risen  foure  or  five  foote  in  height,  so  as  it
was  not possible by the  strength of  any  men,  or  with
any  boat  whatsoever  to  rowe  into  the  River  against  the
streame. I therefore sent Captaine Thyn, Captaine
Greenvile,  my  nephew  John  Gylbert,  my  cosen  Butshead
Gorges,  Captaine Clarke,  and  some  thirtie  shotte  more
to  coast  the  River  by  land,  and  to  goe  to  a  towne  some
twentie  miles  over  the  valley  called  Amnatapoi,  and  they  Amnatapoi,  a
found  guides  there,  to  goe  farther  towards  the  mountaine  ''''^"^"
foote  to  another  great  towne  called  Capurepana,  belonging
to  a  Casique called Haharacoa (that  was a nephew to
olde Topiawari King of  Arromaia  our  chiefest  friend)
because  this  towne  and  province  of  Capurepana  adjoyned
to Macureguarai, which was a frontier towne of  the  [III.  652.]
Empire: and  the meane while my  selfe with Captaine
Gifford,  Captaine  Calfield,  Edward  Hancocke,  and  some
halfe a dosen shotte marched  over  land to viewe the
strange  overfals  of  the  river  of  Caroli  which  rored  so  farre
off,  and  also  to  see  the  plaines  adjoyning,  and  the  rest  of
the  province  of  Canuri: I  sent  also  Captaine  Whiddon,
William Connocke, and some eight shotte  with  them,
to  see  if  they  coulde  finde  any  Minerall  stone  alongst  the
river  side. When  we  were  come  to  the  tops  of  the  first  The  strange
hilles  of  the  plaines  adjoyning  to  the  river,  we  behelde  '^^C^f-^  °f
that wonderfull breach of  waters, which ranne downe
Caroli : and might  from that mountaine see the river
howe  it  ranne  in  three  parts,  above  twentie  miles  off,  and
there  appeared  some  tenne  or  twelve  overfals  in  sight,

403

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

every  one  as  high  over  the  other  as  a  Church-tower,
which  fell  with  that  fury,  that  the  rebound  of  water  made
it  seeme,  as  if  it  had  bene  all  covered  over  with  a  great
shower  of  raine :  and  in  some  places  wee  tooke  it  at  the
first  for  a  smoke  that  had  risen  over  some  great  towne.
For  mine  owne  part  I  was  well  perswaded  from  thence
to  have  returned,  being  a  very  ill  footeman,  but  the  rest
were  all  so  desirous  to  goe  neere  the  saide  strange  thunder
of  waters,  as  they  drew  me  on  by  little  and  little,  till  wee
came  into  the  next  valley  where  we  might  better  discerne
Awostbeauti-  the  same.  I  never  saw  a  more  beautifull  countrey,  nor
full  country,  j^ore  lively  prospects,  hils  so  raised  here  and  there  over
the  valleys,  the  river  winding  into  divers  branches,  the
plaines  adjoyning  without  bush  or  stubble,  all  faire  greene
grasse,  the  ground  of  hard  sand  easie  to  march  on,  either
for  horse  or  foote,  the  deere  crossing  in  every  path,  the
birdes  towards  the  evening  singing  on  every  tree  with  a
thousand  severall  tunes,  cranes  and  herons  of  white,
crimson,  and  carnation  pearching  in  the  rivers  side,  the
aire  fresh  with  a  gentle  Easterly  winde,  and  every  stone
that  we  stouped  to  take  up,  promised  either  golde  or
silver  by  his  complexion.  Your  Lordship  shall  see  of
many  sorts,  and  I  hope  some  of  them  cannot  bee  bettered
under  the  Sunne,  and  yet  we  had  no  meanes  but  with  our
daggers  and  fingers  to  teare  them  out  here  and  there,  the
Abundance  of  rockes  being  most  hard  of  that  minerall  Sparre  afore-
mwerau  saide,  which  is  like  a  flint,  and  is  altogether  as  hard  or

harder,  and  besides  the  veines  lye  a  fathome  or  two  deepe
in  the  rockes.  But  we  wanted  all  things  requisite  save
onely  our  desires  and  good  will  to  have  performed  more
if  it  had  pleased  God.  To  be  short,  when  both  our  com-
panies returned,  each  of  them  brought  also  severall  sorts
of  stones  that  appeared  very  faire,  but  were  such  as  they
found  loose  on  the  ground,  and  were  for  the  most  part
but  coloured,  and  had  not  any  golde  fixed  in  them,  yet
such  as  had  no  judgement  or  experience  kept  al  that
glistered,  and  would  not  be  perswaded  but  it  was  rich
because  of  the  lustre,  and  brought  of  those,  and  of  Mar-

404

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595.
quesite  with  all,  from  Trinidad,  and  have  delivered  of
those  stones  to  be  tried  in  many  places,  and  have  thereby
bred  an*  opinion  that  all  the  rest  is  of  the  same :  yet  some
of  these  stones  I  shewed  afterward  to  a  Spaniard  of  the
Caracas,  who  tolde  mee  that  it  was  El  Madre  del  oro,
that  is  the  mother  of  gold,  and  that  the  Mine  was  farther
in  the  ground.

But  it  shall  be  found  a  weake  policie  in  me,  either  to
betray  my  selfe,  or  my  countrey  with  imaginations,  neither
am  I  so  farre  in  love  with  that  lodging,  watching,  care,
perill,  diseases,  ill  savours,  bad  fare,  and  many  other  mis-
chiefes  that  accompany  these  voyages,  as  to  woo  my  selfe
againe  into  any  of  them,  were  I  not  assured  that  the
Sunne  covereth  not  so  much  riches  in  any  part  of  the
earth.  Captaine  Whiddon,  and  our  Chirurgion  Nicholas
Millechap  brought  mee  a  kinde  of  stones  like  Saphires,
what  they  may  prove  I  know  not.  I  shewed  them  to
some  of  the  Orenoqueponi,  and  they  promised  to  bring
mee  to  a  mountaine,  that  had  of  them  very  large  pieces
growing  Diamond  wise:  whether  it  be  Christall  of  the
mountaine,  Bristol-Diamond,  or  Saphire  I  doe  not  yet
know,  but  I  hope  the  best,  sure  I  am  that  the  place  is  as
likely  as  those  from  whence  all  the  rich  stones  are  brought,
and  in  the  same  height  or  very  neere.

On  the  left  hand  of  this  river  Caroli  are  seated  those
nations  which  are  called  Iwarawakeri  before  remembred,
which  are  enemies  to  the  Epuremei :  and  on  the  head  of
it  adjoyning  to  the  great  lake  Cassipa,  are  situate  those
other  nations  which  also  resist  Inga,  and  the  Epuremei,
called  Cassepagotos,  Eparegotos,  and  Arrawagotos.  I
farther  understood  that  this  lake  of  Cassipa  is  so  large,  Cassipa  a
as  it  is  above  one  dayes  journey  for  one  of  their  Canoas  S''^^^  '^'^'^^•
to  crosse,  which  may  bee  some  fourtie  miles,  and  that
thereinto  fall  divers  rivers,  and  that  great  store  of  graines
of  gold  are  found  in  the  Summer  time  when  the  lake
falleth  by  the  banckes,  in  those  branches.

There  is  also  another  goodly  river  beyond  Caroli  which  The  river  of
is  called  Arui,  which  also  runneth  thorow  the  lake  Cassipa,  ^''*'-

405

Ato'tca  and
Caora.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

and  falleth  into  Orenoque  farther  West,  making  all  that
land  betweene  Caroli  and  Arui  an  yland,  which  is  likewise
a most  beautiful! countrey. Next  unto  Arui  there  are

The  rwers^  of  ^^;^Q  rivers  Atoica  and  Caora,  and  on  that  branch  which  is
called  Caora,  are  a  nation  of  people,  whose  heads  appeare
not  above  their  shoulders ;  which  though  it  may  be
thought  a  meere  fable,  yet  for  mine  owne  part  I  am
resolved  it  is  true,  because  every  childe  in  the  provinces  of
Arromaia  and  Canuri  affirme  the  same : they  are  called

Ewatpanomaa  Ewaipanoma : they are  reported  to  have  their eyes in

\^^^^^^/f  ~ their  shoulders,  and  their  mouthes  in  the  middle  of  their
/esse  nation.  '  .  - , .

[III.  653.]  breasts,  and  that  a  long  trame  of  haire  groweth  backward
betweene  their  shoulders.  The  sonne  of  Topiawari,  which
I  brought  with  me  into  England  told  me  that  they  are  the
most  mighty  men  of  all  the  land,  and  use  bowes,  arrowes,
and  clubbes  thrice  as  big  as  any  of  Guiana,  or  of  the
Orenoqueponi,  and  that  one  of  the  Iwarawakeri  tooke  a
prisoner  of  them  the  yeere  before  our  arrivall  there,  and
brought  him  into  the  borders  of  Aromaia  his  fathers
countrey.  And  farther  when  I  seemed  to  doubt  of  it,  hee
told  me  that  it  was  no  wonder  among  them,  but  that  they
were  as  great  a  nation,  and  as  common  as  any  other  in  all
the  provinces,  and  had  of  late  yeeres  slaine  many  hundreds
of  his  fathers  people,  and  of  other  nations  their  neigh-
bours, but  it  was  not  my  chance  to  heare  of  them  till  I
was  come  away,  and  if  I  had  but  spoken  one  worde  of  it
while  I  was  there,  I  might  have  brought  one  of  them  with
mee  to  put  the  matter  out  of  doubt.  Such  a  nation  was
written  of  by  Mandevile,  whose  reports  were  holden  for
fables  many  yeeres,  and  yet  since  the  East  Indies  were
discovered,  we  find  his  relations  true  of  such  things  as
heretofore  were  held  incredible :  whether  it  be  true  or  no,
the  matter  is  not  great,  neither  can  there  bee  any  profit  in
the  imagination  ;  for  mine  owne  part  I  saw  them  not,  but
I  am  resolved  that  so  many  people  did  not  all  combine,  or
forethinke  to  make  the  report.

When  I  came  to  Cumana  in  the  West  Indies  afterwards
by  chance  I  spake  with  a  Spaniard  dwelling  not  farre  from

406

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
thence,  a  man  of  great  travell,  and  after  hee  knew  that  I
had  bene  in  Guiana,  and  so  farre  directly  West  as  Caroli,
the  first  question  hee  asked  me  was,  whether  I  had  seene
any  of  the  Ewaipanoma,  which  are  those  without  heads :
who  being  esteemed  a  most  honest  man  of  his  word,  and
in  all  things  else,  tolde  mee  that  hee  had  seene  many  of
them :  I  may  not  name  him,  because  it  may  be  for  his  dis-
advantage, but  hee  is  well  knowen  to  Monsieur  Mucherons
Sonne  of  London,  and  to  Peter  Mucheron  merchant  of  the
Flemish  shippe  that  was  there  in  trade,  who  also  heard
what  he  avowed  to  be  true  of  those  people.

The fourth river  to the West of  Caroli  is Casnero The  river  of
which falleth into Orenoque on this side of  Amapaia,  ^^^"^''°-
and that river is greater then Danubius, or any of
Europe : it riseth on the South of  Guiana from the
mountaines which  devide Guiana from Amazones, and
I  thinke  it  to  bee  navigable  many  hundreth  miles :  but
wee had no  time,  meanes,  nor  season  of  the  yeere, to
search  those  rivers  for  the  causes  aforesayd,  the  Winter  The  Winter
being  come  upon  us,  although  the  Winter  and  Summer  ?/ Gai<7«^.
as  touching  colde  and  heate  differ  not,  neither  doe  the
trees ever sensibly lose  their leaves, but have alwayes
fruit  either  ripe  or  greene,  and  most  of  them  both  blos-
some,  leaves,  ripe  fruite,  and  greene  at  one  time : but
their Winter onely consisteth of terrible raines, and
overflowing  of  the  rivers,  with  many  great  stormes  and
gustes,  thunder  and  lightnings,  of  which  we  had  our  fill,
ere  we  returned.

On  the  North  side,  the  first  river  that  falleth  into
Orenoque  is  Cari,  beyond  it  on  the  same  side  is  the
river  of  Limo,  betweene  these  two  is  a  great  nation  of
Canibals,  and  their  chiefe  towne  beareth  the  name  of  the
river,  and  is  called  Acamacari :  at  this  towne  is  a  con-
tinuall  market  of  women  for  three  or  foure  hatchets  a
piece,  they  are  bought  by  the  Arwacas,  and  by  them
sold  into  the  West  Indies.  To  the  West  of  Limo  is
the  river  Pao,  beyond  it  Caturi,  beyond  that  Voari  and
Cstpuri  which  falleth  out  of  the  great  river  of  Meta,  by

407

A.D.

1595-

Meta,  Pato,
Cassanar.

Papamene.

The  Isle  of
Baraquan.

Orenoque  a
mighty  river
by  which
Peru,  Nuevo
reyno,  if)
Popaian  may
be  invaded.
[III.  654.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  Berreo  descended  from  Nuevo  reyno  de  Granada.
To  the  Westward  of  Capuri  is  the  province  of  Amapaia,
where  Berreo  wintered,  and  had  so  many  of  his  people
poysoned  with  the  tawny  water  of  the  marshes  of  the
Anebas.  Above  Amapaia  toward  Nuevo  reyno  fall  in
Meta,  Pato,  and  Cassanar.  To  the  West  of  those  to-
wards the  provinces  of  the  Ashaguas  and  Catetios  are
the  rivers  of  Beta,  Dawney,  and  Ubarro,  and  toward
the  frontier  of  Peru  are  the  provinces  of  Thomebamba,
and  Caxamalca.  Adjoyning  to  Quito  in  the  North  side
of  Peru  are  the  rivers  of  Guiacar  and  Goauar :  and  on
the  other  side  of  the  sayd  mountaynes  the  river  of
Papamene  which  descendeth  into  Marannon  or  Amazones
passing  thorough  the  province  Mutylones  where  Do^
Pedro  de  Osua  who  was  slaine  by  the  traytour  Agiri
before  rehearsed,  built  his  brigandines,  when  he  sought
Guiana  by  the  way  of  Amazones.

Betweene  Dawney  and  Beta  lyeth  a  famous  Island  in
Orenoque  now  called  Baraquan  (for  above  Meta  it  is
not  knowen  by  the  name  of  Orenoque)  which  is  called
Athule,  beyond  which,  ships  of  burden  cannot  passe  by
reason  of  a  most  forcible  overfall,  and  current  of  waters  :
but  in  the  eddy  al  smaller  vessels  may  be  drawen  even
to  Peru  it  selfe:  But  to  speake  of  more  of  these  rivers
without  the  description  were  but  tedious,  and  therefore
I  will  leave  the  rest  to  the  description.  This  river  of
Orenoque  is  navigable  for  ships  little  lesse  then  1000
miles,  and  for  lesser  vessels  neere  2000.  By  it  (as  afore-
sayd)  Peru,  Nuevo  reyno,  and  Popaian,  may  be  invaded :
it  also  leadeth  to  the  great  empire  of  Inga,  &  to  the
provinces  of  Amapaia,  and  Anebas  which  abound  in  gold :
his  branches  of  Cosnero,  Manta,  Caora  descended  from
the  middle  land  &  valley,  which  lieth  betweene  the
easter  province  of  Peru  and  Guiana  ;  and  it  falles  into
the  sea  betweene  Marannon  and  Trinidad  in  two  degrees
and  a  halfe :  all  which  your  Honours  shall  better  per-
ceive in  the  general  description  of  Guiana,  Peru,  Nuevo
reyno,  the  kingdome  of  Popayan,  and  Roidas,  with  the

408

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595"
province  of  Venezuela,  to  the  bay  of  Uraba,  behind
Cartagena  Westward  ;  and  to  Amazones  Southward.
While  we  lay  at  ankor  on  the  coast  of  Canuri,  and  had  Canuri.
taken  knowledge  of  all  the  nations  upon  the  head  and
branches  of  this  river,  and  had  found  out  so  many
several  people,  which  were  enemies  to  the  Epuremei,
and  the  new  conquerours :  I  thought  it  time  lost  to
linger  any  longer  in  that  place,  especially  for  that  the
fury  of  Orenoque  began  dayly  to  threaten  us  with
dangers  in  our  returne :  for  no  halfe  day  passed,  but
the  river  began  to  rage  and  overflowe  very  fearefully,
and  the  raines  came  downe  in  terrible  showers,  and
gustes  in  great  abundance :  and  withall,  our  men  began
to  crie  out  for  want  of  shift,  for  no  man  had  place  to
bestowe  any  other  apparell  then  that  which  he  ware  on
his  backe,  and  that  was  throughly  washt  on  his  body
for  the  most  part  tenne  times  in  one  day :  and  we  had
now  bene  wel  neere  a  moneth,  every  day  passing  to  the
Westward  farther  and  farther  from  our  shippes.  Wee
therefore  turned  towards  the  East,  and  spent  the  rest  Thc^  returne.
of  the  time  in  discovering  the  river  towards  the  sea,
which  we  had  not  viewed,  and  which  was  most  material!
The  next  day  following  we  left  the  mouth  of  Caroli,
and  arrived  againe  at  the  port  of  Morequito  where  we
were  before :  for  passing  downe  the  streame  we  went
without  labour,  and  against  the  winde,  little  lesse  then  a
hundreth  miles  a  day.  Assoone  as  I  came  to  ankor,  I
sent  away  one  for  olde  Topiawari,  with  whom  I  much
desired  to  have  further  conference,  and  also  to  deale  with
him  for  some  one  of  his  countrey,  to  bring  with  us  into
England,  as  well  to  learne  the  language,  as  to  conferre
withall  by  the  way,  the  time  being  nowe  spent  of  any
longer  stay  there.  Within  three  houres  after  my  mes-
senger came  to  him,  he  arrived  also,  and  with  him  such
a  rabble  of  all  sorts  of  people,  and  every  one  loden  with
somewhat,  as  if  it  had  beene  a  great  market  or  faire  in
England  :  and  our  hungry  companies  clustered  thicke  and
threefold  among  their  baskets,  every  one  laying  hand  on

409

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

The  last  what  he  liked. After  he  had  rested  a  while  in  my  tent,

conference  of  j  ^^^  ^^^  ^jj  y^^^  ^^^  selves,  and  my  interpreter,  and

Ralesh  with ^^^  ^^"^  ^^^^  ^ knew  that  both the  Epuremei  and  the
Topiatvari. Spaniards  were  enemies  to  him,  his  countrey  and  nations :
whose  Sonne  he  that the one had conquered Guiana already, and the
brought  into other  sought  to  regaine  the  same  from  them  both  :  and
ng^n  • therefore  I  desired  him  to instruct me what he could,
both of  the passage into the golden  parts of  Guiana,
and  to  the  civill  townes  and  apparelled  people  of  Inga.
Hee  gave  mee  an  answere  to  this  effect : first  that  hee
could  not  perceive  that  I  meant  to  goe  onward  towards
the citie of  Manoa, for neither the time of  the yeere
served,  neither could hee perceive any sufficient num-
bers for  such  an  enterprize : and if  I did,  I was sure
with all my company to bee buried there, for the
Emperour  was  of  that  strength,  as  that  many  times so
many  men  more  were  too  fewe : besides  hee  gave  mee
Counsell  to  be  this good counsell and advised mee to holde it in

Jo  owe  in minde fas for  himselfe hee knewe,  hee could not  live
other  conquests. .„  ^  . , t i i  i  rr i

till  my  returne)  that  1  should  not  oiter  by  any  meanes

hereafter  to  invade  the  strong  parts of  Guiana  without
the helpe of all those nations which were also their
enemies : for that it was impossible without those,
either to bee conducted, to be victualled, or to  have
ought carried with us,  our people not being able to
indure  the  march  in  so  great  heate,  and  travell,  unlesse
the  borderers  gave  them  helpe,  to  carie  with  them  both
their  meate  and  furniture: For  hee  remembred  that  in
the plaines of  Macureguarai three hundreth Spaniards
were overthrowen,  who were tired out,  and had none
of  the borderers to their friendes : but meeting their
enemies  as  they  passed  the  frontier,  were  environed  on
all  sides,  and  the  people  setting  the  long  drie  grasse  on ||
Macureguarai  fire,  smoothered them, so as they had no breath to '
■je  first  iowne fight, nor could discerne their enemies for the great ,
ofGmana,and  g^rioke. He  told  me  farther  that  4  daies  journey  from jl
apparelled ^*^ towne was Macureguarai,  and that those were the
people.  next and  neerest of  the  subjects  of  Inga,  and of  the

410

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595.
Epuremei,  and  the  first  towne  of  apparelled  and  rich
people,  and  that  all  those  plates  of  gold  which  were
scattered  among  the  borderers  and  caried  to  other
nations  farre  and  neere,  came  from  the  sayd  Macure-
guarai  and  were  there  made,  but  that  those  of  the  land
within  were  farre  finer,  and  were  fashioned  after  the
images  of  men,  beastes,  birds,  and  fishes,  I  asked  him
whether  hee  thought  that  those  companies  that  I  had
there  with  me,  were  sufficient  to  take  that  towne  or  no  ?
He  told  me  that  he  thought  they  were.  I  then  asked
him,  whether  he  would  assist  me  with  guides,  and  some
companies  of  his  people  to  joyne  with  us  ?  He  answered
that  he  would  go  himselfe  with  al  the  borderers,
if  the  rivers  did  remaine  foordable,  upon  this  condition
that  I  would  leave  with  him  til  my  return  againe  fifty
souldiers,  which  hee  undertooke  to  victuall :  I  answered
that  I  had  not  above  fiftie  good  men  in  all  there,  the
rest  were  labourers  and  rowers,  &  that  I  had  no  pro-
vision to  leave  with  them  of  powder,  shot,  apparell,  or  [III,  655,]
ought  else,  and  that  without  those  things  necessary  for
their  defence,  they  should  bee  in  danger  of  the  Spaniards
in  my  absence,  who  I  knewe  would  use  the  same
measure  towards  mine,  that  I  offered  them  at  Trinidad :
And  although  upon  the  motion  Captaine  Calfield,  Cap-
taine  Greenvile,  my  nephew  John  Gilbert  and  divers
others  were  desirous  to  stay,  yet  I  was  resolved  that
they  must  needes  have  perished,  for  Berreo  expected
daylie  a  supply  out  of  Spaine,  and  looked  also  hourely
for  his  Sonne  to  come  downe  from  Nuevo  reyno  de
Granada,  with  many  horse  and  foote,  and  had  also  in
Valencia  in  the  Caracas,  two  hundreth  horse  ready  to
march,  and  I  could  not  have  spared  above  fortie,  and
had  not  any  store  at  all  of  powder,  leade,  or  match  to
have  left  with  them,  nor  any  other  provision,  either
spade,  pickeaxe,  or  ought  else  to  have  fortified  withall.
When  I  had  given  him  reason  that  I  could  not  at  this
time  leave  him  such  a  companie,  he  then  desired  mee
to  forbeare  him  and  his  countrey  for  that  time,  for he

411

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

assured  mee  that  I  should  bee  no  sooner  three  dayes
from  the  coast,  but  those  Epuremei  would  invade  him,
and  destroy  all  the  remaine  of  his  people  and  friendes,
if  hee  should  any  way  either  guide  us  or  assist  us  against
them.

He  further  alleaged,  that  the  Spaniards  sought  his
death,  and  as  they  had  already  murthered  his  Nephew
Morequito  lord  of  that  province,  so  they  had  him  seven-
teene  dayes  in  a  chaine  before  hee  was  king  of  the  coun-
trey,  and  ledde  him  like  a  dog  from  place  to  place,  until
hee  had  payde  an  hundreth  plates  of  golde,  and  divers
chaines  of  Spleen-stones  for  his  ransome  :  and  nowe  since
he  became  owner  of  that  province,  that  they  had  many
times  layd  waite  to  take  him,  and  that  they  would  bee  nowe
more  vehement,  when  they  should  understand  of  his
conference  with  the  English,  and  because,  sayd  hee,  they
would  the  better  displant  me,  if  they  cannot  lay  handes  on
mee,  they  have  gotten  a  Nephew  of  mine  called  Eparacano,
whom  they  have  Christened  Don  Juan,  and  his  sonne  Don
Pedro,  whom  they  have  also  apparelled  and  armed,  by
whom  they  seeke  to  make  a  partie  against  me  in  mine
owne  countrey  :  hee  also  had  taken  to  wife  one  Loviana
of  a  strong  familie,  which  are  borderers  and  neighbours,
and  my  selfe  now  being  olde  and  in  the  handes  of  death
am  not  able  to  travell  nor  to  shifte,  as  when  I  was  of
yoonger  yeeres:  hee  therefore  prayed  us  to  deferre  it  till
the  next  yeere,  when  he  would  undertake  to  draw  in
all  the  borderers  to  serve  us,  and  then  also  it  would
bee  more  seasonable  to  travell,  for  at  this  time  of  the
yeere,  wee  should  not  bee  able  to  passe  any  river,  the
waters  were  and  would  bee  so  growen  ere  our  returne.
He  farther  told  me,  that  I  could  not  desire  so  much
to  invade  Macureguari,  and  the  rest  of  Guiana,  but
that  the  borderers  would  be  more  vehement  then  I,  for
he  yeelded  for  a  chiefe  cause  that  in  the  warres  with  the
Epuremei,  they  were  spoyled  of  their  women,  and  that
their  wives  and  daughters  were  taken  from  them,  so  as
for  their  owne  parts  they  desired nothing  of  the  golde

412

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-
or  treasure,  for  their  labours,  but  onely  to  recover
women  from  the  Epuremei  :  for  hee  farther  complayned
very  sadly  (as  it  had  beene  a  matter  of  great  con-
sequence) that  whereas  they  were  wont  to  have  tenne
or  twelve  wives,  they  were  now  inforced  to  content
themselves  with  three  or  foure,  and  that  the  lords  of  the
Epuremei  had  fifty  or  a  hundreth  :  And  in  truth  they
war  more  for  women  then  either  for  gold  or  dominion:
For  the  lords  of  countreys  desire  many  children  of
their  owne  bodies,  to  increase  their  races  and  kinreds,
for  in  those  consist  their  greatest  trust  and  strength.
Divers  of  his  followers  afterwards  desired  mee  to  make
haste  againe,  that  they  might  sacke  the  Epuremei,  and
I  asked  them  of  what  ?  They  answered,  of  their
women  for  us,  and  their  gold  for  you  :  for  the  hope
of  those  many  of  women  they  more  desire  the  war,
then  either  for  gold,  or  for  the  recovery  of  their
ancient  territories.  For  what  betweene  the  subjects  of
Inga,  and  the  Spaniards,  those  frontiers  are  growen
thinne  of  people,  and  also  great  numbers  are  fled  to
other  nations  farther  off  for feare  of  the  Spaniards.

After  I  received  this  answere  of  the  old  man,  we
fell  into  consideration,  whether  it  had  bene  of  better
advice  to  have  entred  Macureguarai,  and  to  have  begun
a  warre  upon  Inga  at  this  time,  yea  or  no,  if  the  time
of  the  yeere,  and  all  things  else  had  sorted.  For
mine  owne  part  (as  we  were  not  able  to  march  it  for
the  rivers,  neither  had  any  such  strength  as  was
requisite,  and  durst  not  abide  the  comming  of  the
Winter,  or  to  tarie  any  longer  from  our  ships)  I  thought
it  were  evill  counsell  to  have  attempted  it  at  that  time,
although  the  desire  of  gold  will  answere  many  objections :
but  it  would  have  bin  in  mine  opinion  an  utter  over-
throw to  the  enterprize,  if  the  same  should  be  here-
after by  her  Majesty  attempted  :  for  then  (whereas
now  they  have  heard  we  were  enemies  to  the  Spaniards
&  were  sent  by  her  Majesty  to  relieve  them)  they  would
as good cheap have  joyned  with the  Spaniards at  our

413

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

returne,  as  to  have  yeelded  unto  us,  when  they  had
proved  that  we  came  both  for  one  errant,  and  that
both  sought  but  to  sacke  &  spoile  them,  but  as  yet
[III.  656.]  our  desire  of  gold,  or  our  purpose  of  invasion  is  not
knowen  to  them  of  the  empire  :  and  it  is  likely  that
if  her  Majestie  undertake  the  enterprize,  they  will
rather  submit  themselves  to  her  obedience  then  to  the
Spaniards,  of  whose  cruelty  both  themselves  and  the
borderers  have  already  tasted  :  and  therefore  till  I
had  knowen  her  Majesties  pleasure,  I  would  rather
have  lost  the  sacke  of  one  or  two  townes  (although
they  might  have  beene  very  profitable)  then  to  have
defaced  or  indangered  the  future  hope  of  so  many
millions,  &  the  great  good,  &  rich  trade  which  England
may  be  possessed  of  thereby.  I  am  assured  nowe  that
they  will  all  die  even  to  the  last  man  against  the  Spaniards
in  hope  of  our  succour  and  returne  :  whereas  otherwise
if  I  had  either  layd  handes  on  the  borderers,  or  ran-
somed the  lords,  as  Berreo  did,  or  invaded  the  subjects
of  Inga,  I  know  all  had  beene  lost  for  hereafter.

After  that  I  had  resolved  Topiawari  lord  of  Aromaia,
that  I  could  not  at  this  time  leave  with  him  the  companies
he  desired,  and  that  I  was  contented  to  forbeare  the  enter-
prize against  the  Epuremei  till  the  next  yeare,  he  freely
gave  me  his  onely  sonne  to  take  with  me  into  England,  and
hoped, that  though hee  himselfe  had  but  a short  time
to live, yet that by our meanes  his  sonne  should  be
established after his death  : and I left with him one
Francis Francis  Sparrow,  a  servant  of  Captaine  Gifford,  (who  was
Sparrow. desirous  to  tarie,  and  could  describe  a  countrey  with  his
pen)  and  a  boy  of  mine  called  Hugh  Goodwin,  to  learne
the language. I after asked the maner how the
Epuremei  wrought  those  plates  of  golde,  and  howe  they
could  melt  it  out  of  the  stone  ;  hee  tolde  mee  that  the
most  of  the  golde  which  they  made  in  plates  and  images,
The  lake  of  was  not  severed  from  the  stone,  but  that  on  the  lake  of
Manoa. Manoa,  and  in  a  multitude  of  other  rivers  they  gathered
it  in  graines  of  perfect  gold  and  in  peeces  as  bigge  as  small

414

THE  DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

stones,  and  that  they  put  it  to  a  part  of  copper,  otherwise
they  could  not  worke  it,  and  that  they  used  a  great
earthern  pot  with  holes  round  about  it,  and  when  they
had  mingled  the  gold  and  copper  together,  they  fastened
canes  to  the  holes,  and  so  with  the  breath  of  men  they
increased  the  fire  till  the  metall  ran,  &  then  they  cast
it  into  moulds  of  stone  and  clay,  and  so  make  those
plates  and  images.  I  have  sent  your  Honors  of  two
sortes  such  as  I  could  by  chance  recover,  more  to
shewe  the  maner  of  them,  then  for  the  value :  For  I
did  not  in  any  sort  make  my  desire  of  gold  knowen,
because  I  had  neither  time,  nor  power  to  have  a  greater
quantity.  I  gave  among  them  manie  more  peeces  ot
gold,  then  I  received,  of  the  new  money  of  20  shillings
with  her  Majesties  picture  to  weare,  with  promise  that
they  would  become  her  servants  thencefoorth.

I  have  also  sent  your  Honours  of  the  ore,  whereof  Most  rich
I  know  some  is  as  rich  as  the  earth  yeeldeth  any,  of  S"^^  °^^'
which  I  know  there  is  sufficient,  if  nothing  else  were
to  bee  hoped  for.  But  besides  that  we  were  not  able
to  tarrie  and  search  the  hils,  so  we  had  neither  pioners,
barres,  ledges,  nor  wedges  of  yron  to  breake  the  ground,
without  which  there  is  no  workino;  in  mines :  but  wee
saw  all  the  hilles  with  stones  of  the  colour  of  gold  and
silver,  and  we  tried  them  to  be  no  Marquesite,  and  there-
fore such  as  the  Spaniards  call  El  madre  del  oro,  or,
The  mother  of  gold,  which  is  an  undoubted  assurance
of  the  generall  abundance:  and  my  selfe  saw  the  out-
side of  many  mines  of  the  Sparre,  which  I  know  to
be  the  same  that  all  covet  in  this  world,  and  of  those,
more  then  I  will  speake  of.

Having  learned  what  I  could  in  Canuri  and  Aromaia,
and  received  a  faithfull  promise  of  the  principallest  of
those  provinces  to  become  servants  to  her  Majestic,
and  to  resist  the  Spaniards,  if  they  made  any  attempt
in  our  absence,  and  that  they  would  draw  in  the  nations
about  the  lake  of  Cassipa,  and  those  Iwarawaqueri,  I  The  lake  of
then  parted  from  olde  Topiawari,  and  received  his  sonne  ^'^"^P^-

415

A.D.

1595-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

for  a  pledge  betweene  us,  and  left  with  him  two  of  ours
as  aforesayd.  To  Francis  Sparrowe  I  gave  instructions
to  travell  to  Marcureguarai,  with  such  merchandizes  as
I  left  with  them,  thereby  to  learne  the  place,  and  if  it
were  possible,  to  goe  on  to  the  great  citie  of  Manoa :
which being done, we weyed ankor, and coasted the

Guiana  on  the  river  on  Guiana  side,  because  wee  came  upon  the  North

Souihstde. ^jj^^  |^y  ^^^  launes  of  the  Saima  and  Wikiri.

There  came  with  us  from  Aromaia  a  Cassique  called
Putijma,  that  commanded  the  province  of  Warapana,
(which  Putijma  slewe  the  nine  Spaniards  upon  Caroli
before  spoken  of)  who  desired  us  to  rest  in  the  Porte
of  his  countrey,  promising  to  bring  us  unto  a  moun-
taine  adjoyning  to  his  towne  that  had  stones  of  the
colour  of  golde,  which  hee  perfourmed.  And  after  wee
had  rested  there  one  night,  I  went  my  selfe  in  the  morn-
ing with  most  of  the  Gentlemen  of  my  company,  over
land  towards  the  said  mountaine,  marching  by  a  rivers

Mana.  side called Mana, leaving on the right hand a towne

called  Tuteritona,  standing  in  the  Province  of  Tarracoa,
of  the  which  Wariaaremagoto  is  principall.  Beyond  it
lieth  another  towne  towards  the  South,  in  the  valley  of
Amariocapana,  which  beareth  the  name  of  the  sayd  valley,
whose  plaines  stretch  themselves  some  sixtie  miles  in
length.  East  and  West,  as  faire  ground,  and  as  beautifull

[III.  657.]  fields,  as  any  man  hath  ever  seene,  with  divers  copsies
scattered  here  and  there  by  the  rivers  side,  and  all  as
full  of  deere  as  any  forrest  or  parke  in  England,  and
in  everie  lake  and  river  the  like  abundance  of  fish  and
foule,  of  which  Irraparragota  is  lord.

From the river of  Mana,  we crost  another  river  in

Oiana.  the said beautifull valley called Oiana, & rested our

selves  by  a  cleere  lake,  which  lay  in  the  middle  of  the
said  Oiana,  and  one  of  our  guides  kindling  us  fire
with  two  stickes,  wee  stayed  a  while  to  drie  our  shirts,
which  with  the  heate  hong  very  wette  and  heavie  on
our  sholders.  Afterwards  wee  sought  the  ford  to
passe  over  towards  the  mountaine  called Iconuri,  where

416

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
Putijma  foretold  us  of  the  mine. In  this  lake  we  saw
one  of  the  great  fishes, as big as a  wine pipe, which Great  fishes
they call Manati, being most excellent and holsome  '^^^^^'^  Mamtt
meate. But after I perceived, that to passe the said  ^^^^^
river  would require halfe  a dayes march more, I  was
not able my selfe to endure it, and therefore  I  sent
Captaine Keymis with sixe shot to goe on, and gave
him  order  not  to  returne  to  the  port  of  Putijma,  which
is  called  Chiparepare,  but  to take  leisure,  and  to  march
downe  the  sayd  valley,  as  farre  as  a  river  called  Cumaca,
where I promised to meete him  againe, Putijma  him-
selfe promising also to bee his guide : and as they
marched, they left the townes of Emparepana, and
Capurepana, on the right hand, and marched from
Putijmas house downe the sayd valley of  Amarioca-
pana, and wee returning the same day to the rivers
side,  saw  by the  way  many  rockes,  like  unto  gold  ore,
and on the left hand, a  round mountaine which con-
sisted of  minerall  stone.

From  hence  we  rowed  downe  the  streame,  coasting
the  province  of  Parino  :  As  for  the  branches  of  rivers
which  I  overpasse  in  this  discourse,  those  shall  be  better
expressed  in  the  description  with  the  mountaines  of  Ajo,
Ara,  and  the  rest,  which  are  situate  in  the  provinces
of  Parino  and  Carricurrina.  When  we  were  come  as
farre  downe  as  the  land  called  Ariacoa,  (where  Orenoque
devideth  it  selfe  into  three  great  branches,  each  of  them
being  most  goodly  rivers)  I  sent  away  captaine  Henrie
Thin,  and  captaine  Greenevile  with  the  galley,  the  neerest
way,  and  tooke  with  mee  captaine  Gifford,  captaine  Cal-
field,  Edward  Porter,  and  captaine  Eynos  with  mine  owne
barge,  and  the  two  wherries,  and  went  downe  that  branch
of  Orenoque,  which  is  called  Cararoopana,  which  leadeth
towards  Emeria  the  province  of  Carapana,  and  towards
the  East  sea,  as  well  to  finde  out  captaine  Keymis,
whome  I  had  sent  over  land,  as  also  to  acquaint  my
selfe  with  Carapana,  who  is  one  of  the  greatest  of  all  the
lords of  the Orenoqueponi : and when I came to the

X  417  2D

A.D.

1595-

Emeria.

Winicapora.

A  mighty  cata-
ract or  overfall
of  zvater.

Diamonds  l£
other  precious
stones.

Wacarima.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

river  of  Cumaca  (to  which  Putijma  promised  to  con-
duct captaine  Keymis)  I  left  captaine  Eynos  and  master
Porter  in  the  sayd  river  to  expect  his  comming,  &  the
rest  of  us  rowed  downe  the  streame  towards  Emeria.

In  this  branch  called  Cararoopana  were  also  many
goodly  Islands,  some  of  sixe  miles  long,  some  of  ten,
and  some  of  twenty.  When  it  grew  towards  sunne-
set,  we  entred  a  branch  of  a  river  that  fell  into  Orenoque
called  Winicapora :  where  I  was  en  formed  of  the  moun-
taine  of  Christall,  to  which  in  trueth  for  the  length  of
the  way,  and  the  evill  season  of  the  yeere,  I  was  not
able  to  march,  nor  abide  any  longer  upon  the  journey  :
wee  saw  it  afarre  off  and  it  appeared  like  a  white  Church-
tower  of  an  exceeding  height.  There  falleth  over  it  a
mighty  river  which  toucheth  no  part  of  the  side  of  the
mountaine,  but  rusheth  over  the  toppe  of  it,  and  falleth
to  the  ground  with  so  terrible  a  noyse  and  clamor,  as
if  a  thousand  great  bels  were  knockt  one  against  another.
I  thinke  there  is  not  in  the  world  so  strange  an  over-fall,
nor  so  wonderfuU  to  behold :  Berreo  told  mee  that  there
were  Diamonds  and  other  precious  stones  on  it,  and  that
they  shined  very  farre  off:  but  what  it  hath  I  know
not,  neither  durst  he  or  any  of  his  men  ascend  to  the
top  of  the  sayd  mountaine,  those  people  adjoyning
being  his  enemies  (as  they  were)  and  the  way  to  it  so
impassable.

Upon  this  river  of  Winicapora  wee  rested  a  while,
and  from  thence  marched  into  the  countrey  to  a  town
called  after  the  name  of  the  river,  whereof  the  captaine
was  one  Timitwara,  who  also  offered  to  conduct  mee
to  the  top  of  the  sayd  mountaine  called  Wacarima :
But  when  wee  came  in  first  to  the  house  of  the  sayd
Timitwara,  being  upon  one  of  their  sayd  feast  dayes,
we  found  them  all  as  drunke  as  beggers,  and  the  pots
walking  from  one  to  another  without  rest :  we  that
were  weary,  and  bote  with  marching,  were  glad  of  the
plenty  though  a  small  quantitie  satisfied  us,  their  drinke
being  very  strong  and  headie,  and  so  rested  our  selves

4i8

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
a  while ;  after  wee  had  fedde,  we  drew  our  selves
backe  to  our  boats,  upon  the  river  and  there  came  to
us  all  the  lordes  of  the  countrey,  with  all  such  kinde
of  victuall  as  the  place  yeelded,  and  with  their  delicate
wine  of  Pinas,  and  with  abundance  of  hens,  and  other
provisions,  and  of  those  stones  which  wee  call  Spleene-
stones.

Wee  understood  by  the  chiefetaines  of  Winicapora,
that  their  lord  Carapana  was  departed  from  Emeria
which  was  now  in  sight,  &  that  he  was  fled  to
Cairamo,  adjoyning  to  the  mountains  of  Guiana,  over  [III.  658.]
the  valley  called  Amariocapana,  being  perswaded  by
those  tenne  Spaniards  which  lay  at  his  house,  that
we  would  destroy  him,  and  his  countrey.

But  after  these  Cassiques  of  Winicapora  &  Sapora-
tona  his  followers  perceived  our  purpose,  and  saw  that
we  came  as  enemies  to  the  Spaniards  onely,  and  had
not  so  much  as  harmed  any  of  those  nations,  no
though  we  found  them  to  be  of  the  Spaniards  owne
servants,  they  assured  us  that  Carapana  would  be  as
ready  to  serve  us,  as  any  of  the  lords  of  the  pro-
vinces, which  we  had  passed;  and  that  he  durst  doe
no  other  till  this  day  but  entertaine  the  Spaniards,  his
countrey  lying  so  directly  in  their  way,  and  next  of
all  other  to  any  entrance  that  should  be  made  in
Guiana  on  that  side.

And  they  farther  assured  us,  that  it  was  not  for
feare  of  our  comming  that  he  was  remooved,  but  to
be  acquited  of  the  Spaniards  or  any  other  that  should
come  hereafter.  For  the  province  of  Cairoma  is  situate
at  the  mountaine  foote,  which  devideth  the  plaines  of
Guiana  from  the  countreys  of  the  Orenoqueponi  :  by
meanes  whereof  if  any  should  come  in  our  absence  into
his  townes,  hee  would  slip  over  the  mountaines  into  the
plaines  of  Guiana  among  the  Epuremei,  where  the
Spaniards  durst  not  follow  him  without  great  force.

But  in  mine  opinion,  or  rather  I  assure  my  selfe,  that
Carapana  (being  a  notable  wise  and  subtil  fellow,  a  man

419

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

of  one  hundred  yeeres  of  age,  and  therefore  of  great
experience)  is  remooved,  to  looke  on,  and  if  he  finde
that  we  returne  strong  he  will  be  ours,  if  not,  hee  will
excuse  his  departure  to  the  Spaniards,  and  say  it  was
for  feare  of  our  comming.

Wee  therefore  thought  it  bootlesse  to  rowe  so  farre
downe  the  streame,  or  to  seeke  any  farther  of  this  olde
fox  :  and  therefore  from  the  river  of  Waricapana  (which
lieth  at  the  entrance  of  Emeria)  we  returned  againe,  and
left  to  the  Eastward  those  foure  rivers  which  fall  from
the  mountaines  of  Emeria  into  Orenoque,  which  are
Waracayari,  Coirama,  Akaniri,  and  Iparoma  :  below  those
foure  are  also  these  branches  and  mouthes  of  Orenoque,
which  fall  into  the  East  sea,  whereof  the  first  is  Araturi,
the  next  Amacura,  the  third  Barima,  the  fourth  Wana,
the  fift  Morooca,  the  sixt  Paroma,  the  last  Wijmi  :
beyond  them  there  fall  out  of  the  land  betweene
Orenoque  and  Amazones  14  rivers  which  I  forbeare  to
name,  inhabited  by  the  Arwacas  and  Canibals.

It  is  now  time  to  returne  towards  the  North,  and  wee
found  it  a  wearisome  way  backe  from  the  borders  of
Emeria,  to  recover  up  againe  to  the  head  of  the  river
Carerupana,  by  which  we  descended,  and  where  we
parted  from  the  galley,  which  I  directed  to  take  the
next  way  to  the  port  of  Toparimaca,  by  which  we
entred  first.

All  the  night  it  was  stormie  and  darke,  and  full  of
thunder  and  great  showers,  so  as  wee  were  driven  to
keepe  close  by  the  bankes  in  our  small  boats,  being  all
heartily  afraid  both  of  the  billow  and  terrible  curent  of
the  river.  By  the  next  morning  we  recovered  the  mouth
of  the  river  of  Cumaca,  where  we  left  captaine  Eynos
and  Edward  Porter  to  attend  the  comming  of  captaine
Keymis  over  land  :  but  when  wee  entred  the  same,  they
had  heard  no  newes  of  his  arrivall,  which  bred  in  us  a
great  doubt  what  might  become  of  him  :  I  rowed  up  a
league  or  two  farther  into  the  river,  shooting  off  pieces
all  the  way, that hee might  know  of  our  being  there.

420

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

J595-
And  the  next  morning  wee  heard  them  answere  us  also
with  a  piece  :  wee  tooke  them  aboord  us,  and  tooke
our  leave  of  Putima  their  guide,  who  of  all  others  most
lamented  our  departure,  and  offered  to  send  his  sonne
with  us  into  England,  if  we  could  have  stayed  till  he
had  sent  backe  to  his  towne  :  but  our  hearts  were  cold
to  behold  the  great  rage  and  increase  of  Orenoque,  and
therefore  departed,  and  turned  toward  the  West,  till
we  had  recovered  the  parting  of  the  three  branches
aforesayd,  that  we  might  put  downe  the  streame  after
the  galley.

The  next  day  we  landed  on  the  Island  of  Assapano
(which  devideth  the  river  from  that  branch  by  which
we  sent  downe  to  Emeria)  and  there  feasted  our  selves
with  that  beast  which  is  called  Armadilla  presented  unto
us  before  at  Winicapora,  and  the  day  following  we
recovered  the  galley  at  ankor  at  the  port  of  Topari-  The  port  of
maca,  &  the  same  evening  departed  with  very  foule  Topanmaca.
weather  and  terrible  thunder,  and  showers,  for  the  Winter
was  come  on  very  farre  :  the  best  was,  we  went  no
lesse  then  i  oo  miles  a  day,  downe  the  river ;  but  by
the  way  we  entred,  it  was  impossible  to  returne,  for
that  the  river  of  Amana,  being  in  the  bottome  of  the
bay  of  Guanipa,  cannot  be  sayled  backe  by  any  meanes,
both  the  brize  and  current  of  the  sea  were  so  forcible  :
and  therefore  wee  followed  a  branch  of  Orenoque  called
Capuri,  which  entred  into  the  sea  Eastward  of  our
ships,  to  the  end  we  might  beare  with  them  before  the
wind,  and  it  was  not  without  neede,  for  we  had  by  that
way  as  much  to  crosse  of  the  maine  sea  after  we  came
to  the  rivers  mouth,  as  between  Gravelyn  and  Dover,
in  such  boats  as  your  Hon.  hath  heard.

To  speake  of  what  past  homeward  were  tedious,  either
to  describe  or  name  any  of  the  rivers,  Islands,  or  villages
of  the  Tivitivas  which  dwell  on  trees  :  we  will  leave
all  those  to  the  generall  mappe :  and  to  be  short,  [III.  659.]
when  we  were  arrived  at  the  sea  side,  then  grew  our
greatest  doubt,  and  the  bitterest  of  all  our  journey  fore-

421

A.D.
1595.

A  rehearsall
l5  description
of  all  the  na-
tions andrivers
found  in  this
discoverie.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

passed,  for  I  protest  before  God,  that  we  were  in  a  most
desperate  estate  :  for  the  same  night  which  we  ankored
in  the  mouth  of  the  river  of  Capuri,  where  it  falleth  into
the  sea,  there  arose  a  mightie  storme,  and  the  rivers
mouth  was  at  least  a  league  broad,  so  as  we  ranne  before
night  close  under  the  land  with  our  small  boates,
and  brought  the  Galley  as  neere  as  we  could,  but  she
had  as  much  a  doe  to  live  as  could  be,  and  there  wanted
little  of  her  sinking,  and  all  those  in  her  ;  for  mine  owne
part  I  confesse,  I  was  very  doubtfull  which  way  to  take,
either  to  goe  over  in  the  pestred  Galley,  there  being
but  sixe  foote  water  over  the  sandes,  for  two  leagues
together,  and  that  also  in  the  channell,  and  she  drew
five  :  or  to  adventure  in  so  great  a  billow,  and  in  so
doubtfull  weather,  to  crosse  the  seas  in  my  barge.  The
longer  we  taried  the  worse  it  was,  and  therefore  I  tooke
Captaine  GifFord,  Captaine  Calfield,  and  my  cosen
Greenevile  into  my  barge  ;  and  after  it  cleared  up,  about
midnight  we  put  our  selves  to  Gods  keeping,  and  thrust
out  into  the  sea,  leaving  the  Galley  at  anker,  who  durst
not  adventure  but  by  day-light  :  And  so  being  all  very
sober,  and  melancholy,  one  faintly  chearing  another  to
shewe  courage,  it  pleased  God  that  the  next  day  about
nine  of  the  clocke,  wee  descried  the  Ilande  of  Trinidad,
and  stearing  for  the  neerest  part  of  it,  wee  kept  the
shore  till  wee  came  to  Curiapan,  where  wee  founde  our
shippes  at  ankor,  then  which  there  was  never  to  us  a
more  joyfull sight.

Now  that  it  hath  pleased  God  to  sende  us  safe  to  our
shippes,  it  is  time  to  leave  Guiana  to  the  Sunne,  whom
they  worshippe,  and  steare  away  towardes  the  North :
I  will  therefore  in  a  fewe  wordes  finish  the  discovery
thereof.  Of  the  severall  nations  which  we  found  upon
this  discovery  I  will  once  againe  make  repetition,  and
howe  they  are  affected.  At  our  first  enterance  into  Amana,
which  is  one  of  the  outlets  of  Orenoque,  we  left  on  the
right  hand  of  us  in  the  bottome  of  the  bay,  lying  directly
against  Trinidad,  a  nation  of  inhumaine  Canibals,  which

422

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-
inhabite  the  rivers  of  Guanlpa  and  Berbeese  ;  in  the  same
bay  there  is  also  a  third  river  which  is  called  Areo,
which  riseth  on  Paria  side  towards  Cumana,  and  that  river
is  inhabited  with  the  Wikiri,  whose  chiefe  towne  upon  the
sayd  river  is  Sayma  ;  In  this  bay  there  are  no  more  rivers,
but  these  three  before  rehearsed,  and  the  foure  branches
of  Amana,  all  which  in  the  Winter  thrust  so  great
abundance  of  water  into  the  sea,  as  the  same  is  taken
up  fresh,  two  or  three  leagues  from  the  land.  In  the
passages  towardes  Guiana  (that  is,  in  all  those  landes
which  the  eight  branches  of  Orenoque  fashion  into  Hands)
there  are  but  one  sort  of  people  called  Tivitivas,  but  of
two  castes  as  they  tearme  them,  the  one  called  Ciawani,
the  other  Waraweeti,  and  those  warre  one  with  another.
On  the  hithermost  part  of  Orenoque,  as  at  Toparimaca,
and  Winicapora,  those  are  of  a  nation  called  Nepoios,
and  are  of  the  followers  of  Carapana,  Lord  of  Emeria.
Betweene  Winicapora  and  the  port  of  Morequito  which
standeth  in  Aromaia,  and  all  those  in  the  valley  of
Amariocapana  are  called  Orenoqueponi,  and  did  obey
Morequito,  and  are  now  followers  of  Topiawari.  Upon
the  river  of  Caroli,  are  the  Canuri,  which  are  governed
by  a  woman  (who  is  inheritrix  of  that  Province)  who
came  farre  off  to  see  our  Nation,  and  asked  me  diverse
questions  of  her  Majestie,  being  much  delighted  with
the  discourse  of  her  Majesties  greatness,  and  wondering
at  such  reports  as  we  truely  made  of  her  Highnesse
many  vertues  :  And  upon  the  head  of  Caroli,  and  on
the  lake  of  Cassipa,  are  the  three  strong  Nations  of  the
Cassipagotos.  Right  South  into  the  land  are  the  Capure-
pani,  and  Emparepani,  and  beyond  those  adjoyning  to
Macureguarai  (the  first  citie  of  Inga)  are  the  Iwarawakeri :
all  these  are  professed  enemies  to  the  Spaniards,  and  to
the  rich  Epuremei  also.  To  the  West  of  Caroli  are
diverse  nations  of  Canibals,  and  of  those  Ewaipanoma
without  heads.  Directly  West  are  the  Amapaias  and
^nebas,  which  are  also  marveilous  rich  in  gold.  The
rest towards  Peru we will omit. On the North of

423

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

Orenoque,  betweene  it  and  the  West  Indies  are  the
Wikiri,  Saymi,  and  the  rest  before  spoken  of,  all  mortall
enemies  to  the  Spaniardes.  On  the  South  side  of  the
maine  mouth  of  Orenoque,  are  the  Arwacas  ;  and  beyond
them  the  Canibals  and  to  the  South  of  them  the
Amazones.

To  make  mention  of  the  severall  beasts,  birds,  fishes,
fruits,  flowers,  gummes,  sweet  woods,  and  of  their
severall  religions  and  customes,  would  for  the  first
require  as  many  volumes  as  those  of  Gesnerus,  and  for
the  rest  another  bundle  of  Decades.  The  religion  of
the  Epuremei  is  the  same  which  the  Ingas,  Emperours
Piedro  de  of  Peru  used,  which  may  be  read  in  Cieza,  and  other
Cteza.  Spanish  stories,  how  they  beleeve  the  immortalitie  of  the

soule,  worship  the  Sunne,  and  burie  with  them  alive  their
best  beloved  wives  and  treasure,  as  they  likewise  doe  in
Pegu  in  the  East  Indies,  and  other  places.  The  Orenoque-
poni  bury  not  their  wives  with  them,  but  their  jewels,
[III.  660.]  hoping  to  injoy  them  againe.  The  Arwacas  dry  the
bones  of  their  Lords,  and  their  wives  and  friends  drinke
them  in  powder.  In  the  graves  of  the  Peruvians  the
Spaniards  found  their  greatest  abundance  of  treasure :
the  like  also  is  to  be  found  among  these  people  in
every  Province.  They  have  all  many  wives,  and  the
Lords  five-fould  to  the  common  sort :  their  wives  never
eate  with  their  husbands,  nor  among  the  men,  but  serve
their  husbands  at  meales,  and  afterwardes  feede  by  them-
selves. Those  that  are  past  their  younger  yeeres,  make
all  their  bread  and  drinke,  and  worke  their  cotten  beds,
and  doe  all  else  of  service  and  labour,  for  the  men  doe
nothing  but  hunt,  fish,  play,  and  drinke,  when  they  are
out  of  the  warres.

I  will  enter  no  further  into  discourse  of  their  maners,
lawes  and  customes :  and  because  I  have  not  my  selfe
seene  the  cities  of  Inga,  I  cannot  avow  on  my  credit  what
I  have  heard,  although  it  be  very  likely,  that  the  Emperour
Inga  hath  built  and  erected  as  magnificent  palaces  in
Guiana,  as  his  ancestors  did  in  Peru,  which  were  for  their

424

THE DISCOVERY  OF GUIANA  ad

1595-
riches  and  rarenesse  most  marvellous  and  exceeding  all  in
Europe,  and  I  thinke  of  the  world,  China  excepted,  which
also  the  Spaniards  (which  I  had)  assured  me  to  be  true,  as
also  the  Nations  of  the  borderers,  who  being  but  Salvages
to  those  of  the  in-land,  doe  cause  much  treasure  to  be
buried  with  them  :  for  I  was  enformed  of  one  of  the
Cassiques  of  the  valley  of  Amariocapana  which  had  buried
with  him  a  little  before  our  arrivall,  a  chaire  of  golde  most
curiously  wrought,  which  was  made  either  in  Macure-
guaray  adjoyning,  or  in  Manoa :  but  if  we  should  have
grieved  them  in  their  religion  at  the  first,  before  they
had  bene  taught  better,  and  have  digged  up  their  graves,
we  had  lost  them  all :  and  therefore  I  helde  my  first
resolution,  that  her  Majestie  should  either  accept  or
refuse  the  enterprise,  ere  any  thing  should  be  done
that  might  in  any  sort  hinder  the  same.  And  if  Peru
had  so  many  heapes  of  golde,  whereof  those  Ingas  were
Princes,  and  that  they  delighted  so  much  therin ;  no
doubt  but  this  which  now  liveth  and  reigneth  in  Manoa,
hath  the  same  honour,  and  I  am  assured  hath  more
abundance  of  golde,  within  his  territorie,  then  all  Peru  Great  riches.
and  the  West  Indies.

For  the  rest,  which  my  selfe  have  seene,  I  will  promise
these  things  that  follow,  which  I  know  to  be  true.
Those  that  are  desirous  to  discover  and  to  see  many  Exceeding
nations,  may  be  satisfied  within  this  river,  which  bringeth  <:o^"^^^j^^^°J^
foorth  so  many  armes  and  branches  leading  to  severall  Qj.g„Qque
countries  and  provinces,  above  2000  miles  East  and
West,  and  80c  miles  South  and  North,  and  of  these,
the  most  eyther  rich  in  golde,  or  in  other  marchandizes.
The  common  souldier  shall  here  fight  for  golde,  and
pay  himselfe  in  steede  of  pence,  with  plates  of  halfe  a
foote  broad,  whereas  he  breaketh  his  bones  in  other
warres  for  provant  and  penury.  Those  commanders
and  chieftaines  that  shoot  at  honour  and  abundance,
shall  finde  there  more  rich  and  beautifuU  cities,  more
temples  adorned  with  golden  images,  more  sepulchres
filled  with  treasure,  then  either  Cortez  found  in  Mexico,

425

A.D.

1595-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

or  Pizarro  in  Peru :  and  the  shining  glory  of  this
conquest  will  eclipse  all  those  so  farre  extended  beames
of  the  Spanish  nation.  There  is  no  countrey  which
yeeldeth  more  pleasure  to  the  inhabitants,  either  for
those  common  delights  of  hunting,  hawking,  fishing,
fowling,  or  the  rest,  then  Guiana  doth.  It  hath  so
many  plaines,  cleere  rivers,  abundance  of  Phesants,
Partriges,  Quailes,  Railes,  Cranes,  Herons,  and  all
other  fowle :  Deere  of  all  sorts,  Porkes,  Hares,  Lions,
Tygers,  Leopards,  and  divers  other  sortes  of  beastes,
either  for  chase,  or  food.  It  hath  a  kind  of  beast
called  Cama,  or  Anta,  as  bigge  as  an  English  beefe,
and  in  great  plentie.

To  speake  of  the  severall  sorts  of  every  kind,  I
feare  would  be  troublesome  to  the  Reader,  and  there-
fore I  will  omit  them,  and  conclude  that  both  for  health,
good  ayre,  pleasure,  and  riches  I  am  resolved  it  cannot
bee  equalled  by  any  region  either  in  the  East  or  West.
The  hohome-  Moreover  the  countrey  is  so  healthfull,  as  of  an  hundred
nesse  of  the  persons  &  more  (which  lay  without  shift  most  sluttishly,
and  were  every  day  almost  melted  with  heate  in  rowing
and  marching,  and  suddenly  wet  againe  with  great
showers,  and  did  eate  of  all  sorts  of  corrupt  fruits,
and  made  meales  of  fresh  fish  without  seasoning,  of
Tortugas,  of  Lagartos  or  Crocodiles,  and  of  all  sorts
good  and  bad,  without  either  order  or  measure,  and
besides  lodged  in  the  open  aire  every  night)  we  lost
not  any  one,  nor  had  one  ill  disposed  to  my  knowledge,
nor  found  any  Calentura,  or  other  of  those  pestilent
diseases  which  dwell  in  all  hot  regions,  and  so  neere
the  Equinoctiall  line.

Where  there  is  store  of  gold,  it  is  in  effect  needlesse
to  remember  other  commodities  for  trade :  but  it  hath
towards  the  South  part  of  the  river,  great  quantities  of
Brasil-wood,  and  diverse  berries  that  die  a  most  perfect
crimson  and  carnation :  And  for  painting,  all  France,
Italy,  or  the  East  Indies  yeelde  none  such :  For  the  more
the  skin  is  washed,  the  fairer  the  colour  appeareth,  and

426

count?-ey.

Gold.

Brasil  wood.
Excellentdyes

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595.
with  which,  even  those  browne  and  tawnie  women  spot
themselves,  and  colour  their  cheekes. All  places  yeeld
abundance  of  cotton,  of  silke,  of  balsamum,  and  of  those  Cotton,  silke,
kindes  most  excellent,  and  never  knowen  in  Europe,  of  Balsamum,
all  sortes  of  gummes,  of  Indian  pepper : and  what  else  pgppg,.^ '
the  countries  may  afford  within  the  land  we  knowe  not,
neither  had  we  time  to  abide  the  triall,  and  search. The  [III.  661,]
soile  besides  is  so  excellent  and  so full  of  rivers,  as  it
will  Carrie  sugar,  ginger,  and  all  those  other  commodities,
which  the  West  Indies  have.  ^

The  navigation  is  short,  for  it  may  be  sayled  with  an  The  short,

ordinarie winde in sixe  weekes,  and in the like time  ^^•^^^'  ^!^.^
, ,  .  111  -111  • commodious

backe  agame,  and  by  the  way  neither  lee  shore, enemies  navigation  to

coast,  rockes,  nor  sandes,  all  which  in  the  voyages  to  the  Guiana.

West  Indies,  and  all  other  places  we  are  subject  unto,  as

the  chanell  of  Bahama,  comming  from  the  West  Indies,

cannot  well  be  passed  in  the  Winter,  &  when  it  is  at  the  -^

best,  it  is  a  perilous  and  a  fearefull  place. The  rest  of

the  Indies  for  calmes,  and  diseases  very  troublesome,  and

the sea  about  the  Bermudas  a  hellish sea  for  thunder,

lightning,  and  stormes.

This  very  yeere*  there  were  seventeene  sayle  of  Spanish 1595.

ships  lost  in  the  chanell  of  Bahama,  and  the  great  Philip

like  to  have  sunke at  the Bermudas  was put  backe  to

Saint  Juan  de  Puerto  rico. And  so  it  falleth  out  in  that

Navigation  every  yeere  for  the  most  part,  which  in  this

voyage  are  not  to be  feared :  for  the  time of  yeere  to

leave  England  is  best  in  July,  and  the  Summer  in  Guiana

is  in  October,  November,  December,  Januarie,  Februarie,

and March, and then  the ships may  depart  thence in

Aprill,  and  so  returne  againe  into  England  in  June,  so  as

they  shall never be subject to Winter-weather, either

comming,  going,  or  staying  there :  which  for  my  part,  I

take  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  comforts  and incourage-

ments  that  can  be  thought  on,  having  (as  I  have  done)

tasted  in  this  voyage  by  the  West  Indies  so  many  calmes,

so  much  heat,  such  outragious  gustes,  foule  weather,  and

contrarie  windes.

427

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES  1

1595.

To  conclude,  Guiana  is  a  countrey  that  hath  yet  her
maydenhead,  never  sackt,  turned,  nor  wrought,  the  face
of  the  earth  hath  not  bene  torne,  nor  the  vertue  and  salt
of  the  soyle  spent  by  manurance,  the  graves  have  not
bene  opened  for  golde,  the  mines  not  broken  with  sledges,
nor  their  Images  puld  downe  out  of  their  temples.  It
hath  never  bene  entered  by  any  armie  of  strength,  and
never  conquered  or  possessed  by  any  christian  Prince.
It  is  besides  so  defensible,  that  if  two  forts  be  builded  in
one  of  the  Provinces  which  I  have  seene,  the  flood  setteth
in  so  neere  the  banke,  where  the  channell  also  lyeth,  that
no  ship  can  passe  up  but  within  a  Pikes  length  of  the
artillerie,  first  of  the  one,  and  afterwards  of  the  other :
Which  two  Forts  will  be  a  sufficient  guarde  both  to  the
Empire  of  Inga,  and  to  an  hundred  other  several  king-
domes,  lying  within  the  said  river,  even  to  the  citie  of
Quito  in  Peru.

There  is  therefore  great  difference  betweene  the  easi-
nesse  of  the  conquest  of  Guiana,  and  the  defence  of  it
being  conquered,  and  the  West  or  East  Indies :  Guiana
hath  but  one  entrance  by  the  sea  (if  it  hath  that)  for  any
vessels  of  burden  :  so  as  whosoever  shall  first  possesse  it,
it  shall  be  found  unaccessible  for  any  enemie,  except  he
come  in  Wherries,  Barges,  or  Canoas,  or  else  in  flat
bottomed  boates,  and  if  he  doe  offer  to  enter  it  in  that
manner,  the  woods  are  so  thicke  two  hundred  miles
together  upon  the  rivers  of  such  entrance,  as  a  mouse
cannot  sit  in  a  boat  unhit  from  the  banke.  By  lande  it  is
more  impossible  to  approch,  for  it  hath  the  strongest
situation  of  any  region  under  the  sunne,  and  is  so
environed  with  impassable  mountaines  on  every  side,  as
it  is  impossible  to  victuall  any  company  in  the  passage  :
which  hath  bene  well  prooved  by  the  Spanish  nation,  who
since  the  conquest  of  Peru  have  never  left  five  yeeres
free  from  attempting  this  Empire,  or  discovering  some
way  into  it,  and  yet  of  three  and  twentie  severall  Gentle-
men, Knights,  and  Noble  men,  there  was  never  any  that
knewe  which  way  to  leade  an  army  by  land,  or  to  con-

428

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  a.d.

1595-
duct  shippes  by  sea,  any  thing  neere  the  saide  countrie.
Orellana,  of  whom  the  river  of  Amazones  taketh  name,
was  the  first,  and  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  (whom  we
displanted)  the  last :  and  I  doubt  much,  whether  he
himselfe  or  any  of  his  yet  know  the  best  way  into  the
sayde  Empire.  It  can  therefore  hardly  be  regained,  if
any  strength  be  formerly  set  downe,  but  in  one  or  two
places,  and  but  two  or  three  crumsters  or  gallies  built,
and  furnished  upon  the  river  within  :  The  West  Indies
have  many  portes,  watering  places,  and  landings,  and
nearer  then  three  hundred  miles  to  Guiana,  no  man
can  harbour  a  shippe,  except  he  know  one  onely  place,
which  is  not  learned  in  haste,  and  which  I  will  under-
take there  is  not  any  one  of  my  companies  that  knoweth,
whosoever  hearkened  most  after  it.

Besides  by  keeping  one  good  Fort,  or  building  one
towne  of  strength,  the  whole  Empire  is  guarded,  and
whatsoever  companies  shall  be  afterwardes  planted  within
the  land,  although  in  twentie  severall  Provinces,  those
shall  be  able  all  to  reunite  themselves  upon  any  occasion
eyther  by  the  way  of  one  river,  or  be  able  to  march  by
land  without  either  wood,  bogge,  or  mountaine :  whereas
in  the  West  Indies  there  are  fewe  townes  or  Provinces
that  can  succour  or  relieve  one  the  other,  eyther  by
land  or  sea:  By  land  the  countries  are  either  desert,
mountaynous,  or  strong  enemies :  by  sea,  if  any  man
invade  to  the  Eastward,  those  to  the  West  cannot  in
many  moneths  turne  against  the  brize  and  Eastern  wind,
besides  the  Spaniards  are  therein  so  dispersed,  as  they
are  no  where  strong,  but  in  Nueva  Espanna  onely:
the  sharpe  mountaines,  the  thornes,  and  poysoned  [III.  662.]
prickles,  the  sandie  and  deepe  wayes  in  the  valleys,  the
smothering  heate  and  aire,  and  want  of  water  in  other
places  are  their  onely  and  best  defence,  which  (because
those  nations  that  invade  them  are  not  victualled  or
provided  to  stay,  neither  have  any  place  to  friend
adjoyning)  doe  serve  them  in  steede  of  good  armes
and  great  multitudes.

429

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

The  West  Indies  were  first  offered  her  Majesties
grandfather  by  Columbus  a  stranger,  in  whom  there
might  be  doubt  of  deceipt,  and  besides  it  was  then
thought  incredible  that  there  were  such  and  so  many-
lands  &  regions  never  written  of  before.  This  Empire
is  made  knowen  to  her  Majestie  by  her  owne  vassall,  and
by  him  that  oweth  to  her  more  duetie  then  an  ordinary
subject,  so  that  it  shall  ill  sort  with  the  many  graces
and  benefites  which  I  have  received  to  abuse  her  High-
nesse,  either  with  fables  or  imaginations.  The  countrey
is  alreadie  discovered,  many  nations  wonne  to  her
Majesties  love  and  obedience,  and  those  Spaniardes
which  have  latest  and  longest  laboured  about  the  con-
quest, beaten  out,  discouraged  and  disgraced,  which
among  these  nations  were  thought  invincible.  Her
Majestie  may  in  this  enterprize  employ  all  those
souldiers  and  gentlemen  that  are  younger  brethren,  and
all  captaines  and  chieftaines  that  want  employment,  and
the  charge  will  be  onely  the  first  setting  out  in  victual-
ling and  arming  them :  for  after  the  first  or  second
yeere  I  doubt  not  but  to  see  in  London  a  Contractation
house  of  more  receipt  for  Guiana,  then  there  is  now  in
Sivill  for  the  West  Indies.

And  I  am  resolved  that  if  there  were  but  a  small
army  a  foote  in  Guiana,  marching  towards  Manoa  the
chiefe  citie  of  Inga,  he  would  yeeld  to  her  Majestie  by
composition  so  many  hundred  thousand  pounds  yeerely,
as  should  both  defend  all  enemies  abroad,  and  defray
all  expences  at  home,  and  that  he  would  besides  pay
a  garrison  of  three  or  foure  thousand  souldiers  very
royally  to  defend  him  against  other  nations:  For  he
cannot  but  knowe,  how  his  predecessors,  yea  how  his
owne  great  uncles  Guascar  and  Atabalipa  sonnes  to
Guainacapa  Emperour  of  Peru,  were  (while  they  con-
tended for  the  Empire)  beaten  out  by  the  Spaniards,
and  that  both  of  late  yeres  and  ever  since  the  said  con-
quest, the  Spaniards  have  sought  the  passages  and  entrey
of  his countrey : and of their cruelties used to the

430

THE DISCOVERY OF GUIANA  ad.

1595-
borderers  he  cannot  be  ignorant. In  which  respects  no
doubt  but  he  will  be  brought  to  tribute  with  great  glad-
nesse,  if  not,  he  hath  neither  shot  nor  yron  weapon  in
all  his  Empire,  and  therefore  may  easily  be  conquered.

And  I  farther  remember  that  Berreo  confessed  to  me
and  others  (which  I  protest  before  the  Majestie  of  God
to  be  true)  that  there  was  found  among  prophesies  in
Peru  (at  such  time  as  the  Empire  was  reduced  to  the
Spanish  obedience)  in  their  chiefest  temples,  amongst
divers  others  which  foreshewed  the  losse  of  the  said
Empire,  that  from  Inglatierra  those  Tngas  should  be
againe  in  time  to  come  restored,  and  delivered  from
the  servitude  of  the  said  Conquerours.  And  I  hope,
as  we  with  these  few  hands  have  displanted  the  first
garrison,  and  driven  them  out  of  the  said  countrey,  so
her  Majestie  will  give  order  for  the  rest,  and  either  de-
fend it,  and  hold  it  as  tributary,  or  conquere  and  keepe
it  as  Empresse  of  the  same.  For  whatsoever  Prince
shall  possesse  it,  shall  be  greatest,  and  if  the  king  of
Spaine  enjoy  it,  he  will  become  unresistable.  Her
Majestie  hereby  shall  confirme  and  strengthen  the
opinions  of  all  nations,  as  touching  her  great  and
princely  actions.  And  where  the  South  border  of
Guiana  reacheth  to  the  Dominion  and  Empire  of  the
Amazones,  those  women  shall  hereby  heare  the  name
of  a  virgin,  which  is  not  onely  able  to  defend  her  owne
territories  and  her  neighbours,  but  also  to  invade  and
conquer  so  great  Empires  and  so  farre  removed.

To  speake  more  at  this  time,  I  feare  would  be  but
troublesome :  I  trust  in  God,  this  being  true,  will  suffice,
and  that  he  which  is  King  of  all  Kings  and  Lord  of
Lords,  will  put  it  into  her  heart  which  is  Ladie  of
Ladies  to  possesse  it,  if  not,  I  will  judge  those  men
worthy  to  be  kings  thereof,  that  by  her  grace  and  leave
will  undertake  it  of  themselves.

[An  abstract
431

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594.

An  abstract  taken  out  of  certaine  Spaniards  letters
concerning  Guiana  and  the  countries  lying
upon  the  great  river  Orenoque  :  with  certaine
reports  also  touching  the  same.

An  advertisement  to  the  Reader.

Hose  letters  out  of  which  the  abstracts
following  are  taken,  were  surprised  at
sea  as  they  were  passing  for  Spaine  in
the  yeere  1594.  by  Captaine  George
Popham :  who  the  next  yeere,  and  the
same  that  Sir  Walter  Ralegh  discovered
Guiana,  as  he  was  in  a  voyage  for  the
West  Indies,  learned  also  the  reports  annexed.  All
which,  at  his  returne,  being  two  moneths  after  Sir
[III.  663.]  Walter,  as  also  so  long  after  the  writing  of  the  former
discourse,  hearing  also  of  his  discoverie  :  he  made  knowen
and  delivered  to  some  of  her  Majesties  most  honourable
privie  Councell  &  others.  The  which  seeing  they  con-
firme  in  some  part  the  substance,  I  meane,  the  riches
of  that  countrey :  it  hath  bene  thought  fit  that  they
should  be  thereunto  adjoyned.  Wherein  the  Reader  is
to  be  advertised,  that  although  the  Spaniards  seeme  to
glorie  much  of  their  formall  possession  taken  before
Morequito  the  Lord  of  Aromaya,  and  others  there-
abouts, which  throughly  understood  them  not  at  that
time,  whatsoever  the  Spaniards  otherwise  pretend :  yet,
according  to  the  former  discourse,  and  as  also  it  is  re-
lated by  Cayworaco,  the  sonne  of  Topiawary  now  chiefe
Lord  of  the  said  Aromaya,  who  was  brought  into  Eng-
land by  Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  and  was  present  at  the  same
possession  and  discoverie  of  the  Spaniards  mentioned  in
these  letters ;  it  appeareth  that  after  they  were  gone  out
of  their  countrey,  the  Indians  then  having  farther  con-
sideration of  the  matter,  and  more  then  conjecture  of
their  intent,  having knowen  and  heard  of  their  former

432

4

REPORTS OF GUIANA  a.d.

1594.

cruelties  upon  their  borderers  and  others  of  the  Indians
elsewhere :  At  their  next  comming,  there  being  ten  of
them  sent  and  imployed  for  a  farther  discovery,  they
were  provided  to  receive  and  entertaine  them  in  an
other  maner  of  sort  then  they  had  done  before ;  that  is
to  say,  they  slew  them  and  buried  them  in  the  countrey
so  much  sought.  They  gave  them  by  that  meanes  a
full  and  complete  possession,  the  which  before  they  had
but  begunne.  And  so  they  are  minded  to  doe,  to  as
many  Spaniards  as  come  after.  Other  possession  they
have  had  none  since.  Neither  doe  the  Indians  meane,  as
they  protest,  to  give  them  any  other.  One  other  thing
to  be  remembred  is  that  in  these  letters  the  Spaniards
seeme  to  call  Guiana  and  other  countries  neere  it,  border-
ing upon  the  river  of  Orenoque,  by  the  name  of  Nueva
Dorado,  because  of  the  great  plentie  of  golde  there  in
most  places  to  be  found.  Alluding  also  to  the  name
of  El  Dorado  which  was  given  by  Martinez  to  the  great
citie  of  Manoa,  as  is  in  the  former  treatise  specified.
This  is  all  I  thought  good  to  advertise.  As  for  some
other  matters,  I  leave  them  to  the  consideration  and
judgement  of  the  indifferent  Reader.  W.  R.

Letters  taken  at  sea  by  Captaine  George  Popham.

1594-

Alonso  his  letter  from  the  Gran  Canaria  to  his
brother  being  commander  of  S.  Lucar,  con-
cerning El  Dorado.

THere  have  bene  certaine  letters  received  here  of  late,
of  a  land  newly  discovered  called  Nuevo  Dorado,
from  the  sonnes  of  certaine  inhabitants  of  this  citie,  who
were  in  the  discovery :  they  write  of  wonderfull  riches
to  be  found  in  the  said  Dorado,  and  that  golde  there
is  in  great  abundance :  the  course  to  fall  with  it  is  fiftie
leagues  to  the  windeward  of  Margarita.

[Alonsos  letter
X  433  2  E

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594.

S'

Alonsos  letter  from  thence  to  certaine  MarcHantes
of  Sant  Lucar  concerning  El  Dorado.

'Irs,  we  have  no  newes  worth  the  writing,  saving  of
a  discovery  lately  made  by  the  Spaniardes  in  a  new
land  called  Nuevo  Dorado,  which  Is  two  dayes  sayling
to  the  windward  of  Margarita :  there  is  golde  in  such
abundance,  as  the  like  hath  not  bene  heard  of.  Wee
have  it  for  certaine  in  letters  written  from  thence  by
some  that  were  in  the  discoverie,  unto  their  parents  here
in  this  citie.  I  purpose  (God  willing)  to  bestow  tenne
or  twelve  dayes  in  search  of  the  said  Dorado,  as  I  passe
in  my  voyage  towards  Carthagena,  hoping  there  to  make
some  good  sale  of  our  commodities.  I  have  sent  you
therewith  part  of  the  information  of  the  said  discoverie,
that  was  sent  to  his  Majestle.

Part  of  the  Copie  that  was  sent  to  his  Majestic,
of  the  discovery  of  Nuevo  Dorado.

N  the  river  of  Pato  otherwise  called  Orenoque,  In
the  princlpall  part  thereof  called  Warismero,  the  23
of  April  1593  Domingo  de  Vera  master  of  the  campe,
and  Generall  for  Antonio  de  Berreo  Governour  and
Captalne  generall  for  our  lord  the  king,  betwixt  the
rivers  of  Pato  and  Papamene  alias  Orenoque,  and  Mar-
rannon,  and  of  the  Hand  of  Trinidad,  In  presence  of  me
Rodrigo  de  Caranza  Register  for  the  sea,  commanded
[III.  664.]  all  the  souldiers  to  be  drawen  together  and  put  in  order
of  battalle,  the  Captaines  and  souldiers,  and  Master  of
the  campe  standing  in  the  middest  of  them,  said  unto
them :  Sirs,  Souldiers,  and  Captaines,  you  understand
long  since  that  our  General  Antonio  de  Berreo,  with  the
travell  of  eleven  yeeres,  and  expence  of  more  then  an
hundred  thousand  pezos  of  golde,  discovered  the  royall
Provinces  of  Guiana  and  Dorado  :  of  the  which  he  tooke
possession  to  governe  the  same,  but  through  want  of  his  j
peoples  health,  and  necessarle  munition,  he  issued  out
at  the  Hand  Margarita,  and  from  thence  peopled  Trinidad.

434

I

REPORTS OF GUIANA  ad.

1594.
But  now  they  have  sent  me  to  learne  out  and  discover
the  wayes  most  easily  to  enter,  and  to  people  the  said
Provinces,  and  where  the  campes  and  armies  may  best
enter  the  same.  By  reason  wherof  I  intend  so  to  doe
in  the  name  of  his  Majestie,  and  the  saide  governour
Antonio  de  Berreo,  and  in  token  thereof  I  require  you
Francis  Carillo,  that  you  aide  mee  to  advance  this  crosse
that  lieth  here  on  the  ground,  which  they  set  on  end
towardes  the  East,  and  the  said  Master  of  the  campe,
the  captaines  and  souldiers  kneeled  downe,  and  did  due
reverence  unto  the  saide  crosse,  and  thereupon  the  master
of  the  campe  tooke  a  bowle  of  water  and  dranke  it  oiF,
and  tooke  more  and  threw  abroad  on  the  ground :  he
also  drewe  out  his  sworde  and  cut  the  grasse  off  the
ground,  and  the  boughes  off  the  trees  saying,  I  take  this
possession  in  the  name  of  the  king  Don  Philip  our  master,
and  of  his  Governour  Antonio  de  Berreo :  and  because
some  make  question  of  this  possession,  to  them  I  answere,
that  in  these  our  actions  was  present  the  Cassique,  or
principall  Don  Antonio,  otherwise  called  Morequito,
whose  land  this  was,  who  yeelded  consent  to  the  said
possession,  was  glad  thereof,  and  gave  his  obedience  to
our  lord  the  king,  and  in  his  name  to  the  said  Governour
Antonio  de  Berreo.  And  the  said  master  of  the  campe
kneeled  downe  being  in  his  libertie,  and  all  the  Captaines
and  souldiers  said,  that  the  possession  was  well  taken,
and  that  they  would  defend  it  with  their  lives,  upon  who-
soever would  say  the  contrary.  And  the  said  master  of
the  campe  having  his  sword  drawen  in  his  hand  saide  unto
me  :  Register,  that  art  here  present,  give  me  an  instrument
or  testimoniall  to  confirme  me  in  this  possession,  which  I
have  taken  of  this  land,  for  the  Governour  Antonio  de
Berreo,  and  if  it  be  needefull  I  will  take  it  a  newe.  And  I
require  you  all  that  are  present  to  witnesse  the  same,  and
do  further  declare  that  I  will  goe  on,  taking  the  possession
of  all  these  landes  wheresoever  I  shall  enter.  Signed  thus.
Domingo  de  Vera,  and  underneath.  Before  me  Rodrigo
de  Caranza,  Register  of  the  armie.
435

A'

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

Nd  in  prosecution  of  the  said  possession,  and  the
discoverie  of  the  way  and  Provinces,  the  27  of  April
of  the  said  yeere,  the  master  of  the  campe  entred  by  little
and  little  with  all  the  campe  and  men  of  warre,  more  then
two  leagues  into  the  in-land,  and  came  to  a  towne  of  a
principall,  and  conferring  with  him  did  let  him  understand
by  meanes  of  Antonio  Bisante  the  Interpretor,  that  his
Majestie  and  Antonio  de  Berreo  had  sent  him  to  take
the  said  possession.  And  the  said  frier  Francis  Carillo
by  the  Interpretor,  delivered  him  certain  things  of  our
holy  Catholique  faith,  to  all  which  he  answered,  that  they
understood  him  well  and  would  become  Christians,  and
that  with  a  very  good  will  they  should  advance  the  crosse,
in  what  part  or  place  of  the  towne  it  pleased  them,  for
he  was  for  the  Governour  Antonio  de  Berreo,  who  was
his  master.  Thereupon  the  said  master  of  the  campe
tooke  a  great  crosse,  and  set  it  on  end  towarde  the  East,
and  requested  the  whole  campe  to  witnesse  it,  and
Domingo  de  Vera  firmed  it  thus.

It  is  well  and  firmely  done. And  underneath. Before
me  Rodrigo  Caranza,  Register  of  the  armie.

THe  first  of  May  they  prosecuted  the  said  possession
and  discoverie  to  the  towne  on  Carapana.  From
thence  the  said  Master  of  the  campe  passed  to  the  towne
of  Toroco  whose  principall  is  called  Topiawary  being  five
leagues  farther  within  the  land  then  the  first  Nation,  and
well  inhabited.  And  to  this  principall  by  meane  of  the
Interpretor  they  gave  to  understand  that  his  Majestie
and  the  said  Corrigidor  commanded  them  to  take  the
possession  of  that  lande,  and  that  they  should  yeelde  their
obedience  to  his  Majestie,  and  to  his  Corrigidor,  and  to  the
master  of  the  campe  in  his  name,  and  that  in  token  therof
he  would  place  a  crosse  in  the  middle  of  his  towne.
Whereunto  the  said  Cassique  answered  they  should
advance  it  with  a  very  good  will,  and  that  he  remained
in  the  obedience  of  our  lord  the  king,  and  of  the  said
Governour  Antonio  de  Berreo  whose  vassall  he  would  be.

436

REPORTS OF GUIANA  a.d.

1594-

The  fourth  of  May  we  came  to  a  Province  above  five
leagues  thence,  of  all  sides  inhabited  with  much  people,
the  principall  of  this  people  came  and  met  us  in  peaceable
maner :  and  he  is  called  Revato,  he  brought  us  to  a  very
large  house  where  he  entertained  us  well,  and  gave  us
much  Golde,  and  the  interpreter  asking  him  from  whence  [III.  665.]
that  golde  was,  he  answered,  From  a  Province  not  passing
a  dayes  journey  off,  where  there  are  so  many  Indians  as
would  shadowe  the  sunne,  and  so  much  Golde  as  all
yonder  plaine  will  not  conteine  it.  In  which  Countrey
(when  they  enter  into  the  Borracheras  or  their  drunken
feasts)  they  take  of  the  said  Golde  in  dust  and  anoynt
themselves  all  over  therewith  to  make  the  braver  shew;
and  to  the  end  the  Golde  may  cover  them,  they  anoynt
their  bodies  with  stamped  herbes  of  a  glewy  substance  :  &
they  have  warre  with  those  Indians.  They  promised  us
that  if  we  would  goe  unto  them,  they  would  ayde  us ;  but
they  were  such  infinite  numbers,  as  no  doubt  they  would
kill  us.  And  being  asked  how  they  gat  ye  same  Gold,
they  told  us  they  went  to  a  certaine  Downe  or  playne,
and  pulled  or  digged  up  the  grasse  by  the  roote :  which
done,  they  tooke  of  the  earth,  putting  it  in  great  buckets,
which  they  caried  to  wash  at  the  river,  and  that  which
came  in  powder  they  kept  for  their  Borracheras  or  drunken
feasts :  and  that  which  was  in  peeces  they  wrought  into
Eagles.

The  eight  of  May  wee  went  from  thence,  and  marched
about  five  leagues :  at  the  foote  of  a  Hill  wee  found  a
principall  called  Arataco  with  three  thousand  Indians,  men
and  women  all  in  peace  with  much  victuall,  as  Hennes
and  Venison  in  great  abundance,  and  many  sortes  of
wine.  Hee  intreated  us  to  goe  to  his  house,  and  to
rest  that  night  in  his  Towne,  being  of  five  hundred
houses.  The  interpreter  asked  whence  hee  had  those
Hennes :  he  sayde  they  were  brought  from  a  mountaine
not  passing  a  quarter  of  a  league  thence,  where  were
many  Indians,  yea  so  many  as  grasse  on  the  ground,
and  that  these  men  had the points of  their shoulders

437

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594.

higher  then  the  Crownes  of  their  heads,  and  had  so
many  Hennes  as  was  wonderfull ;  and  if  wee  would
have  any,  wee  should  send  them  Jewes  harpes,  for  they
would  give  for  every  one  two  Hennes.  Wee  tooke  an
Indian,  and  gave  him  five  hundred  Harpes ;  the  Hennes
were  so  many  that  hee  brought  us,  as  were  not  to  be
numbred.  Wee  sayde  wee  would  goe  thither;  they
tolde  us  they  were  now  in  their  Borracheras  or  drunken
feasts,  and  would  kiU  us.  Wee  asked  the  Indian  that
brought  the  Hennes,  if  it  were  true ;  hee  sayde  it  was
most  true.  Wee  asked  him  how  they  made  their  Bor-
racheras or  drunken  feasts ;  hee  sayde,  they  had  many
Eagles  of  golde  hanging  on  their  breasts,  and  Pearles  in
their  eares,  and  that  they  daunced  being  all  covered
with  Golde.  The  Indian  sayde  unto  us,  if  wee  would
see  them,  wee  should  give  him  some  Hatchets,  and  he
would  bring  us  of  those  Eagles.  The  Master  of  the
Campe  gave  him  one  Hatchet  (hee  would  give  him  no
more  because  they  should  not  understand  we  went  to
seeke  golde)  he  brought  us  an  Eagle  that  weighed  27.
pounds  of  good  Golde.  The  Master  of  the  Campe
tooke  it,  and  shewed  it  to  the  souldiers,  and  then  threw
it  from  him,  making  shewe  not  to  regard  it.  About
midnight  came  an  Indian  and  sayd  unto  him,  Give
Indians  mee  a  Pickeaxe,  and  I  will  tell  thee  what  the  Indians
with  high  ^\^T^  ^]^g  ]\\g]\  shoulders  meane  to  doe.  The  Interpreter
tolde  the  Master  of  the  Campe,  who  commanded  one
to  be  given  him  :  hee  then  tolde  us,  those  Indians  were
comming  to  kill  us  for  our  marchandize.  Hereupon
the  Master  of  the  Campe  caused  his  company  to  bee
set  in  order,  and  beganne  to  march.  The  eleventh  day
of  May  wee  went  about  seven  leagues  from  thence  to
a  Province,  where  wee  found  a  great  company  of  Indians
apparelled :  they  tolde  us  that  if  wee  came  to  fight,  they
would  fill  up  those  Plaines  with  Indians  to  fight  with
us ;  but  if  wee  came  in  peace,  wee  should  enter  and  bee
well  entertained  of  them,  because  they  had  a  great  desire
to  see  Christians: and there they  tolde us of  all the

438

REPORTS OF GUIANA  a.d.

1594.
riches  that  was.  I  doe  not  heere  set  it  downe,  because
there  is  no  place  for  it,  but  it  shall  appeare  by  the
information  that  goeth  to  his  Majestie :  for  if  it  should
heere  bee  set  downe,  foure  leaves  of  paper  would  not
containe  it.

The  Letter  of  George  Burien  Britton  from  the
sayde  Canaries  unto  his  cousin  a  Frenchman
dwelling  in  S. Lucar,  concerning  El  Dorado.

Sir,  and  my  very  good  cousin,  there  came  of  late
certaine  Letters  from  a  new  discovered  countrey  not
farre  from  Trinidad,  which  they  write,  hath  Golde  in
great  abundance :  the  newes  seemeth  to  bee  very  cer-
taine, because  it  passeth  for  good  amongst  the  best  of
this  Citie.  Part  of  the  information  of  the  Discovery
that  went  to  his  Majestie,  goeth  inclosed  in  Alonsos
letters;  it  is  a  thing  worth  the  seeing.

The  report  of  Domingo  Martinez  of  Jamaica
concerning  El  Dorado.

HE  sayth  that  in  1593.  being  at  Carthagena,  there
was  a  generall  report  of  a  late  discovery  called  '
Nuevo  Dorado,  and  that  a  litle  before  his  comming
thither,  there  came  a  Frigat  from  the  said  Dorado,  [HI.  SeSJ]
bringing  in  it  the  portrature  of  a  Giant  all  of  Gold,  of
weight  47.  kintals,  which  the  Indians  there  held  for
their  IdolL  But  now  admitting  of  Christianitie  and
obedience  to  the  king  of  Spaine,  they  sent  their  sayd
Idol  unto  him  in-  token  they  were  become  Christians,
and  held  him  for  their  King.  The  company  comming
in  the  said  Frigat,  reported  Golde  to  be  there  in  most
abundance,  Diamonds  of  inestimable  value,  with  great
store  of  pearle.

[The  report
439

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594.

The  report  of  a  French  man  called  Bountillier
of  Sherbrouke,  concerning  Trinidad  and
Dorado.

^591-  T  TE  saith  that  beeing  at  Trinidad  in  1591.  he  had
JLj-  of  an  Indian  there  a  peece  of  Golde  of  a  quarter
of  a  pound  in  exchange  of  a  knife;  the  sayde  Indian
tolde  him  hee  had it at the  head  of  that  river  which

Paracoa.  commeth  to  Paracoa  in  Trinidad :  and  that  within  the
River  of  Orenoque,  it  was  in  great  abundance.  Also  in
1593.  beeing  taken  by  the  Spanyardes,  and  brought
prisoner  into  the  Hand  of  Madera  (the  place  for  his
prison)  there  came  in  this  meane  time  a  Barke  of  fortie
Tunnes  from  a  new  Discovery,  with  two  millions  of
Golde ;  the  company  whereof  reported  Golde  in  that
place  to  bee  in  great  abundance,  and  called  it  El  Nuevo
Dorado.  This  Frenchman  passed  from  Spaine  in  the
Barke,  and  having  a  cabben  neere  a  gentleman,  one  of
the  Discoverers  that  came  from  that  place  in  the  sayde
Barke,  had  divers  times  conference  with  him,  and  amongst
other  things,  of  the  great  abundance  of  Golde  in  the
sayd  Dorado,  being  as  they  sayd  within  the  river  of
Orenoque.

Reportes  of  certaine  Marchants  of  Rio  de  Hacha,
concerning  El  Nuevo  Dorado.

THey  sayd  (advancing  the  kings  great  treasure  in
the  Indies)  that  Nuevo  Reyno  yeelded  very  many
Golde  mines,  and  wonderfuU  rich ;  but  lately  was  dis-
covered a  certaine  Province  so  rich  in  Golde,  as  the
report  thereof  may  seeme  incredible,  it  is  there  in  such
abundance,  and  is  called  El  Nuevo  Dorado :  Antonio
de  Berreo  made  the  said  discoverie.

440

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.

The  report  of  a  Spanyard,  Captaine  with Berreo
in  the  discoverie  of  El  Nuevo  Dorado.

THat  the  information  sent  to  the  King  was  in  every
poynt  truely  sayde,  that  the  river  Orenoque  hath
seven  mouths,  or  outlets  into  the  sea,  called  Las  Siete
bocas  de  dragon,  that  the  sayd  river  runneth  farre  into
the  land,  in  many  places  very  broad,  and  that  Anth.
de  Berreo  lay  at  Trinidad,  making  head  to  goe  to  con-
quere  and  people  the  sayd  Dorado.

A  Relation  of  the  second  Voyage  to  Guiana,
performed  and  written  in  the  yeere  1596.  by
Laurence  Keymis  Gent.

To  the  approved.  Right  Valorous,  and  worthy  Knight,
Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  Lord  warden  of  the  Stanneries,
Captaine  of  her  Majesties  Guard,  and  her  Highnesse
Lieutenant  generall  of  the  Countie  of  Cornewall.

Have  here  briefly  set  downe  the  effect  of
this  your  second  Discoverie  without  any
enlargement  of  made  wordes :  for  in  this
argument,  single  speech  best  beseemeth
a  simple  trueth.  Where  the  affinitie  of
the  matter  with  your  person,  leadeth  mee
to  write  of  your  selfe,  unto  your  selfe,
that  small  libertie  which  I  have  therein  used,  shall,  I
doubt  not,  without  offence  or  sinister  construction,  be
given  to  the  cause  in  hand :  which,  whether  it  suffer
not  detriment,  by  attributing  lesse  then  of  right  be-
longeth ;  the  judgement  bee  theirs,  that  uprightly  and
indifferently  shall  weigh  the  consequents  of  their  evill
purpose,  who  in  seeking  to  detract  from  the  Author  of
these  Discoveries,  doe  so  much  as  in  them  lieth,  wound,
deface,  &  tread  under  foot  the  thing  it  selfe.  But  this
is  no  novelty,  nor  proper  only  to  these  our  dayes.
For  long  since  it  hath  bin  said,  Laudes  eo  usque  sunt  Pericles.
tolerabiles,  donee  ea  dicuntur,  quae  auditores  se  quoque

441

A.D.
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

facere  posse  existimant :  simajora  proferantur,  invident,
lion  credunt.  The  fervent  zeale  &  loyalty  of  your
minde  in  labour  with  this  birth  of  so  honorable  expec-
tation, as  it  hath  deserved  a  recompence  farre  different,
so  needeth  it  not  my  poore  suffrage  to  endeare  the
[III.  667.]  toyle,  care,  and  danger  that  you  have  v^illingly  under-
gone for  the  good  and  advancement  of  our  v^eale  pub-
lique.  The  praise-worthinesse  thereof  doeth  approve  it
selfe,  and  is  better  read  in  your  living  doings,  then
in  my  dead  unregarded  papers.  All  that  I  can  wish,
is  that  my  life  were  a  sufficient  pledge,  to  justifie,  how
much  more  easie,  and  more  materiall,  the  course  for
Guiana  would  bee  then  others,  which  requiring  greater
charge,  yeelde  not  so  large  benefit,  and  are  subject  to
more  doubtfuU  events.  If  unto  their  wisdomes  who  sit
in  place  and  authority,  it  shall  appeare  otherwise,  and
that  in  following  of  other  attempts  there  is  lesse  diffi-
cultie,  certainer  profit,  and  needfuller  offence  unto  the
enemie :  the  cost  and  travaile  which  you  have  bestowed,
shall  not,  I  hope,  be  altogether  lost,  if  unto  your  Honour
I  can  prove  how,  and  where  the  amends  is  to  be  had,
maugre  the  force  and  prevention  of  all  Spaniards.
Your  Lordships  to  be  commanded  in  all  service,

Laurence  Keymis.

To  the  Favourers  of  the  Voyage  for  Guiana.

N  things earnestly  desired, though  never
so  likely,  we  are  still  suspicious  : think-
ing it more credite to our common
wisedome, to  discredite  most  noble and
profitable indevours with distrust, then
touch  to our  valours  and  safeties,  to  lie
wilfully idle. So that howsoever an
action  well  and  judicially  attempted,  bee  esteemed  halfe
performed  ; yet is this my  jealous conceite concerning
Guiana, that nothing is begun, before all be ended.
In this regarde (gentle Reader) I have presumed to
burthen thine eares with the weake plea of  a good

442

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.
cause,  and  in  stead  of  opening  it  throughly  to  thy
prudent  consideration,  to  note  only  mine  owne  unsatis-
fied affection  :  hoping  that  because  I  doe  name  Guiana
unto  thee,  thou  wilt  vouchsafe  hoc  nomine,  to  vaile
and  cover  all  other  my  defects  in  the  desert  of  a  good
meaning.  In  publishing  this  Treatise,  my  labor  princi-
pally tendeth  to  this  end  ;  to  remove  all  fig-leaves
from  our  unbeliefe,  that  either  it  may  have  cause  to
shake  off  the  colourable  pretences  of  ignorance  :  or  if
we  will  not  be  perswaded  ;  that  our  selfe-will  may  rest
inexcusable.  They  that  shall  apply,  and  construe  this
my  doing,  to  serve  the  Spaniard  his  turne  so  well  as
our  owne ;  in  so  much  as  it  may  seeme  to  instruct,
warne,  and  arme  him  :  for  their  satisfaction  herein,
they  must  not  be  ignorant,  that  his  eyes,  in  seeing  our
shipping  there,  doe  as  effectually  informe  him,  that
many  of  our  hearts  are  toward  that  place,  as  if  it
should  be  credibly  advertised  by  some  corrupt  hireling,
that  we  thinke,  write,  and  discourse  of  nothing  els.
Neither  can  I  imagine,  that  to  conceale  our  knowledge
herein  (which  to  conceale  may  perhaps  prove,  &  be
hereafter  taken  for  worse  then  paricide)  would  be  of
better  purpose,  then  to  hood  winke  our  selves,  as  who
would  say.  No  man  shall  see  us.  Besides,  if  the  action
were  wholy  to  bee  effected  at  her  Majesties  charge ;
then  might  it  at  her  Highnesse  pleasure  be  shadowed
with  some  other  drift,  and  never  be  discovered,  untill
it  were  acted.  But  since  it  craveth  the  approbation
and  purses  of  many  Adventurers,  who  cannot  be  so
prodigall  both  of  their  possessions  and  lives,  as
voluntarily  to  run  themselves  out  of  breath,  in  pur-
suing they  know  not  what  :  great  reason  it  is,  that
where  assistance  is  to  be  asked,  due  causes  be  yeelded
to  perswade  &  induce  them  unto  it.  The  Spaniard  is
not  so  simple,  unsetled,  &  uncertaine  in  his  determina-
tions, as  to  build  them  on  our  breath,  or  to  make  our
papers  his  Bulwarks ;  nor  so  slow  as  to  expect  a
precedent  of  our  forwardnes. His  proceedings  are  sufii-

443

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

ciently  strengthened  with  the  travailes,  reports,  &  sub-
stantial proofes  of  his  own  men,  that  have  above  60.
yeres  beaten  round  about  this  bush.  And  to  say  a
trueth,  the  expedition  that  he  hath  used  in  sending  so
many  ships  in  February  last  to  people  this  country,
&  disappoint  us  ;  as  it  doth  consequently  shew,  that
he  findeth  his  chiefest  force  and  sinewes  to  consist  in
golde  :  so  doeth  he  thereby  plainly  to  our  faces  expro-
brate  our  remisnesse  &  long  deliberations,  that  in  12.
moneths  space  have  done,  or  sought  to  doe  nothing
worthy  the ancient fame & reputation of  our  English

InJufiei$g6.  nation,  interessed  in  so  weighty  businesse.  *  His  late
provision  of  a  new  supply  of  whole  families  to  the
number  of  600.  persons,  bound  for  Guiana,  but  that
it  pleased  God,  that  by  meanes  of  that  right  honourable
service  most  resolutely  performed  in  the  sea-fight,  and
sacking  of  Cadiz,  the  ships  wherein  they  should  have
bin  conveyed,  were  converted  into  ashes  :  what  might
it  signifie  ?  Certes,  as  it  doth  evidently  prove,  that
El  Dorado  hath  undoubted  credit  &  account  in  their
judgements  :  so  pointeth  it  at  us,  whilst  we  only  to
entertain  idle  time,  sit  listening  for  Guiana  newes,  &
instantly  forget  it,  as  if  it  were  nought  els,  but  a  pleasing

[III.  668.]  dreame  of  a  golden  fancy.  If  we  with  our  selves  shall
expostulate,  how  this  commeth  to  passe,  that  the
advantage  wholy  resting  on  our  side,  in  respect  that
Berreo  was  this  last  yere  beaten  out,  the  countrey
throughly  discovered,  &  the  Inhabitants  made  desirous
of  her  sacred  Majesties  happy  government ;  they  not-
withstanding by  entring  before  us,  have  now  gotten  ye
start  of  us  :  what  may  we  thinke  ?  Shal  wee  judge
that  their  native  countrey  is  lesse  deare,  or  more  weari-
some unto  them,  then  ours  is  unto  us  ?  Their  Peruleri,
who  going  bare  &  empty  out  of  Spaine,  do  againe
within  3.  or  4.  yeres  returne  from  Peru,  rich  and  in
good  estate,  doe  apparently  disprove  all  such  conceits
of  them.  Shall  wee  say  that  they  have  more  spare  men
to be  imployed in such actions  ? It is no secret to

444

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.
know  the  contrary.  Are  they  subject  to  penury  ?  In
all  parts  of  Christendom,  where  money  is  not  scant,  all
other  things  are  plentifuU.  Or  is  their  land  not  able
to  sustain  their  numbers  of  people  ?  They  buy  many
slaves  to  follow  their  husbandry,  &  themselves  disdain-
ing base  idlenes  &  beggery,  do  all  honour  military
profession,  highly  esteeming  it  in  their  mercenaries  and
strangers.  Is  it  then  want  of  ability,  in  those  that  are
willing,  lacke  of  incouragement,  or  default  of  speedy
order  and  direction  for  those  that  doe  voluntarily  offer
themselves,  their  substance,  &  best  indevour  to  further
this  cause  ;  that  maketh  us  to  be  thus  coated  of  the
Spaniard  ?  The  first  is  no  question.  The  later  needeth
no  answere.  The  profit  then  by  their  example  to  be
gathered,  is,  not  to  loose  opportunitie  by  delay,  or  to
seeme  feareful  and  dismayed,  where  there  is  no  cause
of  doubt.  For  as  yet  their  post-haste  doeth  no  way
prejudice  our  advised  leisure  in  setting  forward,  since
their  preparations  of  Negros  to  worke  in  the  mynes,
their  horses,  cattell,  and  other  necessaries  may  (by  the
favour  of  God)  at  our  first  comming,  both  store  us
with  quantities  of  gold  oare,  and  ease  us  of  much
trouble,  paines,  and  travaile.  If  we  should  suppose  our
selves  now  to  live  in  the  dayes  of  King  Henry  the
seventh  of  famous  memory,  and  the  strange  report  of
a  West  Indies,  or  new  world  abounding  with  great
treasure  should  entice  us  to  beleeve  it  :  perhaps  it
might  be  imputed  for  some  blame  to  the  gravity  of
wise  men,  lightly  to  bee  carried  with  the  perswasion
and  hope  of  a  new  found  Utopia,  by  such  a  one  as
Columbus  was,  being  an  alien,  and  many  wayes  subject
to  suspition.  But  since  the  penance  of  that  incredulity
lieth  even  now  heavy  on  our  shoulders  ;  the  example
forethreatning,  I  know  not  what  repentance  :  and  that
we  have  the  personal  triall  of  so  honourable  and  sufficient
a  Reporter,  our  own  Countriman  :  let  it  be  farre  from
us  to  condemne  our  selves  in  that,  which  so  worthily
we  reprove  in  our predecessors  ; and to let our idle

445

A.D.
1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

knowledge  content  it  selfe  with  naked  contemplation,
like  a  barren  wombe  in  a  Monastery.  We  cannot  denie
that  the  chiefe  commendation  of  vertue  doth  consist
in  action  :  we  truely  say,  that  Otium  is  animae  vivae
sepultura  :  we  beleeve,  that  perfect  wisedome  in  this
mobility  of  all  humaine  affaires,  refuseth  not  with  any
price  to  purchase  safetie  :  and  we  justly  do  acknowledge
that  the  Castilians  from  bare  legged  mountainers  have
atteined  to  their  greatnesse  by  labour  &c  industrie.
To  sleepe  then,  because  it  costeth  nothing  ;  to  imbrace
the  present  time,  because  it  flattereth  us  with  deceitfull
contentment ;  and  to  kisse  security,  saying.  What  evill
happeneth  unto  us  ?  is  the  plaine  high  way  to  a
fearefull  downfall  :  from  which  the  Lord  in  his  mercy
deliver  us,  and  give  us  an  understanding  heart,  in
time  to  see,  and  to  seeke  that,  which  belongeth  unto
our  peace.

De  Guiana  carmen  Epicum.

Hat  worke  of  honour  and  eternall  name.
For all the world t'envie and us

t'atchieve,
Filles me with furie, and gives armed

hands
To my hearts peace, that els would
gladly  turne
My  limmes  and  every  sense  into  my  thoughts
Rapt  with  the  thirsted  action  of  my  mind  ?
O  Clio,  Honors  Muse,  sing  in  my  voyce,
Tell  the  attempt,  and  prophecie  th'exploit
Of  his  Eliza-consecrated  sworde.
That  in  this  peacefull  charme  of  Englands  sleepe,
Opens  most  tenderly  her  aged  throte,
Offring  to  powre  fresh  youth  through  all  her  vaines.
That  flesh  of  brasse  and  ribs  of  Steele  retaines.
Riches,  and  Conquest,  and  Renowme  I  sing,
[III.  669.]  Riches  with  honour,  Conquest,  without  blood,
Enough  to  seat  the  Monarchic  of  earth,

446

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.

Like  to  Joves  Eagle  on  Elizas  hand.

Guiana,  whose  rich  feete  are  mines  of  golde,

Whose  forehead  knockes  against  the  roofe  of  Starres,

Stands  on  her  tip-toes  at  faire  England  looking,

Kissing  her  hand,  bowing  her  mightie  breast,

And  every  signe  of  all  submission  making.

To  be  her  sister,  and  the  daughter  both

Of  our  most  sacred  Maide : whose  barren nesse

Is  the  true  fruite  of  vertue,  that  may  get,

Beare  and  bring  forth  anew  in  all  perfection.

What  heretofore  savage  corruption  held

In  barbarous  Chaos ; and  in  this  affaire

Become  her  father,  mother,  and  her  heire.

Then  most  admired  Soveraigne,  let  your  breath

Goe  foorth  upon  the  waters,  and  create

A  golden  world  in  this  our  yron  age.

And  be  the  prosperous  forewind  to  a  Fleete,

That  seconding  your  last,  may  goe  before  it

In  all  successe  of  profite  and  renowme :

Doubt  not  but  your  election  was  divine,

(Aswell  by  Fate  as  your  high  judgement  ordred)

To  raise  him  with  choise  Bounties,  that  could  adde

Height  to  his  height ;  and  like  a  liberall  vine,

Not  onely  beare  his  vertuous  fruite  aloft,

Free  from  the  Presse  of  squint-eyd  Envies  feete,

But  decke  his  gracious  Proppe  with  golden  bunches.

And  shroude  it  with  broad  leaves  of  Rule  oregrowne

From  all  blacke  tempests  of  invasion.

Those  Conquests that  like  generall earthquakes shooke
The  solid  world,  and  made  it  fall  before  them.
Built  all  their  brave  attempts  on  weaker  grounds,
And  lesse  perswasive  likelihoods  then  this ;
Nor  was  there  ever  princely  Fount  so  long
Powr'd  forth  a  sea  of  Rule  with  so  free  course,
And  such  ascending  Majestie  as  you  :
Then  be  not  like  a  rough  and  violent  wind,

447

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

That  in  the  morning  rends  the  Forrests  downe,

Shoves  up  the seas  to  heaven,  makes  earth  to  tremble,

And  toombes  his  wastfuU  bravery  in  the  Even :

But  as  a  river  from  a  mountaine  running,

The  further  he  extends  the  greater  growes,

And  by  his  thriftie  race  strengthens  his  streame.

Even  to  joyne  battell  with  th'imperious  sea

Disdayning  his  repulse,  and  in  despight

Of  his  proud  furie,  mixeth  with  his  maine,

Taking  on  him  his  titles  and  commandes :

So  let  thy  soveraigne  Empire  be  encreast.

And  with  Iberian  Neptune  part  the  stake,

Whose  Trident  he  the  triple  world  would  make.

You  then  that  would  be  wise  in  Wisdomes  spight,
Directing  with  discredite  of  direction,
And  hunt  for  honour,  hunting  him  to  death.
With  whom  before  you  will  inherite  gold,
[III.  670.]  You  will  loose  golde,  for  which  you  loose  your  soules ;
You  that  chuse  nought  for  right,  but  certaintie,
And  feare  that  valour  will  get  onely  blowes.
Placing  you  faith  in  Incredulitie.
Sit  till  you  see  a  wonder,  Vertue  rich :
Till  Honour  having  golde,  rob  golde  of  honour.
Till  as  men  hate  desert  that  getteth  nought,
They  loath  all  getting  that  deserves  not  ought  ;
And  use  you  gold-made  men  as  dregges  of  men ;
And  till  your  poysoned  soules,  like  Spiders  lurking
In  sluttish  chinckes,  in  mystes  of  Cobwebs  hide
Your  foggie  bodies  and  your  dunghill  pride.

O  Incredulitie,  the  wit  of  Fooles,
That  slovenly  will spit  on  all  things  faire.
The  Cowards  castle,  and  the  Sluggards  cradle
How  easie  t'is  to  be  an  Infidel .?

But  you  Patrician  Spirites  that  refine
Your  flesh  to  fire,  and  issue  like  a  flame

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

On  brave  indevours,  knowing  that  in  them

The  tract  of  heaven  in  morne-like  glory  opens,

That  know  you  cannot  be  the  Kings  of  earth,

(Claiming  the  Rights  of  your  creation)

And  let  the  Mynes  of  earth  be  Kings  of  you ;

That  are  so  farre  from  doubting  likely  drifts,

That  in  things  hardest  y'are  most  confident :

You  that  know  death  lives,  where  power  lives  unusde,

Joying  to  shine  in  waves  that  burie  you,

And  so  make  way  for  life  even  through  your  graves;

That  will  not  be  content  like  horse  to  hold

A  thread-bare  beaten  way  to  home  affaires :

But  where  the  sea  in  envie  of  your  reigne,

Closeth  her  wombe,  as  fast  as  t'is  disclosde.

That  she  like  Avarice  might  swallow  all.

And  let  none  find  right  passage  through  her  rage :

There  your  wise  soules  as  swift  as  Eurus  lead

Your  Bodies  through,  to  profit  and  renowne.

And  skorne  to  let  your  bodies  choke  your  soules.

In  the  rude  breath  and  prisoned  life  of  beastes :

You  that  herein  renounce  the  course  of  earth,

And  lift  your  eyes  for  guidance  to  the  starres,

That  live  not  for  yourselves,  but  to  possesse

Your  honour'd  countrey  of  a  generall  store ;

In  pitie  of  the  spoyle  rude  selfe-love  makes,

Of  them  whose  lives  and  yours  one  ayre  doth  feede,

One soile  doeth  nourish,  and  one  strength  combine;

You  that  are  blest  with  sence  of  all  things  noble.

In  this  attempt  your  compleat  woorthes  redouble.

But  how  is  Nature  at  her  heart  corrupted,

(I  meane  even  in  her  most  ennobled  birth)

How  in  excesse  of  Sence  is  Sence  bereft  her!

That  her  most  lightening-like  effects  of  lust

Wound through her flesh, her soule, her flesh un-

wounded ;
And  she  must  neede  incitements  to  her  good.
Even  from  that  part  she  hurtes ! O  how  most  like

X  449  2  F

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

[III.  671.]  Art  thou  (heroike  Autor  of  this  Act)

To  this  wrong' d  soule  of  Nature  that  sustain st

Paine,  charge,  and  perill  for  thy  countreys  good,

And  she  much  like  a  bodie  numb'd  with  surfeits,

Feeles  not  thy  gentle  applications

For  the  health,  use,  and  honour  of  her  powers !

Yet  shall  my  verse  through  all  her  ease-lockt  eares-

Trumpet  the  Noblesse  of  thy  high  intent :

And  if  it  cannot  into  act  proceed,

The  fault  and  bitter  penance  of  the  fault

Make  red  some  others  eyes  with  penitence.

For  thine  are  cleare ;  and  what  more  nimble  spirits,.

Apter  to  byte  at  such  unhooked  baytes

Gaine  by  our  losse ;  that  must  we  needs  confesse

Thy  princely  valure  would  have  purchast  us.

Which  shall  be  fame  eternall  to  thy  name,

Though  thy  contentment  in  thy  grave  desires,

Of  our  advancement,  faile  deserv'd  effect.

O  how  I  feare  thy  glory  which  I  love.

Least  it  should  dearely  grow  by  our  decrease.

Natures  that  sticke  in  golden-graveld  springs.

In  mucke-pits  cannot  scape  their  swallowings.

But  we  shall  foorth  I  know; Golde  is  our  Fate,
Which  all  our  actes  doth  fashion  and  create.

Then  in  the  Thespiads  bright  Propheticke  Fount,,
Me  thinkes  I  see  our  Liege  rise  from  her  throne.
Her  eares  and  thoughts  in  steepe  amaze  erected,
At  the  most  rare  endevour  of  her  power.
And  now  she  blesseth  with  her  woonted  Graces
Th'industrious  Knight,  the  soule  of  this  exploit.
Dismissing  him  to  convoy  of  his  starres.
And  now  for  love  and  honour  of  his  woorth,
Our  twise-borne  Nobles  bring  him  Bridegroome-like,
That  is  espousde  for  vertue  to  his  love
With  feasts  and  musicke,  ravishing  the  aire,
To  his  Argolian  Fleet,  where  round  about

450

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.
His  bating  Colours  English  valure  swarmes
In  haste,  as  if  Guianian  Orenoque
With  his  Fell  waters  fell  upon  our  shore.
And  now  a  wind  as  forward  as  their  spirits,
Sets  their  glad  feet  on  smooth  Guianas  breast,
Where  (as  if  ech  man  were  an  Orpheus)
A  world  of  Savages  fall  tame  before  them.
Storing  their  theft-free  treasuries  with  golde,
And  there  doth  plentie  crowne  their  wealthie  fields.
There  Learning  eates  no  more  his  thriftlesse  bookes,
Nor  Valure  Estridge-like  his  yron  armes.
There  Beautie  is  no  strumpet  for  her  wants.
Nor  Gallique  humours  putrifie  her  blood :
But  all  our  Youth  take  Hymens  lights  in  hand,
And  fill  eche  roofe  with  honor'd  progenie.
There  makes  Societie  Adamantine  chaines.
And  joyns their hearts  with  wealth,  whom  wealth  dis-

join'd.
There  healthfuU  Recreations  strow  their  meades,
And  make  their  mansions  daunce  with  neighbourhood.
That  here  were  drown'd  in  churlish Avarice.
And  there  do  Pallaces  and  temples  rise  [III.  672.]

Out  of  the  earth,  and  kisse  th'enamored  skies.
Where  new  Britannia  humblie  kneeles  to  heaven,
The  world  to  her,  and,  both  at  her  blest  feet,
In  whom  the  circles  of  all  Empire  meete.

G.  C.

Ad  Thomam  Hariotum  Matheseos,  &  universas
Philosophias  peritissimum,  de  Guiana  Carmen.
Dat.  Anno. 1595.

MOntibus  est  Regio,  quasi  muris,  obsita,  multis :
Circumsepit  aquis  quos  Raleana  suis.
Intus  habet  largos  Guiana  recessus :
Hostili  gestans  libera  coUa  jugo.
Hispanus  clivis  illis  sudavit,  &  alsit

Septem  annos,  novies : nee  tamen  invaluit.

451

A.D.

1596.

They  fall
with  the
Canary  Isles.

Cape  Verde.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Numen,  &  omen  inest  numeris. Fatale  sit  illi :

Et  nobis  virtus  sit  recidiva,  precor.
Gualtero  patefacta  via  est  duce  &  auspice  Ralegh

Mense  uno: 6  factum  hoc  nomine  quo  celebrem?
Nocte  dieque ;  datis  velis,  remisque  laborans,

Exegit  summae  dexteritatis  opus.
Scilicet  expensis  magnis  non  ille  pepercit,

Communi  natus  consuluisse  bono.
Providus  excubuit  simili  discrimine  Joseph :

Sic  fratres,  fratrem  deseruere  suum :
Fama  coloratam  designet  sibona,  vestem :

Vestis  Scissa  malis  sic  fuit  ilia  modis.
Mira  leges. Auresque  animumque  tuum  arrige. Tellus

Haec  aurum,  &  gemmas  graminis  instar,  habet.
Ver  ibi  perpetuum  est : ibi  prodiga  terra  quotannis

Luxuriat,  sola  fertilitate  nocens.
Anglia  nostra  licet  dives  sit,  &  undique  foelix :

Anglia,  si  confers,  indigna  frugis  erit.
Expertes  capitum,  volucres  piscesque  ferasque;

Praetereo :  baud  prosunt,  quae  novitate,  placent.
Est  ibi,  vel  nusquam,  quod quasrimus. Ergo  petamus  :

Det  Deus,  banc  Canaan  possideamus. Amen.

Tui  Amantiss. L.  K.

The  second  voyage  to  Guiana.

Unday  the  26.  of  January,  in  the  yeere
of  our  Lord  1596.  we  departed  from
Portland  road,  in  the  Darling  of  London,
having  in  company  the  Discoverer,  a  small
pinnesse,  whom  we  lost  at  sea,  in  foule
weather,  the  Thursday  next  following.
Friday,  the  13.  of  February,  wee  fell  with
the  Canarie  Islands,  where  we  expected  our  pinnesse,
according  to  our  appoyntment,  seven  or  eight  dayes.
Here  we  tooke  two  boats,  the  one  a  passenger,  we  bulged,
the  other  wee  towed  at  our  shippe  sterne,  steering  South-
southwest  for  the  Islands  of  Cape  Verde.  Therehence  we
set  saile  the  28.  of  Februarie,  keeping  a  Westsouthwest

452

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.
course.  In  this  passage  wee  found  very  smooth  seas,  faire
weather,  and  steddie  winds,  blowing  ordinarily  betweene
the  East  and  Northeast  poynts.  Neere  30.  leagues  from
these  Islands,  wee  came  into  a  growne  sea,  the  swollen
waters  making  a  strange  noise  &  hurtling  together,  as  if  it
might  be  two  strong  currents  encountring  ech  other.
The  12.  of  March  wee  sounded,  and  had  sandie  ground  in
47.  fathome.  At  midnight  in  twelve  fathom  wee  came  to
an  anker,  the  ground  sandie  oaze.  Sunday  the  14.  towards
night,  about  some  sixe  leagues  from  the  shore,  wee  descried
a  low  land  in  the  bottome  of  a  bay.  From  the  9.  of
March  untill  this  time,  we  kept  for  the  most  part  a  South-
southwest  course.  The  water  in  this  place  is  smooth,  but
muddie,  and  the  colour  red  or  tawny.  From  the  Wester-
most  of  the  Cape  Verde-Islands  unto  this  Bay  I  doe  [ill.  673.]
estimate  the  distance  to  be  neere  550.  leagues.  It  seemed
to  most  of  our  sea-men,  to  be  the  very  banke  of  a
shoald  upon  a  lee-shore :  the  rather  because  without
it,  in  the  cleane  greene  sea  wee  had  but  7.  fathome
depth :  but  after  by  proofe  finding  that  there  is
no  sudden  alteration  in  any  part  of  the  coast,  and
that  the  sea  is  smoothest  neere  the  land,  we  alwayes
at  night  sought  to  anker  in  three  or  foure  fathome.  And
doubtlesse  as  the  hand  of  God  is  woonderfuU  in  all
his  workes :  so  herein  his  mercifull  providence  is  most  A  notable
admirable,  that  upon  a  lee-shore  subject  unto  a  perpetuall  observation.
Easterly  gale,  neither  much  wind  can  endanger  shipping,
by  reason  that  the  foule  heavie  water  is  not  capable
of  vehement  motion,  and  the  soft  light  oaze,  if  they  touch,
cannot  bruise  them :  nor  is  there  any  jeopardie  in  beeing
wind-bound,  or  imbayed :  for  the  most  forcible  windes
make  the  greatest  flood-tides,  whereby  the  freshets  when
they  take  their  ordinarie  course  of  ebbe,  doe  grow  strong
and  swift,  setting  directly  oiF  to  sea  against  the  wind.  They  anker  in
Wee  by  turning  went  cleere  of  all  Bayes  :  howbeit  in  this  the  mouth  of
case,  as  also  in  the  rivers,  the  use  of  a  drove  sayle  seemeth  ■^_^^°'^^p

J J  I'll  T^L r: ^ 1  1 •  situate  in  one

a  good  and  readie  helpe. Ihe nrst  place  wherem  wee  ^  ^■^^j_

ankered,  was  in  the  mouth  of  Arrowari,  a  faire  and  great  utes.

453

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

river.  It  standeth  in  one  degree  and  fourtie  minutes :  for
we  fell  so  farre  to  the  Southwardes  by  your  lordships
direction.  The  barre  without  hath  at  the  least  three
fathome,  at  the  shoaldest  place,  when  it  is  lowe  ebbe.
The  depth  within  is  eight  and  tenne  fathome.  The  water
alwayes  brackish.  We  found  not  any  inhabitants  in  this
place  neere  the  sea  coast.  I  omit  here  to  recite  the  names
of  the  nations  that  are  borderers,  their  townes,  Captaines
and  commodities  that  their  countreyes  doe  yeelde,  as  also
the  soundings,  tydes,  and  how  the  coast  lyeth  &c.  think-
ing it  fittest  to  reduce  these  disjoyned  and  scattering
remembrances  to  one  place.  As  wee  passed  we  alwayes
kept  the  shore  within  viewe  and  stopped  the  floods,
still  ankering  at  night  in  three  or  foure  fathome.  When
we  came  to  the  North  headland  of  this  Bay  (which  wee
named  Cape  Cecyl)  we  sawe  two  high  mountaines  like
two  islands,  but  they  joyne  with  the  mayne.  In  this  tract
lying  Northnorthwest  neere  60.  leagues,  there  fall  into  the
sea  these  severall  great  rivers,  Arrowari,  Iwaripoco,
Maipari,  Coanawini,  Caipurogh.  Wee  ankered  in  two
fathome  not  farre  from  these  hilles,  and  filled  all  our
caske  with  fresh  water  by  the  shippe  side,  for  in  the
A  sea  of  fresh  sea  thirtie  miles  from  the  mouth  of  any  river  it  is  fresh
water.  ^.ndi  good. This second Bay extendeth it selfe above

thirtie  leagues  to  the  Westward,  and  containeth  within  it
these  rivers  Arcooa,  Wiapoco,  Wanari,  Caparwacka,  Cawo,
Caian,  Wia,  Macuria,  Cawroor,  Curassawini.  Here  leav-
ing the  ship  at  anker,  I  tooke  into  the  boate  John  Provost,
my  Indian  Interpreter,  John  Linsey,  and  eight  or  nine
others,  intending  to  search  some  of  these  rivers,  and  to
seeke  speech  with  the  Indians.  In  Wiapoco,  at  the  foote
of  the  Eastermost  mountaine,  where  the  river  falleth  into
the  sea,  wee  found  twentie  or  thirtie  houses,  but  not
inhabited.  Wee  stayed  there  but  one  night.  Wanari
we  overpassed,  because  the  entrance  is  rockie  and  not
deepe.  In  Caperwacka  we  sailed  some  fourtie  miles,  but
could  see  no  Indian.  At  one  of  their  portes  under  the
side  of  a  hill,  wee  tooke  in  so  much  Brasill  wood  as  our

454

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

boate  could  carrie.  Amongst  other  trees  we  cut  downe
one  for  an  example,  which  I  do  verily  beleeve  to  be  the
same  sort  of  sinamon,  which  is  found  in  the  streights
of  Magellan.  From  Caperwacka  wee  passed  to  Cawo,
and  there  rtlet  with  a  Canoa,  wherein  were  two  Indians.
It  was  long  time  before  wee  could  procure  them  to  come
neere  us,  for  they  doubted  least  wee  were  Spanish.
When  my  interpreter  had  perswaded  them  the  contrarie,
and  that  wee  came  from  England,  they  without  farther
speech  or  delay,  brought  us  to  Wareo  their  Captaine,  who
entertained  us  most  friendly,  and  then  at  large  declared
unto  us,  that  hee  was  lately  chased  by  the  Spaniards
from  Moruga,  one  of  the  neighbour  rivers  to  Raleana,
or  Orenoque :  and  that  having  burnt  his  owne  houses,
and  destroyed  his  fruites  and  gardens,  hee  had  left  his
countrey  and  townes  to  bee  possessed  by  the  Arwaccas
who  are  a  vagabound  nation  of  Indians,  which  finding
no  certaine  place  of  abode  of  their  owne,  doe  for  the  most
part  serve  and  follow  the  Spanyards.  Hee  shewed  me  that
he  was  of  the  nation  of  the  laos,  who  are  a  mightie  people.  The  Im  a
and  of  a  late  time  were  Lords  of  all  the  sea  coast  so  farre  "^k^^'^^  ^^^^°"-
as  Trinidad,  which  they  likewise  possessed.  Howbeit,
that  with  a  generall  consent,  when  the  Spanyards  first
began  to  borrow  some  of  their  wives,  they  all  agreed
to  change  their  habitation,  and  doe  now  live  united  for
the  most  part  towards  the  river  of  Amazones.  But  the
especiall  cause  of  his  present  remoove  was,  because  two
or  three  yeeres  past,  twentie  Spaniards  came  to  his  towne,
and  sought  to  take  his  best  wife  from  him :  but  before
they  carried  her  away,  hee  at  time  and  place  of  advantage
killed  halfe  of  them :  the  rest  fledde,  most  of  them
sore  hurt.  Now  in  this  case  hee  thought  it  best  to  dwell
farre  ynough  from  them.  Your  Indian  pilot  Ferdinando,  Ferdinando
who  conducted  you  by  Amana,  and  now  abideth  neere  the  *^f,  Indian
head  of  Dessekebe,  is  one  of  this  mans  subjects :  By  j^alter
whom  (as  it  may  seeme)  hee  hath  taken  good  notice  Ralegh.
of  our  princesse  and  countrey.  For  hee  descended  more  [III.  674.
particularly  to  inquire  what  forces  were  come  with  us,

455

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

assuring  me  of  the  Spaniards  beeing  in  Trinidad,  and  that
the  Indians  our  friendes  betwixt  hope  and  feare,  have
earnestly  expected  our  returne  from  England  these  foure
or  five  moneths.  When  I  had  answered  him,  that  at  our
departure  we  left  no  Spaniards  alive  to  annoy  them  ;  that
we  now  came  only  to  discover,  and  trade  *with  them  ;  and
that  if  her  Majestie  should  have  sent  a  power  of  men,
where  no  enemie  was  to  resist,  the  Indians  might  perhaps
imagine,  that  wee  came  rather  to  invade,  then  to  defend
them :  He  replied,  that  this  course  very  wel  sorted
with  the  report  which  they  had  heard  of  our  Princesse
justice,  rare  graces,  and  vertues:  the  fame  of  whose  power
in  beeing  able  to  vanquish  the  Spaniards,  and  singular
goodnesse  in  undertaking  to  succour  and  defend  the
afflicted  Indians,  was  now  so  generall,  that  the  nations
farre  and  neere  were  all  agreed  to  joyne  with  us,  and  by
all  meanes  possible  to  assist  us  in  expelling  and  rooting
out  the  Spaniards  from  all  parts  of  the  land :  and  that  we
were  deceived,  if  wee  thought  this  countrey  not  large
ynough  to  receive  us,  without  molestation  or  intrusion
upon  the  Indians,  who  wanted  not  choise  of  dwelling-
places,  if  they  forsooke  one  to  live  in  another :  but  stoode
in  neede  of  our  presence  at  all  times  to  ayde  them,  and
maintaine  their  libertie,  which  to  them  is  deerer  then
land  or  living.  He  then  farther  desired,  that  he  with  his
people  might  have  our  favour  against  the  Arwaccas,  who
not  being  content  to  enjoy  their  groundes  and  houses,  had
taken  from  them  many  of  their  wives  and  children,
the  best  of  whose  fortune  was,  if  they  lived,  to  live  in
perpetuall  slaverie  under  the  Spaniards.  Wee  put  him  in
good  hope  and  comfort  thereof.  And  hee  to  deserve  some
part  of  this  friendship,  commended  unto  us  an  elderly
man  to  be  our  Pilote  in  bringing  us  to  Raleana.  When
we  were  ready  to  depart,  he  demanded  whether  we
Brasil-wood.  wanted  any  Urapo,  which  is  the  wood,  that  is  usually
carried  from  these  parts  to  Trinidad  in  Canoas,  and  is
there  sold  to  the  French  for  trade  :  he  offered,  if  we  would
bring  our  ship  neere  his  port,  to  put  in  her  lading  thereof,

456

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.

But because  most  of  our caske was not yron-bound,

and  in  making  stowage-way  to  remoove  it,  would  have

bene  the  losse  of  our  Sider  and  other  drinke  ;  I  therefore

referred  the  taking  of  any  quantity  to  fitter  opportunitie  :

thinking  it  sufficient  at  this  time,  to  have  only  my  boats

lading thereof:  which  afterwards  in  extremitie  of  foule

weather, before we could get aboord our ship, wee

were  inforced  in  a  darke  night  to heave  all  overboord  :

thinking our selves happy, to have recovered thither

at seven dayes ende, with safetie of  life onely. All

which time wee could no where set foote on shore,

but  rested  day  and  night  wet  and  weatherbeaten  in  our

covertlesse boate,  which  was  sometimes  ready to sinke

under  us. For  wee  had  in  this  place  without  comparison

more  raine,  wind,  and  gustes,  then  else where at any

time. To  bee  briefe,  my  men  became  weake  and  sicke,

and if  wee had stayed any  longer  time out, I  doubt

whether the  greatest  part  of  us  had  ever  come  aboord

againe. I afterwards  understood by my Indian pilot,

that  this  weather is for  most  part  of  the  yeere  usuall,

neere  the  Island  Oncaiarie,  which  lyeth  North  from  the  Unseasonable

river Capurwacka  some  sixe  leagues  into  the  sea  : and  ^^^^^^J"  ^^°^^

that  they  hold  opinion  how  this Hand  is  kept  by  some  Oncalane

evil spirit : for they verily beleeve,  that to sleepe in

the  day  time  neere  it (except  it  be  after  much  drinke)

is  present death. The  only  season  wherein  little raine

doth fal there,  is  (as I gathered  by their  speech, they

dividing al times by their Moones) at our Winter

Solstice. The  mother-wind  of  this  coast  is  for  the  most

part  to  the Northward of  the East, except when the

Sunne  is  on  this  side  of  the  Equinoctiall,  for  then  it  often

veares  Southerly,  but  most  in  the  night. This  our  guid

is  of  the  laos,  who  doe  al  marke  themselves,  thereby  to  How  the

bee  knowen from  other  nations  after  this  maner. With  "^^^"^  °f^^^

the  tooth  of  a  small  beast  like  a  Rat,  thev  race  some  their  !!°^  "^f  \
r  I'll-  r  T  r  -r  - themscLves  to

races, some their bodies, after divers formes, as if  it  be  knowen

were  with  the  scratch  of  a  pin,  the  print  of  which  rasure  from  other

can never bee done away againe during life. When  P^^P^^-

457

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1596.

he  had  sometime  conversed  with  our  Indians,  that  went
from  England  with  us,  hee  became  willing  to  see  our
countrey.  His  sufficiencie,  trustinesse,  and  knowledge
is  such,  that  if  the  pretended  voyage  for  Guiana  doe  take
place,  you  shall  (I  doubt  not)  find  him  many  wayes  able
to  steed  your  Lordship  in  your  designes  and  purposes.
For  besides  his  precise  knowledge  of  all  the  coast,  and
of  the  Indian  townes  and  dwellings,  he  speaketh  all  their
languages,  was  bred  in  Guiana,  is  a  sworne  brother  to
Putima,  who  slewe  the  Spaniards  in  their  returne  from
Manoa,  can  direct  us  to  many  golde  mines,  and  in  nothing
will  undertake  more,  then  hee  assuredly  will  performe.
To  the  Westward  this  Bay  hath  many  good  roads  under
small  Islands,  whereof  the  greatest  named  Gowateri,  is
inhabited  by  the  Shebaios  :  and  besides  the  plenty  of
foule,  fish,  fruits,  wilde  porks  and  deere,  which  are  there
to  be  had,  where  Caiane  falles  into  the  sea,  (for  it  standeth
in  the  mouthes  of  Wia  and  Caiane)  it  yeeldes  safe  and
good  harbour  in  foure  and  five  fathome  for  ships  of  great
burthen.  On  all  that  coast  we  found  not  any  like  it  :
Port  Howard  wee  therefore  honoured  this  place  by  the  name  of  Port
J^^^^  Howard.  The  road  under  Triangle  Islands,  which  are
Gowateri  '^^  Westermost  from  the  rest  and  stand  in  five  degrees,
[III.  675.]  which  have  also  store  of  fish,  foule,  deere  and  Iwanas,
is  good,  but  not  comparable  with  this  other,  where  in
all  windes  and  weather,  shippes,  though  they  be
many,  may  all  ride  securely.  The  hils  and  high  lands
are  limits  to  this  bay  on  ech  side  :  for  to  the  Eastward
beyond  it  appeare  none  at  all,  and  to  the  Westward  of
mount  Hobbeigh  very  few.  Where  the  mountaines
faile,  there  Brasill  wood  is  no  farther  to  bee  sought  for  :
but  in  all  parts  cotton,  pepper,  silke  and  Balsamum  trees
doe  grow  in  abundance.  The  rootes  of  the  herbe  Wia-
passa  are  here  most  plentifull  :  I  finde  them  in  taste
nothing  different  from  good  ginger,  and  in  operation
very  medicinable  against  the  flixe  and  headach.  These
rivers,  as  also  others  neerer  Raleana,  doe  all  fall  out
of  the plaines of  this empire over rocks, as the  river

458

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.
Caroli  doeth  into Raleana  : and  in most places  within
the  utmost  hedge of  woods,  the  land  within  is  plaine,
voyd  of  trees,  and  beareth  short  grasse  like  Arromaiaries
countrey.

Next  adjoyning  unto  these,  are  the  rivers  Cunanamma,
Uracco,  Mawara,  Mawarparo,  Amonna,  Marawini,  Oncowi,
Wiawiami,  Aramatappo,  Camaiwini,  Shurinama,  Shurama,
Cupanamma,  Inana,  Guritini,  Winitwara,  Berbice,  Wapari,
Maicaiwini,  Mahawaica,  Wappari,  Lemdrare,  Dessekebe,
Caopui,  Pawrooma,  Moruga,  Waini,  Barima,  Amacur,
Aratoori,  Raleana.  From  Cape  Cecyl  to  Raleana,  the  From  Cape
coast  trendeth  two  hundred  leagues  next  hand  West-  ^^y^  ^°
northwest.  In  this  varietie  of  goodly  rivers,  Amonna  i^^^^^g^
among  the  rest  powreth  himselfe  into  the  sea  in  a  large
and  deepe  chanell :  his  swiftnesse  sufFereth  no  barre,  nor
refuseth  any  shipping  of  what  burthen  soever  they  be  :
within  his  mouth  for  good  and  hopefuU  respectes  is  port
Burley  placed.  The  inhabitants  that  dwell  Eastward,  doe
never  passe  lower  then  Berbice  to  trade.  Above  Curitini
in  the  woods  they  gather  great  quantities  of  hony.
Farther  to  the  Eastward  then  Dessekebe,  no  Spaniard
ever  travelled.  In  which  respect,  and  that  no  sea-card
that  I  have  scene  at  any  time,  doth  in  any  sort  neere
a  trueth,  describe  this  coast  :  I  thought  the  libertie  of
imposing  English  names  to  certaine  places  of  note,  of
right  to  belong  unto  our  labours  ;  the  rather  because
occasion  thereby  ofFereth  it  selfe  gratefully  to  acknow-
ledge the  honour  due  unto  them  that  have  beene,  and
I  hope  will  still  continue  favourers  of  this  enterprize.
The  Indians  to  shew  the  worthinesse  of  Dessekebe  (for  Dessekebe
it  is very  large  and full of  Islands  in  the  mouth)  doe  '^^^^^^  "^^^

call  it  the  brother  of  Orenoque. It  lyeth  Southerly  into  ^"^^^^^Z
1 1 J  1 r  1  ^ r '  111 Orenoque.

the land, and rrom the mouth or  it  unto  the  head,

they  passe  in  twentie  dayes  :  then  taking  their  provision
they  Carrie  it  on  their  shoulders  one  dayes  journey ;  after-
wards they  returne  for  their  Canoas,  and  beare  them
likewise  to  the  side  of  a  lake,  which  the  laos  call
Roponowini, the Charibes, Parime  : which is of  such

459

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1596.

bignesse, that they know no  difference  betweene  it  &
The  great t^g  maine  sea. There be infinite numbers of  Canoas

^ManoTor\l  ^"  ^^^  ^^^^'  ^"^  ^^  ^  suppose)  it  is  no  other  then  that.

Dorado  whereon  Manoa  standeth  : In  this  river,  which  we  now

standeth.  Call Devoritia,  the Spaniards  doe  intend  to  build them

a  towne. In  Moruga  it  was,  that  they  hunted  Wareo  and

In  September,  his  people,  about  halfe  a  yere  since. Arromaiarie,  who

wan so great credit by overthrowing  the Tivitivas of

Amana,  and  making  free  the  passage  of  that  river  (but

now  againe  liveth  in  disgrace,  by  reason  that  the  Charibes

of  Guanipa  have  killed  most  of  his  followers,  and  burnt

his  townes)  was  present  with  them,  and  tooke  away  many

of  the  women  of  that  place. Arracurri,  another  Indian

of  the  nation  of  the  Arwaccas  inhabiting  in  Barima,  was

likewise present, and conducted the Spaniards  to all

the  Indian  dwellings. They  were  not  of  Anthonie de

Berreo  his  companie,  that  followed  this  chase,  but  were

the  Spaniards  of  Margarita,  and  the  Caraccas,  with  whom

This  Spaniard  *  Santiago forsaking  his  governour Berreo  joyned  him-

undentandeth g^jf^^ p^^.  ^j^j^j^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  1  ^^j^  -^^  {^.tt^rs  at  Trini-

the  (juianian , .  ,  .  •' _  . , — ,,

language  and  '^^^^  every  day  expectmg  sentence  or  death. 1  he  occasion

is  reputed  a hereof  grew  as  followeth.

very  sufficient When Berreo, having lost his men, was left with
man.  Fasshardo  at Cumana  all alone,  as forlorne, and  never

likely  to  compasse  his  intended  conquest  of  Guiana :
the  governors  of  the  Caraccas  and  Margarita  consulting
together,  sent  with  all  speede  into  Spaine,  to  advertise
their  king,  that  Berreo  was  utterly  unable  to  folow  this
enterprise,  that  he  had  given  it  over,  and  did  now  sojorne
in  his  old  dayes  at  Fasshardo  his  house,  minding  nothing
else  but  his  solace,  and  recreation.  They  farther  declared,
of  how  great  importance  this  matter  was  :  and  that  an
English  gentleman  of  such  reckoning,  as  they  named
your  lordship  to  be,  having  bene  in  Guiana,  and  under-
standing so  much  of  the  state  thereof,  and  the  nations
thereunto  adjoyning,  as  Topiawarie,  being  both  olde  and
wise,  could  informe  you  of,  who  also  in  confirmation
of  friendship,  had  given  you  his  onely  sonne,  to  whome

460

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.
the  inheritance  of  the  countrey  did  belong  after  him  :
there  was  no  other  likelihood,  but  that  you,  who  ad-
ventured so  farre,  and  in  such  sort  as  you  did,  onely
to  see,  and  knowe  a  certainty,  would  leave  nothing
unattempted  to  possesse  so  rich  a  countrey,  and  without
all  doubt  would  returne  presently.  That  meane  time,  you
had  left  this  aged  Sire  alive,  to  bee  a  blocke  in  their
way,  to  whom  after  his  decease,  this  enterprise  by  patent
did  belong,  and  to  bee  a  weake  adversarie  against  your  [III.  676.]
selfe,  whom  at  all  times  you  knew  easily  how  to  distresse :
and  that  therefore  it  might  be  behoovefuU  for  his  majestie
to  revoke  Berreo  his  grant,  and  to  use  their  service,  who
were  readie  and  willing  without  any  delay  to  undertake  the
charge.  These  newes  being  at  large  amplified  and  de-
livered to  the  king  :  Domingo  de  Vera,  Berreo  his  Camp-
master,  who  was  sent  into  Spaine,  five  moneths  before
your  arrivall  at  Trinidad,  with  a  sufficient  quantitie  of
gold  gotten  out  of  Guiana,  to  levie  and  furnish  500.  men,
having  gotten  knowledge  of  this  practise,  so  solicited  this
cause  in  Berreo  his  behalfe,  that  present  order  was  given
for  the  victualling  and  manning  of  tenne  ships  to  be  sent
to  Berreo  :  and  farther,  this  gold  bore  such  waight,  that
the  king  commanded  other  18.  of  his  ships  to  stop  at
Trinidad,  and  not  to  follow  their  other  directions,  before
they  saw  that  place  secured  from  enemies.

Berreo  supposing  that  these  governours  in  sending
with  such  speede  into  Spaine,  meant  him  no  good ;  to
approove  his  care  and  constancie,  and  that  he  never
would  yeelde  under  the  burthen  of  his  adverse  fortune ;
giving  no  time  or  breath  to  his  adversaries  nor  himselfe :
returned  foorthwith  to  Carapana  his  port,  onely  with
fifteene  men,  being  the  scattered  remnant  of  those  whom
you  lately  dispossessed  of  Trinidad.  These  governours
followed  him,  and  assuring  themselves  of  present  imploy-
ment  from  their  king,  preoccupating  the  time  of  their
directions  to  bee  returned  from  Spaine,  entered  Guiana
with  their  men,  with  full  determination  to  murther
Berreo,  and to  dispatch  all  his  company. They  indeed

461

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

killed  two  or  three,  but  Berreo  fledde  towards  Caroli,
where  hee  stayed  hoping  for  succour  from  his  sonne
Antonie  de  Ximenes,  to  come  downe  the  river  from
Nuevo  Reyno  de  Granada.  The  Margaritanes  with  their
accomplices  busied  themselves,  some  in  searching  the
countrey,  others  in  purveying  of  victuals  out  of  the
rivers  that  doe  lie  Eastward,  of  which  number  these
were,  that  entred  into  Moruga  with  twentie  Canoas.
Santiago  passed  up  into  Topiawaries  countrey,  and  there
Francis  tooke Francis Sparrowe sir George Gifford his man

Sparrow  taken  prisoner,  who  with  plentie  of  gold  ransomed  his  life,
and  is  now  abiding  in  Cumana.  This  done,  they  all
returned  to  Trinidad,  and  beganne  to  builde  their  towne
there,  when  unhappily  to  their  small  comfort  the  eight
and  twentie  sayles  arrived,  and  tooke  Santiago  prisoner.
The  other  Actors  in  this  Enterlude  vanished,  and  in
Canoas  recovered  Margarita  and  Cumana  againe.  Eigh-
teene  of  the  said  ships  leaving  all  things  in  good  order,
departed  from  Trinidad  to  follow  their  others  directions :
ten  doe  yet  remaine  fortifying  at  Conquerabia,  and
expecting  our  comming.

This  particular  relation  I  had  from  an  Indian,  servant
to  Berreo,  that  could  speake  Spanish,  whom  I  tooke
in  the  river.  He  is  of  the  nation  of  the  laos,  and
from  a  child  bred  up  with  Berreo.  I  gave  him
trade  to  buy  him  a  Canoa  to  returne  into  his  countrey,
and  so  left  him  glad,  that  hee  had  met  with  us.

Now  the  Indians  of  Moruga  being  chased  from  their
dwellings,  doe  seeke  by  all  meanes  possible  to  accord
all  the  nations  in  one,  so  to  invade  the  Arwaccas  who
were  guides  to  the  Spaniards,  in  shewing  their  townes,
and  betraying  them.  For  they  are  fully  perswaded,  that
by  driving  these  Arwaccas,  who  serve  the  Spaniards  (for  a
great  part  of  this  nation  doth  also  hate,  or  not  know
them)  out  of  their  territories,  and  Trinidad,  the  Spaniards
for  want  of  bread,  will  bee  inforced  to  seeke  habitation
farther  off,  or  at  the  least  in  time  consume  and  be
wasted.

462

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.
The  6.  day  of  Aprill  we  came  to  an  anker  within  the They^  anker
mouth  of  the  river Raleana, having spent twentie  and  '^^^^^
three  dayes  in  discoverie  upon  this coast. The  chanell  Qremque
of  this  river  hath  sixe  or  seven  fathome  depth,  nine  or  ten
miles  off  at  sea,  the  barre  lyeth  farther  out,  and  at  low
water  hath  not  full  two  fathome. It  highes  not above
five  foote, except  at  a  spring tyde. Wee  ankered in
ten fathome the first night : the next  morning twelve
Canoas  came  unto  us,  furnished  and  provided  of  victuals
after  their  maner  for  the  warres. Their  Captaines  names
were  Anwara,  and  Aparwa. These  Cassiques,  when  the
Spaniards  made  the  last  inrode  in  those  parts,  were  in  the
inland amongst the Iwarawakeri their neighbours, by
which  occasion  having  lost  some  of  their  wives  (for  not-  Spanish
withstanding  their  profession  of  Christianitie,  some  of  these  ^'^K^^^^^^-
Spaniards  keepe  Xqw  or  twelve  women,  thinking them-
selves wel and surely  blessed, howsoever they  live,  if
their  towne  and  houses  be  religiously  crossed)  they  kept
together  30.  Canoas,  hoping  at  our  comming,  which  they
had  now  long  expected  to  recover  this  losse  upon  them  and
the  Arwaccas,  who  in  their  absence  had  done  this  wrong.
They shewed me  this  their  purpose,  &  required to  be
joyned  in  league  of  frindship  with  us  against  our  enemies.
When of  them I  had  learned so much  of  the present
estate  of  the  countrey,  as  they  did  know :  they  demanded
whether  we  had brought no  more  forces  with us,  but
onely  one  ship  1 I  answered  them  as  before  I  did the
others,  that  wee  now  came  only  to  trade,  not  knowing
until  this  present  that  any  Spaniards  were  in  Guiana ;  that
upon  our  return e  our  whole  fleete  will  hasten  to  set  for-
wardes,  and  that  in  the  meane  time,  wee  would  now  visite  [III.  d-]-]^
our friendes,  and  helpe them  so  farre as  wee  could  in
any  thing  that  wee  should  finde  needefull  presently  to  bee
done. After  long  discourse  (for  their  chiefe  man  stayed
with  mee  all  night)  when  hee  had  caused  mee  to  spit  in
my  right  hand,  with  many  other  ceremonies  which  they
use  in  confirming  friendshippe,  hee  went  to  the  shoare,
and  one  of  his  Canoas  hee  sent  to  bring  forwardes  the

463

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

other  twentie :  one  other  hee  caused  to  goe  up  the  river
before  us,  to  bring  intelligence. Then  calling  together
the  chiefe  of  his  companie,  they  made  small  fyers,  and
sitting in their Hamacas, or Indian beddes, each one
sorted  himselfe  with  his  companion,  recounting  amongst
themselves the worthiest deedes, and deaths of  their
Ancestours, execrating their enemies most despitefully,
and  magnifying  their  friendes  with  all  titles  of  prayses  and
honour,  that  may  bee  devised. Thus  they  sitte  talking,
and  taking Tabacco  some two houres,  and untill their
pipes  bee  all  spent  (for  by  them  they  measure  the  time  of
this  their  solemne  conference)  no  man  must  interrupt,  or
disturbe  them  in  any  sort :  for  this  is  their  religion,  and
prayers,  which  they  now  celebrated,  keeping  a  precise  fast
Her  Majestic,  one  whole  day,  in  honour  of  the  great  Princes  of  the
North,  their Patronesse and defender. Their Canoas
being made ready, they  accompanyed us, and in their
way shewed us, where the shoaldes  of  the  river doe
Muchikenthe  lye. By  this  Captaine  I  learned  that  Muchikeri is  the
-name  of  the name of  the Countrey where Macureguerai the first
zvh^re  Macu-  ^owne of  the Empire of  Guiana, that lyeth towardes
rigueray  the Raleana,  is  seated  in  a  fayre  and  exceeding  large  plaine,
Jnt  tozvne  of  belowe the high mountaines, that beare Northwesterly
Ginana  is from  it,  that  it  is  but  three  dayes  journey  distant  from
situate.  Carapana his Porte,  and  that  Manoa  is but sixe  dayes

farther.  That  they  themselves  doe  passe  in  three  dayes
into  the  Countrey  of  the  Iwarewakeri  by  the  River
Amacur,  which  though  it  bee  not  the  directest,  yet  it
is  the  readiest  way  to  Macureguarai,  for  that  which
leadeth  to  Carapana  his  dwelling,  is  in  some  places
difficult,  and  mountainous.  That  a  nation  of  clothed
people,  called  Cassanari,  doe  dwell  not  farre  from  the
place,  where  the  River  doeth  first  take  the  name  of
Orenoque,  and  that  farre  within,  they  border  upon  a  Sea
Parime  an  of  salt  water,  named  Parime.  That  a  great  River,  called
Inland  sea  of  Macurwini,  passeth  through  their  Countrey  into  Ore-
noque. That  Manoa  standeth  twentie  dayes  journey
from  the  mouth  Wiapoco :  sixeteene  dayes  from  Barima,

464

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

thirteene dayes from Amacur, and tenne dayes from

Aratoori. That  the  best  way  unto  it,  is  not  by  Macure-

guerai. That  of  all  others  the  Charibes  that  dwell  high

up  in  Orenoque,  knowe  most  the  inlande,  and  of  those

nations, and they speake no  other  language,  then  such

as John your  Interpreter  doeth  well  understand. Hee

certified  mee  of  the  headlesse  men,  and  that  their  mouthes

in  their  breastes  are  exceeding  wide. The  name  of  their

nation  in the  Charibes  language  is  Chiparemai,  and  the

Guianians  call  them  Ewiapanomos. What  I  have  heard They  have

of  a  sorte  of  people  more  monstrous,  I  omit  to  mention,  ^/"^'^^f  ^  ^^^^-^
,  . . ^ ^  -,.-,,.'  f. ,  like  aos;s,  and

because  it  is  no  matter  or  dimcultie  to  get  one  or  them,  n^g  all  the  da-^

and  the  report  otherwise  will  appeare  fabulous. Lastly  time  in  the
hee tolde mee of  an inland River, named Cawrooma,  sea,they speake
adjoyning to Aratoori, and that the Quepyn moun-  ^j^  Chanbes
taines, where Carapana dwelleth, are hardly  accessible.
That  the  Amapagotos  have  images  of  gold  of  incredible
bignesse, and great store of  unmanned horses of  the
Caracas breed : and they dwell five dayes  journey up
the  River  about  Caroli. Wee  with  our  fleete  of  Canoas
were  now  not  farre  from  Carapanas  Port,  when  our  intel-
ligencer returned and informed us that tenne Spani-
ardes were lately gone with much trade to Barima,
where these  Indians dwelt, to buy Cassavi bread ;  and
that within one day two other Canoas of  Spaniards
were  appointed  to  come  by  the  River  Amana,  to  Cara-
pana his  Port.

Upon  this  occasion  they  tooke  counsell,  arid  in  the
ende  desired  to  returne  to  their  houses,  least  the  Spani-
ardes  finding  them  from  home,  and  imagining  that  they
did  purposely  absent  themselves,  shoulde  take  away  their
wives  and  spoyle  their  dwellings.  They  farther  resolved
if  it  were  possible  to  cut  them  off:  which  afterwardes
they  did  perfourme.  For  when  they  were  dispersed
in  their  houses  seeking  Cassavi,  suddenly  at  one  time,  ^  sudden
in  all  places  they  were  assaulted,  and  not  one  of  them  '^I[^  .  ^ ,  f

I  11 J  -I-  1-1  opaniards  by

escaped. Carapana,  whose  hand  was  in  laying  this  plot,  ^/^g  Indians.
sent  us this newes,  as  wee returned downe  the  River.

X  465  2G

AD.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1596.

The  two  other  Canoas  that  came  from  Trinidad  by
Amana,  notwithstanding  that  wee  kept  a  league  before
the  shippe  with  our  boates,  sawe  the  shippe  before
wee  had  sight  of  them,  and  presently  with  all  speede
went  to  Berreo  to  advertize  him  of  our  comming.
Hee  foorthwith  dispatched  two  or  three  messengers  to
Trinidad.  One  of  his  Canoas  mette  with  our  spie,
whome  the  Indians  of  Barima  had  left  to  goe  with  us :
they  rifled  him  of  his  victuals,  gave  him  knives,  and
dismissed  him.

In  eight  dayes  sayling  still  before  a  winde,  wee  arrived

at  Topiawaries  Porte,  in  all  which  time  no Indian that

wee knewe came abourd us. For the time of our

returne promised at  your Lordshippes departure from

thence  being expired ; they in dispaire severed them-

[III.  678.] selves  amongst  the  other  nations. Here  the  Spaniardes

A  Ranchena h^ve  seated their Rancheria  of  some twentie or thirtie

planted  h  the  t^o^ses. The high rockie Island, that lyeth in the

Spaniardes  at middest of  the River,  against the mouth of  Caroli,  is

a  Port  of their Forte or refuge, when they misdoubt  safetie in

Topiawary. their Towne, or having notice of  any practise against

them : but now leaving  both Towne and Island, they

joyned  themselves  altogether,  and  returning  to  the  mouth

of  River  Caroli,  placed  there  a  secret  ambush,  to  defend

the  passage  to  those  mines,  from  whence  your  Oare  and

white stones were taken the last  yeere : Wee all not

without  griefe to see ourselves thus defeated,  and our

hungry  hopes  made  voyde,  were  witnesses  of  this their

remoove. As  we  road  at  an  ancor  within  musket  shot

of their Towne, an Indian came unto us with lean

cheekes,  thinne haire,  and  a squint eye,  to informe us

that  they  were  very strong,  that Berreo his sonne was

with him,  that they had but two small Pinnisses at

Trinidad, which  they  dayly  looked  for  to  come  up the

River,  and lastly to viewe our shippe well,  and our

provision, but especially to learne whether Gualtero,

Topiawarie  his  sonne  were  with  us.

This informers very countenance gave him to bee

466

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

suspected,  and  therefore  partlie  by  threatning,  partlie  by-
promise  of  rewarde  wee  wonne  him  to  confesse  the
trueth.  Which  hee  did,  assuring  us  that  Berreo  had
not  full  fiftie  five  men  with  him,  whereof  twentie  came
lately  from  Trinidad,  twentie  from  Nuevo  Reyno,  and
the  rest  hee  brought  with  him  about  sixe  moneths
since,  when  hee  fledde  from  Carapana  his  Porte,  and
was  driven  with  his  small  companie  to  keepe  the  afore-
saide  Island  neere  Caroli.  And  that  though  nowe  his
number  is  thus  increased  yet  dareth  hee  not  adventure
at  any  time  to  leave  the  fast  woodes,  and  to  goe  but
halfe  a  league  from  his  holde  into  the  plaines.  That
some  fewe  of  the  Arwaccas  are  abiding  with  him.  That
hee  dayly  looketh  for  his  sonne  from  Nuevo  Reyno,
for  his  Campemaster  from  Trinidad,  and  for  horses
from  the  Caraccas.  That  Topiawarie  is  dead  :  the
Indians  of  that  coast  all  fledde,  and  dispersed,  except-
ing the  Sonne  of  one  Curmatoi,  and  another  woman  of
account,  whome  the  Spaniardes  holde  prisoners,  for  con-
senting to  the  death  of  their  nine  men,  and  the  holy
Fryer  in  Morekito  his  time.  This  Curmatoi  is  fledde  Topiawarie
towardes  Guanipa,  and  is  a  man  of  speciall  note  amongst  ^^^  ^°""^'
the  Indians.  That  Iwiakanarie  Gualtero  his  neere  kins-
man, hath  helde  the  Countrey  to  his  use,  by  his  fathers
appointment,  ever  since  your  being  in  the  River.  That
there  are  tenne  ships,  and  many  Spaniardes  at  Trinidad.
That  the  Indians  our  friendes  did  feare,  least  you  with
your  company  were  all  slaine,  and  your  shippes  sunke
at  Cumana  (for  so  the  Spaniardes  noysed  it  amongst  The  common
them,)  that  some  of  Gualtero  his  friendes  with  Putijma,  ^^^  °-f^^
were  in  the  mountaines  not  farre  from  the  hill  Aio.  ^
And  that  Berreo  had  sent  for  sixe  peeces  of  ordinance,
which  he  meant  to  plant,  where  they  might  best  com-
mand the  River.

When  wee  had  stayed  here  two  dayes,  considering
that  where  no  hope  was  left  of  doing  good,  to  abide
there  in  harmes  way  doing  nothing,  would  be  bootlesse :
I  resolved  to seeke  Putijma  in the mountaines : and

467

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

turning  downe  the  River  with  the  force  of  the  streame
some  twentie  miles  in  sixe  houres :  the  next  morning
with  ten  shot  I  went  ashoare,  intending  if  the  Indians
should  thinke  themselves  too  weake,  with  our  helpe  to
displant  the  Spaniardes :  to  set  some  of  them  on  worke,
for  hatchets  and  knives  to  returne  us  golde  graines,
and  white  stones  from  such  places,  as  they  should  be
directed  unto.  When  wee  came  to  the  place  of  their
usuall  abode  ;  wee  sawe  that  they  lately  had  bene  there,
but  could  speake  with  none  of  them.  It  may  be  that
feare  (which  is  easie  of  beliefe)  perswaded  them  that
we  were  Spaniards.  Gilbert  my  Pilot  here  offered  to
bring  us  either  to  the  myne  of  white  stones  neere
Winicapora,  or  else  to  a  gold  myne,  which  Putijma
had  shewed  him,  being  but  one  dayes  journey  over-
land, from  the  place  where  we  now  stayed  at  an  ancor.
I  sawe  farre  off  the  mountaine  adjoyning  to  this  gold
myne,  and  having  measured  their  pathes  neere  the  same
place  this  last  yeere,  could  not  judge  it  to  bee  fifteene
miles  from  us.  I  doe  well  remember  howe  comming
that  way  with  Putijma  the  yeere  before,  he  pointed  to
this  same  mountaine,  making  signes  to  have  me  goe
with  him  thither.  I  understood  his  signes  and  marked
the  place,  but  mistooke  his  meaning,  imagining  that  he
would  have  shewed  mee  the  overfall  of  the  River  Cur-
wara  from  the  mountaines.  My  Indian  shewed  me  in
what  sort  without  digging  they  gather  the  gold  in  the
sand  of  a  small  river,  named  Macawini,  that  springeth
and  falleth  from  the  rockes  where  this  myne  is.  And
farther  tolde  me,  that  hee  was  with  Putijma,  at  what
time  Morekito  was  to  be  executed  by  the  Spaniardes,
and  that  then  the  chiefe  of  Morekito  his  friends  were
in  consultation,  to  shewe  this  myne  unto  them  if  so
they  might  redeeme  their  Captaines  life,  but  upon  better
advise,  supposing  them  in  this  case  to  bee  implacable,
and  that  this  might  proove  a  meanes  to  loose  not  onely
their  king,  but  their  Countrey  also :  they  have  to  this
day concealed it from them,  being of all others  the

468

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

richest  and  most  plentiful!.  The  aged  sort  to  keepe
this  from  common  knowledge,  have  devised  a  fable  of
a  dangerous  Dragon  that  haunteth  this  place  and  de-  [HI.  679.]
voureth  all  that  come  neere  it.  But  our  Indian,  if
when  we  returne,  we  doe  bring  store  of  strong  wine
(which  they  love  beyond  measure)  with  it  will  under-
take so  to  charme  this  Dragon,  that  he  shall  doe  us  no
harme.

I,  that  for  this  ende  came  from  home,  and  in  this
journey  had  taken  much  more  paines  to  lesse  purpose,
would  very  gladly  from  this  mountaine  have  taken  so
good  a  proofe  to  witnes  my  being  in  the  Countrey :
but  withall  considering  that  not  one  Indian  of  our
knowne  friends  came  unto  us :  that  Don  Juan  the
cousin  of  Gualtero,  who  liveth  here  a  revolt  from  the
Spaniard,  was  now  in  election  to  bee  chiefe  commander
of  all  the  Indian  forces  in  these  partes,  cannot  in
poUicie,  for  Gualtero  his  sake,  whose  inheritance  hee
sought  to  usurpe,  bee  a  fast  friend  unto  us  :  that  the
Spaniardes  abiding  in  Winicapora  (for  there  were  tenne)
might  well  before  wee  could  doe  any  thing,  and  re-
turne, cause  some  others  of  Berreo  his  men  to  joyne
with  them,  in  the  way  to  intercept  us :  and  forethink-
ing  withall,  that  there  being  no  meanes  but  our  selves,
to  make  knowne  our  discoverie,  if  wee  returned  not ;
in  our  misfortune  the  hope  of  following  this  voyage
would  bee  buried :  but  besides  all  this,  and  the  respect
of  such  spyals,  as  the  Spaniardes  kept  to  observe  our
dooings,  foreknowing  that  if  the  enemie  should  by  our
lingring,  stop  our  passage,  which  in  one  or  two  places
of  advantage,  fewe  of  them  might  easilie  doe :  it  would
bee  a  question  howe  with  our  shippe  to  get  out  of  the
River,  except  first  wee  could  remoove  them  :  I  thought
it  best  (all  other  possibilities  set  apart)  to  seeke  in
time  to  bee  free  from  the  hazard  of  the  aforesaid  evill
passages.

Whilest wee were searching at the  shoare for the
Indians, my  Barge  tooke  a  Canoa,  with  three  men  in

469

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

her :  the  one  a  servant  to  Berreo,  (as  before  is  men-
tioned) the  other  two  marchants  of  Cassavi.  They  had
a  letter  sent  from  the  Governour  to  bee  conveied  to
Trinidad,  which  I  received.  There  was  also  a  great
hatchet,  and  twentie  knives,  wherewith  this  Indian
servant  should  buy  a  Canoa,  and  hire  Indians  to  cary
her  up  the  River  towardes  Nuevo  Reyno.  This  Canoa
forsooth  with  foure  other  were  to  bee  sent  to  bring
The  small  downe  Berreo  his  sonne  with  all  his  forces,  which  nowe
forces  of  )\2,YQ  bene,  I  thinke,  full three  yeeres  in  preparing. If

five  such  boates  bee  sufficient  to  convoy  him,  his  men
and  all  their  provision:  it  may  seeme,  hee  commeth
with  no  great  strength.

This  servant  as  hee  was  a  man  of  especiall  trust,  and
neere  Berreo :  so  appeared  hee  to  have  some  insight  in
This  trans-  ^^g  proceedings.  He  shewed  mee  that  the  Indians,  who
^iTdiansts  ^^^  these  knives  should  be  hired,  were  to  passe  up  so
worthy  of  con-  high,  as  where  some  of  the  Cassanari  doe  dwell  in
stderation.  small  villages.  That  Berreo  his  purpose  was,  when
they  came  thither  to  leave  them  there,  and  make  them
officers  over  the  other  Indians:  and  in  their  places
some  of  the  Cassanari  should  returne,  who  likewise
should  be  made  Justices  and  Constables  over  them  of
Guiana :  that  from  Trinidad  he  meant  to  remove  most
of  the  olde  inhabitants,  that  would  be  tractable  ;  and
interpose  them  amongst  the  Cassanarians  of  Guiana,
and  the  Guianians  of  the  Cassanari.  That  the  Arwaccas
should  wholly  possesse  Trinidad,  and  the  river  side  of
Raleana.  That  they  already  were  provided  of  three-
score Negros,  to  worke  the  mynes  in  these  places.  And
that  by  this  meanes  Berreo  hoped  to  keepe  these
severall  nations  in  mutual  enmitie  each  against  other,
all  to  serve  his  turne,  and  never  to  become  strong,  or
likely  to  joyne  themselves  against  him.  He  farther
shewed  me,  that  Topiawary,  soone  after  our  departure
from  the  river,  fledde  into  the  mountaines,  carying
Hugh  Godwyn  with  him,  and  leaving  a  Substitute  in
his  Countrey,  as  aforesaide : and  that  the  next  newes

470

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.
they  heard  of  him  was,  that  hee  was  dead,  and  the
English  boy  eaten  by  a  Tyger.  That  the  Spaniardes
beleeve  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  That  about  the
ende  of  June,  when  the  River  shall  bee  impassable,  the
tenne  shippes  shall  depart  from  Trinidad.  And  that
Berreo  ever  since  his  comming  to  Guiana,  hath  spent
his  time  altogether  in  purveying  of  victuals,  whereof
there  is  such  scarsitie,  by  reason  that  the  Indians  for-
saking their  houses,  have  not  this  halfe  yeere  planted
any  of  their  grounds,  so  that  the  Spaniards  are  inforced
to  seeke  their  bread  farre  off,  and  content  themselves
to  live  with  litle.

In  sayling  up  the  River,  wee  passed  by  Toparimacko  The  Port  of
his  Port,  which  in  one  place  is  very  shoalde,  the  chanell  1'op'^^i^^<^k°-
lying  close  aboord  the  shore.  Wee  returned  therefore
another  way  by  the  maine  river  on  the  South  side:
this  branch  wee  found  large,  deepe,  and  without
danger.  When  wee  were  come  neere  Carapana  his  The  porte  of
Port,  hee  sent  five  or  sixe  severall  Canoas,  promising  ^^^^P^"^'
this  day  and  the  next,  that  hee  would  come  and  speake
with  us.  Thus  wee  lingred  sixe  or  seven  dayes,  but
hee  came  not.  In  the  ende  hee  sent  one  of  his  aged
followers,  to  certifie  us,  that  hee  was  sicke,  olde,  and
weake :  that  the  wayes  neere  his  dwelling  are  not  easie :
and  that  therefore  he  desired  us  to  holde  him  excused
for  not  comming.  This  olde  man  dilated  unto  us,
that  Carapana  in  hope  of  our  returne,  hath  ever  since
your  Lordshippes  being  in  that  Countrey,  kept  the
mountaines,  where  the  Spaniardes  can  hardly  any  way  [III.  680.]
inforce  him ;  that  they  have  taken  from  him  and  his
people  many  of  their  wives,  because  they  refused  to
furnish  them  weekely  with  a  certaine  proportion  of
bread  and  victuals :  that  Don  Juan  otherwise  called
Eparacano  hath  the  commandement  of  all  his  subjects,
excepting  onely  a  choise  guarde  of  men  sufficient  to
keepe  the  place  hee  nowe  dwelleth  in.  That  it  repenteth
him  of  his  ambition,  ever  to  have  sought  by  the  Span-
iardes meanes, to have enlarged his Countreys and

471

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596-

people.  For  true  it  is  that  from  the  beginning  hee
was  a  Lorde  of  no  other  then  ordinarie  power  amongst
them,  untill  hee  had  entered  into  friendshippe  with
Berreo :  for  then  the  Indians  on  all  sides  left  some
their  habitations,  and  manie  their  commanders  to  be-
come his  subjectes,  that  they  might  have  the  priviledge
to  trade  with  the  Spaniardes  for  hatchets  and  knives,
which  are  jewels  of  great  price  amongst  them :  that
hee  nowe  sawe  no  other  choise,  but  that  the  Indians
must,  if  they  will  doe  well,  without  farther  dissembling
of  their  necessitie,  either  entertaine  us  their  friendes,  or
else  give  place  to  the  Spaniardes  their  enemies.  For
the  plentie  of  golde  that  is  in  this  countrey,  beeing
nowe  knowen  and  discovered,  there  is  no  possibilitie
for  them  to  keepe  it :  on  the  one  side  they  coulde  feele
no  greater  miserie,  nor  feare  more  extremitie,  then
they  were  sure  to  finde,  if  the  Spaniardes  prevayled,
who  perforce  doe  take  all  things  from  them,  using
them  as  their  slaves,  to  runne,  to  rowe,  to  bee  their
guides,  to  cary  their  burthens,  and  that  which  is
worst  of  all,  to  bee  content,  for  safetie  of  their  lives,
to  leave  their  women,  if  a  Spaniard  chance  but  to  set
his  eye  on  any  of  them  to  fancie  her :  on  the  other-
side  they  could  hope  for,  nor  desire  no  better  state
and  usage,  then  her  Majesties  gracious  government,,
and  Princely  vertues  doe  promise,  and  assure  unto
them.  For,  sayde  he,  the  other  yeere,  when  wee  fledde
into  the  mountaines,  and  measured  your  doings  by
the  Spaniards  in  like  case,  we  made  no  other  account,
but  that  your  Commander  being  able,  as  hee  was,  would
doubtlesse  have  persecuted  us  to  the  uttermost,  as  the
onely  maintainers  and  supporters  of  your  enemies,  and
would  at  the  least,  if  hee  could  not  reach  us,  take  our
Townes,  and  make  us  ransome  our  wives  and  children:
wee  found  it  farre  otherwise,  and  that  none  of  your
well  governed  companie  durst  offer  any  of  us  wrong
or  violence,  no  not  by  stealth,  when  unknowne  they
might have done it. We then beleeving it to bee

472

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.

true,  that  your  grand  Captaine  reported  of  his  Prin-
cesse,  tooke  this  for  a  good  proofe  of  her  royall  com-
mandement  and  wisedome,  that  had  framed  her  subjectes
to  such  obedience,  and  of  your  happinesse,  that  injoyed
the  benefite  thereof:  that  Carapana  weighing  the  good  and  Carapana  a
friendly  course  of  our  proceedings,  doeth  humbly  crave  S''^^J  ^'^^'^
of  her  Majestic  for  himselfe  and  his  people,  that  with  ^^^^^  Guiana
the  rest  of  the  Indians,  which  wholly  depende  on  her  craveik  her
Princely  regarde  towardes  them,  hee  also  may  injoy  Majesties
her  favourable  protection :  that  hee  doeth  this,  not  P^'"^^'^^^"^^-
as  a  man  left  unto  himselfe  and  forsaken  by  the  Span-
iardes,  but  as  one  that '  knoweth  their  injustice,  hateth
their  cruelties,  and  taketh  it  for  his  best  choise,  utterly
to  disclaime  their  friendshippe.  It  may  bee  pertinent
(as  surely  it  is  a  thing  worth  the  noting)  to  consider
howe  this  president  of  your  moderation  and  good
order,  which  to  us  seemeth  a  matter  but  of  small  and
ordinarie  respect,  hath  both  alienated  their  heartes  alto-
gether from  the  Spaniard,  and  stirred  up  in  them  true
love  and  admiration  thereof.  For  as  governement
is  the  onely  bond  of  common  societie :  so  to  men
lawlesse,  that  each  one  to  another  are,  Omnes  hoc  jure
molesti,  quo  fortes:  To  men,  I  say,  that  live  in  dayly
tumultes,  feares,  doubtes,  suspitions,  barbarous  cruelties,
never  sleeping  secure,  but  alwayes  either  drunke,  or
practising  one  anothers  death :  to  such  men  as  these
bee,  who  wanting  discipline,  justice  and  good  order
to  confirme  them  in  a  quiet  and  peaceable  course  of
living,  knowing  not  where  to  finde  it :  the  sence  and
sweetenesse  thereof  is  as  the  dewe  of  Hermon :  it  is
as  the  Harmonic  of  a  well  tuned  Instrument :  to  bee
briefe,  it  carieth  in  it  selfe  not  onely  a  due  and  worthy
commendation ;  but  is  avayleable  without  stroke  striking
to  gaine  a  kingdome.  For  the  Indians  in  all  partes
within  and  neere  Guiana,  doe  offer  their  service,  and
promise  to  provide  victuall,  and  what  else  their  coun-
trey  yeeldeth,  desiring  onely  that  some  force  of  men
may  remaine  with  them,  to  deliver  them  from  oppression.

473

rA.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

and  tyrannic.  And  nowe  by  generall  consent  (though
hatchets  and  knives  bee  the  onely  things  of  request  and
usefull  unto  them)  they  have  agreed  by  no  meanes  to
trade  with  the  Spaniard  for  any  thing.

Farther  this  old  man  shewed  mee,  whence  most  of
their  golde  commeth,  which  is  formed  in  so  many
fashions :  whence  their  Spleene-stones,  &  others  of  al
sorts  are  to  be  had  in  plentie :  where  golde  is  to  bee
gathered  in  the  sandes  of  their  rivers :  from  what  partes
the  Spaniards,  both  by  trade,  &  otherwise,  have  re-
turned much  gold.  This  he  uttered  with  Carapana  his
consent  (I  doubt  not)  hoping  thereby  to  induce  us  to
returne  againe.  For  contrarie  to  their  lawe  of  secrecie,
[III.  681,]  which  in  this  case  they  doe  all  generally  observe,
sharply  punishing  the  breakers  thereof,  as  enemies
unto  their  native  Countrey :  I  found  this  man  no
whit  scrupulous,  but  very  free  and  liberall  of  speech  in
all  things.

And  because  we  might  knowe,  that  wee  should  not
want  handes  or  helpe,  in  this  or  any  other  our  enter-
prises, if  perhaps  wee  should  finde  cause  to  passe  up  to
the  head  of  this  River :  hee  declared  that  the  Spaniardes
have  no  Indians  to  trust  unto  but  some  of  the  Arwaccas,
which  since  they  were  not  many,  could  bee  but  of  small
force :  That  the  Charibes  of  Guanipa,  the  Ciawannas
amongst  the  Tivitivas,  the  Shebaios,  laos,  Amaipagotos,
Cassipagotos,  Purpagotos,  Samipagotos,  Serowos,  Etai-
guinams,  Cassamari,  with  the  rest  of  the  nations  farre
and  neere,  were  all  ready,  on  what  side  soever  the
Spaniards  shall  stirre,  to  fight  against  them :  that  the
Pariagotos,  through  whose  countrey  they  must  first
passe,  are  alone  sufficient  to  encounter  them,  such  is
the  strength  of  their  countrey,  and  the  valure  of  the
men.  The  Indians  holde  opinion,  that  they  are  notable
sorcerers,  and  invulnerable.  In  the  mountaines  where
they  dwell,  white  stones  are  found  of  such  hardnesse,
that  by  no  arte  or  meanes  they  can  bee  pierced ;  they
imagine that  these Pariagotos  become  invulnerable, by

474

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

eating these stones. The fable omitted, happily they

may  proove  good  Diamonds.

Then he shewed howe the Iwarewakeri have nour-
ished grasse  in  all  places,  where  passage  is,  these  three
yeeres,  and that  it is  at this present so  high,  as  some
of  the  trees ; which  they  meane  to  burne,  so  soone  as
the Spaniard shall  bee  within danger  thereof Lastly,
hee shewed mee that Wariarimagoto the Emperours  Wanarima-
chiefe  Captaine  for  those  partes,  hath  gathered  together  ^*°  °^^  °f^^^
many  thousandes  of  the  Epuremei,  to  keepe  the  borders  Q^iJnahh
of  the Empire ; and that hee lay now  on the South  chiefe  Cap-
side of the mountaines, some one dayes  journey or  taines  up  in
little  more  from  the Spaniard. To  be  short,  hee  certi-  (i^'^" '^g^^'^st
fied  mee,  that  they  all  were  resolved  not  to  seeke  upon  J.^^^^^^'
them  (for indeede they  feare  their  shot)  but  to  defend
their  owne,  and  to  expect  our  comming. In  the  meane
time they take opportunities,  when they  finde any  of
them straggling  or devided  from  their  strength,  by  litle
and  litle  to  lessen  their  number.

The  place  where  wee  were  at  ancor  was  but  one
dayes  journey  from  Carapana :  I  therefore  made  motion
to  this  Captaine  to  stay  with  two  or  three  of  his  com-
pany aboord  the  shippe,  and  to  cause  his  men  to  bring
mee  with  my  Interpreter  to  Carapana  his  dwelling :
hee  answered  mee  that  it  were  not  good  so  to  doe,
least  perhaps  some  Spie  might  informe  the  Spaniardes
therof,  whereby  danger  would  growe  to  Carapana.  For
they  have  many  times  used  many  meanes  to  reconcile  him
unto  them  :  but  hee  from  time  to  time  hath  dalyed
with  them,  neither  professing  himselfe  their  enemie,  nor
in  ought  shewing  them  any  friendshippe.  Nowe  (sayde
hee)  if  the  Spaniardes  shall  by  any  meanes  come  to  know-
ledge, that  you  have  conferred  together,  they  will  take
this  occasion  to  persecute  him  with  all  extremitie,  as
their  open  enemie,  whom  they  now  neglect,  or  at  the
least  feare  not,  as  being  an  harmelesse  olde  man.  And
for  this  cause  only  hath  Carapana  forborne  to  come
unto  you.

475

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

By  this  I  perceived,  that  to  stay  longer  for  him  (though
gladly  I  could  have  bene  content  to  spend  one  seven-
nights  more  to  speake  with  him)  would  bee  purposelesse.
Wherefore  having  assured  so  many  of  the  Indians  as  at
any  time  came  unto  us,  of  our  speedie  returne,  promising
them  plentie  of  knives,  beades,  and  hatchets,  if  they  would
reserve  their  Cassavi,  and  provide  store  of  their  pieces
of  golde  for  us  :  I  desired  this  Captaine  to  bee  a  meanes
that  our  friends  of  Trinidad  might  understand  of  our
being  in  the  River  and  that  wee  meant  to  relieve  them
so  soone,  as  conveniently  might  bee.  Hee  promised  in
Carapana  his  behalfe,  that  this  should  not  bee  forgotten.
One  of  the  Captaines  of  the  Cyawannas,  who  doe  now
dwell  in  the  River  Arawawo,  neere  Trinidad,  undertooke
also  without  fayle  to  ascertaine  them  thereof.  I  was  the
more  careful!  herein,  because  so  many  ships  being  heere,
I  doubted  least  they  would  take  order  that  no  Indian
should  speake  with  us. For  so  indeede  it  fell  out.

This  Captaine  of  the  Cyawannas  came  likewise  to
joyne  with  us,  and  had  provided  fifteene  Canoas  for  that
purpose.  Their  dwelling  was  lately  in  Macureo,  where
the  Spaniardes  one  night  stealing  on  them,  killed  twentie
of  their  men,  and  burnt  their  houses,  because  they  re-
fused to  trade  with  them  for  certaine  images  of  golde
made  with  many  heades  which  they  had  gotten  out  of
Guiana.  I  sent  a  present  of  Yron  to  Carapana,  and
then  set  sayle.

In  turning  downe  the  river  wee  spent  eight  dayes.  In
many  places  where  the  chanell  lyeth  wee  found  twentie
fathome  depth  :  where  it  is  sholdest,  wee  had  two  fathome
and  a  halfe,  and  that  but  in  one  or  two  places.  Of  the
worthinesse  of  this  River,  because  I  cannot  say  ynough,
[III.  682.]  I  will  speake  nothing.  Wee  have  presumed  to  call  it
by  the  name  of  Raleana,  because  your  selfe  was  the  first
of  our  nation  that  ever  entred  the  same,  and  I  thinke  it
nothing  inferiour  to  Amazones,  which  is  best  knowen  by
the  name  of  Orellana,  the  first  discoverer  thereof.  By
turning onely,  without helpe  of  oares  to  passe  so  long

476

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.
away  in so short  a  time,  against the  winde,  may  suffi-
ciently proove,  that  the  chanell  is  very  large,  good,  and  The  chanel
likely to second our  hopes  in all  that wee  can  desire,  of^^^^^^'^i  °^
Without  the  mouth  of  this  River,  our  Pinnesse,  the  Dis- ^ ^
coverer,  whome wee lost neere the coast of  England,  goo^. Thy
came  unto us. Shee  fell with this land somewhat to  meete  with
the South  warde of  Cape Cecyl, and had spent three  their  Pinnesse.
weekes  and  odde  dayes  in  ranging  alongst  the  coast,  when
shee  mette  with us. William Downe the Master in-
formed mee  that  they  entred,  and  searched  these  foure
rivers. In  Wiapoco  they  sayled  so  farre,  untill  the  rockes
stopped  their  passage. In  Caiane  they  went  up  one  dayes
journey. In  Cunanama they found many  inhabitantes.
Curitini  was  the  last  River  they  had  beene  in. Whence,
having no other meanes to finde Raleana, they  were
inforced  to  borrow  a  Pilot  against  his  will  :  whom  after-
wardes  I  would  have  returned  with  reward  to  his  content-
ment ;  but  he  would  not.

Our  English  that  to  steale  the  first  blessing  of  an
untraded  place,  will  perhaps  secretly  hasten  thither,  may
bee  beholding  to  mee  for  this  caveat,  if  they  take  notice  Agoodcaveat.
thereof.  They  may  bee  assured,  that  this  people,  as
they  no  way  sought  our  harme,  but  used  our  men  with
all  kindnesse  :  so  are  they  impatient  of  such  a  wrong,
as  to  have  any  of  their  people  perforce  taken  from  them,
and  will  doubtlesse  seeke  revenge.  The  example  of  the
like  practise  upon  the  coast  of  Guinie,  in  the  yeere  1566,
and  againe  at  Dominica,  where  Alderman  Wats  his  shippe
hardly  escaped  being  taken,  may  serve  for  our  warning
in  like  case  to  looke  for  no  good,  before  they  bee
satisfied  for  this  injury.

When  wee  had  taken  aboorde  us  such  victuals  as  were
in  the  Pinnesse  :  wee  set  fire  in  her,  (for  her  Rudder
could  serve  her  to  no  longer  use)  and  stopping  the
fioodes,  plyed  to  windwarde  with  the  ebbe  neere  the
shoare,  untill  wee  were  sixteene  leagues  to  the  Eastwarde
of  the  Rivers  mouth,  and  then  standing  off  to  Sea,  wee
fell  in  twentie  foure  houres  sayling  with  Punta  de  Galera

477

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

the  Northeastermost  part  of  Trinidad.  But  having
The  isle  of  Tabaco-island  in  sight,  wee  first  went  thither.  This
Tabago.  Island  is  plentiful!  of  all  things,  and  a  very  good  soyle.

It  is  not  nowe  inhabited,  because  the  Charibes  of
Dominica  are  evill  neighbours  unto  it.  They  of  Trini-
dad have  a  meaning  and  purpose  to  flie  thither,  when
no  longer  they  can  keepe  Trinidad.  Their  onely  doubt
is,  that  when  they  are  seated  there,  the  Spaniard  will
seeke  to  possesse  it  also.  The  Governour  of  Margarita
went  lately  in  a  Pinnesse  to  viewe  this  Island.  Gilbert
my  Pilot  who  sometime  lived  there,  noteth  it  for  the
best  and  fruitfuUest  ground  that  hee  knoweth.

Thence  wee  returned  to  Punta  de  Galera  and  ancored
in  tenne  fathome  under  the  North  side  of  the  Island
some  five  or  sixe  miles  from  the  sayde  point.  The  flood-
tyde  striketh  alongst  the  coast  to  the  Eastward  very
strongly.  Wee  discharged  a  peece  of  ordinance,  and
afterwards  went  to  the  shoore  in  our  boat :  but  no  Indian
came  unto  us.  I  would  have  sent  John  of  Trinidad  to
procure  some  of  them  to  speake  with  us  :  but  he  was
altogether  unwilling,  alleaging  that  their  dwellings  were
farre  within  the  mountaines,  and  that  hee  knewe  no  part
of  that  side  of  the  Island.  From  this  place  we  set
sayle  for  Santa  Lucia,  but  fell  with  Granata,  which  wee
found  not  inhabited.  Saint  Vincent  we  hardly  recovered,
by  turning  under  the  lee  of  the  island.  The  Tabaco
Most  danger-  of  this  place  is  good  :  but  the  Indians  being  Canibals,
ous  Canibals.  promising  US  Store,  and  delaying  us  from  day  to  day,
sought  onely  oportunitie  to  betray,  take,  and  eate  us,
as  lately  they  had  devoured  the  whole  companie  of  a
French  shippe.  This  their  treacherie  being  by  one  of
their  slaves  revealed,  from  thenceforth  they  did  all  for-
beare  to  come  unto  us.  To  sit  downe  on  their  lowe
stooles,  when  they  by  offering  such  ease,  will  seeme  to
shewe  curtesie,  abodeth  death  to  strangers,  that  shall
trust  them.  At  Matalino  or  Martinino  we  found  not
any  inhabitants.  Lastly,  wee  came  to  Dominica,  where
we  could  get  no  good  Tabaco, But  having  intelligence

478

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

of  a  Spanish  shippe,  that  was  taking  in  of  fresh  water,
at  the  Northwest  side  of  the  Island,  wee  wayed  ancor  to
seeke  him.  Hee  discrying  us,  stole  away  by  night.
The  Indians  of  this  place  have  determined  to  remoove,
and  joyne  with  them  of  Guanipa,  against  the  Spaniardes,
who  lately  dispeopled  one  of  their  Islands,  and  at  our
being  there  one  of  their  Canoas  returned  from  Guanipa,
and  certified  us,  that  the  tenne  Spanish  shippes  at  Trini-
dad doe  ride,  some  of  them  at  Conquerabia,  the  rest
at  the  small  Hands  neere  the  disemboging  place.  Here-
hence  we  steered  North  and  by  East,  taking  the  directest
course  to  shorten  our  way  homewards.

Thus  have  I  emptied  your  purse,  spending  my  time  [III.  683.]
and  travell  in  following  your  lordships  directions  for  the
full  discoverie  of  this  coast,  and  the  rivers  thereof.  Con-
cerning the  not  making  of  a  voyage  for  your  private
profite,  I  pretend  nothing.  Sorie  I  am,  that  where  I
sought  no  excuse,  by  the  Spaniardes  being  there  I  found
my  defect  remedilesse.  And  for  mine  owne  part,  I  doe
protest,  that  if  the  consideration  of  the  publique  good
that  may  ensue,  had  not  overpoysed  all  other  hopes  and
desires  :  I  would  rather  have  adventured  by  such  small
and  weake  meanes  as  I  had,  to  doe  well  with  danger,
then  to  returneL  onely  with  safetie.  Nowe  although  in  a
cause  not  doubtfuU,  my  allegation  is  no  way  needefuU  :
yet  because  the  weightiness  thereof,  and  the  expectation
of  others,  seemeth  of  due  and  right  to  claime  something
to  bee  sayde  by  mee,  whome  your  especiall  trust  and
favour  hath  credited  and  graced  with  this  employment :
Pardon  it  (I  beseech  your  honour)  if,  where  my  lampe
had  oyle,  it  borrow  light  also  ;  and  my  speach,  which
is  altogether  unsavourie,  season  it  selfe  with  some
of  the  leaven  of  your  owne  discourse  touching  this  dis-
coverie. The  particular  relation  of  some  certaine  things
I  have  reserved  as  properly  belonging  to  your  selfe,  who
onely,  as  knowing  most,  can  make  best  use  thereof.  So
much  in  generall  is  here  touched,  as  (I  hope)  may  serve
to  refresh  the  memorie  of  this  worthie  enterprise  in  those

479

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

whome  it  may  concerne,  and  testifie  your  care  and  expence
in  following  the  same  :  that  in  a  second  age,  when  in
time  trueth  shall  have  credite,  and  men  wondering  at  the
riches,  and  strength  of  this  place  (which  nature  it  selfe
hath  marvel  ously  fortified,  as  her  chiefe  treasure-house)
shall  mourne  and  sigh  to  holde  idle  cicles,  whilest  others
reape  and  gather  in  this  harvest,  it  bee  not  sayde,  that  Sir
Walter  Ralegh  was  of  all  men  living  in  his  dayes,  most
industrious  in  seeking,  most  fortunate  in  attaining  to  the
fulnesse  of  an  inestimable  publique  good :  if,  knowing
that  for  envie  and  private  respectes,  his  labours  were
lessened,  his  informations  mistrusted,  his  proffers  not
regarded,  and  the  due  honour  of  his  deserts  imparted  to
others  :  If  (I  say)  seeing,  knowing  and  bearing  all  this,
hee  with  patience  had  persisted  in  so  good  a  way  in  doing
his  Princesse,  and  countrey  service ;  and  had  but  perfected
his  first  discoverie  by  sending  a  shippe  or  two  for  that
purpose  :  for  then  surely  all  lets  and  doubts  being  re-
mooved,  and  so  large  a  kingdome,  so  exceeding  rich,  so
plentiful  of  all  things,  as  this  by  his  discourse  appeared  to
bee,  being  offered  :  no  devises  and  vaine  surmises  could
have  taken  place,  no  illusions  could  have  prevailed  :  it
had  bene  blindnesse  and  deafenesse  in  those,  that  being
neere  her  Majestic  doe  spend  their  dayes  in  serving  the
common  weale,  not  to  see,  and  knowe  in  so  weightie  a
matter  :  it  had  beene  malicious  obstinacie,  impotencie  of
minde,  and  more  then  treason  to  the  common  wealth,  the
matter  standing  onely  upon  acceptance,  to  seeke  either  to
foreslowe  so  fit  an  occasion,  or  forsake  so  generall  a
blessing.  This  (if)  is  nowe  cut  off  through  a  singular
and  incomparable  temper,  in  overcomming  evile  with
good.

This  your  seconde  discoverie  hath  not  onely  founde
a  free  and  open  entrance  into  Raleana,  which  the  Naturals
call  Orenoque :  but  moreover  yeeldeth  choyse  of  fourtie
severall  great  rivers  (the  lesser  I  do  not  reckon)  being  for
the  most  part  with  small  vessels  navigable  for  our  mar-
chants  &  others,  that  do  now  finde  little  profit  in  setting

480

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.
forth  for  reprisall,  to  exercise  trade  in.  To  such  as  shall
be  willing  to  adventure  in  search  of  them,  I  could  pro-
pose some  hope  of  gold  mines,  and  certaine  assurance  of
peeces  of  made  golde,  of  Spleene-stones,  Kidney-stones,
and  others  of  better  estimate.  But  because  our  beleefe
seemeth  to  bee  mated  in  these  greater  matters,  and  a
certaintie  of  smaller  profits  is  the  readiest  inducement
to  quicken  our  weake  hopes ;  I  not  going  so  farre  as  mine
owne  eyes  might  warrant  mee,  doe  onely  promise  in  the
aforesayd  rivers  Brasil-wood,  honey,  cotton,  Balsamum,
and  drugs  to  helpe  to  defray  charges  :  and  further,  be-
cause without  a  beginning  there  can  bee  no  continuance  of
these  benefites  unto  our  countrey  to  any  that  shall  be  the
first  undertakers  hereof,  I  am  gladly  content  to  give  such
light  and  knowledge,  as  by  conference  with  the  Indians  I
have  attained  unto.

My  selfe,  and  the  remaine  of  my  fewe  yeeres,  I  have
bequeathed  wholly  to  Raleana,  and  all  my  thoughts  live
onely  in  that  action.  The  prosecuting  whereof  is  in  it
selfe  just,  profitable,  and  necessarie.  Just,  because  it  is
intended  for  the  defence  of  harmelesse  people,  who  fearing
thralldome  and  oppression,  desire  to  protect  themselves
and  their  countrey  under  her  Majesties  tuition  :  Profitable,
as  may  bee  gathered  not  onely  by  many  Spanish  letters
intercepted,  but  also  by  the  proofes  mentioned  in  the
discourse  of  the  first  discoverie,  and  since  that,  by  the
Indians  owne  voluntarie  relations  :  and  lastly,  by  the
provision  that  the  Spaniards  doe  make  to  acquite  us
thereof.  Necessarie  it  is,  as  being  the  onely  helpe  to  put
a  bitte  in  the  mouth  of  the  unbrideled  Spaniard ;  the
onely  way  to  enter  into  his  treasurie  of  Nuevo  Reyno,
and  Peru  ;  the  onely  meanes  to  animate  the  wronged
Indians  with  our  assistance  to  seeke  revenge  for  the  ex-
treme murthers  and  cruelties,  which  they  have  endured,  [in.  684.]
and  to  ruinate  his  naked  cities  in  all  those  parts  of  the
Inland ;  whose  foundations  have  beene  layd  in  the  blood
of  their  parents  and  ancesters.

The forces  that  the Spaniard hath already sent to
X  481  2  H

AD.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1596,

Trinidad,  to  fortifie  there,  and  keepe  the  passage  of  this
river,  are  an  evident  argument  that  the  king  feareth  and
doubteth  the  sequele  of  this  discoverie. For  can  it  bee
a  small  matter  ? Or  hath  hee  so  waste  imployment  for
his  men  and  shipping,  that  upon  no  ground,  hee  would
send  eight  and  twentie  shippes,  to  keepe  us  onely  from
Tabacco  ? For  what  els  that  good  is  can  Trinidad  yeelde
us  ? No  doubtlesse,  if  the  returne  of  Berreo  his  Campe-
master  with  tenne  of  these  shippes  be  compared  with  pre-
cedent advertisements concerning him : it will appeare
more  then  probable,  that  the  Guiana-golde  waged  these
men  and  shipping :  and  that  they  are  nowe  more  careful!
to  obtaine  this  place,  then  to  keepe  others,  which  they
have  already  gotten,  which  note, except in matters of
extraordinarie  account,  is  not  incident  to  their  policie  and
proceedings. Againe,  it  cannot  bee  thought  that  either  it
was  senselesse  madnesse  in  the  governours  of  Margarita,
and  the  Caracas,  to  bring  their  states  and  lives  in  ques-
tion, by  seeking,  contrarie  to  their  kings  order,  to  enter
Guiana,  and  kill  Berreo  with  his  followers  : or  else  the
abundance  of  pearle  in  Margarita,  and  the  golde  mines
in  the  Caracas,  seeming  matters  of  small  account  : Guiana
onely was in their  judgement,  rich,  plentiful!,  and  able
of  it  selfe to  redeeme  their  trespasse  and  offence,  howe
great  soever  it  should  bee.

The  sundry  attemptes  and  overthrowes  of  the
Spaniardes  being  men  of  power,  and  honourable  place,
in  labouring  threescore  and  three  yeeres  and  upwardes,
to  inlarge  the  kingdome  of  Spaine  with  this  mightie  and
great  empire,  doe  plainely  shewe,  that  they  long  time
sought  a  path,  where  in  one  moneth  a  high  way  was
found :  that  the  losse  of  their  lives  witnesseth  their
desires,  and  the  worthinesse  of  the  thing,  where  to  us  the
easinesse  of  obteining  discrediteth  the  greatnes  of  the
attempt :  and  that  if  now  at  the  last  they  doe  prevaile,
they  must  holde  by  tyrannie  that  which  they  get  by  the
sword ;  where  then  our  returne  nothing  by  the  Indians  is
more  wished  for,  nothing  expected  more  earnestly.

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.

Those  objections,  which  have  beene  made  by  many
seeming  wise,  and  the  impediments  likely  to  arise,  as
they  have  supposed,  are  best  answered  by  the  unre-
prooved  witnesse  of  those  mens  actions.  Some  have
termed  these  discoveries  fables,  and  fantasies,  as  if  there
had  beene  no  such  land  or  territorie  :  others  allowing
both  of  the  place,  and  that  such  a  kingdome  or  countrey
is  discovered,  make  conclusion,  that  if  it  had  beene  so
rich  as  wee  have  supposed,  that  no  doubt  the  king  of
Spaine  would  by  this  time  have  possessed  it.  But  if
they  consider  that  the  Spanish  nation  hath  already
conquered  the  two  empires  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  with
so  many  other  kingdoms  and  provinces :  wee  may  very
well  answere,  that  his  power  is  not  infinite,  and  that
hee  hath  done  well  for  the  time.  And  yet  it  is  manifest,
that  this  very  empire  hath  beene  by  all  those  severall
Spaniardes  (the  catalogue  of  whose  names  is  by  it  selfe  .
hereunto  annexed)  at  sundry  times  undertaken,  and
never  perfourmed.  Howbeit,  the  world  hath  reason
to  admire  their  constancie,  and  their  great  labours,
and  wee  may  well  blush  at  our  owne  idle,  despairefuU,
and  loytering  dispositions,  that  can  finde  abilitie  in
another  barren,  and  sterved  nation,  to  possesse  so  much
of  the  worlde,  and  can  doe  nothing  but  frame  argu-
ments against  our  selves,  as  unfit  and  powerlesse  to
possesse  one  province  already  discovered,  and  of  which
our  nation  hath  assurance  of  the  peoples  love,  and
that  all  the  Chieftaines  and  principals  have  vowed  their
obedience  to  her  Majestic  ;  the  navigation  being  withall
so  short,  dangerlesse,  and  free  from  infectious  sickenesse.
If  doubt  of  perils  might  moderate  the  mindes  of  our
men  once  mooved  with  steadfast  hope,  that  golde  shall
bee  the  reward  of  their  travels :  it  may  easily  bee
perceived,  that  all  those  lets  and  hinderances  that  can  any
way  bee  alleaged,  or  wrested  so  much,  as  but  to  touch
us,  doe  deepely  and  neerely  concerne  the  Spanish  king,
and  in  a  maner  violently  withold  him  from  that,  which
hee  notwithstanding  carrieth  with  successe,  whilest  wee

483

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

out  of  season  do  affect  the  bare  stile,  to  be  named  men
stayed  and  circumspect  in  our  proceedings.  It  is  re-
ported, that  Calanus  the  Indian  threw  downe  before
Alexander  the  great,  a  drie  seare  peece  of  leather,  &
then  put  his  foot  on  one  of  the  endes  of  it :  the  leather
being  trode  downe  at  that  side,  rose  on  all  parts  else.
By  this  the  wise  man  did  shewe  unto  him  a  figure
and  similitude  of  his  kingdome,  which  being  exceeding
large,  must  of  necessitie  in  all  other  parts,  excepting
the  place  of  the  kings  residence,  be  alwayes  full  of  stirs,
tumults,  and  insurrections.  The  end  afterwards  con-
firmed, that  this  empire  consisting  of  sundry  nations,
could  not  keepe  it  selfe  from  dissolution.  No  potentate
living  hath,  or  can  have  so  faithfuU  and  incorrupt  coun-
selors, as  bee  the  examples  and  histories  of  forepassed
times  and  ages.  Wee  may  therefore  bee  bolde  to  thinke
[III.  685.]  that  the  Governours  of  the  Spanish  affaires  should  minde
it,  that  their  kings  lustfull  desire,  and  ambitious  thoughts
to  establish  over  all  Europe  one  lawe,  one  Lord,  one
religion,  are  built  and  erected  on  a  dangerous  ungrounded
resolution :  Considering  that  many  of  the  neighbour
kingdomes  being  of  equall  force  in  men,  or  greater
than  hee  can  make,  are  setled  in  a  long  continued
estate,  are  entire  within  themselves,  and  hate  to  heare
the  voyce  of  a  stranger.  It  is  not  unlikely  that
they  in  this  case  should  lay  before  their  king  the
fatall  destinies  of  many  worthies,  that  have  beene
constrained  for  wante  of  sufficient  numbers  of  their
naturall  subjects,  after  many  yeeres  spent  in  the
warres,  to  retire  to  their  owne  countreys,  and  have
beene  glad  peaceably  to  holde  their  owne  Signiories  at
home,  resigning  all  that  unto  others,  which  they  have
gotten  abroad  by  hard  adventure,  and  much  effusion
of  blood.  The  King  of  Spaine  cannot  but  discerne,
that  his  spacious  empires  and  kingdomes  being  so
many,  and  so  farre  divided  one  from  another,  are  like
the  members  of  a  monstrous  bodie,  tyed  together  with
cables  onely. For  take away  the traffique  of  unneces-

484

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.
sarie  commodities  transported  out  of  Spaine :  those
huge  countreys  of  the  Indies  having  no  common  linke  of
affinitie,  lawe,  language,  or  religion,  and  being  of  them-
selves able  to  maintaine  themselves  without  forreine
commerce,  are  not  so  simple,  as  not  to  knowe  their
owne  strength,  and  to  finde,  that  they  doe  rather
possesse  Spaniardes,  then  that  they  are  possessed
by  them.  Hee  cannot  bee  ignorant  that  Spaine  it
selfe  is  on  all  sides  environed  with  many  puissant
enemies,  mightie  and  great  princes,  who  knowing  it  to  bee
rich  without  men,  confident  without  reason,  proud  and
adventurous  without  meanes  sufficient ;  may  happily
confederate  to  chastise  him,  as  an  insolent  intruder,  and
disturber  of  all  quietnesse ;  and  going  no  further  then
Spaine  it  selfe,  may  even  there  shake  the  foundation
of  his  long  contrived  devises,  and  in  one  acte  redeeme
the  time,  controU  his  aspiring  humor,  and  breake  the
bandes  in  sunder  that  import  servitude,  and  subver-
sion to  all  the  dominions  of  Christendome.  Againe,
his  counsell  may  well  informe  him,  that  to  dispeople
and  disable  himselfe  at  home,  in  hope  to  obtaine  Guiana,
being  a  countrey  strong  of  it  selfe,  and  defended  with
infinite  multitudes  of  Indian  enemies,  being  rich,  and
by  the  inhabitants  offered  unto  the  English :  his  con-
tempt towardes  us  would  seeme  so  intoUerable  and
despightfull,  as  might  bee  sufficient  to  provoke  us,
though  otherwise  wee  had  no  such  inclination ;  if  hee
unprovided  of  able  helpes  to  effect  it,  should  rest
himselfe  on  a  carelesse  presumption,  that  wee  cannot,
wee  dare  not,  wee  will  not  stirre  in  a  matter  that  pro-
miseth  us  so  great  benefite,  and  may  so  highly  offend
him.  Hee  may  bee  perswaded,  that  to  leave  no  other
succour  or  safetie  to  his  nakednesse,  but  the  olde  stale
practise  of  spreading  rumours,  and  giving  out  false
intelligences  of  preparations  to  invade  England,  thereby
to  keepe  us  at  home ;  or  els  of  hyring  and  suborning
some  Machavellian  under  hande  by  secret  conveyance,
to stop the course of  our proceedings ; or lastly, of

485

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

procuring  some  wilde  outlaw  to  disquiet  our  tran-
quillitie ;  is  but  a  poore,  weake,  and  uncertaine  stay  to
upholde  his  estate  by.  And  yet  setting  such  like
driftes  aside :  what  can  bee  imagined  likely  to  hinder
us  from  prevailing  in  Guiana,  rather  then  him,  whose
disadvantage  is  to  bee  encombred  with  the  selfe  same,
and  manifolde  more  impediments,  then  can  any  way
bee  supposed,  with  good  cause  to  impeach,  or  divorce
us  from  so  profitable  an  attempt }  All  this  notwith-
standing, if  the  Spanish  king  not  being  able  to  dis-
semble his  desire,  or  beare  the  losse  of  this  one  king-
dome ;  putting  himselfe  out  of  his  strength  at  home,
and  exposing  his  people  to  the  hazard  of  all  casualties
abroad,  bee  resolved,  whatsoever  shall  happen,  not  to
relinquish  Guiana,  but  to  keepe  this  one  yron  more  in
the  fire,  on  no  other  assurance,  but  a  peremptorie  dis-
daine  of  prevention :  If  hee  appeare  so  eagerly  bent
for  Guiana,  as  if  it  were  enacted  for  a  lawe  amongst
themselves,  Viis  &  modis  to  thrust  for  it,  and  not  to
heare,  conceive,  or  beleeve  any  thing,  that  may  dis-
swade  or  deterre  from  the  conquest  thereof:  it  then
appertaineth  unto  us,  not  to  inforce  those  objections
against  our  selves,  which  hee  with  lesse  reason  rejecteth
as  frivolous ;  since  by  howe  much  the  more  earnest
hee  is  in  following  this  purpose,  by  so  much  the  lesse
cause  have  wee  to  bee  diverted  from  it.  To  such  as
shall  bee  willing  further  to  wade  in  this  argument ;  for
brevities  sake,  I  doe  propose  onely  this  bare  assertion :
that  England  and  Guiana  conjoyned,  are  stronger,  and
more  easily  defended,  then  if  England  alone  should
repose  her  selfe  on  her  owne  force,  and  powerfulnesse.
The  reasons  that  might  bee  inferred  to  prove  this  neede
no  rationall  discourse :  they  are  all  intimated  in  the
onely  example  of  Spaine  it  selfe ;  which  without  the
Indies  is  but  a  purse  without  money,  or  a  painted
sheath  without  a  dagger.  In  summer  it  seemeth  unto
me,  that  whereas  the  difficultie  of  performing  this  enter-
prise hath  bene  produced  for  a  discouragement :  it  were

486

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.
a  dull  conceite  of  strange  weakenes  in  our  selves,  to
distrust  our  own  power  so  much,  or  at  least,  our  owne
hearts  and  courages ;  as  valewing  the  Spanish  nation  to
be  omnipotent ;  or  yeelding  that  the  poore  Portugal
hath  that  mastering  spirit  and  conquering  industrie,
above  us ;  as  to  bee  able  to  seate  himselfe  amongst  the  [III.  686.]
many  mightie  princes  of  the  East  Indies,  to  frontire
China,  to  holde  in  subjection  the  Philippinas,  Zeilan,
Calecut,  Goa,  Ormus,  Mozambique,  and  the  rest ;  the
navigation  being  so  tedious  and  full  of  perill :  to  suffer
our  selves  to  bee  put  backe  for  worthlesse  cyphers,  out
of  place,  without  account.  All  which  Regions  being
nowe  also  by  the  late  conquest  of  Portugall,  entituled
to  the  Spanish  king :  to  whom  the  Colonies  of  those
parts  doe  yet  generally  refuse  to  sweare  fealtie  and
allegiance :  and  the  care  depending  on  him,  not  onely
in  governing  them  in  the  East,  so  farre  off;  but  also
of  ordering  and  strengthening  of  those  disunited,  scat-
tered, &  ill  guarded  empires  and  provinces  in  the
West :  It  might  very  well  bee  alleaged  to  the  sayde
Spanish  king,  that  it  were  more  wisedome  for  him  to
assure  and  fortifie  some  part  of  those  already  gotten,
then  to  begin  the  conquest  of  Guiana,  so  farre  separate
from  the  rest  of  his  Indies :  in  which  hee  hath  had  so
many  misfortunes,  and  against  whom  the  naturall  people
are  so  impetuously  bent,  and  opposed :  were  it  not,
that  it  exceedeth  all  the  rest  in  abundance  of  gold,  and
other  riches.  The  case  then  so  standing,  is  it  not  meere
wretchednesse  in  us,  to  spend  our  time,  breake  our
sleepe,  and  waste  our  braines,  in  contriving  a  cavilling
false  title  to  defraude  a  neighbour  of  halfe  an  acre  of
lande :  whereas  here  whole  shires  of  fruitfuU  rich
grounds,  lying  now  waste  for  want  of  people,  do
prostitute  themselves  unto  us,  like  a  faire  and  beauti-
full  woman,  in  the  pride  and  floure  of  desired  yeeres :
If  wee  doe  but  consider,  howe  unhappily  Berreo  his
affaires,  with  his  assistants  have  of  late  yeeres,  in  our
owne knowledge succeeded : who can say,  if  the hand

487

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

of  the  Almighty  be  not  against  them,  and  that  hee  hath
a  worke  in  this  place,  in  stead  of  Papistrie,  to  make  the
sincere  light  of  his  Gospell  to  shine  on  this  people  ?
The  effecting  whereof  shall  bee  a  royall  crowne  of  ever-
lasting remembrance  to  all  other  blessings,  that  from  the
beginning  the  Lorde  hath  plentifully  powred  on  our
dread  Soveraigne,  in  an  eminent  and  supreme  degree  of
all  perfection.  If  the  Castilians,  pretending  a  religious
care  of  planting  Christianitie  in  those  partes,  have  in
their  doings  preached  nought  els  but  avarice,  rapine,
blood,  death,  and  destruction  to  those  naked,  &  sheep-
like creatures  of  God ;  erecting  statues  and  trophees  of
victorie  unto  themselves,  in  the  slaughters  of  millions
of  innocents :  doeth  not  the  crie  of  the  poore  succour-
lesse  ascend  unto  the  heavens?  Hath  God  forgotten
to  bee  gracious  to  the  workemanship  of  his  owne
hands?  Or  shall  not  his  judgements  in  a  day  of  visi-
Her  Majestic,  tation  by  the  ministerie  of  his  chosen  servant,  come  on
these  bloodthirstie  butchers,  like  raine  into  a  fleece  of
wooll  ?  Aliquando  manifesta ;  aliquando  occulta ;  semper
justa  sunt  Dei  judicia.

To  leave  this  digression.  It  is  fit  onely  for  a  prince
to  begin,  and  ende  this  worke :  the  maintenance  and
ordering  thereof  requireth  soveraigne  power,  authoritie,
and  commaundement.  The  river  of  Raleana  giveth  open
and  free  passage,  any  provision  that  the  Spaniard  can
make  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  (for  once  yeerely
the  landes  neere  the  river  be  all  drowned)  to  convey
men,  horse,  munition,  and  victuall  for  any  power  of
men  that  shall  be  sent  thither.

I  doe  speake  it  on  my  soules  health,  as  the  best
testimonie,  that  I  can  in  any  cause  yeelde  to  averre  a
trueth,  that  having  nowe  the  second  time  beene  in  this
countrey,  and  with  the  helpes  of  time  and  leisure  well
advised  my  selfe  upon  all  circumstances  to  bee  thought
on ;  I  can  discerne  no  sufficient  impediment  to  the
contrary,  but  that  with  a  competent  number  of  men,
her Majestic may to her and her successours enjoy

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596-
this  rich  and  great  empire:  and  having  once  planted
there,  may  for  ever  (by  the  favour  of  God)  holde  and
keepe  it,  Contra  ludasos  &  Gentes.  Subjects,  I  doubt
not,  may  through  her  Majesties  gracious  sufferance,
joyning  their  strength  together,  invade,  spoyle,  and
overrunne  it,  returning  with  golde  and  great  riches.
But  what  good  of  perpetuitie  can  foUowe  thereof?
Or  who  can  hope  that  they  will  take  any  other  course
then  such,  as  tendeth  to  a  private  and  present  benefite;
considering  that  an  Empire  once  obtained,  is  of  con-
gruitie,  howe,  and  wheresoever  the  charge  shall  growe,
to  bee  annexed  unto  the  crowne?  The  riches  of  this
place  are  not  fit  for  any  private  estate :  no  question,
they  will  rather  proove  sufficient  to  crosse  and  counter-
vaile  the  Spaniard  his  proceedings  in  all  partes  of  Christen-
dome,  where  his  money  maketh  way  to  his  ambition.

If  the  necessitie  of  following  this  enterprise  doth
nothing  urge  us,  because  in  some  case  better  a  mis-
chiefe,  then  an  inconvenience :  let  the  conveniencie
thereof  somewat  moove  us,  in  respect  both  of  so  many
Gentlemen,  souldiers,  and  younger  brothers,  who,  if  for
want  of  employment  they  doe  not  die  like  cloyed
cattell  in  ranke  easefulnesse ;  are  enforced  for  mainten-
ance sake,  sometimes  to  take  shamefuU  and  unlawfuU
courses :  and  in  respect  of  so  many  handycraftsmen
having  able  bodies,  that  doe  live  in  cleannesse  of  teeth
and  povertie.  To  sacrifice  the  children  of  Belial  unto
the  common  weale,  is  not  to  defile  the  lande  with  blood,
because  the  lawe  of  God  doeth  not  prohibite  it,  and  [III.  687.]
the  execution  of  justice  requireth  it  to  bee  so :  but  yet
if  the  waterboughes,  that  sucke  and  feede  on  the  juice,
and  nourishment  that  the  fruitefull  branches  should  live
by,  are  to  bee  cut  downe  from  the  tree,  and  not
regarded:  luckie  and  prosperous  bee  that  right  hande,
that  shall  plant  and  possesse  a  soyle,  where  they  may
fructifie,  increase,  and  growe  to  good :  thrise  honour-
able and  blessed  bee  the  memorie  of  so  charitable  a
deede,  from  one  generation  to  another.

489

A.D.

1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

To  conclude,  your  lordship  hath  payd  for  the  dis-
coverie  and  search,  both  in  your  owne  person,  and  since
by  mee.  You  have  framed  it,  and  moulded  it  readie
for  her  Majestic,  to  set  on  her  scale.  If  either  envie
or  ignorance,  or  other  devise  frustrate  the  rest,  the
good  which  shall  growe  to  our  enemies,  and  the  losse
which  will  come  to  her  Majestic  and  this  kingdome,
will  after  a  fewe  yeeres  she  we  it  selfe.  Wee  have  more
people,  more  shippes,  and  better  meanes,  and  yet  doe
nothing.  The  Spanish  king  hath  had  so  sweete  a  taste
of  the  riches  thereof,  as  notwithstanding  that  hee  is
lorde  of  so  many  empires  and  kingdomes  already,  not-
withstanding his  enterprises  of  France  and  Flanders,
notwithstanding  that  hee  attended  this  yeere  a  home
invasion : yet  hee  sent  twentie  eight  saile  to Trinidad,

A  Table  of  the  names  of  the  Rivers,  Nations,

second  voyage

[III.  688.]

Rivers.

Nations.

Townes.

I

Arowari  great.

Arwaos,

Pararweas,

Charibes.

2

Iwaripoco  very  great.

Mapurwanas,
laos.

3

Maipari  great.

Arricari.

4

Caipurogh  great.

Arricurri.

5

Arcooa  great.

Marowanas,
Charibes.

6

Waipoco  great.

Coonoracki,

Wacacoia,

Wariseaco.

7

Wanari.

Charibes.

8

Capurvi^acka  great.

Charibes.

9

Cawo  great.

laos.

Icomana.

10

Wia  great.

Maworia,
Charib,
Wiaco,  Ch.
490

Parammona,  great.

LAURENCE KEYMIS

whereof  tenne  were  for  that  place  and  Guiana,  and  had
some  other  shippes  ready  at  Cadiz,  if  the  same  had  not
beene  by  my  Lordes  her  Majesties  Generals  and  your
lordship  set  on  fire.

In  one  worde;  The  time  serveth,  the  like  occasion
seldome  happeneth  in  many  ages,  the  former  repeated
considerations  doe  all  joyntly  together  importune  us,
nowe,  or  never  to  make  our  selves  rich,  our  posteritie
happie,  our  Prince  every  way  stronger  then  our  enemies,
and  to  establish  our  Countrey  in  a  state  flourishing  and
peaceable.  O  let  not  then  such  an  indignitie  rest  on  us,  as
to  deprave  so  notable  an  enterprise  with  false  rumors,  and
vaine  suppositions,  to  sleepe  in  so  serious  a  matter,  and  re-
nouncing the  honour,  strength,  wealth,  and  soveraigntie
of  so  famous  a  conquest,  to  leave  all  unto  the  Spaniard.

Townes,  and  Casiques  or  Captaines  that  in  this
were  discovered.

A.D.

1596.

Captains.

Wareo.
Mashwipo.

1  These  are  enemies  to  the  laos,  their  money

is  of  white  and  greene  stones.  They  speake
the  Tivitivas  language  ;  so  likewise  doe  the
nation  of  the  Arricari,  who  have  greater  store
of  those  moneyes  then  any  others.

2  Here  it  was  as  it  seemeth,  that  Vincent  Pinzon

the  Spaniard  had  his  Emeralds.  In  one  of
these  two  rivers  certain  Frenchmen  that  suf-
fred  shipwrack  some  2.  or  3.  yeres  since,  doe
live.

3.  4.  5.  These  with  the  other  two  seeme  to
bee  branches  of  the  great  river  of  Amazones.
When  wee  first  fell  with  land,  wee  were,  by
ye  Indians  report,  but  I.  dayes  journey  from
the  greatest  river,  that  is  on  that  coast.

6  The  first  mountaines  that  appeare  within  lande,
doe  lie  on  the  East  side  of  this  river. From
491

A.D.

1596.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[III.  689.]

Rivers.

Nations.

Townes.

II

Caiane  g.

Wiaco.  Ch.

Canawi.  g.

Gowateri  a  great  iland.

Shebaios,

Orinikero.

12

Macuria.

Piraos.  Ch.

13

Cawroora.

Arawaccos
Charib.

14

Manmanuri.

Ipaios.  Ch.

15
16

Cureey.
Curassiwini.

Shebaios.
Shebaios.

Musswara.  great.

17

Cunanama.

laos.
Arwaccas.

Waritappi.  great

18

Uracco.

Arwaccas.

19

Moruga.
Mawari.

Arwaccas.

Winicinas.

Arwaccas.

Iwanama.

20

Mawarpari.

Arwaccas.

Awaricana.

21

22

Amonna  very  great.
Capellepo.  g.
Maravi^ini.  g.

Charibes.
Paracuttos.

laremappo.

very  great.

23

Owcowi.

24

Wiawiami.

25
26

27

Aramatappo.

Wiapo.

Macuruma.

28

Carapi.

29

Uraca.

30

Chaimawimini  great.

Carepini.
Charib.

31

Ecrowto.

Upotommas.

32

33

Pawro.
Shurinama  g.

Arwaccas.
Carepini.
Chari.

Maripomma.

34

35

Shurama  g.
Northumbria or Cu-

Carepini.
Char.

Cupari.

36

panama  very  g.
Wioma.

Arwaccas.

37

Cushwini.

Neekeari.

Tawrooromene.

38
39

Inana.  g.
Curitini.  g.

Carepini.
Arwaccas.
Parawianni,

Owaripoore.
Mawronama.

40

Winitwari  g.

Maiapoore.
Cariwacka.

492

LAURENCE KEYMIS

Parawatteo.

Ocapanio.

Carinamari.

Curipotoore.

Marwabo.

Eramacoa.

Aranacoa.

Mahahonero.

Caponaiarie.

Neperwari.

the  mouth  thereof,  the  inhabitants  doe  passe
with  their  canoas  in  20.  dayes  to  the  sake  lake,
where  Manoa  standeth.  The  water  hath
many  Cataracts  like  Caroli,  but  that  they  are
of  greater  distance  one  from  another  :  where
it  falles  into  the  sea,  hils  do  inclose  it  on
both  sides.

10  The  freshet  shoots  out  into  the  sea,  with
great  force  :  the  sea  doth  here  sometimes
campe  high,  and  breake,  as  if  it  were  full  of
rocks  :  but  in  proofe  it  is  nothing  els  but  the
pride  &  force  of  the  tydes.  In  this  bay,
&  round  about,  so  far  as  the  mountaines  do
extend  there  is  great  store  of  Brasill  wood,
some  of  it  bearing  farre  darker  colour  then
other  some.  Here  are  also  many  sortes  of
other  good  woods.

14  These  speake  the  language  of  the  Indians  of
Dominica.  They  are  but  few,  but  very  cruel
to  their  enemies.  For  they  bind,  and  eat
them  alive  peecemeale.  This  torment  is  not
comparable  to  the  deadly  paine  that  commeth
of  hurts,  or  woundes,  made  by  those  arrowes
that  are  invenomed  with  the  juice  of  ye
herbe  Wapototo.  These  Indians  because
they  eate  them  whome  they  kill,  use  no
poyson.  The  sea  coast  is  nowhere  populous,
for  they  have  much  wasted  themselves,  in
mutuall  warres.  But  now  in  all  parts  so  farre
as  Orenoque,  they  live  in  league  and  peace.

21.  Neere  the  head  of  this  river,  Capeleppo
falleth  out  of  the  plaines,  and  runneth  into
the  Sea  with  Curitini.  Some  of  the  Guianians
live  in  this  river.

39.  This  river,  as  also  most  of  the  rest,  is  not
navigable  above  sixe  dayes  journey  by  reason
of  rockes.  It  is  tenne  dayes  journey  to  the
head,  where  the  Guianians  do  dwel  :  hony,
yarne  or  cotton,  silke,  Balsamum,  and  Brasil-
493

1596.

A.D.

1596.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

*  So  called
after  the  name
of  the  right
honourable  the
Earle  of  Essex.

41

42
43

44
45
46

47

48

49
50

51

52

Berbice.  g.

Wapari.

Maicawini.

Mahawaica.
Lemerare.  g.
*Devoritia  or  Desse-
kebe  very  g.

Matorooni.

Coowini,

Chipanama.

Arawanna.

Itorebece.

Pawrooma.  g.

Aripacoro.

Ecawini.

Manurawini.

Moruga.  g.

Piara.

Chaimeragoro.

Waini.  g.

Barima.  g.

Caitooma.

Arooca.

Amacur.  g.

Aratoori.  g.

Cawrooma.  g.

Raleana,  or  Orenoque.

Maipar

Ita  caponea

Owarecapater.

Warucanasso.

Nations.

Arwaccas.

Shebaios.

Arwaccas.

Panapi.

Arwaccas.

Arwaccas.

Wacawaios.

Arwaccas.

laos.

Shebaios.

Arwaccas.

Charibes.

Maripai.

Wocowaios.

Parawianni.

Iwarewakeri.

laos.

Panipi.

laos.

Arwaccas.

Charibes.
Charibes.
Arwaccas.

^  Hands  in  the
mouth  of
I Raleana.

494

Townes.

Aneta.

Manacobeece.

Eppera.

Parawiannos.

Lupulee.

Madewini.

Itewee.

Maburesa.  g.
Maburesa.  g.

Caiaremappo.

Waroopana.

Maripa.

Chipariparo.

Towtwi.

Sarinbugh.

Wariwagh.

Cooparoore.  g.

Awiapari.
Topoo.

Tocoopoima.  g
Pekwa.  g.
Arwakima.

LAURENCE KEYMIS

Warawaroco.

Benmurwagh.
Caporaco.  great  Cap.

Macapowa.
Shuracoima.

Manarecowa.

larwarema.

Parana.
Anawra.
Aparwa.
Arracurri.

beds  are  here  to  bee  had  in  plentie,  and  so
all  the  coast  alongst  Eastward.  Some  images
of  golde,  spleenestones,  and  others  may  bee
gotten  on  this  coast,  but  they  doe  somewhat
extraordinarily  esteeme  of  them,  because
every  where  they  are  current  money.  They
get  their  Moones,  &  other  pieces  of  gold  by
exchange,  taking  for  each  one  of  their  greater
Canoas,  one  piece  or  image  of  golde,  with
three  heades,  and  after  that  rate  for  their
lesser  Canoas,  they  receive  pieces  of  golde  of
lesse  value.  One  hatchet  is  the  ordinarie
price  for  a  Canoa.  They  have  every  where
divers  sorts  of  drugs,  gummes,  and  rootes,
which  I  doubt  not  by  farther  trial,  will  be
found  medicinable.

Names  of  poysoned  hearbes.

Ourari. )  (  Apareepo.

Carassi.  j  (  Parapara.

Hearbes  good  against  poyson.
Turara.  )  j  Wapo.

Cutarapama.  )

(  Macatto.

The  29.  day  of  June  we  arrived  in  Portland
roade,  having  spent  five  moneths  in  going,
staying,  and  returning.

495

[Here  follow

A.D.

1596.

A.D.
1596.

[III.  690.]

The  river  of
Amana  by
which  Sir
Walter
Ralegh  first
entred,  called
by  Diego  de
Ordas  Via-
pari :  and  by
Barth.  de
Casas  Ivia-
Pari.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Here  follow  the  names  of  those  worthie  Spaniards
that  have  sought  to  discover  and  conquer
Guiana  :  Extracted  out  of  the  writings  of  Juan
de  Castellanos  clerigo,  who  compiled  the
booke  intituled,  Primera  parte  de  las  Elegias
de  varones  illustres  de  Indias.

THe  enterprise  of  Guiana  was  undertaken  by  Diego
de  Ordas  of  the  kingdome  of  Leon,  in  the  yeere
1 53 1.  Hee  was  one  of  the  captaines  of  Cortes  in  the
conquest  of  Mexico.  This  Ordas  made  his  entrance  by
the  river  of  Amana,  by  which  wee  entred,  and  spent  fiftie
dayes  before  hee  came  to  the  river  of  Orenoque,  which
we  past  in  fifteene.  Hee  named  the  river  by  which
hee  entred,  Viapari ;  which  name  it  still  retaineth  in  the
Spanish  descriptions.  It  lyeth  South  from  Trinidad  some
five  leagues.  He  transported  out  of  Spaine  a  thousand
souldiers.  He  dyed  afterwards  at  sea  in  returning  for
Spaine.

2  Juan  Corteso  arrived  at  the  river  of  Amazones  or
Orellana  with  three  hundred  men :  Hee  marched  up  into
the  countrey.  But  neither  hee  nor  any  of  his  companie
did  returne  againe.

3  Caspar  de  Sylva,  with  his  two  brothers,  departed
from  Teneriff,  accompanied  with  two  hundred  men  to
assist  Diego  de  Ordas.  They  sought  El  Dorado  by  the
river  of  Amazones :  but  staying  there  a  short  time,
they  fell  downe  to  Trinidad,  where  they  all  three  were
buried.

4  Juan  Gonsales  set  saile  from  Trinidad  to  discover
Guiana.  He  reposed  himselfe  more  on  the  faith  of  his
guides,  then  on  his  small  number  of  men.  Hee  by  triall
founde  the  confines  of  Guiana,  so  farre  as  hee  entred,  to
bee  populous,  plentifull  of  victuall,  and  rich  in  golde.
Upon  such  proofes  as  hee  brought  with  him,  to  make
good  his report, many  others  adventured  to  follow  his

steps.

496

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

5.  6  Philip  de  Uren,  &  after  him  Pedro  de  Limpias,
who  both  successively  commanded  the  Almaines,  were
leaders  in  this  action.  Limpias  was  slaine  by  an  Indian
Casique  named  Porima.

7  Jeronimo  de  Ortal  undertooke  it  by  the  way  of
Maracapana.  After  great  travell  and  his  substance  all
spent,  he  dyed  on  the  sudden  at  S.  Domingo.

8.  9  XimeneSj  brother  of  Don  Ximenes  de  Quesida
the  Adelantado,  and  Pedro  de  Orsua  were  both  at  sundry
times  in  the  same  conquest.

10  Father  lala,  a  Frier,  taking  with  him  onely  one
companion,  and  some  Indian  guides  passed  into  the  pro-
vinces of  Guiana.  Hee  returned  with  good  intelligence,
and  brought  with  him  Eagles,  idols,  and  other  jewels  of
golde.  An.  1560.  Hee  assayed  the  second  time  to  passe
in  like  maner,  but  was  slaine  by  the  Indians.

1 1  Hernandez  de  Serpa  also  undertooke  it.  The
Indians  of  Cumanawgoto  killed  him,  and  defeated  his
armie.

12  Afterwardes,  Diego  de  Vargas,  and  his  sonne  Don
Juan  followed  this  enterprise,  and  at  their  first  setting
out,  were  slaine  by  the  Indians.

13  Caceres  undertooke  this  discovery  from  Nuevo
Reyno  de  Granada.  Hee  came  no  neerer  to  it  then
Matachines,  which  borders  upon  the  sayd  kingdome  of
Granada. Hee  rested  there  and  peopled  that  place.

14  It  was  also  attempted  by  Alonzo  de  Herera,  at  two
severall  times.  Hee  endured  great  miserie,  but  never
entred  one  league  into  the  countrey.  Hee  sought  it  by
Viapari  or  Amana,  and  was  at  last  slaine  by  a  nation  of
Indians  called  Xaguas.

15  It  was  also  undertaken  by  Antonio  Sedenno,  with
whom  Herrera  and  Augustine  Delgado  joyned  in  the
conquest  of  Trinidad,  against  Bawcunar  a  famous  king
of  that  place.  He  passed  by  Maracapana  in  the  yeere
1536  to  discover  El  Dorado  with  500  chosen  men.  In
this  journey  hee  got  much  gold,%,nd  tooke  many  Indian
prisoners,  whom  hee  manacled  in  yrons;  and  many  of

X  497  2 1

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

them  dyed  as  they  were  led  in  the  way.  The  Tigers
being  fleshed  on  those  dead  carkeisses,  assaulted  the
Spaniards,  who  with  much  trouble  hardly  defended  them-
selves from  them.  Sedenno  was  buried  within  the  pre-
cinct of  the  empire  neere  the  head  of  the  river  Tinados.
Most  of  his  people  perished  likewise.

16  Augustine  Delgado  searched  the  countrey  to  the
Southward  of  Cumanawgoto  with  53.  footemen,  and  three
horsemen.  The  warres  that  were  then  betweene  the
Indians  of  the  vale,  and  those  of  the  mountaines,  served
well  for  his  purpose.  By  which  occasion  he  found  meanes
to  passe  so  farre,  untill  he  came  to  an  Indian  Casique,
named  Garamental,  who  entertained  him  with  all  kind-
nesse,  and  gave  him  for  a  present  some  rich  jewels  of
golde,  sixe  seemely  pages,  tenne  young  slaves,  and  three
nymphes  very  beautifull,  which  bare  the  names  of  three
provinces  from  whence  they  were  sent  to  Garamental
chiefe  commander  of  all that  countrey. Their names

[III.  691.]  were  Guanba,  Gotoguane,  and  Maiarare.  These  pro-
vinces are  of  an  excellent  temperature,  very  healthfuU,
and  have  an  admirable  influence  in  producing  faire
women.  The  Spaniards  afterwardes  to  requite  the  mani-
fold curtesies  that  they  received  in  that  countrey,  tooke
and  carried  away,  besides  all  the  golde  that  they  could
get,  all  the  Indians  that  they  could  lay  holde  on:  they
conveyed  them  in  yrons  to  Cubagua,  and  sould  them  for
slaves.  Delgado  afterwards  was  shot  in  the  eye  by  an
Indian :  of  which  hurt  he  died.

17  Diego  de  Losada  succeeded  in  his  brothers  place.
Hee  had  many  more  men ;  who  in  the  ende  wasted  them-
selves in  mutinies :  those  that  lived  returned  to  Cubagua.

18  Reynoso  undertooke  this  journey:  but  having  en-
dured exceeding  troubles,  in  the  discomfort  of  his  minde,
he  gave  it  over,  and  was  buried  in  Hispaniola.

19  Pedro  de  Orsua,  in  the  yeere  1560.  sought  it  with
400.  Spaniards  by  the  river  of  Orellana.  Hee  im-
barqued  his  men  in  the  countrey  of  the  Motijones.  As
they  passed  downe  the  river,  they  found  Synamom  trees.

498

LAURENCE KEYMIS  a.d.

1596.

His  men  murthered  him,  and  afterward  the  sayde  rebels
beheaded  lady  Anes  his  wife,  who  forsooke  not  her  lord
in  all  his  travels  unto  death.

20  Frier  Francis  Montesino  was  in  the  province  of
Maracapana  with  100.  souldiers  bound  for  Guiana,  when
Lopez  Aguirri  the  tyrant  made  insurrection  in  all  those
parts  of  the  Indies.  What  became  of  this  intended
journey  is  not  expressed.

In  this  discoverie  of  Guiana  you  may  reade  both  of
Orellana,  who  discovered  the  river  of  Amazones  An.
1542.  and  of  Berreo,  with  others  that  have  trode  this
maze,  and  lost  themselves  in  seeking  to  finde  this
countrey.

An  advertisement  to  the  Reader.

IN  this  Breviarie,  the  names  onely  are  comprised  of
such,  as  being  led  with  the  generall  fame  of  Guiana,
have  indevoured  to  discover  and  possesse  it.  The  whole
histories  are  long  and  cannot  suddenly  be  translated  or
englished  at  large,  as  we  in  these  Elegies  finde  them.
It  may  perhaps  seeme  strange  and  incredible,  that  so
many  cavalleros  should  all  faile  in  this  one  attempt,  since
in  many  parts  of  the  Indies,  far  smaller  numbers  in
shorter  time  have  performed  as  great  matters,  and  sub-
dued mighty  kingdomes :  I  have  therefore  thought  it
good  here  to  alleage  those  reasons,  which  by  circum-
stance may  bee  gathered  to  have  beene  chiefe  impediments
to  the  Spaniard  in  this  intended  search  and  conquest.

The  first  may  bee  the  remotenesse  or  distance  of  their
places  of  Rendevous,  from  El  Dorado :  which  appeare
to  be  foure,  Nuevo  reyno,  the  mouth  of  Amazones  or
Orellana,  Cubagua  or  the  coast  of  the  Caracas,  and
Trinidad.

I  From  Moiobamba,  where  Orellana  hath  his  head-
spring, to  his  mouth,  the  Spaniards  account  it  2000.
leagues.  Raleana  riseth  neere  the  said  mountaines  in
Moiobamba,  &  tributeth  his  waters  to  the  sea,  not  farre
from  the  other :  Guiana  is  environed  with  these  2  fresh-

499

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

water-seas,  where  their  distance  is  greatest  from  their
risings,  and  is  besides  guarded  with  impassable  moun-
taines  which  inclose  and  defend  it  on  all  parts,  excepting
Topiawaries  countrey.  It  is  no  marvel  then,  if  the  vigor,
heart,  &  life  of  those  Spaniards,  who  sought  it  from
Nuevo  Reyno,  were  allayed  &  spent,  before  they  came
neere  to  it,  in  those  long,  desolate  &  uncomfortable
wayes.

2  From  Cubagua  to  seeke  it  by  sea  in  vessels  of  any
burthen,  is  a  worke  of  far  greater  labour,  then  to  saile
directly  from  Spaine.  And  to  passe  over  land  is  a  matter
of  great  difficultie,  by  reason  that  the  Indian  nations
inhabiting  betweene  the  coast  of  The  Caracas  and  Guiana,
being  wearied  and  harried  with  the  daily  incursions  of  the
Spaniards,  have  now  turned  their  abused  patience  into
furie,  refusing  to  suffer  any  forces  of  men  to  be  led
through  their  countreys.  For  the  Spaniards  travelling
in  those  parts,  when  they  found  not  gold  answerable
to  their  expectation,  overlaid  them  with  cruelties,  tyrannic,
and  thraldome :  forbearing  neither  men,  women,  friends,
nor  foes.  Which  maner  of  dealing,  though  in  some  part
it  satisfied  their  desire  of  present  profit ;  yet  hath  it  other-
wise done  them  much  harme,  in  hardening  and  driving
those  nations  to  desperate  resolutions.

3  From  the  mouth  of  Orellana  to  seeke  entrance  with
any  number  of  men,  &  to  bore  a  hole  through  the  moun-
taines  is  all  one.  Neither  finde  wee,  that  any  seeking  it
that  way,  have  at  any  time  boasted  of  their  gaines  or
pleasurable  journeys.

4  From  Trinidad,  as  the  course  is  shortest,  so  doeth
it  promise  best  likelyhood  of  successe.  Howbeit,  im-
possible it  is  with  any  vessell  of  ordinarie  burthen  by
that  way  to  recover  the  river  of  Raleana.

The  second.  The  Spaniards  have  bene  so  farre  from

helping  and  furthering  one  another,  or  admitting  partners

or  coadjutors  in  the  Guiana-cause,  that  amongst  so  many

[III.  692.]  attemptes,  from  the  beginning  to  the  last,  I  cannot  find

any  one,  when  they  were  otherwise  likeliest  to  prevaile,

500

LAURENCE KEYMIS  ad.

1596.
free  from  discords,  mutinies,  and  cruell  murthers  amongst
themselves.

Thirdly.  The  Spaniardes  in  this  place  have  mist  that
advantage,  which  elsewhere  hath  steeded  themselves  in
all  their  conquestes :  namely,  the  dissentions  and  mutuall
warres  of  the  Indians.  Which  of  that  force  it  is,  may  be
gathered  by  the  example  Arauco  in  Chili.  For  the
Indians  of  that  one  province  conteining  in  circuit  not
above  20.  leagues,  have  maintained  warres  above  these
30.  yeeres  against  all  the  Spaniards,  and  in  despight  of
them  have  kept  their  owne  countrey,  oftentimes  discom-
fiting their  enemies  in  many  set  battels,  burning  and
destroying  some  of  their  strongest  townes.  The  chiefe
reason  whereof  I  take  to  bee,  because  no  Indian  nation
was  enemie  unto  them.  And  howsoever  the  Spaniards
vaunt  of  their  redoubted  exployts  in  the  Indies  :  yet  doe
their  owne  writings  in  effect  testifie,  that  without  the
ayde  of  the  Indians  divided  among  themselves,  Mexico,
Peru,  and  the  rest,  had  never  beene  Spanish.

Lastly.  I  can  impute  it  to  no  cause  so  rightly,  as  im-
mediatly  to  the  divine  providence :  for  by  him  princes
raigne.  And  in  my  beleefe  (except  we  will  looke  to
bee  warned  by  miracle  from  heaven)  wee  neede  no  further
assurances,  then  wee  already  have  to  perswade  our  selves,
that  it  hath  pleased  God  of  his  infinite  goodnesse,  in  his
will  and  purpose  to  appoint  and  reserve  this  empire
for  us.

END OF VOLUME X,

m&msBS!s^jn

:.,%!E!^SSISteRj^^

The  Kroua  l^/el  \i.Ji«n  royjjt  n«Jt
^ b'llief.i^i1icfl«o('ils)u)fS>flBa.lii

:^:D0J'iiiGO,  C.\BTAorjiAa«i
:SAVGV'STIUtril«S!m»t-niiyl-»»
fromPlmiitaiili  m  lU  l-toocil olStpBnU'
1  jff^oitdrnfcd  01  ftrtleiiuoujh  ni  lolic

bejine  plajnlie  de nitdr  7jlie  wickj  1  a<

[e-Ateajmc  [ortni.

7^."^

i<;^,^_b^

11

>' ^ >

J%^-

-%.^J^^"^r

'■■'i >,/W_^'*^-e^^;'

■""*^„1;''

TliOatso con  iBnltgilw

Date  Due

L. B.  CAT.  NO.  1137

J  A  hi.  ig2§

HaMu.AcS902  00074  2077

"oyages  (raff.

G 240 . H2 1903 lO

Hakluyt,  Richard, 1552?-
1616,

The^  principal  navigations
vo'i^ages__jLraff l^uee  &
