The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 7 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 7 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  Traffiques  and

Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume VII

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  AND  COMPANY  LTD.  FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPK.IN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMIV

Phota^iravuTB  Tny  Armfln  Z(.  Song.  [jlaspDw,

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND

The Principal

Navigations  Voyages
Traffiques  &  Discoveries

of  the  EngHsh  Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within  the

compasse  of  these 1600  Yeeres

By

RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church  in  Oxford

VOLUME  VII

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMIV

Vol  590

6^

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages  of  this  seventh  volume
made  to  the  South  and  South-east  quarters,
and  the  Voyages  undertaken  for  the  finding
of  a  Northwest  Passage ;  with  the  Ambas-
sages,  Treatises,  Priviledges,  Letters,  and
other  observations,  depending  upon  the
Voyages  of  this  seventh  Volume  :

The  voyage  of  the  Right  honourable  the  Earle  of  Cumber-
land to  the  Azores,  in  the  yeere  1589. ,  .  .  i

A  fight  performed  by  ten  marchants  ships  of  London  against
12 Spanish gallies, in the Streit of  Gibraltar. An.

1590 31

The  valiant  fight  performed  in  the  Streit  of  Gibraltar  by  the
Centurion  of  London,  against  five  Spanish  gallics,  An.

1591 35

V A,  true  report  of  the  fight  about  the  Isles  of  the  Azores,
betweene  the  Revenge  one  of  her  Majesties  ships,
under  the  conduct  of  Sir  Richard  Grinvile,  and  an
Armada  of  the  king  of  Spaine,  An.  1591.  .  .  38

A  particular  note  of  the  West  Indian  fleete  expected  to
have  arrived  in  Spaine,  An.  1592,  with  the  number
of  ships  of  the  same  fleete  that  perished  and  suffered
shipshrack  &c.  ......  54

V

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  voyage  of  certaine  ships  of  London  to  the  coast  of  Spaine,
and  the  Azores,  An.  1591.  Reported  by  M.  Robert
Flick 56

A  large  testimony  of  John  Huighen  van  Linschoten  concern-
ing the  worthy  exploits  atchieved  by  the  right  hon.
the  erle  of  Cumberland,  by  Sir  Martin  Frobisher,  Sir
Richard  Grinvile,  and  divers  other  English  Captains,
about  the  Isles  of  the  A9ores,  and  upon  the  coastes
of  Spaine  and  Portugale,  in  the  yeares  1589,  1590,  i  59i>  62

A  relation  concerning  the  estate  of  the  Island  and  Castle  of
Arguin,  and  touching  the  rich  and  secret  trade  from
the  inland  of  Africa  thither,  written  in  the  yere  1591.  88

The  voyage  of  Richard  Rainolds  and  Thomas  Dassell  to  the
rivers  of  Senega  and  Gambra,  neere  the  coast  of
Guinea,  Anno  1591.  .....  90

Two  briefe  relations  concerning  the  Cities  and  Provinces  of
Tombuto  and  Gago,  and  concerning  the  exceeding
great  riches  of  the  sayd  Provinces,  and  the  conquest
thereof  by  the  king  of  Marocco,  and  of  the  huge  masse
of  gold,  which  he  yerely  receiveth  thence  for  tribute.
Written  Anno  1594.  .....  99

A  briefe  extract  of  a  patent  granted  to  M.  Thomas  Gregory
of  Tanton,  and  others,  for  traffick  betweene  the  river
of  Nonnia,  and  the  rivers  of  Madrabumba  and  Sierra
Leona,  on  the  coast  of  Guinea,  An.  1592.  .  . 102

The  taking  of  two  Spanish  ships  laden  with  quicksilver  and
with  the  Popes  Bulles,  bound  for  the  West  Indies,  by
M.  Thomas  White  in  the  Amitie  of  London,  An.
1592- i°3

The  taking  of  the  mightie  and  rich  Carak  called  The  Madre
de  Dios,  and  of  the  Santa  Clara  a  Biskaine  of  600
tunnes,  as  likewise  the  firing  of  another  great  Carak
called  The  Santa  Cruz,  Anno  1592. .  .  . 105

vi

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  firing  and  sinking  of  the  stout  and  warlike  Carak  called
The  Cinquo  Chaguas,  or  The  five  woundes,  by  three
ships  of  the  R.  H.  the  Earle  of  Cumberland,  Anno
1594.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .118

A  report  of  the  casting  away  of  the  Tobie,  a  ship  of
London,  neere  Cape  Espartel  on  the  coast  of  Barbary
without  the  Streight  of  Gibraltar,  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lord  1593.  .  .  .  .  .  .124

The  letters  of  the  Queens  Majestic  sent  by  Laurence
Aldersey  unto  the  Emperour  of  Ethiopia,  Anno
1597 129

The  most  ancient  voyage  and  discovery  of  the  West  Indies
performed  by  Madoc  the  sonne  of  Owen  Gained
prince  of  North  Wales,  Anno  1 1 70 ;  taken  out  of  the
history  of  Wales,  &c.  .  .  .  .  -133

The  verses  of  Meredith  the  sonne  of  Rhesus  making  men-
tion of  Madoc  the  sonne  of  Owen  Guined,  and  of  his
Navigation  unto  unknowen  lands,  .  .  . 135

The  offer  of  the  discovery  of  the  West  Indies  by  Christopher
Columbus  to  K.  Henry  the  7.  February  the  13.  Anno
1488;  with  the  Kings  acceptance  of  the  said  offer. . 135

Another  testimony  concerning  the  foresaid  offer  made  by
Bartholomew  Columbus  to  K.  Henry  the  seventh,  on
the  behalfe  of  his  brother  Christopher  Columbus. . 139

The  letters  patents  of  K.  Henry  the  7.  granted  unto  John
Cabot  and  his  3.  sonnes,  Lewis,  Sebastian,  and  Sancius,
for  the  discovery  of  new  and  unknowen  lands.  Anno
1495.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .141

The  signed  bill  of  K.  Henry  the  7.  on  the  behalfe  of  John

Cabot.  ....... 145

vii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  voyage  of  Sebastian  Cabota  to  the  North  part  of
America,  for  the  discovery  of  a  Northwest  passage,  as
farre  as  58.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  from  thence  back
againe  all  along  the  coast,  till  he  fell  with  some  part  of
Florida,  anno  1497;  confirmed  by  6.  testimonies ;  The
first  taken  out  of  the  mappe  of  Sebastian  Cabota  cut
by  Clement  Adames ;  the  second  used  by  Galeacius
Butrigarius  the  Popes  legate,  and  reported  by  him ;
the  third  out  of  the  preface  of  Baptista  Ramusius  before
his  third  volume  of  Navigations ;  the  4.  out  of  the
thirde  decade  of  Peter  Martyr  ab  Angleria ;  the  5.  out
of  the  general  history  of  Lopez  de  Gomara  ;  and  the  6,
out  of  Fabians  chronicle. ..... 145

A  briefe  extract  concerning  the  discovery  of  Newfound-
land. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  • >  S  5

The  large  pension  granted  by  K.  Edward  the  6.  to  Sebastian
Cabota,  constituting  him  Grand  pilote  of  England,
Anno  1549.  •  •  •  •  •  .156

A  discourse  written  by  sir  Humfrey  Gilbert  knight,  to  proove
a  passage  by  the  Northwest  to  Cataya,  and  the  East
Indies.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .158

The  first  voyage  of  M.  Martin  Frobisher  to  the  Northwest

for  the  search  of  a  passage  to  China,  anno  1576.  . 204

The  second  voyage  of  M.  Martin  Frobisher  to  the  West

and  Northwest  regions,  in  the  yeere  1577. .  . 211

The  third  and  last  voyage  of  M.  Martin  Frobisher  for  the

discovery  of  a  Northwest  passage,  in  the  yere  1578, . 231

Experiences  and  reasons  of  the  Sphere  to  proove  all  parts  of
the  worlde  habitable,  and  thereby  to  confute  the
position  of  the  five  Zones.  .  .  .  .250

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  letter  of  M.  Martin  Frobisher  to  certaine  Englishmen,
which  were  trecherously  taken  by  the  Salvages  of  Meta
incognita  in  his  first  voyage.  .... 309

Articles  and  orders  prescribed  by  M.  Martin  Frobisher  to  the
Captaines  and  company  of  every  ship,  which  accom-
panied him  in  his  last  Northwestern  voyage. .  . 322

A  generall  and  briefe  description  of  the  country  and  con-
dition of  the  people,  which  are  founde  in  Meta
incognita. ....... 367

The  letters  patents  of  her  Majesty  graunted  to  M.  Adrian
Gilbert  and  others  for  the  search  and  discovery  of  a
Northwest  passage  to  China. .  .  .  '375

The  first  voyage  of  M.  John  Davis  for  the  discovery  of  a

Northwest  passage,  1585..  .  .  .  . 381

The  second  voyage  of  M.  John  Davis  for  the  discovery  of

the  Northwest  pass.  1586.  .... 393

A  letter  of  M.  J.  Davis  to  M.  Wil. Sanderson  of  London,

concerning  his  second  voyage. .... 407

The  voyage  and  course  which  the  Sunshine  a  barke  of  50.
tunnes,  &  the  Northstarre  a  small  pinnesse,  being  2.
vessels  of  the  Fleete  of  M.  John  Davis,  held,  after  hee
had  sent  them  from  him  to  discover  a  passage  betweene
Groenland  and  Iseland,  1587. .... 408

The  third  voyage  Northwestward,  made  by  M.  John  Davis
Gentleman  for  the  discovery  of  a  passage  to  the  Isles  of
the  Moluccas,  or  the  coast  of  China  in  the  yeere  1587. 414

A  letter  of  M.  John  Davis  to  M.  Wil.  Sanderson  of  London,

concerning  his  3.  voyage. ..... 423

ix

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  traverse-booke  of  M.  John  Davis  contayning  all  the  princi-
pall  notes  and  observations  taken  in  his  third  and  last
voyage  to  the  Northwest.  ..... 424.

A  report  of  M.  John  Davis  concerning  his  three  voyages
made  for  the  discovery  of  the  Northwest  passage,  taken
out  of  a  treatise  of  his  intituled  The  worlds  hydro-
graphical  description.  ..... 440

The  voyage  of  M.  Nicolas  Zeno  and  M.  Anthony  his
brother,  to  the  yles  of  Frisland,  Island,  Engronland,
Estotiland,  Drogeo,  and  Icaria,  begun  in  the  yeere
1380 445

A  testimony  of  Ortelius  for  the  credit  of  the  history  of  M.

Nicolas,  &  M.  Antonio  Zeni. .  .  .  . 464

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

George  Clifford,  Third  Earl  of  Cumberland, Frontispiece

George  ClifFord,  third  Earl  of  Cumberland,  was  born  at
Brougham  Castle  in  Westmoreland in 1558. He
succeeded to the title in January 1569-70. In
1571 he  went  to  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and
took  his  M.A.  degree  in  1576. He  is  also  said  to
have  studied  mathematics  and  geography  at  Oxford.
In  1586  he  fitted  out  his  first  expedition  'intended
for  the  South  Sea '  under  the  command  of  Captains
Robert Withrington and Christopher Lister. In
1588  he  commanded  the  'Elizabeth  Bonaventure'
against  the  Spanish  Armada. In  1589  he  made  an
expedition  to  the  Azores  and  suffered  great  hardships
on  the  return  home  (see  p.  22). Between  1591  and
1595 he  fitted  out  four  more  expeditions,  and in
January 1597-8 he fitted out the largest  of  all,
intended  for  the  West  Indies,  with  himself  in  com-
mand on the 'Malice Scourge.' This ship
subsequently became  famous for  her East Indian
voyages  under  the  name  of  the  '  Red  Dragon.' The
expedition, like most  of  the  former  ones,  was  a
failure. Cumberland died in London on 30th
October 1605. He  is  said  to  have  been  a  man  of
great  personal  beauty,  and  stood  high  in  Elizabeth's
favour. The  portrait,  showing  the Queen's  glove
which  he  wore  as  a  badge  in  his  hat,  is  reproduced
from the original  by  an  unknown painter  in the
National  Portrait  Gallery.

XI

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Sir  Richard  Grenville, ...... 48

Sir  Richard  Grenville  or  Greynville  belonged  to  a
Cornish  family  and  was  born  about  1541.  He  was
a  cousin  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh.  In  1571  he  sat  in
Parliament  as  member  for  Cornwall.  He  made  his
first  sea  voyage  in  May  1585  when  he  commanded
a  fleet  of  seven  ships  intended  for  the  settlement  of
Virginia.  On  his  way  home  'he  tooke  a  Spanish
ship  of  300  tunne  richly  loaden,  boording  her  with
a  boate  made  with  boards  of  chests,  which  fell
asunder,  and  sunke  at  the  ships  side,  assoone  as
ever  he  and  his  men  were  out  of  it.'  In
I  586  he  made  another  voyage  to  Virginia.  In  1 588
he  was  engaged  in  planning  measures  of  defence  for
the  western  counties  in  anticipation  of  the  Spanish
Armada.  In  1591  the  action  off  the  Azores  took
place  which  resulted  in  the  loss  of  the  '  Revenge '
and  his  death.  The  portrait  here  reproduced  is
taken  from  the  British  museum  copy  of  Holland's
Heroologia  published  in  London  in  1620.

John  Huighen  van  Linschoten, .... 64

Linschoten  was  born  at  Haarlem  about  1563,  but  it  was
from  Enkhuizen,  whither  his  parents  had  removed,
that  in  1576  Linschoten  set  out  on  the  travels  which
have  made  his  name  famous.  He  first  went  to  Spain
where  he  stayed  six  years  ;  next  he  joined  the
Spanish  fleet  for  the  East  Indies  and  was  at  Goa  in
1583  when  John  Newbery  and  Ralph  Fitch  arrived
as  prisoners  from  Ormuz.  His  account  of  their
escape  is  given  in  Volume  V  page  505  of  this  edition.
In  1591  he  was  at  Terceira  in  the  Azores  when  the
Spanish  fleet  put  in  for  repairs  after  the  action  with
the  *  Revenge,'  and  his  '  large  testimony '  of  the
fight  as  related  to  him  by  the  Spaniards,  with  the
description  of  the  great  storm  which  followed  it,  will
be  found  at  page  80.  In  1594-5  he  accompanied
Barents  in  his  voyages  to  the  Arctic  regions.  He
died  in  161 1. The  portrait  is  taken  from  a  copy  in

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

the British Museum of  Boissardi's  Bibliotheca  she
Thesaurus  Virtutis  published  at  Frankfort  in  1628.

Map  of  the  World  by  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert,  . 176

This,  the  only  known  map  by  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert
now  in  existence,  is  taken  from  the  copy  in  the
British  Museum  of  his  Discourse  of  a  D'lscoverie  of  a
new  passage  to  Cathaia  published  in  London  in  1576.
It  was  '  made  onelye  for  the  particular  declaration  of
this  discovery.'

Sir  Martin  Frobisher, .  .  .  .  .  .208

Frobisher  was  born  about  1535.  He  made  his  first
voyage,  to  Guinea,  in  1554.  In  1571  he  was
employed  in  sea  service  oiF  the  coast  of  Ireland,
where  he  attracted  the  notice  of  Sir  Humphrey
Gilbert.  On  the  grant  of  a  charter  to  the  Company
of  Cathay  in  1577  he  was  appointed  Captain-
general  and  admiral  of  the  Company's  fleet.  In
1576-78  he  was  occupied  in  his  voyages  in  search
of  the  North-west  passage.  In  1580  he  was  made
clerk  of  Her  Majesty's  ships.  In  September  1585
he  sailed  for  the  West  Indies  in  Drake's  expedition
as  vice-admiral  on  the  'Primrose'.  He  was  in  com-
mand of  the  ^  Triumph '  against  the  Armada  in
1588  and  was  knighted  by  Lord  Howard  of
Effingham  for  *  that  hee  had  valiantly  and  discreetly
behaved  himself  in  the  fight  on  the  25  th  July.  In
1594  in  the  'Dreadnought'  he  was  employed  at
the  relief  of  Brest  and  Crozon,  was  wounded  in  the
hip  while  landing  his  men  at  Crozon,  and  taken
back  to  Plymouth  where  he  died  shortly  after  his
arrival.  The  portrait  is  taken  from  the  copy  in  the
British  Museum  of  Holland's  Heroologia,  1620.

Map  of  the  World,  a.d. 1578, . . . .256

This  map,  made  to  illustrate  George  Best's  Discourse
'  to  proove  all  partes  of  the  worlde  habitable,'  is
taken from the  British Museum copy  of  A  True

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Discourse  of  the  Late  Voyages  of  Discoverie  for  finding
of  a  Passage  to  Cathay  a,  by  the  North-Weast,  under
the  Conduct  of  Martin  Frobisher,  General.  Imprinted
at  London  by  Henry  Bynnyman, 1578.

Map  of  Meta  Incognita, .  .  .  ,  -336

This  '  particular  card '  intended  to  set  '  so  farre  forth  as
the  secretes  of  the  voyage  may  permit'  Frobisher's
discoveries  on  the  coast  of  Meta  Incognita  is  taken
from  Bynnyman's  True  Discourse  cited  above.

Map  of  the  World,  by  Michael  Lock,  ,  .368

According  to  the  fragment  of  Autobiography  preserved
in  the  British  Museum,  Michael  Lock  or  Lok  was
born  in  1532.  He  says :  '  My  late  father,  S''  William
Lok,  knight,  alderman  of  London,  kept  me  at  scholes
of  grammer  in  England  till  I  wras  xiii  yeres  old,
which  was  A°  Dni,  1545,  and  he  being  sworn  ser-
vant to  King  Henrj-  the  VIII*^  his  mercer  and  also
his  agent  beyond  the  seas  dyvers  affayres,  he  then
sent  me  over  seas  to  Flanders  and  France  to  learn
those  languages  and  to  know  the  world.  Synce
which  tyme  I  have  contynued  these  xxxii  yeres  in
travaile  of  body  and  study  of  mynde,  following  my
vocation  in  the  trade  of  merchandise,  whereof  I  have
spent  the  first  xv  yeres  in  contynuall  travaile  of  body,
passing  through  allmost  all  the  cuntrees  of  Chris-
tianity. Namely  out  of  England,  into  Scotland,
Ireland,  Flanders,  Germany,  France,  Spayne,  Italy
and  Greece,  both  by  land  and  by  sea,  not  without
great  labo''',  cares,  dangers  and  expenses  of  mony
incident ;  having  had  the  charge  (as  capitayn)  of
a  great  ship  of  burden  1000  tuns,  by  the  space  of
more  then  iii  yeres  in  dyvers  voyages  in  the  Levant
seas,  wherewithall  I  returned  into  England.  In
which  travailes,  besides  the  knowledge  of  all  those
famous  common  languages  of  those  cuntries,  I  sought
allso  for  the  knowledge  of  the  state  of  all  their  com-
mon wealths,  chiefly  in  all  matters  apperteining  to

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

the  traffique  of  merchants.  And  the  rest  of  my
tyme  I  have  spent  in  England  under  the  happy
raigne  of  the  Queenes  Ma"®  now  being.'  Lock  was
one  of  the  promoters  of  Frobisher's  voyages  and  was
greatly  impoverished  through  their  failure  financially.
He  was  imprisoned  in  the  Fleet  at  the  instance  of
William  Borough  in  158 1.  He  died  about  161 5.
The  map,  which  is  dedicated  to  Sir  Philip  Sidney,
is  taken  from  the  copy  in  the  Hunterian  Library,
University  of  Glasgow,  of  the  Divers  Voyages  touching
the  discoverie  of  America,  published  by  Hakluyt  in
1582.

Letter from John Davis to Walsingham, 3rd

October, 1585, . . . . . . 392

John  Davis,  or  Davys,  '  the  Navigator,'  was  born  at
Sandridge  about  1550.  He  was  a  neighbour  and
companion  of  Humphrey  and  Adrian  Gilbert.
In  1585-6  he  made  his  voyages  in  search  of  the
North-west  passage,  and  on  his  return  home  from
his  first  voyage  in  1585  he  wrote  this  letter  to  Sir
Francis  Walsingham.  In  1589  he  joined  the  Earl
of  Cumberland's  expedition  off  the  Azores,  and
in  1 59 1  he  went  with  Thomas  Cavendish  as  Rear-
admiral  on  the  'Desire.'  In  1598  he  was  pilot  of  a
Dutch  ship,  the  'Lion,'  and  in  1600  was  appointed
Pilot-major  of  the  first  East  Indian  fleet  under
Captain  James  Lancaster.  In  1605,  when  pilot
of  the  '  Tiger '  under  Sir  Edward  Michelborne,
his  ship  was  treacherously  attacked  by  Japanese
pirates  near  Bintung,  in  the  Straits  of  Malacca,
and  he  was  killed.  He  wrote  a  treatise  on  naviga-
tion, the  Seaman's  Secrets,  first  published  in  1594,
and  the  Worldes  Hydrographical  Description,  published
in  1595,  and  he  mvented  the  '  backstaff,'  for  taking
the  altitude  of  the  sun.

The  following  is  the  translation  of  the  letter,  which  is  re-
produced from  the  original  in  the  British  Museum :

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

*  Right  honorable  most  dutyfuUy  craving  pardon  for
this  my  rashe  boldnes,  I  am  herby,  according  to  my
duty,  to  signyfy  unto  yo'  honor  that  the  north-west
passage  is  a  matter  nothing  doubtful!,  but  at  any
tyme  almost  to  be  passed,  the  sea  navigable,  voyd  of
yse,  the  ayre  toUerable,  and  the  waters  very  depe.
I  have  also  found  an  yle  of  very  grate  quantytie,
not  in  any  globe  or  map  dyscrybed,  yelding  a
sufficient  trade  of  furre  and  lether,  and  although  this
passage  hath  bine  supposed  very  impassible,  yeat
through  Gods  mercy,  I  am  in  experience  ann  ey
wyttnes  to  the  contrary,  yea  in  this  most  desperate
clymate ;  which,  by  Gods  help,  I  wyll  very  shortly
most  at  large  revele  unto  yo"^  honor  as  sone  as  I  can
possible  take  order  for  my  maryners  and  shipping.
Thus  depending  up"  yo'  honors  good  favor,  I  most
humbly  comytt  you  to  God  this  third  of  October.
Yo'  honors  for  ever  most  dutyfull

John  Davys.'

Map  of  the  Earl  of  Cumberland's  Voyage  to  the

Azores,  by  Edward  Wright, 1589,  .  . 466

'The  excellent  Mathematician  and  Enginier  Master
Edward  Wright '  was  born  at  Garveston,  Norfolk,
about  1558.  He  went  up  to  Caius  College  Cam-
bridge in  1576,  graduated  B.A.  in  1580-1,  M.A.  in
1584  and  was  a  fellow  from  1587-96.  He  accom-.
panied  the  Earl  of  Cumberland  to  the  Azores  in
1589  and  wrote  the  account  of  the  voyage.  It  is
now  generally  held  that  he  was  the  discoverer  of  the
so-called  'Mercator's'  projection.  He  was  appointed
lecturer  on  navigation  to  the  East  India  Company.
He  died  in  161 5.  The  map  here  reproduced  was
made  by  Wright  to  illustrate  the  Earl  of  Cumberland's
Voyage  to  the  Azores  in  1589  and  is  taken  from  a
copy  of  his  Certain  Errors  in  Navigation  published  in
London  in  1599,  now  in  the  Grenville  Library  in
the  British  Museum.

xvi

THE SEVENTH VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  Traffiques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Made  to  the  South  and  South-east  quarters  of  the

World,  and  the  Voyages  undertaken  for  the

finding  of  a  Northwest  Passage,  with

the  directions,  letters,  privileges

discourses,  and  observations

incident  to  the  same

The  voiage  of  the  right  honorable  George  Erie
of  Cumberland  to  the  Azores,  &c.  Written
by  the  excellent  Mathematician  and  Enginier
master  Edward  Wright.

He  right  honorable  the  Erie  of  Cumber-
land having  at  his  owne  charges  prepared
his  small  Fleet  of  foure  Sailes  onely,
viz.  The  Victorie  one  of  the  Queenes
ships  royall ;  the  Meg  and  Margaret
small  ships,  (one  of  which  also  he  was
forced  soone  after  to  send  home  againe,
finding  her  not  able  to  endure  the  Sea)  and  a  small
Caravell,  and  having  assembled  together  about  400  men
(or  fewer)  of  gentlemen,  souldiers,  and  saylers,  embarked
himself  and  them,  and  set  saile  from  the  Sound  of
Plimmouth  in  Devonshire,  the  18  day  of  June  1589.
being  accompanied  with  these  captaines  and  gentlemen
which  hereafter  folow.

Captaine  Christopher  Lister  a  man  of  great  resolution,
captaine  Edward  Carelesse,  alias  Wright,  who  in  sir
Francis  Drakes  West-Indian  voyage  to  S.  Domingo  and
Carthagena,  was  captaine  of  the  Hope.  Captaine  Boswell,
M.  Mervin,  M.  Henry  Long,  M.  Partridge,  M.  Norton,
M.  William  Mounson  captaine  of  the  Meg,  and  his
viceadmirall,  now  sir  William  Mounson,  M.  Pigeon
captaine  of  the  Caravell.

About  3  dayes  after  our  departure  from  Plimmouth
we  met  with  3  French  ships,  whereof  one  was  of
Newhaven,  another  of  S.  Malos,  and  so  finding  them  to

VII  I  A

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-

be  Leaguers  &  lawful  Prises,  we  tooke  them  and  sent
two  of  them  for  England  with  all  their  loding,  which  was
fish  for  the  most  part  from  New-found-land,  saving
that  there  was  part  thereof  distributed  amongst  our  small
Fleet,  as  we  could  find  Stowage  for  the  same  :  and  in
the  third,  all  their  men  were  sent  home  into  France.
The  same  day  &  the  day  folowing  we  met  with  some
other  ships,  whom  (when  after  some  conference  had  with
them,  we  perceived  plainly  to  bee  of  Roterodam  and
Emden,  bound  for  Rochell)  we  dismissed.

The  28  and  29  dayes  we  met  divers  of  our  English
ships,  returning  from  the  Portugall  voiage  which  my
lord  relieved  with  victuals.  The  13  day  of  July  being
Sonday  in  the  morning,  we  espied  1 1  ships  without
sight  of  ye  coast  of  Spaine,  in  the  height  of  39  degrees,
whom  wee  presently  prepared  for,  &  provided  to  meet
them,  having  first  set  forth  captaine  Mounson  in  the
Meg,  before  us,  to  descry  whence  they  were.  The  Meg
approching  neere,  there  passed  some  shot  betwixt  them,
[II.  ii.  156.]  whereby,  as  also  by  their  Admiral  and  Viceadmirall
putting  foorth  their  flags,  we  perceived  that  some  fight
was  likely  to  follow.  Having  therefore  fitted  our  selves
for  them,  we  made  what  hast  we  could  towards  them
with  regard  alwayes  to  get  the  wind  of  them,  and  about
10  or  II  of  the  clocke,  we  came  up  to  them  with  the
Victory.  But  after  some  few  shot  &  some  litle  fight
passed  betwixt  us,  they  yeelded  themselves,  &  the  masters
of  them  all  came  aboord  us,  shewing  their  several  Pas-
ports  from  the  cities  of  Hamburg  and  Lubeck,  from
Breme,  Pomerania  and  Calice.

They  had  in  them  certaine  bags  of  Pepper  &  Syna-
mom,  which  they  confessed  to  be  the  goods  of  a  Jew
in  Lisbon,  which  should  have  bene  caried  by  them  into
their  country  to  his  Factor  there,  and  so  finding  it  by
their  owne  confession  to  be  lawful  Prise,  the  same  was
soone  after  taken  and  devided  amongst  our  whole  com-
pany, the  value  wherof  was  esteemed  to  be  about  4500
pounds,  at  two  shillings  the  pound.

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1589.

The  17  day  the  foresaid  ships  were  dismissed,  but  7
of  their  men  that  were  willing  to  go  along  with  us  for
sailers,  we  tooke  to  helpe  us,  and  so  held  on  our  course
for  the  Azores.

The  I  of  August  being  Friday  in  the  morning,  we
had  sight  of  the  Hand  of  S.  Michael,  being  one  of  the
Eastermost  of  the  Azores  toward  which  we  sailed  all  that
day,  and  at  night  having  put  foorth  a  Spanish  flag  in
our  main-top,  that  so  they  might  the  lesse  suspect  us,
we  approched  neere  to  the  chiefe  towne  and  road  of  that
Hand,  where  we  espied  3  ships  riding  at  anker  and
some  other  vessels :  all  which  we  determined  to  take  in
the  darke  of  the  night,  and  accordingly  attempted  about
10  or  II  of  the  clocke,  sending  our  boats  well  manned
to  cut  their  cables  and  hausers,  and  let  them  drive  into
the  sea.  Our  men  comming  to  them,  found  y'  one  of
those  greatest  ships  was  the  Falcon  of  London  being-
there  under  a  Scottish  Pilot  who  bare  the  name  of  her  as
his  own.  But  3  other  smal  ships  that  lay  neere  under  3  ships  for-
the  castle  there,  our  men  let  loose  and  towed  them  away  '-''^^h ^'^'^^'^ °"^
unto  us,  most  of  the  Spaniards  that  were  in  them  leaping  °-^  ^^^
over-boord  and  swimming  to  shore  with  lowd  and
lamentable  outcries,  which  they  of  the  towne  hearing
were  in  an  uprore,  and  answered  with  the  like  crying.
The  castle  discharged  some  great  shot  at  our  boats,  but
shooting  without  marke  by  reason  of  the  darknesse  they
did  us  no  hurt.  The  Scots  likewise  discharged  3  great
pieces  into  the  aire  to  make  the  Spaniards  thinke  they
were  their  friends  and  our  enemies,  and  shortly  after  the
Scottish  master,  &  some  other  with  him,  came  aboord
to  my  lord  doing  their  dutie,  and  offring  their  service,
&c.  These  3  ships  were  fraught  with  wine  and  Sallet-
oile  from  Sivil.

The  same  day  our  Caravel  chased  a  Spanish  Caravel
to  shore  at  S.  Michael,  which  caried  letters  thither,  by
which  we  learned  that  the  Caraks  were  departed  from
Tercera  8 dayes  before.

The 7 of  August  we  had  sight  of  a  litle  ship  which

3

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

wee  chased  towards  Tercera  with  our  pinnasse  (the
weather  being  calme)  and  towards  evening  we  overtooke
her,  there  were  in  her  30  tunnes  of  good  Madera  wine,
certaine  woollen  cloth,  silke,  taffata,  &c.  The  14  of
August  we  came  to  the  Hand  of  Flores,  where  we  de-
termined to  take  in  some  fresh  water  and  fresh  victuals,
such  as  the  Hand  did  affoord.  So  we  manned  our  boats
with  some  120  men  and  rowed  towards  the  shore ;  where-
to when  we  approched  the  inhabitants  that  were  assembled
at  the  landing  place,  put  foorth  a  flag  of  truce,  where-
upon we  also  did  the  like.

When  we  came  to  them,  my  Lord  gave  them  to
understand  by  his  Portugall  interpreter,  that  he  was  a
friend  to  their  king  Don  Antonio,  and  came  not  any  way
to  injury  them,  but  that  he  ment  onely  to  have  some
fresh  water  and  fresh  victuals  of  them,  by  way  of  ex-
change for  some  provision  that  he  had,  as  oile,  wine,  or
pepper,  to  which  they  presently  agreed  willingly,  &  sent
some  of  their  company  for  beeves  and  sheepe,  and  we
in  the  meane  season  marched  Southward  about  a  mile
to  Villa  de  Santa  Cruz,  from  whence  all  the  inhabitants
yong  and  old  were  departed,  and  not  any  thing  of  value
left.  We  demanding  of  them  what  was  the  cause  hereof,
they  answered,  Feare ;  as  their  usuall  maner  was  when
any  ships  came  neere  their  coast.

We  found  that  part  of  the  Hand  to  be  full  of  great
rockie  barren  hils  and  mountains,  litle  inhabited  by  reason
that  it  is  molested  with  ships  of  war  which  might  partly
appeare  by  this  towne  of  Santa  Cruz  (being  one  of  their
chiefe  townes)  which  was  all  ruinous,  and  (as  it  were)  but
the  reliques  of  the  ancient  towne  which  had  bene  burnt
about  two  yeeres  before  by  certaine  English  ships  of
war,  as  the  inhabitants  there  reported.

At  evening  as  we  were  in  rowing  towards  the  Victory,
an  huge  fish  pursued  us  for  the  space  well  nigh  of  two
miles  together,  distant  for  the  most  part  from  the  boats
Sterne  not  a  speares  length,  and  sometimes  so  neere
that  the  boat  stroke  upon  him,  the  tips  of  whose  finnes

4

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1589.
about  the  ghils  (appearing  oft  times  above  the  water)
were  by  estimation  4  or  5  yards  asunder,  and  his  jawes
gaping  a  yard  and  an  halfe  wide,  which  put  us  in  feare  of
overturning  the  pinnasse,  but  God  bee  thanked  (rowing
as  hard  as  we  could)  we  escaped.

When  we  were  about  Flores  a  litle  ship  called  the
Drake,  brought  us  word  that  the  Caraks  were  at  Tercera,
of  which  newes  we  were  very  glad,  &  sped  us  thitherward
with  all  the  speed  we  could :  and  by  the  way  we  came
to  Fayal  road  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  August,  [II.  ii.  157.]
after  sunne  set,  where  we  espied  certaine  shippes  ryding
at  anker,  to  whom  we  sent  in  our  SkifFe  with  Captaine
Lister  and  Captaine  Monson  in  her  to  discover  the
roaders :  and  least  any  daunger  should  happen  to  our
boate,  we  sent  in  likewise  the  Sawsie  Jacke  and  the  small
Caravell ;  but  the  wind  being  off  the  shoare,  the  shippes
were  not  able  to  fet  it  so  nigh  as  the  Spaniards  ride,  which
neverthelesse  the  boate  did,  and  clapped  a  shippe  aboord
of  two  hundred  and  fiftie  tunnes,  which  caried  in  her
fourteene  cast  peeces,  and  continued  fight  alone  with
her  for  the  space  of  one  houre  untill  the  comming  up
of  other  boates  to  the  reskue  of  her,  which  were  sent
from  the  shippes,  and  then  a  fresh  boording  her  againe
one  boate  in  the  quarter,  another  in  the  hause,  wee  entred
her  on  the  one  side,  and  all  the  Spaniards  lept  overboord
on  the  other,  save  Juan  de  Palma  the  Captaine  of  her
and  two  or  three  more,  and  thus  we  became  possessors
of  her.  This  shippe  was  mored  to  the  Castle  which  shot
at  us  all  this  while :  the  onely  hurt  which  we  received  of
all  this  shot  was  this,  that  the  master  of  our  Caravell
had  the  calfe  of  his  legge  shot  away.  This  shippe  was
laden  with  Sugar,  Ginger,  and  hides  lately  come  from
S.  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico ;  after  we  had  towed  her  cleare
off  the  castle,  we  rowed  in  againe  with  our  boats,  and
fetched  out  five  small  ships  more,  one  laden  with  hides,
another  with  Elephants  teeth,  graines,  coco-nuts,  and
goates  skins  come  from  Guinie,  another  with  woad,  and
two  with  dogge-fish,  which  two  last  we  let  drive  in  the

5

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

sea  making  none  account  of  them.  The  other  foure
we  sent  for  England  the  30  of  August.

At  the  taking  of  these  Prizes  were  consorted  with
us  some  other  small  men  of  warre,  as  Maister  John
Davis,  with  his  shippe,  Pinnesse,  and  Boate,  Captaine
Markesburie  with  his  ship,  whose  owner  was  Sir  Walter
Ralegh,  the  Barke  of  Lime,  which  was  also  consorted
with  us  before.

The  last  of  August  in  the  morning  we  came  in  sight
of  Tercera,  being  about  some  nine  or  ten  leagues  from
shoare,  where  we  espied  comming  towards  us,  a  small
boat  under  saile,  which  seemed  somewhat  strange  unto  us,
being  so  farre  from  land,  and  no  shippe  in  sight,  to  which
they  might  belong :  but  comming  neere,  they  put  us
Jn  escape  of  out  of  doubt,  shewing  they  were  English  men  (eight
8.  tngfishmen  -^^ number) that  had  lately  beene  prisoners  in  Tercera,

tVOPt y  BTCBVCl  -  ••  .  .

and  finding  opportunitie  to  escape  at  that  time,  with  that
small  boat  committed  themselves  to  the  sea,  under  Gods
providence,  having  no  other  yard  for  their  maine  saile,
but  two  pipe  staves  tyed  together  by  the  endes,  and
no  more  provision  of  victuals,  then  they  could  bring  in
their  pockets  and  bosomes.  Having  taken  them  all  into
the  Victorie,  they  gave  us  certaine  intelligence,  that
the  Carackes  were  departed  from  thence  about  a  weeke
before.

Thus  beeing  without  any  further  hope  of  those  Caraks,
we  resolved  to  returne  for  Fayall,  with  intent  to  surprize
the  towne,  but  untill  the  ninth  of  September,  we  had
either  the  winde  so  contrary,  or  the  weather  so  calme,
that  in  all  that  time,  we  made  scarce  nine  or  ten  leagues
way,  lingring  up  and  downe  not  farre  from  Pico.

The  tenth  of  September,  being  Wednesday  in  the
afternoone,  wee  came  againe  to  Fayal  roade.  Whereupon
immediatly  my  Lord  sent  Captaine  Lister,  with  one  of
Graciosa  (whom  Captaine  Munson  had  before  taken)
and  some  others,  towards  Fayal,  whom  certaine  of  the
Inhabitants  met  in  a  boat,  and  came  with  Captaine  Lister
to my Lord,  to whom  hee gave  this  choice :  either  to

6

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad

1589.
suffer  him  quietly  to  enter  into  the  platforme  there
without  resistance,  where  he  and  his  companie  would
remaine  a  space  without  offering  any  injurie  to  them,
that  they  (the  Inhabitants)  might  come  unto  him  and
compound  for  the  ransome  of  the  Towne ;  or  else  to
stand  to  the  hazard  of  warre.

With  these  words  they  returned  to  the  towne :  but
the  keepers  of  the  platforme  answered,  that  it  was  against
their  oath  and  allegeance  to  king  Philip  to  give  over
without  fight.  Whereupon  my  Lord  commanded  the
boates  of  every  ship,  to  be  presently  manned,  and  soone
after  landed  his  men  on  the  sandie  shoare,  under  the
side  of  an  hill,  about  halfe  a  league  to  the  Northwards
from  the  platforme :  upon  the  toppe  of  which  hill  certaine
horsemen  and  footmen  shewed  themselves,  and  other  two
companies  also  appeared,  with  ensignes  displayed,  the
one  before  the  towne  upon  the  shore  by  the  sea  side,
which  marched  towards  our  landing  place,  as  though
they  would  encounter  us ;  the  other  in  a  valley  to  the
Southwards  of  the  platforme,  as  if  they  would  have  come
to  helpe  the  Townesmen :  during  which  time,  they  in
the  platforme  also  played  upon  us  with  great  Ordinance.
Notwithstanding  my  L.  (having  set  his  men  in  order)
marched  along  the  sea  shore,  upon  the  sands,  betwixt
the  sea  &  the  towne  towards  the  platforme  for  the  space
of  a  mile  or  more,  &  then  the  shore  growing  rockie,  &
permitting  no  further  progresse  without  much  difficultie,
he entred  into  the towne  & passed through  the  street  The  taking  of

without  resistance, unto  the platforme ;  for  those com-  ^^f  ^°^"^^  '^^'^

■, c  .  -,  ^ -r  ,  .  platforme  of

panics berore mentioned  at my Lo. approching, were  Ya-^al

soone  dispersed,  and  suddenly  vanished.

Likewise  they  of  the  platforme,  being  all  fled  at  my  [n,  ii.  158,]
Lordes  comming  thither,  left  him  and  his  company  to  scale
the  walles,  to  enter  and  take  possession  without  resistance.

In  the  meane  time  our  shippes  ceased  not  to  batter
the  foresaid  Towne  and  Platforme  with  great  shotte,
till  such  time  as  we  saw  the  Red-Crosse  of  England
flourishing  upon  the  Forefront  thereof.

7

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-
A  description  This  Fayal  is  the  principall  towne  in  all  that  island,
ofthetowneof^  is  situate  directly  over  against  the  high  and  mighty
mountaine  Pico,  lying  towards  the  West  Northwest  from
that  mountaine,  being  devided  therefrom  by  a  narrow
Sea,  which  at  that  place  is  by  estimation  about  some
two  or  three  leagues  in  bredth  betweene  the  Isles  of
Fayal  and  Pico.

The  towne  conteyned  some  three  hundred  housholds,
their  houses  were  faire  and  strongly  builded  of  lime
and  stone,  and  double  covered  with  hollow  tyles  much
like  our  roofe-tyles,  but  that  they  are  lesse  at  the  one
end  then  at  the  other.

Every  house  almost  had  a  cisterne  or  well  in  a  garden
on  the  backe  side :  in  which  gardens  grew  vines  (with
ripe  clusters  of  grapes)  making  pleasant  shadowes,  and
Tabacco  nowe  commonly  knowen  and  used  in  England,
wherewith  their  women  there  dye  their  faces  reddish,  to
make  them  seeme  fresh  and  young :  Pepper  Indian  and
common ;  figge-trees  bearing  both  white  and  red  figges :
Peach  trees  not  growing  very  tall :  Orenges,  Limons,
Quinces,  Potato-roots,  &c.  Sweete  wood  (Cedar  I
thinke)  is  there  very  common,  even  for  building  and
firing.

My  Lord  having  possessed  himselfe  of  the  towne
and  platforme,  and  being  carefull  of  the  preservation
of  the  towne,  gave  commandement,  that  no  mariner  or
souldier  should  enter  into  any  house,  to  make  any  spoyle
thereof.  But  especially  he  was  carefull  that  the  Churches
and  houses  of  religion  there  should  be  kept  inviolate,
which  was  accordingly  performed,  through  his  appoint-
ment of  guarders  and  keepers  for  those  places :  but
the  rest  of  the  towne  eyther  for  want  of  the  former
inhibition,  or  for  desire  of  spoyle  &  prey,  was  rifled,
&  ransacked  by  the  souldiers  &  mariners,  who  scarcely
left  any  house  unsearched,  out  of  which  they  tooke
such  things  as  liked  them,  as  chestes  of  sweete  wood,
chaires,  cloth,  coverlets,  hangings,  bedding,  apparell :  and
further ranged  into the countrey,  where  some  of  them

8

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1589.

also  were  hurt  by  the  inhabitants.  The  Friery  there
conteyning  and  maintayning  thirtie  Franciscan  Friers
(among  whom  we  could  not  finde  any  one  able  to  speake
true  Latine)  was  builded  by  a  Fryer  of  Angra  in  Tercera
of  the  same  order,  about  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  one
thousand  five  hundred  and  sixe.  The  tables  in  the  hall
had  seates  for  the  one  side  onely,  and  were  alwayes
covered,  as  readie  at  all  times  for  dinner  or  supper.

From  Wednesday  in  the  afternoone,  at  which  time
we  entred  the  towne,  til  Saturday  night,  we  continued
there,  untill  the  Inhabitants  had  agreed  and  payed  for
the  ransome  of  the  towne,  two  thousand  duckats,  most
part  whereof  was  Church-plate.

We  found  in  the  platforme  eight  and  fiftie  yron
peeces  of  Ordinance,  whereof  three  and  twentie  (as  I
remember)  or  more  were  readie  mounted  upon  their
carriages,  betweene  Barricadoes,  upon  a  platforme
towardes  the  sea-side,  all  which  Ordinance  wee  tooke,
and  set  the  platforme  on  fire,  and  so  departed :  My
Lord  having  invited  to  dinner  in  the  Victorie,  on  the
Sunday  following,  so  many  of  the  Inhabitants  as  would
willingly  come  (save  onely  Diego  Gomes  the  Governour,
who  came  but  once  onely  to  parle  about  the  ransome)
onely  foure  came  and  were  well  entertained,  and  solemnely
dismissed  with  sound  of  drumme  and  trumpets,  and  a
peale  of  Ordinance :  to  whom  my  Lord  delivered  his
letter  subscribed  with  his  owne  hand,  importing  a  re-
quest to  all  other  Englishmen  to  abstaine  from  any
further  molesting  them,  save  onely  for  fresh  water,  and
victuals  necessary  for  their  intended  voyage.  During  our
abode  here  (viz.  the  1 1  of  September)  two  men  came  out
of  Pico  which  had  beene  prisoners  there :  Also  at  Fayal
we  set  at  libertie  a  prisoner  translated  from  S.  Jago  who
was  cousin  to  a  servant  of  Don  Anthonio  king  of  Portu-
gall  in  England :  These  prisoners  we  deteyned  with  us.
On  Munday  we  sent  our  boates  a  shore  for  fresh  water,
which  (by  reason  of  the  raine  that  fell  the  former  night)
came  plentifully running downe the hilles, and would

9

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

otherwise  have  beene  hard  to  be  gotten  there.  On
Tuesday  likewise  having  not  yet  sufficiently  served  our
turneSj  we  sent  againe  for  fresh  water,  which  was  then
not  so  easie  to  be  gotten  as  the  day  before,  by  reason
of  a  great  winde :  which  in  the  afternoone  increased  also
in  such  sort,  that  we  thought  it  not  safe  to  ride  so  neere
the  land ;  whereupon  we  weyed  anker  and  so  departed
Northwest  and  by  west,  alongst  the  coast  of  Fayal  Island.
Some  of  the  Inhabitants  comming  aboord  to  us  this  day,
tolde  us  that  alwayes  about  that  time  of  the  yeere  such
windes  West  Southwest  blew  on  that  coast.

This  day,  as  we  sayled  neere  Saint  Georges  Island,  a
huge  fish  lying  still  a  litle  under  water,  or  rather  even
therewith,  appeared  hard  by  a  head  of  us,  the  sea  break-
ing upon  his  backe,  which  was  blacke  coloured,  in  such
sort  as  deeming  at  the  first  it  had  beene  a  rocke,  and  the
[II.  ii,  159.]  ship  stemming  directly  with  him,  we  were  put  in  a
sudden  feare  for  the  time :  till  soone  after  we  saw  him
move  out  of  the  way.

The  16  of  September  in  the  night  it  lightened  much,
whereupon  there  followed  great  winds  and  raine,  which
continued  the  17  18  19  20  and  21  of  the  same.  The  23
of  September  we  came  againe  into  Faial  road  to  weigh  an
anker  which  (for  haste  and  feare  of  foule  weather)  wee
had  left  there  before,  where  we  went  on  shore  to  see  the
towne,  the  people  (as  we  thought)  having  now  setled
themselves  there  againe,  but  notwithstanding  many  of
them  through  too  much  distrustfulnesse,  departed  and
prepared  to  depart  with  their  packets  at  the  first  sight
of  us :  untill  such  time  as  they  were  assured  by  my
Lord,  that  our  comming  was  not  any  way  to  injury
them,  but  especially  to  have  fresh  water,  and  some  other
things  needefull  for  us,  contenting  them  for  the  same.
So  then  we  viewed  the  Towne  quietly,  and  bought
such  things  as  we  desired  for  our  money  as  if  we  had
bene  in  England.  And  they  helped  to  fill  us  in  fresh
water,  receiving  for  their  paines  such  satisfaction  as  con-
tented them.

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1589.

The  25  day  we  were  forced  againe  to  depart  from
thence,  before  we  had  sufficiently  watered,  by  reason  of  a
great  tempest  that  suddenly  arose  in  the  night,  in  so
much,  that  my  Lord  himselfe  soone  after  midnight
raysed  our  men  out  of  their  Cabines  to  wey  anker,
himselfe  also  together  with  them  haling  at  the  Capsten,
and  after  chearing  them  up  with  wine.

The  next  day  we  sent  our  Caravell  and  the  Sawsie-
Jacke  to  the  road  of  Saint  Michael,  to  see  what  they
could  espie :  we  following  after  them  upon  the  2  7  day,
plying  to  and  fro,  came  within  sight  of  S.  Michael,  but
by  contrary  windes  the  28  29  and  30  dayes  wee  were
driven  to  leewarde,  and  could  not  get  neere  the  Island.

The  first  of  October  wee  sayled  alongst  Tercera,  and
even  against  Brasill  (a  promontorie  neere  to  Angra  the
strongest  Towne  in  that  Island)  wee  espied  some  boates
comming  to  the  Towne,  and  made  out  towardes  them  :
but  being  neere  to  the  lande  they  ranne  to  shoare  and
escaped  us.

In  the  afternoone  we  came  neere  to  Graciosa,  where-
upon my  Lord  foorthwith  sent  Captain  Lister  to  the
Ilanders,  to  let  them  understand  that  his  desire  was
onely  to  have  water  and  wine  of  them,  and  some  fresh
victuals,  and  not  any  further  to  trouble  them.  They
answered  they  could  give  no  resolute  answere  to  this
demaund,  untill  the  Governors  of  the  Hand  had  con-
sulted therupon,  and  therefore  desired  him  to  send
againe  to  them  the  next  day.

Upon  the  second  day  of  (October  early  in  the  morning,
we  sent  forth  our  long  boat  and  Pinnesse,  with  emptie
Caske,  and  about  some  fiftie  or  sixty  men  together  with
the  Margaret,  and  Captaine  Davis  his  shippe :  for  we
now  wanted  all  the  rest  of  our  consortes.  But  when
our  men  would  have  landed,  the  Ilanders  shot  at  them,
and  would  not  suffer  them.  And  troupes  of  men
appeared  upon  land,  with  ensignes  displayed  to  resist
us :  So  our  boates  rowed  alongst  the  shoare,  to  finde
some  place  where  they  might  land,  not  with  too  much

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

disadvantage :  our  shippes  and  they  still  shooting  at  the
Ilanders  :  but  no  place  could  be  founde  where  they  might
land  without  great  perill  of  loosing  many  of  their  lives,
and  so  were  constrayned  to  retire  without  receiving  any
answere,  as  was  promised  the  day  before.  We  had  three
men  hurt  in  this  conflict,  whilest  our  boates  were  to-
gether in  consulting  what  was  best  to  be  done :  two  of
them  were  stroken  with  a  great  shot  (which  the  Ilanders
drew  from  place  to  place  with  Oxen)  wherewith  the  one
lost  his  hand,  and  the  other  his  life  within  two  or  three
dayes  after :  the  third  was  shot  into  his  necke  with  a
small  shot,  without  any  great  hurt.

With  these  newes  our  company  returned  backe  againe
at  night,  whereupon  preparation  was  made  to  goe  to  them
againe  the  next  day :  but  the  day  was  farre  spent  before
we  could  come  neere  them  with  our  ship :  neither  could
we  finde  any  good  ground  to  anker  in,  where  we  might
lye  to  batter  the  Towne,  and  further  we  could  finde  no
landing  place,  without  great  danger  to  loose  many  men :
which  might  turne  not  only  to  the  overthrow  of  our
voiage,  but  also  put  the  Queenes  ship  in  great  perill  for
want  of  men  to  bring  her  home.  Therefore  my  Lord
thought  it  best  to  write  to  them  to  this  effect :  That  he
could  not  a  litle  marvell  at  their  inhumanitie  and  crueltie
which  they  had  shewed  towards  his  men,  seeing  they  were
sent  by  him  unto  them  in  peaceable  manner  to  receive
their  answere  which  they  had  promised  to  give  the  day
before :  and  that  were  it  not  for  Don  Antonio  their  law-
full  king  his  sake,  he  could  not  put  up  so  great  injury
at  their  hands,  without  just  revengement  upon  them:
notwithstanding  for  Don  Antonio  his  sake,  whose  friend
he  was,  he  was  yet  content  to  send  to  them  once  againe
for  their  answere :  At  night  Captaine  Lister  returned
with  this  answere  from  them.  That  their  Gunner  shot
off  one  of  their  peeces,  which  was  charged  with  pouder
onely,  and  was  stopped ;  which  our  men  thinking  it  had
bin  shot  at  them,  shot  againe,  and  so  beganne  the  fight :
[II.  ii.  160.]  and  that  the  next  morning  they  would  send  my  Lord  a

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1589-
resolute  answere  to  his  demaunde,  for  as  yet  they  could
not  knowe  their  Governours  minde  herein.  The  next
morning  there  came  unto  us  a  boate  from  the  shoare
with  a  flagge  of  truce,  wherein  were  three  of  the  chiefe
men  of  the  Island,  who  agreed  with  my  Lorde  that  hee
should  have  of  them  sixtie  buttes  of  wine,  and  fresh
victuals  to  refresh  himselfe  and  his  companie  withall :
but  as  for  fresh  water,  they  could  not  satisfie  our  neede
therein,  having  themselves  little  or  none,  saving  such  as
they  saved  in  vessels  or  cisternes  when  it  rayned,  and  that
they  had  rather  give  us  two  tunnes  of  wine  then  one  of
water :  but  they  requested  that  our  souldiers  might  not
come  on  shoare,  for  they  themselves  would  bring  all  they
had  promised  to  the  water-side,  which  request  was
graunted,  we  keeping  one  of  them  aboord  with  us
untill  their  promise  was  performed,  and  the  other  we
sent  to  shoare  with  our  emptie  Caske,  and  some  of  our
men  to  helpe  to  fill,  and  bring  them  away  with  such
other  provision  as  was  promised :  so  the  Margaret,  Cap-
taine  Davis  his  shippe,  and  another  of  Weymouth  stayed
ryding  at  anker  before  the  Towne,  to  take  in  our  pro-
vision. This  shippe  of  Weymouth  came  to  us  the  day
before,  and  had  taken  a  rich  Prize  (as  it  was  reported)
worth  sixteene  thousand  pound,  which  brought  us  newes
that  the  West-Indian  Fleete  was  not  yet  come,  but  would
come  very  shortly.  But  we  with  the  Victorie  put  off
to  sea,  and  upon  Saturday  the  fourth  of  October,  we
tooke  a  French  shippe  of  Saint  Malo  (a  citie  of  the  un-
holy league)  loden  with  fish  from  Newfoundland :  which
had  beene  in  so  great  a  tempest,  that  she  was  constrayned
to  cut  her  mayne  mast  overboord  for  her  safetie,  and
was  now  comming  to  Graciosa,  to  repaire  her  selfe.  But
so  hardly  it  befell  her,  that  she  did  not  onely  not  repaire
her  former  losses,  but  lost  all  that  remayned  unto  us.
The  chiefe  of  her  men  we  tooke  into  our  ship,  and  sent
some  of  our  men,  mariners,  and  souldiers  into  her  to
bring  her  into  England.

Upon the Sunday following at night,  all our  pro-

13

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

mised  provision  was  brought  unto  us  from  Gratiosa :
and  we  friendly  dismissed  the  Ilanders  with  a  peale  of
Ordinance.

Upon  Munday,  Tuesday,  and  Wednesday,  we  plyed
to  and  fro  about  those  Islandes,  being  very  rough  weather.
And  upon  Thursday  at  night,  being  driven  some  three
or  foure  leagues  from  Tercera,  we  saw  fifteene  saile  of
the  West-Indian  Fleete  comming  into  the  Haven  at
Angra  in  Tercera.  But  the  winde  was  such,  that  for  the
space  of  foure  dayes  after,  though  wee  lay, as  close  by  the
winde  as  was  possible,  yet  we  could  not  come  neere  them.
In  this  time  we  lost  our  late  French  Prize,  not  being  able
to  lie  so  neere  the.  winde  as  we,  and  heard  no  more
of  her  till  we  came  to  England  where  shee  safely  arrived.
Upon  Munday  we  came  very  neere  the  Havens  mouth,
being  minded  to  have  runne  in  amongst  them,  and  to
have  fetched  out  some  of  them  if  it  had  beene  possible :
But  in  the  end  this  enterprise  was  deemed  too  daun-
gerous,  considering  the  strength  of  the  place  where  they
rode,  being  haled  and  towed  in  neerer  the  towne,  at  the
first  sight  of  our  approching,  and  lying  under  the  pro-
tection of  the  Castle  of  Brasill,  on  the  one  side  (having
in  it  five  and  twentie  peeces  of  Ordinance)  and  a  fort
on  the  other  side  wherein  were  13  or  14  great  brasse
pieces.  Besides,  when  we  came  neere  land  the  winde
prooved  too  scant  for  us  to  attempt  any  such  enterprise.
Upon  Tuesday  the  fourteenth  of  October  we  sent  our
boate  to  the  roade  to  sound  the  depth,  to  see  if  there
were  any  ankoring  place  for  us,  where  we  might  lie
without  shot  of  the  Castle  and  Fort,  and  within  shot  of
some  of  those  shippes,  that  we  might  either  make  them
come  out  to  us,  or  sinke  them  where  they  lay.  Our
boate  returned  having  found  out  such  a  place  as  we
desired,  but  the  winde  would  not  suffer  us  to  come
neere  it,  and  againe  if  we  could  have  ankored  there,  it
was  thought  Hkely  that  they  would  rather  runne  them-
selves a  ground  to  save  their  lives  and  liberties,  and  some
of  their  goods,  then  come  foorth  to  loose  their  liberties

14

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1589.

and  goods  to  us  their  enemies.  So  we  shot  at  them
to  see  if  we  could  reach  them,  but  it  fell  farre  short.
And  thus  we  departed,  thinking  it  not  probable  that  they
would  come  foorth  so  long  as  we  watched  for  them  before
the  havens  mouth,  or  within  sight  of  them.  For  the
space  of  five  dayes  after  we  put  off  to  sea,  and  lay  without
sight  of  them,  and  sent  a  pinnesse  to  lie  out  of  sight
close  by  the  shore,  to  bring  us  word  if  they  should  come
foorth.  After  a  while  the  Pinnesse  returned  and  tolde
us  that  those  ships  in  the  Haven  had  taken  downe  their
sayles,  and  let  downe  their  toppe  mastes :  so  that  wee
supposed  they  would  never  come  foorth,  till  they  per-
ceived us  to  bee  quite  gone.

Wherefore  upon  the  20  of  October,  hearing  that  there
were  certaine  Scottish  ships  at  Saint  Michael,  we  sayled
thither,  and  found  there  one  Scottish  roader,  and  two
or  three  more  at  Villa  Franca,  the  next  road  a  league
or  two  from  the  towne  of  S.  Michael,  to  the  Eastwards :
of  whom  we  had  for  our  reliefe  some  small  quantitie
of  wine  (viz.  some  five  or  sixe  buttes  of  them  all)  and
some  fresh  water,  but  nothing  sufficient  to  serve  our
turne.

Upon  Tuesday  the  one  and  twentieth  of  October,  we
sent  our  long  boate  to  shore  for  fresh  water  at  a  brooke
a  little  to  the  Westwards  from  Villa  Franca.

But  the  Inhabitants  espying  us  came  downe  with  two  [II.  ii.  161.]
Ensignes  displayed,  and  about  some  hundred  and  fiftie
men  armed,  to  withstand  our  landing.  So  our  men
having  spent  all  their  pouder  upon  them  in  attempting
to  land,  and  not  being  able  to  prevaile  at  so  great  oddes,
returned  frustrate.

From  hence  we  departed  towardes  Saint  Maries  Island,
minding  to  water  there,  and  then  to  goe  for  the  coast
of  Spaine.  For  we  had  intelligence  that  it  was  a  place
of  no  great  force,  and  that  we  might  water  there  very
well :  therefore  upon  Friday  following,  my  Lord  sent
Captaine  Lister,  and  Captaine  Amias  Preston  now  Sir
Amias  Preston (who not long before came to us out

15

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

of  his  owne  shippe,  and  she  loosing  us  in  the  night,  hee
was  forced  to  tarry  still  with  us)  with  our  long  boate
and  Pinnesse,  and  some  sixtie  or  seventie  shotte  in  them,
with  a  friendly  letter  to  the  Ilanders,  that  they  would
grant  us  leave  to  water,  and  we  would  no  further  trouble
them.

So  we  departed  from  the  Victorie  for  the  Hand,  about
nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone,  and  rowed  freshly
untill  about  3  a  clocke  afternoone.  At  which  time  our
men  being  something  weary  with  rowing,  and  being
within  a  league  or  two  of  the  shore,  and  4  or  5  leagues
from  the  Victorie,  they  espied  (to  their  refreshing)  two
ships  ryding  at  anker  hard  under  the  towne,  whereupon
having  shifted  some  6  or  7  of  our  men  into  Captaine
Davis  his  boate,  being  too  much  pestered  in  our  owne,
and  retayning  with  us  some  20  shot  in  the  pinnesse,
we  made  way  towardes  them  with  all  the  speede  we
could.

By  the  way  as  we  rowed  we  saw  boates  passing  betwixt
the  roaders  and  the  shore,  and  men  in  their  shirtes
swimming  and  wading  to  shoare,  who  as  we  perceived
afterwardes,  were  labouring  to  set  those  shippes  fast  on
ground,  and  the  Inhabitants  as  busily  preparing  them-
selves for  the  defence  of  those  roaders,  their  Hand,  and
themselves.  When  we  came  neere  them,  Captaine  Lister
commaunded  the  Trumpets  to  be  sounded,  but  pro-
hibited any  shot  to  be  discharged  at  them,  untill  they
had  direction  from  him :  But  some  of  the  companie,
either  not  well  perceiving  or  regarding  what  he  sayd,
immediatly  upon  the  sound  of  the  Trumpets  discharged
their  pieces  at  the  Islanders,  which  for  the  most  part  lay
in  trenches  and  fortefied  places  unseene,  to  their  owne
best  advantage :  who  immediatly  shot  likewise  at  us,
both  with  small  and  great  shot,  without  danger  to
themselves :  Notwithstanding  Captaine  Lister  earnestly
hastened  forward  the  Saylers  that  rowed,  who  beganne  to
shrinke  at  that  shot,  flying  so  fast  about  their  eares,  and
himselfe  first  entring  one  of  the  shippes  that  lay  a  litle

16

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1589.

further  from  shoare  then  the  other,  we  spedily  followed
after  him  into  her,  still  plying  them  with  our  shot.  And
having  cut  in  sunder  her  Cables  and  Hausers,  towed  her
away  with  our  Pinnesse.  In  the  meane  time  Captaine
Davis  his  boate  overtooke  us  and  entred  into  the  other
shippe,  which  also  (as  the  former)  was  forsaken  by  all  her
men :  but  they  were  constrayned  to  leave  her  &  to  come
againe  into  their  boate  (whilest  shot  and  stones  from
shoare  flew  fast  amongst  them)  finding  her  to  sticke  so
fast  a  grounde,  that  they  could  not  stire  her :  which
the  Townesmen  also  perceiving,  and  seeing  that  they
were  but  fewe  in  number,  and  us  (busied  about  the
other  ship)  not  comming  to  ayde  them,  were  preparing
to  have  come  and  taken  them.  But  they  returned  unto
us,  and  so  together  we  came  away  towards  the  Victory,
towing  after  us  the  Prize  that  we  had  now  taken,  which
was  lately  come  from  Brasill,  loden  with  Sugar.

In  this  fight  we  had  two  men  slaine  and  16  wounded  :
and  as  for  them,  it  is  like  they  had  litle  hurt,  lying  for
the  most  part  behind  stone  walles,  which  were  builded
one  above  another  hard  by  the  sea  side,  upon  the  end
of  the  hill  whereupon  the  Towne  stoode  betwixt  two
valleyes.  Upon  the  toppe  of  the  hill  lay  their  great
Ordinance  (such  as  they  had)  wherewith  they  shot  leaden
bullets,  whereof  one  pierced  through  our  Prizes  side,
and  lay  still  in  the  shippe  without  doing  any  more  harme.

The  next  day  we  went  againe  for  water  to  the  same
Hand,  but  not  knowing  before  the  inconvenience  and
disadvantage  of  the  place  where  we  attempted  to  land,
we  returned  frustrate.

The  same  night  the  25  of  October  we  departed  for
S.  Georges  Hand  for  fresh  water,  whither  we  came  on
Munday  following  October  27,  and  having  espied  where
a  spout  of  water  came  running  downe :  the  pinnesse  and
long  boate  were  presently  manned  and  sent  under  the
conduct  of  Captaine  Preston,  and  Captaine  Munson,  by
whom  my  Lord  sent  a  letter  to  the  Ilanders  as  before,
to grant us leave to water onely, and  we  would no

VII  17  B

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

further  trouble  them  :  notwithstanding  our  men  comming
on  shoare  found  some  of  the  poore  Danders,  which  for
feare  of  us  hid  themselves  amongst  the  rockes.

And  on  Wednesday  following  our  boats  returned  with
fresh  water,  whereof  they  brought  only  sixe  tunnes  for
the  Victorie,  alleaging  they  could  get  no  more,  thinking
[n.  ii.  162.]  (as  it  was  supposed)  that  my  Lord  having  no  more
provision  of  water  and  wine,  but  onely  12  tunnes,  would
not  goe  for  the  coast  of  Spaine,  but  straight  for  the  coast
of  England,  as  many  of  our  men  greatly  desired :  not-
withstanding my  Lord  was  unwilling  so  to  doe,  and  was
minded  the  next  day  to  have  taken  in  more  water :  but
through  roughnesse  of  the  seas  and  winde,  and  un-
willingnesse  of  his  men  it  was  not  done.  Yet  his  Hon.
purposed  not  to  returne  with  so  much  provision  unspent,
and  his  voyage  (as  he  thought)  not  yet  performed  in
such  sort  as  mought  give  some  reasonable  contentment
or  satisfaction  to  himselfe  and  others.

Therefore  because  no  more  water  could  now  con-
veniently be  gotten,  and  being  uncertaine  when  it  could
be  gotten,  and  the  time  of  our  staying  aboord  also  un-
certaine, the  matter  being  referred  to  the  choyse  of  the
whole  companie,  whither  they  would  tarrie  longer,  till
wee  might  be  more  sufficiently  provided  of  fresh  water,
or  goe  by  the  coast  of  Spaine  for  England,  with  halfe
so  much  allowance  of  drinke  as  before,  they  willingly
agreed  that  every  mease  should  bee  allowed  at  one  meale
but  halfe  so  much  drinke  as  they  were  accustomed
(except  them  that  were  sicke  or  wounded)  and  so  to
goe  for  England,  taking  the  coast  of  Spaine  in  our  way,
to  see  if  we  could  that  way  make  up  our  voyage.

Upon  Saturday  Octob.  31  we  sent  the  Margaret
(because  she  leaked  much)  directly  for  England,  together
with  the  Prize  of  Brasile  which  we  tooke  at  S.  Marie,
and  in  them  some  of  our  hurt  and  wounded  men  or
otherwise  sicke  were  sent  home  as  they  desired,  for
England :  but  Captaine  Monson  was  taken  out  of  the
Megge  into  the  Victorie.

18

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1589.

So  we  held  011  our  course  for  the  coast  of  Spaine
with  a  faire  winde  and  a  large  which  before  we  seldome
had.  And  upon  Twesday  following  being  the  4  of
Novemb.  we  espied  a  saile  right  before  us,  which  we
chased  till  about  three  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone,,  at
which  time  we  overtaking  her,  she  stroke  sayle,  and
being  demaunded  who  was  her  owner  and  from  whence
she  was,  they  answered,  a  Portugall,  and  from  Pernan-
bucke  in  Brasile.  She  was  a  ship  of  som  iio  tuns
burden,  fraighted  with  410  chestes  of  Sugar,  and  50
Kintals  of  Brasill-wood,  every  Kintall  contayning  one
hundred  pound  weight :  we  tooke  her  in  latitude  nine
and  twentie  degrees,  about  two  hundred  leagues  from
Lisbone  westwards :  Captaine  Preston  was  presently  sent
unto  her,  who  brought  the  principall  of  her  men  aboord
the  Victorie,  and  certaine  of  our  men,  mariners  and
souldiers  were  sent  aboord  her.  The  Portugals  of  this
Prize  told  us  that  they  saw  another  ship  before  them
that  day  about  noone.  Having  therefore  dispatched  all
things  about  the  Prize  aforesaid  and  left  our  long  boat
with  Captaine  Davis,  taking  his  lesser  boat  with  us,
we  made  way  after  this  other  ship  with  all  the  sayles
we  could  beare,  holding  on  our  course  due  East,  and
giving  order  to  Captaine  Davis  his  ship  and  the  Prize
that  they  should  follow  us  due  East,  and  that  if  they
had  sight  of  us  the  morning  following  they  should
follow  us  still :  if  not,  they  should  goe  for  England.

The  next  morning  we  espied  not  the  sayle  which  we
chased,  and  Captaine  Davis  his  ship  and  the  Prize  were
behinde  us  out  of  sight :  but  the  next  Thursday  the
sixt  of  November  (being  in  latitude  38  degrees  30
minutes,  and  about  sixtie  leagues  from  Lisbone  west-
wards) early  in  the  morning  Captaine  Preston  descried
a  sayle  some  two  or  three  leagues  a  head  of  us,  after
which  we  presently  hastened  our  chase,  and  overtooke
her  about  eight  or  nine  of  the  clocke  before  noone.
She  came  lately  from  Saint  Michaels  roade,  having  beene
before  at  Brasill  loden  with  Sugar  and  Brasile. Having

19

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

sent  our  boat  to  them  to  bring  some  of  the  chiefe  of
their  men  aboord  the  Victorie,  in  the  meane  time  whilest
they  were  in  comming  to  us  one  out  of  the  maine  toppe
espied  another  saile  a  head  some  three  or  foure  leagues
from  us.  So  immediately  upon  the  returne  of  our  boate,
having  sent  her  backe  againe  with  some  of  our  men
aboord  the  prize,  we  pursued  speedily  this  new  chase,
with  all  the  sayles  we  could  packe  on,  and  about
two  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone  overtooke  her :  she  had
made  provision  to  fight  with  us,  having  hanged  the
sides  of  the  ship  so  thicke  with  hides  (wherewith
especially  she  was  loden)  that  musket  shot  could  not  have
pearced  them :  but  yer  we  had  discharged  two  great
pieces  of  our  Ordinance  at  her,  she  stroke  sayle,  and
approching  neerer,  we  asking  of  whence  they  were,  they
answered  from  the  West-Indies,  from  Mexico,  and  Saint
John  de  Lowe  (truely  called  Ulhua.)  This  ship  was
of  some  three  or  foure  hundred  tunnes,  and  had  in  her
seven  hundred  hides  worth  tenne  shillings  a  peece :  sixe
chests  of  Cochinell,  every  chest  houlding  one  hundred
pound  weight,  and  every  pound  worth  sixe  and  twentie
shillings  and  eight  pence,  and  certaine  chests  of  Sugar
and  China  dishes,  with  some  plate  and  silver.

The  Captaine  of  her  was  an  Italian,  and  by  his  be-
haviour seemed  to  be  a  grave,  wise,  and  civill  man :
he  had  put  an  adventure  in  this  shippe  five  and  twentie
thousand  Duckats.  Wee  tooke  him  with  certaine  other
of  her  chiefest  men  (which  were  Spaniards)  into  the
Victorie :  and  Captaine  Lister  with  so  manie  other  of
;,[II.  ii.  163.]  the  chiefest  of  our  Mariners,  souldiers,  and  saylers  as
were  thought  sufficient,  to  the  number  of  20.  or  there
abouts,  were  sent  into  her.  In  the  meane  time  (we
staying)  our  other  prizes  which  followed  after,  came  up
to  us.  And  nowe  wee  had  our  hands  full  and  with
joy  shaped  our  course  for  England,  for  so  it  was  thought
meetest,  having  now  so  many  Portugals,  Spaniards  and
Frenchmen  amongst  us,  that  if  we  should  have  taken
any  more  prizes  afterwards,  wee  had  not  bene  well  able

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1589.

to  have  manned  them  without  endangering  our  selves.
So  about  6.  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  (when  our
other  prize  had  overtaken  us)  wee  set  saile  for  England.
But  our  prizes  not  being  able  to  beare  us  company
without  sparing  them  many  of  our  sailes,  which  caused
our  ship  to  rowle  and  wallow,  in  such  sort  that  it  was
not  onely  very  troublesome  to  us,  but,  as  it  was  thought,
would  also  have  put  the  maine  Maste  in  danger  of
falling  overboord :  having  acquainted  them  with  these
inconveniences,  we  gave  them  direction  to  keepe  their
courses  together,  folowing  us,  and  so  to  come  to  Ports-
mouth. We  tooke  this  last  prize  in  the  latitude  of
39.  degrees,  and  about  46.  leagues  to  the  Westwards
from  The  Rocke.

She  was  one  of  those  16.  ships  which  we  saw  going
into  the  haven  at  Angra  in  Ter^era,  October  8.  Some
of  the  men  that  we  tooke  out  of  her  tolde  us,  that
whilest  wee  were  plying  up  and  downe  before  that  haven,
as  before  was  shewed,  expecting  the  comming  foorth  of
those  shippes,  three  of  the  greatest  and  best  of  them,
at  the  appointment  of  the  Governour  of  Ter9era,  were
unloden  of  their  treasure  and  marchandize.  And  in
every  of  them  were  put  three  hundred  Souldiers,  which
were  appointed  to  have  come  to  lay  the  Victory  aboord
in  the  night,  and  take  her :  but  when  this  should  have
bene  done  the  Victory  was  gone  out  of  their  sight.

Now  we  went  meerily  before  the  winde  with  all  the
sailes  we  could  beare,  insomuch  that  in  the  space  of
24.  houres,  we  sailed  neere  47.  leagues,  that  is  seven-
score  English  miles,  betwixt  Friday  at  noone  and
Saturday  at  noone  (notwithstanding  the  shippe  was  very
foule,  and  much  growne  with  long  being  at  Sea)  which
caused  some  of  our  company  to  make  accompt  they
would  see  what  running  at  Tilt  there  should  bee  at
Whitehall  upon  the  Queenes  day.  Others  were  imagin-
ing what  a  Christmas  they  would  keepe  in  England  with
their  shares  of  the  prizes  we  had  taken.  But  so  it  befell,
that  we kept  a  colde Christmas  with the Bishop and

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

his  clearks  (rockes  that  lye  to  the  Westwards  from  Sylly,
and  the  Westerne  parts  of  England :)  For  soone  after
the  wind  scanting  came  about  to  the  Eastwards  (the
worst  part  of  the  heavens  for  us,  from  which  the  winde
could  blow)  in  such  sort,  that  we  could  not  fetch  any
part  of  England.  And  hereupon  also  our  allowance  of
drinke,  which  was  scant  ynough  before,  was  yet  more
more  scanted,  because  of  the  scarcitie  thereof  in  the
shippe.  So  that  now  a  man  was  allowed  but  halfe  a
pinte  at  a  meale,  and  that  many  times  colde  water,  and
scarce  sweete.  Notwithstanding  this  was  an  happie  estate
in  comparison  of  that  which  followed :  For  from  halfe
a  pinte  we  came  to  a  quarter,  and  that  lasted  not  long
neither,  so  that  by  reason  of  this  great  scarcitie  of  drinke,
and  contrarietie  of  winde,  we  thought  to  put  into  Ireland,
there  to  relieve  our  wants.  But  when  wee  came  neere
thither,  lying  at  hull  all  night  (tarrying  for  the  daylight
of  the  next  morning,  whereby  we  might  the  safelyer
bring  our  ship  into  some  convenient  harbour  there)
we  were  driven  so  farre  to  lee-ward,  that  we  could  fetch
no  part  of  Ireland,  so  as  with  heavie  hearts  and  sad
cheare,  wee  were  constreined  to  returne  backe  againe,  and
expect  till  it  should  please  God  to  send  us  a  faire  winde
either  for  England  or  Ireland.  In  the  meane  time  we
were  allowed  every  man  three  or  foure  spoones  full  of
vineger  to  drinke  at  a  meale :  for  other  drinke  we  had
none,  saving  onely  at  two  or  three  meales,  when  we  had
in  stead  hereof  as  much  wine,  which  was  wringed  out
of  Wine-lees  that  remained.  With  this  hard  fare  (for  by
reason  of  our  great  want  of  drinke,  wee  durst  eate  but
very  litle)  wee  continued  for  the  space  of  a  fourtnight
or  thereabouts :  Saving  that  now  and  then  wee  feasted
for  it  in  the  meane  time :  And  that  was  when  there  fell
any  haile  or  raine :  the  haile-stones  wee  gathered  up  and
did  eate  them  more  pleasantly  then  if  they  had  bene
the  sweetest  Comfits  in  the  world ;  The  raine-drops  were
so  carefully  saved,  that  so  neere  as  wee  coulde,  not  one
was  lost  in  all  our  shippe. Some  hanged  up  sheetes  tied

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad

1589.

with  cordes  by  the  foure  corners,  and  a  weight  in  the
midst  that  the  water  might  runne  downe  thither,  and  so
be  received  into  some  vessell  set  or  hanged  underneth  :
Some  that  wanted  sheetes,  hanged  up  nakins,  and  cloutes,
and  watched  them  till  they  were  thorow  wet,  then  wring-
ing and  sucking  out  the  water.  And  that  water  which
fell  downe  and  washed  away  the  filth  and  soyling  of  the
shippe,  trod  under  foote,  as  bad  as  running  downe  the
kennell  many  times  when  it  raineth,  was  not  lost  I  warrant
you,  but  watched  and  attended  carefully  (yea  sometimes
with  strife  and  contention)  at  every  scupper-hole,  and
other  place  where  it  ranne  downe,  with  dishes,  pots,  Cannes,
and  Jarres,  whereof  some  drunke  hearty  draughts  even
as  it  was,  mud  and  all,  without  tarrying  to  dense  or
settle  it :  Others  clensed  it  first,  but  not  often,  for  it
was  so  thicke  and  went  so  slowly  thorow,  that  they
might  ill  endure  to  tary  so  long,  and  were  loth  to  loose
too  much  of  such  precious  stuffe  :  some  licked  with
their  tongues  (like  dogges)  the  boards  under  feete,  the
sides,  railes,  and  Masts  of  the  shippe :  others  that  were
more  ingenious,  fastened  girdles  or  ropes  about  the  [II.  ii.  164.]
Mastes,  dawbing  tallow  betwixt  them  and  the  Maste
(that  the  raine  might  not  runne  downe  betweene)  in
such  sort,  that  those  ropes  or  girdles  hanging  lower  on
the  one  side  then  on  the  other,  a  spout  of  leather  was
fastened  to  the  lowest  part  of  them,  that  all  the  raine
drops  that  came  running  downe  the  Maste,  might  meete
together  at  that  place,  and  there  be  received.

Hee  that  got  a  canne  of  water  by  these  meanes  was
spoken  of,  sued  to,  and  envied  as  a  rich  man.  Quam
pulchrum  digito  monstrari  &  dicier  hie  est  ^  Some  of  the
poore  Spaniards  that  we  had  taken  (who  notwithstanding
had  the  same  allowance  that  our  owne  men  had)  would
come  and  crave  of  us,  for  the  love  of  God,  but  so  much
water  as  they  could  holde  in  the  hollow  of  their  hand  :
and  they  had  it,  notwithstanding  our  great  extremitie,
to  teache  them  some  humanitie  in  stead  of  their  accus-
tomed barbaritie,  both  to  us  and  other  nations  heretofore.

23

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

They  put  also  bullets  of  lead  into  their  mouthes  to  slake
their  thirst.

Now  in  every  corner  of  the  shippe  were  heard  the
lamentable  cries  of  sicke  and  wounded  men  sounding
wofully  in  our  eares,  crying  out  and  pitifully  complaining
for  want  of  drinke,  being  ready  to  die,  yea  many  dying
for  lacke  thereof,  so  as  by  reason  of  this  great  extremitie
we  lost  many  more  men,  then  wee  had  done  all  the
voyage  before :  having  before  this  time  bene  so  well
and  sufficiently  provided  for,  that  we  lived  in  maner
as  well  and  healthfully,  and  died  as  few  as  if  wee  had
bene  in  England,  whereas  now  lightly  every  day  some
were  cast  overboord.

But  the  second  day  of  December  1589.  was  a  festivall
day  with  us,  for  then  it  rained  a  good  pace,  and  wee
saved  some  pretie  store  of  raine  water  (though  wee  were
well  wet  for  it,  and  that  at  midnight)  and  filled  our
skins  full  besides :  notwithstanding  it  were  muddie  and
bitter  with  washing  the  shippe,  but  (with  some  sugar
which  we  had  to  sweeten  it  withall)  it  went  merrily
downe,  yet  remembred  we  and  wished  for  with  all  our
hearts,  many  a  Conduit,  pumpe,  spring,  &  streame  of
cleare  sweete  running  water  in  England :  And  how
miserable  wee  had  accompted  some  poore  soules  whom
we  had  scene  driven  for  thirst  to  drinke  thereof,  and
how  happy  we  would  now  have  thought  our  selves  if
we  might  have  had  our  fills  of  the  same :  yet  should
wee  have  fared  the  better  with  this  our  poore  feasting,
if  we  might  have  had  our  meate  and  drinke  (such  and
so  much  as  it  was)  stand  quietly  before  us :  but  beside
all  the  former  extremities,  wee  were  so  tossed  and  tur-
moiled  with  such  horrible  stormie  and  tempestuous
weather,  that  every  man  had  best  holde  fast  his  Canne,
cup,  and  dish  in  his  hands,  yea  and  himselfe  too,  many
times,  by  the  ropes,  railes,  or  sides  of  the  ship  or  else  he
should  soone  finde  all  under  feete.

Herewith  our  maine  saile  was  torne  from  the  yarde
and  blowne  overboord  quite  away  into  the  sea  without

24

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1589.

recovery,  and  our  other  sailes  so  rent  and  torne  (from
side  to  side  some  of  them)  that  hardly  any  of  them
escaped  hole.  The  raging  waves  and  foming  surges  of
the  sea  came  rowling  like  mountaines  one  after  another,
and  overraked  the  waste  of  the  shippe  like  a  mightie
river  running  over  it,  whereas  in  faire  weather  it  was
neere  20.  foote  above  the  water,  that  nowe  wee  might
cry  out  with  the  princely  Prophet  Psalme  107.  vers.  26.
They  mount  up  to  heaven,  and  descend  to  the  deepe,
so  that  their  soule  melteth  away  for  trouble :  they  reele
too  and  fro,  and  stagger  like  a  drunken  man,  and  all
their  cunning  is  gone.  With  this  extremitie  of  foule
weather  the  ship  was  so  tossed  and  shaken,  that  by  the
craking  noise  it  made,  and  by  the  leaking  which  was
now  much  more  then  ordinary,  wee  were  in  great
feare  it  would  have  shaken  in  sunder,  so  that  now
also  we  had  just  cause  to  pray  a  litle  otherwise  then
the  Poet,  though  marring  the  verse,  yet  mending  the
meaning.

Deus  maris  &  Coeli,  quid  enim  nisi  vota  supersunt,
Solvere  quassatae  parcito  membra  ratis.

Notwithstanding  it  pleased  God  of  his  great  goodnesse
to  deliver  us  out  of  this  danger.  Then  forthwith  a
new  maine  saile  was  made  and  fastened  to  the  yard,
and  the  rest  repaired  as  time  and  place  would  suffer :
which  we  had  no  sooner  done,  but  yet  againe  wee  were
troubled  with  as  great  extremitie  as  before,  so  that  againe
we  were  like  to  have  lost  our  new  maine  saile,  had  not
Master  William  Antony  the  Master  of  the  ship  him-
selfe  (when  none  else  would  or  durst)  ventured  with
danger  of  drowning  by  creeping  along  upon  the  maine
yarde  (which  was  let  downe  close  to  the  railes)  to  gather
it  up  out  of  the  sea,  and  to  fasten  it  thereto,  being
in  the  meane  while  oft-times  ducked  over  head  and
cares  into  the  sea.

These  stormes  were  so  terrible,  that  there  were  some
in  our  company,  which  confessed  they  had  gone  to  seas
for  the space of  20. yeeres, and had never scene the

25

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.  ^ ^

like, and  vowed  that  if  ever  they  returned safe  home,
they  would  never  come  to  Sea  againe.

The  last  of  November  at  night  we  met  with  an
English  ship,  out  of  which  (because  it  was  too  late  that
night)  it  was  agreed  that  we  should  have  had  the  next
morning  two  or  three  Tunnes  of  wine,  which,  as  they
said,  was  al  the  provision  of  drink  they  had,  save  only
[II.  ii.  165.]  a  But  or  two,  which  they  must  needs  reserve  for  their
owne  use :  but  after  that,  we  heard  of  them  no  more,
till  they  were  set  on  ground  upon  the  coast  of  Ireland,
where  it  appeared  that  they  might  have  spared  us  much
more  then  they  pretended  they  could,  so  as  they  might
wel  have  relieved  our  great  necessities,  and  have  had
sufficient  for  themselves  besides,  to  bring  them  into
England.

The  first  of  December  at  night  we  spake  with  another
English  ship,  and  had  some  beere  out  of  her,  but
not  sufficient  to  carry  us  into  England,  so  that  wee
were  constrained  to  put  into  Ireland,  the  winde  so
serving.

The  next  day  we  came  to  an  anker,  not  far  from  the
S.  Kelmes  under  the  land  &  winde,  where  we  were
somewhat  more  quiet,  but  (that  being  no  safe  harbour  to
ride  in)  the  next  morning  wee  went  about  to  weigh
anker,  but  having  some  of  our  men  hurt  at  the  Capsten,
wee  were  faine  to  give  over  and  leave  it  behinde,  holding
on  our  course  to  Ventrie  haven,  where  wee  safely  arrived
the  same  day,  that  place  being  a  very  safe  and  con-
venient harbor  for  us,  that  now  wee  might  sing  as
we  had  just  cause,  They  that  goe  downe  to  the  Sea,
&c.

So  soone  as  we  had  ankered  here  my  Lord  went
foorthwith  to  shoare,  and  brought  presently  fresh  water
and  fresh  victuals,  as  Muttons,  pigges,  hennes,  &c.  to
refresh  his  company  withall.  Notwithstanding  himselfe
had  lately  bene  very  weake,  and  tasted  of  the  same
extremitie  that  his  Company  did :  For  in  the  time  of
our  former  v/ant, having  a little fresh water left  him

26

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1589.

remaining  in  a  pot,  in  the  night  it  was  broken,  and  the
water  drunke  and  dried  up.  Soone  after  the  sicke  and
wounded  men  were  carried  to  the  next  principall  Towne,
called  Dingenacush,  being  about  three  miles  distant
from  the  foresaide  haven,  where  our  shippe  roade,  to
the  Eastwards,  that  there  they  might  be  the  better  re-
freshed, and  had  the  Chirurgians  dayly  to  attend  upon
them.  Here  we  wel  refreshed  our  selves  whilest  the
Irish  harpe  sounded  sweetely  in  our  eares,  and  here
we,  who  for  the  former  extremities  were  in  maner  halfe
dead,  had  our  lives  (as  it  were)  restored  unto  us
againe.

This  Dingenacush  is  the  chiefe  Towne  in  al  that  part
of  Ireland,  it  consisteth  but  of  one  maine  streete,  from
whence  some  smaller  doe  proceede  on  either  side.  It
hath  had  gates  (as  it  seemeth)  in  times  past  at  either
ende  to  open  and  shut  as  a  Towne  of  warre,  and  a
Castle  also.  The  houses  are  very  strongly  built  with
thicke  stone  walles,  and  narrow  windowes  like  unto
Castles :  for  as  they  confessed,  in  time  of  trouble,  by
reason  of  the  wilde  Irish  or  otherwise,  they  used  their
houses  for  their  defence  as  Castles.  The  castle  and  all
the  houses  in  the  Towne,  save  foure,  were  won,  burnt,
and  ruinated  by  the  Erie  of  Desmond.  These  foure
houses  fortified  themselves  against  him,  and  withstood
him  and  all  his  power  perforce,  so  as  he  could  not
winne  them.

There  remaineth  yet  a  thicke  stone  wall  that  passeth
overthwart  the  midst  of  the  streete  which  was  a  part
of  their  fortification.  Notwithstanding  whilest  they  thus
defended  themselves,  as  some  of  them  yet  alive  con-
fessed, they  were  driven  to  as  great  extremities  as  the
Jewes,  besieged  by  Titus  the  Romane  Emperour,  inso-
much that  they  were  constrained  to  eat  dead  mens
carcases  for  hunger.  The  Towne  is  nowe  againe  some-
what repaired,  but  in  effect  there  remaine  but  the  ruines
of  the  former  Towne.  Commonly  they  have  no  chim-
neis  in  their  houses,  excepting  them of  the  better  sort,,

27

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

so  that  the  smoake  was  very  troublesom  to  us,  while  we
continued  there.  Their  fewell  is  turfes,  which  they  have
very  good,  and  whinnes  or  furres.  There  groweth  little
wood  thereabouts,  which  maketh  building  chargeable
there :  as  also  want  of  lime  (as  they  reported)  which  they
are  faine  to  fetch  from  farre,  when  they  have  neede
thereof.  But  of  stones  there  is  store  ynough,  so  that
with  them  they  commonly  make  their  hedges  to  part  ech
mans  ground  from  other ;  and  the  ground  seemeth  to  be
nothing  else  within  but  rockes  and  stones :  Yet  it  is
very  fruitfull  and  plentifull  of  grasse,  and  graine,  as  may
appeare  by  the  abundance  of  kine  and  cattel  there :  inso-
much that  we  had  good  muttons  (though  somewhat  lesse
then  ours  in  England)  for  two  shillings  or  five  groates  a
piece,  good  pigges  and  hennes  for  3.  pence  a  piece.

The  greatest  want  is  industrious,  painefull,  and  hus-
bandly inhabitants  to  till  and  trimme  the  ground :  for  the
common  sort,  if  they  can  provide  sufficient  to  serve
from  hand  to  mouth,  take  no  further  care.

Of  money  (as  it  seemeth)  there  is  very  small  store
amongst  them,  which  perhaps  was  the  cause  that  made
them  double  and  triple  the  prizes  of  many  things  we
bought  of  them,  more  then  they  were  before  our  com-
ming  thither.

Good  land  was  here  to  be  had  for  foure  pence  the
Mines  in  Ire-  Acre  yeerely  rent.  There  are  Mines  of  Alome,  Tinne,
land.  brasse,  and  yron. Stones wee sawe there  as cleare as

Christall,  naturally  squared  like  Diamonds.

That  part  of  the  Countrey  is  all  ful  of  great  moun-
taines  and  hills,  from  whence  came  running  downe  the
pleasant  streames  of  sweete  fresh  running  water.  The
naturall  hardnesse  of  that  Nation  appeareth  in  this,  that
their  small  children  runne  usually  in  the  middest  of
Winter  up  and  downe  the  streetes  bare-foote  and  bare-
[]I.  ii.  166.]  legged,  with  no  other  apparell  (many  times)  save  onely  a
mantell  to  cover  their  nakednesse.

The  chiefe  Officer  of  their  Towne  they  call  their
Soveraigne,  who hath the same office and authoritie

28

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1589.

among  them  that  our  Maiors  have  with  us  in  England,
and  hath  his  Sergeants  to  attend  upon  him,  and  beare
the  Mace  before  him  as  our  Maiors.

We  were  first  intertained  at  the  Soveraignes  house,
which  was  one  of  those  4.  that  withstood  the  Erie  of
Desmond  in  his  rebellion.  They  have  the  same  forme
of  Common  prayer  word  for  word  in  Latin,  that  we  have
here  in  England.  Upon  the  Sunday  the  Soveraigne
commeth  into  the  Church  with  the  Sergeant  before  him,
and  the  Sheriffe  and  others  of  the  Towne  accompany
him,  and  there  they  kneele  downe  every  man  by  himselfe
privately  to  make  his  prayers.  After  this  they  rise  and
go  out  of  the  Church  againe  to  drinke,  which  being
done,  they  returne  againe  into  the  Church,  and  then  the
Minister  beginneth  prayers.

Their  maner  of  baptizing  difFereth  something  from
ours :  part  of  the  service  belonging  thereto  is  repeated  in
Latin,  and  part  in  Irish.  The  Minister  taketh  the  child
in  his  hands,  and  first  dippeth  it  backwards,  and  then
forwards,  over  head  and  eares  into  the  cold  water  in  the
midst  of  Winter,  whereby  also  may  appeare  their  naturall
hardnesse,  (as  before  was  specified.)  They  had  neither
Bell,  drum,  nor  trumpet,  to  call  the  Parishioners  together,
but  they  expect  till  their  Soveraigne  come,  and  then  they
that  have  any  devotion  follow  him.

They  make  their  bread  all  in  cakes,  and,  for  the  tenth
part,  the  bakers  bake  for  all  the  towne.

We  had  of  them  some  10.  or  11.  Tunnes  of  beere  for
the  Victory,  but  it  proved  like  a  present  purgation  to
them  that  tooke  it,  so  that  we  chose  rather  to  drinke
water  then  it.

The  20.  of  December  we  loosed  from  hence,  having
well  provided  our  selves  of  fresh  water,  and  other  things
necessary,  being  accompanied  with  sir  Edw.  Dennie,  his
Lady,  and  two  yong  sonnes.

This  day  in  the  morning  my  Lord  going  ashoare  to
dispatch  away  speedily  some  fresh  water  that  remained
for the Victory, the winde being very faire for us,

29

ter  drozvned.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

brought  us  newes  that  there  were  60.  Spanish  prizes
taken  and  brought  to  England.  For  two  or  three  dayes
wee  had  a  faire  winde,  but  afterwards  it  scanted  so,  that
(as  I  said  before)  we  were  faine  to  keepe  a  cold  Christmas
with  The  Bishop  and  his  clearkes.

After  this  we  met  with  an  English  ship,  that  brought
us  joyful  news  of  91.  Spanish  prizes  that  were  come  to
England :  and  sorrowfuU  newes  withall,  that  the  last  and
best  prize  we  tooke,  had  suffered  shipwracke  at  a  place
upon  the  coast  of  Cornwal  which  the  Cornish  men  cal
Captaine  Lis-  Als  Efferne,  that  is,  Hel-ciiffe,  and  that  Captaine  Lister
and  all  the  men  in  the  ship  were  drowned,  save  5.  or  6.
the  one  halfe  English,  the  other  Spanish  that  saved
themselves  with  swimming :  but  notwithstanding  much
of  the  goods  were  saved,  and  reserved  for  us,  by  sir
Francis  Godolphin,  and  the  worshipful  gentlemen  of  the
Countrey  there.  My  Lord  was  very  sorry  for  Captaine
Listers  death,  wishing  that  he  had  lost  his  voyage  to
have  saved  his  life.

The  29.  of  December  we  met  with  another  shippe,  that
tolde  us  the  same  newes,  and  that  sir  Martin  Frobisher,
&  Captaine  Reymond  had  taken  the  Admirall  and  vice-
Admirall  of  the  Fleet  that  we  espied  going  to  Ter9era
haven.  But  the  Admiral  was  sunke  with  much  leaking,
neere  to  the  Idy  Stone,  a  rocke  that  lieth  over  against
Plimouth  sound,  and  the  men  were  saved.

This  ship  also  certified  us  that  Captaine  Prestons
ship  had  taken  a  prize  loden  with  silver.  My  Lord
entred  presently  into  this  ship,  &  went  to  Falmouth,  and
we  held  on  our  course  for  Plimouth.  At  night  we  came
neere  to  the  Ram-head  (the  next  Cape  Westwards  from
Plimouth  sound)  but  we  were  afraid  to  double  it  in  the
night,  misdoubting  the  scantnesse  of  the  winde.  So  we
stood  off  to  Sea  halfe  the  night,  and  towards  morning
had  the  winde  more  large,  and  made  too  little  spare
thereof,  that  partly  for  this  cause,  and  partly  through
mistaking  of  the  land,  wee  were  driven  so  much  to  lee-
wards, that  we  could  not  double  that Cape: Therefore

30

A VALIANT FIGHT

we  returned  backe  againe,  and  came  into  Falmouth  haven,
where  wee  strucke  on  ground  in  17.  foote  water:  but  it
was  a  low  ebbe,  and  ready  againe  to  flowe,  and  the
ground  soft,  so  as  no  hurt  was  done.  Here  with  glad-
nesse  wee  set  foote  againe  upon  the  English  ground  (long
desired)  and  refreshed  our  selves  with  keeping  part  of
Christmas  upon  our  native  soile.

The  valiant  fight  performed  by  10.  Merchants
ships  of  London,  against  12.  Spanish  gallies
in  the  Straights  of  Gibraltar,  the  24.  of  April
1590.

T  is  not  long  since  sundry  valiant  ships
appertaining  to  the  Marchants  of  London,
were  fraighted  &  rigged  forth,  some  for
Venice,  some  for  Constantinople,  &  some
to  sundry  other  places  of  trafique,  among
whom these ensuing met within the

*  Straights of Gibraltar, as they were

A.D.

1590.

taking  their  course  homewards,  having  before  escaped  all
other  danger.  The  first  whereof  was  the  Salomon
apperteining  to  M.  Alderman  Barnam  of  London,  and  [ii.  ii.  167.]
M.  Bond,  and  M.  Twyd  of  Harwich ;  which  went  foorth
the  first  day  of  February  last.  The  second  was  the  February
Margaret  and  John  belonging  to  M.  Wats  of  London:  ^59°-
The  thirde  was  the  Minion :  The  fourth  was  the
Ascension.  The  fifth  was  the  Centurion  of  Master
Cordal :  The  sixt  the  Violet :  the  seventh  the  Samuel :
the  eight  the  Crescent :  the  ninth  the  Elizabeth :  and  the
10.  was  the  Richard  belonging  to  M.  Dufiield.  All
these  ships  being  of  notable  and  approved  service,  com-
ming  neere  to  the  mouth  of  the  Straights  hard  by  the
coast  of  Barbary,  descried  twelve  tall  Gallies  bravely
furnished  and  strongly  provided  with  men  and  munition,
ready  to  seaze  upon  these  English  ships :  which  being
perceived  by  the  Captaines  and  Masters  thereof,  wee
made  speedy  preparation for  the  defence  of  our  selves,

31

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

still  waiting  all  the  night  long  for  the  approching  of  the
enemie.  In  the  morning  early  being  the  Tuesday  in
Easter  weeke,  and  the  24  of  April  1590.  according  to
our  usual  customes,  we  said  Service  and  made  our
prayers  unto  Almightie  God,  beseeching  him  to  save  us
from  the  hands  of  such  tyrants  as  the  Spaniards,  whom
we  justly  imagined  to  be,  and  whom  we  knew  and  had
found  to  be  our  most  mortall  enemies  upon  the  Sea.
And  having  finished  our  prayers,  and  set  our  selves  in
a  readinesse,  we  perceived  them  to  come  towards  us,  and
that  they  were  indeede  the  Spanish  Gallies  that  lay  under
the  conduct  of  Andre  Doria,  who  is  Vice-roy  for  the
King  of  Spaine  in  the  Straights  of  Gibraltar,  and  a
notable  knowne  enemie  to  all  Englishmen.  So  when
they  came  somewhat  neerer  unto  us,  they  waved  us  a
maine  for  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  wee  waved  them  a
maine  for  the  Queene  of  England,  at  which,  time  it
pleased  Almightie  God  greatly  to  incourage  us  all  in  such
sort,  as  that  the  neerer  they  came  the  lesse  we  feared
their  great  multitudes  and  huge  number  of  men,  which
were  planted  in  those  Gallies  to  the  number  of  two  or
three  hundred  men  in  ech  Gallic.  And  it  was  thus  con-
cluded among  us,  that  the  foure  first  and  tallest  ships
should  be  placed  hindmost,  and  the  weaker  &  smallest
ships  formost,  and  so  it  was  performed,  every  man  being
ready  to  take  part  of  such  successe  as  it  should  please
God  to  send.

At  the  first  encounter  the  Gallies  came  upon  us  very
fiercely,  yet  God  so  strengthened  us,  that  if  they  had
bene  ten  times  more,  we  had  not  feared  them  at  all.
Whereupon  the  Salomon  being  a  hot  shippe,  and  having
sundry  cast  pieces  in  her,  gave  the  first  shotte  in  such
a  sowre  sort,  as  that  it  shared  away  so  many  men  as  sate
on  the  one  side  of  a  Gallic,  and  pierced  her  through  in
such  maner,  as  that  she  was  ready  to  sinke,  which  made
them  to  assault  us  the  more  fiercely.  Whereupon  the
rest  of  our  shippes,  especially  the  foure  chiefest,  namely,
the  Margaret  and  John,  the  Minion,  and  the  Ascension

32

A VALIANT FIGHT  a.d.

1590.

followed,  and  gave  a  hot  charge  upon them,  and  they

at  us,  where  began a  hot and  fierce  battaile  with  great

valiancie  the  one  against  the  other,  and  so  continued  for  Afigktofiixe

the  space  of  sixe  houres. About  the  beginning  of  this '""^^^  °^^'

our  fight  there came two Flemings to our Fleet,  who

seeing  the  force  of  the  Gallies  to  be  so  great,  the  one  of

them  presently  yeelded,  strooke  his  sailes,  and  was  taken  ^^^«^

by  the  Gallies,  whereas  if  they  would  have  offered  them- ^Ylemim

selves to have  fought in our behalfe  and their owne

defence,  they  needed  not  to  have  bene  taken  so  cowardly

as they  were to their cost. The other  Fleming  being

also  ready  to  performe  the  like  piece  of  service  began  to

vaile  his  sailes,  and  intended  to  have  yeelded  immediatly.

But  the  Trumpetter  in that shippe  plucked  foorth his

faulchion and stepped to the  Pilote  at  the  helme,  and

vowed  that  if  he  did  not  speedily  put  off  to  the  English

Fleete,  and  so  take  part  with  them,  he  would  presently

kill  him :  which  the  Pilote  for  feare  of  death  did,  and  so

by  that  meanes  they  were  defended  from  present  death,

and  from  the  tyrannie  of  those  Spaniards,  which  doubt-

lesse  they  should  have  found  at  their  handes.

Thus  we  continued  in  fight  sixe  houres  and  somewhat
more,  wherein  God  gave  us  the  upper  hand,  and  we
escaped  the  hands  of  so  many  enemies,  who  were  con-
strained to  flie  into  harbour  and  shroude  themselves  from
us,  and  with  speed  to  seeke  for  their  owne  safetie.  This
was  the  handie  worke  of  God,  who  defended  us  all  from
danger  in  such  sort,  as  that  there  was  not  one  man  of  us
slaine.  And  in  all  this  fierce  assault  made  upon  us  by
the  Spanish  power,  wee  sustained  no  hurt  or  damage  at
all  more  then  this,  that  the  shrouds  and  backestay  of  the
Salomon,  who  gave  the  first  and  last  shot,  and  galled
the  enemie  shrewdly  all  the  time  of  the  battell,  were
cleane  striken  off.

The  battel  being  ceased,  we  were  constrained  for  want

of  wind  to  stay  and  waft  up  and  downe,  and  then  went

backe  againe  to  Tition  in  Barbary,  which  is  sixe  leagues

off  from  Gibraltar,  and  when  we  came  thither  we  found

VII  33  c

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

the  people  wonderous  favourable  to  us,  who  being  but
Moores  and  heathen  people  shewed  us  where  to  have
fresh  water  and  al  other  necessaries  for  us.  And  there
we  had  such  good  intertainment,  as  if  we  had  bene  in
any  place  of  England.

The  governour  was  one  that  favoured  us  greatly,  whom
wee  in  respect  of  his  great  friendship  presented  with  giftes
and  such  commodities  as  we  had  in  our  custodie,  which
he  wonderfully  wel  accepted  of:  and  here  we  stayed
foure  dayes.

After  the  battell  was  ceased,  which  was  on  Easter
Tuesday,  we  stayed  for  want  of  winde  before  Gibraltar,
untill  the  next  morning,  where  wee  were  becalmed,  and
[II.  ii.  168.]  therefore  looked  every  houre  when  they  would  have  sent
foorth  some  fresh  supply  against  us,  but  they  were  farre
unable  to  doe  it,  for  all  their  Gallies  were  so  sore
battered,  that  they  durst  not  come  foorth  of  the  harbour,
by  reason  of  our  hot  resistance  which  they  so  lately  before
had  received.  Yet  were  they  greatly  urged  thereunto  by
the  Governour  of  the  said  Towne  of  Gibraltar.

At  our  being  at  Tition  in  Barbary,  there  we  heard
report  of  the  hurt  that  wee  had  done  to  the  Gallies,  for
at  our  comming  from  them  wee  could  not  well  discerne
any  thing  at  all  by  reason  of  the  smoake  which  the
powder  had  made :  there  we  heard  that  we  had  almost
spoiled  those  twelve  Gallies  by  shooting  them  cleane
through,  that  two  of  them  were  ready  to  sinke,  and  that
wee  had  slaine  of  their  men  such  great  abundance,  as  that
they  were  not  able  to  furnish  forth  any  more  Gallies  at
all  for  that  yeere.

Thus  after  we  came  from  Tition,  we  assayed  to  depart
the  Straight  three  severall  times,  but  could  not  passe,
yet,  God  be  thanked,  the  fourth  time  wee  came  safely
away,  and  so  sailed  with  a  pleasant  winde  untill  wee  came
upon  the  coast  of  England,  which  was  in  the  beginning
of  the  moneth  of  July 1590,

34

THE CENTURION'S'  VALIANT  FIGHT

A.D.
159I.

The  valiant  fight  performed  in  the  Straight  of
Gibraltar,  by  the  Centurion  of  London,  against
five  Spanish  Gallies,  in  the  moneth  of  April
1591.

N  the  moneth  of  November  1590,  there
were  sundry  shippes  appertaining  to
several!  Marchants  of  London,  which
were  rigged  and  fraught  foorth  with
marchandize,  for  sundry  places  within
the  Straight  of  Gibraltar :  who,  together
having winde and weather, which oft-

time  fell  out  very  uncertaine,  arrived  safely  in  short
space,  at  such  places  as  they  desired.  Among  whom  was
the  Centurion  of  London,  a  very  tall  shippe  of  burden,
yet  but  weakely  manned,  as  appeareth  by  this  discourse
following.

This  aforesaid  shippe  called  The  Centurion  safely
arrived  at  Marseils,  where  after  they  had  delivered  their
goods,  they  stayed  about  the  space  of  five  weekes,  and
better,  and  then  tooke  in  lading,  intending  to  return e  to
England.

Now  when  the  Centurion  was  ready  to  come  away
from  Marseils,  there  were  sundry  other  shippes  of  smaller
burden  which  entreated  the  Master  thereof,  (whose  name
is  Robert  Bradshaw,  dwelling  at  Lime-house)  to  stay  a
day  or  two  for  them,  untill  they  were  in  a  readinesse  to
depart  with  them,  thereby  perswading  them,  that  it  would
be  farre  better  for  them  to  stay  and  goe  together  in
respect  of  their  assistance,  then  to  depart  of  themselves
without  company,  and  so  happily  for  want  of  aide  fall
into  the  hands  of  their  enemies  in  the  Spanish  Gallies.
Upon  which  reasonable  perswasion,  notwithstanding  that
this  shippe  was  of  such  sufficiencie  as  they  might  hazard
her  in  the  danger  of  the  Sea,  yet  they  stayed  for  those
litle  shippes,  according  to  their  request,  who  together  did
put  to  Sea  from  Marseils,  and  vowed  in  generall  not  to

35

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

flie  one from another,  if  they  should  happen  to  meete
with  any  Spanish  Gallies.

These  small  shippes,  accompanied  with  the  Centurion,
sayling  along  the  coast  of  Spaine,  were  upon  Easter  day
in  the  Straight  of  Gibraltar  suddenly  becalmed,  where
immediatly  they  saw  sundry  Gallies  make  towards  them,
in  very  valiant  and  couragious  sort :  the  chiefe  Leaders
and  souldiers  in  those  Gallies  bravely  apparelled  in  silke
coates,  with  their  silver  whistles  about  their  neckes,  and
great  plumes  of  feathers  in  their  hattes,  who  with  their
Calivers  shot  at  the  Centurion  so  fast  as  they  might:  so
that  by  10.  of  the  clocke  and  somewhat  before,  they  had
boorded  the  Centurion,  who  before  their  comming  had
prepared  for  them,  and  intended  to  give  them  so  soure  a
welcome  as  they  might.  And  thereupon  having  prepared
their  close  fights,  and  all  things  in  a  readinesse,  they
called  upon  God,  on  whom  onely  they  trusted :  and
having  made  their  prayers,  and  cheered  up  one  another
to  fight  so  long  as  life  endured,  they  beganne  to  discharge
their  great  Ordinance  upon  the  Gallies,  but  the  little
shippes  durst  not  come  forward,  but  lay  aloofe,  while  five
Gallies  had  boorded  them,  yea  and  with  their  grapling
irons  made  their  Gallies  fast  to  the  said  shippe  called  the
Centurion.

The  Gallies  were  grapled  to  the  Centurion  in  this
maner,  two  lay  on  one  side,  and  two  on  another,  and  the
Admirall  lay  full  in  the  sterne,  which  galled  and  battered
the  Centurion  so  sore,  that  her  maine  Maste  was  greatly
weakened,  her  sailes  filled  with  many  holes,  and  the
iVIizzen  and  sterne  made  almost  unserviceable.

During  which  time  there  was  a  sore  and  deadly  fight
on  both  sides,  in  which  the  Trumpet  of  the  Centurion
sounded  foorth  the  deadly  points  of  warre,  and  encouraged
them  to  fight  manfully  against  their  adversaries  :  on  the
contrary  part,  there  was  no  warlike  Musicke  in  the
[II.  ii.  1 69.  J  Spanish  Gallies,  but  onely  their  whistles  of  silver,  which
they  sounded  foorth  to  their  owne  contentment :  in  which
fight  many  a  Spaniard  was  turned  into  the  Sea,  and  they

36

THE  'CENTURION'S'  VALIANT  FIGHT  ad.

1591.

in  multitudes  came  crauling  and  hung  upon  the  side  of
the  shippe,  intending  to  have  entred  into  the  same,  but
such  was  the  courage  of  the  Englishmen,  that  so  fast
as  the  Spaniards  did  come  to  enter,  they  gave  them  such
entertainment,  that  some  of  them  were  glad  to  tumble
alive  into  the  Sea,  being  remedilesse  for  ever  to  get
up  alive.  In  the  Centurion  there  were  in  all,  of  men
and  boyes,  fourtie  and  eight,  who  together  fought  most
valiantly,  and  so  galled  the  enemie,  that  many  a  brave
and  lustie  Spaniard  lost  his  life  in  that  place.

The  Centurion  was  fired  five  severall  times,  with  wilde
fire  and  other  provision,  which  the  Spaniards  threw  in
for  that  purpose :  yet,  God  be  thanked,  by  the  great
and  diligent  foresight  of  the  Master  it  did  no  harme
at  all.

In  every  of  the  Gallies  there  were  about  200.
souldiers :  who  together  with  the  shot,  spoiled,  rent,
and  battered  the  Centurion  very  sore,  shot  through  her
maine  Maste,  and  slew  4.  of  the  men  in  the  said  shippe,
the  one  of  them  beinsf  the  Masters  mate.

Ten  other  persons  were  hurt,  by  meanes  of  splinters
which  the  Spaniards  shotte :  yea,  in  the  ende  when  their
provision  was  almost  spent,  they  were  constrained  to
shoote  at  them  hammers,  and  the  chaines  from  their
slaves,  and  yet  God  bee  thanked,  they  received  no  more
domage :  but  by  spoyling  and  overwearying  of  the
Spaniards,  the  Englishmen  constrained  them  to  ungrapple
themselves,  and  get  them  going :  and  sure  if  there  had
bene  any  other  fresh  shippe  or  succour  to  have  relieved
and  assisted  the  Centurion,  they  had  slaine,  suncke,  or
taken  all  those  Gallies  and  their  Souldiers.

The  Dolphin  lay  a  loofe  off  and  durst  not  come
neere,  while  the  other  two  small  shippes  fledde  away,
so  that  one  of  the  Gallies  went  from  the  Centurion
and  set  upon  the  Dolphin,  which  shippe  immediatly
was  set  on  fire  with  their  owne  powder,  whereby  both
men  and  shippe  perished :  but  whether  it  was  with  their
good  wills  or  no,  that  was  not  knowen  unto the  Cen-

37

A.D.

I59I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

turion,  but  sure,  if  it  had  come  forward,  and  bene  an
aide  unto  the  Centurion,  it  is  to  bee  supposed  that  it
had  not  perished.

Five  houres  and  a  halfe  this  fight  continued,  in  which
time  both  were  glad  to  depart  onely  to  breath  themselves,
but  when  the  Spaniards  were  gone,  they  never  durst
return e  to  fight :  yet  the  next  day  sixe  other  Gallies
came  and  looked  at  them,  but  durst  not  at  any  hand
meddle  with  them.

Thus  God  delivered  them  from  the  handes  of  their
enemies,  and  gave  them  the  victory :  for  which  they
heartily  praised  him,  and  not  long  after  safely  arrived
in  London.

^^  There  were  present  at  this  fight  Master  John
Hawes  Marchant,  and  sundry  other  of  good
accompt.

A  report  of  the  trueth  of  the  fight  about  the
Isles  of  A9ores,  the  last  of  August  1591.
betwixt  the  Revenge,  one  of  her  Majesties
shippes,  and  an  Armada  of  the  king  of  Spaine  ;
Penned  by  the  honourable  Sir  Walter  Ralegh
knight.

Ecause  the  rumours  are  diversly  spred,
as  well  in  England  as  in  the  Lowe
countreis  and  elsewhere,  of  this  late
encounter  betweene  her  Majesties  ships
and  the  Armada  of  Spaine ;  and  that  the
Spaniards  according  to  their  usuall  maner,
*  fill  the  world  with  their  vaine-glorious
vaunts,  making  great  apparance  of  victories,  when  on  the
contrary,  themselves  are  most  commonly  and  shamefully
beaten  and  dishonoured ;  thereby  hoping  to  possesse  the
ignorant  multitude  by  anticipating  &  forerunning  false
reports:  It  is  agreeable  with  all  good  reason,  for  mani-
festation of  the  truth,  to  overcome  falshood  and  un-
trueth  ;  that  the  beginning,  continuance  and  successe  of

38

THE  LAST  FIGHT  OF  THE REVENGE'  ad.

1591-
this  late  honourable  encounter  of  Sir  Richard  Greenvil,
and  other  her  Majesties  Captaines,  with  the  Armada  of
Spaine ;  should  be  truely  set  downe  and  published  with-
out partialitie  or  false  imaginations.  And  it  is  no
marveile  that  the  Spaniard  should  seeke  by  false  and
slanderous  pamphlets,  advisoes  and  Letters,  to  cover  their
owne  losse,  and  to  derogate  from  others  their  due  honors,
especially  in  this  fight  being  performed  far  oiF:  seeing
they  were  not  ashamed  in  the  yeere  1588.  when  they
purposed  the  invasion  of  this  land,  to  publish  in  sundry
languages  in  print,  great  victories  in  wordes,  which  they
pleaded  to  have  obteined  against  this  Realme ;  and  spred
the  same  in  a  most  false  sort  over  all  parts  of  France,
Italy,  and  elsewhere.  When  shortly  after  it  was  happily
manifested  in  very  deed  to  al  Nations,  how  their  Navy
which  they  termed  invincible,  consisting  of  140.  saile
of  shippes,  not  onely  of  their  owne  kingdome,  but
strengthened  with  the  greatest  Argosies,  Portugal
Caracks,  Florentines,  and  huge  hulks  of  other  Countreis,
were  by  30.  of  her  Majesties  owne  ships  of  war,  and
a  few  of  our  owne  Marchants,  by  the  wise,  valiant,  [II.  ii.  170.
and  advantagious  conduct  of  the  L.  Charles  Howard
high  Admirall  of  England,  beaten  and  shuffled  together ;
even  from  the  Lizard  in  Cornwall  first  to  Portland,  where
they  shamefully  left  Don  Pedro  de  Valdes,  with  his
mighty  ship ;  from  Portland  to  Cales,  where  they  lost
Hugo  de  Moncado,  with  the  Gallias  of  which  he  was
Captaine,  and  from  Cales,  driven  with  squibs  from  their
anchors,  were  chased  out  of  the  sight  of  England,  round
about  Scotland  and  Ireland.  Where  for  the  sympathie
of  their  barbarous  religion,  hoping  to  finde  succour  and
assistance,  a  great  part  of  them  were  crusht  against  the
rocks,  and  those  other  that  landed,  being  very  many  in
number,  were  notwithstanding  broken,  slaine,  and  taken,
and  so  sent  from  village  to  village  coupled  in  halters,
to  be  shipped  into  England.  Where  her  Majestic  of
her  Princely  and  invincible  disposition,  disdaining  to  put
them  to  death,  and  scorning  either  to  retaine  or  entertaine

39

I59I-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

them :  they  were  all  sent  backe  againe  to  their  countreys,
to  witnes  and  recount  the  worthy  achievements  of  their
invincible  and  dreadful!  Navy :  Of  which  the  number  of
Souldiers,  the  fearefull  burthen  of  their  shippes,  the
commanders  names  of  every  squadron,  with  all  other
their  magasines  of  provisions,  were  put  in  print,  as  an
Army  and  Navy  unresistable,  and  disdaining  prevention.
With  all  which  so  great  and  terrible  an  ostentation,  they
did  not  in  all  their  sailing  round  about  England,  so  much
as  sinke  or  take  one  shippe,  Barke,  Pinnesse,  or  Cockbote
of  ours :  or  ever  burnt  so  much  as  one  sheepecote  of
this  land.  Whenas  on  the  contrarie.  Sir  Francis  Drake,
with  onely  800.  souldiers  not  long  before,  landed  in
their  Indies,  and  forced  Sant-Iago,  Santo  Domingo,
Cartagena,  and  the  forts  of  Florida.

And  after  that.  Sir  John  Norris  marched  from  Peniche
in  Portugal!,  with  a  handfull  of  souldiers,  to  the  gates
of  Lisbone,  being  above  40  English  miles.  Where  the
Earle  of  Essex  himselfe  and  other  valiant  Gentlemen
braved  the  Citie  of  Lisbone,  encamped  at  the  very  gates ;
from  whence,  after  many  dayes  abode,  finding  neither
promised  partie,  nor  provision  to  batter ;  they  made
retrait  by  land,  in  despight  of  all  their  Garrisons,  both
of  horse  &  foote.  In  this  sort  I  have  a  little  digressed
from  my  first  purpose,  onely  by  the  necessarie  comparison
of  theirs  and  our  actions :  the  one  covetous  of  honour
without  vaunt  of  ostentation ;  the  other  so  greedy  to
purchase  the  opinion  of  their  owne  affaires,  and  by  false
rumors  to  resist  the  blasts  of  their  owne  dishonours,
as  they  will  not  onely  not  blush  to  spread  all  manner
of  untruthes :  but  even  for  the  least  advantage,  be  it
but  for  the  taking  of  one  poore  adventurer  of  the
English,  will  celebrate  the  victory  with  bonefires  in  every
towne,  alwayes  spending  more  in  faggots,  then  the  pur-
chase was  worth  they  obtained.  When  as  we  never
thought  it  worth  the  consumption  of  two  billets,  when
we  have  taken  eight  or  ten  of  their  Indian  shippes  at
one time, and twentie of  the Brasill fleete. Such is

40

THE  LAST  FIGHT  OF  THE REVENGE'  ad.

1591.
the  difference  betweene  true  valure,  and  ostentation  :  and
betweene honorable  actions,  and  frivolous  vaineglorious
vaunts. But  now  to  returne  to  my  purpose.

The  L.  Thomas  Howard  with  sixe  of  her  Majesties
shippes,  sixe  victualers  of  London,  the  Barke  Ralegh,
&  two  or  three  other  Pinnases  riding  at  anker  neere  unto
Flores,  one  of  the  Westerly  Hands  of  the  Azores,  the
last  of  August  in  the  afternoone,  had  intelligence  by  one
Captaine  Middleton  of  the  approch  of  the  Spanish
Armada.  Which  Middleton  being  in  a  very  good  sailer
had  kept  them  company  three  dayes  before,  of  good
purpose,  both  to  discover  their  forces  the  more,  as  also
to  give  advise  to  my  L.  Thomas  of  their  approch.  Hee
had  no  sooner  delivered  the  newes  but  the  fleete  was
in  sight :  many  of  our  shippes  companies  were  on  shore
in  the  Ilande ;  some  providing  balast  for  their  ships ;
others  filling  of  water  and  refreshing  themselves  from
the  land  with  such  things  as  they  could  either  for  money,
or  by  force  recover.  By  reason  whereof  our  ships  being
all  pestered  and  romaging  every  thing  out  of  order,  very
light  for  want  of  balast,  and  that  which  was  most  to
our  disadvantage,  the  one  halfe  part  of  the  men  of  every
shippe  sicke,  and  utterly  unserviceable :  for  in  the
Revenge  there  were  ninety  diseased :  in  the  Bonaventure,
not  so  many  in  health  as  could  handle  her  maine  saile.
For  had  not  twenty  men  beene  taken  out  of  a  Barke
of  sir  George  Careys,  his  being  commaunded  to  be  sunke,
and  those  appointed  to  her,  she  had  hardly  ever  recovered
England.  The  rest,  for  the  most  parte,  were  in  little
better  state.  The  names  of  her  Majesties  shippes  were
these  as  followeth,  the  Defiance,  which  was  Admiral,  the
Revenge  Viceadmirall,  the  Bonaventure  commaunded  by
Captaine  Crosse,  the  Lion  by  George  Fenner,  the  Fore-
sight by  M.  Thomas  Vavasour,  and  the  Crane  by  Duffild.
The  Foresight  &  the  Crane  being  but  smal  ships ;  only
the  other  were  of  the  middle  size ;  the  rest,  besides  the
Barke  Ralegh,  commanded  by  Captaine  Thin,  were
victuallers, and of  small force or none. The Spanish

41

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

fleet  having  shrouded  their  approch  by  reason  of  the
Island ;  were  now  so  soone  at  hand,  as  our  shippes  had
scarce  time  to  way  their  anchors,  but  some  of  them  were
driven  to  let  slippe  their  Cables  and  set  saile.  Sir  Richard
Grinvile  was  the  last  that  wayed,  to  recover  the  men  that
were  upon  the  Island,  which  otherwise  had  bene  lost.
The  L.  Thomas  with  the  rest  very  hardly  recovered  the
winde,  which  Sir  Richard  Grinvile  not  being  able  to  doe,
[II.  ii.  171.]  was  perswaded  by  the  Master  and  others  to  cut  his  maine
sayle,  and  cast  about,  and  to  trust  to  the  sayling  of  the
ship ;  for  the  squadron  of  Sivil  were  on  his  weather  bow.
But  Sir  Richard  utterly  refused  to  turne  from  the  enemie,
alleaging  that  hee  would  rather  choose  to  die,  then  to
dishonour  himselfe,  his  countrey,  and  her  Majesties
shippe,  perswading  his  companie  that  hee  would  passe
through  the  two  squadrons,  in  despight  of  them,  and
enforce  those  of  Sivil  to  give  him  way.  Which  hee
performed  upon  divers  of  the  formost,  who,  as  the
Mariners  terme  it,  sprang  their  luffe,  and  fell  under  the
lee  of  the  Revenge.  But  the  other  course  had  beene
the  better,  and  might  right  well  have  bene  answered  in
so  great  an  impossibility  of  prevaling.  Notwithstanding
out  of  the  greatnesse  of  his  minde,  he  could  not  be
perswaded.  In  the  meane  while  as  hee  attended  those
which  were  nearest  him,  the  great  San  Philip  being  in
the  winde  of  him,  and  comming  towards  him,  becalmed
his  sailes  in  such  sort,  as  the  shippe  could  neither  make
way,  nor  feele  the  helme :  so  huge  and  high  carged  was
the  Spanish  ship,  being  of  a  thousand  and  five  hundreth
tuns.  Who  after  layd  the  Revenge  aboord.  When  he
was  thus  bereft  of  his  sailes,  the  ships  that  were  under
his  lee  luffing  up,  also  layd  him  aboord  :  of  which  the
next  was  the  Admiral  of  the  Biscaines,  a  very  mighty  and
puissant  shippe  commanded  by  Brittandona.  The  sayd
Philip  carried  three  tire  of  ordinance  on  a  side,  and  eleven
pieces  in  every  tire.  She  shot  eight  forth  right  out  of
her  chase,  besides  those  of  her  sterne  ports.

After the Revenge was entangled with this Philip,

42

THE  LAST  FIGHT  OF  THE REVENGE'  ad.

1 59 1.

foure  other  boorded  her ;  two  on  her  larboord,  and  two
on  her  starboord.  The  fight  thus  beginning  at  three  of
the  clock  in  the  afternoone,  continued  very  terrible  all
that  evening.  But  the  great  San  Philip  having  received
the  lower  tire  of  the  Revenge,  discharged  with  crossebar-
shot,  shifted  her  selfe  with  all  diligence  from  her  sides,
utterly  misliking  her  first  entertainement.  Some  say  that
the  shippe  foundred,  but  we  cannot  report  it  for  truth,
unlesse  we  were  assured.  The  Spanish  ships  were  filled
with  companies  of  souldiers,  in  some  two  hundred  be-
sides the  mariners ;  in  some  five,  in  others  eight
hundreth.  In  ours  there  were  none  at  all  beside  the
mariners,  but  the  servants  of  the  commanders  and  some
few  voluntary  gentlemen  onely.  After  many  enter-
changed  volies  of  great  ordinance  and  small  shot,  the
Spaniards  deliberated  to  enter  the  Revenge,  and  made
divers  attempts,  hoping  to  force  her  by  the  multitudes
of  their  armed  soulders  and  Musketters,  but  were  still
repulsed  againe  and  againe,  and  at  all  times  beaten  backe  '
into  their  owne  ships,  or  into  the  seas.  In  the  beginning
of  the  fight,  the  George  Noble  of  London  having
received  some  shot  thorow  her  by  the  Armadas,  fell
under  the  lee  of  the  Revenge,  and  asked  Sir  Richard
what  he  would  command  him,  being  but  one  of  the
victuallers  and  of  small  force :  Sir  Richard  bid  him  save
himselfe,  and  leave  him  to  his  fortune.  After  the  fight
had  thus,  without  intermission,  continued  while  the  day
lasted  and  some  houres  of  the  night,  many  of  our  men
were  slaine  and  hurte,  and  one  of  the  great  Gallions  of
the  Armada,  and  the  Admirall  of  the  Hulkes  both
sunke,  and  in  many  other  of  the  Spanish  shippes  great
slaughter  was  made.  Some  write  that  sir  Richard  was
very  dangerously  hurt  almost  in  the  beginning  of  the
fight,  and  lay  speechlesse  for  a  time  ere  hee  recovered.
But  two  of  the  Revenges  owne  company,  brought  home
in  a  ship  of  Lime  from  the  Ilandes,  examined  by  some
of  the  Lordes,  and  others,  afifirmed  that  hee  was  never
so  wounded as that hee  forsooke the  upper  decke,  till

43

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-

an  houre  before  midnight ;  and  then  being  shot  into  the
bodie  with  a  Musket  as  hee  was  a  dressing,  was  againe
shot  into  the  head,  and  withall  his  Chirurgion  wounded
to  death.  This  agreeth  also  with  an  examination  taken
by  sir  Francis  Godolphin,  of  foure  other  mariners  of
the  same  shippe  being  returned,  which  examination,  the
said  sir  Francis  sent  unto  master  William  Killegrue,  of
her  Majesties  privy  Chamber.

But  to  returne  to  the  fight,  the  Spanish  ships  which
attempted  to  bord  the  Revenge,  as  they  were  wounded
and  beaten  off,  so  alwayes  others  came  in  their  places,
she  having  never  lesse  then  two  mighty  Gallions  by  her
sides,  and  aboard  her :  So  that  ere  the  morning,  from
three  of  the  clocke  the  day  before,  there  had  fifteene
severall  Armadas  assayled  her ;  and  all  so  ill  approved
their  entertainement,  as  they  were  by  the  breake  of  day,
far  more  willing  to  harken  to  a  composition,  then  hastily
to  make  any  more  assaults  or  entries.  But  as  the  day
encreased,  so  our  men  decreased :  and  as  the  light  grew
more  and  more,  by  so  much  more  grewe  our  discomforts.
For  none  appeared  in  sight  but  enemies,  saving  one
small  ship  called  the  Pilgrim,  commaunded  by  Jacob
Whiddon,  who  hovered  all  night  to  see  the  successe :
but  in  the  morning  bearing  with  the  Revenge,  was
hunted  like  a  hare  amongst  many  ravenous  houndes,
but  escaped.

All  the  powder  of  the  Revenge  to  the  last  barrell  was
now  spent,  all  her  pikes  broken,  fortie  of  her  best  men
slaine,  and  the  most  part  of  the  rest  hurt.  In  the  be-
ginning of  the  fight  shee  had  but  one  hundreth  free
from  sicknes,  and  fourescore  &  ten  sicke,  laid  in  hold
upon  the  Ballast.  A  small  troup  to  man  such  a  ship,
&  a  weake  garrison  to  resist  so  mighty  an  army.  By
those  hundred  al  was  susteined,  the  voleis,  boordings,
and  entrings  of  fifteen  ships  of  warre,  besides  those  which
[II.  ii.  172.]  beat  her  at  large.  On  the  contrary,  the  Spanish  were
always  supplied  with  souldiers  brought  from  every
squadron : all maner of Armes and powder at will.

44

THE  LAST  FIGHT  OF  THE  'REVENGE'  ad.

1591.

Unto  ours  there  remained  no  comfort  at  all,  no  hope,
no  supply  either  of  ships,  men,  or  weapons ;  the  Mastes
all  beaten  over  boord,  all  her  tackle  cut  asunder,  her
upper  worke  altogether  rased,  and  in  effect  evened  shee
was  with  the  water,  but  the  very  foundation  or  bottome
of  a  ship,  nothing  being  left  over  head  either  for  flight
or  defence.  Sir  Richard  finding  himselfe  in  this  dis-
tresse,  and  unable  any  longer  to  make  resistance,  having
endured  in  this  fifteene  houres  fight,  the  assault  of
fifteene  severall  Armadas,  all  by  turnes  aboord  him,  and
by  estimation  eight  hundred  shotte  of  great  Artillerie,
besides  many  assaults  and  entries ;  and  that  himselfe
and  the  shippe  must  needes  be  possessed  by  the  enemy,
who  were  now  all  cast  in  a  ring  round  about  him.
(The  Revenge  not  able  to  moove  one  way  or  other,
but  as  she  was  moved  with  the  waves  and  billow  of
the  sea)  commaunded  the  Master  gunner,  whom  hee
knew  to  be  a  most  resolute  man,  to  split  and  sinke
the  shippe ;  that  thereby  nothing  might  remaine  of  glory
or  victory  to  the  Spaniards :  seeing  in  so  many  houres
fight,  and  with  so  great  a  Navie  they  were  not  able
to  take  her,  having  had  fifteene  houres  time,  above
ten  thousand  men,  &  fiftie  and  three  saile  of  men  of  The  Spanish
warre  to  performe  it  withall :  and  perswaded  the  com-  53^'^"^-
pany,  or  as  many  as  hee  could  induce,  to  yeelde  them-
selves unto  God,  and  to  the  mercie  of  none  else ;  but
as  they  had,  like  valiant  resolute  men,  repulsed  so  many
enemies,  they  should  not  nowe  shorten  the  honour  of
their  Nation,  by  prolonging  their  owne  lives  for  a  few
houres,  or  a  fewe  dayes.  The  Master  gunner  readily
condescended  and  divers  others ;  but  the  Captaine  and
the  Master  were  of  another  opinion,  and  besought  Sir
Richard  to  have  care  of  them :  alleaging  that  the
Spaniard  would  be  as  ready  to  entertaine  a  composition,
as  they  were  willing  to  offer  the  same :  and  that  there
being  divers  sufficient  and  valiant  men  yet  living,  and
whose  wounds  were  not  mortal,  they  might  do  their
Countrey  and prince acceptable service hereafter. And

45

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

whereas  Sir  Richard  had  alleaged  that  the  Spaniards
should  never  glory  to  have  taken  one  shippe  of  her
Majestie,  seeing  they  had  so  long  and  so  notably
defended  themselves ;  they  answered,  that  the  shippe
had  sixe  foote  water  in  holde,  three  shot  under  water,
which  were  so  weakely  stopped,  as  with  the  first  working
of  the  sea,  she  must  needs  sinke,  and  was  besides  so
crusht  and  brused,  as  shee  could  never  be  removed  out
of  the  place.

And  as  the  matter  was  thus  in  dispute,  and  Sir  Richard
refusing  to  hearken  to  any  of  those  reasons :  the  Master
of  the  Revenge  (while  the  Captaine  wanne  unto  him  the
greater  party)  was  convoyd  aboord  the  Generall  Don
Alfonso  Ba^an.  Who  (finding  none  over  hastie  to  enter
the  Revenge  againe,  doubting  least  Sir  Richard  would
have  blowne  them  up  and  himselfe,  and  perceiving  by
the  report  of  th  Master  of  the  Revenge  his  dangerous
disposition)  yeelded  that  all  their  lives  should  be  saved,
the  company  sent  for  England,  &  the  better  sort  to
pay  such  reasonable  ransome  as  their  estate  would
beare,  and  in  the  meane  season  to  be  free  from  Gaily
or  imprisonment.  To  this  he  so  much  the  rather  con-
descended as  wel,  as  I  have  said,  for  feare  of  further
losse  and  mischiefe  to  themselves,  as  also  for  the  desire
he  had  to  recover  Sir  Richard  Greenvil ;  whom  for  his
notable  valure  he  seemed  greatly  to  honour  and
admire.

When  this  answere  was  returned,  and  that  safetie  of
life  was  promised,  the  common  sort  being  now  at  the
ende  of  their  perill,  the  most  drew  backe  from  Sir
Richard  and  the  Master  gunner,  being  no  hard  matter
to  disswade  men  from  death  to  life.  The  Master  gunner
finding  himselfe  and  Sir  Richard  thus  prevented  and
mastered  by  the  greater  number,  would  have  slaine  him-
selfe with  a  sword,  had  he  not  bene  by  force  with-held
and  locked  into  his  Cabben.  Then  the  Generall  sent
many  boates  aboord  the  Revenge,  and  divers  of  our  men
fearing  Sir Richards  disposition, stole away  aboord  the

46

THE  LAST  FIGHT  OF  THE  '  REVENGE  '  ad.

1591.
Generall  and  other  shippes.  Sir  Richard  thus  over-
matched, was  sent  unto  by  Alfonso  Ba9an  to  remoove
out  of  the  Revenge,  the  shippe  being  marveilous  un-
savorie,  filled  with  blood  and  bodies  of  dead,  and
wounded  men  like  a  slaughter  house.  Sir  Richard
answered  that  hee  might  doe  with  his  body  what  he
list,  for  hee  esteemed  it  not,  and  as  he  was  carried  out
of  the  shippe  hee  swounded,  and  reviving  againe  desired
the  company  to  pray  for  him.  The  Generall  used  Sir
Richard  with  all  humanitie,  and  left  nothing  unattempted
that  tended  to  his  recoverie,  highly  commending  his
valour  and  worthinesse,  and  greatly  bewailing  the  danger
wherein  he  was,  being  unto  them  a  rare  spectacle,  and
a  resolution  sildome  approoved,  to  see  one  shippe  turne
toward  so  many  enemies,  to  endure  the  charge  and
boording  of  so  many  huge  Armadas,  and  to  resist  and
repell  the  assaults  and  entries  of  so  many  souldiers.
All  which  and  more  is  confirmed  by  a  Spanish  Captaine
of  the  same  Armada,  and  a  present  actor  in  the  fight,
who  being  severed  from  the  rest  in  a  storme,  was  by
the  Lion  of  London  a  small  ship  taken,  and  is  now
prisoner  in  London.

The  generall  commander  of  the  Armada,  was  Don
Alphonso  Ba9an,  brother  to  the  Marques  of  Santa  Cruz.
The  admiral  of  the  Biscaine  squadron,  was  Britandona.
Of  the  squadron  of  Sivil,  the  Marques  of  Arumburch.  [II.  ii.  173.]
The  Hulkes  and  Flybotes  were  commanded  by  Luis
Coutinho.  There  were  slaine  and  drowned  in  this  fight,
well  neere  one  thousand  of  the  enemies,  and  two  special!
commanders  Don  Luis  de  sant  John,  and  Don  George
de  Prunaria  de  Mallaga,  as  the  Spanish  captaine  con-
fesseth,  besides  divers  others  of  speciall  account,  whereof^
as  yet  report  is  not  made.

The  Admirall  of  the  Hulkes  and  the  Ascension  of
Sivil  were  both  sunke  by  the  side  of  the  Revenge ;  one
other  recovered  the  rode  of  Saint  Michael,  and  sunke
also  there ;  a  fourth  ranne  her  selfe  with  the  shore  to
save  her  men. Sir  Richard  died  as  it  is  sayd,  the  second

47

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

or  third  day  aboord  the  Generall,  and  was  by  them
greatly  bewailed.  What  became  of  his  body,  whether
it  were  buried  in  the  sea  or  on  the  land  we  know
not :  the  comfort  that  remayneth  to  his  friends  is,  that
hee  hath  ended  his  life  honourably  in  respect  of  the
reputation  wonne  to  his  nation  and  countrey,  and  of  the
same  to  his  posteritie,  and  that  being  dead,  he  hath  not
outlived  his  owne  honour.

For  the  rest  of  her  Majesties  ships  that  entred  not
so  farre  into  the  fight  as  the  Revenge,  the  reasons  and
causes  were  these.  There  were  of  them  but  sixe  in  all,
whereof  two  but  small  ships ;  the  Revenge  ingaged  past
recovery :  The  Hand  of  Flores  was  on  the  one  side,  53
saile  of  the  Spanish,  divided  into  squadrons  on  the  other,
all  as  full  filled  with  souldiers  as  they  could  containe :
Almost  the  one  halfe  of  our  men  sicke  and  not  able  to
serve :  the  ships  growne  foule,  unroomaged,  and  scarcely
able  to  be'are  any  saile  for  want  of  balast,  having  bene
sixe  moneths  at  the  sea  before.  If  all  the  rest  had
entred,  all  had  bene  lost:  for  the  very  hugenes  of  the
Spanish  fleete,  if  no  other  violence  had  beene  offered,
would  have  crusht  them  betweene  them  into  shivers.
Of  which  the  dishonour  and  losse  to  the  Queene  had
bene  farre  greater  then  the  spoyle  or  harme  that  the
enemie  could  any  way  have  received.  Notwithstanding
it  is  very  true,  that  the  Lord  Thomas  would  have  entred
betweene  the  squadrons,  but  the  rest  would  not  con-
descend ;  and  the  master  of  his  owne  ship  offred  to  leape
into  the  sea,  rather  then  to  conduct  that  her  Majesties
ship  and  the  rest  to  bee  a  pray  to  the  enemie,  where
there  was  no  hope  nor  possibilitie  either  of  defence  or
victory.  Which  also  in  my  opinion  .  had  ill  sorted  or
answered  the  discretion  and  trust  of  a  Generall,  to  com-
mit himselfe  and  his  charge  to  an  assured  destruction,
without  hope  or  any  likelyhood  of  prevailing :  thereby
to  diminish  the  strength  of  her  Majesties  Navy,  and  to
enrich  the  pride  and  glory  of  the  enemie.  The  Foresight
of  the  Queenes commaunded by M. Thomas  Vavisor

48

SIR RICHARD GRENVILLE

THE  LAST  FIGHT  OF  THE  'REVENGE'  ad.

1591.

performed  a  very  great  fight,  and  stayed  two  houres  as
neere  the  Revenge  as  the  weather  would  permit  him,
not  forsaking  the  fight,  till  he  was  like  to  be  encompassed
by  the  squadrons,  &  with  great  difficultie  cleared  him-
selfe.  The  rest  gave  divers  voleis  of  shot,  and  entred
as  farre  as  the  place  permitted,  and  their  owne  neces-
sities, to  keepe  the  weather  gage  of  the  enemie,  untill
they  were  parted  by  night.  A  fewe  dayes  after  the  fight
was  ended,  and  the  English  prisoners  dispersed  into
the  Spanish  and  Indie  ships,  there  arose  so  great  a
storme  from  the  West  and  Northwest,  that  all  the  fleete
was  dispersed,  as  well  the  Indian  fleete  which  were  then
come  unto  them,  as  the  rest  of  the  Armada  that  attended
their  arrivall,  of  which  14.  saile  together  with  the  Re-
venge," and  in  her  200  Spaniards,  were  cast  away  upon
the  Isle  of  S.  Michael.  So  it  pleased  them  to  honor
the  buriall  of  that  renowmed  ship  the  Revenge,  not
suffering  her  to  perish  alone,  for  the  great  honour  she
atchieved  in  her  life  time.  On  the  rest  of  the  Ilandes
there  were  cast  away  in  this  storme,  15  or  16  more  of
the  ships  of  warre :  and  of  an  hundred  and  odde  saile
of  the  Indie  fleete,  expected  this  yeere  in  Spaine,  what
in  this  tempest,  and  what  before  in  the  bay  of  Mexico,
and  about  the  Bermudas,  there  were  70  and  odde  con-
sumed and  lost,  with  those  taken  by  our  shippes  of
London,  besides  one  very  rich  Indian  ship,  which  set
her  selfe  on  fire,  beeing  boorded  by  the  Pilgrim,  and
five  other  taken  by  master  Wats  his  ships  of  London,
between  the  Havana  and  Cape  S.  Antonio.  The  fourth
of  this  moneth  of  November  we  received  letters  from
the  Tercera,  affirming  that  there  are  3000  bodies  of
men  remaining  in  that  Hand,  saved  out  of  the  perished
ships :  &  that  by  the  Spaniards  owne  confession,  there
are  loooo  cast  away  in  this  storme,  besides  those  that
are  perished  betweene  the  Hands  and  the  maine.  Thus
it  hath  pleased  God  to  fight  for  us,  and  to  defend  the
justice  of  our  cause,  against  the  ambicious  and  bloody
pretenses of  the Spaniard, who seeking to devoure

VII  49  D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

all  nations,  are  themselves  devoured.  A  manifest  testi-
mony how  injust  and  displeasing,  their  attempts  are  in
the  sight  of  God,  who  hath  pleased  to  witnes  by  the
successe  of  their  affaires,  his  mislike  of  their  bloody  and
injurious  designes,  purposed  and  practised  against  all
Christian  princes,  over  whom  they  seeke  unlawfuU  and
ungodly  rule  and  Empery.

One  day  or  two  before  this  wracke  happened  to  the
Spanish  fleete,  when  as  some  of  our  prisoners  desired
to  be  set  on  shore  upon  the  Ilandes,  hoping  to  be  from
thence  transported  into  England,  which  libertie  was  for-
merly by  the  Generall  promised :  One  Morice  Fitz  John,
Sonne  of  olde  John  of  Desmond,  a  notable  traytour,
cousin  german  to  the  late  Earle  of  Desmond,  was  sent
to  the  English  from  shippe  to  shippe,  to  perswade  them
to  serve  the  King  of  Spaine.  The  arguments  hee  used
[II.  ii.  174.]  to  induce  them  were  these.  The  increase  of  pay  which
he  promised  to  be  trebled :  advancement  to  the  better
sort :  and  the  exercise  of  the  true  Catholique  Religion,
and  safetie  of  their  soules  to  all.  For  the  first,  even
the  beggerly  and  unnaturall  behaviour  of  those  English
and  Irish  rebels,  that  served  the  King  in  that  present
action,  was  sufficient  to  answere  that  first  argument  of
rich  pay.  For  so  poore  and  beggerly  they  were,  as  for
want  of  apparell  they  stripped  their  poore  Countrey  men
prisoners  out  of  their  ragged  garments,  worne  to  noth-
ing by  sixe  months  service,  and  spared  not  to  despoyle
them  even  of  their  bloody  shirtes,  from  their  wounded
bodies,  and  the  very  shooes  from  their  feete ;  A  notable
testimonie  of  their  rich  entertainment  and  great  wages.
The  second  reason  was  hope  of  advancement  if  they
served  well,  and  would  continue  faithfull  to  the  King.
But  what  man  can  bee  so  blockishly  ignorant  ever  to
expect  place  or  honour  from  a  forraine  King,  having  no
other  argument  or  perswasion  then  his  owne  disloyaltie ;
to  be  unnaturall  to  his  owne  Countrey  that  bred  him ;  to
his  parents  that  begat  him,  and  rebellious  to  his  true
Prince, to  whose obedience he is bound by  oath, by

50

THE  LAST  FIGHT  OF  THE  '  REVENGE '  ad.

1591.

nature,  and by  Religion  ? No, they  are onely  assured
to  be  imployed  in  all  desperate  enterprises,  to  bee  helde
in scorne and disdaine ever among those  whom  they
serve. And that ever traitour was either trusted or
advanced  I  could  never  yet reade,  neither  can  I  at  this
time  remember  any  example. And  no  man  coulde  have
lesse  becommed  the  place  of  an  Orator  for  such  a  purpose,
then  this  Morice  of  Desmond. For  the  Erie  his  cosen
being  one of  the greatest  subjects  in  that kingdom  of
Ireland,  having  almost  whole  Countreis  in  his  possession ;
so many  goodly  Mannors, castles,  and lordships ; the
Count  Palatine  of  Kerry,  five  hundred  gentlemen  of  his
owne  name  and  family  to  follow  him,  besides  others  (all
which he  possessed  in  peace  for  three  or  foure  hundred
yeeres)  was  in  lesse  then  three  yeeres  after  his  adhering
to  the  Spaniards  and  rebellion,  beaten  from  all  his  holdes,
not  so  many  as  ten  gentlemen  of  his  name  left  living,
himselfe  taken  and  beheaded  by  a  souldier  of  his  owne
nation, and his land given by a Parliament to her
Majestie,  and  possessed  by  the  English :  His  other  cosen
Sir  John  of  Desmond  taken  by  Master  John  Zi))jch,  and
his  body  hanged  over  the  gates  of  his  native  Citie  to  be
devoured  by  ravens :  the  thirde  brother  Sir  James  hanged,
drawne,  and  quartered in the same place. If  hee had
withall  vaunted of  his successe of  his  owne  house,  no
doubt the argument would have mooved much, and
wrought  great  effect :  which  because,  hee  for  that  present
forgot,  I thought it  good  to  remember  in his  behalfe.
For matter of  Religion it would require  a particuler
volume, if  I  should set downe how irreligiously  they
cover their greedy  and ambicious  pretenses,  with that
veile  of  pietie. But  sure  I  am,  that  there  is  no  kingdome
or  common-wealth  in  all  Europe,  but  if  they  be  reformed,
they  then  invade  it  for  religion  sake : if  it  bee,  as  they
terme  Catholique,  they  pretend  title ; as  if  the  Kings  of
Castile  were  the  naturall  heires  of  all  the  world :  and  so
betweene  both,  no  kingdome  is  unsought. Where  they
dare  not  with  their  owne  forces  to  invade,  they basely

51

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-

entertaine  the  traitours  and  vacabonds  of  all  Nations  i
seeking  by  those  and  by  their  runnagate  Jesuits  to  winne
parts,  and  have  by  that  meane  ruined  many  Noble  houses
and  others  in  this  lande,  and  have  extinguished  both
their  lives  and  families.  What  good,  honour,  or  fortune
ever  man  yet  by  them  atchieved,  is  yet  unheard  of,  or
unwritten.  And  if  our  English  Papists  doe  but  looke
into  Portugall,  against  which  they  have  no  pretence  of
Religion,  how  the  Nobilitie  are  put  to  death,  imprisoned,
their  rich  men  made  a  praye,  and  all  sorts  of  people
captived ;  they  shall  finde  that  the  obedience  even  of  the
Turke  is  easie  and  a  libertie,  in  respect  of  the  slaverie
and  tyrannie  of  Spaine.  What  have  they  done  in  Sicill,
in  Naples,  Millaine,  and  in  the  Low  countreis ;  who  hath
there  bene  spared  for  Religion  at  all .?  And  it  commeth
to  my  remembrance  of  a  certaine  Burger  of  Antwerpe,
whose  house  being  entred  by  a  company  of  Spanish
souldiers,  when  they  first  sacked  the  Citie,  hee  besought
them  to  spare  him  and  his  goods,  being  a  good  Catho-
lique,  and  one  of  their  owne  partie  and  faction.  The
Spaniards  answered,  that  they  knew  him  to  be  of  a  good
conscience  for  himselfe,  but  his  money,  plate,  jewels,  and
goods,  were  all  hereticall,  and  therefore  good  prize.  So
they  abused  and  tormented  the  foolish  Fleming,  who
hoped  that  an  Agnus  Dei  had  bene  a  sufficient  target
against  all  force  of  that  holy  and  charitable  nation.
Neither  have  they  at  any  time  as  they  protest  invaded
the  kingdomes  of  the  Indies  and  Peru,  and  elsewhere,
but  onely  led  thereunto,  rather  to  reduce  the  people  to
Christianitie,  then  for  either  gold  or  Emperie.  When  as
in  one  onely  Island  called  Hispaniola,  they  have  wasted
thirtie  hundred  thousand  of  the  naturall  people,  besides
many  millions  else  in  other  places  of  the  Indies :  a  poore
and  harmelesse  people  created  of  God,  and  might  have
bene  wonne  to  his  knowledge,  as  many  of  them  were,  and
almost  as  many  as  ever  were  perswaded  thereunto.  The
storie  whereof  is  at  large  written  by  a  Bishop  of  their
owne  nation  called  Bartholomew  de  las  Casas,  and  trans-

52

THE  LAST  FIGHT  OF  THE  '  REVENGE '  ad.

1591.

lated  into English  and many  other  languages,  intituled

The Spanish cruelties. Who would therefore repose

trust  in  such  a  nation  of  ravenous  strangers,  and  especially

in those Spaniards which more greedily thirst after

English  blood,  then  after  the  lives  of  any  other  people  of  [II.  ii.  175-]

Europe,  for  the  many  overthrowes  and  dishonours  they

have  received  at  our  hands,  whose  weakenesse  wee  have

discovered to the  world, and whose forces at home,

abroad,  in  Europe,  in  India,  by  sea  and  land,  wee  have

even  with  handfulles  of  men and  shippes,  overthrowen

and  dishonoured. Let  not  therefore  any  English  man,  of

what  religion  soever,  have  other  opinion  of  the  Spaniards,

but  that  those  whom  hee  seeketh  to  winne  of  our  Nation,

he  esteemeth  base  and  trayterous,  unworthy  persons,  or

unconstant fooles : and that he useth his  pretence  of

religion,  for  no  other  purpose  but  to  bewitch us  from

the  obedience  of  our  naturall  Prince,  thereby  hoping  in

time  to  bring  us  to  slavery  and  subjection,  and  then  none

shall be unto them so odious, and disdayned as the

traitours  themselves,  who have  solde  their  Countrey  to

a  stranger,  and  forsaken  their  faith  and  obedience  con-

trarie  to  nature  &  religion ;  and  contrarie  to  that  humane

and generall honour, not onely of  Christians, but of

heathen and  irreligious  nations,  who  have  alwayes sus-

tayned what labour  soever,  and embraced even death

it selfe, for their countrey.  Prince,  or  common-wealth.

To  conclude,  it hath  ever to this day  pleased  God  to

prosper  and  defend  her  Majestie,  to  breake  the  purposes

of  malicious  enemies,  of  forsworne  traytors,  and  of  injust

practises  and  invasions. She  hath  ever  beene  honoured

of  the  worthiest  kings,  served  by  faithfull  subjects,  and

shall  by  the  favour  of  God,  resist,  repell,  and  confound

all whatsoever attempts against her sacred person or

kingdome. In the meane time let the Spaniard and

traytour  vaunt  of  their successe,  and  wee  her true  and

obedient vassals, guided by the shining light of her

vertues,  shall  alwayes  love  her,  serve  her,  and  obey  her

to  the  end  of  our  lives.

53

A.D.
159I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  particular  note  of  the  Indian  fleet,  expected
to  have  come  into  Spaine  this  present  yeere
of  1 59 1,  with  the  number  of  shippes  that  are
perished  of  the  same :  according  to  the  ex-
amination of  certaine  Spaniards  lately  taken
and  brought  into  England  by  the  ships  of
London.

He  fleete  of  Nova  Hispania,  at  their  first
gathering  together  and  setting  foorth,
were  two  and  fiftie  sailes.  The  Admirall
was  of  sixe  hundred  tunnes,  and  the
Vice  Admirall  of  the  same  burthen.
Foure  or  five  of  the  shippes  were  of
nine  hundred  and  1000  tunnes  a  peece,
some  five  hundred,  and  some  foure  hundred  and  the
least  of  two  hundred  tuns.  Of  this  fleet  19  were  cast
away,  and  in  them  2600  men  by  estimation,  which  was
done  along  the  coast  of  Nova  Hispania,  so  that  of  the
same  fleet  there  came  to  the  Havana  but  23 sailes.

The  fleete  of  Terra  Firma  were,  at  their  first  departure
from  Spaine,  fiftie  sailes,  which  were  bound  for  Nombre
de  Dios,  where  they  did  discharge  their  lading,  and
thence  returned  to  Cartagena,  for  their  healths  sake,  untill
the  time  the  treasure  was  readie  they  should  take  in,
at  the  said  Nombre  de  Dios.  But  before  this  fleete
departed,  some  were  gone  by  one  or  two  at  a  time,  so
that  onely  23  sayles  of  this  fleete  arrived  in  the  Havana.

22, sailes  of  Nova  Hispania.
23 sailes  of  Terra  Firma.

At  the  Havana
there  met

12 sailes  of  San  Domingo.

9  sailes  of  the  Hunduras.

The  whole  77  shippes,  joyned  and  set  sailes  all  to-
gether at  the  Havana,  the  17  of  July,  according  to  our
account,  and  kept  together  untill  they  came  into  the
height  of  thirtie  five  degrees,  which  was  about  the  tenth

54

A  NOTE OF  THE INDIAN FLEET  ad.

1591.

of  August,  where  they  found  the  winde  at  Southwest
chaunged  suddenly  to  the  North,  so  that  the  sea  comming
out  of  the  Southwest,  and  the  wind  very  violent  at
North,  they  were  put  all  into  great  extremitie,  and  then
first  lost  the  Generall  of  their  fleete,  with  500  men  in
her ;  and  within  three  or  foure  dayes  after,  an  other
storme  rising,  there  were  five  or  sixe  other  of  the  biggest
shippes  cast  away  with  all  their  men,  together  with  their
Vice-Admirall.

And  in-  the  height  of  38.  degrees,  about  the  end  of
August,  grew  another  great  storme,  in  which  all  the  fleet
saving  48.  sailes  were  cast  away:  which  48.  sailes  kept
together,  untill  they  came  in  sight  of  the  Islands  of
Corvo  and  Flores,  about  the  fift  or  sixt  of  September,
at  which  time  a  great  storme  separated  them  :  of  which
number  fifteene  or  sixeteene  were  after  seene  by  these
Spanyards  to  ride  at  anchor  under  the  Tercera ;  and
twelve  or  foureteene  more  to  beare  with  the  Island  of
S.  Michael ;  what  became  of  them  after  that  these
Spaniards  were  taken  cannot  yet  be  certified ;  their
opinion  is,  that  very  few  of  the  fleet  are  escaped,  but
are  either  drowned  or  taken.  And  it  is  otherwaies  of
late  certified,  that  of  this  whole  fleete  that  should  have
come  into  Spaine  this  yeere,  being  one  hundred  twentie  [II.  ii.  176.
and  three  sayle,  there  are  arrived  as  yet  but  five  and
twentie.  This  note  was  taken  out  of  the  examination  of
certaine  Spaniardes,  that  were  brought  into  England  by
sixe  of  the  ships  of  London,  which  tooke  seven  of  the
above  named  Indian  Fleete,  neere  the  Islands  of  A9ores.

[A  report
55

A.D.
I59I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  report  of  Master  Robert  Flicke  directed  to
Master  Thomas  Bromley,  Master  Richard
Staper,  and  Master  Cordall  concerning  the
successe  of  a  part  of  the  London  supplies  sent
to  my  Lord  Thomas  Howard  to  the  Isles  of
the  Azores, 1591.

Orshipfull,  my  heartie  commendations  unto
you  premised  :  By  my  last  of  the  twelfth
of  August  from  this  place  I  advertised
you  particularly  of  the  accidents  of  our
Fleete  untill  then.  It  remayneth  now  to
relate  our  endevours  in  accomplishing  the
order received  for  the  joyning  with  my

Lorde  Thomas  Howard,  together  with  the  successe  wee
have  had.  Our  departure  from  hence  was  the  seventeenth
of  August,  the  winde  not  serving  before.  The  next  day
following  I  caused  a  Flagge  of  Counsell  to  be  put  foorth,
whereupon  the  Captaines  and  Masters  of  every  shippe
came  aboord,  and  1  acquainted  them  with  my  Com-
mission, firmed  by  the  Right  honourable  the  Lordes  of
her  Majesties  Counsell,  and  with  all  the  advertisements
of  Sir  Edward  Denny,  of  my  Lordes  determination  to
remaine  threescore  leagues  to  the  West  of  Fayal,  spread-
ing North  and  South  betwixt  thirtie  seven  and  a  halfe  or
thirty  eight  and  a  halfe  degrees.  And  not  finding  him
in  this  heighth  to  repaire  to  the  Isles  of  Flores  and
Corvo,  where  a  Pinnesse  of  purpose  should  stay  our
comming  untill  the  last  of  August,  with  intent  after  that
day  to  repaire  to  ye  coast  of  Spaine,  about  the  heigth  of
The  Rocke,  some  twentie  or  thirtie  leagues  off  the  shoare.
The  which  being  advisedly  considered  of,  having  regard
unto  the  shortnesse  of  time,  by  reason  of  our  long  abode
in  this  place,  and  the  uncertainety  of  the  weather  to  favour
us,  it  was  generally  holden  for  the  best  and  securest  way
to  meete  with  my  Lorde,  to  beare  with  the  heigth  of  The
Rocke,  without  making  any  stay  upon  the  coast,  and  so

56

A REPORT OF ROBERT FLICKE  a.d

1591.

directly  for  the  Islands  which  was  accordingly  fully  agreed
and  performed.  The  28  day  wee  had  sight  of  the  Bur-
lings,  and  the  29  being  thwart  of  Peniche,  the  winde
serving  us,  without  any  stay  we  directed  our  course  West
for  the  Islands.  The  30  day  we  met  with  Captaine
Royden  in  the  Red-Rose,  sometime  called  the  Golden
Dragon,  separated  from  my  Lorde  of  Cumberland  in  a
storme :  who  certified  us  of  50  sayles  of  the  Spanish
kings  Armadas  to  be  gone  for  the  Hands,  but  could  not
informe  us  any  newes  of  my  Lord  Thomas  Howard,
otherwise  then  upon  presumption  to  remaine  about  the
Islandes,  and  so  wee  continued  our  course  the  winde
standing  with  us.

The  4  of  September  we  recovered  Tercera,  and  ranged
along  all  the  Islands,  both  on  the  South  and  North  sides
the  space  of  foure  dayes :  during  which  time  it  was  not
our  hap  to  meete  with  any  shipping,  whereby  either  to
understand  of  my  Lord,  or  of  the  Indian  Fleete :  here-
upon we  directed  our  course  to  the  West  from  Fayal,
according  to  the  instructions  of  Sir  Edward  Denny.  The
1 1  day  in  the  plying  to  the  Westwards  we  descried  a  sayle
out  of  our  maine  toppe,  and  in  the  afternoone  betweene
two  and  three  of  the  clocke  having  raysed  her  hull,  the
weather  became  calme,  so  that  the  ship  could  not  fetch
her.  I  sent  off  my  Skiffe  throughly  manned,  furnished
with  shot  and  swords,  The  Cherubin,  and  the  Margaret
and  John  doing  the  like.  Upon  this  the  sayle  stood  off
againe,  and  the  night  approching,  our  boates  lost  her  and
so  returned.  In  this  our  pursute  after  the  sayle  the
Centurion  being  left  a  sterne,  the  next  morning  wee
missed  her,  and  spent  that  day  in  plying  up  and  downe
seeking  her.  And  for  as  much  as  every  of  the  ships  had
received  order,  that,  if  by  extremity  of  weather  or  any
other  mischance  they  should  be  severed  from  our  Fleete,
they  should  meete  and  joyne  at  Flores,  we,  according  to
the  instructions  of  Sir  Edward  Denny,  proceeded  to  the
finding  of  my  Lord  Thomas  Howard,  being  in  the  heigth
appointed  and  not  able  to  holde  the  same  by  reason  of

57

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

extreme  tempestes  which  forced  us  to  the  Isles  of  Flores
and  Corvo,  which  we  made  the  14  day  in  the  mornings
and  there  also  joyned  againe  with  the  Centurion,  whose
company  before  we  had  lost :  who  declared  unto  us  that
the  12  day,  being  the  same  day  they  lost  us,  they  met
with  five  and  forty  sailes  of  the  Indian  Fleete.  The
same  night  upon  these  newes  we  came  to  an  anker  be-
tweene  Flores  and  Corvo,  and  the  morow  following  at
the  breake  of  day,  a  flagge  of  Counsell  being  put  out,
the  Captaines  &  Masters  came  abord  me:  where,  for  the
desire  to  understand  some  tidings  of  my  Lord,  as  also  the
supplying  of  our  want  of  water,  i-t  was  thought  good  to
send  our  boats  furnished  on  shore,  under  the  conduct  of
Captaine  Brothus,  and  then  it  was  also  ordered  after  our
[II.  ii.  177.]  departure  thence  to  range  along  the  Southsides  of  the
Islands  to  the  end  we  might  either  understand  of  my
Lord,  or  else  light  on  the  Indian  fleete ;  and  in  the  miss-
ing of  our  purpose  to  direct  our  course  for  Cape  Sant
Vincente.

The  boates,  according  to  the  foresayd  determination,
being  sent  on  shoare,  it  chaunced  that  The  Costely  ryding
uttermost  in  the  roade,  did  weigh  to  bring  her  selfe  more
neere  among  us  for  the  succour  of  the  boates  sent  off,
and  in  opening  the  land  discovered  two  sayles,  which  we
in  the  roade  could  not  perceive :  whereupon  shee  gave
us  a  warning  piece,  which  caused  us  to  wave  off  our
boates  backe,  and  before  they  could  recover  our  shippes,
the  discryed  ships  appeared  unto  us,  towardes  the  which
we  made  with  all  haste,  and  in  a  very  happie  houre,  as  it
pleased  God.  In  that  wee  had  not  so  soone  cleared  the
iande,  and  spoken  with  one  of  them,  which  was  a  Barke
of  Bristoll,  who  had  also  sought  my  Lorde  in  the  heigths
J  violent  appointed  and  could  not  finde  him,  but  a  violent  storme
siornie.  arose, in such manner, as if  we had remained in the

roade,  we  had  beene  in  daunger  of  perishing :  and  the
same  extremely  continued  during  the  space  of  threescore
houres.  In  which  storme  I  was  separated  from  our
Fleete,  except  the  Cherubin  and  the  Costely,  which  kept

58

A REPORT OF ROBERT FLICKE

company  with  mee.  And  so  sayling  among  the  Hands,
I  viewed  the  roade  of  Fayal,  and  finding  no  Roaders
there,  went  directly  for  the  Isle  Tercera.

The  nineteenth  day  in  the  morning  comming  unto  ye
same  with  intent  to  edge  into  the  Road,  a  tempest  arose
and  scanted  the  winde,  that  we  could  not  seaze  it :  from
the  which  being  driven  we  fell  among  certaine  of  the
Indian  Fleete,  which  the  sayde  storme  dispersed,  and  put
them  from  the  road  :  whereupon  my  selfe  with  the  other
two  ships  in  companie  gave  several!  chases,  and  thereby
lost  the  company  each  of  other.

In  following  our  chase  above  noone  we  made  her  to
strike  and  yeelde,  being  a  Portugall,  laden  with  hides,
salsa-perilla  and  Anile.  At  this  very  instant  we  espied
another,  and  taking  our  Prize  with  us  followed  her,  and
somewhat  before  night  obtayned  her,  named  the  Con-
ception, Francisco  Spinola  being  Captaine,  which  was
laden  with  hides,  Cochonillio,  and  certaine  raw  silke.
And  for  that  the  seas  were  so  growen,  as  neither  with
boate  nor  shippe  they  were  to  bee  boorded,  we  kept  them
till  fit  opportunitie.  The  same  night  a  litle  before  day
there  happened  another  into  our  company,  supposing  us
by  our  two  prizes  to  be  of  their  Fleete,  which  we  untill
the  morning  dissembled.

The  20  day  in  the  morning,  the  sayle  being  shot  some-
what a  head  of  us,  having  a  speciall  care  for  the  safe
keeping  of  the  two  former,  we  purposed  to  cause  our
Prizes  to  put  out  more  sayle  thereby  to  keepe  them  neere
in  giving  chase  to  the  other :  unto  the  which  the  Master
would  not  hearken  nor  be  perswaded,  but  that  they  would
follow  us :  by  the  which  his  wilfulnesse  by  such  time  as
we  had  caused  the  other  to  yeelde,  and  sent  men  aboord,
the  Conception,  Francisco  Spinola  Captaine  being  brought
a  Sterne,  and  having  gotten  the  winde  of  us,  stood  off
with  all  her  sayles  bearing,  so  as  we  were  forced  to  make
a  new  chase  of  her :  and  had  not  the  winde  enlarged  upon
us  we  had  lost  her.  In  the  pursute  before  we  recovered
her and brought  our  selves  againe in  company  of  our

59

A.D.

I59I.

A  Portugall
Prize  taken.

A  rich  West-
India  Prize
taken.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

other  Prizes,  the  whole  day  was  spent,  and  by  this  meanes
we  lost  the  oportunitie  of  that  day,  the  weather  fitly
serving  to  boord  the  Portugall  Prize,  which  was  in  great
distresse,  and  made  request  to  take  them  being  readie  to
sinke,  and,  as  we  well  perceived,  they  ceased  not  to  pumpe
day  and  night:  the  which  ship  to  all  our  judgements  the
same  night  perished  in  the  sea.

The  one  and  twentie  day  the  Conception,  whereof
Francisco  Spinola  was  Captaine,  being  also  in  a  leake,
and  the  same  still  increasing  notwithstanding  the  con-
tinuall  pumping,  in  such  sort  as  not  to  be  kept  along
above  water,  I  tooke  and  discharged  out  of  her  two  and
forty  chestes  of  Cochonillio  and  silkes,  and  so  left  her
with  1 1  foote  water  in  holde,  and  her  furniture  and  4700
hides,  unto  the  seas.

The  other  Prize  which  we  have  brought  into  the
harborough  is  named  Nostra  Sennora  de  los  remedios,
whereof  Francisco  Alvares  is  Captaine,  laden  with  16
chests  of  Cochonillio,  certaine  fardels  of  raw  silke,  and
about  4000  hides.  Upon  the  discharge  of  the  goods
your  worships  shall  be  particularly  advertised  thereof.

In  the  boording  of  the  Prizes  the  disorder  of  the
company  was  such,  as  that  they  letted  not  presently
besides  the  rifling  of  the  Spaniards  to  breake  open  the
chests  and  to  purloyne  such  money  as  was  in  them :
notwithstanding  that  it  was  ordered  at  convenient  leasure
to  have  gone  aboord  my  selfe,  and  there  in  the  presence
of  three  or  foure  witnesses  to  have  taken  a  just  account
thereof,  and  the  same  to  have  put  in  safe  keeping,
according  to  the  effects  of  articles  received  in  this  behalfe.

And  whereas  there  were  also  certaine  summes  of  money
[II.  ii.  178.]  taken  from  the  company  which  they  had  thus  purloyned
and  embeseled,  and  the  same  with  some  other  parcels
brought  aboord  my  ship,  amounting  unto  2129  pezoes
&  a  halfe,  the  company  as  pillage  due  unto  them  de-
manded to  have  the  same  shared,  which  I  refused,  &
openly  at  the  maine  maste  read  the  articles  firmed  by
my  Lord  Treasurer  and  my  lord  Admirall,  whereby  we

60

A REPORT OF ROBERT FLICKE  ad.

1591.

ought  to  be  directed,  and  that  it  was  not  in  mee  any  way
to  dispose  thereof  untill  the  same  were  finally  determined
at  home.  Hereupon  they  mutined  and  at  last  grew  into
such  furie,  as  that  they  would  have  it  or  els  breake  downe
the  cabbine,  which  they  were  also  readie  to  put  in  practise,
whereby  I  was  forced  to  yeeld,  least  the  Spaniards  which
we  had  abord  being  many  perceiving  the  same,  might
have  had  fit  opportunitie  to  rise  against  us,  which,  after
their  brawles  were  appeased,  they  sought  to  have  put  in
execution.

By  the  last  advise  from  Castile  the  Generall  of  the
kings  Armada  which  is  lately  come  to  sea  hath  received
commaundement  to  joyne  his  Fleete  with  those  of  the
Indies,  and  for  to  stay  altogether  at  Tercera  untill  the
1 5  of  October :  for  that  6  pataches  with  7  or  8  millions
of  the  kings  treasure  will  come  by  that  time,  or  els  they
stay  their  comming  from  Havana  until  January  next,  or
the  kings  further  pleasure  therein  to  be  knowen.  These
Pataches  are  said  to  be  of  300  tuns  the  piece,  and  to  cary
30  pieces  of  brasse,  and  also  of  saile  reported  to  have
the  advantage  of  any  shipping.

There  perished  of  the  Indies  Fleete  sunke  in  the  sea
before  their  comming  to  Flores  1 1  sailes,  whereof  the
General  was  one,  and  not  one  man  saved.  And  it  is
by  the  Spaniards  themselves  presupposed  that  the  stormes
which  we  had  at  Flores  &  at  Tercera  have  devoured
many  more  of  them,  whereof  in  part  we  were  eye
witnesses.  And  so  what  by  the  seas  and  our  men  of
warre  I  presume  that  of  75  sailes  that  came  from  Havana,
halfe  of  them  will  never  arrive  in  Spaine.

The  1 1  day  of  October  at  night  we  came  to  anker  in
the  sound  of  Plimouth,  and  the  next  morning  with  our
Prize  came  into  Cattewater  :  for  which  God  be  thanked :
for  that  a  vehement  storme  arose,  and  with  such  fury
increased,  as  that  the  Prize  was  forced  to  cut  over  her
maine  maste :  otherwise  with  the  violence  of  the  storme,
her  ground  tackle  being  bad,  she  had  driven  on  shore :
which  was  the  most  cause  that  moved  me  to  put  in  here ;

61

A.D,
1591-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

intending  now  here  to  discharge  the  goods  without
further  adventure,  and  have  certified  thus  much  unto  my
Lord  Admirall,  and  therewith  also  desired  to  understande
the  direction  of  the  Lords  of  the  Counsell  together  with
yours,  insomuch  as  my  Lord  Thomas  Howard  is  not
returned.  How  the  rest  of  our  consorts  which  were
separated  from  us  by  weather  have  sped,  or  what  Prizes
they  have  taken,  whereof  there  is  much  hope  by  reason
of  the  scattering  of  the  West  Indian  Fleete,  as  yet  we
are  able  to  say  nothing.  And  thus  expecting  your
answere,  and  for  all  other  matters  referring  me  unto
the  bearer  Captaine  Furtho,  I  end.  Plymouth  the  24  of
October. 1591.

Your  worships  loving  friend

Robert  Flicke.

A  large  testimony  of  John  Huighen  van  Lin-
schoten  Hollander,  concerning  the  vsrorthy
exploits  atchieved  by  the  right  honourable  the
Earle  of  Cumberland,  By  Sir  Martine  Fro-
bisher,  Sir  Richard  Greenvile,  and  divers
other  English  Captaines,  about  the  Isles  of  the
A9ores,  and  upon  the  coasts  of  Spaine  and
Portugall,  in  the  yeeres  1589,  1590,  1591,
&c.  recorded  in  his  excellent  discourse  of
voiages  to  the  East  and  West  Indies,  cap.  96.
97.  and  99.

He  22  of  July  1589  about  Evening,
being  by  the  Islands  of  Flores  &  Corvo,
we  perceived  3  ships  that  made  towards
us,  which  came  from  under  the  land,
which  put  us  in  great  feare :  for  they
came  close  by  our  Admirall,  and  shot
divers  times  at  him,  and  at  another  ship
of  our  companie,  whereby  we  perceived  them  to  be
Englishmen,  for  they  bare  an  English  flagge  upon  their

62

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad.

1589-91.

maine  tops,  but  none  of  them  shewed  to  be  above  60
tunnes  in  greatnes.  About  Evening  they  followed  after
us,  and  all  night  bore  lanternes  with  candles  burning
in  them  at  their  sternes,  although  the  Moone  shined.
The  same  night  passing  hard  by  the  Island  of  Fayal,  the
next  day  being  betweene  the  Island  of  S.  George  that
lay  on  our  right  hand,  and  the  small  Island  called
Graciosa  on  our  left  hand,  we  espied  the  3  English  ships
still  following  us  y'  tooke  counsell  together,  whereof  one
sailed  backwards,  thinking  that  some  other  ship  had  come
after  us  without  company,  &  for  a  time  was  out  of  sight,
but  it  was  not  long  before  it  came  again  to  ye  other  two,
wherwith  they  tooke  counsel  &  came  all  3  together
against  our  ship,  because  we  lay  in  the  lee  of  al  our  ships,
&  had  ye  Island  of  S.  George  on  the  one  side  in  stead
of  a  sconce,  thinking  to  deale  so  with  us,  that  in  ye  end
we  should  be  constrained  to  run  upon  the  shore,  whereof
we  wanted  not  much,  and  in  that  manner  with  their  [II.  ii.  179.]
flagges  openly  displayed,  came  lustily  towardes  us,  sound-
ing their  Trumpets,  and  sayled  at  the  least  three  times
about  us,  beating  us  with  Musket  and  Caliver,  and  some
great  pieces,  and  did  us  no  hurt  in  the  body  of  our
shippe,  but  spoyled  all  our  sayles  and  ropes,  and  to
conclude,  wee  were  so  plagued  by  them,  that  no  man
durst  put  foorth  his  head,  and  when  wee  shot  off  a  peece,
wee  had  at  the  least  an  houres  worke  to  lade  it  againe,
whereby  wee  had  so  great  a  noise  and  crie  in  the  shippe,
as  if  we  had  all  bene  cast  away,  whereat  the  English  men
themselves  beganne  to  mocke  us,  and  with  a  thousand
jesting  words  called  unto  us.  In  the  meane  time  the
other  shippes  hoised  all  their  sayles,  and  did  the  best
they  could  to  saile  to  the  Island  of  Tercera,  not  looking
once  behinde  them  to  helpe  us,  doubting  they  should
come  too  late  thither,  not  caring  for  us,  but  thinking
themselves  to  have  done  sufficiently  so  they  saved  their
owne  stakes,  whereby  it  may  easily  be  scene  what  company
they  keepe  one  with  the  other,  and  what  order  is  among
them. In the  ende the English men perceiving small

63

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91,

advantage  against  us,  (little  knowing  in  what  case  and
feare  we  were,  as  also  because  wee  were  not  farre  from
Tercera)  left  us,  which  made  us  not  a  litle  to  rejoyce„
as  thinking  our  selves  to  bee  risen  from  death  to  life,
although  wee  were  not  well  assured,  neyther  yet  voyde
of  feare  till  we  lay  in  the  road  before  Tercera,  and  under
the  safetie  of  the  Portingales  fort,  and  that  we  might  get
thither  in  good  time  wee  made  all  the  sailes  we  could :
on  the  other  side  we  were  in  great  doubt,  because  we
knew  not  what  they  did  in  the  Island,  nor  whether  they
were  our  friends  or  enemies,  and  we  doubted  so  much
the  more,  because  we  found  no  men  of  warre  nor  any^
Carvels  of  advise  from  Portingal,  as  wee  made  our
accounts  to  doe,  that  might  convoy  us  from  thence,  or
give  us  advise,  as  in  that  countrey  ordinarily  they  use
to  do :  and  because  the  English  men  had  bene  so
victorious  in  those  parts,  it  made  us  suspect  that  it  went
not  well  with  Spaine :  they  of  the  Island  of  Tercera  were
in  no  lesse  feare  then  we,  for  seeing  our  fleete,  they
thought  us  to  bee  Englishmen,  and  that  wee  came  to
overrun  the  Island,  because  the  3.  Englishmen  had  bound
up  their  flags,  and  came  in  company  with  us :  for  the
which  cause  the  Island  sent  out  two  Carvels  that  lay
there  with  advise  from  the  king,  for  the  Indians  ships
that  should  come  thither.  Those  Carvels  came  to  view
us,  and  perceiving  what  we  were,  made  after  us,  where-
upon the  English  ships  left  us,  and  made  towardes  them,
because  the  Carvels  thought  them  to  be  friends,  and
shunned  them  not,  as  supposing  them  to  bee  of  our
company,  but  we  shot  foure  or  five  times  and  made  signes
unto  them  that  they  should  make  towards  the  Island,
which  they  presently  did.  The  Englishmen  perceiving
that,  did  put  forwards  into  the  sea,  &  so  the  Carvels
horded  us  telling  us  that  the  men  of  the  Island  were  all  in
armes,  as  having  received  advise  from  Portugall,  that  Sir
Francis  Drake  was  in  readinesse,  and  woulde  come  unto
those  Islands.  They  likewise  brought  us  newes  of  the
overthrow  of  the  Spanish  fleet  before  England,  and  that

64

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad.

1589-91,

the  English  men  had  bene  before  the  gates  of  Lisbon :
whereupon  the  king  gave  us  commandement  that  we
should  put  into  the  Island  of  Tercera,  and  there  lie  under
the  safety  of  the  Castle  until  we  received  further  advise
what  we  should  do,  or  whether  we  should  saile :  for  that
they  thought  it  too  dangerous  for  us  to  go  to  Lisbon.
Those  newes  put  our  fleet  in  great  feare,  and  made  us
looke  upon  eche  other  not  knowing  what  to  say,  as  being
dangerous  for  them  to  put  into  the  road,  because  it  lieth
open  to  the  sea :  so  that  the  Indian  ships,  although  they
had  expresse  commandement  from  the  king,  yet  they
durst  not  anker  there,  but  onely  used  to  come  thither,
and  to  lie  to  and  fro,  sending  their  boates  on  land  to
fetch  such  necessaries  as  they  wanted,  without  ankering :
but  being  by  necessitie  compelled  thereunto,  as  also  by
the  kings  commandement,  and  for  that  we  understood
the  Erie  of  Cumberland  not  to  bee  farre  from  those
Islands  with  certaine  ships  of  warre,  we  made  necessitie
a  vertue,  and  entring  the  road,  ankered  close  under  the
Castle,  staying  for  advise  and  order  from  the  king,  to
performe  our  voyage,  it  being  then  the  24.  of  July,
and  S.  James  day.

The  day  before  the  Erie  of  Cumberland  with  6.  or
7.  ships  of  war,  sailed  by  the  Island  of  Tercera,  and  to
their  great  good  fortune  passed  out  of  sight,  so  that
they  dispatched  themselves  in  all  haste,  and  for  the  more
securitie,  tooke  with  them  4.  hundred  Spaniards,  of  those
that  lay  in  Garrison  in  the  Island,  and  with  them  they
sayled  towards  Lisbon,  having  a  good  wind :  so  that
within  1 1  daies  after  they  arrived  in  the  river  of  Lisbon
with  great  gladnes  &  triumph  :  for  if  they  had  stayed  but
one  day  longer  before  they  had  entred  the  river,  they
had  all  beene  taken  by  Captaine  Drake,  who  with  40
ships  came  before  Cascais  at  the  same  time  that  the
Indian  ships  cast  anker  in  the  river  of  Lisbon,  being
garded  thither  by  divers  Gallies.

While  I  remained  in  Tercera,  the  Erie  of  Cumb.  came
to S. Marie,  to  take in fresh  water, and  some other

YII  65  E

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.  i

victuals :  but  the  inhabitants  would  not  suffer  him  to
have  it,  but  wounded  both  himselfe  &  divers  of  his  men,
whereby  they  were  forced  to  depart  without  having  any
thing  there.

The  Erie  of  Cumberland  while  I  lay  in  Tercera,  came
unto  the  Isle  of  Graciosa,  where  himselfe  in  person,
with  seven  or  eight  in  his  company  went  on  land,  asking
[II.  ii.  180.]  certaine  beastes,  hens,  and  other  victuals,  with  wine  and
fresh  water,  which  they  willingly  gave  him,  and  therewith
he  departed  from  thence,  without  doing  them  any  hurt :
for  the  which  the  inhabitants  thanked  him,  and  com-
mended him  for  his  courtesie,  land  keeping  of  his
promise.

The  same  time  that  the  Erie  of  Cumberland  was  in
the  Island  of  Graciosa,  he  came  likewise  to  Fayall,  where
at  the  first  time  that  he  came,  they  beganne  to  resist
him,  but  by  reason  of  some  controversie  among  them,
they  let  him  land,  where  he  razed  the  Castle  to  the
ground,  and  sunke  all  their  Ordinance  in  the  sea,  taking
with  him  certaine  Caravels  and  ships  that  lay  in  the  road,
with  provision  of  all  things  that  he  wanted:  and  therewith
departed  againe  to  sea.  Whereupon  the  king  caused  the
principall  actors  therein  to  be  punished,  and  sent  a
company  of  souldiers  thither  againe,  which  went  out  of
Tercera,  with  all  kinde  of  warlike  munition,  and  great
shot,  making  the  foretresse  up  againe,  the  better  to
defend  the  Island,  trusting  no  more  in  the  Portugales.

The  99  Chapter.

THe  ninth  of  October  1589.  there  arrived  in  Tercera
fourteene  ships  that  came  from  the  Spanish  Indies,
laden  with  Cochenile,  Hides,  Golde,  Silver,  Pearles,  and
other  rich  wares.  They  were  fiftie  in  companie,  when
they  departed  out  of  the  Haven  of  Havana,  whereof,
in  their  comming  out  of  the  Channell,  eleven  sunke  in
the  same  Channell  by  foule  weather,  the  rest  by  a  storme
were  scattered  and  separated  one  from  the  other.  The
next  day  there  came  another  ship  of  the  same  companie,

66

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad.

1589-91.

that  sailed  close  under  the  Island,  so  to  get  into  the
Roade :  where  she  met  with  an  English  ship  that  had
not  above  three  cast  peeces,  and  the  Spaniards  12.  They
fought  a  long  time  together,  which  we  being  in  the
Island  might  stand  and  behold :  whereupon  the
Governour  of  Tercera  sent  two  boates  of  Musketiers  to
helpe  the  shippe :  but  before  they  could  come  at  her,
the  English  ship  had  shot  her  under  water,  and  we  saw
her  sinke  into  the  Sea  with  all  her  sayles  up,  and  not
any  thing  seene  of  her  above  the  water.  The  Englishmen
with  their  boate  saved  the  Captaine  and  about  thirtie
others  with  him,  but  not  one  penie-worth  of  the  goods,
and  yet  in  the  shippe  there  was  at  the  least  to  the  value
of  two  hundred  thousand  Duckats  in  Golde,  Silver,  and
Pearles,  the  rest  of  the  men  were  drowned  which  might
be  about  fiftie  persons,  among  the  which  were  some
Fryers  and  women,  which  the  Englishmen  would  not
save.  Those  that  they  had  saved  they  set  on  land :  and
then  they  sayled  away.  The  seven  and  twentieth  of
the  same  moneth,  the  sayd  fourteene  ships  having  re-
freshed themselves  in  the  Island  departed  from  Tercera
toward  Sivill,  and  comming  upon  the  coast  of  Spaine
they  were  taken  by  the  English  ships  that  lay  there  to
watch  for  them,  two  onely  excepted  which  escaped  away,
and  the  rest  were  wholly  caried  into  England.

About  the  same  time  the  Erie  of  Cumberland  with  one
of  the  Queenes  ships,  and  five  or  sixe  more,  kept  about
those  Islands  and  came  oftentimes  so  close  under  the
Island,  and  to  the  Road  of  Angra,  that  the  people  on  .
land  might  easily  tell  all  his  men  that  he  had  aboord,  and
knewe  such  as  walked  on  the  Hatches  :  they  of  the  Island
not  once  shooting  at  them,  although  they  might  easily
have  done  it,  for  they  were  within  Musket  shot  both
of  the  towne  and  fort.  In  these  places  he  continued
for  the  space  of  two  moneths,  and  sayled  round  about
the  Islands,  and  landed  in  Graciosa  and  Fayal,  as  in  the
description  of  those  Islands  I  have  alreadie  declared.  Here
he  tooke  divers  ships  and  Caravels,  which  he  sent  into

67

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.

England :  so  that  those  of  the  Island  durst  not  once
put  foorth  their  heads.  At  the  same  time  about  three  or
foure  dayes  after  the  Earle  of  Cumberland  had  beene  in
the  Island  of  Fayal,  and  was  departed  from  thence,  there
arrived  in  the  said  Island  of  Fayal  sixe  Indian  shippes,
whose  Generall  was  one  Juan  Dorives  :  and  there  they  dis-
charged in  the  Hand  4  millions  of  golde  and  silver.  And
having  with  all  speede  refreshed  their  ships,  fearing  the
comming  of  the  Englishmen  they  set  sayle,  and  arrived
safely  In  S.  Lucar,  not  meeting  with  the  enemie,  to  the
great  good  lucke  of  the  Spaniards  and  hard  fortune  of
the  Englishmen  :  for  that  within  lesse  then  two  dayes
after  the  gold  and  silver  was  laden  againe  into  the  Spanish
ships,  the  Erie  of  Cumberland  sayled  againe  by  that
Island :  so  that  it  appeared  that  God  would  not  let  them
have  it,  for  if  they  had  once  had  sight  thereof,  without
doubt  it  had  bene  theirs,  as  the  Spaniards  themselves
confessed.

In  the  moneth  of  November  there  arrived  in  Tercera
two  great  shippes,  which  were  the  Admirall  and  Vice-
admirall  of  the  Fleete  laden  with  silver,  who  with  stormie
weather  were  separated  from  the  Fleete,  and  had  beene
in  great  torment  and  distresse,  and  readie  to  sinke :  for
they  were  forced  to  use  all  their  Pumps :  so  that  they
wished  a  thousand  times  to  have  met  with  the  Englishmen
to  whom  they  would  willingly  have  given  their  silver  and
all  that  ever  they  brought  with  them,  onely  to  save  their
lives.  And  although  the  Erie  of  Cumberland  lay  still
[II.  ii.  181.]  about  those  Islands,  yet  they  met  not  with  him,  so  that
after  much  paine  and  labour  they  got  into  the  Road  before
Angra,  where  with  all  speede  they  unladed  and  discharged
above  five  millions  of  silver,  all  in  pieces  of  8  or  10
pound  great :  so  that  the  whole  Kay  lay  covered  with
plates  and  chests  of  silver,  full  of  Ryales  of  eight,  most
wonderfull  to  behold,  (each  million  being  ten  hundred
thousand  duckats,)  besides  pearles,  gold,  and  other  stones,
which  were  not  registred.  The  Admirall  and  chiefe
commaunder of  those ships and Fleete  called Alvaro

68

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  a.d.

1589-91.

Flores  de  Quiniones  was  sicke  of  the  Neapolitan  disease,
and  was  brought  to  land,  whereof  not  long  after  he  died
in  Sivillia.  He  brought  with  him  the  Kings  broad  seale
and  full  authoritie  to  be  Generall  and  chiefe  commaunder
upon  the  Seas,  and  of  all  Fleetes  or  ships,  and  of  all
places  and  Islands,  or  lands  wheresoever  he  came :  where-
upon the  governour  of  Tercera  did  him  great  honour,  and
betweene  them  it  was  concluded,  perceiving  the  weaknesse
of  their  ships,  and  the  danger  of  the  Englishmen,  that
they  would  send  the  shippes  emptie  with  souldiers  to
convey  them,  either  to  Sivill  or  Lisbon,  where  they  could
first  arrive,  with  advise  unto  his  Majestie  of  all  that
had  past,  and  that  he  would  give  order  to  fetch  the
silver  with  good  and  safe  convoy.  Whereupon  the  said
Alvaro  Flores  stayed  there,  under  colour  of  keeping  the
silver,  but  specially  because  of  his  disease,  and  for  that
they  were  affraide  of  the  Englishmen.  This  Alvaro
Flores  had  alone  for  his  owne  part  above  50000  Duckats
in  pearles  which  he  shewed  unto  us,  &  sought  to  sell
them  or  barter  them  with  us  for  spices  or  bils  of  ex-
change. The  said  two  ships  set  sayle  with  3  or  4  hundred
men,  as  well  souldiers  as  others  that  came  with  them
out  of  India,  and  being  at  sea  had  a  storme,  wherewith
the  Admiral  burst  and  sunke  in  the  sea,  &  not  one
man  saved.  The  Vice-Admirall  cut  downe  her  mast,
and  ranne  the  ship  on  ground  hard  by  Setuval,  where  it
burst  in  pieces,  some  of  the  men  saving  themselves  by
swimming,  that  brought  the  newes,  but  the  rest  were
drowned.

In  the  same  moneth  there  came  two  great  ships  out
of  the  Spanish  Indies,  and  being  within  half  a  mile  of
the  Road  of  Tercera,  they  met  with  an  English  ship,
which,  after  they  had  fought  long  together,  tooke  them
both.  About  7  or  8  moneths  before,  there  had  beene
an  English  shippe  in  Tercera,  that  under  the  name  of
a  Frenchman  came  to  traffike  in  the  Island,  there  to  lade
woad,  and  being  discovered  was  both  ship  and  goods
confiscated to the  kings use, and all the men kept

69

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.

prisoners :  yet  went  they  up  and  downe  the  streetes  to
get  their  livings,  by  labouring  like  slaves,  being  in  deede
as  safe  in  that  Island,  as  if  they  had  beene  in  prison.
But  in  the  ende  upon  a  Sunday,  all  the  Saylers  went
downe  behinde  the  hils  called  Bresil :  where  they  found
a  Fisher-boat,  whereinto  they  got  and  rowed  into  the
sea  to  the  Erie  of  Cumberlands  shippes,  which  to  their
great  fortune  chanced  at  that  time  to  come  by  the
Island,  and  ankered  with  his  ships  about  halfe  a  mile
from  the  Road  of  Angra,  hard  by  two  small  Islands,
which  lie  about  a  bases  shot  from  the  Island  and  are
full  of  Goats,  Deere  and  Sheepe,  belonging  to  the  in-
habitants of  the  Island  of  Tercera.  Those  Saylers  knew
it  well,  and  thereupon  they  rowed  unto  them  with  their
boates,  and  lying  at  anker  that  day,  they  fetched  as  many
Goates  and  sheepe  as  they  had  neede  of:  which  those
of  the  towne  and  of  the  Island  well  saw  and  behelde,
yet  durst  not  once  goe  foorth :  so  there  remained  no
more  on  land  but  the  Master  and  the  Marchant  of  the
said  English  ship.  This  Master  had  a  brother  in  lawe
dwelling  in  England,  who  having  newes  of  his  brothers
imprisonment  in  Tercera,  got  licence  of  the  Queene  of
England  to  set  forth  a  ship,  therewith  to  see  if  he  could
recover  his  losses  of  the  Spaniards  by  taking  some  of
them,  and  so  to  redeeme  his  brother  that  lay  prisoner
in  Tercera,  and  he  it  was  that  tooke  the  two  Spanish
ships  before  the  Towne,  the  Master  of  the  ship  aforesaid
standing  on  the  shore  by  me,  and  looking  upon  them,
for  he  was  my  great  acquaintance.  The  ships  being
taken  that  were  worth  300  thousand  duckats,  he  sent  al
the  men  on  land  saving  onely  two  of  the  principall
Gentlemen,  which  he  kept  aboord  thereby  to  ransome
his  brother :  and  sent  the  Pilot  of  one  of  the  Indian
ships  that  were  taken,  with  a  letter  to  the  Governor  of
Tercera :  wherein  he  wrote  that  he  should  deliver  him
his  brother,  &  he  would  send  the  2  Gentlemen  on  land :
if  not,  he  would  saile  with  them  into  England,  as  indeed
he  did,  because  the  Governour  would  not  doe  it,  saying

70

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  f^^  /  ad.

•j;  1589-91.

that  the  Gentlemen  might  make  that  suite  to  the  king
of  Spaine  himselfe.  This  Spanish  Pilot  we  bid  to  supper
with  us,  and  the  Englishmen  likewise,  where  he  shewed
us  all  the  manner  of  their  fight,  much  commending  the
order  and  maner  of  the  Englishmens  fighting,  as  also  their
courteous  using  of  him :  but  in  the  end  the  English
Pilot  likewise  stole  away  in  a  French  ship,  without  paying
any  ransome  as  yet.

In  the  moneth  of  Januarie  1590  there  arrived  one  ship
alone  in  Tercera,  that  came  from  the  Spanish  Indies,
and  brought  newes  that  there  was  a  Fleete  of  a  hundred
shippes  which  put  out  from  the  Firme  land  of  the
Spanish  Indies,  and  by  a  storme  were  driven  upon  the
coast  called  Florida,  where  they  were  all  cast  away,  she
having  onely  escaped,  wherin  there  were  great  riches,
&  many  men  lost,  as  it  may  well  be  thought :  so  that
they  made  their  account,  that  of  220  ships  that  for  cer-
taine  were  knowen  to  have  put  out  of  Nova  Spagna,
S.  Domingo,  Havana,  Capo  verde,  Brasilia,  Guinea,  &c.  [II.  ii.  182.]
in  the  yeere  1589.  to  saile  for  Spaine  &  Portugall,
there  were  not  above  14  or  15  of  them  arrived  there
in  safetie,  all  the  rest  being  either  drowned,  burst  or
taken.

In  the  same  moneth  of  January  there  arrived  in  Ter-
cera 15  or  16  ships  that  came  from  Sivil,  which  were
most  Flieboats  of  the  Low  countries,  and  some  Britons
that  were  arrested  in  Spaine :  these  came  full  of  souldiers,
and  wel  appointed  with  munition,  to  lade  the  silver  that
lay  in  Tercera,  and  to  fetch  Alvares  de  Flores  by  the
kings  commandement  into  Spaine.  And  because  that
time  of  the  yeere  there  are  alwayes  stormes  about  those
Hands,  therefore  they  durst  not  enter  into  the  road  of
Tercera,  for  that  as  then  it  blew  so  great  a  storme  that
some  of  their  ships  that  had  ankred  were  forced  to  cut
downe  their  mastes,  and  were  in  danger  to  be  lost :  and
among  the  rest  a  ship  of  Biscaie  ran  against  the  land
and  was  striken  in  pieces,  but  all  the  men  saved  them-
selves. The  other  ships  were  forced to keepe  the  sea

71

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.

and  seperate  themselves  one  from  the  other,  where  wind
and  weather  would  drive  them  untill  the  15  of  March
for  that  in  all  that  time  they  could  not  have  one  day  of
faire  weather  to  anker  in,  whereby  they  endured  much
miserie,  cursing  both  the  silver  and  the  Hand.  This  storme
being  past,  they  chanced  to  meet  with  a  small  English
ship  of  about  40  tunnes  in  bignesse,  which  by  reason
of  the  great  wind  could  not  beare  all  her  sailes :  so
they  set  upon  her  and  tooke  her,  and  with  the  English
flag  in  their  Admirals  sterne,  they  came  as  proudly  into
the  haven  as  if  they  had  conquered  all  the  realme  of
England :  but  as  the  Admiral!  that  bare  the  English
flag  upon  her  sterne  was  entring  into  the  road,  there
came  by  chance  two  English  ships  by  the  Hand  that
paied  her  so  well  for  her  paines,  that  they  were  forced
to  cry  Misericordia,  and  without  all  doubt  had  taken
her,  if  she  had  bene  but  a  mile  further  in  the  sea:
but  because  she  got  under  the  Fortresse,  which  also
began  to  shoot  at  the  Englishmen,  they  were  forced
to  leave  her,  and  to  put  further  into  the  sea,  having
slaine  five  or  sixe  of  the  Spaniards.  The  Englishmen
that  were  taken  in  the  small  shippe  were  put  under
hatches,  and  coupled  in  bolts,  and  after  they  had  bene
prisoners  3  or  4  dayes,  there  was  a  Spanish  Ensigne-
bearer  in  the  ship  that  had  a  brother  slaine  in  the  Fleet
that  came  for  England,  who  as  then  minding  to  revenge
his  death,  and  withall  to  shew  his  manhood  on  the
English  captives  that  were  in  the  EngHsh  ship,  which
they  had  taken,  as  is  aforesayd,  tooke  a  poiniard  in  his
hand  and  went  downe  under  the  hatches,  where  finding
the  poore  Englishmen  sitting  in  boltes,  with  the  same
poiniard  he  stabbed  sixe  of  them  to  the  heart :  which
two  others  of  them  perceiving,  clasped  each  other  about
the  middle,  because  they  would  not  be  murthered  by
him,  &  threw  themselves  into  the  sea  and  there  were
drowned.  This  acte  was  of  all  the  Spaniards  much
disliked  and  very  ill  taken,  so  that  they  caried  the
Spaniard  prisoner  unto  Lisbon,  where  being  arrived,  the

72

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  a.d.

1589-91.

king  of  Spalne  willed  he  should  be  sent  into  England,
that  the  Queene  of  England  might  use  him  as  she
thought  good :  which  sentence  his  friends  by  intreatie
got  to  be  reversed,  notwithstanding  he  commanded  he
should  without  all  favour  be  beheaded :  but  upon  a  good
Friday  the  Cardinall  going  to  masse,  all  the  captaines
and  Commanders  made  so  great  intreaty  for  him,  that
in  the  end  they  got  his  pardon.  This  I  thought  good
to  note,  that  men  might  understand  the  bloody  &  dis-
honest minds  of  the  Spaniards  when  they  have  men
under  their  subjection.

The  same  two  English  ships  which  folowed  the
Spanish  Admirall  till  he  had  got  the  Fort  of  Tercera,
as  I  sayd  before,  put  into  the  sea,  where  they  met  with
another  Spanish  ship  being  of  the  same  Fleet,  that  had
likewise  bene  scattred  by  the  storme  and  was  onely
missing,  for  the  rest  lay  in  the  road.  This  small  ship
the  Englishmen  tooke,  and  sent  all  the  men  on  shore,
not  hurting  any  of  them  :  but  if  they  had  knowen  what
had  bene  done  unto  the  foresayd  English  captives,  I
beleeve  they  would  soone  have  revenged  themselves,  as
afterward  many  an  innocent  soule  paied  for  it.  This
ship  thus  taken  by  the  Englishmen,  was  the  same  that
was  taken  and  confiscated  in  the  Hand  of  Tercera  by
the  Englishmen  that  got  out  of  the  Hand  in  a  fisher
boat  (as  T  said  before)  and  was  sold  unto  the  Spaniards
that  as  then  came  from  the  Indies,  wherewith  they
sayled  to  S.  Lucar,  where  it  was  also  arrested  by  the
duke,  and  appointed  to  go  in  company  to  fetch  the
silver  in  Tercera,  because  it  was  a  ship  that  sailed  well,
but  among  the  Spaniards  Fleet  it  was  the  meanest  of
the  company.  By  this  means  it  was  taken  from  the
Spaniards  and  caried  into  England,  and  the  owners  had  it
againe  when  they  least  thought  of  it.

The  19  of  March  the  aforesayd  ships  being  19  in
number,  set  saile,  having  laden  the  kings  silver,  and
received  in  Alvaro  Flores  de  Quiniones,  with  his  com-
pany and  good provision of  necessaries,  munition and

73

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES,

1589-91.

souldiers  that  were  fully  resolved  (as  they  made  shew)  to
fight  valiantly  to  the  last  man  before  they  would  yeeld
or  lose  their  riches :  and  although  they  set  their  course
for  S.  Lucar,  the  wind  drave  them  unto  Lisbon,  which
(as  it  seemed)  was  willing  by  his  force  to  helpe  them,
and  to  bring  them  thither  in  safetie,  although  Alvaro  de
Flores,  both  against  the  wind  and  weather  would  per-
force have  sailed  to  Saint  Lucar,  but  being  constrained
by  the  wind  and  importunitie  of  the  sailers  that  protested
they  would  require  their  losses  and  damages  of  him,  he
[II.  ii.  183.]  was  content  to  saile  to  Lisbon:  from  whence  the  silver
was  by  land  caried  unto  Sivil.  At  Cape  S.  Vincent  there
lay  a  Fleet  of  20  English  ships  to  watch  for  the  Armada,
so  that  if  they  had  put  into  S.  Lucar,  they  had  fallen  right
into  their  hands,  which  if  the  wind  had  served  they  had
done.  And  therefore  they  may  say  that  the  wind  hath
lent  them  a  happy  voiage :  for  if  the  Englishmen  had
met  with  them,  they  had  surely  bene  in  great  danger,  and
possibly  but  few  of  them  had  escaped,  by  reason  of  the
feare  wherewith  they  were  possessed,  because  fortune  or
rather  God  was  wholy  against  them  :  which  is  a  sufficient
cause  to  make  the  Spaniards  out  of  heart,  &  to  the
contrary  to  give  the  Englishmen  more  courage,  and  to
make  them  bolder  for  that  they  are  victorious,  stout  and
valiant :  and  seeing  all  their  enterprises  do  take  so  good
effect,  that  thereby  they  are  become  lords  and  masters
of  the  sea,  and  need  care  for  no  man,  as  it  wel  appeareth
by  this  briefe  discourse.

The  7  of  August  1590..  a  navie  of  English  ships  was
seen  before  Tercera,  being  20  in  number,  and  5  of  them
the  Queenes  ships :  their  Generall  was  one  Martin
Frobisher,  as  we  after  had  intelligence.  They  came
purposely  to  watch  for  the  Fleet  of  the  Spanish  Indies,
and  for  the  Indian  ships,  and  the  ships  of  the  countreys
in  the  West :  which  put  the  Danders  in  great  feare,
specially  those  of  Fayal,  for  that  the  Englishmen  sent  a
trumpet  to  the  Governour  to  aske  certaine  wine,  flesh,
and  other  victuals  for  their  money  and  good  friendship,

74

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad.

1589-91.

They  of  Fayal  did  not  onely  refuse  to  give  eare  unto
them,  but  with  a  shot  killed  their  messenger  or  trum-
peter :  which  the  Englishmen  tooke  in  evill  part,  sending
them  word  that  they  were  best  to  looke  to  themselves
and  stand  upon  their  guard,  for  they  ment  to  come  and
visite  them  whether  they  would  or  no.  The  Governour
made  them  answere,  that  he  was  there  in  the  behalfe  of
his  majestie  of  Spaine,  and  that  he  would  doe  his  best
to  keepe  them  out,  as  he  was  bound :  but  nothing  was
done,  although  they  of  Fayal  were  in  no  litle  feare,
sending  to  Tercera  for  aide,  from  whence  they  had
certaine  barkes  with  pouder  and  munition  for  warre,  with
some  bisket  and  other  necessary  provision.

The  30  of  August  we  received  very  certaine  newes
out  of  Portugal,  that  there  were  80  ships  put  out  of
the  Groine  laden  with  victuals,  munition,  money  and
souldiours,  to  goe  for  Britaine  to  aide  the  Catholiques
and  Leaguers  of  France  against  the  king  of  Navarre.  At
the  same  time  two  Netherland  hulkes  comming  out  of
Portugall  to  Tercera  being  halfe  the  Seas  over,  met  with
4  of  the  Queenes  ships,  their  Generall  being  sir  John
Hawkins,  that  staied  them,  but  let  them  go  againe
without  doing  them  any  harme.  The  Netherlanders
reported,  that  each  of  the  Queenes  ships  had  80  pieces
of  Ordinance,  and  that  captaine  Drake  lay  with  40  ships
in  the  English  chanell  watching  for  the  armie  of  the
Groine :  and  likewise  that  there  lay  at  the  Cape  S.
Vincent  ten  other  English  ships,  that  if  any  ships  escaped
from  the  Hands,  they  might  take  them.  These  tidings
put  the  Ilanders  in  great  feare,  least  if  they  failed  of  the
Spanish  fleete  and  got  nothing  by  them,  that  then  they
would  fall  upon  the  Hands,  because  they  would  not
returne  emptie  home,  whereupon  they  held  streit  watch,
sending  advise  unto  the  king  what  newes  they  heard.

The  first  of  September  there  came  to  the  Hand  of  S.
Michael  a  Portugall  ship  out  of  the  haven  of  Phernam-
buck  in  Brasile,  which  brought  newes  that  the  Admirall
of  the  Portugall Fleet that came from India, having

75

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.

missed  the  Hand  of  S.  Helena,  was  of  necessitie  con-
strained to  put  into  Phernambuck,  although  the  king  had
expresly  under  a  great  penaltie  forbidden  him  so  to  doe,
because  of  the  wormes  that  there  doe  spoile  the  ships.
The  same  shippe  wherein  Bernardin  Ribero  was  Admirall
the  yeere  before  1589.  sailed  out  of  Lisbon  into  the
Indies,  with  5  ships  in  her  company,  whereof  but  4  got
into  India,  the  5  was  never  heard  of,  so  that  it  was
thought  to  be  cast  away :  the  other  foure  returned  safe
againe  into  Portugall,  though  the  Admiral  was  much
spoiled,  because  he  met  with  two  English  ships  that
fought  long  with  him,  and  slew  many  of  his  men,  but
yet  he  escaped  from  them.

The  5  of  the  same  moneth  there  arrived  in  Tercera  a
caravel  of  the  Hand  of  Corvo,  &  brought  with  her  50
men  that  had  bin  spoiled  by  the  Englishmen  who  had  set
them  on  shore  in  the  Hand  of  Corvo,  being  taken  out  of
a  ship  that  came  from  the  Spanish  Indies,  they  brought
tidings  that  the  Englishmen  had  taken  4  more  of  the
Indian  ships,  &  a  caravel  with  the  king  of  Spaines  letters
of  advise  for  the  ships  comming  out  of  the  Portugal
Indies,  &  that  with  those  which  they  had  taken,  they
were  at  the  least  40  English  ships  together,  so  y'  not  one
bark  escaped  them,  but  fel  into  their  hands,  &  that
therefore  the  Portugall  ships  comming  out  of  India  durst
not  put  into  the  Hands,  but  tooke  their  course  under
40  &  42  degrees,  and  from  thence  sailed  to  Lisbon,
shunning  likewise  the  cape  S.  Vincent,  otherwise  they
could  not  have  had  a  prosperous  journey  of  it,  for  that  as
then  the  sea  was  ful  of  English  ships.  Whereupon  the
king  advised  the  fleet  lying  in  Havana  in  ye  Spanish
Indies  ready  to  come  for  Spaine,  that  they  should  stay
there  all  that  yeere  till  the  next  yeere,  because  of  the
great  danger  they  might  fal  into  by  ye  Englishmen,
which  was  no  smal  charge,  &  hinderance  to  the  fleet,  for
that  the  ships  that  lie  there  do  consume  themselves,  and
in  a  maner  eat  up  one  another,  by  reason  of  the  great
number  of  people,  together  with  the  scarcitie  of  al  things,

76

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad

1589-91.
so  that  many  ships  chose  rather  one  by  one  to  adventure  [II.  it.  184.]
themselves  alone to  get home,  then to  stay  there : all
which  fell  into  the  Englishmens  hands,  wherof  divers  of  Great kavock
the men  were brought  into Tercera, for  that a whole  ^  ^'^^^'^^  ''
day  we  could see nothing  els,  but spoiled  men  set on
shore,  some  out  of  one  ship,  some  out  of  another,  that
pitie  it  was  to  see  all  of  them  cursing  the  Englishmen  &
their  owne  fortunes,  with  those  that  had  bene  the  causes
to  provoke the Englishmen to fight,  and complaining
of  the small  remedie and order taken therein by  the
king  of  Spaines  officers.

The  19  of  the  same  moneth  there  came  to  Tercera  a
Caravel  of  Lisbon,  with  one  of  the  kings  officers,
to  cause  the  goods  that  were  saved  out  of  the  ship
which  came  from  Malacca  (for  ye  which  we  staied
there)  to  be  laden  and  sent  to  Lisbon.  And  at  the  same
time  there  put  out  of  the  Groine  one  Don  Alonso  de
Ba9an,  with  40  great  ships  of  warre  to  come  unto  the
Hands,  there  to  watch  for  the  fleet  of  the  Spanish  &
Portugall  Indies,  and  the  goods  of  the  Malacca  ship
being  laden,  they  were  to  convoy  them  all  together  into
the  river  of  Lisbon :  but  being  certaine  daies  at  sea,
alwaies  having  a  contrary  wind,  they  could  not  get  unto
the  Hands,  onely  two  of  them  that  were  scattred  from  the
fleet,  arrived  at  Tercera,  and  not  finding  the  fleet,  they
presently  returned  to  seeke  them :  in  the  meane  time  the
king  changed  his  mind,  &  caused  the  fleet  to  stay  in
India,  as  I  said  before :  and  therefore  hee  sent  worde
unto  Don  Alonso  de  Bassan,  that  hee  should  returne
againe  to  the  Groine,  which  he  presently  did  (without
doing  any  thing,  nor  once  approching  neer  the  Hands,
saving  onely  the  two  foresayd  ships,  for  he  well  knew
that  the  Englishmen  lay  by  the  Hand  of  Corvo,  but  he
would  not  visit  them :  and  so  he  returned  to  the  haven
the  Groine,  whereby  our  goods  that  came  from  Malacca
were  yet  to  ship,  and  trussed  up  againe,  and  forced  to
stay  a  more  fortunate  time  with  patience  perforce.

The  23  of  October  there  arrived  in  Tercera  a  Caravel

77

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.

with  advise  out  of  Portugall,  that  of  5  ships  which  in
the  yere  1590  were  laden  in  Lisbon  for  the  Indies,  4  of
them  were  turned  againe  to  Portin.  After  they  had
bene  4  moneths  abroad,  &  that  the  Admirall,  wherein
the  Viceroy  called  Mathias  d'Albukerk  sailed,  had  onely
gotten  to  India,  as  afterward  newes  thereof  was  brought
over-land,  having  bin  at  the  least  1 1  moneths  at  sea  &
never  saw  land,  and  came  in  great  misery  to  Malacca.
In  this  ship  there  died  by  the  way  280  men,  according  to
a  note  by  himselfe  made,  and  sent  to  the  Cardinal  at
Lisbon,  with  the  names  &  surnames  of  every  man,
together  with  a  description  of  his  voiage,  &  the  misery
they  had  endured,  which  was  onely  done,  because  he
would  not  lose  the  government  of  India :  and  for  that
cause  he  had  sworne  either  to  lose  his  life,  or  to  arrive
in  India,  as  in  deed  he  did  afterwards,  but  to  the  great
danger,  losse  and  hinderance  of  his  companie,  that  were
forced  to  buy  it  with  their  lives,  &  onely  for  want  of
provision,  as  it  may  wel  be  thought :  for  he  knew  full
well  that  if  he  had  returned  backe  againe  into  Portugal  as
the  other  ships  did,  he  should  have  bin  cassiered  from
his  Indian  regiment,  because  the  people  began  already  to
murmure  at  him  for  his  proud  &  lofty  mind.  And
among  other  things  that  shewed  his  pride  the  more,
behind  above  the  gallery  of  his  ship  he  caused  Fortune
to  be  painted,  &  his  own  picture  w'  a  staffe  standing  by
her,  as  it  were  threatning  Fortune,  with  this  posie,  Quero
que  vencas,  that  is,  I  wil  have  thee  to  overcome :  which
being  read  by  the  Cardinal  &  other  gentlemen  (that  to
honor  him  brought  him  aboord  his  ship)  it  was  thought
to  be  a  point  of  exceeding  folly :  but  it  is  no  strange
matter  among  the  Portugals :  for  they  above  all  others
must  of  force  let  the  foole  peepe  out  of  their  sleeves,
specially  when  they  are  in  authoritie,  for  that  I  knew  the
said  Mathias  d'Albukerk  in  India,  being  a  souldier  and  a
captaine,  where  he  was  esteemed  and  accounted  for  one
of  the  best  of  them,  &  much  honoured,  and  beloved  of
all  men,  as  behaving  himselfe  curteously  to  every  man,

78

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  a.d.

1589-91.

whereby  they  all  desired  that  he  might  be  Viceroy. But

when  he  once  had  received  his  patent  with  full  power  &

authoritie  from  the  king  to  be  Viceroy,  he  changed  so

much from his former  behavior,  that  by  reason  of  his

pride,  they  all began to  feare  and  curse  him,  and  that

before hee  departed  out  of  Lisbon,  as  it  is  often  scene

in  many  men  that  are  advanced  unto  state  and  dignitie.

The  20  of  Januarie  1591.  there  was  newes  brought  out
of  Portugall  into  Tercera,  that  the  Englishmen  had  taken
a  ship  that  the  king  had  sent  into  the  Portugal-Indies,
w'  advise  to  the  Viceroy  for  the  returning  againe  of  the
4  ships  that  should  have  gone  to  India,  &  because  the
ships  were  come  backe  againe,  that  ship  was  stuffed  and
laded  as  full  of  goods  as  possible  it  might  be,  having  like-
wise in  ready  money  500  thousand  duckets  in  roials  of
8,  besides  other  wares.  It  departed  from  Lisbon  in  the
moneth  of  November  1590.  &  met  with  the  Englishmen,
with  whom  for  a  time  it  fought,  but  in  the  end  it  was
taken  and  caried  into  England  with  men  &  all,  yet
when  they  came  there,  the  men  were  set  at  libertie,  and
returned  into  Lisbon,  where  the  captaine  was  committed
prisoner ;  but  he  excused  himselfe  and  was  released,  with
whom  I  spake  my  selfe,  &  he  made  this  report  unto  me.
At  the  same  time  also  they  tooke  a  ship  that  came  from
the  Mine  laden  with  gold,  &  2  ships  laden  with  pepper
&  spices  that  were  to  saile  into  Italy,  the  pepper  onely
that  was  in  them,  being  worth  170  thousand  duckets:  all
these  ships  were  caried  into  England,  &  made  good
prise.

In  the  moneth  of  July  1591.  there  hapned  an  earth-  [II.  ii.  185.]
quake  in  the  Hand  of  S.  Michael,  which  continued  from
the  26  of  July,  to  the  12  of  August,  in  which  time  no
man  durst  stay  within  his  house  but  fled  into  the  fields,
fasting  &  praying  with  great  sorow,  for  that  many  of
their  houses  fel  down,  and  a  towne  called  Villa  Franca,
was  almost  cleane  razed  to  the  ground,  all  the  cloisters
&  houses  shaken  to  the  earth,  and  therein  some  people
slaine. The  land  in  some  places  rose  up,  and  the  cliffs

79

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.

remooved  from  one  place  to  another,  and  some  hils  were
defaced  and  made  even  with  the  ground.  The  earth-
quake was  so  strong,  that  the  ships  which  lay  in  the
road  and  on  the  sea,  shaked  as  if  the  world  would  have
turned  round :  there  sprang  also  a  fountaine  out  of  the
earth,  from  whence  for  the  space  of  4  daies,  there  flowed
a  most  cleare  water,  &  after  that  it  ceased.  At  the  same
time  they  heard  such  thunder  &  noise  under  the  earth,  as
if  all  the  devils  in  hell  had  bin  assembled  together  in.  that
place,  wherewith  many  died  for  feare.  The  Hand  of
Tercera  shooke  4  times  together,  so  that  it  seemed  to
turne  about,  but  there  hapned  no  misfortune  unto  it.
Earthquakes  are  common  in  those  Hands,  for  about  20
yeres  past  there  hapned  another  earthquake,  wherein
a  high  hill  that  lieth  by  the  same  towne  of  Villa
Franca,  fell  halfe  downe,  &  covered  all  the  towne  with
earth,  and  killed  many  men.  The  25  of  August  the
kings  Armada  comming  out  of  Ferol  arrived  in  Tercera
being  in  all  30  ships,  Biskaines,  Portugals  and  Spaniards,
and  10  dutch  flieboats  that  were  arrested  in  Lisbon  to
serve  the  king,  besides  other  small  ships  &  pataxos,  that
came  to  serve  as  messengers  from  place  to  place,  and  to
discover  the  seas.  This  navie  came  to  stay  for,  and  con-
voy the  ships  that  should  come  from  the  Spanish  Indies,
and  the  flieboats  were  appointed  in  their  returne  home,
to  take  in  the  goods  that  were  saved  in  the  lost  ship  that
came  from Malacca,  and  to  convoy  them  to  Lisbon.

The  13  of  September  the  said  Armada  arrived  at  the
Hand  of  Corvo,  where  the  Englishmen  with  about  16
ships  as  then  lay,  staying  for  the  Spanish  fleet,  whereof
some  or  the  most  part  were  come,  and  there  the  English
were  in  good  hope  to  have  taken  them.  But  when  they
perceived  the  kings  army  to  be  strong,  the  Admiral  being
the  lord  Thomas  Howard,  commanded  his  Fleet  not  to
fal  upon  them,  nor  any  of  them  once  to  separate  their
ships  from  him,  unlesse  he  gave  commission  so  to  do :
notwithstanding  the  viceadmirall  sir  Richard  Greenvil
being in the ship called the Revenge,  went into the

80

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad.

1589-91.

Spanish  fleet,  and  shot  among  them  doing  them  great
hurt,  &  thinking  the  rest  of  the  company  would  have
folowed,  which  they  did  not,  but  left  him  there,  &  sailed
away :  the  cause  why  could  not  be  knowen.  Which  the
Spaniards  perceiving,  with  7  or  8  ships  they  boorded  her,
but  she  withstood  them  all,  fighting  with  them  at  the
least  12  houres  together  and  sunke  two  of  them,  one
being  a  new  double  Flieboat  of  600  tunnes,  and  Admiral
of  the  Flieboats,  the  other  a  Biscain :  but  in  the  end  by
reason  of  the  number  that  came  upon  her,  she  was  taken,
but  to  their  great  losse  :  for  they  had  lost  in  fighting  and
by  drowning  above  400  men,  and  of  the  English  were
slaine  about  100,  Sir  Richard  Greenvil  himselfe  being
wounded  in  his  braine,  whereof  afterwards  he  died.  He
was  caried  into  the  ship  called  S.  Paul,  wherein  was  the
Admirall  of  the  fleet  Don  Alonso  de  Ba9an :  there  his
wounds  were  drest  by  the  Spanish  surgeons,  but  Don
Alonso  himselfe  would  neither  see  him  nor  speake  with
him  :  all  the  rest  of  the  captaines  and  gentlemen  went  to
visite  him,  and  to  comfort  him  in  his  hard  fortune,  won-
dering at  his  courage  and  stout  heart,  for  y'  he  shewed
not  any  signe  of  faintnes  nor  changing  of  colour ;  but
feeling  the  houre  of  death  to  approch,  he  spake  these
words  in  Spanish,  and  said :  Here  die  I  Richard  Greenvil
with  a  joyful  &  quiet  mind,  for  that  I  have  ended  my
life  as  a  true  souldier  ought  to  do,  that  hath  fought  for
his  countrey,  Queene,  religion  and  honor,  whereby  my
soule  most  joyfuU  departeth  out  of  this  body,  &  shal
alwayes  leave  behind  it  an  everlasting  fame  of  a  valiant
&  true  souldier  that  hath  done  his  dutie  as  he  was  bound
to  doe.  When  he  had  finished  these  or  such  other  like
words,  he  gave  up  the  Ghost,  with  great  &  stout  courage,
&  no  man  could  perceive  any  true  signe  of  heavines  in
him.

This  sir  Rich.  Greenvil  was  a  great  and  a  rich  gentle-
man in  England,  & had  great  yeerely  revenues of  his
owne inheritance,  but he  was  a  man  very  unquiet in
his  mind,  and  greatly  aff'ected to  war ; insomuch  as  of
vn  8i  F

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.

his  owne  private  motion  he  ofFred  his  service  to  the
Queene :  he  had  performed  many  valiant  acts,  and  was
greatly  feared  in  these  Hands,  and  knowen  of  every  man,
but  of  nature  very  severe,  so  that  his  owne  people  hated
him  for  his  fiercenesse,  &  spake  very  hardly  of  him :  for
when  they  first  entred  into  the  fleet  or  Armada,  they
had  their  great  saile  in  a  readinesse,  and  might  possibly
enough  have  sailed  away,  for  it  was  one  of  the  best  ships
for  saile  in  England,  and  the  master  perceiving  that  the
other  ships  had  left  them,  &  folowed  not  after,  com-
manded the  great  saile  to  be  cut  that  they  might  make
away :  but  sir  Rich.  Greenvil  threatned  both  him  &  al  the
rest  that  were  in  the  ship,  y'  if  any  man  laid  hand  upon
it,  he  would  cause  him  to  be  hanged,  and  so  by  that
occasion  they  were  compelled  to  fight  &  in  the  end  were
taken.  He  was  of  so  hard  a  complexion,  that  as  he  con-
tinued among  the  Spanish  captains  while  they  were  at
dinner  or  supper  with  him,  he  would  carouse  3  or  4
glasses  of  wine,  and  in  a  braverie  take  the  glasses  be-
[II.  ii.  186.]  tweene  his  teeth  and  crash  them  in  pieces  &  swalow
them  downe,  so  that  oftentimes  the  blood  ran  out  of
his  mouth  without  any  harme  at  all  unto  him  :  &  this
was  told  me  by  divers  credible  persons  that  many  times
stood  and  beheld  him.  The  Englishmen  that  were  left
in  the  ship,  as  the  captaine  of  the  souldiers,  the  master
and  others  were  dispersed  into  divers  of  the  Spanish  ships
that  had  taken  them,  where  there  had  almost  a  new
fight  arisen  between  the  Biscains  and  the  Portugals :
while  each  of  them  would  have  the  honour  to  have
first  boorded  her,  so  that  there  grew  a  great  noise  and
quarel  among  them,  one  taking  the  chiefe  ensigne,  and
the  other  the  flag,  and  the  captaine  and  every  one  held  his
owne.  The  ships  that  had  boorded  her  were  altogether
out  of  order,  and  broken,  and  many  of  their  men  hurt,
whereby  they  were  compelled  to  come  into  the  Island  of
Tercera,  there  to  repaire  themselves  :  where  being  arrived,
I  and  my  chamber-felow,  to  heare  some  newes,  went
aboord  one  of  the  ships  being  a  great  Biscain,  and  one  of

82

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad.

1589-91.

the  12  Apostles,  whose  captaine  was  called  Bartandono,
that  had  bin  General  of  the  Biscains  in  the  fleet  that  went
for  England.  He  seeing  us  called  us  up  into  the  gallery,
where  with  great  curtesie  he  received  us,  being  as  then
set  at  dinner  with  the  English  captaine  that  sate  by  him,
and  had  on  a  sute  of  blacke  velvet,  but  he  could  not
tell  us  any  thing,  for  that  he  could  speake  no  other
language  but  English  and  Latine,  which  Bartandono  also
could  a  litle  speake.  The  English  captaine  got  licence
of  the  governour  that  he  might  come  on  land  with  his
weapon  by  his  side,  and  was  in  our  lodging  with  the
Englishman  that  was  kept  prisoner  in  the  Hand,  being  of
that  ship  whereof  the  sailers  got  away,  as  I  said  before.
The  governour  of  Tercera  bade  him  to  dinner,  and
shewed  him  great  curtesie.  The  master  likewise  with
licence  of  Bartandono  came  on  land  and  was  in  our
lodging,  and  had  at  the  least  10  or  12  wounds,  as  well
in  his  head  as  on  his  body,  whereof  after  that  being  at
sea  between  Lisbon  &  the  Hands  he  died.  The  captaine
wrote  a  letter,  wherein  he  declared  all  the  maner  of  the
fight,  and  left  it  with  the  English  marchant  that  lay  in
our  lodging,  to  send  it  to  the  lord  Admiral  of  England.
This  English  captaine  comming  unto  Lisbon,  was  there
wel  received  and  not  any  hurt  done  unto  him,  but  with
good  convoy  sent  to  Setuval,  and  from  thence  sailed  into
England  with  all  the  rest  of  the  Englishmen  that  were
taken  prisoners.

The  Spanish  armie  staied  at  the  Hand  of  Corvo  til
the  last  of  September,  to  assemble  the  rest  of  the  fleet
together,  which  in  the  ende  were  to  the  number  of  140
sailes  of  ships  partly  comming  from  India,  and  partly  of
the  army,  and  being  altogether  ready  to  saile  to  Tercera
in  good  company,  there  suddenly  rose  so  hard  &  cruell
a  storme,  that  those  of  the  Hands  did  afiirme,  that  in
mans  memorie  there  was  never  any  such  seen  or  heard
off  before :  for  it  seemed  the  sea  would  have  swalowed
up  the  Hands,  the  water  mounting  higher  then  the  cliff^s,
which  are  so  high  that  it  amaseth  a  man  to  behold  them  :

^3

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-91.

but  the  sea  reached  above  them,  and  living  fishes  were
throwen  upon  the  land.  This  storme  continued  not  only
a  day  or  two  with  one  wind,  but  7  or  8  dayes  continually,
the  wind  turning  round  about  in  al  places  of  the  com-
passe,  at  the  lest  twise  or  thrise  during  that  time,  and  all
alike,  with  a  continuall  storme  and  tempest  most  terrible
to  behold,  even  to  us  that  were  on  shore,  much  more
then  to  such  as  were  at  sea :  so  that  onely  on  the  coasts
and  clifFes  of  the  Hand  of  Tercera,  there  were  above  12
ships  cast  away,  and  not  onely  upon  the  one  side,  but
round  about  it  in  every  corner,  wherby  nothing  els  was
heard  but  complaining,  crying,  lamenting  &  telling,  here
is  a  ship  broken  in  pieces  against  the  cliffes,  and  there
another,  and  all  the  men  drowned :  so  that  for  the  space
of  20  dayes  after  the  storme,  they  did  nothing  els  but
fish  for  dead  men  that  continually  came  driving  on  the
The  wracke  of  shore.  Among  the  rest  was  the  English  ship  called  the
the  Revenge.  Revenge,  that  was  cast  away  upon  a  cliffe  neere  to  the
Hand  of  Tercera,  where  it  brake  in  an  hundred  pieces  &
sunke  to  the  ground,  having  in  her  70  men  Galegos,
Biscains,  and  others,  with  some  of  the  captive  English-
men, whereof  but  one  was  saved  that  got  up  upon  the
cliffes  alive,  and  had  his  body  and  head  all  wounded,  and
he  being  on  shore  brought  us  the  newes  desiring  to  be
shriven,  &  thereupon  presently  died.  The  Revenge  had
in  her  divers  faire  brasse  pieces  that  were  all  sunke  in  ye
sea,  which  they  of  the  Hand  were  in  good  hope  to  waigh
up  againe  the  next  Sommer  after.  Among  these  ships
that  were  cast  away  about  Tercera,  was  likewise  a  Flie-
boat,  one  of  those  that  had  bin  arrested  in  Portugall  to
serve  the  king,  called  the  white  Dove,  the  master  of  her
was  one  Cornelius  Martenson  of  Schiedam  in  Holland,
and  there  were  in  her  100  souldiers,  as  in  every  one  of
the  rest  there  were.  He  being  over-ruled  by  the  captaine
that  he  could  not  be  master  of  his  owne,  sayling  here  and
there  at  the  mercy  of  God,  as  the  storme  drove  him,  in
the  end  came  within  the  sight  of  the  Hand  of  Tercera,
which  the  Spaniards  perceiving  thought  all  their safetie

84

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad

1589-91.

onely  to  consist  in  putting  into  the  road,  compelling  the
Master  and  the  Pilot  to  make  towards  the  Hand,  although
the  master  refused  to  doe  it,  saying,  that  they  were  most
sure  there  to  be  cast  away  and  utterly  spoyled :  but  the
captaine  called  him  drunkard  and  Heretique,  and  striking
him  with  a  stafFe,  commaunded  him  to  doe  as  hee  would
have  him.  The  Master  seeing  this  and  being  compelled
to  doe  it,  sayd :  well  then  my  Masters,  seeing  it  is  the
desire  of  you  all  to  bee  cast  away,  I  can  but  lose  one  life,  [11.  ii.  187.]
and  therewith  desperately  he  sailed  towards  the  shore,  and
was  on  that  side  of  the  Hand,  where  there  was  nothing
-els  but  hard  stones  and  rocks,  as  high  as  mountaines,
most  terrible  to  beholde,  where  some  of  the  inhabitants
stood  with  long  ropes  and  corke  bound  at  the  end  thereof,
to  throw  them  downe  unto  the  men,  that  they  might  lay
holde  upon  them,  and  save  their  lives :  but  few  of  them
got  so  neere,  most  of  them  being  cast  away,  and  smitten
in  pieces  before  they  could  get  to  the  wall.  The  ship
sailing  in  this  maner  (as  I  sayd  before)  towards  the  Hand,
and  approching  to  the  shore,  the  master  being  an  olde
man,  and  full  of  yeeres,  called  his  sonne  that  was  in  the
ship  with  him,  and  having  imbraced  one  another,  and
taken  their  last  farewell,  the  good  olde  father  willed  his
Sonne  not  to  take  care  for  him,  but  seeke  to  save  him-
selfe ;  for  (sayd  he)  sonne  thou  art  yong,  &  mayest  have
some  hope  to  save  thy  life,  but  as  for  me  it  is  no  great
matter  (I  am  olde)  what  become  of  me,  and  therewith
ech  of  these  shedding  many  teares,  as  every  loving  father
and  kinde  childe  may  well  consider,  the  ship  fell  upon
the  clifFes,  and  brake  in  pieces,  the  father  on  the  one  side,
the  sonne  on  the  other  side  falling  into  the  sea,  ech  laying
holde  upon  that  which  came  next  to  hand,  but  to  no
purpose;  for  the  sea  was  so  high  and  furious,  that  they
were  all  drowned,  and  onely  foureteene  or  fifteene  saved
themselves  by  swimming,  with  their  legs  and  armes  halfe
broken  and  out  of  joynt,  among  which  was  the  Masters
sonne,  and  foure  other  Dutch  boyes :  the  rest  of  the
Spaniards  and  Sailers,  with  the  Captaine  and  Master,  were

85

A.D.
1589-91,

Above  100
Spanish  and
Portugall
ships  drowned.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

drowned.  Whose  heart  would  not  melt  with  teares  to
beholde  so  grievous  a  sight,  specially  considering  with
himselfe  that  the  greatest  cause  thereof  was  the  beastlines
and  insolency  of  the  Spaniards,  as  in  this  onely  example
may  well  be  seene  ?  Whereby  may  be  considered  how
the  other  shippes  sped,  as  we  our  selves  did  in  part
beholde,  and  by  the  men  that  were  saved  did  heare  more
at  large,  as  also  some  others  of  our  countreymen  that
as  then  were  in  the  like  danger  can  well  witnesse.

On  the  other  Hands  the  losse  was  no  lesse  then  in
Tercera :  for  on  the  Hand  of  Saint  George  there  were
two  ships  cast  away :  on  the  Hand  of  Pico  two  ships :  on
the  Hand  of  Gratiosa  three  ships :  and  besides  those  there
came  every  where  round  about  divers  pieces  of  broken
ships,  and  other  things  fleeting  towards  the  Hands,  where-
with the  sea  was  all  covered  most  pitifull  to  beholde.
On  the  Hand  of  S.  Michael  there  were  foure  ships  cast
away,  and  betweene  Tercera  and  S.  Michael  three  more
were  sunke,  which  were  seene  and  heard  to  cry  out ;
whereof  not  one  man  was  saved.  The  rest  put  into  the
sea  without  masts,  all  torne  and  rent:  so  that  of  the
whole  fleet  and  armada,  being  140  ships  in  all,  there  were
but  32  or  33  arrived  in  Spaine  and  Portugall,  yea,  and
those  few  with  so  great  misery,  paine  and  labour,  that
not  two  of  them  arrived  there  together,  but  this  day  one,
and  to  morrow  another,  next  day  the  third,  and  so  one
after  the  other  to  the  number  aforesayd.  All  the  rest
were  cast  away  upon  the  Hands,  and  overwhelmed  in  the
Sea,  whereby  may  be  considered  what  great  losse  and
hindrance  they  received  at  that  time :  for  by  many  mens
judgements  it  was  esteemed  to  be  much  more  then  was
lost  by  their  army  that  came  for  England  ;  and  it  may
well  be  thought,  and  presumed,  that  it  was  no  other  but
a  just  plague  purposely  sent  by  God  upon  the  Spaniards,
and  that  it  might  truely  be  sayd,  the  taking  of  the
Revenge  was  justly  revenged  upon  them,  and  not  by  the
might  or  force  of  man,  but  by  the  power  of  God,  as
some  of  them  openly  sayd  in  the  He  of  Tercera,  that  they

86

LINSCHOTEN'S LARGE TESTIMONY  ad.

1589-91.
beleeved  verily  God  would  consume  them,  and  that  he
tooke  part  with  the  Lutherans  and  heretiks :  saying
further  that  so  soone  as  they  had  throwen  the  dead  body
of  the  Viceadmirall  Sir  Richard  Greenfield  over-boord,
they  verily  thought  that  as  he  had  a  divellish  faith  and
religion,  and  therefore  the  divels  loved  him,  so  he
presently  sunke  into  the  bottome  of  the  sea,  and  downe
into  hell,  where  he  raised  up  all  the  divels  to  the  revenge
of  his  death  :  and  that  they  brought  so  great  stormes  and
torments  upon  the  Spaniards,  because  they  onely  main-
tained the  Catholike  &  Romish  religion.  Such  and  the
like  blasphemies  against  God,  they  ceased  not  openly  to
utter,  without  being  reprooved  of  any  man  therein,  nor
for  their  false  opinions :  but  the  most  part  of  them  rather
sayd  and  affirmed,  that  of  trueth  it  must  needs  be  so.

As  one  of  those  Indian  fleets  put  out  of  Nova  Spagna,
there  were  35  of  them  by  storme  and  tempest  cast  away
and  drowned  in  the  Sea,  being  50  in  all ;  so  that  but  1 5
escaped.  Of  the  fleet  that  came  from  Santo  Domingo
there  were  14  cast  away,  comming  out  of  the  chanell  of
Havana,  whereof  the  Admirall  and  Viceadmirall  were  two
of  them :  and  from  Terra  Firma  in  India  there  came
two  ships  laden  with  golde  and  silver,  that  were  taken  by
the  Englishmen  :  and  before  the  Spanish  army  came  to
Corvo,  the  Englishmen  at  times  had  taken  at  the  least
20  ships,  that  came  from  S.  Domingo,  India,  Brasilia,
&"c.  and  were  all  sent  into  England.

[A  relation

87

A.D.
I59I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Commodities
fit  for  Arguin

[II.  ii.  188.]  A  relation  sent  by  Melchior  Petoney  to  Nigil
de  Moura  at  Lisbon,  from  the  Hand  and
Castle  of  Arguin,  standing  a  little  to  the
Southward  of  Cape  Blanco,  in  the  Northerly
latitude  of  19  degrees,  concerning  the  rich
and  secret  trade  from  the  inland  of  Africa
thither:  Anno  1591.

S  concerning  the  trade  to  this  Castle  and

Hand of Arguin, your worship is to

understand,  that if  it  would please the

kings majesty to send hither two or

three caravels once in a yeere with

Flanders and Spanish commodities, as

Bracelets of glasse, Knives, Belles,

Linnen-cloth,  Looking-glasses,  with  other  kinds  of  small

wares,  his highnesse might do  great  good here. For

50  leagues up into the land the Moores have  many

exceeding  rich  golde  mines ; insomuch  that  they  bring

downe their golde to this  Castle  to  traffique  with  us :

and for  a small  trifle they  will  give  us  a  great  wedge

of gold. And because here is no trade, the sayd

Moores  cary  their  golde  to  Fez  being  250  leagues  distant

from  hence,  and there  doe  exchange  the same for the

foresayd  kindes  of  commodities. By  this  meanes  also  his

majesty might stop that passage, and keepe the king

of  Fez  from  so  huge  a  masse  of  golde. Scarlet-clothes,

and fine  Purples  are  greatly  accepted  of  in  these  parts.

It  is  a  most  fertile  countrey  within  the  land,  and  yeeldeth

great  store  of  Wheat,  flesh  of  all  kindes,  and  abundance

of  fruits. Therefore,  if  it  were  possible,  you  should  do

well  to  deale  with  his  majesty,  either  himselfe  to  send  a

couple of  caravels,  or to give your  worship leave to

traflique  here :  for  here is  a  very  good harbour  where

ships may ride at ancre hard by the Castle. The

countrey  where all the golde-mines are is called The

kingdome  of  Darha. In  this  kingdome  are  great  store

Wedges  of
golde  given  for
small  trifles.

Scarlet  i^  fine
Purple  cloth
greatly
accepted.

A  good  harbor
before  the
Castle  of
Arguin.

THE RICH TRADE FROM AFRICA  a.d.

1591.

of  cities and townes ; and in every city  and towne a

Captaine  with certaine souldiers ; which Captaines are

lords  and  owners  of  the  sayd  townes. One  city  there  is  Concerning

called Couton,  another  Xanigeton,  as  also the  cities  of ",  ^^f  '^^^

Tubguer,  Azegue,  Amader,  Quaherque,  and  the  towne  jfricanus  a

of  Faroo. The  which  townes  and  cities  are  very  great  little  after  the

and fairely  built,  being inhabited by  rich Moores,  and  bepnningof

abounding  with all kinde of  cattell,  Barley  and  Dates.  ^^'  ^  ^''°^^'

And  here  is  such  plenty  of  golde  found  upon  the  sands

by  the  rivers  side,  that  the  sayd  Moores  usually  carry  the

same  Northward  to  Marocco,  and  Southward  to  the  city

of  Tombuto  in  the  land  of  Negros,  which  city  standeth

about  300  leagues  from  the  kingdome  of  Darha ;  and  this

kingdome  is  but  60  leagues  from  this  Hand  and  Castle

of  Arguin. Wherefore I beseech  your  worship to  put

his majesty  in  remembrance  hereof; for  the  sayd  cities

and  townes  are but ten dayes  journey  from hence. I

heartily  wish  that  his  majesty  would  send  two  or  three

marchants  to  see  the  state  of  the  Countrey,  who  might

travell  to  the  aforesayd  cities,  to  understand  of  their  rich

trade. For  any  man may  go safe  and  come  safe  from

those places. And thus without troubling of your

worship any  further,  I humbly take my  leave. From

the  Hand  and  Castle  of  Arguin  the  20  of  January  1591.

Your  worships  servant

Melchior  Petoney.

[The  voyage
89

A.D.
I59I.

The  names  of
the  chiefe
places  of
traffike  be-
tweene  Senega
l^  Gambra.

[II.  ii.  189.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  voyage  of  Richard  Rainolds  and  Thomas
Dassel  to  the  rivers  of  Senega  and  Gambra
adjoyning  upon  Guinea,  1591,  with  a  discourse
of  the  treasons  of  certain  of  Don  Antonio
his  servants  and  followers.

Y  vertue  of  her  Majesties  most  gracious
>  charter  given  in  the  yeere  1588,  and  in
the  thirtieth  yeere  of  her  Highnesse
reigne,  certaine  English  marchants  are
granted  to  trade,  in  and  from  the  river
of  Senega  to  and  in  the  river  of  Gambra,
on  the  Westerne  coast  of  Africa.  The
chiefest  places  of  traffique  on  that  coast  betweene  these
rivers,  are  these :

1  Senega  river :  The  commodities  be  hides,  gumme,
elephants  teeth,  a  few  graines,  ostrich  feathers,  amber-
griece,  and  some  golde.

2  Beseguiache,  a  towne  by  Capo  Verde  *  leagues  from
Senega  river :  The  commodities  be  small  hides,  and  a
few  teeth.

3  Refisca  Viejo,  a  towne  4  leagues  from  Beseguiache  :
The  commodities  be  small  hides,  and  a  few  teeth  now
and  then.

4  Palmerin,  a  towne  2  leagues  from  Refisca:  The
commodities  be  small  hides,  and  a  few  elephants  teeth
now  and  then.

5  Porto  dAUy,  a  towne  5  leagues  from  Palmerin :
The  commodities  be  small  hides,  teeth,  amber-griece,  and
a  little  golde :  and  many  Portugals  are  there.

6  Candimal,  a  towne  halfe  a  league  from  Porto  d'AIly :
The  commodities  be  small  hides,  and  a  few  teeth  now
and  then.

7  Palmerin,  a  towne  3  leagues  from  Candimal :  The
commodities  be  small  hides,  and  a  few  teeth  now  and
then.

8  Joala, a towne 6 leagues from Palmerin

90

The

RAINOLDS AND DASSEL  ad.

commodities  be  hides,  waxe,  elephants  teeth,  rice,  and
some  golde :  and  many  Spaniards  and  Portugals  are
there.

9  Gambra river : The commodities are rice, waxe,
hides,  elephants  teeth,  and  golde.

The  Frenchmen  of  Diepe  and  New-haven  have  traded  O*''  ^^''^^
thither  above  thirty  yeres :  and  commonly  with  foure  or ^Jg^^  eganne
five ships a  yere,  whereof  two  small  barks  go  into  the
river  of  Senega. The other  were  woont  (untill  within
these  foure  yeres,  that  our  ships came  thither) to  ride
with  their  ships  in  the  road  of  Porto  d'Ally  and  so  sent
their small shaloups of  sixe  or eight tunnes to some
of  these  places  on  the  Sea  coast  before  repeated. Where
in all places generally  they  were  well beloved and as
courteously entertained of  the  Negros, as if  they had
bene naturally  borne  in  the  countrey. And  very  often
the  Negros  come  into  France  and  returne  againe,  which  is
a further  increasing  of  mutuall  love  and  amity. Since
our  comming  to  that  coast  the  Frenchmen  ride  with  their
shippes at Refisca Viejo, and suffer us to ancre  with
our  shippes  at  Porto  d'Ally. The  Frenchmen  never  use
to  go  into  the  river  of  Gambra :  which  is  a  river  of  secret  Gambra  a
trade  and  riches  concealed  by  the  Portugals. For  long  ^^^\-  jT^f
since  one  Frenchman  entred  the  river  with  a  small  barke  concealed.
which  was  betrayed,  surprised,  and  taken  by  two  gallies
of  the  Portugals.

In  our  second  voyage  and  second  yeere  there  were  by  ^^^  /(ffoW
vile trecherous meanes  of  the Portugals and  the king  ^'^3"^.?'^-
of  the  Negros  consent  in  Porto  dAlly  and Joala  about
forty  Englishmen  cruelly slaine  and captived,  and  most  ■^"^^J'  ^^sl'^^^
or  all  of  their  goods  confiscated  :  whereof  there  returned  '"^;  rater-
onely  two,  which  were  the  marchants. And  also  by  pro-  and  captived.
curement  of  Pedro  Gonsalves,  one  of  Don  Antonio  the
kings servants, Thomas Dassel and others had bene
betrayed,  if  it  had  not  pleased  almighty  God  to  reveale
the  same,  whereby  it  was  prevented.

From  the  South  side  of  Senega  river  on  the  Sea  coast
unto about Palmerin is all one kingdome of  Negros.

91

A.D.
159I.

Cape  Verde.

Besegueache,

Besegueacke.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  kings name is Melick Zamba,  who dwelleth  two
dayes  journey  within  the  land  from  Reiisca.

The  12  of  November  1591,  I  Richard  Rainolds  &
Thomas  Dassel  factors  in  a  ship  called  the  Nightingale
of  London  of  125  tunnes,  and  a  pinnesse  called  the
Messenger  of  40  tunnes  arrived  neere  unto  Capo  Verde
at  a  litle  Hand  called  The  Hand  of  liberty.  At  this  Hand
we  set  up  a  small  pinnesse,  with  which  we  cary  our
marchandise  on  land  when  wee  traffique.  And  in  the
meane  time  Thomas  Dassel  went  with  the  great  pinnesse
to  traffike  with  Spaniards  or  Portugals  in  Porto  d'Ally
or  Joala.  Over  against  the  sayd  Hand  on  the  maine
is  an  habitation  of  the  Negros  called  Besegueache.  The
alcaide  or  governor  thereof  with  a  great  traine  came
aboord  in  their  canoas  to  receive  the  kings  dueties  for
ankerage  and  permitting  the  quiet  setting  up  of  our
pinnesse :  who  liked  passing  well  that  no  Portugall  came
in  the  shippe,  saying,  we  should  be  better  thought  of
by  the  king  and  people,  if  we  never  did  bring  Portugall,
but  come  of  our  selves  as  the  Frenchmen  ever  did  and
doe.  And  to  purchase  the  more  love,  I  Richard  Rainolds
gave  him  and  all  his  company  courteous  entertainment.
Also  upon  his  intreaty,  having  sufficient  pledge  aboord,
I  and  others  went  on  land  with  him.  At  this  instant
there  was  great  warre  betweene  this  alcaide  and  another
governor  of  the  next  province.  Neverthelesse  upon  our
arrivall  truce  was  taken  for  a  space ;  and  I  with  our
company  conducted  among  both  enemies  to  the  governors
house  in  Besegueache,  and  were  gently  and  friendly
feasted  after  their  maner,  and  with  some  presents  returned
safe  aboord  againe.  The  next  day  the  alcaide  came
aboord  againe,  to  wil  me  to  send  some  yron  and  other
commodities  in  the  boat  to  traffike  with  the  Negros,  and
also  requested  me  that  I  would  go  to  Refisca  with  the
ship;  which  I  did.  And  one  thing  I  noted,  that  a
number  of  Negros  attended  the  alcaides  landing  in  war-
like maner  with  bowes  and  poisoned  arrowes,  darts
poisoned, and swords, (because that the enemies by

92

RAINOLDS AND DASSEL  ad.

1591.

reason  of  the  truce  taken  were  there  also  to  view  the
ship)  who  for  the  most  part  approched  to  him  kneeling
downe  and  kissed  the  backe  of  his  hand.

The  1 7  of  November  we  weyed  anker ;  and  by  reason
no  French  ship  was  yet  come,  I  went  to  the  road  of
Refisca :  where  I  sent  for  the  alcaides  interpretors,  who
came  thither  aboord,  and  received  of  me  the  kings  duties
for  to  have  free  traffike  with  the  Negros,  with  whom
dayly  I  exchanged  my  yron  &  other  wares  for  hides  and
some  elephants  teeth,  finding  the  people  very  friendly
and  tractable.  And  the  next  day  after  our  arrivall  I
went  up  into  the  land  about  three  miles  to  the  towne
of  Refisca,  where  I  was  friendly  used  and  well  entertained  Refisca.
of  the  alcaide,  and  especially  of  a  yoong  nobleman  called
Conde  Amar  Pattay,  who  presented  me  with  an  oxe
for  my  company,  goats  and  some  yoong  kids,  assuring
me  that  the  king  would  be  glad  to  heare  of  the  arrivall
of  a  Christians  ship,  whom  they  called  Blancos,  that  is,  [II.  ii.  190.]
white  men  :  especially  of  an  English  ship.  And  so  dayly
the  yong  Conde  came  with  a  small  company  of  horsemen
to  the  sea  side,  feasting  me  very  kindly  and  courteously.
And  the  fift  of  December  he  with  his  traine  came  aboord
to  see  the  ship ;  which  to  them  seemed  woonderfull,  as
people  that  seldome  had  seene  the  like :  who  tolde  me
that  his  messenger  from  the  king  was  returned ;  and  the
king  rejoyced  much  to  heare  that  English  men  were  come
with  a  ship  to  trade  in  his  ports ;  and  being  the  first
Englishman  that  ever  came  with  a  ship,  I  was  the  better
welcome ;  promising  that  I  or  any  Englishman  hereafter
should  be  wel  intreated  &  find  good  dealing  at  their
hands.  And  further  the  Conde  on  the  kings  behalfe
and  his  owne,  earnestly  requested,  that  before  my  de-
parture oflF  the  coast  I  would  returne  againe  to  his  road
to  conferre  with  him  for  the  better  continuance  and
confirming  of  amity  betweene  them  and  Englishmen :
which  I  agreed  unto.  And  so  shewing  him  and  his
company  the  best  friendship  and  courtesie  I  could,  he
went  on  shore,  and  should  have  had  the  honor  of  our

93

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

ordinance  but  that  he  desired  the  contrary,  being  amazed
at  the  sight  of  the  ship  and  noise  of  the  gunnes,  which
they  did  greatly  admire.

The  13  of  December  at  night  we  weighed  anker,  and
Porio  Dally, arrived  the 1 4  day  at the  road  of  Porto  d' Ally,  which
is  another  kingdome : the  king  thereof  is  called Amar
Meleck,  &  sonne  to  Meleck  Zamba  the  other  king,  and
dwelleth  a  dayes  journey  and  an  halfe  from  Porto  dAUy.
When we had ankered, the kings kinsmen being
governors,  with  all  the  officers  of  that  towne  came  aboord
to receive  all duties  for the ship  &  licence to traffike
due to the king ; who there generally  seemed to be
very  glad  that  no  Portugall  was  come  in  our ship  out
of  England ;  saying  it  was  the  kings  pleasure  we  should
bring  none  hereafter ;  for  that  the  king  did  esteeme  them
as  people  of  no  truth ;  and  complained  of  one  Francisco
de  Costa  servant  to  Don  Antonio,  how  he  had  often  and
the  last  yere  also  abused  and  deluded their  king  Amar
Meleck in promising to  bring him  certaine  things  out
of  England,  which  he  never  performed,  and  deemed  that
to  be  the  cause  of  his  staying  behinde  this  voyage,  and
that  neither  Spaniard  nor  Portugall  could  abide  us,  but
reported  very  badly  and  gave  out  hard  speeches  tending
to the defamation & great dishonor  of  England : and
also  affirmed  that  at  the  arrivall  of  an  English  ship  called
TheComanda  The Command, of  Richard Kelley  of  Dartmouth, one
^^%€^l^^' Pedro  Gonsalves  a  Portugall  that  came  in  the  sayd  ship
The  monstrous  ^om Don Antonio reported unto them,  that we were
lies  of  a  For- fled  out  of  England  and  come  away  upon  intent  to  rob
tugall.  and  do  great  spoile  upon  this  coast  to  the  Negros  and

Portugals,  and  that  Thomas  Dassel  had  murdered
Francisco  de  Acosta  since  our  comming  from  England,
who  was  comming  to  their  king  in  our  ship  with  great
presents  from  Don  Antonio,  and  desired  that  at  our
arrivall  stay  might  be  made  of  our  goods  and  our  selves
in  secret  maner ;  which  they  denied,  not  giving  credit
to  his  report,  having  bene  often  abused  by  such  frivolous
and  slanderous  speeches  by  that  nation ;  telling  me  their

94

RAINOLDS AND DASSEL  a.d.

1591-
king  was sory  for the former murder and captivity  of
our  nation,  and  would  never  yeeld to  the  like,  having
the  Portugals  and  Spaniards  in  generall  hatred  ever  since,
and  conceiveth  much  better  of  our  countrey,  and  us,  then
these  our  enemies  report  of. For  which  I  yeelded  them
hearty thanks, assuring them they should finde great
difference  betweene  the  loyalty  of  the  one  and  disloyalty
of  the  other: and  so  payed  their  dueties :  and  for  that  Port  Dally  the
it  was  the  chiefe  place  of  trade, I shewed  them  how  I  ^  y^  P '^■'^^  °j
was  resolved  to  goe  to  their  king  with  certaine  presents
which  we  had  brought  out  of  England ;  which  we  deter-
mined for  the  more  honor  and  credit  of  our  countrey,
and  augmenting  of  their  better  affection  toward  us.

All this while Thomas Dassel was with our  great
pinnesse  at  the  towne  of  Joala,  being  in  the  kingdome  of  -^o^^-
king  Jocoel  Lamiockeric,  traifiking  with  the  Spaniards  &
Portugals  there. And  the  forenamed Pedro  Gonsalves,
which  came  out  of  England,  was  there  also  with other
English marchants about the busines of  Rich.  Kelley ;
and as it  should  seeme,  for that he  could not  obtaine
his  mischievous  pretended  purpose  against  Thomas  Dassel
and  others  at  the  towne  of  Porto  d'Ally,  where  I  Richard
Rainolds  remained,  he  attempted  with  consent  of  other
Portugals  which  were  made  privy  to  his  intent  to  betray
the  sayd  Thomas  Dassel  at  this  towne,  &  had  with  bribes
seduced  the  chiefe  commanders  and  Negros  to  effect  his
wicked  &  most  villanous  practise :  which  as  God  would,
was  revealed  to  the  sayd  Thomas  Dassel  by  Rich.  Cape
an Englishman and servant to the forenamed Rich.
Kelley ; to whom this sayd  Pedro Gonsalves had dis-
closed his  secret  treachery,  willing  him  with  all  expedition
to  stand  upon his  guard. Whereupon Thomas Dassel
went  aboord  a  small  English  barke  called  The  Cherubin ^  ne  L.heriibtn
of  Lime, and there one John Payva a  Portugall and  j^J^'  ^
servant  of  Don  Antonio  declared,  that  if  he  &  one  Garcia
a  Portugall  of  the  sayd  towne  would  have  consented  with
Pedro Gonsalves, the sayd Thomas Dassel had bene
betrayed  long  before. And upon  this  warning  Thomas

95

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

Dassel  the  next  day  having  gotten  three  Portugals  aboord,
advised  for  our  better  securities  to  send  two  on  land,  &
detained  one  with  him  called  Villa  nova,  telling  them  that
if  the  next  day  by  eight  of  the  clocke,  they  would  bring
[II.  ii.  191.]  Pedro  Gonsalves  aboord  to  him,  he  would  release  the
sayd  Villa  nova,  which  they  did  not.  And  Thomas
Dassel  having  intelligence  that  certaine  Negros  and
Portugals  were  ridden  post  over-land  to  Porto  dAlly
with  intent  to  have  Richard  Rainolds  and  his  company
stayd  on  land,  being  doubtfuU  what  friendship  soever
the  unconstant  Negros  professed  (by  reason  they  be  often
wavering  being  overcome  with  drinking  wine)  how  they
would  deale,  to  prevent  the  dangerous  wiles  that  might  be
effected  in  the  road  by  Portugals,  and  for  better  strength,
the  24  of  December  he  came  with  his  pinnesse  &  Por-
tugall  to  ride  in  the  road  of  Porto  dAlly,  where  our
great  shippe  the  Nightingall  was :  who  was  no  sooner
arrived  but  he  had  newes  also  from  the  shore  from  John
Baily  Anthony  Dassels  servant,  who  was  there  with  our
goods  detained  by  the  Portugals  means,  that  above  20
Portugals  and  Spaniards  were  come  from  Joala  by  land,
and  Pedro  Gonsalves  in  their  company,  to  take  order  for
the  releasing  of  Villa  nova.  So  having  had  conference
two  or  three  dayes  with  the  Commanders,  the  Negros,
some  Spaniards,  and  some  Portugals,  in  the  end  by  due
examination  of  the  matter  the  Negros  seeing  how  vilely
Pedro  Gonsalves  had  delt,  he  being  in  their  power,  sayd
he  should  suffer  death  or  be  tortured,  for  an  example  to
others.  But  we  in  recompense  of  his  cruelty  pitied  him
and  shewed  mercy,  desiring  the  Negros  to  intreat  him
well  though  undeserved :  and  thereupon  the  Commanders
brought  him  aboord  the  pinnesse  to  Thomas  Dassel  to
do  with  him  what  he  would :  where  at  his  comming  from
the  shore,  for  lavish  speeches  which  he  used  of  Princes,
he  was  well  buffetted  by  a  Spaniard,  and  might  have
bene  slaine,  if  for  our  sakes  he  had  not  bene  rescued.
While  I  went  on  shore  with  Villa  nova,  the  sayd  Pedro
Gonsalves  confessed  unto Thomas Dassel  that  he  did

96

RAINOLDS AND DASSEL  ad

1591.

enquire  of  some  Negros  and  Portugals  if  he  might  not
stay  him  and  his  goods  in  the  land,  and  that  he  did
nothing  but  by  commission  from  his  king  by  his  letters
which  he  received  from  London  in  Dartmouth  after  we
were  departed  from  London,  for  that  we  presumed  to
come  to  Guinea  to  traffike  without  a  servant  of  his :  and
further,  that  he  had  power  or  procuration  from  Francisco
de  Costa  the  Portugall  that  stayed  behinde  in  England
to  detaine  the  goods  of  Anthony  Dassel  in  Guinea.

By  consent  of  M.  Francis  Tucker,  John  Browbeare,
and  the  rest  of  the  factours  of  Richard  Kelley,  with  whom
this  Pedro  Gonsalves  came,  for  avoiding  further  mischiefe
that  might  be  practised,  we  agreed  that  the  sayd  Pedro
Gonsalves  should  stay  aboord  our  shippe,  and  not  goe
any  more  on  land  untill  they  departed.  So  the  ninth  of
January  he  was  delivered  aboord  to  goe  for  England  in
the  same  ship  wherein  he  came :  who  was  all  the  time
of  his  abode  in  our  shippe  both  courteously  and  friendly
used  at  my  hands,  much  against  the  mariners  willes,  who
could  not  abide  such  a  wicked  creature  and  caitive,  that  is
nourished  and  relieved  in  our  countrey,  and  yet  by
villanous  meanes  sought  the  destruction  of  us  all.

The  Spaniards  and  Portugals  though  they  be  dissem-
blers and  not  to  be  trusted,  when  they  perceived  how
king  Amar  Melicks  Negros  befriended  and  favored  us,
and  that  it  would  be  prejudiciall  to  their  trade  for  divers
respects,  if  we  should  any  way  be  injuried,  renounced  the
sayd  practises,  detesting  the  author,  and  protested  to
defend  us  in  such  cases  with  all  faithfulnesse :  desiring  we
would,  as  the  king  of  Negros  had  commanded  us,  never
bring  Portugal  with  us  more :  using  this  phrase  in
disdaine  of  such  as  came  out  of  England,  let  your
Portugals  be  barres  of  yron :  for  in  trueth  in  regard  of
the  rich  trade  maintained  by  Frenchmen  and  by  us  of
late,  they  esteeme  more  of  one  barre  of  yron  then  of
twenty  Portugals  which  we  should  bring  out  of  England :
who  at  their  comming  thither  very  subtilly  disadvantage
us,  and  doe  great  hurt  to  every  party.

vn  97  G

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

At  the  beginning  of  these  broiles  the  king  Amar
Melick  had  sent  his  chiefe  secretary  and  three  horses
for  me  Richard  Rainolds :  but  I  denied  to  goe  by  reason
of  the  hurley  burley,  though  I  might  have  had  Negros
of  account  for  pledges  aboord :  yet  we  sent  the  presents
unto  the  king ;  who  so  soone  as  he  understood  the  cause
why  I  came  not  to  him,  being  sory  and  offended  thereat,
commanded  presently  by  proclamation,  that  no  injury
should  be  offered  us  in  his  dominions  by  his  owne  people,
or  suffered  to  be  done  by  Spaniards  or  Portugals.  And
if  the  Negros  joyning  to  his  kingdome  should  confederate
with  the  Spaniards  and  Portugals  to  molest  or  trouble
us ;  that  his  subjects  the  Negros  should  be  ready  to
ayde,  succor  and  defend  us.  In  which  people  appeared
more  confident  love  and  goodwill  towards  us,  then  ever
we  shall  finde  either  of  Spaniards  or  Portugals,  though
we  should  relieve  them  of  the  greatest  misery  that  can
be  imagined.

In  the  river  of  Senega  no  Spaniard  or  Portugall  use  to
trade :  and  onely  one  Portugall  called  Ganigoga  dwelleth
farre  within  the  river,  who  was  maried  to  a  kings
daughter.

In  the  townes  of  Porto  d'AUy  and  Joala,  being  townes

of  chiefest  trade,  and  in  the  townes  of  Canton  and  Cassan

in  the  river  of  Gambra  are  many  Spaniards  and  Portugals

resident  by  permission  of  the Negros ; who  have rich

[II.  ii.  192.]  trades there  along  the  coast,  especially  to  San  Domingo

San  Domingo.  ^^^^ j^-^ grande, not far distant from Gambra river ;

Note'thh  ' whither they transport the yron which they buy of

trade.  Frenchmen  and  us,  and  exchange  it  for  Negros ;  which

be  caried continually  to  the  West  Indies  in  such  ships

as  came  from  Spaine. Also  by  the  governors  order  and

Renters  of  Castel  de  Mina  and  other  places,  where  golde

is,  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea,  they  have  a  place  limited

how farre they must  go  to trade within the  river of

Gambra ; and  further  they may not  go upon  paine  of

confiscation  of  their  goods,  and  losse  of  life  :  for  that  the

Renters themselves send at certaine times their owne

98

LAURENCE MADOC

A.D.

1594-

barks  within  the  river  to  such  places,  where  as  they  have
great  store  of  golde.  And  in  all  these  places  hereabouts,  ^  ^''•'^^  ^'f^''
where  we  use  to  trade,  they  have  no  Fort,  Castle,  or  n-^"  .^^J
place  of  strength,  but  onely  trading  by  the  Negros  safe-
conduct  and  permission.  And  the  most  part  of  the
Spaniards  and  Portugals  that  be  resident  in  these  places
be  banished  men  or  fugitives,  for  committing  most
hainous  crimes  and  incestuous  acts,  their  life  &  conversa-
tion being  agreeable ;  and  they  are  of  the  basest  behaviour
that  we  have  ever  seene  of  these  nations  in  any  other
countrey.

A  briefe  relation  concerning  the  estate  of  the
cities  and  provinces  of  Tombuto  and  Gago
w^ritten  in  Marocco  the  first  of  August  1594,
and  sent  to  M.  Anthony  Dassel  marchant  of
London.

Y  hearty  commendations  premised :  your
letter  of  late  I  received,  and  found  that
you  would  have  me  discover  unto  you
the  estate  &  quality  of  the  countreyes
of  Tombuto  and  Gago.  And  that  you
may  not  thinke  me  to  slumber  in  this
action,  wherin  you  would  be  truely  and
perfectly  resolved,  you  shall  understand,  that  not  ten
dayes  past  here  came  a  Cahaia  of  the  Andoluzes  home
from  Gago,  and  another  principall  Moore,  whom  the
king  sent  thither  at  the  first  with  Alcaide  Hamode,  and
they  brought  with  them  thirty  mules  laden  with  gold.
I  saw  the  same  come  into  the  Alcasava  with  mine  owne
eies :  and  these  men  themselves  came  not  poore,  but  with
such  wealth,  that  they  came  away  without  the  kings
commandement :  and  for  that  cause  the  king  will  pay
them  no  wages  for  the  time  they  have  beene  there.  On
the  other  side  they  dare  not  aske  the  king  for  any  wages.
And  when  Alcaide  Hamode  saw  that  the  Cahaia  of  the
Andoluzes  would  not  stay  in  Gago  with  him,  he  thought

99

1594-

Commodities
for  Gago.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

good  to  send  these  thirty  mules  laden  with  golde  by  him,
with  letters  of  commendations,  by  which  the  king  smelled
their  riches  that  they  brought  with  them :  and  this  was
the  cause  of  the  kings  displeasure  towards  them.  So  now
there  remaineth  in  Gago  Alcaide  Hamode,  and  Alcaide
Jawdara,  and  Alcaide  Bucthare.  And  here  are  in  a
readinesse  to  depart  in  the  end  of  this  next  September
Alcaide  Monsor,  Ben  Abdrahaman  Allies,  Monsor  Rico
with  five  thousand  men,  most  of  the  fettilase,  that  is
to  say,  of  iier-mach,  &  muskets.  There  is  gone  good
store  of  reds  &  yellowes :  and  this  yere  here  was  want
of  the  same  commodity ;  but  I  trust  the  next  yere  wil  be
no  want.  But  in  fine  the  king  doth  prosper  wel  in  those
parts,  and  here  are  many  pledges  come  hither,  and  namely
three  of  the  kings  sonnes  of  Gago  and  the  Justice ;  I
saw  them  come  in  with  the  treasure.  Now  when  Alcaide
Monsor  commeth  to  Gago,  the  which  will  be  in  January
next,  then  returneth  hither  Alcaide  Hamode  with  all
the  treasure,  and  Alcaide  Monsor  is  to  keepe  Gago
untill  the  king  take  further  order.  And  thus  much
for  Gago.  Thus  not  having  any  other  thing  to  write
at  this  present,  I  commend  you  to  the  mercifull
tuition  of  the  almighty.  From  Marocco  the  first  of
August 1594.

Your  assured  friend  Laurence  Madoc.

Another  briefe  relation  concerning  the  late  con-
quest and  the  exceeding  great  riches  of  the
cities  and  provinces  of  Tombuto  and  Gago,
v^ritten  from  Marocco  the  30  August  1594,
to  M.  Anthony  Dassel  marchant  of  London
aforesayd.

Oving  friend  M.  Dassel,  two  of  your  letters  I
have  received,  one  by  the  shippe  called  The
Amity,  the  other  by  The  Concord :  the  chiefest
matter  therein  was  to  be  satisfied  of  the  king  of
Marocco his proceedings in Guinea. Therefore these

100

LAURENCE MADOC  a.d.

1594.

are to let you understand that there went with Al-
caide Hamode for those parts seventeene hundred
men : who passing over the sands, for want of  water
perished one third part of  them : and at their  com-
ming  to the  city  of  Tombuto,  the Negros  made  some  Tomhuto
resistance; but  to  small  purpose,  for  that  they  had  no  ^ '
defence but  with their asagaies  or  javelings poisoned.
So  they  tooke  it, and  proceeded  to the city of  Gago,  Gago  taken.
where  the  Negros  were in number infinite, and  meant
to  stand  to  the uttermost for their  countrey : but  the
Moores slew them so fast, that they were faine to
yeeld,  and do pay  tribute by  the yere. The  rent  of  [II.  ii.  193-]
Tombuto  is  60  quintals  of  golde  by  the  yeere ;  the  good-
nesse  whereof  you  know. What  rent  Gago  will  yeeld,
you  shall  know  at  the  Spring,  for  then  Alcaide  Hamode
commeth  home. The  rent  of  Tombuto  is  come  by  the
cafelow  or  carovan,  which  is,  as  above  is  mentioned,  60
quintals. The report is.  that Mahomed bringeth  with
him  such an infinite treasure as I never heard of: it
doth  appeare  that  they  have  more  golde  then  any  other
part  of  the  world  beside. The  Alcaide  winneth  all  the
countrey  where  he  goeth  without  fighting,  and  is  going
downe  towards  the sea coast. This king of  Marocco
is  like  to  be  the  greatest  prince  in  the  world  for  money,
if  he  keepe  this  countrey. But  I  make  account  assoone
as  the  king  of  Spaine  hath  quietnesse  in  Christendome,
he  wil  thrust  him  out: for  that  the  kings  force  is  not
great  as  yet ; but he meaneth to be stronger. There
is  a  campe  ready  to  go  now  with  a  viceroy :  the  speech  is
with  3000  men :  but  I  thinke  they  will  be  hardly  2000 ;
for  by  report,  3000  men  are  enough  to  conquer  all  the
countrey  :  for  they  have  no  defence  of  importance  against
an  enemy. I  thinke  Hamode  will  be  returned  home  in
January  or thereabout :  for  he  stayeth  but  for  the  com-
ming  of  the  viceroy. Mulley  Balasen the  kings  sonne
of  Marocco  was  slaine  in  Guinea  by  his  owne  men,  and
they  were  presently  killed,  because they  should  tell  no
tales. And  thus  leaving  to  trouble  you,  I  commit  you

A.D.

1594-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  God,  who  prosper  you  in  all  your  proceedings. From
Marocco  the  first  of  August 1594.

Yours  to  command  for  ever  Laurence  Madoc.

Of  these  two  rich  cities  and  kingdomes  of  Tombuto
and  Gago  Leo  Africanus  writeth  at  large  in  the  beginning
of  his  seventh  booke  of  the  description  of  Africa,  which
worthy  worke  is  to  be  annexed  into  the  end  of  this
second  volume.

A  briefe  extract  of  a  patent  granted  to  M.  Thomas
Gregory  of  Tanton,  and  others,  for  traffique
betweene  the  river  of  Nonnia  and  the  rivers
of  Madrabumba  and  Sierra  Leona  on  the  coast
of  Guinea,  in  the  yeere 1592.

N  May  the  34  yeere  of  our  gracious
soveraigne  Queene  Elizabeth,  a  patent
of  special]  licence  was  granted  to  Thomas
Gregory  of  Tanton  in  the  county  of
Somerset,  and  to  Thomas  Pope,  and
certaine  other  marchants  to  traffique  into
Guinea  from  the  Northermost  part  of
the  river  of  Nonnia  to  the  Southermost  parts  of  the
rivers  of  Madrabumba  and  Sierra  Leona,  and  to  other
parts  aswell  to  the  Southeast  as  to  the  Northwest,  for
a  certaine  number  of  leagues  therein  specified  which
amount  to  an  hundred  or  thereabout.  Which  patent
was  granted  for  the  terme  of  ten  yeeres :  as  appeareth  at
large  in  the  sayd  patent  recorded  in  the  Rolles  in  her
Majesties  Chancery.

THE  TAKING  OF  TWO  SPANISH  SHIPS

A.D.
1592.

1

The  maner  of  the  taking  of  two  Spanish  ships
laden  with  quicksilver  &  the  Popes  bulles,
bound  for  the  West  Indies,  by  M.  Thomas
White  in  the  Amity  of  London. 1592.

He  26  of  July  1592,  in  my  returning
out  of  Barbary  in  the  ship  called  the
Amity  of  London,  being  in  the  height
of  2^  degrees  or  thereabout,  at  foure
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we  had
sight  of  two  shippes,  being  distant  from
us  about  three  or  foure  leagues :  by
seven  of  the  clocke  we  fetched  them  up,  and  were
within  gunshot:  whose  boldnesse,  having  the  king  of
Spaines  armes  displayed,  did  make  us  judge  them  rather
ships  of  warre,  then  laden  with  marchandise.  And  as
it  appeared  by  their  owne  speeches,  they  made  full
account  to  have  taken  us :  it  being  a  question  among
them,  whether  it  were  best  to  cary  us  to  S.  Lucar,
or  to  Lisbon.  We  waved  ech  other  a  maine.  They
having  placed  themselves  in  warlike  order  one  a  cables
length  before  another,  we  began  the  fight.  In  the  which
we  continued,  so  fast  as  we  were  able  to  charge  and
discharge,  the  space  of  five  houres,  being  never  a  cables
length  distant  either  of  us  from  other.  In  which  time
we  received  divers  shot  both  in  the  hull  of  our  ship,
masts,  and  sailes,  to  the  number  of  32  great,  besides
500  musket  shot  and  harquebuzes  a  crocke  at  the  least,
which  we  tolde  after  the  fight.  And  because  we  per-
ceived them  to  be  stout,  we  thought  good  to  boord
the  Biscaine,  which  was  on  head  the  other :  where  lying
aboord  about  an  houre,  and  plying  our  ordinance  and
small  shot;  in  the  end  we  stowed  all  his  men.  Now
the  other  in  the  flieboat,  thinking  we  had  entred  our
men  in  their  fellow,  bare  roome  with  us,  meaning  to  have
layed  us  aboord,  and  so  to  have  intrapped  us  betwixt
them  both :  which  we  perceiving, fitted our ordinance

103

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

so  for  him,  as  we  quitted  our  selves  of  him,  and  he
boorded  his  fellow :  by  which  meanes  they  both  fell
from  us.  Then  presently  we  kept  our  loofe,  hoised  our
top-sailesj  and  weathered  them,  and  came  hard  aboord
[II.  li.  194.]  the  flieboat  with  our  ordinance  prepared,  and  gave  her
our  whole  broad  side,  with  the  which  we  slew  divers
of  their  men ;  so  as  we  might  see  the  blood  run  out  at
the  scupper  holes.  After  that  we  cast  about,  and  new
charged  all  our  ordinance,  and  came  upon  them  againe,
willing  them  to  yeeld,  or  els  we  would  sinke  them :
wherupon  the  one  would  have  yeelded,  which  was  shot
betweene  winde  and  water ;  but  the  other  called  him
traitor.  Unto  whom  we  made  answere,  that  if  he  would
not  yeeld  presently  also,  we  would  sinke  him  first.  And
thereupon  he  understanding  our  determination,  presently
put  out  a  white  flag,  and  yeelded,  and  yet  refused  to
Marke  this  strike  their  own  sailes,  for  that  they  were  sworne  never
^^  ^"  to strike to any Englishman. We then commanded

their  captaines  and  masters  to  come  aboord  us ;  which
they  did.  And  after  examination  &  stowing  them,  we
sent  certaine  of  our  owne  men  aboord  them,  and  strook
their  sailes,  and  manned  their  ships :  finding  in  them
both  126  persons  living,  &  8  dead,  besides  those  which
they  themselves  had  cast  overboord.  So  it  pleased  God
to  give  us  the  victory  being  but  42  men  and  a  boy,
whereof  2  were  killed  and  3  wounded :  for  the  which
good  successe  we  give  God  the  only  praise.  These  two
rich  prizes  laden  with  1400  chests  of  quicksilver  with
the  armes  of  Castile  and  Leon  fastened  upon  them,  and
with  a  great  quantity  of  bulles  or  indulgences,  and
guilded  Missals  or  Service  books,  with  an  hundred  tunnes
of  excellent  wines,  we  brought  shortly  after  into  the  river
of  Thames  up  to  Blacke-wall.

By  the  taking  of  this  quicksilver,  about  1400  chests,
the  king  of  Spaine  loseth  for  every  quintall  of  the  same
a  quintall  of  silver,  that  should  have  beene  delivered  him
by  the  masters  of  the  mines  there,  which  amounteth  to
600000  pounds.

104

THE  TAKING  OF  THE  'MADRE  DE  DIOS ' a.d.

1592.

More  by  taking  of  his  bulles,  to  wit,  two  millions  and
72  thousand  for  living  and  dead  persons  for  the  provinces
of  Nova  Hispania,  lucatan,  Guatimala,  the  Honduras,
and  the  Phillipinas,  taxed  at  two  reals  the  piece.  And
more  for  eighteene  thousand  bulles  taxed  at  foure  reals,
amounteth  all  to  107700  pounds.  Summa  totalis
707700  li.

More  there  were  taken  ten  fardels  of  gilt  missals  and
breviaries  sent  for  the  kings  account.

So  the  hinderance  that  the  king  receiveth  by  the  losse
of  his  bulles  and  quicksilver  amounteth  as  is  abovesaid :
hesides  the  lacking  of  his  wines,  about  100  tunnes,
whereby  his  fleet  is  disappointed  of  a  great  part  of  their
provision.

A  true  report  of  the  honourable  service  at  Sea
perfourmed  by  Sir  John  Burrough  Knight,
Lieutenant  general!  of  the  fleet  prepared  by
the  honor.  Sir  Walter  Ralegh  Knight,  Lord
warden  of  the  Stanneries  of  Cornwall  and
Devon.  Wherin  chiefly  the  Santa  Clara  of
Biscay,  a  ship  of  600  tunnes  was  taken,  and
the  two  East  Indian  caraks,  the  Santa  Cruz
and  the  Madre  de  Dios  were  forced,  the  one
burnt,  and  the  other  taken  and  brought  into
Dartmouth the  seventh  of  September,  1592.

Ir  Walter  Ralegh  upon  commission  re-
ceived from  her  Majesty  for  an  expedi-
tion to  be  made  to  the  West  Indies,
slacked  not  his  uttermost  diligence  to
make  full  provision  of  all  things  neces-
sary, as  both  in  his  choise  of  good  ships,
and  sufficient  men  to  performe  the  action
evidently  appeared.  For  his  shippes  which  were  in
number  14  or  15,  those  two  of  her  Majesties,  the
Garland & the Foresight were the chiefest ; the rest

105

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592-

either  his  owne  or  his  good  friends  or  adventurers  of
London.  For  the  gentlemen  his  consorts  and  officers,  to
give  them  their  right,  they  were  so  well  qualited  in
courage,  experience,  &  discretion,  as  the  greatest  prince
might  repute  himselfe  happy  to  be  served  with  their
like.  The  honor  of  Lieutenant  generall  was  imposed
upon  sir  John  Burrough,  a  gentleman,  for  his  manifold
good  and  heroicall  parts,  thought  every  way  worthy  of
that  commandement :  with  whom  after  sir  W.  R.  re-
turned was  joyned  in  commission  sir  Martin  Frobisher,
who  for  his  speciall  skill  &  knowledge  in  marine  causes
had  formerly  caried  imploiments  of  like  or  greater  place.
The  rest  of  the  captaines,  souldiers,  and  sailers  were  men
of  notable  resolution,  and  for  the  most  part  such  as
heretofore  had  given  to  the  world  sufficient  propfe  of
their  valour  in  divers  services  of  the  like  nature.  /With
these  ships  thus  manned  sir  Walter  Ralegh  departed
towards  the  West  countrey,  there  to  store  himselfe  with
such  further  necessaries  as  the  state  of  his  voyage  did
needfully  require :  where  the  Westerly  v/indes  blowing
for  a  long  time  contrary  to  his  course,  bound  and  con-
strained him  to  keepe  harborough  so  many  weeks,  that
the  fittest  season  for  his  purpose  was  gone,  the  mindes
of  his  people  much  altered,  his  victuals  consumed;  and
withall,  her  Majesty  understanding  how  crosly  all  this
sorted,  began  to  call  the  proceeding  of  this  preparation
into  question  :  insomuch  that,  whereas  the  sixt  of  May
was  first  come  before  sir  Walter  could  put  to  sea,  the
very  next  day  sir  Martin  Frobisher  in  a  pinnesse  of  my
lord  Admirals  called  The  Disdaine,  met  him,  and  brought
to  him  from  her  Majesty  letters  of  revocation,  with
commandement  to  relinquish  (for  his  owne  part)  the
[II.  ii.  195.]  intended  attempt,  and  to  leave  the  charge  and  conduct
of  all  things  in  the  hands  of  sir  John  Burrough  and
sir  Martin  Frobisher.  But  sir  Walter  finding  his  honor
so  farre  engaged  in  the  undertaking  of  this  voyage,  as
without  proceeding  he  saw  no  remedy  either  to  salve  his
reputation,  or  to  content  those  his  friends  which  had  put

106

THE  TAKING  OF  THE  'MADRE  DE  DIGS  ad.

1592.

in  adventures  of  great  summes  with  him  ;  and  making
construction  of  the  Queenes  letters  in  such  sort  as  if
her  commandement  had  bene  propounded  in  indifferent
termes,  either  to  advance  forward  or  to  retire,  at  his  owne
discretion ;  would  in  no  case  yeeld  to  leave  his  fleet
now  under  saile.  Wherefore  continuing  his  course  into
the  sea,  he  met  within  a  day  or  two,  with  certaine  sailes
lately  come  from  Spaine :  among  which  was  a  ship  ap-
pertaining to  Monsieur  Gourdon  governor  of  Caleis,  and
found  aboord  her  one  M.  Nevel  Davies  an  Englishman,
who  having  indured  a  long  and  miserable  captivity  for
the  space  of  twelve  yeeres,  partly  in  the  inquisition  in
Spaine,  was  now  by  good  fortune  escaped,  and  upon
returne  to  his  countrey.  This  man,  among  other  things,
reported  for  certaine,  that  there  was  little  hope  of  any
good  this  yeere  to  be  done  in  the  West  India ;  consider-
ing that  the  king  of  Spaine  had  sent  expresse  order  to
all  the  ports  both  of  the  Hands  and  of  Terra  firma,  that
no  ship  should  stirre  that  yeere,  nor  any  treasure  be  layed
aboord  for  Spaine.  But  neither  this  unpleasant  relation
nor  ought  els  could  stay  his  proceedings,  untill  a
tempest  of  strange  and  uncouth  violence  arising  upon
Thursday  the  1 1  of  May,  when  he  was  athwart  the  Cape
Finister,  had  so  scattered  the  greater  part  of  the  fleet,
and  sunke  his  boats  and  pinnesses,  that  as  the  rest  were
driven  and  severed,  some  this  way  and  some  that,  sir
Walter  himselfe  being  in  the  Garland  of  her  Majesty  was
in  danger  to  be  swallowed  up  of  the  Sea.  Whereupon
sir  W.  Ralegh  finding  that  the  season  of  the  yere  was
too  farre  gone  to  proceed  with  the  enterprise  which  he
had  upon  Panama,  having  bene  held  on  the  English  coast
from  February  till  May,  and  thereby  spent  three  moneths
victuals ;  and  considering  withall,  that  to  lie  upon  the
Spanish  coast  or  at  the  Hands  to  attend  the  returne  of
the  East  or  West  Indian  fleets  was  rather  a  worke  of
patience  then  ought  els:  he  gave  directions  to  sir  John
Burgh  and  sir  M.  Frobisher  to  divide  the  fleet  in  two
parts; sir M. with the Garland, cap. George Gifford,

107

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

cap.  Henry  Thin,  cap.  Grenvile  and  others  to  lie  off  the
South  cape,  thereby  to  amaze  the  Spanish  fleet,  and  to
holde  them  on  their  owne  coast ;  while  sir  J.  Burgh,
capt.  Robert  Crosse,  capt.  Tomson,  &  others  should
attend  at  the  Hands  for  the  caraks  or  any  other  Spanish
ships  comming  from  Mexico  or  other  parts  of  the  West
Indies.  Which  direction  tooke  effect  accordingly;  for
the  king  of  Spaines  Admirall  receiving  intelligence  that
the  English  fleet  was  come  on  the  coast,  attended  to
defend  the  South  parts  of  Spaine,  &  to  keepe  himselfe
as  nere  sir  Mart.  Frobisher  as  he  could,  to  impeach  him
in  all  things  which  he  might  undertake ;  and  thereby
neglected  the  safeconduct  of  the  caraks,  with  whom  it
fared  as  hereafter  shall  appeare.  Before  the  fleet  severed
The  Santa  themselves  they  mette  with  a  great  Biscain  on  the
Clara  a  £u-  Spanish  coast  called  Santa  Clara  a  ship  of  600  tunnes.
600  tunnes  ^^^  noise  of  the  artillery  on  both sides  being  heard,

taken.  immediatly  they  drew  to  their  fleet ;  where  after  a  reason-

able hot  fight,  the  ship  was  entred  and  mastered,  which
they  found  fraighted  with  all  sorts  of  small  yron-worke,
as  horse-shoes,  nailes,  plough-shares,  yron  barres,  spikes,
boults,  locks,  gimbols,  &  such  like,  valued  by  us  at  6000
or  7000  li.  but  woorth  to  them  treble  the  value.  This
Biscain  was  sailing  towards  S.  Lucar,  there  to  take  in
some  further  provision  for  the  West  India.  This  ship
being  first  roomaged,  and  after  sent  for  England,  our
fleet  coasted  along  towards  the  Southcape  of  S.  Vincent,
and  by  the  way,  about  the  Rocke  nere  Lisbon,  sir  John
Burrough  in  the  Robucke  spying  a  saile  afarre  off,  gave
her  present  chase ;  which  being  a  flieboat  and  of  good
saile,  drew  him  farre  Southwards  before  he  could  fetch
her ;  but  at  last  she  came  under  his  lee  and  strooke  saile.
The  master  of  which  flieboat  comming  aboord  him,  con-
fessed that  the  king  indeed  had  prepared  a  great  fleet  In
S.  Lucar  and  Cadiz,  and  (as  the  report  in  Spaine  was
currant)  for  the  West  Indies.  But  in  deed  the  Spanish
king  had  provided  this  fleet  upon  this  counsell.  He
received  intelligence,  that  sir  Walter  Ralegh  was  to  put

108

THE  TAKING  OF  THE  ' MADRE  DE  DIGS  ad

1592.
out strong for  the  West  India : to impeach  him,  and
to  ranconter  his  force  he  appointed  this  fleet ;  although
looking  for  the  arrivall  of  his  East  Indian  caraks,  he  first
ordained  those  ships  to  waft  them  from  the  A9ores. But
perswading  himselfe,  that  if  the  fleet  of  sir  Walter  Ralegh
did  go  for  the  West  India,  then  the  Hands  should  have
none  to  infest  them  but  small  men  of  warre,  which  the
caraks  of  themselves  would  be  well  able  to  match ;  his
order was to Don Alonso de Ba^an brother to the
Marques  of  Santa  Cruz,  and  Generall  of  his  armada,  to
pursue sir Walters fleet, and to confront him, what
course  soever  he  held. And  that  this  was  true,  our  men
in short time by proofe understood : for sir John
Burrough,  not long after the taking  of  his  last  prize
the flieboat,  as  he  sailed  backe  againe towards  the  rest
of  his  company,  discovered  the  Spanish  fleet  to  sea-ward
of  him  :  which  having  likewise  espied  him  betwixt  them
and  the  shore,  made  full  account  to  bring  him  safe  into
Spanish  harbour ;  and  therefore  spred  themselves  in  such
sort  before  him,  that  indeed  his  danger  was  very  great :
for  both  the  liberty  of  the  sea  was  brought  into  a  narrow
straight,  and  the  shore  being  enemy  could  give  him  no  [II.  ii.  196.]
comfort  of  reliefe :  so  that  trusting  to  Gods  helpe  onely
and  his  good  saile,  he  thrust  out  from  among  them  in
spight  of  all  their  force,  and  to  the  notable  illusion  of  all
their cunning,  which they  shewed to the uttermost,  in
laying  the  way  for  his  apprehension. But  now  sir  John Sir  John  Bur-
Burrough  having  happily  escaped  their  douches,  finding  ^°^^^'-  ^"  S''^^^
the  coast  guarded  by  this  fleet,  and  knowing  it  was  but  spmhh  fleet
folly  to  expect  a  meeting  there  with  sir  Martin  Frobisher
(who understanding of  this  armada  aswell  as  himselfe,
would  be  sure  not  to  come  that  way)  began  ne  to  shape
his course to  the  A9ores according to sir  W.  Raleghs
direction,  and  came  in  sight  of  S.  Michael,  running  so  The  Ik  ofS.
neere  by  Villa  Franca,  that  he  might  easily  discerne  the  ^'^<^hael.
shippes  lying  there  at  anker. Divers  small  caravels  both  Owers  small
here  and  betweene  S.  Georges  and  the  Pike  in  his  course  ^^^^^^  '''^'^^'^•
toward  Flores  he  intercepted ;  of  which  no  great  intelli-

109

A.D.
1592.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^e  in  the
lie  of  Flore 5

gence for his affaires could be understood. Arriving
before Flores upon  Thursday  the  21 of  June,  towards
evening,  accompanied onely  with  captaine Caufield and
the  Master  of  his  shippe,  the  rest  not  being  yet  arrived,
he  made  towards  the  shore  with  his  boat,  finding  all  the
Zanta  Cruz  a  people  of  Santa  Cruz,  a  village  of  that  Hand,  in  armes,
fearing their  landing,  and ready  marshalled to defend
their towne from spoile. Sir John contrariwise made
signes  of  amity  unto  them  by  advancing  a  white  flagge,  a
common  token  of  peace,  which  was  answered againe  of
them  with  the  like : whereupon  ensued  entercourses  of
good  friendship  ; and  pledges  were  taken  on  both  sides,
the  captaine  of  the  towne  for  them,  and  captaine  Caufield
for ours : so that  whatsoever our men wanted, which
that  place  could  supply  either  in  fresh  water,  victuals,  or
the  like,  was  very  willingly  granted  by  the  inhabitants  :
and  good  leave  had  they  to  refresh  themselves  on  shore
as  much  and  as  oft  as  they  would  without  restraint. At
this Santa  Cruz  sir  John  Burrough  was  informed,  that
indeed there  was among them no expectation of  any
fleet  to  come  from  the  West,  but  from  the  East,  that  no
longer  since  then  three  dayes  before  his  arrivall  a  carak
was passed by  for Lisbon,  and that there were foure
caraks  more behinde,  of  one consort. Sir  John being
very  glad  of  this  newes,  stayed  no  longer  on  shore,  but
presently  imbarqued  himselfe,  having  onely  in company
a  small  barke  of  threescore  tunnes  belonging  to  one  M.
Hopkins of  Bristoll. In the meane while that these
things thus passed at Flores, part of  the rest  of  the
English fleet,  which  sir  John Burrough had left upon
the  coast  of  Spaine,  drew  also  towards  the  A9ores : and
whereas he quickly  at sea had discovered one of  the
caraks,  the  same  evening  he  might  descry  two  or three
of  the Earle  of  Cumberlands ships (whereof  one M.
Norton  was  captaine)  which  having  in  like  sort  kenned
the  carak,  pursued  her  by  that  course  which  they  saw  her
to  runne  towards  the  Hands. But  on  no  side  was  there
any  way  made  by  reason  of  a  great  calme  which  yeelded

Newes  of  the
East  Indian
caraks.

THE  TAKING  OF  THE MADRE  DE  BIOS' ad.

1592.

no  breath  to  spread  a  saile. Insomuch  that  fitly  to  dis-
cover her  what she  was,  of  what burthen, force, and
countenance, sir John Burrough tooke his boat, and
rowed the space of  three miles,  to make  her exactly :
and  being  returned,  he  consulted  with  the  better  sort  of
the  company  then  present,  upon  the  boording  her  in  the
morning. But a very mighty storme arising in the
night, the extremity  thereof forced them all to wey
ankers,  yet their care was such in  wrestling  with the
weather  not  to  lose  the  carak,  that  in  the  morning,  the
tempest  being  qualified,  and  our  men  bearing  againe  with
the  shore,  they  might  perceive  the  carak  very  neere  the
land,  and  the  Portugals  confusedly  carrying  on  shore  such
things  as they  could any  maner of  way  convey  out  of
her ; and  seeing  the  haste  our  men  made  to  come  upon
them,  forsooke her: but first,  that nothing might be  A  carak  called
left  commodious  to  our  men,  set  fire  to  that  which  they  ^'^^  ^'^'^^^
could not  cary  with them, intending by that meanes  ^^.^
wholly  to  consume  her;  that  neither  glory  of  victory  nor
benefit  of  shippe  might  remaine  to  ours. And  least  the
approch  and  industry  of  the  English  should  bring  meanes
to  extinguish  the  flame,  thereby  to  preserve  the  residue
of  that  which  the  fire  had not destroyed ; being  foure
hundred of them in number and well armed, they
intrenched  themselves  on  land  so  neere  to  the  carak,  that
she  being  by  their  forces protected,  and  our  men  kept
aloofe  ofi^,  the  fire  might  continue  to  the  consumption  of
the  whole. This  being  noted  by  sir  John  Burrough  he
soone  provided  a  present  remedy  for  this  mischiefe. For
landing  one  hundred  of  his  men,  whereof  many  did  swim  An  hundred
and wade more then brest high to shore, and easily  ''f°^'''  ^^^^
scattering  those  that  presented  themselves  to  guard  the ^^  '
coast,  he  no  sooner  drew  toward  their  new  trenches,  but
they  fled  immediatly,  leaving as  much  as the fire had
spared  to  be  the  reward  of  our  mens  paines. Here  was
taken  among  others one  Vincent Fonseca a Portugall,
Purser of  the carak,  with  two  others,  one  an  Almaine
.and  the  second  a  Low-dutchman,  canoniers :  who  refusing

III

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

to  make  any  voluntary  report  of  those  things  which  were
demanded  of  them,  had  the  torture  threatened,  the  feare
whereof  at  the  last  wrested  from  them  this  intelligence,
that  within  fifteene  dayes  three  other  greater  caraks  then
that  lately  fired  would  arrive  at  the  same  Hand :  and
that  being  five  caraks  in  the  fleet  at  their  departure  from
Goa,  to  wit,  the  Buen  Jesus  admirall,  the  Madre  de
Dios,  the  S  Bernardo,  the  S.  Christophoro,  and  the  S.
Cruz,  (whose  fortune  you  have  already  heard)  they  had
received  speciall  commandement  from  the  king  not  to
[II.  ii,  197.]  touch  in  any  case  at  the  Hand  of  S,  Helena,  where  the
Portugall  caraks  in  their  returne  from  the  East  India
were  alwayes  till  now  woont  to  arrive  to  refresh  them-
selves with  water  and  victuals.  And  the  kings  reason
was ;  because  of  the  English  men  of  warre,  who  (as  he
was  informed)  lay  there  in  wait  to  intercept  them.  If
therefore  their  necessity  of  water  should  drive  them  to
Aiigola  a  neiv  seeke  supply  any  where,  he  appointed  them  Angola  in
wateringplace  ^^  maine  of  Africa,  with  order  there  to  stay  onely  the

tor  the  caralis. ,  . . ^  •  1 ^1 •  •  c  • r •

takmg  in  or  water  to  avoid  the  inconvenice  or  inrections,
wherunto  that  hot  latitude  is  dangerously  subject.  The
last  rendevous  for  them  all  was  the  Hand  of  Flores,  where
the  king  assured  them  not  to  misse  of  his  armada  thither
sent  of  purpose  for  their  wafting  to  Lisbon.  Upon  this
information  sir  John  drew  to  counsel,  meeting  there
captaine  Norton,  captaine  Dounton,  captaine  Abraham
Cocke,  captaines  of  three  ships  of  the  Earle  of  Cumber-
land, M.  Tomson  of  Harwich  cap.  of  the  Dainty  of  sir
John  Haukins,  one  of  sir  W.  Raleghs  fleet,  and  M.
Christopher  Newport  cap.  of  the  Golden  dragon  newly
returned  from  the  West  India,  and  others.  These  being
assembled,  he  communicated  with  them  what  he  had
understood  of  the  foresaid  examinates,  and  what  great
presumptions  of  trueth  their  relation  did  cary :  wishing
that  forasmuch  as  God  &  good  fortune  had  brought  them
together  in  so  good  a  season,  they  would  shew  the
uttermost  of  their  indevors  to  bring  these  Easterlings
under  the  lee  of  the  English obedience. Hereupon  a

THE  TAKING  OF  THE  ' MADRE  DE  DIGS ' ad.

1592.

present  accord  on  all  sides  followed  not  to  part  company
or  leave  of  those  seas  till  time  should  present  cause  to
put  their  consultations  in  execution.  The  next  day  her
Majesties  good  ship  the  Foresight  commanded  by  sir
Rob.  Crosse  came  in  to  the  rest :  and  he  likewise  in-
formed of  the  matter  was  soone  drawen  into  this  service.
Thus  sir  John  with  al  these  ships  departing  thence  6
or  7  leagues  to  the  West  of  Flores,  they  spread  them-
selves abroad  from  the  North  to  the  South,  ech  ship  two
leagues  at  the  least  distant  from  another.  By  which
order  of  extension  they  were  able  to  discover  the  space
of  two  whole  degrees  at  sea.  In  this  sort  they  lay
from  the  29  of  June  to  the  third  of  August,  what  time
cap.  Thomson  in  the  Dainty  had  first  sight  of  the  huge
carak  called  the  Madre  de  Dios,  one  of  the  greatest  receit
belonging  to  the  crowne  of  Portugall.  The  Dainty
being  of  excellent  saile  got  the  start  of  the  rest  of  our
fleet,  and  began  the  conflict  somewhat  to  her  cost,  with
the  slaughter  and  hurt  of  divers  of  her  men.  Within
a  while  after,  sir  John  Burrough  in  the  Robucke  of  sir
W.  Raleghs,  was  at  hand  to  second  her,  who  saluted  her
with  shot  of  great  ordinance,  and  continued  the  fight
within  musket  shot  assisted  by  cap.  Tomson  and  cap.
Newport  till  sir  R.  Crosse  viceadmirall  of  the  fleet  came
up  being  to  leeward,  at  whose  arrival  sir  J.  Burgh
demanded  of  him  what  was  best  to  be  done,  who
answered,  that  if  the  carak  were  not  boorded  she  would
recover  the  shore  and  fire  herselfe  as  the  other  had  done.
Wherupon  sir  J.  Burgh  concluded  to  intangle  her ;  and
sir  R.  Crosse  promised  also  to  fasten  himselfe  to  her
together  at  the  instant ;  which  was  performed :  but  after
a  while  sir  John  Burgh  receiving  a  shot  with  a  canon
perier  under  water,  and  ready  to  sinke,  desired  sir  R.  C.
to  fall  ofi^,  that  he  might  also  cleere  himselfe,  and  save
his  ship  from  sinking,  which  with  difficulty  he  did :  for
both  the  Roebucke  and  the  Foresight  were  so  intangled,
as  with  much  adoe  could  they  cleere  themselves.

The  same  evening  sir  R.  Crosse  finding  the  carak  then

VII  113  H

A.D.
1592.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Dios  taken.

sure  &  drawing  nere  the  Hand  perswaded  his  company
to  boord  her  againe,  or  els  there  was  no  hope  to  recover
her  :  who  after  many  excuses  &  feares,  were  by  him
incouraged,  and  so  fell  athwart  her  foreships  all  alone ;
and  so  hindered  her  sailing  that  the  rest  had  time  to
TheMadrede  come  up  to  his  succour,  &  to  recover  the  carak  yer  she
recovered  the  land :  and  so  toward  the  evening  after
he  had  fought  with  her  alone  three  houres  single,  my
lord  of  Cumberlands  two  ships  came  up,  &  with  very
litle  losse  entred  with  sir  R.  Crosse,  who  had  in  that  time
broken  their  courages,  and  made  the  assault  easie  for
the  rest.

The  generall  having  disarmed  the  Portugals,  and
stowed  them  for  better  security  on  all  sides,  first  had
presented  to  his  eyes  the  true  proportion  of  the  vast  body
of  this  carak,  which  did  then  and  may  still  justly  provoke
the  admiration  of  all  men  not  formerly  acquainted  with
such  a  sight.  But  albeit  this  first  apparance  of  the
hugenesse  thereof  yeelded  sights  enough  to  entertaine
our  mens  eyes ;  yet  the  pitiful!  object  of  so  many  bodies
slaine  and  dismembred  could  not  but  draw  ech  mans  eye
to  see,  and  heart  to  lament,  and  hands  to  helpe  those
miserable  people,  whose  limnes  were  so  torne  with  the
violence  of  shot,  and  paine  made  grievous  with  the  multi-
tude of  woundes.  No  man  could  almost  steppe  but
upon  a  dead  carkase  or  a  bloody  floore,  but  specially
about  the  helme,  where  very  many  of  them  fell  suddenly
from  stirring  to  dying.  For  the  greatnesse  of  the  stirrage
requiring  the  labour  of  twelve  or  foureteene  men  at  once,
and  some  of  our  shippes  beating  her  in  at  the  sterne  with
their  ordinance  often  times  with  one  shot  slew  foure  or
five  labouring  on  either  side  of  the  helme ;  whose  roomes
being  still  furnished  with  fresh  supplies,  and  our  artillery
still  playing  upon  them  with  continual!  volleys,  it  could
not  be  but  that  much  bloud  should  be  shed  in  that  place.
Whereupon  our  Generall  moved  with  singular  commiser-
ation of  their  misery,  sent  them  his  owne  chyrurgions,
denying  them  no  possible  helpe  or  reliefe  that  he  or  any

114

Exceeding
humanity
shewed  to  the
enemy.

THE  TAKING  OF  THE  '  MADRE  DE  DIOS ' ad.

1592.

of  his  company  could  afFoord  them.  Among  the  rest  of  [II.  ii.  198.]
those,  whose  state  this  chance  had  made  very  deplorable,
was  Don  Fernando  de  Mendoga  Grand  captaine  and
Commander  of  this  Carake :  who  indeed  was  descended
of  the  house  of  Mendo9a  in  Spaine ;  but  being  married
into  Portugall,  lived  there  as  one  of  that  nation ;  a
gentleman  well  stricken  in  yeeres,  well  spoken,  of  comely
personage,  of  good  stature,  but  of  hard  fortune.  In  his
severall  services  against  the  Moores  he  was  twise  taken
prisoner,  and  both  times  ransomed  by  the  king.  In  a
former  voyage  of  returne  from  the  East  India  he  was
driven  upon  the  Baxos  or  sands  of  Juda  nere  the  coast
of  Cephala,  being  then  also  captaine  of  a  caracke  which
was  there  lost,  and  himselfe,  though  escaping  the  sea-
danger,  yet  fell  into  the  hands  of  infidels  on  land ;  who
kept  him  under  long  and  grievous  servitude.  Once  more
the  king  carying  a  loving  respect  to  the  man,  and  de-
sirous to  better  his  condition,  was  content  to  let  him  try
his  fortune  in  this  Easterly  navigation,  and  committed
unto  him  the  conduct  of  this  caracke,  wherein  he  went
from  Lisbon  Generall  of  the  whole  fleet,  and  in  that
degree  had  returned,  if  the  Vice-rey  of  Goa  embarked  for
Portugall  in  the  Bon  Jesus  had  not,  by  reason  of  his  late
office,  bene  preferred.  Sir  John  intending  not  to  adde
too  much  affliction  to  the  afflicted,  mooved  with  pity  and
compassion  of  humane  misery,  in  the  end  resolved  freely
to  dismisse  this  captaine  &  the  most  part  of  his  followers
to  their  owne  countrey,  and  for  the  same  purpose  be-
stowed them  in  certaine  vessels  furnished  with  all  kindes
of  necessary  provision.  This  businesse  thus  dispatched,
good  leasure  had  he  to  take  such  view  of  the  goods  as
conveniency  might  affoord.  And  having  very  prudently
(to  cut  off  the  unprofitable  spoile  &  pillage  whereunto
he  saw  the  minds  of  many  inclined)  seised  upon  the
whole  to  her  Majesties  use,  after  a  short  &  slender
romaging  &  searching  of  such  things  as  first  came  to
hand,  he  perceived  that  ye  wealth  would  arise  nothing
disanswerable  to expectation ; but  that the  variety  and

115

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

grandure  of  all  rich  commodities  would  be  more  then
sufficient  to  content  both  the  adventurers  desire  &  the
souldiers  travell.  And  here  I  cannot  but  enter  into  the
consideration  and  acknowledgement  of  Gods  great  favor
towards  our  nation,  who  by  putting  this  purchase  into
our  hands  hath  manifestly  discovered  those  secret  trades
&  Indian  riches,  which  hitherto  lay  strangely  hidden,  and
cunningly  concealed  from  us ;  whereof  there  was  among
some  few  of  us  some  small  and  unperfect  glimse  onely^
which  now  is  turned  into  the  broad  light  of  full  and
perfect  knowledge.  Whereby  it  should  seeme  that  the
will  of  God  for  our  good  is  (if  our  weaknesse  could
apprehend  it)  to  have  us  communicate  with  them  in
those  East  Indian  treasures,  &  by  the  erection  of  a  law-
full  traffike  to  better  our  meanes  to  advance  true  religion
and  his  holy  service.  The  caracke  being  in  burden  by
the  estimation  of  the  wise  and  experienced  no  lesse  then
1600  tunnes  had  full  900  of  those  stowed  with  the
grosse  bulke  of  marchandise,  the  rest  of  the  tunnage
being  allowed,  partly  to  the  ordinance  which  were  32
pieces  of  brasse  of  all  sorts,  partly  to  the  passengers  and
the  victuals,  which  could  not  be  any  small  quantity,  con-
sidering the  number  of  the  persons  betwixt  600  and  700,
A  briefe  cata-  and  the  length  of  the  navigation.  To  give  you  a  taste
logue  of  ye  f  j^  were)  of  the  commodities,  it  shall  suffice  to  deliver
commodities  of  7°^  ^  generall  particularity  of  them,  according  to  the
ye  Madre  de  Catalogue  taken  at  Leaden  hall  the  15  of  September  1592.
Dios.  Where  upon  good  view  it  was  found,  that  the  principall

wares  after  the  jewels  (which  were  no  doubt  of  great
value,  though  they  never  came  to  light)  consisted  of
spices,  drugges,  silks,  calicos,  quilts,  carpets  and  colours.
Sec.  The  spices  were  pepper,  cloves,  maces,  nutmegs,
cinamom,  greene  ginger  :  the  drugs  were  benjamim,  frank-
incense, galingale,  mirabolans,  aloes  zocotrina,  camphire ;
the  silks,  damasks,  taffatas,  sarcenets,  altobassos,  that  is,
counterfeit  cloth  of  gold,,  unwrought  China  silke,  sleaved
silke,  white  twisted  sike,  curled  cypresse.  The  calicos
were  book-calicos,  calico-launes,  broad  white  calicos,  fine

116

THE  TAKING  OF  THE  '  MADRE  DE  DIOS '

starched  calicos,  course  white  calicos,  browne  broad  calicos,
browne  course  calicos.  There  were  also  canopies,  and
course  diaper-towels,  quilts  of  course  sarcenet  and  of
calico,  carpets  like  those  of  Turky ;  wherunto  are  to  be
added  the  pearle,  muske,  civet,  and  amber-griece.  The
rest  of  the  wares  were  many  in  number,  but  lesse  in
value ;  as  elephants  teeth,  porcellan  vessels  of  China,
coco-nuts,  hides,  eben-wood  as  blacke  as  jet,  bedsteds  of
the  same,  cloth  of  the  rindes  of  trees  very  strange  for  the
matter,  and  artificiall  in  workemanship.  All  which  piles
of  commodities  being  by  men  of  approved  judgement
rated  but  in  reasonable  sort  amounted  to  no  lesse  then
150000  li.  sterling,  which  being  divided  among  the  ad-
venturers (whereof  her  Majesty  was  the  chiefe)  was
sufficient  to  yeeld  contentment  to  all  parties.  The
cargazon  being  taken  out,  and  the  goods  fraighted  in
tenne  of  our  ships  sent  for  London,  to  the  end  that  the
bignesse,  heigth,  length,  bredth,  and  other  dimensions  of
so  huge  a  vessell  might  by  the  exact  rules  of  Geometricall
observations  be  truly  taken,  both  for  present  knowledge,
and  derivation  also  of  the  same  unto  posterity,  one  M.
Robert  Adams,  a  man  in  his  faculty  of  excellent  skill,
omitted  nothing  in  the  description,  which  either  his  arte
could  demonstrate,  or  any  mans  judgement  thinke  woorthy
the  memory.  After  an  exquisite  survey  of  the  whole
frame  he  found  the  length  from  the  beak-head  to  the
Sterne  (whereupon  was  erected  a  lanterne)  to  containe  165
foote.  The  breadth  in  the  second  close  decke  whereof  [II
she  had  three,  this  being  the  place  where  there  was  most
extension  of  bredth,  was  46  foot  and  10  inches.  She
drew  in  water  3 1  foot  at  her  departure  from  Cochin  in
India,  but  not  above  26  at  her  arrivall  in  Dartmouth,
being  lightened  in  her  voyage  by  divers  meanes,  some
5  foote.  She  caried  in  height  7  severall  stories,  one  maine
Orlop,  three  close  decks,  one  fore-castle,  and  a  spar-decke
of  two  floores  a  piece.  The  length  of  the  keele  was  100
foote,  of  the  maine-mast  121  foot,  and  the  circuite  about
at  the  partners  10  foote  7  inches,  the  maine-yard  was  106

117

A.D.
1592.

The  capacity
anddimensions
of  the  Madre
de  Dios.

199.]

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

foote  long.  By  which  perfect  commensuration  of  the
parts  appeareth  the  hugenesse  of  the  whole,  farre  beyond
the  mould  of  the  biggest  shipping  used  among  us  either
for  warre  or  receit.

Don  Alonso  de  Ba9an  having  a  great  Fleet  and  suffer-
ing these  two  caraks,  the  Santa  Cruz  to  be  burnt,  and
the  Madre  de  Dios  to  be  taken,  was  disgraced  by  his
prince  for  this  negligence.

The  firing  and  sinking  of  the  stout  and  warre-
like  Carack  called  Las  Cinque  Llaguas,  or.
The  five  Wounds,  by  three  tall  Ships  set
foorth  at  the  charges  of  the  right  honorable
the  Erie  of  Cumberland  and  his  friends  :
Written  by  the  discreet  and  valiant  captaine
M. Nicholas  Downton.

•^  the  latter  ende  of  the  yeere  1593.  the
right  honourable  Erie  of  Cumberland,  at
his owne charges and his friends, pre-
pared 3 ships all at equall rate, and
either of them had like quantitie of
victuals,  and  like  numbers  of  men,  there
being embarked  in  all  3  ships  420  men
of  al sorts. The Roial Exchange went as Admirall,
wherein  M.  George  Cave  was  captaine. The  May-flower
Violet,  or  the  Viceadmirall under  the conduct of  William Anthonie :
Why  not  I. and  the  Sampson,  the  charge  whereof  it  pleased  his  honour
to  commit  unto  me  Nicholas  Dounton. Our  directions
were  sent  us  to  Plimmouth,  and  we  were  to  open  them
at  sea.

The  sixt  of  Aprill  1594  we  set  sayle  in  the  sound  of
Plimmouth,  directing  our  course  toward  the  coast  of
Spaine.

The  24  of  the  sayd  moneth  at  the  Admirals  direction
wee  divided  our  selves  East  and  West  from  ech  other,
being  then  in  the  heigth  of  43  degrees,  with  commaunde-
ment  at  night  to  come  together  againe.

118

Besides  these
3  ships  there
zuas  a  plnnas
called  the

THE  FIRING  OF  'THE  FIVE  WOUNDS'  ad.

1594-

The  27  day  in  the  morning  we  descried  the  May-
flower and  the  litle  Pinnasse  with  a  Prise  that  they  had
taken,  being  of  Viana  in  Portugall,  and  bound  for  Angola
in  Africa.  This  Barke  was  of  28  tunnes,  having  some
17  persons  in  the  same.  There  were  in  her  some  12  Commodities
Buts  of  Galicia  wine,  whereof  we  tooke  into  every  shippe  PM^^S"^^-
a  like  part,  with  some  Ruske  in  chests  and  barrels,  with
5  buts  of  blew  course  cloth,  and  certaine  course  linnen-
cloth  for  Negros  shirts,  which  goods  were  divided  among
our  fleet.

The  4  of  May  we  had  sight  of  our  Pinnasse,  and  the
Admirals  Shallop  which  had  taken  three  Portugall
Caravels,  whereof  they  had  sent  two  away  and  kept  the
third.

The  second  of  June  we  had  sight  of  S.  Michael.  The
third  day  in  the  morning  wee  sent  our  small  pinnasse,
which  was  of  some  24  tunnes,  with  the  small  Caravell
which  we  had  taken  at  the  Burlings  to  range  the  road
of  all  the  Hands,  to  see  if  they  could  get  any  thing  in  the
same :  appointing  them  to  meet  us  W.  S.  W.  1 2  leagues
from  Faiall.  Their  going  from  us  was  to  no  purpose.
They  missed  comming  to  us  when  we  appointed,  as  also
we  missed  them,  when  we  had  great  cause  to  have  used
them.

The  13  of  June  we  met  with  a  mightie  Carack  of  the
East  Indies,  called  Las  cinque  Llagas,  or  The  five  wounds.
The  May-flower  was  in  fight  with  her  before  night.  I,
in  the  Sampson,  fetched  her  up  in  the  evening,  and  as  I
commanded  to  give  her  the  broad  side,  as  we  terme  it,
while  I  stood  very  heedfuUy  prying  to  discover  her
strength :  and  where  I  might  give  counsel  to  boord  her
in  the  night  when  the  Admirall  came  up  to  us,  and  as
I  remember  at  the  very  first  shot  she  discharged  at  us,  I
was  shot  in  a  litle  above  the  belly,  whereby  I  was  made
unserviceable  for  a  good  while  after,  without  touching
any  other  for  that  night.  Yet  by  meanes  of  an  honest
truehearted  man  which  I  had  with  me,  one  captaine
Grant, nothing was neglected  : untill midnight when

119

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

the  Admirall  came  up,  the  May-flower,  and  the  Samp-
son never  left  by  turnes  to  ply  her  with  their  great
ordinance ;  but  then  captaine  Cave  wished  us  to  stay
till  morning,  at  what  time  each  one  of  us  should  give
her  three  bouts  with  our  great  ordinance,  &  so  should
clap  her  a  boord :  but  indeed  it  was  long  lingered  in  the
morning  untill  lo  of  the  clocke  before  wee  attempted  to
boord  her.  The  Admirall  laid  her  a  boord  in  the  mid
ship :  the  May-flower  comming  up  in  the  quarter,  as  it
should  seeme,  to  lie  at  the  sterne  of  the  Admirall  on  the
larboord  side.  The  captaine  of  the  sayd  May-flower  was
slaine  at  the  first  comming  up :  whereby  the  ship  fell  to
[II.  ii.  200.]  the  Sterne  of  the  out-licar  of  the  Carack,  which  (being  a
piece  of  timber)  so  wounded  her  foresaile,  that  they  sayd
they  could  come  no  more  to  fight,  I  am  sure  they  did  not,
but  kept  aloofe  from  us.  The  Sampson  went  aboord  on
the  bow,  but  having  not  rome  enough,  our  quarter  lay
on  the  Exchanges  bow,  and  our  bowe  on  the  Caracks
bowe.  The  Exchange  also  at  the  first  comming  had  her
captaine  M.  Cave  shot  into  both  the  legs,  the  one  whereof
he  never  recovered,  so  he  for  that  present  was  not  able
to  doe  his  office,  and  in  his  absence  he  had  not  any
that  would  undertake  to  lead  out  his  company  to  enter
upon  the  enemie.  My  friend  captaine  Grant  did  lead
my  men  on  the  Caracks  side,  which  being  not  manfully
backed  by  the  Exchanges  men,  his  forces  being  smal,
made  the  enemie  bolder  then  he  would  have  bene,  where-
by I  had  sixe  men  presently  slaine  and  many  more  hurt,
which  made  them  that  remained  unhurt  to  returne
aboord,  and  would  never  more  give  the  assault.  I  say
not  but  some  of  the  Exchanges  men  did  very  well,  and
many  more  (no  doubt)  would  have  done  the  like,  if  there
had  bene  any  principall  man  to  have  put  them  forward,
and  to  have  brought  all  the  company  to  the  fight,  and
not  to  have  run  into  corners  themselves.  But  1  must
needs  say,  that  their  ship  was  as  well  provided  for
defence,  as  any  that  I  have  seene.  And  the  Portugals
.  peradventure  encouraged by  our  slacke  working,  plaied

THE  FIRING  OF  'THE  FIVE  WOUNDS'  ad.

1 594.
the  men  and  had  Barricades  made,  where  they  might
stand  without  any  danger  of  our  shot.  They  plied  us
also  very  much  with  fire,  so  that  most  of  our  men  were
burnt  in  some  place  or  other :  &  while  our  men  were
putting  out  of  the  fire,  they  would  ever  be  plying  them
with  small  shot  or  darts.  This  unusuall  casting  of  fire
did  much  dismay  many  of  our  men  and  made  them  draw
backe  as  they  did.  When  we  had  not  men  to  enter,  we
plied  our  great  ordinance  much  at  them  as  high  up  as
they  might  be  mounted,  for  otherwise  we  did  them  litle
harme,  and  by  shooting  a  piece  out  of  our  forecastle
being  close  by  her,  we  fired  a  mat  on  her  beak-head,
which  more  and  more  kindled,  and  ran  from  thence  to
the  mat  on  the  bow-sprit,  and  from  the  mat  up  to  the
wood  of  the  bow-sprit,  and  thence  to  the  top-saile  yard,
which  fire  made  the  Portugals  abaft  in  the  ship  to  stagger,
and  to  make  shew  of  parle.  But  they  that  had  the
charge  before  encouraged  them,  making  shew,  that  it
might  easily  be  put  out,  and  that  it  was  nothing.
Whereupon  againe  they  stood  stifly  to  their  defence.
Anone  the  fire  grew  so  strong,  that  I  saw  it  beyond
all  helpe,  although  she  had  bene  already  yeelded  to  us.
Then  we  desired  to  be  off  from  her,  but  had  litle  hope
to  obtaine  our  desire ;  neverthelesse  we  plied  water  very
much  to  keep  our  ship  well.  In  deed  I  made  litle
other  reckoning  for  the  ship,  my  selfe,  and  divers  hurt
men,  then  to  have  ended  there  with  the  Carack,  but  most
of  our  people  might  have  saved  themselves  in  boats.
And  when  my  care  was  most,  by  Gods  providence  onely,
by  the  burning  asunder  of  our  spritsaile-yard  with  ropes
and  saile,  and  the  ropes  about  the  spritsaile-yard  of  the
Carack,  whereby  we  were  fast  intangled,  we  fell  apart,
with  burning  of  some  of  our  sailes  which  we  had  then  on
boord.  The  Exchange  also  being  farther  from  the  fire,
afterward  was  more  easily  cleared,  and  fell  off  from  abaft.
And  as  soone  as  God  had  put  us  out  of  danger,  the  fire
got  into  the  fore-castle,  where,  I  thinke,  was  store  of
Benjamin,  and such  other like combustible matter, for

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

it  flamed  and  ran  over  all  the  Carack  at  an  instant  in  a
maner.  The  Portugals  lept  over-boord  in  great  numbers.
Then  sent  I  captaine  Grant  with  the  boat,  with  leave
to  use  his  owne  discretion  in  saving  of  them.  So  he
brought  me  aboord  two  gentlemen,  the  one  an  old  man
called  Nuno  Velio  Pereira,  which  (as  appeareth  by  the
4  chapter  in  the  first  booke  of  the  woorthy  history  of
Huighen  de  Linschoten)  was  governour  of  Mogambique
and  Cefala,  in  the  yeere  1582.  and  since  that  time  had
bene  likewise  a  governour  in  a  place  of  importance  in  the
East  Indies.  And  the  shippe  wherein  he  was  comming
home  was  cast  away  a  litle  to  the  East  of  the  Cape  of
Buona  Speranza,  and  from  thence  he  travelled  over-land
to  Mozambique,  and  came  as  a  passenger  in  this  Carack„
The  other  was  called  Bras  Carrero,  and  was  captaine  of  a
Carack  which  was  cast  away  neere  Mozambique,  and  came
likewise  in  this  ship  for  a  passenger.  Also  three  men  of
the  inferior  sort  we  saved  in  our  boat,  onely  these  two
we  clothed  and  brought  into  England.  The  rest  which
were  taken  up  by  the  other  ship  boats,  we  set  all  on  shore
in  the  He  of  Flores,  except  some  two  or  three  Negros,
whereof  one  was  borne  in  Mozambique,  and  another  in
the  East  Indies.  This  fight  was  open  off  the  Sound
betweene  Faial  and  Pico  6  leagues  to  the  Southward.
The  people  which  we  saved  told  us  that  the  cause  why
they  would  not  yeeld,  was,  because  this  Carack  was  for
the  king,  and  that  she  had  all  the  goods  belonging  to
the  king  in  the  countrey  for  that  yeere  in  her,  and  that
the  captaine  of  her  was  in  favour  with  the  king,  and  at
his  returne  into  the  Indies  should  have  bene  Viceroy
there.  And  withall  this  ship  was  nothing  at  all  pestered
neither  within  boord  nor  without,  and  was  more  like  a
ship  of  warre  then  otherwise :  moreover,  she  had  the
ordinance  of  a  Carak  that  was  cast  away  at  Mozambique,
and  the  company  of  her,  together  with  the  company  of
another  Carack  that  was  cast  away  a  litle  to  the  Eastwards
of  the  Cape  of  Buona  Speranza.  Yet  through  sicknesse
which  they  caught  at  Angola,  where  they  watered,  they

THE  FIRING  OF  'THE  FIVE  WOUNDS'  a.d.

1594-
say,  they  had  not  now  above  1 50  white  men,  but  Negros
a  great  many.  They  likewise  affirmed  that  they  had  [II.  ii.  2011.]
three  noblemen  and  three  ladies  in  her,  but  we  found
them  to  differ  in  most  of  their  talke.  All  this  day  and
all  the  night  she  burned,  but  the  next  morning  her
poulder  which  was  lowest  being  6c  barrels  blew  her
abroad,  so  that  most  of  the  ship  did  swim  in  parts  above
the  water.  Some  of  them  say,  that  she  was  bigger  then
the  Madre  de  Dios,  and  some,  that  she  was  lesse :  but
she  was  much  undermasted,  and  undersailed,  yet  she
went  well  for  a  ship  that  was  so  foule.  The  shot  which
wee  made  at  her  in  great  Ordinance  before  we  layde  her
aboord  might  be  at  seven  bouts  which  we  had,  and  sixe
or  7  shot  at  a  bout,  one  with  another,  some  49  shot :  the
time  we  lay  aboord  might  be  two  houres.  The  shot
which  we  discharged  aboord  the  Carack  might  be  some
twentie  Sacars.  And  thus  much  may  suffice  concerning
our  daungerous  conflict  with  that  unfortunate  Carack.

The  last  of  June  after  long  traversing  of  the  seas  we
had  sight  of  another  mightie  Carack  which  diverse  of  our
company  at  the  first  tooke  to  be  the  great  S.  Philip  the
Admirall  of  Spaine,  but  the  next  day  being  the  first  of
July  fetching  her  up  we  perceived  her  indeede  to  be  a
Carack,  which  after  some  few  shot  bestowed  upon  her
we  summoned  to  yeeld ;  but  they  standing  stoutly  to
their  defence  utterly  refused  the  same.  Wherefore  seeing
no  good  could  be  done  without  boording  her  I  consulted
what  course  we  should  take  in  the  boording.  But  by
reason  that  wee  which  were  the  chiefe  captaines  were
partly  slaine  and  partly  wounded  in  the  former  conflict,
and  because  of  the  murmuring  of  some  disordered  and
cowardly  companions,  our  valiant  and  resolute  determina-
tions were  crossed:  and  to  conclude  a  long  discourse  in
few  wordes,  the  Carack  escaped  our  hands.  After  this
attending  about  Corvo  &  Flores  for  some  West  Indian
purchase,  and  being  disappointed  of  our  expectation,  and
victuals  growing  short,  we  returned  for  England,  where
I  arrived  at  Portesmouth  the  28 of  August.

123

A.D.

1593-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  casting  away  of  the  Tobie  neere  Cape  Es-
partel  corruptly  called  Cape  Sprat  without  the
Straight  of  Gibraltar  on  the  coast  of  Barbaric.

1593-

He  Tobie  of  London  a  ship  of  250
tunnes  manned  with  fiftie  men,  the
owner  whereof  was  the  worshlpfuU  M.
Richard  Staper,  being  bound  for  Livorno,
Zante  and  Patras  in  Morea,  being  laden
with  marchandize  to  the  value  of  1 1  or
12  thousand  pounds  sterling,  set  sayle
from  Black-wall  the  16  day  of  August  1593,  and  we
went  thence  to  Portesmouth  where  we  tooke  in  great
quantitie  of  wheate,  and  set  sayle  foorth  of  Stokes  bay
in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  the  6.  day  of  October,  the
winde  being  faire :  and  the  1 6  of  the  same  moneth  we
were  in  the  heigth  of  Cape  S.  Vincent,  where  on  the
next  morning  we  descried  a  sayle  which  lay  in  try  right
a  head  off  us,  to  which  we  gave  chase  with  very  much
winde,  the  sayle  being  a  Spaniard,  which  wee  found  in
fine  so  good  of  sayle  that  we  were  faine  to  leave  her
and  give  her  over.  Two  dayes  after  this  we  had  sight
of  mount  Chiego,  which  is  the  first  high-land  which
we  descrie  on  the  Spanish  coast  at  the  entrance  of  the
Straight  of  Gibraltar,  where  we  had  very  foule  weather
and  the  winde  scant  two  dayes  together.  Here  we  lay
off  to  the  sea.  The  Master,  whose  name  was  George
Goodlay,  being  a  young  man,  and  one  which  never
tooke  charge  before  for  those  parts,  was  very  proud  of
that  charge  which  he  was  litle  able  to  discharge,  neither
would  take  any  counsel  of  any  of  his  company,  but  did
as  he  thought  best  himselfe,  &  in  the  end  of  the  two
dayes  of  foule  weather  cast  about,  and  the  winde  being
faire,  bare  in  with  the  straights  mouth.  The  19  day
at  night  he  thinking  that  he  was  farther  off  the  land
then  he  was,  bare  sayle  all that  night,  &  an  houre  and

124

THE  CASTING  AWAY  OF  THE  ' TOBIE  '  ad.

1593-
an  halfe  before  day  had  ranne  our  shippe  upon  the
ground  on  the  coast  of  Barbarie  without  the  straight
foure  leagues  to  the  South  of  Cape  Espartel.  Where-
upon being  all  not  a  litle  astonied,  the  Master  said
unto  us,  I  pray  you  forgive  me ;  for  this  is  my  fault
and  no  mans  else.  The  company  asked  him  whether
they  should  cut  off  the  maine  maste :  no  sayd  the
Master  we  will  hoyse  out  our  boate.  But  one  of  our
men  comming  speedily  up,  sayd,  Sirs,  the  ship  is  full
of  water,  well  sayd  the  Master,  then  cut  the  mayne-
mast  over  boord :  which  thing  we  did  with  all  speede.
But  the  after  part  suddenly  split  a  sunder  in  such  sort
that  no  man  was  able  to  stand  upon  it,  but  all  fled
upon  the  foremast  up  into  the  shrouds  thereof;  and
hung  there  for  a  time :  but  seeing  nothing  but  present
death  approch  (being  so  suddenly  taken  that  we  could
not  make  a  raft  which  we  had  determined)  we  com-
mitted our  selves  unto  the  Lord  and  beganne  with
dolefull  tune  and  heavy  hearts  to  sing  the  I2  Psalme.
Helpe  Lord  for  good  and  godly  men  &c.  Howbeit
before  we  had  finished  foure  verses  the  waves  of  the
sea  had  stopped  the  breathes  of  most  of  our  men.
For  the  foremast  with  the  weight  of  our  men  &  the
force  of  the  sea  fell  downe  into  the  water,  and  upon
the  fall  thereof  there  were  38  drowned,  and  onely  12
by  Gods  providence  partly  by  swimming  and  other
meanes  of  chests  gote  on  shoare,  which  was  about  a
quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  wracke  of  the  ship.  The  [II.  ii.  202.]
master  called  George  Goodley,  and  William  Palmer  his
mate,  both  perished.  M.  Cassar  also  being  captaine  and
owner  was  likewise  drowned :  none  of  the  officers  were
saved  but  the  carpenter.

We  twelve  which  the  Lord  had  delivered  from
extreme  danger  of  the  Sea,  at  our  comming  ashore  fell
in  a  maner  into  as  great  distresse.  At  our  first  comming
on  shore  we  all  fell  downe  on  our  knees,  praying  the
Lord  most  humbly  for  his  mercifull  goodnesse.  Our
prayers being  done,  we  consulted together  what  course

125

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1593.

to  take,  seeing  we  were  fallen  into  a  desert  place,  &
we  travelled  all  that  day  untill  night,  sometimes  one
way  and  sometimes  another,  and  could  finde  no  kinde
of  inhabitants ;  onely  we  saw  where  wilde  beasts  had
bene,  and  places  where  there  had  bene  houses,  which
after  we  perceived  to  have  bene  burnt  by  the  Portugals.
So  at  night  falling  into  certaine  groves  of  olive  trees,
we  climed  up  and  sate  in  them  to  avoid  the  danger  of
lions  and  other  wilde  beasts,  whereof  we  saw  many  the
next  morning.  The  next  day  we  travelled  untill  three
of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  without  any  food,  but
water  and  wilde  date  roots :  then  going  over  a  moun-
taine,  we  had  sight  of  Cape  Espartel ;  whereby  we  knew
somewhat  better  which  way  to  travell,  and  then  we  went
forward  untill  we  came  to  an  hedgerow  made  with
great  long  canes ;  we  spied  and  looked  over  it,  and
beheld  a  number  of  men  aswell  horsemen  as  footmen,
to  the  number  of  some  five  thousand  in  skirmish
together  with  small  shot  and  other  weapons.  And  after
consultation  what  we  were  best  to  do,  we  concluded  to
yeeld  our  selves  unto  them,  being  destitute  of  all  meanes
of  resistance.  So  rising  up  we  marched  toward  them,
who  espying  us,  foorthwith  some  hundred  of  them  with
their  javelings  in  their  hands  came  running  towards  us
as  though  they  would  have  run  us  thorow :  howbeit
they  onely  strooke  us  flatling  with  their  weapons,  and
said  that  we  were  Spaniards :  and  we  tolde  them  that  we
were  Englishmen ;  which  they  would  not  beleeve  yet.
By  and  by  the  conflict  being  ended,  and  night  approch-
ing,  the  captaine  of  the  Moores,  a  man  of  some  §6
yeres  olde,  came  himselfe  unto  us,  and  by  his  inter-
pretor  which  spake  Italian,  asked  what  we  were,  and
from  whence  we  came.  One  Thomas  Henmer  of  our
company  which  could  speake  Italian,  declared  unto  him
that  we  were  marchants,  and  how  by  great  misfortune
our  ship,  marchandise,  &  the  greatest  part  of  our  com-
pany were  pitifully  cast  away  upon  their  coast.  But  he
void of  humainity  & all  manhood,  for all this,  caused

126

THE  CASTING  AWAY  OF  THE  'TOBIE'  ad

1593-
his  men  to  strip  us  out  of  our  apparell  even  to  our
shirts  to  see  what  money  and  jewels  we  had  about  us :
which  when  they  had  found  to  the  value  of  some  200
pounds  in  golde  and  pearles  they  gave  us  some  of  our
apparel  againe,  and  bread  and  water  onely  to  comfort
us.  The  next  morning  they  carried  us  downe  to  the
shore  where  our  shippe  was  cast  away,  which  was  some
sixteene  miles  from  that  place.  In  which  journey  they
used  us  like  their  slaves,  making  us  (being  extreame
weake,)  to  carry  their  stuffe,  and  offering  to  beat  us
if  we  went  not  so  fast  as  they.  We  asked  them  why
they  used  us  so,  and  they  replied,  that  we  were  their
captives :  we  sayd  we  were  their  friends,  and  that  there
was  never  Englishman  captive  to  the  king  of  Marocco.
So  we  came  downe  to  the  ship,  and  lay  there  with
them  seven  dayes,  while  they  had  gotten  all  the  goods
they  could,  and  then  they  parted  it  amongst  them.
After  the  end  of  these  seven  dayes  the  captaine  ap-
pointed twenty  of  his  men  wel  armed,  to  bring  us  up
into  ye  countrey :  and  the  first  night  we  came  to  the
side  of  a  river  called  Alarach,  where  we  lay  on  the
grasse  all  that  night :  so  the  next  day  we  went  over
the  river  in  a  frigate  of  nine  oares  on  a  side,  the  river
being  in  that  place  above  a  quarter  of  a  mile  broad :
and  that  day  we  went  to  a  towne  of  thirty  houses,
called  Totteon :  there  we  lay  foure  dayes  having  nothing
to  feed  on  but  bread  and  water ;  and  then  we  went  to
a  towne  called  Cassuri,  and  there  we  were  delivered  by
those  twenty  souldiers  unto  the  Alcaide,  which  examined
us  what  we  were :  and  we  tolde  him.  He  gave  us  a
goode  answere,  and  sent  us  to  the  Jewes  house,  where
we  lay  seven  dayes.  In  the  meane  while  that  we  lay
here,  there  were  brought  thither  twenty  Spaniards  and
twenty  Frenchmen,  which  Spaniards  were  taken  in  a
conflict  on  land,  but  the  Frenchmen  were  by  foule
weather  cast  on  land  within  the  Straights  about  Cape
de  Gate,  and  so  made  captives.  Thus  at  the  seven
dayes end we twelve Englishmen, the twelve French,

127

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1593-

and  the  twenty  Spaniards  were  all  conducted  toward
Marocco  with  nine  hundred  souldiers,  horsemen  and
fotmen,  and  in  two  dayes  journey  we  came  to  the  river
of  Fez,  where  we  lodged  all  night,  being  provided  of
tents.  The  next  day  we  went  to  a  towne  called  Salle,
and  lay  without  the  towne  in  tents.  From  thence  we
travelled  almost  an  hundred  miles  without  finding  any
towne,  but  every  night  we  came  to  fresh  water,  which
was  partly  running  water  and  sometime  raine  water.
So  we  came  at  last  within  three  miles  of  the  city  of
Marocco,  where  we  pitched  our  tents :  and  there  we
mette  with  a  carrier  which  did  travell  in  the  countrey
for  the  English  marchants :  and  by  him  we  sent  word
unto  them  of  our  estate :  and  they  returned  the  next
day  unto  us  a  Moore,  which  brought  us  victuals,  being
at  that  instant  very  feeble  and  hungry;  and  withall
sent  us  a  letter  with  pen,  inke,  and  paper,  willing  us
[II.  ii  203,]  to  write  unto  them  what  ship  it  was  that  was  cast
away,  and  how  many  and  what  men  there  were  alive.
For  said  they  we  would  knowe  with  speed,  for  to
morow  is  the  kings  court:  and  therefore  we  would
know,  for  that  you  should  come  into  the  citie  like
captives.  But  for  all  that  we  were  carried  in  as  captives
and  with  ropes  about  our  neckes  as  well  English  as
the  French  and  Spaniards.  And  so  we  were  carried
before  the  king :  and  when  we  came  before  him  he  did
commit  us  all  to  ward,  where  wee  lay  15  dayes  in  close
prison :  and  in  the  end  we  were  cleared  by  the  English
Marchants  to  their  great  charges :  for  our  deliverance
cost  them  700  ounces,  every  ounce  in  that  country  con-
tayning  two  shillings.  And  when  we  came  out  of  prison
we  went  to  the  Alfandica,  where  we  continued  eight
weekes  with  the  English  marchants.  At  the  end  of  which
time  being  well  apparelled  by  the  bountie  of  our  mar-
chants we  were  conveyed  downe  by  the  space  of  eight
dayes  journey  to  S.  Cruz,  where  the  English  ships  road :
where  we  tooke  shipping  about  the  20  of  March,  two  in
the  Anne  Francis  of  London,  and  five  more  of  us  five

128

QUEEN  ELIZABETH'S  LETTERS

dayes  after  in  the  Expedition  of  London,  and  two  more
in  a  Flemish  flie-boat,  and  one  in  the  Mary  Edward  also
of  London,  other  two  of  our  number  died  in  the  countrey
of  the  bloodie-fluxe :  the  one  at  our  first  imprisonment
at  Marocco,  whose  name  was  George  Hancock,  and  the
other  at  S.  Cruz,  whose  name  was  Robert  Swancon,  whose
death  was  hastened  by  eating  of  rootes  and  other  un-
naturall  things  to  slake  their  raging  hunger  in  our
travaile,  and  by  our  hard  and  cold  lodging  in  the  open
fields  without  tents.  Thus  of  fiftie  persons  through  the
rashnesse  of  an  unskilfull  Master  ten  onely  survived  of
us,  and  after  a  thousand  miseries  returned  home  poore,
sicke,  and  feeble  into  our  countrey.

Richard  Johnson.  Thomas  Henmore.

William  Williams  Carpenter.  John  Silvester.

John  Durham.  Thomas  Whiting.

Abraham  Rouse.  William  Church.

John  Matthewes.  John  Fox.

The  letters  of  the  Queenes  most  excellent  Majestie
sent  by  one  Laurence  Aldersey  unto  the  Em-
perour  of  Aethiopia, 1597.

Invictissimo  potentissimoque  Abassenorum  regi,
magnoque  utriusque  Aethiopia  imperatori &c.

Lizabetha  dei  gratia  Anglias,  Franciae,  &
Hiberniae  regina,  fidei  defensor  &c.  summo
ac  potentissimo  iEthiopiae  imperatori
salutem.  Quod  ab  omnibus  qui  ubivis
terrarum  ac  gentium  sunt  regibus  princi-
pibusque  praestari  par  &  aequum  est,  ut
quanquam  maximo  locorum  intervallo
dissiti,  &  moribus  ac  legibus  discrepantes,  communem
tamen  generis  humani  societatem  tueri  &  conservare,
mutuaque  ut  occasio  ferret,  charitatis  &  benevolentias
officia  velint  exercere :  in  eo  nos  de  vestra  fide  atque
humanitate  spem  certissimam  concipientes,  huic  subito
vn  129  I

A.D.

1597-

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

nostro  Laurentio  Alderseio  in  regnum  vestrum  proficis-
centi,  hasce  literas  nostras,  quibus  &  nostra  erga  vos
benevolentia  testata  sit,  &  ilium  hinc  profectum  esse
constet,  potissimum  vobis  indicandas  dedimus.  Qui  cum
orbis  terrarum  perscrutandi  cognoscendique  studio  per-
motus,  multis  antehac  regionibus  peragratis,  jam  tandem
in  eas  regiones,  quae  vestrae  ditionis  sunt,  longum,
periculosumque  iter  instituat :  cum  ipse  existimavit,  tum
nos  etiam  sumus  in  eadem  opinione,  ad  incolumitatem
suam,  atque  etiam  ad  gratiam  apud  vos,  plurimum  illi
profuturum,  si  diplomate  nostro  munitus,  benevolentiae
nostras  &  profectionis  hinc  suae  testimonium  ad  vos
deferret.  Nam  cum  summus  ille  mundi  conditor  rector-
que  praepotens  deus,  regibus  principibusque  qui  suam
vicem  gerunt,  orbem  terrarum,  suis  cuique  finibus  pro
rata  portione  designatis,  regendum  atque  administrandum
dederit ;  eoque  munere  jus  quoddam  inter  eos  fraternae
necessitudinis,  aeternumque  fcedus  ab  illis  colendum
sanxerit :  non  erit  (ut  arbitramur)  ingratum  vobis,  cum
benevolentiae  nostrae  significationem,  tarn  immensa  maris
ac  terrarum  spatia  transgressam,  ab  ultima  Britannia  ad
vos  in  Aethiopiam  perferri  intellexeritis.  Nobisque  rursiis
erit  jucundum,  cum  subditorum  nostrorum  praedicatione,
ab  ipsis  Nili  fontibus,  &  ab  iis  regionibus  quae  solis
cursum  definiunt,  fama  vestri  nominis  ad  nos  recurret.
Erit  igitur  humanitatis  vestras  huic  subdito  nostro  earn
largiri  gratiam,  ut  in  ditionem  vestram  sub  praesidio  ac
tutela  vestri  nominis  intrare,  ibique  salvus  &  incolumis
manere  possit :  quod  ipsum  etiam  ab  aliis  principibus,  per
quorum  regiones  illi  transeundum  erit,  magnopere  peti-
mus,  nobisque  ipsis  illud  honoris  causa  tributum  exis-
timabimus :  neque  tamen  majorem  hac  in  re  gratiam
postulamus,  quam  vicissim  omnium  principum  subditis,
omniumque  gentium  hominibus  ad  nos  commeantibus
liberrime  concedimus.  Datum  Londini  quinto  die
Novembris :  anno  regni  nostri  tricesimo  nono :  annoque
Dom. 1597.

130

QUEEN  ELIZABETH'S  LETTERS ad.

^597-

The  same  in English.

To  the  most  invincible  and  puissant  king  of  the
Abassens,  the  mightie  Emperour  of  Aethiopia
the  higher  and  the  lower.

ELizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of  England,
France  and  Ireland,  defender  of  the  faith,  &c.  To
the  most  high  and  mightie  Emperour  of  Aethiopia
greeting.  Whereas  it  is  a  matter  requisite  and  well  be-
seeming all  kings  and  princes  of  what  lands  or  nations
soever,  be  they  never  so  much  dissevered  in  place  or
differing  in  customes  and  lawes,  to  maintaine  and  preserve
the  common  societie  of  mankinde,  and,  as  occasion  shall
be  offered,  to  performe  mutuall  duties  of  charitie  and
benevolence :  we  for  that  cause  conceiving  most  un-
doubted hope  of  your  princely  fidelity  and  courtesie,
have  given  unto  this  our  subject  Laurence  Aldersey
intending  to  travell  into  your  dominions,  these  our
letters  to  be  delivered  without  faile  unto  your  Highnesse,
to  the  end  they  may  be  a  testimony  of  our  good  will
towards  you  and  of  our  saide  subject  his  departure  from
England.  Who,  after  his  travels  in  many  forren
countreys,  being  as  yet  enflamed  with  a  desire  more
throughly  to  surveigh  and  contemplate  the  world,  and
now  at  length  to  undertake  a  long  and  daungerous
journey  into  your  territories  and  regions :  both  the  sayd
Laurence  thought,  and  our  selves  also  deemed,  that  it
would  very  much  availe  him,  as  well  for  his  owne  safetie
as  for  the  attayning  of  your  favour,  if,  being  protected
with  our  broad  scale,  hee  might  transport  unto  your
Highnesse  a  testimony  of  our  loving  affection  &  of  his
departure  from  hence.  For  sithence  almightie  God  the
highest  creatour  and  governour  of  the  world  hath  allotted
unto  kings  and  princes  his  vicegerents  over  the  face
of  the  whole  earth,  their  designed  portions  and  limits
to  be  ruled  and  administred  by  them  ;  and  by  this  his
gift hath established among them a certaine law of

131

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

brotherly  kindnesse,  and  an  eternall  league  by  them  to
be  observed :  it  will  not  (we  hope)  seeme  unpleasant  unto
your  highnesse,  when  you  shall  have  intelligence  of  our
loving  letters  sent  so  huge  a  distance  over  sea  and  land,
even  from  the  farthest  realme  of  England  unto  you
in  Aethiopia.  On  the  other  side  our  selves  shall  take
great  solace  and  delight,  when  as  by  the  relation  of  our
owne  subjects,  the  renowme  of  your  name  shall  be
brought  unto  us  from  the  fountains  of  Nilus,  and  from
those  regions  which  are  situate  under  the  Southerne
Tropike.  May  it  please  you  therefore  of  your  princely
clemencie  to  vouchsafe  so  much  favour  on  this  our
subject,  that  he  may,  under  the  safeguard  and  protection
of  your  name,  enter  into  your  highnesse  dominions,  and
there  remaine  safe  and  free  from  danger.  Which  favour
and  courtesie  wee  doe  likewise  most  earnestly  request
at  the  hands  of  other  princes,  through  whose  Seigniories
our  said  subject  is  to  passe ;  and  we  shall  esteeme  it
as  done  unto  our  selfe  and  for  our  honours  sake.

Neither do we  require any greater favour in this

behalfe,  then  we  are  upon  the  like  occasion  most  ready

to graunt unto the subjects of all princes and the

people of  all Nations, traveiling into our dominions.

Given  at  London  the  fift  day  of  November,

in  the  thirtie  and  ninth  yeere  of

our  reigne : and  in  the

yeare  of  our  Lorde

1597.

132

THE  THIRD  AND  LAST  VOLUME

of  the

Principall Navigations,  Voyages,  Traffiques  and
Discoveries  of  the  English Nation

made  to  the Northwest,  West,  and Southwest parts  of

the  world,  with  the  Letters,  Privileges,  Discourses,

Observations,  and  other  necessary  things

concerning  the  same

The most ancient Discovery  of  the  West  Indies  [in.  i.]
by  Madoc  the  sonne  of  Owen  Guyneth  Prince
of North-wales, in the yeere 1 1 70 ; taken
out  of  the  history  of  Wales,  lately  published
by  M. David  Powel  Doctor  of  Divinity.

Fter  the  death  of  Owen  Guyneth,  his
sonnes  fell  at  debate  who  should  inherit
after  him :  for  the  eldest  sonne  borne
in  matrimony,  Edward  or  Jorweth  Drwy-
dion,  was  counted  unmeet  to  governe,
because  of  the  maime  upon  his  face :
and  Howell  that  tooke  upon  him  all  the
rule  was  a  base  sonne,  begotten  upon  an  Irish  woman.
Therefore  David  gathered  all  the  power  he  could,  and
came  against  Howel,  and  fighting  with  him,  slew  him ;
and  afterwards  injoyed  quietly  the  whole  land  of  North-
wales,  until  his  brother  Jorwerths  sonne  came  to  age.
Madoc  another  of  Owen  Guyneth  his  sonnes  left  the  ^^/-'ofL;/^  ^
land in contention betwixt his brethren, & prepared Guyneth.

133

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1 1 70.

certaine  ships,  with  men  and  munition,  and  sought  adven-
tures by  Seas,  sailing  West,  and  leaving  the  coast  of
Ireland  so  farre  North,  that  he  came  unto  a  land  un-
knowen,  where  he  saw  many  strange  things.

Humf.  Lloyd.  This  land  must  needs  be  some  part  of  that  Countrey
of  which  the  Spanyards  affirme  themselves  to  be  the
first  finders  since  Hannos  time.  Whereupon  it  is
manifest  that  that  countrey  was  by  Britaines  discovered,
long  before  Columbus  led  any  Spanyards  thither.

Of  the  voyage  and  returne  of  this  Madoc  there  be
many  fables  fained,  as  the  common  people  doe  use  in
distance  of  place  and  length  of  time  rather  to  augment
then  to  diminish  :  but  sure  it  is  there  he  was.  And  after
he  had  returned  home,  and  declared  the  pleasant  and
fruitful!  countreys  that  he  had  scene  without  inhabitants,
and upon the contrary  part, for what barren & wild

Thi;  second ground his brethren and nephewes did murther one

voyage  of  Ma-  another,  he prepared a number of  ships,  and  got  with
doc  the  somie  of  -,  .  ,  ^^j  ■,  ^  ■  ^^  -,.

Ozuen  "^"^ such  men  and  women  as  were  desirous to  live  in

GuynetJi. quietnesse : and taking  leave of  his friends,  tooke his
journey  thitherward  againe. Therefore  it  is  to  be  sup-
posed that he  and his people inhabited part of  those
Gomara.  lib. countreys  :  for  it  appeareth  by  Francis  Lopez  de  Gomara,
2.  cap.  16. ^Y\^2i^ -j^ Acuzamil  and other places  the  people  honored
the  crosse. Wherby  it  may  be  gathered  that Christians
had bene there before the  comming of  the  Spanyards.
But  because  this  people  were  not  many,  they  followed  the
maners  of  the  land  which  they  came  unto,  &  used  the
language  they  found  there.
M.  Pozoeh  This Madoc  arriving  in the  Westerne  country,  unto

addition.  ^^  which he  came in  the  yere  1 1 70,  left most of  his

people  there,  and  returning  backe  for  more  of  his  owne
nation,  acquaintance  &  friends  to  inhabit  that  faire  &
large  countrey,  went  thither  againe  with  ten  sailes,  as
Gutyn  Given.  I  find  noted  by  Gutyn  Owen.  I  am  of  opinion  that  the
land  whereunto  he  came  was  some  part  of  the  West
Indies.

134

OFFER  OF  CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS

A.D.
1488.

M^

Carmina  Meredith  filii  Rhesi  mentionem  facientia
de  Madoco  filio  Oweni  Guynedd,  &  de  sua
navigatione  in  terras  incognitas.  Vixit  hie
Meredith  circiter  annum  Domini  1477.

" Adoc  wyf,  mwyedic  wedd,  '^■^^^^  ^'^^^^^  ^

lawn  ffenau,  Owyn  Guynedd:  received  of  my

-»T. c  o  . i  J  J  learned  friend

JNi  rynnum  dir,  ry  enaid  oedd  3^  William

Na  da  mawr,  end  y  moroedd.  Camden.

The  same  in  English.

Madoc  I  am  the  sonne  of  Owen  Gwynedd
With  stature  large,  and  comely  grace  adorned :
No  lands  at  home  nor  store  of  wealth  me  please.
My  minde  was  whole  to  search  the  Ocean  seas.

The  offer  of  the  discovery  of  the  West  Indies  [in.  2-]
by  Christopher  Columbus  to  king  Henry  the
seventh  in  the  yeere  1488  the  13  of  February:
with  the  kings  acceptation  of  the  offer,  &
the  cause  whereupon  hee  was  deprived  of  the
same :  recorded  in  the  thirteenth  chapter  of
the  history  of  Don  Fernand  Columbus  of
the  life  and  deeds  of  his  father  Christopher
Columbus.

Hristophoro  Colon  temendo,  se  parimente
i  Re  di  Castiglia  non  assentissero  alia
sua  impresa,  non  gli  bisognasse  proporla
di  nuovo  a  qualche  altro  principe,  &  cosi
in  cio  passasse  lungo  tempo ;  mando  in
Inghilterra  un  suo  fratello,  che  haveva
appresso  di  se,  chiamato  Bartholomeo
Colon :  il  qual,  quantunque  non  havesse  lettere  Latine,
era  pero  huomo  prattico,  &  giudicioso  nelle  cose  del
mare,  &  sapea  molto  bene  far  carte  da  navigare,  &
sphere,  & altri instrument! di quella  professione,  come

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1488.

dal  suo  fratello  era  instrutto.  Partito  adunque  Bar-
tholomeo  Colon  per  Inghilterra,  voile  la  sua  sorte,  che
desse  in  man  di  cor  sali,  i  quali  lo  spogliarono  insieme
con  gli  altri  della  sua  nave.  Per  la  qual  cosa,  &  per  la
sua  poverta  &  infirmita,  che  in  cosi  diverse  terre  lo
assalirono  crudelmente,  prolungo  per  gran  tempo  la  sua
ambasciata,  fin  che,  aquistata  un  poco  di  faculta  con  le
carte,  ch'  ei  fabricava,  comincio  a  far  pratiche  co'  il  Re
Enrico  settimo,  padre  de  Enrico  ottavo,  che  al  presente
regna :  a  cui  appresento  un  mappamondo,  nel  quale
erano  scritti  questi  versi,  che  fra  le  sue  scriture  lo  trovai,
&  da  me  saranno  qui  posti  piu  tosto  per  1'  antichita,
che  per  la  loro  eleganza.

Terrarum  quicunque  cupis  fceliciter  oras
Noscere,  cuncta  decens  docte  pictura  docebit,
Quam  Strabo  affirmat,  Ptolomseus,  Plinius,  atque
Isidorus : non  una  tamen  sententia  cuique.
Pingitur  hie  etiam  nuper  sulcata  carinis
Hispanis  Zona  ilia,  prius  incognita  genti
Torrida,  quae  tandem  nunc  est  notissima  multis.

Et  piu  di  sotto  diceva.

Pro  Authore  sive  Pictore.

Janua  cui  patriae  est  nomen,  cui  Bartholomaeus
Columbus  de  Terra  Rubra,  opus  edidit  istud,
Londoniis  anno  Domini 1480  atque  insuper  anno
Octavo,  decimaque  die  cum tertia  mensis
Februarii. Laudes  Christo  cantentur  abunde.

Et,  percioche  avvertira  alcuno,  che  dice  Columbus  de
Terra  Rubra,  dico,  che  medesimamente  lo  viddi  alcune
sotto  scritioni  dell'  Ammiraglio,  primo  che  acquistasse
lo  stato,  ou'  egli  si  sotto  scriveva,  Columbus  de  Terra
Rubra.  Ma,  tornando  al  Re  d'  Inghilterra,  dico,  che,  da
lui  il  mappamondo  veduto,  &  cio  che  V  Ammiraglio  gli
offeriva,  con  allegro  volto  accetto  la  sua  ofFerta,  &
mandolo  a  chiamare.  Ma,  percioche  Dio  i'  haveva  per
Castiglia  serbata,  gia  1'  Ammiraglio in quel tempo  era

136

OFFER  OF  CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS  ad.

1488.

andato,  &  tornato  con  la  vittoria  della  sua  impresa,
secondo  che  per  ordine  si  raccontera.  Lasciaro  hora  di
raccontar  cio,  che  Bartolomeo  Colon  haveva  negociato  in
Inghilterra,  &  tornaro  all'  Ammiraglio,  &c.

The  same  in  English.

CHristopher  Columbus  fearing  least  if  the  king  of
Castile  in  like  maner  (as  the  king  of  Portugall  had
done)  should  not  condescend  unto  his  enterprise,  he
should  be  inforced  to  offer  the  same  againe  to  some  other
prince,  &  so  much  time  should  be  spent  therein,  sent
into  England  a  certaine  brother  of  his  which  he  had
with  him,  whose  name  was  Bartholomew  Columbus,  who,
albeit  he  had  not  the  Latine  tongue,  yet  neverthelesse
was  a  man  of  experience  and  skilfuU  in  Sea  causes,  and
could  very  wel  make  sea  cards  &  globes,  and  other
instruments  belonging  to  that  profession,  as  he  was
instructed  by  his  brother.  Wherfore  after  that  Bartholo-
mew Columbus  was  departed  for  England,  his  lucke  was
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  pirats,  which  spoiled  him  with
the  rest  of  them  which  were  in  the  ship  which  he  went
in.  Upon  which  occasion,  and  by  reason  of  his  poverty  [m-  3-]
and  sicknesse  which  cruelly  assaulted  him  in  a  countrey  ^  ,^  ^If^"^^'  .
so  farre  distant  from  his  friends,  he  deferred  his  am-  i^i^g^  ^^ere
bassage  for  a  long  while,  untill  such  time  as  he  had  mt  discovered
gotten  somewhat  handsome  about  him  with  making  of  Sea  M  England.
cards.  At  length  he  began  to  deale  with  king  Henry
the  seventh  the  father  of  Henry  the  eight,  which  reigneth
at  this  present :  unto  whom  he  presented  a  mappe  of  the
world,  wherein  these  verses  were  written,  which  I  found
among  his  papers :  and  I  will  here  set  them  downe,  rather
for  their  antiquity  then  for  their  goodnesse.

Thou  which  desirest  easily  the  coasts  of  lands  to  know,
This comely  mappe right learnedly  the same to thee

will  shew :
Which  Strabo,  Plinie,  Ptolomew  and  Isodore  maintaine  :
Yet  for  all  that  they  do  not  all  in  one  accord  remaine.

137

A.D.

1488.

King  Hent"^
the  seventh  his
acceptation  of
Columbus
offer.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Here  also  is  set  downe  the  late  discovered  burning-
Zone

By  Portingals,  unto  the  world  which  whilom  was  un-
knowen,

Whereof  the  knowledge  now  at  length  thorow  all  the
world  is  bio  wen.

And  a  little  under  he  added :

For  the  Authour  or  the  Drawer,

He,  whose  deare  native  soile  hight  stately  Genua,
Even he  whose name is Bartholomew  Colon de  Terra

Rubra,
The  yeere  of  Grace  a  thousand  and  foure  hundred  and

fourescore
And eight, and on the thirteenth day of February

more.
In  London published this  worke. To Christ all laud

therefore.

And  because  some  peradventure  may  observe  that  he
calleth  himselfe  Columbus  de  Terra  Rubra,  I  say,  that
in  like  maner  I  have  scene  some  subscriptions  of  my
father  Christopher  Columbus,  before  he  had  the  degree
of  Admirall,  wherein  he  signed  his  name  thus,  Columbus
de  Terra  Rubra.  But  to  returne  to  the  king  of  England,
I  say,  that  after  he  had  scene  the  map,  and  that  which
my  father  Christopher  Columbus  offered  unto  him,  he
accepted  the  offer  with  joyfull  countenance,  and  sent  to
call  him  into  England.  But  because  God  had  reserved
the  sayd  offer  for  Castile,  Columbus  was  gone  in  the
meane  space,  and  also  returned  with  the  performance  of
his  enterprise,  as  hereafter  in  order  shall  be  rehearsed.
Now  will  I  leave  off  from  making  any  farther  mention
of  that  which  Bartholomew  Colon  had  negotiated  in
England,  and  I  will  returne  unto  the  Admirall,  &c.

138

OFFER  OF  CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS

Another  testimony  taken  out  of  the  60  chapter
of  the  foresayd  history  of  Ferdinando
Columbus,  concerning  the  offer  that  Bartho-
lomew Colombus  made  to  king  Henry  the
seventh  on  the  behalfe  of  his  brother  Chris-
topher.

jOrnato  adunque  V  Ammiraglio  dallo
scoprimento  di  Cuba  &  di  Giamaica,
trono  nella  Spagnuola  Bartolomeo  Colon
suo  fratello,  quelle,  che  era  gia  andato  a
trattare  accordo  col  Re  d'  Inghilterra
sopra  lo  scoprimento  delle  Indie,  come
di  sopra  habiam  detto.  Questo  poi,
ritornando  sene  verso  Castiglia  con  capitoli  conceduti,
haveva  inteso  a  Parigi  dal  re  Carlo  di  Francia  F  Am-
miraglio suo  fratello  haver  gia  scoperte  1'  Indie  :  per  che
gli  sovenne  per  poter  far  il  Viaggio  di  cento  scudi.  Et,
Avenga  che  per  cotal  nuova  egli  si  fosse  molto  affrettato,
per  arrivar  1'  Ammiraglio  in  Spagna,  quando  non  dimeno
giunse  a  Siviglia,  egli  era  gia  tornato  alle  Indie  co'  17
navigli.  Perche,  per  asseguir  quanto  ei  gli  havea  lasciato,
di  subito  al  principio  dell'  anno  del  1494  sen'  ando  a  i
Re  Catholici,  menando  seco  Don  Diego  Colon,  mio
fratello,  &  me  ancora,  accioche  servissimo  di  paggi  al
serenissimo  principe  Don  Giovanni,  il  qual  viva  in  gloria,
si  come  havea  commandato  la  Catholica  Reina  donna
Isabella,  che  alhora  era  in  Vagliadolid.  Tosto  adunque
che  noi  giungemmo,  i  Re  chiamarono  Don  Bartolomeo,
&  mandaronlo  alia  Spagnuola  contre  navi,  &c.

The  same  in  English.

CHristopher  Columbus  the  Admirall  being  returned
from  the  discovery  of  Cuba  and  Jamayca,  found  in
Hispaniola  his  brother  Bartholomew  Columbus,  who
before  had  beene  sent  to  intreat  of  an  agreement  with  the
king  of  England  for  the  discovery  of  the  Indies,  as  we

139

A.D.
1494.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[III.  4.]  have  sayd  before.  This  Bartholomew  therefore  returning
unto  Castile,  with  the  capitulations  granted  by  the  king
of  England  to  his  brother,  understood  at  Paris  by  Charles
the  king  of  France,  that  the  Admirall  his  brother  had
already  performed  that  discovery :  whereupon  the  French
king  gave  unto  the  sayd  Bartholomew  an  hundred
French  crownes  to  beare  his  charges  into  Spaine.  And
albeit  he  made  great  haste  upon  this  good  newes  to
meet  with  the  Admirall  in  Spaine,  yet  at  his  comming
to  Sivil  his  brother  was  already  returned  to  the  Indies
with  seventeene  saiie  of  shipps.  Wherefore  to  fulfill
that  which  he  had  left  him  in  charge  in  the  beginning  of
the  yeere  1494  he  repaired  to  the  Catholike  princes,
taking  with  him  Diego  Colon  my  brother  and  me  also,
which  were  to  be  preferred  as  Pages  to  the  most  excellent
Prince  Don  John,  who  now  is  with  God,  according  to
the  commandement  of  the  Catholike  Queene  Lady
Isabell,  which  was  then  in  Validolid.  Assoone  therefore
as  we  came  to  the  Court,  the  princes  called  for  Don
Bartholomew,  and  sent  him  to  Hispaniola  with  three
ships,  &c.

140

JOHN CABOT'S LETTERS PATENTS

A.D.
1495.

The  English  Voyages,  Navigations,  and  Dis-
coveries (intended  for  the  finding  of  a  North-
west passage)  to  the  North  parts  of  America,
to  Meta  incognita,  and  the  backeside  of  Gron-
land,  as  farre  as  72  degrees  and  12  minuts :
performed  first  by  Sebastian  Cabota,  and  since
by  Sir  Martin  Frobisher,  and  M.  John  Davis,
with  the  Patents,  Discourses,  and  Advertise-
ments thereto  belonging.

The  Letters  patents  of  King  Henry  the  seventh
granted  unto  John  Cabot  and  his  three  sonnes,
Lewis,  Sebastian,  and  Sancius  for  the  dis-
coverie  of  new  and  unknowen  lands.

Enricus  Dei  gratia  rex  Anglias,  &  Franciae,
&  Dominus  Hiberniae,  omnibus,  ad
quos  praesentes  literae  nostrae  pervenerint,
salutem.

Notum  sit  &  manifestum,  quod  de-
dimus  &  concessimus,  ac  per  praesentes
damus  &  concedimus  pro  nobis  &
haeredibus  nostris,  dilectis  nobis  joanni  Caboto  civi
Venetiarum,  Lodovico,  Sebastiano,  &  Sancio,  filiis  dicti
Joannis,  &  eorum  ac  cujuslibet  eorum  haeredibus  &
deputatis,  plenam  ac  liberam  authoritatem,  facultatem  &
potestatem  navigandi  ad  omnes  partes,  regiones,  &  sinus
maris  orientalis,  occidentalis,  &  septentrionalis,  sub  ban-
neris,  vexillis,  &  insigniis  nostris,  cum  quinque  navibus
sive  navigiis,  cujuscunque  portituras  &  qualitatis  existant,
&  cum  tot  &  tantis  nautis  &  hominibus,  quot  &  quantos
in  dictis  navibus  secum  ducere  voluerint,  suis  &  eorum
propriis  sumptibus  &  expensis,  ad  inveniendum,  dis-
cooperiendum,  &  investigandum  quascunque  insulas,
patrias,  regiones  sive  provincias  gentilium  &  infidelium
quorumcunque,  in  quacunque  parte  mundi  positas,  quae
Christianis  omnibus  ante  haec  tempora  fuerint  incognitae.

141

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

H95-

Concessimus  etiam  eisdem  &  eorum  cuilibet,  eorumque
&  cujuslibet  eorum  haeredibus  &  deputatis,  ac  licentiam
dedimus  ad  affigendum  praedictas  banneras  nostras  &
insignia  in  quacunque  villa,  oppido,  castro,  insula  seu
terra  iirma  a  se  noviter  inventis.  Et  quod  praenominatus
Joannes,  &  filii  ejusdem,  seu  haeredes  &  eorum  deputati,
quascunque  hujusmodi  villas,  castra,  oppida,  &  insulas  a
se  inventas,  quas  subjugari,  occupari,  possideri  possint,
subjugare,  occupare,  possidere  valeant  tanquam  vasalli
nostri,  &  gubernatores,  locatenentes,  &  deputati  eorun-
dem,  dominium,  titulum  &  jurisdictionem  earundem
villarum,  castrorum,  oppidorum,  insularum,  ac  terras
firmas  sic  inventorum  nobis  acquirendo.  Ita  tamen,  ut
ex  omnibus  fructibus,  proficuis,  emolumentis,  commodis,
lucris,  &  obventionibus  ex  hujusmodi  navigatione  pro-
venientibus,  praefatus  Johannes,  &  filii  ac  haeredes,  &
eorum  deputati,  teneantur  &  sint  obligati  nobis  pro  omni
viagio  suo,  toties  quoties  ad  portum  nostrum  Bristolliae
applicuerint  (ad  quem  omnino  applicare  teneantur  &  sint
astricti)  deductis  omnibus  sumptibus  &  impensis  neces-
sariis  per  eosdem  factis,  quintam  partem  capitalis  lucri
facti,  sive  in  mercibus,  sive  in  pecuniis  persolvere :
Dantes  nos  &  concedentes  eisdem  suisque  haeredibus
&  deputatis,  ut  ab  omni  solutione  custumarum  omnium
&  singulorum  bonorum  &  mercium,  quas  secum  re-
portarint  ab  illis  locis  sic  noviter  inventis,  liberi  sint  &
immunes.  Et  insuper  dedimus  &  concessimus  eisdem  ac
suis  haeredibus  &  deputatis,  quod  terras  omnes  firmae,
insulae,  villas, oppida, castra, & loca quascunque a se

[III.  5.]  inventa,  quotquot  ab  eis  inveniri  contigerit,  non  possint
ab  aliis  quibusvis  nostris  subditis  frequentari  seu  visitari,
absque  licentia  praedictorum  Joannis  &  ejus  filiorum,
suorumque  deputatorum,  sub  poena  amissionis  tarn
navium  quam  bonorum  omnium  quorumcunque  ad  ea
loca  sic  inventa  navigare  praesumentium.  Volentes  &
strictissime  mandantes  omnibus  &  singulis  nostris  sub-
ditis, tam  in  terra  quam  in  mari  constitutis,  ut  praefato
Joanni,  & ejus filiis ac deputatis, bonam assistentiam

142

JOHN  CABOT'S  LETTERS  PATENTS a.d.

1495.
faclant,  & tarn  in  armandis  navibus  seu  navigiis,  quam
in  provisione  commeatus  &  victualium  pro  sua  pecunia
emendorum,  atque aliarum omnium rerum sibi provi-
dendarum pro dicta navigatione sumenda suos omnes
favores  &  auxilia  impertiant. In  cujus  rei  testimonium ^«'^-  ^°^'
has  literas  nostras  fieri  fecimus  patentes. Teste  meipso '"^95-
apud  Westmonasterium quinto die Martii anno regni
nostri  undecimo.

The  same  in  English.

HEnry  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England and
France,  and  lord  of  Ireland,  to  all  to  whom  these
presents  shall  come.  Greeting.

Be  it  knowen  that  we  have  given  and  granted,  and  by
these  presents  do  give  and  grant  for  us  and  our  heires,
to  our  welbeloved  John  Cabot  citizen  of  Venice,  to
Lewis,  Sebastian,  and  Santius,  sonnes  of  the  sayd  John,
and  to  the  heires  of  them,  and  every  of  them,  and  their
deputies,  full  and  free  authority,  leave,  and  power  to
saile  to  all  parts,  countreys,  and  seas  of  the  East,  of  the
West,  and  of  the  North,  under  our  banners  and  ensignes,
with  five  ships  of  what  burthen  or  quantity  soever  they
be,  and  as  many  mariners  or  men  as  they  will  have  with
them  in  the  sayd  ships,  upon  their  owne  proper  costs
and  charges,  to  seeke  out,  discover,  and  finde  whatsoever
isles,  countreys,  regions  or  provinces  of  the  heathen  and
infidels  whatsoever  they  be,  and  in  what  part  of  the  world
soever  they  be,  which  before  this  time  have  bene  un-
knowen  to  all  Christians :  we  have  granted  to  them,  and
also  to  every  of  them,  the  heires  of  them,  and  every  of
them,  and  their  deputies,  and  have  given  them  licence
to  set  up  our  banners  and  ensignes  in  every  village,
towne,  castle,  isle,  or  maine  land  of  them  newly  found.
And  that  the  aforesayd  John  and  his  sonnes,  or  their
heires  and  assignes  may  subdue,  occupy  and  possesse  all
such  townes,  cities,  castles  and  isles  of  them  found,  which
they  can  subdue,  occupy  and  possesse,  as  our  vassals,  and
lieutenants,  getting  unto  us  the  rule,  title,  and  jurisdic-

143

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1495-

tion  of  the  same  villages,  townes,  castles,  &  firme  land
so  found.  Yet  so  that  the  aforesayd  John,  and  his
sonnes  and  heires,  and  their  deputies,  be  holden  and
bounden  of  all  the  fruits,  profits,  gaines,  and  commodities
growing  of  such  navigation,  for  every  their  voyage,  as
Bristol  thought  often  as  they  shall  arrive  at  our  port  of  Bristoll  (at  the

firivlllme "^^^^^ P°^^ ^^^^^  ^^^^^ ^^ ^°^^^ ^"^ \vo\d.Qn onely  to
discoveries. arrive)  all  maner  of  necessary  costs  and  charges  by  them
made,  being  deducted,  to  pay  unto  us  in  wares  or  money
the  fift  part  of  the  capital!  gaine  so  gotten. We  giving
and  granting  unto  them  and  to  their  heires  and  deputies,
Freedomefrom  that they  shall  be  free  from  all  paying  of  customes  of
cus  omc.  ^11  ^^^  singular  such  merchandize  as  they  shall  bring  with

them  from  those  places  so  newly  found.  And  moreover,
we  have  given  and  granted  to  them,  their  heires  and
deputies,  that  all  the  firme  lands,  isles,  villages,  townes,
castles  and  places  whatsoever  they  be  that  they  shall
chance  to  finde,  may  not  of  any  other  of  our  subjects  be
frequented  or  visited  without  the  licence  of  the  fore-
sayd  John  and  his  sonnes,  and  their  deputies,  under  paine
of  forfeiture  aswell  of  their  shippes  as  of  all  and  singuler
goods  of  all  them  that  shall  presume  to  saile  to  those
places  so  found.  Willing,  and  most  straightly  command-
ing all  and  singuler  our  subjects  aswell  on  land  as  on  sea,
to  give  good  assistance  to  the  aforesayd  John  and  his
sonnes  and  deputies,  and  that  as  well  in  arming  and
furnishing  their  ships  or  vessels,  as  in  provision  of  food,
and  in  buying  of  victuals  for  their  money,  and  all  other
things  by  them  to  be  provided  necessary  for  the  sayd
navigation,  they  do  give  them  all  their  helpe  and  favour.
In  witnesse  whereof  we  have  caused  to  be  made  these
our  Letters  patents.  Witnesse  our  selfe  at  Westminster
the  fift  day  of  March,  in  the  eleventh  yeere  of  our
reigne.

144

JOHN CABOT'S DISCOVERY

Bilk  signata  anno  1 3 Henrici  septimi.

Ex  tertio  die  Februarii,  anno  13,  licentiam  dedit
Joanni  Caboto,  quod  ipse  capere  possit  sex  naves
Anglicanas,  in  aliquo  portu,  sive  portibus  regni
Angliae,  ita  quod  sint  de  portagio  200.  doliorum,  vel
subtus,  cum  apparatu  requisito,  &  quod  recipere  possit
in  dictas  naves  omnes  tales  magistros,  marinarios,  &
subditos  regis,  qui  cum  eo  exire  voluerint,  &c.

The  same  in  English.

THe  king  upon  the  third  day  of  February,  in  the
13  yeere  of  his  reigne,  gave  licence  to  John  Cabot
to  take  sixe  English  ships  in  any  haven  or  havens  of
the  realme  of  England,  being  of  the  burden  of  200
tunnes,  or  under,  with  all  necessary  furniture,  and  to
take  also  into  the  said  ships  all  such  masters,  mariners,
and  subjects  of  the  king  as  willingly  will  go  with  him,  &c.

An  extract  taken  out  of  the  map  of  Sebastian
Cabot,  cut  by  Clement  Adams,  concerning  his
discovery  of  the  West  Indies,  v^hich  is  to  be
scene  in  her  Majesties  privie  gallerie  at  West-
minster, and  in  many  other  ancient  merchants
houses.

Nno  Domini  1497  Joannes  Cabotus
Venetus,  &  Sebastianus  illius  filius  earn
terram  fecerunt  perviam,  quam  nullus
prius  adire  ausus  fuit,  die  24  Junii,
circiter  horam  quintam  bene  mane.  Hanc
autem  appellavit  Terram  primum  visam,
credo  quod  ex  mari  in  eam  partem
primijim  oeulos  injecerat.  Nam  quae  ex  adverso  sita  est
insula,  eam  appellavit  in^ulam  Divi  Joannis,  hac  opinor
ratione,  quod  aperta  fuit  eo  die  qui  est  sacer  Divo  Joanni
Baptistae :  Hujus  incolas  pelles  animalium,  exuviasque
ferarum  pro  indumentis  habent,  easque  tanti  faciunt,
VII  145  J-

A.D.

1497-

A  record  of
the  rolls  touch-
ing the  voyage
of  John  Cabot
and  Sebastian
his  Sonne.

[III.  6.]

H97-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

quanti  nos  vestes  preciosissimas.  Cum  bellum  gerunt,
utuntur  arcu,  sagittis,  hastis,  spiculis,  clavis  ligneis  &
fundis.  Tellus  sterilis  est,  neque  uUos  fructus  affert,  ex
quo  fit,  ut  ursis  albo  colore,  &  cervis  inusitatas  apud  nos
magnitudinis  referta  sit :  piscibus  abundat,  iisque  sane
magnis,  quales  sunt  lupi  marini,  &  quos  salmones  vulgus
appellat ;  soleas  autem  reperiuntur  tarn  longae,  ut  ulns
mensuram  excedant.  Imprimis  autem  magna  est  copia
eorum  piscium,  quos  vulgari  sermone  vocant  Bacallaos.
Gignuntur  in  ea  insula  accipitres  ita  nigri,  ut  corvorum
similitudinem  mirum  in  modum  exprimant,  perdices
autem  &  aquilas  sunt  nigri  coloris.

The  same  in  English.

IN  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1497  John  Cabot  a  Venetian,
and  his  sonne  Sebastian  (with  an  English  fleet  set  out
from  BristoU)  discovered  that  land  which  no  man  before
that  time  had  attempted,  on  the  24  of  June,  about  five
of  the  clocke  early  in  the  morning.  This  land  he  called
Prima  vista,  that  is  to  say.  First  seene,  because  as  I
suppose  it  was  that  part  whereof  they  had  the  first  sight
from  sea.  That  Island  which  lieth  out  before  the  land,
he  called  the  Island  of  S.  John  upon  this  occasion,  as
I  thinke,  because  it  was  discovered  upon  the  day  of  John
the  Baptist.  The  inhabitants  of  this  Island  use  to  weare
beasts  skinnes,  and  have  them  in  as  great  estimation  as
we  have  our  finest  garments.  In  their  warres  they  use
bowes,  arrowes,  pikes,  darts,  woodden  clubs,  and  slings.
The  soile  is  barren  in  some  places,  &  yeeldeth  litle  fruit,
but  it  is  full  of  white  beares,  and  stagges  farre  greater
then  ours.  It  yeeldeth  plenty  of  fish,  and  those  very
great,  as  scales,  and  those  which  commonly  we  call
salmons :  there  are  soles  also  above  a  yard  in  length  :
but  especially  there  is  great  abundance  of  that  kinde  of
fish  which  the  Savages  call  baccalaos.  In  the  same  Island
also  there  breed  hauks,  but  they  are  so  blacke  that  they
are  very  like  to  ravens,  as  also  their  partridges,  and  egles,
which  are  in  like  sort  blacke.

146

SEBASTIAN CABOT'S DISCOURSE

A.D.

1497.

This  discourse
is  taken  out  of
the  second
volume  of  ye
voyages  of
Baptista
Ramusius.

A  discourse  of  Sebastian  Cabot  touching  his  dis-
covery of  part  of  the  West  India  out  of  England
in  the  time  of  king  Henry  the  seventh,  used
to  Galeacius  Butrigarius  the  Popes  Legate  in
Spaine,  and  reported  by  the  sayd  Legate  in
this  sort.

Oe  you  not  understand  sayd  he  (speaking
to  certaine  Gentlemen  of  Venice)  how  to
passe  to  India  toward  the  Northwest,  as
did  of  late  a  citizen  of  Venice,  so  valiant
a  man,  and  so  well  practised  in  all  things
pertaining  to  navigations,  and  the  science
of  Cosmographie,  that  at  this  present  he
hath  not  his  like  in  Spaine,  insomuch  that  for  his  vertues
he  is  preferred  above  all  other  pilots  that  saile  to  the
West  Indies,  who  may  not  passe  thither  without  his
licence,  and  is  therefore  called  Piloto  mayor,  that  is,  the
grand  Pilot.  And  when  we  sayd  that  we  knew  him  not,
he  proceeded,  saying,  that  being  certaine  yeres  in  the  city
of  Sivil,  and  desirous  to  have  some  knowledge  of  the
navigations  of  the  Spanyards,  it  was  tolde  him  that  there
was  in  the  city  a  valiant  man,  a  Venetian  borne  named  [III.  7.]
Sebastian  Cabot,  who  had  the  charge  of  those  things,
being  an  expert  man  in  that  science,  and  one  that  coulde
make  Cardes  for  the  Sea  with  his  owne  hand,  and  that
by  this  report,  seeking  his  acquaintance,  hee  found  him
a  very  gentle  person,  who  intertained  him  friendly,  and
shewed  him  many  things,  and  among  other  a  large  Mappe
of  the  world,  with  certaine  particuler  Navigations,  as  well
of  the  Portugals,  as  of  the  Spaniards,  and  that  he  spake
further  unto  him  to  this  effect.

When  my  father  departed  from  Venice  many  yeeres
since  to  dwell  in  England,  to  follow  the  trade  of  mar-
chandises,  hee  tooke  mee  with  him  to  the  citie  of  London,
while  I  was  very  yong,  yet  having  neverthelesse  some
knowledge of  letters  of  humanitie, and of  the  Sphere.

147

Sebastian
Cabota
Pilot  ma'^or
of  Spaine.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

H97-

And  when  my  father  died  in  that  time  when  newes  were
brought  that  Don  Christopher  Colonus  Genuese  had
discovered  the  coasts  of  India,  whereof  was  great  talke
in  all  the  Court  of  king  Henry  the  7.  who  then  raigned,
insomuch  that  all  men  with  great  admiration  affirmed  it
to  be  a  thing  more  divine  then  humane,  to  saile  by  the
West  into  the  East  where  spices  growe,  by  a  way  that
was  never  knowen  before,  by  this  fame  and  report  there
increased  in  my  heart  a  great  flame  of  desire  to  attempt
some  notable  thing.  And  understanding  by  reason  of
the  Sphere,  that  if  I  should  saile  by  way  of  the  North-
west, I  should  by  a  shorter  tract  come  into  India,  I
thereupon  caused  the  King  to  be  advertised  of  my  devise,
who  immediatly  commanded  two  Carvels  to  bee  furnished
with  all  things  appertayning  to  the  voyage,  which  was  as
farre  as  1  remember  in  the  yeere  1496.  in  the  beginning
of  Sommer. I  beran  therefore  to  saile  toward  the  North-

O

west,  not  thinking  to  finde  any  other  land  then  that  of
Cathay,  &  from  thence  to  turne  toward  India,  but  after
certaine  dayes  I  found  that  the  land  ranne  towards  the
North,  which  was  to  mee  a  great  displeasure.  Never-
thelesse,  sayling  along  by  the  coast  to  see  if  I  could  finde
any  gulfe  that  turned,  I  found  the  lande  still  continent
to  the  ^6.  degree  under  our  Pole.  And  seeing  that  there
the  coast  turned  toward  the  East,  despairing  to  finde  the
passage,  I  turned  backe  againe,  and  sailed  downe  by  the
coast  of  that  land  toward  the  Equinoctiall  (ever  with
intent  to  finde  the  saide  passage  to  India)  and  came  to
that  part  of  this  firme  lande  which  is  nowe  called  Florida,
where  my  victuals  failing,  I  departed  from  thence  and
returned  into  England,  where  I  found  great  tumults
among  the  people,  and  preparation  for  warres  in  Scot-
land :  by  reason  whereof  there  was  no  more  consideration
T/ie  second had  to  this  voyage.

voyage  of  Whereupon  I  went  into  Spaine  to  the  Catholique  king,

Cabot  to  the  ^^^^  Queene  Elizabeth,  which  being  advertised  what  I
Brasll  and  ^^^  done,  intertained  me,  and  at  their  charges  furnished
R'ln  de plata. certaine  ships,  wherewith  they  caused  me  to  saile  to  dis-

SEBASTIAN CABOT

A.D.

1497.

cover  the  coastes  of  Brasile,  where  I  found  an  exceeding
great  and  large  river  named  at  this  present  Rio  de  la
plata,  that  is,  the  river  of  silver,  into  the  which  I  sailed
and  followed  it  into  the  firme  land,  more  then  sixe  score
leagues,  finding  it  every  where  very  faire,  and  inhabited
with  infinite  people,  which  with  admiration  came  running
dayly  to  our  ships.  Into  this  River  runne  so  many  other
rivers,  that  it  is  in  maner  incredible.

After  this  I  made  many  other  voyages,  which  I  nowe
pretermit,  and  waxing  olde,  I  give  my  selfe  to  rest  from
such  travels,  because  there  are  nowe  many  yong  and  lustie
Pilots  and  Mariners  of  good  experience,  by  whose  for-  T^he  office  of
wardnesse  I  doe  rejoyce  in  the  fruit  of  my  labours,  and  ^ mmor.
rest  with  the  charge  of  this  office,  as  you  see.

The  foresaide  Baptista  Ramusius  in  his  preface  to
the  thirde  volume  of  the  Navigations,  w^riteth
thus  of  Sebastian  Cabot.

^jjN  the  latter  part  of  this  volume  are  put
certaine  relations  of  John  de  Vararzana,
Florentine,  and  of  a  great  captaine  a
Frenchman,  and  the  two  voyages  of
Jaques  Cartier  a  Briton,  who  sailed  unto
the  land  situate  in  50.  degrees  of  Lati-
tude to  the  North,  which  is  called  New
France,  which  landes  hitherto  are  not  throughly  knowen,
whether  they  doe  joyne  with  the  firme  land  of  Florida
and  Nova  Hispania,  or  whether  they  bee  separated  and
devided  all  by  the  Sea  as  Hands :  and  whether  that  by
that  way  one  may  goe  by  Sea  unto  the  countrey  of  Cathaia.
As  many  yeeres  past  it  was  written  unto  mee  by  Sebastian
Cabota  our  Countrey  man  a  Venetian,  a  man  of  great
experience,  and  very  rare  in  the  art  of  Navigation,  and
the  knowledge  of  Cosmographie,  who  sailed  along  and
beyond  this  lande  of  New  France,  at  the  charges  of  King  J^^.f!'^.^^^''^]
Henry  the  seventh  king  of  England :  and  he  advertised  j^orthwest
mee,  that  having  sailed  a  long  time  West  and  by  North,  passage.

149

A.D.

1497'

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

beyond  those  Hands  unto  the  Latitude  of  67.  degrees
and  an  halfe,  under  the  North  pole,  and  at  the  1 1 .  day
of  June  finding  still  the  open  Sea  without  any  maner  of
impediment,  he  thought  verily  by  that  way  to  have  passed
on  still  the  way  to  Cathaia,  which  is  in  the  East,  and
[III.  8.]  would  have  done  it,  if  the  mutinie  of  the  shipmaster  and
Mariners  had  not  hindered  him  and  made  him  to  returne
homewards  from  that  place.  But  it  seemeth  that  God
doeth  yet  still  reserve  this  great  enterprise  for  some  great
prince  to  discover  this  voyage  of  Cathaia  by  this  way,
which  for  the  bringing  of  the  Spiceries  from  India  into
Europe,  were  the  most  easie  and  shortest  of  all  other
wayes  hitherto  found  out.  And  surely  this  enterprise
would  be  the  most  glorious,  and  of  most  importance
of  all  other  that  can  be  imagined  to  make  his  name  great,
and  fam.e  immortall,  to  all  ages  to  come,  farre  more  then
can  be  done  by  any  of  all  these  great  troubles  and  warres
which  dayly  are  used  in  Europe  among  the  miserable
Christian  people.

Another testimonie of  the voyage of Sebastian
Cabot  to  the  West  and  Northv^est,  taken  out
of  the sixt Chapter  of  the third  Decade of
Peter  Martyr  of  Angleria.

Crutatus est oras glaciales Sebastianus
quidam Cabotus genere Venetus, sed a
parentibus in Britanniam insulam ten-
dentibus (uti moris est Venetorum,  qui
commercii causa terrarum omnium sunt
hospites)  transportatus  pene  infans. Duo
is sibi navigia, propria pecunia in Brit-
annia ipsa instruxit, & primo tendens  cum hominibus
tercentum  ad Septentrionem donee etiam Julio mense
vastas  repererit  glaciales  moles  pelago  natantes,  &  lucem
fere perpetuam, tellure tamen libera,  gelu liquefacto :
quare coactus fuit, uti ait,  vela  vertere & occidentem
sequi : tetenditque  tantum  ad  meridiem  littore sese in-

150

SEBASTIAN CABOT  ad.

1497-
curvante,  ut  Herculei  freti  latitudinis  fere  gradus  aequarit :
ad  occident6mque  profectus  tantum  est  ut  Cubam  Insulam
a  laeva,  longitudine  graduum  pene  parem,  habuerit.  Is
ea  littora  percurrens,  quae  Baccalaos  appelavit,  eosdem  se
reperisse  aquarum,  sed  lenes  delapsus  ad  Occidentem  ait,
quos  Castellani,  meridionales  suas  regiones  adnavigantes,
inveniunt.  Ergo  non  modo  verisimilius,  sed  necessario
concludendum  est,  vastos  inter  utramque  ignotam  hac-
tenus  tellurem  jacere  hiatus,  qui  viam  prasbeant  aquis
ab  oriente  cadentibus  in  Occidentem.  Quas  arbitror
impulsu  coelorum  circulariter  agi  in  gyrum  circa  terras
globum,  non  autem  Demogorgone  anhelante  vomi,
absorberique  ut  nonnulli  senserunt,  quod  influxu,  &  re-
fluxu  forsan  assentire  daretur.  Baccalaos,  Cabotus  ipse
terras  illas  appellavit,  eo  quod  in  earum  pelago  tantam
reperierit  magnorum  quorundam  piscium,  tynnos  aemu-
lantium,  sic  vocatorum  ab  indigenis,  multitudinem,  ut
etiam  illi  interdum  navigia  detardarent.  Earum  Regionum
homines  pellibus  tantum  coopertos  reperiebat,  rationis
haudquaquam  expertes.  Ursorum  inesse  regionibus
copiam  ingentem  refert,  qui  &  ipsi  piscibus  vescantur.
Inter  densa  namque  piscium  illorum  agmina  sese  im-
mergunt  ursi,  &  singulos  singuli  complexos,  unguibusque
inter  squammas  immissis  in  terram  raptant  &  comedunt.
Propterea  minime  noxios  hominibus  visos  esse  ait.
Orichalcum  in  plerisque  locis  se  vidisse  apud  incolas
praedicat.  Familiarem  habeo  domxi  Cobotum  ipsum,  &
contubernalem  interdum.  Vocatus  namque  ex  Britannia
a  Rege  nostro  Catholico,  post  Henrici  Majoris  Britannise
Regis  mortem,  concuriaHs  noster  est,  expectatque  indies,
ut  navigia  sibi  parentur,  quibus  arcanum  hoc  naturae
latens  jam  tandem  detegatur.

The  same  in  English.

THese  North  Seas  have  bene  searched  by  one  Sebas-
tian Cabot,  a  Venetian  borne,  whom  being  yet  but
in  maner  an  infant,  his  parents  caried  with  them  into
England,  having  occasion  to  resort  thither  for  trade  of  mar-

151

A.D.
1497.

^  current
toward  the

West.

The  people  of
Island  sa"^  the
Sea  and  fee
sstteth  also
West.

Jonas  Jrn-
grimus.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

chandise,  as  is  the  maner  of  the  Venetians  to  leave  no  part
of  the  world  unsearched  to  obtaine  riches.  Hee  therefore
furnished  two  ships  in  England  at  his  owne  charges,  and
first  with  300  men  directed  his  course  so  farre  towards
the  North  pole,  that  even  in  the  moneth  of  July  he
found  monstrous  heapes  of  ice  swimming  on  the  sea,  and
in  maner  continuall  day  light,  yet  saw  he  the  land  in  that
tract  free  from  ice,  which  had  bene  molten  by  the  heat
of  the  Sunne.  Thus  seeing  such  heapes  of  yce  before
him,  hee  was  enforced  to  turne  his  sailes  and  follow
the  West,  so  coasting  still  by  the  shore,  that  he  was
thereby  brought  so  farre  into  the  South,  by  reason  of
the  land  bending  so  much  Southwards,  that  it  was  there
almost  equall  in  latitude,  with  the  sea  Fretum  Herculeum,
having  the  Northpole  elevate  in  maner  in  the  same  degree.
He  sailed  likewise  in  this  tract  so  farre  towards  the  West,
that  hee  had  the  Island  of  Cuba  on  his  left  hand,  in
maner  in  the  same  degree  of  longitude.  As  hee  traveiled
by  the  coastes  of  this  great  land,  (which  he  named  Bac-
calaos)  he  saith  that  hee  found  the  like  course  of  the
waters  toward  the  West,  but  the  same  to  runne  more
softly  and  gently  then  the  swift  waters  which  the  Spaniards
found  in  their  Navigations  Southward.  Wherfore  it  is
not  onely  more  like  to  be  true,  but  ought  also  of
necessitie  to  be  concluded  that  betweene  both  the  lands
hitherto  unknowen,  there  should  be  certaine  great  open
places  whereby  the  waters  should  thus  continually  passe
from  the  East  unto  the  West :  which  waters  I  suppose
to  be  driven  about  the  globe  of  the  earth  by  the  un-
cessant  moving  and  impulsion  of  the  heavens,  and  not
to  bee  swallowed  up  and  cast  up  againe  by  the  breathing
of  Demogorgon,  as  some  have  imagined,  because  they
see  the  seas  by  increase  and  decrease  to  ebbe  and  flowe.
Sebastian  Cabot  himselfe  named  those  lands  Baccalaos,
because  that  in  the  Seas  thereabout  hee  found  so  great
multitudes  of  certaine  bigge  fishes  much  like  unto  Tunies,
(which  the  inhabitants  call  Baccalaos)  that  they  sometime
stayed  his  shippes. He  found  also  the  people  of  those

152

SEBASTIAN CABOT

regions  covered  with  beastes  skinnes,  yet  not  without  the
use  of  reason.  He  also  saith  there  is  great  plentie  of
Beares  in  those  regions  which  use  to  eate  fish  :  for  plung-
ing themselves  into  ye  water,  where  they  perceive  a
multitude  of  these  fishes  to  lie,  they  fasten  their  clawes
in  their  scales,  and  so  draw  them  to  land  and  eate  them,
so  (as  he  saith)  the  Beares  being  thus  satisfied  with  fish,
are  not  noisome  to  men.  Hee  declareth  further,  that  in
many  places  of  these  Regions  he  saw  great  plentie  of
Copper  among  the  inhabitants.  Cabot  is  my  very  friend,
whom  I  use  familiarly,  and  delight  to  have  him  sometimes
keepe  mee  company  in  mine  owne  house.  For  being
called  out  of  England  by  the  commandement  of  the
Catholique  King  of  Castile,  after  the  death  of  King  Henry
the  seventh  of  that  name  King  of  England,  he  was  made
one  of  our  councill  and  Assistants,  as  touching  the
affaires  of  the  new  Indies,  looking  for  ships  dayly  to
be  furnished  for  him  to  discover  this  hid  secret  of
Nature.

The  testimonie  of  Francis  Lopez  de  Gomara  a
Spaniard,  in  the  fourth  Chapter  of  the  second
Booke  of  his  generall  history  of  the  West
Indies  concerning  the  first  discoverie  of  a
great  part  of  the  West  Indies,  to  wit,  from
58.  to  38.  degrees  of  latitude,  by  Sebastian
Cabota  out  of  England.

E  which  brought  most  certaine  newes
of  the  countrey  &  people  of  Baccalaos,
saith  Gomara,  was  Sebastian  Cabote  a
Venetian,  which  rigged  up  two  ships  at
the  cost  of  K.  Henry  the  7.  of  England,
having  great  desire  to  traffique  for  the
spices  as  the  Portingals  did.  He  caried
with  him  300.  men,  and  tooke  the  way  towards  Island
from  beyond  the  Cape  of  Labrador,  untill  he  found
himselfe  in 58.  degrees  and  better. He made  relation

153

A.D.
1497.

Copper  found
in  man"^  places
hy  Cabote.

A.D.
1497.

Cabots  voyage.
from  Bristol

wherein  he

discovered

Nezvfound

land,  y  the

Northerne
parts  of  that

land,  and
from  thence  as
farre  almost  as

Florida.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  in  the  moneth  of  July  it  was  so  cold,  and  the  ice
so  great,  that  hee  durst  not  passe  any  further :  that  the
dayes  were  very  long,  in  a  maner  without  any  night,  and
for  that  short  night  that  they  had,  it  was  very  cleare.
Cabot  feeling  the  cold,  turned  towards  the  West,  re-
freshing himselfe  at  Baccalaos :  and  afterwards  he  sayled
along  the  coast  unto  38.  degrees,  and  from  thence  he
shaped his  course  to  returne  into  England.

A  note  of  Sebastian  Cabots  first  discoverie  of  part
of  the  Indies  taken  out  of  the  latter  part  of
Robert  Fabians  Chronicle  not  hitherto  printed,
which  is  in  the  custodie  of  M.  John  Stow  a
diligent  preserver  of  Antiquities.

N  the  13.  yeere  of  K.  Henry  the  7.  (by
meanes  of  one  John  Cabot  a  Venetian
which  made  himselfe  very  expert  and
cunning  in  knowledge  of  the  circuit  of
the  world  and  Hands  of  the  same,  as  by
a  Sea  card  and  other  demonstrations
reasonable  he  shewed)  the  king  caused
to  man  and  victuall  a  ship  at  Bristow,  to  search  for  an
Island,  which  he  said  hee  knew  well  was  rich,  and  re-
plenished with  great  commodities :  Which  shippe  thus
manned  and  victualled  at  the  kings  cost,  divers  Marchants
of  London  ventured  in  her  small  stocks,  being  in  her
as  chiefe  patron  the  said  Venetian.  And  in  the  company
of  the  said  ship,  sailed  also  out  of  Bristow  three  or
foure  small  ships  fraught  with  sleight  and  grosse  mar-
chandizes,  as  course  cloth,  caps,  laces,  points  &  other
trifles.  And  so  departed  from  Bristow  in  the  begin-
ning of  May,  of  whom  in  this  Maiors  time  returned
no  tidings.

154

DISCOVERY OF NEWFOUNDLAND

A.D.

1497.

Of  three  Savages  which  Cabot  brought  home
and  presented  unto  the  King  in  the  foure-
teenth  yere  of  his  raigne,  mentioned  by  the
foresaid  Robert  Fabian.

His  yeere  also  were  brought  unto  the
king  three  men  taken  in  the  Newfound
Island  that  before  I  spake  of,  in  William
Purchas  time  being  Maior :  These  were
clothed  in  beasts  skins,  &  did  eate  raw
flesh,  and  spake  such  speach  that  no  man
could  understand  them,  and  in  their  [III.  10.]
demeanour  like  to  bruite  beastes,  whom  the  King  kept
a  time  after.  Of  the  which  upon  two  yeeres  after,  I
saw  two  apparelled  after  the  maner  of  Englishmen  in
Westminster  pallace,  which  that  time  I  could  not  dis-
cerne  from  Englishmen,  til  I  was  learned  what  they
were,  but  as  for  speach,  I  heard  none  of  them  utter
one  word.

A  briefe  extract  concerning  the  discoverie  of  New-
found-land, taken  out  of  the  booke  of  M.
Robert  Thorne,  to  doctor  Leigh,  &c.

Reason,  that  as  some  sickenesses  are
hereditarie,  so  this  ificlination  or  desire
of  this  discovery  I  inherited  from  my
father,  which  with  another  marchant  of
Bristol  named  Hugh  Eliot,  were  the
discoverers  of  the  Newfound-lands ;  of  •
the  which  there  is  no  doubt  (as  nowe
plainely  appeareth)  if  the  Mariners  would  then  have
bene  ruled,  and  followed  their  Pilots  minde,  but  the
lands  of  the  West  Indies,  from  whence  all  the  golde
commeth,  had  bene  ours ;  for  all  is  one  coast  as  by
the  Card  appeareth,  and  is  aforesaid.

[The  large

155

A.D.

1549.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  large  pension  granted  by  K.  Edward  the  6.
to  Sebastian  Cabota,  constituting  him  grand
Pilot  of  England.

Dwardus  sextus  Dei  gratia  Angliae,  Fran-
ciae,  &  Hibernian  rex,  omnibus  Christi
fidelibus,  ad  quos  praesentes  has  literae
nostras  pervenerint,  salutem.  Sciatis
quod  nos  in  consideratione  boni  &
acceptabilis  servitii,  nobis  per  dilectum
servientem  nostrum  Sebastianum  Cabo-
tam  impensi  atque  impendendi,  de  gratia  nostra  speciali,
ac  ex  certa  scientia,  &  mero  motu  nostro,  nee  non  de
advisamento,  &  consensu  praeclarissimi  avunculi  nostri
Edwardi  Ducis  Somerseti  personae  nostras  Gubernatoris,
ac  Regnorum,  dominiorum,  subditorumque  nostrorum
protectoris,  &  casterorum  consiliariorum  nostrorum,  de-
dimus  &  concessimus,  ac  per  prassentes  damus,  &  con-
cedimus  eidem  Sebastiano  Cabotas,  quandam  annuitatem
sive  annualem  reditum,  centum  sexaginta  &  sex  librarum,
tresdecim  solidorum,  &  quatuor  denariorum  sterlingo-
rum,  habendam,  gaudendam,  &  annuatim  percipiendam
pr;£dictam  annuitatem,  sive  annalem  reditum  eidem
Sebastiano  Cabotas,  durante  vita  sua  naturali,  de  thesauro
nostro  ad  receptum  scacarii  nostri  Westmonasterii  per
manus  thesaurariorum,  &  Camerariorum  nostrorum,
ibidem  pro  tempore  existentium,  ad  festa  annuntiationis
beatas  Marias  Virginis,  nativitatis  sancti  Joannis  Baptistas,
Sancti  Michaelis  Archangeli,  &  Natalis  Domini  per
aequales  portiones  solvendam.  Et  ulterius  de  uberiori
gratia  nostra,  ac  de  advisamento,  &  consensu  prasdictis
damus,  &  per  praesentes  concedimus  prsfato  Sebastiano
Cabotas,  tot  &  tantas  Denariorum  summas,  ad  quot  &
quantas  dicta  annuitas  sive  annaUs  reditus  centum  sexa-
ginta sex  librarum,  tresdecim  solidorum,  &  quatuor
denariorum,  a  festo  sancti  Michaelis  Archangeli  ultimo
praeterito hue usque se extendit, & attingit, habendas

156

SEBASTIAN  CABOT'S  LARGE  PENSION  ad.

1 549-
&  recipiendas  praefato  Sebastiano  Cabotae  &  assignatis
suis  de  thesauro  nostro  prasdicto  per  manus  praedic-
torum  Thesaurariorum,  &  Camerariorum  nostrorum  de
dono  nostro  absque  compute,  seu  aliquo  alio  nobis,
haeredibus,  vel  successoribus  nostris  proinde  reddendo,
soivendo,  vel  faciendo :  eo  quod  expressa  mentio,  &c.
In  cujus  rei  testimonium,  &c.  Teste  Rege,  apud  West-
monasterium  6.  die  januarii,  Anno  2.  Regis  Edwardi  ^'^»<'  ^•
sexti.  ^  ^5+9-

The  same  in  English.

ED  ward  the  sixt  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of
England,  France  and  Ireland,  defender  of  the  faith,
to  all  Christian  people  to  whom  these  presents  shall
come,  sendeth  greeting.  Know  yee  that  we,  in  con-
sideration of  the  good  and  acceptable  service  done,  and
to  be  done,  unto  us  by  our  beloved  servant  Sebastian
Cabota,  of  our  speciall  grace,  certaine  knowledge,  meere
motion,  and  by  the  advice  and  counsel  of  our  most
honourable  uncle  Edward  duke  of  Somerset  governour
of  our  person,  and  Protector  of  our  kingdomes,
dominions,  and  subjects,  and  of  the  rest  of  our  Coun-
saile,  have  given  &  granted,  and  by  these  presents  do
give  and  graunt  to  the  said  Sebastian  Cabota,  a  certaine
annuitie,  or  yerely  revenue  of  one  hundreth,  threescore
&  sixe  pounds,  thirteene  shillings  foure  pence  sterling,
to  have,  enjoy,  and  yerely  receive  the  foresaid  annuitie,
or  yerely  revenue,  to  the  foresaid  Sebastian  Cabota
during  his  natural  life,  out  of  our  Treasurie  at  the
receit  of  our  Exchequer  at  Westminster,  at  the  hands
of  our  Treasurers  &  paymasters,  there  remayning  for
the  time  being,  at  the  feasts  of  the  Annuntiation  of  the
blessed  Virgin  Mary,  the  Nativitie  of  S.  John  Baptist,
S.  Michael  ye  Archangel,  &  the  Nativitie  of  our  Lord,
to  be  paid  by  equal  portions.

And  further,  of  our  more  speciall  grace,  and by  the  [in.  n.]
advise and consent aforesaide wee doe give,  and by
these  presents  doe  graunt  unto  the  aforesaide  Sebastian

157

A.D.
1549.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Cabota,  so  many,  and  so  great  summes  of  money  as
the  saide  annuitie  or  yeerely  revenue  of  an  hundreth,
threescore  and  sixe  pounds,  thirteene  shillings  4.  pence,
doeth  amount  and  rise  unto  from  the  feast  of  S.
Michael  the  Archangel  last  past  unto  this  present  time,
to  be  had  and  received  by  the  aforesaid  Sebastian
Cabota,  and  his  assignes  out  of  our  aforesaid  Treasurie,
at  the  handes  of  our  aforesaide  Treasurers,  and  officers
of  our  Exchequer  of  our  free  gift  without  accompt,  or
any  thing  else  therefore  to  be  yeelded,  payed,  or  made,
to  us,  our  heires  or  successours,  forasmuch  as  herein
expresse  mention  is  made  to  the  contrary.

In  witnesse  whereof  we  have  caused  these  our  Letters
to  be  made  patents :  Witnesse  the  King  at  Westminster
the  sixt  day  of  Januarie,  in  the  second  yeere  of  his
raigne. The  yeere  of  our  Lord 1548.

A  discourse  written  by  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert
Knight,  to  prove  a  passage  by  the  Northw^est
to  Cathaia,  and  the  East  Indies.

f  The  Table  of  the  matters  in  every  Chapter  of  this

discourse.

Capitulo I .

O  prove  by  authoritie  a  passage  to  be  on
the  North  side  of  America,  to  goe  to
Cataia,  China,  and  to  the  East  India.

Capitulo  2.

To  prove  by  reason  a  passage  to  be
on  the  North  side  of  America,  to  goe
to  Cataia,  Moluccae,  &c.

Capitulo  3.

To  prove  by  experience  of  sundry  mens  travailes  the
opening  of  this  Northwest  passage,  whereby  good  hope
remaineth  of  the  rest.

158

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad

1576.

Capitulo  4.

To  prove  by  circumstance,  that  the  Northwest  passage
hath  bene  sailed  throughout.

Capitulo 5.

To  proove  that  such  Indians  as  have  bene  driven  upon
the  coastes  of  Germanic  came  not  thither  by  the  South-
east, and  Southwest,  nor  from  any  part  of  Afrike  or
America.

Capitulo  6.

To  proove  that  the  Indians  aforenamed  came  not  by
the  Northeast,  and  that  there  is  no  thorow  passage
navigable  that  way.

Capitulo 7.
To  prove  that  these  Indians  came  by  the  Northwest,
which  induceth  a  certaintie  of  this  passage  by  experience.

Capitulo 8 .

What  several  reasons  were  alleaged  before  the  Queenes
Majestic,  and  certaine  Lords  of  her  Highnesse  privie
Council,  by  M.  Anth.  Jenkinson  a  Gentleman  of  great
travaile  and  experience,  to  prove  this  passage  by  the
Northeast,  with  my  severall  answeres  then  alleaged  to
the  same.

Capitulo  9.

How  that  this  passage  by  the  Northwest  is  more
commodious  for  our  traffike,  then  the  other  by  the
Northeast,  if  there  were  any  such.

Capitulo 10.

What  commodities  would  ensue,  this  passage  being
once  discovered.

[To  prove
159

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

To  prove  by  authoritie  a  passage  to  be  on  the
Northside  of  America,  to  goe  to  Cathaia,  and
the  East  India.

Chapter i .

WHen  I  gave  my  selfe  to  the  studie  of  Geographie,
after  I  had  perused  and  diHgently  scanned  the
descriptions  of  Europe,  Asia  &  Afrike,  and  conferred
them  with  the  Mappes  and  Globes  both  Antique  and
Moderne :  I  came  in  fine  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  world,,
commonly  called  America,  which  by  all  descriptions  I
found  to  bee  an  Hand  environed  round  about  with  Sea,
having  on  the  Southside  of  it  the  frete  or  straight  of
Magellan,  on  the  West  side  Mar  del  Sur,  which  Sea
runneth  towards  the  North,  separating  it  fronx  the  East
parts  of  Asia,  where  the  Dominions  of  the  Cathaians  are :
On  the  East  part  our  West  Ocean,  and  on  the  North
side  the  sea  that  severeth  it  from  Groneland,  thorow
which  Northren  Seas  the  Passage  lyeth,  which  I  take
now  in  hand  to  discover.

Plato  in  Timaeo,  and  in  the  Dialogue  called  Critias,
discourseth  of  an  incomparable  great  Hand  then  called
Atlantis,  being  greater  then  all  Affrike  and  Asia,  which
lay  Westward  from  the  Straights  of  Gibraltar,  navigable
round  about :  affirming  also  that  the  Princes  of  Atlantis
did  aswell  enjoy  the  governance  of  all  Affrike,  and  the
most  part  of  Europe,  as  of  Atlantis  it  selfe.

Also  to  prove  Platos  opinion  of  this  Hand,  and  the
inhabiting  of  it  in  ancient  time  by  them  of  Europe,  to  be
of  the  more  credite ;  Marinaeus  Siculus  in  his  Chronicle
of  Spaine,  reporteth  that  there  have  bene  found  by  the
Spaniards  in  the  gold  Mines  of  America,  certaine  pieces
of  Money  ingraved  with  the  Image  of  Augustus  Caesar :
which  pieces  were  sent  to  the  Pope  for  a  testimonie  o£
the  matter,  by  John  Rufus  Archbishop  of  Consentinum.

Moreover,  this  was  not  only  thought  of  Plato,  but  by
Marsilius  Ficinus,  and  excellent  Florentine  Philosopher,,

160

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad

1576.

Grantor  the  Graecian,  and  Proclus,  and  Philo  the  famous  Prodm  pag.
Jew  (as  appeareth  in  his  booke  De  Mundo,  and  in  the  ^+'
Commentaries upon Plato) to be overflowen and
swallowed  up  with  water,  by  reason  of  a  mightie  earth-
quake, and  streaming  downe  of  the  heavenly  Fludgates.
The  like  whereof  happened  unto  some  part  of  Italy,  when
by  the  forciblenes  of  the  Sea,  called  Superum,  it  cut  off
Sicilia  from the Continent  of  Calabria,  as appeareth in
Justine, in the beginning  of  his fourth booke. Also  Justine  Lib.  \.
there  chanced  the  like  in  Zetland  a  part  of  Flanders.

And  also  the  Cities  of  Pyrrha  and  Antissa,  about  Plkie,
Meotis  palus :  and  also  the  Citie  Burys,  in  the  Corynthian
bosome,  commonly  called  Sinus  Corinthiacus,  have  bene
swallowed  up  with  the  Sea,  and  are  not  at  this  day  to
be  discerned :  By  which  accident  America  grew  to  be
unknowen  of  long  time,  unto  us  of  the  later  ages,  and
was  lately  discovered  againe,  by  Americus  Vespucius,  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1497.  which  some  say  to  have
bene  first  discovered  by  Christophorus  Columbus  a
Genuois,  Anno 1492.

The  same  calamitie  happened  unto  this  Isle  of  Atlantis
600.  and  odde  yeres  before  Plato  his  time,  which  some
of  the  people  of  the  Southeast  parts  of  the  world  ac-
compted  as  9000.  yeeres :  for  the  maner  then  was  to
reckon  the  Moone  her  Period  of  the  Zodiak  for  a  yeere,
which  is  our  usual  moneth,  depending  a  Luminari  minori.

So  that  in  these  our  dayes  there  can  no  other  mayne
or  Islande  be  found  or  judged  to  bee  parcell  of  this
Atlantis,  then  those  Westerne  Islands,  which  beare  now
the  name  of  America :  countervailing  thereby  the  name
of  Atlantis,  in  the  knowledge  of  our  age.

Then,  if  when  no  part  of  the  sayd  Atlantis  was
oppressed  by  water,  and  earthquake,  the  coasts  round
about  the  same  were  navigable :  a  farre  greater  hope  now
remaineth  of  the  same  by  the  Northwest,  seeing  the
most  part  of  it  was  (since  that  time)  swallowed  up  with  A  minore  ad
water,  which  could  not  utterly  take  away  the  olde  deeps  ^'^^J^^-
and  chanels,  but  rather,  be  an  occasion  of  the  inlarging
VII  161  L

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

of  the  olde,  and  also  an  inforcing  of  a  great  many  new :
why  then  should  we  now  doubt  of  our  Northwest  passage
and  navigation  from  England  to  India?  &c.  seeing  that
Atlantis  now  called  America,  was  ever  knowen  to  be  an
Island,  and  in  those  dayes  navigable  round  about,  which
by  accesse  of  more  water  could  not  be  diminished.

Also  Aristotle  in  his  booke  De  Mundo,  and  the
learned  Germaine  Simon  Gryneus  in  his  annotations
upon  the  same,  saith  that  the  whole  earth  (meaning
thereby,  as  manifestly  doth  appeare,  Asia,  Africk,  and
Europe,  being  all  the  countreys  then  knowen)  is  but
one  Island,  compassed  about  with  the  reach  of  the  sea
Atlantine :  which  likewise  prooveth  America  to  be  an
Island,  and  in  no  part  adjoyning  to  Asia,  or  the  rest.
Strabolib.  15.  Also  many  ancient  writers,  as  Strabo  and  others,  called
both  the  Ocean  sea,  (which  lieth  East  of  India)  Atlanti-
cum  pelagus,  and  that  sea  also  on  the  West  coasts  of
Spaine  and  Africk,  Mare  Atlanticum :  the  distance  be-
tweene  the  two  coasts  is  almost  halfe  the  compasse  of
the  earth.

So  that it is incredible,  as by  Plato  appeareth  mani-
festly, that  the  East  Indian  Sea  had  the  name  Atlanticum
pelagus of  the mountaine Atlas in  Afrik,  or yet the
sea  adjoining  to  Africk,  had  the  name  Oceanus  Atlanticus
Valerius  of  the same mountaine : but  that those seas  and the

Anselmus  in  mountaine  Atlas  were  so  called  of  this  great  Island
rum^'trhi-  Atlantis,  and  that  the  one  and  the  other  had  their  names
cipium.fol.  6.  for  a  memorial  of  the  mighty  prince  Atlas,  sometime  king
Gen.  9.  10.  thereof,  who  was  Japhet  yongest  sonne  to  Noah,  in
whose  time  the  whole  earth  was  divided  between  the
three  brethren,  Sem,  Cam,  and  Japhet.

Wherefore  I  am  of  opinion  that  America  by  the
Northwest  will  be  found  favourable  to  this  our  enter-
prise, and  am  the  rather  imboldened  to  beleeve  the  same,
for  that  I  finde  it  not  onely  confirmed  by  Plato,  Aristotle,
and  other  ancient  Phylosophers :  but  also  by  all  the  best
[II  moderne Geographers, as Gemma Frisius, Munsterus,

Appianus, Hunterus, Gastaldus,  Guyccardinus, Michael

162

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.

Tramasinus,  Franciscus  Demongenitus,  Bernardus  Pute-
anus,  Andreas  Vavasor,  Tramontanus,  Petrus  Martyr,
and  also  Ortelius,  who  doth  coast  out  in  his  generall
Mappe  set  out  Anno  1569,  all  the  countreys  and  Capes,
on  the  Northwest  side  of  America,  from  Hochelaga  to
Cape  de  Paramantia :  describing  likewise  the  sea  coastes
of  Cataia  and  Gronland,  towards  any  part  of  America,
making  both  Gronland  and  America,  Islands  disjoyned
by  a  great  sea,  from  any  part  of  Asia.

All  which  learned  men  and  painefuU  travellers  have
affirmed  with  one  consent  and  voice,  that  America  was  an
Island :  and  that  there  lyeth  a  great  Sea  betweene  it,
Cataia,  and  Grondland,  by  the  which  any  man  of  our
countrey,  that  will  give  the  attempt,  may  with  small
danger  passe  to  Cataia,  the  Moluccas,  India,  and  all  other
places  in  the  East,  in  much  shorter  time,  then  either
the  Spaniard,  or  Portugal  doeth,  or  may  doe,  from  the
neerest  parte  of  any  of  their  countreys  within  Europe.

What  moved  these  learned  men  to  affirme  thus  much, ^^  '^'^Sh[  h

I know not, or to what ende so many and sundry  ''^^^°^^  '^<§  ^

^  ^ to  have  (2

travellers of  both ages  have  allowed the same : But I  reverent

conjecture that they would never have so constantly  opinion  of

affirmed,  or  notified  their  opinions  therein  to  the  world,  '^orth'^  men.

if  they  had  not  had  great  good  cause,  and  many  probable

reasons,  to  have  lead  them  thereunto.

Now  least  you  should  make  small  accompt  of  ancient

writers  or  of  their  experiences  which  travelled  long  before

our  times,  reckoning their authority  amongst  fables  of

no  importance : I  have  for  the  better  assurance  of  those

proofes,  set  downe  some  part  of  a  discourse,  written  in

the Saxon tongue,  and translated  into English by  M.

Nowel  servant  to  Sir  William  Cecil,  lord  Burleigh,  and

lord  high  treasurer  of  England,  wherein  there  is  described

a  Navigation,  which  one  Ochther  made,  in  the  time  of  A  'Navigation

king  Alfred,  king  of  Westsaxe  Anno 871.  the  words  of  "f  one  Ochther

which discourse  were these : Hee sailed rip^ht North,  ''!f//f.!f  T^
1 •  I'll  11  1 o 1 1  1  Alpeas  time.

havmg  alwaies  the  desert  land  on  the  Starborde,  and  on

the  Larbord  the  maine  sea,  continuing  his  course,  untill

163

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

hee  perceived  that  the  coast  bowed  directly  towards  the
East,  or  else  the  Sea  opened  into  the  land  he  could  not
A  perfect  de-  tell  how  farre,  where  he  was  compelled  to  stay  until  he
scnptionofour  ]^^^  ^  westerne  winde,  or  somewhat  upon  the  North,  and
sayled  thence  directly  East  alongst  the  coast,  so  farre  as
hee  was  able  in  foure  dayes,  where  he  was  againe  inforced
to  tary  untill  hee  had  a  North  winde,  because  the  coast
there  bowed  directly  towards  the  South,  or  at  least
opened  he  knew  not  howe  farre  into  the  land,  so  that  he
sayled  thence  along  the  coast  continually  full  South,  so
farre  as  he  could  travell  in  the  space  of  five  dayes,  where
hee  discovered  a  mighty  river,  which  opened  farre  into
the  land,  and  in  the  entrie  of  this  river  he  turned
backe  againe.

Whereby  it  appeareth  that  he  went  the  very  same  way,
that  we  now  doe  yerely  trade  by  S.  Nicholas  into  Mos-
covia,  which  way  no  man  in  our  age  knew  for  certaintie
By  Sir  Hugh  to  be  by  sea,  until  it  was  since  discovered  by  our  English
T^-^T^c'h "^^^'  ^"  ^^^  ^^"^^  °^  ^^"^  Edward  the  sixt ;  but  thought
celfor'and  ^^~  before  that  time  that  Groneland  had  joyned  to  Normoria,
Borough. Byarmia, &c.  and therefore  was accompted a  new  dis-
covery, being nothing so indeede,  as  by  this  discourse
of  Ochther  it  appeareth.

Neverthelesse  if  any  man  should  have  taken  this
voyage  in  hand  by  the  encouragement  of  this  onely
author,  he  should  have  bene  thought  but  simple :  con-
sidering that  this  Navigation  was  written  so  many  yeres
past,  in  so  barbarous  a  tongue  by  one  onely  obscure
author,  and  yet  we  in  these  our  dayes  finde  by  our  owne
experiences  his  former  reports  to  be  true.

How  much  more  then  ought  we  to  beleeve  this
passage  to  Cataia  to  bee,  being  verified  by  the  opmions
of  all  the  best,  both  Antique,  and  Moderne  Geographers,
and  plainely  set  out  in  the  best  and  most  allowed
Mappes,  Charts,  Globes,  Cosmographical  tables  &  dis-
courses of  this  our  age,  and  by  the  rest  not  denied,  but
left  as  a  matter  doubtful!.

164

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.

To proove by reason, a passage to be on the
Northside  of  America,  to  goe  to  Cataia,  &c.

Chap.  3.

First,  all  seas  are  maintained  by  the  abundance  of  Experimented
water,  so  that  the  neerer  the  end  any  River,  Bay  hour  English
or  Haven  is,  the  shallower  it  waxeth,  (although  by  some
accidentall  barre,  it  is  sometime  found  otherwise)  But
the  farther  you  sayle  West  from  Island  towards  the  place,
where  this  fret  is  thought  to  be,  the  more  deepe  are  the
seas :  which  giveth  us  good  hope  of  continuance  of  the
same  Sea  with  Mar  del  Sur,  by  some  fret  that  lyeth
betweene  America,  Groneland  and  Cataia.

2  Also  if  that  America  were  not  an  Island,  but  a  part

of ye continent adjoyning to Asia, either the people  [III.  14.]
which inhabite Mangia, Anian,  & Quinzay,  &c.  being
borderers upon it,  would before this time have made
some  road  into  it,  hoping  to  have  found  some  like  com-
modities to  their  owne.

3  Or els the Scythians and  Tartarians  (which often
times heretofore have sought  farre and  neere  for new

seats, driven thereunto through the necessitie of  their  t^eede  makes

cold  and  miserable  countreys)  would  in  all  this  time  have  ^^^  old  wife  to

.  trotte

found  the  way  to  America,  and  entred  the  same,  had  the

passages  bene  never  so  straite  or  difficult ;  the  countrey

being  so  temperate,  pleasant  and  fruitfuU,  in  comparison

of  their  owne. But there  was never  any  such people

found there by any of the Spaniards, Portugals, or

Frenchmen, who first discovered the Inland of that

countrey :  which  Spaniards,  or  Frenchmen  must  then  of

necessitie have seene some one civil man in America,

considering  how  full  of  civill  people  Asia  is :  But  they

never  saw so much as one token or signe,  that ever

any  man of  the knowen part of  the  world had bene

there.

4  Furthermore  it  is  to  be  thought,  that  if  by  reason
of  mountaines,  or  other  craggy  places,  the  people  neither

165

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

of  Cataia  or  Tartaric  could  enter  the  countrey  of  America,
or  they  of  America  have  entred  Asia  if  it  were  so  joyned:
yet  some  one  savage  or  wandring  beast  would  in  so
many  yeres  have  passed  into  it :  but  there  hath  not  any
time  bene  found  any  of  the  beasts  proper  to  Cataia,  or
Tartaric  &c.  in  America :  nor  of  those  proper  to  America,
in  Tartaric,  Cataia,  &c.  or  any  part  of  Asia.  Which
thing  proveth  America,  not  onely  to  be  one  Island,  and
in  no  part  adjoyning  to  Asia :  But  also  that  the  people
of  those  Countreys,  have  not  had  any  traffique  with
each  other.

5  Moreover  at  the  least  some  one  of  those  painefuU
travellers,  which  of  purpose  have  passed  the  confines  of
both  countreys,  with  intent  only  to  discover,  would  as
it  is  most  likely  have  gone  from  the  one  to  the  other :
if  there  had  bene  any  piece  of  land,  or  Isthmos,  to  have
joyned  them  together,  or  els  have  declared  some  cause
to  the  contrary.

6  But  neither  Paulus  Venetus,  who  lived  and  dwelt
a  long  time  in  Cataia,  ever  came  into  America,  and  yet
was  at  the  sea  coastes  of  Mangia,  over  against  it  where
he  was  embarked,  and  perfourmed  a  great  Navigation
along  those  seas :  Neither  yet  Verarzanus,  or  Franciscus
Vasques  de  Coronado,  who  travelled  the  North  part  of
America  by  land,  ever  found  entry  from  thence  by  land

The  Se^  hath  to  Cataia,  or  any  part  of  Asia.

three  motions. y  Also  it  appeareth  to  be  an  Island,  insomuch  as  the

1  Motum  ab  g^^  runneth  by  nature  circularly  from  the  East  to  the
dentem '  West,  following  the  diurnal  motion  of  Primum  Mobile,

2  Motum  which  carieth  with  it  all  inferiour  bodies  moveable,  aswel
fluxus  ^  re-  celestiall  as  elemental :  which  motion  of  the  waters  is
;?/m</.  most  evidently  scene  in  the  Sea,  which  lieth  on  the
\ularem  "'"  Southsidc  of  Afrike,  where  the  current  that  runneth  from
Adcceli  the  East  to  the  West  is  so  strong  (by  reason  of  such
viotum  ek-  motion)  that  the  Portugals  in  their  voyages  Eastward
menta  omnia  ^^  Calicut,  in  passing  by  Cap.  de  buona  Speran9a  are
terra)  moz'en-  Enforced  to  make  divers  courses,  the  current  there  being
tur^  SO  swift as it striketh from  thence  all  along  Westv/ard

166

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.

upon  the  fret  of  Magellan,  being  distant  from  thenc^
neere  the  fourth  part  of  the  longitude  of  the  earth :  and
not  having  free  passage  and  entrance  thorow  the  fret
towards  the  West,  by  reason  of  the  narrownesse  of  the
sayd  Straite  of  Magellan,  it  runneth  to  salve  this  wrong
(Nature  not  yeelding  to  accidentall  restraints)  all  along
the  Easterne  coastes  of  America,  Northwards  so  far  as
Cape  Fredo,  being  the  farthest  knowne  place  of  the
same  continent  towards  the  North :  which  is  about  4800
leagues,  reckoning  therewithal!  the  trending  of  the  land.

8  So  that  this  current  being  continually  maintained
with  such  force,  as  Jaques  Cartier  affirmeth  it  to  be,
who  met  with  the  same  being  at  Baccalaos,  as  he  sayled
along  the  coastes  of  America,  then  either  it  must  of
necessitie  have  way  to  passe  from  Cape  Fredo,  thorow
this  fret.  Westward  towards  Cataia,  being  knowen  to
come  so  farre,  onely  to  salve  his  former  wrongs,  by  the
authority  before  named :  or  els  it  must  needes  strike
over,  upon  the  coast  of  Island,  Norway,  Finmarke,  and
Lappia,  (which  are  East  from  the  sayd  place  about  360
leagues)  with  greater  force  then  it  did  from  Cape  de  Positacausaj
buona  Speran9a,  upon  the  fret  of  Magellan,  or  from  P°^^^^^  ^ff^^'
the  fret  of  Magellan  to  Cape  Fredo,  upon  which  coastes
Jaques  Cartier  met  with  the  same,  considering  the  short-
nesse  of  the  Cut  from  the  sayd  Cape  Fredo,  to  Island,
Lappia,  &c.  And  so  the  cause  Efficient  remaining,  it
would  have  continually  followed  along  our  coasts,
through  the  narrow  seas,  which  it  doth  not,  but  is  dis-
gested  about  the  North  of  Labrador,  by  some  through
passage  there  thorow  this  fret.

The  like  course  of  the  water  in  some  respect  happeneth
in  the  Mediterrane  sea  (as  affirmeth  Conterenus)  wheras  Conterenus.
the  current  which  commeth  from  Tanais,  &  Pontus
Euxinus,  running  along  all  the  coasts  of  Greece,  Italy,
France,  and  Spaine,  and  not  finding  sufficient  way  out
through  Gibraltar,  by  meanes  of  the  straitnesse  of  the
fret  it  runneth  backe  againe  along  the  coastes  of  Barbary,
by  Alexandria,  Natolia,  &c.

167

A.D.
1576.

[III. 15.]

j4n  objection
answered.
The  sea  doth
eve7-more  per-
forme  this  cir
cular  tnotion,
either  in
Suprema,  or
concava  super-
ficie  aqua.

The  yce  set
westward
every  yeere
from  Island.
Auth.  Jona
Amgrimo.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

It  may  (peradventure)  bee  thought  that  this  course  of
the  sea  doth  sometime  surcease,  and  thereby  impugne
this  principle,  because  it  is  not  discerned  all  along  the
coast  of  America,  in  such  sort  as  Jaques  Cartier  found
it :  Whereunto  I  answere  this :  that  albeit,  in  every  part
of  the  Coast  of  America,  or  elswhere  this  current  is  not
sensibly  perceived,  yet  it  hath  evermore  such  like  motion,
either  in  the  uppermost  or  nethermost  part  of  the  sea :
as  it  may  be  proved  true,  if  ye  sinke  a  sayle  by  a  couple
of  ropes,  neere  the  ground,  fastening  to  the  nethermost
corners  two  gunne  chambers  or  other  weights :  by  the
driving  whereof  you  shall  plainely  perceive,  the  course
of  the  water,  and  current,  running  with  such  course  in
the  bottome.

By  the  like  experiment,  you  may  finde  the  ordinary
motion  of  the  sea,  in  the  Ocean :  howe  farre  soever  you
be  off  the  land.

9  Also  there  commeth  another  current  from  out  the
Northeast  from  the  Scythian  Sea  (as  M.  Jenkinson  a  man
of  rare  vertue,  great  travaile  and  experience,  told  me)
which  runneth  Westward  towardes  Labrador,  as  the  other
did,  which  commeth  from  the  South  :  so  that  both  these
currents,  must  have  way  thorow  this  our  fret,  or  else
encounter  together  and  runne  contrarie  courses,  in  one
line,  but  no  such  conflicts  of  streames,  or  contrary  courses
are  found  about  any  part  of  Labrodor,  or  Terra  nova,  as
witnesse  our  yeerely  fishers,  and  other  saylers  that  way,
but  is  there  disgested,  as  aforesayd,  and  found  by  ex-
perience of  Barnard  de  la  Torre,  to  fall  into  Mar  del  Sur.

10  Furthermore,  the  current  in  the  great  Ocean,  could
not  have  beene  maintained  to  runne  continually  one  way,
from  the  beginning  of  the  world  unto  this  day,  had  there
not  beene  some  thorow  passage  by  the  fret  aforesayd,  and
so  by  circular  motion  bee  brought  againe  to  maintaine  it
selfe :  For  the  Tides  and  courses  of  the  sea  are  main-
tayned  by  their  interchangeable  motions :  as  fresh  rivers
are  by  springs,  by  ebbing  and  flowing,  by  rarefaction  and
condensation.

168

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.

So  that  it  resteth  not  possible  (so  farre  as  my  simple  The  flowing  is

reason  can  comprehend)  that  this  perpetuall  current  can  o^^^^^o^^fh
1  ^1  • i  • J u  \.  1 L  ^- 11 reason  that  the

by  any  meanes be  mamtamed, but  onely  by  contmuall ,^^^ r^^^

reaccesse of  the  same  water,  which passeth  thorow  the  moone  boyleth,

fret, and  is brought  about  thither againe,  by  such  cir-  and  maketk

cular motion as aforesayd. And the certaine falling  ^^f  ^'^^^

thereof  by  this  fret  into  Mar  del  Sur  is  prooved  by  the  ^  J^'^^  /  !t^

•  J  •  r-n  jii-T-.  ^ , of  rarefaction.

testimonie  and  experience,  or  Bernard  de  la  Torre,  who  jn  experience

was  sent  from  P.  de  la  Natividad  to  the  Moluccae,  Anno  to proove  the

domini 1542.  by  commandement  of  Anthony  Mendoza,  ^^'^^'^.S  ?f  ^^"

then Viceroy  of  Nova Hispania,  which  Bernard sayled  ^^'''f^j  ^Tsur

750. Leagues, on the Northside  of  the  Aequator,  and

there  met  with  a  current,  which  came  from  the  Northeast

the  which  drove  him  backe  againe  to  Tidore.

Wherfore,  this  current  being  proved  to  come  from
C.  de  buona  Speran9a  to  the  fret  of  Magellan,  and  want-
ing sufficient  entrance  there,  by  narrownes  of  the  straite,
is  by  the  necessitie  of  natures  force,  brought  to  Terra
de  Labrador,  where  Jaques  Cartier  met  the  same,  and
thence  certainly  knowen,  not  to  strike  over  upon  Island,
Lappia,  &c.  and  found  by  Bernard  de  la  Torre  in  Mar
del  Sur,  on  the  backeside  of  America :  therefore  this
current  (having  none  other  passage)  must  of  necessity,
fall  out  thorow  this  our  fret  into  Mar  del  Sur,  and  so
trending  by  the  Moluccae,  China,  and  C.  de  buona
Speran9a,  maintaineth  it  selfe  by  circular  motion,  which
is  all  one  in  nature,  with  Motus  ab  Oriente  in  Occi-
dentem.

So  that  it  seemeth,  we  have  now  more  occasion  to
doubt  of  our  returne,  then  whether  there  be  a  passage
that  way,  yea  or  no :  which  doubt,  hereafter  shall  be
sufficiently  remooved.  Wherefore,  in  mine  opinion,
reason  it  self,  grounded  upon  experience,  assureth  us  of
this  passage,  if  there  were  nothing  els  to  put  us  in  hope
thereof.  But  least  these  might  not  suffice,  I  have  added
in  this  chapter  following,  some  further  proofe  hereof,  by
the  experience  of  such  as  have  passed  some  part  of  this
discoverie :  and  in  the  next  adjoining  to  that  the  authority

169

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

of  those,  which have sailed wholy, thorow every part
thereof.

To  prove  by  experience  of  sundry  mens  travels,
the  opening  of  some  part  of  this  Northwest
passage :  vi^herby  good  hope  remaineth  of  the
rest.

Chap.  3.

PAulus  Venetus,  who  dwelt  many  yeres  in  Cataia,
affirmed  that  hee  sayled  1500  miles  upon  the  coastes
of  Mangia,  and  Anian,  towards  the  Northeast :  alwayes
finding  the  Seas  open  before  him,  not  onely  as  farre
as  he  went,  but  also  as  farre  as  he  could  discerne.

2  Also  Franciscus  Vasques  de  Coronado  passing  from

Mexico  by  Cevola,  through  the  countrey  of  Quivira,  to

Siera  Nevada,  found  there  a  great  sea,  where  were  certaine

[III.  16.] ships  laden  with  Merchandise,  carrying  on  their  prowes

Jlcatrarzi  be  the  pictures  of  certaine  birds  called  Alcatrarzi,  part  whereof

Pellicmes. ^ere  made  of  golde,  and  part  of  silver,  who  signified  by

signes, that they were thirty dayes  comming thither :

which  likewise  proveth  America  by  experience  to  be  dis-

joyned  from  Cataia,  on  that  part  by  a  great  Sea,  because

they  could  not  come  from  any  part  of  America,  as  Natives

thereof:  for  that,  so  farre  as  is  discovered,  there  hath  not

bene  found  there  any  one  Shippe  of  that  countrey.

Baros  lib.  9. 3 In  like  maner,  John  Baros  testifieth  that  the  Cosmo-

Of  his  first graphers  of  China  (where  he  himselfe  had  bene)  affi-rme

ecas  cap.  i. ^^^ ^^  g^^  coast trendeth from thence Northeast,  to

50 degrees  of  Septentrional  latitude,  being  the  furthest

part  that  way  which  the  Portugals  had  then  knowledge  of:

And  that  the  said  Cosmographers  knew  no  cause  to  the

contrary,  but  that  it  might  continue  further.

By  whose  experiences  America  is  prooved  to  be  separate
from  those  parts  of  Asia,  directly  against  the  same.  And
not  contented  with  the  judgements  of  these  learned  men
only,  I  have  searched  what  might  be  further  sayd  for
the  confirmation  hereof.

170

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad

1576.

4  And  I  found  that  Franciscus  Lopez  de  Gomara
affirmeth  America  to  be  an  Island,  and  likewise  Gronland  :
and  that  Gronland  is  distant  from  Lappia  40  leagues,
and  from  Terra  de  Labrador, 50.

5  Moreover,  Alvarus  Nunnius  a  Spaniard,  and  learned
Cosmographer,  and  Jacobus  Cartier,  who  made  two
voyages  into  those  parts,  and  sayled  900  miles  upon
the  Northeast  coastes  of  America  doe  in  part  confirme
the  same.

6  Likewise  Hieronymus  Fracastorius,  a  learned  Italian,
and  travailer  in  the  North  parts  of  the  same  land.

7  Also  Jaques  Cartier  having  done  the  like,  heard
say  at  Hochelaga  in  Nova  Francia,  how  that  there  was
a  great  Sea  at  Saguinay,  whereof  the  end  was  not
knowen  :  which  they  presupposed  to  be  the  passage  to
Cataia.

Furthermore,  Sebastian  Cabota  by  his  personal  ex-  Writtenlnthe
perience  and  travel  hath  set  foorth,  and  described  this  ^^^'^°";^^^[  "f
passage  in  his  Charts,  which  are  yet  to  be  scene  in  the
Queens  Majesties  privie  Gallerie  at  Whitehall,  who  was
sent  to  make  this  discovery  by  king  Henrie  the  seventh,
and  entred  the  same  fret :  affirming  that  he  sayled  very
farre  Westward,  with  a  quarter  of  the  North,  on  the
Northside  of  Terra  de  Labrador  the  eleventh  of  June,
untill  he  came  to  the  Septentrionall  latitude  of  67  degrees
and  a  halfe,  and  finding  the  Seas  still  open,  sayd,  that
he  might,  &  would  have  gone  to  Cataia,  if  the  mutinie
of  the  Master  and  Mariners  had  not  bene.

Now  as  these  mens  experience  hath  proved  some  part
of  this  passage :  so  the  chapter  following  shal  put  you
in  full  assurance  of  the  rest,  by  their  experiences  which
have  passed  through  every  part  thereof.

[To  proove
171

A.D.
1576.

Quinque
sensus.

1  Fisus.

2  Auditus.

3  Olfactus.

4  Gustus.

5  Tactus.
S'lngularia
sensu,  un'iver-
salia  vero
mente  perci-

piuntur.

Lib. ^.  cap. 66.

Pag.  590.

[III.  17.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

To proove by circumstance  that the  Northwest
passage  hath  bene  sayled  throughout.

Chap.  4.

THe  diversitie  betweene  bruite  beastes  and  men,  or
betweene  the  wise  and  the  simple  is,  that  the  one
judgeth  by  sense  onely,  and  gathereth  no  surety  of  any
thing  that  he  hath  not  seene,  felt,  heard,  tasted,  or
smelled :  And  the  other  not  so  onely,  but  also  findeth
the  certaintie  of  things  by  reason,  before  they  happen
to  be  tryed.  Wherefore  I  have  added  proofes  of  both
sorts,  that  the  one  and  the  other  might  thereby  be
satisfied.

1  First,  as  Gemma  Frisius  reciteth,  there  went  from
Europe  three  brethren  through  this  passage :  whereof
it  tooke  the  name  of  Fretum  trium  fratrum.

2  Also  Plinie  affirmeth  out  of  Cornelius  Nepos,
(who  wrote  57  yeeres  before  Christ)  that  there  were
certaine  Indians  driven  by  tempest,  upon  the  coast
of  Germanie  which  were  presented  by  the  king  of
Suevia,  unto  Quintus  Metellus  Celer,  the  Proconsull  of
France.

3  And  Plinie  upon  the  same  sayth,  that  it  is  no  marvell
though  there  be  Sea  by  the  North,  where  there  is  such
abundance  of  moisture :  which  argueth  that  hee  doubted
not  of  a  navigable  passage  that  way,  through  which
those  Indians  came.

4  And  for  the  better  proofe  that  the  same  authoritie  of
Cornelius  Nepos  is  not  by  me  wrested,  to  prove  my
opinion  of  the  Northwest  passage :  you  shall  finde  the
same  affirmed  more  plainly  in  that  behalfe,  by  the
excellent  Geographer  Dominicus  Marius  Niger,  who
sheweth  how  many  wayes  the  Indian  sea  stretcheth  it
selfe,  making  in  that  place  recital  of  certaine  Indians,
that  were  likewise  driven  through  the  North  Seas  from
India,  upon  the  coastes  of  Germany,  by  great  tempest,
as  they  were  sayling  in  trade  of  marchandize.

172

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.

5  Also  while  Frederic  Barbarossa  reigned  Emperour,  Avouched  by

Anno  Do.  11 60.  there  came  certaine  other  Indians  upon  F^'^^^"^"^^ Lo-
^1  r  /^  •  '■pes  ae  Lromara

the  coast  of  Germanie.  _  f„  ^.^  ^.^,,,,.,

6  Likewise  Othon  in  the  storie  of  the  Gothes  affirmeth,  of  India,  lib.
that  in  the  time  of  the  Germane  Emperours,  there  were i.  cap-  lo-
also  certaine  Indians  cast  by  force  of  weather,  upon  the

coast  of  the  sayd  countrey,  which  foresaid  Indians  could
not  possibly  have  come  by  the  Southeast,  Southwest,  nor
from  any  part  of  Afrike  or  America,  nor  yet  by  the
Northeast :  therefore  they  came  of  necessitie  by  this  our
Northwest  passage.

To  proove  that  these  Indians  aforenamed  came
not  by  the  Southeast,  Southwest,  nor  from
any  other  part  of  Afrike,  or  America.

Cap.  5.

First,  they  could  not  come  from  the  Southeast  by  the
Cape  de  bona  Speranga,  because  the  roughnes  of  the
Seas  there  is  such  (occasioned  by  the  currents  and  great
winds  in  that  part)  that  the  greatest  Armadas  the  king
of  Portugal  hath,  cannot  without  great  difficulty  passe
that  way,  much  lesse  then  a  Canoa  of  India  could  live
in  those  outragious  seas  without  shipwracke  (being  a
vessell  of  very  small  burden)  and  have  conducted  them-
selves to  the  place  aforesayd,  being  men  unexpert  in  the
Arte  of  navigation.

2  Also,  it  appeareth  plainely  that  they  were  not  able
to  come  from  alongst  the  coast  of  Afrike  aforesayd,  to
those  parts  of  Europe,  because  the  winds  doe  (for  the
most  part)  blow  there  Easterly  off  from  the  shore,  and
the  current  running  that  way  in  like  sort,  should  have
driven  them  Westward  upon  some  part  of  America :  for
such  winds  and  tides  could  never  have  led  them  from
thence  to  the  said  place  where  they  were  found,  nor  yet
could  they  have  come  from  any  of  the  countries  afore-
sayd, keeping  the  seas  alwayes,  without  skilful  mariners

173

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

to have conducted them such like courses as were
necessary  to  performe  such  a  voiage.

3  Presupposing  also,  if  they  had  bene  driven  to  the
West  (as  they  must  have  bene,  comming  that  way)  then
they  should  have  perished,  wanting  supplie  of  victuals,
not  having  any  place  (once  leaving  the  coast  of  Afrike)
untill  they  came  to  America,  nor  from  America  untill
they  arrived  upon  some  part  of  Europe,  or  the  Islands
adjoyning  to  it,  to  have  refreshed  themselves.

4  Also,  if  (notwithstanding  such  impossibilities)  they
might  have  recovered  Germanic  by  comming  from  India
by  the  Southeast,  yet  must  they  without  all  doubt  have
striken  upon  some  other  part  of  Europe  before  their
arrivall  there,  as  the  Isles  of  the  A9ores,  Portugal,  Spaine,
France,  England,  Ireland,  &c.  which  if  they  had  done,  it
is  not  credible  that  they  should  or  would  have  departed
undiscovered  of  the  inhabitants :  but  there  was  never
found  in  those  dayes  any  such  ship  or  men  but  only
upon  the  coasts  of  Germanic,  where  they  have  bene  sundry
times  and  in  sundry  ages  cast  aland :  neither  is  it  like
that  they  would  have  committed  themselves  againe  to  sea,
if  they  had  so  arrived,  not  knowing  where  they  were,  nor
whither  to  have  gone.

This  jift  ^  And  by  the  Southwest  it  is  unpossible,  because  the

reason  by  later  current  aforesayd  which  commeth  from  the  East,  striketh

noveTutterh  ^^^^  ^^^^  force  upon  the  fret  of  Magellan,  and falleth

untrue.  with  such  swiftnesse  and furie into iMar  del  Zur,  that

hardly  any ship (but not possibly  a Canoa,  with such

unskilfull  mariners)  can  come  into  our  Westerne  Ocean

through that fret, from the West  seas of  America,  as

Magellans  experience  hath  partly  taught  us.

6  And  further,  to  proove  that  these  people  so  arriving
upon  the  coast  of  Germany,  were  Indians,  &  not  in-
That  the  habiters  of  any  part  either  of  Africa  or  America,  it  is
Indians  could  manifest,  because  the  natives  both  of  Africa  and  America
not  be  natives  neither  had,  or  have  at  this  day  (as  is  reported)  other
Africa  or  of  ^i^^d  of  boates  then  such  as  do  beare  neither  mastes  nor
America. sailes,  (except  onely  upon  the  coasts  of  Barbaric  and  the

174

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1576.

Turkes ships) but do carie themselves from place to

place  neere  the  shore  by  the  ore  onely.

To  proove  that  those  Indians  came  not  by  the
Northeast,  and  that  there  is  no  thorow  navi-
gable passage  that  way.

Cap.  6.

IT  is  likely  that  there  should  be  no  thorow  passage  by
the  Northeast,  whereby  to  goe  round  about  the  world,
because  all  Seas  (as  aforesayd)  are  maintained  by  the
abundance  of  water,  waxing  more  shallow  and  shelffie
towards  the  ende,  as  we  find  it  doeth  by  experience  in
Mare  Glaciali,  towards  the  East,  which  breedeth  small
hope  of  any  great  continuance  of  that  sea,  to  be  navigable
towards  the  East,  sufficient  to  saile  thereby  round  about
the  world.

2  Also, it standeth scarcely with reason, that the  [^^•  ^^.j

Indians  dwelling:  under  Torrida  Zona,  could  endure  the  y^^'^?^/.
... ^ , °,  1  ,  1 o  • 11-1 naturah  loco

mjurie  or  the  cold  ayre,  about  the  beptentrional  latitude  privatur,

of  80.  degrees,  under  which  elevation  the  passage  by  the  quam  dtissime

Northeast  cannot  bee  (as  the  often  experience  had  of  all  commpitur,

the  South  parts  of  it  sheweth)  seeing  that  some  of  the

inhabitants  of  this  cold  climate  (whose  Summer  is  to  them  Qualis  causa

an  extreme  Winter)  have  bene  stroken  to  death  with  the  ^'^^^^  effectus.

cold  damps  of  the  aire  about  72  degrees,  by  an  accidental

mishap,  and  yet  the  aire  in  such  like  Elevation  is  alwaies

cold,  and  too  cold  for  such  as  the  Indians  are.

3  Furthermore,  the  piercing  cold  of  the  grosse  thicke
aire  so  neere  the  Pole  wil  so  stiffen  and  furre  the  sailes
and  ship  tackling,  that  no  mariner  can  either  hoise  or
strike  them  (as  our  experience  farre  neerer  the  South,
then  this  passage  is  presupposed  to  be,  hath  taught  us)
without  the  use  whereof  no  voiage  can  be  performed.

4  Also,  the  aire  is  so  darkened  with  continuall  mists
and  fogs  so  neere  the  Pole,  that  no  man  can  well  see,
either  to  guide  his  ship,  or  direct  his  course.

5  Also the compasse at such elevation doth very

175

A.D.

1576.

Similium
similis  est
ratio.

Quicquld  cor-
rumpitur  a
contrario  cor-
rumpitur.

Onine  simile
gignit  sui
simile.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

suddenly  vary,  which  things  must  of  force  have  bene
their  destructions,  although  they  had  bene  men  of  much
more  skill  then  the  Indians  are.

6  Moreover,  all  baies,  gulfes,  and  rivers  doe  receive
their  increase  upon  the  flood,  sensibly  to  be  discerned
on  the  one  side  of  the  shore  or  the  other,  as  many  waies
as  they  be  open  to  any  main  sea,  as  Mare  Mediterraneum,
Mare  Rubrum,  Sinus  Persicus,  Sinus  Bodicus,  Thamesis,
and  all  other  knowen  havens  or  rivers  in  any  part  of  the
world,  and  each  of  them  opening  but  on  one  part  to  the
maine  sea,  doe  likewise  receive  their  increase  upon  the
flood  the  same  way,  and  none  other,  which  Mare  Glaciale
doeth,  onely  by  the  West ;  as  M.  Jenkinson  afiirmed
unto  me :  and  therfore  it  followeth  that  this  Northeast
sea,  receiving  increase  but  onely  from  the  West,  cannot
possibly  open  to  the  maine  Ocean  by  the  East.

7  Moreover,  the  farther  you  passe  into  any  sea  towards
„_— the  end  of  it,  on  that  part  which  is shut  up  from  the

maine  sea  (as  in  all  those  above  mentioned)  the  lesse
and  lesse  the  tides  rise  and  fall.  The  like  whereof  also
happeneth  in  Mare  Glaciale,  which  proveth  but  small
continuance  of  that  Sea  toward  the  East.

8  Also,  the  further  yee  goe  toward  the  East  in  Mare
Glaciale,  the  lesse  salt  the  water  is :  which  could  not
happen,  if  it  were  open  to  the  salt  Sea  towards  the  East,
as  it  is  to  the  West  only,  seeing  Every  thing  naturally
ingendreth  his  like :  and  then  must  it  be  like  salt  through-
out, as  all  the  seas  are,  in  such  like  climate  and  elevation.

And  therefore  it  seemeth  that  this  Northeast  sea  is
maintained  by  the  river  Ob,  and  such  like  fresshets,  as
Mare  Goticum,  and  Mare  Mediterraneum,  in  the  upper-
most parts  thereof  by  the  rivers  Nilus,  Danubius,  Neper,
Tanais,  &c.

9  Furthermore,  if  there  were  any  such  sea  at  that
elevation,  of  like  it  should  be  alwaies  frozen  throughout
(there  being  no  tides  to  hinder  it)  because  the  extreme
coldnes  of  the  aire  being  in  the  uppermost  part,  and  the
extreme  coldnesse of  the  earth  in  the  bottome,  the  sea

176

/i-c#i^

£

SIR HUMPHREY GILBERT'S MAP OF THE WORLD, a.d. 1576

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.

there  being  but  of  small  depth,  whereby  the  one  accidentall
coldnesse  doth  meet  with  the  other,  and  the  Sunne  not
having  his  reflection  so  neere  the  Pole,  but  at  very  blunt
angels,  it  can  never  be  dissolved  after  it  is  frozen,  not-
withstanding the  great  length  of  their  day :  for  that  the
sunne  hath  no  heate  at  all  in  his  light  or  beames,  but
proceeding  onely  by  an  accidentall  reflection,  which  there
wanteth  in  eff^ect.

10  And  yet  if  the  Sunne  were  of  sufficient  force  in
that  elevation,  to  prevaile  against  this  ice,  yet  must  it  be
broken  before  it  can  be  dissolved,  which  cannot  be  but
through  the  long  continuance  of  the  sunne  above  their
Horizon,  and  by  that  time  the  Sommer  would  be  so  farre
spent,  and  so  great  darkenes  and  cold  ensue,  that  no  man
could  be  able  to  endure  so  cold,  darke,  and  discomfortable
a  navigation,  if  it  were  possible  for  him  then,  and  there
to  live.

1 1  Further,  the  ice  being  once  broken,  it  must  of
force  so  drive  with  the  windes  and  tides,  that  no  ship
can  saile  in  those  seas,  seeing  our  Fishers  of  Island,  and
the  New  found  land,  are  subject  to  danger  through  the
great  Islands  of  Ice  which  fleete  in  the  Seas  (to  the  sailers
great  danger)  farre  to  the  South  of  that  presupposed
passage.

12  And  it  cannot  be  that  this  Northeast  passage  should
be  any  neerer  the  South,  then  before  recited,  for  then
it  should  cut  off  Ciremissi,  &  Turbi  Tartari,  with
Uzesucani,  Chisani,  and  others  from  the  Continent  of
Asia,  which  are  knowen  to  be  adjoyning  to  Scythia,
Tartaria,  &c.  with  the  other  part  of  the  same  Continent.

And  if  there  were  any  thorowe  passage  by  the
Northeast,  yet  were  it  to  small  ende  and  purpose  for
our  traffique,  because  no  shippe  of  great  burden  can
Navigate  in  so  shallow  a  Sea:  and  ships  of  small  burden  [III.  19.]
are  very  unfit  &  unprofitable,  especially  towards  the
blustering  North,  to  performe  such  a  voyage.

[To  proove

VII  177  M  .

A.D.

1576.

True,  both  in
veniis  oblique
flantibus,  as
also  in  ventis
ex  diatnetro
spirantibus.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

To  proove  that  the  Indians  aforenamed,  came
only  by  the  Northwest,  which  induceth  a
certaintie  of  our  passage  by  experience.

Cap.  7.

IT  is  as  likely  that  they  came  by  the  Northwest,  as
it  is  unlikely  that  they  should  come  either  by  the
Southeast,  Southwest,  Northeast,  or  from  any  other  part
of  Africa  or  America,  and  therefore  this  Northwest
passage  having  bene  alreadie  so  many  wayes  proved,  by
disprooving  of  the  others,  &c.  I  shall  the  lesse  neede
in  this  place,  to  use  many  words  otherwise  then  to
conclude  in  this  sort.  That  they  came  onely  by  the
Northwest  from  England,  having  these  many  reasons  to
leade  me  thereunto.

1  First,  the  one  halfe  of  the  windes  of  the  compasse
might  bring  them  by  the  Northwest,  bearing  alwayes
betweene  two  sheats,  with  which  kind  of  sayling  the
Indians  are  onely  acquainted,  not  having  any  use  of  a
bow  line,  or  quarter  winde,  without  the  which  no  ship
can  possibly  come  either  by  the  Southeast,  Southwest
or  Northeast,  having  so  many  sundry  Capes  to  double,
whereunto  are  required  such  change  and  shift  of  windes.

2  And  it  seemeth  likely  that  they  should  come  by
the  Northwest,  because  the  coast  whereon  they  were
driven,  lay  East  from  this  our  passage.  And  all  windes
doe  naturally  drive  a  ship  to  an  opposite  point  from
whence  it  bloweth,  not  being  otherwise  guided  by  Arte,
which  the  Indians  do  utterly  want,  &  therefore  it
seemeth  that  they  came  directly  through  this  our  fret,
which  they  might  doe  with  one  wind.

3  For  if  they  had  come  by  the  Cape  de  buona
Speran9a,  then  must  they  (as  aforesaid)  have  fallen  upon
the  South  parts  of  America.

4  And  if  by  the  fret  of  Magellan,  then  upon  the
coasts  of  Afrike,  Spaine,  Portugall,  France,  Ireland  or
England.

178

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1576.

5  And  if  by  the  Northeast,  then  upon  the  coasts  of
Ceremissi,  Tartarii,  Lappia,  Island,  Terra  de  Labrador,
&c.  and  upon  these  coasts  (as  aforesaid)  they  have
never  bene  found.

So  that  by  all  likelihood  they  could  never  have  come
without  shipwracke  upon  the  coastes  of  Germanie,  if
they  had  first  striken  upon  the  coastes  of  so  many
countries,  wanting  both  Arte  and  shipping  to  make
orderly  discovery,  and  altogether  ignorant  both  in  the
Arte  of  Navigation,  and  also  of  the  Rockes,  Flats,
Sands  or  Havens  of  those  parts  of  the  world,  which  in
most  of  these  places  are  plentifull.

6  And  further  it  seemeth  very  likely,  that  the  in-
habitants of  the  most  part  of  those  countries,  by  which
they  must  have  come  any  other  way  besides  by  the
Northwest,  being  for  the  most  part  Anthropophagi,  or
men  eaters,  would  have  devoured  them,  slaine  them,
or (at the least wise) kept them as  wonders for the

So  that  it  plainely  appeareth  that  those  Indians
(which  as  you  have  heard  in  sundry  ages  were  driven
by  tempest  upon  the  shore  of  Germanie)  came  onely
through  our  Northwest  passage.

7  Moreover,  the  passage  is  certainely  prooved  by  a
Navigation  that  a  Portugall  made,  who  passed  through
this  fret,  giving  name  to  a  Promontorie  farre  within
the  same,  calling  it  after  his  owne  name,  Promontorium
Corterialis, neere adjoyning  unto  Polisacus  fluvius.

8  Also  one  Scolmus  a  Dane  entred  and  passed  a
great  part  thereof.

9  Also  there  was  one  Salvaterra,  a  Gentleman  of
Victoria  in  Spaine,  that  came  by  chance  out  of  the
West  Indias  into  Ireland,  Anno  1568.  who  affirmed
the  Northwest  passage  from  us  to  Cataia,  constantly  to
be  beleeved  in  America  navigable.  And  further  said  in
the  presence  of  sir  Henry  Sidney  (then  lord  Deputie
of  Ireland)  in  my  hearing,  that  a  Frier  of  Mexico,
called  Andrew  Urdaneta,  more  then  eight  yeeres  before

179

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

his  then  comming  into  Ireland,  told  him  there,  that  he
came  from  Mar  del  Sur  into  Germany  through  this
Northwest  passage,  &  shewed  Salvaterra  (at  that  time
being  then  with  him  in  Mexico)  a  Sea  Card  made  by
his  owne  experience  and  travell  in  that  voyage,  wherein
was  plainly  set  downe  and  described  this  Northwest
passage,  agreeing  in  all  points  with  Ortelius  mappe.

And further,  this Frier tolde the king of  Portugall
(as  he  returned by  that  countrey  homeward)  that  there
was  (of  certainty) such  a  passage  Northwest  from  Eng-
land,  and that he  meant to publish the same : which
done, the  king  most earnestly  desired him  not  in  any
wise to  disclose or  make the passage knowen to any
[III.  20.] nation  : For  that  (said  the  king)  if  England  had  know-
J he  words  of  j^^^gg ^^^ experience thereof,  it  would greatly  hinder
Portugall,  to both  the  king  of  Spaine  and  me. This  Frier  (as Sal-
Andro  Urda-  vaterra  reported) was the greatest Discoverer by sea,
neta  a  Frier, that hath bene in our age. Also Salvaterra being

touching  the  perswaded  of  this  passage  by  the  frier  Urdaneta,  and
concealing  of i .  ^ . . ^ J . „ .,.,:..

thisNorthwest  "7  ^^^  common  opmion  or  the  Spaniards  mhabitmg
passage  from  America,  offered  most  willingly  to  accompanie  me  in
England  to  this  Discovery,  which  of  like  he  would  not  have  done
Cataia.  -f  j^^  j^^^  stood  in  doubt  thereof

And now as these moderne experiences cannot be
impugned, so, least it might be objected that these
things  (gathered  out  of  ancient  writers,  which  wrote  so
many yeeres past) might serve litle to proove this
Jn  objection, passage  by  the  North  of  America,  because  both  America
and India were to them then utterly unknowen : to
Aristotle  lib. remoove this doubt, let this suffise : That Aristotle
demmdo,cap. / j^^  ^^^ ^^^  yeeres  before  Christ)  named  Mare  Indi-
lll,^  r  cum. Also  Berosus  (who  lived  330  yeres  before  Christ)

hath  these  words,  Ganges  in  India.  Also  in  the  first
chapter  of  Hester  be  these  wordes.  In  the  dayes  of
Assuerus  which  ruled  from  India  to  Aethiopia,  which
Assuerus  lived  580  yeeres  before  Christ.  Also  Quintus
Curtius  (where  he  speaketh  of  the  conquests  of  Alex-
ander) mentioneth India. Also, Arianus, Philostratus,

180

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1576.

and  Sidrach  in  his  discourses  of  the  warres  of  the  king
of  Bactria,  and  of  Garaab,  who  had  the  most  part  of
India  under  his  government.  All  which  assureth  us,
that  both  India  and  Indians  were  knowen  in  those  days.

These  things  considered,  we  may  (in  my  opinion)
not  only  assure  our  selves  of  this  passage  by  the
Northwest,  but  also  that  it  is  navigable  both  to  come  and
go,  as  hath  bene  prooved  in  part  and  in  all,  by  the
experience  of  divers,  as  Sebastian  Cabota,  Corterialis,
the  three  brethren  above  named,  the  Indians,  and
Urdaneta  the  Frier  of  Mexico,  &c.

And  yet  notwithstanding  all  this,  there  be  some  that
have  a  better  hope  of  this  passage  to  Cataia  by  the
Northeast  then  )by  the  West,  whose  reasons  with  my
severall  answeres  ensue  in  the  chapter  following.

Certaine  reasons  alleaged  for  the  prooving  of  a
passage  by  the  Northeast,  before  the  Queenes
Majestie,  and  certaine  Lords  of  the  Counsell,
by  Master  Anthonie  Jenkinson,  with  my
severall  answeres  then  used  to  the  same.

Cap.  8.

BEcause  you  may  understand  as  well  those  things
alleaged  against  me,  as  what  doth  serve  for  my
purpose,  I  have  here  added  the  reasons  of  Master
Anthony  Jenkinson  a  worthy  gentleman,  and  a  great
traveller,  who  conceived  a  better  hope  of  the  passage  to
Cataia  from  us,  to  be  by  the  Northeast,  then  by  the
Northwest.

He  first  said  that he  thought not to  the contrary, The  'North-

but  that  there  was  a  passage  by  the Northwest,  accord-  "^est passage
.  ■  ■ •  -I r'  J 1.  J.-L ^ J.-L  assented  unto,

ing  to mme  opmion : but  assured he was, that there

might be found  a  navigable  passage by  the Northeast

from England, to goe to all the East parts of  the

world,  which  he  endevoured  to  proove  three  wayes.

The  first  was  that  he  heard  a  Fisherman  of  Tartaria  The  first

say  in hunting the Morce,  that he sayled very  farre  '■'?^•^^^•

181

A.D.

1576.

The  answer  or
resolution.

Visus  nonnmi-
quam  fallitur
in  suo  objecto.

The  secotid
reason  or  alle-
gation.

The  answer  or
resolution.

[ill.  21.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

towards the Southeast, finding no end of the Sea  :
whereby  he  hoped  a  thorow  passage  to  be  that  way.

Whereunto  I  answered,  that  the  Tartarians  were  a
barbarous  people,  and  utterly  ignorant  in  the  Arte  of
Navigation,  not  knowing  the  use  of  the  Sea  Card,
Compasse  or  Starre,  which  he  confessed  to  be  true :  and
therfore  they  could  not  (said  I)  certainly  know  the
Southeast  from  the  Northeast,  in  a  wide  sea,  and  a  place
unknowen  from  the  sight  of  the  land.

Or  if  he  sailed  any  thing  neere  the  shore,  yet  he
(being  ignorant)  might  be  deceived  by  the  doubling  of
many  points  and  Capes,  and  by  the  trending  of  the
land,  albeit  he  kept  continually  alongst  the  shore.

And  further,  it  might  be  that  the  poore  Fisherman
through  simplicitie  thought  that  there  was  nothing  that
way  but  sea,  because  he  saw  no  land :  which  proofe
(under  correction)  giveth  small  assurance  of  a  Navigable
sea  by  the  Northeast,  to  goe  round  about  the  world.
For  that  he  judged  by  the  eye  onely,  seeing  we  in  this
our  cleare  aire  doe  account  twentie  miles  a  ken  at  Sea.

His  second  reason  is,  that  there  was  an  Unicornes
home  found  upon  the  coast  of  Tartaria,  which  could
not  come  (said  he)  thither  by  any  other  meanes  then
with  the  tides,  through  some  fret  in  the  Northeast  of
Mare  Glaciale,  there  being  no  Unicorne  in  any  part  of
Asia,  saving  in  India  and  Cataia :  which  reason  (in  my
simple  judgement)  forceth  as  litle.

First,  it  is  doubtfull  whether  those  barbarous  Tar-
tarians do  know  an  Unicornes  home,  yea,  or  no :  and
if  it  were  one,  yet  it  is  not  credible  that  the  Sea  could
have  driven  it  so  farre,  being  of  such  nature  that  it  will
not  swimme.

Also  the  tides  running  too  and  fro,  would  have  driven
it  as  farre  backe  with  the  ebbe,  as  it  brought  it  forward
with  the  flood.

There  is  also  a  beast  called  Asinus  Indicus  (whose
home  most  like  it  was)  which  hath  but  one  home  like
an Unicorne in his forehead, whereof  there is great

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad

1576.

plenty  in  all  the  North  parts  therunto  adjoyning,  as  in
Lappia,  Noruegia,  Finmarke,  &c.  as  Jacobus  Zieglerus
writeth  in  his  historie  of  Scondia.

And  as  Albertus  saieth,  there  is  a  fish  which  hath  but
one  home  in  his  forehead  like  to  an  Unicorne,  and
therefore  it  seemeth  very  doubtfull  both  from  whence
it  came,  and  whether  it  were  an  Unicornes  home,  yea,
or  no.

His  third  and  last  reason  was,  that  there  came  a  con-  The  third  and
tinuall  streame  or  current  through  Mare  Glaciale,  of  such  ^^^^  ^^f'°"  "^
swiftnesse  (as  a  Colmax  told  him)  that  if  you  cast  any
thing  therein,  it  would  presently  be  carried  out  of  sight
towards  the  West.

Whereunto  I  answered,  that  there  doth  the  like  from  The  answer  or
Maeotis  Palus,  by  Pontus  Euxinus,  Sinus  Bosphorus,  ^^^°^^°"-
and  along  the  coast  of  Graecia,  &c.  As  it  is  affirmed  by
Contarenus,  and  divers  others  that  have  had  experience
of  the  same :  and  yet  that  Sea  lieth  not  open  to  any
maine  Sea  that  way,  but  is  maintained  by  freshets  as  by
Tanais,  Danubius,  &c.

In  like  maner  is  this  current  in  Mare  Glaciale  in-
creased and  maintained  by  the  Dwina,  the  river  Ob,  &c.

Now  as  I  have  here  briefly  recited  the  reasons  alleaged,
to  proove  a  passage  to  Cataia  by  the  Northeast,  with
my  severall  answeres  thereunto :  so  will  I  leave  it  to
your  judgement,  to  hope  or  dispaire  of  either  at  your
pleasure.

How  that  the  passage  by  the  Northwest  is  more
commodious  for  our  traffique,  then  the  other
by  the  East,  if  there  were  any  such.

Cap.  9.

First,  by  the  Northeast  (if  your  windes  doe  not  give
you  a  marvelous  speedie  &  luckie  passage)  you  are
in  danger  (being  so  neere  the  Pole)  to  be  benighted
almost  the  one  halfe  of  the  yeere,  and  what  danger  that
were,  to  live  so  long  comfortlesse,  voide  of  light,  (if  the

183

this.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

cold  killed  you  not)  each  man  of  reason  or  understanding
may  judge.
Zome  doubt  of 1  Also  Mangia,  Quinzai,  and  the  Moluccas  are  neerer
unto  us  by  the  Northwest,  then  by  the  Northeast,  more
then  two  five  parts,  which  is  almost  by  the  halfe.

3  Also  we  may  have  by  the  West  a  yerely  returne,
it  being  at  all  times  navigable,  whereas  you  have  but
4.  moneths  in  the  whole  yeere  to  goe  by  the  Northeast :
the  passage  being  at  such  elevation  as  it  is  formerly  ex-
pressed, for  it  cannot  be  any  neerer  the  South.

4  Furthermore,  it  cannot  be  finished  without  divers
wintrings  by  the  way,  having  no  havens  in  any  temperate
climate  to  harbour  in  there  :  for  it  is  as  much  as  we  can
well  saile  from  hence  to  S.  Nicholas,  in  the  trade  of
Moscovia,  and  returne  in  the  navigable  season  of  the
yeere,  &  from  S.  Nicholas  to  Cerimissi  Tartari,  which
stande  at  80  degrees  of  the  Septentrionall  latitude,  it  is
at  the  least  400  leagues,  which  amounteth  scarce  to  the
third  part  of  the  way,  to  the  end  of  your  voyage  by
the  Northeast.

5  And  yet  after  you  have  doubled  this  Cape,  if  then
there  might  be  found  a  navigable  Sea  to  carie  you  South-
east according  to  your  desire,  yet  can  you  not  winter
conveniently,  until  you  come  to  60  degrees,  and  to  take
up  one  degree  running  Southeast,  you  must  saile  24
leagues  and  three  foure  parts,  which  amounteth  to  495
leagues.

6  Furthermore,  you  may  by  the  Northwest  saile
thither  with  all  Easterly  windes,  and  returne  with  any
Westerly  windes,  whereas  you  must  have  by  the  North-
east sundry  windes,  and  those  proper,  according  to  the
lying  of  the  coast  and  Capes,  you  shalbe  inforced  to
double,  which  windes  are  not  alwaies  to  be  had,  when
they  are  looked  for:  whereby  your  journey  should  be
greatly  prolonged,  and  hardly  endured  so  neere  the  Pole.
As  we  are  taught  by  sir  Hugh  Willoughbie,  who  was
frozen  to  death  farre  neerer  the  South.

7  Moreover,  it  is  very  doubtfull,  whether  we  should

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.
long  Injoy  that  trade  by  the  Northeast,  if  there  were
any  such  passage  that  way,  the  commodities  thereof  once
knowen  to  the  Moscovite,  what  privilege  soever  hee  hath
granted,  seeing  pollicy  with  the  masse  of  excessive  gaine,
to  the  inriching  (so  greatly)  of  himselfe  and  all  his
dominions  would  perswade  him  to  presume  the  same,
having  so  great  opportunitie  to  utter  the  commodities  of
those  countries  by  the  Narve.

But  by  the  Northwest,  we  may  safely  trade  without
danger  or  annoyance  of  any  prince  living,  Christian  or
Heathen,  it  being  out  of  all  their  trades.

8  Also  the  Queenes  Majesties  dominions  are  neerer  [III.  22.]
the  Northwest  passage  then  any  other  great  princes  that
might  passe  that  way,  and  both  in  their  going  and
returne,  they  must  of  necessitie  succour  themselves  and
their  ships  upon  some  part  of  the  same,  if  any  tempes-
tuous weather  should  happen.

Further,  no  princes  navie  of  the  world  is  able  to  in-
counter  the  Queenes  Majesties  navie,  as  it  is  at  this  pre-
sent :  and  yet  it  should  be  greatly  increased  by  the
traffike  insuing  upon  this  discoverie,  for  it  is  the  long
voyages  that  increase  and  maintaine  great  shipping.

Now  it  seemeth  necessarie  to  declare  what  commodities
would  growe  thereby,  if  all  these  things  were,  as  we  have
heretofore  presupposed,  and  thought  them  to  be  :  which
next  adjoyning  are  briefly  declared.

What  commodities  would  ensue,  this  passage
once  discovered.

Cap. 10.

First,  it  were  the  onely  way  for  our  princes,  to  possesse
the  wealth  of  all  the  East  parts  (as  they  terme  them)
of  the  world,  which  is  infinite :  as  appeareth  by  the
experience  of  Alexander  the  great,  in  the  time  of  his  con-
quest of  India,  and  other  the  East  parts  of  the  world,
alleaged  by  Quintus  Curtius,  which  would  be  a  great
advancement  to  our  countrey,  a  wonderfuU  inriching  to

185

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

our  prince,  and an unspeakable  commoditie to all the
inhabitants  of  Europe.

2  For  through  the  shortnesse  of  the  voyage,  we  should
be  able  to  sell  all  maner  of  merchandize,  brought  from
thence,  farre  better  cheape  then  either  the  Portugall  or
Spaniard  doth  or  may  do.  And  further,  we  should  share
with  the  Portugall  in  the  East,  &  the  Spaniard  in  the
West,  by  trading  to  any  part  of  America,  thorow  Mar
del  Sur,  where  they  can  no  maner  of  way  offend  us.

3  Also  we  might  sayle  to  divers  very  rich  countreys,
both  civill  and  others,  out  of  both  their  jurisdictions,
trades  and  traffikes,  where  there  is  to  be  found  great
abundance  of  golde,  silver,  precious  stones,  cloth  of
gold,  silkes,  all  maner  of  spices,  grocery  wares,  and  other
kinds  of  merchandize  of  an  inestimable  price,  which  both
the  Spaniard  and  Portugall,  through  the  length  of  their
journies,  cannot  well  attaine  unto.

4  Also  we  might  inhabite  some  part  of  those  coun-
tryes,  and  settle  there  such  needy  people  of  our  countrey,
which  now  trouble  the  common  wealth,  and  through
want  here  at  home  are  inforced  to  commit  outragious
offences,  whereby  they  are  dayly  consumed  with  the
gallowes.

5  Moreover,  we  might  from  all  the  aforesaid  places
have  a  yeerely  returne,  inhabiting  for  our  staple  some
convenient  place  of  America,  about  Sierra  Nevada,  or
some  other  part,  whereas  it  shal  seeme  best  for  the
shortning  of  the  voyage.

6  Beside  uttering  of  our  countrey  commodities,  which
the  Indians,  &c.  much  esteeme :  as  appeareth  in  Hester,
where  the  pompe  is  expressed  of  the  great  king  of  India,
Assuerus,  who  matched  the  coloured  clothes,  wherewith
his  houses  and  tents  were  apparelled,  with  gold  and
silver,  as  part  of  his  greatest  treasure :  not  mentioning
either  velvets,  silkes,  cloth  of  gold,  cloth  of  silver,  or
such  like,  being  in  those  countreyes  most  plentifuU :
whereby  it  plainly  appeareth  in  what  great  estimation
they  would  have  the clothes of  this our countrey,  so

186

THE NORTH\¥EST PASSAGE  a.d.

1576.

that  there  would  be  found  a  farre  better  vent  for  them
by  this  meaneSj  then  yet  this  realme  ever  had :  and  that
without  depending  either  upon  France,  Spaine,  Flanders,
Portugall,  Hamborow,  Emden,  or  any  other  part  of
Europe.

7  Also,  here  we  shall  increase  both  our  ships  and
mariners,  without  burthening  of  the  state.

8  And  also  have  occasion  to  set  poore  mens  children
to  learne  handie  craftes,  and  thereby  to  make  trifles  and
such  like,  which  the  Indians  and  those  people  do  much
esteeme :  by  reason  whereof,  there  should  be  none  occa-
sion to  have  our  countrey  combred  with  loiterers,  vaga-
bonds, and  such  like  idle  persons.

All  these  commodities  would  grow  by  following  this
our  discovery,  without  injury  done  to  any  Christian
prince,  by  crossing  them  in  any  of  their  used  trades,
whereby  they  might  take  any  just  occasion  of  offence.

Thus  have  I  briefly  shewed  you  some  part  of  the
grounds  of  mine  opinion,  trusting  that  you  will  no
longer  judge  me  fantasticke  in  this  matter :  seeing  I  have
conceived  no  vaine  hope  of  this  voyage,  but  am  per-
swaded  thereunto  by  the  best  Cosmographers  of  our  age,
the  same  being  confirmed  both  by  reason  and  certaine
experiences.

Also  this  discovery  hath  bene  divers  times  heretofore
by  others  both  offered,  attempted,  and  performed.

It  hath  bene  offered  by  Stephan  Gomes  unto  Carolus
the  fift  Emperour,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  God  1527,  [III.  23.]
as  Alphonso  Ullva  testifieth  in  the  story  of  Carolus  life :
who  would  have  set  him  forth  in  it  (as  the  story  men-
tioneth)  if  the  great  want  of  money,  by  reason  of  his
long  warres  had  not  caused  him  to  surcease  the  same.

And  the  king  of  Portugall  fearing  least  the  Emperour
would  have  persevered  in  this  his  enterprise,  gave  him  to This  discovery
leave the matter unattempted, the summe of  350000  W^^^'^-
crownes :  and  it  is  to  be  thought  that  the  king  of  Portu-
gall would  not  have  given  to  the  Emperour  such  summes
of  money  for  egges  in  mooneshine.

187

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.
TMs  discovery It  hath bene attempted by Sebastian Cabota in  the
attempted. ^i^ig  q{  k\ng  Henry  the  seventh,  by  Corterialis  the  Portu-

gall,  and  Scolmus  the  Dane.
This  discovery And  it  hath  bene performed  by three brethren, the
perjoime  . Indians  aforesaid,  and  by  Urdaneta  the  Frier  of  Mexico.
Also  divers have offered the like unto the  French
king,  who  hath  sent two or three times to  have  dis-
covered the  same : The discoverers spending and  con-
suming their  victuals  in  searching  the gulfes  and  bayes
betweene  Florida  and  Terra de Labrador, whereby  the
yce  is  broken  to  the  after  commers.

So  that  the  right  way  may  now  easily  be  found  out
in  short  time :  and  that  with  litle  jeoperdie  and  lesse
expences.

For  America  is  discovered  so  farre  towardes  the  North

as  Cape  Frio,  which  is  at  62  degrees,  and  that part  of

Grondland  next  adjoyning is knowen to stand but  at

The  labour  of  ^2  degrees. So  that  wee  have  but 10 degrees  to  saile

%fnedT''  ^°^^^  ^  ^°^^^'  ^°  P^^  ^^^  ^o'^^^  °^^  °^  ^°^^^  hereof:

other  mens ^^^  it  is  likely  that  the  king  of  Spaine,  and the  king

travell.  of  Portugall  would  not  have  sit  out  all  this  while,  but

that  they are sure to possesse to themselves  all that

trade  they  now  use,  and  feare  to  deale  in  this  discovery,

least  the  Queenes  Majestic  having  so  good  opportunitie,

and  finding  the  commoditie  which  thereby  might  ensue

to  the common  wealth,  would  cut  them off,  and  enjoy

Why  ye  kings  the  whole  traffique  to  her  selfe,  and  thereby  the  Spaniards

%ortTd  "^""^  ^'"^^  Portugals,  with  their  great  charges,  should  beate  the

zvould  not bush,  and  other  men  catch  the  birds :  which  thing  they

persever  in foreseeing,  have  commanded  that  no  pilot  of  theirs  upon

this  discovery,  paine  of  death,  should  seeke  to  discover  to  the  Northwest,

or  plat  out  in  any  Sea  card  any  thorow  passage  that  way

by  the  Northwest.

Now,  and  if  you  will  indifferently  compare  the  hope
that  remaineth,  to  animate  me  to  this  enterprise,  with
those  likelihoods  which  Columbus  alleaffed  before  Ferdi-
nando  the  king  of  Castilia,  to  proove  that  there  were
such  Islands  in the  West  Ocean,  as  were  after  by  him

188

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.
and  others  discovered  to  the  great  commodity  of  Spaine
and  all  the  world: you  will  thinke  then  this  Northwest
passage  to  be  most  worthy  travell  therein.

For  Columbus  had  none  of  the  West  Islands  set  foorth
unto  him,  either  in  globe  or  card,  neither  yet  once
mentioned  of  any  writer  (Plato  excepted,  and  the  com-
mentaries upon  the  same)  from  942  yeeres  before  Christ,
untill  that  day.

Moreover,  Columbus  himselfe  had  neither  seene
America  nor  any  other  of  the  Islands  about  it,  neither,
understood  he  of  them  by  the  report  of  any  other  that
had  seene  them,  but  only  comforted  himselfe  with  this
hope,  that  the  land  had  a  beginning  where  the  Sea  had
an  ending :  for  as  touching  that  which  the  Spaniards  doe
write  of  a  Biscaine,  which  should  have  taught  him  the
way  thither,  it  is  thought  to  be  imagined  of  them,  to
deprive  Columbus  of  his  honour,  being  none  of  their
countrey  man,  but  a  stranger  borne.

And  if  it  were  true  of  the  Biscaine,  yet  did  he  but
rove  at  the  matter,  or  (at  the  least)  gathered  the  know-
ledge of  it,  by  conjectures  onely.

And  albeit  my  selfe  have  not  seene  this  passage  or
any  part  thereof,  but  am  ignorant  of  it  as  touching  ex-
perience (as  Columbus  was  before  his  attempt  made)  yet
have  I  both  the  report,  relation,  and  authoritie  of  divers
most  credible  men,  which  have  both  seene  and  passed
through  some  and  every  part  of  this  discovery,  besides
sundry  reasons  for  my  assurance  thereof:  all  which
Columbus  wanted.

These  things  considered,  &  indifferently  weighed  to-
gither,  with  the  wonderfull  commodities  which  this
discovery  may  bring,  especially  to  this  realme  of  Eng-
land :  I  must  needes  conclude  with  learned  Baptista
Ramusius,  and  divers  other  learned  men,  who  said,  that
this  discovery  hath  bene  reserved  for  some  noble  prince
or  woorthie  man,  thereby  to  make  himselfe  rich,  and  the
world  happie :  desiring  you  to  accept  in  good  part  this
briefe  and simple  discourse, written in haste,  which  if

189

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

I  may  perceive  that  it  shall  not  sufficiently  satisfie  you
in  this  behalfe,  I  will  then  impart  unto  you  a  large  dis-
course, which  I  have  written  onely  of  this  discovery.

And  further,  because  it  sufficeth  not  only  to  know
that  such  a  thing  there  is,  without  abilitie  to  performe
the  same,  I  wil  at  leasure  make  you  partaker  of  another
[III.  24.]  simple  discourse  of  navigation,  wherein  I  have  not  a
litle  travelled,  to  make  my  selfe  as  sufficient  to  bring
these  things  to  effect,  as  I  have  bene  readie  to  offer  my
selfe  therein.

And  therein  I  have  devised  to  amend  the  errors  of
usuall  sea  cards,  whose  common  fault  is,  to  make  the
degrees  of  longitude  in  every  latitude  of  one  like  big-
nesse.

And  have  also  devised  therein  a  Spherical  instrument,
with  a  compasse  of  variation  for  the  perfect  knowing  of
the  longitude.

And  a  precise  order  to  pricke  the  sea  card,  together
with  certaine  infallible  rules  for  the  shortning  of  any
discovery,  to  know  at  the  first  entring  of  any  fret,
whether  it  lie  open  to  the  Ocean  more  wayes  then  one,
how  farre  soever  the  sea  stretcheth  it  selfe  into  the
land.

Desiring  you  hereafter  never  to  mislike  with  me,  for
the  taking  in  hande  of  any  laudable  and  honest  enter-
prise :  for  if  through  pleasure  or  idlenesse  we  purchase
shame,  the  pleasure  vanisheth,  but  the  shame  remaineth
for  ever.
Pereas  qui  And  therefore  to  give  me  leave  without  offence,
urn  ras  alwayes  to  live  and  die  in  this  mind,  That  he  is  not
worthy  to  live  at  all,  that  for  feare,  or  danger  of  death,
shunneth  his  countries  service,  and  his  owne  honour :
seeing  death  is  inevitable,  and  the  fame  of  vertue  im-
mortall.  Wherefore  in  this  behalfe,  Mutare  vel  timere
sperno.

190

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576.

Certaine  other  reasons,  or  arguments  to  proove
a  passage  by  the  Northwest,  learnedly  written
by  M. Richard  Willes  Gentleman.

FOure  famous  wayes  there  be  spoken  of  to  those
fruitfull  and  wealthie  Islands,  which  wee  doe  usually
call  Moluccaes,  continually  haunted  for  gaine,  and  dayly
travelled  for  riches  therein  growing.  These  Islands,
although  they  stand  East  from  the  Meridian,  distant
almost  halfe  the  length  of  the  worlde,  in  extreame  heate,
under  the  Equinoctiall  line,  possessed  of  Infidels  and
Barbarians :  yet  by  our  neighbours  great  abundance  of
wealth  there  is  painefully  sought  in  respect  of  the  voyage
deerely  bought,  and  from  thence  dangerously  brought
home  unto  us.  Our  neighbours  I  call  the  Portugals  in
comparison  of  the  Molucchians  for  neerenesse  unto  us,
for  like  situation  Westward  as  we  have,  for  their  usuall
trade  with  us,  for  that  the  farre  Southeasterlings  doe
knowe  this  part  of  Europe  by  no  other  name  then
Portugall,  not  greatly  acquainted  as  yet  with  the  other
Nations  thereof.  Their  voyage  is  very  well  understood
•of  all  men,  and  the  Southeasterne  way  round  about  i  By  the
Afrike  by  the  Cape  of  Good  hope  more  spoken  of,  better  Southeast.
knowen  and  travelled,  then  that  it  may  seeme  needfuU
to  discourse  thereof  any  further.

The  second  way  lyeth  Southwest,  betweene  the  West  2  By  the
India  or  South  America,  and  the  South  continent,  through  Southzvest.
that  narrow  straight  where  Magellan  first  of  all  men  that
ever  we  doe  read  of,  passed  these  latter  yeeres,  leaving
thereunto  therefore  his name. The  way  no doubt the
Spaniardes  would commodiously  take,  for that it  lyeth
neere unto their dominions there,  could  the Easterne
current  and  levant  windes  as  easily  suffer  them  to  returne,  This  is  an  er-
as speedily therwith they  may  be carried thither : for  ''^*''-
the  which difficultie,  or rather  impossibility  of  striving
against  the  force  both  of  winde  and  streame,  this  passage
is  litle  or  nothing  used,  although  it  be  very  well  knowen.

191

A.D.
1576.

3  By  the
'Northeast.

Ortel.  tab.
A  sice  3.

4  By  the

Northeast.

Ob.  I.
[III.  25.]

In  Theatro.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  third  way  by  the  Northeast,  beyond  all  Europe
and  Asia,  that  worthy  and  renowmed  knight  sir  Hugh
Willoughbie  sought  to  his  perill,  enforced  there  to  ende
his  life  for  colde,  congealed  and  frozen  to  death.  And
truely  this  way  consisteth  rather  in  the  imagination  of
Geographers,  then  allowable  either  in  reason,  or  approved
by  experience,  as  well  it  may  appeare  by  the  dangerous
trending  of  the  Scythish  Cape  set  by  Ortelius  under
the  80  degree  North,  by  the  unlikely  sailing  in  that
Northerne  sea  alwayes  clad  with  yce  and  snow,  or  at  the
least  continually  pestred  therewith,  if  happily  it  be  at  any
time  dissolved:  besides  bayes  and  shelfes,  the  water
waxing  more  shallow  toward  the  East,  that  we  say  nothing
of  the  foule  mists  and  darke  fogs  in  the  cold  clime,  of
the  litle  power  of  the  Sunne  to  cleare  the  aire,  of  the  un-
comfortable nights,  so  neere  the  Pole,  five  moneths  long.

A  fourth  way  to  go  unto  these  aforesaid  happy  Islands
Moluccas  sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  a  learned  and  valiant
knight  discourseth  of  at  large  in  his  new  passage  to
Cathayo.  The  enterprise  of  it  selfe  being  vertuous,  the
fact  must  doubtlesse  deserve  high  praise,  and  whensoever
it  shal  be  finished,  the  fruits  thereof  cannot  be  smal :
where  vertue  is  guide,  there  is  fame  a  follower,  &  fortune
a  companion.  But  the  way  is  dangerous,  the  passage
doubtfull,  the  voiage  not  throughly  knowen,  and  there-
fore gainesaid  by  many,  after  this  maner.

First,  who  can  assure  us  of  any  passage  rather  by  the
Northwest,  then  by  the  Northeast?  doe  not  both  wayes
lye  in  equall  distance  from  the  North  Pole }  Stand  not
the  North  Capes  of  eyther  continent  under  like  elevation  ?
Is  not  the  Ocean  sea  beyond  America  farther  distant  from
our  Meridian  by  30.  or  40.  degrees  West,  then  the
extreame  poyntes  of  Cathayo  Eastward,  if  Ortelius
generall  Carde  of  the  world  be  true.?  In  the  Northeast
that  noble  Knight  Syr  Hugh  Willoughbie  perished  for
colde :  and  can  you  then  promise  a  passenger  any  better
happe  by  the  Northwest }  Who  hath  gone  for  triall  sake
at  any  time  this  way  out  of  Europe  to  Cathayo  }

192

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1576.

If  you  seeke  the  advise  herein  of  such  as  make  pro-  Ob.  2.
fession  in  Cosmographie,  Ptolome  the  father  of  Geo-
graphie,  and  his  eldest  children,  will  answere  by  their
mappes  with  a  negative,  concluding  most  of  the  Sea
within  the  land,  and  making  an  ende  of  the  world  North-
ward, neere  the  62,.  degree.  The  same  opinion,  when
learning  chiefly  florished,  was  received  in  the  Romanes
time,  as  by  their  Poets  writings  it  may  appeare :  tibi
serviat  ultima  Thyle,  said  Virgil,  being  of  opinion,  that
Island  was  the  extreme  part  of  the  world  habitable  toward
the  North,  Joseph  Moletius  an  Italian,  and  Mercator
a  Germaine,  for  knowledge  men  able  to  be  compared  with
the  best  Geographers  of  our  time,  the  one  in  his  halfe
Spheres  of  the  whole  world,  the  other  in  some  of  his
great  globes,  have  continued  the  West  Indies  land,  even
to  the  North  Pole,  and  consequently,  cut  ofF  all  passage
by  sea  that  way.

The  same  doctors,  Mercator  in  other  of  his  globes
and  mappes,  Moletius  in  his  sea  Carde,  neverthelesse
doubting  of  so  great  continuance  of  the  former  continent,
have  opened  a  gulfe  betwixt  the  West  Indies  and  the
extreame  Northerne  land :  but  such  a  one,  that  either
is  not  to  be  travelled  for  the  causes  in  the  first  objection
alledged,  or  cleane  shut  up  from  us  in  Europe  by
Groenland :  the  South  ende  whereof  Moletius  maketh
firme  land  with  America,  the  North  part  continent  with
Lappeland  and  Norway.

Thirdly,  the  greatest  favourers  of  this  voyage  can  not  Ob.  3.
denie,  but  that  if  any  such  passage  be,  it  lieth  subject
unto  yce  and  snow  for  the  most  part  of  the  yeere,
whereas  it  standeth  in  the  edge  of  the  frostie  Zone.
Before  the  Sunne  hath  warmed  the  ayre,  and  dissolved
the  yce,  eche  one  well  knoweth  that  there  can  be  no
sailing :  the  yce  once  broken  through  the  continuall
abode  the  sunne  maketh  a  certaine  season  in  those  parts,
how  shall  it  be  possible  for  so  weake  a  vessel  as  a  shippe
is,  to  holde  out  amid  whole  Islands,  as  it  were  of  yce
continually  beating  on  eche  side,  and  at  the  mouth  of
vn  193  N

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

that  gulfe,  issuing  downe  furiously  from  the  north,  and
safely  to  passe,  when  whole  mountaines  of  yce  and  snow
shall  be  tumbled  downe  upon  her  ?
Ob.  j^..  Well,  graunt  the  West  Indies  not  to  continue  con-
tinent unto  the  Pole,  grant  there  be  a  passage  betweene
these  two  lands,  let  the  gulfe  lie  neerer  us  then  commonly
in  cardes  we  finde  it  set,  namely,  betweene  the  61.  and
64.  degrees  north,  as  Gemma  Frisius  in  his  mappes  and
globes  imagineth  it,  and  so  left  by  our  countryman
Sebastian  Cabot  in  his  table  which  the  Earle  of  Bedford
hath  at  Cheinies :  Let  the  way  be  voyde  of  all  difficulties,
yet  doeth  it  not  follow  that  wee  have  free  passage  to
Cathayo.  For  examples  sake :  You  may  trend  all
Norway,  Finmarke,  and  Lappeland,  and  then  bowe
Southward  to  Saint  Nicholas  in  Moscovia  :  you  may
likewise  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea  fetch  Constantinople,
and  the  mouth  of  Tanais :  yet  is  there  no  passage  by  Sea
through  Moscovia  into  Pont  Euxine,  now  called  Mare
Maggiore.  Againe,  in  the  aforesaid  Mediterranean  sea,
we  saile  to  Alexandria  in  Egypt,  the  Barbarians  bring
their  pearle  and  spices  from  the  Moluccaes  up  the  Red
sea  or  Arabian  gulph  to  Sues,  scarcely  three  dayes  journey
from  the  aforesayd  haven  :  yet  have  wee  no  way  by  sea
from  Alexandria  to  the  Moluccaes,  for  that  Isthmos  or
litle  straight  of  land  betweene  the  two  seas.  In  like
maner  although  the  Northerne  passage  be  free  at  61
degrees  of  latitude,  and  the  West  Ocean  beyond  America,
usually  called  Mar  del  Zur,  knowen  to  be  open  at  40.
degrees  elevation  from  the  Island  Japan,  yea  three
hundred  leagues  Northerly  above  Japan  :  yet  may  there
be  land  to  hinder  the  thorow  passage  that  way  by  Sea,
as  in  the  examples  aforesaid  it  falleth  out,  Asia  and
America  there  being  joyned  together  in  one  continent.
Ne  can  this  opinion  seeme  altogether  frivolous  unto  any
one  that  diligently  peruseth  our  Cosmographers  doings.
Josephus  Moletius  is  of  that  minde,  not  onely  in  his
plaine  Hemispheres  of  the  world,  but  also  in  his  Sea
card. The French Geographers in like maner be of

194

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1576.

the  same  opinion,  as  by  their  Mappe  cut  out  in  forme
of  a  Hart  you  may  perceive :  as  though  the  West  Indies
were  part  of  Asia.  Which  sentence  well  agreeth  with  that
old  conclusion  in  the  Schooles :  Quicquid  praeter  Africam
&  Europam  est,  Asia  est.  Whatsoever  land  doeth  neither
apperteine  unto  Afrike  nor  to  Europe,  is  part  of  Asia.

Furthermore  it  were  to  small  purpose  to  make  so  long,  Ob.  5.
so  painefull,  so  doubtfull  a  voyage  by  such  a  new  found
way,  if  in  Cathayo  you  should  neither  bee  suffered  to
land  for  silkes  and  silver,  nor  able  to  fetch  the  Molucca
spices  and  pearle  for  piracie  in  those  Seas.  Of  a  law
denying  all  Aliens  to  enter  into  China,  and  forbid-
ding all  the  inhabiters  under  a  great  penaltie  to  let  in
any  stranger  into  those  countryes,  shall  you  reade  in  [III.  26.}
the  report  of  Galeotto  Perera  there  imprisoned  with
other  Portugals :  as  also  in  the  Japonish  letters,  how
for  that  cause  the  worthy  traveller  Xavierus  bargained
with  a  Barbarian  Merchant  for  a  great  summe  of  pepper
to  be  brought  into  Canton,  a  port  in  China.  The
great  and  dangerous  piracie  used  in  those  Seas  no  man
can  be  ignorant  of,  that  listeth  to  reade  the  Japonish
and  East  Indian  historic.

Finally,  all  this  great  labour  would  be  lost,  all  these  Ob.  6.
charges  spent  in  vaine,  if  in  the  ende  our  travellers
might  not  be  able  to  returne  againe,  and  bring  safely
home  into  their  owne  native  countrey  that  wealth  &
riches,  which  they  in  forrein  regions  with  adventure  of
goods,  &  danger  of  their  lives  have  sought  for.  By
the  Northeast  there  is  no  way,  the  Southeast  passage
the  Portugals  doe  hold  as  the  Lords  of  those  Seas.  At
ye  Southwest  Magellans  experience  hath  partly  taught
us,  and  partly  we  are  persuaded  by  reason,  how  the
Easterne  current  striketh  so  furiously  on  that  straight,
and  falleth  with  such  force  into  that  narrow  gulph,  that
hardly  any  ship  can  returne  that  way  into  our  West
Ocean  out  of  Mar  del  Zur.  The  which  if  it  be  true,
as  truely  it  is,  then  wee  may  say  that  the  aforesayd
Easterne  current  or  levant  course  of  waters continually

195

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

following  after  the  heavenly  motions,  looseth  not  alto-
gether his  force,  but  is  doubled  rather  by  an  other
current  from  out  the  Northeast,  in  the  passage  betweene
America  and  the  North  land,  whither  it  is  of  necessity
caryed :  having  none  other  way  to  maintaine  it  selfe  in
circular  motion,  &  consequently  the  force  and  fury
thereof  to  be  no  lesse  in  the  straight  of  Anian,  where
it  striketh  South  into  Mar  del  Zur,  beyond  America
(if  any  such  straight  of  Sea  there  be)  then  in  Magellans
fret,  both  straights  being  of  like  bredth :  as  in  Belognine
Zalterius  table  of  new  France,  and  in  Don  Diego
Hermano  de  Toledo  his  Card  for  navigation  in  that
region  we  doe  finde  precisely  set  downe.

Neverthelesse  to  approove  that  there  lyeth  a  way  to
Cathayo  at  the  Northwest  from  out  of  Europe,  we
have  experience,  namely  of  three  brethren  that  went
that  journey,  as  Gemma  Frisius  recordeth,  and  left  a
name  unto  that  straight,  whereby  now  it  is  called
Fretum  trium  fratrum.  We  doe  reade  againe  of  a
Portugall  that  passed  this  straight,  of  whom  Master
Frobisher  speaketh,  that  was  imprisoned  therefore  many
yeeres  in  Lisbone,  to  verifie  the  olde  Spanish  proverbe,
I  suffer  for  doing  well.  Likewise  Andrew  Urdaneta  a
Fryer  of  Mexico  came  out  of  Mar  del  Zur  this  way
into  Germanic :  his  Carde  (for  he  was  a  great  Dis-
coverer) made  by  his  owne  experience  and  travell  in
that  voyage,  hath  bene  scene  by  Gentlemen  of  good
credite.
Cic.  I.  (ie  Now  if  the observation  and remembrance  of  things

"^^■^'m"^)  breedeth  experience,  and  of  experience  proceedeth  arte,
and  the  certaine  knowledge  we  have  in  all  faculties,  as
the  best  Philosophers  that  ever  were  doe  affirme :  truely
the  voyage  of  these  aforesayd  travellers  that  have  gone
out  of  Europe  into  Mar  del  Zur,  and  returned  thence
at  the  Northwest,  do  most  evidently  conclude  that  way
to  be  navigable,  and  that  passage  free.  So  much  the
Lii>  I  Geo2  ^o^^  ^^  ^^^  ^°  ^°  thinke,  for  that  the  first  principle
Ca/>.  2.  and  chiefe  ground  in  all  Geographic,  as Ptolome  saith,

196

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1576.

is  the  history  of  travell,  that  is,  reports  made  by-
travellers  skilful  in  Geometric  and  Astronomic,  of  all
such  things  in  their  journey  as  to  Geographic  doe
belong.  It  onely  then  rcmaineth,  that  wc  now  answerc
to  those  arguments  that  seemed  to  make  against  this
former  conclusion.

The  first  objection  is  of  no  force,  that  generall  table  Sol.  i.
of  the  world  set  forth  by  Ortelius  or  Mercator,  for  it
greatly  skilleth  not,  being  unskilfully  drawen  for  that
point :  as  manifestly  it  may  appeare  unto  any  one  that
conferreth  the  same  with  Gemma  Frisius  his  universall
Mappe,  with  his  round  quartered  carde,  with  his  globe,
with  Sebastian  Cabota  his  table,  and  Ortelius  his
generall  mappe  alone,  worthily  preferred  in  this  case
before  all  Mercator  &  Ortelius  other  doings:  for  that
Cabota  was  not  onely  a  skilful  Sea  man,  but  a  long
traveller,  and  such  a  one  as  entred  personally  that
straight,  sent  by  king  Henry  the  seventh  to  make  this
aforesayd  Discoverie,  as  in  his  owne  discourse  of
navigation  you  may  reade  in  his  carde  drawen  with  his
owne  hand,  that  the  mouth  of  the  Northwesterne
straight  lyeth  neere  the  318.  Meridian,  betweene  61.
and  64.  degrees  in  the  elevation,  continuing  the  same
bredth  about  10.  degrees  West,  where  it  openeth
Southerly  more  and  more,  untill  it  come  under  the
tropicke  of  Cancer,  and  so  runneth  into  Mar  del  Zur,
at  the  least  18.  degrees  more  in  bredth  there,  then  it
was  where  it  first  began :  otherwise  I  could  as  well
imagine  this  passage  to  be  more  unlikely  then  the
voyage  to  Moscovia,  and  more  impossible  then  it  for
the  farre  situation  and  continuance  thereof  in  the  frostie
clime :  as  now  I  can  affirme  it  to  be  very  possible  and
most  likely  in  comparison  thereof,  for  that  it  neither
coasteth  so  farre  North  as  the  Moscovian  passage
doeth,  neither  is  this  straight  so  long  as  that,  before  it
bow  downe  Southerly  towardes  the  Sunne  againe.

The  second  argument concludeth  nothing. Ptolome  Sol.  2.
knew not what was above sixteene degrees South

197

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

beyond  the  Equinoctiall  line,  he  was  ignorant  of  all
passages  Northward  from  the  elevation  of  63.  degrees:
he knewe no Ocean sea beyond Asia, yet have the

[III.  27.]  Portugals  trended  the  cape  of  Good  hope  at  the  South
point  of  Afrike,  and  travelled  to  Japan  an  Island  in
the  East  Ocean,  betweene  Asia  &  America :  our  mer-
chants in  the  time  of  king  Edward  the  sixt  discovered
the  Moscovian  passage  farther  North  then  Thyle,  &
shewed  Groenland  not  to  be  continent  with  Lappeland
&  Norway :  the  like  our  Northwesterne  travellers  have
done,  declaring  by  their  navigation  that  way,  the  ignor-
ance of  all  Cosmographers  that  either  doe  joyne  Groen-
land with  America,  or  continue  the  West  Indies  with
that  frosty  region  under  the  north  pole.  As  for  Virgil
he  sang  according  to  the  knowledge  of  men  in  his
time,  as  an  other  Poet  did  of  the  hot  Zone.

Ovid.  I.  Quarum quae media est, non est habitabilis ^stu.

Meta.  Imagining, as most men then did, Zonam torridam,

the  hot  Zone  to  be  altogether  dishabited  for  heat,
though  presently  wee  know  many  famous  and  woorthy
kingdomes  and  cities  in  that  part  of  the  earth,  and
the  Island  of  S.  Thomas  neere  ^Ethiopia,  &  the
wealthy  Islands  for  the  which  chiefly  all  these  voyages
are  taken  in  hand,  to  be  inhabited  even  under  the
equinoctiall  line.

5o/.  3.  To  answere the third objection, besides Cabota and

all  other  travellers  navigations,  the  onely  credit  of  M.
Frobisher  may  suffice,  who  lately  through  all  these
Islands  of  ice,  and  mountaines  of  snow,  passed  that
way,  even  beyond  the  gulfe  that  tumbleth  downe  from
the  North,  and  in  some  places  though  he  drewe  one
inch  thicke  ice,  as  he  returning  in  August  did,  yet
came  he  home  safely  againe.

So/  4.  The  fourth  argument  is  altogether  frivolous  &  vaine,

for  neither  is  there  any  isthmos  or  strait  of  land
betweene  America  and  Asia,  ne  can  these  two  landes
joyntly  be  one  continent.  The  first  part  of  my  answere
is  manifestly  allowed  of  by  Homer,  whom  that  excellent

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad.

1576-
Geographer Strabo followeth, yeelding him in this  Lib.  Geog.
facultie the  price. The  authour  of  that booke  likewise
irepi  Koarfxov to Alexander, attributed  unto Aristotle, is
of  the  same  opinion  that  Homer  and  Strabo  be  of,  in

two or three places. Dionisius in oiKov/mevrjg TrepLrjyrjcn

hath this verse wtwis WKeav6<i rn-epiSeSpofxe yaiav aTracrav.

So  doth  the  Ocean  Sea  runne  round  about  the  worlde :

speaking  onely  of  Europe,  Afrike  and  Asia,  as  then  Asia

was  travelled  and  knowen. With  these  Doctours may  Note.

you  joyne  Pomponius  Mela.  cap.  2.  lib.  I.  Plinius  lib.

2.  cap. 67.  and Pius 2.  cap.  2.  in his description of

Asia. All  the  which  writers  doe  no  lesse  confirme  the

whole  Easterne  side  of  Asia  to  be  compassed  about  with

the  sea,  then  Plato doeth  affirme  in  Timaso,  under  the

name  Atlantis,  the  West  Indies to  be  an  Island,  as  in

a  special  discourse thereof  R. Eden writeth,  agreeable  RichardEden.

unto the sentence of  Proclus, Marsilius  Ficinus, and

others. Out  of Plato it is gathered  that  America is

an  Island. Homer,  Strabo, Aristotle,  Dionysius,  Mela,

Plinie, Pius 2. affirme  the continent of Asia, Afrike,

&  Europe,  to be environed with the Ocean. I may

therfore boldly say (though later intelligences therof

had  we none  at all)  that  Asia  &  the  West Indies be

not  tied together  by  any  Isthmos  or straight of  land,

contrary  to the  opinion of some  new Cosmographers,

by  whom  doubtfully  this  matter hath bin brought in

controversie. And  thus much  for  the  first  part  of  my

answere  unto  the  fourth  objection.

The  second  part,  namely  that  America  and  Asia
cannot  be  one  continent,  may  thus  be  proved,  /cara  Lib.  z.  Me-
Tvjv  TTjg  y^g  KoiXoTfjra  pei  Kac  rcov  iroTa/ucov  to  ttXj^Oo?.  The  ^^''^'  ^^^'  ^'
most  Rivers  take  downe  that  way  their  course,  where
the  earth  is  most  hollow  and  deepe,  writeth  Aristotle :
and  the  Sea  (sayth  he  in  the  same  place)  as  it  goeth
further,  so  is  it  found  deeper.  Into  what  gulfe  doe  the
Moscovian  rivers  Onega,  Duina,  Ob,  powre  out  their
streames  Northward  out  of  Moscovia  into  the  sea  ?
Which  way  doeth  that  sea  strike  ? The  South  is  maine

199

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

land,  the  Easterne  coast  waxeth  more  and  more  shalow :
from  the  North,  either  naturally,  because  that  part  of  the
earth  is  higher  Aristot.  2  Met.  cap.  i.  or  of  necessitie,
for  that  the  forcible  influence  of  some  Northerne  starres
causeth  the  earth  there  to  shake  off  the  Sea,  as  some
Philosophers  doe  thinke :  or  finally  for  the  great  store
of  waters  engendred  in  that  frostie  and  colde  climate,  that
the  bankes  are  not  able  to  holde  them.  Alber.  in  2.
Meteor,  cap.  6.  From  the  North,  I  say,  continually
falleth  downe  great  abundance  of  water.  So  that  this
Northeasterne  currant  must  at  the  length  abruptly  bow
toward  us  South  on  the  West  side  of  Finmarke  and
Norway :  or  else  strike  downe  Southwest  above  Grone-
land,  or  betwixt  Groneland  and  Iseland,  into  the  North-
west straight  we  speake  of,  as  of  congruence  it  doeth,
if  you  marke  the  situation  of  that  Region,  and  by  the
report  of  M.  Frobisher  experience  teacheth  us.  And  M.
Frobisher  the  further  he  travailed  in  the  former  passage,
as  he  tolde  me,  the  deeper  alwayes  he  found  the  Sea.
Lay  you  now  the  summe  hereof  together.  The  rivers
runne  where  the  chanels  are  most  hollow,  the  sea  in
taking  his  course  waxeth  deeper,  the  Sea  waters  fall  con-
tinually from  the  North  Southward,  the  Northeasterne
current  striketh  downe  into  the  straight  we  speake  of,
and  is  there  augmented  with  whole  mountaines  of  yce
and  snowe  falling  downe  furiously  out  from  the  land
Plin.  lib.  2.  under  the  North  pole.  Where  store  of  water  is,  there
cap.  67.  jg  \^  ^  thing  impossible  to  want  Sea,  where  Sea  not  onely
doeth  not  want,  but  waxeth  deeper,  there  can  be  dis-
covered no  land.  Finally,  whence  I  pray  you  came  the
[III  28.]  contrary  tide,  that  M.  Frobisher  mette  withall  after  that
he  had  sailed  no  small  way  in  that  passage,  if  there  bee
any  Isthmos  or  straight  of  land  betwixt  the  aforesayd
North westerne  gulfe,  and  Mar  del  Zur,  to  joyne  Asia
and  America  together  ?  That  conclusion  frequented  in
scholes  Quicquid  praeter,  &c.  was  meant  of  the  partes
of  the  world  then  knowen,  and  so  is  it  of  right  to  be
understood.

200

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1576.

The  fift  objection  requireth  for  answere  wisedome  and  Sol.  5.
policie  in  the  travailer,  to  winne  the  Barbarians  favour
by  some  good  meanes :  and  so  to  arme  and  strengthen
himselfe,  that  when  he  shal  have  the  repulse  in  one  coast,
he  may  safely  travaile  to  an  other,  commodiously  taking
his  convenient  times,  and  discreetely  making  choise  of
them  with  whom  hee  will  throughly  deale.  To  force  a
violent  entry,  would  for  us  Englishmen  be  very  hard,
considering  the  strength  and  valour  of  so  great  a  Nation,
farre  distant  from  us,  and  the  attempt  thereof  might  be
most  perillous  unto  the  doers,  unlesse  their  part  were
very  good.

Touching  their  lawes  against  strangers,  you  shall  reade
neverthelesse  in  the  same  relations  of  Galeotto  Perera,
that  the  Cathaian  king  is  woont  to  graunt  free  accesse
unto  all  forreiners  that  trade  into  his  Countrey  for  Mar-
chandise,  and  a  place  of  libertie  for  them  to  remaine  in  :
as  the  Moores  had,  untill  such  time  as  they  had  brought
the  Loutea  or  Lieutenant  of  that  coast  to  bee  a  circum-
cised Saracene :  wherefore  some  of  them  were  put  to  the
sword,  the  rest  were  scattered  abroad :  at  Fuquien  a  great
citie  in  China,  certaine  of  them  are  yet  this  day  to  be
seene.  As  for  the  Japans  they  be  most  desirous  to  be
acquainted  with  strangers.  The  Portingals  though  they
were  straitly  handled  there  at  the  first,  yet  in  the  ende
they  found  great  favour  at  the  Prince  his  hands,  insomuch
that  the  Loutea  or  president  that  misused  them  was  there-
fore put  to  death.  The  rude  Indian  Canoa  halleth  those
seas,  the  Portingals,  the  Saracenes,  and  Moores  travaile
continually  up  and  downe  that  reach  from  Japan  to  China,
from  China  to  Malacca,  from  Malacca  to  the  Moluccaes :
and  shall  an  Englishman,  better  appointed  then  any  of
them  all  (that  I  say  no  more  of  our  Navie)  feare  to  saile
in  that  Ocean  ?  What  seas  at  all  doe  want  piracie }
what  Navigation  is  there  voyde  of  perill .''

To the  last  argument. Our  travailers neede  not  to  Sol.  6.
seeke  their  returne  by  the  Northeast,  neither  shall  they
be constrained, except they list, either to attempt

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

Magellans  straight  at  the  Southwest,  or  to  be  in  danger
of  the  Portingals  for  the  Southeast :  they  may  returne
by  the  Northwest,  that  same  way  they  doe  goe  foorth,
as  experience  hath  shewed.

The  reason  alleadged  for  proofe  of  the  contrary  may
be  disproved  after  this  maner.  And  first  it  may  be  called
in  controversie,  whether  any  current  continually  be  forced
by  the  motion  of  Primum  mobile,  round  about  the  world,
or  no  ?  For  learned  men  doe  diversly  handle  that  ques-
tion. The  naturall  course  of  all  waters  is  downeward,
wherefore  of  congruence  they  fall  that  way  where  they
finde  the  earth  most  lowe  and  deepe :  in  respect  whereof,
Luc.  lib.  I.  it  was  erst  sayd,  the  seas  doe  strike  from  the  Northren
•  landes Southerly. Violently the seas are tossed and

troubled  divers  wayes  with  the  windes,  encreased  and
diminished  by  the  course  of  the  Moone,  hoised  up  &
downe  through  the  sundry  operations  of  the  Sunne  and
the  starres :  finally,  some  be  of  opinion,  that  the  seas  be
caried  in  part  violently  about  the  world,  after  the  dayly
motion  of  the  highest  moveable  heaven,  in  like  maner  as
What  the  the  elements  of  ayre  and  fire,  with  the  rest  of  the  heavenly
Ecisterne  cur-  sph^j-es,  are  from  the  East  unto  the  West.  And  this
they  doe  call  their  Easterne  current,  or  levant  streame.
Some  such  current  may  not  be  denied  to  be  of  great  force
in  the  hot  Zone,  for  the  neerenesse  thereof  unto  the
centre  of  the  Sunne,  and  blustring  Easterne  windes
violently  driving  the  seas  Westward :  howbeit,  in  the
temperate  climes,  the  Sunne  being  further  off,  &  the
windes  more  divers,  blowing  as  much  from  the  North,
the  West  and  South,  as  from  the  East,  this  rule  doeth
not  effectually  withholde  us  from  travailing  Eastward,,
neither  be  we  kept  ever  backe  by  the  aforesaid  Levant
windes  and  streame.  But  in  Magellans  streight  wee  are
violently  driven  backe  Westward :  Ergo,  through  the
Northwesterne  straight  or  Anian  frette  shall  we  not  be
able  to  returne  Eastward  .?  It  followeth  not.  The  first,
for  that  the  northwesterne  straight  hath  more  sea  roome
at the least by one hundreth English myles, then

THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE  ad

1576.

Magellans  frette  hath,  the  onely  want  whereof  causeth
all  narrow  passages  generally  to  be  most  violent.  So
would  I  say  in  the  Anian  gulfe,  if  it  were  so  narrow  as
Don  Diego  and  Zalterius  have  painted  it  out,  any  returne
that  way  to  bee  full  of  difficulties,  in  respect  of  such
streightnesse  thereof,  not  for  the  neerenesse  of  the  Sunne,
or  Easterne  windes,  violently  forcing  that  way  any  levant
streame :  But  in  that  place  there  is  more  sea  roome  by
many  degrees,  if  the  Gardes  of  Cabota,  and  Gemma
Frisius,  and  that  which  Tramezine  imprinted,  be  true.
And  hitherto  reason  see  I  none  at  all,  but  that  I  may
as  well  give  credite  unto  their  doings,  as  to  any  of  the
rest.  It  must  be  Peregrinationis  historia,  that  is,  true  L^^-  ^-  ^^°S-
reportes  of  skilfuU  travailers,  as  Ptolome  writeth,  that  in  ^^'  ^'
such  controversies  of  Geographic  must  put  us  out  of
doubt.  Ortelius  in  his  universall  tables,  in  his  particular  [III.  29.]
Mappes  of  the  West  Indies,  of  all  Asia,  of  the  Northren
kingdomes,  of  the  East  Indies,  Mercator  in  some  of  his
globes,  and  generall  Mappes  of  the  world,  Moletius  in
his  universall  table  of  the  Globe  divided,  in  his  sea  Carde,
and  particuler  tables  of  the  East  Indies,  Zalterius,  and
Don  Diego,  with  Ferdinando  Bertely,  and  others,  doe  so
much  differ  from  Gemma  Frisius  and  Cabota,  among
themselves,  and  in  divers  places  from  themselves,  con-
cerning the  divers  situation  and  sundry  limits  of  America,
that  one  may  not  so  rashly,  as  truely  surmise,  these  men
either  to  be  ignorant  in  those  points  touching  the  afore-
said region,  or  that  the  Mappes  they  have  given  out  unto
the  world,  were  collected  onely  by  them,  and  never  of
their  owne  drawing.

[The  first
203

A.D,
1576.

June.

II M.  Matthew

Kinderslye

zvas  Captaine

of  the  Michael.

Faire  Island.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  first  Voyage  of  M.  Martine  Frobisher,  to
the  Northwest,  for  the  search  of  the  straight
or  passage  to  China,  written  by  Christopher
Hall,  Master  in  the  Gabriel,  and  made  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord 1576.

He  7.  of  June  being  Thursday,  the  two
Barks,  viz.  the  Gabriel,  and  the  I  Michael
&  our  Pinnesse  set  saile  at  Ratcliffe,  and
bare  down  to  Detford,  and  there  we
ancred :  the  cause  was,  that  our  Pinnesse
burst  her  boultsprit,  and  foremast  aboard
of  a  ship  that  rode  at  Detford,  else  wee
meant  to  have  past  that  day  by  the  Court  then  at
Grenewich.

The  8.  day  being  Friday,  about  12  of  the  clocke  we
wayed  at  Detford,  and  set  saile  all  three  of  us,  and  bare
downe  by  the  Court,  where  we  shotte  off  our  ordinance
and  made  the  best  shew  we  could :  Her  Majestie  behold-
ing the  same,  commended  it,  and  bade  us  farewell,  with
shaking  her  hand  at  us  out  of  the  window.  Afterward
shee  sent  a  Gentleman  aboord  of  us,  who  declared  that
her  Majestie  had  good  liking  of  our  doings,  and  thanked
us  for  it,  and  also  willed  our  Captaine  to  come  the  next
day  to  the  Court  to  take  his  leave  of  her.

The  same  day  towards  night  M.  Secretarie  Woolly
came  aboorde  of  us,  and  declared  to  the  company,  that
her  Majestie  had  appointed  him  to  give  them  charge
to  be  obedient,  and  diligent  to  their  Captaine,  and
governours  in  all  things,  and  wished  us  happie  successe.
The  12.  day  being  over  against  Gravesend,  by  the
castle  or  blockehouse,  we  observed  the  latitude,  which
was  51.  degrees  33.  min.  And  in  that  place  the  variation
of  the  Compasse  is  1 1 .  degrees  and  a  halfe.

The  24.  day  at  2.  of  the  clocke  after  noone,  I  had
sight  of  Faire  yle,  being  from  us  6.  leagues  North  and
by  East,  and  when  I  brought  it  Northwest  and  by  North,

204

MARTIN 1  ROBISHER  ad

1576.

it did  rise  at the  Southermost ende  with a  litle hom-
mocke,  and  swampe  in  the  middes.

The  25.  day  from  4.  to  8.  a  clocke  in  the  forenoone,
the  winde  at  Northwest  and  by  North  a  fresh  gale,  I  cast
about  to  the  Westward,  the  Southermost  head  of  Shot-  Shotland.
land  called  Swinborne  head  Northnorthwest  from  me,
and  the  land  of  Faire  yle.  West  Southwest  from  me.  I
sailed  directly  to  the  North  head  of  that  said  land,  sound-
ing as  I  ranne  in,  having  60.  50.  and  40.  fathoms,  and
gray  redde  shels :  and  within  halfe  a  mile  of  that  Island,
there  are  36.  fathoms,  for  I  sailed  to  that  Island  to  see
whether  there  were  any  roadesteede  for  a  Northwest
winde,  and  I  found  by  my  sounding  hard  rockes,  and
foule  ground,  and  deepe  water,  within  two  cables  length
of  the  shoare,  28.  fathome,  and  so  did  not  ancre  but  plied
to  and  fro  with  my  foresaile,  and  mizen  till  it  was  a
high  water  under  the  Island.  The  tide  setteth  there
Northwest  and  Southeast :  the  flood  setteth  Southeast,
and  the  ebbe  Northwest.

The  26.  day  having  the  winde  at  South  a  faire  gale,
sayling  from  Faire  yle  to  Swinborne  head,  I  did  observe
the  latitude,  the  Island  of  Fowlay  being  West  Northwest
from  me  6.  leagues,  and  Swinborne  head  East  southeast
from  me,  I  found  my  *  elevation  to  be  37.  degr.  and  my  ^  By  elevation
declination  22.  degr.  46.  min. So  that  my  latitude  was  ^^,  ^'^^«^^^
59-. degr. 46. min._ At that present being neere to  [hesmnefrom
Swinborne  head,  having  a  leake  which  did  trouble  us,  as  the  zenith.
also  to  take  in  fresh  water,  I  plyed  roome  with  a  sound,
which  is  called  S.  Tronions,  and  there  did  ancre  in  seven  S.  Tronions.
fathoms  water,  and  faire  sande. You  have  comming  in
the sounds  mouth  in  the  entring  17.  15.  12.  10.  9. 8.
and  7.  fathoms,  and  the  sound  lyeth  in  North  northwest,
and there  we  roade  to a  West sunne,  & stopped our
leake,  and  having  refreshed  our  selves  with  water,  at  a
North  northwest  sunne,  I  set  saile  from  S.  Tronions  the
winde  at  South  Southest,  and  turned  out  till  wee  were
cleare  of  the  sound,  and  so  sailed  West  to  go  cleare  of
the  Island  of  Fowlay. And  running  off  toward  Fowlay,  Fowlay  island.

205

A.D.
1576.

[III.  30.]

Latitude  59.
deg.  59.  min,
Here  they  be-
gin  to  saile
West  and  by
North.

July  the  first.

The  Compasse
varying  West-
wards one
point.

1 1,
The  Island  of
Friseland.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I  sounded,  having  fiftie  fathome,  and  streamie  ground,
and  also  I  sounded  Fowlay  being  North  from  mee  one
league  off  that  Islande,  having  fiftie  fathome  at  the  South
head,  and  streamie  ground,  like  broken  otmell,  and  one
shell  being  redde  and  white  like  mackerell.

The  27.  day  at  a  South  sunne  I  did  observe  the
latitude,  the  Island  of  Fowlay  being  from  me  two  leagues
East  Northeast:  I  found  my  selfe  to  be  in  latitude  59.
degrees,  59.  min.  truly  observed,  the  winde  at  South
Southwest :  I  sailed  West  and  by  North.

From  12.  to  foure  a  clocke  afternoone,  the  wind  at
South,  a  faire  gale  the  shippe  sailed  West  and  by  North
6.  leagues,  and  at  the  ende  of  this  watch,  I  sounded
having  60.  fathome,  with  little  stones  and  shels,  the
Island  from  us  8.  leagues  East.

The  first  of  July,  from  4.  to  8.  a  clocke,  wee  sailed
West  4.  glasses  4.  leagues,  and  at  that  present  we  had  so
much  winde  that  we  spooned  afore  the  sea  Southwest  2.
leagues.

The  3.  day  we  found  our  Compasse  to  bee  varied  one
point  to  the  Westwards:  this  day  from  4.  to  8.  a  clocke
we  sailed  West  and  by  North 6.  leagues.

From  8.  to  12.  a  clocke  at  noone  West  and  by  North
4.  leagues.  At  that  present  I  found  our  Compasse  to
be  varied  il.  deg.  and  one  4.  part  to  the  Westwards,
which  is  one  point.

The  1 1  day  at  a  Southeast  sunne  we  had  sight  of  the
land  of  Friseland  bearing  from  us  West  northwest  16.
leagues,  and  rising  like  pinacles  of  steeples,  and  all
covered  with  snowe.  I  found  my  selfe  in  61.  degr.  of
latitude.  Wee  sailed  to  the  shoare  and  could  finde  no
ground  at  1 50.  fathoms,  we  hoised  out  our  boate,  and
the  Captaine  with  4.  men  rowed  to  the  shoare  to  get
on  land,  but  the  land  lying  full  of  yce,  they  could  not
get  on  land,  and  so  they  came  aboord  againe :  We  had
much  adoe  to  get  cleare  of  the  yce  by  reason  of  the
fogge.  Yet  from  Thursday  8.  a  clocke  in  the  morning
to  Friday  at  noone  we  sailed  Southwest  20.  leagues.

206

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1576.

The  18.  day  at  a  Southwest  sunne  I  found  the  sunne 18.
to  be  elevated  23-  <^^g- And  at  a  Southsoutheast  sunne
40.  deg. So  I  observed  it  till  I  found  it  at  the  highest,
and  then  it  was  elevated  52.  deg. I  judged  the  variation  T^e  vanatton
of  the Com  passe to be 2. points and  a halfe to the  "{J/p^/Jt^  and
Westward.  _  ^  a  halfe  to  the

The 21. day  we  had sight of  a  great drift  of  yce,  West.
seeming a firme lande, and we cast  Westward to be  ^  S''^^^  ^^0
cleare  of  it.  vy^^-

The  26.  we  had  sight  of  a  land  of  yce:  the  latitude  The  latitude  of
was  62.  degrees,  and  two  minutes.  bz.  degrees  z.

The  28.  day  in  the  morning  was  very  foggie :  but  at
the  clearing  up  of  the fogge,  wee had sight of  lande,  Sight  of  land
which I supposed to  be  Labrador,  with great store of  ^fPP°^[^  ^\
yce  about  the  land :  I  ranne  in  towards  it,  and  sownded,  hrador.
but could  get  no  ground  at  100. fathom,  and the yce
being  so  thicke,  I  could not  get to the  shoare,  and  so
lay  off, and came cleare of  the yce. Upon Munday  30.
we came within a mile of  the shoare,  and sought a
harborowe :  all  the  sownd  was  full  of  yce,  and  our  boate
rowing  a shoare,  could  get  no  ground  at  100. fathom,
within a Cables length of  the shoare : then  we sailed
Eastnortheast  along the  shoare,  for  so  the  lande  lyeth,
and the currant is there great,  setting  Northeast, and
Southwest :  and  if  we  could  have  gotten  anker  ground,
wee  would  have  seene  with  what  force  it  had  runne,  but
I  judge  a  ship  may  drive  a  league  and  a  halfe,  in one
houre,  with  that  tide.

This  day  at  4.  of  the  cloke  in  the  morning,  being  31.
faire  and  cleere,  we  had  sight  of  a  head  land,  as  we
judged,  bearing  from  us  north,  and  by  East,  and  we
sailed  Northeast,  and  by  North  to  that  land,  and  when
we  came  thither,  wee  could  not  get  to  the  lande  for  yce :
for  the  yce  stretched  along  the  coast,  so  that  we  could
not  come  to  the  land,  by  five  leagues.

Wednesday  the  first  of  August  it  calmed,  and  in  the  August.
after  noone  I  caused  my  boate  to  be  hoysed  out,  being '•
hard  by  a  great  Island  of  yce,  and  I  and  foure  men  rowed  ^"

207

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

to  that  yce,  and  sownded  within  two  Cables  length  of
it,  and  had  sixteene  fathome,  and  little  stones,  and  after
that  sownded  againe  within  a  Minion  shot,  and  had
ground  at  an  hundreth  fathome,  and  faire  sand :  we
sownded  the  next  day  a  quarter  of  a  myle  from  it,  and
had  sixtie  fathome  rough  ground,  and  at  that  present
being  aboord,  that  great  Island  of  yce  fell  one  part  from
another,  making  a  noyse  as  if  a  great  cliffe  had  fallen
into  the  Sea.  And  at  foure  of  the  clocke  I  sownded
againe,  and  had  90.  fathome,  and  small  blacke  stones,
and  little  white  stones,  like  pearles.  The  tide  here  did
set  to  the  shoare.
10.  The  tenth  I  tooke  foure  men,  and  my  selfe,  and  rowed
to  shoare  to  an  Island  one  league  from  the  maine,  and
there  the  flood  setteth  Southwest  alongest  the  shoare,
and  it  floweth  as  neere  as  I  could  judge  so  too,  I  could
not  tarry  to  proove  it,  because  the  ship  was  a  great  way
from  me,  and  I  feared  a  fogge :  but  when  I  came  a
shoare,  it  was  a  low  water.  I  went  to  ye  top  of  the
Island,  and  before  I  came  backe,  it  was  hied  a  foote
water,  and  so  without  tarrying  I  came  aboord.
^'- The  II.  we found  our  latitude  to be 61,.  degr.  and

'sfr?kinZhT  ^^^^^  minutes,  and  this  day  we  entred  the  streight.

latitude  of  6x. The 12.  wee set  saile towardes an  Island,  called  the

deg.and'i.min.  Gabriels  Island,  which  was 10.  leagues  then  from  us.

12. We  espied  a  sound,  and  bare  with  it,  and  came  to  a

ry„  -j^^'  sandie  Baye,  where  we  came  to  an  anker,  the  land  bearing
East  southeast  off  us,  and  there  we  rode  al  night  in  8.
fathome  water.  It  floweth  there  at  a  Southeast  Moone.
We  called  it  Priors  sownd,  being  from  the  Gabriels  Island,
tenne  leagues.

14.  The  14.  we  waied,  and  ranne  into  another  sownde,
where  wee  ankered  in  8.  fathome  water,  faire  sand,  and
blacke  oaze,  and  there  calked  our  ship,  being  weake  from
the  wales  upward,  and  tooke  in  fresh  water.

15.  The  15.  day  we  waied,  and  sailed  to  Priors  Bay,  being
a  mile  from  thence.

16.  The  16.  day  was  calme,  and  we  rode  still,  without  yce,

208

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1576.

but  presently  within  two  houres  it  was  frozen  round
about  the  ship,  a  quarter  of  an  ynch  thicke,  and  that
day  very  faire,  and  calme.

The  17.  day  we  waied,  and  came  to  Thomas  Williams 17.
Island.

The 18.  day  we  sailed  North  northwest,  and  ankered 18.
againe  in  23.  fathome,  and  tough  oaze,  under  Burchers
Island,  which  is  from  the  former  Island,  ten  leagues.

The  19.  day  in  the  morning,  being  calme,  and  no  19.
winde,  the  Captaine  and  I  tooke  our  boate,  with  eight
men  in  her,  to  rowe  us  a  shoare,  to  see  if  there  were
there  any  people,  or  no,  and  going  to  the  toppe  of  the
Island,  we  had  sight  of  seven  boates,  which  came  rowing  ^^i^  °f^^^
from  the  East  side,  toward  that  Island  :  whereupon  we  ^w^^^'*'
returned  aboord  againe :  at  length  we  sent  our  boate
with  five  men  in  her,  to  see  whither  they  rowed,  and
so  with  a  white  cloth  brought  one  of  their  boates  with
their  men  along  the  shoare,  rowing  after  our  boate,  till
such  time  as  they  sawe  our  ship,  and  then  they  rowed
a  shoare :  then  I  went  on  shoare  my  selfe,  and  gave  every
of  them  a  threadden  point,  and  brought  one  of  them
aboord  of  me,  where  hee  did  eate  and  drinke,  and  then
carried  him  on  shoare  againe.  Whereupon  all  the  rest
came  aboord  with  their  boates,  being  nineteene  persons,
and  they  spake,  but  we  understoode  them  not.  They  "^^^  descrip-
bee  like  to  Tartars,  with  long  blacke  haire,  broad  faces,  ^°^j
and  flatte  noses,  and  tawnie  in  colour,  wearing  Seale
skinnes,  and  so  doe  the  women,  not  differing  in  the
fashion,  but  the  women  are  marked  in  the  face  with  blewe
streekes  downe  the  cheekes,  and  round  about  the  eyes.
Their  boates  are  made  all  of  Scales  skinnes,  with  a  keele
of  wood  within  the  skin  :  the  proportion  of  them  is  like
a  Spanish  shallop,  save  only  they  be  flat  in  the  bottome,
and  sharpe  at  both  ends.

The  twentieth  day  wee  wayed,  and  went  to  the  East-  20.

side  of  this  Island,  and  I  and  the  Captaine,  with  foure

men more went on shoare, and there we sawe their

houses,  and  the  people  espying  us,  came  rowing  towards

VII  209  o

A.D.

1576.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

people.

our  boate :  whereupon  we  plied  toward  our  boate :  and
wee  being  in  our  boate  and  they  ashoare,  they  called  to
us,  and  we  rowed  to  them,  and  one  of  their  company
came  into  our  boate,  and  we  carried  him  a  boord,  and
gave  him  a  Bell,  and  a  knife :  so  the  Captaine  and  I
c.  of  our  men  willed  five  of  our  men  to  set  him  a  shoare  at  a  rocke,
taken  by  the  ^^^  ^^^  among  the  company,  which  they  came  from,
but  their  wilfulnesse  was  such,  that  they  would  goe  to
them,  and  so  were  taken  themselves,  and  our  boate  lost.

The  next  day  in  the  morning,  we  stoode  in  neere  the
shoare,  and  shotte  off  a  fauconet,  and  sounded  our
trumpet,  but  we  could  heare  nothing  of  our  men :  this
sound  wee  called  the  five  mens  sound,  and  plyed  out  of
it,  but  ankered  againe  in  thirtie  fathome,  and  oaze :  and
riding  there  all  night,  in  the  morning,  the  snow  lay  a
foote  thicke  upon  our  hatches.

The  22.  day  in  the  morning  we  wayed,  and  went
againe  to  the  place  where  we  lost  our  men,  and  our  boate.
We  had  sight  of  foureteene  boates,  and  some  came  neere
to  us,  but  wee  could  learne  nothing  of  our  men  :  among
the  rest,  we  intised  one  boate  to  our  ships  side,  with
a  Bell,  and  in  giving  him  the  Bell,  we  tooke  him,  and
his  boate,  and  so  kept  him,  and  so  rowed  downe  to
Thomas  Williams  Island,  and  there  ankered  all  night.

The  26.  day  we  waied,  to  come  homeward,  and  by
12.  of  the  clocke  at  noone,  we  were  thwart  of  Trumpets
Island.

The  next  day  we  came  thwart  of  Gabriels  Island,  and
at  8.  of  the  clocke  at  night  we  had  the  Cape  Labrador
as  we  supposed  West  from  us,  ten  leagues.

The  28.  day  we  went  our  course  Southeast.

We  sailed  Southeast,  and  by  East,  22.  leagues.

The  first  day  of  September  in  the  morning  we  had
sight  of  the  land  of  Friseland,  being  eight  leagues  from
us,  but  we  could  not  come  neerer  it,  for  the  monstrous
yce  that  lay  about  it.  From  this  day,  till  the  sixth  of  this
Moneth,  we  ranne  along  Island,  and  had  the  South  part
of  it  at  eight  of  the  clocke.  East  from  us  ten  leagues.

They  returne.
26,

27.

28.
29.

September.

MARTIN FROBISHER

A.D.

The  seventh  day  of  this  moneth  we  had  a  very  terrible  7«
storme,  by  force  whereof,  one  of  our  men  was  blowen
into the sea  out  of  our  waste,  but he  caught hold of
the foresaile sheate, and there held till the Captaine
pluckt  him  againe  into  the  ship.

The 25. day of  this moneth we had sight of  the  [HI-  32-]
Island  of  Orkney,  which  was  then  East  from  us.

The  first  day  of  October  we  had  sight  of  the  Sheld, The  SheU.
and  so  sailed  about  the  coast,  and  ankered  at  Yarmouth,
and  the  next  day  we  came  into  Harwich.

The  language  of  the

Argoteyt,  a  hand.
Cangnawe,  a  nose.
Arered,  an  eye.
Keiotot,  a  tooth.
Mutchatet,  the  head.
Chewat,  an  eare.
Comagaye,  a  legge.
Atoniagay,  a  foote.
Callagay,  a paire of
breeches.

M

people  of  Meta  incognita.

'  Attegay,  a  coate.
Pollevetagay,  a  knife.
Accaskay,  a  shippe.
Coblone,  a  thumbe.
Teckkere,  the  foremost

finger.

Ketteckle,  the  middle  finger.
Mekellacane,  the  fourth

finger.
Yacketrone,  the  litle  finger.

The  second  voyage  of  Master  Martin  Frobisher,
made  to  the  West  and  Northwest  Regions,
in  the  yeere  1577.  with  a  description  of  the
Countrey,  and  people :  Written  by  Master
Dionise  Settle.

N  Whitsunday,  being  the  sixe  and  twen-
tieth of  May,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
God  1577.  Captaine  Frobisher  departed
from  Blacke  Wall,  with  one  of  the
Queenes  Majesties  ships,  called  The
Aide,  of  nine  score  tunnes,  or  there-
abouts :  and  two  other  little  Barkes  like-

wise, the  one  called  The  Gabriel,  whereof  Master  Fenton,
a  Gentleman  of  my  Lord  of  Warwikes,  was  Captaine :

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

and  the  other,  The  Michael,  whereof  Master  Yorke,  a
Gentleman  of  my  Lord  Admirals  was  Captaine,  accom-
panied with  seven  score  Gentlemen,  souldiers,  and
sailers,  well  furnished  with  victuals,  and  other  provision
necessarie  for  one  halfe  yeere,  on  this  his  second  voyage,
for  the  further  discovering  of  the  passage  to  Cathay,  and
other  Countreys,  thereunto  adjacent,  by  West  and  North-
west navigations :  which  passage  or  way,  is  supposed  to
bee  on  the  North  and  Northwest  part  of  America :  and
the  said  America  to  be  an  Island  invironed  with  the  sea,
where  through  our  Merchants  may  have  course  and
recourse  with  their  merchandize,  from  these  our  Northern-
most parts  of  Europe,  to  those  Orientall  coasts  of  Asia,
in  much  shorter  time,  and  with  greater  benefite  then  any
others,  to  their  no  little  commoditie  and  profite  that  do
or  shall  frequent  the  same.  Our  said  Captaine  and
General  of  this  present  voyage  and  company  having  the
yeere  before,  with  two  little  pinnesses,  to  his  great  danger,
and  no  small  commendations,  given  a  worthy  attempt
towards  the  performance  thereof,  is  also  prest,  when
occasion  shall  be  ministred  (to  the  benefite  of  his  Prince,
and  native  Countrey)  to  adventure  himselfe  further
therein.  As  for  this  second  voyage,  it  seemeth  sufficient,
that  he  hath  better  explored  and  searched  the  commodities
of  those  people  and  Countreys,  which  in  his  first  voyage
the  yeere  before  he  had  found  out.

Upon  which  considerations,  the  day  and  yeere  before

expressed,  we  departed from Blacke  Wall to Harwich,

where  making  an  accomplishment  of  things  necessary,  the

last  of  May  we  hoised  up  sailes,  and  with  a  merrie  wind

The  Islands the  7.  of  June  we  arrived  at  the  Islands  called  Orcades,

Ofxades,  or qj. vulgarly  Orkney, being in number 30.  subject and

^'  ■^'  adjacent  to  Scotland,  where  we  made  provision  of  fresh

water ; in  the  doing  whereof  our Generall licensed the

Gentlemen  and  souldiers  for  their  recreation,  to  goe  on

TheOrcadians  ghore. At  our  landing,  the  people  fled  from  their  poore

tiPofi  smell  occ^~  •  ^o'li  ^1^

ston  fee  their cottages,  with  shrikes  and  alarms,  to  warne  their  neigh-
home.  bours  of  enemies,  but  by  gentle  perswasions  we  reclamed

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
them  to  their  houses. It  seemeth  they  are  often  frighted
with Pirats,  or some other enemies,  that moove  them
to such sudden feare. Their houses are  very  simply
builded  with  Pibble  stone,  without  any  chimneis,  the  fire
being made  in the middest thereof. The  good man,
wife,  children,  and  other  of  their  family  eate  and  sleepe
on  the  one  side  of  the  house,  and  the  cattell  on  the  other,
very  beastly  and  rudely,  in  respect  of  civilitie. They  are
destitute of  wood,  their  fire is  turffes,  and  Cowshards.  ^'^  wood  in
They  have  corne,  bigge,  and  oates,  with  which  they  pay  ^''^^O'"
their  Kings  rent,  to  the  maintenance  of  his  house. They
take  great  quantitie  of  fish,  which  they  dry  in  the  wind
and Sunne. They  dresse their meat  very  filthily,  and
eate  it  without  salt. Their  apparell  is  after  the  rudest
sort  of  Scotland. Their  money  is  all  base. Their  Church
and  religion  is reformed  according to the Scots. The
fisher  men  of  England  can  better  declare  the  dispositions  Fisher  men  of
of  those  people  then I : wherefore  I remit other their  ^/^!^"/ ^J^^

r r  .  ..... dmly  traffike

usages to their reports,  as  yeerely  repaires thither, in  ^^  Orkney.
their  course  to  and  from  Island  for  fish.

We  departed  herehence  the  8.  of  June,  and  followed  [HI-  33-]
our  course  betweene  West  and  Northwest,  untill  the  4.  ^fj^^^  "'^■f,
of  July :  all  which  time  we  had  no  night,  but  that  easily,  ^-^  J^^^  ^^^^
and  without  any  impediment  we  had  when  we  were  so  and  North-
disposed,  the  fruition  of  our  bookes,  and  other  pleasures  -'-"^^i  regions.
to  passe  away  the  time :  a  thing  of  no  small  moment,  to
such  as  wander  in  unknowen  seas,  and  long  navigations,
especially,  when both  the  winds and raging surges do
passe  their  common  and  wonted  course. This  benefite
endureth  in  those  parts  not  6.  weekes,  while  the  sunne
is  neere  the  Tropike  of  Cancer :  but  where  the  pole  is
raised  to  70.  or  80.  degrees,  it  continueth  much  longer.

All  along  these  seas,  after  we  were  sixe  dayes  sailing  Great  abun-
from  Orkney,  we  met  floting  in  the  sea,  great  Firre  trees,  dance  of  Firre
which  as  we  judged,  were  with  the  furie  of  great  floods  ^'^^^^J^°^^"S ^^^
rooted up, and so driven into the sea. Island hath
almost  no  other  wood  nor  fuell,  but  such  as  they  take
up  upon  their  coastes. It  seemeth,  that  these  trees  are

213

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-
Inquire  driven  from  some  part  of  the  New  found  land,  with  the

further  of  thu  current  that  setteth  from  the  West  to  the  East.

The  4.  of  July  we  came  within  the  making  of  Fris-
land.  From  this  shoare  10.  or  12.  leagues,  we  met  great
Islands  of  yce,  of  halfe  a  mile,  some  more,  some  lesse  in
compasse,  shewing  above  the  sea,  30.  or  40.  fathoms,  and
as  we  supposed  fast  on  ground,  where  with  our  lead  we
could  scarse  sound  the  bottome  for  depth.

Here,  in place  of  odoriferous and fragrant smels of

sweete  gums,  &  pleasant  notes  of  musicall  birdes,  which

other  Countreys  in  more  temperate  Zones  do  yeeld,  wee

Tce,snow,and  tasted  the  most  boisterous  Boreal  blasts  mixt  with  snow

haikmJune ^^^  \\2c\q^  in the moneths of  June  and July,  nothing

clttd  J  Illy  »•/-••  •  iji*

mrerior  to  our  untemperate  wmter :  a  suaaen  alteration,
and  especially  in  a  place  or  Parallele,  where  the  Pole  is
not  elevate  above  6 1 .  degrees :  at  which  height  other
Countreys  more  to  the  North,  yea  unto  70.  degrees,
shew  themselves  more  temperate  then  this  doth.

All  along  this  coast  yce  lieth,  as  a  continuall  bulwarke,
&  so  defendeth  the  Countrey,  that  those  that  would  land
there,  incur  great  danger.  Our  Generall  3.  dayes  together
attempted  with  the  ship  boate  to  have  gone  on  shoare,
which  for  that  without  great  danger  he  could  not  accom-
plish, he  deferred  it  untill  a  more  convenient  time.  All
along  the  coast  lie  very  high  mountaines  covered  with
snow,  except  in  such  places,  where  through  the  steepenes
of  the  mountaines  of  force  it  must  needs  fall.  Foure
dayes  coasting  along  this  land,  we  found  no  signe  of
habitation.  Little  birds,  whiche  we  judged  to  have  lost
Friseland  sub-  the  shore,  by  reason  of  thicke  fogges  which  that  Countrey
ject  tofogge.  ^g  much  subject  unto,  came  flying  into  our  ships,  which
causeth  us  to  suppose,  that  the  Countrey  is  both  more
tollerable,  and  also  habitable  within,  then  the  outward
shore  maketh  shew  or  signification.

From  hence  we  departed  the  eight  of  July :  and  the
16.  of  the  same,  we  came  with  the  making  of  land,  which
land  our  Generall  the  yeere  before  had  named  The
Queenes  foreland,  being an Island as we  judge,  lying

214

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
neere  the  supposed  continent  with  America :  and  on  the
other  side,  opposite  to  the  same,  one  other  Island  called
Halles  Isle,  after  the  name  of  the  Master  of  the ship,
neere adjacent to the firme land, supposed continent
with  Asia. Betweene  the  which two Islands  there  is  a
large  entrance  or  streight,  called  Frobishers  streight,  after  frobuhers
the  name  of  our  Generall,  the  first  finder  thereof. This  ^  ^"^  '
said streight is supposed to  have passage into  the  sea
of  Sur,  which  I  leave  unknowen  as  yet.

It  seemeth  that  either  here,  or  not  farre  hence,  the  sea
should  have  more  large  entrance,  then  in  other  parts
within  the  frozen  or  untemperate  Zone :  and  that  some
contrary  tide,  either  from  the  East  or  West,  with  maine
force  casteth  out  that  great  quantity  of  yce,  which
commeth  floting  from  this  coast,  even  unto  Friseland,
causing  that  Countrey  to  seeme  more  untemperate  then
others,  much  more  Northerly  then  the  same.

I  cannot  judge  that  any  temperature  under  the  Pole,

the  time  of  the  Sunnes  Northerne  declination  being  halfe

a  yere  together,  and  one  whole  day,  (considering  that  the

Sunnes  elevation  surmounteth  not  23.  degrees  and  30.

minuts)  can  have  power  to  dissolve  such  monstrous  and

huge  yce, comparable to great mountaines, except by  Inlands  of  yce

some  other force,  as by  swift currents and tides,  with  "^P^^/^,  ^  '""
111  r 1  •  1 1  r  1 ir  mounfaines.

the  helpe  or  the  said  day  or  halre  a  yeere.

Before  we  came  within  the  making  of  these  lands  we
tasted  cold  stormes,  in  so  much  that  it  seemed  we  had
changed  summer  with  winter,  if  the  length  of  the  dayes
had  not  remooved  us  from  that  opinion.

At  our  first  comming,  the  streights  seemed  to  be  shut
up  with  a  long  mure  of  yce,  which  gave  no  litle  cause  of
discomfort unto us all : but our Generall, (to whose  9ff^^"^.  ^^'^'
diligence  imminent  dangers,  and  difficult  attempts  seemed  JaU  care  and
nothing, in respect of  his willing  mind, for the  com-  diligence  for
moditie of  his Prince  and Countrey,) with two little  the  benefite  of
Pinnesses prepared of purpose, passed twise thorow  his  Prime  and
them to the East shore, and the Islands thereunto °^^^^^^-
adjacent : and  the  ship,  with  the  two  Barks  lay  off  and

215

1577-

[III.  34-]
The  order  of
the  people  ap-
pearing on
skoare.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

on  something  further  into  the  sea,  from  the  danger  of
the  yce.

Whilest  he  was  searching  the  Countrey  neere  the
shoare,  some  of  the  people  of  the  Countrey  shewed
themselves  leaping  and  dauncing,  with  strange  shrikes
and  cries,  which  gave  no  little  admiration  to  our  men.
Our  Generall  desirous  to  allure  them  unto  him  by  faire
meanes,  caused  knives,  and  other  things  to  be  profered
unto  them,  which  they  would  not  take  at  our  hands :  but
being  laid  on  the  ground,  and  the  party  going  away,  they
came  and  tooke  up,  leaving  some  thing  of  theirs  to
countervail  the  same.  At  the  length  two  of  them  leav-
ing their  weapons,  came  downe  to  our  Generall  and
Master,  who  did  the  like  to  them,  commanding  the
company  to  stay,  and  went  unto  them  :  who  after  cer-
taine  dumbe  signes,  and  mute  congratulations,  began  to
lay  handes  upon  them,  but  they  deliverly  escaped,  and
ranne  to  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  came  fiercely  upon
them,  (not  respecting  the  rest  of  our  companie  which
were  ready  for  their  defence)  but  with  their  arrowes  hurt
divers  of  them  :  we  tooke  the  one,  and  the  other
escaped.

Whilest  our  Generall  was  busied  in  searching  the
Countrey,  and  those  Islands  adjacent  on  the  Eastshoare,
the  ship  and  barkes  having  great  care,  not  to  put  farre
into  the  sea  from  him,  for  that  he  had  small  store  of
victuals,  were  forced  to  abide  in  a  cruell  tempest,  chanc-
ing in  the  night,  amongst  and  in  the  thickest  of  the  yce,
which  was  so  monstrous,  that  even  the  least  of  a  thousand
had  bene  of  force  sufficient,  to  have  shivered  our  ship
and  barks  into  small  portions,  if  God  (who  in  all  neces-
sities, hath  care  upon  the  infirmitie  of  man)  had  not
provided  for  this  our  extremitie  a  sufficient  remedic
through  the  light  of  the  night,  whereby  we  might  well
discerne  to  flee  from  such  imminent  dangers,  which  we
avoyded  with  14.  Bourdes  in  one  watch  the  space  of  4
houres.  If  we  had  not  incurred  this  danger  amongst
these  monstrous  Islands  of  yce,  we  should  have  lost  our

216

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1577-
Generall  and  Master,  and  the  most  of  our  best sailers,
which  were on  the  shoare  destitute  of  victuals :  but  by
the  valure  of  our  Master  Gunner,  Master  Jackman,  and  ^i<:hard  Cox,
Andrew  Dier,  the  Masters  Mates,  men  expert both  in  ^^^^^'■^««-
navigation,  and  other  good  qualities,  wee  were  all  content  Master  Jack-
to  incurre  the  dangers aforerehearsed,  before  we  would  man.
with  our  owne  safetie,  runne  into  the  seas,  to  the  destruc-  AndreivDler.
tion  of  our  sayd  Generall,  and  his  company.

The  day  following,  being  the  19.  of  Julie,  our  captaine
returned  to  the  ship,  with  report  of  supposed  riches,
which  shewed  it  selfe  in  the  bowels  of  those  barren
mountaines,  wherewith  wee  were  all  satisfied.

Within  foure  daies  after  we  had  bene  at  the  entrance
of  the  streights,  the  Northwest  and  West  winds  dispersed
the  yce  into  the  sea,  &  made  us  a  large  entrance  into  the
streights,  so  that  without  any  impediment,  on  the  19.  of
Julie  we  entred  them,  and  the  20.  thereof,  our  Generall
and  Master  with  great  diligence,  sought  out  and  sounded
the  West  shoare,  and  found  out  a  faire  Harborough
for  the  ship  and  barkes  to  ride  in,  and  named  it  after  our
Masters  mate,  Jackmans  sound,  and  brought  the  ship,  Jackmans
barkes,  and  all  their  company  to  safe  anker,  except  one  ^°^^^-
man,  which  died  by  Gods  visitation.

At  our  first  arrivall,  after  the  ship  rode  at  anker,  our
generall,  with  such  company  as  could  well  be  spared  from
the  ships,  in  marching  order  entred  the  lande,  having
speciall  care  by  exhortations,  that  at  our  entrance  there-
into, wee  should  all  with  one  voyce,  kneeling  upon  our
knees,  chiefly  thanke  God  for  our  safe  arrivall :  secondly
beseech  him,  that  it  would  please  his  divine  Majestie,
long  to  continue  our  Queene,  for  whom  he,  and  all  the
rest  of  our  company  in  this  order  tooke  possession  of  the  Possession
Countrey :  and  thirdly,  that  by  our  Christian  studie  and  ''*'^^"'
endevour,  those  barbarous  people  trained  up  in  Pagan-
isme,  and  infidelitie,  might  be  reduced  to  the  knowledge
of  true  religion,  and  to  the  hope  of  salvation  in  Christ
our  Redeemer.  With  other  words  very  apt  to  signifie
his  willing mind, and  affection toward his Prince and

217

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

Countrey :  whereby  all  suspicion  of  an  undutifull  subject,
may  credibly  be  judged  to  be  utterly  exempted  from  his
mind.  All  the  rest  of  the  Gentlemen  and  other  deserve
worthily  herein,  their  due  praise  and  commendation.

These  things  in  this  order  accomplished,  our  Generall
commanded  all  the  company  to  be  obedient  in  things
needfull  for  our  owne  safegard,  to  Master  Fenton,  Master
Yorke,  and  Master  Beast  his  Lieutenant,  while  he  was
occupied  in  other  necessarie  affaires,  concerning  our
comming  thither.

After this  order we marched through  the  Countrey,

with  Ensigne  displaied,  so  farre  as  was  thought  needfull,

and  now  and  then  heaped  up  stones  on  high  mountaines,

and  other  places  in  token  of  possession,  as  likewise  to

signifie  unto  such  as  hereafter  may  chance  to  arrive  there,

that possession is  taken  in the behalfe of  some other

Prince,  by  those  who  first  found  out  the  Countrey.

Tee  needefull Whoso  maketh  navigations  to  those  Countreys, hath

to  be  regarded  j^q^  onely  extreme  winds,  and  furious  seas  to  encounter

men^^^^ withall, but  also many  monstrous  and  great  Islands  of

yce : a thing both  rare, wonderfull,  and  greatly  to be

regarded.

We  were  forced  sundry  times,  while  the  ship  did  ride
here  at  anker,  to  have  continuall  watch,  with  boats  &
[III.  35.]  men  ready  with  halsers  to  knit  fast  unto  such  yce,  as
with  the  ebbe  &  flood  were  tossed  to  and  fro  in  the
harborough,  &  with  force  of  oares  to  hale  them  away,
for  endangering  the  ship.

Our  Generall  certaine  dayes  searched  this  supposed
continent  with  America,  and  not  finding  the  commodity
to  answere  his  expectation,  after  he  had  made  triall
thereof  he  departed  thence  with  two  little  barks,  and  men
suflScient  to  the  East  shore  being  the  supposed  continent
of  Asia,  and  left  the  ship  with  most  of  the  Gentlemen,
souldiers,  and  sailers,  untill  such  time  as  he  either  thought
good  to  send  or  come  for  them.
^°^L^ ^"u  The  stones  of  this  supposed  continent  with  America

zutth  sparkles  ,  1 1 ^ 1 i-  • 1 o  i-.

like  gold.  be altogether sparkled, and glister  m the  bunne like

218

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
gold :  so  likewise  doth  the  sand  in  the  bright  water,  yet
they verifie the old Proverb: All is not gold that  ^ common pro-
glistereth.  "''^'^

On  this  West  shore  we  found  a  dead  fish  floating,
which  had  in  his  nose  a  home  streight  and  torquet,
of  length  two  yards  lacking  two  ynches,  being  broken
in  the  top,  where  we  might  perceive  it  hollow,  into  the
which  some  of  our  sailers  putting  spiders  they  presently
died.  I  saw  not  the  triall  hereof,  but  it  was  reported
unto  me  of  a  trueth :  by  the  vertue  whereof  we  supposed
it  to  be  the  sea  Unicorne.  ^-^^  ^^^  Uni-

After  our  Generall  had  found  out  good  harborough  for  "^"^'
the ship and barks to anker in, and also such store
of  supposed gold ore as  he thought  himselfe satisfied
withall, he returned to the Michael, whereof Master
Yorke aforesaid was Captaine, accompanied  with our
master  and  his  Mate :  who  coasting  along  the  West  shore
not  farre from whence the ship rode, they perceived
a  faire  harborough,  and  willing  to  sound  the  same,  at  the
entrance  thereof  they  espied  two  tents  of  Seale  skins,  unto
which  the  Captaine,  our  said  Master,  and  other  company
resorted. At  the  siffht  of  our  men  the  people  fled  into The  people
the  mountaines : neverthelesse  they  went  to  their tents,  -^.  , r
where  leaving certaine trifles  of  ours,  as  glasses, bels, men.
knives,  and  such  like  things  they  departed, not  taking
any  thing  of  theirs  except  one  dogge. They  did  in  like
maner  leave  behind  them  a  letter,  pen,  yncke,  and  paper,
whereby our men whom the Captaine lost the yere
before,  and in that peoples custody, might (if  any of
them were alive) be advertised of  our presence and
being  there.

On the same day after consultation had, all the
Gentlemen,  and  others  likewise  that  could  be  spared  from
the ship, under the conduct and leading of Master  Master  Phil-
Philpot,  (unto  whom  in  our  Generall  his  absence,  and  his  /"^
Lieutenant  Master  Beast,  al  the  rest  were  obedient)  went  Master  Beast.
a  shore,  determining  to  see,  if  by  faire  means  we  could
either  allure  them  to  familiarity,  or  otherwise  take  some  of

219

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

them,  and so  attaine  to  some  knowledge  of  those  men
whom  our  Generall  lost  the  yeere  before.

At  our  comming  backe  againe  to  the  place  where  their
tents  were  before,  they  had  remooved  their  tents  further
into  the  said  Bay  or  Sound,  where  they  might  if  they
were  driven  from  the  land,  flee  with  their  boates  into  the
sea.  We  parting  our  selves  into  two  companies,  and
compassing  a  mountaine  came  suddenly  upon  them  by
land,  who  espying  us,  without  any  tarying  fled  to  their
boates,  leaving  the  most  part  of  their  oares  behind  them
for  haste,  and  rowed  downe  the  bay,  where  our  two
Pinnesses  met  them  and  drove  them  to  shore :  but  if
they  had  had  all  their  oares,  so  swift  are  they  in  rowing,
it  had  bene  lost  time  to  have  chased  them.
J  fierce  When they  were landed they fiercely  assaulted our

assault  of  a  Yi\Q,i\  with  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  who  wounded  three
of  them  with  our  arrowes :  and  perceiving  themselves
thus  hurt,  they  desperatly  leapt  off^  the  Rocks  into  the
Sea,  and  drowned  themselves :  which  if  they  had  not
done,  but  had  submitted  themselves,  or  if  by  any  meanes
we  could  have  taken  them  alive  (being  their  enemies
as  they  judged)  we  would  both  have  saved  them,  &
also  have  sought  remedy  to  cure  their  wounds  received
at  our  hands.  But  they  altogether  voyd  of  humanity,
and  ignorant  what  mercy  meaneth,  in  extremities  looke
for  no  other  then  death  :  and  perceiving  they  should  fall
into  our  hands,  thus  miserably  by  drowning  rather  desired
death  then  otherwise  to  be  saved  by  us :  the  rest  per-
ceiving their  fellowes  in  this  distresse,  fled  into  the  high
mountaines.  Two  women  not  being  so  apt  to  escape  as
the  men  were,  the  one  for  her  age,  and  the  other  being
incombred  with  a  yong  child,  we  tooke.  The  old  wretch,
whom  divers  of  our  Saylers  supposed  to  be  eyther  a
devill,  or  a  witch,  had  her  buskins  plucked  off,  to  see  if
she  were  cloven  footed,  and  for  her  ougly  hew  and
deformity  we  let  her  goe :  the  yong  woman  and  the  child
we  brought  away.  We  named  the  place  where  they  were
slaine,  Bloodie  point :  and  the  Bay  or  Harborough,  Yorks

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad

1577-
sound,  after the name  of  one  of  the  Captaines  of  the
two  Barks.

Having this  knowledge  both  of  their  fiercenesse  and  ^'^i^^^  meanes
cruelty,  and  perceiving  that faire meanes as  yet is  not  ^°l^"^^ j^

J '  r  ^ .  . .  .  ^  dlluvc  thcin  to

able  to  allure  them  to  familiarity,  we  disposed  our  selves,  familiarit-i

contrary  to  our  inclination,  something  to  be  cruel,  returned

to  their tents  and made a  spoyle  of  the same  : where

we  found  an  old  shirt,  a  doublet,  a  girdle,  and  also  shooes

of  our  men,  whom  we  lost  the  yeere  before :  on  nothing

else  unto  them  belonging  could  we  set  our  eyes.

Their  riches  are  not  gold,  silver  or  precious  Drapery,  [m.  36.]
but  their  said  tents  and  botes,  made  of  the  skins  of  red  ^°^^^^  "f
Deare  and  Seale  skins :  also  dogges  like  unto  woolves,
but  for  the  most  part  black,  with  other  trifles,  more  to  be
wondred  at  for  their strangenesse,  then  for any other
commoditie  needefull  for  our use.

Thus  returning  to  our  ship  the  3.  of  August,  we  Our  departure
departed  from  the  West  shore  supposed  firme  y^\x^  fio'^^^^he  West
America,  after  we  had  ankered  there  13.  dayes:  and  so
the  4.  thereof  we  came  to  our  Generall  on  the  East  shore,
and  ankered  in  a  faire  Harborough  named  Anne  War-
wickes  sound,  unto  which  is  annexed  an  Island  both
named  after  the  Countesse  of  Warwicke,  Anne  Warwickes
sound  and  Isle.

In  this  Isle  our  Generall  thought  good  for  this  voyage,
to  fraight  both  the  ship  and  barkes,  with  such  stone
or  supposed  gold  minerall,  as  he  judged  to  countervaile
the  charges  of  his  first,  and  this  his  second  navigation
to  these  Countreys.

In the meane time of  our abode  here  some  of  the ^^^  countrey

countrey  people  came  to  shew  themselves  unto  us,  sundry  ^f^  ^  f  '^"'
■' ^ , ^ .  .  ,.  '  .<, themselves

times  on  the  mame shore, neere adjacent to the  said  uf,to  us.

Isle. Our  Generall  desirous  to  have  some  newes  of  his

men,  whom  he  lost  the  yeere  before,  with  some  company

with  him  repaired with the ship boat to  common,  or

signe  with them  for familiaritie, whereunto he  is  per-

swaded  to  bring them. They  at the first shew  made

tokens,  that  three  of  his  five  men  were  alive,  and  desired

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577.

penne,  ynck,  and  paper,  and  that  within  three  or  foure
dayes  they  would  returne,  and  (as  we  judged)  bring  those
of  our  men  which  were  living,  with  them.

They  also  made  signes  or  tokens  of  their  King,
whom  they  called  Cacough,  &  how  he  was  carried  on
mens  shoulders,  and  a  man  farre  surmounting  any  of  our
company,  in  bignesse  and  stature.

With  these  tokens  and  signes  of  writing,  penne,  yncke,
and  paper  was  delivered them,  which they  would not
take  at  our  hands,  but  being  laid  upon  the  shore,  and
Their  usage the  partie  gone away, they tooke up :  which likewise
m  iraffique  or  ^ ^^  when  they  desire  any  thine  for  change  of  theirs,
laying  for  that which is left so much  as they  thinke
will  countervail  the  same,  and  not  comming  neere  to-
gether. It seemeth  they  have  bene  used to  this  trade
or  traffique,  with some  other  people  adjoyning,  or  not
farre  distant  from  their  Countrey.
The  people  After  4.  dayes  some  of  them  shewed  themselves  upon

i  ej) em- ^^  firme  land,  but  not  where they  were before. Our

selves  the  ^

third  time. General very  glad thereof, supposing to heare of  our

men,  went  from  the  Island,  with  the  boat,  and  sufficient

company  with  him. They  seemed  very  glad,  and  allured

him  about  a certaine point of  the  land : behind  which

they  might  perceive  a  company  of  the  crafty  villaines  to

lye  lurking,  whom  our  Generall  would  not  deale  withall,

for  that  he  knew  not  what  company  they  were,  and  so

with few signes dismissed them and returned to his

company.

The  people  An  Other  time  as  our  said  Generall  was  coasting  the

shew  them- Countrey  with  two  little  Pinnesses,  whereby  at  our  returne

on  firme  land.  ^^  might  make  the  better  relation  thereof,  three  of  the

crafty  villains,  with a white skin allured  us to  them.

Once  againe  our generall,  for that  he hoped to heare

of  his  men,  went  towards  them  :  at  our  comming  neere

the shore whereon they were, we might perceive a

number  of  them  lie  hidden  behind  great  stones,  &  those

3.  in  sight  labouring by al meanes  possible  that  some

would come  on  land :  and  perceiving  we  made  no  hast

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1577-
by  words  nor  friendly  signes,  which  they  used  by  clapping  Their  first
of  their  hands,  and  being  without  weapon, and  but  3.  ^^^^^^^  t"
in sight, they sought further meanes to provoke us  ^^^^.^
thereunto. One alone  laid jflesh on the shore, which Their  second
we  tooke  up  with  the  Boat  hooke,  as  necessary  victuals  meanes.
for  the  relieving  of  the  man,  woman,  and  child,  whom
we  had  taken :  for  that  as  yet  they  could  not  digest  our
meat : whereby they perceived themselves deceived  of
their  expectation, for all their crafty  allurements. Yet
once  againe  to  make (as it  were) a full shew  of  their  Their  third

craftie  natures,  and  subtile  sleights,  to  the  intent  thereby  ^^^  "'^fi^^^i
j_ -i  • ^  jj^ir  r  allurement.

to  have  mtrapped and  taken some  or  our  men,  one  or

them  counterfeited himselfe impotent and lame  of  his

legs,  who  seemed to descend to the water side,  with

great  difficulty : and to cover his  craft the  more,  one

of  his  fellowes  came  downe  with  him,  and  in  such  places

where  he  seemed  unable  to  passe,  he  tooke  him  on  his

shoulders,  set  him  by  the  water  side,  and  departed  from

him,  leaving  him (as it should seeme) all  alone,  who

playing  his  counterfait  pageant  very  well,  thought  thereby

to  provoke  some  of  us to  come  on  shore,  not  fearing,

but  that  one  of  us  might  make  our  party  good  with  a

lame  man.

Our Generall having compassion of  his impotency. Compassion  to

thought  good  (if  it  were  possible)  to  cure  him  thereof:  ""'^  ^  "'^-^^^

1 °  r °i  ^  J  IT  1  1-  -1 l^ffis  man.

wnererore  he  caused  a  souldier  to  shoote  at  him  with
his  Caleever,  which  grased  before  his  face.  The  counter-
feit villeine  deliverly  fled,  without  any  impediment  at
all,  and  got  him  to  his  bow  and  arrowes,  and  the  rest
from  their  lurking  holes,  with  their  weapons,  bowes,
arrowes,  slings,  and  darts.  Our  Generall  caused  some
caleevers  to  be  shot  off  at  them,  wherby  some  being
hurt,  they  might  hereafter  stand  in  more  feare  of  us.

This  was  all  the  answere  for  this  time  we  could  have  [III.  37.]
of  our  men, or of  our Generals letter. Their crafty
dealing  at  these  three  severall  times  being  thus  manifest
unto  us,  may  plainely shew their disposition in other
things  to  be  correspondent. We  judged  that  they  used

223

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

these  stratagemes,  thereby  to  have  caught  some  of  us,
for  the  delivering  of  the  man,  woman  and  child  whom
we  had  taken.

They  are  men  of  a  large  corporature,  and  good  pro-
portion :  their  colour  is  not  much  unlike  the  Sunne  burnt
Countrey  man,  who  laboureth  daily  in  the  Sunne  for  his
living.

They  weare  their  haire  something  long,  and  cut  before
either  with  stone  or  knife,  very  disorderly.  Their  women
weare  their  haire  long,  and  knit  up  with  two  loupes,
shewing  forth  on  either  side  of  their  faces,  and  the  rest
foltred  upon  a  knot.  Also  some  of  their  women  race
their  faces  proportionally,  as  chinne,  cheekes,  and  fore-
head, and  the  wrists  of  their  hands,  whereupon  they  lay
a  colour  which  continueth  darke  azurine.

They  eate  their  meat  all  raw,  both  flesh,  fish,  and
foule,  or  something  per  boyled  with  blood  and  a  little
water  which  they  drinke.  For  lacke  of  water  they  will
eate  yce,  that  is  hard  frosen,  as  pleasantly  as  we  will  do
Sugar  Candie,  or  other  Sugar.

If  they  for  necessities  sake  stand  in  need  of  the  pre-
misses, such  grasse  as  the  Countrey  yeeldeth  they  plucke
up  and  eate,  not  deintily,  or  salletwise  to  allure  their
stomacks  to  appetite :  but  for  necessities  sake  without
either  salt,  oyles  or  washing,  like  brute  beasts  devouring
the  same.  They  neither  use  table,  stoole,  or  table  cloth
for  comlines :  but  when  they  are  imbrued  with  blood
knuckle  deepe,  and  their  knives  in  like  sort,  they  use
their  tongues  as  apt  instruments  to  lick  them  cleane :
in  doing  whereof  they  are  assured  to  loose  none  of  their
victuals.
Dogges  like  They  frank  or  keepe  certaine  dogs  not  much  unlike
unto  wolves.  "Wolves,  which  they  yoke  togither,  as  we  do  oxen  &
horses,  to  a  sled  or  traile :  and  so  carry  their  necessaries
over  the  yce  and  snow  from  place  to  place :  as  the
captive,  whom  we  have,  made  perfect  signes.  And  when
those  dogs  are  not  apt  for  the  same  use :  or  when  with
hunger  they  are  constrained  for  lacke  of  other  victuals,

224

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
they  eate  them :  so  that they  are  as  needfull  for  them They  eatf  dog^
in  respect  of  their  bignesse,  as  our  oxen  are  for  us. fi"^-

They  apparell  themselves  in  the  skins  of  such  beasts
as  they  kill,  sewed  together  with  the  sinewes  of  them.
All  the  foule  which  they  kill,  they  skin,  and  make
thereof  one  kind  of  garment  or  other,  to  defend  them
from  the  cold.

They  make  their  apparel  with  hoods  and  tailes,  which  Hoods  and
tailes  they  give  when  they  thinke  to  gratifie  any  friend-  ^'^^^'^^  to  iheir
ship shewed unto them : a great signe of  friendship  '^^^'^^^  '
with  them. The men have them not so side  as  the
women.

The  men  and  women  weare  their  hose  close  to  their
legges,  from  the  wast  to  the  knee  without  any  open
before,  as  well  the  one  kind  as  the  other.  Upon  their
legges  they  weare  hose  of  leather,  with  the  furre  side
inward  two  or  three  paire  on  at  once,  and  especially  the
women.  In  those  hose  they  put  their  knives,  needles,
and  other  things  needfull  to  beare  about.  They  put  a
bone  within  their  hose,  which  reacheth  from  the  foote  to
the  knee,  whereupon  they  draw  their  said  hose,  and  so
in  place  of  garters  they  are  holden  from  falling  downe
about  their  feete.

They  dresse  their  skinnes  very  soft  and  souple  with
the  haire  on.  In  cold  weather  or  Winter  they  weare
the  furre  side  inward :  and  in  Summer  outward.  Other
apparell  they  have  none  but  the  said  skinnes.

Those  beasts,  fishes,  and  foules,  which  they  kill,  are
their  meat,  drinke,  apparell,  houses,  bedding,  hose,  shooes,
threed,  and  sailes  for  their  boates,  with  many  other
necessaries  whereof  they  stand  in  need,  and  almost  all
their  riches.

Their  houses  are  tents  made  of  Scale skins,  pitched  Their  houses
up  with  4.  Firre quarters  foure  square meeting  at  the  °f^f'^j^^ktns
top,  and  the  skins  sewed  together  with  sinewes,  and  laid
thereupon : they are so pitched up, that the  entrance
into  them  is  alwayes  South  or  against  the  Sunne.

They  have  other  sorts  of  houses  which  we  found  not
VII  225  p

A.D.

1577.

Their  weapons
of  defence.

[III.  38.]
Three  sorts  of
heads  to  their
arrowes.

Ttvo  sorts  of
iarts.

Ttvo  sorts  of
ho  ate s  made  of
leather.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  be  inhabited,  which  are  raised  with  stones  and  Whale
bones,  and  a  skinne  layd  over  them,  to  withstand  the
raine,  or  other  weather :  the  entrance  of  them  being  not
much  unlike  an  Ovens  mouth,  whereto  I  thinke  they
resort  for  a  time  to  fish,  hunt,  and  foule,  and  so  leave
them  untill  the  next  time  they  come  thither  againe.

Their  weapons  are  bowes,  arrowes,  darts,  and  slings.
Their  bowes  are  of  wood  of  a  yard  long,  sinewed  at  the
back  with  strong  sinewes,  not  glued  too,  but  fast  girded
and  tyed  on.  Their  bow  strings  are  likewise  sinewes.
Their  arrowes  are  three  pieces  nocked  with  bone,  and
ended  with  bone,  with  those  two  ends,  and  the  wood  in
the  midst,  they  passe  not  in  length  halfe  a  yard  or
little  more.  They  are  fethered  with  two  fethers  the
penne  end  being  cut  away,  and  the  fethers  layd  upon
the  arrow  with  the  broad  side  to  the  wood  ;  insomuch
that  they  seeme  when  they  are  tyed  on,  to  have  foure
fethers.  They  have  also  three  sorts  of  heads  to  those
arrowes :  one  sort  of  stone  or  yron,  proportioned  like  to
a  heart :  the  second  sort  of  bone,  much  like  unto  a  stopt
head,  with  a  hooke  on  the  same :  the  third  sort  of  bone
likewise  made  sharpe  at  both  sides,  and  sharpe  pointed.
They  are  not  made  very  fast  but  lightly  tyed  to,  or  else
set  in  a  nocke,  that  upon  small  occasion  the  arrowes
leave  these  heads  behind  them  :  and  they  are  of  small
force,  except  they  be  very  neere  when  they  shoote.

Their  Darts  are  made  of  two  sorts :  the  one  with  many
forkes  of  bones  in  the  fore  end  and  likewise  in  the
midst :  their  proportions  are  not  much  unlike  our  toast-
ing yrons  but  longer :  these  they  cast  out  of  an  instru-
ment of  [wood,  very  readily.  The  other  sort  is  greater
then  the  first  aforesayd,  with  a  long  bone  made  sharpe
on  both  sides  not  much  unlike  a  Rapier,  which  I  take
to  bee  their  most  hurtfuU  weapon.

They  have  two  sorts  of  boats  made  of  leather,  set  out
on  the  inner  side  with  quarters  of  wood,  artificially  tyed
together  with  thongs  of  the  same :  the  greater  sort  are
not much unlike our wherries, wherein sixeteene or

226

MARTIN FROBISHER  a  ^

1577-
twenty men may  sit : they  have for a  sayle  drest the
guts of  such beasts as they  kill  very  fine  and  thinne,
which  they  sew  together :  the  other  boate  is  but  for  one
man  to  sit  and  row  in  with  one  oare.

Their  order  of  fishing,  hunting,  and  fouling  are  with ^^H  "•^^  ^^
these  said  weapons : but  in  what  sort,  or  how  they  use  -^"^  ^'-^"^  '  ^"
them  we  have  no  perfect  knowledge  as  yet.

I  can  suppose  their  abode  or  habitation  not  to  be  here,  I^"jobesup-
for that  neither their houses or apparell, are of  such  f^c'^,.  inhabit-
force  to  withstand  the  extremity  of  cold,  that  the  Coun-  ing  is  ehe-
trey  seemeth to  be infected  with all : neither  do  I  see  luhere,
any  signe  likely  to  performe  the  same.

Those  houses  or  rather  dennes  which  stand  there,  have
no  signe  of  footway,  or  any  thing  else  troden,  which  is
one  of  the  chiefest  tokens  of  habitation.  And  those
tents  which  they  bring  with  them,  when  they  have  suffi-
ciently hunted  and  fished,  they  remove  to  other  places :
and  when  they  have  sufficiently  stored  them  of  such
victuals,  as  the  Countrey  yeeldeth  or  bringeth  forth,  they
returne  to  their  winter  stations  or  habitations.  This
conjecture  do  I  make,  for  the  infertility  which  I  con-
jecture to  be  in  that  Countrey.

They  have  some  yron  whereof  they  make  arrow  heads, Their  use  of
knives, and other little instruments, to worke their  -^'^^'
boates,  bowes,  arrowes,  and  darts  withall,  which  are  very
unapt  to  doe  any  thing  withall  but  with  great  labour.

It  seemeth  that  they  have  conversation  with  some  other
people,  of  whom  for  exchange  they  should  receive  the
same.  They  are  greatly  delighted  with  any  thing  that
is  bright,  or  giveth  a  sound.

What  knowledge  they  have  of  God,  or  what  Idoll  Anthropophagi,
they  adore,  we  have  no  perfect  intelligence,  I  thinke  them
rather  Anthropophagi,  or  devourers  of  mans  flesh  then
otherwise :  for  that  there  is  no  flesh  or  fish  which  they
find  dead  (smell  it  never  so  filthily)  but  they  will  eate
it,  as  they  finde  it  without  any  other  dressing.  A  loath-
some thing,  either  to  the  beholders  or  hearers.

There is  no  maner  of  creeping  beast  hurtfuU,  except

227

A.D.

1577-

Signes  of  gold
cure.

Signes  of  gold
from  other
people.

Description  of
the  Countreis.

A  signe  oj
Earthquakes
or  thunder.

[III.  39-]

No  rivers,  but
such  as  the
Sunne  doth
cause  to  come
of  snow.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

some  Spiders  (which  as  many  affirme,  are  signes  of  great
store  of  gold)  and  also  certaine  stinging  Gnattes,  which
bite  so  fiercely,  that  the  place  where  they  bite  shortly
after  swelleth  and  itcheth  very  sore.

They  make  signes  of  certaine  people  that  weare  bright
plates  of  gold  in  their  foreheads,  and  other  places  of
their  bodies.

The  Countreys  on  both  sides  the  streights  lye  very
high  with  rough  stony  mountaines,  and  great  quantitie
of  snow  thereon.  There  is  very  little  plaine  ground  and
no  grasse,  except  a  little  which  is  much  like  unto  mosse
that  groweth  on  soft  ground,  such  as  we  get  Turffes  in.
There  is  no  wood  at  all.  To  be  briefe  there  is  nothing
fit  or  profitable  for  the  use  of  man,  which  that  Countrey
with  roote  yeeldeth  or  bringeth  forth :  Howbeit  there
is  great  quantity  of  Deere,  whose  skins  are  like  unto
Asses,  there  heads  or  homes  doe  farre  exceede,  as  well
in  length  as  also  in  breadth,  any  in  these  our  parts  or
Countreys :  their  feete  likewise  are  as  great  as  our
oxens,  which  we  measured  to  be  seven  or  eight  ynches  in
breadth.  There  are  also  hares,  wolves,  fishing  beares,
and  sea  foule  of  sundry  sorts.

As  the  Countrey  is  barren  and  unfertile,  so  are  they
rude  and  of  no  capacitie  to  culture  the  same  to  any
perfection :  but  are  contented  by  their  hunting,  fishing,
and  fouling,  with  raw  flesh  and  warme  blood  to  satisfie
their  greedy  panches,  which  is  their  only  glory.

There  is  great  likelihood  of  Earthquakes  or  thunder :
for  that  there  are  huge  and  monstrous  mountaines,  whose
greatest  substance  are  stones,  and  those  stones  so  shaken
with  some  extraordinarie  meanes  that  one  is  separated
from  another,  which  is  discordant  from  all  other  Quarries.

There  are  no  rivers  or  running  springs,  but  such  as
through  the  heate  of  the  Sunne,  with  such  water  as
discendeth  from  the  mountaines  and  hilles,  whereon
great  drifts  of  snow  do  lie,  are  ingendred.

It  argueth  also  that  there  should  be  none :  for  that
the  earth,  which  with  the  extremitie  of  the  Winter  is  so

228

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

i577-_
frosen  within,  that  that  water  which  should  have  recourse  A  probability
within the same to maintaine springs, hath not his  ^f^^/^T^ ■
motion,  whereof  great  waters  have  their  original!,  as  by  ^y^.  ^pfi^g.  gj.
experience is seene otherwhere. Such valleis as are  rivers  in  the
capable  to  receive  the  water,  that in the  Summer  time  ground.
by  the  operation of  the Sunne descendeth from great
abundance of  snowe, which continually lyeth on the
mountaines  and  hath  no  passage,  sinketh  into  the  earth
and so  vanisheth  away,  without  any  runnell above the
earth,  by  which occasion or continuall standing of  the
said water, the earth is opened, and the great frost
yeeldeth  to  the  force  thereof,  which  in  other  places  foure
or  five  fathoms  within  the  ground  for  lacke  of  the  said
moisture,  the  earth  (even  in  the  very  Summer  time)  is
frosen, and so combineth the stones together, that
scarcely  instruments  with great  force can unknit  them.

Also  where  the  water  in  those  valleis  can  have  no  such
passage  away,  by  the  continuance  of  time  in  such  order
as  is  before  rehearsed,  the  yeerely  descent  from  the
mountaines  filleth  them  full,  that  at  the  lowest  banke  of
the  same,  they  fall  into  the  valley,  and  so  continue  as
fishing  Ponds  or  Stagnes  in  Summer  time  full  of  water,
and  in  the  Winter  hard  frosen :  as  by  skarres  that
remaine  thereof  in  Summer  may  easily  be  perceived :  so
that  the  heat  of  Summer  is  nothing  comparable  or  of
force  to  dissolve  the  extremitie  of  cold  that  commeth  in
Winter.

Neverthelesse  I  am  assured  that  below  the  force  of  the
frost  within  the  earth,  the  waters  have  recourse,  and
€mptie  themselves  out  of  sight  into  the  sea,  which
through  the  extremitie  of  the  frost  are  constrained  to
doe  the  same :  by  which  occasion  the  earth  within  is  kept
the  warmer,  and  springs  have  their  recourse,  which  is  the  springs  nou-
onely  nutriment  of  golde  and  Minerals  within  the  same. risk  gold.

There  is  much  to  be  sayd  of  the  commodities  of  these
Countreys,  which  are  couched  within  the  bowels  of  the
earth,  which  I  let  passe  till  more  perfect  triall  be  made
thereof.

229

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

The 24.  of  August,  after  we  had  satisfied  our  minds

with fraight sufficient  for our  vessels,  though not our

covetous  desires  with  such knowledge  of  the  Countrey,

people,  and  other  commodities  as  are before  rehearsed,

Our  departure  ■^yg  departed  therehence. The  17.  of  September  we  fell

^ConltTs ^^^^  ^^  ^^^^^  ^^^^  °^  England,  and  so  sailed  to  Milford

Haven,  from  whence  our  Generall  rode  to  the  Court  for

order,  to  what  Port  or  Haven  to  conduct  the  ship.

How  iff  when "^Ye  lost our two  Barkes  in the  way  homeward,  the

Barks  which ^"^^ ^^^ ^9'  °^  August,  the  other  the 31.  of  the  same

Godneverthe-  nioneth,  by  occasion  of  great  tempest  and  fogge. How-

lesse  restored, beit God restored  the one  to Bristowe,  and the other

made his course by  Scotland to Yermouth. In this

voyage we lost two men, one in the way by Gods

visitation,  and  the  other  homeward  cast  over  borde  with

a  surge  of  the  sea.

Theconclusior..  J  Could  declare  unto  the  Readers,  the  latitude  and
M.  longitude  of  such  places  and  regions  as  we  have  bene
at,  but  not  altogether  so  perfectly  as  our  masters  and
others,  with  many  circumstances  of  tempests  and  other
accidents  incident  to  Sea  faring  men,  which  seeme  not
altogether  strange,  but  I  let  them  passe  to  their  reports
as  men  most  apt  to  set  forth  and  declare  the  same.  I
have  also  left  the  names  of  the  Countreys  on  both  the
shores  untouched,  for  lacke  of  understanding  the  peoples
language :  as  also  for  sundry  respects,  not  needfuU  as
yet  to  be  declared.

Countreys  new  discovered  where  commoditie  is  to  be
looked  for,  doe  better  accord  with  a  new  name  given  by
the  discoverers,  then  an  uncertaine  name  by  a  doubtfull
Authour.

Our  general  named  sundry  Islands,  Mountaines,  Capes,
and  Harboroughs  after  the  names  of  divers  Noble  men
and  other  gentlemen  his  friends,  aswel  on  the  one  shore
as  also  on  the  other.

230

MARTIN FROBISHER

A.D.

1578.

Master  Tor ke.

Christopher

Hall.

The  Hopewel.

Captaine

Caretv.

Andrew  Dier.

The  third  and  last  voyage  unto  Meta  Incognita,
made  by  M.  Martin  Frobisher,  in  the  yeere
1578. Written  by  Thomas  Ellis.

Hese  are  to  let  you  know,  that  upon  the
25.  of  May,  the  Thomas  Allen  being
Viceadmirall  whose  Captaine  was  M.
Yorke,  M.  Gibbes  Master,  Christopher
Hall  Pilot,  accompanied  with  the  Reare-
admiral  named  the  Hopewel,  whose
Captaine  was  M.  Henrie  Carewe,  the
M-  Andrewe  Dier,  and  certaine  other  ships  came  to
Gravesend,  where  wee  ankred  and  abode  the  comming
of  certaine  of  our  Fleete  which  were  not  yet  come.

The  27.  of  the  same  moneth  our  Fleete  being  nowe  [III.  4.0.]
come  together,  and  all  things  prest  in  a  readinesse,  the
wind  favouring,  and  tide  serving,  we  being  of  sailes  in
number  eight,  waied  ankers  and  hoised  our  sailes  toward
Harwich  to  meete  with  our  Admirall,  and  the  residue  Harwich.
which  then  and  there  abode  our  arrivall :  where  we  safely
arrived  the  28.  thereof,  finding  there  our  Admirall,  whom
we  with  the  discharge  of  certaine  pieces  saluted,  acording
to  order  and  duety,  and  were  welcommed  with  the  like
courtesie :  which  being  finished  we  landed :  where  our
Generall  continued  mustering  his  souldiers  and  Miners,
and  setting  things  in  order  appertaining  to  the  voyage
untill  the  last  of  the  said  moneth  of  May,  which  day  we
hoised  our  sailes,  and  committing  our  selves  to  the  con-
ducting of  Almightie  God,  we  set  forward  toward  the
west  Countrey  in  such  luckie  wise  and  good  successe,
that  by  the  fift  of  June  we  passed  the  Dursies,  being  Dursies.
the  utmost  part  of  Ireland  to  the  Westward.  Ireland.

And  here  it  were  not  much  amisse  nor  farre  from  our
purpose,  if  I  should  a  little  discourse  and  speake  of  our
adventures and chances by  the  way,  as  our  landing  at
Plimmouth, as also the meeting certaine poore men,  Plimmouth.
which  were  robbed  and  spoyled  of  all  that  they  had  by

231

A.D.

1578.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Pirates and Rovers : amongst whom was a man of
Bhstoiv.  Bristow,  on  whom  our  Generall  used  his  liberality,  and

sent  him  away  with  letters  into  England.

But  because  such  things  are  impertinent  to  the  matter,
I  will  returne  (without  any  more  mentioning  of  the  same)
to  that  from  the  which  I  have  digressed  and  swarved,  I
meane  our  ships  now  sailing  on  the  surging  seas,  some-
time passing  at  pleasure  with  a  wished  Easterne  wind,
sometime  hindered  of  our  course  againe  by  the  Westerne
blasts,  untill  the  20.  day  of  the  foresayd  moneth  of  June,
Frizeland.  on  which  day  in  the  morning  we  fell  with  Frizeland,
which  is  a  very  hie  and  cragged  land  and  was  almost
cleane  covered  with  snow,  so  that  we  might  see  nought
but  craggie  rockes  and  the  tops  of  high  and  huge
hilles,  sometimes  (and  for  the  most  part)  all  covered  with
foggie  mists.  There  might  we  also  perceive  the  great
Isles  of  yce  lying  on  the  seas,  like  mountaines,  some
small,  some  big,  of  sundry  kinds  of  shapes,  and  such  a
number  of  them,  that  wee  could  not  come  neere  the
shore  for  them.

Thus  sailing  alongst  the  coast,  at  the  last  we  saw  a
place  somewhat  voyd  of  yce,  where  our  Generall  (accom-
panied with  certaine  other)  went  a  shore,  where  they  sawe
certaine  tents  made  of  beasts  skinnes,  and  boates  much
the  like  unto  theirs  of  Meta  Incognita.  The  tents  were
furnished  with  flesh,  fish,  skins,  and  other  trifles  :
amongst  the  which  was  found  a  boxe  of  nailes :  whereby
we  did  conjecture,  that  they  had  either  Artificers  amongst
them,  or  els  a  traffike  with  some  other  nation.  The
men  ran  away,  so  that  wee  could  have  no  conference  or
communication  with  them.  Our  Generall  (because  hee
would  have  them  no  more  to  flee,  but  rather  incouraged
Thecurtesieof  to  Stay  through  his  courteous  dealing)  gave  commaunde-
our  Generall.  j^ej^^-  ^-^^t  his  men  should  take  nothing  away  with  them,
saving  onely  a  couple  of  white  dogs,  for  the  which  he
left  pinnes,  poynts,  knives,  and  other  trifling  things,
and  departed  without  taking  or  hurting  any  thing,  and
so  came  abord,  and  hoysed  sailes,  and  passed  forwards.

232

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.

But  being  scarce  out  of  the  sight  thereof,  there  fell
such  a  foofpe  and  hidious  mist  that  we  could  not  see  one
another :  whereupon  we  stroke  our  drums,  and  sounded
our  trumpets,  to  the  ende  we  might  keepe  together :  and
so  continued  all  that  day  and  night  till  the  next  day  that
the  mist  brake  up :  so  that  we  might  easily  perceive  all
the  ships  thus  sailing  together  all  that  day,  until  the
next  day,  being  the  22.  of  the  same:  on  which  day  wee
sawe  an  infinite  number  of  yce,  from  the  which  we  cast
about  to  shun  the  danger  thereof.

But  one  of  our  small  Barkes  named  the  Michael,  whose  Master
Captaine  was  Master  Kinderslie,  the  Master  Bartholomew  ^-J""^^''^!^^-

_ ^, ,  -11  1  J  Bartnolomezv

Bull, lost our company, insomuch that  we could, not  ^^^//

obteine  the  sight  of  her many  dayes after,  of  whom 1

meane to speake further  anon  when occasion shall be

ministred,  and opportunitie serve. Thus  we  continued

in  our  course  until!  the  second  of  July,  on  which  day  we

fell  with  the  Queenes  foreland,  where  we  saw so  miuch

yce, that we thought it unpossible to get into the

Straights : yet at  the last  we gave the adventure and

entred  the  yce.

Being  amongst  it  wee  sawe  the  Michael,  of  whom  I ^^^  Michael.

spake  before,  accompanied  with  the  Judith,  whose  Cap-  j^^  pl„lJ„

taine  was  Master  Fenton,  the  Master  Charles Jackman, claries

bearing  into  the  foresayd  yce,  farre  distant  from  us,  who  Jackman.

in  a  storme  that  fell  that  present  night,  (whereof  I  will

at  large God  willing, discourse hereafter)  were severed

from us, and being in,  wandred up and downe the

Straights amongst the yce many dayes in great perill,

till  at  the  last,  (by the providence of  God) they  came

safely  to  harbor  in  their  wished  Port. In  the  Countesse  T'he  Comtesse

of  Warwicks sound,  the 20, of  July  aforesayd,  tenne  J-^^'^"^'^'^^

dayes before  any  of  the other shippes :  who going on

shore  found  where  the  people  of  the  Countrey  had  bene,

and had hid their  provision in great  heapes  of  stones

being both of  flesh and fish,  which they  had killed ;

whereof  wee  also  found  great  store  in  other  places  after  [III.  41.]

our arrival. They  found also divers  engins,  as  bowes,

233

A.D.
1578.

Our  entrance
y  passage,

Barke
Dionyse.

'Narow  shifts
for  safetie.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

slings,  and  darts.  They  found  likewise  certaine  pieces
of  the  Pinnesse  which  our  Generall  left  there  the  yeere
before,  which  Pinnesse  he  had  sunke,  minding  to  have
it  againe  the  next  yeere.

Now  seeing  I  have  entreated  so  much  of  the  Judith
and  the  Michael :  I  will  returne  to  the  rest  of  the  other
ships,  and  will  speake  a  little  of  the  storme  which  fell,
with  the  mishaps  that  we  had,  the  night  that  we  put
into  the  yce: whereof  I  made  mention  before.

At  the  first  entring  into  the  yce  in  the  mouth  of  the
Straights,  our  passage  was  very  narrow,  and  difficult
but  being  once  gotten  in,  we  had  a  faire  open  place
without  any  yce  for  the  most  part,  being  a  league  in
compasse,  the  yce  being  round  about  us  and  inclosing
us,  as  it  were,  within  the  pales  of  a  parke.  In  which
place,  (because  it  was  almost  night)  we  minded  to  take
in  our  sailes,  and  lie  a  hull  all  that  night.  But  the
storme  so  increased,  and  the  waves  began  to  mount  aloft,
which  brought  the  yce  so  neere  us,  and  comming  on  so
fast  upon  us,  that  we  were  faine  to  beare  in  and  out,
where  we  might  espie  an  open  place.  Thus  the  yce
comming  on  us  so  fast,  we  were  in  great  danger,  looking
every  houre  for  death.  And  thus  passed  we  on  in  that
great  danger,  seeing  both  our  selves  and  the  rest  of  our
ships  so  troubled  and  tossed  amongst  the  yce,  that  it
would  make  the  strongest  heart  to  relent.

At  the  last  the  Barke  Dionyse  being  but  a  weake
ship,  and  bruised  afore  amongst  the  yce,  being  so  leake
that  no  longer  she  could  tarry  above  the  water,  sanke
without  saving  any  of  the  goods  which  were  within  her :
which  sight  so  abashed  the  whole  Fleete,  that  we  thought
verily  we  should  have  tasted  of  the  same  sauce.  But
neverthelesse  we  seeing  them  in  such  danger,  manned
our  boates  and  saved  all  the  men  in  such  wise,  that  not
one  perished :  God  be  thanked.

The  storme  still  increased  and  the  yce  inclosed  us,
so  that  we  were  faine  to  take  downe  top  and  top  mastes :
for  the  yce  had  so  invironed  us,  that  we  could  see  neither

234

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.
land  nor  sea,  as  farre  as  we  could  kenne :  so  that  we
were  faine  to  cut  our  cables  to  hang  over  boord  for
fenders,  somewhat  to  ease  the  ships  sides  from  the  great
and  driry  strokes  of  the  yce :  some  with  Capstan  barres,
some  fending  off  with  oares,  some  with  plancks  of  two
ynches  thicke,  which  were  broken  immediatly  with  the
force  of  the  yce,  some  going  out  upon  the  yce  to  beare
it  off  with  their  shoulders  from  the  ships.  But  the
rigorousnes  of  the  tempest  was  such,  and  the  force  of  the
yce  so  great,  that  not  onely  they  burst  and  spoyled  the
foresaid  provision,  but  likewise  so  rased  the  sides  of  the
ships,  that  it  was  pitifull  to  behold,  and  caused  the  hearts
of  many  to  faint.

Thus  we  continued  all  that  dismall  and  lamentable
night  plunged  in  this  perplexity,  looking  for  instant
death:  but  our  God  (who  never  leaveth  them  destitute  Gods/>rovi-
which  faithfully  call  upon  him,  although  he  often  punisheth  '^^^
for  amendements  sake)  in  the  morning  caused  the  winds
to  cease,  and  the  fogge  which  all  that  night  lay  on  the
face  of  the  water  to  cleare :  so  that  we  might  perceive
about  a  mile  from  us,  a  certaine  place  cleare  from  any
yce,  to  the  which  with  an  easie  breath  of  wind  which  our
God  sent  us,  we  bent  our  selves.  And  furthermore,  hee
provided  better  for  us  then  we  deserved  or  hoped  for :
for  when  we  were  in  the  foresaid  cleare  place,  he  sent  us
a  fresh  gale  at  West  or  at  West  Southwest,  which  set  us
cleare  without  all  the  yce.  And  further  he  added  more :
for  he  sent  us  so  pleasant  a  day  as  the  like  we  had  not  of
a  long  time  before,  as  after  punishment  consolation.

Thus  we  joyfuU  wights  being  at  libertie,  tooke  in  all
our  sailes  and  lay  a  hull,  praysing  God  for  our  deliver-
ance, and  stayed  to  gather  together  our  Fleete :  which
once  being  done,  we  seeing  that  none  of  them  had  any
great  hurt,  neither  any  of  them  wanted,  saving  onely  they
of  whom  T  spake  before  and  the  ship  which  was  lost,
then  at  the  last  wee  hoised  our  sailes,  and  lay  bulting  off
and  on,  till  such  time  as  it  would  please  God  to  take
away  the  yce  that  wee  might  get  into  the  Straights.

235

A.D.
1578.

A  mountaine
ofyce  appear-
ing in  sundry
figures.

^fig  of  long
continuance.

A  current  to
the 'Northwest.

The  Gabriel.

[III.  42.]
The  people
offer  to  traffike
with  ui.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

And  as  we  thus  lay  off  and  on  we  came  by  a  marvellous
huge  mountaine  of  yce,  which  surpassed  all  the  rest  that
ever  we  saw :  for  we  judged  it  to  be  neere  fourescore
fathomes  above  water,  and  we  thought  it  to  be  a  ground
for  any  thing  that  we  could  perceive,  being  there  nine
score  fathoms  deepe,  and  of  compasse  about  halfe  a  mile.

Also  the  fift  of  July  there  fell  a  hidious  fogge  and
mist,  that  continued  till  the  nineteenth  of  the  same :  so
that  one  shippe  could  not  see  another.  Therefore  we
were  faine  to  beare  a  small  sayle  and  to  observe  the  time :
but  there  ran  such  a  current  of  a  tide,  that  it  set  us  to
the  Northwest  of  the  Queenes  foreland  the  backside  of
all  the  Straights  :  where  (through  the  contagious  fogge
having  no  sight  either  of  Sunne  or  Starre)  we  scarce
knew  where  we  were.  In  this  fogge  the  tenth  of  July
we  lost  the  company  of  the  Viceadmirall,  the  Anne
Francis,  the  Busse  of  Bridgewater,  and  the  Francis  of
Foy.

The  16.  day  one  of  our  small  Barkes  named  the
Gabriel  was  sent  by  our  Generall  to  beare  in  with  the
land  to  descrie  it,  where  being  on  land,  they  met  with
the  people  of  the  Countrey,  which  seemed  very  humane
and  civill,  and  offered  to  traffike  with  our  men,  profering
them  foules  and  skins  for  knives,  and  other  trifles  :  whose
courtesie  caused  us  to  thinke,  that  they  had  small  con-
versation with  other  of  the  Straights.

Then  we  bare  backe  againe  to  goe  with  the  Queenes
foreland :  and  the  eighteenth  day  wee  came  by  two
Islands  whereon  we  went  on  shore,  and  found  where  the
people  had  bene :  but  we  saw  none  of  them.  This  day
wee  were  againe  in  the  yce,  and  like  to  be  in  as  great
perill  as  we  were  at  the  first.  For  through  the  darknesse
and  obscuritie  of  the  foggie  mist,  we  were  almost  run  on
rocks  and  Islands  before  we  saw  them :  But  God  (even
miraculously)  provided  for  us,  opening  the  fogges  that
we  might  see  clearely,  both  where  and  in  what  danger
we  presently  were,  and  also  the  way  to  escape :  or  els
without faile  we had ruinously  runne  upon  the rocks.

236

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad

r578.

When  we  knew  perfectly  our  instant  case,  wee  cast
about  to  get  againe  on  Sea-bord,  which  (God  be  thanked)
by  night  we  obtained  and  praised  God.  The  cleare  con-
tinued scarce  an  houre,  but  the  fogge  fell  againe  as  thicke
as  ever  it  was.

Then  the  Rearadmirall  and  the  Beare  got  themselves
cleare  without  danger  of  yce  and  rocks,  strooke  their
sailes  and  lay  a  hull,  staying  to  have  the  rest  of  the  Fleete
come  forth :  which  as  yet  had  not  found  the  right  way
to  cleare  themselves  from  the  danger  of  rockes  and  yce,
untill  the  next  morning,  at  what  time  the  Rearadmirall
discharged  certaine  warning  pieces  to  give  notice  that  she  fVarning
had  escaped,  and  that  the  rest  (by  following  of  her)  /^^^^-^  'f^ffi'
might  set  themselves  free,  which  they  did  that  day. ^c^harfed

Then  having  gathered  our  selves  togither  we  pro-
ceeded on  our  purposed  voyage,  bearing  off,  and  keeping
our  selves  distant  from  the  coast  till  the  19.  day  of  July :
at  which  time  the  fogges  brake  up  and  dispersed,  so  that
we  might  plainely  and  clearely  behold  the  pleasant  ayre,
which  so  long  had  bene  taken  from  us,  by  the  obscuritie
of  the  foggie  mists :  and  after  that  time  we  were  not
much  encombred  therewith  untill  we  had  left  the  con-
fines of  the  Countrey.

Then  we  espying  a  fayre  sound,  supposed it to  goe  A  faire  sound
into the Straights betweene the Queenes foreland and  betweene  the
Jackmans  sound,  which  proved  as  we  imagined. For  our  iJ"^^j°^^
Generall  sent  forth  againe  the  Gabriel  to  discover  it,  who  jackmam
passed  through  with  much  difficulty : for  there  ran  such  sound,
an  extreme  current  of  a  tide,  with  such  a  horrible  gulfe,
that  with  a  fresh  gale  of  wind  they  were  scarce  able  to
stemme  it : yet  at the  length with  great travaile they
passed  it,  and  came  to  the  Straights,  where  they  met  with
the  Thomas  Allen,  the  Thomas  of  Ipswich,  and  the  Busse
of  Bridgewater :  who  altogether  adventured  to  beare  into
the  yce  againe,  to  see  if  they  could  obtaine  their  wished
Port. But they were so incombred that with much
difficultie they  were able  to  get  out  againe,  yet  at  the
last  they  escaping,  the  Thomas  Allen,  and  the Gabriel

237

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578

bare  in  with  the  Westerne  shore,  where  they  found  har-
bour, and  there  moared  their  ships  untill  the  fourth  of
August,  at  which  time  they  came  to  us  in  the  Countesse
of  Warwicks  sound.  The  Thomas  of  Ipswich  caught  a
great  leake  which  caused  her  to  cast  againe  to  Seabord
and  so  was  mended.

We  sailed  along  still  by  the  coast  untill  we  came  to
the  Queenes  foreland,  at  the  point  whereof  we  met  with
part  of  the  gulfe  aforesayd,  which  place  or  gulfe  (as  some
of  our  Masters  doe  credibly  report)  doeth  flow  nine
houres,  and  ebs  but  three.  At  that  point  wee  discovered
certaine  lands  Southward,  which  neither  time  nor  oppor-
tunitie  would  serve  to  search.  Then  being  come  to  the
mouth  of  the  Straights  we  met  with  the  Anne  Francis,
who  had  laine  bulting  up  and  downe  ever  since  her
departure  alone,  never  finding  any  of  her  company.  We
met  then  also  the  Francis  of  Foy,  with  whom  againe  we
intended  to  venture  and  get  in  :  but  the  yce  was  yet  so
thicke,  that  we  were  compelled  againe  to  retyre  and  get
us  on  Sea-bord.
An  horrible  There  fell  also  the  same  day  being  the  26.  of  July,

snowefellin ^^^  an  horrible  snow,  that  it  lay  a  foot  thick  upon  the
^'  hatches  which  frose  as  it  fell.

We  had  also  at  other  times  divers  cruell  stormes  both
of  snow  and  haile,  which  manifestly  declared  the  dis-
temperature  of  the  Countrey :  yet  for  all  that  wee  were
so  many  times  repulsed  and  put  backe  from  our  purpose,
knowing  that  lingering  delay  was  not  profitable  for  us,
but  hurtfull  to  our  voyage,  we  mutually  consented  to
our  valiant  Generall  once  againe,  to  give  the  onset.

The 28.  day  therefore  of  the  same  July  we  assayed,

and  with  little trouble  (God  be  praysed)  we  passed  the

dangers  by  day  light. Then night  falling on the face

of  the  earth,  wee  hulled in  the  cleare,  til  the  chearefull

light  of  the  day  had  chased  away  the  noysome  darkenesse

The  time  of of  the  night :  at  which  time  we  set  forward  towards  our

our setungfor-  -wished  Port :  by  the  30.  day  wee  obteined  our  expected

' ■ desire,  where  we found the  Judith,  and the Michael :

238

MARTIN FROBISHER  a"

1578.
which  brought  no  smal  joy  unto  the  General,  and  great
consolation  to  the  heavie  hearts  of  those  wearied  wights.

The  30.  day  of  July  we  brought  our  ships  into  the  [III.  43.]
Countesse  of  Warwicks  sound,  and  moared  them,  namely
these  ships,  The  Admirall,  the  Rearadmiral,  the  Francis
of  Foy,  the  Beare  Armenel,  the  Salomon,  and  the  Busse
of  Bridgewater :  which  being  done,  our  Generall  com-
maunded  us  all  to  come  a  shore  upon  the  Countesses
Hand,  where  he  set  his  Miners  to  worke  upon  the  Mine,
giving  charge  with  expedition  to  dispatch  with  their
lading.

Our  Generall  himselfe,  accompanied  with  his  Gentle-
men, divers  times  made  rodes  into  sundry  partes  of  the
Countrey,  as  well  to  finde  new  Mines,  as  also  to  finde
out  and  see  the  people  of  the  Countrey. He  found  out
one  Mine  upon  an  Island  by  Beares  sound,  and  named  it
the  Countesse  of  Sussex  Island. One  other  was  found  in  'I'he  Countesse
Winters  Fornace,  with  divers  others,  to  which  the  ships  V^^^J^^
were sent sunderly to be laden. In the same rodes  ij/i^ters
he  mette  with  divers  of  the  people  of  the  Countrey  at  Fornace.
sundry  times,  as  once  at  a  place  called  Davids  sound  :  who  Davids  Sound.
shot  at  our  men,  and  very desperately gave  them the
onset,  being  not  above  three  or  foure  in  number,  there
being  of  our  Countrey  men  above  a  dosen :  but  seeing
themselves  not  able  to  prevaile,  they  tooke  themselves  to
flight :  whom  our  men  pursued,  but  being  not  used  to
such  craggie  cliffes,  they  soone  lost  the  sight  of  them,  and
so  in  vaine  returned.

We  also  saw  of  them  at Beares  sound,  both  by  Sea  The  polkie  of
and  land  in  great  companies  : but  they  would  at  all  times  ^''-^  pfop^^fo^
keepe the water  betweene  them and us. And if  any  ^|^^^^/^j.
of  our  ships  chanced  to  be  in  the  sound  (as  they  came
divers times,  because the Harbor was not  very  good)
the ship  laded,  and departed againe : then so long  as
any  ships  were  in  sight,  the  people  would  not  be  scene.
But  when  as  they  perceived  the  ships  to  be  gone,  they
would not only shew  themselves standing upon high
clifFes,  and  call  us  to  come  over  unto  them : but  also

239

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

would  come  in  their  Botes  very  neere  to  us,  as  it  were  to
brag  at  us :  whereof  our  Generall  having  advertisement,
sent  for  the  Captaines  and  Gentlemen  of  the  Ships,  to
accompany  and  attend  upon  him,  with  the  Captaine  also
of  the  Anne  Francis,  who  was  but  the  night  before  come
unto  us.  For  they,  and  the  Fleebote  having  lost  us  the
26.  day  in  the  great  snowe,  put  into  an  harbour  in  the
Queenes  foreland,  where  they  found  good  Oare,  where-
with they  laded  themselves,  and  came  to  seeke  the
Generall :  so  that  now  we  had  all  our  Shippes,  saving
one  Barke,  which  was  lost,  and  the  Thomas  of  Ipswich,
who  (compelled  by  what  furie  I  knowe  not)  forsooke
our  company,  and  returned  home  without  lading.
Their  speedie  Our  Generall  accompanied  with  his  Gentlemen,  (of
flight  at  our  -y^^hom  I  spake)  came  all  together  to  the  Countesse  of
rivall  Sussex  Island,  neere  to  Beares  sound :  where  he  manned

out  certaine  Pinnisses,  and  went  over  to  the  people :  who
perceiving  his  arrivall,  fledde  away  with  all  speede,  and
in  haste  left  certaine  dartes  and  other  engines  behinde
them,  which  we  found :  but  the  people  we  could  not
finde.

The  next  morning  our  Generall  perceiving  certaine  of
them  in  botes  upon  the  Sea,  gave  chase  to  them  in  a
Pinnesse  under  saile,  with  a  fresh  gale  of  winde,  but
could  by  no  meanes  come  neere  unto  them :  for  the
longer  he  sailed,  the  further  off  he  was  from  them  :  which
well  shewed  their  cunning  and  activitie.  Thus  time
wearing  away,  and  the  day  of  our  departure  approching,
our  Generall  commaunded  us  to  lade  with  all  expedition,
that  we  might  be  againe  on  Seaboard  with  our  ships :
for  whilest  we  were  in  the  Countrey,  we  were  in  con-
tinual danger  of  freezing  in :  for  often  snow  and  haile
often  falling,  the  water  was  so  much  frosen  and  congealed
in  the  night,  that  in  the  morning  we  could  scarce  rowe
our  botes  or  Pinnesses,  especially  in  Diers  sound,  which
is  a  calme  and  still  water :  which  caused  our  Generall  to
make  the  more  haste,  so  that  by  the  30.  day  of  August
we  were  all  laden,  and  made  all  things  ready  to  depart.

240

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.

But  before  I  proceede  any  further  herein,  to  shew  what  Gentlemen
fortune  befell  at  our  departure,  I  will  turne  my  penne  a  \"l^^i,iJJl/jg
litle  to  M.  Captaine  Fenton,  and  those  Gentlemen  which comtrey.
should  have  inhabited  all  the  yeere  in  those  Countries,
whose  valiant  mindes  were  much  to  be  commended :  For
doubtlesse  they  had  done  as  they  intended,  if  lucke  had
not  withstoode  their  willingnesse.

For  the  Barke  Dionyse  which  was  lost,  had  in  her
much  of  their  house  which  was  prepared  and  should  have
bene  builded  for  them,  with  many  other  implements.
Also  the  Thomas  of  Ipswich  which  had  most  of  their
provision  in  her,  came  not  into  the  Streights  at  all :
neither  did  we  see  her  since  the  day  we  were  separated  in
the  great  snow,  of  which  I  spake  before.  For  these
causes,  having  not  their  house,  nor  yet  provision,  they
were  disappointed  of  their  pretence  to  tarie,  and  therefore
laded  their  ships,  and  so  came  away  with  us.

But  before  we  tooke  shipping,  we  builded  a  litle  house  An  house

in the Countesse  of  Warwicks Island,  and  garnished  it  tricked  and

.,  ,-1  r ■  n  T-.-  -n-^T  parntshedtvtth

With many kmds of  trifles, as  rinnes,  Foints,  J^aces,  ^i^gfs  trinkets.

Glasses,  Kombes,  Babes  on  horsebacke  and  on  foote,  with

innumerable other such fansies and  toyes : thereby  to

allure  and  entice  the  people  to  some  familiaritie  against

other  yeeres.

Thus having finished all things we departed the  [III.  4.4. j

Countrey,  as  I  sayd  before :  but  because  the  Busse  had

not  lading enough in her, she  put into Beares sound

to take in a little more. In the meane while the

Admirall, and  the rest without at  Sea stayed for her.

And  that  night  fell  such  an  outragious  tempest,  beating  .^«  outragious

on  our  ships'  with  such  vehement  rigor,  that  anchor  and  ^^"^P^^^.

cable availed nought : for  we  were driven on rockes

and Islands  of  yce, insomuch that  (had not  the  great

goodnesse  of  God  bene  miraculously  shewed  to  us)  we

had  bene  cast  away  every  man. This  danger  was  more

doubtfull  and  terrible,  then  any that  preceded  or  went

before : for there  was  not  any one shippe (I thinke)

that  escaped  without damage. Some lost anchor and

VII  241  Q

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

also cables, some botes, some Pinnisses : some  anchor,
cables,  boates  and  Pinnisses.

This  boystrous  storme  so  severed  us  from  one  another,
that  one  shippe  knewe  not  what  was  become  of  another.
The  Admirall  knewe  not  where  to  finde  the  Viceadmirall
or  Rearadmirall,  or  any  other  ship  of  our  company.  Our
Generall  being  on  land  in  Beares  sound  could  not  come  to
his  Shippe,  but  was  compelled  to  goe  aboord  the  Gabriel
where  he  continued  all  the  way  homeward :  for  the  boy-
strous blasts  continued  so  extreamely  and  so  long  a  time,
that  they  sent  us  homewarde  (which  was  Gods  favour
towardes  us)  will  we,  nill  we,  in  such  haste,  as  not  any
one  of  us  were  able  to  keepe  in  company  with  other,  but
were  separated.  And  if  by  chance  any  one  Shippe  did
overtake  other,  by  swiftnesse  of  sayle,  or  mette,  as  they
often  did :  yet  was  the  rigour  of  the  wind  so  hidious,
that  they  could  not  continue  company  together  the  space
of  one  whole  night.
Our  entring  Thus  our  journey  outward  was  not  so  pleasant,  but
our  comming  thither,  entering  the  coasts  and  countrey,  by
narrow  Streights,  perillous  yce,  and  swift  tides,  our  times
of  aboade  there  in  snowe  and  stormes,  and  our  departure
from  thence  the  3 1  •  of  August  with  dangerous  blustering
windes  and  tempests,  which  that  night  arose,  was  as  un-
comfortable :  separating  us  so  as  wee  sayled,  that  not
any  of  us  mette  together,  untill  the  28.  of  September,
which  day  we  fell  on  the  English  coastes,  betweene  Sylley
and  the  landes  ende,  and  passed  the  channell,  untill  our
arrivall  in  the  river  of  Thames.

the  coastes
dangerous.

242

THE REPORT OF THOMAS WIARS

The  report  of  Thomas  Wiars  passenger  in  the
Emanuel,  otherwise  called  the  Busse  of  Bridge-
water,  wherein  James  Leech  was  Master,  one
of  the  ships  in  the  last  Voyage  of  Master
Martin  Frobisher  1578.  concerning  the  dis-
coverie  of  a  great  Island  in  their  way  homeward
the 12. of  September.

le  Busse  of  Bridgewater  was  left  in
Beares  sound  at  Meta  incognita,  the
second  day  of  September  behinde  the
Fleete  in  some  distresse,  through  much
winde,  ryding  neere  the  Lee  shoare,  and
forced  there  to  ride  it  out  upon  the
hazard  of  her  cables  and  anchors,  which
were  all  aground  but  two.  The  third  of  September  being
fayre  weather,  and  the  winde  North  northwest  she  set
sayle,  and  departed  thence,  and  fell  with  Frisland  on  the
8.  day  of  September  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night,  and
then  they  set  off  from  the  Southwest  point  of  Frisland,
the  wind  being  at  East,  and  East  Southeast,  but  that  night
the  winde  veared  Southerly,  and  shifted  oftentimes  that
night :  but  on  the  tenth  day  in  the  morning,  the  wind
at  West  northwest  faire  weather,  they  steered  Southeast,
and  by  south,  and  continued  that  course  until  the  12.  day
of  September,  when  about  1 1 .  a  clocke  before  noone,  they
descryed  a  lande,  which  was  from  them  about  five  leagues,
and  the  Southermost  part  of  it  was  Southeast  by  East
from  them,  and  the  Northermost  next,  North  Northeast,
or  Northeast,  The  master  accompted  that  the  Southeast
poynt  of  Frisland  was  from  him  at  that  instant  when
hee  first  descryed  this  new  Islande,  Northwest  by  North,
50.  leagues.  They  account  this  Island  to  be  25.  leagues
long,  and  the  longest  way  of  it  Southeast,  and  Northwest.
The  Southerne  part  of  it  is  in  the  latitude  of  57.  degrees
and  I.  second  part,  or  there  about.  They  continued  in
sight  of  it,  from  the  12.  day  at  a  11.  of  the  clocke,  till  the

243

A.D.
1578.

The  Island
in  length  25.
leagues.
This  Hand  is
in  the  latitude

if  ST-  ^^gi'^e^
and  1  second
pars.

A.D.
1578.

Two  karbo-
roughs  in  this
Island.

[III.  45.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

13.  day  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after  noone,  when
they  left  it :  and  the  last  part  they  saw  of  it,  bare  from
them  Northwest  by  North.  There  appeared  two  Har-
boroughs  upon  that  coast :  the  greatest  of  them  seven
leagues  to  the  Northwards  of  the  Southermost  poynt,  the
other  but  foure  leagues.  There  was  very  much  yce
neere  the  same  land,  and  also  twentie  or  thirty  leagues
from  it,  for  they  were  not  cleare  of  yce,  till  the  15.
day  of  September  after  noone.  They  plyed  their  Voyage
homewards,  and  fell  with  the  West  part  of  Ireland  about
Galway,  and  had  first  sight  of  it  on  the  25.  day  of
September.

Notes  framed  by  M.  Richard  Hakluyt  of  the
middle  Temple  Esquire,  given  to  certaine
Gentlemen  that  went  with  M.  Frobisher  in
his  Northwest  discoverie,  for  their  directions :
And  not  unfit  to  be  committed  to  print,  con-
sidering the  same  may  stirre  up  considerations
of  these  and  of  such  other  things,  not  unmeete
in  such  new  voyages  as  may  be  attempted
hereafter.

I  Hat  the  first  Seate  be  chosen  on  the  sea-
side, so  as  (if  it  may  be)  you  may  have
your  owne  Navie  within  Bay,  river  or
lake,  within  your  Seate  safe  from  the
enemie :  and  so  as  the  enemie  shalbe
forced  to  lie  in  open  rode  abroade  with-
out, to  be  dispersed  with  all  windes  and
tempests  that  shall  arise.  Thus  seated  you  shall  be
least  subject  to  annoy  of  the  enemie,  so  may  you  by
your  Navie  within  passe  out  to  all  parts  of  the  world,
and  so  may  the  Shippes  of  England  have  accesse  to
you  to  supply  all  wants,  so  may  your  commodities  be
caryed  away  also.  This  seat  is  to  be  chosen  in  a
temperate  Climat,  in  sweete  ayre,  where  you  may  pos-
sesse  alwayes  sweete  water,  wood,  seacoles  or  turfe,  with

244

RICHARD HAKLUYT'S NOTES  ad.

1578-
fish,  flesh,  graine,  fruites,  herbes  and  rootes,  or  so  many
of  those  as  may  sufl^ce  very  necessitie  for  the  life  of
such  as  shall  plant  there.  And  for  the  possessing  of
mines  of  golde,  of  silver,  copper,  quicksilver,  or  of  any
such  precious  thing,  the  wants  of  those  needfuU  things
may  be  supplyed  from  some  other  place  by  sea,  &c.

Stone  to  make  Lyme  of,
Slate  stone  to  tyle  withall,  or

such  clay  as  maketh  tyle.
Stone to wall withall, if

Brycke  may  not  bee  made.
Timber  for  buylding  easely  to

be  conveied  to  the  place,
Reede to cover houses or

such  like,  if  tyle  or  slate

be  not.

are  to  be  looked  for
as  things  without
which  no  Citie  may
be  made  nor  people
in  civil  sort  be  kept
together.

The  people  there  to  plant  and  to  continue  are  eyther
to  live  without  traffique,  or  by  traffique  and  by  trade
of  marchandise.  If  they  shall  live  without  sea  traffique,
at  the  first  they  become  naked  by  want  of  linnen  and
woollen,  and  very  miserable  by  infinite  wants  that  will
otherwise  ensue,  and  so  will  they  be  forced  of  them-
selves to  depart,  or  else  easely  they  will  be  consumed
by  the  Spanyards,  by  the  Frenchmen,  or  by  the  naturall
inhabitants  of  the  countrey,  and  so  the  enterprize  be-
comes reprochfull  to  our  Nation,  and  a  let  to  many
other  good  purposes  that  may  be  taken  in  hand.

And  by  trade  of  marchandise  they  can  not  live,  ex-
cept the  Sea  or  the  Land  there  may  yeelde  commoditie.
And  therefore  you  ought  to  have  most  speciall  regard
of  that  poynt,  and  so  to  plant,  that  the  naturall  com-
modities of  the  place  and  seate  may  draw  to  you  accesse
of  Navigation  for  the  same,  or  that  by  your  owne
Navigation  you  may  cary  the  same  out,  and  fetch  home
the  supply  of  the  wants  of  the  seate.

Such  Navigation  so  to  be  employed  shall,  besides  the
supply  of  wants,  be  able  to  encounter  with  forreine  force.

245

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

And  for  that  in  the  ample  vent  of  such  things  as
are  brought  to  you  out  of  England  by  Sea,  standeth  a
matter  of  great  consequence,  it  behoveth  that  all  humanitie
and  curtesie  and  much  forbearing  of  revenge  to  the
Inland  people  be  used :  so  shall  you  have  firme  amitie
with  your  neighbours,  so  shall  you  have  their  inland
commodities  to  mainteine  traffique,  and  so  shall  you
waxe  rich  and  strong  in  force.  Divers  and  severall
commodities  of  the  inland  are  not  in  great  plenty  to
be  brought  to  your  hands,  without  the  ayde  of  some
portable  or  Navigable  river,  or  ample  lake,  and  there-
fore to  have  the  helpe  of  such  a  one  is  most  requisite :
And  so  is  it  of  effect  for  the  dispersing  of  your  owne
commodities  in  exchange  into  the  inlands.

Nothing  is  more  to  be  indevoured  with  the  Inland
people  then  familiarity.  For  so  may  you  best  discover
all  the  natural  commodities  of  their  countrey,  &  also
all  their  wants,  al  their  strengths,  all  their  weaknesse,
and  with  whom  they  are  in  warre,  and  with  whom
confederate  in  peace  and  amitie,  &c.  which  knowen  you
may  worke  many  great  effects  of  greatest  consequence.
And  in  your  planting  the  consideration  of  the  clymate
and  of  the  soyle  be  matters  that  are  to  be  respected.
For  if  it  be  so  that  you  may  let  in  the  salt  sea  water,
not  mixed  with  the  fresh  into  flats,  where  the  sunne  is
of  the  heate  that  it  is  at  Rochel,  in  the  Bay  of  Por-
tugal, or  in  Spaine,  then  may  you  procure  a  man  of
skill,  and  so  you  have  wonne  one  noble  commoditie
for  the  fishing,  and  for  trade  of  marchandize  by  making
of  Salt.

[III.  46.]  Or  if  the  soyle  and  clymate  be  such  as  may  yeeld
you  the  Grape  as  good  as  that  at  Burdeaux,  as  that  in
Portugal,  or  as  that  about  Sivil  in  Spaine,  or  that  in
the  Islands  of  the  Canaries,  then  there  resteth  but  a
workeman  to  put  in  execution  to  make  Wines,  and  to
dresse  Resigns  of  the  sunne  and  other,  &c.

Or if ye finde  a  soyle of the temperature of  the
South part of Spaine or Barbaric in the which you

246

RICHARD  HAKLUYT'S NOTES  ad.

1578.
finde  the  Olive  tree  to  growe :  Then  you  may  be
assured  of  a  noble  marchandize  for  this  Realme,  con-
sidering that  our  great  trade  of  clothing  doeth  require
oyle,  and  weying  how  deere  of  late  it  is  become  by
the  vent  they  have  of  that  commoditie  in  the  West
Indies,  and  if  you  finde  the  wilde  Olive  there  it  may
be  PfrajflFed.

Or  if  you  can  find  the  berrie  of  Cochenile  with  which
we  colour  Stammelles,  or  any  Roote,  Berrie,  Fruite,
wood  or  earth  fitte  for  dying,  you  winne  a  notable
thing  fitte  for  our  state  of  clothing.  This  Cochenile  is
naturall  in  the  West  Indies  on  that  firme.

Or  if  you  have  Hides  of  beasts  fitte  for  sole  Lether,
&c.  It  will  be  a  marchandize  right  good,  and  the
Savages  there  yet  can  not  tanne  Lether  after  our  kinde,
yet  excellently  after  their  owne  manner.

Or  if  the  soyle  shall  yeeld  Figges,  Almonds,  Sugar
Canes,  Quinces,  Orenges,  Lemonds,  Potatos,  &c.  there
may  arise  some  trade  and  traffique  by  Figs,  Almonds,
Sugar,  Marmelade,  Sucket,  &c.

Or  if  great  woods  be  found,  if  they  be  of  Cypres,
chests  may  be  made,  if  they  be  of  some  kinde  of  trees.
Pitch  and  Tarre  may  be  made,  if  they  be  of  some
other,  then  they  may  yeeld  Rosin,  Turpentine,  &c.  and
all  for  trade  and  traffique,  and  Caskes  for  wine  and
oyle may  be made,  likewise ships  and  houses,  &c.

And  because  traffique  is  a  thing  so  materiall,  I  wish
that  great  observation  be  taken  what  every  soyle  yeeldeth
naturally,  in  what  commoditie  soever,  and  what  it  may
be  made  to  yeelde  by  indevour,  and  to  send  us  notice
home,  that  thereupon  we  may  devise  what  meanes  may
be  thought  of  to  raise  trades.

Now  admit  that  we  might  not  be  suffered  by  the
Savages  to  enjoy  any  whole  country  or  any  more  then
the  scope  of  a  citie,  yet  if  we  might  enjoy  traffique,
and  be  assured  of  the  same,  we  might  be  much  inriched,
our  Navie  might  be  increased,  and  a  place  of  safetie
might there be found, if change  of  religion or civil

247

A.B.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^578.

warres  should  happen  in  this  realme,  which  are  things
of  great  benefit.  But  if  we  may  enjoy  any  large  terri-
torie  of  apt  soyle,  we  might  so  use  the  matter,  as  we
should  not  depend  upon  Spaine  for  oyles,  sacks,  resignes,
orenges,  lemonds,  Spanish  skins,  &c.  Nor  upon  France
for  woad,  baysalt,  and  Gascoyne  wines,  nor  on  Eastland
for  flaxe,  pitch,  tarre,  mastes,  &c.  So  we  should  not  so
exhaust  our  treasure,  and  so  exceedingly  inrich  our
doubtfull  friends,  as  we  doe,  but  should  purchase  the
commodities  that  we  want  for  halfe  the  treasure  that
now  wee  doe :  and  should  by  our  owne  industries  and
the  benefites  of  the  soyle  there  cheaply  purchase  oyles,
wines,  salt,  fruits,  pitch,  tarre,  flaxe,  hempe,  mastes,
boords,  fish,  golde,  silver,  copper,  tallow,  hides  and
many  commodities :  besides  if  there  be  no  flatts  to  make
salt  on,  if  you  have  plentie  of  wood  you  may  make  it
in  sufficient  quantitie  for  common  uses  at home  there.

If  you  can  keepe  a  safe  Haven,  although  you  have
not  the  friendship  of  the  neere  neighbours,  yet  you  may
have  traffique  by  sea  upon  one  shore  or  other,  upon
that  firme  in  time  to  come,  if  not  present.

If  you  find  great  plentie  of  tymber  on  the  shore  side
or  upon  any  portable  river,  you  were  best  to  cut  downe
of  the  same  the  first  winter,  to  be  seasoned  for  ships,
barks,  boates  and  houses.

/ind  if  neere  such  wood  there  be  any  river  or  brooke
upon  the  which  a  sawing  mill  may  be  placed,  it  would
doe  great  service,  and  therefore  consideration  would  be
had  of  such  places.

And  if  such  port  &  chosen  place  of  setling  were  in
possession  and  after  fortified  by  arte,  although  by  the
land  side  our  Englishmen  were  kept  in,  and  might  not
enjoy  any  traffique  with  the  next  neighbours,  nor  any
victuals :  yet  might  they  victuall  themselves  of  fish  to
serve  very  necessitie,  and  enter  into  amitie  with  the
enemies  of  their  next  neighbours,  and  so  have  vent  of
their  marchandize  of  England  &  also  have  victual,  or  by
meanes hereupon to be used,  to  force  the next  neigh-

248

RICHARD  HAKLUYT'S NOTES  ad.

1578.
hours  to  amitie.  And  keeping  a  navy  at  the  setling
place,  they  should  find  out  along  the  tract  of  the  land
to  have  trafiique,  and  at  divers  Islands  also.  And  so  this
first  seat  might  in  time  become  a  stapling  place  of  the
commodities  of  many  countreys  and  territories,  and  in
time  this  place  might  become  of  all  the  provinces  round
about  the  only  governour.  And  if  the  place  first  chosen
should  not  so  well  please  our  people,  as  some  other  more
lately  found  out  :  There  might  be  an  easie  remove,  and
that  might  be  rased,  or  rather  kept  for  others  of  our
nation  to  avoyd  an  ill  neighbour.

If  the  soyles  adjoyning  to  such  convenient  Haven  and
setling places be  found marshie  and  boggie, then men  [III.  4.7.]
skilful  in drayning are  to  be  caryed  thither. For  arte
may  worke  wonderful  effects  therein,  and  make  the  soyle
rich  for  many  uses.

To  plant  upon  an  Island  in  the  mouth  of  some  notable
river,  or  upon  the  point  of  the  land  entring  into  the
river,  if  no  such  Island  be,  were  to  great  end.  For  if
such  river  were  navigable  or  portable  farre  into  the  land,
then  would  arise  great  hope  of  planting  in  fertil  soyles,
and  trafiike  on  the  one  or  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,
or  on  both,  or  the  linking  in  amitie  with  one  or  other
pettie  king  contending  there  for  dominion.

Such  rivers  found,  both  Barges  and  Boates  may  be
made  for  the  safe  passage  of  such  as  shall  pierce  the  same.
These  are  to  be  covered  with  doubles  of  course  linnen
artificially  wrought,  to  defend  the  arrow  or  the  dart  of
the  savage  from  the  rower.

Since  every  soile  of  the  world  by  arte  may  be  made  to
yeeld  things  to  feede  and  to  clothe  man,  bring  in  your
returne  a  perfect  note  of  the  soile  without  and  within,
and  we  shall  devise  if  neede  require  to  amend  the  same,
and  to  draw  it  to  more  perfection.  And  if  you  finde  not
fruites  in  your  planting  place  to  your  liking,  we  shall  in
five  drifats  furnish  you  with  such  kindes  of  plants  to  be
carryed  thither  the  winter  after  your  planting,  as  shall  the
very  next  summer  following  yeeld  you  some  fruite,  and

249

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

the  yeere  next  following,  as  much  as  shall  suffice  a  towne
as  bigge  as  Calice,  and  that  shortly  after  shall  be  able
to  yeeld  you  great  store  of  strong  durable  good  sider  to
drinke,  and  these  trees  shall  be  able  to  encrease  you
within  lesse  then  seven  yeeres  as  many  trees  presently
to  beare,  as  may  suffice  the  people  of  divers  parishes,
which  at  the  first  setling  may  stand  you  in  great  stead,
if  the  soile  have  not  the  commoditie  of  fruites  of  good-
nesse  already.  And  because  you  ought  greedily  to  hunt
after  things  that  yeeld  present  reliefe,  without  trouble  of
carriage  thither,  therefore  I  make  mention  of  these  thus
specially,  to  the  end  you  may  have  it  specially  in  minde.

A  true  discourse  of  the  three  Voyages  of  discoverie,
for  the  finding  of  a  passage  to  Cathaya,  by  the
Northwest,  under  the  conduct  of  Martin  Fro-
bisher  Generall :  Before  which,  as  a  necessary
Preface  is  prefixed  a  twofold  e  discourse,  con-
teining  certaine  reasons  to  prove  all  partes  of  the
World  habitable.  Penned  by  Master  George
Best,  a  Gentleman  employed  in  the  same
voyages.

What commodities  and instructions may  be reaped by
diligent  reading  this  Discourse.

I Tpirst, by example may be gathered, how a Dis-
X^ coverer of  new  Countries is to proceede in his
first  attempt  of  any  Discoverie.

2  Item,  how  he  should  be  provided  of  shipping,
victuals,  munition,  and  choice  of  men.

3  How  to  proceede  and  deale  with  strange  people,
be  they  never  so  barbarous,  cruell  and  fierce,  either  by
lenitie  or  otherwise.

4  How  trade  of  Merchandize  may  be  made  without
money.

5  How  a  Pilot  may  deale,  being  invironed  with  moun-
taines  of  yce  in  the  frozen  Sea.

250

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a  o.

1578.

6  How  length  of  dayes,  change  of  seasons,  Summers
and  Winters  doe  differ  in  sundry  regions.

7  How  dangerous  it  is  to  attempt  new  Discoveries,
either  for  the  length  of  the  voyage,  or  the  ignorance  of
the  language,  the  want  of  Interpretors,  new  and  un-
accustomed Elements  and  ayres,  strange  and  unsavoury
meates,  danger  of  theeves  and  robbers,  fiercenesse  of
wilde  beastes  and  fishes,  hugenesse  of  woods,  dangerous-
nesse  of  Seas,  dread  of  tempestes,  feare  of  hidden  rockes,
steepnesse  of  mountaines,  darkenesse  of  sudden  falling
fogges,  continuall  paines  taking  without  any  rest,  and
infinite  others.

8  How  pleasant  and  profitable  it  is  to  attempt  new
Discoveries,  either  for  the  sundry  sights  and  shapes  of
strange  beastes  and  fishes,  the  wonderfuU  workes  of
nature,  the  different  maners  and  fashions  of  divers
nations,  the  sundry  sortes  of  government,  the  sight  of
strange  trees,  fruite,  foules,  and  beastes,  the  infinite
treasure  of  Pearle,  Golde  and  Silver,  the  newes  of  newe
found  landes,  the  sundry  positions  of  the  Sphere,  and
many  others.

9  How  valiant  Captaines  use  to  deale  upon  extremitie,
and  otherwise.

10  How  trustie  souldiers  dutifully  use  to  serve.

1 1  Also  here  may  bee  scene  a  good  example  to  be
observed  of  any  private  person,  in  taking  notes,  and
making  observations  of  all  such  things  as  are  requisite
for  a  Discoverer  of  newe  Countries.

12  Lastly,  the  Reader  here  may  see  a  good  paterne  of  [III.  48.
a  well  governed  service,  sundry  instructions  of  matters  of
Cosmographie,  Geographic,  and  Navigation,  as  in read-
ing more at  large  may  be  seene.

[Experiences
251

A.D.
1578.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Experience  to
prove  thatTor-
rida  Zona  is
habitable.

Experiences  and  reasons  of  the  Sphere,  to  proove
all  partes  of  the  worlde  habitable,  and  thereby
to  confute  the  position  of  the  five  Zones.

Irst,  it  may  be  gathered  by  experience  of
our  Englishmen  in  Anno  1553.  For
Captaine  Windam  made  a  Voyage  with
Merchandise  to  Guinea,  and  entred  so
farre  within  the  Torrida  Zona,  that  he
w^as  within  three  or  foure  decrees  of  the

o

Equinoctiall, and his company abiding
there  certaine Moneths,  returned,  with  gaine.

Also  the  Englishmen  made  another  Voyage  very  pros-
perous and  gainefull,  An.  1554.  to  the  coasts  of  Guinea,
within  3.  degrees  of  the  Equinoctiall.  And  yet  it  is
reported  of  a  trueth,  that  all  the  tract  from  Cape  de
las  Palmas  trending  by  C.  de  tres  puntas  alongst  by
Benin,  unto  the  lie  of  S.  Thomas  (which  is  perpendi-
culer  under  the  Equinoctial)  all  that  whole  Bay  is  more
subject  to  many  blooming  and  smoothering  heates,  with
infectious  and  contagious  ayres,  then  any  other  place  in
all  Torrida  Zona :  and  the  cause  thereof  is  some  accidents
in  the  land.  For  it  is  most  certaine,  that  mountains,
Seas,  woods  and  lakes  &c.  may  cause  through  their
sundry  kinde  of  situation,  sundry  strange  and  extraor-
dinary effects,  which  the  reason  of  the  clyme  otherwise
would  not  give.  I  mention  these  Voyages  of  our
Englishmen,  not  so  much  to  proove  that  Torrida  Zona
may  bee,  and  is  inhabited,  as  to  shew  their  readinesse
in  attempting  long  and  dangerous  Navigations.  Wee
also  among  us  in  England  have  blacke  Moores,  Ethio-
pians, out  of  all  partes  of  Torrida  Zona,  which  after  a
small  continuance,  can  well  endure  the  colde  of  our
Countrey,  and  why  should  not  we  as  well  abide  the
heate  of  their  Countrey }  But  what  should  I  name
any  more  experiences,  seeing  that  all  the  coastes  of
Guinea and Benin are inhabited of  Portugals, Span-

252

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.^.

1578.

yardes,  French,  and  some  Englishmen,  who there  have

built  Castles  and  Townes. Onely  this  I  will  say  to  the  Marochus

Merchants  of  London,  that  trade  yeerely  to  Marochus,  it  J/J^^^y^^^^*

is very  certaine,  that the  greatest part of  the burning  noctidl.

Zone  is  farre  more  temperate  and  coole  in  June,  then  the

Countrey  of  Marochus,  as  shall  appeare  by  these  reasons

and  experiences  following. For  let  us  first  consider  the

breadth and bignesse of  this burning Zone (which as

every man knoweth, is 47. degrees) each Tropicke,

which  are  the  bounders  thereof,  being  23.  degrees  and  a

halfe  distant  from  the  Equinoctiall. Imagine  againe  two

other  Parallels,  on  each  side  the  Equinoctiall  one,  eyther

of  them  distant  from  the  Equinoctial  about  20.  degrees,

which  Paralels  may  be  described  either  of  them  twice  a

yeere  by  the  Sunne,  being  in  the  first  degrees  of  Gemini

the II.  of  May,  and in Leo the 13. of  July,  having

North latitude. And againe, the Sunne being in the

first degrees of  Sagittarius,  the 12.  of  November,  and

in  Aquarius the 9.  of  January,  having South latitude,

I  am  to  proove  by  experience  and  reason,  that  all  that

distance  included  betweene  these  two  Paralels  last  named

(conteyning  40.  degrees  in  latitude,  going  round  about

the  earth,  according  to  longitude)  is  not  onely  habitable,

but  the  same  most fruitfull  and  delectable,  and that if

any  extremitie  of  heate  bee,  the  same  not  to  be  within

the  space  of  twenty  degrees  of  the  Equinoctiall  on  either

side,  but  onely  under  and  about  the  two  Tropickes,  and

so  proportionally  the  neerer  you  doe  approch  to  eyther

Tropicke,  the  more  you  are  subject  to  extremitie  of  heate

(if  any  such  be)  and  so  Marochus  being  situate  but  sixe

or seven degrees from the Tropicke of  Cancer, shall

be  more  subject  to  heate,  then  any  place  under  or  neere

the  Equinoctiall  line.

And  first  by  the  experience  of  sundry  men,  yea
thousands,  Travailers  and  Merchants,  to  the  East  and
West  Indies  in  many  places  both  directly  under,  and  hard
by  the  Equinoctiall,  they  with  one  consent  affirme,  that
it aboundeth in the  middest  of  Torrida  Zona  with all

253

A.D.

1578.

Marvellous
fruitfuU  soile
under  the
EquinoctiaU.

[III.  49.]

Great  trees.

Commodities
and  pleasures
under  the
EquinoctiaU.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

manner  of  Graine,  Hearbes,  grasse,  fruite,  wood  and
cattell,  that  we  have  heere,  and  thousandes  other  sortes,
farre  more  wholesome,  delectable  and  precious,  then  any-
wee  have  in  these  Northerne  climates,  as  very  well  shall
appeare  to  him  that  will  reade  the  Histories  and  Navi-
gations of  such  as  have  travelled  Arabia,  India  intra
&  extra  Gangem,  the  Islands  Moluccae,  America,  &c.
which  all  lye  about  the  middle  of  the  burning  Zone,
where  it  is  truely  reported,  that  the  great  hearbes,  as
are  Radish,  Lettuce,  Colewortes,  Borage,  and  such  like,
doe  waxe  ripe,  greater,  more  savourie  and  delectable  in
taste  then  ours,  within  sixteene  dayes  after  the  seede  is
sowen.  Wheate  being  sowed  the  first  of  Februarie,  was
found  ripe  the  first  of  May,  and  generally,  where  it  is
lesse  fruitfull,  the  wheate  will  be  ripe  the  fourth  moneth
after  the  seed  is  sowne,  and  in  some  places  will  bring
foorth  an  eare  as  bigge  as  the  wrist  of  a  man's  arme
containing  1000.  graines ;  Beanes,  peace,  &c.  are  there
ripe  twice  a  yeere.  Also  grasse  being  cut  downe,  will
grow  up  in  sixe  dayes  above  one  foote  high.  If  our
cattell  be  transported  thither,  within  a  small  time  their
young  ones  become  of  bigger  stature,  and  more  fat  then
ever  they  would  have  bene  in  these  countreys.  There
are  found  in  every  wood  in  great  numbers,  such  timber
trees  as  twelve  men  holding  handes  together  are  not  able
to  fathome.  And  to  be  short,  all  they  that  have  bene
there  with  one  consent  affirme,  that  there  are  the  goodliest
greene  medowes  and  plaines,  the  fairest  mountaines
covered  with  all  sorts  of  trees  and  fruites,  the  fairest
valleys,  the  goodliest  pleasant  fresh  rivers,  stored  with
infinite  kinde  of  fishes,  the  thickest  woods,  greene  and
bearing  fruite  all  the  whole  yeere,  that  are  in  all  the
world.  And  as  for  gold,  silver,  and  all  other  kinde  of
Metals,  all  kinde  of  spices  and  delectable  fruites,  both
for  delicacie  and  health,  are  there  in  such  abundance,
as  hitherto  they  have  bene  thought  to  have  beene  bred
no  where  else  but  there.  And  in  conclusion,  it  is  nowe
thought  that  no  where  else  but  under  the  Equinoctial!,

254

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.d.

1578.

or  not  farre  from  thence,  is  the  earthly  Paradise,  and
the  onely  place  of  perfection  in  this  worlde.  And  that
these  things  may  seeme  the  lesse  strange,  because  it  hath
bene  accompted  of  the  olde  Philosophers,  that  there
coulde  nothing  prosper  for  the  extreme  heat  of  the  Sunne
continually  going  over  their  heades  in  the  Zodiacke,  I
thought  good  here  to  alleadge  such  naturall  causes  as
to  me  seeme  very  substantiall  and  sure  reasons.

First you are to understand that the Sunne doeth
worke his  more  or  lesse heat  in  these  lower  parts  by
two  meanes,  the  one  is  by  the  kinde  of  Angle  that  the
Sunne  beames  doe  make  with  the  earth,  as  in  all  Torrida
Zona it maketh perpendicularly right  Angles in some  Heat  is  caused
place  or  other  at  noone,  and  towards  the  two  Poles  very \  ^^f  f^^"f^
oblique  and uneven  Angles. And the other meane is  ;„^„^;^  of  Jn-
the  longer  or  shorter  continuance  of  the  Sunne  above  the  gk  and  by  his
Horizon. So  that  wheresoever  these  two  causes  do  most  continuance.
concurre,  there  is  most  excesse  of  heat : and  when the
one is wanting, the rigor of  the heat is lesse. For
though  the  Sunne  beames  do  beat  perpendicularly  upon
any  region  subject  unto  it,  if  it  hath  no  continuance  or
abode  above the Horizon, to worke his operation in,
there  can  no hote  effect  proceed. For  nothing  can be
done  in  a  moment. And  this  second  cause  mora  Solis
supra  Horizontem,  the  time  of  the  sunnes  abiding  above
the  Horizon,  the  old  Philosophers  never  remembred,  but
regarded onely  the maner of  Angles that the Sunne
beames made with the Horizon, which if  they were  ^«'^^  i^"
equall  and  right,  the  heat  was  the  greater,  as  in  Torrida  ^'^^^''^•
Zona : if  they  were  unequall  and  oblique,  the  heat  was
the  lesse,  as towards  both Poles,  which  reason is  very
good and substantiall : for the perpendicular beames
reflect  and reverberate in themselves,  so that the heat
is doubled, every  beame striking twice, & by uniting
are multiplied, and continue strong in forme of a
Columne. But  in  our  Latitude  of  50.  and 60.  degrees,
the Sunne beames  descend oblique  and slanting  wise,
and so strike but  once  and depart, and therefore our

255

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

heat  is  the  lesse  for  any  effect  that  the  Angle  of  the
Sunne  beames  make.  Yet  because  wee  have  a  longer
continuance  of  the  Sunnes  presence  above  our  Horizon
then  they  have  under  the  Equinoctial ;  by  this  con-
tinuance the  heat  is  increased,  for  it  shineth  to  us  16.
or  18.  houres  sometime,  when  it  continueth  with  them
but  twelve  houres  alwayes.

And  againe,  our  night  is  very  short  wherein  cold
vapours  use  to  abound,  being  but  sixe  or  eight  houres
long,  whereas  theirs  is  alwayes  twelve  houres  long,  by
which  two  advantages  of  long  dayes  and  short  nights,
though  we  want  the  equalitie  of  Angle,  it  commeth  to
passe  that  in  Sommer  our  heat  here  is  as  great  as  theirs
is  there,  as  hath  bene  proved  by  experience,  and  is
nothino-  dissonant  from  orood  reason.  Therefore  who-
soever  will  rightly  way  the  force  of  colde  and  heat  in
any  region,  must  not  onely  consider  the  Angle  that  the
Sunne  beames  make,  but  also  the  continuance  of  the  same
above  the  Horizon.  As  first  to  them  under  the  Equi-
noctiall  the  Sunne  is  twice  a  yeere  at  noone  in  their
Zenith  perpendicular  over  their  heads,  and  therefore
during  the  two  houres  of  those  two  dayes  the  heat  is
very  urgent,  and  so  perhaps  it  will  be  in  foure  or  five
dayes  more  an  houre  every  day,  untill  the  Sunne  in
his  proper  motion  have  crossed  the  Equinoctiall ;  so  that
this  extreme  heat  caused  by  the  perpendicular  Angle  of
the  Sunne  beames,  endureth  but  two  houres  of  two
dayes  in  a  yeere.  But  if  any  man  say  the  Sunne  inay
scalde  a  good  while  before  and  after  it  come  to  the
Meridian,  so  farre  foorth  as  reason  leadeth,  I  am  content
to  allow  it,  and  therefore  I  will  measure  and  proportion
the  Sunnes  heat,  by  comparing  the  Angles  there,  with
the  Angles  made  here  in  England,  because  this  tempera-
ture is  best  knowen  unto  us.  As  for  example,  the
II.  day  of  March,  when  under  the  Equinoctiall  it  is
halfe  houre  past  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,,
the  Sunne  will  be  in  the  East  about  38.  degrees  above
the Horizon, because there it riseth alwayes at sixe

256

TTOTITH

^^^#L^-.

■J-r'-nrtiliyV

SOVTH

MAP OF THE WORLD,

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  ad.

1578.

of  the  clocke,  and  mooveth  every  houre  15.  degrees,
and  so  high  very  neere  will  it  be  with  us  at  London  [HI.  5°.]
the  said  eleventh  day  of  March  at  noone.  And  therefore
looke  what  force  the  Sunne  hath  with  us  at  noone,  the
eleventh  of  March,  the  same  force  it  seemeth  to  have
under  the  Equinoctial  at  half  an  houre  past  eight  in
the  morning,  or  rather  lesse  force  under  the  Equinoctiall.
For  with  us  the  Sunne  had  bene  already  sixe  houres
above  the  horizon,  and  so  had  purified  and  clensed  all
the  vapours,  and  thereby  his  force  encreased  at  noone;
but  under  the  Equinoctiall,  the  Sunne  having  bene  up
but  two  houres  and  an  halfe,  had  sufficient  to  doe,  to
purge  and  consume  the  cold  and  moyst  vapours  of  the
long  night  past,  and  as  yet  had  wrought  no  effect  of
heate.  And  therefore  I  may  boldly  pronounce,  that
there  is  much  lesse  heate  at  halfe  an  houre  past  eight
under  the  Equinoctiall,  then  is  with  us  at  noone :  a
fortiori.  But  in  March  we  are  not  onely  contented  to
have  the  Sunne  shining,  but  we  greatly  desire  the  same.
Likewise  the  1 1  of  June,  the  Sunne  in  our  Meridian
is  62  degrees  high  at  London :  and  under  the  Equinoctiall
it  is  so  high  after  10  of  the  clocke,  and  seeing  then  it  is
beneficial  with  us ;  a  fortiori  it  is  beneficiall  to  them  after
10  of  the  clocke.

And  thus  have  wee  measured  the  force  of  the  Sunnes
greatest  heate,  the  hottest  dayes  in  the  yeere,  under  the
Equinoctiall,  that  is  in  March  and  September,  from  sixe
till  after  tenne  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  and  from
two  untill  Sunne  set.  And  this  is  concluded,  by  re-
specting onely  the  first  cause  of  heate,  which  is  the
consideration  of  the  Angle  of  the  Sunne  beames,  by  a
certaine  similitude,  that  whereas  the  Sunne  shineth  never
above  twelve  houres,  more  then  eight  of  them  would  bee
coole  and  pleasant  even  to  us,  much  more  to  them
that  are  acquainted  alwayes  with  such  warme  places.  So
there  remaineth  lesse  then  foure  houres  of  any  excessive
heate,  and  that  onely  in  the  two  Sommer  dayes  of  the
yeere,  that  is  the  eleventh  day  of  March,  and  the  foure-
VII  257  R

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.  ■

teenth  of  September :  for  under  the  Equinoctiall  they
have  two  Sommers,  the  one  in  March,  and  the  other  in
September,  which  are  our  Spring  and  Autumne  :  and  like-
wise two  Winters,  in  June  and  December,  which  are
our  Sommer  and  Winter,  as  may  well  appeare  to  him
that  hath  onely  tasted  the  principles  of  the  Sphere.  But
if  the  Sunne  bee  in  either  Tropicke,  or  approching  neere
thereunto,  then  may  wee  more  easily  measure  the  force
of  his  Meridian  altitude,  that  it  striketh  upon  the  Equi-
noctiall. As  for  example,  the  twelfth  of  June  the  Sunne
will  be  in  the  first  degree  of  Cancer.  Then  looke  what
force  the  heate  of  the  Sunne  hath  under  the  Equinoctiall,
the  same  force  and  greater  it  hath  in  all  that  Parallel,
where  the  Pole  is  elevated  betweene  fourtie  and  seven,
Paris  i«  and  fourtie  and  eight degrees. And therefore  Paris  in

France  ts  as pj-^nce  the  twelfth  day  of  Tune  sustaineth  more  heate  of

hotB  C5  WtldCT  , ^

the  Equinoc- ^^  Sunne,  then Saint Thomas Hand lying neere the
tiall  in  June, same  Meridian  doeth likewise at  noone,  or the  Hands
Taprobana, Moluccas, or the firme lande of  Peru in
America,  which  all  lye  underneath  the  Equinoctiall. For
upon the twelfth day of June aforesaide, the Sunne
beames  at  noone  doe  make  an  Isoscheles  Triangle,  whose
Vertex is the Center of  the Sunne, the Basis  a  line
extended from Saint Thomas Hand under the Equi-
noctiall, unto  Paris  in  France  neere  the  same  Meridian :
therefore the two Angles  of  the  Base must  needs be
equal  per  5. primi. Ergo the  force  of  the  heat  equal,
if  there  were no other cause then the reason of  the
Angle,  as  the  olde Philosophers have appointed. But
In  June  is because  at  Paris  the  Sunne  riseth  two  houres  before  it
greater  heat  at  riseth  to  them  under  the  Equinoctiall,  and  setteth  like-
under  the ^^^^  ^^°  houres  after  them,  by  meanes  of  the  obliquitie
Equinoctial, of  the  Horizon,  in  which  time  of  the  Sunnes  presence
foure  houres  in  one  place  more  then  the  other,  it  worketh
some  effect  more  in one place then in the other,  and
being  of  equall height at noone, it must then  needs
follow  to  be  more  hote  in  the  Parallel  of  Paris,  then  it  is
under  the  Equinoctiall.

258

GEOKGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.d.

1578.

Also  this  is  an  other reason, that when the Sunne
setteth  to  them under the Equinoctiall,  it goeth  very
deepe  and lowe under their Horizon, almost even  to
their  Antipodes,  whereby  their  twilights  are  very  short,  T-'^^  twilights
and  their  nights  are  made  very  extreeme  darke  and  long,  ^^^j  J^^^-\f
and  so  the  moysture  and coldnesse of  the  long  nights  barker  under
wonderfully encreaseth, so that at length the Sunne  the  Equinoc-
rising  can  hardly  in many houres consume and drive  t'^^l  f^^»  <^^
away  the  colde  humours  and  moyst  vapours  of  the  night  ^^^"'
past,  which  is  cleane  contrary  in  the  Parallel  of  Paris :
for  the  Sunne  goeth  under  their  Horizon  but  very  little,
after  a  sloping  sort,  whereby  their  nights  are  not  very
darke,  but  lightsome, as  looking into the  North  in  a
cleare  night  without  cloudes  it  doeth  manifestly  appeare,
their twilights are long : for the Parallel of  Cancer
cutteth  not  the  Horizon  of  Paris at  right  Angles,  but
at  Angles  very  uneven,  and  unlike  as  it  doeth  the  Hori-
zon of  the  Equinoctiall. Also  the  Sommer  day  at  Paris
is  sixteene  houres  long,  and  the  night  but  eight :  where
contrarywise under the Equinoctiall the day is but
twelve houres long, and so  long is  also  the  night, in
whatsoever  Parallel  the  Sunne  be : and  therefore  looke
what  oddes  and  difference  of  proportion  there  is  betweene
the Sunnes abode above the Horizon in Paris,  and
the  abode  it  hath  under  the  Equinoctiall, (it being in
Cancer)  the  same  proportion  would  seeme  to  be  betweene
the  heate  of  the one place, and heate of  the other:  [III.  51.]
for  other  things (as the Angle of  the whole arke  of
the Sunnes progresse that day in both places) are
equall.

But  under  the  Equinoctiall  the  presence  and  abode
of  the  Sunne  above  the  Horizon  is  equall  to  his  absence,
and  abode  under  the  Horizon,  eche  being  twelve  houres.
And  at  Paris  the  continuance  and  abode  of  the  Sunne
is  above  the  Horizon  sixteene  houres  long,  and  but  eight
houres  absence,  which  proportion  is  double,  from  which
if  the  proportion  of  the  equalitie  be  subtracted  to  finde
the  difference,  there  will  remaine  still  a  double  propor-

259

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

tion,  whereby it seemeth to follow, that in  June  the

heate at Paris were double to the heate under the

equinoctiall. For  (as  I  have said) the Angles of  the

Sunne  beames  are  in  all  points  equall,  and  the  cause  of

difference  is,  Mora  Solis  supra  Horizontem,  the  stay  of

the  Sunne  in  the  one  Horizon  more  then  in  the  other.

Therefore,  whosoever  could  finde  out  in  what  proportion

In  what  pro- the  Angle  of  the  Sunne  beames  heateth,  and  what  en-

^An°klfth ^^^^^^  ^^  Sunnes  continuance  doeth  adde  thereunto, it

5a«  beames flight  expresly be set  downe,  what force of  heat  and

heateth.  cold  is  in  all  regions.

Thus  you  partly  see  by  comparing a Climate  to  us

well  knowen,  and  familiarly  acquainted  by  like  height  of

the  Sunne in both places, that  under the Equinoctiall

in  June  is  no  excessive  heat,  but  a  temperate  aire  rather

tending  to  cold. For  as  they have  there  for the  most

part  a  continuall moderate heat,  so yet  sometime  they

The"^  use  and are  a  little pinched  with  colde,  and use  the  benefite  of

ave  nee  e  of  ^^^  ^^  ^^  ^^  ^ especially  in the  evening  when  they

jiTe  undeT  the  /-  -^  ' .  .  ^  .  ^

Equinoctiall. S*^^  ^^  ^^^5 ^"^^ ^^ ^^1  ^J^ ^^  hanging beds tied fast

in  the  upper  part  of  the  house, so  will  they  have  fires

made  on  both  sides  their  bed,  of  which  two  fires,  the  one

they  devise  superstitiously  to  drive  away  spirits,  and  the

other  to  keepe  away  from  them  the  coldnesse  of  the  nights.

Also in  many places of  Torrida Zona, especially in

the  higher  landes somewhat  mountainous,  the  people  a

litle  shrincke  at  the  cold,  and  are  often  forced  to  provide

themselves  clothing, so  that the Spaniards have  found

in  the  West  Indies many  people clothed, especially  in

Colde  inter- Winter,  whereby appeareth,  that with their heat  there

heate  under  the  ^^  colde  intermingled,  else  would  they  never  provide  this

Equinoctial, remedy  of  clothing, which to them is rather  a  griefe

and trouble then otherwise. For when they goe to

warres,  they  will  put  off  all  their  apparell,  thinking  it  to

be  combersome,  and  will  alwayes  goe  naked, that  they

thereby  might  be  more  nimble  in  their  fight.

Some  there  be  that  thinke  the  middle  Zone  extreme
hot,  because  the people of  the countrey  can,  and  doe

260

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.d.

1578.
live  without  clothing,  wherein  they  childishly  are  de-
ceived :  for  our  Clime  rather  tendeth  to  extremitie  of
colde,  because  wee  cannot  live  without  clothing :  for  this
our  double  lining,  furring,  and  wearing  so  many  clothes,
is  a  remedy  against  extremitie,  and  argueth  not  the
goodnesse  of  the  habitation,  but  inconvenience  and  injury
of  colde :  and  that  is  rather  the  moderate,  temperate,  and
delectable  habitation,  where  none  of  these  troublesome
things  are  required,  but  that  we  may  live  naked  and
bare,  as  nature  bringeth  us  foorth.

Others  againe  imagine  the  middle  Zone  to  be  extreme
hot,  because  the  people  of  Africa,  especially  the  Ethio-
pians, are  so  cole  blacke,  and  their  haire  like  wooll
curled  short,  which  blacknesse  and  curled  haire  they
suppose  to  come  onely  by  the  parching  heat  of  the
Sunne,  which  how  it  should  be  possible  I  cannot  see :
for  even  under  the  Equinoctiall  in  America,  and  in  the
East  Indies,  and  in  the  Hands  Moluccae  the  people  are
not  blacke,  but  tauney  and  white,  with  long  haire  un-
curled as  wee  have,  so  that  if  the  Ethiopians  blacknesse  Ethiopians^
came  by  the  heat  of  the  Sunne,  why  should  not  those  ^^^^^^^/^[^^

*  . ■'  ITT  11111  1  • cu7'Led  haire.

Americans  and  Indians  also  be  as  blacke  as  they,  seeing
the  Sunne  is  equally  distant  from  them  both,  they  abid-
ing in  one  Parallel :  for  the  concave  and  convexe
Superficies  of  the  Orbe  of  the  Sunne  is  concentrike,  and
equidistant  to  the  earth ;  except  any  man  should  imagine
somewhat  of  Aux  Solis,  and  Oppositum,  which  indiffer-
ently may  be  applied  aswel  to  the  one  place  as  to  the
other.  But  the  Sunne  is  thought  to  give  no  otherwise
heat,  but  by  way  of  Angle  in  reflection,  and  not  by
his  neerenesse  to  the  earth :  for  throughout  all  Africa,  yea
in  the  middest  of  the  middle  Zone,  and  in  all  other
places  upon  the  tops  of  mountaines  there  lyeth  con-  ^-^^  ^^^^^
tinuall  snow,  which  is  neerer  to  the  Orbe  of  the  Sunne,  ff^^'^^  ""'^  ^^

ills  71C6T671CSS6

then  the  people  are in the  valley, by so  much  as  the  ^^^  q^^u  ^„
height  of  these mountaines amount unto, and  yet  the  reflection.
Sunne  notwithstanding  his  neerenesse,  can  not  melt  the
snow  for  want  of  convenient  place  of  reflections. Also

261

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  middle  region  of  the  aire  where  all  the  haile,  frost,
and  snow  is  engendred,  is  neerer  unto  the  Sunne  then
the  earth  is,  and  yet  there  continueth  perpetuall  cold,
because  there  is  nothing  that  the  Sunne  beames  may
reflect  against,  whereby  appeareth  that  the  neerenesse  of
the  body  of  the  Sunne  worketh  nothing.

Therefore to returne againe to the  blacke Moores.

I  my  selfe  have  seene  an Ethiopian  as  blacke  as  a  cole

brought  into  England,  who  taking  a  faire  English  woman

A  black  to  wife,  begat  a sonne in  all respects  as  blacke  as  the

Moores^  some father  was,  although  England  were  his  native  countrey,

land  ^^ "^'  ^^^  ^^  English  woman  his  mother :  whereby  it  seemeth

[III.  52.] this  blacknes  proceedeth  rather  of  some  natural  infection

of  that  man,  which  was  so  strong,  that  neither  the  nature

of the Clime, neither the good complexion of the

mother  concurring,  coulde  any  thing  alter,  and  therefore,

wee  cannot  impute  it  to  the  nature  of  the  Clime. And

for  a  more  fresh  example,  our  people  of  Meta  Incognita

(of  whom  and  for  whom  this  discourse  is  taken  in  hande)

that  were  brought  this  last  yeere  into  England,  were  all

The  colour  of  generally  of  the  same  colour  that  many  nations  be,  lying

the  people  in i^ the middest of  the middle Zone. And this their

't  ^  tT' colo^''  was not  onely  in the  face  which  was  subject  to

complexion  of Sunne  and  aire,  but  also  in  their  bodies,  which  were  stil

the  people  of covered  with  garments  as  ours  are,  yea  the  very  sucking

Meta  incog- childe  of  twelve  moneths  age  had  his  skinne  of  the  very

^^^^'  same  colour  that  most  have  under  the  Equinoctiall,  which

thing  cannot  proceed  by  reason  of  the  Clime,  for that

they  are  at  least  ten  degrees  more  towardes  the  North

then  wee  in  England  are.  No,  the  Sunne  never  commeth

neere  their  Zenith  by  fourtie  degrees :  for  in  effect,  they

are within three or foure degrees of  that  which  they

call the frosen Zone, and as I saide,  fourtie degrees

from  the  burning  Zone,  whereby  it  followeth,  that  there

is some other cause then the Climate or the Sonnes

perpendicular  reflexion,  that  should  cause  the  Ethiopians

great  blacknesse. And  the  most  probable  cause  to  my

judgement is,  that this blackenesse  proceedeth  of  some

262

I

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.d.

1578.
naturall  infection  of  the  first  inhabitants  of  that  Countrey,
and  so  all  the  whole  progenie  of  them  descended,  are
still  polluted  with  the  same  blot  of  infection.  Therefore
it  shall  not  bee  farre  from  our  purpose,  to  examine  the
first  originall  of  these  blacke  men,  and  howe  by  a  lineall
discent  they  have  hitherto  continued  thus  blacke.

It  manifestly  and  plainely  appeareth  by  holy  Scripture,  T^he  cause  of
that  after  the  g-enerall  inundation  and  overflowing:  of  ^^^  Ethiopians
the  earth,  there  remained  no  moe  men  alive  but  Noe
and  his  three  sonnes,  Sem,  Cham,  and  Japhet,  who  onely
were  left  to  possesse  and  inhabite  the  whole  face  of  the
earth  :  therefore  all  the  sundry  discents  that  until  this
present  day  have  inhabited  the  whole  earth,  must  needes
come  of  the  oif-spring  either  of  Sem,  Cham,  or  Japhet,
as  the  onely  sonnes  of  Noe,  who  all  three  being  white,
and  their  wives  also,  by  course  of  nature  should  have
begotten  and  brought  foorth  white  children.  But  the
envie  of  our  great  and  continuall  enemie  the  wicked
Spirite  is  such,  that  as  hee  coulde  not  suflFer  our  olde
father  Adam  to  live  in  the  felicitie  and  Angelike  state
wherein  hee  was  first  created,  but  tempting  him,  sought
and  procured  his  ruine  and  fall :  so  againe,  finding  at  this
flood  none  but  a  father  and  three  sonnes  living,  hee  so
caused  one  of  them  to  transgresse  and  disobey  his  fathers
commaundement,  that  after  him  all  his  posteritie  shoulde
bee  accursed.  The  fact  of  disobedience  was  this  :  When  The  Arke  of
Noe  at  the  commandement  of  God  had  made  the  Arke  ^°^-
and  entred  therein,  and  the  floud-gates  of  heaven  were
opened,  so  that  the  whole  face  of  the  earth,  every  tree
and  mountaine  was  covered  with  abundance  of  water,
hee  straitely  commaunded  his  sonnes  and  their  wives,
that  they  should  with  reverence  and  feare  beholde  the
justice  and  mighty  power  of  God,  and  that  during  the
time  of  the  floud  while  they  remained  in  the  Arke,  they
should  use  continencie,  and  abstaine  from  carnall  copula-
tion with  their  wives :  and  many  other  precepts  hee  gave
unto  them,  and  admonitions  touching  the  justice  of  God,
in  revenging  sinne,  and  his mercie  in  delivering  them,

263

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

who  nothing  deserved  it.  Which  good  instructions  and
Chus  the  some  exhortations  notwithstanding  his  wicked  sonne  Cham
of  Cham  ac-  disobeyed,  and  being  perswaded  that  the  first  childe  borne
after  the  flood  (by  right  and  Lawe  of  nature)  should
inherite  and  possesse  all  the  dominions  of  the  earth,  hee
contrary  to  his  fathers  commandement  while  they  were
yet  in  the  Arke,  used  company  with  his  wife,  and  craftily
went  about  thereby  to  dis-inherite  the  off-spring  of  his
other  two  brethren :  for  the  which  wicked  and  detestable
fact,  as  an  example  for  contempt  of  Almightie  God,  and
disobedience  of  parents,  God  would  a  sonne  should  bee
borne  whose  name  was  Chus,  who  not  onely  it  selfe,  but
all  his  posteritie  after  him  should  bee  so  blacke  and
lothsome,  that  it  might  remaine  a  spectacle  of  disobedience
to  all  the  worlde.  And  of  this  blacke  and  cursed  Chus
Africa  was  came  all  these  blacke  Moores  which  are  in  Africa,  for
called  Chame-  ^f^^j.  ^^  water  was  vanished  from  off  the  face  of  the
earth,  and  that  the  lande  was  dry,  Sem  chose  that  part
of  the  land  to  inhabite  in,  which  nowe  is  called  Asia,  and
Japhet  had  that  which  now  is  called  Europa,  wherein  wee
dwell,  and  Africa  remained  for  Cham  and  his  blacke
sonne  Chus,  and  was  called  Chamesis  after  the  fathers
name,  being  perhaps  a  cursed,  dry,  sandy,  and  unfruitfull
ground,  fit  for  such  a  generation  to inhabite  in.

Thus  you  see,  that  the  cause  of  the  Ethiopians  black-
nesse  is  the  curse  and  naturall  infection  of  blood,  and
not  the  distemperature  of  the  Climate ;  Which  also  may
bee  prooved  by  this  example,  that  these  blacke  men  are
found  in  all  parts  of  Africa,  as  well  without  the  Tropickes,
as  within,  even  unto  Capo  de  buona  Speranza  Southward,
where,  by  reason  of  the  Sphere,  should  be  the  same  tem-
perature that  is  in  Sicilia,  Morea  and  Candie,  where  al  be
of  very  good  complexions.  Wherefore  I  conclude,  that  the
[III.  53.]  blacknesse  proceedeth  not  of  the  hotenesse  of  the  Clime,
but  as  I  saide,  of  the  infection  of  blood,  and  therefore
this  their  argument  gathered  of  the  Africans  blacknesse
is  not  able  to  destroy  the  temperature  of  the  middle
Zone. Wee may  therefore very well bee assertained,

264

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  ad.

1578.

that under the Equinoctiall is the most pleasant  and
delectable  place  of  the  worlde  to  dwell  in ;  where  although
the Sunne for two houres in a yeere be  direct over
their  heades,  and  therefore  the  heate  at  that  time  some-
what of  force,  yet  because  it  commeth  so  seldome,  and
continueth so  small  a  time,  when  it  commeth,  it  is  not
to  bee  wayed,  but  rather the moderate heate of  other  Greatest  tem-
times  in all the  yeere to be  remembred. And if  the  p^rature under
heate  at  any  time  should  in  the  short  day  waxe  somewhat  ^^^^  ^
urgent,  the  coldnesse  of  the  long  night  there  would  easily
refresh it,  according as Honterus sayeth, speaking of
the  temperature  under  the  Equinoctiall.

Quodque  die  solis  violento  incanduit  aestu,
Humida  nox  reficit,  paribusque  refrigerat  horis.

If  the  heate  of  the  Sunne  in  the  day  time  doe  burne
or  parch  any  thing,  the  moysture  of  the  night  doeth
coole  and  refresh  the  same  againe,  the  Sunne  being  as
long  absent  in  the  night,  as  it  was  present  in the  day.

Also  our  Aucthour  of  the  Sphere,  Johannes  de  Sacro
Bosco,  in  the  Chapter  of  the  Zodiacke,  deriveth  the
Etymologie  of  Zodiacus,  of  the  Greeke  word  Zoe,  which
in  Latine  signifieth  Vita,  life ;  for  out  of  Aristotle  hee
alleadgeth,  that  Secundum  accessum  &  recessum  solis  in
Zodiaco,  fiunt  generationes  &  corruptiones  in  rebus
inferioribus :  according  to  the  Sunnes  going  to  and  fro  in
the  Zodiake,  the  inferiour  bodies  take  their  causes  of
generation  and  corruption.  Then  it  followeth,  that  where
there  is  most  going  too  and  fro,  there  is  most  generation
and  corruption :  which  must  needes  be  betweene  the  two
Tropickes ;  for  there  the  Sunne  goeth  too  and  fro  most,
and  no  where  else  but  there.  Therefore  betweene  the  Under  the
two  Tropikes,  that  is,  in  the  middle  Zone,  is  greatest  Equinoctiall  is
increase,  multiplication,  generation,  and  corruption  of  S^'^^/^^^ S^"^-
things,  which  also  wee  finde  by  experience ;  for  there  is
Sommer  twice  in  the  yeere,  and  twice  Winter,  so  that
they  have  two  Harvests  in  the  yeere,  and  continuall
Spring. Seeing then the middle Zone falleth out so

265

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

temperate,  it resteth to  declare  where the  hottest part
of  the  world  should  bee,  for  we  finde  some  places  more
hote  then  others.
Greatest  heate To  answere  this  doubt,  reason  perswadeth,  the  hotest
under theTro-  pi^ce in the  world to bee under and about the two
^ '  Tropickes ; for  there  more  then  in  any  other  place  doe

both  the  causes  of  heate  concurre,  that  is,  the  perpen-
dicular falling  of  the  Sunne  beames,  at  right  angles,  and
a  greater  continuance  of  the  Sunne  above  the  Horizon,
the  Pole  there  being  elevated  three  or  foure  and  twentie
degrees.  And  as  before  I  concluded,  that  though  the
Sunne  were  perpendicular  to  them  under  the  Equinoctiall,
yet  because  the  same  continued  but  a  small  time,  (their
dayes  being  short,  and  their  nights  long)  and  the  speedie
departure  of  the  Sunne  from  their  Zenith,  because  of  the
suddeine  crossing  of  the  Zodiake  with  the  Equinoctiall,
and  that  by  such  continuall  course  and  recourse  of  hote
and  colde,  the  temperature  grew  moderate,  and  very  well
able  to  bee  endured :  so  nowe  to  them  under  the  two
Tropickes,  the  Sunne  having  once  by  his  proper  motion
declined  twentie  degrees  from  the  Equinoctial,  beginneth
to  draw  neere  their  Zenith,  which  may  bee  (as  before)
about  the  eleventh  day  of  May,  and  then  beginneth  to
sende  his  beames  almost  at  right  Angles,  about  which
time  the  Sunne  entreth  into  the  first  degree  of  Gemini,
and  with  this  almost  right  Angle  the  Sunne  beames  will
continue  untill  it  bee  past  Cancer,  that  is,  the  space  of
two  moneths  every  day  at  noone,  almost  perpendicular
over  their  heades,  being  then  the  time  of  Solstitium
Aestivale :  which  so  long  continuance  of  the  Sunne  about
their  Zenith  may  cause  an  extreeme  heate  (if  any  be  in
the  world)  but  of  necessitie  farre  more  heate  then  can
bee  under  the  Equinoctiall,  where  the  Sunne  hath  no
such  long  abode  in  the  Zenith,  but  passeth  away  there-
hence  very  quickly.  Also  under  the  Tropickes,  the  day
is  longer  by  an  houre  and  a  halfe,  then  it  is  under  the
Equinoctiall ;  wherefore  the  heate  of  the  Sunne  having  a
longer time of operation, must needes be encreased,

266

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.d.

1578.
especially  seeing  the  night  wherein  colde  and  moysture
doe  abound  under  the  Tropickes,  is  lesse  then  it  is  under
the  Equinoctiall.  Therefore  I  gather,  that  under  the
Tropickes  is  the  hotest  place,  not  onely  of  Torrida  Zona,
but  of  any  other  part  of  the  world,  especially  because
there  both  causes  of  heate  doe  concurre,  that  is,  the  per-
pendicular falling  of  the  Sunne  beames  two  monethes
together,  and  the  longer  abode  of  the  Sunnes  presence
above  the  Horison.  And  by  this  meanes  more  at  large  is
prooved,  that  Marochus  in  Sommer  is  farre  more  bote,
then  at  any  time  under  the  Equinoctiall,  because  it  is
situate  so  neere  the  Tropick  of  Cancer,  and  also  for  the
length  of  their  dayes.  Neither  yet  do  I  thinke,  that
the  Regions  situate  under  the  Tropicks  are  not  habitable,
for  they  are  found  to  be  very  fruitfuU  also ;  although
Marochus  and  some  other  parts  of  Afrike  neere  the
Tropike  for  the  drinesse  of  the  native  sandie  soile,  and  [HI.  54,]
some  accidents  may  seeme  to  some  to  be  intemperate  for
over  much  heat.  For  Ferdinandus  Oviedus  speaking  of
Cuba  and  Hispaniola,  Hands  of  America,  lying  hard  Cuba.
under,  or  by  the  Tropike  of  Cancer,  saith,  that  these  ^"P^^^°^^-
Hands  have  as  good  pasture  for  cattell,  as  any  other
countrey  in  the  world.

Also,  they  have  most  holesome  and  cleare  water,  and
temperate  aire,  by  reason  whereof  the  heards  of  beastes
are  much  bigger,  fatter,  and  of  better  taste,  then  any
in  Spaine,  because  of  the  ranke  pasture,  whose  moysture
is  better  digested  in  the  hearbe  or  grasse,  by  continuall
and  temperate  heate  of  the  Sunne,  whereby  being  made
more  fat  and  unctious,  it  is  of  better  and  more  stedfast
nourishment :  For  continuall  and  temperate  heate  doeth
not  onely  drawe  much  moysture  out  of  the  earth  to  the
nourishment  of  such  things  as  growe,  and  are  engendred
in  that  Clime,  but  doeth  also  by  moderation  preserve  the
same  from  putrifying,  digesting  also,  and  condensating  or
thickning  the  said  moyst  nourishment  into  a  gumme  and  ^^^^^  f^^ .
unctious  substance,  whereby  appeareth  also,  that  under  ^J^^-ate  tem-
the  Tropikes is  both  holesome,  fruitefull, and pleasant  perature.

267

A.D.

1578.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

habitation,  whereby  lastly  it  foUoweth,  that  all  the  middle
Zone,  which  untill  of  late  dayes  hath  bene  compted  and
called  the  burning,  broyling,  and  parched  Zone,  is  now
found  to  be  the  most  delicate,  temperate,  commodious,
pleasant,  and  delectable  part  of  the  world,  and  especially
under  the  Equinoctiall.

Having  now  sufficiently  at  large  declared  the  tempera-
ture of  the  middle  Zone,  it  remaineth  to  speake  somewhat
also  of  the  moderate  and  continuall  heate  in  colde
Regions,  as  well  in  the  night  as  in  the  day  all  the
Sommer  long,  and  also  how  these  Regions  are  habitable
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  same,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of
the  olde  writers.

Nine  Cli-
mates.

Of  the  temperature  of  colde  Regions  all  the
Sommer  long,  and  also  how  in  Winter  the
same  is  habitable,  especially  to  the  inhabitants
thereof.

He  colde  Regions  of  the  world  are  those,
which  tending  toward  the  Poles  Arctike,
and  Antarctike,  are  without  the  circuite  or
boundes  of  the  seven  Climates :  which
assertion  agreeable  to  the  opinion  of  the
olde  Writers,  is  found  and  set  out  in
our  authour  of  the  Sphere,  Johannes  de
Sacrobosco,  where  hee  plainely  saith,  that  without  the
seventh  Climate,  which  is  bounded  by  a  Parallel  passing  at
fiftie  degrees  in  Latitude,  all  the  habitation  beyonde  is
discommodious  and  intollerable.  But  Gemma  Frisius  a
late  writer  finding  England  and  Scotland  to  be  without
the  compasse  of  those  Climates,  wherein  hee  knewe  to  bee
very  temperate  and  good  habitation,  added  thereunto
two  other  Climates,  the  uttermost  Parallel  whereof
passeth  by  56.  degrees  in  Latitude,  and  therein  com-
prehendeth  over  and  above  the  first  computation,  England,
Scotland,  Denmarke,  Moscovia,  &c.  which  all  are  rich
and  mightie  kingdomes.

268

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  ad.

1578.

The  olde  writers  perswaded  by  bare  conjecture,  went
about  to  determine  of  those  places,  by  comparing  them
to  their  owne  complexions,  because  they  felt  them  to
bee  hardly  tollerable  to  themselves,  and  so  took  thereby
an  argument  of  the  whole  habitable  earth ;  as  if  a  man
borne  in  Marochus,  or  some  other  part  of  Barbarie,  ^  comparison
should  at  the  latter  end  of  Sommer  upon  the  suddeine,  ^^^'^^^"^  ^'^-
either  naked,  or  with  his  thinne  vesture,  bee  brought  Ensland
into  England,  hee  would  judge  this  Region  presently  not
to  bee  habitable,  because  hee  being  brought  up  in  so
warme  a  Countrey,  is  not  able  here  to  live,  for  so  suddeine
an  alteration  of  the  colde  aire :  but  if  the  same  man
had  come  at  the  beginning  of  Sommer,  and  so  afterward
by  little  and  little  by  certaine  degrees,  had  felt  and
acquainted  himselfe  with  the  frost  of  Autumne,  it  would
have  seemed  by  degrees  to  harden  him,  and  so  to  make  it
farre  more  tollerable,  and  by  use  after  one  yeere  or  two,
the  aire  would  seeme  to  him  more  temperate.  It  was
compted  a  great  matter  in  the  olde  time,  that  there  was  a
brasse  pot  broken  in  sunder  with  frosen  water  in  Pontus,
which  after  was  brought  and  shewed  in  Delphis,  in  token
of  a  miraculous  colde  region  and  winter,  and  therefore
consecrated  to  the  Temple  of  Apollo.

This  effect  being  wrought  in  the  Parallel  of  fouretie
three  degrees  in  Latitude,  it  was  presently  counted  a  place
very  hardly  and  uneasily  to  be  inhabited  for  the  great
colde.  And  how  then  can  such  men  define  upon  other
Regions  very  farre  without  that  Parallel,  whether  they
were  inhabited  or  not,  seeing  that  in  so  neere  a  place  they
so  grossely  mistooke  the  matter,  and  others  their  followers
being  contented  with  the  inventions  of  the  olde  Authors,
have  persisted  willingly  in  the  same  opinion,  with  more
confidence  then  consideration  of  the  cause :  so  lightly  was
that  opinion  received,  as  touching  the  unhabitable  Clime  *
neere  and  under  the  Poles.

Therefore  I  am  at  this  present  to  prove,  that  all  the  ^}}j' l^]^
land  lying  betweene  the  last  climate  even  unto  the  point  ^.^p^-^^^  ^^.g
directly under either poles, is or may be inhabited,  habitable.

269

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

especially  of  such  creatures  as  are  ingendred  and  bred
therein.  For  indeed  it  is  to  be  confessed,  that  some
particular  living  creature  cannot  live  in  every  particular
place  or  region,  especially  with  the  same  joy  and  felicitie,
as  it  did  where  it  was  first  bred,  for  the  certeine  agree-
ment of  nature  that  is  betweene  the  place  and  the  thing

Elephant.  bred  in  that  place ;  as  appeareth  by  the  Elephant,  which
being  translated  and  brought  out  of  the  second  or  third
climat,  though  they  may  live,  yet  will  they  never  ingender
or  bring  forth  yong. Also  we  see  the  like  in  many  kinds

Orange  tree,  of  plants  and  herbs ;  for  example,  the  Orange  trees,
although  in  Naples  they  bring  forth  fruit  abundantly,
in  Rome  and  Florence  they  will  beare  onely  faire  greene
leaves,  but  not  any  fruit :  and  translated  into  England,
they  will  hardly  beare  either  flowers,  fruit,  or  leaves,  but
are  the  next  Winter  pinched  and  withered  with  colde :
yet  it  followeth  not  for  this,  that  England,  Rome,  and
Florence  should  not  be  habitable.

Two  causes  of In  the  proving  of  these  colde  regions  habitable,  I  shalbe

heat.  very short, because the same reasons serve for this

purpose,  which  were  alleged  before  in  the  proving  the
middle  Zone  to  be  temperate,  especially  seeing  all  heat
and  colde  proceed  from  the  Sunne,  by  the  meanes  either
of  the  Angle  which  his  beames  do  make  with  the  Horizon,
or  els  by  the  long  or  short  continuance  of  the  Suns
presence  above  ground  :  so  that  if  the  Sunnes  beames
do  beat  perpendicularly  at  right  Angles,  then  there  is
one  cause  of  heat,  and  if  the  Sunne  do  also  long  continue
above  the  Horizon,  then  the  heat  thereby  is  much  in-
creased by  accesse  of  this  other  cause,  &  so  groweth  to
a  kinde  of  extremity.  And  these  two  causes,  as  I  sayd
before,  do  most  concurre  under  the  two  Tropicks,  and
therefore  there  is  the  greatest  heat  of  the  world.  And
likewise,  where  both  these  causes  are  most  absent,  there  is
greatest  want  of  heat,  and  increase  of  colde  (seeing  that
colde  is  nothing  but  the  privation  and  absence  of  heat)
and  if  one  cause  be  wanting,  and  the  other  present,  the
effect will grow indifferent. Therefore this is to be

270

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.d.

1578.
understood,  that  the  neerer  any  region  is  to  the  Equi-
noctiall,  the  higher  the  Sunne  doth  rise  over  their  heads
at  noone,  and  so  maketh  either  right  or  neere  right
Angles,  but  the  Sunne  tarieth  with  them  so  much  the
shorter  time,  and  causeth  shorter  dayes,  with  longer
and  colder  nights,  to  restore  the  domage  of  the  day  past,
by  reason  of  the  moisture  consumed  by  vapour.  But  in
such  regions,  over  the  which  the  Sunne  riseth  lower
(as  in  regions  extended  towards  either  pole)  it  maketh
there  unequall  Angles,  but  the  Sunne  continueth  longer,
and  maketh  longer  dayes,  and  causeth  so  much  shorter
and  warmer  nights,  as  retaining  warme  vapours  of  the
day  past.  For  there  are  found  by  experience  Summer  Hote  nights
nights  in  Scotland  and  Gothland  very  hot,  when  under  "^^^  ^^^  P°^^'
the  Equinoctiall  they  are  found  very  cold.  This  benefit
of  the  Sunnes  long  continuance  &  increase  of  the  day,
doth  augment  so  much  the  more  in  colde  regions  as
they  are  nerer  the  poles,  and  ceaseth  not  increasing  untill
it  come  directly  under  the  point  of  the  pole  Arcticke,  Colde  nights
where  the  Sunne  continueth  above  ground  the  space  of  ^^  ulnlctiall
sixe  moneths  or  halfe  a  yere  together,  and  so  the  day
is  halfe  a  yere  long,  that  is  the  time  of  the  Sunnes  being
in  the  North  signes,  from  the  first  degree  of  Aries  untill
the  last  of  Virgo,  that  is  all  the  time  from  our  10  day
of  March  untill  the  14  of  September.  The  Sunne  ther-  ^"J  ^^^/{^^
fore  during  the  time  of  these  sixe  moneths  without  any
offence  or  hindrance  of  the  night,  giveth  his  influence
upon  those  lands  with  heat  that  never  ceaseth  during
that  time,  which  maketh  to  the  great  increase  of  Summer,
by  reason  of  the  Sunnes  continuance.  Therefore  it
followeth,  that  though  the  Sunne  be  not  there  very  high
over  their  heads,  to  cause  right  angle  beames,  and  to
give  great  heat,  yet  the  Sun  being  there  sometime  almost
24  degrees  high  doth  cast  a  convenient  and  meane  heate,
which  there  continueth  without  hindrance  of  the  night
the  space  of  sixe  moneths  (as  is  before  sayd)  during  which
time  there  followeth  to  be  a  convenient,  moderate  and  Moderate  heat
temperate  heat:  or els  rather  it  is  to  be  suspected  the  ^^der ye ^oles.

271

A.D.
1578.

The  Murine
never  setteth
in  182  da^es.

[III.  56.]

Horizo?i  and
Equinoctiall
all  one  under
the  pole.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

heat  there  to  be  very  great,  both  for  continuance,  and
also.  Quia  virtus  unita  crescit,  the  vertue  and  strength
of  heat  united  in  one  increaseth.  If  then  there  be  such
a  moderate  heat  under  the  poles,  and  the  same  to  con-
tinue so  long  time ;  what  should  moove  the  olde  writers
to  say  there  cannot  be  place  for  habitation.  And  that
the  certainty  of  this  temperate  heat  under  both  the
poles  might  more  manifestly  appeare,  let  us  consider
the  position  &  quality  of  the  sphere,  the  length  of  the
day,  and  so  gather  the  height  of  the  Sunne  at  all  times,
and  by  consequent  the  quantity  of  his  angle,  and  so
lastly  the  strength  of  his  heat.

Those  lands  and  regions  lying  under  the  pole,  and
having  the  pole  for  their  Zenith,  must  needs  have  the
Equinoctial  circle  for  their  Horizon :  therefore  the  Sun
entring  into  the  North  signes,  and  describing  every  24
houres  a  parallel  to  the  Equinoctiall  by  the  diurnall
motion  of  Primum  mobile,  the  same  parallels  must  needs
be  wholly  above  the  Horizon  :  and  so  looke  how  many
degrees  there  are  from  the  first  of  Aries  to  the  last  of
Virgo,  so  many  whole  revolutions  there  are  above  their
Horizon  that  dwell  under  the  pole,  which  amount  to
182,  and  so  many  of  our  dayes  the  Sunne  continueth
with  them.  During  which  time  they  have  there  con-
tinuall  day  and  light,  without  any  hindrance  of  moist
nights.  Yet  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  Sunne  being  in
the  first  degree  of  Aries,  and  last  degree  of  Virgo,  maketh
his  revolution  in  the  very  horizon,  so  that  in  these  24
houres  halfe  the  body  of  the  Sunne  is  above  the  horizon,
and  the  other  halfe  is  under  his  only  center,  describing
both  the  horizon  and  the  equinoctiall  circle.

And  therefore  seeing  the  greatest  declination  of  the
Sunne  is  almost  24  degrees,  it  followeth,  his  greatest
height  in  those  countreys  to  be  almost  24  degrees.  And
so  high  is  the  Sun  at  noone  to  us  in  London  about  the
29  of  October,  being  in  the  15  degree  of  Scorpio,  and
likewise  the  21  of  January  being  in  the  15  of  Aquarius.
Therefore  looke  what force  the  Sun at noone hath in

272

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.d.

1578.
London  the  29  of  October,  the  same  force  of  heat  it  London.
hath,  to  them  that  dwell  under  the  pole,  the  space  almost
of  two  moneths,  during  the  time  of  the  Summer  sol-
stitium,  and  that  without  intermingling  of  any  colde
night ;  so  that  if  the  heat  of  the  Sunne  at  noone  could
be  well  measured  in  London  (which  is  very  hard  to  do,
because  of  the  long  nights  which  ingender  great  moisture
and  cold)  then  would  manifestly  appeare  by  expresse
numbers  the  maner  of  the  heat  under  the  poles,  which
certainly  must  needs  be  to  the  inhabitants  very  com-
modious and  profitable,  if  it  incline  not  to  overmuch
heat,  and  if  moisture  do  not  want.

For  as  in  October  in  England  we  finde  temperate  aire,
and  have  in  our  gardens  hearbs  and  floures  notwith-
standing our  cold  nights,  how  much  more  should  they
have  the  same  good  aire,  being  continuall  without  night.
This  heat  of  ours  continueth  but  one  houre,  while  the
Sun  is  in  that  meridian,  but  theirs  continueth  a  long
time  in  one  height.  This  our  heat  is  weake,  and  by
the  coolenesse  of  the  night  vanisheth,  that  heat  is
strong,  and  by  continuall  accesse  is  still  increased  and
strengthened.  And  thus  by  a  similitude  of  the  equall
height of  the Sun in both places appeareth the com-  Commodious

modious and moderate heat of  the regions under  the  dwelhngmder

,  °  the  poks.

poles.

And  surely  I  cannot  thinke  that  the  divine  providence
hath  made  any  thing  uncommunicable,  but  to  have  given
such  order  to  all  things,  that  one  way  or  other  the  same
should  be  imployed,  and  that  every  thing  and  place
should  be  toUerable  to  the  next :  but  especially  all  things
in  this  lower  world  be  given  to  man  to  have  dominion
and  use  thereof.  Therefore  we  need  no  longer  to  doubt
of  the  temperate  and  commodious  habitation  under  the
poles  during  the  time  of  Summer.

But  all  the  controversie  consisteth  in  the  Winter,  for

then the  Sunne  leaveth  those  regions,  and  is no  more

scene  for  the  space  of  other  sixe  moneths,  in  the  which

time  all the  Sunnes course is under  their  horizon for

VII  273  s

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

the  space  of  halfe  a  yere,  and  then  those  regions  (say
The  nights  some)  must  needs  be  deformed  with  horrible  darknesse,
under  the  pole.  ^^^  continuall  night,  which  may  be  the  cause  that  beasts
can  not  seeke  their  food,  and  that  also  the  colde  should
then  be  intolerable.  By  which  double  evils  all  living
creatures  should  be  constrained  to  die,  and  were  not
able  to  indure  the  extremity  and  injury  of  Winter,  and
famine  insuing  thereof,  but  that  all  things  should  perish
before  the  Summer  following,  when  they  should  bring
foorth  their  brood  and  yoong,  and  that  for  these  causes
the  sayd  Clime  about  the  pole  should  be  desolate  and
not  habitable.  To  all  which  objections  may  be  answered
in  this  maner :  First,  that  though  the  Sunne  be  absent
from  them  those  six  moneths,  yet  it  followeth  not  that
there  should  be  such  extreme  darknesse ;  for  as  the
Sunne  is  departed  under  their  horizon,  so  is  it  not  farre
from  them :  and  not  so  soone  as  the  Sunne  falleth  so
suddenly  commeth  the  darke  night ;  but  the  evening
doth  substitute  and  prolong  the  day  a  good  while  after
by  twilight.  After  which  time  the  residue  of  the  night
receiveth  light  of  the  Moone  and  Starres,  untill  the
breake  of  the  day,  which  giveth  also  a  certaine  light
before  the  Sunnes  rising ;  so  that  by  these  meanes  the
nights  are  seldome  darke ;  which  is  verified  in  all  parts  of
the  world,  but  least  in  the  middle  Zone  under  the
Equinoctiall,  where  the  twilights  are  short,  and  the
nights  darker  then  in  any  other  place,  because  the  Sunne
goeth  under  their  horizon  so  deepe,  even  to  their  anti-
podes. We  see  in  England  in  the  Summer  nights,  when
the  Sunne  goeth  not  farre  under  the  horizon,  that  by
the  light  of  the  Moone  &  Starres  we  may  travell  all
night,  and  if  occasion  were,  do  some  other  labour  also.
And  there  is  no  man  that  doubteth  whether  our  cattell
can  see  to  feed  in  the  nights,  seeing  we  are  so  well
certified  therof  by  our  experience :  and  by  reason  of  the
sphere  our  nights  should  be  darker  then  any  time  under
the  poles.

The  Astronomers  consent  that  the  Sunne  descending

274

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  ad.

1578.
from  our  upper  hemisphere  at  the  1 8  parallel  under  the
horizon  maketh  an  end  of  twilight,  so  that  at  length
the  darke  night  insueth,  and  that  afterward  in  the  morn-
ing the  Sun  approching  againe  within  as  many  parallels,
doth  drive  away  the  night  by  accesse  of  the  twilight.
Againe,  by  the  position  of  the  sphere  under  the  pole,
the  horizon,  and  the  equinoctiall  are  all  one.  These
revolutions  therefore  that  are  parallel  to  the  equinoctiall
are  also  parallel  to  the  horizon,  so  that  the  Sunne  de-
scending under  that  horizon,  and  there  describing  certaine
parallels  not  farre  distant,  doth  not  bring  darke  nights  to
those  regions  untill  it  come  to  the  parallels  distant  18  [III.  57.]
degrees  from  the  equinoctiall,  that  is,  about  the  21  degree
of  Scorpio,  which  will  be  about  the  4  day  of  our
November,  and  after  the  Winter  solstitium,  the  Sunne
returning  backe  againe  to  the  9  degree  of  Aquarius,
which  will  be  about  the  1 9  of  January ;  during  which
time  onely,  that  is,  from  the  4  day  of  November  untill
the  19  day  of  January,  which  is  about  six  weeks  space,
those  regions  do  want  the  commodity  of  twilights :
therefore,  during  the  time  of  these  sayd  six  moneths  of
darknesse  under  the  poles,  the  night  is  destitute  of  the
benefit  of  the  Sunne  and  the  sayd  twilights  onely  for  the  The  regions

space  of  six  weeks  or  thereabout. And  yet  neither  this  under  the  poles

F  r •  1 • •  ^1 ^  1 r  1  r zvant  twihzhts

time  or  six  weeks  is  without  remedy  rrom  heaven;  tor  i^utsixe weeks

the  Moone  with  her  increased  light  hath  accesse  at  that

time,  and  illuminateth  the  moneths  lacking  light every

one of  themselves severally halfe the course of that

moneth,  by  whose  benefit  it  commeth  to  passe  that  the

night  named  extreame  darke  possesseth  those  regions  no

longer  then  one  moneth,  neither  that  continually,  or  all

at  one  time,  but  this  also  divided  into  two  sorts  of  shorter

nights,  of  the  which  either  of  them  indureth  for  the  space

of  1 5  dayes,  and  are  illuminate  of  the  Moone  accordingly.

And  this  reason  is  gathered  out  of  the  sphere,  whereby

we  may  testifie  that  the  Summers  are  warme  and  fruitfull,

and  the  Winters  nights  under  the  pole  are  tolerable  to

living  creatures. And  if  it  be  so  that  the  Winter  and

275

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.
Winter  nights  time  of  darknesse  there  be  very  colde,  yet  hath  not  nature
^^der  the  pole  j^f^  them  unprovided  therefore : for  there  the  beasts  are
limns  creli- covered  with  haire  so  much  the  thicker  in  how  much  the
tures.  vehemency  of  colde  is  greater ; by  reason  whereof  the

best  and  richest  furres  are  brought  out  of  the  coldest
regions.  Also  the  fowles  of  these  colde  countreys  have
thicker  skinnes,  thicker  feathers,  and  more  stored  of
downe  then  in  other  hot  places.  Our  English  men  that
travell  to  S.  Nicholas,  and  go  a  fishing  to  Wardhouse,
enter  farre  within  the  circle  Arctike,  and  so  are  in  the
frozen  Zone,  and  yet  there,  aswell  as  in  Island  and  all
along  those  Northerne  Seas,  they  finde  the  greatest  store
of  the  greatest  fishes  that  are ;  as  Whales,  &c.  and  also
abundance  of  meane  fishes  ;  as  Herrings,  Cods,  Haddocks,
Brets,  &c.  which  argueth  that  the  sea  as  well  as  the  land
may  be  and  is  well  frequented  and  inhabited  in  the  colde
countreys.
Jn  objection  But  some  perhaps  will  marvell  there  should  be  such
ojmeta  incog-  temperate  places  in  the  regions  about  the  poles,  when  at
under  62  degrees  in  latitude  our  captaine  Frobisher  &
his  company  were  troubled  with  so  many  and  so  great
mountaines  of  fleeting  ice,  with  so  great  stormes  of  colde,
with  such  continuall  snow  on  tops  of  mountaines,  and
with  such  barren  soile,  there  being  neither  wood  nor
trees,  but  low  shrubs,  and  such  like.  To  all  which
objections  may  be  answered  thus  :  First,  those  infinite
Islands  of  ice  were  ingendred  and  congealed  in  time  of
Winter,  and  now  by  the  great  heat  of  Summer  were
thawed,  and  then  by  ebs,  flouds,  winds,  and  currents,
were  driven  to  and  fro,  and  troubled  the  fleet ;  so  that
this  is  an  argument  to  prove  the  heat  in  Summer  there
to  be  great,  that  was  able  to  thaw  so  monstrous  moun-
taines of  ice.  As  for  continuall  snow  on  tops  of  moun-
taines, it  is  there  no  otherwise  then  is  in  the  hotest  part
of  the  middle  Zone,  where  also  lieth  great  snow  all  the
Summer  long  upon  tops  of  mountaines,  because  there  is
not  sufficient  space  for  the  Sunnes  reflection,  whereby  the
snow should be molten. Touching the  colde stormy

276

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  ad.

1578.
winds  and  the  barrennesse  of  the  country,  it  is  there  as
it  is  in  Cornwall  and  Devonshire  in  England,  which  parts
though  we  know  to  be  fruitfuU  and  fertile,  yet  on  the
North  side  thereof  all  alongst  the  coast  within  seven  or
eight  miles  off  the  sea  there  can  neither  hedge  nor  tree
grow,  although  they  be  diligently  by  arte  husbanded  and
seene  unto :  and  the  cause  thereof  are  the  Northerne
driving  winds,  which  comming  from  the  sea  are  so  bitter
and  sharpe  that  they  kill  all  the  yoong  &  tender  plants,
and  suffer  scarse  any  thing  to  grow ;  and  so  is  it  in  the
Islands  of  Meta  incognita,  which  are  subject  most  to  Meta  incog-
East  &  Northeastern  winds,  which  the  last  yere  choaked  ntta  inhabited.
up  the  passage  so  with  ice  that  the  fleet  could  hardly
recover  their  port.  Yet  notwithstanding  all  the  objec-
tions that  may  be,  the  countrey  is  habitable ;  for  there
are  men,  women,  children,  &  sundry  kind  of  beasts  in
great  plenty,  as  beares,  deere,  hares,  foxes  and  dogs :  all
kinde  of  flying  fowles,  as  ducks,  seamewes,  wilmots,  par-
tridges, larks,  Crowes,  hawks,  and  such  like,  as  in  the
third  booke  you  shall  understand  more  at  large.  Then
it  appeareth  that  not  onely  the  middle  Zone  but  also  the
Zones  about  the  poles  are  habitable.

Which thing being well considered, and familiarly  Captaine
knowen to  our  Generall captaine Frobisher,  aswell for  ^^"^^
that  he  is  thorowly  furnished of  the  knowledge  of  the  -^  *  '

sphere  and  all  other  skilles  appertaining  to  the  arte  of
navigation,  as  also  for  the  confirmation  he  hath  of  the
same  by  many  yeres  experience  both  by  sea  and  land,  and
being  persuaded  of  a  new  and  nerer  passage  to  Cataya
then  by  Capo  de  buona  Speran9a,  which  the  Portugals
yerely  use :  he  began  first  with  himselfe  to  devise,  and
then  with  his  friends  to  conferre,  and  layed  a  plaine  plat
unto  them  that  that  voyage  was  not  onely  possible  by
the  Northwest,  but  also  he  could  prove  easie  to  be  per-
formed. And  further,  he  determined  and  resolved  with
himselfe  to  go  make  full  proofe  thereof,  and  to  accom-
plish or  bring  true  certificate  of  the  truth,  or  els  never  [III.  58.]
to  returne  againe,  knowing  this  to  be  the  only  thing  of

277

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

the  world  that  was  left  yet  undone,  whereby  a  notable
minde  might  be  made  famous  and  fortunate.  But
although  his  will  were  great  to  performe  this  notable
voyage,  whereof  he  had  conceived  in  his  minde  a  great
hope  by  sundry  sure  reasons  and  secret  intelligence,  which
here  for  sundry  causes  I  leave  untouched,  yet  he  wanted
altogether  meanes  and  ability  to  set  forward,  and  per-
forme the  same.  Long  time  he  conferred  with  his
private  friends  of  these  secrets,  and  made  also  many  offers
for  the  performing  of  the  same  in  effect  unto  sundry
merchants  of  our  countrey  above  15  yeres  before  he
attempted  the  same,  as  by  good  witnesse  shall  well
appeare  (albeit  some  evill  willers  which  challenge  to
themselves  the  fruits  of  other  mens  labours  have  greatly
injured  him  in  the  reports  of  the  same,  saying  that  they
have  bene  the  first  authours  of  that  action,  and  that  they
have  learned  him  the  way,  which  themselves  as  yet  have
never  gone)  but  perceiving  that  hardly  he  was  hearkened
unto  of  the  merchants,  which  never  regard  vertue  without
sure,  certaine,  and  present  gaines,  he  repaired  to  the
Court  (from  whence,  as  from  the  fountaine  of  our
Common  wealth,  all  good  causes  have  their  chiefe  in-
crease and  maintenance)  and  there  layed  open  to  many
great  estates  and  learned  men  the  plot  and  summe  of  his
device.  And  amongst  many  honourable  minds  which
favoured  his  honest  and  commendable  enterprise,  he  was
specially  bound  and  beholding  to  the  right  honourable
Ambrose  Dudley  earle  of  Warwicke,  whose  favourable
minde  and  good  disposition  hath  alwayes  bene  ready  to
countenance  and  advance  all  honest  actions  with  the
authours  and  executers  of  the  same  :  and  so  by  meanes
of  my  lord  his  honourable  countenance  he  received  some
comfort  of  his  cause,  and  by  litle  and  litle,  with  no  small
expense  and  paine  brought  his  cause  to  some  perfection,
and  had  drawen  together  so  many  adventurers  and  such
summes  of  money  as  might  well  defray  a  reasonable
charge  to  furnish  himselfe  to  sea  withall.

He  prepared  two  small  barks  of  twenty  and  five  and

278

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  ad.

1578.

twenty  tunne  a  piece,  wherein  he  intended  to  accomplish
his  pretended  voyage.  Wherefore,  being  furnished  with
the  foresayd  two  barks,  and  one  small  pinnesse  of  ten
tun  burthen,  having  therein  victuals  and  other  necessaries
for  twelve  moneths  provision,  he  departed  upon  the  sayd
voyage  from  Blacke-wall  the  15  of  June  anno  Domini
1576.

One  of  the  barks  wherein  he  went  was  named  The
Gabriel,  and  the  other  The  Michael ;  and  sailing  North-
west from  England  upon  the  1 1  of  July  he  had  sight
of  an  high  and  ragged  land,  which  he  judged  to  be
Frisland  (whereof  some  authors  have  made  mention)  but
durst  not  approch  the  same  by  reason  of  the  great  store
of  ice  that  lay  alongst  the  coast,  and  the  great  mists  that
troubled  them  not  a  litle.  Not  farre  from  thence  he
lost  company  of  his  small  pinnesse,  which  by  meanes  of
the  great  storme  he  supposed  to  be  swallowed  up  of  the
Sea,  wherein  he  lost  onely  foure  men.

Also  the  other  barke  named  The  Michael  mistrusting  The  Michael
the  matter,  conveyed  themselves  privily  away  from  him,  returned
and  returned home,  with  great report  that  he  was  cast  ^°^^-
away.

The  worthy  captaine  notwithstanding  these  discomforts,
although  his  mast  was  sprung,  and  his  toppe  mast  blowen
overboord  with  extreame  foule  weather,  continued  his
course  towards  the  Northwest,  knowing  that  the  sea  at
length  must  needs  have  an  ending,  &  that  some  land
should  have  a  beginning  that  way ;  and  determined  there-
fore at  the  least  to  bring  true  proofe  what  land  and  sea
the  same  might  be  so  farre  to  the  Northwestwards,  be-
yond any  man  that  hath  heretofore  discovered.  And  the
twentieth  of  July  he  had  sight  of  an  high  land,  which  he
called  Queene  Elizabeths  Forland,  after  her  Majesties
name.  And  sailing  more  Northerly  alongst  that  coast,
he  descried  another  forland  with  a  great  gut,  bay,  or
passage,  divided  as  it  were  two  maine  lands  or  continents
asunder.  There  he  met  with  store  of  exceeding  great
ice  all  this  coast  along,  and  coveting  still  to  continue  his

279

A.D.
1578.

Frobishers
first  entrance
within  ye
streights.

Frobishers
straights.

[III.  59.]

Deere.

The  first  sight
of  ye  Savages.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

course  to  the  Northwards,  was  alwayes  by  contrary  winde
deteined  overthwart  these  straights,  and  could  not  get
beyond.  Within  few  dayes  after  he  perceived  the  ice
to  be  well  consumed  and  gone,  either  there  ingulfed  in
by  some  swift  currents  or  indrafts,  carried  more  to  the
Southwards  of  the  same  straights,  or  els  conveyed  some
other  way :  wherefore  he  determined  to  make  proofe  of
this  place,  to  see  how  farre  that  gut  had  continuance,
and  whether  he  might  carry  himselfe  thorow  the  same
into  some  open  sea  on  the  backe  side,  whereof  he  con-
ceived no  small  hope,  and  so  entred  the  same  the  one
and  twentieth  of  July,  and  passed  above  fifty  leagues
therein,  as  he  reported,  having  upon  either  hand  a  great
maine  or  continent.  And  that  land  upon  his  right  hand
as  he  sailed  Westward  he  judged  to  be  the  continent  of
Asia,  and  there  to  be  divided  from  the  firme  of  America,
which  lieth  upon  the  left  hand  over  against  the  same.

This  place  he  named  after  his  name,  Frobishers
streights,  like  as  Magellanus  at  ye  Southwest  end  of
the  world,  having  discovered  the  passage  to  the  South
sea  (where  America  is  divided  from  the  continent  of
that  land,  which  lieth  under  the  South  pole)  and  called
the  same  straights,  Magellanes  straits.

After  he  had  passed  60  leagues  into  this  foresayd
straight,  he  went  ashore,  and  found  signes  where  fire
had  bene  made.

He  saw  mighty  deere  that  seemed  to  be  mankinde,
which  ranne  at  him,  and  hardly  he  escaped  with  his
life  in  a  narrow  way,  where  he  was  faine  to  use  defence
and  policy  to  save  his  life.

In  this  place  he  saw  and  perceived  sundry  tokens  of
the  peoples  resorting  thither.  And  being  ashore  upon
the  top  of  a  hill,  he  perceived  a  number  of  small  things
fleeting  in  the  sea  afarre  off,  which  he  supposed  to  be
porposes  or  scales,  or  some  kinde  of  strange  fish ;  but
comming  neerer,  he  discovered  them  to  be  men  in  small
boats  made  of  leather.  And  before  he  could  descend
downe  from  the  hill,  certaine  of  those  people  had  almost

280

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  a.d.

'578.
cut  off  his  boat  from  him,  having  stollen  secretly  be-
hinde  the  rocks  for  that  purpose,  where  he  speedily
hasted  to  his  boat,  and  bent  himselfe  to  his  halberd,
and  narrowly  escaped  the  danger,  and  saved  his  boat.
Afterwards  he  had  sundry  conferences  with  them,  and
they  came  aboord  his  ship,  and  brought  him  salmon  Salmon.
and  raw  flesh  and  fish,  and  greedily  devoured  the  same
before  our  mens  faces.  And  to  shew  their  agility,  they
tried  many  masteries  upon  the  ropes  of  the  ship  after
our  mariners  fashion,  and  appeared  to  be  very  strong
of  their  armes,  and  nimble  of  their  bodies.  They  ex-
changed coats  of  scales,  and  beares  skinnes,  and  such
like,  with  our  men ;  and  received  belles,  looking  glasses,
and  other  toyes,  in  recompense  thereof  againe.  After
great  curtesie,  and  many  meetings,  our  mariners,  con-
trary to  their  captaines  direction,  began  more  easily  to
trust  them ;  and  five  of  our  men  going  ashore  were  by  Five  Englisk-
them  intercepted  with  their  boat,  and  were  never  since  ^^^  ^T^^'j
heard  of  to  this  day  againe :  so  that  the  captaine  being  ^j^^^
destitute  of  boat,  barke,  and  all  company,  had  scarsely
sufficient  number  to  conduct  backe  his  barke  againe.
He  could  now  neither  convey  himselfe  ashore  to  rescue
his  men  (if  he  had  bene  able)  for  want  of  a  boat ;  and
againe  the  subtile  traitours  were  so  wary,  as  they  would
after  that  never  come  within  our  mens  danger.  The
captaine  notwithstanding  desirous  to  bring  some  token
from  thence  of  his  being  there,  was  greatly  discontented
that  he  had  not  before  apprehended  some  of  them :
and  therefore  to  deceive  the  deceivers  he  wrought  a
prety  policy ;  for  knowing  wel  how  they  greatly  delighted
in  our  toyes,  and  specially  in  belles,  he  rang  a  prety
lowbell,  making  signes  that  he  would  give  him  the  same
that  would  come  and  fetch  it.  And  because  they  would
not  come  within  his  danger  for  feare,  he  flung  one
bell  unto  them,  which  of  purpose  he  threw  short,  that
it  might  fall  into  the  sea  and  be  lost.  And  to  make  Taking  of  the
them  more  greedy  of  the  matter  he  rang  a  louder  bell,  first  lavage.
so that  in the end one of  them came nere the ship

A.D.

1578.

Frobishers  re-
turne.

The  taking
possession  of
Meta  incog-
nita.

How  the  ore
was  found  by
chance.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

side  to  receive  the  bel;  which  when  he  thought  to
take  at  the  captaines  hand,  he  was  thereby  taken  him-
selfe :  for  the  captaine  being  readily  provided  let  the
bell  fall,  and  caught  the  man  fast,  and  plucked  him
with  maine  force  boat  and  all  into  his  barke  out  of
the  sea.  Whereupon  when  he  found  himselfe  in  cap-
tivity, for  very  choler  and  disdaine  he  bit  his  tongue
in  twaine  within  his  mouth :  notwithstanding,  he  died
not  thereof,  but  lived  untill  he  came  in  England,  and
then  he  died  of  cold  which  he  had  taken  at  sea.

Now  with  this  new  pray  (which  was  a  sufficient  wit-
nesse  of  the  captaines  farre  and  tedious  travell  towards
the  unknowen  parts  of  the  world,  as  did  well  appeare
by  this  strange  infidell,  whose  like  was  never  seene,
read,  nor  heard  of  before,  and  whose  language  was
neither  knowen  nor  understood  of  any)  the  sayd  cap-
taine Frobisher  returned  homeward,  and  arrived  in
England  in  Harwich  the  2  of  October  following,  and
thence  came  to  London  1576,  where  he  was  highly
commended  of  all  men  for  his  great  and  notable  at-
tempt, but  specially  famous  for  the  great  hope  he
brought  of  the  passage  to  Cataya.

And  it  is  especially  to  be  remembred  that  at  their
first  arrivall  in  those  parts  there  lay  so  great  store  of
ice  all  the  coast  along  so  thicke  together,  that  hardly
his  boat  could  passe  unto  the  shore.  At  length,  after
divers  attempts  he  commanded  his  company,  if  by  any
possible  meanes  they  could  get  ashore,  to  bring  him
whatsoever  thing  they  could  first  finde,  whether  it  were
living  or  dead,  stocke  or  stone,  in  token  of  Christian
possession,  which  thereby  he  tooke  in  behalfe  of  the
Queenes  most  excellent  Majesty,  thinking  that  thereby
he  might  justify  the  having  and  injoying  of  the  same
things  that  grew  in  these  unknowen  parts.

Some  of  his  company  brought  floures,  some  greene
grasse ;  and  one  brought  a  piece  of  blacke  stone  much
like  to  a  sea  cole  in  colour,  which  by  the  waight
seemed  to  be some kinde  of  metall  or  minerall. This

GEORGE BEST'S DISCOURSE  ad.

1578.
was  a  thing of no account in  the judgement  of  the
captaine  at the first  sight; and  yet for novelty  it  was
kept  in  respect  of  the  place  from  whence  it  came.

After  his  arrivall  in  London,  being  demanded  of
sundry  his  friends  what  thing  he  had  brought  them
home  out  of  that  countrey,  he  had  nothing  left  to
present  them  withall  but  a  piece  of  this  blacke  stone.  [III.  60.]
And  it  fortuned  a  gentlewoman  one  of  the  adventurers
wives  to  have  a  piece  therof,  which  by  chance  she  threw
and  burned  in  the  fire,  so  long,  that  at  the  length  being
taken  forth,  and  quenched  in  a  litle  vineger,  it  glistered
with  a  bright  marquesset  of  golde.  Whereupon  the
matter  being  called  in  some  question,  it  was  brought  to
certaine  Goldfiners  in  London  to  make  assay  thereof,
who  gave  out  that  it  held  golde,  and  that  very  richly
for  the  quantity.  Afterwards,  the  same  Goldfiners  pro-  ^^^^y  adven-
mised  great  matters  thereof  if  there  were  any  store  to  ''*^^'''^"
be  found,  and  offered  themselves  to  adventure  for  the
searching  of  those  parts  from  whence  the  same  was
brought.  Some  that  had  great  hope  of  the  matter
sought  secretly  to  have  a  lease  at  her  Majesties  hands
of  those  places,  whereby  to  injoy  the  masse  of  so  great
a  publike  profit  unto  their  owne  private  gaines.

In  conclusion,  the hope  of  more of  the same  golde
ore  to  be  found  kindled  a  greater  opinion  in  the  hearts
of  many to advance the voyage againe. Whereupon
preparation  was  made  for  a  new  voyage  against  the  yere
following,  and the captaine more specially directed by
commission for  the searching more of this golde ore  -^^  the  second
then for the searching: any further discovery of the  ""^^^^^  '^°^'
passage. And  being  well  accompanied  with  divers  resolute  ^^-^^^  ^^^/^
and  forward  gentlemen,  her  Majesty  then lying at the  for  the  bring-
right  honourable  the  lord  of  Warwicks  house  in  Essex,  ingofore.
he came to take his  leave,  and kissing her hignesse
hands,  with gracious countenance  & comfortable  words
departed  toward  his  charge.

[A  true
283

A.D.

1577-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  true  report  of  such  things  as  happened  in  the
second  voyage  of  captaine  Frobisher,  pretended
for  the  discovery  of  a  new  passage  to  Cataya,
China  and  the  East  India,  by  the  Northwest.
Ann.  Dom. 1577.

Eing  furnished  with  one  tall  ship  of  her
Majesties,  named  The  Ayde,  of  two
hundred  tunne,  and  two  other  small
barks,  the  one  named  The  Gabriel,  the
other  The  Michael,  about  thirty  tun  a
piece,  being  fitly  appointed  with  men,
munition,  victuals,  and  all  things  neces-
sary for  the  voyage,  the  sayd  captaine  Frobisher,  with
the  rest  of  his  company  came  aboord  his  ships  riding  at
Blackwall,  intending  (with  Gods  helpe)  to  take  the  first
winde  and  tide  serving  him,  the  25  day  of  May,  in  the
yere  of  our  Lord  God  1577.

The  names  of  such  gentlemen  as  attempted  this  dis-
covery, and  the  number  of  souldiers  and  mariners  in
ech  ship,  as  followeth.

ABoord  the  Ayd  being  Admirall  were  the  number  of
100  men  of  all  sorts,  whereof  30  or  moe  were
Gentlemen  and  Souldiers,  the  rest  sufficient  and  tall
Sailers.

Aboord  the  Gabriel  being  Viceadmirall,  were  in
all  18  persons,  whereof  sixe  were  Souldiers,  the  rest
Mariners.

Aboord  the  Michael  were  16  persons,  whereof  five
were  Souldiers,  the  rest  Mariners.

28^

MARTIN FROBISHER

Aboord  the
Ayde  was

Generall  of  the
whole  com-
pany for  her
Majesty

His  Lieutenant
His  Ensigne
Corporall  of  the
shot

A.D.

1577-

The  rest  of  the
gentlemen

The  Master
The  Mate
The  Pilot
The  Master
gunner

Martin  Frobisher.

George  Best.
Richard  Philpot.

Francis  Forder.

Henry  Carew.
Edmund  Stafford.
John  Lee.
M.  Harvie.
Mathew  Kinersley.
Abraham  Lins.
Robert  Kinersley.
Francis  Brakenbury.
William  Armshow.

Christopher  Hall.
Charles  Jackman.
Andrew  Dier.

Richard  Cox.

Edward  Fenton.
William  Tamfield.
William  Smyth.

Gilbert  Yorke.
Thomas  Chamberlaine.
James  Beare.

[III.  6i.]

Aboord  the I  -^  "  r- ^^

r^  T_  •  11  -s  ^ne  (jentleman-

Gabriell  was )  ^r',  a/t  •  ^

(^  1  he  Maister

Aboord  the )  -r>,  "  ^ ^,
Tv«^.  1 11  < One  Gentleman-

Michaell  was  j  t^, iv/r  •  ^
(^  Ihe  Maister

ON  Whitsunday  being  the  26  of  May,  Anno  1577,
early  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  anker  at  Blackwall,
and  fell  that  tyde  downe  to  Gravesend,  where  we  re-
mained untill  Monday  at  night.  ^,  . ,

On  munday  morning  the  27  of  May,  aboord  the  Ayde  thecommm-
we received all the Communion by the Minister of  ion

285

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

Gravesend,  and  prepared  us  as  good  Christians  towards
God,  and  resolute  men  for  all  fortunes :  and  towards
night  we  departed  to  Tilbery  Hope.

Tuesday  the  eight  and  twenty  of  May,  about  nine  of
the  clocke  at  night,  we  arrived  at  Harwitch  in  Essex  and
there  stayed  for  the  taking  in  of  certaine  victuals,  untill
Friday  being  the  thirtieth  of  May,  during  which  time
came  letters  from  the  Lordes  of  the  Councell,  straightly
commanding  our  Generall,  not  to  exceede  his  complement
The  number  of  and  number  appointed  him,  which  was,  one  hundred  and
men  in  this twentie  persons :  whereupon  he  discharged  many  proper

^  *  '  men  which  with  unwilling  mindes  departed.

The  con-  He  also  dismissed  all  his  condemned  men,  which  he

demned  men thought  for  some  purposes  very  needefull  for  the  voyage,

and  towards  night  upon  Friday  the  one  and  thirtieth  of

May  we set saile, and put to the Seas againe. And

sayling Northward alongst the  East  coasts  of  England

The  first  arri-  and  Scotland,  the  seventh  day  of  June  we  arrived  in  Saint

vail  after  our Magnus  sound  in  Orkney  Hands,  called  in  latine  Orcades,
departinsfrom ,"  ,  ioi-iriTr»  i

England. ^^'^  came  to  ancker  on  the  South  side  or  the  Jiay,  and

this  place  is  reckoned  from  Blackwall  where  we  set  saile
first leagues.

Here  our  companie  going  on  lande,  the  Inhabitants  of
these  Ilandes  beganne  to  flee  as  from  the  enemie,  where-
upon the  Lieutenant  willed  every  man  to  stay  togither,
and  went  himselfe  unto  their  houses  to  declare  what  we
were  and  the  cause  of  our  comming  thither,  which  being
understood,  after  their  poore  maner  they  friendly  en-
treated us,  and  brought  us  for  our  money  such  things  as

A  Mine  ofsil-  they  had. And  here  our  Goldfiners  found  a  Mine  of  silver.

vn  found  m Orkney  is  the  principall  of  the  Isles  of  the  Orcades,
^'  and standeth in the  latitude  of  fiftie  nine degrees  and

a  halfe.  The  countrey  is  much  subject  to  colde,  answer-
able for  such  a  climate,  and  yet  yeeldeth  some  fruites,
and  sufficient  maintenance  for  the  people  contented  so
poorely  to  live.

There  is  plentie  ynough  of  Poultrey,  store  of  egges,
fish,  and  foule.

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-

For  their  bread  they  have  Oaten  Cakes,  and  their
drinke  is  Ewes  milke,  and  in  some  partes  Ale.

Their  houses  are  but  poore  without  and  sluttish
ynough  within,  and  the  people  in  nature  thereunto
agreeable.

For  their  fire  they  burne  heath  and  turffe,  the  Coun-
trey  in  most  parts  being  voide  of  wood.

They  have  great  want  of  Leather,  and  desire  our  old
shoes,  apparell,  and  old  ropes  (before  money)  for  their
victuals,  and  yet  are  they  not  ignorant  of  the  value  of
our  coine. The  chiefe  towne  is  called  Kyrway.  Kyrway  the

In this Island hath bene sometime  an  Abbey  or  a  chiefi  towne  of
religious  house  called  Saint  Magnus,  being  on  the  West  ^  Ma'mus
side  of  the  He,  whereof  this  sound  beareth  name,  through  sound  why  so
which  we passed. Their  Governour  or chiefe Lord  is  called.
called  the  Lord  Robert  Steward,  who  at  our  being  there,
as  we  understood,  was  in  durance  at  Edenburgh,  by  the
Regents  commandement  of  Scotland.

After  we  had  provided  us  here  of  matter  sufficient  for
our  voyage  the  eight  of  June  wee  set  sayle  againe,  and
passing through Saint Magnus sound having  a merrie
winde  by  night,  came  cleare  and  lost  sight  of  all  the  land,
and  keeping  our  course  West  Northwest  by  the  space  of
two  dayes,  the  winde  shifted  upon  us  so  that  we  lay  in
traverse  on  the  Seas,  with  contrary  windes,  making  good
(as  neere  as  we  could)  our  course  to  the  westward,  and
sometime  to  the  Northward,  as  the  winde  shifted. And
hereabout  we  met  with  3  saile  of  English  fishermen  from
Iseland,  bound  homeward,  by  whom  we  wrote  our  letters
unto  our  friends  in  England. We  traversed  these  Seas
by  the  space  of  26  dayes  without  sight  of  any  land,  and  Great  bodies
met  with much drift  wood, &  whole bodies of  trees,  "f^^^^/  [^~
We sawe many  monsterous iisnes and strange roules,  j.^^^.
which  seemed  to  live  onely  by  the  Sea,  being  there  so  [III.  62.]
farre  distant  from  any  land. At  length  God  favoured  us  Monstrous  fish
with  more  prosperous  windes,  and  after  wee  had  sayled ^  f^^"^^
foure  dayes  with  good  winde  in  the  Poop,  the  fourth  of  ^„^a,  ^^  ^/^^
July  the  Michaell  being  formost  a  head  shot  off  a  peece  Sea.

287

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577. .

of  Ordinance,  and stroke  all  her  sayles,  supposing  that

they  descryed  land  which  by  reason  of  the  thicke  mistes

they  could  not  make  perfit :  howbeit,  as  well  our  account

Water  being as also  the  great  alteration  of  the  water,  which  became

Diacneana niore blacke and smooth,  did plainely  declare  we  were

eth  land  to  be ^°^  farre  off  the  coast. Our  Generall  sent  his  Master

neere.  aboord  the  Michaell  (who  had  beene  with  him  the  yeere

Hands  of  ye. before)  to  beare  in  with  the  place  to  make  proofe  thereof,

who  descryed  not  the  land  perfect,  but  sawe  sundry  huge

Hands  of  yce,  which  we  deemed  to  be  not  past  twelve

leagues  from  the  shore,  for  about  tenne  of  the  clocke  at

The  first  sight  night  being  the  fourth  of  July,  the  weather  being  more

ofFrislandthe  cleare,  we  made  the  land  perfect  and  knew  it  to  be  Fris-

4.  0/ uy. lande. And the heigth being taken here, we found

our selves to be in the  latitude  of  60 degrees  and a

halfe,  and  were  fallen  with  the  South  ermost  part  of  this

land. Betweene Orkney  and Frisland are  reckoned

leagues,

Frisland  de- This Frislande sheweth a ragged and high lande,

scribed.  having  the  mountaines  almost covered over  with snow

alongst  the  coast  full  of  drift  yce,  and  seemeth  almost

inaccessible,  and  is  thought  to  be  an  Hand  in  bignesse  not

inferiour to England,  and is called of  some  Authors,

West Frislande, I thinke because it  lyeth more West

then any part of  Europe. It  extendeth  in  latitude  to

the  Northward  very  farre  as  seemed  to  us,  and  appeareth

by a description set out by two brethren Venetians,

Nicholaus and Antonius Zeni,  who being driven off

from Ireland with a  violent tempest made shipwracke

here,  and  were  the  first  knowen  Christians  that  discovered

this land about two  hundred yeares  sithence,  and  they

have  in  their  Sea-cardes  set  out  every  part  thereof  and

described  the  condition  of  the  inhabitants,  declaring  them

to  be  as  civill and  religious  people  as  we. And  for  so

much  of  this  land  as  we  have  sayled  alongst,  comparing

their  Carde  with the  coast,  we  finde  it  very  agreeable,

Jn  easie  kind  This  coast seemeth to have  good  fishing,  for  we  lying

of  Fishing. becalmed  let  fall  a  hooke  without  any  bayte  and  presently

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1577-
caught  a  great  fish called a  Hollibut,  who served the
whole companie for a dayes meate, and is dangerous
meate  for  surfetting. And  sounding  about  five  leagues
off  from  the  shore,  our  leade  brought  up  in  the  tallow
a kinde of  Corrall  almost  white, and small stones as  White  Corrall
bright  as  Christall :  and  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that  g^  '^■>'  '''^^'^-
this  land  may  be  found  very  rich  and  beneficial  if  it  were
throughly  discovered,  although  we  sawe  no  creature  there
but  little  birdes. It  is  a  marvellous  thing  to  behold  of  ^o^^^rous
what  great  bignesse  and depth some Hands  of  yce  be  f^!f'^i''^^
here,  some  seventie,  some  eightie  fadome  under  water,  where-hence
besides  that which  is  above,  seeming  Hands  more  then  they  are  sup-
halfe  a  mile  in  circuit. All  these  yce  are  in  tast  fresh,  P"^^^  ^°  '^''^^•
and  seeme  to  be  bredde  in  the  sounds  thereabouts,  or  in
some  lande  neere  the  pole,  and  with  the  winde  and  tides
are  driven  alongst  the  coastes. We  found  none  of  these
Hands  of  yce  salt  in  taste,  whereby  it  appeareth  that  they
were not  congealed of  the Ocean Sea water  which is
alwayes  salt,  but  of  some  standing  or  little  mooving  lakes  ^^^  opinion  of
or  great  fresh  waters  neere  the  shore,  caused  eyther  by  ^l^^f"^^"  ^ff

P ,  r.  (.  . .  , ■' . L IS  destroyed  b\

melted  snowe  rrom  tops  or  mountames,  or  by  continual!  experience.
accesse  of  fresh  rivers  from  the  land,  and  intermingling
with  the  Sea  water,  bearing  yet  the  dominion  (by  the
force  of  extreame  frost)  may  cause  some  part  of  salt
water  to  freese  so  with  it,  and  so  seeme  a  little  brackish,
but  otherwise  the  maine  Sea  freeseth  not,  and  therefore
there  is  no  Mare  Glaciale  or  frosen  Sea,  as  the  opinion
hitherto  hath  bene.  Our  Generall  prooved  landing  here
twice,  but  by  the  suddaine  fall  of  mistes  (whereunto  this
coast  is  much  subject)  he  was  like  to  loose  sight  of  his
ships,  and  being  greatly  endangered  with  the  driving  yce
alongst  the  coast,  was  forced  aboord  and  faine  to  surcease
his  pretence  till  a  better  opportunitie  might  serve :  and
having  spent  foure  dayes  and  nightes  sayling  alongst  this
land,  finding  the  coast  subject  to  such  bitter  colde  and
continuall  mistes,  he  determined  to  spend  no  more  time
therein,  but  to  beare  out  his  course  towardes  the  streightes
called  Frobishers  streights  after  the  Generals  name,  who
VII  289  T

A.D.

1577-

The  Stirrage
of  the  Michaell
broken  by
tempest.

The  fast  en  -
trance  of  the
straights.

[III.  63.]

Halles  Hani'

The  descrip-
tion of  the
straights.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

being  the  first  that  ever  passed  beyond  58  degrees  to  the
Northwardes,  for  any  thing  that  hath  beene  yet  knowen
of  certaintie  of  New  found  land,  otherwise  called  the
continent  or  firme  lande  land  of  America,  discovered  the
saide  straights  this  last  yere 1576.

Betweene  Frisland  and  the  straights  we  had  one  great
storme,  wherein  the  Michaell  was  somewhat  in  danger,
having  her  Stirrage  broken,  and  her  toppe  Mastes  blowen
over  boord,  &  being  not  past  50  leagues  short  of  the
straights  by  our  account,  we  stroke  sayle  &  lay  a  hull,
fearing  the  continuance  of  the  storme,  the  winde  being
at  the  Northeast,  and  having  lost  companie  of  the  Barkes
in  that  flaw  of  winde,  we  happily  met  againe  the  seven-
teenth day  of  July,  having  the  evening  before  scene
divers  Hands  of  fleeting  yce,  which  gave  an  argument
that  we  were  not  farre  from  land.  Our  Generall  in  the
morning  from  the  maine  top  (the  weather  being  reason-
able cleare)  descried  land,  but  to  be  better  assured  he
sent  the  two  Barkes  two  contrarie  courses,  whereby  they
might  discry  either  the  South  or  North  foreland,  the
Ayde  lying  off^  and  on  at  Sea,  with  a  small  sayle  by  an
Hand  of  yce,  which  was  the  marke  for  us  to  meete
togither  againe.  And  about  noone,  the  weather  being
more  cleare,  we  made  the  North  forland  perfite,  which
otherwise  is  called  Halles  Hand,  and  also  the  small  Hand
bearing  the  name  of  the  sayde  Hall  whence  the  Ore  was
taken  up  which  was  brought  into  England  this  last  yeere
1576  the  said  Hall  being  present  at  the  finding  &  taking
up  thereof,  who  was  then  Maister  in  the  Gabriell  with
Captaine  Frobisher.  At  our  arrivall  here  all  the  Seas
about  this  coast  were  so  covered  over  with  huge  quantitie
of  great  yce,  that  we  thought  these  places  might  onely
deserve  the  name  of  Mare  Glaciale,  and  be  called  the
Isie  Sea.

This  North  forland  is  thought  to  be  devided  from  the
continent  of  the  Northerland,  by  a  little  sound  called
Halles  sound,  which  maketh  it  an  Hand,  and  is  thought
little  lesse  then  the  He  of  Wight,  and  is  the  first  entrance

290

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1577-

of  the  straights  upon  the  Norther  side,  and  standeth  in

the  latitude  of  sixtie  two  degrees  and  fiftie  minutes,  and

is  reckoned  from  Frisland leagues. God  having  blessed

us  with  so  happie  a  land-fall,  we  bare  into  the  straights

which  runne  in  next  hand,  and  somewhat  further  up  to

the Northwarde,  and came as neere the shore as  wee

might  for  the  yce,  and  upon  the  eighteenth  day  of  July

our  Generall  taking  the  Goldiiners  with  him,  attempted

to  goe  on  shore  with  a  small  rowing  Pinnesse,  upon  the

small Ilande  where the Ore was taken up, to proove  ^°  ^°^^  BP^

whether  there  were  any  store  thereof  to  be  found,  but  ^r^M^J^"'
.  11  • 11 1 Ti 1  1  •  the  first  liana.

he  could  not  get  m  all  that  Hand  a  peece  so bigge as

a  Walnut, where the first  was found. But our men

which  sought  the  other  Hands  thereabouts  found  them

all  to  have  good  store  of  the  Ore,  whereupon  our  Generall

with  these  good  tidings  returned  aboord  about  tenne  of

the  clocke  at  night,  and  was  joyfully  welcommed  of  the

company  with  a  volie  of  shot. He  brought  egges,  foules,  ^S^  l^  foules

and  a  young  Seale  aboord,  which  the  companie  had  killed ■,  ^  atncog-

ashore,  and  havmg  round  upon  those  Hands  gmnes  set  set  to  catch

to  catch  fowle,  and  stickes  newe  cut,  with  other  things,  birds  withall.

he  well perceived that not long before some of  the

countrey  people  had  resorted  thither.

Having  therefore  found  those  tokens  of  the peoples

accesse  in  those  parts,  and  being  in  his  first  voyage  well

acquainted  with  their  subtill  and  cruell  disposition,  hee

provided  well  for his  better  safetie,  and  on  Friday  the

ninteenth of  July in the  morning early,  with his  best

companie  of  Gentlemen  and  souldiers,  to  the  number  of

fortie persons, went on shore, aswell to discover the

Inland  and habitation of  the people,  as also to finde

out some  fit  harborowe  for  our  shippes. And  passing

towardes  the  shoare  with  no  small difficultie  by  reason

of  the  abundance  of  yce  which  lay  alongst the  coast  so

thicke togither that hardly  any  passage through them

might  be  discovered,  we  arrived  at  length  upon  the  maine

of  Halles  greater  Hand,  and  found  there  also  aswell  as

in  the  other  small  Hands  good  store  of  the  Ore. And

291

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

leaving  his  boates  here  with  sufficient  guarde  we  passed
up  into  the  countrey  about  two  EngHsh  miles,  and  re-
covered the  toppe  of  a  high  hill,  on  the  top  whereof  our
men  made  a  Columne  or  Crosse  of  stones  heaped  up
of  a  good  heigth  togither  in  good  sort,  and  solemnely
sounded  a  Trumpet,  and  saide  certaine  prayers  kneeling
about  the  Ensigne,  and  honoured  the  place  by  the  name
The  building of Mount Warwicke, in remembrance of the Right

'^n^IrZ'  Honorable  the  Lord  Ambrose  Dudley  Earle  of  Warwick,
caUed  Mount ,  ii-jj  i  -i-  •

Warwicke. whose  noble  mmd  and  good  countenance  in  this,  as  in

all other  good  actions,  gave great encouragement and

good  furtherance. This  done,  we  retyred  our  companies

not  seeing  any  thing  here  worth  further  discoverie,  the

countrey  seeming  barren  and  full  of  ragged  mountaines

and  in  most  parts  covered  with  snow.

And thus marching towards our botes, we espied

certaine  of  the countrey  people  on  the top of Mount

The  first  sight  Warwick  with  a  flag  wafting  us  backe  againe  and  making

of  the  countne  nrQ2iX.  noise,  with  cries  like  the  mowing;  of  Buls  seeming-
people  waft- '-'  .  .  '-'  ^

ing  with  a greatly  desirous  of  conference  with  us  : whereupon  the

flagge.  Generall being therewith better acquainted, answered

them againe with the like cries,  whereat  and  with the
noise  of  our trumpets  they  seemed greatly  to  rejoyce,
skipping,  laughing  and  dancing  for  joy. And  hereupon
we  made  signes  unto  them,  holding  up  two  fingers,  com-
manding two  of  our  men  to  go  apart  from  our  companies.
The  meeting whereby  they  might  do  the  like. So  that  forthwith  two
apart  of  two q£  q^^.  j^^j^  g^  ^^^  q£  theirs  met  togither  a  good  space
with  two  of from  company,  neither  partie  having  their  weapons  about
that  countrey. them. Our  men gave  them pins  and  points  and  such
trifles  as  they  had. And  they  likewise  bestowed  on  our
men  two  bow  cases  and  such  things  as  they  had. They
earnestly  desired  our  men  to  goe  up  into  their  countrey,
and  our men off^ered them like kindnesse aboord our
ships,  but  neither  part  (as  it  seemed)  admitted  or  trusted
The  order  oj the Others curtesie. Their maner of  traffique is  thus,
thetrtraffique ^^y  ^^^  ^g^  ^q  ^^.y  downe  of  their  marchandise upon
the  ground,  so  much  as  they  meane  to  part  withal,  and

292

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
so  looking  that  the  other  partie  with  whom  they  make
trade  should  doe  the  like,  they  themselves  doe  depart,  [HI.  64.]
and  then  if  they  doe  like  of  their  Mart  they  come  againe,
and  take  in  exchange  the  others  marchandise,  otherwise
if  they  like  not,  they  take  their  owne  and  depart.  The
day  being  thus  well  neere  spent,  in  haste  wee  retired  our
companies  into  our  boates  againe,  minding  foorthwith  to
search  alongst  the  coast  for  some  harborow  fit  for  our
shippes,  for  the  present  necessitie  thereof  was  much,  con-
sidering that  all  this  while  they  lay  off  and  on  betweene
the  two  landes,  being  continually  subject  aswell  to  great
danger  of  fleeting  yce,  which  environed  them,  as  to  the
sodaine  flawes  which  the  coast  seemeth  much  subject
unto.  But  when  the  people  perceived  our  departure,
with  great  tokens  of  affection  they  earnestly  called  us
backe  againe,  following  us  almost  to  our  boates :  where-
upon our  Generall  taking  his  Master  with  him,  who  was  Another  meet-
best  acquainted  with  their  maners,  went  apart  unto  two  of  ^^SV^'^''  V

1  J  L  OUT  tftCtt  Wttft

them,  meaning,  if  they  could  lay  sure  hold  upon  them,  ^^g  of  theirs.
forcibly  to  bring  them  aboord,  with  intent  to  bestow
certaine  toyes  and  apparell  upon  the  one,  and  so  to  dis-
misse  him  with  all  arguments  of  curtesie,  and  retaine  the
other  for  an  Interpreter.  The  Generall  and  his  Maister
being  met  with  their  two  companions  togither,  after  they
had  exchanged  certaine  things  the  one  with  the  other,
one  of  the  Salvages  for  lacke  of  better  marchandise,  cut
off  the  tayle  of  his  coat  (which  is  a  chiefe  ornament
among  them)  and  gave  it  unto  our  Generall  for  a  pre-
sent. But  he  presently  upon  a  watchword  given  with
his  Maister  sodainely  laid  hold  upon  the  two  Salvages.
But  the  ground  underfoot  being  slipperie  with  the  snow
on  the  side  of  the  hill,  their  handfast  fayled  and  their
prey  escaping  ranne  away  and  lightly  recovered  their  bow
and  arrowes,  which  they  had  hid  not  farre  from  them
behind  the  rockes.  And  being  onely  two  Salvages  in
sight,  they  so  fiercely,  desperately,  and  with  such  fury
assaulted  and  pursued  our  Generall  and  his  Master,  being
altogether unarmed,  and not mistrusting  their  subtiltie

293

A.D.

1577-

The  English-
men chased  to
their  boates.

One  of  that

Countreymen

taken.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  they  chased  them  to  their  boates,  and  hurt  the
Generall  in  the  buttocke  with  an  arrow,  who  the  rather
speedily  fled  backe,  because  they  suspected  a  greater
number  behind  the  rockes.  Our  souldiers  (which  were
commanded  before  to  keepe  their  boates)  perceiving  the
danger,  and  hearing  our  men  calling  for  shot  came
speedily  to  rescue,  thinking  there  had  bene  a  greater
number.  But  when  the  Salvages  heard  the  shot  of  one
of  our  calivers  (and  yet  having  first  bestowed  their
arrowes)  they  ranne  away,  our  men  speedily  following
them.  But  a  servant  of  my  Lorde  of  Warwick,  called
Nicholas  Conger  a  good  footman,  and  uncombred  with
any  furniture  having  only  a  dagger  at  his  backe  over-
tooke  one  of  them,  and  being  a  Cornishman  and  a  good
wrastler,  shewed  his  companion  such  a  Cornish  tricke,
that  he  made  his  sides  ake  against  the  ground  for  a
moneth  after.  And  so  being  stayed,  he  was  taken  alive
and  brought  away,  but  the  other  escaped.  Thus  with
their  strange  and  new  prey  our  men  repaired  to  their
boates,  and  passed  from  the  maine  to  a  small  Hand  of
a  mile  compasse,  where  they  resolved  to  tarrie  all  night ;
for  even  now  a  sodaine  storme  was  growen  so  great  at
sea,  that  by  no  meanes  they  could  recover  their  ships.
And  here  every  man  refreshed  himselfe  with  a  small
portion  of  victuals  which  was  laide  into  the  boates  for
their  dinners,  having  neither  eate  nor  drunke  all  the  day
before.  But  because  they  knewe  not  how  long  the
storme  might  last,  nor  how  farre  off  the  shippes  might
be  put  to  sea,  nor  whether  they  should  ever  recover
them  againe  or  not,  they  made  great  spare  of  their
victuals,  as  it  greatly  behoved  them  :  For  they  knew
full  well  that  the  best  cheare  the  countrey  could  yeeld
them,  was  rockes  and  stones,  a  hard  food  to  live  withall,
and  the  people  more  readie  to  eate  them  then  to  give
them  wherewithal!  to  eate.  And  thus  keeping  verie  good
watch  and  warde,  they  lay  there  all  night  upon  hard
cliffes  of  snow  and  yce  both  wet,  cold,  and  comfortlesse.
These  things  thus  hapning  with  the  company  on  land,

294

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
the danger of  the  ships at Sea  was no lesse perilous.
For  within  one  houre  after  the  Generals  departing  in  the
morning  by  negligence  of  the  Cooke  in  over-heating,  and
the  workman  in  making  the  chimney,  the  Ayde  was  set  The  Ayde  set
on  fire,  and  had  bene  the  confusion  of  the  whole  if  by  °^r''^-
chance  a  boy  espying  it,  it  had  not  bene  speedily  with
great  labour  and  Gods  helpe  well  extinguished.

This  day  also  were  diverse  stormes  and  flawes,  and  by
nine  of  the  clocke  at  night  the  storme  was  growen  so
great,  &  continued  such  untill  the  morning,  that  it  put
our  ships  at  sea  in  no  small  perill :  for  having  mountaines
of  fleeting  yce  on  every  side,  we  went  roomer  for  one,
and  loofed  for  another,  some  scraped  us,  and  some
happily  escaped  us,  that  the  least  of  a  M.  were  as  dan-  The  great  dan-
grerous to  strike as any  rocke,  and able  to have split  ?,^''  °f^hose

^  TQCk£S  of  "^CB

asunder  the  strongest  ship  of  the  world.  We  had  a
scope  of  cleare  without  yce,  (as  God  would)  wherein
we  turned,  being  otherwise  compassed  on  every  side
about :  but  so  much  was  the  winde  and  so  litle  was  our
sea  roome,  that  being  able  to  beare  onely  our  fore-
course  we  cast  so  oft  about,  that  we  made  fourteene
hordes  in  eight  glasses  running,  being  but  foure  houres :
but  God  being  our  best  Steresman,  &  by  the  industry  of
Charles  Jackman  and  Andrew  Dyer  the  masters  mates,
both  very  expert  Mariners,  &  Richard  Cox  ye  maister
Gunner,  with  other  very  carefuU  sailers,  then  within  [III.  65.]
bord,  and  also  by  the  helpe  of  the  cleare  nights  which
are  without  darkenesse,  we  did  happily  avoide  those  pre-  ^h^t  "Without

sent  dangers,  whereat  since  wee  have  more  marvelled  then ^^  nesintmt

D ^  _ _ coutttve'^ .

in  the  present  danger  feared,  for  that  every  man  within

borde,  both  better  and  worse  had  ynough  to  doe  with  his

hands  to  hale  ropes,  and  with  his  eyes  to  looke  out  for

danger. But  the  next  morning  being  the  20  of  July,  as

God  would,  the  storme  ceased,  and  the  Generall  espying

the  ships  with  his  new  Captive  and  whole  company,  came

happily  abord,  and  reported  what  had  passed  a  shoare,

whereupon altogither upon our knees we gave God

humble  and  hartie  thankes,  for  that  it  had  pleased  him,

295

A.D.

1577-

Our  first  com-
ming  on  the
Southerland  of
the  sayd
straights.

A  Mine  of
Blacke  lead.

Jackmans
sound.

Smiths  Hand.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

from  so  speedy  peril  to  send  us  such  speedy  deliverance,
and  so  from  this  Northerne  shore  we  stroke  over  towards
the  Southerland.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  July,  we  discovered  a  bay
which  ranne  into  the  land,  that  seemed  a  likely  harborow
for  our  ships,  wherefore  our  Generall  rowed  thither  with
his  boats,  to  make  proofe  thereof,  and  with  his  goldfiners
to  search  for  Ore,  having  never  assayed  any  thing  on  the
South  shore  as  yet,  and  the  first  small  Hand  which  we
landed  upon.  Here  all  the  sands  and  clifts  did  so  glister
and  had  so  bright  a  marquesite,  that  it  seemed  all  to  be
gold,  but  upon  tryall  made,  it  prooved  no  better  then
black-lead,  and  verified  the  proverbe.  All  is  not  gold
that  glistereth.

Upon  the  two  and  twentieth  of  July  we  bare  into  the
sayde  sound,  and  came  to  ancker  a  reasonable  bredth  oflT
the  shore,  where  thinking  our  selves  in  good  securitie,
we  were  greatly  endangered  with  a  peece  of  drift  yce,
which  the  Ebbe  brought  foorth  of  the  sounds  and  came
thwart  us  ere  we  were  aware.  But  the  gentlemen  and
souldiers  within  bord  taking  great  paines  at  this  pinch  at
the  Capstone,  overcame  the  most  danger  thereof,  and  yet
for  all  that  might  be  done,  it  stroke  on  our  sterne  such  a
blow,  that  we  feared  least  it  had  striken  away  our  rudder,
and  being  forced  to  cut  our  Cable  in  the  hawse,  we
were  faine  to  set  our  fore  saile  to  runne  further  up
within,  and  if  our  stirrage  had  not  bene  stronger  then
in  the  present  time  we  feared,  we  had  runne  the  ship
upon  the  rockes,  having  a  very  narrow  Channell  to  turne
in,  but  as  God  would,  all  came  well  to  passe.  And  this
was  named  Jackmans  sound,  after  the  name  of  the
Masters  mate,  who  had  first  liking  unto  the  place.

Upon  a  small  Hand,  within  this  sound  called  Smithes
Hand  (because  he  first  set  up  his  forge  there)  was  found
a  Mine  of  silver,  but  was  not  wonne  out  of  the  rockes
without  great  labour.  Here  our  goldfiners  made  say  of
such  Ore  as  they  found  upon  the  Northerland,  and  found
foure sortes thereof  to holde  gold in good quantitie.

296

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
Upon  another  small  Hand here  was also  found  a  great
dead  fish,  which  as  it  should  seeme,  had  bene  embayed
with  yce,  and  was  in  proportion  round  like  to  a  Porpose,
being  about  twelve  foote  long,  and  in  bignesse  answer-
able, having  a  home  of  two  yardes  long  growing  out  of  The  finding  of
the snoute or nostrels. This home is wreathed and  ^!^ nicomes
straite,  like in fashion to  a  Taper made of  waxe,  and
may  truely  be thought  to  be  the  sea  Unicorne. This
home  is  to  be scene and reserved as a  Jewell by  the
Queenes  Majesties  commandement,  in  her  Wardrope  of
Robes.

Tuesday  the  three  and  twentieth  of  July,  our  General!
with  his  best  company  of  gentlemen,  souldiers  and  saylers,
to  the  number  of  seventie  persons  in  all,  marched  with
ensigne  displayde,  upon  the  continent  of  the  Southerland
(the  supposed  continent  of  America)  where,  command-
ing a  Trumpet  to  sound  a  call  for  every  man  to  repaire
to  the  ensigne,  he  declared  to  the  whole  company  how
much  the  cause  imported  for  the  service  of  her  Majestic,
our  countrey,  our  credits,  and  the  safetic  of  our  owne
lives,  and  therefore  required  every  man  to  be  conformable
to  order,  and  to  be  directed  by  those  he  should  assigne.
And  he  appointed  for  leaders,  Captaine  Fenton,  Captaine
Yorke,  and  his  Lieutenant  George  Beste :  which  done,
we  cast  our  selves  into  a  ring,  and  altogither  upon  our
knees,  gave  God  humble  thanks  for  that  it  had  pleased
him  of  his  great  goodnesse  to  preserve  us  from  such
imminent  dangers,  beseeching  likewise  the  assistance  of
his  holy  spirite,  so  to  deliver  us  in  safetie  into  our
Countrey,  whereby  the  light  and  truth  of  these  secrets
being  knowen,  it  might  redound  to  the  more  honour  of
his  holy  name,  and  consequently  to  the  advancement  of
our  common  wealth.  And  so,  in  as  good  sort  as  the
place  suffered,  we  marched  towards  the  tops  of  the
mountaines,  which  were  no  lesse  painfull  in  climbing
then  dangerous  in  descending,  by  reason  of  their  steep-
nesse  &  yce.  And  having  passed  about  five  miles,  by
such  unwieldie  wayes,  we  returned  unto  our  ships  with-

297

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

out  sight  of  any  people,  or  likelihood  of  habitation.
Here  diverse  of  the  Gentlemen  desired  our  Generall  to
suffer  them  to  the  number  of  twentie  or  thirtie  persons
to  march  up  thirtie  or  fortie  leagues  in  the  countrey,  to
the  end  they  might  discover  the  Inland,  and  doe  some
acceptable  service  for  their  countrey.  But  he  not  con-
tented with  the  matter  he  sought  for,  and  well  consider-
ing the  short  time  he  had  in  hand,  and  the  greedie
desire  our  countrey  hath  to  a  present  savour  and  returne
of  gaine,  bent  his  whole  indevour  only  to  find  a  Mine
to fraight his ships, and to  leave  the rest (by Gods

[III.  66.]  helpe)  hereafter  to  be  well  accomplished.  And  therefore
the  twentie  sixe  of  July  he  departed  over  to  the  North-
land, with  the  two  barkes,  leaving  the  Ayde  ryding  in
Jackmans  sound,  and  ment  (after  hee  had  found  con-
venient harborow,  and  fraight  there  for  his  ships)  to
discover  further  for  the  passage.  The  Barkes  came  the
same  night  to  ancker  in  a  sound  upon  the  Norther-
land,  where  the  tydes  did  runne  so  swift,  and  the  place
was  so  subject  to  indrafts  of  yce,  that  by  reason  thereof
they  were  greatly  endangered,  &  having  found  a  very
rich  Myne,  as  they  supposed,  and  got  almost  twentie
tunne  of  Ore  together,  upon  the  28  of  July  the  yce
came  driving  into  the  sound  where  the  Barkes  rode,  in
such  sort,  that  they  were  therewith  greatly  distressed.
And  the  Gabriell  riding  asterne  the  iVIichael,  had  her
Cable  gauld  asunder  in  the  hawse  with  a  peece  of
driving  yce,  and  lost  another  ancker,  and  having  but
one  cable  and  ancker  left,  for  she  had  lost  two  before,
and  the  yce  still  driving  upon  her,  she  was  (by  Gods
helpe)  well  fenced  from  the  danger  of  the  rest,  by  one
great  Hand  of  yce,  which  came  a  ground  hard  a  head
of  her,  which  if  it  had  not  so  chanced,  I  thinke  surely
shee  had  beene  cast  upon  the  rockes  with  the  yce.  The
Michael  mored  ancker  upon  this  great  yce,  and  roade
under  the  lee  thereof:  but  about  midnight,  by  the
weight  of  it  selfe,  and  the  setting  of  the  Tydes,  the
yce brake within halfe the Barkes length,  and made

29S

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
unto  the  companie  within  hoord  a  sodaine  and  fearefuU
noyse. The  next flood toward the  morning  we  weyed
ancker,  and  went further up  the straights,  and leaving
our  Ore  behind  us which  we had digged,  for  hast left
the  place  by  the  name  of  Beares  sound  after  the  Masters  Beares  sound.
name  of  the Michaell,  and  named the Hand Lecesters  Lecesters
Hand. In one of the small Hands  here we found  a ^^  '
Tombe, wherein  the  bones  of  a  dead  man  lay  together,  ^  1°^^^  ^"^'^

J  r^ r  L-  -^1  01-J a  dead  mans

and  our savage Captive bemg with us,  & being de-  ^^^^^  ^-^  ^^

manded by signes whether his countreymen had not

slaine  this  man and  eat  his  flesh  so  from  the  bones,  he

made signes to the contrary, and that he was slaine

with  Wolves  and  wild  beasts. Here  also  was  found  hid

under  stones  good  store  of  fish,  and  sundry  other  things

of  the inhabitants: as sleddes,  bridles,  kettels of fish-  ^^l^^^^'>

skinnes,  knives  of  bone,  and  such  other  like. And  our  ^^^^^  \nstru-

Savage declared unto  us the use  of all those things,  ments found

And  taking in  his  hand  one  of  those  countrey  bridles,  hid  among  the

he  caught  one  of  our  dogges  and hampred him hand-  ^°'^'^^^-

somely  therein,  as  we  doe  our  horses,  and  with  a  whip

in  his  hand,  he  taught  the  dogge  to  drawe  in  a  sled  as

we doe horses in a coach,  setting  himselfe thereupon

like  a  guide:  so  that  we  might  see  they  use  dogges  for  They  use  great

that purpose that  we do  our  horses. And we found f"^!  ^° '"l?,

■T, A^  .  Ill  r J  1  sleds,  and  litle

Since  by  experience,  that the  lesser  sort  or  dogges  they  dogs  for  their
feede  fatte,  and  keepe  them  as  domesticall  cattell  in  their  meat.
tents  for  their  eating,  and  the  greater  sort  serve  for  the
use  of  drawing  their  sleds.

The  twentie  ninth  of  July,  about  five  leagues  from
Beares  sound,  we  discovered  a  Bay  which  being  fenced
on  ech  side  with  smal  Hands  lying  off  the  maine,  which
breake  the  force  of  the  tides,  and  make  the  place  free
from  any  indrafts  of  yce,  did  proove  a  very  fit  har-
borow  for  our  ships,  where  we  came  to  ancker  under  a
small  Ilande,  which  now  together  with  the  sound  is
called  by  the  name  of  that  right  Honourable  and  ver-
tuous  Ladie,  Anne  Countesse  of  Warwicke.  And  this
is  the  furthest  place  that  this  yeere  we  have  entred  up

299

A.D.

1577-

Thirty  leagues
discovei'ed
within  the
straites.

A  good  presi-
dent of  a  good
Captain
shewed  by
Captain  Fro-
bisher.

The  maner  of
their  houses  in
this  countrey.

Whales  bones
used  in  stead
of  timber.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

within  the  streites,  and  is  reckoned  from  the  Cape  of
the  Queenes  foreland,  which  is  the  entrance  of  the
streites  not  above  30  leagues.  Upon  this  Hand  was
found  good  store  of  the  Ore,  which  in  the  washing
helde  gold  to  our  thinking  plainly  to  be  seene :  where-
upon it  was  thought  best  rather  to  load  here,  where
there  was  store  and  indifferent  good,  then  to  seeke
further  for  better,  and  spend  time  with  jeoperdie.  And
therefore  our  Generall  setting  the  Myners  to  worke,
and  shewing  first  a  good  president  of  a  painefull  labourer
and  a  good  Captaine  in  himselfe,  gave  good  examples
for  others  to  follow  him :  whereupon  every  man  both
better  and  worse,  with  their  best  endevours  willingly
layde  to  their  helping  hands.  And  the  next  day,  being
the  thirtieth  of  July,  the  Michaell  was  sent  over  to
Jackmans  sound,  for  the  Ayde  and  the  whole  companie
to  come  thither.  Upon  the  maine  land  over  against
the  Countesses  Hand  we  discovered  and  behelde  to  our
great  marvell  the  poore  caves  and  houses  of  those
countrey  people,  which  serve  them  (as  it  should  seeme)
for  their  winter  dwellings,  and  are  made  two  fadome
under  grounde,  in  compasse  round,  like  to  an  Oven,
being  joyned  fast  one  by  another,  having  holes  like  to
a  Foxe  or  Conny  berry,  to  keepe  and  come  togither.
They  undertrenched  these  places  with  gutters  so,  that
the  water  falling  from  the  hilles  above  them,  may
slide  away  without  their  annoyance :  and  are  seated
commonly  in  the  foote  of  a  hill,  to  shield  them  better
from  the  cold  windes,  having  their  doore  and  entrance
ever  open  towards  the  South.  From  the  ground  up-
ward they  builde  with  whales  bones,  for  lacke  of
timber,  which  bending  one  over  another,  are  handsomely
compacted  in  the  top  together,  and  are  covered  over
with  Sealesskinnes,  which  in  stead  of  tiles,  fence  them
from  the  raine.  In  which  house  they  have  only  one
roome,  having  the  one  halfe  of  the  floure  raised  with
broad  stones  a  foot  higher  than  ye  other,  whereon
strawing Mosse, they make their nests to sleep in.

300

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
They  defile  these  dennes  most  filthily  with  their  beastly  [HI.  67.]
feeding, & dwell so long in a place (as we thinke)  ^'J'/f^^^^^^
untill their  sluttishnes  lothing  them,  they  are  forced  to  !JgJ/j^
seeke a sweeter ayre,  and a new seate,  and are (no
doubt) a dispersed and  wandring  nation,  as the Tar-
tarians, and live in hords and troupes,  without any
certaine  abode,  as  may  appeare  by  sundry  circumstances
of  our  experience.

Here our captive being  ashore  with us,  to declare  ^  "g"^  -f^^  ¥
the  use  of  such  things  as  we  saw,  stayd  himselfe  alone -^ . ^Tfjl
behind  the  company,  and did  set  up five  small  stickes  Jganing
round  in  a  circle one  by  another,  with  one smal  bone  tkerof.
placed just in  the  middest  of all : which thing  when
one  of  our  men  perceived,  he  called  us  backe  to  behold
the  matter,  thinking that hee  had  meant  some  charme
or  witchcraft  therein. But  the  best  conjecture  we  could
make  thereof  was,  that  hee  would  thereby  his  countrey-
men should understand, that  for our five men  which
they  betrayed the  last  yeere  (whom  he  signified  by  the
five  stickes)  he was  taken  and  kept  prisoner,  which  he
signified by the bone in the midst. For afterwards  The  savage
when  we  shewed him the picture of his countreman,  <^^P^'"^^^^'^-
which the  last  yeere  was  brought  into  England  (whose  comtreimans
counterfeit  we  had  drawen,  with  boate  and  other  furni-  picture.
ture,  both as he  was in his own,  &  also in English
apparel)  he  was  upon  the  sudden  much  amazed  thereat,
and  beholding  advisedly the  same  with silence a good
while,  as though he would streine courtesie whether
should  begin  the  speech  (for  he  thought  him  no  doubt
a  lively  creature)  at  length  began  to  question  with  him,
as with his companion, and finding him dumb and
mute, seemed  to  suspect him,  as one disdeinfull,  and
would  with a  little  helpe  have  growen into choller at
the  matter,  untill  at  last  by feeling  and  handling,  hee
found him but a deceiving picture. And then with
great noise  and cryes, ceased not wondring,  thinking
that  we  could  make  men  live  or  die  at  our  pleasure.

And  thereupon  calling  the  matter  to  his  remembrance,

301

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

he  gave us plainely to  understand by  signes, that he

had  knowledge  of  the  taking  of  our  five  men  the  last

yeere, and confessing the maner of  ech thing, num-

bred  the five  men upon  his five  fingers,  and pointed

unto a  boat in our ship, which was like unto that

wherein our men were betrayed : And  when  we  made

him  signes,  that  they  were  slaine  and  eaten,  he  earnestly

denied,  and  made  signes  to  the  contrary.

The last of July the Michael returned with the

Aide to  us from the Southerland, and  came to  anker

by  us  in  the  Countesse  of  Warwicks  sound,  and  reported

that since we departed from Jackmans sound there

happened nothing  among them there  greatly  worth  the

remembrance,  untill  the  thirtieth  of  July,  when  certaine

of  our company being  a  shoare upon a small Island

within  the  sayd  Jackmans  sound,  neere  the  place  where

Another  shew the Aide rode, did espie a  long boat  with divers of

of  twenty  per-  ^^  countrev  people  therein,  to  the  number  of  eighteene
sons  of  that  y r i

tr '11 °^ twenty persons, whom so soone  as our men  per-

one  boate.  ceived,  they  returned  speedily  aboord,  to  give  notice
thereof  unto  our  company.  They  might  perceive  these
people  climbing  up  to  the  top  of  a  hill,  where  with  a
flagge,  they  wafted  unto  our  ship,  and  made  great  out-
cries and  noyses,  like  so  many  Buls.  Hereupon  our  men
did  presently  man  foorth  a  small  skiffe,  having  not
above  sixe  or  seven  persons  therein,  which  rowed  neere
the  place  where  those  people  were,  to  proove  if  they
could  have  any  conference  with  them.  But  after  this
small  boate  was  sent  a  greater,  being  wel  appointed  for
their  rescue,  if  need  required.

As  soone  as  they  espied  our  company  comming  neere
them,  they  tooke  their  boates  and  hasted  away,  either  for
feare,  or  else  for  pollicie,  to  draw  our  men  from  rescue
further  within  their  danger :  wherefore  our  men  con-
struing that  their  comming  thither  was  but  to  seeke
advantage,  followed  speedily  after  them,  but  they  rowed
so  swiftly  away,  that  our  men  could  come  nothing  neere
them. Howbeit  they  failed  not  of  their  best  endevour  in

302

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
rowing,  and having  chased  them above  two  miles  into
the  sea,  returned  into  their  ships  againe.

The morning following being the first of August,
Captaine  Yorke  with  the  Michael came into Jackmans
sound,  and declared  unto the  company there, that  the
last  night  past  he  came  to  anker  in  a  certaine  baye  (which
sithens  was named  Yorkes  sound)  about  foure  leagues  Torkes  sound.
distant  from Jackmans  sound,  being  put to  leeward of
that  place  for  lacke  of  winde,  where  he  discovered  certaine
tents of the countrey people, where going with his
company ashore, he entred into  them,  but  found the
people  departed,  as  it should  seeme,  for feare  of  their
comming. But  amongst sundry strange things which
in  these  tents  they  found,  there  was  rawe  and  new  killed
flesh  of  unknowen  sorts,  with  dead  carcasses  and  bones
of  dogs,  and I  know  not  what. They  also  beheld  (to  ^-^^  apparel
their  greatest marveile)  a  dublet  of  Canvas  made  after  -{T^^^.f^^Z-^^
the English fashion, a shirt, a  girdle, three shoes  for  ^^^  ^^^-^^  ^^^
contrary  feete,  and  of  unequall  bignesse,  which  they  well  '^ere  before
conjectured  to  be  the  apparell  of  our  five  poore  countrey-  »'^^f  t^ken
men, which were intercepted the last yeere by these  '^^P^^^^-
Countrey  people, about fiftie leagues from  this place,
further  within  the  Straights. Whereupon  our  men  being
in  good  hope,  that some  of  them  might  be  here, and  [HI.  68.]
yet  living : the  Captaine  devising for the best  left  his
mind  behind  him  in  writing,  with  pen,  yncke,  and  paper
also,  whereby  our  poore  captive  countrymen,  if  it  might
come  to their  hands,  might know  their  friends  minds,
and  of  their  arrivall,  and  likewise  returne  their  answere.
And so without  taking  any  thing  away in  their  tents,  ^  SP"^  ^^'^'"^
leaving  there  also  looking  glasses,  points, and  other  of  °L  ^P^^^'"^
our  toyes (the better to allure them  by  such  friendly
meanes)  departed  aboord  his  Barke,  with  intent  to  make
haste  to the  Aide,  to  give  notice  unto the  company  of
all  such  things  as  he  had  there  discovered :  and  so  meant
to returne  to  these  tents  againe,  hoping  that  he  might
by  force  or  policie  intrappe  or  intice  the  people  to  some
friendly  conference. Which  things  when  he  had  delivered

303

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

to  the  whole  company  there,  they  determined  forthwith
to  go  in  hand  with  the  matter.  Hereupon  Captaine
Yorke  with  the  master  of  the  Aide  and  his  mate  (who
the  night  before  had  bene  at  the  tents,  and  came  over
from  the  other  side  in  the  Michael  with  him)  being
accompanied  with  the  Gentlemen  and  souldiors  to  the
number  of  thirty  or  forty  persons  in  two  small  rowing
Pinnasses  made  towards  the  place,  where  the  night  before
they  discovered  the  tents  of  those  people,  and  setting
Charles  Jackman,  being  the  masters  Mate,  ashore  with  a
convenient  number,  for  that  he  could  best  guide  them  to
the  place,  they  marched  over  land,  meaning  to  compasse
them  on  the  one  side,  whilest  the  Captaine  with  his
boates  might  entrap  them  on  the  other  side.  But  landing
at  last  at  the  place  where  the  night  before  they  left  them,
they  found  them  with  their  tents  removed.  Notwith-
standing, our  men  which  marched  up  into  the  countrey,
passing  over  two  or  three  mountaines,  by  chance  espied
certaine  tents  in  a  valley  underneath  them  neere  unto  a
creeke  by  the  Sea  side,  which  because  it  was  not  the
place  where  the  guide  had  bene  the  night  before,  they
judged  them  to  be  another  company,  and  besetting
The  lavages them  about,  determined  to  take  them  if  they  could. But

have  boats  of ^ having  quickly  discried  our  companie,  lanched  one
sundvi  otsnes.  •' o  i  11  i-  1  ^  n

great  &  another  smal  boat,  bemg  about  16  or  18  persons,

and very narrowly escaping, put themselves to sea.

The  English Wherupon  our souldiers discharged their  Calivers,  and

men  pm sue followed  them, thinking the noise therof  being heard
those  people  of  '  ^  1111

that  countrey. to our  boats  at sea,  our  men there  would  make  what

speede  they  might  to  that  place. And  thereupon  indeede

our  men  which  were  in  the  boates  (crossing  upon  them

in  the  mouth  of  the  sound  whereby  their  passage  was  let

from  getting  sea  roome,  wherein  it  had  bene  impossible

The  swift for  US  to  overtake  them  by  rowing)  forced  them  to  put

rowingofthose  themselves  ashore  upon  a  point  of  land  within  the  sayd

peop  e.  sound  (which  upon  the  occasion  of  the  slaughter  there.

The  bloody was  since  named  The  bloody  point)  whereunto  our  men

point.  gQ  speedily  followed,  that  they  had  little  leisure  left  them

304

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1577-
to  make  any  escape. But  so  soone  as  they  landed,  ech  of
them  brake  his  C3are,  thinking  by  that  meanes  to  prevent
us,  in  carying  away  their  boates  for  want  of  Oares. And  Torkes  sound.
desperatly  returning  upon  our  men,  resisted  them  man-  J  hot  skirmish
fully  in  their  landing,  so  long  as  their  arrowes  and  dartes  -^^^^^^'^^  ^^^
lasted,  and  after  gathering  up  those  arrowes  which  our  f^fJ^Alat
men  shot  at them,  yea,  and plucking  our  arrowes out  countrey.
of  their  bodies  incountred  afresh  againe,  and  maintained
their  cause  untill both weapons and life fayled them.
And  when  they  found  they  were  mortally  wounded,  being
ignorant  what  mercy  meaneth,  with  deadly  fury  they  cast  The  desperate
themselves headlong from off  the  rockes  into the sea,  nature  of  those
least  perhaps  their  enemies  should  receive  glory  or  prey  P^°P^-
of  their  dead  carcaises,  for  they  supposed  us  belike  to  be
Canibals  or  eaters  of  mans flesh. In  this conflict  one
of  our  men  was  dangerously  hurt  in  the  belly  with  one
of  their  arrowes,  and  of  them  were  slaine  five  or  sixe,
the  rest  by  flight  escaping  among  the  rockes,  saving  two
women,  whereof  the  one  being  old  and ugly,  our  men
thought  shee  had  bene  a  devill  or  some  witch,  and  there-
fore let  her  goe : the  other being  yong,  and  cumbred  The  taking  of
with  a  sucking  childe  at  her  backe,  hiding  her  selfe  behind  ^^^  '^^ornan  13
the  rockes,  was  espied  by  one  of  our  men,  who  supposing
she  had  bene  a  man,  shot  through  the  haire  of  her  head,
and  pierced  through  the  childs  arme,  whereupon  she  cried
out,  and  our  Surgeon  meaning  to  heale  her  childes  arme,
applyed  salves  thereunto. But  she  not  acquainted  with
such  kind  of  surgery,  plucked  those  salves  away,  and  by
continuall  licking  with  her  owne  tongue,  not  much  un-  A  prety  kind
like  our  dogs,  healed  up  the  childes  arme. And  because  ''/^"■Wn

,1 J  1  ^  11,, zvhtch  nature

the  day  was  welneere  spent  our  men  made  haste  unto  f^^^heth
the  rest  of  our  company  which  on  the  other  side  of  the
water  remained  at  the  tents,  where  they  found  by  the
apparell,  letter,  and  other  English  furniture,  that  they
were  the  same  company  which  Captaine  Yorke  dis-
covered the  night  before,  having  removed  themselves
from  the  place  where  he  left  them.

And now  considering  their sudden flying from our
VII  305  u

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577.

men,  and  their  desperate  maner  of  fighting,  we  began
to  suspect  that  we  had  heard  the  last  newes  of  our  men
which  the  last  yere  were  betrayed  of  these  people.  And
considering  also  their  ravenous  and  bloody  disposition
in  eating  any  kind  of  raw  flesh  or  carrion  howsoever
stinking,  it  is  to  bee  thought  that  they  had  slaine  and
devoured  our  men :  For  the  dublet  which  was  found
in  their  tents  had  many  holes  therein  being  made  with
their  arrowes  and  darts.

[III.  69.]  But  now  the  night  being  at  hand,  our  men  with  their

captives  and  such  poore  stuffe  as  they  found  in  their
tents,  returned  towards  their  ships,  when  being  at  sea,
there  arose  a  sudden  flaw  of  winde,  which  was  not  a
little  dangerous  for  their  small  boates :  but  as  God  would
they  came  all  safely  aboord.  And  with  these  good  newes
they  returned  (as  before  mentioned)  into  the  Countesse
of  Warwicks  sound  unto  us.  And  betweene  Jackmans
sound,  from  whence  they  came,  and  the  Countesse  of
Warwicks  sound  betweene  land  and  land,  being  thought

The  narrowest  the  narrowest  place  of  the Straights  were  judged  nine

place ^  of  the leagues over at  the  least : and Tackmans sound beino;
otrattes  is  q  •  . ^

kames  over, ^po^^  the  Southerland,  lyeth  directly  almost  over  against

the  Countesses  sound,  as  is  reckoned  scarce  thirty  leagues

The  Queenes within the Straights  from the  Queenes  Cape, which is

Cape.  ^.}^g  entrance  of  the  Streits  of  the  Southerland. This  Cape

being  named Queene  Elizabeths Cape, standeth in  the

latitude of  62 degrees  and a halfe  to the Northwards

of  New  found  land,  and upon  the same continent,  for

any  thing  that  is  yet  knowen  to  the  contrary.

The  matter  of Having  now  got a  woman captive for the comfort

the  meeting  of  ^^  ^^^  man,  we  brought  them  both  together,  and  every

the  two  cap-  .  .  v  o  ^  y

tives  andtheir  ^^^^  ^'i^h  silence  desired  to  behold  the  maner  of  their
entertainment,  meeting  and  entertainment,  the  which  was  more  worth
the  beholding  than  can  be  well  expressed  by  writing.
At  their  first  encountring  they  beheld  each  the  other
very  wistly  a  good  space,  without  speech  or  word  uttered,
with  great  change  of  colour  and  countenance,  as  though  it
seemed the  griefe  and disdeine  of  their captivity had

306

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1577-
taken  away  the  use  of  their  tongues  and  utterance :
the  woman  at  the  first  very  suddenly,  as  though  she
disdeined  or  regarded  not  the  man,  turned  away,  and
began  to  sing  as  though  she  minded  another  matter :
but  being  againe  brought  together,  the  man  brake  up  the
silence  first,  and  with  sterne  and  stayed  countenance,
began  to  tell  a  long  solemne  tale  to  the  woman,  where-
unto  she  gave  good  hearing,  and  interrupted  him  nothing,
till  he  had  finished,  and  afterwards,  being  growen  into
more  familiar  acquaintance  by  speech,  they  were  turned
together,  so  that  (I  thinke)  the  one  would  hardly  have
lived  without  the  comfort  of  the  other.  And  for  so
much  as  we  could  perceive,  albeit  they  lived  continually
together,  yet  they  did  never  use  as  man  &  wife,  though
the  woman  spared  not  to  doe  all  necessary  things  that
appertained  to  a  good  houswife  indifferently  for  them
both,  as  in  making  cleane  their  Cabin,  and  every  other
thing  that  appertained  to  his  ease :  for  when  he  was
seasicke,  she  would  make  him  cleane,  she  would  kill
and  flea  the  dogs  for  their  eating,  and  dresse  his  meate.
Only  I  thinke  it  worth  the  noting,  the  continencie  of  The  skame-
them  both :  for  the  man  would  never  shift  himselfe,  f'^^^"^_^  ^^^
except  he  had  first  caused  the  woman  to  depart  out  \hoselava^e
of  his  cabin,  and  they  both  were  most  shamefast,  least  captives.
any  of  their  privie  parts  should  be  discovered,  either
of  themselves,  or  any  other  body.

On  Munday  the  sixth  of  August,  the  Lieutenant  with
all the Souldiers, for the better  garde of  the Myners
and  the  other  things  a  shore,  pitched  their  tents  in  the
Countesses  Island,  and  fortifyed  the  place  for  their  better
defence  as  well  as they  could,  and  were  to  the  number
of  forty  persons,  when  being  all  at  labour,  they  might
perceive upon the top of  a hill over against them a
number  of  the  countrey  people  wafting  with  a  flag,  and  Another  ap-
making  great  outcries  unto  them,  and  were  of  the  same  p^^^'^^i^i^^ofthe
companie,  which had encountred lately our men upon  '^^"Ij^
the other shore, being come to complaine their late
losses,  and to  entreate  (as  it  seemed)  for  restitution  of

307

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

the  woman  and  child,  which  our  men  in  the  late  conflict
had  taken  and  brought  away ;  whereupon  the  Generall
taking  the  savage  captive  with  him,  and  setting  the
woman  where  they  might  best  perceive  her  in  the
highest  place  of  the  Island,  went  over  to  talke  with
them.  This  captive  at  his  first  encounter  of  his  friends
fell  so  out  into  teares  that  he  could  not  speake  a  word
in  a  great  space,  but  after  a  while,  overcomming  his
kindnesse,  he  talked  at  full  with  his  companions,  and
bestowed  friendly  upon  them  such  toyes  and  trifles  as
we  had  given  him,  whereby  we  noted,  that  they  are  very
kind  one  to  another,  and  greatly  sorrowfull  for  the  losse
of  their  friends.  Our  Generall  by  signes  required  his
five  men  which  they  tooke  captive  the  last  yere,  and
promised  them,  not  only  to  release  those  which  he  had
taken,  but  also  to  reward  them  with  great  gifts  and
friendship.  Our  Savage  made  signes  in  answere  from
them  that  our  men  should  be  delivered  us,  and  were
yet  living,  and  made  signes  likewise  unto  us  that  we
should  write  our  letters  unto  them,  for  they  knew  very
These  people  well  the  use  we  have  of  writing,  and  received  knowledge
know  the  use  thereof,  either  of  our  poore  captive  countreymen  which
they  betrayed,  or  else  by  this  our  new  captive  who  hath
scene  us  dayly  write,  and  repeate  againe  such  words  of
his  language  as  we  desired  to  learne :  but  they  for  this
night,  because  it  was  late,  departed  without  any  letter,
although  they  called  earnestly  in  hast  for  the  same.
And  the  next  morning  early  being  the  seventh  of  August,
A  letter  sent  t^gy  called  againe  for  the  letter,  which  being  delivered
"e^° rl  t  unto  them,  they  speedily  departed,  making  signes  with
tives.  three  fingers,  and  pointing  to  the  Sunne,  that  they  meant

to returne within 3 dayes,  untill  which  time  we  heard
no more of  them, & about the time  appointed they
returned,  in  such  sort  as  you  shal  afterwards  heare.
[Ill,  70.]  This  night  because  the  people  were very  neere  unto

us,  the  Lieutenant  caused  the  Trumpet  to  sound  a  call,
and  every  man  in  the  Island  repayring  to  the  Ensigne,
he  put  them  in  minde  of  the place  so  farre  from  their

^08

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1577-
countrey  wherein  they  lived,  and  the  danger  of  a  great
multitude  which  they  were  subject  unto,  if  good  watch
and  warde  were  not  kept,  for  at  every  low  water  the
enimie  might  come  almost  dryfoot  from  the  mayne  unto
us,  wherefore  he  willed  every  man  to  prepare  him  in
good  readinesse  upon  all  sudden  occasions,  and  so  giving
the  watch  their  charge,  the  company  departed  to  rest.
I  thought  the  Captaines  letter  well  worth  the  re-
membring,  not  for  the  circumstance  of  curious  enditing,
but  for  the  substance  and  good  meaning  therein  con-
tained, and  therefore  have  repeated  here  the  same,  as
by  himselfe  it  was  hastily  written.

The  forme  of  M.  Martin  Frobishers  letter  to  the
English  captives.

IN  the  name  of  God,  in  whom  we  all  beleeve,  who
(I  trust)  hath  preserved  your  bodies  and  soules
amongst  these  infidels,  I  commend  me  unto  you.  I  will
be  glad  to  seeke  by  al  means  you  can  devise  for  your
deliverance,  either  with  force,  or  with  any  commodities
within  my  ships,  which  I  will  not  spare  for  your  sakes,
or  any  thing  else  I  can  doe  for  you.  I  have  aboord,
of  theirs,  a  man,  a  woman,  and  a  child,  which  I  am
contented  to  deliver  for  you,  but  the  man  which  I  caried
away  from  hence  the  last  yeere  is  dead  in  England.
Moreover  you  may  declare  unto  them,  that  if  they
deliver  you  not,  I  will  not  leave  a  man  alive  in  their
countrey.  And  thus,  if  one  of  you  can  come  to  speake
with  mee,  they  shall  have  either  the  man,  woman,  or
childe  in  pawne  for  you.  And  thus  unto  God  whom  I
trust  you  doe  serve,  in  hast  I  leave  you,  and  to  him  wee
will  dayly  pray  for  you.  This  Tuesday  morning  the  •
seventh  of  August. Anno 1557.

Yours  to  the  uttermost  of  my  power,

Martin  Frobisher.
I have sent  you by  these  bearers,  penne,  ynke,  and  Postscript
paper,  to  write  backe  unto  me  againe,  if  personally  you
cannot  come  to  certifie  me  of  your  estate.

309

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

The  cause  wh;) Now had the Generall altered his  determination for

™"^f proing-  any  further  into  the  Streites  at  this  time  for  any

ther within  the  further  discovery  of  the  passage,  having  taken  a  man  and

^treits  this a  woman  of  that  countrey,  which  he  thought  sufficient

•^ere.  for  the  use  of  language :  &  having  also  met  with  these

people  here,  which  intercepted  his  men  the  last  yere,  (as

the  apparell  and  English  furniture  which  was  found in

their tents,  very  well declared) he knew it  was but a

labour  lost  to  seeke  them  further  off,  when  he  had  found

them there at  hand. And considering also the short

time he had in  hand,  he  thought it best to bend his

whole  endevour  for  the  getting  of  Myne,  and  to  leave

the  passage  further  to  be  discovered  hereafter. For  his

commission directed him in  this  voyage,  onely  for the

searching  of  the  Ore,  and  to  deferre  the  further  discovery

of  the  passage  untill  another  time.

On  Thursday  the  ninth  of  August  we  began  to  make

a  smal Fort for  our  defence in  the  Countesses  Island,

and  entrenched  a  corner  of  a  cliffe,  which  on  three  parts

like  a  wall  of  good  heigth  was  compassed  and  well  fenced

with  the  sea,  and  we  finished  the  rest  with  caskes  of  the

Bests  bul- earth,  to good purpose,  and  this  was called Bests  bul-

warke.  warke,  after  the  Lieutenants  name,  who  first  devised  the

same. This  was  done  for  that  wee  suspected  more  lest

the desperate men might oppresse us with multitude,

then  any  feare  we  had  of  their  force,  weapons,  or  policie

of  battel : but  as  wisedome  would  us  in  such  place  (so

farre from home) not to be of  our selves  altogether

carelesse :  so  the  signes  which  our  captive  made  unto  us,

of  the comming downe of  his Governour or Prince,

Their  King which he called Catchoe, gave us occasion to foresee

calledCatchoe.  ^^rhat  might  ensue  thereof,  for  he  shewed  by  signes  that

this  Catchoe  was  a  man  of  higher  stature  farre  then  any

How  he  is of  our  nation  is,  and  he  is  accustomed  to  be  caried  upon

honoured. ^^^^  shoulders.

About  midnight  the  Lieutenant  caused  a  false  Alarme
to  be  given  in  the  Island,  to  prove  as  well  the  readines
of  the  company  there  ashore,  as  also  what  help  might  be

310

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad

1577-

hoped for upon  the  sudden from  the  ships  if  need  so

required,  &  every  part  was  found  in  good  readines  upon

such  a  sudden.

Saturday the eleventh  of  August the people  shewed

themselves  againe,  &  called  unto  us  from  the  side  of  a

hil over  against  us. The  General  (with  good hope  to

heare  of  his  men,  and  to  have  answere  of  his  letter)  went

over unto them,  where they presented themselves not

above  three  in  sight,  but  were  hidden  indeede  in  greater

numbers  behind  the  rockes,  and  making  signes  of  delay

with  us  to  intrappe  some  of  us  to  redeeme  their  owne,

did onely  seeke advantage to traine our  boat  about a

point  of  land  from  sight  of  our  companie : whereupon

our  men  justly  suspecting  them,  kept  aloofe  without  their  [III.  71.]

danger,  and  yet  set  one  of  our  company  ashore,  which

tooke  up  a  great  bladder  which  one  of  them  offered  us,  ^  bladder

and  leaving  a  looking  Masse  in  the  place,  came  into  the  <=hangedfor  a
.&&&  1-1  1-1  J looking glasse.

boate  agame. In  the  meane  while  our  men  which  stood

in  the  Countesses  Island  to  beholde,  who  might  better

discerne  them,  then  those  of  the  boate,  by  reason  they

were  on  higher  ground,  made  a  great  outcrie  unto  our

men  in  the  boate,  for  that  they  saw  divers  of  the  Savages

creeping  behind  the  rockes  towards  our  men,  wherupon  ^0  neweso/

the Generall presently  returned  without tidings of  his  ^L^^^f"

men.

Concerning  this  bladder  which  we  received,  our  Cap-  ^°  ^Jl^lJ^^
tive  made  signes  that  it  was  given  him  to  keepe  water  ^^^  ^^n^gfed.
and  drinke  in,  but  we  suspected  rather  it  was  given
him  to  swimme  and  shift  away  withall,  for  he  and  the
woman  sought  divers  times  to  escape,  having  loosed  our
boates  from  asterne  our  ships,  and  we  never  a  boate  left
to  pursue  them  withall,  and  had  prevailed  very  farre,
had  they  not  bene  very  timely  espied  and  prevented
therein.

After  our  Generals comming away from them they  '^^"^^-J'^'^fl^
mustred  themselves  in  our  sight,  upon  the  top  of  a  hill,  ^^^  ^^y  mpes.
to  the  number  of  twenty  in  a  rancke,  all  holding  hands
over  their  heads,  and  dancing  with  great  noise  and  songs

311

A.D.

1577-

A  skirmish
shezoed  to  those
people.

TTieir  flags

made  of
bladders.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

together :  we  supposed  they  made  this  dance  and  shew
for  us  to  understand,  that  we  might  take  view  of  their
whole  companies  and  force,  meaning  belike  that  we
should  doe  the  same.  And  thus  they  continued  upon
the  hill  tops  untill  night,  when  hearing  a  piece  of  our
great  Ordinance,  which  thundred  in  the  hollownesse  of
the  high  hilles,  it  made  unto  them  so  fearefuU  a  noise,
that  they  had  no  great  will  to  tarie  long  after.  And
this  was  done  more  to  make  them  know  our  force  then
to  doe  them  any  hurt  at  all.

On  Sunday  the  12  of  August,  Captaine  Fenton  trained
the  company,  and  made  the  souldiers  maintaine  skirmish
among  themselves,  as  well  for  their  exercise,  as  for  the
countrey  people  to  behold  in  what  readines  our  men  were
alwaies  to  be  found,  for  it  was  to  be  thought,  that  they
lay  hid  in  the  hilles  thereabout,  and  observed  all  the
manner  of  our  proceedings.

On  Wednesday  the  fourteenth  of  August,  our  Generall
with  two  small  boates  well  appointed,  for  that  hee  sus-
pected the  countrey  people  to  lie  lurking  thereabout,
went  up  a  certaine  Bay  within  the  Countesses  sound,  to
search  for  Ore,  and  met  againe  with  the  countrey  people,
who  so  soone  as  they  saw  our  men  made  great  outcries,
and  with  a  white  flag  made  of  bladders  sowed  together
with  the  guts  and  sinewes  of  beasts,  wafted  us  amaine
unto  them,  but  shewed  not  above  three  of  their  company.
But  when  wee  came  neere  them,  wee  might  perceive
a  great  multitude  creeping  behinde  the  rockes,  which
gave  us  good  cause  to  suspect  their  traiterous  meaning :
whereupon  we  made  them  signes,  that  if  they  would
lay  their  weapons  aside,  and  come  foorth,  we  would  deale
friendly  with  them,  although  their  intent  was  manifested
unto  us  :  but  for  all  the  signes  of  friendship  we  could
make  them  they  came  still  creeping  towards  us  behind
the  rocks  to  get  more  advantage  of  us,  as  though  we
had  no  eyes  to  see  them,  thinking  belike  that  our  single
wits  could  not  discover  so  bare  devises  and  simple  drifts
of  theirs. Their  spokesman  earnestly  perswaded  us  with

312

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1577-
many  intising  shewes,  to  come  eate  and  sleepe  ashore,
with  great  arguments  of  courtesie,  and  clapping  his  bare
hands  over  his  head  in  token  of  peace  and  innocencie,
willed  us  to  doe  the  like.  But  the  better  to  allure  our
hungry  stomackes,  he  brought  us  a  trimme  baite  of  raw  Great  offers.
flesh,  which  for  fashion  sake  with  a  boat-hooke  wee
caught  into  our  boate :  but  when  the  cunning  Cater  per-
ceived his  first  cold  morsell  could  nothing  sharpen  our
stomacks,  he  cast  about  for  a  new  traine  of  warme  flesh
to  procure  our  appetites,  wherefore  he  caused  one  of  his
fellowes  in  halting  maner,  to  come  foorth  as  a  lame  man
from  behind  the  rockes,  and  the  better  to  declare  his
kindnes  in  carving,  he  hoised  him  upon  his  shoulders,
and  bringing  him  hard  to  the  water  side  where  we  were,
left  him  there  limping  as  an  easie  prey  to  be  taken  of  us.
His  hope  was  that  we  would  bite  at  this  baite,  and
speedily  leape  ashore  within  their  danger,  wherby  they
might  have  apprehended  some  of  us,  to  ransome  their
friends  home  againe,  which  before  we  had  taken.  The
gentlemen  and  souldiers  had  great  will  to  encounter
them  ashore,  but  the  Generall  more  carefuU  by  processe
of  time  to  winne  them,  then  wilfully  at  the  first  to  spoile
them,  would  in  no  wise  admit  that  any  man  should  put
himselfe  in  hazard  ashore,  considering  the  matter  he  now
intended  was  for  the  Ore,  and  not  for  the  Conquest :
notwithstanding  to  proove  this  cripples  footemanship,  he
gave  liberty  for  one  to  shoote :  whereupon  the  cripple
having  a  parting  blow,  lightly  recovered  a  rocke  and
went  away  a  true  and  no  fained  cripple,  and  hath  learned
his  lesson  for  ever  halting  afore  such  cripples  againe.
But  his  fellowes  which  lay  hid  before,  full  quickly  then
appeared  in  their  likenesse,  and  maintained  the  skirmish
with  their  slings,  bowes  and  arrowes  very  fiercely,  and
came  as  neere  as  the  water  suflred  them :  and  with  as
desperate  minde  as  hath  bene  scene  in  any  men,  without
feare  of  shotte  or  any  thing,  followed  us  all  along  the
coast,  but  all  their  shot  fell  short  of  us,  and  are  of  little
danger. They had  belayed all the  coast  along  for  us,  [ill.  72.]

313

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

and  being dispersed  so,  were  not  well  to  be numbred,

A  hundreth  but  wee  might  discerne  of  them  above  an  hundreth  per-

avages. sons,  and  had  cause  to  suspect  a  greater  number. And

thus  without  losse or hurt we returned to our ships

againe.

Now  our  worke  growing  to  an  end,  and  having,  onely
with  five  poore  Miners,  and  the  helpe  of  a  few  gentle-
men and  souldiers,  brought  aboord  almost  two  hundreth
tunne  of  Ore  in  the  space  of  twenty  dayes,  every  man
therewithall  well  comforted,  determined  lustily  to  worke
a  fresh  for  a  bone  voyage,  to  bring  our  labour  to  a
speedy  and  happy  ende.

And  upon  Wednesday  at  night  being  the  one  and
twentieth  of  August,  we  fully  finished  the  whole  worke.
And  it  was  now  good  time  to  leave,  for  as  the  men
were  well  wearied,  so  their  shooes  and  clothes  were  well
worne,  their  baskets  bottoms  torne  out,  their  tooles
broken,  and  the  ships  reasonably  well  filled.  Some  with
over-straining  themselves  received  hurts  not  a  little
dangerous,  some  having  their  bellies  broken,  and  others
their  legs  made  lame.  And  about  this  time  the  yce
began  to  congeale  and  freeze  about  our  ships  sides  a
night,  which  gave  us  a  good  argument  of  the  Sunnes
declining  Southward,  &  put  us  in  mind  to  make  more
haste  homeward.

It  is  not  a  little  worth  the  memorie,  to  the  commen-
dation of  the  gentlemen  and  souldiers  herein,  who  leaving
all  reputation  apart,  with  so  great  willingnesse  and  with
couragious  stomackes,  have  themselves  almost  overcome
in  so  short  a  time  the  difficultie  of  this  so  great  a  labour.
And  this  to  be  true,  the  matter,  if  it  bee  well  weyed
without  further  proofe,  now  brought  home  doth  well
witnesse.

Thursday  the  22  of  August,  we  plucked  downe  our
tents,  and  every  man  hasted  homeward,  and  making
bonefires  upon  the  top  of  the  highest  Mount  of  the
Island,  and  marching  with  Ensigne  displayed  round  about
the  Island,  wee  gave a vollie of  shotte  for  a  farewell,

314

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577.
in  honour  of  the  right  honourable  Lady  Anne,  Count-
esse  of  Warwicke,  whose  name  it  beareth  :  and so  de-
parted aboord.

The  23 of  August  having  the  wind  large  at  West,  we
set  saile  from  out  of  the  Countesses sound homeward, They  retume.
but  the  wind  calming  we  came  to  anker  within  the  point
of  the  same  sound  againe.

The  24  of  August  about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  having  the  wind  large  at  West,  we  set  saile
againe,  and  by  nine  of  the  clocke  at  night,  wee  left  the
Queenes  Foreland  asterne  of  us,  and  being  cleere  of  the
Streites,  we  bare  further  into  the  maine  Ocean,  keeping
our  course  more  Southerly,  to  bring  our  selves  the
sooner  under  the  latitude  of  our  owne  climate.

The  wind  was  very  great  at  sea,  so  that  we  lay  a
hull  all  night,  &  had  snow  halfe  a  foote  deepe on  the  S^ow  halfe  a

hatches.  ^AutT ''

From  the  24  until  the  28  we  had  very  much  wind,
but  large,  keeping  our  course  Southsoutheast,  and  had
like  to  have  lost  the  Barkes,  but  by  good  hap  we  met
againe. The  height  being  taken,  we  were  in  degrees

and  a  halfe.

The  29  of  August  the  wind  blew  much  at  Northeast,
so  that  we  could  beare  but  onely  a  bunt  of  our  foresaile,
and  the  Barkes  were  not  able  to  cary  any  sayle  at  all.

The  Michael  lost  company  of  us  and  shaped  her  course
towards  Orkney  because  that  way  was  better  knowne
unto  them,  and  arrived  at  Yermouth.

The  30  of  August  with the  force  of  the  wind, and
a  surge  of  the sea, the Master  of  the  Gabriel  and  the  The  Master
Boatswain  were striken both overboord, & hardly  was  "-^^^i  Gabnel
the  Boatswain  recovered,  having  hold  on  a  roape  hang-  jj^Q^d.
ing  overboord  in  the  sea, and  yet  the  Barke  was  laced
fore  and  after  with  ropes  a  breast  high  within  boorde.

This  Master  was  called  William  Smith,  being  but  a
yong  man  and  a  very  sufficient  mariner,  who  being  all
the  morning  before  exceeding  pleasant,  told  his  Captaine
he  dreamed  that he  was cast  overboord, and that  the

315

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

Boatswain  had  him  by  the  hand,  and  could  not  save  him,
and  so  immediately  upon  the  end  of  his  tale,  his  dreame
came  right  evilly  to  passe,  and  indeed  the  Boatswain
in  like  sort  held  him  by  one  hand,  having  hold  on  a
rope  with  the  other,  untill  his  force  fayled,  and  the
Master  drowned.  The  height  being  taken  we  found  our
selves  to  be  in  the  latitude  of  degrees  and  a  halfe,

and  reckoned  our  selves  from  the  Queenes  Cape  home-
ward about  two  hundreth  leagues.

The  last  of  August  about  midnight,  we  had  two  or
three  great  and  sudden  flawes  or  stormes.

The first of  September  the  storme  was  growen  very

great,  and  continued  almost  the  whole  day  and  night,  and

lying  a  hull  to  tarrie  for  the  Barkes  our  ship  was  much

beaten  with the seas, every sea  almost overtaking our

poope,  so  that  we  were  constrained  with  a  bunt  of  our

saile  to  trie  it  out,  and  ease  the  rolling  of  our  ship. And

so the Gabriel not able to beare any  sayle to keepe

company  with  us,  and  our  ship  being  higher  in  the  poope,

[III.  73.] and  a  tall  ship,  whereon the  winde  had  more force to

drive,  went  so  fast  away  that  we  lost  sight  of  them,  and

left  them  to  God  and  their  good  fortune  of  Sea. The

second  day  of  September  in  the  morning,  it  pleased  God

of  his  goodnesse to  send  us  a  calme,  whereby  we  per-

The  Rudder  of  ceived  the  Rudder  of  our  ship  torne  in  twaine,  and  almost

the  Aide  torne  rgadv  to  fall  away. Wherefore  taking;  the  benefite  of  the

m  tzvatn.  • •'  ^  1 rr j  1 7-  1

time,  we  ilung  halre  a  dozen  couple  or  our  best  men  over

boord, who taking great paines under water, driving

plankes, and binding with ropes, did well strengthen

and  mend  the  matter,  who  returned  the  most  part  more

then  halfe  dead  out  of  the  water,  and  as  Gods  pleasure

was,  the sea  was calme untill the  worke  was  finished.

How  the  lati-  The  fift  of  September,  the  height  of  the Sunne being

tudes  were taken,  we  found  our  selves  to  be  in  the  latitude  of

akvayes taken degrees and a halfe. In this voyage commonly wee

m  this  voyage ^^^^^  ^^^  latitude  of  the  place  by  the  height  of  the  sunne,

TcitfiCT  With  the  •■  </  G  ^

Staffe  then because  the  long  day  taketh  away  the  light  not  onely  of
Astrolabe, the  Polar,  but  also  of  all  other  fixed  Starres. And  here

316

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1577-
the  North  Starre  is  so  much  elevated  above  the  Horizon,
that  with  the  stafFe  it  is  hardly  to  bee  well  observed,  and
the  degrees  in  the  Astrolabe  are  too  small  to  observe
minutes.  Therefore  wee  alwaies  used  the  StafFe  and  the
sunne  as  fittest  instruments  for  this  use.

Having  spent  foure  or  five  dayes  in  traverse  of  the
seas  with  contrary  winde,  making  our  Souther  way  good
as  neere  as  we  could,  to  raise  our  degrees  to  bring
our  selves  with  the  latitude  of  Sylley,  wee  tooke  the
height  the  tenth  of  September,  and  found  our  selves
in  the  latitude  of  dep^rees  and  ten  minutes.  The
eleventh  of  September  about  sixe  a  clocke  at  night  the
winde  came  good  Southwest,  we  vered  sheat  and  set  our
course  Southeast.

And  upon  Thursday,  the  twelfth  of  September,  taking
the  height,  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  and  a  halfe,
and  reckoned  our  selves  not  past  one  hundred  and
fifty  leagues  short  of  Sylley,  the  weather  faire,  the
winde  large  at  Westsouthwest,  we  kept  our  course
Southeast.

The  thirteenth  day  the  height  being  taken,  wee  found
our  selves  to  be  in  the  latitude  of  degrees,  the  wind
Westsouthwest,  then  being  in  the  height  of  Sylley,  and
we  kept  our  course  East,  to  run  in  with  the  sleeve  or
chanel  so  called,  being  our  narrow  seas,  and  reckoned
us  short  of  Sylley  twelve  leagues.

Sonday,  the  1 5  of  September  about  foure  of  the  clocke,
we  began  to  sound  with  our  lead,  and  had  ground  at
6 1  fadome  depth,  white  small  sandy  ground,  and  reckoned
us  upon  the  backe  of  Sylley,  and  set  our  course  East
and  by  North,  Eastnortheast,  and  Northeast  among.

The  sixteenth  of  September,  about  eight  of  the  clocke
in  the  morning  sounding,  we  had  6^,  fadome  osey  sand,
and  thought  our  selves  thwart  of  S.  Georges  channell
a  little  within  the  banks.  And  bearing  a  small  saile  all
night,  we  made  many  soundings,  which  were  about  fortie
fadome,  and  so  shallow,  that  we  could  not  well  tell
where  we  were.

317

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

The  seventeenth  of  September  we  sounded,  and  had
forty  fadome,  and  were  not  farre  off  the  lands  end,  finding
branded  sand  with  small  wormes  and  Cockle  shells,  and
were shotte betweene Sylley  and the lands ende, and
being  within the bay,  we  were  not  able  to  double  the
pointe  with  a  South and by  East  way,  but  were  faine
to  make  another  boord,  the  wind  being  at  Southwest  and
by  West,  and  yet could  not  double  the  point  to  come
cleere of  the lands end, to beare along the channel :
and  the  weather  cleered  up  when  we  were  hard  aboord
the  shore,  and  we  made  the  lands  end  perfit,  and  so  put
up  along  Saint  Georges  chanel. And the  weather being
very  foule  at  sea,  we  coveted  some  harborough,  because
The  arrival  of  our  Steerage  was  broken,  and  so  came  to  ancor  in  Padstow
the  Aide  at j-Qad  in  Cornewall. But  riding  there  a  very  dangerous
Cornezvall roade,  we  were advised  by  the  countrey,  to  put  to  Sea
againe,  and  of  the  two  evils,  to  choose  the  lesse,  for  there
was  nothing but  present  perill  where  we  roade :  where-
upon we  plyed  along  the  channell  to  get  to  Londy,  from
whence  we  were  againe  driven,  being  but  an  open  roade,
where  our  Anker  came  home,  and  with  force  of  weather
put  to Seas  againe,  and  about  the  three and  twentieth
Our  comming of  September,  arrived  at  Milford  Haven  in  Wales,  which
toMilford being  a  very  good  harborough,  made  us  happy  men,  that
we  had  received  such  long  desired  safetie.

About one  moneth  after  our  arrivall here, by order

from  the  Lords  of  the  Counsell,  the ship came up  to

The  arrivall Bristow,  where  the  Ore  was  committed  to  keeping  in  the

°'^%-htm''^  Castel there. Here  we found the Gabriel one of  the

Barkes,  arrived  in  good  safetie,  who  having  never  a  man

within  boord  very  sufficient  to  bring  home  the  ship,  after

the Master  was  lost,  by  good fortune,  when she  came

upon  the  coast,  met  with  a  ship  of  Bristow  at  sea,  who

conducted  her  in  safety  thither.

The  Michael Here  we  heard  good  tidings  also  of  the  arrivall  of  the

%Z7h^artT  ^^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^  Michael,  in  the  North  parts,  which
was  not  a  little  joyful  unto  us,  that  it  pleased  God  so
to  bring  us  to a safe  meeting  againe,  and  wee  lost  in

318

MARTIN FROBISHER

A.D.
1578.

1

all the voyage only one man, besides one that dyed Only  one  man
at  sea,  which  was  sicke  before  he  came  aboord,  and  was  ^^^^  ^^^
so  desirous  to  follow  this  enterprise,  that  he  rather  chose -^  *  *
to  dye  therein,  then  not  to  be  one  to  attempt  so  notable
a  voyage.

The third voyage of Captaine Frobisher, pre-  [ni.  74.]
tended  for  the discoverie of  Cataia,  by  Meta
Incognita,  Anno  Do.  1578.

He  Generall  being  returned  from  the
second  voyage,  immediately  after  his  ar-
rivall  in  England,  repaired  with  all  hast
to  the  Court  being  then  at  Windsore,  to
advertise  her  Majestie  of  his  prosperous
proceeding,  and  good  successe  in  this  last
voyage,  &  of  the  plenty  of  gold  Ore,
with  other  matters  of  importance  which  he  had  in  these
Septentrionall  parts  discovered.  He  was  courteously
enterteyned,  and  hartily  weicommed  of  many  noble  men,
but  especially  for  his  great  adventure,  commended  of  her  M.  Frobisher
Majestie,  at  whose  hands  he  received  great  thankes,  and  (commended  of
most  gracious  countenance,  according  to  his  deserts.  ^^  ajes  te.
Her  Highnesse  also  greatly  commended  the  rest  of  the
Gentlemen  in  this  service,  for  their  great  forwardnes  in
this  so  dangerous  an  attempt :  but  especially  she  rejoyced
very  much,  that  among  them  there  was  so  good  order
of  governement,  so  good  agreement,  every  man  so  ready
in  his  calling,  to  do  whatsoever  the  General  should  com-
mand, which  due  commendation  gratiously  of  her  Majes-  The  Gentk-
tie  remembred,  gave  so  great  encouragement  to  all  the  ^^^ ^°^'-
Captaines  and  Gentlemen,  that  they,  to  continue  her
Highnesse  so  good  and  honourable  opinion  of  them,  have
since  neither  spared  labour,  limme,  nor  life,  to  bring  this
matter  (so  well  begun)  to  a  happie  and  prosperous  ende.
And  finding  that  the  matter  of  the  golde  Ore  had  appear-
ance &  made  shew  of  great  riches  &  profit,  &  the  hope
of  the passage to Cataya,  by  this last  voyage greatly

319

A.D.
1578.

Commissioners
appointed  to
examine  the
goodnesse  ef
the  Ore.

A  name  given
to  Replace  new
discovered.

The  hope  of  the
passage  to
Cataya.

A  forte  to  be
built  in  Meta
Intognita.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

increased,  her  Majestic  appointed  speciall  Commissioners
chosen  for  this  purpose,  gentlemen  of  great  judgement,
art,  and  skill,  to  looke  thorowly  into  the  cause,  for  the
true  triall  and  due  examination  thereof,  and  for  the  full
handling  of  all  matters  thereunto  appertaining.  And  be-
cause that  place  and  countrey  hath  never  heretofore  beene
discovered,  and  therefore  had  no  speciall  name,  by  which
it  might  be  called  and  knowen,  her  Majestie  named  it
very  properly  Meta  Incognita,  as  a  marke  and  bound
utterly  hitherto  unknowen.  The  commissioners  after
sufficient  triall  and  proofe  made  of  the  Ore,  and  having
understood  by  sundrie  reasons,  and  substantial!  grounds,
the  possibilitie  and  likelyhood  of  the  passage,  advertised
her  highnesse,  that  the  cause  was  of  importance,  and  the
voyage  greatly  worthy  to  be  advanced  againe.  Where-
upon preparation  was  made  of  ships  and  all  other  things
necessary,  with  such  expedition,  as  the  time  of  the  yeere
then  required.  And  because  it  was  assuredly  made
accompt  of,  that  the  commoditie  of  Mines,  there  already
discovered,  would  at  the  least  countervaile  in  all  respects
the  adventurers  charge,  and  give  further  hope  &  likely-
hood  of  greater  matters  to  follow :  it  was  thought
needfull,  both  for  the  better  guard  of  those  parts  already
found,  and  for  further  discovery  of  the  Inland  and
secrets  of  those  countreys,  &  also  for  further  search  of
the  passage  to  Cataya  (whereof  the  hope  continually
more  &  more  increaseth)  that  certaine  numbers  of  chosen
souldiers  and  discreet  men  for  those  purposes  should
be  assigned  to  inhabite  there.  Whereupon  there  was  a
strong  fort  or  house  of  timber,  artificially  framed,  &
cunningly  devised  by  a  notable  learned  man  here  at
home,  in  ships  to  be  caried  thither,  wherby  those  men
that  were  appointed  to  winter  &  stay  there  the  whole
yere,  might  aswell  bee  defended  from  the  danger  of  the
snow  and  colde  ayre,  as  also  fortified  from  the  force  or
offence  of  those  countrey  people,  which  perhaps  other-
wise with  too  great  multitudes  might  oppresse  them.
And  to  this  great adventure and notable  exploit  many

320

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad

1578.
well  minded  and  forward  yong  Gentlemen  of  our
countrey  willingly  have  offered  themselves.  And  first
Captaine  Fenton  Lieutenant  generall  for  Captaine  Fro-
bisher,  and  in  charge  of  the  company  with  him  there,
Captaine  Best,  and  Captaine  Filpot,  unto  whose  good
discretions  the  government  of  that  service  was  chiefly
commended,  who,  as  men  not  regarding  peril  in  respect
of  the  profit  and  common  wealth  of  their  countrey,  were
willing  to  abide the first brunt & adventure of  those

o

dangers  among  a  savage  and  brutish  kinde  of  people,  in
a  place  hitherto  ever  thought  for  extreme  cold  not
habitable.  The  whole  number  of  men  which  had  offered,
and  were  appointed  to  inhabite  Meta  Incognita  all  the  J  hundreth
yeere,  were  one  hundreth  persons,  wherof  40  should  be  ^^^_  appointed
mariners  for  the  use  of  ships,  30  Miners  for  gathering  ^V^  ^  '^^
the  gold  Ore  together  for  the  next  yere,  and  30  souldiers
for  the  better  guard  of  the  rest,  within  which  last  number
are  included  the  Gentlemen,  Goldfiners,  Bakers,  Car-
penters, &  all  necessary  persons.  To  each  of  the
Captaines  was  assigned  one  ship,  aswel  for  the  further
searching  of  the  coast  &  countrey  there,  as  for  to  returne
&  bring  backe  their  companies  againe,  if  the  necessity
of  the  place  so  urged,  or  by  miscarying  of  the  fleet  the
next  yere,  they  might  be  disappointed  of  their  further
provision.  Being  therfore  thus  furnished  with  al  neces-
saries, there  were  ready  to  depart  upon  the  said  voyage
1 5  saile  of  good  ships,  wherof  the  whole  number  was  to  Fifteene  sayle.
returne  again  with  their  loding  of  gold  Ore  in  the  end
of  the  sommer,  except  those  3  ships,  which  should  be
left  for  the  use  of  those  Captains  which  should  inhabite
there  the  whole  yere.  And  being  in  so  good  readinesse,  [III.  75.]
the  Generall  with  all  the  Captaines  came  to  the  Court,
then  lying  at  Greenwich,  to  take  their  leave  of  her
Majestic,  at  whose  hands  they  all  received  great
incouragement,  and  gracious  countenance.  Her  high-
nesse besides other good gifts, and greater promises, , ,  . ^

o  o ^ _  o _  r  ' j^  chains  of

bestowed on the Generall a faire chaine of golde,  mid  nven  to
and the rest of  the Captaines kissed her hand,  tooke  M.  Frobisher.
VII  321  X

A.D.
1578.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

their leave, and departed every man towards their
charge.

The  names  of  the  ships  with  their  severall
Captaines.

1  In the Aide being Amirall,  was  the  ] Captaine

Generall  Frobisher.

2  In  the  Thomas  Allen  Viceadmirall  Yorke.

3  In  the  Judith  Lieutenant  generall  Fenton.

4  In  the  Anne  Francis  Best.

5  In  the  Hopewell  Carew.

6  In  the  Beare  Filpot.

7  In  the  Thomas  of  Ipswich  >  Tanfield.

8  In  the  Emmanuel  of  Exceter  [  Courtney.

9  In  the  Francis  of  Foy  Moyles.

10  In  the  Moone  Upcot.

1 1  In  the  Emmanuel  of  Bridgewater  Newton.

12  In  the  Salomon  of  Weymouth  Randal.

13  In  the  Barke  Dennis  Kendal.

14  In  the  Gabriel  Harvey.

15  In  the  Michael  J  Kinnersley.

The  sayd  fifteene  saile  of  ships  arrived  and  met  together
at  Harwich,  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  May  Anno
1578,  where  the  Generall  and  the  other  Captaines  made
view,  and  mustred  their  companies.  And  every  severall
Captaine  received  from  the  Generall  certaine  Articles  of
direction,  for  the  better  keeping  of  order  and  company
together  in  the  way,  which  Articles  are  as  followeth.

Articles  and  orders  to  be  observed  for  the  Fieete,
set  downe  by  Captaine  Frobisher  Generall,
and  delivered  in  writing  to  every  Captaine,
as  well  for  keeping  company,  as  for  the  course,
the  31  of  May.

I  TNprimis,  to  banish  swearing,  dice,  and  card-playing,

JL  and  filthy  conmunication,  and  to  serve  God  twice  a

day,  with the ordinary service usuall in Churches of

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.

England,  and to  cleare the  glasse,  according  to  the  old
order  of  England.

2  The  Admiral  shall  carie  the  light,  &  after  his  light
be  once  put  out,  no  man  to  goe  a  head  of  him,  but
every  man  to  fit  his  sailes  to  follow  as  neere  as  they
may,  without  endangering  one  another.

3  That  no  man  shall  by  day  or  by  night  depart  further
from  the  Admirall  then  the  distance  of  one  English  mile,
and  as  neere  as  they  may,  without  danger  one  of  another.

4  If  it  chance  to  grow  thicke,  and  the  wind  contrary,
either  by  day  or  by  night,  that  the  Admirall  be  forced
to  cast  about,  before  her  casting  about  shee  shall  give
warning,  by  shooting  off  a  peece,  and  to  her  shall  answere
the  Viceadmirall  and  the  Rereadmirall  each  of  them  with
a  piece,  if  it  bee  by  night,  or  in  a  fogge ;  and  that  the
Viceadmirall  shall  answere  first,  and  the  Rereadmirall
last.

5  That  no  man  in  the  Fleete  descrying  any  sayle  or
sayles,  give  upon  any  occasion  any  chace  before  he  have
spoken  with  the  Admirall.

6  That  every  evening  all  the  Fleete  come  up  and
speake  with  the  Admirall,  at  seven  of  the  Clocke,  or
betweene  that  and  eight,  and  if  the  weather  will  not  serve
them  all  to  speake  with  the  Admirall,  then  some  shall
come  to  the  Viceadmirall,  and  receive  the  order  of  their
course  of  Master  Hall  chiefe  Pilot  of  the  Fleete,  as  he
shall  direct  them.

7  If  to  any  man  in  the  Fleete  there  happen  any  mis-
chance, they  shall  presently  shoote  off  two  peeces  by
day,  and  if  it  be  by  night,  two  peeces,  and  shew  two
lights.

8  If  any  man  in  the  Fleete  come  up  in  the  night,  &
hale  his  fellow  knowing  him  not,  he  shall  give  him  this
watch-word,  Before  the  world  was  God.  The  other  shal
answere  him  (if  he  be  one  of  our  Fleete)  After  God
came  Christ  his  Sonne. So  that  if  any  be  found  amongst

us,  not of  our owne  company,  he that first descrieth [III.  76.]
any such sayle or sayles, shall give warning to the

323

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

Admirall  by  himselfe  or  any  other  that  he  can  speake  to,
that  sailes  better  then  he,  being  neerest  unto  him,

9  That  every  ship  in  the  fleete  in  the  time  of  fogs,
which  continually  happen  with  little  winds,  and  most  part
calmes,  shall  keepe  a  reasonable  noise  with  trumpet,
drumme,  or  otherwise,  to  keepe  themselves  cleere  one
of  another.

10  If  it  fall  out  so  thicke  or  mistie  that  we  lay  it  to
hull,  the  Admiral  shall  give  warning  with  a  piece,  and
putting  out  three  lights  one  over  another,  to  the  end
that  every  man  may  take  in  his  sailes,  and  at  his  setting
of  sayles  againe  doe  the  like,  if  it  be  not  cleere.

1 1  If  any  man  discover  land  by  night,  that  he  give
the  like  warning,  that  he  doth  for  mischances,  two
lights,  and  two  pieces,  if  it  be  by  day  one  piece,  and
put  out  his  flagge,  and  strike  all  his  sailes  he  hath
aboord.

12  If  any  ship  shall  happen  to  lose  company  by  force
of  weather,  then  any  such  ship  or  ships  shall  get  her
into  the  latitude  of  ,  and  so  keepe  that  latitude  untill
they  get  Frisland.  And  after  they  be  past  the  West
parts  of  Frisland,  they  shall  get  them  into  the  latitude
of  ,  and  ,  and  not  to  the  Northward  of  ;
and  being  once  entred  within  the  Streites,  al  such  ships
shal  every  watch  shoote  off  a  good  piece,  and  looke  out
well  for  smoke  and  fire  which  those  that  get  in  first
shall  make  every  night,  untill  all  the  fleete  be  come
together.

13  That  upon  the  sight  of  an  Ensigne  in  the  mast
of  the  Admirall  (a  piece  being  shot  off)  the  whole  fleete
shall  repair e  to  the  Admirall,  to  understand  such  con-
ference as  the  Generall  is  to  have  with  them.

14  If  we  chance  to  meete  with  any  enemies,  that  foure
ships  shall  attend  upon  the  Admirall,  viz.  the  Francis
of  Foy,  the  Moone,  the  Barke  Dennis,  and  the  Gabriel :
and  foure  upon  my  Lieutenant  generall  in  the  Judith,
viz.  the  Hopewel,  the  Armenal,  the  Beare,  and  the
Salomon :  and  the  other  foure  upon  the  Vizadmirall,  the

324

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

•1578.

Anne  Francis,  the  Thomas of  Ipswich,  the  Emmanuel,

and  the  Michael,

15 If  there  happen  any  disordred  person  in  the  Fleete,

that he be taken and kept in safe custodie untill  he

may  conveniently  be  brought  aboord  the Admirall,  and

there  to  receive  such  punishment  as  his  or  their  offences

shall  deserve.  -d  iv/r ^- t^ l-  l

rJy  me  Martm  Jbrobisher.

Our  departure  from  England.

'Aving  received  these  articles  of  direction  we  departed
from  Harwich  the  one  and  thirtieth  of  May. And
sayling  along  the  South  part  of  England  Westward,  we
at  length  came  by  the  coast  of  Ireland  at Cape Cleare  Cape  Cleare
the  sixth  of  June,  and  gave  chase  there  to  a  small  barke  ^^^  ^^'^^  ^
which  was supposed  to be a  Pyrat,  or Rover on the
Seas,  but  it  fell  out  indeede  that  they  were  poore  men
of  Bristow,  who  had  met  with  such  company  of  French-
men as  had  spoiled  and  slaine  many  of  them,  and  left
the  rest  so  sore  wounded  that  they  were  like  to  perish  in
the sea,  having neither hand nor foote hole to helpe
themselves  with,  nor  victuals to sustaine their hungry
bodies. Our  Generall,  who  well  understood  the  office  of
a  Souldier  and  an  Englishman,  and  knew  well  what  the
necessitie  of  the  sea  meaneth,  pitying  much  the  miserie  ^  charitable
of  the  poore  men,  relieved  them  with  Surgerie  and  salves '
to heale their hurtes, and with meate and drinke to
comfort  their  pining  hearts ;  some  of  them  having  neither
eaten nor  drunke  more  then  olives  and stinking  water
in  many  dayes  before,  as  they  reported. And  after  this
good deede done, having a large  wind, we kept our
course  upon our  sayd  voyage  without staying for the
taking  in  of  fresh  water,  or  any  other  provision,  whereof
many of  the  fleete  were  not throughly  furnished : and
sayling  towards the Northwest parts  from Ireland,  we
mette  with  a  great  current  from out  of  the  Southwest,  ^<irke  this
which caried us  (by  our  reckoning) one point  to the  '^^'■^^''^•
Northeastwards  of  our  sayd  course,  which  current  seemed

325

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

to  us  to  continue  it  selfe  towards  Norway,  and  other  the
Northeast  parts  of  the  world,  whereby  we  may  be
induced  to  beleeve,  that  this  is  the  same  which  the
Portugals  meete  at  Capo  de  buona  Speranza,  where
striking  over  from  thence  to  the  Streites  of  Magellan,
and  finding  no  passage  there  for  the  narrownesse  of  the
sayde  Streites,  runneth  along  into  the  great  Bay  of
Mexico,  where  also  having  a  let  of  land,  it  is  forced  to
strike  backe  againe  towards  the  Northeast,  as  we  not
onely  here,  but  in  another  place  also,  further  to  the
Northwards,  by  good  experience  this  yeere  have  found,
as  shalbe  hereafter  in  his  place  more  at  large declared.

Now  had  we  sayled  about  foureteene  dayes,  without
sight  of  any  land,  or  any  other  living  thing,  except
certaine  foules,  as  Wilmots,  Nodies,  Guiles,  &c.  which
there  seeme  onely  to  live  by  sea.

The  twentieth  of  June,  at  two  of  the  clocke  in  the
[III.  77.]  morning,  the  General  descried  land,  &  found  it  to  be
West  Eng-  West  Frisland,  now  named  west  England.  Here  the
Generall,  &  other  Gentlemen  went  ashore,  being  the  first
knowen  Christians  that  we  have  true  notice  of,  that  ever
set  foot  upon  that  ground :  and  therefore  the  Generall
tooke  possession  thereof  to  the  use  of  our  Sovereigne
Lady  the  Queenes  Majestie,  and  discovered  here  a  goodly
harborough  for  the  ships,  where  were  a|so  certaine  little
boates  of  that  countrey.  And  being  there  landed,  they
espied  certaine  tents  and  people  of  that  countrey,  which
were  (as  they  judge)  in  all  sorts,  very  like  those  of
Meta  Incognita,  as  by  their  apparell,  and  other  things
which  we  found  in  their  tents,  appeared.

The  Savage  and  simple  people  so  soone  as  they  per-
ceived our  men  comming  towards  them  (supposing  there
had  bene  no  other  world  but  theirs)  fled  fearefully  away,
as  men  much  amazed  at  so  strange  a  sight,  and  creatures
of  humane  shape,  so  farre  in  apparell,  complexion,  and
other  things  different  from  themselves.  They  left  in
their  tents  all  their  furniture  for  haste  behind  them,
where  amongst  other  things  were  found  a  boxe  of  small

326

land.

MARTIN FROBISHER  a,d.

1578.
nailes,  and  certaine  red  Herrings,  boords  of  Firre  tree
well  cut,  with  divers  other  things  artificially  wrought :
whereby  it  appeareth,  that  they  have  trade  with  some
civill  people,  or  else  are  indeede  themselves  artificiall
workemen.

Our  men  brought  away  with  them  onely  two  of  their
dogs,  leaving  in  recompense  belles,  looking-glasses,  and
divers  of  our  countrey  toyes  behinde  them.

This  countrey,  no  doubt,  promiseth  good  hope  of
great  commoditie  and  riches,  if  it  may  be  well  discovered.
The  description  whereof  you  shall  finde  more  at  large  in
the  second  voyage.

Some  are  of  opinion,  that  this  West  England  is  firme  Frisland  sup-
land  with  the  Northeast  partes  of  Meta  Incognita,  or  else  P^^edtobecon-
with  Groenland. And  their  reason  is,  because  the  people,  Q^ggni^nd
apparel,  boates,  and  other  things are so  like  to  theirs :
and another  reason  is,  the multitude  of  Islands  of  yce,
which  lay  betweene  it  and  Meta  Incognita,  doth  argue,
that  on  the  North  side  there  is  a  bay,  which  cannot  be
but  by  conjoyning  of  the  two  lands  together.

And  having  a  faire  and  large  winde  we  departed  from
thence  towards  Frobishers  Streites,  the  three  and  twentieth  ^-^^  ^3  "/
of  June. But first  wee  gave name  to  a  high  cliffe  in ^'^^'
West  England,  the  last  that  was  in  our  sight,  and  for  a
certaine  similitude  we called  it Charing crosse. Then  Channg
wee bare Southerly  towards the Sea, because to the  "°"^-
Northwardes  of  this  coast  we  met  with  much  driving  yce,
which  by  reason  of  the  thicke  mistes  and  weather  might
have  bene  some  trouble  unto  us.

On  Munday  the  last  of  June,  wee  met  with  many
great  Whales,  as  they  had  bene  Porposes.

This  same  day  the  Salamander  being  under  both  her  ^  Whale
corses  and  bonets,  happened  to  strike  a  great  Whale  with  ^^^""^^  ^  '^^^•
her  full  stemme,  with  such  a  blow  that  the  ship  stoode
still,  and  stirred  neither  forward  nor  backward.  The
Whale  thereat  made  a  great  and  ugly  noyse,  and  cast  up
his  body  and  taile,  and  so  went  under  water,  and  within
two dales after, there was found a  great  Whale dead

327

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

swimming  above  water, which wee supposed was that
which  the  Salamander  strooke.

The  second  day  of  July  early  in  the  morning  we  had
sight  of  the  Queenes  Foreland,  and  bare  in  with  the  land
all  the  day,  and  passing  thorow  great  quantity  of  yce,  by
night  were  entred  somewhat  within  the  Streites,  per-
ceiving no  way  to  passe  further  in,  the  whole  place  being
frozen  over  from  the  one  side  to  the  other,  and  as  it
Frobhhers  were  with  many  walles,  mountaines,  and  bulwarks  of  yce,
Streites  choked  choked  up  the  passage,  and  denied  us  entrance.  And
yet  doe  I  not  thinke  that  this  passage  or  Sea  hereabouts
is  frozen  over  at  any  time  of  the  yere :  albeit  it  seemed
so  unto  us  by  the  abundance  of  yce  gathered  together,
which  occupied  the  whole  place.  But  I  doe  rather
suppose  these  yce  to  bee  bred  in  the  hollow  soundes  and
freshets  thereabouts :  which  by  the  heate  of  the  sommers
Sunne,  being  loosed,  doe  emptie  themselves  with  the
ebbes  into  the  sea,  and  so  gather  in  great  abundance  there
together.

And  to  speake  somewhat  here  of  the  ancient  opinion  of
the  frozen  sea  in  these  parts :  I  doe  thinke  it  to  be
rather  a  bare  conjecture  of  men,  then  that  ever  any  man
hath  made  experience  of  any  such  sea.  And  that  which
they  speake  of  Mare  glaciale,  may  be  truely  thought  to
be  spoken  of  these  parts:  for  this  may  well  be  called
indeede  the  ycie  sea,  but  not  the  frozen  sea,  for  no  sea
consisting  of  salt  water  can  be  frozen,  as  I  have  more  at
large  herein  shewed  my  opinion  in  my  second  voyage,  for
Saltwater  can-  it  seemeth  impossible  for  any  sea  to  bee  frozen,  which
notfreeze.  \\2ith.  his  course  of  ebbing  and  flowing,  especially  in  those
places  where  the  tides  doe  ebbe  and  flowe  above  ten
fadome.  And  also  all  these  aforesayd  yce,  which  we
sometime  met  a  hundreth  mile  from  lande,  being  gathered
out  of  the  salt  Sea,  are  in  taste  fresh,  and  being  dissolved,
become  sweete  and  holesome  water.
[III.  78.]  And the cause  why this yere we have bene more

combred  with  yce then at  other times  before,  may be
by reason of  the Easterly & Southerly winds, which

328

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.
brought  us  more  timely  thither  now  then  we  looked  for.
Which  blowing  from  the  sea  directly  upon  the  place  of
our  Streites,  hath  kept  in  the  yce,  and  not  suffered  them
to  be  caried  out  by  the  ebbe  to  the  maine  sea,  where
they  would  in  more  short  time  have  bene  dissolved.
And  all  these  fleeting  yce  are  not  only  so  dangerous  in
that  they  wind  and  gather  so  neere  together,  that  a  man
may  passe  sometimes  tenne  or  twelve  miles  as  it  were
upon  one  firme  Island  of  yce :  but  also  for  that  they  open
and  shut  together  againe  in  such  sort  with  the  tides
and  sea-gate,  that  whilest  one  ship  followeth  the  other
with  full  sayles,  the  yce  which  was  open  unto  the  fore-
most will  joyne  and  close  together  before  the  latter  can
come  to  follow  the  first,  whereby  many  times  our  shippes
were  brought  into  great  danger,  as  being  not  able  so
sodainely  to  take  in  our  sayles,  or  stay  the  swift  way  of
our  ships.

We  were  forced  many  times  to  stemme  and  strike
great  rockes  of  yce,  and  so  as  it  were  make  way  through
mighty  mountaines.  By  which  meanes  some  of  the
fleete,  where  they  found  the  yce  to  open,  entred  in,  and
passed  so  farre  within  the  danger  thereof,  with  continuall
desire  to  recover  their  port,  that  it  was  the  greatest
wonder  of  the  world  that  they  ever  escaped  safe,  or  were
ever  heard  of  againe.  For  even  at  this  present  we  missed
two  of  the  fleete,  that  is,  the  Judith,  wherein  was  the
Lieutenant  generall  Captaine  Fenton ;  and  the  Michael,
whom  both  we  supposed  had  bene  utterly  lost,  having
not  heard  any  tidings  of  them  in  moe  then  20  dayes
before.

And  one  of  our  fleete  named  the  Barke  Dennis,  being  Barke  Dennis
of  an  hundreth  tunne  burden,  seeking  way  in  amongst  ^"
these  yce,  received  such  a  blow  with  a  rocke  of  yce  that  she
sunke  downe  therewith  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  fleete.
Howbeit  having  signified  her  danger  by  shooting  off  a
peece  of  great  Ordinance,  new  succour  of  other  ships
came  so  readily  unto  them,  that  the  men  were  all  saved
with  boats.

329

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

Part  of  the Within  this  ship  that  was  drowned  there  was  parcell

house  lost. Qf  Q^j.  house  which  was to bee erected for them  that

should  stay  all  the  winter  in Meta  Incognita.

This  was  a  more  fearefull  spectacle  for  the  Fleete  to

beholde,  for  that  the  outragious  storme  which  presently

followed,  threatned them the like fortune  and danger.

For  the  Fleete  being  thus  compassed  (as  aforesayd) on

every  side with yce, having left much behinde them,

thorow  which  they  passed,  and  finding  more  before  them,

thorow  which  it  was not possible to passe,  there  arose

a  sudden  terrible  tempest  at  the  Southeast,  which  blowing

from the maine sea, directly upon the place of the

Streites, brought together  all the yce a sea-boorde of

us  upon  our  backes,  and thereby  debard  us  of  turning

backe to recover  sea-roome  againe : so  that  being  thus

compassed  with  danger  on  every  side,  sundry  men  with

sundry  devises  sought  the  best  way  to  save  themselves.

Some  of  the  ships,  where  they  could  find  a  place  more

cleare  of  yce,  and  get  a  little  birth  of  sea  roome,  did  take

in their sayles, and there lay a drift. Other some

fastened & mored  Anker  upon  a  great  Island of  yce,

and  roade  under  the  Lee  therof,  supposing  to  be  better

guarded thereby from the outragious winds, and the

danger of  the lesser fleeting yce. And againe some

where so fast shut  up,  and compassed in amongst an

infinite number  of  great  countreys and  Islands  of  yce,

that  they  were  faine  to  submit  themselves  and  their  ships

to  the  mercy  of  the  unmercifull  yce,  and  strengthened  the

sides  of  their  ships  with  junckes  of  cables,  beds,  Mastes,

plankes  and  such  like,  which  being  hanged  over  boord  on

the sides  of  their  ships, might  the better defend  them

from the outragious sway and strokes of the said

yce. But  as  in  greatest distresse,  men of  best valour

are best to bee discerned, so it is greatly worthy

commendation and noting with what invincible minde

every  Captaine encouraged  his  company,  and  with  what

incredible labour the painefuU Mariners and poore

Miners  (unacquainted  with  such  extremities)  to  the  ever-

330

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578-
lasting  renowne  of  our  nation,  did  overcome  the  brunt  of
these  so  great  and  extreme  dangers  :  for  some,  even
without  boord  upon  the  yce,  and  some  within  boord  upon
the  sides  of  their  ships,  having  poles,  pikes,  pieces  of
timber,  and  Ores  in  their  handes,  stoode  almost  day  and
night  without  any  rest,  bearing  off  the  force,  and  breaking
the  sway  of  the  yce  with  such  incredible  paine  and  perill,
that  it  was  wonderfull  to  beholde,  which  otherwise  no
doubt  had  striken  quite  through  and  through  the  sides  of
their  ships,  notwithstanding  our  former  provision :  for
plankes  of  timber  of  more  then  three  inches  thicke,  and
other  things  of  greater  force  and  bignesse,  by  the  surging
of  the  sea  and  billowe,  with  the  yce  were  shivered  and
cut  in  sunder,  at  the  sides  of  our  ships,  so  that  it  will
seeme  more  then  credible  to  be  reported  of.  And  yet
(that  which  is  more)  it  is  faithfully  and  plainely  to  bee
prooved,  and  that  by  many  substantiall  witnesses,  that  our
ships,  even  those  of  greatest  burdens,  with  the  meeting  of
contrary  waves  of  the  sea,  were  heaved  up  betweene
Islands  of  yccj  a  foote  welneere  out  of  the  sea  above  their
watermarke,  having  their  knees  and  timbers  within  boord  [III.  79.]
both  bowed  and  broken  therewith.

And  amidst  these  extremes,  whilest  some  laboured  for
defence  of  the  ships,  and  sought  to  save  their  bodies,
other  some  of  more  milder  spirit  sought  to  save  the  soule
by  devout  prayer  and  meditation  to  the  Almightie,
thinking  indeede  by  no  other  meanes  possible  then  by
a  divine  Miracle  to  have  their  deliverance :  so  that  there
was  none  that  were  either  idle,  or  not  well  occupied,
and  he  that  helde  himselfe  in  best  securitie  had  (God
knoweth)  but  onely  bare  hope  remayning  for  his  best
safetie.

Thus  all  the  gallant  Fleete  and  miserable  men  without
hope  of  ever  getting  foorth  againe,  distressed  with  these
extremities  remayned  here  all  the  whole  night  and  part  of
the  next  day,  excepting  foure  ships,  that  is,  the  Anne
Francis,  the  Moone,  the  Francis  of  Foy,  and  the  Gabriell,
which being somewhat a Seaboord of  the Fleete, and

331

A15.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

being  fast  ships  by  a  winde,  having  a  more  scope  of
cleare,  tryed  it  out  all  the  time  of  the  storme  under  sayle,
being  hardly  able  to  beare  a  coast  of  each.

And  albeit,  by  reason  of  the  fleeting  yce,  which  were
dispersed  here  almost  the  whole  sea  over,  they  were
brought  many  times  to  the  extreamest  point  of  perill,
mountaines  of  yce  tenne  thousand  times  scaping  them
scarce  one  ynch,  which  to  have  striken  had  bene  their
present  destruction,  considering  the  swift  course  and  way
of  the  ships,  and  the  unwieldinesse  of  them  to  stay  and
turne  as  a  man  would  wish  :  yet  they  esteemed  it  their
better  safetie,  with  such  perill  to  seeke  Sea-roome,  than
without  hope  of  ever  getting  libertie  to  lie  striving
against  the  streame,  and  beating  amongst  the  Isie  moun-
taines, whose  hugenesse  and  monstrous  greatnesse  was
such,  that  no  man  would  credite,  but  such  as  to  their
paines  sawe  and  felt  it.  And  these  foure  shippes  by
the  next  day  at  noone  got  out  to  Sea,  and  were  first  cleare
of  the  ycei,  who  now  enjoying  their  owne  libertie,  beganne
a  new  to  sorrow  and  feare  for  their  fellowes  safeties.
And  devoutly  kneeling  about  their  maine  Mast,  they
gave  unto  God  humble  thankes,  not  only  for  themselves,
but  besought  him  likewise  highly  for  their  friendes
deliverance.  And  even  now  whilest  amiddest  these
extremities  this  gallant  Fleete  and  valiant  men  were
altogither  overlaboured  and  forewatched,  with  the  long
and  fearefull  continuance  of  the  foresayd  dangers,  it
pleased  God  with  his  eyes  of  mercie  to  looke  downe  from
heaven  to  sende  them  helpe  in  good  time,  giving  them
the  next  day  a  more  favourable  winde  at  the  West
Northwest,  which  did  not  onely  disperse  and  drive  foorth
the  yce  before  them,  but  also  gave  them  libertie  of
more  scope  and  Sea-roome,  and  they  were  by  night  of
the  same  day  following  perceived  of  the  other  foure
shippes,  where  (to  their  greatest  comfort)  they  enjoyed
againe  the  fellowship  one  of  another.  Some  in  mending
the  sides  of  their  ships,  some  in  setting  up  their  top
Mastes,  and  mending  their  sayles  and  tacklings ;  Againe,

332

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.
some  complayning  of  their  false  Stemme  borne  away,
some  in  stopping  their  leakes,  some  in  recounting  their
dangers  past,  spent  no  small  time  &  labour.  So  that
I  dare  well  avouch,  there  were  never  men  more  danger-
ously distressed,  nor  more  mercifully  by  Gods  providence
delivered.  And  hereof  both  the  torne  ships,  and  the
forwearied  bodies  of  the  men  arrived  doe  beare  most
evident  marke  and  witnesse.  And  now  the  whole  Fleete
plyed  off  to  Seaward,  resolving  there  to  abide  untill  the
Sunne  might  consume,  or  the  force  of  winde  disperse
these  yce  from  the  place  of  their  passage :  and  being
a  good  birth  off  the  shore,  they  tooke  in  their  sailes,
and  lay  adrift.

The  seventh  of  July  as  men  nothing  yet  dismayed,  we  Another  as-
cast about  towards the  inward,  and  had sight  of  land,  ^ '
which  rose  in  forme  like  the  Northerland  of  the  straights,
which some of  the Fleete, and those not the worst
Marriners,  judged to be the  North  Foreland :  howbeit
other  some  were  of  contrary  opinion. But the matter
was  not  well to  be discerned by  reason of  the thicke
fogge  which  a  long  time  hung upon the coast, & the  Fogge,snozv,
new falling snow which yeerely altereth the shape of  ^J  ^l^  ^L  ^^~
the land, and taketh away oftentimes the Mariners  i„gr5  markes.
markes. And  by  reason  of  the  darke  mists  which  con-
tinued by  the  space  of  twentie  dayes  togither,  this  doubt
grewe  the  greater  and  the  longer  perilous. For  whereas
indeede  we  thought  our  selves  to  be  upon  the  Northeast
side  of  Frobishers  straights,  we  were  now  caried  to  the
Southwestwards of  the Queenes Foreland, and being
deceived  by  a  swift  current  comming  from  the  Northeast,  -^  swift  cur-
were  brought  to  the  Southwestwards  of  our  said  course  ^^"^P"^"  ^  ^

o  ...  vs  ovtnccst.

many  miles  more  then  we  did  thinke  possible  could  come
to  passe.  The  cause  whereof  we  have  since  found,  and
it  shall  be  at  large  hereafter  declared.

Here  we  made  a  point  of  land  which  some  mistooke
for  a  place  in  the  straightes  called  Mount  Warwicke  :
but  how  we  should  be  so  farre  shot  up  so  suddainely
within  the  said  straights  the  expertest  Mariners  began  to

333

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ni:irvcll,  thinking  it  u  thing  impossible  th;it  they  could  be
J  current.  SO  hirre  overtaken  in  their  accounts,  or  that  any  current
could  deceive  them  here  which  thev  had  not  by  tormer
experience  prooved  and  found  out.  Howbeit  many
[111.  So.]  confessed  that  they  found  a  swifter  course  of  flood  then
betbre  time  thev  had  observed.  And  truely  it  was
wonderfuU  to  heare  and  see  the  rushincr  and  noise  that
the  tides  do  make  in  this  place  with  so  violent  a  torce
that  our  ships  Iving  a  hull  were  turned  sometimes  round
about  even  in  a  moment  atter  the  maner  ot  a  whirlepoole,
and  the  novse  ot  the  streame  no  lesse  to  be  heard  atarre
otF, then the  waterfall  of  London  Bridge.

But whilest the Fleete lav thus doubtfull amongst

oreat  store  ot  vce  in  a  place thev  knew  not  without  sight

of  Sunne,  wherebv  to  take  the  height,  and  so  to  know

the  true elevation of  the pole, and  without  any  cleere

of  lia;ht  to  make  pertite  the  coast,  the  Generall  with the

Captaines  Cs: Masters  ot  his ships, began doubttullv to

question  ot  the  matter,  and  sent  his  Pinnesse  aboord  to

y^.'Av.r  AVj.'v  heare  each  mans  opinion,  and  speciallv  o\  James  Beare,

i}  gooii  Mar-  M^gf^r  of  the  Anne  Francis,  who  was  knowen  to  be  a

sufficient  and  skiltul  Mariner,  and  havino;  bene  there  the

yere  betbre,  had  wel  observed  the  place,  and  drawen  out

Cardes  of  the  coast. But  the  rather  this  matter  grew  the

Christopher more  doubtfull,  for  that  Christopher  Hall  chiefe  Pilot  ot

tLiil ihufc ^^^  vovage,  delivered  a  plaine  and  publique  opinion in

"  the  hearing  of  the  whole  Fleete,  that  hee  had  never  scene

the  foresavd  coast  before,  and  that  he  could  not  make  it

for  anv  place  ot  Frobishers  Straits,  as  some  ot  the  Fleete

supposed,  and  yet  the  landes  doe  lie  and  trend  so  like,

that  the  best  INlariners  therein  mav  bee  deceived.

The  tenth  ot  July,  the  weather  still  continuing  thicke
and  darke,  some  ot  the  ships  in  the  fogo;e  lost  sight  ot  the
Admirall  and  the  rest  of  the  tleete,  and  wandering  to  and
tro,  with  doubtfull  opinion  whether  it  were  best  to  seeke
backe  ag~aine  to  seaward  through  great  store  oi  yce,  or  to
follow  o\\  a  doubttull  course  in  a  Sea,  Bay,  or  Streites
thev  knew  not,  or  along  a  coast,  whereof  by  reason  ot  the

334

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

darke  mistes  they  could  not  discerne  the  dangers,  if  by
chance  any  rocke  or  broken  ground  should  lie  of  the
place,  as  commonly  in  these  parts  it  doth.

The  Viceadmirall  Captaine  Yorke  considering  the  fore-
sayd  opinion  of  the  Pylot  Hall,  who  was  with  him  in  the
Thomas  Allen,  having  lost  sight  of  the  Fleete,  turned
backe  to  sea  againe,  having  two  other  ships  in  company
with him.

Also  the  Captaine  of  the  Anne  Francis  having  likewise
lost  company  of  the  Fleete,  and  being  all  alone,  held  it
for  best  to  turne  it  out  to  sea  againe,  untill  they  might
have  cleere  weather  to  take  the  Sunnes  altitude,  and  with
incredible  paine  and  perill  got  out  of  the  doubtfuU  place,
into  the  open  Sea  againe,  being  so  narrowly  distressed  by
the  way,  by  meanes  of  continuall  fogge  and  yce,  that  they
were  many  times  ready  to  leape  upon  an  Hand  of  yce
to  avoide  the  present  danger,  and  so  hoping  to  prolong
life  awhile  meant  rather  to  die  a  pining  death.

Some  hoped  to  save  themselves  on  chestes,  and  some  Hard  shifts  to
determined  to  tie  the  Hatches  of  the  ships  togither,  and  ^^^'^  ^""
to  binde  themselves  with  their  furniture  fast  thereunto,
and  so  to  be  towed  with  the  ship-bote  ashore,  which
otherwise  could  not  receive  halfe  of  the  companie,  by
which  meanes  if  happily  they  had  arrived,  they  should
eyther  have  perished  for  lacke  of  foode  to  eate,  or  else
should  themselves  have  beene  eaten  of  those  ravenous,
bloodie,  and Men-eating  people.

The rest  of  the Fleete following the course of  the  Thecoastakng
General!  which  led  them  the  way,  passed  up  above  sixtie  ^^  Southstde  of
leagues  within  the  saide  doubtfull  and  supposed  straights,  iJ^lg^
having  alwayes  a  faire  continent  upon  their  starreboorde
side, and a continuance still of  an open Sea before
them.

The  Generall  albeit  with  the  first  perchance  he  found  Mistaken
out  the  error,  and  that  this  was  not  the  olde  straights,  yet  straights  which
he  perswaded  the  Fleete  alwayes  that  they  were  in  their  ^^tmieltT^  ^^^
right  course,  and  knowen  straights. Howbeit  I  suppose
he  rather  dissembled  his  opinion  therein  then  otherwise,

335

A.D.

1578.

Frobisher
could  have
passed  to
Cataia.

Faire  open
way.

Reasons  to
proove  a  pas-
sage here.

Great
indrafts.
[III.  81.]

A  current  to
the  West.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

meaning  by  that  policie  (being  himselfe  led  with  an
honourable  desire  of  further  discoverie)  to  induce  the
Fleete  to  follow  him,  to  see  a  further  proofe  of  that
place.  And  as  some  of  the  companie  reported,  he  hath
since  confessed  that  if  it  had  not  bene  for  the  charge
and  care  he  had  of  the  Fleete  and  fraughted  ships,  he
both  would  and  could  have  gone  through  to  the  South
Sea,  called  Mar  del  Sur,  and  dissolved  the  long  doubt  of
the  passage  which  we  seeke  to  find  to  the  rich  countrey  of
Cataya.

1  Of  which  mistaken  straights,  considering  the  cir-
cumstance, we  have  great  cause  to  confirme  our  opinion,
to  like  and  hope  well  of  the  passage  in  this  place.  For
the  foresaid  Bay  or  Sea,  the  further  we  sayled  therein,  the
wider  we  found  it,  with  great  likelihood  of  endlesse
continuance.  And  where  in  other  places  we  were  much
troubled  with  yce,  as  in  the  entrance  of  the  same,  so  after
we  had  sayled  fiftie  or  sixtie  leagues  therein  we  had  no
let  of  yce,  or  other  thing  at  all,  as  in  other  places  we
found.

2  Also  this  place  seemeth  to  have  a  marvellous  great
indraft,  and  draweth  unto  it  most  of  the  drift  yce,  and
other  things  which  doe  fleete  in  the  Sea,  either  to  the
North  or  Eastwards  of  the  same,  as  by  good  experience
we  have  found.

3  For  here  also  we  met  with  boordes,  lathes,  and
divers  other  things  driving  in  the  Sea,  which  was  of  the
wracke  of  the  ship  called  the  Barke  Dennis,  which
perished  amongst  the  yce  as  beforesaid,  being  lost  at
the  first  attempt  of  the  entrance  overthwart  the  Queenes
forelande  in  the  mouth  of  Frobishers  straights,  which
could  by  no  meanes  have  bene  so  brought  thither,  neither
by  winde  nor  tyde,  being  lost  so  many  leagues  off,  if
by  force  of  the  said  current  the  same  had  not  bene
violently  brought.  For  if  the  same  had  bene  brought
thither  by  tide  of  flood,  looke  how  farre  the  said  flood
had  carried  it,  the  ebbe  would  have  recarried  it  as  farre
backe  againe,  and  by  the  winde  it  could  not  so  come  to

336

MM' OF MF.T\ INCOCMT,'

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.

passe,  because it  was  then sometime calme, and most
times  contrarie.

And  some  Mariners  doe  affirme  that  they  have  dili-
gently observed,  that  there  runneth  in  this  place  nine  T^ine  houres
houres  flood  to  three  ebbe,  which  may  thus  come  to  -f""  '"  \'^^^
passe  by  force  of  the  sayd  current :  for  whereas  the  Sea  in
most  places  of  the  world,  doth  more  or  lesse  ordinarily
ebbe  and  flow  once  every  twelve  houres  with  sixe  houres
ebbe,  and  sixe  houres  flood,  so  also  would  it  doe  there,
were  it  not  for  the  violence  of  this  hastning  current,
which  forceth  the  flood  to  make  appearance  to  beginne
before  his  ordinary  time  one  houre  and  a  halfe,  and  also
to  continue  longer  than  his  naturall  course  by  an  other
houre  and  a  halfe,  untill  the  force  of  the  ebbe  be  so  great
that  it  will  no  longer  be  resisted :  according  to  the  saying,
Naturam  expellas  furca  licet,  usque  recurrit.  Although
nature  and  naturall  courses  be  forced  and  resisted  never
so  much,  yet  at  last  they  will  have  their  owne  sway
againe.

Moreover  it  is  not  possible  that  so  great  course  of
floods  and  current,  so  high  swelling  tides  with  continuance
of  so  deepe  waters,  can  be  digested  here  without  un-
burdening themselves  into  some  open  Sea  beyond  this
place,  which  argueth  the  more  likelihood  of  the  passage
to  be  hereabouts.  Also  we  suppose  these  great  indrafts
doe  growe  and  are  made  by  the  reverberation  and  re-
flection of  that  same  current,  which  at  our  comming
by  Ireland,  met  and  crossed  us,  of  which  in  the  first  part
of  this  discourse  I  spake,  which  comming  from  the  bay
of  Mexico,  passing  by  and  washing  the  Southwest  parts  of
Ireland,  reboundeth  over  to  the  Northeast  parts  of  the
world,  as  Norway,  Island,  &c.  where  not  finding  any
passage  to  an  open  Sea,  but  rather  being  there  encreased
by  a  new  accesse,  and  another  current  meeting  with  it
from  the  Scythian  Sea,  passing  the  bay  of  Saint  Nicholas
Westward,  it  doth  once  againe  rebound  backe,  by  the
coastes  of  Groenland,  and  from  thence  upon  Frobishers
straights  being  to  the  Southwestwardes  of  the  same.

VII  337  Y

A.D.

1578.

The  sea
moveth  from
East  to  West
continually.

Authoritie.

Hard  but  yet
possible  turn-
ing backe
againe.

Tiaffique.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

5  And  if  that  principle  of  Philosopie  be  true,  that
Inferiora  corpora  reguntur  a  superioribus,  that  is,  if
inferior  bodies  be  governed,  ruled,  and  caried  after  the
maner  and  course  of  the  superiors,  then  the  water  being
an  inferior  Element,  must  needes  be  governed  after  the
superior  heaven,  and  so  follow  the  course  of  Primum
mobile  from  East  to  West.

6  But  every  man  that  hath  written  or  considered  any-
thing of  this  passage,  hath  more  doubted  the  returne  by
the  same  way  by  reason  of  a  great  downefall  of  water,
which  they  imagine  to  be  thereabouts  (which  we  also  by
experience  partly  find)  than  any  mistrust  they  have  of  the
same  passage  at  all.  For  we  find  (as  it  were)  a  great
downefall  in  this  place,  but  yet  not  such  but  that  we  may
returne,  although  with  much  adoe.  For  we  were  easlier
carried  in  one  houre  then  we  could  get  forth  againe  in
three.  Also  by  another  experience  at  another  time,  we
found  this  current  to  deceive  us  in  this  sort :  That
wheras  we  supposed  it  to  be  15  leagues  off,  and  lying  a
hull,  we  were  brought  within  two  leagues  of  the  shore
contrarie  to  all  expectation.

Our  men  that  sayled  furthest  in  the  same  mistaken
straights  (having  the  maine  land  upon  their  starboord
side)  affirme  that  they  met  with  the  outlet  or  passage  of
water  which  commeth  thorow  Frobishers  straights,  and
followeth  as  all  one  into  this  passage.

Some  of  our  companie  also  afiirme  that  they  had  sight
of  a  continent  upon  their  larboord-side  being  60  leagues
within  the  supposed  straights :  howbeit  except  certaine
Hands  in  the  entrance  hereof  we  could  make  no  part
perfect  thereof.  All  the  foresaid  tract  of  land  seemeth  to
be  more  fruitfull  and  better  stored  of  Grasse,  Deere,
Wild  foule,  as  Partridges,  Larkes,  Seamewes,  Guls,  Wil-
mots.  Falcons  and  Tassel  gentils.  Ravens,  Beares,  Hares,
Foxes,  and  other  things,  than  any  other  part  we  have  yet
discovered,  and  is  more  populous.  And  here  Luke
Ward,  a  Gentleman  of  the  companie,  traded  marchandise,
and  did  exchange  knives,  bels,  looking  glasses,  &c.  with

338

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.
those countrey  people, who brought him foule,  fish,
beares  skinnes,  and  such  like,  as  their  countrey  yeeldeth
for  the  same. Here  also  they  saw  of  those  greater  boats
of  the  countrey,  with  twentie  persons  in  a  peece.

Now  after  the  Generall  had  bestowed  these  many  [III.  82.]
dayes  here,  not  without  many  dangers,  he  returned  backe
againe.  And  by  the  way  sayling  alongst  this  coast  (being
the  backeside  of  the  supposed  continent  of  America)  and
the  Queenes  Foreland,  he  perceived  a  great  sound  to
goe  thorow  into  Frobishers  straights.  Whereupon  he
sent  the  Gabriel  the  one  and  twentieth  of  July,  to  proove
whether  they  might  goe  thorow  and  meete  againe  with  Returne  out  of
him  in  the  straights,  which  they  did  :  and  as  wee  imagined  ^^  mistaken
before,  so  the  Queenes  foreland  prooved  an  Hand,  as
I  thinke  most  of  these  supposed  continents  will.  And
so  he  departed  towardes  the  straights,  thinking  it  were
high  time  now  to  recover  his  Port,  and  to  provide  the
Fleete  of  their  lading,  whereof  he  was  not  a  little  carefull,
as  shall  by  the  processe  and  his  resolute  attempts  appeare.
And  in  his  returne  with  the  rest  of  the  fleete  he  was  so
intangled  by  reason  of  the  darke  fogge  amongst  a  number
of  Hands  and  broken  ground  that  lye  off  this  coast,  that
many  of  the  shippes  came  over  the  top  of  rockes,  which
presently  after  they  might  perceive  to  lie  dry,  having  not
halfe  a  foote  water  more  then  some  of  their  ships  did
draw.  And  by  reason  they  could  not  with  a  smal  gale
o{  wind  stemme  the  force  of  the  flood,  whereby  to  goe
cleere  ofl^  the  rockes,  they  were  faine  to  let  an  anker  fall
with  two  bent  of  Cable  togither,  at  an  hundred  and  odde
fadome  depth,  where  otherwise  they  had  bene  by  the
force  of  the  tydes  caried  upon  the  rockes  againe,  and
perished  :  so  that  if  God  in  these  fortunes  (as  a  merciful!  Great  dan-
guide,  beyond  the  expectation  of  man)  had  not  carried  us  S^"-
thorow,  we  had  surely  perished  amidst  these  dangers.
For  being  many  times  driven  hard  aboord  the  shore
without  any  sight  of  land,  untill  we  were  ready  to  make
shipwracke  thereon,  being  forced  commonly  with  our
boats to sound  before our ships,  least  we might light

339

A.D.
1578.

Anne  Francis
met  with  some
ofthefieete.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

thereon  before  we  could  discerne  the  same ;  it  pleased
God  to  give  us  a  cleare  of  Sunne  and  light  for  a  short
time  to  see  and  avoyde  thereby  the  danger,  having  bene
continually  darke  before,  and  presently  after.  Manie
times  also  by  meanes  of  fogge  and  currents  being  driven
neere  upon  the  coast,  God  lent  us  even  at  the  very  pinch
one  prosperous  breath  of  winde  or  other,  whereby  to
double  the  land,  and  avoid  the  perill,  and  when  that  we
were  all  without  hope  of  helpe,  every  man  recommending
himselfe  to  death,  and  crying  out.  Lord  now  helpe  or
never,  now  Lord  looke  downe  from  heaven  and  save  us
sinners,  or  else  our  safetie  commeth  too  late :  even  then
the  mightie  maker  of  heaven,  and  our  mercifull  God  did
deliver  us :  so  that  they  who  have  bene  partakers  of  these
dangers  doe  even  in  their  soules  confesse,  that  God  even
by  miracle  hath  sought  to  save  them,  whose  name  be
praysed  evermore.

Long  time  now  the  Anne  Francis  had  layne  beating
off  and  on  all  alone  before  the  Queenes  foreland,  not
being  able  to  recover  their  Port  for  yce,  albeit  many
times  they  dangerously  attempted  it,  for  yet  the  yce
choaked  up  the  passage,  and  would  not  suffer  them  to
enter.  And  having  never  seene  any  of  the  fleete  since
twenty  dayes  past,  when  by  reason  of  the  thicke  mistes
they  were  severed  in  the  mistaken  straights,  they  did  now
this  present  23  of  July  overthwart  a  place  in  the  straights
called  Hattons  Hedland,  where  they  met  with  seven
ships  of  ye  Fleete  againe,  which  good  hap  did  not  onely
rejoyce  them  for  themselves,  in  respect  of  the  comfort
which  they  received  by  such  good  companie,  but
especially  that  by  this  meanes  they  were  put  out  of  doubt
of  their  deare  friends,  whose  safeties  long  time  they  did
not  a  little  suspect  and  feare.

At  their  meeting  they  haled  the  Admirall  after  the
maner  of  the  Sea,  and  with  great  joy  welcommed  one
another  with  a  thundring  voUy  of  shot.  And  now
every  man  declared  at  large  the  fortunes  and  dangers
which  they  had  passed.

340

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.

The foure and twentieth of  July  we met  with the
Francis  of  Foy,  who  with  much  adoe  sought  way  backe  Francis  of  Foy.
againe, through the yce from out of the mistaken
straights,  where  (to  their  great  perill) they  prooved to
recover  their  Port. They  brought  the  first  newes  of  the
Vizadmirall Captaine Yorke, who many dayes with
themselves,  and  the Busse  of  Bridgewater  was  missing.  Bridgwater
They  reported  that  they  left  the  Vizeadmirall  reasonably  ^  ^^'
cleare  of  the  yce,  but  the  other  ship  they  greatly  feared,
whom  they  could  not  come  to  helpe,  being  themselves  so
hardly  distressed  as  never  men  more. Also  they  told  us
of  the  Gabriel,  who  having  got  thorow  from  the  backside,
and  Western  point  of  the  Queenes foreland,  into  Fro-
bishers  straights,  fell  into  their  company  about  the  cape
of  Good  hope.

And  upon  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  July,  the  ship  of
Bridgewater  got  out  of  the  yce  and  met  with  the  Fleete
which  lay  off  and  on  under  Hattons  Hedland.  They
reported  of  their  marvellous  accidents  and  dangers,  de-
claring their  ship  to  be  so  leake  that  they  must  of
necessitie  seeke  harborow,  having  their  stem  so  beaten
within  their  buddings,  that  they  had  much  adoe  to  keepe
themselves  above  water.  They  had  (as  they  say)  five
hundreth  strokes  at  the  pump  in  lesse  then  halfe  a  watch,
being  scarce  two  houres ;  their  men  being  so  over-
wearied therewith,  and  with  the  former  dangers  that  they
desired  helpe  of  men  from  the  other  ships.  Moreover
they  declared  that  there  was  nothing  but  yce  and  danger  [III.  83,]
where  they  had  bene,  and  that  the  straights  within  were
frozen  up,  and  that  it  was  the  most  impossible  thing  of  T'he  Streits
the  world,  to  passe  up  unto  the  Countesse  of  Warwicks  fi"^^"  °^^^'-
sound,  which  was  the  place  of  our  Port.

The  report  of  these  dangers  by  these  ships  thus
published  amongst  the  fleete,  with  the  remembrance  of
the  perils  past,  and  those  present  before  their  face,
brought  no  small  feare  and  terror  into  the  hearts  of  many
considerate  men.  So  that  some  beganne  privily  to  mur-
mure against the Generall for this wilfuU maner of

341

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

proceeding.  Some  desired  to  discover  some  Harborow
thereabouts  to  refresh  themselves  and  reforme  their
broken  vessels  for  a  while,  untill  the  North  and  North-
west windes  might  disperse  the  yce,  and  make  the  place
more  free  to  passe.  Other  some  forgetting  themselves,
spake  more  undutifuUy  in  this  behalfe,  saying :  that  they
had  as  leeve  be  hanged  when  they  came  home,  as  without
hope  of  safetie  to  seeke  to  passe,  and  so  to  perish
amongst  the  yce.

The Generall not opening his eares to the peevish

passion  of  any  private  person,  but  chiefly  respecting  the

accomplishment  of  the  cause  he  had  undertaken  (wherein

the  chiefe  reputation  and  fame  of  a  Generall  and  Captaine

A  valiant consisteth)  and  calling  to  his  remembrance  the  short  time

mind  of  M.  j^^  j^^^  -^^  hand  to  provide  so  great  number  of  ships  their

t  roots  hcT  .  •  .  -  •

loading,  determined  with  this  resolution  to  passe  and
recover  his  Port,  or  else  there  to  burie  himselfe  with  his
attempt.

Notwithstanding  somewhat  to  appease  the  feeble
passions  of  the  fearefuller  sort,  and  the  better  to  enter-
taine  time  for  a  season,  whilest  the  yce  might  the  better
be  dissolved,  he  haled  on  the  Fleete  with  beleefe  that  he
would  put  them  into  harborow :  thereupon  whilest  the
shippes  lay  off  and  on  under  Hattons  Fledland,  he  sought
to  goe  in  with  his  Pinnesses  amongst  the  Ilandes  there,  as
though  hee  meant  to  search  for  harborowe,  where  indeede
he  meant  nothing  lesse,  but  rather  sought  if  any  Ore
might  be  found  in  that  place,  as  by  the  sequele  appeared.

In  the  meane  time  whilest  the  Fleete  lay  thus  doubtfull
without  any  certaine  resolution  what  to  do,  being  hard
aboord  the  lee-shore,  there  arose  a  sodaine  and  terrible
tempest  at  the  Southsoutheast,  whereby  the  yz^  began
marvellously  to  gather  about  us.

Whereupon  every  man,  as  in  such  case  of  extremitie
he  thought  best,  sought  the  wisest  way  for  his  owne
safety.  The  most  part  of  the  Fleete  which  were  further
shot  up  within  the  straights,  and  so  farre  to  the  leeward,
as that they  could not double the land,  following the

342

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.
course  of  the  Generall,  who led them the way, tooke
in  their  Sayles,  and  layde  it  a  hull  amongst  the  yce,  and
so  passed  over  the  storme,  and  had  no  extremitie  at  all,
but  for  a  short  time  in  the  same  place.

Howbeit  the  other  ships  which  plyed  out  to  Seaward,
had  an  extreme  storme  for  a  longer  season.  And  the
nature  of  the  place  is  such,  that  it  is  subject  diversly
to  divers  windes,  according  to  the  sundry  situation  of
the  great  Alps  and  mountaines  there,  every  mountaine
causing  a  severall  blast,  and  pirrie,  after  the  maner  of
a  Levant.

In  this  storme  being  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  July,
there  fell  so  much  snow,  with  such  bitter  cold  aire,  that
we  could  not  scarce  see  one  another  for  the  same,  nor
open  our  eyes  to  handle  our  ropes  and  sayles,  the  snow  Snow  in  July.
being  above  halfe  a  foote  deepe  upon  the  hatches  of
our  ship,  which  did  so  wet  thorow  our  poore  Mariners
clothes,  that  hee  that  had  five  or  sixe  shifts  of  apparell
had  scarce  one  drie  threed  to  his  backe,  which  kind  of
wet  and  coldnesse,  togither  with  the  overlabouring  of
the  poore  men  amiddest  the  yce,  bred  no  small  sick-
nesse  amongst  the  fleete,  which  somewhat  discouraged
some  of  the  poore  men,  who  had  not  experience  of  the
like  before,  every  man  persv/ading  himselfe  that  the
winter  there  must  needes  be  extreme,  where  they  found  Extreme  win-
so  unseasonable  a  Sommer.  ^^^'

And yet notwithstanding this cold aire,  the Sunne  Great  heat  in
many  times  hath  a  marvellous force of  heate amongst /^^  "'^°^'
those mountaines, insomuch that when there is no
breth  of  winde  to  bring  the colde aire from the dis-
persed yce  upon  us,  we  shall be  wearie of  the  Homing
heate  and then sodainely  with a perry  of  winde  which Unconstant
commeth  downe  from  the  hollownesse  of  the  hilles,  we  ^^^  ^^'
shall have such a breth of heate brought upon our
faces as though  we  were  entred  within  some  bathstove
or  hote-house,  and  when  the  first  of  the  pirry  and  blast
is  past,  we  shall  have the  winde sodainely  a  new  blow
cold  againe.

343

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

In  this  storme  the  Anne  Francis,  the  Moone,  and  the
Thomas  of  Ipswich,  who  found  themselves  able  to  hold
it  up  with  a  saile,  and  could  double  about  the  Cape  of  the
Queenes  foreland,  plyed  out  to  the  Seaward,  holding
it  for  better  policie  and  safetie  to  seeke  Sea  roome,  then  j
to  hazard  the  continuance  of  the  storme,  the  danger  of  I
the  yce,  and  the  leeshoare.

And being uncertaine at this time of  the Generals s

[III.  84.] private  determinations,  the  weather  being  so darke  that |

they  could  not  discerne  one  another,  nor  perceive  which |

way  he  wrought,  betooke  themselves  to  this  course  for I

best  and  safest.  I

The  General,  notwithstanding  the  great  storme,  following
his  own  former  resolution,  sought  by  all  meanes  possible,
by  a  shorter  way  to  recover  his  Port,  and  where  he  saw |
the  yce  never  so  little  open,  he  gate  in  at  one  gappe  and
out at another, and so himselfe  valiantly  led the  way \
thorow  before  to  induce  the  Fleete  to  follow  after,  and
with  incredible  paine  and  perill  at  length  gat  through  the
Th  Genera//  yce,  and  upon  the  one  and  thirtieth  of  July  recovered  his j
recovereth  his \q^^  wished  Port  after  many  attempts  and  sundry  times 1
being put  backe,  and  came  to  anker in the Countesse
of  Warwicks  sound,  in  the  entrance  whereof,  when he \
thought  all  perill  past,  he  encountred  a  great  Hand  of  yce |
which  gave  the  Ayde  such  a  blow,  having  a  little  before
wayed  her  anker  a cocke bill,  that  it  stroke  the  anker ;
flouke  through  the  ships  bowes  under  the  water,  which ;
caused  so  great  a  leake,  that  with  much  adoe  they  pre- ;
served  the  ship  from  sinking.

At  their  arrivall  here  they  perceived  two  ships  at  anker
within  the  harborough,  whereat  they  began  much  to  *
marvell  and  greatly  to  rejoyce,  for  those  they  knew  to  '
be  the  Michael,  wherein  was  the  Lieutenant  generall  '
Captaine  Fenton,  and  the  small  Barke  called  the  Gabriel,
who  so  long  time  were  missing,  and  never  heard  of  \
before,  whom  every  man  made  the  last  reckoning,  never  I
to  heare  of  againe.  [

Here  every  man  greatly  rejoyced  of  their  happie  meet-

344

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.

ing,  and  welcommed  one  another  after  the Sea  manner

with their  great Ordinance,  and  when each partie had

ripped up their sundry  fortunes and perils past,  they

highly praysed God,  and altogither upon their knees

gave  him  due,  humble  and  hearty  thankes,  and Maister  Master  Wolf-

Wolfall a learned man, appointed by her Majesties  ^^^  Preacher.

Councell  to  be  their  Minister  and  Preacher  made  unto

them a  godly  sermon,  exhorting  them especially  to  be

thankefull to God for their strange and miraculous

deliverance in those so dangerous places,  and putting

them in  mind  of  the  uncertainetie of  mans life,  willed

them  to  make  themselves  alwayes  readie  as  resolute  men

to  enjoy  and  accept  thankefully  whatsoever  adventure  his

divine  Providence  should  appoint. This  maister  Wolfall

being well seated and setled at home in his owne

Countrey,  with  a  good  and  large  living,  having  a  good

honest woman to wife and very towardly children,

being of  good reputation  among  the best,  refused not

to take in hand this painefull  voyage,  for the onely

care  he  had  to  save  soules,  and  to  reforme  those  Infidels

if  it  were  possible  to  Christianitie :  and  also  partly  for  the

great desire he had that this notable  voyage so  well

begunne,  might  be  brought  to  perfection :  and  therefore

he  was  contented  to  stay  there  the  whole  yeare  if  occasion

had  served,  being  in  every  necessary  action  as  forward  as

the  resolutest  men  of  all. Wherefore  in  this  behalfe  he

may  rightly  be  called  a  true  Pastor  and  minister  of  Gods

word,  which  for  the  profite  of  his  flocke  spared  not  to

venture  his  owne  life.

But  to  returne  againe  to  Captaine  Fentons  company,  '^^^  adven-
and  to  speake  somewhat  of  their  dangers  (albeit  they  be  ^\^^  %  ^^'
more  then by  writing  can be expressed) they  reported  ^„^  ^^^  ^^^^
that  from  the  night  of  the  first  storme  which  was  about  panie.
the first day of July untill seven dayes before the
Generals  arrivall,  which  was  the  sixe  and  twentith  of  the
same,  they  never  saw  any  one  day  or  houre,  wherin  they
were not troubled  with  continuall danger  and feare  of
death, and were twentie dayes almost togither fast

345

A.D.

1578.

Extremltie
causeth  men  to
devise  new
arts  and  ;v-
medies.

Hard  shifts.

[III.  85.]

Strange  won-
ders.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

amongst  the  yce.  They  had  their  ship  stricken  through
and  through  on  both  sides,  their  false  stemme  borne  quite
away,  and  could  goe  from  their  ships  in  some  places
upon  the  yce  very  many  miles,  and  might  easily  have
passed  from  one  Hand  of  yce  to  another  even  to  the
shore,  and  if  God  had  not  wonderfully  provided  for
them  and  their  necessitie,  and  time  had  not  made  them
more  cunning  and  wise  to  seeke  strange  remedies  for
strange  kindes  of  dangers,  it  had  bene  impossible  for
them  ever  to  have  escaped :  for  among  other  devises,
wheresoever  they  found  any  Hand  of  yce  of  greater
bignesse  then  the  rest  (as  there  be  some  of  more  then
halfe  a  mile  compasse  about,  and  almost  forty  fadome
high)  they  commonly  coveted  to  recover  the  same,  and
thereof  to  make  a  bulwarke  for  their  defence,  whereon
having  mored  anker,  they  road  under  the  lee  therof  for
a  time,  being  therby  garded  from  the  danger  of  the  lesser
driving  yce.  But  when  they  must  needes  forgoe  this
new  found  fort  by  meanes  of  other  yce,  which  at  length
would  undermine  and  compasse  them  round  about,  and
when  that  by  heaving  of  the  billow  they  were  therewith
like  to  be  brused  in  peeces,  they  used  to  make  fast  the
shippe  unto  the  most  firme  and  broad  peece  of  yce  they
could  find,  and  binding  her  nose  fast  thereunto,  would  fill
all  their  sayles  whereon  the  winde  having  great  power,
would  force  forward  the  ship,  and  so  the  shippe  bearing
before  her  the  yce,  &  so  one  yce  driving  forward  another,
should  at  length  get  scope  &  searoome.  And  having
by  this  meanes  at  length  put  their  enemies  to  flight,
they  occupyed  the  cleare  place  for  a  prettie  season  among
sundry  mountaines  and  Alpes  of  yce.  One  there  was
found  by  measure  to  be  6^  fadome  above  water,  which
for  a  kind  of  similitude,  was  called  Salomons  porch.
Some  thinke  those  Hands  eight  times  so  much  under
water  as  they  are  above,  because  of  their  monstrous
weight.  But  now  I  remember  I  saw  very  strange
wonders,  men  walking,  running,  leaping  and  shooting
upon  the  mayne  seas  40. myles  from  any  land,  without

346

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.
any  Shippe  or  other  vessell  under  them.  Also  1  saw  fresh
Rivers  running  amidst  the  salt  Sea  a  hundred  myle  from
land,  which  if  any  man  will  not  beleeve,  let  him  knowe
that  many  of  our  company  leapt  out  of  their  Shippe  upon
Ilandes  of  yce,  and  running  there  up  and  downe,  did
shoote  at  Buts  upon  the  yce,  and  with  their  Calivers
did  kill  great  Seales,  which  use  to  lye  and  sleepe  upon
the  yce,  and  this  yce  melting  above  at  the  toppe  by
reflection  of  the  Sunne,  came  downe  in  sundry  streames,
which  uniting  together,  made  a  pretie  Brooke  able  to
drive  a  Mill.

The  sayde  Captaine  Fenton  recovered  his  Port  tenne
dayes  before  any  man,  and  spent  good  tyme  in  searching
for  Mine,  and  hee  found  good  store  thereof.  He  also
discovered  about  tenne  Miles  up  into  the  Countrey,
where  he  perceived  neither  Towne,  Village,  nor  likeli-
hoode  of  habitation,  but  it  seemeth  (as  he  sayeth)  barren,
as  the  other  parts  which  as  yet  we  have  entred  upon  :
but  their  victuals  and  provision  went  so  scant  with  them,
that  they  had  determined  to  returne  homeward  within
seven  dayes  after,  if  the  Fleete  had  not  then  arrived.

The  Generall  after  his  arrivall  in  the  Countesses  sound,
spent  no  time  in  vaine,  but  immediatly  at  his  first  landing
called  the  chiefe  Captaines  of  his  Councell  together,  and
consulted  with  them  for  the  speedier  execution  of  such
things  as  then  they  had  in  hand.  As  first,  for  searching
and  finding  out  good  Minerall  for  the  Miners  to  be
occupyed  on.  Then  to  give  good  Orders  to  bee  observed
of  the  whole  company  on  shore.  And  lastly,  to  consider
for  the  erecting  up  of  the  Fort  and  House  for  the  use
of  them  which  were  to  abide  there  the  whole  yeere.  For
the  better  handling  of  these,  and  all  other  like  important
causes  in  this  service,  it  was  ordeined  from  her  Majestic
and  the  Councell,  that  the  Generall  should  call  unto  him
certaine  of  the  chiefe  Captaines  and  Gentlemen  in
Councell,  to  conferre,  consult  and  determine  of  all
occurrents  in  this  service,  whose  names  are  as  here  they
follow.

347

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

Captaine  Fenton.^ TCaptaine  Carew.

Captaine  Yorke. V <

Captaine  Best. J (^Captaine  Philpot.

And  in  Sea  causes  to  have  as  assistants,  Christopher
Hall  and  Charles  Jackman,  being  both  very  good  Pilots,
and  sufficient  Mariners,  whereof  the  one  was  chiefe  Pilot
of  the  Voyage,  and  the  other  for  the  discoverie.  From
the  place  of  our  habitation  Westward,  Master  Selman  was
appointed  Notarie,  to  register  the  whole  maner  of  pro-
ceeding in  these  affaires,  that  true  relation  thereof  might
be  made,  if  it  pleased  her  Majestie  to  require  it.

The  first  of  August  every  Captaine  by  order,  from
the  Generall  and  his  councell,  was  commanded  to  bring
ashoare  unto  the  Countesses  Hand  all  such  Gentlemen,
souldiers,  and  Myners,  as  were  under  their  charge,  with
such  provision  as  they  had  of  victuals,  tents,  and  things
necessary  for  the  speedy  getting  together  of  Mine,  and
fraight  for  the  shippes.

The  Muster  of  the  men  being  taken,  and  the  victuals
with  all  other  things  viewed  and  considered,  every  man
was  set  to  his  charge,  as  his  place  and  office  required.
The  Myners  were  appointed  where  to  worke,  and  the
Mariners  discharged  their  shippes.

Upon  the  second  of  August  were  published  and
proclaymed  upon  the  Countesse  of  Warwicks  Hand  with
sound  of  Trumpet,  certaine  Orders  by  the  Generall  and
his  councell,  appoynted  to  be  observed  of  the  company
during  the  time  of  their  abiding  there.

In  the  meane  time,  whilest  the  Mariners  plyed  their
worke,  the  Captaines  sought  out  new  Mynes,  the  Gold-
finers  made  tryall  of  the  Ore,  the  Mariners  discharged
their  shippes,  the  Gentlemen  for  example  sake  laboured
heartily,  and  honestly  encouraged  the  inferiour  sort  to
worke.  So  that  the  small  tyme  of  that  little  leisure
that  was  left  to  tarrie,  was  spent  in  vaine.

The  second  of  August  the  Gabriel  arrived,  who  came
from  the  Vizeadmirall,  and  beeing  distressed  sore  with
Yce, put  into Harborough neere  unto Mount  Oxford.

348

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.
And  now  was  the  whole  Fleete  arrived  safely  at  their
Port,  excepting  foure,  besides  the  Shippe  that  was  lost :
that  is,  the  Thomas  Allen,  the  Anne  Francis,  the  Thomas
of  Ipswich,  and  the  Moone,  whose  absence  was  some
lette  unto  the  workes  and  other  proceedings,  aswell  for
that  these  Shippes  were  furnished  with  the  better  sorte  of
Myners,  as  with  other  provision  for  the  habitation.

The  ninth  of  August  the  Generall  with  the  Captaynes
of  his  counsell  assembled  together,  and  began  to  consider
and  take  order  for  the  erecting  up  of  the  house  or  Fort
for them that  were to  inhabite there  the  whole  yeere,  [III.  86.]
and that presently the Masons and Carpenters might
goe in hande  therewith. First therefore they perused  Consultation
the Bils of  lading, what every man received  into his  -^'  inhabiting
Shippe,  and  found  that  there  was  arrived  onely  the  East-  ^^^^
side,  and  the Southside  of  the  house,  and  yet  not  that
perfect  and  entier :  for  many  pieces  thereof  were  used  for
fenders  in  many  Shippes,  and  so  broken  in  pieces  whilest
they  were  distressed  in  the  yce. Also  after  due  examina-
tion had,  and  true  account  taken,  there  was  found  want  of
drinke  and  fuel  to  serve  one  hundreth  men,  which  was  ^«  hundred
the number appoynted first  to inhabite there, because  '"^f  appointed
their  greatest  store  was  in  the  Shippes  which  were  not
yet  arrived. Then  Captaine  Fenton  seeing  the  scarcitie
of  the  necessary things aforesayd, was contented, and
ofFred  himselfe  to  inhabite  there  with  sixtie  men. Where-  ^0  habitation
upon they  caused  the  Carpenters  and  Masons  to come  ^^"  y^^^^-
before  them,  and  demanded  in  what  time  they  would  take
upon them to erect up a  lesse house for sixtie  men.
They required eight or nine weekes, if there were
Tymber sufficient,  whereas now  they  had  but  sixe  and
twentie dayes in all to remayne in that Countrey.
Wherefore it was fully  agreed  upon,  and  resolved by
the  Generall  and  his  counsell,  that  no  habitation  should
be  there  this  yeere. And  therefore  they  willed  Master
Selman  the Register to set  downe  this  decree  with  all
their  consents,  for  the  better  satisfying  of  her  Majestic,
the  Lords  of  the  Counsell,  and  the  Adventurers.

349

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

The Anne  Francis, since shee was parted from the
Fleete,  in  the  last  storme  before  spoken  of,  could  never
recover  above  five  leagues  within  the  streights,  the  winde
being  sometime  contrary,  and  most  times  the  Yce  com-
passing them  round  about. And  from  that  time,  being
about  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  July,  they  could  neither
heare  nor  have  sight  of  any  of  the  Fleete,  until  the  3.
of  August,  when  they  descryed  a  sayle  neere  unto  Mount
Oxford,  with  whom  when  they  had  spoken,  they  could
understand  no  newes  of  any  of  the  Fleete  at  all. And
this  was  the  Thomas  of  Ipswich,  who  had  layne  beating
off  and  on  at  Sea  with  very  fowle  weather,  and  contrary
windes,  ever  since  that  foresayd  storme,  without  sight  of
any  man. They  kept  company  not  long  together,  but
were  forced  to  loose  one  another  againe,  the  Moone  being
consort  alwayes  with  the  Anne  Francis,  and  keeping  very
good  company  plyed  up  together  into  the  streights,  with
great  desire  to  recover  their  long  wished  Port :  and  they
attempted  as often,  and  passed  as  farre  as possible  the
winde,  weather,  &  yce  gave  them  leave,  which  commonly
they found  very  contrary. For  when  the  weather  was
cleare  and  without  fogge,  then  commonly  the  winde  was
contrary. And  when  it  was  eyther  Easterly  or  Southerly,
which  would  serve  their  turnes,  then  had  they  so  great
a  fogge  and  darke  miste  therewith,  that  eyther  they  could
not discerne  way  thorow  the  yce,  or  els  the  yce  lay  so
thicke  together,  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  passe.
And  on  the  other  side,  when  it  was  calme, the  Tydes
had  force  to  bring  the  yce  so  suddenly  about  them,  that
commonly then they were most therewith distressed,
having no Winde to cary them from the danger
thereof.

And  by  the  sixt  of  August  being  with  much  adoe
got  up  as  high  as  Leicester  point,  they  had  good  hope
to  finde  the  Souther  shore  cleare,  and  so  to  passe  up
towardes  their  Port.  But  being  there  becalmed  and
lying  a  hull  openly  upon  the  great  Bay  which  commeth
out  of  the  mistaken  streights  before  spoken  of,  they  were

350

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.

so  suddenly  compassed  with  yce  round  about  by  meanes
of  the  swift  Tydes  which  run  in  that  place,  that  they  were
never  afore  so  hardly  beset  as  now.  And  in  seeking
to  avoyde  these  dangers  in  the  darke  weather,  the  Anne
Francis  lost  sight  of  the  other  two  Ships,  who  being
likewise  hardly  distressed,  signified  their  danger,  as  they
since  reported,  by  shooting  off  their  ordinance,  which  the
other  could  not  heare,  nor  if  they  had  heard,  could  have
given  them  any  remedie,  being  so  busily  occupied  to
winde  themselves  out  of  their  owne  troubles.

The  Fleeboate  called  the  Moone,  was  here  heaved  The  Moone.
above  the  water  with  the  force  of  the  yce,  and  received
a  great  leake  thereby.  Likewise  the  Thomas  of  Ipswich,
and  the  Anne  Francis  were  sore  brused  at  that  instant,
having  their  false  stemmes  borne  away,  and  their  ship
sides  stroken  quite  through.

Now  considering  the  continuall  dangers  and  contraries,
and  the  little  leasure  that  they  had  left  to  tarie  in  these
partes,  besides  that  every  night  the  ropes  of  their  Shippes
were  so  frozen,  that  a  man  could  not  handle  them  without
cutting  his handes,  together  with  the  great  doubt  they
had  of  the  Fleetes  safety,  thinking  it  an  impossibilitie  for
them to passe unto  their Port, as well for that they
saw themselves,  as for that they  heard  by the  former
report  of  the  Shippes  which had  prooved before,  who
affirmed  that the  streights  were  all  frozen  over  within :
They  thought  it  now  very  hie  time  to  consider  of  their
estates and  safeties that  were yet  left together. And
hereupon  the  Captaines  and masters of  these Shippes,
desired the  Captaine  of  the  Anne  Francis  to  enter  into  The  Jme
consideration with them of  these matters. Wherefore  £,?1"^'/?
Captame  Tanfield  or  the  Thomas  or  Ipswich,  with  his  ip^^ch  and
Pilot  Richard  Cox,  and  Captaine  Upcote  of  the  Moone,  the  Moone con-
with his master John  Lakes came aboorde the Anne  i^^lt.
Francis  the  eight  of  August  to  consult  of  these  causes,  t^^^-  ^7-j
And being  assembled  together in the  Captaines  Cabin,
sundry  doubts  were  there  alledged. For  the  fearefuUer
sort  of Mariners being overtyred with the continuall

351

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

labour  of  the  former  dangers,  coveted  to  returne  home-
ward, saying  that  they  would  not  againe  tempt  God  so
much,  who  had  given  them  so  many  warnings,  and
delivered  them  from  so  wonderful!  dangers :  that  they
rather  desired  to  lose  wages,  fraight,  and  all,  then  to
continue  and  follow  such  desperate  fortunes.  Againe,
their  Ships  were  so  leake,  and  the  men  so  wearie,  that
to  amend  the  one,  and  refresh  the  other,  they  must  of
necessitie  seeke  into  harborough.

But  on  the  other  side  it  was  argued  againe  to  the
contrary,  that  to  seeke  into  harborough  thereabouts,  was
but  to  subject  themselves  to  double  dangers :  if  happily
they  escaped  the  dangers  of  Rockes  in  their  entring,  yet
being  in,  they  were  neverthelesse  subject  there  to  the
danger  of  the  Ice,  which  with  the  swift  tydes  and  currents
is  caryed  in  and  out  in  most  harboroughs  thereabouts,
and  may  thereby  gaule  their  Cables  asunder,  drive  them
upon  the  shoare,  and  bring  them  to  much  trouble.  Also
the  coast  is  so  much  subject  to  broken  ground  and  rockes,
especially  in  the  mouth  and  entrance  of  every  Har-
borough, that  albeit  the  Channell  be  sounded  over  and
over  againe,  yet  are  you  never  the  neerer  to  discerne
the  dangers.  For  the  bottome  of  the  Sea  holding  like
shape  and  forme  as  the  Land,  being  full  of  hils,  dales,
and  ragged  Rockes,  suffreth  you  not  by  your  soundings
to  knowe  and  keepe  a  true  gesse  of  the  depth.  For  you
shall  sound  upon  the  side  or  hollownesse  of  one  Hill
or  Rocke  under  water,  and  have  a  hundreth,  fiftie,  or
fourtie  fadome  depth :  and  before  the  next  cast,  yer
you  shall  be  able  to  heave  your  lead  againe,  you  shall
be  upon  the  toppe  thereof,  and  come  aground  to  your
utter  confusion.

Another  reason  against  going  to  harborough  was,  that
the  colde  ayre  did  threaten  a  sudden  freezing  up  of  the
sounds,  seeing  that  every  night  there  was  new  congealed
yce,  even  of  that  water  which  remayned  within  their
shippes.  And  therefore  it  should  seeme  to  be  more  safe
to  lye  off  and  on  at  Sea,  then  for  lacke  of  winde  to  bring

352

Bests  resolu-
tion.

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.
them  foorth  of  harborough,  to  hazard  by  sudden  frosts
to  be  shut  up  the  whole  yeere.

After  many  such  dangers  and  reasons  alledged,  and
large  debating  of  these  causes  on  both  sides,  the  Captaine
of  the  Anne  Francis  delivered  his  opinion  unto  the
company  to  this  effect.  First  concerning  the  question  Captaine
of  returning  home,  hee  thought  it  so  much  dishonorable,
as  not  to  grow  in  any  farther  question :  and  againe  to
returne  home  at  length  (as  at  length  they  must  needes)
and  not  to  be  able  to  bring  a  certaine  report  of  the  Fleete,
whether  they  were  living  or  lost,  or  whether  any  of  them
had  recovered  their  Port  or  not,  in  the  Countesses  sound,
(as  it  was  to  bee  thought  the  most  part  would  if  they
were  living)  hee  sayde  that  it  would  be  so  great  an
argument  eyther  of  want  of  courage  or  discretion  in  them,
as  hee  resolved  rather  to  fall  into  any  danger,  then  so
shamefully  to  consent  to  returne  home,  protesting  that
it  should  never  bee  spoken  of  him,  that  hee  would  ever
returne  without  doing  his  endevour  to  finde  the  Fleete,
and  knowe  the  certaintie  of  the  Generals  safetie.  Hee
put  his  company  in  remembrance  of  a  Pinnisse  of  ^P^^^^^^Pj"
five  tunne  burthen,  which  hee  had  within  his  Shippe,
which  was  caryed  in  pieces,  and  unmade  up  for  the
use  of  those  which  should  inhabite  there  the  whole  yeere,
the  which,  if  they  could  finde  meanes  to  joyne  together,
hee  offered  himselfe  to  proove  before  therewith,  whether
it  were  possible  for  any  Boate  to  passe  for  yce,  whereby
the  Shippe  might  bee  brought  in  after,  and  might  also
thereby  give  true  notice,  if  any  of  the  Fleete  were
arrived  at  their  Port  or  not.

But  notwithstanding,  for  that  he  well  perceived  that
the  most  part  of  his  company  were  addicted  to  put  into
harborough,  hee  was  willing  the  rather  for  these  causes
somewhat  to  encline  thereunto.  At  first,  to  search  alongst
the  same  coast,  and  the  soundes  thereabouts,  hee  thought
it  to  be  to  good  purpose,  for  that  it  was  likely  to  finde
some  of  the  Fleete  there,  which  being  leake,  and  sore
brused  with  the  yce,  were  the  rather  thought  likely  to  be
VII  353  2

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

put  into  an  yll  harborough,  being  distressed  with  foule
weather  in  the  last  storme,  then  to  hazard  their  uncertaine
safeties  amongst  the  yce :  for  about  this  place  they  lost
them,  and  left  the  Fleete  then  doubtfully  questioning
of  harborough.

It  was  likely,  also,  that  they  might  iinde  some  fitte
harborough  thereabouts,  which  might  bee  behoovefull
for  them  against  another  time.  It  was  not  likewise  im-
possible to  finde  some  Ore  or  Mine  thereabouts  where-  _
withall  to  fraight  their  Shippes,  which  would  bee  more
commodious  in  this  place,  for  the  neerenesse  to  Seaward,
and  for  a  better  outlet,  then  farther  within  the  streights,  ;
being  likely  heere  alwayes  to  loade  in  a  shorter  time,
howsoever  the  streight  should  be  pestered  with  yce
within,  so  that  if  it  might  come  to  passe  that  thereby
they  might  eyther  finde  the  Fleete,  Mine,  or  convenient
harborough,  any  of  these  three  would  serve  their  present

[III.  88.]  turnes, and give some hppe and comfort unto their
companies,  which  now  were  altogether  comfortlesse. But
if  that  all  fortune  should  fall  out  so  contrary,  that  they
could neyther recover their Port, nor any of these  1
aforesayde  helpes,  that yet they  v/ould not  depart the
Coast,  as  long  as  it  was  possible  for  them  to  tary  there,
but  would  lye  off  and  on  at  Sea  athwart  the  place. There-
fore his finall conclusion was set downe thus. First,
that the Thomas of Ipswich and the Moone should
consort  and keepe  company  together  carefully  with the  j
Anne  Francis,  as  neere  as  they  could,  and  as  true  English-
men  and  faithfull friends, should supply  one anothers
want in all fortunes and dangers. In the morning  ■
following, every Shippe to send off  his  Boate  with a  >
sufficient  Pylot,  to  search  out  and  sound  the  harboroughs
for  the  safe  bringing  in  of  their  Shippes. And beeing
arrived  in  harborough,  where  they  might  finde  convenient
place  for  the  purpose,  they  resolved  foorthwith  to  joyne  |
and  sette  together  the  Pinnesse,  wherewithall  the  Captaine
of  the Anne Francis might, according to his former
determination,  discover  up  into  the  streights.

354  !

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.

After  these  determinations  thus  set  downe,  the  Thomas
of  Ipswich  the  night  following  lost  company  of  the  other
Shippes,  and  afterward  shaped  a  contrary  course  home-
ward, which  fell  out  as  it  manifestly  appeared,  very  much
against  their  Captaine  Master  Tanfields  minde,  as  by  due
examination  before  the  Lordes  of  her  Majesties  most
honourable  privie  Counsell  it  hath  since  bene  prooved,  to
the  great  discredite  of  the  Pilot  Cox,  who  specially
persuaded  his  company  against  the  opinion  of  his  sayd
Captaine,  to  returne  home.

And  as  the  Captaine  of  the  Anne  Francis  doeth
witnesse,  even  at  their  conference  togither,  Captaine
Tanfield  tolde  him,  that  he  did  not  a  little  suspect  the
sayd  Pilot  Cox,  saying  that  he  had  opinion  in  the  man
neither  of  honest  duetie,  manhoode,  nor  constancie.
Notwithstanding  the  sayde  Shippes  departure,  the  Cap-
taine of  the  Anne  Francis  being  desirous  to  put  in
execution  his  former  resolutions,  went  with  his  Shippe
boate  (being  accompanied  also  with  the  Moones  Skiffe)
to  proove  amongst  the  Hands  which  lye  under  Hattons
Hedland,  if  any  convenient  harborough,  or  any  knowledge
of  the  Fleete,  or  any  good  Ore  were  there  to  be  found.
The  Shippes  lying  off  and  on  at  Sea  the  while  under
Sayle,  searching  through  many  sounds,  they  sawe  them
all  full  of  many  dangers  and  broken  ground :  yet  one
there  was,  which  seemed  an  indifferent  place  to  har-
borough in,  and  which  they  did  very  diligently  sound
over,  and  searched  againe.

Here  the  sayde  Captaine  found  a  great  blacke  Hand,
whereunto  hee  had  good  liking,  and  certifying  the
company  thereof,  they  were  somewhat  comforted,  and
with  the  good  hope  of  his  wordes  rowed  cheerefuUy  unto
the  place :  where  when  they  arrived,  they  found  such
plentie  of  blacke  Ore  of  the  same  sort  which  was  brought
into  England  this  last  yeere,  that  if  the  goodnesse  might
answere  the  great  plentie  thereof,  it  was  to  be  thought
that  it  might  reasonably  suffice  all  the  golde-gluttons  of
the  world. This  Hand  the  Captaine  for  cause  of  his  good

355

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.
Bestes  bless- hap,  called  after  his  owne  name,  Bestes  blessing,  and  with
^^^'  these  good  tydings  returning  aboord  his  Ship  the  ninth  |

of  August  about  tenne  of  the  clocke  at  night,  hee  was  i
joyfully  welcommed  of  his  company,  who  before  were  i
discomforted,  and  greatly  expected  some  better  fortune  i
at  his  handes.  '

The  next  day  being  the  tenth  of  August,  the  weather  ''<
reasonably fayre, they put into the foresayde Har-
borough, having their Boate for their better securitie  \
sounding  before  their  Shippe. But  for  all  the  care  and  :
diligence  that  could  bee  taken  in  sounding  the  Channell  1
Anne  Francis over and  over  againe,  the  Anne  Francis  came  aground
tn  danger. upon  a  suncken  Rocke  within  the  Harborough,  and  lay
thereon  more  then  halfe  drye  untill  the  next  flood,  when
by  Gods Almighty providence, contrary almost to all  \
expectation,  they  came  afloat  againe,  being  forced  all  that  .
time  to  undersette  their  Shippe  with  their  mayne  Yarde,  \
which  otherwise  was  likely  to  overset  and  put  thereby  in
danger the whole company. They had above two
thousand strokes together at the Pumpe,  before they
could  make  their  Shippe  free  of  the  water  againe,  so  sore
The  Moone  in  shee  was  brused  by  lying  upon  the  Rockes. The  Moone
harborough. ^^me safely,  and  roade  at  anchor  by  the  Anne  Francis,
whose  helpe  in  their  necessitie  they  could  not  well  have
missed.

Now  whilest  the  Mariners  were  romaging  their  Shippes,
and  mending  that  which  was  amisse,  the  Miners  followed
their  labour  for  getting  together  of  sufficient  quantitie  of
Ore,  and  the  Carpenters  indevoured  to  doe  their  best  for
the  making  up  of  the  Boate  or  Pinnesse :  which  to  bring  ,
to  passe,  they  wanted  two  speciall  and  most  necessarie
things,  that  is,  certaine  principall  tymbers  that  are  called
Knees,  which  are  the  chiefest  strength  of  any  Boate,  and
also  nayles,  wherewithall  to  joyne  the  plancks  together.
Whereupon  having  by  chance  a  Smyth  amongst  them,
(and  yet  unfurnished  of  his  necessary  tooles  to  worke  and
[III.  89.]  make  nayles  withall)  they  were  faine  of  a  gunne  chamber  ,
to  make  an  Anvile  to  worke  upon,  and  to  use  a  pickaxe  |

356  !

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.
in  stead  of  a  sledge  to  beate  withall,  and  also  to  occupy
two  small  bellowes  in  steade  of  one  payre  of  greater
Smiths  bellowes.  And  for  lacke  of  small  Yron  for  the
easier  making  of  the  nayles,  they  were  forced  to  breake
their  tongs,  grydiron,  and  fireshovell  in  pieces.

The  eleventh  of  August  the  Captaine  of  the  Anne
Francis  taking  the  Master  of  his  Shippe  with  him,  went
up  to  the  toppe  of  Hattons  Hedland,  which  is  the  highest  HattonsHed-
land  of  all  the  streights,  to  the  ende  to  descry  the  ^'^^^-
situation  of  the  Countrey  underneath,  and  to  take  a  true
plotte  of  the  place,  whereby  also  to  see  what  store  of  Yce
was  yet  left  in  the  streights,  as  also  to  search  what
Mineral  matter  or  fruite  that  soyle  might  yeeld :  And
the  rather  for  the  honour  the  said  Captaine  doeth  owe
to  that  Honourable  name  which  himselfe  gave  thereunto
the  last  yeere,  in  the  highest  part  of  this  Hedland  he
caused  his  company  to  make  a  Columne  or  Crosse  of
stone,  in  token  of  Christian  possession.  In  this  place
there  is  plentie  of  Blacke  Ore,  and  divers  pretie  stones.  Pretie  stones.

The  seventeenth  of  August  the Captaines  with  their  ^  mightie
companies  chaced  and  killed  a  great  white  Beare,  which  "^hite  Beare.
adventured  and  gave  a  fierce  assault  upon  twentie  men
being  weaponed. And  he  served  them  for  good  meate
many  dayes.

The  eighteenth  of  August  the  Pinnesse  with  much  ^  P'mnesse
adoe  being  set  together,  the  sayd  Captaine  Best  deter-  ^^^^^  ^«^^'^-
mined  to  depart  up  the  streights,  to  proove  and  make
tryall,  as  before  was  pretended,  some  of  his  company
greatly  persuading  him  to  the  contrary,  and  specially  the
Carpenter  that  set  the  same  together,  who  sayde  that  hee
would  not  adventure  himselfe  therein  for  five  hundreth
pounds,  for  that  the  boate  hung  together  but  onely  by
the  strength  of  the  nayles,  and  lacked  some  of  her
principall  knees  and  tymbers.

These  wordes  somewhat  discouraged  some  of  the
company  which  should  have  gone  therein.  Whereupon
the  Captaine,  as  one  not  altogether  addicted  to  his  owne
selfe-will, but somewhat foreseeing how it might be

357

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

afterwards  spoken,  if  contrary  fortune  should  happen  him
(Lo  he  hath  followed  his  owne  opinion  and  desperate
resolutions,  and  so  thereafter  it  is  befallen  him)  calling
the  Master  and  Mariners  of  best  judgement  together,
declared  unto  them  how  much  the  cause  imported  him
in  his  credite  to  seeke  out  the  Generall,  as  well  to  con-
ferre  with  him  of  some  causes  of  weight,  as  otherwise
to  make  due  examination  and  tryall  of  the  goodnesse  of
the  Ore,  whereof  they  had  no  assurance  but  by  gesse  of
the  eye,  and  it  was  well  like  the  other :  which  so  to  cary
home,  not  knowing  the  goodnesse  thereof,  might  be  as
much  as  if  they  should  bring  so  many  stones.  And
therefore  hee  desired  them  to  deliver  their  plaine  and
honest  opinion,  whether  the  Pinnesse  were  sufficient  for
him  so  to  adventure  in  or  no.  It  was  answered,  that  by
carefull  heede  taking  thereunto  amongst  the  yce,  and  the
foule  weather,  the  Pinnesse  might  suffice.  And  here-
upon the  Masters  mate  of  the  Anne  Francis  called  John
Gray,  manfully  and  honestly  offering  himselfe  unto  his
Captaine  in  this  adventure  and  service,  gave  cause  to
others  of  his  Mariners  to  follow  the  attempt.

And  upon  the  nineteenth  of  August  the  sayd  Captaine

being  accompanied  with  Captaine  Upcote  of  the  Moone,

and  eighteene  persons  in  the  small  Pinnesse,  having  con-

The;j  adven-  venient  portion  of  victuals  and  things  necessary,  departed

tiire^  i>y  the ^pon  the  sayd  pretended  Voyage,  leaving  their  shippe  at

we^e  Pin- ^'^chor in a  good  readinesse for  the  taking  in  of  their

nesse.  fraight. And having  little  winde  to  sayle withall, they

plyed  alongst  the  Souther  shore,  and passed  above  30.

leagues, having the onely  helpe of  mans labour  with

Oares,  and  so  intending  to  keepe  that  shore  aboord  until

they  were got  up to  the farthest  and  narrowest  of  the

streights, minded there to crosse over,  and to search

likewise alongst the Northerland unto the Countesses

sound,  and from thence to passe all that coast  along,

whereby if  any of  the Fleete had bene distressed  by

wrecke  of  rocke  or  yce,  by  that  meanes  they  might  be

perceived  of  them,  and  so  they  thereby  to  give  them  such

358

MARTIN FROBISHER  ad.

1578.
helpe  and  reliefe  as  they  could. They  did  greatly  feare,
and ever suspect that some of  the Fleete  were surely
cast  away,  and  driven  to  seeke  sowre  sallets  amongst  the
colde  cliffes.

And  being  shotte  up  about  fortie  leagues  within  the  4°-  leagues
Streights,  they  put  over  towardes  the  Norther  shore,  ^^^^^"  ^^^
which  was  not  a  little  dangerous  for  their  small  boates.
And  by  meanes  of  a  sudden  flawe  were  dryven,  and  faine
to  seeke  harborough  in  the  night  amongst  all  the  rockes
and  broken  ground  of  Gabriels  Hands,  a  place  so  named  Gabriels
within  the  streights  above  the  Countesse  of  Warwicks  ^^  ^'
sound :  And  by  the  way  where  they  landed,  they  did
finde  certaine  great  stones  set  up  by  the  Countrey  people
as  it  seemed,  for  markes,  where  they  also  made  many
Crosses  of  stone,  in  token  that  Christians  had  bene  there.
The  22.  of  August  they  had  sight  of  the  Countesses
sound,  and  made  the  place  perfect  from  the  toppe  of  a
hill,  and  keeping  along  the  Norther  shore,  perceived  the
smoke  of  a  fire  under  a  hils  side :  whereof  they  diversly  [HI.  90.]
deemed.  When  they  came  neere  the  place,  they  per-
ceived people  which  wafted  unto  them,  as  it  seemed,  with
a  flagge  or  ensigne.  And  because  the  Countrey  people
had  used  to  doe  the  like,  when  they  perceived  any  of  our
boats  to  passe  by,  they  suspected  them  to  be  the  same.
And  comming  somewhat  neerer,  they  might  perceive
certaine  tents,  and  discerne  this  ensigne  to  be  of  mingled
colours,  blacke  and  white,  after  the  English  fashion.  But
because  they  could  see  no  Shippe,  nor  likelihood  of
harborough  within  five  or  sixe  leagues  about,  and  knewe
that  none  of  our  men  were  woont  to  frequent  those
partes,  they  could  not  tell  what  to  judge  thereof,  but
imagined  that  some  of  the  ships  being  carried  so  high
with  the  storme  and  mistes,  had  made  shipwracke  amongst
the  yce  or  the  broken  Islands  there,  and  were  spoyled
by  the  countrey  people,  who  might  use  the  sundry
coloured  flagge  for  a  policie,  to  bring  them  likewise
within  their  danger.  Whereupon  the  sayd  Captaine  with
his  companies,  resolved  to  recover  the  same  ensigne,  if  it

359

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

were  so,  from  those  base  people,  or  els  to  lose  their  lives,
and  all  together.  In  the  ende  they  discerned  them  to  be
their  countreymen,  and  then  they  deemed  them  to  have
lost  their  Ships,  and  so  to  be  gathered  together  for  their
better  strength.  On  the  other  side,  the  company  ashoare
feared  that  the  Captaine  having  lost  his  Shippe,  came  to
seeke  forth  the  Fleete  for  his  reliefe  in  his  poore  Pin-
nisse,  so  that  their  extremities  caused  eche  part  to  suspect
the  worst.

The  Captaine  now  with  his  Pinnisse  being  come  neere
the  shoare,  commanded  his  Boate  carefully  to  be  kept
aflote,  lest  in  their  necessitie  they  might  winne  the  same
from  him,  and  seeke  first  to  save  themselves :  for  every
Proxmus  sum  man  in  that  case  is  next  himselfe.  They  haled  one
egomet  mihi.  another  according  to  the  manner  of  the  Sea,  and  de-
maunded  what  cheere  .?  and  either  partie  answered  the
other,  that  all  was  well :  whereupon  there  was  a  sudden
and  joyfull  outshoote,  with  great  flinging  up  of  caps,  and
a  brave  voly  of  shotte  to  welcome  one  another.  And
truely  it  was  a  most  strange  case  to  see  how  joyfull
and  gladde  every  partie  was  to  see  themselves  meete  in
safetie  againe,  after  so  strange  and  incredible  dangers :
Yet  to  be  short,  as  their  dangers  were  great,  so  their
God  was  greater.

And  here  the  company  were  working  upon  new  Mines,
CaptainYorke  which  Captaine  Yorke  being  here  arrived  not  long
arrived.  before,  had  found  out  in  this  place,  and  it  is  named  the

Countesse  of  Sussex  Mine.

After  some  conference  with  our  friends  here,  the
Captaine  of  the  Anne  Francis  departed  towards  the
Countesse  of  Warwicks  sound,  to  speake  with  the
Generall,  and  to  have  tryall  made  of  such  mettall  as
he  had  brought  thither,  by  the  Goldfiners.  And  so  he
determined  to  dispatch  againe  towards  his  ship.  And
having  spoken  with  the  General,  he  received  order  for
all  causes,  and  direction  as  well  for  the  bringing  up  of  his
Shippe  to  the  Countesses  sound,  as  also  to  fraight  his
Ship with the same Oare which he himselfe had

360

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.
found, which upon triall made, was supposed to be
very  good.

The  23.  of  August,  the  sayd  Captaine  mette  together
with  the  other  Captaines  (Commissioners  in  counsell  with
the  Generall)  aboorde  the  Ayde,  where  they  considered
and  consulted  of  sundry  causes,  which  being  particularly
registred  by  the  Notarie,  were  appoynted  where  and
how  to  be  done  against  another  yeere.

The  24.  of  August,  the  Generall  with  two  Pinnisses
and  good  numbers  of  men  went  to  Beares  sound,  com-
manding the  sayde  Captaine  with  his  Pinnesse  to  attend
the  service,  to  see  if  he  could  encounter  or  apprehend  any
of  the  people :  for  sundry  times  they  shewed  themselves
busie  thereabouts,  sometimes  with  seven  or  eyght  Boates
in  one  company,  as  though  they  minded  to  encounter
with  our  company  which  were  working  there  at  the
Mines,  in  no  great  numbers.  But  when  they  perceived
any  of  our  Shippes  to  ryde  in  that  roade  (being  belike
more  amazed  at  the  countenance  of  a  Shippe,  and  a  more
number  of  men)  they  did  never  shewe  themselves  againe  ^o^e  of  the
there  at  all.  Wherefore  our  men  sought  with  thciv  P'^^^ ""'"  ^'
Pinnisses  to  compasse  about  the  Hand  where  they  did
use,  supposing  there  suddenly  to  intercept  some  of  them.
But  before  our  men  could  come  neere,  having  belike
some  watch  in  the  toppe  of  the  mountaines,  they  con-
veyed themselves  privily  away,  and  left  (as  it  should
seeme)  one  of  their  great  dartes  behinde  them  for  haste,
which  we  found  neere  to  a  place  of  their  caves  and
housing.  Therefore,  though  our  Generall  were  very
desirous  to  have  taken  some  of  them  to  have  brought
into  England,  they  being  now  growen  more  wary  by
their  former  losses,  would  not  at  any  time  come  within
our  dangers.  About  midnight  of  the  same  day,  the
captaine  of  the  Anne  Francis  departed  thence  and  set  his
course  over  the  streights  towards  Hattons  Hedland,  being
about  15.  leagues  over,  and  returned  aboord  his  Shippe
the  25.  of  August,  to  the  great  comfort  of  his  company,
who long  expected his  comming,  where  hee  found  his

361

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

Shippes  ready  rigged  and  loden.  Wherefore  he  departed
from  thence  againe  the  next  morning  towards  the
[III.  91.]  Countesses  sound,  where  he  arrived  the  28.  of  the  same.
By  the  way  he  set  his  Miners  ashore  at  Beares  sound,
for  the  better  dispatch  and  gathering  the  Ore  togither :
for  that  some  of  the  ships  were  behind  hand  with  their
fraight,  the  time  of  the  yeere  passing  suddenly  away.

The  thirtith  of  August  the  Anne  Francis  was  brought
aground,  and  had  8.  great  leakes  mended  which  she  had
received  by  meanes  of  the  rocks  and  yce. This  day  the
A  house  Masons  finished  a  house  which  Captaine  Fenton  caused

buiided  and  ^^  j^^  made  of  lyme  and  stone  upon  the  Countesse  of
Warwickes  Island,  to  the  ende  we  might  prove  against
the  next  yeere,  whither  the  snow  could  overwhelme  it,
the  frost  breake  it  up,  or  the  people  dismember  the  same.
And  the  better  to  allure  those  brutish  and  uncivill  people
to  courtesie  against  other  times  of  our  comming,  we  left
therein  divers  of  our  Countrey  toyes,  as  belles,  and
knives,  wherein  they  specially  delight,  one  for  the  neces-
sary use,  and  the  other  for  the  great  pleasure  thereof.
Also  pictures  of  men  and  women  in  lead,  men  on  horse-
backe,  looking  glasses,  whistles,  and  pipes.  Also  in  the
house  was  made  an  Oven,  and  bread  left  baked  therein
for  them  to  see  and  taste.

We  buried  the  timber  of  our pretended fort. Also
here  we  sowed  pease,  corne,  and  other  graine,  to  prove
the  fruitfulnesse  of  the  soyle  against  the  next  yeere.
M.  Wolfall  a Master  Wolfall  on  Winters  Fornace  preached  a  godly
^°  y  sermon,  which being  ended,  he  celebrated  also  a  Com-

munion upon  the  land,  at  the  partaking  whereof  was  the
Captaine  of  the  Anne  Francis,  and  many  other  Gentlemen
and  Souldiers,  Mariners,  and  Miners  with  him.  The
celebration  of  the  divine  mystery  was  the  first  signe,
scale,  and  confirmation  of  Christs  name,  death,  and
passion  ever  knowen  in  these  quarters.  The  said  M.
Wolfall  made  sermons,  and  celebrated  the  Communion  at
sundry  other  times,  in  severall  and  sundry  ships,  because
the  whole  company  could  never  meet  together  at  any  one

362

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.
place. The  Fleet  now  being  in  some  good  readinesse  for
their  lading,  the  Generall  calling  together  the  Gentlemen
and Captaines to consult,  told them that he  was  very
desirous  that  some  further  discovery  should  be  attempted,
and  that  he  would  not  onely  by  Gods  helpe  bring  home
his  Ships  laden  with  Ore,  but  also  meant  to  bring  some
certificate  of  a  further  discovery  of  the  Countrey,  which
thing to bring  to  passe  (having  sometime  therein  con-
sulted) they found very hard, and almost invincible.
And  considering  that  already  they  had  spent  sometime  in  Consultation
searching  out  the  trending  and  fashion  of  the  mistaken  J°!.  ^•'^^^  ^^
straites,  therefore  it  could  not  be  sayd,  but  that  by  this
voyage  they  have  notice  of  a  further  discovery,  and  that
the hope  of  the  passage  thereby  is  much  furthered  and
encreased,  as appeared before  in the discourse thereof.
Yet notwithstanding if  any meanes might be further
devised, the Captaines  were contented and willing, as
the  Generall  shoulde  appoynt  and  commaund,  to  take  any
enterprise in hand. Which after long debating was
found  a  thing  very  impossible,  and  that  rather  consulta-
tion was  to  be  had  of  returning  homeward,  especially  for
these  causes  following. First  the  darke  io^^y  mists,  the
continuall falling  snowe  and  stormy  weather  which  they
commonly  were  vexed  with,  and  now  daily  ever  more  and
more  increased,  have  no  small  argument  of  the  Winters
drawing  neere. And  also  the  frost  every  night  was  so
hard  congealed  within  the  sound,  that  if  by  evill  hap  they
should bee long kept in  with contrary  winds, it  was
greatly  to  be  feared,  that  they  should  be  shut  up  there
fast the whole yeere,  which being utterly unprovided,
would  be  their  utter  destruction. Againe,  drinke  was  so
scant  throughout  all  the Fleet by  meanes  of  the  great
leakage, that not onely the provision which was layd
in for  the habitation  was  wanting  and  wasted,  but  also
each shippes severall provision spent and lost, which
many  of  our  company  to  their  great  griefe  found  in  their
returne since, for  all the way homewards they dranke
nothing  but  water. And  the  great  cause  of  this  leakage

363

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

and  wasting  was,  for  that  the  great  timber  and  seacole,
which  lay  so  waighty  upon  the  barrels,  brake,  bruised,
and  rotted  the  hoopes  insunder.  Yet  notwithstanding
these  reasons  alleaged  the  Generall  himselfe  (willing  the
rest  of  the  Gentlemen  and  Captaines  every  man  to  looke
to  his  severall  charge  and  lading,  that  against  a  day
appointed,  they  should  be  all  in  a  readinesse  to  set
homeward)  went  in  a  Pinnesse  and  discovered  further
Northward  in  the  straights,  and  found  that  by  Beares
sound  and  Halles  Island,  the  land  was  not  firme,  as  it  was
Broken  Hands  first  supposed,  but  all  broken  Islands  in  maner  of  an
tnmanerofan  Archipelagus,  and  so  with  other  secret  intelligence  to
'  himselfe,  he  returned  to  the  Fleet.  Where  presently
upon  his  arrivall  at  the  Countesses  sound,  he  began  to
take  order  for  their  returning  homeward,  and  first  caused
certaine  Articles  to  be  proclaimed,  for  the  better  keeping
of  orders  and  courses  in  their  returne,  which  Articles  were
delivered  to  every  Captaine.

The  Fleetes  returning  homeward.

Aving  now  received  Articles  and  directions  for  our
returne homewards,  all other  things being in for-
wardnesse  and in good order, the  last day of  August
[III.  92.] the  whole  Fleete departed  from the  Countesses  sound,
excepting  the  Judith,  and  the  Anne  Francis,  who  stayed
for  the  taking  in  of  fresh  water,  and  came  the  next  day
and  mette  the Fleete  lying off  and on,  athwart  Beares
sound,  who  stayed  for  the  Generall,  which  then  was  gone
Returne  home-  ashore to dispatch the two Barkes and the Busse of
ward.  Bridgewater,  for  their  loading,  whereby  to  get  the  com-

panies and  other  things  aboord.  The  Captaine  of  the
Anne  Francis  having  most  part  of  his  company  ashore,
the  first  of  September  went  also  to  Beares  sound  in  his
Pinnesse  to  fetch  his  men  aboord,  but  the  wind  grewe
so  great  immediatly  upon  their  landing,  that  the  shippes
at  Sea  were  in  great  danger,  and  some  of  them  forcibly
put  from  their  ankers,  and  greatly  feared  to  be  utterly
lost,  as  the  Hopewell,  wherein  was  Captaine  Carew  and

364

H

MARTIN FROBISHER  a.d.

1578.
others,  who  could  not  tell  on  which  side  their  danger
was  most :  for  having  mightie  rockes  threatning  on  the
one  side,  and  driving  Islands  of  cutting  yce  on  the  other
side,  they  greatly  feared  to  make  shipwracke,  the  yce
driving  so  neere  them  that  it  touched  their  bolt-sprit.
And  by  meanes  of  the  Sea  that  was  growne  so  hie,  they
were  not  able  to  put  to  sea  with  their  small  Pinnesses
to  recover  their  shippes.  And  againe,  the  shippes  were
not  able  to  tarrie  or  lie  athwart  for  them,  by  meanes  of
the  outragious  windes  and  swelling  seas.  The  Generall
willed  the  Captaine  of  the  Anne  Francis  with  his  com-
pany, for  that  night  to  lodge  aboord  the  Busse  of
Bridgewater,  and  went  himselfe  with  the  rest  of  his  men
aboord  the  Barkes.  But  their  numbers  were  so  great,
and  the  provision  of  the  Barkes  so  scant,  that  they
pestered  one  another  exceedingly.  They  had  great  hope
that  the  next  morning  the  weather  would  be  faire,
whereby  they  might  recover  their  shippes.  But  in  the
morning  following  it  was  much  worse,  for  the  storme
continued  greater,  the  Sea  being  more  swollen,  and  the
Fleete  gone  quite  out  of  sight.  So  that  now  their  doubts
began  to  grow  great :  for  the  ship  of  Bridgewater  which
was  of  greatest  receit,  and  whereof  they  had  best  hope
and  made  most  account,  roade  so  farre  to  leeward  of
the  harborowes  mouth,  that  they  were  not  able  for  the
rockes  (that  lay  betweene  the  wind  and  them)  to  lead
it  out  to  Sea  with  a  saile.  And  the  Barks  were  already
so  pestered  with  men,  and  so  slenderly  furnished  with
provision,  that  they  had  scarce  meat  for  sixe  dayes  for
such  numbers.

The  Generall  in  the  morning  departed  to  Sea  in  the
Gabriel  to  seeke  the  Fleete,  leaving  the  Busse  of  Bridge-
water,  and  the  Michael  behind  in  Beares  sound.  The
Busse  set  sayle,  and  thought  by  turning  in  the  narrow
channell  within  the  harborow  to  get  to  windward :  but
being  put  to  leeward  more,  by  that  meanes  was  faine
to  come  to  anker  for  her  better  safetie,  amongst  a  number
of  rockes,  and  there  left  in  great  danger  of  ever  getting

365

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

forth  againe.  The  Michael  set  sayle  to  follow  the
Generallj  and  could  give  the  Busse  no  reliefe,  although
they  earnestly  desired  the  same.  And  the  Captaine  of
the  Anne  Francis  was  left  in  hard  election  of  two  evils :
eyther  to  abide  his  fortune  with  the  Busse  of  Bridgewater,
which  was  doubtfull  of  ever  getting  forth,  or  else  to  bee
towed  in  his  small  Pinnesse  at  the  sterne  of  the  Michael
thorow  the  raging  Seas,  for  that  the  Barke  was  not  able
to  receive  or  relieve  halfe  his  company,  wherein  his
danger  was  not  a  little  perillous.

So  after  hee  resolved  to  commit  himselfe  with  all  his
company  unto  that  fortune  of  God  and  Sea,  and  was
dangerously  towed  at  the  sterne  of  the  Barke  for  many
miles,  untill  at  length  they  espyed  the  Anne  Francis  under
sayle,  hard  under  their  Lee,  which  was  no  small  comfort
unto  them.  For  no  doubt,  both  those  and  a  great
number  more  had  perished  for  lacke  of  victuals,  and
convenient  roome  in  the  Barks  without  the  helpe  of
the  sayd  Ship.  But  the  honest  care  that  the  Master  of
the  Anne  Francis  had  of  his  Captaine,  and  the  good
regarde  of  duetie  towardes  his  Generall,  suffered  him  not
to  depart,  but  honestly  abode  to  hazard  a  dangerous
roade  all  the  night  long,  notwithstanding  all  the  stormy
weather,  when  all  the  Fleete  besides  departed.  And  the
Pinnesse  came  no  sooner  aboord  the  shippe,  and  the
men  entred,  but  shee  presently  shivered  and  fell  in  pieces
and  sunke  at  the  ships  sterne,  with  all  the  poore  mens
furniture :  so  weake  was  the  boat  with  towing,  and  so
forcible  was  the  sea  to  bruise  her  in  pieces.  But  (as
God  would)  the  men  were  all  saved.

At  this  present  in  this  storme  many  of  the  Fleete
were  dangerously  distressed,  and  were  severed  almost  all
asunder.  Yet,  thanks  be  to  God,  all  the  Fleete  arrived
safely  in  England  about  the  first  of  October,  some  in
one  place  and  some  in  another.  But  amongst  other,  it
was  most  marvellous  how  the  Busse  of  Bridgewater  got
away,  who  being  left  behind  the  Fleete  in  great  danger
of  never  getting  forth,  was  forced  to  seeke  a  way  North-

366

A.D.
1578.

An  unknotven
channell  into
the  Northeast,
discovered  by
the  Busse  of
Bridgewater.

[III.  93.]

A  fruitful
new  Island
discovered.

DESCRIPTION OF META  INCOGNITA

ward  thorow  an  unknowen  channell  full  of  rocks,  upon
the  backe  side  of  Beares  sound,  and  there  by  good  hap
found  out  a  way  into  the  North  sea,  a  very  dangerous
attempt :  save  that  necessitie,  which  hath  no  law,  forced
them  to  trie  masteries.  This  aforesayd  North  sea  is  the
same  which  lyeth  upon  the  backe  side  of  Frobishers
straits,  where  first  the  Generall  himselfe  in  his  Pinnesses,
and  after  some  other  of  our  company  have  discovered
(as  they  affirme)  a  great  foreland,  where  they  would  have
also  a  great  likelihood  of  the  greatest  passage  towards  the
South  sea,  or  Mar  del  Sur.

The  Busse  of  Bridgewater,  as  she  came  homeward,  to
the  Southeastward  of  Friseland,  discovered  a  great  Island
in  the  latitude  of  57  degrees  and  an  halfe,  which  was
never  yet  found  before,  and  sailed  three  dayes  alongst
the  coast,  the  land  seeming  to  be  fruitfull,  full  of  woods,
and  a  champion  Countrey.

There  died  in  the  whole  Fleet  in  all  this  voyage  not
above  forty  persons,  which  number  is  not  great,  con-
sidering how  many  ships  were  in  the  Fleet,  and  how
strange  fortunes  we  passed.

A  generall  and  briefe  description  of  the  Countrey,
and  condition  of  the  people,  which  are  found
in  Meta  Incognita.

Aving  now  sufficiently  and  truly  set  forth
the  whole  circumstance,  and  particuler
handling  of  every  occurrent  in  the  3.
voyages  of  our  worthy  Generall,  Captaine
Frobisher,  it  shal  not  be  from  the  pur-
pose to  speake  somewhat  in  generall  of
the  nature  of  this  Countrey  called  Meta
Incognita,  and  the  condition  of  the  savages  there  in-
habiting.

First  therefore  touching  the  Topographical  description  ^Topograpln-
of  the  place,  It  is  now  found  in  the  last  voyage,  that  '^of Meta  In-"
Queene  Elizabeths  Cape  being  situate  in  latitude  at  61.  capita.

367

A.D.
1578.

The  people  of
Meta  Incog-
nita like  unto
Samoeds.

Their  native
colour.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

degrees  and  a  halfe,  which  before  was  supposed  to  be
part  of  the  firme  land  of  America,  and  also  al  the  rest
of  the  South  side  of  Frobishers  straites,  are  all  severall
Islands  and  broken  land,  and  likewise  so  will  all  the
North  side  of  the  said  straites  fall  out  to  be  as  I  thinke.
And  some  of  our  company  being  entred  above  60.  leagues
within  the  mistaken  straites  in  the  third  voyage  men-
tioned, thought  certainely  that  they  had  discryed  the
firme  land  of  America  towards  the  South,  which  I  thinke
will  fall  out  so  to  be.

These  broken  lands  and  Islands  being  very  many  in
number,  do  seeme  to  make  there  an  Archipelagus,  which
as  they  all  differ  in  greatnesse,  forme,  and  fashion  one
from  another ;  so  are  they  in  goodnesse,  colour,  and
soyle  much  unlike.  They  all  are  very  high  lands,  moun-
tain-es,  and  in  most  parts  covered  with  snow  even  all
the  Sommer  long.  The  Norther  lands  have  lesse  store
of  snow,  more  grasse,  and  are  more  plaine  Countreys :
the  cause  whereof  may  be,  for  that  the  Souther  Hands
receive  all  the  snow,  that  the  cold  winds  and  percing
ayre  bring  out  of  the  North.  And  contrarily,  the  North
parts  receive  more  warme  blasts  of  milder  ayre  from  the
South,  whereupon  may  grow  the  cause  why  the  people
covet  to  inhabit  more  upon  the  North  parts  then  the
South,  as  farre  as  we  can  yet  by  our  experience  perceive
they  doe.  These  people  I  judge  to  be  a  kind  of  Tartar,
or  rather  a  kind  of  Samoed,  of  the  same  sort  and
condition  of  life  that  the  Samoeds  bee  to  the  North-
eastwards beyond  Moscovy,  who  are  called  Samoeds,
which  is  as  much  to  say  in  the  Moscovy  tongue  as
eaters  of  themselves,  and  so  the  Russians  their  borderers
doe  name  them.  And  by  late  conference  with  a  friend
of  mine  (with  whom  I  did  sometime  travell  in  the  parts
of  Moscovy)  who  hath  great  experience  of  those  Samoeds
and  people  of  the  Northeast,  I  find  that  in  all  their  maner
of  living,  those  people  of  the  Northeast,  and  these  of  the
Northwest  are  like.  They  are  of  the  colour  of  a  ripe
Olive, which how it may come to passe, being  borne

368

^llAlvI. LUK'S MAP DP I'lIE NEW WORI.l). ,,i,. nS;

DESCRIPTION OF META  INCOGNITA  ad.

1578.

in  so  cold  a  climate  I  referre  to  the  judgement  of  others,
for  they  are  naturally  borne  children  of  the  same  colour
and  complexion  that  all  the  Americans  are,  which  dwell
under  the  Equinoctiall  line.

They  are  men very  active  and nimble. They  are  a
strong people  and  very  warlike,  for  in our  sight upon
the  toppes  of  the  hilles  they  would  often  muster  them-
selves,  and after the maner of  a skirmish trace their
ground  very  nimbly,  and  mannage  their  bowes  and  dartes
with great dexterity. They  go  clad in  coates  made  of  Theirapparel.
the  skinnes  of  beasts,  as  of  Scales,  Deere,  Beares,  Foxes,
and  Hares. They  have  also  some  garments  of  feathers,
being made of  the cases of  Foules, finely sowed and
compact  togither. Of  all  which  sorts  wee  brought  home
some with us into  England, which we found in  their
tents. In  Sommer  they  use  to  weare  the  hairie  side  of
their coates  outward,  and sometime  goe  naked  for  too
much heate. And in  Winter (as  by signes  they have
declared)  they  weare  foure  or  five  folde  upon  their  bodies
with  the  haire  (for  warmth)  turned  inward. Hereby  it
appeareth, that the ayre there is not indifferent, but
either  it  is fervent  hote, or els extreme  cold, & farre
more  excessive  in  both  qualities,  then  the  reason  of  the
climate should yeeld. For there it is colder, being
under  62.  degrees  in  latitude, then  it  is  at  Wardhouse
in  the  voyage  to  Saint  Nicholas  in Moscovie,  being at
above  72.  degrees  in  latitude. The  reason  hereof  perhaps  The  acctden-
may  be, that  this Meta  Incognita  is much frequented  f'^^j^^^'^'ff^
and  vexed  with  Easterne  and  Northeastern  wmds,  which  Meta  Incog-
from  the  sea  and  yce  bringeth  often  an  intollerable  cold  nita.
ayre,  which  was  also  the  cause  that  this  yeere  our  straits
were  so  long  shut  up  with  so  great  store  of  yce. But
there  is  great  hope  and  likelihood,  that further within  [III.  94.]
the  Straights it will bee  more constant  and temperate
weather.

These  people are in nature very  subtill and sharpe
witted,  ready to conceive  our meaning  by signes, and
to  make  answere  well  to  be  understood  againe. And  if
VII  369  2  A

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

they  have  not  scene  the  thing  whereof  you  aske  them,

they  will  wincke,  or  cover  their  eyes  with  their hands,

as  who would  say, it hath bene  hid from their  sight.

If  they  understand you not whereof  you aske them,

they  wil  stop  their  eares. They  will  teach  us  the  names

of  each thing in their language which wee desire to

learne, and  are  apt to learne any thing  of  us. They  I

The  Samges delight  in  Musicke  above  measure,  and  will  keepe  time

delight  m ^j^(^  Stroke  to  any  tune  which  you  shall  sing,  both  with

their voyce, head, hand and feete, and will sing the

same tune aptly after you. They will row with our

Ores  in  our boates,  and keepe a  true stroke  with our

Mariners, and seeme to take great delight therein.

Hard  kind  of  They  live in Caves of  the earth, and hunt  for their

living,  dinners  or  praye,  even  as  the  beare  or  other  wild  beastes

do. They  eat raw flesh  and  fish, and refuse no  meat

howsoever  it be  stinking. They  are  desperate in  their

fight,  sullen  of  nature,  and  ravenous  in  their  maner  of

feeding.

Their  sullen  &  desperate  nature  doth  herein  mani-
festly appeare,  that  a  company  of  them  being  environed
by  our  men  on  the  top  of  a  hie  cliffe,  so  that  they
could  by  no  meanes  escape  our  hands,  finding  them-
selves in  this  case  distressed,  chose  rather  to  cast
themselves  headlong  down  the  rocks  into  the  sea,  and
so  be  bruised  and  drowned,  rather  then  to  yeeld  them-
selves to  our  mens  mercies.
Their  wea-  For their weapons to ofi^end their enemies or kill

pons.  their  prey  withall, they have  darts, slings, bowes, and

arrowes  headed  with  sharpe  stones,  bones,  and  some
with  yron.  They  are  exceeding  friendly  and  kind
hearted  one  to  the  other,  and  mourne  greatly  at  the
losse  or  harme  of  their  fellowes,  and  expresse  their  griefe
of  mind,  when  they  part  one  from  another  with  a
Their  chastity,  mourneful  song,  and  Dirges.  They  are  very  shamefast
in  bewraying  the  secrets  of  nature,  and  very  chaste  in  the
maner  of  their  living :  for  when  the  man,  which  wee
brought from thence into England the last voyage,

370

DESCRIPTION OF META  INCOGNITA  a.d.

1578.
should  put  off  his  coat  or  discover  his  whole  body  for
change,  hee  would  not  suffer  the  woman  to  bee  present,
but  put  her  forth  of  his  Cabin.  And  in  all  the  space
of  two  or  three  moneths,  while  the  man  lived  in  com-
pany of  the  woman,  there  was  never  any  thing  scene
or  perceived  betweene  them,  more  then  might  have
passed  betweene  brother  and  sister :  but  the  woman  was
in  all  things  very  serviceable  for  the  man,  attending  him
carefully  when  he  was  sicke,  and  he  likewise  in  all  the
meates  which  they  did  eate  together,  woulde  carve
unto  her  of  the  sweetest,  fattest,  and  best  morsels  they
had.  They  wondred  much  at  all  our  things,  and  were
afraid  of  our  horses  and  other  beasts  out  of  measure.
They  began  to  grow  more  civill,  familiar,  pleasant,  and
docible  amongst  us  in  very  short  time.

They  have  boates  made  of  leather,  and  covered  cleane  Their  boates.
over  saving  one  place  in  the  middle  to  sit  in,  planked
within  with  timber,  and  they  use  to  row  therein  with
one  Ore,  more  swiftly  a  great  deale,  then  we  in  our
boates  can  doe  with  twentie.  They  have  one  sort  of
greater  boates  wherein  they  can  carrie  above  twentie  per-
sons, and  have  a  Mast  with  a  saile  thereon,  which  saile
is  made  of  thinne  skinnes  or  bladders,  sowed  togither
with  the  sinewes  of  fishes.

They  are  good  Fishermen,  and  in  their  small  Boates
being  disguised  with  their  coates  of  Scales  skinnes,  they
deceive  the  fish,  who  take  them  rather  for  their  fellow
Scales,  then  for  deceiving  men.

They  are.  good  marke-men.  With  their  dart  or  arrow
they  will  commonly  kill  a  Ducke,  or  any  other  foule  in
the  head,  and  commonly  in  the  eye.

When  they  shoote  at  a  great  fish  with  any  of  their
darts,  they  use  to  tye  a  bladder  thereunto,  whereby  they
may  the  better  find  them  againe,  and  the  fish  not  able
to  cary  it  so  easily  away  (for  that  the  bladder  doth  boy
the  dart)  will  at  length  be  wearie,  and  dye  therewith. Traffiquewtth

1  hey  use  to  traffike  and  exchange their  commodities  ^^^^^^  ^^_
with  some  other  people,  of  whom  they  have  such  things  kmwen.

r

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578-

as  their  miserable  Countrey,  and  ignorance  of  Art  to
make,  denieth  them  to  have,  as  barres  of  yron,  heads  of
yron  for  their  darts,  needles  made  foure  square,  certaine
buttons  of  copper,  which  they  use  to  weare  upon  their
forehads  for  ornament,  as  our  Ladies  in  the  Court  of
England  doe  use  great  pearle.
Gold.  Also  they  have  made  signes  unto  us,  that  they  have

scene  gold,  and  such  bright  plates  of  mettals,  which  are
used  for  ornaments  amongst  some  people  with  whom
they  have  conference.

We  found  also  in  their  tents  a  Guiny  Beane  of  redde

colour, the which doth usually grow in they hote

Countreys : whereby  it  appeareth they  trade  with  other

nations which dwell farre off, or else themselves are

great  travellers.

Their fewell. They  have  nothing  in  use  among  them  to  make  fire

withall, saving a kinde of  Heath and Mosse which

groweth  there.

[III.  95.]  And  they  kindle  their  fire  with  continuall  rubbing  and

How  they fretting  one  sticke  against  another,  as  we  doe  with  flints.

' They  drawe  with dogges in sleads upon the yce,  and

remoove  their  tents therewithall wherein  they  dwell in

Sommer,  when  they  goe  a  hunting  for  their  praye  and

provision  against  Winter. They  doe  sometime  parboyle

Their  kettles their  meat  a  little  and  seeth  the  same  in  kettles  made  of

and  pannes, leasts  skins : they have  also pannes cut  and made of

stone  very  artificially ;  they  use  prety  ginnes  wherewith 1

they  take  foule. The  women  carry  their  sucking  children

at  their  backes,  and  doe  feede  them  with  raw  flesh,  which

first  they  do  a  little  chaw  in  their  owne  mouths. The

women have  their faces  marked or painted  over with ,

small  blewe  spots :  they  have  blacke  and  long  haire  on j

their  heads,  and  trimme  the  same  in  a  decent  order. The

men  have  but  little  haire  on  their  faces,  and  very  thinne

beards. For their common drinke, they eate yce to

. quench their thirst withall. Their earth yeeldeth no

eate srasse and  g^^i'^^  or  fruit  of  sustenance  for  man,  or  almost  for  beast

shrubs.  to  live  upon :  and  the  people  will  eate  grasse  and  shrubs

372

DESCRIPTION OF MET  A  INCOGNITA  a.d.

1578.
of  the  ground,  even  as  our  kine  doe.  They  have  no  wood
growing  in  their  Countrey  thereabouts,  and  yet  wee  find
rhey  have  some  timber  among  them,  which  we  thinke
doth  growe  farre  off  to  the  Southwards  of  this  place,
about  Canada,  or  some  other  part  of  New  found  land :
for  there  belike,  the  trees  standing  on  the  cliifes  of
the  sea  side,  by  the  waight  of  yce  and  snow  in  Winter
overcharging  them  with  waight,  when  the  Sommers  thaw
commeth  above,  and  also  the  Sea  underletting  them
beneath,  which  winneth  dayly  of  the  land,  they  are
undermined  and  fall  downe  from  those  cliifes  into  the
Sea,  and  with  the  tydes  and  currents  are  driven  to  and  fro
upon  the  coastes  further  off,  and  by  conjecture  are  taken
up  here  by  these  Countrey  people,  to  serve  them  to
planke  and  strengthen  their  boates  withall,  and  to  make
dartes,  bowes,  and  arrowes,  and  such  other  things  neces-
sarie  for  their  use.  And  of  this  kind  of  drift  wood  we
find  all  the  Seas  over  great  store,  which  being  cut  or
sawed  asunder,  by  reason  of  long  driving  in  the  Sea  is
eaten  of  wormes,  and  full  of  holes,  of  which  sort  theirs
is  found  to  be.

We  have  not  yet  found  any  venemous  Serpent  or  A  strange  kind
other  hurtful  thing  in  these  parts,  but  there  is  a  kind  of  V S"^^-
small  flie  or  gnat  that  stingeth  and  offendeth  sorely,
leaving  many  red  spots  in  the  face,  and  other  places
where  she  stingeth.  They  have  snow  and  haile  in  the
best  time  of  their  Sommer,  and  the  ground  frosen  three
fadome  deepe.

These  people  are  great  inchanters,  and  use  many  Inchanters.
charmes  of  witchcraft :  for  when  their  heads  doe  ake,
they  tye  a  great  stone  with  a  string  unto  a  sticke,  and
with  certaine  prayers  and  wordes  done  to  the  sticke,
they  lift  up  the  stone  from  ground,  which  sometimes
with  all  a  mans  force  they  cannot  stirre,  and  sometime
againe  they  lift  as  easily  as  a  fether,  and  hope  thereby
with  certaine  ceremonious  wordes  to  have  ease  and  helpe.
And  they  made  us  by  signes  to  understand,  lying
groveling  with  their  faces  upon  the  ground,  and  making

373

A.«.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

a  noise  downeward,  that  they  worship  the  devill  under
them.
The  beasts  and  They  have  great  Store  of  Deere,  Beares,  Hares,  Foxes,
r"t  ^  ^^'^  innumerable  numbers  of  sundry  sorts  of  wild  foule,
as  Seawmewes,  Guiles,  Wilmotes,  Ducks,  &c.  wherof
our  men  killed  in  one  day  fifteene  hundred.

They  have  also  store  of  haukes,  as  Falkons,  Tassels,  &c.
whereof  two  alighted  upon  one  of  our  ships  at  their
returne,  and  were  brought  into  England,  which  some
thinke  wil  prove  very  good.

There  are  also  great  store  of  ravens,  larkes,  and
partriges,  wherof  the  Countrey  people  feed.

All  these  foules  are  farre  thicker  clothed  with  downe
and  fethers,  and  have  thicker  skinnes  then  any  in  Eng-
land have:  for  as  that  countrey  is  colder,  so  nature  hath
provided  a  remedie  thereunto.

Our  men  have  eaten  of  the  Beares,  Hares,  Partridges,
Larkes,  and  of  their  wild  foule,  and  find  them  reasonable
good meat,  but  not  so  delectable  as  ours.

Their  wild  foule  must  be  all  fleine,  their  skins  are  so
thicke  :  and  they  tast  best  fryed in  pannes.

The  Countrey  seemeth  to  be  much  subject  to  Earth-
quakes.

The  ayre  is  very  subtile,  piercing  and  searching,  so
that  if  any  corrupted  or  infected  body,  especially  with
the  disease  called  Morbus  Gallicus  come  there,  it  will
presently  breake  forth  and  shew  it  selfe,  and  cannot
there  by  any  kind  of  salve  or  medicine  be  cured.

Their  longest  Sommers  day  is  of  great  length,  without
any  darke  night,  so  that  in  July  al  the  night  long,  we
might  perfitly  and  easily  write  and  reade  whatsoever  had
pleased  us,  which  lightsome  nights  were  very  beneficiall
unto  us,  being  so  distressed  with  abundance  of  yce  as
we  were.
7he  length  of  The  Sunne  setteth  to  them  in  the  Evening  at  a  quarter
^^'  of  an  houre  after  tenne  of  the  clocke,  and  riseth  againe
in  the  morning  at  three  quarters  of  an  houre  after  one
of  the  clocke,  so  that  in  Sommer  their  Sunne  shineth  to

374

ADRIAN  GILBERT'S  LETTERS  PATENTS

A.D.
158?.

them twenty  houres and a halfe, and in the  night  is

absent three houres and a halfe. And although the

Sunne  bee  absent  these  3.  houres  and  a  halfe,  yet  it  is

not darke  that  time,  for  that  the  Sunne  is  never  above  [HI.  96.]

three  or  foure  degrees  under  the  edge  of  their  Horizon  :

the  cause  is,  that  the  Tropicke  of  Cancer  doth  cut  their

Horizon  at  very  uneven  and  oblique Angles. But  the-

Moone  at  any  time  of  the  yeere  being  in  Cancer,  having  ^pttrevoh-

North  latitude,  doth  make  a  full  revolution  above  their  ^T  ^  ^  f
T  T •  1  -1  1 A  /T  I  iVLoone  above

Jrlorizon, so  that  sometime  they  see  the  Moone above  their Hoiizon.

24.  houres  togither.  Some  of  our  company  of  the  more
ignorant  sort,  thought  we  might  continually  have  scene
the  Sunne  and  the  Moone,  had  it  not  bene  for  two  or
three  high  mountaines.

The  people  are  now  become  so  warie,  and  so  circum-
spect, by  reason  of  their  former  losses,  that  by  no  meanes
we  can  apprehend  any  of  them,  although  wee  attempted
often  in  this  last  voyage.  But  to  say  trueth,  wee  could
not  bestow  any  great  time  in  pursuing  them,  because
of  our  great  businesse  in  lading, and  other things.

The  Letters  patents  of  the  Queenes  Majestie,
granted  to  Master  Adrian  Gylbert  and  others,
for  the  search  and  discovery  of  the  North-
west Passage  to  China.

Lizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  of  England,
France,  and  Ireland  Queene,  defender  of
the  faith,  &c.  To  all,  to  whome  these
presents  shall  come,  greeting  :  Forasmuch
as  our  trustie  and  welbeloved  subject
Adrian  Gylbert  of  Sandridge  in  the
Countie  of  Devon,  Gentleman,  to  his
great  costes  and  charges,  hath  greatly  and  earnestly
travelled  and  sought,  and  yet  doth  travell  and  seeke,
and  by  divers  meanes  indevoureth  and  laboureth,  that
the  Passage  unto  China  and  the  lies  of  the  Moluccas,
by the Northwestward, Northeastward, or Northward,

375

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

unto  which  part  or  partes  of  the  world,  none  of  our
loyall  Subjects  have  hitherto  had  any  traffique  or  trade,
may  be  discovered,  knowen,  and  frequented  by  the
Subjects  of  this  our  Realme :  Knowe  yee  therefore  that
for  the  considerations  aforesayd  and  for  divers  other
good  considerations  us  thereunto  specially  mooving.
.We  of  our  grace  especiall,  certaine  knowledge,  and
meere  motion,  have  given  and  granted,  and  by  these
presents  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors,  doe  give
and  grant  free  libertie,  power,  and  full  authoritie  to  the
sayd  Adrian  Gylbert,  and  to  any  other  person  by  him
or  his  heires  to  be  assigned,  and  to  those  his  associates
and  assistants,  whose  names  are  written  in  a  Scedule
hereunto  annexed,  and  to  their  heires,  and  to  one
assignee  of  each  of  them,  and  each  of  their  heires  at  all
times,  and  at  any  time  or  times  after  the  date  of  these
presents,  under  our  Banners  and  Ensignes  freely,  with-
out let,  interruption,  or  restraint,  of  us,  our  heires  or
successors,  any  law,  statute,  proclamation,  patent,  charter,
or  proviso  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  to  saile,
make  voyage,  and  by  any  maner  of  meanes  to  passe
and  to  depart  out  of  this  our  Realme  of  England,  or
any  our  Realmes,  Dominions,  or  Territories  into  all  or
any  Isles,  Countreys,  Regions,  Provinces,  Territories,  '
Seas,  Rivers,  Fortes,  Bayes,  Creekes,  armes  of  the  Sea,  I
and  all  Havens,  and  all  maner  of  other  places  whatso-  \
ever,  that  by  the  sayde  Northwestward,  Northeastward,  '
or  Northward,  is  to  be  by  him,  his  associates  or  assignes
discovered,  and  for  and  in  the  sayde  sayling,  voyage,
and  passage,  to  have  and  use  so  many  shippes,  Barkes,  >
Pinnesses,  or  other  vessels  of  any  quantitie  or  burthen,  t
with  all  the  furniture  of  men,  victuals,  and  all  maner
of  necessary  provision,  armour,  weapons,  ordinance,
targets,  and  appurti nances  whatsoever,  as  to  such  a
voyage  shall  or  may  be  requisite,  convenient  or  com-
modious, any  lawe,  statute,  ordinance  or  proviso  to  the
contrary  thereof  notwithstanding.  And  also  we  doe
give and grant to the  sayde Adrian Gylbert,  and his

376

ADRIAN  GILBERT'S  LETTERS  PATENTS ad.

1583.
sayde  associates,  and  to  such  assignee  of  him,  and  his
heires,  and  to  the  heires  and  one  assignee  of  every  of
his  sayde  associates  for  ever,  full  power  and  absolute
authoritie  to  trade  and  make  their  resiance  in  any  of
the  sayde  Isles,  Countreys,  Regions,  Provinces,  Terri-
tories, Seas,  Rivers,  Portes,  Bayes,  and  Havens,  and
all  maner  of  other  places  whatsoever  with  all  commodi-
ties, profites,  and  emoluments  in  the  sayde  places  or
any  of  them,  growing  and  arising,  with  all  maner  of
priviledges,  prerogatives,  jurisdictions  and  royalties  both
by  sea  and  land  whatsoever,  yeelding  and  paying  there-
fore unto  us,  our  heires  and  successors,  the  tenth  part
of  all  such  golde  and  silver  oare,  pearles,  jewels,  and
precious  stones,  or  the  value  thereof,  as  the  sayd  Adrian
Gylbert  and  his  sayd  associates,  their  heires  and  assignes,
servants,  factors,  or  workemen,  and  every  or  any  of  them
shall  finde,  the  sayd  tenth  to  bee  delivered  duely  to  our
Customer,  or  other  officers  by  us,  our  heires  or  successors
thereunto  assigned,  in  the  Portes  of  London,  Dartmouth,
or  Plimmouth,  at  which  three  places  onely  the  sayde
Adrian  Gylbert,  and  his  sayde  associates,  their  sayde
heires  and  assignes,  shall  lade,  charge,  arrive,  and  dis-
charge all  maner  of  wares,  goods,  and  merchandizes
whatsoever  to  the  sayde  voyage,  and  newe  trade  belong-
ing or  appertaining*  And  moreover,  wee  have  given,
granted,  and  authorized,  and  by  these  presents  for  us,  [III.  97.]
our  heires  and  successors,  of  our  grace  especiall,  certaine
knowledge,  and  meere  motion,  doe  give,  graunt,  and
authorize  the  sayd  Adrian  Gilbert,  and  his  sayd  associats
for  ever,  their  heires  and  their  said  assignes  &  every
of  them,  that  if  the  aforesayd  lies,  Countreys,  Regions,
Provinces,  Territories,  Seas,  Rivers,  Ports,  Bayes,  or
Havens,  or  any  other  of  the  premisses  by  the  sayd
Adrian  Gylbert  or  his  associats,  their  heires  and  their
said  assignes  or  any  of  them,  to  be  found  by  them,  dis-
covered and  traffiqued  unto  by  any  trade  as  aforesayd,
shall  be  by  any  other  our  subjects  visited,  frequented,
haunted,  traded unto  or  inhabited  by  the wayes  afore-

377

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

saydj  without  the  special  licence  in  writing  of  the  said
Adrian  Gilbert  and  his  associats,  and  their  heires  and
assignes  for  ever,  or  by  the  most  part  of  them,  so
that  the  sayd  Adrian  Gilbert,  his  heires  or  assignes
be  one  of  them,  that  then  aswell  their  ship,  or  ships
in  any  such  voyage  or  voyages  be  used,  as  all  and
singuler  their  goods,  wares,  and  marchandizes,  or  any
other  things  whatsoever,  from  or  to  any  of  the
places  aforesayd  transported,  that  so  shall  presume  to
visit,  frequent,  haunt,  trade  unto,  or  inhabite,  shall  be
forfaited  and  confiscated,  ipso  facto,  the  one  halfe  of  the
same  goods  and  marchandizes,  or  other  things  whatso-
ever, or  the  value  thereof  to  be  to  the  use  of  us,  our
heires  or  successours,  and  the  other  moytie  thereof  to
be  to  the  use  of  the  sayd  Adrian  Gylbert  and  his  sayd
associats,  their  heires  and  assignes  for  ever :  and  unto
the  sayd  Adrian  Gylbert  and  his  sayd  associats,  their
heires  and  assignes  wee  impose,  give,  assigne,  create
and  confirme  this  name  peculiar  to  be  named  by,  to
sue  and  to  be  sued  by,  that  is  to  wit,  by  the  name
The  colkgues  of  the  Colleagues  of  the  fellowship  for  the  discoverie
V'^'y ,^' of  the Northwest  passage,  and  them  for  us,  our  heires

ship  foT  the  r  o ^  _  '

discover'^  of  the  ^^*^  successours  by  that  name  doe  incorporate,  and  doe
Northwest  erect  and  create  as  one  body  corporate  to  have  con-
passage.  tinuance for ever. Moreover unto the sayd Adrian

Gylbert,  and  his  said  associats,  and  unto  their  heires
and  their  sayd  assignes  for  ever,  by  name  of  the
Colleagues  of  the  fellowship,  for  the  discoverie  of  the
Northwest  passage,  we  have  given,  granted,  and  con-
firmed, and  doe  by  these  presents  give,  grant,  and
confirme  full  power  and  authoritie  from  time  to  time,
and  at  all  times  hereafter,  to  make  order,  decree  and
enact,  constitute  and  ordeine,  and  appoynt  all  such
ordinances,  orders,  decrees,  lawes,  and  actes,  as  the
sayd  new  corporation  or  body  politique.  Colleagues
of  the  fellowship  for  the  discoverie  of  the  North-
west passage,  shall  thinke  meete,  necessary,  and  con-
venient,  so  that they  or  any  of  them be not  contrary

378

ADRIAN  GILBERT'S  LETTERS  PATENTS a.d.

1583.
to the lawes of  this realme, and of  this our present
graunt.

And  we  by  our  Royall  prerogative,  and  fulnesse  of
our  authority,  of  our  grace  especiall,  certaine  knowledge
and  meere  motion,  do  establish,  confirme  &  ratifie  all
such  ordinances,  orders,  decrees,  lawes  and  acts  to  be
in  so  full  and  great  power  and  authority,  as  we,  our
heires  or  successours  may  or  can  in  any  such  case
graunt,  confirme,  or  ratifie.  And  further  for  the  better
incouragement  of  our  loving  subjects  in  this  discoverie,
we  by  our  Royall  prerogative,  and  fulnesse  of  authority
for  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  doe  give,  graunt,
establish,  confirme,  ordeine,  ratifie  and  allow  by  these
presents,  to  the  sayd  Adrian  Gylbert  and  to  his  asso-
ciates, and  to  the  heires  and  assignes  of  them  and
every  of  them  for  ever,  and  to  all  other  person  or
persons  of  our  loving  subjects  whatsoever  that  shall
hereafter  travaile,  sayle,  discover,  or  make  voyage  as
aforesayd  to  any  the  lies,  Mainelands,  Countreys  or
Territories  whatsoever,  by  vertue  of  this  our  graunt  to
be  discovered,  that  the  heires  and  assignes  of  them  and
every  of  them  being  borne  within  any  of  the  lies,
Mainelands  and  Countreys,  or  Territories  whatsoever
before  mentioned,  shall  have  and  injoy  all  the  privileges
of  free  Denizens,  as  persons  native  borne  within  this  FreeDeniza-
our  Realme  of  England,  or  within  our  allegiance  for  ^'^°^  granted.
ever,  in  such  like  ample  maner  and  forme,  as  if  they
were  or  had  bene  borne  and  personally  resiant  within
our  sayd  Realme,  any  law,  statute,  proclamation,  cus-
tome  or  usage  to  the  contrary  hereof  in  any  wise  not-
withstanding.

Moreover,  for  the consideration  aforesayd by  vertue
hereof, we give and graunt unto the sayd Adrian
Gylbert,  his  heires and assignes for  ever,  free libertie,
licence and privilege, that during the space of five  This  Patent
yeeres  next  and immediatly  ensuing the  date hereof,  it  ^Jf"^"^J'^  ^^
shall not  be  lawfull for any  person or persons what-  lUlgj  ^^
soever,  to visit,  haunt,  frequent,  trade,  or  make  voyage

379

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  any  lies,  Mainlands,  Countreys,  Regions,  Provinces,
Territories,  Seas,  Rivers,  Ports,  Bayes,  and  Havens,  nor
to  any  other  Havens  or  places  whatsoever  hitherto  not
yet  discovered  by  any  of  our  subjects  by  vertue  of
this  graunt  to  be  traded  unto,  without  the  special  con-
sent and  good  liking  of  the  said  Adrian  Gylbert,  his
heires  or  assignes  first  had  in  writing.  And  if  any
person  or  persons  of  the  associats  of  the  sayd  Adrian,
his  heires  or  assignes,  or  any  other  person  or  persons
whatsoever,  free  of  this  discovery,  shall  do  any  act  or
acts  contrary  to  the  tenour  and  true  meaning  hereof,
during  the  space  of  the  sayd  five  yeeres,  that  then  the
partie  and  parties  so  offending,  they  and  their  heires
for  ever  shall  loose  (ipso  facto)  the  benefite  and
privilege  of  this  our  graunt,  and  shall  stand  and  remaine
to  all  intents  and  purposes  as  persons  exempted  out  of
this  graunt,

[III.  98.]  And further  by  vertue  hereof  wee give  and  graunt,

for  us,  our  heires  and  successours  at  all  times  during
the  space of five  yeers next ensuing the date  hereof,

Authont'te  to Hbertie and licence, and full authority to the sayd

proceedeatSea  ^jj-ja^^ Gylbert, and  his  heires and  assignes, that  if  it
against  1 n 1  •  1  •  i  •

mutiners  ^^^^^ happen any one or moe m any ship or ships

sayling  on  their  sayd  voyage,  to  become  mutinous,
seditious,  disordered,  or  any  way  unruly  to  the  prejudice
or  hinderance  of  the  hope  for  the  successe  in  the
attempt  or  prosecuting  of  this  discoverie  or  trade  in-
tended, to  use  or  execute  upon  him  or  them  so  offend-
ing, such  punishment,  correction,  or  execution,  as  the
cause  shall  be  found  in  justice  to  require  by  the  verdict
of  twelve  of  the  companie  sworne  thereunto,  as  in
such  a  case  apperteineth  :  That  expresse  mention  of  the
certaintie  of  the  premisses,  or  of  other  gifts  or  graunts
by  us  to  the  sayd  Adrian  Gylbert  and  his  associats
before  this  time  made  is  not  mentioned  in  these
presents,  or  any  other  lawe,  act,  statute,  proviso,
graunt,  or  proclamation  heretofore  made  or  hereafter  to
be made to  the  contrary  hereof  in any  wise notwith-

380

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1585.

standing. In witnesse whereof  we have made these
our  Letters to bee  made  patents  : Witnesse our selfe 1583.
at Westminster, the sixt  day of  Februarie,  in  the  sixe
and  twenty  yeere  of  our  reigne.

The  first  voyage  of  M.  John  Davis,  undertaken
in  June  1585.  for  the  discoverie  of  the  North-
west passage.  Written  by  M.  John  Janes
Marchant,  sometimes  servant  to  the  worship-
full  Master  William  Sanderson.

Ertaine  Honourable  personages  and  wor-
thy Gentlemen  of  the  Court  &  Countrey,
with  divers  worshipful  Marchants  of
London  and  of  the  West  Countrey,
mooved  with  desire  to  advance  Gods
glory  and  to  seeke  the  good  of  their
native  Countrey,  consulting  together  of
the  likelyhood  of  the  Discoverie  of  the  Northwest
passage,  which  heretofore  had  bene  attempted,  but  un-
happily given  over  by  accidents  unlooked  for,  which
turned  the  enterprisers  from  their  principall  purpose,
resolved  after  good  deliberation,  to  put  downe  their
adventures  to  provide  for  necessarie  shipping,  and  a  fit
man  to  be  chiefe  Conductour  of  this  so  hard  an  enter-
prise. The  setting  forth  of  this  Action  was  committed
by  the  adventurers,  especially  to  the  care  of  M.  William
Sanderson  Marchant  of  London,  who  was  so  forward
therein,  that  besides  his  travaile  which  was  not  small,
hee  became  the  greatest  adventurer  with  his  purse,  and
commended  unto  the  rest  of  the  companie  one  M.  John
Davis,  a  man  very  well  grounded  in  the  principles  of
the  Arte  of  Navigation,  for  Captaine  and  chiefe  Pilot
of  this  exployt.

Thus  therefore  all  things  being  put  in  a  readines,
wee  departed  from  Dartmouth  the  seventh  of  June,
towards  the  discoverie  of  the  aforesayd  Northwest
passage,  with two  Barkes,  the  one  being  of  50.  tunnes,

381

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

named  the  Sunneshine  of  London,  and  the  other  being
1,^.  tunnes,  named  the  Mooneshine  of  Dartmouth.  In
the  Sunneshine  we  had  23,  persons,  whose  names  are
these  following,  M.  John  Davis  Captaine,  William  Eston
Master,  Richard  Pope  Masters  mate,  John  Jane  Mar-
chant,  Henry  Davie  gunner,  William  Crosse  boatswayne,
John  Bagge,  Walter  Arthur,  Luke  Adams,  Robert
Coxworthie,  John  Ellis,  John  Kelley,  Edward  Helman,
Musitians.  William  Dicke,  Andrew  Maddocke,  Thomas  Hill,
Robert  Wats  Carpenter,  William  Russell,  Christopher
Gorney  boy :  James  Cole,  Francis  Ridley,  John  Russell,
Robert  Cornish  Musicians.

The  Mooneshine  had  19.  persons,  William  Bruton
Captaine, John Ellis Master,  the  rest  Mariners.

The  7.  of  June  the  Captaine  and  the  Master  drewe
out  a  proportion for  the continuance  of  our  victuals.

The  8.  day  the  wind  being  at  Southwest  and  West
southwest,  we  put  in  for  Falmouth,  where  we  remained
untill  the 13.

The  13.  the  wind  blew  at  North,  and  being  faire
weather  we  departed.

The  14.  with  contrary  wind  we  were  forced  to  put
into  Silley.

The  15.  wee  departed  thence,  having  the  wind  North
and  by  East  moderate  and  faire  weather.

The  16.  wee  were  driven  backe  againe,  and  were
constrained  to  arrive  at  newe  Grymsby  in  Silley :  here
the  winde  remained  contrary  12.  dayes,  and  in  that
space  the  Captaine,  the  Master  and  I  went  about  all
the  Hands,  and  the  Captaine  did  plat  out  and  describe
the  situation  of  all  the  Hands,  rocks  and  harboroughs
to  the  exact  use  of  Navigation,  with  lines  and  scale
thereunto  convenient.
They  depart  The  28.  in  Gods  name  we  departed  the  wind  being
from  Silky. Easterly  but  calme.

July.  The  first  of  July  wee  sawe  great  store  of  Porposes ;

The  Master  called  for  an  harping  yron,  and shot  twise
or thrise : sometimes he  missed,  and at last shot one

382

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1585.
and  strooke  him in the side, and  wound  him  into  the  [III.  99.]
ship : when we had him aboord, the Master  sayd it
was  a  Darlie  head.

The  2.  we  had  some  of  the  fish  sodden,  and  it  did
eat  as  sweete  as  any  mutton.

The  3.  wee  had  more  in  sight,  and  the  Master  went  to
shoote  at  them,  but  they  were  so  great,  that  they  burst
our  yrons,  and  we  lost  both  fish,  yrons,  pastime  and  all :
yet  neverthelesse  the  Master  shot  at  them  with  a  pike,
and  had  welnigh  gotten  one,  but  he  was  so  strong  that
he  burst  off  the  barres  of  the  pike  and  went  away :
then  he  tooke  the  boat-hooke,  and  hit  one  with  that,
but  all  would  not  prevaile,  so  at  length  we  let  them
alone.

The  6.  we  saw  a  very  great  Whale,  and  every  day
we  saw  whales  continually.

The  16. 17. and  18.  we  saw  great store  of  Whales. Great  store  of

The  19.  of  July  we  fell  into  a  great  whirling  and  ^^'^''^^•
brustling  of  a  tyde,  setting  to  the  Northwards :  and
sayling  about  halfe  a  league  wee  came  into  a  very  calme
Sea,  which  bent  to  the  Southsouthwest.  Here  we  heard
a  mighty  great  roaring  of  the  Sea,  as  if  it  had  bene  the
breach  of  some  shoare,  the  ayre  being  so  foggie  and  full  of
thicke  mist,  that  we  could  not  see  the  one  ship  from  the
other,  being  a  very  small  distance  asunder :  so  the
Captaine  and  the  Master  being  in  distrust  how  the  tyde
might  set  them,  caused  the  Mooneshine  to  hoyse  out
her  boate  and  to  sound,  but  they  could  not  finde  ground
in  300.  fathoms  and  better.  Then  the  Captaine,  Master,
and  I  went  towards  the  breach,  to  see  what  it  should  be,
giving  charge  to  our  gunners  that  at  every  glasse  they
should  shoote  off  a  musket-shot,  to  the  intent  we  might
keepe  our  selves  from  loosing  them.  Then  comming
nere  to  the  breach,  we  met  many  Hands  of  yce  floting,
which  had  quickly  compassed  us  about :  then  we  went  The  rouUng  cf
upon  some  of  them,  and  did  perceive  that  all  the  roaring  ^he  yce  together
which  we  heard,  was  caused  onely  by  the  rowling  of  this  ^rmrim^^^^
yce together : Our  companie seeing  us not to returne

383

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

according  to  our  appoyntment,  left  off  shooting  muskets,
and  began  to  shoote  falkonets,  for  they  feared  some
mishap  had  befallen  us,  but  before  night  we  came  aboord

Tceturnedlnto  againe  with  our  boat  laden  with  yce,  which made  very

water.  good fresh  water. Then  wee bent our course toward

the  North,  hoping  by  that  meanes  to  double  the  land.
The  20.  as  we  sayled  along  the  coast  the  fogge  brake
up,  and  we  discovered  the  land,  which  was  the  most
deformed  rockie  and  mountainous  land  that  ever  we  saw :
The  first  sight  whereof  did  shew  as  if  it  had  bene  in
forme  of  a  sugar-loafe,  standing  to  our  sight  above  the
cloudes,  for  that  it  did  shew  over  the  fogge  like  a  white
liste  in  the  skie,  the  tops  altogether  covered  with  snow,
and  the  shoare  beset  with  yce  a  league  off  into  the  Sea,
making  such  yrkesome  noyse  as  that  it  seemed  to  be  the
true patterne of desolation, and after the same our

7!^,?  land  of Captaine  named  it.  The  land  of  Desolation.

Desolation.  "XYi^ 21.  the  winde  came  Northerly  and  overblew,  so

that  we  were  constrained  to  bend  our  course  South
againe,  for  we  perceived  that  we  were  runne  into  a  very
deepe  Bay,  where  wee  were  almost  compassed  with  yce,
for  we  saw  very  much  toward  the  Northnortheast,  West,
and  Southwest :  and  this  day  and  this  night  wee  cleared
our  selves  of  the  yce,  running  Southsouthwest  along
the  shoare.

Upon  Thursday  being  the  22.  of  this  moneth,  about
three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  wee  hoysed  out  our
boate,  and  the  Captaine  with  sixe  saylers  went  towards
the  shoare,  thinking  to  find  a  landing  place,  for  the  night
before  we  did  perceive  the  coast  to  be  voyde  of  yce  to
our  judgement,  and  the  same  night  wee  were  all  per-
swaded  that  we  had  scene  a  Canoa  rowing:  along  the
shoare,  but  afterwards  we  fell  in  some  doubt  of  it,  but  we
had  no  great  reason  so  to  doe.  The  Captaine  rowing
towards  the  shoare,  willed  the  Master  to  beare  in  with
the  land  after  him,  and  before  he  came  neere  the  shoare
by  the  space  of  a  league,  or  about  two  miles,  hee  found
so much  yce,  that hee  could not  get to land by  any

384

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1585.
meanes. Here  our  mariners  put  to  their  lines  to  see  if
they  could get  any fish, because there  were so many
scales  upon  the  coast,  and  the  birds  did  beate  upon  the
water,  but  all  was  in  vaine :  The  water  about  this  place  ^^n  blacke
was  very  blacke  and  thicke  like  to  a  filthy  standing  poole,  "'^^^''•
we sounded and had  ground  in 120.  fathoms. While
the Captaine  was  rowing  to  the  shoare,  our  men sawe
woods  upon  the  rocks  like  to  the  rocks  of  Newfoundland,
but  I  could  not  discerne  them,  yet  it  might  be  so  very
well :  for  we  had  wood  floting  upon  the  coast  every  day,  Floting  wood.
and  the  Mooneshine  tooke  up  a  tree  at  Sea  not  farre  from
the coast being sixtie foote of  length and foureteene
handfuls  about,  having  the  roote  upon  it :  After  this  the
Captaine  came  aboord,  the  weather  being  very  calme  and
faire  we  bent  our  course  toward  the  South,  with  intent
to  double  the  land.

The 23. we coasted the land which did lie East-
northeast  and  Westsouthwest.

The  24.  the  winde  being  very  faire  at  East,  we  coasted
the  land  which  did  lie  East  and  West,  not  being  able  to
come  neere  the  shoare  by  reason  of  the  great  quantitie  of
yce. At  this  place,  because  the  weather  was somewhat  Coldebyreason
colde  by  reason  of  the  yce,  and  the  better  to  encourage  ^fy^^-
our  men,  their  allowance  was  increased :  the  captaine  and  [III.  100.]
the master tooke order that every messe, being five
persons,  should  have  halfe  a  pound  of  bread  and  a  kan  of
beere  every  morning  to  breakfast. The  weather  was  not
very  colde,  but  the  aire  was  moderate  like  to  our  April-
weather in England : when the  winde  came from the
land,  or the  ice,  it  was  some  what  colde,  but  when  it
came  oflF  the  sea  it  was  very  hote.

The  25  of  this  moneth  we  departed  from  sight  of  this  They  saile
land  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morninsf,  directing  our  ^°^^^^"f-
course  to  the  Northwestward,  hoping  in  Gods  mercy  to  ^^^^  ^
finde  our  desired  passage,  and  so  continued  above  foure
dayes.  ^^^^  .^  ^

The 29 of  July  we discovered  land in 64 degrees  ^ggrees  15
1 5  minutes  of  latitude,  bearing  Northeast  from  us. The  min.
VII  385  2  B

A.D.
1585.

The  sound
where  our
ships  did  ride
teas  called
Gilberts
sound.

Musicians.

The  people  of
the  countrey
came  and  con-
ferred with
men.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

winde  being  contrary  to  goe  to  the  Northwestwards,  we
bare  in  with  this  land  to  take  some  view  of  it,  being
utterly  void  of  the  pester  of  yce  and  very  temperate.
Comming  neere  the  coast,  we  found  many  faire  sounds
and  good  roads  for  shipping,  and  many  great  inlets  into
the  land,  whereby  we  judged  this  land  to  be  a  great
number  of  Islands  standing  together.  Heere  having
mored  our  barke  in  good  order,  we  went  on  shoare  upon
a  small  Island  to  seeke  for  water  and  wood.  Upon  this
Island  we  did  perceive  that  there  had  bene  people :  for
we  found  a  small  shoo  and  pieces  of  leather  sowed  with
sinewes,  and  a  piece  of  furre,  and  wooll  like  to  Bever.
Then  we  went  upon  another  Island  on  the  other  side
of  our  shippes :  and  the  Captaine,  the  Master,  and  I,
being  got  up  to  the  top  of  an  high  rocke,  the  people  of
the  countrey  having  espied  us,  made  a  lamentable  noise,
as  we  thought,  with  great  outcries  and  skreechings :  we
hearing  them,  thought  it  had  bene  the  howling  of  wolves.
At  last  I  hallowed  againe,  and  they  likewise  cried.  Then
we  perceiving  where  they  stood,  some  on  the  shoare,  and
one  rowing  in  a  Canoa  about  a  small  Island  fast  by  them,
we  made  a  great  noise,  partly  to  allure  them  to  us,  and
partly  to  warne  our  company  of  them.  Whereupon  M.
Bruton  and  the  Master  of  his  shippe,  with  others  of  their
company,  made  great  haste  towards  us,  and  brought  our
Musicians  with  them  from  our  shippe,  purposing  either
by  force  to  rescue  us,  if  need  should  so  require,  or  with
courtesie  to  allure  the  people.  When  they  came  unto  us,
we  caused  our  Musicians  to  play,  our  selves  dancing,  and
making  many  signes  of  friendship.  At  length  there  came
tenne  Canoas  from  the  other  Islands,  and  two  of  them
came  so  neere  the  shoare  where  we  were,  that  they  talked
with  us,  the  other  being  in  their  boats  a  prety  way  off.
Their  pronunciation  was  very  hollow  thorow  the  throat,
and  their  speech  such  as  we  could  not  understand :  onely
we  allured  them  by  friendly  imbracings  and  signes  of
curtesie.  At  length  one  of  them  pointing  up  to  the
Sunne  with  his  hand,  would  presently  strike  his  breast  so

386

JOHN DAVIS

A.D.
1585.

hard  that  we  might  heare  the  blow.  This  hee  did  many
times  before  he  would  any  way  trust  us.  Then  John
Ellis  the  Master  of  the  Mooneshine  was  appointed  to  use
his  best  policie  to  gaine  their  friendship ;  who  strooke
his  breast,  and  pointed  to  the  Sunne  after  their  order :
which  when  he  had  divers  times  done,  they  beganne  to
trust  him,  and  one  of  them  came  on  shoare,  to  whom  we
threw  our  cappes,  stockings  and  gloves,  and  such  other
things  as  then  we  had  about  us,  playing  with  our
musicke,  and  making  signes  of  joy,  and  dauncing.  So
the  night  comming,  we  bade  them  farewell,  and  went
aboord  our  barks.

The  next  morning  being  the  30  of  July  there  came  37  Thirty  seven
Canoas  rowing  by  our  ships,  calling  to  us  to  come  on  ^^''"'^■f-
shoare:  we  not  making  any  great  haste  unto  them,  one
of  them  went  up  to  the  toppe  of  the  rocke,  and  leapt  and
daunced  as  they  had  done  the  day  before,  shewing  us
a  seales  skinne,  and  another  thing  made  like  a  timbrell,
which  he  did  beat  upon  with  a  sticke,  making  a  noise  Their  mtmke.
like  a  small  drumme.  Whereupon  we  manned  our  boats
and  came  to  them,  they  all  staying  in  their  Canoas :  we
came  to  the  water  side  were  they  were :  and  after  we
had  sworne  by  the  Sunne  after  their  fashion,  they  did
trust  us.  So  I  shooke  hands  with  one  of  them,  and  he
kissed  my  hand,  and  we  were  very  familiar  with  them.
We  were  in  so  great  credit  with  them  upon  this  single  Great famili-
acquaintance,  that  we  could  have  any  thing  they  had.  ^"^'^  ^  ^^^
We  bought  five  Canoas  of  them :  we  bought  their  clothes
from  their  backs,  which  were  all  made  of  seales  skinnes
&  birds  skinnes ;  their  buskins,  their  hose,  their  gloves,
all  being  commonly  sowed  and  well  dressed :  so  that  we
were  fully  perswaded  that  they  have  divers  artificers
among  them.  We  had  a  paire  of  buskins  of  them  full  of
fine  wooll  like  bever.  Their  apparell  for  heat  was  made
of  birds  skinnes  with  their  feathers  on  them.  We  saw
among  them  leather  dressed  like  Glovers  leather,  and
thicke  thongs  like  white  leather  of  a  good  length.  We
had of  their darts  and  oares,  and found  in them that

387

A.D.
1585.

[III. lOI.]

Divers  sorts
of  wood.

They  may
make  much
traine,  if  they
had  meanes
how  to  use  it.

Moscevie
glasse.

A  fruit  like
corinths.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

they  would  by  no  meanes  displease  us,  but  would  give  us
whatsoever  we  asked  of  them,  and  would  be  satisfied
with  whatsoever  we  gave  them.  They  tooke  great  care
one  of  another :  for  when  we  had  bought  their  boats,
then  two  other  would  come  and  cary  him  away  betweene
them  that  had  solde  us  his.  They  are  very  tractable
people,  void  of  craft  or  double  dealing,  and  easie  to  be
brought  to  any  civility  or  good  order :  but  we  judge
them  to  be  idolaters  and  to  worship  the  Sunne.

During  the  time  of  our  abode  among  these  Islands  we
found  reasonable  quantity  of  wood,  both  firre,  spruse  and
juniper ;  which  whether  it  came  floting  any  great  distance
to  these  places  where  we  found  it,  or  whether  it  grew  in
some  great  Islands  neere  the  same  place  by  us  not  yet
discovered,  we  know  not;  but  we  judge  that  it  groweth
there  further  into  the  land  then  we  were,  because  the
people  had  great  store  of  darts  and  oares  which  they
made  none  account  of,  but  gave  them  to  us  for  small
trifles,  as  points  and  pieces  of  paper.  We  saw  about  this
coast  marveilous  great  abundance  of  seales  skulling  to-
gether like  skuls  of  small  fish.  We  found  no  fresh  water
among  these  Islands,  but  onely  snow  water,  whereof  we
found  great  pooles.  The  clifi^es  were  all  of  such  oare  as
M.  Frobisher  brought  from  Meta  incognita.  We  had
divers  shewes  of  Study  or  Muscovy  glasse  shining  not
altogether  unlike  to  Christall.  We  found  an  herbe  grow-
ing upon  the  rocks,  whose  fruit  was  sweet,  full  of  red
juice,  and  the  ripe  ones  were  like  corinths.  We  found
also  birch  and  willow  growing  like  shrubbes  low  to  the
ground.  These  people  have  great  store  of  furres  as  we
judge.  They  made  shewes  unto  us  the  30  of  this
present,  which  was  the  second  time  of  our  being  with
them,  after  they  perceived  we  would  have  skinnes  and
furres,  that  they  would  go  into  the  countrey  and  come
againe  the  next  day  with  such  things  as  they  had :  but
this  night  the  winde  comming  faire,  the  captaine  and  the
master  would  by  no  meanes  detract  the  purpose  of  our
discovery. And  so  the  last  of  this  moneth  about  foure

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1585.
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  in  Gods  name  we  set  saile,
and  were  all  that  day  becalmed  upon  the  coast.

The  first  of  August  we  had  a  faire  winde,  and  so  pro-  August.
ceeded  towards  the  Northwest  for  our  discovery.

The  sixt  of  August  we  discovered  land  in  66  degrees  ^(^^d  in  66
40  minuts  of  latitude,  altogether  void  from  the  pester  of  '^^^^^^  4°
ice :  we  ankered  in  a  very  faire  rode  under  a  brave
mount,  the  clifFes  whereof  were  as  orient  as  golde.  This
mount  was  named  Mount  Raleigh.  The  rode  where  our
ships  lay  at  anker  was  called  Totnes  rode.  The  sound
which  did  compasse  the  mount  was  named  Exeter  sound.
The  foreland  towards  the  North  was  called  Diers  cape.
The  foreland  towards  the  South  was  named  Cape  Wal-
singham.  So  soone  as  we  were  come  to  an  anker  in
Totnes  rode  under  Mount  Raleigh,  we  espied  foure  white  Foure  white
beares  at  the  foot  of  the  mount :  we  supposing  them  to  ^^'^'"^■^•
be  goats  or  wolves,  manned  our  boats  and  went  towards
them  :  but  when  we  came  neere  the  shore,  we  found  them
to  be  white  beares  of  a  monstrous  bignesse :  we  being
desirous  of  fresh  victuall  and  the  sport,  began  to  assault
them,  and  I  being  on  land,  one  of  them  came  downe  the
hill  right  against  me  :  my  piece  was  charged  with  hailshot
&  a  bullet :  I  discharged  my  piece  and  shot  him  in  the
necke ;  he  roared  a  litle,  and  tooke  the  water  straight,
making  small  account  of  his  hurt.  Then  we  followed
him  with  our  boat,  and  killed  him  with  boare-speares,
&  two  more  that  night.  We  found  nothing  in  their
mawes ;  but  we  judged  by  their  dung  that  they  fed  upon
grasse,  because  it  appeared  in  all  respects  like  the  dung  of
an  horse,  wherein  we  might  very  plainly  see  the  very
strawes.

The  7  we  went  on  shore  to  another  beare  which  lay  all
night  upon  the  top  of  an  Island  under  Mount  Raleigh,
and  when  we  came  up  to  him  he  lay  fast  asleep.  I
levelled  at  his  head,  and  the  stone  of  my  piece  gave  no
fire :  with  that  he  looked  up,  and  layed  downe  his  head  ^  huge  white
againe  :  then  I  shot  being  charged  with  two  bullets,  and  ^^^''^^
strooke him in the head : he  being but  amazed fell

389

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

backwards :  whereupon  we  ran  all  upon  him  with  boare-
speares,  and  thrust  him  in  the  body :  yet  for  all  that  he
gript  away  our  boare-speares,  and  went  towards  the
water ;  and  as  he  was  going  downe,  he  came  backe  againe.
Then  our  Master  shot  his  boare-speare,  and  strooke  him
in  the  head,  and  made  him  to  take  the  water,  and
swimme  into  a  cove  fast  by,  where  we  killed  him,  and
brought  him  aboord.  The  breadth  of  his  forefoot  from
one  side  to  the  other  was  foureteene  inches  over.  They
were  very  fat,  so  as  we  were  constrained  to  cast  the  fat
away.  We  saw  a  raven  upon  Mount  Raleigh.  We
found  withies  also  growing  like  low  shrubs  &  flowers
like  Primroses  in  the  sayd  place.  The  coast  is  very
mountainous,  altogether  without  wood,  grasse,  or  earth,
and  is  onely  huge  mountaines  of  stone  ;  but  the  bravest
stone  that  ever  we  saw.  The  aire  was  very  moderate  in
this  countrey.

The  8  we  departed  from  Mount  Raleigh,  coasting
along  the  shoare,  which  lieth  Southsouthwest,  and  East-
northeast.

The  9  our  men  fell  in  dislike  of  their  allowance,  be-
cause it  was  too  small  as  they  thought :  wherupon  we
made  a  new  proportion ;  every  messe  being  five  to  a
messe  should  have  foure  pound  of  bread  a  day,  twelve
wine  quarts  of  beere,  six  Newland  fishes ;  and  the  flesh
dayes  a  gill  of  pease  more :  so  we  restrained  them  from
their  butter  and  cheese.
[III.  102.]  The  1 1  we  came  to  the  most  Southerly  cape  of  this
land,  which  we  named  The  Cape  of  Gods  mercy,  as  being
the  place  of  our  first  entrance  for  the  discovery.  The
weather  being  very  foggy  we  coasted  this  North  land ;  at
length  when  it  brake  up,  we  perceived  that  we  were  shot
into  a  very  faire  entrance  or  passage,  being  in  some  places
twenty  leagues  broad,  and  in  some  thirty,  altogether  void
of  any  pester  of  ice,  the  weather  very  tolerable,  and  the
water  of  the  very  colour,  nature  and  quality  of  the  maine
ocean,  which  gave  us  the  greater  hope  of  our  passage.
Having  sailed Northwest  sixty  leagues  in  this  entrance

390

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1585.
we  discovered  certaine  Islands  standing  in  the  midst
thereof,  having  open  passage  on  both  sides.  Wherupon
our  ships  divided  themselves,  the  one  sailing  on  the
North  side,  the  other  on  the  South  side  of  the  sayd
Isles,  where  we  stayed  five  dayes,  having  the  winde  at
Southeast,  very  foggy  and  foule  weather.

The  14  we  went  on  shoare  and  found  signes  of  people,
for  we  found  stones  layed  up  together  like  a  wall,  and
saw  the  skull  of  a  man  or  a  woman.

The  1 5  we  heard  dogs  houle  on  the  shoare,  which  we
thought had bene wolves, and therefore  we  went on
shoare  to  kill  them. When  we  came  on  land  the  dogges
came  presently  to  our  boat  very  gently,  yet  we  thought
they came to pray  upon us,  and  therefore  we  shot  at
them,  and  killed  two  : and  about  the necke  of  one  of
them  we  found  a  leatherne  coller,  wherupon  we  thought
them  to  be  tame  dogs. There  were  twenty  dogs  like
mastives  with prickt eares and long bush tailes : we
found  a  bone  in  the  pizels  of  their  dogs. Then  we  went
farther,  and  found  two  sleads  made  like  ours  in  England :
the  one  was  made  of  firre,  spruse  and  oken  boords  sawen  Timber
like  inch  boords :  the  other  was  made  all  of  whale  bone,  ^'^^^^«'
&  there  hung  on  the  tops  of  the  sleads  three  heads  of
beasts  which  they  had  killed. We  saw  here  larks,  ravens,  Fowle.
and  partridges.

The  17  we  went  on  shoare,  and  in  a  little  thing  made
like  an  oven  with  stones  I  found  many  small  trifles,  as  a
small  canoa  made  of  wood,  a  piece  of  wood  made  like  an
image,  a  bird  made  of  bone,  beads  having  small  holes  Jn  image.
in  one  end  of  them  to  hang  about  their  necks,  &  other
small  things.  The  coast  was  very  barren  without  wood
or  grasse  :  the  rocks  were  very  faire  like  marble,  full  of
vaines  of  divers  colours.  We  found  a  seale  which  was
killed  not  long  before,  being  fleane,  and  hid  under  stones.

Our Captaine and Master searched still for proba-  Probabilities
bilities  of  the  passage,  and  first  found, ii  that this place  fi'^  the  passage.
was all Islands, with great sounds passing betweene
them.

391

. A.D.
1585.

Wee  never
came  into  any
bay  before  or
after,  but  the
waters  colour
was  altered
very  blackish.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Secondly,  the  water  remained  of  one  colour  with  the
maine  ocean  without  altering.

Thirdly,  we  saw  to  the  West  of  those  Isles  three  or
foure  whales  in  a  skull,  which  they  judged  to  come
from  a  Westerly  sea,  because  to  the  Eastward  we  saw
not  any  whale.

Also  as  we  were  rowing  into  a  very  great  sound  lying
Southwest,  from  whence  these  whales  came,  upon  the
sudden  there  came  a  violent  counter-checke  of  a  tide
from  the  Southwest  against  the  flood  which  we  came
with,  not  knowing  from  whence  it  was  mainteined.

Fiftly,  in  sailing  twenty  leagues  within  the  mouth  of
this  entrance  we  had  sounding  in  90  fadoms,  faire  grey
osie  sand,  and  the  further  we  ran  into  the  Westwards
the  deeper  was  the  water ;  so  that  hard  aboord  the  shoare
among  these  Isles  we  could  not  have  ground  in  330
fadoms.

Lastly,  it  did  ebbe  and  flow  sixe  or  seven  fadome  up
and  downe,  the  flood  comming  from  divers  parts,  so  as
we  could  not  perceive  the chiefe  maintenance  thereof.

The  18  and  19  our  Captaine  and  Master  determined
what  was  best  to  doe,  both  for  the  safegard  of  their
credits,  and  satisfying  of  the  adventurers,  and  resolved,
if  the  weather  brake  up,  to  make  further  search.

The  20  the  winde  came  directly  against  us :  so  they
altered  their  purpose,  and  reasoned  both  for  proceeding
and  returning.

The  2 1  the  winde  being  Northwest,  we  departed  from
these  Islands ;  and  as  we  coasted  the  South  shoare  we
saw  many  faire  sounds,  whereby  we  were  perswaded  that
it  was  no  firme  land  but  Islands.

The  23  of  this  moneth  the  wind  came  Southeast,  with
very  stormy  and  foule  weather :  so  we  were  constrained
to  seeke  harborow  upon  the  South  coast  of  this  entrance,
where  we  fell  into  a  very  faire  sound,  &  ankered  in  25
fadoms  greene  osie  sand.  Here  we  went  on  shore,  where
we  had  manifest  signes  of  people  where  they  had  made
their  fire,  and  layed  stones  like  a  wall. In  this  place  we

392

isi^^iiey

'■'"W

/f2.f.

^  <-

. -'2

LETTER FROM JOHN DAVIS TO WALSINGHAM, jrd OCTOBER, 1585

JOHN DAVIS

saw  foure  very  faire  faulcons ;  and  M.  Bruton  tooke
from  one  of  them  his  prey,  which  we  judged  by  the
wings  and  legs  to  be  a  snite,  for  the  head  was  eaten  off.

The  24  in  the  afternoone,  the  winde  comming  some-
what faire,  we  departed  from  this  road,  purposing  by
Gods  grace  to  returne  for  England.

The  26  we  departed  from  sight  of  the  North  land  of
this  entrance,  directing  our  course  homewards  untill  the
tenth  of  the  next  moneth.

The  10.  of  September  wee  fell  with  The  land  of  desola-
tion, thinking  to  goe  on  shoare,  but  we  could  get  never
a  good  harborough.  That  night  wee  put  to  sea  againe
thinking  to  search  it  the  next  day :  but  this  night  arose
a  very  great  storme,  and  separated  our  ships,  so  that  we
lost  the  sight  of  the  Mooneshine.

The  13.  about  noone  (having  tried  all  the  night  before
with  a  goose  wing)  we  set  saile,  &  within  two  houres
after  we  had  sight  of  the  Mooneshine  againe :  this  day
we  departed  from  this  land.

The  27.  of  this  moneth  we  fell  with  sight  of  England.
This  night  we  had  a  marveilous  storme  and  lost  the
Mooneshine.

The  30.  of  September  wee  came  into  Dartmouth,
where  wee  found  the  Mooneshine  being  come  in  not
two  houres  before.

A.D.

1585.

Faulcons.

Their  returne.

September.
[III.  103.]

They  saile
from  The  land
of  desolation  to
England  in
14.  days.

The  second  voyage  attempted  by  M.  John  Davis
with  others,  for  the  discovery  of  the  North-
west passage,  in  Anno 1586.

He  7.  day  of  May,  I  departed  from  the
port  of  Dartmouth  for  the  discovery  of
the  Northwest  passage,  with  a  ship  of  an
hundred  and  twentie  tunnes  named  the
Mermayd,  a  barke  of  60.  tunnes  named
the  Sunneshine,  a  barke  of  35.  tunnes
named  the  Mooneshine,  and  a  pinnesse
of  tenne  tunnes  named  the  North  starre.

393

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

Land dis-  And  the  1 5.  of  June  I  discovered  land  in  the  latitude

covered  in  60.  ^^  ^^^  degrees,  and  in  longitude  from  the  Meridian  of
'  London Westward  47. degrees, mightily  pestered  with

yce  and  snow,  so  that  there  was  no  hope  of  landing :  the
yce  lay  in  some  places  tenne  leagues,  in  some  20.  and
in  some  50.  leagues  off  the  shore,  so  that  wee  were  con-
strained to  beare  into  57.  degrees  to  double  the  same,
and  to  recover  a  free  Sea,  which  through  Gods  favourable
mercy  we  at  length  obtained.

The  29.  of  June  after  many  tempestuous  storms  we
againe  discovered  land,  in  longitude  from  the  Meridian
of  London  58.  degr.  30.  min.  and  in  latitude  64.  being
East  from  us :  into  which  course  sith  it  please  God  by
contrary  winds  to  force  us,  I  thought  it  very  necessary  to
beare  in  with  it,  &  there  to  set  up  our  pinnesse,  provided
in  the  Mermayd  to  be  our  scout  for  this  discovery,  and
so  much  the  rather  because  the  yere  before  I  had  bene
in  the  same  place,  and  found  it  very  convenient  for  such
a  purpose,  wel  stored  with  flote  wood,  &  possessed  by  a
people  of  tractable  conversation:  so  that  the  29.  of  this
moneth  we  arrived  within  the  Isles  which  lay  before  this
land,  lying  North  northwest,  and  South  southeast,  we
know  not  how  farre.  This  land  is  very  high  &  moun-
tainous, having  before  it  on  the  West  side  a  mighty
company  of  Isles  full  of  faire  sounds,  and  harboroughs.
This  land  was  very  litle  troubled  with  snow,  and  the
sea  altogether  voyd  of  yce.

The  ships  being  within  the  sounds  wee  sent  our  boates
to  search  for  shole  water,  where  wee  might  anker,  which
in  this  place  is  very  hard  to  finde  :  and  as  the  boat  went
sounding  and  searching,  the  people  of  the  countrey
having  espied  them,  came  in  their  Canoas  towards  them
with  many  shoutes  and  cries :  but  after  they  had  espied
in  the  boat  some  of  our  company  that  were  the  yeere
before  here  with  us,  they  presently  rowed  to  the  boate,
and  tooke  hold  on  the  oare,  and  hung  about  the  boate
with  such  comfortable  joy,  as  would  require  a  long  dis-
course to  be  uttered :  they  came  with  the  boates  to  our

394

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1586.

ships,  making  signes  that  they  knewe  all  those  that  the

yeere  before  had  bene  with  them. After  I  perceived  their  Gentle  and

joy  and  small  feare  of  us,  my  selfe  with  the  Merchants °^^^^

&  others  of  the  company  went  a shoare, bearing  with

me  twentie  knives : I had  no  sooner  landed, but they

lept  out  of  their  Canoas  and  came  running  to mee  and

the  rest,  and  embraced  us  with  many signes  of  heartie

welcome :  at  this  present  there  were  eighteene  of  them,

and  to  eche  of  them  I  gave  a  knife : they  ofFred  skinnes

to  me  for  reward,  but  I  made  signes  that  they  were  not

solde, but  given  them of  courtesie : and so  dismissed

them  for  that  time,  with  signes  that  they  should  returne

againe  after  certaine  houres.

The  next  day  with  all  possible  speede  the  pinnesse  was  An  100

landed  upon  an  Isle there  to be  finished to serve our  ^.^«^^^  "'^^^
r  _  _  ,  divsrs  com-

purpose  for  the  discoverie,  which  Isle  was  so  convenient  rnodities.
for  that  purpose,  as  that  we  were  very  wel  able  to  defend
our  selves  against  many  enemies.  During  the  time  that
the  pinnesse,  was  there  setting  up,  the  people  came  con-
tinually unto  us  sometime  an  hundred  Canoas  at  a  time,
sometime  fourtie,  fiftie,  more  and  lesse,  as  occasion
served.  They  brought  with  them  seale  skinnes,  stagge
skinnes,  white  hares,  Seale  fish,  samon  peale,  smal  cod,
dry  caplin,  with  other  fish,  and  birds  such  as  the  countrey
did  yeeld.

My  selfe  still  desirous  to  have  a  further  search  of
this  place,  sent  one  of  the  shipboates  to  one  part  of  the
lande,  and  my  selfe  went  to  another  part  to  search  for  the
habitation  of  this  people,  with  straight  commandement  [III.  104.]
that  there  should  be  no  injurie  offered  to  any  of  the
people,  neither  any  gunne  shot.

The  boates  that  went  from  me  found  the  tents  of  the  Images,  tram
people  made  with  seale  skinnes  set  up  upon  timber,  where-  oy^^^^l^^^^^^
in  they  found  great  store  of  dried  Caplin,  being  a  litle  ^^^^
fish  no  bigger  then  a  pilchard  :  they  found  bags  of  Trane
oyle,  many  litle  images cut in  wood, Seale  skinnes in
tan-tubs, with many other such trifles, whereof they
diminished  nothing.

395

A.D,
1586.

A plaine  cham-
pion countrey.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

They  also  found  tenne  miles  within  the  snowy  moun-
taines  a  plaine  champion  countrey,  with  earth  and  grasse,
such  as  our  moory  and  waste  grounds  of  England  are :
J  goodly  river,  they  went  up  into  a  river  (which  in  the  narrowest  place  is
two  leagues  broad)  about  ten  leagues,  finding  it  still  to
continue  they  knewe  not  howe  farre :  but  I  with  my  com-
pany tooke  another  river,  which  although  at  the  first  it
offered  a  large  inlet,  yet  it  proved  but  a  deepe  bay,  the
ende  whereof  in  foure  houres  I  attained,  and  there  leaving
the  boat  well  manned,  went  with  the  rest  of  my  company
three  or  foure  miles  into  the  countrey,  but  found  nothing,
nor  saw  any  thing,  save  onely  gripes,  ravens,  and  small
birds,  as  larkes  and  linnets.

The  third  of  July  I  manned  my  boat,  and  went  with
fifty  Canoas  attending  upon  me  up  into  another  sound
where  the  people  by  signes  willed  mee  to  goe,  hoping
to  finde  their  habitation :  at  length  they  made  signes
that  I  should  goe  into  a  warme  place  to  sleepe,  at  which
place  I  went  on  shore,  and  ascended  the  toppe  of  an
high  hill  to  see  into  the  countrey,  but  perceiving  my
labor  vaine,  I  returned  againe  to  my  boat,  the  people  still
following  me,  and  my  company  very  diligent  to  attend
us,  and  to  helpe  us  up  the  rockes,  and  likewise  downe :
at  length  I  was  desirous  to  have  our  men  leape  with
them,  which  was  done,  but  our  men  did  overleape  them :
from  leaping  they  went  to  wrestling,  we  found  them
strong  and  nimble,  and  to  have  skil  in  wrestling,  for
they  cast  some  of  our  men  that  were  good  wrestlers.

The  fourth  of  July  we  lanched  our  pinnesse,  and  had
fortie  of  the  people  to  helpe  us,  which  they  did  very
willingly :  at  this  time  our  men  againe  wrestled  with
them,  and  found  them  as  before,  strong  and  skilfull.
This  fourth  of  July  the  Master  of  the  Mermayd  went
to  certaine  Hands  to  store  himselfe  with  wood,  where
he  found  a  grave  with  divers  buried  in  it,  only  covered
with  scale  skinnes,  having  a  crosse  laid  over  them.  The
people  are  of  good  stature,  wel  in  body  proportioned,
with  small slender  hands  and  feet, with broad  visages,

396

j4  grave  with
a  crosse  layd
over.

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1586.
and  smal  eyes,  wide  mouthes,  the  most  part  unbearded,  The  Tartars
great  lips,  and  close  toothed. Their  custome  is  as  often  ^"^P^°P^^  °f

^ , ^ r  -11  1 •  I  Japan  are  also

as  they  go  rrom  us,  still  at  their  returne  to  make  a  new  ^mal  e-^ed

truce,  in  this  sort,  holding  his  hand  up  to  the  Sun  with

a  lowd  voice he  crieth Ylyaoute,  and  striketh  his  brest

with  like  signes,  being  promised  safety,  he  giveth  credit.

These people are much given to bleed,  and therefore

stop their  noses  with  deeres haire,  or the  haire of  an

elan. They  are  idolaters  and  have  images great store,

which  they  weare  about  them,  and  in  their  boats,  which

we  suppose  they  worship. They  are  witches, and  have

many  kinds  of  inchantments,  which  they  often  used,  but

to  small  purpose,  thankes  be  to  God.

Being  among  them  at  shore  the  fourth  of  July,  one

of  them  making  a  long  oration,  beganne  to  kindle  a  fire

in  this  maner :  he  tooke  a  piece  of  a  board  wherein  was

a  hole  halfe  thorow : into  that  hole  he  puts  the  end  of

a round stick like unto a bedstaffe,  wetting the end

thereof  in  Trane,  and  in  fashion  of  a  turner  with  a  piece  Their  maner

of  lether, by his violent motion doeth very  speedily  ofk^ndhngfire

produce fire : which done,  with  turfes he made a  fire,  ^.^  America

into which with  many  words  and strange  gestures, he  a  fire  made  of

put  diverse  things,  which  wee  supposed  to  be  a  sacrifice :  turfes.

my  selfe and  divers of  my  company  standing by,  they

were  desirous  to have  me  go  into  the  smoke,  I  willed

them  likewise  to  stand  in  the  smoke,  which  they  by  no

meanes  would  do. I  then  tooke  one  of  them,  and  thrust

him  into  the  smoke,  and  willed  one  of  my  company  to

tread  out  the  fire,  &  to  spurne  it  into  the  sea,  which  was

done  to  shew  them  that  we  did  contemne  their  sorcery.

These  people are  very  simple  in  all  their  conversation,  Great  tkeeves.

but  marveilous  theevish,  especially  for  iron,  which  they

have  in  great  account. They  began  through  our  lenitie

to  shew  their  vile  nature :  they  began  to  cut  our  cables :

they  cut  away the Moonelights  boat  from her sterne,

they  cut  our  cloth  where  it  lay  to  aire, though  we  did

carefully  looke  unto  it,  they  stole  our  oares,  a  caliver,  a

boare  speare,  a  sword,  with  divers  other  things,  wherat

397

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

the  company  and  Masters  being  grieved,  for  our  better

securitie,  desired  me  to  dissolve  this  new  friendship,  and

to leave the company of these theevish miscreants:

whereupon  there was  a caliver shot  among them,  and

immediatly upon the same a faulcon, which strange

noice did sore amaze them, so that  with speed  they

departed :  notwithstanding  their  simplicitie  is  such,  that

within  ten  houres  after  they  came  againe  to  us  to  entreat

peace ;  which  being  promised,  we  againe  fell  into  a  great

league. They brought us Scale skinnes, and sammon

peale, but  seeing  iron, they  could  in  no wise  forbeare

stealing : which  when I perceived, it did but minister

unto  mee  an  occasion  of  laughter,  to  see  their  simplicitie,

and  I  willed  that  in  no  case  they  should  bee  any  more

[III.  105.1 hardly  used,  but  that  our  owne  company  should  be  the

more  vigilant  to  keepe  their  things,  supposing  it  to  be

very  hard  in  so  short time  to  make  them know their

Their  rude evils. They  eate  all  their  meat  raw,  they  live  most  upon

diet'  fish,  they  drinke  salt  water,  and  eate  grasse  and  ice  with

delight :  they  are  never  out  of  the  water,  but  live  in  the

nature  of  fishes,  save  only  when  dead  sleepe  taketh  them,

and  then  under  a  warme  rocke  laying  his  boat  upon  the

Their  zvea- land,  hee  lyeth  downe  to  sleepe. Their  weapons  are  all

pons.  darts,  but  some  of  them  have  bow  and  arrowes  and  slings.

Strange  nets. They  make  nets  to  take  their  fish  of  the  finne  of  a  whale  :

they  do all  their  things  very  artificially : and  it  should

These  Is- seeme that these  simple theevish Islanders have  warre

landers  warre  ^j^^  those of  the maine, for many of  them are sore

wit epeope  -^Q^j^^je^j which  wounds  they  received  upon  the  maine

of  the  matne. . ,  ,' .  ,  ^  j  j ttt l j

land,  as  by  signes  they  gave  us  to  understana. We  nad

Copper  oare.  among  them  copper  oare,  black  copper,  and  red  copper :
they  pronounce  their  language  very  hollow,  and  deepe  in
the  throat :  these  words  followinar  we  learned  from  them.

Their  Ian- Kesinyoh,  Eate  some.
guage.  Madlycoyte,  Musicke.

Aginyoh,  go  fetch.

Yliaoute,!  meanenoharme.

Ponameg,  A  boat.

f  Paaotyck,  An  oare.

Asanock,  A  dart.

Sawygmeg,  A  knife.

Uderah,  A  nose.
^  Aoh,  Iron.

398

JOHN DAVIS

Blete,  An  eye.
Unuicke,  Give  it.
Tuckloak,  A  stagge  or  ellan.
Panygmah,  A  needle.
Aob,  The  Sea.
Mysacoah,  Wash  it.
Lethicksaneg, A seale

skinne.
Canyglow,  Kisse  me.
Ugnera,  My  sonne.
Acu,  Shot.
Conah,  Leape.
Maatuke,  Fish.
Sambah,  Below.
Maconmegj  Wil  you  have

this.

M

'  Cocah,  Go  to  him.

Aba,  Fallen  downe.

Icune,  Come  hither.

Awennye,  Yonder.
I  Nugo,  No.

Tucktodo,  A  fogge.

Lechiksah,  A  skinne.

Maccoah,  A  dart.

Sugnacoon,  A  coat.

Gounah,  Come  downe.

Sasobneg,  A  bracelet.

Ugnake,  A  tongue.

Ataneg,  A  seale.

Macuah,  A  beard.

Pignagogah,  A  threed.

A.D.
1586.

^  Quoysah,  Give  it  to  me.

The  7.  of  July  being  very  desirous  to  search  the  habi-
tation of  this  countrey,  I  went  myselfe  with  our  new
pinnesse  into  the  body  of  the  land,  thinking  it  to  be  a
firme  continent,  and  passing  up  a  very  large  river,  a  great
flaw  of  winde  tooke  me,  whereby  wee  were  constrained
to  seeke  succour  for  that  night,  which  being  had,  I
landed  with  the  most  part  of  my  company,  and  went  to
the  top  of  a  high  mountaine,  hoping  from  thence  to  see
into  the  countrey :  but  the  mountaines  were  so  many
and  so  mighty  as  that  my  purpose  prevailed  not :  where-
upon I  againe  returned  to  my  pinnesse,  and  willing  divers
of  my  company  to  gather  muscles  for  my  supper,  whereof  Muscles.
in  this  place  there  was  great  store,  my  selfe  having  espied
a  very  strange  sight,  especially  to  me  that  never  before
saw  the  like,  which  was  a  mighty  whirlewinde  taking  up  ^  strange
the  water  in  very  great  quantitie,  furiously  mounting  it  "^htrkwinde.
into  the  aire,  which  whirlewinde,  was  not  for  a  pujfFe
or  blast,  but  continual,  for  the  space  of  three  houres,
with  very  little  intermission,  which  sith  it  was  in  the
course  that  I  should  passe,  we  were  constrained  that
night  to  take  up  our  lodging  under  the  rockes.

The next morning the  storme being  broken up,  we

399

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

went  forward  in  our  attempt,  and  sailed  into  a  mighty
great  river  directly  into  the  body  of  the  land,  and  in
briefe,  found  it  to  be  no  firme  land,  but  huge,  waste,  and

Great  Hands,  desert  Isles  with  mighty  sounds,  and  inlets  passing
betweene  Sea  and  Sea.  Whereupon  we  returned  towards
our  shippes,  and  landing  to  stoppe  a  floud,  wee  found
the  burial  of  these  miscreants ;  we  found  of  their  fish
in  bagges,  plaices,  and  caplin  dried,  of  which  wee  tooke
onely  one  bagge  and  departed.  The  ninth  of  this
moneth  we  came  to  our  ships,  where  wee  found  the
people  desirous  in  their  fashion,  of  friendship  and  barter :
our  Mariners  complained  heavily  against  the  people,  and
said  that  my  lenitie  and  friendly  using  of  them  gave
them  stomacke  to  mischiefe :  for  they  have  stoUen  an
anker  from  us,  they  have  cut  our  cable  very  dangerously,
they  have  cut  our  boats  from  our  sterne,  and  nowe  since

Slings.  your  departure,  with  slings  they  spare  us  not  with  stones

of  halfe  a  pound  weight :  and  wil  you  stil  indure  these
injuries?  It  is  a  shame  to  beare  them.  I  desired  them
to  be  content,  and  said,  I  doubted  not  but  al  should  be
wel.  The  10.  of  this  moneth  I  went  to  the  shore,  the
people  following  mee  in  their  Canoas :  I  tolled  them  on
shore,  and  used  them  with  much  courtesie,  and  then
departed  aboord,  they  following  me,  and  my  company.
I  gave  some  of  them  bracelets,  &  caused  seven  or  eight

[III.  106.]  of  them  to  come  aboord,  which  they  did  willingly,  and
some  of  them  went  into  the  top  of  the  ship :  and  thus
curteously  using  them,  I  let  them  depart :  the  Sunne
was  no  sooner  downe,  but  they  began  to  practise  their
devilish  nature,  and  with  slings  threw  stones  very
fiercely  into  the  Moonelight,  and  strake  one  of  her
men  then  boatswaine,  that  he  overthrew  withall :  where-
at being  moved,  I  changed  my  curtesie,  and  grew
to  hatred,  my  self  in  my  owne  boate  well  manned
with  shot,  and  the  barks  boat  likewise  pursued  them,
and  gave  them  divers  shot,  but  to  small  purpose,  by
reason of their swift rowing : so smally content we

returned.

400

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1586.

The  II,  of  this  moneth  there  came  five  of  them  to
make  a  new  truce :  the  master  of  the  Admiral  came  to
me  to  shew  me  of  their  comming,  and  desired  to  have
them  taken  and  kept  as  prisoners  untill  we  had  his
anker  againe :  but  when  he  sawe  that  the  chiefe  ring-
leader and  master  of  mischiefe  was  one  of  the  five,  he
then  was  vehement  to  execute  his  purpose,  so  it  was
determined  to  take  him :  he  came  crying  Iliaout,  and
striking  his  brest  offered  a  paire  of  gloves  to  sell,  the
master  offered  him  a  knife  for  them  :  so  two  of  them
came  to  us,  the  one  was  not  touched,  but  the  other
was  soone  captive  among  us :  then  we  pointed  to  him
and  his  fellowes  for  our  anker,  which  being  had,  we
made  signes  that  he  should  be  set  at  libertie :  within
one  houre  after  he  came  aboord  the  winde  came  faire,
whereupon  we  weyed  and  set  saile,  and  so  brought  the  Oneofthepeo-
fellow  with  us :  one  of  his  fellowes  still  following  our  p^^takenwhch
ship  close  aboord,  talked  with him  and made a  kinde  -^

of  lamentation,  we  still  using  him  wel  with  Yliaout,
which  was  the  common  course  of  curtesie.  At  length
this  fellow  aboord  us  spake  foure  or  five  words  unto
the  other  and  clapped  his  two  hands  upon  his  face,
whereupon  the  other  doing  the  like,  departed  as  we
suppose  with  heavie  chere.  We  judged  the  covering  of
his  face  with  his  hands  and  bowing  of  his  body  downe,
signified  his  death.  At  length  he  became  a  pleasant  com-
panion among  us.  I  gave  him  a  new  sute  of  frize  after
the  English  fashion,  because  1  saw  he  could  not  indure
the  colde,  of  which  he  was  very  joyfuU,  he  trimmed  up
his  darts,  and  all  his  fishing  tooles,  and  would  make
okam,  and  set  his  hand  to  a  ropes  end  upon  occasion.
He  lived  with  the  dry  Caplin  that  I  tooke  when  I  was
searching  in  the  pinnis,  and  did  eate  dry  Newland  fish.

All  this  while,  God  be  thanked,  our  people  were  in
very  good  health,  onely  one  young  man  excepted,  who
dyed  at  sea  the  fourteenth  of  this  moneth,  and  the
fifteenth,  according  to  the  order  of  the  sea,  with  praise
given  to  God  by  service,  was  cast  overboord.

vn  401  2  c

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

Ahugequan- The 1 7 of  this  moneth  being  in  the  latitude  of  G-i^.

g^^'^  J-^^^  "^^  degres 8.  minuts, we fell upon a most mighty and

latitude.  Strange quantitie  of  yce  in one intire masse, so bigge

as  that  we  knew  not  the  limits  thereof,  and  being
withall  so  very  high  in  forme  of  a  land,  with  bayes
and  capes  and  like  high  cliffe  land,  as  that  we  supposed
it  to  be  land,  and  therefore  sent  our  pinnesse  off  to
discover  it :  but  at  her  returne  we  were  certainely
informed  that  it  was  onely  yce,  which  bred  great
admiration  to  us  all  considering  the  huge  quantitie
thereof,  incredible  to  be  reported  in  trueth  as  it  was,
and  therefore  I  omit  to  speake  any  further  thereof.
This  onely  I  thinke,  that  the  like  before  was  never
seene:  and  in  this  place  we  had  very  stickle  and  strong
currents.

We  coasted  this  mightie  masse  of  yce  untill  the  30
of  July,  finding  it  a  mighty  barre  to  our  purpose :  the
ayre  in  this  time  was  so  contagious  and  the  sea  so
pestered  with  yce,  as  that  all  hope  was  banished  of
proceeding :  for  the  24  of  July  all  our  shrowds,  ropes
and sailes were so frosen, and compassed with yce,

The  nature  of  onely by  a  grosse  fogge,  as  seemed  to  me more then
foS&^-  strange, sith the  last yeere  I found this  sea free and

navigable,  without  impediments.

Our  men  through  this  extremity  began  to  grow
sicke  and  feeble,  and  withall  hopelesse  of  good  suc-
cesse :  whereupon  very  orderly,  with  good  discretion
they  intreated  me  to  regard  the  state  of  this  busines,
and  withall  advised  me,  that  in  conscience  I  ought  to
regard  the  saftie  of  mine  owne  life  with  the  preserva-
tion of  theirs,  and  that  I  should  not  through  my  over-
boldnes  leave  their  widowes  and  fatherlesse  children  to
give  me  bitter  curses.  This  matter  in  conscience  did
greatly  move  me  to  regard  their  estates :  yet  consider-
ing the  excellencie  of  the  businesse  if  it  might  be
attained,  the  great  hope  of  certaintie  by  the  last  yeeres
discovery,  and  that  there  was  yet  a  third  way  not  put
in practise, I thought it would growe to my great

402

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1586.

disgrace,  if  this  action  by  my  negligence  should  grow
into  discredite :  whereupon  seeking  helpe  from  God,
the  fountaine  of  all  mercies,  it  pleased  his  divine
majestie  to  move  my  heart  to  prosecute  that  which  I
hope  shal  be  to  his  glory,  and  to  the  contentation  of
every  Christian  minde.  Whereupon  falling  into  con-
sideration that  the  Mermaid,  albeit  a  very  strong  &
sufficient  ship,  yet  by  reason  of  her  burthen  was  not
so  convenient  and  nimble  as  a  smaller  bark,  especially
in  such  desperate  hazzards:  further  having  in  account
her  great  charge  to  the  adventurers  being  at  loo.li.
the  moneth,  and  that  in  doubtfull  service :  all  the  pre-
misses considered  with  divers  other  things,  I  determined
to  furnish  the  Moonelight  with  revictualling  and  suffi-
cient men,  and  to  proceede  in  this  action  as  God  should
direct  me.  Whereupon  I  altered  our  course  from  the
yce,  and  bare  Eastsoutheast  to  recover  the  next  shore
where  this  thing  might  be  performed :  so  with  favour-
able winde  it  pleased  God  that  the  first  of  August  we
discovered  the  land  in  Latitude  66.  degrees,  33.  min.  [III.  107.]
and  in  longitude  from  the  Meridian  of  London  70.
degrees  voyd  of  trouble  without  snow  or  ice.

The  second  of  August  wee  harboured  our  selves  in  a
very  excellent  good  road,  where  with  all  speed  we  graved
the  Moonelight,  and  revictualled  her :  wee  searched  this
countrey  with  our  pinnesse  while  the  barke  was  trim-
ming, which  William  Eston  did :  he  found  all  this  land
to  be  onely  Hands,  with  a  Sea  on  the  East,  a  Sea  on
the  West,  and  a  Sea  on  the  North.  In  this  place  wee
found  it  very  hot,  and  wee  were  very  much  troubled  Great  heat.
with  a  flie  which  is  called  Muskyto,  for  they  did  sting
grievously.  The  people  of  this  place  at  our  first  com-
ming  in  caught  a  Seale,  and  with  bladders  fast  tied  to
him  sent  him  unto  us  with  the  floud,  so  as  hee  came
right  with  our  shippes,  which  we  tooke  as  a  friendly
present  from  them.

The  fift  of  August  I  went  with  the  two  Masters  and
others  to  the  toppe  of  a  hill,  and  by  the  way  William

403

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

Eston  espied  three  Canoas  lying  under  a  rocke,  and
went  unto  them :  there  were  in  them  skinnes,  darts,
with  divers  superstitious  toyes,  whereof  wee  diminished
nothing,  but  left  upon  every  boat  a  silke  point,  a  bullet
of  lead,  and  a  pinne.  The  next  day  being  the  sixt  of
August,  the  people  came  unto  us  without  feare,  and  did
barter  with  us  for  skinnes,  as  the  other  people  did :
they  differ  not  from  the  other,  neither  in  their  Canoas
nor  apparel,  yet  is  their  pronuntiation  more  plaine  then
the  others,  and  nothing  hollow  in  the  throat.  Our
Savage  aboord  us  kept  himselfe  close,  and  made  shew
that  he  would  faine  have  another  companion.  Thus
being  provided,  I  departed  from  this  lande  the  twelft  of
August  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  where  I  left
the  Mermayd  at  an  anker :  the  foureteenth  sailing  West
about  fiftie  leagues,  we  discovered  land,  being  in  latitude

66.  degrees 66.  degrees  19  minuts  : this  land  is  70.  leagues  from  the

19.  minutes,  other  from  whence  we  came.  This  fourteenth  day  from
nine  a  clocke  at  night  till  three  a  clocke  in  the  morning,
wee  ankered  by  an  Hand  of  yce,  twelve  leagues  off  the
shore,  being  mored  to  the  yce.

The  fifteenth  day  at  three  a  clocke  in  the  morning
we  departed  from  this  land  to  the  South,  and  the
eighteenth  of  August  we  discovered  land  Northwest
from  us  in  the  morning,  being  a  very  faire  promontory,
in latitude  ^f^.  degrees,  having no land on  the  South.

Great  hope  of  Here  wee  had  great  hope  of  a  through  passage.

a  passage.  This day  at three a clocke in the  afternoone wee

againe  discovered  lande  Southwest  and  by  South  from
us,  where  at  night  wee  were  becalmed.  The  nineteenth
of  this  moneth  at noone,  by observation, we were in

64.  degr.  20. 6\. degrees 20.  minuts. From the eighteenth day  at

''""•  noone  unto  the  nineteenth  at  noone,  by  precise  ordinary

care,  wee  had  sailed  15.  leagues  South  and  by  West,
yet  by  art  and  more  exact  observation,  we  found  our
course to  be  Southwest,  so that we plainely  perceived

rent^to  the' ^  great  current  striking  to  the  West.

ff^est.  This  land is nothing in  sight but Isles, which  in-

404

JOHN DAVIS  AD

1586.
creaseth  our  hope.  This  nineteenth  of  August  at  sixe
a  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  it  began  to  snow,  and  so
continued  all  night  with  foule  weather,  and  much  winde,
so  that  we  were  constrained  to  lie  at  hull  all  night
five  leagues  off  the  shore :  In  the  morning  being  the
twentieth  of  August,  the  fogge  and  storme  breaking
up,  we  bare  in  with  the  lande,  and  at  nine  a  clocke
in  the  morning  wee  ankered  in  a  very  faire  and  safe
road  and  lockt  for  all  weathers.  At  tenne  of  the  clocke
I  went  on  shore  to  the  toppe  of  a  very  high  hill,
where  I  perceived  that  this  land  was  Islands :  at  foure  Hands.
of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  wee  weyed  anker,  having
a  faire  North  northeast  winde,  with  very  faire  weather ;
at  six  of  the  clocke  we  were  cleare  without  the  land,
and  so  shaped  our  course  to  the  South,  to  discover  the
coast,  v/hereby  the  passage  may  be  through  Gods  mercy
found.

We coasted this  land till the  eight and  twentieth  of  They  runne  8.
August,  finding it  still to  continue  towards  the South,  ^^^^^  South-
from the latitude of 67. to 57. degrees: we found  '^to\'i  decrees
marveilous  great  store  of  birds,  guls  and  mewes,  incredible  upon  the  coast.
to  be  reported,  whereupon  being  calme  weather,  we  lay
one  glasse  upon  the  lee,  to  prove  for  fish,  in  which  space
we caught 100. of  cod, although we were but badly
provided  for  fishing,  not  being  our  purpose. This  eight
and  twentieth  having  great  distrust  of  the  weather,  we
arrived in a  very  faire harbour in the  latitude of t^^.  ^ harborough
degrees,  and  sailed  10.  leagues  into  the  same,  being  two  ^^ '^6. degrees.
leagues  broad,  with  very  faire  woods  on  both  sides :  in
this  place  wee continued until the first of  September,
in  which  time  we  had  two  very  great  stormes. I  landed,
&  went  sixe  miles  by  ghesse  into  the  countrey,  and  found
that  the  woods  were  firre,  pineapple,  alder,  yew,  withy,  Faire  woods.
and birch : here wee saw a blacke beare : this place
yeeldeth  great  store  of  birds,  as  fezant,  partridge,  Barbary
hennes  or  the  like,  wilde  geese,  ducks,  black  birdes,  jeyes,
thrushes,  with  other  kinds  of  small  birds. Of  the  par-
tridge  and fezant  we killed great store  with bow and

405

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

arrowes :  in  this  place  at  the  harborough  mouth  we  found
Store  of  cod. great  store  of  cod.

The  first  of  September  at  tenne  a  clocke  wee  set  saile,

and coasted the shore  with very faire weather. The

thirde  day  being  calme,  at  noone  we  strooke  saile,  and

[III.  108.] let  fall  a  cadge  anker,  to  prove  whether  we  could  take

any  fish, being  in latitude 54. degrees 30.  minuts, in

which place  we  found  great  abundance  of  cod,  so that

the  hooke  was  no  sooner  overboord,  but  presently  a  fish

was  taken. It  was  the  largest  and  the  best  fed  fish  that

ever  I sawe,  and  divers  fisher men that  were  with me

sayd  that  they  never  saw  a  more  suavle  or better  skull

of  fish  in  their  lives :  yet  had  they  scene  great  abundance.

The  fourth  of  September  at  five  a  clocke  in  the  after-

noone  we  ankered  in  a  very  good  road  among  great  store

of  Isles,  the  countrey  low  land,  pleasant  and  very  full

of  fayre  woods. To  the  North  of  this  place  eight  leagues,

A  perfect  hope  -^g  j^^^j  ^  perfect  hope  of  the  passage,  finding  a  mightie

oj e  passage gj.^^^  g^^  passing  betweene  two  lands  West. The  South

grees  and  (in 1^*^^ to our  judgement being nothing but Isles: we

halfe.  greatly  desired  to  goe  into  this  sea,  but  the  winde  was

directly  against  us. We  ankered  in  foure  fathome  fine

sand. In  this  place  is  foule  and  fish  mightie  store.

The  sixt  of  September  having  a  faire  Northnorthwest
winde,  having  trimmed  our  Barke  we  purposed  to  depart,
and  sent  five  of  our  sailers  yong  men  a  shore  to  an
Island,  to  fetch  certaine  fish  which  we  purposed  to  weather,
and  therefore  left  it  al  night  covered  upon  the  Isle :  the
brutish  people  of  this  countrey  lay  secretly  lurking  in
the  wood,  and  upon  the  sudden  assaulted  our  men :
which  when  we  perceived,  we  presently  let  slip  our  cables
upon  the  halse,  and  under  our  foresaile  bare  into  the
shoare,  and  with  all  expedition  discharged  a  double
musket  upon  them  twise,  at  the  noyse  whereof  they  fled :
notwithstanding  to  our  very  great  griefe,  two  of  our  men
Two  of  our were slaine with their arrowes, and two grievously

menslatne  by mounded,  of  whom  at  this  present  we  stand  in  very  great
the  oavazes.  ^  . .  .  ^

doubt,  onely  one  escaped by  swimming,  with  an  arrow

406

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1586.

shot  thorow  his  arme.  These  wicked  miscreants  never
offered  parly  or  speech,  but  presently  executed  their
cursed  fury.

This  present  evening  it  pleased  God  further  to  increase
our  sorowes  with  a  mighty  tempestuous  storme,  the
winde  being  North  northeast,  which  lasted  unto  the  tenth
of  this  moneth  very  extreme.  We  unrigged  our  ship,
and  purposed  to  cut  downe  our  masts,  the  cable  of  our
shutanker  brake,  so  that  we  onely  expected  to  be  driven
on  shoare  among  these  Canibals  for  their  pray.  Yet  in
this  deepe  distresse  the  mightie  mercie  of  God,  when  hope
was  past,  gave  us  succour,  and  sent  us  a  faire  lee,  so  as  we
recovered  our  anker  againe,  and  newe  mored  our  ship :
where  we  saw  that  God  manifestly  delivered  us :  for
the  straines  of  one  of  our  cables  were  broken,  and  we
only  roade  by  an  olde  junke.  Thus  being  freshly
mored  a  new  storme  arose,  the  winde  being  Westnorth-
west,  very  forcible,  which  lasted  unto  the  tenth  day  at
night.

The  eleventh  day  with  a  faire  Westnorthwest  winde  we
departed  with  trust  in  Gods  mercie,  shaping  our  course
for  England,  and  arrived  in  the  West  countrey  in  the
beginning  of  October.

Master  Davis  being  arrived,  wrote  his  letter  to
M.  William  Sanderson  of  London,  concerning
his  voyage,  as  followeth.

[r,  the  Sunneshine  came  into  Dartmouth
the  fourth  of  this  moneth  :  she  hath  bene
at  Island,  and  from  thence  to  Groenland,
and  so  to  Estotiland,  from  thence  to
Desolation,  and  to  our  Marchants,  where
she  made  trade  with  the  people,  staying
in  the  countrey  twentie  dayes.  They
have  brought  home  five  hundred  scale  skinnes,  and  an
hundred  and  fortie  halfe  skinnes  and  pieces  of  skinnes.
I  stand  in  great  doubt  of  the  pinnesse,  God  be  merciful!

407

A.D,

1586.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

unto the poore  men,  and  preserve them,  if  it be his
blessed  will.

I  have  now  experience  of  much  of  the  Northwest  part
of  the  world,  &  have  brought  the  passage  to  that  likeli-
hood, as  that  I  am  assured  it  must  bee  in  one  of  foure
places,  or  els  not  at  all.  And  further  I  can  assure  you
upon  the  perill  of  my  life,  that  this  voyage  may  be
performed  without  further  charge,  nay  with  certaine
profite  to  the  adventurers,  if  I  may  have  but  your  favour
in  the  action.  I  hope  I  shall  finde  favour  with  you  to
see  your  Card.  I  pray  God  it  be  so  true  as  the  Card
shal  be  which  I  will  bring  you :  and  I  hope  in  God,  that
your  skill  in  Navigation  shall  be  gaineful  unto  you,
although  at  the  first  it  hath  not  proved  so.  And  thus  with
my  humble  commendations  I  commit  you  to  God,  desiring
no  longer  to  live,  then  I  shall  be  yours  most  faithfully  to
command. Exon  this  fourteenth  of  October. 1586.

Yours  to  command

John  Davis.

The  relation  of  the  course  v^hich  the  Sunshine
a  barke  of  fiftie  tunnes,  and  the  Northstarre
a  small  pinnesse,  being  two  vessels  of  the  fleete
of  M.  John  Davis,  helde  after  hee  had  sent
them  from  him  to  discover  the  passage  be-
tweene  Groenland  and  Island,  written  by
Henry  Morgan  servant  to  M.  William  Sander-
son of  London.

He  seventh  day  of  May  1586.  wee
departed  out  of  Dartmouth  haven  foure
sailes,  to  wit,  the  Mermaid,  the  Sunshine,
the  Mooneshine,  &  the  Northstarre.  In
the  Sunshine  were  sixteene  men,  whose
names  were  these  :  Richard  Pope  Master,
Marke  Carter  Masters  mate,  Henry
Morgan  Purser,  George  Draward,  John  Mandie,  Hugh
Broken,  Philip  Jane,  Hugh  Hempson,  Richard  Borden,

408

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1586.

John  Philpe,  Andrew  Madock,  William  Wolcome,
Robert  Wag  carpenter,  John  Bruskome,  William  Ashe,
Simon  Ellis.

Our  course  was  Westnorthwest  the  seventh  and  eight
dayes : and  the  ninth  day  in  the  morning  we  were  on
head  of  the  Tarrose  of  Silley. Thus  coasting  along  the
South  part  of  Ireland  the 1 1 .  day,  we  were  on  head  of
the  Dorses : and  our  course was Southsouthwest  untill
sixe  of  the  clocke  the  12.  day. The 13.  day  our  course
was  Northwest. We  remained in  the  company  of  the
Mermaid and the Mooneshine until we  came  to the
latitude  of  60.  degrees :  and  there  it  seemed  best  to  our
Generall  M.  Davis  to  divide  his  fleete,  himself  sayling  to  ^-  ^'^^'^^
the  Northwest,  and  to  direct  the  Sunshine,  wherein  I  was,  ^^  ^
and the pinnesse called the North starre, to seeke a  divUeth  his
passage Northward betweene Groenland and Island to  fleete  into  2.
the  latitude  of  80.  degrees,  if  land  did  not  let  us. So  i*^^^-^-
the  seventh  day  of  June  wee  departed  from  them:  and  They.ofJune.
the  ninth  of  the  same  we  came  to  a  firme  land  of  yce,
which we  coasted along  the ninth, the tenth,  and the
eleventh  dayes of  June : and  the eleventh  day at sixe
of  the  clocke  at  night  we  saw  land  which  was  very  high,
which afterward  we  knew  to  be  Island : and  the  twelft  island
day  we  harboured there, and found many  people : the  '^^■^'^O'^*-
land  lyeth  East  and  by  North  in  66.  degrees.  66.  degrees.

Their  commodities  were  greene  fish,  and  Island  lings.  Their  commo-
and  stockfish,  and  a  fish  which  is  called  Scatefish  :  of  all  '^^^'^■^•
which  they  had  great  store. They  had  also  kine,  sheep
and  horses,  and  hay  for  their  cattell,  and  for  their  horses.
Wee  saw  also  their  dogs. Their  dwelling houses  were  Their  dweU-
made  on  both  sides  with  stones,  and  wood layd  crosse  ^'"^^'
over  them,  which  was  covered  over  with  turfes  of  earth,
and  they  are  flat  on  the  tops,  and  many  of  these  stood
hard  by  the  shore. Their  boates  were  made  with  wood  Their  boats.
and  yron  all  along  the  keele  like our  English  boates :
and  they  had  nayles  for  to  naile  them  withall,  and  fish-
hookes  and  other  things  for  to  catch  fish  as  we  have  here
in  England. They  had  also  brasen  kettles,  and  girdles

409

A.D.

1586.

M.  Joh?i  Roy-
donof Ipswich.

They  departed
from  Island
Northwest.

July.

Groneland  dis-
covered.

The  land  of
Desolation.

Groenland
coasted  from
the  7.  till  the
last  of  July.
August.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  purses  made  of  leather,  and  knoppes  on  them  of
copper,  and  hatchets,  and  other  small  tooles  as  necessary
as  we  have.  They  drie  their  fish  in  the  Sun,  and  when
they  are  dry,  they  packe  them  up  in  the  top  of  their
houses.  If  we  would  goe  thither  to  fishing  more  then  we
doe,  we  should  make  it  a  very  good  voyage :  for  wee  got
an  hundreth  greene  fish  in  one  morning.  Wee  found
heere  two  English  men  with  a  shippe,  which  came  out  of
England  about  Easter  day  of  this  present  yeere  1586,
and  one  of  them  came  aboord  of  us,  and  brought  us  two
lambs.  The  English  mans  name  was  M.  John  Roydon
of  Ipswich  marchant :  hee  was  bound  for  London  with
his  ship.  And  this  is  the  summe  of  that  which  I
observed  in  Island.  We  departed  from  Island  the
sixteenth  day  of  June  in  the  morning,  and  our  course
was  Northwest,  and  we  saw  on  the  coast  two  small  barkes
going  to  an  harborough  :  we  went  not  to  them,  but  saw
them  a  farre  off.  Thus  we  continued  our  course  unto
the  end  of  this  moneth.

The  third  day  of  July  we  were  in  betweene  two  firme
lands  of  yce,  and  passed  in  betweene  them  all  that  day
untill  it  was  night :  and  then  the  Master  turned  backe
againe,  and  so  away  we  went  towards  Groenland.  And
the  seventh  day  of  July  we  did  see  Groenland,  and  it  was
very  high,  and  it  looked  very  blew :  we  could  not  come
to  harborough  into  the  land,  because  we  were  hindered  by
a  firme  land  as  it  were  of  yce,  which  was  along  the  shoares
side :  but  we  were  within  three  leagues  of  the  land,
coasting  the  same  divers  dayes  together.  The  seventeenth
day  of  July  wee  saw  the  place  which  our  Captaine  M.
John  Davis  the  yeere  before  had  named  The  land  of
Desolation,  where  we  could  not  goe  on  shore  for  yce.
The  eighteenth  day  we  were  likewise  troubled  with  yce,
and  went  in  amongst  it  at  three  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning.  After  wee  had  cleared  our  selves  thereof,  wee
ranged  all  along  the  coast  of  Desolation  untill  the  ende
of  the  aforesayd  moneth.

The  third  day  of  August  we  came  in  sight  of  Gilberts

410

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1586.

sound  in  the  latitude  of  64.  deg.  15.  min.  which  was  the
place  where  wee  were  appoynted  to  meete  our  Generall
and  the  rest  of  our  Fleete.  Here  we  came  to  an  har-
borough  at  6.  of  the  clocke  at  night.

The  4.  day  in  the  morning  the  Master  went  on  shore  [III.  no.]
with 10.  of  his  men,  and  they  brought  us  foure  of  the
people  rowing  in  their  boats  aboord  of  the  ship. And  in
the  afternoone  I  went  on  shore  with  6.  of  our  men,  and
there  came  to  us  seven  of  them  when  we  were  on  land.
We  found  on  shore  three  dead  people,  and  two  of  them
had  their  staves  lying by  them, and  their  olde  skinnes
wrapped  about  them  and  the  other  had  nothing  lying  by,
wherefore  we thought it  was  a  woman. We  also  saw
their  houses  neere  the  Sea  side,  which  were  made  with  The  homes  of
pieces  of  wood  on  both  sides,  and  crossed  over  with  poles  ^^'°^  ^"  ■
and then covered over with earth : we found Foxes
running  upon the  hilles  :  as  for  the  place  it  is  broken
land all the way that we went, and full of broken
Islands.

The  21.  of  August  the  Master  sent  the  boate  on  shore
for  wood  with  sixe  of  his  men,  and  there  were  one  and
thirtie  of  the  people  of  the  countrey  which  went  on  shore
to  them,  &  they  went  about  to  kill  them  as  we  thought,
for  they  shot  their  dartes  towards  them,  and  we  that  were
aboord  the  ship,  did  see  them  goe  on  shore  to  our  men :
whereupon  the  Master  sent  the  pinnesse  after  them,  and
when  they  saw  the  pinnesse  comming  towards  them,  they
turned  backe,  and  the  Master  of  the  pinnesse  did  shoote
off  a  caliver  to  them  the  same  time,  but  hurt  none  of
them,  for  his  meaning  was  onely  to  put  them  in  feare.
Divers  times  they  did  wave  us  on  shore  to  play  with  them  Our  men  play
at  the  football,  and  some  of  our  company  went  on  shore  ^-^"J^/
to  play  with  them,  and  our  men  did  cast  them  downe  as  lavages.
soone  as  they  did  come  to  strike  the  ball.  And  thus
much  of  that  which  we  did  see  and  do  in  that  harborough
where  we  arrived  first.

The  23.  day  wee  departed  from  the  Merchants  Isle,
where  wee  had  beene  first,  and  our  course  from  thence

411

A.D.
1586.

Sweete  wood
found.

J  skirmish  be-
tween the  Sa-
vages and  our
men.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

was  South  &  by  "West,  and  the  wind  was  Northeast,  and
we  ran  that  day  and  night  about  5.  or  6.  leagues,  untill
we  came  to  another  harborough.

The  24.  about  eleven  of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone
wee  entred  into  the  aforesayd  new  harborow,  and  as  wee
came  in,  we  did  see  dogs  running  upon  the  Islands.
When  we  were  come  in,  there  came  to  us  foure  of  the
people  which  were  with  us  before  in  the  other  har-
borough, and  where  we  rode,  we  had  sandie  ground.  We
saw  no  wood  growing,  but  found  small  pieces  of  wood
upon  the  Islands,  &  some  small  pieces  of  sweete  wood
among  the  same.  We  found  great  Harts  homes,  but
could  see  none  of  the  Stagges  where  we  went,  but  we
found  their  footings.  As  for  the  bones  which  we
received  of  the  Savages  I  cannot  tell  of  what  beasts
they  be.

The  stones  that  we  found  in  the  countrey  were  black,
and  some  white,  as  I  thinke  they  be  of  no  value,
neverthelesse  I  have  brought  examples  of  them  to
you.

The  30.  of  August  we  departed  from  this  harborough
towards  England,  &  the  wind  tooke  us  contrary,  so  that
we  were  faine  to  go  to  another  harborough  the  same  day
at  II.  of  the  clocke.  And  there  came  to  us  39.  of  the
people,  and  brought  us  13.  Scale  skins,  and  after  we
received  these  skins  of  them,  the  Master  sent  the
carpenter  to  change  one  of  our  boates  which  wee  had
bought  of  them  before,  and  they  would  have  taken
the  boate  from  him  perforce,  and  when  they  sawe  they
could  not  take  it  from  us,  they  shot  with  their  dartes
at  us,  and  stroke  one  of  our  men  with  one  of  their  dartes,
and  John  Filpe  shot  one  of  them  into  the  brest  with
an  arrow.  And  they  came  to  us  againe,  and  foure  of  our
men  went  into  the  shipboate,  and  they  shot  with  their
dartes  at  our  men :  but  our  men  tooke  one  of  their
people  in  his  boate  into  the  shipboate,  and  he  hurt  one  of
them  with  his  knife,  but  we  killed  three  of  them  in  their
boates  :  two  of  them  were  hurt  with  arrowes  in  the  brests,

412

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1586.

and  he  that  was  aboord  our  boat,  was  shot  in  with  an
arrow,  and  hurt  with  a  sword,  and  beaten  with  staves,
whome  our  men  cast  overboord,  but  the  people  caught
him  and  carried  him  on  shore  upon  their  boates,  and  the
other  two  also,  and  so  departed  from  us.  And  three
of  them  went  on  shore  hard  by  us,  where  they  had  their
dogs,  and  those  three  came  away  from  their  dogs,  and
presently  one  of  their  dogs  came  swimming  towards  us
hard  aboord  the  ship,  whereupon  our  Master  caused  the
Gunner  to  shoote  off  one  of  the  great  pieces  towards
the  people,  and  so  the  dog  turned  backe  to  land  and
within  an  houre  after  there  came  of  the  people  hard
aboord  the  ship,  but  they  would  not  come  to  us  as
they  did  come  before.

The  3 1 .  of  August  we  departed  from  Gylberts  sound
for  England,  and  when  we  came  out  of  the  harborough
there  came  after  us  17.  of  the  people  looking  which
way  we  went.

The  2.  of  September  we  lost  sight  of  the  land  at  12.  of  September.
the  clocke  at  noone.

The  third  day  at  night  we  lost  sight  of  the  Northstarre
our pinnesse in a  very  great storme, and lay  a hull
tarying  for  them  the  4.  day,  but  could  heare  no  more  of  The  pinnesse
them. Thus we  shaped  our  course  the 5. day  South-  ^''^rrem-ned
southeast,  and  sayhng  untill  the  27.  of  the  sayd  moneth,
we  came  in  sight  of  Cape  Clere  in  Ireland.

The  30.  day  we  entred  into  our  owne  chanell.

The  2.  of  October  we  had  sight  of  the  Isle  of
Wight.

The  3.  we  coasted  all  along  the  shore,  and  the  4.
and  5.

The  6.  of  the  said  moneth  of  October  wee  came  into  [III.  in.]
the  river of  Thames  as  high  as  Ratliffe  in  safetie  God
be  thanked.

[The  third
413

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  third  voyage  Northwestward,  made  by  M.
John  Davis  Gentleman,  as  chiefe  captaine  &
Pilot  generall,  for  the  discovery  of  a  passage
to  the  Isles  of  the  Moluccas,  or  the  coast  of
China,  in  the  yeere  1587.  Written  by  M.
John  Janes.

May.

He  19.  of  this  present  moneth  about
midnight  wee  weyed  our  ankers,  set
sayle,  and  departed  from  Dartmouth  with
two  Barkes  and  a  Clincher,  the  one
named  the  Elizabeth  of  Dartmouth,  the
other  the  Sunneshine  of  London,  and  the
Clincher  called  the  Helene  of  London :
thus  in  Gods  name  we  set  forwards  with  the  wind  at
Northeast  a  good  fresh  gale.  About  3.  houres  after  our
departure,  the  night  being  somewhat  thicke  with  dark-
nesse,  we  had  lost  the  pinnesse :  the  Captaine  imagining
that  the  men  had  runne  away  with  her,  willed  the  Master
of  the  Sunshine  to  stand  to  Seawards,  and  see  if  we  could
descry  them,  we  bearing  in  with  the  shore  for  Plimmouth.
At  length  we  descried  her,  bare  with  her,  and  demanded
what  the  cause  was :  they  answered  that  the  tiller  of  their
helme  was  burst.  So  shaping  our  course  Westsouthwest,
we  went  forward,  hoping  that  a  hard  beginning  would
make  a  good  ending,  yet  some  of  us  were  doubtfull  of  it,
falling  in  reckoning  that  she  was  a  Clincher ;  neverthe-
lesse  we  put  our  trust  in  God.

The  2 1 .  we  met  with  the  Red  Lion  of  London,  which
came  from  the  coast  of  Spaine,  which  was  afrayd  that  we
had  bene  men  of  warre,  but  we  hailed  them,  and  after  a
little  conference,  we  desired  the  Master  to  carie  our
letters  for  London  directed  to  my  uncle  Sanderson,  who
promised  us  a  safe  deliverie.  And  after  wee  had  heaved
them  a  lead  and  a  line,  whereunto  wee  had  made  fast  our

414

JOHN DAVIS  'A.D.

1587.

letters,  before  they  could  get  them  into  the  ship,  they  fell
into  the  Sea,  and  so  all  our  labour  and  theirs  also  was
lost ;  notwithstanding  they  promised  to  certifie  our
departure  at  London,  and  so  we  departed,  and  the  same
day  we  had  sight  of  Silley.  The  22.  the  wind  was  at
Northeast  by  East  with  faire  weather,  and  so  the  23.  and
24.  the  like.  The  25.  we  layd  our  ships  on  the  Lee  for
the  Sunneshine,  who  was  a  romaging  for  a  leake,  they  had
500.  strokes  at  the  pumpe  in  a  watch,  the  wind  at  North-
west.

The  26.  and  27.  wee  had  faire  weather,  but  this  27.
the  pinnesses  foremast  was  blowen  overboord.  The  28.
the  Elizabeth  towed  the  pinnesse,  which  was  so  much
bragged  off  by  the  owners  report  before  we  came  out  of
England,  but  at  Sea  she  was  like  a  cart  drawen  with
oxen.  Sometimes  we  towed  her  because  she  could  not
saile  for  scant  wind.

The  31.  day  our  Captaine  asked  if  the  pinnesse  were
stanch,  Peerson  answered  that  she  was  as  sound  and
stanch  as  a  cup.  This  made  us  something  glad,  when
we  sawe  she  would  brooke  the  Sea,  and  was  not  leake.

June.

THe  first  6.  dayes  wee  had  faire  weather:  after  that
for  5.  dayes  wee  had  fogge  and  raine,  the  winde
being  South.  The  12.  wee  had  cleare  weather.  The
Mariners  in  the  Sunneshine  and  the  Master  could  not
agree :  the  Mariners  would  goe  on  their  voyage  a  fish-
ing, because  the  yeere  began  to  waste :  the  Master  would
not  depart  till  hee  had  the  companie  of  the  Elizabeth,
whereupon  the  Master  told  our  Captaine  that  hee  was
afrayd  his  men  would  shape  some  contrary  course  while
he  was  asleepe,  and  so  he  should  lose  us.  At  length
after  much  talke  and  many  threatnings,  they  were  con-
tent to  bring  us  to  the  land  which  we  looked  for  daily.

The  14.  day  we  discovered  land  at  five  of  the  clocke  Land  descried.
in  the  morning,  being  very  great  and  high  mountaines,
the  tops  of  the  hils  being  covered  with  snow. Here  the

415

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

wind  was  variable,  sometimes  Northeast,  Eastnortheast,
and  East  by  North  :  but  we  imagined  ourselves  to  be
16.  or 17.  leagues  off  from  the  shore.

The  16.  we  came  to  an  anker  about  4.  or  5.  of  the
clocke  after  nonne,  the  people  came  presently  to  us  after
the  old  maner,  with  crying  Ilyaoute,  and  shewing  us
Seales  skinnes.  The  17.  we  began  to  set  up  the  pinnesse
that  Peerson  framed  at  Dartmouth,  with  the  boords
which  hee  brought  from  London.

The 18. Peerson and the Carpenters of  the ships
began  to  set  on  the  plankes. The 19.  as  we  went  about
Salt  kerned  on  an Island, were found blacke Pumise stones, and salt
the  rockes. kerned on  the  rockes,  very  white  and  glistering. This
day  also  the Master of  the Sunneshine tooke of the
people  a  very  strong  lusty  yoong  fellow.
[III.  112.]  The  20.  about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the

Savages  came  to  the  Island  where  our  pinnace  was
built  readie  to  bee  launched,  and  tore  the  two  upper
strakes,  and  carried  them  away  onely  for  the  love  of
the  yron  in  the  boords.  While  they  were  about  this
practise,  we  manned  the  Elizabeths  boate  to  goe  a  shore
to  them  :  our  men  being  either  afrayd  or  amazed,  were
so  long  before  they  came  to  shore,  that  our  Captaine
willed  them  to  stay,  and  made  the  Gunner  give  fire  to  a
Saker,  and  layd  the  piece  levell  with  the  boate  which  the
Savages  had  turned  on  the  one  side  because  wee  should
not  hurt  them  with  our  arrowes,  and  made  the  boate
their  bulwarke  against  the  arrowes  which  we  shot  at
them.  Our  Gunner  having  made  all  things  readie,  gave
fire  to  the  piece,  and  fearing  to  hurt  any  of  the  people,
and  regarding  the  owners  profite,  thought  belike  hee
would  save  a  Sakers  shot,  doubting  wee  should  have
occasion  to  fight  with  men  of  warre,  and  so  shot  off  the
Saker  without  a  bullet :  we  looking  stil  when  the  Savages
that  were  hurt  should  run  away  without  legs,  at  length
wee  could  perceive  never  a  man  hurt,  but  all  having
their  legges  could  carrie  away  their  bodies :  wee  had  no
sooner  shot  off  the  piece,  but  the  Master  of  the  Sunne-

416

JOHN  DAVIS  AD.

■ ,  ^  1587.

shine  manned  his  boate,  and  came  rowing  toward  the
Island,  the  very  sight  of  whom  made  each  of  them  take
that  hee  had  gotten,  and  flee  away  as  fast  as  they  could
to  another  Island  about  two  miles  off,  where  they  tooke
the  nayles  out  of  the  timber,  and  left  the  wood  on  the
Isle,  when  we  came  on  shore,  and  saw  how  they  had
spoiled  the  boat,  after  much  debating  of  the  matter,  we
agreed  that  the  Elizabeth  should  have  her  to  fish  with-
all :  whereupon  she  was  presently  caryed  aboord,  and
stowed.

Now  after  this  trouble,  being  resolved  to  depart  with
the  first  wind,  there  fell  out  another  matter  worse  then
all  the  rest,  and  that  was  in  this  maner.  John  Church-
yard one  whom  our  Captaine  had  appoynted  as  Pilot  in
the  pinnace,  came  to  our  Captaine,  and  master  Bruton,
and  told  them  that  the  good  ship  which  we  must  all
hazard  our  lives  in,  had  three  hundred  strokes  at  one
time  as  she  rode  in  the  harbour :  This  disquieted  us  all
greatly,  and  many  doubted  to  goe  in  her.  At  length  our
Captaine  by  whom  we  were  all  to  be  governed,  deter-
mined rather  to  end  his  life  with  credite,  then  to  returne
with  infamie  and  disgrace,  and  so  being  all  agreed,  wee
purposed  to  live  and  die  together,  and  committed  our
selves  to  the  ship.  Now  the  21.  having  brought  all
our  things  aboord,  about  11.  or  12.  of  the  clocke  at
night,  we  set  saile  and  departed  from  those  Isles,  which
lie  in  64.  degrees  of  latitude,  our  ships  being  all  now  1^^^^  z«  64.
at  Sea,  and  wee  shaping  our  course  to  goe,  coasting  ^^S'^^^^-
the  land  to  the  Northwards  upon  the  Easterne  shore,
which  we  called  the  shore  of  our  Marchants,  because
there  we  met  with  people  which  traffiqued  with  us,
but  here  wee  were  not  without  doubt  of  our  ship.

The  24.  being  in  67.  degrees,  and  40.  minutes,  wee  Store  of  ^
had great store of  Whales, and a kinde of  sea  birds  ^halesme^
which the Mariners call Cortinous. This day about
sixe of the clocke at night, we espied two of the
countrey  people at Sea, thinking  at the first  they  had
bene two great Scales, untill wee sawe their oares

VII  417  2D

A.D.
1587.

72.  deg.  12.
min.

The  great  va-
riation of  the
compasse.
Lo?ido?i  coast.
Betweene
Gronland  iff
the  ISlorth  of
Americaabove
40.  leagues.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

glistering  with  the  Sunne :  they  came  rowing  towardes
us,  as  fast  as  they  could,  and  when  they  came  within
hearing,  they  held  up  their  oares,  and  cryed  Ilyaoute,
making  many  signes  :  and  at  last  they  came  to  us,  giving
us  birdes  for  bracelets,  and  of  them  I  had  a  darte  with  a
bone  in  it,  or  a  piece  of  Unicorns  home,  as  I  did  judge.
This  dart  he  made  store  of,  but  when  he  saw  a  knife,
he  let  it  go,  being  more  desirous  of  the  knife  then  of
his  dart :  these  people  continued  rowing  after  our  ship
the  space  of  3.  howres.

The  25.  in  the  morning  at  7.  of  the  clocke  we  descried
30.  Savages  rowing  after  us,  being  by  judgement  10.
leagues  off  from  the  shore :  they  brought  us  Salmon
Peales,  Birdes,  and  Caplin,  and  we  gave  them  pinnes,
needles,  bracelets,  nailes,  knives,  bels,  looking  glasses,
and  other  small  trifles,  and  for  a  knife,  a  naile  or  a
bracelet,  which  they  call  Ponigmah,  they  would  sell
their  boate,  coates,  or  any  thing  they  had,  although
they  were  farre  from  the  shore.  Wee  had  but  few
skinnes  of  them,  about  20.  but  they  made  signes  to  us
that  if  wee  would  goe  to  the  shore,  wee  should  have
more  store  of  Chichsanege :  they  stayed  with  us  till
II.  of  the  clocke,  at  which  time  wee  went  to  prayer
and  they  departed  from us.

The 28.  and 29.  were foggie with  cloudes, the 30
day  wee  tooke  the  heigth,  and  found  our  selves  in 72
degrees  and 12  minutes  of  latitude  both  at  noone and
at  night,  the  Sunne  being  5.  degrees  above  the  Horizon
At midnight the compasse set to  the  variation  of  28
degrees to the Westward. Now having coasted the
land, which  wee called  London  coast,  from  the  21.  of
this  present,  till  the  30.  the  Sea  open  all  to  the  West-
wards and  Northwards,  the  land  on  starboord  side  East
from  us,  the  winde  shifted  to  the  North,  whereupon  we
left  that  shore,  naming  the  same  Hope Sanderson, and
shaped our course West, and ranne 40. leagues and
better  without  the  sight  of  any  land.

418

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1587.

July.  [III.  113.]

THe  second  of  July  wee  fell  with  a  mightie  banke  of  ^  mlghtk
yce  West  from  us,  lying North  and South,  which  f^^'^J.'/^
banke  wee  would  gladly  have  doubled  out  to  the  North-  Inf South.
wards,  but  the  winde  would  not suffer  us, so that  we
were faine to coast it to the Southwards, hoping to
double  it  out,  that  wee  might have  run so  farre  West
till  wee  had  found  land,  or  els  to  have  beene thorowly
resolved  of  our  pretended  purpose.

The  3.  wee  fell  with  the  yce  againe,  and  putting  off
from  it,  we  sought  to  the  Northwards,  but  the  wind
crossed  us.

The  4.  was  foggie :  so  was  the  5.  also  with  much
wind  at  the  North.

The  6.  being  very  cleare,  we  put  our  barke  with  oares
through  a  gap  in  the  yce,  seeing  the  Sea  free  on  the  West
side,  as  we  thought,  which  falling  out  otherwise,  caused
us  to  returne  after  we  had  stayed  there  betweene  the  yce.
The  7.  and  the  8.  about  midnight,  by  Gods  helpe  we
recovered  the  open  Sea,  the  weather  being  faire  and
calme,  and  so  was  the  9.  The  10.  we  coasted  the  yce.
The 1 1 .  was  foggie,  but  calme.

The  12.  we  coasted  againe  the  yce,  having  the  wind  at
Northnorthwest.  The  13.  bearing  off  from  the  yce,  we
determined  to  goe  with  the  shoare  and  come  to  an  anker,
and  to  stay  5.  or  6.  dayes  for  the  dissolving  of  the  yce,
hoping  that  the  Sea  continually  beating  it,  and  the  Sunne
with  the  extreme  force  of  heat  which  it  had  alwayes  shin-  Extreme  heate
ing  upon  it,  would  make  a  quicke  dispatch,  that  we  might  ^^^^  ^ume.
have  a  further  search  upon  the  Westerne  shore.  Now
when  we  were  come  to  the  Easterne  coast,  the  water
something  deepe,  and  some  of  our  companie  fearefull
withall,  we  durst  not  come  to  an  anker,  but  bare  off
into  the  Sea  againe.  The  poore  people  seeing  us  goe
away  againe,  came  rowing  after  us  into  the  Sea,  the  waves
being  somewhat  loftie.  We  truckt  with  them  for  a  few
skinnes  and  dartes,  and  gave  them  beads,  nailes,  pinnes,

419

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

needles  and  cardes,  they  poynting  to  the  shore,  as  though
they  would  shew  us  some  great  friendship :  but  we  little
regarding  their  curtesie,  gave  them  the  gentle  farewell,
and  so  departed.

The  14.  wee  had  the  wind  at  South. The 15.  there

was some fault  either  in  the barke,  or  the  set  of  some

They  were current,  for  wee  were driven sixe points beyond our

driven  West course  West. The  16.  wee  fell  with  the  banke of  yce

nxepotntsout  ^ ^ ^^ ^^^ g  r- ^j^^

of  their  course ' , 1  •  ^^ r 1 1 j

in  6-].  degrees,  at  one  a  clocke  arter noone,  wee had  sight  or  the  land

45.  minutes, which we called Mount  Raleigh, and at 12. of the
Mount  clocke  at  night,  we  were  thwart  the streights  which  we

'^  ^^^  '  discovered  the  first  yeere. The  20.  wee  traversed  in  the

mouth of  the streight,  the wind being at  West,  with
faire  and  cleare  weather. The  21.  and  22.  wee  coasted
the  Northerne  coast of  the streights. The  23.  having
sayled  threescore  leagues  Northwest  into  the  streights,  at
two  a  clocke  after  noone  wee  ankered  among  many  Isles
The  Earle  of  \^  ^^g  bottome  of  the  gulfe,  naming  the  same  The  Earle
Cumberlands ^^  Cumberlands Isles,  where riding  at  anker,  a Whale
passed by  our  ship  and  went  West  in  among  the  Isles.
The  variation Heere the compasse set at thirtie degrees Westward
ytw"t variation. The 23.  wee departed, shaping our  course
zvard^'  Southeast  to recover the Sea. The 25.  wee  were be-

calmed in  the  bottome  of  the  gulfe,  the  ayre  being
extreme  hot.  Master  Bruton  and  some  of  the  Mariners
went  on  shoare  to  course  dogs,  where  they  found  many
Graves  and  Trane  spilt  on  the  ground,  the  dogs  being  so
fat  that  they  were  scant  able  to  run.

The  26.  wee  had  a  prety  storme,  the  winde  being  at
Southeast.  The  27.  and  28.  were  faire.  The  29.  we
were  cleare  out  of  the  streights,  having  coasted  the  South
The  land  shore,  and  this  day  at  noone  we  were  in  62.  degrees  of
trendethfrom  latitude.  The  30.  in  the  afternoone  wee  coasted  a  banke
this  place  of  yce,  which  lay  on  the  shore,  and  passed  by  a  great
Southwest  and  ^^j^j^-g  qj.  Inlet,  which  lay  between  di^.  and  62.  degrees  of
M-ilordLum-  latitude,  which  we  called  Lumlies  Inlet.  We  had  often-
leys  Inlet. times, as  we sailed  alongst the  coast,  great  ruttes,  the

420

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1587.
water  as  it  were  whirling  and  overfalling,  as  if  it  were  the
fall  of  some  great  water  through  a  bridge.

The  3 1 .  as  we  sayled  by  a  Headland,  which  we  named
Warwicks  Foreland,  we fell  into one  of  those  overfals  Warwkks
with  a  fresh  gale  of  wind,  and  bearing  all  our  sailes,  wee ^<"'^^'^«'^-
looking upon an Island of  yce betweene us and the
shoare,  had thought  that our  barke did  make  no  way,
which  caused  us  to  take  markes  on  the  shoare : at  length
wee  perceived  our  selves  to  goe  very  fast,  and  the  Island
of  yce  which  we saw  before,  was carried  very  forcibly
with  the set of  the current  faster  then  our  ship  went.  ^  very  forcible
This  day  and  night  we  passed  by  a  very  great  gulfe,  the  ^"^''J^  ^^'^-
water  whirling  and roaring  as  it  were  the meetings  of
tydes.

August.  [HI.  114.]

^He  first  of  August  having  coasted  a  banke  of  ice  which

T

was  driven  out  at  the  mouth  of  this  gulfe,  we  fell
with  the  Southermost  cape  of  the  gulfe,  which  we  named
Chidleis  cape,  which  lay  in  61  degrees  and  10  minutes  of  Chidleys  cape.
latitude.  The  2  and  3  were  calme  and  foggie,  so  were
the  4,  5,  and  6.  The  7  was  faire  and  calme :  so  was  the
8,  with  a  litle  gale  in  the  morning.  The  9  was  faire,  and
we  had  a  litle  gale  at  night.  The  10  we  had  a  frisking
gale  at  Westnorthwest.  The  11  faire.  The  12  we  saw
five  deere  on  the  top  of  an  Island,  called  by  us  Darcies  The  lord Dar-
Island.  And  we  hoised  out  our  boat,  and  went  ashore  to  "^^  Inland.
them,  thinking  to  have  killed  some  of  them.  But  when
we  came  on  shore,  and  had  coursed  them  twise  about  the
Island,  they  tooke  the  sea  and  swamme  towards  Islands
distant  from  that  three  leagues.  When  we  perceived
that  they  had  taken  the  sea  we  gave  them  over  because
our  boat  was  so  small  that  it  could  not  carrie  us,  and
rowe  after  them,  they  swamme  so  fast :  but  one  of  them
was  as  bigge  as  a  good  prety  Cow,  and  very  fat,  their
feet  as  bigge  as  Oxe  feet.  Here  upon  this  Island  I  killed
with  my  piece  a  gray  hare.

The  13  in  the  morning  we  saw  three  or  foure  white

421

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

beares,  but  durst  not  go  on  shore  to  them  for  lacke  of  a
good  boat.  This  day  we  stroke  a  rocke  seeking  for  an
harboroWj  and  received  a  leake :  and  this  day  we  were  in
54  degrees  of  latitude.

The  14  we  stopt  our  leake  in  a  storme  not  very
outragious,  at  noone.

The  15  being  almost  in  52  degrees  of  latitude,  and  not

finding  our ships,  nor  (according  to  their  promise)  any

kinde  of  marke,  token,  or  beacon,  which  we  willed  them

to  set  up,  and  they  protested  to  do  so  upon  every  head

land,  Island  or  cape,  within  twenty  leagues  every  way  off

The  fishing from  their  fishing  place,  which  our  captaine  appointed  to

^^"^^  dT^^T  ^^  betweene  54  and  c^c^  degrees:  This  15  I  say  we  shaped

grees  of  lati- ^ur  course  homewards  for  England,  having  in  our  ship

tude.  but  litle  wood,  and  halfe  a  hogshead  of  fresh  water. Our

men were  very willing to depart, and no man more

forward  then  Peerson,  for  he  feared  to  be  put  out  of  his

office  of  stewardship : but because every man was so

willing  to  depart,  we  consented  to  returne  for  our  owne

countrey : and  so  we  had  the  1 6  faire  weather,  with  the

winde  at  Southwest.

The  17  we  met  a  ship  at  sea,  and  as  farre  as  we  could

judge  it  was  a  Biskaine : we  thought  she  went  a  fishing

Abundance  of  for  whales ;  for  in  52  degrees  or  thereabout  we  saw  very

whales  in  C  2

,  5 many.

The 18  was  faire,  with  a  good  gale  at  West.

The  19  faire  also,  with  much  winde  at  West  and  by
South.

And  thus  after  much  variable  weather  and  change  of
They  arrive  at  winds  we  arrived  the  15  of  September  in  Dartmouth
iTofTi  ^^  anno  1587,  giving  thanks  to  God  for  our  safe  arrivall.
teniber.

422

JOHN DAVIS

A  letter  of  the  sayd  M.  John  Davis  written  to
M.  Sanderson  of  London  concerning  his  fore-
written  voyage.

Ood  M.  Sanderson,  with  Gods  great
mercy  I  have  made  my  safe  returne  in
heakh,  with  all  my  company,  and  have
sailed  threescore  leagues  further  then  my
determination  at  my  departure.  I  have
bene  in  73  degrees,  finding  the  sea  all
open,  and  forty  leagues  betweene  land
and  land.  The  passage  is  most  probable,  the  execution
easie,  as  at  my  comming  you  shall  fully  know.

Yesterday  the 1 5 of  September I landed all  weary ;
therefore  I  pray  you  pardon  my  shortnesse.
Sandridge  this 16  of  September  anno 1587.

Yours  equall  as  mine  owne,  which
by  triall you  shall  best  know,

John  Davis.

A.D.

1587.

[A  Traverse-Booke

423

A.D.

1587.

[III.  115.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  Traverse-Booke  made  by  M.  John  Davis  in

west  passage.

Moneth.

May.

0

0
n

Course.

n

orp

C

Elevation

of  the

pole.

crtj _3

The  winde.

19

W.  S.  W.
Westerly.

50

30

N.  E.

20

21

35

W.  S.  W.

Westerly.

50

50

N.  E.

22

15

W.  N.  W.

14

N.  E.  by  E.

22

6

W.  N.  W.

6

N.  E.  by  E.

22

3

W.  N.  W.

2

23

15

N.  W.  by  W.

18

N.E.

23

39

W.  N.  W.

36

50

40

3

W.  N.  W.

2

N.  N.  E.

6

N.  W.  by  W.

5

N.  E.  by  N.

3

W.  N.  W.

3

N.  N.  E.

12

W.  N.  W.

12

N.E.

Noone  the

24

24

W.  N.  W.
Northerly.

25

51

16

3

W.  N.  W.

3

1 N.  N.  E.

3

W.  N.  W.

2|

i N.  by  E.

6

W.  by  N.

5

N.

6

W.  by  N.

5

N.

2

S.

\

N.

Noone  the

25

24

W.  by  N.

20

51

30

3

W.

3

N.  N.  W.

3

w.  s.  w.

2

N.  W.

I

s.  w.

I

W.  N.  W.

2

W.  N.  W.

i|

N.

3

W.  N.  W.

1*

N.

3

Calme.

4

W.  N.  W.

4

S.  S.  E.

5

w.

6

S.  S.  E.

424

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1587.

his  third  voyage  for  the  discoverie  of  the  North-
Anno  1587.

THE DISCOURSE.

This  day  we  departed  from  Dartmouth  at  two  of  the  clocke  at  night.

This  day  we  descried  Silly  N.  W.  by  W.  from  us.
This  day  at  noone  we  departed  from  Silly.

The  true  course,  distance  and  latitude.

The  true  course,  distance,  and  latitude.

Now  we  lay  upon  the  lee  for  the  Sunshine,  which  had  taken  a  leake
of  500  strokes  in  a  watch.

The  true  course,  distance  and  latitude.

425

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[III.  116.]

Moneth.
May.

0
n

n

0

d
ci

03

fn

Elev
of
po

CTQ

ation

the

le.

^.

5

5'

n

Noone  the

26

24-

W.  by  N.
Westerly.

23

51

40

I I

W.

16

S.  S.  E.

6

W.  N.  W.

2

S.  S.  E.

7

W.

5

S.  E.

Noone  the

27

24

W.  Northerly.

23

Noone  the

28

24

W.

20

52

13

E.  S.  E.

Noone  the

28

28

W.  by  N.
Northerly.

43

52

13

Noone  the

29

24

N.  W.

30

S.  by  E.

6

N.  W.

10

S.

3

N.  by  W.

2

W.  by  N.

3

W.  by  N.

3

W.  by  S.

12

N.  W.

12

S.  S.  W.

Noone  the

30

48

N.  W.  by  N.

65

54

50

9

N.  W.

12

S.  W.

9

N.  W.  by  W.

12

s.  s.  w.

3

W.  N.  W.

3

N.  N.  E.

3

W.  by  N.

4

N.

30

24

W.  N.  W.
Northerly.

27

55

30

June

I

12

W.

10

N.  N.  W.

9

N.  W.

8

E.  N.  E.

3

N.  W.

2i-

E.  N.  E.

I

24

W.  N.  W.

Westerly.

17

55

45

12

N.  W.

16

E.  S.  E.

6

N.  W.

7

S.

6

N.  W.

8

s.  s.  w.

Noone  the

2

24

N.  W.
Northerly.

32

56

55

Noone  the

5

72

W.  by  S.
southerly.

45

56

20

Noone  the

6

24

S.  W.

16

W.  N.W.

7

S.  W.  by  W.

6

W.  by  N.

426

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1587.

THE  DISCOURSE.

The  true  course,  distance,  &c.

We  lay  at  hull  with  much  winde,  raine,  and  fog.

The  common  course  supposed.

We  towed  the  pinnesse  18  houres  of  this  day.

The  true  course,  distance,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.  drawen  from  divers  traverses.

427

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Moneth.
June.

0

0

Course.

OQ

Eleva

of  1

po

a

n
crtj

tion

:he

le.

g
5

5*

5

1

Calme.

3

W.  N.  W.

I

S.

Noone  the

7

9

W.  N.  W.

12

S.

12

W.  N.  W.

20

S.

3

W.  N.  W.

4

S.

Noone  the

8

9

W.  N.  W.

7

S.

12

W.  N.  W.

5

S.

Noone  the

9

12

W.  N.  W.

13

S.  E.

Noone  the

9

96

W.  by  N.
northerly.

86

57

30

3

W.  N.  W.

4

S.  E.

3

W.  N.  W.

2

S.  E.

6

W.  N.  W.

1

Calme.

Noone  the

10

12

W.  N.  W.

1 61

E.

7

W.  N.  W.

12

E.

2

N.  W.

2

E.

Noone  the

1 1

15

N.  W.

18

E.  N.  E.

12

N.  W.

12

E.  N.  E.

12

N.  W.

13

E.  by  S.

Noone  the

12

72

N.  W.  by  W.
northerly.

78

59

50

Noone  the

13

24

N.  N.  W.
Westerly.

26

60

58

E.  by  N.

Noone  the

H

24

N.  N.  W.

32

62

30

N.  E.

9

W.  N.  W.

7

N.

3

N.  W.

2

N.  N.  E.

3

N.  W.  by  N.

2

N.  E.  by  N.

15

9

N.  N.  W.

8

N.  E.

Noone  the

15

24

N.  W.
Northerly.

23

63

20

428

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1587.

THE  DISCOURSE.

The  true  course,  distance,  &  latitude  for  96  houres.

The  true  course,  &c.  for  72  houres.

This  day  in  the  morning  at  five  of  the  clocke  we  discovered  land  being
distant  from  us  at  the  neerest  place  sixteene  leagues.  This  land  in
generall  lay  Northwest  and  to  the  Westwards,  being  very  mountainous.
The  winde  was  this  day  variable,  and  the  aire  sometime  foggie,  and  some-
time cleere.  The  foresayd  land  bare  from  us  (so  neere  as  we  could  judge)
North,  Northwest,  and  Southeast.

The  true  course,  &c.

429

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Moneth.
June.

0

0

1-1
n

n

0

c

Oft}

n

Elevation
of  the
pole.

crp 3

a.

f!)

Noone  the

16

24

N.  N.  E.
Easterly.

H

64

17

20

*At  mid-
night ye

21

8

W.  N.  W.

7

S.  E.

Noone  the

22

4

N.  W.

6

S.  E.

13

N.  W.

18

S.  E.

1 1

N.

13

S.  E.

Noone  the

23

36

N.  W.  by  N.

42

65

40

[III.

I  17.] Noone  the

24

24

N.  by  E.
Northerly.

41

67

40

S.  S.  E.

25

Noone  the

26

48

N.

S.

3

N.  W.

2

s.  w.

7

N.  N.  E.

10

s.

6

N.

8

s.  w.

8

W.  N.  W.

5

S.  E.

Noone  the

27

72

N.  Westerly.

52

70

4

Noone  the

30

72

N.

43

72

12

30

July

I

30

W.  by  S.
Westerly.

44

71

36

N.  W.  by  N.

2

24

S.  E.

12

71

9

Noone  the

3

8

N.  N.  W.

1 1

71

40

N.

Noone  the

5

48

S.  S.  E.

36

70

N.

430

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1587.

THE  DISCOURSE.

The  true  course,  &c.  This  16  of  June  at  5  of  the  clocke  In  the  after-
noone,  being  in  the  latitude  of  64  degrees,  through  Gods  helpe  we  came
to  an  anlcer  among  many  low  islands  which  lay  before  the  high  land.
This  17  of  June  we  set  up  our  pinnesse.  The  20  she  was  spoiled  by  the
Savages.  At  midnight  the  21  of  June  wee  departed  from  this  coast,  our
two  barks  for  their  fishing  voyage,  and  my  selfe  in  the  pinnesse  for  the
discovery. From  midnight  the  2 1  we  shaped  our  course  as  foUoweth.*

At  this  time  we  saw  great  store  of  whales.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.  Here  the  weather  was  very  hot.  This  24  of
June  at  6  of  the  clocke  at  night  we  met  two  savages  at  sea  in  their  small
canoas,  unto  whom  we  gave  bracelets,  and  nailes,  for  skins  &  birds.
At  9  of  the  clocke  they  departed  from  us.  The  next  day  at  7  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning,  there  came  unto  us  30  savages  20  leagues  off  the
shore,  intreating  us  to  goe  to  the  shore.  We  had  of  them  fish,  birds,
skinnes,  darts,  and  their  coats  from  their  backs,  for  bracelets,  nailes,
knives  &c. They  remained  with  us  foure  houres,  and  departed.

The  true  course,  &c.  for  72  houres.

The  true  course,  &c.  Since  the  2 1  of  this  moneth  I  have  continually
coasted  the  shore  of  Gronland,  having  the  sea  all  open  towards  the  West,
and  the  land  on  ye  starboord  side  East  from  me.  For  these  last  4  dayes
the  weather  hath  bene  extreame  hot  and  very  calme,  the  Sun  being  5
degrees  above  the  horizon  at  midnight.  The  compasse  in  this  place
varieth  28  degrees  towards  ye  West.

The  true  course,
of  ice  West  from  us.

&c.

This

day  at

noone  wee

coasted  a  mighty

banke

This  day  we  fell
North.

againe  wi

th  the

ice,

seeking

to  double  it  out

by  the

The  True  course,

,  &c.

431

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Moneth.

^ g
CO n

July.

0
0

S

n

Crc?

C

Elevation

of  the

pole.

n — •

The  winde.

6

24

s.  s.  w.

22

69

Variable.

7

8

Noone  the 9

72

E.  S.  E.

7

68

50

Calme.

Noone  the 10

24

S.  E.  by  S.

8

68

30

E.  by  N.

Noone  the 1 1

24

E.  N.  E.

i^l

68

45

Variable.

Noone  the 12

24

S.  S.  E.

16

68

N.  N.  W.

13

24

E.  by  S.

20

S.

Noone  the 14.

24

W.  by  N.

1 1

67

5°

s.

Noone  the i  5

24

w.  s.  w.

5

67

45

E.

Noone  the 16

24

S.  W.  by  W.
westerly.

23

67

10

S.

Noone  the 18

48

S.  by  W.

30

65

33

N.  fog.

Noone  the 19

24

W. southerly.

13

65

30

S.  fog.

20

23

24

25

!

432

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1587.

THE  DISCOURSE.

The  true  course,  &c.  This  6  of  July  we  put  our  barke  thorow  the  ice,
seeing  the  sea  free  on  the  West  side :  and  having  sailed  5  leagues  West,
we  fell  with  another  mighty  barre,  which  we  could  not  passe :  and
therefore  returning  againe,  we  freed  our  selves  the  8  of  this  moneth  at
midnight,  and  so  recovered  the  sea  through  Gods  favour,  by  faire  winds,
the  weather  being  very  calme.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c. This  day  we  coasted  the  ice.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

This  day  the  people  came  to  us  off  the  shore,  and  bartered  with  us.
Being  within  the  Isles,  &  not  finding  good  ankorage,  we  bare  off  againe
into  the  sea.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.  This  day  a  great  current  set  us  West  6  points
from  our  course.

The  true  course,  &c.  This  day  we  fell  w'  a  mighty  banke  of  ice
West  of  us.

The  true  course,  &c. Collected  by  divers  experiments.

The  true  course,  &c.  This  19  of  July  at  one  a  clocke  in  the  after-
noone  we  had  sight  of  the  land  of  Mount  Ralegh,  and  by  12.  of  the
clocke  at  night  wee  were  thwart  the  Streights  which  (by  Gods  helpe)
I  discovered  the  first  yere.

The  20  day  wee  traversed  in  the  mouth  of  the  sayd  Streights  with  a
contrary  winde,  being  West  and  faire  weather.

This  23  day  at  2  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  having  sailed  60
leagues  Northwest,  we  ankered  among  an  huge  number  of  isles  lying  in
the  bottome  of  the  sayd  supposed  passage,  at  which  place  the  water  riseth
4  fadome  upright.  Here  as  we  rode  at  anker,  a  great  whale  passed  by
us,  and  swam  West  in  among  the  isles.  In  this  place  a  S.  W.  by  W.
moone  maketh,  a  full  sea. Here  the  compasse  varied  30  degrees.

The  24  day  at  5  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we  set  saile,  departing  from
this  place,  and  shaping  our  course  S.  E.  to  recover  the  maine  Ocean  againe.

This  25  we  were  becalmed  almost  in  the  bottome  of  the  Streights,  &
had  the  weather  marvellous  extreame  hot.

VII  433  2  E

A.D.
1587.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

Moneth.

n
July.

0

c
•-t
0

0

0

c

2

on?

fH

Elev
of
po

n
op

ition

the

le.

5

5'

26

S.  E.

27

S.

Noone  the 29

64

Noone  the 30

24

s.  s.  w.

22

63

.118.] 31

24

S.  by  W.

27

62

N.  W.

August.

Noone  the I

24

S.E.  by  S.

16

61

10

w.  s.  w.

Noone  the 3

48

S.  S.  E.

16

60

26

Variable.

Noone  the 6

72

S.  E.

Southerly.

22

59

35

Variable  w'
calme.

7

24

S.  S.  E.

22

58

40

W.  S.  W.

8

24

S.  E.

13

58

12

W.  fog.

9

24

S.  by  W.

13

57

30

Variable
&  calme.

10

24

S.  S.  E.

17

56

40

S.  W.  by  W.

1 1

24

S.  E.  easterly.

40

55

13

W.  N.  W.

12

24

S.  E.  easterly.

20

54

32

w.  s.  w.

13

24

S.  S.  E.

4

54

N.  W.

434

JOHN DAVIS  AjD.

1587.

THE  DISCOURSE.

This  day  being  in  the  Straights,  we  had  a  very  quicke  storme.
Being  still  in  the  Straight,  we  had  this  day  faire  weather.
At  this  present  we  got  cleere  of  the  Streights,  having  coasted  the  South
shore,  the  land  trending  from  hence  S.  W.  by  S.

This  day  we  coasted  the  shore,  a  banke  of  ice  lying  thereupon.  Also
this  30  of  July  in  the  afternoone  we  crossed  over  the  entrance  or  mouth
of  a  great  inlet  or  passage,  being  20  leagues  broad,  and  situate  betweene
62  &  63  degrees.  In  which  place  we  had  8  or  9  great  rases,  currents  or
overfals,  lothsomly  crying  like  the  rage  of  the  waters  under  London
bridge,  and  bending  their  course  into  the  sayd  gulfe.

This  31  at  noone,  comming  close  by  a  foreland  or  great  cape,  we  fell
into  a  mighty  rase,  where  an  island  of  ice  was  carried  by  the  force  of  the
current  as  fast  as  our  barke  could  saile  with  lum  wind,  all  sailes  bearing.
This  cape  as  it  was  the  most  Southerly  limit  of  the  gulfe  which  we
passed  over  the  30  day  of  this  moneth,  so  was  it  the  North  promontory
or  first  beginning  of  another  very  great  inlet,  whose  South  limit  at  this
present  wee  saw  not.  Which  inlet  or  gulfe  this  afternoone,  and  in  the
night,  we  passed  over  :  where  to  our  great  admiration  we  saw  the  sea
falling  down  into  the  gulfe  with  a  mighty  overfa),  and  roring,  and  with
divers  circular  motions  like  whirlepooles,  in  such  sort  as  forcible  streames
passe  thorow  the  arches  of  bridges.

The  true  course,  &c.  This  first  of  August  we  fell  with  the  promon-
tory of  the  sayd  gulfe  or  second  passage,  having  coasted  by  divers  courses
for  our  savegard,  a  great  banke  of  the  ice  driven  out  of  that  gulfe.

The  true  course,  &;c.

The  true  course,  &c.
The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.
The  true  course,  &c.
The  true  course,  &c.

This  day  seeking  for  our  ships  that  went  to  fish,  we  strooke  on  a  rocke,
being  among  many  iles,  and  had  a  great  leake.

435

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Moneth.
August.

0

n

0

C

m

0

0

e

n

n

OX}

s

Elev
of
po

ition

the

le.

?.
5

tr
n

1.

5'
0-

n

Noone  the

14

24

S.  S.  E.

28

52

40

N.  W.

*Noone  ye

15

52

12

s.  s.  w.

16

20

E.  S.  E.  halfe
point  S.

50

51

s.  w.

17

24

E.  by  S.

30

50

40

s.

18

24

E.  by  N.
northerly.

49

51

18

w.

19

24

E.  halfe  point
north

51

51

35

Variable
W.  &  S.

20

24

E.  S.  E.

31

50

50

S.  W.

Noone  the

22

48

E.  by  N.

68

51

30

S.  S.  w.

23

24

E.  by  N.
Northerly.

33

51

52

s.

24

24

E.  by  N.

31

52

10

\^ariable.

i

1

Noone  the

27

72

E.

Northerly.

40

5^

23

Variable
&  calme.

Noone  the

29

48

E.  S.  E.

47

51

28

Variable
W.  &  N.

Noone  the

31

48

S.  E.  by  E.

Easterly.

14

51

9

Variable.

September

2

48

E.  Southerly.

65

51

N.  W.

3

24

E.  by  S.
Easterly.

24

50

50

W.  N.  W.

4-

24

S.  E.  by  E.

20

50

21

N.  N.  E.

5

24

S.  E.  by  E.

18

49

48

N.  N.  E.

6

24

E.  by  S.

15

49

40

N.

7

24

E.  S.  E.

20

49

15

N.  N.  W.

8

24

N.  E.

18

49

40

9

24

w.  s.  w.

7

49

42

10

24

S.  E.  by  E.

8i

49

28

Variable.

436

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1587.

THE  DISCOURSE.

This  day  we  stopped  our  leake  in  a  storme.  The  i  5  of  August  at
noon,  being  in  the  latitude  of  52  degrees  12.  min.  and  16  leagues  from  the
shore,  we  shaped  our  course  for  England,  in  Gods  name,  as  foUoweth.*

The  true  latitude.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c. This  day  upon  the  Banke  we  met  a  Biscaine
bound  either  for  the  Grand  Bay  or  for  the  passage. He  chased  us.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.  This  24  of  August  observing  the  variation,  I
found  the  compasse  to  vary  towards  the  East,  from  the  true  Meridian,
one  degree.

The  true  course,  &c.  for  72  houres.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c. Now  we  supposed  our  selves  to  be  55 leagues
from  Sillie.

The  true  course,  &c.

The  true  course,  &c.

437

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Moneth.

Elevation

H

n

X

n

n

of  the

13-

n

0

c

n

c

CfQ

C

pole.

1

5'

September.

ffp

a

1 1

24

N.  E.  by  E.

10

49

45

Variable.

12

24

N.  W.  by  W.

6

50

N.  E.

13

24

E.  by  S.
southerly.

15

49

47

N.  E.

15

I

Under  the  title  of  the  houres,  where  any  number  exceedeth  24,  it  is  the

next  before,  as  conteine

438

JOHN DAVIS  AD.

1587.

THE  DISCOURSE.

This  15  of  September  1587  we  arrived  at  Dartmouth.

summe  or  casting  up  of  so  many  other  dayes  and  partes  of  dayes  going
the  foresayd  summe.

[A  report
439

A.D.
1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[III,  119.]  A  report  of  Master  John  Davis  of  his  three
Voyages  made  for  the  discovery  of  the  North-
w^est  passage,  taken  out  of  a  Treatise  of  his,
Intituled  the  worlds  Hydrographicall  descrip-
tion.

Ow  there  onely  resteth  the  North  parts  of
America,  upon  which  coast  my  selfe  have
had  most  experience  of  any  in  our  age :
for  thrise  I  was  that  waye  imployed  for
the  discovery  of  this  notable  passage,  by
the  honourable  care  and  some  charge  of
Syr  Francis  Walsingham  knight, princi-

pall  secretary  to  her  Majestie,  with  whom  divers  noble
men  and  worshipfull  marchants  of  London  joyned  in
purse  and  willingnesse  for  the  furtherance  of  that
attempt,  but  when  his  honour  dyed  the  voyage  was
friendlesse,  and  mens  mindes  alienated  from  adventuring
therein.
The  \. voyage.  In  my  first  voyage  not  experienced  of  the  nature  of
those  climates,  and  having  no  direction  either  by  Chart,
Globe,  or  other  certaine  relation  in  what  altitude  that
passage  was  to  be  searched,  I  shaped  a  Northerly  course
and  so  sought  the  same  toward  the  South,  and  in  that
my  Northerly  course  I  fell  upon  the  shore  which  in
ancient  time  was  called  Greenland,  five  hundred  leagues
distant  from  the  Durseys  Westnorthwest  Northerly,  the
land  being  very  high  and  full  of  mightie  mountaines  all
covered  with  snow,  no  viewe  of  wood,  grasse  or  earth  to  be
seene,  and  the  shore  two  leagues  off  into  the  sea  so  full  of
yce  as  that  no  shipping  could  by  any  meanes  come  neere
the  same.  The  lothsome  view  of  the  shore,  and  irksome
noyse  of  the  yce  was  such,  as  that  it  bred  strange  con-
ceites  among  us,  so  that  we  supposed  the  place  to  be  wast
and  voyd  of  any  sensible  or  vegitable  creatures,  where-
upon I  called  the  same  Desolation :  so  coasting  this  shore
towards the South in the  latitude of  sixtie degrees, I

440

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1587.

found  it  to  trend  towards  the  West,  I  still  followed  the
leading  therof  in  the  same  height,  and  after  fifty  or  sixtie
leagues  it  fayled  and  lay  directly  North,  which  I  still
followed,  and  in  thirtie  leagues  sayling  upon  the  West
side  of  this  coast  by  me  named  Desolation,  we  were  past
al  the  yce  and  found  many  greene  &  pleasant  Isles
bordering  upon  the  shore,  but  the  hils  of  the  maine
were  still  covered  with  great  quantities  of  snow,  I  brought
my  ship  among  those  Isles  and  there  mored  to  refresh
our  selves  in  our  weary  travell,  in  the  latitude  of  sixtie
foure  degrees  or  there  about.  The  people  of  the
countrey  having  espyed  our  shippes  came  downe  unto
us  in  their  Canoas,  &  holding  up  their  right  hand  to  the
Sunne  and  crying  Yliaout,  would  strike  their  breasts :  we
doing  the  like  the  people  came  aboard  our  shippes,  men
of  good  stature,  unbearded,  small  eyed  and  of  tractable
conditions,  by  whome  as  signes  would  permit,  we  under-
stood that  towards  the  North  and  West  there  was  a  great
sea,  and  using  the  people  with  kindenes  in  giving  them
nayles  and  knives  which  of  all  things  they  most  desired,
we  departed,  and  finding  the  sea  free  from  yce  supposing
our  selves  to  be  past  al  daunger  we  shaped  our  course
Westnorthwest  thinking  thereby  to  passe  for  China,  but
in  the  latitude  of  sixtie  sixe  degrees  we  fell  with  another
shore,  and  there  found  another  passage  of  twenty  leagues
broad  directly  West  into  the  same,  which  we  supposed  to
be  our  hoped  straight,  we  entered  into  the  same  thirty
or  fortie  leagues,  finding  it  neither  to  wyden  nor
streighten,  then  considering  that  the  yeere  was  spent
(for  this  was  the  fine  of  August)  not  knowing  the  length
of  the  straight  and  dangers  thereof,  we  tooke  it  our  best
course  to  returne  with  notice  of  our  good  successe  for
this  small  time  of  search.  And  so  returning  in  a  sharpe
fret  of  Westerly  windes  the  29.  of  September  we  arived
at  Dartmouth.  And  acquainting  master  Secretary  Wal-
singham  with  the  rest  of  the  honourable  and  worshipful!
adventurers  of  all  our  proceedings,  I  was  appointed  againe
the second  yere  to  search  the  bottome  of  this  straight,

441

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

because  by  all  likelihood  it  was  the  place  and  passage  by
us  laboured  for.  In  this  second  attempt  the  marchants
of  Exeter,  and  other  places  of  the  West  became  adven-
turers in  the  action,  so  that  being  sufficiently  furnished
for  sixe  moneths,  and  having  direction  to  search  these
straights,  untill  we  found  the  same  to  fall  into  another
sea  upon  the  West  side  of  this  part  of  America,  we
should  againe  returne :  for  then  it  was  not  to  be  doubted,
but  shipping  with  trade  might  safely  be  conveied  to
China,  and  the  parts  of  Asia.  We  departed  from  Dart-
mouth, and  ariving  upon  the  South  part  of  the  coast  of
Desolation  coasted  the  same  upon  his  West  shore  to  the
latitude  of  sixetie  sixe  degrees,  and  there  ancored  among
the  Isles  bordering  upon  the  same,  where  we  refreshed
our  selves,  the  people  of  this  place  came  likewise  unto
us,  by  whom  I  understood  through  their  signes  that
towards  the  North  the  sea  was  large.  At  this  place  the
chiefe  ship  whereupon  I  trusted,  called  the  Mermayd  of
Dartmouth,  found  many  occasions  of  discontentment,  and
being  unwilling  to  proceed,  shee  there  forsook  me.  Then
considering  how  I  had  given  my  faith  and  most  constant
promise  to  my  worshipfull  good  friend  master  William
Sanderson,  who  of  all  men  was  the  greatest  adventurer
in  that  action,  and  tooke  such  care  for  the  performance
thereof,  that  he  hath  to  my  knowledge  at  one  time  dis-
bursed as  much  money  as  any  five  others  whatsoever,
out  of  his  owne  purse,  when  some  of  the  companie  have
bene  slacke  in  giving  in  their  adventure :  And  also
knowing  that  I  should  loose  the  favor  of  M.  Secretary
Walsingham,  if  I  should  shrink  from  his  direction ;  in
one  small  barke  of  30  Tunnes,  whereof  M.  Sanderson
was  owner,  alone  without  farther  company  I  proceeded
on  my  voyage,  and  arriving  at  these  straights  followed
the  same  80.  leagues,  untill  I  came  among  many  Islands,
where  the  water  did  ebbe  and  flow  sixe  fadome  upright,
and  where  there  had  bene  great  trade  of  people  to  make
traine.  But  by  such  things  as  there  we  found,  wee  knew
that  they  were  not  Christians  of  Europe  that  had  used

442

JOHN DAVIS  A.D.

1587-
that  trade :  in  fine  by  searching  with  our  boat,  we  found
small  hope  to  passe  any  farther  that  way,  and  therefore
recovered  the  sea  and  coasted  the  shore  towards  the
South,  and  in  so  doing  (for  it  was  too  late  to  search
towards  the  North)  we  found  another  great  inlet  neere
40  leagues  broad,  where  the  water  entred  in  with  violent
swiftnesse,  this  we  also  thought  might  be  a  passage :  for
no  doubt  the  North  partes  of  America  are  all  Islands  by  The  North
ought  that  I  could  perceive  therein :  but  because  I  was  ^^^^  y  ,,
alone  in  a  small  barke  of  thirtie  tunnes,  and  the  yeere  i^i^nds. '
spent,  I  entred  not  into  the  same,  for  it  was  now  the
seventh  of  September,  but  coasting  the  shore  towardes
the  South  wee  saw  an  incredible  number  of  birds :
having  divers  fishermen  aboord  our  barke  they  all  con-
cluded that  there  was  a  great  skull  of  fish,  we  being
unprovided  of  fishing  furniture  with  a  long  spike  nayle
made  a  hooke,  and  fastened  the  same  to  one  of  our
sounding  lines,  before  the  baite  was  changed  we  tooke
more  then  fortie  great  Cods,  the  fish  swimming  so  abun-
dantly thicke  about  our  barke  as  is  incredible  to  bee
reported,  of  which  with  a  small  portion  of  salt  that  we
had,  we  preserved  some  thirtie  couple,  or  thereaboutes,
and  so  returned  for  England.  And  having  reported  to
M.  Secretarie  Walsingham  the  whole  successe  of  this
attempt,  he  commanded  me  to  present  unto  the  most
honourable  Lord  high  Treasurour  of  England,  some
part  of  that  fish :  which  when  his  Lordship  saw,  &  heard
at  large  the  relation  of  this  second  attempt,  I  received
favourable  countenance  from  his  honour,  advising  me  to
prosecute  the  action,  of  which  his  Lordship  conceived  a
very  good  opinion.  The  next  yere,  although  divers  of
the  adventurers  fell  from  the  Action,  as  all  the  Westerne
marchants,  and  most  of  those  in  London :  yet  some  of
the  adventurers  both  honorable  &  worshipfull  continued
their  willing  favor  and  charge,  so  that  by  this  meanes
the  next  yere  two  shippes  were  appointed  for  the  fishing
and  one  pinnesse  for  the  discoverie.

Departing from  Dartmouth,  through  Gods  mercifuU  Thei.voyage.

443

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

favour,  I  arrived  at  the  place  of  fishing,  and  there
according  to  my  direction  I  left  the  two  ships  to  follow
that  busines,  taking  their  faithful  promise  not  to  depart
untill  my  returne  unto  them,  which  should  be  in  the  fine
of  August,  and  so  in  the  barke  I  proceeded  for  the
discoverie :  but  after  my  departure,  in  sixeteene  dayes  the
two  shippes  had  finished  their  voyage,  and  so  presently
departed  for  England,  without  regard  of  their  promise:
my  selfe  not  distrusting  any  such  hard  measure  proceeded
for  the  discoverie,  and  followed  my  course  in  the  free
and  open  sea  betweene  North  and  Northwest  to  the
latitude  of  67  degrees,  and  there  I  might  see  America
West  from  me,  and  Gronland,  which  I  called  Desolation,
East :  then  when  I  saw  the  land  of  both  sides  I  began
to  distrust  it  would  proove  but  a  gulfe :  notwithstanding
desirous  to  know  the  full  certainty  I  proceeded,  and  in
68  degrees  the  passage  enlarged,  so  that  I  could  not  see
the  Westerne  shore :  thus  I  continued  to  the  latitude
of  73  degrees,  in  a  great  sea,  free  from  yce,  coasting  the
Westerne  shore  of  Desolation :  the  people  came  con-
tinually rowing  out  unto  me  in  their  Canoas,  twenty,
forty,  and  one  hundred  at  a  time,  and  would  give  me
fishes  dryed,  Salmon,  Salmon  peale,  Cod,  Caplin,  Lumpe,
Stone-base  and  such  like,  besides  divers  kinds  of  birds,
as  Partrige,  Fesant,  Guls,  Sea  birds  and  other  kindes  of
flesh :  I  still  laboured  by  signes  to  know  from  them  what
they  knew  of  any  sea  toward  the  North,  they  still  made
signes  of  a  great  sea  as  we  understood  them,  then  I
departed  from  that  coast,  thinking  to  discover  the  North
parts  of  America :  &  after  I  had  sailed  towards  the
West  40  leagues,  I  fel  upon  a  great  banke  of  yce :
the  winde  being  North  and  blew  much,  I  was  con-
strained to  coast  the  same  toward  the  South,  not  seeing
any  shore  West  from  me,  neither  was  there  any  yce
towards  the  North,  but  a  great  sea,  free,  large  very
salt  and  blew,  &  of  an  unsearchable  depth  :  So  coasting
towards  the  South  I  came  to  the  place  where  I  left
the ships to fish, but found them not. Then being

444

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  a.d.

1200.

forsaken  &  left  in  this  distresse  referring  my  self  to
the  mercifull  providence  of  God,  I  shaped  my  course
for  England,  &  unhoped  for  of  any,  God  alone  releeving
me,  I  arrived  at  Dartmouth.  By  this  last  discovery  it
seemed  most  manifest  that  the  passage  was  free  &  with-
out impediment  toward  the  North :  but  by  reason  of
the  Spanish  fleet  &  unfortunate  time  of  M.  Secretaries
death,  the  voyage  was  omitted  &  never  sithens  attempted.
The  cause  why  I  use  this  particular  relation  of  all  my
proceedings  for  this  discovery,  is  to  stay  this  objection,
why  hath  not  Davis  discovered  this  passage  being  thrise
that  wayes  imploied  }  How  far  I  proceeded  &  in  what
forme  this  discovery  lieth,  doth  appeare  upon  the  Globe
which  M.  Sanderson  to  his  very  great  charge  hath  pub-
lished, for  the  which  he  deserveth  great  favor  &  com-
mendations.

The  discoverie of  the Isles  of Frisland,  Iseland,  [in.  izi.
Engroneland,  Estotiland, Drogeo and Icaria :
made by  two brethren,  namely  M. Nicholas
Zeno,  and  M.  Antonio  his  brother : Gathered
out  of  their  letters  by  M.  Francisco  Marcolino.

N  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1200  there  was
in  the  Citie  of  Venice  a  famous  Gentle-
man, named  Messer  Marino  Zeno,  who
I  for  his  great  vertue  and  singular  wise-
dome,  was  called  and  elected  governour
in  certaine  common  wealths  of  Italy  :  in
the  administration  whereof  he  bore  him-
selfe  so  discretly,  that  he  was  beloved  of  all  men,  and
his  name  greatly  reverenced  of  those  that  never  knew
or  saw  his  person.  And  amongst  sundry  his  worthy
workes,  this  is  recorded  of  him,  that  he  pacified  certaine
grievous  civile  dissentions  that  arose  among  the  citizens
of  Verona:  whereas  otherwise,  if  by  his  grave  advise
and  great  diligence  they  had  not  bene  prevented,  the
matter was likely  to breake  out into hot broyles of

445

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1205.

warre.  He  was  the  first  Podesta,  or  Ruler,  that  the
Common  wealth  of  Venice  appointed  in  Constantinople
in  the  yeere  1205  when  our  state  had  rule  thereof  with
the  French  Barons.  This  Gentleman  had  a  sonne  named
Messer  Pietro,  who  was  the  father  of  the  Duke  Rinieri,
which  Duke  dying  without  issue,  made  his  heire  M.
Andrea,  the  sonne  of  M.  Marco  his  brother.  This  M.
Andrea  was  Captaine  Generall  and  Procurator,  a  man
of  great  reputation  for  many  rare  partes,  that  were  in
him.  He  had  a  sonne  M.  Rinieri,  a  worthy  Senatour
and  prudent  Counsellour :  of  whom  descended  M.
Pietro  Captaine  Generall  of  the  league  of  the  Christians
against  the  Turkes,  who  was  called  Dragon,  for  that  in
his  shield,  in  stead  of  a  Manfrone  which  was  his  armes
at  the  first,  he  bare  a  Dragon.  He  was  father  to  M.
Carlo  II  grande  the  famous  Procurator  and  Captaine
generall  against  the  Genowayes  in  those  cruell  warres,
when  as  almost  all  the  cheife  Princes  of  Europe  did
oppugne  and  seeke  to  overthrow  our  Empire  and
libertie,  wherein  by  his  great  valiancie  and  prowesse,  as
Furius  Camillus  delivered  Rome,  so  he  delivered  his
country  from  the  present  perill  it  was  in,  being  ready
to  become  a  pray  and  spoile  unto  the  enemie :  where-
fore he  was  afterward  surnamed  the  Lyon,  and  for  an
eternall  remembrance  of  his  fortitude  and  valiant  ex-
ploits he  gave  the  Lyon  in  his  armes.  M.  Carlo  had
two  brethren,  M.  Nicolo,  the  knight  and  M.  Antonio,
the  father  of  M.  Dragon,  of  whom  issued  M.  Caterino,
the  father  M.  Pietro  da  i  Grocecchieri.  This  M.  Pietro
had  sonnes  M.  Caterino,  that  died  the  last  yere,  being
brother  unto  M.  Francisco,  M.  Carlo,  M.  Battista,  and
M.  Vincenzo :  Which  M.  Caterino  was  father  to  M.
Nicolo,  that  is  yet  living.

Now  M.  Nicolo,  the  knight,  being  a  man  of  great
courage,  after  this  aforesaid  Genouan  warre  of  Chioggia
that  troubled  so  our  predecessours,  entred  into  a  great
desire  and  fansie  to  see  the  fashions  of  the  worlde  and
to travell and acquaint himselfe with the maners of

446

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  a.d.

1380.
sundry nations and learne their languages, whereby
afterwards upon  occasions he  might be  the  better  able
to  doe  service  to  his  countrey, and purchase to him-
selfe credite  and  honour. Wherefore  he  caused  a  ship
to  be  made, and having  furnished her at his proper
charges (as he  was very  wealthy)  he departed out of
our  seas,  and  passing  the  straites  of  Gibraltar,  he  sailed
for  certaine dayes upon  the Ocean,  keeping  his  course
still to the Northwards,  with intent to see England
and  Flanders. Where  being  assalted  in those Seas by
a terrible  tempest, he  was so tossed for  the space of
many  dayes  with  the sea  and  winde,  that  he  knew  not
where  he  was, till  at length he discovered land, and
not being  able any  longer to  susteine the  violence of
the  tempest the ship  was cast away  upon  the  Isle of  The  ship  of
Friseland. The  men  were  saved,  and  most  part  of  the  ^-  "^^  ^^"°
goods  that  were  in  the  ship. And  this  was  in  the  yere  '^uLn'^risland
1380. The  inhabitants  of  the  Island came  running  in  in  Anno
great  multitudes  with  weapons to  set  upon M.  Nicolo 1380.
and his  men,  who  being  sore  weather-beaten  and  over-
laboured at  sea,  and  not  knowing in  what part  of  the
world  they  were,  were  not  able to  make  any  resistance
at  all,  much  lesse  to  defend  themselves  couragiously,  as
it  behooved  them  in  such  a  dangerous  case. And  they
should  have  bene  doubtlesse  very  discourteously  intreated
and  cruelly  handled,  if  by  good  hap  there  had  not  beene  ^  firrame

hard by  the place  a  prince  with armed people. Who  P'^f'k^P^ij^S
■, ■^ ,. ^ ■,  1  1  to  be  in  Fns-

understandmg that there  was even at that present a  land  with

great  ship  cast  away upon the Island,  came  runing at  armed  men,

the noyse and outcryes that they made against our  whenM.Zeno

poore Mariners, and dryving away the inhabitants,  ^^^^^"■^^p-

spake in Latine  and  asked them  what they  were and  ^^me  unto  Mm

from  whence  they  came,  and  perceiving  that  they  came  and  spake

from  Italy  and  that  they  were  men  of  the  said  Countrey,  Latine.

he  was  surprised  with  marvelous  great  joy. Wherefore

promising them all, that they  should receive no dis-

courtesie,  and  that they  were  come  into  a  place  where

they  should  be  well  used and  very welcome,  he tooke

447

A.D.

c.  1380.

Xichmni
prince  of
Porland  or
Duke  of
Zorani.

[III.  122.]

Frisland  the
King  ofNor-
wayes.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

them  into  his  protection  upon  his  faith.  This  was  a
great  Lord,  and  possessed  certaine  Islands  called  Porland,
lying  on  the  South  side  of  Frisland,  being  the  richest
and  most  populous  of  all  those  parts,  his  name  was
Zichmni :  and  beside  the  said  little  Islands,  he  was  Duke
of  Sorani,  lying  over  against  Scotland.

Of  these  North  parts  I  thought  good  to  draw  the
copie  of  a  Sea  carde,  which  amongst  other  antiquities  I
have  in  my  house,  which  although  it  be  rotten  through
many  yeeres,  yet  it  falleth  out  indifferent  well :  and  to
those  that  are  delighted  in  these  things,  it  may  serve
for  some  light  to  the  understanding  of  that,  which  with-
out it  cannot  so  easily  be  conceived.  Zichmni  being
Lord  of  those  Sygnories  (as  is  said)  was  a  very  warlike
and  valiant  man  and  above  all  things  famous  in  Sea
causes.  And  having  the  yere  before  given  the  over-
throw to  the  king  of  Norway,  who  was  Lord  of  the
Island,  being  desirous  to  winne  fame  by  feates  of  armes,
hee  was  come  on  land  with  his  men  to  give  the  attempt
for  the  winning  of  Frisland,  which  is  an  Island  much
bigger  then  Ireland.  Wherefore  seeing  that  M.  Nicolo
was  a  man  of  judgement  &  discretion,  and  very  expert
both  in  sea  matters  and  martiall  affaires,  hee  gave  him
commission  to  goe  aboord  his  Navy  with  all  his  men,
charging  the  captaine  to  honour  him  and  in  all  things
to  use  his  counsaile.

This  Navy  of  Zichmni  was  of  thirteene  vessels,
whereof  two  onely  were  rowed  with  oares,  the  rest
small  barkes  and  one  ship,  with  the  which  they  sayled
to  the  Westwards  and  with  little  paines  wonne  Ledovo
and  Ilofe  and  divers  other  small  Islands :  and  turning
into  a  bay  called  Sudero,  in  the  haven  of  the  towne
named  Sanestol,  they  tooke  certaine  small  barks  laden
with  fish.  And  here  they  found  Zichmni,  who  came
by  land  with  his  armie  conquering  all  the  countrey  as
he  went :  they  stayed  here  but  a  while,  and  led  on
their  course  to  the  Westwards  till  they  came  to  the
other  Cape  of  the gulfe or bay, then turning  againe,

448

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  a.d.

c.  1380.
they  found  certaine  Islandes  and  broken  lands  which
they  reduced  al  unto  the  Signorie  &  possession  of
Zichmni.  These  seas,  forasmuch  as  they  sailed,  were
in  maner  nothing  but  sholds  &  rocks,  in  so  much  that
if  M.  Nicolo  and  the  Venetian  mariners  had  not  bene
their  Pilots,  the  whole  fleete  in  judgement  of  all  that
were  in  it,  had  bene  cast  away,  so  small  was  the  skill
of  Zichmnis  men,  in  respect  of  ours,  who  had  bene
trained  up  in  the  arte  and  practise  of  Navigation  all
the  dayes  of  their  life.  Now  the  fleete  having  done
such  things  as  are  declared,  the  Captaine,  by  the  coun-
saile  of  M.  Nicolo,  determined  to  goe  a  land,  at  a
towne  called  Bondendon,  to  understand  what  successe
Zichmni  had  in  his  warres :  where  they  heard  to  their
great  content,  that  he  had  fought  a  great  battell  and
put  to  flight  the  armie  of  his  enemie :  by  reason  of
which  victory,  they  sent  Embassadours  from  all  parts
of  the  Island  to  yeeld  the  countrey  up  into  his  handes,
taking  downe  their  ensignes  in  every  towne  and  castle :
they  thought  good  to  stay  in  that  place  for  his  comming,
it  being  reported  for  certaine  that  hee  would  be  there  very
shortly.  At  his  comming  there  was  great  congratulation
and  many  signes  of  gladnesse  shewed,  as  well  for  the
victory  by  land,  as  for  that  by  sea :  for  the  which  the
Venetians  were  honoured  and  extolled  of  all  men,  in
such  sort  that  there  was  no  talke  but  of  them,  and  of
the  great  valour  of  M.  Nicolo.  Wherefore  the  prince,
who  was  a  great  favourer  of  valiant  men  and  especially
of  those  that  could  behave  themselves  well  at  sea,  caused
M.  Nicolo  to  be  brought  before  him,  and  after  having
commended  him  with  many  honourable  speeches,  and
praysed  his  great  Industrie  and  dexteritie  of  wit,  by  the
which  two  things  he  acknowledged  himselfe  to  have
received  an  inestimable  benefite,  as  the  saving  of  his
fleet  and  the  winning  of  many  places  without  any  great
trouble,  he  made  him  knight,  and  rewarded  his  men  N.  Zeno,
with  many  rich  &  bountiful  gifts.  Then  departing  from  made  Mght
thence  they  went  in  tryumphing  maner  toward  Frisland, -^ ^^^'

VII  449  2  F

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1380-90.

the  chiefe  citie  of  that  Island,  situate  on  the Southeast

side  of  the  Isle,  within  a  gulfe,  as  there  are  many  in  that

Ships  laden Island. In  this  gulf  or  bay  there  is  such  great  abundance

loithjish  at q£  i^gj^  taken,  that  many  ships  are  laden  therewith  to  serve

t  TlSldUd TOT  . .

Flanders  Flanders,  Britain,  England,  Scotland,  Norway,  and  Den-

Britain,  Eng-  marke,  and  by  this  trade  they  gather  great  wealth.
land, Scotland, And  thus  much  is  taken  out  of  a  letter,  that  M.  Nicole

Norway  and  ^^^^  ^^  jyj^  Antonio  his  brother,  requesting;  that  he  would
Denmarke.  ,  ,  .  ^ ^-^,9 r 1  1

But  not  to  be  seeke  some  meanes  to  come  to  him. Whererore  he  who

proved  that  had  as  great  desire  to  travaile  as  his  brother,  bought  a
ever  any  came  ship,  and  directed  his  course  that  way :  &  after  he  had
thence.  sailed  a  ffreat  while  and  escaped  many  dangers,  he  arrived

A  letter  sent  m ,  -P.  r • •  1 t\ /i tCt- 1  1  • j  1  •

M,  N  Zeno ^^  length  m  saretie  witn  M.  JNicolo,  who  received  him  very

from  Fris/and  joyfully,  for  that  he  was  his  brother  not  onely  in  flesh  and

to  his  brother blood,  but  also  in  valour  and  good  qualities. M.  Antonio

M.  Antonio remained  in Frisland  and  dwelt there for  the space  of

The  end  of ^4  y^^es,  4  yeres  with  M.  Nicolo,  and 10  yeres  alone.

the  first  Where  they  came  in  such  grace and favour with the

letter.  Prince,  that  he  made  M.  Nicolo  Captaine  of  his  Navy,

and  with  great  preparation  of  warre  they  were  sent  forth

for  the  enterprise  of  Estland,  which  lyeth  upon  the  coast

betweene Frisland and Norway,  where  they did many

dammages : but hearing  that  the  king of  Norway was

coming towardes  them  with  a  great  fleet,  they  departed

with  such  a  terrible  flaw  of  winde,  that  they  were  driven

upon  certaine sholds : were  a  great  part  of  their  ships

were  cast  away,  the  rest  were  saved  upon  Grisland,  a  great

Island but  dishabited. The  king  of  Norway  his fleete

being taken with the same storme, did utterly perish

in  those  seas :  Whereof  Zichmni  having  notice,  by  a  ship

of  his  enemies  that  was  cast  by  chance  upon  Grisland,

having  repayred  his  fleet,  and  perceiving  himself  Northerly

neere  unto  the  Islands,  determined  to  set  upon  Island,

[III.  123.] which together  with the rest, was subject to the  king

of  Norway :  but  he  found  the  countrey  so  well  fortified

and defended, that his fleete being  so  small, and  very

ill  appointed  both  of  weapons  and  men,  he  was  glad  to

retire. And  so  he  left  that  enterprise  without  performing

450

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  a.d.

c.  1380-90.
any  thing  at  all : and  In  the  same  chanels  he  assaulted
the  other  Isles  called  Islande,  which  are  seven,  Talas,  Broas,
Iscant,  Trans,  Mimant,  Dambere,  and  Bres  :  and  having
spoyled them  all, hee built  a fort in Bres, where he
left M. Nicolo, with certaine small barkes and men
and  munition. And  now  thinking  he  had  done  wel  for
this  voyage, with those few  ships which were  left he
returned  safe  into  Frisland. M.  Nicolo  remaining  nowe
in  Bres,  determined  in  the  spring  to  go  forth  and  discover
land : wherefore arming out three small  barkes in  the
moneth  of  July,  he  sayled  to  the  Northwards,  and  arrived
in Engroneland. Where he found a Monasterie of  Engroneland.
Friers, of  the  order of  the  Predicators, and a Church  ^■S^^'^'^^^^L  .
dedicated  to  Saint  Thomas, hard  by  a  hill  that  casteth j^Iq^J
forth  fire,  like  Vesuvius  and  Etna.

There  is  a  fountaine  of  hot  burning  water  with  the
which  they  heate  the  Church  of  the  Monastery  and
the  Fryers  chambers,  it  commeth  also  into  the  kitchin
so  boyling  hot,  that  they  use  no  other  fire  to  dresse  their
meate  :  and  putting  their  breade  into  brasse  pots  without
any  water,  it  doth  bake  as  it  were  in  an  hot  oven.  They
have  also  smal  gardens  covered  over  in  the  winter  time,
which  being  watered  with  this  water,  are  defended  from
the  force  of  the  snow  and  colde,  which  in  those  partes
being  situate  farre  under  the  pole,  is  very  extreme,
and  by  this  meanes  they  produce  flowers  and  fruites  and
herbes  of  sundry  sorts,  even  as  in  other  temperate
countries  in  their  seasons,  in  such  sort  that  the  rude
and  savage  people  of  those  partes  seeing  these  super-
naturall  effects,  doe  take  those  Fryers  for  Gods,  and
bring  them  many  presents,  as  chickens,  flesh,  and  divers
other  things,  and  have  them  all  in  great  reverence  as
Lords.  When  the  frost  and  snowe  is  great,  they  heate
their  houses  in  maner  beforesaid,  and  wil  by  letting  in  the
water  or  opening  the  windowes,  at  an  instant  temper  the
heate  and  cold  at  their  pleasure.  In  the  buildings  of  the
Monasterie  they  use  no  other  matter  but  that  which  is
ministred  unto  them  by  the  fire :  for  they  take  the  burn-

451

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1380-90.

ing  stones  that  are  cast  out  as  it  were  sparkles  or  cinders
at  the  fierie  mouth  of  the  hill,  and  when  they  are  most
enflamedj  cast  water  upon  them,  whereby  they  are
dissolved  and  become  excellent  white  lime  and  so  tough
that  being  contrived  in  building  it  lasteth  for  ever.
And  the  very  sparkles  after  the  fire  is  out  of  them  doe
serve  in  stead  of  stones  to  make  walles  and  vautes :  for
being  once  colde  they  wil  never  dissolve  or  breake,
except  they  be  cut  with  some  iron  toole,  and  the  vautes
that  are  made  of  them  are  so  light  that  they  need  no
sustentaccle  or  prop  to  holde  them  up,  and  they  will
endure  continually  very  faire  and  whole.  By  reason  of
these  great  commodities,  the  Fryers  have  made  there  so
many  buildings  and  walles  that  it  is  a  wonder  to  see.
The  coverts  or  roofes  of  their  houses  for  the  most  part
are  made  in  maner  following :  first  they  rayse  up  the  wall
up  to  his  full  height,  then  they  make  it  enclining  or
bowing  in  by  little  and  litle  in  fourme  of  a  vaut.  But  they
are  not  greatly  troubled  with  raine  in  those  partes,  because
the  climate  (as  I  have  saide)  is  extreme  colde :  for  the  first
Winter  of^.  snow  being  fallen,  it  thaweth  no  more  for  the  space  of
nine  moneths,  for  so  long  dureth  their  winter.  They
feede  of  the  flesh  of  wilde  foule  and  of  fish  :  for  wheras
the  warme  water  falleth  into  the  sea,  there  is  a  large
and  wide  haven,  which  by  reason  of  the  heate  of  the
water,  doeth  never  freeze  all  the  winter,  by  meanes
whereof  there  is  such  concourse  and  flocks  of  sea  foule
and  such  aboundance  of  fish,  that  they  take  thereof  infinite
multitudes,  wherby  they  maintaine  a  great  number  of
people  round  about,  which  they  kepe  in  continuall
worke,  both  in  building  and  taking  of  foules  and  fish,
and  in  a  thousand  other  necessarie  afiaires  and  busines
about  the  Monasterie.

Their  houses  are  built  about  the  hill  on  every  side,
in  forme  round,  and  25  foote  broad,  and  in  mounting
upwards  they  goe  narower  and  narower,  leaving  at  the
top  a  litle  hole,  whereat  the  aire  commeth  in  to  give
light  to  the  house,  and  the  flore  of  the  house  is  so  hot,

452

moneths.

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  a.d.

c,  1380-90.
that  being  within  they  feele  no  cold  at  all. Hither  in  the
Summer  time  come  many  barkes  from  the  Islands  their
about, and from the  cape above Norway, and from
Trondon,  and  bring  to  the  Friers  al  maner  of  things  that  Trade  in  sum-
may  be  desired,  taking  in  change  thereof  fish,  which  they  ^l^^J^/^^^^
dry  in  the  sunne  or  in  the  cold,  &  skins  of  divers  kindes  Thomas  Friers
of  beasts. For  the  which  they  have  wood  to  burne  and  in  Groneknd.
timber  very  artificially  carved, and  corne,  and  cloth  to  Resort  of
make  them  apparell. For  in  chanp^e  of  the  two  aforesaid  ^J'W^fi'^^'-
commodities  all  the  nations  bordering  round  about  them  5^^^^^  to  the
covet to  trafficke  with  them,  and  so  they without  any  Monaster'^  in
travell  or expences have that which they desire. To  Engroneland,
this  Monasterie  resort  Fryers  of  Norway,  of  Suetia  and  ^^"'^«'^-  ^ho.
of  other countreys, but the most part  are  of  Islande.
There  are  continually  in  that  part  many  barks,  which  are
kept  in  there  by  reason  of  the  sea  being  frozen,  waiting
for  the  spring  of  the  yere  to  dissolve  the  yce. The  fishers  -^-  Frobishet
boates are  made like  unto a weavers shuttle : taking  brought  these

,  ,.  r r -i  1  r ^ •  i  -ill  kiude  Of  OOatS

the skms or  fishes, they  rashion them with  the oones  ^.^^  ^^^^
of  the  same  fishes,  and  sowing  them  together  in  many  parts  into
doubles  they  make  them  so  sure  and  substanciall,  that  it  England.
is  miraculous to  see,  howe in tempests  they will shut
themselves  close  within  and  let  the  sea  and  winde  cary
them they  care not whether, without any feare either  [III.  124.]
of  breaking or drowning. And if  they  chance to be
driven  upon  any  rocks,  they  remaine  sound  without  the
least  bruse  in  the  world :  &  they  have  as  it  were  a  sleeve
in the bottome,  which  is  tyed  fast in  the  middle, and
when  there  commeth  any  water  into  the  boat,  they  put  it
into  the  one  halfe  of  the  sleeve,  then  fastening  the  ende
thereof  with  two pieces  of  wood  and  loosing  the  band
beneath,  they  convey  the  water  forth  of  the boat :  and
this  they  doe  as  often  as  they  have  occasion,  without  any
perill  or  impediment  at  all.

Moreover,  the  water  of  the  Monastery,  being  of
sulphurious  or  brimstonie  nature,  is  conveyed  into  the
lodgings  of  the  principall  Friers  by  certaine  vesselles
of  brasse,  tinne,  or  stone,  so  hot  that  it  heateth  the  place

453

A.D.

c.  1380-90.

In  the  Mona-
ster'^ of  Saint
Thomas  most
of  them  spake
the  Latlne
tongue.  The
end  of  the  2.
letter.

N.  Zeno  dyed
in  Frisland.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

as  it  were  a  stove,  not  carying  with  it  any  stinke  or
other  noysome  smell.

Besides  this  they  have  another  conveyance  to  bring
hot  water  with  a  wall  under  the  ground,  to  the  end  it
should  not  freeze,  unto  the  middle  of  the  court,  where
it  falleth  into  a  great  vessel  of  brasse  that  standeth  in  the
middle  of  a  boyling  fountaine,  and  this  is  to  heat  their
water  to  drinke  &  to  water  their  gardens,  &  thus  they
have  from  the  hill  the  greatest  commodities  that  may
be  wished :  and  so  these  Fryers  employ  al  their  travaile
and  studie  for  the  most  part  in  trimming  their  gardens
and  in  making  faire  and  beautifuU  buildings,  but  especi-
ally handsome  and  commodious :  neyther  are  they
destitute  of  ingenious  and  paineful  artificers  for  the
purpose ;  for  they  give  very  large  payment,  and  to  them
that  bring  them  fruits  and  seedes  they  are  very  bounti-
full,  and  give  they  care  not  what.  So  that  there  is  great
resort  of  workemen  and  masters  in  divers  faculties,  by
reason  of  the  good  gaines  and  large  allowance  that  is
there.

The  most  of  them  speake  the  Latine  tongue,  and
specially  the  superiours  and  principals  of  the  Monastery.
And  this  is  as  much  as  is  knowen  of  Engroneland,  which
is  all  by  the  relation  of  M.  Nicolo,  who  maketh  also  par-
ticular description  of  a  river  that  he  discovered,  as  is  to
be  seene  in  the  carde  that  I  drew.  And  in  the  end
M.  Nicolo,  not  being  used  &  acquainted  with  these
cruell  coldes,  fel  sicke,  and  a  litle  while  after  returned
into  Frisland,  where  he  dyed.  He  left  behind  him  in
Venice,  two  sonnes,  M.  Giovanni  and  M.  Toma,  who
had  two  sonnes,  M.  Nicolo  the  father  of  the  famous
Cardinal  Zeno,  and  M.  Pietro  of  whom  descended  the
other  Zenos,  that  are  living  at  this  day.

Now  M.  Nicolo  being  dead,  M.  Antonio  succeeded
him  both  in  his  goods,  and  in  his  dignities  and  honour :
and  albeit  he  attempted  divers  wayes,  and  made  great
supplication,  he  could  never  obtaine  licence  to  returne
into  his  countrey. For  Zichmni,  being  a  man  of  great

454

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  a.d.

c.  1380-90.
courage  and  valour,  had  determined  to  make  himself
Lord  of  the  sea.  Wherfore  using  alwayes  the  counsaile
and  service  of  M.  Antonio,  he  determined  to  send  him
with  certaine  barks  to  the  Westwards,  for  that  towards
those  parts,  some  of  his  fishermen  had  discovred  certaine
Islands  very  rich  and  populous :  which  discovery
M.  Antonio,  in  a  letter  to  his  brother  M.  Carlo,  re-
counteth  from  point  to  point  in  this  maner,  saving  that
we  have  changed  some  old  words,  leaving  the  matter
entire  as  it  was.

Sixe  and  twentie  yeeres  agoe  there  departed  foure  fisher
boats,  the  which,  a  mightie  tempest  arising,  were  tossed
for  the  space  of  many  dayes  very  desperately  upon the
Sea,  when  at  length,  the  tempest  ceasing,  and  the  wether
waxing  faire,  they  discovered  an  Island  called  Estotiland, The dhcoverie
lying  to  the  Westwards  above  1000  Miles  from  Frisland,  tf  Estotiland
upon  the  which  one  of  the  boats  was  cast  away,  and  sixe  n- r.^'.
men  that  were  in  it  were  taken of  the inhabitants  and  men  taken.
brought  into  a  faire  and  populous  citie,  where  the  king
of  the  place  sent  for  many  interpreters,  but  there  was  none
could  be  found  that  understood  the  language  of  the  fisher-
men, except  one  that  spake  Latine,  who  was  also  cast  by  Fishermen  of
chance  upon  the  same  Island,  who  in  the  behalfe  of  the  Ensland
king asked them  what  countreymen  they  were :  and  so  ^^^^  ^
understanding  their  case,  rehearsed  it  unto  the  king,  who
willed  that  they  should  tary  in  the  countrey : wherefore
they  obeying  his  commandement,  for  that  they  could  not
otherwise  doe,  dwelt  five  yeres  in  the  Island,  &  learned  ^ixe  were  five
the  language,  and  one  of  them  was  in  divers  partes of  ^^^^^{j^
the  Island,  and  reporteths  that  it  is  a  very  rich  countrey,  q^^  ^r^j^^
abounding  with  all the commodities of  the  world,  and  fishers  ofiFris-
that  it  is  litle  lesse  then  Island,  but  farre  more  fruitfull,  land,  reporteth
having  in  the  middle  thereof  a  very  high  mountaine,  from  of  Estotiland.
the  which  there  spring foure rivers  that  passe through  ^^^j^  abound-
the  whole  countrey.  hig  with  all

The  inhabitants  are  very  wittie people,  and  have  all  the  commodi-
artes  and  faculties,  as  we  have : and it  is credible that  ^^^^  <fithe
in  time  past  they  have  had  trafficke  with  our  men,  for

455

A.D.

c.  1380-90.

Abundance
of  golde.
Trade  from
Estotiland,  to
Engroneland  :
Skins,  brim-
stone, and
pitch :  golde,
come,  and
beere,  or  ale.
Many  cities
and  castles.

[III.  125.]
A  countrey
called  Drogio.

The  6  fisher-
men ofFris-
land  onely
saved,  by
shewing  the
maner  to  take
fish.

The  chiefest
of  the  6 fishers,
specified  before
and  his  com-
panions.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

he  said,  that  he  saw  Latin  bookes  in  the  kings  Librarie,
which  they  at  this  present  do  not  understand :  they  have
a  peculiar  language,  and  letters  or  caracters  to  themselves.
They  have  mines  of  all  maner  of  mettals,  but  especial
they  abound  with  gold.  They  have  their  trade  in
Engroneland,  from  whence  they  bring  furres,  brimstone
&  pitch :  and  he  saith,  that  to  the  Southwards,  there  is
a  great  populous  countrey  very  rich  of  gold.  They
sow  corne,  and  make  beere  and  ale,  which  is  a  kinde  of
drinke  that  North  people  do  use  as  we  do  wine.  They
have  mighty  great  woods,  they  make  their  buildings  with
wals,  &  there  are  many  cities  and  castles.  They  build
small  barks  and  have  sayli ng,  but  they  have  not  the  load
stone,  nor  know  not  the  use  of  the  compasse.  Where-
fore these  fishers  were  had  in  great  estimation,  insomuch
that  the  king  sent  them  with  twelve  barks  to  the  South-
wards to  a  countrey  which  they  call  Drogio :  but  in
their  voyage  they  had  such  contrary  weather,  that  they
thought  to  have  perished  in  the  sea :  but  escaping  that
cruell  death,  they  fell  into  another  more  cruell :  for  they
were  taken  in  the  countrey  and  the  most  part  of  them
eaten  by  the  Savage  people,  which  fed  upon  mans  flesh,
as  the  sweetest  meat  in  their  judgements  that  is.

But  that  fisher  with  his  fellowes  shewing  them  the
maner  of  taking  fish  with  nets,  saved  their  lives :  and
would  goe  every  day  a  fishing  to  the  sea  and  in  fresh
rivers,  and  take  great  abundance  of  fish  and  give  it  to
the  chiefe  men  of  the  countrey,  whereby  he  gate  him-
selfe  so  great  favour,  that  he  was  very  well  beloved  and
honoured  of  every  one.

The  fame  of  this  man  being  spread  abroad  in  the
countrey,  there  was  a  Lord  there  by,  that  was  very
desirous  to  have  him  with  him,  and  to  see  how  he  used
his  miraculous  arte  of  catching  fish,  in  so  much  that  he
made  warre  with  the  other  Lord  with  whom  he  was
before,  and  in  the  end  prevailing,  for  that  he  was  more
mightie  and  a  better  warriour,  the  fisherman  was  sent
unto him  with  the  rest  of  his  company. And  for  the

456

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  ad.

c.  1380-90.
space  of  thirteene  yeres  that  he  dwelt  in  those  parts,  he  I^'  the  space
saith,  that  he  was  sent  in  this  order  to more  then 25  "/ '  3  ^'^^^^■f
Lords,  for  they  had  continuall  war  amongst  themselves,  [JJHf ^^
this  Lord  with  that  Lord,  and  he with another, onely  Drogio.
to  have  him  to  dwell  with  them :  so  that  wandring  up
and downe the  countrey  without  any  certaine  abode  in
one  place, he  knew almost all  those parts. He saith,
that  it  is  a  very  great  countrey  &  as  it  were  a  new  world  :
the  people  are  very  rude  and  voide  of  all  goodnesse,  they
goe all naked so  that  they are miserably vexed with
colde, neither  have  they  the  wit  to  cover their  bodyes
with  beasts  skins  which  they  take  in  hunting,  they  have
no  kinde  of  mettal,  they  live  by  hunting,  they  cary  cer-
taine lances  of  wood  made  sharpe  at  the  point,  they  have
bowes,  ye  strings  wherof  are  made  of  beasts  skins :  they
are  very  fierce  people,  they  make  cruell  warres  one  with
another,  and  eate  one  another,  they  have  governours  &
certaine  lawes  very  divers  among  themselves. But  the
farther  to  the  Southwestwards,  the  more  civiltie  there  is,
the  ayre  being somewhat  temperate,  so  that there they
have  cities  and temples  to idols,  wherein they  sacrifice
men and afterwards eate them, they  have there some
knowledge  and  use  of  gold  and  silver.

Now  this  fisherman  having  dwelt  so  many  yeeres  in
those  countreys  purposed,  if  it  were  possible,  to  returne
home  into  his  countrey,  but  his  companions  despairing
ever  to  see  it  againe,  let  him  goe  in  Gods  name,  and
they  kept  themselves  where  they  were.  Wherefore  he
bidding  them  farwell,  fled  through  the  woods  towards
Drogio,  and  was  very  well  received  of  the  Lord  that
dwelt  next  to  that  place  ;  who  knew  him  and  was  a
great  enemie  of  the  other  Lord  ;  and  so  running  from
one  Lord  to  another,  being  those  by  whom  he  had  passed
before,  after  long  time  &  many  travels  he  came  at  length
to  Drogio,  where  he  dwelt  three  yeres.  When  as  by
good  fortune  he  heard  by  the  inhabitants,  that  there
were  certaine  boates  arrived  upon  the  coast :  wherefore
entring  into  good  hope  to  accomplish  his  intent,  he  went

457

A.D.

c.  1380-90,

He  retu7-ned
from  Estoti-
land  to  Fris-
land.

Tjichmni
minded  to  send
M.  Antonio
Zeno  with  a
fieete  towards
those  parts  of
Estotiland.

The  4  letter.
The  fsherman
dyed  that
should  have
bene  inter-
preter.
Certaine
mat'iners
taken  in  his
steede,  which
came  with  him
from  Estoti-
land.

Isle  llofe.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  the  sea  side,  and  asking  them  of  what  countrey  they
were ;  they  answered  of  Estotiland,  whereat  he  was
exceeding  glad,  and  requested  that  they  would  take  him
in  to  them,  which  they  did  very  willingly,  and  for  that
he  had  the  language  of  the  countrey,  and  there  was  none
that  could  speake  it,  they  used  him  for  their  interpreter.

And  afterward  he  frequented  that  trade  with  them  in
such  sort,  that  he  became  very  rich,  and  so  furnishing
out  a  barke  of  his  owne,  he  returned  into  Frislande,
where  he  made  reporte  unto  this  Lord  of  that  wealthy
countrey.

And  he  is  throughly  credited  because  of  the  mariners,
who  approve  many  strange  things,  that  he  reporteth  to
be  true.  Wherfore  this  Lord  is  resolved  to  send  me
forth  with  a  fleet  towards  those  parts,  and  there  are  so
many  that  desire  to  go  in  the  voyage,  for  the  noveltie
and  strangenesse  of  the  thing,  that  I  thinke  we  shall  be
very  strongly  appointed,  without  any  publike  expence  at
all.  And  this  is  the  tenor  of  the  letter  before  mentioned,
which  I  have  here  set  downe  to  give  intelligence  of
another  voyage  that  M.  Antonio  made,  being  set  out
with  many  barkes,  and  men,  notwithstanding  he  was  not
captaine,  as  he  had  thought  at  the  first  he  should :  for
Zichmni  went  in  his  owne  person  :  and  concerning  that
matter  I  have  a  letter  in  forme  following.

One  great  preparation  for  the  voyage  of  Estotiland  was
begun  in  an  unlucky  houre :  for  three  dayes  before  our
departure  the  fisherman  died  that  should  have  bene  our
guide :  notwithstanding  this  Lord  would  not  give  over
the  enterprize,  but  instead  of  the  fisherman  tooke  certaine
mariners  that  returned  out  of  the  Island  with  him  :  and
so  making  our  Navigation  to  the  Westwards,  we  dis-
covered certaine  Islands  subject  to  Frisland,  and  having
passed  certaine  shelves  we  stayed  at  Ledovo  for  the  space
of  7  daies  to  refresh  our  selves,  and  to  furnish  the  fleet
with  necessarie  provision.  Departing  from  thence  we
arrived  the  first  of  July  at  the  Isle  of  llofe :  and  for  that
the  wind made  for  us,  we  stayed  not  there,  but  passed

458

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  a.d.

c.  1380-90,
forth,  and being  upon the maine sea,  there  arose im-
mediately a  cruel  tempest,  wherwith  for  eight  dayes  space
we  were  miserably  vexed,  not  knowing  where  we  were:  [III.  126.]
&  a  great  part  of  the  barks  were  cast  away,  afterward  the
weather  waxing  faire,  we  gathered  up  the  broken  peices
of  the  barks  that  were  lost,  and  sayling  with  a  prosperous
winde  we  discovered  land  at  West. Wherefore  keeping  'Z'ichmni  Ms
our course directly  upon it,  we arrived  in  a  good  and  ^[^'^^f^p^lf

r 1 1  11  ■ r •  ■  r  the  island

sate harborougn,  where  we saw  an innnit  companie or  icaria

people  ready  in  armes,  come  running  very  furiously  to

the water side, as it  were for defence  of  the Island.

Wherfore  Zichmni  causing his  men  to make  signes  of

peace  unto  them,  they  sent  10  men  unto  us that  could

speake  ten  languages,  but  we  could understand  none  of

them,  except  one  that  was  of  Island. He  being  brought  ^«  Island

before  our  prince  and  asked,  what  was  the  name  of  the  ^^'^  "^  ^'^^'''^'

Island,  and  what people  inhabited  it,  &  who  governed

it,  answered,  that  the  Island  was  called  Icaria,  and  that  all

the  kings  that  reigned  there,  were  called  Icari,  after  the The  kings  of

name  of  the  first  king  of  that  place,  which  as  they  say  was  \^^'''^^  '^f^^'^'
c>  i >  J J  lean  afteT  the

the  Sonne  of  Dedalus  king  of  Scotland,  who  conquered  ^^^^^  ^^^^
that  Island,  left  his  sonne  there  for  king,  and  left  them  first  king  of
those  lawes  that they  retaine  to  this present,  and  after  that  place,
this,  he  desiring  to  sayle  further,  in  a  great  tempest  that  ^'^''  ^^  ^^^^
arose,  was drowned,  wherefore for a memoriall of  his  sonneloDeda-
death,  they  call  those  seas  yet,  the  Icarian  Sea,  and  the  ks  king  of
kings  of  the  Island  Icari,  and  for  that  they  were  contented  ^^^ots.^
with that state, which God had given them, neither  ^'^^^'^^^  ^^'^•
would  they  alter  one  jote of  their  lawes  and  customes,
they  would not receive any stranger : wherefore they
requested  our  prince,  that  hee  would  not  seeke  to  violate
their  lawes,  which  they  had  received  from that  king  of
worthy  memory  and  observed  very  duly  to  that  present :
which  if  he  did  attempt,  it  would  redound  to  his  manifest
destruction,  they  being  all  resolutely  bent  rather  to  leave
their  life,  then  to  loose  in  any  respect  the  use  of  their
lawes. Notwithstanding,  that  we  should  not  thinke  they
did  altogether  refuse  conversation  and  traffick  with  other

459

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1380-90.

men,  they  tolde  us  for  conclusion  that  they  would
willingly  receive  one  of  our  men,  &  preferre  him  to  be  one
of  the  chiefe  amongst  them,  onely  to  learne  my  language
The  people  of  the  Italian  tongue,  and  to  be  informed  of  our  manners
I  carta  desirous  ^^^^  customes,  as  they  had  already  received  those  other
tonpue  ^^^^^  ^^^  °^  ^^^  sundry  nations,  that  came  into  their  Island.
Ten  men  of  To  these  things  our  Prince  answered  nothing  at  all,  but
ten  sundry  causing  his  men  to  seke  some  good  harbrough,  he  made
nations.  signes as  though he  would depart,  and sayling round

about  the  Island,  he  espied  at  length  a  harbrough  on  the
East  side  of  the  Island,  where  hee  put  in  with  all  his
Fleet :  the  mariners  went  on  land  to  take  in  wood  and
water,  which  they  did  with  as  great  speede  as  they  could,
doubting  least  they  should  be  assaulted  by  the  inhabitants,
as  it  fell  out  in  deed,  for  those  that  dwelt  therabouts,
making  signes  unto  the  other  with  fire  and  smoke,  put
Infinite  mult'i-  themselves  presently  in  armes  and  the  other  comming  to
tildes  of  armed  ^^.^  ^^^^  came  all  running  downe  to  the  sea  side  upon
our  men,  with  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  other  weapons,  so
that  many  were  slaine  and  divers  sore  wounded.  And
we  made  signes  of  peace  unto  them,  but  it  was  to  no
purpose,  for  their  rage  increased  more  and  more,  as
though  they  had  fought  for  land  and  living.  Wherefore
Zichmni  ^e  were  forced  to  depart,  and  to  sayle  along  in  a  great

departed  from  (.jj-^Qite about the Islande, being  alwayes accompanyed
wards.  upon the hil tops & the sea  coastes  with  an infinite

number  of  armed  men  :  and  so  doubling  the  Cape  of
the  Island  towards  the  North,  we  found  many  great
sholdes,  amongst  the  which  for  the  space  of  ten  dayes  we
were  in  continuall  danger  of  loosing  our  whole  fleet,  but
that  it  pleased  God  all  that  while  to  send  us  faire  weather.
Wherefore  proceeding  on  till  we  came  to  the  East  cape,
we  saw  the  inhabitants  still  on  the  hill  tops  and  by  the
sea  coast  keepe  with  us,  and  in  making  great  outcryes
and  shooting  at  us  a  farre  off,  they  uttered  their  old
spitefull  affection  towards  us.  Wherefore  wee  deter-
mined to  stay  in  some  safe  harborough,  and  see  if  wee
might speake once againe with the Islander, but our

460

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  ad.

c.  1380-90,
determination was frustrate : for the people  more  like
unto beasts  then  men,  stood  continually  in  armes  with
intent to beat us back, if  we should come on land.
Wherefore  Zichmni  seeing he could not prevaile, and
thinking if  he should have persevered and followed
obstinately  his  purpose,  their  victuals  would have  failed
them,  he  departed  with  a  fayre  wind  and  sailed  sixe  daies
to  the  Westwards,  but  the  winde  changing  to  the  South-
west, and  the  sea  waxing rough, wee sayling 4 dayes
with  the  wind  the  powp,  and  at  length  discovering  land,
were  afraid  to  approch  nere  unto  it,  the  sea  being  growen,
and  we not knowing  what land it  was : but God so
provided  for  us,  that  the  winde  ceasing  there  came  a  great
calme. Wherefore  some  of  our  company  rowing  to  land
with  oares,  returned  &  brought  us  newes  to  our  great
comfort,  that  they  had  found  a  very  good  countery  and  a
better harborough : upon which newes  we towed our
ships  and  smal  barks  to  land,  and  being  entred  into  the
harborough,  we  saw  a  farre  off  a  great  mountain,  that  cast
forth  smoke,  which  gave  us  good  hope  that  we  should
finde some inhabitants in the Island, neither would
Zichmni  rest,  although  it  were  a  great  way  off,  but  sent
100 souldiers  to  search  the countrey  and bring report 100  men  sent
what  people  they  were  that  inhabited  it,  &  in  the  meane  ^°  disme  the
time  they  tooke  in  wood  and  water  for  the  provision  of  '^^^''^  ^^^'
the  fleet,  and  catcht  great  store  of  fish  and  sea  foule  and
found  such  aboundance  of  birds  egges,  that  our  men  that
were  halfe  famished,  were  filled  therewithall. Whiles  we
were  riding  here,  began  the  moneth of  June,  at  which
time  the  aire  in  the  Island  was  so  temperate  and  pleasant  [III.  127.]
as  is  impossible  to  expresse :  but  when  we  could  see  no
people  at  al,  we  suspected  greatly  that  this  pleasant  place
was desolate and dishabited. We gave name to the  ^i^^^  returned
heaven  calling  it  Trin,  and  the  point  that  stretched  out  which  had
into  the  sea,  we  called  Capo  de  Trin. The  100  souldiers  bene  through
that  were  sent  forth,  8  dayes  after  returned,  and  brought  ^^^  i^i^nd,
word  that  they  had  bene  through  the  Island  and  at  the  ^^  ^^,  ^^^
mountaine,  and  that  the  smoke  was  a  naturall  thing  pro-  found.

461

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1380-90.

ceding:  from  a  great  fire  that  was  in  the  bottome  of  the
hill,  and  that  there  was  a  spring  from  which  issued  a
certaine  water  like  pitch  which  ran  into  the  sea,  and  that
thereabouts  dwelt  great  multitudes  of  people  halfe  wilde,
hiding  themselves  in  caves  of  the  ground,  of  small
stature,  and  very  fearefuU ;  for  as  soone  as  they  saw  them
they  fled  into  their  holes,  and  that  there  was  a  great  river
and  a  very  good  and  safe  harborough.  Zichmni  being
thus  informed,  and  seeing  that  it  had  a  holesome  and
pure  aire,  and  a  very  fruitfull  soyle  and  faire  rivers,  with
sundry  commodities,  fell  into  such  liking  of  the  place,
that  he  determined  to  inhabite  it,  and  built  there  a  citie.
But  his  people  being  weary  and  faint  with  long  and
tedious  travell  began  to  murmure,  saying  that  they  would
returne  into  their  countrey,  for  that  the  winter  was  at
hand,  and  if  they  entred  into  the  harborough,  they
should  not  be  able  to  come  out  againe  before  the  next
Summer.  Wherefore  he  retaining  onely  the  barks  with
Oares  and  such  as  were  willing  to  stay  with  him,  sent  all
M.  Antonio  the  rest  with  the  shippes  backe  againe,  and  willed  that  I,
Zeno,  made^  (though  unwilling)  should  be  their  captaine.  I  therefore
\fthose^ship5  departing,  because  I  could  not  otherwise  chuse,  sayled  for
which  went  the  space  of  twenty  dayes  to  the  Eastwards  without  sight
back  to  Fris-  of  any  land  ;  then  turning  my  course  towards  the  South-
east, in  5.  dayes  I  discovered  land,  and  found  my  selfe
upon  the  Isle  of  Neome,  and  knowing  the  countrey,  I
perceived  I  was  past  Island :  wherefore  taking  in  some
fresh  victuals  of  the  inhabitants  being  subject  to  Zichmni,
I  sayled  with  a  faire  winde  in  three  dayes  to  Frisland,
where  the  people,  who  thought  they  had  lost  their  prince,
because  of  his  long  absence,  in  this  our  voyage  received
us  very  joyfully.

What  followed  after  this  letter  I  know  not  but  by
conjecture,  which  I  gather  out  of  a  piece  of  another
letter,  which  I  will  set  downe  here  underneath :  That
Zichmni  built  a  towne  in  the  port  of  the  Island  that  he
discovered,  and  that  he  searched  the  countrey  very
diligently  and discovered  it all,  and also the  rivers  on

462

land.

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  ad.

c.  1380-90.
both sides  of  Engroneland,  for  that  I  see  it  particularly-
described  in  the  sea  card,  but  the  discourse  or  narration
is  lost. The  beginning  of  the  letter  is  thus.

Concerning  those  things  that  you  desire  to  know  of  The  5  leuer.
me,  as  of  the  men  and  their  maners  and  customes,  of  the
beasts,  and  of  the  countries  adjoyning,  I  have  made  therof
a  particuler  booke,  which  by  Gods  help  I  will  bring  with
me :  wherein  I  have  described  the  countrey,  the  mon-
strous fishes,  the  customes  and  lawes  of  Frisland,  Island,
Estland,  the  kingdome  of  Norway,  Estotiland,  Drogio,
and  in  the  end  the  life  of  M.  Nicolo,  the  knight  our
brother,  with  the  discovery  which  he  made,  and  the  state
of  Groneland.  I  have  also  written  the  life  and  acts  of
Zichmni,  a  prince  as  worthy  of  immortall  memory,  as  any
that  ever  lived,  for  his  great  valiancie  and  singuler
humanitie,  wherein  I  have  described  the  discovery  of
Engroneland  on  both  sides,  and  the  citie  that  he  builded.
Therefore  I  will  speake  no  further  hereof  in  this  letter,
hoping  to  be  with  you  very  shortly,  and  to  satisfie  you
in  sundry  other  things  by  word  of  mouth.

All  these  letters  were  written  by  M.  Antonio  to
Messer  Carlo  his  brother:  and  it  grieveth  me,  that  the
booke  and  divers  other  writings  concerning  these  pur-
poses, are  miserably  lost :  for  being  but  a  child  when  they
came  to  my  hands,  and  not  knowing  what  they  were,  (as
the  maner  of  children  is)  I  tore  them,  and  rent  them
in  pieces,  which  now  I  cannot  cal  to  remembrance  but  to
my  exceeding  great  griefe.  Notwithstanding,  that  the
memory  of  so  many  good  things  should  not  bee  lost :
whatsoever  I  could  get  of  this  matter,  I  have  disposed
and  put  in  order  in  the  former  discourse,  to  the  ende  that
this  age  might  be  partly  satisfied,  to  the  which  we  are
more  beholding  for  the  great  discoveries  made  in  those
partes,  then  to  any  other  of  the  time  past,  being  most
studious  of  the  newe  relations  and  discoveries  of  strange
counteries,  made  by  the  great  mindes,  and  industrie  of
our  ancestours.

For  the  more  credite  and  confirmation  of  the  former

463

A.D.

c.  1380-90.

=  8.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Historic  of  Messer  Nicolas  and  Messer  Antonio  Zeni
(which  for  some  fewe  respects  may  perhaps  bee  called  in
question)  I  have  heere  annexed  the  judgement  of  that
famous  Cosmographer  Abraham  Ortelius,  or  rather  the
yealding  and  submitting  of  his  judgement  thereunto :
who  in  his  Theatrum  Orbis,  fol.  6.  next  before  the  map
of  Mar  del  Zur,  boroweth  proofe  and  authoritie  out  of
this  relation,  to  shew  that  the  Northeast  parte  of  America
called  Estotiland,  and  in  the  original  alwayes  affirmed
to  bee  an  Islande,  was  about  the  yeere  1390  discovered
by  the  aforesayd  Venetian  Gentleman  Messer  Antonio
Zeno,  above  100  yeeres  before  ever  Christopher  Colum-
bus set  saile  for  those  Westerne  Regions ;  and  that  the
Northren  Seas  were  even  then  sayled  by  our  European
Pilots  through  the  helpe  of  the  loadstone :  with  divers
other  particulars  concerning  the  customes,  religion  and
wealth  of  the  Southern  Americans,  which  are  most
evidently  confirmed  by  all  the  late  and  moderne  Spanish
Histories  of  Nueva  Espanna  and  Peru.

ANd  here  I  shall  not  (as  I  suppose)  commit  any  great
inconvenience,  or  absurditie,  in  adding  unto  this
History  of  the  new  world,  certaine  particulars  as  touching
the  first  discovery  therof,  not  commonly  known.  Which
discoverie  al  the  writers  of  our  time  ascribe  (&  that  not
unworthily)  unto  Christopher  Columbus.  For  by  him
it  was  in  a  maner  first  discovered,  made  knowen,  and
profitably  communicated  unto  the  Christian  world,  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord  1492.  Howbeit  I  finde  that  the
North  part  thereof  called  Estotiland,  (which  most  of
all  extendeth  toward  our  Europe  and  the  Islands  of
the  same,  namely,  Groneland,  Island,  and  Frisland,)  was
long  ago  found  out  by  certaine  fishers  of  the  Isle  of
Frisland,  driven  by  tempest  upon  the  shore  thereof:  and
was  afterward  about  the  yeere  1390  discovered  a  new,
by  one  Antonio  Zeno  a  gentleman  of  Venice  ;  which
sayled  thither  under  the  conduct  of  Zichmni  king  of  the
saide Isle  of  Frisland,  a prince  in  those  parts  of  great

464

NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO  ad.

c.  1380-90.
valour,  and  renowned  for  his  martiall  exploits  and
victories.  Of  which  expedition  of  Zichmni  there  are
extant  in  Italian  certaine  collections  or  abridgements
gathered  by  Francisco  Marcolino  out  of  the  letters  of
M.  Nicolo  and  Antonio  Zeni  two  gentlemen  of  Venice
which  lived  in  those  partes.  Out  of  which  collections
I  doe  adde  concerning  the  description  of  Estotiland  afore-
said these  particulars  following.

Estotiland  (saith  he)  aboundeth  with  all  things  neces-
sary for  mankinde.  In  the  mids  thereof  standeth  an
exceeding  high  mountaine,  from  which  issue  foure  rivers
that  moisten  all  the  countrie.  The  inhabitants  are  wittie
and  most  expert  in  all  Mechanicall  arts.  They  have  a
kinde  of  peculiar  language  and  letters.  Howbeit  in  this
Kings  Librarie  are  preserved  certaine  Latine  bookes,
which  they  understand  not,  being  perhaps  left  there  not
many  yeeres  before  by  some  Europeans,  which  traffiqued
thither.  They  have  all  kinde  of  mettals ;  but  especially
golde,  wherewith  they  mightily  abound.  They  trafficke
with  the  people  of  Groneland  :  from  whence  they  fetch
skinnes,  pitch  and  brimstone.  The  inhabitants  report
that  towardes  the  South,  there  are  regions  abounding
with  gold,  and  very  populous :  they  have  many  and  huge
woods,  from  whence  they  take  timber  for  the  building  of
ships  and  cities,  whereof  and  of  castles  there  are  great
store.  The  use  of  the  loadstone  for  Navigation  is
unknowen  unto  them.  They  make  relation  also  of  a
certaine  region  toward  the  South,  called  Drogio,  which  Drogio.
is  inhabited  by  Canibals,  unto  whom  mans  flesh  is  delicate
meat :  wherof  being  destitute  they  live  by  fishing,  which
they  use  very  much.  Beyond  this  are  large  regions,  and
as  it  were  a  newe  world :  but  the  people  are  barbarous
and  goe  naked :  howbeit  against  the  colde  they  cloth
themselves  in  beastes  skinnes.  These  have  no  kinde  of
metall :  and  they  live  by  hunting.  Their  weapons  are
certaine  long  staves  with  sharpe  points,  and  bowes.
They  wage  warres  one  against  another.  They  have
governours, and obey  certaine lawes. But from hence

VII  465  2G

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1380-90.

more  towardes  the  South  the  climate  is  much  more
temperate :  and  there  are  cities,  and  temples  of  idoles,
unto  whom  they  sacrifice  living  men,  whose  flesh  they
afterwards  devoure.  These  nations  have  the  use  of
silver  and  gold.

Thus  much  of  this  tract  of  landes  out  of  the  aforesaide
collections  or  abridgements.  Wherein  this  also  is  worthy
the  observation,  that  even  then  our  Europaean  Pilots
sayled  those  seas  by  the  helpe  of  the  loadstone.  For
concerning  the  use  thereof  in  Navigation,  I  suppose  there
is  not  to  be  found  a  more  ancient  testimonie.  And
these  things  I  have  annexed  the  rather  unto  this  table
of  Mar  del  Zur ;  considering  that  none  of  those  Authours
which  have  written  the  Histories  of  the  Newe  world,
have  in  any  part  of  their  writings,  mentioned  one  word
thereof. Hitherto  Ortelius.

END OF VOLUME VII.

L^SEzm:^-

Date  Due

'^yf-tr

J4ftl3  0M

V^nM  2^

M^  3  i  '§/^

L.  B.  Cat. No.  1 137

mml"

CLAPP

3  5002  00074  2044

Hakluyt,  Richard
I The  principal  tiai/igaiioni  voyages  traffi

-^^^ — J-— /—yjii

G 240 . H2 1S03 7

Hakluyt., Richard, 1552?-
1616,

The- principal navigat-ions
vovaQe-s •traffl^ues &

V
