The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 6 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 6 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  Traffiques  and

Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume  VI

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  AND  COMPANY  LTD.  FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK.

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMIV

PhotD^ravure  "by  Annan  &  Sons.DlasjJ

SIR FRANCIS WALSINGHAM.

The Principal

Navigations  Voyages
Traffiques  &  Discoveries

of  the  English Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within  the

compasse  of  these 1600  Yeeres

By
RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church  in  Oxford

VOLUME  VI

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University
New  York: The  Macmillan  Company

MCMIV

6^
6'

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages  of  this  sixth  volume
made  to  the  South  and  South-east  quarters  ;
with  the  Ambassages,  Treatises,  Priviledges,
Letters,  and  other  observations,  depending
upon  the  Voyages  of  this  sixth  Volume  :

The  voyage  of  M.  John  Eldred  to  Tripolis  in  Syria  by  sea,
and  from  thence  by  land  and  river  to  Babylon,  and
Balsara,  Anno  1583.  .  .  .  .  .  i

The  money,  weights,  measures,  and  customes  used  in
Babylon,  Balsara,  Ormuz,  Goa,  Cochin,  and  Malacca  :
written  from  Alepo  in  Syria,  by  M.  William  Barret,
Anno  1584.  ......  10

The  charge  of  a  journey,  by  land  and  river,  from  Alepo  in

Syria  to  Goa  in  the  East  India. .  .  .  ,23

A  declaration  of  all  the  places  from  whence  each  particular
commoditie  of  the  East  Indies  commeth.

24

The  times  or  seasonable  windes  called Monsons,  wherein

the  ships  depart  from  place  to  place  in  the  East  Indies.  28

A  description  of  the  Isle  of  S. Helena  frequented  by  the

Portugales  in  their  returne  from  the  East  India.  ,  33

The  voyage of  M. John Evesham by sea into vEgypt,

Anno  1586,.  .  .  .  .  .  .  35

V

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  voyage  of  M. Laurence Aldersey to the cities of

Alexandria  and  Cairo  in  Aegypt,  Anno  1586. .  .  39

The  voyage  of  five  marchants  ships  of  London  into  Turkie  :
and  their  valiant  fight  in  their  returne  with  1 1  gallies
and  two  frigats  of  the  king  of  Spaine,  at  Pantalarea
within  the  Streits  of  Gibraltar,  Anno  1586. .  . 46

The  voyage  of  Master  William  Hareborne  over-land  from

Constantinople  to  London,  Anno  1588.  .  .  58

A  Priviledge  granted  by  Peter  Prince  of  Moldavia,  to  the

English  merchants.  Anno  1588. .  .  .  .  59

A  briefe  extract  specifying  the  certaine  dayly  payments
answered  quarterly  in  time  of  peace,  by  the  Grand
Signor,  out  of  his  treasury,  to  the  officers  of  his
Seraglio  or  Court,  successively  in  degrees.  .  . 61

The  chiefe  officers  of  the  great  Turkes  Empire;  the  num-
ber of  souldiers  attending  upon  each  of  his  Beglerbegs ;
the  principal  officers  in  his  Seraglio  or  Court ;  his
yeerely  revenues,  and  his  allowances  to  forren  Am-
bassadours. .  .  .  .  .  .  .67

The  letters  of  Sinan  Bassa  chiefe  counsellor  to  Sultan  Murad
Can  the  Grand  Signor,  An.  1590,  to  the  sacred
Majestie  of  Elizabeth  Queene  of  England :  signifying,
that  upon  her  request,  and  for  her  sake  especially  he
granted  peace  unto  the  king  of  Poland.  .  .  .  69

The  second  letters  patents  granted  by  the  Queenes  Majestie,
to  the  right  wor.  company  of  the  English  merchants
for  the  Levant,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1592. .  .  73

A description of  a voyage  to Constantinople  and Syria

begun  the  21  of  March,  1593,  and  ended  the  ninth

of  August 1595  : wherein is  shewed  the  manner  of

delivering  the  second  present,  by  M.  Edwai'd Barton

vi

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

her  Majesties  ambassadour,  which  was  sent  from  her
Majestic  to  Sultan  Murad  Can,  the  Emperour  of
Turkic. ....... 93

A  letter  written  by  the  most  high  and  mighty  Emprcssc
the  wife  of  the  Grand  Signer  Sultan  Murad  Can  to
her  most  sacred  Majesty  of  England,  Anno  1594. . 1 14

The  voyage  of  Macham  the  first  discoverer  of  the  Isle  of

Madera,  in  the  yeere  1344.  .  .  .  .119

A  Note  concerning  the  ayde  and  assistance  given  to  king
John  the  first  of  Portugale,  by  certaine  English  mer-
chants, for  the  winning  of  Ceut  in  Barbary,  Anno
T415.  ....... 121

The  Ambassage  of  John  the  second,  king  of  Portugale  to
Edward  the  4.  king  of  England,  to  stay  John  Tintam,
and  William  Fabian  Englishmen,  preparing  for  a
voyage  to  Guinea,  Anno  1481..  .  .  . 122

A  briefe  note  concerning  an  ancient  trade  of  English  mar-
chants  to  the  Canarie  Isles,  Anno  1526. .  .  .124

A  description of  the Canarie Islands,  with  their  strange

fruits  and  commodities. .  .  .  .  .125

(The  first  voyage  to  Barbary,  Anno  1551. .  .  • 136

The  second  voyage  to  Barbary,  Anno  1552. .  .  . 138

The  voyage  of  M.  Thomas  Windam to Guinea  and  the

kingdom  of  Benin,  Anno  1553. .... 141

The  voyage  of  M.  John  Lok  to  Guinea,  Anno  1554-  • ^54

The  first  voyage  of  Master  William  Towrson  marchant  of

London  to  Guinea,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord,  1555. . 177

The  second  voyage  of  M.  William  Towrson  to  Guinea  and

the  castle  of  Mina.  An.  1556. .... 212
vii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  third  voyage  of  the  sayd  M.  William  Towrson  to  the

coast  of  Guinea  and  the  river  of  Sestos,  Anno  1557. . 231

The  commodities  and  wares  that  are  most  desired  in
Guinea,  betwixt  Sierra  Leona,  and  the  furthest  place
of  the  Mina.  .  .  .  .  .  .252

Certaine articles of  remembrance delivered to M.  John

Lok,  touching  a  voyage  to  Guinea,  Anno  1561.  . 253

A  letter  of  M.  John  Lok  to  the  worshipfull  company  of

marchants  adventurers  of  Guinea,  Anno  156 1.  .  . 255

»

The  relation  of  one  William  Rutter  concerning  a  voyage
set  out  to  Guinea,  Anno  1562.  Described  also  in
verse  by  Robert  Baker. .  .  .  .  .258

A  meeting  at  Sir  William  Gerards  house  for  the  setting
foorth  of  a  voyage  to  Guinea,  with  the  Minion  of  the
Queenes,  The  John  Baptist  of  London,  and  the
Merline  of  M.  Gonson,  Anno  1564. .  .  . 262

A  relation  of  the  successe  of  the  same  voyage,  taken  out  of

a  voyage  of  Sir  John  Haukins  to  the  West  Indies. . 263

The  voyage  of  M.  George  Fenner  to  Guinea  and  to  the

Isles  of  Capo  Verde,  An.  1566. .... 266

The  voyage  and  ambassage  of  Master  Edmund  Hogan  to

the  Emperour  of  Marocco,  Anno  1577.  .  .  .285

The  voyage  of  Thomas  Stukeley  into  Barbary,  1578.  . 293

Certaine  reports  of  the  mighty  kingdome  of  China  delivered

by  Portugales  which  were  there  imprisoned. .  .295

A  discourse  of  the  Isle  of  Japan,  and  of  other  Isles  in  the

East  Ocean,  &c. .  .  .  .  .  .327

An  excellent  description  of  the  kingdome  of  China,  and  of

the  estate  and  governement  thereof.  .  .  . 34.8

viii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  voyage  of  Thomas  Stevens  about  the  Cape  of  Buona

Esperanza  unto  Goa  in  the  East  India,  Anno  1579. • 377

A  briefe  relation  of  the  great  magnificence  and  rich  trafficke

of  the  kingdom  of  Pegu,  beyond  the  East  India.  . 385

The  memorable  voyage  of  M.  James  Lancaster  about  the
Cape  of  Buona  Esperanza,  along  the  Easterne  coast  of
Africa,  beyond  Cape  Comori,  as  far  as  the  maine  land
of  Malacca,  and  from  thence  home  againe,  begun  in
the  yeere  1591. ...... 387

Certaine  remembi'ances  of  a  voyage  intended  to  Brasil,  and
to  the  river  of  Plate,  but  miserably  overthrowen  neere
Rio  grande  in  Guinea,  in  the  yeere  1583.  .  . 408

The  escape  of  the  Primrose,  a  ship  of  London,  from  before
the  towne  of  Bilbao  in  Biscay,  and  the  taking  of  the
Corrigidor,  Anno  1585. .  .  .  .  .413

The  king  of  Spaines  Commission  for  the  generall  imbarg-

ment  or  arrest  of  the  English  &c.  Anno  1585.  .  . 417

The  Letters  patents  granted  by  her  Majestic  to  certaine
noblemen  and  merchants  of  London,  for  a  trade  to
Barbary,  Anno  1585.  .  .  .  .  . 419

The  voyage and ambassage of  Master  Henry  Roberts  to

Mully  Hamet  Emperour  of  Marocco,  Anno  1585. . 426

An  edict  from  the  Emperour  of  Marocco  in  favour  of  all
Englishmen  trading  throughout  his  dominions,  Anno
1587.  ....... 428

A  letter  of  the  sayd emperour  written to the Erie of

Leicester,  in  the  yeare  1587. .... 430

A  letter  of  the  Queenes  Majestic  written  to  the  emperour

of  Marocco,  in  the  yere  1587. .... 432

The  voyage  made by  two  of  sir  Walter  Raleghs Pinasses
called  The  Serpent  and  The  Mary  Spark  of  Plimouth
ix

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

to  the  Azores :  which  tooke  the  governour  of  the  Isle
of  S.  Michael,  and  Pedro  Sarmiento  governour  of  the
Streights  of  Magellan  in  the  yere  1586.  .  ,  , 434

The  voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Drake  to  Cadiz,  and  the  memor-
able exploits  and  services  performed  by  him  as  well
there  as  at  diverse  other  places  upon  the  coast  of  Spaine
and  Portugale,  and  his  taking  of  the  great  East  Indian
Carak  called  The  Sant  Philip,  neere  the  Isle  of  S.
Michael,  Anno  1587. ..... 438

A  patent  graunted  to  certaine  merchants  of  Exceter,  and
others  of  the  West  parts,  and  of  London,  for  a  trade  to
the  rivers  of  Senega  and  Gambra  in  Guinea,  Anno
1588 443

A  voyage  to  Benin  beyond  the  countrey  of  Guinea  made
by  Master  James  Welsh,  who  set  foorth  in  the  yeere
1588.  ....... 450

A  relation  concerning  a  voyage  set  foorth  by  M.  John
Newton,  and  M.  John  Bird,  merchants  of  London,  to
the  kingdome  and  citie  of  Benin,  written  by  Antony
Ingram,  An.  1588..  ...'.. 458

The  second  voyage  made  by  M.  James  Welsh  to  Benin  in

Africa,  An.  1590. ...... 461

An advertisement to king  Philip  the  2.  of  Spaine,  from
Angola,  touching  the  state  of  the  same  countrey,  An.  •
1591.  ....... 468

The voyage to Spaine and Portugale written (as it is

thought)  by  Colonell  Anthonie  Wingfield,  An.  1589. . 470

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Sir  Francis  Walsingham, .... Frontispiece

Sir  Francis  Walsingham  was  born  about  1530.  He
matriculated  at  King's  College,  Cambridge,  and
subsequently  entered  Gray's  Inn.  On  Queen
Mary's  accession  he  left  England  and  travelled  on
the  Continent,  but  returned  home  on  her  death.
He  then  entered  Parliament  as  member  for  Ban-
bury, and  later  represented  Lyme  Regis  and  Surrey.
His  knowledge  of  foreign  affairs  brought  him  under
the  notice  of  Burghley,  and  through  his  foreign
friends  and  correspondents  he  obtained  much  valu-
able secret  intelligence.  In  1570  he  went  on  an
embassy  to  Paris,  and  later  in  that  year  was  ap-
pointed resident  ambassador  at  the  French  Court.
In  December,  1573,  Walsingham  was  appointed  one
of  the  principal  Secretaries  of  State,  and  in  1577
was  knighted.  He  was  one  of  the  Commissioners
who  tried  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  and  it  was  largely
on  the  secret  information  obtained  by  him  that  she
was  condemned.  Walsingham  died  in  London  on  6th
April,  1590,  and  was  buried  privately  the  next  night
in  St.  Paul's.  The  portrait  here  reproduced  is  from
the  engraving  in  the  British  Museum  of  the  original
formerly  in  the  collection  of  the  Duke  of  Dorset.

John  Eldred, . . . . . . . 8

According  to  the  tablet  beneath  the  monument,  which
is  here  pictured,  in  Great  Saxham  Church,  Suffolk,

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

'  New  Buckingham  in  Norfolke  was  John  Eldred's
first  being.  In  Babilon  hee  spent  some  parte  of
his  time,  and  the  rest  of  his  earthly  pilgrimage  hee
spent  in  London,  and  was  Alderman  of  that  Famous
Cittie.'  He  traded  to  the  East,  and  was  a  member
of  the  Levant  Company.

The  Emperor  Akbar, .  .  .  .  .  .16

Akbar  (or  '  the  great ')  Mogul  Emperor  of  India,  is  the
*  Selabdim  Echebar  King  of  Cambaia,'  frequently
mentioned  by  Hakluyt.  He  came  to  the  throne
in  1556,  when  between  thirteen  and  fourteen  years
old,  and  reigned  until  1605.  In  addition  to  being
a  great  conqueror,  he  was  a  wise  and  enlightened
ruler.  The  present  picture  represents  him  as  he
appeared  towards  the  middle  of  his  reign,  when  at
the  height  of  his  power,  and  after  he  had  founded
his  new  religion.  It  is  reproduced  from  an  original
in  an  album  of  miniatures  and  calligraphic  speci-
mens of  the  seventeenth  and  early  eighteenth
centuries,  preserved  in  the  Department  of  Oriental
MSS. in  the  British  Museum.

Plan  of  Ormuz, ....... 32

From  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum  of  G.  Braun  and
F. Hohenberg's  Civttates  Orbis  Terrarum, 1573.

English  Sailing  Chart,  1592,  .  .  .  .128

This  chart,  drawn  by  T.  Hood,  and  engraved  by  Ryther
in  1 592,  is  reproduced  from  the  original  in  a
volume  of  miscellaneous  papers  entitled  Sea  Tracts,
Vol.  II.,  in  the  Pepys  Library,  Magdalene  College,
Cambridge,  by  permission  of  the  College  authorities.
It  gives  the  coast  lines  from  the  latitude  of  the
Orkneys  to  the  Cape  Verde  Islands.  Thomas
Hood,  *  Doctor  in  Phisicke,'  was  also  a  lecturer  on
navigation,  a  seller  of  compasses,  and  author  and
editor  of  various  books  on  mathematics  and  naviga-
tion. Specimens  of  his  charts  are  very  rare.

ILLUSTRATIONS

Map  of  Egypt, . -.  .  .  . .  . 176

From  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum  of  John  Hu'ighen
van  Linschoien  his  Discours  of  Voyages  unto  ye  Easte
and  Weste  Indies,  printed  at  London,  1598.  It  is
of  interest  to  note  the  '  diche  begonne  in  auncient
tyme  and  somewhat  attempted  of  late  by  Sinan
the  Bassa  to  joyne  both  the  Seas  together' — now
the  Suez  Canal.

George  Fenner, .  .  ,  .  .  .  . 272

George  Fenner,  '  a  man  that  had  beene  conversant  in
many  sea-fights,'  belonged  to  a  Sussex  family,  and
was  probably  a  native  of  Chichester.  The  family
produced  several  other  seamen,  of  whom  William
Fenner,  Viceadmiral  under  Drake  and  Norris  in  the
Portugal  voyage  (see  p.  483),  and  Thomas  Fenner,
captain  of  the  '  Dreadnought '  in  Dralce's  Cadiz  Ex-
pedition (see  p.  438),  are  best  known.  The  action
off  the  Azores  between  the  Portuguese  squadron
and  George  Fenner's  ships  (see  pp.  281-3)  is
'  memorable  as  the  earliest  revelation  to  English
seamen  of  the  power  their  superiority  in  gunnery
was  to  give  them '  (Corbett,  Drake  and  the  Tudor
Navy,  I.  93).  On  his  return  from  the  voyage  to
Guinea  in  1566,  Fenner  traded  with  the  Low
Countries.  In  1588  he  commanded  the  'Galleon
Leicester'  against  the  Armada,  and  in  1597  accom-
panied Essex  in  the  Islands  voyage.  The  portrait  is
taken  from  that  in  John  Pine's  Tapestry  Han^ngs  oj
the  House  of  Lords,  London,  1753,  in  the  British
Museum.

Plan  of  Goa, ....... 384-

From  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum  of  G.  Braun  and
F.  Hohenberg's  Civitates  Orbis  Terrarum, 1573.
xiii

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Despatch  from  Sir  Francis  Drake,  .... 440

This  despatch,  dated  27th  April,  1587,  gives  Drake's
account  of  the  burning  of  the  Spanish  ships  in  Cadiz
Harbour.  It  is  reproduced  by  permission  from  the
original  preserved  in  the  Public  Record  Office.  The
postscripts  are  in  Drake's  ow^n  handw^riting.  The
despatch,  which  is  addressed  'To  the  righte  honor-
able Sir  Ffrauncis  Walsingham,  Knighte  principall
Secretary  to  Her  Ma"^  w^ith  all  haste  haste  poste
haste '  runs  as  follows  :

Righte  honorable  Theise  are  to  geive  to  understande  that
on  the  seconde  of  this  moneth  we  departede  out
of  the  sound  of  Plymouth  we  had  sighte  of  the
Cape  venester  the  v*  :  we  were  encountrede  with
a  violente  storme  duringe  the  space  of  five  dales  by
which  meanes  our  fleate  was  putt  a  sonder  and  a
greate  leake  sprange  uppon  the  Dreadenoughte  :
the  16*  we  mette  all  together  at  the  Rocke  &  the
ig***  we  arrivede  into  the  roade  of  Cales  in  Spaigne
where  we  founde  sondrie  greate  shippes  some  laden
some  halfe  laden  and  some  readie  to  be  laden  with
the  kings  provisions  for  Englande  ;  we  staiede  there
untill  the  24*  in  which  meane  tyme  we  sanke  a
Biskanie  of  12*^  tonnes,  burnte  a  shippe  of  the
Marquice  of  Santa  Cruse  of  15*^  Tonnes  and  31
shippes  more  of  1000  800  600  :  400  to  200  tonnes
the  peice  carried  awaie  fower  with  us  laden  with
provision,  And  departede  thence  at  our  pleasure  with
as  moch  honour  as  we  coulde  wishe  notwithstand-
inge  that  duringe  the  tyme  of  our  aboade  there  we
were  bothe  oftentymes  foughte  with  all  by  12  of
the  kinges  gallies  (of  whome  we  sanke  two  and
allwaies  repulsed  the  rest)  and  were  (withoute
Ceassinge)  vehemently  shott  at  from  the  shoare
but  to  our  litle  hurte,  god  be  thanked,  yeat  at
our  departure  we  were  Curteouslie  written  unto
by  one  Don  Pedro  generall  of  those  gallies  ;  I
assure  your  Ho  :  the  like  preparacion  was  never
xiv

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

hearde of  nor knowen as the kinge of  Spaigne
hathe and dailie makethe to invade Englande.
He is allied with mighte Prynces  and  Dukes  in
the Straits of  whome (besides the forces in his
owne  domynyons)  he  is  to  have  greate  aide  shortlie :
and his provisions of  breade and wynes are so
greate as  will  suffice  40000 men  a  wholle  yeere,
which,  if  they  be  not  ympeached  before  they  joyne,
wilbe  verie  perillous, Our  entente  therfore  is  (by
gods helpe) to intercepte  their meetinges by  all
possible  meanes  we  maye,  which  I  hope  shall  have
such  a  good  successe  as  shall  tende  to  thadvaunce-
ment  of  gods  glorie,  the  savetie  of  her  highnes  royall
person, the quyett of her countrie, and than-
noyaunce  of  the  Enemie. This  service  which  by
gods sufFeraunce we have done will (withoute
doute) breade  some  alteracyon of  their  pretences
howebeit  all  possible preparacions  for  defence  are
very  expediente  to  be  made  : Thus  moch  touch-
inge  our  proceedinges  and  farther  entente in  this
actyon I have thoughte meete to signifie unto
your honour  & would use  more larger discourse
but  that  wante  of  leisure  causeth me  to  leave  the
same  to  the  reporte  of  this  bearer,  And  so  in  verie
greate haste with remembraunce of  my humble
duetie  doe  take  my  leave  of  your  honour : fFrom
aboarde her highnes good ship the Elizabethe
Bonadventure  the  zf^  of  Aprill 1587

Your  honours  redye  allwayes  to
be  comaunded

Fra  :  Drake

I  leave the report of  dyvers prisonars to the bearer
herof  and  pray  pardon  for  not  writtyng  with my
owne  hand,  I  am  overcom  with  businesses
Your  honours  ever  redy

Fra  :  Drake

I  dare  not  a  most  writ  unto  your  honour  of  the  great
forces  we  hear  the  K.  of  Spayne hath  out  of  the

XV

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

straytts  prepair  in  yngland  strongly  and  most  by
sea :  stope  him  now  and  stope  hym  ever :  look
well  to  the  cost  of  Sussex  I  will  sourly  writ  you
mor  as  ocasyon  shalbe  menestred  and  with  the
grace  of  god  will  fight  with  them  for  it  is  the
Lord  that  geveth  victory.

Chart  of  Cadiz  Harbour  by  William  Borough, . 448

This  chart  of  Drake's  operations  in  Cadiz  Harbour,  April,
1587,  was  drawn  by  William  Borough  Vice-admiral
on  the  *  Lion,'  and  is  reproduced  by  permission  from
the  original  preserved  in  the  Public  Record  Office.
It  was  in  this  expedition  that  Borough  was  put  under
arrest  by  Drake  for  insubordination,  and  afterwards
court-martialled  and  condemned  to  death.  He  was,
however,  subsequently  pardoned.

Map  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  .... 5x8

From  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum  of  John  Huighen
van  Linschoten  his  Discours  of  Voyages  unto  ye  Easte
and  Weste  Indies,  printed  at  London, 1598.

THE SIXTH VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  TraiBques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Made  to  the  South  and  South-east  quarters  of  the

World,  with  the  directions,  letters,  privileges

discourses,  and  observations  incident

to  the  same

The  voyage  of  M.  John  Eldred  to  Trypolis  in  Syria
by  sea,  and  from  thence  by  land  and  river  to
Babylon  and  Balsara. 1583.

Departed  out  of  London  in  the  ship
called  the  Tiger,  in  the  company  of  M.
John  Newbery,  M.  Ralph  Fitch,  and  sixe
or  seven  other  honest  marchants  upon
Shrove  munday  1583,  and  arrived  in
Tripolis  of  Syria  the  first  day  of  May
next  insuing :  at  our  landing  we  went
on  Maying  upon  S.  Georges  Hand,  a  place  where
Christians  dying  aboord  the  ships,  are  woont  to  be  buried.
In  this  city  our  English  marchants  have  a  Consull,  and
our  nation  abide  together  in  one  house  with  him,  called
Fondeghi  Ingles,  builded  of  stone,  square,  in  maner  like
a  Cloister,  &  every  man  hath  his  severall  chamber,  as  it
is  the  use  of  all  other  Christians  of  severall  nations.  This  T^}^  desciip-
towne  standeth  under  a  part  of  the  mountaine  of  Libanus  ^l?^.  ^^  ^^^°'
two  English  miles  distant  from  the  port :  on  the  side
of  which  port,  trending  in  forme  of  an  halfe  Moone,
stand  five  blocke  houses  or  small  forts,  wherein  is  some
very  good  artillery,  and  the  forts  are  kept  with  about
an  hundred  Janisaries.  Right  before  this  towne  from
the  seaward  is  a  banke  of  moving  sand,  which  gathereth
and  increaseth  with  the  Westerne  winds,  in  such  sort,
that,  according  to  an  olde  prophesie  among  them,  this
banke  is  like  to  swallow  up  &  overwhelme  the  towne :
for  every  yere  it  increaseth  and  eateth  up  many  gardens,
although  they  use  all  policy  to  diminish  the  same,  and
to  make  it  firme  ground. The  city  is  about  the  bignesse

lis  in  Syria.

VI

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

of  Bristow,  and  walled  about,  though  the  walles  be  of
no  great  force.  The  chiefe  strength  of  the  place  is  in
a  Citadell,  which  standeth  on  the  South  side  within  the
walles,  and  overlooketh  the  whole  towne,  and  is  strongly
kept  with  two  hundred  Janisaries  and  good  artillery.  A
river  passeth  thorow  the  midst  of  the  city,  wherewith  they
water  their  gardens  and  mulbery  trees,  on  which  there
Store  of  white  grow  abundance  of  silke  wormes,  wherewith  they  make
silke.  great  quantity  of  very  white  silke,  which  is  the  chiefest

naturall  commodity  to  be  found  in  and  about  this  place.
This  rode  is  more  frequented  with  Christian  marchants,
to wit, Venetians, Genouois, Florentines, Marsilians,
Sicilians,  Raguses,  and  lately  with  English  men,  then  any
other port  of  the Turks  dominions. From Tripolis  I
departed  the 14  of  May  with  a  caravan,  passing  three
dayes over the ridge of mount Libanus, at the  end
The  city  of whereof we arrived in a city called Hammah, which
Eanmah. standeth on a  goodly plaine  replenished  with  corne  &
Cotton  wooU. cotton  wooll. On these  mountaines which we passed
Gall  trees. grow  great  quantity  of  gall trees,  which  are  somewhat
like  our  okes,  but  lesser  and  more  crooked : on  the  best
tree  a man shall not finde above a  pound of  galles.
This  towne  of  Hammah is  fallen  and  falleth  more  and
more  to  decay,  and  at  this  day  there  is  scarse  one  halfe
of  the  wall  standing,  which  hath bene  very  strong  and
faire :  but  because it cost many  mens lives to  win  it,
the  Turke  will  not  have  it  repaired ; and  hath  written
in the Arabian tongue over the castle gate, which
standeth in the midst of the towne, these words  :
Cursed be the father and the sonne that shall lay
their hands to the repairing hereof. Refreshing our
selves  one  day  here,  we  passed  forward  with  camels  three
Jleppo,  dayes  more  untill  we  came  to  Aeppo,  where  we  arrived

the  21  of  May.  This  is  the  greatest  place  of  traffique
for  a  dry  towne  that  is  in  all  those  parts :  for  hither
[II.  i,  269.]  resort  Jewes,  Tartarians,  Persians,  Armenians,  Egyptians,
Indians,  and  many  sorts  of  Christians,  and  injoy  free-
dome  of  their  consciences,  and  bring  thither  many  kinds

JOHN  ELDRED  ad.

1583.
of  rich  marchandises.  In  the  middest  of  this  towne  also
standeth  a  goodly  castle  raised  on  high,  with  a  garison
of  foure  or  five  hundred  Janisaries.  Within  foure  miles
round  about  are  goodly  gardens  and  vineyards  and
trees,  which  beare  goodly  fruit  neere  unto  the  rivers
side,  which  is  but  small ;  the  walks  are  about  three
English  miles  in  compasse,  but  the  suburbs  are  almost
as  much  more.  The  towne  is  greatly  peopled.  We
departed  from  thence  with  our  camels  the  last  of  May
with  M.  John  Newbery  and  his  company,  and  came  to
Birrah  in  three  dayes,  being  a  small  towne  situated  upon  Birrak.
the  river  Euphrates,  where  it  beginneth  first  to  take
his  name,  being  here  gathered  into  one  chanell,  whereas
before  it  commeth  downe  in  manifolde  branches,  and
therefore  is  called  by  the  people  of  the  countrey  by  a
name  which  signifieth  a  thousand  heads.  Here  is  plenty
of  victuals,  wherof  we  all  furnished  our  selves  for  a
long  journey  downe  the  aforesayd  river.  And  accord-
ing to  the  maner  of  those  that  travell  downe  by  water,
we  prepared  a  small  barke  for  the  conveyance  of  our
selves  and  of  our  goods.  These  boats  are  flat  bottomed,
because  the  river  is  shallow  in  many  places :  and  when  Euphrates
men  travell  in  the  moneth  of  July,  August,  and  Septem-  "  ^  °'^'
ber,  the  water  being  then  at  the  lowest,  they  are  con-
strained to  cary  with  them  a  spare  boat  or  two  to  lighten
their  owne  boats,  if  they  chance  to  fall  on  the  sholds.
We  were  eight  and  twenty  dayes upon the water be-  Eight  y

tweene  Birrah  and Felug-ia, where  we  disimbarked  our '^^^■^  P^^

T-P  . , /- 10  journey  by

selves  and  our  goods. Every  night  after  the  Sun  setteth,  river.

we  tie  our  barke  to  a  stake,  go  on  land  to  gather  sticks,

and set on our pot with rice  or brused wheat, and

having  supped,  the  marchants  lie  aboord  the  barke,  and

the  mariners  upon  the  shores  side  as  nere  as  they  can

unto  the  same. In many places upon the rivers  side

we  met  with  troops of  Arabians,  of  whom  we  bought  ^rabiansupon

milke,  butter,  egges,  and  lambs,  and  gave  them  in  barter, J IT.^^f

(for  they  care  not for money) glasses, combes, corall,

amber,  to hang about their armes  and  necks, and  for

3

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1583.

churned milke we gave them bread and pomgranat
peeles,  wherewith  they  use  to  tanne  their  goats  skinnes
which  they  churne withall. Their haire, apparell,  and
colour  are  altogether  like  to  those  vagabond  Egyptians,
The  Arabian  which  heretofore  have gone about  in  England. Their
women  weare ^^^^^  ^  without exception  weare  a  great round  rinff
golde  rings  tn .  r 1 •  1 r 1  1 -i  j

their  nostrels.  ^^  ^ne  ot  their  nostrels,  or  golde,  silver,  or  yron,  accord-
ing to  their  ability,  and  about  their  armes  and  smalles
of  their  legs  they  have  hoops  of  golde,  silver  or  yron.
All  of  them  aswel  women  and  children  as  men,  are  very
great  swimmers,  and  often  times  swimming  they  brought
us  milke  to  our  barke  in  vessels  upon  their  heads.
These  people  are  very  theevish,  which  I  proved  to  my
cost :  for  they  stole  a  casket  of  mine,  with  things  of  good
value  in  the  same,  from  under  my  mans  head  as  he  was
asleepe :  and  therefore  travellers  keepe  good  watch  as
Euphrates  de-  they  passe  downe  the  river.  Euphrates  at  Birrah  is
scribed.  about  the  breadth  of  the Thames  at Lambeth, and in

some places narrower, in some broader : it runneth
very  swiftly,  almost  as fast as the river  of  Trent : it
hath  divers  sorts  of  fish  in  it,  but  all  are  scaled, some
Felugia.  as  bigge  as  salmons,  like  barbils. We  landed  at  Felugia

the  eight  and  twentieth  of  June,  where  we  made  our
abode  seven  dayes,  for  lacke  of  camels  to  cary  our  goods
to  Babylon  :  the  heat  at  that  time  of  the  yere  is  such
in  those  parts,  that  men  are  loth  to  let  out  their  camels
to  travell.  This  Felugia  is  a  village  of  some  hundred
houses,  and  a  place  appointed  for  discharging  of
such  goods  as  come  downe  the  river :  the  inhabitants
are  Arabians.  Not  finding  camels  here,  we  were  con-
strained to  unlade  our  goods,  and  hired  an  hundred
asses  to  cary  our  English  marchandises  onely  to  New
Babylon  over  a  short  desert,  in  crossing  whereof  we
spent  eighteene  houres  travelling  by  night,  and  part  of
the  morning,  to  avoid  the  great  heat.
The  mines  of  In  this  place  which  we  crossed  over,  stood  the  olde
Q  e  a  ylon.  flighty  city  of  Babylon,  many  olde  ruines  wherof  are
easily  to  be seene by day-light,  which I  John Eldred

4

JOHN ELDRED  ad.

1583.
have  often  beheld  at  my  good  leasure,  having  made
three  voyages  betweene  the  new  citv  of  Babylon  and
Aleppo  over  this  desert.  Here  also  are  yet  standing
the  ruines  of  the  olde  tower  of  Babel,  which  being
upon  a  plaine  ground  seemeth  a  farre  off  very  great,
but  the  nerer  you  come  to  it,  the  lesser  and  lesser  it
appeareth ;  sundry  times  I  have  gone  thither  to  see  it,
and  found  the  remnants  yet  standing  above  a  quarter
of  a  mile  in  compasse,  and  almost  as  high  as  the  stone-
worke  of  Pauls  steeple  in  London,  but  it  sheweth
much  bigger.  The  bricks  remaining  in  this  most
ancient  monument  be  halfe  a  yard  thicke,  and  three
quarters  of  a  yard  long,  being  dried  in  the  Sunne
onely,  and  betweene  every  course  of  bricks  there  lieth
a  course  of  mattes  made  of  canes,  which  remaine  sound
and  not  perished,  as  though  they  had  bene  layed  within
one  yeere.  The  city  of  New  Babylon  joyneth  upon  New  Babylon.
the  aforsayd  small  desert  where  the  Olde  city  was,  and
the  river  of  Tigris  runneth  close  under  the  wall,  and  ^^^  p^^''
they  may  if  they  will  open  a  sluce,  and  let  the  water  ^^S^"-
of  the  same  runne  round  about  the  towne.  It  is  above
two  English  miles  in  compasse,  and  the  inhabitants
generally  speake  three  languages,  to  wit,  the  Persian,
Arabian  and  Turkish  tongues :  the  people  are  of  the
Spaniards  complexion :  and  the  women  generally  weare
in  one  of  the  gristles  of  their  noses  a  ring  like  a  wed-  [II.  i.  270.]
ding  ring,  but  somewhat  greater,  with  a  pearle  and  a
Turkish  stone  set  therein :  and  this  they  do  be  they
never  so  poore.

This is a place  of  very great traffique,  and  a  very
great  thorowfare  from  the  East  Indies  to  Aleppo. The
towne  is  very  well furnished  with  victuals  which  come
downe  the  river  of  Tigris  from  Mosul  which  was  called
Ninive  in  olde time. They bring these victuals and
divers sorts of marchandises upon rafts borne upon  Rafts  borne
goats  skins blowen up  ful  of  wind in  maner  of  blad-  '^^"^  bladders
ders. And  when  they  have  discharged  their  goods,  they ^
sel  the  rafts  for  fire,  and  let  the  wind  out  of  their  goats

5

A.D,
1583-

Seldome  rain.

Eight  y
twenty  dayes
journey  more
by  7-wer,from
Babylon  to
Bahara.

Curna  Castle.

Bahara.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

skins,  and  cary  them  home  againe  upon  their  asses  by-
land,  to  make  other  voyages  downe  the  river.  The
building  here  is  most  of  bricke  dried  in  the  Sun,  and
very  litle  or  no  stone  is  to  be  found :  their  houses  are
all  flat-roofed  and  low.  They  have  no  raine  for  eight
moneths  together,  nor  almost  any  clouds  in  the  skie,
night  nor  day.  Their  Winter  is  in  November,  Decem-
ber, January  and  February,  which  is  as  warme  as  our
Summer  in  England  in  a  maner.  This  I  know  by  good
experience,  because  my  abode  at  severall  times  in  this
city  of  Babylon  hath  bene  at  the  least  the  space  of  two
yeres.  As  we  come  to  the  city,  we  passe  over  the  river
of  Tigris  on  a  great  bridge  made  with  boats  chained
together  with  two  mighty  chaines  of  yron.  From
thence  we  departed  in  flat  bottomed  barks  more  strong
&  greater  then  those  of  Euphrates,  and  were  eight  and
twenty  dayes  also  in  passing  downe  this  river  to  Balsara,
but  we  might  have  done  it  in  eighteene  or  lesse,  if  the
water  had  bene  higher.  Upon  the  waters  side  stand  by
the  way  divers  townes  resembling  much  the  names  of
the  olde  prophets :  the  first  towne  they  call  Ozeah,  &
another  Zecchiah.  Before  we  come  to  Balsara  by  one
dayes  journey,  the  two  rivers  of  Tigris  and  Euphrates
meet,  and  there  standeth  a  castle  called  Curna,  kept  by
the  Turks,  where  all  marchants  pay  a  small  custome.
Here  the  two  rivers  joyned  together  begin  to  be  eight
or  nine  miles  broad :  here  also  it  bemnneth  to  ebbe  and
flow,  and  the  water  overflowing  maketh  the  countrey
all  about  very  fertile  of  corne,  rice,  pulse,  and  dates.
The  towne  of  Balsara  is  a  mile  and  an  halfe  in  circuit :  all
the  buildings,  castle  and  wals,  are  made  of  bricke  dried
in  the  Sun.  The  Turke  hath  here  five  hundred  Jani-
saries,  besides  other  souldiers  continually  in  garison  and
pay,  but  his  chiefe  strength  is  of  gallies  which  are  about
five  and  twenty  or  thirty  very  faire  and  furnished  with
goodly  ordinance.  To  this  port  of  Balsara  come
monethly  divers  ships  from  Ormuz,  laden  with  all  sorts
of  Indian marchandise, as spices, drugs, Indico and

6

JOHN ELDRED  a.i>.

1584.
Calecut  cloth. These ships are usually from forty  to
threescore  tunnes, having their planks sowed together
with  corde made of  the barke of Date  trees,  and in
stead  of  Occam they use the  shiverings of  the barke
of the sayd trees, and of the same they also make
their tackling. They have no kinde of  yron worke  ^^^P^  ^^^^
belonging to these vessels, save only their ankers.  ^^' "^O"""
From this place six dayes sailing downe the gulfe,  p.^/^_
they go  to  a  place  called  Baharem  in  the mid way to
Ormus :  there  they  fish  for  pearles  foure  moneths  in  the
yere, to wit, in June, July, August, and September.
My  abode  in  Balsara  was  just  sixe  moneths,  during  which
time  I received  divers  letters  from M.  John Newbery
from Ormus, who as he passed that way with her
Majesties  letters  to  Zelabdim  Echebar  king  of  Cambaia,  Zelabdim
&  unto  the  mighty  emperour  of  China,  was  traiterously  Echebar  ktng
there  arrested,  and  all  his  company,  by  the  Portugals,  and
afterward  sent  prisoner  to  Goa :  where  after  a  long  and
cruell  imprisonment  he  and  his  companions  were  delivered
upon  sureties,  not  to  depart  the  towne  without  leave,  at
the  sute  of  one  father  Thomas Stevens  an  English  re-
ligious man,  which  they  found  there : but  shortly  after
three of  them  escaped,  whereof  one, to  wit,  M.  Ralph
Fitch,  is  since  come  into  England. The  fourth,  which
was  a  painter  called  John  Story,  became  religious  in  the
college of  S. Paul in Goa,  as we  understood by  their
letters. I  and  my  companion  William  Shales  having  dis-  ^^  retumeth
patched  our  businesse  at  Balsara,  imbarked  our  selves  in  -^^^^^^i  ^/^^^
company of  seventy  barks all  laden with marchandise,
having every barke 14 men to draw them,  like our
Westerne  bargemen  on  the  Thames,  and  we  were  forty
foure  dayes  comming  up  against  the  streame  to  Babylon,
where  arriving  and  paying  our  custome,  we  with  all  other
sorts  of  marchants  bought  us  camels,  hired  us  men  to
lade and drive them, furnished our selves with rice,  T^heir provi-
butter, bisket,  hony made of  dates,  onions and  dates :  ^^°.^.  ^-^ ,

1  11  1  •  c  \-  victuals.

and  every  marchant  bought  a  proportion  or  hve  muttons,
and  hired  certaine  shepheards  to  drive  them  with  us :  we

7

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

also bought us tents to lie in,  and to put  our  goods
A  Caravan  of  under : and in this our caravan were foure thousand
fouie  t  ousand  camels  laden with spices and other  rich marchandises.
These  camels  will  live  very  well  two  or  three  daycs  with-
out  water : their feeding is on thistles, wormewood,
magdalene,  and  other  strong  weeds  which  they  finde  upon
the  way. The  government  and  deciding  of  all quarels
and  dueties  to  be  payed,  the  whole  caravan  committeth
to  one  speciall  rich  marchant  of  the  company,  of  whose
honesty  they  conceive  best. In  passing  from  Babylon  to
Aleppo,  we  spent  forty  dayes,  travelling  twenty,  or  foure
and  twenty  miks  a  day,  resting  ourselves  commonly  from
two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  wntil  three  in  the
morning,  at  which  time  we begin  to  take  our  journey.
Eight  dayes  journey  from  Babylon  toward  Aleppo,  neere
[II.  i.  271.] unto  a  towne  called  Heit,  as  we  crosse  the  river  Euphrates
by  boates,  about  3.  miles  from  the  town  there  is  a  valley
wherein  are many  springs throwing out  abundantly  at
great  mouths,  a  kind  of  blacke  substance  like  unto  tarre,
which serveth all the countrey to make stanch their
barkes  and  boates : every  one  of  these  springs  maketh
a  noise  like  unto  a  Smiths  forge  in  the  blowing  &  puffing
out  of  this  matter,  which  never ceaseth night  nor  day,
and  the  noise  may  be  heard  a  mile  off  continually. This
vale  swaloweth  up  all  heavie  things  that  come  upon  it.
The  people  of  the  countrey  cal  it  in  their  language  Babil
gehenham, that  is to say, Hell doore. As  we  passed
through these  deserts, we  saw certaine  wild beasts,  as
wild  asses  all  white. Roebucks,  wolfes, leopards, foxes,
and many  hares,  whereof  we chased and killed many.
Aborise the king of  the wandring  Arabians in these
deserts,  hath  a  dutie  of  40. s.  sterling,  upon  every  Camels
lode, which he sendeth his officers to receive  of  the
Caravans, and  in consideration hereof, he taketh  upon
him  to  conduct  the  sayd  Caravans  if  they  need  his  helpe,
and to defend them against  certaine prowling thieves.
I and  my companion William Shales came to Aleppo
with  the  Caravan  the  eleventh  of  June,  1584.  where  we

JOHN ELDRED

JOHN ELDRED  a.d.

1588.

were  joyfully  received  20.  miles  distant  from  the  towne

by  M.  William  Barret  our  ConsuU,  accompanied  with  his  William  Bat-

people  and  Janissaries,  who fell sicke immediately  and  ^^^"'"^^'■^^

departed  this  life  within  8.  dayes  after,  and  elected  before  u  Wil.Bar-

his  death  M.  Anthonie  Bate  Consul  of  our  English  nation  ret.

in  his  place,  who  laudably  supplied the  same  roome  3.

yeeres. In  which  meane  time,  I  made  two  voyages  more  ^^^^  voiages

unto  Babylon,  and  returned  by  the  way  aforesayd,  over  ^^'J  ^^^^^  ^°

the  deserts  of  Arabia. And  afterwards,  as  one  desirous

to  see  other  parts  of  the  countrey,  I  went  from  Aleppo

to  Anti-och,  which  is  thence  60.  English  miles,  and  from

thence went downe to  Tripolis,  where  going  aboord  a

small  vessell,  I  arrived  at  Joppe,  and  travelled  to  Rama,

Lycia,  Gaza,  Jerusalem,  Bethleem,  to  the  river  of  Jordan,

and  the  sea  or  lake  of  Zodome,  and  returned  backe  to

Joppe,  &  from  thence  by  sea  to  Tripolis,  of  which  places

because  many  others  have  published  large  discourses,  I

surcease  to  write. Within  few  dayes  after  imbarking  my

selfe  at  Tripolis  the  22.  of  December,  I  arrived  (God  be

thanked) in safety  here in the river of  Thames with

divers  English  marchants, the 26. of  March, 1588, in

the  Hercules  of  London,  which  was  the  richest ship  of

English  marchants  goods  that  ever  was  knowen  to  come

into  this  realme.

[The  money

A.D.

1584.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  money  and  measures  of  Babylon,  Balsara,  and
the  Indies,  with  the  customes,  &c.  written
from  Aleppo  in  Syria,  An.  1584.  by  M.  WilL
Barret.

BABYLON:

The weight,  measure,  and money  currant there,  and
the  customes  of  merchandize.

Mana  of  Babylon  is  of  Aleppo  i  roue
5  ounces  and  a  halfe :  and  68  manas  and
three  seventh  parts,  make  a  quintall  of
Aleppo,  which  is  494  li.  8  ounces  of
London:  and  100  manas  is  a  quintall
of  Babylon,  which  maketh  in  Aleppo  146
roues,  and  of  London  722  li.  and  so
much  is  the  sayd  quintall :  but  the  marchants  accord  is
by  so  much  the  mana,  and  in  the  sayd  place  they  bate
the  tare  in  all  sorts  of  commodities,  according  to  the
order  of  Aleppo  touching  the  tare.

The  measure  of  Babylon  is  greater  then  that  of  Aleppo
21  in  ye  100.  For  bringing  100  pikes  of  any  measurable
ware  from  Aleppo  thither,  there  is  found  but  82  pikes
in  Babylon,  so  that  the  100  pikes  of  Babylon  is  of  Aleppo
121  pikes,  very  litle  lesse.

The  currant  mony  of  Babylon  are  Saies,  which. Say  is
5  medines,  as  in  Aleppo,  and  40  medines  being  8  Saies
make  a  duckat  currant,  and  47  medines  passe  in  value
as  the  duckat  of  gold  of  Venice,  and  the  dollars  of  the
best  sort  are  worth  33  medines.  The  roials  of  plate  are
sold  by  the  100  drams  at  prise,  according  as  they  be  in
request :  but  amongst  the  marchants  they  bargaine  by
the  100  metrals,  which  are  150  drams  of  Aleppo,  which
150  drams  are  135  single  roials  of  plate:  but  in  the  mint
or  castle,  they  take  them  by  the  100  drams,  which  is  90
roials  of  plate,  and  those  of  the  mint  give  5  medines
lesse  in  each 100  drams  then  they  are  woorth  to  be  sold

10

THE MONEY OF BUSSORAH  ad.

1584.
among  the  marchants,  and  make  paiment  at  the  terme  of
40  dayes  in  Sayes.

The  custome  in  Babylon,  as  wel  inward  as  outward,
is  in  this  maner :  Small  wares  at  6  per  100,  Coral  and
amber  at  5  and  a  halfe  per  100,  Venice  cloth,  English
cloth,  Kersies,  Mockairs,  Chamblets,  Silks,  Velvets,
Damasks,  Sattins  &  such  like  at  5  per  100  :  &  they
rate  the  goods  without  reason  as  they  lust  themselves.
The  Toafo,  Boabo,  and  other  exactions  6  medines  per
bale,  all  which  they  pay  presently  in  ready  mony,  accord-
ing to  the  custome  and  use  of  the  emperor.

To  the  Ermin  of  the  mint  ye  ordinarie  use  is  to  give
30  Sales  in  curtesie,  otherwise  he  would  by  authoritie
of  his  office  come  aboord,  &  for  despight  make  such
search  in  the  barke,  that  he  would  turne  all  things  topsie
turvie.

BALSARA:  [ii.  i.  z;^]

The  weight, measure, and money in the citie of

Balsara.

AMana  of  Balsara  answereth  5  roues  2  ounces  &  a
halfe  of  Aleppo  weight,  &  1 9  manas  and  one  4  part
of  Balsara,  answereth  the  quintall  of  Aleppo,  which  is
494  roues,  8  ounces  English,  and  20  manas  is  the  quintall
of  Balsara,  which  is  104  Alepine,  and  of  London  514
li.  8.  ounces,  and  so  much  is  the  sayd  quintall,  but  the
marchants  bargaine  at  so  much  the  mana  or  wolsene
(which  is  all  one)  and  they  abate  the  tare  in  every  mana,
as  the  sort  of  spice  is,  and  the  order  taken  therefore  in
that  place.

The  measure  of  Balsara  is  called  a  pike,  which  is  just
as  the  measure  of  Babylon,  to  say,  100  pikes  of  Balsara
make  of  Aleppo  121  pikes,  ut  supra  in  the  rate  of
Babylon.

The  currant  mony  of  Balsara  is  as  foloweth.  There
is  a  sort  of  jflusses  of  copper  called  Estivi,  whereof  12
make  a  mamedine,  which  is  the  value  of  one  medine
Aleppine, the  said mamedine is of  silver, having the

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

Moresco  stampe  on  both  sides,  and  two  of  these  make
a  danine,  which  is  2 medines  Aleppine.

The  said  danine  is  of  silver,  having  the  Turkesco
stampe  on  both  sides,  &  2  and  a  halfe  of  these  make
a  Saie,  which  is  in  value  as  the  Saie  of  Aleppo.

The  said  Saie  is  of  the  similitude  and  stampe  of
Aleppo,  being  (as  appeares)  60  estives.  Also  one  Say
and  20  estives  make  a  larine,  which  is  of  Aleppo
money  6  medines  and  a  halfe.

The  sayd  larine  is  a  strange  piece  of  money,  not
being  round  as  all  other  currant  money  in  Christianitie,
but  is  a  small  rod  of  silver  of  the  greatnesse  of  the
pen  of  a  goose  feather,  wherewith  we  use  to  write,  and
in  length  about  one  eight  part  thereof,  which  is
wrested,  so  that  the  two  ends  meet  at  the  just  halfe
part,  and  in  the  head  thereof  is  a  stampe  Turkesco,
and  these  be  the  best  currant  money  in  all  the  Indias,
and  6  of  these  larines  make  a  duckat,  which  is  40
medines  or  eight  Saies  of  Aeppo.

The  duckat  of  gold  is  woorth  there  7  larines,  and
one  danine,  which  is  of  Aleppo  money  48  medines  and
a  halfe.

The  Venetian  money  is  worth  larines  88  per  100
meticals, which  is 150  drams  of  Aleppo,  ut  supra.

The  roials  of  plate  are  worth  88  larines  by  the  100
meticals,  &  albeit  among  the  marchants  they  sel  by  the
100  meticals,  yet  in  the  mint  or  castle,  they  sel  by  the
TOO  drams,  having  there  lesse  then  the  worth  5  medines
in  each  hundred  drams,  and  have  their  paiment  in  40
dayes  made  them  in  Saies  or  larines.

The  custome  of  the  said  places,  aswell  inward  as
outward,  are  alike  of  all  sorts  of  goods,  to  say  6  by
the  100,  and  Toafo,  Boabo,  &  scrivan  medines  6  by
the  bale  inward  &  outward,  to  say,  3  inward,  and  as
much  outward :  but  who  so  leaveth  his  goods  in  the
custome  house  paieth  nothing,  where  otherwise  at  the
taking  thereof  away,  he  should  pay  3  med.  by  the  bale,
and  of  the said goods  there is no  other duty to  pay.

THE MONEY OF BUSSORAH  a.d.

1584.
and  this  commeth  to  passe  when  the  customers  esteeme
the  goods  too  high.  For  in  such  a  case  they  may  be
driven  to  take  so  much  commoditie  as  the  custome
amounteth  to,  and  not  to  pay  them  in  money,  for  such
is  the  order  from  the  Grand  Signior.

Having  paid  the  custome,  it  behoveth  to  have  a
quittance  or  cocket  sealed  and  firmed  with  the  cus-
tomers hand,  in  confirmation  of  the  dispatch  and  clear-
ing, and  before  departure  thence,  to  cause  the  sayd
customer  to  cause  search  to  be  made,  to  the  end  that
at  the  voiages  returne  there  be  no  cavillation  made,  as
it  oftentimes  happeneth.

Note  that  100  meticals  of  Balsara  weigh  17  ounces
and  a  halfe  sottile  Venetian,  and  of  Aleppo  drams  150,
ut  supra.

The  fraight  of  the  barkes  from  Ormuz  to  Balsara,  I
would  sa^  from  Balsara  to  Ormuz,  they  pay  according
to  the  greatnesse  thereof.  To  say,  for  cariage  of  10
cares  180  larines,  those  of  15  cares  270  larines,  those
of  20  cares  360  larines,  those  of  30  cares  540  larines.
Note  that  a  cara  is  4  quintals  of  Balsara.  They  pay
also  to  the  pilot  of  the  barke  for  his  owne  cariage  one
care,  and  to  all  the  rest  of  the  mariners  amongst  them
3  cares  fraight,  which  is  in  the  whole  4  cares,  and
paying  the  abovesayd  prises  and  fraights,  they  are  at  no
charges  of  victuals  with  them,  but  it  is  requisite  that
the  same  be  declared  in  the  charter  partie,  with  the
condition  that  they  lade  not  aboord  one  rotilo  more
then  the  fraight,  under  paines  that  finding  more  in
Ormuz,  it  is  forfeit,  and  besides  that  to  pay  the  fraight
of  that  which  they  have  laden.

And  in  this  accord  it  behoveth  to  deale  warilie,  and
in  the  presence  of  the  Ermin  or  some  other  honest
man  (whereof  there  are  but  few)  for  they  are  the  worst
people  in  all  Arabia.  And  this  diligence  must  be  put
in  execution,  to  the  end  the  barks  may  not  be  over-
laden, because  they  are  to  passe  many  sands  betwixt
Balsara  and  Ormuz.

13

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

[II.  i.  273.]  ORMUZ  :

The  weight,  measure,  and  money  currant  in  the
kingdom  of  Ormuz :

[Pices  and  drugs  they  weigh  by  the  bar,  and  of  every
sort  of  goods  the  weight  is  different.  To  say,  of
some  drugs  3  quintals,  and  3  erubi  or  roues,  and  other
some  4  quintals  25  rotiloes,  and  yet  both  is  called  a
barre,  which  barre,  as  well  great  as  litle,  is  20  frasoli,
and  every  frasoli  is  10  manas,  and  every  mana  23
chiansi,  and  every  chianso  10  meticals  and  a  halfe.  Note
that  every  quintall  maketh  4  erubi  or  roues,  and  every
What  a  rotilo  roue  3  2  rotiloes,  &  every  rotilo  1 6  ounces,  and  every
"'  ounce 7 meticals, so that the  quintall commeth  to  be

128  rotiloes,  which  is  Aleppine  26  rotiloes  and  one
third  part,  which  is  132  li.  english  weight.  And  con-
trarywise  ye  quintal  of  Aleppo  (which  is  494  rotiloes
8  ounces  english)  maketh  477  rotiloes  and  a  halfe  of
Ormuz,  which  is  3  quintals  2  roues,  29  rotiloes  and  a
halfe.

Note  that  there  are  bars  of  divers  weights,  ut  supra,
of  which  they  bargaine  simply,  according  to  the  sort  of
commoditie,  but  if  they  bargaine  of  the  great  barre,  the
same  is  7  quintals  and  24  rotiloes,  which  is  958  li.  9
ounces  of  London  weight,  and  of  Aleppo  193  rotiloes
and  a  halfe.

Touching  the  money  of  Ormuz,  they  bargaine  in
marchandize  at  so  many  leches  by  the  barre,  which  lech
is  100  Asaries,  and  maketh  larines  100  &  a  halfe,
which  maketh  pardaos  38,  &  larines  one  halfe,  at  larines
5  by  the  pardao.  One  asarie  is  sadines  10,  and  every
sadine  is 100.  danarie.

The  larine  is  worth  5  sadines  and  one  fourth  part,
so  that  the  sadine  is  worth  of  Aleppo  mony  i  medine
and  I  fourth  part,  &  the  larine  as  in  Balsara  worth  of
Aleppo  mony  6  medines  &  a  half.

The  pardao  is 5  larines  of  Balsara.

There  is  also  stamped  in  Ormuz  a  seraphine  of  gold,

14

THE MONEY OF ORMUZ  ad.

1584.
which is litle and round, and is worth 24 sadines,
v/hich  maketh  30  medines  of  Aleppo.

The  Venetian  mony  is  worth  in  Ormuz  larines  88
per  100  meticals,  &  the  roials  are  worth  larines  86
lesse  one  sadine,  which  is  every  thousand  meticals,  382
asures :  but  those  that  will  not  sel  them,  use  to  melt
them,  and  make  them  so  many  larines  in  the  king  of
Ormuz  his  mint,  whereby  they  cleare  2  per  100,  and
somewhat  more :  and  this  they  doe  because  neither
Venetian  money  nor  roials  run  as  currant  in  Ormuz,
per  advise.

The  measure  of  Ormuz  is  of  2  sorts,  the  one  called
codo  which  increaseth  upon  the  measure  of  Aleppo  3
per  100,  for  bringing  100  pikes  of  any  measurable
wares  from  Aleppo  to  Ormuz,  it  is  found  in  Ormuz  to
be  103  codes.  Also  these  measures  of  Ormuz  increase
upon  those  of  Balsara  and  Babylon  25  and  two  third
parts  per  100:  for  bringing  100  pikes  of  any  measurable
wares  from  Balsara  or  Babylon,  there  is  found  in  Ormuz
125  codes  and  two  third  parts.

The  other  measure  is  called  a  vare,  which  was  sent
from  the  king  of  Portugall  to  the  India,  by  which  they
sell  things  of  small  value,  which  measure  is  of  5  palmes
or  spans,  and  is  one  code  and  two  third  parts,  so  that
buying  100  codes  of  any  measurable  wares,  and  return-
ing to  measure  it  by  the  sayd  vare,  there  are  found  but
60  vares,  contrary  wise  100  vares  make  166  codes  and
two  third  parts.

Note  that  al  such  ships  as  lade  horses  in  Ormuz  for
Goa  or  any  other  place  of  India,  lading  10  horses  or
upwards,  in  what  places  soever  the  said  horses  be  taken
a  shore  in  the  India,  the  marchandize  which  is  to  be
discharged  out  of  that  ship  wherein  the  said  horses
come,  are  bound  to  pay  no  custome  at  all,  but  if  they
lade  one  horse  lesse  then  ten,  then  the  goods  are  bound
to  pay  the  whole  custome.  And  this  law  was  made  by
Don  Emanuel  king  of  Portugall,  but  it  is  to  be  dili-
gently foreseene,  whither  all  those  horses  laden  be  bound

15

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

to  pay  the  king  his  custome  :  for  many  times  by  the
king  of  Portugall  his  commandement,  there  is  favour
shewed  to  the  king  of  Cochin  his  brother  in  armes,  so
that  his  horses  that  come  in  the  same  ship,  are  not  to
answere  custome.  As  for  example  :  If  there  were  4
horses  laden  in  one  ship,  all  which  were  to  pay  custome
to  the  king,  and  one  other  of  the  king  of  Cochins
which  were  not  to  pay  any  custome,  the  same  causeth
all  the  marchandize  of  that  ship  to  be  subject  to  pay
custome,  per  advise.  But  if  they  lade  ten  horses  upon
purpose  to  pay  the  king  his  custome  in  Goa,  and  in
the  voyage  any  of  them  should  die  in  that  case,  if  they
bring  the  taile  of  the  dead  horse  to  the  custome  in
Goa,  then  the  marchandize  is  free  from  all  custome,
because  they  were  laden  in  Ormuz  to  pay  custome  in
Goa.  Moreover,  if  the  horses  should  die  before  the
midst  of  the  voyage,  they  pay  no  custome  at  all,
and  if  they  die  in  the  mids  of  the  voyage,  then
they  pay  halfe  custome,  but  if  any  horse  die  after
the  mid  voiage,  they  pay  custome  no  lesse  then  if
they  arrive  safe.  Notwithstanding,  the  merchandize
(whether  the  said  horses  die  before  or  in  the  mid
voyage  or  after  the  mid  voiage)  are  free  from  all
custome.

The  custome  of  Ormuz  is  eleven  in  the  100,  to  say,
10  for  the  king,  and  i  for  the  arming  of  the  foists:  but
for  small  wares  as  glasses,  and  looking  glasses  of  all  sorts,
and  such  like,  made  for  apparell,  pay  no  custome.  But
cloth  of  Wooll,  Karsies,  Mockaires,  Chamlets,  and  all
[11.  i,  274.]  sortes  of  Silke,  Saffron,  and  such  like,  pay  custome,  being
esteemed  reasonably.

There  is  also  another  custome,  which  they  call  caida,
which  is,  that  one  bringing  his  goods  into  Ormuz,  with
purpose  to  send  ye  same  further  into  India,  the  same  are
bound  to  pay  3  by  the  100,  but  none  other  are  bound
to  pay  this  custome,  except  the  Armenians,  Moores,  and
Jewes :  for  the  Portugals  and  Venetians  pay  nothing
thereof.

16

THE EMPEROR  AKBAR

THE MONEY OF GOA  a.d.

1584.

Note  y'  in  Ormuz  they  abate  tare  of  all  sorts  of  com-
modities, by  an  order  observed  of  custome.

The  fraight  from  Ormuz  to  Chaul,  Goa,  and  Cochin,
is  as  foloweth :  Mokaires  larines  6  per  table  of  60  pikes.
Aquariosa  8  larines  by  ordinarie  chist,  raisins  10  by  chist,
which  is  a  quintall  of  roues  128.  Ruvia  of  Chalangi
larines  10  per  quintall,  glasses  larines  8  per  chist,  of
4  foote  and  a  halfe,  glasses  in  great  chists  14  &  15
larines  by  chist.  Small  wares  larines  1 2  by  chist  of  five
foot.  Tamari  for  Maschat  sadines  2  and  a  half,  and
3  by  the  fardle.  Tamarie  for  Diu  and  Chaul  4  sadines,
and  4  and  a  halfe  by  bale.  Other  drugs  and  things
which  come  from  Persia  pay  according  to  the  greatnesse
of  the  bales.

The  fraight  mentioned,  they  pay  as  appeareth,  when
they  ship  the  sayd  goods  in  ships  where  horses  goe :
otherwise  not  having  horses,  they  pay  somewhat  lesse,
because  of  the  custom  which  they  are  to  pay.

The  use  of  the  India  ships  is,  that  the  patrones  thereof
are  not  at  any  charge  neither  with  any  passenger,  nor  yet
with  any  mariner  in  the  ship,  but  that  every  one  at  the
beginning  of  the  voyage  doe  furnish  to  maintaine  his
owne  table  (if  he  will  eate)  and  for  drinke  they  have
a  great  Jarre  of  water,  which  is  garded  with  great
custodie.

GOA.

The  weight,  measure,  and  mony  currant  in  Goa.

THe  quintall  of  Goa  is  5  manas,  and  8  larines,  &  the
mana  is  24  rotilos,  so  that  the  quintall  of  Goa  is
128  rot.  and  every  rot.  is  16  ounces,  which  is  of  Venice
weight  I  li.  and  a  halfe,  so  that  the  quintall  of  Goa  is  192
li.  sotile  Venice,  which  is  26  rotiloes  8  ounces  Aleppine,
and  of  London  weight  132  li.  English,  as  the  weight  of
Ormuz.

All  the  marchandize,  spices  and  drugs,  are  sold  by  this
quintal,  except  some  drugs,  as  lignum  de  China,  Galanga,
&  others,  whereof  they  bargaine  at  so  much  per  candill,
VI  17  B

A.D.
1584.

ISIote  that  4
7-oues  make  a
quintall.

Muske  ofTar-
tar'te  by  ye
way  af  China.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

advertising  that  there  be  two  sorts  of  candill,  one  of  1 6
manas,  the  other  of  20  manas,  that  of  1 6  manas  commeth
to  be  just  3  quintals,  and  that  of  20  manas,  3  quintals,
3  roues.  Note  that  4  roues  make  a  quintall,  and  the
roue  is  32  rotiloes,  as  in  Ormuz.

There  is  also  another  weight  which  they  call  Marco,
which  is  eight  ounces  or  halfe  a  rotilo  of  Goa,  &  9  ounces
of  Venice  sotile :  with  this  they  weigh  amber,  corall,
muske,  ambracan,  civet,  and  other  fine  wares.

There  is  also  another  sort  of  weight  called  Man-
giallino,  which  is  5  graines  of  Venice  weight  and
therewith  they  weigh  diamants  and  other  jewels.

Note  that  in  Goa  they  use  not  to  abate  any  tare  of  any
goods,  except  of  sacks  or  wraps,  &  therfore  it  requireth
great  advisement  in  buying  of  the  goods,  especially  in  the
muske  of  Tartaria  which  commeth  by  way  of  China  in
bladders,  and  so  weigh  it  without  any  tare  rebating.

The  measure  of  Goa  is  called  a  tode,  which  encreaseth
upon  the  measure  of  Babylon  &  Balsara  after  the  rate  of
17  &  one  eight  part  by  the  100,  so  that  bringing  100
pikes  of  any  measurable  ware  from  thence  to  Goa,  it  is
found  117  pikes  7  eight  parts,  and  bringing  100  codes
from  Ormuz  to  Goa,  there  is  found  but  93  codes  and
one  fourth  part.

There  is  also  the  vare  in  Goa,  which  is  just  as  the  vare
of  Ormuz,  and  therewith  they  measure  onely  things  that
are  of  small  value.

For  the  mony  of  Goa,  there  is  a  kind  of  mony  made
of  lead  and  tin  mingled,  being  thicke  and  round,  and
stamped  on  the  one  side  with  the  spheare  or  globe  of
the  world,  and  on  the  other  side  two  arrowes  &
5  rounds :  and  this  kind  of  mony  is  called  Basaruchi,
and  15 of  these  make  a  vinton  of  naughty  mony, and

5  vintons  make  a  tanga,  and  4  vintenas  make  a  tanga  of
base  money :  so  that  the  tanga  of  base  mony  is  60
basaruchies,  and  the  tanga  of  good  mony  75  basaruchies,

6  5  tangas  make  a  seraphine  of  gold,  which  in  marchan-
dize  is  worth 5 tangas  good  money : but  if  one  would

THE MONEY OF GOA  ad.

1584.
change  them  Into  basaruchies,  he  may  have  5  tangas,
and  16  basaruchies,  which  overplus  they  cal  cerafagio,  &
when  they  bargain  of  the  pardaw  of  gold,  each  pardaw  is
ment  to  be  6  tangas  good  mony,  but  in  marchandize  they
use  not  to  demaund  pardawes  of  gold  in  Goa,  except  it
be  for  jewels  and  horses,  for  all  the  rest  they  take  of
seraphins  of  silver,  per  adviso.

The  roials  of  plate,  I  say,  the  roial  of  8  are  worth  per
custome  &  commandement  of  the  king  of  Portugall  400
reies,  and  every  rey  is  one  basaruchie  &  one  fourth  part,
which  maketh  tangas  6,  and  53  basaruchies  as  their  just  [II.  i.  275.]
value,  but  for  that  the  said  roials  are  excellent  silver  and
currant  in  divers  places  of  the  India,  and  chiefly  in
Malacca,  when  the  ships  are  to  depart  at  their  due  times
(called  Monsons)  every  one  to  have  the  said  roials  pay
more  then  they  are  worth,  &  the  overplus,  as  is  above-
said  they  call  serafagio.  And  first  they  give  ye  just  value
of  the  100  roials  of  8,  and  5  tangas  50  basaruchies  a
piece,  which  done,  they  give  seraphins  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,
12,  15,  untill  22  by  the  100,  according  as  they  are  in
request.

The  duckat  of  gold  is  v/orth  9  tangas  and  a  halfe  good
money,  and  yet  not  stable  in  price,  for  that  when  the
ships  depart  from  Goa  to  Cochin,  they  pay  them  at
9  tangas  and  3  fourth  partes,  and  10  tangas,  and  that  is
the  most  that  they  are  woorth.

The  larines  are  woorth  by  just  value  basaruchies  93
and  3  fourth  parts,  and  4  larines  make  a  seraphine  of
silver,  which  is  5  tangas  of  good  money,  and  these  also
have  serafagion  of  6,  7,  8,  10,  untill  16,  by  the  100,  for
when  the  ships  depart  for  the  North,  to  say,  for  Chaul,
Diu,  Cambaia,  or  Bassaim,  all  cary  of  the  same,  because
it  is  money  more  currant  then  any  other.

There  is  also  a  sort  of  seraphins  of  gold  of  the  stampe
of  Ormuz,  whereof  there  are  but  fewe  in  Goa,  but  being
there,  they  are  woorth  five  larines  and  somewhat  more,
according  as  they  are  in  request.

There  is  also  another  litle  sort  of  mony,  round,  having

19

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

on  the  one  side  a  crosse,  and  on  the  other  side  a  crowne,
which  is  woorth  one  halfe  a  tanga  of  good  money,  and
another  of  the  same  stampe  lesse  then  that  which  they
call  Imitivo  de  buona  moneda,  which  is  worth  18  basa-
ruches  3 fourth  parts  a  piece.

Note  that  if  a  man  bargaine  in  marchandize,  it  behoo-
veth  to  demaund  tangas  of  good  money :  for  by
nominating  tangas  onely,  is  understood  to  be  base
money  of  60  basaruches,  which  wanteth  of  the  good
money  ut  supra.

The  custome  of  Goa  is  8  in  the  100  inward,  and  as
much  outward,  and  the  goods  are  esteemed  justly  rather
to  the  marchants  advantage  then  the  kings.  The  custome
they  pay  in  this  order.  Comming  with  a  ship  from
Ormuz  to  Goa  without  horses,  they  pay  8  in  the  100
whether  they  sell  part  or  all,  but  if  they  would  carie  of
the  sayd  marchandise  to  any  other  place,  they  pay
none  other  custome,  except  others  buy  it  and  carie  it
foorth  of  the  countrey,  and  then  they  pay  it  8  in  the  100.
And  if  one  having  paied  the  custome  should  sell  to
another  with  composition  to  passe  it  forth  as  for  his
proper  accounts  to  save  the  custome,  this  may  not  be,
because  the  seller  is  put  to  his  oth,  whether  he  send  the
goods  for  his  owne  account,  or  for  the  account  of  any
others  that  have  bought  the  same,  and  being  found  to
the  contrary,  they  pay  custome  as  abovesaid.  And  in
this  order  the  marchants  pay  of  all  the  goods  which  come
from  any  part  of  the  Indies.  But  if  they  come  from
Ormuz  to  Goa  with  horses,  they  are  not  subject  to  pay
any  custome  inward,  notwithstanding  if  they  send  all
or  any  part  thereof  for  any  other  place,  or  returne  it  to
Ormuz,  they  pay  the  custome  outward,  although  they
could  not  sell.

They  use  also  in  Goa  amongst  the  common  sort  to
bargaine  for  coales,  wood,  lime  &  such  like,  at  so  many
braganines,  accounting  24  basaruches  for  one  braganine,
albeit  there  is  no  such  mony  stamped.  The  custome  of
the Portugals is, that  any  Moore or Gentile, of  what

THE MONEY OF MALACCA  a.d.

1584.
condition  or  state  soever  he  be,  may  not  depart  from
Goa  to  go  within  the  land,  without  licence  of  certaine
deputies  deputed  for  that  office,  who  (if  they  be  Moores
or  Gentiles)  doe  set  a  scale  upon  the  arme,  having
thereon  the  armes  of  Portugal,  to  be  knowen  of  the
porters  of  the  citie,  whether  they  have  the  said  licence
or  no.

COCHIN.

The  weight,  measure,  and  money,  currant  in  Cochin.

A  LI  the  marchandise  which  they  sell  or  buy  within
the  sayd  citie,  they  bargaine  for  it  at  so  many
serafines  per  quintal,  which  is  128.  rotilos  of  just  weight
with  ye  quintall  &  rotilo  of  Goa  and  Ormuz :  advertis-
ing that  there  are  divers  sorts  of  bars  according  to  the
sorts  of  commodities,  and  in  traffiquing,  they  reason  at
so  much  the  bar.  Note  that  there  are  bars  of  3  quintals
&  3  quintals  and  halfe,  and  4  quintals.  They  abate  a
used  tare  of  all  marchandize,  according  to  the  sort  of
goods,  and  order  taken  for  the  same.

The  measure  of  Goa  and  Cochin  are  all  one.

The  money  of  Cochin  are  all  the  same  sorts  which
are  currant  in  Goa,  but  the  duckat  of  gold  in  value  is
10  tangas  of  good  money.

The  custome  of  Cochin  as  wel  inward  as  outward  for
all  strangers,  is  eight  in  the  hundred,  but  those  that
have  bene  married  foure  yeere  in  the  countrey  pay  but
foure  in  the  hundred,  per  adviso.

MALACCA.  [II.  i.  276.]

The  weight,  measure,  and  money  of  Malacca.

FOr  the  marchandise  bought  and  sold  in  the  citie
they  reckon  at  so  much  the  barre,  which  barre  is
of  divers  sorts,  great  and  small,  according  to  the  ancient
custome  of  the  said  citie,  &  diversitie  of  the  goods.
But  for  the  cloves  they  bargaine  at  so  much  the  barre,
which  barre  is  3  quintals,  2  roues  and  10  rotilos.  As  I
have abovesaid, all kind of  drugs  have their sorts of

21

^f-  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

barres  limited.  Note  that  every  quintal  is  4  roues,  and
every  roue  32  rotilos,  which  is  128  rotilos  the  quintall,
the  which  answereth  to  Aleppo  95  rotilos,  and  to  London
472  li.  per  quintal.

The  measures  of  Malacca  are  as  the  measures  of  Goa.
In  Malacca  they  abate  tare  according  to  their  distinc-
tion and  agreement,  for  that  there  is  no  just  tare
limited.

For  the  money  of  Malacca,  the  least  money  currant  is
of  tinne  stamped  with  the  armes  of  Portugall,  and  12
of  these  make  a  Chazza.

The  Chazza  is  also  of  tinne  with  the  said  armes,  and
2 of  these  make  a  challaine.

The  Challaine  is  of  tinne  with  the  said  armes,  and  40
of  these  make  a  tanga  of  Goa  good  money,  but  not
stamped  in  Malacca.

There  is  also  a  sort  of  silver  money  which  they  call
Patachines,  and  is  worth  6  tangas  of  good  money,  which
is  360  reyes,  and  is  stamped  with  two  letters,  S.  T.
which  is  S.  Thomas  on  the  one  side,  and  the  armes  of
Portugall  on  the  other  side.

There  is  also  a  kind  of  mony  called  cruzados  stamped
with  the  armes  of  Portugall,  &  is  worth  6  tangas  good
mony,  the  larines  are  every  9  of  them  worth  2  cruzados,
which  is  12  tangas  good  money,  and  these  larines  be  of
those  which  are  stamped  in  Balsara  and  Ormuz.

The  roials  of  8  they  call  Pardaos  de  Reales,  and  are
worth  7  tangas  of  good  money.

The  custome  of  Malacca  is  10  in  the  100  as  wel  in-
ward as  outward,  and  those  which  pay  the  custome
inwards,  if  in  case  they  send  the  same  goods  for  any
other  place  within  terme  of  a  yeere  and  a  day,  pay  no
custome  for  the  same.

CHARGES FROM ALEPPO TO GOA  ad.

1584.

A  note  of  charges  from  Aleppo  to  Goa,
as  foloweth.

TT^Or  camels  from  Aleppo  to

Birrha.  Medines  60  per  *somme.  ^' Or,  by  the

Cam''-  '"  -
den.

For mules from Aleppo to  Camels  bur-

Birrha,  med.  45.  per  somme.

For  custome  at  Birrha,  med.  10.  per  somme.

For Avania of the Cady at

Birrha,  med.  200.

For 4 dishes raisins, and 20

pounds  sope,  med.  35.

For a present to the Ermine

the  summe  of  med.  400.

For a barke of 30 or 35

sommes. Due.  60  is  med.  2400.  per  barke

For meat for the men the

summe  of  med.  200.

For custome at Racca the

summe  of  med.  5.  per  somme.

For  3 platters of  raisins, and

15  pounds  of  sope,  med.  25.

For  custome  to  king  Aborissei,

Due.  20.  is  med.  800.

For  custome  at  Dea  the  summe

of  med.  230.  per  barke.

For  4  dishes raisins, and  20.

pounds  of  sope.  med.  35.

For custome at Bosara, the

summe  of  med.  10.  per  barke.

For 2 dishes raisins,  and 10

pound  of  sope,  med.  17.

For  custome  in  Anna,  in  10  per

summe,  med.  10.  per  somme.

For  4  dishes  of  raisins,  and  20

pound  of  sope,  med.  35.

For  custome  in  Adite,  medines

10  per  barke,  med.  10.  per  barke.

23

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

For 2 dishes raisins, and 10

pound  of  sope,  med.  17.

For  custome  at  Gwekc,  med.  10.  per  barke.

For  2 dishes raisins, and 20

pound  of  sope,  med.  17.

For  custome  in  1st,  med.  10.  per  somme.

For  4 platters raisins,  and  20

pound  of  sope,  med.  35.

Charges  of  presents  at  Felugia,  med.  30.
For camels from Felugia to

Babylon,  med.  30.  per  somme.

For  custome  in  Babylon,  as  in

the  booke  appeareth.
For  a  barke from  Babylon  to

Balsara,  med.  900.

For  custome  of  small  wares,  at

Corno,  med.  20.  per  somme.

For custome of clothes at

Corno,  the  summe  of med.  per  somme.
For 3 dishes raisins, and 20

pound  of  sope,  med.  26.

[II.  i.  277.] For fraight from Balsara to Ormus, according to the

greatnesse,  as  in  this  booke  appeareth.
For  custome  in  Ormus,  as  is  abovesaid  in  this  booke.
For fraight from Ormus to Goa,  as is in this  booke

shewed.
For  custome  in  Goa,  as  is  abovesaid.

A  declaration  of  the  places  from  whence  the
goods  subscribed  doe  come.

C Loves,  from  Maluco,  Tarenate,  Amboina,  by  way  of
Java.
Nutmegs,  from  Banda.
Maces  from  Banda,  Java,  and  Malacca.
Pepper  Gawrie,  from Cochin.
Pepper  common,  from  Malabar.
Sinnamon,  from  Seilan.
Tinne,  from  Malacca.

24

EASTERN MERCHANDISE  ad.

1584.
Sandals  wilde,  from  Cochin.
Sandales  domestick,  from  Malacca.
Verzini,  from  S.  Thomas,  and  from  China.
Spicknardj  from  Zindi,  and  Lahor.
Quicksilver,  from  China.

Galls,  from  Cambaia,  Bengala,  Istria  &  Syria.
Ginger  Dabulin,  from  Dabul.

Ginger  Belledin,  from  the  Countrie  within  Cambaia.
Ginger  Sorattin,  from  Sorat  within  Cambaia.
Ginger  Mordassi,  from  Mordas  within  Cambaia.
Ginger  Meckin,  from  Mecca.
Mirabolans  of  all  sorts,  from  Cambaia.
White  sucket  from  Zindi,  Cambaia  and  China.
Corcunia,  from  divers  places  of  India.
Corall  of  Levant,  from  Malabar.
Chomin,  from  Balsara.
Requitria,  from  Arabia  Felix.
Garble  of  Nutmegs  from  Banda.
Sal  Armoniacke,  from  Zindi  and  Cambaia.
Zedoari,  from  divers  places  of  India.
Cubeb,  from  China.
Amomum,  from  China.
Camphora,  from  Brimeo  neere  to  China.
Myrrha,  from  Arabia  Felix.
Costo  dulce,  from  Zindi,  and  Cambaia.
Borazo,  from  Cambaia,  and  Lahor.
Asa  fetida,  from  Lahor.
Waxe,  from  Bengala.
Seragni,  frorn  Persia.

Cassia,  from  Cambaia,  and  from  Gran  Cayro.
Storax  calamita,  from  Rhodes,  to  say,  from  Aneda,  and

Canemarie  within  Caramania.
Storax  liquida,  from  Rhodes.
Tutia,  from  Persia.
Cagiers,  from Malabar,  and  Maldiva.
Ruvia  to  die  withall,  from  Chalangi.
Alumme  di  Rocca,  from  China,  and  Constantinople.
Chopra,  from  Cochin  and  Malabar.

25

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

Oppopanax,  from  Persia.

Lignum  Aloes,  from  Cochin,  China,  and  Malacca.
Demnar,  from  Siacca  and  Blinton.
Galangae,  from  China,  Chaul,  Goa,  &  Cochin.
Laccha,  from  Pegu,  and  Balagvate.
Carabbe,  from  Almanie.
Coloquintida,  from  Cyprus.
Agaricum,  from  Alemania.
Scamonea,  from  Syria,  and  Persia.
Bdellium,  from  Arabia  felix,  and  Mecca.
Cardamomum  small,  from  Barcelona.
Cardamomum  great,  from  Bengala.
Tamarinda,  from  Balsara.
Aloe  Secutrina,  from  Secutra.
Aloe  Epatica,  from  Pat.
Safran,  from  Balsara,  and  Persia.
Lignum  de  China,  from  China.
Rhaponticum,  from  Persia,  and  Pugia.
Thus,  from  Secutra.
Turbith,  from  Diu,  and  Cambaia.
Nuts  of  India,  from  Goa,  and  other  places  of  India.
Nux  vomica,  from Malabar.
Sanguis  Draconis,  from  Secutra.
Armoniago,  from  Persia.
Spodio-  di  Cana,  from  Cochin.
Margaratina,  from  Balagvate.
Muske  from  Tartaric,  by  way  of  China.
Ambrachan,  from  Melinde,  and  Mosambique.
Indico,  from  Zindi  and  Cambaia.
• Silkes  fine,  from  China.

Long  pepper,  from  Bengala  and  Malacca.

Latton,  from  China.

Momia,  from  the  great  Cayro.

Belzuinum  Mandolalo,  from  Sian,  and  Baros.

Belzuinum  burned,  from  Bonnia.

Castorium,  from  Almania.

Corallina,  from  the  red  sea.

Masticke,  from  Sio.

26

EASTERN MERCHANDISE  ad.

1584.
Mella,  from  Romania.
Oppium,  from  Pugia,  and  Cambaia.
Calamus  Aromaticus,  from  Constantinople.
Capari,  from  Alexandria  and  other  places.
Dates,  from  Arabia  felix,  and  Alexandria.
Dictamnum  album,  from  Lombardia.
Draganti,  .from  Morea.
Euphorbium,  from  Barbaria.
Epithymum,  from  Candia.
Sena,  from  Mecca.
Gumme  Arabike,  from  Zaffo.
Grana,  from  Coronto.
Ladanum,  from  Cyprus  and  Candia.
Lapis  lazzudis,  from  Persia.

Lapis  Zudassi,  from  Zaffetto.  [II.  i.  278.]

Lapis  Spongii  is  found  in  sponges.
Lapis  Haematites,  from  Almanie.
Manna,  from  Persia.

Auripigmentum,  from  manie  places  of  Turkie.
Pilatro,  from  Barbaria.
Pistaches,  from  Doria.
Worme-seede,  from  Persia.
Sumack,  from  Cyprus.
Sebesten,  from  Cyprus.
Galbanum,  from  Persia.

Dente  dAbolio,  from  Melinde,  and  Mosambique.
Folium  Indicum,  from  Goa,  and  Cochin.
Diasprum  viride,  from  Cambaia.
Petra Bezzvar,  from  Tartaria.
SarcacoUa,  from  Persia.
Melleghete,  from  the  West  parts.
Sugo  di  Requillicie,  from  Arabia  felix.
Chochenillo,  from  the  West  India.
Rubarbe,  from  Persia,  and  China.

[The  times
27

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

The  times  or  seasonable  windes  called  Monsons,
wherein  the  ships  depart  from  place  to  place
in  the  East  Indies.

NOte,  that  the  Citie  of  Goa  is  the  principall  place  of
all the Orientall India, and the winter there
beginneth  the 1 5  of  May  with  very  great  raine,  and  so
continueth  till  the first  of  August,  so  that  during  that
space,  no  shippe  can  passe  over  the  barre  of  Goa,  because
through the continuall shoures of  raine all  the  sandes
joyne  together  neere  unto  a mountaine  called Oghane,
and  all  these  sandes  being  joyned  together,  runne  into
the  shoales  of  the  barre  and  port  of  Goa,  and  can  have
no  other  issue,  but  to  remaine  in  that  port,  and  therefore
it  is  shut  up  untill  the  first  of  August,  but  at  the  10  of
August  it  openeth  by  reason  of  the  raine  which  ceaseth,
and  the  sea  doeth  then  scoure  the  sands  away  againe.
The  monson from Goa  to the Northward,  to  say,  for
Chaul, Diu, Cambaia, Daman, Basaim, and other
places.
The  ships  depart  betwixt  the  tenth  and  24  of  August,
for  the  Northward  places  abovesayde,  and  to  these  places
they  may  saile  all  times  of  the  yeere,  except  in  the  winter,
which  beginneth  and  endeth  at  the  times  abovesaid.
The  monson  from  the  North  parts,  for  Goa.
The  ships  depart  from  Chaul,  Diu,  Cambaia,  and  other
places  Northwards for Goa,  betwixt  the 8 and 15 of
Januarie,  and  come  to  Goa  about  the  end  of  Februarie.
The  first  monson  from  Diu  for  the  straight  of  Mecca.
The  ships  depart  from  Diu  about  the  1 5  of  Januarie,
and  returne  from  the  straights  to  Diu  in  the  moneth  of
August.

The  second  monson  from  Diu for  the straight  of

Mecca.
The  ships  depart  betwixt  the  25  and  first  of  September,
and  returne  from  the  straights  to  Diu,  the  first  and  15
of  May.

28

THE MONSOONS FROM GOA  a.d.

1584.
The  monson  from  Secutra  for  Ormus.
The ships depart about the tenth of  August for
Ormus : albeit  Secutra  is an Island and  hath but few
ships,  which  depart  as  abovesaid.

The  monson  wherein  the  Moores  of  the  firme  land
come  to  Goa.

About  the  fifteenth  of  September  the  Moores  of  the
firme  lande  beginne  to  come  to  Goa,  and  they  come  from
all  parts,  as  well  from  Balagvate,  Bezenegar,  as  also  from
Sudalcan,  and  other  places.

The  monson  wherein  the  Moores  of  the  firme  land
depart  from  Goa.

They  depart  from  Goa  betwixt  the  10  and  15  day  of
November.  Note  that  by  going  for  the  North  is  ment
the  departing  from  Goa,  for  Chaul,  Diu,  Cambaia,
Daman,  Basaim,  Ghassain,  and  other  places  unto  Zindi :
and  by  the  South  is  understood,  departing  from  Goa,  for
Cochin,  and  all  that  coast  unto  Cape  Comori.

The  first  monson  from  Goa  for  Ormus.
The shippes  depart  in  the  moneth of  October from
Goa,  for  Ormus,  passing  with  Easterly  windes  along  the
coast  of  Persia.

The  second  monson  from  Goa  to  Ormus.
The  ships  depart  about  the  20  of  Januarie  passing  by
the  like navigation  and  windes  as  in  the  first  monson,
and  this  is  called  of  the Portugals  and Indians Entre-
monson.

The  third  monson  from  Goa  to  Ormus.
The  ships  depart  betwixt  the  25  of  March,  and  6  of
Aprill,  having  Easterly  windes,  till  they  passe  Secutra,
and  then  they  find  Westerly  windes,  and  therfore  they
set  their  course  over  for  the  coast  of  Arabia,  till  they
come  to  Cape  Rasalgate  and  the  Straight  of  Ormus,  and
this  monson  is  most  troublesome  of  all :  for  they  make  [II.  i,  279.]
two  navigations  in  the  heigth  of  Seylan,  which  is  6
degrees  and  somewhat  lower.

29

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

The  first  monson from Ormus  for  Chaul
and  Goa.
The  ships  depart  from  Ormus  for  Chaul,  and  Goa  in
the  moneth of  September,  with North and Northeast
windes.

The  second  monson  from Ormus  for  Chaul
and  Goa.
The  second  monson is betwixt the  five and twentie
and last of  December,  with like  winds as the former
monson.

The  third  monson  from  Ormus  for  Chaul,
and  Goa.
The  third  monson  the  ships  depart  from  Ormus,  for
Chaul  and  Goa,  betwixt  the  first  and  15  of  April,  and
they  saile  with  Southeast  windes.  East  and  Northeast
windes,  coasting  upon  the  Arabia  side  from  Cape  Mos-
andon  unto  Cape  Rasalgate,  and  having  lost  the  sight
of  Cape  Rasalgate,  they  have  Westerly  windes,  and  so
come  for  Chaul  and  Goa,  and  if  the  said  ships  depart  not
before  the  25  of  April,  they  are  not  then  to  depart  that
monson,  but  to  winter  in  Ormus  because  of  the
winter.

The  first  monson  from  Ormus  for  Zindi.
The  ships  depart  for  Ormus  betwixt  the 15 and 20
of  Aprill.

The  second  monson  from  Ormus  for  Zindi.
The  ships  depart betwixt  the 10  and  20  of  October
for  Zindi  from  Ormus.

The  monson  from  Ormus  for  the  red  sea.
The ships depart from Ormus betwixt  the  first  and
last  of  Januarie.

30

THE MONSOONS FROM GOA  a.d.

1584.

Hitherto  I  have  noted  the  monsons  of  the  ships
departing  from  Goa  to  the  Northward :  Now
follow  the  monsons  wherein  the  ships  depart
from  Goa  to  the  Southward.

The  monson  from  Goa  for  Calicut,  Cochin,  Seilan,
and  all  that  coast.

THe  ships  depart  from  those  places  betwixt  the  i  and
15  of  August,  and  there  they  find  it  navigable  all
the  yeere  except  in  the  winter,  which  continueth  as  is
aforesaid,  from  the  15  of  May  till  the  10  of  August.  Note.
In  like  maner  the  ships  come  from  these  places  for  Goa
at  every  time  in  the  yeere  except  in  the  winter,  but  of
all  other  the  best  time  is  to  come  in  November,  December
and  January.

The  first  monson  from  Goa,  for  Pegu.

The ships depart  from  Goa,  betwixt the 15  and  20
of  April,  and  winter  at  S.  Thomas,  and  after  the 5 of
August,  they  depart  from  S.  Thomas  for  Pegu.
The  second  monson  from  Goa  for  Pegu.

The  ships  depart  from  Goa  betwixt  the  8  and  24  of
August,  going  straight  for  Pegu,  and  if  they  passe  the
24  of  August,  they  cannot  passe  that  monson,  neither
is  there  any  more  monsons  till  April  as  is  aforesaid.
Note  that  the  chiefest  trade  is,  to  take  money  of  S.  ^^"handize
Thomas  rials,  and  patechoni,  and  to  goe  to  S.  Thomas,  ^
and  there  to  buy  Tellami,  which  is  fine  cloth  of  India,
whereof  there  is  great  quantitie  made  in  Coromandel,
and  brought  thither,  and  other  marchandise  are  not  good
for  that  place  except  some  dozen  of  very  faire  Emeraulds
orientall.  For  of  golde,  silver,  and  Rubies,  there  is
sufficient  store  in  Pegu.

The  monson  from  Pegu  for  the  Indies.

The  ships  depart  from  Pegu  betwixt  the  15  and  25
of  Januarie,  and  come  to  Goa  about  the  25  of  March,
or  in  the  beginning  of  April.  Note,  that  if  it  passe
the  10  of  May  before  the  sayde  ships  be  arrived  in  Goa,

3^

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

they  cannot  come  thither  that  monson,  and  if  they
have  not  then  fet  the  coast  of  India,  they  shall  with  great
perill  fetch  S.  Thomas.

The  first  monson  from  Goa  for  Malacca.
The  ships  depart  betwixt  the  1 5  and  last  of  September,
and  arrive  in  Malacca  about  the  end  of  October.

The  second  monson  from  Goa  to  Malacca.
The  ships  depart  about  the  5  of  May  from  Goa,  and
arrive  in  Malacca  about  the 1 5  of  June.

The  first  monson  from  Malacca  to  Goa.
The  ships  depart  about  the  10  of  September,  and  come
to  Goa  about  the  end  of  October.

The  second  monson  from  Malacca  to  Goa.
The  ships  depart  from  Malacca  about  the  10  of
February,  and  come  to  Goa  about  the  end  of  March.
But  if  the  said  ships  should  stay  till  the  10  of  May,
[II.  i.  280.]  they  cannot  enter  into  Goa,  and  if  at  that  time  also
they  should  not  be  arrived  at  Cochin,  they  are  forced
to  returne  to  Malacca,  because  the  winter  and  contrary
windes  then  come  upon  them.

The  monson  from  Goa  for  China.
The  ships  depart  from  Goa  in the  moneth  of  April.

The  monson  from  China  for  Goa.
The  ships  depart  to  be  the 10  of  May  in  Goa,  and
being not then arrived, they turne backe to Cochin,
and if they cannot fetch Cochin, they returne to
Malacca.

The  monson  from  Goa  to  the  Moluccaes.
The  ships  depart  about  the 10  or  15  of  May,  which
time being past, the shippes can not passe over the
barre  of  Goa  for  the  cause  abovesaid.

The  monson  of  the  ships  of  the  Moluccaes  arrivall

in  Goa.
The  ships  which  come  from  the  Moluccaes  arrive  upon
the  bar  of  Goa  about  the 15  of  April.

32

wwfm

O

THE MONSOONS FOR PORTUGAL  ad.

1584.

The  monsons  of  the  Portingall  ships  for  the
Indies.
The  ships  which  come  from  Portugall  depart  thence
ordinarily  betwixt  the  tenth  &  fifteenth  of  March,
comming  the  straight  way  during  the  moneth  of  July
to  the  coast  of  Melinde,  and  Mosambique,  and  from  Note.
thence  goe  straight  for  Goa,  and  if  in  the  moneth  of
July  they  should  not  be  at  the  coast  of  Melinde,  they
can  in  no  wise  that  yeere  fetch  Melinde,  but  returne
to  the  Isle  of  Saint  Helena,  and  so  are  not  able,  that
time  being  past,  to  fetch  the  coast  of  India,  and  to
come  straight  for  Goa.  Therefore  (as  is  abovesaid)  they
returne  to  the  Island  of  Saint  Helena,  and  if  they  cannot
make  the  said  Island,  then  they  runne  as  lost  upon  the
coast  of  Guinea:  but  if  the  said  ships  be  arrived  in
time  upon  the  coast  of  Melinde,  they  set  forwardes  for
Goa,  and  if  by  the  fifteenth  of  September  they  cannot
fetch  Goa,  they  then  goe  for  Cochin,  but  if  they  see
they  cannot  fetch  Cochin,  they  returne  to  Mosambique
to  winter  there  upon  the  sayd  coast.  Albeit  in  the  yeere  Note.
of  our  Lord  1580  there  arrived  the  ship  called  San
Lorenzo,  being  wonderfull  sore  sea-beaten,  the  eight  of
October,  which  was  accounted  as  a  myracle  for  that  the
like  had  not  bene  seene  before.

The  monson  from  India  for  Portugall.
The  shippes  depart  from  Cochin  betweene  the  fifteenth
and  last  of  January,  going  on  till  they  have  sight  of
Capo  de  buona  speranza,  and  the  Isle  of  Saint  Helena,
which  Islande  is  about  the  midway,  being  in  sixteene
degrees  to  the  South.  And  it  is  a  litle  Island  being
fruitfull  of  all  things  which  a  man  can  imagine,  with
great  store  of  fruit :  and  this  Island  is  a  great  succour
to  the  shipping  which  returne  for  Portugall.  And  not
long  since  the  said  Island  was  found  by  the  Portugales,
and  was  discovered  by  a  shippe  that  came  from  the
Indies  in  a  great  storme,  in  which  they  found  such
abundance  of  wilde  beastes,  and  boares,  and  all  sort  of
VI  33  c

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

fruite,  that  by  meanes  thereof  that  poore  ship  which  had
beene  foure  moneths  at  sea,  refreshed  themselves  both
with  water  and  meate  very  well,  and  this  Island  they
called  S.  Helena,  because  it  was  discovered  upon  S.
Helens  day.  And  undoubtedly  this  Island  is  a  great
succour,  and  so  great  an  ayde  to  the  ships  of  Portugall,
that  many  would  surely  perish  if  that  helpe  wanted*
And  therefore  the  king  of  Portugall  caused  a  Church
to  be  made  there  for  devotion  of  S.  Helena :  where
there  are  onely  resident  Eremits,  and  all  other  are  for-
bidden to  inhabite  there  by  the  kings  commaundement,
to  the  ende  that  the  ships  may  be  the  more  sufficiently
furnished  with  victuals,  because  the  ships  which  come
Note,  from  India  come  but  slenderly  victualled,  because  there
groweth  no  corne  there,  neither  make  they  any  wine :
but  the  ships  which  come  from  Portugall  to  the  Indies
touch  not  in  the  sayd  Island,  because  they  set  out  being
sufficiently  furnished  with  bread  and  water  from  Portugall
for  eight  moneths  voyage.  Any  other  people  then  the
two  Eremites  abovesaid,  cannot  inhabite  this  Island,
except  some  sicke  man  that  may  be  set  there  a  shore
to  remaine  in  the  Eremites  companie,  for  his  helpe  and
recovery.

The  monson  from  Goa  to  Mosambique.
The  ships  depart  betwixt  the 10  and 15  of  Januarie.

The  monson  from  Mosambique  to  Goa.
The  ships  depart  betweene  the  8  and  last  of  August,
and  arrive  in  Chaul  or  Goa  in  the  moneth  of  October,
till  the 15  of  November.

The  monson  from  Ormus  to  Bengala.

The  ships  depart  betwixt  the  15  and  20  of  June,  and

goe  to  winter  at  Teve  and  depart  thence  about  the 15
of  August  for  Bengala.

34

JOHN EVESHAM

A.D.
1586.

The  voyage  passed by  sea  into  Aegypt,  by  John  [ii.  i.  281.]
Evesham  Gentleman. Anno 1586.

He  5  of  December  1586  we  departed
from  Gravesend  in  the  Tiger  of  London,
wherein  was  Master  under  God  for  the
voyage  Robert  Rickman,  and  the  21.  day
at  night  we  came  to  the  Isle  of  Wight :
departing  from  thence  in  the  morning
following  we  had  a  faire  winde,  so  that
on  the  27  day  wee  came  in  sight  of  the  rocke  of  Lisbone,
and  so  sayling  along  we  came  in  sight  of  the  South  Cape,
the  29  of  the  same,  and  on  the  morrowe  with  a  Westerly
winde  we  entred  the  straights :  and  the  second  of  January
being  as  high  as  Cape  de  Gate,  we  departed  from  our
fleete  towards  Argier.  And  the  4  day  we  arrived  at  the
port  of  Argier  aforesaid,  where  we  staied  till  the  first  of
March.  At  which  time  we  set  saile  towardes  a  place
called  Tunis,  to  the  Eastward  of  Argier  100  leagues,  Tunis.
where  we  arrived  the  8  of  the  same.  This  Tunis  is  a
small  citie  up  12  miles  from  the  sea,  and  at  the  port  or
rode  where  shipping  doe  ride,  is  a  castle  or  fort  called
Goletta,  sometimes  in  the  handes  of  the  Christians,  but
now  of  the  Turkes  :  at  which  place  we  remained  till  the
third  of  Aprill :  at  which  time  wee  set  saile  towardes
Alexandria,  and  having  sometime  faire  windes,  sometime
contrary,  we  passed  on  the  12  day  betweene  Sicilia  and
Malta  (where  neere  adjoyning  hath  beene  the  fort  and
holde  of  the  knights  of  the  Rhodes)  and  so  the  19  day
we  fell  with  the  Isle  of  Candy,  and  from  thence  to
Alexandria,  where  we  arrived  the  27  of  April,  and  there
continued  till  the  5  of  October.

The  said  citie  of  Aexandria  is  an  old  thing  decayed  or  y^^  descrip-
ruinated,  having  bene  a  faire  and  great  citie  neere two  tion  of  Alex-
miles  in  length,  being  all  vauted  underneath  for  provision  (^^dria.
of  fresh  water,  which  water  commeth thither but  once
every  yeere,  out  of  one  of  the  foure  rivers  of  paradise
(as  it  is  termed)  called  Nilus,  which  in  September  floweth

35

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1586.

neere  eighteene  foote  upright  higher  then  his  accustomed
manner,  and  so  the  banke  being  cut,  as  it  were  a  sluce,
about  thirty  miles  from  Alexandria,  at  a  towne  called
Rossetto,  it  doth  so  come  to  the  saide  Citie,  with  such
aboundance,  that  barkes  of  twelve  tunne  doe  come  upon
the  same  water,  which  water  doth  fill  all  the  vauts,
cesternes,  and  wels  in  the  said  Citie,  with  very  good
water,  and  doth  so  continue  good,  till  the  next  yeere
following :  for  they  have  there  very  litle  raine  or  none
at  all,  yet  have  they  exceeding  great  dewes.  Also  they
have  very  good  corne,  and  very  plentifuU :  all  the
Countrey  is  very  hot,  especially  in  the  moneths  of
August,  September,  and  October.  Also  within  the  saide
Citie  there  is  a  pillar  of  Marble,  called  by  the  Turkes,
King  Pharaoes  needle,  &  it  is  foure  square,  every  square
is  twelve  foote,  and  it  is  in  height  90  foote.  Also  there
is  without  the  wals  of  the  said  Citie,  about  twentie  score
paces,  another  marble  pillar,  being  round,  called  Pompey
his  pillar :  this  pillar  standeth  upon  a  great  square  stone,
every  square  is  fifteene  foote,  and  the  same  stone  is
fifteene  foote  high,  and  the  compasse  of  the  pillar  is  37
foote,  and  the  heigth  of  it  is  loi  feete,  which  is  a  wonder
to  thinke  how  ever  it  was  possible  to  set  the  said  pillar
upon  the  said  square  stone.  The  port  of  the  said  Citie
is  strongly  fortified  with  two  strong  Castles,  and  one
other  Castle  within  the  citie,  being  all  very  well  planted
with  munition :  and  there  is  to  the  Eastward  of  this
Cayro.  Citie,  about  three  dayes  journey  the  citie  of  Grand  Cayro,
otherwise  called  Memphis :  it  hath  in  it  by  report  of  the
registers  bookes  which  we  did  see,  to  the  number  of  2400
Churches,  and  is  wonderfully  populous,  and  is  one  dayes
journey  about  the  wals,  which  was  journeyed  by  one  of
our  Marriners  for  triall  thereof  Also  neere  to  the  saide
citie  there  is  a  place  called  the  Pyramides,  being,  as  I  may
well  terme  it,  one  of  the  nine  wonders  of  the  world :
that  is,  seven  severall  places  of  flint  and  marble  stone,
foure  square,  the  wals  thereof  are  seven  yards  thicke  in
those  places  that  we  did  see  : the  squarenes  is  in  length

-.6

JOHN EVESHAM  a.d.

1586.

about  twentie  score  every  square,  being  built  as  it  were
a  pointed  diamond,  broad  at  the  foote,  and  small  or
narrow  at  the  toppe  :  the  heigth  of  them,  to  our  judge-
ment, doth  surmount  twise  the  heigth  of  Paules  steeple :
within  the  saide  Pyramides,  no  man  doth  know  what
there  is,  for  that  they  have  no  entrance  but  in  the  one
of  them,  there  is  a  hole  where  the  wall  is  broken,  and  so
we  went  in  there,  having  torch-light  with  us,  for  that  it
hath  no  light  to  it,  and  within  the  same,  is  as  it  were
a  great  hall,  in  the  which  there  is  a  costly  tombe,  which
tombe  they  say,  was  made  for  king  Pharao  in  his  life
time,  but  he  was  not  buried  there,  being  drowned  in  the
red  sea :  also  there  are  certaine  vauts  or  dungeons,  which
goe  downe  verie  deepe  under  those  Pyramides  with  faire
staires,  but  no  man  dare  venter  to  goe  downe  into  them,
by  reason  that  they  can  cary  no  light  with  them,  for  the
dampe  of  the  earth  doth  put  out  the  light :  the  red  sea
is  but  three  daies  journey  from  this  place,  and  Jerusalem
about  seven  dayes  journey  from  thence  :  but  to  returne
to  Cayro.  There  is  a  Castle  wherin  is  the  house  that
Pharaoes  wives  were  kept  in,  and  in  the  Pallace  or  Court
thereof  stande  ^§  marble  pillars,  in  such  order,  as  our
Exchange  standeth  in  London  :  the  said  pillars  are  in
heigth  60  foote,  and  in  compasse  14  foote:  also  in  the  [II.  i.  282.]
said  Citie  is  the  castle  were  Joseph  was  in  prison,  where
to  this  day  they  put  in  rich  men,  when  the  king  would
have  any  summe  of  money  of  them  :  there  are  seven
gates  to  the  sayd  prison,  and  it  goeth  neere  fiftie  yardes
downe  right :  also,  the  water  that  serveth  this  casde,
commeth  out  of  the  foresaide  river  of  Nilus,  upon  a  wall
made  with  arches,  five  miles  long,  and  it  is  twelve  foote
thicke.  Also  there  are  in  old  Cayro  two  Monasteries,
the  one  called  S.  Georges,  the  other  S.  Maries :  &  in  the
Courts  where  the  Churches  be,  was  the  house  of  king
Pharao.  In  this  Citie  is  great  store  of  marchandize,
especially  pepper,  and  nutmegs,  which  come  thither  by
land,  out  of  the  East  India :  and  it  is  very  plentifull  of
all maner of  victuals, especially of  bread, rootes, and

37

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

hearbes :  to  the  Eastwards  of  Cayro,  there  is  a  Well,  five
miles  ofF,  called  Matria,  and  as  they  say,  when  the  Virgin
Marie  fled  from  Bethleem,  and  came  into  ^Egypt,  and
being  there,  had  neither  water,  nor  any  other  thing  to
sustaine  them,  by  the  providence  of  God,  an  Angell  came
from  heaven,  and  strake  the  ground  with  his  wings,  where
presently  issued  out  a  fountaine  of  water :  and  the  wall
did  open  where  the  Israelites  did  hide  themselves,  which
fountaine  or  well  is  walled  foure  square  till  this  day.
Also  we  were  at  an  old  Citie,  all  ruinated  and  destroyed,

Carthage,  called  in  olde  time,  the  great  Citie  of  Carthage  where
Hannibal  and  Queene  Dido  dwelt :  this  Citie  was  but
narrow,  but  was  very  long :  for  there  was,  and  is  yet  to
bee  scene,  one  streete  three  mile  long,  to  which  Citie
fresh  water  was  brought  upon  arches  (as  afore)  above  25
miles,  of  which  arches  some  are  standing  to  this  day.
Also  we  were  at  divers  other  places  on  the  coast,  as  we
came from  Cayro,  but of  other  antiquities  we  saw  but

Ar^er.  few.  The  towne  of  Argier  which  was  our  first  and  last
port,  within  the  streights  standeth  upon  the  side  of  an
hill,  close  upon  the  sea  shore :  it  is  very  strong  both  by
sea  and  land,  and  it  is  very  well  victualed  with  all  manner
of  fruites,  bread  and  fish  good  store,  and  very  cheape.
It  is  inhabited  with  Turkes,  Moores,  and  Jewes,  and  so
are  Alexandria  and  Cayro.  In  this  towne  are  a  great
number  of  Christian  captives,  wherof  there  are  of  English-
men onely  fifteene,  from  which  port  we  set  sayle  towardes
England,  the  seventh  of  Januarie,  Anno  1587,  and  the
30  day  of  the  sayd  moneth,  we  arrived  at  Dartmouth  on
the  coast  of  England.

38

LAURENCE ALDERSEY

A.D.
1586.

The  second  voyage  of  M.  Laurence  Aldersey,  to
the  Cities  of  Alexandria,  and  Cayro  in  Aegypt.
Anno 1586.

Embarked  my  selfe  at  Bristoll,  in  the
Hercules,  a  good  ship  of  London,  and
set  saile  the  21  day  of  Februarie,  about
ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  having
a  merry  winde :  but  the  23  day,  there
arose  a  very  great  storme,  and  in  the
mids  of  it  we  descried  a  small  boate  of

the  burden  of  ten  tunnes,  with  foure  men  in  her,  in  very
great  danger,  who  called  a  maine  for  our  helpe.  Where-
upon our  Master  made  towardes  them,  and  tooke  them
into  our  ship,  and  let  the  boate,  which  was  laden  with
timber,  and  appertained  to  Chepstow,  to  runne  a  drift.
The  same  night  about  midnight  arose  another  great
storme,  but  the  winde  was  large  with  us,  untill  the  27  of
the  same  moneth,  which  then  grew  somewhat  contrary :
yet  notwithstanding  we  held  on  our  course,  and  the  tenth
day  of  March,  we  descried  a  saile  about  Cape  Sprat,
which  is  a  litle  on  this  side  the  streight  of  Gibraltare,
but  we  spake  not  with  her.  The  next  day  we  descried
twelve  sayle  more,  with  whom  we  thought  to  have
spoken,  to  have  learned  what  they  were,  but  they  made
very  fast  away,  and  we  gave  them  over.

Thursday  the  16  of  March,  we  had  sight  of  the
streights,  and  of  the  coast  of  Barbary.  The  1 8  day  we
passed  them,  and  sailed  towards  Patras.  Upon  the  23
of  March,  we  met  with  the  Centurion  of  London  which
came  from  Genoa,  by  whom  we  sent  letters  to  England,
and  the  foure  men  also  which  we  tooke  in,  upon  the
coast  of  England,  beforementioned.

The  29 of  March we  came  to  Goleta  a small  Hand,  Goleta.
and had sight  of  two  shippes,  which  we  judged to  be
of  England.

Tuesday  the  fourth  of  Aprill,  we  were  before  Malta,  Malta.

39

A.D.
1586.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  being  there  becalmed,  our  Maister  caused  the  two
ship  boates  to  be  had  out,  and  they  towed  the  ship,
till we  were  out  of  sight  of  the  Castle  of  Malta. The

Xante.  9  day  of  Aprill  we  came  to  Zante,  and  being  before  the

towne,  William  Aldridge,  servant  to  Master  Thomas
Cordall  of  London,  came  aboord  us,  with  whom  our
Master  and  twelve  more  of  our  company,  thought  to
have  gone  on  shoare,  but  they  could  not  be  permitted :

Patras.  so  we  all  came  aboord  againe,  and  went  to  Patras,  where

we  arrived  upon  good  Friday,  and  lay  there  with  good
entertainement  at  the  English  house,  where  was  the
Consull  Master  Grimes,  Ralph  Ashley,  and  John
Doddington,  who  very  kindly  went  with  us,  and  shewed
us  the  pleasures  of  the  towne.

They  brought  us  to  the  house  of  the  Cady,  who  was

[II.  i.  283.]  made  then  to  understand  of  the  20  Turks  that  wee  had
aboord,  which  were  to  goe  to  Constantinople,  being
redeemed  out  of  captivitie,  by  sir  Francis  Drake  in  the
West  Indies,  and  brought  with  him  into  England,  and
by  order  of  the  Queenes  Majestic  sent  now  into  their
Countrey.  Whereupon  the  Cady  commaunded  them  to
be  brought  before  him,  that  he  might  see  them  :  and  when
he  had  talked  with  them,  and  understood  howe  strangely
they  were  delivered,  hee  marveiled  much,  and  admired
the  Queenes  Majestic  of  England,  who  being  but  a
woman,  is  notwithstanding  of  such  power  and  renowne
amongst  all  the  princes  of  Christendome,  with  many
other  honourable  wordes  of  commending  her  Majestic.
So  he  tooke  the  names  of  those  20.  Turkes,  and  recorded
them  in  their  great  bookes,  to  remaine  in  perpetuall
memory.  After  this,  our  foresaid  countreymen  brought
mee  to  the  Chappel  of  S.  Andrew  where  his  tombe  or
sepulchre  is,  and  the  boord  upon  which  he  was  beheaded,
which  boord  is  now  so  rotten,  that  if  any  man  offer  to
cut  it,  it  falleth  to  powder,  yet  I  brought  some  of  it
away  with  me.

Upon  Tuesday  in  Easter  weeke,  wee  set  out  towards
Zante  againe,  and  the  24.  of  April  with  much  adoe,  wee

40

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  a.d.

1586.
were  all  permitted  to  come  on  shoare,  and  I  was  caried
to  the  English  house  in  Zante,  where  I  was  very  well
entertained.  The  commodities  of  Zante  are  Currans  and
oyle :  the  situation  of  the  Towne  is  under  a  very  great
hill,  upon  which  standeth  a  very  strong  Castle,  which
commaundeth  the  Towne.  At  Zante  we  tooke  in  a
Captaine  and  16.  souldiers,  with  other  passengers.  Wee
departed  from  Zante  upon  Tuesday  the  15.  of  April,
and  the  next  day  we  ankered  at  a  small  Island,  called
Strivalia,  which  is  desolate  of  people,  saving  a  fewe  Strivalia.
religious  men,  who  entertained  us  well,  without  taking
any  money :  but  of  courtesie  we  bestowed  somewhat
upon  them  for  their  maintenance,  and  then  they  gave
us  a  couple  of  leane  sheepe,  which  we  caried  aboord.
The  last  day  of  Aprill,  wee  arrived  at  Candie,  at  a  Castle,  Candle.
<:alled  Sowday,  where  wee  set  the  Captaine,  Souldiers,
and  Mariners  ashoare,  which  wee  tooke  in  at  Zante,
with  all  their  carriage.

The  second  day  of  May  wee  set  saile  againe,  and  the  ^^y-
fourth day came to the Islands of Milo, where we  ??'/'^^''f/
ankered,  and  round  the  people  there  very  courteous,  and  ^^-^^  called
tooke  in  such necessaries as  we wanted. The Islands  ^parades.
are  in  my  judgement  a  hundred  in  number,  and  all  within
the  compasse  of  a  hundred  miles.

The  II.  day,  the  Chaus,  which  is  the  greatest  man
there  in  authoritie,  for  certaine  offences  done  in  a  little
Chappell  by  the  water  side,  which  they  saide  one  of  our
shippe  had  done,  and  imputed  it  to  mee,  because  I  was
seene  goe  into  it  three  dayes  before,  came  to  us,  and
made  much  a  doe,  so  that  we  were  faine  to  come  out
of  our  shippe  armed :  but  by  three  pieces  of  golde  the
brabling  was  ended,  and  we  came  to  our  shippe.  This
day  wee  also  set  saile,  and  the  next  day  passed  by  the
Castle  of  Serpeto,  which  is  an  old  ruinated  thing,  and
standeth  under  a  hils  side.

The  13.  day  we  passed  by  the  Island  of  Paris,  and
the  Island  of  the  bankes  of  Helicon,  and  the  Island  called
Ditter, where are many boares, and the women bee

41

Ao  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

witches.  The  same  day  also  wee  passed  by  the  Castle
of  Tino,  standing  upon  a  very  high  mountaine,  and
neere  unto  it  is  the  Island  of  Diana.

Sio.  The 15. of  May, wee  came to  Sio,  where I stayed

thirtie  and  three  dayes.  In  it  is  a  very  proper  Towne,
after  the  building  of  that  Countrey,  and  the  people  are
civil :  and  while  we  were  here,  there  came  in  sixe  Gallies,
which  had  bene  at  Alexandria,  and  one  of  them  which
was  the  Admiral,  had  a  Prince  of  the  Moores  prisoner,
whom  they  tooke  about  Alexandria,  and  they  meant  to
present  him  to  the  Turke.  The  towne  standeth  in  a
valley,  and  a  long  the  water  side  pleasantly.  There  are
about  26.  winde-mils  about  it,  and  the  commodities  of
it  are  cotton  wooll,  cotton  yarne,  mastike,  and  some  other
drugs.

i\.s  we  remained  at  Sio,  there  grew  a  great  controversie
betweene  the  mariners  of  the  Hercules,  and  the  Greekes
of  the  Towne  of  Sio,  about  the  bringing  home  of  the
Turkes,  which  the  Greekes  tooke  in  ill  part,  and  the
boyes  cried  out,  Vive  el  Re  Philippe :  whereupon  our
men  beate  the  boyes,  and  threwe  stones,  and  so  a  broile
beganne,  and  some  of  our  men  were  hurt :  but  the
.  Greekes  were  fetcht  out  of  their  houses,  and  manacled
together  with  yrons,  and  threatned  to  the  Gallies :  about
fourtie  of  them  were  sent  to  the  prison,  and  what  became
of  them,  when  we  were  gone,  we  know  not,  for  we  went
thence  within  two  dayes  after,  which  was  the  19.  of
June.

Singonim.  The  20.  day  wee  passed  by  the  Island  of  Singonina,
an  Island  risen  by  the  casting  of  stones  in  that  place :
the  substance  of  the  ground  there  is  brimstone,  and
burneth  sometimes  so  much  that  it  bloweth  up  the
rockes.

The  24.  of  June  wee  came  to  Cyprus,  and  had  sight
in  the  way  of  the  aforesaide  sixe  Gallies,  that  came
from  Alexandria,  one  whereof  came  unto  us,  and  required
a  present  for  himselfe,  and  for  two  of  the  other  Gallies,,
which  we  for  quietnesse  sake  gave  them.

42

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  a.d.

1586.

The  27.  of  June,  wee  came  to  Tripolie,  where  I  stayed  [II.  i.  284.]
till  the  fift  of  July,  and  then  tooke  passage  in  a  smal
barke  called  a  Caramusalin,  which  was  a  passage  boat,
and  was  bound  for  Bichieri,  thirteene  miles  on  this  side
Alexandria,  which  boate  was  fraighted  with  Turkes,
Moores,  and  Jewes.

The  20.  day  of  July,  this  barke  which  I  passed  in
ranne  upon  a  rocke,  and  was  in  very  great  danger,  so
that  we  all  began  some  to  be  ready  to  swimme,  some
to  leape  into  the  shippe  boate,  but  it  pleased  God  to
set  us  quickly  off  the  rocke,  and  without  much  harme.

The  28.  of  July  I  came  to  Bichieri,  where  I  was  well  Bichieri.
entertained of  a Jewe which was the Customer there,
giving me Muskadine, and drinking water himselfe :
having  broken my fast  with him, he provided mee a
Camell  for  my  carriage,  and  a  Mule  for  mee  to  ride  upon,
and  a  Moore  to  runne  by  me  to  the  City  of  Alexandria,  '^^^  English
who had charge  to  see  mee  safe  in  the  English  house,  j^i^xandria
whither  I  came,  but  found no  Englishmen  there : but
then  my  guide  brought  mee  aboord  a  ship  of  Alderman
Martins,  called  the  Tyger  of  London,  where  I  was  well
received  of  the  Master  of  the  said  ship,  whose  name  was
Thomas  Rickman,  and  of  all  the  company.

The  said  Master  having  made  me  good  cheere,  and
made  me  also  to  drinke  of  the  water  of  Nilus,  having  the
keyes  of  the  English  house,  went  thither  with  me  him-
selfe, &  appointed  mee  a  faire  chamber,  and  left  a  man
with  me  to  provide  me  all  things  that  I  needed,  and  every
day  came  himselfe  to  me,  and  caried  me  into  the  City,
and  shewed  me  the  monuments  thereof,  which  be
these.

Hee  brought  mee  first  to  Pompey  his  pillar,  which  is  ^'^^  ^^JfJ
a mighty thing of  gray  marble,  and all of  one  stone,  ^^J^)/^
in  height  by  estimation  above  52.  yards,  and  the  compasse
about  sixe  fadome.

The  City  hath  three  gates,  one  called  the  gate  of
Barbaria,  the  other  of  Merina,  and  the  thirde  of
Rossetto.

43

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

He  brought  me  to  a  stone  in  the  streete  of  the  Citie,
whereupon  S.  Marke  was  beheaded :  to  the  place  where
S.  Katherine  died,  having  there  hid  herselfe,  because  she
would  not  marry : also  to  the  Bath  of  S.  Katherine.

I  saw  there  also  Pharaos  needle,  which  is  a  thing  in
height  almost  equall  with  Pompeys  pillar,  and  is  in
compasse  five  fadome,  and  a  halfe,  and  all  of  one  stone.

I  was  brought  also  to  a  most  brave  and  daintie  Bath,
where  we  washed  our  selves :  the  Bath  being  of  marble,
and  of  very  curious  workemanship.

The  Citie  standeth  upon  great  arches,  or  vawtes,  like
unto  Churches,  with  mightie  pillars  of  marble,  to  holde
up  the  foundation :  which  arches  are  built  to  receive
the  water  of  the  river  of  Nilus,  which  is  for  the  use
of  the  Citie.  It  hath  three  Castles,  and  a  hundred
Churches :  but  the  part  that  is  destroyed  of  it,  is  sixe
times  more  then  that  part  which  standeth.

The  last  day  of  July,  I  departed  from  Alexandria
towards  Cayro  in  a  passage  boate,  wherein  first  I  went
Rossetto.  to  Rossetto,  standing  by  the  river  side,  having  13.  or
14.  great  churches  in  it,  their  building  there  is  of  stone
and  bricke,  but  as  for  lodging,  there  is  litle,  except  we
bring  it  with  us.

From  Rossetto  wee  passed  along  the  river  of  Nilus,
which  is  so  famous  in  the  world,  twise  as  broad  as  the
Thames  at  London :  on  both  sides  grow  date  trees  in
great  abundance.  The  people  be  rude,  insomuch  that  a
man  cannot  traveile  without  a  Janizary  to  conduct  him.
The  Turkes  The  time  that  I  stayed  in  ^gypt  was  the  Turkes
and  Moores  Lent,  in  all  which  time  they  burne  lamps
in  their  churches,  as  many  as  may  hang  in  them  :  their
Lent  endureth  40.  dayes,  and  they  have  three  Lents  in
the  yere :  during  which  time  they  neither  eate  nor
drink  in  the  day  time,  but  all  the  night  they  do  nothing
else.

Betwixt  Rossetto  and  Cayro  there  are  along  the
water  side  three  hundred  cities  and  townes,  and  the
length  of  the  way  is  not  above  three  hundred  miles.

44

Lent.

LAURENCE ALDERSEY  ad.

1586.

To  this  famous  Citie  of  Cayro  I  came  the  fift  day  of  Cayro.
August,  where  I  found  M.  William  Alday,  and  William
Cassar,  who  intertained  me  in  very  good  sort.  M.
Caesar  brought  mee  to  see  the  Pyramides  which  are
three  in  number,  one  whereof  king  Pharao  made  for
his  owne  tombe,  the  tombe  it  selfe  is  almost  in  the  top
of  it :  the  monuments  bee  high  and  in  forme  4.  square,
and  every  of  the  squares  is  as  long  as  a  man  may
shoote  a  roving  arrowe,  and  as  high  as  a  Church,  I
sawe  also  the  ruines  of  the  Citie  of  Memphis  hard  by
those  Pyramides.

The  house  of  Joseph  is  yet  standing  in  Cayro,  which
is  a  sumptuous  thing,  having  a  place  to  walke  in  of
^6.  mighty  pillars,  all  gilt  with  gold,  but  I  saw  it  not,
being  then  lame.

The  1 1 .  day  of  August  the  lande  was  cut  at  Cayro,
to  let  in  the  water  of  the  river  of  Nilus,  which  was
done  with  great  joy  and  triumph.

The  12.  of  August  I  set  from  Cayro  towards  Alex-
andria againe,  and  came  thither  the  14.  of  August.
The  26.  day  there  was  kept  a  great  feast  of  the  Turkes
and  Moores,  which  lasted  two  dayes,  and  for  a  day  they
never  ceased  shooting  off  of  great  Ordinance.

From  Alexandria  I  sailed  to  Argier,  where  I  lay  with  The  English
M.  Typton Consull of the English nation,  who used Consul  at
me  most  kindly,  and  at  his  owne  charge. Hee  brought ^ '
mee  to the  kings  Court, and into  the  presence  of  the  [II.  i,  285.]
King,  to  see  him,  and  the maners of  the Court : the
King doeth onely beare the name of a King, but
the  greatest  government  is  in  the  hands  of  the  souldiers.

The  king  of  Potanca  is  prisoner  in  Argier,  who
comming  to  Constantinople,  to  acknowledge  a  duety  to
the  great  Turke,  was  betrayed  by  his  owne  nephew,
who  wrote  to  the  Turke,  that  hee  went  onely  as  a  spy,
by  that  meanes  to  get  his  kingdome.  I  heard  at  Argier
of  seven  Gallies  that  were  at  that  time  cast  away  at  a
towne  called  Formentera :  three  of  them  were  of  Argier,
the  other  foure  were  the  Christians.

45

A.D.
1586.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

We  found  here  also  13.  Englishmen,  which  were  by-
force  of  weather  put  into  the  bay  of  Tunis,  where
they  were  very  ill  used  by  the  Moores,  who  forced
them  to  leave  their  barke :  whereupon  they  went  to  the
Councell  of  Argier,  to  require  a  redresse  and  remedy
for  the  injurie.  They  were  all  belonging  to  the  shippe,
called  the  Golden  Noble  of  London,  whereof  Master
Birde  is  owner.  The  Master  was  Stephen  Haselwood,
and  the  Captaine  Edmond  Bence.

The  thirde  day  of  December,  the  pinnesse  called  the
Mooneshine  of  London,  came  to  Argier  with  a  prize,
which  they  tooke  upon  the  coast  of  Spaine,  laden  with
sugar,  hides,  and  ginger :  the  pinnesse  also  belonging  to
the  Golden  Noble :  and  at  Argier  they  made  sale  both
of  shippe  and  goods,  where  wee  left  them  at  our
comming  away,  which  was  the  seventh  day  of  Januarie,
and  the  first  day  of  February,  I  landed  at  Dartmouth,
and  the  seventh  day  came  to  London,  with  humble
thankes  to  Almightie  God,  for  my  safe  arrivall.

A  true  report  of  a  worthy  fight,  performed  in
the  voyage  from  Turkic,  by  five  Ships  of
London,  against  1 1 .  Gallies,  and  two  Frigats
of  the  King  of  Spaines,  at  Pantalarea  within
the  Streights,  Anno,  1 586.  Written  by
Philip  Jones.

He  Marchants  of  London,  being  of  the
incorporation  of  the  Turky  trade,  hav-
ing received  intelligences,  and  advertise-
ments, from  time  to  time,  that  the
King  of  Spaine  grudging  at  the  pros-
peritie  of  this  kingdome,  had  not  onely
of  late  arrested  al  English  ships,  bodies,

and  goods,  in  Spaine,  but  also  maligning  the  quiet
trafique  which  they  used  to  and  in  the  dominions,  and
provinces,  under  the  obedience  of  the  Great  Turke,
had  given  order  to  the  Captaines of  his  gallies  in  the

46

A REPORT OF A WORTHY FIGHT  ad.

1586.

Levant,  to  hinder  the  passage  of  all  English  ships,  and
to  endevour  by  their  best  meanes,  to  intercept,  take,
and  spoile  them,  their  persons,  and  goods :  they  here-
upon thought  it  their  best  course  to  set  out  their  fleete
for  Turkie,  in  such  strength  and  abilitie  for  their
defence,  that  the  purpose  of  their  Spanish  enemie  might
the  better  be  prevented,  and  the  voyage  acomplished
with  greater  securitie  to  the  men  and  shippes.  For
which  cause,  five  tall,  and  stoute  shippes,  appertaining
to  London,  and  intending  onely  a  Marchants  voyage,
were  provided  and  furnished  with  all  things  belonging
to  the  Seas ;  the  names  whereof  were  these :

1.  The Marchant Royall, a  very  brave  and  good

shippe,  and  of  great  report.

2.  The  Tobie.

3.  The  Edward  Bonaventure.

4.  The  William,  and  John.

5.  The  Susan.

These  five  departing  from  the  coast  of  England,  in
the  moneth  of  November  1585.  kept  together  as  one
fleete,  til  they  came  as  high  as  the  Isle  of  Sicile,  within
the  Levant.  And  there,  according  to  the  order  and
direction  of  the  voyage,  each  shippe  began  to  take
leave  of  the  rest,  and  to  separate  himselfe,  setting  his
course  for  the  particular  port,  whereunto  hee  was
bounde :  one  for  Tripolie  in  Syria,  another  for  Con-
stantinople, the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  Turkes  Empire,
situated  upon  the  coast  of  Romania,  called  of  olde,
Thracia,  and  the  rest  to  those  places,  whereunto  they
were  privatly  appointed.  But  before  they  devided  them-
selves, they  altogether  consulted,  of  and  about  a  certaine
and  speciall  place  for  their  meeting  againe  after  the
lading  of  their  goods  at  their  severall  portes.  And  in
conclusion,  the  generall  agreement  was  to  meete  at
Zante,  an  Island  neere  to  the  maine  continent  of  the
West  part  of  Morea,  well  knowen  of  all  the  Pilots,  &
thought  to  be  the  fittest  place  of  their  Rendevous.
Concerning  which meeting, it  was also covenanted on

47

a;?.  the ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

eche  side,  and  promised,  that  whatsoever  ship  of  these
5.  should  first  arrive  at  Zante,  should  there  stay  and
expect  the  comming  of  the  rest  of  the  fleete,  for  the
space  of  twentie  dayes.  This  being  done,  ech  man
made  his  best  hast  according  as  winde  and  wether
woulde  serve  him  to  fulfill  his  course,  and  to  dispatch
his  businesse ;  and  no  neede  was  there  to  admonish  or
incourage  any  man,  seeing  no  time  was  ill  spent,  nor
opportunitie  omitted  on  any  side,  in  the  performance
of  ech  mans  duetie,  according  to  his  place.
[II.  1.  286.]  It  fell  out  that  the  Tobie  which  was  bound  for
Constantinople  had  made  such  good  speede,  and  gotten
such  good  weather,  that  she  first  of  al  the  rest  came
back  to  the  appointed  place  of  Zante,  and  not  forget-
ting the  former  conclusion,  did  there  cast  ancre,  attending
the  arrivall  of  the  rest  of  the  fleete,  which  accordingly
(their  busines  first  performed)  failed  not  to  keepe
promise.  The  first  next  after  the  Tobie  was  the  Royal
Marchant,  which  together  with  the  William  and  John
came  from  Tripolie  in  Syria,  and  arrived  at  Zante
within  the  compasse  of  the  foresaide  time  limitted.
These  ships  in  token  of  the  joy  on  all  parts  conceived
for  their  happy  meeting,  spared  not  the  discharging  of
their  Ordinance,  the  sounding  of  drums  &  trumpets,
the  spreading  of  Ensignes  with  other  warlike  and  joy-
full  behaviours,  expressing  by  these  outward  signes,  the
inward  gladnesse  of  their  mindes,  being  all  as  ready  to
joyne  together  in  mutuall  consent  to  resist  the  cruel
enemie,  as  now  in  sporting  maner  they  made  myrth
and  pastime  among  themselves.  These  three  had  not
bene  long  in  the  haven,  but  the  Edward  Bonaventure
also,  together  with  the  Susan  her  consort,  were  come
from  Venice  with  their  lading,  the  sight  of  whom  in-
creased the  joy  of  the  rest,  and  they  no  lesse  glad  of
the  presence  of  the  others,  saluted  them  in  most
friendly  and  kinde  sort,  according  to  the  maner  of  the
Seas :  and  whereas  some  of  these  ships  stoode  at  that
instant  in some  want  of  victuals,  they  were all content

A REPORT OF A WORTHY FIGHT  ad

1586.

to  stay  in  the  port,  till  the  necessities  of  ech  shippe
were  supplied,  and  nothing  wanted  to  set  out  for  their
returne.

In  this  port  of  Zante,  the  newes  was  fresh  and  cur-
rant, of  two  severall  armies  and  fleetes  provided  by  the
king  of  Spaine,  and  lying  in  waite  to  intercept  them  :  the
one  consisting  of  30.  strong  Gallies,  so  well  appointed
in  all  respects  for  the  warre,  that  no  necessary  thing
wanted  :  and  this  fleete  hovered  about  the  Streights  of
Gibraltar.  The  other  armie  had  in  it  20.  Gallies,  whereof
some  were  of  Sicilie,  and  some  of  the  Island  of  Malta,
under  the  charge  and  government  of  John  Andrea
Dorea,  a  Captaine  of  name  serving  the  king  of  Spaine.
These  two  divers  and  strong  fleetes  waited  and  attended
in  the  Seas  for  none,  but  the  English  shippes,  and  no
doubt  made  their  accompt  and  sure  reckoning  that  not
a  shippe  should  escape  their  furie.  And  the  opinion
also  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Isle  of  Zante  was,  that  in
respect  of  the  number  of  Gallies  in  both  these  armies,
having  received  such  streight  commandement  from  the
king,  our  ships  and  men  being  but  few,  and  little  in
comparison  of  them,  it  was  a  thing  in  humane  reason
impossible,  that  wee  should  passe  either  without  spoil-
ing, if  we  resisted,  or  without  composition  at  the  least,
and  acknowledgement  of  duetie  to  the  Spanish  king.

But  it  was  neither  the  report  of  the  attendance  of
these  armies,  nor  the  opinions  of  the  people,  nor  any
thing  else,  that  could  daunt  or  dismay  the  courages  of
our  men,  who  grounding  themselves  upon  the  goodnesse
of  their  cause,  and  the  promise  of  God,  to  bee  delivered
from  such  as  without  reason  sought  their  destruction,
caried  resolute  mindes,  notwithstanding  all  impediments
to  adventure  through  the  Seas,  and  to  finish  their  Navi-
gation, maugre  the  beards  of  the  Spanish  souldiers.  But
least  they  should  seeme  too  carelesse,  and  too  secure  of
their  estate,  and  by  laying  the  whole  and  entire  burden
of  their  safetie  upon  Gods  providence,  should  foolishly
presume  altogether  of  his  helpe,  and  neglect  the  meanes

VI  49  D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

which  was  put  into  their  handes,  they  failed  not  to  enter
into  counsell  among  themselves,  and  to  deliberate  ad-
visedly for  their  best  defence.  And  in  the  end  with
generall  consent,  the  Marchant  Royall  was  appointed
Admirall  of  the  fleete,  and  the  Tobie  Viceadmiral,  by
whose  orders  the  rest  promised  to  be  directed,  and  ech
shippe  vowed  not  to  breake  from  another,  whatsoever
extremitie  should  fall  out,  but  to  stand  to  it  to  the
death,  for  the  honour  of  their  Countrey,  and  the
frustrating  of  the  hope  of  the  ambitious  and  proud
enemie.

Thus  in  good  order  they  left  Zante  and  the  Castle  of
Graecia,  and  committed  themselves  againe  to  the  Seas,
and  proceeded  in  their  course  and  voyage  in  quietnes,
without  sight  of  any  enemie,  till  they  came  neere  to
Pantalarea,  an  Island  so  called,  betwixt  Sicilie,  and  the
coast  of  Africke:  into  sight  whereof  they  came  the  13.  day
of  July  1586.  And  the  same  day  in  the  morning  about
7.  of  the  clocke  they  descried  13.  sailes  in  number,
which  were  of  the  Gallies,  lying  in  waite  of  purpose  for
them,  in  and  about  that  place.  As  soone  as  the  English
ships  had  spied  them,  they  by  and  by  according  to  a  com-
mon order,  made  themselves  ready  for  a  fight,  layed  out
their  Ordinance,  scoured,  charged,  and  primed  them,  dis-
played their  ensignes,  and  left  nothing  undone  to  arme
themselves  throughly.  In  the  meane  time,  the  Gallies  more
and  more  approched  the  ships,  and  in  their  banners  there
appeared  the  armes  of  the  Isles  of  Sicilia,  and  Malta,
being  all  as  then  in  the  service  and  pay  of  the  Spaniard.
Immediatly,  both  the  Admirals  of  the  Gallies  sent  from
ech  of  them  a  frigate,  to  the  Admiral  of  our  English
ships,  which  being  come  neere  them,  the  Sicilian  frigat
first  hailed  them,  and  demanded  of  them  whence  they
were.?  They  answered  that  they  were  of  England,  the
armes  whereof  appeared  in  their  colours.  Whereupon
the  saide  frigat  expostulated  with  them,  and  asked  why
they  delayed  to  sende  or  come  with  their  Captaines
and  pursers  to  Don  Pedro de  Leiva  their  Generall,  to

50

A REPORT OF A WORTHY FIGHT  ad.

1586.

acknowledge  their  duty  and  obedience  to  him  in  the  name  [II.  i.  287.]
of  the  Spanish  king,  Lord  of  those  seas  ?  Our  men
replied,  and  said,  that  they  owed  no  such  duetie  nor
obedience  to  him,  and  therefore  would  acknowledge
none,  but  commanded  the  frigat  to  depart  with  that
answere,  and  not  to  stay  longer  a  brabling,  upon  her
perill.  With  that  away  she  went,  and  up  comes  toward
them  the  other  frigat  of  Malta,  and  shee  in  like  sort
hailed  the  Admiral,  and  would  needs  know  whence  they
were,  and  where  they  had  bene.  Our  Englishmen  in
the  Admirall,  not  disdaining  an  answere,  tolde  them  that
they  were  of  England,  Marchants  of  London,  had  bene
at  Turkic,  and  were  now  returning  home :  and  to  be
requited  in  this  case,  they  also  demaunded  of  the  frigat
whence  she  and  the  rest  of  the  gallies  were :  the  mes-
senger answered,  we  are  of  Malta,  and  for  mine  owne
part  my  name  is  Cavallero.  These  Gallies  are  in  service
and  pay  to  the  king  of  Spaine,  under  the  conduct  of
Don  Pedro  de  Leiva  a  noble  man  of  Spaine,  who  hath
bene  commanded  hither  by  the  King  with  this  present
force  and  armie,  of  purpose  to  intercept  you.  You  shall
therefore  (quoth  he)  do  well  to  repaire  to  him  to  know
his  pleasure,  he  is  a  noble  man  of  good  behaviour  and
courtesie,  and  meanes  you  no  ill.  The  Captaine  of  the
English  Admiral,  whose  name  was  M.  Edward  Wilkin-
son, replied  and  said.  We  purpose  not  at  this  time  to
make  triall  of  Don  Pedro  his  courtesie,  whereof  we  are
suspitious  and  doubtful,  and  not  without  good  cause  :
using  withall  good  words  to  the  messenger,  and  willing
him  to  come  aboord  him,  promising  securitie  and  good
usage,  that  thereby  he  might  the  better  knowe  the
Spaniards  minde :  whereupon  he  in  deed  left  his  frigat,
and  came  aboord  him,  whom  hee  intertained  in  friendly
sort,  and  caused  a  cuppe  of  wine  to  be  drawne  for  him,
which  he  tooke  and  beganne,  with  his  cap  in  his  hand,
and  with  reverend  termes  to  drinke  to  the  health  of  the
Queene  of  England,  speaking  very  honourably  of  her
Majestic, and giving good  speeches of  the courteous

51

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

usage  and  interteinement  that  he  himselfe  had  received
in  London,  at  the  time  that  the  duke  of  Alenson,
brother  to  the  late  French  king  was  last  in  England :
and  after  he  had  well  drunke,  hee  tooke  his  leave,  speak-
ing well  of  the  sufficiencie  and  goodnesse  of  our  shippes,
and  especially  of  the  Marchant  Royal,  which  he  confessed
to  have  scene  before,  riding  in  the  Thames  neere  Lon-
don. He  was  no  sooner  come  to  Don  Pedro  de  Leiva
the  Spanish  general,  but  he  was  sent  off  againe,  and
returned  to  the  English  Admirall,  saying  that  the  plea-
sure of  the  Generall  was  this,  that  either  their  Captaines,
Masters  and  Pursers  should  come  to  him  with  speed,  or
else  hee  would  set  upon  them,  and  either  take  them  or
sinke  them.  The  reply  was  made  by  M.  Wilkinson
aforesaid,  that  not  a  man  should  come  to  him :  and  for
the  bragge  and  threat  of  Don  Pedro,  it  was  not  that
Spanish  bravado  that  should  make  them  yeeld  a  jot  to
their  hinderance,  but  they  were  as  ready  to  make  resist-
ance, as  he  to  offer  an  injurie.  Whereupon  Cavallero
the  messenger  left  bragging,  and  began  to  perswade  them
in  quiet  sort,  and  with  many  wordes,  but  all  his  labour
was  to  no  purpose,  and  as  his  threat  did  nothing  terrifie
them,  so  his  perswasion  did  nothing  moove  them  to  doe
that  which  hee  required.  At  the  last  he  intreated  to
have  the  Marchant  of  the  Admirall  caried  by  him  as  a
messenger  to  the  Generall,  that  so  he  might  be  satisfied,
and  assured  of  their  mindes  by  one  of  their  owne  com-
pany. But  M.  Wilkinson  would  agree  to  no  such  thing,
although  Richard  Rowit  the  marchant  himselfe  seemed
willing  to  bee  imployed  in  that  message,  and  laboured  by
reasonable  perswasions  to  induce  M.  Wilkinson  to  graunt
it,  as  hoping  to  be  an  occasion  by  his  presence  and
discreet  answeres  to  satisfie  the  Generall,  and  thereby  to
save  the  effusion  of  Christian  blood,  if  it  should  grow
to  a  battel.  And  he  seemed  so  much  the  more  willing
to  be  sent,  by  how  much  deeper  the  othes  and  protes-
tations of  this  Cavallero  were,  that  he  would  (as  hee
was a  true knight and a  souldier)  deliver him backe

52

A REPORT OF A WORTHY FIGHT  ad.

1586.

againe  in  safetie  to  his  company.  Albeit,  M.  Wilkinson,
which  by  his  long  experience  had  received  sufficient
triall  of  Spanish  inconstancie  and  perjurie,  wished  him
in  no  case  to  put  his  life  and  libertie  in  hazard  upon
a  Spaniards  othe.  But  at  last,  upon  much  intreatie,  hee
yeelded  to  let  him  go  to  the  General,  thinking  in  deed,
that  good  speeches  and  answeres  of  reason  would  have
contented  him,  whereas  otherwise  refusall  to  do  so,
might  peradventure  have  provoked  the  more  discontent-
ment.

M.  Rowit  therefore  passing  to  the  Spanish  Generall,
the  rest  of  the  Gallies  having  espied  him,  thought  in
deed  that  the  English  were  rather  determined  to  yeelde,
then  to  fight,  and  therefore  came  flocking  about  the
frigat,  every  man  crying  out.  Que  nuevas,  que  nuevas,
Have  these  English  men  yeelded  ?  the  frigat  answered.
Not  so,  they  neither  have,  nor  purpose  to  yeeld,  onely
they  have  sent  a  man  of  their  company  to  speake  with
our  Generall :  and  being  come  to  the  Gallie  wherein  he
was,  he  shewed  himselfe  to  M.  Rowit  in  his  armour,  his
guard  of  souldiers  attending  upon  him  in  armour  also,
and  began  to  speake  very  proudly  in  this  sort :  Thou
Englishman,  from  whence  is  your  fleete,  why  stand  ye
aloofe  off,  knowe  ye  not  your  duetie  to  the  Catholique
King,  whose  person  I  here  represent  .f"  Where  are  your
billes  of  lading,  your  letters,  pasports,  and  the  chiefe  of
your  men?  Thinke  ye  my  attendance  in  these  seas  to
be  in  vaine,  or  my  person  to  no  purpose  ?  Let  al  these
things  be  done  out  of  hand  as  I  command,  upon  paine  of
my  further  displeasure  and  the  spoyle  of  you  all :  These  [II.  i.  288.]
wordes  of  the  Spanish  Generall  were  not  so  outragiously
pronounced  as  they  were  mildly  answered  by  M.  Rowit,
who  tolde  him  that  they  were  al  Marchantmen,  using
trafique  in  honest  sort,  and  seeking  to  passe  quietly,  if
they  were  not  urged  further  then  reason.  As  for  the
king  of  Spaine,  he  thought  (for  his  part)  that  there  was
amitie  betwixt  him  and  his  soveraigne  the  Queene  of
England,  so  that  neither  he  nor  his  officers  should  goe

53

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

about  to  offer  any  such  injuria  to  English  Marchants,
who  as  they  were  farre  from  giving  offence  to  any  man,
so  they  would  be  loath  to  take  an  abuse  at  the  handes  of
any,  or  sit  downe  to  their  losse,  where  their  abilitie  was
able  to  make  defence.  And  as  touching  his  commande-
ment  aforesaide,  for  the  acknowledging  of  duetie,  in  such
particular  sort,  he  told  him,  that  where  there  was  no
dutie  owing,  there  none  should  be  performed,  assuring
him  that  their  whole  company  and  shippes  in  generall,
stood  resolutely  upon  the  negative,  and  would  not  yeeld
to  any  such  unreasonable  demaund,  joyned  with  such
imperious  and  absolute  maner  of  commanding.  Why
then,  said  he,  if  they  wil  neither  come  to  yeeld,  nor  shew
obedience  to  me  in  the  name  of  my  king,  I  wil  either
sinke  them  or  bring  them  to  harbor,  and  so  tell  them
from  me.  With  that  the  frigat  came  away  with  M.
Rowit,  and  brought  him  aboord  the  English  Admiral
againe  according  to  promise :  who  was  no  sooner  entred
in,  but  by  and  by  defiance  was  sounded  on  both  sides :
the  Spaniards  hewed  off  the  noses  of  the  Gallies,  that
nothing  might  hinder  the  levell  of  the  shot,  and  the
English  on  the  other  side  couragiously  prepared  them-
selves to  the  combat,  every  man  according  to  his  roome,
bent  to  performe  his  office  with  alacritie  and  diligence.
In  the  meane  time  a  Cannon  was  discharged  from  the
Admirall  of  the  gallies,  which  being  the  onset  of  the
fight,  was  presently  answered  by  the  English  Admiral
with  a  Culvering :  so  the  skirmish  began,  and  grew  hot
and  terrible,  there  was  no  powder  nor  shot  spared  :  ech
English  ship  matched  it  selfe  in  good  order  against  two
Spanish  Gallies,  besides  the  inequalitie  of  the  frigats  on
the  Spaniards  side :  and  although  our  men  performed
their  parts  with  singular  valure,  according  to  their
strength,  insomuch  that  the  enemie  as  amased  therewith
would  oftentimes  pause  and  stay,  and  consult  what  was
best  to  be  done,  yet  they  ceased  not  in  the  midst  of
their  businesse  to  make  prayer  to  Almighty  God  the
revenger  of  al evils,  and  the  giver of  victories,  that  it

54

A REPORT OF A WORTHY FIGHT  ad

158-6.

would please him to assist them in that  good  quarell

of  theirs,  in defending themselves against so proud a

tyrant,  to  teach their  handes  to  warre,  and  their  fingers

to  fight,  that the glory  of  the victory might  redound

to  his Name,  and  to  the  honor  of  true  Religion  which

the insolent enemie sought so much to overthrowe.

Contrarily,  the  foolish  Spaniardes  cried  out  according  to

their  maner,  not  to  God,  but  to  our  Lady  (as  they  terme

the  virgin  Mary)  saying,  O  Lady  helpe,  O  blessed  Lady

give  us  the  victory,  and  the  honor  thereof  shalbe  thine.

Thus with blowes & prayers  on both sides the fight

continued  furious  and  sharpe,  and  doubtful  a  long  time

to  which  part  the  victory  would  incline : til  at  the  last

the Admiral of  the Gallies of  Sicilie began to warpe

from the fight,  and to holde up her side  for  feare of

sinking,  and  after  her  went  also  two  others  in  like  case,

whom al the sort of  them inclosed, labouring by  all

their  meanes to keepe them  above  water,  being ready

by  the  force  of  English  shot  which  they  had  received  to

perish  in  the  seas : &  what  slaughter  was  done  among

the  Spaniards themselves,  the English  were uncertaine,

but by  a probable conjecture apparant afar off, they

supposed  their  losse  was  so  great,  that  they  wanted  men

to  continue  the  charging  of  their  pieces:  whereupon  with  A  fight  of  five

shame  and  dishonor,  after  5.  houres  spent  in  the  battel,  ^^°^^^'-

they withdrew  themselves : and the  English contented

in  respect  of  their  deepe  lading,  rather  to  continue  their

voyage then to follow  the chase, ceased from further

blowes,  with  the  losse  onely  of  two  men  slaine  amongst

them all, and another hurt in his arme, whom M.

Wilkinson with his  good  words and friendly  promises

did  so  comfort,  that  he  nothing  esteemed  the  smart  of

his  wound in  respect  of  the  honour  of  the  victory,  and

the  shamefull  repulse  of  the  enemy.

Thus  with  duetiful  thankes  to  the  mercy  of  God  for
his  gracious  assistance  in  that  danger,  the  English  ships
proceeded  in  their  Navigation,  and  comming  as  high  as
Alger,  a  port  towne  upon  the  coast  of  Barbary,  they  fell

55

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

with  it,  of  purpose  to  refresh  themselves  after  their
wearinesse,  and  to  take  in  such  supply  of  fresh  water  &
victuals,  as  they  needed :  they  were  no  sooner  entred
into  the  port,  but  immediatly  the  king  thereof  sent  a
messenger  to  the  ships  to  knowe  what  they  were,  with
which  messenger  the  chiefe  master  of  ech  shippe  repaired
to  the  king,  and  acquainted  him  not  onely  with  the  state
of  their  ships,  in  respect  of  marchandize,  but  with  the
late  fight  which  they  had  passed  with  the  Spanish  Gallies,
reporting  every  particular  circumstance  in  word  as  it  fell
out  in  action :  whereof  the  said  king  shewed  himselfe
marveilous  glad,  interteining  them  in  the  best  sort,  and
promising  abundant  reliefe  of  all  their  wants,  making
generall  proclamation  in  the  city  upon  paine  of  death,
that  no  man  of  what  degree  or  state  soever  he  were,
should  presume  either  to  hinder  them  in  their  affaires,
or  to  offer  them  any  maner  of  injury  in  body  or  goods.
By  vertue  whereof  they  dispatched  al  things  in  excellent
good  sort,  with  al  favor  &  peaceablenesse :  only  such
prisoners  and  captives  of  the  Spaniards  as  were  in  the
Citie,  seeing  the  good  usage  which  they  received,  and
[II.  i.  289.]  hearing  also  what  service  they  had  performed  against  the
foresaide  Gallies,  grudged  exceedingly  against  them,  and
sought  as  much  as  they  could  to  practise  some  mischiefs
against  them :  and  one  amongst  the  rest  seeing  an
Englishman  alone  in  a  certaine  lane  of  the  Citie,  came
upon  him  suddenly,  and  with  his  knife  thrust  him  in
the  side,  yet  made  no  such  great  wound,  but  that  it  was
easily  recovered.  The  English  company  hearing  of  it,
acquainted  the  king  with  the  fact,  who  immediatly  sent
both  for  the  party  that  had  received  the  wound,  and  the
offender  also,  and  caused  an  executioner  in  the  presence
of  himselfe  and  the  English,  to  chastise  the  slave  even
to  death,  which  was  performed  to  the  ende  that  no  man
should  presume  to  commit  the  like  part,  or  to  doe  any
thing  in  contempt  of  his  royal  commandement.

The  English  having  received  this  good  justice  at  the
kings  hands,  and al  other things that they  wanted,  or

56

A REPORT OF A WORTHY FIGHT  ad.

1586.

could  crave for the furnishing of  their shippes,  tooke

their  leave  of  him,  and  of  the  rest  of  their  friendes,  that

were  resident  in  Alger,  and  put  out  to  Sea,  looking  to

meete  with  the  second  army  of  the Spanish  king,  which

waited for them about the mouth of  the Straights  of

Gibraltar,  which  they  were of  necessitie  to  passe. But

comming neere  to  the  said  Streight,  it  pleased  God  to

raise  at that  instant a  very  darke  and mistie  fogge,  so

that  one  ship  coulde  not  discerne  another,  if  it  were  40.

paces  off:  by  meanes  whereof,  together  with  the  notable

faire  Easterne  winds that  then blewe  most  fit  for  their

course,  they  passed  with  great  speed  through  the  Streight,

and  might have  passed  with  that  good  gale,  had there

bene  500.  Gallies  to  withstand  them,  and  the  aire  never

so  cleare  for  every  ship  to  be  scene. But  yet  the  Spanish T^^^  ^^<r««^

Gallies  had  a  sight  of  them  when  they  were  come  within  ^P^^"^  P^!^

3.  English  miles  of  the  towne,  and  made  after  them  in  for  the

all  possible  haste,  and  although  they  saw  that  they  were  English.

farre  out  of  their  reach,  yet  in  a  vaine  fury  and  foolish

pride,  they  shot  off  their Ordinance,  and  made  a  stirre

in the Sea as if  they  had bene in  the  midst  of  them,

which vanitie of  theirs ministred to our men notable

matter  of  pleasure  and  mirth,  seeing  men  to  fight  with

shadowes, and to take so great paines to so small

purpose.

But  thus  it  pleased  God  to  deride,  and  delude  all  the
forces  of  that  proud  Spanish  king,  which  he  had  provided
of  purpose  to  distresse  the  English,  who  notwithstanding
passed  through  both  his  Armies,  in  the  one,  little  hurt,
and  in  the  other  nothing  touched,  to  the  glory  of  his
immortall  Name,  the  honour  of  our  Prince  and  Countrey,
and  the  just  commendation  of  ech  mans  service  per-
formed in  that  voyage.

[The  returne

57

A.D.

1588.

The  letters  of
the  Fr'tnce  of
Moldavia  to
the  Queene.
Letters  of  the
Chanceler  of
Poland  to  the
Queene.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The returne of Master  William Harborne  from
Constantinople  over  land  to  London, 1588.

I  Departed  from  Constantinople  with  30.
persons  of  my  suit  and  family  the  3.  of
August.  Passing  through  the  Countries
of  Thracia,  now  called  Romania  the
great,  Valachia  &  Moldavia,  where  ariv-
ing  the  5.  of  September  I  was  according
to  the  Grand  Signior  his  commandement
very  courteously  interteined  by  Peter  his  positive  prince,
a  Greeke  by  profession,  with  whom  was  concluded  that
her  Majesties  subjects  there  trafiquing  should  pay  but
three  upon  the  hundreth,  which  as  well  his  owne  Subjects
as  all  other  nations  answere :  whose  letters  to  her  Majes-
tic be  extant.  Whence  I  proceeded  into  Poland,  where
the  high  Chanceler  sent  for  mee  the  27.  of  the  same
moneth.  And  after  most  honorable  intertainment
imparted  with  me  in  secret  maner  the  late  passed  and
present  occurrents  of  that  kingdome,  &  also  he  writ  to
her  Majestic.

Thence  I  hasted  unto  Elbing,  where  the  12.  of  October
I  was  most  friendly  welcomed  by  the  Senate  of  that
City,  whom  I  finde  and  judge  to  be  faithfully  devoted
to  her  Majesties  service,  whose  letters  likewise  unto  the
same  were  presented  me.  No  lesse  at  Dantzik  the  27.
of  that  moneth  I  was  courteously  received  by  one  of  the
Buroughmasters  accompanied  with  two  others  of  the
Senate,  &  a  Civil  doctor  their  Secretarie.  After  going
through  the  land  of  Pomer  I  rested  one  day  at  Stetin,
where,  for  that  ye  duke  was  absent,  nothing  ensued.  At
Rostoke  I  passed  through  the  Citie  without  any  stay,  and
at  Wismar  received  like  friendly  greeting  as  in  the  other
places :  but  at  Lubeck,  for  that  I  came  late  and  departed
early  in  the  morning,  I  was  not  visited.  At  Hamburg
the  19.  of  November,  and  at  Stoad  the  ninth  of  Decem-
ber in  like  maner  I  was  saluted  by  a  Boroughmaster  and
the  Secretarie,  and  in  all  these  places  they  presented  mee

58

PRINCE OF MOLDAVIA'S PRIVILEGE  a.d.

1588.

sundry  sorts  of  their  best  wine  and  fresh  fish,  every  of
them  with  a  long  discourse,  congratulating,  in  the  names
of  their  whole  Senate,  her  Majesties  victory  over  the
Spaniard,  and  my  safe  returne,  concluding  with  offer  of
their  ready  service  to  her  future  disposing.  Yet  the
Dantziks  after  my  departure  thence  caused  the  Marchants
to  pay  custome  for  the  goods  they  brought  with  them  in
my  company,  which  none  other  towne  neither  Infidels  nor
Christians  on  ye  way  ever  demanded.  And  notwith-
standing the  premisses,  I  was  most  certainly  informed  of
sundry  of  our  nation  there  resident  that  most  of  the  [II.  i.  290.]
Hanse-towns  upon  the  sea  coasts,  especially  Dantzik,
Lubeck,  and  Hamborough  have  laden  and  were  ship-
ping for  Spaine,  great  provision  of  corne,  cables,  ropes,
powder,  saltpeter,  hargubusses,  armour,  iron,  leade,
copper,  and  all  other  munition  serving  for  the  warre.
Whereupon  I  gather  their  fained  courtesie  proceeded
rather  for  feare  then  of  any  good  affection  unto  her
Majesties  service,  Elbing  and  Stoad  onely  excepted,
which  of  duetie  for  their  commoditie  I  esteemed  well
affected.

The  privilege  of  Peter  the Prince of  Moldavia
graunted  to  the  English Marchants.

Etrus  Dei  gratia  princeps  Valachiae  &
Moldaviae ;  significamus  praesentibus,
universis  &  singulis  quorum  interest  ac
intererit,  quod  cum  magnifico  domino
Guilielmo  Hareborne  oratore  Serenissimae
ac  potentissimas  dominae,  dominae  Eliza-
bethae  Dei  gratia  Angliae,  Franciae,  ac
Hiberniae  Reginae  apud  Serenissimum  ac  potentissimum
Turcarum  Imperatorem  hanc  constitutionem  fecerimus :
Nimirum  ut  dehinc  su£e  Serenitatis  subditis,  omnibusque
mercatoribus  integrum  sit  hie  in  provincia  nostra  com-
morandi,  conversandi,  mercandi,  vendendi,  contrahendique,
imo  omnia  exercendi,  quae  mercaturas  ac  vitae  humanae
societas  ususque  requirit,  sine  uUa  alicujus  contradictione,

59

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

aut  inhibitione :  salvo  ac  integro  tamen  jure  Telonii
nostri ;  hoc  est,  ut  a  singulis  rebus  centum  ducatorum
pretiij  tres  numerent.  Quod  ratum  ac  firmum  constitu-
tione  nostra  haberi  volumus.  In  cujus  rei  firmius
testimonium,  sigillum  nostrum  appressum  est.  Actum
in  castris  nostris  die  27.  mensis  Augusti,  anno  Domini
1588.

The  same  in  English.

jEter  by  the  grace  of  God  prince  of  Valachia  and  Mol-
davia ;  we  signifie  by  these  presents  to  all  and  singuler
persons,  whom  it  doth  or  shall  concerne,  that  we  have
made  this  agreement  with  the  worthy  gentleman  William
Hareborne  Ambassador  of  the  right  high  and  mighty
prince,  the  Lady  Elizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene
of  England,  France  and  Ireland,  with  the  most  puissant
and  mightie  Emperour  of  the  Turkes :  To  witte,  that
from  hencefoorth  it  shalbe  lawfuU  for  her  highnesse  sub-
jects and  all  her  Marchants,  to  remaine,  converse,  buy,
sel,  bargaine  and  exercise  all  such  things,  as  the  trade  of
marchandise,  and  humane  societie  and  use  requireth,
without  any  hinderance  or  let :  the  right  of  our  Custome
alwayes  reserved ;  That  is,  that  they  pay  three  ducats
upon  all  such  things  as  amount  to  the  price  of  one  hun-
dred ducats.  Which  by  this  our  ordinance  we  command
to  be  surely  and  firmely  observed ;  For  the  more  assured
testimony  whereof,  our  seale  is  hereunto  annexed.  Given
in  our  Campe  the  27.  of  the  moneth  of  August  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord 1588.

60

THE GRAND SIGNIOR'S PAYMENTS

A  briefe  extract  specifying  the  certaine  dayly  pai-
ments,  answered  quarterly  in  time  of  peace,  by
the  Grand  Signior,  out  of  his  Treasurie,  to  the
Officers  of  his  SeragHo  or  Court,  successively
in  degrees :  collected  in  a  yeerely  totall  summe,
as  folio weth.

Or  his  owne  diet  every  day,  one  thousand
and  one  aspers,  according  to  a  former
custome  received  from  his  auncestors :
notwithstanding  that  otherwise  his  diur-
nall  expence  is  very  much,  and  not
certainly  knowen,  which  summe  maketh
sterling  money  by  the  yere,  two  thou-
sand, one  hundred,  92.  pounds,  three  shillings,  eight
pence.

The  five  and  fourtie  thousand  Janizaries  dispersed  in
sundry  places  of  his  dominions,  at  sixe  aspers  the  day,
amounteth  by  the  yeere  to  five  hundreth,  fourescore  and
eleven  thousand,  and  three  hundreth  pounds.

The  Azamoglans,  tribute  children,  farre  surmount  that
number,  for  that  they  are  collected  from  among  the
Christians,  from  whom  betweene  the  yeeres  of  sixe  and
twelve,  they  are  pulled  away  yeerely  perforce :  whereof  I
suppose  those  in  service  may  be  equall  in  number  with
the  Janizaries  abovesaid,  at  three  aspers  a  day,  one  with
another,  which  is  two  hundred  fourescore  and  fifteene
thousand,  sixe  hundred  and  fiftie  pounds.

The  five  Bassas,  whereof  the  Viceroy  is  supreme,  at  one
thousand  aspers  the  day,  besides  their  yerely  revenues,
amounteth  sterling  by  the  yeere  to  ten  thousand,  nine
hundred  and  fiftie  pounds.

The  five  Beglerbegs,  chiefe  presidents  of  Greece,  Hun-
gary and  Sclavonia,  being  in  Europe,  in  Natolia,  and
Caramania  of  Asia,  at  one  thousande  aspers  the  day :
as  also  to  eighteene  other  governours  of  Provinces,
at five hundred aspers the day, amounteth by the

61

A.D.
1588.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

yeere, to  thirtie  thousand sixe hundred,  and  threescore
pounds.
[II.  i.  291.] The  Bassa,  Admirall  of  the  Sea,  one  thousand  aspers
the  day,  two  thousand,  one  hundred,  foure  score  and  ten
thousand  pounds.

The  Aga  of  the  Janizaries,  generall  of  the  footemen,
five  hundred  aspers  the  day,  and  maketh  by  the  yeere  in
sterling  money,  one  thousand,  fourescore  and  fifteene
pounds.

The  Imbrahur  Bassa,  Master  of  his  horse,  one  hundred
and  fiftie  aspers  the  day,  is  sterling  money,  three  hun-
dred and  eight  and  twenty  pounds.

The  chiefe  Esquire  under  him,  one  hundred  and  fiftie
aspers,  is  three  hundred  and  eight  and  twenty  pounds.

The  Agas  of  the  Spahi,  Captaines  of  the  horsemen,
sixe,  at  one  hundred  and  fiftie  aspers  to  either  of  them,
maketh  sterling,  one  thousand,  nine  hundred,  three  score
and  eleven  pounds.

The  Capagi  Bassas  head  porters  foure,  one  hundred
and  fiftie  aspers  to  ech,  and  maketh  out  in  sterling  money
by  the  yeere,  one  thousand,  three  hundred,  and  foure-
teene  pounds.

The  Sisinghir  Bassa,  Controller  of  the  housholde,  one
hundred  and  twentie  aspers  the  day,  and  maketh  out  in
sterling  money  by  the  yeere,  two  hundred,  threescore  and
two  poundes,  sixteene  shillings.

The  Chaus  Bassa,  Captaine  of  the  Pensioners,  one  hun-
dred and  twentie  aspers  the  day,  and  amounteth  to  by  the
yeere  in  sterling  money,  two  hundred,  threescore  and  two
pounds,  sixteene  shillings.

The  Capigilar  Caiasi,  Captaine  of  his  Barge,  one  hun-
dreth  and  twentie  aspers  the  day,  and  maketh  out  by  the
yeere  in  sterling  money,  two  hundred,  threescore  and  two
poundes,  sixteene  shillings.

The  Solach  Bassi,  Captaine  of  his  guard,  one  hundred
and  twentie  aspers,  two  hundred,  three  score  and  two
pounds,  sixteene  shillings.

The  Giebrigi  Bassi,  master  of  the  armoury,  one  hun-

62

THE GRAND SIGNIOR'S PAYMENTS  ad.

1588.

dred  and  twenty  aspers,  two  hundred,  three  score  and
two  pounds,  sixteene  shillings.

The  Topagi  Bassi,  Master  of  the  artilierie,  one  hundred
and  twentie  aspers,  two  hundred,  three  score  and  two
pounds,  sixteene  shillings.

The  Echim  Bassi,  Phisition  to  his  person,  one  hundred
and  twentie  aspers,  two  hundred,  three  score  and  two
pounds,  sixteene  shillings.

To  fourtie  Phisitions  under  him,  to  ech  fourtie  aspers,
is  three  thousand,  eight  hundred,  three  score  and  sixe
pounds,  sixteene  shillings.

The  Mustafaracas  spearemen,  attending  on  his  person,
in  number  five  hundred,  to  either  three  score  aspers,
and  maketh  sterling,  threescore  and  five  thousand,  and
seven  hundred  pounds.

The  Cisingeri  gentlemen,  attending  upon  his  diet,
fiDurtie,  at  fourtie  aspers  ech  of  them,  and  amounteth
to  sterling  by  the  yeere,  three  thousand,  five  hundred
and  foure  pounds.

The  Chausi  Pensioners,  foure  hundred  and  fourtie,  at
thirtie  aspers,  twenty  eight  thousand,  nine  hundred,  and
eight  pounds.

The  Capagi  porters  of  the  Court  and  City,  foure
hundred,  at  eight  aspers,  and  maketh  sterling  money  by
the  yeere,  seven  thousand,  and  eight  pounds.

The  Solachi,  archers  of  his  guard,  three  hundreth  and
twenty,  at  nine  aspers,  and  commeth  unto  in  English
money,  the  summe  of  sixe  thousand,  three  hundred  and
sixe  pounds.

The  Spahi,  men  of  Armes  of  the  Court  and  the  City,
ten  thousand,  at  twenty  five  aspers,  and  maketh  of
English  money,  five  hundred,  forty  and  seven  thousand,
and  five  hundred  pounds.

The  Janizaires  sixteene  thousand,  at  six  aspers,  is  two
hundred  and  ten  thousand,  and  two  hundred  and  forty
pounds.

The  Giebegi  furbushers  of  armor,  one  thousand,  five
hundred, at sixe aspers, and amounteth to sterling

63

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

money,  nineteene  thousand, seven hundred,  and  foure-
score  pounds.

The  Seiesir,  servitors  in  his  Equier  or  stable,
five  hundred,  at  two  aspers,  and  maketh  sterling
money,  two  thousand,  one  hundred,  fourescore  and  ten
pounds.

The  Saesi,  Sadlers  and  bit  makers,  five  hundred,  at
seven  aspers,  seven  thousand,  six  hundred,  threescore
and  five  pounds.

The  Catergi,  Carriers  upon  Mules,  two  hundred,  at
five  aspers,  two  thousand,  one  hundred,  fourescore  and
ten  pounds.

The  Cinegi,  Carriers  upon  Camels,  one  thousand,  five
hundred,  at  eight  aspers,  and  amounteth  in  sterling
money,  to  twenty  sixe  thousand,  two  hundred,  and
fourescore  pounds.

The  Reiz,  or  Captaines  of  the  Gallies,  three  hundred,
at  ten  aspers,  and  amounteth  in  English  money  by  the
yeere,  the  summe  of  sixe  thousand,  five  hundred,  three-
score and  ten  pounds.

The  Alechingi,  Masters  of  the  said  Gallies,  three
hundred,  at  seven  aspers,  foure  thousand,  five  hundred,
fourescore  and  nineteene  pounds.
[II.  i.  292.]  The  Getti,  Boateswaines  thereof,  three  hundred,  at
sixe  aspers,  is  three  thousande,  nine  hundred,  fourty  and
two  pounds.

The  Oda  Bassi,  Pursers,  three  hundred,  at  five  aspers,
maketh  three  thousand,  two  hundred,  and  fourescore
pounds.

The  Azappi  souldiers  two  thousand  sixe  hundred  at
foure  Aspers,  whereof  the  six  hundred  do  continually
keepe  the  gallies,  two  and  twentie  thousand,  seven  hun-
dred fourscore  and  six  pounds.

The  Mariers  Bassi  masters  over  the  shipwrights  and
kalkers  of  the  navie,  nine,  at  20.  Aspers  the  piece,
amounteth  to  three  thousand  fourescore  and  foure
pound,  foure  shillings.

The  Master  Dassi  shipwrights  &  kalkers,  one  thousand

THE GRAND SIGNIOR'S PAYMENTS  ad

1588.

at fourteene aspers,  which amounteth by  the  yeere,  to
thirtie  thousand,  sixe  hundred  threescore  pound.

Summa  totalis  of  dayly  paiments  amounteth  by  the
yeere  sterling,  one  million,  nine  hundred  threescore
eight  thousand,  seven  hundred  thirty  five  pounds,
nineteene  shillings  eight  pence,  answered  quarterly
without  default,  with  the  summe  of  foure  hundred
fourescore  twelve  thousand,  one  hundred  fourescore
and  foure  pounds  foure  shillings  eleven  pence,  and  is
for  every  day  jfive  thousand  three  hundred  fourescore
and  thirteene  pounds,  fifteene  shillings  ten  pence.

Annuities  of  lands  never  improved,  five  times
more  in  value  then  their  summes  mentioned,
given  by  the  saide  Grand  Signior,  as  followeth.

TO  the  Viceroy  for  his  Timar  or  annuitie  60,  thousand
golde  ducats.
To the second Bassa for his annuitie 50.  thousand

ducats.
To  the  third  Bassa  for  his  annuitie  40.  thousand  ducats.
To  the  fourth  Bassa  for  his  annuitie  30.  thousand  ducats.
To  the  fifth  Bassa  for  his  annuitie  20.  thousand  ducats.
To  the  Captaine  of  the  Janizaries  20.  thousand  ducats.
To  the  Jeu  Merhorbassi  master  of  his  horse  15.  thousand

ducats.
To  the  Captaine  of  the  pensioners  10.  thousand  ducats.
To  the  Captaine  of  his  guard  5.  thousand  ducats.

Summa  totalis  90.  thousand  li.  sterling.
Beside  these  above  specified,  be  sundry  other  annuities
given  to  divers  others  of  his  aforesaid  officers,  as  also  to
certaine  called  Sahims,  diminishing  from  three  thousand
to  two  hundreth  ducats,  esteemed  treble  to  surmount
the  annuitie  abovesaid.

The  Turkes  chiefe  officers.

THe  Viceroy  is  high  Treasurer,  notwithstanding  that
under  him  be  three subtreasurers  called  Teftadars,
which bee accomptable to him of  the  receipts out of

VI  65  E

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Europe,  Asia  and  Africa,  save  their  yeerely  annuitie  of
lands.

The  Lord  Chancellor  is  called  Nissangi  Bassa,  who
sealeth  with  a  certaine  proper  character  such  licences,
safe  conducts,  passeports,  especiall  graunts,  &c.  as  pro-
ceed from  the  Grand  Signior :  notwithstanding  all  letters
to  forreine  princes  so  firmed  be  after  inclosed  in  a  bagge,
and  sealed  by  the  Grand  Signior,  with  a  signet  which  he
ordinarily  weareth  about  his  necke,  credited  of  them  to
have  bene  of  ancient  appertayning  to  king  Salomon  the
wise.

The  Admirall  giveth  his  voyce  in  the  election  of  all
Begs,  Captaines  of  Islandes,  to  whom  hee  giveth  their
charge,  as  also  appointeth  the  Subbassas,  Bayliffes  or
Constables  over  Cities  and  Townes  upon  the  Sea  coastes
about  Constantinople,  and  in  the  Archipelago,  whereof
hee  reapeth  great  profit.

The  Subbassi  of  Pera  payeth  him  yeerely  fifteene
thousande  ducats,  and  so  likewise  either  of  the  others
according  as  they  are  placed.

The  Ressistop  serveth  in  office  to  the  Viceroy  and
Chancellor,  as  Secretary,  and  so  likewise  doeth  the
Cogie  Master  of  the  Rolls,  before  which  two,  passe  all
writings  presented  to,  or  granted  by  the  said  Viceroy
and  Chancellor,  ofl!ices  of  especiall  credite  and  like
profite,  moreover  rewarded  with  annuities  of  lands.

There  are  also  two  chiefe  Judges  named  Cadi  Lesker,
the  one  over  Europe,  and  the  other  over  Asia  and  Africa,
which  in  Court  doe  sit  on  the  Bench  at  the  left  hand  of
the  Bassas.  These  sell  all  offices  to  the  under  Judges
of  the  land  called  Cadies,  whereof  is  one  in  every  Citie
[II.  i.  293.]  or  towne,  before  whom  all  matters  in  controversie  are  by
judgement  decided,  as  also  penalties  and  corrections  for
crimes  ordained  to  be  executed  upon  the  offenders  by
the  Subbassi.

66

THE BEGLERBEG'S ATTENDANTS

The  number  of  Souldiers  continually  attending
upon  the  Beglerbegs  the  governours  of  Pro-
vinces and  Sanjacks,  and  their  petie  Captaines
mainteined  of  these  Provinces.

The  Beglerbegs  of

GRaecia,  fourtie  thousand
Buda,  fifteene  thousand
Sclavonia,  fifteene  thousand
Natolia,  fifteene  thousand
Caramania,  fifteene  thousand
Armenia,  eighteene  thousand  ^  persons.

Persia,  twentie  thousand
Usdrum,  fifteene  thousand
Chirusta,  fifteene  thousand
Caraemiti,  thirtie  thousand
Giersul,  two  and  thirtie  thousand

The  Beglerbegs  of

lAgdat,  five  and  twentie  thousand
Balsara,  two  and twenty  thousand
Lassaija,  seventeene  thousand
Alepo,  five  and  twentie  thousand
Damasco,  seventeene  thousand
Cayro,  twelve  thousand
Abes,  twelve  thousand
Mecca,  eight  thousand
Cyprus,  eighteene  thousand
Tunis  in  Barbary,  eight  thousand
Tripolis  in  Syria,  eight  thousand
Alger,  fourtie  thousand

Whose  Sangjacks  and  petie  Captaines  be  three  hundred
sixtie  eight,  every  of  which  retaining  continually  in  pay
from  five  hundreth  to  two  hundreth  Souldiers,  may  be
one  with  another  at  the  least,  three  hundreth  thousand
persons.

[Chiefe  oflEicers
67

A.D.

1588.

B

>■  persons.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Be  these

CAplc
Aln

Chiefe  officers  in  his  Seraglio  about  his  person.

iaga,  High  porter.
Alnader  Bassi,  Treasurer.
Oda  Bassi,  Chamberlaine.
Killergie  Bassi,  Steward.
Sarajaga,  Comptroller,
Peskerolen,  Groome  of  the  chamber.
Edostoglan,  Gentleman  of  the  Ewer.
Sehetaraga,  Armour  bearer.
Choataraga,  he  that  carieth  his  riding  cloake.
Ebietaraga,  Groome  of  the  stoole.
There  be  many  other  maner  Officers,  which  I  esteeme
superfluous  to  write.

The  Turkes  yeerely  revenue.

THe  Grand  Signiors  annual  revenue  is  said  to  be  four-
teene  Millions  and  an  halfe  of  golden  ducats,  which
is  sterling  five  millions,  eight  score  thousand  pounds.

The  tribute  payd  by  the  Christians  his  Subjects  is  one
gold  ducat  yeerely  for  the  redemption  of  every  head,
which  may  amount  unto  not  so  litle  as  one  Million  of
golden  ducats,  which  is  sterling  three  hundred  threescore
thousand  pounds.

Moreover,  m  time  of  warre  he  exacteth  manifolde
summes  for  maintenance  of  his  Armie  and  Navie  of
the  said  Christians.

The  Emperour  payeth  him  yeerely  tribute  for  Hun-
gary, threescore  thousand  dollers,  which  is  sterling
thirteene  thousand  pound,  besides  presents  to  the  Vice-
roy and  Bassas,  which  are  said  to  surmount  to  twentie
thousand  dollers.

[II.  i.  294.]  Ambassadors  Allowances.

THe Ambassadour of  the Emperor is allowed one
thousand  Aspers  the  day.
The Ambassadour of the French king heretofore
enjoyed the like : but of late yeeres by meanes of

68

SINAN PASHA'S LETTERS

displeasure  conceived  by  Mahumet  then  Viceroy,  it  was
reduced  to  sixe  crownes  the  day,  beside  the  provision
of  his  Esquier  of  his  stable.

The  Ambassadours  of  Poland,  and  for  the  state  of
Venice  are  not  Ligiers  as  these  two  abovesaid.  The
said  Polack  is  allowed  12.  French  crownes  the  day  during
his  abode,  which  may  be  for  a  moneth.  Very  seldome
do  the  state  of  Venice  send  any  Ambassador  otherwise,
then  enforced  of  urgent  necessity :  but  in  stead  thereof
keepe  their  Agent,  president  over  other  Marchants,  of
them  termed  a  bailife,  who  hath  none  allowance  of  the
Grand  Signior,  although  his  port  &  state  is  in  maner
as  magnifical  as  the  other  aforesaid  ambassadors.  The
Spanish  Ambassador  was  equall  with  others  in  Janizaries :
but  for  so  much  as  he  would  not  according  to  custome
folow  the  list  of  other  ambassadors  in  making  presents
to  ye  Grand  Signior,  he  had  none  alowance.  His  abode
there  was  3.  yeres,  at  the  end  wherof,  having  concluded
a  truce  for  6.  yeres,  taking  place  from  his  first  comming
in  November  last  past  1580.  he  was  not  admitted  to
the  presence  of  the  Grand  Signior.

The  letters  of  Sinan  Bassa  chiefe  counsellour  to
Sultan  Murad  Can  the  Grand  Signior,  to  the
sacred  Majestie  of  Elizabeth  Queene  of
England,  shewing  that  upon  her  request,  and
for  her  sake  especially,  hee  graunted  peace
unto  the  King  and  kingdome  of  Pokiid.

Loriosissima  &  splendore  fulgidissima
foeminarum,  selectissima  Princeps  magna-
nimorum  Jesum  sectantium,  regni  inclyti
Angliae  Regina  Serenissima  Elizabetha,
moderatrix  rerum  &  negotiorum  omnium
plebis  &  familiae  Nazarenorum  sapientis-
sima;  Origo  splendoris  &  glorias  dulcis-
sima ;  nubes  pluviarum  gratissima,  heres  &  domina
beatitudinis & gloriae regni inclyti Angliae ; ad quam

69

1590.

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1590-

omnes  supplices  confugiunt,  incrementum  omnium  rerum
&  actionum  Serenitatis  vestrae  beatissimum,  exitusque
foelicissimos  a  Creatore  omnipotente  optantes,  mutuaque
&  perpetua  familiaritate  nostra  digna  vota  &  laudes
sempiternas  offerentes :  Significamus  Ser.  vestrae  amicis-
sime ;  Quia  sunt  anni  aliquot,  a  quibus  annis  potentissima
Caesarea  celsitudo  bella  ineiFabilia  cum  Casul-bas,  Principe
nempe  Persarum  gessit ;  ratione  quorum  bellorum  in
partes  alias  bellum  movere  noluit,  ob  eamque  causam
in  partibus  Poloniae  latrones  quidam  Cosaci  nuncupati,
&  alii  facinorosi  in  partibus  illis  existentes,  subditos
Caesaris  potentissimi  turbare  &  infestare  non  desierunt.
Nunc  autem  partibus  Persicis  compositis  &  absolutis,
in  partibus  Poloniae  &  aliis  partibus  exurgentes  facino-
rosos  punire  constituens,  Beglerbego  Grasciae  exercitu
aliquo  adjuncto,  &  Principi  Tartarorum  mandato  Caesaris
misso,  anno  proxime  praeterito  pars  aliqua  Regni  Poloniae
infestata,  turbata  &  devastata  fuit,  &  Cosaci  aliique
facinorosi  juxta  merita  sua  puniti  fuerunt.  Quo  rex
Poloniae  viso  duos  legatos  ad  Caesaream  celsitudinem
mittens,  quod  facinorosos  exquirere,  &  poena  perfecta
punire,  &  ab  annis  multis  ad  portam  Caesareas  celsitudinis
missum  munus  augere  vellet,  significavit.  Caesarea  autem
celsitudo  (cui  Creator  omnipotens  tantam  suppeditavit
potentiam,  &  quae  omnes  supplices  exaudire  dignata  est)
supplicatione  Regis  Poloniae  non  accepta,  iterum  in
regem  Poloniae  exercitum  suum  mittere,  &  Creatoris
omnipotentis  auxilio  regnum  ejus  subvertere  constituerat.
Verum  Legato  Serenitatis  vestrae  in  porta  beata  &  fulgida
Caesareae  celsitudinis  residente  sese  interponente,  Et  quod
Serenitati  vestrae  ex  partibus  Poloniae,  fruges,  pulvis,
arbores  navium,  tormenta,  &  alia  necessaria  suppedi-
tarentur  significante,  &  pacem  pro  regno  &  rege  Poloniae
petente,  neve  regnum  Poloniae  ex  parte  Caesareae  celsi-
tudinis turbaretur  vel  infestaretur  intercedente,  Serenita-
tisque  vestrae  banc  singularem  esse  voluntatem  exponente,
Legati  serenitatis  vestrae  significatio  &  intercessio  cum
Caesareae  celsitudini  significata  fuisset.  In  favorem  sereni-

70

SINAN PASHA'S LETTERS  ad.

1590-
tatis  vestrae,  cui  dmnis  honos  &  gratia  debetur,  juxta
modum  praedictum,  ut  Cosaci  facinorosi  exquirantur  &
poena  perfecta  puniantur,  aut  ratione  muneris  aliquantuli
eorum  delicta  condonentur,  hac  inquam  conditione  literae
Caesareae  celsitudinis  ad  Regem  Poloniae  sunt  datae.  Si
autem  ex  parte  Serenitatis  vestrae  foedus  &  pax  sollicitata
non  fuisset,  nulla  ratione  Cassarea  celsitudo  foedus  cum
regno  Poloniae  injisset.  In  favorem  autem  Serenitatis
vestrae  regno  &  Regi  Poloniae  singularem  gratiam
Caesarea  celsitudo  exhibuit.  Quod  tarn  Serenitas  vestra,
quam  etiam  Rex  &  regnum  Poloniae  sibi  certo  persuadere
debent.  Serenitatem  vestram  bene  foelicissimeque  valere
cupimus.  Datum  Constantinopoli  in  fine  mensis  Sabaum
nuncupati,  Anno  prophetae  nostri  sacrati  Mahumedi
nongentesimo,  nonagesimo,  octavo.  Jesu  vero  Anno
millesimo  quingentesimo  nonagesimo,  die  duodecimo
mensis  Junii.

The  same  in  English.  [II.  i,  295.]

MOst  glorious,  and  the  most  resplendent  of  women,
most  select  Princesse,  most  gratious  Elizabeth
Queene  of  the  valiant  followers  of  Jesus  in  the  famous
kingdom  of  England,  most  wise  govern  esse  of  all  the
affaires  and  businesses  of  the  people  and  family  of  the
Nazarens,  most  sweet  fountaine  of  brightnesse  and  glory,
most  acceptable  cloud  of  raine,  inheritresse  &  Ladie
of  the  blessednesse  and  glory  of  the  renowmed  kingdome
of  England,  to  whom  in  humble  wise  all  men  offer  their
petitions :  wishing  of  the  almightie  Creator  most  happie
increase  and  prosperous  successe  unto  all  your  Majesties
affaires  and  actions,  and  offering  up  mutuall  &  per-
petuall  vowes  worthy  of  our  familiarity,  with  eternall
prayses :  In  most  friendly  manner  we  signifie  unto  your
princely  Highnesse,  that  certaine  yeeres  past  the  most
mightie  Cesarlike  majestie  of  the  Grand  Signor  waged
unspeakeable  warres  with  Casul-bas  the  Prince  of  the
Persians,  in  regarde  of  which  warres  he  would  not  goe
in  battell  against  any other  places ; and  for  that  cause

71

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590-

certaine  theeves  in  the  partes  of  Polonia  called  Cosacks,
and  other  notorious  persons  living  in  the  same  partes
ceased  not  to  trouble  and  molest  the  subjects  of  our
most  mightie  Emperour.  But  now  having  finished  and
brought  to  some  good  issue  his  affaires  in  Persia,  de-
termining to  punish  the  saide  malefactors  of  Poland,  and
for  that  purpose  committing  an  army  unto  the  Beglerbeg
of  Grecia,  and  the  yeere  last  past,  sending  his  imperiall
commaundement  unto  the  Prince  of  the  Tartars,  he  hath
forraged,  molested,  and  layed  waste  some  part  of  the
kingdome  of  Poland,  and  the  Cosacks  and  other  notorious
offenders  have  received  condigne  punishment.  Which
the  king  of  Poland  perceiving  sent  two  Embassadours  to
his  imperiall  Highnesse  signifying,  that  he  would  hunt
out  the  said  malefactors,  and  inflict  most  severe  punish-
ments upon  them,  and  also  that  he  would  better  his
gift,  which  he  hath  for  many  yeeres  heretofore  ordinarily
sent  unto  the  porch  of  his  imperiall  Highnesse.  Howbeit
his  imperiall  majestie  (upon  whom  the  almightie  creator
hath  bestowed  so  great  power,  and  who  vouchsafeth  to
give  eare  unto  all  humble  suppliants)  rejecting  the  suppli-
cation of  the  King  of  Poland,  determined  againe  to  send
his  armie  against  the  said  king,  and  by  the  helpe  of  the
Almightie  creator,  utterly  to  subvert  and  overthrowe
his  kingdome.  By  your  Majesties  Embassadour  resident
in  the  blessed  and  glorious  porch  of  his  imperiall  High-
nesse interposing  himselfe  as  a  mediatour,  signifying  that
from  the  partes  of  Poland  you  were  furnished  with  corne,
gun-powder,  mastes  of  ships,  guns,  and  other  necessaries,
and  craving  peace  on  the  behalfe  of  the  kingdome  and
king  of  Poland,  and  making  intercession,  that  the  said
king  might  not  be  molested  nor  troubled  by  the  meanes
of  the  Grand  Signor,  &  declaring  that  this  was  your
Majesties  most  earnest  desire ;  so  soone  as  the  report
and  intercession  of  your  Majesties  Embassadour  was
signified  unto  the  Grand  Signor,  for  your  sake,  unto
whom  all  honour  and  favourable  regard  is  due,  upon  the
condition aforesaid, namely, that the wicked Cosacks

72

THE  SECOND  LEVANT  CHARTER ad

1592.
might  be  sought  out  and  grievously  punished,  or  that
their  offences  might  be  remitted  for  the  value  of  some
small  gift,  upon  this  condition  (I  say)  the  letters  of  his
imperiall  Highnesse  were  sent  unto  the  king  of  Poland.
Howbeit  had  not  this  conclusion  of  league  and  amitie
beene  soUicited  on  the  behalfe  of  your  Majestie,  his
imperiall  Highnesse  would  never  have  vouchsafed  the
same  unto  the  kingdome  of  Poland.  But  for  your
Majesties  sake  his  imperiall  Highnesse  hath  exhibited
this  so  singular  a  favour  unto  the  said  king  and  kingdome
of  Poland.  And  hereof  your  Majestie  and  the  king  of
Poland  ought  certainely  to  be  perswaded.  We  wish  your
Majestie  most  happily  and  well  to  fare.  Given  at  Con-
stantinople in  the  ende  of  the  moneth  called  Sabaum,  in
the  yeare  of  our  sacred  prophet  Mahomet  998,  and  in
the  yeere  of  Jesus 1590,  the 12  of  June.

The  second  letters  Patents  graunted  by  the
Queenes  Majestie  to  the  Right  worshipful!
companie  of  the  English  Marchants  for  the
Levant,  the  seventh  of  Januarie 1592.

Lizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of
England,  France,  and  Irelande,  defender
of  the  faith  &c.  To  all  our  Officers,
ministers  and  subjects,  and  to  all  other
people  aswell  within  this  our  Realme  of
England,  as  else  where  under  our  obey-
sance  and  jurisdiction  or  otherwise  unto
whom  these  our  letters  shalbe  scene,  shewed,  or  read,
greeting.

Where  our  welbeloved  subjects  Edward  Osborne
knight  Alderman  of  our  citie  of  London,  William  Hare-
borne  Esquire,  and  Richard  Staper  of  our  saide  citie
Marchant,  have  by  great  adventure  and  industrie  with
their  great  cost  and  charges  by  the  space  of  sundry  late  [II.  i.  296.]
yeeres  travelled,  and  caused  travell  to  be  taken  aswell
by secrete  and  good meanes, as by daungerous wayes

73

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

and  passages  both  by  lande  and  sea  to  finde  out  and  set
open  a  trade  of  marchandize  and  traffike  into  the  landes,
Ilandes,  Dominions,  and  territories  of  the  great  Turke,
commonly  called  the  Grand  Signor,  not  before  that  time
in  the  memorie  of  any  man  now  living  knowen  to  be
commonly  used  and  frequented  by  way  of  marchandize
by  any  the  marchantes  or  other  subjectes  of  us  or  our
progenitors :  And  also  have  by  their  like  good  meanes
and  industrie  and  great  charges  procured  of  the  sayde
Grand  Signor  in  our  name,  amitie,  safetie  and  freedome
for  trade  and  traffike  of  marchandize  to  be  used  and
continued  by  our  subjects  within  his  sayd  dominions,
whereby  we  perceive  and  finde  that  both  many  good
actions  have  beene  done  and  performed,  and  hereafter
are  likely  continually  to  be  done  and  performed  for  the
peace  of  Christendome :  Namely  by  the  reliefs  and
discharge  of  many  Christians  which  have  beene,  and  which
hereafter  may  happen  to  be  in  thraldome  and  bondage
under  the  sayde  Grand  Signor  and  his  vassals  or  subjects.
And  also  good  and  profitable  vent  and  utterance  of  the
commodities  of  our  Realme,  and  sundrie  other  great
benefites  to  the  advancement  of  our  honour  and  dignitie
Royall,  the  maintenance  of  our  Navie,  the  encrease  of
our  customes,  and  the  revenues  of  our  Crowne,  and
generally  the  great  wealth  of  our  whole  Realme.

And  whereas  we  are  enformed  of  the  sayd  Edward
Osborne  knight,  William  Hareborne,  and  Richard  Staper,
that  George  Barne,  Richard  Martine,  John  Harte  knights,
and  other  marchants  of  our  sayd  Citie  of  London  have
by  the  space  of  eight  or  nine  yeeres  past  joyned  them-
selves in  companie,  trade  and  traffike  with  them  the  sayd
Edward  Osborne  knight,  William  Hareborne  and  Richard
Staper,  into  the  sayde  dominions  of  the  sayd  great
Turke,  to  the  furtherance  thereof  and  the  good  of  the
Realme.

And  whereas  further  it  is  made  knowen  unto  us,  that
within  fewe  yeeres  now  past  our  loving  and  good  subjects
Thomas  Cordall,  Edward  Holmeden,  William  Garraway

74

THE SECOND LEVANT CHARTER  ad.

1592.

and  Paul  Banning,  and  sundry  other  marchants  of  our
said  Citie  of  London,  have  likewise  at  their  great  costes
and  charges,  builded  and  furnished  diverse  good  and
serviceable  shippes  and  therewith  to  their  like  costs  and
charges  have  traded  and  frequented,  and  from  time  to
time  doe  trade  and  frequent  and  traffike  by  sea  with
the  commodities  of  our  Realme  to  Venice,  Zante,  Candie,
and  Zephalonia  and  other  the  dominions  of  the  Segniorie
and  State  of  Venice,  and  thereby  have  made  and  main-
teyned,  and  doe  make  and  continually  maintaine  divers
good  shippes  with  mariners  skilfull  and  iitte  and  necessarie
for  our  service :  and  doe  vent  out  of  our  Realme  into
those  partes  diverse  commodities  of  our  Realme,  and
returne  hither  into  our  sayde  Realme  many  good  and
necessarie  commodities  for  the  common  wealth  thereof:
All  which  traffike,  as  well  inward  as  outward  untill  it
hath  beene  otherwise  brought  to  passe  by  the  sayde
endevours,  costs,  and  charges  of  our  sayde  subjects,
was  in  effect  by  our  subjectes  wholy  discontinued.

Knowe  yee,  that  hereupon  we  greatly  tendring  the
wealth  of  our  people  and  the  encouragement  of  them
and  other  our  loving  subjects  in  their  good  enterprises
for  the  advancement  of  lawfuU  traffike  to  the  benefite
of  our  common  wealth,  have  of  our  speciall  grace,  certaine
knowledge,  and  meere  motion  given  and  graunted,  and
by  these  presents  for  us,  our  heyres,  and  successours,  doe
give  and  graunt  unto  our  sayd  trustie  and  welbeloved
subjectes  Edwarde  Osborne  Knight,  George  Barne  Knight,
George  Bonde  knight,  Richard  Martine  knight,  John
Harte  knight,  John  Hawkins  knight,  William  Massam,
John  Spencer,  Richard  Saltonstall,  Nicholas  Mosley  Alder-
men of  our  sayde  Citie  of  London,  William  Hareborne,
Edwarde  Barton,  William  Borrough  Esquires,  Richard
Staper,  Thomas  Cordall,  Henrie  Parvis,  Thomas  Laurence,
Edwarde  Holmeden,  William  Garraway,  Robert  Dowe,
Paul  Banning,  Roger  Clarke,  Henrie  Anderson,  Robert
Offley,  Philip  Grimes,  Andrewe  Banning,  James  Staper,
Robert  Sadler,  Leonarde  Power,  George  Salter,  Nicholas

75

A.D.
1592.

The  marckants
above  named
be  made  a  fel-
lowship and
companie  for
1 2  yeeres  by
the  name  of
the  Governor
and  companie
of  the  ma?--
chants  of  the
Levant.

[II.  i.  297.]

iS/V'  Edward
Osborne  ap-
pointed the
first  Gover-
nour.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Leate,  John  Eldred,  William  Shales,  Richard  May,
William  Wilkes,  Andrewe  Fones,  Arthur  Jackson,
Edmund  Ansell,  Ralph  Ashley,  Thomas  Farrington,
Roberte  Sandie,  Thomas  Garraway,  Edwarde  Lethlande,
Thomas  Dalkins,  Thomas  Norden,  Robert  Bate,  Edward
Sadler,  Richard  Darsall,  Richard  Martine  Junior,  Ralph
Fitch,  Nicholas  Pearde,  Thomas  Simons,  and  Francis
Dorrington,  that  they  and  every  of  them  by  the  name
of  Governour  and  company  of  Marchants  of  the  Levant
shall  from  hence  foorth  for  the  terme  of  twelve  yeeres
next  ensuing  the  date  hereof  bee  one  bodie,  fellowshippe
and  companie  of  themselves  both  in  deede  and  in  name :
And  them  by  the  name  of  Governour  and  companie  of
marchantes  of  the  Levant  wee  doe  ordayne,  incorporate,
name,  and  declare  by  these  presentes,  and  that  the  same
fellowshippe  and  companie  from  hence  foorth  shall  and
may  have  one  Governour.  And  in  consideration  that
the  sayde  Edwarde  Osborne  Knight  hath  beene  of  the
chiefe  setters  foorth  and  actors  in  the  opening  and  putting
in  practise  of  the  sayde  trade  to  the  dominions  of  the
sayde  Grand  Signor :  Wee  doe  therefore  specially  make,
ordaine,  and  constitute  the  sayde  Edwarde  Osborne
Knight,  to  bee  nowe  Governour  during  the  time  of  one
whole  yeere  nowe  next  following,  if  hee  so  long  shall
live :  and  after  the  expiration  of  the  sayde  yeere,  or
decease  of  the  sayde  Edward  Osborne  the  choyse  of  the
next  Governour,  and  so  of  every  Governour  from  time
to  time  during  the  sayde  terme  of  twelve  yeeres  to  be
at  the  election  of  the  sayde  fellowshippe  or  companie  of
marchantes  of  the  Levant  or  the  more  part  of  them
yeerely  to  be  chosen,  and  that  they  the  sayde  Sir  Edwarde
Osborne,  and  all  the  residue  of  the  sayde  fellowshippe
or  companie  of  Marchantes  of  the  Levant  and  everie  of
them,  and  all  the  sonnes  of  them  and  of  every  of  them,
and  all  such  their  apprentises  and  servants  of  them  and
of  every  of  them,  which  have  beene  or  hereafter  shall  be
imployed  in  the  sayde  trade  by  the  space  of  foure  yeeres
or upwardes by  themselves, their servantes, factors or

76

THE SECOND LEVANT CHARTER  ad.

1592.

deputies,  shall  and  may by  the space of  twelve yeeres

from the  day  of  the date of  these our  letters  Patents

freely  traffike,  and  use  the  trade  of  Marchandize  as  well

by  sea  as  by  lande  into  and  from  the  dominions  of  the

sayde  Grand  Signor,  and  into  and  from  Venice,  Zante,  A  pnmledge

Candie  and  Zephalonia,  and  other  the  dominions  of  the  i^^es

Signiorie  and  State  of  Venice,  and  also  by  lande  through

the  Countries  of  the  sayde  Grand  Signor  into  and  from

the East India, lately discovered by John Newberie,

Ralph  Fitch,  William  Leech,  and  James  Storie,  sent  with

our  letters  to  that  purpose  at  the  proper  costs  and  charge

of  the  sayde  Marchants  or  some  of  them  : and  into  and

from  everie  of  them  in  such  order,  manner,  forme,  libertie

and condition to all  intentes and purposes as  shall  be

betweene them of  the  sayde fellowshippe or  companie

of  Marchantes  of  the  Levant  or  the  more  part  of  them

for  the  time  being  limited  and  agreed,  and  not  otherwise,

without  any  molestation, impeachment,  or disturbance ;

any  lawe,  statute,  usage,  or  diversitie  of  Religion  or  faith,

or  any  other  cause  or  matter  whatsoever  to  the  contrarie

notwithstanding.

And  that  the  sayde  Governour  and  companie  of
Marchantes  of  the  Levant,  or  the  greater  part  of  them
for  the  better  governement  of  the  sayde  fellowshippe  and
companie,  shall  and  may  within  fortie  dayes  next  and
immediatly  following  after  the  date  heereof,  and  so  from
thence  foorth  yeerely  during  the  continuance  of  this  our
graunt,  assemble  themselves  in  some  convenient  place,
and  that  they  or  the  greater  parte  of  them  being  so
assembled,  shall  and  may  elect,  ordaine,  nominate,  and
appoint  twelve  discreete  and  honest  persons  of  the  sayde
companie  to  be  assistants  to  the  sayde  Governour,  and  to
continue  in  the  sayde  office  of  assistants,  untill  they  shall
die  or  bee  remooved  by  the  sayde  Governour  and  com-
panie or  the  greater  part  of  them.  And  if  it  happen  the
sayde  assistantes  or  any  of  them  to  die,  or  be  remooved
from  their  sayde  office  at  anie  time  during  the  continuance
of  this  our  graunt : that  then  and  so  often  it  shall  and

77

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

may  bee  lawful!  to  and  for  the  sayde  Governour  and
companie  of  marchantes  of  the  Levant,  or  the  greater
part  of  them  to  elect  and  chuse  one  or  more  other  persons
of  the  sayd  companie  into  the  place  or  places  of  every
such  person  or  persons  so  dying  or  happening  to  be
remooved,  as  is  aforesayde.  And  wee  will  and  ordaine
that  the  same  person  or  persons  so  as  is  aforesayde  to  be
elected  shall  be  of  the  sayd  number  of  assistants  of  the
sayde  companie.  And  this  to  be  done  so  often  as  the
case  shall  so  require.  And  that  it  shall  and  may  be
lawfull  to  and  for  the  sayde  Edwarde  Osborne  Knight,
George  Barne  Knight,  George  Bonde  knight,  Richard
Martine  knight,  John  Hart  knight,  John  Hawkins  knight,
William  Massam,  John  Spencer,  Richard  Saltonstall,
Nicholas  Mosley,  William  Hareborne,  Edwarde  Barton,
William  Borrough,  Richard  Staper,  Thomas  Cordall,
Henrie  Parvis,  Thomas  Laurence,  Edwarde  Holmeden,
William  Garraway,  Robert  Dowe,  Paul  Banning,  Roger
Clarke,  Henrie  Anderson,  Robert  Offley,  Philip  Grimes,
Andrewe  Banning,  James  Staper,  Robert  Sadler,  Leonarde
Power,  George  Salter,  Nicholas  Leate,  John  Eldred,
William  Shales,  Richard  May,  William  Wilkes,  Andrewe
Fones,  Arthur  Jackson,  Edmund  Ansell,  Ralph  Ashley,
Thomas  Farrington,  Roberte  Sandie,  Thomas  Garraway,
Edwarde  Lethlande,  Thomas  Dalkins,  Thomas  Norden,
Robert  Bate,  Edward  Sadler,  Richard  Darsall,  Richard
Martine  Junior,  Ralph  Fitch,  Nicholas  Pearde,  Thomas
Simons,  and  Francis  Dorrington  aforesayde,  or  any  of
them  to  assemble  themselves  for  or  about  any  the  matters,
causes  or  affaires  or  businesses  of  the  sayde  trade  in  any
place  or  places  for  the  same  convenient  from  time  to
time  during  the  sayde  terme  of  twelve  yeeres  within  our
dominions  or  else  where.  And  that  also  it  shall  and  may
bee  lawfull  for  them  or  the  more  part  of  them  to  make,
ordaine  and  constitute  reasonable  lawes  and  orders  for
the  good  governement  of  the  sayde  companie,  and  for
the  better  advancement  and  continuance  of  the  sayde
[II.  i.  298.] trade and  traffike : the same  lawes  and ordinances  not

78

THE SECOND LEVANT CHARTER  ad.

1592.

being  contrarie  or  repugnant  to  the  lawes,  statutes  or
customes  of  our  Realme :  And  the  same  lawes  and
ordinances  so  made  to  put  in  ure,  and  execute  accord-
ingly, and  at  their  pleasures  to  revoke  and  alter  the  same
lawes  and  ordinances  or  any  of  them  as  occasion  shall
require.

And  we  doe  also  for  us,  our  heyres  and  successors  of
our  speciall  grace,  certaine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion
graunt  to  and  with  the  sayd  Governour  and  companie
of  marchantes  of  the  Levant,  that  when  and  as  often
at  any  time  during  the  sayde  terme  and  space  of  twelve
yeeres  as  any  custome,  pondage,  subsidie  or  other  duetie
shall  be  due  and  payable  unto  us,  our  heires,  or  suc-
cessors for  any  goods  or  marchandize  whatsoever,  to  be
carried  or  transported  out  of  this  our  port  of  London
into  any  the  dominions  aforesayde,  or  out  of  or  from
any  the  sayde  dominions  unto  our  sayde  port  of  London,
that  our  Customers,  and  all  other  our  Officers  for  receites
of  custome,  pondage,  subsidie  or  other  duetie  unto  whom
it  shall  appertaine,  shall  upon  the  request  of  the  sayde
Governour  for  the  time  being,  give  unto  the  sayde
companie  three  monethes  time  for  the  payment  of  the
one  halfe,  and  other  three  monethes  for  the  payment  of
the  other  halfe  of  their  sayde  custome,  pondage,  or  other
subsidie  or  duetie  for  the  same,  receiving  good  and
sufficient  bonde  and  securitie  to  our  use  for  the  payment
of  the  same  accordingly.  And  upon  receipt  of  the  sayde
bonde  to  give  them  out  their  cockets  or  other  warrants
to  lade  out  and  receive  in  the  same  their  goods  by  vertue
hereof  without  any  disturbance.  And  that  also  as  often
as  at  any  time  during  the  sayde  terme  of  twelve  yeeres
any  goods  or  marchandize  of  any  of  the  sayde  com-
panie laden  from  this  our  port  of  London  in  any  the
dominions  beforesayde  shall  happen  to  miscarie  before
their  safe  discharge  in  the  partes  for  and  to  the  which
they  be  sent :  That  then  and  so  often  so  much  custome,
pondage,  and  other  subsidie  as  they  answered  us  for  the
same,  shall  after  due  proofe  made  before  the  Treasurour

79

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

of  England  for  the  time  being  of  the  sayde  losse,  and
the  just  quantitie  thereof,  be  by  the  vertue  hereof  allowed
unto  them,  by  warrant  of  the  sayde  Treasurour  to  the
sayde  Customers  in  the  next  marchandize  that  they  shall
or  may  shippe  for  those  partes,  according  to  the  true
rates  of  the  customes,  pondage,  or  subsidies  heretofore
payde  for  the  goods  so  lost  or  any  part  or  parcell
thereof.

And  for  that  the  sayde  companie  are  like  continually
to  bring  into  this  our  Realme  a  much  greater  quantitie
of  forren  commodities  from  the  forren  Countreyes,
places,  or  territories  aforesaide,  then  here  can  be  spent
for  the  necessarie  use  of  the  same,  which  of  necessitie
must  be  transported  into  other  countreyes,  and  there
vented,  we  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors  of  our
speciall  grace,  certaine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion  doe
graunt  to  and  with  the  sayd  Governour  and  companie
that  at  all  times  from  time  to  time  during  the  space  of
thirteene  moneths  next  after  the  discharge  of  any  the
sayde  goods  so  brought  in,  and  the  subsidies,  pondage,
customes  and  other  duties  for  the  same  being  before
hande  payde  or  compounded  for  as  aforesayd,  it  shall
be  lawfull  for  them  or  any  of  them  or  any  other  person
or  persons  whatsoever  being  naturall  subjects  of  the
Realme  which  may  or  shall  buy  the  same  of  them  or
any  of  them  to  transport  the  same  in  English  bottomes
freely  out  of  this  Realme  without  payment  of  any
further  custome,  pondage,  or  other  subsidie  to  us,  our
heires  or  successors  for  the  same,  whereof  the  sayde
subsidies,  pondage,  or  customes  or  other  duties  shall  be
so  formerly  payde  and  compounded  for,  as  aforesayd,
and  so  proved.  And  the  sayd  customer  by  vertue
hereof  shall  upon  due  and  sufficient  proofe  thereof  made
in  the  custome  house  give  them  sufficient  cocket  or
certificate  for  the  safe  passing  out  thereof  accordingly.
And  to  the  ende  no  deceipt  be  used  herein  to  us  our
heires,  and  successors,  certificate  shall  be  brought  from
our  collector  of  custome  inwardes  to  our  customer  out-

80

THE  SECOND  LEVANT  CHARTER ad.

1592.
wardes  that  the  sayd  marchandizes  have  within  the  time
limited  answered their due  custome, subsidie, pondage
and  other  duties  for  the  same  inwards.

And furthermore we of  our ample and aboundant
grace, meere motion, and certaine knowledge have
graunted,  and  by  these  presents  for  us  our  heyres  and
successours  doe graunt unto the said  Governours  and
companie  of  marchantes  of  the Levant, that they  and
such  onely  as be  and shall  be  of  that companie,  shall
for  the  sayd  terme  of  twelve  yeeres  have,  use,  and  enjoy
the  whole  and  onely  trade  and  traffike,  and the  whole
entire  and  onely  libertie,  use,  and  priviledge  of  trading
and  traffiking,  and  using feate of  marchandise  by  and
through  the  Levant  seas  otherwise  called  the  Mediterran
seas  into and  from  the sayd dominions of  the  Grand
Signor,  and  dominions  of  the  state  of  Venice;  and  by
and  through  the  sayd  Grand  Signors  dominions  to  and
from  such  other  places  in  the  East  Indies  discovered  as
aforesayd. And  that  they  the  sayd  Governour  and  com-
panie of  marchants of  the  Levant  and every  particular
and  severall  person of  that companie their and  every
one  of  their  servants, factors, and deputies shall  have
full and free authoritie, libertie, facultie, licence, and
power  to trade  and  trafficke by  and through the sayd
Levant seas into and from all and every the sayd
dominions  of  the  sayde  Grand  Signor,  and  the  dominions  [II.  i.  299.]
of  the  state  of  Venice,  and  the sayde Indies,  and  into
and  from  all  places  where  by  occasion  of  the  sayd  trade
they  shall  happen to arrive or come, whither  they  be
Christians,  Turkes, Gentiles, or others : And by and
through  the  sayd Levant  seas  into  and from all  other
seas,  rivers,  portes,  regions,  territories,  dominions,  coastes
and  places  with their ships, barkes, pinases  and  other
vessels,  and  with  such mariners  and men as  they  will
leade  or  have  with them,  or  sende  for  the  sayde  trade
as  they  shall thinke  good at their owne  proper  costes
and  expenses.

And for that the shippes sayling into the sayde

VI  81  F

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

Countreyes  must  take  their  due  and  proper  times  to
proceede  in  these  voyages,  which  otherwise  as  wee  well
perceive  can  not  be  performed  in  the  rest  of  the  yeere
following :  Therefore  we  of  our  speciall  grace,  certaine
knowledge,  and  meere  motion  for  us  our  heyres  and
successors  doe  graunt  to  and  with  the  sayd  Governour
and  companie  of  Marchantes  of  the  Levant,  that  foure
good  shippes  well  furnished  with  ordinance  and  other
munition  for  their  defence,  and  two  hundred  marriners
English  men  to  guide  and  sayle  in  the  same  foure
shippes  at  all  times  during  the  sayde  twelve  yeeres  shall
quietly  bee  permitted  and  suffered  to  depart  and  goe  in
the  sayde  voyages,  according  to  the  purport  of  these
presents,  without  any  stay  or  contradiction  by  us,  our
heyres  and  successors,  or  by  the  Lorde  high  Admirall
or  any  other  officer  or  subject  of  us,  our  heires  or  suc-
cessours  in  any  wise :  Any  restraint,  lawe,  statute,
usage  or  matter  whatsoever  to  the  contrarie  notwith-
standing.

Provided  neverthelesse,  that  if  wee  shall  at  any  time
within  the  sayde  twelve  yeeres  have  just  cause  to  arme
our  Navie  in  warrelike  manner  in  defence  of  our  Realme,
or  for  offence  of  our  enemies :  and  that  it  shall  be  founde
needefuU  and  convenient  for  us  to  joyne  to  our  Navie
the  shippes  of  our  subjects  to  be  also  armed  for  warres
to  such  number  as  cannot  bee  supplied  if  the  sayd  foure
shippes  should  be  permitted  to  depart  as  above  is  men-
tioned ;  then  upon  knowledge  given  by  us  or  our
Admirall  to  the  sayde  Governour  or  companie  about  the
fifteenth  day  of  the  moneth  of  March,  or  three  monethes
before  the  saide  companie  shall  beginne  to  make  readie
the  same  foure  shippes  that  we  may  not  spare  the  sayd
foure  ships  and  the  marriners  requisite  for  them  to  be
out  of  our  Realme  during  the  time  that  our  Navie  shall
be  upon  the  seas,  that  then  the  sayde  companie  shall
forbeare  to  send  such  foure  shippes  for  their  trade  of
marchandise  untill  that  we  shall  retake  our  sayd  Navie
from  the  sayd  service.

82

THE SECOND LEVANT CHARTER  a.d.

1592.

And  further  our  will  and  pleasure  is,  and  wee  doe  by
these  presentes  graunt  that  it  shall  be  lawfull  to  and  for
the  sayd  Governour  and  companie  of  Marchantes  of  the
Levant  to  have  and  use  in  and  about  the  affaires  of  the
sayde  companie  a  common  seale  for  matters  concerning
the  sayde  companie  and  trade.  And  that  also  it  shall
be  lawfull  for  the  Marchants,  Mariners,  and  Sea-men,
which  shall  be  used  and  imployed  in  the  sayde  trade  and
voyage  to  set  and  place  in  the  toppes  of  their  ships
or  other  vessels  the  Armes  of  England  with  the  redde-
crosse  in  white  over  the  same  as  heretofore  they  have
used.

And  we  of  our  further  Royall  favour  and  of  our
especiall  grace,  certaine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion
have  graunted  and  by  these  presents  for  us  our  heyres
and  successors  doe  graunt  to  the  sayd  Governour  and
companie  of  Marchants  of  the  Levant,  that  the  sayde
landes,  territories,  and  dominions  of  the  sayde  Grand
Signor,  or  the  dominions  of  the  Signiorie  of  Venice,  or
any  of  them  within  the  sayde  Levant  or  Mediterran
seas  shall  not  be  visited,  frequented,  or  haunted  by  the
sayde  Levant  sea  by  way  of  marchandize  by  any  other
our  subjects  during  the  saide  terme  of  twelve  yeeres
contrarie  to  the  true  meaning  of  these  presentes.  And
by  vertue  of  our  prerogative  Royall,  which  wee  will
not  in  that  behalfe  have  argued  or  brought  in  question,
wee  straightly  charge,  commaunde  and  prohibite  for  us,
our  heyres  and  successours  all  our  subjects  of  what
degree  or  qualitie  soever  they  bee,  that  none  of  them
directly  or  indirectly  doe  visite,  haunt,  frequent,  trade,
traffike  or  adventure  by  way  of  marchandise  into  or
from  any  of  the  sayd  dominions  of  the  sayd  Grand
Signor,  or  the  dominions  of  the  saide  Segniorie  of
Venice,  by  or  through  the  sayde  Levant  sea  other  then
the  sayd  Governour  and  companie  of  marchants  of  the
Levant,  and  such  particular  persons  as  be  or  shall  be
of  that  companie,  their  factors,  agents,  servants  and
assignes. And  further  for  that  wee  plainely  understande

83

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

that  the  States  and  Governours  of  the  citie  and  Segniorie
of  Venice  have  of  late  time  set  and  raysed  a  newe  impost
and  charge  over  and  besides  their  auncient  impost,  cus-
tome,  and  charge  of  and  upon  all  manner  of  marchandize
of  our  Realme  brought  into  their  dominions,  and  also
of  and  upon  all  marchandise  caried  or  laden  from  their
sayd  Countrey  or  dominions  by  our  subjects  or  in  the
ships  or  bottoms  of  any  of  our  subjectes  to  the  great
and  intoUerable  charge  and  hinderance  of  our  sayd  sub-
jects trading  thither,  wee  therefore  minding  the  redresse
thereof,  doe  also  by  these  presents  for  us,  our  heires
[II.  i.  300.]  and  successors  further  straightly  prohibite  and  forbid
not  onely  the  subjects  of  the  sayde  State  and  Segniorie
of  Venice,  but  also  of  all  other  Nations  or  Countries
whatsoever  other  then  the  sayd  Governour  and  companie
of  marchants  of  the  Levant,  and  such  onely  as  be  or
shall  be  of  that  companie,  their  factors,  agents,  servantes,
and  assignes :  That  they  or  any  of  them  during  the  sayde
terme  of  twelve  yeeres,  shall  bring  or  cause  to  be  brought
into  this  our  Realme  of  Englande,  or  any  part  thereof
anie  manner  of  small  fruites  called  corrants,  being  the
raysins  of  Corinth,  or  wine  of  Candie,  unlesse  it  be  by
and  with  the  licence,  consent,  and  agreement  of  the  sayde
Governour  and  companie  in  writing  under  their  sayd
common  seale  first  had  and  obteyned  upon  paine  unto
every  such  person  and  persons  that  shall  trade  and  traffike
into  any  the  sayde  dominions  of  the  State  and  Segniorie  of
Venice  by  sea,  or  that  shall  bring  or  cause  to  be  brought
into  our  saide  Realme  any  of  the  said  corrants  being  the
raysins  of  Corinth,  or  wines  of  Candia,  other  then  the
sayd  companie  in  paine  of  our  indignation,  and  of  forfai-
ture  and  losse  aswell  of  the  shippe  and  ships  with  the
furniture  thereof,  as  also  of  the  goods,  marchandize,  and
thinges  whatsoever  they  be  of  those  which  shall  attempt
or  presume  to  commit  or  doe  any  matter  or  thing  con-
trarie  to  the  prohibition  aforesayd.  The  one  halfe  of  all
the  saide  forfeitures  to  be  to  us,  our  heires  and  suc-
cessours,  and  the  other  halfe  of  all  and  every  the  sayde

THE  SECOND  LEVANT  CHARTER ad.

1592.

forfeitures  we  doe  by  these  presents,  of  our  speciall  grace,
certaine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion  clearely  and  wholie
for  us,  our  heires  and  successors,  give  and  graunt  unto
the  saide  Governour  and  companie  of  marchantes  of  the
Levant.

And  further  all  and  every  the  sayde  ofFendours  for
their  sayde  contempt  to  suffer  imprisonment  during  our
pleasures,  and  such  other  punishment  as  to  us  for  so  high
a  contempt  shall  seeme  meete  and  convenient,  and  not  to
be  in  any  wise  delivered  untill  they  and  every  of  them
shall  be  come  bounde  unto  the  sayd  Governour  for  the
time  being  in  the  summe  of  one  thousand  poundes  or
lesse  at  no  time,  then  after  to  sayle  or  traffike  by  sea  into
any  the  dominions  aforesaide,  or  to  bring  or  cause  to  be
brought  from  any  the  places  aforesayde  any  corrants,
raysins  of  Corinth,  or  wines  of  Candia  contrarie  to  our
expresse  commaundement  in  that  behalfe  herein  set  downe
and  published.

Provided  alwayes,  and  our  expresse  will  is  notwith-
standing the  premisses  that  if  our  sayde  subjectes  shall  at
any  time  hereafter  be  recompensed  of  and  for  all  such
newe  impostes  and  charges  as  they  and  every  of  them
shall  pay,  and  likewise  be  freely  discharged  of  and  from
the  payment  of  all  manner  of  newe  imposte  or  taxe  for
any  of  their  marchandise  which  they  hereafter  shall  bring
into  or  from  any  the  dominions  of  the  sayde  State  or
Segniorie  of  Venice,  and  from  all  bondes  and  other
assurances  by  them  or  any  of  them  to  be  made  for  or  in
that  behalfe,  that  then  immediatly  from  and  after  such
recompence  and  discharge  made  as  aforesayde  our  sayde
prohibition  and  restraint  in  these  presentes  mentioned,
shall  not  be  of  any  strength  or  force  against  the  sayde
Citie  or  State  of  Venice,  or  any  the  subjects  thereof,  but
for  and  during  such  time  onely  and  in  such  case  when
hereafter  the  sayde  State  of  Venice  shall  againe  beginne
to  taxe  or  levie  any  manner  of  newe  imposte  within  the
sayde  dominions  upon  any  the  goods  or  marchandizes  of
our  sayde  subjectes  heereafter  to  be  brought  into  any  the

85

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592-

dominions  of  the  said  State  or  Segniorie  of  Venice.  Any
thing  in  these  our  letters  Patents  contayned  to  the  con-
trarie  thereof  in  any  wise  notwithstanding.

And  further  wee  straightly  charge  and  commaunde,
and  by  these  presentes  prohibite  all  and  singular  Cus-
tomers and  Collectors  of  our  Customes,  pondage,  and
subsidies,  and  all  other  Officers  within  our  Porte  and
Citie  of  London  and  else  where,  to  whom  it  shall  apper-
taine  and  every  of  them,  That  they  or  any  of  them  by
themselves,  their  clarkes,  or  substitutes  shall  not  receive
or  take,  or  suffer  to  be  received  or  taken  for  us  or  in  our
name,  or  to  our  use,  or  in  the  name,  or  unto  the  use  of
our  heires  or  successors  of  any  person  or  persons,  any
summe  or  summes  of  money,  or  other  consideration
during  the  sayde  terme  of  twelve  yeeres  for  any  custome,
pondage,  taxe  or  subsidie  of  any  corrants,  raysins  of
Corinth,  or  wines  of  Candie  aforesayd  save  onely  of  and
in  the  name  of  the  sayde  Governour  and  companie  of
marchantes  of  the  Levant,  or  of  some  of  that  companie
without  the  consent  of  the  sayde  Governour  and  com-
panie in  writing  under  their  sayd  common  seale,  first
had  and  obteyned,  and  unto  them  shewed  for  the
testifying  their  sayd  consent.  And  for  the  better  and
more  sure  observation  thereof  wee  will  and  graunt  for
us,  our  heires  or  successors  by  these  presentes,  that  our
Treasurour  and  Barons  of  the  Exchequer  for  the  time
being  by  force  of  these  presentes,  and  the  inroUment
thereof  in  the  sayde  Court  of  our  Exchequour,  at  all  and
every  time  and  times  during  the  sayde  terme  of  twelve
yeeres,  at  and  upon  the  request  of  the  sayde  Governour
and  companie,  their  Attourney  or  Attourneys,  Deputies
or  assignes,  shall  and  may  make  and  direct  under  the
seale  of  the  sayde  Court  one  or  more  sufficient  writte
[II.  i.  301.]  or  writtes  close  or  patent,  unto  every  or  any  of  the  sayd
Customers  or  other  Officers  to  whom  it  shall  appertaine,
commaunding  them  and  every  of  them  thereby,  that
neither  they  nor  any  of  them  at  any  time  or  times  during
the  sayd  space  of  twelve  yeeres  shall  take  entrie  of  any

86

THE  SECOND  LEVANT  CHARTER a.d.

1592.
corants,  raisins  of  Corinth,  or  wines  of  Candia,  or  take  or
make  any  agreement  for  any  custome,  pondage,  or  other
subsidie  for  any  of  the  sayd  corants,  raisins  of  Corinth,
or  wines  of  Candie,  with  any  person  or  persons  whatso-
ever, other  then  with,  or  in  the  name  and  by  the  privitie
of  the  sayd  governour  and  company  or  some  of  the  same
company.

And  further  of  our  speciall  grace,  certaine  knowledge,
and  meere  motion  we  have  condescended  and  graunted,
and  by  these  presents  for  us  our  heires  and  successours
doe  condescend  and  graunt  to  the  sayd  Governour  and
company  of  marchants  of  Levant,  that  wee  our  heires  and
successours,  during  the  sayd  terme,  will  not  graunt
libertie,  licence,  or  power  to  any  person  or  persons  what-
soever contrary  to  the  tenour  of  these  our  letters  patents,
to  saile,  passe,  trade,  or  traffique  by  the  sayde  Levant
Sea,  into,  or  from  the  sayde  dominions  of  the  sayd  Grand
Signior  or  the  dominions  of  the  State  of  Venice  or  any  of
them,  contrary  to  the  true  meaning  of  these  presents,
without  the  consent  of  the  sayd  Governour  and  Com-
panie  or  the  most  part  of  them.

And  whereas  Henry  Farrington  and  Henry  Hewet
have  not  yet  assented  to  bee  incorporated  into  the  sayd
societie  of  Governour  and  companie  of  marchants  of
Levant,  neverthelesse  sithence,  as  we  be  informed,  they
have  bene  traders  that  way  heretofore ;  our  will  and
pleasure  is,  and  we  doe  hereby  expressely  commaund  and
charge  that  if  it  happen  at  any  time  within  two  moneths
next  following  after  the  date  hereof,  the  sayd  Henry
Farrington  and  Henry  Hewet  or  either  of  them,  to  sub-
mit themselves  to  be  of  the  sayd  companie,  and  doe  give
such  assurance  as  the  sayd  Governour  and  companie,  or
the  more  part  of  them  shall  allow  of,  to  beare,  pay,  and
performe  such  orders,  constitutions,  paiments  and  con-
tributions, as  other  of  the  sayd  company  shall  be  ordered
to  beare,  pay,  and  performe,  that  then  every  of  the  sayd
Henry  Farrington  and  Henry  Hewet  so  doing  and  sub-
mitting himselfe,  shall  upon  his  or  their  request  unto  the

87

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

sayd  Governour  bee  admitted  into  the  sayd  companie  and
corporation  of  Governour  and  companie  of  marchants  of
Levant,  and  have  and  enjoy  the  same,  and  as  great  liber-
ties, privileges,  and  preheminences,  as  the  rest  of  the
sayde  corporation  or  companie  may,  or  ought  to  have  by
vertue  of  this  our  graunt.  Any  thing  in  these  presents
contained  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.

And  our  will  and  pleasure  is,  and  hereby  wee  doe  also
ordaine  that  it  shall  and  may  bee  lawfuU,  to,  and  for  the
sayde  Governour  and  company  of  marchants  of  Levant
or  the  more  part  of  them,  to  admit  into,  and  to  be  of  the
sayd  companie,  any  such  as  have  bene  or  shall  bee
employed  as  servants,  factors,  or  agents  in  the  trade  of
marchandise  by  the  sayd  Levant  seas,  into  any  the  coun-
tries, dominions  or  territories  of  the  sayd  Grand  Signior
or  Signiorie  or  State  of  Venice,  according  as  they  or  the
most  part  of  them  shall  thinke  requisite.

And  where  Anthony  Ratcliffe,  Steven  Some,  and
Robert  Brooke  Aldermen  of  the  saide  Citie  of  London,
Simon  Laurence,  John  Wattes,  John  Newton,  Thomas
Middleton,  Robert  Coxe,  John  Blunt,  Charles  Faith,
Thomas  Barnes,  Alexander  Dansey,  Richard  Aldworth,
Henry  Cowlthirste,  Caesar  Doffie,  Martine  Bonde,  Oliver
Stile  and  Nicolas  Stile  Marchants  of  London  for  their
abilities  and  sufficiencies  have  bene  thought  fit  to  be  also
of  the  sayd  Company  of  the  saide  governour  and  Com-
pany of  Marchants  of  Levant :  Our  will  and  pleasure
and  expresse  commaundement  is,  and  wee  doe  hereby
establish  and  ordeine,  that  every  such  of  the  same
Anthony  RadclifFe,  Steven  Some,  Robert  Brooke,  Simon
Laurence,  John  Wattes,  John  Newton,  Thomas  Midle-
ton,  Robert  Coxe,  John  Blunt,  Charles  Faith,  Thomas
Barnes,  Alexander  Dansey,  Richard  Aldworth,  Henry
Cowlthirst,  Caesar  Doffie,  Martine  Bonde,  Oliver  Style,
and  Nicolas  Style,  as  shall  pay  unto  the  saide  Governour
and  company  of  Marchants  of  Levante  the  summe  of  one
hundred  and  thirtie  poundes  of  lawfull  English  money
within  two  monethes  next  after  the  date  hereof  towards

88

THE  SECOND  LEVANT  CHARTER ajd.

1592.

the  charges  that  the  same  Company  have  already  bene  at
in  and  about  the  establishing  of  the  sayde  trades  shall
from  thencefoorth  bee  of  the  same  company  of  Marchants
of  Levant  as  fully  and  amply  and  in  like  maner,  as  any
other  of  that  societie  or  Company.

Provided  also,  that  wee  our  heires  and  successours  at
any  time  during  the  sayd  twelve  yeeres  may  lawfully
appoynt  and  authorize  two  other  persons  exercising  the
lawfuU  trade  of  marchandize,  and  being  fit  men  to  bee
of  the  sayd  companie  of  Governour  and  companie  of
marchants  of  Levant,  so  that  the  sayd  persons  to  bee
nominated  or  authorized,  shall  aide,  doe,  beare,  and  paie
such  payments  and  charges  touching  and  concerning  the
same  trade  and  Companie  of  marchants  of  Levant,  [II.  i.  302.]
ratablie  as  other  of  the  sayd  Companie  of  marchants
of  Levant  shall,  and  doe,  or  ought  to  beare  and  pay :
and  doe  also  performe  and  observe  the  orders  of  the
sayd  Companie  allowable  by  this  our  graunt,  as  others
of  the  same  doe  or  ought  to  doe.  And  that  such
two  persons  so  to  bee  appoynted  by  us  our  heires  or
successours,  shall  and  may  with  the  sayd  Company  use
the  trade  and  feate  of  marchandise  aforesayd,  and  all  the
liberties  and  privileges  herein  before  granted,  according
to  the  meaning  of  these  our  letters  patents,  any  thing
in  these  our  letters  patents  contained  to  the  contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided  also,  that  if  any  of  the  marchants  before  by
these  presents  named  or  incorporated,  to  bee  of  the  sayd
fellowship  of  Governour  and  companie  of  the  merchants
of  Levant,  shall  not  bee  willing  to  continue  or  bee  of
the  same  companie,  and  doe  give  notice  thereof,  or  make
the  same  knowen  to  the  sayd  Governour  within  two
moneths  next  after  the  date  hereof,  that  then  such  per-
son so  giving  notice,  shall  no  further  or  any  longer  be
of  that  companie,  or  have  trade  into  those  parties,  nor
be  at  any  time  after  that  of  the  same  corporation  or
companie,  or  use  trade  into  any  the  territories  or
countries  aforesayd.

89

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

Provided  alwayes  neverthelesse,  that  every  such  person
so  giving  notice  and  having  at  this  present  any  goods
or  marchandises  in  any  the  Territories  or  countreys  of
the  sayd  Grand  Signior,  or  Segniorie  or  State  of  Venice,
may  at  any  time  within  the  space  of  eighteene  moneths
next,  and  immediately  following  after  the  date  hereof,
have  free  libertie,  power,  and  authoritie  to  returne  the
same  or  the  value  thereof  into  this  Realme,  without  using
any  traffique  there,  but  immediately  from  thence  hither,
paying,  bearing,  answering,  and  performing  all  such
charges,  dueties  and  summes  of  money  ratably  as  other
of  the  same  corporation  or  company  doe  or  shall  pay,
beare,  answere,  or  performe  for  the  like.

Provided  also,  that  if  any  of  the  persons  before  by
these  presents  named  or  incorporated  to  bee  of  the  sayd
fellowship  of  Governour  and  Companie  of  the  marchants
of  Levant,  or  which  hereafter  shall  bee  admitted  to  bee
of  the  sayde  Corporation  or  Companie,  shall  at  any  time
or  times  hereafter  refuse  to  bee  of  the  sayd  Corporation
or  Companie,  or  to  beare,  pay,  or  be  contributorie  to,  or
not  beare  and  pay  such  ratable  charges  and  allowances,  or
to  observe  or  performe  such  ordinances  to  bee  made  as
is  aforesayd,  as  other  of  the  same  company  are,  or
shall  bee  ordered,  to  beare,  paie,  or  performe,  that  then
it  shall  and  may  bee  lawfull  for  the  rest  of  the  sayd
Governour  and  companie  of  marchants  of  Levant,  pre-
sently to  expell,  remoove,  and  displace  every  such  person
so  refusing,  or  not  bearing  or  paying  out,  of,  and  from
the  sayd  Corporation  and  companie,  and  from  all  privi-
lege, libertie,  and  preheminence  which  any  such  person
should,  or  might  claime,  or  have  by  vertue  of  this  our
graunt,  and  in  place  of  them  to  elect  others  exercising
the  lawfull  trade  of  marchandise  to  bee  of  the  sayd
Companie.  And  that  every  such  person  so  expelled,  re-
mooved,  or  displaced  by  consent  of  the  sayd  Governour
and  companie  of  marchants  of  Levant,  or  the  more  part
of  them,  shall  bee  from  thencefoorth  utterly  disabled  to
take  any  benefite  by  vertue  of  this  privilege,  or  any  time

90

THE  SECOND  LEVANT  CHARTER ad.

1592.

after  to  bee  admitted  or  received  againe  into  the  same,
any  thing  in  these  presents  contained  to  the  contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided  alwayes,  that  if  it  shall  hereafter  appeare  to
us  our  heires  and  successours,  that  this  graunt  or  the
continuance  thereof  in  the  whole  or  in  any  part  thereof,
shall  not  bee  profitable  to  us  our  heires  and  successours,
or  to  this  our  realme,  that  then  and  from  thencefoorth,
upon  and  after  eighteene  moneths  warning  to  bee  given  to
the  sayd  companie  by  us  our  heires  and  successours,  this
present  graunt  shall  cease,  bee  voyd,  and  determined
to  all  intents,  constructions  and  purposes.

And  further  of  our  speciall  grace,  certaine  knowledge,
and  meere  motion,  wee  have  condescended  and  graunted,
and  by  these  presents  for  us,  our  heires  and  successours,
doe  condescend  and  graunt  to  the  sayde  Governour  and
companie  of  marchants  of  Levant,  that  if  at  the  ende  of
the  sayd  terme  of  twelve  yeeres  it  shall  seeme  meete
and  convenient  to  the  sayde  Governour  and  Companie,
or  any  the  parties  aforesayd,  that  this  present  graunt
shall  bee  continued :  And  if  that  also  it  shall  appeare
unto  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  that  the  continu-
ance thereof  shall  not  bee  prejudiciall  or  hurtfuU  to  this
our  realme,  but  that  wee  shall  finde  the  further  continu-
ance thereof  profitable  for  us  our  heires  and  successours
and  for  our  realme  with  such  conditions  as  are  herein
mentioned,  or  with  some  alteration  or  qualification
thereof,  that  then  wee  our  heires  and  successours  at
the  instance  and  humble  petition  of  the  sayde  Governour
and  Companie,  or  any  of  them  so  suing  for  the  same,
and  such  other  person  and  persons  our  subjectes  as  they
shall  nominate  and  appoint,  or  shall  bee  by  us,  our
heires  and  successours  newly  nominated,  not  exceeding
in  number  twelve,  new  letters  patents  under  the  great
scale  of  England  in  due  forme  of  lawe  with  like  cove-  [II.  i.  303-]
nants,  graunts,  clauses,  and  articles,  as  in  these  presents
are  contained,  or  with  addition  of  other  necessarie  articles
or changing of these in some partes,  for,  and during

91

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

the  full  terme  of  twelve  yeeres  then  next  following.
Willing  now  hereby,  and  straightly  commaunding  and
charging  all  and  singular  our  Admirals,  Vice-admirals,
Justices,  Maiors,  Shiriffes,  Escheators,  Constables,  Bailiffes,
and  all  and  singular  other  our  Officers,  Ministers,  Liege-
men and  subjects  whatsoever,  to  bee  aiding,  favouring,
helping,  and  assisting  unto  the  sayd  Companie  and  their
successours,  and  to  their  Deputies,  Officers,  Factors,
servaunts,  assignes  and  ministers,  and  every  of  them,
in  executing  and  enjoying  the  premisses  as  well  on  land
as  on  Sea,  from  time  to  time,  &  at  all  times  when  you
or  any  of  you  shal  thereto  bee  required,  any  Statute,
Acte,  ordinance.  Proviso,  Proclamation  or  restraint  here-
tofore had,  made,  set  foorth,  ordained  or  provided,  or
any  other  matter,  cause  or  thing  whatsoever  to  the
contrary  in  any  wise  notwithstanding.

Although  expresse  mention  of  the  true  yeerely  value
or  certaintie  of  the  premisses,  or  any  of  them,  or  of  any
other  gifts  or  graunts  by  us,  or  any  of  our  progenitours
to  the  sayde  Governour  and  Companie  of  the  marchants
of  Levant  before  this  time  made,  in  these  presents  is  not
made :  Or  any  Statute,  Acte,  Ordinance,  provision,  pro-
clamation or  restraint  to  the  contrary  thereof  before  this
time  had,  made,  done,  or  provided,  or  any  other  matter,
thing  or  cause  whatsoever,  in  any  wise  notwithstanding.
In  witnesse  whereof  wee  have  caused  these  our  letters
to  be  made  patents.  Witnesse  our  selfe  at  Westminster
the  seventh  day  of  Januarie  in  the  foure  and  thirtieth
yeere  of  our  raigne.

Per  breve  de  privato  Sigillo.

Bailie.

92

RICHARD WRAG

To  the  Worshipfull  and  his  very  loving  Uncle
M.  Rowland  Hewish  Esquier,  at  Sand  in
Devonshire.

Ir,  considering  the  goodnesse  of  your
Nature  which  is  woont  kindely  to  accept
from  a  friend,  even  of  meane  things
being  given  with  a  good  heart,  I  have
presumed  to  trouble  you  with  the  read-
ing of  this  rude  discourse  of  my  travailes
into  Turkic,  and  of  the  deliverie  of  the
present  with  such  other  occurrents  as  there  happened
woorthie  the  observation :  of  all  which  proceedings  I
was  an  eie-witnesse,  it  pleasing  the  Ambassadour  to
take  mee  in  with  him  to  the  Grand  Signior.  If  for
lacke  of  time  to  put  it  in  order  I  have  not  performed
it  so  well  as  it  ought,  I  crave  pardon,  assuring  you  that
to  my  knowledge  I  have  not  missed  in  the  trueth  of  any
thing.  If  you  aske  mee  what  in  my  travels  I  have
learned,  I  answere  as  a  noble  man  of  France  did  to  the
like  demaund.  Hoc  unum  didici,  mundi  contemptum  :
and  so  concluding  with  the  wise  man  in  the  booke  of
the  Preacher,  that  all  is  vanitie,  and  one  thing  onely  is
necessarie,  I  take  my  leave  and  commit  you  to  the
Almightie. From  London  the  i6.  March  1597.

Your  loving  Nephew

Richard  Wrag.

A.D.

1597.

[A  description

93

A.D.

1593-

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

A  description  of  a  Voiage  to  Constantinople  and
Syria,  begun  the  21.  of  March  1593-  and
ended  the  9.  of  August,  1595.  wherein  is
shewed  the  order  of  delivering  the  second
Present  by  Master  Edward  Barton  her  ma-
jesties Ambassador,  which  was  sent  from  her
Majestie  to  Sultan  Murad  Can,  Emperour  of
Turkie.

E  set  saile  in  the  Ascension  of  London,
a  new  shippe  very  well  appointed,  of
two  hundred  and  three  score  tunnes
(whereof  was  master  one  William
Broadbanke,  a  provident  and  skilful!
man  in  his  facultie)  from  Gravesend
the one and twentie of March 1593.

And  upon  the  eight  of  Aprill  folowing  wee  passed  the
streights  of  Gibraltar,  and  with  a  small  Westerne  gale,
the  24.  of  the  same,  we  arrived  at  Zante  an  Hand
under  the  Venetians.  The  fourth  of  May  wee  departed,
and  the  one  and  twentie  wee  arrived  at  Alexandretta  in
Cilicia  in  the  very  bottome  of  the  Mediterrane  sea,  a
roade  some  25.  miles  distant  from  Antioch,  where  our
marchants  land  their  goods  to  bee  sent  for  Aleppo.
[II.  i.  304.]  From  thence  wee  set  saile  the  fift  of  June,  and  by
contrary  windes  were  driven  upon  the  coast  of  Cara-
mania  into  a  road  neere  a  litle  Hand  where  a  castle
standeth,  called  Castle  Rosso,  some  thirtie  leagues  to
the  Eastwards  of  the  Rhodes,  where  after  long  search
for  fresh  water,  we  could  finde  none,  until  certaine
poore  Greekes  of  the  Hand  brought  us  to  a  well  where
we  had  5  or  6  tuns.  That  part  of  the  country  next
the  sea  is  very  barren  &  full  of  mountains,  yet  found
we  there  an  olde  tombe  of  marble,  with  an  epitaph  of
an  ancient  Greeke  caracter,  by  antiquity  neere  worne  out
and  past  reading;  which  to  the  beholders  seemed  a
monument  of  the  greatnesse of  the Grecian monarchy.

94

RICHARD WRAG  ajd.

1593-
From  thence  we  went  to  the  Rhodes,  and  by  contrary
windes  were  driven  into  a  port  of  Candy,  called  Sittia :  Candle.
this  Hand  is  under  the  Venetians,  who  have  there  600
souldiers,  beside  certaine  Greeks,  continually  in  pay.
Here  with  contrary  winds  we  stayed  six  weeks,  and  in
the  end,  having  the  winde  prosperous,  we  sailed  by
Nicaria,  Pharos,  Delos,  and  Andros,  with  sight  of  many
other  Hands  in  the  Archipelago,  and  arrived  at  the  two
castles  in  Hellespont  the  24  of  August.  Within  few
dayes  after  we  came  to  Galipoli  some  thirty  miles  from
this  place,  where  foure  of  us  tooke  a  Parma  or  boat
of  that  place,  with  two  watermen,  which  rowed  us
along  the  Thracian  shore  to  Constantinople,  which
sometime  sailing  and  sometime  rowing,  in  foure  dayes
they  performed.  The  first  of  September  we  arrived  at
the  famous  port  of  the  Grand  Signior,  where  we  were
not  a  little  welcome  to  M.  Edward  Barton  untill  then
her  Majesties  Agent,  who  (with  many  other  great
persons)  had  for  many  dayes  expected  the  present.  Five
or  sixe  dayes  after  the  shippe  arrived  neere  the  Seven  TheJscemwn
towers,  which  is  a  very  strong  hold,  and  so  called  of  arrived  at  the
so  many  turrets,  which  it  hath,  standing  neere  the  sea
side,  being  the  first  part  of  the  city  that  we  came  unto.
Heere  the  Agent  appointed  the  master  of  the  Ascension
to  stay  with  the  shippe  untill  a  fitte  winde  and  oppor-
tunity served  to  bring  her  about  the  Seraglio  to  salute
the  Grand  Signior  in  his  moskyta  or  church :  for  you
shall  understand  that  he  hath  built  one  neere  the  wall
of  his  Seraglio  or  pallace  adjoyning  to  the  Sea  side ;
whereunto  twise  or  thrise  a  weeke  hee  resorteth  to
performe  such  religious  rites  as  their  law  requireth :
where  hee  being  within  few  dayes  after,  our  shippe  set
out  in  their  best  maner  with  flagges,  streamers  and
pendants  of  divers  coloured  silke,  with  all  the  mariners,
together  with  most  of  the  Ambassadours  men,  having
the  winde  faire,  and  came  within  two  cables  length  of
this  his  moskita,  where  (hee  to  his  great  content
beholding the  shippe  in such bravery) they discharged

95

A.D.

1593-

The  ship  sa-
luteth  the
grand  ^ignior.

The  cause  of
staying  the
present.

An  Arz,  to
the  grand

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

first  two  volies  of  small  shot,  and  then  all  the  great
ordinance  twise  over,  there  being  seven  and  twentie  or
eight  and  twentie  pieces  in  the  ship.  Which  performed,
he  appointed  the  Bustangi-Bassa  or  captaine  of  the
great  and  spacious  garden  or  parke,  to  give  our  men
thankes,  with  request  that  some  other  day  they  would
shew  him  the  like  sporte  when  hee  would  have  the
Sultana  or  Empresse  a  beholder  thereof,  which  few
dayes  after  at  the  shippes  going  to  the  Custome-house
they  performed.

The  grand  Signiors  salutation  thus  ended,  the  master
brought  the  ship  to  an  anker  at  Rapamat  neere  the
ambassadors  house,  where  hee  likewise  saluted  him  with
all  his  great,  ordinance  once  over,  and  where  he  landed
the  Present,  the  deliverie  whereof  for  a  time  was  staied :
the  cause  of  which  staie  it  shall  neither  be  dishonorable
for  our  nation,  or  that  woorthie  man  the  ambassador  to
shew  you.  At  the  departure  of  Sinan  Bassa  the  chiefe
Vizir,  and  our  ambassadors  great  friend  toward  the
warres  of  Hungarie  there  was  another  Bassa  appointed
in  his  place,  a  churlish  and  harsh  natured  man,  who
upon  occasion  of  certaine  Genouezes,  escaping  out  of
the  castles  standing  toward  the  Euxine  Sea,  nowe  called
the  blacke  Sea,  there  imprisoned,  apprehended  and
threatened  to  execute  one  of  our  Englishmen  called
John  Field,  for  that  hee  was  taken  thereabouts,  and
knowen  not  many  dayes  before  to  have  brought  a  letter
to  one  of  them :  upon  the  solliciting  of  whose  libertie
there  fell  a  Jarre  betweene  the  Bassa  (being  now  chiefe
Vizir)  and  our  ambassador,  and  in  choler  he  gave  her
majesties  ambassador  such  words,  as  without  sustaining
some  great  indignitie  hee  could  not  put  up.  Where-
upon after  the  arrivall  of  the  Present,  he  made  an
Arz,  that  is,  a  bill  of  Complaint  to  the  grand  Signior
against  him,  the  maner  in  exhibiting  whereof  is  thus
performed.

The  plaintifes  expect  the  grand  Signiors  going  abroad
from his pallace, either to Santa Sophia or to his

96

RICHARD WRAG  ad

1593-
church  by  the  sea  side,  whither,  with  a  Perma  (that  is
one  of  their  usuall  whirries)  they  approch  within  some
two  or  three  score  yards,  where  the  plaintife  standeth
up,  and  holdeth  his  petition  over  his  forehead  in  sight
of  the  grand  Signior  (for  his  church  is  open  to  the  Sea
side)  the  rest  sitting  still  in  the  boat,  who  appointeth
one  of  his  Dwarfes  to  receive  them,  and  to  bring  them
to  him.  A  Dwarfe,  one  of  the  Ambassadors  favorites,
so  soone  as  he  was  discerned,  beckned  him  to  the
shore  side,  tooke  his  Arz,  and  with  speed  caried  it  to
the  grand  Signior.  Now  the  effect  of  it  was  this;  that
except  his  highnesse  would  redresse  this  so  great  an
indignitie,  which  the  Vizir  his  slave  had  offered  him
and  her  majestie  in  his  person,  he  was  purposed  to
detaine  the  Present  untill  such  time  as  he  might  by
letters  over-land  from  her  majestie  bee  certified,  whither
she  would  put  up  so  great  an  injurie  as  it  was.  [II.  i.  305.]
Whereupon  he  presently  returned  answere,  requesting
the  ambassador  within  an  houre  after  to  goe  to  the
Dovan  of  the  Vizir,  unto  whom  himselfe  of  his  charge  Thegreathdl
would  send  a  gowne  of  cloth  of  gold,  and  commaund  ^
him  publikely  to  put  it  upon  him,  and  with  kind
entertainment  to  embrace  him  in  signe  of  reconciliation.
Whereupon  our  ambassador  returning  home,  tooke  his
horse,  accompanied  with  his  men,  and  came  to  the
Vizirs  court,  where,  according  to  the  grand  Signiors
command,  he  with  all  shew  of  kindnesse  embraced  the
ambassador,  and  with  curteous  speeches  reconciled  him-  ^econcUtamn  ^
selfe,  and  with  his  own  hands  put  the  gowne  of  cloth  ^^^^^
of  gold  upon  his  backe.  Which  done,  hee  with  his
attendants  returned  home,  to  the  no  small  admiration
of  all  Christians  that  heard  of  it,  especially  of  the
French  and  Venetian  ambassadors,  who  never  in  the  like
case  against  the  second  person  of  the  Turkish  Empire
durst  have  attempted  so  bold  an  enterprise  with  hope
of  so  friendly  audience,  and  with  so  speedie  redresse.
This  reconciliation  with  the  great  Vizir  thus  made,  the
ambassador  prepared  himselfe  for  the  deliverie  of  the
VI  97  G

A.D.

1593-

The  ambassa-
dor goeth  to
the  court  with
the  present.

The  Ambass.
came  to  the
Seraglio.

'^  All  these  are
captaines  of
hundreds  and
of  fifties.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Present,  which upon the 7 of October 1593.  in this
maner  he  performed.

The  Ascension  with  her  flags  and  streamers,  as  afore-
said, repaired  nigh  unto  the  place  where  the  ambassador
should  land  to  go  up  to  the  Seraglio :  for  you  must
understand  that  all  Christian  ambassadors  have  their
dwelling  in  Pera  where  most  Christians  abide,  from
which  place,  except  you  would  go  4  or  5  miles  about,
you  cannot  by  land  go  to  Constantinople,  whereas  by
Sea  it  is  litle  broder  then  the  Thames.  Our  Ambas-
sador likewise  apparelled  in  a  sute  of  cloth  of  silver,
with  an  upper  gowne  of  cloth  of  gold,  accompanied  with
7  gentlemen  in  costly  sutes  of  Sattin,  with  30  other  of
his  men  very  well  apparelled,  and  all  in  one  liverie  of
sad  French  russet  cloth  gownes,  at  his  house  tooke
boate :  at  whose  landing  the  ship  discharged  all  her
ordinance,  where  likewise  attended  2  Bassas,  with  40  or
50  Chauses  to  accompany  ye  ambassador  to  the  court,
&  also  horses  for  the  ambassador  &  his  gentlemen,
very  richly  furnished,  with  Turkish  servants  attendant
to  take  the  horses  when  they  should  light.  The
ambassador  thus  honorably  accompanied,  the  Chauses
foremost,  next  his  men  on  foote  all  going  by  two
and  two,  himselfe  last  with  his  Chause  and  Drugaman
or  Interpreter,  and  4  Janissaries,  which  he  doeth
usually  entertaine  in  his  house  to  accompany  him
continually  abroad,  came  to  the  Seraglio  about  an
English  mile  from  the  water  side,  where  first  hee  passed
a  great  gate  into  a  large  court  (much  like  the  space
before  White  hall  gate)  where  he  with  his  gentlemen
alighted  and  left  their  horses.  From  hence  they  passed
into  an  other  stately  court,  being  about  6  score  in
bredth,  and  some  10  score  yards  long,  with  many  trees
in  it :  where  all  the  court  was  with  great  pompe  set  in
order  to  entertaine  our  ambassador.  Upon  the  right
hand  all  the  length  of  the  court  was  a  gallerie  arched
over,  and  borne  up  with  stone  pillars,  much  like  the
Roiall Exchange, where stood* most of  his  guard in

RICHARD WRAG  ad

1593-
rankes  from  the  one  end  to  the  other  in  costly  aray,  with
round  head  pieces  on  their  heads  of  mettall  and  gilt  over,
with  a  great  plume  of  fethers  somewhat  like  a  long  brush
standing  up  before.  On  the  left  hand  stood  the  Cap-
pagies  or  porters,  and  the  Chauses.  All  these  courtiers
being  about  the  number  of  2000.  (as  I  might  well  gesse)
most  of  them  apparelled  in  cloth  of  gold,  silver,  velvet,
sattin  and  scarlet,  did  together  with  bowing  their  bodies,
laying  their  hands  upon  their  brests  in  curteous  maner  of
salutation,  entertain  the  Ambassador :  who  likewise
passing  between  them,  &  turning  himself  somtime  to
the  right  hand  and  sometime  to  the  left,  answered  them
with  the  like.  As  he  thus  passed  along,  certaine  Chauses
conducted  him  to  the  Dovan,  which  is  the  seat  of  Justice,
where  certaine  dayes  of  the  weeke  the  grand  Vizir,  with
the  other  Vizirs,  the  Cadi-lesker  or  lord  chiefe  Justice,
&  the  Mufti  or  high  priest  do  sit  to  determine  upon  such
causes  as  be  brought  before  them,  which  place  is  upon  the
left  side  of  this  great  court,  whither  the  ambassador  with  The  ambassa-
his  gentlemen  came,  where  hee  found  the  Vizir  thus  f''^'^^^^^^^'^^
accompanied  as  aforesayd,  who  with  great  shew  of  kind-  ^^-^^  ^n
nes  received  him  :  and  after  receit  of  her  majesties  letters,  kindnesse.
&  conference  had  of  the  Present,  of  her  majesties  health,
of  the  state  of  England,  and  such  other  matters  as  con-
cerned our  peaceable  trafBque  in  those  parts :  dinner
being  prepared  was  by  many  of  ye  Courtiers  brought  ^'^1^^^'  brought
into  another  inner  roome  next  adjoining,  which  consisted
of  an  hundred  dishes  or  therabouts,  most  boiled  &  rosted,
where  the  ambassador  accompanied  w*  the  Vizirs  went  to
dinner,  his  gentlemen  likewise  with  the  rest  of  his  men
having  a  dinner  with  the  like  varietie  prepared  upon  ye
same  side  of  the  court,  by  themselves  sate  downe  to  their
meat,  40  or  50  Chauses  standing  at  the  upper  end  attend-
ing upon  the  gentlemen  to  see  them  served  in  good
order ;  their  drinke  was  water  mingled  with  rose  water
&  sugar  brought  in  a  Luthro  (that  is  a  goates  skinne)
which  a  man  carieth  at  his  backe,  and  under  his  arme
letteth  it  run  out  at  a  spout  into  cups  as  men  wil  call  for

99

tn.

A.D.

1593-

Diner  taken

azvay.

[II.  i.  306.]

Gownes  of
cloth  of  gold
for  the
ambassador
and  his
gentlemen.

The  Present.

The  Present

viewed.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

it.  The  dinner  thus  with  good  order  brought  in,  and  for
halfe  an  houre  with  great  sobrietie  and  silence  performed,
was  not  so  orderly  taken  up ;  for  certaine  Moglans
officers  of  the  kitchin  (like  her  majesties  blacke  guard)
came  in  disordered  maner  and  tooke  away  the  dishes,
and  he  whose  hungry  eie  one  dish  could  not  satisfie,
turned  two  or  three  one  into  the  other,  and  thus  of  a
sudden  was  a  cleane  riddance  made  of  all.  The  ambas-
sador after  dinner  with  his  gentlemen,  by  certaine  officers
were  placed  at  the  upper  ende  upon  the  left  side  of  the
court,  nere  unto  a  great  gate  which  gave  entrance  to  a
third  court  being  but  litle,  paved  with  stone.  In  the
midst  whereof  was  a  litle  house  built  of  marble,  as  I  take
it,  within  which  sate  the  grand  Signor,  according  to  whose
commandement  given  there  were  gownes  of  cloth  of  gold
brought  out  of  the  wardrope,  and  put  upon  the  ambas-
sador and  7  of  his  gentlemen,  the  ambassador  himselfe
having  2,  one  of  gold,  and  the  other  of  crimosin  velvet,
all  the  rest  one  a  piece.  Then  certaine  Cappagies  had
the  Present,  which  was  in  trunks  there  ready,  delivered
them  by  the  ambassadors  men,  it  being  12  goodly  pieces
of  gilt  plate,  36  garments  of  fine  English  cloth  of  al
colors,  20  garments  of  cloth  of  gold,  10  garments  of
sattin,  6  pieces  of  fine  Holland,  and  certaine  other  things
of  good  value ;  al  which  were  caried  round  about  the
court,  each  man  taking  a  piece,  being  in  number  very
neere  100  parcels,  and  so  2  and  2  going  round  that  all
might  see  it,  to  the  greater  glory  of  the  present,  and  of
him  to  whom  it  was  given :  they  went  into  the  innermost
court  passing  by  the  window  of  that  roome,  where  the
grand  Signior  sate,  who,  as  it  went  by  to  be  laid  up  in
certaine  roomes  adjoining,  tooke  view  of  all.  Presently
after  the  present  followed  the  ambassador  with  his  gentle-
men;  at  the  gate  of  which  court  stoode  20  or  30  Agaus
which  be  eunuchs.  Within  the  court  yard  were  the
Turkes  Dwarfes  and  Dumbe  men,  being  most  of  them
youths.  At  the  doore  of  his  roome  stood  the  Bustangi-
bassa,  with  another  Bassa  to  lead  the  ambassador  and  his

100

RICHARD WRAG  a.d.

1593-
folowers  to  the  grand  Signior  who  sate  in  a  chaire  of
estate,  apparelled  in  a  gowne  of  cloth  of  silver.  The
floore  under  his  feete,  which  part  was  a  foote  higher  then
the  rest,  was  covered  with  a  carpet  of  green  sattin  embro-
dered  most  richly  with  silver,  orient  pedes  &  great
Turkeses ;  ye  other  part  of  the  house  was  covered  with
a  carpet  of  Carnation  sattin  imbrodered  w'  gold,  none
were  in  the  roome  with  him,  but  a  Bassa  who  stood  next
the  wall  over  against  him  hanging  down  his  head,  &
looking  submissely  upon  the  ground  as  all  his  subjects
doe  in  his  presence.  The  ambassador  thus  betwixt  two  J'^^/^^J"^"^^"
which  stood  at  the  doore  being  led  in,  either  of  them  "^^^Hsl^JJ^
taking  an  arme,  kissed  his  hand,  and  so  backward  with  j^and.
his  face  to  the  Turke  they  brought  him  nigh  the  dore
againe,  where  he  stood  untill  they  had  likewise  done  so
with  all  the  rest  of  his  gentlemen.  Which  ended,  the
ambassador,  according  as  it  is  the  custome  when  any
present  is  delivered,  made  his  three  demaunds,  such  as
he  thought  most  expedient  for  her  majesties  honor,  &  the
peaceable  traffique  of  our  nation  into  his  dominions :
whereunto  he  answered  in  one  word,  Nolo,  which  is  in
Turkish  as  much  as,  it  shal  be  done :  for  it  is  not  the
maner  of  the  Turkish  emperor  familiarly  to  confer  with
any  Christian  ambassador,  but  he  appointeth  his  Vizir  in  his  Tke  ambassa-
person  to  graunt  their  demaunds  if  they  be  to  his  liking ;
as  to  our  ambassador  he  granted  all  his  demands,  &  gave
order  that  his  daily  allowance  for  his  house  of  mony,
flesh,  wood,  &  haie,  should  be  augmented  with  halfe  as
much  more  as  it  had  bene  before.  Hereupon  the
ambassador  taking  his  leave,  departed  with  his  gentlemen
the  same  way  he  came,  the  whole  court  saluting  him  as
they  did  at  his  comming  in ;  &  comming  to  the  second
court  to  take  our  horses,  after  we  were  mounted,  we
staied  halfe  an  houre,  until  the  captain  of  the  guard  with
2000  horsmen  at  the  least  passed  before,  after  whom
folowed  40  or  50  Chauses  next  before  the  ambassador
to  accompany  him  to  his  house.  And  as  before  at  his
landing,  so  now  at  his  taking  boat,  the  ship  discharged

lOI

dors  demands
granted.

A.D.

1593-

The  Sultanas
present.

The  Sultanas
present  to  the
Queene.

Letters  sent
for  England.

The  others  Vi-
zirs presented.

[II.  i.  307.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

all  her  great  ordinance,  where  arriving,  he  likewise  had  a
great  banquet  prepared  to  entertaine  those  which  came  to
bring  him  home.  The  pompe  &  solemnitie  of  the
Present,  with  the  day  thus  ended,  he  shortly  after  pre-
sented the  Sultana  or  empresse  who  (by  reason  that  she
is  mother  to  him  which  was  heire  to  the  crown  Imperial)
is  had  in  far  greater  reverence  then  any  of  his  other
Queens  or  concubines.  The  Present  sent  her  in  her
majesties  name  was  a  jewel  of  her  majesties  picture,  set
with  some  rubies  and  diamants,  3  great  pieces  of  gilt
plate,  10  garments  of  cloth  of  gold,  a  very  fine  case  of
glasse  bottles  silver  &  gilt,  with  2  pieces  of  fine  Holland,
which  so  gratefully  she  accepted,  as  that  she  sent  to  know
of  the  ambassador  what  present  he  thought  she  might
return  y^  would  most  delight  her  majestic :  who  sent
word  that  a  sute  of  princely  attire  being  after  the  Turkish
fashion  would  for  the  rarenesse  thereof  be  acceptable  in
England.  Whereupon  she  sent  an  upper  gowne  of  cloth
of  gold  very  rich,  an  under  gowne  of  cloth  of  silver,
and  a  girdle  of  Turkie  worke,  rich  and  faire,  with  a  letter
of  gratification,  which  for  the  rarenesse  of  the  stile,
because  you  may  be  acquainted  with  it,  I  have  at  the
ende  of  this  discourse  hereunto  annexed,  which  letter  and
present,  with  one  from  the  grand  Signor,  was  sent  by
M.  Edward  Bushell,  and  M.  William  Aldridge  over-land
the  20  of  March,  who  passed  through  Valachia  and  Mol-
davia, &  so  through  Poland,  where  Michael  prince  of
Valachia,  and  Aron  Voivoda  prince  of  Moldavia  receiving
letters  from  the  ambassador,  entertained  them  with  al
curtesie,  through  whose  meanes  by  the  great  favour
which  his  lordship  had  with  the  grand  Signior,  they  had
not  long  before  both  of  them  bene  advanced  to  their
princely  dignities.  Hee  likewise  presented  Sigala  the
Admirall  of  the  Seas,  with  Abrim  Bassa,  who  maried  the
great  Turkes  daughter,  and  all  the  other  Vizirs  with
divers  pieces  of  plate,  fine  English  cloth  &  other  costly
things :  the  particulars  whereof,  to  avoid  tedious-
nesse, I omit. All the presents  thus  ended, the  ship

102

RICHARD WRAG  ad.

1594.

shooting  ten  pieces  of  ordinance  at  the  Seraglio  point,  as

a  last  farewell,  departed  on  her  journey  for  England  the  The  Ascension

first  of  November,  my  selfe  continuing  in  Constantinople  ^^P^^^^^^-

untill  the  last  of  July  after. This yere in the spring

there  was  great  preparation  for  the  Hungarian  wars  ;  and  Great^  pre-

the Pfreat Turke  threatened  to  gfoe  himselfe  in  person  :  P^^fJ°"P\
1 1-1 TT  1- 11  1  • /-r •  1 •  •  thetiungartan

but  like  Meliogabalus,  his  arrections  being  more  service-  zuarres.

able  to  Venus  then  to  Mars,  he  stayed  at  home.  Yet  a
great  army  was  dispatched  this  yere ;  who,  as  they  came
out  of  Asia  to  goe  for  Hungary,  did  so  pester  the  streets
of  Constantinople  for  the  space  of  two  moneths  in  the
spring  time,  as  scarse  either  Christian  or  Jew  could
without  danger  of  losing  his  money  passe  up  and  downe
the  city.  What  insolencies,  murders  and  robberies  were
committed  not  onely  upon  Christians  but  also  upon
Turks  I  omit  to  write,  and  I  pray  God  in  England  the
like  may  never  be  seene :  and  yet  I  could  wish,  that  such
amongst  us  as  have  injoyed  the  Gospel  with  such  great  and
admirable  peace  and  prosperity  under  her  Majesties
government  this  forty  yeeres,  and  have  not  all  this  time
brought  forth  better  fruits  of  obedience  to  God,  and
thankfulnesse  to  her  Majesty,  were  there  but  a  short
time  to  beholde  the  miserable  condition  both  of  Chris-
tians and  others  living  under  such  an  infidell  prince,  who
not  onely  are  wrapped  in  most  palpable  &  grosse  ignor-
ance of  mind,  but  are  cleane  without  the  meanes  of  the
true  knowledge  of  God :  I  doubt  not  but  the  sight
hereof  (if  they  be  not  cleane  void  of  grace)  would  stirre
them  up  to  more  thankefulnesse  to  God,  that  ever  they
were  borne  in  so  happy  a  time,  and  under  so  wise
and  godly  a  prince  professing  the  true  religion  of
Christ.

The  number  of  souldiours  which  went  to  the  warres
of  Hungary  this  yere  were  470000,  as  by  the  particulars
given  by  the  Admirall  to  the  Ambassadour  hereunder
doe  appeare.  Although  all  these  were  appointed  and
supposed  to  goe,  yet  the  victories  which  the  Christians
in the spring had against the Turks strooke such a

103

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

terrour  in  many  of  the  Turkish  souldiours,  as  by  re-
port divers  upon  the  way  thither  left  their  Captaines
and  stole  away.

The  number  of  Turkish  souldiers  which  were
appointed  to  goe  into  Hungary  against  the
Christian  Emperour. May 1594.

Slnan  Bassa  generall,  with  the  Sanjacke  masould,  that
is,  out  of  office,  with  the  other  Sanjacks  in  office
or  of  degree,  40000.

Achmigi,  that  is.  Adventurers,  50000.

The  Agha  or  Captaine  with  his  Janisaries,  and  his
Giebegies,  20000.

The  Beglerbeg  of  Graecia,  with  all  his  Sanjacks,  40000.

The  company  of  Spaheis  or  horsemen,  loooo.

The  company  of  Silitari,  6000.

The  company  of  Sagbulve  and  of  Solbulve  both  to-
gether, 8000.

The  Bassa  of  Belgrad,

The  Bassa  of  Temiswar.

The  Bassa  of  Bosna.  ^  80000.

The  Bassa  of  Buda.

The  Sanjack  of  Gersech.

Out  of  Asia.

The  Bassa  of  Caramania.

The  Bassa  of  Laras.

The  Bassa  of  Damasco.

The  Bassa  of  Suas.  ' 120000.

The  Bassa  of  Van  or  Nan.

The  Bassa  of  Usdrum.

Of  Tartars  there  be  about  1 00000.

Thus  you  may  see  that  the  great  Turke  maketh
warre  with  no  small  numbers.  And  in  anno  1597,
when  Sultan  Mahomet  himselfe  went  in  person  into
Hungary,  if  a  man  may  beleeve  reports,  he  had  an
army  of  600000.

104

RICHARD WRAG  a.d.

1594.
For  the  city  of  Constantinople  you  shall  understand
that  it  is  matchable  with  any  city  in  Europe,  aswell  in
bignesse  as  for  the  pleasant  situation  thereof,  and  com-
modious traffike  and  bringing  of  all  maner  of  necessary
provision  of  victuals,  and  whatsoever  els  mans  life  for
the  sustentation  thereof  shall  require,  being  seated  upon
a  promontory,  looking  toward  Pontus  Euxinus  upon  the
Northeast,  and  to  Propontis  on  the  Southwest,  by  which
two  seas  by  shipping  is  brought  great  store  of  all  maner  [II.  i.  308.]
of  victuals.  The  city  it  selfe  in  forme  representeth  a
triangular  figure,  the  sea  washing  the  walles  upon  two
sides  thereof,  the  other  side  faceth  the  continent  of
Thracia ;  the  grand  Signiors  seraglio  standeth  upon  that
point  which  looketh  into  the  sea,  being  cut  off  from  the
city  by  a  wall ;  so  that  ye  wall  of  his  pallace  conteineth
in  circuit  about  two  English  miles :  the  seven  towers
spoken  of  before  stand  at  another  corner,  &  Constan-
tines  olde  pallace  to  the  North  at  the  third  corner.
The  city  hath  a  threefolde  wall  about  it ;  the  inner-
most very  high,  the  next  lower  then  that,  and  the  third
a  countermure,  and  is  in  circuit  about  ten  English  miles :
it  hath  foure  and  twenty  gates :  and  when  the  empire  was
remooved  out  of  the  West  into  the  East,  it  was  inriched
with  many  spoiles  of  olde  Rome  by  Vespasian  and  other
emperours,  having  many  moriuments  and  pillars  in  it
worthy  the  observation  ;  amongst  the  rest  in  the  midst
of  Constantinople  standeth  one  of  white  marble  called
Vespasians  pillar,  of  38  or  40  yards  high,  which  hath
from  the  base  to  the  top  proportions  of  men  in  armour
fighting  on  horsebacke :  it  is  likewise  adorned  with  divers
goodly  buildings  &  stately  Mesquitas,  whereof  the  biggest
is  Sultan  Solimans  a  great  warriour,  which  lived  in  the
time  of  Charles  the  fifth  ;  but  the  fairest  is  Santa  Sophia,  Santa  Sophia.
which  in  the  time  of  the  Christian  emperours  was  the
chiefe  cathedrall  church,  and  is  still  in  greatest  account
with  the  great  Turke :  it  is  built  round  like  other
Greekish  churches,  the  pavements  and  walles  be  all  of
marble, it hath beneath 44 pillars of  divers coloured

105

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

marble  of  admirable  heigth  and  bignesse,  which  stand
upon  great  round  feet  of  brasse,  much  greater  then  the
pillars,  and  of  a  great  heigth,  some  ten  yards  distant  from
the  wall :  from  which  unto  these  pillars  is  a  great  gallery
built,  which  goeth  round  about  the  church  ;  and  upon
the  outside  of  the  gallery  stand  66  marble  pillars  which
beare  up  the  round  roofe  being  the  top  of  the  church  :
it  hath  three  pulpits  or  preaching  places,  and  about  2000
lampes  brought  in  by  the  Turke.  Likewise  upon  one
side  in  the  •  top  is  the  picture  of  Christ  with  the  1 2
Apostles,  but  their  faces  are  defaced,  with  two  or  three
ancient  tombs  of  Christians :  to  the  West  sticketh  an
arrow  in  the  toppe  of  the  church,  which,  as  the  Turks
report.  Sultan  Mahomet  shot  when  he  first  tooke  the
city.  Neere  adjoyning  be  two  chapels  of  marble,  where
lie  buried  most  of  the  emperours  with  their  children  &
sultanas.  The  1 6  of  July,  accompanied  with  some  other
of  our  nation  we  went  by  water  to  the  Blacke  sea,  being
16  miles  distant  from  Constantinople,  the  sea  al  the  way
thither  being  little  broader  then  the  Thames ;  both  sides
of  the  shore  are  beautified  with  faire  &  goodly  buildings.
At  the  mouth  of  this  Bosphorus  lieth  a  rocke  some  foure-
score  yards  from  the  maine  land,  whereupon  standeth
Pompeppillar  a  white  marble  pillar  called  Pompeys  pillar,  the  shadow
whereof  was  23  foote  long  at  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the
forenoone :  over  against  it  is  a  turret  of  stone  upon  the
maine  land  120  steps  high,  having  a  great  glasse-lanthorne
in  the  toppe  foure  yards  in  diamiter  and  three  in  heigth,
with  a  great  copper  pan  in  the  midst  to  holde  oile,  with
twenty  lights  in  it,  and  it  serveth  to  give  passage  into
this  straight  in  the  night  to  such  ships  as  come  from  all
parts  of  those  seas  to  Constantinople :  it  is  continually
kept  by  a  Turke,  who  to  y'  end  hath  pay  of  the  grand
Signior.  And  thus  having  spent  eleven  moneths  in
Constantinople,  accompanied  with  a  chause,  &  carying
certaine  mandates  from  the  grand  Signior  to  the  Bassa
of  Aleppo  for  the  kinde  usage  of  our  nation  in  those
parts,  the  30  of  July  I  tooke  passage  in  a  Turkish  car-

106

RICHARD WRAG  ad.

1594-
mosaic  or  shippe  bound  for  Sidon ; and  passing  thorow
Propontis,  having  Salimbria  with  Heraclia  most  pleasantly
situated  on  the  right  hand,  and  Proconesus  now called
Marmora  on  the  left,  we  came  to  Gallipoly,  and  so  by  Gallipoly.
Hellespont,  betweene  the  two  castles  before  named  called
Sestos  and  Abydos,  famous  for  the  passages  made  there
both  by  Xerxes  and  great  Alexander,  the  one  into  Thracia,
the  other  into  Asia,  and  so  by  the  Sigean  Promontory,
now  called  Cape  Janitzary,  at  the  mouth  of  Hellespont
upon  Asia  side,  where  Troy  stood,  where  are  yet  ruines  Troy.
of  olde  walles  to  be  seene,  with  two  hils  rising  in  a  pira-
midall  forme,  not  unlikely  to  be  the  tombs  of  Achilles
and  Ajax. From  thence  we  sailed  along,  having  Tenedos
and  Lemnos  on  the  right  hand,  and  the  Trojan  fields  on
the  left : at  length  we  came  to JVI  itylen  and  Sio long Zio.
time inhabited by  the Genoueses, but now under the
Turke, The  Hand is beautified  with  goodly  buildings
and  pleasant  gardens,  and  aboundeth  with  fruits,  wine,
and  the  gum  masticke. From  thence  sailing  alongst  the
gulfe  of  Ephesus  with  Nicaria  on  the  right  hand,  Samos
and Smirna  on  the  left,  we  came  to Patmos,  where  S.  Patmos.
John wrote the Revelation. The Hand is but small,
not above  five miles in compasse : the chiefe thing  it
yeeldeth  is  corn :  it  hath  a  port  for  shipping,  and  in  it  is
a  monastery  of  Greekish  Caloieros. From  thence  by  Cos  Cos.
(now  called  Lango)  where  Hipocrates  was  borne  :  &  pass-
ing many  other  Hands  and  rocks,  we  arrived  at  Rhodes,  Rhodes.
one  of  the  strongest  and  fairest  cities  of  the  East :  here  we
stayed  three or foure  dayes ; and by  reason  of  a  By
which went in the ship to Paphos in Cyprus, who
used  me  with  all kindnesse,  I  went  about  the  city,  and
tooke  the view  of  all : which city  is  still with  all the
houses  and  walles  thereof  maintained  in  the  same  order
as  they tooke  it from  the  Rhodian  knights. Over  the
doores  of  many  of  the houses,  which be  strongly  built
of  stone,  do  remaine  undefaced,  the  armes  of  England,  [II.  i.  309.]
France, Spaine,  and many other Christian knights, as
though  the  Turkes in  the view  thereof  gloried in the

107

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

taking  of  all  Christendome,  whose  armes  there  they
beholde.  From  thence  we  sailed  to  Paphos  an  olde
ruinous  towne  standing  upon  the  Westerne  part  of
Cyprus,  where  S.  Paul  in  the  Acts  converted  the  gover-

Sidon.  nor. Departing  hence,  we  came  to  Sidon,  by  the  Turks

called  Saytosa,  within  tenne  or  twelve  miles  of  the  place

Ezek.  26.  5.  where  Tirus  stood,  which  now  being  eaten  in  by  the
sea,  is,  as  Ezekiel  prophesied,  a  place  for  the  spreading
out  of  a  net.  Sidon  is  situated  in  a  small  bay  at  the
foot  of  mount  Libanus,  upon  the  side  of  an  hill  look-
ing to  the  North :  it  is  walled  about,  with  a  castle
nigh  to  the  sea,  and  one  toward  the  land  which  is
ruinated,  but  the  walle  thereof  standeth.  Some  halfe
mile  up  toward  the  mountaine  be  certaine  ruines  of
buildings,  with  marble  pillars,  remaining :  heere  for  three
dayes  we  were  kindly  entertained  of  the  captaine  of  the
castle :  and  in  a  small  barke  we  sailed  from  hence  along
the  shore  to  Tripoli,  &  so  to  Alexandretta,  where  the
24  of  August  we  arrived.  From  thence  with  a  Vene-
tian caravan we  went by  land to Aleppo,  passing by

Antioch.  Antioch,  which  is  seated  upon  the  side  of  an  hill,  whose
walles  still  stand  with  360  turrets  upon  them,  and
neere  a  very  great  plaine  which  beareth  the  name  of  the
city,  thorow  which  runneth  the  river  Orontes,  in  Scrip-

Akppo.  ture  called  Farfar. In  Aleppo  I  stayed  untill  February

following;  in  this  city,  as  at  a  mart,  meete  many  nations
out  of  Asia  with  the  people  of  Europe,  having  con-
tinuall  traffike  and  interchangeable  course  of  marchandise
one  with  another :  the  state  and  trade  of  which  place,
because  it  is  so  well  knowen  to  most  of  our  nation  I
omitte  to  write  of.  The  27  of  February  I  departed
from  Aleppo,  and  the  fifth  of  March  imbarked  my
selfe  at  Alexandretta  in  a  great  ship  of  Venice  called
the  Nana  Ferra,  to  come  for  England.  The  14  we  put
into  Salino  in  Cyprus,  where  the  ship  staying  many
dayes  to  lade  cotton  wooll,  and  other  commodities,  in
the  meane  time  accompanied  with  M.  William  Barret
my  countrey man,  the master of  the ship a Greeke,

108

RICHARD WRAG  ad.

1595.

and others  we  tooke  occasion  to  see  Nicosia,  the  chiefe  Nicosia.

city  of  this Hand,  which was some twenty  miles  from

this  place, which is situated at the foot  of  an  hill :  to

the East is  a  great  plaine, extending  it  selfe  in  a  great

length  from  the  North  to  the  South  : it  is  walled  about,

but  of  no such strength  as  Famagusta  (another  city  in

this  Hand neere  the  Sea  side)  whose walles  are  cut  out

of  the  maine  rocke. In this city  be  many  sumptuous

and goodly  buildings of stone, but uninhabited ; the

cause  whereof  doth  give  me  just  occasion  to  shew  you

of  a  rare  judgement  of  God  upon  the  owners  sometime

of  these  houses,  as  I  was  credibly  informed  by  a  Cipriot

a  marchant  of  good  wealth  in  this  city. Before  it  came  Agreatjudge-

in subjection to the Turks, while it was under the  ^^^^t  V^od
■\T ^-  ^\  1  111  r  ^po'"^  the  noble

Venetians, there  were many barons and noble men  or  menofCvprus

the  Cipriots,  who  partly  by  usurping  more  superiority
over  the  common  people  then  they  ought,  and  partly
through  their  great  revenues  which  yeerely  came  in  by
their  cotton  wooll  and  wines,  grew  so  insolent  and
proud,  and  withall  so  impiously  wicked,  as  that  they
would  at  their  pleasure  command  both  the  wives  and
children  of  their  poore  tenants  to  serve  their  uncleane
lusts,  &  holding  them  in  such  slavery  as  though  they
had  beene  no  better  then  dogges,  would  wage  them
against  a  grayhound  or  spaniell,  and  he  who  woon  the
wager  should  ever  after  holde  them  as  his  proper  goods
and  chattels,  to  do  with  them  as  he  listed,  being
Christians  aswell  as  themselves,  if  they  may  deserve  so
good  a  name.  As  they  behaved  themselves  most  un-
christianly  toward  their  brethren,  so  and  much  more
ungodly  (which  I  should  have  put  in  the  first  place)
did  they  towards  God :  for  as  though  they  were  too
great,  standing  on  foot  or  kneeling  to  serve  God,  they
would  come  riding  on  horsebacke  into  the  church  to
heare  their  masse :  which  church  now  is  made  a  publike
basistane  or  market  place  for  the  Turkes  to  sell  com-
modities in  :  but  beholde  the  judgement  of  the  righteous
God,  who  payeth  the  sinner  measure  for  measure. The

109

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^595-

Turkes  the  yeere  before  the  overthrowe  given  them
at  Lepanto  by  Don  John  tooke  Cyprus.  These  mighty
Nimrods  fled  some  into  holes  &  some  into  mountaines
to  hide  themselves ;  whereupon  the  Turkes  made
generall  proclamation,  that  if  they  would  all  come  in
and  yeeld  themselves,  they  would  restore  them  to  their
former  revenues  and  dignities :  who  not  mistrusting  the
mischievous  pretense  of  the  Turkes,  assembled  together
to  make  themselves  knowen ;  whom  after  the  Turkes
had  in  possession,  they  (as  the  Lords  executioners)  put
them  with  their  wives  and  children  all  to  the  sword,
pretending  thereby  to  cut  of  all  future  rebellion,  so
that  at  this  day  is  not  one  of  the  noble  race  knowen
alive  in  the  Iland,  onely  two  or  three  remaine  in
Venice  but  of  litle  wealth,  which  in  the  time  of  the
warres  escaped.  After  we  had  stayed  in  this  Iland  some
thirty  dayes,  we  set  saile  in  the  foresayd  shippe  being
about  the  burthen  of  900  tunnes,  having  in  her  pas-
sengers of  divers  nations,  as  Tartars,  Persians,  Jewes,
and  sundry  Christians.  Amongst  all  which  I  had  often
conference  with  a  Jew,  who  by  reason  of  his  many
yeeres  education  at  Safet  a  place  in  Judea  neere  Jeru-
salem, where  they  study  the  Rabbines  with  some  other
arts  as  they  thinke  good,  as  also  for  his  travels  into
Persia  and  Ormus,  he  seemed  to  be  of  good  experience
in  matters  abroad,  who  related  unto  me  such  conference

[II.  i.  310.] as  he  had  with  a  Baniane  at  Ormus,  being  one  of  the
Indians inhabiting the countrey of Cambaia. This

Indians  skil- Baniane being a  Gentile had skill in Astronomic, as

■^^  ,  ^^  many  of  that  nation  have,  who  by  his  books  written  in

Astronomy.  J  ^  -^  1  j n 1  •

his  owne  tongue  and  Lnaracters,  could  tell  the  time
of  Eclipses  both  of  Sunne  and  Moone,  with  the  Change
and  Full,  and  by  judgement  in  Astrologie  gave  answere
to  any  question  demanded.  Being  asked  concerning  his
opinion  in  religion,  what  he  thought  of  God  ?  He
made  answere,  that  they  held  no  other  god  but  the  sun,
(to  which  planet  they  pray  both  at  the  rising  and  set-
ting) as  I  have  scene  sundry  doe  in  Aleppo :  his  reason

RICHARD WRAG  a.d.

1595.
was  drawen  from  the  effects  which  it  worketh  in  giving
light  to  the  moone  &  other  starres,  and  causing  all
things  to  grow  and  encrease  upon  the  earth :  answere
was  made,  that  it  did  moove  with  the  rest  as  the
wheeles  of  a  clocke,  and  therefore  of  force  must  have
a  moover.  Likewise  in  the  Eclipse  being  darkened  it
is  manifestly  prooved  that  it  is  not  god,  for  God  is
altogether  goodnesse  and  brightnesse,  which  can  neither
be  darkened  nor  receive  detriment  or  hurt :  but  the
Sun  receiveth  both  in  the  Eclipse,  as  it  is  apparant :  to
which  hee  could  not  answere ;  but  so  they  had  received
from  their  ancestors,  that  it  was  without  beginning  or
ende,  as  in  any  Orbicular  or  round  body  neither  begin-
ning or  end  could  be  found.  He  likewise  sayd,  that
there  were  other  Gentiles  in  ye  Indies  which  worship
the  moone  as  chiefe,  and  their  reason  is.  The  moone
when  she  riseth  goeth  with  thousands  of  starres  accom-
panied like  a  king,  and  therefore  is  chiefe :  but  the
Sunne  goeth  alone,  and  therefore  not  so  great.  Against
whom  the  Banianes  reason,  that  it  is  not  true,  because
the  Moone  and  starres  receive  their  light  from  the
Sunne,  neither  doth  the  Sunne  vouchsafe  them  his
company  but  when  he  list,  and  therefore  like  a  mighty
prince  goeth  alone,  yet  they  acknowledge  the  Moone  as
Queene  or  Viceroy.  Law  they  hold  none,  but  onely  'I'he  seven
seven  precepts  which  they  say  were  P;iven  them  from  PJ'^^P^^  "f
their  father  Noe,  not  knowing  Abraham  or  any  other.
First,  to  honor  father  and  mother ;  secondly,  not  to
steale ;  thirdly  not  to  commit  adultery ;  fourthly  not  to
kill  any  thing  living;  fiftly,  not  to  eate  any  thing
living;  sixtly,  not  to  cut  their  haire ;  seventhly,  to  go
barefoot  in  their  churches.  These  they  hold  most
strictly,  &  by  no  meanes  will  breake  them :  but  he
that  breaketh  one  is  punished  with  twenty  stripes ;  but
for  the  greatest  fault  they  will  kill  none,  neither  by  a
short  death  nor  a  long,  onely  he  is  kept  some  time  in
prison  with  very  little  meat,  and  hath  at  the  most  not
above  twenty  or five & twenty stripes. In  the yere

III

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

they  have  i6  feasts,  and  then  they  go  to  their  churchy
where  is  pictured  in  a  broad  table  the  Sun,  as  we  use
to  paint  it,  the  face  of  a  man  with  beames  round
about,  not  having  any  thing  els  in  it.  At  their  feast
they  spot  their  faces  in  divers  parts  with  safiron  all
yellow,  and  so  walke  up  and  downe  the  streets ;  and
this  they  doe  as  a  custome.  They  hold,  there  shalbe  a
resurrection,  and  all  shall  come  to  judgement,  but  the
account  shalbe  most  straight,  insomuch  that  but  one  of
loooo  shalbe  received  to  favor,  and  those  shall  live
againe  in  this  world  in  great  happinesse :  the  rest  shalbe
tormented.  And  because  they  will  escape  this  judge-
ment, when  any  man  dieth,  he  and  his  wife  be  both
burnt  together  even  to  ashes,  and  then  they  are  throwen
into  a  river,  and  so  dispersed  as  though  they  had  never
bene.  If  the  wife  will  not  burne  with  her  dead  hus-
band, she  is  holden  ever  after  as  a  whore.  And  by
this  meanes  they  hope  to  escape  the  judgement  to  come.
As  for  the  soule,  that  goeth  to  the  place  from  whence  it
came,  but  where  the  place  is  they  know  not.  That  the
body  should  not  be  made  againe  they  reason  w'  the
phylosophers,  saying,  that  of  nothing  nothing  can  be
made  (not  knowing  that  God  made  the  whole  world
and  their  god  the  Sun  of  nothing)  but  beholding  the
course  of  nature,  that  nothing  is  made  but  by  a
meanes,  as  by  the  seed  of  a  man  is  made  another,  and
by  corne  cast  into  the  ground  there  commeth  up  new
corne :  so,  say  they,  man  cannot  be  made  except  some
part  of  him  be  left,  and  therefore  they  burne  the
whole :  for  if  he  were  buried  in  the  earth,  they  say
there  is  a  small  bone  in  the  necke  which  would  never
be  consumed :  or  if  he  were  eaten  by  a  beast,  that
bone  would  not  consume,  but  of  that  bone  would
come  another  man ;  and  then  the  soule  being  restored
againe,  he  should  come  into  judgement,  whereas  now,
the  body  being  destroyed,  the  soule  shall  not  be  judged :
for  their  opinion  is,  that  both  body  and  soule  must  be
united  together,  as  they  have  sinned  together,  to  receive

RICHARD WRAG  ad.

1595-
judgement ;  and  therfore  the  soule  alone  cannot.  Their
seven  precepts  which  they  keepe  so  strictly  are  not  for
any  hope  of  reward  they  have  after  this  life,  but  onely
that  they  may  be  blessed  in  this  world,  for  they  thinke
that  he  which  breaketh  them  shall  have  ill  successe  in
all  his  businesse.

They  say,  the  three  chiefe  religions  in  the  world
be  of  the  Christians,  Jewes,  &  Turks,  &  yet  but  one
of  them  true  :  but  being  in  doubt  which  is  the  truest
of  the  three,  they  will  be  of  none :  for  they  hold  that
all  these  three  shall  be  judged,  and  but  few  of  them
which  be  of  the  true  shall  be  saved,  the  examination
shall  be  so  straight ;  and  therefore,  as  I  have  sayd  before,
to  prevent  this  judgement,  they  burne  their  bodies  to
ashes.  They  say,  these  three  religions  have  too  many
precepts  to  keepe  them  all  wel,  &  therfore  wonderful
hard  it  wil  be  to  make  account,  because  so  few  doe
observe  all  their  religion  aright.  And  thus  passing  the
time  for  the  space  of  three  moneths  in  this  sea  voyage,  [II  i.  311.]
we  arrived  at  Venice  the  tenth  of  June :  and  after  I
had  scene  Padua,  with  other  English  men,  I  came  the
ordinary  way  over  the  Alpes,  by  Augusta,  Noremberg,
and  so  for  England ;  where  to  the  praise  of  God  I  safely
arrived  the  ninth  of  August 1595.

[A  letter

VI  113  H

A.D.
1594.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  letter  written  by  the  most  high  and  mighty
Empresse  the  wife  of  the  Grand  Signior  Sultan
Murad  Can  to  the  Queenes  Majesty  of
England,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord, 1 594.

L  principio  del  ragionamento  nostro  sia
scrittura  perfetta  nelle  quatro  parte  del
mondo,  in  nome  di  quelle  che  ha  create
indifferentemente  tante  infinite  creature,
che  non  havevano  anima  ni  persona,  &
di  quelle  che  fa  girar  gli  nove  cieli,  &  che
la  terra  sette  volte  una  sopra  1'  altra fa

firmar ;  Signer  &  Re  senza  vicere,  &  che  nen  ha  compa-
racien  alia  sua  creatiene  ne  opera,  &  une  senza  precie,
adorate  incomparabilmente,  V  altissime  Die  createre ;  che
nen  ha  similitudine,  si  ceme  e  descrite  dalli  prepheti :
a  la  cui  grandessa  nen  si  arrive,  &  alia  perfettiene  sua
cempiuta  nen  si  eppene,  &  quel  emnipetente  createre
&  coeperatere ;  alia  grandessa  del  quale  inchinano  tutti
li  prepheti ;  fra  quali  il  maggior  &  che  ha  ettenuto  gracia,
herte  del  paradise,  ragi  dal  sole,  amate  del  altissime  Die
e  Mahomet  Mustaffa,  al  qual  &  suei  adherenti  &  imi-
tateri  sia  perpetua  pace :  alia  cui  sepultura  ederifera  si
fa  egni  henore.  Quelle  che  e  imperator  de  sette  climati,
&  delle  quatro  parti  del  mende,  invincibile  Re  di  Grascia,
Agiamia,  Ungeria,  Tartaria,  Valachia,  Ressia,  Turchia,
Arabia,  Bagdet,  Caramania,  Abessis,  Gieuasir,  Sirvan,
Barbaria,  Algieri,  Franchia,  Corvacia,  Belgrade,  &c.
sempre  felicissimo,  &  de  dodeci  Aveli  possessor  della
corona,  &  della  stirpe  di  Adam,  fin  hera  Imperator,
figliolo  del'Imperatere,  conservato  de  la  divina  provi-
denza,  Re  di  egni  dignita  &  honore.  Sultan  Murat,  che
II  Signer  Die  sempre  augmenti  le  sue  ferzze,  &  padre
di  quelle  a  cui  aspetta  la  corona  imperiale,  herte  &
cypresse  mirabile,  degno  della  sedia  regale,  8e:  vere  herede
del  commando  imperiale,  dignissimo  Mehemet  Can,  filiol

114

THE SULTANA'S LETTER  ad.

1594-
de  Sultan  Murat  Can,  che  dio  compisca  li  suoi  dissegni,
&  alunga  li  suoi  giorni  felici :  Dalla  parte  della  madre  del
qual  si  scrive  la  presente  alia  serenissima  &  gloriosissima
fra  le  prudentissime  Donne,  &  eletta  fra  li  triomfanti  sotto
il  standard©  di  Jesu  Christo,  potentissima  &  ricchissima
regitrice,  &  al  mondo  singularissima  fra  il  feminil  sesso,
la  serenissima  Regina  d'Ingilterra,  che  segve  le  vestigie
de  Maria  virgine,  il  fine  della  quale  sia  con  bene  &  per-
fettione,  secondo  il  suo  desiderio.  Le  mando  una
salutacion  di  pace,  cosi  honorata,  che  non  basta  tutta  la
copia  di  rosignoli  con  le  loro  musiche  arivare,  non  che
con  questa  carta :  1'  amore  singulare  che  e  conciputo  fra
noi,  e  simile  a  un'  horto  di  Uccelli  vagi ;  che  il  Signor
Dio  la  faci  degna  di  salvacione,  &  il  fine  suo  sia  tale,
che  in  questo  mondo  &  nel'  futuro  sia  con  pace.  Doppo
comparsi  li  suoi  honorati  presenti  da  la  sedia  de  la  Serenita
vostra,  sapera  che  sono  capitati  in  una  hora  che  ogni  punto
e  stato  una  consolation  di  lungo  tempo,  per  occasione
del  Ambassadore  di  vostra  serenita  venuto  alia  felice  porta
del  Imperatore,  con  tanto  nostro  contento,  quanto  si
posso  desiderare,  &  con  quello  una  lettera  di  vostra
sereneta,  che  ci  estata  presentata  dalli  nostri  Eunuchi
con  gran  honore ;  la  carta  de  la  quale  odorava  di  camfora
&  ambracano,  &  I'inchiostro  di  musco  perfetto,  &  quella
pervenuta  in  nostro  mano  tutta  la  continenza  di  essa
a  parte  a  parte  ho  ascoltato  intentamente.  Quello  che
hora  si  conviene  e,  che  correspondente  alia  nostra
affecione,  in  tutto  quello  che  si  aspetta  alle  cose  attenente
alii  paesi  che  sono  sotto  il  commando  di  vostra  serenita,
lei  non  manchi  di  sempre  tenermi,  dato  noticia,  che  in
tutto  quello  che  li  occorera,  lo  possi  compiacerla ;  de
quello  che  fra  le  nostre  serenita  e  conveniente,  accioche
quelle  cose  che  si  interprenderano,  habino  il  desiderate
buon  fine ;  perche  lo  saro  sempre  ricordevole  al  altissimo
Imperatore  delle  occorenze  di  vostra  serenita,  per  che
sia  in  ogni  occasione  compiaciuta.  La  pace  sia  con  vostra
serenita,  &  con  quelli  che  seguitano  dretamente  la  via
di  Dio.

"5

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

Scritta al primi dell luna di Rabie Livol, anno del
profeta 1002,  &  di  Jesu 1594.

U

The  same  in  English.

Et  the  beginning  of  our  discourse  be  a  perfect  writing
in  the  foure  parts  of  the  world,  in  the  name  of  him
which  hath  indifferently  created  such  infinite  numbers
of  creatures,  which  had  neither  soule  nor  body,  and
of  him  which  mooveth  the  nine  heavens,  and  stablisheth
the  earth  seven  times  one  above  another,  which  is  Lord
and  king  without  any  deputy,  who  hath  no  comparison  to
his  creation  and  worke,  and  is  one  inestimable,  worshipped
without  all  comparison,  the  most  high  God,  the  creator,
which  hath  nothing  like  unto  him,  according  as  he  is
described  by  the  Prophets,  to  whose  power  no  man  can
attaine,  and  whose  absolute  perfection  no  man  may
controll ;  and  that  omnipotent  creatour  and  fellow-worker,
[II.  i.  312.]  to  whose  Majesty  all  the  Prophets  submit  themselves,
among  whom  the  greatest,  and  which  hath  obtained
greatest  favour,  the  garden  of  Paradise,  the  beame  of  the
Sunne,  the  beloved  of  the  most  high  God  is  Mahomet
Mustaffa,  to  whom  and  to  his  adherents  and  followers
be  perpetuall  peace,  to  whose  fragrant  sepulture  all  honour
is  performed.  He  which  is  emperour  of  the  seven  climats
and  of  the  foure  parts  of  the  world,  the  invincible  king
of  Gr^cia,  Agiamia,  Hungaria,  Tartaria,  Valachia,  Rossia,
Turchia,  Arabia,  Bagdet,  Caramania,  Abessis,  Giouasir,
Sirvan,  Barbaria,  Alger,  Franchia,  Corvacia,  Belgrade,  &c.
alwayes  most  happy,  and  possessour  of  the  crowne  from
twelve  of  his  ancestours ;  and  of  the  seed  of  Adam,  at
this  present  emperour,  the  sonne  of  an  emperour,  pre-
served by  the  divine  providence,  a  king  woorthy  of  all
glory  and  honour.  Sultan  Murad,  whose  forces  the  Lord
God  alwayes  increase,  and  father  of  him  to  whom  the
imperiall  crowne  is  to  descend,  the  paradise  and  woonder-
fuU  tall  cypresse,  worthy  of  the  royall  throne,  and  true
heire  of  the  imperiall  authority,  most  woorthy  Mehemet

116

THE SULTANA'S LETTER  a.d.

1594.

Can,  the  sonne  of  Sultan  Murad  Can,  whose  enterprises
God  vouchsafe  to  accomplish,  and  to  prolong  his  happy
dayes  :  on  the  behalfe  of  whose  mother  this  present  letter  '^^"  Sultana
is  written  to  the  most  gracious  and  most  glorious,  the  ^L^l  ^^^^
wisest  among  women,  and  chosen  among  those  which  ^/^^^.^  -^ow
triumph  under  the  standard  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  most  reigneth  as
mighty  and  most  rich  governour,  and  most  rare  among  Emperor.
womankinde  in  the  world,  the  most  gracious  Queene
of  England,  which  follow  the  steps  of  the  virgine  Mary,
whose  end  be  prosperous  and  perfect,  according  to  your
hearts  desire.  I  send  your  Majesty  so  honorable  and
sweet  a  salutation  of  peace,  that  al  the  flocke  of  Nightin-
gales with  their  melody  cannot  attaine  to  ye  like,  much
lesse  this  simple  letter  of  mine.  The  singular  love  which
we  have  conceived  one  toward  the  other  is  like  to  a
garden  of  pleasant  birds :  and  the  Lord  God  vouchsafe
to  save  and  keepe  you,  and  send  your  Majesty  an  happy
end  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  world  to  come.  After
the  arrivall  of  your  honourable  presents  from  the  Court
of  your  Majesty,  your  Highnesse  shall  understand  that
they  came  in  such  a  season  that  every  minute  ministred
occasion  of  long  consolation  by  reason  of  the  comming
of  your  Majesties  Ambassadour  to  the  triumphant  Court
of  the  Emperour,  to  our  so  great  contentment  as  we
could  possibly  wish,  who  brought  a  letter  from  your
Majestie,  which  with  great  honour  was  presented  unto  us
by  our  eunuks,  the  paper  whereof  did  smell  most
fragrantly  of  camfor  and  ambargriese,  and  the  incke  of
perfect  muske  ;  the  contents  whereof  we  have  heard  very
attentively  from  point  to  point.  I  thinke  it  therefore
expedient,  that,  according  to  our  mutuall  affection,  in
any  thing  whatsoever  may  concerne  the  countreys  which  are
subject  to  your  Majesty,  I  never  faile,  having  information
given  unto  me,  in  whatsoever  occasion  shall  be  ministred,
to  gratifie  your  Majesty  to  my  power  in  any  reasonable
and  convenient  matter,  that  all  your  subjects  businesses
and  affaires  may  have  a  wished  and  happy  end.  For  I
will  alwayes  be  a  sollicitour  to  the  most  mighty  Emperour

117

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

for  your  Majesties  affaires,  that  your  Majesty  at  all  times
may be fully satisfied. Peace be to your Majesty,
and  to all  such  as  follow  rightly  the  way  of
Jnn.  Don.  God. Written  the  first  day  of  the

^594-  Moone  of  Rabie  Livol  in  the

yere  of  the  Prophet,
1 002.

118

THE  SECOND  PART  OF  THIS  SECOND  VOLUME
containing  the

Principall Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques, and
Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation,

made  to  the  South  and  Southeast  quarters  of  the  world

without  the  Straights  of  Gibraltar,  namely  to  the  Hands

of  Madera, and of  the Canaries,  to the kingdome  of

Barbaric, to the lies of Capo Verde, to the River

of  Senga, to the Coast of  Ghinea and Benin, about

the Cape of  Buona Esperanza,  and so to  Goa  in the

East  Indies,  and  likewise  beyond  cape  Comori

to  the  lies  of  Nicubar,  to  Sumatra,  to  the

Channell  of  Sincapura  over  against

the  City  of  Malacca,  and  to

divers  other  places

The  voyage  of  Macham  an  English  man,  v^herein  [II.  ii.  i.]
he  first of  any man discovered the Hand of
Madera, recorded verbatim in the Portugall
history,  written  by  Antonio  Galvano.

N  the  yeere 1344,  King  Peter  the  fourth

of  that name reigning in Aragon, the

Chronicles of  his age  write that about

this  time  the  Hand  of  Madera,  standing  Madera  first

in 7  2 degrees, was discovered by an  '^"^'^l^/^'^  h
T-, ,.  , °  1  . 1  1 TV  /r 1  one  Macham

English  man,  which  was  named  Macham,  anEngUshman

who  sailing  out  of  England  into  Spaine,

with  a  woman  that  he  had  stoUen,  arrived  by  tempest  in
that  Hand,  and  did  cast  anker  in  that  haven  or  bay,
which  now  is  called  Machico  after  the  name  of  Macham.

119

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1344.

And  because  his  lover  was  sea-sicke, he  went  on  land

with  some  of  his  company,  and  the  shippe  with  a  good

winde  made  saile  away,  and  the  woman  died  for  thought.

Machammade  Macham, which loved  her dearely, built a chapell, or

there  a  chapel,  hermita2:e, to bury her in, calling it by the name of

naming  it  ,  o'  j"^,-  11  "^i

Jesus  chapell.  J  ^sus,  and  caused  his  name  and  hers  to  be  written  or
graven  upon  the  stone  of  her  tombe,  and  the  occasion
of  their  arrivall  there,  i^nd  afterward  he  ordeined  a  boat
made  of  one  tree  (for  there  be  trees  of  a  great  compasse
about)  and  went  to  sea  in  it,  with  those  men  that  he
had,  and  were  left  behinde  with  him,  and  came  upon
the  coast  of  Afrike,  without  saile  or  oare.  And  the
Moores  which  saw  it  tooke  it  to  be  a  marvellous  thing,
and  presented  him  unto  the  king  of  that  countrey  for
a  woonder,  and  that  king  also  sent  him  and  his  com-
panions for  a  miracle  unto  the  king  of  Castile.

In  the  yeere  1395,  King  Henry  the  third  of  that  name
reigning  in  Castile,  the  information  which  Macham  gave
of  this  Hand,  and  also  the  ship  of  his  company,  mooved
many  of  France  and  Castile  to  go  and  discover  it,  and
also  the  great  Canaria,  &c.

In  the  yeere  141 7,  King  John  the  second  reigning  in
Castile,  and  his  mother  Lady  Katherine  being  Regent,
one  Monsieur  Ruben  of  Bracamont,  which  was  Admirall
of  France,  demanding  the  conquest  of  the  Hands  of  the
Canaries,  with  the  title  of  King,  for  a  kinsman  of  his
named  Monsieur  John  Betancourt,  after  that  the  Queene
hath  given  him  them,  and  holpen  him,  he  departed  from
Sivil  with  a  good  army.  And  they  affirme  also,  that  the
principall  cause  which  moved  him  to  this,  was  to  discover
the  Hand  of  Madera,  which  Macham  had  found,  &c.
ibidem  pag. 1.  of  Anthonio  Galvano.

120

ENGLISH AID TO PORTUGAL  ad.

1415.

This  note  following,  concerning  the  ayde  and
assistance  of  the  English  Marchants,  given  to
King  John  the  first  of  Portugall,  for  the
winning  of  Ceuta  in  Barbaric,  which  was  the
first  occasion  of  all  the  Portugall  discoveries,
is  taken  out  of  Thomas  Walsingham  his
Latine  Chronicle. Anno 141 5.

Oc  anno  Joannes  primus  Rex  Portugallise  fretus
auxilio  Mercatorum  Anglias  quam  maxime,  &
Alemannorum, vicit Agarenos in terra Regis

Betinarinorum,  multis  eorum  millibus  ad  generum
Cereris  destinatis :  cepitque  civitatem  eorum  quam
amplissimam  supra  mare  sitam,  vocatam  Ceut  eorum
lingua.

The  same  in  English.  [ii.  ii.  2.]

THis  yere  John  the  first  king  of  Portugall,  being
principally  assisted  by  the  helpe  of  the  English
Marchants,  and  Almaines,  overcame  the  Moores  in  the
dominion  of  the  king  of  Barbary,  putting  many  thousands
of  them  to  the  sword,  and  he  tooke  their  city  which  was
very  mighty,  seated  upon  the  sea,  which  is  called  Ceuta
in  their  language.

[Confirmatio

121

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1482.

Confirmatio  treugarum  inter  Regem  Anglic
Eduardum  quartum,  &  Joannem  secundum
Regem  Portugallis,  datarum  in  oppido  montis
Majoris  8  Februarii,  &  apud  Westmonasterium
12  Septembris,  1482,  anno  regni  22  Regis
Eduardi  quarti,  lingua  Lusitanica  ex  opere
sequenti  excerpta.

Libro  das  obras  de  Garcia  de  Resende,  que  tracta
da  vida  e  feitos  del  Rey  dom  Job  am  secundo.

Embaixada  que  el  Rey  mandov  a  el  Rey
d'Inglaterra,  cap. 33.

|Da qui de Monte Mor mandov  el  Rey

por embaixadores  a  el rey dom Duarte

de Inglaterra Ruy de Sousa pessoa

principal  e  de  muyto  bon  saber  e  credito,

de que el Rey muyto confiava, e ho

doutor  Joam  d'Elvas,  e  Fernam  de  Pina

por secretario. E foram por  mar  muy

honradamente com muy boa companhia : hos quaes

foram  en  nome  del  Rey  confirmar  as  ligas  antiquas  com

Inglaterra, que polla  condisan dellas  ho novo Rey de

hum  reyno  e  do  outro  era  obrigado  a  mandar  confirmar :

e  tambien  pera  mostrarem  ho  titolo  que  el  rey  tinha  no

senhorio  de Guinee,  pera que depois de  visto el rey

d'Inglaterra  defendesse  em  todos  seus  reynos,  que nin-

guen armasse nem podesse mandar a Guinee : e assi

mandasse  desfazer  huna  armada,  que  pera  laa  faziam,  per

mandado do Duque de Medina Sidonia, hum Joam

Tintam  e hum Guilherme Fabiam Ingreses. Com ha

qual  embaixada  el  rey  d'Inglaterra  mostrov  receber  grande

contentamento, e foy  delle  com  muyta  honra recebida,

e  em  tudo  fez  inteiramente  ho  que  pellos  embaixadores

II  These  zurit- Ihe foy  requerido. De  que ellcs  trouxeran  ||  autenticas

ings  are  tn escrituras das dilipfencias que con pubricos pregones
the  Tower. n  <  ■ ^  • ^ ^  °

nzeram : e  assi  as  provisones  das  aprovasones  que eran

A.D.

I481,

A PORTUGUESE AMBASSAGE

necessarian : e  com  tudo  muyto  ben  acabado,  e  ha  vontade
del  rey  se  vieram.

The  Ambassage  which  king  John  the  second,  king
of  Portugall,  sent  to  Edward  the  fourth  king
of  England,  which  in  part  was  to  stay  one
John  Tintam,  and  one  William  Fabian  English
men,  from  proceeding  in  a  voyage  which  they
were  preparing  for  Guinea,  1481,  taken  out  of
the  booke  of  the  workes  of  Gracias  de  Resende,
which  intreateth  of  the  life  and  acts  of  Don
John  the  second,  king  of  Portugall. Chap.  33.

Nd  afterwards the king sent  as  Ambas-
sadours  from  tlie  towne  of  Monte  major
to  king  Edward  the  fourth  of  England,
Ruy  de  Sousa,  a principall  person, and
a  man  of  great  wisedome  and  estimation,
and in whom the king reposed great
trust,  with  doctor  John  d'Elvas,  and  Fer-
dinand de Pina, as secretarie. And they made their
voyage  by  sea  very  honourably,  being  very  well  accom-
panied. These men were sent  on  the  behalfe  of  their  The  first  cause
king, to confirme the ancient leagues with England,  of^^^^mbas-
wherein  it  was  conditioned  that  the  new  king  of  the  one  ^^^^'
and  of  the  other  kingdome,  should  be  bound  to  send  to
confirme  the  olde  leagues. And  likewise  they  had  order  The  second
to  shew  and  make  him  acquainted  with  the  title  which  '^^^^^'
the  king  held  in  the  segneury  of  Ginnee,  to  the  intent
that  after  the  king  of  England  had  scene  the  same,  he
should  give  charge thorow  all  his kingdomes,  that  no
man  should  arme or  set foorth ships to  Ginnee :  and  ^^^  ^^"'^
also  to  request him, that  it  would please  him  to  give  '^^'"^'
commandement  to dissolve a  certaine fleet, which  one
John  Tintam  and one William Fabian, English men,
were  making,  by  commandement  of  the  duke  of  Medina
Sidonia,  to  goe  to  the  aforesayd  parts  of  Ginnee. With

123

A.D,
I481.

[II.  ii.  3.]

The  English
had  an  ordin-
ary trade  to
the  Canaries
1526.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  ambassage  the  king  of  England  seemed  to  be  very-
well  pleased,  and  they  were  received  of  him  with  very
great  honour,  and  he  condescended  unto  all  that  the
ambassadours  required  of  him,  at  whose  hands  they  re-
ceived authenticall  writings  of  the  diligence  which  they
had  performed,  with  publication  thereof  by  the  heralds :
and  also  provisoes  of  those  confirmations  which  were
necessary.  And  having  dispatched  all  things  well,  and
with  the  kings  good  will,  they  returned  home  into  their
countrey.

A  briefe  note  concerning  an  ancient  trade  of  the
English  Marchants  to  the  Canarie-ilands,
gathered  out  of  an  olde  ligier  booke  of  M.
Nicolas  Thorne  the  elder  a  worshipfull  mar-
chant  of  the  city  of  Bristoll.

T  appeareth  evidently  out  of  a  certaine  note  or
letter  of  remembrance,  in  the  custody  of  me
Richard  Hakluyt,  written  by  M.  Nicolas  Thorne
the  elder  a  principall  marchant  of  Bristoll,  to  his  friend
and  factour  Thomas  Midnall  and  his  owne  servant
William  Ballard  at  that  time  resident  at  S.  Lucar  in
Andaluzia;  that  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1526  (and
by  all  circumstances  and  probabilities  long  before)  cer-
taine English  marchants,  and  among  the  rest  himselfe
with  one  Thomas  Spacheford  exercised  usuall  and  ordi-
nary trade  of  marchandise  unto  the  Canarie  Hands.  For
by  the  sayd  letter  notice  was  given  to  Thomas  Midnall
and  William  Ballard  aforesayd,  that  a  certaine  ship  called
The  Christopher  of  Cadiz  bound  for  the  West  Indies
had  taken  in  certaine  fardels  of  cloth  both  course  and
fine,  broad  and  narrow  of  divers  sorts  and  colours,  some
arovas  of  packthreed,  sixe  cerons  or  bagges  of  sope  with
other  goods  of  M.  Nicolas  Thorne,  to  be  delivered  at
Santa  Cruz  the  chiefe  towne  in  Tenerifa  one  of  the  seven
Canary-ilands.  All  which  commodities  the  sayd  Thomas
and  William  were  authorised  by  the  owner  in  the  letter

124

A DESCRIPTION OF THE CANARIES

before  mentioned  to  barter  &  sell  away  at  Santa  Cruz.
And  in  lieu  of  such  mony  as  should  arise  of  the  sale
of  those  goods  they  were  appointed  to  returne  backe
into  England  good  store  of  Orchell  (which  is  a  certaine
kinde  of  mosse  growing  upon  high  rocks,  in  those  dayes
much  used  to  die  withall)  some  quantity  of  sugar,  and
certaine  hundreds  of  kid-skinnes.  For  the  procuring  of
which  and  of  other  commodities  at  the  best  and  first
hand  the  sayd  Thomas  and  William  were  to  make  their
abode  at  Santa  Cruz,  and  to  remaine  there  as  factours
for  the  abovesayd  M.  Nicolas  Thorne.

And  here  also  I  thought  good  to  signifie,  that  in  the
sayd  letters  mention  is  made  of  one  Thomas  Tison  an
English  man,  who  before  the  foresayd  yere  1526  had
found  the  way  to  the  West  Indies,  and  was  there  resi-
dent, unto  whom  the  sayd  iM.  Nicolas  Thorne  sent
certaine  armour  and  other  commodities  specified  in  the
letter  aforesayd.

A  description  of  the  fortunate  Hands,  otherwise
called  the  Hands  of  Canaria,  with  their  strange
fruits  and  commodities :  composed  by  Thomas
Nicols  English  man,  who  remained  there  the
space  of  seven  yeeres  together.

Ine  intent  is  particularly  to  speake  of  the
Canaria  Hands,  which  are  seven  in
number,  wherein  I  dwelt  the  space  of
seven  yeres  and  more,  because  I  finde
such  variety  in  sundry  writers,  and
especially  great  untruths,  in  a  booke
called  The  New  found  world  Antarctike,

A.D.

c.  1550.

set  out  by  a  French  man  called  Andrew  Thevet,  the
which  his  booke  he  dedicated  to  the  Cardinall  of  Sens,
keeper  of  the  great  seale  of  France.

It  appeareth  by  the  sayd  booke  that  he  had  read  the
works  of  sundry  Phylosophers,  Astronomers,  and  Cos-
mographers,  whose  opinions  he  gathered  together. But

125

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1550.

touching  his  owne  travell,  which  he  affirmeth,  I  refer
to  the  judgement  of  the  expert  in  our  dayes,  and  there-
fore for  mine  owne  part  1  write  of  these  Canaria  Hands,
as  time  hath  taught  me  in  many  yeres.

The  Hand  of  Canaria.

THe  Hand  of  Canaria  is  almost  equal  in  length  and
bredth,  containing  12  leagues  in  length,  touching
the  which  as  principall  and  the  residue,  the  Spanyards
holde  opinion,  that  they  discovered  the  same  in  their
navigation  toward  America,  but  the  Portugals  say,  that
their  nation  first  found  the  sayd  Hands  in  their  navi-
gation toward  Aethiopia  and  the  East  Indies.
English  men  g^t  truth  it  is  that  the  Spanyards  first  conquered  these

at  the  first u^nds,  with  divers  English  gentlemen  in  their  company,
conquest  of  the ,'  .  ,  . °  °, ..  ,.  o

Canaries.  whose  posterity  this  present  day  injoyeth  them,  bome
write  that  this  Hand  was  named  Canaria  by  meane  of  the
number  of  dogs  which  there  were  found  :  as  for  example,
Andrew  Thevet  sayth,  that  one  Juba  carried  two  dogs  from
thence :  but  that  opinion  could  I  never  learne  by  any  of
the  naturall  people  of  the  countrey,  although  I  have
talked  with  many  in  my  time,  and  with  many  of  their
children.  For  trueth  it  is,  that  there  were  dogs,  but
such  as  are  in  all  the  Northwest  lands,  and  some  part
of  the  West  India,  which  served  the  people  in  stead  of
sheepe  for  victuall.  But  of  some  of  the  conquerors  of
those  Hands  I  have  heard  say  that  the  reason  why  they
were  called  the  Canaria  Islands  is,  because  there  grow
generally  in  them  all  fouresquare  canes  in  great  multitude
together,  which  being  touched  will  cast  out  a  liquor  as

[II.  ii.  4.]  white  as  milke,  which  liquor  is  ranke  poison,  and  at
the  first  entry  into  these  Hands  some  of  the  discoverers
were  therewith  poisoned :  for  many  yeeres  after  that
conquest  the  inhabitants  began  to  plant  both  wine  and
sugar,  so  that  Canaria  was  not  so  called  by  sugar  canes.
The  people  which  first  inhabited  this  land  were  called
Canaries  by  the  conquerors,  they  were  clothed  in  goat
skinnes  made  like  unto  a  loose  cassocke,  they  dwelt  in

126

A DESCRIPTION OF THE CANARIES  ad.

c.  1550.
caves  in  the  rocks,  in  great  amity  and  brotherly  love.
They  spake  all  one  language  :  their  chiefe  feeding  was
gelt  dogges,  goates,  and  goates  milke,  their  bread  was
made  of  barley  meale  and  goates  milke,  called  Gofia,
which  they  use  at  this  day,  and  thereof  I  have  eaten
divers  times,  for  it  is  accounted  exceeding  holesome.

Touching  the  originall  of  these  people  some  holde
opinion,  that  the  Romans  which  dwelt  in  Africa  exiled
them  thither,  aswell  men  as  women,  their  tongues
being  cut  out  of  their  heads,  for  blasphemy  against  the
Romane  gods.  But  howsoever  it  were,  their  language
was  speciall,  and  not  mixed  with  Romane  speech
or  Arabian.

This  Hand  is  now  the  principallest  of  all  the  rest,
not  in  fertility,  but  by  reason  it  is  the  seat  of  justice
and  government  of  all  the  residue.  This  Hand  hath  a
speciall  Governour  for  the  Hand  onely,  yet  notwithstand-
ing there  are  three  Judges  called  Auditours,  who  are
superiour  Judges,  and  all  in  one  joyntly  proceed  as  the
Lord  Chanceller  of  any  realme.

To  this  city  from  all  the  other  Hands  come  all  such
by  appeale,  as  have  sustained  any  wrong,  and  these  good
Judges  do  remedy  the  same.  The  city  is  called  Civitas  Cwitas  Pal-
Palmarum,  it  hath  a  beautifull  Cathedrall  church,  with  ^^''^»^-
all  dignities  thereunto  pertaining.  For  the  publike
weale  of  the  Hand  there  are  sundry  Aldermen  of  great
authority,  who  have  a  councell  house  by  themselves.
The  city  is  not  onely  beautifull,  but  the  citizens  curious
and  gallant  in  apparell.  And  after  any  raine  or  foule
weather  a  man  may  goe  cleane  in  Velvet  slippers,  because
the  ground  is  sandy,  the  aire  very  temperate,  without
extreame  heat  or  colde.

They  reape  wheat  in  February,  and  againe  in  May,
which  is  excellent  good,  and  maketh  bread  as  white  as
snow.  This  Hand  hath  in  it  other  three  townes,  the  one
called  Telde,  the  second  Galder,  and  the  third  Guia.  It
hath  also  twelve  sugar  houses  called  Ingenios,  in  which
they  make  great  quantity  of  good  sugar.

127

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1550.
The  planting The  maner  of  the  growth  of  sugar  is  in  this  sort,  a
and  growth  of  good  ground  giveth  foorth  fruit  nine  times  in 1 8  yere :
sugar  canes. ^^^ -^ ^^ ^^^^  ^j^^  ^^^^ -^ called  Planta,  which is  layd

along  in  a  furrow,  so  that  the  water  of  a  sluce  may-
come  over  every  roote  being  covered  with  earth :  this
root  bringeth  foorth  sundry  canes,  and  so  consequently
all  the  rest.  It  groweth  two  yeeres  before  the  yeelding
of  profit,  and  not  sixe  moneths,  as  Andrew  Thevet  the
French  man  writeth.
The  making  Then  are  they  cut  even  with  the  ground,  and  the  tops

of  sugar.  ^ leaves called Coholia  cut off,  and  the canes bound

into  bundels  like  faggots,  and  so  are  caried  to  the  sugar
house  called  Ingenio,  where  they  are  ground  in  a  mill,
and  the  juyce  thereof  conveyed  by  a  conduct  to  a  great
vessell  made  for  the  purpose,  where  it  is  boiled  till  it
waxe  thicke,  and  then  is  it  put  into  a  fornace  of  earthen
pots  of  the  molde  of  a  sugar  loafe,  and  then  is  it  carried
to  another  house,  called  a  purging  house  where  it  is
placed  to  purge  the  blacknesse  with  a  certaine  clay  that
is  layd  thereon.  Of  the  remainder  in  the  cauldron  is
made  a  second  sort  called  Escumas,  and  of  the  purging
liquor  that  droppeth  from  the  white  sugar  is  made  a
third  sort,  and  the  remainder  is  called  Panela  or  Netas,
the  refuse  of  all  the  purging  is  called  Remiel  or  Malasses :
and  thereof  is  made  another  sort  called  Refinado.

When  this  first  fruit  is  in  this  sort  gathered,  called
Planta,  then  the  Cane-field  where  it  grew  is  burned  over
with  sugar  straw  to  the  stumps  of  the  first  canes,  and
being  husbanded,  watred  and  trimmed,  at  the  end  of
other  two  yeeres  it  yeeldeth  the  second  fruit  called  Zoca.
The  third  fruit  is  called  Tertia  Zoca,  the  fourth  Quarta
Zoca,  and  so  orderly  the  rest,  til  age  causeth  the  olde
Canes  to  be  planted  againe.
Wine.  This  Hand  hath  singular  good  wine,  especially  in  the

towne  of  Telde,  and  sundry  sorts  of  good  fruits,  as
Batatas,  Mellons,  Peares,  Apples,  Orenges,  Limons,
Pomgranats,  Figs,  Peaches  of  divers  sorts,  and  many
other  fruits : but  especially  the  Plantano  which  groweth

128

^^\,

"^Zh

W'l

„Ufi  th

><

:^

\/  '\/  h I V

4^--aM  .

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1550.

yeeres  therein.  Also  there  is  a  wood  called  Barbusano,
of  like  vertue,  with  many  Savine  trees  and  Pine  trees.
And  beneath  these  sorts  of  trees  are  woods  of  Bay  trees
of  10  &  12  miles  long,  which  is  a  pleasant  thing  to
travell  thorow,  among  the  which  are  great  numbers  of
small  birds,  which  sing  exceeding  sweet,  but  especially
one  sort  that  are  very  litle,  and  of  colour  in  all  respects
like  a  Swallow,  saving  that  he  hath  a  little  blacke  spot
on  his  breast  as  broad  as  a  peny.  He  singeth  more
sweetly  then  all  the  rest,  but  if  he  be  taken  and  impri-
soned in  a  cage,  he  liveth  but  a  small  while.  This  Hand
bringeth  foorth  all  sorts  of  fruits,  as  Canaria  doth :  and
also  all  the  other  Hands  in  generall  bring  foorth  shrubs
or  bushes,  out  of.  the  which  issueth  a  juice  as  white
as  milke,  which  after  a  while  that  it  hath  come  out
Lime.  waxeth  thicke,  and  is  exceeding  good  birdlime,  the  bush

is  called  Taybayba.  This  Hand  also  bringeth  foorth
another  tree  called  Drago,  which  groweth  on  high  among
rocks,  and  by  incision  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  issueth
out  a  liquor  like  blood,  which  is  a  common  drug
among  Apothecaries.  Of  the  wood  of  this  tree  are
made  targets  greatly  esteemed,  because  if  any  sword  or
dagger  hit  thereon,  they  sticke  so  fast  that  it  is  hard
plucking  them  out.

This  is  the  most  fruitfull  Hand  of  all  the  rest  for
corne,  and  in  that  respect  is  a  mother  or  nurse  to  all
the  others  in  time  of  need.  There  groweth  also  a
Orchelgood  certaine  mosse  upon  the  high  rocks  called  Orchel,
for  dying,  ^hich  is  bought  for  Diars  to  die  withall.  There  are  1 2
sugar  houses  called  Ingenios,  which  make  great  quantity
of  sugar.  There  is  also  one  league  of  ground  which
standeth  between  two  townes,  the  one  called  Larotava,
and  the  other  Rialeio,  and  it  is  thought  that  the  like
plot  of  ground  is  not  in  all  the  world.  The  reason  is,
that  this  one  league  of  ground  produceth  sweet  water
out  of  the  cliffes  or  rocky  mountaines,  corne  of  all  sortes,
fruites  of  all  sortes,  and  excellent  good  silke,  flaxe,  waxe,
and  hony,  and  very  good  wines  in  abundance,  with  great

130

A DESCRIPTION OF THE CANARIES  ad.

c.  1550.

store  of  sugar  and  fire-wood.  Out  of  this  Hand  is
laden  great  quantity  of  wines  for  the  West  India,  and
other  countreys.  The  best  groweth  on  a  hill  side  called
the  Ramble.

There  is  in  that  Hand  a  faire  city,  standing  three
leagues  from  the  sea,  nere  unto  a  lake  called  Laguna,
wherein  are  two  faire  parish  churches,  there  dwelleth
the  governour  who  ruleth  all  that  Hand  with  justice.
There  are  also  aldermen  for  the  publike  weale,  who  buy
their  offices  of  the  king:  the  most  of  the  whole  in-
habitants of  this  city  are  gentlemen,  merchants,  and
husband  men.

There are other foure townes called Santa Cruz,  Santa  Cruz.
Larotava,  Rialeio,  and  Garachico.

In  this  Hand  before  the  conquest  dwelt  seven  kings,
who  with  all  their  people  dwelt  in  caves,  and  were
clothed  in  goat  skinnes,  as  the  Canaria  people  were,  and
used  such  like  order  of  diet  as  they  had.  Their  order
of  buriall  was,  that  when  any  died,  he  was  carried  naked
to  a  great  cave,  where  he  was  propped  up  against  the
wall  standing  on  his  feet.  But  if  he  were  of  any
authority  among  them,  then  had  he  a  staffe  in  his  hand,
and  a  vessell  of  milke  standing  by  him.  I  have  scene
caves  of  300  of  these  corpses  together,  the  flesh  being
dried  up,  the  body  remained  as  light  as  parchment.
These  people  were  called  Guanches,  naturally  they  spake
another  language  cleane  contrary  to  the  Canarians,  and  so
consequently  every  Hand  spake  a  severall  language.

Note  (gentle  reader)  that  the  Hand  of  Canaria,  the  He
of  Tenerif,  and  the  He  of  Palma  appertaine  to  the  king
of  Spaine,  unto  whom  they  pay  fifty  thousand  duckats
yeerely  for  custome  and  other  profits.  All  these  Hands
joyntly  are  one  bishopricke,  which  pay  to  the  bishop
twelve  thousand  duckats  yeerely.  And  thus  I  conclude
of  the  He  of  Tenerif,  which  standeth  in  27  degrees  and
a  halfe,  as  I  have  before  declared.

[Gomera
131

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1550.

T

Gomera.

^He  Hand  of  Gomera  standeth  Westward  from
Tenerif,  in  distance  sixe  leagues :  this  is  but  a
small  Hand  conteining  eight  leagues  in  length.  It  is  an
[II.  11.  6.]  Earledome,  &  the  Lord  thereof  is  called  the  earle  of
Gomera.  But  in  case  of  any  controversie  the  vassals  may
appeale  to  the  kings  superior  Judges  which  reside  in
Canaria.

This  Hand  hath  one  proper  towne  called  Gomera,
which  hath  an  excellent  good  port  or  harbour  for  ships,
where  often  times  the  Indian  fleet  take  refreshing  for
their  voyage.

There  is  also  sufficient  graine  and  fruit  for  the  main-
tenance of  themselves.

There  is  one  Ingenio  or  Sugar-house,  with  great  plenty
of  wine  and  other  sorts  of  fruits,  as  Canaria  and  Tenerif
hath.

This  Hand  yeeldeth  no  other  commodity  but  onely
orchell ;  it  standeth  in  27  degrees  distant  from  the
Equator  toward  the  pole  Arcticke.

The  He  of  Palma.

THe  He  of  Palma  standeth  twelve  leagues  distant
from  the  He  of  Gomera  Northwestward.  This
Hand  is  fruitfull  of  wine  and  sugar:  it  hath  a  proper
city  called  the  city  of  Palma,  where  is  great  contraction
for  wines,  which  are  laden  for  the  West  India  &  other
places.  This  city  hath  one  faire  church,  and  a  govern  our,
and  aldermen  to  maintaine  and  execute  justice.  It  hath
also  another  prety  towne,  called  S.  Andrewes.  It  hath
also  foure  Ingenios  which  make  excellent  sugar,  two
of  the  which  are  called  Zauzes,  and  the  other  two,
Tassacort.

This  Hand  yeeldeth  but  little  bread-corne ;  but  rather
is  thereof  provided  from  Tenerif  and  other  places.

Their  best  wines  grow  in  a  soile  called  the  Brenia,
where  yerely  is  gathered  twelve  thousand buts  of  wine

132

A DESCRIPTION OF THE CANARIES  ad.

c.  1550.
like unto Malmsies. This Hand standeth round, and
containeth  in  circuit  neere  five  and  twenty  leagues. It
hath  plenty  of  all  sorts  of  fruits,  as  Canaria  and  Tenerif
have,  it  standeth  in  twenty  seven  degrees  and  a  halfe.

The  Hand  of  Yron,  called Hierro.

THis  Hand  standeth  ten  leagues  distant  from  the
Hand  of  Palma  Westward :  it  is  but  a  little  Hand,
which  containeth  sixe  leagues  in  circuit,  and  hath  but
small  extension.  It  appertaineth  to  the  earle  of  Gomera.
The  chiefest  commodity  of  this  Hand  is  goats  flesh  and
orchell. There  is  no  wine  in  all  that  Hand,  but  onely  "^^^  °^^b .

one  vineyard  that  an English man  of  Taunton  in  the  ^"^fy^^^^
__^  J  ,  o  11-  tiierroplanted

West countrey planted among rocks, his name was  ^,  /^i.  Hill

John Hill.  of  Taunton.

This  Hand  hath  no  kind  of  fresh  water,  but  onely  in

the  middle  of  the  Hand  groweth  a  great  tree  with  leaves

like  an  Olive  tree,  which  hath  a  great  cisterne  at  the  foot

of  the  sayd  tree. This  tree  continually  is  covered  with

clouds,  and  by  meanes thereof  the  leaves  of  the sayd

tree continually  drop  water,  very  sweet, into the sayd

cisterne,  which  commeth  to  the  sayd  tree  from  the  clouds

by  attraction. And  this  water  sufficeth  the  Hand  for  all

necessities,  aswell  for  the  cattell,  as for  the  inhabitants.

It  standeth  in  27  degrees.

The  Hand  of  Lanzarota.

THe  Hand  of  Lanzarota  standeth  eighteene  leagues
distant  from  grand  Canaria  Southeastward.  The
onely  commodity  of  this  Hand  is  goats  flesh  and  orchell.
It  is  an  earledome,  and  doth  appertaine  to  Don  Augustine
de  Herrera,  with  title  of  earle  of  Fortaventura  and  Lan-
zarota. But  the  vassals  of  these  earledomes  may  in  any
cause  of  wrong  appeale  to  the  Kings  Judges,  which
reside  in  Canaria,  as  I  have  sayd  before  :  because
although  the  king  hath  reserved  to  himselfe  but  onely
the  three  fruitful  Hands,  called  Canaria,  Tenerif,  and
Palma,  yet  he  also reserved  the  rod  of  justice  to  him-

133

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

c.  1550.

selfe, because otherwise the vassals might be evill
intreated  of  their  Lords.

From  this  Hand  do  weekly  resort  to  Canaria,  Tenerif,
&  Palma,  boats  laden  with  dried  goats  flesh,  called
Tussmetta,  which  serveth  in  stead  of  bacon,  and  is  very-
good  meat.  This  Hand  standeth  in  26  degrees,  and  is
in  length  twelve  leagues.

The  He  of  Forteventura.

THe  He  of  Forteventura  standeth  fifty  leagues  from
the  promontory  of  Cabo  de  Guer,  in  the  firme
land  of  Africa,  and  foure  &  twenty  leagues  distant  from
Canaria  Estward.  This  Hand  doth  appertaine  to  the
lord  of  Lanzarota.  It  is  reasonable  fruitfull  of  wheat
and  barley,  and  also  of  kine,  goats,  and  orchel :  this  He
is  fifteene  leagues  long  and  ten  leagues  broad.  On  the
North  side  it  hath  a  little  Hand  about  one  league  distant
from  the  maine  Hand,  betweene  both  of  the  which  it  is
navigable  for  any  ships,  and  is  called  Graciosa.

Both  Forteventura  and  Lanzarota  have  very  little  wine
of  the  growth  of  those  Hands.  It  standeth  in  27
degrees.
[II.  ii.  7.]  Thus  much  have  I  written  of  these  seven  Hands  by
experience,  because  I  was  a  dweller  there,  as  I  have  sayd
before,  the  space  of  seven  yeeres  in  the  affaires  of  master
Thomas  Locke,  master  Anthonie  Hickman,  and  master
Edward  Castelin,  who  in  those  dayes  were  worthy  mer-
chants, and  of  great  credite  in  the  citie  of  London,

A  description  of  the  Hand  of  Madera.

THe  Hand  of  Madera  standeth  in  32  degrees  distant
from  the  equinoctinall  line,  and  seventie  leagues
from  the  He  of  Tenerif  Northeastward  and  Southwest
from  Hercules  pillars.  This  Hand  was  first  discovered
by  one  Macham  an  Englishman,  and  was  after  conquered
and  inhabited  by  the  Portugall  nation.  It  was  first
called  the  Hand  of  Madera,  by  reason  of  the  great
wildernesse of sundry sortes of trees that there did

134

A DESCRIPTION OF MADEIRA  ad.

c.  1550.
growe,  and  yet  doe,  as  Cedars,  Cypres,  Vinatico,  Bar-
buzano,  Pine  trees,  and  divers  others,  and  therefore  the
sayd  Hand  continueth  still  with  the  same  name.  How-
beit  they  hold  opinion,  that  betweene  the  sayd  Hand  and
the  He  of  Palma  is  an  Hand  not  yet  discovered,  which  is
the  true  Hand  Madera  called  saint  Brandon.  This  Hand
yeeldeth  a  great  summe  of  money  to  the  king  of
Portugall  yeerely :  it  hath  one  faire  citie  called  Fouchall,
which  hath  one  faire  port  or  harbour  for  shippes,  and
a  strong  bulwarke,  and  a  faire  Cathedrall  church,  with  a
bishop  and  other  dignities  thereunto  appertaining.  There
is  also  justice  and  government  according  to  the  Portugall
use.  But  causes  of  appellation  are  remitted  to  the  citie
of  Lisbone  in  Portugall  to  the  kings  superior  judges
there.  This  Hand  hath  another  towne  called  Machico,
which  hath  likewise  a  good  road  for  ships,  which  towne
and  road  were  so  called  after  the  name  of  Macham  the
Englishman,  who  first  discovered  the  same.  There  are
also  sixteene  sugar  houses  called  Ingenios,  which  make
excellent  good  sugar.

There  is  besides  the  goodly  timber  before  declared,
great  store  of  divers  sortes  of  fruites,  as  Peares,  Apples,
Plummes,  wild  Dates,  Peaches  of  divers  sortes,  Mellons,
Batatas,  Orenges,  Lemmons,  Pomgranates,  Citrons,  Figges,
and  all  maner  of  garden  herbes.  There  are  many  Dragon
trees,  such  as  grow  in  the  Canarie  Hands,  but  chiefly  this
land  produceth  great  quantitie  of  singular  good  wines
which  are  laden  for  many  places.  On  the  North  side
of  this  land  three  leagues  distant  from  the  maine  Hand
standeth  another  litle  Hand  called  Porto  santo :  the  people
thereof  liveth  by  husbandrie,  for  the  Hand  of  Madera
yeeldeth  but  litle  corne,  but  rather  is  thereof  provided
out  of  France  and  from  the  Hand  of  Tenerif.  On  the
East  side  of  the  He  of  Madera  sixe  leagues  distant
standeth  another  litle  Hand  called  the  Desert,  which  pro-
duceth onely  Orchell,  and  nourisheth  a  great  number  of
Goates,  for  the  provision  of  the  maine  Hand,  which  may
be thirtie  leagues  in circuit: and  the  land is of  great

135

'A.D.

c.  1550.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

heigth  where  the  foresayd  trees  growe.  It  is  woonder
to  see  the  conveyance  of  the  water  to  the  Ingenios  by
Mines  through  the  mountaines.

In  the  mid  way  betweene  Tenerif  and  the  Hand  of
Madera  standeth  a  litle  solitarie  Hand  called  the  Salvages,
which  may  bee  about  one  league  in  compasse,  which  hath
neither  tree  nor  fruit,  but  is  onely  food  for  Goates.

The  originall  of  the  first  voyage  for  traffique  into
the  kingdom  of  Marocco  in  Barbaric,  begun
in  the  yeere  1551.  with  a  tall  ship  called  the
Lion  of  London,  whereof  went  as  captaine
Master  Thomas  Windam,  as  appeareth  by  this
extract  of  a  letter  of  James  Aldaie,  to  the
worshipfull  master  Michael  Locke,  which
Aldaie  professeth  himselfe  to  have  bene  the
first  inventer  of  this  trade.

Orshipful  Sir,  having  lately  bene  ac-
quainted with  your  intent  to  prosecute
the  olde  intermitted  discoverie  for  Catai,
if  therein  with  my  knowledge,  travell  or
industrie  I  may  doe  you  service,  I  am
readie  to  doe  it,  and  therein  to  adven-
ture my  life  to  the  uttermost  point.
Trueth  it  is,  that  I  have  bene  by  some  men  (not  my
friends)  evill  spoken  of  at  London,  saying  that  although
I  be  a  man  of  knowledge  in  the  Arte  of  Navigation  and
Cosmographie,  and  that  I  have  bene  the  inventer  of  some
voyages  that  be  now  growen  to  great  effect ;  yet  say
they  maliciously  and  without  just  cause,  that  I  have  not
bene  willing  at  any  season  to  proceed  in  those  voyages
that  I  have  taken  in  hand,  taking  example  especially  of
two  voyages.  The  one  was  when  I  was  master  in  the
great  Barke  Aucher  for  the  Levant,  in  which  voyage  I
went  not,  but  the  causes  they  did  not  know  of  my  let
from the same, nor of  the other. But first the  very

136

A LETTER FROM JAMES ALDAY  a.d.

1551.
trueth  is,  that  I  was  from  the  same  voyage  letted  by  the  [II.  ii.  8.]
Princes  letters,  which  my  Master  Sebastian  Gabota  had
obtained  for  that  purpose,  to  my  great  griefe.  And  as
touching  the  second  voyage  which  I  invented  for  the
trade  of  Barbaric,  the  living  God  knoweth  that  I  say
most  true,  that  when  the  great  sweate  was,  (whereon
the  chiefe  of  those  with  whom  I  joyned  in  that  voyage
died,  that  is  to  say.  Sir  John  Lutterell,  John  Fletcher,
Henry  Ostrich  and  others)  I  my  selfe  was  also  taken
with  the  same  sweate  in  London,  and  after  it,  whether
with  evill  diet  in  keeping,  or  how  I  know  not,  I  was
cast  into  such  an  extreame  fever,  as  I  was  neither  able  to
ride  nor  goe :  and  the  shippe  being  at  Portesmouth,
Thomas  Windam  had  her  away  from  thence,  before  I
■was  able  to  stand  upon  my  legges,  by  whom  I  lost  at
that  instant  fourescore  pound.  Besides  I  was  appointed
by  them  that  died  (if  they  had  lived)  to  have  had  the
whole  government  both  of  shippe  and  goods,  because  I
was  to  them  the  sole  inventer  of  that  trade.

In  the  first  voyage  to  Barbary  there  were  two  Moores,
being  noble  men,  whereof  one  was  of  the  Kings
blood,  convayed  by  the  said  Master  Thomas  Wind-
ham into  their  Countrey  out  of  England.

Yours  humble  at  your  commandement,

James  Alday.

[The  second
137

A.D.
1552.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  second  voyage  to  Barbary  in  the  yeere  1552.
Set  foorth  by  the  right  worshipfull  Sir  John
Yorke,  Sir  WilHam  Gerard,  Sir  Thomas  Wroth,
Master  Frances  Lambert,  Master  Cole,  and
others  ;  Written  by  the  relation  of  Master
James  Thomas  then  Page  to  Master  Thomas
Windham  chiefe  Captaine  of  this  voyage.

He  shippes  that  went  on  this  voyage  were
three,  whereof  two  were  of  the  River  of
Thames,  That  is  to  say,  the  Lyon  of
London,  whereof  Master  Thomas  Wind-
ham was  Captaine  and  part  owner,  of
about  an  hundred  &  fiftie  tunnes :  The
other  was  the  Buttolfe  about  fourescore
tunnes,  and  a  Portugal!  Caravel  bought  of  certaine  Portu-
gals  in  Newport  in  Wales,  and  fraighted  for  this  voyage,
of  summe  sixtie  tunnes.  The  number  of  men  in  the
Fleete  were  an  hundred  and  twentie.  The  Master  of
the  Lyon  was  one  John  Kerry  of  Mynhed  in  Somerset-
shire, his  Mate  was  David  Landman.  The  chiefe
Captaine  of  this  small  Fleete  was  Master  Thomas
Windham  a  Norifolke  gentleman  borne,  but  dwelling
at  Marshfield-parke  in  Somerset  shire.  This  Fleete
departed  out  of  King-rode  neere  Bristol!  about  the  be-
ginning of  May  1552.  being  on  a  Munday  in  the
morning:  and  the  Munday  fortnight  next  ensuing  in
the  evening  came  to  an  ancker  at  their  first  port  in  the
Asafi.  roade  of  Zafia,  or  Asafi  on  the  coast  of  Barbarie,  stand-

ing in  32.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  there  put  on  land
part  of  our  marchandise  to  be  conveied  by  land  to  the
citie  of  Marocco :  which  being  done,  and  having  re-
freshed our  selves  with  victuals  and  water,  we  went  to
Santa  Cruz,  the  second  port  called  Santa  Cruz,  where  we  discharged
the  rest  of  our  goods,  being  good  quantitie  of  linnen
and  woollen  cloth,  corall,  amber.  Jet,  and  divers  other
things  well  accepted  by  the  Moores. In  which  road  we

138

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO BARBARY  ad.

1552.
found  a  French  ship,  which  not  knowing  whether  it  were
warre  or  peace  betweene  England  and  France,  drewe  her
selfe  as  neere  under  the  towne  wals  as  she  could  possible,
craving  aide  of  the  towne  for  her  defence,  if  need  were,
which  in  deed  seeing  us  draw  neere,  shot  at  us  a  piece
from  the  wals,  which  came  over  the  Lion  our  Admirall,
between  the  maine  mast  &  her  foremast.  Whereupon
we  comming  to  an  anker,  presently  came  a  pinnes  aboord
us  to  know  what  we  were,  who  understanding  that  we
had  bene  there  the  yere  before,  &  came  with  the  good  ^^^  English
leave  of  their  king  in  marchant  wise,  were  fully  satisfied,  ^[^^^.l  ^^^'^
and  gave  us  good  leave  to  bring  our  goods  peaceably  -^eere  before
on  shore,  where  the  Viceroy,  whose  name  was  Sibill  being  n^s^i.
Manache,  within  short  time  after  came  to  visite  us,  and
used  us  with  all  curtesie.  But  by  divers  occasions  we
spent  here  very  neere  three  moneths  before  we  could
get  in  our  lading,  which  was  Sugar,  Dates,  Almonds,
and  Malassos  or  sugar  Syrrope.  And  for  all  our  being
here  in  the  heate  of  the  Sommer,  yet  none  of  our  com-
pany perished  by  sicknesse.  Our  ships  being  laden,  wee
drew  into  the  Sea  for  a  Westerne  wind  for  England.
But  being  at  sea,  a  great  leake  fell  upon  the  Lion,  so
that  we  were  driven  to  Lancerota,  and  Forteventura,
where,  betweene  the  two  Hands,  we  came  to  a  road,
whence  wee  put  on  land  out  of  our  sayd  ship  70.  chestes
of  Sugar  upon  Lancerota,  with  some  dozen  or  sixteene
of  our  company,  where  the  inhabitants  supposing  we
had  made  a  wrongfull  prize  of  our  caravell,  suddenly
came  with  force  upon  our  people,  among  whom  I  my
selfe  was  one,  tooke  us  prisoners,  and  spoiled  the  sugars :
which  thing  being  perceived  from  our  ships,  they  manned  [II.  ii.  9.]
out  three  boates,  thinking  to  rescue  us,  and  drave  the
Spaniards  to  flight,  whereof  they  slew  eighteene,  and
tooke  their  governour  of  the  Hand  prisoner,  who  was
a  very  aged  gentleman  about  70.  yeeres  of  age.  But
chasing  the  enemie  so  farre,  for  our  recoverie,  as  pouder
and  arrowes  wanted,  the  Spaniardes  perceiving  this,  re-
turned, and  in  our  mens  retire  they  slew  sixe  of  them.

139

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1552-

Then  a  Parle  grew,  in  the  which  it  was  agreed,  that  we
the  prisoners  should  be  by  them  restored,  and  they
receive  their  olde  governour,  giving  us  a  testimonie
under  his  and  their  hands,  what  damages  wee  had  there
received,  the  which  damages  were  here  restored,  and
made  good  by  the  king  of  Spaine  his  marchants  upon
our  returne  into  England.  After  wee  had  searched  and
mended  our  leake,  being  returned  aboord,  we  came  under
saile,  and  as  wee  were  going  to  the  sea  on  the  one  side
of  the  Hand,  the  Cacafuego  and  other  ships  of  the  king
of  Portugals  Armada  entered  at  the  other,  and  came  to
anker  in  the  road  from  whence  we  were  but  newly
departed,  and  shot  off  their  great  ordinance  in  our  hear-
ing. And  here  by  the  way  it  is  to  bee  understood
that  the  Portugals  were  much  offended  with  this  our
new  trade  into  Barbarie,  and  both  in  our  voiage  the
yeere  before,  as  also  in  this  they  gave  out  in  England
by  their  marchants,  that  if  they  tooke  us  in  those  partes,
they  would  use  us  as  their  mortall  enemies,  with  great
threates  and  menaces.  But  by  God  and  good  provi-
dence wee  escaped  their  handes.  From  this  Hand  shap-
ing our  course  for  England,  we  were  seven  or  eight
weekes  before  we  could  reach  the  coast  of  England.
The  first  port  wee  entered  into  was  the  haven  of  Plim-
mouth,  from  whence  within  short  time  wee  came  into
the  Thames,  and  landed  our  marchandise  at  London,
about  the  ende  of  the  moneth  of  October, 1552.

140

THE FIRST VOYAGE TO GUINEA

A.D.

1553-

A  voiage  made  out  of  England  unto  Guinea  and
Benin  in  AfFrike,  at  the  charges  of  certaine
marchants  Adventurers  of  the  Citie  of  London,
in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1553.

Was  desired  by  certaine  of  my  friends  to
make  some  mention  of  this  Voiage,  that
some  memorie  thereof  might  remaine  to
our  posteritie,  if  either  iniquitie  of  time
consuming  all  things,  or  ignorance  creep-
ing in  by  barbarousnesse  and  contempt  of
knowledge  should  hereafter  bury  in  obli-

vion so  woorthie  attempts,  so  much  the  greatlier  to  bee
esteemed,  as  before  never  enterprised  by  Englishmen,  or
at  the  least  so  frequented,  as  at  this  present  they  are,
and  may  bee,  to  the  great  commoditie  of  our  marchants,
if  the  same  be  not  hindered  by  the  ambition  of  such,  as
for  the  conquering  of  fortie  or  fiftie  miles  here  and  there,
and  erecting  of  certaine  fortresses,  thinke  to  be  Lordes  o£
halfe  the  world,  envying  that  other  should  enjoy  the
commodities,  which  they  themselves  cannot  wholy
possesse.  And  although  such  as  have  bene  at  charges  in
the  discovering  and  conquering  of  such  landes  ought  by
good  reason  to  have  certaine  privileges,  preheminences,
and  tributes  for  the  same,  yet  (to  speake  under  correc-
tion) it  may  seeme  somewhat  rigorous,  and  agaynst  good
reason  and  conscience,  or  rather  agaynst  the  charitie  that
ought  to  be  among  Christian  men,  that  such  as  invade  the
dominions  of  other  should  not  permit  other  friendly  to
use  the  trade  of  marchandise  in  places  neerer,  or  seldome
frequented  of  them,  whereby  their  trade  is  not  hindered
in  such  places,  where  they  themselves  have  at  their
owne  election  appointed  the  Martes  of  their  traffike.
But  forasmuch  as  at  this  present  it  is  not  my  intent
to  accuse  or  defend,  approove  or  improove,  I  will  cease
to  speake  any  further  hereof,  and  proceed  to  the  descrip-
tion  of  the  first  voyage, as briefly and faithfully  as  I

141

A.D.

1553-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

was  advertised  of  the  same,  by  the  information  of  such
credible  persons,  as  made  diligent  inquisition  to  know
the  trueth  thereof,  as  much  as  shall  be  requisite,  omitting
to  speake  of  many  particular  things,  not  greatly  neces-
sarie  to  be  knowen :  which  neverthelesse,  with  also  the
exact  course  of  the  navigation,  shall  be  more  fully
declared  in  the  second  voiage.  And  if  herein  favour
or  friendship  shall  perhaps  cause  some  to  thinke  that
some  have  bene  sharply  touched,  let  them  lay  apart
favour  and  friendship,  and  give  place  to  trueth,  that
honest  men  may  receive  prayse  for  well  doing,  and
lewd  persons  reproch,  as  the  just  stipend  of  their  evill
desertes,  whereby  other  may  be  deterred  to  doe  the  like,
and  vertuous  men  encouraged  to  proceed  in  honest
attempts.

But  that  these  voyages  may  be  more  plainly  under-
stood of  all  men,  I  have  thought  good  for  this  purpose,
before  I  intreat  hereof,  to  make  a  briefe  description  of
Africa,  being  that  great  part  of  the  world,  on  whose  West
side  beginneth  the  coast  of  Guinea  at  Cabo  Verde,  about
twelve  degrees  in  latitude,  on  this  side  the  Equinoctiall
[IL  ii.  lo.]  line,  and  two  degrees  in  longitude  from  the  measuring
line,  so  running  from  the  North  to  the  South,  and  by
East  in  some  places,  within  5,  4,  and  3  degrees  and  a
halfe  unto  the  Equinoctiall,  and  so  foorth  in  maner
directly  East  and  by  North,  for  the  space  of  36  degrees
or  thereabout,  in  longitude  from  the  West  to  the  East,
as  shall  more  plainly  appeare  in  the  description  of  the
second  voyage.

A briefe  description of  Afrike gathered by
Richard  Eden.

Tunis.
Bugia.
Tripoli.

Numidia.

N  Africa  the  lesse  are  these  kingdoms :  the
kingdom  of  Tunis  and  Constantina,  which  is  at
this  day  under  Tunis,  and  also  the  region  of
Bugia,  Tripoli,  and  Ezzah.  This  part  of  Afrike  is
very  barren  by  reason  of  the  great  deserts,  as  the
deserts of  Numidia  and Barca. The principall ports

142

THE FIRST VOYAGE TO GUINEA  a.d.

1553-
of  the  kingdome  of  Tunis  are  these : Goletta,  Bizerta,
Potofarnia, Bona, and Stora. The chiefe cities of
Tunis are Constantina and Bona, with divers other.
Under this kingdom  are  many  Hands,  as Zerbi,  Lam-  Hands  of
padola,  Pantalarea,  Limoso,  Beit,  Gamelaro,  and  Malta,  I/^""
where at this present is the great master of the
Rhodes. Under the South of  this kingdom are the
great  deserts of  Lybia. All  the nations  in  this  Africa  The  deserts  of
the  lesse are of  the sect of  Mahomet, and a  rusticall -^  ^^'
people,  living  scattred  in  villages. The  best  of  this  part
of  Afrike is Barbaria lying on the coast of  the sea  Barbarie.
Mediterraneum.

Mauritania  (now  called  Barbaria)  is  divided  into two  Mauritania.
parts,  as  Mauritania  Tingitana,  and  Csesariensis. Mauri-
tania Tingitana  is  now  called  the  kingdom  of  Fes,  and  T'he  kingdom
the  kingdom of  Marocco. The principall  citie of  Fes  °JF^^  ^
is  called  Fessa :  and  the  chiefe  citie  of  Marocco  is  named
Marocco.

Mauritania  Cassariensis  is  at  this  day  called  the  king-
dom of  Tremisen,  with  also  the  citie  called  Tremisen  or  Tremisen.
Telensin. This  region  is full  of  deserts, and  reacheth
to  the  Sea  Mediterraneum,  to  the  citie  of  Oram,  with  the  Oram.
port of  Mersalquiber. The kingdom of  Fes reacheth  Mersalquiber.
unto the Ocean Sea, from the West to the citie of
Argilla : and the port of  the sayd kingdom is  called
Sala.  ^ala.

The  kingdom  of  Marocco  is  also  extended  above  the
Ocean  Sea,  unto  the  citie of  Azamor  and  Azafi,  which  Jzamor.
are  upon  the  Ocean Sea,  toward the  West  of  the  sayd
kingdom, Nere  Mauritania  Tingitana  (that  is  to  say,  by
the  two  kingdoms  of  Fes,  and  Marocco)  are  in  the  Sea,
the  Hands  of  Canarie,  called  in  old  time,  The  fortunate  The  Hands  of
Hands. Toward  the  South  of  this  region  is  the  kingdom ^^^'^^^^•
of  Guinea,  with  Senega,  Jalofo,  Gambra,  and  many  other  Guinea.
regions of  the Blacke Moores, called Aethiopians or  Aethiopians.
Negros, all which are watered with the river Negro
called  in  old  time Niger. In the  sayd  regions  are no
cities,  but  onely  certaine  lowe  cottages  made  of  boughes

U3

A.D.

1553-

Marocco.
Fes.

Tremisen.
Guinea.

Africa  ye
great.

Africa  the
lesse.

Carthage.

Prester  John.

Cape  de  Bona
Speranza.

Alcair.
[II.  ii.  II.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  trees,  plastered  with  chalke,  and  covered  with  strawe.
In  these  regions  are  also  very  great  deserts.

The  kingdom  of  Marocco  hath  under  it  these  seven
kingdoms :  Hea,  Sus,  Guzula,  the  territorie  of  Marrocco,
Duccala,  Hazchora,  and  Tedle.  The  kingdom  of  Fes
hath  as  many :  as  Fes,  Temesne,  Azgar,  Elabath,  Errif,
Garet,  and  Elcair.  The  kingdom  of  Tremisen  hath  these
regions :  Tremisen,  Tenez,  and  Elgazair,  all  which  are
Machometists.  But  all  the  regions  of  Guinea  are  pure
Gentiles,  and  idolatrous,  without  profession  of  any
religion,  or  other  knowledge  of  God,  then  by  the  law
of  nature.

Africa  the  great  is  one  of  the  three  parts  of  the  world,
knowen  in  old  time,  and  severed  from  Asia,  on  the  East
by  the  river  Nilus,  on  the  West  from  Europe  by  the
pillars  of  Hercules.  The  hither  part  is  now  called
Barbaric,  and  the  people  Moores.  The  inner  part  is
called  Lybia  and  Aethiopia.  Afrike  the  lesse  is  in  this
wise  bounded.  On  the  West  it  hath  Numidia;  On  the
East  Cyrenaica :  On  the  North,  the  sea  called  Mediter-
raneum.  In  this  countrey  was  the  noble  city  of
Carthage.

In  the  East  side  of  Afrike  beneath  the  red  sea,  dwelleth
the  great  and  mighty  Emperour  and  Christian  king
Prester  John,  well  knowen  to  the  Portugales  in  their
voyages  to  Calicut.  His  dominions  reach  very  farre  on
every  side :  and  hath  under  him  many  other  Kings  both
christian  and  heathen  that  pay  him  tribute.  This  mightie
prince  is  called  David  the  Emperour  of  Aethiopia.  Some
write  that  the  king  of  Portugall  sendeth  him  yeerely
eight  ships  laden  with  marchandize.  His  kingdom  con-
fineth  with  the  red  Sea,  and  reacheth  far  into  Afrike
toward  Aegypt  and  Barbarie.  Southward  it  confineth
with  the  Sea  toward  the  Cape  de  Bona  Speranza :  and  on
the  other  side  with  the  sea  of  sand,  called  Mare  de
Sabione,  a  very  dangerous  sea  lying  between  ye  great
citie  of  Alcair,  or  Cairo  in  Aegypt,  and  the  country  of
Aethiopia : In the which way are many unhabitable

144

Amacaiz.

THE FIRST VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1553-
deserts,  continuing  for  the  space  of  five  dayes  journey.
And  they  affirme,  that  if  the  sayd  Christian  Emperor
were  not  hindered  by  those  deserts  (in  the  which  is  great
lacke  of  victuals,  &  especially  of  water)  he  would  or
now  have  invaded  the  kingdom  of  Egypt,  and  the  citie
of  Alcair.  The  chiefe  city  of  Ethiopia,  where  this  great
emperor  is  resident,  is  called  Amacaiz,  being  a  faire  citie,
whose  inhabitants  are  of  the  colour  of  an  Olive.  There
are  also  many  other  cities,  as  the  city  of  Sava  upon  the
river  of  Nilus,  where  the  Emperour  is  accustomed  to
remaine  in  the  Sommer  season.  There  is  likewise  a
great  city  named  Barbaregaf,  and  Ascon,  from  whence
it  is  said  that  the  Queene  of  Saba  came  to  Hierusalem
to  heare  the  wisedom  of  Salomon.  This  citie  is  but
litle,  yet  very  faire,  and  one  of  the  chiefe  cities  in  Ethiope.
In  this  province  are  many  exceeding  high  mountains,  upon
the  which  is  said  to  be  the  earthly  paradise :  and  some
say  that  there  are  the  trees  of  the  Sunne  and  Moone,
whereof  the  antiquitie  maketh  mention :  yet  that  none
can  passe  thither  by  reason  of  great  deserts  of  an  hundred
daies  journey.  Also  beyond  these  mountains  is  the  Cape
of  Bona  Speranza.  And  to  have  said  thus  much  of
Afrike  it  may  suffice.

The  first  voiage  to Guinea and Benin.

N  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1553.  the  twelfth
day  of  August,  sailed  from  Portsmouth
two  goodly  ships,  the  Primerose  and  the
Lion,  with  a  pinnas  called  the  Moone,
being  all  well  furnished  aswell  with  men
of  the  lustiest  sort,  to  the  number  of
seven  score,  as  also  with  ordinance  and
victuals  requisite  to  such  a  voiage :  having  also  two
captaines,  the  one  a  stranger  called  Anthonie  Anes  Pin-  Plnteado.
teado,  a  Portugall,  borne  in  a  towne  named  The  Port
of  Portugall,  a  wise,  discreet,  and  sober  man,  who  for
his  cunning  in  sailing,  being  as  well  an  expert  Pilot  as
a  politike  captaine,  was  sometime  in  great  favour  with
VI  145  K

From  whence
the  Queene  of
Saba  came.

The  earthly

Paradise.
The  trees  of
the  Sunne  and
the  Moone.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

3  553-
Brasik.  the  king  of  Portugall,  and  to  whom  the  coasts  of  Brasile

Guinea.  and  Guinea  were  committed  to  be  kept  from  the  French-

men, to  whom  he  was  a  terrour  on  the  Sea  in  those  parts,
and  was  furthermore  a  gentleman  of  the  king  his  masters
house.  But  as  fortune  in  maner  never  favoureth  but
flattereth,  never  promiseth  but  deceiveth,  never  raiseth
but  casteth  downe  againe :  and  as  great  wealth  &  favour
have  alwaies  companions,  emulation  and  envie,  he  was
after  many  adversities  &  quarels  made  against  him,
inforced  to  come  into  England :  where  in  this  golden
voyage  he  was  evil  matched  with  an  unequal  companion,
and  unlike  match  of  most  sundry  qualities  &  conditions,
with  vertues  few  or  none  adorned.  Thus  departed  these
noble  ships  under  saile  on  their  voyage :  But  first
captaine  Windam  putting  forth  of  his  ship  at  Portsmouth
a  kinsman  of  one  of  the  head  marchants,  and  shewing
herein  a  muster  of  the  tragicall  partes  hee  had  conceived
in  his  braine,  and  with  such  small  beginnings  nourished
so  monstrous  a  birth,  that  more  happy,  yea  and  blessed
was  that  yong  man  being  left  behind,  then  if  he  had  bene
taken  with  them,  as  some  do  wish  he  had  done  the  like
by  theirs.  Thus  sailed  they  on  their  voyage,  untill  they
The  Hands  of  came  to  the  Hand  of  Madera,  where  they  tooke  in
Madera.  certaine  wines  for  the  store  of  their  ships,  and  paid  for
them  as  they  agreed  of  the  price.  At  these  Hands  they
met  with  a  great  Galion  of  the  king  of  Portugall,  full  of
men  and  ordinance :  yet  such  as  could  not  have  prevailed
if  it  had  attempted  to  withstand  or  resist  our  ships,  for
the  which  cause  it  was  set  foorth,  not  onely  to  let  and
interrupt  these  our  shippes  of  their  purposed  voiage,  but
al  other  that  should  attempt  the  like :  yet  chiefly  to
frustrate  our  voiage.  For  the  king  of  Portugall  was
sinisterly  informed,  that  our  ships  were  armed  to  his
The  castle  of  castle  of  Mina  in  those  parties,  whereas  nothing  lesse
was  ment.

After  that  our  ships  departed  from  the  Hand  of
Madera  forward  on  their  voiage,  began  this  worthy
captaine  Pinteados  sorow,  as  a  man  tormented  with  the

146

Mina.

THE FIRST VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1553-
company  of  a  terrible  Hydra,  who  hitherto  flattred  with
him,  &  made  him  a  faire  countenance  and  shew  of  love.
Then did he take upon him to command all alone,
setting nought  both  by  captain  Pinteado, and  the  rest
of  the  marchants factors, sometimes with opprobrious
words,  and somtimes with threatnings most shamfully
abusing  them,  taking  from  Pinteado  the  service  of  the
boies and  certain  mariners  that  were assigned him by
the  order  and  direction  of  the  worshipful  merchants,  and
leaving  him  as  a  common  mariner,  which  is  the  greatest
despite  and  grief  that  can  be  to  a  Portugale  or  Spaniard,
to  be  diminished  of  their  honor,  which  they  esteem  above
all  riches. Thus  sailing  forward  on their  voiage,  they
came to the  Hands  of  Canarie,  continuing  their  course  The  Hands  of
from  thence  until  they  arrived  at  the  Hand  of  S.  Nicholas,  Ef'^^ff'^*  ,
where they  victualled themselves with fresh meat, of  ^  ^slicTolas
the  flesh  of  wild  goats,  whereof  is  great  plenty  in  that
Hand,  &  in  maner  of  nothing  els. From  hence  folowing
on  their  course  and  tarying  here  &  there  at  the  desert
Hands in the  way,  because they  would  not come too
timely  to  the  countrey  of  Guinea  for  the  heat,  and  tarying
somwhat too long  (for  what can be  well ministred  in
a common wealth, where  inequalitie  with tyrannie wil
rule  alone)  they  came  at  the  length  to  the  first  land  of  the
country  of  Guinea,  where  they  fel  with  the  great  river  of  The  river  of
Sesto,  where  they  miffht  for  their  marchandizes  have  laden  ^"^°'..
their  ships with  the srraines  of  that  countrey,  which  is  U  '•  ' '-'
a  very  note  rruit,  and  much  like  unto  a  fig  as  it  groweth
on  the  tree. For  as  the  figs  are  full  of  small  seeds,  so  is
the  said  fruit  full  of  graines,  which  are  loose  within  the
cod,  having  in  the  mids  thereof  a  hole  on every  side.
This  kind  of  spice  is  much  used  in  cold  countries,  &  may
there  be  sold  for  great  advantage,  for  exchange  of  other
wares. But  our  men,  by  the  perswasion  or  rather  inforce-
ment  of  this  tragicall  captaine,  not  regarding  and  setting
light  by  that  commoditie,  in  comparison  of  ye  fine  gold  The  thirst  of
they thirsted, sailed an hundred leagues further, until  ^°^^'
they  came  to  the  golden  land :  where  not  attempting  to

147

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

The  castle  of come  neere  the  castle  pertaining  to  the  king  of  Portugall,

iyi-T-na.  which  was  within  the  river  of  Mina,  they  made  sale  of

their  ware  only  on  this  side  &  beyond  it,  for  the  gold  of

The  quantitie  that  country, to the  quantitie  of  an  hundred  and  fiftie

^^^ ■  pounds  weight,  there  being  in  case  that  they  might  have

dispatched  all  their  ware  for  gold,  if  the  untame  braine  of

Windam  had,  or  could  have  given  eare  to  the  counsell

and  experience  ofPinteado. For  when  that  Windam  not

satisfied with  the  gold  which  he  had,  and  more might

have  had  if  he  had  taried  about  the  Mina,  commanding

the  said  Pinteado  (for  so  he  tooke  upon  him)  to  lead  the

ships  to  Benin,  being  under  the  Equinoctial  line,  and  an

hundred  and  fifty  leagues beyond  the Mina,  where he

looked  to  have  their  ships  laden  with  pepper :  and  being

counselled  of  the  said  Pinteado,  considering  the  late  time

of  the  yeere,  for  that  time  to  go  no  further,  but  to  make

sale  of  their  wares  such  as  they  had  for  gold,  wherby  they

might  have  bene great  gainers :  Windam not  assenting

Fune  admiit-  hereunto, fell into a sudden rage, reviling the sayd

et  no  counse .  pinte^do,  calling  him  Jew,  with  other  opprobrious  words,

saying.  This  whoreson  Jew  hath  promised  to  bring  us  to

such  places  as  are  not,  or  as  he  cannot  bring  us  unto  :

but  if  he  do  not,  I  will  cut  off  his  eares  and  naile  them  to

the  maste. Pinteado  rave  the  foresaid  counsell  to  2:0  no

further  for  the  safegard  of  the  men  and  their  lives,  which

they  should  put  in  danger  if  they  came  too  late,  for  the

The  Rossia. Rossia which is their Winter, not for cold, but for

smothering  heate,  with  close  and  cloudie  aire  and  storming

weather,  of  such putrifying qualitie,  that it rotted the

coates  of  their  backs  : or  els  for  comming  to  soone  for

Rotting  heat, the  scorching  heat  of  the  sunne,  which  caused  them  to

linger  in  the  way. But  of  force  and  not  of  will  brought

Benin.  he  the  ships  before  the  river  of  Benin,  where  riding  at  an

Anker,  they  sent  their  pinnas  up  into  the  river  50  or  60

leagues, from whence certaine of  the marchants with

Francisco. captaine  Pinteado,  Francisco  a  Portugale,  Nicholas  Lam-

j \  bart  gentleman,  and  other  marchants  were  conducted  to

the  court  where  the  king  remained,  ten  leagues  from  the

THE FIRST VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1553-
river  side,  whither  when  they  came,  they  were  brought
with  a  great  company  to  the  presence  of  the  king,  who The  king  of
being  a  blacke  Moore  (although  not  so  blacke  as  the  rest)  ^^^^^  ^"
sate  in  a  great  huge  hall,  long  and  wide,  the  wals  made  of
earth  without  windowes,  the  roofe  of  thin  boords,  open  in
sundry  places,  like  unto  lovers  to  let  in  the  aire.

And  here  to  speake  of  the  great  reverence  they  give  to  Reverence  to-
their  king,  it  is  such,  that  if  we  would  give  as  much  to  ^^rd  the  king.
our  Savior Christ,  we  should  remoove  from our  heads
many  plagues  which  we  daily  deserve  for  our  contempt
and  impietie.

So  it  is  therfore,  that  when  his  noble  men  are  in  his
presence,  they  never  looke  him  in  the  face,  but  sit  cow-
ring,  as  we  upon  our  knees,  so  they  upon  their  buttocks,
with  their  elbowes  upon  their  knees,  and  their  hands
before  their  faces,  not  looking  up  until  the  king  command
them.  And  when  they  are  comming  toward  the  king,  as
far  as  they  do  see  him,  they  do  shew  such  reverence,
sitting  on  the  ground  with  their  faces  covered  as  before.
Likewise  when  they  depart  from  him,  they  turn  not  their
backs  toward  him,  but  goe  creeping  backward  with  like
reverence.

And  now to  speake  somewhat  of  the  communication
that  was  between  the  king  and  our  men,  you  shall  first
understand  that  he  himselfe  could  speake  the  Portugall
tongue,  which  he  had  learned  of  a  child. Therefore  after  The  commmi-
he  had  commanded  our  men  to  stand  up,  and  demanded  ^^f ^f.  ^^^'^^^^

the  kins'  of

of  them  the  cause  of  their  comming  into  that  countrey,  Benin  and  our
they  answered by Pinteado, that they  were marchants  men.
traveiling  into  those  parties  for the  commodities  of  his
countrey,  for  exchange  of  wares  which  they  had  brought
from their  countries,  being  such  as  should be  no  lesse
commodious for him and  his people. The  king  then
having  of  old  lying  in  a  certaine  store-house  30  or  40
kintals  of  Pepper  (every  kintall  being  an  hundred  weight)  Pepper.
willed  them  to  looke  upon  the  same,  and  againe  to  bring
him a  sight  of  such  merchandizes  as  they  had  brought
with  them. And  thereupon  sent  with  the  captaine  and

149

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

the  marchants  certaine  of  his  men  to  conduct  them  to  the

waters  side,  with  other  to  bring  the  ware  from  the  pinnas

The  kings  gen-  to  the  court. Who  when they  were  returned and  the

tlenes  towards  ^ya^j-gg  seen,  the  king  grew  to  this  ende  with  the  merchants

our  men.  ^^  provide  in  30  dayes  the  lading  of  al  their  ships  with

pepper. And in case their merchandizes would not

extend to  the  value of  so much pepper, he  promised

to  credite  them  to  their  next  returne,  and  thereupon  sent

the  country  round  about  to  gather  pepper,  causing  the

same to  be brought to  the court : So  that  within the

space of  30  dayes they had  gathered fourescore  tunne

of  pepper.  , , .  , ^

In  the  meane  season  our  men  partly  havmg  no  rule  of
[II.  ii.  13.]  themselves,  but  eating  without  measure  of  the  fruits  of
the  countrey,  and  drinking  the  wine  of  the  Palme  trees
that  droppeth  in  the  night  from  the  cut  of  the  branches
of  the  same,  and  in  such  extreme  heate  running  con-
tinually into  the  water,  not  used  before  to  such  sudden
and  vehement  alterations  (then  the  which  nothing  is  more
dangerous)  were  thereby  brought  into  swellings  and
agues :  insomucli  that  the  later  time  of  the  yeere  com-
ming  on,  caused  them  to  die  sometimes  three  &  some-
times 4  or  5  in  a  day.  Then  Windam  perceiving  the
time  of  the  30  daies  to  be  expired,  and  his  men  dying  so
fast,  sent  to  the  court  in  post  to  Captaine  Pinteado,  &  the
rest  to  come  away  and  to  tary  no  longer.  But  Pinteado
with  the  rest,  wrote  backe  to  him  againe,  certifying  him  of
the  great  quantity  of  pepper  they  had  alreadie  gathered
&  looked  daily  for  much  more :  desiring  him  furthermore
to  remember  the  great  praise  and  name  they  should  win,
if  they  came  home  prosperously,  and  what  shame  of  the
contrary.  With  which  answere  Windam  not  satisfied,  and
many  of  their  men  dying  dayly,  willed  and  commaunded
them  againe  either  to  come  away  forthwith,  or  els
threatened  to  leave  them  behinde.  When  Pinteado  heard
this  answere,  thinking  to  perswade  him  with  reason,  hee
tooke  his  way  from  the  court  toward  the  ships,  being
conducted  thither  with  men  by  the  kings  commandement.

150

THE FIRST VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad

1553-
In the meane season Windam  all raging, brake  up

Pinteados  Cabin,  brake open his chestes, spoiled such

provision  of  cold  stilled  waters and  suckets  as he had

provided  for  his  health, and  left  him nothing, neither

of  his  instruments  to  saile  by,  nor  yet  of  his  apparell :

and  in  the  meane  time  falling  sicke,  himselfe  died  also. The  death  of

Whose death Pinteado comming aboord, lamented as  ^'''^'^'^^•

much  as  if  he  had  bene  the  deerest  friend  he  had  in  the

world. But  certaine  of  the  mariners  and  other  officers  Pinteado  evlll

did  spit  in  his  face,  some  calling  him  Jewe,  saying  that  he  ^^^^°f^^^^

had  brought  them  thither  to  kill  them  :  and  some  drawing

their  swords  at  him,  making  a  shew  to  slay  him. Then

he  perceiving  that  they  would  needs  away,  desired  them

to tary  that  he  might fetch  the  rest  of  the  marchants

that  were  left  at  the court,  but they  would not  grant

this request. Then desired he them  to  give  him the

ship-boate,  with  as  much  of  an  old  saile  as  might  serve

for  the  same,  promising  them  therwith  to  bring  Nicholas  ^'^^  Lambert

Lambert  and  the  rest  into  England,  but  all  was  in  vaine.  "^j^^  ^,  °^~

~  dinev  boi'ne

Then  wrote  he  a  letter  to  the  court  to  the  marchants, .  whose  father
informing  them of  all  the  matter,  and  promising  them  had  bin  Lord
if  God  would  lend  him  life  to  returne  with  all  haste  to  Maior  of
fetch them. And thus  was Pinteado kept  ashipboord  ^°'''^°^'
against  his  will,  thrust  among  the  boyes  of  the  ship,  not
used  like  a  man,  nor  yet  like  an  honest  boy,  but  glad
to  find  favour  at  the  cookes  hand. Then  departed  they,
leaving  one  of  their  ships  behind  them,  which  they  sunke
for  lacke of  men  to  cary  her. After  this,  within 6 or
7  dayes  sayling,  dyed  also  Pinteado  for  very  pensivenesse  1'^^  ^^^^^  ¥
&  thought  that  stroke  him  to  the  heart. A  man  worthy  P^"^^^^°-
to serve any prince, and most vilely used. And of
sevenscore  men  came  home  to  Plimmouth  scarcely  forty,
and of  them many died. And that no man should
suspect  these  words  which  I  have  saide  in  commendation
of  Pinteado,  to  be  spoken upon  favour  otherwise  then
trueth,  1  have  thought  good  to  adde  hereunto  the  copie
of  the  letters  which  the  king  of  Portugall  and  the  infant
his brother  wrote  unto  him to reconcile  him,  at such

151

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

time  as  upon  the  king  his  masters  displeasure  (and  not

for  any  other  crime or  offence,  as  may  appeare  by  the

said  letters) he  was  only  for  povertie  inforced to  come

Finteado first \^^q  England,  where  he  first  perswaded  our  marchants  to

perswadedour  ^^^^^^^ ^^  said  vovaeres  to Guinea. But  as  the  king
men  to  the  vot-  '-  •/ o  _  o

age  of  Guinea.  ^^  Portugall  too  late  repented  him  that  he  had  so
punished  Pinteado,  upon  malicious  informations  of  such
as  envied  the  mans  good  fortune :  even  so  may  it  hereby
appeare  that  in  some  cases  even  Lions  themselves  may
either  be  hindered  by  the  contempt,  or  aided  by  the  help
of  the  poore  mise,  according  unto  the  fable  of  Esope.

The  copie  of  Anthonie  Anes  Pinteado  his  letters
patents,  whereby  the  king  of  Portugall  made
him  knight  of  his  house,  after  all  his  troubles
and  imprisonment,  which,  by  wrong  infor-
mation made  to  the  king,  he  had  susteined
of  long  time,  being  at  the  last  delivered,  his
cause  knowen  and  manifested  to  the  king  by
a  gray  Frier  the  kings  Confessor.

The king  doe  give you  to understand  lord Francis
Desseaso,  one of  my counsell and overseer  of  my
house,  that in  consideration of  the  good service  which
Anthony  Anes  Pinteado,  the  sonne  of  John  Anes,  dwel-
ling in  the  towne  called  the  Port,  hath  done unto  me,
my will and pleasure is, to make him knight of  my
Seven  hun- house,  allowing to him in pension seven hundred  reis
dred  rets  are monethly,  and  every  day  one  alcayre  of  barly,  as  long  as
Akav"u^' ^^ keepeth a horse, & to be paid according to the
halfeabushell.  ordinance  of  my  house. Providing  alwaies  that  he  shall
receive  but  one marriage  gift. And this also in such
condition,  that  the  time  which  is  accepted  in our  ordi-
nance, forbidding  such men to marry  for  getting such
children  as  might  succeede  them  in  this  allowance,  which
is 6 yeres  after  the  making  of  this  patent,  shalbe  first
expired  before he  do  marry. 1  therfore  command  you
to cause this to be entred in the booke called the

152

I

THE FIRST VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1551-
Matricula  of  our  houshold,  under  the  title  of  knights.
And  when  it  is  so  entred,  let  the  clarke  of  the  Matricula,  [II.  ii.  14.]
for  the  certeintie  therof,  write  on  the  backside  of  this
Alvala,  or  patent,  the  number  of  the  leafe  wherein
this  our  grant  is  entred.  Which  done,  let  him  returne
this  writing  unto  the  said  Anthonie  Anes  Pinteado  for
his  warrant.

I  Diego  Henriques  have  written  this  in  Almarin  the
two  and  twentie  day  of  September,  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lord  1 55 1.  And  this  benevolence  the  king  gave  unto
Anthonie  Anes  Pinteado,  the  five  and  twentie  day  of
July  this  present  yeere.

Rey.

The  Secretaries  declaration  written  under  the
kings  grant.

YOur  Majestie  hath  vouchsafed,  in  respect  and  con-
sideration of  the  good  service  of  Anthony  Anes
Pinteado,  dwelling  in  the  port,  and  sonne  of  John  Anes,
to  make  him  knight  of  your  house,  with  ordinarie
allowance,  of  seven  hundred  reis  pension  by  the  moneth,
and  one  alcaire  of  barley  by  the  day,  as  long  as  he
keepeth  a  horse :  and  to  be  paide  according  to  the
ordinance  of  your  house,  with  condition  that  hee  shall
have  but  one  marriage  gift :  and  that  not  within  the
space  of  sixe  yeres  after  the  making  of  these  letters
Patents.  The  Secretaries  note.  Entred  in  the  booke  of
the  Matricula. Fol. 683.

Francisco  de  Siquera.

The  copie  of  the  letter  of  Don  Lewes  the  infant,
and  brother  to  the  king  of  Portugall,  sent
into  England  to  Anthonie  Anes  Pinteado.

ANthony  Anes  Pinteado,  I  the  infant  brother  to  the
king,  have  me  heartily  commended  unto  you.  Peter
Gonsalves  is  gone  to  seeke  you,  desiring  to  bring  you
home  again  into  your  countrey.  And  for  that  purpose
he  hath  with  him  a  safe  conduct  for  you,  granted  by  the

153

A.D.

1552.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

king,  that  therby  you  may  freely  and  without  all  feare
come  home.  And  although  the  weather  be  foule  and
stormie,  yet  faile  not  to  come :  for  in  the  time  that  his
Majestie  hath  given  you,  you  may  doe  many  things  to
your  contentation  and  gratifying  the  king,  whereof  I
would  be  right  glad :  and  to  bring  the  same  to  passe,
I  will  do  all  that  lieth  in  me  for  your  profite.  But  foras-
much as  Peter  Gonsalves  will  make  further  declaration
hereof  unto  you,  I  say  no  more  at  this  present.  Written
in  Lisbone,  the  eight  day  of  December. Anno  1552.

The  infant Don  Lewes.

A  LI  these  foresaid  writings  I  saw  under  scale,  in  the
house  of  my  friend  Nicholas  Liese,  with  whom
Pinteado  left  them,  at  his  unfortunate  departing  to
Guinea.  But,  notwithstanding  all  these  friendly  letters
and  faire  promises,  Pinteado  durst  not  attempt  to  goe
home,  neither  to  keepe  companie  with  the  Portugals  his
countrey  men,  without  the  presence  of  other :  forasmuch
as  he  had  secrete  admonitions  that  they  intended  to  slay
him,  if  time  and  place  might  have  served  their  wicked
intent.

The  second  voyage  to  Guinea  set  out  by  Sir
George  Barne,  Sir  John  Yorke,  Thomas  Lok,
Anthonie  Hickman  and  Edward  Castelin,  in
the  yere  1554.  The  Captaine  whereof  was
M.  John  Lok.

S  in  the  first  voiage  I  have  declared  rather
the  order  of  the  history,  then  the  course
of  the  navigation,  whereof  at  that  time
I  could  have  no  perfect  information :  so
in  the  description  of  this  second  voyage,
my  chiefe  intent  hath  beene  to  shew
the  course  of  the  same,  according  to  the
observation  and  ordinarie  custome  of  the  mariners,  and
as  I  received  it  at  the  handes  of  an  expert  Pilot,  being
one  of  the  chiefe  in  this  voyage,  who  also  with  his  owne

154

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad

1554-
hands  wrote  a  briefe  declaration  of  the  same,  as  he  found
and  tried  all  things,  not  by  conjecture,  but  by  the  art
of  sayling,  and  instruments  perteining  to  the  mariners
facultie.  Not  therefore  assuming  to  my  selfe  the  com-
mendations due  unto  other,  neither  so  bold  as  in  any
part  to  change  or  otherwise  dispose  the  order  of  this
voyage  so  well  observed  by  art  and  experience,  I  have
thought  good  to  set  forth  the  same,  in  such  sort  and
phrase  of  speech  as  is  commonly  used  among  them,  and
as  1  received  it  of  the  said  Pilot,  as  I  have  said.  Take
it  therefore  as  foUoweth.

In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord 1554  the eleventh day  of
October,  we departed the river of  Thames  with three  [II.  ii.  15.]
goodly  ships,  the  one  called  the Trinitie,  a ship  of  the
burden  of  seven-score  tunne,  the  other  called  the  Bartho-
lomew, a  ship  of  the  burden  of  ninetie,  the  third  was  the
John Evangelist,  a ship of  seven score tunne. With  RobertGainsk
the  sayd  ships  and  two pinnesses  (wherof  the one  was  "^^^  master  of
drowned  on  the  coast  of  England)  we  went  forward  on i^^^
our  voyage,  and  stayed  at  Dover  fourteene  dayes. We
staied  also  at  Rie  three  or  foure  dayes. Moreover  last
of  all  we  touched  at  Dartmouth.

The  first  day  of  November  at  nine  of  the  clocke  at
night,  departing  from  the  coast  of  England,  we  set  off
the  Start,  bearing  Southwest  all  that  night  in  the  sea,  and
the  next  day  all  day,  and  the  next  night  after,  untill  the
third  day  of  the  said  moneth  about  noone,  making  our
way  good,  did  runne  threescore  leagues.

The  1 7  day  in  the  morning  we  had  sight  of  the  He  The  Ik  of
of  Madera,  which  doth  rise  to  him  that  commeth  in  the  ^^dera.
Northnortheast  part  upright  land  in  the  west  part  of  it,
and  very  high  :  and  to  the  Southsoutheast  a  low  long
land,  and  a  long  point,  with  a  saddle  thorow  the  middest
of  it,  standing  in  two  and  thirtie  degrees :  and  in  the
West  part,  many  springs  of  water  running  downe  from
the  mountaine,  and  many  white  fieldes  like  unto  corne
fields,  &  some  white  houses  to  the  Southeast  part  of
it :  and  the  toppe  of  the  mountaine  sheweth  very  ragged,

155

A.D.

1554.

The  lie  of
Palmes.
Teneriffa.
The  Canaries.

From  Madera
to  the  Isle  of
Palmes.

Gran
Canar'ia.
Forteventura.
The  Hand  of
Gomera.

Teneriffa.
Snow.

The  coast  of
Barbarie.
Cape  Blanke.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

if  you  may  see  it,  and  in  the  Northeast  part  there  is  a
bight  or  bay  as  though  it  were  a  harborow :  Also  in  the
said  part,  there  is  a  rocke  a  little  distance  from  the  shoare,
and  over  the  sayd  bight  you  shall  see  a  great  gappe
in  the  mountaine.

The  19  day  at  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  had  sight  of
the  isle  of  Palmes  and  Teneriffa  and  the  Canaries.
The  He  of  Palme  riseth  round,  &  lieth  Southeast  and
Northwest,  and  the  Northwest  part  is  lowest.  In  the
South  is  a  round  hill  over  the  head  land,  and  another
round  hill  above  that  in  the  land.  There  are  betweene
the  Southeast  part  of  the  He  of  Madera  &  the  Northwest
part  of  the  He  of  Palme  seven  and  fifty  leagues.  This
Isle  of  Palme  lieth  in  eight  and  twenty  degrees.  And
our  course  from  Madera  to  the  He  of  Palme  was  South
and  South  and  by  West,  so  that  we  had  sight  of  Teneriffa
and  of  the  Canaries.  The  Southeast  part  of  the  He  of  the
Palme,  &  the  Northnortheast  of  Teneriffa  lie  Southeast
and  Northwest,  and  betweene  them  are  20  leagues.
Teneriffa  and  the  great  Canary  called  Gran  Canaria,  and
the  West  part  of  Forteventura  stande  in  seven  and
twenty  degrees  and  a  halfe.  Gomera  is  a  faire  Island
but  very  ragged,  &  lieth  Westsouthwest  off  Teneriffa.
And  whosoever  wil  come  betweene  them  two  Hands  must
come  South  and  by  East,  and  in  the  South  part  of
Gomera  is  a  towne  and  a  good  rode  in  the  said  part
of  the  Hand  :  and  it  standeth  in  seven  and  twentie  degrees
and  three  terces.  Teneriffa  is  an  high  land,  with  a  great
high  pike  like  a  sugar  loafe,  and  upon  the  said  pike  is
snow  throughout  all  the  whole  yeere.  And  by  reason
of  that  pike  it  may  be  knowen  above  all  other  Hands,  and
there  we  were  becalmed  the  twentieth  day  of  November,
from  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  untill  foure
of  the  clocke  at  afternoone.

The  two  and  twentieth  day  of  November,  under  the
Tropike  of  Cancer  the  Sunne  goeth  downe  West  and
by  South.  Upon  the  coast  of  Barbarie  five  and  twentie
leagues  by  North  Cape  blanke,  at  three  leagues  off  the

156

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1554-
maine,  there  are  fifteene  fadomes  and  good  shelly  ground,
and  sande  among  and  no  streames,  and  two  small  Hands
standing  in  two  and  twentie  degrees  and  a  terce.

From  Gomera  to  Cape  de  las  Barbas  is  an  hundred
leagues,  and  our  course  was  South  and  by  East.  The
said  Cape  standeth  in  two  and  twentie  and  a  halfe :  and
all  that  coast  is  flatte,  sixteene  or  seventeene  fadome
deepe.  Seven  or  eight  leagues  off  from  the  river  del  T^he  river  del
Oro  to  Cape  de  las  Barbas,  there  use  many  Spaniardes  °'
and  Portugals  to  trade  for  fishing,  during  the  moneth
of  November  :  and  all  that  coast  is  very  low  lands.  Also
we  went  from  Cape  de  las  Barbas  Southsouthwest,  and
Southwest  and  by  South,  till  we  brought  our  selves  in
twentie  degrees  and  a  halfe,  reckoning  our  selves  seven
leagues  off:  and  there  were  the  least  sholes  of  Cape
Blanke.

Then  we  went  South  untill  we  brought  our  selves
in  13  degrees,  reckoning  our  selves  five  and  twentie
leagues  off.  And  in  1 5  degrees  we  did  reare  the  Cros-  ^-^^  crossien
siers,  and  we  might  have  reared  them  sooner  if  we  had  °^' "''^^^^  ^(^"■
looked  for  them.  They  are  not  right  a  crosse  in  the
moneth  of  November,  by  reason  that  the  nights  are  short
there.  Neverthelesse  we  had  the  sight  of  them  the  29
day  of  the  said  moneth  at  night.

The  first  of  December,  being  in  13  degrees  we  set  our
course  South  and  by  East,  untill  the  fourth  day  of
December  at  12  of  the  clocke  the  same  day.  Then  we
were  in  nine  degrees  and  a  terce,  reckoning  our  selves
30  leagues  off  the  sholes  of  the  river  called  Rio  Grande,  Rio  Grande.
being  Westsouthwest  off  them,  the  which  sholes  be  30
leagues  long.

The  fourth  of  December  we  beganne  to  set  our  course
Southeast,  we  being  in  sixe  degrees  and  a  halfe.

The  ninth  day  of  December  we  set  our  course  East-  [II.  ii.  16.]
southeast : the  fourteenth day  of  the  sayde  moneth we
set  our  course  East,  we  being  in  five  degrees  and  a  halfe,
reckoning our selves thirty  and sixe  leagues  from  the
coast  of  Guinea.

157

A.D.

1554-

Cape  Me7i-

surado.

The  river  of

Sesto.

The  river  of
Sesto.

Rio  Duke.

Cape  de
Monte.

Cate  de  las
Palmas.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  nineteenth  of  the  said  moneth  we  set  our  course
East  and  by  North,  reckoning  our  selves  seventeene
leagues  distant  from  Cape  Mensurado,  the  said  Cape
being  Eastnortheast  of  us,  and  the  river  of  Sesto  being
East.

The  one  and  twentieth  day  of  the  said  moneth,  we  fell
with  Cape  Mensurado  to  the  Southeast,  about  two  leagues
off.  This  Cape  may  be  easily  knowen,  by  reason  y'  the
rising  of  it  is  like  a  Porpose-head.  Also  toward  the
Southeast  there  are  three  trees,  whereof  the  Eastermost
tree  is  the  highest,  and  the  middlemost  is  like  a  hie
stacke,  &  the  Southermost  like  unto  a  gibet :  and  upon
the  maine  are  foure  or  five  high  hilles  rising  one  after
another  like  round  hommocks  or  hillocks.  And  the
Southeast  of  the  three  trees,  brandiernwise :  and  all  the
coast  along  is  white  sand.  The  said  Cape  standeth
within  a  litle  in  sixe  degrees.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  December  we  came  to  the
river  of  Sesto,  &  remained  there  untill  the  nine  and
twentieth  day  of  the  said  moneth.  Here  we  thought  it
best  to  send  before  us  the  pinnesse  to  the  river  Duke,
called  Rio  Dulce,  that  they  might  have  the  beginning  of
the  market  before  the  comming  of  the  John  Evangelist.

At  the  river  of  Sesto  we  had  a  tunne  of  graines.  This
river  standeth  in  sixe  degrees,  lacking  a  terce.  From
the  river  of  Sesto  to  Rio  Dulce  are  five  and  twentie
leagues.  Rio  Dulce  standeth  in  five  degrees  and  a  halfe.
The  river  of  Sesto  is  easie  to  be  knowen,  by  reason  there
is  a  ledge  of  rockes  on  the  Southeast  part  of  the  Rode.
And  at  the  entring  into  the  haven  are  five  or  sixe  trees
that  beare  no  leaves.  This  is  a  good  harborow,  but  very
narow  at  ye  entrance  into  the  river.  There  is  also  a
rocke  in  the  havens  mouth  right  as  you  enter.  And
all  that  coast  betweene  Cape  de  Monte,  and  cape  de  las
Palmas,  lieth  Southeast  &  by  East,  Northwest  &  by  West,
being  three  leagues  off  the  shore.  And  you  shal  have  in
some  places  rocks  two  leagues  off:  and  that,  betweene
the  river  of  Sesto  and  cape  de  las  Palmas.

158

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1555.

Betweene the  river  of  Sesto  and  the  river  Duke  are
iive  and  twentie  leagues  :  &  the  high  land  that  is  betweene
them  both,  is  called  Cakeado,  being  eight  leagues  from  ^-^^  ^^^^  °f
the  river  of  Sesto. And  to  the  Southeastwarde  of  it  is  ^'^^^^'^°-
a  place  called  Shawgro,  and  an  other  called Shyawe  or
Shauo,  where  you  may  get  fresh  water. Off  this  Shyawe  Skauo.
lieth  a  ledge  of  rockes : and  to  the  Southeastward  lieth
a  hedland  called  Croke. Betweene  Cakeado  and  Croke  Croke.
are  nine  or  ten  leagues. To  the  Southeastward  off,  is
a harborow called S. Vincent : Right over against  S.  '^-  Vincents
Vincent, is  a  rocke under the  water,  two  leagues &  a "^ "'"
halfe  off  the  shore. To  the  Southeastward  of  that  rocke
you  shal  see  an  island  about  three  or  foure  leagues  off:
this  island  is not  past  a  league  off  the  shore. To  the
Eastsoutheast of  the island  is  a  rocke  that  lieth  above
the water,  and  by  that  rocke  goeth  in  the  river  Dulce,  T'he  nver
which  you  shall  know  by  the  said  river  and  rocke. The
Northwest  side  of  the  haven  is  flat  sand,  and  the  South-
east side  therof  is  like  an  Island,  and  a  bare  plot  without
any  trees,  and  so  is  it  not  in  any  other  place.

In  the  Rode  you  shall  ride  in  thirteene  or  foureteene
fadomes,  good  oaze  and  sand,  being  the  markes  of  the
Rode  to  bring  the  Island  and  the  Northeast  land  together,
and  here  we  ankered  the  last  of  December.

The  third  day  of  Januarie,  we  came  from  the  river
Dulce.

Note that Cape de las  Palmas is  a faire high land. Cape  de  las
but  some  low  places  thereof  by  the  water  side  looke  like  P^l^a^-
red cliffes with white strakes like hie wayes, a cable
length a piece,  and this is the  East  part  of  the cape.
This cape  is the Southermost  land in all  the coast  of  The  coast  of
Guinea,  and  standeth  in  foure  degrees  and  a  terce.  Guinea.

The  coast  from  Cape  de  las  Palmas  to  Cape  Trepointes,
or  de  Tres  Puntas,  is  faire  &  cleare  without  rocke  or
other  danger.

Twentie  and  five  leagues  from  Cape  de  las  Palmas,
the  land  is  higher  then  in  any  place,  untill  we  come
to  Cape  Trepointes:  And  about  ten  leagues  before  you

159

A.D.
1555.

The  castle  of
Arra.

[II.  ii.  17.]

The  towne  of
Samma.

The  pledge
was  sir  John
Yorke  his
'Nephew.

Cape  Corea.

The  castle  of
Mina  pei-tein-
ing  to  the  king
of  Portugall.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

come  to  Cape  Trepointes,  the  land  riseth  still  higher  and
higher,  untill  you  come  to  Cape  Trepointes,  Also  before
you  come  to  the  said  Cape,  after  other  5  leagues  to  the
Northwest  part  of  it,  there  is  certaine  broken  ground,
with  two  great  rockes,  and  within  them  in  the  bight  of  a
bay,  is  a  castle  called  Arra,  perteining  to  the  king  of
Portugall.  You  shall  know  it  by  the  said  rockes  that  lie
off  it :  for  there  is  none  such  from  Cape  de  las  Palmas  to
Cape  Trepointes.  This  coast  lieth  East  and  by  North,
West  and  by  South.  From  Cape  de  las  Palmas  to  the
said  castle  is  fourescore  and  fifteene  leagues.  And  the
coast  lieth  from  the  said  castle  to  the  Westermost  point
of  Trepoyntes,  Southeast  and  by  South,  Northwest  and
by  North.  Also  the  Westermost  point  of  Trepoyntes
is  a  low  lande,  lying  halfe  a  mile  out  in  the  sea :  and
upon  the  innermost  necke,  to  the  land-ward,  is  a  tuft
of  trees,  and  there  we  arrived  the  eleventh  day  of
January.

The  12  day  of  January  we  came  to  a  towne  called
Samma  or  Samva,  being  8  leagues  from  Cape  Trepointes
toward  Eastnortheast.  Betweene  Cape  Trepointes  and
the  towne  of  Samva  is  a  great  ledge  of  rockes  a  great
way  out  in  the  sea.  We  continued  foure  dayes  at  that
Towne,  and  the  Captaine  thereof  would  needs  have  a
pledge  a  shore.  But  when  they  received  the  pledge,
they  kept  him  still,  and  would  traffike  no  more,  but
shot  off  their  ordinance  at  us.  They  have  two  or  three
pieces  of  ordinance  and  no  more.

The  sixteenth  day  of  the  said  month  we  made  reckon-
ing to  come  to  a  place  called  Cape  Corea,  where  captaine
Don  John  dwelleth,  whose  men  entertained  us  friendly.
This  Cape  Corea  is  foure  leagues  Eastwarde  of  the  castle
of  Mina,  otherwise  called  La  mina,  or  Castello  de  mina,
where  we  arrived  the  18  day  of  the  moneth.  Here  we
made  sale  of  all  our  cloth,  saving  two  or  three  packes.

The  26  day  of  the  same  moneth  we  weighed  anker,
and  departed  from  thence  to  the  Trinitie,  which  was
seven  leagues  Eastward  of  us,  where  she  solde  her  wares.

160

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1555-
Then  they  of  the  Trinitie  willed  us  to  go  Eastward  of
that  eight  or  nine  leagues,  to  sell part  of  their  wares,
in  a  place  called  Perecow,  and  another  place  named  Pere-  Perecow.
cow  Grande,  being  the  Eastermost  place  of  both  these,  Perecow
which  you  shal  know  by  a  great  round  hill  neere  unto  it,  S^^^^-
named Monte Rodondo,  lying  Westward from  it,  and  Monte  Rodon-
by  the  water side  are many  high palme trees. From  '^°-
hence  did  we  set  forth  homeward  the  thirteenth  day  of
February,  &  plied  up  alongst  till  we  came  within  seven
or eight  leagues to Cape  Trepointes. About eight  of
the  clocke  the  1 5  day  at  afternoone,  wee  did  cast  about
to seaward :  and beware of  the currants,  for they  will  The  currants.
deceive  you  sore. Whosoever  shall  come  from  the  coast
of  Mina  homeward,  let him  be  sure  to  make  his  way  P^f^^  Mtna
good  West, untill he  reckon himselfe  as  farre  as  Cape  ^'"^^"'^^^•
de  las  Palmas,  where  the  currant  setteth  alwayes  to  the
Eastward. And  within  twentie  leagues  Eastward  of  Cape
de  las  Palmas  is  a  river  called  De  los  Potos,  where  you  P-^o  ^^  lo^
may  have  fresh  water  and  balast  enough,  and  plenty  of  ^°^°^'
ivory  or  Elephants  teeth. This  river  standeth  in  foure  Ivory.
degrees,  and  almost  two  terces. And  when  you  reckon
your  selfe  as  farre  shot  as  Cape  de  las  Palmas,  being  in  ^^^^  '^^  ^^^
a  degree,  or  a  degree  and  a  halfe,  you  may  go  West,  and  ^^'^*^-
West  by  North,  untill  you  come  in  three  degrees :  and
then  you  may  go  Westnorthwest,  and  Northwest  and  by
West,  untill  you  come  in  five  degrees,  and  then  North-
west. And  in  sixe  degrees,  we  met  Northerly  windes,
and  great  ruffling  of  tides. And  as  we  could  judge,  the
currants  went  to  the  Northnorthwest. Furthermore  be-
tweene Cape de Monte, and Cape Verde, go great
currants,  which  deceive  many  men.  Currants.

The  22  day  of  Aprill,  we  were  in  8  degrees  and  two
terces :  and  so  we  ran  to  the  Northwest,  having  the
winde  at  Northeast  and  Eastnortheast,  and  sometimes
at  East,  untill  we  were  at  18  degrees  and  a  terce,  which
was  on  May  day.  And  so  from  18  and  two  terces,  we
had  the  winde  at  East  and  Eastnortheast,  and  sometimes
at  Eastsoutheast :  and  then  we  reckoned  the  Islands  of
VI  161  L

A.D.
1555.

The  lie  de
Flores.

The  lie  of
Corvo.

IVhere  they
lost  the  sight
of  the  North
starre.

How  the  corn-
passe  doeth
varie.

[II,  ii.  18.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Cape  verde  Eastsoutheast  of  us,  we  judging  our  selves
to  be  48  leagues  off.  And  in  20  and  2 1  degrees,  we  had
the  winde  more  Easterly  to  the  Southward  then  before.
And  so  we  ran  to  the  Northwest  and  Northnorthwest,
and  sometimes  North  and  by  West  and  North,  untill
we  came  into  3 1  degrees,  where  we  reckoned  our  selves
a  hundred  and  fourescore  leagues  Southwest  and  by
South  of  the  Island  de  los  Flores,  and  there  wee  met
with  the  winde  at  Southsoutheast,  and  set  our  course
Northeast.

In  23  degrees  we  had  the  winde  at  the  South  and
Southwest,  and  then  we  set  our  course  Northnortheast,
and  so  we  ran  to  40  degrees,  and  then  we  set  our  course
Northeast,  the  winde  being  at  the  Southwest,  and  having
the  Isle  de  Flores  East  of  us,  and 17  leagues  off.

In  the  41  degrees  we  met  with  the  winde  at  North-
east, and  so  we  ran  Northwestward,  then  we  met  with
the  winde  Westnorthwest,  and  at  the  West  within  6
leagues,  running  toward  the  Northwest,  and  then  we
cast  about,  and  lay  Northeast,  untill  we  came  in  42
degrees,  where  we  set  our  course  Eastnortheast,  judging
the  He  of  Corvo  South  and  by  West  of  us,  and  sixe  and
thirtie  leagues  distant  from  us.

A  remembrance,  that  the  21  day  of  May  we  com-'
muned  with  John  Rafe,  and  he  thought  it  best  to  goe
Northeast,  and  judged  himselfe  25  leagues  Eastward  to
the  Isle  de  Flores,  and  in  39  degrees  and  a  halfe.

Note,  that  on  the  fourth  day  of  September,  under  nine
degrees,  we  lost  the  sight  of  the  North  starre.

Note  also,  that  in  45  degrees,  the  compasse  is  varied
8 degrees  to  the  West.

Item,  in  40  degrees  the  compasse  did  varie  15  degrees
in  the  whole.

Item,  in  30  degrees  and  a  halfe,  the  compasse  is  varied
5  degrees  to  the  West.

Be  it  also  in  memory  that  two  or  three  daies  before
we  came  to  Cape  de  3  puntas,  the  pinnesse  went  alongst
the  shore,  thinking to  sell some of  our  wares,  and so

162

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1555.
we  came  to  anker  three  or  foure  leagues  West  and  by-
South of the Cape de 3 puntas, where we left the
Trinitie.

Then  our pinnesse came aboord with all our men,
the  pinnesse  also  tooke  in  more  wares. They  told  me
moreover that they  would  goe to a place where the
Primrose  was,  and  had  received  much  gold  at  the  first  The  Primrose.
voyage  to  these  parties,  and  tolde  me  furthermore  that
it  was  a  good  place : but  I  fearing  a  brigantine  that  was
then  upon  the  coast,  did  wey  and  follow  them,  and  left
the  Trinitie  about  foure  leagues  off  from  us,  and  there
we  rode  against  that  towne  foure  dayes :  so  that  Martine
by  his owne desire, and assent of  some of  the  Com-
missioners that  were in the  pinnesse,  went  a  shoare  to
the  towne,  and  there  John  Berin  went  to  trafique  from
us, being  three  miles off  trafiquing at  an  other  towne.
The  towne  is  called  Samma  or  Samva,  for  Samma  and  The  towne  of
Sammaterra,  are  the  names  of  the  two  first  townes,  where  ^^^^^•
we  did  trafique  for  gold,  to  the  Northeast  of  Cape  de  3 Golde.
puntas.

Hitherto  continueth  the  course  of  the  voyage,  as  it
was  described  by  the  sayde  Pilot.  Nowe  therefore  I
will  speake  somewhat  of  the  countrey  and  people,  and
of  such  things  as  are  brought  from  thence.

They  brought from thence at  the last  voiage foure  Gold  foure
hundred  pound  weight  and odde of  gold,  of  two and  ^^^-"^If^
twentie  carrats  and  one  graine  in  finenesse :  also  sixe  and
thirtie  buts  of  graines,  &  about  two hundred  and  fifty  Graines.
Elephants teeth of  all quantities. Of  these  I saw &  Elephants
measured  some of  nine  spans  in length,  as they  were  '^^  ^"
crooked. Some  of  them  were  as  bigge  as  a  mans  thigh
above the knee, and weyed  about fourescore and ten
pound  weight  a  peece. They  say  that some one  hath
bin seene of  an hundred and five & twentie pound
weight. Other  there  were  which  they  call  the  teeth  of
calves,  of  one  or  two  or  three  yeeres,  whereof  some  were
a  foot  and  a  halfe,  some  two  foot,  and  some  3  or  more,
according  to  ye  age  of  the  beast. These  great  teeth  or

163

A.D.
1555.

The  head  of
an  Elephant.

Sir  Andrew
Judde.
The  contem-
plations of
Gods  works.

The  descrip-
tion and  pro-
perties of  the
Elephant.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

tusks  grow  in  the  upper  jaw  downeward,  and  not  in  the
nether  jaw  upward,  wherein  the  Painters  and  Arras
workers  are  deceived.  At  this  last  voyage  was  brought
from  Guinea  the  head  of  an  Elephant,  of  such  huge
bignesse,  that  onely  the  bones  or  cranew  thereof,  beside
the  nether  jaw  &  great  tusks,  weighed  about  two  hundred
weight,  and  was  as  much  as  I  could  well  lift  from  the
ground :  insomuch  that  considering  also  herewith  the
weight  of  two  such  great  teeth,  the  nether  jaw  with
the  lesse  teeth,  the  tongue,  the  great  hanging  eares,  the
bigge  &  long  snout  or  troonke,  with  all  the  flesh,  braines,
and  skinne,  with  all  other  parts  belonging  to  the  whole
head,  in  my  judgement  it  could  weigh  litle  lesse  then
five  hundred  weight.  This  head  divers  have  scene  in
the  house  of  the  worthy  marchant  sir  Andrew  Judde,
where  also  I  saw  it,  and  beheld  it,  not  only  with  my
bodily  eyes,  but  much  more  with  the  eyes  of  my  mind
and  spirit,  considering  by  the  worke,  the  cunning  and
wisedome  of  the  workemaister :  without  which  considera-
tion, the  sight  of  such  strange  and  wonderfull  things  may
rather  seeme  curiosities,  then  profitable  contemplations.

The  Elephant  (which  some  call  an  Oliphant)  is  the
biggest  of  all  foure  footed  beasts,  his  forelegs  are  longer
then  his  hinder,  he  hath  ancles  in  the  lower  part  of  his
hinder  legges,  and  five  toes  on  his  feete  undivided,  his
snout  or  tronke  is  so  long,  and  in  such  forme,  that  it
is  to  him  in  the  stead  of  a  hand :  for  he  neither  eateth
nor  drinketh  but  by  bringing  his  tronke  to  his  mouth,
therewith  he  helpeth  up  his  Master  or  keeper,  therewith
he  overthroweth  trees.  Beside  his  two  great  tusks,  he
hath  on  every  side  of  his  mouth  foure  teeth,  wherewith
he  eateth  and  grindeth  his  meate :  either  of  these  teeth
are  almost  a  span  in  length,  as  they  grow  along  in  the
jaw,  and  are  about  two  inches  in  height,  and  almost  as
much  in  thicknesse.  The  tuskes  of  the  male  are  greater
then  of  the  female :  his  tongue  is  very  litle,  and  so  farre
in  his  mouth,  that  it  cannot  be  scene :  of  all  beastes  they
are  most  gentle  and  tractable,  for  by  many  sundry  wayes

164

THE SECOND VOYAGE  TO GUINEA  ad.

1555-
they  are taught,  and doe understand : insomuch that
they  learne to doe due  honor to a king,  and are of
quicke sense  and sharpenesse  of  wit. When the male
hath  once  seasoned  the  female,  he  never  after  toucheth
her. The  male  Elephant  liveth  two  hundreth  yeeres,  or
at  the  least  one  hundred  and  twentie :  the  female  almost
as  long,  but  the floure of  their age is but threescore
yeres,  as  some  write. They  cannot  suffer  winter  or  cold  :
they  love  rivers,  and  will  often  go  into  them  up  to  the
snout,  wherewith  they  blow  and  snuffe,  and  play  in  the
water :  but  swimme  they  cannot,  for  the  weight  of  their
bodies. Plinie and Soline  write, that they use none
adulterie. If they happen to meete with a man in
wildernesse being out of  the  way,  gently they  wil  go
before  him,  &  bring  him  into  the  plaine  way. Joyned  in
battel,  they  have no  small respect unto them that be
wounded : for  they  bring  them that  are  hurt  or  weary
into  the  middle  of  the  army  to  be  defended : they  are
made  tame  by  drinking  the  juise  of  barley. They  have  Debate
continual warre against Dragons, which desire \}ix^y[  -  betweene  the
blood,  because  it  is  very  cold : and  therfore  the  Dragon  tjig  j^razon
lying  awaite  as  the  Elephant  passeth  by,  windeth  his  taile
(being  of  exceeding  length)  about  the  hinder  legs  of  the
Elephant,  &  so  staying  him,  thrusteth  his  head  into  his
tronke and exhausteth his breath, or else biteth him
in  the  eare,  wherunto  he  cannot  reach  with  his  tronke,
and  when  the  Elephant  waxeth  faint,  he  falleth  downe  on  [ii.  ii.  19.]
the  serpent,  being  now  full  of  blood,  and  with  the  poise
of  his  body  breaketh  him  : so  that  his  owne  blood  with
the  blood  of  the  Elephant  runneth  out  of  him  mingled
together, which being colde, is congealed into that
substance  which  the  Apothecaries  call  Sanguis  Draconis,  Sanguis  Dra-
(that is) Dragons blood, otherwise called Cinnabaris,  "^"•
although there  be an other  kinde of  Cinnabaris,  com-  Cinnabaris.
monly  called  Cinoper or  Vermilion,  which the  Painters
use  in  certaine  colours.

They  are  also  of  three  kinds,  as  of  the  Marshes,  the  Three  kinds
plaines,  and the mountaines,  no  lesse differing in  con-  of  Elephants.

X65

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555.

ditions.  Philostratus  writeth,  that  as  much  as  the
Elephant  of  Libya  in  bignes  passeth  the  horse  of  Nysea,
so  much  doe  the  Elephants  of  India  exceed  them  of
Libya :  for  the  Elephants  of  India,  some  have  bene  seene
of  the  height  of  nine  cubits :  the  other  do  so  greatly
feare  these,  that  they  dare  not  abide  the  sight  of  them.
Of  the  Indian  Elephants  onely  the  males  have  tuskes,
but  of  them  of  Ethiopia  and  Libya  both  kindes  are
tusked  :  they  are  of  divers  heights,  as  of  twelve,  thirteene,
and  fourteene  dodrants,  every  dodrant  being  a  measure
of  nine  inches.  Some  write  that  an  Elephant  is  bigger
then  three  wilde  Oxen  or  Buffes.  They  of  India  are
black,  or  of  ye  colour  of  a  mouse,  but  they  of  Ethiope  or
Guinea  are  browne :  the  hide  or  skinne  of  them  all  is
very  hard,  and  without  haire  or  bristles :  their  eares  are
two  dodrants  broad,  and  their  eyes  very  litle.  Our  men
saw  one  drinking  at  a  river  in  Guinea,  as  they  sailed
into  the  land.

Of  other  properties  &  conditions  of  the  Elephant,  as
of  their  marveilous  docilitie,  of  their  fight  and  use  in  the
warres,  of  their  generation  and  chastitie,  when  they  were
first  seene  in  the  Theaters  and  triumphes  of  the  Romanes,
how  they  are  taken  &  tamed,  and  when  they  cast  their
tusks,  with  the  use  of  the  same  in  medicine,  who  so
desireth  to  know,  let  him  reade  Plinie,  in  the  eight  booke
of  his  naturall  history.  He  also  writeth  in  his  twelft
Workes  of  booke,  that  in  olde  time  they  made  many  goodly  workes
Ivoiie.  Qf  ivory  or  Elephants  teeth :  as  tables,  tressels,  postes  of
houses,  railes,  lattesses  for  windowes,  images  of  their
gods,  and  divers  other  things  of  ivory,  both  coloured  and
uncoloured,  and  intermixt  with  sundry  kindes  of  precious
woods,  as  at  this  day  are  made  certaine  chaires,  lutes,
and  virginals.  They  had  such  plenty  thereof  in  olde
time,  that  (as  far  as  I  remember)  Josephus  writeth,  that
one  of  the  gates  of  Hierusalem  was  called  Porta  Eburnea,
(that  is)  the  Ivory  gate.  The  whitenesse  thereof  was  so
much  esteemed,  that  it  was  thought  to  represent  the
natural  fairenesse  of  mans  skinne :  insomuch  that  such  as

166

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1555-
went  about  to  set  foorth  (or  rather  corrupt)  naturall
beautie  with  colours  and  painting,  were  reproved  by  this
proverbe,  Ebur  atramento  candefacere,  that  is,  To  make
ivory  white  with  inke.  The  Poets  also  describing  the
faire  necks  of  beautifull  virgins,  call  them  Eburnea  colla,
that  is.  Ivory  necks.  And  to  have  said  thus  much  of
Elephants  and  Ivory,  it  may  suffice.

Now  therefore  I  will  speake  somewhat of  the  people  The  people  of
and their  maners,  and maner  of  living,  with  an other  4^''^<«-
briefe  description  of  Africa  also. It  is  to  be  understood,
that  the people  which now  inhabite the  regions  of  the
coast  of  Guinea,  and  the  midle  parts  of  Africa,  as  Libya
the  inner,  and  Nubia,  with divers other  great &  large
regions  about  the  same,  were  in  old  time  called  iEthiopes
and Nigritae,  which we now  call Moores,  Moorens,  or
Negroes,  a  people  of  beastly  living,  without  a  God,  lawe,
religion,  or  common  wealth,  and  so  scorched  and  vexed
with  the  heat  of  the  sunne,  that  in  many  places  they  curse
it  when  it  riseth. Of  the  regions  and  people  about  the
inner Libya (called Libya interior) Gemma Phrysius  Libyainterior.
writeth  thus.

Libya  interior  is  very  large  and  desolate,  in  the  which
are  many  horrible  wildernesses  &  mountaines,  replenished
with  divers kinds of  wilde  and  monstrous beastes and
serpents. First  from Mauritania  or  Barbary  toward  the
South  is  Getulia,  a  rough  and  savage  region,  whose  in-  Getulia.
habitants  are  wilde  and  wandering people. After  these
follow  the  people  called  Melanogetuli  and  Pharusii,  which
wander in the wildernesse, carrying with them great
gourdes  of  water. The  Ethiopians  called  Nigritae  occupy  ^thiopes.
a  great  part of  Africa,  and are extended to  the  West  ^'W^ta.
Ocean. Southward  also  they  reach  to  the  river  Nigritis,  The  river
whose  nature  agreeth  with  the  river  of  Nilus,  forasmuch  ^W^^^^  <""
as  it  is  increased  and  diminished  at  the  same  time,  and
bringeth forth the like beasts as the Crocodile. By
reason  whereof,  I  thinke  this  to  be  the  same  river  which
the  Portugals  call  Senega  :  For  this  river  is  also  of  the  same  ^  strange
nature. It  is  furthermore  marveilous and  very  strange  thing.

167

A.D.

1555-

Garamantes.

People  of
Libya.

[II.  ii.  20.]
Prester  John.

Regnum
Qrguene.

Gambra.

Guinea.

Cabo  Verde.
The  Portugals
'Navigation  to
Brasile.

Aethiopia.

The  Island  of
Meroe.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  is  said  of  this  river :  And  this  is,  that  on  the  one
side  thereof,  the  inhabitants  are  of  high  stature  and  black,
and  on  the  other  side,  of  browne  or  tawnie  colour,  and
low  stature,  which  thing  also  our  men  confirme  to  be
true.

There  are  also  other  people  of  Libya  called  Garamantes,
whose  women  are  common :  for  they  contract  no  matri-
monie,  neither  have  respect  to  chastitie.  After  these
are  the  nations  of  the  people  called  Pyrei,  Sathiodaphnitae,
Odrangi,  Mimaces,  Lynxamatas,  Dolopes,  Aganginae,
Leuci  Ethiopes,  Xilicei  Ethiopes,  Calcei  Ethiopes,  and
Nubi.  These  have  the  same  situation  in  Ptolome  that
they  now  give  to  the  kingdome  of  Nubia.  Here  are
certaine  Christians  under  the  dominion  of  the  great
Emperour  of  ^Ethiopia,  called  Prester  John.  From  these
toward  the  West  is  a  great  nation  of  people  called
Aphricerones,  whose  region  (as  farre  as  may  be  gathered
by  conjecture)  is  the  same  that  is  now  called  Regnum
Orguene,  confining  upon  the  East  parts  of  Guinea.
From  hence  Westward,  and  somewhat  toward  the  North,
are  the  kingdoms  of  Gambra  and  Budomel,  not  farre
from  the  river  of  Senega.  And  from  hence  toward  the
inland  regions,  and  along  by  the  sea  coast,  are  the  regions
of  Ginoia  or  Guinea,  which  we  commonly  call  Ginnee.
On  the  Westside  of  these  regions  toward  the  Ocean,  is
the  cape  or  point  called  Cabo  verde,  or  Caput  viride,
(that  is)  the  greene  cape,  to  the  which  the  Portugals
first  direct  their  course  when  they  saile  to  America,  or
the  land  of  Brasile.  Then  departing  from  hence,  they
turne  to  the  right  hand  toward  the  quarter  of  the  winde
called  Garbino,  which  is  betweene  the  West  and  the
South.  But  to  speake  somewhat  more  of  ^Ethiopia :
although  there  are  many  nations  of  people  so  named,  yet
is  Aethiopia  chiefly  divided  into  two  parts,  whereof  the
one  is  called  Aethiopia  under  Aegypt,  a  great  &  rich
region.  To  this  perteineth  the  Island  Meroe,  imbraced
round  about  with  the  stremes  of  the  river  Nilus.  In  this
Island  women reigned in old time. Josephus  writeth,

168

THE  SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1555-
that  it  was  sometime  called  Sabea : and  that  the  Queene  The  Queene
of  Saba came from  thence to  Jerusalem,  to heare  the  of  Saba.
wisedom of  Salomon. From hence toward the East
reigneth  the  said  Christian  Emperor  Prester  John,  whom  Prester  John
some cal Papa  Johannes,  &  other say  that  he  is  called  ^^^^J^'  "-^
Pean  Juan  (that  is)  great  John,  whose Empire  reacheth
far  beyond  Nilus,  and  is  extended  to  the  coasts  of  the
Red sea  & Indian sea. The middle of  the region is
almost  in 66.  degrees  of  longitude,  and 12.  degrees  of
latitude. About this region  inhabite the  people called  ^^''/^f  °f^^^
Clodi, Risophagi, Babylonii, Axiunitae, Molili, and  Ji^^J  °^
Molibae. After  these  is  the  region  called  Troglodytica,
whose  inhabitants  dwel  in  caves  and  dennes  : for these
are  their  houses,  &  the  flesh  of  serpents  their  meat,  as
writeth Plinie, and Diodorus Siculus. They  have no
speach,  but  rather  a  grinning  and  chattering. There  are
also  people  without  heads,  called  Blemines,  having  their  People  without
eyes  and  mouth  in  their  breast. Likewise  Strucophagi, ^'^  ^'
and  naked  Ganphasantes  :  Satyrs  also,  which  have  nothing
of  men  but  onely  shape. Moreover  Oripei,  great  hunters.
Mennones  also,  and  the  region  of  Smyrnophora,  which
bringeth  foorth  myrrhe. After these is the region of  Mjrrh.
Azania,  in  the  which  many  Elephants  are  found. A  great Azania.
part  of  the  other  regions  of  Africke  that  are  beyond  the
Aequinoctiall  line,  are  now  ascribed  to  the  kingdome  of
Melinde, whose inhabitants are accustomed to  trafique  Regnum
with  the nations  of  Arabia,  and  their  king  is  joyned  in  ^^^^^d^-
friendship  with  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  payeth  tribute
to  Prester  John.

The  other Ethiope,  called  ^Ethiopia  interior  (that  is)  Aethiopia
the  inner  Ethiope,  is  not  yet  knowne  for  the  greatnesse  ^^^^^^°^'
thereof,  but  onely  by  the  sea  coastes :  yet  is  it  described
in  this  maner. First  from  the  Aequinoctiall  toward  ye
South,  is  a  great  region  of  Aethiopians,  which  bringeth
forth white  Elephants, Tygers, and the beastes  called White
Rhinocerotes. Also  a  region  that  bringeth  foorth  plenty  ^^^P'^^^^^-
of  cynamome, lying betweene the branches  of  Nilus.
Also  the  kingdome  of  Habech  or  Habasia,  a  region  of  Habasia.

169

A.D.
1555.

Ichthiophagi.

Anthropo-
phagi.

Monies  Lunce.
Gazatia.

Cap.  bona
Spei.

Africa  with-
out colde.

The  winter
of  Africa.

Flames  of  fire
and  noise  in
the  aire.

The  middle
re^on  of  the
aire  is  cold.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Christian  men,  lying  both  on  this  side  and  beyond  Nilus.
Here  are  also  the  Aethiopians,  called  Ichthiophagi  (that  is)
such  as  live  onely  by  fish,  and  were  sometimes  subdued
by  the  warres  of  great  Alexander.  Furthermore  the
Aethiopians  called  Rhapsii,  &  Anthropophagi,  y'  are
accustomed  to  eat  mans  flesh,  inhabite  the  regions  neere
unto  the  mountains  called  Montes  Lunae  (that  is)  the
mountaines  of  the  Moone.  Gazatia  is  under  the  Tropike
of  Capricorne.  After  this  followeth  the  front  of  Afrike,
the  Cape  of  Buena  Speranza,  or  Caput  Bonae  Spei,  that  is,
the  Cape  of  good  hope,  by  the  which  they  passe  that  saile
from  Lisbon  to  Calicut.  But  by  what  names  the  Capes
and  gulfes  are  called,  forasmuch  as  the  same  are  in  every
globe  and  card,  it  were  here  superfluous  to  rehearse
them.

Some  write  that  Africa  was  so  named  by  the  Grecians,
because  it  is  without  colde.  For  the  Greeke  letter  Alpha
or  A  signifieth  privation,  voyd,  or  without :  and  Phrice
signifieth  colde.  For  in  deed  although  in  the  stead  of
Winter  they  have  a  cloudy  and  tempestuous  season,  yet
is  it  not  colde,  but  rather  smoothering  hote,  with  bote
showres  of  raine  also,  and  somewhere  such  scorching
windes,  that  what  by  one  meanes  and  other,  they  seeme
at  certaine  times  to  live  as  it  were  in  fornaces,  and  in
maner  already  halfe  way  in  Purgatorie  or  hell.  Gemma
Phrisius  writeth,  that  in  certaine  parts  of  Africa,  as  in
Atlas  the  greater,  the  aire  in  the  night  season  is  seene
shining,  with  many  strange  fires  and  flames  rising  in
maner  as  high  as  the  Moone :  and  that  in  the  element  are
sometime  heard  as  it  were  the  sound  of  pipes,  trumpets
and  drummes :  which  noises  may  perhaps  be  caused  by
the  vehement  and  sundry  motions  of  such  firie  exhala-
tions in  the  aire,  as  we  see  the  like  in  many  experiences
wrought  by  fire,  aire  and  winde.  The  hoUownesse  also,
and  divers  reflexions  and  breaking  of  the  cloudes  may  be
great  causes  hereof,  beside  the  vehement  colde  of  the
middle  region  of  the  aire,  whereby  the  said  fiery  exhala-
tions, ascending  thither,  are  suddenly  stricken  backe  with

170

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA

great  force :  for  even  common  and  dayly  experience
teacheth  us,  by  the  whissing  of  a  burning  torch,  what
noise  fire  maketh  in  the  aire,  and  much  more  where  it
striveth  when  it  is  inclosed  with  aire,  as  appeareth  in
gunnes,  and  as  the  like  is  scene  in  onely  aire  inclosed,  as
in  Organ  pipes,  and  such  other  instruments  that  go  by
winde.  For  winde  (as  say  the  Philosophers)  is  none
other  then  aire  vehemently  moved,  as  we  see  in  a  paire
of  bellowes,  and  such  other.

Some  of  our  men  of  good  credit  that  were  in  this  last
voiage  to  Guinea,  affirme  earnestly  that  in  the  night
season  they  felt  a  sensible  heat  to  come  from  the  beames
of  the  moone.  The  which  thing,  although  it  be  strange
and  insensible  to  us  that  inhabite  cold  regions,  yet  doeth
it  stand  with  good  reason  that  it  may  so  be,  forasmuch  as
the  nature  of  starres  and  planets  (as  writeth  Plinie)  con-
sisteth  of  fire,  and  conteineth  in  it  a  spirit  of  life,  which
cannot  be  without  heat.

And,  that  the  Moone  giveth  heate  upon  the  earth
the  Prophet  David  seemeth  to  confirme  in  his  121.
Psalme,  where  speaking  of  such  men  as  are  defended
from  evils  by  Gods  protection,  hee  saith  thus :  Per  diem
Sol  non  exuret  te,  nee  Luna  per  noctem.  That  is  to  say.
In  the  day  the  Sunne  shall  not  burne  thee,  nor  the
Moone  by  night.

They  say  furthermore,  that  in  certaine  places  of  the
sea  they  saw  certaine  streames  of  water,  which  they  call
spouts,  falling  out  of  the  aire  into  the  sea,  &  that  some
of  these  are  as  bigge  as  the  great  pillars  of  Churches :
insomuch  that  sometimes  they  fall  into  shippes,  and
put  them  in  great  danger  of  drowning.  Some  faine
that  these  should  be  the  Cataracts  of  heaven,  which  were
all  opened  at  Noes  floud.  But  I  thinke  them  rather  to
be  such  fluxions  and  eruptions  as  Aristotle  in  his  booke
de  Mundo  saith,  to  chance  in  the  sea.  For  speaking
of  such  strange  things  as  are  scene  often  times  in  the  sea,
he  writeth  thus.  Oftentimes  also  even  in  the  sea  are
scene  evaporations  of  fire,  and  such  eruptions  and  break-

171

A.D.

1555-

[II.  ii.  21.]
The  strife  of
Elements.

Winde.

The  heate  of
the  Moone.

The  nature  of
the  starres.

Spoutes  of
water  falling
out  of  the  aire.

Cataracts  0/
heaven.

A.D.

1555-

Vehement
motions  in  the
Sea.

A  strange
thing.

The  power  of
nature.

They  rase
their  skinnes.

Fine  jewels.
A  bracelet.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ing  foorth  of  springs,  that  the  mouthes  of  rivers  are
opened.  Whirlepooles,  and  fluxions  are  caused  of  such
other  vehement  motions,  not  only  in  the  middest  of  the
sea,  but  also  in  creeks  &  streights.  At  certaine  times
also,  a  great  quantity  of  water  is  suddenly  lifted  up  and
carried  about  with  the  Moone,  &c.  By  which  wordes  of
Aristotle  it  doth  appeare  that  such  waters  be  lifted  up  in
one  place  at  one  time,  and  suddenly  fall  downe  in  an
other  place  at  another  time.  And  hereunto  perhaps
perteineth  it  that  Richard  Chanceller  told  me  that  he
heard  Sebastian  Cabot  report,  that  (as  farre  as  I  remember)
either  about  the  coasts  of  Brasile  or  Rio  de  Plata,  his
shippe  or  pinnesse  was  suddenly  lifted  from  the  sea,
and  cast  upon  land,  I  wot  not  howe  farre.  The  which
thing,  and  such  other  like  wonderfull  and  strange  workes
of  nature  while  I  consider,  and  call  to  remembrance  the
narrownesse  of  mans  understanding  and  knowledge,  in
comparison  of  her  mightie  power,  I  can  but  cease  to
marvell  and  confesse  with  Plinie,  that  nothing  is  to  her
impossible,  the  least  part  of  whose  power  is  not  yet
knowen  to  men.  Many  things  more  our  men  saw  and
considered  in  this  voyage,  woorthy  to  be  noted,  whereof  I
have  thought  good  to  put  some  in  memory,  that  the
reader  may  aswell  take  pleasure  in  the  variety  of  things,
as  knowledge  of  the  historie.  Among  other  things
therefore,  touching  the  maners  and  nature  of  the  people,
this  may  seeme  strange,  that  their  princes  &  noble  men
use  to  pounce  and  rase  their  skinnes  with  pretie  knots  in
divers  formes,  as  it  were  branched  damaske,  thinking  that
to  be  a  decent  ornament.  And  albeit  they  goe  in  maner
all  naked,  yet  are  many  of  them,  &  especialy  their  women,
in  maner  laden  with  collars,  bracelets,  hoopes,  and  chaines,
either  of  gold,  copper,  or  ivory.  I  my  selfe  have  one
of  their  braslets  of  Ivory,  weighing  two  pound  and  sixe
ounces  of  Troy  weight,  which  make  eight  and  thirtie
ounces :  this  one  of  their  women  did  weare  upon  her
arme.  It  is  made  of  one  whole  piece  of  the  biggest  part
of  the  tooth,  turned  and  somewhat  carved,  with  a  hole  in

172

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  a.d.

1555.
the  midst,  wherin  they  put  their  hands  to  weare  it  on  their
arme. Some  have  on  every  arme  one,  and  as  many  on
their  legges,  wherewith  some  of  them  are  so  galled,  that
although  they  are  in  maner  made  lame  thereby,  yet  will
they  by no meanes  leave  them off. Some weare  also
on their legges  great shackles of  bright copper,  which  Shackles.
they  thinke  to bee  no  lesse  comely. They weare  also
collars, bracelets,  garlands,  and  girdles, of  certain  blew
stones  like  beads. Likewise  some  of  their  women  weare
on their bare armes certaine foresleeves  made of  the
plates  of  beaten  golde. On  their  fingers  also  they  weare
rings,  made  of  golden  wires,  with  a  knot  or  wreath,  like  Rings.
unto that which children make in a  ring of  a  rush.
Among  other  things  of  golde  that our  men  bought  of
them for exchange  of  their wares, were certaine dog-  Dogschaines
chaines  and  coUers.  'f^olde.

They  are  very  wary  people  in  their  bargaining,  and
will  not  lose  one  sparke  of  golde  of  any  value.  They
use  weights  and  measures,  and  are  very  circumspect  in
occupying  the  same.  They  that  shall  have  to  doe  with
them,  must  use  them  gently :  for  they  will  not  trafique  or
bring  in  any  wares  if  they  be  evill  used.  At  the  first
voyage  that  our  men  had  into  these  parties,  it  so  chanced,
that  at  their  departure  from  the  first  place  where  they
did  trafick,  one  of  them  either  stole  a  muske  Cat,  or  J  muske  cat.
tooke  her  away  by  force,  not  mistrusting  that  that  should
have  hindered  their  bargaining  in  another  place  whither
they  intended  to  goe.  But  for  all  the  haste  they  coulde
make  with  full  sailes,  the  fame  of  their  misusage  so
prevented  them,  that  the  people  of  that  place  also,  offended
thereby,  would  bring  in  no  wares :  insomuch  that  they
were  inforced  either  to  restore  the  Cat,  or  pay  for  her  [II.  ii.  22.]
at  their  price,  before  they  could  trafique  there.

Their  houses  are  made  of  foure  postes or  trees,  and  Tkeh-  houses.
covered  with  boughes.

Their  common  feeding  Is  of  roots,  &  such fishes  as  Their  feeding.
they  take,  whereof  they  have  great  plenty.

There  are  also  such  flying  fishes  as  are  seene  in  the  Flying  fishes.

173

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

sea  of  the  West  Indies.  Our  men  salted  of  their  fishes,
hoping  to  provide  store  thereof:  but  they  would  take
no  salt,  and  must  therfore  be  eaten  forthwith  as  some
say.  Howbeit  other  affirme,  that  if  they  be  salted
immediatly after they be taken, they  wil last uncor-

A  strange rupted  ten  or  twelve  dayes. But  this  is  more strange,

thing.  ^j^^^  p^j.j.  q£  's,\xQh  flesh  as  they  caried  with  them  out  of

England,  which  putrified  there,  became  sweete  againe  at
their  returne  to  the  clime  of  temperate  regions.

Their  bread.  They  use  also  a  strange  making  of  bread,  in  this
maner.  They  grinde  betweene  two  stones  with  their
handes  as  much  corne  as  they  thinke  may  suflice  their
family,  and  when  they  have  thus  brought  it  to  floure,
they  put  thereto  a  certaine  quantitie  of  water,  and
make  thereof  very  thinne  dough,  which  they  sticke  upon
some  post  of  their  houses,  where  it  is  baked  by  the
heate  of  the  Sunne :  so  that  when  the  master  of  the
house  or  any  of  his  family  will  eate  thereof,  they  take
it  downe  and  eate  it.

Their  wheat.  They  have  very  faire  wheate,  the  eare  whereof  is  two
handfuls  in  length,  and  as  bigge  as  a  great  Bulrush,
and  almost  foure  inches  about  where  it  is  biggest.  The
stemme  or  straw  seemeth  to  be  almost  as  bigge  as  the
litle  finger  of  a  mans  hand,  or  litle  lesse.  The  graines
of  this  wheate  are  as  big  as  our  peason,  round  also,
and  very  white,  and  somewhat  shining,  like  pearles  that
have  .  lost  their  colour.  Almost  all  the  substance  of
them  turneth  into  floure,  &  maketh  litle  bran  or  none.
I  told  in  one  eare  two  hundred  &  threescore  graines.
The  eare  is  inclosed  in  three  blades  longer  then  it  selfe,
&  of  two  inches  broad  a  piece. And  by  this  fruitfulnes

The  Sunne.  the  Sunne  seemeth  partly  to  recompence  such  griefes  and
molestations  as  they  otherwise  receive  by  the  fervent
heate  thereof.  It  is  doubtlesse  a  worthy  contemplation  to
consider  the  contrary  eff^ects  of  the  sunne :  or  rather  the
contrary  passions  of  such  things  as  receive  the  influence
of  his beames,  either to their  hurt or benefit. Their

Their  drinke.  drinke  is  either  water,  or  the  juise  that  droppeth  from

174

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO GUINEA  ad.

1555.
the  cut  branches  of  the  barren  Date  trees,  called  Palmitos.
For  either  they  hang  great  gourdes  at  the  said  branches
every  evening,  and  let  them  so  hang  all  night,  or  else
they  set  them  on  the  ground  under  the  trees,  that  the
droppes  may  fall  therein.  They  say  that  this  kinde  of
drinke  is  in  taste  much  like  unto  whey,  but  somewhat
sweeter,  and  more  pleasant.  They  cut  the  branches
every  evening,  because  they  are  seared  up  in  the  day
by  the  heate  of  the  Sunne.  They  have  also  great  beanes
as  bigge  as  chestnuts,  and  very  hard,  with  a  shell  in
the  stead  of  a  huske.

Many  things  more  might  be  saide  of  the  maners  of
the  people,  and  of  the  wonders  and  monstrous  things
that  are  engendred  in  Africke.  But  it  shall  suffice  to
have  saide  thus  much  of  such  things  as  our  men  partly
sawe,  and  partly  brought  with  them.

And  whereas  before  speaking  of  the  fruit  of  graines,  Graines
I  described  the  same  to  have  holes  by  the  side  (as  in
deede  it  hath,  as  it  is  brought  hither)  yet  was  I  afterward
enfourmed,  that  those  holes  were  made  to  put  stringes
or  twigges  through  the  fruite,  thereby  to  hang  them
up  to  dry  at  the  Sunne.  They  grow  not  past  a  foote
and  a  halfe,  or  two  foote  from  the  ground,  and  are  as
red  as  blood  when  they  are  gathered.  The  graines
themselves  are  called  of  the  Phisicions  Grana  Paradisi,

At their comming home  the keeles of  their  shippes  Sh/s  that
were marveilously overgrowne v/ith certaine shelles of  cleave  to  skps.
two inches length and more,  as thicke as they  could
stand,  and  of  such  bignesse  that  a  man might put his
thumbe in the mouthes of them. They certainely
affirme that in these there groweth a certaine slimie
substance,  which  at  the  length  slipping  out  of  the  shell
and falling in the sea, becommeth those foules  which
we  call  Barnacles. The  like  shelles  have  bene  scene  in Barnacles.
ships  returning from Iseland,  but  these shels  were  not
past  halfe  an inch in length. Of  the  other  that  came
from  Guinea,  I sawe  the  Primerose  lying  in  the  docke,
and  in  maner  covered  with  the  said  shels,  which  in  my

175

A.D.

1555-

Bromas.

A  secret.

The  death  of
our  men.

Five  blacke
Moores
brought  into
England.
[II.  ii.  23.]
Colde  may  be
better  abiden
then  heate.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

judgement  should  greatly  hinder  her  sayling.  Their
ships  were  also  in  many  places  eaten  with  the  wormes
called  Bromas  or  Bissas,  whereof  mention  is  made  in
the  Decades.  These  creepe  betweene  the  plankes,  which
they  eate  through  in  many  places.

Among  other  things  that  chanced  to  them  in  this
voyage,  this  is  worthy  to  be  noted,  that  wheras  they
sailed  thither  in  seven  weekes,  they  could  returne  in
no  lesse  space  then  twentie  weekes.  The  cause  whereof
they  say  to  be  this :  That  about  the  coast  of  Cabo  Verde
the  winde  is  ever  at  the  East,  by  reason  whereof  they
were  enforced  to  saile  farre  out  of  their  course  into  the
maine  Ocean,  to  finde  the  winde  at  the  West  to  bring
them  home.  There  died  of  our  men  at  this  last  voyage
about  twentie  and  foure,  whereof  many  died  at  their
returne  into  the  clime  of  the  colde  regions,  as  betweene
the  Islands  of  Azores  and  England.  They  brought  with
them  certaine  blacke  slaves,  whereof  some  were  tall  and
strong  men,  and  could  wel  agree  with  our  meates  and
drinkes.  The  colde  and  moyst  aire  doth  somewhat
oifend  them.  Yet  doubtlesse  men  that  are  borne  in  hot
Regions  may  better  abide  colde,  then  men  that  are  borne
in  colde  Regions  may  abide  heate,  forasmuch  as  vehement
heate  resolveth  the  radicall  moysture  of  mens  bodies,  as
colde  constraineth  and  preserveth  the  same.

This  is  also  to  be  considered  as  a  secret  worke  of
nature,  that  throughout  all  Africke,  under  the  Equi-
noctial line,  and  neere  about  the  same  on  both  sides,  the
regions  are  extreeme  bote,  and  the  people  very  blacke.
Whereas  contrarily  such  regions  of  the  West  Indies  as
are  under  the  same  line  are  very  temperate,  and  the
people  neither  blacke,  nor  with  curlde  and  short  wooll
on  their  heads,  as  they  of  Africke  have,  but  of  the
colour  of  an  Olive,  with  long  and  blacke  heare  on  their
heads :  the  cause  of  which  variety  is  declared  in  divers
places  in  the  Decades.

It is also  worthy  to be noted that some of  them
that were at this  voyage told me : That is, that they

176

if'. AscuX^s^^Z  >-j

WILLIAM TOWERSON

overtooke  the  course  of  the  Sunne,  so  that  they  had  it
North  from  them  at  noone,  the  14.  day  of  March.
And  to  have  said  thus  much  of  these  voyages,  it  may
suffice.

The  first  voyage  made  by  Master  William
Towrson  Marchant  of  London,  to  the  coast
of  Guinea,  with  tv^o  Ships,  in  the  yeere  1555.

A.D,

1555-

Pon  Munday  the  thirtieth  day  of  Sep-  September.
tember  wee  departed  from  the  Isle  of
Wight,  out  of  the  haven  of  Neuport
with  two  good  shippes,  the  one  called
the  Hart,  the  other  the  Hinde,  both  of
London,  and  the  Masters  of  them  were
John  Ralph,  and  William  Carter,  for
a  voyage  to  bee  made  unto  the  River  de  Sestos  in
Guinea,  and  to  other  havens  thereabout.

It  fell  out  by  the  varietie  of  windes,  that  it  was  the
foureteenth  day  of  October  before  wee  coulde  fetch  October.
Dartmouth :  and  being  there  arrived  wee  continued  in
that  roade  sixe  dayes,  and  the  20.  of  October  we  warpt
out  of  the  haven,  and  set  saile,  directing  our  course
towards  the  Southwest,  and  the  next  morning  we  were
runne  by  estimation  thirty  leagues.

The  first  of  November  we  found  ourselves  to  be  in  November.
3 1 .  degrees  of  latitude  by  the  reckoning  of  our  Master.
This  day  we  ranne  about  40.  leagues  also.
The  second  day  we  ranne  36.  leagues.

The  third  day  we  had  sight  of  Porto  Santo,  which  is  Porto  Santo.
a  small  Island  lying  in  the  sea,  about  three  leagues  long,
and  a  league  &  a  halfe  broad,  &  is  possessed  by
Portugals.  It  riseth  as  we  came  from  the  Northnorth-
west  like  two  small  hilles  neere  together.  The  East
end  of  the  same  Island  is  a  high  land  like  a  saddle
with  a  valley,  which  makes  it  to  beare  that  forme.
The  West  ende  of  it  is  lower  with  certaine  small  round
hillocks. This  Island  lyeth  in  thirty  and  three  degrees.

VI

177

M

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

The  same  day  at  1 1 .  of  the  clocke  we  raysed  the  Isle
Madera,  of  Madera,  which  lieth  I2.  leagues  from  Porto  Santo,
towards  the  Southwest :  that  Island  is  a  faire  Island  and
fruitfuU,  and  is  inhabited  by  Portugals,  it  riseth  afarre
off  like  a  great  whole  land  and  high.  By  three  of  the
clocke  this  day  at  after  noone  we  were  thwart  of  Porto
Santo,  and  we  set  our  course  Southwest,  to  leave  the
Isle  of  Madera  to  the  Eastward,  as  we  did  Porto  Santo.
These  two  Islands  were  the  first  land  that  we  saw  since
wee  left  the  coast  of  England.  About  three  of  the
clocke  after  midnight  wee  were  thwart  of  Madera,  within
three  leagues  of  the  West  ende  of  it,  and  by  meanes  of
the  high  hilles  there,  we  were  becalmed :  We  suppose
we  ranne  this  day  and  night  30.  leagues.

The  fourth  day  wee  lay  becalmed  under  the  Isle  of
Madera,  untill  one  of  the  clocke  at  afternoone,  and  then,
the  winde  comming  into  the  East,  wee  went  our  course,
and  ranne  that  day  fifteene  leagues.

The  5.  day  we  ranne 15.  leagues  more.

The 6.  day  in the morning  we raysed the Isle of
Tenerif.  Tenerif,  otherwise  called the  Pike,  because it  is  a  very
high  Island, with  a  pike upon the  top like  a  loafe  of
Palma. suger. The same night  we raised the Isle  of  Palma,
which is a high land  also, and to the Westward of
the  Isle  of  Tenerif.
Gomera. The 7.  day  we  perceived  the  Isle  of  Gomera,  which
is  an  Island  standing  betwixt  Tenerif  and  Palma,  about
12. leagues Eastward from Palma, and 8. leagues
Westward from Tenerif: and for feare of being be-
calmed with the  Isle of  Tenerif, we  left both it, and
Gomera to the Eastward of us, and went betwixt
Palma  and  Gomera. We  ranne  this  day  and  night  30.
leagues.

Note  that  these  Islands  be  60.  leagues  from  Madera,
and  that  there  are  3.  Islands  more  to  the  Westward  of
Tenerif,  named  the  Grand  Canaria,  Forte-ventura,  &
Lancerot,  of  which  Islands  we  came  not  in  sight :  they
be  inhabited  by  Spaniards.

178

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1555-

This  day  also  we  had  sight  of  the  Isle  of  Ferro,  Ferro.
which  is  to  the  Southwards  13.  leagues  from  the  other
Islands,  and  is  possessed  by  Spaniards.  All  this  day
and  night  by  reason  of  the  winde  we  could  not  double  [II.  ii.  24.]
the  point  of  the  Isle  of  Ferro,  except  we  would  have
gone  to  the  Westward  of  it,  which  had  bene  much  out
of  our  course :  therefore  we  kept  about,  and  ranne
backe  five  houres  Eastnortheast  to  the  ende  we  might
double  it  upon  the  next  boord,  the  winde  continuing
Southeast,  which  hath  not  bene  often  scene  upon  that
coast  by  any  travailers :  for  the  winde  continueth  there
for  the  most  part  Northeast,  &  East  Northeast :  so
upon  the  other  boord  by  the  next  morning  we  were
in  a  maner  with  the  Island,  and  had  roome  ynough  to
double  the  same.

The  8.  day  we  kept  our  course  as  neere  the  winde
as  wee  could,  because  that  our  due  course  to  fetch  the
coast  of  Barbary  was  Southeast  and  by  East,  but  by
the  scant  winde  wee  could  not  goe  our  due  course,
but  went  as  neere  it  as  we  could,  and  ranne  this  day
and  night  25.  leagues.

The  9.  day  we  ranne  30.  leagues,  the  10.  25.  leagues,
the 12. 24.

The  12.  day  we  sawe  a  saile  under  our  Lee,  which
was  as  we  thought  a  fisherman,  so  that  wee  went  roome
to  have  spoken  with  him,  but  within  one  houre  there
fell  such  a  fogge,  that  wee  could  not  see  the  shippe
nor  one  of  us  the  other :  we  shot  off  divers  pieces  to
the  Hinde,  but  she  heard  them  not :  at  after  noone  she
shot  off  a  piece  which  wee  heard,  and  made  her  answere
with  another :  and  within  one  halfe  houre  after  the
fogge  brake  up,  and  we  were  within  4.  leagues  of  the
shoare  upon  the  coast  of  Barbary,  and  wee  sounded  and
had  14.  fadom  water.  The  Barke  also  came  roome  with
us  and  there  ankered  by  reason  of  the  contrary  winde.
When  we  fell  with  the  land,  we  could  not  judge  justly
what  part  of  the  land  it  was,  because  the  most  part  of
that  coast  is  lowe  land,  and  no  part  to  be  judged  of  it

179

A.D.

J555-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

but  the  forepart  of  the  shoare,  which  is  white  like
chalke  or  sand,  and  very  deepe  unto  the  hard  shoare :
there  immediatly  we  began  to  fish,  and  found  great
store  of  a  kinde  of  fish  which  the  Portugals  commonly
fish  for  upon  that  coast,  which  they  cal  Pergosses,  the
Frenchmen  call  them  Saders,  and  our  men  salt-water
breames.  Before  the  clearing  up  of  the  fogge,  the
shippe  which  we  followed  shaped  us  such  a  course  that
we  could  see  her  no  more,  by  reason  of  our  shooting
off  to  finde  the  Hinde  againe.  This  part  of  the  coast
of  Barbary,  by  our  Pilots  reckoning,  is  about  i6.  leagues
River  del  Oro.  to  the  Eastwards  of  the  river  del  Oro.

The  13.  day  in  the  afternoone  wee  spyed  a  saile
comming  towards  us,  which  wee  judged  to  be  the  saile
that  wee  sawe  the  day  before,  and  as  soone  as  we
spied  him,  wee  caused  the  Hinde  to  way  her  ancre  and
to  goe  towardes  him,  and  manned  out  our  Skiffe  in
like  case  to  lay  him  aboorde,  or  to  discerne  what  hee
was,  and  wee  our  selves  within  halfe  an  houre  after
wayed  also :  but  after  the  saile  had  espied  us,  hee  kept
about,  and  turned  backe  againe,  and  shortly  after  there
fell  such  another  fogge,  that  wee  coulde  not  see  him :
which  fogges  continued  all  that  night,  so  that  we  were
constrained  to  leave  the  chase.  This  afternoone  the
winde  came  about,  and  wee  went  our  course  Southwest
and  by  West,  to  goe  cleare  off  the  coast,  wee  ranne
that  night  sixteene  leagues.

The  foureteenth  day  in  the  morning  was  very  foggie :
but  about  twelve  a  clocke  wee  espied  a  Carvell  of  60.
tunne  which  was  fishing,  and  we  sent  our  Skiffe  to  him
with  five  men,  and  all  without  any  weapon  saving
their  Oares.  The  Carvell  for  haste  let  slippe  her  ancre,
and  set  saile ;  and  they  seeing  that,  fearing  that  they
should  not  fetch  her,  would  tary  for  no  weapons,  and
in  the  ende  overtooke  the  Carvell,  and  made  her  to
strike  saile,  and  brought  her  away,  although  they  had
foureteene  or  fifteene  men  aboord,  &  every  man  his
weapon,  but  they  had  not  the  hearts  to  resist  our  men.

A  Carvell
taken.

WILLIAM  TOWERSON  ad.

1555-
After  they  were  come  to  us,  they  let  fall  their  ancre,
for  wee  had  cast  ancre  because  the  winde  was  not
o^ood :  I  caused  then  the  SkifFe  to  come  for  mee,  and
I  went  aboorde  of  them  to  see  that  no  harme  should
bee  done  to  them,  nor  to  take  any  thing  but  that
which  they  might  spare  us  for  our  money.  So  we
tooke  of  them  3.  Tapnets  of  figges,  two  small  pots  of
oyle,  two  pipes  of  water,  foure  hogsheads  of  saltfish
which  they  had  taken  upon  the  coast,  and  certaine  fresh
fish  which  they  did  not  esteeme,  because  there  is  such
store  upon  that  coast,  that  in  an  houre  and  sometime
lesse,  a  man  may  take  as  much  fish  as  will  serve  ^^^^^  -f^"''^  of
twentie  men  a  day.  For  these  things,  and  for  some  -^^^/{f  ^^^
wine  which  wee  dranke  aboorde  of  them,  and  three  or  Sarbary^
foure  great  Cannes  which  they  sent  aboord  of  our
shippes,  I  payed  them  twentie  and  seven  Pistolets,
which  was  twise  as  much  as  they  willingly  would  have
taken :  and  so  let  them  goe  to  their  ancre  and  cable
which  they  had  let  slippe,  and  got  it  againe  by  our
helpe.  After  this  wee  set  saile,  but  the  winde  caused
us  to  ancre  againe  about  twelve  leagues  off  the  river
del  Oro,  as  the  Portugals  tolde  us.  There  were  five
Carvels  more  in  this  place,  but  when  they  sawe  us,  they
made  all  away  for  feare  of  us.

The 15.  day  we  ridde  still  because  of  the  winde.

The 16. day  we set  saile  and  ranne  our  course  40.
leagues. This  day,  by  the  reckoning  of  our  Pilots,  we
were  right  under  the Tropike  of  Cancer. The 17.  day  The  Tropike
we ranne  2C.  leagues  within  sight for  the  most  part  of  "f^^^'^^J"^"
the  coast  of  Barbary.  /^^^g,

The  18.  day  wee  ranne  thirtie  leagues,  and  at  twelve
of  the  clocke  by  the  reckoning  of  our  Pilots  we  were
thwart  of  Cape  Blanke.  Cape  Blanke.

The 22.  day our Pilots reckoned us to  be thwart  [H-  "•  2 5. J
Cape  Verde.  _  ^^^^  ^''^'■

The 12. day of  December we had sight of  land  of  The  coast  of
Guinea,  which as soone  as  we saw we  hailed  into  the  Guinea.
land Northeast,  and  about 12. of  the clocke at night

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

we  were  neere  the  shoare  within  lesse  then  2.  leagues:
and  then  we  kept  about  and  sounded,  and  found  18.
fadom  water.  Afterwards  we  saw  a  light  towards  the
shoare,  which  we  thought  to  have  bene  a  ship,  and
thereby  judged  it  to  be  the  river  de  Sestos,  which  light
as  soone  as  we  espied,  we  came  to  an  anker  &  armed
our  tops,  and  made  all  things  ready  to  fight,  because
we  doubted  that  it  might  be  some  Portugal  or  French
man :  this  night  we  remained  at  an  anker,  but  in  the
morning  we  saw  no  man,  only  we  espied  4.  rockes
about  2.  English  miles  from  us,  one  great  rocke,  and
the  3.  other  smal  ones,  which  when  we  sawe,  we  sup-
posed that  the  light  came  from  the  shore,  and  so
wayed  and  set  saile  East  Southeast  along  the  shoare,
because  the  Master  did  not  well  know  the  place,  but
thought  that  we  were  not  so  farre  to  the  East  as  the
river  de  Sestos.

This  land  all  a  long  is  a  low  land,  and  full  of  very
high  trees  all  along  the  shoare,  so  that  it  is  not  possible
to  know  the  place  that  a  man  doth  fall  withall,  except
it  be  by  the  latitude :  In  these  24.  houres  I  thinke
we  ran  16.  leagues,  for  all  the  night  we  had  a  great
gale  as  we  were  under  saile,  and  had  withall  store  of
thunder  and  lightnings.

The  13.  day  for  the  most  part  we  ran  East  South-
east all  along  the  shoare,  within  two  leagues  alwayes  of
the  same,  and  found  the  land  all  as  at  the  first,  ful
of  woods  and  great  rocks  hard  aboord  the  shoare,  and
the  billow  beating  so  sore,  that  the  seas  brake  upon  the
shoare  as  white  as  snow,  and  the  water  mounted  so
high  that  a  man  might  easily  discerne  it  4.  leagues
off,  in  such  wise  that  no  boate  could  land  there.  Thus
we  ran  until  12.  of  the  clocke,  and  then  they  tooke
the  Sunne  and  after  judged  themselves  to  be  24.
leagues  past  the  river  de  Sestos  to  the  Eastwards,  by
reason  whereof  we  hailed  into  the  shoare  within  two
English  miles,  and  there  ancred  and  found  fifteene
fadom  water, and all off  from the shoare the sea so

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1555.

smooth,  that  we  might  wel  have  rid  by  an  Hawser. All

that  after-noone  we  trimmed  our  boate  and  made  her a

saile,  to  the  ende  that  she  might  go  along  by  the  shoore

to seeke some place to  water in : for wee could not

goe  backe  againe  to  the river de Sestos, because the

winde blowes alwayes contrary, and the Currant run-  ^^^  Currant

neth alwayes to  the Eastwards,  which  was also  against  ^^^"f ^^^~

us.

The  14.  day  we  set  saile  &  went  back  againe  along
the  coast,  and  sent  our  boats  hard  aboord  the  shoare  to
seeke  a  watering  place,  which  they  found  about  12.  of
the  clock,  and  we  being  farre  into  the  sea,  met  with
divers  boats  of  the  Countrey,  small,  long  and  narrow,
&  in  every  boate  one  man  and  no  more :  we  gave  them
bread  which  they  did  eat,  &  were  very  glad  of  it.  About
4  of  the  clocke  our  boats  came  to  us  with  fresh  water :
and  this  night  we  ankered against  a  River.

The  15.  day  we  wayed  and  set  saile  to  goe  neere  the
shoare,  and  with  our  leade  wee  sounded  all  the  way,
and  found  sometimes  rockes,  and  sometimes  faire  ground,
and  at  the  shallowest  found  7.  fadoms  alwayes  at  the
least.  So  in  fine  we  found  7.  fadom  and  a  halfe  within
an  English  mile  of  the  shoare,  and  there  we  ankered  in
a  maner  before  the  mouth  of  the  River,  and  then  wee
sent  our  boats  into  the  River  for  water,  which  went  about
a  mile  within  the  River,  where  they  had  very  good  water.  ^^^^^  5»  ^^'w-
This  River  lieth  by  estimation  8.  leagues  beyond  the  '^^"^'
River  de  Sestos,  and  is  called  in  the  Carde  River  S.
Vincent,  but  it  is  so  hard  to  finde,  that  a  boat  being
within  halfe  a  mile  of  it  shall  not  be  able  to  discerne
that  it  is  a  River :  by  reason  that  directly  before  the
mouth  of  it  there  lyeth  a  ledge  of  rockes,  which  is
much  broader  then  the  River,  so  that  a  boate  must
runne  in  along  the  shoare  a  good  way  betwixt  the
rockes  and  the  shoare  before  it  come  to  the  mouth  of
the  River,  and  being  within  it,  it  is  a  great  River  and
divers  other  Rivers  fall  into  it :  The  going  into  it  is
somewhat ill,  because that at the entring the seas do

183

A.D.

1555-

Cloth  made  of
the  barke  of
trees.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Negroes
race  their
skinnes.

Graines  of

Guinea.

Elephants

teeth.

[II.  li.  26.]

goe  somewhat  high,  but  being  once  within  it,  it  is  as
calme  as  the  Thames.

There  are  neere  to  the  Sea  upon  this  River  divers
inhabitants,  which  are  mighty  bigge  men  and  go  al
naked  except  some  thing  before  their  privie  parts,  which
is  like  a  clout  about  a  quarter  of  a  yard  long  made  of
the  barke  of  trees,  and  yet  it  is  like  a  cloth :  for  the
barke  is  of  that  nature,  that  it  will  spin  small  after  the
maner  of  linnen.  Some  of  them  also  weare  the  like
upon  their  heades  being  painted  with  divers  colours,  but
the  most  part  of  them  go  bare  headed,  and  their  heads
are  clipped  and  shorne  of  divers  sorts,  and  the  most  part
of  them  have  their  skin  of  their  bodies  raced  with  divers
workes,  in  maner  of  a  leather  Jerkin.  The  men  and
women  goe  so  alike,  that  one  cannot  know  a  man  from
a  woman  but  by  their  breastes,  which  in  the  most  part
be  very  foule  and  long,  hanging  downe  low  like  the
udder  of  a  goate.

The  same  morning  we  went  into  the  River  with  our
Skiife,  and  caried  certaine  basons,  manels,  &c.  And  there
we  tooke  that  day  one  hogs-head  and  100.  li.  waight  of
Graines,  and  two  Elephants  teeth  at  a  reasonable  good
reckoning.  Wee  solde  them  both  basons,  and  Manelios,
and  Margarits,  but  they  desired  most  to  have  basons :
For  the  most  part  of  our  basons  wee  had  by  estimation
about  30.  li.  for  a  piece,  and  for  an  Elephants  tooth  of
30.  li.  waight,  we  gave  them 6.

The  16.  day  in  the  morning  we  went  into  the  river
with  our  Skiffe,  and  tooke  some  of  every  sort  of  our
marchandize  with  us,  and  shewed  it  to  the  Negroes,  but
they  esteemed  it  not,  but  made  light  of  it,  and  alsp  of
the  basons,  Manellios  and  Margarits,  which  yesterday
they  did  buy :  howbeit  for  the  basons  they  would  have
given  us  some  graines,  but  to  no  purpose,  so  that  this
day  wee  tooke  not  by  estimation  above  one  hundreth
pound  waight  of  Graines,  by  meanes  of  their  Captaine,
who  would  suffer  no  man  to  sell  any  thing  but  through
his  hands,  and  at  his  price : he  was  so  subtile,  that  for

184

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1555.
a  bason  hee  would  not  give  15.  pound  waight  of  Grain es,
and  sometimes  would  ofFer  us  small  dishfuls,  whereas
before  wee  had  baskets  full,  and  when  he  saw  that  wee
would  not  take  them  in  contentment,  the  Captaine  de-
parted, and  caused  all  the  rest  of  the  boates  to  depart,
thinking  belike  that  wee  would  have  followed  them,  and
have  given  them  their  owne  askings.  But  after  that  wee
perceived  their  fetch,  wee  wayed  our  Grapnel  and  went
away,  and  then  wee  went  on  land  into  a  small  Towne  to
see  the  fashions  of  the  Countrey,  and  there  came  a  three-
score of  them  about  us,  and  at  the  first  they  were  afraid
of  us,  but  in  the  ende  perceiving  that  wee  did  no  hurt,
they  would  come  to  us  and  take  us  by  the  hand  and  be
familiar  with  us,  and  then  we  went  into  their  Townes,  The  descrip-
which  were  like  to  twentie  small  hovels,  all  covered  over  ^"  of  their
with  great  leaves  and  baggage,  and  all  the  sides  open,  j^^^^^^
and  a  scaffolde  under  the  house  about  a  yard  high,  where
they  worke  many  pretie  things  of  the  barkes  of  trees,
and  there  they  lye  also.  In  some  of  their  houses  they
worke  yron  and  make  faire  dartes,  and  divers  other
things  to  worke  their  boates,  and  other  things  withall,
and  the  women  worke  as  well  as  the  men.  But  when
wee  were  there  divers  of  the  women  to  shew  us  pleasure
danced  and  sung  after  their  maner,  full  ill  to  our  eares.
Their  song  was  thus :

Sakere,  sakere,  ho,  ho. Sakere,  sakere,  ho,  ho.

And  with  these  words  they  leape  and  dance  and  clap
their  hands.  Beastes  we  could  see  none  that  they  had,
but  two  goates,  small  dogges,  and  small  hennes :  other
beastes  we  saw  none.  After  that  we  had  well  marked
all  things  we  departed  and  went  aboord  our  ships :  which
thing  the  Captaine  of  the  other  towne  perceiving,  sent
two  of  his  servants  in  a  boat  with  a  basket  of  Graines,
and  made  us  signes  that  if  when  we  had  slept  wee  would
come  againe  into  their  river,  wee  should  have  store  of
Graines,  and  so  shewed  us  his  Graines  and  departed.

The  17.  day  in  the  morning  because  we  thought  that
the Negroes  would have done something because the

185

A.D.
1555.

Diago  the
name  of  a
Captaine.

The  latitude
ofS.  Vincent
river  is  4.
degrees  and  a
halfe.

Leaves  of  ex-
ceeding length.

Long  pease
stalkes.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Captaine  sent  for  us,  I  required  the  Master  to  goe  on
shoare,  and  sent  the  rest  of  our  Marchants  with  him,
and  taried  aboord  my  selfe  by  reason  that  the  last  day  he
esteemed  our  things  so  litle :  so  when  the  Master  and  the
rest  came  into  the  river,  the  captaine  with  divers  others
came  to  them,  and  brought  Graines  with  them,  &  after
that  he  saw  that  I  was  not  there,  he  made  signes  to  know
where  I  was,  and  they  made  signes  to  him  againe  that
I  was  in  the  ships :  and  then  hee  made  signes  to  know
who  was  Captaine  by  the  name  of  Diago,  for  so  they  call
their  Captaine,  &  they  pointed  to  the  master  of  the  ship :
then  he  began  to  shew  his  Graines,  but  he  held  them
so  unreasonably,  that  there  was  no  profit  to  be  made  of
them :  which  things  the  Master  perceiving,  and  seeing
that  they  had  no  store  of  Graines,  came  away,  and  tooke
not  above  50.  pound  waight  of  Graines.  Then  he  went
a  shoare  to  the  litle  Towne  where  we  were  the  day  before,
&  one  of  them  plucked  a  Gourd,  wherewith  the  Negroes
were  offended,  &  came  many  of  them  to  our  men  with
their  darts  and  great  targets,  and  made  signes  to  them
to  depart :  which  our  men  did,  having  but  one  bow  and
two  or  three  swords,  and  went  aboord  the  boate  and
came  away  from  them :  and  assoone  as  they  were  come
aboord  we  wayed  and  set  saile,  but  the  winde  was  off  the
Sea,  so  that  we  could  not  get  out  cleare  of  certaine  rocks,
and  therefore  we  came  to  an  ancre  againe.

This  river  is  called  River  S.  Vincent,  standing  in  4.
degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  it  ebbeth  and  floweth  there
every  12.  houres,  but  not  much  water  when  it  ebbeth
the  most :  while  wee  were  there,  it  ebbed  one  fadome  and
a  halfe  water.

This  countrey  as  farre  as  we  could  perceive  is  alto-
gether woody,  and  al  strange  trees,  whereof  wee  knewe
none,  and  they  were  of  many  sorts,  with  great  leaves  like
great  dockes,  which  bee  higher  then  any  man  is  able  to
reach  the  top  of  them.

There  are  certaine  peason  by  the  Sea  side,  which  grow
upon  great  and  very  long  stalkes, one  of  the  stalkes  I

186

WILLIAM TOWERSON

A.D.

1555-

measured and found it 27. paces  long,  and  they  grow

upon  the  sand  like  to  trees,  and  that  so  neere  the  Sea,

that  sometimes the Sea floweth into the  woods as  we

might  perceive  by  the  water  markes. The  trees  and  all

things  in  this  place  grow  continually  greene. Divers  of

the  women  have  such  exceeding  long  breasts,  that  some  Longwomens

of  them  wil  lay  the  same  upon  the  ground  and  lie  downe  '^'"^^^^■^•

by  them,  but  all  the  women  have  not  such  breasts.

At this place all the  day  the  winde bloweth  off  the  [II.  ii.  27.]
Sea,  and  all  the  night  off  the  land,  but  wee  found  it  to
differ  sometimes,  which  our  Master  marveiled  at.

This  night  at  9.  of  the  clocke  the  winde  came  up  at
the  East,  which  ordinarily  about  that  time  was  wont  to
come  out  of  the  North  Northwest  off  the  shoare  :  yet  we
wayed  and  hailed  off  South  with  that  winde  all  night  into
the  Sea,  but  the  next  morning  we  hailed  in  againe  to  the
lande,  and  tooke  in  6.  Tunnes  of  water  for  our  ship,  and
I  thinke  the  Hinde  tooke  in  as  much.

I  could  not  perceive  that  here  was  any  gold,  or  any
other  good  thing :  for  the  people  be  so  wilde  and  idle,
that  they  give  themselves  to  seeke  out  nothing :  if  they
would  takes  paines  they  might  gather  great  store  of
graines,  but  in  this  place  I  could  not  perceive  two  Tunne.

There  are  many  foules  in  the  Countrey,  but  the  people
wil  not  take  the  paines  to  take  them.

I  observed  some  of  their  words  of  speach,  which  I
thought  good  here  to  set  downe.

Bezow,  bezow,
Manegete  afoye,
Crocow  afoye,
Zeramme  afoye,
Begge  sacke,
Begge  come,
Borke,
Coutrecke,
Veede,
Brekeke,
Diago,

Is  their  salutation.
Graines  ynough.
Hennes  ynough.
Have  you  ynough .?
Give  me  a  knife.
> <  Give  me  bread.

Holde  your  peace.
Ye  lye.

Put  foorth,  or  emptie.
Rowe.
^  Their  Captaine,  and  some
187

The  language
about  the
River  ofS.
Vincent.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555.

call  him  Dabo.  These  and  other  wordes  they  speake
very  thicke,  and  oftentimes  recite  one  word  three  times
together,  and  at  the  last  time  longer  then  at  the  two
first.

The  18.  day  towards  night,  as  we  were  sailing  along
the  coast,  we  met  with  certaine  boats  in  the  sea,  &  the
men  shewed  us  that  there  was  a  river  thwart  of  us,  where
there  were  Graines  to  be  sold,  but  we  thought  it  not
good  to  tary  there,  least  the  other  ships  should  get
before  us.  This  river  hath  lying  before  it  three  great
rockes,  and  5.  small  rocks,  one  great  tree,  and  a  litle  tree
right  by  the  river,  which  in  height  exceeded  all  the  rest :
we  hailed  this  night  along  the  coast 10.  leagues.

The  19.  day  as  we  coasted  the  shoare,  about  twelve  of
the  clocke  there  came  out  to  us  3.  boates  to  tell  us  that
they  had  graines,  &  brought  some  with  them  for  a  shew,
but  we  could  not  tary  there.  We  proceeded  along  the
coast,  &  ancred  by  the  shore  all  the  night,  and  ran  this
day 10.  leagues.

The  20.  day  the  Hinde  having  ankered  by  us  amongst
rockes,  and  foule  ground,  lost  a  small  anker.  At  noone,
as  we  passed  along  the  coast,  there  came  forth  a  Negro
to  us,  making  signes,  that  if  we  would  goe  a  shoare,  wee
should  have  Graines,  and  where  wee  ankered  at  night.
there  came  another  to  us,  and  brought  Graines,  and
shewed  us  them,  and  made  signes  that  wee  should  tary,
and  made  a  fire  upon  the  land  in  the  night,  meaning
thereby  to  tell  us  where  we  should  land,  and  so  they  did
in  divers  other  places  upon  the  coast,  where  they  saw  us
to  anker.
The  tides  and  In  al  the  places  where  we  have  ancred,  since  we  came
nature  of  the  fj.Qj;n  our  watring  place,  we  have  found  the  tide  alwayes
running  to  the  Westwards,  and  all  along  the  coast  many
rockes  hard  aboord  the  shoare,  and  many  of  them  a
league  off  the  shoare  or  more,  we  ran  this  day  12.
leagues.

The  21.  day,  although  we  ranne  all  day  with  a  good
gale  of  winde,  yet  the  tides  came  so  sore  out  of  the  coast,

shoare.

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1555.
that  we  were  not  able  to  runne  above  sixe  leagues : and
this  day  there  came  some  Negroes  to  us,  as  there  had
done  other  times.

The 22. wee ranne all day  and night to double a  The  point  of
point,  called  Das  palmas,  and  ranne  sixteene  leagues. Palmas.

The  23.  day  about  3.  of  the  clocke  we  were  thwart  of
the  point,  &  before  we  came  to  the  Westermost  part  of  it,
we  saw  a  great  ledge  of  rocks,  which  lie  West  from  the
Cape  about  3.  leagues  and  a  league  or  more  from  the
land.  Shortly  after  we  had  sight  of  the  Eastermost  part
of  the  Cape,  which  lieth  4.  leagues  from  the  Westermost
part,  and  upon  the  very  corner  thereof  lie  two  greene
places,  as  it  were  closes,  and  to  the  Westwards  of  the
Cape  the  land  parted  from  the  Cape,  as  it  were  a  Bay,
whereby  it  may  well  be  knowen.  Foure  leagues  more
beyonde  that  there  lieth  a  head-land  in  the  sea,  and  about
two  leagues  beyond  the  head-land  there  goeth  in  a  great
Bay,  as  it  were  a  river,  before  which  place  we  ankered  all
that  night,  which  wee  did,  least  in  the  night  wee  should
overrunne  a  river,  where  the  *last  yeere  they  had  all  *  That  was
their  Elephants  teeth.  theyerei^S^.

This  Cape  Das  palmas  lieth  under  foure  degrees  and  a
halfe,  and  betwixt  the  said  Cape,  and  the  river  de  Sestos
is  the  greatest  store  of  Graines  to  be  had,  and  being  past
the  said  Cape,  there  is  no  great  store  else  where.

Where  we  ankered  this  night,  we  found  that  the  tide. The  tides
which  before ran alwayes to the Westward, from this  ^^^^^^S
Cape  runneth  all  to  the  Eastward : this day  we ranne  rjj  j-  ^g  i
some 16.  leagues.

The  24.  day  running  our  course,  about  eight  of  the
clock  there  came  forth  to  us  certaine  boats,  which  brought
with  them  small  egges,  which  were  soft  without  shels,
and  they  made  us  signes,  that  there  was  within  the  land
fresh  water,  and  Goates  :  and  the  Master  thinking  that  it
was  the  river  which  we  sought,  cast  ancker  and  sent  the
boate  on  shoare,  with  one  that  knew  the  river,  and
comming  neere  the  shoare,  hee  perceived  that  it  was  not
the  river,  and  so  came  backe  againe,  and  went  along  the

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

shoare,  with  their  oares  and  saile,  and  wee  weyed  and
ranne  along  the  shoare  also :  and  being  thirteene  leagues
beyond  the  Cape,  the  Master  perceived  a  place  which  he
judged  to  be  the  river,  when  wee  were  in  deede  two
miles  shot  past  it :  yet  the  boate  came  from  the  shoare,
and  they  that  were  in  her  saide,  that  there  was  no  river  :
notwithstanding  wee  came  to  an  ancker,  and  the  Master
and  I  tooke  five  men  with  us  in  the  boat,  and  when  hee
came  neere  the  shoare,  hee  perceived  that  it  was  the  same
river  which  hee  did  seeke :  so  we  rowed  in,  and  found
the  entrance  very  ill,  by  reason  that  the  sea  goeth  so
high  :  and  being  entred,  divers  boates  came  to  us,  and
shewed  us  that  they  had  Elephants  teeth,  and  they
brought  us  one  of  about  eight  pound,  &  a  little  one  of  a
pound,  which  we  bought :  then  they  brought  certaine
teeth  to  the  river  side,  making  signes,  that  if  the  next
day  we  would  come  againe,  they  would  sell  us  them  :  so
we  gave  unto  two  Captaines,  to  either  of  them  a  manillio,
and  so  we  departed,  and  came  aboord,  and  sent  out  the
other  boate  to  another  place,  where  certaine  boates  that
came  into  the  sea,  made  us  signes  that  there  was  fresh
A  Towne.  water :  and  being  come  thither,  they  found  a  towne,  but
no  river,  yet  the  people  brought  them  fresh  water,  and
shewed  them  an  Elephants  tooth,  making  signes  that  the
next  day  they  would  sel  them  teeth,  and  so  they  came
aboord.

This  river  lieth  by  the  Carde  thirteene  leagues  from
the  Cape  Das  palm.as,  and  there  lieth  to  the  Westwards  of
the  same  a  rocke  about  a  league  in  the  sea,  and  the  river
it  selfe  hath  a  point  of  lande  comming  out  into  the  Sea,
whereupon  grow  five  trees,  which  may  well  bee  discerned
two  or  three  leagues  off,  comming  from  the  Westward,
but  the  river  cannot  bee  perceived  untill  such  time  as  a
man  be  hard  by  it,  and  then  a  man  may  perceive  a  litle
Towne  on  ech  side  the  river,  and  to  ech  Towne  there
belongeth  a  Captaine.  The  river  is  but  small,  but  the
water  is  good  and  fresh.

Two  miles  beyond  the  river,  where  the  other  towne  is,

190

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1555-
there  lieth  another  point  into  the  Sea,  which  is  greene
like  a  close,  and  not  above  sixe  trees  upon  it,  which
growe  one  of  them  from  the  other,  whereby  the  coast
may  well  be  knowen :  for  along  all  the  coast  that  we
have  hitherto  sailed  by,  I  have  not  scene  so  much  bare
land.

In  this  place,  and  three  or  foure  leagues  to  the  West-
ward of  it,  al  along  the  shoare,  there  grow  many  Palme  Many  Palme
trees,  whereof  they  make  their  wine  de  Palma.  These  ^^^^^•
trees  may  easily  be  knowen  almost  two  leagues  off,  for
they  be  very  high  and  white  bodied,  and  streight,  and  be
biggest  in  the  midst :  they  have  no  boughes,  but  onely  a
round  bush  in  the  top  of  them  :  and  at  the  top  of  the
same  trees  they  boare  a  hole,  and  there  they  hang  a
bottell,  and  the  juyce  of  the  tree  runneth  out  of  the  said
hole  into  the  bottle,  and  that  is  their  wine.

From  the  Cape  das  Palmas,  to  the  Cape  Tres  puntas, (^^P^  Tres
there  are  loo.  leagues  : and  to  the  port  where  we  pur-  P'^"^^'-
pose  to  make  sales  of  our  cloth  beyond  the  Cape  Tres
puntas  40.  leagues.

Note,  that  betwixt  the  river  De  Sestos,  and  the  Cape
Das  palmas,  is  the  place  where  all  the  graines  be
gathered.

The  language  of  the  people  of  this  place,  as  far  as  I
could  perceive,  differeth  not  much  from  the  language  of
those  which  dwel  where  we  watred  before:  but  the
people  of  this  place  be  more  gentle  in  nature  then  the
other,  and  goodlier  men :  their  building  &  apparel  is  all
one  with  the  others.

Their  desire  in  this  place  was  most  of  all  to  have
Manillios  and  Margarites :  as  for  the  rest  of  our  things,
they  did  litle  esteeme  them.

About nine of  the clocke there came boates to us  Their  maner
foorth,  from  both  of  the places aforesaid,  and brouerht  "f^'^f^^^^S

•  h  V trip fiitltP  T

With  them  certaine  teeth,  and  after  they  had  caused  me  ^jr^^^  5^^
to sweare by  the  water  of  the Sea that I  would not
hurt  them,  they  came aboord our ship three or  foure
of  them,  and  we  gave  them  to  eate of  all such things

191

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

as  we  had,  and  they  did  eate  and  drinke  of  all  things,
as  well  as  we  our  selves.  Afterwards  we  bought  all
their  teeth,  which  were  in  number  14.  and  of  those  14.
there  were  10.  small:  afterwards  they  departed,  making
us  signes  that  the  next  day  we  should  come  to  their
Townes.

Tzvo  townes.  The  26.  day  because  we  would  not  trifle  long  at  this
place  I  required  the  Master  to  goe  unto  one  of  the
townes,  and  to  take  two  of  our  marchants  with  him,  &
I  my  selfe  went  to  the  other,  and  tooke  one  with  me,
because  these  two  townes  stand  three  miles  asunder.
To  these  places  we  caried  somewhat  of  every  kinde  of
marchandize  that  we  had :  and  hee  had  at  the  one  Towne,
nine  teeth,  which  were  but  small,  and  at  the  other  towne

[II.  ii.  29.]  where  I  was,  I  had  eleven,  which  were  also  not  bigge,
and  we  left  aboord  with  the  Master  certaine  Manillios,
wherewith  he  bought  12.  teeth  aboord  the  ship,  in  our
absence :  and  having  bought  these  of  them,  wee  per-
ceived that  they  had  no  more  teeth :  so  in  that  place
where  I  was  one  brought  to  me  a  small  goat,  which  I
bought,  and  to  the  Master  at  the  other  place  they
brought  five  small  hennes,  which  he  bought  also,  and
after  that  we  saw  there  was  nothing  else  to  be  had,  we
departed,  and  by  one  of  the  clocke  we  met  aboord,  and
then  wayed,  and  went  East  our  course  18.  leagues  still
within  sight  of  land.

The  28.  the  wind  varied,  and  we  ranne  into  the  sea,
and  the  winde  comming  againe  off  the  sea,  wee  fell  with
the  land  againe,  and  the  first  of  the  land  which  we  raised
shewed  as  a  great  red  cliffe  round,  but  not  very  high,
and  to  the  Eastward  of  that  another  smaller  red  cliffe,
and  right  above  that  into  the  land  a  round  hummoke
and  greene,  which  we  tooke  to  be  trees.  We  ranne  in
these  24.  houres,  not  above  foure  leagues.

The  29.  day  comming  neere  to  the  shoare,  we  per-
ceived the  red  cliffe  aforesaide  to  have  right  upon  the
top  of  it  a  great  heape  of  trees,  and  all  to  the  Westwards
of  it  ful  of  red  cliffes  as  farre  as  we  could  see,  and  all

192

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1556^
along  the  shoare,  as  well  upon  the  cliffes,  as  otherwise,
full  of  wood  :  within  a  mile  of  the  said  great  cliffe  there
is  a  river  to  the  Eastwards,  and  no  cliffes  that  we
could  see,  except  one  small  clijffe,  which  is  hard  by
it. We  ran  this  day  and  night  12.  leagues.

The  windes  that  wee  had  in  this  place  by  the  reports
of  the  people  and  of  those  that  have  bene  there,  have
not  bene  usuall,  but  in  the  night,  at  North  off  the
lande,  and  in  the  day  South  off  the  sea,  and  most
commonly  Northwest,  and  Southwest.

The  31.  day  we  went  our  course  by  the  shoare
Northwards :  this  land  is  al  along  a  low  shoare,  and  full
of  wood,  as  all  the  coast  is  for  the  most  part,  and  no
rockes.  This  morning  came  out  many  boates  which  went
a  fishing,  which  bee  greater  boates  then  those  which  we
sawe  before,  so  that  in  some  of  them  there  sate  5.  men,
but  the  fashion  of  the  boats  is  all  one.  In  the  after-
noone  about  three  of  the  clocke  wee  had  sight  of  a
Towne  by  the  sea  side,  which  our  Pilots  judged  to
be  25.  leagues  to  the  Westwards  of  the  Cape  Tres
puntas.

The  third  of  January  in  the  morning  we  fell  with
the  Cape  Tres  puntas,  and  in  the  night  passed,  as  our  Cape  Tres
Pilots  saide,  by  one  of  the  Portugals  castles,  which  is  8.  P^^^'^^-
leagues  to  the  Westwards  of  the  Cape :  upon  the  first
sight  of  the  Cape  wee  discerned  it  a  very  high  land,
and  all  growen  over  with  trees,  and  comming  neere  to
it,  we  perceived  two  head  lands,  as  it  were  two  Bayes
betwixt  them,  which  opened  right  to  the  Westward,  and
the  uttermost  of  them  is  the  Easterne  Cape,  there  we
perceived  the  middle  Cape,  and  the  Eastermost  Cape :
the  middle  Cape  standeth  not  above  a  league  from  the
West  Cape,  although  the  Card  sheweth  them  to  be  3.
leagues  one  from  the  other :  and  that  middle  Cape  hath
right  before  the  point  of  it  a  small  rocke  so  neere  to
it,  that  it  cannot  be  discerned  from  the  Cape,  except  a
man  be  neere  to  the  shoare,  and  upon  the  same  Cape
standeth  a  great  heape  of  trees,  and  when  a  man  is  thwart

VI  193  N

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

the  same  Cape  to  the  Eastward,  there  riseth  hard  by  it  a
round  greene  hommoke,  which  commeth  out  of  the
maine.

The  thirde  Cape  is  about  a  league  beyond  the  middle
Cape,  and  is  a  high  land  like  to  the  other  Capes,  and
betwixt  the  middle,  and  the  thirde  commeth  out  a  litle
head  or  point  of  a  land  out  of  the  maine,  and  divers
rocks  hard  aboord  the  shoare.

Before  we  came  to  the  Capes,  being  about  8.  leagues
off  them,  wee  had  the  land  Southeast,  and  by  East,  and
being  past  the  Capes,  the  land  runneth  in  againe  East
Northeast.

About  two  leagues  beyond  the  farthest  Cape  there  is
a  lowe  glade  about  two  miles  long,  and  then  the  land
riseth  high  againe,  and  divers  head-lands  rise  one  beyond
another,  and  divers  rockes  lie  at  the  point  of  the  first
head-land.  The  middest  of  these  Capes  is  the  neerest
to  the  Southwards,  I  meane,  further  into  the  sea  then
any  of  the  other,  so  that  being  to  the  Eastward  of  it,
it  may  be  discerned  farre  off,  and  being  so  to  the  East-
ward it  riseth  with  two  small  rockes.

This  day  we  ankered  for  feare  of  overshooting  a  towne
called  S.  Johns.  Wee  ran  this  day  not  above  8.  leagues.
In  the  afternoone  this  day  there  came  a  boate  of  the
countrey  from  the  shoare,  with  five  men  in  her,  and  went
along  by  us,  as  we  thought,  to  discerne  our  flagges,  but
they  would  not  come  neere  us,  and  when  they  had  well
looked  upon  us,  they  departed.

The  fourth  day  in  the  morning,  sailing  by  the  coast,
we  espied  a  ledge  of  rockes  by  the  shoare,  and  to  the
Westwards  of  them  two  great  greene  hils  joyning
together,  so  that  betweene  them  it  was  hollow  like  a
saddle :  and  within  the  said  rockes  the  Master  thought
the  aforenamed  Towne  had  stoode,  and  therefore  we
manned  our  boates,  and  tooke  with  us  cloth,  and  other
marchandize,  and  rowed  ashoare,  but  going  along  by
the  coast,  we  sawe  that  there  was  no  towne,  therefore
wee  went  aboord  againe.

194

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1556.

From  these  two  hils  aforesaid,  about  two  leagues  to
the  Eastward,  lie  out  into  the  Sea  almost  two  miles
a  ledge  of  rockes,  and  beyond  that  a  great  Bay,  which
runneth  into  the  North  Northwestward,  and  the  land
in  this  place  lieth  North  Northeast  along  the  shoare :
but  the  uttermost  point  of  land  in  that  place  that  we  [II.  ii.  30.]
could  see,  lay  Northeast,  and  by  East  from  us.

After  that  we  were  with  a  small  gale  of  winde  runne
past  that  uttermost  head-land,  we  sawe  a  great  red  clifFe,
which  the  Master  againe  judged  to  be  the  towne  of  S.
Johns,  and  then  wee  tooke  our  boate  with  marchandize,
and  went  thither,  and  when  we  came  thither,  we  per-
ceived that  there  was  a  towne  upon  the  toppe  of  the
hill,  and  so  wee  went  toward  it,  and  when  we  were  hard
by  it,  the  people  of  the  towne  came  together  a  great
sort  of  them,  and  waved  us  to  come  in,  with  a  peece
of  cloth,  and  so  we  went  into  a  very  faire  Bay,  which
lieth  to  the  Eastward  of  the  clifFe,  whereupon  the  towne
standeth,  and  being  within  the  clifFe,  wee  let  fall  our
grapnell,  and  after  that  we  had  taried  there  a  good
space,  they  sent  a  boate  aboord  of  us,  to  shewe  us  that
they  had  golde,  and  they  shewed  us  a  peece  about  halfe
a  crowne  weight,  and  required  to  know  our  measure,
&  our  weight,  that  they  might  shewe  their  Captaine
thereof:  and  wee  gave  them  a  measure  of  two  elles,  and
a  waight  of  two  Angels  to  shew  unto  him,  which  they
tooke,  and  went  on  shoare,  and  shewed  it  unto  their
Captaine,  and  then  they  brought  us  a  measure  of  two
elles,  one  quarter  and  a  halfe,  and  one  Crusado-weight
of  gold,  making  us  signes  that  so  much  they  would  give
for  the  like  measure,  and  lesse  they  would  not  have.
After  this,  we  taried  there  about  an  houre,  and  when
we  sawe  that  they  would  doe  no  otherwise,  and  withall
understood,  that  all  the  best  places  were  before  us,  wee
departed  to  our  shippes  and  wayed,  and  ranne  along  the
shoare,  and  went  before  with  our  boate,  and  having  sailed
about  a  league,  we  came  to  a  point  where  there  lay  foorth
a  ledge  of  rockes,  like  to  the  others before spoken  of,

195

Don  John.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1556.

and  being  past  that  people,  the  Master  spied  a  place
which  hee  saide  plainely  was  the  towne  of  Don  John :
and  the  night  was  come  upon  us,  so  that  we  could  not
well  discerne  it,  but  we  ankered  as  neere  unto  the
place  as  we  could.
The  towne  of  The  fift  day  in  the  morning  we  perceived  it  to  be
the  same  towne  in  deede,  and  we  manned  our  boates
and  went  thither,  and  because  that  the  last  yeere  the
Portugals  at  that  place  tooke  away  a  man  from  them>
and  after  shot  at  them  with  great  bases,  and  did  beate
them  from  the  place,  we  let  fall  our  grapnel  almost  a,
base  shot  oiF  the  shoare,  and  there  we  lay  about  two
houres,  and  no  boats  came  to  us.  Then  certaine  of  our
men  with  the  Hindes  boate  went  into  the  Bay  which
lieth  to  the  Eastward  of  the  towne,  and  within  that  Bay
they  found  a  goodly  fresh  river,  and  afterwards  they
came  and  waved  to  us  also  to  come  in,  because  they
perceived  the  Negroes  to  come  downe  to  that  place,
which  we  did :  and  immediatly  the  Negroes  came  to  us,
and  made  us  signes  that  they  had  golde,  but  none  of
them  would  come  aboord  our  boates,  neither  could  wee
perceive  any  boates  that  they  had  to  come  withall,  so
that  we  judged  that  the  Portugals  had  spoiled  their-
boates,  because  we  saw  halfe  of  their  towne  destroyed.
Wee  having  stayed  there  a  good  space,  and  seeing  that
they  would  not  come  to  us,  thrust  our  boates  heads  a
shoare,  being  both  well  appointed,  and  then  the  Captaine
of  the  Towne  came  downe  being  a  grave  man :  and  he
came  with  his  dart  in  his  hand,  and  sixe  tall  men  after
him,  every  one  with  his  dart  &  his  target,  and  their
darts  were  all  of  yron,  faire  and  sharpe,  and  there  came
another  after  them  which  caried  the  Captaines  stoole :
wee  saluted  him,  and  put  off  our  caps,  and  bowed  our
selves,  and  hee  like  one  that  thought  well  of  himselfe,
did  not  moove  his  cap,  nor  scant  bowed  his  body,  and
sate  him  downe  very  solemnly  upon  his  stoole :  but  all
his  men  put  off  their  caps  to  us,  and  bowed  downe.
themselves.

196

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1556.

He  was  clothed  from  the  loines  downe  with  a  cloth
of  that  Countrey  making,  wrapped  about  him,  and  made
fast  about  his  loynes  with  a  girdle,  and  his  cap  of  a
certaine  cloth  of  the  Countrey  also,  and  bare  legged,
and  bare  footed,  and  all  bare  above  the  loynes,  except
his  head.

His  servants,  some  of  them  had  cloth  about  their
loines,  and  some  nothing  but  a  cloth  betwixt  their  legges,
and  made  fast  before,  and  behinde  to  their  girdles,  and
cappes  of  their  owne  making,  some  like  a  basket,  and
some  like  a  great  wide  purse  of  beasts  skinnes.

All their  cloth,  cordes,  girdles, fishing  lines,  and all
such  like  things  which  they  have,  they  make  of  the  bark
of  certaine trees, and thereof  they can worke things
very  pretily,  and  yron  worke they  can  make  very  fine,
of  all  such  things  as  they  doe  occupy,  as  darts,  fishhookes,  Their
hooking  yrons,  yron  heads,  and  great  daggers,  some  of  ^^^P°^^-
them as  long  as  a  woodknife,  which  be  on  both  sides
exceeding  sharpe,  and  bended  after  the  maner  of  Turkic
blades,  and  the  most  part  of  them  have  hanging  at  their  -
left  side  one  of  those  great  daggers.

Their  targets  bee  made  of  such  pils  as  their  cloth  is
made  of,  and  very  closely  wrought,  and  they  bee  in
forme  foure  square,  and  very  great,  and  somewhat  longer
then  they  bee  broad,  so  that  kneeling  downe,  they  make
their  targets  to  cover  their  whole  body.  Their  bowes  be
short,  and  of  a  pretie  strength,  as  much  as  a  man  is  able
to  draw  with  one  of  his  fingers,  and  the  string  is  of  the
barke  of  a  tree,  made  flat,  and  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch
broad :  as  for  their  arrowes,  I  have  not  as  yet  scene  any
of  them,  for  they  had  wrapped  them  up  close,  and
because  I  was  busie  I  could  not  stand  about  it,  to  have
them  open  them.  Their  golde  also  they  worke  very
well.

When the  Captaine  was  set,  I  sent  him  two  elles  of  [II.  ii.  31.]
cloth,  and  two  basons,  and  gave  them  unto  him,  and  hee
sent  againe  for  a  waight  of  the  same  measure,  and  I  sent
him  a  weight  of  two  Angels,  which  he  would  not  take,

197

AD.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1556.

nether  would  hee  suffer  the  towne  to  buy  any  thing,
but  the  basons  of  brasse :  so  that  wee  solde  that  day  74.
basons  unto  the  men  of  the  towne,  for  about  halfe  an
Angel  weight,  one  with  another,  and  nine  white  basons,
which  we  solde  for  a  quarter  of  an  Angell  a  peece,  or
thereabouts.

We  shewed  them  all  our  other  things  which  we  had,
but  they  did  not  esteeme  them.

About  two  of  the  clocke,  the  Captaine  who  did  depart
in  the  morning  from  us,  came  againe,  and  brought  with
him  to  present  mee  withall,  a  henne,  and  two  great
rootes,  which  I  received,  and  after  made  me  signes  that
the  countrey  would  come  to  his  towne  that  night,  and
bring  great  store  of  gold,  which  in  deed  about  4.  of  the
clocke  they  did:  for  there  came  about  100.  men  under
3.  Captaines,  well  appointed  with  their  darts  and  bowes,
and  when  they  came  to  us,  every  man  sticked  downe
his  dart  upon  the  shoare,  and  the  Captaines  had  stooles
brought  them,  and  they  sate  downe,  and  sent  a  young
man  aboord  of  us,  which  brought  a  measure  with  him
of  an  ell,  and  one  fourth  part,  and  one  sixteenth  part,
and  he  would  have  that  foure  times  for  a  waight  of
one  Angell  and  twelve  graines :  I  offered  him  two  elles,
as  I  had  done  before  for  two  Angels  weight,  which  he
esteemed  nothing,  but  still  stucke  at  his  foure  measures
aforesaid :  yet  in  the  ende,  when  it  grew  very  late,  and
I  made  him  signes  that  I  would  depart,  he  came  to  foure
elles  for  the  weight  abovesaid,  and  otherwise  he  would
not  deale,  and  so  we  departed.  This  day  we  tooke  for
basons  sixe  ounces  and  a  halfe  and  one  eight  part.

The  sixt  day  in  the  morning  we  manned  our  boates
and  the  skiffe  well,  for  feare  of  the  Portugals  which
the  last  yeere  had  taken  away  a  man  from  the  other  ships,
and  went  on  shoare,  and  landed,  because  they  had  no
boates  to  come  to  us,  and  so  the  young  man  which  was
with  us  the  night  before  was  sent  aboord,  who  seemed
to  have  dealt  and  bargained  before  with  the  Portugals  for
he  could speake  a litle Portuguise,  and  was  perfect in

198

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1556.
weights  and  measures :  at  his  comming  he  offered  us,
as  he  had  done  before,  one  Angell,  and  twelve  graines
for  foure  elles,  and  more  he  would  not  give,  and  made
signes,  that  if  we  would  not  take  that,  we  should  depart,
which  we  did :  but  before  we  did  indeede  depart,  I
offered  him  of  some  rotten  cloth  three  elles  for  his  waight
of  an  Angell  and  twelve  graines,  which  he  would  not
take,  and  then  we  departed  making  signes  to  him  that
we  would  go  away,  as  indeede  we  would  have  done,
rather  then  have  given  that  measure,  although  the  cloth
was  ill,  seeing  we  were  so  neere  to  the  places,  which  we
judged  to  be  better  for  sale.  Then  we  went  aboord  our
ships,  which  lay  about  a  league  off,  and  came  backe  againe
to  the  shoare  for  sand  and  balaste :  and  then  the  Captaine
perceiving  that  the  boats  had  brought  no  marchandize
but  came  onely  for  water  and  sand,  and  seeing  that  we
would  depart,  came  unto  them,  making  signes  againe  to
know  whether  we  would  not  give  the  foure  elles,  and
they  made  signes  againe,  that  we  would  give  them  but
three,  and  when  they  sawe  that  the  boates  were  ready ,
to  depart,  they  came  unto  them  and  gave  them  the
weight  of  our  Angell  and  twelve  graines,  which  we
required  before  and  made  signes,  that  if  we  would  come
againe,  they  would  take  three  elles.  So  when  the  boates
came  aboord,  we  layde  wares  in  them  both,  and  for  the
speedier  dispatch  I  and  John  Savill  went  in  one  boat,  and
the  Master  John  Makeworth,  and  Richard  Curligin,  in
the  other,  and  went  on  shoare,  and  that  night  I  tooke  for
my  part  fiftie  and  two  ounces,  and  in  the  other  boate  they
tooke  eight  ounces  and  a  quarter,  all  by  one  weight  and
measure,  and  so  being  very  late,  we  departed  and  went
aboord,  and  tooke  in  all  this  day  three  pound.

The  seventh  day  we  went  a  shoare  againe,  and  that
day  I  tooke  in  our  boate  three  pound  19  ounces,  so
that  we  dispatched  almost  all  the  cloth  that  we  caried  with
us  before  noone,  and  then  many  of  the  people  were
departed  &  those  that  remained  had  litle  golde,  yet  they
made  us  signes  to  fetch  them  some  latten  basons,  which

199

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

I  would  not  because  I  purposed  not  to  trifle  out  ye  time,
but  goe  thence  with  speede  to  Don  Johns  towne.  But
John  Savill  and  John  Makeworth  were  desirous  to  goe
againe :  and  I,  loth  to  hinder  them  of  any  profite,
consented,  but  went  not  my  selfe  :  so  they  tooke  eighteene
ounces  of  gold  and  came  away,  seeing  that  the  people  at
a  certaine  crie  made,  were  departed.

While  they  were  at  the  shoare,  there  came  a  young
fellow  which  could  speake  a  little  Portuguise,  with  three
more  with  him,  and  to  him  I  solde  39  basons  and  two
small  white  sawcers,  for  three  ounces,  &c.  which  was  the
best  reckoning  that  we  did  make  of  any  basons :  and  in
the  forenoone  when  I  was  at  the  shoare,  the  Master  solde
five  basons  unto  the  same  fellow,  for  halfe  an  ounce  of
golde.

This fellow,  as farre  as  we  could perceive,  had bene
taken  into  the  Castle  by  the  Portugales,  and  was  gotten
away  from  them,  for  he  tolde  us  that  the  Portugales  were
[II.  ii.  32.] bad  men,  and  that  they  made  them  slaves  if  they  could
take  them,  and  would  put  yrons  upon  their  legges,  and
besides  he  told  us,  that  as  many  Frenchmen  or  English-
men, as  they  could  take  (for  he  could  name  these  two
very  well)  they  would  hang  them: he  told  us  further,
60.  Portugales  that  there  were  60  men  in  the  castle,  and  that  every  yeere
M" ^^  there  came  thither  two  shippes,  one  great,  and  one  small

carvell,  and  further,  that  Don  John  had  warres  with  the
Portugals, which gave mee the better  courage to goe
to his towne, which lieth but foure  leagues from the
Castle,  wherehence  our  men  were  beaten  the  last  yeere.
This fellowe  came aboord our  shippe without feare,
and  assoone  as  he  came,  he  demaunded,  why  we  had  not
The  English brought  againe  their  men,  which  the  last  yeere  we  tooke
in  anno  1554  ^^^^^y  ^cnA  could  tell  US  that  there  were  five  taken  awav
tooke  away  5 , K v  1  j 1  ■  i  1  ^

Negroes.  ^y  rLnghshmen : we  made  nim  answere, that they  were

in  England  well  used,  and  were  there  kept  till  they
could  speake  the  language,  and  then  they  should  be
brought  againe  to  be  a  helpe  to  Englishmen  in  this
Countrey : and  then  he  spake  no  more  of  that  matter.

WILLIAM TOWERSON

Our  boates  being  come  aboord,  we  wayed  and  set
sayle  and  a  litle  after  spied  a  great  fire  upon  the
shoare,  and  by  the  light  of  the  fire  we  might  discerne
a  white  thing,  which  they  tooke  to  be  the  Castle,  and
for  feare  of  overshooting  the  towne  of  Don  John  we
there  ankered  two  leagues  off  the  shoare,  for  it  is  hard
to  fetch  up  a  towne  here,  if  a  ship  overshoot  it.  This
day  we  tooke  seven  pound,  and  five  ounces  of  golde.

This  towne  lieth  in  a  great  Bay,  which  is  very  deepe.

The  people  in  this  place  desired  most  to  have  basons
and  cloth.  They  would  buy  some  of  them  also  many
trifles,  as  knives,  horsetailes,  homes :  and  some  of  our
men  going  a  shoare,  sold  a  cap,  a  dagger,  a  hat,  &c.

They  shewed  us  a  certain  course  cloth,  which  I  thinke
to  be  made  in  France,  for  it  was  course  wooU,  and  a
small  threed,  and  as  thicke  as  wosted,  and  striped  with
stripes  of  greene,  white,  yellow  &c.  Divers  of  the
people  did  weare  about  their  neckes  great  beades  of
glasse  of  diverse  colours.  Here  also  I  learned  some
of  their  language,  as  followeth

A.D.
1556.

Mattea,  mattea,
Dassee,  dassee,
Sheke,
Cowrte,
Cracca,
Bassina,
Foco,  foco,
Molta,

M

T^is  language
seemeth  partly
to  be  corrupt.

Is  their  salutation.

I  thanke  you.

Golde.

Cut.

Knives.

Basons.

Cloth.
^  Much,  or  great  store.
The eight day in  the morning  we  had  sight  of  the  ^ight  of  the
Castle, but by reason of a miste that then fell we  '^^^tkofMina
could not have the perfect sight of  it, till we were
almost  at the towne  of  Don  John,  and then  it  cleared
up, and  we saw it and a white house, as it  were a
Chappell, upon  the  hill  about  it: then we hailed into
the  shoare, within two English miles of Don Johns
towne, and there ankered in seven fadome water.
Here,  as  in  many  other  places  before,  we  perceived  that
the  currant  went  with  the  winde.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

The  land  here  is  in  some  places  low  and  in  some
high,  and  full  of  wood  altogether.
Don  Johns  The  towne  of  Don  John  is  but  litle,  of  about
^TsT'bed  twentie  houses,  and  the  most  part  of  the  towne  is
walled  in  with  a  wall  of  a  mans  height,  made  with
reede  or  sedge,  or  some  such  thing.  Here  we  staied
two  or  three  houres  after  we  had  ankered,  to  see  if  any
man  would  come  unto  us :  and  seeing  that  none  did
come,  we  manned  our  boates  and  put  in  marchandize,
and  went  and  ankered  with  our  boates  neere  to  the
shoare :  then  they  sent  out  a  man  to  us  who  made  us
signes  that  that  was  the  towne  of  Don  John,  and  that
he  himselfe  was  in  the  Countrey,  and  would  be  at  home
at  the  going  downe  of  the  Sunne,  and  when  he  had
done,  he  required  a  reward,  as  the  most  part  of  them
will  doe  which  come  first  aboord,  and  I  gave  him  one
ell  of  cloth  and  he  departed,  and  that  night  we  heard
no  more  of  him.

The  ninth  day  in  the  morning  we  went  againe  with
our  boates  to  the  shoare,  and  there  came  foorth  a  boate
to  us,  who  made  signes  that  Don  John  was  not  come
home,  but  would  be  at  home  this  day :  and  to  that
place  also  came  another  boate  from  the  other  towne  a
mile  from  this,  which  is  called  Don  Devis,  and  brought
with  him  gold  to  shew  us,  making  signes  that  we  should
come  thither.  I  then  left  in  this  place  John  Savill,  and
John  Makeworth,  and  tooke  the  Hinde,  and  went  to
the  other  towne  and  there  ankered,  and  tooke  cloth  and
went  to  shore  with  the  boate,  and  by  and  by  the  boates
came  to  us  and  brought  a  measure  of  foure  yards  long
&  a  halfe,  and  shewed  us  a  weight  of  an  angell  and
twelve  graines,  which  they  would  give  for  so  much,  and
not  otherwise :  so  I  staied  and  made  no  bargaine.  And
[II.  ii.  33.]  all  this  day  the  barke  lay  at  Don  Johns  towne,  and  did
nothing,  having  answere  that  he  was  not  come  home.

The  tenth  day  we  went  againe  to  the  shoare,  and
there  came  out  a  boat  with  good  store  of  gold,  and
having driven  the matter  off a long time,  and  having

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1556.

brought  the  measure  to  a  nayle  lesse  then  three  elles,
and  their  weight  to  an  angell  and  twentie  graines,  and
could  not  bring  them  to  more,  I  did  conclude  with  them
and  solde,  and  within  one  quarter  of  an  houre  I  tooke
one  pound  and  a  quarter  of  an  ounce  of  golde :  and
then  they  made  me  signes  to  tary,  till  they  had  parted
their  cloth  upon  the  shoare  as  their  manner  is,  and  they
would  come  againe,  and  so  they  went  away,  and  layde
the  cloth  all  abroad  upon  the  sande  peece  by  peece,  and
by  and  by  one  came  running  downe  from  the  towne  to
them,  and  spake  unto  them,  and  foorthwith  every  man
made  as  much  haste  as  he  could  away,  and  went  into
the  woods  to  hide  his  golde  and  his  cloth  :  we  mis-
trusted some  knavery,  and  being  waved  by  them  to
come  a  shoare,  yet  we  would  not,  but  went  aboorde  the
Hinde,  and  perceived  upon  the  hill  30  men  which  we
judged  to  be  Portugals  :  and  they  went  up  to  the  toppe  of
the  hill  and  there  mustered  and  shewed  themselves,  having
a  flagge  with  them.  Then  I  being  desirous  to  knowe
what  the  Hart  did,  tooke  the  Hindes  boate  and  went
towards  her,  and  when  I  came  neere  to  them  they
shot  off  two  pieces  of  ordinance  which  I  marveiled  at :
I  made  as  much  haste  as  I  could  to  her,  and  met  her
boate  and  skiffe  comming  from  the  shoare  in  all  haste,
and  we  met  aboord  together.  They  shewed  me  that
they  had  beene  a  shoare  all  that  day,  and  had  given
to  the  two  sonnes  of  Don  John,  to  either  of  them
three  yardes  and  a  halfe  of  cloth,  and  three  basons
betwixt  them,  and  had  delivered  him  3  yards  of  cloth
more  and  the  weight  of  an  angell  and  12  graines,  and
being  on  land  did  tarie  for  his  answere,  and  in  the
meane  time the  Portugals came  running  from  the hill  "^^^  Portu-

upon  them,  whereof  the  Negroes  a  litle  before  had  gfiven  ^  "  ^,f.
/  ;  1111°  11°  castle  of  Mtna

them  warnmg,  and  bad  them  to  go  away  but  they  per-  invaded  our

ceived  it  not. The  sonne  of  Don  John  conspired  with  men,

the  Portugales against them,  so  that they  were  almost

upon  them,  but  yet  they  recovered  their  boate  and  set

off from the shoare, and the Portugales shot their

203

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

calievers  at  them,  but  hurt  no  man,  and  then  the
shippe  perceiving  it,  shot  off  the  two  peeces  aforesayde
among  them.  Hereupon  we  layde  bases  in  both  the
boates,  and  in  the  Skiffe  and  manned  them  well,  and
went  a  shoare  againe,  but  because  of  the  winde  we
could  not  land,  but  lay  off  in  the  sea  about  ten  score
and  shot  at  them,  but  the  hill  succoured  them,  and
they  from  the  rockes  and  from  the  hilles  shotte  at  us
with  their  halfe  hakes,  and  the  Negroes  more  for  feare
then  for  love  stoode  by  them  to  helpe  them,  and  when
we  saw  that  the  Negroes  were  in  such  subjection  unto
them  that  they  durst  not  sell  us  any  thing  for  feare
of  them  we  went  aboord,  and  that  night  the  winde
kept  at  the  East,  so  that  we  could  not  with  our  ship
fetch  the  Hinde,  but  I  tooke  the  boate  in  the  night
and  went  aboord  the  barke  to  see  what  was  there  to
be  done,  ^nd  in  the  morning  we  perceived  the  towne
to  be  in  like  case  layde  with  Portugales,  so  we  wayed
The  towne  of  and  went  along  the  coast.  This  towne  of  John  de
Don  John  de  y-g^  standeth  upon  an  hill  like  the  towne  of  Don
John,  but  it  hath  beene  burned,  so  that  there  are  not
passing  sixe  houses  in  it :  the  most  part  of  the  golde
that  comes  thither  comes  out  of  the  countrey,  and  no
doubt  if  the  people  durst  for  feare  of  the  Portugals
bring  forth  their  gold,  there  would  be  had  good  store :
but  they  dare  not  sell  any  thing,  their  subjection  is  so
great  to  the  Portugales.  The  1 1  day  running  by  the
shoare  we  had  sight  of  a  litle  towne  foure  leagues
from  the  last  towne  that  we  came  from,  and  about
halfe  a  league  from  that,  of  another  towne  upon  a  hill,
and  halfe  a  league  from  that  also  of  another  great
towne  upon  the  shoare :  whither  we  went  to  see  what
could  there  be  done :  if  we  could  doe  nothing,  then  to
returne  to  the  other  towne,  because  we  thought  that  the
Portugales  would  leave  the  towne  upon  our  departure.
Along  from  the  castle  unto  this  place  are  very  high
hilles  which  may  be  seene  above  all  other  hilles,  but  they
are  full  of  wood,  and  great  red  cliffes  by  the  sea  side.

204

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1556.

The  boates  of  these  places  are  somewhat  large  and  bigge,
for  one  of  them  will  carrie  twelve  men,  but  their  forme
is  alike  with  the  former  boates  of  the  coast.  There  are
about  these  townes  few  rivers :  their  language  differeth
not  from  the  language  used  at  Don  Johns  towne :  but
every  one  can  speake  three  or  foure  words  of  Portuguise,
which  they  used  altogether to  us.

We  sawe  this  night  about  5  of  the  clocke  22  boates
running  along  the  shoare  to  the  Westward,  whereupon
we  suspected  some  knavery  intended  against  us.  The
12  day  therefore  we  set  sayle  and  went  further  along
the  coast,  and  descried  more  townes  wherein  were  greater
houses  then  in  the  other  townes,  and  the  people  came  out
of  the  townes  to  looke  upon  us,  but  we  could  see  no
boates.  Two  mile  beyond  the  Eastermost  towne  are
blacke  rocks,  which  blacke  rockes  continue  to  the  utter-
most cape  of  the  land,  which  is  about  a  league  off,  and
then  the  land  runnes  in  Eastnortheast,  and  a  sandy  shoare
againe :  upon  these  blacke  rockes  came  downe  certaine
Negroes,  which  waved  us  with  a  white  flagge,  but  we
perceiving  the  principall  place  to  be  neere,  would  not
stay,  but  bare  still  along  the  shoare :  and  as  soone  as
we  had  opened  the  point  of  the  land,  we  raysed  another
head-land  about  a  league  off  the  point,  which  had  a  rocke
lying  off  it  into  the  sea,  and  that  they  thought  to  be  the  [II.  ii.  34.]
place  which  we  sought.  When  we  came  thwart  the  place
they  knew  it,  and  we  put  wares  into  our  boate,  and  the
ship  being  within  halfe  a  mile  of  the  place  ankered  in  five
fadome  water  and  faire  ground.  We  went  on  shoare
with  our  boate,  and  ankered  about  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the
forenoone :  we  saw  many  boates  lying  upon  the  shoare,
and  divers  came  by  us,  but  none  of  them  would  come
neere  us,  being  as  we  judged  afraid  of  us :  because  that
foure  men  were  taken  perforce  the  last  yeere  from  this  Foure  men
place,  so  that  no  man  came  to  us,  whereupon  we  went  ^"^  Jf  ^^^-J.
aboord  againe,  and  thought  here  to  have  made  no  saile '.
yet  towardes  night  a  great  sort  came  downe  to  the  water
side,  and  waved  us  on  shoare  with  a  white  flagge,  and

205

A.D.
1556.

A  great  towne .

The  like  they
doe  In  the
■countrey  of
Prete  Janni.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

afterwarde  their  Captaine  came  downe  and  many  men
with  him,  and  sate  him  downe  by  the  shore  under  a  tree :
which  when  I  perceived,  I  tooke  things  with  me  to  give
him :  at  last  he  sent  a  boat  to  call  to  us,  which  would  not
come  neere  us,  but  made  us  signes  to  come  againe  the
next  day :  but  in  fine,  I  got  them  to  come  aboord  in
offering  them  things  to  give  to  their  captaine,  which  were
two  elles  of  cloth,  one  latten  bason,  one  white  bason,  a
bottle,  a  great  piece  of  beefe,  and  sixe  bisket  cakes,  which
they  received  making  us  signes  to  come  againe  the  next
day,  saying,  that  their  Captain  was  Grand  Capitane  as
appeared  by  those  that  attended  upon  him  with  their  darts
and  targets,  and  other  weapons.

This  towne  is  very  great  and  stands  upon  a  hill  among
trees,  so  that  it  cannot  well  be  scene  except  a  man  be
neere  it :  to  the  Eastward  of  it  upon  the  hill  hard  by  the
towne  stand  2.  high  trees,  which  is  a  good  marke  to
knowe  the  towne.  And  under  the  towne  lieth  another
hill  lower  then  it,  whereupon  the  sea  beates :  and  that  end
next  the  sea  is  all  great  blacke  rockes,  and  beyonde  the
towne  in  a  bay  lieth  another  small  towne.

The  13  day  in  the  morning  we  tooke  our  boate  and
went  to  shoare,  and  stayed  till  ten  a  clocke  and  no  man
came  to  us :  we  went  about  therefore  to  returne  aboord,
and  when  the  Negroes  saw  that,  they  came  running
downe  with  a  flagge  to  wave  us  againe,  so  we  ankered
againe,  and  then  one  shewed  us  that  the  Captaine  would
come  downe  by  and  by :  we  saw  a  saile  in  the  meane  time
passe  by  us  but  it  was  small,  and  we  regarded  it  not.
Being  on  shore  wee  made  a  tilt  with  our  oares  and  sayle,
and  then  there  came  a  boate  to  us  with  five  men  in  her,
who  brought  us  againe  our  bottle,  and  brought  me  a  hen,
making  signes  by  the  sunne,  that  within  two  houres
the  marchants  of  the  countrey  would  come  downe  and
buy  all  that  we  had :  so  I  gave  them  sixe  Manillios
to  carry  to  their  Captaine,  and  they  made  signes  to  have
a  pledge  of  us,  and  they  would  leave  us  another  man :
and  we  willing  to  doe  so,  put  one  of  our  men  in  their

206

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1556.
boate,  but  they  would  not  give  us  one  of  theirs,  so  we
tooke  our  man  againe,  and  there  tarried  for  the  mar-
chants  :  and  shortly  after  one  came  downe  arrayed  like
their  Captaine  with  a  great  traine  after  him,  who  saluted
us  friendly,  and  one  of  the  chiefest  of  them  went  and  sate
downe  under  a  tree,  where  the  last  yere  the  Captaine  was
wont  to  sit :  and  at  last  we  perceived  a  great  many  of
them  to  stand  at  the  ende  of  a  hollow  way,  and  behinde
them  the  Portugales  had  planted  a  base,  who  suddenly
shotte  at  us  but  overshot  us,  and  yet  we  were  in  a
manner  hard  by  them,  and  they  shot  at  us  againe  before
we  could  ship  our  oares  to  get  away  but  did  no  hurt.
Then  the  Negroes  came  to  the  rocks  hard  by  us,  and
discharged  calievers  at  us,  and  againe  the  Portugales  shot
off  their  base  twise  more,  and  then  our  ship  shot  at  them,
but  the  rockes  and  hilles  defended  them.

Then  we  went  aboord  to  goe  from  this  place,  seeing  MasterRobert
the  Negroes  bent  against  us,  because  that  the  last  yeere  ^^^^^^^J^  ^_°y-
M.  Gainsh  did  take  away  the  Captaines  sonne  and  three  ^^"^^^^  /c  cl^
others  from  this  place  with  their  golde,  and  all  that  they
had  about  them :  which  was  the  cause  that  they  became
friends  with  the  Portugales,  whom  before  they  hated,  as
did  appeare  the  last  yeere  by  the  courteous  intertainement
which the Trinitie  had  there,  when the  Captaine  came  The  English
aboord the shippe, and brought them to his towne,  "^^re  ofered to

and  offered  them  ground  to  build  a  Castle  in,  and  there -"^  ^ °^"

,  , ,  , ,0  '  tn  (jume.

they  had  good  sales.

The  14  day  we  wayed  and  plyed  backe  againe  to  seeke
the  Hinde,  which  in  the  morning  we  met,  and  so  we
turned  both  backe  to  the  Eastwardes  to  see  what  we  could
doe  at  that  place  where  the  Trinitie  did  sell  her  eight
frises  the  last  yeere.  The  Hinde  had  taken  eighteene
ounces  and  a  halfe  more  of  golde  of  other  Negroes,
the  day  after  that  we  left  them.  This  day  about  one  of
the  clocke  we  espied  certaine  boates  upon  the  sand  and
men  by  them  and  went  to  them  with  marchandizes,
and  tooke  three  ounces  of  gold  for  18  fuffs  of  cloth,
every  fuffe  three  yards  and  a  halfe  after  one  angell  and  1 2

207

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

graines  the  fuffe,  and  then  they  made  me  signes  that  the
next  day  I  should  have  golde  enough  :  so  the  Master
tooke  the  Hinde  with  John  Savill  and  John  Makeworth,
and  went  to  seeke  the  place  aforesaid,  &  I  with  Richard
Pakeman  remained  in  this  place  to  see  what  we  could  do
the  next  day :  and  when  the  Negroes  perceived  our  ship
to  go  away,  they  feared  that  the  other  would  follow,  &  so
sent  forth  2  boats  to  us  with  4  men  in  them,  requiring  us
to  tary  &  to  give  them  one  man  for  a  pledge,  and  2  of
them  should  tary  with  us  for  him,  so  Edward  M.  Morleis
[II.  ii.  35.]  servant  seeing  these  men  so  earnest  therein  offered  him-
selfe  to  be  pledge,  and  we  let  him  goe  for  two  of  them,
one  whereof  had  his  waights  and  scales,  and  a  chaine
of  golde  aboute  his  necke,  and  another  about  his  arme.
They  did  eate  of  such  things  as  we  had  and  were
well  contented.  In  the  night  the  Negroes  kept  a  light
upon  the  shoare  thwart  of  us,  and  about  one  of  the  clocke
we  heard  and  saw  the  light  of  a  base  which  shot  off  twise
at  the  said  light,  and  by  and  by  discharged  two  calievers,
A  Portugak  which  in  the  end  we  perceived  to  be  the  Portugals
Brigandine.  brigandine  which  followed  us  from  place  to  place,  to  give
warning  to  the  people  of  the  countrey,  that  they  should
not  deale  with  us.

The  15  day  in  the  morning  the  Captaine  came  downe
with  100  men  with  him,  and  brought  his  wife,  and  many
others  brought  their  wives  also,  because  their  towne  was  8
miles  up  in  the  countrey,  and  they  determined  to  lie
by  the  sea  side  till  they  had  bought  what  they  would.
When  he  was  come  he  sent  our  man  aboord,  and  required
to  have  two  men  pledges,  and  he  himselfe  would  come
aboord,  and  I  sent  him  two,  of  whom  he  tooke  but  one,
and  so  came  aboord  us,  he  and  his  wife  with  divers  of  his
friends,  and  brought  me  a  goate  and  two  great  rootes,  and
T  gave  him  againe  a  latten  bason,  a  white  bason,  6
manillios,  and  a  bottell  of  Malmesie,  and  to  his  wife  a
small  casket.  After  this  we  began  to  make  our  measure
and  weight :  and  he  had  a  weight  of  his  owne  which  held
one  angell  and  14  graines,  and  required  a  measure  of  4

208

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1556.

elles  and  a  halfe.  In  fine  we  concluded  the  8  part  for  one
angell  and  20  graines,  and  before  we  had  done,  they
tooke  mine  owne  weight  and  measure.

The  16  day  I  tooke  8  li.  i  ounce  of  gold:  and  since
the  departure  of  the  Hinde  I  heard  not  of  her,  but  when
our  pledge  went  into  the  countrey  the  first  night,  he  said
he  saw  her  cast  anker  about  five  leagues  from  this  place.
The  1 7  day  I  sold  about  1 7  pieces  of  cloth,  &  tooke  4.  li.
4  ounces  and  a  halfe  of  gold.  The  18  day  the  captaine
desired  to  have  some  of  our  wine,  and  ofiFered  halfe  a
ducket  of  gold  for  a  bottell :  but  I  gave  it  him  freely,  and
made  him  and  his  traine  drinke  besides.  And  this  day
also  I  tooke  5  li.  5  ounces  of  gold.  The  19  day  we  sold
about  18  clothes,  and  tooke  4  li.  4.  ounces  and  one
quarter  of  golde.

The  20  day  we  tooke  3  li.  sixe  ounces  and  a  quarter  of
golde.  The  21  we  tooke  8.  li.  7.  ounces  and  a  quarter.
The  22.  3.  li.  8.  ounces  and  a  quarter.  And  this  night
about  4  of  the  clocke  the  Captaine  who  had  layen  all  this
while  upon  the  shoare,  went  away  with  all  the  rest  of.
the  people  with  him.

The  23  day  we  were  waved  a  shoare  by  other  Negroes,
and  sold  them  cloth,  caskets,  knives,  and  a  dosen  of  bels,
and  tooke  i.  li.  10.  ounces  of  gold.  The  24  likewise
we  sold  bels,  sheetes,  and  thimbles,  and  tooke  two  li.  one
ounce  and  a  quarter  of  gold.  The  25  day  we  sold  7
dosen  of  smal  bels  and  other  things,  and  then  perceiving
their  gold  to  be  done,  we  wayed  and  set  sayle  &  went  to
leeward  to  seeke  the  Hinde,  and  about  5  of  the  clocke  at
night  we  had  sight  of  her,  and  bare  with  her,  and  under-
stood that  shee  had  made  some  sales.  The  26  day  wee
received  out  of  the  Hinde  48  li.  3  ounces  and  one  eight
part  of  golde,  which  they  had  taken  in  the  time  that  we
were  from  them.  And  this  day  upon  the  request  of  a
Negro  that  came  unto  us  from  a  captaine,  we  went  to
shoare  with  our  marchandize,  and  tooke  7  li.  and  one
ounce  of  gold.  At  this  place  they  required  no  gages  of
us,  but  at  night  they  sent  a  man  aboord  us,  which  lay
VI  209  o

A.D.

1556.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

with  us  all  night,  because  we  might  knowe  that  they
would  also  come  to  us  the  next  day.  The  27  day  in
both  our  shippes  we  tooke  8.  li.  one  ounce,  three  quarters
and  halfe  a  quarter  of  golde.  The  28  we  made  sales
for  the  companie,  and  tooke  one  pound  and  halfe  an
ounce  of  gold.  The  29  day  in  the  morning  we  heard
two  calievers  shot  off  upon  the  shore,  which  we  judged
to  be  either  by  the  Portugales  or  by  the  Negroes  of  the
Portugales :  we  manned  our  boates  and  armed  our  selves
and  went  to  shoare,  but  could  finde  nothing :  for  they
were  gone.  The  30  day  we  made  more  sales  for  the
companie  and  for  the  Masters.

The  31  we  sent  our  boate  to  shoare  to  take  in  sand
for  balast,  and  there  our  men  met  the  Negroes,  with
whom  they  had  made  sale  the  day  before  a  fishing  which
did  helpe  them  to  fill  sand,  and  having  no  gold,  sold
fish  to  our  men  for  their  handkerchiefes  and  nightker-
chiefes.

Februarie.  The  I .  day  of  February  we  wayed  and  went  to  another

place,  and  tooke  i.  li.  9.  ounces  3  quarters  of  gold.  The
2  day  we  made  more  sales :  but  having  viewed  our
victuals,  we  determined  to  tarie  no  long  time  upon  the
coast,  because  the  most  part  of  our  drinke  was  spent,
&  that  which  remained  grew  sowre.  The  3  and  4  dayes
we made some  sales,  though  not  great,  and  finding  the

They  reiurne wind  this  4.  day  to  come  off  the  shoare,  we  set  saile  and

for  England,  j-anne  along  the  shoare  to  the  Westwards :  upon  this
coast  we  found  by  experience  that  ordinarily  about  2  of
the  clocke  in  the  night  the  winde  comes  off  the  shoare
at  Northnortheast,  and  so  continueth  untill  eight  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning :  and  all  the  rest  of  the  day  and
night  it  comes  out  of  the  Southwest  :  and  as  for  the
tide  or  currant  upon  this  shore,  it  goeth  continually  with
the  winde.  The  5  day  we  continued  sayling  and  thought
to  have  met  with  some  English  ships,  but  found  none.

[11.  ii.  36.]  The  sixt  day  we  went  our  course  Southwest  to  fetch

under  the  line,  and  ranne  by  estimation  24  leagues.
The  13  day  wee  thought  our  selves  by  our  reckoning

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1556.
to be cleare off  the Cape das Palmas, and ranne 12
leagues.

The  22  day  we  were  thwart  of  the  Cape  de  Monte,  Cape  de
which  is  to  the  Westward  of  the  River  de  Sestos,  about  ^*"^^-
30  leagues.

The  first  day  of  March  in  a  Ternado  we  lost  the  March.
Hinde,  whereupon  we  set  up  a  light  and  shot  off  a
piece  but  could  not  heare  of  her,  so  that  then  we
strooke  our  saile  and  taried  for  her,  and  in  the  morn-
ing had  sight  of  her  againe  three  leagues  a  sterne
off  us.

Upon  the  22 day  we  found  our  selves  to  be  in the  Cape  Verde
height  of  Cape  Verde,  which  stands  in 14.  degrees  and  i^  ^^Mi^de  14

a  halfe.  Mfi!  ^  "^

From  this  day  till  the  29  day  we  continued  our  course,
and  then  we  found  our  selves  to  be  in  22  degrees.  This
day  one  of  our  men  called  William  King,  who  had  bene
long  sicke,  died  in  his  sleepe,  his  apparell  was  distri-
buted to  those  that  lackt  it,  and  his  money  was  kept  for
his  friends  to  be  delivered  them  at  his  comming  home. ,

The  30  day  we  found  our  selves  to  be  under  the
Tropike.

The  3 1  day  we  went  our  course,  and  made  way  1 8
leagues.

From  the  first  day  of  Aprill  to  the  20  we  went  our  Aprill.
course,  and  then  found  our  selves  to  bee  in  the  height
of  the  Asores.

The  seventh  day  of  May  we  fell  with  the  South  part  Ma'j.
of  Ireland,  and  going  on  shoare  with  our  boate  had  fresh
drinke,  and  two  sheepe  of  the  countrey  people,  which
were  wilde  Kernes,  and  we  gave  them  golde  for  them,
and  bought  further  such  other  victuals  as  we  had  neede
of,  and  thought  would  serve  us  till  we  arrived  in
England.

The 14  day  with the afternoone tide we went into  Their arrlvall
the  Port  of  Bristoll  called  Hungrode,  and  there  ankered  ^^  Brhtoll.
in safetie and gave thankes to God for our safe
arrivall.

A.D.
1556.

1

i

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  second  voyage  made  by  Maister  William
Towrson  to  the  coast  of  Guinea,  and  the
Castle  of  Mina,  in  the  yeere  1556.  with  the
Tiger  of  London,  a  ship  of  120  tunnes,  the
Hart  of  London  of  60  tunnes,  and  a  Pinnesse
of  sixteene  tunnes.

He  fourteenth  day  of  September,  the
yeere  abovesayd,  we  departed  from  Har-
wich, and  directed  our  course  for  the
Isle  of  Sillie,  to  meete  there  with  the
Hart  and  Pinnesse,  which  were  rigged
and  victualed  at  Bristoll,  but  arriving
there  the  eight  and  twentieth  day  we
found  them  not,  and  therefore  after  long  lying  at  hull
to  tarrie  for  them,  but  not  espying  them,  we  turned
backe  to  Plimmouth  the  12  day  of  October,  and  being
there,  the  Hart  and  the  Pinnesse  came  to  us,  so  that  the
'November.  1 5  of  November  we  all  departed  together  from  Plim-
mouth at  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  after  noone,  and  the
28  day  we  had  sight  of  the  Isle  of  Porto  Santo,  and
the  next  day  in  the  morning  of  Madera.
December.  The  third  day  of  December  we fell  with  the  He of

Palma,  and  the  9  we  were  thwart  of  Cape  Blanke,  and
found  there  certaine  Caravels  fishing  for  Pargoes.
Zierra  Leona.  The  19  we  found  our  selves  in  the  height  of  Sierra
Leona,  and  all  this  day  we  ranne  thwart  of  certaine
Currants,  which  did  set  to  the  West  Southwestward  so
fast  as  if  it  had  bene  the  overfall  of  a  sand,  making  a
great  noyse  like  unto  a  streame  or  tide-gate  when  the
water  is  shoale :  and  to  proove  whither  we  could  finde
ground  in  this  place,  we  sounded  and  had  150  fadome,
and  no  ground,  and  so  departed.

The  30  of  December  we  fell  with  the  coast  of  Guinea,
and  had  first  sight  of  it  about  4  leagues  off.  The  best
marke  that  we  could  take  of  the  place  to  knowe  it  was
three  hilles,  which  lay  Northeast  and  by  East  from  us :

212

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1556.

betwixt  the  Nothermost  two hilles there  are two  high

and great trees standing in sight as it  were a sailes

breadth one from another, and a litle more to the

Northwestwards  are  certaine  hommocks. Having  sayled

somewhat  into  the  shoare  wee tooke our selves to be

shotte somewhat  past  the  river  de Sestos, so that we

kept  about  to  fetch  it. And  a  litle  after  we  had  sight

of  three  sayles  of  shippes  and  two  pinnesses  which  were

in  the  weather  of  us,  and  having  sight  of  them  we  made

our  selves  readie  to  meete  them,  and  hailed  off  our  ships

to  fetch the  winde as  neere as  we could : and  having

sayled  about  an  houre  or  two,  they  also  went  about,  and

went  as  we  went  to  make  themselves  readie,  and  when

we had them  in chase,  they  went  away  from  us  : but

when  they  had  made  themselves  readie,  they  kept  about

againe,  and  came  with  us  verie  finely  appointed  with  their

streamers,  and  pendants  and  ensignes,  and  noyse  of  trum-  [II.  ii.  37.]

pets  very  bravely :  so  when  we  met,  they  had  the  weather

of  us,  and  we  being determined to fight,  if  they had

bene Portugals, waved  them to come under our Lee,  .

which  they  denied  stoutly :  then  we  demaunded  of  them

whence they  were,  and they  sayd of  France, we told

them  againe  that  we  were  of  London  in  England. They

asked  of  us  what  Portugals  wee  had  seene,  we  answered,

none  but  Fishermen :  then  they  told  us  that  there  were

certaine  Portugall  ships  gone  to  the  Mina  to  defend  it,

and  that  they  met  with  another  at  the  river  de  Sestos,  The  river  of

which  was  a  ship  of  two  hundred  which  they  had  burned,  ^^^*°^'

and  had saved  none but the master  and two  or  three

Negroes, and certaine others which were sore burned

which they  left  a shore there. Then they desired to

come  aboord  of  us  with  their  boates to  talke  with  us,

and wee gave them  leave. Then the captaine of  the

Admirall  and divers others came  aboord  very  friendly,

desiring us to keepe them company because of  the

Portugals, and to goe to the Mina  with them : wee

told  them  that  we had  not  watered,  and that  we  were

but  now  fallen  with  the  coast,  and  they  shewed  us  that

213

A.D.

1556.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Frenchmen
into  their
companie.

we  were  fiftie  leagues  past  the  river  de  Sestos :  notwith-
standing there  was  water  enough  to  be  had,  and  they
would  helpe  us  to  water  with  their  owne  boats  because
they  would  have  our  companie.  And  told  us  further,
that  they  had  bene  sixe  weekes  upon  the  coast,  and  had
gotten  but  three  tunnes  of  graines  amongst  them  all :
and  when  wee  had  heard  them,  we  made  our  reckoning
that  although  the  Mina  were  cleare,  yet  if  they  did  goe
before  us,  they  would  marre  our  market ;  and  if  it  were
not  cleare,  then  if  the  Portugals  were  there  and  did  take
them,  they  would  understand  that  we  were  behind,  and
They  admit  so  would  waite  for  us.  And  further  we  made  account
certame  ^^^  •£  ^^  went  with  them  we  should  doe  as  well  as  they,
if  the  coast  were  cleare :  if  it  were  not  cleare,  then  by
them  we  were  assured  to  be  the  stronger.  Therefore
having  considered  thus  much  of  their  gentle  offers,  wee
told  them  that  the  next  day  wee  would  conferre  more
largely  of  the  matter.  Whereupon  they  desired  me  to
come  the  next  day  to  dinner  to  them,  and  to  bring  the
masters  of  our  ships  with  me,  and  such  marchants  as  I
thought  good,  promising  ta  give  us  water  out  of  their
owne  ships  if  we  would  take  it,  or  els  to  tarie  with
us  and  helpe  us  to  water  with  their  own  boats  and  pin-
nasses.

The  3 1  day  in  the  morning  the  Admirall  sent  his
boat  aboord  for  me,  and  I  tooke  our  masters  and  cer-
taine  of  our  marchants  and  went  to  him,  who  had
provided  a  notable  banquet  for  us,  and  intreated  us  very
friendly,  desiring  us  still  to  keepe  his  company,  promising
that  what  victuals  were  in  his  ships,  or  other  things  that
might  doe  us  pleasure  untill  the  end,  we  should  have
the  one  halfe  of  it,  offering  us  if  we  would  to  furle
his  Flags,  and  to  bee  at  our  commaundement  in  all
things.

In  the  ende  we  agreed  to  come  to  an  anker,  and  to
send  our  boat  on  shore  with  the  Admirals  boat,  and  one
of  his  pinnasses,  and  an  Almaine  which  they  had  brought
out  of  France,  to  seeke  water,  as for  our  pinnasse  she

214

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1557-
came  to  an  anker to  seaward  of  us  all,  and  would  not
come at us. All this night the boats continued on
shore.

The  first  day  of  January  our  boats  came  to  us  againe
and  had  found  no  river.  Whereupon  we  weighed  and
set  saile,  and  ankred  againe  at  another  river.

The  2  day  we  went  into  the  river  and  bargained,  and
tooke  5 small  Elephants  teeth.

The  3 day  we  tooke 5  more.

The  fourth  day  the  French  Admirall  and  we  tooke  ^«  assault
fifteene  small  teeth.  This  day  wee  tooke  thirtie  men  ^P^
with  us  and  went  to  seeke  Elephants,  our  men  being
all  well  armed  with  harquebusses,  pikes,  long  bowes,
crossebowes,  partizans,  long  swordes,  and  swordes  and
bucklers  :  wee  found  two  Elephants  which  wee  stroke
divers  times  with  harquebusses  and  long  bowes,  but  they
went  away  from  us  and  hurt  one  of  our  men.  The  fift
day  we  set  saile  and  ranne  along  the  coast.

The  6  day we fell with the river de  S. Andre,  at  ^^°  ^^  ^•
which  place  the  land  is  somewhat  high  to  the  Westward.  ^"'"^•
of  the  river,  and  a  faire  Baie  also  to  the  Westward  of
it :  but  to  the  Eastward  of  it  it  is  lowe  land.

The  7  day  we  went  into  the  River  and  found  no
village,  but  certaine  wild  Negros  not  accustomed  to
trade.  It  is  a  very  great  river  and  7  fadome  water  in
some  places  at  the  entring.  Here  we  filled  water,  and
after  set  saile.

The  8  day  we  sailed  along  the  shore  and  came  to
the  Red  clifFes,  and  went  forward  in  sailing  the  9  day
also.

The 10  day  we  came  together  to  confer  with  captaine  Captaim
Blundel  Admiral  of  the  French  ships,  Jerom  Baudet  his  f^lf^j^^^
vice  admiral,  and  John  de  Orleans  master  of  a  ship  of  j^fnlrall
70  tunne, and with their marchants, and agreed that
when  God  should  send  us  to  any  place  where  wee  might
make  sale,  that  we should be of  one accord  and  not
one  of  us  hurt  the  market  of  the  other,  but  certaine  of
our  boates  to  make  the  price  for  all  the  rest,  and  then

215

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-
[II.  ii.  38.] one boate  to  make  sale  for every shippe. This  night
our  boats  going  to  the  shore  met  with  certaine  Negros,
who  said  that  they  had  gold,  and  therefore  we  here  cast
anker.

The II day all the day we tooke but one halfe
angel  weight  of  4  graines,  which  we  tooke  by  hand,  for
the  people  of  this place had no weight: the Negros
Allow.  called  this  place  Allow.

The  1 2  day  we  ran  along  the  coast  and  found  but  one
towne,  but  no  boates  would  come  out  to  us,  and  there-
fore we  went  our  course.

The  13  day  I  tooke  my  boat  and  went  along  the
shore,  and  passed  by  divers  small  townes,  and  was  waved
to  come  on  shore  at  3  places,  but  the  sea  went  so  high
upon  the  shore,  that  it  was  not  possible  for  us  to  land,
neither  could  they  come  to  us  if  they  had  had  boats,
as  I  could  see  none  but  at  one  place,  where  there  was
one  that  would  have  come  unto  us,  but  the  Land-wash
went  so  sore  that  it  overthrew  his  boat,  and  one  of
the  men  was  drowned,  which  the  people  lamented,  and
cried  so  sore,  that  we  might  easily  heare  them,  and  they
got  his  body  out  of  the  sea,  and  caried  it  amongst  them
to  their  towne.

The 14  day  we  came  within  Saker-shot  of  the  castle,

&  straightway they  set  forth an  Almade  to  descry  us,

and  when  they  perceived that we were no Portugals,

they  ranne  within  the  towne  againe  :  for  there  is  a  great

Dondou  a towne  by the Castle which is called by the Negros

great  towne. Dondou. Without  this there lie  two  great  rockes  like

Hands, and the castle standeth upon a point which

sheweth  almost  like  an  Hand. Before  we came  at  this

castle,  we  found  the  land  for five  or six  leagues  to  be

high  land,  and  about  seven  leagues before we  came  to

The  castle  of the  castle, lowe  land,  until  we came  at  the  castle,  and

Mina.  \}s\^w wee found the land high againe. This castle

t?"

Cape  de  Tres  standeth about five leagues to the East of  Cape de

puntas.  Tres  puntas. Here  I  tooke  the  boate  with  our  Negros

and  ranne  alongst the shore till I came to  the  Cape

216

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1557-
and  found two small townes,  but no boates  at  them,

neither  any traffique to be had. At these  places  our

Negros did understand them well, and one of  them

went  a  shore  at  all  the  places  and  was  well  received  of

them. This night we ankred at the Cape de Tres

puntas.

The  15  day  I  tooke  our  boat  and  went  along  the
shore,  &  about  3  leagues  beyond  the  Eastermost  part
of  the  Cape  we  found  a  faire  Bay  where  we  ran  in,  and
found  a  smal  towne  and  certaine  boates  which  belonged
to  the  same  towne,  but  the  Negros  in  a  long  time
would  not  come  to  us,  but  at  the  last  by  the  perswasion
of  our  owne  Negros,  one  boat  came  to  us,  and  with
him  we  sent  George  our  Negro  a  shore,  and  after  he
had  talked  with  them,  they  came  aboord  our  boates
without  feare,  and  I  gave  to  their  captaine  a  bason,
and  two  strings  of  Margarets,  and  they  shewed  us  about
5  duckats  weight  of  gold,  but  they  required  so  much
for  it  that  wee  would  not  take  it,  because  the  Frenchmen
and  we  had  agreed  to  make  price  of  our  goods  all  in
one  boat,  and  the  price  being  made  then  every  man  to
sell  in  his  owne  boat,  and  no  man  to  give  more  then
the  price  which  should  be  set  by  us  al.  This  place  is
called  Bulle,  and  here  the  Negros  were  very  glad  of  Bulk.
our  Negros,  and  shewed  them  all  the  friendship  they
could,  when  they  had  told  them  that  they  were  the  men
that  were  taken  away  being  now  againe  brought  by  us.

The  Negros  here  shewed  us  that  a  moneth  since  there
were  3  ships  that  fought  together,  &  the  two  shippes
put  the  other  to  flight :  and  before  that  at  the  castle  of
Mina  there  were  4  ships  of  the  Portugals  which  met
with  one  Frenchman,  which  Frenchman  caused  them  all
to  flee,  which  shippe  we  tooke  to  be  the  Roebarge :  for
the  Frenchmen  of  our  company  judged  her  to  be  there-
about that  time  with  her  pinnasse  also.  And  further,
that  after  her  went  a  shippe  of  twelve  score  named  the
Shaudet  all  alone,  and  after  her  a  ship  of  fourescore,
and  both  for  the  Mina. And  there  were  two  others  also

217

A.D.

1557-

Hanta.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  they  left,  one  at  Cape  Verde  called  the  Leuriere
of  Diepe,  and  another  at  the  river  De  Sestos,  besides
these  3  which  all  this  time  be  in  our  company,  whose
names  be  these :

The  Espoier  of  Hableneff  which  is  the  Admirall,  whose
captaine  is  Denis  Blundell.

The  Leuriere  of  Roan  Viceadmirall,  whose  master  is
Jerome  Baudet.

The  other  is  of  Hunfleur  whose  master  is  called  John
de  Orleans.

The  sixteenth  day  I  went  along  the  shore  with  two
pinnasses  of  the  Frenchmen,  and  found  a  Baie  and  a
fresh  river,  and  after  that  went  to  a  towne  called  Hanta,
twelve  leagues  beyond  the  Cape.  At  this  towne  our
Negros  were  well  knowen,  and  the  men  of  the  towne
wept  for  joy  when  they  saw  them,  and  demanded  of
them  where  Anthonie  and  Binne  had  bene :  and  they
told  them  that  they  had  bene  at  London  in  England,  and
should  bee  brought  home  the  next  voyage.  So  after
this,  our  Negros  came  aboord  with  other  Negros  which
brought  a  weight  with  them,  which  was  so  small  that  wee
could  not  give  them  the  halfe  of  that  which  they  de-
maunded  for  it.

The  Negros  here  told  us  that  there  were  five  Portugall
shippes  at  the  Castle  and  one  pinnasse,  and  that  the
Portugals  did  much  harme  to  their  Countrey,  and  that
[II.  il.  39.]  they  lived  in  feare  of  them,  and  we  told  them  againe,
that  we  would  defend  them  from  the  Portugals  whereof
they  were  very  glad.

The  17  day  we  went  a  shore  and  the  Frenchmen  with
us,  but  did  no  great  good,  the  Negros  were  so  unreason-
able, we  sold  80  Manellios  for  one  ounce  of  gold.
Shamma.  Then wee departed  and  went  to  Shamma,  and  went

into  the  river  with  five  boates  well  appointed  with  men
and  ordinance,  and  with  our  noises  of  trumpets  and
drummes,  for  we  thought  here  to  have  found  some
Portugals  but  there  were  none :  so  wee  sent  our  Negros
on  shore, and  after  them  went  divers  of  us,  and  were

218

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1557-
very  well  received,  and  the  people  were  very  glad  of  our
Negros,  specially  one  of  their  brothers wives,  and  one  ^'^^  Negi-os
of  their  aunts,  which  received  them  with  much  joy,  and  ^pH^^^^^^^
so  did  all  the rest of  the  people,  as if  they  had  bene
their  naturall  brethren : we comforted  the captaine  and
told  him  that  hee  should  not  feare  the  Portugals,  for  wee
would  defend  him  from  them  :  whereupon  we  caused  our
boats to shoote off  their bases and harquebusses,  and
caused  our  men  to  come  on  shore  with  their  long  bowes,
and  they  shot  before  the  captaine,  which  he,  with  all  the
rest of  the  people, wondred  much at,  specially  to see
them  shoot  so  farre  as  they  did,  and  assaied  to  draw  their
bowes  but  could  not. When  it  grew  to  be  late,  we  de-
parted to  our  ships,  for  we  looked  every  houre  for  the
Portugals. *  And  here  the  Negros  shewed  us  that  there  *  T^ote.
was an English ship  at the Mina,  which had  brought
one  of  the Negros  againe,  which  Robert  Gaynsh  tooke  Robert
away.  GaynsL

The  1 8  day  we  went  into  the  river  with  no  lesse
strength  then  before,  and  concluded  with  the  Negros  to-
give  them  for  every  Fuffe  two  yards  and  three  nailes  of
Cloth,  and  to  take  for  it  one  angel-duckat :  so  that  we
tooke  in  all  70  Duckats,  whereof  the  Frenchmen  had
fortie,  and  wee  thirtie.

The  nineteenth  day  wee  went  a  shore  every  man  for
himselfe,  and  tooke  a  good  quantitie  of  gold,  and  I  for
my  part  tooke  foure  pound  and  two  ounces  and  a  halfe
of  gold,  and  our  Hartes  boate  tooke  one  and  twentie
ounces.  At  night  the  Negros  shewed  us  that  the  next
day  the  Portugals  would  be  with  us  by  land  or  by  Sea :
and  when  wee  were  ready  to  depart,  we  heard  divers
harquebusses  shoote  off  in  the  woods  by  us  which  wee
knew  to  bee  Portugals,  which  durst  come  no  nearer  to  us,
but  shot  off  in  the  woods  to  see  if  they  could  feare  us
and  so  make  us  to  leave  our  traffique.

The  20  day  we  manned  our  five  boats,  and  also  a
great  boat  of  the  Frenchmens  with  our  men  and  the
Admirals,  12  of  them  in  their  murrians  and  corslets,  and

219

A.D.

1557-

Hanta.

Five  satles  of

Poriingah

descried.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  rest  all  well  appoynted,  with  foure  trumpets,  a
drumme  and  a  Fife,  and  the  boate  all  hanged  with
streamers  of  Silke  and  pendants  very  faire,  and  went  into
the  river  and  traffiqued,  our  man  of  warre  lying  off  and
on  in  the  river  to  waft  us,  but  we  heard  no  more  of  the
Portugals.  This  day  the  Negros  told  us  that  there  were
certain  ships  come  into  Hanta,  which  towne  is  about  2
leagues  to  the  Westward  of  this  place.

This  21  day  we  manned  our  boats  againe  &  went  to
a  place  a  league  from  this  to  the  Westwards,  and  there
found  many  Negros  with  another  Captaine,  and  sold  at
the  same  rate  that  wee  had  done  with  the  others.

The  22  day  we  went  a  shore  againe  and  traffiqued  in
like  sort  quietly,  and  I  tooke  4  pound  and  six  ounces
of  gold.

The  23  day  about  night  the  Negros  with  their  captaine
came  to  us  and  told  us  that  the  king  of  Portugals  ships
were  departed  from  the  Castle,  meaning  the  next  day  to
plie  to  the  windward  to  come  to  us,  giving  us  warning
to  take  heed  to  our  selves :  we  told  them  againe  that
wee  were  very  glad  of  their  comming,  and  would  be
ready  at  all  times  to  meet  them,  and  to  assure  them  that
we  were  glad  of  it,  wee  sounded  our  trumpets,  and  shot
off  certaine  bases  whereof  the  Negros  were  very  glad,  and
requested  us  that  if  the  Portugals  sought  to  hinder  our
traffique,  to  shew  them  all  the  extremitie  that  we  could,
prornising  us  that  if  they  came  by  land,  they  would
advertise  us  thereof.

The  24  we  went  a  shore  with  our  trumpets  and
drummes,  and  traffiqued,  and  I  bade  the  captaine  of  the
towne  to  dinner.

The  25  day  we  being  a  shore,  our  ships  had  descried
five  sailes  of  the  king  of  Portugals,  &  our  ships  shot  off
ordinance  to  call  us  away,  and  we  threw  every  man  his
caske  a  shore  for  water,  and  went  to  our  ships,  and  by
that  time  we  had  weighed  and  given  order  one  to  another
what  to  do,  it  was  night,  so  y'  that  night  nothing  was
done. We  set  saile  and  lay  close  all  night  to  get  the

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1557.
wind  if  we  could :  we  were  neere  some  of  them,  and  one
shot  off  a  piece  which  wee  judged  to  be  the  Admirall
of  the  Portugals,  to  cause  the  rest  to  come  and  speake
with  him :  so  all  this  night  we  made  our  selves  ready  for
fight.

The  26  we  came  in  with  the  shore  and  had  sight  of
the  Portugals  where  they  rid  at  anker,  and  we  bare  with
them,  and  we  gave  all  our  men  white  scarffes,  to  the  ende
that  the  Frenchmen  might  know  one  the  other  if  we  came  [II.  ii.  40.]
to  boording :  but  the  night  came  upon  us  that  we  could
not  fetch  them,  but  we  ankered  within  demie-Culvering
shot  of  them.

The  27  day  we  weighed  and  so  did  the  Portugals,  and
about  eleven  of  the  clocke  wee  had  the  wind  of  them,
and  then  we  went  roome  with  them,  which  when  they
perceived,  they  kept  about  to  the  shore  againe,  and  wee
after  them,  and  when  they  were  so  neere  the  shore  that
they  could  not  well  runne  any  further  on  that  boord,
they  kept  about  againe,  and  lay  to  the  Seaward,  and  then
we  kept  about  with  them,  and  were  a  head  of  them,  and  -
tooke  in  our  topsailes  and  taried  for  them :  and  the  first
that  came  up  was  a  small  barke  which  sailed  so  well
that  she  cared  not  for  any  of  us,  and  caried  good  ordi-
nance :  and  assoone  as  she  came  up,  she  shot  at  us,  and
overshot  us,  and  then  she  shot  at  the  Admirall  of  the
Frenchmen,  and  shot  him  through  in  two  or  three  places.  The  fight  with
and  went  foorth  a  head  of  us,  because  we  were  in  our  ^^  Portugals.
fighting  sailes :  then  came  up  another  caravell  under  our
Lee  in  like  case  which  shot  at  us  and  at  the  Frenchman,
and  hurt  two  of  his  men  and  shot  him  through  the
maine  maste.  And  after  them  came  up  the  Admirall
under  our  Lee  also,  but  he  was  not  able  to  doe  us  so
much  harme  as  the  small  shippes,  because  he  caried
ordinance  higher  then  they,  neither  were  we  able  to  make
a  good  shot  at  any  of  them,  because  our  shippe  was  so
weake  in  the  side,  that  she  laid  all  her  ordinance  in  the
Sea :  wherefore  we  thought  to  lay  the  great  ship  aboord,
and  as  soone  as  the  French  Admirall  went  roome  with

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

him,  he  fell  a  sterne  and  could  not  fetch  him,  and  after
he  fell  a  sterne  of  two  caravels  more  and  could  fetch  none
The  French  of  them,  but  fell  to  Leeward  of  them  all :  and  when  he
men  ^  "^'^  ^^^  ^°  Leeward,  he  kept  about  to  the  shoreward,  and
left  us,  and  then  we  put  out  our  topsailes  and  gave  them
chase,  and  both  the  other  Frenchmen  kept  the  wind,  and
would  not  come  neere  us,  and  our  owne  ship  was  a  sterne
so  that  she  could  not  come  to  us :  and  after  we  had
folowed  them  about  two  houres  to  the  seaward,  they  kept
about  againe  towards  the  shore,  thinking  to  pay  us  as
they  went  along  by,  and  to  have  the  wind  of  the  French
Admirall  which  before  ran  in  towards  the  shore,  and  we
kept  about  with  them,  and  kept  still  the  wind  of  them
thinking  that  our  Viceadmiral  and  the  other  would  have
folowed  us  as  wee  willed  them  to  do  :  but  after  that  the
Portugall  was  past  by  them,  and  every  one  had  shot  at
us  and  our  Viceadmirall,  both  our  Viceadmirall  and  the
two  Frenchmen,  &  our  owne  pinnasse  left  us  in  the  laps,
and  ran  to  seaward,  and  we  ran  still  along,  and  kept  the
wind  of  them  to  succour  the  French  Admirall,  who  was
under  all  of  their  Lees,  and  when  they  met  with  him,
every  one  went  roome  with  him,  and  gave  him  the  broad
side,  and  after  they  cast  about  againe,  and  durst  not  boord
him,  because  they  sawe  us  in  the  weather  of  them,  or  els
without  doubt  they  had  taken  or  sunke  them,  for  three
of  them  which  were  the  smallest,  went  so  fast  that  it
was  not  possible  for  a  ship  to  boord  them,  and  caried
such  ordinance  that  if  they  had  had  the  weather  of  us,
they  would  have  troubled  3  of  the  best  ships  that  we
had,  and  as  for  their  Admirall  and  Viceadmirall  they  were
both  notablie  appointed.

When  the  Frenchman  was  cleare  of  them,  hee  laie  as
neere  the  winde  as  hee  could,  and  wee  followed  them
still  towardes  the  shore,  and  then  the  Admirall  ranne  to
Sea  after  the  rest,  and  left  us  all  alone :  and  when  the
Portugals  perceived  that  we  were  alone,  and  gave  them
chase,  they  kept  about  with  us  and  we  with  them,  to
keepe  the  wind  of  them,  and  we  ranne  still  within  base

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1557-
shot  of  them,  but  they  shot  not  at  us,  because  we  had
the  weather  of  them,  and  sawe  that  they  could  do  us
no  hurt :  and  thus  we  folowed  one  another  until  night,
and  in  the  night  we  lost  them,  but  as  for  all  the  rest  of
our  ships,  they  packed  on  all  the  sailes  that  they  could
and  ranne  to  sea,  and  as  they  themselves  confesse,  they
praied  for  us,  but  as  for  helpe  at  their  hands  we  could
have  none.

The  28  day  we  met  with  our  Viceadmirall,  our  pin-
nasse,  and  two  of  the  Frenchmen,  and  the  third  was  fled
which  was  a  ship  of  fourscore  tunne,  and  belonged  to
Roan :  and  when  I  had  the  sight  of  the  rest  of  our  ships,
I  tooke  our  skiffe  and  went  to  them  to  know  why  they
lost  us  in  such  a  case,  and  John  Kire  made  me  answere
that  his  ship  would  neither  reare  nor  steere,  and  as  for
the  pinnasse,  John  Davis  made  me  answere  that  she
would  doe  nothing,  and  that  he  could  cary  her  no  further,
for  her  rudder  was  broken,  so  that  the  Hart  was  glad  to
towe  her.  Then  1  went  to  the  French  Admirall,  and
found  himselfe  to  be  a  man  of  good  stomacke,  but  the  .
one  halfe  of  his  men  were  sicke  and  dead :  and  then  I
talked  with  the  smaller  Frenchman,  and  he  made  mee
answere  that  he  could  doe  nothing,  saying,  that  his  ship
would  beare  no  saile,  and  had  16  of  his  men  dead  and
sicke,  so  he  made  us  plaine  answere  that  he  was  able  to
doe  nothing.  After  this  the  Frenchmen  durst  not  anker
for  feare  of  the  Portugales.

The  29  day  the  master  of  the  pinnasse  came  to  us  and
sayd  that  they  were  not  able  to  keepe  her  any  longer,
and  then  wee  viewed  her  and  seeing  there  was  no
remedie,  her  rudder  with  all  the  iron  worke  being  broken
both  aloft  and  belowe,  wee  agreed  to  breake  her  up
and  to  put  the  men  into  the  Hart.  So  we  tooke  out  [II.  ii.  41.]
of  her  foure  bases,  one  anker,  and  certaine  fire  wood,
and  set  her  on  fire,  and  afterwards  ran  along  the
coast.

The  thirtie  day  we  went  in to  the  shore,  and  spake
with certaine Negros,  who told us that some French

223

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

shippes  had  bene  there,  but  wee  could  not  bargaine  with
them  they  were  so  unreasonable.

The  31 day  I  went  to  shore  but  did  not  traffike.
Februarie. The I day  of  Februarie  we  weighed,  seeing  we  could
not  bring  the  Negros  to  any  reason,  and  came  to  another
place  which  standeth  upon  an  hill.

The  third  day  I  went  to  a  towne  foure  leagues  from
us,  and  shot  off  two  pieces,  and  the  Captaine  came  to  us,
and  I  sent  Thomas  Rippen  a  land  who  knew  the  Captaine,
and  assoone  as  he  came  on  shore  the  Captaine  knew
him  and  divers  of  the  Negros  who  then  began  to  aske
for  mee,  and  having  told  the  Captaine  that  I  was  in  the
boate,  hee  made  no  longer  tarying  but  by  and  by  caused
two  boates  to  be  put  to  the  Sea,  and  came  to  me  him-
selfe,  and  when  he  sawe  me,  he  cryed  to  me  before  hee
came  to  the  boat  and  seemed  to  be  the  gladdest  man
alive,  and  so  did  all  the  com  panic  that  knew  mee,  and  I
gave  him  a  reward  as  the  maner  of  the  Countrey  is,  and
caused  the  Frenchmen  to  give  another,  promising  the
next  day  to  give  him  wine :  and  that  night  because  it  was
late,  he  would  not  talke  of  any  price,  but  left  me  a
pledge,  and  tooke  another  of  me  and  so  departed.

The  4  day  going  on  shore,  I  found  that  the  ships  of
France  which  had  bin  there,  had  done  much  hurt  to  our
markets,  but  yet  I  tooke  five  ounces  and  a  halfe  of  gold.

The  fift  day  I  tooke  eight  ounces  and  one  eight  part
of  gold :  but  I  saw  that  the  Negros  perceived  the  differ-
ence in  Cloth  betwixt  ours  and  that  which  the  French-
men had,  which  was  better,  and  broader  then  ours :  and
then  I  told  captaine  Blundel  that  I  would  goe  to  the
Leeward,  because  I  perceived  that  being  there  where  his
Cloth  was  sold,  I  should  do  no  good,  whereof  hee  was
sorie.

The  6  day  there  came  an  Almade  &  Negros  aboord
me,  requesting  me  to  come  to  their  towne  for  they  had
much  gold  and  many  marchants :  and  so  I  went  and
found  their  old  Captaine  gone,  and  another  in  his  place :
but  this  night  wee  did  no  good,  because  the  marchants

224

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1557-
were  not  come  downe : so  he  required  a  pledge  which  I

let him  have,  and  tooke  another  of  him.

The 7 day  George  our  Negro  came  to  us,  who  had  George  our
followed  us  at  the  least  30  leagues  in  a  small  boat,  and ^^^°'
when he  came,  the  Negros  and  we  soone  concluded  of
price. I  tooke  this  day  five  pound  and  one  ounce,  and  3
quarters  of  gold. This  Negro  we  had  left  at Shamma
at  the  time  of  the  fight,  who  said that  he  saw  the  fight
being  on  shore,  and  that  when  we  were  gone  from  the
Portugals,  the  Portugals  came  into  their  river,  and  told
them  that  the  Englishmen  had  slaine  two  Portugals  with  TwoPortugah
a piece,  which  was  in deed  out  of  our ship,  and  they  ^^^J^./
required harbour there, but  the captaine of Shamma
would  not  suffer  them.

The  8  day  we  tooke  nineteene  pound  three  ounces
and  a  halfe.

The  9  day  we  tooke  two  pound  six  ounces  and  a
halfe.

The 10  day  three  pound.

The 1 1 day  came to us Jerome Bawdet the  Vice-  -
admirall of  the Frenchmen and his pinnasse,  and he
shewed  us  that  where  we  left  them  there  was  no  good  to
be  done,  and  sayd  he  would  goe  to the Eastward,  but
wee told him hee should not : and thereupon com-
maunded him to goe to his company which he  was
appointed  to  bee  with,  which  hee  refused  to  doe  untill  '^^^  f^^T^'
wee  had  shot  three  or  foure  pieces  at  their  pinnasse,  and  i,l"f^jEnplisk
when  the  ship  sawe  that,  she  kept  about,  and  ranne  to
Seaward,  and  durst  come  no  neerer  to  us,  so  the  pinnasse
went after  her. We tooke this day one pound five
ounces.

The  12  day  there  came  one  of  the  Frenchmens  pin-
nasses  to  us  laden  with  cloth,  and  would  have  made  sale,
but  I  would  not  suffer  him,  and  therefore  tooke  him  and
sent  him  aboord  of  our  ship,  and  caused  him  to  ride
there  all  day.  We  tooke  five  pound  six  ounces  and  a
halfe.

The  14  day  we  tooke  of  some  Negros  4  ounces  of  gold.
VI  225  p

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

The  1 6  we  came  to  another  towne.
The  17  day  I  went  a  shore  and  understood  that  3  of
the  Portugall  ships  were  at  the  Castle,  and  the  other  two
at  Shamma.  The  captaine  of  this  towne  was  gone  to  the
principall  towne,  to  speake  with  their  king,  and  would
returne  shortly  as  they  told  me,  and  so  he  did,  and
brought  me  a  weight  and  measure,  and  I  sent  a  man  to
see  that  principall  towne,  and  their  king.  The  Portugall
ships  rid  so  neere  us,  that  within  3  houres  they  might  be
with  us,  yet  were  all  contented  to  tary  for  sales.

The  1 8  day  certaine  of  the  kings  servants  came  to  us,
and  we  tooke  one  pound  two  ounces,  and  one  eight  part
of  gold.
[IL  ii.  42.] The 10  day  we  tooke  five  pound  one  ounce.
The  20  day  one  pound  and  foure  ounces.
The  21  I  tooke  foure  pound  and  one  ounce,  and  the
Negroes  enquired  for  fine  cloth,  and  I  opened  two  pieces
which  were  not  fine  enough,  as  they  sayd,  but  seeing  that
we had no other,  they  bought of  them. At night I
provided  a  gift,  or  present,  and  sent  one  marchant  and  a
mariner  with  it  to  the  king,  to  certifie  him  of  our  want
of  victuals,  by  reason  whereof  we  could not stay  long :
for  in  deed  we  searched  our  ship,  and the  most  part  of
our  beere  was  leaked  out  of  all  our  barrels.

The  22  day  we  tooke  three  ounces  and  a  halfe.

King  Abaan. The  23  our  men  came  from  the  king  Abaan,  and  told

us,  that  he  had  received  them  very  friendly,  but  he  had

litle  gold,  but  promised,  if  we  would  tary,  to  send  into  all

The  offer  of his  countrey  for  gold  for  us,  and  he  willed  our  men  at

the  king  to  the  ^^^^  comming  home  to  speake  to  our  king  to  send  men

Lngltsh  to  1  ..'-'.  ,  . ^  1-11  1  J

build  a  Fort.  '^'^^  provision  into  his  countrey,  to  build  a  castle,  and
to  bring  Tailors  with  them,  to  make  them  apparell,  and
good  wares,  and  they  should  be  sure  to  sell  them  :  but
for  that  present  the  Frenchmen  had  filled  them  full  of
cloth.

This  towne  standeth  about  foure  leagues  up  in  the
circuit  as  bis:  ^^^^j  ^^^  ^s,  by  the  estimation  of  our  men,  as  big  in
as  London. circuit  as  London,  but  the  building  is  like  to  the  rest  of

226

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1557-
the  countrey. They  have  about  this  Towne  great  store

of  the  wheate  of  the  Countrey,  and  they  judge,  that  on

one  side  of  the  towne  there  were  one  thousand  rikes  of

Wheate,  and  another  sort  of  Corne  which  is  called  Mill,

which  is  much  used  in  Spaine. About  this  towne  they

keepe  good  watch  every night,  and have  to  warne  the

watchmen certaine cordes made fast over their  wayes,

which  lead  into  the  towne,  and  certaine  bels  upon  them, -A  pretle

so  that  if  any  man  touch  the  cordes,  the  bels  ring,  and ,  "f  ^^

' ,  ^  dcscrtc  the

then  the  watchmen  runne  foorth  of  their  watch houses  g^g^ig^

to  see  what  they  be :  and  if  they  be  enemies,  if  they  passe

the  cord,  they  have  provision  with  certaine  nets  hanged

over  the  wayes,  where  they  must  passe,  to  let  fall  upon

them,  and so take them,  and otherwise then by the

wayes  it  is  not  possible  to  enter  the  towne,  by  reason  of

the  thickets  and  bushes  which  are  about  the  same,  and

the  towne  is  also  walled  round about  with  long  cords,

and bound together  with sedge  and  certaine  barkes  of

trees.

When  our  men  came  to  the  towne,  it  was  about  five
of  the  clock  in  the  morning,  for  there  they  travell  alwayes
in  the  night  by  reason  of  the  heate  of  the  day :  and  about
nine  of  the  clocke,  the  king  sent  for  them,  for  there  may
no  man  come  to  him  before  he  be  sent  for,  and  then
they  would  have  caried  their  present  with  them :  but  the
Negros  told  them,  that  they  must  bee  three  times
brought  before  him,  before  they  might  offer  their  gift :
and  when  they  came  to  him,  he  talked  with  them,  and  The  kings
received  them  very  friendly,  and  kept  them  about  halfe  fr^f^^b  ^»^''-
an  houre,  and  then  they  departed,  and  after  that  sent  for  g^Tmn
them  againe  three  times,  and  last  of  all,  they  brought
him  their  present,  which  he  received  thankfully,  and  then
caused  a  pot  of  wine  of  Palme  to  be  brought  foorth,  and
made  them  drinke :  and  before  they  drinke,  both  here
and in  all the  Countrey,  they  use certaine  ceremonies.

First,  they  bring  foorth  their  pot  of  drinke,  and  then  Their  cere-
they  make  a  hole  in the  ground,  &  put some of  the  '^''f^^f  ^«
drinke into  it,  and they  cast the earth upon it,  which ^^^  ^^^'

227

A.D.

1557-

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

they  digged  forth  before,  and  then  they  set  the  pot  upon
the  same,  then  they  take  a  litle  thing  made  of  a  goord,
and  with  that  they  take  out  of  the  same  drinke,  and  put
it  upon  the  ground  in  three  places,  and  in  divers  places
they  have  certaine  bunches  of  the  pils  of  Palme  trees  set
in  the  ground  before  them,  and  there  they  put  in  some
drinke,  doing  great  reverence  in  all  places  to  the  same
Palme  trees.

All  these  ceremonies  first  done,  the  king  tooke  a  cup
of  gold,  and  they  put  him  in  wine,  and  hee  dranke  of  it,
and  when  he  dranke,  the  people  cried  all  with  one  voice,
Abaan,  Abaan,  with  certaine  other  words,  like  as  they  cry
commonly  in  Flanders,  upon  the  Twelfe  night.  The
kinning  drinks :  and  when  he  had  drunke,  then  they
gave  drinke  to  every  one,  and  that  done,  the  king  licensed
them  to  depart,  and  every  one  that  departeth  from  him
boweth  3  times  towards  him,  and  waveth  with  both  hands
together,  as  they  bow,  and  then  do  depart.  The  king
hath  commonly  sitting  by  him  8  or  lo  ancient  men  with
gray  beards.

This  day  we  tooke  one  pound  and  lo  ounces  of  gold.

The  24  day  we  tooke  3  pound  and  7  ounces.

The  25  we  tooke  3 ounces  and  3 quarters.

The  26  we  tooke  2  pound  and 10  ounces.

The  27  two  pound  and  five  ounces.

The  28  foure  pound,  and  then  seeing  that  there  was
no  more  gold  to  be  had,  we  weighed  and  went  foorth.

The first day  of  March  we came to a towne  called

Mowre.  Mowre,  but  we  found  no  boats  nor  people  there : but

being  ready  to depart,  there  came two Almades to us

[II.  ii.  43.] from another towne, of  whom we tooke two ounces

and a halfe of golde : and they tolde us that the

Negroes that dwelled  at Mowre  were gone to dwell

Lagova.  at  Lagova.

TJu"^  returne.  The  second  day  we  came  thwart  of  the  castle,  and
about  two  leagues  off,  and  there  saw  all  the  five  Portugall
ships  at  anker,  and  this  day  by  night  we  fetched
Shamma.

228

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1557-

The  third  day  we  had  sight  of  one  tall  ship,  of  about
two  hundred  tunnes,  in  the  weather  of  us,  and  within
lesse  then  two  leagues  of  our  ships,  and  then  we  saw  two
more  a  sterne  of  her,  the  one  a  ship  of  five  hundred  or
more,  and  the  other  a  pinnesse  :  and  these  were  a  new
fleet  at  that  present  arrived  out  of  Portugall.  Whereupon  ^hips  of
we  wayed,  and  made  shift  to  double  out  of  the  land,  and  ^^^'^"■S^"-
then  the  winde  comming  to  the  South-southwest,  the
Hart  going  roome  with  them  fell  three  leagues  to  the
leewards  of  us.  These  Portugals  gave  us  the  chase  from
nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  till  five  at  night,
but  did  no  good  against  us.  At  last,  we  perceiving  the
Admirall  to  be  farre  a  sterne  of  his  company,  because
his  maine  topmast  was  spent,  determined  to  cast  about
with  them  againe,  because  we  were  sure  to  weather  them,
and  the  winde  being  as  it  was,  it  was  our  best  course :
but  the  Hart  was  so  farre  to  the  leeward,  that  we  could
not  doe  it,  except  we  would  lose  her  company,  so  that
we  tooke  in  some  of  our  sailes,  and  went  roome  with
him :  which  when  he  perceived,  he  looffed  to,  and  was
able  to  lie  as  neere  as  he  did  before.  At  night,  when  we
came  to  him,  he  would  not  speake  to  us :  then  we  asked
of  his  company  why  he  went  so  roome ;  and  they  made
excuse  that  they  were  able  to  beare  no  saile  by,  for  feare
of  bearing  their  foretopmast  over  boord :  but  this  was
a  simple  excuse.

The  fourth  day,  being  put  from  our  watring  place
we  began  to  seethe  our  meat  in  salt  water,  and  to  rebate
our  allowance  of  drinke,  to  make  it  indure  the  longer :
and  so  concluded  to  set  our  course  thence,  for  our
owne  countrey.

The  12  of  March  I  found  my  selfe  thwart  of  Cape
das  palmas.

The  1 6  day  we  fell  with  the land,  which  we  judged
to  be the  Cape  Mensurado,  about  which  place  is  very  Cape
much high  land.  Mensurado.

The  1 8  day  we  lost  sight  of  the  Hart,  and  I  thinke
the  willful!  Master ran in  with the shore of  purpose

229

A.D.

1557-

Two  small
Hands  by
Sierra  Leona.

Note.

A  French
bravado.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  lose  us,  being  offended  that  I  tolde  him  of  his  owne
folly.

The  27  day  we  fell  in  sight  of  two  small  Hands,  which
lie  by  our  reckoning  sixe  leagues  off  the  headland  of
Sierra  Leona :  and  before  we  came  in  sight  of  the  same
Hands,  we  made  our  reckoning  to  be  forty  or  thirty
leagues  at  the  least  off  them.  Therefore  all  they  that
saile  this  way  are  to  regard  the  currents  which  set  North-
northwest,  or  els  they  may  be  much  deceived.

The  14  of  Aprill  we  met  with  two  great  ships  of
Portugall,  which  although  they  were  in  the  weather  of
us,  yet  came  not  roome  with  us,  whereby  we  judged
that  they  were  bound  for  Calicut.

The  18 day  we  were  in  the  heigth  of  Cape  verde.

The  24  we  were  directly  under  the  tropike  of  Cancer.

The  first  day  of  May  Henry  Wilson  our  Steward
died :  and  the  next  day  died  John  Underwood.

The  fift  day  we  were  in  the  heigth  of  S.  Michael.

The  23  we  had  sight  of  a  shippe  in  the  weather  of
us,  which  was  a  Frenchman  of  90  tunne,  who  came  with
us  as  stoutly  and  as  desperately  as  might  be,  and
comming  neere  us  perceived  that  we  had  bene  upon  a
long  voyage,  and  judging  us  to  be  weake,  as  in  deed  we
were,  came  neerer  us,  and  thought  to  have  layed  us
aboord,  &  there  stept  up  some  of  his  men  in  armour,
and  commanded  us  to  strike  saile :  whereupon  we  sent
them  some  of  our  stuffe,  crossebarres,  and  chaineshot,
and  arrowes,  so  thicke,  that  it  made  the  upper  worke
of  their  shippe  flie  about  their  eares,  and  we  spoiled  him
with  all  his  men,  and  toare  his  shippe  miserably  with
our  great  ordinance,  and  then  he  began  to  fall  a  sterne
of  us,  and  to  packe  on  his  sailes,  and  get  away :  and  we
seeing  that,  gave  him  foure  or  five  good  pieces  more
for  his  farewell ;  and  thus  we  were  rid  of  this  French
man,  who  did  us  no  harme  at  all.  We  had  aboord  us
a  French  man  a  Trumpetter,  who  being  sicke,  and
lying  in  his  bed,  tooke  his  trumpet  notwithstanding,
and  sounded  till  he  could  sound  no  more,  and  so  died.

230

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1577.

The  28  we  conferred  together,  and  agreed  to  go  into
Severne,  and  so  to  Bristol!,  but  the  same  night  we  had
sight  of  the  Lizard,  and  by  reason  of  the  winde,  we  were
not  able  to  double  the  lands  end  to  go  into  Severne,
but  were  forced  to  beare  in  with  the  Lizard.

The  29  day,  about  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
we  arrived  safely  in  Plimmouth,  and  praised  God  for
our  good  arrivall.

The third and last voyage of M. William  [H-  ii-  44-]
Towrson to the coast of Guinie, and the
Castle  de  Mina,  in  the  yeere 1577.

He  thirtieth  day  of  January,  the  yeere
abovesayd,  we  departed  out  of  the  sound
of  Plimmouth,  with  three  ships,  and  a
pinnesse,  whereof  the  names  are  these :

1  The  Minion  Admirall  of  the  fleet.

2  The  Christopher  Viceadmirall.

3  The  Tyger.

4  A  pinnesse  called  the  Unicorne :  being  all  bound
for  the  Canaries,  and  from  thence,  by  the  grace  of  God,
to  the  coast  of  Guinie.

The  next  day,  being  the  last  of  this  moneth,  we  met  It  is  to  be
with  two hulks  of  Dantzick,  the  one  called the Rose,  understood,
a ship of  foure hundred tunnes,  and the  other  called  time  there  was
the  Unicorne,  of  an  hundred  and  fifty  tunnes,  the  Master  warre  betwixt
of  the  Rose  was  called  Nicholas  Masse,  and  the  Master  England  and
of  the  Unicorne  Melchior  White,  both laden at Bour-  ^^'^'^<^^-
deaux, and for  the most part  with wines. When we
came to them,  we caused them to hoise foorth  their
boats,  and  to  come  and  speake  with  us,  and  we  examined
every  one  of  them  apart,  what  French  mens  goods  they
had  in  their  shippes,  and  they  sayd  they  had  none :  but
by  the  contrarieties  of  their  tales,  and by  the  suspicion
which  we  gathered  of  their  false  chartar-parties,  we  per-
ceived that  they  had  French mens  goods in  them :  we
therefore caused one of  them to fetch up  his bils of

231

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

lading,  and  because  he  denied  that  he  had  any,  we  sent
certaine  with  him,  who  caused  him  to  goe  to  the  place
where  he  had  hid  them,  and  by  the  differences  of  his
billes  of  lading,  and  his  talke,  we  gathered,  as  before,
that  they  had  Frenchmens  goods.  Whereupon  we
examined  them  straightly,  and  first  the  Purser  of  the
Unicorne,  which  was  the  smaller  shippe,  confessed  that
they  had  two  and  thirty  tunnes  and  a  hogshead  of  a
French  mans.  Then  we  examined  the  Master  in  like
case,  and  he  acknowledged  the  same  to  be  true.  Then
we  examined  also  the  Master  of  the  great  ship,  and  he
confessed  that  he  had  an  hundred  and  eight  and  twenty
tunnes  of  the  same  French  mans,  and  more  they  would
not  confesse,  but  sayd  that  all  the  rest  was  laden  by
Peter  Lewgues  of  Hamburg,  to  be  delivered  to  one
Henry  Summer  of  Camphire,  notwithstanding  all  their
letters  were  directed  to  Hamburg,  and  written  in  Dutch
without,  and  within  in  French.

When  they  had  confessed  that  they  had  thus  much
French  mens  goods  within  their  shippes,  we  conferred
together  what  was  best  to  be  done  with  them.  William
Cretton  and  Edward  Selman  were  of  the  opinion,  that
it  should  be  good  either  to  carry  them  into  Spaine,  and
there  to  make  sale  of  the  goods,  or  els  into  Ireland,
or  to  returne  backe  againe  into  England  with  them,  if
the  winde  would  permit  it.  But  I,  waying  what  charge
we  had  of  our  Masters,  first  by  mouth,  and  afterwards
by  writing,  that  for  no  such  matter  we  should  in  any
case  prolong  the  time,  for  feare  of  losing  the  voyage,  and
considering  that  the  time  of  the  yeere  was  very  farre
spent,  and  the  money  that  we  should  make  of  the  wines
not  very  much,  in  respect  of  the  commodity  which  we
hoped  for  by  the  voyage,  perswaded  them  that  to  goe
into  Ireland,  the  winde  being  Easterly  as  it  was,  might  be
an  occasion  that  we  should  be  locked  in  there  with  that
winde,  and  so  lose  our  voyage :  and  to  cary  them  into
Spaine,  seeing  they  sailed  so  ill,  that  having  all  their  sailes
abroad,  we  kept  them  company  onely  with  our  foresailes,

232

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1577-
and  without  any  toppe  sailes  abroad,  so  that  in  every
two  dayes  sailing  they  would  have  hindered  us  more  then
one ;  and  besides  that  (the  winde  being  Easterly)  we
should  not  be  able  to  seaze  the  coast  with  them  :  besides
all  this  the  losse  of  time  when  we  came  thither  was  to
be  considered,  whereupon  I  thought  it  not  good  to  carry
them  any  further.

And  as  for  carying  them  into  England,  although  the
winde  had  bene  good,  as  it  was  not,  considering  what
charge  we  had  of  our  Masters,  to  shift  us  out  of  the
way  for  feare  of  a  stay  by  reason  of  the  warres,  I  held
it  not  in  any  wise  convenient.

But  notwithstanding  all  this,  certeine  of  our  company
not  being  herewith  satisfied  went  to  our  Master  to  know
his  opinion therein,  who made them a plaine  answere,
that  to  cary  them into any  place,  it was not the best  The  French
way nor the profit of  their Masters. And he tolde  mens  goods
them  further,  that  if  the  time  were  prolonged  one  moneth  ^^-^^  ^^^^^
longer before they passed the Cape, but a few men  warre  upon
would  go the  voyage. All  these  things  considered,  we  the  losse  of
all paused,  and determined at  the  last,  that every  man  ^'^^^^^
should  take  out  of  the  hulks  so  much  as  he  could  well
bestow  for  necessaries,  and  the  next  morning  to  conclude
what  should  be  further  done  with  them. So  we  tooke
out of  them for us foureteene  tunnes and a halfe of
wine,  and  one  tunne  we  put  into  the  pinnesse.

More  we  tooke  out  one  hogshead  of  Aquavitas.

Sixe  cakes  of  rozzen.

A  small  halser  for  ties :  and  certeine  chesnuts.
The  Christopher  tooke  out,  [II.  ii.  45.]

Ten  tunnes  of  wine,  and  one  hogshead.

A  quantity  of  Aquavitae.

Shall-lines.

Chesnuts.

Sixe  double  bases  with  their  chambers.  And  their
men  broke  up  the  hulks  chests,  and  tooke  out  their
compasses,  and  running  glasses,  the  sounding  leade  and
line, and candles : and cast some of  their  beefe  over

233

AD-  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

boord,  and  spoiled  them  so  much,  that  of  very  pity  we
gave  them  a  compasse,  a  running  glasse,  a  lead  and  a
line,  certaine  bread  and  candles,  and  what  apparell  of
theirs  we  could  finde  in  their  ship,  we  gave  them  againe,
and  some  money  also  of  that  which  William  Crompton
tooke  for  the  ransome  of  a  poore  Frenchman,  who  being
their  Pilot  downe  the  River  of  Bordeux,  they  were  not
able  to  set  him  a  shore  againe,  by  reason  of  the  foule
weather.

The  Tyger  also  tooke  out  of  the  smaller  hulke  sixe
or  seven  tunnes  of  wine,  one  hogshead  of  Aquavitae,  and
certeine  rozzen,  and  two  bases  he  tooke  out  of  the
great  hulke.

The  first  day  of  February  in  the  morning  we  all  came
together  againe  saving  W.  Crompton  who  sent  us  word
that  he  was  contented  to  agree  to  that  order  which  we
should  take.

Now  Edward  Selman  was  of  this  opinion,  that  it  was
not  best  to  let  the  ships  depart,  but  put  men  into  them
to  cary  them  into  England,  which  thing  neither  we  nor
our  Master  would  agree  unto,  because  we  thought  it
not  good  to  unman  our  ships  going  outward,  considering
how  dangerous  the  time  was :  so  that  in  fine  we  agreed
to  let  them  depart,  and  give  them  the  rest  of  the  wine
which  they  had  in  their  ships  of  the  Frenchmens  for
the  fraight  of  that  which  we  had  taken,  and  for  their
ordinance,  rozzen,  aquavitse,  chesnuts,  and  other  things
which  the  company  had  taken  from  them.  So  we
received  a  bill  of  their  handes,  that  they  confessed  how
much  Frenchmens  goods  they  had,  and  then  we  let  them
depart.

The  lo  day  we  reckoned  our  selves  to  be  25  leagues
from  the  Grand  Canarie,  and  this  day  about  nine  of
the  clocke  our  pinnesse  brake  her  rudder,  so  that  we
were  forced  to  towe  her  at  the  sterne  of  the  Minion,
which  we  were  able  to  doe,  and  yet  kept  company  with
the  rest  of  our  ships.  About  eleven  of  the  clocke  this
day  we  had  sight  of  the  Grand  Canarie.

234

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1577-
The  1 1  day  when  we  came  to  the  Hand  we  perceived
that  It  was  the  He  of  Tenerif,  &  then  in  deed  wee  had
sight  of  the  Grand  Canarie,  which  lieth  12  leagues  to
the  Eastwards  of  Tenerif:  and  because  the  road  of
Tenerif  is  foule  ground,  and  nothing  was  there  to  be
gotten  for  the  helping  of  our  pinnesse,  having  the  winde
large,  we  agreed  to  go  with  the  Grand  Canarie.

The  12  day  we  came  into  the  roade  of  the  towne  of
Canarie,  which  lieth  one  league from the same towne.
And  after  we  had  shot  off  divers  pieces  of  ordinance  to
salute the towne and the castle, the governour and
captaines  of  the  Hand  sent  to  us  which  were  the  captaines
of  the  ships,  requiring  us  to  come  a  shore. And  when
we  came  to  them  they  received  us  very  frendly,  offering
us  their  owne Jennets to ride to  the  towne,  and  what
other friendship they  could shew  us :  and  we  went  to
the  towne  with  two  English  Marchants  which  lay  there,  ^^^  English
and  remained  in  their  house  that  day. The  second  day  ^^f^'^^f^-f
following  we  came  aboord to deliver  our  marchandise,  Qrand
and  to  get  our  pinnesse  mended.  Canary.

The  14  day  came  into  the  road  the  Spanish  fleet  which
was  bound  to  the  Emperours  Indies,  which  were  in
number  nineteene  saile,  whereof  sixe  were  ships  of  foure  "^^^  Spanish
hundred  and  five  hundred  a  piece,  the  rest  were  of  two  ^^^^^J^'^}^^
hundred,  an  hundred  and  fifty,  and  of  an  hundred,  teene  saile.
When  they  were  come  to  an  ancre  they  saluted  us  with
ordinance,  and  so  we  did  them  in  like  case.  And  after-
wards the  Admirall  (who  was  a  knight)  sent  his  pinnesse
to  desire  me  to  come  to  him ;  and  when  I  came  to  him
he  received  me  friendly,  and  was  desirous  to  heare
somewhat  of  the  state  of  England  and  Flanders.  And
after  he  had  made  me  a  banquet,  I  departed;  and  I
being  gone  unto  the  boat,  hee  caused  one  of  his  gentle-
men to  desire  Francisco  the  Portugall,  which  was  my
interpreter,  to  require  me  to  furle  my  flagge,  declaring
that  hee  was  Generall  of  the  Emperours  fleet.  Which
thing  (being  come  aboord)  Francisco  shewed  me :  and
because I refused to furle it,  and kept it foorth still,

23s

A.D.

1577-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[II.  ii.  46.]

certaine  of  the  souldiers  in  the  ships  shot  divers  harque-
bush  shot  about  the  ship,  and  over  the  flagge :  and  at
the  same  time  there  came  certeine  gentlemen  aboord
our  ship  to  see  her :  to  whom  I  sayd,  that  if  they  would
not  cause  those  their  men  to  leave  shooting,  I  would
shoot  the  best  ordinance  I  had  thorow  their  sides.  And
when  they  perceived  that  I  was  offended,  they  departed,
and  caused  their  men  of  warre  and  souldiers  to  shoot
no  more,  and  afterwards  they  came  to  me  againe,  and
tolde  me  that  they  had  punished  their  men.  That  done,
I  shewed  them  the  ship,  and  made  them  such  cheere
as  I  could,  which  they  received  very  thankfully :  and  the
day  following  they  sent  for  mee  to  dine  with  them,  and
sent  me  word  that  their  General  was  very  sory  that  any
man  should  require  me  to  furle  my  flagge,  and  that  it
was  without  his  consent :  and  therefore  he  requested
me  not  to  thinke  any  ungentlenesse  to  be  in  him,
promising  that  no  man  of  his  should  misdemeane
himselfe.

The  1 7  day  we  set  saile  in  the  road  of  Grand  Canarie,
and  proceeded  on  our  voyage.

The  20  in  the  morning  we  had  sight  of  the  coast
of  Barbaric,  and  running  along  the  shore  we  had  sight
Rio  del  Oro.  of  Rio  del  Oro,  which  lieth  almost  under  the  tropike
of  Cancer.

The  21  day  we  found  ourselves  to  be  in  20  degrees
and  a  halfe,  which  is  the  heigth  of  Cape  Blank.

The  25  we  had  sight  of  the  land  in  the  bay  to  the
Northward  of  Cape  Verde.

The  26  I  tooke  Francisco  and  Francis  Castelin  with
and  went into the pinnesse, and so  went  to the

Francis
Castelin

me.

Tyger  which  was  neerer  the  shore  then  the  other  ships,
and  went  aboord  her,  and  with  her  and  the  other  ships
we  ranne  West  and  by  South,  and  West-southwest,
untill  about  foure  of  the  clocke,  at  which  time  we  were

Cape  verde.  hard  aboord  the  Cape,  and  then  we  ran  in  Southwest,
and beyond the  Cape  about foure  leagues  we  found  a

Foure  Hands, faire  Hand,  and  besides  that  two  or  three  Hands,  which

236

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1577-
were  of  very  high rocks,  being full  of  divers  sorts of
sea-foule, and of pigeons, with other sorts of  land-
foules,  and  so  many,  that  the  whole  Hand  was  covered
with  the  dung  thereof,  and seemed  so white as  if  the
whole Hand had bene of chalke ; and within those
Hands  was  a  very  faire  bay,  and  hard  aboord  the  rocks
eighteene fadom water,  and faire  ground. And  when  ^  S^'^^^  *^^^^
we perceived the bay, and understanding that the  "-^^^^  French-
Frenchmen had a great trade there, which we were  ^erde.
desirous  to  know,  we  came  to  an  ancre  with  the  Tyger.
And  after  that  the  Minion  and the  Christopher  ancred
in like  case : then we caused the pinnesse to runne
beyond another  Cape  of  land,  to  see  if  there  were  any
place  to  trade  in  there.

It  being  neere  night  I  tooke  our  cocke  and  the
Tygers  skifFe,  and  went  to  the  Hand,  where  we  got
certaine  foules  like  unto  Gannards :  and  then  I  came
aboord  againe  and  tooke  two  of  the  Gannards  which
we  had  taken,  and  caried  them  to  the  captaine  of  the
Christopher,  and  when  I  had  talked  with  him,  I  found
him  not  willing  to  tary  there,  neither  was  I  desirous  to
spend  any  long  time  there,  but  onely  to  attempt  what
was  to  be  done.  The  Master  of  the  Christopher  tolde
me  he  would  not  tary,  being  not  bound  for  that  place.

The 27 the Captaine of the Tyger and Edward
Selman  came to me,  and John Makeworth from the
Christopher,  and  then  we  agreed  to  take  the  pinnesse,
& to come along the shore,  because that where  we
rid  no  Negros came  to  us,  and the night before our
pinnesse brought us  word that there  was a  very  faire  ^  faire  Hand
Iland. And  when  I  came  beyond  the  point  I  found  it  ^^^^^-^^
so,  and  withall  a  goodly  bay,  and  we  saw  upon  the  maine
certaine  Negros  which  waved  us  on  shore,  and  then  we
came  to  an  ancre  with  the  pinnesse,  and  went  a  shore  with
our  cocke,  and  they  shewed  us where their trade  was,
and  that  they  had  Elephants  teeth,  muske,  &  hides,  and  Elephants
offered us to fetch downe  their  Captaine,  if  we  would  f^^f^T^'^^
send  a  man  with  them,  and  they  would  leave  a  pledge  for

237

A.D.

Cabo  de
Monte.

The  river  de
Sestos.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

him :  then  we  asked  them  when  any  ship  had  bene  there ;
and  some  of  them  sayd  not  in  eight  moneths,  others,  in
sixe  moneths,  and  others  in  foure,  and  that  they  were
Frenchmen.

Then  we  perceiving  the  Christopher  not  willing  to
tary,  departed  from  them,  &  set  saile  with  the  pinnesse
and  went  aboord  the  Tyger.

The  lo  day  of  March  we  fell  with  the  coast  of  Guinea,
five  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  Cape  de  Monte,  beside  a
river  called  Rio  das  Palmas.

The  1 1  we  went  to  the  shore,  and  found  one  man
that  could  speake  some  Portuguise,  who  tolde  us  that
there  were  three  French  ships  passed  by ;  one  of  them
two  moneths  past,  and  the  other  one  moneth  past.  At
this  place  I  received  nineteene  Elephants  teeth,  and  two
ounces  and  halfe  a  quarter  of  golde.

The  12  we  set  saile  to  go  to  the  river  de  Sestos.

The  13  at  night  we  fell  with  the  same  river.

The  14  day  we  sent  in  our  boats  to  take  water,  and
romaged  our  shippes,  and  delivered  such  wares  to  the
Christopher  and  Tyger,  as  they  had  need  of.

The  15  we  came  together,  and  agreed  to  send  the
Tyger  to  another  river  to  take  in  her  water,  and  to
see  what  she  could  do  for  graines.  After  that  we  tooke
marchandise  with  us,  and  went  into  the  river,  and  there
we  found  a  Negro  which  was  borne  in  Lisbone,  left  there
by  a  ship  of  Portugal  which  was  burned  the  last  yere  at
this  river  in  fighting  with  three  Frenchmen ;  and  he  told
us  further,  that  two  moneths  past  there  were  three
Frenchmen  at  this  place ;  and  sixe  weeks  past  there
were  two  French  ships  at  the  river ;  and  fifteene  dayes
past  there  was  one.  All  which  ships  were  gone  towards
the  Mina. This  day  we  tooke  but  few  graines.

The  19  day  considering  that  the  Frenchmen  were  gone
before  us,  and  that  by  reason  of  the  unholesome  aires  of
this  place  foureteene  of  our  men  in  the  Minion  were  fallen
sicke,  wee  determined  to  depart,  and  with  all  speed  to
go  to  the  Mina.

238

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1577-

The  21  wee  came  to  the  river  de  Potos,  where  some  [II.  ii.  47.]
of  our  boats  went  in  for  water,  and  I  went  in  with  ^^^  <^^  P°^'^^-
our  cocke,  and  tooke  12  small  Elephants  teeth.

The  23.  day,  after  we  had  taken  as  many  teeth  as  we
could  get,  about  nine  of  the  clocke  we  set  saile  to  go
towards  the  Mina.

The  3 1  we  came  to  Hanta,  and  made  sale  of  certaine
Manillios.

The  first  Aprill  we  had  sight  of  five  saile  of  Portugals,  They  descrk
whereupon  we  set  saile  and  went  oiF  to  sea  to  get  the  -^f^  ^^  ^ .
winde  of  them,  which  wee  should  have  had  if  the  winde
had  kept  his  ordinary  course,  which  is  all  the  day  at  the
Southwest,  and  West-southwest :  but  this  day  with  a  flaw
it  kept  all  the  day  at  the  East,  and  East-southeast,  so
that  the  Portugals  had  the  winde  of  us,  and  came  roome
with  the  Tyger  and  us  untill  night,  and  brought  them-
selves all  save  one,  which  sailed  not  so  well  as  the  rest,
within  shot  of  us :  then  it  fell  calme,  and  the  winde  came
up  to  the  Southwest,  howbeit  it  was  neere  night,  and  the
Christopher,  by  meanes  of  her  boat,  was  about  foure
leagues  to  the  leewards  of  us.  We  tacked  and  ranne
into  the  weather  of  the  Admirall,  and  three  more  of  his
company,  and  when  we  were  neere  him  we  spake  to  him,
but  he  would  not  answere.  Then  we  cast  about  and  lay  The  fight.
in  the  weather  of  him ;  and  casting  about  he  shot  at  us,
and  then  wee  shot  at  him,  and  shot  him  foure  or  five
times  thorow.  They  shot  divers  times  thorow  our  sailes,
but  hurt  no  man.  The  Tyger  and  the  pinnesse,  because
it  was  night,  kept  out  their  sailes,  &  would  not  meddle
with  them.  After  we  had  thus  fought  together  2  houres
or  more,  and  would  not  lay  him  aboord  because  it  was
night,  we  left  shooting  one  at  the  other,  and  kept  still
the  weather  of  them.  Then  the  Tyger  and  the  pinnesse
kept  about  and  came  to  us,  and  afterward  being  neere
the  shore,  wee  three  kept  about  and  lay  to  the  sea,  and
shot  off^  a  piece  to  give  warning  to  the  Christopher.

This  night  about  12  of  the  clocke,  being  very  litle
winde,  and  the  Master  of  the  Tyger  asleepe,  by  the  ill

239

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

worke  of  his  men  the  ship  fel  aboord  of  us,  and  with  her

sheare-hooks  cut  our  maine  saile,  and  her  boat  being
betwixt  us  was  broken  and  suncke,  with  certaine  mar-
chandise  in  her,  and  the  ships  wales  were  broken  with  her
outleger :  yet  in  the  ende  we  cleared  her  without  any-
more hurt,  but  she  was  in  hazzard  to  be  broken  downe
to  the  water.

The  second  day  we  had  sight  of  the  Christopher,  and
were  neere  unto  her,  so  that  I  tooke  our  boat  and  went
to  her.  And  when  I  came  thither,  they  shewed  me,  that
after  the  Portugals  had  left  us,  they  went  all  roome  with
him,  and  about  twelve  a  clocke  at  night  met  him,  and
shot  at  him,  and  hee  at  them,  and  they  shot  him  thorow
the  sailes  in  divers  places,  and  did  no  other  great  hurt.
And  when  we  had  understood  that  they  had  beene  with
him  as  well  as  with  us,  we  agreed  altogether  to  seeke
them  (if  wee  might  finde  them)  and  keepe  a  weather
our  places  of  traffique.

The  third  day  we  ran  all  day  to  the  Southwestwards  to
seeke  the  Portugals,  but  could  have  no  sight  of  them,
and  hailed  into  the  shore.

The  fourth  day,  when  we  had  sight  of  land,  we  found
that  the  currant  had  set  us  thirty  leagues  to  the  East-
wards of  our  reckoning,  which  we  woondered  at :  for  the
Lagm. first  land  we  made  was  Lagua. Then  I  caused  our  boat
to  be  manned,  and  the  Christophers  also,  and  went  to  the
shore  and  tooke  our  Negro  with  us. And  on  shore  we
learned  that there  were foure French ships upon the
Perinnen.  coast ; one at Perinnen, which is six leagues to the
Weamba. Westward of  Laguoa: another at Weamba, which is
foure leagues to the Estward of  Laguoa : a third at
PerecQw. Perecow, which is foure leagues to the Eastward of
Egrand. Weamba: and the fourth at Egrand, which is foure
leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  Perecow.

When  we  had  intelligence  of  these  newes  we  agreed  to
go  to  the  Eastwards  with  the  French  men  to  put  them
from  their  traffique,  and  shot  oif  two  or  three  pieces  in
our boats to  cause  the  ships  to  way :  and  having  bene

240

WILLIAM TOWERSON  a.d.

1577-
about  one  houre  under  saile,  we  had  sight  of  one  of  the
French  men  under  saile,  hailing  off  from  Weamba  to
whome  we  gave  chase,  and  agreed  in  the  night  for  feare
of  overshooting  them,  that  the  Minion  should  first  come
to  ancre,  and  after  that  about  three  houres,  the  Tyger
and  the  Christopher  to  beare  along  all  night.

The  5.  day  we  found  three  of  the  French  ships  at
ancre:  one  called  La  foye  de  Honfleur,  a  ship  of  220
tunnes,  another  called  the  Ventereuse  or  small  Roebarge
of  Honfleur,  of  100  tunnes,  both  appertaining  to  Shawdet
of  Honfleur,  the  third  was  called  the  Mulet  de  Batuille
a  ship  of  120  tunnes,  and  this  ship  belonged  to  certaine
Marchants  of  Roan.

When  we  came  to  them,  we  determined  to  lay  the
Admiral  aboord,  the  Christopher  the  Viceadmirall,  and
the  Tyger  the  smallest :  but  when  we  came  nere  them
they  wayed,  and  the  Christopher  being  the  headmost
&  the  weathermost  man,  went  roome  with  the  Admirall :
the  Roebarge  went  so  fast  that  wee  could  not  fetch  her.
The  first  that  we  came  to  was  the  Mulet,  and  her  wee  The  English
layed  aboord,  and  our  men  entred  and  tooke  her,  which  ""^^  ^^'
ship  was  the  richest  except  the  Admirall :  for  the  Admirall  rjj  -j  . g'-i
had  taken  about  80  pound  of  golde,  and  the  Roeberge
had  taken  but  22  pound ;  and  all  this  we  learned  of
the  Frenchmen,  who  knew  it  very  well :  for  they  were  all
in  consort  together,  and  had  bene  upon  the  coast  of
Mina  two  moneths  and  odde  dayes :  howbeit  the  Roe-
berge had  bene  there  before  them  with  another  ship
of  Diepe,  and  a  caravel,  which  had  beaten  all  the  coast,
and  were  departed  one  moneth  before  our  arriving
there,  and  they  three  had  taken  about  700  pound  of
golde.

Assoone  as  we  had  layed  the  ship  aboord,  and  left
certaine  men  in  her  to  keepe  her,  we  set  saile  and  gave
chase  to  the  other  two  ships,  and  chased  them  all  day
and  night,  and  the  next  day  untill  three  a  clocke  in
the  afternoone,  but  we  could  not  fetch  them :  and  ther-
fore  seeing  that  we  brought  our  selves  very  farre  to
VI  241  Q

A.D.

1577-

Fifty  pound
of  golde  taken
In  the  French
prise.

Benin.

Our  men  die
of  sicknesse.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

leeward  of  our  place,  we  left  the  chase,  and  kept  about
againe  to  go  with  the  shore.

The  7  day  I  sent  for  the  captaine,  marchants  &  Masters
of  the  other  ships,  and  when  they  came  we  weighed
the  golde  which  we  had  from  the  Frenchmen,  which
weighed  fifty  pound  and  five  ounces  of  golde  :  this  done,
we  agreed  to  put  men  out  of  every  ship  into  the  prise  to
keepe  her.

The  12  day  we  came  to  the  further  place  of  the  Mina
called  Egrand,  and  being  come  to  an  ancre,  discharged  all
the  marchants  goods  out  of  the  prise,  and  would  have
sold  the  ship  with  the  victuals  to  the  Frenchmen,  but
because  she  was  leake  they  would  not  take  her,  but
desired  us  to  save  their  lives  in  taking  them  into  our
owne  ships :  then  we  agreed  to  take  out  the  victuals  and
sinke  the  ship,  and  divide  the  men  among  our  ships.

The  15  at  night  we  made  an  end  of  discharging  the
prise,  and  divided  all  the  Frenchmen  except  foure  which
were  sicke  and  not  able  to  helpe  themselves ;  which  foure
both  the  Christopher  and  the  Tyger  refused  to  take,
leaving  them  in  their  ship  alone  in  the  night,  so  that
about  midnight  I  was  forced  to  fetch  them  into  our
ship.

The  15  of  April,  mooving  our  company  for  the
voyage  to  Benin,  the  most  part  of  them  all  refused  it.

The  16,  seeing  the  unwillingnesse  of  the  company  to
goe  thither,  we  determined  to  spend  as  much  time  upon
the  coast  as  we  could,  to  the  end  we  might  make  our
voyage,  and  agreed  to  leave  the  Minion  here  at  Egrand,
the  Tyger  to  go  to  Pericow  which  is  foure  leagues  off,
and  the  Christopher  to  goe  to  Weamba,  which  is  ten
leagues  to  the  weatherward  of  this  place :  and  if  any  of
them  both  should  have  sight  of  more  sailes  then  they
thought  good  to  meddle  withall,  to  come  roome  with
their  fellowes :  to  wit,  first  the  Christopher  to  come  with
the  Tyger,  and  then  both  they  to  come  with  us.

We  remained  in  this  place  called  Egrand,  untill  the
last  day  of  April,  in  which  time  many  of  our  men  fell

242

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1577-
sicke ;  and  sixe  of  them  died. And  here  we  could  have
no  traffique  with  the  Negros  but  three  or  foure  dayes  in
the weeke, and all the  rest  of  the weeke they  would
not  come  at  us.

The  3  of  May  not  having  the  pinnesse  sent  us  with
cloth  from  the  other  ships,  as  they  promised,  we  solde
French  cloth,  and  gave  but  three  yards  thereof  to  every
fuffe.

The  5  day  the  Negros  departed,  and  told  us  they
would  come  to  us  againe  within  foure  dayes,  which  we
determined  there  to  tary,  although  we  had  divers  of  our
men  sicke.

The  8  day,  all  our  cloth  in  the  Minion  being  sold,
I  called  the  company  together,  to  know  whether  they
would  tary  the  sale  of  the  cloth  taken  in  the  prise  at  this
place  or  no :  they  answered,  that  in  respect  of  the  death
of  some  of  their  men,  and  the  present  sicknesse  of  twenty  Skknesse.
more,  they  would  not  tary,  but  repaire  to  the  other  ships,
of  whom  they  had  heard  nothing  since  the  27  of  April:
and  yet  they  had  our  pinnesse  with  them,  onely  to  cary
newes  from  one  to  another.

The  9  day  we  determined  to  depart  hence  to  our
fellowes,  to  see  what  they  had  done,  and  to  attempt  what
was  to  be  done  at  the  towne  of  Don  John.

The  10  day  in  the  morning  we  sat  saile  to  seeke  the
Christopher  and  the  Tyger.

The  1 1  day  the  captaine  of  the  Christopher  came  to
us,  and  told  us  that  they  could  finde  small  doings  at  the
places  where  they  had  bene.

The  12  William  Crompton  and  I  in  our  small  pinnesse
went  to  the  Tyger  and  the  Christopher  at  Perenine.

The  13  we  sent  away  the  Tyger  to  Egrand,  because
we  found  nothing  to  doe  at  Perenine,  worth  the  tarying
for.

The  14  our  great  pinnesse  came  to  us,  and  presently
we  put  cloth  into  her,  and  sent  her  backe  to  Weamba,
where  she  had  bene  before,  and  had  taken  there  ten
pound  of  golde.

243

A.D.

Mowre.

[II.  ii.  49.]

The  g}-eat
towne  of  Don
John.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  1 5  the  Minion  came  to  us,  and  the  next  day  we
went  a  shore  with  our  boats,  and  tooke  but  one  ounce
of  golde.

The  19  day  having  set  saile  we  came  to  an  ancre  before
Mowre,  and  there  we  tarried  two  dayes,  but  tooke  not
an  ounce  of  golde.

The  21  we  came  to  an  ancre  before  Don  Johns
towne.

The  22  we  manned  our  boats  and  went  to  shore,  but
the  Negros  would  not  come  at  us;  then  the  Captaine  of
the  Christopher  and  I  tooke  a  skiffe  and  eight  men  with
us,  and  went  and  talked  with  the  Negros,  and  they  sayd
that  they  would  send  a  man  to  the  great  towne,  where
Don  John  himselfe  lay,  to  advertise  him  of  our  comming.

The  23  we  went  a  shore  againe,  and  the  Negros  tolde
us  that  this  day  the  marchants  of  Don  John  would  come
downe:  so  we  tarried  there  untill  night,  and  no  man
would  come  to  us :  but  divers  of  the  Negros  made  us
signes  to  depart.

The  24  the  Captaine  of  the  Christopher  tooke  his  boat
&  went  to  Mowre,  and  when  he  came  thither,  certaine
Negros  came  to  him  to  know  the  price  of  his  wares,  but
in  the  end  there  came  an  Almade,  which  he  judged  came
from  the  castle,  and  caused  all  the  Negros  to  depart  from
him  :  and  when  he  saw  they  would  come  no  more  to
him,  he  went  a  shore  and  tooke  certaine  men  with  him,
and  then  the  Negros  cast  stones  at  them,  &  would  not
suffer  them  to  come  up  to  their  towne.  And  when  they
saw  that,  they  tooke  certaine  of  the  Almades,  and  put
them  to  the  sea,  and  afterwards  departed.  The  same
morning  I  went  a  shore  at  Don  Johns  towne,  and  tooke
a  white  flag  with  me,  but  none  of  the  Negros  could  come
to  me,  which  caused  us  to  judge  that  the  Portugals  were
in  the  towne.  After  this,  our  boat  came  to  us  well
manned,  and  I  sent  one  man  up  to  the  towne  with  a
white  flag  in  his  hand,  but  when  he  was  come  thither,
all  the  Negros  went  away  &  would  not  speake  with  him.
Then  I  sent  one  alone  into  the  woods  after them,  but

244

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad

1577-
they  in  no  case  would  come  to  us.  When  we  saw  that,
we  tooke  twelve  goats  and  fourteene  hennes,  which  we
found  in  the  towne,  and  went  aboord  without  doing  any
further  hurt  to  the  towne :  and  when  I  came  aboord,  I
found  our  pinnesse  come  from  Cormatin,  which  had  taken  Cormatin.
there  two  pound  &  five  ounces  of  golde.  Then  after
much  ado  with  the  froward  Mariners,  we  went  thither-
wards with  our  ship,  and  the  Christopher  went  to  Mowre.

The 25 day  the Master  of  the  Christopher  sent  his
boat  to  the  shore  for  balast,  and  the  Negros  would  have  "^  fight  with
beaten the company from the shore, whereupon the ^ ^^°^'
company  resisted them, and slew and hurt divers of
them,  and  having  put  them  to  flight,  burned  their  towne,
and  brake  all  their  boats.

The  26  day  our  pinnesse  came  to  us  from  Cormatin,
and  had  taken  two  pound  &  eleven  ounces  of  golde  :  and
John  Shirife  tolde  us  that  the  Negros  of  that  place  were
very  desirous  to  have  a  ship  come  backe  againe  to  their
towne.

The  27  we  wayed  and  went  to  Cormatin.

The  28  the  Christopher  came  to  us  from  Mowre,  and
traffiqued  there  two  dayes.

The  second  day  of  June  the  Tyger  came  to  us  from
Egrand,  and  the  pinnesse  from  Weamba,  and  they  two
had  taken  about  fifty  pound  of  golde  since  they  departed
from  us.

The  4  day  we  departed  from  Cormatin  to  plie  up  to
Shamma,  being  not  able  to  tary  any  longer  upon  the
coast  for  lacke  of  victuals,  and  specially  of  drinke.

The  7  day  we  had  sight  of  five  of  the  king  of  Portugals
ships,  which  came  to  an  ancre  besides  the  castle.

The  8  day  George  and  Binny  came  to  us,  and  brought
with  them  about  two  pound  of  golde.

The  10  day  in  the  morning  I  tooke  our  small  pinnesse,
and  the  Captaine  of  the  Christopher  with  me,  and
manned  her  well,  and  went  to  the  castle  to  view  the
Portugals  ships,  and  there  we  found  one  ship  of  about
300  tunne,  and  foure  caravels  :  when  we  had  well  viewed

24s

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

them,  we  returned  backe  againe  to  our  ships  which  we
found  seven  leagues  at  sea.

The  1 1  day  in  the  morning  we  found  our  selves  wel
shot  toward  Shamma,  &  the  Tyger  with  us,  but  the
Minion  &  the  pinnesse  had  not  wayed  that  night,  so
that  we  were  out  of  sight  of  them  :  and  having  brought
our  selves  in  the  weather  of  the  Portugals  ships,  we  came
to  an  ancre  to  tary  for  the  Minion,  or  els  we  might  have
fetched  Shamma.  At  night  the  Minion  and  the  pinnesse
came  up  to  us,  but  could  not  fetch  so  farre  to  the
weatherward  as  we,  and  therefore  they  ancred  about  a
league  a  weather  The  castle,  and  we  waied  in  the  Chris-
topher, and  went  roome  with  her.

The  12  day  the  Tyger  came  roome  with  us,  and  she
and  the  Christopher  finding  themselves  to  stand  in  great
need  of  victuals,  would  have  gone  with  the  Portugals
ships  to  have  fetched  some  of  them  forth :  but  our
master  and  company  would  in  no  case  consent  to  goe
with  them,  for  feare  of  hanging  when  we  came  home :
and  the  other  two  ships  being  tully  minded  to  have  gone,
and  fearing  that  their  owne  company  would  accuse  them,
durst  not  go  to  them.

After  this,  by  reason  of  the  want  of  victuals  in  the
pinnesse,  which  could  receive  no  victuals  from  the  other
shippes,  but  from  us  onely,  we  tooke  out  all  our  men,
and  put  twelve  Frenchmen  into  her,  and  gave  them
victuals  to  bring  them  to  Shamma.
[II.  ii.  50.]  The  19  day  the  Tyger  and  Minion  arrived  at  Shamma,
^'"^^^  and  the  Christopher  within  two leagues off  them, but

could  not  fetch  the  winde  by  reason  of  the  scantnesse  of
the  winde,  which  hath  bene  so  scant,  that  in  fifteene
dayes  we  have  plied  to  the  windewards  but  twelve
leagues,  which  before  we  did  in  one  day  and  a
night.

The  20  day  I  tooke  our  pinnesse,  and  went  to  the
towne  of  Shamma  to  speake  with  the  captaine,  and  he
tolde  me  that  there  was  no  golde  there  to  be  had,  nor
so  much  as  a  hen  to be bought,  and  all  by  reason  of

246

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1577-
the  accord  which  he  had  made  with  the  Portugals,  and  I
seeing  that  departed  peaceably  from  him.

The  21  I  put  such  things  as  we  had  into  our  small
pinnesse,  and  tooke  one  marchant  of  our  ship,  and
another  of  the  Tyger,  and  sent  her  to  Hanta,  to  attempt,
if  she  could  doe  any  thing  there.  That  night  they
could  do  nothing  but  were  promised  to  have  golde  the
next  day.

The  next  day  (which  was  the  22)  being  come,  we  sent
our  pinnesse  to  Hanta  againe,  but  there  neither  the
captaine  nor  the  Negros  durst  traffike  with  us,  but  intised
us  from  place  to  place,  and  all  to  no  purpose.

This day  we put away  our pinnesse,  with  five and  ^-^O'  P^^  ^^^
twenty  Frenchmen  in  her,  and  gave  them  such  victuals  ^^f"^"-^^"
as  we  could  spare,  putting  fifteene  of  them  to  the  ransome  i^^g  ^^^
of  sixe  crownes  a  man.  pinnesse.

The  23  of  June  our  pinnesse  came  to  us  from  Hanta,
and  tolde  us  that  the  Negros  had  dealt  very  ill  with
them,  and  would  not  traffike  with  them  to  any  purpose.

The  24  we  tooke  our  boat  and  pinnesse  and  manned  ,
them well, and  went to the towne of  Shamma, and  Shamma  burnt
because  the  Captaine  thereof  was  become  subject  to  the  h^^^^nghsh.
Portugals  we  burned  the  towne,  and our men  seeking
the  spoile  of  such  trifles  as  were  there  found  a  Portugals
chest,  wherein  was  some  of  his  apparell,  and  his  weights,
and  one  letter  sent  to  him  from  the  castle,  whereby  we
gathered that the Portugall had bene there of  a  long
time.

The  2  5 day,  about  three  of  the  clocke  at  afternoone, ^■^«'''  feturne
we  set saile,  and  put  into the sea,  for our  returne to  "°"^^'^^^^-
England.

The  last  day  of  this  moneth  we  fell  with  the  shore
againe,  and  made  our  reckoning  to  be  eighteene  leagues
to  the  weatherward  of  the  place  where  we  set  off.  When
we  came  to  make  the  land,  we  found  our  selves  to  be
eighteene  leagues  to  the  leeward  of  the  place,  where  we
set  off,  which  came  to  passe,  by  reason  of  the  extreame
currant  that  runneth  to  the  Eastward  :  when  we  perceived  The  currant.

247

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1577-

our  selves  so  abused,  we  agreed  to  cast  about  againe,  and
to  lie  as  neere  the  winde  as  we  could,  to  fetch  the  line.
S.  Thome  The  seventh  of  July  we  had sight of  the He of  S.

Iknd.  Thome,  and  thought  to  have  sought  the  road  to  have

ancred there : but the next  morning the winde came
about,  and  we  kept  our  course.

The  ninth,  the  winde  varying,  we  kept  about  againe,
and  fell  with  the  Hand  of  S.  Thome,  and  seeking  the
road,  were  becalmed  neere  the  Hand,  and  with  the  currant
were  put  neere  the  shore,  but  could  have  no  ground  to
ancre :  so  that  we  were  forced  to  hoise  out  our  pinnesse,
and  the  other  ships  their  skifs  to  towe  from  the  Hand,
which  did  litle  good,  but  in  the  end  the  winde  put  us
three  leagues  off  the  shore.

The  tenth  day  the  Christopher  and  the  Tyger  cast
about,  whereby  we  judged  them  to  have  agreed  together,
to  goe  seeke  some  ships  in  the  road,  and  to  leave  us :
our  men  were  not  willing  to  goe  after  them,  for  feare  of
running  in  with  the  Hand  againe,  and  of  putting  our
selves  into  the  same  danger  that  we  were  in  the  night
before :  but  we  shot  oif  a  piece,  and  put  out  two  lights,
and  they  answered  us  with  lights  againe :  whereupon  we
kept  our  course,  and  thought  that  they  had  followed  us,
but  in  the  morning  we  could  not  see  them,  so  that  they
left  us  willingly,  and  we  determined  to  follow  them  no
more.  But  the  eleventh  day  we  altered  our  opinion  and
course,  and  consented  to  cast  about  againe  for  the  Hand,
to  seeke  our  ships ;  and  about  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone  we  met  with  them.

The 13  we  fell  againe  with  the Hand  of  S.  Thome;

and  the  same  night  we  found  our  selves  directly  under

the  line.

The  descrip- This  Hand is  a  very  high  Hand,  and  being  upon  the

^^^"  °-fJ!^^  ^^^'  West  side  of  it,  you  shall  see  a  very  high  pike,  which  is

oj .  ^  onie. ^gj.y.  gjji^ii^  2in'dL  streight,  as  it  were  the  steeple  of  a  church,

which  pike  lieth  directly  under  the  line,  and  at  the  same

South  end  of  the  Hand  to  the  Westward  thereof  lieth  a

small  Hand,  about  a  mile  from  the  great  Hand.

248

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad

1577.

The  third  of  August  we  departed  from  the  He  of  S.
Thome,  &  met  the  winde  at  the  Southwest.

The 12 day  we  were  in  the  height  of  Cape  verde.

The  22  day  we  fell  with  one  of  the  lies  of  Cape  verde,
called  The  He  of  Salt,  and  being  informed  by  a  Scotish  T^he  Hand  of
man that  we tooke among the Frenchmen upon the
coast,  that  there  were  fresh  victuals  to  be  had,  we  came
to  an  ancre  there.

The  23  day  in  the  morning  we  manned  our  skiffe,
and  went  a  shore,  and  found  no  houses,  but  we  saw  foure
men,  which  kept  themselves  alwayes  farre  from  us,  as
for  cattell  we  could  finde  none,  but  great  store  of  goats,  [II.  ii.  51.]
and  they  were  so  wilde,  that  we  could  not  take  above
three  or  foure  of  them :  but  there  we  had  good  store  of
fish,  and  upon  a  small  Hand  which  lay  by  the  same  we
had  great  store  of  sea-birds.

At  night  the  Christopher  brake  her  cable,  and  lost  an
ancre,  so  that  she  could  tary  no  longer,  so  we  all  wayed,
and  set  saile.  Upon  the  same  Hand  we  left  the  Scotish
man,  which  was  the  occasion  of  our  going  aland  at  that
place,  but  how  he  was  left  we  could  not  tell :  but,  as  we
judged,  the  people  of  the  Hand  found  him  sleeping,  and
so  caried  him  away :  for  at  night  I  went  my  selfe
to  the  Hand  to  seeke  him,  but  could  hear  nothing  of
him.

The  24  day  the  Master  of  the  Tyger  came  aboord  us,
&  tolde  us  that  his  men  were  so  weake,  and  the  shippe
so leake,  that  he  was  not  able  to  keepe  her above  the
water,  and  therefore requested us to go backe  againe
to  the  Hand,  that  we  might  discharge  her,  and  give  her
up :  but  we  intreated  him  to  take  paine  with  her  a  while,
and  we  put  a  French Carpenter  into her,  to see  if  he
could  finde  the  leake. This  day  we  tooke  a  view  of  all  ^^^^  EXf^t  ^'^-
our  men,  both  those  that  were  hole,  and  the  sicke  also,  ^^»^^»^^f^^J
and  we  found  that  in  all  the  three  ships,  were  not  above  ^^.^^  ^^  ^^^^^
thirty  sound  men.  ofGuinle.

The  25  we  had  sight  of  the  He  of  S.  Nicholas,  and  the
day following,  of  the other Hes,  S. Lucia,  S.  Vincent,

249

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

and  S.  Anthony ;  which  foure  lies  lie  the  one  from  the
other  Northwest  and  by  West,  Southeast  and  by  East.
The  26  we  came  againe  with  the  Hand  of  S.  Anthony,
and  could  not  double  the  Cape.  This  day  Philip  Jones,
the  Master  of  the  Christopher,  came  aboord  us,  who  had
beene  aboord  the  Tyger,  and  tolde  us  that  they  were  not
able  to  keepe  the  Tyger,  because  she  was  leake,  and
the  Master  very  weake,  and  sayd  further,  he  had  agreed
with  the  Master  and  the  company,  that  if  the  next
day  we  could  double  the  Hand,  we  should  runne  to
the  leeward  of  it,  and  there  discharge  her :  but  if  we
could  not  double  it,  then  to  put  in  betwixt  the  Hand
of  S.  Vincent  and  S.  Anthony,  to  see  if  we  could  dis-
charge her.

The  third  day  of  September  I  went  aboord  the
Tyger,  with  the  Master  and  marchants  with  me,  to
view  the  shippe  and  men :  and  we  found  the  shippe
very  leake,  and  onely  six  labouring  men  in  her,  whereof
one  was  the  Master .  gunner :  so  that  we  seeing  that
they  were  not  able  to  keepe  the  ship,  agreed  to  take
in  the  men,  and  of  the  goods  what  we  could  save,  and
then  to  put  the  ship  away.

The  fift  day  we  went  to  discharge  the  Tyger.
The  eight  day,  having  taken  out  the  artillery,  goods,
The  Tyger  victuals,  and  gold of  the Tyger, we gave  her up 25
given  up. degrees  by  North  the  line.

The  27  we  had  sight  of  two  of  the  Hes  of  the
Azores,  S.  Mary,  and  S.  Michael.

The  fourth  of  October  we  found  our  selves  to  be
41 degrees  and  a  halfe  from  the  line.

The  sixt  day  the  Christopher  came  to  us,  and  willed
us  to  put  with  the  Cape,  for  they  also  were  so  weake,
that  they  were  not  able  to  keepe  the  sea,  and  we  being
weake  also,  agreed  to  goe  for  Vigo,  being  a  place
which  many  English  men  frequent.

The  10  day  the  Christopher  went  roome  with  the
Cape,  but  we  having  a  mery  wind  for  England,  and
fearing  the danger  of  the  enemies,  which ordinarily  lie

250

WILLIAM TOWERSON  ad.

1577-
about  the  Cape :  besides,  not  knowing  the  state  of
our  countrey  and  Spaine,  and  although  it  were  peace,
yet  there  was  little  hope  of  friendship  at  their  hands,
considering  the  voyage  that  we  had  made,  and  we  also
being  so  weake,  that  by  force  and  violence  we  could
come  by  nothing,  and  doubting  also  that  the  King  of
Portugall  knowing  of  our  being  there,  might  worke
some  way  with  the  Councell  of  Spaine  to  trouble  us :
and  further,  considering  that  if  we  did  put  in  with  any
harbor,  we  should  not  be  able  to  come  out  againe,  till
we  sent  for  more  men  into  England,  which  would  be
a  great  charge,  and  losse  of  time,  and  meanes  of  many
dangers.  All  these  things  pondred,  we  agreed  to  shoot
off  two  pieces  of  ordinance,  to  warne  the  Christopher,
and  then  we  went  our  course  for  England :  she  hear-
ing our  pieces  followed  us,  and  we  carried  a  light  for
her,  but  the  next  day  in  the  morning  it  was  thicke,
and  we  could  not  see  her  in  the  afternoone  neither,  so
that  we  suspected  that  either  she  was  gone  with  Spaine,
or  els  that  she  should  put  foorth  more  sailes  then  we  in
the  night,  and  was  shot  a  head  of  us,  so  that  then  we
put  forth  our  top-sailes,  and  went  our  course  with
England.

At  the  time  when  the  Christopher  left  us,  we  were
within  1 20  leagues  of  England,  and  45  leagues  North-
west and  by  West  from  Cape  Finister :  and  at  the
same  time  in  our  ships  we  had  not  above  sixe  Mariners
and  sixe  Marchants  in  health,  which  was  but  a  weake
company  for  such  a  ship  to  seeke  a  forren  harbour.

The 16 day, about  sixe  of  the  clocke  at night, we
met with a great storme at the Westsouthwest, &
West, and our men being weake, and not able to  Extreame
handle our  sailes, we  lost the same  night our  maine  ^^'^knesse  of
saile, foresaile, and spreetsaile, &  were  forced to  lie  a
hulling,  untill  the  eighteenth day,  and then we made
ready  an  olde  course of  a  foresaile,  and put it  to  the
yard,  and  therewith  finding  our  selves  far  shot  into  the  [II.  ii.  52.]
sleeve, we bare with our owne  coast ; but that  fore-

251

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^577-

saile  continued  not  above  two  houres,  before  it  was
blowen  from  the  yard  with  a  freat,  and  then  we  were
forced  to  lie  a  hull  againe,  untill  the  nineteenth  day
of  October  in  the  morning,  and  then  we  put  an  olde
bonnet  to  our  foreyard,  which,  by  the  good  blessing  and
providence  of  God,  brought  us  to  the  He  of  Wight,
where  we  arrived  the  20  of  October  in  the  afternoone.

The  commodities  and  wares  that  are  most  desired
in  Guinie,  betwixt  Sierra  Liona  and  the
furthest  place  of  the  Mine.

M  Anils  of  brasse,  and  some  of  leade.
Basons  of  divers  sorts,  but  the  most  lattin.

Pots  of  course  tinne,  of  a  quart  and  more.

Some  wedges  of  yron.

Margarites,  and  certaine  other  sleight  beads.

Some  blew  Corall.

Some  horse  tailes.

Linnen  cloth  principally.

Basons  of  Flanders.

Some  red  cloth  of  low  price,  and  some  kersie.

Kettles  of  Dutch-land  with  brasen  handles.

Some  great  brasse  basons  graved,  such  as  in  Flanders
they  set  upon  their  cupboords.

Some  great  basons  of  pewter,  and  ewers  graven.

Some  lavers,  such  as  be  for  water.

Great  knives  of  a  low  price.

Sleight  Flanders-caskets.

Chests  of  Roan  of  a  lowe  price,  or  any  other  chests.

Great  pinnes.

Course  French  coverings.

Packing  sheets  good  store.

Swords,  daggers,  frise  mantels,  and  gownes,  clokes,  hats,
red  caps,  Spanish  blankets,  axe  heads,  hammers,  short
pieces  of  yron,  sleight  belles,  gloves  of  a  lowe  price,
leather  bags,  and  what  other  trifles  you  will.

252

A REMEMBRANCE FOR  JOHN LOK  ad.

1561.

Certaine  Articles  delivered  to  M.  John  Lok,  by
Sir  William  Gerard  Knight,  M.  William
Winter,  M.  Benjamin  Gonson,  M.  Anthony
Hickman,  and  M.  Edward  Castelin  the  8
of  September  1561,  touching  a  voyage  to
Guinea.

A  remembrance for  you M. Lok at your  com-
ming  to  the  coast  of  Guinie.

Irst,  when  God  shal  send  you  thither,  to
procure,  as  you  passe  alongst  the  coast,
to  understand  what  rivers,  havens,  or
harboroughs  there  be ;  and  to  make
your  selfe  a  plat  thereof,  setting  those
places  which  you  shall  thinke  materiall
in  your  sayd  plat,  with  their  true  eleva-
tions.

Also  you  shall  learne  what  commodities  doe  belong
to  the  places  where  you  shall  touch,  and  what  may  be
good  for  them.

It  is  thought  good,  that  having  a  fort  upon  the  coast  T'he  English
of  Mina  in  the  king:  of  Habaans  country,  it  would  serve  f^^^'^f"^-^

.  tflt€7tci  to

to  great purpose : wherfore you are especially  sent to  ^^./^^  /„
consider  where  the  fort  might  be  best  placed,  and upon  Gkinea,tntke
what  ground : wherein are to be noted these things  king  of
following.  ^^'^'^^^^

1.  That  the  ground  so  serve,  that  it  joyne  to  the
sea  on  the  one  part,  so  as  shippes  and  boats  may  come
to lade  and  unlade.

2.  What  molde  of  earth  the  ground  is  of.

3.  What  timber  or  wood  may  be  had,  and  how  it
will  be  caried.

4.  What  provision  of  victuals  may  be  had  in  the
countrey :  and  what  kinde  of  our  victuals  will  best
serve  to  continue.

5.  The  place must be naturally strong,  or such as

253

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1561.

may  be  made  strong  with  a  small  charge,  and  afterwards
kept  with  a  few  men.  I

6.  How  water  may  be  provided,  if  there  be  none  to
be  had  in  the  ground  where  the  fort  shall  stand,  or
neere  to  it.

7.  What  helpe  is  to  be  had  from  the  people  of  the
countrey,  either  for  the  building  of  it,  or  for  the
defence  thereof.

[II.  ii.  53.] To moove the king of Haban a farre off, for

The  king  of  ^^  making  of  a fort,  and to  note  how  he  will  like  it;

but use your communication so,  that although there

might fall out  good cause for  the  doing  of  it,  yet  he

do  not  understand  your  meaning.

Search  the  countrey  so  farre  as  you  may,  both  alongst
the  coast,  and  into  the  land.

To  learne  what  became  of  the  marchants  that  were
left  at  Benin.

The  matters  which  shall  be  of  importance  to  be  noted
we  nothing  doubt  that  you  will  omit,  wherefore  we
referre  the  order  of  these  affaires  to  your  good  dis-
cretion.

Also  we  pray  you  as  occasion  shall  serve  that  you  ayd
and  helpe  our  factours,  both  with  your  counsell  and
otherwise ;  and  thus  God  send  you  safely  to  returne.

William  Gerrard,  William  Winter,  Benjamin  Gonson,
Anthony  Hickman,  Edward  Castelin.

254

A LETTER FROM JOHN LOK  ad.

1561.

A  letter  of  M.  John  Lok  to  the  worshipfull
company  of  Marchants  adventurers  for  Guinie,
written  1561,  shewing  reasons  for  his  not
proceeding  in  a  voyage  then  intended  to  the
foresayd  countrey.

OrshipfuU  sirs ;  since  the  arrivall  of  M.
Pet  and  Buttoll  Monjoy  (as  I  understand)
for  the  voyage  it  is  concluded  that  the
Minion  shall  proceed  on  her  voyage,  if
within  20  dayes  she  may  be  repaired  of
those  hurts  she  hath  received  by  the  last
storme :  or  in  the  moneth  of  January
also,  if  the  wind  wil  serve  therfore.  Wherefore  for  that
your  worships  shall  not  be  ignorant  of  my  determined
purpose  in  the  same,  with  the  reasons  that  have  perswaded
me  thereunto ;  I  have  thought  good  to  advertise  you
thereof,  trusting  that  your  worships  will  weigh  them,  as  I
uprightly  and  plainly  meane  them.  And  not  for  any  feare-
or  discouragement  that  I  have  of  my  selfe  by  the  raging
of  the  stormes  of  the  sea,  for  that  (I  thanke  the  Lord)
these  have  not  beene  the  first  that  I  have  abiden,  neither
trust  I  they  shalbe  the  last.  First  the  state  of  the  ship,  in
which,  though  I  thinke  not  but  M.  Pet  can  do  more
for  her  strengthening  then  I  can  conceive,  yet  for  all  that,
it  will  neither  mend  her  conditions,  nor  yet  make  her
so  stanch  that  any  cabin  in  her  shalbe  stanch  for  men  to
lie  drie  in :  the  which  sore,  what  a  weakening  it  will  be  to
the  poore  men  after  their  labour,  that  they  neither  can
have  a  shift  of  apparell  drie,  nor  yet  a  drie  place  to  rest  in,
I  referre  to  your  discretion.  For  though  that  at  Harwich
she  was  both  bound  and  caulked  as  much  as  might  be,
both  within  and  without,  yet  for  all  that  she  left  not,
afore  this  flaw,  in  other  weathers,  being  stressed,  to  open
those  seames,  and  become  in  the  state  she  was  before ;  I
meane,  in  wetting  her  men :  notwithstanding  her  new
worke. And  my  judgement,  with  that  little  experience

255

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1561.

I have  had,  leadeth me  to  thinke  that the  ship  whose
water  works  and  footings  be  spent  and  rotten  cannot  be
but  leake  for  men. Next,  the  unseasonable  time  of  the
yere  which  is  now  present. And  how  onely  by  meanes  of
the  unseasonable  times  in  the returne  from  the  voyage
home,  many  thereby  have  decayed,  to  the  great  misery  and
calamity  of  the  rest,  and  also  to  the  great  slander  of  the
voyage  (which  I  much  respect)  the  last  and  other  voyages
have declared. And  what it  is  to  make  the  voyage  in
unseasonable time, that hath the second voyage also
declared. Wherefore weying and foreseeing this (as
I  may  wel  terme it)  calamity  and  unevitable  danger of
men,  and  that  by  men  she  must  be  brought  home  againe
(except  that  God  will  shew  an  extraordinary  miracle) I
purpose  not  nor  dare  I  venture  with  a  safe  conscience  to
tempt  God  herein. Againe,  forsomuch  as  she  is  alone,
and  hath  so  little  helpe  of  boat  or  pinnesse  in  her  trade,  &
also  for  her  watering,  where  a  long  time  of  force  must  be
spent,  my  going,  to  the  accomplishment  of  your  expecta-
tions, will  be  to  small  effect  for  this  time,  because  1  shall
want  both  vessell  and  men  to  accomplish  it. And  I  would
not  gladly  so  spend  my  time  and  travell,  to  my  great
charges  and  paine,  and  after,  for  not  falling  out  accordingly,
to  lose  both  pot  and  water,  as  the  proverbe  is. As  for  the
Primrose,  if  she  be  there,  her  trade  will  be  ended  or  ever
we  come  there,  so  that  she  of  force,  by  want  of  provision,
must  returne : yea,  though  we should carry  with  us  a
supply  for  her,  yet  is  the  meeting  of  her  doubtfull,  and
though  we  met  her, yet  will  the  men not  tarry,  as  no
reason  is  they  should  :  howbeit  my  opinion  of  her  is  that
she  is  put  into  Ireland. The  Flowerdeluce  was  in  Mil-
ford. Thus  for  that your worships might understand
the  whole  cause  why  I  doe  not  proceed,  I  have  troubled
you  at  this  time  with  this  my  long  Letter. And,  as  God
is  my  Judge,  not  for  feare  of  the  Portugals,  which  there
we  shall meet  (and yet  alone  without  ayde)  as  here  is
a  shippe  which  was  in  Lisbon,  whose  men  say  that  there
are  in  a  readinesse  (onely  to  meet  us)  foure  great  ships,  of

256

A LETTER FROM JOHN LOK  ad.

1 56 1.

the  which  one  is  accounted  700  tunnes,  &  other  pinnesses  :

yet  not  for  feare  of  them,  nor  raging  of  the  seas  (whose

rage  God  is  above  to  rule)  but  onely  for  the  premisses :

the sequell whereof  must by reason turne to a great  [II.  ii.  54.

misery  to the  men  :  the  which  I  for  my  part  (though  it

might  turne  me  to  as  much  gaine  as  the  whole  commeth

to) yet would I not be so tormented, as the sight

thereof  would  be  a  corsive  to  my  heart,  and  the  more,

because foreseeing the same, I should be  so  leud, as

yeelding, to have runne into the danger thereof, and

therefore  I  have  absolutely  determined  with  my  selfe  not

to  goe  this  voyage. Howbeit  if  in  a  seasonable  time  of

the  yeere I had but  one ship sufficient,  though much

lesse  by  the  halfe,  I  would  not  refuse  (as  triall  being  made

thereof  should  appeare)  or  if  I had  ability  of  my  selfe

to  venture  so  much,  it  should  well  be  seene. And  this  I

speake  to  give  you  to  understand  that  I  refuse  not  this

for  feare :  If  you  purpose  to  proceed  heerein,  send  some

one  whom  you  please ;  to  whom  I  will  not  onely  deliver

the  articles  which  I have received, but  also will  give .

some particular notes which I have noted in the

affaires which you have committed unto mee, with

the  best  helpe  and  counsell  I  can. Thus  the  living  God

keepe  your  worships  all. BristoU  this 1 1 of  December

1561.

Your  worships  to  comand  to  his  power
John  Lok.

[The  relation
VI  257  R

A.D.

1562.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  relation  of  one  William  Rutter  to  M.
Anthony  Hickman  his  master  touching  a
voyage  set  out  to  Guinea  in  the  yeere  1562,
by  Sir  William  Gerard,  Sir  William  Chester,
M.  Thomas  Lodge,  the  sayd  Antony  Hick-
man, and  Edward  Castelin :  which  voyage  is
also  written  in  verse  by  Robert  Baker.

ijlOrshipfuU  sir,  my  duty  remembred,  this
shalbe  to  declare  unto  you  tlie  discourse
of  this  our  voyage,  since  our  departure
out  of  England  from  Dartmouth ;  at
which  time  I  gave  you  to  understand  of
our  departure,  which  was  the  25  of
February  1562.  Then  having  a  prosper-
ous winde  we  departed  from  thence,  and  sailed  on  our
Cape  verde.  voyage  untill  we  arrived  at  Cavo  verde  the  20  of  March,
making  no  abode  there,  but  sailed  along  the  coast  to  our
R\o  de  Sestos.  first  appointed  port  Rio  de  sestos,  at  which  port  we
arrived  the  third  of  Aprill  in  the  morning,  having  the
sight  of  a  Frenchman,  who  assoone  as  he  perceived  us,
set  saile  and  made  to  the  sea :  in  the  meane  time  we
came  to  an  anker  in  the  rode :  and  after  that  he  had
espied  our  flag,  perceiving  us  to  be  Englishmen,  he  bare
with  the  shore,  &  hailed  our  ships  with  his  ordinance,  at
which  time  we  the  merchants  of  both  the  ships  were  in  the
river  in  traffike,  and  had  understanding  of  the  Negros
that  he  had  bene  there  three  dayes  before  our  comming :
so  we  concluded  together,  that  if  he  sent  his  pinnesse
to  traffike,  we  would  not  suifer  him,  untill  we  had  taken
further  order  with  their  captaine  &  marchants.  In  the
afternoone  the  pinnesse  came  into  the  river,  whose  men
we  willed  to  make  no  traffike  untill  we  had  talked  further
with  their  captaine,  whom  we  willed  that  night  to  come
aboord  our  admirall ;  which  was  done.  At  which  sayd
The  Minion,  time  M.  Burton  and  John  Munt  went  aboord  the  Minion
where  the  Frenchmen  were,  &  there  concluded  that  they

258

WILLIAM RUTTER  ad.

1562.
should  tary  by  us  eight  dayes,  and  suffer  us  quietly  to
traffike,  wherewith  they  were  not  well  pleased. Where-
upon  the  next  morning  they  departed from  us, sailing
alongst  the  coast  to  the  Eastward  towards  Potis,  which  he
did to hinder our traffike that way : wherefore the
marchants  of  the  Minion  &  we  concluded  (forasmuch  as
at  that  present  we  understood  that  there  were  no  sailes
past  alongst) that  we  should  go  before,  to  the  end  we
might  not  be  hindred  of  our  traffike  by  the  Frenchmen ;
which thing  we did : and  at  our  comming thither  we
found  the  Frenchman  in  traffike  to  the  West  of  Potis,  by
whom we passed,  &  arrived  at  Rio  de  Potis  the  1 2  of  Rio  de  Potis.
April,  where  we  remained  in  traffike  untill  the  15  of  the
sayd  moneth,  and  then  departed  from  thence  along  the
coast  toward  Sant  Andre,  where  we  appointed  by  agree-  ^io  de  S.
ment to  tary for  the  Minion:  and  the 17  at  night  we  ^"^re.
came  to  the  river  of  S.  Andre ; in  which  very  day  the
Minion  came  unto  us,  telling  us  that  they  met  at  cavo  das  ^^^^^  das
Palmas  a  great  ship  and  a  carvell  of  the  king  of  Portugals  Z"^''^^-^-
bound  to  the  Mina,  who  gave  chase  unto  them,  and  shot
freely  at  them,  and  the  Minion  in  her  defence  returned
her the  like :  but  God  be  praised the  Minion  had  no
hurt  for  that  time. In  the  end  we  concluded  to  hasten
towards  cavo  de  tres  puntas  to  have  put  them  from  the  ^^^^  de  tres
castle, if  by any meanes wee might  ; and  when wee  P^'^^^^-
were  come to the Cape,  we  lay  a  hull  one  night and
two  dayes,  and  doubting  they  had  bene  past,  the  Minion
went  neere  the  shore,  and  sent  her  merchants  to  a  place
called  Anta,  where  beforetime  we  had  traffike,  and the  Anta.
next  morning  very  early  being  the  2 1  of  the  sayd  moneth,
we  againe  had  sight  of  the  ship  and  the  caravell  a  good
way  to sea-boord  of  us. Then we presently  set  saile,
and  bare  with  the  formost  of  them,  hoping  to  have  got
betweene  the  castle  and  them,  but  we  came  short  of  our
purpose,  which  was  no  small  griefe  unto  us  all ;  and  when
they  had  gotten  the  castle  to  friend,  they  shot  at  us  freely,
and  we  at  them,  and  the  castle  at  us ; but  we  profited
litle. In  the  afternoone  we  set  saile  &  came  to  the  town

259

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1562.

Equi.  of  Don  Juan  called  Equi,  where  the  22 in  the  morning

we  went  a  shore  to  traffike,  but  the  Negros  would  not
untill  they  had  newes  from  Don  Luis,  for  at  that  time
Don  Juan  was  dead,  and  the  23  came  Don  Luis  his  sonne

[II.  ii.  55.] and  Pacheco  minding  to  traffike  with  us,  at  which  said

Two  galies.  day  came  two  galies  rowing  along  the  shore  from  the
castle,  minding  to  keepe  us  from  our  traffike.  The  24
we  set  saile  and  chased  the  galies  to  the  castle  againe.
The  Negros  being  glad of  that  required  us  to  goe to

Mowre.  Mowre, which is some 3 leagues behind, and thither

would  they  come  for  that  they  stood  in  feare  of  the
Portugals,  and  there  we  remained  for  the  marchants  that
came  out  of  the  countrey  which  were  come  with  their
gold,  but  Anthonio  don  Luis  his  sonne,  and  Pacheco
were  aboord  the  Minion.  And  the  25  in  the  morning
came  the  two  galies  from  the  castle  againe  unto  us,  the
weather  being  very  calme,  they  shot  at  us  and  hit  us
3  times,  and  shortly  after  the  wind  came  from  the  shore,
at  which  instant  we  descried  the  ship,  &  the  caravell
comming  towards  us,  then  we  weighed  and  set  saile,  and
bare  as  neere  unto  them  as  we  could :  but  it  was  night
or  ever  wee  met  with  them,  and  the  night  being  very
darke  we  lost  them. The  next  day  plying  to  the  shore,

Corimntin.  at  night  we  agreed  to  go  with  Cormantin,  but  the  next
morning  being  the  28  we  were  but  a  litle  distant  from
the  great  ship  and  the  2  galies,  having  no  wind  at  all,
and  the  caravell  hard  aboord  the  shore.  Then  being
calme,  came  the  2  galies  rowing  to  the  sterne  of  the
Minion,  and  fought  with  her  the  most  part  of  the  fore-
noone : and in the fight a mischance hapned in the

Much^  hurt Minions  steward-roome  by  means  of  a  barrell  of  pouder

done  tn  the^ ^^^  tooke  fire,  wherewith  were  hurt  the  master  g-unner,

JVltfllOTl ZUttr  O  ■'

firins:  a  barrel  ^^  Steward,  and  most  part  of  the  gunners ;  which  the
of  gunpQuder.  galies  perceiving,  began  to  be  more  fierce  upon  them,
and  with  one  shot  cut  halfe  her  foremast  in  twaine,  that
without  present  remedie  shee  was  not  able  to  beare  saile,
and  presently  upon  this  the  great  ship  sent  her  boat  to
the  galies,  who  suddenly  departed  from  us. And  after

360

WILLIAM RUTTER  ad.

1562.

their  departure  we  went  aboord  the  Minion  to  counsell
what  were  best  to  be  done,  at  which  time  they  were  sore
discomfited.  Whereupon  we  devised  what  was  best  to
be  done :  and  because  wee  knew  that  the  Negros  neither
would  nor  durst  traffike  so  long  as  the  galies  were  on
the  coast ;  it  was  therefore  agreed  that  we  should  prepare
our  selves  to  depart  to  Rio  de  Sestos,  and  so  we  departed  They  retume.
that  day.  The  14  of  May  in  the  morning  we  fell  with
the  land,  and  when  wee  came  to  it,  we  doubted  what
place  it  was,  and  sent  our  boates  on  land  to  know  the
trueth,  and  we  found  it  to  be  Rio  de  Barbos,  which  is  to  RlodeBarbos.
the  Eastward  of  sant  Andre,  and  there  remained  in  getting
of  water  untill  the  21,  where  we  lost  the  day  before  5
of  our  men  by  meanes  of  overthrowing  our  blacke  pin-  .  ^  hlacke
nasse.  The  22  we  departed  from  thence  to  Rio  de  Sesto,  -^^-^  ^^  ^^^.^^
where  we  arrived  the  2  of  June,  and  the  4  wee  departed
from  Rio  de  Sesto,  and  arrived  (God  bee  thanked)  the
6  of  August  within  sight  of  the  Stert  in  the  West  part
of  England,  our  men  being  very  sicke  and  weake.  We
have  not  at  this  present  above  20  sound  men  that  are
able  to  labour,  and  we  have  of  our  men  21  dead,  and
many  more  very  sore  hurt  and  sicke.  Master  Burton
hath  bene  sicke  this  6  weekes,  and  at  this  present  (God
strengthen  him)  is  so  weake  that  I  feare  he  will  hardly
escape.  Herein  inclosed  your  worship  shall  receive  a
briefe  of  all  the  goods  sold  by  us,  &  also  what  com-
modities we  have  received  for  the  same.  Thus  I  leave
to  trouble  your  worship,  reserving  all  things  els  to  our
generall  meeting,  and  to  the  bringer  hereof.  From
aboord  the  Primerose  the  6  of  August  1563.
Your  obedient  servant

William  Rutter.

There  are  brought  home  this  voiage  An.  1563.  Elephants
teeth  166.  weighing  1758  pounds.  Graines  22  buts
full.

[A  meeting
261

A.D.
1564.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

A  meeting  at  Sir  William  Gerards  house  the  1 1
of  July  1564.  for  the  setting  foorth  of  a
voyage  to  Guinea,  with  the  Minion  of  the
Queens,  the  John  Baptist  of  London,  and
the  Merline  of  M.  Gonson.

T  this  meeting  were  these  chiefe  adven-
turers, Sir  William  Gerard,  sir  William
Chester,  sir  Thomas  Lodge,  Anthonie
Hickman,  and  Edward  Castelin.  Where
it  was  agreed  that  Francis  Ashbie  should
be  sent  to  Deptford  to  M.  Gonson  for
his  letters  to  Peter  Pet  to  goe  about  the
rigging  of  the  Minion  upon  the  Queenes  majesties
charges,  and  so  the  said  Francis  to  repaire  with  the
same  letters  to  Gillingham  with  money  to  supplie  our
charge  there.

Also  that  every  one  of  the  five  partners  shall  foorth-
with  call  upon  their  partners  to  supply  towards  this  new
rigging  and  victualling,  29  li.  los.  6d.  for  every  100  li.
value.

Also  that  every  one  of  the  five  partners  shall  foorth-
with  bring  in  50  li.  towards  the  furniture  of  the
premisses.

Likewise  it  is  agreed  that  if  M.  Gonson  give  his  con-
sent that  the  Merline  shall  be  brought  about  from
Bristoll  to  Hampton,  that  a  letter  be  drawen  where-
unto  his  hand  shall  be,  before  order  be  given  for  the
same.

262

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  ad.

1564.

The  successe  of  this  Voiage  in  part  appeareth  [H-  ii-  56.]
by  certaine  briefe  relations  extracted  out  of
the  second  voyage  of  Sir  John  Hawkins  to
the  West  Indies,  made  in  the  sayd  yeere
1564.  which  I  thought  good  to  set  downe
for  want  of  further  instructions,  which  hither-
to I  could  not  by  any  meanes  come  by,  albeit
I  have  used  all  possible  indevour  for  the
obtaining  of  the  same:  Take  them  therefore
in  the  meane  season  as  foloweth.

Aster  John  Hawkins,  with  the  Jesus  of
Lubeck  a  ship  of  700.  tunnes,  and  the
Salomon,  a  ship  of  7  score,  the  Tiger  a
barke  of  50,  and  the  Swalow  of  30
tunnes,  being  all  well  furnished  with
men  to  the  number  of  one  hundred
threescore and ten, as also with ordi-

nance and  victuall  requisite  for  such  a  voiage,  departed
out  of  Plimmouth  the  18  day  of  October  in  the  yeere
of  our  Lord  1564.  with  a  prosperous  winde :  at  which
departing,  in  cutting  the  foresaile,  a  marveilous  misfor-
tune happened  to  one  of  the  officers  in  the  ship,  who
by  the  puUie  of  the  sheat  was  slaine  out  of  hand  being
a  sorowfull  beginning  to  them  all.  And  after  their
setting  out  10  leagues  to  the  Sea,  hee  met  the  same
day  with  the  Minion  a  ship  of  the  Queens  Majesties,  ^he  Minion
whereof  was  captaine  David  Carlet,  &  also  her  consort  °f^^^  Queene.
the  John  Baptist  of  London  being  bound  to  Guinea  like-
wise, who  hailed  one  the  other  after  the  custome  of  the
sea,  with  certaine  pieces  of  ordinance  for  joy  of  their
meeting :  which  done,  the  Minion  departed  from  him
to  seeke  her  other  consort  the  Merline  of  London,  which
was  a  Sterne  out  of  sight,  leaving  in  M.  Hawkins  com-
panie  the  John  Baptist  her  other  consort.

Thus  sailing  forwards  on  their  way  with  a  prosperous
wind  until  the  21  of  the  same  moneth,  at  that  time  a

263

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

great  storme  arose,  the  wind  being  at  Northeast  about  9
of  the  clocke  at  night,  and  continued  so  23  houres  to-
gether, in  which  storme  M.  Hawkins  lost  the  company
of  the  John  Baptist  aforesaid,  and  of  his  pinnasse  called
the  Swallow,  the  other  3  ships  being  sore  beaten  with
the  storme.  The  23  day  the  Swalow,  to  his  no  small
rejoicing,  came  to  him  againe  in  the  night  10  leagues  to
the  Northward  of  Cape  Finister,  having  put  roomer  and
not  being  able  to  double  the  Cape,  in  that  there  rose  a
contrary  wind  at  Southwest.  The  25  the  wind  con-
tinuing contrary,  he  put  into  a  place  in  Galicia  called
Ferol,  where  he  remained  5  daies  and  appointed  all  the
masters  of  his  ships  an  order  for  the  keeping  of  good
company.

The  26  day  the  Minion  came  in  also  where  he  was,
for  the  rejoycing  whereof  he  gave  them  certaine  pieces  of
ordinance  after  the  curtesie  of  the  Sea  for  their  welcome,
but  the Minions men had no mirth because of  their

The  firing  and  consort  the  Merline,  whom  at  their  departure  from  M.

^l,^,^  °-^/^^ ,  Hawkins  upon  the  coast  of  England,  they  went  to  seeke,

IrLBTltttB  bound,  •  •  O  -•  •  ^

for  Guinea  '^^'^  having  met  with  her,  kept  company  two  dayes  to-
gether, and  at  last  by  misfortune  of  fire  (through  the
negligence  of  one  of  the  gunners)  the  pouder  in  the
gunners  roome  was  set  on  fire,  which  with  the  first  blast
stroke  out  her  poope,  and  therewithall  lost  3  men,  besides
many  sore  burned  (which  escaped  by  the  Brigandine
being  at  her  sterne)  and  immediatly  to  the  great  losse
of  the  owners,  and  most  horrible  sight  of  the  beholders,
she  sunke  before  their  eies.  The  30  day  of  the  moneth
M.  Hawkins  with  his  consorts  and  company  of  the
Minion  having  now  both  the  Brigandines  at  her  sterne,
weighed  anker,  and  set  saile  on  their  voiage  having  a  pros-
perous wind  thereunto.  The  4  of  November  they  had
sight  of  the  Hand  of  Madera,  and  the  6  day  of  Teneriffa,
which  they  thought  to  have  bene  the  Canarie,  in  that  they
supposed  themselves  to  have  bene  to  the  Eastward  of
Teneriffa  but  were  not :  but  the  Minion  beyng  3  or  4
leagues  a  head  of  us  kept  on  her  course  to  Teneriffa,

264

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS  a.d.

1564.
having  better  sight  thereof  then the  other  had,  and  by
that  means  they  parted  company.

The  aforesaid  Sir  John  Hawkins  passing  on  his  voiage
by  Cavo  Verde,  and  Sierra  Leona,  and  afterward  crossing  ,
over  the  maine  Ocean  comming  to  the  towne  of  Bur-
boroata  upon  the  coast  of  Terra  firma  in  the  West  Indies,
had  further  information  of  the  evill  successe  of  this
Guinean  voyage,  as  in  the  same  hereafter  is  verbatim
mentioned.

The  29  of  April,  we  being  at  anker  without  the  road,
a  French  ship  called  the  green  Dragon  of  Newhaven,
whereof  was  captaine  one  Bon  Temps  came  in,  who
saluted  us  after  the  maner  of  the  sea,  with  certaine  pieces
of  ordinance,  and  we  resaluted  him  with  the  like  againe :
with  whom  having  communication,  he  declared  that  hee
had  bene  at  the  Mina  in  Guinea,  and  was  beaten  off  by
the  Portugals  gallies,  and  enforced  to  come  thither  to
make  sale  of  such  wares  as  he  had :  and  further  that  the
like  was  hapned  unto  the  Minion :  also,  that  captaine
David  Carlet,  &  a  march  ant,  with  a  dozen  mariners  were
betraied  by  the  Negros  at  their  first  arrivall  thither,  re-
maining prisoners  with  the  Portugals,  besides  other
misadventures  of  the  losse  of  their  men  hapned  through
the  great  lacke  of  fresh  water,  with  great  doubts  of  bring-
ing home  the  ships :  which  was  most  sorowfuU  for  us
to  understand.

[The  voyage
265

A.D.
1566.

[II.  ii. 57.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  voyage  of  M.  George  Fenner  to  Guinie,  and
the  Islands  of  Cape  Verde,  in  the  yeere  of
1566.  with  three  ships,  to  wit,  the  Admirall
called  the  Castle  of  Comfort,  the  May  Flower,
and  the  George,  and  a  Pinnasse  also :

Written  by  Walter  Wren.

He  10  day  of  December,  in  the  yeere
abovesayd,  we  departed  from  Plimmouth,
and  the  12  day  we  were  thwart  of
Ushant.

The  15  day  in  the  morning  being
Sunday,  wee  had  sight  of  Cape  Finister,
and  the  same  night  we  lost  the  company
of  our  Admirall,  wherefore  we  sayled  along  the  coast  of
Portugall,  hoping  that  our  Admirall  had  bene  before  us.
The  1 8  day  we  met  with  a  French  ship  of  whom  wee
made  inquirie  for  our  Admirall,  but  he  could  not  tell
us  newes  of  him :  so  we  followed  our  course  to  the
Hands  of  the  Canaries.

The  25  day  in  the  morning  we  fell  with  a  small  Hand
called  Porto  Santo,  &  within  3  houres  wee  had  sight  of
another  Hand  called  Madera  which  is  6  leagues  from
Porto  Santo.

The  said  25  day  being  the  day  of  the  Nativitie,  we
hoised  out  our  boat,  and  fet  master  Edward  Fenner
captaine  of  the  May  Flower  aboord  us,  being  in  the
George,  with  the  master  whose  name  was  Robert  Cortise
and  others  of  the  sayd  shippe,  and  feasted  them  with
such  cheere  as  God  had  sent  us.

The  28  day  we  fel  with  an  Hand  called  Tenerif,  which
is  27  leagues  from  the  said  Hand,  and  on  the  East  side
thereof  we  came  to  an  anker  in  40  fadome  water,  within
a  base  shot  of  the  shore,  in  a  litle  Baie  wherein  were
3  or  4  small  houses :  which  Baie  and  houses  were  distant
from  a  litle  towne  called  Santa  Cruz,  a  league  or  there-
about, and  as  we  rode  in  the said  Baie,  we  might  see

266

GEORGE FENNER  ad.

1566.

an  Hand  called  The  grand  Canarie  which  was  6  or
7  leagues  from  us.

The  29  day  the  May  Flower  for  that  she  could  not
fet  into  ye  road  where  we  were  at  an  anker,  by  reason
the  wind  was  off  the  shore,  &  because  she  bare  more
roomer  from  the  land  then  we  did,  in  the  morning  came
bearing  in  with  the  towne  of  Santa  Cruz,  thinking  to
come  to  an  anker  in  the  road  against  the  towne,  and
before  she  came  within  the  reach  of  any  of  their  ordinance,
they  shot  at  her  foure  pieces  which  caused  her  to  come
roome  with  us,  and  came  at  last  to  an  anker  by  us.  And
about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  the  forenamed
captaine  of  the  May  Flower  wrote  a  letter  a  shore,
directing  it  to  the  head  officer  of  the  towne  of  Santa
Cruz,  to  the  intent  to  understand  the  pretense  of  the
shooting  off  the  said  ordinance.

The  letter  being  written,  Robert  Courtise  master  of  the
May  Flower,  and  Walter  Wren  were  appointed  to  deliver
the  same  a  land  at  3  or  4  houses  to  bee  conveid  to  the
foresayd  towne,  and  so  went  with  six  men  in  the  boate,
and  rowed  to  the  shore  as  neere  as  they  might,  for
setting  the  boat  on  ground,  for  the  sea  went  cruelly
at  the  shore.

The  people  stood  in  number  30  persons  with  such
armour  as  they  had :  the  foresayd  Wren  called  to  them
in  Spanish,  declaring  to  them  that  they  had  a  letter
which  they  would  very  gladly  have  conveid  unto  the
towne,  shewing  that  they  would  traffique  with  them  as
marchants,  desiring  their  helpe  for  the  conveiance  of  the
same  letter.  With  that  one  of  the  Spaniards  willed  us
to  come  on  land,  and  we  should  be  welcome,  but
doubting  the  worst,  the  said  Walter  answered  them  that
they  would  not  come  on  land,  until  they  had  answere
of  their  letter  which  they  had  brought.

Whereupon  one  of  the  Spaniards  unraied  himselfe,  and
lept  into  the  water,  and  swam  to  the  boat,  whom  we
received.  And  he  saluted  us,  and  demaunded  what  our
request  was :  we  made  him  answere,  that  by  misfortune

267

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

we  lost  the  companie  of  our  Admirall,  and  being  bound
to  this  Hand  to  traffique  for  wines  and  other  things
necessary  for  us,  do  here  mind  to  stay  untill  he  come.

Concerning  our  letter  he  made  us  answere,  that  he
would  with  all  diligence  cary  it,  and  deliver  it  according
to  the  direction,  and  so  the  said  Walter  knit  the  letter
in  a  bladder,  and  delivered  it  unto  him,  and  also  gave
him  foure  roials  of  Spanish  money  for  his  paines :  and
promising  that  we  should  have  answere  of  it,  he  tooke
his  leave  and  swamme  againe  on  shore,  where  the  people
stood  ready  to  receive  him.  And  after  that  they  had
talked  with  him,  and  understood  our  meaning,  some  of
them  threw  up  their  hats,  &  the  other  put  them  off
holding  them  in  their  hands,  and  made  us  very  curteous
signes,  alwaies  desiring  that  the  boat  would  come  a  land,
but  we  resaluting  them  rowed  backe  againe  aboord.

The  30  day  the  Governours  brother  of  Santa  Cruz
came  aboord  the  May  Flower  with  sixe  or  seven  Spaniards
with  him,  who  concluded  with  the  Captaine  that  we  might
come  a  shore  and  traffique  with  them,  but  that  day  we
did  not,  for  we  had  no  sufficient  pledge  of  theirs  for  our
assurance.  Our  Captaine  entertained  them  well,  and  at
[II.  ii.  58.]  their  departure  gave  them  foure  pieces  of  ordinance  for
a  farewell,  and  bestowed  upon  them  two  cheeses  with
other  things.

The  sayd  Governours  brother  promised  our  Captaine
that  hee  should  have  sufficient  pledges  the  morrow
folowing,  which  was  not  done,  whereupon  wee  grew
suspicious,  and  went  not  that  day  a  shore.

The  first  day  of  January  our  captaine  sent  Nicholas
Day  and  John  Sumpter  a  shore,  who  were  very  well
entertained  with  as  many  of  our  company  as  went  after
them.

In  the  said  Hand  is  a  marveilous  high  hill  called  the
Pike,  which  is  a  far  off  more  like  a  cloud  in  the  aire,
then  any  other  thing :  the  hill  is  round  and  somewhat
small  at  the  top,  it  hath  not  bene  knowen  that  ever  any
man could goe  up to the top  thereof. And  although

268

GEORGE FENNER  ad

1567-
it  stand  in  28  degrees  which  is  as  hote  in  January,  as  it
is  in  England  at  Midsommer,  yet  is  the  top  of  the  said
hil  Winter  and  Sommer  seldome  without  snow.

In  this  Hand  about  two  leagues  from  the  said  Santa
Cruz  is  a  citie  called  Anagona.

The  third  day  wee  departed  about  the  Westerne  point
of  the  Hand,  about  12  or  14  leagues  from  Santa  Cruz,
into  a  Baie  which  is  right  agaynst  the  house  of  one  Petro
de  Souses,  in  which  Baie  we  came  to  an  anker  the  5  day,
where  we  heard  that  our  Admirall  had  bene  there  at
an  anker  7  dayes  before  us,  and  was  gone  thence  to  an
Hand  called  Gomera,  whereupon  wee  set  saile  presently
to  seeke  him.

The  6 day  we  came  to  an anker  against the towne  ^%  ^^^^
of  Gomera, where  we found our  Admirall, which was  ^heir-Admirdl
very  joyfull  of  our  comming,  and  we  also  of  his  sight.

In  the  sayd  road  we  found  Edward  Cooke  in  a  tall
ship,  and  a  shippe  of  the  Coppersmiths  of  London,  which
the  Portugals  had  trecherously  surprised  in  the  Baie  of
Santa  Cruz,  upon  the  coast  of  Barbarie,  which  ship  we
left  there  all  spoiled.

Our  General  &  marchants  bought  in  the  said  towne
for  our  provision,  14  buts  of  wine,  which  cost  15  duckats
a  but,  which  were  ofFred  us  at  Santa  Cruz  in  Tenerif
for  8,  9,  and 10  duckats.

The  9  day  we  departed  from  this  road  to  another  Baie,
about  3  leagues  off,  and  there  tooke  in  fresh  water :
&  so  the  10  day  we  set  saile  towards  Cape  Blanke,  which
is  on  the  coast  of  Guinea.

The  12  day  we  fell  into  a  Baie  to  the  Eastward  of
Cape  Pargos,  which  is  35  leagues  from  Cape  Blanke,
But  having  no  knowledge  of  that  coast,  we  went  with
Cape  Blanke,  and  at  the  fall  of  the  land  we  sounded  and
had  16  fadome  water  two  leagues  from  the  shore.  The
land  is  very  lowe  and  white  sand.  Upon  the  fall  of  the  A  good  caveat.
sayd  coast  beware  how  you  borow  in  12  or  10  fadome,
for  within  2  or  3  casts  of  the  lead  you  may  be  on
ground.

269

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

The  17  day  we  set  saile  from  Cape  Blanke,  directing
our  course  South  and  by  East,  &  South  among,  and  so
fell  into  a  Baie  to  the  Eastward  of  Cape  Verde,  about
16  leagues,  and  about  sixe  leagues  from  the  shore.  The
sayd  land  seemed  unto  us  as  if  it  had  bene  a  great
number  of  shippes  under  saile,  being  in  deed  nothing
els  but  the  land  which  was  full  of  Hammoks,  some
high  some  lowe,  with  high  trees  on  them.  We  bare  with
the  said  land  till  we  were  within  3  leagues  of  the  shore,
and  then  we  sounded,  and  found  28  fadome  water,  blacke
oase.  This  day  we  saw  much  fish  in  sundry  sculs  swim-
ming with  their  noses  with  the  brim  of  the  water.

Passing  along  this  coast  we  might  see  two  small  round
hils,  seeming  to  us  about  a  league  one  from  the  other,
which  is  the  Cape,  and  betweene  them  are  great  store
of  trees,  and  in  all  our  dayes  sailing  we  saw  no  land  so
high  as  the  said  two  hils.

The  19  day  we  came  to  an  anker  at  the  Cape,  in  a
roade  fast  by  the  Westermost  side  of  two  hils  in  10
fadome  of  water  where  you  may  ride  in  five  or  sixe
fadome,  for  the  ground  is  faire,  and  alwayes  you  shall
have  the  winde  off  the  shore.  And  as  soone  as  we  were
all  at  an  anker,  our  Generall  came  aboord  us,  and  with
him  the  master  of  the  Admirall,  whose  name  was  William
Bats,  and  with  them  the  captaine  of  the  Viceadmirall,
whose  name  was  master  Edward  Fenner,  and  Robert
Curtise  the  master,  and  dined  aboord  of  us  being  in
the  George,  wherein  was  Captaine  John  Heiwood,  and
John  Smith  of  Hampton  master,  and  there  we  concluded
to  goe  aland,  which  was  halfe  a  mile  from  us :  and  by
the  counsell  of  William  Bats  both  Captaine  and  mar-
chants  and  divers  of  the  companie  went  without  armour :
swadtns:\l7'  ^°^  ^^  ^^y^>  ^^^^  although  the  people  were  blacke  and
company  to  naked,  yet  they  were  civill :  so  that  hee  would  needs
land  unarmed,  give  the  venter  without  the  consent  of  the  rest  to  go
without  weapon.  Thus  they  rowed  to  shore,  where,  we
being  in  the  shippe  might  see  a  great  companie  of  Negros
naked,  walking to and  fro by  the sea side  where the

270

GEORGE FENNER  a.d.

1567.
landing  place  was,  waiting  for  the  comming  of  our  men,
who came too soone,  and  landed to their losse as it
fell  out  afterwards.

There  went  a  shore  the  Admirals  skiffe,  and  the
May  Flowers  boate,  and  in  them  the  number  of  20
persons  or  thereabouts,  as  M.  George  Fenner  the
Generall,  his  brother  M.  Edward  Fenner,  Thomas
Valentine,  John  Worme  and  Francis  Leigh  marchants,
John  Haward,  William  Bats,  Nicholas  Day,  John
Tomson  and  others.

At  their  comming  to  the  shore  there  were  100  Negros  [II.  li.  59.]
or  upward,  with  their  bowes  and  arrowes :  our  Captaines
and  merchants  talked  with  them,  &  according  to  the
use  of  the  country,  the  one  demanded  pledges  of  the
other,  &  they  were  content  to  deliver  3  of  their  Negros
for  5  of  our  men.  Our  5  mens  names  were  these,
John  Haward,  Wil.  Bats,  Nich.  Day,  Joh.  Tomson,  &
John  Curtise :  these  were  delivered  them,  and  we  re-
ceived 3 Negros  into  our  Admirals  skiffe.

Our  men  being  a  shore  among  the  Negros,  began  to Civet,  muske,

talke  with them,  declaring  what  ware and marchandize  gP/^^S^^^^^y

11  n  1 fi T  1 .1 •  1  the  commodt-

we had, as woollen cloth, Imnen cloth, iron, cheese  ties  of  Cape

&  other  things.  The  Negros  answered  againe,  they  had  Verde.
civet,  muske,  gold  and  graines,  which  pleased  our  cap-
taines and  marchants  very  well.  Then  the  Negros
desired  to  have  a  sight  of  some  of  our  wares,  to  the
which  our  marchants  were  content,  and  forthwith  sent
aboord  one  of  the  boats  for  part  of  their  marchandise,
and  in  the  meane  time  while  the  boate  went  to  the
ship,  our  five  men  were  walking  on  the  shore  with
the  Negros,  and  our  Generall  and  marchants  staied  in
the  other  boat  by  the  sea  side,  having  the  3  Negros
with  them.

Our  boate  then  came  againe  and  brought  iron  and
other  marchandise,  with  bread,  wine,  and  cheese  which
they  gave  unto  them.  Then  two  of  the  Negros  (which
were  the  pledges)  made  themselves  sicke,  desiring  to
goe a shore, promising to send other two for  them.

271

trecherie.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

Captaine  Haiward  perceiving  that  our  men  had  let  the
Negros  come  a  shore,  asked  what  they  meant,  and  doubt-
ing the  worst  began  to  drawe  toward  the  boate,  and
two  or  three  of  the  Negros  folowed  him.  And  when
hee  came  to  the  boate  they  began  to  stay  him,  and  he
made  signes  unto  them  that  hee  would  fetch  them  more
drinke  and  bread :  notwithstanding,  when  he  was  entering
into  the  boate,  one  of  them  caught  him  by  the  breeches
and  would  have  staied  him,  but  hee  sprang  from  him
and  leapt  into  the  boate,  and  as  soone  as  hee  was  in,
one  of  the  Negros  a  shore  beganne  to  blow  a  pipe,  and
presently  the  other  Negro  that  was  in  our  boate  sitting
on  the  boates  side,  and  master  Wormes  sword  by  him.
The  Negros  suddenly  drew  the  sword  out  of  the  scabberd,  and  cast
himselfe  into  the  Sea  and  swamme  a  shore,  and  presently
the  Negros  laied  handes  on  our  men  that  were  on  shore,
and  tooke  three  of  them  with  great  violence,  and  tore
all  their  apparell  from  their  backes  and  left  them
nothing  to  cover  them,  and  marty  of  them  shot  so
thicke  at  our  men  in  our  boates,  that  they  could  scarse
set  hand  to  any  Oare  to  rowe  from  the  shore,  yet  (by
the  helpe  of  God)  they  got  from  them  with  their
boates,  although  many  of  them  were  hurt  with  their
poysoned  arrowes :  and  the  poison  is  uncurable,  if  the
arrow  enter  within  the  skin  and  drawe  blood,  and
except  the  poison  bee  presently  suckt  out,  or  the  place
where  any  man  is  hurt  bee  foorthwith  cut  away,  hee
dieth  within  foure  dayes,  and  within  three  houres  after
they  bee  hurt  or  pricked,  wheresoever  it  be,  although
but  at  the  litle  toe,  yet  it  striketh  up  to  the  heart,
and  taketh  away  the  stomacke,  and  causeth  the  partie
marveilously  to  vomite,  being  able  to  brooke  neither
meat  nor  drinke.

The  Negros  having  used  our  men  with  such  cruelty,
whose  names  were  Nicholas  Day,  William  Bats  and  John
Tomson,  led  them  away  to  a  towne  which  was  within
a  mile  of  the  water  side,  or  thereabout.

The  20  day  we  sent  to  land  a  boate  or  skiffe  wherein

272

GEORGE FENNER

GEORGE FENNER  ad.

1567.

were  eight  persons,  and  one  of  them  was  the  foresayd
John  Tomson  and  our  interpreter  which  was  a  French-  ^  French  in-
man,  (for  there  was  one  of  the  Negros  which  spake  good  ^^P^^^^M
French :)  and  they  caried  with them two  harquebusses, ^^^
two  targets  and  a  mantell.

The  cause  of  sending  them  was  to  learne  what  ransome
they  demaunded  for  Bats  and  Day  whom  they  detained.
And  when  they  came  to  the  shore  and  told  the  Negros
what  they  desired,  they  went  and  fetched  them  from
among  the  trees,  and  brought  them  loose  among  fortie
or  fiftie  of  them.  And  being  come  within  a  stones  cast
of  the  sea  side,  William  Bats  brake  from  them,  and  ran
as  fast  as  he  could  into  the  sea  towards  the  boat,  and
he  was  not  so  soone  in  the  water  but  hee  fell  downe,
either  being  out  of  breath  or  his  foote  failing  him  in
the  sand  being  soft :  so  that  the  Negros  came  and  fell
on  him  and  tooke  him  and  haled  him,  that  we  thought
they  had  torne  him  in  pieces :  for  they  tore  againe  all
the  apparell  from  his  backe,  so  that  some  of  them  caried  .
our  men  againe  to  the  towne,  and  the  rest  shot  at  us
with  their  poisoned  arrowes,  and  hurt  one  of  our  men  The  danger  of
called  Androwes  in  the  smal  of  the  leg,  who  being  come  P°"°^^'^
aboord,  (for  al  that  our  Surgeons  could  do)  we  thought
he  would  have  died.

Our  Generall  (notwithstanding  all  this  villanie)  sent
agayne  to  them,  and  offered  them  any  thing  that  they
desired  for  the  raunsome  of  our  men,  but  they  would  not
deliver  them :  giving  us  this  answere :  That  there  was  '^he  answere
in  the  foresayd  roade,  three  weekes  before  wee  came,  ^ '  ^  ^^'^°^'
an  English  shippe  which  had  taken  three  of  their  people,
and  untill  wee  did  bring  or  send  them  againe,  wee  should
not  have  our  men  although  wee  would  give  our  three
shippes  with  their  furniture.

The  2 1  day  a  French  shippe  of  the  burden  of  80  [II.  ii.  60.]
tunnes  (or  thereabouts,)  came  to  the  place  where  we
were,  being  bound  to  traffique  at  the  Cape :  we  told  them
of  the  detaining  of  our  two  men  by  the  Negros :  and
seeing  that  these  Frenchmen  were  very  well  welcome
VI  273  s

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

to  the  Negros,  we  wished  them  to  see  whether  they
could  procure  them  againe  of  the  Negros,  and  bring
them  along  with  them,  and  our  Generall  promised  the
Frenchmen  100  li.  to  obtaine  them.  So  wee  committed
the  matter  to  the  Frenchmen  and  departed.

Of  our  men  that  were  hurt  by  the  Negros  arrowes,
foure  died,  and  one  to  save  his  life  had  his  arme  cut
off.  Androwes  that  was  last  of  all  hurt,  lay  lame  not
able  to  helpe  himselfe :  onely  two  recovered  of  their
hurts.  So  we  placed  other  men  in  the  roomes  of  those
that  we  lost,  and  set  saile.

The  26  day  betweene  Cape  Verde  and  Bona  vista  we
sawe many flying fishes of  the bignesse of herrings,
whereof  two  flew  into  our  boat,  which  we  towed  at  our
Sterne.
Bona  vista.  The  28  day  we  fell  with  an  Hand  called  Bona  vista,

which  is  from  Cape  Verde  86  leagues.  The  Northside
of  the  sayde  Hand  is  full  of  white  sandie  hils  and  dales,
and  somewhat  high  land.

The  sayd  day  wee  came  to  an  anker  within  the  Wester-
most  point,  about  a  league  within  the  point,  and  found
in  our  sounding  faire  sand  in  ten  fadome  water,  but  you
may  goe  neere  till  you  be  in  five  or  six  fadome,  for  the
ground  is  faire.

As  soone  as  we  were  at  an  anker,  our  Generall  sent
his  pinnasse  a  land,  and  found  five  or  sixe  small  houses,
but  the  people  were  fled  into  the  mountains :  and  the
next  day  he  sent  a  shore  againe,  and  met  with  two
Portugals,  who  willingly  went  aboord  with  his  men,  and
at  their  comming  he  welcommed  them,  although  they
were  but  poore  &  simple,  and  gave  each  of  them  a  paire
of  shoes,  and  so  set  them  a  shore  againe.

The  30  day  we  weighed  &  sailed  into  a  Bay  within
a  smal  Hand  about  a  league  from  us,  and  tooke  plentie
of  divers  sortes  of  fishe.  The  foresayd  Hand  lieth  in
sixteene  degrees.  And  if  you  meane  to  anker  in  the
said  Bay,  you  may  borow  in  foure  or  five  fadome  of  the
Southermost  point  of  the  sayd  Hand,  which  you  may  see

274

GEORGE FENNER  ad.

1567.
when  you  ride  in  the  road. But  beware  of  the  middle  A  good
of  the  Baie,  for  there  lieth  a  ledge  of  rocks,  which  at  a  ^'^«''«''^''"'-
lowe  water  breaketh,  yet  there  is  three  fadome  water  over
them.

The  last day  of  Januarie our Generall  with  certaine
of  his  men  went  a  shore  in  the  Baie  to  the  houses,  where
he  found  12  Portugals. In  all  the  Hand  there  were  not  Banished
above  30  persons,  which  were  banished  men  for  a  time,  ^^^^'^S^"-
some  for  more  yeeres,  some  for  lesse,  and  amongst  them
there  was  one  simple  man  which  was  their  captaine.

They  live  upon  goats  flesh,  cocks,  hennes,  and  fresh
water :  other  victuals  they  have  none,  saving  fish,  which
they  esteeme  not,  neither  have  they  any  boats  to  take  them.

They  reported  that  this  Hand  was  given  by  the  king
of  Portugall  to  one of  his  gentlemen,  who  hath  let  it
foorth  to  rent  for  one  hundreth  duckats  a  yeere,  which
rent is reared onely in goats skinnes. For by their  Great  store  of
speaches  there hath bene  sent  foorth  of  the  sayd  Hand  S°^^^^-
into  Portugall  40000  skins  in  one  yeere.

We  were  to  these  men  marveilously  welcome,  and  to
their  powers  very  wel  entertained,  and  they  gave  us  the
flesh  of  as  many  hee-goates  as  wee  would  have,  and  tooke
much  paines  for  us  in  taking  them,  and  bringing  them
from  the  mountains  upon  their  asses.

They  have  there  great  store  of  the  oyle  of  Tortoises,
which  Tortoise  is  a  fish  which  swimmeth  in  the  Sea,  with
a  shell  on  his  backe  as  broad  as  a  target.  It  raineth  not
in  this  Hand  but  in  three  moneths  of  the  yeere,  from  the
midst  of  July  to  the  midst  of  October,  and  it  is  here
alwayes  very  hote.  Kine  have  bene  brought  hither,  but
by  reason  of  the  heate  and  drought  they  have  died.

The  3  of  February  wee  departed  from  this  Hand,  and
the  same  day  fell  with  another  Hand  called  the  Hand  of  The  He  of
Maiyo,  which  is  14  leagues  from  the  other  Hand:  there  ^^^y°-
is  in  the  midst  of  the  way  between  these  two  Hands  a
danger  which  is  alwayes  to  be  scene.

We  ankred  in  the  Northwest  side  of  the  sayd  He  in
a  faire  Baie  of  eight  fadomes  water  and  faire  sand,  but

275

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

here  we  staled  not,  but  the  fourth  day  weighed  and  sailed
S.  Jago.  to  another  Hand  called  S.  Jago,  which  lieth  off  the  said
Hand  of  Maiyo  East  and  by  South,  and  about  five  leagues
one  from  the  other.  Being  come  within  the  Westermost
point,  we  saw  a  faire  road,  and  a  small  towne  by  the  water
side,  and  also  a  fort  or  platforme  by  it :  there  we  purposed
to  come  to  anker,  and  our  marchants  to  make  some  sale.
But  before  we  came  within  their  shot,  they  let  flie  at  us
two  pieces,  whereupon  we  went  roomer  and  sailed  along
the  shore  two  or  three  leagues  from  the  road,  where  we
found  a  small  Baie  and  two  or  three  small  houses,  where
we  came  to  an  anker  in  14  fadome  faire  ground.
[II.  ii.  61.]  Within  an  houre  after  we  had  ankered  we  might  see
divers  horsemen  and  footmen  on  the  land  right  against
us  riding  and  running  to  and  fro.

The  next  day  being  the  fift  of  Februarie,  a  great  com-
panie  of  their  horsemen  and  footemen  appeared  on  the
shoare  side,  unto  whom  our  Generall  sent  to  understande
whether  they  would  quietly  trafike  with  them  :  And  they
sent  him  worde  againe,  desiring  that  they  might  speake
with  him,  promising  that  if  he  came  to  trafike  as  a
marchant  he  should  be  welcome,  and  also  that  he  should
have  any  thing  that  he  or  the  marchant  would  with
reason  demaund.

When  this  answere  was  brought  unto  our  Generall  he
was  very  glad  thereof  and  the  whole  companie,  and
presently  (with  as  much  speede  as  he  could)  he  caused
his  boates  to  be  made  readie :  but  doubting  the  villanie
of  the  Portugales,  he  armed  his  boates  putting  a  double
base  in  the  head  of  his  pinnesse,  and  two  single  bases  in
the  head  of  the  Skiffe,  and  so  sent  to  the  May-floure
and  the  George,  and  willed  them  in  like  sort  to  man
their  two  boates.

These  boates  being  thus  manned  and  well  appointed,
our  Generall  entered  into  his  Skiffe,  and  with  the  rest
rowed  to  the  shoare  where  were  threescore  horsemen  or
more,  and  two  hundreth  footemen  readie  to  receive  them.
Our Generall marveiled that they came in so great  a

276

GEORGE FENNER  ad.

1567.
number  and  all  armed,  and  therefore  with  a  flagge  of
truce  sent  to  them  to  knowe  their  pleasure :  and  they
answered  him  with  many  faire  promises  and  othes,  that
their  pretence  was  all  true,  and  that  they  meant  like
Gentlemen  and  Marchantes  to  trafike  with  him,  declaring
also  that  their  Captaine  was  comming  to  speake  with  him,
and  therefore  desired  our  Generall  to  come  and  speake
with  him  himselfe.

With  this  answere  the  boate  returned,  and  then  our
Generall  caused  his  pinnesse  to  rowe  to  them,  and  as  he
came  neere  the  shoare  they  came  in  a  great  companie  with
much  obeysance,  opening  their  hands  and  armes  abroade,
bowing  themselves  with  their  bonnets  ojfiF,  with  as  much
humble  salutations  outwardly  as  they  might :  earnestly
desiring  our  Generall  and  Marchants  to  come  on  lande
to  them,  whereunto  he  would  not  agree  without  sufficient
gages  of  Gentlemen  and  Marchants.  At  length  they
promised  to  sende  two  gages  to  our  Generals  content-
ment, promising  fresh  water,  victuall,  money,  or  Negroes
for  ware,  if  it  were  such  as  they  liked :  and  therefore
desired  our  Generall  and  Marchants  to  sende  them  a"
shoare  in  writing  the  quantitie  of  their  wares,  and  the
names  of  them  :  all  which  our  Generall  departed  to  per-
forme,  looking  for  their  answere  the  morrowe  following.
And  being  gone  a  litle  from  the  shoare,  he  caused  his
bases,  curriers,  and  harquebusses  to  be  shot  off,  and  our
ships  in  like  case  shot  off  five  or  sixe  pieces  of  great
ordinance,  and  so  came  aboord  to  prepare  the  note.  The
Portugales  most  of  them  departed,  saving  those  that  were
left  to  watch  and  to  receive  the  note,  which  about  foure
or  five  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone  was  sent,  and  it  was
received.  But  all  the  purposes  of  the  Portugals  were  "^^^  treason  of
villainously  to  betray  us  (as  shal  appeare  hereafter)  f  ^„  07_tugas
although  we  meant  in  truth  and  honestie,  friendly  to  our  men.
trafike  with  them.

There  was  to  the  Westwards  of  us  and  about  two
leagues  from  us,  a  towne  behinde  a  point  fast  by  the  sea
side,  where they  had certaine Caravels,  or  shippes  and

277

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

also  two  Brigandines,  whereof  they  (with  all  the  speede
that  they  might)  made  readie  foure  Caravels,  and  both
the  brigandines  which  were  like  two  Gallies,  and  furnished
them  both  with  men  and  ordinance  as  much  as  they  could
carrie,  and  as  soone  as  it  was  night,  they  came  rowing
and  falling  towardes  us :  so  that  the  land  being  high  and
weather  somewhat  cloudie  or  mystie,  and  they  comming
all  the  way  close  under  the  shoare  wc  could  not  see  them
till  they  were  right  against  one  of  our  ships  called  the
May-floure.

By  this  time  it  was  about  one  or  two  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning,  and  the  May-floure  roade  neerer  them  then
the  other  two  by  a  base  shotte,  so  that  they  made  a  sure
account  either  to  have  taken  her  or  burnt  her.  In  the
meane  time  our  men  that  had  the  watch  (litle  thinking
of  such  villanous  treacheries  after  so  many  faire  wordes)
were  singing  and  playing  one  with  the  other,  and  made
such  a  noyse,  that  (being  but  a  small  gale  of  winde,  and
riding  neere  the  lande)  they  might  heare  us  from  the
shoare :  so  that  we  supposed  that  they  made  account  that
we  had  espyed  them,  which  indeede  we  had  not,  neither
had  any  one  piece  of  ordinance  primed,  or  any  other  thing
m  a  readinesse.

They  came  so  neere  us  that  they  were  within  gunshot
of  us,  &  then  one  of  our  men  chanced  to  see  a  light,  &
then  looking  out  spied  the  4  ships,  and  suddenly  cried
out,  Gallies,  gallies,  at  which  cry  we  were  all  amazed,  and
foorthwith  they  shot  at  us  all  the  great  ordinance  that
they  had,  and  their  harquebusses,  and  curriers,  and  so
lighted  certaine  tronkes  or  pieces  of  wilde  fire,  and  all
of  them  with  one  voice  (as  well  they  on  the  shoare  as
they  in  the  shippes)  gave  a  great  shoute,  and  so  continued
hallowing  with  great  noyses,  still  approching  neerer  and
neerer  unto  the  May-floure.  We  (with  all  the  speede
that  we  might)  made  readie  one  piece  of  ordinance  and
[II.  ii,  62.]  shotte  at  them,  which  caused  them  somewhat  to  stay,  so
they  charged  their  ordinance  and  shot  at  us  freshly  againe,
and  while  they  shotte  this  second  time  at  us,  we  had

278

GEORGE FENNER  a.d.

1567.
made  readie  three  pieces  which  we  shot  at  them,  but  they
approched  still  so  neere,  that  at  last  we  might  have  shot
a  sheafe  arrowe  to  them.  Whereupon  we  having  a  gale
of  winde  off  the  shoare  hoysed  our  foresayle,  and  cut  our
cable  at  the  hawse,  and  went  towarde  our  Admirall,  and
they  continued  following  and  shooting  at  us,  and  some-
time at  our  Admirall,  but  our  Admirall  shotte  one  such
piece  at  them,  that  it  made  them  to  retire,  and  at  length
to  warpe  away  like  traiterous  villaines,  and  although  they
thus  suddenly  shot  all  their  shot  at  us,  yet  they  hurt
neither  man  nor  boy  of  ours,  but  what  we  did  to  them
we  know  not.

But  seeing  the  villanie  of  these  men  we  thought  it
best  to  stay  there  no  longer,  but  immediatly  set  sayle
towards  an  Hand  called  Fuego,  1 2  leagues  from  the  said  'T^he  Isle  of
Island  of  S.  Jago.  At  which  Island  of  Fuego  we  came  ^^^S^-
to  an  anker  the  1 1  day  of  this  moneth,  against  a  white
chappell  in  the  West  end  of  the  sayd  Island,  within  halfe
a  league  of  a  litle  towne,  and  within  a  league  or  there-
about of  the  uttermost  point  of  the  said  Island.

In  this  Island  is  a  marveilous  high  hill  which  doth
burne  continually,  and  the  inhabitants  reported  that
about  three  yeeres  past  the  whole  Island  was  like
to  be  burned  with  the  abundance  of  fire  that  came  out
of  it.

About  a  league  from  the  said  chappel  to  the  Westward
is  a  goodly  spring  of  fresh  water,  where  we  had  as  much
as  we  would.  Wheate  they  have  none  growing  here,  but
a  certaine  seede  that  they  call  Mill,  and  certaine  peason  Mill.
like  Guinie  peason,  which  Mill  maketh  good  breade,  but
they  have  here  good  store  of  rother  beasts  and  goates.
Their  marchandize  is  cotton,  which  groweth  there.  Cotton  in

The  inhabitants  are  Portugals  which  have  commande-  ^^^SP-
ment  from  the  king  to  trafike  neither  with  Englishmen
nor  Frenchmen  for  victuall  or  any  other  thing,  except
they  be  forced  so  to  doe.

There  lieth  off  this  Island  another  called  Ilha  Brava,  "The  hie  of
which  is  not  passing  two  leagues  over,  it  hath  good  store  ^^^'"'^^

279

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

of  goates  and  many  trees,  but  there  are  not  passing  three
or  foure  persons  dwelling  in  it.
They  returne. Xhe 25 day  of  February  we departed towardes the
'^^'^  '  Islands  of  Azores : and  on  the  23 day  of  March  we

had  sight  of  one  of  them  called  Flores,  and  then  wee
might  see  another  Island  to  the  Northward  of  it  called
Cuervo,  lying  two  leagues  or  thereabouts  off  the  other.

The  27  we  came  to  an  anker  in  Cuervo  over  against
a  village  of  about  twelve  simple  houses ;  but  in  the  night
by  a  gale  of  winde,  which  caused  us  to  drawe  our  anker
after  us,  we  hoysed  sayle  and  went  to  the  aforesayd  Island
of  Flores,  where  we  sawe  strange  stream es  of  water
running  downe  from  the  high  cliffes  by  reason  of  the
great  abundance  of  raine  that  had  suddenly  fallen.

The  29  day  we  came  againe  to  Cuervo  and  cast  anker,
but  a  storme  arose  and  continued  seven  or  eight  houres
together,  so  that  we  let  slip  a  cable  and  anker,  and  after
the  storme  was  alayed  we  came  againe  thinking  to  have
recovered  the  same,  but  the  Portugals  had  either  taken  it,
or  spoiled  it :  the  cable  was  new  and  never  wet  before,
and  both  the  cable  and  anker  were  better  worth  then  40
li.  So  that  we  accompt  our  selves  much  beholding  to
the  honest  Portugales.
Afrill  The  1 8  day  of  April  we  tooke  in  water  at  the  Island  of

Flores,  and  having  ankered,  our  cable  was  fretted  in
sunder  with  a  rocke  and  so  burst,  where  wee  lost  that
cable  and  anker  also,  and  so  departed  to  our  coast.

Then  wee  set  sayle  to  an  Islande  named  Faial,  about
the  which  lie  three  other  Islands,  the  one  called  Pico,  the
other  Saint  George,  and  the  other  Graciosa,  which  we  had
sight  of  on  the  eight  and  twentieth  day.

The  29  we  came  to  an  anker  in  the  Southwest  side  of
Faial  in  a  faire  bay,  and  22  fadom  water  against  a  litle
towne  where  we  had  both  fresh  water  and  fresh  victuall.
In  this  Island  by  the report of  the inhabitants,  there
Woad.  groweth  certaine  greene  woad,  which  by  their  speeches  is

farre  better  then  the  woad  of  S.  Michael  or  of  Tercera.
May.  The  8  day  of  May  we  came  to  Tercera  where  we  met

GEORGE FENNER  a.d.

1567.
with  a  Portugal!  ship,  and  being  destitute  of  a  cable  and
anker,  our  Generall  caused  us  to  keepe  her  companie,  to
see  if  she could  conveniently spare us  any. The  next
morning  we  might  see  bearing  with  us  a  great  shippe  and
two Caravels, which we  judged to be  of  the  king of
Portugals Armada, and so they were, whereupon we
prepared  our  selves  for  our  defence. The  said  ship  was  ^  Portugall
one  of  the kings  Galliasses,  about  the  burden  of  foure  ^^^^^"^  °f
hundred  tunnes,  with  about  three  hundred  men  in  her,  the
shippe  being  well  appointed  with  brasse  pieces  both  great
and  small,  and  some  of  them  so  bigge  that  their  shot  was
as  great  as  a  mans  head,  the  other  two  Caravels  were  also
very warlike and well appointed both with men  and
munition.

As  soone  as  they  were  within  shotte  of  us,  they  waved  [II.  ii.  63.]
us  amaine  with  their  swords,  we  keeping  our  course,  the
greatest  shippe  shot  at  us  freely  and  the  caravell  also,  and  ^fg^^  ^^-
we  prepared  our  selves,  and  made  all  things  cleare  for  our  |^'^^^VJ/,v,
safegard  as  neere  as  we  could. Then the  great  shippe  ^„^  -
shot  at  us  all  her  broad  side,  and  her  foure  greatest  pieces  Portugals.
that  lay  in  her  sterne,  and  therewith  hurt  some  of  our
men, and  we did the best  we  could  with  our  shot  to
requite  it. At  last  two  other  Caravels  came  off  the  shoare,
and  two  other  pinnesses  full  of  men,  and  delivered  them
aboord  the  great  shippe,  and  so  went  backe  againe  with
two  men  in  a  piece  of  them. The  ship  and  the  Caravell
gave  us  the first  day three fights,  and  when  the night
was  come  they  left  off  shooting,  yet  notwithstanding  kept
hard  by  us  all the night. In the meane  time  we  had
as  much  as  wee  could  doe  all  the  night  to  mende  our
ropes,  and  to  strengthen  our  bulwarkes,  putting  our  trust
in God,  and  resolving  our selves rather  to  die  in  our
defence  then  to  bee  taken  by  such  wretches.

The  next  day  being  the  10  of  May  in  the  morning,
there  were  come  to  aide  the  said  Portugals  foure  great
Armadas  or  Caravels  more  which  made  seven,  of  which  4
three  of  them  were  at  the  least  100  tunnes  a  piece,  the
other  not  so  bigge,  but  all  well  appointed  and  full  of  men.

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1567.

All  these  together  came  bearing  with  us  being  in  our
Admirall,  and  one  of  the  great  Caravels  came  to  lay  us
aboorde  (as  we  judged)  for  they  had  prepared  their  false
nettings,  and  all  things  for  that  purpose,  so  that  the
Gallias  came  up  in  our  larboord  side,  and  the  Caravell
in  our  starboord  side.

Our  Captaine  and  Master  perceiving  their  pretence,
caused  our  gunners  to  make  all  our  ordinance  readie
with  crossebarres,  chaineshotte  and  haileshot :  so  the  ship
and  Caravell  came  up,  and  as  soone  as  they  were  right  in
our  sides,  they  shotte  at  us  as  much  ordinance  as  they
could,  thinking  to  have  layde  us  presently  aboord  :  where-
upon we  gave  them  such  a  heate  with  both  our  sides,
that  they  were  both  glad  to  fall  asterne  of  us,  &  so
paused  the  space  of  two  or  three  houres  being  a  very
small  gale  of  winde.

Then  came  up  the  other  five  and  shot  all  at  us,
and  so  fell  all  asterne  of  us,  &  then  went  to  counsell
together.

Then  our  small  barke  named  the  George  came  to  us,
and  wee  conferred  together  a  great  space.  And  as  the
Portugall  shippes  and  Caravels  were  comming  to  us
againe,  our  barke  minding  to  fall  asterne  of  us  and  so  to
come  up  againe,  fell  quickly  upon  the  lee,  and  by  reason
of  the  litle  winde,  it  was  so  long  before  she  could  fill  her
sailes  againe,  that  both  the  shippe  and  Caravels  were
come  up  to  us,  and  she  falling  in  among  them  made
reasonable  shift  with  them,  but  they  got  a  head  of  her,  so
that  she  could  not  fetch  us :  then  5  of  the  Caravels
followed  her,  but  we  saw  she  defended  her  selfe  against
them  all.

Then  came  the  great  shippe  and  the  Caravell  to  us,
and  fought  with  us  all  that  day  with  their  ordinance.

The  May-floure  our  other  consort  being  very  good  by
the  winde,  tooke  the  benefite  thereof  and  halde  all  that
day  close  by  the  winde,  but  could  not  come  neere  us.
So  when  night  againe  was  come,  they  gave  over  their
fight  and  followed  us  all  the  night.

282

GEORGE FENNER  a.d.

1567.

In  these  many  fights  it  could  not  otherwise  be  but
needes  some  of  our  men  must  be  slaine,  (as  they  were
indeede)  and  divers  hurt,  and  our  tackle  much  spoyled :
yet  for  all  this  we  did  our  best  indevour  to  repaire
all  things,  and  to  stand  to  it  to  the  death  with  our
assured  trust  in  the  mercie  and  helpe  of  God.

This  night  the  May-floure  came  up  to  us,  and  our
Captaine  tolde  them  his  harmes  and  spoyles,  and  wished
them  if  they  could  spare  halfe  a  dosen  fresh  men  to  hoyse
out  their  boate  and  sende  them  to  him,  but  they  could  not
spare  any,  and  so  bare  away  againe.  Which  when  our
enemies  sawe  in  the  next  morning  that  we  were  one
from  another,  they  came  up  to  us  again  and  gave  us  a
great  fight  with  much  hallowing  and  hooping,  making
accompt  either  to  boorde  us  or  els  to  sinke  us :  but
although  our  companie  was  but  small,  yet  least  they
should  see  us  any  whit  dismayed,  when  they  hallowed
we  hallowed  also  as  fast  as  they,  and  waved  to  them
to  come  and  boorde  us  if  they  durst,  but  that  they  would  T^he  7  Portu-
not,  seeing  us  still  so  couragious :  and  having  given  us  S^^^^P^^f
that  day  foure  fights,  at  night  they  forsooke  us  with  r.^^  ^^^
shame,  as  they  came  to  us  at  the  first  with  pride.  English  ship.

They  had  made  in  our  ship  some  leakes  with  their
shot  which  we  againe  stopped  with  al  speed,  and  that
being  done,  we  tooke  some  rest  after  our  long  labour
and  trouble.

The  next  day  in  the  morning  the  May-floure  came
to  us,  and  brought  us  sixe  men  in  her  boate  which  did  us
much  pleasure,  and  we  sent  to  them  some  of  our  hurt
men.

Then  we  directed  our  course  for  our  owne  countrey,
and  by the  second  day  of  June  we  were  neere  to our  jme.
owne  coast  and  sounded  being  thwart  the  Lyzard.

The third  day  we  had  sight  of  a  shippe which  was
a  Portugall,  who  bare  with  us,  and  at  his  comming  to  us  [ii.  ii.  64.]
(the  weather  being  calme)  our  Captaine  caused  him to
hoyse foorth  his boate  to come aboord  to  speake  with
him,  and  at  their  comming  our  Captaine  and  Marchants

283

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

demanded  of  them what  ware they had, and whither

they  were bound, and they  made answere that their

lading was  sugar  and  cotton. Then our  Captaine  and

Marchants  shewed them  five  Negroes  that  we  had,  and

asked them  whether  they  would  buy  them,  which  they

were  very  desirous  to  doe,  and  agreed  to  give  for  them

40  chests  of  sugar,  which  chests  were  small  having  not

above  26 loaves in  a  piece: so  they  with their  boate

did fetch five of  the chestes  and delivered them and

went for  more,  and  when they  had laden their boate

and  were come  againe, we  might see bearing with  us

A  Portugall a  great  ship and  a  small,  which  our  Captaine  supposed

ship  (notwith-  ^Q  i^g j^gj^ q£ warre or Rovers, and then willed the

standing  all .f^  ,  ...  '  , . .  .

their vilanies)  J^ortugales to carie their sugar to their ship againe,

defended  by  purposing  to  make  our  selves  readie  for  our  defence.
our  men  from  But  the  Portugales  earnestly  intreated  our  Captaine  not
Rovers.  ^^ ^^ forsake them,  and promised him (if  he  would

safegard  them)  to  give  him  above  the  bargaine  ten
chests  of  sugar :  whereupon  our  Captaine  was  content,
and  the  Portugall  not  being  good  of  sayle,  we  spared
our  topsayles  for  her :  so  at  last  the  foresaid  ship  bare
with  us,  and  (seeing  that  we  did  not  feare  them)  gave
us  over.  And  the  next  morning  came  two  others
bearing  with  us,  and  seeing  us  not  about  to  flie  a  jot
from  them  forsooke  us  also.

The  5  day  of  June  we  had  sight  of  the  Stert,  and
about  noone  we  were  thwart  of  the  bay  of  Lime,  and
so  sounded  and  had 'XiS  fadom  water.

The  sixt  day  we  came  in  at  the  Needles  and  so
came  to  an  anker  under  the  Isle  of  Wight  at  a  place
called  Meadhole,  and  from  thence  sayled  to  South-
hampton where  we  made  an  ende  of  this  voyage.

284

EDMUND HOGAN'S AMBASSAGE

A.D.

1577-

The  Ambassage  of  M.  Edmund  Hogan,  one  of
the  sworne  Esquires  of  her  Majesties  person,
from  her  Highnesse  to  Mully  Abdelmelech
Emperour  of  Marocco,  and  king  of  Fes  and
Sus : in  the  ycere 1577,  written  by  himselfe.

Edmund Hogan being  appointed Am-
bassadour from the Queenes Majestic
to  the  above  named  Emperour  and  King
Mully Abdelmelech, departed  with my
company  and  servants  from  London  the
two and twentie day of Aprill 1577,
being  imbarked in  the good  ship  called
the  Gallion of  London,  and  arrived  in  Azafi  a  port  of  M.  Hogan  his
Barbaric the  one  and twentie  day  of  May  next  follow-  ^^p'^'i  ,^
ing. Immediatly I sent Leonell Edgerton a shoare  Barbarie.
with my letters directed to John  Williams  and John  Ma'j.
Bampton, who dispatched a Trottero to Marocco to
knowe  the  kings  pleasure for  my  repaire  to  the  Court,
which letters came to their hands on the Thursday
night.

They  with  all  speede  gave  the  king  understanding
of  it,  who  being  glad  thereof  speeded  the  next  day
certaine  Captaines  with  souldiers  and  tents,  with  other
provision  to  Azafi :  so  that  upon  Whitsunday  at  night
the  said  Captaines  with  John  Bampton,  Robert  Wash-
borne,  and  Robert  Lion,  and  the  kings  officers  came
late  to  Azafi.

In  the  meane  time  I  remained  a  boord,  and  caused
some  of  the  goods  to  be  discharged  for  lightning  of
the  shippe,  and  I  wrote  in  my  letter  that  I  would  not
lande,  till  I  knewe  the  Kings  pleasure.

The  22  day  being  Saturday,  the  Make-speede  arrived

in  the  roade  about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone.

The 27 day, being Whitsunday, cam.e aboord the

Gallion John Bampton, and others, giving me to

understande how  much  the King rejoyced of  my safe

285

A.D.

1577.

[II.  ,i.  65.]

In  Barbary
they  have  no
Innes  but  they
lodge  in  open
Jieldes  where
they  can  find
water.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

arrivall,  comming  from  the  Queenes  Majestic,  and  how
that  for  my  safe  conduct  to  the  Court  he  had  sent
foure  Captaines  and  an  hundred  souldiers  well  appointed,
with  a  horse  furnished  which  he  used  himselfe  to  ride
on  with  all  other  furniture  accordingly :  they  wished
mee  also  to  come  on  lande  in  the  best  order  I  could,
as  well  for  my  selfe  as  my  men,  which  I  did,  having
to  the  number  of  tenne  men,  whereof  three  were
trumpetters.

The  ships  being  foure  appointed  themselves  in  the
best  order  they  could  for  the  best  shew,  and  shot  off
all  their  ordinance  to  the  value  of  twentie  Markes  in
powder.

At  my  comming  a  shoare,  I  found  all  the  souldiers
well  appointed  on  horsebacke,  the  Captaines  and  the
Governour  of  the  towne  standing  as  neere  the  water
side  as  they  could,  with  a  Jennet  of  the  kings,  and
received  mee  from  the  boate  declaring  how  glad  his
Majestie  was  of  my  safe  arrival!,  comming  from  the
Queenes  Majestie  my  Mistresse,  and  that  hee  had  sent
them  to  attend  upon  me,  it  being  his  pleasure  that  I
should  tarie  there  on  shoare  five  or  sixe  dayes  for  my
refreshing.

So  being  mounted  upon  the  Jennet,  they  conducted
mee  through  the  Towne  into  a  faire  fielde  upon  the
Sea-side  where  was  a  tent  provided  for  mee,  and  all  the
ground  spread  with  Turkic  carpets,  and  the  Castle
discharged  a  peale  of  ordinance,  and  all  things  necessarie
were  brought  into  my  tent,  where  I  both  tooke  my
table  and  lodging,  and  had  other  convenient  tents  for
my  servants.

The  souldiers  environed  the  tents,  and  watched  about
us  day  and  night  as  long  as  I  lay  there,  although  I
sought  my  speedier  dispatch.

On  the  Wednesday  towards  night,  I  tooke  my  horse
and  traveiled  ten  miles  to  the  first  place  of  water  that
we  could  finde,  and  there  pitched  our  tents  till  the
next morning,  and so  traveiled  till  ten of  the  clocke,

286

EDMUND HOGAN'S AMBASSAGE  a.d.

1577.
and then  pitched  our  tents  till  foure, and  so  traveiled
as  long  as  day  light  would  suffer about 26 miles that
day.

The  next  day  being  Friday  I  traveiled  in  like  order
but  eight  and  twentie  miles  at  the  -most,  and  by  a  River
being  about  sixe  miles  within  sight  of  the  Citie  of
Marocco  we  pitched  our  tents.

Immediatly  after  came  all  our  English  marchants,  and

the French on horsebacke to meete me,  and before

night  there  came  an  Alcayde  from the king  with  fiftie

men,  & divers  mules  laden  with victuall and banket,

for my  supper,  declaring unto  me how  glad  the  king  T^^^  singular

shewed  himselfe  to  heare  of  the  Queenes  Maiestie,  and  ^f"f!^^^^  °f

. "^ .  . iut  ktns[  to  our

that his pleasure was I should be received into his  Ambassadour.

countrey  as  never any  Christian the  like : and desired

to knowe  what time the next day I  would  come  into

his  citie,  because  he  would that all the Christians as

also his nobilitie should meete me, and willed  John

Bampton to  be  with him  early  in  the  morning,  which

he  did.

About seven of  the  clocke being accompanied  with
the  French  and  English  marchants,  and  a  great  number
of  souldiers, I passed towards the citie,  and by that
time  I had traveiled 2 miles, there met me all the  The  Spaniards
Christians  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portugals  to  receive  me,  ^^^P°^t^g<^^"
which I knowe  was more  by  the  kings  commandement  manded  bv  the
then  of  any  good  wils  of  themselves : for  some  of  them  king  in  paine
although they speake me  faire  hung  downe  their  heads  of  death,  to
like dogs, and especially  the Portugales,  and I coun-  ^^^^^^
tenanced  them  accordingly.  Ambassadour,

So  I  passed  on  till  I  came  within  two  English  miles
of  the  Citie,  and  then  John  Bampton  returned,  shewing
me  that  the  king  was  so  glad  of  my  comming,  that
hee  could  not  devise  to  doe  too  much,  to  shewe  the
good  will  that  hee  did  owe  to  the  Queenes  Majestie,
and  her  Realme.

His  counsellers  met  me  without  the  gates,  and  at
the entrie of the gates, his footmen & guard were

287

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

placed  on  both sides  of  my  horse,  and  so  brought  me
to  the  kings  palace.

The  king  sate  in  his  chaire  with  his  Counsell  about
him,  as  well  the  Moores  as  the  Elchies,  and  according
to  his  order  given  unto  me  before,  I  there  declared  my
message  in  Spanish,  and  made  deliverie  of  the  Queenes
Majesties  letters,  and  all  that  I  spake  at  that  present
in  Spanish,  hee  caused  one  of  his  Elchies  to  declare  the
same  to  the  Moores  present,  in  the  Larbe  tongue.

Which  done,  he  answered  me  againe  in  Spanish,
yeelding  to  the  Queenes  Majestie  great  thankes,  and
offering  himselfe  and  his  countrey  to  bee  at  her  Graces
commaundement,  and  then  commaunded  certaine  of  his
Counsellers  to  conduct  mee  to  my  lodging,  not  being
farre  from  the  Court.

The  house  was  faire  after  the  fashion  of  that  countrey,
being  daily  well  furnished  with  al  kind  of  victuall  at
the  kings  charge.

The  same  night  he  sent  for  mee  to  the  Court,  and
I  had  conference  with  him  about  the  space  of  two
houres,  where  I  throughly  declared  the  charge  com-
mitted unto  mee  from  her  Majestie,  finding  him  con-
formable, willing  to  pleasure  and  not  to  urge  her
Majestie  with  any  demaundes,  more  then  conveniently
shee  might  willingly  consent  unto,  hee  knowing  that
out  of  his  countrey  the  Realme  of  England  might  be
better  served  with  lackes,  then  hee  in  comparison
from  us.
The  king  of  Further  he  gave  me  to  understand,  that  the  king  of

Spatne  sought  Spaine  had  sent  unto  him  for  a  licence,  that  an  Ambas-
0  tsgrace  t  e  g^^Q^J.  Qf  j^jg  j-nipr^t  come  into  his  countrey,  and  had
Ambassadour.  niade  great  meanes  that  ir  the  (Jueenes  majesty  or
England  sent  any  unto  him,  that  he  would  not  give  him
any  credit  or  intertainment,  albeit  (said  he)  I  know  what
the  king  of  Spaine  is,  and  what  the  Queene  of  England
and  her  Realme  is :  for  I  neither  like  of  him  nor  of  his
religion,  being  so  governed  by  the  Inquisition  that  he
can  doe  nothing  of  himselfe.

EDMUND HOGAN'S AMBASSAGE  ad.

^577-

Therefore  when  he  commeth  upon  the  licence  which
I  have  granted,  he  shall  well  see  how  litle  account  I  will
make  of  him  and  Spaine,  and  how  greatly  I  will  extoU
you  for  the  Queenes  majestie  of  England.

He  shall  not  come  to  my  presence  as  you  have  done,  [11.  ii.  66.]
and shall  dayly : for I minde to  accept  of  you  as  my
companion  and  one  of  my  house,  whereas  he  shall  attend
twentie  dayes  after  he  hath  done  his  message.

After  the  end  of  this  speech  I  delivered  Sir  Thomas
Greshams  letters,  when  as  he  tooke  me  by  the  hand,  and
led  me  downe  a  long  court  to  a  palace  where  there  ranne
a  faire  fountaine  of  water,  and  there  sitting  himselfe  in
a  chaire,  he  commanded  me  to  sit  downe  in  another,  and
there  called  for  such  simple  Musicians  as  he  had.

Then  I  presented  him  with  a  great  base  Lute,  which  l'^^  ^^"f  °f
he  most  thankfully  accepted,  and then  he  was  desirous  ^^^^^^^^/^"J

1  rt A/r--  IT 111-  1  1  i^^'^  hngland

to  neare  or  the  Musicians,  and  1  tolde  him  that  there  was  for  Miisicians.
great  care  had  to  provide  them,  and  that  I  did  not  doubt
but  upon  my  returne  they  should  come  with  the  first  ship.
He  is  willing  to  give  them  good  intertainment  with  pro-
vision of  victuall,  and  to  let  them  live  according  to  their
law  and  conscience  wherein  he  urgeth  none  to  the  contrary.

I  finde  him  to  be  one  that  liveth  greatly  in  the  feare
of  God,  being  well  exercised  in  the  Scriptures,  as  well
in  the  olde  Testament  as  also  in  the  New,  and  he  beareth
a  greater  affection  to  our  Nation  then  to  others  because
of  our  religion,  which  forbiddeth  worship  of  Idols,  and
the  Moores  called  him  the  Christian  king.

The  same  night  being  the  first  of  June,  I  continued
with  him  till  twelve  of  the  clocke,  and  he  seemed  to  have
so  good  liking  of  me,  that he  tooke  from  his  girdle  a  ^  rich  gift
short  dagger  being  set  with  200  stones,  rubies  and  turkies,  '^^^^"'^^'^
and  did  bestow  it  upon  me,  and so  I  being  conducted  jmbassadour
returned  to  my  lodging  for  that  time.

The  n^yX  day  because  he  knew  it  to  be  Sunday  &
our  Sabboth  day  he  did  let  me  rest.  But  on  the  munday
in  the  afternoone  he  sent  for  me,  and  I  had  conference
with  him  againe,  and  musicke.

VI  280  T

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

Likewise  on  the  tuesday  by  three  of  the  clocke  he  sent
for  me  into  his  garden,  finding  him  layd  upon  a  silke
bed  complayning  of  a  sore  leg :  yet  after  long  conference
he  walked  into  another  Orchard,  where  as  having  a  faire
banketting-house  and  a  great  water,  and  a  new  gallie  in
it,  he  went  aboord  the  gallie  and  tooke  me  with  him,  and
passed  the  space  of  two  or  three  houres,  shewing  the
great  experience  he  had  in  Gallies,  wherein  (as  he  said)
he  had  exercised  himselfe  eighteene  yeres  in  his  youth.
After  supper  he  shewed  me  his  horses  and  other  com-
modities that  he  had  about  his  house,  and  since  that
night  I  have  not  seene  him,  for  that  he  hath  kept  in  with
his  sore  legge,  but  he  hath  sent  to  me  daily.
June.  The  1 3  of  June  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  I had

againe  audience  of  the  king,  and  I continued  with  him
till  midnight,  having debated as  well for the Queenes
commission  as  for the  well  dealing  with  her marchants
for  their  traffike  here  in  these  parts,  saying,  he  would  do
much more  for  the  Queenes majesty  and the  Realme,
The  offers  of offering  that  all  English  ships  with  her  subjects  may  with
^E r'V°'^^' %'^^^ securitie enter into his ports and dominions as
merchants. ^ell  in  trade  of  marchandize,  as  for  victuall  &  water,  as
also  in  time  of  warre  with  any  her  enemies  to  bring  in
prises and to make sales as occasion should serve,  or
else  to  depart  againe  with  them  at  their  pleasure.

Likewise  for  all  English  ships  that  shall  passe  along
his  coast  of  Barbarie,  &  thorow  the  straites  into  the
Levant  seas,  that  he  would  graunt  safe  conduct  that  the
said  ships  and  marchants  with  their  goods  might  passe
into  the  Levant  seas,  and  so  to  the  Turks  dominions,
and  the  king  of  Argiers,  as  his  owne,  and  that  he  would
write  to  the  Turke  and  to  the  king  of  Argier  his  letters
for  the  well  using  of  our  ships  and  goods.

Also  that  hereafter  no  Englishmen  that  by  any  meanes
may  be  taken  captives,  shall  be  solde  within  any  of  his
dominions :  whereupon  I  declared  that  the  Queenes
majesty  accepting  of  these  his  offers  was  pleased  to  con-
firme  the  intercourse  &  trade  of  our marchants  within

290

EDMUND HOGAN'S AMBASSAGE  ad.

1577-
this his countrey, as also to pleasure him with such
commodities  as he  should  have  need  of,  to  furnish  the  A  good
necessities  and  wants of  his countrey  in  trade of  mar-  P^"'^""-
chandize, so as  he required nothing contrarie to her
honour and law,  and the breach of  league with the
Christian  princes  her  neighbours.

The  same  night  I  presented  the  king  with  the  case  of
combes,  and  desired  his  majestic  to  have  special  regard
that  the  ships  might  be  laden  backe  againe,  for  that  I
found  litle  store  of  salt-peter  in  readinesse  in  John
Bamptons  hands.  He  answered  me  that  I  should  have
all  the  assistance  therein  that  he  could,  but  that  in  Sus
he  thought  to  have  some  store  in  his  house  there,  as
also  that  the  Mountayners  had  made  much  in  a  readi-
nesse :  I  requested  that  he  would  send  downe,  which  he
promised  to  doe.

The  eighteene  day  I  was  with  him  againe  and  so  con-
tinued there  till  night,  and  he  shewed  me  his  house  with
pastime  in  ducking  with  water-Spaniels,  and  baiting  buls
with  his  English  dogges.

At  this  time  I  mooved  him  againe  for  the  sending
downe  to  Sus,  which  he  granted  to  doe,  and  the  24.  day  [II.  ii.  Sj.]
there  departed  Alcayde  Mammie,  with  Lionell  Edgerton,
and  Rowland  Guy  to  Sus,  and  caried  with  them  for  our
accompts  and  his  company  the  kings  letters  to  his  brother
Muly  Hammet,  and  Alcayde  Shauan,  and  the  Viceroy.

The  23.  day  the  king  sent  me  out  of  Marocco  to  his
garden  called  Shersbonare,  with  his  gard,  and  Alcayde
Mamoute,  and  the  24.  at  night  I  came  to  the  court  to
see  a  Morris  dance,  and  a  play  of  his  Elchies.  He
promised  me  audience  the  next  day  being  Tuesday,  but
he  put  it  off  till  Thursday  :  and  the  Thursday  at  night  I
was  sent  for  to  the  king  after  supper,  and  then  he  sent
Alcayde  Rodwan,  and  Alcayde  Gowry  to  conferre  with
me,  but  after  a  little  talke  I  desired  to  be  brought  to
the  King  for  my  dispatch.  And  being  brought  to  him,
I  preferred  two  bils  of  John  Bamptons  which  he  had
made for  provision of  Salt-peter : also  two  bils  for  the

291

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

quiet  traffique  of  our  English  Marchants,  and  bils  for
sugars  to  be  made  by  the  Jewes,  as  well  for  the  debts
past,  as  hereafter,  and  for  good  order  in  the  Ingenios.
Also  I  mooved  him  againe  for  the  Salt-peter,  and  other
dispatches,  which  he  referred  to  be  agreed  upon  by  the
two  Alcaydes.  But  the  Friday  being  the  20.  the  Alcaydes
could  not  intend  it,  and  upon  Saturday  Alcayde  Rodwan
fell  sicke,  so  on  Sunday  we  made  meanes  to  the  King,
and  that  afternoone  I  was  sent  for  to  conferre  upon  the
bargaine  with  the  Alcaydes  and  others,  but  did  not  agree.

Upon  Tuesday  I  wrote  a  letter  to  the  King  for  my
dispatch,  and  the  same  afternoone  I  was  called  againe  to
the  Court,  and  referred  all  things  to  the  King,  accepting
his  offer  of  Salt-peter.

That  night  againe  the  King  had  me  into  his  Gallie,
and  the  Spaniels  did  hunt  the  ducke.

The  Thursday  I  was  appointed  to  way  the  300.  kintals
grosse  of  Salt-peter,  and  that  afternoone  the  Tabybe  came
unto  mee  to  my  lodging,  shewing  mee  that  the  king  was
offended  with  John  Bampton  for  divers  causes.

The  Sunday  night  late  being  the  7.  of  July,  I  got
the  King  to  forgive  all  to  John  Bampton,  and  the  King
promised  me  to  speake  againe  with  me upon Munday.

Upon  Tuesday  I  wrote  to  him  againe  for  my  dispatch,
and  then  hee  sent  Fray  Lewes  to  mee,  and  said  that  he
had  order  to  write.

Upon  Wednesday  I  wrote  againe,  and  he  sent  me
word  that  upon  Thursday  I  should  come  and  be  dis-
patched, so  that  I  should  depart  upon  Friday  without
faile,  being  the  twelfth  of  July.

So the friday  after according to the kings order &
appointment  I  went  to  the  court,  &  whereas  motion  and
petition  was  made  for  the  confirmation  of  the  demaunds
which  I  had  preferred,  they  were  all  granted,  and  like-
wise the privileges which were  on the behalfe of  our
The  Emperor  English marchants requested, were with great favour
privileges  to  ^  ^^^ readinesse  yeelded unto. And whereas the  Jewes
the  English, there resident were to our men in certaine round

292

THOMAS STUKELEY  a.d.

1578.

summes  indebted,  the  Emperors  pleasure  and  com-
mandement  was*,  that  they  should  without  further  ex-
cuse or  delay,  pay  and  discharge  the  same.  And  thus
at  length  I  was  dismissed  with  great  honour  and  speciall
countenance,  such  as  hath  not  ordinarily  bene  shewed
to  other  Ambassadors  of  the  Christians.

And  touching  the  private  affaires  intreated  upon  be-
twixt her  Majestie  and  the  Emperour,  I  had  letters  from
him  to  satisfie  her  highnesse  therein.  So  to  conclude,
having  received  the  like  honourable  conduct  from  his
Court,  as  I  had  for  my  part  at  my  first  landing,  I
embarked  my  selfe  with  my  foresaid  company,  and
arriving  not  long  after  in  England,  I  repaired  to  her
Majesties  court,  &  ended  my  Ambassage  to  her  high-
nesse good  liking,  with  relation  of  my  service  performed.

The  voyage  of  Thomas  Stukeley,  wrongfully
called  Marques  of  Ireland,  into  Barbary  1578.
Written  by  Johannes  Thomas  Freigius  in
Historia  de casde Sebastiani Regis  Lusitaniag.

Enerant  autem  ad  regem  etiam  sexcenti
Itali,  quos  Papa  subministrarat,  Comiti
Irlandiae  :  qui  cum  Vlissiponem  tribus
instructis  navibus  appulisset  Regi  operam
suam  condixit,  eumque  in  bellum  sequi
promisit.  Cap.  7.

Totum  exercitum  divisit  in  quatuor
acies  quadratas :  In  dextro  latere  primum  agmen  erat
Velitum  &  militum  Tingitanorum,  eosque  ducebat  Alvarus
Peresius  de  Tavara :  sinistram  aciem  seu  mediam  tenebant
Germani  &  Itali,  quibus  imperabat  Marchio  Irlandiae,  &c.
Cap.  1 1 .

Inter  nobiles  qui  in  hoc  praelio  ceciderunt,  fuerunt,
praeter  regem  Sebastianum,  dux  de  Avero,  Episcopi
Conimbricensis  &  Portuensis,  Commissarius  generalis  a
Papa  missus  Marchio  Irlandiae,  Christophorus  de  Tavora,
&  plures  alii.  Cap.  13.

293

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

The  same  in  English.

THere  came  also  to  Don  Sebastian  the  King  of
Portugal  600.  Italians,  whom  the  Pope  sent  under
Thomai  the  conduct  of  the  *  Marques  of  Irland :  who  being
Stukeley  zvas  arrived  at  Lisbone  with  three  tall  ships,  proffered  his
wrongfully service  to  the  king,  and  promised  to  attend upon him

indued  with • ^i  s

this  title ^^  ^^  warres,  &c.

[II.  ii.  68.]  He  divided  the  whole  Armie  into  4.  squadrons  :  upon
the  right  wing  stood  the  first  squadron,  consisting  of  men
lightly  armed  or  skirmishers  and  of  the  souldiers  of
Tangier,  Generall  of  whom  was  Don  Alvaro  Perez  de
Tavara :  the  left  or  midle  squadron  consisted  of  Ger-
manes  and  Italians,  under  the  command  of  the  Marques
of  Irland,  &c.  cap.  7.

Of  Noblemen  were  slaine  in  this  battell  (besides  Don
Sebastian  the  king)  the  duke  de  Avero,  the  two  bishops
of  Coimbra  &  of  Porto,  the  Marques  of  Irland  sent  by
the  Pope  as  his  Commissary  generall,  Christopher  de
Tavara,  and  many  others,  cap.  13.

IT  is  further  also  to  be  remembred,  that  divers  other
English  gentlemen  were  in  this  battell,  whereof  the
most  part  were  slaine ;  and  among  others  M.  Christopher
Lyster  was  taken  captive,  and  was  there  long  detained
in  miserable  servitude.  Which  gentleman  although  at
length  he  happily  escaped  the  cruel  hands  of  the  Moores ;
yet  returning  home  into  England,  and  for  his  manifold
good  parts  being  in  the  yeere  1586.  employed  by  the
honourable  the  Earle  of  Cumberland,  in  a  voyage  in-
tended by  the  Streights  of  Magellan  for  the  South  sea,
as  Viceadmirall,  (wherein  he  shewed  singular  resolution
and  courage)  and  appointed  afterward  in  divers  places
of  speciall  command  and  credite,  was  last  of  all  miserably
drowned  in  a  great  and  rich  Spanish  prize  upon  the  coast
of  Cornwall.

294

REPORTS OF CHINA

A.D.

c.  1565.

Certaine  reports  of  the  province  of  China  learned
through  the  Portugals  there  imprisoned,  and
chiefly  by  the  relation  of  Galeotto  Perera,  a
Gentleman  of  good  credit,  that  lay  prisoner
in  that  Countrey  many  yeeres.  Done  out  of
Italian  into  English by  Richard  Willes.

His  land  of  China  is  parted  into  13.
Shires,  the  which  sometimes  were  ech
one  a  kingdome  by  it  selfe,  but  these
many  yeeres  they  have  bene  all  subject
unto  one  King,  Fuquien  is  made  by  the  Fuquien.
Portugals  the  first  Shire,  because  there
their  troubles  began,  &  they  had  occasion
thereby  to  know  the  rest.  In  this  shire  be  8.  cities,  but
one  principally  more  famou.s  then  others  called  Fuquieo,
the  other  seven  are  reasonably  great,  the  best  knowen
whereof  unto  the  Portugals  is  Cinceo,  in  respect  of  a  Cinceo.
certaine  haven  joyning  thereunto,  whither  in  time  past
they  were  wont  for  marchandise  to  resort.

Cantan  is  the  second  shire,  not  so  great  in  quantitie,  Cantan.
as  well  accompted  of,  both  by  the  king  thereof,  and  also
by  the  Portugals,  for  that  it  lieth  neerer  unto  Malacca
then  any  other  part  of  China,  and  was  first  discried  by
the  Portugals  before  any  other  shire  in  that  province :
this  shire  hath  in  it  seven  Cities.

Chequeam  is  the  third  shire,  the  chiefest  Citie  therein Chequeam.
is  Donchion,  therein  also  standeth  Liampo,  with  other  13.
or 14.  boroughes : countrey  townes therin are too too
many  to  be  spoken  of.

The fourth shire is called Xutiamfu, the principall  Xutiamfu.
Citie  thereof  is  great  Pachin,  where  the  King  is  alwayes
resident. In  it  are  fifteene other  very  great  Cities : of
other townes therein, and boroughes well walled and
trenched  about,  I  wil  say  nothing.

The fift shire hath name Chelim : the great Citie  Chelim.
Nanquin chiefe of  other fifteene cities was herein of

295

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

ancient  time  the  royall  seat  of  the  Chinish  kings.  From
this  shire,  &  from  the  aforesaid  Chequeam  forward  bare
rule  the  other  kings,  until  the  whole  region  became  one
kingdome.
Quianct,  or,  Xhe  6.  shire  beareth  the  name  Quianci,  as  also  the
\)uin%t.  principal  City  thereof,  wherein  the  fine  clay  to  make
vessels  is  wrought.  The  Portugals  being  ignorant  of
this  Countrey,  and  finding  great  abundance  of  that  fine
clay  to  be  solde  at  Liampo,  and  that  very  good  cheape,
thought  at  the  first  that  it  had  bene  made  there,  howbeit
in  fine  they  perceived  that  the  standing  of  Quinzi  more
neere  unto  Liampo  then  to  Cinceo  or  Cantan  was  the
cause  of  so  much  fine  clay  at  Liampo :  within  the  com-
passe  of  Quinci  shire  be  other  12.  cities.

The  7.  shire  is  Quicin,  the  8.  Quansi,  the  9.  Confu,
the  10.  Urnan,  the  11.  Sichiva.  In  the  first  hereof  there
be  1 6.  Cities,  in  the  next  1 5  :  how  many  Townes  the
other  3.  have,  wee  are  ignorant  as  yet,  as  also  of  the
proper  names  of  the  12.  and.  13.  shires,  and  the  townes
therein.

This  finally  may  be  generally  said  hereof,  that  the
greater  shires  in  China  province  may  bee  compared
with  mightie  kingdomes.

In  eche  one  of  these  shires  bee  set  Ponchiassini  and
Anchiassini,  before  whom  are  handled  the  matters  of
other  Cities.  There  is  also  placed  in  ech  one  a  Tutan,
as  you  would  say,  a  governour,  and  a  Chian,  that  is  a
visiter,  as  it  were :  whose  ofiice  is  to  goe  in  circuit,  and
to  see  justice  exactly  done.  By  these  meanes  so  up-
rightly things  are  ordered  there,  that  it  may  be  worthily
accompted  one  of  the  best  governed  provinces  in  all  the
world.

The  king  maketh  alwayes  his  abode  in  the  great  city

Packin. Pachin,  as  much  to  say  in  our  language,  as  by  the  name

[II.  11.  69.J  thereof  I am advertised, the towne of  the kingdome.

This  kingdome  is  so  large,  that  under  five  monethes  you

are  not  able  to  travaile  from  the  Townes  by  the  Sea  side

to the Court, and backe againe, no not under three

296

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
monethes  in  poste  at  your  urgent  businesse.  The  post-
horses  in  this  Countrey  are  litle  of  body,  but  swift  of
foote.  Many  doe  traveile  the  greater  part  of  this  journey
by  water  in  certaine  light  barkes,  for  the  multitude  of
Rivers  commodious  for  passage  from  one  Citie  to
another.

The  King,  notwithstanding  the  hugenesse  of  his  king-  Theirmoneths.
dome,  hath  such  a  care  thereof,  that  every  Moone  (for
by  the  Moones  they  reckon  their  monethes)  he  is  adver-
tised fully of  whatsoever thing happeneth therein, by
these  meanes  following.

The  whole  province  being  divided  into  shires,  and  ech
shire  having  in  it  one  chiefe  and  principall  Citie,  where-
unto  the  matters  of  all  the  other  Cities,  Townes  and
boroughes,  are  brought,  there  are  drawen  in  every  chiefe
Citie  aforesaid  intelligences  of  such  things  as  doe  monethly
fall  out,  and  be  sent  in  writing  to  the  Court.  If  happely
in  one  moneth  every  Post  be  not  able  to  goe  so  long  a
way,  yet  doeth  there  notwithstanding  once  every  moneth
arrive  one  Poste  out  of  the  shire.  Who  so  commeth
before  the  new  moone  stayeth  for  the  delivery  of  his
letters  until  the  moone  be  changed.  Then  likewise  are
dispatched  other  Posts  backe  into  all  the  13.  shires
againe.

Before  that  we  doe  come  to  Cinceo  wee  have  to  passe
through  many  places,  and  some  of  great  importance.  For
this  Countrey  is  so  well  inhabited  neere  the  Sea  side,  that
you  cannot  goe  one  mile  but  you  shal  see  some  Towne,
borough  or  hostry,  the  which  are  so  aboundantly  provided
of  all  things,  that  in  the  Cities  and  townes  they  live
civily.  Neverthelesse  such  as  dwel  abrode  are  very  poore,
for  the  multitude  of  them  every  where  is  so  great,  that
out  of  a  tree  you  shall  see  many  times  swarme  a  number
of  children,  where  a  man  would  not  have  thought  to
have  found  any  one  at  all.

From  these  places  in  number  infinite,  you  shall  come
unto  two  Cities  very  populous,  and,  being  compared  with
Cinceo,  not  possibly  to  be  discerned  which  is  the  greater

297

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

of  them.  These  cities  are  as  well  walled  as  any  Cities  in
all  the  world.  As  you  come  in  to  either  of  them,  there
standeth  so  great  and  mighty  a  bridge,  that  the  like
thereof  I  have  never  scene  in  Portugal  nor  else  where.
I  heard  one  of  my  fellowes  say,  that  hee  tolde  in  one
bridge  40.  arches.  The  occasion  wherefore  these  bridges
are  made  so  great  is,  for  that  the  Countrey  is  toward  the
sea  very  plaine  and  low,  and  overflowed  ever  as  the  sea
water  encreaseth.  The  breadth  of  the  bridges,  although
it  bee  well  proportioned  unto  the  length  thereof,  yet  are
they  equally  built,  no  higher  in  the  middle  then  at  either
ende,  in  such  wise  that  you  may  see  directly  from  the
one  ende  to  the  other :  the  sides  are  wonderfully  well
engraved  after  the  maner  of  Rome-workes.  But  that  we
did  most  marveile  at  was  therewithall  the  hugenesse  of
the  stones,  the  like  whereof,  as  we  came  in  to  the  Citie,
we  did  see  many  set  up  in  places  dis-habited  by  the  way,
to  no  small  charges  of  theirs,  howbeit  to  little  purpose,
whereas  no  body  seeth  them  but  such  as  doe  come  by.
The  arches  are  not  made  after  our  fashion,  vauted  with
sundry  stones  set  together :  but  paved,  as  it  were,  whole
stones  reaching  from  one  piller  to  an  other,  in  such  wise
that  they  lye  both  for  the  arches  heads,  and  galantly  serve
also  for  the  high  way.  I  have  bene  astonied  to  beholde
the  hugenesse  of  the  aforesaid  stones :  some  of  them  are
xii.  pases  long  and  upward,  the  least  1 1 .  good  pases  long,
and  an  halfe.

The  wayes  echwhere  are  galantly  paved  with  foure-
square  stone,  except  it  be  where  for  want  of  stone  they
use  to  lay  bricke :  in  this  voyage  wee  travailed  over
certaine  hilles,  where  the  wayes  were  pitched,  and  in
many  places  no  worse  paved  then  in  the  plaine  ground.
This  causeth  us  to  thinke,  that  in  all  the  world  there  bee
no  better  workemen  for  buildings,  then  the  inhabitants
of  China.  The  Countrey  is  so  well  inhabited,  that  no
one  foote  of  ground  is  left  untilled :  small  store  of  cattell
have  we  scene  this  day,  we  saw  onely  certaine  oxen
wherewithal! the countreymen do plow their ground.

298

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
One  oxe  draweth  the  plough  alone,  not  onely  in  this
shire,  but  in  other  places  also,  wherein  is  greater  store
of  cattell.  These  countreymen  by  arte  do  that  in  tillage,
which  we  are  constrained  to  doe  by  force.  Here  be  solde
the  voydings  of  close  stooles,  although  there  wanteth  not
the  dung  of  beastes  :  and  the  excrements  of  man  are  good
marchandise  throughout  all  China.  The  dungfermers
seek  in  every  streete  by  exchange  to  buy  this  durtie  ware
for  herbs  and  wood.  The  custome  is  very  good  for
keeping  the  Citie  cleane.  There  is  great  aboundance  of
hennes,  geese,  duckes,  swine,  and  goates,  wethers  have
they  none :  the  hennes  are  solde  by  weight,  and  so  are
all  other  things.  Two  pound  of  hennes  flesh,  geese,
or  ducke,  is  worth  two  foi  of  their  money,  that  is,
d.ob. sterling.  Swines  flesh  is  sold  at  a  penie  the  pound.
Beefe  beareth  the  same  price,  for  the  scarcitie  thereof,
howbeit  Northward  from  Fuquieo  and  farther  off  from
the  seacoast,  there  is  beefe  more  plentie  and  solde  better
cheape ;  We  have  had  in  all  the  Cities  we  passed  through,
great  abundance  of  all  these  victuals,  beefe  onely  excepted.
And  if  this  Countrey  were  like  unto  India,  the  inhabi-
tants whereof  eate  neither  henne,  beefe,  nor  porke,  but
keepe  that  onely  for  the  Portugals  and  Moores,  they  [II.  ii.  70.]
would  be  sold  here  for  nothing.  But  it  so  falling  out,
that  the  Chineans  are  the  greatest  eaters  in  all  the  world,
they  do  feed  upon  all  things,  specially  on  porke,  which,
the  fatter  it  is,  is  unto  them  the  lesse  lothsome.  The
highest  price  of  these  things  aforesaid  1  have  set  downe,
better  cheape  shal  you  sometimes  buy  them  for  the  great
plentie  thereof  in  this  countrey.  Frogs  are  solde  at  the
same  price  that  is  made  of  hennes,  and  are  good  meate
amongst  them,  as  also  dogs,  cats,  rats,  snakes,  and  all
other  uncleane  meates.

The  Cities  be  very  gallant,  specially  neere  unto  the
gates,  the  which  are  marveilously  great,  and  covered  with
iron.  The  gatehouses  are  built  on  high  with  towers,  &
the  lower  part  thereof  is  made  of  bricke  &  stone,  pro-
portionally with the walls, from the walls upward the

299

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565-

building  is  of  timber,  and  many  stories  in  it  one  above
the  other.  The  strength  of  their  townes  is  in  the  mightie
walles  and  ditches,  artillerie  have  they  none.

The  streetes  in  Cinceo,  and  in  all  the  rest  of  the  Cities
we  have  seene  are  very  faire,  so  large  and  so  straight,
that  it  is  wonderfuU  to  behold.  Their  houses  are  built
with  timber,  the  foundations  onely  excepted,  the  which
are  layd  with  stone  :  in  ech  side  of  the  streetes  are  pentises
or  continuall  porches  for  the  marchants  to  walke  under :
the  breadth  of  the  streets  is  neverthelesse  such,  that  in
them  15.  men  may  ride  commodiously  side  by  side.  As
they  ride  they  must  needs  passe  under  many  high  arches
of  triumph  that  crosse  over  the  streetes  made  of  timber,
and  carved  diversly,  covered  with  tiles  of  fine  clay :  under
these  arches  the  Mercers  do  utter  their  smaller  wares,  &
such  as  list  to  stand  there  are  defended  from  raine  and
the  heate  of  the  Sunne.  The  greater  gentlemen  have
these  arches  at  their  doores :  although  some  of  them  be
not  so  mightily  built  as  the  rest.

I  shall  have  occasion  to  speake  of  a  certaine  order  of
gentlemen  that  are  called  Louteas.  1  wil  first  therefore
Loutea.  expound  what  this  word  signifieth.  Loutea  is  as  much
to  say  in  our  language  as  Sir,  and  when  any  of  them
calleth  his  name,  he  answereth  Sir :  and  as  we  do  say,
that  the  king  hath  made  some  gentleman,  so  say  they,
that  there  is  made  a  Loutea.  And  for  that  amongst  them
the  degrees  are  divers  both  in  name  and  office,  I  will  tell
you  onely  of  some  principals,  being  not  able  to  adver-
tise you  of  all.

The  maner  how  gentlemen  are  created  Louteas,  and
do  come  to  that  honour  and  title,  is  by  the  giving  of  a
broad  girdle,  not  like*  to  the  rest,  and  a  cap,  at  the  com-
maundement  of  the  king.  The  name  Loutea  is  more
generall  &  common  unto  mo,  then  the  equalitie  of  honour
thereby  signified  agreeth  withall.  Such  Louteas  as  doe
serve  their  prince  in  weightie  matters  for  justice,  are
created  after  trial  made  of  their  learning :  but  the  other
which  serve  in smaller  affaires,  as  Captaines,  constables,

300

REPORTS OF CHINA  a.d.

c.  1565.
sergeants  by  land  and  sea,  receivers  and  such  like,  whereof
there  be  in  every  citie,  as  also in this,  very  many,  are
made  for  favour :  the  chiefe  Louteas  are  served  kneeling.

The  whole  province  of  China  is  divided,  as  I  have  said,
into  13.  shires,  in  every  shire  at  the  least  is  one  governour
called  there  Tutan,  in  some  shires  there  be  two.

Chiefe  in  office  next  unto  them  be  certaine  other  named
Chians,  that  is,  high  Commissioners  as  you  would  say,  or  Chlan,  or,
visiters,  with  full  authoritie  in  such  wise,  that  they  doe  ^^^^^•
call  unto  an  accompt  the  Tutans  themselves,  but  their
authoritie  lasteth  not  in  any  shire  longer  then  one  yere.
Neverthelesse  in  every  shire  being  at  the  least  7.  cities,
yea,  in  some  of  them  15.  or  16.  beside  other  boroughes
and  townes  not  well  to  be  numbred,  these  visiters  where
they  come  are  so  honoured  and  feared,  as  though  they
were  some  great  princes.  At  the  yeres  end,  their  circuit
done,  they  come  unto  that  Citie  which  is  chiefe  of  others
in  the  shire,  to  do  justice  there :  finally  busying  them-
selves in  the  searching  out  of  such  as  are  to  receive  the
order  of  Louteas,  whereof  more  shalbe  said  in  another
place.

Over  and  besides  these  officers,  in  the  cheife  City  of
ech  one  of  these  aforesaid  13.  provinces,  is  resident  one
Ponchiassi,  Captaine  thereof,  and  treasurer  of  all  the  kings  Ponckiassi.
revenues.  This  Magistrate  maketh  his  abode  in  one  of
the  foure  greatest  houses  that  be  in  all  these  head  Cities.
And  although  the  principall  part  of  his  function  be  to
be  Captaine,  to  be  treasourer  of  the  revenues  in  that
province,  &  to  send  these  revenues  at  appointed  times  to
the  Court :  yet  hath  he  notwithstanding  by  his  office  also
to  meddle  with  matters  appertaining  unto  justice.

In  the  second  great  house  dwelleth  an  other  Magis-
trate called  Anchiassi,  a  great  officer  also,  for  he  hath  Anchlassi,  i
dealings  in  all  matters  of  justice.  Who  although  he  be  ^^•^^■f^-
somewhat  inferior  in  dignitie  unto  the  Ponchiassi,  yet
for  his  great  dealings  and  generall  charge  of  justice,
whosoever  seeth  the  affaires  of  the  one  house  and  the
other  might  judge  this  Anchiassi  to  be  the  greater.

301

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

Tuzi.  Tuzi,  an other  officer so  called, lieth in the thirde

house,  a magistrate of  importance, specially in things
belonging  unto  warfare,  for  thereof  hath  he  charge.
There  is resident in the 4. house  a  fourth officer,

Taissu.  bearing  name  Taissu. In this house is the principal!

prison  of  all  the  Citie.  Ech  one  of  these  Magistrates
aforesaide  may  both  lay  evill  doers  in  prison,  &  deliver
them  out  againe,  except  ye  fact  be  heinous  &  of  im-
portance :  in  such  a  case  they  can  do  nothing,  except
they do meet  al  together. And if  the  deed  deserveth

[II.  ii.  71.]  death,  all  they  together  cannot  determine  thereof,  with-
out recourse  made  unto  the  Chian  wheresoever  hee  be,
or  to  the  Tutan :  and  eftsoones  it  falleth  out,  that  the
case  is  referred  unto  higher  power.  In  all  Cities,  not
onely  chiefe  in  ech  shire,  but  in  the  rest  also,  are
meanes  found  to  make  Louteas.  Many  of  them  do
study  at  the  prince  his  charges,  wherefore  at  the  yeeres
ende  they  resort  unto  the  head  Cities,  whither  the
Chians  doe  come,  as  it  hath  bene  earst  saide,  as  well
to  give  these  degrees,  as  to  sit  in  judgement  over  the
prisoners.

The  Chians  go  in  circuit  every  yere,  but  such  as  are
to  be  chosen  to  the  greatest  offices  meete  not  but  from
three  yeeres  to  three  yeeres,  and  that  in  certaine  large
halles  appointed  for  them  to  be  examined  in.  Many
things are  asked them, whereunto  if  they  doe  answere

Licentiates,  accordingly,  and  be  found  sufficient  to  take  their  degree,
the  Chian  by  and  by  granteth  it  them  :  but  the  Cap
and  girdle,  whereby  they  are  knowen  to  be  Louteas,
they  weare  not  before that they  be confirmed by  the

Doctors.  king.  Their  examination  done,  and  triall  made  of  them,
such  as  have  taken  their  degree  wont  to  be  given  them
with  all  ceremonies,  use  to  banquet  and  feast  many  dayes
together  (as  the  Chineans  fashion  is  to  ende  all  their
pleasures  with  eating  and  drinking)  and  so  remaine
chosen  to  do  the  king  service  in  matters  of  learning.
The  other  examinates  founde  insufficient  to  proceed  are
sent  backe  to their  studie againe. Whose  ignorance  is

302

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
perceived  to  come  of  negligence  and  default,  such  a  one
is  whipped,  and  sometimes  sent  to  prison,  where  lying
that  yeere  when  this  kinde  of  acte  was,  we  found  many
thus  punished,  and  demaunding  the  cause  thereof,  they
saide  it  was  for  that  they  knew  not  how  to  answere
unto  certaine  things  asked  them.  It  is  a  world  to  see
how  these  Louteas  are  served  and  feared,  in  such  wise,
that  in  publike  assemblies  at  one  shrike  they  give,  all
the  servitors  belonging  unto  justice  tremble  thereat.  At
their  being  in  these  places,  when  they  list  to  moove,
be  it  but  even  to  the  gate,  these  servitors  doe  take
them  up,  and  carry  them  in  seates  of  beaten  gold.
After  this  sort  are  they  borne  when  they  goe  in  the  City,
either  for  their  owne  businesse  abroade,  or  to  see  ech
other  at  home.  For  the  dignitie  they  have,  and  office
they  doe  beare,  they  be  all  accompanied:  the  very
meanest  of  them  all  that  goeth  in  these  seates  is  ushered
by  two  men  at  the  least,  that  cry  unto  the  people  to  give
place,  howbeit  they  neede  it  not,  for  that  reverence  the
common  people  have  unto  them.  They  have  also  in
their  company  certaine  Sergeants  with  their  Maces  either
silvered  or  altogether  silver,  some  two,  some  foure,  other
sixe,  other  eight,  conveniently  for  ech  one  his  degree.
The  more  principal  and  chiefe  Louteas  have  going  orderly
before  these  Sergeants,  many  other  with  staves,  and  a
great  many  catchpoules  with  rods  of  Indish  canes  dragged
on  the  ground,  so  that  the  streets  being  paved,  you  may
heare  afarre  off  as  well  the  noyse  of  the  rods,  as  the
voyce  of  the  criers.  These  fellowes  serve  also  to  appre-
hend others,  and  the  better  to  be  knowen  they  weare
livery  red  girdles,  and  in  their  caps  peacocks  feathers.
Behinde  these  Louteas  come  such  as  doe  beare  certaine
tables  hanged  at  staves  endes,  wherein  is  written  in
silver  letters,  the  name,  degree,  and  office  of  that
Loutea,  whom  they  follow.  In  like  maner  they  have
borne  after  them  hattes  agreeable  unto  their  titles:  if
the  Loutea  be  meane,  then  hath  he  brought  after  him
but one  hat, and  that may not  be  yealowe : but  if  he

303

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

be  of  the  better  sort,  then  may  he  have  two,  three,  or
foure :  the  principall  and  chiefe  Louteas  may  have  all
their  hats  yealow,  the  which  among  them  is  accompted
great  honour.  The  Loutea  for  warres,  although  he  be
but  meane,  may  notwithstanding  have  yealow  hats.  The
Tutans  and  Chians,  when  they  goe  abroad,  have  besides
all  this  before  them  ledde  three  or  foure  horses  with
their  guard  in  armour.

Furthermore  the  Louteas,  yea  and  all  the  people  of
China,  are  wont  to  eate  their  meate  sitting  on  stooles
at  high  tables  as  we  doe,  and  that  very  cleanely,  although
they  use  neither  table-clothes  nor  napkins.  Whatsoever
is  set  downe  upon  the  boord  is  first  carved  before  that
it  be  brought  in :  they  feede  with  two  sticks,  refraining
We,  that  is  from  touching  their  meate  with  their  hands,  even  as  we
the  Italians  ^^  ^j^j^  forkes :  for  the  which  respect  they  lesse  do
pamar  s.  ^^^^^  ^^^  table  clothes.  Ne  is  the  nation  only  civill
at  meate,  but  also  in  conversation,  and  in  courtesie  they
seeme  to  exceede  all  other.  Likewise  in  their  dealings
after  their  maner  they  are  so  ready,  that  they  farre
passe  all  other  Gentiles  and  Moores :  the  greater  states
are  so  vaine,  that  they  line  their  clothes  with  the  best
silke  that  may  be  found.  The  Louteas  are  an  idle
generation,  without  all  maner  of  exercises  and  pastimes,
except  it  be  eating  and  drinking.  Sometimes  they  walke
abroad  in  the  fields  to  make  the  souldiers  shoot  at
pricks  with  their  bowes,  but  their  eating  passeth :  they
will  stand  eating  even  when  the  other  do  draw  to  shoot.
The  pricke  is  a  great  blanket  spread  on  certaine  long
poles,  he  that  striketh  it,  hath  of  the  best  man  there
standing  a  piece  of  crimson  TafFata,  the  which  is  knit
about  his  head :  in  this  sort  the  winners  be  honoured,
and  the  Louteas  with  their  bellies  full  returne  home
againe.  The  inhabitants  of  China  be  very  great  Idola-
ters, all  generally  doe  worship  the  heavens :  and,  as  wee
are  wont  to  say,  God  knoweth  it:  so  say  they  at  every
word,  Tien  Tautee,  that  is  to  say.  The  heavens  doe
know  it. Some  doe  worship  the  Sonne, and  some  the

304

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
Moone,  as  they  thinke  good,  for  none  are  bound  more  [II.  ii.  72.]
to  one  then to  another. In their temples,  the which
they do call Meani,  they  have a great altar in the  After  the
same  place as we have,  true it  is that  one may  goe  ^^^'^^f'^^^^°^-
round  about it. There set they  up the image of  a
certaine  Loutea of  that  countrey,  whom they have in
great  reverence  for  certaine  notable  things  he  did. At
the right hand standeth the divel much more ugly
painted  then  we doe use to set him out,  whereunto
great  homage  is  done  by  such  as  come  into  the  temple
to  aske counsell,  or  to draw lottes : this  opinion  they
have  of  him, that  he is  malicious  and  able  to  do  evil.
If  you  aske  them  what they do thinke of  the soules
departed,  they  will  answere  that  they  be immortall,  and
that  as soone as any  one  departeth  out  of  this  life,  he
becommeth  a  divel  if  hee  have  lived  well  in  this  world,  Pythagorean

J'  h

if  otherwise,  that  the  same  divel  changeth  him  into  a  ^  ^'
bufle,  oxe,  or  dogge.  Wherefore  to  this  divel  they  doe
much  honour,  to  him  doe  they  sacrifice,  praying  him  that
he  will  make  them  like  unto  himselfe,  and  not  like  other
beastes.  They  have  moreover  another  sort  of  temples,
wherein  both  upon  the  altars  and  also  on  the  walls  do
stand  many  idols  well  proportioned,  but  bare  headed  :  these
beare  name  Omithofon,  accompted  of  them  spirits,  but  such
as  in  heaven  do  neither  good  nor  evill,  thought  to  be
such  men  and  women  as  have  chastly  lived  in  this  world
in  abstinence  from  fish  and  flesh,  fed  onely  with  rise
and  salates.  Of  that  divel  they  make  some  accompt :
for  these  spirits  they  care  litle  or  nothing  at  all.  Againe
they  holde  opinion  that  if  a.  man  do  well  in  this  life,
the  heavens  will  give  him  many  temporall  blessings,  but
if  he  doe  evil,  then  shall  he  have  infirmities,  diseases,
troubles,  and  penurie,  and  all  this  without  any  know-
ledge of  God.  Finally,  this  people  knoweth  no  other
thing  then  to  live  and  die,  yet  because  they  be  reason-
able creatures,  all  seemed  good  unto  them  we  speake  in
our  language,  though  it  were  not  very  sufficient :  our
maner  of  praying  especially  pleased  them,  and  truely
VI  305  u

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

they  are  well  ynough  disposed  to  receive  the  knowledge
of  the  trueth.  Our  Lord  grant  for  his  mercy  all  things
so  to  be  disposed,  that  it  may  sometime  be  brought  to
passe,  that  so  great  a  nation  as  this  is  perish  not  for
want  of  helpe.

Our  maner  of  praying  so  well  liked  them,  that  in
prison  importunately  they  besought  us  to  write  for
them  somewhat  as  concerning  heaven,  the  which  we  did
to  their  contentation  w'  such  reasons  as  we  knew,  how-
beit  not  very  cunningly.  As  they  do  their  idolatry  they
laugh  at  themselves.  If  at  any  time  this  countrey
might  be  joyned  in  league  with  the  kingdome  of  Por-
tugale,  in  such  wise  that  free  accesse  were  had  to  deale
with  the  people  there,  they  might  all  be  soone  con-
verted. The  greatest  fault  we  do  finde  in  them  is
Sodomie,  a  vice  very  common  in  the  meaner  sort,  and
nothing  strange  amongst  the  best.  This  sinne  were  it
left  of  them,  in  all  other  things  so  well  disposed  they  be,
that  a  good  interpreter  in  a  short  space  might  do  there
great  good :  If,  as  I  said,  the  countrey  were  joyned  in
league  with  us.

Furthermore  the  Louteas,  with  all  the  people  of  China,
are  wont  to  solemnize  the  dayes  of  the  new  and  full
Moones  in  visiting  one  an  other,  and  making  great
banquets :  for  to  that  end,  as  I  earst  said,  do  tend  all
their  pastimes,  and  spending  their  days  in  pleasure.
They  are  wont  also  to  solemnize  ech  one  his  birth  day,
whereunto  their  kindred  and  friends  do  resort  of  custome,
with  presents  of  jewels  or  money,  receiving  againe  for
their  reward  good  cheare.  They  keepe  in  like  maner  a
generall  feast  with  great  banquets  that  day  their  king
was  borne.  But  their  most  principall  and  greatest  feast
of  all,  and  best  cheare,  is  the  first  day  of  their  new  yeere,
namely  the  first  day  of  the  new  Moone  of  February,
so  that  their  first  moneth  is  March,  and  they  reckon  the
times  accordingly,  respect  being  had  unto  the  reigne  of
their  princes :  as  when  any  deed  is  written,  they  date
it thus.  Made  such  a  day  of  such a  moone,  and such

306

REPORTS OF  CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
a  yeere  of  the  relgne  of  such  a  king. And  their  ancient
writings  beare  date  of  the  yeeres  of  this  or  that  king.

Now  will  I  speake  of  the  maner  which  the  Chineans
doe  observe  in  doing  of  justice,  that  it  may  be  knowen
how  farre  these  Gentiles  do  herein  exceed  many  Christians,
that  be  more  bounden  then  they  to  deale  justly  and  in
trueth.  Because  the  Chinish  king  maketh  his  abode
continually  in  the  City  Pachin,  his  kingdome  so  great,
&  the  shires  so  many,  as  tofore  it  hath  bene  said :  in
it  therefore  the  governours  and  rulers,  much  like  unto
our  Shiriffes,  be  appointed  so  suddenly  and  speedily  dis-
charged againe,  that  they  have  no  time  to  grow  naught.
Furthermore  to  keepe  the  state  in  more  securitie,  the
Louteas  that  governe  one  shire  are  chosen  out  of  some
other  shire  distant  farre  off,  where  they  must  leave  their
wives,  children  and  goods,  carying  nothing  with  them
but  themselves.  True  it  is,  that  at  their  comming  thither
they  doe  finde  in  a  readinesse  all  things  necessary,  their
house,  furniture,  servants,  and  all  other  things  in  such
perfection  and  plentie,  that  they  want  nothing.  Thus
the  king  is  well  served  without  all  feare  of  treason.

In  the  principall  Cities  of  the  shires  be  foure  chiefe
Louteas,  before  whom  are  brought  all  matters  of  the
inferiour  Townes,  throughout  the  whole  Realme.  Divers
other  Louteas  have  the  managing  of  justice,  and  receiving
of  rents,  bound  to  yeelde  an  accompt  thereof  unto  the
greater  officers.  Other  do  see  that  there  be  no  evil  rule
kept  in  the  Citie :  ech  one  as  it  behoveth  him.  Generally  [II.  il.  73.]
all  these  doe  imprison  malefactours,  cause  them  to  be
whipped  and  racked,  hoysing  them  up  and  downe  by
the  armes  with  a  cord,  a  thing  very  usuall  there,  and  The  Italians
accompted  no  shame.  These  Louteas  do  use  great  ^'^"^^J'^
diligence  in  the  apprehending  of  theeves,  so  that  it  is
a  wonder  to  see  a  theefe  escape  away  in  any  City,  towne
or  village.  Upon  the  sea  neere  unto  the  shoare  many
are  taken,  and  looke  even  as  they  are  taken,  so  be  they
first  whipped,  and  afterward  layde  in  prison,  where  shortly
after they  all die for hunger  and cold. At that time

307

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

when  we  were  in  prison,  there  died  of  them  above  three-
score and  ten.  If  happely  any  one,  having  the  meanes  to
get  food,  do  escape,  he  is  set  with  the  condemned  persons,
and  provided  for  as  they  be  by  the  King,  in  such  wise
as  hereafter  it  shalbe  said.

Their  whips  be  certaine  pieces  of  canes,  cleft  in  the
middle,  in  such  sort  that  they  seeme  rather  plaine  then
sharpe.  He  that  is  to  be  whipped  lieth  grovelong  on
the  ground :  upon  his  thighes  the  hangman  layeth  on
blowes  mightily  with  these  canes,  that  the  standers  by
tremble  at  their  crueltie.  Ten  stripes  draw  a  great  deale
of  blood,  20.  or  30.  spoile  the  flesh  altogether,  50.  or
60.  will  require  long  time  to  bee  healed,  and  if  they
come  to  the  number  of  one  hundred,  then  are  they
incurable.

The  Louteas  observe  moreover  this :  when  any  man
is  brought  before  them  to  be  examined,  they  aske  him
openly  in  the  hearing  of  as  many  as  be  present,  be  the
offence  never  so  great.  Thus  did  they  also  behave  them-
selves with  us :  For  this  cause  amongst  them  can  there
be  no  false  witnesse,  as  dayly  amongst  us  it  falleth  out.
This  good  commeth  thereof,  that  many  being  alwayes
about  the  Judge  to  heare  the  evidence,  and  beare  witnesse,
the  processe  cannot  be  falsified,  as  it  happeneth  sometimes
with  us.  The  Moores,  Gentiles,  and  Jewes  have  all  their
sundry  othes,  the  Moores  do  sweare  by  their  Mossafos,
the  Brachmans  by  their  Fili,  the  rest  likewise  by  the
things  they  do  worship.  The  Chineans  though  they  be
wont  to  sweare  by  heaven,  by  the  Moone,  by  the  Sunne,
and  by  all  their  Idoles,  in  judgement  neverthelesse  they
sweare  not  at  all.  If  for  some  offence  an  othe  be  used
of  any  one,  by  and  by  with  the  least  evidence  he  is
tormented,  so  be  the  witnesses  he  bringeth,  if  they  tell
not  the  trueth,  or  do  in  any  point  disagree,  except  they
be  men  of  worship  and  credit,  who  are  beleeved  without
any  further  matter :  the  rest  are  made  to  confesse  the
trueth  by  force  of  torments  and  whips.  Besides  this
order  observed  of  them in  examinations,  they  do  feare

308

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad,

c.  1565.
so  much  their  King,  and  he  where  he  maketh  his  abode
keepeth  them  so  lowe,  that  they  dare  not  once  stirre.
Againe,  these  Louteas  as  great  as  they  be,  notwithstanding
the  multitude  of  Notaries  they  have,  not  trusting  any
others,  do  write  all  great  processes  and  matters  of  im-
portance themselves.  Moreover  one  vertue  they  have
worthy  of  great  praise,  and  that  is,  being  men  so  wel
regarded  and  accompted  as  though  they  were  princes,  yet
they  be  patient  above  measure  in  giving  audience.  We
poore  strangers  brought  before  them  might  say  what  we
would,  as  all  to  be  lyes  and  fallaces  that  they  did  write,
ne  did  we  stand  before  them  with  the  usuall  ceremonies
of  that  Countrey,  yet  did  they  beare  with  us  so  patiently,
that  they  caused  us  to  wonder,  knowing  specially  how
litle  any  advocate  or  Judge  is  wont  in  our  Countrey  to
beare  with  us.  For  wheresoever  in  any  Towne  of
Christendome  should  be  accused  unknowen  men  as  we
were,  I  know  not  what  end  the  very  innocents  cause
would  have :  but  we  in  a  heathen  Countrey,  having  our
great  enemies  two  of  the  chiefest  men  in  a  whole  Towne,
wanting  an  interpreter,  ignorant  of  that  Countrey  lan-
guage, did  in  the  end  see  our  great  adversaries  cast  into
prison  for  our  sake,  and  deprived  of  their  Offices  and
honour  for  not  doing  justice,  yea  not  to  escape  death  :
for,  as  the  rumour  goeth,  they  shalbe  beheaded.  Some-
what is  now  to  be  said  of  the  lawes  that  I  have  bene  able
to  know  in  this  Countrey,  and  first,  no  theft  or  murther
is  at  any  time  pardoned :  adulterers  are  put  in  prison,
and  the  fact  once  proved,  are  condemned  to  die,  the
womans  husband  must  accuse  them  :  this  order  is  kept
with  men  &  women  found  in  that  fault,  but  theeves  and
murderers  are  imprisoned  as  I  have  said,  where  they
shortly  die  for  hunger  and  cold.  If  any  one  happely
escape  by  bribing  the  Gailer  to  give  him  meate,  his
processe  goeth  further,  and  commeth  to  the  Court  where
he  is  condemned  to  die.  Sentence  being  given,  the
prisoner  is  brought  in  publique  with  a  terrible  band  of  j  puiof^
men  that  lay  him  in  Irons  hand  and  foot,  with  a  boord  board.

309

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

at  his  necke  one  handfull  broad,  in  length  reaching  downe
to  his  knees,  cleft  in  two  parts,  and  with  a  hole  one
handfull  downeward  in  the  table  fit  for  his  necke,  the
which  they  inclose  up  therein,  nailing  the  boord  fast
together ;  one  handfull  of  the  boord  standeth  up  behinde
in  the  necke :  The  sentence  and  cause  wherefore  the
fellon  was  condemned  to  die,  is  written  in  that  part  of
the  table  that  standeth  before.

This  ceremony  ended,  he  is  laid  in  a  great  prison  in
the  company  of  some  other  condemned  persons,  the
which  are  found  by  the  king  as  long  as  they  do  live.
The  bord  aforesaid  so  made  tormenteth  the  prisoners
very  much,  keeping  them  both  from  rest,  &  eke
letting  them  to  eat  commodiously,  their  hands  being
manacled  in  irons  under  that  boord,  so  that  in  fine  there

[II.  ii.  74.]  is  no  remedy  but  death.  In  the  chiefe  Cities  of  every
shire,  as  we  have  erst  said,  there  be  foure  principall
houses,  in  ech  of  them  a  prison :  but  in  one  of  them,
where  the  Taissu  maketh  his  abode,  there  is  a  greater
and  a  more  principal  prison  then  in  any  of  the  rest:
and  although  in  every  City  there  be  many,  neverthelesse
in  three  of  them  remaine  onely  such  as  be  condemned
to  die.  Their  death  is  much  prolonged,  for  that  ordinarily
there  is  no  execution  done  but  once  a  yeere,  though  many
die  for  hunger  and  cold,  as  we  have  seene  in  this  prison.
Execution  is  done  in  this  maner.  The  Chian,  to  wit,
the  high  Commissioner  or  Lord  chiefe  Justice,  at  the
yeres  end  goeth  to  the  head  City,  where  he  heareth  again e
the  causes  of  such  as  be  condemned.  Many  times  he
delivereth  some  of  them,  declaring  ye  boord  to  have  bene
wrongfully  put  about  their  necks  :  the  visitation  ended,
he  choseth  out  seven  or  eight,  not  many  more  or  lesse
of  the  greatest  malefactors,  the  which,  to  feare  and  keepe
in  awe  the  people,  are  brought  into  a  great  market  place,
where  all  the  great  Louteas  meete  together,  and  after
many  ceremonies  and  superstitions,  as  the  use  of  the
Countrey  is,  are  beheaded.  This  is  done  once  a  yeere :
who  so  escapeth  that  day,  may  be  sure  that  he  shall  not

310

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
be  put  to  death  all  that  yeere  following,  and  so  remaineth
at  the  kings  charges  in  the  greater  prison.  In  that  prison
where  we  lay  were  alwayes  one  hundred  and  mo  of  these
condemned  persons,  besides  them  that  lay  in  other
prisons.

These  prisons  wherein  the  condemned  caytifes  do  re-
maine  are  so  strong,  that  it  hath  not  bene  heard,  that
any  prisoner  in  all  China  hath  escaped  out  of  prison,  for
in  deed  it  is  a  thing  impossible.  The  prisons  are  thus
builded.  First  all  the  place  is  mightily  walled  about,
the  walles  be  very  strong  and  high,  the  gate  of  no  lesse
force :  within  it  three  other  gates,  before  you  come
where  the  prisoners  do  lye,  there  many  great  lodgings
are  to  be  scene  of  the  Louteas,  Notaries,  Parthions,  that
is,  such  as  do  there  keepe  watch  and  ward  day  and  night,
the  court  large  and  paved,  on  the  one  side  whereof
standeth  a  prison,  with  two  mighty  gates,  wherein  are
kept  such  prisoners  as  have  committed  enormious  offences.
This  prison  is  so  great,  that  in  it  are  streetes  and  Market
places  wherein  all  things  necessary  are  sold.  Yea  some
prisoners  live  by  that  kinde  of  trade,  buying  and  selling,
and  letting  out  beds  to  hire :  some  are  dayly  sent  to
prison,  some  dayly  delivered,  wherefore  this  place  is  never
void  of  7.  or  eight  hundred  men that  go  at  libertie.

Into  one  other  prison  of  condemned  persons  shall
you  go  at  three  yron  gates,  the  court  paved  and
vauted  round  about,  and  open  above  as  it  were  a
cloister.  In  this  cloister  be  eight  roomes  with  yron
doores,  and  in  ech  of  them  a  large  gallerie,  wherein  every
night  the  prisoners  do  lie  at  length,  their  feet  in  the
stocks,  their  bodies  hampered  in  huge  wooden  grates
that  keep  them  from  sitting,  so  that  they  lye  as  it  were
in  a  cage,  sleepe  if  they  can :  in  the  morning  they  are
losed  againe,  that  they  may  go  into  the  court.  Not-
withstanding the  strength  of  this  prison,  it  is  kept  with
a  garrison  of  men,  part  whereof  watch  within  the  house,
part  of  them  in  the  court,  some  keepe  about  the  prison
with lanterns and watch-bels answering one another

311

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

five  times  every  night,  and  giving  warning  so  lowd,  that
the  Loutea  resting  in  a  chamber  not  neere  thereunto,
may  heare  them.  In  these  prisons  of  condemned  persons
remaine  some  15,  other  20.  yeres  imprisoned,  not  exe-
cuted, for  the  love  of  their  honorable  friends  that  seeke
to  prolong  their  lives.  Many  of  these  prisoners  be
shoomakers,  and  have  from  the  king  a  certaine  allowance
of  rise :  some  of  them  worke  for  the  keeper,  who  suffreth
them  to  go  at  libeftie  without  fetters  and  boords,  the
better  to  worke.  Howbeit  when  the  Loutea  calleth  his
checke  roll,  &  with  the  keeper  vieweth  them,  they  all
weare  their  liveries,  that  is,  boords  at  their  necks,  yronned
hand  and  foot.  When  any  of  these  prisoners  dieth,  he
is  to  be  scene  of  the  Loutea  and  Notaries,  brought  out
of  a  gate  so  narrow,  that  there  can  but  one  be  drawen
out  there  at  once.  The  prisoner  being  brought
forth,  one  of  the  aforesaid  Parthions  striketh  him
thrise  on  the  head  with  an  yron  sledge,  that  done  he
is  delivered  unto  his  friends,  if  he  have  any,  otherwise
the  king  hireth  men  to  cary  him  to  his  buriall  in  the
fields.

Thus  adulterers  and  theeves  are  used.  Such  as  be
imprisoned  for  debt  once  knowen,  lie  there  until  it  be
paied.  The  Taissu  or  Loutea  calleth  them  many  times
before  him  by  the  vertue  of  his  office,  who  understanding
the  cause  wherefore  they  do  not  pay  their  debts,  ap-
pointeth  them  a  certaine  time  to  do  it,  within  the  com-
passe  whereof  if  they  discharge  not  their  debts  being
debters  in  deed,  then  they  be  whipped  and  condemned
to  perpetuall  imprisonment :  if  the  creditors  be  many,
and  one  is  to  be  paied  before  another,  they  do,  contrary
to  our  maner,  pay  him  first  of  whom  they  last  borrowed,
and  so  ordinarily  the  rest,  in  such  sort  that  the  first
lender  be  the  last  receiver.  The  same  order  is  kept  in
Of  like  the  paying  legacies : the last named receiveth his portion

pi  en  ers  ^^^^^ They  accompt  it  nothing;  to  shew  favour  to  such

be  the  more  ^  ^ .  . ^

weaithie. ^  ^^^  ^s  can  do  the  like  againe :  but  to  do  good  to  them

that  have  litle  or  nothing,  that  is  worth  thanks,  therefore

312

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

C.1565.
pay  they  the  last before  the first,  for that their  intent
seemeth  rather  to  be  vertuous  then  gainefull.

When  I  said,  that  such  as  be  committed  to  prison  for
theft  and  murther  were  judged  by  the  Court,  I  ment  not
them  that  were  apprehended  in  the  deed  doing,  for  they
need  no  triall,  but  are  brought  immediatly  before  the  [II.  ii.  75.]
Tutan,  who  out  of  hand  giveth  sentence.  Other  not
taken  so  openly,  which  do  need  trial,  are  the  malefactors
put  to  execution  once  a  yere  in  the  chiefe  cities,  to  keepe
in  awe  the  people :  or  condemned,  do  remaine  in  prison,
looking  for  their  day.  Theeves  being  taken  are  caried  to
prison  from  one  place  to  another  in  a  chest  upon  mens
shoulders,  hired  therfore  by  the  king,  the  chest  is  6.
handfuls  high,  the  prisoner  sitteth  therein  upon  a  bench,
the  cover  of  the  chest  is  two  boords,  amid  them  both
a  pillery-like  hole,  for  the  prisoners  necke,  there  sitteth
he  with  his  head  without  the  chest,  and  the  rest  of  his
body  within,  not  able  to  moove  or  turne  his  head  this
way  or  that  way,  nor  to  plucke  it  in :  the  necessities  of
nature  he  voydeth  at  a  hole  in  the  bottome  of  the  chest,
the  meate  he  eateth  is  put  into  his  mouth  by  others.
There  abideth  he  day  and  night  during  his  whole
journey :  if  happily  his  porters  stumble,  or  the  chest  do
jogge  or  be  set  downe  carelessly,  it  turneth  to  his  great
paines  that  sitteth  therein,  al  such  motions  being  unto
him  hanging  as  it  were.  Thus  were  our  companions
caried  from  Cinceo,  7.  daies  journey,  never  taking  any
rest  as  afterward  they  told  us,  &  their  greatest  griefe  was
to  stay  by  the  way :  as  soone  as  they  came,  being  taken
out  of  the  chests,  they  were  not  able  to  stand  on  their
feet,  and  two  of  them  died  shortly  after.  When  we  lay
in  prison  at  Fuquieo,  we  came  many  times  abroad,  &  Fuquieo.
were  brought  to  the  pallaces  of  noble  men,  to  be  seene
of  them  &  their  wives,  for  that  they  had  never  seene  any
Portugale  before.  Many  things  they  asked  us  of  our
Country,  and  our  fashions,  &  did  write  every  thing,  for
they  be  curious  in  novelties  above  measure.  The
gentlemen shew  great  courtesie unto  strangers,  and  so  Hereof  to/ore

313

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

did  we  finde  at  their  hands,  and  because  that  many  times
we  were  brought  abroad  into  the  City,  somewhat  wil  I
say  of  such  things  as  I  did  see  therein,  being  a  gallant
City,  and  chiefe  in  one  of  the  13.  shires  aforesaid.  The
City  Fuquieo  is  very  great,  &  mightily  walled  with
square  stone  both  within  and  without,  and,  as  it  may
seeme  by  the  breadth  therof,  filled  up  in  the  middle
with  earth,  layd  over  with  brick  &  covered  with  tyle,
after  the  maner  of  porches  or  galleries,  that  one  might
dwel  therein.  The  staires  they  use  are  so  easily  made,
that  one  may  go  them  up  and  downe  a  hors-backe,  as
eftsoones  they  do :  the  streets  are  paved,  as  already  it
hath  bin  said :  there  be  a  great  number  of  Marchants,
every  one  hath  written  in  a  great  table  at  his  doore  such
things  as  he  hath  to  sel.  In  like  maner  every  artisane
painteth  out  his  craft :  the  market  places  be  large,  great
abundance  of  al  things  there  be  to  be  sold.  The  city
standeth  upon  water,  many  streames  run  through  it,  the
banks  pitched,  &  so  broad  that  they  serve  for  streets  to
the  cities  use.  Over  the  streams  are  sundry  bridges  both
of  timber  &  stone,  which  being  made  level  with  the
streets,  hinder  not  the  passage  of  the  barges  too  and  fro,
the  chanels  are  so  deepe.  Where  the  streames  come  in
and  go  out  of  the  city,  be  certaine  arches  in  the  wal,
Parai.  there  go  in  and  out  their  Parai,  that  is  a  kind  of  barges
they  have,  &  that  in  the  day  time  only  :  at  night  these
arches  are  closed  up  with  gates,  so  do  they  shut  up  al
the  gates  of  the  City.  These  streames  and  barges  do
ennoblish  very  much  the  City,  and  make  it  as  it  were  to
seeme  another  Venice.  The  buildings  are  even,  wel
made,  high,  not  lofted,  except  it  be  some  wherein  mar-
chandize  is  laid.  It  is  a  world  to  see  how  great  these
cities  are,  and  the  cause  is,  for  that  the  houses  are  built
even,  as  I  have  said,  &  do  take  a  great  deale  of  roome.
One  thing  we  saw  in  this  city  that  made  us  al  to  wonder,
and  is  worthy  to  be  noted  :  namely,  over  a  porch  at  the
comming  in  to  one  of  the  aforesaid  4.  houses,  which  the
king hath in  every  shire for his  governors,  as  I have

314

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
erst  said,  standeth  a  tower  built  upon  40.  pillers,  ech  one
whereof  is  but  one  stone,  ech  one  40.  handfuls  or  spans
long:  in  bredth  or  compasse  12,  as  many  of  us  did
measure  them.  Besides  this,  their  greatnesse  is  such  in
one  piece,  that  it  might  seeme  impossible  to  worke  them  :
they  be  moreover  cornered,  and  in  colour,  length  and
breadth  so  like,  that  the  one  nothing  difFereth  from  the
other. This  thing  made  us  all to  wonder  very  much.

We  are  wont  to  cal  this  country  China,  and  the  people
Chineans,  but  as  long  as  we  were  prisoners,  not  hearing
amongst  them  at  any  time  that  name,  I  determined  to
learne  how  they  were  called :  and  asked  sometimes  by
them  thereof,  for  that  they  understood  us  not  when  we
called  them  Chineans,  I  answered  them,  that  al  the  in-
habitants of  India  named  them  Chineans,  wherefore  I
praied  them  that  they  would  tel  me,  for  what  occasion
they  are  so  called,  whether  peradventure  any  city  of  theirs
bare  that  name.  Hereunto  they  alwayes  answered  me,
y^  they  have  no  such  name,  nor  ever  had.  Then  did  I
aske  them  what  name  the  whole  Country  beareth,  &  what
they  would  answere  being  asked  of  other  nations  what
countrymen  they  were  ?  It  was  told  me  that  of  ancient
time  in  this  country  had  bin  many  kings,  &  though  pre-
sently it  were  al  under  one,  ech  kingdom  nevertheles
enjoyed  that  name  it  first  had,  these  kingdomes  are  the
provinces  I  spake  of  before.  In  conclusion  they  said,
that  the  whole  country  is  called  Tamen,  &  the  inhabi-  Tamen  the
tants  Tamegines,  so  that  this  name  China  or  Chineans,  P^'p^'''^^^^
is  not  heard  of  in  y'  country.  I  thinke  that  the  neer-
nesse  of  another  province  therabout  called  Cochinchina,
&  the  inhabitants  therof  Cochinesses,  first  discovered
before  China  was,  lying  not  far  from  Malacca,  did  give
occasion  to  ech  of  the  nations,  of  that  name  Chineans,
as  also  the  whole  country  to  be  named  China.  But  their
proper  name  is  that  aforesaid.

I  have  heard  moreover  that  in  the  City  of  Nanquim  [II.  ii.  -jd?^
remaineth  a  table  of  gold,  and  in  it  written  a  kings  name,
as  a  memory  of  that  residence  the  kings  were  wont  to

315

A.D.

c.  1565.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Pockan,  or,
Pachin.

keepe  there.  This  table  standeth  in  a  great  pallace,
covered  alwayes,  except  it  be  on  some  of  their  festival!
dayes,  at  what  time  they  are  wont  to  let  it  be  seene,
covered  neverthelesse  as  it  is,  all  the  nobilitie  of  the  City
going  of  duetie  to  doe  it  every  day  reverence.  The  like
is  done  in  the  head  Cities  of  all  the  other  shires  in  the
pallaces  of  the  Ponchiassini,  wherein  these  aforesaid  tables
doe  stand  with  the  kings  name  written  in  them,  although
no  reverence  be  done  thereunto  but  in  solemne  feastes.
I  have  likewise  understood  that  the  City  Pachin,
where  the  king  maketh  his  abode,  is  so  great,  that  to
go  from  one  side  to  the  other,  besides  the  Suburbs,  the
which  are  greater  then  the  City  it  selfe,  it  requireth  one
whole  day  a  horseback,  going  hackney  pase.  In  the
suburbs  be  many  wealthy  marchants  of  all  sorts.  They
told  me  furthermore  that  it  was  moted  about,  and  in  the
motes  great  store  of  fish,  whereof  the  king  maketh  great
gaines.
Theirenemies  It  was  also  told  me  that  the  king  of  China  had  no
king  to  wage  battel  withall,  besides  the  Tartars,  with
whom  he  had  concluded  a  peace  more  then  80.  yeres
ago.  Neverthelesse  their  friendship  was  not  so  great,
that  the  one  nation  might  marry  with  the  other.  And
demanding  with  whom  they  married,  they  said,  that  in
olde  time  the  Chinish  kings  when  they  would  marry  their
daughters,  accustomed  to  make  a  solemne  feast,  where-
unto  came  all  sorts  of  men.  The  daughter  that  was  to
be  married,  stood  in  a  place  where  she  might  see  them
all,  and  looke  whom  she  liked  best,  him  did  she  chuse  to
husband,  and  if  happely  he  were  of  a  base  condition,  hee
became  by  and  by  a  gentleman  :  but  this  custome  hath
bene  left  long  since.  Now  a  dayes  the  king  marrieth  his
daughters  at  his  owne  pleasure,  with  great  men  of  the
kingdome :  the  like  order  he  observeth  in  the  marriage
of  his  sonnes.

They  have  moreover  one  thing  very  good,  and  that
which  made  us  all  to  marveile  at  them  being  Gentiles :
namely, that there be hospitals in all their Cities,

316

Manage  of
the  kings
children.

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
alwayes full of  people,  we never saw any poore body
begge. We  therefore  asked  the  cause  of  this :  answered  He  speaketk
it  was,  that  in  every  City  there  is  a  great  circuit,  wherein  not  here  of  all
be  many  houses  for  poore  people,  for  blinde,  lame,  old  ff^g^citie^  for
folke,  not  able  to  travaile  for  age,  nor  having  any  other  in  other  places
meanes  to  live. These  folke  have  in  the  aforesaid  houses  there  be  beg-
ever  plentie  of  rice  during  their  lives,  but  nothing  else.  -S''^"'  ^^  ^"^
Such  as  be  received  into  these  houses,  come  in  after  this , ,
maner. When  one  is  sicke,  blinde  or  lame,  he  maketh  a  swarming  out
supplication  to the  Ponchiassi,  and  proving  that to  be  of  trees.
true he writeth, he remaineth in the aforesaid great
lodging  as  long  as he liveth : besides this they  keepe
in  these  places  swine  and  hennes,  whereby  the  poore  be
relieved  without  going  a  begging.

I  said  before  that  China  was  full  of  rivers,  but  now
I  minde  to  confirme  the  same  anew :  for  the  farther  we
went  into  the  Countrey,  the  greater  we  found  the  rivers.
Sometimes  we  were  so  farre  off  from  the  sea,  that  where
we  came  no  sea  fish  had  bene  scene,  and  salt  was  there
very  deare,  of  fresh  water  fish  yet  was  there  great  abund-
ance, and  that  fish  very  good :  they  keep  it  good  after
this  maner.  Where  the  rivers  do  meete,  and  so  passe
into  the  sea,  there  lieth  great  store  of  boats,  specially
where  no  salt-water  commeth,  and  that  in  March  and
April.  These  boates  are  so  many  that  it  seemeth  won-
derfull,  ne  serve  they  for  other  then  to  take  small  fish.
By  the  rivers  sides  they  make  leyres  of  fine  and  strong
nettes,  that  lye  three  handfuls  under  water,  and  one  above
to  keepe  and  nourish  their  fish  in,  untill  such  time  as
other  fishers  do  come  with  boates,  bringing  for  that
purpose  certaine  great  chests  lined  with  paper,  able  to
holde  water,  wherein  they  cary  their  fish  up  and  downe
the  river,  every  day  renuing  the  chest  with  fresh  water,
and  selling  their  fish  in  every  City,  towne  and  village
where  they  passe,  unto  the  people  as  they  neede  it :  most
of  them  have  net  leyres  to  keepe  fish  in  alwayes  for  their
provision.  Where  the  greater  boates  cannot  passe  any
further  forward,  they  take  lesser,  and  because  the  whole

317

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

Countrey  is  very  well  watered,  there  is  so  great  plenty  of
divers  sorts  of  fish,  that  it  is  wonderfull  to  see :  assuredly
we  were  amazed  to  behold  the  maner  of  their  provision.
Meanes  to  fat  Their  fish is  chiefly  nourished  with the  dung  of  Bufles
fi^^-  and  oxen,  that  greatly  fatteth  it. Although  I  said  their

fishing  to  be  in  March  and  April  at  what  time  we  saw
them  do  it,  neverthelesse  they  told  us  that  they  fished  at
all  times,  for  that  usually  they  do  feed  on  fish,  wherefore
it  behoveth  them  to  make  their  provision  continually.
He  speakcth  When  we  had passed Fuquien,  we  went  into  Quicin

oj  tiiquicn  shire,  where  the  fine  clay  vessell  is  made,  as  I  said  before  :
and  we  came  to  a  City,  the  one  side  whereof  is  built
upon  the  foote  of  a  hill,  whereby  passeth  a  river  navi-
gable :  there  we  tooke  boat,  and  went  by  water  toward
the  Sea  :  on  ech  side  of  the  river  we  found  many  Cities,
Townes  and  villages,  wherein  we  saw  great  store  of  mar-
chandize,  but  specially  of  fine  clay :  there  did  we  land  by
the  way  to  buy  victuals  and  other  necessaries.  Going
downe  this  river  Southward,  we  were  glad  that  wee  drew
neere  unto  a  warmer  Countrey,  from  whence  we  had
bene  farre  distant :  this  Countrey  we  passed  through  in
eight  dayes,  for  our  journey  lay  downe  the  streame.
[II.  ii,  77.]  Before  that  I  doe  say  any  thing  of  that  shire  we  came
into,  I  will  first  speake  of  the  great  City  of  Quicin,
wherein  alwayes  remaineth  a  Tutan,  that  is  a  governour,
as  you  have  scene,  though  some  Tutans  do  governe  two
or  three  shires.

That  Tutan  that  was  condemned  for  our  cause,  of
whom  I  spake  before,  was  borne  in  this  Countrey,  but
he  governed  Foquien  shire :  nothing  it  availed  him  to
be  so  great  an  officer.  This  Countrey  is  so  great,  that
in  many  places  where  we  went,  there  had  bene  as  yet  no
talke  of  his  death,  although  he  were  executed  a  whole
Alias  Cenchi.  yere  before.  At  the  Citie  Quanchi  whither  we  came,  the
river  was  so  great  that  it  seemed  a  Sea,  though  it  were
so  litle  where  we  tooke  water,  that  we  needed  small  boats.
One  day  about  9.  of  the  clocke,  beginning  to  row  neere
the  walls  with  the  streame,  we  came  at  noone  to  a  bridge

318

revenues.

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad

c.  1565.
made  of  many  barges,  overlinked  al  together  with  two
mightie  cheines.  There  stayed  we  untill  it  was  late,  but
we  saw  not  one  go  either  up  thereon  or  downe,  except
two  Louteas  that  about  the  going  downe  of  the  Sunne,
came  and  set  them  downe  there,  the  one  on  one  side,  the
other  on  the  other  side.  Then  was  the  bridge  opened  in
many  places,  and  barges  both  great  and  small  to  the
number  of  sixe  hundred  began  to  passe:  those  that  went
up  the  streame  at  one  place,  such  as  came  downe  at  an
other.  When  all  had  thus  shot  the  bridge,  then  was  it
shut  up  againe.  We  heare  say  that  every  day  they  take
this  order  in  all  principall  places  of  marchandize,  for  pay-
ing of  the  Custome  unto  the  king,  specially  for  salt,
whereof  the  greatest  revenues  are  made  that  the  king  The  Kings
hath  in  this  Countrey.  The  passages  of  the  bridge
where  it  is  opened,  be  so  neere  the  shoare,  that  nothing
can  passe  without  touching  the  same.  To  stay  the  barges
at  their  pleasure,  that  they  goe  no  further  forward,  are
used  certaine  iron  instruments.  The  bridge  consisteth
of  112.  barges,  there  stayed  we  untill  the  evening  that
they  were  opened,  lothsomely  oppressed  by  the  multitude
of  people  that  came  to  see  us,  so  many  in  number,  that
we  were  enforced  to  go  aside  from  the  banke  untill  such
time  as  the  bridge  was  opened :  howbeit  we  were  never-
thelesse  thronged  about  with  many  boates  full  of  people.
And  though  in  other  Cities  and  places  where  we  went,
the  people  came  so  importunate  upon  us,  that  it  was
needfull  to  withdraw  our  selves :  yet  were  we  here  much
more  molested  for  the  number  of  people :  &  this  bridge
is  the  principall  way  out  of  the  Citie  unto  another  place
so  wel  inhabited,  that  were  it  walled  about,  it  might
be  compared  to  the  Citie.  When  we  had  shot  the
bridge,  we  kept  along  the  Citie  until  it  was  night,  and
then  met  we  with  an  other  river  that  joyned  with  this,
we  rowed  up  that  by  the  walls  untill  we  came  to  another
bridge  gallantly  made  of  barges,  but  lesser  a  great  deale
then  that  other  bridge  over  the  greater  streame :  here
stayed  we that night,  and other  two  dayes with more

319

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

quiet,  being  out  of  the  preasse  of  the  people.  These
rivers  do  meet  without  at  one  corner  point  of  the  City.
In  either  of  them  were  so  many  barges  great  and  small,
that  we  all  thought  them  at  the  least  to  be  above  three
thousand :  the  greater  number  thereof  was  in  the  lesser
river,  where  we  were.  Amongst  the  rest  here  lay
Parai.  certaine greater  vessels, called in their  language Parai,

that  serve  for  the  Tutan,  when  he  taketh  his  voyage
by  other  rivers  that  joyne  with  this,  towards  Pachin,
where  the  king  maketh  his  abode.  For,  as  many  times
I  have  erst  said,  all  this  Countrey  is  full  of  rivers.
Desirous  to  see  those  Parai  we  got  into  some  of  them,
where  we  found  some  chambers  set  foorth  with  gilded
beds  very  richly,  other  furnished  with  tables  and  seats,
and  all  other  things  so  neat  and  in  perfection,  that  it
was  wonderfull.

Quiacim  shire,  as  farre  as  I  can  perceive,  lieth  upon
the  South.  On  that  side  we  kept  at  our  first  entry
thereinto,  travayling  not  farre  from  the  high  mountaines
we  saw  there.  Asking  what  people  dwelleth  beyond
those  mountaines,  it  was  told  me  that  they  be  theeves
&  men  of  a  strange  language.  And  because  that  unto
sundry  places  neere  this  river  the  mountaines  doe  ap-
proch,  whence  the  people  issuing  downe  do  many  times
great  harme,  this  order  is  taken  at  the  entry  into
Quiacim  shire.  To  guard  this  river  whereon  continually
go  to  &  fro  Parai  great  &  small  fraught  with  salt,
Fish  pondered  fish  poudred  with  peper,  and  other  necessaries  for  that
withpeper.  countrey,  they  do  lay  in  divers  places  certaine  Parai,  and
great  barges  armed,  wherin  watch  and  ward  is  kept  day
and  night  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  for  the  safety  of
the  passage,  &  securitie  of  such  Parai  as  do  remaine
there,  though  the  travailers  never  go  but  many  in  com-
pany. In  every  rode  there  be  at  the  least  thirtie,  in  some
two  hundred  men,  as  the  passage  requireth.  This  guard
is  kept  usually  untill  you  come  to  the  City  Onchio,
where  continually  the  Tutan  of  this  shire,  and  eke  of
Cantan, maketh his abode. From that City upward,

320

REPORTS OF CHINA  a.d.

c.  1565.

where  the  river  waxeth  more  narrow,  and  the  passage
more  dangerous,  there  be  alwayes  armed  one  hundred
and  fiftie  Parai,  to  accompany  other  vessels  fraught
with  marchandize,  and  all  this  at  the  Kings  charges.
This  seemed  to  me  one  of  the  strangest  things  I  did
see  in  this  Countrey.

When  we  lay  at  Fuquien,  we  did  see  certaine  Moores,
who  knew  so  litle  of  their  secte,  that  they  could  say
nothing  else  but  that  Mahomet  was  a  Moore,  my  father
was  a  Moore,  and  I  am  a  Moore,  with  some  other
wordes  of  their  Alcoran,  wherewithall,  in  abstinence  from
swines  flesh,  they  live  untill  the  divel  take  them  all.
This  when  I  saw,  &  being  sure  that  in  many  Chinish  [II.  ii-  78.]
Cities  the  reliques  of  Mahomet  are  kept,  as  soone  as
we  came  to  the  City  where  these  fellowes  be,  I  enfourmed
my  selfe  of  them,  and  learned  the  trueth.

These  Moores,  as  they  tolde  me,  in  times  past  came  Q^^anAips
in  great  ships  fraught  with  marchandise  from  V^-chin  co^j^ming  from
ward,  to  a  port  granted  unto  them  by  the  king,  as  fke  NortA.
hee  is  wont  to  all  them  that  traffique  into  this  Countrey,
where  they  being  arrived  at  a  litle  Towne  standing  in
the  havens  mouth,  in  time  converted  unto  their  sect
the  greatest  Loutea  there.  When  that  Loutea  with  all
his  family  was  become  Moorish,  the  rest  began  likewise
to  doe  the  same.  In  this  part  of  China  the  people  be
at  libertie,  every  one  to  worship  and  folow  what  him
liketh  best.  Wherefore  no  body  tooke  heede  thereto,
untill  such  time  as  the  Moores  perceiving  that  many
followed  them  in  superstition,  and  that  the  Loutea
favoured  them,  they  began  to  forbid  wholy  the  eating
of  swines  flesh.  But  all  these  countreymen  and  women
chosing  rather  to  forsake  father  and  mother,  then  to  leave
oflf  eating  of  porke,  by  no  meanes  would  yeeld  to  that
proclamation.  For  besides  the  great  desire  they  all  have
to  eate  that  kinde  of  meate,  many  of  them  do  live
thereby :  and  therefore  the  people  complained  unto  the
Magistrates,  accusing  the  Moores  of  a  conspiracie  pre-
tended betwixt  them  and  the  Loutea  against  their  king.
VI  321  X

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

In  this  countrey,  as  no  suspition,  no  not  one  traiterous
word  is  long  borne  withall,  so  was  the  king  speedily
advertised  thereof,  who  gave  commandement  out  of  hand
that  the  aforesaid  Loutea  should  be  put  to  death,  and
with  him  the  Moores  of  most  importance :  the  other
to  be  layde  first  in  prison,  and  afterward  to  be  sent
abroad  into  certaine  Cities,  where  they  remained  per-
petuall  slaves  unto  the  king.  To  this  City  came  by
happe  men  and  women  threescore  and  odde,  who  at  this
day  are  brought  to  five  men  and  foure  women,  for  it
is  now  twenty  yeeres  since  this  happened.  Their  off-
spring passeth  the  number  of  two  hundreth,  and  they
in  this  City,  as  the  rest  in  other  Cities  whither  they
''That  is  their  were  sent,  have  their  *Moscheas,  whereunto  they  all
temples.  resort every Friday to keepe their  holy  day. But, as

I  thinke,  that  will  no  longer  endure,  then  whiles  they
doe  live  that  came  from  thence,  for  their  posteritie  is
so  confused,  that  they  have  nothing  of  a  Moore  in  them
but  abstinence  from  swines  flesh,  and  yet  many  of  them
It  should seeme  doe  eate  thereof  privily.  They  tell  mee  that  their  native
by  their  Countrey  hath  name  Camarian,  a  firme  land,  wherein  be

Cardandan  in  ^^^^7  kings,  and  the  Indish  countrey  well  knowen  unto
Ortelius.  them. It  may  so  be : for  as  soone  as  they  did  see  our

servants  (our  servants  were  Preuzaretes)  they  judged
them  to  be  Indians :  many  of  their  wordes  sounded  upon
the  Persian  tongue,  but  none  of  us  coulde  understand
them.  I  asked  them  whether  they  converted  any  of  the
Chinish  nation  unto  their  secte :  they  answered  mee,  that
with  much  a  doe  they  converted  the  women  with  whom
they  doe  marry,  yeelding  me  no  other  cause  thereof,  but
the  difficultie  they  finde  in  them  to  be  brought  from
eating  swines  flesh  and  drinking  of  wine.  I  am  per-
swaded  therefore,  that  if  this  Countrey  were  in  league
with  us,  forbidding  them  neither  of  both,  it  would  be
an  easie  matter  to  draw  them  to  our  Religion,  from  their
superstition,  whereat  they  themselves  do  laugh  when
JNmherne they  do  their  idolatry.

Sea.  I  have  learned  moreover  that  the  Sea,  whereby  these

322

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
Moores  that  came  to  China  were  wont  to  travaile,  is  a  It  seemeth
very  great  gulfe,  that  falleth  into  this  Countrey  out  from  ^^p  <^f-^^ ^P
Tartaria  and Persia, leaving  on the other side  all the  the^cZpian^
Countrey  of  China,  and  land  of  the Mogores,  drawing  ^ea.
alwayes toward the South : and  of  all  likelyhood it  is  At  Cacan.
even  so,  because  that  these  Moores,  the  which  we  have  Ri'^^rs  over-
seene,  be  rather  browne  then  white,  whereby  they  shewe  q^^J^
themselves  to come from some  warmer  Countrey  then
China is neere  to  Pachin,  where  the rivers are frosen
in the Winter for colde, and many of them so
vehemently,  that  carts  may  passe  over  them.

We did see in this Citie many  Tartars, Mogores,  AH  Avoins.
Brames, and Laoynes, both men and women. The
Tartars  are  men  very  white,  good  horsemen  and  archers,  Tartars.
confining  with  China  on  that  side  where  Pachin  standeth,
separated from thence by  great mountaines that are  Mount  Usont.
betwixt  these  kingdomes. Over  them  be  certaine  wayes
to  passe, and for both sides. Castles continually kept
with Souldiers : in time past the Tartars were wont
alwayes to have warres  with the Chineans,  but these
fourescore  yeeres  past  they  were  quiet,  untill  the  second
yeere  of  our  imprisonment. The Mogores be in like  Mogores.
maner  white,  and  heathen,  we  are  advertised  that  of  one
side they  border upon these  Tartars,  and confine  with
the  Persian  Tartars  on  the  other  side,  whereof  wee  sawe
in them some tokens,  as their maner of  clothes, and
that  kinde  of  hat  the  Saracens  doe  weare. The  Moores
affirmed, that where the king lyeth, there be many
Tartars  and  Mogores,  that  brought  into  China  certaine
blewes  of  great  value :  all  we  thought  it  to  be  Vanil  of  Blezues  of
Cambaia wont  to be sold at Ormus. So  that  this is  fff/  ^^'^^^  ^^
the  true  situation  of  that  Countrey,  not  in the North-
parts,  as  many  times I have heard say,  confining  with
Germanie.

As for the Brames we have scene in this city  Brames.
Chenchi certaine  men &  women,  amongst  whom there
was  one that came not long since,  having as yet  her
haire tied up after the Pegues fashion : this woman,

323

A.D.

c.  1565.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  other  mo  with  whom  a  black  Moore  damsel  in  our
company  had  conference,  and  did  understand  them  wel
ynoughj  had  dwelt in Pegu. This new  come  woman,

[II.  ii.  79.]  imagining  that  we  ment  to  make  our  abode  in  that
citie,  bid  us  to  be  of  good  comfort,  for  that  her
countrey  was  not  distant  from  thence  above  five  dayes
journey,  and  that  out  of  her  countrey  there  lay  a  high
way  for  us  home  into  our  owne.  Being  asked  the
way,  she  answered  that  the  first  three  daies  the  way
lieth  over  certaine  great  mountaines  &  wildernesse,
afterward  people  are  met  withall  againe.  Thence  two
dayes  journey  more to the Brames countrey. Where-

Southward fore  I  doe  conclude,  that  Chenchi  is  one  of  the  confines

Jrom  Chencht  ^^  ^j^-g  ]^ingdome,  separated  by  certaine  huge  mountaines,
as  it  hath  bene  alreadie  said,  that  lie  out  towards  the
South. In the residue of these mountaines standeth

Avoins.  the province of Sian, the Laoyns countrey, Camboia,

Campaa,  and  Cochinchina.

Chenchi.  This citie  chiefe of  other sixteene is situated in a

pleasant  plaine  abounding  in  all  things  necessarie,  sea-fish
onely  excepted,  for  it  standeth  farre  from  the  sea :  of
fresh  fish  so  much  store,  that  the  market  places  are  never
emptie.  The  walles  of  this  city  are  very  strong  and
high :  one  day  did  I  see  the  Louteas  thereof  go  upon
the  walles  to  take  the  view  thereof,  borne  in  their  seates
which  I  spake  of  before,  accompanied  with  a  troupe  of
horsemen  that  went  two  and  two :  It  was  tolde  me  they
might  have  gone  three  &  three.  We  have  scene  more-
over, that  within  this  aforesayd  Citie  the  king  hath
moe  then  a  thousande  of  his  kinne  lodged  in  great
pallaces,  in  divers  partes  of  the  Citie :  their  gates  be
redde,  and  the  entrie  into  their  houses,  that  they  may
be  knowen,  for  that  is  the  kings  colour.  These  Gentle-
men, according  to  their  neerenesse  in  blood  unto  the
king,  as  soone  as  they  be  married  receive  their  place
in  honour  :  this  place  neither  increaseth  nor  diminisheth  in
any  respect  as  long  as  the  king  liveth,  the  king  appointeth
them their wives and familie, allowing them by the

324

REPORTS OF CHINA  ad.

c.  1565.
moneth  all  things  necessarie  abundantly,  as  he  doth  to
his  governours  of  shires  and  Cities,  howbeit,  not  one
of  these  hath  as  long  as  he  liveth  any  charge  or  governe-
ment  at  all.  They  give  themselves  to  eating  and
drinking,  and  be  for  the  most  part  burly  men  of  bodie,
insomuch  that  espying  any  one  of  them  whom  we  had
not  scene  before,  we  might  knowe  him  to  be  the  King
his  cosin.  They  be  neverthelesse  very  pleasant,  cour-
teous, and  faire  conditioned :  neither  did  we  find,  all  the
time  wee  were  in  that  citie,  so  much  honour  and  good
intertainement  any  where  as  at  their  hands.  They  bid
us  to  their  houses  to  eate  and  drinke,  and  when  they
found  us  not,  or  we  were  not  willing  to  go  with  them,
they  bid  our  servants  and  slaves,  causing  them  to  sit
downe  with  the  first.  Notwithstanding  the  good  lodging
these  Gentlemen  have,  so  commodious  that  they  want
nothing,  yet  are  they  in  this  bondage,  that  during  life
they  never  goe  abroad.  The  cause,  as  I  did  understand,
wherefore  the  king  so  useth  his  cosins  is,  that  none  of
them  at  any  time  may  rebell  against  him :  and  thus  he
shutteth  them  up  in  three  or  foure  other  cities.  Most
of  them  can  play  on  the  Lute,  and  to  make  that  kinde  of
pastime  peculiar  unto  them  onely,  all  other  in  the  cities
where  they  doe  live  be  forbidden  that  instrument,  the
Curtisans  and  blinde  folke  onely  excepted,  who  be
musicians  and  can  play.

This  king  furthermore,  for  the  greater  securitie  of  his
Realme  and  the  avoyding  of  tumults,  letteth  not  one  in
all  his  countrey  to  be  called  Lord,  except  he  be  of  his
blood.  Manie  great  estates  and  governours  there  be,
that  during  their  office  are  lodged  Lordlike,  and  doe  beare
the  port  of  mightie  Princes:  but  they  be  so  many  times
displaced  and  other  placed  a  new,  that  they  have  not  the
time  to  become  corrupt.  True  it  is  that  during  their
office  they  be  well  provided  for,  as  afterward  also  lodged
at  the  kings  charges,  and  in  pension  as  long  as  they  live,
payed  them  monethly  in  the  cities  where  they  dwell
by certaine officers appointed for that purpose. The

325

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

king  then  is  a  Lord  onely,  not  one  besides  him  as  you
have  scene,  except  it  be  such  as  be  of  his  blood.  A
Nephew  likewise  of  the  king,  the  kings  sisters  sonne,
lyeth  continually  within  the  walles  of  the  citie  in  a  strong
pallace  built  Castlewise,  even  as  his  other  cousins  do,
remayning  alwayes  within  doores,  served  by  Eunuches,
never  dealing  with  any  matters.  On  their  festivall  dayes,
new  moones,  &  full  moones  the  magistrates  make  great
bankets,  and  so  do  such  as  be  of  the  king  his  blood.
The  kings  Nephew  hath  to  name  Vanfuli,  his  pallace  is
walled  about,  the  wall  is  not  high,  but  foure-square,  and

Goa  is  a  city  in  circuit  nothing  inferiour  to  the  wals  of  Goa,  the  out-
/  • l^^~  side  is  painted  red,  in  every  square  a  gate,  and  over  each

EasTlndies  S^^^  ^  tower  made  of  timber  excellently  well  wrought :
before  the  principall  gate  of  the  foure  that  openeth  into
the  high  streete  no  Loutea,  be  he  never  so  great,  may
passe  on  horsebacke,  or  carried  in  his  seat.  Amidst  this
quadrangle  standeth  the  pallace  where  that  Nobleman
lyeth,  doubtlesse  worth  the  sight,  although  we  came  not
in  to  see  it.  By  report  the  roofes  of  the  towers  and
house  are  glased  greene,  &  the  greater  part  of  the
quadrangle  set  with  savage  trees,  as  Okes,  Chestnuts,
Cypresse,  Pineapples,  Cedars,  and  other  such  like  that  we
do  want,  after  the  manner  of  a  wood,  wherein  are  kept
Stags,  Oxen,  and  other  beasts,  for  that  Lord  his  recrea-
tion never  going  abroad  as  I  have  sayd.  One  prehemi-
nence  this  citie  hath  above  the  rest  where  we  have
bene,  &  that  of  right,  as  we  do  thinke,  that  besides  the
multitude  of  market  places  wherein  all  things  are  to  be
sold  through  every  streete  continually  are  cryed  all  things

[II.  li.  80.]  necessary,  as  flesh  of  all  sortes,  freshfish,  hearbes,  oyle,
vineger,  meale,  rise :  in  summa,  all  things  so  plentifully,
that  many  houses  neede  no  servants,  every  thing  being
brought  to  their  doores.  Most  part  of  the  marchants
remaine  in  the  suburbes,  for  that  the  cities  are  shut  up
every  night,  as  I  have  sayd.  The  marchants  therefore,
the  better  to  attend  their  businesse,  do  chuse  rather  to
make  their  abode  without  in  the  suburbes then  within

326

REPORTS OF JAPAN

A.D.

c.  1565.

the  citie. I have scene  in  this  river  a  pretie  kinde  of

fishing,  not  to  be  omitted  in  my  opinion,  and  therefore

I  will  set it downe. The king hath in many rivers  Oderkus

good  store  of  barges  full  of  sea-crowes  that  breede,  are  "^J^^^^^^  °f  ^^'

fedde and doe die therein, in certaine cages, allowed

monethly  a  certaine  provision  of  rise. These  barges  the

king  bestoweth  upon  his  greatest  magistrates,  giving  to

some  two,  to  some  three  of  them  as  he  thinketh  good,

to  fish therewithall after this manner. At the houre

appointed  to  fish,  all  the  barges  are  brought  together  in

a  circle,  where  the  river  is  shalow,  and  the  crowes  tyed

together  under  the  wings are  let  leape  downe  into  the

water, some under, some above, woorth the looking

upon : each  one as  he  hath  filled  his  bagge, goeth to

his  own  barge  and  emptieth  it,  which  done,  he  returneth

to  fish  againe. Thus having  taken  good  store  of  fish,

they  set  the  crowes  at  libertie, and do suffer  them  to

fish  for  their  owne pleasure. There  were  in that  citie ,

where  I  was,  twentie  barges  at  the  least  of  these  aforesayd

crowes. I  went  almost  every  day  to  see  them,  yet  could

I  never  be  throughly satisfied  to  see  so  strange  a  kind

of  fishing.

Of  the  Hand  Japan,  and  other  litle  lies  in  the
East  Ocean. By  R.  Willes.

He  extreame  part  of  the  knowen  world
unto  us  is  the  noble  Hand  Giapan,
written  otherwise  Japon  and  Japan.  This
Island  standeth  in  the  East  Ocean,  be-
yond all  Asia,  betwixt  Cathayo  and  the
West  Indies  sixe  and  thirtie  degrees
Northward  from  the  Equinoctial  line,  in
the  same  clime  with  the  South  part  of  Spaine  and  Portu-
gall,  distant  from  thence  by  sea  sixe  thousand  leagues :
the  travaile  thither,  both  for  civill  discord,  great  pyracie,
and  often  shipwracks  is  very  dangerous.  This  countrey
is  hillie  and  pestered  with  snow,  wherefore  it  is  neither
so  warme  as  Portugall,  nor  yet  so  wealthy,  so  far  as  we

327

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

can  learne,  wanting  oyle,  butter,  cheese,  milke,  egges,
sugar,  honny,  vineger,  saffron,  cynamom  and  pepper.
Barley-branne  the  Danders  doe  use  in  stead  of  salt :  medi-
cinable  things  holsome  for  the  bodie  have  they  none  at
all.  Neverthelesse  in  that  Hand  sundry  fruites  doe
growe,  not  much  unlike  the  fruites  of  Spaine  :  and
Great  store  of  great  store  of  Silver  mynes  are  therein  to  be  seene.
t  ver  mynes.  'pj^^  people  are  tractable,  civill,  wittie,  courteous,  without
deceit,  in  vertue  and  honest  conversation  exceeding  all
other  nations  lately  discovered,  but  so  much  standing
upon  their  reputation,  that  their  chiefe  Idole  may  be
thought  honour.  The  contempt  thereof  causeth  among
them  much  discord  and  debate,  manslaughter  and  mur-
ther  :  even  for  their  reputation  they  doe  honour  their
parents,  keepe  their  promises,  absteine  from  adulterie
and  robberies,  punishing  by  death  the  least  robbery  done,
holding  for  a  principle,  that  whosoever  stealeth  a  trifle,
will,  if  he  see  occasion,  steale  a  greater  thing.  It  may
be  theft  is  so  severely  punished  of  them,  for  that  the
nation  is  oppressed  with  scarcitie  of  all  things  necessary,
and  so  poore,  that  even  for  miserie  they  strangle  their
owne  children,  preferring  death  before  want.  These
fellowes  doe  neither  eate  nor  kill  any  foule.  They  live
chiefely  by  fish,  hearbes,  and  fruites,  so  healthfully,  that
they  die  very  old.  Of  Rice  and  Wheat  there  is  no
great  store.  No  man  is  ashamed  there  of  his  povertie,
neither  be  their  gentlemen  therefore  lesse  honoured  of
the  meaner  people,  neither  will  the  poorest  gentleman
there  match  his  childe  with  the  baser  sort  for  any  gaine,
so  much  they  do  make  more  account  of  gentry  then  of
wealth.  The  greatest  delight  they  have  is  in  armour,
each  boy  at  fourteene  yeeres  of  age,  be  he  borne  gentle
or  otherwise,  hath  his  sword  and  dagger :  very  good
archers  they  be,  contemning  all  other  nations  in  com-
parison of  their  manhood  and  prowesse,  putting  not  up
one  injurie  be  it  never  so  small  in  worde  or  deede,
among  themselves.  They  feede  moderately,  but  they
drinke  largely. The  use  of  vines  they  knowe  not,  their

328

REPORTS OF JAPAN  ad.

c.  1565.
drinke  they  make  of  Rice,  utterly  they  doe  abhorre  dice,
and  all  games,  accounting  nothing  more  vile  in  a  man,
then  to  give  himselfe  unto  those  things  that  make  us
greedy  and  desirous  to  get  other  mens  goods.  If  at
any  time  they  do  sweare,  fot  that  seldome  they  are  wont
to  doe,  they  sweare  by  the  Sunne :  many  of  them  are
taught  good  letters,  wherfore  they  may  so  much  the
sooner  be  brought  unto  Christianitie.  Each  one  is  con-
tented with  one  wife :  they  be  all  desirous  to  learne,  &
naturally  inclined  unto  honesty  &  courtesie :  godly  talke
they  listen  unto  willingly,  especially  when  they  under-
stand it  throughly.  Their  government  consisteth  of  3
estates.  The  first  place  is  due  unto  the  high  Priest,  by
whose  lawes  &  decrees  all  publike  and  private  matters  [II.  ii.  81.]
appertayning  to  religion  are  decided.  The  sects  of  their
clergie  men,  whom  they  doe  call  Bonzi,  be  of  no
estimation  or  authoritie  except  the  high  Priest  by  letters
patent  doe  confirme  the  same :  he  confirmeth  and  alloweth
of  their  Tundi,  who  be  as  it  were  Bishops,  although  in
many  places  they  are  nominated  by  sundry  Princes.
These  Tundi  are  greatly  honoured  of  all  sorts :  they
doe  give  benefices  unto  inferiour  ministers,  and  do  grant
licences  for  many  things  as  to  eate  flesh  upon  those  dayes
they  goe  in  pilgrimage  to  their  Idoles  with  such  like
privileges.  Finally,  this  high  Priest  wont  to  be  chosen  in
China  for  his  wisedome  and  learning,  made  in  Japan
for  his  gentry  and  birth,  hath  so  large  a  Dominion  and
revenues  so  great,  that  eftsones  he  beardeth  the  petie
Kings  and  Princes  there.

Their  second  principal  Magistrate,  in  their  language
Vo,  is  the  chiefe  Herehaught,  made  by  succession  and
birth,  honoured  as  a  God.  This  gentleman  never  toucheth
the  ground  with  his  foote  without  forfaiting  of  his  office,
he  never  goeth  abroad  out  of  his  house,  nor  is  at  all
times  to  be  seene.  At  home  he  is  either  carried  about
in  a  litter,  or  els  he  goeth  in  woodden  Choppines  a  foote
high  from  the  ground :  commonly  he  sitteth  in  his  chaire
with  a  sword  in  one  side,  and  a  bow  and  arrowes  in  the

329

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

C.1565.

other,  next  his  bodie  he  weareth  blacke,  his  outward
garments  be  red,  all  shadowed  over  with  Cypresse,  at
his  cappe  hang  certaine  Lambeaux  much  like  unto  a
Bishops  Miter,  his  forehead  is  painted  white  and  red,
he  eateth  his  meat  in  earthen  dishes.  This  Herehaught
determineth  in  all  Japan  the  diverse  titles  of  honour,
whereof  in  that  Hand  is  great  plentie,  each  one  particularly
knowen  by  his  badge,  commonly  scene  in  sealing  up
their  letters,  and  dayly  altered  according  to  their  degrees.
About  this  Vo  every  Noble  man  hath  his  Soliciter,  for
the  nation  is  so  desirous  of  praise  and  honour,  that  they
strive  among  themselves  who  may  bribe  him  best.  By
these  meanes  the  Herehaught  groweth  so  rich,  that
although  hee  have  neither  land  nor  any  revenues  other-
wise, yet  may  he  be  accounted  the  wealthiest  man  in
all  Japan.  For  three  causes  this  great  Magistrate  may
loose  his  office :  first,  if  he  touch  the  ground  with  his
foote,  as  it  hath  beene  alreadie  said :  next,  if  he  kill
any  body :  thirdly,  if  he  be  found  an  enemie  unto  peace
and  quietnesse,  howbeit  neither  of  these  aforesaid  causes
is  sufficient  to  put  him  to  death.

Their  third  chiefe  officer  is  a  Judge,  his  office  is  to
take  up  and  to  end  matters  in  controversie,  to  determine
of  warres  and  peace,  that  which  he  thinketh  right,  to
punish  rebels,  wherein  he  may  commaund  the  noble  men
to  assist  him  upon  paine  of  forfeiting  their  goods :  never-
thelesse  at  all  times  he  is  not  obeyed,  for  that  many
matters  are  ended  rather  by  might  and  armes,  then
determined  by  law.  Other  controversies  are  decided
either  in  the  Temporall  Court,  as  it  seemeth  good  unto
the  Princes,  or  in  the  Spirituall  consistorie  before  the
Tundi.

Rebelles  are  executed  in  this  manner,  especially  if  they
be  noble  men  or  officers.  The  king  looke  what  day
he  giveth  sentence  against  any  one,  the  same  day  the
partie,  wheresoever  he  be,  is  advertised  thereof,  and  the
day  told  him  of  his  execution.  The  condemned  person
asketh  of  the  messenger  whether  it  may  bee  lawfull  for

330

REPORTS OF JAPAN  ad.

c.  1565.

him  to  kill  himselfe :  the  which  thing  when  the  king
doeth  graunt,  the  partie  taking  it  for  an  honour,  putteth
on  his  best  apparel  and  launcing  his  body  a  crosse  from
the  breast  downe  all  the  belly,  murthereth  himselfe.
This  kind  of  death  they  take  to  be  without  infamie,
neither  doe  their  children  for  their  fathers  crime  so
punished,  loose  their  goods.  But  if  the  king  reserve
them  to  be  executed  by  the  hangman,  then  flocketh  he
together  his  children,  his  servants,  and  friends  home
to  his  house,  to  preserve  his  life  by  force.  The  king
committeth  the  fetching  of  him  out  unto  his  chiefe  Judge,
who  first  setteth  upon  him  with  bow  and  arrowes,  and
afterward  with  pikes  and  swords,  untill  the  rebell  and
all  his  family  be  slaine  to  their  perpetuall  ignominie
and  shame.

The  Indie-writers  make  mention  of  sundry  great  cities
in  this  Hand,  as  Cangoxima  a  haven  towne  in  the  South
part  thereof,  and  Meaco  distant  from  thence  three
hundred  leagues  northward,  the  royall  seat  of  the  king
and  most  wealthy  of  all  other  townes  in  that  Hand.  The
people  thereabout  are  very  noble,  and  their  language  the
best  Japonish.  In  Meaco  are  sayd  to  be  ninetie  thousande
houses  inhabited  and  upward,  a  famous  Universitie,  and
in  it  five  principall  Colleges,  besides  closes  &  cloysters
of  Bonzi,  Leguixil,  and  Hamacata,  that  is.  Priests,  Monks
and  Nunnes.  Other  five  notable  Universities  there  be
in  Japan,  namely,  Coia,  Negru,  Homi,  Frenoi,  and
Bandu.  The  first  foure  have  in  them  at  the  least  three
thousand  &  five  hundred  schollers :  in  the  fift  are  many
mo.  For  Bandu  province  is  very  great  and  possessed
with  sixe  princes,  five  whereof  are  vassals  unto  the  sixt,
yet  he  himselfe  subject  unto  the  Japonish  king,  usually
called  the  great  king  of  Meaco :  lesser  scholes  there  be
many  in  divers  places  of  this  Ilande.  And  thus  much
specially  concerning  this  glorious  Hand,  among  so  many
barbarous  nations  and  rude  regions,  have  I  gathered
together  in  one  summe,  out  of  sundry  letters  written
from  thence  into  Europe,  by  no  lesse  faithfull  reporters

331

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1565.

than  famous  travellers. For  confirmation  wherof,  as  also

[II.  ii.  82.]  for  the  knowledge  of  other  things  not  conteyned  in  the

premisses, the curious readers may peruse these 4

volumes  of  Indian matters  written  long  ago  in  Italian,

Petrus  2indi of late compendiously made latine, by Petrus

rebus^^^  ^ Maffeius  my  olde  acquainted  friend,  entituling  the  same,

Japonicis. De  rebus  Japonicis. One whole letter  out of  the  fift

booke thereof, specially intreating of  that  countrey, I

have  done  into  English  word  for  word  in  such  wise  as

followeth.

Aloisius  Froes  to  his  companions  in  Jesus  Christ
that  remaine  in  China  and  India.

THe  last  yeere,  deare  brethren,  I  wrote  unto  you
from  Firando,  how  Cosmus  Turrianus  had  appointed
me  to  travaile  to  Meaco  to  helpe  Caspar  Vilela,  for  that
there  the  harvest  was  great,  the  labourers  few,  and  that  I
should  have  for  my  companion  in  that  journey  Aloisius
Almeida.  It  seemeth  now  my  part,  having  by  the  helpe
of  God  ended  so  long  a  voiage,  to  signifie  unto  you
by  letter  such  things  specially  as  I  might  thinke  you
would  most  delight  to  know.  And  because  at  the
beginning  Almeida  and  I  so  parted  the  whole  labour
of  writing  letters  betwixt  us,  that  he  should  speake  of
our  voyage,  and  such  things  as  happened  therein,  I  should
make  relation  of  the  Meachians  estate,  &  write  what
1  could  well  learne  of  the  Japans  maners  and  conditions :
setting  aside  all  discourses  of  our  voyage,  that  which
standeth  me  upon  I  will  discharge  in  this  Epistle,  that
you  considering  how  artificially,  how  cunningly,  under  the
pretext  of  religion,  that  craftie  adversary  of  mankind
leadeth  and  draweth  unto  perdition  the  Japanish  mindes,
blinded  with  many  superstitions  and  ceremonies,  may
the  more  pitie  this  Nation.

The  inhabiters  of  Japan,  as  men  that  never  had  greatly
to  doe  with  other  Nations,  in  their  Geography  divided
the  whole  world  into  three  parts,  Japan,  Sian,  and  China.
And albeit the  Japans received  out  of  Sian  and  China

332

REPORTS OF JAPAN  a.d.

1565.

their  superstitions  and  ceremonies,  yet  do  they  never-
thelesse  contemne  all  other  nations  in  comparison  of
themselves,  and  standing  in  their  owne  conceite  doe  far
preferre  themselves  before  all  other  sorts  of  people  in
wisedome  and  policie.

Touching  the  situation  of  the  countrey  and  nature  of
the  soyle,  unto  the  things  eftsoones  erst  written,  this  one
thing  I  wil  adde :  in  these  Hands,  the  sommer  to  be  most
hot,  the  winter  extreme  cold.  In  the  kingdome  of  Canga,
as  we  call  it,  falleth  so  much  snow,  that  the  houses  being
buried  in  it,  the  inhabitants  keepe  within  doores  certaine
moneths  of  the  yeere,  having  no  way  to  come  foorth
except  they  breake  up  the  tiles.  Whirlewindes  most
vehement,  earthquakes  so  common,  that  the  Japans  dread
such  kind  of  feares  litle  or  nothing  at  all.  The  countrey
is  ful  of  silver  mines  otherwise  barren,  not  so  much  by
fault  of  nature,  as  through  the  slouthfulnesse  of  the
inhabitants :  howbeit  Oxen  they  keepe  and  that  for
tillage  sake  onely.  The  ayre  is  holesome,  the  waters
good,  the  people  very  faire  and  well  bodied :  bare  headed
commonly  they  goe,  procuring  baldnesse  with  sorrow  and
teares,  eftsoones  rooting  up  with  pinsars  all  the  haire  of
their  heads  as  it  groweth,  except  it  be  a  litle  behind,  the
which  they  knot  and  keepe  with  all  diligence.  Even
from  their  childhood  they  weare  daggers  and  swords,  the
which  they  use  to  lay  under  their  pillowes  when  they  goe
to  bed :  in  shew  courteous  and  affable,  in  deede  haughtie
and  proud.  They  delight  most  in  warlike  affaires,  and
their  greatest  studie  is  armes.  Mens  apparel  diversely
coloured  is  worne  downe  halfe  the  legges  and  to  the
elbowes  :  womens  attyre  made  hansomely  like  unto  a  vaile,
is  somewhat  longer :  all  manner  of  dicing  and  theft  they
doe  eschue.  The  marchant,  although  he  be  wealthy,  is
not  accounted  of.  Gentlemen,  be  they  never  so  poore,
retaine  their  place :  most  precisely  they  stande  upon  their
honour  and  woorthinesse,  ceremoniously  striving  among
themselves  in  courtesies  and  faire  speeches.  Wherein  if
any  one  happily  be  lesse  carefuU  than  he  should  be,  even

333

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1565.

for  a  trifle  many  times  he  getteth  evill  will.  Want,
though  it  trouble  most  of  them,  so  much  they  doe  detest,
that  poore  men  cruelly  taking  pittie  of  their  infantes
newly  borne,  especially  girles,  do  many  times  with  their
owne  feete  strangle  them.  Noble  men,  and  other  like-
wise of  meaner  calling  generally  have  but  one  wife  a
peece,  by  whom  although  they  have  issue,  yet  for  a  trifle
they  divorse  themselves  from  their  wives,  and  the  wives
also  sometimes  from  their  husbands,  to  marry  with  others.
After  the  second  degree  cousins  may  there  lawfully  marry.
Adoption  of  other  mens  children  is  much  used  among
them.  In  great  townes  most  men  and  women  can  write
and  reade.

This  Nation  feedeth  sparingly,  their  usuall  meat  is
rice  and  salets,  and  neere  the  sea  side  fish.  They  feast
one  another  many  times,  wherein  they  use  great  diligence,
especially  in  drinking  one  to  another,  insomuch  that  the
better  sort,  least  they  might  rudely  commit  some  fault
therein,  doe  use  to  reade  certaine  bookes  written  of
duties  and  ceremonies  apperteyning  unto  banquets.  To
be  delicate  and  fine,  they  put  their  meate  into  their
mouthes  with  litle  forkes,  accounting  it  great  rudenesse
to  touch  it  with  their  fingers :  winter  &  sommer  they
[II.  ii.  83.]  drinke  water  as  hot  as  they  may  possibly  abide  it.  Their
houses  are  in  danger  of  fire,  but  finely  made  and  cleane,
layde  all  over  with  strawe-pallets,  whereupon  they  doe
both  sit  in  stead  of  stooles,  and  lie  in  their  clothes  with  .
billets  under  their  heads.  For  feare  of  defiling  these
pallets,  they  goe  either  barefoote  within  doores,  or  weare
strawe  pantofles  on  their  buskins  when  they  come  abroad,
the  which  they  lay  aside  at  their  returne  home  againe.
Gentlemen  for  the  most  part  do  passe  the  night  in
banketting,  musicke,  &  vaine  discourses,  they  sleepe  the
day  time.  In  Meaco  and  Sacaio  there  is  good  store
of  beds,  but  they  be  very  litle,  and  may  be  compared
unto  our  pues.

In  bringing  up  their  children  they  use  words  only  to
rebuke them,  admonishing as diligently  and advisedly

334

REPORTS OF JAPAN  a.d.

1565.
boyes  of  sixe  or  seven  yeeres  of  age,  as  though  they
were  olde  men.  They  are  given  very  much  to  inter-
taine  strangers,  of  whom  most  curiously  they  love  to
aske  even  in  trifles  what  forraine  nations  doe,  and  their
fashions.  Such  arguments  and  reasons  as  be  manifest,
and  are  made  plaine  with  examples,  doe  greatly  persuade
them.  They  detest  all  kinde  of  theft,  whosoever  is  taken
in  that  fault  may  be  slaine  freely  of  any  bodie.  No
publike  prisons,  no  common  gayles,  no  ordinary  Justicers  :
privately  each  housholder  hath  the  hearing  of  matters
at  home  in  his  owne  house,  and  the  punishing  of  greater
crimes  that  deserve  death  without  delay.  Thus  usually
the  people  is  kept  in  awe  and  feare.

About  foure  hundred  yeeres  past  (as  in  their  olde
recordes  we  finde)  all  Japan  was  subject  unto  one  Em-
perour  whose  royall  seat  was  Meaco,  in  the  Japonish
language  called  Cubucama.  But  the  nobilitie  rebelling
against  him,  by  litle  and  litle  have  taken  away  the  greatest
part  of  his  dominion,  howbeit  his  title  continually  re-
mayneth,  and  the  residue  in  some  respect  doe  make
great  account  of  him  still,  acknowledging  him  for  their
superior.  Thus  the  Empyre  of  Japan,  in  times  past  but
one  alone,  is  now  divided  into  sixtie  sixe  kingdomes,  the
onely  cause  of  civill  warres  continually  in  that  Hand,  to
no  small  hinderance  of  the  Gospell,  whilest  the  kings  that
dwell  neare  together  invade  one  another,  each  one  covet-
ing to  make  his  kingdome  greater.  Furthermore  in
the  citie  Meaco  is  the  pallace  of  the  high  Priest,  whom
that  nation  honoureth  as  a  God,  he  hath  in  his  house
2,66  Idoles,  one  whereof  by  course  is  every  night  set  by
his  side  for  a  watchman.  He  is  thought  of  the  common
people  so  holy,  that  it  may  not  be  lawfull  for  him  to  goe
upon  the  earth :  if  happily  he  doe  set  one  foote  to  the
ground,  he  looseth  his  office.  He  is  not  served  very  But  his  almes
sumptuously  he  is  maintained  by  almes.  The  heads  and  '^^'^  ^^'^
beards  of  his  ministers  are  shaven,  they  have  name
Cangues,  and  their  authoritie  is  great  throughout  all
Japan. The  Cubucama  useth  them  for  Embassadors  to

335

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

decide  controversies  betwixt  princes  and  to  end  their
warres,  whereof  they  were  wont  to  make  very  great
gaine.  It  is  now  two  yeres  since  or  there  about,  that
one  of  them  came  to  Bungo,  to  intreate  of  peace  betwixt
the  king  thereof  and  the  king  of  Amanguzzo.  This
Agent  favouring  the  king  of  Bungo  his  cause  more  then
the  other,  brought  to  passe  that  the  foresayd  king  of
Bungo  should  keepe  two  kingdomes,  the  which  he  had
taken  in  warres  from  the  king  of  Amanguzzo.  Where-
fore he  had  for  his  reward  of  the  king  of  Bungo  above
30000  ducats. And  thus  farre  hereof.

I  come  now  to  other  superstitions  and  ceremonies,  that
you  may  see,  deare  brethren,  that  which  I  said  in  the
beginning,  how  subtilly  the  devill  hath  deceived  the
Japonish  nation,  and  how  diligent  and  readie  they  be  to
obey  &  worship  him.  And  first,  al  remembrance  and
knowledge  not  onely  of  Christ  our  Redeemer,  but  also  of
that  one  God  the  maker  of  all  things  is  cleane  extin-
guished and  utterly  abolished  out  of  the  Japans  hearts.
Moreover  their  superstitious  sects  are  many,  whereas  it
is  lawfuU  for  each  one  to  follow  that  which  liketh  him
best  :  but  the  principall  sects  are  two,  namely  the
Amidans  and  Xacaians.  Wherefore  in  this  countrey
shall  you  see  many  monasteries,  not  onely  of  Bonzii
men,  but  also  of  Bonziae  women  diversly  attired,  for
some  doe  weare  white  under,  and  blacke  upper  garments,
other  goe  apparelled  in  ash  colour,  and  their  Idole  hath
to  name  Denichi :  from  these  the  Amidanes  differ  very
much.  Againe  the  men  Bonzii  for  the  most  part  dwell
in  sumptuous  houses,  and  have  great  revenues.  These
fellowes  are  chaste  by  commaundement,  marry  they  may
not  upon  paine  of  death.  In  the  midst  of  their  Temple
is  erected  an  altar,  whereon  standeth  a  woodden  Idole
of  Amida,  naked  from  the  girdle  upward,  with  holes  in
his  eares  after  the  manner  of  Italian  gentlewomen,  sitting
on  a  woodden  rose  goodly  to  behold.  They  have  great
libraries,  and  halles  for  them  all  to  dine  and  sup  together,
and  bels  wherwith  they  are  at  certaine  houres  called  to

336

REPORTS OF JAPAN  a.d.

1565.

prayers. In  the  evening  the  Superintendent  giveth  each

one  a  theame  for  meditation. After  midnight  before  the

altar  in  their  Temple  they  do  say  Mattens  as  it  were  out

of  Xaca  his  last  booke,  one  quier one  verse,  the  other

quier  an  other. Early  in  the  morning  each  one  giveth

himselfe  to  meditation  one  houre :  they  shave  their  heads

and  beards. Their  cloysters  be  very  large,  and  within  the

precinct  therof,  Chappels  of  the  Fotoquiens,  for  by  that

name  some  of  the  Japanish  Saints  are  called :  their  holy-

daies  yeerely  be  very  many. Most  of  these  Bonzii  be

gentlemen,  for that the Japanish nobility  charged  with  [II.  ii.  84.]

many  children,  use  to  make  most  of  them Bonzii,  not

being  able  to  leave  for  each  one  a  patrimony  good  enough.

The  Bonzii  most  covetously  bent,  know  all the  wayes

how to come by money. They sell unto the people

many  scrolles  of  paper,  by  the  helpe  whereof  the  common

people  thinketh  it  selfe  warranted  from  all  power  of  the

devils. They  borrow  likewise  money  to  be  repayed  with

great  usury  in  an  other  worlde,  giving  by  obligation  unto

the  lender  an  assurance  thereof,  the  which  departing  out

of  this  life  he  may  carry  with  him  to  hell.

There  is  another  great  company  of  such  as  are  called  Inambuxu.
Inambuxu,  with  curled  and  staring  haire.  They  make
profession  to  finde  out  againe  things  either  lost  or  stolen,
after  this  sort.  They  set  before  them  a  child  whom  the
devill  invadeth,  called  up  thither  by  charmes :  of  that
child  then  doe  they  aske  that  which  they  are  desirous
to  know.

These  mens  prayers  both  good  and  bad  are  thought
greatly  to  prevaile,  insomuch  that  both  their  blessings
and  their  curses  they  sell  unto  the  people.  The  novices
of  this  order,  before  they  be  admitted,  goe  together  two
or  three  thousand  in  a  company,  up  a  certaine  high
mountaine  to  doe  pennance  there,  threescore  dayes
voluntarily  punishing  themselves.  In  this  time  the
devill  sheweth  himselfe  unto  them  in  sundry  shapes :
and  they  like  young  graduats,  admitted  as  it  were
fellowes  into  some  certaine  companie,  are  set  foorth  with
VI  337  Y

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

white  tassels  hanging  about  their  neckes,  and  blacke
Bonnets  that  scarcely  cover  any  more  then  the  crowne
of  their  heads.  Thus  attyred  they  range  abroade  in  all
Japan,  to  set  out  themselves  and  their  cunning  to  sale,
each  one  beating  his  bason  which  he  carieth  alwayes
about  with  him,  to  give  notice  of  their  comming  in  al
townes  where  they  passe.
Genguis.  There  is  also  an  other  sort  called  Genguis,  that  make
profession  to  shewe  by  soothsaying  where  stollen  things
are,  and  who  were  the  theeves.  These  dwell  in  the
toppe  of  an  high  mountaine,  blacke  in  the  face :  for  the
continuall  heate  of  the  sunne,  for  the  cold  windes,  and
raines  they  doe  continually  endure.  They  marry  but  in
their  owne  tribe  and  line :  the  report  goeth  that  they  be
horned  beasts.  They  climbe  up  most  high  rockes  and
hilles,  and  go  over  very  great  rivers  by  the  onely  arte  of
the  devill,  who  to  bring  those  wretches  the  more  into
errour,  biddeth  them  to  goe  up  a  certaine  high  moun-
taine, where  they  stande  miserably  gazing  and  earnestly
looking  for  him  as  long  as  the  devill  appointeth  them.
At  the  length  at  nonetide  or  in  the  evening  commeth
that  devil,  whom  they  call  Amida  among  them  to  shew
himselfe  unto  them :  this  shew  breedeth  in  the  braines
and  hearts  of  men  such  a  kinde  of  superstition,  that  it
can  by  no  meanes  be  rooted  out  of  them  afterward.

The  devill  was  wont  also  in  another  mountaine  to  shew
himselfe  unto  the  Japanish  Nation.  Who  so  was  more
desirous  than  other  to  go  to  heaven  and  to  enjoy  Paradise,
thither  went  he  to  see  that  sight,  and  having  seene  the
devill  followed  him  (so  by  the  devill  perswaded)  into
a  denne  untill  he  came  to  a  deepe  pit.  Into  this  pit  the
devill  was  wont  to  leape,  and  to  take  with  him  his  wor-
shipper whom  he  there  murdred.  This  deceit  was  thus
perceived.  An  old  man  blinded  with  this  superstition,
was  by  his  sonne  disswaded  from  thence,  but  all  in  vaine.
Wherefore  his  sonne  followed  him  privily  into  that  denne
with  his  bow  &  arrows,  where  the  devill  gallantly  appeared
unto  him  in  the  shape  of  a  man. Whilest  the  old  man

338

REPORTS OF JAPAN  a.d.

1565.
falleth  downe  to  worshippe  the  devill,  his  sonne  speedily
shooting  an  arrow  at  the  spirit  so  appearing,  strooke  a
Foxe  in  stead  of  a  man,  so  suddenly  was  that  shape
altered.  This  olde  man  his  sonne  tracking  the  Foxe  so
running  away,  came  to  that  pit  whereof  I  spake,  and  in
the  bottome  thereof  he  found  many  bones  of  dead  men,
deceived  by  the  devill  after  that  sort  in  time  past.  Thus
delivered  he  his  father  from  present  death,  and  all  other
from  so  pestilent  an  opinion.

There  is  furthermore  a  place  bearing  name  Coia,  very
famous  for  ye  multitude  of  Abbyes  which  the  Bonzii
have  therein.  The  beginner  and  founder  whereof  is
thought  to  be  one  Combendaxis  a  suttle  craftie  fellowe,
that  got  the  name  of  holinesse  by  cunning  speech,  although
the  lawes  and  ordinances  he  made  were  altogether  devil-
lish :  he  is  said  to  have  found  out  the  Japanish  letters
used  at  this  day.  In  his  latter  yeeres  this  Sim  suttle
buried  himselfe  in  a  fouresquare  grave,  foure  cubites
deepe,  severely  forbidding  it  to  be  opened,  for  that  then
he  died  not,  but  rested  his  bodie  wearied  with  continual!
businesse,  untill  many  thousand  thousands  of  yeeres  were
passed,  after  the  which  time  a  great  learned  man  named
Mirozu  should  come  into  Japan,  and  then  would  he  rise
up  out  of  his  grave  againe.  About  his  tombe  many
lampes  are  lighted,  sent  thither  out  of  diverse  provinces,
for  that  the  people  are  perswaded  that  whosoever  is
liberall  and  beneficiall  towardes  the  beautifying  of  that
monument  shall  not  onely  increase  in  wealth  in  this
world,  but  in  the  life  to  come  be  safe  through  Comben-
daxis helpe.  Such  as  give  themselves  to  worship  him,
live  in  those  Monasteries  or  Abbyes  with  shaven  heads,
as  though  they  had  forsaken  all  secular  matters,  whereas
in  deede  they  wallow  in  all  sortes  of  wickednesse  and
lust.  In  these  houses,  the  which  are  many  (as  I  sayd)  in
number,  doe  remaine  6000  Bonzii,  or  thereabout  besides  [II.  ii.  85.]
the  multitude  of  lay  men,  women  be  restrained  from
thence  upon  paine  of  death.  Another  company  of  Bonzii
dwelleth  at  Fatonochaiti. They  teach  a  great  multitude

339

A.D.
1565.

A  warrelike
people  300
leagues  to  the
North  of
Meaco.

The  Japanish
funerals.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  children  all  tricks  &  sleights  of  guile  &  theft :  whom
they  do  find  to  be  of  great  towardnes,  those  do  they
instruct  in  al  the  petigrues  of  princes,  and  fashions  of  the
nobilitie,  in  chivalrie  and  eloquence,  and  so  send  them
abroad  into  other  provinces,  attired  like  yong  princes,  to
this  ende,  that  faining  themselves  to  be  nobly  borne,  they
may  with  great  summes  of  money  borowed  under  the
colour  and  pretence  of  nobilitie  returne  againe.  Where-
fore this  place  is  so  infamous  in  all  Japan,  that  if  any
scholer  of  that  order  be  happily  taken  abroad,  he  incon-
tinently dieth  for  it.  Neverthelesse  these  cousiners  leave
not  daily  to  use  their  woonted  wickednesse  and  knaverie.

North  from  Japan,  three  hundred  leagues  out  of
Meaco,  lieth  a  great  countrey  of  savage  men  clothed  in
beasts  skinnes,  rough  bodied,  with  huge  beards  and  mon-
strous muchaches,  the  which  they  hold  up  with  litle
forkes  as  they  drinke.  These  people  are  great  drinkers
of  wine,  fierce  in  warres,  and  much  feared  of  the  Japans :
being  hurt  in  fight,  they  wash  their  wounds  with  salt
water,  other  Surgerie  have  they  none.  In  their  breasts
they  are  sayd  to  cary  looking  glasses :  their  swordes  they
tie  to  their  heads,  in  such  wise,  that  the  handle  doe  rest
upon  their  shoulders.  Service  and  ceremonies  have  they
none  at  all,  onely  they  are  woont  to  worship  heaven.  To
Aquita  a  great  towne  in  that  Japonish  kingdom,  which  we
call  Gevano,  they  much  resort  for  marchandise,  and  the
Aquitanes  likewise  doe  travell  into  their  countrey,  how-
beit  not  often,  for  that  there  many  of  them  are  slaine  by
the  inhabiters.

Much  more  concerning  this  matter  I  had  to  write :  but
to  avoyd  tediousnesse  I  will  come  to  speake  of  the  Japans
madnesse  againe,  who  most  desirous  of  vaine  glory  doe
thinke  then  specially  to  get  immortall  fame,  when  they
procure  themselves  to  be  most  sumptuously  and  solemnly
buried :  their  burials  and  obsequies  in  the  citie  Meaco
are  done  after  this  maner.  About  one  houre  before  the
dead  body  be  brought  foorth,  a  great  multitude  of  his
friends  apparelled  in  their  best  aray  goe  before  unto  the

340

REPORTS OF JAPAN  a.d.

1565.

fire,  with  them  goe  their  kinswomen  and  such  as  bee  of
their  acquaintance,  clothed  in  white  (for  that  is  the
mourning  colour  there)  with  a  changeable  coloured  vaile
on  their  heads.  Each  woman  hath  with  her  also,  accord-
ing to  her  abilitie,  all  her  familie  trimmed  up  in  white
mockado :  the  better  sort  and  wealthier  women  goe  in
litters  of  Cedar  artificially  wrought  and  richly  dressed.
In  the  second  place  marcheth  a  great  company  of  foote-
men  sumptuously  apparelled.  Then  afarre  off  commeth
one  of  these  Bonzii  master  of  the  ceremonies  for  that
superstition,  bravely  clad  in  silkes  and  gold,  in  a  large
and  high  litter  excellently  well  wrought,  accompanied  with
30  other  Bonzii  or  thereabout,  wearing  hats,  linnen  albes,
and  fine  blacke  upper  garments.  Then  attired  in  ashe
colour  (for  this  colour  also  is  mourning)  with  a  long
torch  of  Pineaple,  he  sheweth  the  dead  body  the  way
unto  the  fire,  lest  it  either  stumble  or  ignorantly  go  out
of  the  way.  Well  neere  200  Bonzii  folow  him  singing
the  name  of  that  devill  the  which  the  partie  deceassed
chiefly  did  worship  in  his  life  time,  and  therewithall  a
very  great  bason  is  beaten  even  to  the  place  of  fire  in
stead  of  a  bell.  Then  follow  two  great  paper  baskets
hanged  open  at  staves  endes  full  of  paper  roses  diversly
coloured,  such  as  beare  them  doe  march  but  slowly,
shaking  ever  now  and  then  their  staves,  that  the  afore-
sayd  flowers  may  fall  downe  by  litle  and  litle  as  it  were
drops  of  raine :  and  be  whirled  about  with  wind.  This
shower  say  they  is  an  argument  that  the  soule  of  the
dead  man  is  gone  to  paradise.  After  al  this,  eight
beardles  Bonzii  orderly  two  and  two  drag  after  them  on
the  ground  long  speares,  the  points  backward,  with  flags
of  one  cubite  a  piece,  wherein  the  name  also  of  that  idole
is  written.  Then  there  be  caried  10  lanterns  trimmed
with  the  former  inscription,  overcast  with  a  fine  vaile,  and
candles  burning  in  them.  Besides  this,  two  yoong  men
clothed  in  ashe  colour  beare  pineaple  torches,  not  lighted,
of  three  foote  length,  the  which  torches  serve  to  kindle  They  burns
the  fire  wherein  the  dead  corpes  is  to  bee  burnt. In  the  iheir  dead.

341

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

same  colour  follow  many  other  that  weare  on  the  crownes
of  their  heads  faire,  litle,  threesquare,  blacke  lethren  caps
tied  fast  under  their  chinnes  (for  that  is  honorable  amongst
them)  with  papers  on  their  heads,  wherein  the  name  of
the  devill  I  spake  of,  is  written.  And  to  make  it  the
more  solemne,  after  commeth  a  man  with  a  table  one
cubite  long,  one  foot  broad,  covered  with  a  very  fine
white  vaile,  in  both  sides  whereof  is  written  in  golden
letters  the  aforesayd  name.  At  the  length  by  foure  men
is  brought  foorth  the  corps  sitting  in  a  gorgeous  litter
clothed  in  white,  hanging  downe  his  head  and  holding
his  hands  together  like  one  that  prayed :  to  the  rest  of
his  apparell  may  you  adde  an  upper  gowne  of  paper,
written  full  of  that  booke  the  which  his  God  is  sayd  to
have  made,  when  he  lived  in  the  world,  by  whose  helpe
and  merites  commonly  they  doe  thinke  to  be  saved.  The
dead  man  his  children  come  next  after  him  most  gallantly
set  foorth,  the  yongest  wherof  carieth  likewise  a  pineaple
torch  to  kindle  the  fire.  Last  of  all  foloweth  a  great
number  of  people  in  such  caps  as  I  erst  spake  of.
When  they  are  al  come  to  ye  place  appointed  for  the
[II.  ii.  86.]  obsequie,  al  the  Bonzii  w'  the  whole  multitude  for  the
space  of  one  houre,  beating  pannes  and  basons  with  great
clamours,  call  upon  the  name  of  that  devill,  the  which
being  ended,  the  Obsequie  is  done  in  this  maner.  In
the  niidst  of  a  great  quadrangle  railed  about,  hanged  with
course  linnen,  and  agreeably  unto  the  foure  partes  of  the
world  made  with  foure  gates  to  goe  in  and  out  at,  is
digged  a  hole :  in  the  hole  is  laied  good  store  of  wood,
whereon  is  raised  gallantly  a  waved  roofe :  before  that
stand  two  tables  furnished  with  divers  kindes  of  meates,
especially  drie  Figs,  Pomegranates  and  Tartes  good  store,
but  neither  Fish  nor  Flesh  :  upon  one  of  them  standeth
also  a  chafer  with  coales,  and  in  it  sweete  wood  to  make
perfumes.  When  all  this  is  readie,  the  corde  wherewith
the  litter  was  caried,  is  throwen  by  a  long  rope  into  the
fire :  as  many  as  are  present  strive  to  take  the  rope  in
their  handes,  using  their  aforesayd  clamours,  which  done,

342

REPORTS OF JAPAN  ad.

1565.

they  goe  in  procession  as  it  were  round  about  the  quad-
rangle thrise.  Then  setting  the  litter  on  the  wood  built
up  ready  for  the  fire  that  Bonzius  who  then  is  master
of  the  ceremonies,  saieth  a  verse  that  no  bodie  there
understandeth,  whirling  thrise  about  over  his  head  a
torch  lighted,  to  signifie  thereby  that  the  soule  of  the
dead  man  had  neither  any  beginning,  ne  shall  have  at
any  time  an  ende,  and  throweth  away  the  torch.  Two
of  the  dead  man  his  children,  or  of  his  neere  kinne,
take  it  up  againe,  and  standing  one  at  the  East  side  of
the  litter,  the  other  at  the  West,  doe  for  honour  and
reverence  reach  it  to  each  other  thrise  over  the  dead
corps,  and  so  cast  it  into  the  pile  of  wood :  by  and  by
they  throw  in  oyle,  sweete  wood,  and  other  perfumes,
accordingly  as  they  have  plentie,  and  so  with  a  great
flame  bring  the  corpes  to  ashes :  his  children  in  the
meane  while  putting  sweete  wood  into  the  chafer  at  the
table  with  odours,  doe  solemnly  and  religiously  worship
their  father  as  a  Saint :  which  being  done,  the  Bonzii  are
paied  each  one  in  his  degree.  The  master  of  the  cere-
monies hath  for  his  part  five  duckats,  sometimes  tenne,
sometimes  twentie,  the  rest  have  tenne  Julies  a  piece,  or
els  a  certaine  number  of  other  presents  called  Caxae.
The  meate  that  was  ordained,  as  soone  as  the  dead  corps
friends  and  all  the  Bonzii  are  gone,  is  left  for  such  as
served  at  the  obsequie,  for  the  poore  and  impotent  lazars.
The  next  day  returne  to  the  place  of  obsequie  the
dead  man  his  children,  his  kinred  and  friends,  who
gathering  up  his  ashes,  bones,  and  teeth,  doe  put  them
in  a  gilded  pot,  and  so  carie  them  home,  to  bee  set  up  in
the  same  pot  covered  with  cloth,  in  the  middest  of  their
houses.  Many  Bonzii  returne  likewise  to  these  private
funerals,  and  so  doe  they  againe  the  seventh  day:  then
cary  they  out  the  ashes  to  bee  buried  in  a  place
appointed,  laying  thereupon  a  fouresquare  stone,  wherein
is  written  in  great  letters  drawen  all  the  length  of  the
stone,  the  name  of  that  devil  the  which  the  dead  man
worshipped  in his life time. Every  day  afterward  his

343

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

children  resort  unto  the  grave  with  roses  and  warme
water  that  the  dead  corps  thirst  not.  Nor  the  seventh
day  onely,  but  the  seventh  moneth  and  yeere,  within
their  owne  houses  they  renue  this  obsequie,  to  no  small
commodities  and  gaine  of  the  Bonzii :  great  rich  men
doe  spend  in  these  their  funerals  3000  duckats  or  there-
about, the  meaner  sort  two  or  three  hundred.  Such  as
for  povertie  be  not  able  to  go  to  that  charges,  are  in  the
night  time  darkelong  without  all  pompe  and  ceremonies
buried  in  a  dunghill.

They  have  another  kinde  of  buriall,  especially  neere
the  Sea  side,  for  them  that  bee  not  yet  dead.  These
fellowes  are  such,  as  having  religiously  with  much
devotion  worshipped  Ami  da,  now  desirous  to  see  him,
doe  slay  themselves.  And  first  they  goe  certaine  dayes
begging  almes,  the  which  they  thrust  into  their  sleeves,
then  preach  they  in  publique  a  sermon  unto  the  people,
declaring  what  they  mind  to  doe,  with  the  great  good
liking  of  all  such  as  doe  heare  them :  for  every  body
wondreth  at  such  a  kinde  of  holinesse.  Then  take  they
hookes  to  cut  downe  briars  and  thornes  that  might
hinder  them  in  their  way  to  heaven,  and  so  embarke
themselves  in  a  nev/  vessell,  tying  great  stones  about
their  neckes,  armes,  loines,  thighes,  and  feete :  thus  they
launching  out  into  the  maine  Sea  be  either  drowned
there,  their  shippe  bouged  for  that  purpose,  or  els  doe
cast  themselves  over-boord  headlong  into  the  Sea.  The
emptie  barke  is  out  of  hand  set  a  fire  for  honours  sake
by  their  friends  that  folow  them  in  another  boat  of  their
owne,  thinking  it  blasphemie  that  any  mortall  creature
should  afterward  once  touch  the  barke  that  had  bene  so
religiously  halowed.

Truly  when  we  went  to  Meaco,  eight  dayes  before  we
came  to  the  He  of  Hiu  at  Fore  towne,  sixe  men  and
two  women  so  died.  To  all  such  as  die  so  the  people
erecteth  a  Chappell,  and  to  each  of  them  a  pillar  and  a
pole  made  of  Pineaple  for  a  perpetuall  monument,  hang-
ing  up many  shreds  of paper in  stickes all the  roofe

344

REPORTS OF JAPAN  a.d.

1565.

over,  with  many  verses  set  downe  in  the  walles  in
commendation  of  that  blessed  company.  "Wherefore  unto
this  place  both  day  and  night  many  come  very  super-
stitiously  in  pilgrimage.  It  happened  even  then  as
Aloisius  Almeida  and  I  went  to  christen  a  childe  wee
traveiled  that  way  at  what  time  foure  or  five  olde
women  came  foorth  out  of  the  aforesayd  chappell  with
beades  in  their  handes  (for  in  this  point  also  the  devill
counterfaiteth  Christianitie)  who  partly  scorned  at  us  for  [II.  ii.  87.]
follie,  partly  frowned  and  taunted  at  our  small  devotion,
for  passing  by  that  holy  monument  without  any  rever-
ence or  worship  done  thereunto  at  all.

It  remaineth  now  we  speake  two  or  three  wordes  of
those  Sermons  the  Bonzii  are  woont  to  make,  not  so
many  as  ours  in  number,  but  assuredly  very  well  pro-
vided for.  The  Pulpit  is  erected  in  a  great  temple
with  a  silke  Canopie  over  it,  therein  standeth  a  costly
seate,  before  the  seate  a  table  with  a  bell  and  a  booke.
At  the  houre  of  Sermon  each  sect  of  the  Japans
resorteth  to  their  owne  doctors  in  divers  Temples.  Up
goeth  the  doctor  into  the  Pulpit,  and  being  set  downe,
after  that  hee  hath  lordlike  looked  him  about,  signifieth
silence  with  his  bell,  and  so  readeth  a  fewe  wordes  of
that  booke  we  spake  of,  the  which  he  expoundeth
afterward  more  at  large.  These  preachers  be  for  the
most  part  eloquent,  and  apt  to  drawe  with  their  speach
the  mindes  of  their  hearers.  Wherefore  to  this  ende
chieflie  (such  is  their  greedinesse)  tendeth  all  their
talke,  that  the  people  bee  brought  under  the  colour  of
godlinesse  to  enrich  their  monasteries,  promising  to
each  one  so  much  the  more  happinesse  in  the  life  to
come,  how  much  the  greater  costes  and  charges  they
bee  at  in  Church  matters  and  obsequies :  notwithstand-
ing this  multitude  of  superstitious  Sects  and  companies,
and  the  diversities  thereof  amongst  themselves :  yet  in
this  principally  all  their  Superintendents  doe  travell  so
to  perswade  their  Novices  in  their  owne  tales  and  lies,
that  they  thinke  nothing  els  trueth,  nothing  els  sure  to

345

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565-

come  by  everlasting  salvation,  nothing  els  woorth  the
hearing.  Whereunto  they  adde  other  subtleties,  as  in
going  gravitie,  in  countenance,  apparell,  and  in  all  out-
ward shew,  comelinesse.  Whereby  the  Japans  mindes
are  so  nousled  in  wicked  opinions,  &  doe  conceive
thereby  such  trust  and  hope  of  everlasting  salvation,
that  not  onely  at  home,  but  also  abroad  in  every
corner  of  the  towne  continually  almost  they  run  over
their  beades,  humbly  asking  of  Amida  and  Xaca,
wealth,  honour,  good  health,  and  everlasting  joyes.
Thus  then,  deare  brethren,  may  you  thinke  how  greatly
they  need  the  helpe  of  God,  that  either  doe  bring  the
Gospell  into  this  countrey,  or  receiving  it  brought  unto
them,  doe  forsake  idolatrie  and  joine  themselves  with
Christ,  being  assaulted  by  so  many  snares  of  the  devill,
troubled  with  the  daily  dissuasions  of  their  Bonzii,  and
finally,  so  injuriously,  so  hardly,  so  sharpely  vexed  of
their  kinred  and  friends,  that  except  the  grace  of  God
obtained  by  the  sacrifices  and  prayers  of  the  Catholique
church  doe  helpe  us,  it  cannot  be  chosen  but  that  the
faith  and  constancie  of  many,  if  not  of  all,  in  these  first
beginnings  of  our  churches,  will  greatly  be  put  in
jeopardie.  So  much  the  more  it  standeth  you  upon
that  so  earnestly  long  for  the  health  of  soules,  to  com-
mend specially  these  Japanish  flocks  unto  our  Lord.

We  came  to  Sacaio  the  eight  and  twentie  day  of
January :  Aloisius  Almeida  first  for  businesse,  but  after-
ward let  by  sicknesse,  staied  there  some  while,  but  I
parting  the  next  day  from  thence  came  thirteene  leagues
off  to  Meaco  the  last  of  Januarie.  Of  my  comming  all
the  Christians  tooke  great  comfort,  but  specially  Gaspar
Vilela  who  in  6  yeres  had  seen  none  of  our  companie
at  Meaco :  his  yeeres  are  not  yet  fortie,  but  his  gray
haires  shew  him  to  be  seventie,  so  vehemently  is  his
litle  body  afflicted  and  worne  with  extreme  cold.  Hee
speaketh  Japanish  so  skilfully  after  the  phrase  of  Meaco
(the  which  for  the  renowne  of  this  people  and  royal
seat  of the  king  is  best  accounted  of) that hee  doeth

346

REPORTS OF JAPAN  a.d.

1565.

both  confesse  and  preach  in  that  language.  Certaine
godly  bookes  also  he  hath  done  into  that  speach,  not
omitting  to  translate  other  as  laisure  suffreth  him.  To
make  an  ende,  our  Lord  for  his  goodnesse  vouchsafe
to  preserve  us  all  continually,  and  to  give  us  ayde  both
rightly  to  interprete  his  will,  and  well  to  doe  the  same.
From  Meaco  the 19  of  February 1565.

Other  such  like  matter  is  handled  both  in  other  his
letters,  and  also  in  the  Epistles  written  by  his  com-
panions to  be  seene  at  large  in  the  aforesaid  volume.
Amongst  the  rest  this  seemed  in  my  judgement  one  of
the  principall,  and  therefore  the  rather  I  tooke  upon
me  to  do  it  into  English.

Of  the  lies  beyond  Japan  in  the  way  from
China  to  the  Moluccas.

AMongst  other  lies  in  the  Asian  sea  betwixt  Cantan
a  Chinish  haven  in  Cathaio  &  the  Moluccas,  much
spoken  of  in  the  Indian  histories  and  painted  out  in
Maps,  Ainan  and  Santianum  are  very  famous.  Ainan  Jinan.
standeth  19  degrees  on  this  side  of  the  Equinoctiall
line  nere  China,  from  whence  the  Chinish  nation  have
their  provision  for  shipping  and  other  necessaries  requisite
for  their  Navie.  There  staied  Balthasar  Gagus  a  great
traveiler  5  moneths,  who  describeth  that  place  after  this  De  reb.  Jap.
maner.  Ainan  is  a  goodly  countrey  ful  of  Indian  fruits  ^^-  +•
&  all  kind  of  victuals,  besides  great  store  of  jewels  and
pearle,  well  inhabited,  the  townes  built  of  stone,  the
people  rude  in  conditions,  apparelled  in  divers  coloured
rugs,  with  two  oxe  homes,  as  it  were,  made  of  fine  cypres
hanging  downe  about  their  eares,  and  a  paire  of  sharpe
cyzers  at  their  foreheads.

The  cause  wherefore  they  go  in  such  attire  I  could  not  [ll,  ii.  88.]
understand,  except  it  bee  for  that  they  do  counterfeit  the
devil  in  the  forme of  a  brute  beast,  offring themselves
up  to  him.

Santianum is  an  He  neere  unto  the  haven  Cantan  in  Santianum.
the confines likewise of  China,  famous for the death

347

A.D,
1565.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  that  woorthy  traveller  and  godly  professour  and
painfull  doctor  of  the  Indian  nation  in  matters  concern-
ing religion,  Francis  Xavier,  who  after  great  labours,
many  injuries,  and  calamities  infinite  suffred  with  much
patience,  singular  joy  and  gladnesse  of  mind,  de-
parted in  a  cabben  made  of  bowes  and  rushes  upon  a
desert  mountaine,  no  lesse  voyd  of  all  worldly  com-
modities, then  endued  with  all  spirituall  blessings,  out
of  this  life,  the  2  day  of  December,  the  yeere  of  our
Lord  1552.  after  that  many  thousand  of  these  Easterlings
were  brought  by  him  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  Of
this  holy  man,  his  particular  vertues,  and  specially  travell,
and  wonderfull  works  in  that  region,  of  other  many  litle
lies  (yet  not  so  litle,  but  they  may  right  wel  be  written
of  at  laisure)  all  the  latter  histories  of  the  Indian  regions
are  full.

An  excellent  treatise  of  the  kingdome  of  China,
and  of  the  estate  and  government  thereof:
Printed  in  Latine  at  Macao  a  citie  of  the
Portugals  in  China,  An.  Dom.  1590.  and
written  Dialogue-wise.  The  speakers  are
Linus,  Leo,  and  Michael.

Linus.

Oncerning  the  kingdome  of  China  (Michael)
which  is  our  next  neighbour,  we  have
heard  and  daily  do  heare  so  many  re-
ports, that  we  are  to  request  at  your
hands  rather  a  true  then  a  large  discourse
and  narration  thereof.  And  if  there  be
ought  in  your  knowledge  besides  that
which  by  continual  rumours  is  waxen  stale  among  us,  we
will  right  gladly  give  diligent  eare  unto  it.

Michael.  Because  the  report  of  this  most  famous
kingdome  is  growen  so  common  among  us,  reducing
divers  and  manifold  particulars  into  order,  I  will  especially
aime at the trueth of  things  received  from the fathers

348

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590-
of  the  societie,  which  even  now  at  this  present  are  con-
versant in China. First of  all  therefore  it is  not un-  27/^  situation
knowen, that of  all parts  of  the maine  continent this  '^qV^^^^^^  °-^
kingdom of China is situate most Easterly : albeit
certaine  Hands,  as  our  native  Japon,  &  the  He  of  Manilia
stand  more Easterly  then  China  it selfe. As touching
the  limites  &  bounds  of  this  kingdom,  we  may  appoint
the  first  towards  ye  West  to  be  a  certaine  He  commonly
called  Hainan,  which  standeth  in  1 9  degrees  of  Northerly
latitude. For  the continent next adjoining unto  this
He  trendeth  towardes  the  East,  and  that  especially,  where
the promontorie of  the  citie called Nimpo or Liampo
doeth  extend  it  selfe. Howbeit,  from  that  place  declining
Northward,  it  stretcheth  foorth  an  huge  length,  insomuch
that the  farthest Chinian inhabitants  that  way  doe be-
hold the  North  pole elevated,  at  least 50 degrees,  and
perhaps  more  also : whereupon  a  man  may  easilie  con-
jecture (that  I  may  speake  like  an  Astronomer)  how  large
the  latitude  of  this  kingdom is,  when as  it containeth
about  more  then  540  leagues  in  direct  extension  towards
the North. But as  concerning the longitude  which is
accounted  from  East  to  West,  it  is  not  so  exactly  found
out,  that  it  may  be  distinguished  into  degrees, Howbeit
certaine it is,  that according  to the Map  wherein the
people of  China describe the  forme of  their  kingdom, Chinian  Cos-
the  latitude  thereof  doeth  not  much  exceed  ye  longitude.  ^^°S^^phers.
This  kingdom therfore is,  without  all  peradventure,  of
all  earthly  kingdoms the  most  large  and  spacious : for
albeit divers  other kings under their  jurisdiction con-
taining in dimensions more  length & breadth  then  all
China,  do  possesse very  many  kingdoms  &  far distant
asunder :  yet  none  of  them  all  enjoieth  any  one  kingdom
so large and so ample,  as the most puissant king of
China  doeth. Now,  if  we  shall  make  enquirie  into  his  27^^  ^'^'^^
revenues  and tributes,  true  it is,  that this king  of  all  ^'f^^ff^^  °f
others,  is  endued  with  the  greatest  and  the  richest,  both china^
in  regard  of  the  fertilitie  &  greatnes  of  his  dominions,
&  also by  reason  of  the  severe  collection and  exaction

349

A.D.
1590.

Fifteene  great
provinces  in
China.

The  seats
roiall  of  the
king  of  China.
[II.  ii.  89.]

The  warlike
munitions  of
China,  i^  a
marveilous
wall.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  his  duties:  yea,  tributes  are  imposed  upon  his  subjects,
not  onely  for  lands,  houses,  and  impost  of  marchandise,
but  also  for  every  person  in  each  family.  It  is  likewise
to  be  understood,  that  almost  no  lord  or  potentate  in
China  hath  authoritie  to  levie  unto  himselfe  any  peculiar
revenues,  or  to  collect  any  rents  within  the  precincts  of
his  seigniories,  al  such  power  belonging  onely  unto  the
king :  whereas  in  Europe  the  contrary  is  most  commonly
seen,  as  we  have  before  signified.  In  this  most  large
kingdom  are  conteined  15  provinces,  every  one  of  which
were  in  it  selfe  sufficient  to  be  made  one  great  kingdom.
Six  of  these  provinces  do  border  upon  the  sea,  namely
(j^  I  may  use  the  names  of  the  Chinians  themselves)
Coantum,  Foquien,  Chequiam,  Nanquin,  Xantum,
Paquin :  the  other  9  be  in-land  provinces,  namely,
Quiansi,  Huquam,  Honan,  Xiensi,  Xansi,  Suchuon,
Queicheu,  Junan,  Coansi.  Amongst  all  the  foresayd
provinces,  two  are  allotted  for  the  kings  court  and  seat
roial,  that  is  to  say,  Paquin  for  his  court  in  the  North,
and  Nanquin  for  his  court  in  the  South.  For  the  kings
of  China  were  woont  to  be  resident  altogether  at  the
South  court :  but  afterward,  by  reason  of  the  manifold
and  cruell  warres  mooved  by  the  Tartars,  they  were  con-
strained to  defixe  their  princely  seate  and  habitation  in
that  extreme  province  of  the  North.  Whereupon  it
commeth  to  passe,  that  those  Northren  confines  of  the
kingdom  doe  abound  with  many  moe  fortresses,  martiall
engines,  and  garrisons  of  souldiers.

Leo.  I  have  heard,  amongst  those  munitions,  a
certaine  strange  and  admirable  wall  reported  of,  where-
with the  people  of  China  doe  represse  and  drive  backe
the  Tartars  attempting  to  invade  their  territories.

Michael.  Certes  that  wall  which  you  have  heard  tell
of  is  most  woorthie  of  admiration  ;  for  it  runneth  alongst
the  borders  of  three  Northerlie  provinces,  Xiensi,  Xansi,
and  Paquin,  and  is  sayd  to  containe  almost  three  hundred
leagues  in  length,  and  in  such  sort  to  bee  built,  that  it
hindereth not the courses  and streames of  any rivers,

35°

A TREATISE OF CHINA  a.d.

1590.
their  chanels  being  overthwarted  and  fortified  with
wonderfull  bridges  and  other  defences.  Yet  is  it  not
unlikely,  that  the  sayd  wall  is  built  in  such  sort,  that
onely  lowe  and  easie  passages  bee  therewith  stopped  and
environed ;  but  the  mountaines  running  betweene  those
lowe  passages  are,  by  their  owne  naturall  strength,  and
inaccessible  heigth,  a  sufficient  fortification  agaynst  the
enemie.

Linus.  Tell  us  (Michael)  whether  the  kingdome  of
China  be  so  frequented  with  inhabitants,  as  wee  have
often  bene  informed,  or  no  ?

Michael. It  is  (Linus)  in  very  deed  a  most  populous  Abundance

kingdom,  as  I  have  bene  certified from the fathers of  "f  inhabitants
1 ° . .  ...  J  .  r  tn  China.

the societie : who havmg seene sundry provmces or

Europe  renoumed  for  the  multitude  of  their  inhabitants,
doe  notwithstanding  greatly  admire  the  infinite  swarmes
of  people  in  China.  Howbeit  these  multitudes  are  not
pel-mel  and  confusively  dispersed  over  the  land,  but
most  conveniently  and  orderly  distributed  in  their  townes
and  famous  cities :  of  which  assemblies  there  are  divers
kindes  among  the  Chinians.  For  they  have  certaine
principal  cities  called  by  the  name  of  Fu :  other  inferior  Cities  and
cities  called  Cheu :  and  of  a  third  kind  also  named  ^°'^"^^-
Hien,  which  be  indeed  walled  townes,  but  are  not
privileged  with  the  dignities  and  prerogatives  of  cities.
To  these  may  be  added  two  other  kindes  of  lesser
townes,  which  are  partly  villages,  and  partly  garrisons  of
souldiers.  Of  the  first  and  principall  kind  is  that  most
noble  citie  standing  neere  unto  the  port  of  Macao,  called
by  the  Chinians  Coanchefu,  but  by  the  Portugals  com-
monly termed  Cantam,  which  is  rather  the  common  name
of  the  province,  then  a  word  of  their  proper  imposition.
Unto  the  third  kind  appertaineth  a  towne,  which  is  yet
nigher  unto  the  port  of  Macao,  called  by  the  Portugals
Ansam,  but  by  the  Chinians  Hiansanhien.  Al  the  fore-
sayd  provinces  therefore  have  their  greater  cities  named
Fu,  &  their  lesser  cities  called  Cheu,  unto  both  of  which
the  other  townes  may  be  added. Moreover,  in  every  pro-

351

A.D,
1590.

The  Chlnlan
rivers  greatly
inhabited.

Hoksome  aire,
plenty  y
peace  in
China.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

vince  there  is  a  certain  principal  city  which  is  called  the
Metropolitane  thereof,  wherein  the  chief  magistrates  have
their  place  of  residence,  as  the  principal  citie  by  me  last
mentioned,  which  is  the  head  of  the  whole  province
called  Coantum.  The  number  of  the  greater  cities
throughout  the  whole  kingdom  is  more  then  150,  and
there  is  the  same  or  rather  a  greater  multitude  of  in-
feriour  cities.  Of  walled  townes  not  endued  with  the
privileges  of  cities  there  are  mo  then  11 20:  the  villages
&  garrisons  can  scarce  be  numbred :  over  &  besides  the
which  convents  it  is  incredible  what  a  number  of  countrie
farmes  or  granges  there  be  :  for  it  is  not  easie  to  find
any  place  desert  or  void  of  inhabitants  in  all  that  land.
Now  in  the  sea,  in  rivers,  &  in  barks  there  are  such
abundance  of  people,  and  of  whole  families  inhabiting,
that  even  the  Europaeans  themselves  doe  greatly  wonder
thereat :  insomuch  that  some  (albeit  beyond  measure)
have  bene  perswaded  that  there  are  as  many  people
dwelling  upon  the  water  as  upon  the  land.  Neither  were
they  induced  so  to  thinke  altogether  without  probabilitie :
for  whereas  the  kingdom  of  China  is  in  all  parts  thereof
interfused  with  commodious  rivers,  &  in  many  places
consisteth  of  waters,  barges  &  boats  being  every-where
very  common,  it  might  easily  bee  supposed,  that  the
number  of  watermen  was  equal  unto  the  land-inhabitants.
Howbeit,  that  is  to  be  understood  by  amplification,
whereas  the  cities  do  swarme  so  ful  with  citizens  &
the  countrie  with  peasants.

Leo.  The  abundance  of  people  which  you  tell  us  of
seemeth  very  strange :  whereupon  I  conjecture  the  soile
to  be  fertile,  the  aire  to  be  holesome,  and  the  whole
kingdom  to  be  at  peace.

Michael.  You  have  (friend  Leo)  ful  judicially  con-
jectured those  three :  for  they  do  all  so  excel,  y'  which
of  the  three  in  this  kingdom  be  more  excellent,  it  is
not  easie  to  discerne.  And  hence  it  is  that  this  common
opinion  hath  bene  rife  among  the  Portugals,  namely,  that
the  kingdom  of  China  was  never  visited  with  those  three

352

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590.

most  heavy  &  sharpe  scourges  of  mankind,  warre,  famine,
&  pestilence.  But  that  opinion  is  more  common  then
true :  sithens  there  have  bene  most  terrible  intestine  and
civile  warres,  as  in  many  and  most  autenticall  histories
it  is  recorded :  sithens  also  that  some  provinces  of  the  Chlnian
sayd  kingdom,  even  in  these  our  dayes,  have  bene  afflicted  ^^°"^^-
with  pestilence  and  contagious  diseases,  and  with  famine.
Howbeit,  that  the  foresaid  three  benefits  do  mightily
flourish  and  abound  in  China,  it  cannot  be  denied.  For
(that  I  may  first  speake  of  the  salubritie  of  the  aire)  the
fathers  of  the  societie  themselves  are  witnesses,  that  [II.  ii.  90.]
scarcely  in  any  other  realme  there  are  so  many  found
that  live  unto  decrepite  and  extreme  old  age :  so  great
a  multitude  is  there  of  ancient  and  grave  personages :
neither  doe  they  use  so  many  confections  and  medicines,
nor  so  manifold  and  sundry  wayes  of  curing  diseases,
as  wee  saw  accustomed  in  Europe.  For  amongst  them
they  have  no  Phlebotomie  or  letting  of  blood :  but  all.
their  cures,  as  ours  also  in  Japon,  are  atchieved  by  fasting,
decoctions  of  herbes,  &  light  or  gentle  potions.  But
in  this  behalfe  let  every  nation  please  themselves  with
their  owne  customes.  Now,  in  fruitfulnes  of  soile  this
kingdom  certes  doth  excel,  far  surpassing  all  other
kingdoms  of  the  East :  yet  is  it  nothing  comparable  unto
the  plentie  and  abundance  of  Europe,  as  I  have  declared
at  large  in  the  former  treatises.  But  the  kingdom  of
China  is,  in  this  regard,  so  highly  extolled,  because  there
is  not  any  region  in  the  East  partes  that  aboundeth  so
with  marchandise,  and  from  whence  so  much  traffique
is  sent  abroad.  For  whereas  this  kingdome  is  most  large
&  full  of  navigable  rivers,  so  that  commodities  may  easilie
be  conveyed  out  of  one  province  into  another :  the
Portugals  doe  find  such  abundance  of  wares  within  one
and  the  same  Citie,  (which  perhaps  is  the  greatest  Mart  The  city  of
throughout  the  whole  kingdome)  that  they  are  verily  Comchefu,
perswaded,  that  the  same  region,  of  all  others,  most
aboundeth  with  marchandise :  which  notwithstanding  is
to  be  understood  of  the  Orientall  regions :  albeit  there
VI  353  2

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

are  some  kindes  of  marchandise,  wherewith  the  land  of
China is better  stored then  any  other kingdom. This
region affordeth especially  sundry kinds of  mettals, of
which the chiefe, both in excellencie & in abundance,
Great  abun- Js  gold,  whereof  SO  many  Pezoes  are  brought  from  China
'^_^^'^^€ gold ^Q  India,  and  to  our  countrey  of  Japon,  that  I  heard  say,
that  in  one  and  the  same  ship,  this  present  yeere,  2000
such pieces  consisting  of  massie  gold,  as  the  Portugals
commonly  call  golden  loaves,  were  brought  unto  us  for
marchandise : and one  of  these  loaves  is  worth almost
100  duckats. Hence  it  is  that  in  the  kingdom  of  China
so  many  things  are  adorned  with  gold,  as  for  example,
beds, tables, pictures, images, litters wherein nice and
daintie dames  are  caried upon their servaunts backes.
Neither are these golden loaves onely  bought by the
Portugals,  but  also  great  plentie  of  gold-twine  and  leaves
of  gold :  for  the  Chinians  can  very  cunningly  beate  and
Great  store  of  extenuate  gold  into  plates  and  leaves. There  is  also  great
"  ^^^'  store  of  silver,  whereof  (that  I  may  omit  other  arguments)

it  is  no  small  demonstration,  that  every  yeere  there  are
brought  into  the  citie  commonly  called  Cantam  by  the
Portugal  marchants  to  buie  wares,  at  the  least  400  Ses-
tertium  thereof,  and  yet  nothing  in  a  maner  is  conveied
out  of  the  Chinian  kingdom  :  because  the  people  of  China
abounding  with  all  necessaries,  are  not  greatly  inquisitive
or  desirous  of  any  marchandise  from  other  kingdomes.
I  doe  here  omit  the  Silver  mines  whereof  there  are  great
numbers  in  China,  albeit  there  is  much  circumspection
used  in  digging  the  silver  thereout :  for  the  king  standeth
much  in  feare  least  it  may  bee  an  occasion  to  stirre  up
the  covetous  and  greedie  humour  of  many.  Nowe  their
silver  which  they  put  to  uses  is  for  the  most  part  passing
fine,  and  purified  from  all  drosse,  and  therefore  in  trying
it  they  use  great  diligence.  What  should  I  speake  of
their  iron,  copper,  lead,  tinne,  and  other  mettals,  and  also
of  their  quick-silver  ?  Of  all  which  in  the  realme  of
China  there  is  great  abundance,  and  from  thence  they  are
transported into divers  countreys. Hereunto may  bee

354

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590.
added  the  wonderfull  store  of  pearles,  which,  at  the  lie  Pearks.
of  Hainan,  are  found  in  shell-fishes  taken  very  cunningly
by certaine Divers, and doe much enlarge the kings
revenues. But now let us proceed unto the Silke or  Great  store  of
Bombycine  fleece,  whereof  there  is  great  plentie  in  China:  ^^^^^^"^kina.
so  that  even  as  the  husbandmen  labour  in  manuring  the
earth,  and  in  sowing  of  Rice ;  so  likewise  the  women  doe
employ  a  great  part  of  their  time  in  preserving  of  silke-
wormes,  and  in  keeming  and  weaving  of  Silke. Hence
it  is  that  every  yeere  the  King  and  Queene  with great
solemnitie  come  foorth  into  a  publique  place,  the  one  of
them  touching  a  plough,  and  the  other  a  Mulberie  tree,
with the leaves whereof  Silke-wormes are nourished :
and both  of  them by  this  ceremonie  encouraging both
men  and  women  unto  their  vocation  and  labour :  whereas
otherwise,  all  the  whole  yeere  throughout,  no  man  besides
the  principall  magistrates,  may  once  attaine  to  the  sight
of  the  king. Of  this  Silke  or  Bombycine  fleece  there  is
such abundance, that  three shippes for the most part
comming  out  of  India  to  the  port  of  Macao,  &  at  the  ^}^ke  brought
least one every yeere comming unto us, are laden  ^'^^^  J^pon.
especially  with  this  fraight,  and  it  is  used  not  onely  in
India,  but caried even unto Portugal. Neither is the
Fleet  it  selfe  onely  transported  thence,  but  also  divers  &
sundry  stufi^es  woven  thereof,  for  the  Chinians  do  greatly
excel  in  the  Art  of  weaving,  and  do  very  much  resemble
our  weavers of  Europe. Moreover the kingdom of
China  aboundeth  with  most  costlie  spices  &  odours,  and  5/?V^j,  Cam-
especially  with cynamom  (albeit not  comparable to the  ^  ^'T'
cynamom  of  Zeilan)  with  camphire  also  &  muske,  which
is very principal &  good. Muske deriveth his  name
from  a  beast  of  the  same  name  (which  beast  resembleth
a Bever) from the parts whereof brused & putrified
proceedeth a  most delicate & fragrant smel  which the
Portugals  highly esteem,  commonly  calling those parts
of  the foresaid beasts (because they are  like unto the
gorges  of  foules)  Papos,  &  convey  great  plenty  of  them  [II.  ii.  91.]
into  India,  &  to  us  of  Japon. But  who  would  beleeve,

355

A.D.
1590.

Cotton  wooll,
whereof  Cali-
cut-cloth is
made.

Three
qualities  of
porcellan.

Plants.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  there  were  so  much  gossipine  or  cotton-wool  in
China ;  whereof  such  variety  of  clothes  are  made  like
unto  linnen ;  which  we  our  selves  do  so  often  use,  &
which  also  is  conveied  by  sea  into  so  many  regions  ?
Let  us  now  intreat  of  that  earthen  or  pliable  matter
commonly  called  porcellan,  which  is  pure  white,  &  is  to
be  esteemed  the  best  stuffe  of  that  kind  in  the  whole
world :  wherof  vessels  of  all  kinds  are  very  curiously
framed.  1  say,  it  is  the  best  earthen  matter  in  all  the
world,  for  three  qualities ;  namely,  the  cleannesse,  the
beauty,  &  the  strength  thereof.  There  is  indeed  other
matter  to  be  found  more  glorious,  and  more  costly,  but
none  so  free  from  uncleannes,  and  so  durable :  this  I
adde,  in  regard  of  glasse,  which  indeed  is  immaculate
and  cleane,  but  may  easily  be  broken  in  pieces.  This
matter  is  digged,  not  thorowout  the  whole  region  of
China,  but  onely  in  one  of  the  fifteene  provinces  called
Quiansi,  wherein  continually  very  many  artificers  are
imployed  about  the  same  matter :  neither  doe  they  onely
frame  thereof  smaller  vessels,  as  dishes,  platters,  salt-
sellers,  ewers,  and  such  like,  but  also  certaine  huge
tunnes,  and  vessels  of  great  quantity,  being  very  finely
and  cunningly  wrought,  which,  by  reason  of  the  danger
and  difficulty  of  carriage,  are  not  transported  out  of  the
realme,  but  are  used  onely  within  it,  and  especially  in
the  kings  court.  The  beauty  of  this  matter  is  much
augmented  by  variety  of  picture,  which  is  layed  in  certaine
colours  upon  it,  while  it  is  yet  new,  golde  also  being-
added  thereunto,  which  maketh  the  foresayd  vessels  to
appeare  most  beautifull.  It  is  wonderfuU  how  highly  the
Portugals  do  esteeme  thereof,  seeing  they  do,  with  great
difficulty,  transport  the  same,  not  onely  to  us  of  Japon
and  into  India,  but  also  into  sundry  provinces  of  Europe.
Unto  the  marchandize  above-mentioned  may  be  added
divers  and  sundry  plants,  the  rootes  whereof  be  right
holesome  for  mens  bodies,  and  very  medicinable,  which
are  brought  unto  our  lies  of  Japon,  and  unto  many
other Hands, amongst the which that wood may be

356

A TREATISE OF CHINA  a.d.

1590.

reckoned,  which  (by  a  synechdoche)  is  called  The  wood
of  China,  being  of  notable  force  to  expell  out  of  mens
bodies  those humours, which would breed contagious
diseases. To  these  you  may  adde  sugar-canes  (for  in  the
realme  of  China  there  is  great  store  of  excellent  sugar)  Sugar.
which  is  conveyed  by  the  Portugals  very  plentifully,  both
into  our  countrey, and  also into India. My  speeches
uttered  immediatly  before  concerned  marchandize  onely,
in regard  whereof  this  kingdome is beneficiall not to
itselfe  alone,  but  most  profitable  to  many other  nations
also. As  for  those  fruits  which  pertaine  to  yerely  sus-
tenance and  common  food,  they  can  scarse  be  numbred ;
albeit,  of  those  three  commodities  which  they  of  Europe
so  greatly  account  of;  namely  of  cornes,  vines,  and  olives  China  in  a
the  land  of  China  is  not  very  capable :  for  the  Chinians  ^^^ff .
know  not  so  much  as the name  of  an  Olive  tree  (out  ^^^^^  ^^^^
of  the  fruit  whereof  oile is expressed) neither yet  the y  oile.
name  of  a  vine. The province of  Paquin  is not  alto-
gether destitute  of  wine,  but  whether  it  be  brought  from
other places, or there made, I  am not able  to say :
although  it  aboundeth  with  many  other,  and  those  not
unpleasant liquours,  which may serve in the  stead of
wine  it  selfe. Now,  as  touching  corne,  there  is  indeed
wheat  sowen  in  all  the  provinces,  howbeit  rise  is  in  farre
more  use  and  request  then  it :  and  so  in  regard  of  these
two  commodities  profitable  for  mans  life ;  namely,  wine
and  corne ;  the  kingdome  of  China  and  our  countrey  of
Japon  may  be  compared  together.

Leo. You  have  discoursed  (Michael)  of  the  fruitful-
nesse  of  China,  whereof  I  have  often  heard,  that  it  is  no
lesse pleasant than fruitful,  and I  have  bene especially  Chinian  maps.
induced  so  to  thinke,  at  the  sight  of  the  Chinian  maps.

Michael.  The  thing  it  selfe  agrees  right  well  with
the  picture :  for  they  that  have  scene  the  mediterran  or
inner  parts  of  the  kingdome  of  China,  do  report  it  to  be
a  most  amiable  countrey,  adorned  with  plenty  of  woods,
with  abundance  of  fruits  and  grasse,  and  with  woonderfull
variety  of  rivers, wherewith the Chinian kingdome  is

357

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590-

watered  like  a  garden ;  divers  of  which  rivers  doe  natur-
ally flowe,  and  others  by  arte  and  industry  are  derived
into  sundry  places.  But  now  I  will  intreat  of  the
tranquillity  and  peace  of  China,  after  I  have  spoken  a
word  or  two  concerning  the  maners  of  the  inhabitants.
This  nation  is  indued  with  excellent  wit  and  dexterity  for
the  attaining  of  all  artes,  and,  being  very  constant  in  their
owne  customes,  they  lightly  regard  the  customes  or
The  dtsposi-  fashions  of  other  people.  They  use  one  and  the  same
tions  y  kinde  of  vesture,  yet  so,  that  there  is  some  distinction

^Chinians  ^  betweene  the  apparell  of  the  magistrate  &  of  the  common
subject.  They  all  of  them  do  weare  long  haire  upon
their  heads,  and,  after  the  maner  of  women,  do  curiously
keame  their  dainty  locks  hanging  downe  to  the  ground,
and,  having  twined  and  bound  them  up,  they  cover  them
with  calles,  wearing  sundry  caps  thereupon,  according
to  their  age  and  condition.  It  seemeth  that  in  olde
Their  time  one  language was common to  all the  provinces :

language.  notwithstanding,  by  reason  of  variety  of  pronunciation,  it
is  very  much  altered,  and  is  divided  into  sundry  idiomes
or  proprieties  of  speech,  according  to  the  divers  pro-
vinces :  howbeit,  among  the  magistrates,  and  in  publike
assemblies  of  judgement,  there  is  one  and  the  very  same
kinde  of  language  used  thorowout  the  whole  realme,
from  the  which  (as  I  have  sayd)  the  speech  of  ech  pro-
Their  loyaltie  vince  difFereth  not  a  little.  Moreover  this  people  is
unto  their  most  loyall  and  obedient  unto  the  king  and  his  magis-
supenours.  j-j-ates,  which  is  the  principall  cause  of  their  tranquillity
&  peace.  For  whereas  the  common  sort  doe  apply
themselves  unto  the  discretion  and  becke  of  inferiour
magistrates,  and  the  inferiour  magistrates  of  the  superiour,
and  the  superiour  magistrates  of  the  king  himselfe,  fram-
ing and  composing  all  their  actions  and  affaires  unto
that  levell :  a  world  it  is  to  see,  in  what  equability  and
indifferency  of  justice  all  of  them  do  leade  their  lives,
and  how  orderly  the  publike  lawes  are  administred.
Which  thing  notwithstanding  shall  be  handled  more  at
large,  when  we  come  to  intreat  of  the  government.

358

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590.

Linus. Tell  us  now  (Michael)  of  the  industry  of  that  Their  labor-
people,  whereof  we  have  heard  great  reports.  '^°^^  industry.

Michael.  Their  industry  is  especially  to  be  discerned
in  manuary  artes  and  occupations,  and  therein  the
Chinians  do  surpasse  most  of  these  Easterly  nations.
For  there  are  such  a  number  of  artificers  ingeniously  and
cunningly  framing  sundry  devices  out  of  golde,  silver,
and  other  mettals,  as  likewise  of  stone,  wood,  and  other
matters  convenient  for  mans  use,  that  the  streets  of  cities
being  replenished  with  their  shops  and  fine  workeman-
ship,  are  very  woonderfull  to  beholde.  Besides  whom
also  there  are  very  many  Painters,  using  either  the  Painting.
pensill  or  the  needle  (of  which  the  last  sort  are  called
Embrotherers)  and  others  also  that  curiously  worke
golde-twine  upon  cloth  either  of  linnen  or  of  cotton :
whose  operations  of  all  kinds  are  diligently  conveyed  by
the  Portugals  into  India.  Their  industry  doth  no  lesse
appeare  in  founding  of  gunnes  and  in  making  of  gun-  Gunnes.
powder,  whereof  are  made  many  rare  and  artificial!
fire-works.  To  these  may  be  added  the  arte  of  Printing,  Printing.
albeit  their  letters  be  in  maner  infinite  and  most  difficult,
the  portraitures  whereof  they  cut  in  wood  or  in  brasse,
and  with  marvellous  facilitie  they  dayly  publish  huge
multitudes  of  books.  Unto  these  mechanicall  &  illi-
berall  crafts  you  may  adde  two  more ;  that  is  to  say,
navigation  and  discipline  of  warre ;  both  of  which  have  Navigation.
bene  in  ancient  times  most  diligently  practised  by  the
inhabitants  of  China :  for  (as  we  have  before  signified  in
the  third  dialogue)  the  Chinians  sailing  even  as  farre  as
India,  subdued  some  part  therof  unto  their  owne
dominion :  howbeit  afterward,  least  they  should  diminish
the  forces  of  their  realme  by  dispersing  them  into  many
provinces,  altering  their  counsell,  they  determined  to  con-
taine  themselves  within  their  owne  limits :  within  which
limits  (as  I  have  sayd)  there  were  in  olde  time  vehement
and  cruell  warres,  both  betweene  the  people  of  China  _  _
themselves,  and  also  against  the  Tartarian  king,  who  t»ranni%ed
invaded  their  kingdome, and by himselfe and  his  sue-  over  China.

359

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

cessours,  for  a  long  season,  usurped  the  government
thereof.  Howbeit  the  kings  of  the  Tartarian  race  being
worne  out,  and  their  stocke  and  family  being  utterly-
abolished,  the  Chinians  began  to  lift  up  their  heads,  and
to  advance  themselves,  injoying  for  these  200  yeeres
last  past  exceeding  peace  and  tranquillity,  and  at  this
day  the  posterity  of  the  same  king  that  expelled  the
Tartars,  with  great  dignity  weareth  the  crowne,  and
wieldeth  the  royall  scepter.  Albeit  therefore  the  people
of  China  (especially  they  that  inhabit  Southerly  from  the
province  of  Paquin)  are,  for  the  most  part,  by  reason
of  continuall  ease  and  quiet,  growen  effeminate,  and
their  courage  is  abated,  notwithstanding  they  would
proove  notable  and  brave  souldiers,  if  they  joyned  use
and  exercise  unto  their  naturall  fortitude.  As  a  man
may  easily  observe  in  them,  that  maintaine  continuall
warres  against  the  most  barbarous  and  cruel  Tartars.
Howbeit  in  this  kingdome  of  China  there  is  so  great
Military  regard  of  military  discipline,  that  no  city  nor  towne
discipline.  there  is  destitute  of  a  garison,  the  captaines  and  gover-
nours  keeping  ech  man  his  order ;  which  all  of  them,  in
every  province,  are  subject  unto  the  kings  lieutenant
general!  for  the  warres,  whom  they  call  Chumpin,  and
yet  he  himselfe  is  subject  unto  the  Tutan  or  viceroy.
Let  us  now  come  unto  that  arte,  v/hich  the  Chinians
do  most  of  all  professe,  and  which  we  may,  not  unfitly.
The  literature  call  literature  or  learning.  For  although  it  be  commonly
of  China.  reported,  that  many  liberall  sciences,  and  especially
naturall  and  morall  phylosophy  are  studied  in  China,
and  that  they  have  Universities  there,  wherein  such  in-
genuous artes  are  delivered  and  taught,  yet,  for  the  most
part,  this  opinion  is  to  be  esteemed  more  popular  then
true :  but  I  will  declare,  upon  what  occasion  this  conceit
first  grew.  The  people  of  China  doe,  above  all  things,
professe  the  arte  of  literature ;  and  learning  it  most  dili-
gently, they  imploy  themselves  a  long  time  and  the
better  part  of  their  age  therein.  For  this  cause,  in  all
cities  and  townes,  yea,  and  in  pety  villages  also,  there  are

360

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590-
certaine schole-masters hired for stipends to instruct
children :  and  their  literature  being  (as  ours  in  Japon  is
also)  in  maner  infinite,  their  children  are  put  to  schole
even  from  their  infancy  and  tender  yeeres,  from  whence
notwithstanding such  are  taken  away,  as  are  judged  to
be  unfit  for  the same purpose, and are trained  up  to
marchandise  or  to  manuary  sciences :  but  the  residue  do
so  dedicate  themselves to the study of  learning, that
(a  strange  thing  it  is  to consider) being conversant  in
the  principall  books,  they  will  easily  tel  you,  if  they  be
asked  the question,  how many  letters  be conteined  in
every  page,  and  where ech  letter  is placed. Now,  for
the  greater  progresse  and  increase  of  learning, they  (as
the  maner  is  in  Europe)  do  appoint  three  degrees  to  the  "^^^^^  degrees
attaining  of  noble sciences :  that is to say, the  lowest,  ^"  «'^'«^«<g'-
the  middle  degree, and the  highest. Graduates  of  the
first  degree  are called Siusai, of  the second Quiugin,
and of  the  third  Chinzu. And  in ech city or  walled  [II.  ii.  93.]
towne  there  is  a  publique  house  called  the  Schoole,  and
unto  that  all  they  doe  resort  from  all  private  and  pety-
schooles that  are minded  to  obtaine the first degree ; ^ he  first
where  they  do  amplifie  a  sentence  or  theame  propounded  ^^S^'^^-
unto  them  by  some  magistrate  : and  they,  whose  stile  is
more  elegant  and  refined,  are,  in  ech  city,  graced  with  the
first  degree. Of  such  as  aspire  unto  the  second  degree  "^^^  j^^ow^
triall  is  made  onely  in  the  metropolitan  or  principall  city  '^'^-S''^^-
of  the  province,  whereunto,  they  of  the  first  degree,  every
third  yere,  have  recourse,  and,  in  one  publike  house  or
place  of  assembly,  doe,  the  second  time,  make  an  oration
of  another sentence  obscurer  then  the  former,  and  doe
undergo a more severe examination. Now, there is
commonly  such  an  huge  multitude  of  people,  that  this
last  yere,  in  the  foresayd  famous  city  of  Cantam,  by  reason
of  the incredible assembly of persons flocking  to that
publike  act  or  commencement,  at  the  first  entrance  of  the
doores,  there  were  many  troden  under  foot,  and  quelled
to death, as we have bene most certainly informed, cj-y  ^^^y^  ^^^
Moreover  they  that  sue  for  the  highest  degree  are  subject  highest  degree.

361

A.D.

1590.

Note  the  ex-
traordinary
honor  vouch-
safed by  the
great  King  of
China  upon
his  learned
graduates.

Morall
philosophy.

Natural!
philosophy.

Excellent
astronomers
in  China.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

unto  a  most  severe  and  exact  censure,  whereby  they  are
to  be  examined  at  the  Kings  Court  onely,  and  that  also
every  third  yere  next  insuing  the  sayd  yere  wherein
graduates  of  the  second  degree  are  elected  in  ech  province,
and,  a  certaine  number  being  prescribed  unto  every
particular  province,  they  do  ascend  unto  that  highest
pitch  of  dignity,  which  is  in  so  great  regard  with  the
king  himselfe,  that  the  three  principall  graduates  do,  for
honours  sake,  drinke  off  a  cup  filled  even  with  the  Kings
owne  hand,  and  are  graced  with  other  solemnities.  Out
of  this  order  the  chiefe  magistrates  are  chosen :  for  after
that  they  have  attained  unto  this  third  degree,  being  a
while  trained  up  in  the  lawes  of  the  realme,  and  in  the
precepts  of  urbanity,  they  are  admitted  unto  divers
functions.  Neither  are  we  to  thinke  that  the  Chinians
be  altogether  destitute  of  other  artes.  For,  as  touching
morall  philosophy,  all  those  books  are  fraught  with  the
precepts  thereof,  which,  for  their  instructions  sake,  are
alwayes  conversant  in  the  hands  of  the  foresayd  students,
wherein  such  grave  and  pithy  sentences  are  set  downe,
that,  in  men  void  of  the  light  of  the  Gospell,  more  can
not  be  desired.  They  have  books  also  that  intreat  of
things  and  causes  naturall,  but  herein  it  is  to  be  supposed,
that  aswell  their  books  as  ours  do  abound  with  errors.
There  be  other  books  among  them,  that  discourse  of  herbs
and  medicines,  and  others  of  chivalry  and  martiall  affaires.
Neither  can  I  here  omit,  that  certaine  men  of  China
(albeit  they  be  but  few,  and  rare  to  be  found)  are
excellent  in  the  knowledge  of  astronomy,  by  which  know-
ledge of  theirs  the  dayes  of  the  new  moone  incident  to
every  moneth  are  truely  disposed  and  digested,  and  are
committed  to  writing  and  published :  besides,  they  doe
most  infallibly  foretell  the  eclipses  of  the  Sun  and  Moone:
and  whatsoever  knowledge  in  this  arte  we  of  Japon  have,
it  is  derived  from  them.

Leo.  We  doe  freely  confesse  that  (Michael)  sithens
our  books  intreating  of  the  same  arte  are,  a  great  part
of  them,  written in the characters  or letters of  China.

362

A TREATISE OF CHINA  a.d.

1590.
But now, instruct  you us as touching their  maner of  The politike
government, wherein  the Chinians  are sayd greatly to  S^^^^^^^^^  "f

11  \^  fit  flu,

excel!.

Michael. That,  that,  in very deed, is their  chiefe

arte, and unto that all their  learning and exercise of

letters  is  directed. Whereas  therefore,  in  the  kingdome

of China, one onely king beares rule over  so many

provinces,  it  is  strange  what  a  number  of  Magistrates  are

by  him  created  to  administer  publique  affaires. For  (to

omit  them  which  in  ech  Towne  and  City  have  jurisdiction

over  the  townesmen  and  citizens)  there  are  three  principall  Thj-ee

Magistrates  in  every  province. The  first  is  he  that  hath  P^^^'^^Pf .
Y 1 •  • • ^^  1 •  11 1 ^ 1  1 magistrates  m

to  deale  m  cases  crimmall,  and  is  called  Lrancnasu  :  the  ech  province.

second is the  Kings  Fosterer,  and is  called  Puchinsu :

the  third  is  the  Lieutenant-generall  for  the  warres,  named,

as  we  sayd  before,  Chumpin. These  three  therefore  have

their  place  of  residence  in  the  chiefe  City  of  the  province  :

and  the  two  former  have  certaine  associates  of  their  owne

order, but of  inferiour authority, appointed in divers

Cities  and  Townes,  unto  whom,  according  to  the  variety

of  causes, the  Governours  of  Townes,  and  the Maiors

of  Cities doe appeale. Howbeit  the three forenamed

Magistrates are in subjection unto the  Tutan,  that  is,

the  Vice-roy,  ordained  in  ech  province. And  all  these

Magistrates beare  office for the space  of  three yeeres

together :  yet  so,  that  for  the  governing  of  ech  province,

not  any  of  the  same  province,  but  strangers,  that  is,  men

of  another  province,  are  selected :  whereof  it  commeth  to

passe, that  the Judges may  give  sentence  with  a  farre

more  entire  and  incorrupt  minde,  then  if  they  were  among

their  owne kinsefolke  and  allies. Over  and  besides  all

these,  there  is  an  annuall  or  yeerely  Magistrate,  which  is

called  Chaien,  whose  duety  it  is  to  make  inquisition  of

all  crimes,  and  especially  the  crimes  of  Magistrates,  and

also  to punish common offences : but concerning the

faults  of  the  great magistrates to admonish the king

himselfe. Of  this  order,  every  yere,  are  sent  out  of  the

Kings  Court,  for  ech  province,  one ;  and  going  over  all

363

A.D,
1590.

[II.  ii.  94.]

Two  Senates
or  Counsels
continually
holden  in
China,

The  causes
of  peace  in
China.

Learning  the
only  step  to
honour  in
China.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  Cities  and  Townes  thereof,  they  do  most  diligently
ransacke  and  serch  out  all  crimes,  and  upon  them  which
are  imprisoned  they  inflict  due  punishment,  or,  being
found  not  guilty,  they  dismisse  them  unpunished.  Hence
it  is,  that  all  Magistrates  greatly  fearing  to  be  called  in
question  by  the  Chaien  are  well  kept  within  the  limits  of
their  callings.  Besides  all  these  Magistrates  there  is  at
either  Court,  namely  in  the  North,  and  in  the  South,  a
Senate  or  honourable  assembly  of  grave  counsellours,  unto
the  which,  out  of  all  provinces,  according  to  the  neerenesse
and  distance  of  the  place,  affaires  of  greater  weight  and
moment  are  referred,  and  by  their  authority  divers
Magistrates  are  created :  howbeit  the  managing  and
expedition  of  principall  affaires  is  committed  unto  the
Senate  of  Paquin.  Moreover  there  are  every  yeere
certaine  Magistrates  appointed  in  ech  province,  to  goe
unto  the  king :  and  every  third  yeere  all  the  Governours
of  Cities  and  of  Townes  do  visit  him  at  once,  what  time
triall  is  made  of  them  that  aspire  unto  the  third  degree :
upon  which  occasion  there  is  at  the  same  time  an
incredible  number  of  people  at  the  Kings  Court.  By
reason  of  this  excellent  order  and  harmony  of  Magistrates
placed  one  under  another,  it  can  scarse  be  imagined,  what
sweet  peace  and  tranquility  flourisheth  thorowout  the
whole,  realme,  especially  sithens,  after  speedy  inquisition,
persons  that  are  guilty  be  put  (as  the  maner  is  there)  to
the  punishment  of  the  bastonado  :  neither  yet  are  suits  or
actions  any  long  time  delayed.  Also  it  is  not  to  be
omitted,  that  for  the  obtaining  of  any  dignity  or  magis-
tracy, the  way  is  open,  without  all  respect  of  gentry  or
blood,  unto  all  men,  if  they  be  learned,  and  especially
if  they  have  attained  unto  the  third  and  highest  degree
aforesayd.  Neither  can  it  be  expressed  how  obedient
and  duetifuU  the  common  sort  are  unto  their  Magistrates,
and  with  what  magnificence  and  pompe  the  sayd  Magis-
trates come  abroad :  for  the  most  part  of  them  have
fiftie  or  threescore  Sergeants  attending  upon  them,  and
going  before  them, two  and  two in  a  ranke : some  of

364

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590.
them  carrying  Halberds, Maces,  and  Battle-axes :  some  T^he  stately  y
trailing  yron  chaines  upon the  ground :  others  holding  M^^^'^^^^^
arreat roddes or staves of  a certaine kinde of  reede,  ^J°'^^^^°^ y

1  •  1  1 r  •  1 1 • 1 ■ 1 1  \ the  Lmntan

wherewith  maleractours  are  punished,  in  their  hands :  and  magistrates.

two there  are  that carry, inclosed  in  a  case,  the  Kings

seale  peculiar  for  ech  office :  and  many  others  also,  that

shew  sundry  spectacles  unto  the  people :  whereunto  may

be added the horrible out-cries and showtes, which

betweene  whiles  they  utter,  to  strike  a  terrour  into  the

hearts  of  all  men  : and  at  length  come  the  Magistrates

themselves,  being  carried  in  a  throne  upon  the  backs  of

foure men, sixe men, or eight men, according to the

dignity  of  their  office. Now,  as  concerning  their  houses,  The  houses  of

they  are  very  large  and  stately,  being  built  and  furnished  ^^^  Chtman

with  all  necessary  stuffe,  at  the  Kings  owne  cost,  in  the  ^^^''^  ^'^  ^^'

which,  so  long  as their  magistracy  lasteth,  they  leade  a

brave and  an honourable life. The sayd houses are

without  variety  of  stories  one  above  another,  which in

the  kingdome  of  China  and  in  our  lies  of  Japon  also  are

not ordinarily  used  for  habitation,  but either  to  keepe

watch  and ward, or els for solace  and  recreations  sake

(for  the  which  purposes,  eight  most  lofty  turrets  of  nine

stories high are built) or  els  for  the  defence  of  Cities.

Howbeit in other regardes these buildings doe shew

foorth  no  small  magnificence  :  for  they  have  their  cisternes

for the receit of  raine-water, which are  adorned with

beautifull  trees,  set  in  order,  round  about  them  :  and  they

have  also  their  places  designed  for  the  administration  of

justice, and divers other convenient roomes to bestow

their wives and  families  in. Within  the  doores  of  the

foresayd  habitations  a  certaine  number  of  Sergeants  and

officers,  having  cabbins  or  little  houses  allotted  them  on

both sides,  doe  alwayes  give their attendance ; and so

long  as  matters  of  judgement are in  deciding,  they  be

alwayes ready at hand, that, at the direction of  the

Magistrates they may either beat malefactours, or  by

torments  constraine  them  to  tell  the  trueth. The  savd  ^a

A  /r •  11  1 •  1  • 1  J Ine  magt-

Magistrates also have their peculiar barges wherein  to  strates  barges.

365

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

take  the  water ;  being  in  breadth  and  length  not  much
unlike  to  the  galleys  of  Europe,  but  for  swiftnesse
and  multitude  of  oares,  farre  inferiour  unto  them.  The
rowers,  sitting  upon  galleries  without  the  hatches  or
compasse  of  the  barge,  doe  moove  it  on  forward  with
their  oares :  whereupon  it  commeth  to  passe,  that  the
middle  part  of  the  barge  affoordeth  sufficient  roome  for
the  Magistrates  themselves  to  abide  in,  containing
chambers  therein  almost  as  convenient  and  handsome,
as  in  any  of  their  foresayd  publique  houses,  together  with
butteries  and  kitchins,  and  such  other  places  necessary
^ for  the  provision  and  stowage  of  victuals.

Leo.  All  these  things  agree  right  well  with  the  reports,
which  we  have  heard  of  the  stately  and  renowmed  king-
dome  of  China :  I  would  now  right  gladly  know  some-
what concerning  the  order  which  is  observed  in  the
obtaining  of  magistracies.

Michael. You have enquired of a matter most
woorthy  to  be  knowen,  which  I  had  almost  omitted  to
The  maner entreat  of. The  Chinians  therefore  doe  use  a  kinde  of
of  electing gradation in advancing men unto sundry places of
^Mna^  ^^  ^"  authority,  which  for  the  most  part  is  performed  by  the
Senatours of  Paquin. For  first they  are  made  Judges
of  Townes  :  then  of  Cities : afterward  they  are elected
to be of that order, which decreeth punishments in
cases criminall without further appeale, or of their
order,  that are the kings fosterers. And in both of
Degrees  unto these  Orders,  which  are  very  honourable,  there  are  many
places and degrees, so that from the inferiour place
they  must  ascend  unto  the  superiour,  untill  they have
attained  unto  the  highest  dignity  of  all :  and  immediatly
[II.  ii.  95.] after that they  come to be  Vice-royes. Howbeit this
gradation is not  alwayes accomplished in one  and the
same  province,  but  in  changing  their  offices  they  change
places and provinces also. Moreover, next after the
office of  Vice-roy  they  are  capable  to  be  chosen Sena-
tours  of  Nanquin,  and  last  of  all  to  be  elected  into  the
Senate of  Paquin. Now, there is such an order and

366

honour.

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590-
methode  observed  in  the  ascending  unto  these  dignities,
that  all  men  may  easily  conjecture,  what  office  any  one
is  to  undertake.  And  there  is  so  great  diligence  and
celerity  used  for  the  substitution  of  one  into  the  roome
of  another,  that,  for  the  same  purpose,  messengers  are
dispatched  by  land,  upon  swift  post-horses,  unto  divers  Ridingpost.
provinces,  almost  twenty  dayes  journey  from  the  Kings
Court.  And,  to  be  short,  there  is  such  district  severity
in  degrading  those  that  unjustly  or  negligently  demeane
themselves,  from  an  honourable  unto  an  inferiour  and
base  office,  or  altogether  in  depriving  them  of  the  kings
authority :  that  all  Magistrates  doe  stand  in  feare  of
nothing  in  the  world  more  then  of  that.  The  same
order,  almost,  is  observed  among  the  Captaines  and
Lieu-tenants  generall  for  the  warres :  except  onely  in
them,  that  their  birth  and  offspring  is  respected :  for
many  there  be,  who  descending  by  parentage  from  such  Martiall
men  as  have  in  times  past  atchieved  brave  exploits  in  ^W^^^^^-
warfare,  so  soone  as  they  come  to  sufficient  yeeres,  are
created  Centurions,  Colonels,  and  Governours,  untill  at
last  they  attaine  to  be  Lieu-tenants  generall  and  Pro-
tectours  of  some  whole  province :  who  notwithstanding
(as  I  have  sayd)  are  in  all  things  subject  unto  the  Vice-
roy. All  the  foresayd  Magistrates  both  of  warre  and
of  peace  have  a  set  number  of  attendants  allotted  unto
them,  enjoying  a  stipend,  and  carying  certaine  ensignes
and  peculiar  badges  of  their  office :  and  (besides  the
ordinary  watch,  which  souldiers  appointed  for  the  same
purpose  doe  in  the  night  season,  after  the  City  gates
be  shut,  keepe  in  their  forts)  wheresoever  any  Magistrate
is,  either  at  his  house  or  in  his  barge,  the  sayd  attendants
striking  upon  a  cymball  of  brasse,  at  certaine  appointed
times,  do  keepe  most  circumspect  and  continual!  watch
and  ward  about  his  person.

Linus.  You  have  (Michael)  sufficiently  discoursed  of
the  Magistrates :  informe  us  now  of  the  king  himselfe,
whose  name  is  so  renowmed  and  spread  abroad.

Michael.  Concerning  this  matter  I  will  say  so  much

367

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

onely  as  by  certaine  rumours  hath  come to  my  know-

The  king  of ledge :  for  of  matters  appertaining  unto  the  kings  Court

Lhina.  ^^ have no eye-witnesses, sithens the fathers of the

society have not as yet proceeded unto Paquin, who

so soone as (by Gods assistance) they  shall there be

arrived, will by their  letters more fully advertise us.

The  king  of  China  therefore  is  honoured  with  woonder-

full reverence and submission thorowout his whole

Realme : and  whensoever  any  of  his  chiefe Magistrates

Van-Svi. speaketh  unto  him,  he  calleth  him  VAN-SVI,  signifying

thereby  that  he  wisheth  tenne  thousands  of  yeeres  unto

him. The  succession  of  the  kingdome  dependeth  upon

The  succession  the  bloud  royall :  for  the  eldest  sonne  borne  of  the  kings

of  the  crowne.  ^^^^  ^^^  lawful!  wife  obtaineth  the  kingdome after  his

fathers  decease :  neither  doe  they  deprive  themselves  of

the  kingly  authority  in  their  life  time  (as  the  maner  is

in our  Hands  of  Japon)  but  the  custome  of  Europe  is

there observed. Now, that the safety  and life of  the

The  kings ]^ing  j^^y  stand  in  more  security,  his  yoonger  brethren,

■^jonger  reth- ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  borne  of  concubines  are  not  permitted  to

T671  •

live  in  the  kings  Court :  but  places  of  habitation  are  by
the  king  himselfe  assigned  unto  them  in  divers  provinces
farre  distant  asunder,  where  they  dwell  most  com-
modiously,  being  comparable  unto  kings  for  their  build-
ings and  revenues :  howbeit  they  exercise  no  authority
over  the  people,  but  all  the  government  of  those  Cities
wherein  they  dwell,  concerneth  the  Magistrates,  who
notwithstanding  have  the  sayde  Princes  in  high  regard
and  honour,  and  doe  visit  them  twise  in  a  moneth,  and
salute  them  kneeling  upon  their  knees,  and  bowing  their
faces  downe  to  the  earth :  and  yet  they  communicate
nothing  unto  them  as  touching  the  administration  of  the
Common-wealth.  These  are  they  which  may  properly
be  called  the  Peeres  or  Princes  of  the  Realme  of  China :
for  they  derive  their  houses  and  revenues  unto  their
posterity,  and  so  are  these  royall  families  continually  pre-
served. But  to  returne  unto  the  king  himselfe,  hee  is
most  chary  in  observing  the  Chinian  lawes  and  customes,

368

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590-
and diligently  exerciseth  himselfe in  learning so much

as  concernes his  estate,  sheweth  himselfe  dayly  unto  his
chiefe Magistrates, and communeth of matters  apper-
taining to  the  publique  commodity  of  the  Realme. His
palace  is  of  woonderfuU  largenesse  and  capacity,  out  of
the which he very seldome takes his progresse ; and
whensoever he doeth so, there are twelve chariots  Tv^elve
brought foorth,  all of  them most  like one to another  '^'^^^^°^^'
both in  workemanship and  in  value,  that no man may
discerne in which the king himselfe is placed. He
foUoweth in religion especially the opinions of the  The  idolatrous
Magistrates,  attributingf divine power  unto  heaven  and  ^f.  ^^"^  ^  ^  ^
earth  as  unto  the  parents  of  all,  and  with  great  solemnity
sacrificing  unto  them. He  hath  divers  most  sumptuous
Temples  dedicated  unto  his  ancestours,  whereunto  like-
wise  he  ascribeth divine honour,  and yet ceaseth hee
not to  favour  Priests of  other sects, yea  hee erecteth
Temples  unto  their  Patrons,  endowing  them  with  most
rich revenues ; and so often as any urgent necessity
requireth, he enjoynes continuall fastings and prayers  [H.  ii.  96.]
unto them : and after this  sort  he doeth in a maner
patronize all the idolatrous sects of  his Realme, and
shewing himselfe ready to embrace any false religion
whatsoever, he liveth in sundry  and manifolde kindes
of  superstition. Out  of  all  the  former  particulars  by  me  '^^^  "^^^^
alledged,  you  may  easily  coniecture  that  the  administra-  S°^^J^^^"  V

°  r 1 1  • 1  V  /--I  •  1 1 r 1  China  most

tion  or  the  kmgdome  or  Lhma  doeth,  tor  the  most  part,  agreeable  to
agree  with  the  instinct  of  nature,  authority  being  com-  the  instinct  of
mitted,  not  unto  rude  and  unskilfull  persons,  but  unto  nature.
such  as  have  beene  conversant  in  the  use  and exercise
or  learning,  yea,  and in promoting  learned men unto
magistracies,  great  consideration  is  had  of  their  wisedome,
justice,  and  of  other  vertues  esteemed  by  the  Chinians :
wherefore  the  way  being  open  for  all  men,  without  any
respect of  degree or  parentage,  to obtaine any  of  the
foresayd dignities, it can not be but that this most
mighty  and famous kingdome must needes enjoy ex-
ceeding peace  and  tranquillity.

VI  369  2  A

A.D.

1590.

The  five
vertues  prin-
cipally es-
teemed among
the  Chinians.

Urbanity.

The  Chinians
great  piety
towards  their
parents.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Leo.  I  would  nowe  (Michael)  right  gladly  understand,
what  kinde  of  urbanity  or  civill  demeanour  both  the
common  people  and  the  Magistrates  doe  use  one
towardes  another :  for  it  is  not  likely  that  where  such
due  administration  of  justice  is,  common  civility,  which
so  well  beseem eth  all  men,  should  be  wanting.

Michael.  You  have  hit  even  the  very  naile  on  the
head :  for  among  the  five  vertues,  which  the  Chinians
principally  regard,  urbanity  or  courtesy  is  one ;  the  rest
are  piety,  a  thankefull  remembrance  of  benefites,  true
dealing  in  contracts  or  bargaines,  and  wisedome  in
atchieving  of  matters :  with  the  praises  and  commenda-
tions of  which  vertues  the  Chinian  bookes  are  full
fraught.  Now  as  touching  their  urbanity,  it  is  much
unlike  unto  ours  in  Japan,  and  unto  that  of  Europe:
howbeit  under  two  principall  kindes  the  rule  of  their
urbanity  or  courtesie  may  be  comprehended :  whereof
one  is  observed  betweene  equals,  and  the  other  betweene
superiours  and  inferiours.  For  when  men  of  equall
dignity  meet  together,  they  stand  bending  their  backes,
and  bowing  their  heads  downe  to  the  ground,  and  this
they  doe  either  once  or  twise,  or  sometimes  thrise.
Now,  when  the  inferiour  meets  with  his  superiour,  the
sayd  inferiour,  for  the  most  part  kneeling  lowly  on  his
knees,  enclineth  his  countenance  downe  to  the  earth.
But  how  often  and  when  this  obeizance  is  to  be  per-
formed it  is  woonderfull  what  a  number  of  rules  and
prescriptions  are  set  downe,  which  to  recount  would
require  a  long  time.  Somewhat  also  I  will  say  as  touch-
ing their  piety,  and  especially  of  the  piety  which  they
use  towards  their  parents,  which  verily  is  so  exceeding
great,  that  for  the  space  of  three  whole  yeres  together,
the  sonnes  being  cladde  in  mourning  vestures  doe
bewaile  the  death  of  their  parents,  which  duety  is  per-
formed not  onely  by  the  common  sort,  but  even  by  all
the  Magistrates  themselves,  and  that  most  curiously  and
diligently.  And,  that  all  men  may  wholly  give  their
attendance  unto  this  businesse,  it  is  provided  by  a  most

370

A TREATISE OF CHINA  ad.

1590-
inviolable  law  among  the  Chinians,  that  Magistrates,  upon
the  death  of  their  parents,  must  foorthwith  renounce  their
authority,  and  three  whole  yeeres,  for  the  performance  of
their  fathers  exequies,  must  betake  themselves  unto  a
private  kinde  of  living :  which  also  is  most  duely  put  in
practise  by  the  Senatours  of  the  Kings  owne  Councell.
For  albeit  a  man  be  right  gracious  in  the  eyes  of  his
Prince,  yea,  and  such  an  one,  as  upon  whom  the  adminis-
tration of  the  Realme  doeth  principally  depend ;  yet
having  heard  of  the  death  of  his  parents,  that  is,  of  his
father  or  his  mother,  he  hies  himselfe  immediatly  home
to  solemnize  their  funerals :  insomuch  that  if  the  king
would  retaine  him  still  in  his  office,  he  should  be  esteemed
by  the  people,  as  a  transgressour  of  the  lawes  and  customes
of  China :  which  accident  (as  it  is  recorded)  in  ancient
times  fel  out  even  so.  For  whenas  a  certain  king  most  A  memorable
familiarly  used  a  certaine  Senatour  of  his  about  the  ^^°^'y-
managing  and  expedition  of  publique  affaires,  and  under-,
standing  well  how  necessary  the  helpe  of  his  foresayd
Senatour  was,  would  gladly,  after  the  death  of  his  father,
have  retained  him  still  in  his  office :  yet  a  certaine  other
man,  being  a  welwiller  unto  the  Chinian  lawes,  could  in
no  case  abide  it,  but  checking  his  Prince  with  sharpe
rebukes,  objected  the  transgression  of  the  law  against
him.  The  king  waxing  wroth  menaced  present  death
unto  the  man :  but  when  the  party  being  no  wit  danted
with  the  terrour  of  death,  persisted  still  in  his  sayings,
the  king  changing  his  determination  dismissed  the
Senatour  to  mourne  for  his  father,  but  as  for  his  repre-
hender  he  advanced  him  unto  an  higher  dignity.

Linus.  I  perceive  (Michael)  that  drawing  to  an  end  of
these  dialogues,  and  being  weary  of  your  long  race,  you
begin  to  affect  brevity :  yet  let  it  not  seeme  troublesome
unto  you  to  speake  somewhat  of  the  religion  of  China, The  religion
which  onely  thing  seemes  to  be  wanting  in  this  present  of^hma.
dialogue.

Michael. I confesse indeed that I endevour to be
briefe,  not  so  much  in  regard  of  wearisomnesse,  as  for

371

A.D.
1590.

[II.  ii.  97.]
Three  prin-
cipall  sectes
among  the
Chinians.

Confucius
authour  of  the
first  sect.

The  summe  of
Confucius  his
doctrine.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

feare  least  I  have  bene  over  tedious  unto  you :  howbeit  I
will  not  faile  but  accomplish  that  which  I  have  under-
taken, and  (according  to  your  request)  adde  somewhat
more  concerning  religion.  Whereas  therefore  the  king-
dome  of  China  hath  hitherto  bene  destitute  of  true
religion,  and  now  the  first  beginnings  thereof  are  included
in  most  narrow  bounds,  that  nation  being  otherwise  a
people  most  ingenious,  and  of  an  extraordinary  and  high
capacity,  hath  alwayes  lived  in  great  errours  and  ignorance
of  the  trueth,  being  distracted  into  sundry  opinions,  and
following  manifolde  sects.  And  among  these  sects  there
are  three  more  famous  then  the  rest :  the  first  is  of  them
that  professe  the  doctrine  of  one  Confucius  a  notable
philosopher.  This  man  (as  it  is  reported  in  the  history
of  his  life)  was  one  of  most  upright  and  incorrupt  maners,
whereof  he  wrote  sundry  treatises  very  pithily  and  largely,
which  above  all  other  books,  are  seriously  read  and  per-
used by  the  Chinians.  The  same  doctrine  do  all  Magis-
trates embrace,  and  others  also  that  give  their  mindes  to
the  study  of  letters,  a  great  part  whereof  Confucius  is
sayd  to  have  invented :  and  he  is  had  in  so  great  honour,
that  all  his  followers  and  clients,  upon  the  dayes  of  the
new  and  full  Moone,  doe  assemble  themselves  at  the
common  Schoole,  which  I  have  above  mentioned,  and
before  his  image,  which  is  worshipped  with  burning  of
incense  and  with  tapers,  they  doe  thrise  bend  their  knees,
and  bow  their  heads  downe  to  the  ground ;  which  not
onely  the  common  scholars,  but  the  chiefe  Magistrates  do
performe.  The  summe  of  the  foresayd  doctrine  is,  that
men  should  follow  the  light  of  nature  as  their  guide,  and
that  they  should  diligently  endevour  to  attaine  unto  the
vertues  by  me  before  mentioned :  and  lastly,  that  they
should  employ  their  labour  about  the  orderly  government
of  their  families  and  of  the  Common-wealth.  All  these
things  are  in  very  deed  praise-woorthy,  if  Confucius  had
made  any  mention  of  almighty  God  and  of  the  life  to
come,  and  had  not  ascribed  so  much  unto  the  heavens,
and  unto  fatall  necessity,  nor  yet  had  so  curiously  intreated

372

A TREATISE OF CHINA  a.d.

1590.

of  worshipping  the  images  of  their  forefathers. In  which

regard  he  can  very  hardly  or  not  at  all  be  excused  from

the  crime  of  idolatry :  notwithstanding  it  is  to  be  granted,

that  none  other  doctrine  among  the  Chinians  approcheth

so  neere  unto  the  trueth  as  this  doeth. The  second  sect  Xequiam  au-

is  of  them,  which  follow  the  instructions  of  Xaquam,  or  as ^  ^  ^

, »  *-  second  sect

the  Chinians  call  him  Xequiam,  whose  opinions,  because  whosefollowers

they  are  well  knowen  amongst  us,  it  were  bootlesse  for  are  called  Cen
me  to  repeat ;  especially  sithens,  in  the  Catechisme  com-  0^'  Bonzi.
posed  by  our  grave  visitour,  they  are  notably  refuted.
This  doctrine  doe  all  they  embrace,  which  are  in  China
called  Cen,  but  with  us  at  Japon  are  named  Bonzi.  For
this  I  doe  briefly  and  by  the  way  give  you  to  understand,
that  all  words  of  the  Chinians  language  are  of  one  sillable  Note.
onely,  so  that  if  there  be  any  word  that  consisteth  of
more  sillables  then  one,  it  consisteth  also  of  more  wordes
then  one.  These  sectaries  called  Cen  doe  shave  their
beards  and  their  heads,  and  doe  for  the  most  part,  together
with  divers  of  their  associates,  inhabit  the  Temples  of
Xaquam,  or  of  others  which  in  regard  of  the  same  pro-
fession have  in  their  Kalenders  beene  canonized  for
Saints,  and  doe  rehearse  certaine  prayers  after  their  maner,
either  upon  books  or  beads,  using  other  ceremonies  after
the  maner  of  our  Bonzi.  These  men  have  some  inckling
of  the  life  to  come,  and  of  the  rewardes  of  good  men,  and
the  punishments  of  the  wicked  :  howbeit  all  their  asser-
tions are  fraught  with  errours.  The  third  sect  is  of  them  The  third  sect.
which  are  called  Tauzu :  and  those  doe  imitate  a  certaine
other  man,  to  be  adored,  as  they  thinke,  for  his  holinesse.
These  also  are  Priests  after  their  kinde,  howbeit  they  let
their  haire  grow,  and  doe  in  other  observations  differ
from  the  former.  Nowe,  because  the  sect  of  Confucius
is  the  most  famous  of  all  the  three,  and  the  two  other
sects  called  Cen  and  Tauzu  are  not  much  addicted  unto
learning,  their  religion  prevailing  onely  among  the
common  sort,  the  Priests  of  both  the  sayd  sects  doe  leade
a  most  base  and  servile  life  amongst  the  Chinians,  inso-
much that  they  kneele  downe  before  the  Magistrates,  and

373

A.D.
1590.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  supersti-
tion of  the
Saracens.

are  not  permitted  to  sit  beside  them,  and  sometimes,  if
the  Magistrate  please,  are  abased  unto  the  punishment  of
the  bastonado :  whereas  in  our  lies  of  Japon  it  is  farre
otherwise,  Priests,  even  of  false  religion,  being  had  in
so  great  honour  among  us.

Leo.  I  heard  also  (Michael)  that  the  Saracens  super-
stition takes  place  in  China :  now,  whether  it  doth  or  no,
you  can  resolve  us.

Michael.  That  forren  superstition  was  brought  into
China  what  time  the  Tartars  invaded  the  kingdome,  and
usurped  the  government  thereof.  All  the  Saracens  there-
fore in  China  are  originally  descended  of  the  Tartars,
who,  because  they  were  an  infinite  number,  could  not
utterly  be  expelled  and  rooted  out  of  the  kingdome,  but
remaining  still  there,  have  propagated  their  posterity,
though  not  their  religion.  These  therefore  are  souldiers
for  the  greater  part  of  them,  and  sometimes  doe  obtaine
martiall  dignities :  and  except  a  few  ceremonies  of  their
superstition  which  is  nowe  become  stale  and  almost  worne
out,  they  doe  live  altogether  after  the  Chinians  fashion,
their  predecessours  being  brought  into  the  same  king-
dome  about  foure  hundred  yeeres  agoe.

Linus.  Now  (Michael)  let  us  heare  you  say  somewhat
of  the  Christian  religion,  which  as  we  hope  hath  set  most
happy  footing  in  that  kingdome.

Michael.  I  could  say  much  concerning  those  most
wished  and  acceptable  beginnings,  were  they  not  already
published  in  Japon  by  the  letters  of  the  fathers :  howbeit
I  will  make  a  briefe  rehearsall  of  all  things,  that  I  may
not  seeme  altogether  to  have  abandoned  this  labour.
You  know  that  from  the  time  wherein  the  fathers  of
the  society  arrived  in  our  Hands,  to  the  end  they  might
augment  Christian  religion,  they  were  in  like  sort  most
[II.  il.  98.]  carefuU  how  they  might  insinuate  themselves  into  the
innermost  parts  of  the  kingdome  of  China.  In  the
middest  of  this  endevour  and  travell  Francis  Xavier,  a
most  devout  man  of  the  foresayd  society,  departed  out  of
this  present  life at the  lie  of  Sancian  (which  some  call

374

Christian  re-
ligion planted
in  China.

A TREATISE OF CHINA  a.b.

1590^
Sangiam)  leaving  an  example  unto  the  rest  of  his  associ-
ates, how  they  should  likewise  doe  their  best  to  plant  the
religion  of  Christ  in  that  nation. This  man  was  seconded
by  others,  who  used  all  meanes,  and  left  no  practise  un-
attempted,  that  they  might  bring  these  good  beginnings
unto a prosperous issue : howbeit they were greatly
hindered  by  reason  of  an  ancient  custome  in  China,  in  ^^^  ancient
regard  whereof  they  doe  not  without  great  difficulty  and  '^^^'l^^ worthy
Circumspection  admit  any  strangers  into  their  dominions,
except  those  which  having  a  long  time  executed  the  office
of  ambassadours  doe  ordinarily  every  third  yeere  present
themselves  before  the  king : in  the  admission  of  whom
likewise  there  is  marvellous  care  used,  that  they  may  not
easily  espie  and  become  acquainted  with  the affaires  of

the  Realme. Heereunto  may  be  added,  that  the  Chinians  ^-^^  Chmans

/- ^1  -_•  J  ...  z. ^ contemne  other

are  great  contemners  or  other  nations,  and  most  constant  ^^^^^^^

observers  of  their  owne  lawes  and  customes :  in  all  which
respects  it  came  to  passe,  that  there  was  woonderfuU
labour  and  diligence  employed  above  thirty  yeeres
together,  onely  to  get  an  entrance,  untill  in  the  yeere
one  thousand  five  hundred  fourescore  and  three,  two
fathers  of  the  foresayd  society,  that  had  pretty  skill  in
the  letters  and  language  of  China,  utterly  despairing  of
mans  helpe,  and  depending  upon  the  providence  of
almighty  God,  obtained  licence  of  the  Tutan  or  Vice-roy
to  build  them  an  house  and  a  Church  in  the  City  of
Xauquin,  which  by  reason  of  the  commodiousnesse
thereof  is  the  seat  of  the  Viceroy  himselfe.  This  worke
being  begunne,  the  sayd  fathers  of  the  society,  for  the
novelty  thereof,  were  a  few  yeeres  right  well  entreated
by  the  Magistrates :  insomuch  that  two  others  out  of
India  had  free  and  easie  accesse  unto  them,  one  couple
remaining  still  in  their  foresayd  house  at  Xauquin,  and
the  other  two  taking  their  journey  for  the  inner  pro-
vinces, to  convert  more  people  unto  the  faith  :  who  not-
withstanding afterward,  other  Magistrates  not  approoving
of  their  attempts,  were  constrained  to  retire.  Nowe  all
the  time  wherein  the  foresayd  fathers  abode  at  Xauquin

375

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

(being  more  then  five  yeeres)  certaine  of  the  common
people  were  restrained  from  false  superstition  to
Christian  religion,  and  seventy  persons  were  baptized.
But  the  enemy  of  mankinde,  who  omitteth  none  oppor-
tunity for  the  hinderance  of  Christian  religion,  suggested
into  the  mindes  of  the  Chinians  (being,  as  I  sayd,  of
their  owne  nature,  a  people  estranged  from  the  traffique
and  acquaintance  of  other  nations,  and  alwayes  being
too  too  suspicious  of  strangers)  that  they  should
exhibite  letters  of  supplication  unto  the  Caien  and  the
Tutan  their  principall  Magistrates,  to  have  the  fathers
expelled  out  of  Xauquin :  which  Magistrates  repairing
unto  their  foresayd  house  and  Church  entered  consul-
tation how  they  might  bannish  them  out  of  the  sayd
City  of  Xauquin :  in  which  thing  verily  they  used
great  moderation,  not  any  way  offending  or  exasperating
the  mindes  of  the  fathers,  but  onely  signifying  that
they  had  regard  unto  the  estate  of  their  Common-
wealth. For  the  Tutan  or  Vice-roy  calling  the  fathers
unto  him,  and  (to  let  passe  other  accidents)  using
courteous  and  familiar  conference  with  them,  declared
by  many  arguments,  that  their  habitation  in  the  City
of  Xauquin  was  not  convenient,  especially  sithens  so
many  Magistrates  resorted  unto  that  City,  who  would
take  great  offence  at  the  presence  of  strangers.  For
the  which  cause  he  perswaded  them  to  accept  some
part  of  the  money  which  they  had  bestowed  in  the
building  of  their  house,  and  so  to  returne  either  home
into  their  owne  countrey,  or  unto  the  port  of  Macao.
Howbeit,  such  was  the  instant  supplication  of  the
fathers,  and  so  woorthy  of  compassion,  that  the  Tutan
or  Vice-roy,  in  the  extreame  and  mediterrane  borders
of  the  province  of  Coantum,  assigned  unto  them  a  new
habitation  at  the  city  called  Xaucheo,  commending  them
also  to  a  certaine  Magistrate,  who  was  come  from  the
same  place  to  salute  him.  Thither  therefore  the  sayd
fathers,  not  without  great  sorrow  and  griefe  of  the
Christians,  hied  themselves,  and  as  we  are  informed  by

376

LETTER FROM THOMAS STEVENS  a.d.

1579-
their  last  letters,  they  have  even  now  layed  the  founda-
tion of  their  first  building,  and  have  also  written  that
they  are  like  to  live  much  more  peaceably  and  con-
veniently for  the  propagating  of  Christian  religion.
These  be  the  first  beginnings  of  Christianity  in  China,
where,  even  as  in  other  places  of  the  Christian  Com-
mon-wealth, the  seed  is  to  be  sowen  with  great  labour
and  teares,  that  acceptable  fruits  may  be  reaped  with
gladnesse.

Leo.  It  is  even  as  you  have  sayd  (Michael)  and
nowe  for  this  your  pleasant  and  eloquent  discourse  we
do  acknowledge  our  selves  much  bounden  unto  you.

A  Letter  written from  Goa,  the principall City  [II.  ii.  99.]
of all the East Indies, by one Thomas
Stevens an English man, and sent to his
father,  M.  Thomas  Stevens: Anno 1579.

Fter  most  humble  commendations :  These
shall  be  to  crave  your  dayly  blessing,
with  like  commendations  unto  my
mother ;  and  withall,  to  certifie  you  of
my  being :  according  to  your  will  and
my  duety.  I  wrote  unto  you  taking  my
journey  from  Italy  to  Portugall,  which
letters  I  thinke  are  come  to  your  hands,  so  that  pre-
suming thereupon,  I  thinke  I  have  the  lesse  need  at
this  time  to  tell  you  the  cause  of  my  departing,  which
neverthelesse  in  one  word  I  may  conclude,  if  I  do
but  name  obedience.  I  came  to  Lisbon  toward  the  end
of  March,  eight  dayes  before  the  departure  of  the
shippes,  so  late  that  if  they  had  not  bene  stayed  about
some  weighty  matters,  they  had  bene  long  gone  before
our  comming :  insomuch  that  there  were  others  ordained
to  goe  in  our  places,  that  the  kings  provision  and
ours  also  might  not  be  in  vaine.  Neverthelesse  our
sudden  comming  tooke  place,  and  the  fourth  of  Aprill
five ships departed for Goa,  wherein besides shipmen

377

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

and  souldiers,  there  were  a  great  number  of  children
which  in  the  seas  beare  out  better  then  men,  and  no
marvell,  when  that  many  women  also  passe  very  well.
The  setting  foorth  from  the  port  I  need  not  to  tell
how  solemne  it  is  with  trumpets,  and  shooting  of
ordinance,  you  may  easily  imagine  it,  considering  that
they  go  in  the  maner  of  warre.  The  tenth  of  the
foresayd  moneth  we  came  to  the  sight  of  Porto  Santo
neere  unto  Madera,  where  an  English  shippe  set  upon
ours  (which  was  then  also  alone)  with  a  few  shots,
which  did  no  harme,  but  after  that  our  ship  had  layed
out  her  greatest  ordinance,  they  straight  departed  as
they  came.  The  English  shippe  was  very  faire  and
great,  which  I  was  sory  to  see  so  ill  occupied,  for  she
went  roving  about,  so  that  we  saw  her  againe  at  the
Canarian  lies,  unto  the  which  we  cam.e  the  thirteenth
of  the  sayd  moneth,  and  good  leisure  we  had  to
woonder  at  the  high  mountaine  of  the  Hand  Tenerif,
for  we  wandred  betweene  that  and  great  Canaria  foure
dayes  by  reason  of  contrary  windes :  and  briefly,  such
evill  weather  we  had  untill  the  foureteenth  of  May,
that  they  despaired,  to  compasse  the  Cape  of  Good
hope  that  yeere.  Neverthelesse,  taking  our  voyage
betweene  Guinea  and  the  Hands  of  Capo  Verde,  with-
out seeing  of  any  land  at  all,  we  arrived  at  length
unto  the  coast  of  Guinie,  which  the  Portugals  so  call,
chiefly  that  part  of  the  burning  Zone,  which  is  from
the  sixt  degree  unto  the  Equinoctiall,  in  which  parts
they  suffered  so  many  inconveniences  of  heats,  and
lacke  of  windes,  that  they  thinke  themselves  happy
when  they  have  passed  it :  for  sometimes  the  ship
standeth  there  almost  by  the  space  of  many  dayes,
sometime  she  goeth,  but  in  such  order  that  it  were
almost  as  good  to  stand  still.  And  the  greatest  part
of  this  coast  not  cleare,  but  thicke  and  cloudy,  full  of
thunder  and  lightening,  and  raine  so  unholesome,  that
if  the  water  stand  a  little  while,  all  is  full  of  wormes,
and falling  on  the  meat  which  is  hanged  up,  it  maketh

378

LETTER FROM THOMAS STEVENS  a.d.

1579-
it  straight  full  of  wormes.  Along  all  that  coast  we
often  times  saw  a  thing  swimming  upon  the  water  like
a  cocks  combe  (which  they  call  a  ship  of  Guinea)  but
the  colour  much  fairer;  which  combe  standeth  upon  a
thing  almost  like  the  swimmer  of  a  fish  in  colour  and
bignesse,  and  beareth  underneath  in  the  water,  strings,
which  save  it  from  turning  over.  This  thing  is  so
poisonous,  that  a  man  cannot  touch  it  without  great
peril!.  In  this  coast,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  sixt
degree  unto  the  Equinoctiall,  we  spent  no  lesse  then
thirty  dayes,  partly  with  contrary  windes,  partly  with
calme.  The  thirtieth  of  May  we  passed  the  Equinoc-
tiall with  contentation,  directing  our  course  aswell  as
we  could  to  passe  the  promontory,  but  in  all  that
gulfe,  &  in  all  the  way  beside,  we  found  so  often
calmes,  that  the  expertest  mariners  wondred  at  it.  And
in  places  where  are  alwayes  woont  to  be  most  horrible
tempests,  we  found  most  quiet  calmes  which  was  very
troublesome  to  those  ships  which  be  the  greatest  of  all
other,  and  cannot  go  without  good  windes.  Insomuch,
that  when  it  is  tempest  almost  intollerable  for  other
ships,  and  maketh  them  maine  all  their  sailes,  these
hoise  up,  and  saile  excellent  well,  unlesse  the  waters
be  too  too  furious,  which  seldome  happened  in  our
navigation.  You  shall  understand,  that  being  passed
the  line,  they  cannot  straightway  go  the  next  way  to
the  promontory :  but  according  to  the  winde,  they  draw
alwayes  as  neere  South  as  they  can  to  put  themselves
in  the  latitude  of  the  point,  which  is  25  degrees  and
an  halfe,  and  then  they  take  their  course  towards  the
East,  and  so  compasse  the  point.  But  the  winde  served
us  so,  that  at  23  degrees  we  did  direct  our  course
toward  the  point  or  promontory  of  Good  hope.

You  know  that  it  is  hard  to  saile  from  East  to
West,  or  contrary,  because  there  is  no  fixed  point  in
all  the  skie,  whereby  they  may  direct  their  course,
wherefore  I  shall  tell  you  what  helps  God  provided  for
these men. There is not a fowle that appereth, or

379

A.D.

1579-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  varia-
tion of  the
compasse.

signe  in  the  aire,  or  in  the  sea,  which  they  have  not
written,  which  have  made  the  voyages  heretofore.
Wherfore,  partly  by  their  owne  experience,  and  pon-
dering withall  what  space  the  ship  was  able  to  make
[11.  ii.  loo.]  with  such  a  winde,  and  such  direction,  and  partly  by
the  experience  of  others,  whose  books  and  navigations
they  have,  they  gesse  whereabouts  they  be,  touching
degrees  of  longitude,  for  of  latitude  they  be  alwayes
sure :  but  the  greatest  and  best  industry  of  all  is  to
marke  the  variation  of  the  needle  or  compasse,  which
in  the  Meridian  of  the  Hand  of  S.  Michael,  which  is  one
of  the  Azores  in  the  latitude  of  Lisbon,  is  just  North,
and  thence  swarveth  towards  the  East  so  much,  that  be-
twixt the  Meridian  aforesayd,  and  the  point  of  Africa
it  carrieth  three  or  foure  quarters  of  32.  And  againe
in  the  point  of  Afrike,  a  little  beyond  the  point  that
is  called  Cape  das  Agulias  (in  English  the  needles)  it
returneth  againe  unto  the  North,  and  that  place  passed,
it  swarveth  againe  toward  the  West,  as  it  did  before
proportionally.  As  touching  our  first  signes,  the  neerer
we  came  to  the  people  of  Afrike,  the  more  strange
kindes  of  fowles  appeared,  insomuch  that  when  we  came
within  no  lesse  then  thirty  leagues  (almost  an  hundred
miles)  and  sixe  hundred  miles  as  we  thought  from  any
Hand,  as  good  as  three  thousand  fowles  of  sundry  kindes
followed  our  ship :  some  of  them  so  great  that  their
wings  being  opened  from  one  point  to  the  other,  con-
tained seven  spannes,  as  the  Mariners  sayd.  A  mar-
vellous thing  to  see  how  God  provided,  so  that  in  so
wide  a  sea  these  fowles  are  all  fat,  and  nothing  wanteth
them.  The  Portugals  have  named  them  all  according
to  some  propriety  which  they  have  :  some  they  call
Rushtailes,  because  their  tailes  be  not  proportionable  to
their  bodies,  but  long  and  small  like  a  rush,  some
forked  tailes  because  they  be  very  broad  and  forked,
some  Velvet  sleeves,  because  they  have  wings  of  the
colour  of  velvet,  and  bowe  them  as  a  man  boweth  his
elbow. This  bird  is  alwayes  welcome,  for  he  appeareth

380

Signes  about
the  Cape  of
Bona
Speransa.

LETTER FROM THOMAS STEVENS  ad.

1579-
nearest  the  Cape.  I  should  never  make  an  end  if  I
should  tell  all  particulars :  but  it  shall  suffice  briefly  to
touch  a  few,  which  yet  shall  be  sufficient,  if  you  marke
them,  to  give  occasion  to  glorifie  almighty  God  in  his
wonderfull  worksj  and  such  variety  in  his  creatures.
And  to  speake  somewhat  of  fishes  in  all  places  of  calme,  Fishes  on  the
especially  in  the  burning  Zone,  neere  the  line  (for  with-  ^^^^^'^^^  °f
out  we  never  saw  any)  there  waited  on  our  ship  fishes  as
long  as  a  man,  which  they  call  Tuberones,  they  come
to  eat  such  things  as  from  the  shippe  fall  into  the  sea,
not  refusing  men  themselves  if  they  light  upon  them.
And  if  they  finde  any  meat  tied  in  the  sea,  they  take  it
for  theirs.  These  have  waiting  on  them  six  or  seven
small  fishes  (which  never  depart)  with  gardes  blew  and
greene  round  about  their  bodies,  like  comely  serving
men :  and  they  go  two  or  three  before  him,  and  some
on  every  side.  Moreover,  they  have  other  fishes  which
cleave  alwayes  unto  their  body,  and  seeme  to  take  such
superfluities  as  grow  about  them,  and  they  are  sayd  to
enter  into  their  bodies  also  to  purge  them  if  they  need.
The  Mariners  in  time  past  have  eaten  of  them,  but  since
they  have  scene  them  eate  men  their  stomacks  abhorre
them.  Neverthelesse,  they  draw  them  up  with  great
hooks,  &  kill  of  them  as  many  as  they  can,  thinking  that
they  have  made  a  great  revenge.  There  is  another  kind
of  fish  as  bigge  almost  as  a  herring,  which  hath  wings
and  flieth,  and  they  are  together  in  great  number.  These
have  two  enemies,  the  one  in  the  sea,  the  other  in  the
aire.  In  the  sea  the  fish  which  is  called  Albocore,  as
big  as  a  Salmon,  followeth  them  with  great  swiftnesse  to
take  them.  This  poore  fish  not  being  able  swim  fast,
for  he  hath  no  finnes,  but  swimmeth  with  mooving  of
his  taile,  shutting  his  wings,  lifteth  himselfe  above  the
water,  and  flieth  not  very  hie :  the  Albocore  seeing  that,
although  he  have  no  wings,  yet  he  giveth  a  great  leape
out  of  the  water,  and  sometimes  catcheth  him,  or  els
he  keepeth  himselfe  under  the  water  going  that  way  on
as  fast  as  he  flieth. And  when  the  fish  being  weary  of

381

A.D.

1579-

Note.

Corall.
[11.  ii.

lOI.]

Two  wayes
beyond  ye  cape
of  Good  hope.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  aire,  or  thinking  himselfe  out  of  danger,  returneth
into  the  water,  the  Albocore  meeteth  with  him :  but
sometimes  his  other  enemy  the  sea-crow,  catcheth  him
before  he  falleth.  With  these  and  like  sights,  but
alwayes  making  our  supplications  to  God  for  good
weather  and  salvation  of  the  ship,  we  came  at  length
unto  the  point,  so  famous  &  feared  of  all  men :  but  we
found  there  no  tempest,  only  great  waves,  where  our
Pilot  was  a  little  overseene :  for  whereas  commonly  al
other  never  come  within  sight  of  land,  but  seeing  signes
ordinary,  and  finding  bottome,  go  their  way  sure  and
safe,  he  thinking  himselfe  to  have  winde  at  will,  shot
so  nigh  the  land  that  the  winde  turning  into  the  South,
and  the  waves  being  exceeding  great,  rolled  us  so  nere  the
land,  that  the  ship  stood  in  lesse  then  14  fadoms  of  water,
no  more  then  sixe  miles  from  the  Cape,  which  is  called
Das  Agulias,  and  there  we  stood  as  utterly  cast  away :
for  under  us  were  rocks  of  maine  stone  so  sharpe,  and
cutting,  that  no  ancre  could  hold  the  ship,  the  shore  so
evill,  that  nothing  could  take  knd,  and  the  land  itselfe  so
full  of  Tigers,  and  people  that  are  savage,  and  killers
of  all  strangers,  that  we  had  no  hope  of  life  nor  com-
fort, but  onely  in  God  and  a  good  conscience.  Notwith-
standing, after  we  had  lost  ancres,  hoising  up  the  sailes
for  to  get  the  ship  a  coast  in  some  safer  place,  or  when
it  should  please  God,  it  pleased  his  mercy  suddenly,
where  no  man  looked  for  helpe,  to  fill  our  sailes  with
wind  from  the  land,  &  so  we  escaped,  thanks  be  to
God.  And  the  day  following,  being  in  the  place  where
they  are  alwayes  wont  to  catch  fish,  we  also  fell  a  fishing,
and  so  many  they  tooke,  that  they  served  all  the  ship  for
that  day,  and  part  of  the  next.  And  one  of  them  pulled
up  a  corall  of  great  bignesse  and  price.  For  there  they
say  (as  we  saw  by  experience)  that  the  corals  doe  grow  in
the  maner  of  stalks  upon  the  rocks  in  the  bottome,  and
waxe  hard  and  red.  The  day  of  perill  was  the  nine  and
twentieth  of  July.  And  you  shall  understand  that,  the
Cape  passed,  there  be  two  wayes  to  India : one  within

382

LETTER FROM THOMAS STEVENS  ad.

1579-
the  He  of  S.  Laurence,  which  they  take  willingly,  because
they  refresh  themselves  at  Mosambique  a  fortnight  or
a  moneth,  not  without  great  need,  and  thence  in  a
moneth  more  land  in  Goa.  The  other  is  without  the
He  of  S.  Laurence,  which  they  take  when  they  set  foorth
so  late,  and  come  so  late  to  the  point,  that  they  have  no
time  to  take  the  foresayd  Mosambique,  and  then  they
goe  heavily,  because  in  this  way  they  take  no  port.
And  by  reason  of  the  long  navigation,  and  want  of  food
and  water,  they  fall  into  sundry  diseases,  their  gummes
waxe  great,  and  swell,  and  they  are  faine  to  cut  them
away,  their  legges  swell,  and  all  the  body  becommeth
sore,  and  so  benummed,  that  they  can  not  stirre  hand
nor  foot,  and  so  they  die  for  weakenesse,  others  fall  into
fluxes  and  agues,  and  die  thereby.  And  this  way  it
was  our  chance  to  make :  yet  though  we  had  more  then
one  hundred  and  fifty  sicke,  there  died  not  past  seven
and  twenty ;  which  losse  they  esteemed  not  much  in
respect  of  other  times.  Though  some  of  ours  were
diseased  in  this  sort,  yet,  thanks  be  to  God,  I  had  my
health  all  the  way,  contrary  to  the  expectation  of  many :
God  send  me  my  health  so  well  in  the  land,  if  it  may
be  to  his  honour  and  service.  This  way  is  full  of  privy
rockes  and  quicke-sands,  so  that  sometimes  we  durst  not
saile  by  night,  but  by  the  providence  of  God  we  saw
nothing,  nor  never  found  bottome  untill  we  came  to
the  coast  of  India.  When  we  had  passed  againe  the
line,  and  were  come  to  the  third  degree  or  somewhat
more,  we  saw  crabs  swimming  on  the  water  that  were
red  as  though  they  had  bene  sodden :  but  this  was  no
signe  of  land.  After,  about  the  eleventh  degree,  the
space  of  many  dayes,  more  then  ten  thousand  fishes
by  estimation  followed  round  about  our  ship,  whereof
v/e  caught  so  many,  that  for  fifteene  dayes  we  did  eate
nothing  els,  and  they  served  our  turne  very  well :  for
at  this  time  we  had  neither  meat  nor  almost  any  thing
els  to  eate,  our  navigation  growing  so  long  that  it  drew
neere  to  seven  moneths,  where  as  commonly  they  goe  it

383

A.D.

1579-

They  com-
monly saile
from  Lisbon
to  Goa  in  5
moneths.

Running  seas
very  dan-
gerous.

Certaine  signs
of  land.

They  arrived
at  Goa  the  24
of  October.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

in  five,  I  meane  when  they  saile  the  inner  way.  But
these  fishes  were  not  signe  of  land,  but  rather  of  deepe
sea.  At  length  we  tooke  a  couple  of  birds,  which  were
a  kinde  of  Hawks,  whereof  they  joyed  much,  thinking
that  they  had  bene  of  India,  but  indeed  they  were  of
Arabia,  as  we  found  afterward.  And  we  that  thought  we
had  bene  neere  India,  were  in  the  same  latitude  neere
Zocotoro,  an  He  in  the  mouth  of  the  Red  sea.  But  there
God  sent  us  great  winds  from  the  Northeast  or  North-
northeast,  whereupon  unwillingly  they  bare  up  toward  the
East,  and  thus  we  went  tenne  dayes  without  seeing  signe
of  land,  whereby  they  perceived  their  errour  :  for  they  had
directed  their  course  before  alwayes  Northeast,  coveting
to  multiply  degrees  of  latitude,  but  partly  the  difference
of  the  Needle,  and  most  of  all  the  running  seas,  which
at  that  time  ran  Northwest,  had  drawen  us  to  this  other
danger,  had  not  God  sent  us  this  winde,  which  at  length
waxed  larger,  and  restored  us  to  our  right  course.  These
running  seas  be  so  perillous  that  they  deceive  the  most
part  of  the  governours,  and  some  be  so  little  curious,
contenting  themselves  with  ordinary  experience,  that  they
care  not  to  seeke  out  any  meanes  to  know  when  they
swarve,  neither  by  the  compasse,  nor  by  any  other  trial!.
The  first  signe  of  land  were  certaine  fowles  which  they
knew  to  be  of  India :  the  second,  boughes  of  palmes  and
sedges :  the  third,  snakes  swimming  on  the  water,  and
a  substance  which  they  call  by  the  name  of  a  coine  of
money,  as  broad  and  as  round  as  a  groat,  woonderfuUy
printed  and  stamped  of  nature,  like  unto  some  coine.
And  these  two  last  signes  be  so  certaine,  that  the  next
day  after,  if  the  winde  serve,  they  see  land,  which  we
did  to  our  great  joy,  when  all  our  water  (for  you  know
they  make  no  beere  in  those  parts)  and  victuals  began
to  faile  us.  And  to  Goa  we  came  the  foure  and  twentieth
day  of  October,  there  being  received  with  passing  great
charity.  The  people  be  tawny,  but  not  disfigured  in  their
lips  &  noses,  as  the  Moores  and  Cafres  of  Ethiopia.
They  that be not of  reputation,  or  at least the most

384

G  OA  ^^frnpimn  ituiicr  vr'fs  m  (TnnT^ii onim pml^m  arm  Sai

(uns I  <  o  Q i  u;  ul

A BRIEF RELATION OF PEGU

part,  goe  naked,  saving  an  apron  of  a  span  long,  and
as  much  in  bredth  before  them,  and  a  lace  two  fingers
broad  before  them,  girded  about  with  a  string  and  no
more :  and  thus  they  thinke  them  as  well  as  we  with  all
our  trimming.  Of  the  fruits  and  trees  that  be  here  I
cannot  now  speake,  for  I  should  make  another  letter  as
long  as  this.  For  hitherto  I  have  not  seene  a  tree  here,
whose  like  I  have  seene  in  Europe,  the  vine  excepted,
which  neverthelesse  here  is  to  no  purpose,  so  that  all  the
wines  are  brought  out  of  Portugall.  The  drinke  of
this  countrey  is  good  water,  or  wine  of  the  Palme  tree,
or  of  a  fruit  called  Cocos.  And  this  shall  suffice  for  this
time.  If  God  send  me  my  health,  I  shall  have  oppor-
tunity to  write  to  you  once  againe.  Now  the  length  of
my  letter  compelleth  me  to  take  my  leave :  and  thus  I
wish  your  most  prosperous  health. From  Goa  the  tenth

A.D.

1589.

of  November, 1579.

Your  loving  sonne  Thomas
Stevens.

A  briefe  relation of  the great magnificence and  [II.  ii.  102J
rich  traffike  of  the  kingdome  of  Pegu  beyond
the East India, written by Frey Peter of
Lisbon,  to his cousin Frey  Diego of  Lisbon,
from  Cochin.

I  Received  your  letters  in  the  harbour  of
Damaon  by  a  caravell  of  advise  that
came  from  Malacca,  which  brought
shot,  powder,  and  other  provision  for
the furnishing of  foure gallies and a

i  great  gallion,  which  are  now  in  building,
to keepe our coast for feare of  great

store  of  men  of  warre,  being  Moores,  which  trouble  us  The  coast  of
very  sore. At  that  instant  when  I  received  your  letters  India  greatl;^

T ^  1  c  1 1  • J  r  -n  L  troubled  with

J was newly  come  from  the  kmgdome  or  Pegu,  where  ^^^^^^
I  had  remained  one  yeere  and  an  halfe,  and  from  thence
I  departed  to  the  city  of  Cochin  in  October  1587. The
newes which 1 can certifie you of concerning these

385

VI

2  B

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^589.

countreys  are : That  this  king  of  Pegu  is  the  mightiest

king  of  men,  &  the  richest  that  is  in  these  parts  of  the
world:  for  he  bringeth  into  the  field  at  any  time,  when
he  hath  warres  with  other  princes,  above  a  million  of
fighting  men :  howbeit  they  be  very  leane  and  small
people,  and  are  brought  unto  the  field  without  good
Abundance  of  order.  He  is  lord  of  the  Elephants,  and  of  all  the  golde
golde,  silver, ^j^j silver mines,  and of  all  the  pearles and precious

^IZJ!!. /.«. stones: so that  he hath the  greatest store  of  treasure

precious  stones  o

in  Pegu.  that ever was heard of  in  these parts. The  countrey

people  call  him  The  God  of  trueth  and  of  justice. I  had

great conference with this king, and with the head

captaine  of  the  Portugals,  which  is  one  of  the  countrey.

They  demanded  of  me  many  questions  as  touching  the

law  and  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  as  touching  the  Ten

Commandements. And  the  king  gave  his  consent  that

our  Order  should  build  a  Church  in  his  countrey,  which

was halfe builded ; but our perverse and malicious

Portugals  plucked  it  downe  againe : for  whereas  it  is  a

countrey  wherein  our  nation  gaine  very  much by  their

commodities, they fearing  that by  the  building  of  this

Church there would be greater resort thither,  and so

The  great their trade should be impaired, if their great gaines

gaine  of  the should  be  knowen  unto  others  then  those  which  found

Portuga  s  in ^j^-^  countrey  out  first,  therefore  they  were  so  unwilling

that the building of  this  Church  should goe forward.

Our  Portugals  which  are  here  in  this  realme  are  woorse

people  then  the  Gentiles. I  preached  divers  times  among

those  heathen  people; but  being  obstinate  they  say,  that

as  their  fathers  beleeved  so  they  will  beleeve : for  if  their

forefathers  went  to  the  divell  so  they  will. Whereupon

I  returned  backe  againe  to  our  monastery  to  certifie  our

father provinciall of the estate of this New found

Pegu  the  best countrey. It  is  the  best  and  richest  countrey  in  all  this

y  richest £^g^  India  ; and  it  is  thought  to  be  richer  then  China.

^ the  East  hidia ^  ^"^  afrayd  that  the  warres  which  his  Majesty  hath

with England  will be  the  utter  undoing  and spoile  of

Spaine : for  these  countreys  likewise  are  almost  spoiled

386

JAMES LANCASTER

1591.

against  Spaine.

with  civill  warres,  which  the  Moores  have  against  the
Gentiles :  for  the  kings  here  are  up  in  armes  all  the
countrey  over.  Here  is  an  Indian  which  is  counted  a  A prophesie
Prophet,  which  hath  prophesied  that  there  will  a  Dragon  ^'^^  Indian
arise  in  a  strange  countrey,  which  will  do  great  hurt  to
Spaine.  How  it  will  fall  out,  onely  God  doth  know.
And  thus  I  rest:  from  this  monastery  of  Cochin  the  28
of  December,  1589.

Your  good  cousin  and assured  friend
frier  Peter  of  Lisbon.

A  voyage  with  three  tall  ships,  the  Penelope
Admirall,  the  Marchant  royall  Viceadmirall,
and  the  Edward  Bonaventure  Rereadmirall,
to  the  East  Indies,  by  the  Cape  of  Buona
Speransa,  to  Quitangone  neere  Mosambique,
to  the  lies  of  Comoro  and  Zanzibar  on  the
backeside  of  Africa,  and  beyond  Cape  Comori
in  India,  to  the  lies  of  Nicubar  and  of  Gomes
Polo  within  two  leagues  of  Sumatra,  to  the
Hands  of  Pulo  Pinaom,  and  thence  to  the
maine  land  of  Malacca,  begunne  by  M.
George  Raymond,  in  the  yeere  1591,  and
performed  by  M.  James  Lancaster,  and  written
from  the  mouth  of  Edmund  Barker  of
Ipswich,  his  lieutenant  in  the  sayd  voyage,
by  M. Richard  Hakluyt.

Ur  fleet  of  the  three  tall  ships  above-
named  departed  from  Plimmouth  the  10
of  April  1 59 1,  and  arrived  at  the  Canarie-
ilands  the  25  of  the  same,  from  whence
we  departed  the  29  of  April.  The
second  of  May  we  were  in  the  height  of
Cape  Blanco.  The  fift  we  passed  the
tropique  of  Cancer.  The  eight  we  were  in  the  height
of  Cape  Verde. All  this  time  we  went  with  a  faire  winde

387

AJ>  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

at  Northeast,  alwayes  before  the  winde  untill  the  13  of
the  same  moneth,  when  we  came  within  8  degrees  of  the
Equinoctiall  line,  where  we  met  with  a  contrary  winde.
Here  we  lay  off  and  on  in  the  sea  untill  the  sixt  of  June>
on  which  day  we  passed  the  sayd  line.  While  we  lay
[II.  ii.  103.]  thus  off  and  on,  we  tooke  a  Portugal  Caravel  laden  by
marchants  of  Lisbon  for  Brasile,  in  which  Caravel  we  had
some  60  tunnes  of  wine,  1200  jarres  of  oyle,  about  100
jarres  of  olives,  certaine  barrels  of  capers,  three  fats  of
peason,  with  divers  other  necessaries  fit  for  our  voyage  l
which  wine,  oyle,  olives  and  capers  were  better  to  us  then
Three  gold. We  had  two  men  died  before  wee  passed  the  line,

occasions  of ^^^ divers sicke,  which tooke their  sicknesse  in those
the  line.  ^ote  climates : tor  they  be  wonderrul unholesome  trom

8  degrees  of  Northerly  latitude  unto  the  line,  at  that
time  of  the  yeere :  for  we  had  nothing  but  Ternados,
with  such  thunder,  lightning,  and  raine,  that  we  could
not  keep  our  men  drie  3  houres  together,  which  was  an
occasion  of  the  infection  among  them,  and  their  eating
of  salt  victuals,  with  lacke  of  clothes  to  shift  them.  After
we  passed  the  line,  we  had  the  wind  still  at  Eastsoutheast,
which  caried  us  along  the  coast  of  Brasil  100  leagues
from  the  maine,  til  we  came  in  26  degrees  to  the
Southward  of  the  line,  where  the  wind  came  up  to  the
North,  at  which  time  we  did  account,  that  the  Cape  of
Buona  esperansa  did  beare  off  us  East  and  by  South,
betwixt  900  and  1000  leagues.  Passing  this  gulfe  from
the  coast  of  Brasil  unto  the  Cape  we  had  the  wind  often
variable  as  it  is  upon  our  coast,  but  for  the  most  part
so,  that  we  might  lie  our  course.  The  28  of  July  we
had  sight  of  the  foresayd  Cape  of  Buona  esperansa :
untill  the  3 1  wee  lay  off  and  on  with  the  wind  contrary
to  double  the  Cape,  hoping  to  double  it,  &  so  to  have
gone  seventie  leagues  further  to  a  place  called  Agoada
de  S.  Bras,  before  we  would  have  sought  to  have  put
into  any  harbour.  But  our  men  being  weake  and  sicke
in  all  our  shippes,  we  thought  good  to  seeke  some  place
to  refresh  them. With  which  consent  we  bare  up  with

388

JAMES LANCASTER  ^■^■

1591.

the  land  to  the  Northward  of  the  Cape,  and  going  along

the  shore,  we  espied  a  goodly  Baie  with  an  Hand  lying

to  Seawards  of  it,  into  which  we  did  beare,  and  found

it  very  commodious  for  our  ships  to  ride  in. This  Baie

is  called  Agoada  de  Saldanha,  lying  1 5  leagues  Northward  Agoada  de

on the hither  side of  the Cape. The first of  August  Saldanha.

being  Sunday  we  came  to  an  anker  in  the  Baie,  sending

our  men on  land,  and  there came unto them  certaine

blacke  Salvages  very  brutish  which  would  not  stay,  but

retired from them. For the space of  15 or 20  dayes

we could find no reliefe but onely foules  which  wee

killed  with our pieces, which  were cranes and geese :

there  was  no  fish  but  muskles  and  other  shel-fish,  which

we  gathered  on  the  rockes. After  15  or  20  dayes  being

here,  our  Admirall  went  with  his  pinnasse  unto  the  Hand

which  lieth off  this  Baie,  where hee found great  store  Great  store  of

of  Penguines  &  Scales,  whereof  he  brought  good  plenty  Peng"-^ns  and

with  him. And  twise  after  that  we  sent  certain  of  our ^^^^'

men,  which  at  both  times  brought  their  bots  lading  unto

our  ships. After  we  had  bene  here  some  time,  we  got

here a Negro,  whom  we compelled  to  march  into  the

country  with  us,  making  signs  to  bring  us  some  cattell ;

but  at  this  time  we  could  come  to  the  sight  of  none,  so

we  let  the  Negro  goe  with  some  trifles. Within  8  dayes

after,  he  with  30  or  40  other  Negroes,  brought  us  downe

some  40  bullocks  and oxen,  with as  many  sheepe : at  Bullocks,oxen,

which  time  we  bought  but  few  of  them. But  within  8  (ind  sheepe,

dayes  after  they  came  downe  with  as  many  more,  &  then '^^'^  ^^^^'

we bought some 24  oxen  with as many sheepe. We

bought  an  oxe  for  two  knives,  a  stirke  for  a  knife,  and  a

sheepe  for  a  knife,  and  some  we  bought  for  lesse  value

then  a  knife. The  oxen  be  very  large  and  well  fleshed,

but not  fat. The  sheepe  are  very  big  and  very  good

meat,  they  have  no  woll on  their  backs  but  haire,  and

have  great  tailes  like the sheepe in Syria. There be

divers  sorts  of  wild  beasts,  as  the  Antilope,  (wherof  M.

Lancaster  killed  one  of  the  bignes  of  a  yong  colt)  the  red

&  fallow  Deere,  with  other  great  beasts  unknowen  unto

389

A.D.
I59I.

Cape  de
Buona  Sper-
ansa  doubled.
Cape  dos
Corrientes.
Here  they  are
severed  from
the  Penelope.

Foure  men
slaine  with  a
clap  of  thunder.
[II.  ii.  104,]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

us.  Here  are  also  great  store  of  over-growen  monkeis.
As  touching  our  proceeding  upon  our  voyage,  it  was
thought  good  rather  to  proceed  with  two  ships  wel
manned,  then  with  three  evill  manned  :  for  here  wee
had  of  sound  and  whole  men  but  198,  of  which  there
went  in  the  Penelope  with  the  Admiral  10 1,  and  in  the
Edward  with  the  worshipfuU  M.  captaine  Lancaster  97.
We  left  behind  50  men  with  the  Roiall  marchant,  where-
of there  were  many  pretily  well  recovered,  of  which  ship
was  master  and  governour  Abraham  Kendal,  which  for
many  reasons  we  thought  good  to  send  home.  The
disease  that  hath  consumed  our  men  hath  bene  the
skurvie.  Our  souldiers  which  have  not  bene  used  to  the
Sea,  have  best  held  out,  but  our  mariners  dropt  away,
which  (in  my  judgement)  proceedeth  of  their  evill  diet
at  home.

Sixe  dayes  after  our  sending  backe  for  England  of  the
Marchant  Roiall  from  Agoada  de  Saldanha,  our  Admirall
M.  captaine  Raimond  in  the  Penelope,  and  M.  James
Lancaster  in  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  set  forward  to
double  the  Cape  of  Buona  esperansa,  which  they  did  very
speedily.  But  being  passed  as  far  as  Cape  dos  Corrientes,
the  14  of  September  we  were  encountred  with  a  mighty
storme  and  extreeme  gusts  of  wind,  wherein  we  lost  our
Generals  companie,  and  could  never  heare  of  him  nor  his
ship  any  more,  though  we  did  our  best  endevour  to  seeke
him  up  and  downe  a  long  while,  and  staied  tor  him
certaine  dayes  at  the  Hand  of  Comoro,  where  we  appointed
to  stay  one  for  another.  Foure  dayes  after  this  uncom-
fortable seperation  in  the  morning  toward  ten  of  the
clocke  we  had  a  terrible  clap  of  thunder,  which  slew  foure
of  our  men  outright,  their  necks  being  wrung  in  sonder
without  speaking  any  word,  and  of  94  men  there  was  not
one  untouched,  whereof  some  were  striken  blind,  others
were  bruised  in  their  legs  &  armes,  and  others  in  their
brests,  so  that  they  voided  blood  two  dayes  after,  others
were  drawen  out  at  length  as  though  they  had  bene
racked. But  (God  be  thanked)  they  all  recovered  saving

390

S.  Laurence.

neere  Mozam-
bique.

JAMES LANCASTER  ad.

1591-
onely  the  foure  which  were  slaine  out  right.  Also  with
the  same  thunder  our  maine  maste  was  torne  very
grievously  from  the  head  to  the  decke,  and  some  of  the
spikes  that  were  ten  inches  into  the  timber,  were  melted
with  the  extreme  heate  theereof.  From  thence  wee
shaped  our  course  to  the  Northeast,  and  not  long  after
we  fell  upon  the  Northwest  end  of  the  mighty  Hand  of
S,  Laurence :  which  one  of  our  men  espied  by  Gods  ^-^^  Shoulds  of
good  blessing  late  in  the  evening  by  Moone  light,  who
seeing  afarre  off  the  breaking  of  the  Sea,  and  calling  to
certaine  of  his  fellowes,  asked  them  what  it  was :  which
eftsoones  told  him  that  it  was  the  breaking  of  the  Sea
upon  the  Shoulds.  Whereupon  in  very  good  time  we
cast  about  to  avoyd  the  danger  which  we  were  like  to
have  incurred.  Thus  passing  on  forward,  it  was  our
lucke  to  over-shoote  Mozambique,  and  to  fall  with  a
place  called  Quitan^one  two  leagues  to  the  Northward  Q»itangone
or  It,  and  we  tooke  three  or  foure  Barkes  of  Moores,
which  Barkes  in  their  language  they  call  Pangaias,  laden
with  Millio,  hennes,  and  ducks,  with  one  Portugall  boy,
going  for  the  provision  of  Mozambique.  Within  few
dayes  following  we  came  to  an  Hand  an  hundred  leagues
to  the  Northeast  of  Mozambique  called  Comoro,  which  ^'^^  ^^'^  °f
we  found  exceeding  full  of  people,  which  are  Moores
of  tawnie  colour  and  good  stature,  but  they  be  very
trecherous  and  diligently  to  be  taken  heed  of.  Here  wee
desired  to  store  our  selves  with  water,  whereof  we  stood
in  great  need,  and  sent  sixteene  of  our  men  well  armed
on  shore  in  our  boate :  whom  the  people  suffred  quietly
to  land  and  water,  and  divers  of  them  with  their  king
came  aboord  our  ship  in  a  gowne  of  crimosine  Sattin
pinked  after  the  Moorish  fashion  downe  to  the  knee,
whom  we  entertained  in  the  best  maner,  and  had  some
conference  with  him  of  the  state  of  the  place  and  marchan-
dises,  using  our  Portugall  boy  which  we  had  taken  before
for  our  interpreter,  and  in  the  end  licensed  the  king  and
his  company  to  depart,  and  sent  our  men  againe  for  more
water, who then also dispatched their businesse, &

391

Comoro.

A.D.

320/  our  men
betraied  at  the
lie  of  Comoro.

Zanzibar
Hand.

A  Portugall
Factorie  In
Zanzibar.

The  treason  of
the  Portugals
towards  the
English.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

returned  quietly :  the  third  time  likewise  we  sent  them
for  more,  which  also  returned  without  any  harme.  And
though  we  thought  our  selves  furnished,  yet  our  master
William  Mace  of  Radcliffe  pretending  that  it  might  be
long  before  we  should  finde  any  good  watering  place,
would  needes  goe  himselfe  on  shore  with  thirtie  men,
much  against  the  will  of  our  captaine,  and  hee  and  16
of  his  company,  together  with  one  boat  which  was  all
that  we  had,  and  16  others  that  were  a  washing  over-
against  our  ship,  were  betrayed  of  the  perfidious  Moores,
and  in  our  sight  for  the  most  part  slaine,  we  being  not
able  for  want  of  a  boat  to  yeeld  them  any  succour.  From
hence  with  heavie  hearts  we  shaped  our  course  for
Zanzibar  the  7  of  November,  where  shortly  after  wee
arrived  and  made  us  a  new  boat  of  such  boards  as  we
had  v/ithin  boord,  and  rid  in  the  road  untill  the  15  of
February,  where,  during  our  aboad,  we  sawe  divers
Pangaias  or  boates,  which  are  pinned  with  woodden
pinnes,  and  sowed  together  with  Palmito  cordes,  and
calked  with  the  huskes  of  Cocos  shels  beaten,  whereof
they  make  Occam.  At  length  a  Portugal  Pangaia  com-
ming  out  of  the  harborow  of  Zanzibar,  where  they  have
a  small  Factorie,  sent  a  Canoa  with  a  Moore  which  had
bene  christened,  who  brought  us  a  letter  wherein  they
desired  to  know  what  wee  were,  and  what  we  sought.
We  sent  them  word  we  were  Englishmen  come  from
Don  Antonio  upon  businesse  to  his  friends  in  the  Indies :
with  which  answere  they  returned,  and  would  not  any
more  come  at  us.  Whereupon  not  long  after  wee
manned  out  our  boat  and  tooke  a  Pangaia  of  the  Moores,
which  had  a  priest  of  theirs  in  it,  which  in  their  language
they  call  a  Sherife :  whom  we  used  very  curteously :
which  the  king  tooke  in  very  good  part,  having  his
priests  in  great  estimation,  and  for  his  deliverance
furnished  us  with  two  moneths  victuals,  during  all  which
time  we  detained  him  with  us.  These  Moores  informed
us  of  the  false  and  spitefuU  dealing  of  the  Portugals
towards  us,  which  made  them  beleeve  that  we  were  cruell

392

JAMES LANCASTER  ad.

1592.

people  and men-eaters,  and  willed them if  they  loved

their  safetie  in  no  case  to  come  neere  us. Which  they

did  onely  to  cut  us  off  from  all  knowledge  of  the  state

and  traffique  of  the  countrey. While  we  road  from  the

end  of  November  until  the  middle  of  February  in  this

harborough,  which is  sufficient for  a  ship  of  500 tuns

to ride  in,  we  set upon a Portugall Pangaia  with  our

boat,  but  because  it  was  very  litle,  &  our  men  not  able

to  stirre  in  it,  we  were  not  able  to  take  the  sayd  Pangaia,

which  was  armed  with  10  good  shot  like  our  long  fouling

pieces. This  place  for  the  goodnesse  of  the  harborough  ^«  excellent

and  watering:,  and  plentifuU  refreshing  with  fish,  whereof  Pi^^fi^  ^^-

°  -1  J r  J  ^ freshing.

we  tooke  great  store  with  our  nets,  and  tor  sundry  sorts
of  fruits  of  the  countrey,  as  Cocos  and  others,  which
were  brought  us  by  the  Moores,  as  also  for  oxen  and
hennes,  is  carefully  to  be  sought  for  by  such  of  our
ships,  as  shall  hereafter  passe  that  way.  But  our  men
had  need  to  take  good  heed  of  the  Portugals :  for  while
we  lay  here  the  Portugall  Admiral  of  the  coast  from
Melinde  to  Mozambique,  came  to  view  and  to  betray
our  boat  if  he  could  have  taken  at  any  time  advantage,
in  a  gallie  Frigate  of  ten  tunnes  with  8  or  9  oares  on  A  gdlie
a  side.  Of  the  strength  of  which  Frigate  and  their  ^^^^^!f-  ,
trecherous  meaning  we  were  advertised  by  an  Arabian
Moore  which  came  from  the  king  of  Zanzibar  divers
times  unto  us  about  the  deliverie  of  the  priest  aforesayd,
and  afterward  by  another  which  we  caried  thence  along
with  us :  for  wheresoever  we  came,  our  care  was  to  get
into  our  hands  some  one  or  two  of  the  countreys  to
learne  the  languages  and  states  of  those  partes  where  we
touched.  Moreover,  here  againe  we  had  another  clap  of  Another
thunder  which  did  shake  our  foremast  very  much,  which  *"  e^-c  ap.
wee  fisht  and  repaired  with  timber  from  the  shore,  whereof
there  is  good  store  thereabout  of  a  kind  of  trees  some
fortie  foot  high,  which  is  a  red  and  tough  wood,  and  as  I
suppose,  a, kind  of  Cedar.  Here  our  Surgeon  Arnold
negligently  catching  a  great  heate  in  his  head  being  on  Heat  In  the
land  with  the  master  to  seeke  oxen,  fell  sicke  and  shortly  ^^^^  deadly.

393

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1592.
Letting  of died,  which  might  have  bene  cured  by  letting  of  blood
blood  very before  it  had  bin  setled. Before  our  departure  we  had
necessary. -^  ^j^-^  place  some  thousand weight of  pitch,  or  rather
a kind of gray and white gumme like unto frank-
incense, as clammie as turpentine, which in melting
groweth as blacke as  pitch, and is  very brittle of  it
selfe,  but  we  mingled  it  with  oile,  whereof  wee  had  300
jarres  in  the  prize which we tooke to the Northward
of  the  Equinoctiall, not farre  from Guinie,  bound for
Brasil. Sixe  dayes  before  wee  departed  hence,  the  Cape
marchant  of  the  Factorie  wrote  a  letter  unto  our  capi-
taine  in  the  way  of  friendship,  as  he  pretended,  requesting
a  Jarre  of  wine,  and  a  Jarre  of  oyle,  and two  or  three
pounds  of  gunpouder,  which  letter  hee  sent  by  a  Negro
his  man, and Moore in a Canoa : we sent him his
demaunds  by  the Moore, but tooke  the Negro  along
with  us because  we  understood  he  had  bene  in  the  East
Indies  and  knew  somewhat of  the countrey. By this
Negro  we were advertised of  a small  Barke of  some
A  J  unco  laden  thirtie  tunnes  (which  the Moores call  a Junco)  which
"^^th  pepper ^^g  come  from Goa  thither  laden  with  Pepper  for  the
lugs. Factorie  and  service of  that kingdome. Thus having
trimmed  our  shippe  as  we  lay  in  this  road,  in  the  end
we  set  forward  for  the  coast  of  the  East  India,  the 15  of
February aforesayd, intending if we could to have
reached  to  Cape  Comori,  which  is  the  headland  or  Pro-
montorie  of  the maine  of  Malavar,  and  there  to  have
lien  off  and  on for such ships as should have  passed
from  Zeilan, Sant  Tome, Bengala,  Pegu, Malacca,  the
Moluccos,  the coast of  China, and the He  of  Japan,
which  ships  are  of  exceeding  wealth  and  riches. But  in
The  currents our  course  we  were  very  much  deceived  by  the  currents
^ei^othe ^^^  gg^  -j^^Q  ^^  orulfe  of  the Red  sea  alone:  the  coast

Northwards  ^  .  .  ^

of  Melinde.  And  the  windes  shortening  upon  us  to  the
Northeast  and  Easterly,  kept  us  that  we  could  not  get
off,  and  so  with  the  putting  in  of  the  currents  from  the
Westward,  set  us  in  further  unto  the  Northward  within
Zocotora. fourescore  leagues  of  the  He  of  Zocotora,  farre  from  our

394

JAMES LANCASTER  ad.

1592.
determined  course  and expectation. But  here  we  never
wanted abundance of Dolphins, Bonitos and flying
fishes. Now  while we  found our  selves thus  farre  to
the  Northward, and  the time  being so  farre  spent,  we
determined  to  goe for the Red sea, or  for the Hand
of  Zocotora,  both to  refresh our selves, and also  for
some  purchase. But  while  wee  were  in  this  consultation,
the  winde  very luckily came about to the Northwest
and  caried  us  directly  toward  Cape  Comori. Before  we
should  have  doubled  this  Cape,  we  were  determined  to
touch  at  the  Hands  of  Mamale,  of  which  we  had  adver-  "^^^  ^^^^  °f
tisement,  that  one  had  victuals,  standing  in  the  Northerly  '*^'^'"'^^-
latitude of  twelve degrees. Howbeit it was not  our
good  lucke  to finde  it, which fell out partly by the
obstinacie of  our master : for the day  before  we  fell
with  part of  the Hands the wind came about to  the
Southwest,  and  then  shifting our  course we missed  it.
So  the  wind  increasing  Southerly,  we  feared  we  should
not  have  bene able to  have  doubled the Cape, which
would  have  gready  hazarded  our  casting  away  upon  the
coast  of  India,  the  Winter  season  and  Westerne Mon-
sons  already  being  come  in,  which  Monsons  continue  on
that  coast  until  August. Nevertheles  it  pleased  God  to
bring  the  wind  more  Westerly,  &  so  in  the  moneth  of
May 1592.  we happily  doubled Cape Comori without  Cape  Comori
sight  of  the  coast  of  India. From hence thus  having  doubled  i'^()z.
doubled  this  Cape,  we  directed  our  course  for  the  Hands  Th^  i^"  "f
of  Nicubar,  which  lie  North  and  South  with  the  Westerne  ^^^«'^^'"-
part  of  Sumatra,  and  in  the  latitude  of  7  degrees  to  the
Northward  of  the  Equinoctiall. From which Cape  of
Comori unto the aforesayd Hands we ranne in sixe
dayes  with  a  very  large  wind  though  the  weather  were
foule  with  extreme  raine  and  gustes  of  windes. These
Hands  were  missed  through  our  masters  default  for  want
of  due  observation  of  the South starre. And  we fell
to  the  Southward  of  them  within  the  sight  of  the  Hands  The  lies  of
of  Gomes  Polo,  which  lie  hard  upon  the  great  Hand  of  ^°"^^^  ^°^°-
Sumatra  the  first  of  June,  and  at  the  Northeast  side  of

395

A.D.

1592.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Sumatra.

The  Iks  of
Pub  Pinaou

them  we  lay  two  or  three  dayes  becalmed,  hoping  to
have  had  a  Pilote  from  Sumatra,  within  two  leagues
whereof  wee  lay  off  and  on.  Now  the  Winter  comming
upon  us  with  much  contagious  weather,  we  directed  our
course  from  hence  with  the  Hands  of  Pulo  Pinaou,
(where  by  the  way  is  to  be  noted  that  Pulo  in  the
Malaian  tongue  signifieth  an  Hand)  at  which  Hands  wee
arrived  about  the  beginning  of  June,  where  we  came  to
an  anker  in  a  very  good  harborough  betweene  three
Hands :  at  which  time  our  men  were  very  sicke  and
many  fallen.  Here  we  determined  to  stay  untill  the
[II.  ii.  1 06. J  Winter  were  overpast.  This  place  is  in  6  degrees  and  a
halfe  to  the  Northward,  and  some  five  leagues  from
the  maine  betweene  Malacca  and  Pegu.  Here  we  con-
tinued untill  the  end  of  August.  Our  refreshing  in
this  place  was  very  smal,  onely  of  oisters  growing  on
rocks,  great  wilks,  and  some  few  fish  which  we  tooke
with  our  hookes.  Here  we  landed  our  sicke  men  on
these  uninhabited  Hands  for  their  health,  neverthelesse
26  of  them  died  in  this  place,  whereof  John  Hall  our
master  was  one,  and  M.  Rainold  Golding  another,  a
marchant  of  great  honestie  and  much  discretion.  In
these  Islands  are  abundance  of  trees  of  white  wood,  so
right  and  tall,  that  a  man  may  make  mastes  of  them
being  an  hundred  foote  long.  The  winter  passed  and
having  watered  our  ship  and  fitted  her  to  goe  to  Sea,
wee  had  left  us  but  33  men  and  one  boy,  of  which
not  past  22  were  sound  for  labour  and  helpe,  and  of
them  not  past  a  third  part  sailers :  thence  we  made
saile  to  seeke  some  place  of  refreshing,  and  went  over
to  the  maine  of  Malacca.  The  next  day  we  came  to
an  anker  in  a  Baie  in  six  fadomes  water  some  two  leagues
from  the  shore.  Then  master  James  Lancaster  our
captaine,  and  M.  Edmund  Barker  his  lieutenant,  and
other  of  the  companie  manning  the  boat,  went  on  shore
to  see  what  inhabitants  might  be  found.  And  comming
on  land  we  found  the  tracking  of  some  barefooted  people
which  were departed thence  not long before : for we

396

Trees  Jit  for
mastes.

Malacca.

JAMES LANCASTER  ad

1592.

sawe  their  fire  still  burning,  but  people  we  sawe  none,
nor  any  other  living  creature,  save  a  certaine  kind  of
foule  called  oxe  birds,  which  are  a  gray  kind  of  Sea-
foule,  like  a  Snite  in  colour,  but  not  in  beake.  Of
these  we  killed  some  eight  dozen  with  haile-shot  being
very  tame,  and  spending  the  day  in  search,  returned
toward  night  aboord.  The  next  day  about  two  of  the
clocke  in  the  afternoone  we  espied  a  Canoa  which  came
neere  unto  us,  but  would  not  come  aboord  us,  having
in  it  some  sixteen  naked  Indians,  with  whom  nevertheles
going  afterward  on  land,  we  had  friendly  conference  and
promise  of  victuals.  The  next  day  in  the  morning  we
espied  three  ships,  being  all  of  burthen  60  or  70  tunnes,  ^-^''^^  •^'^^/•f  °f
one  of  which  wee  made  to  strike  with  our  very  boate :  "^J  ^
and  understanding  that  they  were  of  the  towne  of  Mar-  Martabam'.
tabam,  which  is  the  chiefe  haven  towne  for  the  great
citie  of  Pegu,  and  the  goods  belonging  to  certaine  Portu-
gal Jesuites  and  a  Biscuit  baker  a  Portugal,  we  tooke
that  ship  &  did  not  force  the  other  two,  because  they
were  laden  for  marchants  of  Pegu,  but  having  this  one
at  our  command,  we  came  together  to  an  anker.  The
night  folowing  all  the  men  except  twelve,  which  we
tooke  into  our  ship,  being  most  of  them  borne  in  Pegu,
fled  away  in  their  boate,  leaving  their  ship  and  goods
with  us.  The  next  day  we  weighed  our  anker  and  went
to  the  Leeward  of  an  Hand  hard  by,  and  tooke  in  her
lading  being  pepper,  which  shee  and  the  other  two  had
laden  at  Pera,  which  is  a  place  on  the  maine  30  leagues  Pera.
to  the  South.  Besides  the  aforesaid  three  ships,  we
tooke  another  ship  of  Pegu  laden  with  pepper,  and  per-
ceiving her  to  bee  laden  with  marchants  goods  of  Pegu
onely,  wee  dismissed  her  without  touching  any  thing.

Thus  having  staied  here  10  daies  and  discharged  her
goods  into  the  Edward,  which  was  about  the  beginning
of  September,  our  sicke  men  being  somewhat  refreshed
and  lustie,  with  such  reliefe  as  we  had  found  in  this
ship,  we  weighed  anker,  determining  to  runne  into  the  p^j^
streights  of  Malacca  to  the  Hands  called  Pulo  Sambilam,  Sambilam.

397

A.D.

1592.

J  ship  of
Negapatan
taken.

A  ship  of
S.  Thome.

The  galeon  of
Malacca  of
700  taken.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  are  some  five  and  fortie  leagues  Northward  of
the  citie  of  Malacca,  to  which  Hands  the  Portugals  must
needs  come  from  Goa  or  S.  Thome,  for  the  Malucos,
China,  and  Japan.  And  when  wee  were  there  arrived,
we  lay  too  and  agayne  for  such  shipping  as  should  come
that  way.  Thus  having  spent  some  five  dayes,  upon  a
Sunday  we  espied  a  saile  which  was  a  Portugall  ship
that  came  from  Negapatan  a  towne  on  the  maine  of
India  over-against  the  Northeast  part  of  the  He  of
Zeilan ;  and  that  night  we  tooke  her  being  of  250
tunnes :  she  was  laden  with  Rice  for  Malacca.  Captaine
Lancaster  commanded  their  captaine  and  master  aboord
our  shippe,  and  sent  Edmund  Barker  his  lieutenant  and
seven  more  to  keepe  this  prize,  who  being  aboord  the
same,  came  to  an  anker  in  thirtie  fadomes  water :  for  in
that  chanell  three  or  foure  leagues  from  the  shore  you
shall  finde  good  ankorage.  Being  thus  at  an  anker  and
keeping  out  a  light  for  the  Edward,  another  Portugall
ship  of  Sant  Thome  of  foure  hundred  tunnes,  came  and
ankered  hard  by  us.  The  Edward  being  put  to  Lee-
ward for  lacke  of  helpe  of  men  to  handle  her  sailes,
was  not  able  the  next  morning  to  fetch  her  up,  until
we  which  were  in  the  prize  with  our  boate,  went  to
helpe  to  man  our  shippe.  Then  comming  aboord  we
went  toward  the  shippe  of  Sant  Thome,  but  our  ship  was
so  foule  that  shee  escaped  us.  After  we  had  taken  out
of  our  Portugall  prize  what  we  thought  good,  we  turned
her  and  all  her  men  away  except  a  Pilot  and  foure
Moores.  We  continued  here  untill  the  sixt  of  October,
at  which  time  we  met  with  the  ship  of  the  captaine
of  Malacca  of  seven  hundred  tunnes  which  came  from
Goa :  we  shot  at  her  many  shot,  and  at  last  shooting
her  maine-yard  through,  she  came  to  an  anker  and
yeelded.  We  commaunded  her  Captaine,  Master,  Pilot
and  Purser  to  come  aboord  us.  But  the  Captaine
accompanied  with  one  souldier  onely  came,  and  after
certaine  conference  with  him,  he  made  excuse  to  fetch
the  Master  and  Purser,  which  he  sayd  would  not  come

398

JAMES LANCASTER  ad.

1592.

unlesse  he  went  for  them :  but  being  gotten  from  us  in
the  edge of  the evening,  he  with  all  the people  which  [II.  ii.  107.]
were  to  the  number  of  about  three  hundred  men,  women
and  children, gote  a shore with two  great  boates and
quite  abandoned  the  ship. At  our  comming  aboord  we
found  in  her  sixteene  pieces  of  brasse,  and  three  hundred
buts of  Canarie wine, and  Nipar  wine,  which  is  made
of  the palme trees,  and  raisin  wine  which  is  also  very
strong :  as  also  all  kind  of  Haberdasher  wares,  as  hats,  Wares  fit  to
red  caps  knit  of  Spanish  wooU,  worsted  stockings  knit,  '^^'^  tnto  the
shooes,  velvets,  tafFataes,  chamlets,  and  silkes,  abundance
of  suckets,  rice,  Venice glasses,  certaine  papers  full of
false  and  counterfeit  stones  which  an  Italian  brought  from
Venice to deceive the rude  Indians  withall,  abundance
of  playing cardes,  two or  three  packs  of  French  paper.
Whatsoever  became of  the treasure which usually is
brought  in  roials  of  plate  in  this  gallion,  we  could  not
find  it. After  that  the  mariners  had  disordredly  pilled  ,
this  rich  shippe,  the  Captaine  because they  would not
follow  his  commandement  to  unlade  those  excellent  wines
into  the  Edward,  abandoned  her  &  let  her  drive  at  Sea,
taking  out  of  her  the  choisest  things  that  she  had. And
doubting  the forces  of  Malaca,  we  departed  thence to
a  Baie  in  the  kingdom  of  Junsalaom,  which  is  betweene  2^-^^  kingdom
Malacca  and  Pegu eight degrees  to  the  Northward,  to  "fJ""^^^^"^-
seeke  for  pitch  to  trimme  our  ship. Here  we  sent  our
souldier,  which  the  captaine  of  the  aforesaid  galion  had
left behind  him  with us, because  he had  the Malaian
language,  to  deale  with  the  people  for  pitch,  which  hee
did  faithfully,  and  procured  us  some  two  or  three  quintals
with promise  of  more,  and  certaine  of  the  people  came
unto  us. We  sent  commodities  to  their  king  to  barter
for  Amber-griese,  and  for  the  homes  of  Abath,  whereof  Amber-greese.
the  king  onely  hath the traffique  in  his hands. Now.  y^^^  ^^^.^^^
this  Abath  is  a  beast  which  hath  one  home  onely  in  her  of  Abath.
forehead,  and  is  thought  to  be  the  female  Unicorne,  and  The  female
is  highly  esteemed  of  all  the  Moores  in  those  parts  as  Unkome.
a  most soveraigne remedie against poyson. We had

399

A.D.
1592.

Some  small
quantit'ie  here-
of may  be
carted  to
pleasure  those
kings.

They  arrive
at  the  lies  of
Nicubar,
•which  are  in-
habited by
Moores.

They  reiurne
homeward.
They  arrive
at  Zeilan.

Tanaseri  in
the  kingdom
of  Siam.

Commodities
of  Bengala.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

onely  two  or  three  of  these  homes  which  are  of  the
colour  of  a  browne  gray,  and  some  reasonable  quantitie
of  Amber-griese.  At  last  the  king  went  about  to  betray
our  Portugall  with  our  marchandise  :  but  he  to  get  aboord
us,  told  him  that  we  had  gilt  armour,  shirtes  of  maile
and  halberds,  which  things  they  greatly  desire :  for  hope
whereof  he  let  him  returne  aboord,  and  so  he  escaped  the
danger.  Thus  we  left  this  coast  and  went  backe  againe
in  sight  of  Sumatra,  and  thence  to  the  Hands  of  Nicubar,
where  we  arrived  and  found  them  inhabited  with  Moores,
and  after  wee  came  to  an  anker,  the  people  daily  came
aboord  us  in  their  Canoas,  with  hennes,  Cocos,  plantans
and  other  fruits :  and  within  two  dayes  they  brought
unto  us  roials  of  plate,  giving  us  them  for  Calicut  cloth  :
which  roials  they  finde  by  diving  for  them  in  the  Sea,
which  were  lost  not  long  before  in  two  Portugall  ships
which  were  bound  for  China  and  were  cast  away  there.
They  call  in  their  language  the  Coco  Calambe,  the
Plantane  Pison,  a  Hen  Jam,  a  Fish  Iccan,  a  Hog  Babee.
From  thence  we  returned  the  21  of  November  to  goe
for  the  Hand  of  Zeilan,  and  arrived  there  about  the  third
of  December  1592.  and  ankered  upon  the  Southside  in
sixe  fadomes  water,  where  we  lost  our  anker,  the  place
being  rockie  and  foule  ground.  Then  we  ranne  along
the  Southwest  part  of  the  sayd  Hand,  to  a  place  called
Punta  del  Galle,  where  we  ankered,  determining  there
to  have  remained  untill  the  comming  of  the  Bengala  Fleet
of  seven  or  eight  ships,  and  the  Fleete  of  Pegu  of  two
or  three  sailes,  and  the  Portugall  shippes  of  Tanaseri
being  a  great  Baie  to  the  Southward  of  Martabam  in
the  kingdom  of  Siam  :  which  ships,  by  divers  intelligences
which  we  had,  were  to  come  that  way  within  foureteene
dayes  to  bring  commodities  to  serve  the  Caraks,  which
commonly  depart  from  Cochin  for  Portugall  by  the
middest  of  Januarie.  The  commodities  of  the  shippes
which  come  from  Bengala  bee  fine  pavillions  for  beds,
wrought  quilts,  fine  Calicut  cloth.  Pintados  and  other
fine  workes,  and  Rice,  and  they  make  this  voiage  twise

400

JAMES LANCASTER  ad

1593-
in the  yeere. Those  of  Pegu  bring  the  chiefest  stones, Commodities
as  Rubies  and  Diamants,  but  their  chiefe  fraight  is  Rice  of^^g"--
and certaine cloth. Those of Tanaseri are chiefly  Commodities
fraighted  with  Rice  and  Nipar  wine,  which  is  very  strong,  '^f'^^^^^^^'^-
and in colour  like  unto  rocke  water  somewhat  whitish,
and  very  hote  in  taste  like  unto  Aqua  vitae. Being  shot
up to  the  place aforesayd,  called  Punta del  Galle,  wee
came to an anker in foule  ground  and  lost the same,
and  lay  all  that  night  a  drift,  because  we  had  nowe  but
two  ankers  left  us,  which  were  unstocked  and  in  hold.
Whereupon our men tooke occasion to come home,
our Captaine at that time  lying  very  sicke  more  like
to  die  then  to  live. In  the  morning  wee  set  our  fore-
saile  determining  to  lie  up  to  the  Northward  and  there  to
keepe  our  selves  to  and  againe  out  of  the  current,  which  A  great  cur-
otherwise  would  have  set  us  oiFto  the  Southward  from  all  ^^^^  j'^  ^^^

1  1 J /-i-ii  1 •  ^  r  1  1 • Southward.

knowen  land, ihus havmg set our roresayle, and m

hand  to  set  all  our  other  sayles  to  accomplish  our  afore-  .

sayd determination, our men made  answere  that they

would take their  direct  course  for  England  and would

stay there no longer. Nowe seeing they could not

bee  perswaded  by  any  meanes  possible,  the  captaine  was

constrained to give his  consent  to returne,  leaving  all

hope of so great possibilities. Thus the eight of

December 1592. wee set sayle  for  the  Cape  of  Buona

Speransa,  passing  by  the  Hands  of  Maldiva,  and  leaving

the mightie Hand of  S. Laurence on the starreboord  [II.  ii.  108.]

or  Northward  in  the  latitude  of  26  degrees  to  the  South.

In Our  passage  over  from  S.  Laurence  to  the  maine  we

had exceeding great store of Bonitos and Albocores,  ^  notable  re-

which  are  a  greater  kind  of  fish :  of  which  our  captain, '^y  of  fishes

being now recovered of  his sicknesse, tooke with  an

hooke  as  many  in  two  or  three  howers  as  would serve

fortie persons a whole day. And this skole of fish

continued  with our ship  for  the space  of  five  or  sixe

weekes, all which while we tooke to the quantitie

aforesayd, which was no small refreshing to us. In

February 1593. we fell with the Eastermost land  of

VI  401  2C

A.D.

1593-
Baia  de  Agoa.

They  double
the  Cape  of
Buona
Speransa.

S.  Helena.

John  Segar  an

Englishman
left  1 8  moneths
alone  In  the
lie  ofsanta
Helena.

A  miraculous
efect  of  ex-
treme fear  e  or
extreme  joy.

The  descrip-
tion of  the
commodities  of
the  ileof  santa
Helena.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Africa  at  a  place  called  Baia  de  Agoa  some  loo  leagues  to
the  Northeast  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope :  and  finding
the  winds  contrary,  we  spent  a  moneth  or  five  weekes
before  we  could  double  the  Cape.  After  wee  had  doubled
it  in  March  folowing,  wee  directed  our  course  for  the
Hand  of  Santa  Helena,  and  arrived  there  the  third  day
of  Aprill,  where  wee  staied  to  our  great  comfort  nineteene
dayes :  in  which  meane  space  some  one  man  of  us  tooke
thirtie  goodly  Congers  in  one  day,  and  other  rockie
fishe  and  some  Bonitos.  After  our  arrivall  at  Santa
Helena,  I  Edmund  Barker  went  on  shore  with  foure
or  five  Peguins  or  men  of  Pegu  which  we  had  taken,
and  our  Surgion,  where  in  an  house  by  the  Chappell
I  found  an  Englishman  one  John  Segar  of  Burie  in
Suffolke,  who  was  left  there  eighteene  moneths  before
by  Abraham  Kendall,  who  put  in  there  with  the  Roiall
marchant,  and  left  him  there  to  refresh  him  on  the
Hand,  being  otherwise  like  to  have  perished  on  ship-
boord :  and  at  our  comming  wee  found  him  as  fresh
in  colour  and  in  as  good  plight  of  body  to  our  seeming
as  might  be,  but  crazed  in  minde  and  halfe  out  of
his  wits,  as  afterward  wee  perceived :  for  whether  he
were  put  in  fright  of  us,  not  knowing  at  first  what
we  were,  whether  friends  or  foes,  or  of  sudden  joy  when
he  understood  we  were  his  olde  consorts  and  countrey-
men,  hee  became  idle-headed,  and  for  eight  dayes  space
neither  night  nor  day  tooke  any  naturall  rest,  and  so
at  length  died  for  lacke  of  sleepe.  Here  two  of  our  men,
whereof  the  one  was  diseased  with  the  skurvie,  and  the
other  had  bene  nine  moneths  sicke  of  the  fluxe,  in  short
time  while  they  were  on  the  Hand,  recovered  their  perfect
health.  We  found  in  this  place  great  store  of  very  hole-
some  and  excellent  good  greene  figs,  orenges,  and  lemons
very  faire,  abundance  of  goates  and  hogs,  and  great  plentie
of  partriges,  Guiniecocks,  and  other  wilde  foules.  Our
mariners  somewhat  discontented  being  now  watered  and
having  some  provision  of  fish,  contrary  to  the  will  of  the
capitaine, would straight home. The  capitaine  because

402

JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1593.
he  was  desirous  to  goe  for  Phernambuc  in  Brasil,  granted
their request. And  about  the 12 of  Aprill 1593. we
departed  from S. Helena, and  directed our  course  for
the  place  aforesayd. The  next  day  our  capitaine  calling
upon  the  sailers  to  finish  a  foresaile  which  they  had  in
hand,  some  of  them  answered  that unlesse they  might
goe  directly  home,  they  would  lay  their  hands  to  nothing ;
whereupon  he  was  constrained to folow their humour.
And  from  thence-foorth  we  directed  our  course  for  our
countrey,  which  we  kept  untill  we  came  8  degrees  to  the
Northward  of  the  Equinoctiall,  betweene  which  8  degrees
and the line,  we spent some sixe  weekes,  with  many
calme  and  contrary  winds  at  North,  and  somtimes  to  the
Eastward,  & somtimes to the  Westward : which losse
of  time  and  expense  of  our  victuals,  whereof  we  had  very
smal  store,  made us doubt to keepe our course: and
some  of  our  men  growing  into  a  mutinie  threatned  to
breake up  other  mens  chests,  to  the overthrow  of  our
victuals  and  all  our  selves,  for  every  man  had  his  share
of  his  victuals before in his owne custody, that they
might  be sure  what to trust to,  and husband it more
thriftily. Our capitaine seeking to prevent this mis-
chiefe,  being  advertised  by  one  of  our  companie  which
had  bene  at  the  He  of  Trinidada  in  M.  Chidleis  voyage,
that  there  we  should  be  sure  to  have  refreshing,  hereupon
directed  his  course  to  that  Hand,  and  not  knowing  the
currents,  we  were  put  past  it  in  the  night  into  the  gulfe  '^^^plf^  of
of  Paria in the beginning  of  June,  wherein we  were  ^l^^^ ^gi
8 dayes,  finding  the  current  continually  setting  in,  and  Dragone
oftentimes  we  were  in  3 fadomes  water,  and  could  find  passed.
no  going  out  until  the  current  had  put  us  over  to  the  ^  S°°^  "°^^-
Westernside  under  the maine  land,  where  we  found  no
current  at  all,  and  more  deep  water ;  and  so  keeping  by
the  shore,  the  wind  off  the  shore  every  night  did  helpe
us out to the Northward. Being cleare,  within foure
or  five  dayes  after  we  fell  with  the  He  of  Mona  where  The  Ik  of
we  ankred  and rode  some  eighteene  dayes. In  which  ^°^^-
time the Indians of  Mona gave us some refreshing.

403

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1593-

And in the meane space there arrived  a French ship
of Cane in which was capitaine one Monsieur de
Barbaterre,  of  whom  wee  bought  some  two  buts  of  wine
and  bread,  and other  victuals. Then  wee  watered  and
fitted  our  shippe,  and  stopped  a  great  leake  which  broke
on us as  we  were  beating out  of  the gulfe of  Paria.
And  having  thus  made  ready  our ship to goe to Sea,
we determined to goe directly for New-found-land.
But  before  wee  departed,  there  arose  a  storme  the  winde
being  Northerly,  which  put  us  from  an  anker  and  forced
us  to  the  Southward  of  Santo  Domingo. This  night  we
were in danger of shipwracke upon an Hand called
The  lie  ofSa-  Savona,  which  is  environed  with  flats  lying  4  or  5  miles
•vom environed  off. ^^^  j^ pleased God to cleare us of  them, & so
"'^ J^^  ^' we directed our  course  Westward along  the Hand of
Cape  de  Santo  Domingo,  and  doubled  Cape  Tiberon,  and  passed

Tweron.  through  the  old  chanell  betweene  S.  Domingo  and  Cuba

for  the  cape  of  Florida :  And  here  we  met  againe  with
the  French  ship  of  Caen,  whose  Captaine  could  spare
us  no  more  victuals,  as  he  said,  but  only  hides  which  he
had  taken  by  traffike  upon  those  Hands,  wherewith  we
were  content  and  gave  him  for  them  to  his  good  satis-
faction. After  this,  passing  the  Cape  of  Florida,  and
The  old  Chanel  cleere  of  the  chanell  of  Bahama,  we  directed  our  course
passed.  f^j. ^j^^ banke of Newfound-land. Thus running to

the  height  of  36  degrees,  and  as  farre  to  the  East  as
the  Isle  of  Bermuda  the  17  of  September  finding  the
winds  there  very  variable,  contrarie  to  our  expectation
and  all  mens  writings,  we  lay  there  a  day  or  two  the
winde  being  northerly,  and  increasing  continually  more
and  more,  it  grewe  to  be  a  storme  and  a  great  frete
of  wind :  which  continued  with  us  some  24  houres,  with
such  extremitie,  as  it  caried  not  onely  our  sayles  away
being  furled,  but  also  made  much  water  in  our  shippe,
so  that  wee  had  sixe  foote  water  in  holde,  and  having
freed  our  ship  thereof  with  baling,  the  winde  shifted
to  the  Northwest  and  became  dullerd :  but  presently
upon  it  the  extremitie  of  the  storme  was  such  that  with

404

JAMES LANCASTER

1593-

the  labouring  of  the  ship  we  lost  our  foremaste,  and  our
ship  grewe  as  full  of  water  as  before.  The  storme  once
ceased,  and  the  winde  contrary  to  goe  our  course,  we
fell  to  consultation  which  might  be  our  best  way  to  save
our  lives.  Our  victuals  now  being  utterly  spent,  &
having  eaten  hides  6  or  7  daies,  we  thought  it  best  to
beare  back  againe  for  Dominica,  &  the  Islands  adjoyning,
knowing  that  there  we  might  have  some  reliefe,  where-
upon we  turned  backe  for  the  said  Islands.  But  before  we  They  retume
could  get  thither  the  winde  scanted  upon  us,  which  did  ^^'^^^  ^°  ^j.^
greatly  endanger  us  for  lacke  of  fresh  water  and  victuals :
so  that  we  were  constrained  to  beare  up  to  the  Westward
to  certaine  other  Ilandes  called  the  Nueblas  or  cloudie
Hands,  towards  the  He  of  S.  Juan  de  porto  Rico,  where
at  our  arrivall  we  found  land-crabs  and  fresh  water,  and
tortoyses,  which  come  most  on  lande  about  the  full  of
the  moone.  Here  having  refreshed  our  selves  some  17
or  18  dayes,  and  having  gotten  some  small  store  of
victuals  into  our  ship,  we  resolved  to  returne  againe  for
Mona :  upon  which  our  determination  five  of  our  men  F^^'^  English
left  us,  remaining  still  on  the  lies  of  Nueblas  for  all  ^'^''Jf ''' ^^'
perswasions  that  we  could  use  to  the  contrary,  which
afterward  came  home  in  an  English  shippe.  From  these
lies  we  departed  and  arrived  at  Mona  about  the  twentieth
of  November  1593,  and  there  comming  to  an  anker
toward  two  or  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the
Captaine,  and  Edmund  Barker  his  Lieuetenant  with  some
few  others  went  on  land  to  the  houses  of  the  olde  Indian
and  his  three  sonnes,  thinking  to  have  gotten  some  foode,
our  victuals  being  all  spent,  and  we  not  able  to  proceede
any  further  untill  we  had  obteyned  some  new  supply.
We  spent  two  or  three  daies  in  seeking  provision  to
cary  aboord  to  relieve  the  whole  companie.  And  com-
ming downe  to  go  aboord,  the  winde  then  being
northerly  and  the  sea  somewhat  growne,  they  could  not
come  on  shore  with  the  boate,  which  was  a  thing
of  small  succour  and  not  able  to  rowe  in  any  rough
sea,  whereupon  we  stayed  untill  the  next  morning,  think-

405

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1593-

ing  to  have  had  lesse  winde  and  safer  passage.  But  in
The  ship  lost  the  night  about  twelve  of  the  clocke  our  ship  did  drive
by  driving  away  with  five  men  and  a  boy  onely  in  it,  our  carpenter
secretly  cut  their  owne  cable,  leaving  nineteene  of  us  on
land  without  boate  or  any  thing,  to  our  great  discomfort.
In  the  middest  of  these  miseries  reposing  our  trust  in
the  goodnesse  of  God,  which  many  times  before  had
succoured  us  in  our  greatest  extremities,  we  contented
our  selves  with  our  poore  estate,  and  sought  meanes
to  preserve  our  lives.  And  because  one  place  was  not
able  to  sustaine  us,  we  tooke  our  leaves  one  of  another,
dividing  our  selves  into  severall  companies.  The
Great  famine,  greatest  reliefe  that  we  sixe  which  were  with  the  Captaine
could  finde  for  the  space  of  nine  and  twentie  dayes  was
the  stalkes  of  purselaine  boyled  in  water,  and  nowe  and
then  a  pompion,  which  we  found  in  the  garden  of  the
olde  Indian,  who  upon  this  our  second  arrivall  with  his
three  sonnes  stole  from  us,  and  kept  himselfe  continually
aloft  in  the  mountaines.  After  the  ende  of  nine  and
twentie  dayes  we  espied  a  French  shippe,  which  after-
warde  we  understood  to  be  of  Diepe,  called  the  Luisa,
whose  Captaine  was  one  Mounsieur  Felix,  unto  whom
wee  made  a  fire,  at  sight  whereof  he  tooke  in  his  top-
sayles,  bare  in  with  the  land,  and  shewed  us  his  flagge,
whereby  we  judged  him  French :  so  comming  along
to  the  Westerne  ende  of  the  Island  there  be  ankered,
we  making  downe  with  all  speede  unto  him.  At  this
time  the  Indian  and  his  three  sonnes  came  done  to  our
Captaine  Master  James  Lancaster,  and  went  along  with
Two  ships  of  him  to  the  shippe.  This  night  he  went  aboord  the
Diepe.  French  man,  who  gave  him  good  entertainement,  and  the

next  day  fetched  eleven  more  of  us  aboord  entreating
us  all  very  courteously.  This  day  came  another  French
shippe  of  the  same  towne  of  Diepe  which  remayned  there
untill  night  expecting  our  other  seven  mens  comming
downe :  who,  albeit  we  caused  certaine  pieces  of  ordi-
nance to  be  shot  oiF  to  call  them,  yet  came  not  downe.
Whereupon  we  departed  thence,  being  devided  sixe  into

406

JAMES LANCASTER

one  ship,  and  sixe  into  another,  and  leaving  this  Island,
departed  for  the  Northside  of  Saint  Domingo,  where  we
remained  untill  Aprill  following  1594,  and  spent  some
two  monethes  in  traffike  with  the  inhabitants  by  permis-
sion for  hides  and  other  marchandises  of  the  Countrey.
In  this  meane  while  there  came  a  shippe  of  New-haven
to  the  place  where  we  were,  whereby  we  had  intelligence
of  our  seven  men  which  wee  left  behinde  us  at  the  Isle
of  Mona :  which  was,  that  two  of  them  brake  their
neckes  with  ventring  to  take  foules  upon  the  cliffes,
other  three  were  slaine  by  the  Spaniards,  which  came
from  Saint  Domingo,  upon  knowledge  given  by  our  men
which  went  away  in  the  Edward,  the  other  two  this
man  of  New-haven  had  with  him  in  his  shippe,  which
escaped  the  Spaniards  bloodie  hands.  From  this  place
Captaine  Lancaster  and  his  Lieutenant  Master  Edmund
Barker,  shipped  themselves  in  another  shippe  of  Diepe,
the  Captaine  whereof  was  one  John  La  Noe,  which  was
readie  first  to  come  away,  and  leaving  the  rest  of  their
companie  in  other  ships,  where  they  were  well  intreated,
to  come  after  him,  on  Sunday  the  seventh  of  Aprill
1594  they  set  homewarde,  and  disbocking  through  the
Cajicos  from  thence  arrived  safely  in  Diepe  within  two
and  fortie  dayes  after,  on  the  19  of  May,  where  after
we  had  stayed  two  dayes  to  refresh  our  selves,  and  given
humble  thankes  unto  God,  and  unto  our  friendly  neigh-
bours, we  tooke  passage  for  Rie  and  landed  there  on
Friday  the  24  of  May  1594,  having  spent  in  this  voyage
three  yeeres,  sixe  weekes  and  two  dayes,  which  the
Portugales  performe  in  halfe  the  time,  chiefely  because
wee  lost  our  fit  time  and  season  to  set  foorth  in  the
beginning  of  our  voyage.

We  understood  in  the  East  Indies  by  certaine  Portu-
gales which  we  tooke,  that  they  have  lately  discovered
the  coast  of  China  to  the  latitude  of  nine  and  fiftie
degrees,  finding  the  sea  still  open  to  the  Northward :
giving  great  hope  of  the  Northeast  or  Northwest  passage.
Witnesse  Master  James  Lancaster.

407

A.D.

1594.

The  French
trafike  to  S.
Domingo.
[II.  ii.  no.]

M.  Lancaster
returneth  to
Diepe,  and  so
to  England.

A.D.
1583.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Certaine  remembrances  of  an  intended  voyage  to
Brasill,  and  the  River  of  Plate,  by  the  Edward
Cotton,  a  ship  of  260  Tunnes  of  Master  Ed-
ward Cotton  of  Southhampton,  which  perished
through  extreme  negUgence  neare  Rio  grande
in Guinie,  the  17  of  July  1583.

ARticles  of  Covenants  agreed  upon  betweene  Edward
Cotton  Esquier,  owner  of  the  good  ship  called  the
Edward  Cotton  of  Southhampton,  and  of  all  the  mar-
chandizes  in  her  laden,  of  the  one  part,  and  William
Huddie  gentleman,  Captaine  of  the  said  ship,  John
Hooper  his  Lieutenant,  John  Foster  Master,  Hugh
Smith  Pilot  for  the  whole  voyage,  and  William  Chees-
man  marchant,  on  the  other  part.

10  observe  and  keepe  the  dayly  order
of  Common  prayer  aboord  the  ship,
and  the  companie  to  be  called  there-
unto, at  the  least  once  in  the  day,  to
be  pronounced  openly.

2  Item,  that  they  be  ready  with  the
first  faire  winde,  to  set  saile  and  sailes
in  the  voyage,  and  not  to  put  into  any  port  or  harbour,
but  being  forcibly  constrained  by  weather,  or  other
apparant  and  urgent  cause.

3  Item,  that  they  take  in,  at  or  about  the  Isles  of  Cape
Verde,  to  the  quantitie  of  25  or  30  tuns  of  salt,  to  be
imployed  among  other  the  owners  marchandize,  at  Santos,
and  S.  Vincent,  to  his  onely  behoofe,  and  the  rest  of  the
salt,  so  much  as  shall  be  needed  for  victuall,  and  for
saving  of  the  hides  to  be  kept  aboord,  &  the  same  salt
to  be  provided  either  at  the  fishermens  hands  neere  the
said  Isles  for  trucke  of  commodities,  or  els  to  be  taken
in  at  the  aforesaid  Isles,  at  the  discretion  of  the  above-
named.

4  Item,  upon  the  due  performance  of  this  voiage,  the
owner  bindeth  himselfe  by  this  deede,  to  yeeld  unto  any

408

REMEMBRANCES FOR BRAZIL  ad.

1583.
such  of  the  companie,  as  shall  refuse  their  shares  before
they depart from the coast of  England, 20 markes a
single  share,  for  the  dutie  of  the  whole  voiage,  making
not  above  75.  shares  single  in  the  whole.

5  Item,  the  company  according  as  they  be  appointed
by  the  officers  of  the  said  ship  above  named,  shall  at  all
times  be  most  ready  to  doe  their  painfull  indevor,  not
onely  aboord,  but  in  all  labours  at  the  land,  according  to
the  direction  given  by  the  above  named  officers,  upon
paine  of  forfeiture  of  their  shares  and  wages,  the  same
to  be  divided  amongst  the  company.

6  Item,  that  the  shares  be  taken  at  their  returne  out
of  al  the  traine  oile,  and  hides  of  the  seales,  and  of  all
other  commodities  gotten  by  their  handie  labour,  and  of
the  salt  that  shall  be  vended  and  other  commodities,  at,
or  neere  the  coast  of  Brasill,  to  allow  after  9  li.  the
tunne  freight,  whereof  one  third  to  goe  to  the  companie.

7  Item,  that  if  any  man shall  practise  by  any  devise  '
or  devises  whatsoever,  to  alter  the  voiage  from  the  true
purpose  and  intent  of  the  owner,  viz.  to  make  their  first
port  at  Santos,  and  Saint  Vincent,  and  there  to  revictuall
and  traffike,  and from  thence to the river  of  Plate  to

make  their  voyage  by  the  traine,  and  hide  of  the  seales,  [II.  ii.  iii.]
with  such  other  commodities  as  are  there  to  be  had,
according  as  the  owner,  with  divers  that  have  govern-
ment in  the  said  ship,  are  bound  to  her  highnesse  by
their  deedes  obligatorie  in  great  summes,  that  all  such
practisers,  upon  due  proofe  made,  shall  loose  their  whole
intertainement  due  by  shares  or  otherwise  for  this  sayde
voyage  to  be  adjudged  by  the  Captaine,  his  Lieutenant,
the  Master,  Pilot,  and  marchant,  or  three  of  them  at  the
least,  whereof  the  Captaine  to  be  one.

8  Item,  that  the  pinnesse  be  ready  at  al  times  to  serve
the  marchants  turne  upon  his  demand,  to  take  in  wares
and  commodities,  and  to  cary  and  recary  to  and  from  the
shore,  when,  and  as  oft  as  neede  shall  be,  and  to  give
due  attendance  at  the  marchant  and  marchants  direction,
during  the  whole  voyage.

409

A.D.
1583.

The  Isle  ofS.
Sebastian.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

9  Item,  that  no  head  or  chiefe  officer  being  set  downe
for  such  an  officer  under  the  hand  of  the  owner,  at  the
going  to  sea  of  the  said  shippe,  shall  or  may  be  displaced
from  his  said  place  or  office,  without  great  cause,  and  his
misdemeanor  to  be  adjudged  by  the  Captaine,  and  his
Lieutenant,  the  Master,  the  Pilot,  and  the  marchant,  or
by  the  consent  of  three  of  them  at  the  least.

10  Item,  that  upon  the  returne  of  the  shippe  to  the
coast  of  England,  the  Maister  and  Pilot  put  not  into
any  port  or  harbour,  to  the  Westward  of  Southhampton,
but  forced  by  weather,  or  such  like  urgent  cause.

William  Huddie.  John  Foster.

John  Hooper.  William  Cheesman.

Hugh  Smith.

A  direction  as  well  for  the  Captaine,  and  other  my
friends  of  the  ship,  as  especially  for  William
Cheesman  Marchant,  for  the  voyage  to  the
river  of  Plate.

T  your  comming  to  the  Isle  of  Saint
Sebastian,  upon  the  coast  of  BrasiU,  you
shall  according  to  your  discretions,  make
sale  of  such  commodities,  as  you  may
thinke  will  be  thereabout  well  vented,
and  likewise  to  buy  commodities  without
making  longer  stay  there  then  your
victuals  be  providing,  but  rather  to  bespeake  commodities
against  your  returne  from  the  river  of  Plate,  especially  of
Amber,  Sugar,  Greene  ginger.  Cotton  wooll,  and  some
quantitie  of  the  peppers  of  the  countrey  there.  Also  for
Parats  and  Munkies,  and  the  beast  called  Serrabosa.  Also
you  shall  barrell  up  of  the  beefe  called  Petune,  two  or
three  barrels,  and  to  lose  no  good  oportunitie,  to  gather
of  the  Indian  figges,  and  the  graines  of  them  to  preserve
drie,  in  such  quantitie  as  conveniently  may  be  done :  and
touching  the  making  of  the  traine,  and  preserving  of  the
hides,  I  leave  it  wholly  to  the  order  and  the  discretion  of

410

REMEMBRANCES FOR BRAZIL  a.d.

1583.
the  chiefe  of  the  companie.  Also  that  in  any  road  where
the  ship  shall  ride  upon  the  coast  of  America,  triall  be
made  with  the  dragges,  for  the  pearle  Oisters,  and  the
sartie  being  taken,  to  be  opened  and  searched  for  pearle
in  the  presence  of  the  Captaine,  his  Lieutenant,  the
Master,  the  Pilot,  and  marchant,  or  three  of  them,
whereof  the  Captaine  or  his  Lieutenant  to  be  one,  and
to  remaine  in  the  custodie  of  the  Captaine  and  marchant,
under  two  lockes,  either  of  them  to  have  a  key  to  his
owne  locke,  and  that  a  true  inventorie  be  delivered  also
to  the  Master  and  Pilot  of  the  said  pearle  or  other  jewels
of  price  gotten  in  the  said  voiage,  to  the  intent  that  no
partie  be  defrauded  of  his  due,  and  that  no  concealment
be  made  of  any  such  thing  upon  forfeiture,  the  partie  to
lose  his  share  and  dutie  for  the  voyage  that  shall  so
conceale  and  not  reveale  it  unto  the  officers  above  named.
Also  to  doe  your  best  indevour  to  try  for  the  best  Ore
of  golde,  silver,  or  other  rich  mettals  whatsoever.  Forget
not  also  to  bring  the  kernels  and  seeds  of  strange  plants
with  you,  the  Palmito  with  his  fruit  inclosed  in  him.
Serve  God,  keepe  good  watch,  and  stand  alwayes  upon
your  garde.

Edward  Cotton.

These  things  being  thus  ordered,  and  the  ship  of  the
burden  of  260  tunnes,  with  83  men  of  all  sortes  fur-
nished, and  fully  appointed  for  the  voyage,  began  to  set
saile  from  Hurst  Castle  upon  Friday  the  20  of  May,
Anno  1583,  and  the  17  day  of  July  ensuing  fell  with  the
coast  of  Guinie,  to  take  in  fresh  water,  where,  through
meere  dissolute  negligence,  she  perished  upon  a  sand,
with  the  most  part  of  the  men  in  her,  as  appeareth  by
the  confession  of  one  that  escaped,  the  substance  and
tenor  whereof  is  this.

[The  confession
411

H^

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

[II.  ii.  112.]  The  confession  of  William  Bends  Masters  Mate
in  the  Edward  Cotton,  the  21  of  October,
Ann. 1584.

"E  sayth,  that  the  17  day  of  July,  Anno  1583.  having
some  lacke  of  fresh  water,  they  put  roome  upon  the
coast  of  Guinie,  where  they  were  set  upon  a  sand  about
8  leagues  from  the  shore,  and  this  Examinate,  with  29
more,  got  into  the  pinnesse,  who  arrived  in  an  Island,
being  desolate  of  people,  and  five  miles  in  compasse,
where  they  rested  18  dayes  through  force  of  weather,
having  nought  to  eate  but  grasse.  The  rest  of  the
company  the  ship  being  splitted  in  two,  and  in  quarters,
got  them  into  one  of  the  after  quarters,  and  by  the  helpe
of  raftes  came  also  a  shore  into  another  Island  neere  to
Rio  grande. Rio  grande,  where  they  all  died  as  he  supposeth.

The  other  30  in  the  pinnesse,  at  the  end  of  18  dayes,
departed  that  Island,  and  came  to  Saint  Domingo,  where
comming  on  shore,  they  were  taken  of  the  Moores,  &
stripped  naked.  And  they  buried  one  Coxe  an  olde
°man  Imried  ^^'"^  alive,  notwithstanding  his  pitifuU  lamentation  and
alive  by  the  skrikings  :  the  rest  having  Rice  and  water  allowed  them,
Moores  of  Rio  lived  there  a  certaine  time.  This  Examinate  was  at  last
grande  in  ^^^  ^q  ^  Portugall,  with  whom  he  dwelt  the  space  of  a
quarter  of  a  yere,  and  in  the  end,  a  Portugall  Caravel
comming  thither,  his  master  laded  the  same  with
Negroes,  and  he  obtained  leave  of  his  master  to  goe  in
the  same  Caravell,  &  by  that  meanes  arrived  at  Lisbone,
and  from  thence  came  into  England  the  17  of  October,
1584,  leaving  behinde  him  of  his  companie  alive,  Richard
Hacker,  John  Baker,  John  Mathew,  and  a  boy,  with
two  others  which  were  gone  beyond  Saint  Domingo :  all
which,  as  he  saith,  were  so  sicke  and  diseased,  that  he
judgeth  them  to  be  long  before  this  time  dead.

412

One  Coxe  an

Guinea.

THE ESCAPE OF THE PRIMROSE'

A.D.

The  escape  of  the  Primrose  a  tall  ship  of  London,
from  before  the  towne  of  Bilbao  in  Biscay :
which  ship  the  Corrigidor  of  the  same  Pro-
vince, accompanied  with  97  Spaniards,  offered
violently  to  arrest,  and  was  defeated  of  his
purpose,  and brought prisoner  into England.

Whereunto  is  added  the  Kings  Commission  for  a  generall
imbargment  or  arrest  of  all  English,  Netherlandish,
and  Easterlings  ships,  written  in  Barcelona  the  19
of  May 1585.

T  is  not  unknowen  unto  the  world  what
danger  our  English  shippes  have  lately
escaped,  how  sharpely  they  have  beene
intreated,  and  howe  hardly  they  have
beene  assaulted :  so  that  the  valiancie  of
those  that  mannaged  them  is  worthy
remembrance.  And  therefore  in  respect
of  the  couragious  attempt  and  valiant  enterprise  of  the
ship  called  the  Primrose  of  London,  which  hath  obteined
renowne,  I  have  taken  in  hande  to  publish  the  trueth
thereof,  to  the  intent  that  it  may  be  generally  knowen
to  the  rest  of  the  English  ships,  that  by  the  good
example  of  this  the  rest  may  in  time  of  extremitie  ad-
venture to  doe  the  like :  to  the  honour  of  the  Realme,
and  the  perpetuall  remembrance  of  themselves :  The
maner  whereof  was  as  folio weth.

UPon  Wednesday  being  the  sixe  and  twentieth  day
of  May  1585,  the  shippe  called  the  Primrose  being
of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  tunnes,  lying  without  the  bay
of  Bilbao,  having  beene  there  two  dayes,  there  came  a
Spanish  pinnesse  to  them,  wherein  was  the  Corrigidor
and  sixe  others  with  him  :  these  came  aboord  the  Prim-
rose, seeming  to  be  Marchantes  of  Biscay,  or  such  like,
bringing  Cherries  with  them,  and  spake  very  friendly
to  the  Maister  of  the  ship,  whose  name  was  Foster,  and

413

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

he in courteous  wise  bad  them  welcome,  making  them
the best cheere that he could with beere, beefe, and
bisket, wherewith that ship was well furnished  : and
while  they  were  thus  in  banquetting  with  the Maister,
foure  of  the seven departed  in  the  sayd Pinnesse,  and
went  backe  againe  to  Bilbao  :  the  other  three  stayed,  and
were  very  pleasant for the time. But Master Foster
misdoubting  some  danger secretly  gave speech that  he
was doubtfull of  these men what their intent was;
neverthelesse  he  sayd  nothing,  nor  seemed  in  any  out-
ward wise to mistrust them at  all. Foorthwith there
came a  ship-boate  wherein  were  seventie persons  being
Marchants and such like of  Biscay : and  besides  this
boate,  there came also the Pinnesse  which before had
brought  the  other  three,  in  which Pinnesse  there  came
foure  and  twentie,  as  the  Spaniards  themselves  since  con-
[II.  ii.  113.]  fessed. These made towards the Primrose,  and being
come thither, there came aboord the Corrigidor  with
three  or  foure  of  his  men  :  but  Master  Foster  seeing  this
great  multitude  desired  that  there  might  no  more  come
aboord, but  that the rest should stay  in their boates,
which  was  granted  :  neverthelesse  they  tooke  small  heede
of  these  wordes ;  for  on  a  suddaine  they  came  foorth  of
the boate,  entring the shippe, every Spaniarde taking
him to his Rapier  which they brought in the boate,
with other weapons, and a drumme wherewith to
triumph over them. Thus  did  the  Spaniards  enter  the
shippe, plunging in fiercely upon  them,  some planting
themselves  under  the  decke,  some  entring  the  Cabbens,
and  a multitude attending their  pray. Then  the Cor-
rigidor having  an officer  with him  which bare  a  white
wand  in  his  hand,  sayd  to  the  master  of  the  ship :  Yeeld
your selfe,  for  you are  the  kings  prisoner :  whereat  the
Maister  sayd  to  his  men.  We  are  betrayed. Then  some
of  them  set  daggers  to  his  breast,  and  seemed  in  furious
manner  as  though  they  would  have  slaine  him,  meaning
nothing  lesse  then  to  doe  any  such  act,  for  all  that  they
sought  was  to  bring  him  and  his  men  safe  alive  to  shore.

414

THE ESCAPE OF THE 'PRIMROSE'  a.d.

1585.

Whereat  the  Maister  was  amazed,  and  his  men  greatly
discomfited  to  see  themselves  readie  to  be  conveyed  even
to  the  slaughter :  notwithstanding  some  of  them  re-
specting the  daunger  of  the  Maister,  and  seeing  how
with  themselves  there  was  no  way  but  present  death
if  they  were  once  landed  among  the  Spaniards,  they  re-
solved themselves  eyther  to  defend  the  Maister,  and
generally  to  shunne  that  daunger,  or  else  to  die  and  be
buried  in  the  middest  of  the  sea,  rather  then  to  suffer
themselves  to  come  into  the  tormentors  hands :  and
therefore  in  very  bold  and  manly  sort  some  tooke  them
to  their  javelings,  lances,  bore-speares,  and  shot,  which
they  had  set  in  readinesse  before,  and  having  five
Calievers  readie  charged,  which  was  all  the  small  shot
they  had,  those  that  were  under  the  hatches  or  the  grate
did  shoote  up  at  the  Spaniards  that  were  over  their
heads,  which  shot  so  amazed  the  Spaniards  on  the  sud-
daine,  as  they  could  hardly  tell  which  way  to  escape,
the  daunger,  fearing  this  their  small  shot  to  be  of  greater
number  then  it  was :  others  in  very  manlike  sort  dealt
about  among  them,  shewing  themselves  of  that  courage
with  bore-speares  and  lances,  that  they  dismayed  at
every  stroke  two  or  three  Spaniards.  Then  some  of
them  desired  the  Maister  to  commaund  his  men  to  cease
and  holde  their  handes,  but  hee  answered  that  such  was
the  courage  of  the  English  Nation  in  defence  of  their
owne  lives,  that  they  would  slay  them  and  him  also :  and
therefore  it  lay  not  in  him  to  doe  it.  Now  did  their
blood  runne  about  the  ship  in  great  quantitie,  some  of
them  being  shot  in  betweene  the  legges,  the  bullets
issuing  foorth  at  their  breasts,  some  cut  in  the  head,  some
thrust  into  the  bodie,  and  many  of  them  very  sore
wounded,  so  that  they  came  not  so  fast  in  on  the  one
side,  but  now  they  tumbled  as  fast  over  boord  on  both
sides  with  their  weapons  in  their  handes,  some  falling
into  the  sea,  and  some  getting  into  their  boates,  making
haste  towardes  the  Citie.  And  this  is  to  be  noted,  that
although they  came  very  thicke thither,  there  returned

415

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

but  a  small  companie  of  them,  neither  is  it  knowen  as
yet  how  many  of  them  were  slaine  or  drowned,  onely
one  English  man  was  then  slaine,  whose  name  was  John
Tristram,  and  sixe  other  hurt.  It  was  great  pitie  to
behold  how  the  Spaniards  lay  swimming  in  the  sea,  and
were  not  able  to  save  their  lives.  Foure  of  them  taking
holde  of  the  shippe  were  for  pities  sake  taken  up  againe
by  Maister  Foster  and  his  men,  not  knowing  what  they
were :  all  the  Spaniards  bosomes  were  stuft  with  paper,
to  defend  them  from  the  shot,  and  these  foure  having
some  wounds  were  drest  by  the  surgion  of  the  shippe.
One  of  them  was  the  Corrigidor  himselfe,  who  is  gover-
nour  of  a  hundred  Townes  and  Cities  in  Spaine,  his
living  by  his  office  being  better  then  sixe  hundred
pound  yerely.  This  skirmish  happened  in  the  evening
about  sixe  of  the  clocke,  after  they  had  laden  twentie
Tunne  of  goods  and  better  out  of  the  sayd  ship :
which  goods  were  delivered  by  two  of  the  same  ship,
whose  names  were  John  Burrell,  and  John  Brod-
banke,  who  being  on  shore  were  apprehended  and
stayed.
The  Cor-  After this valiant enterprise of eight and twentie

rtgidorofBti-  English  men  against  97  Spaniardes,  they  saw  it  was  in
brought  to  vaine  for  them  to  stay  and  therefore  set  up  sayles,  and  by
London.  Gods  providence  avoyded  all  danger,  brought  home  the

rest  of  their  goods,  and  came  thence  with  all  expedition :
and  (God  be  thanked)  arrived  safely  in  England  neere
London  on  Wednesday  being  the  8  day  of  June,  1585.
In  which  their  returne  to  England  the  Spaniards  that
they  brought  with  them  oiFered  five  hundred  crownes  to
be  set  on  shore  in  any  place :  which,  seeing  the  Maister
would  not  doe,  they  were  content  to  be  ruled  by  him
and  his  companie,  and  craved  mercie  at  their  hands.
And  after  Master  Foster  demaunded  why  they  came  in
such  sort  to  betray  and  destroy  them,  the  Corrigidor
answered,  that  it  was  not  done  onely  of  themselves,  but
by  the  commandement  of  the  king  himselfe ;  and  calling
for  his  hose  which  were  wet,  did  plucke  foorth  the  kings

416

THE ESCAPE OF THE PRIMROSE'  a.d.

1585.
Commission,  by  which  he  was  authorized  to  doe  all  that
he  did : The  Copie  whereof  followeth,  being  translated
out  of  Spanish.

The Spanish kings commission for the generall  [il.  ii.  114..]
imbargment  or  arrest  of  the  English,  &c.

LIcentiat  de  Escober,  my  Corigidor  of  my  Signorie
of  Biskay,  I  have  caused  a  great  fleete  to  be  put
in  readinesse  in  the  haven  of  Lisbone,  and  the  river  of
Sivill.  There  is  required  for  the  Souldiers,  armour,
victuals,  and  munition,  that  are  to  bee  imployed  in
the  same  great  store  of  shipping  of  all  sortes  against
the  time  of  service,  and  to  the  end  there  may  be  choise
made  of  the  best,  upon  knowledge  of  their  burden  and
goodnesse ;  I  doe  therefore  require  you,  that  presently
upon  the  arrivall  of  this  carrier,  and  with  as  much  dis-
simulation as  may  be  (that  the  matter  may  not  be  knowen
untill  it  be  put  in  execution)  you  take  order  for  the  ,
staying  and  arresting  (with  great  foresight)  of  all  the
shipping  that  may  be  found  upon  the  coast,  and  in
the  portes  of  the  sayd  Signorie,  excepting  none  of
Holand,  Zeland,  Easterland,  Germanie,  England,  and
other  Provinces  that  are  in  rebellion  against  mee,  saving
those  of  France  which  being  litle,  and  of  small  burden
and  weake,  are  thought  unfit  to  serve  the  turne.  And
the  stay  being  thus  made,  you  shall  have  a  speciall  care
that  such  marchandize  as  the  sayd  shippes  or  hulkes
have  brought,  whether  they  be  all  or  part  unladen,  may
bee  taken  out,  and  that  the  armour,  munition,  tackels,
sayles,  and  victuals  may  be  safely  bestowed,  as  also  that
it  may  be  well  foreseene,  that  none  of  the  shippes  or  men
may  escape  away.  Which  things  being  thus  executed,
you  shall  advertise  me  by  an  expresse  messenger,  of
your  proceeding  therein :  And  send  me  a  plaine  and
distinct  declaration  of  the  number  of  ships  that  you
shall  have  so  stayed  in  that  coast  and  partes,  whence
every  one  of  them  is,  which  belong  to  my  Rebels,  what
burthen  &  goods  there  are,  and what number of  men

VI  417  2D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

is  in  every  of  them,  and  what  quantitie  they  have  of
armour,  ordinance,  munition,  victuals,  tacklings  and  other
necessaries,  to  the  end  that  upon  sight  hereof,  having
made  choise  of  such  as  shall  be  fit  for  the  service,  we
may  further  direct  you  what  ye  shall  do.  In  the  meane
time  you  shall  presently  see  this  my  commandement
put  in  execution,  and  if  there  come  thither  any  more
ships,  you  shall  also  cause  them  to  be  stayed  and
arrested  after  the  same  order,  using  therein  such  care
and  diligence,  as  may  answere  the  trust  that  I  repose  in
you,  wherein  you  shall  doe  me  great  service.  Dated  at
Barcelona  the  29  of  May.  1585.

And  thus  have  you  heard  the  trueth  and  manner
thereof,  wherein  is  to  be  noted  the  great  courage  of
the  maister,  and  the  loving  hearts  of  the  servants  to
save  their  master  from  the  daunger  of  death :  yea,  and
the  care  which  the  master  had  to  save  so  much  of  the
owners  goods  as  hee  might,  although  by  the  same  the
greatest  is  his  owne  losse  in  that  he  may  never  travell
to  those  parts  any  more  without  the  losse  of  his  owne
life,  nor  yet  any  of  his  servantes :  for  if  hereafter  they
should,  being  knowen  they  are  like  to  taste  of  the  sharpe
torments  which  are  there  accustomed  in  their  Holy-house.
And  as  for  their  terming  English  shippes  to  be  in  rebel-
lion against  them,  it  is  sufficiently  knowen  by  themselves,
and  their  owne  consciences  can  not  denie  it,  but  that
with  love,  unitie,  and  concord,  our  shippes  have  ever
beene  favourable  unto  them,  and  as  willing  to  pleasure
their  King,  as  his  subjectes  any  way  willing  to  pleasure
English  passengers.

418

THE  LETTERS  PATENTS  FOR  BARBARY

A.D.

1585.

The  Letters  patents  or  priviledges  granted  by
her  Majestie  to  certaine  Noble  men  and  Mar-
chants  of  London,  for  a  trade  to  Barbarie,  in
the  yeere 1585.

Lizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene
of  England,  France,  and  Ireland,  de-
fender of  the  faith,  &c.  to  the  Treasurer
&  Barons  of  our  Eschequer,  and  to  al
Maiors,  shirifs,  constables,  customers,
collectors  of  our  customes  and  subsidies,
controllers,  searchers,  and  keepers  of  our
havens  and  creekes,  ports  and  passages,  within  this  our
realme  of  England  and  the  dominions  of  the  same,  and
to  al  our  officers,  ministers  and  subjects,  and  to  all  other
whosoever  to  whom  it  shall  or  may  appertaine,  and  to
every  of  them  greeting.  Whereas  it  is  made  evidently
and  apparantly  knowen  unto  us,  that  of  late  yeeres  our
right  trustie  and  right  welbeloved  councellors,  Ambrose
Erie  of  Warwike,  and  Robert  Erie  of  Leicester,  and  also
our  loving  and  naturall  subjects,  Thomas  Starkie  of  our
citie  of  London  Alderman,  Jerard  Gore  the  elder,  and  all
his  sonnes,  Thomas  Gore  the  elder,  Arthur  Atie  gentle-
man, Alexander  Avenon,  Richard  Staper,  William  Jen-
nings, Arthur  Dawbeney,  William  Sherington,  Thomas
Bramlie,  Anthony  Garrard,  Robert  How,  Henry  Colthirst,
Edward  Holmden,  John  Swinnerton,  Robert  Walkaden,
Simon  Lawrence,  Nicholas  Stile,  Oliver  Stile,  William
Bond,  Henrie  Farrington,  John  Tedcastle,  Walter  [il.  II.  115.]
Williams,  William  Brune,  John  Suzan,  John  Newton,
Thomas  Owen,  Roger  Afield,  Robert  Washborne,  Reinold
Guy,  Thomas  Hitchcocke,  George  Lydiat,  John  Cart-
wright,  Henry  Paiton,  John  Boldroe,  Robert  Bowyer,
Anthonie  Dassell,  Augustine  Lane,  Robert  Lion,  and
Thomas  Dod,  all  of  London,  Marchants  now  trading
into  the  Countrey  of  Barbary,  in  the  parts  of  Africa,
under  the  government  of  Muly  Hammet  Sheriffe,  Em-

419

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

peror  of  Marocco,  and  king  of  Fesse  and  Sus,  have
sustained  great  and  grievous  losses,  and  are  like  to
sustaine  greater  if  it  should  not  be  prevented :  In  tender
consideration  whereof,  and  for  that  divers  Marchandize
of  the  same  Countries  are  very  necessary  and  convenient
for  the  use  and  defence  of  this  our  Realme  of  England,
and  for  divers  other  causes  us  specially  moving,  minding
the  reliefe  and  benefite  of  our  said  subjects,  and  the  quiet
trafique  and  good  government  to  be  had,  and  used
among  them  in  their  said  trade,  of  our  speciall  grace,
certaine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion  have  given  and
granted,  and  by  these  presents  for  us,  our  heires  and
successors,  doe  give  and  grant  unto  the  saide  Earles  of
Warwike  and  Leicester,  Thomas  Starkie,  Jerard  Gore
the  elder,  Arthur  Atie  gentleman,  Alexander  Avenon,
Richard  Staper,  William  Jennings,  Arthur  Dawbenie,
William  Sherington,  Thomas  Bramlie,  Anthonie  Gerrard,
Robert  Howe,  Henry  Colthirst,  Edward  Holmden,  John
Swinnerton,  Robert  Walkaden,  Simon  Lawrence,  Nicholas
Stile,  Oliver  Stile,  William  Bond,  Henry  Farrington,  John
Tedcastle,  Walter  Williams,  William  Brune,  John  Suzan,
John  Newton,  Thomas  Owen,  Roger  Afild,  Robert  Wash-
borne,  Rainold  Guie,  Thomas  Hitchcocke,  George  Lidiate^
John  Cartwright,  Henry  Payton,  John  Baldroe,  Robert
Bowyer,  Anthony  Dassell,  Augustine  Lane,  Robert  Lion,
and  Thomas  Dod,  that  they  and  every  of  them  by  them-
selves or  by  their  factors  or  servants,  and  none  others,
shall  and  may,  for,  and  during  the  space  of  12.  yeeres,
have  and  enjoy  the  whole  freedome  and  libertie  in  the
saide  trafique  or  trade,  unto  or  from  the  said  countrey  of
Barbary,  or  to  or  from  any  part  thereof,  for  the  buying
and  selling  of  all  maner  of  wares  and  marchandizes  what-
soever, that  now  or  accustomably  heretofore  have  bene
brought  or  transported,  from,  or  to  the  said  country  of
Barbary,  or  from  or  to  any  of  the  cities,  townes,  places,
ports,  roades,  havens,  harbors  or  creeks  of  the  said  country
of  Barbary,  any  law,  statute,  graunt,  matter,  customes  or
privileges,  to  the  contrary  in  any  wise  notwithstanding.

420

THE  LETTERS  PATENTS  FOR  BARBARY ad.

1585-
And  for  the  better  establishing,  ordering  and  govern-
ing of  the  said  Erles  of  Warwike  and  Leicester,  Thomas
Starkie,  &c.  abovesaid,  their  factors,  servants  and  assignes
in  the  trade  aforesaid,  we  for  us  our  heires  and  succes-
sors, doe  by  these  presents  give  and  graunt  full  licence
to  the  saide  Thomas  Starkie,  Jerard  Gore  the  elder,  and
the  rest  aforesaide,  and  to  every  of  them  from  time  to
time,  during  the  said  terme  of  twelve  yeres,  at  their
pleasures  to  assemble  and  meete  together  in  any  place  or
places  convenient  within  our  citie  of  London,  or  else-
where, to  consult  of,  and  for  the  said  trade,  and  with
the  consent  of  the  said  Erie  of  Leicester,  to  make  and
establish  good  and  necessary  orders  and  ordinances,  for,
and  touching  the  same,  and  al  such  orders  and  ordinances
so  made,  to  put  in  ure  and  execute,  and  them  or  any
of  them  with  the  consent  of  the  said  Erie  of  Leicester,
to  alter,  change  and  make  voyde,  and  if  need  be,  to
make  new,  as  at  any  time  during  the  saide  terme,  they
or  the  most  part  of  them  then  living  and  trading,  shall
finde  convenient.

Provided  alwayes,  that  the  ordinances  or  any  of  them
bee  not  contrary  or  repugnant  to  the  lawes,  statutes  or
customes  of  this  our  Realme  of  England.  And  to  the
intent  that  they  onely  to  whom  the  said  libertie  of
trafique  is  graunted  by  these  our  Letters  patents,  and
none  other  our  Subjects  whatsoever,  without  their  special
consent  and  licence  before  had,  should  during  the  said
terme  have  trade  or  trafique  for  any  maner  of  Marchan-
dizes,  to,  or  from  the  said  countrey  of  Barbary,  or  to,  or
from  any  Citie,  towne,  place,  port,  harbor  or  creeke
within  the  said  countrey  of  Barbary,  to,  or  out  of  our
said  Realmes  and  dominions,  wee  doe  by  these  presents
straightly  charge,  commaund,  and  prohibite  all  and  every
our  Subjects  whatsoever,  other  then  only  the  said  Erles
of  Warwike  and  Leicester,  Thomas  Starkie,  and  the  rest
abovesaid,  and  every  of  them  by  themselves,  or  by  their
Factors  or  servants  during  the  saide  terme,  to  trade  or
trafique,  for  or  with any  marchandize,  to,  or  from  the

421

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

saide  Countrey  of  Barbary,  or  to,  or  from  any  the
dominions  of  the  same,  as  they  tender  our  favour,  and
will  avoyde  our  high  displeasure,  and  upon  paine  of
imprisonment  of  his  and  their  bodies,  at  our  will  and
pleasure,  and  of  forfeiting  all  the  marchandizes,  or  the
full  value  thereof,  wherewith  they  or  any  of  them  during
the  saide  terme,  shall  trade  or  trafique  to  or  from  the
said  countrey  of  Barbary,  or  to,  or  from  the  dominions
of  the  same,  contrary  to  this  our  privilege  and  prohi-
bition, unlesse  it  be  by  and  with  the  expresse  licence,
consent,  and  agreement  of  the  saide  Erles  of  Warwike
and  Leicester,  Thomas  Starkie,  Jerard  Gore  the  elder,
and  all  his  sonnes,  Thomas  Gore  the  elder,  Arthur  Atie
gentleman,  Alexander  Avenon,  Richard  Straper,  William
Jennings,  Arthur  Dawbnie,  William  Sherington,  Thomas
Bramlie,  Anthonie  Gerrard,  Robert  Howe,  Henry  Col-
thirst,  Edward  Holmden,  John  Swinnerton,  Robert
Walkaden,  Simon  Lawrence,  Nicholas  Stile,  Oliver  Stile,
[IL  ii.  116.]  William  Bond,  Henry  Farington,  John  Tedcastle,  Walter
Williams,  William  Brune,  John  Suzan,  John  Newton,
Thomas  Owen,  Roger  Afield,  Robert  Washborne,  Rain-
old  Guy,  Thomas  Hitchcock,  George  Lidiate,  &c.  or
by,  and  with  the  expresse  licence  and  consent  of  the
more  part  of  them  then  living  and  trading,  first  had  and
obtained,  so  alwayes,  that  the  sayd  Earle  of  Leicester  be
one,  if  hee  bee  living.

And  we  further  for  us  our  heires  and  successors  of
our  speciall  grace,  meere  motion  and  certaine  knowledge,
do  graunt  to  the  said  Erles  of  Warwike  and  Leicester,
Thomas  Starkie,  and  the  rest  abovesaid,  and  to  every  of
them,  that  nothing  shall  be  done,  to  be  of  force  or  vali-
ditie  touching  the  said  trade  or  trafique,  or  the  exercise
thereof,  without  or  against  the  consent  of  the  saide  Erles,
Thomas  Starkie,  (and  the  others  before  named)  during
the  time  of  these  our  Letters  patents  for  12.  yeeres  as
aforesaid.

And  for  that  the  said  Erles,  Thomas  Starkie,  &c.  and
every  of  them  aforesaid  should  not  be  prevented  or  in-

422

THE  LETTERS  PATENTS  FOR  BARBARY ad.

1585-
terrupted  in  this  their  said  trade,  we  do  by  these  presents
for  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  straightly  prohibite
and  forbid  all  maner  of  person  or  persons,  as  well
strangers  of  what  nation  or  countrey  soever,  as  our  owne
Subjects,  other  then  onely  the  said  Erles,  Thomas  Star-
kie,  &c.  and  every  of  them  as  aforesaid,  that  they  nor
any  of  them  from  hencefoorth  during  the  said  terme  of
12.  yeeres,  do  or  shall  bring,  or  cause  to  be  brought
into  this  our  Realme  of  England,  or  to  any  the  domi-
nions thereof,  any  maner  of  marchandizes  whatsoever
growing,  or  being  made  within  the  said  Countrey  of
Barbary,  or  within  any  the  dominions  thereof,  unlesse  it
be  by  and  with  the  licence,  consent  and  agreement  of
the  said  Erles,  Thomas  Starkie,  &c.  or  with  the  consent
and  licence  of  the  more  part  of  them  then  living,  first
had  and  obtained,  so  alwayes  y'  the  sayd  Erie  of  Leices-
ter (if  hee  be  living)  be  one,  under  the  paine  that  every
one  that  shall  offend  or  doe  against  this  our  present
prohibition  here  last  above  mentioned  in  these  presents,
shall  forfeite  and  lose  all  and  singular  the  said  marchan-
dizes to  be  landed  in  any  our  realmes  and  dominions,
contrary  to  the  tenor  and  true  meaning  of  this  our  pro-
hibition in  that  behalfe  provided :  the  one  moitie  of  all
and  every  which  said  forfaitures  whatsoever  mentioned
or  specified  in  these  our  present  Letters  patents,  shalbe
to  us  our  heires  &  successors :  And  the  other  moity  of
al  and  every  the  said  forfaitures,  we  doe  by  these  pre-
sents of  our  certaine  knowledge  and  meere  motion,
clearely  and  wholy  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors,
give  and  graunt  unto  the  said  Erles,  Thomas  Starkie,
&c.  And  these  our  Letters  patents,  upon  the  onely
sight  thereof,  without  any  further  warrant,  shal  bee  suffi-
cient authoritie  to  our  Treasurer  of  England  for  the
time  being,  to  our  Barons  of  the  Exchequer,  and  to  all
other  our  officers  that  shall  have  to  deale  in  this  behalfe,
to  make  full  allowance  unto  the  said  Erles,  Thomas
Starkie,  &c.  their  deputies  or  assignes  of  the  one  moitie
of  all  and  singular  the  goods, marchandizes and  things

423

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1585.

whatsoever  mentioned  in  these  our  present  Letters
patents,  to  be  forfaited  at  any  time  or  times  during  the
said  terme  of  twelve  yeres :  which  said  allowance  we  doe
straightly  charge  and  commaund  from  time  to  time  to
be  made  to  the  sayd  Erles,  Thomas  Starkie,  &c.  and  to
every  of  them  accordingly,  without  any  maner  of  delay
or  deniall  of  any  of  our  officers  whatsoever,  as  they
tender  our  favour  and  the  furtherance  of  our  good
pleasure.  And  wee  doe  straightly  charge  and  commaund,
and  by  these  presents  prohibite  all  and  singular  Cus-
tomers and  Collectors  of  our  customes  &  subsidies,  and
comptrollers  of  the  same,  of,  and  within  our  Citie  and
port  of  London,  and  all  other  portes,  creekes,  &  places
within  this  our  Realme  of  England,  and  every  of  them,
that  they  ne  any  of  them  take  or  perceive,  or  cause,
or  suffer  to  be  taken,  received,  or  perceived  for  us  &
in  our  name,  or  to  our  use,  or  to  ye  uses  of  our  heires  or
successors  of  any  person  or  persons,  any  sum  or  summes
of  money,  or  other  things  whatsoever  during  the  said
terme  of  12.  yeres,  for,  and  in  the  name  &  liew  or
place  of  any  custome,  subsidy  &  other  thing  or  duties
to  us,  our  heires  or  successors  due  or  to  be  due  for  the
customes  &  subsidies  of  any  marchandizes  whatsoever
growing,  being  made  or  comming  out  of  the  said  coun-
trey  of  Barbary,  or  out  of  the  dominions  thereof,  nor
make,  cause,  nor  suffer  to  be  made  any  entrie  into  our
or  their  books  of  customs  &  subsidies,  nor  make  any
agreement  for  the  subsidies  and  customs,  of,  and  for
any  the  said  marchants,  saving  onely  with,  &  in  the
name  of  the  said  Erles,  Thomas  Starkie,  &c.  or  the
most  part  of  them,  as  they  and  every  of  them  will
answere  at  their  uttermost  perils  to  the  contrary.  And
for  the  better  and  more  sure  observation  of  this  our
graunt,  wee  will,  and  grant  for  us  our  heires  &  suc-
cessors by  these  presents,  that  the  Treasurer  &  barons
of  our  Exchequer  for  the  time  being,  by  force  of  this
our  graunt  or  enrolment  thereof  in  the  said  court,  at  al
&  every time & times during the  said  terme of 12.

424

THE  LETTERS  PATENTS  FOR  BARBARY ad.

1585.
yeres,  at  &  upon  request  made  unto  them  by  the  said
Erles,  Thomas  Starkie,  &c.  or  by  the  atturneis,  factors,
deputies  or  assignes  of  them,  or  the  most  part  of  them
then  living  and  trading,  shall  and  may  make  &  direct
under  the  seale  of  the  said  Exchequer,  one  or  moe
sufficient  writ  or  writs,  close  or  patents,  unto  every  or
any  of  our  said  customers,  collectors  or  controllers  of
our  heires  and  successors  in  all  and  every,  or  to  any
port  or  ports,  creeke,  haven,  or  other  places  within
this  our  realme  of  England,  as  the  said  Erles,  Thomas  [II.  ii.  117.]
Starkie,  &c.  or  any  the  atturneis,  factors,  deputies  or
assignes  of  them  or  the  most  part  of  them  then  living
and  trading,  shall  at  any  time  require,  commaunding  and
straightly  charging  them  and  every  of  them,  that  they
nor  any  of  them  at  any  time  or  times  during  the  said
terme  of  12.  yeeres,  make  any  entrie  of  any  wares  or
marchandizes  whatsoever,  growing,  being  made  or  com-
ming  out  or  from  the  said  countrey  of  Barbary,  or  the
dominions  thereof,  nor  receive  or  take  any  custome,  sub-
sidie  or  other  entrie,  or  make  any  agreement  for  the
same,  other  then  with  or  in  the  name  of  the  said  Erles,
Thomas  Starkie,  &c.  the  factor  or  factors,  deputies  or
assignes  of  them  or  the  most  part  of  them  then  living
and  trading,  according  to  this  our  graunt,  and  the  true
meaning  thereof,  and  according  to  our  saide  will  and
pleasure  before  in  these  presents  declared.  In  witnesse
whereof  we  have  caused  these  our  Letters  to  be  made
patents.  Witnesse  our  selfe  at  Westminster  the  5.  day
of  July  in  the  27.  yeere  of  our  reigne.

[The  Ambassage

425

A.D.
1585-89.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Ambassage  of  Master  Henry  Roberts,  one  of
the  sworne  Esquires  of  her  Majesties  person,
from  her  highnesse  to  Mully  Hamet  Emperour
of  Marocco  and  the  King  of  Fesse,  and  Sus,
in  the  yeere  1585:  who  remained  there  as
Liger  for  the  space  of  3.  yeeres.  Written
briefly  by  himselfe.

Pon  an  incorporation  granted  to  the
Company  of  Barbary  Marchants  resi-
dent in  London,  I  Henry  Roberts  one
of  her  Majesties  sworne  Esquires  of  her
person,  was  appointed  her  highnesse
messenger,  and  Agent  unto  the  aforesaid
Mully  Hamet  Emperor  of  Marocco,  king

of  Fesse,  and  Sus.  And  after  I  had  received  my  Com-
mission, instructions,  and  her  Majesties  letters,  I  departed
from  London  the  14.  of  August  in  the  yeere  1585.  in
a  tall  ship  called  the  Ascension,  in  the  company  of  the
Minion  and  Hopewell,  and  we  all  arrived  in  safetie  at
Azafi  a  port  of  Barbary,  the  14.  of  September  next
following.  The  Alcaide  of  the  towne  (being  the  kings
officer  there,  and  as  it  were  Maior  of  the  place)  re-
ceived mee  with  all  humanitie  and  honour,  according  to
the  custome  of  the  Countrey,  lodging  me  in  the  chiefest
house  of  the  towne,  from  whence  I  dispatched  a  mes-
senger (which  in  their  language  they  call  a  Trottero)
to  advertise  the  Emperour  of  my  arrivall :  who  im-
mediatly  gave  order,  and  sent  certaine  souldiers  for  my
guard  and  conduct,  and  horses  for  my  selfe,  and  mules
for  mine  owne  and  my  companies  carriages.  Thus  being
accompanied  with  M.  Richard  Evans,  Edward  Salcot,
and  other  English  Marchants  resident  there  in  the
Countrey,  with  my  traine  of  Moores  and  carriages,  I
came  at  length  to  the  river  of  Tensist,  which  is  within
foure  miles  of  Marocco  :  and  there  by  the  water  side  I
pitched my  tents under the  Olive  trees: where  I met

426

AMBASSAGE OF HENRY ROBERTS  ad.

1585-89.

with  all  the  English  Marchants  by  themselves,  and  the
French  and  Flemish,  and  divers  other  Christians,  which
attended  my  comming.  And  after  we  had  dined,  &
spent  out  the  heat  of  the  day,  about  foure  of  the  clocke
in  the  afternoone  we  all  set  forward  toward  the  Citie  of
Marocco,  where  we  arrived  the  said  day,  being  the  14.
of  September,  and  I  was  lodged  by  the  Emperours
appointment  in  a  faire  house  in  the  Judaria  or  Jurie,
which  is  the  place  where  the  Jewes  have  their  abode,
and  is  the  fairest  place,  and  quietest  lodging  in  all  the
Citie.

After  I  had  reposed  my  selfe  3.  dayes,  I  had  accesse
to  the  kings  presence,  delivered  my  message  and  her
Majesties  letters,  and  was  received  with  all  humanitie,
and  had  favourable  audience  from  time  to  time  for  three
yeeres  :  during  which  space  I  abode  there  in  his  Court,
as  her  Majesties  Agent  and  Ligier :  and  whensoever  I
had  occasion  of  businesse  I  was  admitted  either  to  his
Majestie  himselfe,  or  to  his  vice  Roy,  whose  name  was
Alcayde  Breme  Saphiana,  a  very  wise  and  discreet  person,
and  the  chiefest  about  his  Majestie.  The  particulers  of
my  service,  for  divers  good  and  reasonable  causes,  I
forbeare  here  to  put  downe  in  writing.

After  leave  obtained,  and  an  honourable  reward  be-
stowed by  the  Emperour  upon  me,  I  departed  from  his
Court  at  Marocco  the  18.  of  August  1588.  toward  a
garden  of  his,  which  is  called  Shersbonare,  where  he
promised  mee  I  should  stay  but  one  day  for  his  letters :
howbeit,  upon  some  occasion  I  was  stayed  until  the  14.
of  September  at  the  kings  charges,  with  40.  or  50.  shot
attending  upon  me  for  my  guard  and  safetie.

From  thence  at  length  1  was  conducted  with  all  things
necessary  to  the  port  of  Santa  Cruz,  being  sixe  dayes
journey  from  Marocco,  and  the  place  where  our  shippes
do  commonly  take  in  their  lading,  where  I  arrived  the
21.  of  the  same  moneth.  In  this  port  I  stayed  43.
dayes,  and  at  length  the  second  of  November  I  em-
barqued  my  selfe,  and  one  Marshok  Reiz  a  Captaine  and

427

A.O.
1585-89.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

a  Gentleman,  which  the  Emperour  sent  with  mee  upon
an  Ambassage  to  her  Majestic :  and  after  much  torment
and  foule  weather  at  Sea,  yet  New-yeres  day  I  came  on
land  at  S.  Ives  in  Cornwall,  from  whence  passing  by
land  both  together  up  towards  London,  we  were  met
[II.  ii.  118.]  without  the  citie  with  the  chiefest  marchants  of  the
Barbary  Company,  well  mounted  all  on  horsebacke,  to
the  number  of  40.  or  50.  horse,  and  so  the  Ambassadour
and  my  selfe  being  both  in  Coche,  entred  the  citie  by
torchlight,  on  Sunday  at  night  the  12.  of  January  1589.

Este  es  un  traslado  bien  y  fielmente  sacado  da
una  carta  real  del  Rey  Muley  Hamet  de  Fes
y  Emperador  de  Marruecos,  cuyo  tenor  es
este,  que  Segue.

On  el  nombre  de  Dios  piadoso  y  miseri-

cordioso,  &c. El  siervo  de  Dios  soberano,

el  conquistador  per  su  causa,  el  successor

ensal9ado por Dios, Emperador de los

Moros, hijo del Emperador de los

Moros,  Jariife,  Haceni,  el  que  perpetue

su  honra,  y  ensal9e  su  estado. Se  pone

este nuestro real mandado  en  manos  de  los  criados  de

nuestras  altas  puertas  los  mercadores  Yngleses ;  para  que

por el sepan todos los que la presente  vieren, come

nuestro  alto  Conseio  les  anpara  con  el  favor  de  Dios  de

todo  aquello,  que  les  enpeciere  y  dannare  en  qualquiera

manera, que fueren ofFendidos,  y en qualquiera viaie,

que fueren, ninguno les captivara en estos nuestros

reynos,  y  puertos,  y  lugares,  que  a  nos  pertenescen  : y

que  les  cubre  el  anporo  de  nuestro  podor  de  qualquiera

fatiga ;  y  ningun  los  impida  con  mano  de  enemistad,  ni  se

dara causa,  de que se agravien en qualquiera manera

con  el  favor  de  Dios  y  de  su  amparo. Y  mandamos  a

los  Alcaydes  de  los  nuestros  puertos  y  fortalezas,  y  a  los

que  en  estos  nuestros reynos  tienen  cargo,  y  a  toda  la

gente commun,  que  no  les  alleguen  en  ninguna  manera,

428

AMBASSAGE OF HENRY ROBERTS  ad.

1587,

con  orden,  de  que  scan  offendidos  en  ninguna  manera ;

y  esto  sera  necessariamente  : Que  es  escrita  en  los  medios

dias  de  Rabel,  segundo  anno  de  nueve  ^ientos,  y  noventa

y  seys.

Concorda  el  dia  d'esta  carta  con  veynte  dias  de  Mar90
del  anno  de  mil  y  quiniento  y  ochenta  y  siete,  lo
qual  yo  Abdel  Rahman  el  Catan,  interprete  per  su
Magestad  saque,  y  roman9e  de  verbo  ad  verbum,
como  en  el  se  contiene,  y  en  Fee  dello  firmo  de
my  nombre,  fecho  ut supra.

Abdel  Rahman  el  Catan.

This  is  a  copy  well  and  truely  translated  of  an
edict  of  Maley  Hamet  king  of  Fez  and
Emperour  of  Marocco,  whose  tenor  is  as  fol-
loweth :  to  wit,  that  no  Englishmen  should
be  molested  or  made  slaves  in  any  part  of  his
Dominions,  obtained  by  the  aforesaid  M.
Henry  Roberts.

N  the  Name  of  the  pitifull  and  the  The  same  In
mercifull  God,  &c.  The  servant  of  the  ^»S^"h.
supreme  God,  the  conqueror  in  his  cause,
the  successor  advanced  by  God,  the
Emperour  of  the  Moores,  the  sonne  of
the  Emperour  of  the  Moores,  the  Jariffe,
the  Ha9eny,  whose  honour  God  long
increase  and  advance  his  estate.  This  our  princely  com-
mandement  is  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  English
marchants,  which  remaine  in  the  protection  of  our  stately
palaces  :  to  the  ende  that  all  men  which  shall  see  this
present  writing,  may  understand  that  our  princely
counsaile  wil  defend  them  by  the  favor  of  God,  from
any  thing  that  may  impeach  or  hurt  them  in  what  sort
soever  they  shalbe  wronged  :  and  that,  which  way  soever
they  shall  travaile,  no  man  shall  take  them  captives  in
these  our  kingdomes,  ports,  and  places  which  belong
unto  us,  which  also  may  protect  and  defend  them  by  our

429

A.D.

1587.

THE ENGLISH V^OYAGES

authoritie  from  any  molestation  whatsoever :  and  that
no  man  shall  hinder  them  hy  laying  violent  hand  upon
them,  and  shall  not  give  occasion  that  they  may  be
grieved  in  any  sort  by  the  favour  and  assistance  of  God.
And  we  charge  and  command  our  officers  of  our  havens
and  fortresses,  and  all  such  as  beare  any  authoritie  in
these  our  dominions,  and  likewise  all  the  common  people,
that  in  no  wise  they  do  molest  them,  in  such  sort  that
they  be  no  way  offended  or  wronged.  And  this  our
commandement  shall  remaine  inviolable,  being  registred
in  the  middest  of  the  moneth  of  Rabel  in  the  yeere
996.

The  date  of  this  letter  agreeth  with  the  20.  of  March
1587.  which  I  Abdel  Rahman  el  Catan,  interpretour
for  his  Majestie,  have  translated  and  turned  out  of
the  Arabian  into  Spanish  word  for  word  as  is  con-
teined  therein :  and  in  witnesse  thereof  have  sub-
scribed my  name  as  aforesaid.

Abdel  Rahman  el  Catan.

En  nombre  de  Dios  el  piadoso  piadador.

Oracion  de  Dios  sobre  nuestro  Sennor  y  Propheta
Mahumet,  y  los  allegados  a  el.

L  siervo  de  Dios,  y  muy  guerrero,  y
ensalsado  por  la  gratia  de  Dios,  Myra
Momanyn,  hijo  de  Myra  Momanyn,
nieto  de  Myra  Momanyn,  el  Jarif,  el
Hazeny,  que  Dios  sustenga  sus  reynos,
y  enhalse  sus  mandados,  para  el  Sennor
muy  affamado  y  muy  illustre,  muy  esti-
mado,  el  Conde  de  Leycester,  despues  de  dar  las  loores
[II.  ii.  119.]  devidas  a  Dios,  y  las  ora9iones,  y  saludes  devidas  a  le
Propheta  Mahumet.  Servira  esta  por  os  hazer  saber  que
llego  a  qui  a  nuestra  real  Corte  vuestra  carta,  y  enten-
dimos  lo  que  en  ella  se  contiene.  Y  vuestro  Ambaxador,
que  aqui  esta  en  nuestra  corte  me  dio  a  entender  la
causa  de  la  tardan9a  de  los  rehenes  hasta  agora :  el  qual

430

J  letter  of
MuHy  Haraet
to  the  Erie  of
Leicester.

AMBASSAGE OF HENRY ROBERTS  ad.

descuento  re9ebimos,  y  nos  damos  por  satisfechos.  Y
quanta  a  lo  que  a  nos  escriveys  por  causa  de  Juan
Herman,  y  lo  mesmo  que  nos  ha  dicho  el  Ambaxador
sobre  el,  antes  que  llegasse  vuestra  carta  por  la  quexa
del  ambaxador,  que  se  avia  quexado  del,  ya  aviamos
mandado  prender  lo,  y  assi  que  da  aora  preso,  y  quedera,
hasta  que  se  le  haga  la  justicia  que  mas  se  le  ha  de  hazer.
Y  con  tanto  nuestro  Sennor  os  tenga  en  su  guardia.
Hecha  en  nuestra  corte  real  en  Marruecos,  que  Dios
sostenga,  el  28.  dias  del  mes  de  Remodan  anno  996.

In  the  Name  of  the mercifull and pitifull  God.

The blessing  of  God  light  upon  our  lord  and  prophet
Mahumet,  and  those  that  are  obedient  unto him.

iIHe  servant  of  God  both  mightie  in  warre
and  mightily  exalted  by  the  grace  of
God  Myra  Momanyn,  the  son  of  Myra-
Momanyn,  the  Jariff,  the  Hazeni,  whose
kingdoms  God  maintaine  and  advance
his  authoritie:  Unto  the  right  famous,
^  right  noble,  &  right  highly  esteemed
Erie  of  Leicester,  after  due  praises  given  unto  God,  &
due  blessings  and  salutations  rendred  unto  the  prophet
Mahumet.  These  are  to  give  you  to  understand,  that
your  letters  arrived  here  in  our  royal  Court,  and  we
wel  perceive  the  contents  thereof.  And  your  Ambas-
sador which  remaineth  here  in  our  Court  told  me  the
cause  of  the  slownesse  of  the  gages  or  pledges  until
this  time :  which  reckoning  we  accept  of,  and  holde
our  selves  as  satisfied.  And  as  touching  the  matter
wherof  you  write  unto  us  concerning  John  Herman,
and  the  selfe  same  complaint  which  your  Ambassador
hath  made  of  him,  before  the  comming  of  your  letter,
we  had  already  commaunded  him  to  be  taken  upon
the  complaint  which  your  Ambassadour  had  made  of
him,  whereupon  he  stil  remaineth  in  hold,  and  shal  so
continue  until  further  justice  be  done  upon  him  accord-

431

A.D.
1587.

II  Which  is
with  us  1587.

The  Queenes
letters  to  the
Emperour.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ing  to  his  desert.  And  so  our  Lord  keepe  you  in  his
safegard.  Written  at  our  royall  court  in  Marocco,  which
God  maintaine,  the  20.  day  of  the  moneth  Remodan,
Anno  il  996.

The Queenes Majesties letters to  the Emperour
of  Marocco.

Uy  alto,  y  muy  poderoso  Sennor,

Aviendo  entendido  de  parte  de  nues-
tro  Agente  la  mucha  aficion,  y  volontad,
que  nos  teneys,  y  quanta  honra,  y  favor
le  hazeys  por  amor  nuestro,  para  dar
nos tanto mayor testimonio de  vuestra

"*  amistadj  hemos  recebido  de  lo  uno  y  de
lo  otro  muy  grande  contento,  y  satisfacion :  y  assy  no
podemos  dexar  de  agradesceroslo,  como  mereceys.  Vues-
tras  cartas  hemos  tambien  recibido,  y  con  ellas  holga-
donos  infinitamente,  por  venir  de  parte  de  un  Principe,
a  quien  tenemos  tanta  obligacion.  Nuestro  Agente  nos
ha  escripto  sobre  ciertas  cosas,  que  desseays  ser  os
embiadas  de  aqui :  Y,  aunque  queriamos  poder  os  en
ello  puntualmente  complazer,  como  pidiz,  ha  succedido,
que  las  guerras,  en  que  stamos  al  presente  occupadas,
no  nos  lo  consienten  del  todo :  Hemos  pero  mandado,
que  se  os  satisfaga  en  parte,  y  conforme  a  lo  que  por
agora  la  necessitad  nos  permite,  como  mas  particular-
mente  os  lo  declarara  nuestro  Agente :  esperando,  que
lo  reciberreys  en  buena  parte  y  conforme  al  animo,  con
que  OS  lo  concedemos.  Y  porque  nos  ha  sido  referido,
que  aveys  prometido  de  proceder  contra  un  Juan
Herman  vassallo  nuestro,  (el  qual  nos  ha  gravemente
offendido)  de  la  manera,  que  os  lo  demandaremos,
avemos  dado  orden  a  nuestro  dicho  Agente  de  deziros
mas  parcularmente  lo  que  desseamos  ser  hecho  a  cerca
deste  negocio,  rogando  os,  que  lo  mandeys  assi  com-
plir :  y  que  seays  servido  de  favorescer  siempre  al  dicho
Agente,  y  tener  lo  en  buen  credito,  como  hasta  agora
aveys  hecho, sin permiter, que nadie os haga mudar

432

A.D.
1587.

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER

de  parecer  a  cerca  de  las  calumnias,  que  le  podran
levantar,  ny  dudar,  que  no  complamos  muy  por  entero
todo,  lo  que  de  nuestra  parte  os  prometiere.  Nuestro
Sennor  guarde  vostra  muy  alta  y  muy  poderosa  per-
sona. Hecha  en  nuestra  Corte  Real  de  Grenewich  a
20.  de  Julio 1587.

The  same  in  English.

Ight  high  and  mightie  Prince,  Having
understood  from  our  Agent  the  great
affection  and  good  wil  which  you  beare
us,  and  how  great  honour  and  favor  you
shew  him  for  our  sake,  to  the  end  to
give  us  more  ample  testimonie  of  your
friendship,  we  have  received  very  great
contentment  &  satisfaction,  aswel  of  the  one  as  of  the
other :  and  withall  we  could  not  omit  to  magnifie  you,
according  to  your  desert.  We  have  also  received  your  -
letters,  and  do  not  a  litle  rejoyce  thereof,  because  they
come  from  a  prince  unto  whom  we  are  so  much  be-
holden. Our  Agent  hath  written  unto  us  concerning
certaine  things  which  you  desire  to  bee  sent  unto  you
from  hence.  And  albeit  we  wish  that  we  could  par-
ticularly satisfie  you,  as  you  desire,  yet  it  is  fallen  out,
that  the  warres,  wherin  at  this  present  we  be  busied,
wil  not  suffer  us  fully  to  doe  the  same :  neverthelesse,
wee  have  commaunded  to  satisfie  you  in  part,  and  [II.  ii.  120.]
according  as  the  present  necessitie  doeth  permit  us,  as
our  Agent  will  declare  unto  you  more  particularly,
hoping  you  will  receive  it  in  good  part,  and  according
to  the  good  will  wherewith  wee  graunt  the  same.  And
because  it  hath  bene  signified  unto  us  that  you  have
promised  to  proceed  in  justice  against  one  John  Herman  John  Herman
our  subject,  which  hath  grievously  offended  us,  in  such  ^^^J^&"f^
sort  as  wee  have  sent  word  unto  you,  wee  have  given
order  to  our  said  Agent  to  informe  you  more  par-
ticularly in  that  which  we  desire  to  be  done  in  this
busines,  praying  you  also  to  command  the  same  to  be
VI  433  2  E

A.D,

1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

put  in  execution :  and  that  it  would  please  you  alwayes
to  favour  our  said  Agent  and  to  hold  him  in  good
credite,  as  you  have  done  hitherto,  not  suiFering  your
selfe  to  be  changed  in  your  opinion,  for  all  the  false
reports  which  they  may  raise  against  him,  nor  to  doubt
that  wee  will  not  accomplish  at  large  all  that  he  shall
promise  you  on  our  behalfe.  Our  Lord  keepe  and
preserve  your  right  high  and  mightie  person.  Written
in  our  royall  Court  at  Greenwich  the  20.  of  July  1587.

A  voyage  to  the  Azores  with  two  pinases,  the
one  called  the  Serpent,  and  the  other  the
Mary  Sparke  of  Plimouth,  both  of  them
belonging  to  Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  written  by
John  Evesham  Gentleman,  wherein  were  taken
the  governour,  of  the  Isle  of  Sainct  Michael,
and  Pedro  Sarmiento  governour  of  the  Straits
of  Magalanes,  in  the  yeere 1586.

He  10.  of  June  1586.  we  departed  from
Plimouth  with  two  Pinases,  the  one
named  the  Serpent,  of  the  burden  of
2S-  Tunnes,  and  the  other  the  Mary
Sparke  of  Plimouth  of  the  burthen  of
50.  Tuns,  both  of  them  belonging  to
sir  Walter  Ralegh  knight ;  and  directing

our course  towards  the  coast  of  Spaine,  &  from  thence

towards the Isles of the Azores, we tooke a small

barke laden with Sumacke and other commodities.

The  governor wherein was the governour of S. Michaels Island,

0/5.  Michael  bgi^p.  ^  Portugal,  having  other  Portugals  and  Spaniards
t(ikc?i  prisoner, . ^ .  '-' — ^  P  '■

with him. And from thence  we sailed  to  the Island

of  Graciosa,  to  the  Westward  of  the  Island  of  Tercera,

where we  discried a saile, and bearing with her  wee

found her to be a Spaniard : But at the first not

greatly  respecting whom  we tooke,  so that  we might

have  enriched our  selves, which was the  cause of  this

our  travaile,  and  for  that  we  would  not  bee  knowen  of

434

A VOYAGE TO THE AZORES  ad.

1586.

what  nation  we  were,  wee  displayed  a  white  silke  ensigne

in  our  maine toppe,  which they  seeing, made  accompt

that  we  had  bene  some  of  the  king  of  Spaines  Armadas,

lying  in wait  for English men of  war : but  when we

came  within shot  of her,  we tooke downe  our white

flagge, and spread abroad the Crosse of S. George,

which when they saw,  it  made them to  flie  as  fast  as

they  might,  but  all  their haste  was in vaine, for our

shippes were swifter of  saile then they, which they

fearing, did presently cast their ordinance and small

shot  with  many  letters,  and the draft  of  the  Straights

of  Magelan  into  the  Sea,  and  thereupon  immediatly  we

tooke her, wherein wee also tooke a gentleman of

Spaine, named Pedro Sarmiento, governour of the  Pedro  Sarmi-

Straights of Magelan,  which saide Pedro  we brought  '^^r^l^the''

into England  with us,  and  presented  him  to  our  sove-  ^^^I^^Mts  of

raigne  Lady  the  Queene.  Magelan

After  this,  lying  off  and  about  the  Islands,  wee  de-  takenprisoner.
scried  another  saile,  and  bearing  after  her,  we  spent  the
maine  maste  of  our  Admirall,  but  yet  in  the  night  our
Viceadmirall  tooke  her,  being  laden  with  fish  from  Cape  A  ship  laden
Blanke,  the  which  shippe  wee  let  goe  againe  for  want  with  fish  taken
of  men  to  bring  her  home.  The  next  day  we  discried
two  other  sailes,  the  one  a  shippe  and  the  other  a
Caravel,  to  whom  we  gave  chase,  which  they  seeing,
with  all  speede  made  in  under  the  Isle  of  Graciosa,  to
a  certaine  Fort  there  for  their  sucGOur,  where  they  came
to  an  anker,  and  having  the  winde  of  us  we  could  not
hurt  them  with  our  ships,  but  we  having  a  small  boate,
which  we  called  a  light  horseman,  wherein  my  selfe  was,
being  a  Musqueter,  and  foure  more  with  Calivers,  and
foure  that  rowed,  came  neere  unto  the  shore  against
the  winde,  which  when  they  saw  us  come  towards  them
they  caried  a  great  part  of  their  marchandise  on  land,
whither  also  the  men  of  both  vessels  went  and  landed,
and  as  soone  as  we  came  within  Musquet  shot,  they
began  to  shoote  at  us  with  great  ordinance  and  small
shot,  and  we  likewise at them, and in the ende we

435

and  released
againe.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

One  of  the boorded  one shippe wherein  was no  man left, so we
s  ips  taken, ^^^  ■\^^^ Cables, hoysed her sailes, and sent her  away

ana  sent  away .  ,  r.  ■'  1 i  1  r  1

with  2.  per- "^^^^ ^"^°  ^^  °^^ men, and  the  other 7. or us passed
sons.  more  neere unto  the  shoare,  and  boorded the  Caravel,

which did  ride  within  a stones cast from the shoare,
and so  neere the  land that  the people did cast  stones
The  Caravel at  US, but  yet  in despight  of  them all we  tooke  her,
ts  taken.  ^^^ ^^^  onely  Negro therein ; and cutting her cables

in  the  hawse  we  hoysed  her  sailes  and  being  becalmed
under  the  land,  we  were  constrained  to  rowe  her  out
with  our  boate,  the  Fort  still  shooting  at  us,  and  the
people  on  land  with  Musquets  and  calivers,  to  the  num-
ber of  150.  or  thereabout:  and  we  answered  them  with
the  small  force  wee  had ;  In  the  time  of  which  our
shooting,  the  shot  of  my  Musquet  being  a  crossebarre-
[II.  ii.  121.]  shot  happened  to  strike  the  gunner  of  the  fort  to  death,
even  as  he  was  giving  levell  to  one  of  his  great  pieces,
and  thus  we  parted  from  them  without  any  losse  or
hurt  on  our  side.  And  now,  having  taken  these  five
sailes  of  shippes,  we  did  as  before,  turne  away  the  shippe
with  the  fish,  without  hurting  them,  and  from  one  of
the  other  shippes  wee  tooke  her  maine  Maste  to  serve
our  Admirals  turne,  and  so  sent  her  away  putting  into
The  prises  her  all  the  Spaniards  and  Portugals,  (saving  that  gentle-
sent  home.  Y[\2iVi  Pedro  Sarmiento,  with  three  other  of  the  principal
men  and  two  Negroes)  leaving  them  all  within  sight
of  land,  with  bread  and  water  sufficient  for  10.  dayes
if  neede  were.

Thus setting our  course  for  England,  being off  the

Islands  in  the  height  of  41.  degrees,  or  there  about,  one

of  our  men  being  in  the  toppe  discried  a  saile,  then  10.

saile, then 15.  whereupon it was concluded to sende

home those prizes we had, and so left in both our

Pinasses  not  above  60.  men. Thus  wee  returned  againe

to the Fleete wee had discried,  where  wee found 24.

iwo  \^a- g^-jg  q£  shippes,  whereof  two  of  them  were  Caracks,  the

Gallions  12 °"^  °^  I200.  and  the  other  of  a  1000. tunnes,  and  10.

small  ships. Galions,  the rest  were small shippes and Caravels all

436

A VOYAGE TO THE AZORES  ad.

.1586.

laden  with  Treasure,  spices,  and  sugars,  with  which 24.

shippes  we  with two  small  Pinasses  did  fight,  and kept

company the space of 32. houres, continually fighting

with  them  and  they  with  us,  but  the  two  Caracks  kept

still  betwixt  the  Fleete  and  us,  that  wee  could  not  take

any  one  of  them,  so  wanting  powder,  wee  were forced

to  give  them  over  against  our  willes,  for  that  wee  were

all  wholly  bent to the gaining of  some of  them,  but

necessitie compelling us, and that onely for want of

powder,  without losse of  any  of  our men,  (which  was

a  thing  to  be  wondered  at  considering  the  inequalitie  of

number)  at  length  we  gave  them  over. Thus  we  againe  The  z. pinasses

set  our  course  for  England,  and so  came  to Plimouth  ^ff'^^J^^ M

within 6.  houres after our  prizes,  which  we sent  away "^^^

40. houres before us, where wee were received with

triumphant  joy, not onely  with great Ordinance then

shot  off,  but  with  the willing hearts of  all the people

of  the  Towne,  and  of  the  Countrey  thereabout ;  and  we

not  sparing our  Ordinance (with  the powder  wee had

left) to requite and answere them againe. And from

thence  wee brought our  prizes  to Southampton,  where

sir  Walter  Ralegh being  our  owner,  rewarded us  with

our  shares.

Our  prizes  were  laden  with  sugars.  Elephants  teeth,
waxe,  hides,  rice,  brasill,  and  Cuser,  as  by  the  testimonie
of  John  Evesham  himselfe,  Captaine  Whiddon,  Thomas
Rainford,  Benjamin  Wood,  William  Cooper  Master,
William  Cornish  Master,  Thomas  Drake  Corporall,  John
Ladd  gunner,  William  Warefield  gunner,  Richard
Moone,  John  Drew,  Richard  Cooper  of  Harwich,
William  Beares  of  Ratcliffe,  John  Row  of  Saltash,  and
many  others,  may  appeare.

[A  briefe

437

A.D,
1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  briefe  relation  of  the  notable  service  performed
by  Sir  Francis  Drake  upon  the  Spanish  Fleete
prepared  in  the  Road  of  Cadiz :  and  of  his
destroying  of  100.  saile  of  barks;  Passing
from  thence  all  along  the  coast  to  Cape  Sacre,
where  also  hee  tooke  certaine  Forts :  and  so
to  the  mouth  of  the  River  of  Lisbon,  and
thence  crossing  over  to  the  Isle  of  Sant
Michael,  supprized  a  mighty  Carack  called
the  Sant  Philip  comming  out  of  the  East
India,  w^hich  v^as  the  first  of  that  kinde  that
ever  was  scene  in  England :  Performed  in  the
yeere 1587.

p  Er  Majestic  being  informed  of  a  mightie
i  preparation  by  Sea  begunne  in  Spaine
\  for  the  invasion  of  England,  by  good
advise  of  her  grave  and  prudent  Coun-
sell  thought  it  expedient  to  prevent  the
same.  Whereupon  she  caused  a  Fleete
of  some  30.  sailes  to  be  rigged  and
furnished  with  all  things  necessary.  Over  that  Fleete
she  appointed  Generall  sir  Francis  Drake  (of  whose
manifold  former  good  services  she  had  sufficient  proofe)
to  whom  she  caused  4.  ships  of  her  Navie  royall  to  be
delivered,  to  wit,  The  Bonaventure  wherein  himselfe
went  as  General ;  the  Lion  under  the  conduct  of  Master
William  Borough  Controller  of  the  Navie ;  the  Dread-
nought under  the  command  of  M.  Thomas  Venner ;
and  the  Rainebow,  captaine  whereof  was  M.  Henry
Bellingham :  unto  which  4  ships  two  of  her  pinasses
were  appointed  as  hand-maids.  There  were  also  added
unto  this  Fleet  certaine  tall  ships  of  the  Citie  of  London,
of  whose  especiall  good  service  the  Generall  made  par-
ticular mention  in  his  private  Letters  directed  to  her
Majestic. This Fleete set saile from the sound of

438

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

15.87.
Plimouth  in  the  moneth  of  April  towards  the  coast of
Spaine.

The  16.  of  the  said  moneth  we  mette  in  the  latitude
of  40.  degrees  with  two  ships  of  Middleborough,  which
came  from  Cadiz ;  by  which  we  understood  that  there
was  great  store  of  warlike  provision  at  Cadiz  &  there-
about ready  to  come  for  Lisbon.  Upon  this  informa-
tion our  Generall  with  al  speed  possible,  bending
himselfe  thither  to  cut  off  their  said  forces  and  provisions,
upon  the  19.  of  April  entered  with  his  Fleet  into  the
Harbor  of  Cadiz :  where  at  our  first  entring  we  were
assailed  over  against  the  Towne  by  sixe  Gallies,  which  [II.  ii.  122.]
notwithstanding  in  short  time  retired  under  their  for-
tresse.

There  were  in  the  Road  60.  ships  and  divers  other
small  vessels  under  the  fortresse :  there  fled  about  20.
French  ships  to  Port  Real,  and  some  small  Spanish
vessels  that  might  passe  the  sholdes.  At  our  first  corn-
ming  in  we  sunke  with  our  shot  a  ship  of  Raguza  of
a  1000.  tunnes,  furnished  with  40.  pieces  of  brasse  and
very  richly  laden.  There  came  two  Gallies  more  from
S.  Mary  port,  and  two  from  Porto  Reale,  which  shot
freely  at  us,  but  altogether  in  vaine :  for  they  went
away  with  the  blowes  well  beaten  for  their  paines.

Before  night  we  had  taken  30.  of  the  said  ships,  &
became  Masters  of  the  Road,  in  despight  of  the
Gallies,  which  were  glad  to  retire  them  under  the  Fort :
in  the  number  of  which  ships  there  was  one  new  ship
of  an  extraordinary  hugenesse  in  burthen  above  1200.
tunnes,  belonging  to  the  Marquesse  of  Santa  Cruz  being
at  that  instant  high  Admiral  of  Spaine.  Five  of  them
were  great  ships  of  Biskay,  whereof  4.  we  fired,  as  they
were  taking  in  the  Kings  provision  of  victuals  for  the
furnishing  of  his  Fleet  at  Lisbon :  the  fift  being  a  ship
about  1000.  tunnes  in  burthen,  laden  with  Iron-spikes,
nailes,  yron  hoopes,  horse-shooes,  and  other  like  neces-
saries bound  for  the  West  Indies  we  fired  in  like  maner.
Also  we  tooke  a  ship  of  250.  tunnes  laden  with  wines

439

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

for  the  Kings  provision,  which  wee  caried  out  to  the
Sea  with  us,  and  there  discharged  the  said  wines  for
our  owne  store,  and  afterward  set  her  on  fire.  Moreover
we  tooke  3.  Flyboats  of  300.  tunnes  a  piece  laden  with
biscuit,  whereof  one  was  halfe  unladen  by  us  in  the
Harborow,  and  there  fired,  and  the  other  two  we  tooke
in  our  company  to  the  Sea.  Likewise  there  were  fired
by  us  ten  other  ships  which  were  laden  with  wine,
raisins,  figs,  oiles,  wheat,  &  such  like.  To  conclude,  the
whole  number  of  ships  and  barkes  (as  we  suppose)  then
burnt,  suncke,  and  brought  away  with  us,  amounted  to
30.  at  the  least,  being  (in  our  judgement)  about  loooo.
tunnes  of  shipping.

There  were  in  sight  of  us  at  Porto  Real  about  40*
ships,  besides  those  that  fled  from Cadiz.

We  found  little  ease  during  our  aboad  there,  by
reason  of  their  continuall  shooting  from  the  Gallies,  the
fortresses,  and  from  the  shoare :  where  continually  at
places  convenient  they  planted  new  ordinance  to  offend
us  with  :  besides  the  inconvenience  which  wee  suffered
from  their  ships,  which,  when  they  could  defend  no
longer,  they  set  on  fire  to  come  among  us.  Where-
upon when  the  flood  came  wee  were  not  a  little  troubled
to  defend  us  from  their  terrible  fire,  which  neverthelesse
was  a  pleasant  sight  for  us  to  beholde,  because  we  were
thereby  eased  of  a  great  labour,  which  lay  upon  us  day
and  night,  in  discharging  the  victuals,  and  other  pro-
visions of  the  enemie.  Thus  by  the  assistance  of  the
Almightie,  and  the  invincible  courage  and  Industrie  of
our  Generall,  this  strange  and  happy  enterprize  was
atchieved  in  one  day  and  two  nights,  to  the  great
astonishment  of  the  King  of  Spaine,  which  bread  such
a  corrasive  in  the  heart  of  the  Marques  of  Santa  Cruz
high  Admiral  of  Spaine,  that  he  never  enjoyed  good
day  after,  but  within  fewe  moneths  (as  may  justly  be
supposed)  died  of  extreame  griefe  and  sorrow.

Thus  having  performed  this  notable  service,  we  came
out  of  the  Road  of  Cadiz  on  the  Friday  morning  the

440

!(-/ riit^ft.^;  ^>r:'9^ -^.,. <-^xvtA«*  /;,.<„  i-f^  vji<^  y'.r^^»Q•o<s^,'■
]^,„  viiUf fkr// V^«  ""atr- //»"«■ "^fi^ ^c^^  r^<„^v  i^yf^ '

*J  ?

I 'N)-^

'^

r:

-.

rT-

"^^''^-v  j-y}x.-/i c^  y^^i  yt(^'

,^^

-?

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1587.

21.  of  the  said  moneth  of  April,  with  very  small  losse
not  worth  the  mentioning.

After  our  departure  ten  of  the  Gallies  that  were  in
the  Road  came  out,  as  it  were  in  disdaine  of  us,  to  make
some  pastime  with  their  ordinance,  at  which  time  the
wind  skanted  upon  us,  whereupon  we  cast  about  againe,
and  stood  in  with  the  shoare,  &  came  to  anker  within
a  league  of  the  towne ;  where  the  said  Gallies,  for  all
their  former  bragging,  at  length  suffred  us  to  ride
quietly

We  nov/  have  had  experience  of  Gally-fight :  wherein
I  can  assure  you,  that  onely  these  4.  of  her  Majesties
ships  will  make  no  accompt  of  20.  Gallies,  if  they  may
be  alone,  and  not  busied  to  guard  others.  There  were
never  Gallies  that  had  better  place  and  fitter  opportunitie
for  their  advantage  to  fight  with  ships :  but  they  were
still  forced  to  retire,  wee  riding  in  a  narrow  gut,  the  place
yeelding  no  better,  and  driven  to  maintaine  the  same,
untill  wee  had  discharged  and  fired  the  shippes,  which
could  not  conveniently  be  done  but  upon  the  flood,  at
which  time  they  might  drive  cleare  off  us.  Thus  being
victualed  with  bread  and  wine  at  the  enemies  cost  for
divers  moneths  (besides  the  provisions  that  we  brought
from  home)  our  Generall  dispatched  Captaine  Crosse  into
England  with  his  letters,  giving  him  further  in  charge  to
declare  unto  her  Majestic  all  the  particularities  of  this
our  first  enterprize.

After  whose  departure  wee  shaped  our  course  toward
Cape  Sacre,  and  in  the  way  thither  wee  tooke  at  severall
times  of  ships,  barkes,  and  Caravels  well  neere  an
hundred,  laden  with  hoopes,  gally-oares,  pipe-staves,  &
other  provisions  of  the  king  of  Spaine,  for  the  furnishing
of  his  forces  intended  against  England,  al  which  we
burned,  having  delt  favorably  with  the  men  and  sent
them  on  shoare.  We  also  spoiled  and  consumed  all  the
fisher-boats  and  nets  thereabouts,  to  their  great  hinder-
ance :  and  (as  we  suppose)  to  the  utter  overthrow  of  the
rich  fishing  of  their  Tunies  for  the  same  yere. At  length

441

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

we  came  to  the  aforesaid  Cape  Sacre,  where  we  went  on
[II.  ii.  123.]  land;  and  the  better  to  enjoy  the  benefite  of  the  place,
and  to  ride  in  harborow  at  our  pleasure,  we  assailed  the
same  castle,  and  three  other  strong  holds,  which  we
tooke  some  by  force  and  some  by  surrender.

Thence  we  came  before  the  haven  of  Lisbon  ankering
nere  unto  Cascais,  where  the  Marques  of  Santa  Cruz  was
with  his  Gallies,  who  seeing  us  chase  his  ships  a  shoare,
&  take  and  cary  away  his  barks  and  Caravels,  was  content
to  suffer  us  there  quietly  to  tary,  and  likewise  to  depart,
and  never  charged  us  with  one  Canon-shot.  And  when
our  Generall  sent  him  worde  that  hee  was  there  ready  to
exchange  certaine  bullets  with  him,  the  marques  refused
his  chalenge,  sending  him  word,  that  he  was  not  then
ready  for  him,  nor  had  any  such  Commission  from  his
King.

Our  Generall  thus  refused  by  the  Marques,  and  seeing
no  more  good  to  be  done  in  this  place,  thought  it  con-
venient to  spend  no  longer  time  upon  this  coast : and
therefore  with  consent  of  the  chiefe  of  his  Company  he
shaped  his  course  toward the Isles  of  the  Agores,  and
passsing  towards  the  Isle  of  Saint  Michael,  within  20.  or
30. leagues thereof, it  was his  good  fortune to  meete
The  Carack with a Portugale Carak called Sant Philip, being the
called  the same  shippe  which  in  the  voyage  outward  had  caried  the
uiken  3'  Princes  of  Japan,  that  were  in  Europe,  into  the  Indies.

This  Carak  without  any  great  resistance  hee  tooke,  be-
stowing the  people  thereof  in  certaine  vessels  well
furnished  with  victuals,  and  sending  them  courteously
home  into  their  Countrey  :  and  this  was  the  first  Carak
that  ever  was  taken  comming  foorth  of  the  East  Indies ;
which  the  Portugals  tooke  for  an  evil  signe,  because  the
ship  bare  the  Kings  owne  name.

The  riches  of  this  prize  seemed  so  great  unto  the
whole  Company  (as  in  trueth  it  was)  that  they  assured
themselves  every  man  to  have  a  sufficient  reward  for  his
travel :  and  thereupon  they  all  resolved  to  returne  home
for  England : which  they happily did, and arrived in

442

A PATENT FOR SENEGAL  ad.

1588.
Plimouth  the  same  Sommer  with  their  whole  Fleete  and
this  rich  booty,  to  their  owne  profite  and  due  commenda-
tion, and  to  the  great  admiration  of  the  whole  kingdome.
And  here  by  the  way  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  taking
of  this  Carak  wrought  two  extraordinary  effects  in  Eng-
land :  first,  that  it  taught  others,  that  Caracks  were  no
such  bugs  but  that  they  might  be  taken  (as  since  indeed
it  hath  fallen  out  in  the  taking  of  the  Madre  de  Dios,
and  fyreing  and  sinking  of  others)  and  secondly  in  ac-
quainting the  English  Nation  more  generally  with  the
particularities  of  the  exceeding  riches  and  wealth  of  the
East  Indies :  whereby  themselves  and  their  neighbours  of
Holland  have  bene  incouraged,  being  men  as  skilfull  in
Navigation  and  of  no  lesse  courage  then  the  Portugals
to  share  with  them  in  the  East  Indies :  where  their
strength  is  nothing  so  great  as  heretofore  hath  bene
supposed.

A  Patent  granted  to  certaine  Marchants  of  Exeter,
and  others  of  the  West  parts,  and  of  London,
for  a  trade  to  the  River  of  Senega  and  Gambra
in  Guinea, 1588.

jLizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of
England,  France  and  Ireland,  defender  of
the  faith,  &c.  To  our  Treasurer  and
I  Admirall  of  England,  our  Treasurer  and
Barons  of  our  Exchequer,  and  all  and
every  our  Officers,  ministers  and  subjects
■'  whatsoever,  greeting.  Whereas  our  wel-
beloved  subjects  William  Bray  ley,  Gilbert  Smith,  Nicolas
Spicer,  and  John  Doricot  of  our  City  of  Exeter  mar-
chants,  John  Yong  of  Coliton  in  our  county  of  Devon
marchant,  Richard  Doderige  of  Barnestable  in  our  saide
Countie  of  Devon  Marchant,  Anthonie  Dassell,  and
Nicolas  Turner  of  our  Citie  of  London  Marchants,  have
bene  perswaded  and  earnestly  moved  by  certaine  Portugals
resident  within  our  Dominions,  to  undertake  and  set  for-

443

A.D.
1588.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ward  a  voyage  to  certaine  places  on  the  coast  of  Guinea :
Videlicet,  from  the  Northermost  part  of  the  River  com-
monly called  by  the  name  of  the  River  of  Senega,  and
from  and  within  that  River  all  along  that  coast  unto  the
Southermost  part  of  another  River  commonly  called  by
the  name  of  Gambra,  and  within  that  River :  which,  as
A  former  voy-  -^q  are  informed,  they  have  already  once  performed
^^/^  accordingly:  And  for  that  we  are  credibly  given  to  under-

stand that  the  further  prosecuting  of  the  same  voyage,
and  the  due  and  orderly  establishing  of  an  orderly  trafique
and  trade  of  marchandize  into  those  Countreis,  wil  not
only  in  time  be  very  beneficial  to  these  our  Realmes  and
dominions,  but  also  be  a  great  succour  and  reliefe  unto
the  present  distressed  estate  of  those  Portugals,  who  by
our  princely  favour  live  and  continue  here  under  our
protection :  And  considering  that  the  adventuring  and
enterprising  of  a  newe  trade  cannot  be  a  matter  of  small
charge  and  hazard  to  the  adventurers  in  the  beginning :
we  have  therefore  thought  it  convenient,  that  our  said
loving  subjects  William  Brayley,  Gilbert  Smith,  Nicholas
Spicer,  John  Doricot,  John  Yong,  Richard  Doderige,
Anthonie  Dassell,  and  Nicholas  Turner,  for  the  better
incouragement  to  proceede  in  their  saide  adventure  and
trade  in  the  said  Countreis,  shal  have  the  sole  use  and
[II.  ii,  124,]  exercise  thereof  for  a  certaine  time.  In  consideration
whereof,  and  for  other  waightie  reasons  and  considerations
us  specially  mooving,  of  our  speciall  grace,  certaine  know-
ledge and  meere  motion,  we  have  given  and  graunted,
and  by  these  presents  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors
doe  give  and  graunt  unto  the  said  William  Brayley,
Gilbert  Smith,  Nicholas  Spicer,  John  Doricot,  John
Young,  Richard  Doderide,  Anthony  Dassell  and  Nicholas
Turner,  and  to  every  of  them,  and  to  such  other  our
Subjects  as  they  or  the  most  part  of  them  shall  thinke
convenient  to  receive  into  their  Company  and  society,  to
be  the  traders  with  them  into  the  said  Countreis,  that
they  and  every  of  them  by  themselves  or  by  their  servants
or  Factors  and  none  others,  shall  and  may  for  and  during

444

A PATENT FOR SENEGAL  a.d.

1588,
the  full  space  and  terme  of  tenne  yeeres  next  ensuing  the
date  of  these  presents,  have  and  enjoy  the  free  and  whole
trafique,  trade  and  feat  of  marchandise,  to  and  from  the
said  Northermost  part  of  the  said  River,  commonly  called
by  the  name  of  the  River  of  Senega :  and  from  and  within
that  River  all  along  the  coast  of  Guinea,  unto  the  Souther-
most  part  of  the  said  River,  commonly  called  by  the  name
of  the  River  of  Gambra,  and  within  that  River  also.
And  that  they  the  said  William  Brayley,  Gilbert  Smith,
Nicholas  Spicer,  John  Doricot,  John  Yong,  Richard
Doderige,  Anthony  Dassel  and  Nicholas  Turner,  &  every
of  them,  by  themselves  or  by  their  servants  or  Factors,  &
such  as  they  or  the  most  part  of  them  shall  receive  into
their  Company  and  societie,  to  be  traders  with  them  into
the  sayd  Countreis  (as  is  aforesaid)  and  none  others,  shall
and  may,  for,  and  during  the  said  space  and  terme  of  10.
yeres,  have  and  enjoy  the  sole  &  whole  trafique  or  trade
of  marchandize  into  and  from  the  said  places  afore  limitted
a.nd  described,  for  the  buying  &  selling,  bartering  and
changing  of  and  with  any  goods,  wares,  and  marchandizes
whatsoever,  to  be  vented  had  or  found,  at  or  within  any  the
cities,  townes,  or  places  situated  or  being  in  the  countries,
partes  &  coastes  of  Guinea  before  limitted,  any  law,  statute,
or  graunt,  matter,  custome  or  privileges  to  the  contrary  in
any  wise  notwithstanding.  And  for  the  better  ordering,
establishing,  &  governing  of  the  said  societie  and  Company
in  the  said  trade  and  trafique  of  marchandizes,  &  the
quiet,  orderly  &  lawfull  exercise  of  the  same.  We  for
us,  our  heires,  and  successors,  do  by  these  presents  give
and  graunt  full  license  and  authoritie  unto  the  said
William  Brayley,  Gilbert  Smith,  Nicholas  Spicer,  John
Doricot,  John  Yong,  Richard  Doderige,  Anthonie  Dassell,
and  Nicholas  Turner,  and  to  such  others  as  they  shall
receive  into  their  saide  societie  and  company  to  be  traders
into  the  said  countreis,  as  is  aforesaid,  and  to  every  of
them,  that  they  or  the  most  part  of  them  shall  and  may
at  all  convenient  times  at  their  pleasures,  assemble  and
meete  together  in  any  place  or  places  convenient,  aswell

445

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

within  our  citie  of  Exeter,  as  elsewhere  within  this  our
Realme  of  England,  or  other  our  dominions,  during  the
said  terme  of  ten  yeere,  to  consult  of,  for,  and  concerning
the  saide  trade  and  trafique  of  marchandize,  and  from  time
to  time  to  make,  ordaine,  and  stablish  good,  necessary,
and  reasonable  orders,  constitutions,  and  ordinances,  for,
and  touching  the  same  trade. And  al  such  orders,  con-
stitutions, and  ordinances  so  to  be  made,  to  put  in  ure
and  execute,  and  them,  or  any  of  them,  to  alter,  change,
and  make  voyd,  and,  if  neede  be,  to make  new,  as at
any  time,  during  the  said  terme  of  ten  yeeres,  to  them,
or  the  most  part  of  them  then  trading,  as  is  aforesaide,
shall be thought necessary and convenient. Unto all
and  every  which  said  orders,  constitutions,  and  ordinances,
they,  and  every  of  them,  and  all  other  persons  which  shall
hereafter  be  received  into  the  saide  societie  and  Company,
shall  submit  themselves,  and  shall  well  and  duely  observe,
performe,  and  obey  the  same,  so  long  as  they  shall  stand
in  force,  or  else  shall pay  and  incurre  such  forfeitures,
paines,  and  penalties,  for  the  breach  thereof,  and  in  such
maner  and  forme,  and  to  such  uses  &  intents,  as  by  the
saide orders, constitutions, and ordinances shall be
assessed, limitted and appointed. So alwayes, as the
same orders, constitutions and ordinances,  be not re-
pugnant or  contrary  to  the  lawes,  statutes,  and  customes
of  this  Realme  of  England,  nor  any  penaltie  to  exceede
the  reasonable  forme  of  other  penalties,  assessed  by  the
Company  of  our  Marchants,  named  Adventurers. And
to  the  intent  that  they  onely,  to  whom  the  said  power
and libertie of trafique and trade of marchandize is
graunted  by  these  our  letters  patents  aforesaid,  and  none
others whatsoever, without their speciall consent and
license  before  had,  shall,  during the  said terme  of  ten
yeeres,  use,  or  have  trade  or  trafique,  with or for  any
maner  of  goods  or  marchandizes,  to  and  from  the  saide
coastes  or  parts  of  Guinea  afore  limited : Wee  doe by
these presents, by  our royall and supreme authoritie,
straightly charge and commaund, that no person, or

446

A PATENT FOR SENEGAL  a.d.

1588.
persons  whatsoever,  by  themselves,  or  by  their  factors,
or  servants,  during  the  said  terme  of  10.  yeres,  shall  in
any  wise  trade  or  trafique,  for  or  with  any  goods  or
marchandizes,  to  or  from  the  said  coasts  and  parts  of
Guinea  afore  limitted,  other  then  the  said  William
Brayley,  Gilbert  Smith,  Nicholas  Spicer,  John  Doricot,
John  Yong,  Richard  Doderige,  Anthony  Dassell,  and
Nicholas  Turner,  and  such  as  from  time  to  time,  they,
or  the  most  part  of  them,  shall  receive  into  their  societie
or  company,  to  be  traders  with  them,  as  is  aforesaid,  as
they  tender  our  favour,  and  will  avoyde  our  high  dis-
pleasure, and  upon  paine  of  imprisonment  of  his  or  their
bodies,  at  our  will  and  pleasure,  and  to  lose  and  forfeit
the  ship  or  shippes,  and  all  the  goods,  wares,  and  mar-
chandizes, wherewith  they,  or  any  of  them  shal,  during
the  said  terme  of  10.  yeres,  trade,  or  trafique  to  or  from  [II.  ii.  125.]
the  said  Countries,  or  any  part  thereof,  according  to
the  limitation  above  mentioned,  contrary  to  our  expresse
prohibition  and  restraint,  in  that  behalfe.  And  further,
we  do  by  these  presents  give  and  graunt  full  power
and  authoritie  to  the  said  William  Braily,  Gilbert  Smith,
Nicholas  Spicer,  John  Doricot,  John  Yong,  Richard
Doderige,  Anthony  Dassell,  and  Nicholas  Turner,  and
to  such  other  persons,  as  they  shal  receive  into  their
societie  and  company,  to  be  traders  with  them,  as  is
aforesaid,  and  the  most  part  of  them,  for  the  time  being :
that  they,  and  every  of  them,  by  themselves,  their  factors,
deputies,  or  assignes,  shall  and  may,  from  time  to  time,
during  the  said  terme  of  10.  yeres,  attach,  arrest,  take,
and  sease  all,  and  all  maner  of  ship,  and  ships,  goods,
wares,  and  marchandizes  whatsoever,  which  shall  be
brought  from,  or  caried  to  the  said  coasts  and  parts  of
Guinea  afore  limited,  contrary  to  our  will  and  pleasure,
and  the  true  meaning  of  the  same,  declared  and  expressed
in  these  our  letters  patents.  Of  all  and  every  which  said
forfaitures  whatsoever,  the  one  third  part  shall  be  unto  us,
our  heires,  and  successors,  and  another  thirde  part  thereof
we  give  and  graunt  by  these  presents,  for  and  towards

447

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

the  reliefe  of  the  saide  Portugals  continuing  here  under
our  protection,  as  is  aforesaid.  And  the  other  third  part
of  al  the  same  forfaitures,  we  do  by  these  presents,  of
our  certaine  knowledge  and  meere  motion,  for  us,  our
heires  and  successors,  give  and  grant  cleerely  and  wholy
unto  the  said  William  Brayley,  Gilbert  Smith,  Nicholas
Spicer,  John  Doricot,  John  Yong,  Richard  Doderige,
Anthony  Dassel,  and  Nicholas  Turner,  and  such  other
persons,  as  they  shall  receive  into  their  societie,  and
company,  as  is  aforesaid.  And  these  our  letters  patents,
or  the  inrolment  or  exemplification  of  the  same,  without
any  further  or  other  warrant,  shall  from  time  to  time,
during  the  said  tenne  yeeres,  be  a  sufficient  warrant  and
authoritie  to  our  Treasurer  of  England,  for  the  time
being,  and  to  the  barons  of  our  Exchequer,  and  to  all
other  our  officers  and  ministers  whatsoever,  to  whom
it  shall  or  may  appertaine,  to  allow,  deliver,  and  pay  one
thirde  part  of  all  the  said  forfeitures,  to  the  use  of  the
said  Portugals,  and  one  other  thirde  part  of  the  same
forfeitures,  to  the  saide  William  Brayley,  Gilbert  Smith,
Nicholas  Spicer,  John  Doricot,  John  Yong,  Richard
Doderige,  Anthony  Dassell,  and  Nicholas  Turner,  and
such  other  persons,  as  they  shall  receive  into  their  societie
and  Company,  to  be  traders  with  them,  as  aforesaide,
to  their  owne  proper  use  and  behoofe :  which  said  allow-
ances and  paiments  thereof,  our  will  and  pleasure  is,
and  we  do  straightly  charge  and  command,  to  bee  from
time  to  time  duely  made  and  performed  accordingly,
without  any  delay  or  denial  of  any  our  officers  aforesaid,
or  any  other  our  officers  or  ministers  whatsoever.  And
we  do  straightly  charge  and  command,  and  by  these
presents  prohibite  all  and  singular  our  customers,
collectors,  and  farmers  of  our  Customes  and  subsidies,
and  controllers  of  the  same,  of  and  within  our  ports
of  the  citie  of  London,  and  the  Citie  of  Exeter,  and  all
other  ports,  creekes,  and  places,  within  this  our  Realme
of  England,  and  every  of  them,  and  all  other  our  officers
and  ministers  whatsoever,  which  have  or  shall  have  any

448 ,

A PATENT FOR SENEGAL  ad

1588.
dealing  or  intermedlingj  touching  our  said  Customes
and  subsidies,  that  they,  ne  any  of  them  by  themselves,
their  clearks,  deputies,  or  substitutes,  or  any  of  them
take  or  receive,  or  in  any  wise  cause  or  suffer  to  be
taken  or  received  for  us,  or  in  our  name,  or  to  our  use,
or  for,  or  in  the  names  or  to  the  uses  of  our  heires  or
successors,  of  any  person,  or  persons,  any  summe  or
summes  of  money,  or  other  things  whatsoever,  during
the  said  terme  of  ten  yeeres,  for,  or  in  the  name,  lieu,
or  place  of  any  Custome,  subsidie,  or  other  thing  or
duetie,  to  us,  our  heires,  or  successors,  due,  or  to  be  due,
for  the  Customes  or  subsidies  of  any  such  goods,  wares,
or  marchandizes,  to  be  transported,  caried,  or  brought
to  or  from  the  privileged  places,  before  in  these  presents
mentioned,  or  any  of  them :  nor  make,  nor  cause  to
be  made  any  entry  into,  or  of  the  bookes  of  subsidies
or  customes,  nor  make  any  agreement  for  the  Customes
or  subsidies,  of,  or  for  any  goods,  wares,  or  marchandizes,
to  bee  sent  to,  or  returned  from  any  the  privileged  places,
before  in  these  presents  mentioned,  saving  onely  with,
and  in  the  name,  and  by  the  consent  of  the  saide  William
Brayley,  Gilbert  Smith,  Nicholas  Spicer,  John  Doricot,
John  Yong,  Richard  Doderige,  Antonie  Dassel,  and
Nicholas  Turner,  or  of  some  of  them,  or  of  such  as  they
or  the  most  part  of  them  shall  receive  into  their  societie
and  Company,  as  aforesaid.  Provided  alwaies,  that  if
at  any  time  hereafter,  we  our  selves,  by  our  writing
signed  with  our  proper  hand,  or  any  sixe  or  more  of  our
privie  Counsell,  for  the  time  being,  shall,  by  our  direction,
and  by  writing  signed  and  subscribed  with  their  hands,
signifie  and  notifie  to  the  said  William  Brayley,  Gilbert
Smith,  Nicholas  Spicer,  John  Doricot,  John  Yong,
Richard  Doderige,  Anthony  Dassell,  and  Nicholas  Turner,
or  to  any  of  them,  or  to  any  other,  whom  they,  or  the
most  part  of  them  shal  receive  into  their  Companie  and
society,  as  is  aforesaid,  or  otherwise  to  our  officers  in  our
ports  of  Exeter,  or  Plimouth,  by  them  to  be  notified
to  such  as  shall  have  interest  in  this  speciall  privilege,
VI  449  2  F

A.D.
1588.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  our  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  the  said  trade  and
trafique  shal  cease,  and  be  no  longer  continued  into  the
saide  coasts  and  partes  of  Guinea  before  limited  :  then
immediatly  from  and  after  the  ende  of  sixe  moneths
[11.  ii.  126.]  next  insuingj  after  such  signification  &  notification  so  to
be  given  to  any  of  the  said  Company  and  societie,  as
is  aforesaid,  or  otherwise  to  our  Officers  in  our  ports
of  Exeter  or  Plimouth,  by  them  to  be  notified  to  such
as  shall  have  interest  in  this  speciall  privilege,  these  our
present  letters  Patents,  and  our  graunt  therein  contained
shall  be  utterly  voyde,  and  of  none  effect,  ne  validitie
in  the  lawe,  to  all  intents  and  purposes :  any  thing  before
mentioned  to  the  contrary  in  any  wise  notwithstanding.
Witnesse  our  selfe  at  Westminster,  the  thirde  day  of
May,  in  the  thirtieth  yere  of  our  Reigne 1588.

A  voyage  to  Benin  beyond  the  Countrey  of
Guinea,  set  foorth  by  Master  Bird  and  Master
Newton  Marchants  of  London,  with  a  shippe
called  the  Richard  of  Arundell,  and  a  Finesse ;
Written  by  James  Welsh,  who  was  chiefe
Master  of  the  said  voyage,  begunne  in  the
yeere 1588.

Pon  the  twelft  of  October  wee  wayed  our
ankers  at  Ratcliffe  and  went  to  Blackwall.
And  the  next  day  sayli  ng  from  thence,
by  reason  of  contrary  winde  and  weather,
wee  made  it  the  25.  of  October  before
wee  were  able  to  reach  Plimouth,  and
there  we  stayed  (to  our  great  expense  of
victuals)  for  lacke  of  winde  and  weather  unto  the  14.  of
December.

On  Saturday  the  said 14.  of  December  we  put  from

thence,  and about  midnight  were  thwart  of  the  Lizart.

Rio  del  oro  is Thursday  the  second  of  January  wee  had  sight  of  the

in  22. degrees,  j^nd  neere  Rio  del  oro,  God  be  thanked,  and  there  had

and\'].min. ^^^  degrees  of  latitude,  and  47.  minutes.

450

JAMES WELSH  ad.

1589.

The  thirde  of  January  wee  had  sight  of  Cavo  de  las  Cava  de  las
Barbas,  and  it  bare  Southeast  five  leagues  off.  Barbas.

The  4.  we  had  sight  of  the  Crosiers  in  the  morning. Crosiers.

Tuesday  the  7.  day  we  had  sight  of  Cavo  verde,  and  Cavo  Verde,
I  finde  this  place  to  be  in  latitude  14.  degrees,  and  43.  ^^  H-  ^^g-
minutes,  being  4.  leagues  from  the  shoare.  ^^^'  "'"

Friday the 17. Cavo de Monte bare off  us North  Cavo  de
Northeast,  we  sounded  and  had  50.  fathom  blacke  oase,  ^°^^^'
and  at  2.  of  the  clocke  it  bare  North  Northwest  8.  leagues
off. And  Cavo  Mensurado  bare  of  us  East  and  by  South,  Cavo  Mensu-
and  wee  went  Northeast  with  the  maine  :  here  the  currant "*
setteth  to  the  East  Southeast  alongst  the  shoare,  and  at
midnight  wee  sounded  and  had  26.  fathome  blacke  oase.

The  18.  in  the  morning  we  were  thwart  of  a  land
much  like  Cavo  verde,  and  it  is  as  I  judge  9.  leagues
from  Cavo  Mensurado ;  it  is  a  hill  sadlebacked,  and  there
are  4.  or  5.  one  after  another :  and  7.  leagues  to  the
Southward  of  that,  we  saw  a  row  of  hils  sadlebacked  also,-
and  from  Cavo  Mensurado  are  many  mountaines.

The 19.  we  were  thwart  Rio  de  Sestos,  and  the  20.  ^''^  de  testes.
Cavo  dos Baixos  was  North &  by  West  4.  leagues  off  ^J":" f°^
the  shoare,  and  at  afternoone  there  came  a  boate  from  the
shoare  with  3.  Negroes,  from  a  place  (as  they  say)  called
Tabanoo. And  towards  evening  we  were  thwart  of  an  Tabanoo.
Island,  and  a  great  many  of  small  Islands  or  rockes  to
the  Southward,  and  the  currant  came  out  of  the  Souther-
boord : we  sounded  and  had  ^iS  fathomes.

The  21.  wee  had  a  flat  hill  that  bare  North  Northeast
off  us,  and  wee  were from the shoare 4. leagues,  and
at  2.  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone  we  spake  with  a  French-  A  French  ship
man  riding  neere  a  place  called  Ratire,  and  another  place  ^^ ^^"^'
hard  by  called  Crua. This  Frenchman  caried  a  letter  from  Crua.
us  to  M.  Newton :  wee  layd  it  on  hull  while  wee  were
writing  of  our  letter ;  and  the  current  set  us  to  the  South-  "^  currant  to
ward  a  good  pase  alongst  the  shoare  South  Southeast.  ^ ^J^^  ^^^^"

The  25.  we  were  in  the  bight  of  the  bay  that  is  to  the
Westward  of  Capo  de  Tres  puntas :  the  currant  did  set
East  Northeast.

451

A.D.
1589.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Cava  de  tres
punias.

The  Castle  of
Mina.

The  28.  we  lay  sixe  glasses  a  hull  tarying  for  the
pinesse.

The  last  of  January  the  middle  part  of  Cape  de  tres
puntas  was  thwart  of  us  three  leagues  at  seven  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning:  and  at  eight  the  pinesse  came
to  an  anker :  and  wee  prooved  that  the  current  setteth  to
the  Eastward :  and  at  sixe  at  night  the  uttermost  lande
bare  East  and  by  South  5.  leagues,  and  we  went  South-
west, and  Southwest  and  by  South.

Saturday  the  first  of  February  1588.  we  were  thwart  of
a  Round  foreland,  which  I  take  to  be  the  Eastermost
part  of  Capo  de  tres  puntas :  and  within  the  said  Round
foreland  was  a  great  bay  with  an  Island  in  the  said
bay.

The  second  of  February  wee  were  thwart  of  the  Castle
of  Mina,  and  when  the  thirde  glasse  of  our  Looke-out
was  spent,  we  spied  under  our  Larbord-quarter  one  of
their  Boates  with  certaine  Negroes,  and  one  Portugale  in
[II.  ii.  127.]  the  Boate,  wee  would  have  had  him  to  come  aboord,  but
he  would  not.  And  over  the  castle  upon  the  hie  rockes
we  did  see  as  it  might  be  two  watch-houses,  and  they  did
shew  very  white : and  we  went  eastnortheast.

The  4  in  the  morning  we  were  thwart  a  great  high  hill,
and  up  into  the  lande  were  more  high  ragged  hilles,
and  those  I  reckoned  to  be  but  little  short  of  Monte
Redondo.  Then  I  reckoned  that  we  were  20  leagues
Southeast-ward  from  the  Mina,  and  at  11  of  the  clocke
I  sawe  two  hilles  within  the  land,  these  hils  I  take  to  be
7  leagues  from  the  first  hils.  And  to  sea-ward  of  these
hilles  is  a  bay,  and  at  the  east  end  of  the  bay  another
hill,  and  from  the  hils  the  landes  lie  verie  low.  We  went
Eastnortheast,  and  East  and  by  North  22  leagues,  and
then  East  along  the  shore.

The  6  we  were  short  of  Villa  longa,  and  there  we
met  with  a  Portugall  Caravell.

The  7  a  faire  temperate  day,  and  all  this  day  we  road
before  Villa  longa.

The 8 at noone  we set saile from Villa  longa,  and

452

Two  white
watch-houses.

Monte  Re
dondo.

Villa  longa.

JAMES WELSH  a.d.

1589.

ten leagues  from thence  we  ankered  againe  and stayed
all  that  night  in  ten  fadom  water.

The 9 we set saile, and  all alongst the shore were
very  thicke  woodes,  and  in  the  afternoone  we  were  thwart
a  river,  &  to  the  Eastward  of  the  river  a  litle  way  off  Rio  de  Lagos.
was  a  great  high  bush-tree  as  though  it  had  no  leaves,
and  at  night  we  ankered  with  faire  and  temperate  weather.

The  10  we  set  sayle  and  went  East,  and  East  and
by  South  14  leagues  along  the  shoare,  which  was  so  full
of  thicke  woods,  that  in  my  judgement  a  man  should
have  much  to  doe  to  passe  through  them,  and  towards
night  we  ankered  in  7  fadome  with  faire  weather.

The  1 1  we  sayled  East  and  by  South,  and  three  leagues
from  the  shore  we  had  but  5  fadome  water,  and  all  the
wood  upon  the  land  was  as  even  as  if  it  had  beene  cut
with  a  paire  of  gardeners  sheeres,  and  in  running  of  two
leagues  we  descerned  a  high  tuft  of  trees  upon  the  brow
of  a  land,  which  shewed  like  a  Porpose  head,  and  when
wee  came  at  it,  it  was  but  part  of  the  lande,  and  a  league
further  we  saw  a  head-land  very  low  and  full  of  trees,
and  a  great  way  from  the  land  we  had  very  shallow  water,  Ven  shallow
then  we  lay  South  into  the  sea,  because  of  the  sands  for  '^"^^^^'•
to  get  into  the  deepe  water,  and  when  we  found  it  deepe,
we  ankered  in  five  fadom  thwart  the  river  of  Jaya,  in
the  rivers  mouth.

The  12  in  the  morning  we  road  still  in  the  rivers
mouth.  This  day  we  sent  the  pinnesse  and  the  boat  on
land  with  the  marchants,  but  they  came  not  againe  untill
the  next  morning.  The  shallowest  part  of  this  river  is
toward  the  West,  where  there  is  but  4  fadom  and  a
halfe,  and  it  is  very  broad.  The  next  morning  came  the
boate  aboord,  and  they  also  said  it  was  Rio  de  Jaya.  Rio  de  Jaya.
Here  the  currant  setteth  Westward,  and  the  Eastermost
land  is  higher  then  the  Westermost.

Thursday  the  13  we  set  saile,  and  lay  South  Southeast
along  the  shore,  where  the  trees  are  wonderfuU  even,  and
the  East  shore  is  higher  then  the  West  shore,  and  when
wee  had  sayled  1 8  leagues  we  had  sight  of  a  great  river,

453

A,D,
1589.

Rio  Benin.

A  currant
Westward.

Ten  foote
water  upon
the  barre  of
Rio  de  Benin.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

then  we  ankered  in  three  fadom  and  a  halfe,  and  the
currant  went  Westward.  This  river  is  the  river  of  Benin,
and  two  leagues  from  the  maine  it  is  very  shallowe.

The  15  we  sent  the  boat  and  pinnesse  into  the  river
with  the  marchants,  and  after  that  we  set  saile,  because
we  road  in  shallow  water,  and  went  Southsoutheast,  and
the  starbord  tacke  aboord  untill  we  came  to  five  fathom
water,  where  we  road  with  the  currant  to  the  Westward :
then  came  our  boat  out  of  the  harbour  and  went  aboord
the  pinnesse.  The  West  part  of  the  land  was  high
browed  much  like  the  head  of  a  Gurnard,  and  the  Easter-
most  land  was  lower,  and  had  on  it  three  tufts  of  trees
like  stackes  of  wheate  or  corne,  and  the  next  day  in
the  morning  we  sawe  but  two  of  those  trees,  by  reason
that  we  went  more  to  the  Eastward.  And  here  we  road
still  from  the  14  of  Februarie  untill  the  14  of  Aprill,
with  the  winde  at  Southwest.

The  16  of  Februarie  we  rode  still  in  5  fadome,  and
the  currant  ranne  still  to  the  Westward,  the  winde  at
Southwest,  and  the  boat  and  pinnesse  came  to  us  againe
out  of  the  river,  and  told  us  that  there  was  but  ten  foote
water  upon  the  barre.  All  that  night  was  drowsie,  and
yet  reasonable  temperate.

The  17  a  close  day  the  winde  at  Southwest.  Our
marchants  wayed  their  goods  and  put  them  aboord  the
pinnesse  to  goe  into  the  river,  and  there  came  a  great
currant  out  of  the  river  and  set  to  the  Westward.

The  18  the  marchants  went  with  the  boat  and  pinnesse
into  the  river  with  their  commodities.  This  day  was
close  and  drowsie,  with  thunder,  raine  and  lightning.

The  24  a  close  morning  and  temperate,  and  in  the
afternoone  the  boat  came  to  us  out  of  the  river  from
our  marchants.

Tuesday  the  4  of  March,  a  close  soultry  hot  morning,
the  currant  went  to  the  Westward,  and  much  troubled
water  came  out  of  the  river.

The  16  our  pinnesse  came  a  boord  and  Anthonie
Ingram  in  her,  &  she  brought  in  her  94  bags  of  pepper,

454

JAMES WELSH  a.d.

1589.
and  28  Elephants  teeth,  and  the  Master  of  her  and  all  [II.  ii.  128.]
his  company  were  sicke. This  was  a  temperate  day  and  Sidf^esse
the  winde  at  Southwest.  Z7^ '"'

The  17.  18.  and  19  were  faire  temperate  weather  and
the  winde  at  Southwest.  This  day  the  pinnesse  went
into  the  river  againe,  and  caried  the  Purser  and  the
Surgion.

The  25  of  the  said  moneth  1589  we  sent  the  boate
into  the  river.

The  30  our  pinnesse  came  from  Benin,  and  brought
sorowfull  newes,  that  Thomas  Hemsted  was  dead  and  our  The  (kath  of
Captaine also,  and  she  brought  with  her  159  Cerons  or  PetperiiSEle-
sackes  of  pepper  and  Elephants  teeth.  phants  teeth.

Note  that  in  all  the  time  of  our  abiding  here,  in  the  A  good  note.
mouth  of  the  river  of  Benin,  and  in  all  the  coast  here-
about it  is  faire  temperate  weather,  when  the  winde  is  at
Southwest.  And  when  the  winde  is  at  Northeast  and
Northerly,  then  it  raineth,  with  lightning  and  thunder^
and  is  very  intemperate  weather.

The  13  of  Aprill  1589  we  set  saile  homewards  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  In  the  morning  we  sayled  with  the
winde  at  Southwest,  and  lay  West  and  by  North,  but  it
prooved  calme  all  that  night,  and  the  currant  Southeast.

The  14  the  river  of  Benin  was  Northeast  7  leagues
from  the  shore,  and  there  was  litle  winde  and  towards
night  calme.

The  17  a  faire  temperate  day  the  winde  variable,  and
we  had  of  latitude  foure  degrees  and  20  minutes.

The  25  a  faire  temperate  day  the  winde  variable,  and
here  we  had  three  degrees  &  29  minuts  of  latitude.

The  8  of  May  we  had  sight  of  the  shore,  which  was
part  of  Cavo  de  Monte,  but  we  did  not  thinke  we  had
beene  so  farre,  but  it  came  so  to  passe  by  reason  of  the
currant. In  this  place  M.  Towrson  was  in  like  maner  A  deceitpfull
deceived  with  the  currant.  currant.

The  9  we  had  sight  of  Cavo  de  monte.

The  17  a  darke  drowsie  day,  this  was  the  first  night
that  I  tooke  the  North  starre.

455

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

The  26  a  temperate  day  with  litle  winde,  and  we  were
in 12  degrees  and 13 minutes  of  latitude.

The  30  we  met  a  great  sea  out  of  the  Northwest.

The  6  of  June  we  found  it  as  temperate  as  if  we  had
beene  in  England,  &  yet  we  were  within  the  height  of  the
sunne,  for  it  was  declined  23  degrees,  and  26  minuts  to
the  Northward,  and  we  had  1 5  degrees  of  latitude.

The  8  faire  and  temperate  as  in  England,  here  we  met
with  a  counter  sea,  out  of  the  Southborde.

The  15a  faire  temperate  day,  the  winde  variable,  here
we  had  1 8  degrees  and  fiftie  nine  minutes.
Rockweedor The  12  of  July  in  30  degrees  of  latitude  we  met  with
Saragassa  all ^^^^  ^^^^^ ^£  rockweed,  which did stick together  like

cIQ71Z  tnB  S6CI  /•  -  .  -  ^  .

clusters  of  grapes,  and  this  continued  with  us  untill  the
17  of  the  said  moneth,  and  then  we  saw  no  more,  at
which  17  day  we  were  in  two  and  thirtie  degrees  sixe
and  fortie  minutes  of  latitude.

The  25  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  had
sight  of  the  Isle  of  Pike,  it  bare  North  and  by  East  from
us,  we  being 15  leagues  off.

The  27  we  spake  with  the  poste  of  London  and  she
told  us  good  newes  of  England.

The  nine  and  twentieth  we  had  sight  of  the  Island  of
Cuervo,  and  the  30  we  saw  the  Island  of  Flores.

The  27  of  August  in  41  degrees  of  latitude  we  saw  9
saile  of  Britons,  and  three  of  them  followed  us  untill
noone,  and  then  gave  us  over.

The  30  we  had  sight  of  Cape  Finisterre.

The  eight  of  September  at  night  wee  put  into  Pli-
mouth  sound,  and  road  in  Causon  bay  all  night.

The  9  we  put  into  Catwater  and  there  stayed  untill
the  28  of  September,  by  reason  of  want  of  men  and
sicknesse.

The  nine  and  twentieth  we  set  sayle  from  Plimouth,
and  arrived  at  London  the  second  of  October 1589.

The  commodities  that  we  caried  in  this  voyage  were
cloth  both  linnen  &  wollen,  yron  worke  of  sundry  sorts,

456

JAMES WELSH  a.d.

1589.
Manilllos or bracelets of copper, glasse beades, and
corrall.

The  commodities  that  we  brought  home  were  pepper
and Elephants teeth, oyle of  palme, cloth made of
Cotton  wooll  very  curiously  woven,  and  cloth made  of
the  barke  of  palme  trees. Their  money  is  pretie  white  [II.  ii.  129.]
shels, for  golde and silver we  saw none. They have
also  great  store  of  cotton  growing : their  bread  is  a  kind
of  roots,  they  call  it  Inamia,  and  when  it  is  well  sodden  Inamia.akind
I would leave our  bread  to eat  of  it,  it  is  pleasant  in  ^ !^^ ^^
eating,  and light of  digestion, the roote thereof  is  as
bigge  as  a  mans  arme. Our  men  upon  fish-dayes  had
rather eate the rootes with oyle  and  vineger, then to
eate good stockfish. There are great store of  palme
trees,  out of  the  which  they  gather  great  store  of  wine,  ^^^  of  palm
which  wine  is  white  and  very  pleasant,  &  we  should  buy '^^^'
two gallons  of  it  for  20  shels. They  have  good  store
of  sope,  and  it  smelleth  like  beaten  violets. Also  many
pretie  fine  mats  and  baskets  that  they  make,  and  spoones
of  Elephants  teeth  very curiously  wrought  with divers
proportions  of  foules  and  beasts  made  upon  them. There
is  upon  the  coast  wonderfull  great  lightning  and  thunder,
in so much as I never  hard  the  like  in  no Countrey,
for  it  would  make the  decke  or  hatches  tremble  under
our  feete,  and  before  we  were  well  acquainted  with  it,  we
were  fearefuU,  but  God  be  thanked  we  had  no harme.
The  people are  very  gentle and  loving,  and they  goe
naked  both  men  and  women  untill  they  be  married,  and
then  they  goe  covered from the middle downe  to  the  Abundance  of
knees. They  would bring our men  earthen  pottes  of  honj.
the quantitie of  two gallons, full of hony and hony  This  preser-
combes  for 100  shelles. They  would  also  bring great  J/^^Jf^"^
store of  Oranges and Plantans which is a fruit that  casting  into  an
groweth  upon  a  tree,  and  is  very  like  unto  a  Cucumber  hogshead  of
but very pleasant in eating. It hath  pleased God  of  ^^i^^  ^«
his  merceifull  goodnesse  to  give  me  the  knowledge  how  ^^ _^^if^^
to  preserve  fresh  water  with  little  cost,  which  did  serve  the  author  told
us  sixe  moneths  at  the  sea,  &  when  we  came  into  Plim-  me.

457

A.13.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

mouth  it  was  much  wondered  at,  of  the  principal  men
of  the  towne,  who  said  that  there  was  not  sweeter  water
in  any  spring  in  Plimouth.  Thus  doth  God  provide  for
his  creatures,  unto  whom  be  praise  now  and  for  ever-
more, Amen.

The  voiage  set  forth  by  M.  John  Newton,  and
M.  John  Bird  marchants  of  London  to  the
kindome  and  Citie  of  Benin  in  Africa,  with
a  ship  called  the  Richard  of  Arundell,  and  a
pinnesse,  in  the  yere  1588.  briefely  set  downe
in  this  letter  following,  written  by  the  chiefe
Factor  in  the  voyage  to  the  foresaid  Mar-
chants  at  the  time  of  the  ships  first  arrivall
at  Plimouth.

Orshipful  Sirs,  the  discourse  of  our
whole  proceeding  in  this  voyage  wil  aske
more  time  and  a  person  in  better  health
then  I  am  at  this  present,  so  that  I  trust
you  will  pardon  me,  till  my  comming
up  to  you :  in  the  meane  time  let  this
suffice.  Whereas  we  departed  in  the
moneth  of  December  from  the  coast  of  England  with
your  good  ship  the  Richard  of  Arundell  and  the  pinnesse,
we  held  on  our  direct  course  towards  our  appointed
port,  and  the  14  day  of  Februarie  following  we  arrived
in  the  haven  of  Benin,  where  we  found  not  water  enough
to  carry  the  ship  over  the  barre,  so  that  we  left  her
without  in  the  road,  and  with  the  pinnesse  &  ship
boat,  into  which  we  had  put  the  chiefest  of  our  mar-
Goto  171  Benin,  chandise,  we  went  up  the  river  to  a  place  called  Goto,
where  we  arrived  the  20  of  February,  the  foresaid  Goto
being  the  neerest  place  that  we  could  come  to  by
water,  to  go  for  Benin.  From  thence  we  presently  sent
Negroes  to  the  king,  to  certifie  him  of  our  arrivall,
and  of  the  cause  of  our  comming  thither :  who  returned
to us againe the 22 day  with  a  noble  man in their

458

ANTHONY INGRAM  ad.

1589.
company to bring  us  up to the Citie,  and with 200
Negroes to carrie our commodities: hereupon the 23
day  we  delivered  our  marchandize  to  the  kings  Factor,
& the 25 day  we came to the  great Citie  of Benin,  The  great
where we  were  well intertained  : The sixe  & twenty  "^^^  of  Benin.
day  we went to the Court to  have spoken  with the
king, which (by  reason of  a solemne  feast then kept
amongst  them)  we  could not  doe : but yet we spake
with  his Veadore,  or  chiefe  man,  that  hath the  dealing
with the  Christians : and  we  conferred with him con-
cerning our trading,  who answered  us, that  we  should
have all things to our desire, both in pepper and
Elephants  teeth.

The  first  of  March  we  were  admitted  to  the  kings
presence,  and  he  made  us  the  like  courteous  answere
for  our  traffike :  the  next  day  we  went  againe  to  the
Court,  where  the  foresaid  Veadore  shewed  us  one
basket  of  greene  pepper,  and  another  of  dry  in  the
stalkes :  wee  desired  to  have  it  plucked  from  the  stalks
and  made  cleane,  who  ansv/ered,  that  it  would  aske
time,  but  yet  it  should  be  done :  and  that  against
another  yeere  it  should  be  in  better  readines,  &  the
reason  why  we  found  it  so  unprepared  was,  because  in
this  kings  time  no  Christians  had  ever  resorted  thither,
to  lade  pepper.  The  next  day  there  were  sent  us  12
baskets,  and  so  a  litle  every  day  untill  the  9  of  March
at  which  time  we  had  made  upon  64  serons  of  pepper,
and  28  Elephants  teeth.  In  this  time  of  our  being  at
Benin  (our  natures  at  this  first  time  not  so  well  ac-
quainted with  that  climate)  we  fell  all  of  us  into  the
disease  of  the  fever,  whereupon  the  Captaine  sent  me
downe  with  those  goods  which  we  alreadie  had  received,
to  the  rest  of  our  men  at  Goto  :  where  being  arrived,
I  found  all  the  men  of  our  pinnesse  sicke  also,  and
by  reason  of  their  weaknes  not  able  to  convey  the
pinnesse  and  goods  downe  to  the  place  where  our  ship  [II.  ii.  130.]
road :  but  by  good  hap  within  two  houres  after  my
comming to Goto,  the  boate came up from  the  ship,

459

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

to  see  how  all  things  stood  with  us,  so  that  I  put  the
goods  into  the  boat,  and  went  downe  towards  the  ship :
but  by  that  time  I  was  come  aboord,  many  of  our  men
died :  namely.  Master  Benson,  the  Cooper,  the  Car-
penter, &  3  or  4  more,  &  my  selfe  was  also  in  such  a
weake  state  that  I  was  not  able  to  returne  againe  to
Benin.  Whereupon  I  sent  up  Samuel  Dunne,  and  the
Chirurgian  with  him  to  our  men,  that  were  about  to
let  them  blood,  if  it  were  thought  needful! :  who  at
their  comming  to  Benin,  found  the  Captaine  and  your
Sonne  William  Bird  dead,  and  Thomas  Hempsteede
very  weake,  who  also  died  within  two  dayes  after  their
comming  thither.  This  sorrowfull  accident  caused  them
with  such  pepper  and  teeth,  as  they  could  then  find,
speedily  to  returne  to  the  ship,  as  by  the  Cargason
will  appeare :  at  their  comming  away  the  Veadore  tolde
them,  that  if  they  could  or  would  stay  any  longer  time,
he  would  use  all  possible  expedition  to  bring  in  more
commodities :  but  the  common  sicknesse  so  increased
and  continued  amongst  us  all,  that  by  the  time  our
men  which  remained  were  come  aboord,  we  had  so
many  sicke  and  dead  of  our  companie,  that  we  looked
all  for  the  same  happe,  and  so  thought  to  loose  both
our  ship,  life,  countrey  and  all.  Very  hardly  and  with
much  adoe  could  we  get  up  our  ankers,  but  yet  at  the
last  by  the  mercie  of  God  having  gotten  them  up,  but
leaving  our  pinnesse  behinde  us,  we  got  to  sea,  and
set  saile,  which  was  upon  the  13  of  Aprill.  After  which
by  little  and  little  our  men  beganne  to  gather  up  their
crums  and  to  recover  some  better  strength :  and  so
sailing  betwixt  the  Islands  of  Cape  Verde,  and  the
maine  we  came  to  the  Islands  of  the  Azores  upon  the
25  of  July,  where  our  men  beganne  a  fresh  to  grow
ill,  and  divers  died,  among  whom  Samuel  Dun  was
one,  and  as  many  as  remained  living  were  in  a  hard
case :  but  in  the  midst  of  our  distresse,  it  fell  so  wel
out,  by  Gods  good  providence,  that  we  met  with  your
ship the Barke Burre, on  this side the North cape,

460

JAMES WELSH

which  did  not  only  keepe  us  good  companie,  but  also
sent  us  sixe  fresh  men  aboord,  without  whose  helpe,
we  should  surely  have  tasted  of  many  inconveniences.
But  by  this  good  meanes  we  are  now  at  the  last
arrived  in  Plimouth,  this  9  day  of  September :  and
for  want  of  better  health  at  this  time,  I  referre  the
further  knowledge  of  more  particularities,  till  my  com-
ming  to  London.

Yours  to  commaund

Anthony  Ingram.

The  second  voyage  to  Benin,  set  foorth  by  Master
John  Newton,  and  Master  John  Bird  Mar-
chants  of  London  in  the  yeere  1590  with  a
ship  called  the  Richard  of  Arundel!  of  the
burthen  of  one  hundreth  tunnes,  and  a  small
pinnesse,  in  which  voyage  Master  James  Welsh
was  chiefe  Maister.

He  third  of  September  1590  we  set  saile
from  Ratcliffe,  and  the  18  of  the  said
moneth  we  came  into  Plimouth  sound,
and  the  two  and  twentieth  we  put  to
sea  againe,  and  at  midnight  we  were
off  the  Lisart,  and  so  passed  on  our
voyage  untill  the  14  of  October,  on
which  day  we  had  sight  of  Forteventura  one  of  the
Canarie  Islands,  which  appeared  very  ragged  as  we  sailed
by  it.

The  16  of  October,  in  the  latitude  of  24  degrees  and
nine  minutes  we  met  with  a  great  hollow  sea,  the  like
whereof  I  never  saw  on  this  coast,  and  this  day  there
came  to  the  ships  side  a  monstrous  great  fish  (I  thinke
it  was  a  Gobarto)  which  put  up  his  head  to  the  steepe
tubs  where  ye  cooke  was  in  shifting  the  victuals,  whom
I  thought  the  fish  would  have  caried  away.

The  21  in  this  latitude  of  18  degrees  we  met  with
a  countersea out of the North boord, and the last

461

A.D.

1590.

A.D.
1590.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  token  of  a

Noj-therly

winde.

Great  cur
7-anis.

voyage  in  this  very  place  we  had  the  countersea  out  of
the  South,  being  very  calme  weather  as  now  it  is  also.

The  24  we  had  sight  of  Cavo  Verde,  and  the  25
we  met  with  a  great  hollow  sea  out  of  the  North,  which
is  a  common  signe  that  the  winde  will  be  Northerly,
and  so  it  prooved.

The  15  of  November  we  met  with  three  currants
out  of  the  West  and  Northwest,  one  after  another,  with
an  houres  time  betweene  each  currant.  This  was  in
the  latitude  of  6  degrees  and  42  minutes.

The  18  day  we  met  with  two  other  great  currants
out  of  the  Southwest,  and  the  20  we  saw  another
current  out  of  the  Northeast,  and  the  24  we  had  a  great
current  out  of  the  Southsouthwest,  and  at  6  of  the
clocke  towards  night  we  had  3 currents  more.

The  27  we  thought  that  we  had  gone  at  the  least
2  leagues  and  a  halfe  every  watch,  and  it  fell  out  that
we  sailed  but  one  league  every  watch  for  the  space  of
24  hours,  by  meanes  of  a  great  billow  and  current  that
came  still  out  of  the  South.
[II.  ii.  131.]  The  5  of  December  in  setting  the  watch  we  cast
about  and  lay  East  Northeast,  and  Northeast,  and  here
in 5  degrees  and  a  halfe  our  pinnesse lost  us  wilfully.

The  7  at  the  going  downe  of  the  Sunne  we  saw  a
great  blacke  spot  in  the  Sunne,  and  the  8.  day  both
at  rising  and  setting  we  saw  the  like,  which  spot  to
our  seeming  was  about  the  bignesse  of  a  shilling,  being
in  5  degrees  of  latitude,  and  still  there  came  a  great
billow  out  of  the  southerboord.

The  14  we  sounded  and  had  15  fadom  water  and
grosse  red  sand,  and  2  leagues  from  the  shore  the
currant  set  Southeast  along  the  shore  with  a  billow
still  out  of  the  southerboord.

The  15  we  were  thwart  a  rocke  somewhat  like  the
Mewstone  in  England,  it  was  2  leagues  from  us,  here
we  sounded  and  had  27  fadom,  but  the  rocke  is  not
above  a  mile  from  the  shore,  and  a  mile  farther  we
saw another rocke, and betweene them both broken

462

Two  rocks.

JAMES WELSH  ad.

1590.
ground ;  here  we  sounded  and  had  but  20  fadome  and
blacke  sand,  and  we  might  see  plaine  that  the  rockes
went  not  along  the  shore,  but  from  the  land  to  the
seaward,  and  about  5  leagues  to  the  Southward  we
sawe  a  great  bay,  here  we  had  4  degrees  and  27  minuts.

The 16 we met  with a French ship of Hunfleur,  A  French  ship
who  robbed  our  pinnesse,  we  sent  a  letter  by  him,  and  ^  Hunfleur.
this night we saw  another  spot in  the Sunne at his
going downe. And towards evening we  were thwart
of  a  river,  and  right  over  the  river  was  a  high  tuft  of
trees.

The  17  we  ankered  in  the  rivers  mouth,  and  then
we  found  the  land  to  be  Cavo  de  las  Palmas,  and  Cam  de  las
betweene  us  &  the  cape  was  a  great  ledge  of  rockes,  ^''''"^■^•
one  league  and  a  halfe  into  the  sea,  and  they  bare  to
the  West  of  the  Cape,  we  saw  also  an  Island  off  the
point  of  the  foreland,  thus  it  waxed  night  that  we  could
perceive  no  more  of  the  lande,  but  onely  that  it
trended  in  like  a  bay,  where  there  runneth  a  streame
as  if  it  were  in  the  river  of  Thames,  and  this  was  the
change  day  of  the  Moone.

The  19  a  faire  temperate  day,  and  the  wind  South,
we  went  East,  and  the  lande  a  sterne  of  us  West,  and
it  shewed  low  by  the  water  side  like  Islands,  this  was
the  east  of  Cavo  de  las  Palmas,  and  it  trended  in  with
a  great  sound,  and  we  went  East  all  night,  and  in  the
morning  wee  were  but  3 or  4  leagues  from  the  shore.

The  20  we  were  thwart  of  a  river  called  Rio  de  los  ^^°  ^^  ^"^
Barbos.  ^'''^''^

The  21  we  went  along  the  shore  East,  &  3  or  4
leagues  to  the  West  of  Cavos  de  tres  puntas,  I  find  the
bay  to  be  set  deeper  then  it  is  by  4  leagues,  and  at  4  of
the  clocke  the  land  begun  to  shewe  high,  and  the  first
part  of  it  full  of  Palme  trees.

The  24  still  going by  the shore,  the  land  was  very
low  and  full  of  trees  by  the  water  side,  and  at  1 2  of  the
clocke we  ankered  thwart of  the river called,  Rio  de  Rio  de  Boila
Boilas. Here  we  sent  our  boate  a  shore  with  the  mar-

463

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

chants,  but  they  durst  not  put  into  the  river  because  of
a  great  billow  that  continually  brake  at  the  enterance  upon
the  barre.

The  28  we  sailed  alongst  the  shore,  and  ankered  at
night  in  seven  fadom  because  a  great  current  would  have
put  us  backe,  which  came  from  the  East  Southeast  from

Papuas.  Papuas.

Arda.  The  2^  2Lt  noone  we  were  thwart  of  Arda,  and  there

we  tooke  a  Caravel  but  the  men  were  fled  on  land,  then
we  went  aboord  her,  but  she  had  nothing  in  her  but
only  a  litle  oyle  of  Palme  trees,  and  a  few  roots.  The
next  morning  our  Captaine  and  marchants  went  to  meete
Portugals,  that  came  in  a  boate  to  speake  with  us,  where
they  communed  about  the  buying  of  the  Caravell  of  our
men  againe,  and  the  Portugals  promised  that  we  should
have  for  the  Caravell,  certaine  bullocks  and  Elephants
teeth,  and  they  gave  us  one  tooth  and  one  buUocke
presently,  and  sayd  they  would  bring  us  the  rest  the
next  day.

Januarie.  The  first  of  Januarie our Captaine went  on  land  to

speake  with  the  Portugales,  but  when  he  saw  they  did
dissemble,  he  came  aboord  againe,  and  presently  we  un-
rigged the  Caravell,  and  set  her  on  fire  before  the  towne.
Then  we  set  saile  and  went  along  the  coast,  where  we
saw  a  Date  tree,  the  like  whereof  is  not  in  all  that  coast
upon  the  water  side,  also  we  fell  on  ground  a  litle  in  one

Filla  longa. place :  Thus  we  went  to  Villa  longa,  and  there  ankered.

Rio  de  Lagoa.  The  third  we  were  as  far  shot  as  Rio  de  Lagoa,  where
our  marchants  went  a  shore  and  upon  the  barre  they
found  3  fadom  flat,  but  they  went  not  in  because  it  was
late.  There  is  also  to  the  Eastward  of  this  river  a  Date
tree  higher  then  all  the  rest  of  the  other  trees  thereabout.
Thus  we  went  along  the  coast,  and  every  night  ankered,
&  al  the  shore  as  we  went  was  full  of  trees  and  thicke
woods.

The  6  day  in  the  morning  it  was  very  ^o^^^  so  that
we  could  not  see  the  land,  and  at  three  of  the  clocke
in  the  afternoone  it  cleared  up, & then  we  found  our

464

JAMES WELSH  ad.

1591.
selves  thwart  of  the  river  of  Jaya,  and  when  we  found  The  river  of
the  shallow  water, we  bare into the sea  South, as  we  ■^^'^'^•
did  the  voyage before, and came to an ancre  in  five
fadom  water. The  next day we set saile againe,  and
towards  noone  we  were  thwart  of  the  river  of  Benin  in  The  river  of
foure  fadom  water.  -^^"^"•

The  10  day  our  Captaine  went  on  land  with  the  shal-  [II.  ii.  132.]
lop  at  2  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone.  All  this  weeke  it
was  very  foggy  every  day  untill  ten  a  clocke,  and  all
this  time  hitherto  hath  beene  as  temperate  as  our  sum-
mer in  England.  This  day  we  went  into  the  road  and
ankered,  &  the  west  point  of  the  road  bare  East  northeast
off  us,  wee  riding  in  foure  fadome  water.

The  21 a  faire  temperate day, this  day  M. Hassald
went to the towne of Goto, to heare newes  of the  Goto.
Captaine.

The  23  came  the  Caravell,  and  Samuell  in  her,  and  The  Caravell
she  brought  63 Elephants  teeth,  and  three  bullocks. ^^f^f  '''^^

The  28  a  faire  temperate  day,  and  towards  night  there'
fell  much raine, lightning, and thunder, this day  our
boate  came  aboord  from  Goto.

The 24  of  Februarie, we tooke in 298 Cerons  or  ^^'^- sacks  of
sackes  of  pepper,  and  4  Elephants  teeth,  and  the  winde  ^^f^^^-
was  at  Southeast. And  the  26  we  put  the  rest  of  our
goods  into  the  Caravell,  and  M.  Hassald  went  with  her
to  Goto.

The  5  of  March  ye  Caravel  came  againe  &  brought
21 Cerons  of  pepper,  &  4  Elephants  teeth.

The  9  of  Aprill  our  Caravell  came  aboord  with  water
for  our  provision  for  the  sea,  and  this  day  also  we  lost
our  shallope.

The  17a  drowsie  rainie  day,  and  in  the  afternoone  Three  spouts.
we  saw  3  great  spoutes  of  raine,  two  on  our  larbord
side,  and  one  right  with  the  ships  head,  but  God  be
thanked,  they  came  not  at  us,  and  this  day  we  tooke  in
the  last  of  our  water  for  the  sea,  and  the  26  we  victualed
our  Caravell  to  go  with  us  to  the  sea.  7^^^^  returned

The  27  we  set  saile  to  goe  homewarde  with  the  winde  homeward.
VI  465  2  G

A.D,
159I.

Brava.

We  departed
in  company
of  a  prise.

Corvo.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

at  Southwest, and at two  a  clocke in the  afternoone,
the  river  of  Benin  was  Northeast  8  leagues  from  us.

The  3  of  May  we  had  such  a  terrible  gust  with  raine,
lightning  &  thunder,  that  it  tore  and  split  our  fore  saile,
and  also  the  Caravels  fore-sayle  and  maine-sayle,  with
the  wind  at  Southeast.

The  12  a  faire  temperate  day,  much  like  our  sommer
mornings  in  England,  being  but  one  degree  &  a  halfe
from  the  line,  but  at  midnight  we  had  a  cruell  gust  of
raine,  &  the  wind  at  northeast.

The  24  we  were  South  from  Cavo  de  las  Palmas  37
leagues.

The  first  of  July  we  had  sight  of  the  Island  of  Brava,
and  it  bare  East  7  leagues  oJflF,  and  this  Island  is  one  of
the  Islands  of  Cavo  Verde.

The  13  of  August  we  spake  with  the  Queenes  ships,
the  Lord  Thomas  Howard  being  Admirall,  and  sir
Richard  Greenevill  Viceadmirall.  They  kept  us  in  their
company  untill  the  15  day  at  night,  themselves  lying  a
hull,  in  waight  for  purchase  30  leagues  to  the  Southwest
of  the  Island  of  Flores.

The  15  we  had  leave  to  depart  with  a  fly-boat  laden
with  sugar  that  came  from  Sant  Thome,  which  was  taken
by  the  Queenes  ships,  whereof  my  Lord  Admirall  gave
me  great  charge,  not  to  leave  her  untill  she  were  harbored
in  England.

The  three  and  twentieth  the  Northeast  part  of  the  Island
of  Corvo  bare  off  us  East  and  by  South  sixe  leagues  off.

The  1 7  of  September  we  met  with  a  ship  of  Plimouth
that  came  out  of  the  West  Indies,  but  she  could  tell  us
no  newes.  The  next  day  we  had  sight  of  another  sayle,
this  day  also  one  of  our  company  named  M.  Wood  died.

The  23  we  spake  with  the  Dragon  of  my  Lord  of
Cumberland,  whereof  Master  Ivie  was  Maister.

The  second  of  October  we  met  with  a  ship  of  New-
castle which  came  from  Newfoundland,  and  out  of  her
we  had  300  couple  of  Newland  fish.

The  6  we  had  sight  of  Sillie,  and  with  raine  and  winde

466

JAMES WELSH  ad.

1591.
we  were  forced  to  put  into  S. Maries  sound,  where  we
staied  all  night,  and  4  dayes  after.

The  II  we  set  saile  againe,  and  comming  out  had
three  fadom  upon  the  barre  at  a  high  water,  then  we  lay-
out Southeast,  through  Crow-sand,  and  shortly  after  we
had  sight  of  the  lands  end,  and  at  ten  of  the  clocke  we
were  thwart  of  the  Lysart.

The  13  we  were  put  into  Dartmouth,  and  there  we
stayd  untill  the  12  of  December.  From  thence  we  put
out  with  the  winde  at  West,  and  the  18  of  December,
God  be  praised,  we  ankered  at  Limehouse  in  the  Thames,
where  we  discharged  589  sacks  of  Pepper,  150  Ele-
phants teeth,  and  32  barrels  of  oile  of  Palme  trees.

The  commodities  that  we  caried  out  this  second  voy-
age were  Broad  cloth,  Kersies,  Bayes,  Linnen  cloth,  Yron
unwrought.  Bracelets  of  Copper,  Corall,  Hawks  belles,
Horsetailes,  Hats,  and  such  like.

This  voyage  was  more  comfortable  unto  us  then  the  '
first,  because  we  had  good  store  of  fresh  water,  and  that
very  sweet :  for  as  yet  we  have  very  good  water  in  the
shippe  which  we-  brought  out  of  the  river  of  Benin  the  [II.  ii.  133.]
first  day  of  Aprill  1591.  and  it  is  at  this  day  (being  the
7  of  June  1592.)  to  be  seen  aboord  the  ship  as  cleare
and  as  sweet  as  any  fountaine  can  yeeld.

In  this  voiage we  sailed 350 leagues within  halfe  a  It  is  more
degree  of  the  equinoctiall line, and there we  found  it  ^^J^P^^^t^  ^f-
more  temperate, then  where  we  rode. And  under  the  ^l^fi^n  /j^J
line  wee  did kill great store of  small Dolphines,  and  on  the  coast  of
many other good fishes, and so did we all the  way,  Gulnle  l£
which  was  a  very  great  refreshing  unto  us,  and  the  fish  -^^«^'^-
never  forsooke  us,  until  we  were  to  the  Northwards  of
the  Hands of  Azores, and  then  we  could  see  no  more
fish,  but  God  be  thanked  wee  met  with  good  company
of  our  countrey  ships  which  were  great  comfort  unto  us,
being  five  moneths  before  at  Sea  without  any  companie.

By  me  James  Welsh  master  of  the  Richard
of  Arundell,  in  both  these voyages  to
the  river  of  Benin.
467

A.D.

I59I-.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Paulo  Dias
Governour  of
Angola.

The  king  of
Matamba.

1 14  Portugals
slain  in
Angola.

Amasanguano
the  Portugals
abode  in
Angola.

An  Advertisement  sent  to  Philip  the  second  king
of  Spaine  from  Angola  by  one  Baltazar  Almeida
de  Sousa,  touching  the  state  of  the  foresayd
countrey,  written  the  21  of  May, 1591.

He  26  of  July  I  certified  your  majestic  by
John  Frere  de  Bendanha  your  majesties
pay-master  and  commissioner,  with  the
governour  Paulo  Dias,  which  is  lately
deceased,  of  all  things  that  happened
the  28  of  December  in  the  yere  last
past  1590.  Now  I  thought  it  con-
venient to  advertise  your  majestie  what  hath  fallen  out
since  that  time,  which  is  as  foloweth.  The  governour
Luis  Serrano  encamped  himselfe  eight  leagues  from
Cabasa,  where  the  Negro  king  dwelleth,  with  350  Portu-
gal souldiers :  &  afterward  being  there  encamped,  it
hapned  that  the  king  of  Matamba  sent  a  strong  and
mightie  army,  &  in  warlike  maner,  with  strange  inven-
tions for  the  sayd  purpose.  So  the  king  of  Angola  gave
this  other  king  battel],  and  the  governour  sent  114
souldiers  Portugals  to  helpe  the  said  king  of  Angola :
in  which  battell  it  was  the  will  of  God  that  our  army
was  overthrowen  and  all  slaine,  as  well  our  Portugals
as  the  Moores  which  tooke  part  with  them.  So  with
this  overthrow  it  happened  that  this  realme  the  second
time  hath  rebelled  against  your  majestie.  Hereupon
the  Governour  assembling  the  rest  of  his  Portugall
souldiers,  to  the  number  of  250  altogether,  went  to
Amasanguano,  which  is  now  his  place  of  abode.  More-
over, besides  the  manifold  losses  which  have  befallen
the  Portugals  in  this  realme,  your  majestie  hath  sus-
tained other  great  misfortunes  both  in  your  lands  and
goods.  And  because  I  cannot  personally  come  to  certifie
your  majestie  thereof,  I  thought  it  good  to  write  some
part  of  the  same  whereby  your  majestie  may  understand
the  estate  of  this  countrey. This  realme,  for  the  most

468

AN ADVERTISEMENT FROM ANGOLA  a.d.

1591.
part thereof  hath twise  bene  wonne,  and  twise  lost for
want  of  good  government. For here have  bene  many
governours which have pretended to do  justice, but
have pitifully neglected the same, and practised the
cleane contrary. And this I know to be most true.
But the onely way to recover this realme, and to  Theojtelyway
augment  your  majesties  lands,  goods  and  treasure,  must  ^^  ^'f  ««^^  f' "'^■
be  by  sending  some  noble  and  mighty  man  to  rule  here,  ^^^  ^^^fg
which  must  bring  authoritie  from  your  majestie,  and  by  obedience.
taking  streight order that every captaine which doeth
conquere  here  may  bee  rewarded  according  to  his  deserts.
Likewise your majestie must send hither 2000  good
souldiers, with munition and sufficient store of pro-
vision for  them. And by  this means your highnesse
shall  know  what  yeerely  revenue  Angola  will  yeeld  unto
your  coffers,  and  what  profit  will  grow  thereof. Other-
wise your  majestie  shall  reape  but  litle  benefit  here. If
with  my  presence  I  may  doe  your  majestie  any  service  in
giving information  of  the state of  this  realme,  as one
which  have  had  experience  thereof,  and  have  scene  the
order  of  it,  upon the understanding  of  your majesties
pleasure  herein,  I  will  doe  my  best  indevour. And  the  Anusudltruk
cause  wherefore I have not done this heretofore  hath  °f  ^^'^^  g^'^^r-
bene, by reason that the Governours of this realme
would suffer none of  the captaines which have con-
quered  this  countrey  to  informe  your majestie of  that
which  is  needfuU  for  your  service,  and  the  augmenting
of  this conquest. Our lord preserve your catholique
person  with increase  of  many  kingdomes,  and  the  aug-
mentation  of  youre crowne. Written in the conquest
of  the  realme  of  Angola  the  21 of  May 1591.

Your  majesties  most  loiall  subject,

Baltazar  Almeida  de  Souza.

[A  true
469

A.D.

1589.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

[II.  ii.  134.]  A  true  discourse  written  (as  is  thought)  by  Colonel
Antonie  Winkfield  emploied  in  the  voiage  to
Spaine  and  Portugall,  1589.  sent  to  his  par-
ticular friend,  &  by  him  published  for  the
better  satisfaction  of  all  such  as  having  bene
seduced  by  particular  report,  have  entred  into
conceits  tending  to  the  discredite  of  the  enter-
prise and  Actors  of  the  same.

iLthough  the  desire  of  advancing  my  repu-
tation caused  me  to  withstand  the  many
perswasions you used to hold me at
home,  &  the  pursute  of  honorable  actions
drew  me  (contrary  to  your  expectation)
to  neglect that  advise,  which in  love  I
know  you gave me :  yet in respect of
the many assurances you have yeelded mee of  your
kindest  friendship,  I  cannot  suspect  that  you  will  either
love  or  esteeme  me  the  lesse,  at this  my  returne :  and
therfore I  wil  not  omit  any  occasion  which may  make
me appeare thankfuU, or discharge any part of that
duetie I owe you ; which now  is none other  then to
offer  you  a  true discourse how  these  warres  of  Spaine
and  Portugall  have  passed  since  our  going  out  of  Eng-
land the  1 8  of  Aprill,  till  our  returne  which  was  the  first
of  July. Wherein  I  wil  (under  your  favourable  pardon)
for  your further satisfaction,  as  well make relation of
those reasons  which confirmed me in my  purpose of
going  abroad,  as  of  these  accidents  which  have  happened
during  our  aboad  there ;  thereby  hoping  to  perswade  you
that  no  light  fansie  did  drawe  me  from  the  fruition  of
your  dearest  friendship,  but  an  earnest  desire,  by  follow-
ing the  warres  to  make  my  selfe  more  woorthy  of  the
same.

Having  therefore  determinately  purposed  to  put  on
this  habite  of  a  souldier,  1  grew  doubtfull  whether  to
employ  my  time  in  ye  wars  of  the  low  Countries,  which

470

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

^589.
are  in  auxiliarie  maner  maintained  by  her  majestic,  or
to  folow  the  fortune  of  this  voiage,  which  was  an
adventure  of  her  and  many  honorable  personages,  in
revenge  of  unsupportable  wrongs  offered  unto  the  estate
of  our  countrey  by  the  Castilian  king :  in  arguing  where-
of, I  find  that  by  how  much  the  chalenger  is  reputed
before  the  defendant,  by  so  much  is  the  journey  to  be
preferred  before  those  defensive  wars.  For  had  the
duke  of  Parma  his  turne  bene  to  defend,  as  it  was  his
good  fortune  to  invade :  from  whence  could  have  pro-
ceeded that  glorious  honor  which  these  late  warres  have
laid  upon  him,  or  what  could  have  bene  said  more  of
him,  then  of  a  Respondent  (though  never  so  valiant)
in  a  private  Duell .?  Even,  that  he  hath  done  no  more
then  by  his  honour  he  was  tied  unto.  For  the  gaine
of  one  towne  or  any  small  defeat  giveth  more  renoume
to  the  Assailant,  then  the  defence  of  a  countrey,  or  the
withstanding  of  twentie  encounters  can  yeeld  any  man
who  is  bound  by  his  place  to  guard  the  same :  whereof
as  well  the  particulars  of  our  age,  especially  in  the
Spaniard,  as  the  reports  of  former  histories  may  assure
us,  which  have  still  laied  the  fame  of  all  warres  upon
the  Invader.  And  do  not  ours  in  these  dayes  live
obscured  in  Flanders,  either  not  having  wherewithall  to
manage  any  warre,  or  not  putting  on  armes,  but  to
defend  themselves  when  the  enemie  shall  procure  them  ?
Whereas  in  this  short  time  of  our  Adventure,  we  have
won  a  towne  by  escalade,  battred  &  assaulted  another,
overthrowen  a  mightie  princes  power  in  the  field,  landed
our  armie  in  3  several  places  of  his  kingdom,  marched  7
dayes  in  the  heart  of  his  country,  lien  three  nights  in  the
suburbs  of  his  principall  citie,  beaten  his  forces  into
the  gates  thereof,  and  possessed  two  of  his  frontier
Forts,  as  shall  in  discourse  thereof  more  particularly
appeare :  whereby  I  conclude,  that  going  with  an  In-
vader, and  in  such  an  action  as  every  day  giveth  new
experience,  I  have  much  to  vaunt  of,  that  my  fortune
did  rather  cary  me  thither  then  into  the  wars  of  Flanders.

471

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

Notwithstanding  the  vehement  perswasions  you  used  with
me  to  the  contrary,  the  grounds  whereof  sithence  you
received  them  from  others,  you  must  give  me  leave  to
acquaint  you  with  the  error  you  were  led  into  by  them,
who  labouring  to  bring  the  world  into  an  opinion  that
it  stood  more  with  the  safetie  of  our  estate  to  bend  all
our  forces  against  the  prince  of  Parma,  then  to  folow  this
action  by  looking  into  the  true  effects  of  this  journey,
will  judicially  convince  themselves  of  mistaking  the
matter.  For,  may  the  conquest  of  these  countries
against  the  prince  of  Parma  be  thought  more  easie  for
us  alone  now,  then  the  defence  of  them  was  1 1  yeeres
agoe,  with  the  men  and  money  of  the  Queene  of
England  ?  the  power  of  the  Monsieur  of  France  ?  the
assistance  of  the  principal  states  of  Germanie  ?  and  the
nobilitie  of  their  owne  country  ?  Could  not  an  armie
of  more  then  20000  horse,  &  almost  30000  foot,  beat
Don  John  de  Austria  out  of  the  countrey,  who  was
possessed  of  a  very  few  frontier  townes  ?  &  shall  it  now
be  laid  upon  her  majesties  shoulders  to  remoove  so
mightie  an  enemie,  who  hath  left  us  but  3  whole  parts
of  17  unconquered  ?  It  is  not  a  journey  of  a  few
moneths,  nor  an  auxiliarie  warre  of  few  yeeres  that  can
damnifie  the  king  of  Spaine  in  those  places  where  we  shall
meet  at  every  8  or  10  miles  end  with  a  towne,  which  will
cost  more  the  winning  then  will  yeerely  pay  4  or  5
thousand  mens  wages,  where  all  the  countrey  is  quartered
by  rivers  which  have  no  passage  unfortified,  and  where
[II.  il  135.]  most  of  the  best  souldiers  of  Christendom  that  be  on  our
adverse  party  be  in  pension.  But  our  armie,  which  hath
not  cost  her  majestic  much  above  the  third  part  of  one
yeres  expenses  in  the  Low  countries,  hath  already  spoiled
a  great  part  of  the  provision  he  had  made  at  the  Groine
of  all  sortes,  for  a  new  voyage  into  England;  burnt
3  of  his  ships,  wherof  one  was  ye  second  in  the  last
yeres  expedition  called  S.  Juan  de  Colorado,  taken  from
him  above  150  pieces  of  good  artillerie ;  cut  off  more
then  60  hulks  and  20  French  ships  wel  manned  fit  and

472

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
readie  to  serve  him  for  men  of  war  against  us,  laden  for
his  store  with  corne,  victuals,  masts,  cables  and  other
marchandizes ;  slaine  and  taken  the  principal  men  of  war
he  had  in  Galitia ;  made  Don  Pedro  Enriques  de  Gusman,
Conde  de  Fuentes,  Generall  of  his  forces  in  Portugall,
shamefully  run  at  Peniche ;  laid  along  of  his  best  Com-
manders in  Lisbon ;  and  by  these  few  adventures
discovered  how  easily  her  majestic  may  without  any
great  adventure  in  short  time  pull  the  Tirant  of  the  world
upon  his  knees,  as  wel  by  the  disquieting  his  usurpation
of  Portugall  as  without  difficultie  in  keeping  the  com-
moditie  of  his  Indies  from  him,  by  sending  an  army
so  accomplished,  as  may  not  be  subject  to  those  ex-
tremities which  we  have  endured :  except  he  draw,  for
those  defences,  his  forces  out  of  the  Low  countries  and
disfurnish  his  garisons  of  Naples  &  Milan,  which  with
safetie  of  those  places  he  may  not  do.  And  yet  by  this
meane  he  shall  rather  be  inforced  thereunto,  then  by  any
force  that  can  be  used  there  against  him :  wherefore  I
directly  conclude  that  this  proceeding  is  the  most  safe  and
necessary  way  to  be  held  against  him,  and  therefore  more
importing  then  the  war  in  the  Low  countries.  Yet  hath
the  journey  (I  know)  bene  much  misliked  by  some,  who
either  thinking  too  worthily  of  the  Spaniards  valure,  too
indifferently  of  his  purposes  against  us,  or  too  unworthily
of  them  that  undertooke  this  journey  against  him,  did
thinke  it  a  thing  dangerous  to  encounter  the  Spaniard  at
his  owne  home,  a  thing  needlesse  to  proceed  by  invasion
against  him,  a  thing  of  too  great  moment  for  two
subjects  of  their  qualitie  to  undertake:  And  therfore  did
not  so  advance  the  beginnings  as  though  they  hoped  for
any  good  successe  therof.

The  chances  of  wars  be  things  most  uncertaine :  for
what  people  soever  undertake  them,  they  are  in  deed
as  chastisements  appointed  by  God  for  the  one  side  or  the
other.  For  which  purpose  it  hath  pleased  him  to  give
some  victories  to  the  Spaniards  of  late  yeeres  against
some  whom  he  had  in  purpose  to  ruine. But  if  we  con-

473

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

sider  what  wars  they  be  that  have  made  their  name  so
terrible,  we  shal  find  them  to  have  bin  none  other  then
against  the  barbarous  Moores,  the  naked  Indians,  and  the
unarmed  Netherlanders,  whose  yeelding  rather  to  the
name  then  act  of  the  Spaniards,  hath  put  them  into  such  a
conceit  of  their  mightines,  as  they  have  considerately
undertaken  the  conquest  of  our  monarchie,  consisting
of  a  people  united  &  alwayes  held  sufficiently  warlike :
against  whom  what  successe  their  invincible  army  had  the
last  yeere,  as  our  very  children  can  witness,  so  I  doubt
not  but  this  voiage  hath  sufficiently  made  knowen  what
they  are  even  upon  their  owne  dunghill,  which,  had  it
bene  set  out  in  such  sort  as  it  was  agreed  upon  by  their
first  demaund,  it  might  have  made  our  nation  the  most
glorious  people  of  the  world.  For  hath  not  the  want
of  8  of  the  12  pieces  of  artillerie,  which  were  promised
unto  the  Adventure,  lost  her  majestie  the  possession  of
the  Groine  and  many  other  places,  as  hereafter  shal
appeare,  whose  defensible  rampires  were  greater  then  our
batterie  (such  as  it  was)  cold  force :  and  therefore  were
left  unattempted  ?

It  was  also  resolved  to  have  sent  600  English  horses
of  the  Low  countries,  whereof  we  had  not  one,  notwith-
standing the  great  charges  expended  in  their  transportation
hither :  and  that  may  the  army  assembled  at  Puente  de
Burgos  thanke  God  of,  as  well  as  the  forces  of  Portugall,
who  foreran  us  6  daies  together :  Did  we  not  want  7
of  the  1 3  old  Companies,  which  we  should  have  had  from
thence;  foure  of  the  10  dutch  Companies;  &  6  of  their
men  of  war  for  the  sea,  from  the  Hollanders :  which
I  may  justly  say  we  wanted,  in  that  we  might  have  had  so
many  good  souldiers,  so  many  good  ships,  and  so  many
able  bodies  more  then  we  had  ?

Did  there  not  upon  the  first  thinking  of  the  journey
divers  gallant  Courtiers  put  in  their  names  for  adven-
turers to  the  summe  of  loooo  li.  who  seeing  it  went
forward  in  good  earnest,  advised  themselves  better,  and
laid  the  want  of  so  much  money  upon  the  journey  ?

474

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

Was  there  not  moreover  a  round  summe  of  the
adventure  spent  in  levying,  furnishing,  and  maintaining
3  moneths  1500  men  for  the  service  of  Berghen,  with
which  Companies  the  Mutinies  of  Ostend  were  suppressed,
a  service  of  no  smal  moment  ?

What  misery  the  detracting  of  the  time  of  our  setting
out,  which  should  have  bene  the  i  of  February,  did  lay
upon  us,  too  many  can  witnes :  and  what  extremitie  the
want  of  that  moneths  victuals  which  we  did  eat,  during
the  moneth  we  lay  at  Plimmouth  for  a  wind,  might  have
driven  us  unto,  no  man  can  doubt  of,  that  knoweth  what
men  do  live  by,  had  not  God  given  us  in  the  ende  a  more
prosperous  wind  and  shorter  passage  into  Galitia  then
hath  bene  often  seen,  where  our  owne  force  &  fortune
revictualled  us  largely :  of  which  crosse  windes,  that  held
us  two  dayes  after  our  going  out,  the  Generals  being
wearie,  thrust  to  Sea  in  the  same,  wisely  chusing  rather
to  attend  the  change  thereof  there,  then  by  being  in
harborough  to  lose  any  part  of  the  better,  when  it  should  [II.  li,  136.]
come  by  having  their  men  on  shore :  in  which  two  dayes
25  of  our  companies  shipped  in  part  of  the  fleet  were
scattered  from  us,  either  not  being  able  or  willing  to
double  Ushant.

These  burdens  layed  upon  our  Generals  before  their
going  out,  they  have  patiently  endured,  and  I  thinke  they
have  thereby  much  enlarged  their  honour :  for  having
done  thus  much  with  the  want  of  our  artillery,  600  horse,
3000  foot,  20000  li.  of  their  adventure,  and  one  moneths
victuals  of  their  proportion,  what  may  be  conjectured
they  would  have  done  with  their  ful  complement  ?

For  the  losse  of  our  men  at  sea,  since  we  can  lay  it
on  none  but  the  will  of  God,  what  can  be  said  more,
then  that  it  is  his  pleasure  to  turne  all  those  impediments
to  the  honor  of  them  against  whom  they  were  intended :
and  he  will  still  shew  himselfe  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  doing
great  things  by  them,  whom  many  have  sought  to
obscure :  who  if  they  had  let  the  action  fall  at  the  height
thereof  in respect of  those defects, which were such

475

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

especially for  the  service at  land,  as would  have  made
a  mighty  subject  stoope  under  them,  I  do  not  see  how
any  man  could  justly  have  layd  any  reproch  upon  him
who  commanded  the  same,  but  rather  have  lamented  the
iniquity  of  this  time,  wherein  men  whom  forren  countries
have for  their  conduct  in  service  worthily  esteemed  of,
should  not  only  in  their  owne  countrey  not  be  seconded
in  their  honorable  endevors,  but  mightily  hindred,  even
to ye impairing of their owne estates, which most
willingly  they  have adventured for the good  of  their
countries :  whose  worth  I  will  not  value  by  my  report,
lest I should  seem  guiltie  of  flattery  (which my soule
abhorreth) & yet come  short in the  true measure  of
their praise. Onely for  your instruction  against them
who  had  almost  seduced  you  from  the  true  opinion  you
hold of  such men, you shal understand  that  General
Norris  from his  booke  was  trained  up in  the  wars of
the Admiral of France, and in  very yong  yeeres  had
charge  of  men  under  the  erle  of  Essex  in  Ireland :  which
with what commendations  he then  discharged, I leave
to  the  report  of  them  who  observed  those  services. Upon
the  breach  betwixt  Don  John  &  the  States,  he  was  made
Colonell  generall  of  all  ye  English  forces  there  present,
or  to  come,  which  he  continued  2  yeeres :  he  was  then
made  Marshall  of  the  field  under  Conte  Hohenlo :  and
after  that.  General  of  the  army  in  Frisland :  at  his  com-
ming home in the time  of  Monsieurs  government in
Flanders, he  was made  lord President of Munster in
Ireland,  which  he  yet  holdeth,  from  whence  within  one
yeere he was sent  for,  &  sent  Generall  of  the English
forces  which  her  majestic  then  lent  to  the  Low  countries,
which  he  held  til  the  erle  of  Leicesters  going  over. And
he  was  made  Marshall  of  the  field  in  England,  the  enemy
being upon our coast,  and  when it was expected the
crowne of  England should have bene tried by battel.
Al which places of commandement which never any
Englishman successively attained unto in forren wars,
and the high places her majestie had thought him

476

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  a.d.

1589.

woorthy  of,  may  suffice  to  perswade  you,  that  he  was
not  altogether  unlikely  to  discharge  that  which  he  under-
tooke.

What  fame  general  Drake  hath  gotten  by  his  journy
about  the  world,  by  his  adventures  to  the  west  Indies,
&  the  scourges  he  hath  laid  upon  the  Spanish  nation,  I
leave  to  the  Southerne  parts  to  speake  of,  &  refer  you
to  The  Booke  extant  in  our  own  language  treating  of
ye  same,  &  beseech  you  considering  the  waighty  matters
they  have  in  all  the  course  of  their  lives  with  wonderfull
reputation  managed,  that  you  wil  esteeme  them  not  wel
informed  of  their  proceedings,  that  thinke  them  insuffi-
cient to  passe  through  that  which  they  undertooke,
especially  having  gone  thus  far  in  the  view  of  the  world,
through  so  many  incombrances,  &  disappointed  of  those
agreements  which  led  them  ye  rather  to  undertake  the
service.  But  it  may  be  you  wil  thinke  me  herein
either  to  much  opinionated  of  the  voiage,  or  conceited
of  the  Commanders,  y'  labouring  thus  earnestly  to
advance  the  opinion  of  them  both,  have  not  so  much
as  touched  any  part  of  the  misorders,  weaknes  &  wants
that  have  bene  amongst  us,  whereof  they  that  returned
did  plentifully  report.  True  it  is,  I  have  conceived  a
great  opinion  of  the  journey,  &  do  thinke  honorably
of  the  Commanders :  for  we  find  in  greatest  antiquities,
that  many  Commanders  have  bene  received  home  with
triumph  for  lesse  merite,  &  that  our  owne  countrey  hath
honored  men  heretofore  with  admiration  for  adventures
unequal  to  this :  it  might  therfore  in  those  daies  have
seemed  superfluous  to  extend  any  mans  commendations
by  particular  remembrances,  for  that  then  all  men  were
ready  to  give  every  man  his  due.  But  I  hold  it  most
necessary  in  these  daies,  sithence  every  vertue  findeth
her  direct  opposite,  &  actions  woorthy  of  all  memory
are  in  danger  to  be  enviously  obscured,  to  denounce
the  prayses  of  the  action,  and  actors  to  the  ful,  but  yet
no  further  then  with  sinceritie  of  trueth,  &  not  without
grieving  at  the  injury  of  this  time,  wherein  is  enforced

477

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

a  necessitie  of  Apologies  for  those  men  &  matters,  which
all  former  times  were  accustomed  to  entertaine  with  the
greatest  applause  that  might  be.  But  to  answere  the
reports  which  have  bene  given  out  in  reproch  of  the
actors  and  action  by  such  as  were  in  the  same :  let  no
man  thinke  otherwise,  but  that  they,  who  fearing  the
casuall  accidents  of  war  had  any  purpose  of  returning,
did  first  advise  of  some  occasion  that  should  move  them
thereunto :  and  having  found  any  whatsoever  did  thinke
it  sufficiently  just,  in  respect  of  the  earnest  desire  they
had  to  seeke  out  matter  that  might  colour  their  com-
ming  home.
[II.  ii,  137.]  Of  these  there  were  some,  who  having  noted  the  late
Flemish  warres  did  finde  that  many  yong  men  have  gone
over  and  safely  returned  souldiers  within  fewe  moneths,
in  having  learned  some  wordes  of  Arte  used  in  the
warres,  and  thought  after  that  good  example  to  spend
like  time  amongst  us :  which  being  expired  they  beganne
to  quarrell  at  the  great  mortalitie  that  was  amongst  us.

The  neglect  of  discipline  in  the  Armie,  for  that  men
were  suffered  to  be  drunke  with  the  plentie  of  wines.

The  scarsitie  of  Surgions.

The  want  of  carriages  for  the  hurt  and  sicke :  and
the  penurie  of  victuals  in  the  Campe :

Thereupon  divining  that  there  would  be  no  good
done :  And  that  therefore  they  could  be  content  to  lose
their  time,  and  adventure  to  returne  home  againe.

These  men  have  either  conceived  wel  of  their  owne
wits  (who  by  observing  the  passages  of  the  warre  were
become  sufficient  souldiers  in  these  fewe  weeks,  &  did
long  to  be  at  home,  where  their  discourses  might  be
wondred  at)  or  missing  of  their  Portegues  and  Milrayes
which  they  dreamed  on  in  Portugall,  would  rather
returne  to  their  former  maner  of  life,  then  attend  the
ende  of  the  journey.  For  seeing  that  one  hazard  brought
another ;  and  that  though  one  escaped  the  bullet  this
day  it  might  light  upon  him  to  morow,  the  next  day,
or any  day ; and that the  warre  was not confined to

478-

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
any one place,  but y'  every place brought foorth new
enemies, they were glad to see some of the poore
souldiers fal sicke, y'  fearing to be infected by  them
they  might  justly  desire  to  go  home.

The  sicknesse  I  confesse  was  great,  because  any  is  Answere  to
too  much.  But  hath  it  bene  greater  then  is  ordinary  ^'^^ fi''^^-
amongst  Englishmen  at  their  first  entrance  into  the
warres,  whithersoever  they  goe  to  want  the  fulnesse  of
their  flesh  pots  }  Have  not  ours  decayed  at  all  times  in
France,  with  eating  yong  fruits  and  drinking  newe  wines }
have  they  not  abundantly  perished  in  the  Low  countreys
with  cold,  and  rawnesse  of  the  aire,  even  in  their  garri-
sons .f*  Have  there  not  more  died  in  London  in  sixe
moneths  of  the  plague,  then  double  our  Armie  being
at  the  strongest }  And  could  the  Spanish  Armie  the  last
yeere  (who  had  all  provisions  that  could  be  thought  on
for  an  Armie,  and  tooke  the  fittest  season  in  the  yeere
for  our  Climate)  avoyd  sicknes  amongst  their  souldiers }
May  it  then  be  thought  that  ours  could  escape  there,
where  they  found  inordinate  heat  of  weather,  and  hot
wines  to  distemper  them  withall.''

But  can  it  be,  that  wee  have  lost  so  many  as  the
common  sort  perswade  themselves  wee  have }  It  hath
bene  prooved  by  strickt  examinations  of  our  musters,  that
we  were  never  in  our  fulnesse  before  our  going  from
Plimouth  1 1000.  souldiers,  nor  above  2500.  Marriners.
It  is  also  evident  that  there  returned  above  6000.  of
all  sorts,  as  appeareth  by  the  severall  paiments  made  to
them  since  our  comming  home.  And  I  have  truely
shewed  you  that  of  these  numbers  very  neere  3000.  for-
sooke  the  Armie  at  the  Sea,  whereof  some  passed  into
France  and  the  rest  returned  home.  So  as  we  never
being  13000.  in  all,  and  having  brought  home  above
6000.  with  us,  you  may  see  how  the  world  hath  bene
seduced,  in  beleeving  that  we  have  lost  i6oot).  men  by
sicknes.

To  them  that  have  made  question  of  the  government  Answere  to
of  the  warres  (little  knowing  what  appertaineth  thereunto  ^^^  second.

479

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

in  that  there  were  so  many  drunkards  amongst  us)  I
answere,  that  in  their  government  of  shires  and  parishes,
yea  in  their  very  housholdes,  themselves  can  hardly
bridle  their  vassals  from  that  vice.  For  we  see  it  is  a
thing  almost  impossible,  at  any  your  Faires  or  publique
assemblies  to  finde  any  quarter  thereof  sober,  or  in  your
Townes  any  Alepoles  unfrequented :  And  we  observe
that  though  any  man  having  any  disordered  persons  in
their  houses,  do  locke  up  their  drinke  and  set  Butlers
upon  it,  that  they  will  yet  either  by  indirect  meanes  steale
themselves  drunke  from  their  Masters  tables,  or  runne
abroad  to  seeke  it.  If  then  at  home  in  the  eyes  of  your
Justices,  Maiors,  Preachers,  and  Masters,  and  where  they
pay  for  every  pot  they  take,  they  cannot  be  kept  from
their  liquor :  doe  they  thinke  that  those  base  disordered
persons  whom  themselves  sent  unto  us,  as  living  at  home
without  rule,  who  hearing  of  wine  doe  long  for  it  as  a
daintie  that  their  purses  could  never  reach  to  in  England,
and  having  it  there  without  mony  even  in  their  houses
where  they  lie  &  hold  their  guard,  can  be  kept  from
being  drunk ;  and  once  drunke,  held  in  any  order  or
tune,  except  we  had  for  every  drunkard  an  officer  to
attend  him  ?  But  who  be  they  that  have  runne  into
these  disorders  ?  Even  our  newest  men,  our  yongest
men,  and  our  idelest  men,  and  for  the  most  part  our
slovenly  prest  men,  whom  the  Justices,  (who  have
alwayes  thought  unwoorthily  of  any  warre)  have  sent  out
as  the  scumme  and  dregs  of  their  countrey.  And  those
were  they,  who  distempering  themselves  with  these  hote
wines,  have  brought  in  that  sicknesse,  which  hath  infected
honester  men  then  themselves.  But  I  hope,  as  in  other
places  the  recoverie  of  their  diseases  doeth  acquaint  their
bodies  with  the  aire  of  the  countries  where  they  be,
so  the  remainder  of  these  which  have  either  recovered,
or  past  without  sicknesse  will  proove  most  fit  for
..  Martiall  services.

Answere  to  ^^  '^^  have  wanted  Surgeons,  may  not  this  rather  be

the  third. laid Upon the  captaines (who are to  provide for  their

480

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
severall  Companies)  then  upon  the  Generals,  whose  care
hath  bene  more  generall.  And  how  may  it  be  thought
that  every  captaine,  upon  whom  most  of  the  charges  of
raising  their  Companies  was  laid  as  an  adventure,  could
provide  themselves  of  all  things  expedient  for  a  war,
which  was  alwaies  wont  to  be  maintained  by  the  purse  of
the  prince.  But  admit  every  captaine  had  his  Surgeon :
yet  were  the  want  of  curing  never  the  lesse :  for  our
English  Surgeons  (for  the  most  part)  be  unexperienced  in
hurts  that  come  by  shot ;  because  England  hath  not
knowen  wars  but  of  late,  from  whose  ignorance  proceeded
this  discomfort,  which  I  hope  wil  warne  those  y'  here-
after go  to  the  wars  to  make  preparation  of  such  as
may  better  preserve  mens  lives  by  their  skill.

From  whence  the  want  of  cariages  did  proceed,  you  Answere  to
may  conjecture in y*  we marched through a  countrey  ^"^  fi^''^^-
neither  plentiful  of  such  provisions,  nor  willing  to  part
from  any  thing : yet  this  I  can  assure  you,  that  no  man .
of  worth  was  left  either  hurt  or  sicke  in  any  place  un-
provided for. And  that  the  General  commanded  all  the
mules  &  asses  that  were  laden  with  any  baggage  to  be
unburdened and taken to that use : and the earle of
Essex  and  he  for  mony hired men to cary  men  upon
pikes. And  the  earle  (whose  true  vertue  and  nobilitie,  as
it  doeth  in  all  other  his  actions  appeare,  so  did  it  very
much in this) threw down his own stuffe, I meane
apparel  &  necessaries  which  he  had  there,  from  his  owne
cariages,  and  let  them  be  left  by  the  way,  to  put  hurt  and
sicke  men  upon  them. Of  whose  honorable  deservings
I  shall  not  need  here  to  make  any  particular  discourse,
for  that  many  of  his  actions  do  hereafter  give  me  occasion
to  observe  the  same.

And  the  great  complaint  that  these  men  make  for  the  Answere  to
want  of  victuals  may  well  proceed  from  their  not  know-  ^^  -^^
ing  the  wants  of  the  war ;  for  if  to  feed  upon  good  bieves,
muttons  &  goats,  be  to  want,  they  have  endured  great
scarcitie  at  land,  wherunto  they  never  wanted,  two  daies
together,  wine  to  mixe  with  their  water,  nor  bread  to  eat
VI  481  2  H

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

with  their  meat  (in  some  quantitie)  except  it  were  such  as
had  vowed  rather  to  starve  then  to  stir  out  of  their  places
for  food :  of  whom  we  had  too  many,  who  if  their  time
had  served  for  it,  might  have  seen  in  many  campes  in
the  most  plentifull  countries  of  the  world  for  victuals,
men  daily  die  with  want  of  bread  and  drinke  in  not
having  money  to  buy,  nor  the  countrey  yeelding  any
good  or  healthful  water  in  any  place ;  whereas  both
Spaine  and  Portugall  do  in  every  place  affoord  the  best
water  that  may  be,  and  much  more  healthful  then  any
wine  for  our  drinking.

And  although  some  have  most  injuriously  exclaimed
against  the  smal  provisions  of  victuals  for  the  sea,  rather
grounding  the  same  upon  an  evil  that  might  have  fallen,
then  any  that  did  light  upon  us :  yet  know  you  this,  that
there  is  no  man  so  forgetfull,  that  will  say  they  wanted
before  they  came  to  the  Groine,  that  whosoever  made  not
very  large  provisions  for  himselfe  &  his  company  at  the
Groine,  was  very  improvident,  where  was  plentiful  store
of  wine,  biefe  and  fish,  &  no  man  of  place  prohibited  to
lay  in  the  same  into  their  ships,  wherewith  some  did  so
furnish  themselves,  as  they  did  not  onely  in  the  journey
supplie  the  wants  of  such  as  were  lesse  provident  then
they,  but  in  their  returne  home  made  a  round  commoditie
of  the  remainder  thereof.  And  that  at  Cascais  there  came
in  such  store  of  provisions  into  the  Fleet  out  of  England,
as  no  man  that  would  have  used  his  diligence  could  have
wanted  his  due  proportion  thereof,  as  might  appeare  by
the  remainder  that  was  returned  to  Plimmouth,  and  the
plentifull  sale  thereof  made  out  of  the  marchants  ships
after  their  comming  into  the  Thames.

But  least  I  should  seeme  unto  you  too  studious  in
confuting  idle  opinions,  or  answering  frivolous  questions,
I  wil  addresse  me  to  the  true  report  of  those  actions  that
have  passed  therein :  wherin  1  protest,  I  will  neither  hide
any  thing  that  hath  hapned  against  us,  nor  attribute  more
to  any  man  or  matter,  then  the  just  occasions  thereof  lead
me  unto :  wherein  it  shall  appeare  that  there  hath  bene

482

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
nothing  left  undone  by  the  Generals  which  was  before
our  going  out  undertaken  by  them,  but  that  there  hath
bene  much  more  done  then  was  at  the  first  required  by
Don  Antonio,  who  should  have  reaped  the  fruit  of  our
adventure.

After 6  daies  sailing  from the  coast of  England, &  Our  men  land
the  c  after  we  had  the  wind  good  beine;  the  20  of  April  ^/f  "^  ^j^^

.  . ^ .  .of  the  (jTOine

in  the  evening,  we  landed  in  a  baie  more  then  an  English  ^^  20  of
mile  from  the  Groine,  in  our  long  boats  and  pinnasses  April
without  any  impeachment :  from  whence  we  presently
marched  toward  the  towne,  within  one  halfe  mile  we  were
encountred  by  the  enemie  who  being  charged  by  ours,
retired  into  their  gates.  For  that  night  our  armie  lay  in
the  villages,  houses  &  mils  next  adjoining,  and  very  neere
round  about  the  towne,  into  the  which  the  Galeon  named
S.  John  (which  was  the  second  of  the  last  yeeres  Fleet
agaynst  England)  one  hulke,  two  smaller  ships  and  two
Gallies  which  were  found  in  the  road,  did  beate  upon,
us  and  upon  our  Companies  as  they  passed  too  and  fro
that  night  and  the  next  morning.  Generall  Norris  having
that  morning  before  day  viewed  the  Towne,  found  the
same  defended  on  the  land  side  (for  it  standeth  upon  the
necke  of  an  Hand)  with  a  wall  upon  a  dry  ditch :  where-
upon he  resolved  to  trie  in  two  places  what  might  bee
done  against  it  by  escalade,  and  in  the  meane  time  advised  [II.  ii.  139.]
for  the  landing  of  some  artillery  to  beat  upon  the  ships
and  gallies,  that  they  might  not  annoy  us :  which  being
put  in  execution,  upon  the  planting  of  the  first  piece  the
gallies  abandoned  the  road,  and  betooke  them  to  Feroll,
not  farre  from  thence :  and  the  Armada  being  beaten  with
the  artillery  and  musketers  that  were  placed  upon  the
next  shore,  left  her  playing  upon  us.  The  rest  of  the
day  was  spent  in  preparing  the  companies,  and  other  pro-
visions ready  for  the  surprise  of  the  base  towne,  which
was  effected  in  this  sort.

There  were  appointed  to  be  landed  1200  men  under
the  conduct  of  Colonell  Huntley,  and  Captaine  Fenner
the  Viceadmirall,  on  that  side  next  fronting  us  by  water

483

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

in  long  boats  and  pinnesses,  wherein  were  placed  many-
pieces  of  artillery  to  beat  upon  the  towne  in  their  aproch  :
at  the  corner  of  the  wall  which  defended  the  other  water
side,  were  appointed  Captaine  Richard  Wingfield  Lieuten-
ant Colonell  to  Generall  Norris,  and  Captaine  Sampson
Lieutenant  Colonell  to  Generall  Drake  to  enter  at  low
water  with  500  men  if  they  found  it  passable,  but  if  not,
to  betake  them  to  the  escalade,  for  they  had  also  ladders
with  them  :  at  the  other  corner  of  the  wall  which  joyned
to  that  side  that  was  attempted  by  water,  were  appointed
Colonell  Umpton,  and  Colonell  Bret  with  300  men  to
enter  by  escalade.  All  the  companies  which  should  enter
by  boat  being  imbarked  before  the  low  water,  and
having  given  the  alarme,  Captaine  Wingfield  and  Captaine
Sampson  betooke  them  to  the  escalade,  for  they  had  in
commandement  to  charge  all  at  one  instant.  The  boats
landed  without  any  great  difEculty :  yet  had  they  some
men  hurt  in  the  landing.  Colonell  Bret  and  Colonell
Umpton  entred  their  quarter  without  encounter,  not  find-
ing any  defence  made  against  them :  for  Captaine  Hinder
being  one  of  them  that  entred  by  water,  at  his  first  entry,
with  some  of  his  owne  company  whom  he  trusted  well,
betooke  himselfe  to  that  part  of  the  wall,  which  he  cleared
before  that  they  offered  to  enter,  and  so  still  scoured  the
wall  till  hee  came  on  the  backe  of  them  who  main-
teined  the  fight  against  Captaine  Wingfield  and  Captaine
Sampson ;  who  were  twise  beaten  from  their  ladders,  and
found  very  good  resistance,  till  the  enemies  perceiving
ours  entred  in  two  places  at  their  backs,  were  driven  to
abandon  the  same.  The  reason  why  that  place  was  longer
defended  then  the  other,  is  (as  Don  Juan  de  Luna  who
commanded  the  same  affirmeth)  that  the  enemy  that  day
had  resolved  in  councell  how  to  make  their  defences,  if
they  were  approched :  and  therein  concluded,  that,  if  we
attempted  it  by  water,  it  was  not  able  to  be  held,  and
therefore  upon  the  discovery  of  our  boats,  they  of  the
high  towne  should  make  a  signall  by  fire  from  thence,
that  all  the  low  towne  might  make  their  retreat  thither  i

484

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
but  they  (whether troubled  with  the  sudden terror  we

brought  upon  them,  or  forgetting  their  decree)  omitted
the  fire,  which  made  them  guard  that  place  til  we  were
entred  on  every  side.

Then  the  towne  being  entred  in  three  several  places
with  an  huge  cry,  the  inhabitants  betooke  them  to  the
high  towne :  which  they  might  with  lesse  perill  doe,  for
that  ours  being  strangers  there,  knew  not  the  way  to  cut
them  off.  The  rest  that  were  not  put  to  the  sword  in
fury,  fled  to  the  rocks  in  the  Hand,  and  others  hid  them-
selves in  chambers  and  sellers,  which  were  every  day
found  out  in  great  numbers.

Amongst  those  Don  Juan  de  Luna,  a  man  of  very
good  commandement,  having  hidden  himselfe  in  a  house,
did  the  next  morning  yeeld  himselfe.

There  was  also  taken  that  night  a  commissary  of  vic-
tuals called  Juan  de  Vera,  who  confessed  that  there  were  in
the  Groine  at  our  entry  500  souldiers  being  in  seven  com-
panies which  returned  very  weake  (as  appeareth  by  the  small
numbers  of  them)  from  the  journey  of  England,  namely :
'  Don  Diego  Barran,  a  bastard  sonne  of  the
Marques  of  Santa  Cruz ;  his  company
was  that  night  in  the  Galeon.
Don  Antonio  de  Herera  then  at  Madrid.
Don  Pedro  de  Manriques  brother  to  the

Earle  of  Paxides.
Don  Jeronimo  de  Mourray  of  the  Order
of  S. Juan, with some of  the towne
were  in  the  fort.
Don Gomez de Caramasal then at
Madrid.
^  Captaine  Mango  Caucaso  de  Socas.
Also there came in that day of our landing from
Retanzas  the companies of  Don  Juan de  Mosalle,
and  Don  Pedro  poure  de  Leon.
Also he saith  that  there  was  order  given  for  baking  of
300000  of  biscuit,  some  in  Batansas,  some  in  Ribadeo,
and  the  rest  there.

485

Under Don
Juan  de ■<
Luna.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

There  were  then  in  the  towne  2000  pipes  of  wine,  and

150  in  the  ships.
That  there  were  lately  come  unto  the  Marques  of  Seralba

300000  ducats.
That  there  were 1000  jarres  of  oile.
A  great  quantity  of  beanes,  peaze,  wheat,  and  fish.
That  there  were  3000  quintals  of  beefe.
[II.  ii.  140.]  And  that not  twenty  dayes  before,  there  came  in  three

barks  laden  with  match  &  harquebuzes.
Some  others  also  found  favour  to  be  taken  prisoners,
but  the  rest  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  common
souldiers,  had  their  throats  cut,  to  the  number  of  500,
as  I  conjecture,  first  and  last,  after  we  had  entred  the
towne ;  and  in  the  entry  thereof  there  was  found  every
celler  full  of  wine,  whereon  our  men,  by  inordinate
drinking,  both  grew  themselves  for  the  present  senselesse
of  the  danger  of  the  shot  of  the  towne,  which  hurt  many
of  them  being  drunke,  &  tooke  the  first  ground  of
their  sicknesse ;  for  of  such  was  our  first  and  chiefest
mortality.  There  was  also  abundant  store  of  victuals,
salt,  and  all  kinde  of  provision  for  shipping  and  the
warre :  which  was  confessed  by  the  sayd  Commissary
of  victuals  taken  there,  to  be  the  beginning  of  a
magasin  of  all  sorts  of  provision  for  a  new  voyage
into  England :  whereby  you  may  conjecture  what  the
spoile  thereof  hath  advantaged  us,  and  prejudiced  the
king  of  Spaine.

The  next  morning  about  eight  of  the  clocke  the
enemies  abandoned  their  ships.  And  having  overcharged
the  artillery  of  ye  gallion,  left  her  on  fire,  which  burnt
in  terrible  sort  two  dayes  together,  the  fire  and  over-
charging of  the  pieces  being  so  great,  as  of  fifty  that
were  in  her,  there  were  not  above  sixteene  taken  out
whole ;  the  rest  with  overcharge  of  the  powder  being
broken,  and  molten  with  heat  of  the  fire,  were  taken  out
in  broken  pieces  into  divers  shippes.  The  same  day
was  the  cloister  on  the  South  side  of  the  towne  entred
by  us,  which  joyned  very  neere  to  the  wall  of  the  towne,

486

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

out of  the  chambers and  other places  whereof  we beat
into  the  same  with  our  musquetiers.

The  next  day  in  the  afternoone  there  came  downe
some  2000  men,  gathered  together  out  of  the  countrey,
even  to  the  gates  of  the  towne,  as  resolutely  (ledde  by
what  spirit  I  know  not)  as  though  they  would  have
entred  the  same :  but  at  the  first  defence  made  by  ours
that  had  the  guard  there,  wherein  were  slaine  about
eighteene  of  theirs,  they  tooke  them  to  their  heeles  in
the  same  disorder  they  made  their  approch,  and  with
greater  speed  then  ours  were  able  to  follow :  notwith-
standing we  followed  after  them  more  then  a  mile.  The
second  day  Colonell  Huntley  was  sent  into  the  countrey
with  three  or  foure  hundred  men,  who  brought  home
very  great  store  of  kine  and  sheepe  for  our  reliefe.

The  third  day  in  the  night  the  Gener  all  had  in  purpose
to  take  a  long  munition-house  builded  upon  their  wall,
opening  towards  us,  which  would  have  given  us  great-
advantage  against  them ;  but  they  knowing  the  com-
modity thereof  for  us,  burnt  it  in  the  beginning  of  the
evening ;  which  put  him  to  a  new  councell :  for  he  had
likewise  brought  some  artillery  to  that  side  of  the  towne.
During  this  time  there  happened  a  very  great  fire  in  the
lower  end  of  the  towne ;  which,  had  it  not  bene  by  the
care  of  the  Generals  heedily  scene  unto,  and  the  fury
thereof  prevented  by  pulling  downe  many  houses  which
were  most  in  danger,  as  next  unto  them,  had  burnt  all
the  provisions  we  found  there,  to  our  woonderfuU
hinderance.

The  fourth  day  were  planted  under  the  gard  of  the
cloister  two  demy-canons,  and  two  colverings  against  the
towne,  defended  or  gabbioned  with  a  crosse  wall,  thorow
the  which  our  battery  lay;  the  first  and  second  tire
whereof  shooke  all  the  wall  downe,  so  as  all  the  ordinance
lay  open  to  the  enemy,  by  reason  whereof  some  of  the
Canoniers  were  shot  and  some  slaine.  The  Lieutenant
also  of  the  ordinance,  M.  Spencer,  was  slaine  fast  by
Sir  Edward  Norris,  Master  thereof: whose  valour  being

487

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

accompanied  with  an  honourable  care  of  defending  that
trust  committed  unto  him,  never  left  that  place,  till  he
received  direction  from  the  Generall  his  brother  to  cease
the  battery,  which  he  presently  did,  leaving  a  guard
upon  the  same  for  that  day ;  and  in  the  night  following
made  so  good  defence  for  the  place  of  the  battery,  as
after  there  were  very  few  or  none  annoyed  therein.  That
day  Captaine  Goodwin  had  in  commandement  from  the
Generall,  that  when  the  assault  should  be  given  to  the
towne,  he  should  make  a  proffer  of  an  escalade  on
the  other  side,  where  he  held  his  guard :  but  he  (mis-
taking the  signall  that  should  have  bene  given)  attempted
the  same  long  before  the  assault,  and  was  shot  in  the
mouth.  The  same  day  the  Generall  having  planted  his
ordinance  ready  to  batter,  caused  the  towne  to  be  sum-
moned ;  in  which  summons  they  of  the  towne  shot  at
our  Drum :  immediatly  after  that  there  was  one  hanged
over  the  wall,  and  a  parle  desired ;  wherein  they  gave
us  to  understand,  that  the  man  hanged  was  he  that
shot  at  the  Drum  before:  wherein  also  they  intreated
to  have  faire  warres,  with  promise  of  the  same  on  their
parts.  The  rest  of  the  parle  was  spent  in  talking  of
Don  Juan  de  Luna,  and  some  other  prisoners,  and  some-
what of  the  rendring  of  the  towne,  but  not  much,  for
they  listened  not  greatly  thereunto.

Generall  Norris  having  by  his  skilfull  view  of  the
towne  (which  is  almost  all  seated  upon  a  rocke)  found
one  place  thereof  mineable,  did  presently  set  workemen
in  hand  withall ;  who  after  three  dayes  labour  (and  the
seventh  after  we  were  entred  the  base  towne)  had  bedded
their  powder,  but  indeed  not  farre  enough  into  the  wall.
[II.  ii.  141.]  Against  which  time  the  breach  made  by  the  canon
being  thought  assaultable,  and  companies  appointed  as
well  to  enter  the  same,  as  that  which  was  expected  should
be  blowen  up  by  the  mine :  namely,  to  that  of  the  canon,
Captaine  Richard  Wingfield,  and  Captaine  Philpot,  who
lead  the  Generals  foot-companie,  with  whom  also  Captaine
Yorke went,  whose principall commandment  was over

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  a.d.

1589.
the  horsemen.  And  to  that  of  the  Myne,  Captaine  John
Sampson,  and  Captaine  Anthonie  Wingfield  Lieutenant
Colonell  to  the  Master  of  the  Ordinance,  with  certaine
selected  out  of  divers  Regiments.  All  these  companies
being  in  armes,  and  the  assault  intended  to  be  given  in
al  places  at  an  instant,  fire  was  put  to  the  traine  of  the
mine  ;  but  by  reason  the  powder  brake  out  backewards
in  a  place  where  the  cave  was  made  too  high,  there  could
be  nothing  done  in  either  place  for  that  day.  During
this  time  Captaine  Hinder  was  sent  with  some  chosen
out  of  every  company  into  the  countrey  for  provisions,
whereof  he  brought  in  good  store,  and  returned  with-
out losse.

The  next  day  Captaine  Anthony  Sampson  was  sent
out  with  some  500  to  fetch  in  provisions  for  the  army,
who  was  encountred  by  them  of  the  countrey,  but  he
put  them  to  flight,  and  returned  with  good  spoile.  The
same  night  the  Miners  were  set  to  worke  againe,  who
by  the  second  day  after  had  wrought  very  well  into  the
foundation  of  the  wall.  Against  which  time  the  com-
panies aforesayd  being  in  readinesse  for  both  places
(Generall  Drake  on  the  other  side,  with  two  or  three
hundred  men  in  pinnesses,  making  proffer  to  attempt  a
strong  fort  upon  an  Hand  before  the  towne,  where  he
left  more  then  thirty  men)  fire  was  given  to  the  traine
of  the  mine,  which  blew  up  halfe  the  tower  under  which
the  powder  was  planted.  The  assailants  having  in  charge
upon  the  effecting  of  the  mine  presently  to  give  the
assault,  performed  it  accordingly :  but  too  soone :  for
having  entred  the  top  of  the  breach,  the  other  halfe  of
the  tower,  which  with  the  first  force  of  the  powder  was
onely  shaken  and  made  loose,  fell  upon  our  men :  under
which  were  buried  about  twenty  or  thirty,  then  being
under  that  part  of  the  tower.  This  so  amazed  our  men
that  stood  in  the  breach,  not  knowing  from  whence  that
terror  came,  as  they  forsooke  their  Commanders,  and  left
them  among  the  ruines  of  the  mine.  The  two  Ensignes
of  Generall Drake and Captaine Anthony Wingfield

489

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

were  shot  in  the  breach,  but  their  colours  were  rescued :
the  Generals  by  Captaine  Sampsons  Lieutenant,  and
Captaine  Wingfields  by  himselfe.  Amongst  them  that
the  wall  fell  upon,  was  Captaine  Sydenham  pitifully  lost ;
who  having  three  or  foure  great  stones  upon  his  lower
parts,  was  held  so  fast,  as  neither  himselfe  could  stirre,
nor  any  reasonable  company  recover  him.  Notwith-
standing the  next  day  being  found  to  be  alive,  there  was
ten  or  twelve  lost  in  attempting to  relieve  him.

The  breach  made  by  the  canon  was  woonderfuUy  well
assaulted  by  them  that  had  the  charge  thereof,  who
brought  their  men  to  the  push  of  the  pike  at  the  top
of  the  breach.  And  being  ready  to  enter,  the  loose
earth  (which  was  indeed  but  the  rubbish  of  the  outside
of  the  wall)  with  the  weight  of  them  that  were  thereon
slipped  outwards  from  under  their  feet.  Whereby  did
appeare  halfe  the  wall  unbattered.  For  let  no  man  thinke
that  culverin  or  demy-canon  can  sufficiently  batter  a
defensible  rampire :  and  of  those  pieces  which  we  had  ;
the  better  of  the  demy-canons  at  the  second  shot  brake
in  her  carriages,  so  as  the  battery  was  of  lesse  force,  being
but  of  three  pieces.

In  our  retreat  (which  was  from  both  breaches  thorow
a  narrow  lane)  were  many  of  our  men  hurt :  and  Cap-
taine Dolphin,  who  served  very  well  that  day,  was
hurt  in  the  very  breach.  The  failing  of  this  attempt,
in  the  opinion  of  all  the  beholders,  and  of  such  as
were  of  best  judgement,  was  the  fall  of  the  mine ;
which  had  doubtlesse  succeeded,  the  rather,  because  the
approch  was  unlooked  for  by  the  enemy  in  that  place,
and  therefore  not  so  much  defence  made  there  as  in
the  other ;  which  made  the  Generall  grow  to  a  new
resolution :  for  finding  that  two  dayes  battery  had  so
little  beaten  their  wall,  and  that  he  had  no  better
preparation  to  batter  withall :  he  knew  in  his  experi-
ence, there  was  no  good  to  be  done  that  way ;  which
I  thinke  he  first  put  in  proofe,  to  trie  if  by  that
terror he could  get the upper  towne,  having  no  other

490

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

way  to  put  it  in  hazzard  so  speedily,  and  which  in
my  conscience  had  obtained  the  towne,  had  not  the
defendants  bene  in  as  great  perill  of  their  lives  by  the
displeasure  of  their  king  in  giving  it  up,  as  by  the  bullet
or  sword  in  defending  the  same.  For  that  day  before
the  assault,  in  the  view  of  our  army,  they  burnt  a
cloister  within  the  towne,  and  many  other  houses  adjoyn-
ing  to  the  castle,  to  make  it  more  defensible  :  whereby
it  appeared  how  little  opinion  themselves  had  of  holding
it  against  us,  had  not  God  (who  would  not  have  us
suddenly  made  proud)  layed  that  misfortune  upon  us.

Hereby  it  may  appeare,  that  the  foure  canons,  and
other  pieces  of  battery  promised  to  the  journey,  and
not  performed,  might  have  made  her  Majesty  mistresse
of  the  Groine :  for  though  the  mine  were  infortunate,
yet  if  the  other  breach  had  bene  such  as  the  earth
would  have  held  our  men  thereon,  I  doe  not  thinke
but  they  had  entred  it  thorowly  at  the  first  assault
given :  which  had  bene  more  then  I  have  heard  of  in
our  age.  And  being  as  it  was,  is  no  more  then  the
Prince  of  Parma  hath  in  winning  of  all  his  townes  [II.  ii.  142.]
endured,  who  never  entred  any  place  at  the  first  assault,
nor  above  three  by  assault.

The  next  day  the  Generall  hearing  by  a  prisoner
that  was  brought  in,  that  the  Conde  de  Andrada  had
assembled  an  armie  of  eight  thousand  at  Puente  de
Burgos,  sixe  miles  from  thence  in  the  way  to  Petance,
which  was  but  the  beginning  of  an  armie ;  in  that  there
was  a  greater  leavie  readie  to  come  thither  under  the
Conde  de  Altemira,  either  in  purpose  to  relieve  the
Groine,  or  to  encampe  themselves  neere  the  place  of
our  embarking,  there  to  hinder  the  same ;  for  to  that
purpose  had  the  marquesse  of  Seralba  written  to  them
both  the  first  night  of  our  landing,  as  the  Commis-
sarie  taken  then  confessed,  or  at  the  least  to  stop  our
further  entrance  into  the  Countrey,  (for  during  this
time,  there  were  many  incursions  made  of  three  or
foure hundred at a time, who burnt, spoyled, and

491

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

brought in victuals plentifully) the Generall, I say,
hearing of  this armie, had in purpose the next  day
following  to  visite  them, agaynst  whom  hee  caried  but
nine  Regiments : in  the  vantgard  were  the  Regiment  of
Sir  Roger  Williams, Sir  Edward Norris, and Colonell
Sidney : in  the  Battaile,  that  of  the  Generall,  of  Colonell
Lane, and  Colonel  Medkerk :  and  in  the  Rereward,  Sir
Henrie Norris, Colonell Huntley, and Colonell Brets
Regiments ; leaving the other five Regiments with
Generall Drake, for the guard of the Cloister and
Artillerie. About  ten  of  the  clocke  the  next  day,  being
the sixt of  May, halfe a mile from the campe, we
discovering  the enemy. Sir Edward Norris,  who com-
manded the  vantgard  in  chiefe,  appointed  his  Lieutenant
Colonell  Captaine  Anthonie  Wingfield  to  command  the
shot  of  the  same,  who  divided  them  into  three  troups ;
the  one  he  appointed  to  Captaine  Middleton  to  be  con-
ducted in a  way  on  the  left  hand :  another  to  Captaine
Erington  to  take  the way  on the right  hand, and  the
body  of  them  (which  were  Musquetiers)  Captaine  Wing-
field tooke himselfe, keeping the direct way of  the
march. But  the  way  taken  by  Captaine  Middleton  met
a  little  before  with  the  way  held  by  Captaine  Wingfield,
so  as  he  giving  the  first  charge upon the enemy,  was
in  the  instant  seconded  by  Captaine  Wingfield,  who  beat
them  from  place  to  place  (they  having  very  good  places
of  defence,  and crosse walles which they might have
held  long)  till  they  betooke  them  to  their  bridge,  which
is over  a creeke  comming  out of  the Sea,  builded  of
stone upon arches. On the foot  of the further side
whereof, lay the Campe of  the enemy  very strongly
entrenched,  who with  our shot beaten to the further
end  of  the  bridge.  Sir  Edward  Norris  marching in  the
point  of the  pikes,  without stay  passed  to  the bridge,
accompanied with Colonell Sidney, Captaine Hinder,
Captaine Fulford, and divers others, who found the
way cleare over the same,  but through an incredible
volley  of  shot ;  for  that  the  shot  of  their  army  flanked

492

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
upon  both  sides  of  the  bridge,  the  further  end  whereof
was  barricaded  with  barrels :  but  they  who  should  have
guarded  the  same,  seeing  the  proud  approch  we  made,
forsooke  the  defence  of  the  barricade,  where  Sir  Edward
entered,  and  charging  the  first  defendant  with  his  pike,
with  very  earnestnesse  in  overthrusting,  fell,  and  was
grievously  hurt  at  the  sword  in  the  head,  but  was  most
honourably  rescued  by  the  Generall  his  brother,  accom-
panied with  Colonell  Sidney,  and  some  other  gentlemen  :
Captaine  Hinder  also  having  his  Caske  shot  off,  had
five  wounds  in  the  head  and  face  at  the  sword :  and
Captaine  Fulford  was  shot  into  the  left  arme  at  the
same  encounter :  yet  were  they  so  thorowly  seconded
by  the  Generall,  who  thrust  himselfe  so  neere  to  give
encouragement  to  the  attempt  (which  was  of  woonder-
full  difficulty)  as  their  bravest  men  that  defended  that
place  being  overthrowen,  their  whole  army  fell  presently  2^-^^  notable
into  rout,  of  whom  our  men  had  the  chase  three  miles  "^f™^"^
in  foure  sundry  wayes,  which  they  betooke  themselves  Spaniards  at
unto.  There  was  taken  the  Standerd  with  the  Kings  Puente  de
armes,  and  borne  before  the  Generall.  How  many  two  Burgos.
thousand  men  (for  of  so  many  consisted  our  vantgard)
might  kill  in  pursuit  of  foure  sundry  parties,  so  many
you  may  imagine  fell  before  us  that  day.  And  to  make
the  number  more  great,  our  men  having  given  over  the
execution,  and  returning  to  their  standes,  found  many
hidden  in  the  Vineyards  and  hedges,  which  they  dis-
patched. Also  Colonell  Medkerk  was  sent  with  his
regiment  three  miles  further  to  a  Cloister,  which  he
burnt  and  spoiled,  wherein  he  found  two  hundred  more,
&  put  them  to  the  sword.  There  were  slaine  in  this
fight  on  our  side  onely  Captaine  Cooper,  and  one  private
souldier ;  Captaine  Barton  was  also  hurt  upon  the  bridge
in  the  eye.  But  had  you  scene  the  strong  baricades
they  had  made  on  either  side  of  the  bridge,  and  how
strongly  they  lay  encamped  thereabouts,  you  would  have
thought  it  a  rare  resolution  of  ours  to  give  so  brave
a  charge upon an  army  so  strongly  lodged. After  the

493

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

furie  of  the  execution,  the  Generall  sent  the  vantgard
one  way,  and  the  battell  another,  to  burne  and  spoile ;
so  as  you  might  have  seene  the  countrey  more  then
three  miles  compasse  on  fire.  There  was  found  very
good  store  of  munition  and  victuals  in  the  Campe,  some
plate  and  rich  apparell,  which  the  better  sort  left  behinde,
they  were  so  hody  pursued.  Our  sailers  also  landed
in  an  Hand  next  adjoyning  to  our  ships,  where  they
burnt  and  spoiled  all  they  found.  Thus  we  returned
[II.  ii.  143.]  to  the  Groine,  bringing  small  comfort  to  the  enemy
within  the  same,  who  shot  many  times  at  us  as  we
marched  out ;  but  not  once  in  our  comming  backe
againe.

The  next  day  was  spent  in  shipping  our  artillery
landed  for  the  battery,  and  of  the  rest  taken  at  the
Groine,  which  had  it  bene  such  as  might  have  given  us
any  assurance  of  a  better  battery,  or  had  there  bene
no  other  purpose  of  our  journey  but  that,  I  thinke  the
Generall  would  have  spent  some  more  time  in  the  siege
of  the  place.

The  two  last  nights,  there  were  that  undertooke  to
fire  the  higher  towne  in  one  place,  where  the  houses
were  builded  upon  the  wall  by  the  water  side ;  but  they
within  suspecting  as  much,  made  so  good  defence  against
us,  as  they  prevented  the  same.  In  our  departure  there
was  fire  put  into  every  house  of  the  low  towne,  inso-
much as  I  may  justly  say,  there  was  not  one  house  left
standing  in  the  base  towne,  or  the  cloister.

The  next  day  being  the  eight  of  May,  we  embarked
our  army  without  losse  of  a  man,  which  (had  we  not
beaten  the  enemy  at  Puente  de  Burgos)  had  bene  im-
possible to  have  done ;  for  that  without  doubt  they
would  have  attempted  something  against  us  in  our
imbarking :  as  appeared  by  the  report  of  the  Commissary
aforesayd,  who  confessed,  that  the  first  night  of  our
landing  the  Marques  of  Seralba  writ  to  the  Conde  de
Altemira,  the  Conde  de  Andrada,  and  to  Terneis  de
Santisso,  to  bring all the forces against us that they

494

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589-
could  possible  raise,  thinking  no  way  so  good  to  assure
that  place,  as  to  bring  an  army  thither,  wherewithall
they  might  either  besiege  us  in  their  base  towne,  if  we
should  get  it,  or  to  lie  betweene  us  and  our  place  of
imbarking,  to  fight  with  us  upon  the  advantage  ;  for
they  had  above  15000  souldiers  under  their  commande-
ments.

After  we  had  put  from  thence,  we  had  the  winde  so
contrary,  as  we  could  not  under  nine  dayes  recover  the
Burlings :  in  which  passage  on  the  thirteenth  day  the
Earle  of  Essex,  and  with  him  M.  Walter  Devereux  his
brother  (a  Gentleman  of  woonderfuU  great  hope)  Sir
Roger  Williams  Colonell  generall  of  the  footmen.  Sir
Philip  Butler,  who  hath  alwayes  bene  most  inward  with
him,  and  Sir  Edward  Wingfield,  came  into  the  fleet.
The  Earle  having  put  himselfe  into  the  journey  against
the  opinion  of  the  world,  and  as  it  seemed  to  the  hazzard
of  his  great  fortune,  though  to  the  great  advancement
of  his  reputation,  (for  as  the  honourable  cariage  of  him-
selfe towards  all  men  doth  make  him  highly  esteemed
at  home ;  so  did  his  exceeding  forwardnesse  in  all  services
make  him  to  be  woondered  at  amongst  us)  who,  I  say,
put  off  in  the  same  winde  from  Falmouth,  that  we  left
Plimmouth  in,  where  he  lay,  because  he  would  avoid
the  importunity  of  messengers  that  were  dayly  sent  for
his  returne,  and  some  other  causes  more  secret  to  him-
selfe, not  knowing  (as  it  seemed)  what  place  the  Generals
purposed  to  land  in,  had  bene  as  farre  as  Cadiz  in
Andaluzia,  and  lay  up  and  downe  about  the  South  Cape,
where  he  tooke  some  ships  laden  with  corne,  and  brought
them  unto  the  fleet.  Also  in  his  returne  from  thence
to  meet  with  our  fleet,  he  fell  with  the  Hands  of  Bayon ;
and  on  that  side  of  the  river  which  Cannas  standeth
upon,  he,  with  Sir  Roger  Williams,  and  those  Gentlemen
that  were  with  him  went  on  shore,  with  some  men  out
of  the  ship  he  was  in,  whom  the  enemy,  that  held  guard
upon  that  coast,  would  not  abide,  but  fled  up  into  the
countrey.

495

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

The  16  day  we  landed  at  Peniche  in  Portugall,  under
the  shot  of  the  castle,  and  above  the  waste  in  water,
more  then  a  mile  from  the  towne,  wherein  many  were
in  perill  of  drowning,  by  reason  the  winde  was  great,
and  the  sea  went  high,  which  overthrew  one  boat,  wherein
five  and  twenty  of  Captaine  Dolphins  men  perished.
The  enemy  being  five  companies  of  Spaniards  under  the
commandement  of  the  Conde  de  Fuentes,  sallied  out
of  the  towne  against  us,  and  in  our  landing  made  their
approch  close  by  the  water  side.  But  the  Earle  of  Essex
with  Sir  Roger  Williams,  and  his  brother,  having  landed
sufficient  number  to  make  two  troups,  left  one  to  holde
the  way  by  the  water  side,  and  led  the  other  over  the
Sandhils ;  which  the  enemy  seeing,  drew  theirs  likewise
further  into  the  land ;  not,  as  we  conjectured,  to  en-
counter us,  but  indeed  to  make  their  speedy  passage
away :  notwithstanding,  they  did  it  in  such  sort,  as  being
charged  by  ours  which  were  sent  out  by  the  Colonell
generall  under  Captaine  Jackson,  they  stood  the  same
even  to  the  push  of  the  pike :  in  which  charge  and  at
the  push,  Captaine  Robert  Piew  was  slaine.  The  enemy
being  fled  further  then  we  had  reason  to  follow  them,
all  our  companies  were  drawen  to  the  towne ;  which
being  unfortified  in  any  place,  we  found  undefended  by
any  man  against  us.  And  therefore  the  Generall  caused
the  castle  to  be  summoned  that  night;  which  being
abandoned  by  him  that  commanded  it,  a  Portugall  named
Antonio  de  Aurid,  being  possessed  thereof,  desired  but
to  be  assured  that  Don  Antonio  was  landed,  whereupon
he  would  deliver  the  same ;  which  he  honestly  performed.

Fen'iche  taken.  There  was  taken  out  of  the  castle  some  hundred  shot
and  pikes,  which  Don  Emanuel  furnished  his  Portugals
withall,  and  twenty  barrels  of  powder:  so  as  possessing
both  the  towne  and  the  castle,  we  rested  there  one  day :
wherein  some  Friers  and  other  poore  men  came  unto
their  new  king,  promising  in  the  name  of  their  country

[II.  ii.  144.]  next  adjoyning,  that  within  two  dayes  he  should  have  a
good  supply  of  horse  and  foote  for  his  assistance. That

496

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad

1589.
day  we  remained  there,  the  Generals  company  of  horses
were  unshipped.

The  Generals  there  fully  resolved,  that  the  Armie
should  march  over  land  to  Lisbone  under  the  conduct
of  Generall  Norris ;  and  that  Generall  Drake  should
meete  him  in  the  river  therof  with  the  Fleete ;  that  there
should  be  one  Company  of  foote  left  in  garde  of  the
Castle,  and  sixe  in  the  ships  :  also  that  the  sicke  &  hurt
should  remaine  there  with  provisions  for  their  cures.
The  Generall,  to  trie  the  event  of  the  matter  by  expedi-
tion, the  next  day  beganne  to  march  in  this  sort :  his
owne  Regiment,  and  the  Regiment  of  Sir  Roger  Williams,
Sir  Henrie  Norris,  Colonell  Lane,  and  Colonell  Med-
kerk,  in  the  vantgard :  Generall  Drake,  Colonell  Deve-
reux.  Sir  Edward  Norris,  and  Colonell  Sidneis  in  the
battell :  Sir  James  Hales,  Sir  Edward  Wingfield,  Colonell
Umptons,  Colonell  Huntlies,  and  Colonell  Brets  in  the
arrereward.  By  that  time  our  army  was  thus  marshalled,
Generall  Drake,  although  hee  were  to  passe  by  Sea,  yet
to  make  knowen  the  honourable  desire  he  had  of  taking
equall  part  of  all  fortunes  with  us,  stood  upon  the
ascent  of  an  hill,  by  the  which  our  battalions  must  of
necessity  march,  and  with  a  pleasing  kindnesse  tooke  his
leave  severally  of  the  Commanders  of  every  regiment,
wishing  us  all  most  happy  successe  in  our  journey  over
the  land,  with  a  constant  promise  that  he  would,  if  the
injury  of  the  weather  did  not  hinder  him,  meet  us  in
the  river  of  Lisbon  with  our  fleet.  The  want  of  cari-
ages  the  first  day  was  such,  as  they  were  enforced  to
cary  their  munition  upon  mens  backs,  which  was  the
next  day  remedied.

In  this  march  Captaine  Crispe  the  Provost  Marshall
caused  one  who  (contrary  to  the  Proclamation  published
at  our  arrivall  in  Portugall)  had  broken  up  an  house
for  pillage,  to  be  hanged,  with  the  cause  of  his  death
upon  his  breast,  in  the  place  where  the  act  was  com-
mitted :  which  good  example  providently  given  in  the
beginning  of  our  march,  caused  the  commandement  to
VI  497  2 1

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

be  more  respectivly  regarded  all  the  journey  after,  by
them  whom  feare  of  punishment  doeth  onely  holde
within  compasse.  The  campe  lodged  that  night  at
Lorinha :  the  next  day  we  had  intelligence  all  the  way,
that  the  enemy  had  made  head  of  horse  and  foot
against  us  at  Torres  Vedras,  which  we  thought  they
would  have  held :  but  comming  thither  the  second  day
of  our  march,  not  two  houres  before  our  vantgard  came
in,  they  left  the  towne  and  the  castle  to  the  possession
of  Don  Antonio.

There  began  the  greatest  want  we  had  of  victuals,
especially  of  bread,  upon  a  commandement  given  from
the  Generall,  that  no  man  should  spoile  the-  countrey,
or  take  any  thing  from  any  Portugal! :  which  was  more
respectively  observed,  then  I  thinke  would  have  bene
in  our  owne  countrey,  amongst  our  owne  friends  and
kindred :  but  the  countrey  (contrary  to  promise)  wholly
neglected  the  provision  of  victuals  for  us,  whereby  we
were  driven  for  that  time  into  a  great  scarsity.  Which
mooved  the  Colonell  generall  to  call  all  the  Colonels
together,  and  with  them  to  advise  for  some  better  course
for  our  people :  who  thought  it  best,  first  to  advertise
the  king  what  necessity  we  were  in,  before  we  should  of
our  selves  alter  the  first  institution  of  abstinence.  The
Colonell  generall  having  acquainted  the  Generall  here-
with, with  his  very  good  allowance  thereof,  went  to  the
king ;  who  after  some  expostulations  used,  tooke  the
more  carefull  order  for  our  men,  and  after  that  our  army
was  more  plentifully  relieved.

The  third  day  we  lodged  our  army  in  three  sundry
villages,  the  one  battalion  lying  in  Exarama  de  los  Caval-
leros,  another  in  Exarama  do  Obispo,  and  the  third  in
San  Sebastian.

Captaine  Yorke  who  commanded  the  Generals  horse
company,  in  this  march  made  triall  of  the  valour  of  the
horsemen  of  the  enemy ;  who  by  one  of  his  Corporals
charged  with  eight  horses  thorow  40  of  them,  &  him-
selfe  thorow  more  then  200  with  some  forty  horses :  who

498

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
would  abide  him  no  longer  then  they  could  make  way
from  him.

The  next  day  we  marched  to  Lores,  and  had  divers
intelligences  that  the  enemy  would  tary  us  there:  for  the
Cardinall  had  made  publique  promise  to  them  of  Lisbon,
that  he  would  fight  with  us  in  that  place,  which  he
might  have  done  adva  tageously ;  for  we  had  a  bridge
to  passe  over  in  the  same  place :  but  before  our  comming
he  dislodged,  notwithstanding  it  appeared  unto  us  that
he  had  in  purpose  to  encampe  there ;  for  we  found  the
ground  staked  out  where  their  trenches  should  have  bene
made :  and  their  horsemen  with  some  few  shot  shewed
themselves  upon  an  hill  at  our  comming  into  that
village ;  whom  Sir  Henry  Norris  (whose  regiment  had  the
point  of  the  vantgard)  thought  to  draw  unto  some  fight,
and  therfore  marched  without  sound  of  drumme,  and
somewhat  faster  then  ordinary,  thereby  to  get  neere  them
before  he  were  discovered,  for  he  was  shadowed  from  them
by  an  hill  that  was  betweene  him  and  them :  but  before
he  could  draw  his  companies  any  thing  neere,  they  retired.

General  Drakes  regiment  that  night,  for  the  commodity
of  good  lodging,  drew  themselves  into  a  village,  more
then  one  English  mile  from  thence,  and  neere  the  enemy :
who  not  daring  to  do  any  thing  against  us  in  foure  dayes  [II.  ii.  145.]
before,  tooke  that  occasion,  and  in  the  next  morning  fell
downe  upon  that  regiment,  crying.  Viva  el  Rey  Don
Antonio,  which  was  a  generall  salutation  thorow  all  the
Countrey  as  they  came :  whom  our  yoong  Souldiers
(though  it  were  upon  their  guard,  and  before  the  watch
were  discharged)  began  to  entertaine  kindly,  but  having
got  within  their  guard,  they  fell  to  cut  their  throats :  but
the  alarme  being  taken  inwards,  the  officers  of  the  two
next  Companies,  whose  Captaines  (Captaine  Sydnam  and
Captaine  Young)  were  lately  dead  at  the  Groine,  brought
downe  their  colours  and  pikes  upon  them  in  so  resolute
maner,  as  they  presently  drave  them  to  retire  with  losse :
they  killed  of  ours  at  their  first  entrance  fourteene,  and
hurt  sixe  or  seven.

499

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

The  next  day  we  lodged  at  Alvelana  within  three  miles
of  Lisbon,  where  many  of  our  souldiers  drinking  in  two
places  of  standing  waters  by  the  way  were  poisoned,  and
thereon  presently  died.  Some  do  thinke  it  came  rather
by  eating  of  hony,  which  they  found  in  the  houses
plentifully.  But  whether  it  were  by  water  or  by  hony,
the  poore  men  were  poisoned.

That  night  the  Earle  of  Essex,  and  Sir  Roger  Williams
went  out  about  eleven  of  the  clocke  with  1000  men  to
lie  in  ambuscade  neere  the  towne,  and  having  layed  the
same  very  neere,  sent  some  to  give  the  alarme  unto
the  enemy :  which  was  well  performed  by  them  that  had
the  charge  thereof,  but  the  enemy  refused  to  issue  after
them,  so  as  the  Earle  returned  assoone  as  it  was  light
without  doing  any  thing,  though  he  had  in  purpose,  and
was  ready  to  have  given  an  honourable  charge  on  them.

The  25  of  May  in  the  evening  we  came  to  the  suburbs
of  Lisbon :  at  the  very  entrance  whereof  Sir  Roger
Williams  calling  Captaine  Anthony  Wingfield  with  him,
tooke  thirty  shot  or  thereabouts,  and  first  scowred  all  the
streets  till  they  came  very  neere  the  towne ;  where  they
found  none  but  olde  folks  and  beggers,  crying.  Viva  el
Rey  Don  Antonio,  and  the  houses  shut  up :  for  they
had  caried  much  of  their  wealth  into  the  towne,  and  had
fired  some  houses  by  the  water  side,  full  of  corne  and
other  provisions  of  victuals,  least  we  should  be  benefited
thereby,  but  yet  left  behinde  them  great  riches  in  many
houses.

The  foure  regiments  that  had  the  vantgard  that  day,
which  were  Colonell  Devereux,  Sir  Edward  Norris,
Colonell  Sidneys,  and  Generall  Drakes  (whom  I  name
as  they  marched)  the  Colonell  generall  caused  to  holde
guard  in  the  neerest  streets  of  the  Suburbs :  the  battell
and  the  arreward  stood  in  armes  all  the  night  in  the  field
neere  to  Alcantara.  Before  morning  Captaine  Wingfield,
by  direction  from  the  Colonell  generall  Sir  Roger
Williams,  held  guard  with  Sir  Edward  Norris  his
regiment  in  three  places  very  neere  the  towne  wall,  and

500

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
so  held  the  same  till  the  other  regiments  came  in  the
morning.  About  midnight  they  within  the  towne  burnt
all  their  houses  that  stood  upon  their  wall  either  within
or  without,  least  we  possessing  them,  might  thereby
greatly  have  annoyed  the  towne.

The  next  morning  Sir  Roger  Williams  attempted  (but
not  without  peril)  to  take  a  Church  called  S.  Antonio,
which  joyned  to  the  wall  of  the  towne,  and  would  have
bene  a  very  evill  neighbor  to  the  towne :  but  the  enemy
having  more  easie  entry  into  it  then  we  gained  it  before
us.  The  rest  of  that  morning  was  spent  in  quartering
the  battell  and  arrereward  in  the  Suburbs  called  Bona
Vista,  and  in  placing  Musquetiers  in  houses,  to  front
their  shot  upon  the  wall,  who  from  the  same  scowred
the  great  streets  very  dangerously.

By  this  time  our  men  being  thorowly  weary  with  our
sixe  dayes  march,  and  the  last  nights  watch,  were  desirous
of  rest :  whereof  the  enemy  being  advertised,  about  one  '
or  two  of  the  clocke  sallied  out  of  the  towne,  and  made
their  approch  in  three  severall  streets  upon  us,  but  chiefly
in  Colonell  Brets  quarter :  who  (as  most  of  the  army  was)
being  at  rest,  with  as  much  speed  as  he  could,  drew  his
men  into  armes,  and  made  head  against  them  so  thorowly,
as  himselfe  was  slaine  in  the  place,  Captaine  Carsey  shot
thorow  the  thigh,  of  which  hurt  he  died  within  foure
dayes  after,  Captaine  Carre  slaine  presently,  and  Captaine
Cave  hurt  (but  not  mortally)  who  were  all  of  his
regiment.

This  resistance  made  aswell  here,  as  in  other  quarters
where  Colonell  Lane  and  Colonell  Medkerk  commanded,
put  them  to  a  sudden  foule  retreat;  insomuch,  as  the
Earle  of  Essex  had  the  chase  of  them  even  to  the  gates
of  the  high  towne,  wherein  they  left  behinde  them  many
of  their  best  Commanders :  their  troupe  of  horsemen
also  came  out,  but  being  charged  by  Captaine  Yorke,
withdrew  themselves  againe.  Many  of  them  also  left
the  streets,  and  betooke  them  to  houses  which  they  found
open : for  the  Sergeant  major  Captaine  Wilson  slew  in

501

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

one  house  with  his  owne  hands  three  or  foure,  and
caused  them  that  were  with  him  to  kill  many  others.
Their  losse  I  can  assure  you  did  triple  ours,  aswell  in
quality  as  in  quantity.

During  our  march  to  this  place,  Generall  Drake  with
the  whole  fleet  was  come  into  Cascais,  and  possessed  the
towne  without  any  resistance :  many  of  the  inhabitants
[II.  ii.  146.]  at  their  discovery  of  our  navy,  fledde  with  their  baggage
into  the  mountaines,  and  left  the  towne  for  any  man  that
would  possesse  it,  till  Generall  Drake  sent  unto  them  by
a  Portugall  Pilot  which  he  had  on  boord,  to  offer  them
all  peaceable  kindnesse,  so  farre  foorth  as  they  would  accept
of  their  King,  and  minister  necessaries  to  the  army  he
had  brought ;  which  offer  they  joyfully  imbraced,  and
presently  sent  two  chiefe  men  of  their  towne,  to  signifie
their  loyalty  to  Don  Antonio,  and  their  honest  affections
to  our  people.  Whereupon  the  Generall  landed  his
companies  not  farre  from  the  Cloister  called  San
Domingo,  but  not  without  perill  of  the  shot  of  the
castle,  which  being  guarded  with  6^  Spaniards,  held  still
against  him.

As  our  fleet  were  casting  ancre  when  they  came  first
into  that  road,  there  was  a  small  ship  of  Brasil  that  came
from  thence,  which  bare  with  them,  and  seemed  by
striking  her  sailes,  as  though  she  would  also  have  ancred :
but  taking  her  fittest  occasion  hoised  againe,  and  would
have  passed  up  the  river,  but  the  Generall  presently
discerning  her  purpose,  sent  out  a  pinnesse  or  two  after
her,  which  forced  her  in  such  sort,  as  she  ran  herselfe
upon  the  Rocks :  all  the  men  escaped  out  of  her,  and
the  lading  (being  many  chests  of  sugar)  was  made  nothing
woorth,  by  the  salt  water.  In  his  going  thither  also,  he
tooke  ships  of  the  port  of  Portugall,  which  were  sent
from  thence,  with  fifteene  other  from  Pedro  Vermendes
Xantes  Sergeant  major  of  the  same  place,  laden  with  men
and  victuals  to  Lisbon :  the  rest  that  escaped  put  into
Setuvel.

The  next  day  it  pleased  Generall  Norris  to  call  all  the

502

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
Colonels  together,  and  to  advise  with  them,  whether  it
were  more  expedient  to  tary  there  to  attend  the  forces
of  the  Portugall  horse  and  foot,  whereof  the  King  had
made  promise,  and  to  march  some  convenient  number
to  Cascais  to  fetch  our  artillery  and  munition,  which  was
all  at  our  ships,  saving  that  which  for  the  necessity  of
the  service  was  brought  along  with  us :  whereunto,  some
caried  away  with  the  vaine  hope  of  Don  Antonio,  that
most  part  of  the  towne  stood  for  us,  held  it  best  to
make  our  abode  there,  and  to  send  some  3000  for  our
artillery :  promising  to  themselves,  that  the  enemy  being
wel  beaten  the  day  before,  would  make  no  more  sallies :
some  others  (whose  unbeliefe  was  very  strong  of  any
hope  from  the  Portugall)  perswaded  rather  to  march
wholly  away,  then  to  be  any  longer  carried  away  with  the
opinion  of  things,  whereof  there  was  so  little  appearance.
The  Generall  not  willing  to  leave  any  occasion  of  blotte
to  be  layed  upon  him  for  his  speedy  going  from  thence,
nor  to  lose  any  more  time  by  attending  the  hopes  of
Don  Antonio ;  tolde  them,  that  though  the  expedition
of  Portugall  were  not  the  onely  purpose  of  their  journey,
but  an  adventure  therein  (which  if  it  succeeded  pros-
perously, might  make  them  sufficiently  rich,  and  woonder-
fuU  honourable)  and  that  they  had  done  so  much  already
in  triall  thereof,  as  what  end  soever  happened,  could
nothing  impaire  their  credits :  yet  in  regard  of  the  Kings
last  promise,  that  he  should  have  that  night  3000  men
armed  of  his  owne  Countrey,  he  would  not  for  that  night
dislodge.  And  if  they  came,  thereby  to  make  him  so
strong,  that  he  might  send  the  like  number  for  his
munition,  he  would  resolve  to  trie  his  fortune  for  the
towne.  But  if  they  came  not,  he  found  it  not  convenient
to  divide  his  forces,  by  sending  any  to  Cascais,  and
keeping  a  remainder  behinde,  sithence  he  saw  them  the
day  before  so  boldly  sally  upon  his  whole  army,  and
knew  that  they  were  stronger  of  Souldiours  armed  within
the  towne,  then  he  was  without:  and  that  before  our
returne could be from Cascais, they expected more

503

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

supplies  from  all  places,  of  Souldiours :  for  the  Duke
of  Bragan9a,  and  Don  Francisco  de  Toledo  were  looked
for  with  great  reliefe.  Whereupon  his  conclusion  was,
that  if  the  3000  promised  came  not  that  night,  to  march
wholly  away  the  next  morning.

It  may  be  here  demanded,  why  a  matter  of  so  great
moment  should  be  so  slenderly  regarded,  as  that  the
Generall  should  march  with  such  an  army  against  such
an  enemy,  before  he  knew  either  the  fulnesse  of  his
owne  strength,  or  certaine  meanes  how  he  should  abide
the  place  when  he  should  come  to  it.  Wherein  I  pray
you  remember  the  Decrees  made  in  the  Councell  at
Peniche,  and  confirmed  by  publique  protestation  the
first  day  of  our  march,  that  our  navy  should  meet  us
in  the  river  of  Lisbon,  in  the  which  was  the  store  of
all  our  provisions,  and  so  the  meane  of  our  tariance  in
that  place,  which  came  not,  though  we  continued  till
we  had  no  munition  left  to  entertaine  a  very  small
fight.  We  are  also  to  consider,  that  the  King  of  Por-
tugall  (whether  carried  away  with  imagination  by  the
advertisements  he  received  from  the  Portugals,  or  wil-
ling by  any  promise  to  bring  such  an  army  into  his
Countrey,  thereby  to  put  his  fortune  once  more  in
triall)  assured  the  Generall,  that  upon  his  first  landing,
there  would  be  a  revolt  of  his  subjects:  whereof  there
was  some  hope  given  at  our  first  entry  to  Peniche,  by
the  maner  of  the  yeelding  of  that  towne  and  fort,
which  made  the  Generall  thinke  it  most  convenient
speedily  to  march  to  the  principall  place,  thereby  to
give  courage  to  the  rest  of  the  Countrey.  The  Friers
also  and  the  poore  people  that  came  unto  him  promised,
that  within  two  dayes  the  gentlemen  and  others  of  the
Countrey  would  come  plentifully  in  :  within  which  two
[II.  ii.  147.]  dayes  came  many  more  Priests,  and  some  very  few
gentlemen  on  horsebacke;  but  not  til  we  came  to
Torres  Vedras :  where  they  that  noted  the  course  of
things  how  they  passed,  might  somewhat  discover  the
weaknesse  of  that  people. There  they  tooke  two  dayes

504

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  a.d.

1589.

more ; and at the end thereof referred him till our

comming to Lisbon,  with assurance,  that so soone as

our army should be seene there, all the inhabitants

would  be  for  the  King  and  fall  upon  the  Spaniards.

After  two  nights  tariance  at  Lisbon,  the  King,  as  you
have  heard,  promised  a  supply  of  3000  foot,  and  some
horse  :  but  all  his  appointments  being  expired,  even  to
the  last  of  a  night,  all  his  horse  could  not  make  a
cornet  of  40,  nor  his  foot  furnish  two  ensignes  fully,
although  they  caried  three  or  foure  colours :  and  these
were  altogether  such  as  thought  to  inrich  themselves
by  the  ruine  of  their  neighbours :  for  they  committed
more  disorders  in  every  place  where  we  came  by  spoile,
then  any  of  our  owne.

The  Generall,  as  you  see,  having  done  more  then
before  his  comming  out  of  England  was  required  by
the  King,  and  given  credit  to  his  many  promises,  even  to
the  breach  of  the  last,  he  desisted  not  to  perswade  him
to  stay  yet  nine  dayes  longer :  in  which  time  he  might
have  engaged  himselfe  further,  then  with  any  honour
he  could  come  out  of  againe,  by  attempting  a  towne
fortified,  wherein  were  more  men  armed  against  us,  then
we  had  to  oppugne  them  withall,  our  artillery  and
munition  being  fifteene  miles  from  us,  and  our  men  then
declining ;  for  there  was  the  first  shew  of  any  great
sickenesse  amongst  them.  Whereby  it  seemeth,  that
either  his  prelacy  did  much  abuse  him  in  perswading  him
to  hopes,  whereof  after  two  or  three  dayes  he  saw  no
semblance :  or  he  like  a  silly  lover,  who  promiseth
himselfe  favor  by  importuning  a  coy  mistresse,  thought
by  our  long  being  before  his  towne,  that  in  the  end  taking
pity  on  him,  they  would  let  him  in.

What  end  the  Friers  had  by  following  him  with  such
devotion,  I  know  not,  but  sure  I  am,  the  Laity  did
respite  their  homage  till  they  might  see  which  way  the
victory  would  sway;  fearing  to  shew  themselves
apparantly  unto  him,  least  the  Spaniard  should  after  our
departure  (if  we  prevailed  not)  call  them  to  account :  yet

505

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

sent  they  under  hand  messages  to  him  of  obedience,
thereby  to  save  their  owne,  if  he  became  King;  but
indeed  very  well  contented  to  see  the  Spaniards  and  us
try  by  blowes,  who  should  carry  away  the  crowne.  For
they  be  -of  so  base  a  mould,  as  they  can  very  wel
subject  themselves  to  any  government,  where  they  may
live  free  from  blowes,  and  have  liberty  to  become  rich,
being  loth  to  endure  hazzard  either  of  life  or  goods.
For  durst  they  have  put  on  any  minds  thorowly  to
revolt,  they  had  three  woonderfull  good  occasions  offered
them  during  our  being  there.

Themselves  did  in  generall  confesse,  that  there  were
not  above  5000  Spaniards  in  that  part  of  the  Countrey,  of
which  number  the  halfe  were  out  of  the  towne  till  the
last  day  of  our  march :  during  which  time,  how  easily
they  might  have  prevailed  against  the  rest,  any  man  may
conceive.  But  upon  our  approch  they  tooke  them  all  in,
and  combined  themselves  in  generall  to  the  Cardinall.

The  next  day  after  our  comming  thither,  when  the
sally  was  made  upon  us  by  their  most  resolute  Spaniards,
how  easily  might  they  have  kept  them  out,  or  have  given
us  the  gate  which  was  held  for  their  retreat,  if  they  had
had  any  thought  thereof  .f'

And  two  dayes  after  our  comming  to  Cascais,  when
6000  Spaniards  and  Portugals  came  against  us  as  farre
as  S.  Julians  by  land,  as  you  shal  presently  heare  (all
which  time  I  thinke  there  were  not  many  Spaniards
left  in  the  towne)  they  had  a  more  fit  occasion  to  shew
their  devotion  to  the  King,  then  any  could  be  offered
by  our  tarying  there.  And  they  could  not  doubt,  that
if  they  had  shut  them  out,  but  that  we  would  have  fought
with  them  upon  that  advantage,  having  sought  them  in
Galitia  upon  disadvantage  to  beat  them :  and  having
taken  so  much  paines  to  seeke  them  at  their  owne  houses,
whereof  we  gave  sufficient  testimony  in  the  same  accident.
But  I  thinke  the  feare  of  the  Spaniard  had  taken  so
deepe  impression  within  them,  as  they  durst  not  attempt
any  thing  against  them  upon  any  hazzard.

506

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

For,  what  civill  countrey  hath  ever  suffered  themselves
to be conquered  by  so few  men as they  were ;  to  be
deprived of  their naturall King, and  to be tyrannized
over  thus  long,  but  they  ? And  what  countrey,  living
in  slavery  under a stranger whom  they naturally  hate,
having  an  army  in  the  field  to  fight  for  them  and  their
liberty,  would  lie  still with  the  yoke  upon  their  necks,
attending if any strangers would unburthen them,
without so much as rousing  themselves under it,  but
they  ? They  will  promise much  in speeches, for they
be  great talkers,  whom  the Generall  had  no reason to
distrust  without triall, and therefore marched on  into
their countrey: but they performed little in action,
whereof  we  could  have  had  no  proofe  without  this  thorow
triall. Wherein  he  hath  discovered  their  weaknesse,  and
honorably  performed  more  then  could  be  in  reason  ex-
pected of  him  :  which  had  he  not  done,  would  not  these
maligners,  who  seeke  occasions  of  slander,  have  reported  [II.  ii.  148.]
him  to  be  suspicious  of  a  people,  of  whose  infidelity  he
had no testimony : and to be fearefuU  without cause,
if  he  had  refused  to  give  credit  to  their  promises  without
any  adventure  ? Let  no frivolous  questionist  therefore
further  enquire  why  he  marched  so  many  dayes  to  Lisbon,
and  taried  there  so  small  a  while.

The  next  morning,  seeing  no  performance  of  promise
kept,  he  gave  order  for  our  marching  away ;  himselfe,
the  Earle  of  Essex,  and  Sir  Roger  Williams  remaining
with  the  stand  that  was  made  in  the  high  street,  till  the
whole  army  was  drawen  into  the  field,  and  so  marched
out  of  the  towne,  appointing  Captaine  Richard  Wingfield,
and  Captaine  Anthony  Wingfield  in  the  arrereward  of
them  with  the  shot ;  thinking  that  the  enemy  (as  it
was  most  likely)  would  have  issued  out  upon  our  rising ;
but  they  were  otherwise  advised.  When  we  were  come
into  the  field,  every  battalion  fell  into  that  order  which
by  course  appertained  unto  them,  and  so  marched  that
night  unto  Cascais.  Had  we  marched  thorow  his
Countrey as enemies, our Souldiours had beene well

507

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-

supplied  in  all  their  wants :  but  had  we  made  enemies
of  the  Suburbs  of  Lisbon,  we  had  beene  the  richest
army  that  ever  went  out  of  England :  for  besides  the
particular  wealth  of  every  house,  there  were  many  Ware-
houses by  the  water  side  full  of  all  sorts  of  rich
marchandizes.

In  our  march  that  day  the  gallies  which  had  somewhat,
but  not  much,  annoyed  us  at  Lisbon,  (for  that  our  way
lay  along  the  river)  attended  us  till  we  were  past  S.
Julians,  bestowing  many  shot  amongst  us,  but  did  no
harme  at  all,  saving  that  they  strooke  off  a  gentlemans
legj  &  killed  the  Sergeant  majors  moile  under  him.  The
horsemen  also  followed  us  afarre  off,  and  cut  off  as  many
sicke  men  as  were  not  able  to  holde  in  march,  nor  we
had  cariage  for.

After  we  had  bene  two  dayes  at  Cascais,  we  had  in-
telligence by  a  Frier,  that  the  enemy  was  marching
strongly  towards  us,  and  then  came  as  farre  as  S.
Julian :  which  newes  was  so  welcome  to  the  Earle  of
Essex  and  the  Generals,  as  they  offered  every  one  of
them  to  give  the  messenger  an  hundred  crownes  if  they
found  them  in  the  place  ;  for  the  Generall  desiring
nothing  more  then  to  fight  with  them  in  field  roome,
dispatched  that  night  a  messenger  with  a  trumpet,  by
whom  he  writ  a  cartell  to  the  Generall  of  their  army,
wherein  he  gave  them  the  lie,  in  that  it  was  by  them
reported  that  we  dislodged  from  Lisbon  in  disorder  and
feare  of  them  (which  indeed  was  most  false)  for  that  it
was  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  before  we  fell  into
armes,  and  then  went  in  such  sort,  as  they  had  no  courage
to  follow  out  upon  us.  Also  he  challenged  him  therein,
to  meet  him  the  next  morning  with  his  whole  army,  if
he  durst  attend  his  commi ng,  and  there  to  try  out  the
justnesse  of  their  quarrel  by  battell :  by  whom  also  the
Earle  of  Essex  (who  preferring  the  honor  of  the  cause,
which  was  his  countreys,  before  his  owne  safety)  sent  a
particular  cartel,  offering  himselfe  against  any  of  theirs,
if  they  had any  of  his quality ; or if  they  would not

508

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

admit  of  that ;  sixe,  eight,  or  tenne,  or  as  many  as  they
would  appoint,  should  meet  so  many  of  theirs  in  the
head  of  our  battell  to  trie  their  fortunes  with  them  ;  and
that  they  should  have  assurance  of  their  returne  and
honourable  intreaty.

The  Generall  accordingly  made  all  his  army  ready  by
three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  and  marched  even  to
the  place  where  they  had  encamped,  but  they  were  dis-
lodged in  the  night  in  great  disorder,  being  taken  with  a
sudden  feare  that  we  had  bene  come  upon  them,  as  the
Generall  was  the  next  day  certainely  informed :  so  as  the
Trumpet  followed  them  to  Lisbon,  but  could  not  get
other  answere  to  either  of  his  letters,  but  threatening  to
be  hanged,  for  daring  to  bring  such  a  message.  How-
beit  the  Generall  had  caused  to  be  written  upon  the
backside  of  their  pasport,  that  if  they  did  offer  any
violence  unto  the  messengers,  he  would  hang  the  best
prisoners  he  had  of  theirs :  which  made  them  to  advise'
better  of  the  matter,  and  to  returne  them  home ;  but
without  answere.

After  our  army  came  to  Cascais,  and  the  castle  sum-
moned, the  Castellan  thereof  granted,  that  upon  five  or
sixe  shot  of  the  canon  he  would  deliver  the  same,  but
not  without  sight  thereof.  The  Generall  thinking  that
his  distresse  within  had  bene  such  for  want  of  men  or
victuals  as  he  could  not  holde  it  many  dayes,  because  he
saw  it  otherwise  defensible  enough,  determined  rather  to
make  him  yeeld  to  that  necessity,  then  to  bring  the
cannon,  and  therefore  onely  set  a  guard  upon  the  same,
least  any  supply  of  those  things  which  he  wanted  should
be  brought  unto  them.  But  he  still  standing  upon  those
conditions,  the  Generall  about  two  dayes  before  he  deter-
mined to  goe  to  Sea,  brought  three  or  foure  pieces  of
battery  against  it:  upon  the  first  tire  whereof  he  sur-
rendered, and  compounded  to  go  away  with  his  baggage
and  armies ;  he  had  one  canon,  two  culverings,  one
basiliske,  and  three  or  foure  other  field  pieces,  three-
score and  five  Souldiours,  very  good  store  of  munition,

509

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

and  victualles  enough  in  the  Castle ;  insomuch  as  he
might  have  held  the  same  longer  then  the  Generall  had
in  purpose  to  tarry  there.  One  company  of  footmen  was
put  into  the  guard  thereof,  till  the  artillery  was  taken
[II.  ii.  149.]  out,  and  our  army  embarked;  which  without  having  that
fort,  we  could  not  without  great  perill  have  done.  When
we  were  ready  to  set  saile  (one  halfe  of  the  fort  being
by  order  from  the  Generall  blowen  up  by  mine)  the
company  was  drawne  away.

During  the  time  we  lay  in  the  road,  our  fleet  began
the  second  of  June,  and  so  continued  sixe  dayes  after  to
fetch  in  some  hulks  to  the  number  of  threescore,  of
Dansikj  Stetin,  Rostock,  Lubeck  &  Hamburgh,  laden
with  Spanish  goods,  and  as  it  seemed  for  the  kings  pro-
vision, and  going  for  Lisbon  :  their  principall  lading  was
Corne,  Masts,  Cables,  Copper,  and  Waxe :  amongst  which
were  some  of  great  burthen  woonderful  well  builded  for
sailing,  which  had  no  great  lading  in  them,  and  therefore
it  was  thought  that  they  were  brought  for  the  kings
provision,  to  reinforce  his  decayed  navy :  whereof  there
was  the  greater  likelyhood,  in  that  the  owner  of  the
greatest  of  them  which  caried  two  misnes,  was  knowen
to  be  very  inward  with  the  Cardinall,  who  rather  then  he
would  be  taken  with  his  ships,  committed  himselfe  unto
his  small  boat,  wherein  he  recovered  S.  Sebastians :  into
the  which  our  men,  that  before  were  in  flieboats,  were
shipped,  and  the  flieboats  sent  home  with  an  offer  of
corne,  to  the  value  of  their  hire.  But  the  winde  being
good  for  them  for  Rochel,  they  chose  rather  to  lose  their
corne  then  the  winde,  and  so  departed.  The  Generall
also  sent  his  horses  with  them,  and  from  thence  shipped
them  into  England.

The  third  of  June,  Colonell  Devereux  and  Colonell
Sidney,  being  both  very  sicke,  departed  for  England,  who
in  the  whole  journey  had  shewed  themselves  very  forward
to  all  services,  and  in  their  departure  very  unwilling  to
leave  us :  that  day  we  imbarked  all  our  army,  but  lay  in
the  road  untill  the  eight  thereof

510

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

The  sixt  day  the  Earle  of  Essex,  upon  receit  of  letters
from  her  Majesty,  by  them  that  brought  in  the  victuals,
presently  departed  towards  England,  with  whom  Sir
Roger  Williams  was  very  desirous  to  go,  but  found
the  Generals  very  unwilling  he  should  do  so,  in  that
he  bare  the  next  place  unto  them,  and  if  they  should
miscarry,  was  to  command  the  army.  And  the  same
day  there  came  unto  us  two  small  barks  that  brought
tidings  of  some  other  shippes  come  out  of  England  with
victuals,  which  were  passed  upwards  to  the  Cape :  for
meeting  with  whom,  the  second  day  after  we  set  saile
for  that  place,  in  purpose  after  our  meeting  with  them
to  go  with  the  lies  of  A9ores,  the  second  day,  which  was
the  ninth,  we  met  with  them  comming  backe  againe  to-
wards us,  whose  provision  little  answered  our  expectation.
Notwithstanding  we  resolved  to  continue  our  course  for
the  Hands.

About  this  time  was  the  Marchant-Royall,  with  three
or  foure  other  ships,  sent  to  Peniche,  to  fetch  away  the
companies  that  were  left  there ;  but  Captaine  Barton
having  received  letters  from  the  Generals  that  were  sent
overland,  was  departed  before,  not  being  able  by  reason
of  the  enemies  speedy  marching  thither,  either  to  bring
away  the  artillery,  or  all  his  men,  according  to  the  direc-
tion those  letters  gave  him ;  for  he  was  no  sooner  gone,
then  the  enemy  possessed  the  town  and  castle,  and  shot
at  our  ships  as  they  came  into  the  road.

At  this  time  also  was  the  Ambassador  from  the
Emperor  of  Marocco,  called  Reys  Hamet  Bencasamp,
returned,  and  with  him  M.  Ciprian,  a  Gentleman  of
good  place  and  desert,  was  sent  from  Don  Antonio,  and
Captaine  Ousley  from the  Generals  to  the  Emperor.

The  next  morning  the  nine  gallies  which  were  sent  not
five  dayes  before  out  of  Andaluzia  for  the  strengthening
of  the  river  of  Lisbon  (which  being  joyned  with  the
other  twelve  that  were  there  before,  though  we  lay  hard
by  them  at  S.  Julians,  durst  never  make  any  attempt
against  us)  upon  our  departure  from  thence  were  return-

511

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

ing  home,  and  in  the  morning  being  a  very  dead  calme,
in  the  dawning  thereof,  fell  in  the  winde  of  our  fleet,
in  the  uttermost  part  whereof  they  assailed  one  stragling
barke  of  Plimmouth,  of  the  which  Captaine  Caverley
being  Captaine  of  the  land  company,  with  his  Lieutenant,
the  Master,  and  some  of  the  Mariners  abandoned  the
ship,  and  betooke  them  to  the  ship-boats,  whereof  one,
in  which  the  Master  and  the  Captaine  were,  was  over-
runne  with  the  gallies,  and  they  drowned.  There  were
also  two  hulks  stragled  farre  from  the  strength  of  the
other  ships,  which  were  so  calmed,  as  neither  they  could
get  to  us,  nor  we  to  them,  though  all  the  great  shippes
towed  with  their  boats  to  have  relieved  them,  but  could
not  be  recovered ;  in  one  of  which  was  Captaine  Min-
shaw  with  his  company,  who  fought  with  them  to  the
last,  yea  after  his  ship  was  on  fire,  which  whether  it  was
fired  by  himselfe  or  by  them  we  could  not  wel  discerne,
but  might  easily  judge  by  his  long  and  good  fight,  that
the  enemy  could  not  but  sustaine  much  losse  :  who
setting  also  upon  one  other  hulke  wherein  was  but  a
Lieutenant,  and  he  very  sicke,  were  by  the  valour  of  the
Lieutenant  put  off,  although  they  had  first  beaten  her
with  their  artillery,  and  attempted  to  boord  her.  And
seeing  also  one  other  hulke  a  league  off,  a  sterne  off  us,
they  made  towards  her :  but  finding  that  she  made  ready
to  fight  with  them,  they  durst  not  further  attempt  her :
whereby  it  seemed,  their  losse  being  great  in  the  other
fights,  they  were  loth  to  proceed  any  further.
[II.  ii.  150.]  From  that  day  till  the  19  of  June,  our  direction  from
the  Generall  was,  that  if  the  wind  were  Northerly,  we
should  plie  for  the  A9ores ;  but  if  Southerly,  for  the  lies
of  Bayon.  We  lay  with  contrary  windes  about  that  place
and  the  Rocke,  till  the  Southerly  winde  prevailing  carried
us  to  Bayon:  part  of  our  ships  to  the  number  of  25,  in
a  great  winde  which  was  two  dayes  before,  having  lost
the  Admirals  and  fleet,  according  to  their  direction,  fell
in  the  morning  of  that  day  with  Bayon,  among  whom
was  Sir  Henry  Norris  in  the  Ayde ;  who  had  in  purpose

512

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
(if  the  Admirals  had  not  come  in)  with  some  500  men
out  of  them  all  to  have  landed,  and  attempted  the
taking  of  Vigo.  The  rest  of  the  fleet  held  with
Generall  Drake,  who  though  he  were  two  dayes  before
put  upon  those  Hands,  cast  off  againe  to  sea  for  the
A9ores :  but  remembring  how  unprovided  he  was  for
that  journey  and  seeing  that  he  had  lost  company  of  his
great  ships,  returned  for  Bayon,  and  came  in  there  that
night  in  the  evening,  where  he  passed  up  the  river  more
then  a  mile  above  Vigo.

The  next  morning  we  landed  as  many  as  were  able
to  fight,  which  were  not  in  the  whole  above  2000  men,
(for  in  the  17  dayes  we  continued  on  boord  we  had  cast
many  of  our  men  overboord)  with  which  number  the
Colonell  generall  marched  to  the  towne  of  Vigo,  neere
the  which  when  he  approched,  he  sent  Captaine  Anthony
Wingfield  with  a  troupe  of  shot  to  enter  one  side  of  Vl^  taken.
the  same,  who  found  upon  every  streets  end  a  strong
barricade,  but  altogether  abandoned;  for  having  entred
the  towne,  he  found  but  one  man  therein,  but  might
see  them  making  way  before  him  to  Bayon.  On  the
other  side  of  the  towne  entred  Generall  Drake  with
Captaine  Richard  Wingfield,  whose  approch  on  that  side
(I  thinke)  made  them  leave  the  places  they  had  so
artificially  made  for  defence :  there  were  also  certaine
shippes  sent  with  the  Vice-admirall  to  lie  close  be-
fore the  towne,  to  beat  upon  the  same  with  their
artillery.

In  the  afternoone  were  sent  300  under  the  conduct  of
Captaine  Petuin  and  Captaine  Henry  Poure,  to  burne
another  village  betwixt  that  and  Bayon,  called  Borsis,  and
as  much  of  the  country  as  the  day  would  give  them  leave
to  do ;  which  was  a  very  pleasant  rich  valley :  but  they
burnt  it  all,  houses  and  corne,  as  did  others  on  the  other
side  of  the  towne,  both  that  and  the  next  day,  so  as
the  countrey  was  spoiled  seven  or  eight  miles  in  length.
There  was  found  great  store  of  wine  in  the  towne,
but  not  any  thing  els:  for  the  other  dayes  warning  of
VI  513  2K

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

the shippes that  came first in, gave them a respit  to
cary  all  away.

The  next  morning  by  breake  of  the  day  the  Colonell
generall  (who  in  the  absence  of  the  Generals  that  were
on  boord  their  ships,  commanded  that  night  on  shore)
caused  all  our  companies  to  be  drawen  out  of  the
Vigo  burned,  towne,  and  sent  in  two  troups  to  put  fire  in  every
house  of  the  same :  which  done,  we  imbarked  againe.

This  day  there  were  certaine  Mariners  which  (without
any  direction)  put  themselves  on  shore,  on  the  contrary
side  of  the  river  from  us  for  pillage ;  who  were  beaten
by  the  enemy  from  their  boats,  and  punished  by  the
Generals  for  their  offer,  in  going  without  allowance.

The  reasons  why  we  attempted  nothing  against  Bayon
were  before  shewed  to  be  want  of  artillery,  and  may  now
be  alledged  to  be  the  small  number  of  our  men :  who
should  have  gone  against  so  strong  a  place,  manned  with
very  good  souldiers,  as  was  shewed  by  Juan  de  Vera
taken  at  the  Groine,  who  confessed  that  there  were  sixe
hundred  olde  Souldiers  in  garrison  there  of  Flanders,
and  the  Tercios  of  Naples,  lately  also  returned  out  of
the  journey  of  England.

Capitan  Puebla,

Christofero  Vasques  de  Viralta  a  souldier  of
Flanders.
Under  the  ■  Don  Pedro  Camascho,  del  tercio  de  Napoles.
leading of  j  Don  Francisco  de  Cespedes.

Cap.  Juan  de  Solo,  del  tercio  de  Naples.
Don  Diego  de  Cassava.
Cap.  Sauban.
Also  he  sayth  there  be  18  pieces  of  brasse,  and  foure
of yron, lately layed upon the walles of the
towne,  besides  them  that  were  there  before.
The  same  day  the  Generals seeing  what  weake  estate
our  army  was drawn into by  sicknesse,-  determined to
man  and  victuall  twenty  of  the  best  ships  for  the  Hands
of  A9ores  with  Generall  Drake,  to  see  if  he  could  meet
with the Indian fleet, and Generall  Norris to returne

514

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  a.d.

1589.
home  with  the  rest :  And  for  the  shifting  of  men  and
victualles  accordingly,  purposed  the  next  morning  to  fall
downe  to  the  Hands  of  Bayon  againe,  and  to  remaine
there  that  day.  But  Generall  Drake,  according  to  their
apointment,  being  under  saile  never  strooke  at  the  Hands,
but  put  straight  to  sea ;  whom  all  the  fleet  followed
saving  three  and  thirty,  which  being  in  the  river  further
then  he,  and  at  the  entrance  out  of  the  same,  finding  the
v/inde  and  tide  too  hard  against  them,  were  inforced  to
cast  ancre  there  for  that  night ;  amongst  whom,  by  good
fortune,  was  the  Foresight,  and  in  her  sir  Edward  Norris.  [II.  ii.  151.]
And  the  night  folowing,  Generall  Norris  being  driven
from  the  rest  of  the  Fleet  by  a  great  storme,  (for  all
that  day  was  the  greatest  storme  we  had  all  the  time
we  were  out)  came  againe  into  the  Hands,  but  not  with-
out great  perill,  he  being  forced  to  trust  to  a  Spanish
Fisher-man  (who  was  taken  two  dayes  before  at  sea)
to  bring  him  in.

The  next  morning  he  called  a  council  of  as  many  as
he  found  there,  holding  the  purpose  he  had  concluded
with  sir  Francis  Drake  the  day  before,  and  directed  all
their  courses  for  England,  tarying  there  all  that  day  to
water  and  helpe  such  with  victuall,  as  were  left  in  wonder-
full  distresse  by  having  the  victuals  that  came  last,
caried  away  the  day  before  to  sea.

The  next  day  he  set  saile,  and  the  10  day  after,  which  Their  returne
was  the  2  of  July  came  into  Plimmouth,  where  he  found  '"  P^^^^°^'^-
sir  Francis  Drake  and  all  the  Queens  ships,  with  many  of
the  others  but  not  all :  for  the  Fleet  was  dispersed  into
other  harbors,  some  led  by  a  desire  of  returning  from
whence  they  came,  and  some  being  possessed  of  the
hulks,  sought  other  Ports  from  their  Generals  eie,  where
they  might  make  their  private  commoditie  of  them,  as
they  have  done  to  their  great  advantage.

Presently  upon  their  arrivall  there,  the  Generals  dis-
solved all  the  armie  saving  8  companies  which  are  yet
held  together,  giving  every  souldier  five  shillings  in
money,  and  the  armes  hee  bare  to  make  money  of,  which

515

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

was  more  then  could  by  any  means  be  due  unto  them  :
for  they  were  not  in  service  three  moneths,  in  which
time  they  had  their  victuals,  which  no  man  will  value
at  lesse  then  halfe  their  pay,  for  such  is  the  allowance  in
her  majesties  ships  to  her  mariners,  so  as  there  remained
but  10  shillings  a  moneth  more  to  be  paid,  for  which
there  was  not  any  private  man  but  had  apparel  and
furniture  to  his  owne  use,  so  as  every  common  souldier
discharged,  received  more  in  money,  victuals,  apparell  and
furniture,  then  his  pay  did  amount  unto.

Notwithstanding,  there  be  even  in  the  same  place
where  those  things  have  passed,  that  either  do  not  or
will  not  conceive  the  souldiers  estate,  by  comparing  their
povertie  and  the  shortnesse  of  the  time  together,  but  lay
some  injuries  upon  the  Generals  and  the  action.  Where,
and  by  the  way,  but  especially  here  in  London,  I  find
there  have  bene  some  false  prophets  gone  before  us,
telling  strange  tales.  For  as  our  countrey  doeth  bring
foorth  many  gallant  men,  who  desirous  of  honour  doe
put  themselves  into  the  actions  thereof,  so  doeth  it
many  more  dull  spirited,  who  though  their  thoughts
reach  not  so  high  as  others,  yet  doe  they  listen  how  other
mens  acts  doe  passe,  and  either  beleeving  what  any  man
will  report  unto  them,  are  willingly  caried  away  into
errors,  or  tied  to  some  greater  mans  faith,  become  secre-
taries against  a  noted  trueth.  The  one  sort  of  these  doe
take  their  opinions  from  the  high  way  side,  or  at  the
furthest  goe  no  further  then  Pauls  to  enquire  what  hath
bene  done  in  this  voiage :  where,  if  they  meet  with  any,
whose  capacitie  before  their  going  out  could  not  make
them  live,  nor  their  valour  maintaine  their  reputation,
and  who  went  onely  for  spoile,  complaining  on  the  hard-
nesse  and  misery  thereof,  they  thinke  they  are  bound
to  give  credite  to  these  honest  men  who  were  parties
therein,  and  in  very  charitie  become  of  their  opinions.
The  others  to  make  good  the  faction  they  are  entred  into,
if  they  see  any  of  those  malecontents  (as  every  journey
yeeldeth  some)  doe  runne  unto  them  like  tempting  spirits

516

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
to  confirme  them in  their  humour,  with  assurance  that
they  foresaw  before  our going  out  what  would  become
thereof.

Be  ye  not  therefore  too  credulous  in  beleeving  every
report :  for  you  see  there  have  bene  many  more  be-
holders of  these  things  that  have  passed,  then  actors  in
the  same ;  who  by  their  experience,  not  having  the
knowledge  of  the  ordinarie  wants  of  the  warre,  have
thought,  that  to  lie  hard,  not  to  have  their  meat  well
dressed,  to  drinke  sometimes  water,  to  watch  much,  or
to  see  men  die  and  be  slaine,  was  a  miserable  thing;
and  not  having  so  given  their  mindes  to  the  service,
as  they  are  any  thing  instructed  thereby,  doe  for  want
of  better  matter  discourse  ordinarily  of  these  things :
whereas  the  journey  (if  they  had  with  that  judgement
seene  into  it,  which  their  places  required)  hath  given
them  far  more  honorable  purpose  and  argument  of
discourse.

These  mens  discontentments  and  mislikings  before  our
comming  home  have  made  mee  labour  thus  much  to
instruct  you  in  the  certaintie  of  every  thing,  because  I
would  not  willingly  have  you  miscaried  in  the  judgements
of  them,  wherein  you  shall  give  me  leave  somewhat  to
dilate  upon  a  question,  which  I  onely  touched  in  the  ^  worthy
beginning  of  my  letter,  namely,  whether  it  bee  more  ^J^^/J°J
expedient  for  our  estate  to  maintain  an  offensive  war
against  the  king  of  Spaine  in  the  Low  countries,  or  as
in  this  journey,  to  offend  him  in  his  neerer  territories,
seeing  the  grounds  of  arguing  thereof  are  taken  from  the
experience  which  the  actions  of  this  journey  have  given
us.

There  is  no  good  subject  that  wil  make  question,
whether  it  be  behoofeful  for  us  to  hold  friendship  with
these  neighbours  of  ours  or  no,  aswell  in  respect  of  the
infinite  proportion  of  their  shipping,  which  must  stand
either  with  us  or  against  us;  as  of  the  commoditie  of
their  harbors,  especially  that  of  Vlishing,  by  the  favour
whereof  our  Navie  may  continually  keepe  the  Narrow

517

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

seas,  and  which  would  harbour  a  greater  Fleete  agaynst
us,  then  the  Spaniard  shall  need  to  annoy  us  withall,  who
being  now  distressed  by  our  common  enemie,  I  thinke  it
[II.  ii.  152.]  most  expedient  for  our  safetie  to  defend  them,  and  if  it
may  be,  to  give  them  a  reentrie  into  that  they  have  of
late  yeeres  lost  unto  him.  The  one  without  doubt  her
majestic  may  do  without  difficultie,  and  in  so  honorable
sort  as  he  shal  never  be  able  to  dispossesse  her  or  them
of  any  the  townes  they  now  hold.  But  if  any  man  thinke
that  the  Spaniard  may  be  expelled  from  thence  more
speedily  or  conveniently  by  keeping  an  armie  there,  then
by  sending  one  against  him  into  his  owne  countrey :  let
him  foresee  of  how  many  men  and  continuall  supplies
that  armie  must  consist,  and  what  intolerable  expenses
it  requireth.  And  let  him  thinke  by  the  example  of  the
duke  of  Alva,  when  the  prince  of  Orenge  had  his  great
armie  agaynst  him ;  and  of  Don  Juan,  when  the  States
had  their  mightie  assembly  against  him,  how  this  wise
enemie,  with  whom  we  are  to  deale,  may  but  by  pro-
longing to  fight  with  us,  leave  us  occasions  enough  for
our  armie  within  few  moneths  to  mutine  and  breake ;  or
by  keeping  him  in  his  townes  leave  us  a  spoyled  field :
where  though  our  provision  may  bee  such  of  our  owne
as  we  starve  not,  yet  is  our  weaknesse  in  any  strange
countrey  such,  as  with  sicknes  and  miserie  we  shall  be
dissolved.  And  let  him  not  forget  what  a  continual
burthen  we  hereby  lay  upon  us,  in  that  to  repossesse
those  countreys  which  have  been  lately  lost,  wil  be  a
warre  of  longer  continuance  then  we  shall  be  able  to
endure.

In  the  very  action  whereof,  what  should  hinder  the
king  of  Spaine  to  bring  his  forces  home  unto  us  .?  For
it  is  certaine  he  hath  long  since  set  downe  in  councell,
that  there  is  no  way  for  him  wholy  to  recover  those  Low
countries,  but  by  bringing  the  warre  upon  England  it
selfe,  which  hath  alwayes  assisted  them  against  him  :  and
that  being  determined,  and  whereunto  he  hath  bene
vehemently  urged  by  the  last  yeeres  losse  he  sustained

518

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  a.d.

1589.

upon  our  coasts,  and  the  great  dishonor  this  journey  hath

laid  upon  him ;  no  doubt  if  we  shall  give  him  respite  to

doe  it,  but  he  will  mightily  advance  his  purpose,  for  he  is

richly  able  thereunto,  and  wonderfuU  desirous  of  revenge.

To  encounter  wherewith,  I  wish  even  in  true  and
honest  zeale  to  my  Countrey,  that  we  were  all  perswaded
that  there  is  no  such  assured  meanes  for  the  safetie  of
our  estate,  as  to  busy  him  with  a  well  furnished  armie  in
Spaine,  which  hath  so  many  goodly  Bayes  open,  as  we
may  land  without  impeachment  as  many  men  as  shall  be
needfull  for  such  an  invasion.  And  having  an  armie  of
20000  roially  furnished  there,  we  shall  not  need  to  take
much  care  for  their  payment :  for  shal  not  Lisbon  be
thought  able  to  make  so  few  men  rich,  when  the  Suburbs
thereof  were  found  so  abounding  in  riches,  as  had  we
made  enemie  of  them,  they  had  largely  enriched  us  all  ?
Which  with  what  small  losse  it  may  be  won,  is  not  here
to  shew ;  but  why  it  was  not  won  by  us,  I  have  herein
shewed  you.  Or  is  not  the  spoyle  of  Sivil  sufficient  to
pay  more  then  shall  bee  needfull  to  bee  sent  against  it,
whose  defence  (as  that  of  Lisbone)  is  onely  force  of  men,
of  whom  how  many  may  for  the  present  be  raised,  is  not
to  be  esteemed,  because  wee  have  discovered  what  kind
of  men  they  be,  even  such  as  will  never  abide  ours  in
field,  nor  dare  withstand  any  resolute  attempt  of  ours
agaynst  them :  for  during  the  time  we  were  in  many
places  of  their  countrey,  they  cannot  say  that  ever  they
made  20  of  our  men  turne  their  faces  from  them.  And
be  there  not  many  other  places  of  lesse  difficultie  to
spoyle,  able  to  satisfie  our  forces  ?

But  admit,  that  if  upon  this  alarme  that  we  have  given
him,  he  tendering  his  naturall  and  neerest  soile  before  his
further  remmooved  off  governments,  do  draw  his  forces
of  old  souldiers  out  of  the  Low  countreys  for  his  owne
defence,  is  not  the  victory  then  won  by  drawing  and
holding  them  from  thence,  for  the  which  we  should  have
kept  an  armie  there  at  a  charge  by  many  partes  greater
then  this,  and  not  stirred  them  ?

5^9

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

Admit  further  our  armie  be  impeached  from  landing
there,  yet  by  keeping  the  Sea,  and  possessing  his  principall
roades,  are  we  not  in  possibilitie  to  meet  with  his  Indian
marchants,  and  very  like  to  prevent  him  of  his  provisions
comming  out  of  the  East  countreys ;  without  the  which,
neither  the  subject  of  Lisbon  is  long  able  to  live,  nor
the  king  able  to  maintaine  his  Navie  ?  For  though  the
countrey  of  Portugall  doe  some  yeeres  find  themselves
corne,  yet  are  they  never  able  to  victuall  the  least  part
of  that  Citie.  And  albeit  the  king  of  Spaine  be  the
richest  prince  in  Christendome,  yet  can  he  neither  draw
cables,  hewe  mastes,  nor  make  pouder  out  of  his  mettals,
but  is  to  be  supplied  of  them  all  from  thence.  Of  whom
(some  will  hold  opinion)  it  is  no  reason  to  make  prize,
because  they  bee  not  our  enemies :  and  that  our  dis-
agreeance  with  them  will  impeach  the  trade  of  our
marchants,  and  so  impoverish  our  countrey.  Of  whose
mind  I  can  hardly  be  drawen  to  be :  For  if  my  enemie
fighting  with  me  doe  breake  his  sword,  so  as  I  thereby
have  the  advantage  against  him ;  what  shall  I  thinke  of
him  that  putteth  a  new  sword  into  his  hand  to  kill  me
withall?  And  may  it  not  bee  thought  more  fitting  for
us  in  these  times  to  loose  our  trades  of  Cloth,  then  by
suffering  these  mischiefes,  to  put  in  hazard  whether  we
shall  have  a  countrey  left  to  make  cloth  in  or  no  ?  And
yet  though  neither  Hamburgh,  Embden,  nor  Stode  doe
receive  our  cloth,  the  necessary  use  thereof  in  all  places
is  such,  as  they  will  find  means  to  take  it  from,  us  with
our  sufficient  commoditie.
[II.  ii.  153.]  And  admit  (which  were  impossible)  that  we  damnific  him
neither  at  sea  nor  land  (for  unlesse  it  be  with  a  much  more
mightie  armie  then  ours,  he  shall  never  be  able  to  with-
stand us)  yet  shall  we  by  holding  him  at  his  home,  free
our  selves  from  the  warre  at  our  owne  wals :  the  benefit
whereof  let  them  consider  that  best  can  judge,  and  have
observed  the  difference  of  invading,  and  being  invaded ;
the  one  giving  courage  to  the  souldier,  in  that  it  doeth
set  before  him  commoditie  and  reputation ; the  other  a

520

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

fearefull  terror  to  the  countrey-man,  who  if  by  chance  he
play  the  man  yet  is  he  never  the  richer :  and  who  know-
ing many  holes  to  hide  himselfe  in,  will  trie  them  all
before  he  put  his  life  in  perill  by  fighting :  whereas  the
Invader  casteth  up  his  account  before  hee  goeth  out,  and
being  abroad  must  fight  to  make  himselfe  way,  as  not
knowing  what  place  or  strength  to  trust  unto.  I  will  not
say  what  I  observed  in  our  countrey-men  when  the  enemy
offred  to  assaile  us  here :  but  I  wish  that  all  England
knew  what  terror  we  gave  to  the  same  people  that
frighted  us,  by  visiting  them  at  their  owne  houses.

Were  not  Alexanders  fortunes  great  against  the  mightie
Darius,  onely  in  that  his  Macedonians  thirsted  after  the
wealth  of  Persia,  and  were  bound  to  fight  it  out  to  the
last  man,  because  the  last  man  knew  no  safer  way  to  save
himselfe  then  by  fighting  ?  Whereas  the  Persians  either
trusting  to  continue  stil  masters  of  their  wealth  by  yeeld-
ing  to  the  Invader,  began  to  practise  against  their  owne'
king :  or  having  more  inward  hopes,  did  hide  themselves
even  to  the  last,  to  see  what  course  the  Conquerour  would
take  in  his  Conquest.  And  did  not  the  advise  of  Scipio,
though  mightily  impugned  at  the  first,  proove  very  sound
and  honourable  to  his  countrey  ?  Who  seeing  the  Romans
wonderfully  amazed  at  the  neerenesse  of  their  enemies
Forces,  and  the  losses  they  daily  sustained  by  them,  gave
counsell  rather  by  way  of  diversion  to  cary  an  army  into
Afrike,  and  there  to  assaile,  then  by  a  defensive  warre  at
home  to  remaine  subject  to  the  common  spoiles  of  an
assailing  enemie.  Which  being  put  in  execution  drew
the  enemie  from  the  gates  of  Rome,  and  Scipio  returned
home  with  triumph :  albeit  his  beginnings  at  the  first
were  not  so  fortunate  against  them,  as  ours  have  bene  in
this  smal  time  against  the  Spaniard.  The  good  successe
whereof  may  encourage  us  to  take  armes  resolutely
against  him.  And  I  beseech  God  it  may  stirre  up  all
men  that  are  particularly  interested  therein,  to  bethinke
themselves  how  small  a  matter  will  assure  them  of  their
safetie,  by  holding  the  Spaniard  at  a  Baie,  so  farre  off:

521

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

whereas,  if  we  give  him  leave  quietly  to  hatch  and  bring
foorth  his  preparations,  it  will  be  with  danger  to  us  all.
He  taketh  not  armes  against  us  by  any  pretense  of
title  to  the  crowne  of  this  realme,  nor  led  altogether
with  an  ambicious  desire  to  command  our  countrey,  but
with  hatred  towards  our  whole  Nation  and  religion.
Her  majesties  Scepter  is  already  given  by  Bull  to
another,  the  honours  of  our  Nobilitie  are  bestowed  for
rewards  upon  his  attendants,  our  Clergie,  our  Gentlemen,
our  Lawyers,  yea  all  men  of  what  condition  soever  are
offered  for  spoyle  unto  the  common  souldier.  Let  every
man  therefore,  in  defence  of  the  libertie  and  plentie  he
hath  of  long  enjoyed,  offer  a  voluntarie  contribution  of
the  smallest  part  of  their  store  for  the  assurance  of  the
rest.  It  were  not  much  for  every  Justice  of  peace,  who
by  his  blew  coat  protecteth  the  properest  and  most
serviceable  men  at  every  muster  from  the  warres,  to
contribute  the  charge  that  one  of  these  idle  men  doe
put  him  to  for  one  yeere :  nor  for  the  Lawyer,  who
riseth  by  the  dissensions  of  his  neighbours,  to  take  but
one  yeeres  gifts  (which  they  call  Fees)  out  of  his  coffers.
What  would  it  hinder  every  officer  of  the  Exchequer,
and  other  of  her  Majesties  courts,  who  without  checke
doe  suddenly  grow  to  great  wealth,  honestly  to  bring
foorth  the  mysticall  commoditie  of  one  yeeres  profits  ?
Or  the  Clergie,  who  looke  precisely  for  the  Tenths  of
every  mans  increase,  simply  to  bring  forth  the  Tenth
of  one  yeeres  gathering,  and  in  thankfulnesse  to  her
Majestie,  (who  hath  continued  for  all  our  safeties  a  most
chargeable  warre  both  at  land  &  sea)  bestow  the  same
for  her  honor  &  their  owne  assurance,  upon  an  army
which  may  make  this  bloody  enemy  so  to  know  himselfe
and  her  Majesties  power,  as  he  shall  bethinke  him  what
it  is  to  moove  a  stirring  people .?  Who,  though  they
have  received  some  small  checke  by  the  sicknesse  of  this
last  journey,  yet  doubt  I  not,  but  if  it  were  made
knowen,  that  the  like  voyage  were  to  bee  supported  by
a  generalitie,  (that  might  and  would  beare  the  charge  of

522

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

a  more  ample  provision)  but  there  would  of  all  sortes
most  willingly  put  themselves  into  the  same :  some
caried  with  an  honorable  desire  to  be  in  action,  and
some  in  love  of  such  would  affectionately  folow  their
fortunes ;  some  in  thirsting  to  revenge  the  death  and
hurts  of  their  brethren,  kinred,  and  friends :  and  some
in  hope  of  the  plentifull  spoyles  to  be  found  in  those
countreys,  having  bene  there  already  and  returned  poore,
would  desire  to  goe  againe,  with  an  expectation  to  make
amends  for  the  last :  and  all,  in  hatred  of  that  cowardly
proud  Nation,  and  in  contemplation  of  the  true  honour
of  our  owne,  would  with  courage  take  armes  to  hazard
their  lives  agaynst  them,  whom  every  good  Englishman
is  in  nature  bound  to  hate  as  an  implacable  enemie  to
England,  thirsting  after  our  blood,  and  labouring  to  ruine
our  land,  with  hope  to  bring  us  under  the  yoke  of  per-
petuall  slaverie.

Against  them  is  true  honour  to  be  gotten,  for  that  we  [II.  ii.  154.]
shall  no  sooner  set  foot  in  their  land,  but  that  every
step  we  tread  will  yeeld  us  new  occasion  of  action,  which
I  wish  the  gallantrie  of  our  Countrey  rather  to  regard
then  to  folow  those  soft  unprofitable  pleasures  wherein
they  now  consume  their  time  and  patrimonie.  And  in
two  or  three  townes  of  Spaine  is  the  welth  of  all  Europe
gathered  together,  which  are  the  Magasins  of  the  fruits
and  profits  of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  whereunto  I
wish  our  yong  able  men,  who,  (against  the  libertie  they
are  borne  unto)  terme  themselves  Serving  men,  rather
to  bend  their  desires  and  affections,  then  to  attend  their
double  liverie  and  40  shillings  by  the  yeere  wages,  and
the  reversion  of  the  old  Copy-hold,  for  carying  a  dish
to  their  masters  table.  But  let  me  here  reprehend  my
selfe  and  crave  pardon  for  entring  into  a  matter  of  such
state  and  consequence,  the  care  whereof  is  already  laid
upon  a  most  grave  and  honorable  counsell,  who  wil  in
their  wisdoms  foresee  the  dangers  that  may  be  threatned
agaynst  us.  And  why  do  I  labour  to  disquiet  the  secu-
ritie  of  these  happy gentlemen, & the trade  of  those

523

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

honest  serving  men,  by  perswading  them  to  the  warres
when  I  see  the  profession  thereof  so  slenderly  esteemed  ?
For  though  all  our  hope  of  peace  be  frustrate,  and  our
quarels  determinable  by  the  sword :  though  our  enemy
hath  by  his  owne  forces  and  his  pensionaries  industry,
confined  the  united  Provinces  into  a  narow  roume,  &
almost  disunited  the  same :  if  he  be  now  in  a  good  way
to  harbor  himselfe  in  the  principall  havens  of  France,
from  whence  he  may  front  us  at  pleasure :  yea  though
we  are  to  hope  for  nothing  but  a  bloodie  warre,  nor
can  trust  to  any  helpe  but  Armes ;  yet  how  far  the
common  sort  are  from  reverencing  or  regarding  any
persons  of  conduction,  was  too  apparant  in  the  returne
of  this  our  journey,  wherein  the  base  and  common
souldier  hath  bene  toUerated  to  speake  against  the  Cap-
taine,  and  the  souldier  and  Captaine  against  the  Generals,
and  wherein  mechanicall  and  men  of  base  condicion  doe
dare  to  censure  the  doings  of  them,  of  whose  acts  they
be  not  woorthy  to  talke.

The  ancient  grave  degree  of  the  Prelacie  is  upheld,
though  Martin  raile  never  so  much,  &  the  Lawyer  is
after  the  old  maner  worshipped,  whosoever  inveigh
against  him.  But  the  ancient  English  honour  is  taken
from  our  men  of  war,  &  their  profession  in  disgrace,
though  never  so  necessary.  Either  we  commit  idolatry
to  Neptune,  and  will  put  him  alone  stil  to  fight  for  us
as  he  did  the  last  yeere,  or  we  be  inchanted  with  some
divelish  opinions,  that  travell  nothing  more  then  to
diminish  the  reputation  of  them,  upon  whose  shoulders
the  burden  of  our  defence  against  the  enemie  must  lie
when  occasion  shall  be  offred.  For  whensoever  he  shall
set  foote  upon  our  land,  it  is  neither  the  preaching  of
the  Clergie  that  can  turne  him  out  againe,  nor  the
pleading  of  any  Lawyers  that  can  remoove  him  out  of
possession :  no,  then  they  will  honour  them  whom  now
they  thinke  not  on,  and  then  must  those  men  stand
betweene  them  and  their  perils,  who  are  now  thought  un-
woorthy  of  any  estimation.

524

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.

May  the  burning  of  one  towne  (which  cost  the  king
then  being  six  times  as  much  as  this  hath  done  her
majestie,  wherein  were  lost  seven  times  as  many  men
as  in  any  one  service  of  this  journey,  and  taried  not  the
tenth  part  of  our  time  in  the  enemies  Countrey)  be  by
our  elders  so  highly  reputed  and  sounded  out  by  the
historie  of  the  Rcalme ;  and  can  our  voyage  be  so
meanly  esteemed,  wherein  we  burned  both  townes  and
Countreys  without  the  losse  of  fortie  men  in  any  such
attempt  ?

Did  our  kings  in  former  times  reward  some  with  the
greatest  titles  of  honour  for  overthrowing  a  number  of
poore  Scots,  who,  after  one  battell  lost,  were  never  able
to  reenforce  themselves  against  him ;  and  shall  they  in
this  time  who  have  overthrowen  our  mightie  enemie  in
battell,  and  taken  his  roiall  Standerd  in  the  field,  besieged
the  marquesse  of  Saralba  15  dayes  together,  that  should
have  bene  the  Generall  of  the  Armie  against  us,  brought
away  so  much  of  his  artillarie  (as  I  have  before  declared)
be  unwoorthily  esteemed  of?

Is  it  possible  that  some  in  some  times  should  receive
their  reward  for  looking  upon  an  enemie,  and  ours  in
this  time  not  receive  so  much  as  thanks  for  having  beaten
an  enemie  at  handle  strokes  ?

But  it  is  true  that  no  man  shall  bee  a  prophet  in  his
Countrey:  and  for  my  owne  part  I  will  lay  aside  my
Armes  till  that  profession  shal  have  more  reputation,
and  live  with  my  friends  in  the  countrey,  attending
either  some  more  fortunate  time  to  use  them,  or  some
other  good  occasion  to  make  me  forget  them.

But  what  ?  shall  the  blind  opinion  of  this  monster,  a
beast  of  many  heads,  (for  so  hath  the  generalitie  of  old
bene  termed)  cause  me  to  neglect  the  profession  from
whence  I  chalenge  some  reputation,  or  diminish  my  love
to  my  countrey,  which  hitherto  hath  nourished  me  ?  No,
it  was  for  her  sake  I  first  tooke  armes,  and  for  her  sake
I  will  handle  them  so  long  as  I  shall  be  able  to  use
them : not regarding how some men in private con-

525

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589-

venticles  do  measure  mens  estimations  by  their  owne
humors ;  nor  how  every  popular  person  doeth  give
[II.  ii.  155.]  sentence  on  every  mans  actions  by  the  worst  accidents.
But  attending  the  gracious  aspect  of  our  dread  Sove-
raigne,  who  never  yet  left  vertue  unrewarded :  and
depending  upon  the  justice  of  her  most  rare  and  grave
advisors,  who  by  their  heedie  looking  into  every  mans
worth,  do  give  encouragement  to  the  vertuous  to  exceed
others  in  vertue :  and  assuring  you  that  there  shall
never  any  thing  happen  more  pleasing  unto  me,  then
that  I  may  once  againe  bee  a  partie  in  some  honorable
journey  against  the  Spaniard  in  his  owne  countrey,  1
will  cease  my  complaint :  and  with  them  that  deserve
beyond  me,  patiently  endure  the  unadvised  censure  of
our  malicious  reproovers.

If  I  have  seemed  in  the  beginning  hereof  troublesome
unto  you,  in  the  discovering  of  those  impediments,  and
answering  the  slanders  which  by  the  vulgar  malicious  and
mutinous  sort  are  laid  as  blemishes  upon  the  journey,
and  reproches  upon  the  Generals  (having  indeed  pro-
ceeded from  other  heads :)  let  the  necessitie  of  conserving
the  reputation  of  the  action  in  generall,  &  the  honors
of  our  Generals  in  particular,  bee  my  sufficient  excuse :
the  one  having  by  the  vertue  of  the  other  made  our
country  more  dreaded  &  renowmed,  then  any  act  that
ever  England  undertooke  before.  Or  if  you  have
thought  my  perswasible  discourse  long  in  the  latter  end ;
let  the  affectionate  desire  of  my  countreys  good  be  therein
answerable  for  me.  And  such  as  it  is  I  pray  you  accept
it,  as  only  recommended  to  your  selfe,  and  not  to  be
delivered  to  the  publique  view  of  the  world,  least  any
man  take  offence  thereat :  which  some  particular  men
may  seeme  justly  to  do,  in  that  having  deserved  very
well,  I  should  not  herein  give  them  their  due  com-
mendations :  whereas  my  purpose  in  this  private  dis-
course hath  bene  onely  to  gratifie  you  with  a  touch  of
those  principall  matters  that  have  passed,  wherein  I  have
onely  taken  notes  of  those  men  who  either  commaunded

526

THE PORTUGAL VOYAGE  ad.

1589.
every  service,  or  were  of  chiefest  marke :  if  therefore
you  shall  impart  the  same  to  one,  and  he  to  another,  and
so  it  passe  through  my  hands,  I  know  not  what  con-
structions would  be  made  thereof  to  my  prejudice ;  for
that  the  Hares  eares  may  happily  be  taken  for  homes.
Howbeit  I  hold  it  very  necessary  (I  must  confesse)
that  there  should  be  some  true  manifestation  made  of
these  things :  but  be  it  far  from  me  to  be  the  author
thereof,  as  very  unfit  to  deliver  my  censure  of  any  matter
in  publique,  &  most  unwilling  to  have  my  weaknesse
discovered  in  private.  And  so  I  doe  leave  you  to  the
happy  successe  of  your  accustomed  good  exercises,
earnestly  wishing  that  there  may  be  some  better  accept-
ance made  of  the  fruits  of  your  studies,  then  there  hath
bene  of  our  hazards  in  the  wars.  From  London  the
30  of  August 1589.

END OF VOLUME VI.

mmsssBssspjt

♦.:^^SS§?Sl#H

<&

3  5002  00074  2150

Hakluyl,  Richard

The  principnl  navigations  voyages  Iraffi

C 2<40 .  H2; 1^03 6

Hakluy-t, Richard, 1552? -1616

The- pirlnclpal naviga-tlons
voyage-s t.raf f Ique-s &
