The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 11 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 11 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  Traffiques  and

Discoveries  of  the  EngHsh  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume XI

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT  MACLEHOSE &'  COMPANY LTD. FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMIV

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Boston  Library  Consortium  IVIember  Libraries

http://www.archive.org/details/principalnavigat011hakl

{TfoT  iOa  ^candi3e  inffxetor,  'Chflripimi  Thomx  Cam^fpb  rteib&isAn
jU  ad  viyim,  mujgoi  jta  ffcAnfia  xi  ittij jsSSnavm  ccnseenims,  totum
teme  atiAUtm  arctaniwi0<ani,re^'^  injatrig  f<n'twa'Flauimi:AjsSift.jj89.

THOMAS CAVENDISH

The Principal

Navigations  Voyages
TrafRques  &  Discoveries

of  the  Enghsh Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within  the

compasse  of  these 1600 Yeeres

By

RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church in  Oxford

VOLUME XI

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University
New  York : The  Macmillan  Company

^

'QoJdLb

/I

THE TABLE

PAGE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages  of  this  eleventh  volume
made  to  divers  places  upon  the  coast  of
Brasill,  and  divers  English  voyages,  some  in-
tended and  some  performed  to  the  Streights
of  Magellan,  the  South  Sea,  and  round  about
the  circumference  of  the  whole  Earth ;  with
the  principall  observations,  ruttiers  and  in-
telligences belonging  to  the  voyages  of  this
eleventh  volume  :

J  The  3.  voyage  set  forth  by  sir  Walter  Ralegh  to  Guiana
with  a  pinnesse  called  The  Wat,  begun  in  the  yere
1596.  written  by  M.  Thomas  Masham  a  gentleman
of  the  company. ......  I

Three  testimonies  of  Josepho  de  Acosta  concerning  the
mightie  river  of  Amazones,  or  Orellana,  and  of  the
downefall  of  waters  at  the  head  thereof  called  El
Pongo,  and  likewise  of  the  Empire  of  Dorado  or
Guiana,  and  of  the  golden  countrey  of  Paytiti. .  16

A  briefe  description  of  the  foresayd  river  of  Amazones  or
Orellana,  and  of  the  countries  thereabout,  as  also  of
the  sea  of  fresh  water,  taken  out  of  an  ancient  dis-
course written  by  Martin  Fernandez  de  Engifa. .  19

The  first  voyage  of  M.  William  Hawkins  of  Plimmouth,

father  unto  sir  John  Hawkins,  to  Brasil  Anno  15.30. 23

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  second voyage of  M. William Hawkins to Brasil,

1532- 24

The  voyage  of  M.  Robert  Reniger  &  M.  Tho.  Borey  to

Brasil,  in  the  yere  1540.  .  .  .  .25

The  voyage  of  one  Pudsey  to  Baya  in  Brasil 1542. . 25

A  letter written to M.  Richard Staper  by  John  Whithal

from  Santos  in  Brasil,  the  26.  of  June, 1578.  .  26

A  letter  of  the  adventurers  for  Brasil  sent  to  John
Whithal  dwelling  at  Santos,  by  the  Minion  of
London,  dated  the  24.  of  October  1580. .  .  31

The voyage of  M. Stephan Hare in the Minion of

London  to  Brasil  anno 1580. ....  34

An  intercepted  letter  of  Francis  Suarez  to  his  brother
Diego  Suarez  dwelling  in  Lisbon,  written  from  the
river  of  Jenero  in  Brasil  in  June  1596.  concerning
an  exceeding  rich  trade  newly  begunne  betweene
that  place  and  Peru  by  the  way  of  the  river  of
Plate,  with  small  barkes  of  30.  or  40.  tunnes.  . 39

The prosperous voyage of Master James Lancaster to

the  towne  of  Fernambuck  in  Brasil, 1594. .  .  43

An  intercepted  letter  written  from  Feliciano  Cie9a  de
Carvalho  the  governour  of  Paraiva  in  the  most
Northren  part  of  Brasil  1597.  to  Philip  the  second
King  of  Spaine,  concerning  the  conquest  of  Rio
grande,  &c.  ....... 64

A  speciall  note  concerning  the  currents  of  the  sea  be-
tweene the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperan9a,  and  the
coast  of  Brasilia. .  .  .  . .  .72

An  excellent  ruttier  describing  the  course  to  be  kept
from  Cabo  verde  to  the  coast  of  Brasil,  and  all
along  the  said  coast  from  Fernambuck  to  the  river  of

Plate. 73

vi

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A ruttler from the river of Plate to the Streights of

Magellan. ....... 85

A  Voyage  of  two  Englishmen  to  the  river  of  Plate  in  the

company  of  Sebastian  Cabota,  1527. .  .  .  9*

The  voyage  of  M.  John  Drake  after  his  departure  from

M.  Fenton,  up  the  river  of  Plate  1582.  .  . 92

A  Ruttier  which  declareth  the  situation  of  the  coast  of
Brasil  from  the  yle  of  Santa  Catelina  unto  the
mouth  of  the  river  of  Plate,  and  all  along  up
within  the  said  river,  and  what  armes  &  mouths  it
hath  to  enter  into  it,  as  farre  as  it  is  navigable
with  small  barkes.  ...... 96

The  famous  voyage  of  sir  Francis  Drake  into  the  South
sea,  and  therehence  about  the  globe  of  the  whole
earth,  begunne  Anno  1577. .  .  .  . loi

The names of  the kings of  Java, at the time of sir

Francis  Drakes  being  there.  .  .  .  .132

Certaine words of  the natural! language of  Java, with

the  interpretation  thereof.  .  .  .  .132

The  voyage  of  Nunno  de  Silva  a  Portugal  Pilot  taken
by  sir  Francis  Drake  at  the  yles  of  Cabo  Verde,  and
caried  along  with  him  as  farre  as  the  haven  of
Guatulco  upon  the  coast  of  New  Spaine  :  with
his  confession  made  to  the  Viceroy  of  Mexico  of
all  matters  that  befell,  during  the  time  that  he
accompanied  sir  Francis  Drake.  .  .  . 133

A  letter  written  in  the  South  sea  by  sir  Francis  Drake

unto  his  consort  M.  John  Winter. .  .  .147

vii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  voyage  of  M.  John  Winter  into  the  South  sea  by
the  Streight  of  Magellan  in  consort  with  sir  Francis
Drake,  begun  in  the  yeere  1577.  he  being  the  first
Christian  that  ever  repassed  the  said  Streight.  . 148

Instructions  given  by  the  R.  H.  the  lords  of  the  councell,
to  M.  Edvirard  Fenton  esquire,  for  the  order  to  be
observed  in  the  voyage  recommended  unto  him  for
the  East  Indies  and  Cathay,  April  9,  1582..  . 163

The  voyage  of  M.  Edward  Fenton  and  M,  Luke  Ward
his  viceadmirall  with  4.  ships,  intended  for  China,
but  performed  onely  to  the  coast  of  Brasil,  as  farre
as  33.  degrees  of  Southerly  latitude;  begunne  in
the  yeere  1582. ...... 172

The  voyage  of  M.  Robert  Withrington,  and  M.  Chris-
topher Lister  intended  for  the  South  sea,  with  two
tal  ships  set  forth  at  the  charges  of  the  right  honour-
able the  Earle  of  Cumberland,  but  performed  onely  to
the  Southerly  latitude  of  44.  degrees,  begun  Anno  1586. 202

A  discourse  of  the  West  Indies  and  the  South  sea,
written  by  Lopez  Vaz  a  Portugall,  conteining
divers  memorable  matters  not  to  be  found  in  any
other  writers,  and  continued  unto  the  yere 1587. . 227

The  prosperous  voyage  of  M.  Thomas  Candish  esquire
into  the  South  sea,  and  so  round  about  the  circum-
ference of  the  whole  earth,  begun  in  the  yere  1586.
and  finished 1588.  ..... 290

Certaine  rare  and  speciall  notes  most  properly  belonging
to  the  voyage  of  M.  Thomas  Candish  about  the
world  ;  concerning  the  latitudes,  soundings,  lying
of  lands,  distances  of  places,  the  variation  of  the
compasse,  and  other  notable  observations,  diligently
taken  by  M.  Thomas  Fuller  of  Ipswich.  .  . 348

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  letter  of  M.  Thomas  Candish  to  the  R.  H.  the
olde  Lord  Hunsdon,  L.  Chamberlaine,  one  of  her
Majesties  most  honourable  privie  councell,  touch-
ing the  successe  of  his  voyage  rounde  about  the
worlde.  .  .  ...  .  . 376

Certaine  notes  or  references  taken  out  of  a  large  map  of

China,  brought  home  by  M.Thomas  Candish 1588. 378

The  voyage  of  the  Delight  a  ship  of  Bristol  one  of  the
consorts  of  M.  John  Chidley  esquire,  and  M.  Paul
Wheele,  made  to  the  Streights  of  Magellan,  begun
in  the  yere 1589.  ..... 381

A  petition  made  in  the  streight  of  Magellan  by  certeine
of  the  company  of  the  Delight  of  BristoU,  unto
Robert  Burnet  the  Master  of  the  sayd  ship,  and
one  of  the  consorts  of  M.  Chidley  the  12  of
February  1589. ...... 385

The  last  voyage  of  M.  Thomas  Candish  intended  for  the
South  sea,  the  Philippinas,  and  the  coast  of  China,
with  three  tall  ships,  and  two  barks,  begun 1 591. . 389

The  testimoniall  of  the  company  of  the  Desire,  a  ship
of  M.  Candishes  fleet  in  his  last  voyage,  touching
the  loosing  of  their  generall,  which  appeareth  to
have  bene  utterly  against  their  meanings. .  -397

The  letters  of  the  Queenes  most  excellent  Majestie,  sent
in  the  yere  1596,  to  the  emperour  of  China,  by
M.  Richard  Allot  and  M.  Thomas  Bromefield,
merchants  of  London,  who  were  embarked  in  the
fleet,  whereof  M.  Benjamin  Wood  was  generall. . 417

Three  severall  testimonies  concerning  the  mighty  king-
dome  of  Coray,  tributary  to  the  king  of  China,
and  bordering  upon  his  Northeast  frontiers  :  and
also  touching  the  warres  of  Quabacondono  the
monarch  of  Japan  against  China,  by  the  way  of  Coray. 422

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Yoya.gQS— Continued.  page

A  briefe  note  concerning  an  extreame  Northerly  province
of  Japan,  called  Zuegara,  situate  30  dayes  journey
from  Miaco,  &  also  of  a  certeine  nation  of  Tartars,
called  Jezi,  inhabiting  on  the  maine  to  the  North
of  China. .  .  ....  .  . 44.1

Advertisements  touching  the  ships  that  goe  from  Sivil  to
the  Indies  of  Spaine,  together  with  some  sea-orders
of  the  Contractation  house  of  Sivil. .  .  . /\.^z

The order of  the  Carena given to the ships that goe

out  of  Spaine  to  the  West  Indies. .  .  . 44.7

The  examination  of  the  Masters  and  Pilots  which  saile
in  the  fleets  of  Spaine  to  the  West  Indies,  written
in  Spanish  by  Pedro  Dias  a  Spanish  Pilot. .  . 4.48

ILLUSTRATIONS

Thomas  Cavendish, ..... Frontispiece

Thomas  Cavendish  or  Candish,  the  second  Englishman
to  sail  round  the  world,  was  born  at  Gumston  Hall,
in  Trimley  Saint  Martin  Parish,  Suffolk,  about  1555.
Little  is  known  of  his  early  years.  His  first  voyage
was  in  a  ship  of  his  own  in  Sir  Richard  Grenville's
voyage  to  Virginia  made  for  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
in  1585  (Hakluyt,  Vol.  VIII.,  page  310).  Imme-
diately after  his  return  he  began  the  preparation
for  his  own  voyage  of  circumnavigation.  A  full
account  of  this  *  admirable  and  prosperous  voyage,
written  by  Master  Francis  Pretty,  lately  of  Ey  in
Suffolke,  a  Gentleman  employed  in  the  same  action,'
is  given  at  page  290.  On  his  return  home.  Caven-
dish was  received  at  Court  at  Greenwich,  and  seems
to  have  spent  *  his  fortune  in  gallantry  and  following
the  Court.'  An  account  of  his  last  voyage,  begun
on  26th  August,  1 591,  up  to  the  time  when  the
ships  were  dispersed,  and  the  subsequent  sufferings
of  Captain  John  Davis,  the  Arctic  Navigator,  and
the  crew  of  the  'Desire,'  will  be  found  at  page
389.  After  losing  the  'Desire'  and  the  Pinnace
Cavendish  with  the  *  Leicester  Galeon  '  and  *  Roe-
buck' made  for  Brazil  and  tried  to  land  at
Santos  and  Espirito  Santo.  Through  disobedience
to  his  orders,  and  through  the  treachery  of  his  men,
the  Portuguese  and  the  Indians  beat  him  off  with
xi

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

the  loss  of  many  of  his  best  hands.  Short  of  pro-
visions and  water,  deserted  by  the  *  Roebuck '  and
with  only  three  whole  sails  left,  Cavendish  next
determined  to  '  beate  for  Saint  Hellena,  and  there
either  to  make  ourselves  happy  by  mending  or
ending.'  In  spite  of  continuous  adverse  winds  he
fetched  within  two  leagues  of  the  Island,  but  could
not  make  it,  *  the  winde  being  continually  at  East-
South-east,  the  most  contrary  wind  that  could
blow.'  He  next  tried  to  reach  *an  Island  which
the  cardes  make  to  be  in  8  degrees  to  the  southward
of  the  line,'  probably  Ascension  Island,  but  *  I
could  by  no  means  finde  it,  so  as  I  was  forced  to
goe  towards  England.'  He  died  on  the  voyage
homewards  worn  out  with  privations  and  disappoint-
ment. The  portrait  is  taken  from  the  copy  in  the
British  Museum  of  the  unique  chart  engraved  by
Judocus  Hondius  about  1595.  The  chart  itself  is
given  at  page  336.

Drake's  Drum, . . . . . . .104

This  drum,  which  now  hangs  in  the  hall  at  Buckland
Abbey,  is  reproduced  by  permission  of  Lady  Elliot
Drake.  It  bears  Drake's  arms,  and  on  it  the  last
salute  was  probably  beaten  as  his  body  was  com-
mitted to  the  sea  (Corbett,  Drake  and  the  Tudor
Navy,  I.,  xi.)  The  legend  connected  with  the
drum  forms  the  subject  of  Henry  Newbolt's
ballad  Drake^s  Drum  : —

*  Take  my  drum  to  England,  hang  et  by  the  shore.

Strike  et  when  your  powder's  runnin'  low ;
If  the Dons sight Devon,  I'll quit the port o'
Heaven,
An'  drum  them  up  the  Channel  as  we  drummed
them  long  ago.'

Owing  to  the  frail  condition  of  the  drum  it  was
not  found  possible  to  remove  it  from  the  glass  case
which  protects  it,  but  it  is  hoped  that  the  interest
of  the  subject  will  excuse  the  want  of  clearness  in

the  reproduction.

xii

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Chart  of  Cape  Horn, "*

This  chart  is  taken  from  a  manuscript  (Sloane  MSS.  6i)
in  the  British  Museum.  It  shows  the  southern  part
of  Patagonia,  with  Magellan  Straits  and  the  islands
of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  with  the  open  sea  to  the  south.
The  manuscript,  written  in  1577,  purports  to  be
'  an  exact  copy  of  the  originall  to  a  haire '  of  the
notes  'written  and  faithfully  layed  downe  by
Ffrancis  Ffletcher,  Minister  of  Christ  and  Preacher
of  the  Gospell,  adventurer  and  traveller  in  the
same  voyage'  [Drake's  circumnavigation].  The
copy  is  by  *Jo.  Conyers,  Cittizen  and  Apothecary
of  London.'  It  was  at  the  *  Insulae  Elizabethides '
that  the  incident  narrated  by  Sir  Richard  Hawkins
in  his  Observations  took  place,  when  Drake,  '  going
ashoare,  carried  a  Compasse  with  him,  and  seeking
out  the  Southermost  part  of  the  Hand,  cast  himselfe
downe  upon  the  uttermost  point  groveling,  and
so  reached  out  his  bodie  over  it.  Presently  he
imbarked,  and  then  recounted  unto  his  people,  that
he  had  beene  upon  the  Southermost  knowne  Land
in  the  World,  and  more  further  to  the  Southwards
upon  it,  then  any  of  them,  yea,  or  any  man  as  yet
knowne.'

Sir  Christopher  Hatton, 136

Sir  Christopher  Hatton  was  born  at  Holdenby,  North-
amptonshire, in  1540.  He  entered  St.  Mary  Hall,
Oxford,  as  a  gentleman  commoner,  but  took  no
degree.  In  November,  1559,  he  was  admitted  to
the  Society  of  the  Inner  Temple.  As  the  portrait
shows,  he  was  a  tall  and  handsome  man,  and  he
was  noted  for  his  graceful  dancing.  He  quickly
attracted  Queen  Elizabeth's  attention,  and  became
one  of  her  gentlemen  pensioners  in  1564.  In
1568  he  was  appointed  Keeper  of  the  Parks  at
Eltham  and  Home,  and  in  1572  Captain  of  the
Queen's  Bodyguard,  In  October,  1573,  Sir  John
Hawkins, being mistaken for Sir Christopher

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Hatton,  was  stabbed  in  the  Strand  by  a  Puritan
fanatic  named  Burchett.  In  November,  1578,
Hatton  was  appointed  Vice-Chamberlain  of  the
Household,  with  a  seat  in  the  Privy  Council,  and
on  1st  December  he  was  knighted  at  Windsor,  He
was  returned  to  Parliament  for  Northamptonshire
in  1584.  He  was  a  Commissioner  for  the  trial  of
Anthony  Babington  and  his  fellow-conspirators  in
September,  1586,  and  played  a  most  important  part
in  the  proceedings  which  ended  in  the  execution
of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots.  On  25th  April,  1587,
the  Queen  appointed  him  Lord  Chancellor,  which
post  he  retained  until  his  death  on  20th  November,
1 59 1.  He  was  buried  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral.  It
was  in  honour  of  Sir  Christopher  Hatton  that
Drake,  on  entering  Magellan  Straits,  changed  the
name  of  his  ship  from  the  *  Pelican '  to  the  '  Golden
Hind,'  the  Hatton  crest  being  a  'hind  trippant  or.'
The  portrait  is  taken  from  an  engraving  in  the
Print  Room  of  the  British  Museum  after  the
portrait  by  Ketel.

A  Galley, ........ 240

Reproduced  from  Furttenbach's  Archttectura  Navalis,
Ulm,  1629.  Galleys  were  for  long  the  main  arm
of  the  Continental  navies.  Propelled  as  they
were  by  oars,  for  although  they  carried  lateen
sails  they  depended  chiefly  on  the  oars,  they
were  very  formidable  vessels,  especially  in  narrow
channels  and  confined  waters.  As,  however,  the
freeboard  was  necessarily  low,  and  as  the  principal
armament  was  carried  at  the  bow  and  could  not  be
used  for  broadside  fire,  they  were  of  little  value  in
the  ocean,  and  could  not  move  far  from  land.  The
English  seamen  soon  found  out  their  weak  points.
Writing  to  Drake  after  the  first  attack  on  Cadiz,
Captain  Thomas  Fenner  says,  '  I  assure  your  honour
there  is  no  account  to  be  made  of  his  [the  King  of
Spain's] galleys. Twelve of  Her Majesty's  ships

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

will  make  account  of  all  his  galleys  in  Spain
Portugal  and  all  his  dominions  within  the  Straits,
although  they  are  150  in  number.  If  it  be  to
their  advantage  in  a  calm  we  have  made  such  trial
of  their  fight  that  we  perfectly  see  into  the  depth
thereof  (Corbett,  op.  clt.  II.  92).  The  illustration
gives  a  good  idea  of  the  appearance  of  these  vessels.
The  guns  are  seen  projecting  at  the  bow,  supported
by  the  'trumpeters  and  musketers'  above  them.  On
the  'corsia,'  or  narrow  gangway  connecting  the  bow
and  the  stern,  are  two  men  with  long  poles  ready
to  beat  any  unfortunate  rower  who  shows  signs  of
flagging,  while  on  a  platform  at  the  stern  sits  the
captain  directing  the  course  of  the  galley,  with  the
helmsman  behind  him.  The  length  of  this  galley
from  the  extremity  of  the  '  beak '  to  the  stern  is
given  as  about  169  feet,  with  an  extreme  beam  of
about  20  feet.

Chart  of  the  World  by  Judocus  Hondius,  Circa  1595, 336

This  chart,  reproduced  from  the  original  in  the  Grenville
Library  in  the  British  Museum,  was  engraved  by
Judocus  Hondius  about  1595.  The  courses  of
the  circumnavigations  of  Drake  and  Cavendish
are  very  clearly  marked  on  the  chart.  The  en-
graving of  the  *  Golden  Hind '  in  the  centre
medallion  is  interesting  as  being  probably  the
only  representation  of  the  famous  ship  now  in
existence.  In  all  likelihood  it  is  an  accurate  draw-
ing, as  Hondius  was  working  as  an  engraver  in
London  in  1580,  and  the  'Golden  Hind'  was  pre-
served at  Deptford  for  many  years  after  the  circum-
navigation. The  engravings  in  the  corners  represent
four  of  the  incidents  of  Drake's  voyage.  In  the
upper  left-hand  corner  is  shown  the  harbour  of  New
Albion,  with  the  *  Golden  Hind '  at  anchor.  This
harbour  has  been  identified  by  Professor  Davidson
of  the  United  States  Geodetic  Survey  as  the  harbour
now  called  *  Drake  Harbour,*  a  little  to  the  north

XV

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

of  San  Francisco  Bay  and  near  Point  de  los  Reyes,
two  important  means  of  identification  being  *  the
white  bankes  and  clifFes  which  lie  towards  the  sea,'
and  the  gophers  or  pouched  rats,  *  a  strange  kind  of
conies,  having  under  her  chinne  on  either  side  a
bag,  into  the  which  she  gathereth  her  meate,  when
she  hath  filled  her  bellie  abroad'  (Page  123).  In  the
upper  right-hand  corner  the  *  Golden  Hind '  is  seen
in  the  harbour  of  Java  Major.  In  the  lower  left-
hand  medallion  the  '  Golden  Hind '  is  being  towed
to  a  good  anchorage  ofFTernate  by  the  king's  canoes.
Whilst  the  ship  was  being  towed  'our  ordinance
thundred,  which  wee  mixed  with  great  store  of  small
shot,  among  which  sounding  our  trumpets  and  other
instruments  of  musick,  both  of  still  and  loud  noise;
wherewith  he  [the  king]  was  so  much  delighted,
that,  requesting  our  musick  to  come  into  the  boate,
he  joyned  his  Canow  to  the  same,  and  was  towed  at
least  a  whole  houre  together,  with  the  boate  at  the
Sterne  of  our  ship.'

The  dangerous  incident  of  the  9th  of  January,
1579,  is  shown  in  the  lower  right-hand  medallion,
when  the  ship  *  ranne  suddenly  upon  a  rocke,  where
wee  stuck  fast  from  8  of  the  clocke  at  night  till
4  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  of  the  next  day,
being  indeed  out  of  all  hope  to  escape  the  danger.'
However,  by  lightening  the  ship  *  of  3  tunne  of
cloves,  8.  pieces  of  ordinance,  and  certaine  meale
and  beanes,  and  then  the  winde  (as  it  were  in  a
moment  by  the  speciall  grace  of  God)  changing  from
the  starreboord  to  the  larboord  of  the  ship,  we
hoised  our  sailes,  and  the  happy  gale  drove  our  ship
off  the  rocke  into  the  sea  againe.' (Page  129.)

The  Black  Pinnace, 400

This  engraving  of  *The  Black  Pynnes'  is  reproduced
from  a  copy  of  The  Procession  at  the  obsequies  of  Sir
Philip  Sidney,  Knight,  drawn  and  invented  by  Thomas
Lant, Gentleman, London, 1587, in the British

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Museum.  In  '  The  Black  Pynnes '  Sidney's  body
was  carried  from  Flushing  to  Tower  Hill,  where  it
was  landed  on  November  5th,  1585.  The  vessel  is
represented  with  '  her  fights  made  close,'  that  is,
with  waistcloths  rigged  up  to  prevent  boarding,  and
nettings  drawn  over  the  waist  to  intercept  dropping
missiles.  The  term  '  pinnace '  is  indefinite  :  some-
times it  is  used  to  describe  the  largest  of  the  ships'
boats  (in  this  sense  it  is  used  in  the  British  navy
at  the  present  day),  and  we  read  of  the  pinnaces
being  carried  in  pieces  in  the  great  ships'  holds  and
put  together  as  occasion  required ;  more  frequently,
however,  it  refers  to  'vessels  varying  from  eighty  to
fifteen  tons,  and  setting  aside  certain  special  func-
tions in  general  actions,  and  landing  operations,
they  were  to  the  capital  ships  exactly  what  the
frigate  was  to  the  ship  of  the  line '  (Corbett,
op.cit.,1.  35).

Map  of  the  Moluccas,  . . . . -458

This  map,  *  Imprinted  at  London  by  John  Wolfe,  graven
by  Robert  Beckit,'  is  reproduced  from  the  copy  in
the  British  Museum  of  John  Huighen  van  Linschoten
his  Discours  of  Voyages  unto  ye  Easte  and  Weste  Indies,
London,  1598.

Along  the  lower  edge  of  the  map  are  shown  some
of  the  products  from  which  the  '  Islands  of  Spicerie '
took  their  name :  red,  white,  and  yellow  sandalwood,
'arbor  cariophilorum '  or  cloves,  and  *nux  myristica'
or  nutmeg,  '  with  its  flower,  commonly  called  mace.'

THE ELEVENTH VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  TrafBques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Made  to  divers  places  upon  the  coast  of  Brasilia

and  divers English  voyages  some  intended

and  some  performed  to  the  Streights  of

Magellan,  the  South  Sea,  and  round

about  the  circumference  of  the

whole  Earth ;

with  the  principall  observations,  ruttiers  and

intelligences  belonging  to  the  voyages

of  this  eleventh  volume

The  third  voyage  set  forth  by  sir  Walter  Ralegh
to  Guiana,  with  a  pinnesse  called  The  Watte,
in  the  yeere  1596.  Written  by  M.  Thomas
Masham  a  gentleman  of  the  companie.

Pon  Thursday  the  14.  of  October  1596.
we  set  saile  from  Limehouse  upon  the
river  of  Thames,  and  through  much
contrarietie  of  winds  and  other  acci-
dents, we  made  it  the  27.  of  December,
before  we  could  get  out  of  Waimouth.
The  25.  of  Januarie  in  the  morning  we

came  to  the  North  side  of  the  Island  of  Grand  Canaria,
where  we  hoped  to  have  gotten  a  boate  to  serve  us  upon
the  coast  of  Guiana,  but  the  winde  was  so  great,  that  we
could  not  lanch  our  shalope :  so  we  past  along  by  the
roade  and  the  towne,  and  at  length  saw  a  boate  lying  on
shoare,  which  being  too  bigge  for  us,  wee  ripped  up,  and
wooded  our  selves  with  her.  That  day  wee  descryed  a
saile,  which  at  length  wee  found  to  be  a  flieboate  of  Dart-
mouth, of  200.  tunnes,  bound  to  the  Island  of  Mayo  for
salte.  Wee  fell  in  consort  with  her,  and  that  night
stoode  for  the  Southermost  part  of  the  Island  there  to
water,  where  wee  stayed  all  the  next  day,  and  watered  at
the  Southsouthwest  part  thereof  That  night  wee  weyed
and  stoode  away  together  Southsoutheast,  and  South
and  by  East,  purposing  by  their  perswasion  to  goe  for
the  river Doro. The 28. of Tanuarie  wee made the  {f;  ^^JU^^"'

r 1  r -r. 1 •  1 1 •  •  fVOOa  OOUncl

furthermost part or Barbarie ; and this mornmg we  ^^.  y^^^  ^^^^^^
met  with  M.  Benjamin  Wood  with  his  fleete  of  3 sailes  sea.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

bound  for  the  straights of  Magellan & China, to wit,

The  Beare,  The  Whelpe,  and  The  Benjamin :  who  told

us  that  there  was  no  good  to  be  done  in  the  river  Doro.

Cape  Blanco,  Whereupon  we  stood  along  with  them  for  Cape  Blanco,
unto  which  we  came  upon  Sunday  night  next  following.
And  upon  Munday  morning  the  first  of  Februarie,  we
saw  two  ships  in  a  sandie  bay :  so  wee  stirred  in  with
them,  which  were  Frenchmen  bound  for  the  West
Indies,  and  put  all  into  the  bay,  where  wee  refreshed
our  selves  with  fish,  in  which  there  was  infinite  store,
and  stayed  there  untill  Thursday  the  5.  at  which  time
wee  stood  up  with  the  Cape  againe,  where  rode  the
Frenchman  and  his  pinnesse,  who  put  foorth  right
afore  us,  and  another  Frenchman  and  his  caravel  well
manned :  So  all  we  5.  English  came  to  an  anker  by
them,  where  after  kinde  greeting  with  many  shots  out
of  every  ship  both  English  and  French,  all  our  cap-
taines  were  invited  to  a  feast  aboord  the  French
admirall :  where  after  great  cheere  and  kinde  entertain-
ment, it  was  concluded  on  all  handes  to  take  the  Isle
of  Fogo,  if  God  would  give  us  leave.

The  same  day  we  all  weyed  and  stoode  along  for  the

The  Island Isle  of  Sal, unto  which  we  came the 8. of  Februarie,

^f^'^^-  and ankered altogether at a bay in the West part

thereof:  in  which  Island  wee  had  good  store  of  goates
and  fresh  fish.  There  is  no  man  dwelling  upon  the
Island  that  we  could  see.  Wee  could  finde  no  fresh
water  upon  it,  but  one  standing  puddle  of  bad  water :
it  hath  foure  great  mountaines  upon  the  4.  corners
of  it.  Here  the  Frenchmen  (as  it  seemeth  being  over-
come with  drinke,  having  bene  aboord  our  Generall
at  a  feast)  being  on  shoare,  one  of  the  gentlemen  of
their  companie  was  slaine,  and  their  chiefe  captaine
sorely  wounded  :  by  reason  whereof,  and  of  the  setting
together  of  a  pinnesse  which  they  were  about,  the  French
admiral  and  the  caravel  stayed  behind.  So  wee  in
the  Watte,  and the other 6. ships weyed the 10.  of

[III.  693.] Februarie,  and  stood  away  for  the  isle  of  Maio. This

THOMAS  MASHAM  ad.

1597-
night  the  other  two  French  shippes  that  came  from
Sal  with  us  (as  it  seemeth  of  purpose,  because  their
consorts  were  not  with  them)  lost  us.  The  next  morn-
ing wee  sawe  Maio.  So  wee  and  the  flieboate  of
Dartmouth  compassed  the  Northermost  part  of  the
Island,  and  master  Benjamin  Wood  in  the  China-fleete,
the  Southermost,  and  came  all  to  an  anker  together  at
the  Southwest  part  thereof:  where  rode  sixe  sayles  of  z^  sailes  of
Flemmings  lading  sake;  who  had  brought  their  horses  ^^^oTf/S
and  cartes,  and  wheele-barrowes,  and  plankes  for  their
barrowes  to  runne  upon.  Here  is  abundance  of  sake
in  this  Island  made  by  Gods  hande  without  mans  labour.
These  tolde  us  that  there  were  thirtie  sayles  more,  which
fell  to  leeward  of  Fogo,  who,  as  I  heard  since,  beat  it
up  with  much  adoe,  &  came  thither  also  for  sake.  This
trade  may  bee  very  beneficiall  to  England,  considering
the  dearnesse  of  sake.  Of  goates  on  this  Island  there
is  such  store,  as  is  incredible,  but  to  those  that  have
seene  them :  and  it  is  a  wonder  howe  they  live  one  by
the  other,  the  ground  being  stonie  and  barren.  It  is
thought  that  there  are  dwelling  in  it  some  twentie
Mountainiers,  which  got  one  of  the  Flemmings  men
;  stragling,  and  God  knoweth  what  they  did  with  him :
;  for  they  sawe  him  no  more.  This  Island  is  somewhat
lowe  and  round,  having  no  great  mountaines  upon  it.
Here  ended  our  determination  concerning  the  invading
of  Fogo.  And  here  wee  left  the  flieboat  of  Dartmouth
lading  sake,  and  the  China-fleete  to  refresh  themselves
with  goates,  who  as  I  have  heard  since  had  at  the  village
(from  whence  the  Mountainiers  were  fledde  into  the
furthest  partes  of  the  Island  and  rocks)  great  store  of
dryed  goates  which  they  carried  along  with  them :  which
were  like  to  bee  a  great  helpe  unto  them  in  their  long
voyage.  So  upon  Saturday  the  12  of  Februarie  at
night  wee  set  saile  and  stood  for  the  coast  of  Wiana,
which  wee  were  bound  for.

Upon Sunday  the  twentieth  of  Februarie  wee  came
into  the  maine  current  that  setteth  from  the  Cape  of

3

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

Buena  Esperanza  along  the  coast  of  Brasil,  and  so  toward
the  West  Indies,  for  the  most  part  setting  away  Northwest.

The  Tuesday  night  following,  whereas  before  our
course  was  Westsouthwest,  wee  stoode  away  West  and
by  South :  by  reason  whereof,  and  of  the  current  that
set  us  to  the  Northward,  wee  were  the  next  day  by
noone  twentie  minutes  further  to  the  Northward  then
the  day  before.  So  that  then  wee  lay  away  Southwest,
because  wee  were  loath  to  fall  to  the  Northward  of  our
place  intended :  which  if  wee  should  bee  put  to  leeward
of,  there  was  small  hope  left  to  recover  it.

By  Thursday  wee  were  within  one  degree  ^  of  the
Equinoctiall  line :  therefore  this  day  wee  hailed  away
West  and  by  South,  and  West  among.  This  night
wee  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  at  90  fathoms.

The  next  day  in  the  morning  the  colour  of  the  water
began  to  change,  and  to  bee  more  white,  so  wee  made
another  sound  and  had  ground  at  thirtie  fathoms,  but
saw  no  lande,  and  in  the  afternoone  wee  hailed  away
Westnorthwest,  Northwest,  and  Northnorthwest.  In  the
night  wee  sounded  divers  times,  and  had  twelve,  ten,  and
nine  fathoms  water.

All  Saturday  wee  had  a  thick  red  water,  and  had
seven  and  eight  fathoms  both  day  and  night,  and  upon
Sunday  morning  by  day  being  the  seven  and  twentieth
of  Februarie,  wee  made  the  lande  which  appeared  lowe,
and  trended  neerest  as  wee  fell  with  it,  South  and  by
East,  North  and  by  West  about  two  degrees  |-  toward
the  North.  Right  on  head  of  us  was  a  Cape  or  head
land,  so  that  had  wee  beene  shot  a  little  further  into  the
bay,  the  winde  being  more  Northerly,  wee  should  hardly
have  doubled  it  off.  For  with  much  adoe  making  many
boords,  and  stopping  every  tyde,  it  was  the  Tuesday
following  before  wee  cleered  our  selves  of  the  bay,  and
recovered  the  Cape.  Nowe  the  land  trended  Northwest
and  by  North,  and  Southeast  and  by  South.  And  still
wee  were  faine  to  anker  every  tyde  sometimes  in  foure
fathoms,  and  sometimes  in  three,  as  farre  as  wee  could

4

THOMAS  MASHAM  ad.

1597-
see  land. So about night  wee  sawe  Cape Cecill : and  Cape  Cecil  in
after  some  two  houres  came  to  an  anker. Betweene  these  3  f^^^^^^  '^"'^
two  Capes  the  lande  lyeth  lowe  and  even.

Upon  Wednesday  morning,  having  the  winde  large
at  Eastnortheast,  wee  layd  it  away  upon  a  board  into
the  bay  of  Wiapoucou  and  came  to  an  anker  in  the
rivers  mouth  in  two  fathoms :  over  the  barre  there  is
little  water,  as  6  and  7  foote,  and  lesse  in  many  places.
And  this  river  of  Wiapoucou  standeth  almost  in  4  degrees  I'he  river  of

to  the  Northward  of  the  line.  Wiapoucou

,_,  .  J  J  J- •  •  1 almost  in  A.  ae-

L  he next  mornmg  wee  weyed,  and  standmg  m  with ^^^  jsiortk.

our  pinnesse  by  night,  wee  got  some  eight  leagues  up  the

river. This  day  sometimes  wee  had  but 5  foote  water

and  drew  7  foot, but  being soft  oaze  we  went  cleere :

and a little before wee came to anker, wee were on

ground  upon  a  rocke,  but  with  some  trouble  and  labour

wee  got  off  and  had  no  hurt.

Upon  Friday  the  4  of  March  towards  night  wee  came

to the falles. The next day M. Leonard Berrie our

captaine,  the  Master,  my  selfe  and  some  5 more,  went

through  the  woods,  and  spent  all  the  day  in  searching

the  head  of  the  falles,  but  could  not  finde  it :  for  though

wee  passed  by  many,  yet  were  there  more  still  one  above  [III.  694.]

the other. So  that  finding  no  Indians  in  this  river  to

buy  victuals of,  neither  any  kind of  thing that  might

intice us  to come to so  short  allowance,  as wee must

have  done,  if  wee  had  spent  any  long  time  here,  finding

it over hard to passe the falles, wee fell downe the

river againe, and by Friday the 11 of March wee

cleered our selves of  the river and bay. This river

from the mouth to the falles is some 16 leagues, in

many  places  a mile over, but  for  the most  part  halfe

a mile. There  are many  Islands in it :  as  are  also  in

most of  the  rivers upon the coast. This night wee

ankered  against Cawo in two fathoms  ; whereinto  wee  Cawo.

thought  to  have  put  with  our  pinnesse  :  but  found  the

water so shoald, and the sea  so growen, that neither

with  our  shippe  nor  shallope  wee  durst  goe  in.

5

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597.

On Saturday  by  noone  wee  came  to  anker  under  one
The  7  lldnds.  of  the 7 Islands  : upon which going on shoare wee
found  neither  man  nor  beast,  but  great  store  of  yellow
plumbes  which  are  good  to  eate.

Upon Sunday after dinner our Master William

Dowle  and 6 more  went  off  with  our  boat  to  a  towne

Aramatto  a called Aramatto  ;  where they found many inhabitants,

great  towne. ^^^  brought  victuals  and  some  Tabacco  with  them,  and

one  Indian  named  Caprima,  who  lying  aboord  all  night,

the  next  day  being  Munday  the  14  of  March  went  with

TheCaribesof  our Captaine into Wias, and there traded with the

Wtastractable  Caribes for  such things as they  had. And afterward

^  ^  '  they  of  Aramatto  came  off  with  their  canoas  to  us,  and

wee went on shoare to them  : and from thence our

Captaine sent a canoa with seven men, which had

every one  of  them a knife to goe  backe to the  river

of Cawo, and to tell Ritimo captaine of that place,

that  because  wee  coulde  not  come  to  him,  wee  would

Chianaa stay  at Chiana for him, whither  wee intreated him  to

rwerandbay.  ^q^q  ^q  ^s^ So  upon  Thursday  the 17  wee stoode  in

for  Chiana,  and  came  to  an anker  without in the bay

in  3  fathoms  that  night  :  and  had  the  Caribes  comming

continually  to us  with their canoas, which brought us

great store of victuals and some Tabacco, shewing

themselves  very  kinde and  loving, and came all from

their townes,  and  dwelt  on  shoare  by  us  untill  Ritimo

came  :  at  whose  comming  they  returned  all  up  to  their

townes againe, which was  upon the Sunday following.

All  this  day  we feasted him and his traine,  and the

next day we traffiqued  with them for such things as

they  brought,  which  was  principally  tabacco.

After  that  they  had  made  knowen  their  mindes  of
the  desire  that  they  had  to  have  the  English  come  and
kill  the  Spaniards,  and  to  dwell  in  Orenoque  and  in
the  countrey,  they  departed  with  their  3  canoas  the  next
day.  And  wee  with  the  helpe  of  the  Caribes  of  Chiana,
having  by  their  meanes  from  the  shoare  watered,
because the rivers mouth was salte, departed out of

6

THOMAS  MASHAM  a.d.

1597.
the  bay  the  Thursday  following,  &  passing  by  Macerea,
Couroura,  and  Manamanora,  by  reason  of  shoalds,
rockes,  and  great  windes,  beeing  a  lee  shoare  ;  and  for
want  of  a  good  shalope,  wee  came  to  an  anker  the
next  day  being  good  Friday  in  five  fathoms  neere  The
Triangle  Islands  called  The  Careres.  And  upon  The  Carenes.
Saturday  standing  to  the  Westward,  wee  stopped
against  the  towne  of  Maware,  which  is  a  little  to  the  Maware.
Westward  of  the  towne  Comanamo  :  from  whence  and
from  the  other  townes  in  that  bay,  which  are  some  6
or  7,  wee  had  canoas  come  off  to  us  as  before  with
such  things  as  they  had  themselves  in  use,  with  parrots,
monkeys,  and  cotton-wooU,  and  flaxe.  From  whence
wee  departed  upon  Munday  following  the  28  of
March 1597.

And  passing  by  the  rivers  of  Euracco  and  Amano,
which  openeth  but  a  small  river,  and  is  shoald  off,  wee
came  to  Marawinne  the  next  day  :  And  finding  a  Marawinne
chanell  of  three,  foure,  and  five  fathoms,  wee  stood  ^  '^^^'"*
into  the  river :  and  the  same  day  came  to  an  anker
some  2  leagues  in  against  the  mouth  of  Cooshepwinne,
which  river  goeth  into  Amana.  Into  which,  (under-
standing that  there  were  Arwaccawes  dwelling)  this
night  we  sent  our  boat  and  came  to  a  towne  called
Marrac  one  league  in  :  And  finding  the  people  some-  Marrac,  a
thing  pleasant,  having  drunke  much  that  day,  being  as  ^°'^^^-
it  seemed  a  festivall  day  with  them,  yet  were  they  very
fearefuU  and  ready  to  run  away  at  the  first  sight  of
us,  having  seldome  scene  any  Christian  before.  But
assoone  as  Henry  our  Indian  interpreter  had  tolde
them  what  wee  were,  and  our  intent,  they  came  to  us
and  used  us  kindely,  and  brought  us  victuals  and  other
things.  And  the  next  day  their  captaine  Mawewiron
came  out  into  Marawinne,  with  divers  canoas,  &
traded  with  us,  and  wee  went  in  againe  to  them  on
shore,  who  made  very  much  of  us,  and  carried  us  from
house  to  house,  and  made  us  eate  and  drinke  in  every
house  which  wee  came  in. And  the  next  day  following

7

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

being  the  last  of  March,  having  the  captaine  of  Marrack
with  us,  wee  weyed  and  stoode  into  the  river,  and  about
two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  came  to  an  anker
some  eight  leagues  within  the  river,  a  little  short  of  a
Quij>aria  a  towne  called  Quiparia,  the  people  whereof  are  Caribes  :
towneofthe  ^v^^o,  when  they  sawe  us  come  toward  their  towne  with
our  boate,  began  all  to  runne  into  the  woods,  untill
the  captaine  of  Marrac  which  was  with  us  in  the  boate,
leaped  overboord  and  swamme  on  shoare  unto  them,
and  told  them  that  wee  were  Englishmen,  and  came
in  friendship  to  trade  with  them.

Upon whose report  they came before night  sixe or
[III.  695.] seven canoas aboord us, yet very fearefuU, because
there was never either shippe or Christian scene in
that river before. The first of  Aprill, wee weighed
Macinia  a againe,  and  stood  in  to  the  next  towne  called  Macirria  :
towne.  where comming to anker,  there came a canoa from

Amano  to  us,  with  great  store  of  victuals,  which  canoa
wee  bought  :  and  because  wee  mette  with  some  sholds,
we  were  loath  to  goe  any  farther  with  our  Pinnesse  :  so
there  wee  mored  her,  and  the  next  day  at  three  of  the
clocke  in  the  afternoone,  eleven  of  us  (Master  Monax
having  the  government  of  the  action,  by  the  Captaines
appointment)  with  Mawerirou,  Henry,  and  William  of
Cawo,  in  the  canoa  which  we  bought,  went  into  the
river  farther  to  search  it  so  farre  as  wee  could,  and
that  night  gatte  some  five  leagues  from  our  shippe.
And  betweene  two  villages,  Awodwaier  and  Mapeributto,
we  tooke  up  our  lodging  in  the  woods.  The  third  of
Aprill,  betimes  in  the  morning,  we  tooke  our  course
still  unto  the  river,  and  in  the  afternoone  came  to  one
house  where  wee  found  many  Indians,  where  wee  hired
another  canoa  and  foure  Indians,  into  the  which  I
went,  and  one  more  of  our  men,  and  this  night  gat
twelve  leagues  farther,  and  as  before,  lodged  among
the  wilde  beastes.

On  Munday  the  fourth  of  Aprill,  wee  came  to  the  falles
of  this  river  about  two  in  the  afternoone  : and having

8

THOMAS  MASHAM  ad

1597-
shotte  up  some  of  the  rockes,  wee  went  on  shore  upon
an  island,  and  there  conferred  of  our  farther  proceeding.
And  inquiring  of  the  Indians  that  wee  hired  for  our
Pilots  of  the  last  house,  whether  the  falles  were
passable  or  not  :  their  first  answere  was,  that  they  had
nothing  to  eate  :  but  wee  being  loath  to  loose  so  much
labour,  and  the  sight  of  that  upper  rich  countrey,  ^  ^'^i^h
which  wee  desired,  told  them  that  they  should  have  '^°^^^^'n-
victuals  of  us  (though  God  knoweth  wee  had  none  for
our  selves)  who  seeing  us  so  importunate,  sayde  farther,
that  the  rockes  would  kill  the  canoas  :  which  they  sayde
because  indeed  they  had  no  victuals  :  which  by  some
was  taken  for  sufficient  to  proceede  no  farther,  and  so
wee  left  off,  and  onely  stayed  some  two  houres  upon
the  Island,  and  with  the  swiftnesse  of  the  current,  fell
that  night  downe  lo  leagues  againe.  Though  I  for
mine  owne  part  offered  in  that  small  canoa  that  I  was
in,  being  so  leake,  that  my  selfe  did  nothing  but  lave
out  the  water,  to  lead  them  the  way,  and  if  they  sawe
any  danger  to  mee,  they  might  chuse  whether  they
would  come  into  it  or  not  themselves.

For  seeing  the  countrey  above  was  rich  as  wee  were
informed,  that  their  bowes  were  handled  with  golde,  Boms  handled
(being  men  of  an  extraordinarie  stature  for  talnes)  wee  ^^  ^
should  have  taken  the  more  paines,  and  have  fared  the
harder,  untill  wee  had  gotten  up  in  the  countrey  which
wee  sawe  with  our  eyes  :  for  though  wee  had  not
victuals  in  any  sort  to  cary  us  up,  yet  the  woods  doe
yeld  fruites  and  the  palmito  trees  afforde  meate,
whereby  wee  might  have  made  shift  to  live,  untill  wee
had  come  to  the  inhabitants,  by  whome  we  might  both
bee  refreshed  with  victuals,  and  also  have  reaped  that,
which  might  have  done  us  good  as  long  as  wee  had
lived.

But  to  returne  to  the  rest  of  our  voyage  :  the  day
after  wee  went  from  the  falles  wee  came  to  our  shippe,
which  was  the  fifth  of  Aprill  1597.  On  Wednesday
wee fell  with our  Finn  esse  to  Quiparia  againe  : where

9

A.D.

^597-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Pitch  to  trim
shippes.

The  river  of
Cusse-zoinne.

we  brought  her  on  ground  right  before  the  town,  and
trimmed  her  with  the  pitch  of  the  countrey  :  and  untill
wee  had  done,  kept  a  corps  du  guard,  night  and  day
on  shore,  which  was  upon  Saturday  following  the  ninth
of  Aprill.  All  the  while  we  were  there  we  had  an
house  of  the  Caribes,  and  were  kindely  used  of  them,
and  had  victuals,  and  every  thing  we  needed  of  them.
And  so  taking  our  leave  on  Tuesday  being  the
twelfth  of  Aprill,  wee  came  to  the  mouth  of  Cusse-
winne,  where  the  Arwaccas  of  Marrac  and  of  the  river  had
provided  and  brought  to  us  such  infinite  store  of  potatoes,
and  Guiney-wheate,  that  the  stewarde  sayd  wee  had  no
stowage  for  them  ;  and  so  they  were  turned  backe,  and
wee  by  that  meanes  came  to  shorter  allowance  home  ward
bound,  then  (if  there  had  bene  any  good  care)  wee
needed  to  have  done.

On Fryday the fifteeneth  of  Aprill,  wee  put foorth

Marawinne.  of  Marawinne,  which  is  some  foure  leagues  over,  and
within  one  league  and  an  halfe  for  the  most  part  broad  ;
full  of  islands,  and  divers  small  rivers  running  into  it :  and
it  is  betweene  forty  and  fifty  leagues,  from  the  mouth  to
the  falles,  and  lyeth  for  the  most  part  South  Southwest
up,  altering  some  3  poynts,  being  almost  streight.  And
standing  along  to  the  Westward,  this  night  we  tryed  with
our  mayne  coarse  and  bonnet.  On  Saturday  night  we
came  to  an  anker,  in  three  fathomes  against  Sewramo.
On  Sunday  morning  we  thought  to  have  gone  into  Cuppa-
namo :  but  sending  ofF  our  boat  &  finding  uncertaine
sounding,  sometimes  3  fathomes  and  presently  9  foote,
we  stood  along  to  Coritine,  and  came  into  it  upon  the
Munday  being  the  1 8  of  Aprill :  and  the  next  night  wee
came  to  anker  against  Warrawalle  in  10  fathoms.  On
Wednesday  the  Indians  of  the  towne  having  hunted  a
Doe,  shee  tooke  soyle  &  came  neer  our  ship,  and  putting
off  with  our  boat  we  tooke  her,  being  like  unto  our  deere
in  England,  not  altogether  so  fat,  but  very  good  flesh  and

[III.  696.]  great  bodied.  In  this  river  we  met  a  Barke  called  the
John  of  London  captaine  Leigh  being  in  her. And  being

Sewramo.

Coritine
river.

THOMAS  MASHAM  a.d.

1597-
both  fallen  downe  within  some  five  leagues  of  the  mouth
of  the  river,  upon  intelligence  that  one  Marracon,  (whom
wee  brought  along  with  us)  gave  us,  namely  that  the
river  Desekebe,  in  which  he  dwelt  (and  wherein  there
were  some  three  hundred  Spaniards,  which  for  the  most
part  now  are  destroyed  and  dead)  doeth  lead  so  farre
into  the  countrey,  that  it  commeth  within  a  dayes  journey
of  the  lake  called  Perima,  whereupon  Manoa  is  supposed  The  great  Me
to  stand  ;  and  that  this  river  of  Coritine  doeth  meete  with  P^^^^^-
Desekebe  up  in  the  land :  by  meanes  whereof  wee  make
account  to  goe  up  into  the  countrey,  and  to  have  dis-
covered a  passage  unto  that  rich  citie.  So  having  con-
cluded both  shippes,  we  stood  up  into  the  river  againe,
and  comming  to  Warawalle  the  24  of  Aprill  there  our
shippes  roade  untill  we  went  up  to  Mawranamo  to  speake
with  Marracon,  to  know  the  trueth  of  these  things :
whom  when  we  had  found,  he  verified  al  that  before
he  had  spoken  :  Master  Monax  being  the  man  that  of
Leonard  of  Cawe  tooke  all  the  intelligence :  who  being
brought  up  with  Antonie  Berreo  could  speak  some
Spanish  and  Marracons  language  also.  And  besides  wee
our  selves  by  signes,  and  drawing  the  two  rivers  on  the
ground,  and  the  meeting  of  them  aloft,  did  perceive
as much. Now  comming downe with  our boates the  They  bring

sixe  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  we  went  up  with  our  ships  to  ^^"'  ^^^PP^'

.  up  to  the

Mawranama,  where  wee morred  them,  and  taking  some  Mawranamo.

twentie out of  both,  upon Thursday the eight and

twentieth  in  the  afternoone with  two  shallops  and two

Canoas,  in  one  of  which  Henry  the  Indian  was  and  some

twentie Indians more,  wee  went up the  river ;  and by

night getting some three leagues farther wee lodged

in  the  woods,  and  the  next  morning  wee  with  our  boate

and the two Canoas went into a small river called

Tapuere,  to  a  towne  called  Macharibi,  thinking  to have

had  Casavi  and  other  victuals,  which  they  were  altogether

unprovided  of,  by  reason  that  they  make  no  more  ready

then  serveth  themselves  from  hand  to  mouth,  living  in

this  towne  for  the  most  part  by  fish. By  meanes  of  going

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

into  this  river,  though  wee  rowed  very  hard  it  was  noone
before  wee  overtooke  the  bigger  shallop  wherein  both  the
Captaines  were.  This  night  we  came  to  a  towne  called
Vaperon,  where  wee  stayed  all  Saturday  and  the  night
following,  for  Casavi:  whereof  they  baked  good  store
for  us  being  but  a  fewe  left  in  the  towne.  For  not
a  moneth  before  wee  came  thither,  the  Waccawaes
that  dwell  above  the  falles  came  downe  to  the
towne,  and  slewe  some  tenne  of  them,  and  many
of  the  rest  fled  away,  so  that  wee  found  most  of  the
houses  emptie.  Upon  Sunday  morning  being  May  day,
wee  went  from  this  place,  and  by  night  gotte  some  twelve
leagues  beyond,  and  being  past  all  townes  wee  lodged
as  before  in  the  woods,  and  the  next  day  came  to  the
falles  of  the  river ;  up  some  of  which  falles  we  shotte  with
our  boates,  and  going  upon  a  rocke  there  came  some  nine
canoas  up  the  river  to  us,  and  would  have  gone  up  with  us
to  kill  the  Waccawayans,  because  they  had  killed  some  of
them,  as  before  is  said.  Whereupon  the  Captaines  and
Master  Monax  tooke  advise :  and  because  nowe  they  had
learned,  as  they  sayde,  that  five  dayes  journey  farther
there  was  a  fall  not  passable,  and  that  by  this  meanes  they
should  make  the  Wacchawayans  their  enemies,  which
would  turne  to  our  great  hurt,  when  Sir  Walter  Ralegh
should  come  thither,  having  occasion  to  use  this  river,
where  wee  were  informed  was  good  store  of  golde,  they
resolved  to  returne,  though  I  yeelded  divers  reasons  to  the
contrary.  So  upon  Tuseday  night,  we  came  backe  to
Vaperon,  where  we  lodged.

And  upon  Wednesday  the  fourth  of  May,  wee  came  to
our  shippes  :  where  it  was  reported  that  the  Spaniardes  were
gonne  out  of  Desekebe,  which  was  not  so :  but  as  it
seemed  in  policie  by  them  given  out  to  make  our  men
that  wee  left  in  our  shippes  more  carelesse,  that  they
might  the  easier  have  surprised  them  in  our  absence.
The  next  night  wee  had  newes  brought  us  to  Mawranamo,
where  we  yet  roade,  that  there  were  tenne  canoas  of
Spaniardes  in  the  mouth  of  Coritine ;  and  fearing  lest  they

THOMAS  MASHAM  a.d.

1597-
had  intended  to  come  to  us  in  the  night,  we  fitted  all  our
gunnes  and  muskets,  and  kept  good  watch  to  prevent
them  of  their  purpose ;  who,  as  it  was  afterwarde  tolde
us,  went  along  the  coast  to  buy  bread  and  other  victuals
for  them  in  Orenoque,  Marowgo,  and  Desekebe.  Upon
Fryday  the  sixth  of  May  we  weighed  and  made  downe
the  river,  and  upon  Sunday  the  eighth  we  gat  cleare
of  it.

This  river  is  much  like  unto  Marawynne  in  bredth,
and  about  fiftie  leagues  from  the  mouth  to  the  first  falles,
full  of  Islandes  as  the  other :  in  which  three  rivers,  Mano,
Tapuere,  and  Tabuebbi,  otherwise  Tapuellibi:  with  sixe
Townes,  Warrawalle,  Mawranamo,  Maapuere,  Maccha-
ribi,  Yohoron,  and  Vaperon.  And  so  clering  our  selves
of  this  coast,  wee  tooke  our  course  to  the  Islands  of  the
West  Indies.

Now  I  thinke  it  not  amisse  to  speak  something  of  this
countrey.  And  first  touching  the  climate ;  though  it
stand  within  the  Tropick,  and  something  neere  to  the
Equinoctial,  so  that  the  Sunne  is  twise  a  yeere  over  their
heads  &  never  far  from  them,  yet  is  it  temperate  ynough
in  those  partes.  For  besides  that  wee  lost  not  a  man  [III.  697.]
upon  the  coast,  one  that  was  sicke  before  hee  came  there,
was  nothing  sicker  for  being  there,  but  came  home  safe,
thanks  be  to  God.  And  for  mine  owne  part,  I  was  never
better  in  body  in  all  my  life,  and  in  like  sort  fared  it  with
the  rest  of  the  company:  for  indeed  it  is  not  so  extreame
hote  as  many  imagine.  The  people  in  all  the  lower  parts
of  the  countrey  goe  naked,  both  men  and  women,  being
of  severall  languages,  very  tractable,  and  ingenious,  and
very  loving  and  kinde  to  Englishmen  generally;  as  by
experience  we  found,  and  upon  our  owne  knowledge  doe
report.  In  the  upper  countreys  they  goe  apparelled,
being,  as  it  seemeth,  of  a  more  civill  disposition,  having
great  store  of  golde,  as  we  are  certeinely  informed  by  the  Great  store
lower  Indians,  of  whom  we  had  some  golde,  which  they  ^fs"^^^  ^"
brought  and  bought  in  the  high  countrey  .of  Wiana,  being
able to buy no  more,  because they  wanted the things

13

A.D.

1597-

Passing  good
drinke  made
of  maiz.

The  commodi-
ties ofWiana.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  now  wee  have  left  among  them.  They  keepe  no
order  of  marriage ;  but  have  as  many  wives  as  they
can  buy,  or  win  by  force  of  their  enemies,  which  princi-
pally is  the  cause  of  all  their  warres.  For  bread  there  is
infinite  store  of  casavi,  which  is  as  good  bread  as  a  man
need  to  eate,  and  better  then  we  can  cary  any  thither.
We  spent  not  a  bit  of  our  owne  all  the  while  we  were
upon  the  coast.  It  is  made  of  a  root  so  called ;  which
they  take  and  scrape,  and  crush  all  the  juyce  out,  being
poison ;  and  when  it  is  drie  it  is  as  fine  floure  as  our  white
meale  maketh :  which  dry  as  it  is,  without  any  moisture,
they  strew  upon  a  round  stone,  having  a  still  fire  under
it,  and  so  it  congealeth  to  a  cake ;  and  when  it  commeth
new  off,  it  eateth  like  to  our  new  white  bread.  Besides
there  is  great  store  of  Guiny-Wheat  (whereof  they  make
passing  good  drinke)  which  after  it  is  once  sowed,  if  you
cut  off  the  eare,  on  the  same  stalke  groweth  another.

For  victuals,  wee  either  did  not,  or  at  least  needed  not
to  have  spent  any  of  our  owne :  for  there  is  great  store  of
as  good  fish  in  the  rivers,  as  any  is  in  the  world.  Great
store  of  fowle,  of  divers  sorts.  Tortoise-flesh  plentifuU,
and  Tortoises  egges  innumerable.  Deere,  swine,  conies,
hares,  cockes  and  hennes,  with  potatoes  more  then  wee
could  spend.  Besides,  all  kinde  of  fruits,  at  all  times  of
the  yeere :  and  the  rarest  fruits  of  the  world,  the  pine,  the
plantan,  with  infinite  other  variable  and  pleasant,  growing
to  their  handes,  without  planting  or  dressing.  For  com-
modities, though  wee  had  but  small  time  to  search,  because
wee  spent  so  much  time  in  searching  the  rivers :  yet  wee
have  brought  examples  of  some,  which  the  countrey
yeeldeth  in  great  plenty :  as  a  kinde  of  long  hempe  like
unto  Steele  hempe,  fine  cotton  wooll,  which  the  trees
yeeld  great  store  of;  and  wherewith  the  wom^en  make  a
fine  threed,  which  will  make  excellent  good  fustians  or
stockings.  Great  store  of  pitch,  divers  sorts  of  sweet
gummes,  &  West  Indian  pepper,  balsamum,  parrots  and
monkies.  Besides  divers  other  commodities,  which  in
good time may be found out to the benefit of  our

14

THOMAS  MASHAM  ad

1597-
countrey, and profit of  the adventurers, who as yet
having  ventured  much,  have  gained  litle.

Now  leaving  the  river  of  Coritine,  passing  by  Saint
Vincent,  Santa  Lucia,  and  Matalina,  we  came  to  Dominica
upon  the  Friday  following,  being  the  thirteenth  of  May,
having  lost  the  barke  that  came  out  with  us  the  Wednes-  ^'^0'  ^'^^^  '^^P-
day  before.  Upon  Sunday  morning,  the  fifteenth  of  ^fj^^ffi '"
May,  we  came  to  Guadalupe,  where  wee  watered  at  lofidon.
the  Souther  part  of  the  Island,  and  having  done  by
night,  we  set  saile,  and  stood  away  to  the  Northward,
but  were  becalmed  all  night,  and  untill  tenne  of  the
clocke  on  Munday  night :  at  which  time  having  a  faire
gale  at  East,  and  after  at  Southeast,  wee  passed  along
in  the  sight  of  Monserate,  Antigua,  and  Barbuda,  Upon
the  ninth  of  June,  being  Thursday,  we  made  the  Islands
of  Flores  and  Corvo :  and  the  eight  and  twentieth  of
June  we  made  the  Lisart,  and  that  night  came  all  safe
to  Plymmouth,  blessed  be  God.

Betweene  the  Isle  of  Barbuda  in  the  West  Indies  and
England  we  had  three  mighty  stormes,  many  calmes,  and
some  contrary  windes.  And  upon  the  foureteenth  of
June  1597,  there  being  divers  whales  playing  about
our  pinnesse,  one  of  them  crossed  our  stemme,  and
going  under,  rubbed  her  backe  against  our  keele :  but
by  none  of  all  these  we  susteined  any  losse.  Thanks
be  to  him  that  governeth  all  things.

Written  by  Master

Thomas  Masham.

[Certaine  briefe
15

A.D.
1590.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[III.  698.] CERTAINE  BRIEFE  TESTIMONIES

Concerning the  mightie River of  Amazones or

Orellana,  and  of  the  most  wonderfull  downefall  or

cataract  of  waters  at  the  head  thereof,  named  by

the Spaniards El Pongo : together with  some

mention of  the rich and  stately empire of

Dorado,  called  by  Sir  Walter  Ralegh  and

the natural inhabitants Guiana, and of

the  golden  countrey  of  Paytity  neere

adjoyning, with other memorable

matters : taken out of  Josephus

de Acosta his naturall and

morall  historic  of  the  West

Indies.

The  first Testimonie  out  of  Josephus de  Acosta,
lib. 2. cap. 6.

Ut  when  we  intreat  of  Rivers,  that  which

some men call the river of  Amazones,

others Marannon, others the river of

Orellana,  doeth  justly put  to  silence  all

the rest, whereunto our  Spaniards have

gone  and  sayled. And  I  stand  in  doubt,

whether I may  cal  it a river or a sea.

This river  runneth  from  the mountaines  of  Piru,  from

which  it  gathereth  infinite  store  of  waters,  of  raine,  and

rivers,  which  runneth  along,  gathering  it  selfe  together,

and passing through the great fieldes and plaines of

Paytiti, of  Dorado,  and  of  the Amazones,  and falleth

at  length  into  the  Ocean  sea,  and  entreth  into  it  almost

over  against  the  Isles  of  Margarita  and  Trinidad. But

it  groweth  so  broad,  especially  towardes  the  mouth,  that  it

maketh  in the  middest  many  and  great  Isles  :  and  that

which seemeth  incredible, sayling  in the middle chanel

16

TESTIMONIES OF THE AMAZON  a.d.

1590.

of  the  river,  men  can  see  nothing  but  the  skie  and  the
river,  although  men  say  that  there  are  hilles  neere  the
bankes  thereof,  which  can  not  be  kenned,  through  the
greatnesse  of  the  River.  Wee  understood  by  very  good
meanes  the  wonderful!  bredth  and  largenesse  of  this
River,  which  justly  may  bee  called  the  Emperour  of
Rivers,  to  wit  by  a  brother  of  our  companie,  which
being  a  boy  was  there,  &  sayled  it  wholy  through,  being
personally  present  in  all  the  successes  of  that  strange
enterance,  which  Pedro  de  Orsua  made,  and  in  the
mutinies  and  perilous  conspiracies  of  that  wicked  Diego
de  Aguirre,  out  of  all  which  troubles  and  dangers  the
Lord  delivered  him,  to  make  him  one  of  our  societie.

The  second  Testimonie  out  of  Josephus  de
Acosta,  lib. 3.  cap. 20.

AMong  all  the  rivers  not  onely  of  the  West  Indies
but  also  of  the  whole  world,  the  chief  is  the  River
of  Marannon  or  of  the  Amazones,  whereof  I  have  spoken
in  the  second  booke.  The  Spaniards  have  divers  times
sayled  along  this  river,  with  determination  to  discover
countries,  which,  according  to  report,  are  of  great  riches,
especially  that  which  they  call  Dorado,  and  Paytiti.  The
Adelantado  or  admirall  Juan  de  Salinas  made  a  very
notable  entrance,  although  to  small  profite.  It  hath
a  salt  or  fall  of  water  which  they  call  El  Pongo,  which  El  Pongo.
is  one  of  the  most  dangerous  places  in  the  world :  for
being  restrained  betweene  two  exceeding  hie  devided
mountaines,  it  maketh  a  fall  of  terrible  depth  where  the
water  with  the  great  descent  maketh  such  whirlepooles
that  it  seemeth  impossible  but  that  it  should  sinke  it  self
there  into  the  ground.  For  all  this  the  boldnes  of  men
hath  attempted  to  passe  the  said  El  Pongo  for  the
greedines  to  come  to  that  so  famous  renowmed  Dorado.
They  suffered  themselves  to  bee  caryed  from  aloft,  being
throwne  downe  headlong  with  the  furie  of  the  river,  and
sitting  fast  in  their  Canoas  or  boats  in  which  they  sayled,
although  they  were  overturned  in  the  fal,  and  they  and
XI  17  B

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1590.

their  Canoas  suncke  downe  to  the  bottome,  yet  they  rose
up  againe  above  the  water,  and  at  length  with  their  hands
and  force  gat  out  of  the  whirlepooles.  The  whole  army
in  a  maner  escaped,  saving  a  very  fewe  which  were
drowned :  and  which  I  most  marvel  at,  they  handled
the  matter  so  well,  that  they  lost  not  their  victuals
and  powder  which  they  caryed  with  them.  In  their
returne  (for  after  great  travels  and  dangers  they  returned
that  way  againe)  they  clymed  up  over  one  of  those  afore-
saide  exceeding  high  mountaines,  creeping  up  upon
their  hands  and  feete.

Captaine  Pedro  de  Orsua  made  another  enterance  by
the  selfe  same  river,  and  after  hee  was  slaine  by  a  mutinie
of  his  people,  other  captaines  followed  the  discoverie,
by  the  arme  that  falleth  into  the  North  Sea.  One
of  our  companie  told  me  (who  while  he  was  a  secular
man  was  in  al  that  expedition)  that  they  entred  up  the
River  almost  an  hundred  leagues  with  the  tydes,  and
that  when  the  fresh  water  &  the  salt  meeteth,  which  is
either  almost  under  or  very  neere  the  Equinoctial  line,
the  river  is  70  leagues  broad,  a  thing  incredible,  and
which  exceedeth  the  breadth  of  the  Mediterran  sea.
Howbeit  other  in  their  descriptions  make  it  not  past
25  or  30  leagues  broad  at  the  mouth.

[III.  699.]  The  third  Testimonie  out  of  Josephus  de

Acosta,  lib. 3.  cap. 25.

N  that  part  of  America,  whereof  the  coasts  be
throughly  known,  the  greater  part  of  the  Inland  is
not  knowen,  which  is  that  which  falleth  betweene  Piru
and  Brasil,  and  there  are  divers  opinions  of  some,  which
say,  that  it  is  all  sunken  land  full  of  lakes  and  bogges,
and  of  others,  which  afErme  that  there  are  great  and
florishing  kingdomes  there,  and  there  they  place  the
Countrey  of  Paytity,  and  Dorado,  and  great  Emperours,
and  say,  that  there  are  wonderfuU  things  there.  I  heard
of  one  of  our  companie  my  selfe,  a  man  of  credite,
that hee had seene great townes, and  high wayes as

I

TESTIMONIES OF  THE  AMAZON

broad  and  as  much  beaten,  as  the  wayes  betweene
Salamanca  and  Validolid :  and  this  was  when  the  great
entrance  or  discoverie  was  made  by  the  great  river  of
the  Amazones  or  Marannon  by  Pedro  de  Orsua,  and
afterwardes  by  others  that  succeeded  him :  and  they
supposing  that  Dorado  which  they  sought,  was  farther
up  in  the  countrey,  did  not  inhabite  there,  and  afterward
returned  without  discovering  Dorado  (which  they  never
found)  and  without  that  great  province  which  they  left.

A  short  description  of  the  river  of  Marannon
or  Amazones,  and  the  Countries  thereabout,
as  also  of  the  sea  of  Fresh-water,  taken  out  of
an  ancient  Discourse  of  all  the  Portes,  Creekes,
and  Havens  of  the  West  Indies,  Written  by
Martin  Fernandez  de  Enciza,  and  dedicated
to  Charles  the  Emperour,  Anno 1518.

Arannon  lyeth  in  seven  degrees  and  an
halfe  Northward  of  the  Equinoctial,  it
is  a  great  river,  and  hath  more  then
fifteene  leagues  in  bredth  eight  leagues
within  the  land.  It  hath  many  islands,
and  in  this  river  within  the  land  fortie
leagues  there  is  neere  to  the  sayde  river
a  mountaine,  whereupon  growe  trees  of  Incense,  the
trees  be  of  a  good  height,  &  the  boughs  thereof  be
like  to  Plumtrees,  and  the  Incense  doeth  hang  at  them,
as  the  yce  doeth  at  the  tiles  of  a  house  in  the  winter
season  when  it  doeth  freeze.  In  this  river  were  taken
foure  Indians  in  a  smal  boat,  called  in  the  Indian  lan-
guage a  Canoa,  that  came  downe  by  the  river,  and
there  were  taken  from  them  two  stones  of  Emeralds,
the  one  of  them  being  as  great  as  a  mans  hand.  They
sayd  that  so  many  dayes  journey  going  upward  by  the
river,  they  found  a  rocke  of  that  stone.  Likewise
there  were  taken  from  them  two  loaves  made  of  floure,
which  were  like  to  cakes  of  Sope,  and  it  seemed  that

19

A.D.
I518.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1518.

they  were  kneaded  with  the  licour  of  Balsamum.  All
this  coast  from  the  Cape  of  S.  Austine  unto  Marannon
is  a  cleare  coast  &  deep,  but  neer  to  the  river  are
certaine  sholds  towardes  the  East  part.  And  by  the
West  part  the  river  is  deepe,  and  it  hath  a  good  entrie.
From  this  river  Marannon,  unto  the  river  which  is
called  The  sea  of  fresh  water,  are  25  leagues:  this
river  hath  40  leagues  of  bredth  at  the  mouth,  and
carieth  such  abundance  of  water  that  it  entreth  more
then  20  leagues  into  the  Sea,  and  mingleth  not  it  selfe
with  the  salt  water:  this  bredth  goeth  25  leagues
within  the  land,  and  after  it  is  devided  into  partes,
the  one  going  towards  the  Southeast,  and  the  other
towards  the  Southwest.  That  which  goeth  towards
the  Southeast  is  very  deepe  and  of  much  water,  and
hath  a  chanel  half  a  league  of  bredth,  that  a  Carack
may  goe  up  through  it :  &  the  tydes  be  so  swift,  that
the  ships  have  need  of  good  cables.  The  river  of  this
port  is  very  good,  and  there  have  bene  some  that  have
entred  50  leagues  within  it,  &  have  scene  no  moun-
taines.  The  Indians  of  this  countrey  have  their  lips
made  full  of  small  holes  in  4  parts,  &  through  those
holes  be  put  small  rings,  and  likewise  at  their  eares :
&  if  any  man  aske  of  them  where  they  had  their  gold,
they  answere,  that  going  up  by  the  river  so  many  dayes
journey,  they  found  certaine  mountaines  that  had  much
of  it,  and  from  those  mountaines  they  brought  it  when
they  would  have  it,  but  they  made  no  great  account  of
it,  for  they  neither  buy  nor  sell,  and  amongst  them  is
nothing  but  change.  In  this  countery  they  eate  bread  of
rootes,  and  Maiz,  and  they  eate  certaine  rootes  which
they  call  Aies  and  Batatas,  but  the  Batatas  bee  better
then  the  other  rootes,  and  being  rawe  they  have  a  smell
of  Chestnuts :  they  are  to  be  eaten  rosted.  These
Indians  doe  make  wine  of  the  fruit  of  Date-trees,
which  fruit  is  yellow  in  colour,  and  is  as  great  as  a
little  Doves  egge,  and  being  in  season  is  good  to  be
eaten,  and  of  it  proceedeth  good  wine,  and  is  preserved

TESTIMONIES OF  THE AMAZON  a.d.

1518.

for  a  long  time.  These  kinde  of  people  do  make  their
houses  with  upper  roomes,  and  they  sleepe  in  them,  as
also  al  their  habitation  is  in  the  upper  roomes,  and  that
which  is  belowe,  they  leave  open :  and  also  they  use
certaine  mantels  of  cotten  wooU,  and  these  they  tie  at
the  endes  with  ropes,  and  the  one  ende  of  the  rope
they  make  fast  to  one  part  of  the  house,  and  the  other
ende  to  the  other  part  of  the  house:  and  in  these  they
lye,  which  bee  their  beddes,  and  these  kinde  of  beds
bee  used  in  all  India,  and  there  is  not  in  any  part  of
India  any  chambers  that  the  people  do  use  to  lodge  in
aloft  from  the  ground,  nor  they  make  any  hie  roomes,
but  only  in  this  part  of  India:  &  in  al  other  places
they  make  their  houses  without  any  loftes  or  chambers,
and  they  cover  their  houses  with  the  leaves  of  date-
trees,  and  of  grasse.  And  from  this  fresh  water  sea  [III.  700.]
unto  Paria,  the  coast  lyeth  West  Northwest,  and  is  so
ful  of  sholds  that  the  ships  cannot  come  neer  to  the
land.  There  are  from  this  river  to  Paria  250  leagues.
In  this  fresh  water  sea,  the  tydes  do  ebbe  &  flow  as
much  as  they  do  in  Britayne,  and  it  standeth  in  6  de-
grees and  a  halfe.  Paria  standeth  on  the  other  side  of
the  Equinoctial  toward  the  North,  in  seven  degrees:
In  Paria  the  sea  floweth  but  little,  and  from  Paria
towards  the  West,  the  sea  doth  not  flow.  From  the
entry  of  the  gulfe  of  Paria  unto  the  Cape  that  lyeth
towards  the  West,  are  2S  leagues,  and  from  thence  the
coast  turneth  towardes  the  Northeast  other  35  leagues,
&  from  thence  the  coast  turneth  toward  the  West.
Before  this  gulfe  standeth  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  and
towards  the  West  doeth  appeare  the  gulfe  of  Paria  like
to  halfe  a  round  circle,  after  the  fashion  of  a  Diameter,
and  at  the  end  of  this  circle  is  the  entery  in  of  Paria,
&  at  this  entery  there  is  betweene  the  land  and  the
Island  8  leagues,  and  on  the  other  side  there  is  but
litle  space  betweene  the  Hand  and  the  land,  but  it  is
deepe,  and  hath  a  good  entry :  this  Hand  of  Trinidad
hath  in  length  25  leagues,  and  as  many  in  bredth,  and

21

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1518.

standeth  in  eight  degrees,  and  is  inhabited  of  many-
people,  and  as  yet  not  under  subjection.  Here  the
Indians  do  use  to  shoote  with  bowes  and  arrowes
which  are  of  a  fathome  in  length,  made  of  reeds,
which  grow  in  that  Countrey,  and  at  the  ende  of  them
is  artificially  joyned  a  piece  of  wood  very  strong,  unto
the  which  piece  of  wood  at  the  end  of  it,  they  put  a
bone  of  a  fish,  in  place  of  an  arrow  head :  these  kinde
of  bones  bee  harder  then  Diamonds,  and  every  one  of
them  be  three  or  foure  fingers  long,  &  they  are  taken
out  of  a  fish  that  hath  three  of  these  bones,  one  upon
the  backe,  another  under  every  wing:  but  that  which
groweth  upon  the  backe  is  the  strongest  and  the
greatest.  In  this  Island  the  people  saith  that  there
groweth  golde :  and  in  this  Island  and  in  Paria  growe
reedes  so  great,  that  they  make  staves  of  them  and
cary  of  them  into  Spaine.  Likewise  there  bee  Popin-
jayes  very  great  and  gentle,  and  some  of  them  have
their  foreheads  yellow,  and  this  sort  do  quickly  learne
to  speak,  and  speak  much.  There  be  likewise  in  the
gulfe  of  Paria  pearles,  although  not  many,  but  very
good  and  great.

22

WILLIAM  HAWKINS  a.d.

1530-32.

CERTAINE VOYAGES

Navigations and traffiques both ancient and of
late, to divers places upon the coast of  Brasil:
together with a Ruttier for  all that  coast,  and
two intercepted letters which reveale many-
secrets of the state of that counterv: the
rest  of  our  voyages  to Brasil  which  have
bene either intended or performed to
the River of Plate,  the Streight  of
Magellan,  the South Sea,  or far-
ther that way, being reserved
for the generall heades next
insuing.

A  brief  relation  of  two  sundry  voyages  made  by
the  worshipful  M.  William  Haukins  of  Plim-
mouth,  father  to  Sir  John  Haukins  knight,  late
Treasurer  of  her  Majesties  Navie,  in  the
yeere 1530  and 1532.

Lde  M.  William  Haukins  of  Plimmouth,
a  man  for  his  wisedome,  valure,  experi-
ence, and  skill  in  sea  causes  much  es-
teemed, and  beloved  of  K.  Henry  the
8,  and  being  one  of  the  principall  Sea-
captaines  in  the  West  parts  of  England
in  his  time,  not  contented  with  the
short  voyages  commonly  then  made  onely  to  the
knowne  coasts  of  Europe,  armed  out  a  tall  and  goodly
shippe  of  his  owne  of  the  burthen  of  250  tunnes,
called  the  Paule  of  Plimmouth,  wherwith  he  made  three
long  and  famous  voyages  unto  the  coast  of  Brasil,  a
thing  in  those  dayes  very  rare,  especially  to  our  Nation.
In  the  course  of  which  voyages  he  touched  at  the  river
of  Sestos  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea,  where  hee  traffiqued

23

A.D.

1530-32.

The  second
voyage  of  M.
William
Haukins  to
Brasil.
A  king  of
Brasil
brought  into
England.

[III.  701.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

with  the  Negros,  and  tooke  of  them  Elephants  teeth,
and  other  commodities  which  that  place  yeeldeth :  and
so  arriving  on  the  coast  of  Brasil,  he  used  there  such
discretion,  and  behaved  himself  so  wisely  with  those
savage  people,  that  he  grew  into  great  familiarity  and
friendship  with  them.  Insomuch  that  in  his  second
voyage,  one  of  the  savage  kings  of  the  countrey  of
Brasil,  was  contented  to  take  ship  with  him,  and  to  be
transported  hither  into  England :  whereunto  M.  Haukins
agreed,  leaving  behinde  in  the  Countery  as  a  pledge  for
his  safetie  and  returne  againe,  one  Martin  Cockeram  of
Plimmouth.  This  Brasilian  king  being  arrived,  was
brought  up  to  London  and  presented  to  K.  Henry
the  8,  lying  as  then  at  White-hall:  at  the  sight  of
whom  the  King  and  all  the  Nobilitie  did  not  a  litle
marvaile,  and  not  without  cause :  for  in  his  cheekes
were  holes  made  according  to  their  savage  maner,  and
therein  small  bones  were  planted,  standing  an  inch  out
from  the  said  holes,  which  in  his  owne  Countrey  was
reputed  for  a  great  braverie.  He  had  also  another
hole  in  his  nether  lip,  wherein  was  set  a  precious
stone  about  the  bignes  of  a  pease  :  All  his  apparel,
behaviour,  and  gesture,  were  very  strange  to  the
beholders.

Having  remained  here  the  space  almost  of  a  whole
yeere,  and  the  king  with  his  sight  fully  satisfied,  M.
Hawkins  according  to  his  promise  and  appointment,
purposed  to  convey  him  againe  into  his  countrey :  but
it  fell  out  in  the  way,  that  by  change  of  aire  and
alteration  of  diet,  the  said  Savage  king  died  at  sea,
which  was  feared  would  turn  to  the  losse  of  the
life  of  Martin  Cockeram  his  pledge.  Neverthelesse,
the  Savages  being  fully  perswaded  of  the  honest  deal-
ing of  our  men  with  their  prince,  restored  againe  the
said  pledge,  without  any  harme  to  him,  or  any  man
of  the  company:  which  pledge  of  theirs  they  brought
home  againe  into  England,  with  their  ship  fraighted,
and furnished with the commodities  of the countrey.

24

A.D.

1540-42.

KENIGER, BOREY  AND PUDSEY

Which  Martin  Cockeram,  by  the  witnesse  of  Sir  John
Hawkins,  being  an  officer  in  the  towne  of  Plimmouth,
was  living  within  these  fewe  yeeres.

An  ancient  voyage  of  M.  Robert  Reniger  and
M.  Thomas  Borey  to  Brasil  in  the  yeere  of
our  Lord  1540.

Have  bene  certainly  informed  by  M.
Anthony  Garrard  an  ancient  and  wor-
shipfuU  marchant  of  the  citie  of
London,  that  this  commodious  and
gainefuU  voyage  to  Brasil  was  ordi-
narily and  usually  frequented  by  M.
Robert  Reniger,  M.  Thomas  Borey,
and  divers  other  substantial  and  wealthie  marchants  of
Southampton,  about  60.  yeeres  past,  that  is  to  say  in
the  yeere  1540.

A  voyage  of  one  Pudsey  to  Baya  in  Brasil
anno 1 542.

Lso  the  worshipfull  M.  Edward  Cotton
of  Southampton  Esquire  gave  mee
more  particularly  to  understand,  how
that  one  Pudsey  of  Southampton,  a
man  of  good  skill  and  resolution  in
marine  causes,  made  a  voyage  in  like
maner  62.  yeeres  agoe  to  Baya  de
todos  los  Santos  the  principall  towne  of  all  Brasil,
and  the  seate  of  the  Portugal  vice-roy  and  of  the
bishop,  and  that  he  built  a  fort  not  farre  distant  from  A  fort  built
that  place,  in  the  foresaid  yeere 1542.  lh^En[^h

[A  letter

25

A.D.
1578.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  letter  written  to  M.  Richard  Staper  by  John
Whithal  from  Santos  in  Brasil,  the  26.  of
June 1578.

Orshipfull  sir,  and  welbeloved  friend  M.
Staper,  I  have  me  most  heartily  com-
mended unto  you,  wishing  your  health
even  as  mine  owne.

These  few  words  may  bee  to  let
you  understand,  that  whereas  I  wrote
unto  you  not  many  dayes  past  by
the  way  of  Lisbon,  howe  that  I  determined  to  bee
with  you  very  shortly,  it  is  in  this  countrey  offered  mee
to  marry,  and  to  take  my  choice  of  three  or  foure :  so
that  I  am  about  three  dayes  agoe  consorted  with  an
Italian  gentleman  to  marry  with  his  daughter  within
these  foure  dayes.  This  my  friend  and  father  in  law
Signor  lofFo  Dore  is  borne  in  the  citie  of  Genua  in
Italy :  his  kindred  is  well  knowen  amongst  the  Italians
in  London :  also  hee  hath  but  onely  this  childe  which
is  his  daughter,  which  hee  hath  thought  better  bestowed
upon  mee  then  on  any  Portugal  in  all  the  countrey,
and  doeth  give  with  her  in  marriage  to  me  part  of  an
Ingenio  which  he  hath,  that  doeth  make  every  yeere
a  thousand  roves  of  sugar.  This  my  mariage  will  be
worth  to  me  two  thousand  duckets,  little  more  or  lesse.
Also  Signor  loffo  Dore  my  father  in  law  doeth  intende
to  put  into  my  handes  the  whole  Ingenio  with  sixtie
or  seventie  slaves,  and  thereof  to  make  me  factor  for
us  both.  I  give  my  living  Lord  thankes  for  placing
me  in  such  honour  and  plentifulnesse  of  all  things.

Also  certaine  dayes  past  I  talked  with  the  Provedor
and  the  Captaine,  and  they  have  certified  me,  that  they
Mines  of  gold  have  discovered  certaine  Mines  of  silver  and  gold,  and
^"^ f  t^  looke  every  day  for  Masters  to  come  to  open  the  said
covered  at  S  Mines  :  which  when  they  be  opened  will  inrich  this
Vincent.  countrey  very much. This  place is called S. Vincent,

26

JOHN WHITHALL  ad.

1578.
and  is  distant  from  you  two  thousand  leagues,  and  in
24.  degrees  of  latitude  on  the  South  side  of  the  Equi-
noctial line,  &  almost  under  the  Tropike  of  Capricorne.
A  countrey  it  is  very  healthfuU  without  sicknesse.

Moreover,  I  have  talked  with  the  Captaine  and  Pro-
vedor,  and  my  father  in  law,  who  rule  all  this  countrey,
for  to  have  a  ship  with  goods  to  come  from  London
hither,  which  have promised  mee  to  give  mee  licence,
saying  that  nowe I am free denizen of  this  countrey.
To  cause  a  ship  to  come  hither  with  such  commodities
as would serve this countrey, would come to great
gaines, God sending  in safety the profite and gaines.
In  such  wares  and commodities  as  you may  ship  hither  T^^  voyage  to
from  London  is  for  every  one  commoditie  delivered  here  y  ^T'^l^\
three for  one,  and  then after the  proceed may  be  im-  ^^^  outward
ployed  in  white  sugar  at  foure  hundred  reis  the  rove. only.

I  meane  also  to  have  a  friend  in  London  to  sende  [HI.  702.]
mee  a  ship  of  60.  or  70.  tunnes,  little  more  or  lesse,
with  such  commodities  as  I  shall  give  advise  for.  This
voyage  is  as  good  as  any  Peru-voyage.  If  you  and
Master  Osborne  will  deale  here,  I  will  deale  with  you
before  any  other,  because  of  our  old  friendly  friendship
in  time  past.  If  you  have  any  stomacke  thereto,  in
the  Name  of  God  do  you  espie  out  a  fine  barke  of
seventie  or  eightie  tunnes,  and  send  her  hither  with  a
Portugal  Pilot  to  this  port  of  S.  Vincent  in  Brasil,
bordering  upon  the  borders  of  Peru.

Also  I  herewith  write  unto  you  in  what  forme  and
maner  you  shall  furnish  this  voyage  both  in  commodi-
ties and  otherwise.

First  you  must  lade  in  the  said  ship  certaine  Hamp-  In  what  maner
shire  and  Devonshire  karsies : for  the  which  you  must  ^  ^oy^g^  'f  S.
let  her  depart  from  London  in  October,  and  to  touch  ^"lip^gf!!^
in  the  Canaries,  and  there  to make  sale of  the  saide  or  80,  tmnes
karsies,  and with the proceed  thereof  to lade fifteene  is  to  be  made.
tunnes of wines that be perfect and good, and
sixe dozen of  Cordovan skinnes of  these colours, to
wit, orenge, tawnie, yellow, red, and  very  fine  black.

27

A.D.
1578.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I  thinke  you  shall  not  finde  such  colours  there.  There-
fore you  must  cause  them  that  shall  go  upon  this  voyage,
to  take  saffron  with  them,  to  cause  the  same  skinnes  to
bee  put  into  the  saide  colours.  Also  I  thinke  you  shall
finde  oyles  there.  Three  hogsheads  of  sweete  oyle  for
this  voyage  are  very  necessary,  or  a  hundred  &  fiftie
jarres  of  oyle.  Also  in  London  you  may  lade  in
the  said  ship  these  parcels  of  commodities  or  wares,  as
followeth :

In  primis,  Foure  peeces of  hollands of  middle
sort.
Item,  One  peece  of  fine  hoUand.
Foure  hundred  elles  of  osenbriges  very  fine.
Foure  dozen  of  sizzors  of  all  sorts.
Sixteene  kintals  of  pitch  of  the  Canaries.
Twentie dozen  of  great  knives  which  be  made in

fardles,  of  a  low  price.
Foure  dozen  of  a  small  sort.
Sixe  peeces  of  bayes  of  the  lowest  sort.
One  very  fine  peece  of  bayes.
Foure  hundred elles of Manchester-cottons,  most

blacke,  greene,  some  yellow.
Eight or tenne dozen of hats, the one halfe
trimmed  with  taffata,  the  other plaine,  with  the
bands  of  Cypresse.
Sixe  dozen  of  course  shirts.
Three  dozen  of  doublets  of  canvas.
Three  dozen  of  doublets  of  stitched  canvas.
One  peece  of  fine  Millan-fustian  barred.
Sixe  dozen  of  locks  for  doores  and  chests.
Sixe  thousand  of  all  maner  of  fish  hooks.
Foure  dozen  reames  of  paper.
Two  dozen  of  glasses  of  divers  sorts.
Two  dozen  of  Venice  glasses,  the  one  halfe  great,

the  other  middle  sort.
Two dozen of mantles of  frize, of the lowest

price  that  can  be.
Three  dozen  of  frize  gownes.

28

JOHN WHITHALL  a.d

1578.

Foure hundred pound of tinne of the use of

Portugall,  most  smal  dishes  and  trenchers.
Foure  pound  of  silke  of  all  colours.
Twentie  pound  of  spices,  cloves,  cinamom,  pepper,

and  saffron.
Two  kintals  of  white  sope.

Three  pound  of  threed,  white,  blacke,  and  blew.
Three  pound  of  fine  white  threed.
Item,  halfe  a  dozen  of  Northerne  karsies  of  divers

colours.
Foure  sorting  clothes,  blew,  red,  yellow,  and  green.
Sixe  Northerne  dozens  of  divers  colours.
One  fine  blew  cloth  of  eight  pound.
One  fine  stamell  of  tenne  or  twelve  pound.
One  fine  sheeps  coloured  cloth  of  twelve  pound.
One  fine  blacke  karsie.} {One  fine  stamell  karsie.
Sixe  yards  of  blacke  velvet.
Three  barrels  of  nailes  for  chests.
Two  barrels  of  nailes  for  ships  and  barks.
Sixe  kintals  of  Occom.

Two  dozen  of  velvet  girdles  without  hangers.
Foure  yards  of  taffata  red,  blacke,  and  blew,  with  [III.  703.]

some  greene.
Two  dozen  of  leather  girdles.
Sixe  dozen  of  axes,  hatchets,  and  small  billes  to  cut

wood.
Foure  mases  of  gitterne  strings.
Foure  hundred  or  five  hundred  elles  of  some  linn  en
cloth  that  is  of  a  low  price  to  make  shirts  and
sheets.
Foure  tunne  of  yron.
'hese  be  such  sort  of  wares  as  I  would  you  should
send. If  you  meane  to  deale,  or  send  any  ship  hither,
have  you  no  doubt,  but  by  the  helpe  of  God  I  shall
put all  things  in good  order according to your con-
tentment and  profit : for  my  father  in  lawe  with  the
Captaine  and  Provedor  doe  rule  this  countrey.

My father in law & I shal (God willing) make

29

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

a  good  quantitie  of  sugar  every  yeere,  which  sugar  we
intend  to  ship  for  London  from  henceforth,  if  we  can
get  such  a  trustie  &  good  friend  as  you  to  deale  with
us  in  this  matter.  I  pray  you  presently  after  the
receit  of  this  my  letter  to  write  mee  answere  thereof,  &
send  your  letter  to  M.  Holder  to  Lisbone,  &  he  wil
convey  it  to  me  out  of  hand.

Besides  the  premisses  send  sixe  yards  of  skarlet,
parchment  lace  of  divers  colours.
•^  Sixe  yards  of  crimosin  velvet.
Sixe  yards  of  crimosin  satten.
^  Twelve  yards  of  fine  puke  blacke.
Here  in  this  countrey  in  stead  of  John  Whithall  they
Joh7i  Leitoan.  have  called  me  John  Leitoan  : so  that they have used
this  name  so  long  time,  that  at  this  present  there  is  no
remedie but it must remaine so. When you write
unto  me,  let  the  superscription  be  unto  John  Leitoan.

Thus  I  commit  you  with  all  yours  to  the  holy
Ghost  for  ever.

If  you  send  this  ship,  I  would  have  you  give  order
that  she  touch  in  no  part  of  the  coast  of  Guinie  nor
any  other  coast,  but  to  come  directly  hither  to  the  port
of  S.  Vincent,  and  from  the  Canaries  let  her  be  dis-
patched in  my  name,  to  wit,  John  Leitoan.

f  Also a dozen of  shirts for my wearing  let  be

sent,  if  you  send  the  ship.
\  Item,  sixe  or eight pieces of  sayes  for  mantles
for  women,  which  is  the  most  necessary  thing
that  can  be  sent.

By  your  assured  friend  John  Whithall.

30

LETTER  TO  JOHN  WHITHALL

A.O.
1580.

A  copie  of  the  letters  of  the  Adventurers  for
Brasill  sent  to  John  Whithall  dwelling  in
Santos,  by  the  Minion  of  London.  Anno
1580. the  24.  of  October  in  London.

Aster Whithall, as unacquainted wee
commend us unto you, &c. under-
standing by your friends, M. John
Bird, M. Robert Walkaden,  and your
brother James Whithall of certaine
letters  that  they  have  received  of  yours
from  Santos,  which  wee have  seene  and
read,  wherein  from  time  to  time  you  doe  require,  and
desire  them to  send  a  good ship  to Santos,  with such
wares  and  commodities  as you did write for,  whereby
you  did  not  onely  promise  that  they  should  have  good
intertainment, but also should sell the saide com-
modities to  make  three  of  one  outward  at  the  least  in
every  thing,  and  that  for  to  relade  their  ship  backe,  they
should  have  of  the  best,  finest,  &  whitest  drie  sugars  32.
pound  of  our  weight  for  a  ducket  at the most. The
premises  considered,  with  the  great  credit  that  they  and
we  doe  give  to  your  writing  &  promise,  have  caused  us,
whose  names  be  hereunder  written,  to  joyne  our  selves
in company together, & to be  at great charges  pur-
posely to  send  this  good ship the  Minion  of  London,
not onely with such marchandizes as you wrote  for,
but also with as many other things as we thought
might any wayes  pleasure  you,  or  profit  the  country.
And we crave of  you, that we  and our  factors  may
have  so  much  credite  of  you,  as  we  have  in  you  and
of  your letters, which is to beleeve us  that  we  have
taken this voyage upon us, with no  other  minde  or
purpose, then to deale faithfully and truely in the
trade by sea and land, so as you shall not onely
have cause to rejoyce, and deserve thanks for our
comming, but also you wil procure the magistrates

31

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

there to be bound, as they use in Galicia, that we
may be  preserved  and defended  from  all  reprisals  and
imbargments of  princes or subjects  for any  causes or
matters whatsoever,  whereby wee may bee  incouraged
by them, giving us this securitie of good intertain-
ment, to continue the trade yeerely henceforth : and
for our parts we promise upon our credits and
fidelities,  to commit  no outrage at the sea nor land,
nor suffer any  to be done in our company  that  we
may let, but rather to defend and protect all other
such peaceable marchants as we are, with their  ships
and goods.
[III.  704.] And to the ende that you and others  shall  know
that wee meane as  we say, we have given order to
our factours to give you good hostages for your
assurance  of  our  good  fidelities : and  further  we  have
sent a testimoniall of our owne true meaning in
writing under  the seales of  this honourable Citie of
London, which we wil not discredite by our be-
haviours  for all the treasure that you  have: and so
we have written to your magistrates of your port,
and  others  in Spanish,  the  copy  whereof  we  send  you
herewith  enclosed  in  English. And  if  the  time  should
fal out so contrary to our expectations, that there
should not be  fine  white sugar  sufficient  to  lade  our
said ship in due time at Santos,  then we pray  you
direct  our  factours  where  they  may  goe  with  the  shippe
in  safetie  to  supply their want,  and helpe  them to a
good sure Pilot for that purpose, and write your
letters  to  your  friends  where  the best sugar is made
in their favours, and helpe our factours to have a
testimoniall from Santos, that they and you traded
together  friendly,  and  so  departed  in  good  and perfect
amitie,  and  shew  them  that  the  just  cause  of  our  com-
ming  is  to trade as marchants peaceably,  and not as
Pirats  to  commit  any  offence  to  one  or  other.

Also  we  pray  you,  if  there  be  any  store  of  waxe,  or
salt-peeter, whereby the price there may yeeld us  as

32

LETTER  TO  JOHN  WHITHALL  ad.

1580.

much  profit  as  the  white  sugars  at  a  ducket  the  rove,
or  any  other  commodity  of  like  profite,  then  to  pro-
cure that  we  may  lade  it  without  danger  of  lawe,  be  it
oare  of  golde  or  silver  or  whatsoever  else.

Wee  have  sent  you  copper  cauldrons  for  your  In-
genios,  with  iron  and  all  other  necessaries  for  your
purpose,  and  artificers  to  set  the  same:  and  as  wee
have  at  your  request  bene  at  great  charges  in  sending
these  men,  so  we  pray  you  let  us  have  lawful  favour
in  like  courtesie  to  further  all  our  causes.  And  if  any
of  our  Mariners  or  passengers  in  any  respect  of  dis-
pleasure against  their  company,  or  in  hope  of  prefer-
ment of  mariage  or  otherwise  would  procure  to  tary
and  dwell  there,  and  leave  his  charge  and  office,  that
then  you  will  be  a  meane  to  the  Justice  that  such
fugitives  should  bee  sent  abord  the  ship  as  prisoners :
for  as  you  know,  without  our  men  wee  cannot  bring
home  our  ship.

Wee  have  given  order  to  our  factours  to  use  your
counsell  and  helpe  in  their  affaires,  and  to  gratifie  you
for  the  same  as  to  your  courtesie  and  faithfull  friendship
shall  appertaine  to  your  good  liking :  and  in  the  meane
time  for  a  token  of  our  good  willes  toward  you,  we  have
sent  you  a  fieldbed  of  walnut  tree,  with  the  canopy,  valens,
curtaines,  and  gilt  knops.  And  if  there  be  any  com-
moditie  else  that  may  pleasure  you  or  your  friends,  wee
have  given  order  that  they  shall  have  the  refusing  of
it  before  any  other,  giving  for  it  as  it  is  worth.

And  thus  to  conclude,  promising  to  performe  all  the
foresaid e  things  on  our  parts  in  every  condition,  we
commit  you  to  God,  who  ever  preserve  you  with  all  his
blessings.

{Christopher  Hodsdon.
Anthonie  Garrard.
Thomas  Bramlie.
John  Bird. } { William  Elkin .

[Certaine  notes
XI  33  c

A.D.

1580.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

M.  Stephen
Hare  was
Captatne  in
this  voyage.

The  yle  o/S.
Sebastian.

The  yle  of  S.
Catelina.

[III.  705.]

Certaine  notes  of  the  voyage  to  Brasill  with  the
Minion  of  London  aforesaid,  in  the  yere  1580.
written  by  Thomas  Grigs  Purser  of  the  said
ship.

He  thirde  day  of  November  in  the  yeere
abovesaid  we  departed  in  the  Minion  of
London  from  Harwich,  from  which  time
no  great  thing  worth  the  knowledge  or
regard  of  others  happened  until  the  22.
of  December  the  next  moneth,  which  day
for  our  owne  learning  &  use  wee  ob-
served the  setting  of  the  Sunne,  which  was  West  south-
west, we  then  being  under  the  line  Equinoctiall,  where
we  found  the  air  very  temperate,  and  the  winde  for
the  most  part  Southeast  and  East  southeast.  The  same
day  we  also  observed  the  rising  of  the  moone,  being
one  day  after  the  full,  which  rose  at  East  northeast.

The  first  land  that  wee  fell  with  upon  the  coast  of
Brasill  was  the  yland  of  S.  Sebastian,  where  we  arrived
the 14.  day  of  January  in  the  yeere 1581.

The  16,  day  Thomas  Babington,  and  others  in  our
pinnesse,  went  a  shoare  to  Guaybea,  where  they  met  with
John  Whithall  his  father  and  mother  in  lawe,  who  having
received  letters  from  thence  to  be  delivered  at  Santos,
came  abord,  and  then  we  weyed  and  set  saile,  and  the
28.  day  wee  arrived  at  the  yland  of  Santa  Catelina,
neere  the  entrance  of  Santos.

Our  course  from  S.  Sebastian  was  Southwest  and  by
West,  and  betwixt  the  Southwest  and  by  West,  and
West  southwest.

This  yland  of  Santa  Catelina  seemeth  at  the  first  to
be  a  part  of  the  yland  of  Girybia.  Wee  ankered  at  nine
fathome  blacke  osie  ground.

Upon  the  yland  there  grow  many  Palmito-trees,  but  no
fresh  water  is  there  to  be  found.

The  third  day  of  February  we  arrived  before  the  towne

34

STEPHEN HARE  ad.

1581.
of  Santos,  and  were  there  well  received  and  intertained  of  They  arrive
the  Captaine,  the  kings  officers,  and  all  the  people. at  Santos.

The  fourth  day  we  tooke  into  our  ship  a  beefe  alive,
which  served  for  the  victualling  of  the  ship,  and  the
refreshing  of  our  men,  and  to  make  us  the  merrier  at
Shrovetide.

The  eight  day  we  delivered  to  M.  John  Whithall  a
bedstead  with  the  appurtenances,  which  were  sent  to  him
from  our  marchants  of  London.

The  18.  day  the  captaine  of  Santos  came  abord  our
ship,  by  whom  we  had  knowledge  of  foure  great  French
ships  of  warre,  that  had  bene  at  the  river  of  Jenero,  which
there  tooke  three  Canoas,  but  were  driven  from  thence
by  their  castles  &  forts,  and  were  looked  for  here  at
Santos.  Whereupon  the  Captaine  requested  us  to  lend
them  some  armour  and  artillery,  and  we  lent  them
twentie  calivers,  and  two  barrels  of  powder.

The 19.  day  our  skifFe  which  we  had  sent  to  Alcat-  The  yk  of

rarzas,  and  had  bene  away  sixe  dayes,  came  againe,  and  ^''^^^''^''^'^^
4  ,  ,  r  1  1 r  1  111  <""  Pelicanes.

brought  good  store  or  great  and  good  nsh,  and  tolde  us
that  there  was  good  store  of  fish  to  be  taken  there  by
the  hooke,  and  as  much  wood  as  we  could  have  of  the
Palmito-tree.

The  20.  day  at  night  Nicholas  Gale,  one  of  our
company,  fell  over  our  shippes  side,  and  was  drowned
in  the  port  of  Santos  before  the  towne,  where  our  ship
rode  at  anker.

The  22.  day  two  of  the  Canoas  which  the  Frenchmen
tooke  in  the  river  of  Jenero,  returned  to  Santos,  and
reported  that  the  foure  French  ships  were  past  to  the
southwards,  as  they  thought,  for  the  Straights  of
Magellan,  and  so  into  the  South  sea.

The  23.  day  the  aforesaide  Nicholas  Gale,  who  fell
overbord  two  dayes  before,  was  found  againe,  and  taken
up  three  miles  from  our  ship,  and  our  company  went
to  his  buriall  in  the  Church  at  Santos.

This  day  the  Captaine  and  Justices  of  Santos  wished
us  to  tary  in  their  road  till the  last  of  April,  for  they

35

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

had  sent  a  barke  of  Santos  to  Baya  at  the  kings  charges,
to  know  whether  we  should  have  trade  there  or  no,  and
this  barke  could  not  returne  before  that  time.

About  this  time  there  arrived  at  Fernambuck  a  shippe
from  Portugall,  which  brought  newes  that  the  Islands,
Indies,  and  Portugall  it  selfe  was  molested  and  troubled
by  the  Spaniards,  and  that  the  Portugales  had  both
English  and  Frenchmen  to  Lisbone  to  defend  them
against  Spaine.

The  25.  day  wee  sent  two  of  our  men,  namely  Thomas
Michael  and  Simon  Thorne  to  Baya  in  a  barke  that  went
thither  from  Santos.

The  two  and  twentie  day  of  Aprill  our  Master  and
Thomas  Babington  having  some  talke  and  conference  with
the  Padres  of  Santos,  they  (our  men  being  ready  to  go  to
the  River  of  Jenero)  tolde  them,  that  they  were  sorry  for
our  banishment  from  the  Church,  and  that  the  Minis-
trador  had  written  from  Rio  de  Jenero,  that  forasmuch
as  these  twentie  yeres  or  more  the  English  nation  had
denied  the  Church  of  Rome  and  her  proceedings,  there-
fore the  Ministrador  commanded  that  none  of  us  should
come  to  their  Church :  the  Padres  willed  us  herein  to
have  patience,  and  to  take  it  in  good  part,  and  promised
to  stand  our  friends  in  their  word  and  writing,  both  to
the  Ministrador  and  to  the  Bishop  at  Baya,  and  further
requested  all  our  English  company  to  have  no  ill
opinion  of  them.
Their  lading  The  28.  of  April  we  laded  sugars  into  our  ships.
of  sugars.  "Xho. 21. of  May we tooke in fresh victuals  from

Santos.

The  10.  day  of  June  wee  gratified  one  losto  Thorno,
dwelling  in  Santos,  with  some  of  our  English  victuals,  and
intertained  him  in  good  sort  in  our  ship,  and  this  day
wee  were  promised  to  have  a  Pilot  at  Santos  to  cary
us  to  Baya.

The  1 1 .  day  we  went  to  fish,  to  make  provision  for
our  ship  and  men,  and  from  that  time  till  the  eighteenth
day  wee  fet  water,  and  cut  wood  for  our  fire,  and  trimmed

36

STEPHEN HARE  a.d.

1581.

our  ship  of  the  harmes  and  leakes  which  the  wormes  had  ^ea^^  ^n  the
made  in  her  while  wee  ridde  at  the  viand  of  S.  Sebastian,  f '''">"  "'^^'
and in the  meane time we  departed rrom  berore the
towne  of  Santos. Our  Master  sent  his skiffe  from  the
barre of Santos, thinking to have brought Thomas
Babington  and  William  Euet  with  the  Pilot,  which  wee
had  tarried  for  three  dayes :  and  as  the  skiffe  was  going,
William  Euet  being  by  the Rivers side, called  to  our
pinnesse,  and  sent  a  letter  to  our  *Master,  which  Thomas  *Whose  name
Babington  had  written,  wherein  were  no  newes,  but  that  ^^  Stephen
the  Ministrador  was  arrived  at  Santos  from  the  River  of
Jenero,  and  would  speake  with  our  Master,  but  he  willed
that  whatsoever  Thomas  Babington  did  write,  no  credit
should  be  given  to  it. And further  he  wished  us  pre-
sently to depart for Sant Sebastian, and there to
dispatch our businesse, and then to sende backe for
Babington  and  himselfe  to  Guaybea,  where  he  (if  he  were  [HI.  7o6-]
well)  would  give  his  attendance to  come  abord.

As  we  rid  two  leagues  a  sea-bord  the  barre  of  Santos  ^^^^^  <^^-
wee  broke  a  cable  in  the  open  sea,  which  happened  the  P^^^^J'^f^"^
15.  day  of  this  moneth.

We  arrived  at  S.  Sebastian  the  15.  day,  and  there
shifted  our  balast,  and  had  in  stones,  and  hailed  our  ship
a  ground  to  stop  our  leakes,  &  caried  our  caske  a  shoare
to  be  hooped  for  water,  which  indeed  might  better  have
bene  done  in  Santos,  before  the  Ministrador  came  thither  :
yet  we  finished  all  things  pertaining  to  our  ship,  by
the  11.  of  this  moneth,  at  S.  Sebastian.

The  first  day  of  July  Thomas  Babington  came  abord
with  William  Euet,  in  our  pinnesse,  and  the  rest  of  our
men  that  went  for  them :  but  there  was  no  Pilot  brought
according  to  promise  to  cary  us  to  Baya.

The  things  that  we  observed  and  noted  in  the  time  of
our  being  at  Santos,  were  these.

All  such  wares  and  marchandizes  as  owe  no  custome
in  Brasill,  their  use  is,  to  set  a  price  upon  the  same,  how
they  shalbe  sold  :  which  is  done  by  the  magistrates  of
the  towne,  according  to  the  ordinances  of  their  king.

37

to  use  their

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

But  for  all  such  marchandizes  as  doe  owe  custome  there,

the  marchants  are  to  sell  them  according  as  they  may,

to  the  greatest  profit  and  advantage  that  they  can.

^ome  part  of Concerning  the  province  of  Peru,  wee  learned  that  one

Peru  but  12. p^^j.^  q£  j^  y^^  \2xidi  &  water  is  but  twelve  dayes  journey

from  Santos, ^om  the  towne  of  Santos,  and  from  thence  it  may  be

about  foure  or  five  dayes  journey  by  water  to  the  maine

river  of  Plate.

From  the  head  of  the  river  of  Plate,  and  from  their
chiefe  townes  there,  they  doe  trade  and  trafique  by  land
into  Peru  by  waggons,  and  horses  or  mules.

The  saide  river  of  Plate  is  so  full  of  sands  and  dangers,
and  the  fresh  so  fierce  sometimes,  that  no  shipping  dares
to  deale  with  it,  small  barks  to  their  knowledge  may  go
up  it,  and not els.
The  Portu-  The  Portugales  here  cannot  bee  suffered  to  use  their

gales  forbidden  Mines  of  treasure  in  these  parts,  upon  paine  of  death,  the
contrary  being  commanded  by  the  king  and  the  Vice-roy,
who  is  as  their  king  in  place  of  authoritie.

About  twentie  leagues  from  Santos  there  is  a  certaine
kinde  of  wilde  Savages,  lying  in  the  mountaines,  which
are  in  friendship  with  the  Portugales,  and  they  have
continuall  warres  with  certaine  other  Savages  that  dwell
towards  the  borders  of  Peru,  which  is  distant  from  Santos
about  400.  or  500.  leagues.  Those  Savages  of  Peru  have
store  of  gold  and  silver,  but  they  knowe  not  the  use
of  it.

Looke  what  Savages  of  their  enemies  they  take,  they
sell  them  to  the  Portugales  for  knives,  combes,  axes  or
hatchets,  and  other  trifles  :  they  will  sell  one  for  a  pennie-
knife  to  a  Portugal,  and  after  two  yeeres  they  are  worth
twentie  or  thirtie  duckets  to  the  Portugal.

This  people  have  also  continuall  warres  with  the
Spaniards  :  and  this  was  tolde  us  by  one  of  those  Savages,
which  hath  dwelt  among  the  Portugales  these  seven
yeeres,  with  his  master  called  Sennor  Manoel  Veloso.  And
this  fellowe  would  willingly  have  come  with  us  for
England.

38

STEPHEN HARE  ad.

1596.

There are certaine rockes  that lie off  betweene  the

yle  of  Alcatrarzas  and  S. Sebastian,  about  two  leagues, The  yle  of

which  are  to  be  taken  heed  of,  which  a  farre  off  in  faire  "^^^^^^^'^^^
,  ,  ,., ,  .,  r 1  •  or  Peltcanes,

weather  shewe  like  the  sailes  or  ships.  danserous for

There are other  rocks that lie off  S.  Catelina also  rocks.
five  leagues  to  the  East  and  by  South into  the  sea  off
the  yland.

At  our  comming  up  to  Santos  we  found  foure  fadom
and  a  halfe  water  in  the  shallowest  place,  and  the  like  we
found  within  a  league  after  we  were  departed  from
S.  Catelina,  litle  more  or  lesse,  but  after  you  have  runne
in  the  depth  of  foure  fadome  and  a  halfe,  about  a  mile
or  lesse,  then  you  shall  have  it  deeper  againe  more  and
more.

Before  the  towne  of  Santos  we  rode  in  eight  and
tenne  fadome  water.

A  letter  of  Francis  Suares  to  his  brother  Diego
Suares  dw^elling  in  Lisbon,  written  from  the
river  of  Jenero  in  Brasill  in  June  1 596.  con-
cerning the  exceeding  rich  trade  newly  begunne
betweene  that  place  and  Peru,  by  the  way
of  the  river  of  Plate,  with  small  barks  of  30.
and  40.  tunnes.

Ir,  we  set  saile  from  Lisbon  the  fourth
of  April  1596,  and  arrived  here  in  this
river  of  Jenero  the  twentie  seventh  of
June  next  ensuing.  And  the  same  day
the  Visitadores  did  visit  our  ship  with
great  joy,  thinking  that  those  com-
modities which  wee  brought  with  us,
had  bene  for  the  marchants  of  this  countrey  :  but  it
prooved  to  the  contrary.

The pilot  brought  with  him  in  the  sayd shippe  two  [III.  707.]
pipes of  wine which were taken from him,  and  solde  Wine  solde  at
by  the  Justice  for  foure and  twenty  reals  every  gallon,  an  excessive
But  I  solde  mine  for  two  and  thirty  and  sixe  and  thirty  "^^^'

39

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

reals  the  gallon.  If  I  had  brought  any  great  store  of
wine,  I  should  have  made  a  great  gaine  of  it :  for  I
should  have  gotten  eight  reals  for  one.

The  next  day  in  the  morning  wee  went  all  on  shore,
and  gave  God  thanks  for  our  prosperous  voyage,  and
good  successe  which  he  had  sent  us.  And  because  the
governour  of  this  countrey  was  gone  from  this  Towne
to  another  house  of  his,  three  leagues  up  into  the  river
beyond  the  place  where  we  rode  at  anker,  I  desired
the  captaine  of  our  shippe  after  dinner,  that  we  might  take
the  shippe  boat,  and  goe  to  the  place  where  the  governour
did  lie.  And  so  going  up  the  river,  we  met  with  a  canoa
which  was  comming  downe  the  river,  and  going  aboord  our
shippe  ;  which  canoa  was  laden  with  fresh  victuals,  and
in  the  same  was  one  Portugall,  which  met  us,  and  tolde
us  that  the  governour  of  that  captaine  shippe  had  sent
us  a  present,  which  we  received  very  thankefuUy,  and
sent  it  aboord.  And  we  went  up  the  river,  to  the  place
where  the  governour  did  dwell ;  and  comming  to  the  place
where  we  landed,  hard  by  the  rivers  side,  the  governour
came  thither  and  received  us  very  courteously.  So  we
remained  at  his  house  two  dayes,  talking  of  many
matters  of  Portugall :  then  we  departed  from  him,  and
came  downe  the  river.

Three  dayes  after,  I hired  a  ware-house  by  my  selfe,
and  landed  my  commodities. And  now  I  am  selling  them
as  fast  as  I can  ;  and  sell  them  very  well,  and  to  great
profit : for  I  have  solde  all  our  hats. I  would I had
brought forty or fifty dozen, by reason of  the  great
utterance  of  them  up  into  Peru,  and  into  the  new  king-
dome  of  Granada,  by  the  way  of  the  river  of  Plate. For
A  rich  trade here  is  passage  every  three  or  foure  moneths  with  barks
from  the  river  q£  thirty  and  forty  tunnes  a  piece,  which  are  laden  with
the  7iver  of Sugars,  rice,  taffataes,  hats,  and  other  kindes  of  commodities
Plate  into of  this  countrey,  which  are caried  up  the  sayd  river  of
Peru,  ^c. Plate  in  the  sayd  barks,  and  thence  are  conveyed  up  into
Peru. And  these  barks  are  but  tenne  or twelve  dayes
going  up  the  sayd  river  to  Peru. And  within  foure  and

40

LETTER  FROM  FRANCIS SUARES  ad.

1596.

five  moneths  after,  the  sayd  barkes  come  downe  this  river  The  shortnesse

againe  laden  with  reals  of  plate,  and  bring  downe  from  "fj^y^^^^"^
1  1  1  T  • 1  ^ . of  the  voyage

those places no other  commodities  but  treasure. It  is  ^^  p^^^

a  woonderfuU  thing  to  beholde  the  great  gaine  and  profit

which  is  gotten  in  this  river  and  in  this  countrey. I  am

ashamed  to  write  it,  fearing  that  I  shall  not  be  beleeved.

For the imployment of  one  hundred  ducats  in  Spaine,

being  brought  hither,  will  yeeld  twelve  hundred  and  fif-

teene  hundred  ducats  profit. This  trade  hath  beene  used  ^'^"  ^''^'^^

but  within  this  yeere. For  wee  can  goe  up  to  the  mines  ^  ,7^ '

r  -n • 1  • 1  1 1  • 1  •  • gunne  in  the

of  Potosi,  which  are  the  best  and the richest mines in  yre  1595.

all  Peru. If  the  merchants  of  Spaine  and  Portugall  did

know  this  trade,  they  would  not  send  nor  venture  so  much

merchandise  to  Cartagena  as  they  doe. For  up  this  river

is  a  great  deale  the  neerer  way,  and  the  easier  to  go  to

Peru. For  the  Peruleros  or  merchants  of  Peru,  which

dwell there, come downe to this harbour  and river

of  Jenero, and bring  with them fifteene  thousand  and

twentie  thousand  ducats  in  reals  of  plate  and  gold,  and

imploy  it  heere  in  this  river  in  commodities  :  and  when

heere  are  no  commodities  to  be  had  for  money  in  this

place,  then  these  merchants  of  Peru  are  constrained  to  go

to  Baia  and  Fernambuc,  and  there  to  imploy  their  money.

I  would  I  had  brought  good  store  of  silks,  and  not  these

kinde  of  commodities  which  I  did  bring. For  heere  is  '^^^  voyage^

more  profit  to  be  had  a  great  deale  then  in  the  voyage  jf"^°  ^  ^"

of  Angola. For  heere  with  five  hundred  ducats  in  five

moneths  space  a  man  may  get  sixe  thousand  ducats. And

this  is  no  fable,  but  most  true,  and  a  great  deale  more  then

I  can  expresse. For  a  rapier  which  doeth  cost  in  Spaine

foure  and  twenty  and  sixe  and  twenty  reals,  is  solde  heere

for  forty  and  fifty  ducats  :  a  bridle for  a  horse  is  solde '

for  fifteene  ducats  : a  locke  of  a  doore  and  the  key  is  solde

for  ten  ducats :  a  pound  of  benjamin  is  solde  for  fifteene

ducats  :  a  yard  of  velvet  is  solde  for  twenty  and  five  and

twenty  ducats  :  taffataes  are  solde  for  sixe  and  seven  ducats

the  vare  :  an  ownce  of  muske  is  solde  for  forty  ducats :

and all kinde of  commodities  after  this  rate. So  one

41

A.D.
1596.

Gaine  often
thousand
ducats  for  the
laying  out  of
one  thousand.

A  trade  of
bufing  Negros
in  Angola.

Broad  cloth
excellently
well  solde.
Vineger.
[III.  708.]

Olives.

Taffataes.
Velvets.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

thousand  ducats  of  Spanish  commodities  will  gaine  tenne
thousand  ducats.  Thus  I  hope  in  God  to  make  more
profit  and  gaine  this  voyage,  then  in  two  voyages  to
Angola  :  for  I  have  solde  most  of  my  hats  for  two  duckets
and  a  halfe  and  for  three  ducats.  The  rest  I  will  cary  to
Angola,  to  helpe  to  sell  the  rest  of  my  commodities,  which
I  cannot  sell  in  this  river.  And  I  have  solde  an  hundred
cubits  of  broad  cloth  for  five  hundred  and  five  hundred
and  fifty  and  sixe  hundred  reys  the  cubit.  If  I  would
have  solde  all  my  cloth  for  ready  money  tolde  downe
for  foure  hundred  and  fifty  and  five  hundred  reyes,
the  merchants  would  have  bought  it  all  of  me  :  but  I
would  sell  no  more,  because  I  meant  to  exchange  it  in
Angola  for  Negros.  Howbeit  with  ready  money  in  hand
in  Angola  a  man  shall  buy  better  Negros,  and  better
cheape.  The  captaine  of  our  ship  solde  all  his  cloth  for
ready  money  for  foure  hundred  &  fifty  reys  the  cubit,
and  thought  that  he  had  made  a  good  market :  but  he
hath  deceived  himselfe.  I  solde  six  broad  clothes  for  five
hundred  and  fifty  reys  the  cubit :  and  I  was  offered  thirty
thousand  reys  for  a  cloth.  Vineger  is  solde  for  two  and
thirty,  and  sixe  and  thirty,  and  forty  reals  a  jarre,  by
reason  there  is  great  store  of  limmons  and  orenges
in  the  countrey :  but  in  Angola  it  is  more  woorth.
Olives  are  solde  for  halfe  a  reall  a  piece :  wherefore  I
hope  to  sell  the  hogshead  for  twenty  thousand  reys.  In
taffataes  and  velvets  there  will  be  gotten  two  hundred
and  fifty  and  three  hundred  for  one  hundred.  If  I  had
brought  great  store,  I  could  have  solde  it  all  at  this
rate.  I  have  already  gotten  good  store  of  reals  of
plate :  for  it  is  tolde  mee  that  money  is  a  good  com-
modity in  Angola.  But  I  must  imploy  some  in  meale,
which  is  in  the  grinding.  All  the  rest  of  my  money
I  will  send  you  by  billes  of  exchange,  and  some  part
I  will  imploy  in  sugars :  for  I  have  sent  order  to  Baia
for  that  purpose.  For  from  this  place  there  is  no
shipping  that  doth  go  that  way.  So  these  letters  1
do  send  by  the  way  of  Fernambuc,  and have directed

42

LETTER FROM FRANCIS SUARES  ad.

1594.

them  to  my  cousin  :  for  I  do  determine  to  settle  my
selfe  here  in  this  countrey.  There  is  come  downe  from
Peru,  by  this  river  of  Plate,  a  merchant  called  Alonso
Ramires,  and  he  hath  brought  downe  with  him  ten
or  twelve  thousand  ducats  in  reals  of  plate,  and  is  come
downe  to  this  place  to  build  him  a  ship  to  returne
into  Spaine ;  and  there  is  come  in  his  company  a  bishop.
And  thus  Jesus  Christ  send  you  long  health.

Your  loving  brother  Francis  Suares.

The  well  governed  and  prosperous  voyage  of  M.
James  Lancaster,  begun  with  three  ships  and  a
galley-frigat  from  London  in  October  1594,
and  intended  for  Fernambuck,  the  port-towne
of  Olinda  in  Brasil.  In  which  voyage  (besides
the  taking  of  nine  and  twenty  ships  and  frigats)
he  surprized  the  sayd  port-towne,  being
strongly  fortified  and  manned ;  and  held
possession  thereof  thirty  dayes  together  (not-
withstanding many  bolde  assaults  of  the  enemy
both  by  land  and  water)  and  also  providently
defeated  their  dangerous  and  almost  inevitable
fireworks.  Heere  he  found  the  cargazon  or
freight  of  a  rich  East  Indian  carack ;  which
together  with  great  abundance  of  sugars,
Brasil-wood,  and  cotton  he  brought  from
thence ;  lading  therewith  fifteene  sailes  of
tall  ships  and  barks.

N  September  1594  the  worshipfuU  M.  John  Wats,
alderman,  M,  Paul  Banning,  alderman,  &  others
of  worship  in  the  city  of  London,  victualled  three
good  ships ;  to  wit,  The  Consent,  of  the  burthen  of
240  tunnes  or  thereabout,  The  Salomon,  of  170  tunnes,
and  The  Virgin,  of  60  tunnes :  and  appointed  for  com-
manders in  this  voyage,  M.  James  Lancaster  of  London,

43

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594.

gentleman,  admirall  of  the  fleet,  M.  Edmund  Barker  of
London,  viceadmirall,  and  M.  John  Audely  of  Poplar
neere  London,  rereadmirall,  having  in  their  sayd  ships
to  the number  of  275 men  and  boyes.

Being  fully  furnished  with  all  needfull  provision,  wee
departed  from  Blackwall  in  October  following,  keeping
our  owne  coast,  untill  we  came  into  the  West  countrey,
where  we  met  with  such  gusts  and  stormes,  that  the
Salomon  spending  her  mast  at  the  Range  of  Dartmouth,
put  into  harbour ;  but  by  the  earnest  care  and  industry  of
the  generall  and  others  having  charge,  she  was  shortly
againe  provided.  Which  done,  having  a  pleasant  gale
for  our  purpose,  we  put  foorth  from  Dartmouth  the
last  of  November  following.  But  contrary  to  our
expectation,  not  fifty  leagues  from  our  owne  coast,  we
lost  the  Salomon  and  the  Virgin,  by  a  storme  of  contrary
winde  that  fell  upon  us :  yet  being  alone,  in  hope  to
meet  them  about  the  Canaries  or  Cape  Blank,  we  kept
on  our  course  to  the  Canaries,  but  could  heare  no
tidings of  our  consorts ;  which  greatly  grieved  us.

Thence  we  went,  bearing  for  the  isle  of  Tenerif,  where

in  the  morning  early  we  had  sight  of  a  saile,  which  being

becalmed  under  the  shore,  was  towing  with  their  boat  a

head, having one other at her sterne. For  this  saile

we  manned  our  boat,  appointing  our  men  wel  for  fight,

if  need  should  require. The Spaniards  seeing our boat

come, entred theirs, and leaving the ship, sought to

save  themselves  by  flight: but  our  men  pursued  them

so  fast,  that  they  boorded  them,  and  brought  them  with

A  skippe  with  their  shippe  to  our  Generall. This  ship  was  laden  with

80  tmnes  of gQ tunnes of Canary-wine, which  came not unto us

wtne  ta  en. bef^j.^  {^  ^^g  welcome. We  kept  and  manned  it,  plying

that  day,  and  the  next  night  thereabout. The  very  next

morning  we  had  sight  of  one  other ; to whome in  like

maner  wee  sent  our  boat : but  their  gunner  made  a  shot

.at  her,  and  strooke  off  a  propper  yoong  mans  arme ;  yet

with  4.0  tuns ^^  mrorced  her  to  yeeld,  and  round  40  tunnes  or  wme  m

of  wine  taken,  her. The Spaniards  having their free passage,  and  an

44

JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1594.
acquitance  for  the  delivery  of  their  wines,  were  all  set
on  shore  upon  Tenerif,  making  a  quicke  returne  of  their
long  voyage  intended  into  the  West  Indies.

Hence  we  departed  toward  Cape  Blank ;  and  before  wee
came  thither,  we  met  againe  with  the  Virgin  our  rere-
admirall,  whose  men  tolde  us  for  very  trueth,  that  the
Salomon  was  returned  for  England  :  inforced  so  to  doe,  by
spending  her  mast  the  second  time.  Which  when  our
men  understood,  they  were  all  in  a  maze,  not  knowing  [III.  709.]
what  to  doe,  and  saying  among  themselves  that  their  force
was  but  small  when  all  our  strength  were  together,  and
now  we  had  lost  the  one  halfe  of  our  strength,  we  were
not  able  to  performe  the  voyage :  and  therefore  some
of  them  came  to  the  captain,  asking  him  what  he  would
now  do,  seeing  the  Salomon  was  lost,  the  one  halfe  of
our  strength,  giving  him  counsel!  to  beare  up  for  the
West  Indies,  and  prove  there  to  make  his  voyage,
because  his  first  plat  for  want  of  strength  was  cleane
overthrown.  The  captaine  hearing  this  new  novelty,  as
not  unacquainted  with  the  variable  pretenses  of  mariners,
made  them  this  answere :  Sirs,  I  made  knowen  to  you
all  at  my  comming  out  of  England  what  I  pretended,
and  that  I  meant  to  go  for  Fernambuck,  and  although
at  the  present  we  want  one  of  our  ships,  yet  (God  will-
ing) I  meane  to  go  forward,  not  doubting  but  to  meet
her  at  the  appointed  places,  which  are  either  at  Cape
Blank  or  the  islands  of  Cape  Verde :  for  I  am  assured
that  M.  Barker  the  captaine  is  so  resolute  to  performe
this  voyage,  that  his  mast  being  repaired,  he  will  not
faile  to  meet  us,  &  it  were  no  wisdome  for  us  to  divert
our  course,  till  we  have  sought  him  at  those  places
where  our  appointed  meeting  is  :  for  the  diverting  of
courses  is  the  overthrow  of  most  of  our  actions.  And
I  hope  you  will  be  all  contented  herewith :  for  to  go
any  other  course  then  I  have  determined,  (by  Gods
helpe)  I  will  not  be  drawen  unto.  With  these  reasons
and  many  others  shewed,  they  rested  all  satisfied :  and
at our comming  to  Cape  Blank  (God  be  praised) we

45

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594-

met  with  the Salomon with no small  joy to us all ;

Foure  y and there she had taken of  Spaniards and Portugals

tzvcnty  sailes ^^  g^- j^  ^f  ships  and  caravels,  fisher-men,  and  had  taken

caraz'J/s  taken  ^^^  °^  them  such necessaries  as  she  had  need  of. Of

by  the  these  ships our captaine tooke foure  along  with him,

Salomon.  with another that he had taken himselfe, meaning to

imploy them as occasion should serve. At this  place

he  understood  of  one  of  the  pilots  of  those  ships,  that

one  of  the  caracks that came out of  the  East Indies,

was  cast  away  in  the rode of  Fernambuc,  and that  all

her  goods were layd upon the Arrazife which is the

lower towne. Of  these newes we were all  glad, and

rejoyced much ; for our hopes  were  very  good,  seeing

such  a  booty  before  us.

Of  this  good  company  and  happy  successe  we  were  all

joyful, and had  great  hope of  the blessing  of  God in

performance  of  our  intended  voyage,  and  so  after  some

parle  &  making  frolike  for  joy  of  our  meeting  one  with

Mato,  the other (praising God for all) we plied  for  Maio :

where  comming  to anker, our generall & the rest of

the  captaines  went  ashore to view  the place  where  we

A gally-frigat  might  in  best  safety  set  our  gally-frigat  together;  which

'^^rried  out  of  fj-^jj^e ^ee brought from  England  of  purpose to land

Pl^^g^ ^ men  in  the  country  of  Brasil. Here  we  discharged  our

great prize  of  wine, and set her on fire : but before

our  comming  thither,  you  shall  understand  we  had  sight

of  foure  sailes,  which  was captaine Venner in his ship

the  Peregrine,  and  a  proper  Biskaine  which  he  tooke  at

Cape Blank, the  Welcome of  Plymmouth &  her  pin-

nesse : all which stood with  us. But they  seeing  our

flags,  not  expecting  such  good  fellowes  as  we,  did  beare

from us  all they  might; which  our  people  tooke  very

unkindly, that being all friends they would neither

enquire, nor tell us any newes of our friends, but

without  making  any  shew  of  kindnes would  so depart.

As  before  I have said, the choice being  made for the

The  gaily- place to build the gally-frigat, ashore it  was brought,

frigat  set  up. ^hej-g  the carpenters  applied their  worke, still  cheered

46

JAMES LANCASTER  ad.

1595-
unto  it  by  the  generals  good  gifts  bestowed  among  them,
and  kind  usage  of  the  rest  of  the  commanders,  not
without  great  care  of  the  captaine  for  the  safety  of
them  all,  by  keeping  good  watch :  yet  one  negligent
fellow,  which  had  no  knowledge  of  the  countrey,  stray-
ing from  his  company,  was  by  the  Portugals  taken,  &
very  kindly  used,  and  brought  againe  unto  us :  for
which  good  the  generall  rewarded  them  well  with  gifts
very  acceptable,  which  they  tooke  as  kindly.  While
wee  were  thus  busily  imployed  about  the  foresayd  galley,
we  descried  at  sea  foure  sailes,  which  we  had  good
hope  would  have  proved  Indies  men,  or  some  to  have
brought  us  what  wee  looked  for :  but  they  proved
captaine  Venner  with  his  fleet,  as  aforesayd,  who,  seeing
us  at  anker,  ankered  also ;  where  spending  some  time,
and  being  acquainted  with  our  generals  determination
for  landing,  consorted  with  us,  &  their  bils,  according
to  the  maner  of  the  sea,  were  made  and  signed  on  either
part,  we  to  have  three  parts,  &  he  the  fourth,  of  all
that  should  be  taken,  wherby  our  strength  was  increased,
to  all  our  comforts.  Three  weeks  or  thereabouts  we
stayd  in  this  place  before  the  gaily  was  finished  ;  which
done,  putting  men  into  her,  and  fitting  her  with  oares,
having  foureteene  banks  on  a  side,  a  mast  and  saile,  the
commandement  of  her  was  committed  unto  M.  Wats,
an  honest  skilfull  mariner.

From  thence  we  put  againe  to  sea,  and  went  for  the
lie  Brava,  where  we  watered :  which  done,  we  made  no
long stay  after, but  bent our course  as directly  as  we
could  for  the  place,  making  our  first  fall  with  the land
to  the  Southward  of  Cape  S. Augustine ;  from whence  Cape  S.
wee  plied  still  to  our  desired  port  of  Fernambuck,  and  ^^g^^^i^'
did so  much,  that about midnight  we  came  before  the  rpj^^ r  '
harbour ;  where  some  plied  up  and  downe,  holding  that  March.
the  best policy, to  forbeare the  entring  till day might
give them  light, the harborow being hard, and there-
fore the  more  perillous. Our  ships  being  in  safety  well  [III.  710.]
arrived,  God  was  praised :  and  the  generall  in  his  boat

47

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

went  from  ship  to  ship,  willing  them  to  make  ready
such  men  as  they  could  spare,  with  muskets,  pikes,
billes,  bowes,  arrowes,  and  what  weapons  they  had  to
follow  him.  Himselfe,  with  80  men  from  his  owne
ship,  imbarked  himselfe  in  the  gaily,  which  caried  in
her  prow  a  good  sacar,  and  two  murdering  pieces.

Our  admirall  spent  all  the  night  in  giving  directions
to  every  ship  to  have  their  men  ready  shipped  in  their
boats,  for  he  intended  to  enter  the  harborow  at  the
breake  of  day,  &  to  leave  his  ships  without,  till  he
had  gotten  the  fort  and  the  towne :  for  he  would  not
adventure  the  ships  in,  till  the  harborow  was  gotten.
Also  he  provided  five  ships,  which  he  brought  from
Cape  Blank,  and  put  men  in  them  as  many  as  could
conveniently  saile  them,  and  no  more,  giving  them  charge
to  enter  the  harborow  with  his  boats :  for  at  the  entrance
of  the  harborow  rode  three  great  Holland  ships,  which
our  admirall  doubted  would  impeach  his  going  in  ;  and
therefore  he  gave  order  to  the  men  of  these  five  small
ships,  which  were  not  above  60  tunnes  a  piece,  if  the
Hollanders  did  offer  any  resistance,  to  run  aboord  of
them,  &  to  set  their  owne  ships  on  fire,  and  scape
in  their  boats,  which  they  had  for  the  same  purpose,
that  by  this  meanes  they  might  not  impeach  our  entrance.
But  when  the  morning  was  come,  we  were  fallen  above
halfe  a  mile  downe  to  the  Northward,  below  the  har-
borow, which  was  a  great  inconvenience  unto  us :  so
that  before  wee  could  get  up  againe,  the  ebbe  was
come  upon  us,  and  thereby  we  were  forced  to  hover
before  the  harborow  till  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  in  the  sight  of  all  the  towne.  In  this  meane
time,  our  ships  rode  before  the  fort  without  the  har-
borow, about  a  demy-colvering  shot  off:  in  the  which
time  passed  many  shot  betweene  the  fort  and  the  ships,
and  especially  betweene  the  admirals  ship  and  them :
but  no  great  harme  was  done  on  either  part.  All  this
while  our  admirall  kept  the  men  ready  hovering  in  the
gaily  & the boats. The Hollanders that rode in the

48

JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1595.
mouth  of  the  harborow,  seeing  our  resolution,  layd  out
haulsers,  and  wound  themselves  out  of  the  way  of  us.
Our  admiral  was  very  joyfull,  &  gave  great  incourage-
ment  to  all  his  men :  for,  to  passe  these  three  great
Hollanders,  he  held  it  the  greatest  danger  of  all.  About
12  of  the  clocke  the  governer  of  the  towne  sent  a
Portugall  aboord  the  admirals  ship,  to  know  what  he
would  have,  and  wherefore  he  came.  He  returned  him
this  answere :  That  he  wanted  the  caracks  goods,  and
for  them  he  came,  and  them  he  would  have,  and  that
he  should  shortly  see.  In  this  processe  of  time,  the
townes-men  and  inhabitants  which  saw  so  much  ship-
ping, &  perceived  us  to  be  enemies,  gathered  themselves
together,  three  or  foure  ensignes  of  men,  esteemed  to
the  number  of  some  sixe  hundred  at  the  least.  These
came  to  the  fort  or  platforme  lying  over  against  the
entry  of  the  harborow,  and  there  attended  our  landing :
but  before  our  admirall  set  forward  with  his  boats,  he
gave  expresse  order  to  all  that  had  charge  of  governing
the  boats  or  galley,  to  run  them  with  such  violence
against  the  shore,  that  they  should  be  all  cast  away
without  recovery,  and  not  one  man  to  stay  in  them,
whereby  our  men  might  have  no  maner  of  retreat  to
trust  unto,  but  onely  to  God  and  their  weapons.

Now  was  the  time  come  of  the  flood,  being  about
two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  when  our  admirall
set  forward,  and  entered  the  harborow  with  the  small
galley,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  boats  following  him,  the
Hollanders  that  rode  in  the  mouth  of  the  harborow,
nothing  impeached  him :  but  now  the  fort  began  to
play  with  their  ordinance  upon  the  galley  and  the  boats ;
and  one  of  their  shot  tooke  away  a  great  piece  of  our
ensigne  out  of  the  galley.  But  our  saile  being  set,  it
was  no  time  for  us  to  make  any  stay,  but  with  all  the
force  we  could  we  ranne  the  galley  upon  the  shore  right
under  the  fort,  within  a  coits  cast  of  it,  with  such
violence,  that  we  brake  her  backe ;  and  she  suncke
presently : for there where  we landed, went a breach

XI  49  D

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

of  the  sea,  which  presently  cast  her  away.  The  boats
comming  after  did  the  like.  At  our  arrivall,  those  in
the  fort  had  laden  all  their  ordinance,  being  seven  pieces
of  brasse,  to  discharge  them  upon  us  at  our  landing;
which  indeed  they  did :  for  our  admirall  leaping  into
the  water,  all  the  rest  following  him,  off  came  these
pieces  of  ordinance :  but  almighty  God  be  praised,  they
in  the  fort,  with  feare  to  see  us  land  in  their  faces,  had
piked  their  ordinance  so  steepe  downewards  with  their
mouthes,  that  they  shot  all  their  shot  in  the  sand,
although,  as  I  sayd  before,  it  was  not  above  a  coits
cast  at  the  most  betweene  the  place  wee  landed  and  the
face  of  the  fort :  so  that  they  only  shot  off  one  of  our
mens  armes,  without  doing  any  more  hurt ;  which  was
to  us  a  great  blessing  of  God  :  for  if  those  ordinances
had  bene  well  levelled,  a  great  number  of  us  had  lost
our  lives  at  that  instant.  Our  admirall  seeing  this,  cried
out,  incouraging  his  men,  Upon  them,  upon  them  ;  all
(by  Gods  helpe)  is  ours :  and  they  therewith  ran  to  the
fort  with  all  violence.  Those  foure  ensignes  of  men
that  were  set  to  defend  our  landing,  seeing  this  resolu-
tion, began  to  go  backe,  and  retire  into  certeine  bushes
that  were  by  the  same  fort ;  and  being  followed,  fledde
thorowe  a  certeine  oaze  which  was  drie,  being  then  but
The  fort  of  the  beginning  of  the  tide  :  and  so  abandoned  the  fort,
Fernambuck  and  left  it  with  their  ordinance  to  us.  This  day  of
^  ^"'  our arrivall was their  Good-friday,  when by custome

[III.  711.]  they  usually  whippe  themselves:  but  God  sent  us  now
for  a  generall  scourge  to  them  all,  whereby  that  labour
among  them  might  be  well  spared.  The  fort  being
taken  with  all  their  ordinance,  the  admirall  waved  to
the  ships,  willing  them  to  wey  and  come  in ;  which  they
did  with  all  speed,  himselfe  taking  order  in  leaving
certeine  men  in  keeping  the  sayd  fort,  and  placed  the
ordinance  toward  the  high  towne,  from  whence  hee
suspected  the  greatest  danger ;  and  putting  his  men  in
order,  marched  toward  the  low  towne,  which  was  about
some foureteene  score from the  fort : in  which  towne

50

JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1595-

lay  all  their  merchandize  and  other  goods.  Approching
to  the  towne,  he  entered  the  same,  the  people  imbark-
ing  themselves  in  caravels  &  boats,  with  all  the  expe-
dition they  could.  The  base  towne,  of  above  an
hundred  houses,  being  thus  taken,  we  found  in  it  great
store  of  merchandizes  of  all  sorts :  as  Brasil-wood,
sugars.  Calico-cloth,  pepper,  cynamon,  cloves,  mase,  nut-
megs, with  divers  other  good  things,  to  the  great  com-
fort of  us  all.  The  admirall  went  up  and  downe  the
towne,  and  placed  at  the  South  end  of  the  same  captaine
Venner  and  his  company,  himselfe  and  his  company  in
the  midst  of  the  towne,  and  captaine  Barker  and  captaine
Addy  at  the  other  end  of  the  towne,  giving  great  charge,
that  no  man  upon  paine  of  great  punishment  and  losse
of  his  shares,  should  breake  up  or  enter  into  any  ware-
house, without  order  and  direction  from  the  admirall.
And  this  commandement  was  as  well  kept  as  ever  any
was  kept,  where  so  great  spoile  and  booty  was  found :
for  it  was  not  knowen  in  all  the  time  of  our  being  there,
that  any  disorder  was  committed,  or  any  lodge  or  ware-
house broken  open,  or  any  spoile  was  made,  or  pillaging
of  any  thing ;  which  is  a  note  much  to  be  observed  in
such  an  action :  for  common  mariners  and  souldiers
are  much  given  to  pillaging  and  spoiling,  making  greater
account  of  the  same  then  of  their  shares.

Order  being  put  in  all  things,  we  kept  a  very  sure
watch  this  first  night,  and  the  morning  being  come,
our  admirall  and  captaine  Venner,  with  the  rest  of  the
captaines,  went  about  the  towne,  and  gave  order  for
the  fortifying  of  it  with  all  expedition  :  so  that  within
two  dayes  it  was  surrounded  with  posts  &  planks,
all  that  part  of  the  towne  next  the  maine  land,  at  least
nine  foot  high  ;  for  (God  be  thanked)  we  found  provi-
sion in  the  towne,  sufficient  store  for  it.  Now  it  is  to
be  understood,  that  this  towne  is  environed  on  the  one
part  by  the  sea,  and  on  the  backside  by  a  river  that
runneth  behinde  it ;  so  that  to  come  to  it  by  land,
you  must  enter  it  by  a  small  narrow  passage  not  above

51

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

forty  paces  over  at  an  high  water.  At  this  passage  we
built  a  fort,  and  planted  in  it  five  pieces  of  ordinance,
which  we  tooke  out  of  the  first  fort  we  wan  at  our
comming  into  the  harborow.  Now  we  having  the
towne  in  possession,  our  admirall  sent  for  the
Hollanders  by  his  chyrurgian,  which  had  bene  brought
up  in  that  countrey,  a  man  knowing  their  conditions,
and  sober  and  discreet  of  his  owne  cariage.  At  his
first  comming  aboord  of  them,  they  seemed  to  stand
upon  their  owne  guard  and  defence,  for  they  were  three
great  and  strong  ships  :  but  he  used  himselfe  so,  that
they  at  the  last  willed  him  to  come  into  the  greatest
of  their  ships,  which  was  above  450  tunnes.  Then  he
declared  to  them  our  intent  of  comming  thither,  and
that  they  should  be  there  as  sure  from  any  shew  of
violence  or  injury  offered  them,  as  if  they  were  in
their  owne  houses,  and  if  they  should  thinke  so  good,
his  admirall  would  fraight  them  for  England,  if  they
would  be  content  with  fraight  reasonable,  and  as  they
should  agree,  and  it  should  be  at  their  owne  choise
whether  to  go  or  not,  he  would  not  force  them,  unlesse
it  were  to  their  benefit  and  good  liking.  Although
this  people  were  somewhat  stubburne  at  the  first,  as
that  nation  is  in  these  causes,  yet  being  satisfied  with
good  words  and  good  dealing  they  came  aland,  &  after
conference  had  with  the  admirall,  they  were  so  satisfied,
that  they  went  thorow  with  a  fraight  :  and  then  we
joyned  with  them,  &  they  with  us,  and  they  served  us
as  truely  &  as  faithfully  as  our  owne  people  did,  both
at  watch  and  ward,  by  sea  and  all  other  services.
Within  two  dayes  after  our  comming  in,  about  midnight,
a  great  number  of  Portugals  and  Indians  with  them,
came  downe  upon  us  with  a  very  great  cry  and  noise  ;
but  God  be  thanked,  we  were  ready  for  them  :  for  our
admirall  supposing  some  such  assault,  had  provided  all
our  muskets  with  haile-shot,  which  did  so  gaule  both
the  Indians  and  the  Portugals,  that  they  made  them
presently  retreat. And  this  is  to be noted,  that there

52

JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1595.
was  both  the  horse  and  his  rider  slaine  both  with  one
of  these  shot.  Our  men  followed  them  some  five  or
sixe  score,  but  no  further.  We  lost  in  this  conflict
but  onely  one  man,  but  had  divers  hurt.  What  was
lost  of  their  part,  we  could  not  tell,  for  they  had
before  day,  after  our  retreat,  caried  away  all  their  dead.
Within  three  or  foure  dayes  after  our  comming  in
appeared  before  the  harborow  3  ships  &  2  pinnesses,
the  pinnesses  being  somewhat  nere,  discried  our  flags,
and  one  of  them  came  in,  which  was  a  French  pinnesse,
declaring  all  the  rest  to  be  French  bottoms  ;  which  our
admirall  willed  should  come  in  :  and  so  they  did.
These  were  Frenchmen  of  war,  and  came  thither  for
purchase.  The  captaines  came  aland,  and  were  wel-
comed ;  amongst  whom  was  one  captaine  John  Noyer
of  Diepe,  that  the  yere  before  had  taken  in  our  admirall
at  the  iland  of  Mona  in  the  West  Indies,  where  his
ship  was  cast  away,  comming  out  of  the  East  Indies.
To  this  man  our  admirall  ofi^ered  great  kindnes,  and
performed  it,  &  was  not  ungratefuU  for  his  former  [III.  712.]
benefit  shewed  unto  him.  This  captaine  desired  of
our  admirall  to  bestow  upon  him  his  ships  lading  of
Fernambuc-wood,  which  he  granted  him,  and  also  his
pinnesse,  and  more,  gave  him  a  caravel  of  about  50
tuns,  &  bid  him  lade  her  with  wood  also  ;  which  with
other  benefits  he  gratefully  received.  To  the  other  two
captaines  he  granted  their  ladings  of  wood,  the  one
captaine  being  of  Diepe,  the  other  of  Rochel.  The
captain  of  Diepe  confessed  that  he  met  Abraham  Cocke  Abraham^

certein  moneths  before,  &  being  distressed  for  want  of  C^ocke  going
1  •  o  ^ •  ^1 1  • ^  . ■ fir  the  river

water,  gave  him  some,  &  went  with  nim  to  a  watering  ofpi^te  met

place  where  he  had  water  enough,  and  so  departed  from  withall.

him, saying that his men were very weake. The

comming  in  of  these ships did much strengthen us ;

for our  admiral  appointed both these French  and the

Flemings  to  keepe  watch  upon  the  river  by  night  with

their boats, every boat having in her 12 men at the

least,  and  the  boats  well  provided. This  was  for  feare

.53

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

of  fired  ships  or  barks  to  come  downe,  which  our
admirall  had  great  care  unto,  and  caused  our  ships  to
ride  by  cables  and  haulsers,  at  all  advantages  to  shun
them,  if  by  that  meanes  they  should  attempt  to  put  us
out  of  the  harborow  ;  giving  commandement  to  us
that  watched  in  the  towne,  that  what  fires  soever  we
should  espy  or  see,  not  one  man  to  start  from  his
watch  or  quarter,  unlesse  we  were  by  himselfe  com-
manded to  the  contrary.  Now  this  order  put  in  all
things,  and  having  viewed  all  the  goods  in  the  towne,
and  thinking  our  selves  sufficiently  fortified,  we  began
to  unlade  our  ships,  which  came  as  full  laden  in  as
they  went  foorth,  but  not  with  so  good  merchandize.
And  this  order  was  taken  about  the  unlading  of  them,
and  also  the  lading  of  goods  out  of  the  towne  :  our
men  were  divided  into  halves,  and  the  one  halfe
wrought  one  day,  and  the  other  halfe  the  other  day  ;
alwayes  those  that  wrought  not  kept  the  watch  with
their  furniture  in  their  hands  and  about  them,  and
none  stept  far  off  or  wandred  from  his  colours,  and
those  that  wrought  had  all  their  weapons  in  good  order
set  &  placed  by  them,  so  that  at  an  instant  every  one
knew  where  to  go  to  his  furniture  :  and  this  was  very
carefully  looked  unto.

The  third  day  after  our  comming  in,  came  down
from  the  higher  towne,  which  might  be  about  foure
miles  off  upon  a  hill,  three  or  foure  of  the  principall
gentlemen  of  the  countrey,  and  sayd  that  from  the
bishop,  themselves,  &  the  rest,  they  would  have  some
conference  with  our  admirall.  This  newes  being  brought
to  the  admirall,  he  hung  downe  his  head  for  a  small
season  ;  and  when  he  had  muzed  a  while,  he  answered,
I  must  go  aboord  of  the  Flemings  upon  busines  that
importeth  me,  and  therefore  let  them  stay  if  they  will  :
and  so  he  went  &  sate  there  with  the  Flemings  from
nine  of  the  clocke  till  two  at  the  afternoone.  In  this
space  divers  messengers  went  to  the  admirall,  to  come
away, for these  gentlemen stayd. To whom he gave

54

JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1595-
this  answere  :  Are  they  not  gone  yet  ?  And  about
two  of  the  clocke  he  came  aland,  and  then  they  tolde
him  they  were  departed.  Many  of  the  better  sort  of
our  men  marvelled,  and  thought  much,  because  he
would  not  vouchsafe  to  come  and  have  conference  with
such  men  of  account  as  they  seemed  to  be.  But  the
admiral  made  them  this  answere,  Sirs,  I  have  bene
brought  up  among  this  people,  I  have  lived  among
them  as  a  gentleman,  served  with  them  as  a  souldier,
and  lived  among  them  as  a  merchant,  so  that  I  should
have  some  understanding  of  their  demeanors  and
nature  ;  and  I  know  when  they  cannot  prevaile  with
the  sword  by  force,  then  they  deale  with  their  deceiveable
tongues  ;  for  faith  and  trueth  they  have  none,  neither
will  use  any,  unlesse  it  be  to  their  owne  advantage.
And  this  I  give  you  warning,  that  if  you  give  them
parle,  they  will  betray  us ;  and  for  my  part,  of  all
nations  in  the  world,  it  would  grieve  me  most  to  be
overtaken  by  this  nation  &  the  Spaniards  :  and  I  am
glad  it  was  my  fortune  to  pay  them  with  one  of  their
owne  fetches,  for  J  warrant  you  they  understand  me
better  then  you  thinke  they  do.  And  with  this  I  pray
you  be  satisfied  ;  I  hope  it  is  for  all  our  goods  :  for
what  shall  we  gaine  by  parle,  when  (by  the  helpe  of
God)  we  have  gotten  already  that  we  came  for,  should
we  venture  that  we  have  gotten  with  our  swords,  to
see  if  they  can  take  it  from  us  by  words  and  policy  ?
there  were  no  wisedome  in  so  doing.  You  know  what
it  hath  cost  us,  and  how  many  men  lie  wounded  that
be  not  yet  hole  of  this  other  nights  hurts  :  and  there-
fore from  hencefoorth  I  give  this  commission,  that  if
any  be  taken,  he  be  sent  away  with  this  order,  although
he  come  as  a  friend,  that  if  either  he  or  any  other
approch  us  from  henceforth,  he  shalbe  hanged  out  of
hand  :  and  other  course  then  this  I  will  not  take  with
them.  Which  course  was  followed,  for  within  3  or  4
dayes  after  it  was  performed  by  two  taken  in  the
night : and after that we were never troubled with

55

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

spies ;  and  although  divers  slaves  came  running  from
their  men  to  us,  by  which  we  understood  much  of  their
working  &  pretences,  yet  the  admirall  would  enterteine
few  of  them.

In  this  meane  time  that  we  began  to  worke,  the
Portugals  with  the  country  people  were  not  idle,  for
seeing  us  so  busie,  about  sixe  nights  after  our  comming
in,  they  privily  in  the  night  cast  up  a  trench  in  the
sands  about  a  sacar  shot  from  our  ships,  minding
there  to  plant  ordinance,  which  would  have  offended
our  ships  greatly  ;  &  they  would  not  have  bene  able
to  have  rode  there  to  take  in  their  lading,  which  now
began  to  go  aboord  of  them.  The  admirall  hear-
[III.  713.]  ing  this,  about  3  of  the  clocke  in  the  after  noone
marshalled  our  men,  and  he  and  all  the  rest  of  the
captaines  marched  toward  them.  The  Portugals  &
Indians  perceiving  our  comming,  began  to  withdraw
themselves  within  the  trench,  meaning  (as  it  should
appeare)  to  fight  it  out  there  :  but  we  made  no
stand,  neither  did  it  behove  us,  but  presently
approched  the  trenches  with  our  muskets  &  pikes,
afore  their  trenches  were  thorowly  finished  :  so  that
by  Gods  helpe  we  entered  them.  And  the  Portugals  &
Indians  left  the  place,  &  left  unto  us  4  good  peeces  of
brasse  ordinance,  with  powder  and  shot  &  divers  other
necessaries,  and  among  the  rest  5  smal  carts  of  that
countrey,  which  to  us  were  more  worth  then  al  the  rest  we
tooke,  for  the  lading  of  our  goods  from  the  towne  to  the
waters  side :  for  without  them  we  could  not  have  told
what  to  have  done,  much  of  our  goods  being  so  heavie,
that  without  carts,  we  were  not  able  to  weyld  them  :  all
these  things  we  brought  away  &  destroyed  al  those  plat-
forms that  they  had  made,  and  then  we  had  rest  with
them  for  certaine  dayes,  in  which  we  went  forward,
deviding  our  marchandize  with  captaine  Venner  according
to  our  consort,  and  went  daily  lading  them  abord,  every
ships  company  according  as  their  turnes  fell  out,  but  only
the  three  Dutch  ships :  for  the  goods  being  put  into  their

56

JAMES LANCASTER  ad.

1595-
boats  their  owne  companies  laded  themselves.  And  this
farther  good  chance  or  blessing  of  God  we  had  to  helpe  us,
that  assoone  as  we  had  taken  our  cartes,  the  next  morning
came  in  a  ship  with  some  60  Negros,  10  Portugall
women,  and  40  Portugals  :  the  women  and  the  Negros
we  turned  out  of  the  towne,  but  the  Portugals  our  Ad-
mirall  kept  to  draw  the  carts  when  they  were  laden,
which  to  us  was  a  very  great  ease.  For  the  countrey
is  very  hote  and  ill  for  our  nation  to  take  any  great
travell  in.

In  this  towne  there  is  no  fresh  water  to  be  had,  and
therefore  we  were  every  5  or  6  dayes  compelled  to  passe
over  the  river  into  the  maine  land  to  get  fresh  water,
which  after  the  first  or  second  time  the  Portugals  kept
and  would  have  defended  our  watering,  so  that  we  were
driven  to  water  of  force,  and  at  severall  times  some  of
our  men  were  hurt,  and  onely  two  or  three  slaine,  and
with  this  danger  we  were  forced  to  get  our  water.

And  as  they  molested  us  in  our  watering,  so  they  slept
not  in  other  devises,  but  put  in  practise  to  burne  our  ships
or  remove  them  out  of  the  harbour.  For  within  some  20
dayes  after  our  comming  in,  they  had  prepared  5  Caravels
and  filled  them  with  such  things  as  would  best  take  fire
and  burne :  these  they  brought  within  a  mile  or  little
more  of  our  ships,  and  there  set  them  on  fire,  for  neerer
they  could  not  well  come  because  of  our  watch  of  boates,
for  as  is  above  said,  the  Admirall  had  alwaies  6  boates  that
kept  watch  above  halfe  a  mile  from  the  ships  for  feare
of  such  exploytes  as  these,  which  was  the  cause  they
could  not  fire  them,  so  neere  the  ships  as  they  would  have
done.  But  these  fired  Caravels  had  the  tide  with  them,
and  also  the  little  winde  that  blewe  was  in  their  favour ;
which  caused  them  to  come  downe  the  streame  the  faster :
which  our  boats  perceiving  made  to  them  with  as  much
expedition  as  conveniently  they  could,  but  the  tide  and
wind  both  serving  them,  they  approched  toward  the
ships  with  great  expedition.  Our  men  in  the  towne  began
to be in  some  feare  of  them, yet  no  man  mooved  or

57

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595-

started'  from  his  quarter  more  then  if  there  had  bene
nothing  to  doe.  Also  the  masters  and  such  as  were
aboord,  were  somewhat  amased  to  see  5  so  great  fires
to  be  comming  downe  among  their  ships,  but  they  pre-
pared for  to  cleere  them  of  it,  as  well  as  they  could,
being  provided  afore  hande  &  judging  that  some  such
stratagems  would  be  there  used,  the  river  being  very
fit  therefore.  But  (God  be  thanked)  who  was  alwaies
with  us  &  our  best  defence  in  this  voyage ;  by  whose
assistance  we  performed  this  so  great  an  attempt  with  so
small  forces.  Our  companie  in  the  boats  so  played  the
men  when  they  saw  the  fires  come  neere  our  ships,  that
casting  grapnels  with  yron  chaines  on  them,  as  every  boat
had  one  for  that  purpose,  some  they  towed  aground,  and
some  they  brought  to  a  bitter  or  anker,  where  they  rode
till  all  their  force  was  burned  out,  &  so  we  were  de-
livered by  Gods  helpe  from  this  fearefull  danger.  Within
some  6  nights  after  this,  which  might  be  about  the  26
day  after  our  comming  in  &  abode  there,  about  1 1  of
the  clocke  at  night,  came  driving  downe  other  3  great
raftes  burning  with  the  hugest  fires  that  I  have  scene.
These  were  exceeding  dangerous,  for  when  our  men
approched  them  thinking  to  clap  their  grapnels  upon
them,  as  they  had  done  upon  the  Caravels  the  night
before,  they  were  prevented:  for  there  stooke  out  of  the'
rafts  many  poles  which  kept  them  from  the  body  of  the
rafts,  that  they  could  not  come  to  throw  their  grapnels
into  them :  &  yet  they  had  this  inconvenience  worse  then
al  the  rest  which  most  troubled  us.  There  stooke  out
among  the  poles  certaine  hollow  trunks  filled  with  such
provision  of  fire-workes  that  they  ceased  not  still  (as  the
fire  came  downe  to  those  trunks  to  set  them  on  fire)  to
spout  out  such  sparkles,  that  our  boats  having  powder  in
them  for  our  mens  use,  durst  not  for  feare  of  fyring  them-
selves with  their  owne  powder  come  neere  those  sparkles
of  the  raftes,  but  seeing  them  to  drive  neerer  &  neerer
our  ships,  they  wet  certain  clothes  and  laid  upon  their
flaskes  and  bandelers  and  so  ventured  upon  them,  &  with

58

JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1595.
their  grapnels  tooke  holde  of  them,  and  so  towed  them
on  ground,  where  they  stooke  fast  &  were  not  burnt
out  the  next  day  in  the  morning.  Diverse  logs  and  tim-  [III.  7H«]
bers  came  driving  along  by  our  ships,  and  burning,  but
with  our  boats  we  easily  defended  them.  And  thus  (God
be  praysed)  we  escaped  the  second  fires.  A  third  firing
was  prepared,  as  a  Negro  gave  us  to  understand,  but  this
we  prevented  by  our  departure.  For  this  third  firing
were  very  great  preparations ;  and  we  were  credibly  in-
formed of  certainetie,  that  this  firing  should  be  such  as  we
should  never  be  able  to  prevent,  and  assuredly  these  fires
be  dangerous  things  and  not  to  be  prevented  upon  the
sudden,  unlesse  it  be  afore  prepared  for  and  foreseene.
For  when  it  commeth  upon  the  sudden  and  unlooked  for,
and  unprovided  for,  it  bringeth  men  into  a  great  amaze-
ment and  at  their  wits  ende.  And  therefore  let  all  men
riding  in  rivers  in  their  enemies  countrey  be  sure  to  looke
to  be  provided  before  hand,  for  against  fire  there  is  no
resistance  without  preparation.

Also  it  is  a  practise  in  these  hot  countreys,  where  there
be  such  expert  swimmers,  to  cut  the  cables  of  ships :  and
one  night  it  was  practised  to  cut  the  Admirals  cable,  and
yet  the  boate  rode  by  the  cable  with  two  men  in  her  to
watch  all  the  night,  and  the  bwoy  onely  was  cut,  but  not
the  cable:  but  after  that  night,  seeing  then  our  good
watch,  they  never  after  attempted  it.

While  all  these  things  passed,  our  ships  (God  be
thanked)  thorow  the  industry  of  our  governours,  and
diligent  labour  of  our  men,  began  to  be  wholly  laden,  and
all  the  best  marchandize  conveyed  aboord  our  ships,  so
that  our  Admirall  ment  to  depart  that  night,  which  was
the  3 1  day  after  our  entrance,  or  else  on  the  next  day  at
the  farthest,  and  so  warning  was  given  to  all  men  to
make  themselves  readie.  Our  Admiral  being  aboord  his
ship  ye  same  morning,  espyed  in  the  sands  right  against
the  place  where  the  ships  rode,  that  there  was  a  small
banke  of  sand  newly  cast  up,  under  which  he  perceived
now  and  then  some  people  to  be :  presently  he  tooke  his

59

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

boat  and  went  to  the  towne  and  called  all  the  Captaines
together,  declaring  that  the  enemies  were  about  some
pretence  right  against  the  ships,  consulting  whether  it
were  best  to  sally  out  &  see  what  they  were  doing,  or
depart  that  evening  according  to  the  former  determina-
tion. The  Admirall  was  of  opinion  to  depart  that  night,
saying  it  was  but  folly  to  seeke  warres  since  we  had  no
neede  to  doe  it  :  other  affirmed,  it  were  good  to  see  what
they  did,  least  the  winde  might  be  contrarie  and  the  ships
not  get  out,  and  so  our  enemies  may  build  upon  us  to
our  great  disadvantage.  Well,  said  the  Admiral,  the
matter  is  not  great,  for  there  can  be  no  danger  in  this
sally,  for  where  they  worke  it  is  within  Falkonshot  of  the
ships,  and  if  any  power  should  come  against  you,  the
ships  may  play  upon  them  with  40  peeces  of  ordinance  at
the  least,  so  that  a  bird  cannot  passe  there  but  she  must
be  slaine.  I  am  somewhat  unwilling  you  should  go,  for  I
have  not  bene  well  these  two  dayes,  and  I  am  not  strong
to  march  upon  those  heavie  sands  :  they  answered  all  at
once,  you  shall  not  neede  to  trouble  your  selfe  for  this
service,  for  you  see  it  is  nothing  and  of  no  danger,  being
so  neere  the  ships,  doubt  you  not  we  will  accomplish  this
service  well  ynough,  and  returne  againe  within  this  houre.
The  Admirall  answered :  the  danger  cannot  be  great,  but
yet  you  shall  goe  out  strong  for  feare  of  the  worst.  And
so  the  Admirall  marshalled  them  275  men  French  and
English,  which  were  under  the  conduct  of  Edmund
Barker,  captaine  Barker  of  Plimmouth,  Viceadmirall  to
captaine  Venner,  captaine  Addy,  and  the  three  French
captaines  all  going  out  together,  and  they  were  to  march
upon  a  narrow  peece  of  ground  to  the  place  whether  they
were  sent  unto  :  in  the  brodest  part  betwixt  the  sea  and
the  water  on  the  other  side,  it  is  not  above  a  stones  cast,
for  it  is  a  bank  of  sand  lying  betweene  the  river  &  the
sea,  so  they  needed  not  to  feare  any  comming  on  their
backs  or  on  their  sides,  and  before  them  could  no  man
come,  but  he  must  passe  by  all  the  ships  which  no
company  of  men  were  able  to  do  without  present  death.

60

JAMES LANCASTER  ad.

1595.
The  Admirall  commanded  them  at  their  departure  to  go
no  further  then  the  place  he  sent  them  to,  and  so  he  him-
selfe  went  aboord the ships and made readie all the
ordinance  for  feare  of  the  worst,  not  knowing  what  might
insue,  although  he  saw  no  danger  might  follow. Thus  we
marched quietly till we came to the place we were
sent  unto,  being  right over against the  ships : out of
which place came some dozen shot,  which seeing us
come, discharged and ran their wayes with such as
were working within the said  platforme. So  that  we
came into it and perceived they  had  begunne to lay
plankes to plant ordinance  upon. Our  Admiral  com-
manded, if  there were any such thing, to burne the
plankes &  returne in againe, which we might have
done without hurting of any mans finger : but our
leaders  were  not  content  to  have  performed  the  service
committed  them in charge, but  would needes expresly
&  against their order march on further  to  fight  with
certaine Ensignes almost a  mile  off,  cleane out of  the
reach of  the ordinance  of  all our ships, &  where  lay
the strength of  the  whole countrey. When  our men
began to draw neere those Ensigns of men, the
Ensignes  seemed  to  retire  with  great  speed,  which our
men followed with such great hast that some out-
running other some,  our order  was  broken,  and  those
ensignes retyred themselves into the force of the
whole countrey, so that our formost men were in
the midst of their enemies yer they were aware,
which were slaine  yer the  rest  could come  to  succour  [III.  715.]
them. The enemies incouraged by this,  came also
upon  the  rest, which presently  began to  retire, & the
enemies followed them  til  they  came  within  the reach
of  the  ordinance  of  our  ships,  where  they  were beaten
off  and  left  their  pursuit. In  this conflict  were slaine
captain  Barker  captaine  of  the  Salomon,  captaine  Cotton
ye  Admirals Lieutenant,  captaine  John  Noyer  a  French
captaine of Diepe, and another French captaine of
Rochel,  with M.  John  Barker  &  other to  the  number

61

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1595.

of  35  :  for  these  were  the  formost  and  hottest  in  the
pursuit  of  the  Ensignes  aforesaid,  and  by  their  for-
wardnes  came  all  to  perish.  At  our  returne  into  the
towne  the  Admiral  came  to  us  much  bewayling  the
death  of  so  many  good  men  as  were  lost,  wondering
what  we  ment  to  passe  the  expresse  order  that  was
given  us.  With  this  losse  our  men  were  much  danted,
but  our  Admirall  began  againe  to  encourage  them,
declaring  that  the  fortune  of  the  warres  was  some-
times to  win  and  sometimes  to  loose.  And  therewith-
all  he  wished  every  man  to  prepare  &  make  himselfe
readie :  for  that  night  (God  willing)  he  would  depart.
For  all  our  ships  were  readie  and  laden,  and  he  would
not  stay  any  further  fortune.  The  evening  being  come,
the  ships  began  to  wey  &  go  forth  of  the  harbour,
and  God  be  thanked  of  his  goodnesse  toward  us  who
sent  us  a  faire  wind  to  go  foorth  withall,  so  that  by
1 1  of  the  clocke  in  the  night  we  were  all  forth  in
safety.  The  enemies  perceiving  our  departing,  planted
a  peece  or  two  of  ordinance,  and  shot  at  us  in  the
night,  but  did  us  no  harme.  We  were  at  our  com-
ming  foorth  15  sailes,  that  is,  3  sailes  of  Hollanders,
the  one  of  450  tunnes,  the  other  of  350  tunnes,  and
the  third  of  300  tunnes,  foure  sailes  of  french  &  one
ship  which  the  Admiral  gave  the  french  Captain,  3
sailes  of  Captain  Venners  fleet  of  Plimmouth,  and  4
sailes  of  our  Admirals  fleete,  all  these  were  laden  with
marchandizes,  and  that  of  good  worth.  We  stayed  in
this  harbour  to  passe  all  this  businesse  but  onely  31
dayes,  and  in  this  time  we  were  occupied  with  skir-
mishes and  attempts  of  the  enemie  11.  times;  in  all
which  skirmishes  we  had  the  better,  onely  this  last
excepted.  To  God  be  the  honour  and  praise  of  all,
&c.  The  whole  fleete  being  out  in  safety,  the  next  day
in  the  morning  the  Admirall  gave  order  to  the  whole
Peranjeu  40. flee^g  to  saile  toward  Peranjew  a  harbour  lying  some  40

^S^f!,?"' "  leagues to the Northward of  Fernambucke, and there

ward  of o  r i 1 t

Fernambuck. to  take  in  fresh  water  and to  refresh themselves : and

62

JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1595-

to  make  provision  for  refreshing,  our  Admirall  had
sent  thither  some  6  daies  before  two  French  men  in  a
smal  pinnesse,  which  Frenchmen  he  had  provided  from
Diepe  before  his  comming  out  of  England  for  that
purpose.  For  both  these  two  spake  the  Indians
language  very  perfectly :  for  at  this  port  of  Peranjew
and  an  other  called  Potaju  some  6  leagues  to  the
Northward  the  Frenchmen  have  had  trade  for  brasil-
wood,  and  have  laden  from  thence  by  the  Indians
meanes,  who  have  fet  it  for  them  some  2,0  leagues
into  the  country  upon  their  backs,  3  or  4  ships  every
yere.  Thus  we  all  sailed  toward  Peranjew,  at  which
place  we  arrived  in  the  night,  so  that  we  were  forced
to  lie  off  &  on  with  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind,  in  which
we  lost  the  most  part  of  our  fleete,  &  they  not
knowing  this  coast  put  off  to  the  sea,  and  so  went
directly  for  England.  Our  Admirall  and  some  4  saile
more  with  him  put  into  the  harborow  of  Peranjew,
and  there  watered  and  refreshed  himselfe  very  well,
with  hens,  conies,  hares  and  potatos,  with  other  things,
which  the  two  Frenchmen  had  partly  provided  before
his  comming :  this  is  a  very  good  harborow  where  Peranjeu  a
ships  may  ride  and  refresh  very  well.  But,  as  I  am  ^^n  S°o'^
given  to  understand  since  our  comming  from  thence,
the  Portugals  have  attempted  the  place  and  doe  inhabite
it,  and  have  put  the  French  from  their  accustomed
trade.  Here  having  watered  and  refreshed  our  selves,
we  put  to  the  sea,  plying  after  the  rest  of  our  fleete
which  were  gone  before,  which  we  never  heard  of  till
our  arrivall  in  England  at  The  downes  in  the  moneth
of  July,  where  we  understood  the  rest  of  our  consorts
to  be  passed  up  for  London,  Captaine  Venner  &  his
fleete  to  be  at  Plimmouth,  and  the  French  ships  to  be
safe  arrived  at  Diepe,  which  to  us  was  very  great  com-
fort. At  our  setting  sayle  from  The  downes,  accord-
ing as  tne  custome  is,  finding  the  Queenes  ships  there,
we  saluted  them  with  certaine  ordinance.  The  Gunner
being  carelesse,  as  they  are  many  times  of  their  powder,

63

A.D,
1595.

[III.  716.]

l^ke  king  of
Spaines  resolu-
tion to  proceed
in  the  dis-
coverie  y
conquest  of
Rio  Grande.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

in  discharging  certain  pieces  in  ye  gunner  roome,  set  a
barrel  of  powder  on  fire,  which  tooke  fire  in  ye  gunner
roome,  blew  up  the  Admirals  caben,  slew  the  gunner
with  2  others  outright,  &  hurt  20  more,  of  which  4  or
5  died.  This  powder  made  such  a  smoke  in  the  ship
with  the  fire  that  burnt  in  the  gunner  roome  among
all  the  fire  workes,  that  no  man  at  the  first  wist  what
to  doe :  but  recalling  backe  their  feare,  they  began  to
cast  water  into  the  gunner  roome  in  such  abundance
(for  the  Queenes  ships  now  &  also  the  other  ships  that
were  in  our  company  came  presently  to  our  helpe)  that
(God  be  praised)  we  put  out  the  fire  &  saved  all,  &
no  great  harme  was  done  to  the  goods.  By  this  may
be  seene  that  there  is  no  sure  safety  of  things  in  this
world.  For  now  we  made  account  to  be  out  of  all
danger,  where  behold  a  greater  came  upon  us,  then  we
suffered  all  the  whole  voyage.  But  the  almightie  be
praysed  for  ever,  which  delivered  us  out  of  this  and
many  other  in  this  voyage.  Our  fire  being  well  put
out,  and  we  taking  in  fresh  men  (God  be  praysed)  we
came  to  Blacke-wall  in  safety.

A  speciall  letter  written  from  Feliciano  Cieza
de  Carvalsho  the  Governour  of  Parajua  in
the  most  Northerne  part  of  Brasil,  1597,
to  Philip  the  second  king  of  Spaine,  answer-
ing his  desire  touching  the  conquest  of  Rio
Grande,  with  the  relation  of  the  besieging  of
the  castle  of  Cabodelo  by  the  Frenchmen,
and  of  the  discoverie  of  a  rich  silver  mine
and  diverse  other  important  matters.

Received  your  Majesties  letter  bearing  date  the
ninth  of  November  1596,  whereby  I  understande
that  your  Majestie  doth  determine  to  proceede  in

the  discoverie  and  conquest  of  Rio  Grande,  according  to  the
relation  which  was  sent  your  Majestie  by  Don  Francisco
de  Sousa,  Governour  generall  of  this  realme  of  Brasilia :

64

LETTER  FROM FELICIANO CIEZA  a.d.

together  with  a  copie  of  a  letter,  which  your  Majestic
sent  unto  us,  bearing  date  the  two  and  twentieth  of
March  1596.  Moreover  I  received  another  letter  from
your  Majestic  bearing  date  the  15  of  March  1597.
Both  which  letters  were  to  one  effect.  It  may  please
your  Majestic  to  understand  that  there  are  diverse
Gentlemen  in  these  countreys  of  as  good  abilitie  as
my  selfe,  which  seeke  to  live  at  home  onely  for
their  ease  and  pleasure,  and  are  not  wont  to  hazard
nor  venture  their  bodies,  lives,  and  goods  so  often
times  in  your  Majesties  service  as  I  have  done  and
commonly  doc  ;  and  can  keepe  their  goods  and  riches,
and  not  spend  nor  wast  them  as  I  have  done,  and
dayly  doe  so  wilfully :  yet  neverthelesse  being  spent  in
your  Majesties  service,  I  am  very  glad  thereof.  For  I
and  they  arc  alwayes  rcadic  at  your  Majesties  com-
mandement.

And as concerning your Majesties commandement
in commanding mc that I should put to my help-
ing hand in the conquest of Rio Grande : although
this  Captaineship of  Parajua  and  countrey where  I  doe  TheCaptaine-
governe  doth  want  abilitie  for  that  purpose,  yet never-  ^^^f  °f
thelessc  your  Majestic  shall  alwayes finde  mc  readie to  stand^thln
doe your Majestic the best service I can : for it is  sixe  degi:  45
very well knowcn how forward I have bene  alwayes  min.  of
and am in this conquest, and still doc put to my  ^^^^herly  lati-
helping hand, as partly your Majestic doth under- *  ^'
stand by a letter  which I wrote to  your Majesty  by
my  Sonne,  bearing  date  the 19 of  March 1596 where-
in your Majestic may understand what good service
I have alreadic done therein, and alwayes will be
readie to my power to doe  the like  in  furthering  of
the said enterprise.

It  may  please  your  Majestic  to  understand  that
the  third  of  July  there  was  brought  unto  me  a
Frenchman  a  prisoner,  who  presented  himselfc  unto
me.  And  I  examining  of  him,  he  toldc  mc  that  he
came  running  away  from  certainc  French  ships  men
XI  65  E

A.D.

1597-

The  castle  of
Cabodelo  be-
sieged by  the
French.

The  garison
of  Fernam-
buck.

The  countrey
ofPetiguar
rebelleth
against  the
Portugals.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  warre,  which  came  upon  this  coast :  and  he  tolde
me  that  he  had  served  your  Majestie  in  the  warres
of  France.  Likewise  he  told  me  that  he  left  me
seven  great  ships  Frenchmen  of  warre  riding  at  an
anker  in  Rio  Grande,  and  that  there  were  13  french
ships  of  warre  more,  which  had  given  battery  to  the
castle  of  Cabodelo,  and  landed  350  soldiers  all  in
white  armour,  and  the  battery  continued  from  Friday
untill  the  Munday  following  both  by  sea  and  land,
and  great  store  of  Frenchmen  were  slaine,  and  two
Captaines  of  the  French.  On  our  side  the  Captaine
of  the  castle  was  slaine,  and  other  two  Portugals
hurt :  other  harme  they  had  none.  There  were  but
twentie  Portugals  in  the  castle,  and  five  pieces  of
ordinance.  They  ment  to  have  kept  the  castle,  and
to  have  traded  with  the  Indian  people.  So  seeing
they  could  not  take  the  castle,  they  hoysed  sayles,
and  went  from  thence  to  Rio  Grande :  and  being
altogether  they  are  in  number  20  saile  at  an  anker
in  Rio  Grande.  And  some  of  them  determine  after
they  be  new  trimmed  and  drest,  and  have  taken  in
fresh  victuals,  and  stayed  there  untill  Easter,  then  to
depart  from  thence  to  the  Honduras,  and  so  to  burne
and  spoyle  some  townes  thereabout.

I  certified  Manuel  Mascarenhas  of  these  informations
by  my  letters,  requesting  him  to  send  me  with  all  expedi-
tion those  souldiers  which  were  in  garison  in  Fernambuck
to  ayde  me,  and  to  defende  this  Captaineship  from  the
enemie.  But  the  Friers  of  The  Covent  would  not
consent  thereunto,  nor  suffer  them  to  be  sent  unto
me.  So  I  was  forced  to  make  shift  with  those  souldiers
only  which  I  had  in  my  government  and  tooke  them  with
me,  and  marched  to  the  place  where  the  enemies  were
entrenched,  and  upon  Whitsunday  in  the  evening  about
three  of  the  clocke,  having  in  my  company  a  Negro  of
the  countrey  of  Petiguar,  which  was  our  guide,  he
brought  us  where  the  enemies  campe  was ;  and  presently
I  did  assault  them,  and  slew  great  store  of  them,  burning

66

LETTER FROM FELICIANO CIEZA  a.d.

1597-
the  villages  and  countrey  of  those  rebels,  which  did  joine
with  the  Frenchmen,  and  tooke  many  of  them  prisoners.
So  they  told  me  that  there  were  ten  great  French  ships
of  warre  which  were  at  an  anker  in  Rio  Grande.

Likewise  I  was  informed,  that  there  is a  Frenchman
called Daurmigas, which hath discovered and found
great store of  silver in a place  called Copaoba. The  ^  ^''^<:^  "^'^^^
silver  hath  bene  tried  and  melted,  it  is  very  good  and  ^^^fi""^^^
fine silver, and there is great quantitie. The man  ^iff^i„  ^ixe
which told me of  this hath beene in the mine, and  ^ayes jouj-ney
hath  scene  it  tried  and  melted. And  1 have  bene  my  ofParajua.
selfe once in the place: it is but 6 dayes journey  \y^^'T^1-\
from  this  Captaineship.

Furthermore  this  Frenchman  told  me  that  one
Monsieur  Mifa  a  french  Captaine,  and  a  kinsman  of
the  governour  and  Viceadmirall  of  Diepe  in  Nor-
mandie,  had  one  of  his  armes  strooken  off  at  the
siege  of  the  castle  of  Cabodelo ;  who  is  departed  from
Rio  Grande,  with  determination  to  come  backe  hither
againe  the  next  yeere  in  the  moneth  of  Januarie  fol-
lowing, and  to  inhabite  in  this  countrey  of  Paraiba,
which  is  20  leagues  from  Fernambuck,  because  of  the
great  store  of  silver,  which  they  have  alreadie  found
here.

Moreover  I  am  enformed  that  a  noble  man  of  France
called  The  earle  of  Villa  Dorca  doth  intend  to  come
upon  this  coast  with  a  great  fleete  from  Rochel.  It
were  good  that  your  Majestic  would  send  into  France
to  knowe  the  certainetie  thereof.

The  Frenchman  likewise  told  me  that  all  the  Canibals  All  the  Cani-
of  Petiguar  have  joyned themselves  in  companie  with  '^"'^^  ofPett-
certaine Frenchmen, which were cast away in two  ^^'ilj/J^^
ships upon this  coast. The one of  these ships  which  Frenchmen
were cast away was one Rifoles,  and the other ship  against  the
was this mans. And those Frenchmen which came  Po^'^^S^l^-
upon this coast did joyne themselves with those
Canibals which did rebell, and did divide themselves
into two squadrons. So I sent presently to Manuel

67

4.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

Mascarenhas  that  he  should  send  me  aide  and  muni-
tion. But  he  sent  me  word  againe,  that  he  had  none
to  spare,  and  that  he  did  purpose  with  all  speede  to
goe  himselfe  to  Rio  Grande;  and  that  he  was  not  able
to  furnish  himselfe  so  well  as  he  could  wish,  nor  to
bring  his  souldiers  into  the  field,  for  lacke  of  shot,
powder,  and  other  munition,  which  he  did  want.

Hereupon  once  more  the  29  of  July  I  with  my
souldiers  marched  to  the  enemies  campe,  and  there
joyning  battell  with  the  Indian  rebels,  which  were
joyned  with  the  Frenchmen  that  were  their  leaders,
I  did  set  upon  them,  and  slew  great  store  of  them,
and  tooke  foureteene  of  them  prisoners.  They  doe
report  the  very  same  newes,  which  the  other  French-
men did  tell  me  as  touching  the  ships  which  were  in
the  harbour  of  Rio  Grande ;  and  how  their  pretence
was  to  have  come  and  have  taken  us,  and  spoyled
the  countrey.

But  now  being  put  to  flight  and  having  received
the  overthrow,  they  can  get  no  victuals  to  victuall
their  shippes :  which  hath  bene  the  cause  that  they
are  mightily  hindered  in  their  intent,  and  dare  not
come  any  more  to  attempt  us.  And  the  Indians  are
so  dismayed,  that  in  haste  they  will  have  no  more
helpe  nor  aide  of  the  Frenchmen.  So  by  these  meanes
of  necessitie  the  Indians  must  submit  themselves  unto
us,  considering  they  are  quite  spoyled  and  overthrowen
for  a  long  time.  Likewise  they  have  enformed  me
touching  the  silver  mines  which  are  found,  that  it  is
French  ships  most  true.  For  those  french  shippes  which  were  in
laden  with  RJo  Grande  have  laden  great  store  of  the  oare.  Where-
great  store  of  ^^^^  j  certified  Manuel  de  Mascarenhas  of  the  Frenchmens
newes,  and  howe  every  thing  did  stand  ;  wishing  him  to
make  readie  foure  ships  and  three  hundred  souldiers,
and  so  to  take  the  harbour  of  Rio  Grande,  being  now
cleered  and  voyde  of  the  enemie :  and  to  search  out
the  situation  of  the  place,  and  where  were  best  to
fortifie and to build some fortes for the defence of

68

LETTER FROM FELICIANO CIEZA  ad.

1597-
this  river,  where  neede  shall  require.  Hereunto  Mas-
carenhas  sent  me  word,  that  when  he  went  himselfe,
and  found  it  true  which  hath  beene  reported  touching
the  silver  mines,  that  then  he  would  send  both  men
and  ships.  Therefore  your  Majestic  must  give  order,
that  the  rest  of  the  Governours  shall  ayde  and  assist
me  in  these  warres :  otherwise  of  my  selfe  I  am  not
able  to  doe  more  then  I  have  alreadie  done  in  defend-
ing of  this  countrey  against  our  enemies  which  are
many.

It  may  please  your  Majestic  to  be  advertised,  that
from  time  to  time  I  have  written  unto  Don  Francisco
de  Sousa  Governor  general  of  this  realme,  who  is  in
Baia,  as  concerning  these  Frenchmen  of  warre :  but  he
will  not  answere  me  to  any  purpose,  because  I  do  write
unto  him  for  such  things  as  I  doe  want,  which  are  shot,
powder,  men,  and  munition  requisite  for  your  Majesties
service  &  safegard  of  this  captaineship.  For  here  are
neither  shot,  powder,  nor  any  thing  els  to  defend  us
from  our  enemies;  nor  any  that  wil  put  to  their  help-
ing hands  for  the  defence  of  this  countrey,  &  the  service
of  your  Majestic.  And  therefore  it  were  needful  that
your  Majesty  should  commit  the  charge  and  govern-
ment into  the  hands  of  Diego  Sierva,  with  expresse
charge  that  all  the  captaines  &  commanders  upon  paine
of  death  obey  him  and  be  readie  at  all  times  to  aide
and  assist  him  in  your  service.  Otherwise  this  countrey
cannot  be  kept  and  maintained,  having  so  great  warres
continually  as  we  have,  and  are  troubled  withall.  For
this  Diego  Sierva  is  a  very  good  souldier,  and  hath
good  experience ;  and  is  fit  to  governe  this  countrey.
Your  Highnesse  is  also  to  send  him  Commission  with
expresse  commandement  to  follow  these  wars ;  otherwise
this  countrey  cannot  be  kept,  but  daily  they  will  rebell.
For  here  are  none  that  will  serve  your  Majestic  so  justly
as  he  will  do :  who  wil  have  a  great  care  in  any  thing
which  shal  concerne  your  Majesties  service  touching  the  [III.  718.]
estate  of  this  countrey. For  the  Governour  Sousa  doth

69

A.D.

f597-

The  conquest
of  Rio
Grande.

Two  Torts  to
be  builded  at
Cabodelo.

The  countrey
of  Parajua  in
danger  dayly
to  be  lost.

The  warres
ofPetiguar.

A  nezv  cap-
tain appointed
in  Cabodelo.

A  great  con-
troversie
touching  the
government  of
the  Indian
tozvnes.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

spend your Majesties treasure in building his owne
Ingenios  or  sugar-milles.

And  those  Captaines  which  your  Majestie  intendeth
to  send  hither  must  bring  with  them  shot,  powder,  and
all  kind  of  weapons,  furniture,  and  munition  for  the
defence  and  safegarde  of  this  countrey,  and  for  the
conquest  of  Rio  Grande.  For  there  is  no  kind  of
munition  in  al  this  countrey  to  be  had,  if  occasion
should  serve.  It  were  also  good  that  your  Majestie
should  send  order  for  the  building  of  a  couple  of  Forts
or  Castles  at  Cabodelo,  for  they  be  very  needefull  for
the  defence  of  the  enemie,  which  dayly  doth  warre  against
this  Captaineship.  For  that  man  which  shall  governe  this
countrey,  if  he  be  no  more  fortunate  than  I  have  bene
hitherto,  shall  not  misse  one  time  or  another,  but  he  shall
loose  all  the  countrey.  If  Don  Francisco  de  Sousa  had
sent  mee  those  two  hundred  and  fiftie  souldiers  which  I
did  send  for,  which  were  in  garison  in  the  castle  of
Arrecife,  which  doe  nothing  but  spend  your  Majesties
victuals  and  treasure,  and  had  not  sent  them  to  Baiha,
where  there  was  no  neede,  these  warres  ofPetiguar  had
bene  ended  long  agone,  and  had  saved  your  Majesty  a
great  deale  of  charges  which  you  had  spent  in  folowing  of
this  conquest  of  Rio  Grande.  I  have  chosen  one  Cap-
taine  John  de  Matas  Cardoso  to  be  Governour  of
Cabodelo,  who  is  a  very  sufficient  man.

Furthermore,  it  may  please  your  Majestie  to  under-
stand, that  the  chiefest  Friers  of  this  Monasterie  of  S.
Antonie  have  complained  on  me  to  the  lord  Governour
generall,  and  have  caused  great  strife  and  debate  betweene
him  and  me  touching  the  government  and  rule  of  these
Indian  townes.  For  the  Friers  would  command  and
governe  both  the  Indians  and  their  townes  as  well  in
Ecclesiasticall  as  Temporall  causes,  as  touching  the  punish-
ment of  the  bodies  of  such  as  are  offenders.  But  I  have
resisted  them  in  your  Majesties  name,  and  have  alleaged,
that  none  but  your  Majestie  must  rule  and  governe
them  and  their  countrey,  and  that  the  townes  appertaine

70

LETTER FROM FELICIANO CIEZA  a.d.

1597-
to  your  Majestic,  and  not  unto  the  Friers.  But  the
Governour  hath  written  a  letter  unto  me,  signifying
that  he  hath  pronounced  a  sentence  against  me  in  the
Friers  behalfe,  which  is  this.  The  King  our  master
hath  sent  a  decree  and  certaine  statutes  touching  the  good
government  and  orders  to  be  executed  and  kept  in  those
Indian  townes  :  and  that  upon  sight  hereof  I  shall
presently  banish  all  the  Mamalukes  and  white  men
which  dwell  in  any  of  those  Indian  townes  with  all
speede,  and  that  none  of  them  from  hence  forward  shall
enter  into  the  said  villages,  without  commandement  and
consent  of  the  said  Friers.  So  this  sentence  was  pre-
sented unto  me  by  the  Reverend  father  Custodio,  Prior
of  Sant  Anton  of  Brasil,  with  a  further  postscript  of  the
governour  importing  these  words  ;  I  doe  likewise  charge
and  commaund  you  the  Governour  of  Parajua,  that
presently  upon  sight  hereof  you  shall  restore  those
villages  and  houses  which  you  have  burned  and  de-
stroyed in  the  last  warres,  and  likewise  the  towne  of  The  towne  of
S.  Augustine,  and  that  you  shall  build  them  againe  at  ^-  -^^^^^t^^^-
your  owne  proper  cost  and  charges  :  for  the  Friers
alleage  that  these  townes  were  given  them,  by  a  decree
sent  them  from  Pope  Pius  Quintus,  that  the  said  Friers
should  governe  and  rule  them.

On  the  other  side  I  have  pronounced  another  sentence
against  the  said  Friers,  in  your  Majesties  name,  and
for  your  Majestie,  alleaging  that  those  townes,  villages,
and  subjects  appertaine  and  belong  unto  your  Majestie,
and  that  in  temporall  causes  I  am  to  punish  those
offenders,  which  shall  rebell  against  your  Majestie  :  and
as  touching  ecclesiastical  causes  that  the  Vicar  of  this
Cathedrall  church  shall  rule,  governe  and  instruct  them
in  the  Christian  religion.  So  we  both  have  appealed
unto  your  Majestie  herein,  and  your  Majestie  may  peruse
all  our  writings,  and  then  determine  that  which  shall
be  best  and  most  profitable  for  your  Majesties  service
and  enlargement  of  your  crowne.  For  through  these
broyles  the  inhabitants  of  this  Parajua  forsake  their  houses

71

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1597-

&  dwelling  places,  and  so  doe  some  of  the  Friers,  because

they  cannot  be  suffered  to  rule  &  governe.

Also  the  Indians  have  complayned  against  me,  because
I  have  burned  their  villages  in  this  last  rebellion.  Where-
fore if  your  Majestic  doe  not  send  some  order  for
this  countrev  and  see  into  these  cases,  it  will  breed
great  dissention  and  rebellion  among  us,  and  we
shall  be  readie  to  cut  one  anothers  throat  before  it  be
long.

Thus  I  thought  good,  according  to  my  humble
bounden  dutie,  and  for  the  service  of  your  Majestic
and  quietnesse  of  this  realme,  to  ccrtific  your  Majestic
the  truth  of  the  whole  matter  ;  hoping  in  short  time
that  your  Majestic  will  send  some  good  order  to  qualifie
these  broyles :  for  there  is  great  hatred  and  malice  among
us.  Jesus  Christ  preserve  and  keepe  the  royall  person
of  your  Majestic  with  long  health,  as  it  pleaseth  him.
From  the  Captaineship  of  Parajua  this  present  20  of
August. 1597.

Feliciano  Cieza  de  Carvalsho.

[III.  719.]  A  special  note  concerning  the  currents  of  the
sea  betweene  the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperanza
and  the  coast  of  Brasilia,  given  by  a  French
Pilot  to  Sir  John  Yorke  knight,  before  Sebastian
Cabote  ;  which  pilot  had  frequented  the
coasts  of  Brasilia  eighteene  voyages.

Emorandum,  that  from  Cabo  de  buena
Esperanza  unto  Brasilia  the  Sunne  hath
the  like  dominion  over  the  tides  there,
as  the  Moone  hath  over  our  tides  here.
And  that  whensoever  the  Sunne  is
in  any  of  these  signes  he  governeth
the  tides  as  followeth.

^, „  . . • /->  ^  • • the  tide  hath  his  course

The  Sunne bemg  m^  Gemmi  \  Northwest.

[^  Cancer  J
72

A RUTTIER  FOR BRAZIL

C  Leo
The  Sunne being  in  ■{  Virgo ^  no  current
[  Libra J

^, c u  • • c^°^£^°-  the tide hath his

The  Sunne being  in  <  Sagittarius >  c ^.u^^^*.

=> I  /-  ° • I  course  Southeast.
(^  Lapricorne  J

C  Aquarius  1

The  Sunne being  in  -^  Pisces )■  no  current.

[  Aries J

A  ruttier  or  course  to  be  kept  for  him  that  will
sayle  from  Cabo  Verde  to  the  coast  of  Brasil,
and  all  along  the  coast  of  Brasil  unto  the  river
of  Plate  :  and  namely  first  from  Cabo  Verde
to  Fernambuck.

He  ship  that  goeth  from  Cabo  Verde  to
Brasilj  must  goe  Southsoutheast  :  and
when  she  is  within  5  or  6  degrees  of
the  Equinoctial  she  must  go  Southeast
and  by  South.  And  if  she  have  the
ternados,  that  is  thundrings  and  light-
nings, then  thou  must  go  altogether
South,  or  that  way  and  by  that  boord  that  doth  profit
thee  most.  And  take  this  for  advise,  that  having  the
general  winds,  &  if  the  wind  be  at  South  or  Southeast,
then  go  Southwest,  or  westsouthwest.  And  if  the  winde
be  South,  then  goe  Southwest,  and  by  this  way
but  little,  for  it  is  not  a  way  for  thy  profit,  because
the  more  thou  goest  this  way,  the  more  will  be  thy
trouble,  because  thou  mayest  not  come  neerer  the
coaste  of  Guinea  then  60  or  70  leagues  unto  the  sholde
called  Os  baixos  de  Santa  Anna.  And  being  this  distance
from  the  same,  thou  shalt  cast  about  the  other  way
towards  Brasil,  and  the  wind  will  be  large.

Thou  shalt  understand  that  the  ship  that  keepeth
this  course  to  Fernambuck,  and  goeth  in  October  or
after, and chanceth to goe to windward of  the Isle

73

Te  that  will
sayle  to  Brasil,
must  not  come
within  60  or
70  leases  of
the  coast  of
Guinea.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  Fernando  de  Loronha,  when  thou  commest  to  8
*  Of  Souther-  degrees,  or  8  and  J*  then  thou  shalt  go  West  and
ly  latitude.  beare  with  the  land.  Thou  must  take  this  for  a  warning,
that  if  going  West  in  8  degrees  thou  see  land,  then
looke  to  the  Northward,  and  thou  shalt  see  certaine
white  clifFes.  Then  I  advise  thee  that  thou  goe  well
to  the  Southward.  And  this  is  to  bee  understoode  from
October  forward,  for  then  the  time  is  most  subject
to  Northeast  and  Eastnortheast  winds.  And  if  thou  find
thy  selfe  in  the  sayd  height  above  mentioned,  and  seest
clifFes,  and  seest  a  Cape  to  the  Southward,  and  seest
no  more  land  to  the  South,  then  make  accompt  that
thou  art  at  Capiguoari  :  and  from  thence  to  Fernambuck
thou  hast  sixe  leagues,  and  hast  a  good  port.

Thou  shalt  take  this  for  a  warning,  that  if  in  8  degrees

and a halfe thou see land lying  all  flat,  thou mayest

goe  neerer  it,  and  be  bold  till  thou  come  in  tenne  or  twelve

fadomes  :  And  then thou  shalt  see  a  great  grosse  land

along  the  sea-coast  which  is  called  Capitagua  :  And  being

East and West with this land, and, as  I have sayd,

in  tenne  or  twelve  fadomes  water  ;  and  the  time  being

from October to Februarie, then thou needest not

to  feare  any  thing  :  but  looke  to  the  South  and thou

shalt see the  cape  of  S.  Augustine : and  looke to  the

North  and  thou  shalt  see  a  point,  and  to  the  Southeast

a point called Punta de Olinda, where Aponiquay

standeth. And the land from the  cape  to the poynt

called  Punta  de  Olinda  lieth  North  and  South.

[III.  720.]  I advise  thee that if  thou  be East  and  West  with

the  cape  of  Saint  Augustine,  thou  shalt  see  within  the

land  an high  hill, having as  it were a  saddle  upon  it

like  to a  camel :  And  thou  shalt  see  to  the  Southwards

three hilles along the sea, and then presently thou

shalt  see  the  coaste  to  lie  Northeast  and  Southwest,

The  height  of Thou shalt understand  that  from this  cape  of  Saint

ye  cape  of  S. Augustine, to the towne of  Olinda, thou hast nine

of  Olinda  l^ leagues  to  the  North. And  this  cape  standeth  in  eight

Fernambuck. degrees  and  two  third  parts,  and  Olinda  standeth  in  eight

74

A  RUTTIER  FOR BRAZIL

degrees  and  a  quarter,  and  Fernambuck  standeth  in
eight  degrees.  And  this  course  is  to  be  understood  to
be  observed  and  kept,  if  thou  depart  from  Lisbon  in
October  or  November.

Take  this  advise,  that  if  thou  depart  in  February  or
March from Lisbone,  then thou shalt goe to beare  In  what  height
with the land in nine degrees, because that from  ^^^^  shall
March forwards raigne most  commonly Southeast  and  ^^^^  detart
Southwest  windes. And if  by this  height  and  course  from  Lisbon
thou bring thyselfe nigh to the shore,  feare not to  in  February
bring thy ship into i8 or 20 fadomes, for all the  or  March.
coast is cleane : and there are no more  dangers,  but
such  as  the  sea  doth  breake  upon.

And  if  after thy  fall  with the  land thou  have  occa-
sion to goe to the Northward, and so going seest
certaine  sholdes,  doubt  not  to  come  for  the  North,  and  ^^"^  ^^  ^^°^
thou  shalt  see  the  cape  of  Saint  Augustine,  which  lyeth  ^^^  ^^P^  °f
as  it  were  sloaping  to  the  seaward,  and  hath  as  it  were
a  Whales  head,  and  hath  upon  it  a  round  hill,  with  many
hilles  round  about  it. And  if  thou  come  along  the  sea
coast  much  about  the  depth  above  mentioned,  thou  shalt
see  a  little Island  called  Saint  Alexio : And  from  this  ^^^^  ^f  ^^"^°
Island  to  the  cape  of  Saint  Augustine  are  foure  leagues, ^^^°'
and  it  standeth  in  eight  degrees  and  three  quarters.

The  course  that  a  man  must  keepe  to  the  bay
called  A  Bahia  de  Todos  os  Santos,  that  is
to  say.  The  bay  of  all  Saints,  which  lieth
on  the  foresayd  coast  of  Brasil.

F  thou  goe  for  Bahia  de  Todos  os  Santos,  thou
must  keepe  the  course  which  I  have  already  set
downe,  and shalt observe  the time  from March

forwards,  as  also  from  October  forwards. Thou  shalt  The  height  of

understand  that  the  Bahia  de  Todos  os  Santos  standeth  £f  j'*^  '^^

in 13 degrees  and  J : and  if  thou  goe  in October  or  5^^^^^  i„  j ,

after October,  then goe to fall with the land in 12  degrees  and

degrees  or  12  and  a  halfe.  ojie  third  part.
And  take  this  for  a  warning,  that  when  thou  seest  a

75

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  situation
of  the  Isle  of
Tapaon.

When  a  man
may  beare  in
vpith  Bahia.

The  distance
of  O  morro  de
San  Paulo
from  Bahia.

Rio  de  Tin-
sare  a  very
good  river.

white  land,  and  long  bankes  of  white  sand,  which  shew
much  like  linnen  cloth  when  it  is  in  whiting,  then
thou  must  go  along  from  the  North  to  the  South  untill
this  white  land  doe  end :  and  thou  needest  not  to  feare
to  goe  along  the  coast,  for  there  are  no  sholds.  Before
thou  be  cleane  past  the  white  land  or  white  sands,  thou
shalt  have  sight  of  an  Island  that  standeth  along  the  bay,
I  say  on  the  Northside  of  the  bay,  which  is  called
Tapaon : and  here  the  land  lieth  West  and  by  South.

When  thou  art  so  farre  shot  as  Tapaon,  thou  shalt
see  a  certaine  great  tree  which  is  round,  and  standeth
neere  the  sea  upon  the  very  point  of  the  entrance  into
Bahia  on  the  Northside.

And  marke  well  that  if  thou  looke  to  the  Southward,
and  seest  no  white  grounds  such  as  I  wrote  of  before,
but  that  they  be  all  behind  thee  to  the  Northward :
then  when  thou  seest  none  to  the  Southward,  thou
mayest  bee  bold  to  beare  in  with  Bahia.  And  if  when
thou  goest  into  Bahia  to  the  Northwest,  and  seest  the
sea  to  breake,  feare  nothing :  for  it  is  the  breach  of  a
certaine  banke,  whereon  thou  shalt  have  alwayes  5  or
6  fadomes  water : and  this  be  sure  of.

Thou  shalt  understand  that  if  thou  come  for  this
place  from  March  to  the  end  of  April,  I  would  wish
thee  not  to  fall  to  the  Southward  of  13  degrees  and  a
halfe.  And  falling  with  the  land,  and  not  seeing  the
white  sands,  thou  shalt  strive  to  goe  to  the  North-
ward. And  seeing  the  land  in  13  degrees  and  a  halfe,
thou  shalt  have  sight  of  an  hill  along  the  sea:  And  if
thou  be  nigh  the  land,  and  cannot  make  it  certaine  what
land  it  is :  thou  shalt  marke  if  it  bee  a  round  high  hill
along  the  sea,  that  it  is  O  morro  de  San  Paulo,  or,  The
hill  of  Saint  Paul:  and  it  lieth  blacke  and  bare  on  the
top. And  from  thence  to  Bahia  is  tenne  leagues.

And  here  along  this  hill  on  the  Northwest  side
there  is  a  great  river  called  Tinsare :  and  it  is  a  very
good  river.  And  in  the  entrance  of  Bahia  there  are
sixe or seven fadomes  water in the chanell. And I

76

A RUTTIER  FOR BRAZIL

advise  thee  that  being  in  the  height  of  13  degrees  and
a  halfe,  thou  come  not  neere  the  land,  for  it  hath  a
bay  very  dangerous.

And  if  thou  goe  from  Bahia  to  Fernambuck,  then  I
advise  thee  that  thou  take  good  heede  of  the  coast  on
the  Northeast  and  Southwest,  and  thou  shalt  goe  East,
if  the  winde  will  suffer  thee  to  goe  East:  and  so  goe
thirtie  or  forty  leagues  off  to  the  sea.

I  advise  thee  that  thou  beare  not  in  with  the  land
of  Fernambuck,  but  in  the  height  of  9  or  10  degrees,
because  that  in  1 1  degrees  thou  shalt  fall  with  the  bay
called  A  Enseada  de  Vazabaris.  Also  if  thou  come
from  Portugal  and  fallest  with  the  land  in  eleven  de-
grees, beare  not  in  with  it,  neither  come  neere  it,  for
thou  mayest  hurt  thy  selfe  in  so  doing :  but  thou  shalt
shunne  it,  and  goe  to  the  Southv/ard.  For  if  thou  lie  to
the  North  thou  shalt  bring  thy  selfe  into  some  trouble.

This  Bay  of  All  Saints  standeth  in  thirteene  degrees.
And  from  thence  to  Fernambuck  thou  hast  a  hundreth
leagues :  and  the  coast  lyeth  Northeast  and  Southwest.
And  from  thence  to  Rio  das  Ilhas,  that  is,  the  river
of  the  Islands  the  coast  runneth  Northeast  and  South-
west, I  meane  taking  a  quarter  of  the  North  and  South.

The  course  for  Baia  das  Ilhas,  that  is,  The  bay
of  the  Islands,  which  lie  on  the  sayd  coast  of
Brasil,  &  the  marks  for  the  finding  of  them.

IF  thou  goe  for  Baia  das  Ilhas  thou
must  looke  for  it  in  fifteene  degrees
lacking a quarter.

If  thou  be  minded  as I sayd  to  goe
for  these  Isles,  if  it  bee  from  March  for-
ward, thou  shalt  fall  with  the  land  in  15
degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  though  it  be  in
15  degrees  and  f,  it  is  all  the  better.

And  if  thou  have  sight  of  certaine  high  hilles,  that
seeme  to  reach  to  the  skie,  these  hilles  are  called  As
Serras Raiemores. Then having sight  of  these hilles,

77

A  dangerous
bay  in  13
degrees  and  a
halfe.

[III.  721.]
The  height  of
the  bay  called
A  Enseada
de  Fazabaris.

Baia  de  todos
Santos  in  i  3
degrees.

Baia  das  Ilhas
lieth  in  15
degrees  lack-
ing a  quarter.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

thou  shalt  goe  along  the  coast ;  and  feare  nothing,  for
there  are  no  sholdes  along  to  the  North.  And  when
thou  seest  the  Islands,  thou  mayest  make  accompt  they
be  these  which  thou  seekest,  for  there  are  no  other  on
A  round  hill,  al  this  coast,  and  thou  shalt  see  a  round  hil  along  the
sea.  Thou  shalt  understand  that  on  the  North  side  of
this  hill  is  the  going  in  of  the  river.  But  if  it  chance
that  thou  finde  thy  selfe  in  a  time  that  will  not  suffer
thee  to  goe  in,  then  goe  along  the  Islands  giving  them
a  bredth  off.  And  thou  mayest  well  come  to  an  ankor
hard  aboord  them,  for  all  is  cleane  ground.  And  thou
shalt  finde  eight  or  nine  fadomes,  and  from  thence  thou
mayest  goe  into  the  river  hard  aboord  the  shore.  And
if  it  chance  that  thou  goe  from  the  North  to  the
South  all  along  the  great  Island,  thou  must  keepe  thy
selfe  from  the  land :  and  when  thou  hast  brought  it
Eastnortheast,  then  thou  mayest  ankor  two  cables
length  from  the  shore : for  all  is  cleane  ground.

If  thou  chance  to  arrive  on  this  coast  in  the  time
of  the  Northeast  windes,  thou  shalt  seeke  to  fall  with
the  land  in  foureteene  degrees.  And  if  thou  see  a
lowe  land,  thou  mayest  make  accompt  it  is  the  land
called  Ciemana,  and  then  thou  shalt  see  Mangues:
And  also  thou  shalt  come  along  this  coast  to  the
South  :  and  when  thou  seest  an  ende  of  the  low  land,
then  thou  shalt  finde  an  high  land  along  the  sea  like
the  other  that  I  have  made  mention  of  before,  that  is,
all  sandie  along  the  sea  coast.

And  thou  must  understand,  that  where  the  high  land
beginneth,  there  is  a  little  river  called  Rio  das  Contas,
but  enter  not  into  it :  it  hath  for  a  marke  to  be  knowen
by  as  it  were  a  white  mouth.  And  from  thence  to
the  Islands  thou  hast  nine  leagues.  And  at  the  ende
of  this  high  land  to  the  Southward  of  it  thou  shalt
find  a  great  bay  within  the  land,  &  then  thou
shalt  looke  to  the  Westsouthwest,  and  shalt  see  another
high  land,  which  lieth  as  it  were  in  the  middest  of
the bay,  and  thou shalt  there  see  certaine  white  houses

78

In  what  height
a  man  must
fall  with  this
place  in  time
of  the  North-
east winds.
Ciemana.
Mangues.

A RUTTIER FOR BRAZIL

which are the Ingenios or houses  wherein they make  T'he  white

sugar of  Lucas Giraldo. From thence thou shalt see  ^Jf  ^°'''"
.1^ T  1,. 1 •.__ _- r.,..._ -i-_.._ __ r)- j„ /-„„.„„ of  Lucas

the Isles beine so farre shotte as Rio de Contas.

^tD

Giraldo.

And  thou  shalt  see  within  the  land  a  round  hill  which
is  like  Monte  de  laude,  and  it  hath  another  copple  on
the  South  side.

The  course  to  sayle  to  Porto  Seguro,  that  is
to  say,  The  safe  haven,  lying  on  the  fore-
sayd  coast  of  Brasil,  &  the  markes  to  know
the  same  by.

IF  thou goe for  Porto Seguro  and  goest
in the time of the Southeast windes,
which  is  from  March  forwards,  I  advise
thee  that  thou  fall  not  in  more  degrees
then  sixteen  and  a  halfe,  because  of  the
sholdes called Os baixos dos  Abrolhos,  To  avoide  Os
which are very dangerous,  and stretch  b^^^<^^dos
very farre into  the sea. And  also going West from
them, that thou keepe thy lead going and be often
sounding. And  if  thou  chance  to  see  the  land,  and  an
high  hill  and  long  withall,  much  like to  The pike, it
is the hill that  is  called Monte Pasqual. And from  ^««'^
thence thou must goe to the  North, and  when  thou  ^^^i^^^-
hast brought it Southwest  of  thee, then thou  mayest
beare  with  the  land,  but  with  great  care  to looke  about
thee.

Marke  when  thou  seest  the  land  and  commest  to  see
a  red  cliffe,  then  looke  to  the  Southward,  and  thou  [III.  722.]
shalt  see  a  great  smooth  coast  along  the  sea,  and  then
on  the  North  side  thou  shalt  descrie  Porto  Seguro.  And
going  along  the  coast  thou  shalt  see  the  towne  of  Porto
Seguro  standing  upon  the  toppe  of  an  hill ;  which  hill
is  a  white  rocke  :  and  on  the  North  side  of  the  sayd  rocke
there  is  a  very  hie  land.  I  advise  thee  that  when  thou
art  East  and  West  with  the  sayd  land,  I  meane  with
this  rocke,  that  then  thou  looke  to  the  Northward,  and ■

79

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  place  of
comming  to  an
ankor  before
Porto  Seguro,
which  standeth
in  1 6  deg.  l^
one  third.

16  degrees.

A  dangerous
river  in  1 6
degrees.

Baixos  de
Santo  Antonio.

thou  shalt  see  certaine  rocks  lying  two  leagues  off  into
the  sea,  whereon  the  sea  doth  breake,  and  to  the  South-
ward of  them  thou  mayest  come  to  an  ankor  against
the  towne,  and  hast  a  good  place  to  ride  in  thirteen
fadomes  in  sight  of  the  towne.

And  if  it  be  thy  chance  to  arrive  in  the  time  of  the
Northeast  winds,  and  commest  in  the  height  of  fifteene
degrees  and  two  third  parts,  and  seest  not  certaine  hilles,
then  thou  must  goe  along  the  coast  being  in  16  degrees,
and  under  the  first  hie  land  that  thou  shalt  descrie,  thou
shalt  see  certaine  sandie  bayes  along  the  sea  coast :  And  if
thou  have  sight  of  a  river  in  this  height,  put  not  thy  selfe
into  it,  neither  beare  with  the  land,  for  it  hath  many
sholdes.  And  off  them  lie  certaine  sunken  grounds,
called  Os  Baixos  de  Santo  Antonio.  And  from  hence
to  the  Southward  lyeth  Porto  Seguro.

I  advise  thee  that  going  along  the  coast  to  the  South-
ward, and  seeing  such  sholdes,  and  the  sea  to  breake
upon  them,  as  the  other  which  I  last  spake  of,  thou
shalt  runne  along  them  a  sea  boord  of  them  :  and  when
thou  art  at  the  end  of  them,  then  the  towne  will  beare
West  of  thee :  and  then  thou  mayest  goe  to  thine  ankor-
ing  place  as  is  abovesayd,  giving  these  sholds  a  good  birth.

The  course  to  the  haven  named  Baia  do  Spirito
Santo,  that  is  to  say,  The  bay  of  the  holy-
Ghost,  lying  on  the  sayd  coast  of  Brasil,  and
the  markes  thereof.

Hou  shalt  understand  that  the  ship  that
goeth  for  Spirito  Santo,  when  it  hath
doubled  the  sholdes  Os  Baixos  dos
Abrolhos,  and  hath  brought  it  selfe  in
20  or  19  degrees  and  a  halfe,  then  it
may  hall  with  the  land  in  18  or  19
degrees and a halfe, and in twentie.

whkh7he' tides  ^^'^ ^^^  ^^Y^  shippe must  goe in  this  height, because

set.  on this coast  there  are  no  Monzoins.

80

Monzoins  are
certaine  set
winds  with

A RUTTIER FOR BRAZIL

If  thou  chance  to  come  in the  height  of 19 degrees  Markes  ontke
J  and  seest  lowe  land  to the  Northwest  off  thee,  then  ^7r///sl»l^
thou  art  on the North  side  of  Spirito  Santo,  and  thou
mayest make accompt that it is the land lying over
Criquare,  and  over  the  river  called  Rio  dolce,  that  is  the
river  of  sweete  or  fresh  water. If  thou  come  along  the
land  thou  shalt  find  certaine  high  hilles :  but  trust  not  the
first that thou seest only. For besides the  rest  thou
shalt  see  a  round  hie  hill  which  is  at  the  capes  end,  which
is  called  la Sierra  de  mestre  Alvaro. Take  heede  that  '^^^  situation
going  for  this  land  thou  looke  to  the  North  and  thou  ^ff'^'^'^^
shalt  see  a  river  called  Rio  dos  Reyes Magos : that  is,  jlvaro.
The  river  of  the three kings. And comming  to the  Rio  dos  Reyes
Southward  thou  shalt  see  presently  the  mouth  of  the  bay  ^agos.
to  open. At  the  end  of  this  hill  on  the  South  side,  thou
hast  a  point  of  a  rocke, which is called A punta do
Tubaron. And  on the South  side of  the bay  it hath
two or  three  blacke  hie hilles, and  in the middest of
the  bay  thou  shalt  goe  in  westward.

I  advise  thee  that  in  going  in  thou  take  heede  of  a
sholde  which  lieth  in  the  mouth  of  the  bay :  thou  must
leave  it  to  the  Southward  of  thee,  and  then  plie  to  double
a  certaine  Island  which  lieth  within,  and  thou  must  leave
it  to  the  Northward  of  thee :  and  when  it  beareth  on  the
North  or  Northeast,  thou  mayest  come  to  an  ankor :  for
all  is  cleane  ground.

And  if  thou  chance  to  come  by  this  course,  and  fallest
in  20  degrees,  and  seest  many  hilles,  and  one  among  the
rest  very  high  and  craggie  : it  is  called  A  Sierra  de  Guari-  ^  Sierra  de
parim,  that  is,  the  hill  of  Guaraparim,  and  seest  another  ^uaripanm
hill  on  the  North  side,  which  is  called  A  Sierra  de  Pero  j  Sierra  de  '
Cam :  both  these  lie  on  the  South  side  of  Spirito  Santo.  Pero  Cam.
And  from  these hils thou  shalt see  a  little  hill  named
Guaipel. And  when  thou seest  these hilles, thou  shalt
see  three  little  Islands  together,  lying  to  the  Southward :
And  then  from  these  thou  shalt  see  another  rockie,  bare,
and  round  Island :  and  to  the  land  off  this  Island  thou
shalt  see  a  great  bay. If  thou  wilt thou mayest  ankor

XI  81  F

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

here  safely.  And  if  thou  wilt  go  in,  thou  shalt  bring
thy  selfe  East  and  West  with  the  hill,  and  so  thou  mayest
And  thou  shalt  leave  a  lowe  land  to  the  North

pro  in.

A  llha  de of  thee,  which  is  called  A  Ilha  de  Repouso,  that  is,  the
Repouso.  jgjg  q£  j.ggj. . ^j-j  J  ^i^^g  jgjg  lieth  along  the  coast : and  thou

mayest  be  bold  to  ride  betwixt  it  and  the  maine,  giving  it

a  breadth  off.

From  these  three  Islands  to  Spirito  Santo  are  12
Spiriio  Santo  leagues :  and  running  Northwards  to  come  to  Spirito
standeth  in  20  g^j^^.^ ^)^^^  ^}^^^  sgg  another  Island,  and  shalt  2:0  a  sea-

boord  of  it,  and  by  &  by  the  mouth  of  the  bay  will  open

toward  thee. And  this  bay  standeth  in  20  degrees.

[III.  723.]

The  course  from  the  bay  de  Spirito  Santo  to  the
bay  of  S.  Vincent,  and  the  markes  thereof.
Also  the  course  from  Saint  Vincent  to  the
river  of  Plate.

Baia  de
Salvador  12
leagues  North
from  Cabo
frio.

Two  small
Islands.

The  height  of
Cape  Frio  in
23  degrees.
Rio  de  Jenero.

Ailing  from  Spirito  Santo  for  Saint  Vincent,
thou  mayest  goe  along  the  coast,  keeping
seven  or  eight  leagues  off,  and  must  goe
to  seeke  Cabo  Frio,  that  is,  The  cold
cape.  And  as  thou  commest  toward
Cabo  Frio,  thou  hast  a  very  great  bay
called  Bahia  de  Salvador,  that  is,  The
bay  of  our  Saviour.  And  from  thence  thou  hast  twelve
leagues  to Cabo  Frio.

And  before  thou  commest  to  Cabo  Frio,  thou  hast  two
small  Islands.  Thou  mayest  go  safely  either  a  sea  boord
of  them,  or  else  betweene  them.  Thou  shalt  understand
that  Cabo  Frio  hath  as  it  were  an  Island  in  the  midst  of
the  face  or  shew  thereof,  that  doth  cut  off  the  cape.
Thou  mayest  ride  safely  on  the  West  side  thereof;  for  all
is  cleane  ground.

Understand  that  Cabo  Frio  standeth  in  23  degrees  :  and
from  it  to  Rio  de  Jenero  are  twelve  leagues.  And  this
river  of  Jenero  hath  in  the  mouth  thereof  3  or  4  Islands.
And if thou wilt  go into this river de Jenero, thou

82

A  RUTTIER FOR BRAZIL

mayest  well  goe  in  betweene  two  Islands  which  stand  in T"^^  situation

the  entrance  of  the  river  on  the  South  side:  neere  unto  <^f '^^  ^ill like

...  ,  .  ,  ...  .  ,  .  , a  man  with

this  river  there  is  a  great  hill  seeming  to  bee  a  man  with  lonvhaire  by

long  haire.  Jenero.

And  take  this  for  advise,  that  if  thou  be  in  the  height
of  this  river,  thou  shait  see  certaine  high  hilles  within  the
land,  which  be  like  unto  organs. And  when  thou  seest  The  organs
these  organs,  then  make  accompt  thou  art  right  against  '^f^jj^^^^  '^^S'^
the  river :  and  comming  neere  the  land  thou  shalt  see  a
certaine  Island  very  round,  which  lieth  to  the  Southward,
and  is  hie  and  bare  in  the  top. Thou must  know  that
the  mouth  of  this  river  standeth  in  23  degrees  and  one
third  part. And  from  this  river  to  Angra,  that  is  to  say,  Jngra.
The  open  haven,  thou  hast 15  leagues. Goe  not  neere
the  land there,  except  necessitie  compell  thee.

I  advise  thee,  that  from  this  river  that I  spake of,  I
meane  from  the  entrance  thereof,  thou  must  goe  West-
southwest,  and  Southwest,  and  West  and  by  South. And
thou  shalt  see  a  great  Island  called  Isla  de  San  Sebastiano,  ^  ^^ha  de  San
and  to  the  Southward  thereof  another  small  Island  very  ^^^^^^^^^°-
high,  called  the  Island  of  Alcatrarzas,  that  is  to  say.  The  "^^^  ^^^^  °f
Island  of  Pellicanes :  but  come  not  neere  it,  for  it  hath  ^^-^^^^'^^^i^?/.
dangerous shoalds. And from hence thou mayest  go
West, and  so  thou  shalt fall right with  the mouth  of
Saint  Vincent, and thou shalt  see an Island. And if
thou  meane  to  goe  into  Saint  Vincent  thou must  leave
this  Island  to  the  Westward. And  understand  that  Saint  ^^^'^■^  Vincent
Vincent  lieth  in  foure  and  twentie  degrees. And when  ^l^^  f^^^j

,  .  ,  1 r 1  • 1  Many  islands

thou  art  in the mouth or this bay, or  art neere  the  about  ye  mouth
mouth of  it, then thou shalt  see many other Islands,  ofS.  Vincent,
and  one  among  the  rest to the  seaward. And having ^  °'"^  "^^  ^°
these  sights,  thou  hast  the  best  markes  that  bee  for  these  ^^^  ^^^■^^rd.
Islands,  that  I  have  told  thee  of: and  this Island  lieth
Northwest  and  Southeast  with  the  mouth  of  S.  Vincent.

[The  course
83

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  course  from  Saint  Vincent  to  the  river
of  Plate.

Cananea.

Rio  de  San
Francisco.

Boca  de  Over-

Ilha  de
Arvoredo,

SantaCatalina
a  gj-eat  Island.

Porto  de

Patos.

Porto  de  Don

Roderigo.

Laguna.

Rio  de  Martin
de  Sous  a.

Rom  S.  Vincent  to  Cananea  thou  hast
40  leagues :  and  the  coast  lieth  North-
east and  by  East,  and  Southwest  and  by
West.  From  Cananea  to  the  river  of
Saint  Francisco  are  fifteene  leagues,  and
the  coast  lieth  Northeast  and  Southwest.
There  is  a  little  Island,  which  hath  as
it  were  two  bayes,  and  a  good  rode,  and  is  in  26  degrees
and  a  quarter,  and  towards  the  maine  it  is  hie  and
craggie.

From  San  Francisco  to  Boca  de  Overniron  are  26
leagues,  and  the  coast  lieth  North  &  South.  Also  thou
must  marke  that  the  river  of  San  Francisco  hath  a  great
entrance,  and  3  small  Islands,  and  to  seaward  it  hath  a
good  road ;  and  the  maine  is  high  and  craggie.

From  this  Boca  de  Overniron  to  Ilha  de  Arvoredo
thou  hast  no  great  markes  be  observed :  but  this  Boca
is  a  very  great  bay,  and  this  bay  is  deepe  within  the
Island,  and  is  a  good  road,  and  hath  many  Islands,  and
standeth  in  28  degrees.  And  to  the  North  of  this  Island
under  the  point  there  is  a  good  road :  and  there  is  no
other  road  hereabout  but  this,  and  it  is  under  the
Island.

From  hence  thou  shalt  have  sight  of  the  Isle  called
Santa  Catharina,  which  is  a  great  Island  about  eight  or
nine  leagues  long,  and  lieth  North  and  South.  And
hard  by  even  with  this  Hand  is  Porto  de  Patos,  which
standeth  in  29  degrees.  And  from  Porto  de  Patos  to
Porto  de  Don  Roderigo  are  ten  or  eleven  leagues  :  and
the  coast  lieth  North  and  South.  And  from  Porto  de
Don  Roderigo  to  Laguna  are  5  leagues.  And  this  is
a  good  harbour  for  all  winds,  except  the  Northeast
wind.

From  the  Laguna  to  the  river  called  Rio  de  Martin
de Sousa are 42 leagues. And  the  coast  is somthing

84

A RUTTIER  TO MAGELLAN  STRAITS

high,  &  lieth  Northeast  &  by  North,  &  Southwest  &  by
South : and it hath  an Island 2 leagues into  the sea,  [III.  724.]
where ships may ride well. And from the river of
Martin  de  Sousa  to  Rio  de  San Pedro  are  52  leagues,  Rio  de  S.
and  the  coast  lieth  Northeast  and  Southwest,  Pedro.

From this  river  of  San  Pedro  there  lieth a point  of
sand a  good  league  off  and more,  and  it  lyeth  on  the
Southwest  side  of  the  port. And  from  thence  to  Cabo  Cabode  Santa
de Santa Maria are 42 leagues: and the coast lieth  ■'^^''^•
Northeast  and  Southwest,  and  all  is  lowe  land.

Also  on  the  Southeast  side  of  Cabo  de  Santa  Maria
there  lyeth  an  Isle  two  leagues  off  into  the  sea,  and  it
hath  a  good  harborough  betwixt  it  and  the  mayne.  And
note  that  the  mayne  is  lowe  land.

The  cape  of  Santa  Maria  standeth  in  35  degrees,  and
at  the  point  thereof  it  hath  an  Island  a  league  into
the  sea.

Hereafter followeth a Ruttier from the sayd
river  of  Plate  to  the  Streight  of  Magelane.

He  cape  of  Santa  Maria  is  in  35  degrees.
From  thence  to  the  Cape  de  Santo
Antonio,  which  is  on  the  other  side  of
the  river,  are  30  leagues  Northnortheast,
&  Southsouthwest.  And  this  is  the
broadest  place  of  the  river.  And  this
cape  is  in  '1^6  degrees  and  a  halfe,  and
it  is  a  blacke  grosse  land.  And  thou  must  marke  that
25  leagues  a  seaboord  the  mouth  of  the  river  there  lie
certain  e  sands,  which  be  called  Baixos  de  los  Castellanos.  Baixos  de  los
He  that  falleth  with  the  Cape  of  Santa  Maria  must  ^^^^^"^"^0^-
take  good  heede  to  go  Southeast  untill  hee  be  in  36
degrees,  and  from  thence  Southsoutheast  untill  36  degrees
and  a  halfe,  giving  the  sayd  sholds  de  los  Castellanos  a
breadth :  and  also  taking  heede  of  the  flats  of  the  cape.
And  when  hee  findeth  40  or  45  fadomes,  and  russet
sand,  then  he  must  goe  Southwest  and  by  South,  untill
he be  in 40 degrees :  where hee  shall find  great store

85

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Cabo  dc

Jrenas

Gordas.

Rio  de  S.
Anna.

Cape  de  5.
Andre.

Baia  Ane-

Punta  de
Tierra  liana.

Baia  sin

fondo.

Cabo  redondo.
Puerto  de  los
hones.

Puerto  de  los
leones  in  44
degrees  \$
better.

of  weedes,  which  come  from  the  coast,  and  a  man  may  go
20  leagues  from  the  shore  in  this  sounding.

From  the  Cape  de  Santo  Antonio  to  the  Cape  de
Arenas  Gordas  are  eight  &  forty  leagues,  and  the  coast
lieth  Northeast  and  Southwest,  and  by  East,  and  by
West :  and  in  the  first  eighteene  leagues  is  the  river
called  Rio  de  Santa  Anna,  which  hath  at  the  entrance
certaine  flats  and  sholds,  give  them  a  good  breadth,  and
come  not  nigh  them  by  much,  but  keepe  thy  selfe  in
forty  fadomes  to  goe  surely.

From  the  cape  de  Arenas  Gordas  to  the  cape  of  Sant
Andre  are  one  and  thirty  leagues :  it  lieth  Northeast  and
by  East,  and  Southwest  by  West :  I  meane  when  thou
art  in  the  raiddest  with  an  equall  distance  from  them
both.  And  betweene  both  the  capes  are  many  bayes
and  rivers,  but  all  full  of  sandie  sholdes.

From  the  cape  of  Sant  Andres  to  the  bay  called
Anegada,  that  is,  The  sunken  bay,  are  30  leagues  East-
northeast,  and  Westsouthwest.  It  standeth  in  40  degrees,
rather  lesse  then  more.

From  the  bay  called  Baia  Anegada  to  The  point  of  the
plaine  land  are  25  leagues  Northnortheast,  and  South-
southwest.  This  point  lyeth  in  41  degrees  and  a  halfe.
And  from  this  point  to  Baia  sin  fondo,  that  is  to  say  The
bottomlesse  bay,  are  35  leagues  Eastnortheast,  and  West-
southwest.  This  bay  standeth  in  42  degrees  and  a  halfe,
rather  lesse  then  more.

And  from  Baia  sin  fondo  to  Cabo  Redondo,  &  Puerto
de  los  leones,  are  37  leagues  Northnortheast  and  South-
southwest,  somewhat  to  the  North  and  South.  And  if
thou  meane  to  go  out  from  thence  with  a  com  passe  about
after  the  maner  of  a  halfe  circle  or  an  arch,  so  thou
mayest  passe  through  the  Baia  sin  fondo  along  the
shore : for  there  is  water  enough.

Note  that  from  the  river  of  Plate  to  this  place  is
never  a  good  harbour  for  great  shipping.

From  this  place  to  Puerto  de  los  leones  the  coast
is cleane, and a man may  come nigh unto the land :

86

A  RUTTIER TO MAGELLAN STRAITS

And  it  is  a  lowe  land  with  white  cliffes. This  harbour

is in 44  degrees. And as a man goeth thither,  after  Take  good

hee bee  in  41 degrees or more,  hee  must  have  a  care  ^f^^^V^J^^^^

r  •  •  •  Itttle  rocks

to  looke  out for  certaine  small rockes  which lie neere

the  land,  and  lie  North  of  the  harbour.

From this  harbour  to Cabo de Matas,  or  The cape  ^^^°  ^^
of  shrubs,  are  30  leagues  North  &  South,  halfe  a  point ^^'^''
to  the  East  and  to  the  West : and betwixt  them  there
is a great bay very  long : And to the Northwest 1 8
leagues  from Cabo  redondo is a  river lying East and
West :  and  it  is  called  Rio  de  Camarones,  or,  The  river  ^^0  ^^  Cama-
of  shrimps. You  shall know  when  you  fall  with  this  '""^•^'
river,  by  seeing  many  white  spots  upon  the  water,  and
they  are  small  shrimps.

From  this  river  to  Cabo  redondo  the  coast  lieth  Cabo  redondo
Northwest  and  by  North,  and  Southeast  and  by  South.  ^L^^^^^"
This  cape  is  in  45 degrees  and  a  halfe  large.  /^^p.^_

From  this  sayd  cape  to  Cabo  Blanco  and  Barancas  Cabo  Blanco
Blancas  that  is  to  say,  to  The  white  cape  and  white  and  Barancas
cliffes  are  72  leagues'  lying  North  and  by  East  and  BJancas  tn  a^j
South  and  by  West:  and  they  stand  in  47  degrees. rjjj_  -' -i

From  this  Cape  the  coast  lyeth  towards  the  North
side  Northwest  about  three  leagues  all  full  of  white  cliffes
steepe  up :  and  the  last  cliffe  is  the  biggest  both  in  length
and  height,  and  sheweth  to  be  the  saile  of  a  ship  when
it  is  under  saile.  These  white  cliffes  are  6  in  number.
And  this  Cape  hath  in  the  face  thereof  a  certaine  round
land  that  sheweth  to  bee  an  Island  afarre  off:  and  it  hath
certaine  poynts  of  rockes  hard  by  it.  And  two  Cables
length  from  the  land  is  25  fathomes  water.  Above  these
white  cliffes  the  land  is  plaine  and  even :  and  it  hath
certaine  woods.  There  is  much  people  in  the  countrey :  People  to  be
of  whom  I  wish  thee  to  take  good  heed.  taken  heed  of.

From  this  Cape  the  land  lyeth  North  and  South ;  which
is  the  first  fall  of  the  Cape :  and  in  the  face  thereof  it  hath
a  poynt  of  rocks,  which  shewe  themselves. And  on  the
South  side  of  this  Cape  is  a  good  harbour  and  road,  and  ^  SP°^  ^^f'-
there  is  a  Bay  in  the  middest.  '

87

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

From Cabo  Blanco  to  Puerto  de  San Julian  are  37

leagues,  and  the  coast  lyeth  North  and  by  East  and  South

The  port  of and  by  West. This harbour  of  S. Julian  hath  in  the

Saint  Julian, entrance  certain e  high  hilles,  which  afarre  off  seeme  to  be

towers. On  the  South  part  of  the  entrance  the  chanell

is  deepest  in  the  middest :  and  thou  must  borrow  neerer

the  North  side  then  to  the  South. Within  the  harbour

are  two Islands :  thou  must  come  to  an  anker  hard  to

them. This  haven  lyeth  in  49  degrees. And  betweene

llhas  de  As- Cabo Blanco and this harbour are The Islands of

censaom.  Ascension,  and  they  be  eight. From  this  said  harbour

Morro  de to the hill  of  S.  Yves  are  3  5  leagues ; the  coast  lyeth

Santo  Yves,  in  Northeast  &  Southwest :  it  is  a  low  land  and  even  and

Co  desTces

large.  \v2J(\\  onely  one  hill,  and  it  is  a  plaine  from  one  part  to  the

other,  and  hath  certaine cliffes to seaward,  and to the

Southward,  and  to  the  South  side  it  hath  certaine  little

copples : it  standeth  in 50  degrees  large.

Rio  de  Cruz. From  the  hill  of  S.  Yves  to  Rio  de  Cruz  are  8  leagues.

Northeast  and  Southwest :  and  on  the  Northside  of  the

river  it hath a very high land,  and  in  the  toppe it is

plaine  and  lyeth  two  leagues  broad,  layd  out  along  North

and South,  and  the  downefall on  both sides  hath  as  it

were  saddles. This  Cape  hath  many  poynts  of  rockes

lying  4  leagues  into  the  sea :  and  when  thou  hast  sight

of  this  land,  it  is  good  for  thee  to  keepe  from  it  a  good

bredth  off. And  going  from  thence  thou  mayest  runne

in  sight  of  the  land  in  25  fathoms.

Rio  de  Gale- From  Rio  de  Cruz  to  Rio  de  Galegos  are  25  leagues,

Z°^  ^^d the Northeast  and  Southwest;  and  it  standeth  in  52  degrees

and  -^  of  a  degree. It  hath  a  certaine  high  land :  and  in

the highest of  the sayd land it is plaine,  and to the

Northeast  it  is  a  pike  up,  and  hath  certaine  white  cliffes :

and  on  the  toppe  and  something  downewarde  it  is  blacke :

at  the foote  of  this  high  land  to  the  Eastward  thereof

it hath certaine steps like a  lather : and  to the sea  it

hath a sharpe poynt  that  lyeth into this Cape almost

halfe  a  league. To  the  Southward of  this  Cape  where

the  lather  is,  there  is  a  little  Bay,  which  is  the  entrance

A RUTTIER TO MAGELLAN STRAITS

of Rio de Galegos, it ebbeth and floweth here 12
fathomes. A  man  must  have  a  great  care  how  he  goeth  I"  the  mouth
in here for the cause abovesaid : but he must keepe  ''j^^ .
himselfe  out  and  not  anker  in  it.  ebbeth  and

From  Rio  de  Galegos  to  the  Streits  of  Magelan  the  fioweth  1 2  fa-
coast  lyeth  Northnorthwest  &  Southsoutheast : 8  leagues  thomes.
unto  Cabo  de  la  virgin  Maria,  which  is  the  entrance  into  Caho  de  la
the  Streit : and  4 leagues before  a man come to this  ^"'^'^  Maria.
Cape there  are  white  cliffes with certaine blacke spots
in  them ;  and  they  be  caused  with  the  falUng  downe  of
the water. Here is water inough, and thou mayest
come to  an anker hard aboord the shore, and hast a
good  defence  for  a  Southwest  wind. And  the  Cape  it
selfe is the highest land of  all, and is like to Cape
Saint  Vincent  in  Spaine :  and  it  hath  on  the  East  side  a  Ciudad  de
ledge  of  rockes,  and  a  poynt  of  sand,  with  divers  sands  ^0^^^^  d.^
which shewe themselves at a lowe water: thou must  j^^'candish
take  great  heede heere and  give  them a good bredth  Poj-t  Famine
halfe  a  league  or a  quarter  of  a  league  off, until thou  because  he
bring  the Cape Westnorthwest, and then thou mayest  fi^^^,  ^^  ^^^  ■
stirre  away  Southwest. And  when  thou  commest  to  the  ^Pff^f^^f^'

,  111-  1  r 1  1  mtshed,  and

lower  land  and  mto  tenne  or  twelve  fathoms,  then  art  the  towne  it
thou  over  against  la  Purificacion.  And  halfe  a  league  selfe  utterly
within  the  land  the  citie  of  Nombre  de  Jesus  was  builded,  abandoned.
East  and  West  with  the  sayd  cape  right  against  a  cliffe,  ^^/^^^^f^
which  commeth  from  the  sayd  Cape,  and  goeth  within  ^;.^  ^^  /^^^j
the  Streits. This  Cape  standeth  in  52  degrees  just. stood.

And this  is  to  be  taken  for  a  warning,  that  he  that
commeth  neere  this  Cape,  and  passeth  by  it  as I have
said  with  the  wind  at  Northeast,  or  any  other  wind  off
the sea  inclining to the Southeast, must not come to
anker, but presently be sure to  passe by; because  in  ^°^^^J"^^{
Sommer  this  place  is  much subject  to  Southwest  winds,  ^uchherein
which blow right in : and they put a  man from his  Sommer.
tackle, &  make  him  to  loose his voyage. And from  F^'°^  March
March forwards there  blow  favourable  winds from  the  fi^^y^  ^^^
sea  to  goe  from  this  Cape  to  enter  into  the  Streits,  from  fapourable  for
this said Cape the Streits  go in to the Northwest 14  the  Streits.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[III.  726.]

Cabo  de  San
Gregorio  a
good  roadstead
for  any  winds
from  the
'Northwest  to
the  Southwest.
The  Indians
about  Cape  de
San  Gregorio
in  the  Streits
are  very
trecherous.
The  second
Streit  called
Nuestra  Sen-
nora  de
Gracia.

Puntade  Santa
Anna  in  53
deg.  and  a
halfe.
Rincones.
La  Ciudad
del  don
Philippe :
which  is  now
utterly  ruined.

leagues :  and  the  chanell  waxeth  narrower  and  narrower
unto  the  first  Streit  which  runneth  Eastnortheast,  and
Westsouthwest.  And  comming  out  of  the  mouth  thereof
a  man  must  keepe  himselfe  a  poynt  to  the  Northward,
because  there  be  rocks  and  shoalds.  And  if  you  see
beds  of  weeds,  take  heed  of  them,  and  keepe  off  from
them  :  and  after  you  be  past  this  Streight  you  must  stirre
Westsouthwest  8  leagues  unto  Cabo  de  San  Gregorio,
which  is  a  high  white  cliffe,  and  is  a  good  road  for  any
wind  from  the  Northwest  to  the  Southwest.  But  men
must  beware  and  not  trust  the  Indians  of  this  Cape  :  for
they  be  subtill  and  will  betray  a  man.

From  this  Cape  beginneth  the  second  Streit  which
is  called  Nuestra  Sennora  de  Gracia,  and  lyeth  East-
northeast  and  Westsouthwest  3  leagues.  And  comming
out  of  this  Streit  thou  shalt  see  3  little  Islands,  lying
West  off  this  Streit :  thou  mayest  go  betweene  them,
for  there  is  no  danger :  provided  alwayes  that  thou
keepe  well  off  from  the  bayes  on  both  sides,  lest  thou
bee  imbayed.  And  from  these  Islands  thou  must  keepe
forwards  in  the  chanell  Westsouthwest  two  leagues  :
and  then  the  coast  lyeth  North  and  South  unto  53
degrees  and  a  halfe,  unto  a  place  called  Punta  de  Santa
Anna :  and  to  the  Northwest  thereof  in  a  corner  or
nooke  (which  is  one  of  the  rincones  or  nookes)  was
the  towne  builded  called  La  Ciudad  del  Don  Philippe.
Thou  must  come  to  an  anker  to  the  Northward  thereof,
after  thou  art  past  the  castle  and  a  great  tree.

90

VOYAGES TO THE RIVER PLATE

A.D,

1527.

TWO VOYAGES

Of certaine Englishmen to the river of Plate
situate in 35 degrees of  southerly latitude: to-
gether with an exact ruttier and description
thereof, and of  all the maine branches, so
farre as they  are navigable with small
barkes,  by  which  river  the  Spaniards
of  late  yeeres  have  frequented  an
exceeding  rich  trade  to  and
from  Peru,  and  the  mines
of  Potossi,  as  also  to
Chili,  and  other
places.

A  report  of  a  voyage  of  two  Englishmen  in  the
company  of  Sebastian  Cabota,  intended  for
the  Malucos  by  the  Streights  of  Magellan,
but  perfourmed  onely  to  the  river  of  Plate
in  April  1527.  Taken  out  of  the  informa-
tion of  M.  Robert  Thorne  to  Doctor  Ley
Ambassadour  for  King  Henry  the  eight,  to
Charles  the  Emperour,  touching  the  discovery
of  the  Malucos  by  the  North.

N  a  flote  of  three  ships  and  a  caravell
that  went  from  this  citie  of  Sivil  armed
by  the  merchants  of  it,  which  departed
in  Aprill  last  past,  I  and  my  partner
have  one  thousand  foure  hundred  duckets
that  wee  employed  in  the  sayd  fleete,
principally  for  that  two  Englishmen,
friendes  of  mine,  which  are  somewhat  learned  in  Cos-
mographie,  should  goe  in  the  same  ships,  to  bring  me
certaine  relation  of  the  situation  of  the  countrey,  and
to  be  expert  in  the navigation  of  those  seas,  and there

91

This  was  the
jieete  wherein
Cabot  discov-
ered the  river
of  Plate,
1526. Two
Englishmen
went  with
Cabot  in  this
discovery.

A.D.

1527.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  have  informations  of  many  other  things,  and  advise
that  I  desire  to  know  especially.  Seeing  in  those
quarters  are  ships  and  mariners  of  that  countrey,  and
cardes  by  which  they  saile,  though  much  unlike  ours :
that  they  should  procure  to  have  the  sayd  cards,
and  learne  how  they  understand  them,  and  especially
to  know  what  navigation  they  have  for  those  Islands
Northwards  and  Northeastward.
The  Islands  of  For  if  from  the  said  Islands  the  sea  doth  extend
the  Malum,  ^j^hout  interposition  of  land  to  saile  from  the  North
point  to  the  Northeast  point  one  thousand  seven
hundred  or  one  thousand  eight  hundred  leagues,  they
should  come  to  The  new  found  Islands  that  we  dis-
covered, &  so  we  should  be  neerer  to  the  said  Spicerie
by  almost  200  leagues  then  the  Emperour,  or  the  king
of  Portugall  are.

An  extract  out  of  the  discourse  of  one  Lopez
Vaz  a  Portugal,  touching  the  fight  of  M.
Fenton  vv^ith  the  Spanish  ships,  with  a  report
of  the  proceeding  of  M.  John  Drake  after
his  departing  from  him  to  the  river  of  Plate.

Pon  the  relation  of  Pedro  Sarmiento
concerning  the  streits  of  Magellan,  that
they  might  be  fortified,  and  for  that  the
king  heard,  that  there  were  ships  in
England  preparing  for  the  same  streits,
he  commanded  Diego  Flores  de  Valdes
a noble  man  of  Spaine,  to  passe  thither

The  New
found  Hands
discovered  by
the  English.

with 23 ships,  and 3500 men to stoppe the passage
of  the  Englishmen.

There  went  in  this  fleete  the  governour  of  Chili,
with  500  olde  souldiers  that  came  out  of  Flanders :
Five  ships  of  but  this  was  the  unhappiest  fleet  of  ships  that  ever
this  fleete  cast  ^^^^  q^^-  Qf  Spaine:  for  before  they  came  from  the
tZTt  of  Spaine.  coast  of  Spaine  a  storme  tooke  them,  and  cast  away
[III.  727.] five  of  the  fleete  and  in  them  above  800  men,  and  the

92

LOPEZ VAZ  A.D.

1582.
rest  came  into  Cadiz.  But  the  king  sent  them  word
that  they  should  proceede:  and  so  there  went  out  on
the  voyage  16  of  the  shippes,  for  two  more  of  their
fleete  were  much  spoyled  by  the  storme  which  they
had.

In  these  sixteene  shippes  Pedro  Sarmiento  was  sent
to  bee  governour  in  the  straites,  and  had  assigned
unto  him  500  men  to  stay  there  with  him,  and  hee
carried  with  him  all  kinde  of  Artificers  to  make  him
forts,  and  other  necessaries,  with  great  store  of  ordin-
ance and  other  munition.

This fleete because it was late,  did winter on the  This  fleete
coast  of  Brasil,  in  the  river  of  Tenero :  and  from  thence  '^^"^'^f^  ^^

.  t/ic  vivBr  of

they went when the winter was past,  and about the  jg^gro.
height  of  42  degrees  they  had  a  sudden  storme,  so  that
Diego  Flores  beat  it  up  and  downe  11 dayes,  in  which
time hee lost one of the best ships he had, which
had in her 300 men and 20 women, that went to
inhabit  the  Streits  :  and  in  this  ship  also  was  most  part  of
the  munition  which  should  have  bene  left  in  the  Streits,
so  in  the  end  the  storme  grew  to  bee  so  great,  that  the
ships  were  not  able  to  endure  it  any  longer,  but  were  put
backe  unto  an  Island  called  Santa  Catelina  :  and  there  he
found  a  barke  wherein  were some fryers  going for  the  ■^-  Tenton
river of Plate : which friers told him of  two great  ^1°^  ^^^^^
English  ships, and a pinnesse,  which had  taken  them, -^
but tooke nothing from them, nor did them any
harme,  but  onely  asked them for the king  of  Spaines
ships.

Hereupon  Diego  Flores  knowing  that  these  English
ships  would  goe  for  the  Streits,  determined  to  goe  thither,
although  it  was  in  the  moneth  of  Februarie,  and  choosing
10  ships  of  the  15  that  were  left,  hee  left  two  ships  which
were  not  in  case  to  goe  to  sea  at  the  Island,  and  into  the
other  three  ships  which  were  old,  and  shaken  with  the
storme  hee  put  all  the  women  and  sicke  men  in  all  the
fleete,  and  sent  them  to  the  river  of  Jenero,  and  he  with
the  other 10  returned  again  for  the  Streits.

93

A.D.
1583-

J  fghi  be-
tzuixt  our  2
English  ships
y  three
Spanish  ships.

They  victual
at  Spirito
Santo.

John  Drake
proceedeth  on
to  the  river  of
Plate.

RichardFaire-
weather  re-
may  neth  in  the
river  of  Plate.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  three  ships  in  which  the  sicke  men  and  women
were,  went  to  Brasil,  and  there  they  found  within  the  port
of  S.  Vincent  the  two  ships  before  mentioned.

They  woulde  have  had  the  English  men  to  have  gone
out  of  the  harbour,  and  thereupon  they  fell  to  fight,  and
because  that  these  three  ships  were  weake  with  the
storme,  and  the  men  that  they  had  were  the  worst  in  all
the  fleete,  the  Englishmen  easily  put  them  to  the  worst,
and  sunke  one  of  them,  and  might  have  sunke  another,  if
the  Englishmen  would  :  but  they  minded  not  the  de-
struction of  any  man  :  for  that  is  the  greatest  vertue  that
can  be  in  a  man,  that  when  hee  may  doe  hurt,  yet  he  will
not  doe  it.  So  the  Englishmen  went  from  this  port  to
Spirito  Santo,  where  they  had  victuals  for  their  mer-
chandise, and  so  they  went  backe  for  England,  without
doing  of  any  harme  in the  Countrey.

The  cause  why  these  English  shippes  under  the  con-
duct of  M.  Fenton  went  not  to  the  streits,  I  know  not :
but  some  say  that  they  were  put  backe  by  foule  weather :
other  some  say  that  it  was  for  feare  of  the  kings  ships.

But  the  pinnesse  of  these  two  ships  went  from  them,
in  which  was  Captaine  John  Drake :  the  cause  why  they
parted  I  know  not,  but  the  pinnesse  came  into  the  river
of  Plate,  and  within  five  leagues  of  Seale  Island,  not  farre
from  the  place  where  the  Earle  of  Cumberlands  shippes
did  take  in  fresh  water,  shee  was  cast  away  upon  a  ledge
of  rockes  :  but  the  men  were  saved  in  their  boat,  which
were  in  number  18,  who  went  ashore  on  the  Northside,
and  went  a  dayes  journey  into  the  land,  and  met  with  the
Savages  which  are  no  men-eaters,  but  take  all  the  Chris-
tians that  they  can,  and  make  them  slaves.

But  the  Englishmen  fought  with  them  and  the  Savages
slew  five  of  them,  and  tooke  1 3  alive,  which  were  with
the  Savages  about  1 5  moneths.  But  the  Master  of  the
pinnesse,  whose  name  was  Richard  Faireweather  being  not
willing  to  indure  the  misery  that  hee  was  in,  and  having
knowledge  that  there  was  a  towne  of  Christians  on  the
other  side  of  the  river,  he  in  a  night  called  John  Drake,

94

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1583.
and  another  yong  man  which  was  with  them,  and  tooke  a
very  little  Canoa,  which  had  but  two  oares,  &  so  passed
to  the  other  side  of  the  river,  which  is  about  1 9  leagues
broade,  and  were  three  dayes  before  they  could  get  over
without  meat :  and  comming  to  land,  they  hit  upon  an
high  way  that  went  towardes  the  Christians  :  and  seeing
the  footing  of  horses,  they  followed  it,  and  at  last  came  to
an  house  where  there  was  corne  sowed,  and  there  they
met  with  Indians  servants  unto  the  Spaniards,  which  gave
them  meate,  and  clothes  to  cover  them,  for  they  were  all
naked,  and  one  of  the  Indians  went  to  the  towne,  and
told  them  of  the  Englishmen  ;  so  the  Captaine  sent
foure  horsemen,  who  brought  them  to  the  towne  behind
them.

This  Captaine  clothed  them,  and  provided  lodging  for
them,  and  John  Drake  dieted  at  the  Captaines  table,  and
they  were  all  very  well  intreated,  the  Captaine  purposing
to  send  them  for  Spaine. But  the  Viceroy  of  Peru  having  John  Drake
newes  hereof,  sent  for  them,  and  so  John  Drake  was  sent  ^^^^  ^°  ^"-^^
to  him,  but  the  other  two  were  kept  there,  because  they  p^^^  ^
were  married  in  the  countrey,  so  that  I  know  no  more  of  [in.  728.]
their  affaires.

Upon  this  comming  of  the  Englishmen,  there  were  pre-
pared 50  horsemen  to  goe  over  the  river  to  seeke  the  rest
of  the  Englishmen,  and  also  certaine  Spaniards  that  were
among  the  savage  people,  but  I  am  not  certaine,  whether
they  went  forward  or  not.

[A  ruttier
95

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Isle  of

Santa  Cate-
lina. Rio
Grande.

Puerto  de
Biaza,  or
Laguna.

Isla  de  raparo.

Rio  Grande.

Certaine
Hands  12
leagues  distant
from  the  mouth
of  the  river  of
Plate,  which
are  3  in
number.

A  ruttier  which  declareth  the  situation  of  the  coast
of  Brasil  from  the  Isle  of  Santa  Catelina  unto
the  mouth  of  the  river  of  Plata,  and  all  along
up  within  the  sayd  river,  and  what  armes  and
mouthes  it  hath  to  enter  into  it,  as  farre  as
it  is  navigable  with  small  barks.

Rom  the  Isle  of  Santa  Catelina,  (which  is
in  28  degrees  of  Southerly  latitude)  unto
Rio  Grande  is  fortie  leagues.  This  river
by  another  name  is  called  Ygai.  The
Island  of  Santa  Catelina  is  sixe  leagues  in
length  :  It  hath  two  small  Hands  on  the
North  side  betweene  the  maine  land  and
it :  and  on  the  South  side  it  hath  a  shoald  of  rockes,
which  lyeth  hidden  very  neere  unto  the  poynt  of  the  Isle.
You  are  to  passe  betweene  the  firme  land  and  the  poynt
of  the  Isle.

From  Santa  Catelina  to  the  haven  of  Biaza,  which  by
another  name  is  called  la  Laguna,  are  twelve  leagues :  it
is  a  good  haven  within  :  but  you  must  stay  the  full  sea  to
enter  into  it,  because  it  hath  shoaldes  in  the  mouth,  and  it
may  be  knowen  by  a  small  Island  which  lyeth  a  league
into  the  sea  which  is  called  La  Isla  de  Raparo,  that  is  The
Island  of  succour  or  defence,  and  you  must  ride  there  to
search  the  chanell.

From  this  harbour  unto  the  river  before  named  there
is  no  haven  for  a  ship  to  harbour  it  selfe.  And  Rio
Grande  hath  many  shoalds  in  the  mouth  thereof.  It  is  a
river  that  none  but  very  small  shippes  can  enter  into.
And  this  river  divideth  the  countrey  of  the  people  called
Carios  from  other  nations  which  are  called  Guavaes.  And
from  this  river  unto  the  entrance  of  the  mouth  of  the
river  of  Plate  it  is  al  a  plaine  land,  and  very  low :  you
must  saile  all  along  two  or  three  leagues  into  the  sea  from
the  shore,  untill  you  come  to  certaine  Islands  which  lye
twelve  leagues  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  of  Plate.

96

A RUTTIER FOR THE RIVER PLATE

From  Rio  Grande  unto  these  Islands  are  68  leagues.
And  from  these  Islands  unto  the  Cape  of  Saint  Marie  the
coast  runneth  Northeast  and  Southwest,  somewhat  in-
clining a  poynt  to  the  South.  The  Islands  are  three,  and
may  be  knowen  as  you  come  from  the  sea  by  two  poynts,
which  shew  like  the  eares  of  a  conie :  you  may  ride
betweene  them  and  the  maine.

From  Rio  Grande  to  the  Cape  of  Saint  Marie  are  80
leagues  :  and  the  Cape  may  be  knowne  by  one  Island
which  lyeth  from  it  a  league  and  an  halfe  into  the  sea.
You  may  sayle  betweene  the  maine  and  that  Island,  be-
cause there  is  above  8  or  9  fathoms  water.  The  Cape  of
Saint  Mary  standeth  in  35  degrees  of  Southerly  latitude.

The  Cape  of  Santa  Maria  upon  the  poynt  thereof  hath  a
little  hill  which  standeth  over  against  the  Isle  of  Seales.
From  this  coast  of  Santa  Maria  you  must  coast  along  the
land  alway  on  the  North  shore,  and  along  the  same  are
certaine  Bayes.  From  the  Cape  unto  the  river  of  Solis  are
tenne  leagues,  the  coast  runneth  East  and  West.  There
standeth  an  Island  over  against  the  mouth  thereof.  From
this  river  of  Solis  unto  Los  tres  Mogotes  which  are  on
the  maine  land  is  three  leagues.  And  from  Los  Mogotes
unto  the  Isles  of  Saint  Graviel  are  other  8  or  9  leagues
more :  all  this  distance  runneth  East  and  West.  These
are  five  small  Islands :  to  ride  here  you  must  keepe  some-
what neere  the  maine  within  an  harquebuze  shot  halfe  a
league  before  you  come  at  the  Islands,  and  straightway
you  shall  see  a  crosse  'h  standing  on  the  said  land,  and
there  is  an  harbour  for  some  winds.

From  Saint  Graviel  unto  the  river  of  Sant  Juan  going
along  the  same  coast,  I  say  on  the  North  shore,  are  three
leagues :  it  is  very  well  knowen  by  the  broken  cliffe
which  it  hath,  which  is  a  white  hill.  The  entrance  into
this  river  is  very  dangerous :  because  it  is  shallow,  and
none  but  very  small  shippes  can  enter  into  the  same :  the
entrance  thereof  is  on  the  West  side  very  neere  the  land,
great  Carackes  may  ride  within  the  harbour.  From  this
river  unto  the  Isle  of  Martin  Garzia  are  three  leagues :  it

XI  97  G

TAe  Cape  of
S.  Marie.
An  Island  a
league  an  halfe
from  Cape
Sainf  Marie.
Isla  de  Lobos.

The  way  to
enter  into  the
river  of  Plate.
Rio  de  Solis
10  leagues
within  the
Cape.

Los  tres  Mogo-
tes 3  leagues.
Saint  Graviel
8  leagues.

Rio  de  S.  Juan
3  leagues.

The  Isle  of
Ma?-tin  Gar-
zia 3  leagues.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Rio  de  Buenos
Aeres  on  ihe
south  side  of
the  Tiver  of
Plate.
[III.  729-]

The  first
Spanish  colonie
was  planted  in
the  river  of
Buenos  Acres.

The  Isles  of
San  Lazaro.

Rio  Uruay.

Parana  is  the
great  river.

is  one  Island  alone,  and  you  must  sayle  along  the  coast
on  the  North  shore :  and  after  you  be  come  unto  the
Island,  I  say,  over  against  the  same,  you  shall  have  three
fathoms  water,  and  on  the  West  side  it  hath  a  little  creeke
where  you  may  ride.

He  that  desireth  to  crosse  over  the  river  of  Plate  unto
the  river  de  Buenos  Aeres  from  the  Isles  of  Saint  Graviel,
must  shape  his  course  Southwest :  and  the  cut  over  is
sixeteene  leagues  and  upon  his  arrivall  on  the  South
shore  of  the  river,  hee  must  seeke  a  chanell  of  three
fathomes  water,  and  straite  he  must  goe  along  the  coast
untill  hee  come  to  a  broken  cliffe  and  a  poynt  like  unto
the  firme  land,  which  is  distant  from  this  chanell  three
or  foure  leagues :  and  when  thou  seest  this  broken  cliffe,
keepe  thee  a  league  from  it.  Here  upon  this  river  of
Buenos  Aeres  was  the  first  Colonie  that  Don  Pedro  de
Mendoza  planted.  This  river  lieth  very  much  hidden :
because  it  is  not  seene,  it  is  very  shallow  at  a  low  sea,
wherefore  you  must  come  in  with  the  first  of  the  flood.

From  the  Isle  of  Martin  Garzia  unto  certaine  small
Islands  which  are  called  the  Isles  of  Saint  Lazarus  is  two
leagues,  these  are  shoalds :  and  to  goe  thither  you  must
goe  hard  aboord  the  maine.  for  there  goeth  the  chanell :
all  this  is  to  be  passed  on  the  North  shore,  and  with  small
barkes,  and  with  good  heede.

From  the  Isle  of  Martin  Garzia  to  the  mouthes  of  the
river  are  eight  leagues  in  passing  along  on  this  side  to
seeke  one  of  the  mouthes  of  the  river  Parana,  as  it  is
hereafter  described.  But  you  had  need  first  to  harbour
in  a  bay,  which  is  in  the  very  cliffe  or  Barranca,  and  you
must  stay  for  the  full  sea.  And  if  you  fall  into  the
mouth  of  the  river  which  is  called  Uruay,  you  must
leave  it  on  the  right  hand,  I  say  on  the  North  side.
And  foorthwith  leaving  the  said  mouth  forward  toward
the  West,  you  may  enter  into  the  first  mouth  although
it  seeme  narrow;  or  rather  you  may  enter  into  any  of
the  mouthes:  for  all  of  them  meete  together  in  Parana,
which  is  the  maine  river.

98

A RUTTIER FOR THE RIVER PLATE

And  hee  that  desireth  to  goe  from  the  Isle  of  Martin
Garzia  to  the  river  of  Palmas,  which  is  the  best  of  all  Rio  de  las
these  armes,  or  mouthes  to  speake  more  properly,  is  to  P^^^^^-
shape  his  course  to  the  West,  and  comming  over  to  the
other  shore,  and  sayling  along  the  coast  North  northwest
hee  shall  discover  the  mouth  of  this  river  of  Palmas :  and
hee  must  enter  hard  by  Los  Juncales,  which  lye  on  the
South  side :  and  afterward  within  is  very  deepe  sounding.
All  these  mouthes  of  this  river  which  are  5,  are  full  of
sholds  towards  the  East  above  the  space  of  two  leagues.
And  if  the  course  of  the  water  were  not  swift  there,  you
could  not  enter  into  them,  as  I  have  already  sayd,  and
you  must  passe  all  along  with  much  heede  and  foresight.

And  if  peradventure  you  have  passed  Cape  Saint  Marie
and  are  come  over  to  Cape  Blanco,  consider  it,  that  it  is  Cape  Blanco
so  even  and  smooth  a  land,  that  you  can  scarcely  dis-  °^J^^^^^f^
cerne  it  a  league  from  the  maine,  unlesse  it  be  a  very  mouth  of  the
cleare  day :  and  after  this  sort  the  coast  lieth  low  unto  river  of  Plate
the  river  de  Buenos  Acres. And  from  thence  the  coast  ^  ^^n  ^^^
lyeth  somewhat  high  unto  the  entrance  of  the  river  de  ^^^  even  land.
Palmas : all the  coast  runneth  as I sayd before. And
all  along  this  coast  are  naughty  people,  which  eate  those  Man-eaters
which  they  kill,  and  many  Tygers.  upon^the  south

From  the  Isle  of  Martin  Garzia  unto  Sant  Salvador  is  Sant  Salvador
nine  or  tenne  leagues. This  is  an  Island  which  standeth  an  Island  ten
two  leagues  within  the  first  mouth  :  where  Sebastian  Cabota  l^agues^  off.
tooke  possession. And  this  countrey  is  very  well  peopled  ^^^^^^^^^
by  a  people  called  Carios ;  and  you  must  beware  of  all
these  people  : for they  are  your  deadly  enemies. The
most  Southerly  mouth  of  Parana  called  Rio  de  Palmas  is
sixteene  leagues  long,  and it hath many  turnings,  and 16.  Leagues.
many  palme or  date-trees  growing  neere  it, whereupon
it  is  called  The  river  of  palme  trees : and forthwith  it
entreth  into  the  river  Parana,  as  soone  as  these  sixteene
leagues  are  finished. All  the  other  armes  containe  like-
wise sixteene leagues in length, saving one small or
narrowe  arme,  which  is  called  The  river  de  los  Beguaes ;
for  this containeth  fortie  leagues  in  length. From  this

99

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Santo  Spirito
50  leagues
from  Rio  de
Palmas.

Los  Tenbuis  a
people.
1 5 .  Leagues.

The  Quiloacas
20.  leagues.

This  towne
perhaps  may
be  the  towne
ofSantaJnna,
I  5.  leagues.
The  Mequar-
etas  a  people.
20  leagues.

The  Mepenes
30  leagues.

8.  leagues.

The  river
Paraguai.

The  7.
currents.
[III.  730.]

The  towne  of
Piquiri  or
Picora  170
leagues  up  the
river  of
Parana.

you  must  enter  by  the  mouth  of  the  river  of  Palmas
unto  Santo  Spirito,  the  way  is  fiftie  leagues :  you  are
to  passe  still  along  the  cliffes.  As  you  enter  on  the
left  hand  which  is  on  the  West  shore  up  this  river  there
are  many  Isles,  lakes  and  small  rivers,  and  many  Indians
which  are  your  enemies.

From  Santo  Spirito  unto  a  people  which  are  called
Los  Tenbuis  is  fifteene  leagues.  This  is  by  the  narrow
arme  whereby  they  passe  into  the  river  Parana :  it  is  the
more  because  it  is  the  longer  way.  From  the  Tenbuis
by  this  narrow  arme  upward  unto  the  Quiloacas,  which
is  another  nation,  are  twentie  leagues ;  and  all  up  this
river  is  great  store  of  people.

From  the  Quiloacas,  to  a  place  where  the  Spaniards
now  have  builded  a  towne,  are  fifteene  leagues.  From
this  towne  unto  the  people  called  Los  Mequaretas  is
twentie  leagues.  Here  are  many  sholds  which  continue
thirtie  leagues.  All  these  thirtie  leagues  are  sunken
landes :  where  are  many  Isles,  flats,  and  nations,  which
are  our  enemies.

From  the  Mequaretas  unto  the  people  called  Mepenes
are  these  thirtie  leagues.  And  from  hence  begin  the
coasts  of  the  firme  land  unto  the  mouth  of  the  river
Paraguai ;  saving  that  there  are  eight  leagues  more  of
sunken  ground.

From  the  Mepenes  unto  the  mouth  of  the  river  of
Paraguai  arc  thirtie  leagues :  it  is  a  river  that  cannot  be
mistaken  although  it  hath  many  armes  and  Islands  and
dangers,  it  hath  a  marke  two  leagues  beneath  the  mouth
on  the  East  side,  to  wit,  an  high  land,  where  are  7  points,
which  we  call  the  7  currents :  and  immediatly  above  these
currents  there  is  an  Island  as  you  passe  up  the  river  over
against  the  poynt  aforesaid  standeth  the  mouth  of  Para-
guai. This  mouth  is  very  plaine  to  be  found  in  seeking
whereof  a  man  cannot  be  deceived.  From  this  mouth
the  river  of  Parana  is  divided,  which  is  a  very  great  river :
and  it  goeth  unto  the  towne  of  Piquiri,  which  is  an  hun-
dred and  seventie  leagues :  and  it  runneth  all  this  space

A RUTTIER FOR THE RIVER  PLATE  ad.

1577-
North and  South,  and in the  way  are many  flats  and
shoalds ; and great store of  people, which are a bad
nation, although they bee divided. From the place  ^-^^  "'^^'^  of
where  these  two  rivers  are  divided,  that  is  to  say,  from  ^"^^P^^^on^or
the  mouth  of  Paraguai  are  sixtie  leagues  unto  the  citie  leagues  from  '
of  Assumption. This  is  a  good  river,  and  better  to  sayle  tie  mouth  of
then  all  the  rest  of  the  rivers,  which  are  in  this  countrey.  Paraguai.
And from this  towne  to  Los  Xaraes  are 200.  leagues,  200.  leagues

very  well  inhabited  with  people  of  divers  nations,  which  -^^^  Assump-
^ I n  -I  t^on  subject  to

serve  the  Spanyards.  the  Spaniard,

to  the  citie  of

THE  TWO FAMOUS  VOYAGES  Xaraes.

Happily perfourmed round  about the  world, by
Sir Francis Drake, and M. Thomas Candish
Esquire, together with the rest of  our English
voyages  intended  for  the  South  Sea,  the  kingdomes
of  Chili,  Peru,  the  backe  side  of  Nueva  Espanna,
the  Malucos,  the  Philippinas,  the  mightie  empire
of  China, though  not so happily perfourmed as
the  two  former : whereunto  are  annexed  certaine
rare  observations  touching  the  present  state  of
China,  and  the  kingdome  of  Coray,  lately
invaded by Quabacondono the last
monarch of the 66. prince-
domes  of  Japan.

The  famous  voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Drake  into  the
South  sea,  and  therehence  about  the  whole
Globe  of  the  earth,  begun  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lord, 1577.

He  15.  day  of  November,  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lord  1577.  M.  Francis  Drake,  with  a  fleete  of
five ships and barkes, and to the number of

164.  men,  gentlemen  and  sailers,  departed  from  Plim-
mouth,  giving  out  his  pretended  voyage  for  Alexandria :
but the wind falling contrary, hee was forced the

lOI

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577-

next  morning to put  into Falmouth haven in Corne-

wall,  where  such  and  so  terrible  a  tempest  tooke  us,
as  few  men  have  seene  the  like,  and  was  in  deed  so
vehement,  that  all  our  ships  were  like  to  have  gone  to
wracke :  but  it  pleased  God  to  preserve  us  from  that
extremitie,  and  to  afflict  us  onely  for  that  present  with
these  two  particulars :  The  mast  of  our  Admirall  which
was  the  Pellican,  was  cut  over  boord  for  the  safegard  of
the  ship,  and  the  Marigold  was  driven  ashore,  and  some-
what bruised :  for  the  repairing  of  which  damages  wee
returned  againe  to  Plimmouth,  and  having  recovered
those  harmes,  and  brought  the  ships  againe  to  good  state,
we  set  forth  the  second  time  from  Plimmouth,  and  set
saile  the 13.  day  of  December  following.

The 25. day of  the same moneth we fell  with the

Cape  Cantin,  upon  the coast of  Barbarie,  and coasting

The  Isle  of  along,  the  27.  day  we  found  an  Island  called  Mogador,

Mogador  on  lying  one  mile  distant  from  the  maine,  betweene  which

t^  coast  of  jgj^j^^  2jn.^  the  maine,  we found a  very  good and safe

harbour for our ships to ride in, as also very  good

entrance,  and  voyde  of  any  danger.

On  this  Island  our  Generall  erected  a  pinnesse,
whereof  he  brought  out  of  England  with  him  foure
already  framed.  While  these  things  were  in  doing,
there  came  to  the  waters  side  some  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  countrey,  shewing  foorth  their  flags  of  truce,
which  being  seene  of  our  Generall,  hee  sent  his  ships
boate  to  the  shore,  to  know  what  they  would  :  they
being  willing  to  come  aboord,  our  men  left  there  one
man  of  our  company  for  a  pledge,  and  brought  two
of  theirs  aboord  our  ship,  which  by  signes  shewed  our
General,  that  the  next  day  they  would  bring  some
provision,  as  sheepe,  capons  and  hennes,  and  such  like  :
whereupon  our  Generall  bestowed  amongst  them  some
linnen  cloth  and  shooes,  and  a  javeling,  which  they  very
joyfully  received,  and  departed  for  that  time.

The  next  morning  they  failed  not  to  come  againe
to  the  waters  side,  and  our  Generall  againe  setting  out

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1578.
our  boate,  one  of  our  men  leaping  over  rashly  ashore,
and  offering  friendly  to  imbrace  them,  they  set  violent
hands  on  him,  offering  a  dagger  to  his  throte  if  hee
had  made  any  resistance,  and  so  laying  him  on  a  horse,
caried  him  away  :  so  that  a  man  cannot  be  too  circum-
spect and  warie  of  himselfe  among  such  miscreants.

Our  pinnesse  being  finished,  wee  departed  from  this
place  the  30.  and  last  day  of  December,  and  coasting  [III.  731.]
along  the  shore,  wee  did  descrie,  not  contrary  to  our
expectation,  certaine  Canters  which  were  Spanish  fisher-
men, to  whom  we  gave  chase  and  tooke  three  of
them,  and  proceeding  further  we  met  with  3.  Caravels
and  tooke  them  also.

The  17.  day  of  January  we  arrived  at  Cape  Blanco,  Januarie.
where  we  found  a  ship  riding  at  anchor,  within  the
Cape,  and  but  two  simple  Mariners  in  her,  which  ship
we  tooke  and  caried  her  further  into  the  harbour,
where  we  remained  4.  dayes,  and  in  that  space  our
General  mustered,  and  trayned  his  men  on  land  in
warlike  maner,  to  make  them  fit  for  all  occasions.

In  this  place  we  tooke  of  the  Fishermen  such  ne-
cessaries as  wee  wanted,  and  they  could  yeeld  us,  and
leaving  heere  one  of  our  litle  barkes  called  the  Benedict,
wee  tooke  with  us  one  of  theirs  which  they  called  Canters,
being  of  the  burden  of  40.  tunnes  or  thereabouts.

All  these  things  being  finished,  wee  departed  this
harbour  the  22.  of  Januarie,  carying  along  with  us
one  of  the  Portugall  Caravels  which  was  bound  to  the
Islands  of  Cape  Verde  for  salt,  whereof  good  store  is
made  in  one  of  those  Islands.

The  master  or  Pilot  of  that  Caravel  did  advertise
our  Generall  that  upon  one  of  those  Islands  called  Mayo,  The  Isle  of
there  was  great  store  of  dryed  Cabritos,  which  a  few  ■^^J*'"-
inhabitants  there  dwelling  did  yeerely  make  ready  for
such  of  the  kings  Ships  as  did  there  touch,  beeing
bound  for  his  countrey  of  Brasile  or  elsewhere.  Wee
fell  with  this  Island  the  27.  of  January,  but  the
Inhabitants would in no case traffique  with us,  being

103

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578-

thereof  forbidden  by  the  kings  Edict :  yet  the  next  day
our  Generall  sent  to  view  the  Island,  and  the  likeli-
hoodes  that  might  be  there  of  provision  of  victuals,
about  threescore  and  two  men  under  the  conduct  and
government  of  Master  Winter  and  Master  Doughtie,
and  marching  towards  the  chiefe  place  of  habitation  in
this  Island  (as  by  the  Portugal!  wee  were  informed)
having  travailed  to  the  mountaines  the  space  of  three
miles,  and  arriving  there  somewhat  before  the  day
breake,  we  arrested  our  selves  to  see  day  before  us,
which  appearing,  we  found  the  inhabitants  to  be  fled :
but  the  place,  by  reason  that  it  was  manured,  wee
found  to  be  more  fruitful!  then  the  other  part,  especially
the  valleys  among  the  hils.
Ripe  grapes  171  Here  we  gave  our  selves  a  litle  refreshing,  as  by  very
Winter.  j.jpg ^^^^ sweete  grapes,  which the fruitfulnesse of  the

earth  at  that  season  of  the  yeere  yeelded  us  :  and  that
season  being  with  us  the  depth  of  Winter,  it  may
seeme  strange  that  those  fruites  were  then  there  grow-
ing :  but  the  reason  thereof  is  this,  because  they  being
betweene  the  Tropike  and  the  Equinoctial!,  the  Sunne
passeth  twise  in  the  yeere  through  their  Zenith  over
their  heads,  by  meanes  whereof  they  have  two  Summers,
&  being  so  neere  the  heate  of  the  line,  they  never  lose
the  heate  of  the  Sunne  so  much,  but  the  fruites  have
their  increase  and  continuance  in  the  midst  of  Winter.
The  Island  is  wonderfully  stored  with  goates  and
wilde  hennes,  and  it  hath  salt  also  without  labour,  save
onely  that  the  people  gather  it  into  heapes,  which
continually  in  great  quantitie  is  increased  upon  the
sands  by  the  flowing  of  the  sea,  and  the  receiving
heate  of  the  Sunne  kerning  the  same,  so  that  of  the
increase  thereof  they  keepe  a  continuall  trafiique  with
their  neighbours.
The  descrip-  Amongst  Other  things  we  found  here  a  kind  of  fruit
'r"  °V^^-  V^  called  Cocos,  which  because  it  is  not  commonly  knowen
Com  vj'ith. us in England, I thought good to make some

description  of  it.

104

DRAKE'S  DRUM

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1578.

The  tree  beareth  no  leaves  nor  branches,  but  at  the
very  top  the  fruit  groweth  in  clusters,  hard  at  the  top
of  the  stemme  of  the  tree,  as  big  every  severall  fruite
as  a  mans  head  :  but  having  taken  off  the  uttermost
barke,  which  you  shall  find  to  bee  very  full  of  strings
or  sinowes,  as  I  may  terme  them,  you  shall  come  to  a
hard  shell  which  may  holde  of  quantitie  in  liquor  a
pint  commonly,  or  some  a  quart,  and  some  lesse  :
within  that  shell  of  the  thicknesse  of  halfe  an  inch
good,  you  shall  have  a  kinde  of  hard  substance  and
very  white,  no  lesse  good  and  sweete  then  almonds  :
within  that  againe  a  certaine  cleare  liquor,  which  being
drunke,  you  shall  not  onely  finde  it  very  delicate  and
sweete,  but  most  comfortable  and  cordiall.

After  wee  had  satisfied  our  selves  with  some  of  these
fruites,  wee  marched  further  into  the  Island,  and  saw
great  store  of  *  Cabritos  alive,  which  were  so  chased  *  Or  goates.
by  the  inhabitants,  that  wee  could  doe  no  good  towards
our  provision,  but  they  had  layde  out  as  it  were  to
stoppe  our  mouthes  withall,  certaine  olde  dryed  Cabritos,
which  being  but  ill,  and  small  and  few,  wee  made  no
account  of.

Being  returned  to  our  ships,  our  Generall  departed
hence  the  31.  of  this  moneth,  and  sayled  by  the  Island  The  Isle  of  Z.
of  S.  lago,  but  farre  enough  from  the  danger  of  the  ^^S^-
inhabitants,  who  shot  and  discharged  at  us  three  peeces,
but  they  all  fell  short  of  us,  and  did  us  no  harme.
The  Island  is  fayre  and  large,  and  as  it  seemeth,  rich
and  fruitfull,  and  inhabited  by  the  Portugals,  but  the
mountaines  and  high  places  of  the  Island  are  sayd  to
be  possessed  by  the  Moores,  who  having  bin  slaves  to
the  Portugals,  to  ease  themselves,  made  escape  to  the
desert  places  of  the  Island,  where  they  abide  with
great  strength.

Being  before  this  Island,  we  espied  two  ships  under  [m.  732.]
sayle,  to  the  one  of  which  wee  gave  chase,  and  in  the  end
boorded  her  with  a  ship-boat  without  resistance,  which
we  found  to  be  a  good  prize,  and  she  yeelded  unto  us

105

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.
A  prize,  and  good  Store  of  wine  :  which  prize  our  General  committed
NunodaSiha  ^^  ^^^  custodie  of  Master  Dousfhtie,  and  reteining  the
Pilot  taken.  "i^ot,  sent  the  rest  away  with  his  Finnesse,  giving  them
a  Butte  of  wine  and  some  victuals,  and  their  wearing
clothes,  and  so  they  departed.
The  isle  of  The  same  night  wee  came  with  the  Island  called  by

^°^°-  the  Portugals,  Ilha  del  fogo,  that  is,  the  burning  Island :

in  the  Northside  whereof  is  a  consuming  fire,  the
matter  is  sayde  to  be  of  Sulphure,  but  notwithstanding
it  is  like  to  bee  a  commodious  Island,  because  the
Portugals  have  built,  and  doe  inhabite  there.

Upon  the  South  side  thereof  lyeth  a  most  pleasant
and  sweete  Island,  the  trees  whereof  are  alwayes  greene
and  faire  to  looke  upon,  in  respect  whereof  they  call  it
Ilha  Brava,  that  is,  the  brave  Island.  From  the  bankes
thereof  into  the  sea  doe  run  in  many  places  reasonable
streames  of  fresh  waters  easie  to  be  come  by,  but  there
was  no  convenient  roade  for  our  ships  :  for  such  was
the  depth,  that  no  ground  could  bee  had  for  anchoring,
and  it  is  reported,  that  ground  was  never  found  in
that  place,  so  that  the  tops  of  Fogo  burne  not  so  high
in  the  ayre,  but  the  rootes  of  Brava  are  quenched  as
low  in  the  sea.

Being  departed  from  these  Islands,  we  drew  towards
the  line,  where  wee  were  becalmed  the  space  of  3.
weekes,  but  yet  subject  to  divers  great  stormes,  terrible
lightnings  and  much  thunder  :  but  with  this  miserie
we  had  the  commoditie  of  great  store  of  fish,  as
Dolphins,  Bonitos,  and  flying  fishes,  whereof  some  fell
into  our  shippes,  wherehence  they  could  not  rise  againe
for  want  of  moisture,  for  when  their  wings  are  drie,
they  cannot  flie.

From  the  first  day  of  our  departure  from  the  Islands

of  Cape  Verde, wee  sayled 54. dayes  without sight of

land,  and  the  first  land  that  we  fell  with  was  the  coast

Aprill.  of  Brasil,  which  we saw  the  fift of  April  in  ye height

33- egiees. q£  ^^^ degrees towards the pole  Antarctike,  and being

discovered at sea by  the inhabitants of  the countrey,

106

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1578.

they  made  upon  the  coast  great  fires  for  a  sacrifice
(as  we  learned)  to  the  devils,  about  which  they  use
conjurations,  making  heapes  of  sande  and  other  cere-
monies, that  when  any  ship  shall  goe  about  to  stay  upon
their  coast,  not  onely  sands  may  be  gathered  together
in  shoalds  in  every  place,  but  also  that  stormes  and
tempests  may  arise,  to  the  casting  away  of  ships  and
men,  whereof  (as  it  is  reported)  there  have  bene  divers
experiments.

The  seventh  day  in  a  mightie  great  storme  both  of
lightning,  rayne  and  thunder,  wee  lost  the  Canter  which  we
called  the  Christopher :  but  the  eleventh  day  after,  by  our
Generals  great  care  in  dispersing  his  ships,  we  found
her  againe,  and  the  place  where  we  met,  our  Generall
called  the  Cape  of  Joy,  where  every  ship  tooke  in  some  The  Cape  of
water.  Heere  we  found  a  good  temperature  and  sweete  ''°'^'
ayre,  a  very  faire  and  pleasant  countrey  with  an  exceeding
fruitfuU  soyle,  where  were  great  store  of  large  and  mightie
Deere,  but  we  came  not  to  the  sight  of  any  people :  but
traveiling  further  into  the  countrey,  we  perceived  the
footing  of  people  in  the  clay-ground,  shewing  that  they
were  men  of  great  stature.  Being  returned  to  our  ships,
we  wayed  anchor,  and  ranne  somewhat  further,  and  har-
boured our  selves  betweene  a  rocke  and  the  maine,  where
by  meanes  of  the  rocke  that  brake  the  force  of  the  sea,  we
rid  very  safe,  and  upon  this  rocke  we  killed  for  our
provision  certaine  sea-wolves,  commonly  called  with  us
Scales.

From  hence  we  went  our  course  to  ^i^.  degrees,  and  Their  entrance
entred  the  great  river  of  Plate,  and  ranne  into  54.  and  k,c^.  ^^^°^he  nver
fadomes  and  a  halfe  of  fresh  water,  where  wee  filled  our
water  by  the  ships  side : but  our  Generall  finding  here
no  good  harborough,  as  he  thought  he  should,  bare  out
againe  to  sea  the  27.  of  April,  and  in  bearing  out  we
lost sight of our Flieboate wherein master Doughtie
was,  but  we  sayling  along,  found  a  fayre  and  reasonable
good  Bay  wherein  were  many,  and  the same  profitable  Abundance  of
Islands,  one  whereof  had  so  many  Scales,  as  would  at  the  Seales.

107

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

least  have  laden  all  our  Shippes,  and  the  rest  of  the
Islands  are  as  it  were  laden  with  foules  which  is  won-
derfull  to  see,  and  they  of  divers  sortes.  It  is  a  place
very  plentifull  of  victuals,  and  hath  in  it  no  want  of
fresh  water.

Our  Generall  after  certaine  dayes  of  his  abode  in
this  place,  being  on  shore  in  an  Island,  the  people  of
the  countrey  shewed  themselves  unto  him,  leaping  and
dauncing,  and  entred  into  traffique  with  him,  but  they
would  not  receive  any  thing  at  any  mans  hands,  but  the
same  must  bee  cast  upon  the  ground.  They  are  of
cleane,  comely,  and  strong  bodies,  swift  on  foote,  and
seeme  to  be  very  active.
May.  The  eighteenth  day of  May our Generall thought

it  needfull  to  have  a  care  of  such  Ships  as  were  absent,
and  therefore  indevouring  to  seeke  the  Flieboate  wherein
master Doughtie was, we espied her againe the next
day : and whereas certaine of  our ships were sent  to
discover  the  coast  and  to  search  an  harbour,  the  Mary-
gold and the  Canter being imployed in  that  businesse,
[III.  733.] came unto us and gave us understanding of a safe
harbour  that  they  had  found, wherewith all our ships
bare, and entred  it,  where we watered and made new
provision  of  victuals,  as  by  Scales,  whereof  we  slew  to  the
number  of  200.  or  300.  in  the  space  of  an  houre.
Here  our  Generall  in  the  Admirall  rid  close  aboord  the
T/ie  Flie-boat Flie-boate, and tooke  out of  her all the provision  of
cast  off  and victuals  and  what  els  was  in  her,  and  hailing  her  to  the
Lande,  set  fire  to  her,  and  so  burnt  her  to  save  the  iron
worke  : which  being  a  doing,  there  came  downe  of  the
The  people  of  countrey  certaine  of  the  people  naked,  saving  only  about
the  countrey. ^^^^  waste the  skinne  of  some  beast  with  the  furre  or
haire  on, and something  also  wreathed  on  their  heads  :
their  faces  were  painted  with  divers  colours,  and  some  of
them  had  on  their  heads  the  similitude  of  homes,  every
man  his  bow  which  was  an  ell  in  length,  and  a  couple
of  arrowes. They  were  very  agill  people  and  quicke  to
deliver,  and  seemed  not  to be ignorant  in  the  feates  of

108

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1578.
warres,  as  by  their  order  of  ranging  a  few  men,  might
appeare.  These  people  would  not  of  a  long  time  receive
any  thing  at  our  handes ;  yet  at  length  our  Generall  being
ashore,  and  they  dauncing  after  their  accustomed  maner
about  him,  and  hee  once  turning  his  backe  towards  them,
one  leapt  suddenly  to  him,  and  tooke  his  cap  with  his
golde  band  off  his  head,  and  ran  a  litle  distance  from  him
and  shared  it  with  his  fellow,  the  cap  to  the  one,  and  the
band  to  the  other.

Having  dispatched  all  our  businesse  in  this  place,  wee
departed  and  set  sayle,  and  immediatly  upon  our  setting
foorth  we  lost  our  Canter  which  was  absent  three  or  foure
dayes :  but  when  our  General  had  her  againe,  he  tooke
out  the  necessaries,  and  so  gave  her  over  neere  to  the
Cape of  Good hope.  The  cape  of

The  next  day  after  being  the  twentieth  of  June,  wee  ^°°^  ^"P^-
harboured  our  selves  againe  in  a  very  good  harborough,
called by Magellan  Port  S.  Julian,  where  we  found  a  PortS.  Julian.
gibbet  standing  upon  the  maine,  which  we  supposed  to  be
the  place  where  Magellan  did  execution  upon  some  of
his  disobedient  and  rebellious  company.

The  two  and  twentieth  day  our  Generall  went  ashore
to  the  maine,  and  in  his  companie,  John  Thomas,  and
Robert  Winterhie,  Oliver  the  Master  gunner,  John
Brewer,  Thomas  Hood,  and  Thomas  Drake,  and  entring
on  land,  they  presently  met  with  two  or  three  of  the
countrey  people,  and  Robert  Winterhie  having  in  his
hands  a  bowe  and  arrowes,  went  about  to  make  a  shoote
of  pleasure,  and  in  his  draught  his  bowstring  brake,
which  the  rude  Savages  taking  as  a  token  of  warre,  began
to  bend  the  force  of  their  bowes  against  our  company,
and  drove  them  to  their  shifts  very  narrowly.

In  this  Port  our  Generall  began  to  enquire  diligently
of  the  actions  of  M.  Thomas  Doughtie,  and  found  them
not  to  be  such  as  he  looked  for,  but  tending  rather
to  contention  or  mutinie,  or  some  other  disorder,  whereby
(without  redresse)  the  successe  of  the  voyage  might
greatly  have bene hazarded : whereupon the company

109

A.D.

1578.

M.  Thomas

Dougktie

executed.

August.
The  str eight
of  Magelia?!.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

was  called together  and made  acquainted  with  the  par-
ticulars of  the  cause,  which  were  found  partly  by  master
Doughties  owne  confession,  and  partly  by  the  evidence  of
the fact, to be true : which when our Generall saw,
although his  private affection to M. Doughtie (as  hee
then  in  the  presence of  us  all sacredly  protested) was
great,  yet  the  care  he  had  of  the  state  of  the  voyage,  of
the  expectation  of  her  Majestie,  and  of  the  honour  of  his
countrey  did  more  touch  him,  (as  indeede  it  ought)  then
the  private  respect  of  one  man :  so  that  the  cause  being
throughly  heard,  and  all  things  done in  good  order  as
neere  as  might  be  to  the  course  of  our  lawes  in  England,
it was concluded that M. Doughtie should receive
punishment according to the qualitie of the offence  :
and he seeing no remedie but patience for himselfe,
desired  before  his  death  to  receive  the  Communion,  which
he  did  at  the  hands  of  M.  Fletcher  our  Minister,  and  our
Generall  himselfe  accompanied  him  in  that  holy  action :
which  being  done,  and  the  place  of  execution  made  ready,
hee  having  embraced  our  Generall  and  taken  his  leave  of
all the  companie,  with  prayer  for  the  Queenes  majestie
and  our  realme,  in  quiet  sort  laid  his  head  to  the  blocke,
where  he  ended  his  life. This  being  done,  our  Generall
made  divers  speaches  to  the  whole  company,  perswading
us  to  unitie,  obedience,  love,  and  regard  of  our  voyage ;
and  for  the  better  confirmation  thereof,  willed  every  man
the  next  Sunday  following  to  prepare  himselfe  to  receive
the  Communion,  as  Christian  brethren  and  friends  ought
to  doe,  which  was  done  in  very  reverent  sort,  and  so  with
good  contentment  every  man  went  about  his  businesse.

The  17.  day  of  August  we  departed  the  port  of
S.  Julian,  &  the  20.  day  we  fell  with  the  streight  or
freat  of  Magellan  going  into  the  South  sea,  at  the  Cape
or  headland  whereof  we  found  the  bodie  of  a  dead  man,
whose  flesh  was  cleane  consumed.

The  21.  day  we  entred  The  streight,  which  we  found
to  have  many  turnings,  and  as  it  were  shuttings  up,  as  if
there  were  no  passage  at  all,  by  meanes  whereof  we  had

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1578.
the  wind often against us,  so  that  some  of  the  fleete
recovering  a  Cape  or  point of  land,  others should be
forced  to  turne  backe  againe,  and  to  come  to  an  anchor  [III.  734.]
where  they  could.

In  this  streight  there  be  many  faire  harbors,  with  store
of  fresh  water,  but  yet  they  lacke  their  best  commoditie  :
for  the  water  is  there  of  such  depth,  that  no  man  shal
find  ground  to  anchor  in,  except  it  bee  in  some  narow
river  or  corner,  or  betweene  some  rocks,  so  that  if  any
extreme  blasts  or  contrary  winds  do  come  (whereunto
the  place  is  much  subject)  it  carieth  with  it  no  small
danger.

The  land  on  both  sides  is  very  huge  &  mountainous,
the  lower  mountains  whereof,  although  they  be  mon-
strous and  wonderfull  to  looke  upon  for  their  height,  yet
there  are  others  which  in  height  exceede  them  in  a
strange  maner,  reaching  themselves  above  their  fellowes
so  high,  that  betweene  them  did  appeare  three  regions
of  cloudes.

These  mountaines  are  covered  with  snow  :  at  both
the  Southerly  and  Easterly  partes  of  the  streight  there
are  Islands,  among  which  the  sea  hath  his  indraught
into  the  streights,  even  as  it  hath  in  the  maine  entrance
of  the  freat.

This  streight  is  extreme  cold,  with  frost  and  snow
continually ;  the  trees  seeme  to  stoope  with  the  burden
of  the  weather,  and  yet  are  greene  continually,  and  many
good  and  sweete  herbes  doe  very  plentifully  grow  and
increase  under  them.

The  bredth  of  the  streight  is  in  some  place  a  league,  The  bredth  of
in  some  other  places  2,  leagues,  and  three  leagues,  and  the  streights  of
in  some  other  4. leagues, but the  narowest  place  hath ^^^  '^^'
a  league  over.

The 24. of  August  we  arrived  at an Island in the
streights, where  we found great store of  foule  which  Abundance  of
could not  flie, of  the bignesse of  geese, whereof  we  -^^^f  "^  ^^^
killed  in  lesse  then  one  day  3000.  and  victualled  our  ^^^^^
selves  throughly  therewith.

Ill

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578-
September.  The  6.  day  of  September  we  entred  the  South  sea  at

the  Cape  or  head  shore.

The  seventh  day  wee  were  driven  by  a  great  storme

from  the  entring  into  the  South  sea  two  hundred  leagues

and  odde  in  longitude,  and  one  degree  to  the  Southward

of  the  Streight: in which  height,  and  so  many  leagues

to  the  Westward,  the  fifteenth  day  of  September  fell  out

the  Eclipse  of  the Moone  at the houre  of  sixe  of  the

clocke  at night :  but  neither did the  Eclipticall  conflict

of  the  Moone  impayre  our  state,  nor  her  clearing  againe

amend  us  a  whit,  but  the  accustomed  Eclipse  of  the  Sea

continued  in  his  force,  wee  being  darkened  more  then  the

Moone  seven  fold.

From  the  Bay  (which  we  called  The  Bay  of  severing

of  friends)  wee  were  driven  backe  to  the  Southward  of

%■].  Degrees the  streights  in  57.  degrees  and  a  terce :  in  which  height

and  a  terce  of  ^^ came  to  an  anker  among  the Islands, having  there

latitude  fresh  and  very  good  water,  with  herbes  of  singular  vertue.

Not  farre  from  hence  we  entred  another  Bay,  where  wee

found people both men and women in their Canoas,

Botero  wr'tteth  naked,  and  ranging  from  one  Island  to  another  to  seeke

that  another their  meat,  who  entered  traffique  with  us  for  such  things

hath  found  this  ^1  1 j

place  all  ^^  ^^ey  had.  _

Islands.  We  returning  hence  Northward  agame,  found  the  3.

of  October  three  Islands,  in  one  of  which  was  such  plentie

of  birdes  as  is  scant  credible  to  report.

M.  Winter  The  8. day of  October  we  lost  sight  of  one  of  our

separated  and Consorts  wherein  M.  Winter  was,  who  as  then  we  sup-

re  nine  . posed  was  put  by  a  storme  into  the  streights  againe,  which

at  our  returne  home  wee  found  to  be  true,  and  he  not

perished,  as  some  of  our  company  feared.

Thus being come into the height of  The streights

againe,  we  ran,  supposing  the  coast  of  Chili  to  lie  as  the

generall Maps have described it, namely Northwest,

The  trending which  we  found  to  lie  and  trend  to  the  Northeast  and

of  the  coast  of  Eastwards, whereby  it  appeareth  that  this  part  of  Chili

^  ^"  hath  not  bene  truely  hitherto  discovered,  or  at  the  least

not  truely  reported for the  space  of  12.  degrees  at  the

112

pr-r

•  •  •

, '  .  ,'^M'^'i^'^^-^ "  A

.i^. ;••.*.:

« «> «

ytVlTx'.^  •  •  ■ \  \

CHART  OF  CAPE  HORN

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1578.

least,  being  set  downe  either  of  purpose  to  deceive,  or  of

ignorant  conjecture.

We  continuing  our  course,  fell  the  29.  of  November

with  an Island  called  la Mocha,  where  we  cast  anchor,  The  Lk  la

and  our  Generall  hoysing  out  our  boate,  went  with  ten  of  ^°'^ha  m  38.

,•'=>,  r J  1  1  degrees  and

our  company  to  shore,  where  wee  round  people,  whom  ^^  minutes.

the  cruell  and  extreme  dealings  of  the Spaniards have

forced  for  their  owne  safetie  and  libertie  to  flee  from  the

maine, and to fortifie themselves in this Island. We

being  on  land,  the  people  came  downe  to  us  to  the  water

side  with  shew  of  great  courtesie,  bringing  to  us  potatoes,

rootes, and two very fat sheepe, which our Generall

received  and  gave  them  other  things  for  them,  and  had

promise  to  have  water  there :  but  the  next  day  repayring

againe  to the  shore, and sending two men  aland with

barrels  to  fill  water,  the  people  taking  them  for  Spaniards

(to  whom  they  use  to  shew  no  favour  if  they  take  them)

layde  violent hands on them, and as  we thinke,  slew

them.

Our  Generall  seeing  this,  stayed  here  no  longer,  but
wayed  anchor,  and  set  sayle  towards  the  coast  of  Chili,
and  drawing  towards  it,  we  mette  neere  to  the  shore  an
Indian  in  a  Canoa,  who  thinking  us  to  have  bene  Spaniards,
came  to  us  and  tolde  us,  that  at  a  place  called  S.  lago,
there  was  a  great  Spanish  ship  laden  from  the  kingdome
of  Peru:  for  which  good  newes  our  Generall  gave  him  [III.  735.]
divers  trifles,  wherof  he  was  glad,  and  went  along  with
us  and  brought  us  to  the  place,  which  is  called  the  port  The  port  of
of  Valparizo.  _ ^^^C";T,f

When  we  came  thither,  we  found  indeede  the  ship  '  ^^fa^^^^_
riding  at  anker,  having  in  her  eight  Spaniards  and  three
Negros,  who  thinking  us  to  have  bene  Spaniards  and
their  friends,  welcommed  us  with  a  drumme,  and  made
ready  a  Bottija  of  wine  of  Chili  to  drinke  to  us:  but  as  Wine  of  Chili.
soone  as  we  were  entred,  one  of  our  company  called
Thomas  Moone  began  to  lay  about  him,  and  strooke  one
of  the  Spanyards,  and  sayd  unto  him,  Abaxo  Perro,  that
is  in  English,  Goe  downe  dogge.  One  of  these  Spaniards
XI  113  H

A.D.
1578.

The  tozune  of
S.  lago  taken.

Wine  of  Chili.

John  Griego  a
Pilot  taken.

Gold  ofBal-
divia.

Coquimbo  in

29.  degrees

30.  minutes.

Tarapaza.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

seeing  persons  of  that  quality  in  those  seas,  all  to  crossed,
and  blessed  himselfe  :  but  to  be  short,  wee  stowed  them
under  hatches  all  save  one  Spaniard,  who  suddenly  and
desperately  leapt  over  boord  into  the  sea,  and  swamme
ashore  to  the  towne  of  S.  lago,  to  give  them  warning  of
our  arrivall.

They  of  the  towne  being  not  above  9.  housholds,  pre-
sently fled  away  and  abandoned  the  towne.  Our  generall
manned  his  boate,  and  the  Spanish  ships  boate,  and  went
to  the  Towne,  and  being  come  to  it,  we  rifled  it,  and
came  to  a  small  chappell  which  wee  entred,  and  found
therein  a  silver  chalice,  two  cruets,  and  one  altar-cloth,
the  spoyle  whereof  our  Generall  gave  to  M.  Fletcher
his  minister.

We  found  also  in  this  towne  a  warehouse  stored  with
wine  of  Chili,  and  many  boords  of  Cedar-wood,  all
which  wine  we  brought  away  with  us,  and  certaine  of
the  boords  to  burne  for  fire-wood :  and  so  being  come
aboord,  wee  departed  the  Haven,  having  first  set  all  the
Spaniards  on  land,  saving  one  John  Griego  a  Greeke
borne,  whom  our  Generall  caried  with  him  for  his  Pilot
to  bring  him  into  the  haven  of  Lima.

When  we  were  at  sea,  our  Generall  rifled  the  ship,  and
found  in  her  good  store  of  the  wine  of  Chili,  and  25000.
pezoes  of  very  pure  and  fine  gold  of  Baldivia,  amounting
in  value  to  37000.  ducats  of  Spanish  money,  and  above.
So  going  on  our  course,  wee  arrived  next  at  a  place  called
Coquimbo,  where  our  Generall  sent  14.  of  his  men  on
land  to  fetch  water  :  but  they  were  espied  by  the  Spaniards,
who  came  with  300.  horsemen  and  200  footemen,  and
slewe  one  of  our  men  with  a  piece,  the  rest  came  aboord
in  safetie,  and  the  Spaniards  departed :  wee  went  on  shore
againe,  and  buried  our  man,  and  the  Spaniards  came
downe  againe  with  a  flag  of  truce,  but  we  set  sayle  and
would  not  trust  them.

From  hence  we  went  to  a  certaine  port  called  Tarapaza,
where  being  landed,  we  found  by  the  Sea  side  a  Spaniard
lying  asleepe,  who  had  lying  by  him 13.  barres  of  silver,

114

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1579-
which  weighed  4000.  ducats  Spanish ;  we  tooke  the  silver,
and  left  the  man.

Not  farre  from  hence  going  on  land  for  fresh  water,
we  met  with  a  Spaniard  and  an  Indian  boy  driving  8.
Llamas  or  sheepe  of  Peru  which  are  as  big  as  asses ;  every
of  which  sheepe  had  on  his  backe  2.  bags  of  leather,  each
bagge  conteining  50.  li.  weight  of  fine  silver :  so  that
bringing  both  the  sheepe  and  their  burthen  to  the  ships,
we  found  in  all  the  bags  800.  weight  of  silver.

Here  hence  we  sailed  to  a  place  called  Arica,  and  -^fif^^ «'«  18.
being  entred  the  port,  we  found  there  three  small  barkes  ^^S'  3°-  "^^"^
which  we  rifled,  and  found  in  one  of  them  57  wedges  of
silver,  each  of  them  weighing  about  20  pound  weight,  and
every  of  these  wedges  were  of  the  fashion  and  bignesse
of  a  brickbat.  In  all  these  3.  barkes  we  found  not  one
person :  for  they  mistrusting  no  strangers,  were  all  gone
aland  to  the  Towne,  which  consisteth  of  about  twentie
houses,  which  we  would  have  ransacked  if  our  company
had  bene  better  and  more  in  number.  But  our  Generall
contented  with  the  spoyle  of  the  ships,  left  the  Towne
and  put  off  againe  to  sea  and  set  sayle  for  Lima,  and  by
the  way  met  with  a  small  barke,  which  he  boorded,  and
found  in  her  good  store  of  linnen  cloth,  whereof  taking
some  quantitie,  he  let  her  goe.

To  Lima  we  came  the  13.  day  of  February,  and  being  Lima  in  11.
entred  the  haven,  we  found  there  about  twelve  sayle  of  ^^S-  5°-
ships  lying  fast  moored  at  an  anker,  having  all  their  sayles
caried  on  shore ;  for  the  masters  and  marchants  were
here  most  secure,  having  never  bene  assaulted  by  enemies,
and  at  this  time  feared  the  approch  of  none  such  as  we
were.  Our  generall  rifled  these  ships,  and  found  in  one
of  them  a  chest  full  of  royals  of  plate,  and  good  store  of
silkes  and  linnen  cloth,  and  tooke  the  chest  into  his  owne
ship,  and  good  store  of  the  silkes  and  linnen.  In  which
ship  hee  had  newes  of  another  ship  called  the  Cacafuego
which  was  gone  towards  Paita,  and  that  the  same  shippe
was  laden  with  treasure :  whereupon  we  staied  no  longer
here, but  cutting  all the  cables of  the shippes in the

115

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1579-

haven,  we  let  them  drive  whither  they  would,  either  to
sea  or  to  the  shore,  and  with  all  speede  we  followed  the
Cacafuego  toward  Paita,  thinking  there  to  have  found
her :  but  before  wee  arrived  there,  she  was  gone  from
thence  towards  Panama,  whom  our  Generall  still  pursued,
and  by  the  way  met  with  a  barke  laden  with  ropes  and
tackle  for  ships,  which  hee  boorded  and  searched,  and
found  in  her  80. li.  weight  of  golde,  and  a  crucifixe
[III.  736.]  of  gold  with  goodly  great  Emerauds  set  in  it  which  he
tooke,  and  some  of  the  cordage  also  for  his  owne  ship.

From  hence  we  departed,  still  following  the  Cacafuego,

and  our  Generall  promised  our  company,  that  whosoever

could first descrie her,  should  have  his  chaine  of  gold

for his good newes. It fortuned that John Drake

going  up  into  the  top,  descried  her  about  three  of  the

clocke, and  about sixe  of  the  clocke  we  came to her

The  rich  ship and boorded her,  and shotte at her three peeces of

called  the ordinance, and strake downe her Misen, and being

taken  entered, we found in her great riches, as  jewels  and

precious stones,  thirteene  chests  full  of  royals  of  plate,

foure score pound weight of golde, and sixe and

twentie  tunne  of  silver. The  place  where  we  tooke  this

Cape  de  San prize, was called Cape de San Francisco, about 1 50.

7eTelZVe' ^^^g^^^  ^^°"^  Panama.

North  l^h.Q.  Pilots name of  this Shippe was Francisco, and

amongst  other  plate  that  our  Generall  found  in  this
ship,  he  found  two  very  faire  guilt  bowles  of  silver,
which  were  the  Pilots  :  to  whom  our  Generall  sayd  :
Senior  Pilot,  you  have  here  two  silver  cups,  but  I
must  needes  have  one  of  them  :  which  the  Pilot  because
hee  could  not  otherwise  chuse,  yeelded  unto,  and  gave
the  other  to  the  steward  of  our  Generals  ships.

When  this  Pilot  departed  from  us,  his  boy  sayde
thus  unto  our  Generall  :  Captaine,  our  ship  shall  be
called  no  more  the  Cacafuego,  but  the  Cacaplata,  and
your  shippe  shall  bee  called  the  Cacafuego  :  which
pretie  speach  of  the  Pilots  boy  ministred  matter  of
laughter  to  us,  both  then  and  long  after.

116

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1579-

When  our  Generall  had  done  what  hee  would  with
this  CacafuegOj  hee  cast  her  off,  and  wee  went  on  our
course  still  towards  the  West,  and  not  long  after  met
with  a  ship  laden  with  linnen  cloth  and  fine  China-
dishes  of  white  earth,  and  great  store  of  China-silks,  of  China-silks,
all  which  things  wee  tooke  as  we  listed.  and  Ponellan.

The  owner  himselfe  of  this  ship  was  in  her,  who  was
a  Spanish  Gentleman,  from  whom  our  Generall  tooke  a
Fawlcon  of  golde,  with  a  great  Emeraud  in  the  breast
thereof,  and  the  Pilot  of  the  ship  he  tooke  also  with
him,  and  so  cast  the  ship  off.

This  Pilot  brought  us  to  the  haven  of  Guatulco,  the  Guatuko.
towne  whereof,  as  he  told  us,  had  but  17.  Spaniards  in
it.  Assoone  as  we  were  entred  this  haven,  wee  landed,
and  went  presently  to  the  towne,  and  to  the  Towne-
house,  where  we  found  a  Judge  sitting  in  judgement,
being  associate  with  three  other  officers,  upon  three
Negros  that  had  conspired  the  burning  of  the  Towne  :
both  which  Judges  &  prisoners  we  tooke,  and  brought
them  a  shipboord,  and  caused  the  chiefe  Judge  to  write
his  letter  to  the  Towne,  to  command  all  the  Townesmen
to  avoid,  that  we  might  safely  water  there.  Which  being
done,  and  they  departed,  we  ransaked  the  Towne,  and  in
one  house  we  found  a  pot  of  the  quantitie  of  a  bushell,
full  of  reals  of  plate,  which  we  brought  to  our  ship.

And  here  one  Thomas  Moone  one  of  our  company,
tooke  a  Spanish  Gentleman  as  hee  was  flying  out  of
the  towne,  and  searching  him,  he  found  a  chaine  of
golde  about  him,  and  other  jewels,  which  he  tooke,
and  so  let  him  goe.

At  this  place  our  General  among  other  Spaniards,  set  The  Portugal
ashore his Portugall Pilote,  which hee tooke at the  Pilot  set  on
Islands  of  Cape  Verde,  out  of  a ship  of  S.  Mary  port ^^  '
of  Portugall :  and  having  set  them  ashore,  we  departed
hence,  and sailed to the Island of  Canno,  where our  The  Island  of
Generall  landed,  and  brought  to shore his owne ship,  ^^"^°-
and discharged her, mended, and graved her, and
furnished  our  ship  with  water  and  wood  sufficiently.

117

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-
j4  skip  with  a And while  wee  were here,  we espied a shippe,  and
governourfor g^^ g^jjg after her, and tooke her, and found in her
Philippinas ^^° Pilots, and a Spanish Governour, going for the
Islands  of  the Philippinas  : wee searched the shippe,
and tooke some of  her marchandizes, and so let her
goe. Our Generall at this place and time, thinking
himselfe  both  in  respect  of  his  private  injuries  received
from the Spaniards, as also of their contempts and
indignities offered to our countrey and Prince in
generall,  sufficiently  satisfied,  and  revenged  :  and  suppos-
ing that  her  Majestie  at  his  returne  would  rest  contented
with  this  service,  purposed  to  continue  no  longer  upon
the  Spanish  coasts,  but  began  to  consider  and  to  consult
of  the  best  way  for  his  Countrey.

He  thought  it  not  good  to  returne  by  the  Streights,
for  two  speciall  causes  :  the  one,  lest  the  Spaniards
should  there  waite,  and  attend  for  him  in  great  number
and  strength,  whose  hands,  hee  being  left  but  one  ship,
could  not  possibly  escape.  The  other  cause  was  the
dangerous  situation  of  the  mouth  of  the  streights  in
the  South  sea,  where  continuall  stormes  reigning  and
blustering,  as  he  found  by  experience,  besides  the  shoalds
and  sands  upon  the  coast,  he  thought  it  not  a  good
course  to  adventure  that  way  :  he  resolved  therefore  to
avoyde  these  hazards,  to  goe  forward  to  the  Islandes  of
the  Malucos,  and  therehence  to  saile  the  course  of  the
Portugals  by  the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperanza.

Upon this resolution,  hee beganne to thinke of  his

[III.  737.] best  way  to the Malucos, and finding himselfe where

he now was becalmed, he saw that of  necessitie hee

must be forced to take a Spanish course, namely  to

sayle  somewhat  Northerly  to  get  a  winde. Wee  there-

S/r  Francis ^^^'"^ ^^^ saile,  and sayled 600.  leagues at the  least  for

Drake  sayled a good  winde,  and thus  much  we  sailed  from the 1 6.

on  the  backside  of  April,  till  the  3.  of  June.

of  America  to  'pj^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^  June,  being  in  43.  degrees  towards
Vortherh^  ^^^  P°^^  Arctike,  we  found  the  ayre  so  colde,  that  our
latitude.  men  being  grievously  pinched  with  the  same,  complained

118

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1579-

of  the  extremitie  thereof,  and  the  further  we  went,  the

more the colde increased upon us. Whereupon we

thought it best for that time to seeke the  land,  and

did so, finding it not mountainous, but low plaine

land,  till  wee  came  within  38.  degrees  towards  the  line.  38.  Degrees.

In  which height  it  pleased  God  to  send  us  into  a  faire

and  good  Baye,  with  a  good  winde  to  enter  the  same.

In this Baye wee anchored, and the people of  the  ^  description

Countrey  having  their  houses  close  by  the  waters  side,  91  the  people
1  J •' ,  ,°  1  ^  and  G  ountre"^

shewed  themselves  unto  us,  and sent  a  present  to  our  ^fNova

Generall.  Jlbion.

When  they  came  unto  us,  they  greatly  wondred  at
the  things  that  wee  brought,  but  our  Generall  (according
to  his  naturall  and  accustomed  humanitie)  courteously
intreated  them,  and  liberally  bestowed  on  them  necessary
things  to  cover  their  nakednesse,  whereupon  they
supposed  us  to  be  gods,  and  would  not  be  perswaded
to  the  contrary  :  the  presents  which  they  sent  to  our
Generall,  were  feathers,  and  calles  of  net-worke.

Their  houses  are  digged  round  about  with  earth,
and  have  from  the  uttermost  brimmes  of  the  circle,  clifts
of  wood  set  upon  them,  joyning  close  together  at  the
toppe  like  a  spire  steeple,  which  by  reason  of  that
closenesse  are  very  warme.

Their  beds  is  the  ground  with  rushes  strowed  on  it,
and  lying  about  the  house,  have  the  fire  in  the  midst.
The  men  go  naked,  the  women  take  bulrushes,  and
kembe  them  after  the  manner  of  hempe,  and  thereof
make  their  loose  garments,  which  being  knit  about
their  middles,  hang  down  about  their  hippes,  having
also  about  their  shoulders  a  skinne  of  Deere,  with  the
haire  upon  it.  These  women  are  very  obedient  and
serviceable  to  their  husbands.

After  they  were  departed  from  us,  they  came  and
visited  us  the  second  time,  and  brought  with  them
feathers  and  bags  of  Tabacco  for  presents  :  And  when
they  came  to  the  top  of  the  hill  (at  the  bottome
whereof  we had pitched our  tents) they staied them-

119

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

^579-

selves  :  where one  appointed for speaker  wearied him-

A  long selfe  with  making  a  long  oration,  which  done,  they  left

oration. their  bowes  upon  the  hill,  and came downe  with their

presents.

In  the  meane  time  the  women  remaining  on  the  hill,

tormented themselves lamentably, tearing their flesh

from their cheekes, whereby we perceived that they

were  about  a  sacrifice. In  the  meane  time  our  Generall

with his company  went to prayer, and to reading of

the  Scriptures,  at  which  exercise  they  were  attentive,  &

seemed greatly  to be affected  with it  : but  when they

were  come  unto  us,  they  restored  againe  unto  us  those

things  which  before  we  bestowed  upon  them.

The  newes  of  our  being  there  being  spread  through

the Countrey,  the people that inhabited round about

came downe, and amongst them  the King himselfe, a

man of  a goodly stature, & comely personage, with

many  other  tall  and  warlike  men  :  before  whose  comming

were  sent  two  Ambassadors  to  our  Generall,  to  signifie

that  their  King  was  comming,  in  doing  of  which  message,

their  speach  was  continued  about  halfe  an  houre. This

ended, they  by  signes requested our Generall to send

some  thing  by  their  hand  to  their  king,  as  a  token  that

his  comming  might  be  in  peace  :  wherein  our  Generall

having satisfied them,  they  returned  with glad tidings

to their King, who marched to us with a princely

majestie, the people crying continually after their

manner,  and as they  drew  neere unto us,  so did  they

strive to behave themselves in their actions with

comelinesse.

In  the  fore-front  was  a  man  of  a  goodly  personage,  who

bare  the scepter or  mace before the King,  whereupon

hanged two crownes, a  lesse  and  a bigger, with three

chaines  of  a  marveilous  length  :  the  crownes  were  made

of  knit  worke  wrought  artificially  with  fethers  of  divers

Chaines  like  Colours  :  the  chaines  were  made  of  a  bonie  substance,  and

those  of few be  the  persons  among  them that are admitted to

Canada. ^eare them  :  and of  that number also  the persons are

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1579-
stinted,  as  some  ten,  some  12.  &c.  Next  unto  him  which
bare  the  scepter,  was  the  King  himselfe,  with  his  Guard
about  his  person,  clad  with  Conie  skins,  &  other  skins :
after  them  followed  the  naked  common  sort  of  people,
every  one  having  his  face  painted,  some  with  white,  some
with  blacke,  and  other  colours,  &  having  in  their  hands
one  thing  or  another  for  a  present,  not  so  much  as  their
children,  but  they  also  brought  their  presents.

In  the  meane  time  our  Generall  gathered  his  men
together,  and  marched  within  his  fenced  place,  making
against  their  approching  a  very  warre-like  shew.  They
being  trooped  together  in  their  order,  and  a  generall
salutation  being  made,  there  was  presently  a  generall
silence.  Then  he  that  bare  the  scepter  before  the  King,
being  informed  by  another,  whom  they  assigned  to  that
office,  with  a  manly  and  loftie  voyce  proclaymed  that
which  the  other  spake  to  him  in  secrete,  continuing  halfe  [III.  738.]
an  houre  :  which  ended,  and  a  generall  Amen  as  it  were
given,  the  King  with  the  whole  number  of  men  and
women  (the  children  excepted)  came  downe  without  any
weapon,  who  descending  to  the  foote  of  the  hill,  set
themselves  in  order.

In  comming  towards  our  bulwarks  and  tents,  the
scepter-bearer  began  a  song,  observing  his  measures  in
a  daunce,  and  that  with  a  stately  countenance,  whom  the
King  with  his  Guarde,  and  every  degree  of  persons
following,  did  in  like  maner  sing  and  daunce,  saving
onely  the  women,  which  daunced  &  kept  silence.  The
General  permitted  them  to  enter  within  our  bulwarke,
where  they  continued  their  song  and  daunce  a  reasonable
time.  When  they  had  satisfied  themselves,  they  made
signes  to  our  General  to  sit  downe,  to  whom  the  King,
and  divers  others  made  several  orations,  or  rather  suppli-
cations, that  hee  would  take  their  province  and  kingdome
into  his  hand,  and  become  their  King,  making  signes  that
they  would  resigne  unto  him  their  right  and  title  of  the
whole  land,  and  become  his  subjects.  In  which,  to  per-
swade us the better, the  King  and  the  rest,  with one

A.D.

1579-

The  King
resignes  his
crowne  and
kingdome  to
Sir  Francis
Drake.

The  like  they
did  in  Hoche-
laga.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

consent,  and  with  great  reverence,  joyfully  singing  a
song,  did  set  the  crowne  upon  his  head,  inriched  his
necke  with  all  their  chaines,  and  ofFred  unto  him  many
other  things,  honouring  him  by  the  name  of  Hioh,
adding  thereunto  as  it  seemed,  a  signe  of  triumph  :  which
thing  our  Generall  thought  not  meete  to  reject,  because
he  knew  not  what  honour  and  profit  it  might  be  to  our
Countrey.  Wherefore  in  the  name,  and  to  the  use  of  her
Majestie  he  tooke  the  scepter,  crowne,  and  dignitie  of  the
said  Countrey  into  his  hands,  wishing  that  the  riches  &
treasure  thereof  might  so  conveniently  be  transported
to  the  inriching  of  her  kingdom  at  home,  as  it  aboundeth
in  ye  same.

The  common  sorte  of  people  leaving  the  King  and  his
Guarde  with  our  Generall,  scattered  themselves  together
with  their  sacrifices  among  our  people,  taking  a  diligent
viewe  of  every  person  :  and  such  as  pleased  their  fancie,
(which  were  the  yongest)  they  inclosing  them  about
ofFred  their  sacrifices  unto  them  with  lamentable  weeping,
scratching,  and  tearing  the  flesh  from  their  faces  with  their
nailes,  whereof  issued  abundance  of  blood.  But  wee  used
signes  to  them  of  disliking  this,  and  stayed  their  hands
from  force,  and  directed  them  upwards  to  the  living  God,
whom  onely  they  ought  to  worship.  They  shewed  unto
us  their  wounds,  and  craved  helpe  of  them  at  our  hands,
whereupon  we  gave  them  lotions,  plaisters,  and  oynt-
ments,  agreeing  to  the  state  of  their  griefes,  beseeching
God  to  cure  their  diseases.  Every  third  day  they
brought  their  sacrifices  unto  us,  until  they  understood  our
meaning,  that  we  had  no  pleasure  in  them :  yet  they
could  not  be  long  absent  from  us,  but  dayly  frequented
our  company  to  the  houre  of  our  departure,  which  de-
parture seemed  so  greevous  unto  them,  that  their  joy  was
turned  into  sorow.  They  intreated  us,  that  being  absent
we  would  remember  them,  and  by  stealth  provided  a
sacrifice,  which  we  misliked.

Our  necessarie  businesse  being  ended,  our  Generall
with  his  company  travailed  up  into  the  Countrey  to  their

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1579-
villages,  where  we  found herdes of  Deere  by  looo.  in  Great  herdes
a  company,  being  most  large,  and  fat of  body.  °J  ^^^^^^

We  found  the  whole  Countrey  to  bee  a  warren  of  a  Abundance  of
strange  kinde  of  Connies,  their  bodies  in  bignesse  as  be  ^^^^^^^  '^'^^^"•
the  Barbary  Connies,  their  heads  as  the  heads  of  ours,
the  feete  of  a  Want,  and  the  taile  of  a  Rat  being  of
great  length :  under  her  chinne  is  on  either  side  a  bag,
into  the  which  she  gathereth  her  meate,  when  she  hath
filled  her  bellie  abroad.  The  people  eate  their  bodies,
and  make  great  accompt  of  their  skinnes,  for  their  Kings
coate  was  made  of  them.

Our  Generall  called  this  Countrey  Nova  Albion,  and  TSlova  Albion.
that  for  two  causes  :  the  one  in  respect  of  the  white  bankes
and  cliffes, which  lie  towards the sea : and the other,
because  it  might  have  some  affinitie  with  our  Countrey  in
name,  which  sometime  was  so  called.

There is no part of  earth heere to bee taken up,  Golde  and

wherein  there  is not some probable shew of  gold or  -^ ,^  ^^  ff^

•  1  ^  °  earth  of  Nova

^'^^?'  ,  ,  ^  ..  Albion.

At  our  departure  hence  our  Generall  set  up  a  monu-
ment of  our  being  there,  as  also  of  her  Majesties  right
and  title  to  the  same,  namely  a  plate,  nailed  upon  a
faire  great  poste,  whereupon  was  ingraven  her  Majesties
name,  the  day  and  yeere  of  our  arrivall  there,  with  the
free  giving  up  of  the  province  and  people  into  her
Majesties  hands,  together  with  her  highnesse  picture
and  armes,  in  a  peece  of  sixe  pence  of  current  English
money  under  the  plate,  whereunder  was  also  written  the
name  of  our  Generall.

It  seemeth  that  the  Spaniards  hitherto  had never  bene  Their  depar-
in  this  part  of  the Countrey,  neither  did  ever  discover  ^"■^'^•
the  land by many degrees, to  the Southwards of this
pl^ce.  ^  October.

After we had set saile from hence, wee continued  Certaine
without sight of land till the 13. day of October  Islands  in  %,
following,  which  day  in the  morning  wee  fell  with  cer-  ^^S^^^^-
taine  Islands  8.  degrees  to  the  Northward  of  the line,  Canoas  like
from which Islands came a great number  of  Canoas,  those  of  Java.

123

A.D.

1579-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

having  in  some  of  them  4.  in  some  6.  and  in  some  also
14.  men,  bringing  with  them  cocos,  and  other  fruites.
[III.  739.]  Their  Canoas  were  hollow  within,  and  cut  with  great  arte
and  cunning,  being  very  smooth  within  and  without,  and
bearing  a  glasse  as  if  it  were  a  home  daintily  burnished,
having  a  prowe,  and  a  sterne  of  one  sort,  yeelding  inward
circle-wise,  being  of  a  great  height,  and  full  of  certaine
white  shels  for  a  braverie,  and  on  each  side  of  them  lie
out  two  peeces  of  timber  about  a  yard  and  a  halfe  long,
more  or  lesse,  according  to  the  smalnesse,  or  bignesse
of  the  boate.

This  people  have  the  nether  part  of  their  eares  cut  into
a  round  circle,  hanging  downe  very  lowe  upon  their
cheekes,  whereon  they  hang  things  of  a  reasonable  weight.
The  nailes  of  their  hands  are  an  ynche  long,  their  teeth
are  as  blacke  as  pitch,  and  they  renew  them  often,
by  eating  of  an  herbe  with  a  kinde  of  powder,  which
they  alwayes  carrie  about  them  in  a  cane  for  the  same
purpose.

Leaving  this  Island  the  night  after  we  fell  with  it,  the
18.  of  October,  we  lighted  upon  divers  others,  some
whereof  made  a  great  shew  of  Inhabitants.

Wee  continued  our  course  by  the  Islands  of  Tagulada,
Zelon,  and  Zewarra,  being  friends  to  the  Portugals,
the  first  whereof  hath  growing  in  it  great  store  of
Cinnamom.

The  14.  of  November  we  fell  with  the  Islands  of
Maluco,  which  day  at  night  (having  directed  our  course
to  runne  with  Tydore)  in  coasting  along  the  Island  of
Mutyr,  belonging  to  the  King  of  Ternate,  his  Deputie  or
Vice-king  seeing  us  at  sea,  came  with  his  Canoa  to  us
without  all  feare,  and  came  aboord,  and  after  some  con-
ference with  our  Generall,  willed  him  in  any  wise  to
The  Isle  of  runne  in  with  Ternate,  and  not  with  Tydore,  assuring
him  that  the  King  would  bee  glad  of  his  comming,  and
would  be  ready  to  doe  what  he  would  require,  for  which
purpose  he  himselfe  would  that  night  be  with  the  King,
and  tell  him  the  newes,  with  whom  if  he  once  dealt,  hee

124

Islands.

'November.

Ternate.

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1579-
should  finde  that  as  he  was  a  King,  so  his  word  should
stand :  adding  further,  that  if  he  went  to  Tydore  before
he  came  to  Ternate,  the  King  would  have  nothing  to  doe
with  us,  because  hee  held  the  Portugall  as  his  enemie :
whereupon  our  General  resolved  to  runne  with  Ternate,
where  the  next  morning  early  we  came  to  anchor,  at
which  time  our  Generall  sent  a  messenger  to  the  king
with  a  velvet  cloke  for  a  present,  and  token  of  his
comming  to  be  in  peace,  and  that  he  required  nothing  but
traffique  and  exchange  of  marchandize,  whereof  he  had
good  store,  in  such  things  as  he  wanted.

In the meane time  the  Vice-king  had  bene  with  the
king according to his promise, signifying unto him
what  good things he might  receive  from  us by  traf-
fique: whereby the King was mooved with great
liking towards us, and sent to our Generall with
speciall message,  that hee should have what things he
needed,  and  would require  with peace  and friendship,
and  moreover  that  hee would yeeld himselfe,  and the  ^^•^^  king  of
right  of his Island to bee  at the pleasure  and com-  ^^^f^,.
mandement  of so famous  a  Prince as we served. In  ;^/^  ^^^  ^^-^
token  whereof  he sent to our Generall a signet,  and  kingdome  to
within  short time  after  came in  his  owne  person,  with  the  service  of
boates,  and  Canoas to our ship,  to bring her into a  ^^^  Q^^ene  of
better  and  safer  roade  then  she  was  in  at  present.

In  the  meane  time,  our  Generals  messenger  beeing
come  to  the  Court,  was  met  by  certaine  noble  person-
ages with  great  solemnitie,  and  brought  to  the  King,  at
whose  hands  hee  was  most  friendly  and  graciously
intertained.

The  King  purposing  to  come  to  our  ship,  sent  before  The  great  and
4.  great and large  Canoas,  in  every  one  whereof  were  ^^^^^S^  ^^-

* o  ^  o  'J  ^ fiocs  of  the

certaine of his greatest states that were about him,  King  of
attired  in  white  lawne  of  cloth  of  Calicut,  having  over  Ternate.
their  heads  from the one ende  of  the Canoa to the
other,  a  covering  of  thinne perfumed mats, borne up
with  a  frame  made  of  reedes for the  same  use,  under
which  every  one  did  sit  in  his  order  according  to  his

125

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

dignitie,  to  keepe  him  from  the  heate  of  the  Sunne,
divers  of  whom  beeing  of  good  age  and  gravitie,  did
make  an  ancient  and  fatherly  shew.  There  were  also
divers  yong  and  comely  men  attired  in  white,  as  were
the  others :  the  rest  were  souldiers,  which  stood  in
comely  order  round  about  on  both  sides,  without  whom
sate  the  rowers  in  certaine  galleries,  which  being  three
on  a  side  all  along  the  Canoas,  did  lie  off  from  the
side  thereof  three  or  foure  yardes,  one  being  orderly
builded  lower  then  another,  in  every  of  which  galleries
were  the  number  of  4.  score  rowers.

These  Canoas  were  furnished  with  warlike  munition,
every  man  for  the  most  part  having  his  sword  and
target,  with  his  dagger,  beside  other  weapons,  as  launces,
calivers,  darts,  bowes  and  arrowes :  also  every  Canoa
had  a  small  cast  base  mounted  at  the  least  one  full
yarde  upon  a  stocke  set  upright.

Thus  comming  neere  our  shippe,  in  order  they
rowed  about  us,  one  after  another,  and  passing  by,
did  their  homage  with  great  solemnitie,  the  great  per-
sonages beginning  with  great  gravitie  and  fatherly
countenances,  signifying  that  ye  king  had  sent  them  to
conduct  our  ship  into  a  better  roade.
The  King  of  Soone  after  the  King  himselfe  repaired,  accompanied
Ternate  came ^^^j^  5^  grave  and ancient persons,  who  did their  obei-

to  visite  Sir  -t^l  -i  u -r^-  '-ru 1  •

r ■  sance  with  marvellous  humilitie. 1  he  king  was a man

Drake.  of  tall  stature,  and seemed to  be  much  delighted  with

[III.  740.] the  sound of  our musicke, to whom as also to his

nobilitie, our Generall gave presents, wherewith they

were  passing  well  contented.

At  length the  King  craved  leave  of  our  Generall  to

depart, promising  the  next  day  to  come  aboord,  and in

the meane time to send us such victuals, as were

necessarie  for  our  provision  :  so  that  the  same  night  we

Sagu  a  kinde received  of  them  meale,  which they  call Sagu,  made  of

ofmeale.  ^^ ^-Qps Qf  certaine trees, tasting in the mouth like

sowre  curds,  but  melteth  like  sugar,  whereof  they  make

certaine cakes, which may be kept the space of ten

126

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1579.

yeeres,  and  yet  then  good  to  be  eaten.  We  had  of
them  store  of  rice,  hennes,  unperfect  and  liquid  sugar,
sugar  canes,  and  a  fruite  which  they  call  Figo,  with
store  of  cloves.

The  King  having  promised  to  come  aboord,  brake
his  promise,  but  sent  his  brother  to  make  his  excuse,
and  to  intreate  our  Generall  to  come  on  shoare,  offring
himselfe  pawne  aboord  for  his  safe  returne.  Where-
unto  our  Generall  consented  not,  upon  mislike  conceived
of  the  breach  of  his  promise,  the  whole  company  also
utterly  refusing  it.  But  to  satisfie  him,  our  General
sent  certaine  of  his  Gentlemen  to  the  Court,  to  accom-
pany the  King's  brother,  reserving  the  Vice-king  for
their  safe  returne.  They  were  received  of  another
brother  of  the  kings,  and  other  states,  and  were  con-
ducted with  great  honour  to  the  Castle.  The  place  ^  <:a^iie  in
that  they  were  brought  unto,  was  a  large  and  faire  T-^^^'^^^-
house,  where  were  at  the  least 1000.  persons  assembled.

The  King  being  yet  absent,  there  sate  in  their  places
60.  grave  personages,  all  which  were  said to be of  the
kings Counsel. There  were besides 4.  grave persons,
apparelled  all  in  red,  downe to  the  ground,  and  attired
on their  heads  like  the  Turkes,  and  these  were  said to
be Romanes,  and Ligiers  there  to  keepe  continual  traf-  Romanes  and
fike with  the people  of Ternate. There  were  also 2. Tw^^  Ligiers
Turks  Ligiers  in  this  place,  and  one  Italian. The  king  7^^^  majes'tie
at  last  came  in  guarded  with 12,  launces  covered  over  of  the  King.
with a rich canopy,  with  embossed gold. Our men
accompanied  with one  of  their  Captaines  called Moro,
rising to meete him,  he graciously did welcome, and
intertaine  them. He was attired after the manner of
the Countrey, but more sumptuously then the rest.
From his  waste  downe  to  the  ground,  was  all  cloth  of
golde, and the  same very rich :  his legges were bare,
but on his  feete  were  a  paire  of  shooes,  made  of  Cor-
dovan  skinne. In the attire of  his head were finely
wreathed hooped rings of  gold, and about his necke
he  had a  chaine of  perfect golde,  the linkes whereof

127

A.D.

1579-

Ternate  the
chief e it  of  the
Maluco-isles.

A  litle  Island
to  the  South-
ward of
Celebes.

Fiery  worms.

Bats.
Cravishes.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

were  great,  and  one  folde  double.  On  his  fingers  hee
had  sixe  very  faire  jewels,  and  sitting  in  his  chaire  of
estate,  at  his  right  hand  stood  a  page  with  a  fanne  in
his  hand,  breathing  and  gathering  the  ayre  to  the  King.
The  fanne  was  in  length  two  foote,  and  in  bredth  one
foote,  set  with  8.  saphyres,  richly  imbrodered,  and  knit
to  a  staffe  3.  foote  in  length,  by  the  which  the  Page
did  hold,  and  moove  it.  Our  Gentlemen  having  deli-
vered their  message,  and  received  order  accordingly,
were  licensed  to  depart,  being  safely  conducted  backe
againe  by  one  of  the  kings  Counsell.

This  Island  is  the  chiefest  of  all  the  Islands  of
Maluco,  and  the  King  hereof  is  King  of  70.  Islands
besides.  The  king  with  his  people  are  Moores  in
religion,  observing  certaine  new  Moones,  with  fastings :
during  which  fasts,  they  neither  eat  nor  drinke  in  the
day,  but  in  the  night.

After  that  our  Gentlemen  were  returned,  and  that  we
had  heere  by  the  favour  of  the  king  received  all  neces-
sary things  that  the  place  could  yeeld  us :  our  General
considering  the  great  distance,  and  how  farre  he  was
yet  off  from  his  Countrey,  thought  it  not  best  here  to
linger  the  time  any  longer,  but  waying  his  anchors,  set
out  of  the  Island,  and  sayled  to  a  certaine  litle  Island
to  the  Southwards  of  Celebes,  where  we  graved  our
ship,  and  continued  there  in  that  and  other  businesses
26.  dayes.  This  Island  is  throughly  growen  with  wood
of  a  large  and  high  growth,  very  straight  and  without
boughes,  save  onely  in  the  head  or  top,  whose  leaves
are  not  much  differing  from  our  broome  in  England.
Amongst  these  trees  night  by  night,  through  the  whole
land,  did  shew  themselves  an  infinite  swarme  of  fiery
wormes  flying  in  the  ayre,  whose  bodies  beeing  no  bigger
then  our  common  English  flies,  make  such  a  shew  and
light,  as  if  every  twigge  or  tree  had  bene  a  burning
candle.  In  this  place  breedeth  also  wonderfuU  store  of
Bats,  as  bigge  as  large  hennes :  of  Crayfishes  also  heere
wanted no  plentie,  and they  of  exceeding  bignesse,  one

128

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1580.

whereof  was  sufficient  for  4.  hungry  stomacks  at  a
dinner,  beeing  also  very  good,  and  restoring  meate,
whereof  we  had  experience :  and  they  digge  themselves
holes  in  the  earth  like  Conies.

When  wee  had  ended  our  businesse here,  we  waied,
and  set  saile  to  runne  for  the  Malucos : but having  at
that  time  a  bad  winde,  and  being  amongst  the  Islands,
with  much  difficultie  wee  recovered  to  the  Northward  of
the  Island  of  Celebes,  where  by  reason  of  contrary  winds
not  able to continue our  course to  runne  Westwards,
we  were  inforced to  alter  the  same to  the Southward
againe,  finding  that  course  also  to  be  very  hard  and  dan-
gerous for  us,  by  reason  of  infinite  shoalds  which lie
off,  and  among  the  Islands :  whereof  wee  had  too  much
triall  to  the  hazard  and  danger  of  our  shippe  and  lives.
For  of  all  other  dayes  upon  the  9.  of  Januarie,  in  the  Januarie  in
yeere 1579.  wee  ranne  suddenly upon a rocke,  where  ^»«^  i579-
we  stucke  fast from 8. of  the  clocke at night,  til 4. '  ''^  '-■
of  the clocke in the  afternoone the next day, being
indeede  out  of  all  hope  to  escape  the  danger : but  our  T^^^'"'  danger
Generall  as hee had alwayes hitherto  shewed himselfe  ^^°^  ^  ^
couragious,  and  of  a  good  confidence  in  the  mercie  and
protection  of  God : so  now he  continued  in the  same,
and lest  he  should seeme to perish  wilfully,  both he,
and  we  did  our  best  indevour  to  save  our  selves,  which
it  pleased  God  so  to  blesse,  that  in  the  ende  we  cleared
our  selves  most  happily  of  the  danger.

We  lighted  our  ship  upon  the  rockes  of  3.  tunne  of  Cloves.
cloves, 8.  peeces  of  ordinance, and certaine  meale  and
beanes : and  then  the  winde  (as it  were  in  a  moment  ^'^^  ^^k^  °f^
by  the  speciall  grace  of  God)  changins:  from  the  starre-  "'T^"^.  ^"  ^^
boord to  the  larboord  of  the  ship,  we  hoised  our  sailes,
and  the  happy  gale  drove  our ship  off  the  rocke  into
the  sea  againe,  to  the  no  litle  comfort  of  all  our  hearts,
for  which  we  gave  God such prayse  and  thanks,  as  so
great  a  benefite  required.  ,

The  8.  of  Februarie  following,  wee  fell  with  the  fruit-  Barateve
full  Island  of  Barateve,  having  in  the  meane  time  suffered  island.
XI  129  I

A.D.
1580.

Linen-cloth
gsod  marchan-

dize.

Nutmegs  and
long  Peper
growing  in
Barateve.

Commendation
of  the  Island
of  Barateve.

Java  major.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

many  dangers  by  windes  and  shoalds.  The  people  of
this  Island  are  comely  in  body  and  stature,  and  of  a  civill
behaviour,  just  in  dealing,  and  courteous  to  strangers,
whereof  we  had  the  experience  sundry  wayes,  they  being
most  glad  of  our  presence,  and  very  ready  to  releeve  our
wants  in  those  things  which  their  Countrey  did  yeelde.
The  men  goe  naked,  saving  their  heads  and  privities,
every  man  having  something  or  other  hanging  at  their
eares.  Their  women  are  covered  from  the  middle  downe
to  the  foote,  wearing  a  great  number  of  bracelets  upon
their  armes,  for  some  had  8.  upon  each  arme,  being  made
some  of  bone,  some  of  home,  and  some  of  brasse,  the
lightest  whereof  by  our  estimation  waied  two  ounces
apeece.

With  this  people  linnen-cloth  is  good  marchandize,
and  of  good  request,  whereof  they  make  rols  for  their
heads,  and  girdles  to  weare  about  them.

Their  Island  is  both  rich  and  fruitfull:  rich  in  golde,
silver,  copper,  and  sulphur,  wherein  they  seeme  skilful!
and  expert,  not  onely  to  trie  the  same,  but  in  working
it  also  artificially  into  any  forme  and  fashion  that
pleaseth  them.

Their  fruits  be  divers  and  plentiful,  as  nutmegs,  ginger,
long  pepper,  lemmons,  cucumbers,  cocos,  figu,  sagu,  with
divers  other  sorts :  and  among  all  the  rest,  wee  had  one
fruite,  in  bignesse,  forme,  and  huske,  like  a  Bay  berry,
hard  of  substance,  and  pleasant  of  taste,  which  being
sodden,  becommeth  soft,  and  is  a  most  good  and  whol-
some  victuall,  whereof  we  tooke  reasonable  store,  as  we
did  also  of  the  other  fruits  and  spices :  so  that  to  confesse
a  trueth,  since  the  time  that  we  first  set  out  of  our  owne
Countrey  of  England,  we  happened  upon  no  place
(Ternate  onely  excepted)  wherein  we  found  more  com-
forts and  better  meanes  of  refreshing.

At  our  departure  from  Barateve,  we  set  our  course  for
Java  major,  where  arriving,  we  found  great  courtesie,  and
honourable  entertainment.  This  Island  is  governed  by
5.  Kings,  whom they  call  Rajah:  as  Rajah Donaw,  and

130

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1580.
Rajah  Mang  Bange,  and  Rajah  CabuccapoUo,  which  live
as  having  one  spirite,  and  one  minde.

Of  these  five  we  had  foure  a  shipboord  at  once,  and
two  or  three  often.  They  are  wonderfully  delighted  in  ^ed  l^ greem
coloured  clothes,  as  red  and  greene :  their  upper  parts  '^^°^^"  ^J^'^^
of  their  bodies  are  naked,  save  their  heads,  where-
upon they  weare  a  Turkish  roll,  as  do  the  Maluccians :
from  the  middle  downward  they  weare  a  pintado  of
silke,  trailing  upon  the  ground,  in  colour  as  they  best
like.

The Maluccians hate that their women should  bee  "^^^  manners
seene of strangers: but these offer them of high  °f^^^P^°P^^
courtesie,  yea  the  kings  themselves.

The  people  are  of  goodly  stature,  and  warlike,  well
provided  of  swords  and  targets,  with  daggers,  all  being
of  their  owne  worke,  and  most  artificially  done,  both  in
tempering  their  mettall,  as  also  in  the  forme,  whereof  we
bought  reasonable  store.

They  have  an  house  in  every  village  for  their  common
assembly :  every  day  they  meete  twise,  men,  women,  and
children,  bringing  with  them  such  victuals  as  they  thinke
good,  some  fruites,  some  rice  boiled,  some  hennes  roasted,
some  sagu,  having  a  table  made  3.  foote  from  the  ground,
whereon  they  set  their  meate,  that  every  person  sitting
at  the  table  may  eate,  one  rejoycing  in  the  company  of
another.

They  boile  their  rice  in  an  earthen  pot,  made  in  forme  ^  strange
of  a  sugar  loafe,  being  ful  of  holes,  as  our  pots  which  we  f^^^^°^  °f,
water  our  gardens  withall,  and  it  is  open  at  the  great  ende, -^ "^ '^
wherein  they  put  their  rice drie,  without  any  moisture.
In  the  meane  time  they  have  ready  another  great  earthen
pot,  set  fast  in  a  fornace,  boiling  full  of  water,  whereinto
they  put  their  pot  with  rice,  by  such  measure,  that  they
swelling  become  soft  at  the  first,  and  by  their  swelling
stopping  the  holes  of  the  pot,  admit  no  more  water  to
enter,  but  the  more  they  are  boiled,  the  harder  and  more
firme  substance  they  become,  so  that  in  the  end  they  are
a  firme  &  good  bread,  of  the  which  with  oyle,  butter,

131

A.D.

1580.

[III.  742.]
The  French
pocks.

The  Cape  of
Buena  Esper-
anza  not  so
dangerous  as
the  Portugals
have  given  out.

Sierra  Leona.

Oister-trces.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

sugar,  and  other  spices,  they  make  divers  sorts  of  meates
very  pleasant  of  taste,  and  nourishing  to  nature.

The  French  pocks  is  here  very  common  to  all,  and
they  helpe  themselves,  sitting  naked  from  ten  to  two  in
the  Sunne,  whereby  the  venemous  humour  is  drawen  out.
Not  long  before  our  departure,  they  tolde  us,  that  not
farre  off  there  were  such  great  Ships  as  ours,  wishing  us  to
beware : upon  this  our  Captaine  would  stay  no  longer.

From  Java  Major  we  sailed  for  the  cape  of  Good
Hope,  which  was  the  first  land  we  fell  withall :  neither
did  we  touch  with  it,  or  any  other  land,  untill  we  came  to
Sierra  Leona,  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea :  notwithstanding
we  ranne  hard  aboord  the  Cape,  finding  the  report  of  the
Portugals  to  be  most  false,  who  affirme,  that  it  is  the
most  dangerous  Cape  of  the  world,  never  without  in-
tolerable stormes  and  present  danger  to  travailers,  which
come  neere  the  same.

This  Cape  is  a  most  stately  thing,  and  the  fairest  Cape
we  saw  in  the  whole  circumference  of  the  earth,  and  we
passed  by  it  the 18.  of  June.

From  thence  we  continued  our  course  to  Sierra  Leona,
on  the  coast  of  Guinea,  where  we  arrived  the  22.  of  July,
and  found  necessarie  provisions,  great  store  of  Elephants,
Oisters  upon  trees  of  one  kind,  spawning  and  increasing
infinitely,  the  Gister  suffering  no  budde  to  grow.  We
departed  thence  the  24.  day.

We  arrived  in  England  the  third  of  November  1580.
being  the  third  yeere  of  our  departure.

The  names  of  the  Kings  or  Princes  of  Java  at  the  time  of

our  English  mens  being  there.

("Raja  Donaw.  fR^ja  Tymbanton.

X  Raja  Rabacapala. X  Raja  Mawgbange.

(^Raja  Bacabatra.  (,Raja  Patimara.

Certaine  wordes  of  the  naturall  language  of  Java,  learned

and  observed  by  our  men  there.
^  Sabuck,  silke.  ^Larnike,  drinke.

^Sagu,  bread  of  the  Countrey.  i^Paree,  ryce  in  the  huske.

132

DRAKE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION

Braas,  sodden  ryce.
Calapa,  Cocos.
Cricke,  a  dagger.
Catcha,  a  looking  glasse.
Arbo,  an  oxe.
Vados,  a  goate.
Cabo,  golde.
Gardange,  a  plantane.
Hiam,  a  henne.
Sevit,  linnen  cloth.
Doduck,  blew  cloth.
Totopps,  one  of  their  caps.
Gula,  blacke  sugar.
Tadon,  a  woman.

Bebeck,  a  ducke.

Anjange,  a  deere.

Popran,  oyntment.

Coar,  the  head.

Endam,  raine.

Jonge,  a  shippe.

Chay,  the  sea.

Sapelo,  ten  in  number.

Dopolo,  twentie.

Treda,  no.

Lau,  understand  you.

Bayer,  goe.

Adadizano,  I  will  fetch  it.

Suda,  ynough.

A.D.

1578.

The  relation  of  a  Voyage  made  by  a  Pilot  called  1579.
Nuno  da  Silva  for  the  Vice-roy  of  new  Spaine,
the  20.  of  May,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1579.
in  the  citie  of  Mexico,  from  whence  it  was
sent  to  the  Vice-roy  of  the  Portugall-Indies :
wherein  is  set  downe  the  course  and  actions
passed  in  the  Voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Drake  that
tooke  the  aforesayd  Nuno  da  Silva  at  S.  lago
one  of  the  Islands  of  Cabo  Verde,  and  caried
him  along  with  him  through  the  Streights  of
Magellan,  to  the  Haven  of  Guatulco  in  new
Spaine,  where  he  let  him  goe  againe.

Uno  da  Silva  borne  in  Porto,  a  Citizen
and  inhabitant  of  Guaia,  saith,  that  hee
departed  out  of  his  house  in  the  begin-
ning of  November  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lorde  1577.  taking  his  course  to  Cabo
Verde,  or  The  greene  Cape,  where  he
anchored  with  his  Shippe  close  by  the
Haven  of  the  Island  of  Sant  lago,  one  of  the  Islandes
of  Cabo Verde aforesayde, beeing the nineteenth of

133

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

[III.  743,]  January  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1578.  And  lying
there,  there  came  sixe  ships,  which  seemed  to  be  English-
men, whereof  the  Admirall  boorded  his  ship,  and  by  force
with  his  men  tooke  him  out  of  his  ship,  bringing  him  in
the  boate  aboord  the  Admirals  shippe,  leaving  some  of
his  best  men  aboord  his  ship :  and  although  the  fortresse
of  the  Island  shot  foure  or  five  times  at  them,  yet  they
hurt  not  the  Englishmen :  who  having  done,  set  saile
from  thence  to  the  Island  of  Brava,  taking  with  them
the  ship  of  the  sayd  Nuno  da  Silva  :  being  there,  they
filled  certaine  vessels  with  fresh  water :  from  thence  hold-
ing their  course  inward  to  sea,  having  first  with  a  boat
set  the  men  of  Nuno  da  Silvas  ship  on  land,  onely
keeping  Nuno  da  Silva  in  his  ship,  as  also  his  ship  with
the  wines  that  were  therein.  And  Nuno  da  Silva  saith,
the  cause  why  they  kept  him  on  boord  was,  because
they  knew  him  to  bee  a  pilot  for  the  coast  of  Brasilia,
that  hee  might  bring  them  to  such  places  in  those  coun-
treys  as  had  fresh  water.

Being  put  off  from  the  Island  of  Brava,  they  helde
their  course  to  the  land  of  Brasilia,  which  they  descried
upon  the  first  of  Aprill,  under  the  height  of  thirtie
degrees :  and  without  landing  or  taking  in  fresh  water,

Rio  de  Plata,  they  helde  on  their  course  to  Rio  de  la  Plata,  that  is,  The
river  of  silver,  lying  under  five  and  thirtie  degrees,
little  more  or  lesse :  where  they  went  on  land,  and  pro-
vided themselves  of  fresh  water.

From  thence  they  helde  on  their  course  till  they  came
under  nine  and  thirtie  degrees,  where  they  ankered  :
and  beeing  there  they  left  two  of  their  sixe  shippes
behinde  them,  and  sailed  but  foure  in  companie  (that  of
Nuno  da  Silva  being  one)  till  they  came  to  the  Bay  called

Bay  de  las  Baya  de  las  Islas,  that  is,  The  Bay  of  the  Hands,  lying
under  nine  and  fortie  degrees,  where  it  is  sayde,  that
Magellan  lay  and  wintered  there  with  his  shippe,  when
hee  first  discovered  the  Streight,  which  now  holdeth  his
name.  Into  this  Bay  the  twentieth  of  June  they  entred,
and  there  ankered  so  close  to  the  land,  that  they  might

134

hla

NUNO DA SILVA  ad.

1578.
send  to  it  with  a  harquebuse  shot :  and  there  they  sawe
the  land  to  bee  inhabited  with  Indians,  that  were  apparelled
with  skinnes,  with  their  legges  from  the  knees  downe-
ward,  and  their  armes  from  the  elbowes  downeward
naked,  all  the  rest  of  their  bodies  beeing  clothed,  with
bowes  and  arrowes  in  their  handes,  being  subtill,  great,
and  well  formed  people,  and  strong  and  high  of  stature :
where  sixe  of  the  Englishmen  went  on  land  to  fetch
fresh  water,  and  before  they  leapt  on  land,  foure  of  the
Indians  came  unto  their  boate,  to  whome  the  Englishmen
gave  bread  and  wine :  and  when  the  Indians  had  well
eaten  and  drunke,  they  departed  thence :  and  going
somewhat  farre  from  them,  one  of  the  Indians  cryed  to
them,  and  sayde :  Magallanes,  Esta  he  minha  Terra,
that  is,  Magallanes,  this  is  my  countrey :  and  because  the
Englishmen  followed  them,  it  seemed  the  Indians  fledde
upward  into  the  land,  and  beeing  somewhat  farre  off,  they
turned  backe  againe,  and  with  their  arrowes  slewe  two
of  the  English  shippers,  one  being  an  Englishman,  the
other  a  Netherlander :  the  rest  came  backe  againe  and
saved  themselves  in  the  boate,  wherewith  they  presently
put  off  from  the  shore.  Here  they  stayed  till  the
seventeenth  of  August,  upon  the  which  day  they  set
saile,  running  along  by  the  coast  about  a  league  and  a
halfe  from  the  land,  (for  there  it  is  all  faire  and  good
ground,  at  twentie,  and  five  and  twentie  fathome  deepe)
and  were  about  foure  or  five  dayes  before  they  came  to
the  mouth  or  entrie  of  the  Streight :  but  because  the
wind  was  contrary,  they  stayed  till  the  24  of  August
before  they  entred.

The  entrie  or  mouth  of  the  Streight  is  about  a  league  The  descrip-
broad,  on  both  sides  being  bare  and  flatte  land :  on  the  tionofThe
North  side  they  sawe  Indians  making  great  fires,  but  on  ^^^^  fi
the  South  side  they  saw  no  people  stirring. The  foure
and  twentieth  day  aforesayd,  they  beganne  to  enter  into
the  Streight,  with  an  Eastnortheast  wind. This  Streight
may  bee  about  an  hundred  and  tenne  leagues  long,  and  in
bredth  a  league. About  the  entry  of  the  Streight,  and

135

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

halfe  way  into  it,  it  runneth  right  foorth  without  any
windings  or  turnings  :  and  from  thence  about  eight  or
tenne  leagues  towards  the  ende,  it  hath  some  boutes  and
windings,  among  the  which  there  is  one  so  great  a  hooke
or  headland,  that  it  seemed  to  runne  into  the  other  land :
and  there  it  is  lesse  then  a  league  broad  from  one  land  to
the  other  :  and  from  thence  forward  it  runneth  straight  out
againe  :  And  although  you  finde  some  crookings,  yet  they
are  nothing  to  speake  of.  The  issue  of  the  Streight  lieth
Westward,  and  about  eight  or  tenne  leagues  before  you
come  to  the  ende,  then  the  Streight  beginneth  to  bee
broader,  and  it  is  all  high  land  to  the  ende  thereof,
after  you  are  eight  leagues  within  the  Streight,  for  the
first  eight  leagues  after  you  enter  is  low  flat  land,  as  I  sayd
before  :  and  in  the  entrie  of  the  Streight  you  find  the
streame  to  runne  from  the  South  sea  to  the  North  sea.

And  after  they  began  to  saile  in  with  the  Eastnortheast
wind,  being  entred  they  passed  along  without  any  let  or
hinderance  either  of  wind  or  weather :  and  because  the
high  land  on  both  sides  lay  covered  with  snow,  and  that
all  the  Streight  is  faire  and  cleare,  they  helde  their  course  a
[III.  744.]  harquebuse-shot  in  length  from  off  the  North  side,  having
nine  and  tenne  fathome  depth,  with  good  ground,  as  I
said  before,  where  (if  neede  require)  a  man  may  anker:
the  hilles  on  both  sides  being  full  of  trees,  some  of  the
hilles  and  trees  reaching  downe  to  the  sea  side  in  some
places  having  plaine  and  even  land :  and  there  they  sawe
not  any  great  rivers,  but  some  small  rivers  that  issued
out  of  the  riffes  and  breaches  of  the  land :  and  in  the
countrey  where  the  great  Cape  or  crooking  is,  on  the
South  side  they  saw  certaine  Indian  fishermen  in  their
Canoas  or  skiffs,  being  such  as  they  saw  first  on  the  North
side,  but  more  people  they  saw  not  on  the  South  side.

Being  out  of  the  Streight  on  the  other  side,  upon
the  sixt  of  September  of  the  aforesaid  yeere,  they  held
their  course  Northwest  for  the  space  of  three  dayes,  and
the  third  day  they  had  a  Northeast  wind,  that  by  force
drave  them  Westsouthwest,  which  course  they  held  for

136

SIR  CHRISTOPHER  HATTON

NUNO DA SILVA  a.d.

1578.

the  space of  ten or twelve dayes with few sailes  up :

and  because  the  wind  began  to  be  very  great,  they  tooke  in

all  their  sailes,  and  lay  driving  till  the  last  of  September.

The  24  day  of  the  same  moneth  having:  lost  the  sight  of  This  was  the

one  of  their  shippes  which  was  about  an  hundred  tunne,  ^"^<^^li'^  ^«
,  . ^1  1 • J -1 1  ^1  • 1  John  Winters

then  agame they  noised saile because  the wmde came  ^^^^

better,  holding  their  course  Northeast  for  the  space  of
seven  dayes,  and  at  the  ende  of  the  sayde  seven  dayes,
they  had  the  sight  of  certayne  Islands,  which  they  made
towards  for  to  anker  by  them,  but  the  weather  would
not  permit  them  :  and  being  there,  the  wind  fell  North-
west :  whereupon  they  sailed  Westsouthwest.

The  next  day  they  lost  the  sight  of  another  ship  of  their
company,  for  it  was  very  foule  weather,  so  that  in  the
ende  the  Admirals  shippe  was  left  alone,  for the ship
of  Nuno  da  Silva  was  left  in  the  Bay  where  they  wintered
before  they entered into the  Streights : and with this
foule  weather  they  ranne  till  they  were  under  seven  and  The';)  were
fiftie degrees,  where  they entred into a haven of an  ^^'^'^^^  ^^to
Island,  and ankered  about the  length of  the  shot  of  a  ^''^^  ^^'^^^  ^
great piece from the land, at  twentie fathome deepe,  latitude.
where  they stayed three or foure dayes,  and the  wind
comming Southward, they  weyed anker, holding  their
course  Northward  for the  space  of  two  daies,  and  then
they  espied  a  small  unhabited  Island,  where  being  arrived,
they  stroke  sailes,  and  hoised  out  their  boate,  and  there
they  tooke  many  birds  and  Scales.

The  next  day  they  set  saile  againe,  holding  their  course
Northnortheast,  and  North,  to  another  Island  lying  five  The  Isle  of
or  sixe  leagues  from  the  firme  land, on  the  North  side  ■^"'^^^  ^^  3^.
of  the Streight, where they ankered about a quarter *'  ^
of  a  league from the land, in twelve fathome  water.
This  Island  is  small  and  lowe  land,  and  full  of  Indians,
the  Island being  altogether  possessed and inhabited  by
them, where they  hoysed out  their  boate, wherein  the
Admirall  and  twelve  Englishmen  entred,  going  to  fetch
fresh  water,  and  to  seeke  for  victuals :  and  being  landed
upon  the  Island,  the  Indians  in  exchange  of  other  things,

137

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

brought  two  Spanish  sheepe,  and  a  little  Maiz  or  rootes
whereof  they  make  bread,  and  because  it  was  late,  they
returned  againe  unto  their  ship,  without  doing  any  other
thing  for  that  day.

The  next  day  the  said  Captaine  with  the  aforesaid
twelve  men  being  harquebusiers,  rowed  to  land  againe,
and  set  two  of  their  company  on  shore  with  their  vessels
to  fetch  fresh  water,  and  by  the  place  where  they  should
fill  their  water  there  lay  certaine  Indians  secretly  hidden,
that  fell  upon  the  two  Englishmen  and  tooke  them :  which
they  in  the  boat  perceiving,  went  out  to  helpe  them,  but
they  were  so  assailed  with  stones  &  arrowes,  that  all  or

Sir  Francis  the  most  part  of  them  were  hurt,  the  Captaine  himselfe
,  ,  being  wounded  with  an  arrow  on  the  face,  and  with  an
other  arrow  in  the  head,  whereby  they  were  constrained
to  turne  backe  againe,  without  once  hurting  any  of  the
Indians,  and  yet  they  came  so  neere  the  boate,  that
they  tooke  foure  of  their  oares  from  them.  This  done,
they  set  saile  againe,  running  along  the  coast  with  a  South
winde,  sailing  so  for  the  space  of  sixe  dayes,  passing
by  the  haven  called  Sant  lago,  and  put  into  another
haven,  and  there  they  tooke  an  Indian  that  lay  fishing
in  a  Canoa,  giving  him  linnen  and  butchers  chopping
knives,  with  other  trifles,  and  not  long  after  there  came
another  Indian  aboord  their  shippe  called  Felippe,  and
he  spake  Spanish,  he  gave  the  English  Captaine  notice
of  a  certaine  shippe  that  lay  in  the  haven  of  Sant  lago,
which  they  had  left  sixe  leagues  behind  them  :  with
that  intelligence  the  Indian  being  their  guide,  the  next
day  they  set  saile  and  went  to  the  aforesayd  haven  of
S.  lago,  and  entring  therein,  they  tooke  the  said  shippe,
wherein  they  found  a  thousand  seven  hundred  and  70
Botijas  or  Spanish  pots  full  of  wine,  and  other  things  :
which  having  done,  they  lept  on  land,  where  they
tooke  certaine  sackes  with  meale,  with  whatsoever  they
could  find  ;  they  tooke  likewise  the  ornaments  and  the
reliques  out  of  the  Church,  wherewith  they  departed
from thence, taking the aforesayd shippe, with two

138

NUNO  DA SILVA  a.d.

1578.

men (that they found in her) with them, and so
departed from that haven, which lyeth under 32 The  haven  of
degrees and  a halfe, running along by the coast till ,  ■''^^  ^"  P
they  came  under  one and thirtie,  and thirtie degrees  :  ^^1^^
which was the place where they had appointed to  [in.  74.5.]
meete,  and there  to  stay  for  ech  other,  if  by  tempest
or foule weather they chanced to be separated, and
50  loose  eche  others  company.

And  comming  under  thirtie  degrees,  they  found  a
^ery  good  haven,  whereinto  they  entred,  and  ankered
at  sixe  fathome  deepe,  the  shot  of  a  great  peece  from
the  land,  which  was  right  over  against  a  river,  where
they  tooke  in  sixe  pipes  of  fresh  water  :  and  to  defend
them  that  fetched  the  water,  they  set  twelve  men  upon
the  land,  and  being  busied  in  filling  of  their  water,  they
espied  a  company  of  men  comming  towards  them,
whereof  halfe  of  them  were  Spaniards,  being  about
two  hundred  and  fifty  horsemen,  and  as  many  foote-
men,  but  they  had  no  sooner  espied  them,  but  they
presently  entred  into  the  boat,  and  escaped  away,
loosing  but  one  man.

The  same  night  they  set  saile  againe  with  both
their  ships,  running  along  the  coast  about  ten  leagues
farther,  where  they  tooke  in  some  fresh  water,  but
because  they  perceived  certaine  horsemen,  they  departed
without  lading  any  more  water.

From  thence  they  followed  on  their  course  along  the
coast  for  the  space  of  30.  leagues,  where  they  entred
into  a  desert  or  unhabited  haven  :  yet  they  went  not
on  land,  for  every  day  they  saw  people  upon  the
shore,  &  there  they  made  out  a  smal  pinnesse,  the
peeces  wherof  they  brought  ready  framed  out  of  England,
and  having  prepared  it,  they  launched  it  into  the  water,
wherein  the  Captaine  with  fifteene  men  entred  with
the  chiefe  boatesman  called  John  the  Greeke,  (being
Master  of  the  ship  which  they  had  taken  in  the  haven
of  S.  lago,)  wherewith  they  went  to  see  if  they  could
find  the two shippes that they had lost by stormie

139

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

weather,  as  I  sayd  before  :  and  likewise  thinking  to
goe  on  land  to  fill  certaine  vessels  with  fresh  water,
they  durst  not  venture,  for  they  saw  people  on  all  sides
of  the  shore  :  so  that  in  the  ende  they  returned  againe
without  hearing  of  the  other  ships  :  being  there,  they
tooke  all  the  ordinance  out  of  their  ship,  and  new
dressed  and  rigged  her  :  which  done,  they  put  a  small
peece  of  ordinance  into  the  pinnesse,  wherewith  they  set
saile  againe,  following  on  their  course.

Having  sailed  thirteene  dayes,  they  came  to  an
Island  lying  about  the  shotte  of  a  base  from  the  land,
where  they  ankered,  and  there  they  found  foure  Indian
fishermen  in  two  Canoas  who  told  them  that  on  the
firme  land  they  might  have  fresh  water,  but  they
understanding  that  there  was  not  much,  and  that  it
was  somewhat  within  the  land,  would  not  spend  any
time  about  it,  but  set  saile  againe,  leaving  the
fishermen  with  their  Canoas,  following  on  their  course
along  by  the  shore.

The  next  day  being  somewhat  further,  they  espied
certaine  Indian  fishermen  that  were  upon  the  land  in
their  houses,  which  the  English  captaine  perceiving,
presently  entred  into  his  pinnesse,  and  rowed  on  land,
where  he  tooke  three  of  the  said  fishermen,  taking
with  him  halfe  of  the  fish  that  lay  packed  upon  the
shore  ready  to  be  laden,  with  the  which  Indians  and
booty,  they  came  on  boord  againe.

The  next  day  following,  they  saw  a  barke  laden  with
fish,  that  belonged  to  the  Spaniards,  with  foure  Indians
in  it.  This  barke  with  the  Indians  and  the  fish  they
tooke,  and  bound  the  Spanish  ship  to  their  sterne,  and
so  drewe  it  after  them,  leaving  the  said  Indians  within
it,  who  by  night  unbound  the  barke,  and  secretly  made
away  with  barke  and  fish,  and  were  no  more  scene.
The  next  day  the  Captaine  went  into  the  pinnesse,
and  because  he  saw  certaine  houses  upon  the  shore,
he  made  thither,  and  being  on  land,  he  found  two  men
in them, one whereof he tooke, leaving the other

140

NUNO  DA SILVA  a.d.

1579-
behind,  and  there  he  found  three  thousand  pezos  of
silver,  (every  pezo  being  the  value  of  a  ryall  of  eight,)
and  seven  Indian  sheepe,  and  hennes,  &  tooke  al
whatsoever  they  found  :  wherewith  they  departed  from
thence,  following  on  their  course.  And  two  dayes  after
they  came  to  the  haven  called  Arica,  where  they  found  Arica,
two  ships,  the  one  laden  with  goods  and  Spanish
wares,  out  of  the  which  they  tooke  only  two  hundred
Botijas,  or  Spanish  pots  with  wine,  and  out  of  the
other  seven  and  thirty  barres  of  silver,  which  are
peeces  of  ten  or  twelve  pound  eche  barre,  and  thinking
to  leape  on  shore  (with  two  barks  that  they  found  in
the  said  haven,  with  about  seven  and  thirty  harquebuses
and  bowes)  they  perceived  on  the  land  certaine
horsemen  comming  towards  them,  whereupon  they  left
off  their  pretence,  and  tooke  with  them  a  Negro  that
they  found  in  the  barks,  with  whom  they  returned
aboord.

The  next  day  in  the  morning  they  burnt  the  ship,
that  was  laden  with  the  Spanish  wares,  and  tooke  the
other  with  them,  passing  forward  with  it  on  their
course,  the  Captaine  sailing  along  the  shore  with  his
pinnesse,  and  the  ship  keeping  about  a  league  from
him  to  seaward,  to  seeke  for  a  ship  wherof  they  had
intelligence :  and  having  in  that  maner  sailed  about
£ve  and  forty  leagues,  they  found  the  ship  that  lay
■at  anker  in  a  haven,  who  about  two  houres  before
had  bene  advertised  of  an  English  pirate  or  sea-rover,
and  had  discharged  eight  hundred  barres  of  silver  out
of  her,  and  hidden  it  on  the  land,  which  silver  belonged
to  the  king  of  Spaine,  of  the  which  silver  the  English-  [III.  746.]
men  had  received  some  intelligence,  but  they  durst  not
go  on  land,  because  there  were  many  Indians  and
Spaniards  that  stood  to  gard  it,  and  they  found  nothing
in  the  ship  but  three  pipes  of  water  :  the  ship  they
tooke  with  them,  and  being  about  a  league  in  the  sea,
they  hoysed  up  all  her  sailes  and  let  her  drive,  doing
ihe  like  with  the  ship  that  they  had  taken  in  Arica,  as

141

4.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

also  the  other  of  Sant  lago,  which  likewise  they  let  drive,
following  on  their  course  with  their  owne  ship,  and  the
pinnesse.
Calao  de  Being  seven  or  eight  leagues  from  the  haven  of
Lima,  Calao  de  Lyma,  they  espied  three  ships,  and  boording
one  of  them,  they  tooke  three  men  out  of  her,  and  so
held  on  their  course  towards  Calao  de  Lyma,  where
they  entred,  being  about  two  or  three  houres  within
night,  sailing  in  betweene  all  the  ships  that  lay  there,
being  seventeene  in  number  :  and  being  among  the
ships,  they  asked  for  the  ship  that  had  laden  the  silver,
but  when  answere  was  made  them,  that  the  silver  was
layd  on  land,  they  cut  the  cables  of  the  ships,  and  the
masts  of  two  of  the  greatest  ships,  and  so  left  them.
At  the  same  time  there  arrived  a  ship  from  Panama
laden  with  wares  and  merchandise  of  Spaine,  that
ankered  close  by  the  English  ship,  which  was,  while
the  English  Captaine  sought  in  the  other  ships  for  the
silver.  Assoone  as  the  ship  of  Panama  had  ankered,
there  came  a  boat  from  the  shore  to  search  it  :  but
because  it  was  in  the  night,  they  let  it  alone  till
morning,  and  comming  to  the  English  ship,  they
asked  what  ship  it  was  :  whereupon  one  of  the  Spanish
prisoners  (by  the  English  Captaines  commandement)
answered  and  said  it  was  the  ship  of  Michael  Angelo,
that  came  from  Chili  :  which  they  of  the  boat  hearing
sent  a  man  on  board,  who  climing  up,  light  upon  one
of  the  great  peeces,  wherewith  he  was  afraid,  and
presently  stept  backe  againe  into  the  boat  (because  the
shippes  that  lay  there,  and  that  sailed  in  those  countreys,
used  to  carry  no  great  shot)  and  therewith  they  were
abashed,  and  made  from  it  :  which  the  ship  of  Panama
hearing,  that  was  newly  come  in,  shee  judged  it  to  be
a  rover,  and  therewith  cutting  her  cables,  shee  put  to
sea,  which  the  Englishmen  perceiving,  shipped  certaine
men  in  their  pinnesse,  and  followed  her  :  and  being
hard  by  her,  they  badde  her  strike,  which  they  of
the ship refused to doe, and with a harquebuse shot

142

NUNO  DA  SILVA  ad.

1579-
killed  one  of  the  Englishmen,  wherewith  they  turned
again e  into  their  shippe,  and  presently  set  saile,  follow-
ing after  the  ship,  which  not  long  after  they  overtooke  :
which  they  of  the  shippe  perceiving  hoysed  out  their
boate,  and  leaping  into  it,  rowed  to  the  land,  leaving
the  shippe  with  all  the  goods,  which  the  Englishmen
presently  tooke,  and  with  her  sayled  on  their  course.

The  next  day  they  saw  a  boat  with  sailes  making
towards  them,  whereby  they  presently  mistrusted  it  to
be  a  spie,  and  not  long  after  they  perceived  two  great
ships  comming  towards  them,  which  made  the  English
thinke  they  came  to  fight  with  them,  whereupon  they
let  the  shippe  of  Panama  drive,  therein  leaving  John
the  Greeke,  with  the  two  men  that  they  had  taken
the  same  day  that  they  entred  into  the  Calao  de  Lyma,
as  I  sayde  before,  and  presently  hoysed  all  their  sailes,
and  sailed  forward,  not  once  setting  eye  againe  upon  the
aforesayde  ships,  for  they  made  towards  the  ship  of
Panama,  which  the  Englishmen  let  drive.  From  thence
they  sailed  againe  along  the  coast,  following  on  their
course :  and  having  sailed  certaine  dayes,  they  met  a
frigate  that  went  towards  Lyma,  laden  with  wares  and
merchandises  of  the  countrey,  from  whence  the  English-
men tooke  a  lampe  and  a  fountaine  of  silver,  and  asked
the  pilote  being  a  Spaniard,  if  they  met  not  with  a  ship,
that  they  understood  should  be  laden  with  silver,  but  the
one  Pilote  saide  he  met  her  not,  and  the  other  said  he
saw  her  about  three  dayes  before.  This  frigat  came  not
to  the  ship,  but  to  the  pinnesse,  wherein  the  Captaine
sailed,  for  the  pinnesse  ranne  close  by  the  shore,  and  the
ship  kept  a  league  and  a  halfe  from  the  lande :  where-
upon they  let  the  frigate  goe,  following  on  their  course.

Two  dayes  after,  they  came  to  the  haven  called  Payta,  Payta,
where  they  found  a  ship  laden  with  Spanish  wares,  which
the  pinnesse  boorded,  and  tooke  without  any  resistance :
for  assoone  as  the  Spaniards  perceived  the  Englishmen,
they  presently  made  to  land  with  their  boate,  and  two  of
them  lept  into  the  sea,  none  staying  in  the  shippe,  but

143

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

the  Master,  Pilote,  and  some  Negros,  out  of  the  which
shippe  the  Englishmen  tooke  the  pilote,  and  all  the
bread,  hennes  and  a  hogge,  and  so  sailed  forward  with
the  ship :  but  being  about  two  harquebuse  shot  to  sea-
ward, they  let  it  goe  againe,  not  taking  any  thing  out  of
it,  and  asking  after  the  ship,  which  they  sought  for,  they
told  them  that  about  two  dayes  before  she  departed  from
that  place,  wherewith  they  followed  on  their  course,  and
before  night  they  met  with  a  ship  of  Panama,  which  they
presently  boorded,  but  tooke  nothing  from  her  but  onely
a  Negro,  and  so  left  it,  holding  on  their  course.

The  next  day  being  the  first  of  Februarie,  they  met
another  ship  that  sailed  to  Panama,  laden  with  fish  and
other  victuals,  and  fortie  barres  of  silver,  and  some  gold,
but  I  know  not  how  much,  which  they  tooke,  and  sent  the
passengers  (with  two  friers  that  were  in  her)  in  a  boate
[III.  747.]  to  land.  The  next  day  they  hanged  a  man  of  the  ship,
because  hee  would  not  confesse  two  plates  of  golde  that
he  had  taken,  which  after  they  found  about  him :  which
done,  they  let  the  ship  drive,  following  on  their  course.

The  first  of  March  towards  noone,  they  espied  the
ship  laden  with  silver,  being  about  foure  leagues  to  sea-
ward from  them :  and  because  the  English  ship  was
somewhat  heavie  before,  whereby  it  sailed  not  as  they
would  have  it,  they  tooke  a  company  of  Botijas  or
J  pretie  de-  Spanish  pots  for  oyle,  and  filling  them  with  water,  hung
vice  to  make^  them  by  ropes  at  the  sterne  of  the  ship  to  make  her  sayle
thetr  ship  mile  ^^  better :  and  the  shippe  that  sayled  towardes  Panama
made  towards  the  English  shippe  to  know  what  shee  was,
thinking  it  to  bee  one  of  the  shippes  that  used  to  saile
along  the  coastes,  and  to  traffique  in  the  countrey :  and
beeing  hard  by  her,  the  English  Captaine  badde  them
strike,  but  the  other  refusing  to  doe  it,  with  a  great
peece  hee  shotte  her  mast  overboord,  and  having  wounded
the  Master  with  an  arrowe,  the  shippe  presently  yeelded,
which  they  tooke,  and  sayled  with  her  further  into  the
sea,  all  that  night  and  the  next  day  and  night,  making
all  the  way  they  could.

144

NUNO DA SILVA  ad.

1579-
The  third  day  being  out  of  sight  of  the  land,  they
beganne  to  search  the  ship,  and  to  lade  the  goods  out  of
her  into  their  ship,  which  was  a  thousand  three  hundred
barres  or  peeces  of  silver,  and  foureteene  chestes  with
ryals  of  eight,  and  with  gold :  but  what  quantitie  it  was
I  know  not,  onely  the  passengers  sayd  that  there  was
great  store,  and  that  three  hundred  barres  of  the  silver
belonged  to  the  king,  the  rest  belonged  to  certaine  mer-
chants. That  done,  they  let  the  ship  with  the  men  saile
on  their  course,  putting  the  three  pilots  in  her  that  they
brought  with  them,  so  that  as  then  they  had  none  but
their  owne  men  aboord,  being  the  sixt  of  March,  and
from  thence  they  held  their  course  towards  the  land  of
Nicaragua,  Nicaragua

The thirteenth of March,  either the day  before  or
after,  in  the  morning  they  descried  land,  not  being  very
high,  being a  small Island  two  leagues from the  fir  me  The  Island  of
land,  and  there they found  a small Bay,  wherein  they  ^^^"°-
ankered  at five  fathome deepe  close  by the  land,  and  The  first  sight
there  they  stayed  till  the  twentie  day. Upon  the  which  ^-^^^^^
day  there passed a Frigate  close by  the Island, which ^^
with  their  pinnesse  they  followed,  and  taking  her,  brought
her to the  English  ship, which frigat  was laden with
Salsaperilla, and  Botijas  or  pots  with  butter  and  hony,
and  with  other  things. The  English  Captaine  went  on
boord,  and  cast  the  Salsaperilla  on  the  land,  leaving  all
the  rest  of  the  wares  in  the  frigate,  and  then  he  put  all
his  peeces  into  the  frigate,  that  so  he  might  lay  his  ship
on  shore,  to  new  calke  and  trimme  her,  which  continued They  calke
till  the  three  and  twentie  or  foure  and  twentie  of  March.  f^'^-J.'H^l^
Which  done, and  having  made  provision of  wood  and  ^^^  //^  ^
fresh  water,  they  held  on  their  course  along  by  the  coast,  Canno  over
sayling  Westward,  taking  the  sayd  frigate  and  her  men  against
with  them,  and  having  sailed  two  dayes,  they  tooke  their  ^^<^^r^S^^^'
men  out  of  her,  and  set  them  in  the  pinnesse,  among  the
which  were  foure  sailers,  that  meant  to  sayle  to  Panama,
and  from  thence  to  China,  whereof  one  they  tooke,  with
the  letters  and  patents  that  hee  had  about  him,  among
XI  145  K

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

the  which  were  the  letters  of  the  king  of  Spaine,  sent  to
Sea-charts  of the  governour  of  the Philippinas, as  also  the  sea-cards
the  South  sea -^herewith they should make their voyage,  and direct
themselves  in  their  course.

And  so  sailing  untill  the  sixt  of  Aprill,  about  evening
they  discovered  a  shippe  that  held  two  leagues  to  seaward
from  the  land  :  and  before  the  next  day  in  the  morning
they  were  hard  by  her,  and  suddenly  fell  upon  her  while
her  men slept, and  presently  made the  men  enter  into
their ship, among the which was one Don Francisco
Xarate. Which  done,  they  followed  on  their  course  with
the  sayd  ship,  out  of  the  which  they  tooke  certaine  packes
and  other  wares,  but  I  know  not  what  it  was. They  like-
wise tooke  a  Negro  out  of  it,  and  three  dayes  after  they
both  let  the  ship  and  men  goe  whether  they  woulde,  set-
ting therein  the  two  saylers  that  should  goe  for  China,
which  they  had  taken  in  the frigate,  keeping  onely  one
sailer  to  shewe  them  where  they  should  find  fresh  water,
to the which  ende they tooke  the emptie  vessels with
them  to  fill  with  water,  and  so  kept  on  their  course  to  the
They  arrive haven  of  Guatulco,  where  they  put  in,  being  upon  Mun-
^  Guatulco, j^y  ^j^g  thirteenth  of  Aprill,  and  having  ankered,  they
Stilo  novo'. Stayed  there  till  the  sixe  and  twentie  of  Aprill:  and  about
three or foure houres  within  the  night,  they  set  sayle,
holding their course  Westward, and an houre or two
NunodaSilva  before they let Nuno da Silva goe, putting him into
set  on  land. another  ship,  that  lay  in  the  haven  of  Guatulco.

From  thence  forward  the  Englishmen  passed  on  their
voyage,  to  the  Islands  of  Malucos,  and  from  thence  they
passed  by  the  Cape  de  Buena  Esperanza,  and  so  to  Eng-
land, as  it  is  well  knowen,  so  that  this  is  onely  the  descrip-
tion of  the  voyage  that  they  made,  while  the  said  pilote
Nuno  da  Silva  was  with  them.

Hereafter  followeth  the  copie  of  a  letter  written  by  sir

[III.  748.] Francis  Drake  (being  in  the  South  sea  of  New  Spaine,  in

his  ship  called  The  Pellican  or  the  Golden  Hinde  with  the

ship  of  Sant  John  de  Anton,  which  hee  had  taken)  to  his

companions  in  the  other  shippes  that  were  of  his  company,

146

NUNO DA  SILVA  a.d.

1579-
and  by  foule  weather  separated  from  him,  as  I  said  before  :
The  contents  whereof  were  these :

Master  Winter,  if  it  pleaseth  God  that  you  should
chance  to  meete  with  this  ship  of  Sant  John  de  Anton,
I  pray  you  use  him  well,  according  to  my  word  and
promise  given  unto  them,  and  if  you  want  any  thing  that
is  in  this  ship  of  Sant  John  de  Anton,  I  pray  you  pay
them  double  the  value  for  it,  which  I  will  satisfie  againe,
and  command  your  men  not  to  doe  her  any  hurt :  and
what  composition  or  agreement  we  have  made,  at  my
returne  into  England  I  will  by  Gods  helpe  perfourme,
although  I  am  in  doubt  that  this  letter  will  never  come
to  your  hands:  notwithstanding  I  am  the  man  I  have
promised  to  be :  Beseeching  God,  the  Saviour  of  all  the
world,  to  have  us  in  his  keeping,  to  whom  onely  I  give
all  honour,  praise  and  glory.  What  I  have  written,  is
not  only  to  you  M.  Winter,  but  also  to  M.  Thomas,  M.
Charles,  M.  Caube,  and  M.  Anthonie,  with  all  our  other
good  friendes,  whom  I  commit  to  the  tuition  of  him  that
with  his  blood  redeemed  us,  and  am  in  good  hope,  that
we  shal  be  in  no  more  trouble,  but  that  he  will  helpe
us  in  adversitie,  desiring  you  for  the  Passion  of  Christ,
if  you  fall  into  any  danger,  that  you  will  not  despaire  of
Gods  mercy,  for  hee  will  defend  you  and  preserve  you
from  all  danger,  and  bring  us  to  our  desired  haven,  to
whom  bee  all  honour,  glory,  and  praise  for  ever  and  ever.
Amen.  Your  sorowfull  Captaine,  whose  heart  is  heavy
for  you :  Francis  Drake.

[The  voyage
147

A.D.

1577-

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

They  set  for-
ward from
Plimmouth  the
13.  of  Decem-

The  voyage  of  M.  John  Winter  into  the  South
sea  by  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  in  consort
with  M.  Francis  Drake,  begun  in  the  yeere
1577.  By  which  Streight  also  he  returned
safely  into  England  the  second  of  June  1579.
contrary  to  the  false  reports  of  the  Spaniards
which  gave  out,  that  the  said  passage  was  not
repasseable :  Written  by  Edward  ClifFe  Mariner.

N  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1577.  the  19.
of  September  there  went  out  of  the  river
of  Thamis  over  the  lands  ende  one  good
and  newe  ship  called  the  Elizabeth,  of
80  tunnes  in  burthen :  in  company  where-
of went  also  a  small  pinnesse  being  12
tunnes  in  burthen  called  the  Benedict.
The  sayd  ship  with  her  pinnesse  arrived  at  Plimmouth :
in  which  haven  were  three  ships  more,  one  called  the
PelHcan  in  burthen  120  tunnes,  being  Admirall  of  the
fleeter  a  barke  called  the  Marigold  in  burthen  thirty
tunnes,  with  a  flieboat  of  50  tunnes.  These  ships  had
in  them  164  men,  and  were  victualled  and  furnished
with  all  kind  of  necessary  provision  to  make  a  voyage
into  the  South  sea.  Wee  set  sayle  the  15  of  November,
but  were  put  into  Falmouth  by  contrary  winds :  and
afterward  were  constrained  to  put  backe  againe  to  Plim-
mouth to  repaire  the  great  hurt  which  divers  of  our
fleete  had  sustained  in  that  tempest :  and  at  length  the
1 3  of  December  wee  set  forward  from  thence  upon  our
voyage.

The  five  and twentie  of  December  we  had sight  of
Cape Cantin : this Cape lyeth in the latitude of  32.

ber

Cape  Cantin. degrees and 30. minutes upon the coast  of Barbarie,

Aiaphi.  neere  to  a  towne  called  Asaphi. The  land  all  along  this

coast is hie and great mountaines. Sayling from the

sayd  Cape  Southsouthwest  about 18  leagues,  wee  found

148

JOHN WINTER  ad.

1577-
a  little  Island  called  Mogador  an  English  mile  distant  Mogador  an
from  the  maine,  we  sent  our  boat  to  sound  the  depth,  ^^l^^f  °^J^^^
and  at  the  returne  thereof  we  understood  by  our  men  ^^^
that  the  haven  was  without  danger,  having  five  fathomes
of  water  fast  by  the  rocks  entring  in  upon  the  poynt
of  the  Island :  wherefore  wee  entred  in  with  our  whole
fleete  the  27  of  December.  The  Moores  that  were  on
the  maine  seeing  our  ships  ride  there,  came  from  the
mountain es  to  beholde  us :  whom  our  Generall,  M.
Francis  Drake  espying,  shewed  to  them  a  white  flagge
in  token  of  friendship,  and  sent  his  boat  to  shore  with
one  of  our  men,  which  not  long  before  had  bene
captive  in  the  countrey,  and  partly  understoode  their
language,  to  talke  with  them.  When  the  boate  came  to
shore,  the  sayd  man  went  on  land  to  them :  to  whom
they  shewed  many  tokens  of  friendship,  casting  up  their
eyes  to  heaven,  and  after  looking  downe  upon  the
ground,  as  though  they  had  sworne  by  heaven  and
earth,  promising  peace.  That  done  two  of  them  came
aboord  to  our  Generall,  and  our  man  stayed  on  shore
for  a  pledge.

These  two  Moores,  after  they  had  made  good  cheere,
and  received  certaine  gifts  of  our  Generall  went  to
shore  againe,  and  our  man  came  aboord  also.  But  the
craftie  slaves  having  devised  to  betray  us,  came  the  next
day  along  the  sea  side  with  certain  camels  as  though
they  had  brought  some  merchandize  to  traffique  with
us :  to  whom  our  General  sent  certaine  of  our  men  in
the  boat  to  learne  what  they  had  brought,  giving  charge
that  none  of  them  should  goe  on  land.  But  the  boate  [III.  749.]
being  neere  the  shore  one  of  our  men  more  hastie  then
wise  lept  to  shore;  whom  the  Moores  immediatly
tooke  by  force,  and  setting  him  on  horsebacke  caried
him  away  into  the  mountaines,  so  that  we  saw  him  no
more  after  that  time.  In  the  meane  time  wee  set  up  a
Pinnesse  in  the  island,  whereof  wee  brought  4  loose  out  ^".^''^  '"''^^
of  England :  which  being  finished,  the  last  of  December  ]jj.ousht  out  of
wee  weighed,  and  came  out  of  the  North part  of  the  England.

149

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1577.

island,  the  same  way  that  wee  came  in : for the  South

chanel  is dangerous, having  but 8 foote  at low  water,
MogadorinT,! and is full of rockes. This island standeth in 31
degrees  and  an  ^Qg^tes  ^  of  latitude,  being  one  league  in  circuite,  not
inhabited;  and  hath  infinite  number  of  doves  upon  it.

At  Sea  wee  met  with a  contrary  winde,  so that  wee
beate  off  and on,  till  the  4  of  Januarie 1578,  at  which
time  a  more  favourable  winde  began  to  blowe  at  North-
east,  and then  wee  set  our  course Southsouthwest,  till
Cape  de  Guer  on  the  7  of  Januarie  wee  came  as  high  as  Cape  de  Guer,
tn  10  degrees,  ^j^j^h standeth in 30  degrees  of latitude. Here our
new  Pinnesse  tooke  3 Spanish  fisher-boates,  called  Can-
tars. From  thence  wee  ran  Southwest  and Southsouth-
west,  carying  the  sayd Cantars  along  with  us, till the
10  of  the sayd moneth,  at  which  time  wee found our
selves  in 27 degrees  4 min. being 10 leagues  West-
Cape  Bojador  south west  from Cape  Bojador,  which  lieth  on  the  maine
'^^  '^1,  d^g^^es.  j^^j q£  ^fj-jca. From thence  we ran South and by
West, untill the 13  day  at  noone,  at  which  time  wee
had  sight  of  Rio  del Oro,  where  our  Pinnesse  tooke  a
Portugall  caravel. The  1 5,  the  Marigold  took  a  caravel
Cape  de  las about Cape  de las Barbas. And thence  we  ran  along
r EI  the  coast  being  low  sandie  land,  till  wee  arrived  at  Cape

in  20  degrees. Blanco. This  Cape  sheweth  it  selfe  like  the  corner  of  a
30  min.  wall  upright  from  the  water,  to  them  which  come  from

the  Northwardes :  where  the  North  pole  is  elevated  20
degrees  30  min.  And  the  Crociers  being  the  guards
of  the  South  pole,  be  raised  9  degrees  30  min.  The
said  Crociers  be  4  starres,  representing  the  forme  of  a
crosse,  and  be  30  degrees  in  latitude  from  the  South
pole :  and  the  lowest  starre  of  the  sayd  Crociers  is  to
be  taken,  when  it  is  directly  under  the  uppermost ;
and  being  so  taken  as  many  degrees  as  it  wanteth  of
30,  so  many  you  are  to  the  Northwards  of  the  Equi-
noctial :  and  as  many  degrees  as  be  more  then  30,  so
many  degrees  you  are  to  the  Southwards  of  the  Equi-
noctial. And  if  you  finde  it  to  be  just  30  then  you  be
directly  under  the  line.

150

JOHN WINTER  a.d.

1578.
Within the sayd Cape Blanco  wee tooke  one  ship
more, all the men being fled away,  save two. We
brought  this  ship  with  all  the  rest  which  wee  had  taken
before, into our harbour, 5 leagues within the Cape,
where  we  washed  and  trimmed our  ships,  and  went to
sea  againe  the 22  of  Januarie,  leaving  all  the  Spaniards
there  with  their  ships,  saving  one  Cantar,  for  which  our
Generall  gave  them  the  Benedict. In  which  course  wee
ran  continually  to  the  Southwest,  untill  the  26  day,  when
wee found the  North  pole  raysed 15 degrees 15 min.
having the  winde Northeast  or  Eastnortheast,  which  is
common on that coast. For it  doeth blow for the
most  part  continually  from  the  shore :  and  we  kept  the
sayd course,  untill  wee  came  neere  the  island  Bonavista,
within 2  leagues  off  the  shore ; so that  wee haled off
againe  Northwest,  the  space  of  one  houre,  and  then  ran
Southwest againe, till day light the 27 of Januarie:
from  which  time  wee  ran  Southsouthwest,  untill  3  of  the
clocke  in the  afternoone,  at which time  we approched
neere  the island of  Mayo, being high  and hilly  land,  T^he^  hie  ef
saving  that  the  North  part  of  the  island  stretcheth  out  ^^^°'
it  selfe,  a  league  into  the  sea  very  lowe. Wee  came  to
anker  under the  West part of  this island  the  28 day
of  Januarie,  and  stayed  there  untill  the  30  of  the  same.
During which time, our General appointed M. John
Winter  and  M. Thomas Doughtie,  to  goe  over  to  the
East  part  of  the  island  with  70  men,  to  get  some  fresh
victuals. And  as  wee  marched  through  the  island,  about
the  middest  thereof,  we  found  one  house  having  a  garden
belonging to  it, in  which  wee found ripe grapes, also  Ripe  grapes,
ripe  gourds,  and  melons,  in  the  most  dead  time  of  our  Januarie.
Winter. Wee  found  also  a  tree  which  beareth  the  fruite
Cocos,  which  is  bigger  then  a  mans  head, having  within The  Cocos
the  utter  coate,  which  is  about  3  inches  thicke,  a  certaine  ^'''^^•
nut  as bigge  as  two  fists,  and  hath  within  a  white  sub-
stance, cleaving  fast  to  the  shell,  which  is  halfe  an  inche
thick,  very  pleasant  to  taste,  and  within that  a  certaine
hoUownesse  or  voyde  place,  wherein  is  contained  a  pure

151

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

and  pleasant  water  in  taste,  and  as  some  thinke,  mar-
vellous comfortable.  As  we  passed  through  this  island
the  inhabitants  fledde  into  the  mountaines,  so  that  we
could  have  no  talke  with  them.

But  we  understood  by  the  Portugals  which  came  with
us,  that  they  were  but  servants  to  those  of  S.  lago,  to
keepe  their  cattell  and  goates,  which  bee  very  plentifull
in  this  island :  but  we  found  them  so  wilde,  that  we
could  take  none  saving  some  yong  kiddes :  wherefore
wee  returned  backe  againe  to  our  shippes.  The  Por-
tugals had  salted  their  Welles  neere  to  the  sea,  so  that
we  could  not  water.

Then  our Generall commanded every man aboord :
afterward  we  weighed,  and  ranne  over  to Sant  lago  the
same  night,  being  10  leagues  distant  from  thence:  which
[III.  750.]  seemed  to  bee  a  fruitefull  island  and  well peopled. For
wee sawe  3  townes  on  the  shore : two  of  which  shot  at
us,  as we passed along. Our  General  made  a  shot at
one  of  them againe. And sayling  along  the  shore,  at
the  South  part  of  the  island,  wee  tooke  a  Portugal  shippe
laden  with wine and other commodities. This island
hath 15  degrees  in  latitude.
The  isle  of From hence  wee ran Southsouthwest to  the  isle of
^ogo-  Fogo,  so  called,  because  it  casteth  continually  flames  of

fire  and  smoake  out  of the top  thereof,  all the  whole
island being  one  high mountaine. Two leagues West
Brava. from  the  isle  of Fogo, is  another island called Brava,
where  the  sea  is  above 120  fathoms  deepe  neere  to  the
shore,  so  that  we could  not  anker  for  the  depth  of  the
sea, by reason  whereof  we  were  constrained to depart
without  water. Here  the  Generall  discharged the  Por-
tugals,  giving  unto them our Pinnesse  which  we  built
at Mogador : with  wine,  breade,  and fish,  and  so  dis-
missed them  the  first of  Februarie,  taking  one of  their
'Nonnez.  de companie  along  with  him,  called  Nonnez  de  Silva. The
S'llva.  2  of  February  wee  set  off  from  Brava,  and  directed  our

course  Southsoutheast,  running  so  untill  the  9  of  Feb-
ruary,  being within 4 degrees of  the Equinoctial : at

152

JOHN WINTER  ad.

1578.
which time,  wee had the ayre troubled with thunder
and lightning, notwithstanding calme with extreme
heate,  and  divers  times  great  showers  of  raine.

The  17  day  wee  were  right  under  the  line,  which  is
the  most  fervent  place  of  the  burnt  Zone :  where  in  the
middest  of  February  we  susteined  such  heat,  with  often
thunder  and  lightnings,  that  wee  did  sweate  for  the
most  part  continually,  as  though  wee  had  bene  in  a
stove,  or  hote-house.  Here  we  saw  flying  fishes  in  Flftngfishes.
great  abundance,  some  a  foote  long,  some  lesse.  Their
fynnes  wherewith  they  flye  be  as  long  as  their  bodies.
They  be  greatly  pursued  by  the  Dolphine  and  Bonitoes,
whom  as  soone  as  the  flying  fishes  espie,  immediatly  they
mount  out  of  the  sea  in  great  numbers,  and  fly  as  long
as  their  fynnes  continue  moyst :  and  when  they  bee  dry,
they  fall  downe  into  the  sea  againe.  And  here  is  to  bee
noted,  that  after  we  came  within  4  degrees  of  the  Equi-  Continuall
noctial,  untill  we  were  so  much  past  it,  no  day  did  passe  ^^^"f,^^
without  great  store  of  raine.  ,,^,  n,,^,  ^h,

From  hence  wee  directed  our  course  towards  the  Equinoctial.
Southsouthwest  untill  the  5  of  Aprill ;  at  which  time,
wee  had  a  very  sweet  smell  from  the  land.  The  same
day  at  noone  wee  sounded,  and  found  the  sea  to  be
32  fathomes  deepe,  the  ground  being  soft  oaze :  and
shortly  after  we  had  but  28  fathomes,  being  31  degrees  Land  in  31
and  70  min.  beyond  the  Equinoctial,  towarde  the  South  ^^i-^^^^-  3°

fHttl to  tilB

pole : and  wee had sight  of  the  land  about  3 of  the  ^^^^^^  ^f^j^g
clocke in the afternoone the same day. This land is  Equinoctial.
very  lowe  neere  the  sea;  and  hie  mountaines  up  within
the  countrie.

From hence we ran towardes the Southsouthwest,
untill  the  14  of  Aprill;  when  wee  found  a  little  island,
lying neere the maine land of Cape Sant Marie, by  Cape ^ant
which  is  the  enterance  into  the  river  of  Plate,  being  in  ^^^'^^  ^^  Y'^
35  degrees  of  Southerly  latitude. From  this  island  wee  jn^gr  of
ran  7  or  8  leagues  along  the  maine,  where  we  came  to  Plate.
an  anker  under  a  Cape,  which  our  General  called  Cape
Joy. Here  every  ship  tooke  in  fresh  water. Then  we

153

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

departed,  and  ran  about  15  leagues  towards  the  West-
southwest,  where  we  found  a  deepe  bay.  In  the  bottome
of  this  bay  is  a  long  rocke,  not  far  from  the  maine :
which  rocke  so  breaketh  the  force  of  the  sea,  that  shippes
may  ride  commodiously  under  the  same  for  Southerly
windes.  Hither  came  all  our  fleete  to  anker,  the  19  of
Aprill,  and  roade  there  untill  the  20  day  at  night.  Here
wee  killed  some  scales.  And  from  thence  wee  ran  about
20  leagues,  where  we  found  the  water  very  much
troubled  and  fresh,  and  wee  ran  in  so  farre  that  we
had  but  3  fathomes  water.  Here  wee  tooke  in  fresh
water,  and  ranne  over  to  the  Southward,  and  fell  with
the  land  which  lyeth  on  the  South  part  of  the  river  of
Plate,  the  27  day.  This  land  lyeth  Southsouthwest
and  Northnortheast,  and  is  shold  3  or  4  leagues  into
the  sea.  Here  our  fly-boat  lost  our  companie  in  the
night.

From  hence  we  ran  toward  the  Southwest,  having
much  foule  weather  and  contrary  windes,  untill  the  12
of  May:  and  then  wee  sounded  and  had  28  fathomes,
with  blacke  sande  and  small  stones,  and  had  sight  of
the  land  the  same  morning  about  10  of  the  clocke.  This
land  is  47  degrees  in  latitude.  Our  Generall  named
Cape  of  Hope  this  land,  Cape  Hope.  We  came  to  anker  there,  about
in  if-j  degrees.  ^  leagues  from  the  shore  the  same  night.  The  next
morning  our  General,  went  to  the  maine  in  a  boate :  by
meanes  whereof  hee  had  bene  in  great  danger,  if  the
Marigold  had  not  weighed,  and  ran  in  with  the  shore,
and  so  tooke  up  the  boate  and  men :  for  there  arose  such
foule  weather,  with  a  thicke  myst  and  a  Southeast  winde,
that  they  were  not  able  to  recover  their  shippes  againe
which  rode  without :  which  were  forced  to  weigh  and
runne  to  sea.  The  Prize  weighed  the  13  at  night,
and  ran  to  the  Southwards :  the  other  stayed  untill  the
14  in  the  morning  and  then  ran  to  sea,  not  being  able
to  ride.

In the meane  time while the Marigold rode under
the  shore, our Generall with  certaine  of  his men  went

154

JOHN WINTER  ad.

1578.
on  land,  where  they  sawe  two  naked  men,  saving  that
they  had  a  certaine  skinne  wrapt  about  their  shoulders
and  rowles  upon  their  heades.  To  whom  our  General
shewed  a  white  cloth,  in  signe  of  friendship,  who  with  [HI.  75']
certaine  gestures  of  their  bodies  and  handes,  shewed
the  like  to  him  againe,  speaking  likewise  and  making  a
noyse,  which  our  men  could  not  understand,  but  they
would  in  no  case  come  neere  our  men.  Our  Generall
went  the  next  day  to  the  same  place  againe :  but  hee
had  no  sight  of  the  foresaid  men  or  any  other.  How-
beit  hee  found  certaine  foules,  as  Ostriches,  and  other  Ostriches  and
sea  foules,  which  the  sayd  men  had  newly  killed,  and  ^^^P'^^^-
laid  them  on  an  heape  together,  as  though  they  had
done  that  for  our  men  of  purpose.  There  was  also  a
certaine  bagge  with  litle  stones  of  divers  colours,  which
together  with  the  victuals  our  General  brought  aboord,
and  then  weighed,  and  came  to  sea  the  15  of  the  sayd
moneth :  where  all  the  rest  of  the  fleet  mette  with  him,
save  the  Prize,  and  the  fly-boat.  The  16  day  wee  ran
into  a  bay  to  the  Southwardes  of  Cape  Hope,  where
we  roade  al  that  night.  The  next  morning  our  Generall
weighed,  &  ran  without  the  cape  to  the  Northwardes,
&  sent  the  Elizabeth  towards  the  South  to  looke  for
the  Prize :  leaving  the  Marigold  and  the  Canter  to
search  if  in  the  bay  they  could  finde  any  fit  harbor
for  our  ships.  The  same  day  being  the  14  of  May,
our  General  met  with  the  fly-boat  (which  lost  us  the
27  of  April)  and  brought  her  into  saide  bay.  The  18
in  the  morning  we  had  word  from  the  ships,  that  they
had  found  a  safe  harbour  and  we  weighed  and  ran  in,
the  same  day  being  Whitsunday.  The  Elizabeth  weighed
&  put  forth  again  to  sea,  the  20  day,  to  looke  for  the
Prize,  and  not  finding  her  came  in  the  next  day.  In
the  meane  time  our  General  discharged  the  fly-boat,
and  ran  her  upon  the  maine,  where  we  broke  her  up
for  fire-wood.  In  the  meane  while  there  came  about  Th^  descrip-
30  of  the  countrey  people  downe  to  the  sea  side:  and  ^^°^ °f <^^rt^^^^
when  they  were  within 100  pases  of  our  men,  they  set

155

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

themselves  in  array  very  orderly  casting  their  companie
into  the  forme  of  a  ring,  every  man  having  his  bow  and
arrowes :  who  (when  they  had  pight  a  stafFe  on  the
ground,  with  certeine  glasses,  beads,  and  other  trifles)
returned  backe.  Then  the  countrey  people  came  and
tooke  them  and  afterward  approched  neerer  to  our
men,  shewing  themselves  very  pleasant,  insomuch  that
M.  Winter  daunced  with  them.  They  were  exceed-
ingly delighted  with  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and
vialles.  They  be  of  a  meane  stature,  wel  limmed,  and
of  a  duskish,  tawnie,  or  browne  colour.  Some  of  them
having  their  faces  spotted  with  divers  colours,  as  red,
white,  and  blacke.  Their  apparel  is  a  certeine  skinne
(wherein  they  wrap  themselves)  not  reaching  so  low  as
to  cover  their  privy  members,  all  the  rest  of  their  bodies
be  naked,  saving  that  they  weare  certaine  roules  upon
•their  heads,  whose  ends  hang  over  their  shoulders.
Every  one  beareth  his  bow,  being  an  ell  in  length,  and
arrowes  made  of  reeds,  having  heads,  framed  very
strangely  &  cunningly  of  a  flint  stone.  They  be  much
given  to  mirth  and  jollity,  and  are  very  sly,  and  ready
to  steale  any  thing  that  comes  within  their  reach :  for
one  of  them  snatched  our  Generals  cap  from  his  head
(as  he  stouped)  being  of  skarlet  with  a  golden  band :
yet  he  would  suffer  no  man  to  hurt  any  of  them.  They
eate  rawe  flesh,  for  we  found  scales  bones,  the  raw  flesh
whereof  they  had  gnawen  with  their  teeth  like  dogs.
In  this  bay  we  watered,  and  victualed  with  scales :  for
there  is  such  plentie  that  we  slew  above  200  in  the
space  of  one  houre  upon  a  litle  island.

The  3  of  June  we  departed  from  thence,  and  being
at  sea  we  were  put  backe  againe  to  Cape  Hope,  where
we  discharged  our  Canter  and  let  her  float  in  the  sea.
Afterward  wee  ran  to  the  50  degree  of  the  South  pole,
where  wee  met  with  the  winde  Southerly,  and  so  turned
backe  againe  to  the  Northward.  And  as  we  ran  along
the  shore,  we  met  with  our  Prize  the  19  of  June,  which
we  lost  the 13 of  May. The  day  following  we  found

156

JOHN WINTER  ad.

1578.
a  harbour,  into  the which  we  entred  with  all  our  fleet
the  same  day. This  port  is  49  degrees  and  an  halfe  in
latitude,  and  I  suppose  it  to  be  the  same  which  Magellan
named Port  S. Julian: for  we found a  gybbet  on  an The  port  of
hil, whereupon they were executed that did conspire ^^* "'^^^'
against  Magellan,  and  certaine  bones  also  of  their  dead
bodies. The  22 of  this  moneth  our  Generall  going  to
shore  upon  the  maine  with  7  or  8  of  his  men,  met  with
3  of  the  Patagons,  having  bowes  and  arrowes,  who  came
neere  to  our  men  making  them  signes  to  depart. Where-  ^^^  °f°^^
upon  a  gentleman  being  there  present,  and  having  a  bowe  ^I^ p  ^!"^  -^
and  arrowes,  made  a  shot  to  the  end  to  shew  them  the
force  of  our  bowes,  with  the  which  shot  his  string  broke  :
whereupon  the  Patagons presumed to encounter  them,
directing  their  arrowes  first  at  our  M.  Gunner,  who  had
a  caliver  ready  bent  to  shot  at  them but  it  would not
take fire : and  as  he levelled his peece one of  them
shot him through the brest, and out at the backe,
wherewith  he  fell  downe  starke  dead. Also  the  gentle-
man that  shot  the  arrow  was  so  wounded  that  hee  dyed
the 2 day  after and  with the other was buryed in a
litle island  lying  in the said  port. Our men  left  the
slaine man  on shore till night, and  then fetched him
in  a  boat. In  the  meane  time  the  Patagons  had  stript
him  of  all  his  clothes,  and  viewed  his  body  laying  his
clothes under his head, and so left him untouched,
saving  that  they  had  stucke the English arrow in his
left eye. These men be of  no such stature as the
Spaniardes  report, being  but of  the  height of  English
men :  for  I have  seene men in England  taller then I
could  see  any  of  them. But  peradventure  the  Spaniard
did  not  thinke  that  any  English  men  would  have  come
thither  so  soone  to  have  disproved  them  in  this  &  divers  [III.  752.]
others  of  their  notorious  lies :  wherefore  they  presumed
more  boldly  to  abuse  the  world. The  last  of  June  M.  The  execution
Thomas Doughty was brought to his answere, was  of  M.  Thomas
accused, and  convicted of  certaine  articles,  and by  M. ^^^
Drake  condemned. He was beheaded the 2 of  July

157

A.D.

1578.

The  entrance
of  the  str eight
of  Magellan.

Ordinarie
flood  and  ebbe
in  the  streight.

Abundance  of
seafoules  on  S.
Georges  island
in  the  streight
of  Magellan.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578,  whose  body  was  buried  in  the  said  island,  neer
to  them  which  were  slaine.  We  wintered  in  this  port
2  moneths,  during  which  time  we  had  such  weather
as  is  commonly  in  England  in  the  depth  of  winter,  or
rather  colder.  After  we  had  trimmed  up  our  ships,
and  made  provision  of  fewell  and  fresh  water,  we  departed
thence  with  3  ships  the  17  of  August  about  noone.
And  the  20  of  the  said  moneth  we  seazed  Cape  Victorie,
by  the  which  Cape  is  the  way  into  the  South  sea,  called
The  streights  of  Magellan,  the  first  discoverer  thereof.
Wee  found  the  mouth  of  the  streights  to  be  52  degrees
|-  Southward  of  Equinoctial.  In  this  streight,  we  found
the  sea  to  have  no  such  current  as  some  do  imagine,
(following  the  course  of  the  primum  mobile  from  East
to  West)  but  to  eb  and  flow  as  ordinarily  as  upon  other
coasts,  rising  5  fathoms  upright.  The  flood  riseth  out
of  the  East  ocean,  and  stretcheth  it  selfe  so  far  into  the
streights,  that  it  meeteth  the  flood  of  the  South  sea  neere
about  the  midst  of  the  streights,  where  it  bendeth  like
an  elbow,  tending  to  the  West-north-west  into  the
South  Sea,  whereas  the  East  part  from  the  mouth  of
the  streights  to  this  elbow  lyeth  South-west  and  by
West,  or  South-west  to  ^^  degrees  and  \.  30  leagues
within  the  streights  there  be  3  islands.  To  the  greatest
our  general  gave  the  name  of  Elizabeth :  to  the  2
Bartholomew,  because  we  found  it  on  S.  Bartholomews
day :  the  3  he  named  S.  Georges  island.  Here  we
staied  one  day  &  victualled  our  selves  with  a  kinde  of
foule  which  is  plentifuU  in  that  isle,  and  whose  flesh  is
not  farre  unlike  a  fat  goose  here  in  England  :  they  have
no  wings,  but  short  pineons  which  serve  their  turne  in
swimming.  Their  colour  is  somewhat  blacke  mixt  with
white  spots  under  their  belly,  and  about  their  necke.
They  walke  so  upright,  that  a  farre  off^  a  man  would
take  them  to  be  litle  children.  If  a  man  aproch  any
thing  neere  them,  they  run  into  holes  in  the  ground
(which  be  not  very  deepe)  whereof  the  island  is  full.
So  that  to  take  them  we  had staves  with  hookes  fast  to

158

JOHN WINTER  a.d.

1578.

the  ends,  wherewith  some  of  our  men  pulled  them  out

and  others  being  ready  with  cudgels  did knocke them

on  the  head,  for  they  bite  so  cruellie  with  their  crooked

bils,  that none of  us was able to handle them alive.

The land on both parts is very  high :  but especially

toward  the  South  sea,  monstrous  high  hills  and  craggy  High  hib  on

rocks  do  exalt  themselves,  whose  tops  be  all  hoary  with  '^ sides  of

snowe, in the moneths of August, September, and ^ '^

October. Notwithstanding  the  lower  partes  of  the  hilles

are  replenished  and  beautified with  impenetrable  thicke

woods  of  strange  and  unknown  trees,  flourishing  all  the

yere  long. Here  we  made  provision  of  fewel  and  fresh

water,  and  passed  by  Cape  Deseado  into  the  South  sea  ^^P^  Deseado

the  6 of  September. And  running  along  towards the  '^herethejen-

r  00^  t7'£d  into  the

North-west  about 70  leagues,  the winde  turned  directly  5^^^^  j.^^

against us, with great extremitie  of  foule  weather, as

raine,  haile, snow,  and thicke  fogs  which  continued  so

more then 3 weeks, that we  could beare  no  saile,  at

which time  we  were  driven 57  degr.  to  the  south  pole. T'h^')  "^^re

The ic of  September the moone  was there ecclipsed,  ^rwen  toj^-j

oi"^  111  1  -K r  1  •  r  degrees  houth-

&  began  to  be  darkened  presently  arter  the  setting  or  ^^^.^
the  sunne,  about  6  of  the  clocke  at  night,  being  then
Equinoctial  vernal  in  that  countrey.  The  said  ecclipse
happened  the  16  day  in  the  morning  before  one  of  the
clocke  in  England,  which  is  about  sixe  houres  difference,
agreeing  to  one  quarter  of  the  world,  from  the  Meridian
of  England  towards  the  West.  The  last  of  September
being  a  very  foule  night,  and  the  seas  sore  growne,  we
lost  the  Marigold,  the  Generals  shippe  and  the  Elizabeth
running  to  the  East-ward  to  get  the  shore,  whereof  we
had  sight,  the  7  of  October,  falling  into  a  very  dangerous
bay  full  of  rocks :  and  there  we  lost  company  of  M.  They  loose  M.
Drake  the  same  night.  The  next  day  very  hardly  I^^^^^^  '^°^-
escaping  the  danger  of  the  rocks,  we  put  into  the
streights  againe,  where  we  ankered  in  an  open  bay  for
the  space  of  2  dayes,  and  made  great  fiers  on  the  shore,
to  the  end  that  if  M.  Drake  should  come  into  the
streights, hee might  finde  us. After  wee  went  into a

159

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

sound,  where  we  stayed  for  the space  of  3  weekes  and

named  it  The  port  of  Health,  for  the  most  part  of  our

men being very sicke with  long watching, wet, cold,

and  evill diet, did here  (God  be  thanked)  wonderfully

recover their  health in  short space. Here  we  had  very

great  muscles  (some  being  20  inches  long)  very  pleasant

meate,  and  many  of  them  full  of  seed-pearles.

The  voyage  We came out  of  this  harbour  the  first  of  November,

given  over. giving  over  our  voiage  by  M.  Winters  compulsion  (full

sore  against  the  mariners minds)  who  alleged,  he  stood

in dispaire,  as well  to  have winds to serve his turne

for Peru, as  also  of  M.  Drakes  safetie. So  we came

backe  againe  through  the  streights  to  S.  Georges  Island,

where  we  tooke  of  the  foules  before  named,  and  after

departed.

They  returned And thus  wee  passed by Cape Victorie out of  the

^"■^  'fF^l streights  the 1 1 of  November,  directing  our course to

^ofmveJber, ^^^ North-east, till the last of this moneth. What

having  entred time  wee  arrived  at  an  island which  lyeth  at  the  mouth

into  The  south  of  the  river  of  Plate, Upon  this  island  there  is  such  an

sea  the  6  of infinite  number  of  seales,  as  may  seeme  incredible  to  any

ep  em u ^^^ ^^^  \\2L\h  not  bene there,  some  of  them  being  16

[HI-  753-] foote long, not fearing the presence of  men  : for the

most  of our  men  were upon  the  island,  for the  space

of 15 dayes to set  up a  Pinnesse, during  which  time

the seales would come  and slepe  by them,  and rather

resist  our men, then give  place,  unlesse mortall  blowes

forced  them  to  yeelde.

When  our  Pinnesse  was  built,  we  went  to  another
island,  where  wee  did  water,  and  afterward  departed  the
first  of  Januarie  1579,  and  ran  towards  the  North  till  the
20  of  the  said  moneth,  and  then  we  arrived  at  an  island
which  lieth  on  the  coast  of  Brasil,  neere  to  a  towne
Sant  Vincent  called  sant  Vincent  inhabited  by  the  Portugals.  The
m  Brasil  in  ^  ^^  towne  lyeth  24  degrees  Southwarde,  almost  under
the  Tropicke  of  Capricorne.  Here,  by  reason  of  fowle
weather  we  lost  our  Pinnesse,  and  8  men  in  her,  and
never  saw  them since. Here  also  our  ship  was  in  great

160

JOHN WINTER  ad.

1579-
danger,  by  the  meanes  of  a strong current,  which  had  ^  dangerous
almost cast us  upon the  shore  before  wee  were  aware,  '^"■^''^'^^•
insomuch  that  we  were  constrained  to  anker  in  the  open
sea,  and  brake  our  cable  and  lost  an  anker,  and  presently
let fal another anker ; in  weighing  whereof our men
were sore spoiled. For the capstan ranne about  so
violently  with  the  rising  of  the  shippe  in  the sea,  that
it  threwe the  men from  the  barres,  and  brake  out  the
braines of  one man :  one  other had his  legge  broken,
and  divers  others  were  sore  hurt. At  last  wee  gote  up
our anker and set sayle, and ran into a  place called
Tanay, where we roade under  an  island  and tooke  in  Tanay  aplace
wood  and  water.  '''  ^'''''^•

And  while  we  stayed  here,  there  came  3  Portugals
aboord  us  in  a  canoa,  to  knowe  what  wee  would  have,
or  of  what  countrey  we  were.  To  whom  our  Captaine
made  answere :  that  we  were  Englishmen,  and  had
brought  commodities  for  their  countrey,  if  they  would
trafficke  with  us :  whereat  they  greatly  marveiled.  For
they  saide  that  they  never  heard  of  any  English  ship
to  have  bene  in  that  countrey  before ;  and  so  they  went
to  land  againe,  having  one  of  our  men  with  them  to
speake  with  the  Governour  of  the  towne,  and  we  kept
one  of  them  for  a  pledge.  Shortly  after  there  came
another  canoa  aboord  us  with  one  Portugal  and  al  the
rest  naked  men  of  the  countrey :  of  whom  wee  had
two  small  Oxen,  one  yong  Hogge,  with  certaine  hennes :
also  Pome-cytrons,  limons,  oranges,  and  other  fruites  of
the  countrey.  For  the  which  our  Captaine  gave  to  them,
linnen  cloth,  combes,  knives,  and  other  trifles.  In  the
meane  time  the  Governour  of  the  towne  sent  word  that
we  should  have  nothing,  unlesse  we  would  bring  our
shippe  into  the  haven.  Whereunto  our  Captaine  would
in  no  case  consent :  for  all  their  practise  was  to  have
gotten  us  within  their  danger,  nevertheles  we  came
somewhat  neere  the  towne  with  our  ship,  as  though  wee
would  have  gone  in ;  but  we  never  meant  it.

Here  we tooke  in our  man ; and set  the  Portugal
XI  161  L

A.D.

1579-

The  isle  of
S ant  Sebastian
about  the
Tropicke  of
Capricorne.

Cape  Sa7it
Augustine.

The  isle  of
Fernando  de
Loronha.

The  sea  of
Weedes,  neere
the  Tropicke  of

Cancer.

Their  arrivall
at  llfoord-
combe  in
Devonshire.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

pledge  on  land.  After  that  we  went  to  an  Hand  called
the  isle  of  Sant  Sebastian ;  where  wee  tooke  fish.  Here
the  Portugals  had  betrayed  us,  if  a  Brasillian  one  of  their
slaves  had  not  bene.  For  he  stole  from  them,  &  shewed
unto  us  by  signes,  that  the  Portugals  were  comming  with
their  canoas  to  take  us,  as  it  fell  out  in  deed  :  for  the  next
morning  they  shewed  themselves  with  12  or  16  canoas,
some  of  them  having  40  men  in  them.  The  same  night
two  of  our  men  ran  away  with  our  boat  to  the  Portugals.
And  thus  wee  came  away  from  thence  toward  our
owne  countrey  the  17  of  March :  and  had  sight  of
the  Cape  of  sant  Augustine,  lying  in  8  degrees  to  the
Southward  of  the  line.  After  that  we  had  sight  of  an
island  lying  within  3  degrees  of  the  Equinoctial,  called  the
isle  of  Fernando  de  Loronha.  We  crossed  the  Equinoc-
tial the  1 3  of  April,  and  had  sight  of  the  North  starre  the
19  of  the  sayd  moneth.

The  I,  2,  3,  4,  and  5  of  May,  wee  sayled  through  the
sea  of  Weedes,  about  the  space  of  100  leagues,  being  under
the  Tropicke  of  Cancer.  From  whence  wee  kept  our  course
towards  the  North-east,  untill  wee  had  the  pole  raysed  47
degrees. The  22  of  May  we  ranne  Eastnortheast.

The  29  we  sounded  and  had  70  fathomes  with  white
oaze  ;  having  the  North  pole  raysed  51  degrees.  The  30
of  May  wee  had  sight  of  S.  Ives  on  the  North  side
of  Corne-wall,  and  the  2  of  June  1579  we  arrived  at
Ilfoord-combe  in  Devon-shire.

And  thus  after  our  manifold  troubles  and  great  dangers
in  having  passed  The  streights  of  Magellan  into  the  South
Sea  with  our  Generall  M.  Francis  Drake,  and  having  bene
driven  with  him  downe  to  the  Southerly  latitude  of
57  degrees,  and  afterward  passing  backe  by  the  same
streights  againe,  it  pleased  God  to  bring  us  safe  into
our  owne  native  countrey  to  enjoy  the  presence  of  our
deare  friendes  and  kinsefolkes,  to  whom  bee  prayse,
honour,  and  glory,  for  ever  and  ever. Amen.

Edward  Cliffe,
Mariner.
162

INSTRUCTIONS TO EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.

Instructions given by  the right honourable the  [HI.  754]
Lordes  of  the  Counsell,  to  M.  Edward  Fenton
Esquire,  for the order to be observed in the
voyage recommended to him for the East
Indies  and  Cathay. Aprill  9. 1582.

Irst  you  shall  enter  as  Captaine  Generall,
into  the  charge  and  government  of  these
shippes,  viz.  the  Beare  Gallion,  the
Edward  Bonaventure,  the  Barke  Francis,
and  the  small  Frigate  or  Pinnesse.

2  Item  you  shall  appoint  for  the  fur-
nishing of  the  vessels  in  the  whole,  to  the
number  of  200  able  persons,  accompting  in  that  number
the  Gentlemen  and  their  men,  the  Ministers,  Chirurgians,
Factors,  &c.  which  sayd  number  is  no  way  to  be  ex-
ceeded, whereof  as  many  as  may  be,  to  be  sea-men  ;  and
shal  distribute  them  into  every  vessel,  as  by  advise  here
before  your  going  shal  be  thought  meete :  Provided  that
you  shall  not  receive  under  your  charge  and  governement,
any  disordered  or  mutinous  person,  but  that  upon  know-
ledge had,  you  shall  remoove  him  before  your  departure
hence,  or  by  the  way  as  soone  as  you  can  conveniently
avoide  him,  and  receive  better  in  his  place.

3  Item,  for  the  more  and  better  circumspect  execution,
and  determination  in  any  waightie  causes  incident  in  this
voyage,  we  will  that  you  shall  take  unto  you  for  assistants,
Captaine  Hawkins,  captain  Ward,  M.  Nicholas  Parker,
M.  Maddox,  M.  Walker,  M.  Evans,  Randolph  Shaw,
Matthew  Talboys,  with  whom  you  shall  consult  and  con-
ferre  in  all  causes,  matters,  and  actions  of  importance,  not
provided  for  in  these  instructions  touching  this  service
now  in  hand.  And  in  all  such  matters,  so  handled,
argued,  and  debated,  wee  thinke  that  convenient  alwayes
to  be  executed,  which  you  shall  thinke  meetest  with  the
assent  also  of  any  4  of  them,  the  matter  having  bene
debated,  and  so assented  unto,  in the  presence of  your

163

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

said  assistants.  And  in  case  that  such  conference  and
debating  the  opinions  of  the  aforesaid  Assistants  be  found
in  effect  any  way  to  differ,  then  it  is  thought  meete,
that  all  such  matters  so  argued  upon,  shall  rest  to  bee  put
in  execution  in  such  sort  as  you  shal  thinke  most  meetest,
having  the  assent  of  any  4  of  them,  as  aforesaid.  And  if
any  of  these  Assistants  shal  die,  then  the  number  of
the  one  halfe  of  the  Survivours  to  joyne  with  the  General
captaine  for  consent  in  all  things  aforesaid.

4  Of  all  which  your  assemblies  and  consultations,  for
the  matters  aforesaid,  we  thinke  it  very  convenient,  that  a
particular  and  true  note  should  be  kept,  for  which  cause
we  appoint  master  Maddox  minister,  and  if  he  should
decease,  then  the  Generall  with  halfe  the  Assistants
Survivours,  to  name  one  to  keepe  a  booke  of  all  such
matters  as  shall  bee  brought  in  consultation,  and  of
all  such  reasons  as  shall  be  propounded  by  any  person,
either  on  the  one  side,  or  on  the  other :  what  was  resolved
on,  and  by  whose  consent,  who  dissented  there  from,  and
for  what  causes.  In  which  book  he  shall  in  the  beginning
of  the  note  of  every  such  assembly,  set  downe  particularly
the  day,  and  the  place,  if  it  may  be,  the  names  of  the
persons  then  present,  and  upon  what  occasion  the  sayd
consultation  was  appointed  or  holden,  and  shall  have
to  every  acte,  the  handes  of  the  General,  and  of  all,  or
so  many  of  the  said  Assistants  as  will  subscribe :  which
booke  the  said  master  Maddox,  or  the  other  upon  his
decease  appointed  in  his  place  shall  keepe  secrete,  and
in  good  order  to  bee  exhibited  unto  us,  at  your  returne
home.

5  Item,  if  there  happen  any  person  or  persons  im-
ployed  in  this  service,  of  what  calling  or  condition,  hee  or
they  shall  be,  should  conspire,  or  attempt  privatly  or
publikely,  any  treason,  mutinie,  or  other  discord,  either
touching  the  taking  away  of  your  owne  life,  or  any  other
of  authoritie  under  you,  whereby  her  Majesties  service
in  this  voiage  might  bee  overthrowne  or  impugned  :  we
will therefore,  that upon  just  proofe  made  of  any  such

164

INSTRUCTIONS TO EDWARD FENTON  a.d.

1582.
treason,  mutinie,  or  any  other  discord  attempted  as  afore-
said, the  same  shalbe  punished  by  you,  or  your  Lieue-
tenant,  according  to  the  qualitie  and  enormitie  of  the
fact.  Provided  alwayes,  and  it  shall  not  bee  lawfull  neither
for  you,  nor  for  your  Lieuetenant  to  proceede  to  the
punishment  of  any  person  by  losse  of  life  or  lim,  unlesse
the  partie  shall  be  judged  to  have  deserved  it  by
the  rest  of  your  Assistants,  as  is  before  expressed,  or
at  the  least  by  foure  of  them.  And  that  which  shall
concerne  life  to  be  by  the  verdict  of  twelve  men  of  the
company  employed  in  this  voyage,  to  be  impanelled  for
that  purpose,  with  the  observation  of  the  forme  of  our
countrey  lawes  in  that  behalfe,  as  neere  as  you  may.
Provided,  if  it  shall  not  appeare,  that  the  forbearing  of  the
execution  by  death,  shall  minister  cause  to  increase  the
facte  of  the  offender,  then  it  were  better  to  convince  the
partie  of  his  facte,  by  the  othes  of  1 2  indifferent  persons,
and  to  commit  him  to  hard  imprisonment,  untill  the
returne.  And  aswell  of  the  factes  committed  by  any,
as  also  of  the  proofe  thereof,  and  of  the  opinions  of  you,
and  your  Assistants,  and  the  maner  of  the  punishment,  the
Register  shall  make  a  particular  and  true  note,  in  the
booke  of  your  consultation,  as  is  before  appointed.

6  Item,  you  shall  not  remoove  Captaine  William  Haw-  [m.  755,]
kins  your  lieutenant,  master  Captaine  Luke  Ward  your
viceadmiral,  or  captaine  of  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  nor
captaine  Carlile  from  his  charge  by  land,  whom  we  will  M.  Carlik
not  to  refuse  any  such  service  as  shall  be  appointed  to  him  ^P°"  occasion
by  the  Generall  and  the  councill,  nor  any  captaine  of  other
vessels from their charges,  but upon  just cause duely
prooved,  and  by  consent  of  your  Assistants,  or  of  foure
of  them  at  the  least.

7  Item,  for  the  succession  of  the  Generall,  governour
of  this  whole  voyage,  if  it  should  please  God  to  take  him
away,  it  is  thought  meete  that  there  should  bee  the  names
of  such  Gentlemen  secretly  set  downe  to  succeede  in  his
place  one  after  the  other,  which  are  severally  written
in  parchment,  included  in  bals  of  waxe,  sealed  with  her

165

zvas  not  in  this
voyage.

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1582.

Majesties  signet,  put  into  two  cofFers  locked  with  three
severall  locks,  whereof  one  key  is  to  bee  in  the  custodie  of
Captaine  Luke  Ward,  the  other  of  William  Hawkins,  the
third  of  master  Maddox  the  Minister,  and  the  same  two
coffers  to  bee  put  into  two  severall  shippes,  videlicet,
the  one  coffer  in  the  Gallion,  in  the  custodie  of  the
Generall,  the  other  in  the  Edward  Bonaventure  in  the
custodie  of  the  Viceadmirall :  the  same  two  coffers  upon
any  such  casualtie  of  the  Generals  death  by  consent  of  the
Assistants  which  shall  overlive,  to  bee  opened,  and  the
partie  therein  named  to  succeede  in  the  place,  who  shall
thereupon  take  upon  him  the  charge  in  the  said  voiage
according  to  these  instructions,  in  such  sort  as  if  they  had
bene  specially  directed  unto  him,  and  the  rest  of  the
companie  so  to  take  and  repute  him  in  every  respect,
as  they  will  answer  to  the  contrary.  But  if  it  shall  so
fall  out,  (as  we  hope  it  will)  that  there  shall  bee  no  such
neede,  but  that  the  Generall  doe  continue  still,  then  shall
you  at  your  returne  deliver  backe  the  sayd  coffers
and  bals  of  waxe  sealed  in  such  sort  as  they  be,  without
opening  them,  unlesse  it  be  in  the  case  aforesayd.

8  You  shall  make  a  just  and  true  inventorie  in  every
ship  and  vessell  appointed  for  this  voyage  of  all  the
tackle,  munition,  and  furniture  belonging  to  them  at  their
setting  foorth  hence,  and  of  all  the  provisions  whatsoever,
and  one  copie  thereof  under  your  hand,  and  under  the
hands  of  your  Viceadmirall  and  lieutenant,  to  be  delivered

Thegovermur  to  the  Earle  of  Leicester,  and  the  other  to  the  governour
of  this  com-  q£  ^^  companie  for  them  before  your  departure  hence,
and  the  like  to  bee  done  at  your  returne  home  of  all
things  then  remaining  in  the  sayd  ships  and  vessels,  with
a  true  certificate  how  and  by  what  meanes  any  parcell  ot
the  same  shall  have  bene  spent  or  lost.

9  Item,  you  shall  use  all  diligence  possible  to  depart
The'^  are  in- from  Southampton  with  your  sayd  ships  and  vessels  before

joynedtogoby  ^.j^^  j^^j.  ^f  ^|^jg  present  moneth  of  Aprill,  and  so  goe  on
Buena  Ester-  7°^^  course  by  Cape  de  buena  Esperanza,  not  passing  by
anza.  the  streight  of  Magellan  either  going  or  returning,  except

166

INSTRUCTIONS TO EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.

upon  great  occasion  incident,  that  shall  bee  thought  other-
wise good  to  you,  by  the  advise  and  consent  of  your  sayd
Assistants,  or  foure  of  them  at  the  least.

10  Item,  you  shall  not  passe  to  the  Northeastward  of
the  40  degree  of  latitude  at  the  most,  but  shall  take  your
right  course  to  the  lies  of  the  Malucos  for  the  better
discovery  of  the  Northwest  passage,  if  without  hinderance
of  your  trade,  dz  within  the  same  degree  you  can  get
any  knowledge  touching  that  passage,  whereof  you  shall
do  wel  to  be  inquisitive,  as  occasion  in  this  sort  may
serve.

1 1  Item,  you  shall  have  speciall  regard  after  your
departure  from  the  coast  of  England,  so  to  order  your
course,  as  that  your  ships  and  vessels  lose  not  one
another,  but  keepe  companie  together  both  outward  and
homeward.  And  lest  if  they  happen  to  sever  the  one  from
the  other  by  tempest  or  otherwise,  it  shall  not  bee  amisse,
that  you  appoint  to  the  Captaines  and  Masters  certaine
places,  wherein  you  will  stay  certaine  dayes.  And  every
ship  passing  aforehand,  and  not  knowing  what  is  become
of  the  other  ships,  to  leave  upon  every  Promontorie  or
Cape  a  token  to  stand  in  sight,  with  a  writing  lapped  in
leade  to  declare  the  day  of  their  passage.  And  if  any
wilfulnesse  or  negligence  in  this  behalfe  shall  appeare  in
any  person  or  persons  that  shall  have  charge  of  any  of
the  ships  or  vessels  aforesayd,  or  if  they  or  any  of  them
shall  doe  otherwise  then  to  them  appertaineth,  you
shall  punish  such  offenders  sharpely  to  the  example  of
others.

12  Item,  we  do  straightly  enjoine  you,  and  con-
sequently all  the  rest  imployed  in  this  voyage  in  any
wise,  and  as  you  and  they  will  answere  the  contrary  at
your  comming  home  by  the  lawes  of  this  realme,  that
neither  going,  tarrying  abroad,  nor  returning,  you  doe
spoyle  or  take  any  thing  from  any  of  the  Queenes
Majesties  friends  or  allies,  or  any  Christians,  without
paying  justly  for  the  same,  nor  that  you  use  any  maner  of
violence  or  force  against  any  such,  except  in  your  owne

167

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

defence,  if  you  shall  be  set  upon  or  otherwise  be  forced
for  your  owne  safegard  to  do  it.

13  Item,  wee  will  that  you  deale  altogether  in  this
voyage  like  good  and  honest  merchants,  traffiquing  and
exchanging  ware  for  ware,  with  all  courtesie  to  the
nations  you  shall  deale  with,  as  well  Ethniks  as  others,
and  for  that  cause  you  shall  instruct  all  those  that  shall
goe  with  you,  that  whensoever  you  or  any  of  you  shall
happen  to  come  in  any  place  to  conference  with  the
people  of  those  parts,  that  in  all  your  doings  and  theirs,

[III.  756.]  you  and  they  so  behave  your  selves  towards  the  sayd
people,  as  may  rather  procure  their  friendship  and  good
liking  toward  you  by  courtesie,  then  to  move  them  to
offence  or  misliking,  and  especially  you  shall  have  great
care  of  the  performance  of  your  word  and  promise  to
them.

14  Item  wee  will,  that  by  the  advise  of  your  Assis-
tants, in  places  where  you  and  they  shall  thinke  most  fit,
you  settle  if  you  can  a  beginning  of  a  further  trade  to  bee

Strange  people  had  hereafter :  and  from  such  places  doe  bring  over  with
to  be  brought  ^^^  some  fewe  men  and  women  if  you  may,  and  doe
also  leave  some  one  or  two,  or  more,  as  to  you  and  your
Assistants  shall  seeme  convenient  of  our  nation  with  them
for  pledges,  and  to  learne  the  tongue  and  secrets  of  the
countreys,  having  diligent  care  that  in  delivering  and
taking  of  hostages,  you  deliver  not  personages  of  more
value  then  you  receive,  but  rather  deliver  meane  persons
under  colour  of  men  of  value,  as  the  Infidels  do  for  the
most  part  use.  Provided  that  you  stay  not  longer  to
make  continuance  of  further  trade,  then  shall  be  expedient
for  good  exchange  of  the  wares  presently  carried  with
you.

1 5  Item  you  shall  have  care,  and  give  generall  warning,
that  no  person  of  what  calling  soever  hee  be,  shall  take
up,  or  keepe  to  himselfe  or  his  private  use,  any  stone,
pearle,  golde,  silver,  or  other  matter  of  commoditie  to  be
had  or  found  in  places  where  you  shall  come,  but  hee  the
said person,  so  seased  of  such  stone,  pearle,  golde,  silver,

168

INSTRUCTIONS TO EDWARD FENTON  a.d.

1582.

or  other  matter  of  commodltie,  shall  with  all  speede,  or  so
soone  as  he  can,  detect  the  same,  and  make  deliverie
thereof  to  your  selfe,  or  you  Viceadmirall,  or  Lieuetenant,
and  the  Factor  appointed  for  this  voyage,  upon  paine  of
forfeiture  of  all  the  recompense  he  is  to  have  for  his
service  in  this  voyage  by  share  or  otherwise :  and  further
to  receive  such  punishment,  as  to  you  &  your  Assis-
tants, or  the  more  part  of  them  shal  seeme  good,  and
otherwise  to  be  punished  here  at  his  returne,  if  ac-
cording to  the  qualitie  of  his  offence  it  shalbe  thought
need  full.

16  Item,  if  the  Captaines,  Marchants  or  any  other,
shall  have  any  apparell,  jewels,  chaines,  armour,  or  any
other  thing  whatsoever,  which  may  bee  desired  in  coun-
treys  where  they  shall  traffique,  that  it  shall  not  bee
lawfull  for  them  or  any  of  them  to  traffique,  or  sell
any  thing  thereof  for  their  private  accompt :  but  the  same
shall  bee  prized  by  the  most  part  of  those  that  shall  bee  in
commission  in  the  places  where  the  same  may  be  so
required,  rated  at  such  value,  as  it  may  bee  reasonably
worth  in  England,  and  then  solde  to  the  profite  of  the
whole  voyage,  and  to  goe  as  in  adventure  for  those  to
whom  it  doeth  appertaine.

17  Item  you  your  selfe  shall  in  the  Gallion  keepe  one
booke,  and  the  Factors  appointed  for  the  same  shippe
another,  wherein  shall  bee  a  just  accompt  kept,  aswell  of
the  marchandise  carried  hence,  as  of  those  you  shall  bring
home.  And  aswell  at  your  setting  foorth,  as  from  time
to  time,  as  exchange  shalbe  made,  you  shall  set  your  hand
to  their  booke,  and  they  theirs  to  yours,  and  the  like
order  shal  you  see  that  the  Captaine  and  the  Factors
in  the  Edward  Bonaventure  shall  use  in  their  ship,
and  the  other  Captaines  and  Factors  in  each  other
vessell.

1 8  Item  you  shall  give  straight  order  to  restraine,  that
none  shall  make  any  charts  or  descriptions  of  the  sayd
voyage,  but  such  as  shall  bee  deputed  by  you  the  Generall,
which  sayd  charts  and  descriptions,  wee  thinke  meete  that

169

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

you  the  Generall  shall  take  into  your  hands  at  your
returne  to  this  our  coast  of  England,  leaving  with  them
no  copie,  and  to  present  them  unto  us  at  your  returne  :
the  like  to  be  done  if  they  finde  any  charts  or  maps  in
those  countreys.

19  Item  you  shall  at  your  returne  so  direct  your
course,  that  all  the  ships  under  your  government  may
come  home  together,  and  arrive  here  in  the  river  of
Thames,  if  it  may  conveniently  be.  And  wheresoever  in
this  Realme  you,  or  any  of  the  shippes  shall  arrive,  you
shall  give  speciall  and  straight  order,  that  no  person  of
what  condition  soever  he  be,  shall  unlade,  or  bring  on
land,  or  forth  of  the  vessels  in  which  he  came,  any  part  or
parcel  of  marchandize,  or  matter  of  commoditie  brought
in  any  of  the  sayd  vessels,  untill  we  being  certified  of
your  or  their  arrivall,  shall  give  further  order  and
direction  therein,  under  the  penalties  and  forfeitures
expressed  in  the  fifteenth  article,  against  such  as  shall
retaine  any  thing  to  their  private  use,  as  in  the  sayd
article  is  further  expressed.

20  Item,  to  the  intent  that  all  such  persons  as  shall  go
with  you  in  this  voyage,  may  better  understand  what  they
ought  to  do,  and  what  to  avoid,  we  thinke  it  requisite,
that  aswell  out  of  these,  as  otherwise  with  the  advise  of
your  Assistants  and  Masters  of  the  ships,  you  shall  cause
some  convenient  order  to  bee  set  downe  in  writing  for
their  better  government  both  at  sea  and  land,  if  they  shall
happen  to  goe  on  lande  any  where  :  and  the  same  to  bee
openly  read  and  made  knowen  unto  them,  to  the  intent
they  may  understand  how  to  behave  themselves,  and
upon  any  fault  committed,  not  to  have  any  excuse  to
pretend  ignorance,  and  so  to  avoid  such  punishment  as  it
is  requisite  to  have  ministred  for  the  keeping  of  them  in
good  order.

21  And  to  the  end  God  may  blesse  this  voyage  with
happie  and  prosperous  successe,  you  shall  have  an
especiall  care  to  see  that  reverence  and  respect  bee  had
to the Ministers appointed to accompanie  you in this

170

INSTRUCTIONS TO EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.

voyage,  as  appertaineth  to  their  place  and  calling,  and
to  see  such  good  order  as  by  them  shall  be  set  downe  [III.  757.]
for  reformation  of  life  and  maners,  duely  obeyed  and
perfourmed,  by  causing  the  transgressours  and  con-
temners of  the  same  to  be  severely  punished,  and  the
Ministers  to  remoove  sometime  from  one  vessell  to
another,

22  Provided  alwayes,  that  the  whole  direction  and
government  of  the  people,  life  and  limme  excepted,  as
in  the  fift  article,  and  the  course  of  this  voyage,  shall  bee
wholly  at  your  disposition,  except  in  the  course  by  the
Streight  of  Magellan,  either  outward  or  homeward,  and
in  your  passage  by  the  Northward  of  40  degrees  in  lati-
tude, wherein  you  shall  follow  directions  set  downe  in
the  nine  and  ten  articles,  as  also  in  the  displacing  of  the
Captaine  of  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  and  other  captaines,
wherin  you  shall  foUowe  the  order  appointed  in  the  sixt
article :  Provided  that  wee  meane  not  by  this  article  to
derogate  any  thing  from  the  authoritie  of  your  assistants
established  in  the  third  article,  or  in  any  other  article  of
these  instructions.

23  Item,  in  all  occasions  and  enterprises  that  may  fall

out  to  bee  upon  the  lande,  wee  will  that  Captaine  Carlile  ^-  Carlik
shall  have  the  ^enerall  and  chiefe  charge  thereof.  upon  occasion

.  WC'S  flOt  Ifl  tfltS

24  And  finally  wee  require  you  and  every  of  you  to
have  a  due  regard  to  the  observation  and  accomplishment
of  these  our  instructions,  and  of  all  such  other  things,
as  may  any  kind  of  way  tend  to  the  furtherance  and
benefite  of  this  service  committed  to  your  charge.

voyage.

[The  voyage
171

A.D.
1582.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  voyage  intended  towards  China,  wherein  M.
Edward  Fenton  was  appointed  Generall :  Writ-
ten by  M.  Luke  Ward  his  Viceadmiral,  and
Captaine  of  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  begun
Anno  Dom.  1582.

He  second  of  April  I  departed  with  the
Edward  Bonaventure  from  Blackwall,  and
the  19  of  the  same  arrived  in  Nettle
roade  at  Hampton,  where  I  found  riding
the  Gallion  Leicester :  and  so  remaining
there  till  the  first  of  May,  wee  set  saile
thence  in  the  forenoone,  being  of  us  in
the  whole  fleete  foure  saile.

1  The  Gallion  Leicester  of  400  tunnes  Admirall,
whereof  was  Generall  Captaine  Edward  Fenton,  and
William  Hawkins  the  yonger  lieutenant  Generall  in
her,  and  Christopher  Hall,  Master.

2  The  Edward  Bonaventure  of  300  tunnes  Vice-
admirall,  whereof  was  Captaine  Luke  Ward,  and  Thomas
Perrie  Master.

3  The  Francis  of  fortie  tunnes,  whereof  was  Captaine
John  Drake,  and  William  Markam  Master.

4  The  Elizabeth  of  fiftie  tunnes,  whereof  was  Captaine
Thomas  Skevington  and  Ralph  Crane  Master.

We  spent  by  meanes  partly  of  businesse,  and  partly  of
contrary  windes,  the  moneth  of  May  upon  the  coast,  and
then  leaving  the  land  wee  put  off  to  sea,  and  proceeded
on  our  voyage  intended  by  the  grace  of  God  for  China :
untill  the  moneth  of  August  following,  nothing  fell  out
much  worthy  the  knowledge  of  the  worlde,  which  is
not  common  to  all  navigants,  but  about  the  beginning  of
August  aforesayd,  being  somewhat  neere  the  coast  of
Guinie,  upon  the  shooting  off  a  peece  and  the  putting
out  of  a  flag  in  the  Admiral,  I  went  on  boord,  and  M.
Walker, M. Shaw, M. Gefl'reis,  our Master & Pilot

172

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.

with  me,  where  the  generall  counsel  was  assembled  to
consider  of  two  points,  viz.

The  first,  whether  it  were  necessarie  to  water  presently
or  not,  which  was  thought  very  needful  of  all  men,  and
so  concluded.

The  second,  where  the  best  and  aptest  place  was  to
water  in,  which  was  thought  of  the  greater  number  to  be
at  Sierra  leona  on  the  coast  of  Guinie,  which  was  also
concluded,  and  by  the  Master  and  Pilots  agreed  to  goe
hence  Southeast,  which  determined,  wee  returned  aboord.

The  3  day  wee  went  Southeast  and  Eastsoutheast,  till
sixe  a  clocke  at  night  that  wee  sawe  the  lande  of  Guinie,
which  bare  Northeast  of  us  about  12  leagues  off,  which
scene,  wee  sounded,  and  had  no  ground :  then  went  I
and  our  Master  and  Pilot  aboord  the  Admirall,  and  after
many  debatements  concluded  to  run  in  Northeast  by
East,  and  at  eleven  at  night  wee  came  aboord  againe,
and  went  all  night  Northeast  by  East.

The  4  at  eight  a  clocke  in  the  forenoone  wee  were
within  2  leagues  of  the  lande,  which  bare  off  us  North-
east, which  rose  like  a  hill  full  of  woods,  and  on  each
side  low  land :  wee  being  perswaded  by  our  pilots  that  it
was  the  entrance  into  Sierra  leona,  went  in  Northeast  untill
we  were  within  an  halfe  league  of  the  shoar,  and  had
brought  the  South  point  Southeast  by  east  off  us.  At
eleven  a  clocke  finding  it  a  bay  and  not  Sierra  leona,  wee
brought  our  tacks  aboord,  and  stoode  along  West  by
North  and  West  larboord  tacked.

In  this  time  our  Admirals  pinnesse  rowed  in,  and  went
on  land  upon  the  South  side  of  the  bay,  and  the  Eliza-  [III.  758.]
beths  boate  with  her.  They  found  houses  of  boughes,
and  in  one  of  the  houses  the  tongue  of  a  beast,  and  a
bullocks  tongue  fresh  killed ;  also  a  lake  with  plentie
of  fresh  water,  and  fresh-water-fish  in  it  had  by  the  sea
side :  they  found  drie  pomegranates,  and  pease  like  nuts,
with  other  unknowen  fruites  under  the  trees.  The  Eliza-
beth ranne  in,  and  brought  the  South  point  South  by  West
of  her,  and  ankered  within  Faulcon  shot  of  the  shore  in

^73

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

seven  fathom  oaze,  where  they  tooke  fish  with  hookes,
while  hee  stayed  for  the  boates.

The  4  all  the  afternoone  wee  ran  along  the  coast
(which  lyeth  Northwest  and  by  North,  and  Southeast  by
South)  West,  and  within  a  point  one  way  or  the  other,
seeing  the  lande  under  our  lee  three  or  foure  leagues
off,  and  all  night  likewise.

The  9  at  three  a  clock  in  the  morning  our  Admiral
shot  off  a  peece,  and  at  foure  wee  weyed  and  went  hence
They  arrive  Northeast.  At  five  in  the  morning  wee  saw  the  land
tn  the  river  of  ^long,  and  the  Island  which  wee  saw  the  night  before,
and  divers  other  Islands  about  it,  &  so  ran  in  Northeast
untill  we  had  brought  our  selves  thwart  of  the  river,  and
then  ran  in  East  about  sixe  at  night,  being  a  league
within  the  river.  Our  Admirall  shot  off  a  peece,  and
there  wee  ankered  in  eight  fathom  sand.  Being  at  anker,
I  manned  our  boate  and  would  have  gone  aboord  the
Admirall,  but  could  not,  the  flood  was  bent  so  strong,
and  she  rode  halfe  a  mile  beneath  us  in  the  tyde,  but
we  had  no  tyde.

The  10  in  the  morning  at  five  a  clocke  I  sent  our
skiffe  with  our  pilot  in  her  to  find  a  roade,  and  a  watring
place :  in  the  meane  time  at  sixe  a  clocke  we  set  saile  with
our  ship,  and  being  calme  wee  towed  with  our  boat  untill
ten,  and  then  ankered  a  mile  short  of  the  watering  place.
After  dinner  I  went  on  land  with  my  skiffe  to  finde
timber  to  fish  our  maste,  and  searching  along  the  shoare
we  found  a  good  watring  place :  and  further  seeking  in
the  wood,  which  all  the  countrey  is  full  of,  and  of  divers
Trees  hung  sorts,  wee  found  Limmon  trees  full  of  fruits :  also  trees
with  oysters,  growing  by  the  water  side  with  the  stalkes  hung  full  of
oysters  and  great  periwinkles,  and  crabs  amongst  them  :
wee  found  drie  pomegranates  with  many  other  fruits  un-
knowen  to  us.  In  the  meane  time  our  Admirall  and  the
Edward  with  the  barkes,  having  a  gale  at  West,  set  saile,
and  ran  up  and  ankered  in  the  rode  before  the  accus-
tomed watering  place.

The  22 day  certaine  Portugals  which  had  bene  with

174

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.
us  before,  came  down  and  brought  some  other  Portugals
and  Negros  with  them  in  a  shippe-boate,  wherein  they
brought  us  80  mewes  of  rice,  500  and  odde  weight  of
Elephants  teeth,  and  a  Negro  boy,  which  boy  they  gave
the  Generall,  and  the  rice  and  teeth  for  the  Elizabeth,  Their  trafique
which  wee  solde  them,  with  all  her  tackle  and  sailes,  ^^"  ^^^^  '^^
having  neede  of  the  rice,  because  our  meale  which  wee  "^  ^^^  ^'
brought  out  of  England  was  decayed  and  naught,  whereof
wee  had  into  the  Edward  30  bushels,  which  is  a  mewe
and  a  halfe :  the  Francis  had  5  bushels,  and  the  Gallion
had  the  rest.  And  wee  had  200  weight  of  Elephants
teeth,  and  the  Gallion  300  and  a  halfe,  and  sixe  pound.
During  this  time  we  sent  our  skifFe  with  the  Admiralls
pinnesse  up  the  river  to  meete  with  a  Gundall,  which
the  Portugals  had  sent  for  fresh  victuals  for  us :  who
not  finding  her,  returned  at  night:  All  this  day  I  with
M.  Walker  remained  aboord  with  the  Admirall,  and  after
their  dinner  and  supper  wee  ended  our  businesse,  and
returned  aboord,  having  had  many  good  speaches  with
the  Portugals.

The  26  day  being  Sunday,  Captaine  Hawkins,  M.
Maddox,  M.  Hall,  M.  Bannister,  Captaine  Drake,  M.
Evans,  M.  Hoode,  and  others  came  aboord  and  heard
the  Sermon,  and  dined  with  me :  after  dinner  we  went
on  shoare  to  the  lower  point  where  we  followed  the
footing  of  an  Elephant,  but  saw  him  not,  and  so  spent
the  time  to  and  fro  till  supper  time,  and  then  came
aboord,  and  supped  together,  which  done,  each  man
departed  to  his  abode.

This night I was  very sicke, (and so  were  all  they  Skknesse  by
that  were  on  shoare with  mee,)  with  eating  of  a  fruite  eating  some
in  the  countrey,  which wee  found on  trees,  like  nuts :  -^^^^^  ^"
whereof  some  did  eate  foure,  some  five,  some  sixe,  and
more, but  wee vomited and scoured upon it without
reason.

The  27  day  in  the  afternoone  the  olde  Greeke
Francisco  came  aboord  to  me,  with  request  that  hee
might  have the  Francis boate  to  goe  up for  his owne

175

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

boate  which  was  not  come  downe,  with  whom  I  talked
of  this  Countrey  and  Countrey-people,  untill  five  of  the
clocke  at  night  that  the  flood  was  come,  and  then  I
went  aboorde  to  the  Admirall,  and  got  his  consent,
and  sent  themselves  in  her :  viz.  Ferdinando  the  Portu-
gall  Master,  and  his  Negro :  In  the  meane  time  I  sent
foure  of  my  men  to  watch  in  the  Elizabeth  all  night.
The  28  day  in  the  morning  at  foure  a  clocke  I  sent
my  skifFe  with  the  Admirals  pinnesse  down  to  the
west  point  to  fish,  who  came  aboorde  againe  at  one  in
the  afternoone,  and  brought  as  much  fish  as  all  our
companies  could  eate.

During  the  time  that  our  boates  were  a  fishing,  came
downe  the  river  a  canoa  and  the  Portugals  former  boate,
The  Portugals  with  hennes,  orenges,  plantans,  which  they  presented  the
presents.  Generall  and  mee  with :  and  also  the  rest  of  the  rice  due

to  us  for  the  payment  of  the  Elizabeth. For  the  parti-
[III,  759.] tions  whereof  I  went  aboord  the  Admirall,  where  I  dined.
M.  Evans After  dinner  M.  Evans  began  to  barter  away  certaine  of
one  of  our t^g  ships  commodities  with  the  Negros,  without  acquaint-
marchants. -^^^  ^^  Generall  or  any  other  untill  hee  had  done,  where-
of grewe more wordes then profite,  as by the bookes
of  marchandise  appeareth. Which  done  I  came  aboord,
and had two of the Portugals to supper with mee.
About two of  the clocke in the morning we had a
Ternado,  and  much  raine.
The'^  search  The 29  about  4  a clocke  in the morning, I in my

the  countrey.  gj^^ffg^  ^j-j^  Captaine  Parker  in  his  pinnesse,  went  downe
to  the  West  point,  and  there  wee  landed  with  1 1  men
in  all  well  furnished,  and  searched  the  woods,  plaines
and  plashes,  after  an  Elephant,  finding  the  haunt,  footing,
and  soyle  of  many  newly  done,  yet  wee  saw  none  of
them.  Wee  saw  hogs,  goates  or  fawnes,  and  divers
sorts  of  fowles  very  wilde :  and  having  travailed  about
2  leagues,  about  noone  wee  returned  to  the  point,  where
wee  landed,  and  met  our  boates  which  had  beene  at  sea,
and  taken  plentie  of  good  fish :  there  wee  refreshed
our selves with such victuals as wee had, and came

176

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.
aboord  our  severall ships,  where  I  found  the  Portugals
and Negros, who had dined,  and  after supped  aboord
with  mee.

The  2  of  September  we  set  saile  at  sixe  of  the  clock
in  the  morning,  &  went  out  West  betweene  7  and  10
fathom,  with  a  pretie  gale  at  East  til  8,  then  it  waxed
calme,  wee  being  shot  out  of  the  harbour  a  league  and
a  halfe.  It  continued  calme  this  day  till  one  in  the
afternoone,  and  then  it  blewe  up  at  Westsouthwcst  a
good  gale,  so  wee  stood  off  Northnorthwest,  and  North-
west till  5  in  the  afternoone,  then  wee  ankered  in
12  fathom,  being  6  leagues  off  the  point  West  by
North.

The  3  day  about  eight  a  clocke  in  the  forenoone,  the  Thy  retume
Generall  came  aboord  to  mee,  complaining  that  his  maine  ^°  ^[^J'ra  leona
crosse-trees were broken, and therefore determined to  ^^^^^^'
goe  into  Sierra  leona  againe  when  the  winde  blewe : at
12 at noone  wee  set  saile, and went  in  Eastsoutheast,
and Southeast,  and Southsoutheast,  being  carried  to  the
Northward with the flood. And at 7 at night wee
ankered  in  eight  fathom  three  leagues  off  the  entrance,
Westnorthwest.

The  12  day  came  downe  the  river  a  boate  with  three  Trafique  zoith
other  Portugals,  with  whom  the  General  bargained,  to  let 3  other  Portu-
them  have  3  barrels  of  salt  for  5  barrels  of  rice,  and  after ^  ^'^^^-^ "
that  rate  to  exchange  for  40  barrels,  which  hee  acquainted  Henriques  a
mee  with :  afterwards  I  dined  among  the  Portugals  with  dweller  here
him : after dinner  I  went  on shoare to the oven,  and  ^^°'^^  ^°
to  the  carpenters. After  I  had  bene  on  shoare  and  scene  '^^Manjig^
the  worke  there,  I  returned  aboord,  &  there  supped  with  Fernandas
mee  the  Generall,  M. Maddox,  Captaine  Hawkins,  and  Captaim,
seven  Portugals :  after  supper  each  man  returned  to  his Z  P^dro  Faz
place.  ^^  °^'

The  13  in  the  afternoone,  the  Portugals  came  againe
aboord  me,  and  brake  their  fast  with  me :  after  I  sent
by  them  up  the  river  in  my  skiffe  12  barrels  of  salt,
and  gave  them  a  bottell  of  wine  for  one  of  the  savage
Queenes.

XI  177  M

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

They  enter  up The  1 5  after  dinner,  the  Master,  M.  Walker,  and  I,

to  search  the accompanied  with 1 2  other  travelled  over  a  great  deale

cour.  tey.  ^^  ground to  finde some  cattell,  but  found none : and

comming  home  thorow  the  Oyster  bay,  I  found  of  my

company  and  of  the  Admirals  together  rosting  of  oysters :

and  going  from  them,  Thomas  Russell  one  of  my  com-

panie  sawe  a  strange  fish  named  Utelif,  which  had  fought

with  a  crocodile,  and  being  hurt  came  neere  the  shoare,

where  hee  waded  in,  and  by  the  taile  drew  him  a  lande,

J  sword-fish and  there  slewe  him,  and  sent  the  Generall  the  hinder

L'  77 J

halfe  of  him  :  the  head  part  I  kept,  in  whose  nose  is
a  bone  of  two  foot  long  like  a  sword  with  three  and
twentie  pricks  of  a  side,  sharpe  and  strange :  The  bodie
wee  did  eate,  and  it  was  like  a  Sharke.

The  30  and  last  day  of  September  the  Francis  cooke
came aboord about seven a clocke in the forenoone
from fishing with my net,  and brought among other
A  strange  fish  f^g^^  a  Sea-calfe  (as  wee  called  it)  with  haire  and  lympits,
^^  ^^'  and barnacles  upon him,  being  seven  foote  long,  foure

foote  nine  inches  about :  which  to  see  I  sent  for  the
Generall,  and  such  as  pleased  to  come  see  it  out  of
the  Admirall,  who  came  and  brought  with  him  M.
Maddox,  Captaine  Hawkins,  Captaine  Parker,  and  most
part  of  his  companie,  who  having  viewed  the  beast,
which  was  ougly  being  alive,  it  being  flayed,  opened,
and  dressed,  prooved  an  excellent,  faire,  and  good  meate,
broyled,  rosted,  sodde  and  baked,  and  sufficed  all  our
companies  for  that  day.

The  first  day  of  October  in  the  morning,  wee  tooke
in  to  make  up  our  full  complement  of  rice  twentie
barrels  for  the  twelve  barrels  of  salt,  delivered  the
Portugall  Lewis  Henriques  before.

The  2  day  about  sixe  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  wee
set  saile  having  little  winde :  the  Captaine  with  the
Master,  and  other  of  their  companie  of  the  Portugals
came  aboord  me,  complaining  that  the  carsey  by  them
received  for  the  foure  Negros  of  the  Generall,  was  not
sufficient for their payment, whereupon I gave them

178

EDWARD FENTON  ad

1582.
scarlet  caps,  and  other  things  to  their  content,  who
finding  themselves  well  pleased,  departed  away  in  the
Gundall,  and  we  having  little  winde,  got  downe  thwart
of  the  fishing  bay,  and  there  came  to  anker  about  nine
a  clocke  the  same  forenoone.

The  third  day  about  two  a  clocke  in  the  morning
wee  set  saile,  and  went  hence  Southwest  by  West  till
two  in  the  afternoone  then  being  little  wind :  at  five  wee
ankered  sixe  leagues  Eastsoutheast  of  the  Southermost  [III.  760.]
part  of  the  land  in  fifteene  fathom,  and  there  wee  rode
till  eight  a  clocke  at  night,  and  set  saile  with  a  stiiFe
gale  at  Northeast,  which  sometime  blewe,  and  sometime
was  little  winde,  and  so  continued  all  night.

The  first  day  of  November  in  the  forenoone,  wee
tooke  in  our  maine  saile  to  mend  it :  in  the  meane
time,  the  Admirall  came  up  by  us,  and  desiring  mee
with  my  Master,  and  M.  Blackcoller  to  come  aboord
to  him  about  certaine  conference,  hee  sent  his  boate  for
us,  where  by  him  was  propounded,  whether  it  were
best  for  us  to  stand  on  with  the  coast  of  Brasil  as  wee
did,  or  else  to  stand  about  starboord  tacked  to  the  East-
wards :  whereupon  divers  of  their  charts  and  reckonings
were  shewed  :  by  some  it  appeared,  wee  were  a  hundred
and  fifteene  leagues,  by  some  a  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,
by  some  a  hundred  and  fortie  leagues,  and  some  a  great
deale  further  short  of  Brasil,  next  hand  Northeast  of  us :
but  all  agreed  to  bee  within  twentie  minutes  of  the
line,  some  to  the  North,  some  to  the  South  of  the
line.

After  many  debatements,  it  was  agreed  by  most  con-
sent to  stand  on  for  the  coast  of  Brasil,  except  the  wind
changed,  and  there  to  doe,  as  weather  should  compell
us.  In  this  consultation,  wee  had  speaches  of  courses,
and  places  of  meeting,  if  by  misfortune  wee  should  bee
separated,  wherein  was  no  full  order  concluded,  but  that
we  should  speake  every  night  with  the  Admirall,  if  wee
conveniently  might,  and  so  to  appoint  our  course  from
time  to  time,  if  wee  lost  companie,  to  stay  fifteene  dayes

179

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

in  the  river  of  Plate,  and  from  thence  to  go  for  the
streights,  and  there  to  ride,  and  water,  and  trimme  our
ships.

The  12  in  the  afternoone  M.  Maddox,  M.  Hall,
M.  Bannister,  and  others  came  aboord  to  visite  M.
Walker.  After  a  time  of  abode  with  him,  they
returned  to  the  gallion  all  againe,  except  M.  Maddox
who  remained  with  M.  Walker  here  aboord.

This  night  M.  Maddox  and  I,  behelde  many  constel-
lations in  the  firmament,  and  set  downe  certaine  newe
starres  raised  to  the  Southwards.  All  day  and  night
wee  went  South,  and  South  by  East  among.

The  seventeenth day  in  the  afternoone  wee  shot off
three peeces of  ordinance in honour of  our Queenes
Majestie, This  day  after  dinner  came  master  Maddox,
and Captaine  Drake  with  others  to  take  their  leave  of
Master  Walker, as  I with  all my  company had done
before, supposing him past hope of recoverie. At
I  ^  degrees  of foure of  the clocke, finding our selves in nineteene
Southerly degrees to the Southwards of  the  line,  and  cleare  of
laittude.  ^j^^  shoalds  called  by  us  Powles,  wee  went  hence  South-

southwest  all  night  following.

The  18  day  being  Sunday,  after  dinner  the  Generall,
M.  Maddox,  Captaine  Parker,  and  many  other  came
aboord,  and  visited  M.  Walker :  which  done,  they
dranke,  and  departed  aboord  againe.  All  this  day  and
night,  we  went  our  course  Southwest  by  South,  with  a
franke  gale.

The  19  day  about  noone,  the  Sun  was  in  our  Zenith,
being  declined  to  the  Southwards  21  degrees,  and  33
minutes,  where  wee  found  the  aire  fresh  and  temperate,
as  in  England  in  June,  when  a  fresh  gale  of  winde
Cold  evenings,  doeth  blow  in  the  heate  of  the  day,  but  the  evening,
the  night,  and  the  morning  are  more  fresh  and  colder
here,  then  it  is  in  England  either  in  June  or  Julie.

The  first  of  December,  about  sixe  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning,  wee  sawe  lande  on  the  coast  of  Brasil,  in
the height of  28 degrees or there  abouts,  which bare

180

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.
Northwest,  and  was  eight  leagues  from  us  very  high
land.  Wee  stood  in  with  it,  being  much  winde,  and
comming  neere,  found  divers  Islands  :  and  seeing  the  Divers  Hands.
Francis  would  not  come  roome  nor  run  ahead  us,  wee
stood  in  with  the  shore,  and  sounded  in  30  fathom  oaze
three  leagues  off  the  lande,  bearing  from  the  West-
northwest  to  the  Northnorthwest  of  us,  and  so  stoode
still  till  it  shoalded  orderly  into  seven  fathom,  within
a  mile  of  a  headland  :  then  perceiving  a  breach  over
our  bowe,  and  no  hope  of  a  good  harbour,  in  that
place,  wee  bare  up  roome,  and  our  Admirall  after  us,
whom  wee  haled  :  then  hee  tolde  us  hee  would  seeke
harbour  to  leewards,  requiring  me  to  go  ahead.  Then
seeing  the  barke  was  asterne  I  hoised  out  my  skiffe,
and  set  her  maste  and  saile,  taking  her  ging,  and  Tobias
one  of  my  Masters  mates  with  mee,  and  ranne  before
the  shippe,  sounding  in  15  fathom  faire  sand,  leaving
a  ledge  of  rockes  asea-boord  of  us  :  so  the  ships  and
the  barke  looffed  up  under  a  headland,  and  ankered  in
eight  fathom,  halfe  a  mile  off  the  lande,  having  brought
the  headland  which  lyeth  in  27  (iegrees  50  minutes  The  latitude
Southsoutheast  off  them,  and  the  North  land  Northeast  °f^7  '^^Srees
off  them.  50  minutes.

I  stoode  on  with  the  skiffe,  hoping  to  finde  a  better
harbour  to  leeward  three  leagues,  but  it  prooved  not
so  :  wherefore  I  returned,  and  in  my  way  aboord  I
met  with  a  rocke  in  the  sea,  where  we  landed,  and
killed  good  store  of  fowle,  and  after  I  went  aboord
the  Admirall,  where  I  presented  him  with  fowle,  and
returned  aboord  to  supper.

In  this  time  our  boates  had  beene  aland,  and  found
water,  ballaste,  and  two  decayed  houses,  as  they  told
me,  and  our  men  aboord  hooked  fresh-fish.  This
night  wee  rode  quietly.

The  second,  being  Sunday, our  masters moared  our  [HI.  761-]
ships further into the bay. We brought the South  ^  ^^f-
point  Southeast  off  us,  and  the  North  land  Northeast :
and  so  rid.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

After dinner captaine Parker, with my boat, and

company, went a land, and there placed pipes, and

Wels  made  by  made three wels. In the meane time, I accompanied

our  men.  ^-^^  M.  Hawkins, M.  Maddox,  M.  Cotton,  and  divers

of  mine owne people, landed farther within the bay,

and  found  two  rivers  of  fresh  water,  and  a  good  fishing

place. Presently  I  sent  aboord  for  my  net,  with  which

Jn  exceeding  at  One  draught  we  drew  600  great  mullets,  and  5  great

g^eat  draught ^asses  ;  the  like  draught  was  never  scene  with  so  small

^•^^  ■  a net : with which we went aboord, giving to the

admirall 240, to the Francis 80, and the rest our

company  spent,  and  gave  almighty  God  thanks  for  his

great  goodnesse.

The  woods  set All  this while  was captaine Parker  and others gone

onjire  by  our -j^^^ ^.j^g land, and fired the woods : which burned

men.  ,

extremely.

The  third  day  in  the  morning  our  carpenter  calked
without  boord,  and  the  master  and  others  tooke  up  all
the  merchandize  in  the  stearne  sheets  to  the  keele,  and
there  put  downe  a  boats  loding  of  stone  :  and  seeing
the  merchandize  well  conditioned,  stowed  the  same
againe.  In  the  meane  time,  my  selfe,  and  others  in
our  boats,  scraped  off  the  wormes,  and  washed  the
rudder,  and  part  of  one  side  of  our  ship.

After  dinner,  the  master,  pilot,  and  I,  went  ashore,
and  observed  the  Sunne  at  noone,  which  being  past,
with  our  net  we  drew  plenty  of  divers  sorts  of  fishes,
and  went  from  that  bay  to  the  watering  place  :  from
thence,  aboord  the  generall,  which  had  taken  physicke,
and  gave  them  and  the  Francis  fish  for  their  companies,
and  so  went  aboord,  where  our  company  had  romaged
aforemast  :  so  that  this  afternoone  we  tooke  in  two
boats  more  lading  of  stones  afore  mast.
J  saile  seene  The  sixt  day  in  the  morning,  before  sixe  of  the
and  taken.  clocke,  we  saw  a  saile  which  went  towards  the  South-
wards, the  admirall  not  having  knowledge  thereof.  I
went  aboord,  and  certified  him  ;  who  appointed  me
to goe and bring her  in,  and to take captaine Parker

EDWARD FENTON  a.d.

1582.

and some of  the gallions men into the Francis, and

the  admirals  skiffe  with  us  :  so  we  gave  her  chase,  and

tooke her sixe leagues to the leewards of  the place

we rode in. Then not being able to fetch  the  rode

againe,  we ankered in the sea. I intending to come

away  in the pinnesse,  and leave the Francis,  and the

prize together,  being ready  to depart, the winde blew

at South a stout gale,  and raine ; so that  about sixe

of the clocke, we ankered in the rode, where our

ships  rid.

After  we  had  taken  them,  and  that  captaine  Parker
and  I  were  aboord,  we  had  much  talke  with  them
before  they  came  to  the  ships ;  and  being  ankered
there,  the  chiefe  men  were  caried  abord  the  general,
which  was  a  gentleman,  named  Don  Francisco  de  Torre
Vedra,  nephew  to  the  governour  of  the  river  of  Plate,
named  Don  John  de  Torre  Vedra.

We found an Englishman, named Richard Carter  ^ii:hard
borne in Limehouse, who had bene out of  England  ^^'^^J' '^^
foure and twenty yeres, and hath bene nere twelve  ^^^^^  i„  ^^^
yeres  dwelling  in  the  river  of  Plate,  at  a  towne  named  prize.
Ascension, three hundred leagues up in the river,
whither they  were now determined to go & inhabit,
having two women, and two yong children, seven
friers, the rest boyes, and sailers, to the number of
one  and  twenty  persons.  ^^'?  number

The  olde  frier  was  had  in  great  reverence  among  the  ^-^.^ '  ^"  ^^^
rest  : insomuch that they  called him the Holy  father.
He  was  abiding in no place  ; but  as  visitour  he  went
visiting  from  monastery  to  monastery.

The  substance  of  all  the  speeches  was,  that  the
Spanish  fleet  was  before  the  streights  of  Magellan,  as
they  thought ;  for  they  were  departed  sixe  weeks  past
from  the  river  of  Jenero,  where  they  had  beene  seven
moneths  to  refresh  and  Winter,  and  that  these  were
not  of  that  company,  but  came  out  of  Spaine  the  26
of  May  1582  in  a  barke  of  fourescore  tun,  and
fourescore persons, of  purpose  for the river of  Plate.

183

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

The  friers  being  eighteene  in  number,  could  not
agree,  and  their  barke  was  a  ground  at  Spirito  santo,
like  to  be  lost  :  therefore  the  old  frier  bought  this
small  barke  of  46  tun,  at  a  port  named  Spirito  santo,
in  Brasill ;  and  so  divided  themselves :  and  comming
from  thence,  lost  company  at  sea  :  but  they  thought
they  were  before  at  the  river  of  Plate.  After  his
speeches,  I  went  and  appointed  (by  the  generals  order)
men  to  remaine  aboord  the  prize  with  captaine  Parker,
and  brought  one  of  the  Portugals  sailes  away  with
me,  and  came  aboord,  where  I  found  that  our  men
had  filled  water  all  day.

The  7  day  in  the  morning  the  generall  sent  for  me  ;
where  he  shewed  me  and  M.  Maddox  certeine  articles
which  the  friers  and  mariners  Spaniards  were  examined
of;  which  tended  altogether  to  the  knowledge  of  the
Spanish  fleets  intent,  and  of  the  meanes  whereby  we
might  be  discovered  by  the  way  of  the  river  of  Plate
by  land  to  Peru.  In  this  time  came  the  rest  :  after
whose  comming  it  was  debated,  whether  it  were  best  to
take  the  boat  &  people  with  us  or  not.  Which  was
not  determined  ;  but  referred  till  further  examination.
[ITI.  762.]  Then  was  it  determined  to  passe  by  the  streights,
notwithstanding  the  Spaniards  were  there,  but  not  to  set
up  forge,  nor  to  build  pinnesse,  but  water,  and  so  thorow.
The  eight  day  afore  noone  M.  Walker  and  I  went
aboord  the  admirall  to  dinner,  where  was  determined  to
discharge  the  Spanish  barke,  named  Our  lady  of  pity,  and  all
the  men,  except  Richard  Carter  the  English  man,  and  John
Pinto  a  Portugall,  which  dwelled  at  the  river  of  Plate.
The  Spanish  After  dinner,  the  generall  appointed  mee  and  captaine
barke  dts-  Hawkins  to  see  them  all  set  aboord  their  ship,  and  to
receive  from  them  certeine  necessaries,  which  willingly  they
imparted  with  us,  and  to  leave  them  satisfied.  Which
done, I returned  aboord.

The  9.  day,  being  Sunday,  in  the  morning,  I  sent  M.
Shaw  and  M.  Geffries  aboord  the  admirall,  to  peruse  the
Spaniards  letters  :  wherein they  found  the  estate  of  the

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.
fleet  which  was  in  the  str eights  of  Magellan,  as  by  the
note  thereof  appeareth.

About  ten  of  the  clocke  the  generall,  M.  Maddox,
captaine  Hawkins,  and  captaine  Parker,  came  aboord  of
me.  The  generall  began  to  reproove  my  quarter  master
for  grudging  of  victuall  for  the  Francis.  Which  was
answered :  and  he  well  satisfied.  Then  sent  I  for  the
olde  frier  and  Don  Francisco ;  who  all  dined  with  me :
and  after  dinner,  the  Spaniards  having  received  the  canoa,
which  was  suncke,  aland,  and  stones  to  ballast  them,
which  my  boat  caried  them,  and  all  other  things  to  their
liking  and  content,  they  departed  from  me.  The  generall
also  departed,  and  his  company,  who  being  gone,  I
divided  the  sugar  and  ginger  among  my  people,  which  Spanish
the  Spaniards  gave  us :  and  after  spent  the  day  in  presents.
ordinary  businesse.

The  10  day  in  the  morning,  our  skifFe  went  a  fishing,
whereof  we  eat  as  much  to  supper  as  served  the  com-
pany: the  rest  we  salted  for  store,  and  to  prove  if  they
would take salt or  not.

The  1 1  day,  betimes  in  the  morning,  our  skiffe  went
againe  to  fish,  and  tooke  great  plentie.  About  seven
of  the  clocke  I  went  aland,  taking  with  me  the  master,
and  others  of  our  best  men,  to  the  number  of  22  per-
sons, &  travelled  to  the  place  where  our  people  before  had  Things  found
found  many  great  jars  of  earth,  and  decayed  habitations  "^  *^'^  island.
of  the  Indians,  and  trees,  being  dead  and  withered,  of
sweet  wood.  From  that  place  we  saw  over  the  tops  of
a  narrow  wood,  a  faire  plaine,  which  at  the  request
of  the  master  and  the  rest,  I  went  with  them  to  see.  We
passed  thorow  a  thicke  and  perillous  wood,  before  we
came  to  the  supposed  plaine  :  and  when  we  came  to  it,
we  found  the  lowest  part  thereof  higher  then  any  of  our
heads,  and  so  mossy  under  foot,  that  we  slipped  to
the  knees  many  steps,  which  so  wearied  us,  that  for  my
part,  I  was  very  sicke,  and  so  hasted  aboord,  leaving
the  master  with  1 5  men,  which  cut  a  tree  of  sweet  wood,
and brought many  pieces  thereof  aboord.

185

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

About  3  afternoone,  M.  Walker  and  many  of  our
men  being  ashore,  the  winde  came  faire,  and  we  layed
out  a  warpe  to  the  Northeast,  and  began  to  winde  ahead.
After  we  layed  out  another  warpe  with  a  bend,  and  wound
to  the  plat,  and  so  rid  by  it  with  one  anker  all  night.
The'^  leave  the  The  12  day  about  five  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  set
harbour  in -2.1  gg^jjg g^^^  g^g  ^g  j.gj^  Q^^  betwixt  the  ledge  of  rocks  and

decrees  dTid  .../•

CO.  min.  "^^  maine,  in  eight  fadom  water,  as  we  were  catting  our

anker,  the  catt-rope,  stopper,  and  all  brake ;  so  that  we
were  glad  to  let  slip  all  the  cable,  and  cast  off  our  boat
and  skiffe  to  wey  the  same.  After  we  had  stood  out
a  good  way,  the  admirall  was  under  saile:  then  cast  we
about  and  went  roorae  with  the  admirall  which  weaved
us,  who  sent  in  his  pinnesse  and  the  Francis  to  helpe  out
our  boats ;  so  by  the  helpe  of  the  admirals  pinnesse,  with
her  saile,  we  had  our  boat  the  sooner,  and  about  12  a
clocke  at  noone  had  taken  in  the  anker,  cable,  our  long  boat,
skiffe,  &  all,  and  put  out  all  our  sailes  bearing  after  the
admirall,  which  went  hence  South  by  east.  About  sixe  a
clocke  at  night,  being  thicke  weather,  we  lost  sight  of
the  land,  being  foure  leagues  off  or  thereabout.  All  night
it  was  but  little  winde :  yet  went  we  our  course  South
by  west.

The  13  day  about  seven  afore  noon,  the  wind  blew
at  Southsoutheast,  &  was  very  foggy;  with  which  gale
we  stood  in  larboord  tacked  West,  till  ten  a  clocke  the
same  forenoone.  Then  had  we  sight  of  the  land  ahead,
all  along  (for  it  waxed  cleere  weather)  it  sheweth  a  farre
off  like  white  cliffes,  but  is  all  sandy  hilles,  and  bayes
along  the  sea  side.  At  one  a  clocke  after  noone  we  were
in  16  fadome  water,  and  within  halfe  a  league  of  the
shore,  where  we  saw  severall  fires  made  by  the  Indians
to  give  warning  to  the  other  people  within  the  land,  as
we  supposed.  Then  we  cast  about,  and  stood  off  South-
east by  east  till  midnight,  that  the  winde  came  large  :
then  went  we  our  course  South  by  west  till  next  morning.

The  14  day  we  went  our  course  South  by  west,
having  sight  of  the  land  at  sixe  a  clocke  in  the  morning

186

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1582.

about  seven  leagues  off:  and  so  went  till  sixe  at  night,
that  wee  saw  land  againe  seven  leagues  off  West,  and
the  winde  shifted  to  the  South.  Then  we  cast  about,  and
stood  off  Eastsoutheast  at  seven  at  night  for  a  while :
then  came  up  the  winde  at  Northwest,  and  blew  agood.

The  15  day  in  the  morning,  the  admirall  was  ahead,
as  farre  as  we  could  almost  see  her,  by  whose  default  I
know  not;  and  being  little  winde  we  could  not  get  to
her  till  foure  of  the  clocke  after  noone :  then  we  hayled  [III.  763.]
her,  and  stood  in  betweene  the  Southsouthwest  and  the
Southwest  till  sixe  at  night,  that  the  winde  was  vari-
able, and  foule  weather.  Then  we  cast  about,  and
sounded  in  23  fadome  soft  oaze,  and  stood  off  a  while
Northeast ;  and  presently  cast  about  againe,  and  went
South  by  East  larboord  tacked,  and  Southsoutheast,
among  all  night:  finding  at  foure  in  the  morning  15
fadome  sand.

The  20  day,  about  ten  a  clocke  afore  noone,  we  went
aboord  the  admirall;  viz.  M.  Walker,  the  master,  the
pilot,  the  two  merchants,  and  my  selfe,  being  directed  so
to  doe  by  the  Generall.  Upon  our  comming  the  generall
was  going  to  dinner,  where  wee  also  dined  with  him.
Having  dined,  the  generall  called  us  his  assistants  into
his  cabbin,  and  there  delivered  to  us  in  writing  two
demands,  to  be  by  us  considered  upon,  and  he  to  have
our  opinions  therein.

The  effects  of  the  demands  were  these.

1  Whether  it  was  best  for  us  to  adventure  our  selves
to  passe  the  streights  of  Magellan  or  not ;  considering
the  force  of  the  enemy,  which  we  knew  to  be  there
before  us :  and  also  that  our  determination  was  there  to
set  up  our  pinnesse,  make  yron  hoops,  carene  our  ships,
and  do  all  our  necessary  businesses  for  the  full  acomplish-
ment  of  our  voyage.

2  If  that  course  were  not  thought  best,  which  way
were  meetest  for  us  to  take.

To  the  first  we  were  of  opinion,  that  it  were  good  to
heare  the  opinions  of  captaine  Hawkins,  captaine  Drake,

187

A.D.
1582.

Richard
Carter  the
English  man
taken  in  the
prize,  carted
along  with
them.

They  returne
in  the  latitude
ofZZ-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  the  two  pilots,  which  had  passed  the  streights  and
knew  the  harbours,  and  likest  places  to  be  fortified,  and
inhabited  or  not,  who  were  called,  &  the  three  masters
with  them.  Their  opinions  were  as  divers  as  their  names  ;
&  as  much  differed,  as  before  this  time  they  were  wont
usually  to  doe  :  onely  they  all  agreed  in  this  one  point,  that
it  was  impossible  for  us  to  passe  the  streights  without
seeing,  and  incountring  with  the  ships,  although  the  for-
tification of  the  land  did  not  annoy  us :  which  being  long
and  thorowly  debated,  and  their  opinions  with  the  three
masters  demanded,  which  accorded  not  scant  any  one
with  other,  they  were  dismissed.

Then  the  generall  received  the  opinions  of  us  his  as-
sistants, beginning  with  the  yoongest  in  authority  first :
which  when  he  had  heard  them  all  over,  and  being  set
downe  in  writing  under  our  hands,  he  tooke  deliberation
till  after  supper  to  give  his  determination.

When  we  had  all  supped,  then  he  sent  for  us  downe
into  his  cabbin,  and  delivered  in  writing  his  determina-
tion, (which  was)  to  victuall,  and  furnish  our  selves  on
this  coast,  before  he  proceeded  any  further ;  and  named
two  places,  The  river  of  Plate,  or  S.  Vincent,  to  be
chosen.

For  the  better  deciphering  of  the  river  of  Plate,  &
the  commodities  thereof,  was  called  before  us,  Richard
Carter,  which  doth  dwell  there ;  who  could  not  assure
us  of  any  wine,  except  we  could  stay  foure  moneths  for
it :  but  other  victuals  plenty.  The  river  is  shoale  and
dangerous,  the  road  seven  leagues  from  any  towne,  or
place  of  commodity :  which  considered  with  the  trechery
that  might  from  thence  be  used,  into  the  streights  by
sea,  and  into  Peru  by  land,  we  all  concluded  to  go  to
S.  Vincent,  which  place  is  inhabited  by  Portugals,  and
where  in  honest  sort  we  might  conveniently  have  all  our
businesse  done.

With  this  resolution  we  tooke  our  leaves  about  eight
a  clocke  at  night,  &  being  come  aboord,  presently  bare
up,  and  went  roome,  having  all  the  day  before  beat  up  the

EDWARD FENTOA^  ad.

1583.
winde  larboord-tacked  Eastsoutheast till at  night : after
it  was  a  little  winde  all  night  we  went  North  next  hand.

The  2 1  day,  after  service,  I  declared  unto  my  company
the  intent  of  our  returne  to  the  port  of  S.  Vincent,  where-
with they  were  well  satisfied,  being  before  doubtfull  that
we  should  not  proceed,  but  returne  without  performance
of  our  voyage.  It  continued  calme  all  day  till  six  at  night,
then  we  went  Northwest  by  west  till  eight  at  night,
and  then  we  cast  about,  and  stood  off  Eastsoutheast,  and
East  by  south  all  night  with  a  good  gale.

The 22  day in the  morning  we missed the  Francis,  John  Drake  in
which  by  all  presumption  went  roome  in  the  beginning  of  ^^  ^^'^^ncts

the night.  _  ...  river  of  Plate,

The  25  day,  being  Christmasse  day,  it  was  little  winde  wherein  his
in  the  forenoon e  till  ten  a  clocke ;  then  it  blew  a  fresh  ship  was  cast
gale,  with  which wee  went  our course  Northnortheast.  ^"^^h  "^^  ^^^
In the  afternoone  it was  lesse  wind: yet  went  we  our  Zldfldlived
course  North  by  east,  and  Northnortheast,  and  North,  and 1 5  moneths
North by west, till  midnight. Then  being  in shoaled  among  the
water,  wee  cast  about,  and  lay  Southsoutheast,  and  South-  Savages.
east  by  south,  an  houre ;  and  seeing  our  admirall  came
not  after  us,  we  cast  about  backe  againe,  and  presently
met  him  :  so  we  went  both  together  next  hand  Southsouth-
east all  the  rest  of  the  night. This  afternoone  we  saw  the  Infnite  num-
skim  of  fishes  so  thicke  in  the  sea,  that  it  seemed  a  water  '^"'  "ffi^^-
troubled  with  trampling  of  horses ;  which  was  thicke,  and
slimy :  for  we  had  taken  up  some  of  it.

The 17 day of  January,  about seven a  clocke,  the
master,  M.  Blaccoller,  and  I  went  in  our  skiffe,  and  rowed,
and sounded  round  about  an  ile,  and  found 16  fadoms
within a stones cast hard aboord the  shore,  and  faire
ground  :  after  we  landed,  and  found  nothing  but  woods
and  bushes,  and  strange  wormes :  we  saw  a  faulcon,  and  [HI.  764-]
one  other  small  bird,  and  therefore  named  it  Faulcon  ile :  A  small  Island
it  is  a  mile  about,  with  a  rocke  on  the  East  side,  which  "^hichour men
lieth  close  to  it,  and  it  is  in  sight  without  danger. After  ^^^^_
we  came  aboord,  and  dined ;  at  two  a  clocke  we  set  saile,
with  winde  Southeast,  and  ran  in  Northeast  a  while,  till  the

189

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

winde  scanted  : then  we  went  in  Northnortheast,  till  we

were  in  seven  fadome  and  a  halfe  of  water,  within  a  league
of  shore  :  then  we  cast  about,  and  stood  off  Southsoutheast
all  night,  till  sixe  a  clocke  the  next  morning.

The  1 8  day  about  three  a  clocke,  afore  day,  we  saw  our
admirall  againe,  and  kept  her  company  till  day.

Citron  isle.  The 1 9  day,  being  within  a  league  of  the  Citron  ile,

about  eight  a  clocke  afore  noone,  we  went  aboord  the
general,  viz.  M.  Walker,  the  master,  the  pilot,  and  my
selfe,  rejoycing  of  our  good  meeting,  who  tolde  me  of
their  evill  road,  where  they  lost  an  anker,  a  cable,  and  a
haulser,  and  how  the  day  before,  their  pinnesse  was  ashore
on  the  same  iland,  and  found  fowle,  and  water  there,
whither  now  they  had  sent  their  boat  and  pinnesse  for
more  water,  where  I  know  they  had  small  store.

I  also  taking  captaine  Parker,  the  master,  and  M.
Wilks  with  me,  went  ashore,  and  travelled  to  the  top
of  the  ile,  which  is  wooded,  and  high  grasse,  but  evill
water,  and  little  on  it,  but  yoong  fowle  plenty,  and
dangerous  comming  to  them.  By  this  time  (I  having  set
the  isles,  and  headlands  about  in  sight  with  a  compasse)
came  a  small  gale  at  Southsoutheast;  then  our  admirall
shot  off  a  piece  for  the  boats,  and  hence  I  went,  and  dined
aboord  with  him,  and  came  after  aboord,  and  went  in
Northnortheast  and  Northeast  till  morning :  at  which  time
wee were  within a  league of  the isle, entring before

Their  arrival/  §, Vincent,  but knew  not how  much  water  was upon

at  S.  Vincent. ^^^ ^^^^.^ ^^ ^^ ^^^

The  20  day  in  the  morning,  being  calme,  the  generals
pinnesse  came  in  to  the  shore,  with  intent  to  sound
Three  canons  ^^  entrance,  but  seeing  three  canoas,  with  ech  at  the  least
°{ITT^^^  twenty  men,  whereof  the  greater  part  were  naked  Indians,
which  rowed,  the  rest  Portugals,  they  returned  aboord
again.  The  canoas  came  with  a  flag  of  truce  within,
calling  of  our  ship,  and  we  shewed  them  the  like,  asking
what  we  were,  and  of  what  nation  :  at  length  one  Portugall
went  aboord  the  admirall,  by  whom  the  generall  sent
a letter to the governour,  craving  a  pilot  to bring  in

190

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1583.
our  ship  of  courtesie,  and  to  have  traffique.  About
noone,  having  the  winde  at  South,  we  bare  in  Northwest,
and  so  to  the  Northeast,  as  the  chanell  trended  :  but
comming  into  seven  fadome  water,  we  ankered,  untill  our
boats  had  sounded  the  barre.  During  which  time,  I
went  aboord  the  admirall,  to  conferre  with  him  about  our
proceedings.

After  I  had  stayed  a  while  aboord  the  admirall,  the
generall  came  aboord  with  me,  where  we  published  unto
all  my  company  very  good  rules  for  their  behaviour  and
profit,  to  their  great  satisfaction  :  after  he  went  downe  into
my  cabbin,  where  with  all  his  assistants  he  conferred  of
divers  particulars  of  our  voyage :  by  which  time  the  boat
being  returned  from  sounding,  we  departed,  and  set  saile,
following  our  skiffes  and  with  our  ships  got  within
the  barre  into  seven  fadome  :  then  being  becalmed,  we
ankered  againe  before  a  sandy  bay,  wherein  stands  a  castle  J  castle.
and  houses :  we  rid  within  musket  shot  of  it :  and  ankered
about  foure  a  clocke  afternoone.

Then  went  I  forwards  with  my skiffe  unto  a  further
point,  sounding  along. Before  my returne,  the  generall
had  sent  for  me  to  supper ;  and  thither  I  went :  but  being
ready  to  sit  downe,  there  came  out  to  us  a  canoa,  wherein  -^  ^^noa  with
were  ten  Indians  and  two  Christians ;  the  one  an  ancient  '^'^  Indians
Genouois,  the  other  a  Portugall :  who  came aboord,  and  chrhtians
there  received  a  small banket,  declaring  their  comming  whereof  one
was  to  understand  our  intents,  and  what  we  sought :  who  ^as  an  old
being satisfied,  departed  with  a  farewell of  three great  G^^°"-°"-
pieces  from  ech  ship.

The 21 day  about three a clocke afternoone, came
a  canoa,  with  the  old  Genouois named  Joseph  Dory,  a  ^°hn  Whithall
Fleming named Paul Badeves, and Steven Repose a  ^^  Enghsh-
Portugall,  and  brought  a  letter  from  the  governor,  and  ^^velkth  at
withall,  answere  of  feare and  doubts of  us,  &c. After  Santos,  hath
many  speeches  and  requests,  a  banket  was  made  them,  and  married  this
the  generall  in  his  pinnesse  with  his  musicke,  &  trumpets ;  ^°^^P^  Dories
and  I  in  my  skiffe  with  trumpets,  drum  and  fife,  and  tabor ^*^  ^''
and  pipe,  accompanied  them  a  mile  up  the  river :  at  going

191

A.D.
1583.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Santos.

[III.  765.]

off,  we  saluted  them  with  a  volley  of  three  great  pieces
out  of  ech  ship :  and  after  us  came  captaine  Parker  with
the  admirals  long  boat,  and  certeine  shot  in  the  same,
to  attend  on  the  generall.

The  22  day  betimes  in  the  morning,  I  went  aboord  the
admirall  to  conferre  about  the  sending  of  some  token  and
present  to  the  governor,  which  was  by  all  the  assistants
determined  to  send  him  three  yards  of  fine  skarlet,  &
three  yards  of  fine  murry-cloth ;  and  to  Joseph  Dory  the
old  Genouois,  Steven  Repose  the  Portugall,  and  to  Paul
Badeves  the  Fleming,  ech  of  them  three  yards  of  fine
blacke  cloth,  which  our  merchants  went  up  to  Santos  with-
all  in  the  admirals  skiffe,  about  nine  a  clocke  aforenoone.

Also  this  forenoone,  we  being  minded  to  goe  up  higher
with  our  ships  into  harbour,  I  advised  them  to  goe  view
the  place,  and  sound  the  road  before  we  went  up ;  which
we  did :  where  were  found  the  place  both  unconvenient,
and  the  road  woorse:  and  so  we  returned,  and  left  the
first  determination.  This  day  we  tooke  downe  our  main-
tops, and  top-mast,  and  all  the  shrowds.

About  two  a  clocke  after  noone  our  merchants
returned  with  their  presents,  not  having  beene  at  the
towne,  because  Steven  Repose  by  the  way  met  them
on  the  river,  and  advised  them  to  stay  untill  there  had
beene  word  sent  to  the  governour,  who  was  unwilling
to  speake  with  them  yet,  but  shortly  would  send  their
answere.

The  rest  of  this  forenoone  we  spent  in  communication
about  the  appointing  of  a  purser  for  the  Edward.  Also
we  signed  an  assent  for  comming  to  this  place :  about
which  thing  grew  foule  speeches  betweene  the  generall
and  his  lieutenant,  after  the  olde  custome.

Then  went  wee  to  supper :  and  being  at  supper,  certaine

Indians  came  aboord,  and  brought  the  generall  a  strange

crow,  and potatos,  and sugar  canes,  to  whom he gave

_, , „ ,  looking glasses, great pinns, and biscuit : and so we

S  Vincent departed,  bemg late. Also this atternoone 1 ran over

sounded.  towards  S. Vincent,  and  sounded  the  bay  a  league  over,

192

The  Indians
j)resents.

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1583.
and found the  chanell  and flats,  and returned aboord
againe  within  two  houres,  having  a  good  gale  of  winde.

The  23  day  our  skiffe  went  ashore  to  fish,  and  tooke
prety  store :  we  sent  our  main-top  ashore  to  be  mended,
and  many  of  our  men  to  wash  their  cloaths ;  also  I  went
my  selfe  with  them  aland,  to  take  order  that  no  man
should  any  wayes  offend  the  Indians.  In  the  meane  time
the  generall  with  all  the  rest  of  the  chiefest  gentlemen,
came  ashore,  and  viewed  the  place,  and  appointed  out
the  fittest  roome  to  set  up  our  smithes  forge,  and  ovens  Portable  ovens
to  bake  our  biscuit,  and  place  for  our  coopers  to  trim  ^^  ^^^^  ^^•
our  water  caske.

The  24  day  at  foure  of  the  clocke,  before  day,  we
heard  one  call  for  a  boat  on  the  North  shore,  to  whom
I  sent  my  skiffe,  who  brought  aboord  one  named  John  J"^^
Whithall,  an  English  man,  which  is  maried  here  in  this  ^^^^^'^^^•
place,  and  with  him  two  of  his  Indians ;  whom  I  enter-
teined  untill  I  sent  word  to  the  generall  to  prepare
himselfe  to  receive  him  :  in  which  time  he  and  I  talked
of  many  severall  particulars.

About sixe a clocke I conveyed him aboord the  Good  counsell
admirall: there he  discovered unto  us  what had bene  h  the  foresaid
done at  the towne,  as fortifi.cation, and sending their  ^^en  to  our
wives  away,  &c.  advising  us  to  receive  no  more  delayes,  men.
but  to  come  up  presently  before  the  towne  with  our  ships.

About  ten  a  clocke  came  a  canoa,  and  brought  downe
Joseph  Dory  and  Steven  Repose,  who  tolde  us  that  on
Saturday  the  governour  would  meet  our  generall,  and
talke  with  him,  praying  us  in  the  meane  time  to  use
our  ordinary  business  of  cooperage,  carpenters  worke,  fill-
ing water,  fishing,  and  washing,  &c.  but  not  to  set  up
forge,  nor  oven,  untill  speech  had  with  the  governour.
After  this  answere,  we  dined  together  aboord  the  gallion  :
after  dinner  we  left  the  messengers  sitting  in  the  cabbin,
and  went  upon  the  poope ;  where  the  generall  demanded
the  advice  of  his  assistants,  whether  it  were  not  best  to  stay
these  men  while  we  had  them  or  not,  or  whether  it
were  best  to  go  up  with  our  ships  to  the  towne  or  no.
XI  193  N

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

Whereunto  ech  man  paused  to  make  answere :  where-
fore I  delivered  my  opinion ; which  was,  that  we  were
forbidden  to  use  violence  to  any  nation  for  trade.
The  Minion  of Secondly,  I  considered that  divers  of  our  nation,  wor-
London  some- ghipfull  merchants,  and  now  adventurers in  this  voyage,
for  traffique. ^^^ ^^^  °^^ ^^ Minion hither, and begun a trade,
which with our forcible dealing might be  spoiled,  and
our  nation  brought  in  hatred.

Lastly,  that  with  force  we  were  not  like  to  atteine
so  much  commodity,  as  we  were  in  possibility  to  have
with  courtesie.

Heereupon  all  was  concluded,  and  they  suffered  to
passe  away :  to  whom  the  generall  gave  the  three  cloake-
clothes,  to  Joseph  Dory,  to  Paul  Baudevese,  and  to
Steven  Repose,  to  ech  of  them  one,  which  were  before
cut  out  for  them :  and  so  friendly  we  and  they  departed
about  two  a  clocke  after  noone.
Three  Spanish  About  foure  of  the  clocke  this  afternoone  we  saw
ships  dis-  three  saile  of  ships  come  bearing  in  about  the  point,
which  assoone  as  they  saw  us,  ankered  upon  the  barre,
and  put  themselves  in  readinesse,  sending  from  one
ship  to  another  with  their  boats,  and  blowing  off  their
ordinance,  meaning  to  take  us :  and  we  before  night,
getting  our  men  and  other  necessaries  from  the  shore,
which  were  busie  on  land,  armed  our  ships  to  defend
our  selves.  Then  went  I  aboord  the  admirall  to  know
what  he  meant  to  do :  who  determined  to  set  his  watch
in  warlike  sort ;  and  so  he  did :  for  after  the  trumpets
and  drum  had  sounded,  he  shot  off  a  great  piece,  as
they  before  had  done ;  and  presently  the  viceadmirall
shot  at  me,  whom  I  answered  with  another,  and  so
ceased.  We  then  set  up  our  main-top,  and  top-mast,
rigged  before  eleven  of  the  clocke  the  same  night.  In
the  meane  while  they  let  slip  their  ankers  and  cables,
and  came  driving  and  towing  with  their  boats  in  upon
[III.  766.]  us,  meaning  to  have  boorded  us :  and  being  neere  our
admirall,  he  hailed  them ;  who  refused  to  tell  of
whence  they  were,  thinking by  spending  of  time  to  get

194

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1583.
aboord  of  him  :  to  whom I called  still  to beware, and
to  shoot  at  them  in  time. At  length  he  let  flie  at  them, The  fight  be-
yet  was  glad to let  an anker  and cable slip to  avoid  ^^^■^/f^'c^
them : then came they  all driving downe thwart my  ^l^nish  ships
haulse,  so that I was faine to  let slip  an anker and  at  S.  Vincent.
cable  to  shun  the  gallion. All  this  while  the  ordinance
and small shot plied  of  all parts, and I  was faine  to
send the  gallion  my skifFe  with  a haulser to  ride by,
for  shee  was  loose,  and  with  the  flood  drave  up  within
me. Then  was  the  viceadmirall  on  my  broad  side,  who
was  well  payed  before, yet I left  not galling  of  him,
til I thought our  pov/der  spent in  vaine to shoot at
him,  he  was  so  torne,  and  broken  downe  by  us. About
foure  of  the  clocke  it  rained  so  fast,  that  we  could  scant
discerne  one  the  other, the Moone  being  gone  downe,
yet  rid  the  admirall, and  the rereadmirall, but a  little
ahead  of  us : during  which  time,  we  paused,  and  made
ready  all  our  munition.

The  25 day, by  day-light, we saw the viceadmirall  The  Spanish
sunke  hard  by us,  so  that  his  yards which  were  hoised  viceadmirall

h h fit

acrosse, and his tops, and that over  head, was above  "^if f.  7
/. 1 .  ... hngltsn.

water : most  or their men were gotten away  m their

boats,  saving about  fourtie  persons  which hung in the

shrowds, and  toppes, whom I advised  our generall to

send for away,  and  had made ready,  and  well  manned

our pinnesses ; but being upon the way going, the

generall  called  them backe,  and  would  not  suffer  them

to  goe. There  were  three  of  their  boats  also  going  for

them  from  their  ships ;  at  whom  I  shot,  and  made  them

to  retire,  and  leave  them  upon  the  shrowds. At  length

our  generall sent  for  two  of  the men  away :  which  his

pinnesse brought to him ; the one  was heaved over

boord,  because  he was  sore  hurt,  not  like  to  live ;  and  j-^^-^  Qregke

he  was  a  Marsillian ; the  other  was  a  Greeke,  borne in  told  the

Zante, boatswaine of  the viceadmirall : the rest  of  the  Generall  that

men,  some  swam  away  upon rafts,  some  were  drowned,  ^^^^^  ^^^f^ , ,
J  • J 1.-1T 1  •  1  -r» 1  • •  000  and  odde

and some  remained  still  hanging  on  her. By  this  time  ^^  ^^^  ,  5.^^_

it  was faire  day-light,  and I called to  our  generall to  ish  ships.

195

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

wey,  and  drive  downe  to  them,  who  required  mee  to
goe  first  and  anker  on  their  quarter,  and  he  would
follow,  and  anker  on  their  bowes.  I  weyed,  and  went
downe,  and  ankered  by  them ;  yet  not  so  nere  as  I
meant,  for  the  ebbe  put  me  off  to  the  Northwards.
There  rid  I  alone,  spending  shot  at  them,  and  they
both  at  me,  foure  houres,  before  our  admiralls  anker
would  come  up ;  during  which  time  I  had  some  spoile
done;  but  when  our  admirall  came,  she  had  her  part,
and  eased  me  very  well.

At  length  our  admirall  began  to  warpe  away,  and
being  come  without  me,  set  saile,  and  began  to  stand
out  into  the  sea :  I  went  aboord  of  him  to  know  his
pleasure.  Who  determined  to  get  out  of  shot ;  but
could  not,  because  the  winde  scanted  on  them.  The
Edward  before  she  could  get  up  her  ankers,  endured
many  more  shot,  after  the  gallion  was  further  off  a
good  way  then  she,  and  sometime  the  gallion  had  two
or  three.  Thus  we  ended  about  two  of  the  clocke  after
noone :  the  rest  of  this  day  and  part  of  the  night,  we
spent  in  mending,  fitting,  and  putting  our  ordinance
and  furniture  in  order  for  the  next  morning,  thinking
they  would  have  bene  with  us.

The  26  day  in  the  morning  we  could  not  see  them,
because  they  were  gone  up  the  river :  wee  manned  our
boats  and  pinnesses,  and  weyed  two  ankers  and  one
cable,  that  they  let  slip  the  night  before :  as  our  men
were  weying  the  third  anker,  the  bwoy-rope  brake,  and
so  we  lost  that  anker.  Our  admirall  had  an  anker  of
twelve  hundred,  and  a  good  cable  of  eleven  inches,  and
we  had  an  anker  about  sixe  hundred,  with  a  piece  of  a
basse  cable,  and  bwoy-rope  nothing  worth.

After  dinner  I  went  aboord  the  admirall,  to  confer
with  him,  who  determined  to  go  off  to  sea,  and
thither  I  caried  Senor  Pinto  to  interpret  the  Indian
language,  with  an  Indian  named  Peter,  which  fled  from
the  bay  where  we  rid  in  a  canoa,  and  brought  with  him
a  Spaniards  caliver,  flaske,  and  touch  boxe,  to  goe  with

196

EDWARD FENTON  a.d.

1583.
us,  whom  our  admirals  boat  met,  and  brought  him
aboord  to  the  admirall.  Hee  tolde  us  that  the  Spaniards
had  brought  many  dead  men  on  land,  and  buried  them,
and  also  landed  many  hurt  men  in  their  bay,  and  that
there  were  certeine  Spaniards  gone  over  thorow  the
woods  to  looke  after  us.  Then  the  Generall,  captaine
Hawkins,  and  master  Maddox  came  aboord  of  mee  to
viewe  my  hurt  men,  and  harmes  of  my  shippe,  both
men,  shippe,  and  tackle ;  and  I  also  went  aboord  him
to  peruse  his  hurts,  who  had  but  one  man,  a  sailer,
slaine.

The  28  day  in  the  morning  died  Lancelot  Ashe,  of
a  hurt ;  who  departed  very  godly.  This  day  we  stood
to  the  Northwards :  and  in  getting  in  our  ankers  and
skiffe,  we  were  put  3  leagues  to  leeward  of  Fiddle  ile,
but  the  gallion  rid  still.

The 29 day  in the  morning,  seeing  my  selfe  put to  Where  the
sea  from  the  admirall,  I  assembled  master  Walker,  master  g^ttionandthe
Shawe,  master  Jeffries,  the  master,  the  masters  mate,  and  ^^^fj^j-g  ^g,.g
the pilot, to whom I shewed that I was desirous to  severed,  and
goe  backe  to  seeke  our  admirall,  whereunto  the  master,  never  met
pilot,  and  masters  mate  answered  directly,  that  wee  could  l^^'""'^''^-
not  fetch  the  ile  where  wee  left  them,  and  to  meete  them  [III.  767.]
in  going backe  it  was  very  unlikely  and  to  us  danger-
ous many  wayes,  aswell for falling  into  the  laps  of  the
Spaniards,  as  to  be put  on  a  lee shoare :  whereupon  all
the  rest  advised me to stand  off  into the sea,  where-
unto I  assented,  remembring  withal,  that  time  spent  con-
sumed  victuall,  and howe  long  wee had  beaten  up  and
downe in  the same bay  before,  to  get  in  with  calmes
and  contrary  windes.

Thus  wee  concluded  that  M.  Walker  should  set  downe
each  mans  opinion,  and  wee  set  to  our  handes,  and
from  hencefoorth  hee  to  keepe  a  Register  of  all  our
proceeding,  as M. Maddox  did abord  the  Admirall.

The  first  day  of  February,  wee  went  East  by  south,
and  East  southeast  with  a  stoute  gale :  and  went  the
same  course  the  3.  4.  and  5.  dayes  following.

197

A.D.
1583-

M.  Walker
the  preacher
dieth.

Variation  of
the  Compasse.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  5.  day  about  10.  a  clocke  in  the  forenoone  M.
Walker  died,  who  had  bene  weake  and  sicke  of  the
bloodie  flixe  6.  dayes,  wee  tooke  a  view  of  his  things,
and  prised  them,  and  heaved  him  over  bord,  and  shot
a peece  for  his knell.

The  14.  day  I  called  into  my  cabbin  the  two  marchants,
the  Master  and  the  Pilot,  shewing  them  our  wants  of
victuals  and  other  necessaries  :  whereupon  they  and  I  con-
cluded, that  it  was  best  for  us  to  returne  to  our  countrey,
with  as  litle  losse  of  time  and  expense  of  victuals  as
might  be,  being  without  hope  of  reliefe  upon  this  coast,
and  yet  to  keepe  the  coast  of  Brasil  to  friend  for  feare
of  extremitie.

The  17.  day  in  the  morning  having  much  raine,  wee
saved  above  two  tunne  of  water,  of  which  we  were  very
glad.

The  18.  day  I  observed  the  variation  of  the  compasse,
which  varied  one  point,  and  a  halfe  to  the  Southwards,
by  our  ordinary  compasse of  London.

The  second  day  of  March  the  Master,  Pilot,  &  I
agreed  to  fetch  the  yle  of  Fernando  Loronha.

From  the  3.  day  to  the  10.  day  we  went  West,  and  by
South,  and  ran  in  for  the  shoare.

The  10.  day  we  saw  the  land,  which  was  sandie  hilles
with  woods  on  it.

The  1 1 .  day  seeking  to  goe  a  shoare,  wee  sawe  foure
men,  which  weaved  to  us  with  a  white  shirt,  and  we
weaved  to  them  with  a  flagge  of  truce :  At  length  one  of
them  swamme  to  our  boats  side,  and  there  lay  in  the  Sea
talking  with  us,  almost  an  houre  :  in  the  ende,  being
partly  perswaded  by  Pinto,  who  talked  with  them  in  the
Indian-tongue,  and  partly  entised  with  such  trifles  as  I
shewed  him,  hee  came  into  our  Skiffe,  and  called  to  his
companions  on  shoare,  who  came  abord  swimming:  wee
delivered  them  certaine  barricos  to  fetch  us  them  full  of
fresh  water :  after,  there  came  downe  40.  Indians,  boyes,
women,  and  men,  and  with  them  a  French  boy,  but  the
former  Indians  deceived  us  of  our  barricos. Whereupon

198

EDWARD FENTON  ad

1583.
Pinto  and  Russell  swamme  a  shoare  to  seeke  water,  but
found  none.

The  same  day  wee  sailed  to  a  place  where  boats  might
land,  &  1  went  a  land  in  my  Skiffe,  and  found  the  Indians,
and  Frenchman  which  were  with  mee  the  day  before,  and
they  brought  our  three  barricos  full  of  fresh  water :  for
which  I  rewarded  them  with  some  trifles.  In  the  meane
time  our  boat  went  ashoare,  and  our  men  with  some  of
the  Indians  brought  us  twentie  barricos  more  of  fresh
water,  and  I  my  selfe  went  to  shoare  and  brought  23.
hennes  of  India.

The  12.  day  betimes  in  the  morning,  wee  manned  our
boat  and  Skiffe,  and  tooke  some  trifling  things  to  shoare,
and  barricos  :  at  our  first  arrivall  the  rude  Indians  flocked
together,  wading  to  the  Skiffe  wherein  I  was,  begging  and
wondering  about  us  :  First  I  caused  them  to  fetch  27.
barricos  of  water,  whom  I  rewarded  with  small  bells,  &c.
In  the  meane  time  they  brought  hens  to  me,  wading  to  the
Skiffe,  for  I  kept  my  selfe  alwayes  afloat,  and  for  their
hens  I  gave  them  a  knife,  and  a  smal  looking  glasse.  All
this  while  M.  Blackcoller  our  Pilot,  Thomas  Russel,
Marke  Thawghts  were  still  on  shoare,  and  would  not
tarry  abord :  In  the  ende,  fearing  some  treacherie,  because
all  the  Indians  were  slipped  on  shoare  from  mee,  I  called  Treason  of  the
our  men  away,  and  suddenly  they  layed  handes  on  our  ^«'^'^«^-
men  ashoare,  and  with  their  bowes  shot  thicke  at  us  in
the  boats,  and  waded  into  the  water  to  us,  laying  hands
on  our  Skiffe,  yet  God  of  his  mercie  delivered  us  from
their  hands,  with  the  losse  of  five  men  slaine,  and  others
hurt.

Thus  we  got  abord  with  40.  hens,  ducks,  turkies,  and

parrats,  and  three  hogsheads of  water : and  I caried a

Frenchman abord with mee,  named Jaques Humfrey,  Jaqms

who  was  by  chance  in  the  boat  with  me  when  this fray  ^^^frp  '^
,  ■'  ' Frenchman

The  17.  day  we  tooke  three  sharks  in  the  mornmg.
From that day  to the  first  of  April, wee  went  our
course,  sometime  with  raine,  and  sometime  with  variable

199

A.D.
1583.

[III.  768.]

A  desperate
act.

Variation  of
the  Compasse.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

windes,  &  so  til  the  4.  of  April  :  which  day  we  saw  4.
birds  with  long  tailes,  which  hovered  about  the  ship,  and
in  the  afternoone  we  saw  and  tooke  up  many  weedes
which  drave  thicke  in  the  sea,  which  we  judged  to  be
driven  with  the  East  windes  from  the  yles  of  Cape
verde.

From  this  day  till  the  1 1 .  day  we  went  our  course
sometime  Northeast,  sometime  Northwest  according  to
the  winds :  upon  this  1 1 .  day  George  Coxe  one  of  our
Carpenters,  having  the  night  before  broken  up  the  hold,
and  stolne  wine,  and  drunken  himselfe  drunke,  being
taken  in  the  roome,  lept  overbord  out  of  the  beake  head
and  so  drowned  himselfe.

The  12.  day  wee  spied  our  foremast  to  be  perished  in
the  hownes,  and  durst  not  beare  our  foretop  saile  upon
it,  but  went  hence  with  our  sailes,  next  hand,  North  all
day  and  night.

From  hence  to  the  20.  day  we  went  Northeast  and
by  North.  This  day  I  observed  the  variation  of  the
compasse :  and  I  noted  that  the  South  point  of  the
compasse  caried  more  then  halfe  a  point  to  the  West-
wards.

The  25.  day  of  May  wee  went  betweene  the  East  north-
east, and  the  Northeast  with  a  small  gale  till  five  a  clocke  in
the  afternoone :  then  had  we  sight  of  land,  which  rose
ragged  to  the  Northwards  like  broken  land,  we  being  about
five  leagues  off:  that  yle  bare  Northeast  by  North  of  us,
and  the  Northermost  part  bare  North  by  East  of  us,  with
a  rocke  a  sea  bord :  we  then  sounded  and  had  fiftie  and
five  fadome  grey  sand,  and  maze  great  store  in  it  :  so
wee  stood  in  Northeast  till  eight  a  clocke,  and  then
behelde  it  againe  being  within  foure  leagues  of  it,  bearing
as  before,  but  wee  coulde  not  make  it,  for  some  thought
it  to  bee  the  foreland  of  Fontenay,  some  judged  it  the  yle
of  Ussant:  then  we  sounded  againe  in  c^k^.  fadome  browne
sand,  and  little  maze  in  it:  at  eight  a  clocke  at  night  we
went  about,  and  stoode  off  South  southwest  one  watch,
then  the  wind  shrinked  to  the  Southwest,  that  we  could

200

EDWARD FENTON  ad.

1583-
lye  but  South  southwest  sixe  glasses,  so  that  at  three  a
clocke  wee  cast  about,  and  lay  Northwest  sixe  glasses,
and  North  northwest  a  watch  being  then  eight  a  clocke
the  next  day.

The  26.  day  wee  lay  as  nigh  as  wee  coulde  betweene
the  North  and  the  North  northeast,  and  saw  the  same
land  againe,  and  made  it  to  bee  the  foreland  of  Fontenay,
and  the  ragges  to  bee  the  Seames,  which  bare  now  East
Northeast  of  us :  and  wee  stoode  on  till  tenne  a  clocke,
then  being  within  two  leagues  of  the  rockes  and  lesse,  wee
cast  about  and  stoode  off  Southwest,  because  wee  could
not  double  the  uttermost  rockes :  when  we  were  about  we
drave  to  the  Southwards  very  faste,  for  the  ebbe  set  us
West  southwest,  and  being  spring  tides,  it  horsed  us
a  pace  to  leewards,  for  the  space  of  one  houre :  then
with  the  flood  which  was  come,  we  drave  againe  to
windewards :  at  twelve  at  noone  it  was  calme  till  6.
afternoone,  then  wee  stoode  about  larbord  tacked,  South
southwest  one  watch,  then  at  midnight  wee  cast  about  and
stoode  over  North  till  foure  aforenoone.

The 27. day  having  brought  the  land  East  southeast
of  us,  we  made  it  to  be  Sylly  being  before  deceived,  and  T^^  y^e  of
went  hence  East  by  North  to  double  Grimsbie,  leaving  ^-^'^v-
The  bishop  and  his  clearks  to  the  Southwestwards,  which
we  before  tooke  to  be  The  Seames.

At  7.  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone  we  sawe  the  lands  end
of  England,  which  bare  East  by  North  off  us,  and  is  7.
leagues  off  from  Sylly.

The  29.  day  at  sixe  a  clocke,  beforenoone  we  had
brought  the  Ramhead  North  of  us,  and  were  within  a
league  of  it,  and  went  in  Northeast  next  hand,  being  thicke
and  foggie,  and  little  winde  :  so  that  at  eleven  a  clocke  we  ^-^f  <:<im£  to
got  in  within  the  yland,  and  there  by  mistaking  of  a  P^^^^^^^^-
sounding,  our  ship  came  aground  betweene  the  yle  and
the  maine,  and  there  sate  till  4.  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone
that  it  was  halfe  flood.

The  30.  day  about  9.  a  clocke,  with  much  adoe  I
furnished  away  P. Jeffries, M.  Symberbe,  and  William

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

Tovvreson  with  letters,  after  dined  at  M.  Blaccollers,  and
made  many  salutations  with  divers  gentlemen.
1583.  The  31.  I  wrought  abord  all  day,  and  put  our  ship,  and

things  in  order :  Afternoone  I  having  pitie  of  some  poore
men  of  Milbrooke,  which  were  robbed  the  night  before
by  a  pirate  named  Purser,  which  rid  in  Cawson  bay,  I
consented  to  goe  out  with  the  Edward  in  company  of  a
small  shippe  which  they  had  furnished  to  bee  their
Master,  so  about  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
came  a  hundreth  men  of  theirs  abord  of  mee  :  About
twelve  a  clocke  wee  set  saile,  and  by  three  afore  day  wee
were  gotten  to  the  windwards  of  him,  then  hee  set  saile,
and  went  hence  to  the  Eastwards,  and  outsailed  us,
because  our  consort  would  not  come  neere  him :  after  a
small  chase  which  we  gave  him  to  no  effect,  wee  returned
into  our  old  road,  and  there  moared  the  ship  about  nine
of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone,  and  hence  went  all  the
Milbrooke  men  againe  ashore  from  mee.  And  thus  I
ended  a  troublesome  voyage.

[III.  769.]  The  voyage  set  out  by  the  right  honourable  the
Earle  of  Cumberland,  in  the  yere  1586.  in-
tended for  The  South  sea,  but  performed  no
farther  then  the  latitude  of  44.  degrees  to  the
South  of  the  Equinoctial,  Written  by  M.  John
Sarracoll  marchant  in  the  same  voyage.

|He 26.  day  of  June, in  the  yeere 1586.

and in the 28. yeere of the Queenes

majesties raigne, wee departed from

Gravesend in two ships ; the Admirall

called The red dragon, and the other

The barke Clifford, the one of the

burden  of  260.  tunnes,  with 130.  men,

and  the  other  of  the burden  of 130.  tunnes,  with 70.

men : the Captaine of the Admirall was M. Robert

Withrington,  Of  the  vice-admirall  M.  Christopher  Lister,

both  being  furnished  out  at  the  costs  and  charges  of  the

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  a.d.

1586.

right  honourable  the  Erie  of  Cumberland,  having  for
their  masters  two  brethren,  the  one  John  Anthonie,  and
the  other  William  Anthonie.

The  24.  of  July  wee  came  into  the  sound  of  Plim-
mouth,  and  being  there  constrained  by  Westerly  winds,
to  stay  till  the  17.  of  August,  wee  then  departed  with
another  ship  also  for  our  Rear-admirall  called  the  Roe,
whereof  M.  Hawes  was  Captaine,  and  a  fine  pinnesse
also  called  the  Dorothie,  which  was  sir  Walter  Raleghs.
We  foure  being  out  in  the  sea,  met  the  20.  of  August,
with  16.  sailes  of  hulkes  in  the  Sleeve,  who  named  them-
selves to  bee  men  of  Hamborough,  laden  and  come
from  Lisbone.  Our  Admirall  hailed  their  Admirall  with
courteous  wordes,  willing  him  to  strike  his  sailes,  and
to  come  abord  to  him  onely  to  know  some  newes  of
the  countrey,  but  hee  refused  to  do  so,  onely  stroke  his
flag  &  tooke  it  in.  The  vice-admiral  of  the  hulkes  being
a  head,  would  neither  strike  flagge  nor  saile,  but  passed
on  without  budging,  whereupon  our  Admirall  lent  him
a  piece  of  Ordinance,  which  they  repayed  double,  so  that
we  grew  to  some  little  quarel,  whereupon  one  of  the
sternemost  hulkes,  being  as  I  suppose  more  afraide  then
hurt,  stroke  amaine,  our  Admirall  being  neere  him,  laid
him  abord,  and  entred  with  certaine  of  his  men,  how
many  I  know  not,  for  that  we  were  giving  chase  to  the
Windermost  men,  thinking  our  Admirall  would  have
come  up  againe  to  us,  to  have  made  them  all  to  have
stroke :  but  the  weather  growing  to  be  very  thicke  and
foggie,  with  small  raine,  he  came  not  up  but  kept  with
another  of  the  hulkes  which  Captaine  Hawes  had  horded
and  kept  all  night,  and  tooke  out  of  her  some  provision
that  they  best  liked.  They  learned  of  the  men  that  were
in  the  hulke,  that  there  were  7.  hulkes  laden  in  Lisbone
with  Spaniards  goods,  and  because  their  lading  was  very
rich,  they  were  determined  to  go  about  Ireland,  and  so
they  let  her  goe  againe  like  a  goose  with  a  broken  wing.

The  next  day  after  being  the  21.  day,  wee  espied  5.
sailes more,  which lay  along  to  the Eastwards,  but  by

203

A.D.

1586.

Lanzarota
spoiled  by  the
men  of  Algiers.

RiodelOro,in
23.  degrees
and  a  halfe.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

reason  of  the  night  which  then  was  neere  at  hand,  wee
could  hardly  come  to  them.  Yet  at  last  we  hailed  one
of  the  biggest  of  them,  &  they  tolde  us  that  they  were
al  of  Hamborough :  but  another  saide  shee  was  of  Den-
marke,  so  that  indeede  they  knew  neither  what  to  say,
nor  what  to  do.  Our  Admirall  being  more  desirous  to
folow  his  course,  then  to  linger  by  chasing  the  hulks,
called  us  from  pursuing  them  with  his  trumpet,  and  a
piece  of  Ordinance,  or  else  wee  would  have  seene  what
they  had  bene,  and  wherewith  they  had  bene  laden.

The  22.  day  because  of  contrary  winde  wee  put  into
Dartmouth  all  4.  of  us,  and  taried  there  seven  dayes.

The  29.  we  departed  thence  and  put  out  to  Sea,  and
began  our  voyage,  thinking  at  the  first  to  have  runne
along  the  coast  of  Spaine,  to  see  if  wee  could  have
mette  with  some  good  prize  to  have  sent  home  to  my
Lord :  but  our  Captaine  thought  it  not  the  best  course
at  the  last,  but  rather  kept  off  in  the  sea  from  the  coast.
And  upon  Saturday  the  17.  of  September  wee  fell  with
the  coast  of  Barbaric,  and  the  18.  hailed  in  with  the  roade
of  Santa  Cruz.  The  21.  day  wee  fell  with  one  of  the
ylands  of  the  Canaries,  called  Forteventura.  In  running
alongst  this  yland,  we  espied  upon  a  hill  by  the  water
side,  one  waving  with  a  white  flagge,  whereupon  wee
manned  both  our  boates,  and  sent  them  towards  the
shoare,  to  understand  what  newes.  They  found  them
to  bee  two  ragged  knaves  and  one  horseman,  and  they
tolde  us  that  Lanzarota  was  taken,  and  spoyled  in  August
by  the  Turkes :  when  we  saw  they  had  nothing  else  to
say,  we  left  them,  and  proceeded  on  our  course,  and  fell
againe  with  the  coast  of  Barbaric.

The  25.  day  of  September  about  10.  of  the  clocke  we
fell  with  Rio  del  Oro,  standing  just  under  our  Tropike :
we  anckered  in  the  mouth  of  it  in  8.  fadom,  the  entrance
of  it  is  about  2.  leagues  over.  And  the  next  day  our
Captaine  with  the  boate  searched  the  river,  and  found  it
to  be  as  broad  14.  or  15.  leagues  up,  as  at  the  entrie  of
it,  but  found  no  towne  nor  habitation,  saving  that  there

204

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  ad.

1586.

came  downe  two  poore  men,  and  one  of  them  spake
good  Spanish,  and  told  our  Captaine,  that  certaine
Frenchmen  used  to  come  thither,  and  laded  some  oxe  Trade  of  the
hides,  and  goats  hides,  but  other  commoditie  there  was  ^jiy^ffQ  ^"
none.  We  departed  thence  the  27  day,  &  the  last  day  rjjj  770.I*
of  the  moneth  being  calme  we  went  abord  our  General,
&  there  consented  to  goe  for  Sierra  Leona,  to  wood  and
water.  From  thence  till  the  10.  of  October  wee  were
much  becalmed  with  extreeme  hot  weather,  much  light-
ning, and  great  store  of  raine.  This  10.  day  we  sounded,
finding  a  great  current  as  we  supposed  by  the  ripling
water,  which  after  wee  found  to  bee  an  ordinary  tide,
the  flood  setting  to  the  Northwest,  and  the  ebb  South-
east, and  here  we  had  but  18.  fathom e  water,  and  no
lande  to  bee  scene :  it  was  on  the  Southermost  part  of
the  showles  that  lie  in  about  1 1 .  degrees,  but  hailing
South  off  againe,  it  presently  deeped  unto  50.  fathome,
and  after  hailing  Southeast  and  by  East,  and  East  south-
east, we  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  in 120.  fathome.

The  21.  of  October  wee  fell  with  land  upon  the  coast
of  Guinea,  in  the  height  of  8.  degrees,  a  very  high  land,
but  of  no  great  length :  it  was  the  high  land  over  Sierra  Sierra  Leona,
Leona.  Wee  drewe  in  to  the  land,  and  found  neere  the
shoare  more  water  then  in  the  offing:  at  the  Northern
end  of  the  high  land  we  anckered  about  a  mile,  and  some-
what more  from  the  shoare  in  11.  fathome.  To  goe
into  the  harbor  of  Sierra  Leona  we  did  borrow  upon  the
South  side,  having  no  ground  in  10.  fathome,  halfe  a
mile  from  the  shoare.

Upon  the  Northside  of  this  harbour  is  very  shoale
water,  but  on  the  Southside  no  feare,  more  then  is  to
be  scene.

The  23.  day  being  Sunday  wee  came  to  an  ancker  in
the  bay  of  fresh  water,  and  going  ashoare  with  our  boate,
wee  spake  with  a  Portugal,  who  tolde  us  that  not  farre
off  there  were  Negros  inhabiting,  and  that  in  giving  to
the  king  a  Botija  of  wine,  and  some  linnen  cloth,  hee
would  suffer  us  to  water  and  wood  at  our  pleasure. But

205

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

our  Captaines  thinking  it  not  good  to  give  any  thing
for  that  which  they  might  take  freely,  landed,  and  cer-
taine  of  our  men  with  them,  whereupon  the  Portugall
and  the  Negros  ranne  all  away  into  the  woods.  Then
wee  returned  againe  into  our  boates,  and  presently  went
and  landed  in  another  place,  thinking  to  have  fetcht  a
walke,  and  so  to  come  to  our  boats  againe.  But  wander-
ing through  a  little  wood,  we  were  suddenly  and  unawares
Atowneofthe  upon  a  towne  of  the  Negros,  whereupon  they  strooke  up
'Ne^os.  their  drumme,  giving  withall  a  great  showt,  and  off  went

their  arrowes  as  thicke  as  haile.  Wee  were  in  number
about  30.  caleevers,  and  20.  with  our  weapons,  which  wee
also  let  ilie  into  the  woods  among  them,  and  what  hurt
we  did,  we  know  not.

Then  wee  returned  to  our  boates,  and  tooke  wood  and

water  at  our  pleasure,  and  reasonable  store  of  fish,  and

A  strange amongst  the rest  we hailed up  a great foule monster,

monster.  whose  head  and  backe  were  so  hard,  that  no  sword  could

enter  it :  but  being  thrust  in  under  the  belly  in  divers

places,  and much  wounded,  hee bowed a  sword in  his

mouth, as a man would do a  girdle of  leather about

his  hande,  and  likewise  the  yron  of  a  boare  speare. He

was  in  length  about  nine  foote,  and  had  nothing  in  his

belly, but a certaine quantitie of  small stones, to the

value  of  a  pottell.

Another  great Xhe  fourth  of  November  wee  went  on  shore  to  a  towne

^^^Miowne  q£  ^j^g  Negros, which stoode on the  Southeast  side of

' the  harbour,  about  a  Sacar  shot  from  the  roade,  which

we  found  to  be  but lately built: it  was of  about two

hundreth  houses,  and walled about with mightie  great

trees,  and  stakes  so  thicke,  that  a  rat  could  hardly  get

in  or out. But  as  it  chanced,  wee  came  directly  upon

a  port  which  was not  shut  up,  where  wee  entred  with

such  fiercenesse,  that  the  people  fled  all  out  of  the  towne,

which we  found to bee  finely  built  after  their  fashion,

and  the  streetes  of  it  so  intricate,  that  it  was  difl^cult  for

us  to  finde  the  way  out,  that  we  came  in  at. Wee  found

their  houses  and  streets  so  finely  and  cleanly  kept,  that

206

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  ad.

1587.
it  was  an admiration  to  us all,  for  that  neither in  the
houses  nor  streets  was  so  much  dust to bee  found,  as
would fill an egge shell. Wee found little in their
houses, except some matts, goards, and some earthen
pots. Our men at their departure set the towne on
fire,  and  it was burnt (for the most  part  of  it) in  z'  J  towne
quarter of an houre, the houses being covered with  ^«^«^-
reed  and  straw.

After  this  wee  searched the  countrey  about  it,  where
wee  found  in  divers  plaines  good  store  of  rice  in  stacks,  Rice  in  stacks.
which our  men  did beate out,  and brought  a  bord in
the  huske,  to  the  quantitie  of  14.  or  15.  tunnes  in  both
our  ships.

The  17.  day  of  November  wee  departed  from  Sierra
Leona,  directing  our  course  for  the  Straights  of  Magellan.
In  this  harbour  divers  of  our  men  fell  sicke  of  a  disease
in  the  belly,  which  for  the  time  was  extreeme,  but  (God
bee  thanked)  it  was  but  of  small  continuance.  Wee
founde  also  in  divers  places  of  the  woods,  images  set  I  doles.
upon  pinnes,  with  divers  things  before  them,  as  eggs,
meale,  rice,  round  shot  of  stones,  and  divers  other  things,
such  as  the  barbarous  people  had  to  offer  up.

When  we  came  neere  to  the  Line,  wee  found  it
nothing  so  hot  as  it  is  at  Sierra  Leona,  by  reason  of  the
great  winde  and  raine.

About  the  24.  day  of  November  one  or  two  of  our  [III.  771.]
men  died,  and  others  also  were  sicke  of  a  Calentura.

The  second  day  of  January  we  had  a  little  sight  of
land,  being  about  the  height  of  28.  degrees  to  the  South-
ward of  the  Line.

The  4.  day  wee  fell  with  the  shoare  high  and  bold,  Theyfallwith
being  in 30. degrees,  and a terse,  little  more  or  lesse.  ^^ highland m
All  of  it  to  the  Northward  was  a  high  land,  but  to  the  ^°"  '^^^^'^^  ^'
Southward it did presently faile,  and was a  very  low
land, and all sandie. About sixe leagues from the
shoare  wee  sounded,  and  had  about  fifteene  or  sixteene
fathome  water,  and  blacke  sandie  oze. We  thought to
have  gone  to  the  shoare,  and  to  have  watered,  but  we

207

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

could  not  discerne  any  good  harbour,  and  therefore  we
cast  off  to  seaward  againe.

The  12.  day  wee  found  our  selves  in  32.  degrees  and
27.  minutes.  From  the  day  of  the  Nativitie  of  Christ,
till  the  13.  day  of  this  moneth,  although  the  Sunne  was
very  neere  unto  us,  yet  we  found  no  want  of  winds
but  variable  as  in  England,  &  not  so  hot  but  that
a  mans  shoulders  might  well  disgest  a  frize  gowne,  and
his  bellie  the  best  Christmas  cheere  in  England,  yet
wee  for  our  parts  had  no  want,  but  such  as  might
content  honest  men.

The  tenth  day  being  about  8.  leagues  from  the  shoare,

and  a  little  short  of  the  River  of  Plate,  it  was  my  good

A  Portugal happe  to  espie  a  saile,  which  was  a  small  Portugal  bound

ship  taken, ^^^  ^^  River  to  a towne  called  Santa Fee :  and  from

for  Pilot  Ab- thence by horse and carts,  the  marchants, and part  of

raham  Cocke their  goods were to bee transported into Peru. This

an  English- shippe  being  about  the  burthen  of  45.  or  50.  tunnes,  wee

man Jeft  there  ^QQj^g  ^j^^^-  (^^y  about  three  of  the  clocke,  wherein  there

Minion  of  ^ ^^^  ^°''  Master  or  Pilote  an  Englishman  called  Abraham

London  \z,%\.  Cocke  borne  in  Lee. We examined him and  the  rest

concerning  the  state  of  the  River,  and  they  told  us  that

Five  townes there  were  in  the  River  five  townes,  some  of  70.  hous-

upon  the  river  holds,  and  some of  more. The  first  towne  was  about

^^^'  50.  leagues  up  the  River  called  Buenos  Ayres,  the  rest

some 40. some 50.  leagues one from another,  so  that

the uppermost towne called Tucaman is 230. leagues

from the entrance  of  the River. In these townes is

great store of  corne, cattell, wine, and sundry fruits,

but no  money  of  gold  or  silver: they  make  a  certaine

kinde of slight cloth, which they give in trucke of

sugar, rice. Marmalade, and Sucket, which were the

commodities  that  this  shippe  had.

They  had  abord  also  45.  Negros,  whereof  every  one
in  Peru  yeeldeth  400.  duckets  a  piece,  and  besides  these,
there  were  as  passengers  in  her,  two  Portugal  women
and  a  childe.

The  1 1 .  day  wee  espied  another  saile,  which  was  the

208

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  ad.

1587.
consort  of  this  Portugall,  and  to  him  also  we  gave  chase,  Another
and  tooke  him  the  same  day :  Hee  was  of  the  burthen  ^"^^"■i^^  ^^^P
of  the  other,  and  had  in  him  good  store  of  sugar,  Mar-
malade, and Succats, with divers other things, which
we noted downe our booke. In this ship also we
found  about  35.  Negro  women,  and  foure  or  five  friers,
of  which  one  was  an  Irish  man,  of  the  age  of  three  or  An  Irish  fj-ier
foure and twentie yeeres, and two Portugal women ""
also, which were borne in the river  of  Jenero. Both
these ships were bought in Brasil, by a yong man
which was Factor for the bishop of Tucaman, and  '^^^  bishop ^  of

the friers  were sent  for by  that  bishop  to possesse  a  J^'^^f^"  ^^

^ .  ^  ^  . trie  rtver  of

new  Monasterie, which the bishop was then a build-  pi^te.

ing. The bookes, beads, and pictures in her, cost

(as one of the Portugals confessed) above 1000.

duckats.

Of  these  ships  we  learned,  that  M.  John  Drake,  who  The  newes
went in consort with M. Fenton, had his Barke cast  °{)^^/°^^
away  a  little short  of  the River of  Plate, where  they
were taken captives by the Savages, all saving them
which  were  slaine  in  the  taking :  the  Savages  kept  them
for  a  time,  and  used  them  very  hardly,  yet  at  the  last
John  Drake  and  Richard  Faireweather,  and  two  or  three  Richard
more  of  their company with them got a Canoa,  and  P^"'^^^^^^"'-
escaped,  and  came  to  the  first  towne  of  the  Spaniards.
Faireweather  is  maried  in  one  of  the  townes,  but  John
Drake  was  carried  to  Tucaman  by  the  Pilot  of  this  ship,
and  was  living,  and  in  good  health  the  last  yeere. Con-
cerning this  voyage  of  the  Portugals  they  tolde  us  that
it  was  the  thirde  voyage  that  was  made  into  the  River
of  Plate  these  30.  yeeres.

The  12.  of  January  wee  came  to  Scale  yland,  and  the  Seak-y lands
14.  day  to  the  Greene  yland,  where  going  in  we  found  and  Green-
hard  abord  the  maine 8.  fathome, 7.  and  6.  and  never  ^
lesse  then  five  fathome. There  lies  a  ledge  of  rocks  in
the  faire  way,  betwixt  the  yland  and  the  maine,  so  that
you must  bee  sure to borrow  hard  abord  the maine,
and  leave  the  ledge  on  the  larbord  side.

XI  209  o

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

One  of  the  Portugals  which  wee  caried  along  with  us
in  our  shippe  seemed  to  bee  a  man  of  experience,  and
I  entred  into  speach  with  him  concerning  the  state  of
Buenos  Ayres.  the  River :  hee  tolde  mee  that  the  towne  of  Buenos
Ayres  is  from  the  Greene  yland  about  seventie  leagues,
standing  on  the  Southside  of  the  River,  and  from  thence
Santa  Fee.  to  Santa  Fee  is  100.  leagues,  standing  on  the  same  side
also.  At  which  towne  their  shippes  doe  discharge  all
their  goods  into  small  Barkes,  which  rowe  and  towe
up  the  River  to  another  towne  called  Ascension,  which
[III.  772.]  is  from  Santa  Fee  150.  leagues,  where  the  boats  dis-
charge on  shoare,  and  so  passe  all  the  goods  by  carts
and  horses  to  Tucaman,  which  is  in  Peru.

The  towne  of  Ascension  stands  in  a  very  fertile  place,
reaping  corne  twise  in  the  yeere,  with  abundance  of  wine,
cattell,  and  fruits.  In  the  townes  of  Ascension  and
Tucaman  a  rapier  of  20.  rials  of  plate  is  worth  30.
duckats,  a  boxe  of  Marmalade  20.  duckats;  a  looking
glasse  a  foote  over  is  worth  30.  li.  pictures  in  tables
of  14.  inches,  30.  and  40.  li.  a  piece.

The  16.  day  wee  went  from  Greene  yland  to  the
watering  place,  which  is  about  a  league  to  the  West-
ward, where  wee  tooke  in  about  18.  tunnes  of  water,
and  the  22.  day  came  againe  to  Scale  yland  to  make
provision  of  Scales,  where  a  storme  arose,  which  put
us  in  some  danger,  by  the  breaking  of  our  anckers  and
cables,  and  the  winde  blew  so  colde,  that  wee  much
marveiled  at  it,  considering  the  height  of  the  place.
I  must  needes  in  this  place  finde  fault  with  our  selves
and  the  whole  company,  that  riding  in  this  River  16.
dayes,  the  chanell  was  not  sounded,  nor  the  way
made  perfect.

The  29.  day  wee  tooke  into  our  ship  one  Miles
Philips,  which  was  left  in  the  West  Indies  by  M.
Hawkins.

The  first  of  February  I  tooke  the  Sunne  in  38.
degrees.  And  the  3.  day  of  February  I  tooke  it  againe
and  found  it  to  be  in  41.  degrees.

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  ad.

1587.

The  7.  day  of  February  our  Captaine  master  Lister
being  in  one  of  the  prizes,  hoysed  over  bord  his  Gundelo,
and  went  abord  the  Admirall,  and  being  there  they  sent
their  Gundelo  abord  us,  for  our  Master,  master  Collins,
and  my  selfe,  &  at  our  comming  we  were  called  into
the  Captaines  cabbin,  where  were  set  in  counsell  for
matters  touching  the  state  of  our  voyage,  these  men
whose  names  are  under  written.

'  Master  Robert  Withrington  Captaine  of  the  Admirall.

Master Christopher Lister Captaine of The barke
Clifford.

John  Anthonie,  Master  of  the  Admirall.

Thomas  Hood,  Pilot  for  the  Streights.

William  Anthonie,  Master  of  the  barke  Clifford.

David  Collins.} {Tristram  Gennings.

Master  William  Withrington.

Master  Beumond  Withrington.

Master  Wasnes.} {Master  Norton.

Master  Wilkes. } {  Master  Harris.

Thomas  Anthonie.

Nicholas  Porter.

The  master  Gunner :

And  Alexander  Gundie,  his  mate.
^  John  Sarracol.

This  company  being  all  assembled  together,  the  Master  M.  John  An-
of  the  Admiral  declared  that  the  cause  of  our  assembly
was  to  determine  after  good  advice,  what  course  or  way
were  best  and  most  likely  to  all  mens  judgments  to  be
taken.  First  for  the  good  preferment  of  my  Lords
voyage,  then  the  health  of  our  men,  and  lastly  the  safe-
gard  of  our  shippes,  and  further  shewed  his  minde  to
us  all  in  these  wordes,  as  neere  as  I  could  cary  them
away.

MY  masters,  my  Lords  determination  touching  this
our  voyage  is  not  unknowen  unto  you  all,  having
appointed  it  to  be  made,  and  by  the  grace  of  God  to  be
performed  by  us  for  the  South  sea. But  for  as  much

211

thonie.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

as  wee  doe  all  see  the  time  of  the  yeere  to  bee  farre
spent,  as  also  the  windes  to  hang  contrary,  the  weather
drawes  on  colder  and  colder,  the  nights  longer  and
longer,  our  bread  so  consumed  that  we  have  not  left
above  two  moneths  bisket,  our  drinke  in  a  maner  all
spent,  so  that  we  have  nothing  but  water,  which  in  so
cold  a  countrey  as  the  Streights,  if  we  should  get  in,
and  bee  forced  there  to  winter,  would  no  doubt  be  a
great  weakening  to  our  men,  and  a  hazard  of  the  over-
throw of  the  voyage :  These  things  considered,  both  our
Captaine,  Master  Hood,  and  I  doe  rather  thinke  it
good  for  the  wealth  of  our  voyage,  the  health  of  our
men,  and  safetie  of  our  ships,  to  goe  roome  with  the
coast  of  Brasill,  where  by  Gods  grace  wee  shall  well  victuall
our  selves,  both  with  wine  which  is  our  greatest  want,
and  other  necessaries.

Besides,  it  is  given  us  here  to  understand  by  the
Portugals  which  we  have  taken,  that  there  is  no  doubt
but  that  by  Gods  helpe  and  our  endevour,  wee  shall
bee  able  to  take  the  towne  of  Baya,  at  our  pleasure,
which  if  wee  doe  put  in  practise,  and  doe  not  performe
it,  being  somewhat  advised  by  them,  they  offer  to  loose
their  lives. And having  by  this  meanes victualled  our

[III.  773.]  selves,  wee  may  there  spend  upon  the  coast  some  three
or  foure  moneths,  except  in  the  meane  time  wee  may
happen  upon  some  good  thing  to  content  my  Lord,
and  to  purchase  our  owne  credits :  otherwise,  wee  may
take  the  Spring  of  the  yeere,  and  so  proceede,  according
to  my  lords  directions.  And  assure  your  selves  (by  the
assistance  of  God)  wee  will  not  returne  without  such
benefite  by  this  voyage,  as  may  redound  to  my  lords
profite,  and  the  honour  of  our  countrey.  Nowe  if  there
bee  any  of  you  that  can  give  better  course  and  advise,
then  this  which  I  have  delivered,  let  him  speake,  and  wee
will not onely heare him, but thanke him for his

torlh7e7ch <^o""sell,  and  followe  it.

7captatne'^ To  this  speech  of  M.  Anthony,  M.  Lister  our  captaine

Liiter.  answered  in  this  sort: M.  Withrington,  &  M.  Anthony,

212

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  a.d.

1587.

both,  you  know,  that  the  last  words  that  my  lord  had

with us in such a  chamber  were,  that  in any  case  we

should  follow  our  voyage  only  for  the  South  sea,  except

by the way, we might perchance meete  with such  a

purchase,  as  that  wee  might  returne  with  6000  pounds :

and  therefore  I see  no  safetie,  howe  wee  may  dare  offer

to  goe  backe  againe,  being  so  neere  the  Streights  as  we

are :  for  my  part  I  neither  dare nor  wil  consent  unto  it,

except we be further forced, then yet wee  are. My

accompt  is this,  that he that dieth for this yeere  is

excused for the  next,  and I  rather  choose  death, then

to  returne  in  disgrace  with  my  lord.

Hereunto  both  the  captaine  and  master  of  the  Admirall
replied  that  they  were  all  of  that  mind :  yet  notwith-
standing, that  in  going  roome  the  voyage  was  in  better
possibilitie  to  bee  performed,  then  in  wintring  either  in
the  Streights,  or  at  Port  S.  Julian,  all  things  considered
And  so  agreeing,  and  concluding  all  in  one,  they  were
determined  presently  to  beare  up.

The  next  day  being  the  8  of  February,  there  fell  out
many  and  divers  speeches  on  each  part  concerning  the
altering  of  our  course,  some  would  continue  for  the
Streights,  and  other  some  would  not.  Whereupon  a
viewe  was  taken  in  both  ships  of  victuals,  and  reasonable
store  was  found  for  both  companies :  and  the  winde
withall  comming  to  the  North,  we  determined  to  take
out  of  the  prizes  the  best  necessaries  that  were  in  them,
and  so  cast  them  off,  and  to  plie  for  the  Streights.

All  this  time  wee  held  on  our  course,  and  the  1 5  day  The'^  returne
wee  found  our  selves  in  the height  of  44  degrees,  but  ^^^f^J«  ^^^
then the  winde came  to  the South,  with  much  raine,  ^^r^J ^^
wind,  cold,  and  other  untemperate  weather, continuing
in  that  sort  five  or  sixe  dayes,  in  which  time  we  hulled
backe  againe  into  the  height  of  42  degrees.

Sunday  being  the  20  of  February,  our  Admirall  being
something  to  the  leeward  of  us,  and  the  storme  some-
what ceased,  put  aboord  his  flag  in  the  mizen  shrowds,
as  a  token  that  hee  would  speake  with  us,  and there-

213

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^587.

upon  wee  bare  roome  with  him,  and  having  hailed  one

another,  captaine  Withrington  shewed  the  disposition  of
all  his  company,  which  was  rather  to  goe  roome  with  the
coast  of  Brasil,  then  to  lie  after  that  sort  in  the  sea  with
foule  weather  and  contrary  winds.  Our  captaine  on  the
other  side  shewed  the  contrary  disposition  of  his  men,
and  company,  willing  notwithstanding  to  proceede:  but
in  the  ende,  both  the  shippes  fell  asunder,  and  our
captaine  sayd,  Seeing  then  there  is  no  remedie,  I  must
be  content,  though  against  my  will.

The  21  day  the  weather  grew  faire,  and  the  wind  good
at  the  South  for  the  Streights,  yet  our  Admirall  bare
roome  still,  we  supposing  hee  would  have  taken  the
benefit  of  the  time :  whereupon  our  whole  company
began  to  thinke  of  the  inconveniences  that  would  arise
by  deviding  our  selves,  and  losing  our  Admirall,  being
very  willing  to  continue  their  course,  and  yet  not  without
the  company  of  the  Admiral.  And  then  wee  began  to
cast  about  after  him,  and  at  the  last  bare  with  him,  and
he  tolde  us,  that  upon  a  second  viewe  of  the  victuals,
hee  found  their  store  so  slender,  and  their  want  so  great,
that  there  was  no  remedy  for  them  but  to  seeke  some
meanes  to  be  relieved,  which  was  the  onely  cause  that
hee  bare  Northward.  This  speech  made  us  of  the  barke
to  enter  into  a  new  consultation  :  and  we  found  many
of  our  men  v/eake,  and  all  our  calievers  not  serviceable,
and  the  Smiths  that  should  mend  them  to  be  in  the
Admiral.  We  considered  also,  that  by  breaking  of  com-
pany, eche  ship  should  be  the  more  weakened :  wee
continued  in  this  consultation  til  the  foure  and  twentieth
day,  and  in  all  that  time  found  master  captaine  Lister
more  desirous  to  accomplish,  and  to  fulfill  the  voyage,
and  not  willing  in  any  case  to  turne  his  ship,  but  that
the  desire  which  we  all  had  to  continue  in  consort  with
A  final  our  Admirall,  made  us  to  thinke  well  of  his  company,  and
resolution  to  -j^  ^^^  ^j^  agreement  and  conclusion  was  thus  made  on
all  sides,  to  follow  the  Admiral,  without  any  more  talke
of  the  Streights till the  Spring.

214

retume.

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  a.d.

1587.

The 10 day  of  March,  it fell out  so  unfortunately, March,
that  Samuel  Teller  our  masters  mate,  fell  overboord,  and
so  perished,  we  being  not  able  by  any  meanes  to  recover
him.

The  eight  and twentieth day  being in  the height  of
one and twenty  degrees,  wee  espied  a saile,  which wee
judged  came  out  of  the  Streights,  and  had  rich  lading,
but  the  night  being  at  hand,  we  lost  her  very  unluckily,  [III.  774.]
and  the  next  day  could  have  no  sight  of  her.

The  fift  day  of  April  we  fel  with  the  land  of  Brasilia,
in  the  height,  as  I  judge,  of  sixteen  degrees  and  a  tierce,
and  our  Captaine  went  then  aboord  the  Admirall,
where  they  concluded  to  sende  the  pinnesse  and  our
boate  on  shore  for  fresh  water,  because  wee  stoode  in
neede  of  it,  which  did  so  with  eighteene  good  men,
and  three  or  foure  tunne  of  water  caske.  They  were  from
us  till  the  eighth  day  in  the  morning,  at  which  time
we  espied  them  againe,  and  that  day  we  came  all  together
into  the  roade  of  Camana,  where  there  came  a  Canoa  TJie  rode  of
aboord  us,  and  one  of  the  chiefest  Portugals  that  belonged
to  the  place.  Here  wee  tooke  in  beefes,  hogs,  water
and  wood  at  our  pleasure,  having  almost  no  man  able
to  resist  us,  but  some  of  our  Portugals  stole  from  us
in  the  Canoa.

The  1 1  day  wee  entred  into  the  haven  of  Baya,  where  '^he^  -^"^^f
wee  were  received  at  the  point  comming  in,  with  two  great  ^'^1°^'^^  ^^""^^
pieces  of  Ordinance,  which  discharged  bullets  at  us  five
times  a  piece,  but  they  lost  shot  and  powder,  and  did  us
no  harme.  After  wee.  had  passed  the  point,  wee  hailed  in
for  the  roade  as  close  as  the  wind  would  permit  us,
but  could  not  come  so  neere  as  we  desired,  and  therefore
we  came  to  an  ankor  a  faire  birth  off  the  towne,  not  with-
out great  store  of  shotte  from  thence,  but  yet  our  harme
was  none  at  all  for  ought  they  could  doe.

At  our  comming  in,  wee  found  in  the  road  eight  ships
and  one  caravel,  of  the  which  one  was  a  hulke  or  double
flie  boat  of  the  burden  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  tunnes,
having  in  her  24  pieces  of  good  Ordinance :  shee  with  the

215

Camana.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

rest  of  the  ships,  together  with  the  towne,  gave  us
shot,  and  shot,  but  not  one  touched  so  much  as  any  of
our  sayles.  And  least  wee  should  seeme  in  the  meane
time  to  be  idle,  we  repayed  for  every  shot  of  theirs,
two  or  three  sometimes  at  the  ships  and  the  towne
together.

The  next  day  at  night  wee  thought  to  have  hailed  in

with  the  ships,  and  to  have  fetched  out  some  of  them  :  but

the wind blew  then off  the shore,  so that wee could

not  possiblie  doe  it. And  againe  the  next  day  at  night  we

concluded  to  goe  with  our  owne  two  boates,  and  two  other

boats  of  the  countrey  which  we  had  taken  before,  which

went  with  caravel-sailes,  into  the  roade,  and accordingly

performed the same, notwithstanding the shot of  the

enemie. The  Moone  did  shine,  and  gave  very  good  light,

and  in  we  went  with  our  caravels  and  boates,  and  the  shot

came  about  our  eares  as  thicke  as  haile  :  but  the  Portugals

and  the  rest  perceiving  us  no  whit  at  all  to  shrinke  or  be

dismayed,  forsooke  their  ships,  &  began  to  provide  to  save

themselves,  some with their  boats,  some by  swimming,

and  so  wee  entred  the  ships  with  a  great  showte,  and  found

few  to  resist  us :  but  yet  the  shore  not  being  a cables

length  from  us,  they  did  so  plie  both  their  great  and  small

ordinance  at  us,  that  it  much  annoyed  us :  But  yet  for  all

that  we made  light  of  their  shot,  and  our  men  of  the

They  take  4 barke Clifford entred the Admirall and Viceadmirall,

Tlrbourff^^  and  our  Admirals  men  entred  two  other  ships  of  the  like

Bay  a  notwith-  burden,  and presently  every one cut  the cables in the

standing  the hause,  and  so  by  the  helpe  of  God  in  despite  of  them  all,

shot  of  the wee  brought  away  foure  of  them. The  least  whereof  was

enemie.  ^^  ^^  burthen  of  130  tunnes.

In  this  broile  the  hulke  shotte  at  us  many  times,  but  did
no hurt  at  all  : but  at  the  last  comming  by  the  hulke
towing our  new  prizes,  we  hailed them  and  demanded
A  hulke  of whence  they  were,  they  answered  us  of  Flushing,  and  then
Flushing.  ^g  commanded  him  to  wey  ankor,  and  to  come  after  us :

And  not  daring  to  refuse  it,  he  did  so,  and  brought  with
him  a  caravel  with  fortie  or  fiftie  buts  of  wine  in  her,  and

216

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  ad.

1587-
another  small  barke  which  had  little  or  nothing  in  her :
and  rode  by  us  as  one  of  our  company,  and  was  a  ship
of  the  burden  of  two  hundreth  and  fifty  tunnes.  Our
hard  happe  was  to  find  no  great  matter,  either  of  mar-
chandize  or  victuals  in  these  ships,  saving  in  one  of  them
we  found  foure  buts  of  wine,  in  another  two,  in  another
one,  and  some  fish,  and  all  the  rest  of  their  lading  was
on  shore.

All  this  was  done  upon  Easter  eeve,  and  we  gave
thanks  to  God,  that  we  had  sped  so  well:  and  that  very
night  there  came  a  boate  from  the  towne,  with  a  Dutch
merchant,  and  one  Portugal,  to  oiFer  some  ransome  for
the  ships,  as  they  sayd,  but  as  I  judge  rather  to  espie  our
strength  :  we  kept  them  that  night  aboord,  and  the  next
day  we  sent  them  to  our  Admiral.

The  next  day  being  Easter  day  arose  a  very  great
storme  insomuch  that  our  caravel  which  we  first  tooke
brake  from  us,  and  one  of  our  new  prizes  also,  by  meanes
of  the  breaking  of  her  cable,  slipt  away:  whereupon,
although  the  winde  was  great,  and  the  sea  troublesome,
yet  wee  sent  certaine  of  our  men  in  our  boat,  to  recover
them  if  they  might,  but  we  feare,  that  the  rage  of  the
weather  hath  caused  us  to  leese  both  our  men  and
prizes.

In  the  middest  of  this  storme,  our  two  Spaniards  which
wee  tooke  in  the  river  of  Plate,  seeing  us  all  busie  about
our  prizes,  beganne  to  thinke  howe  they  might  escape
our  handes,  and  suddenly  slipt  both  out  of  one  of
the  cabbins  windowes,  and  by  swimming  got  a  shoare,
a  thing  which  seemed  to  us  impossible,  considering  the  [III.  775.]
outrage  of  the  weather.

This  storme  continued  long,  and  prevented  us  of  mak-
ing our  intended  attempt  against  the  towne,  having  as
much  to  doe  as  possibly  we  might,  in  keeping  our  ships
and  prizes  from  running  ashore  ;  and  falling  into  the
hands  of  those  that  stood  gaping  greedily  for  our  ruine.

The  19  day  the  storme  being  a  little  ceased,  wee  all
weyed  and  came  to  an  Island  that  lyeth  next  Northwest

217

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

from  the  bay,  and  the  twentieth  day  we  went  on  shore,
and  our  carpenters  set  up  our  pinnesse.

The  23  day  the  people  of  the  countrey  came  downe
amaine  upon  us,  and  beset  us  round,  and  shot  at  us  with
their  bowes  and  arrowes,  but  in  short  time  wee  caused
them  to  retire,  and  many  of  them  were  caried  away  by  the
helpe  of  their  fellowes,  although  wee  had  some  of  our
men  hurt  with  some  of  their  arrowes.

The  24  day  we  received  out  of  the  caravel  twelve  buts
of  wine  and  foure  barels  of  oyle,  and  halfe  a  quarter.

The  26  of  April  our  pinnesse  was  lanched:  and  the
same  day  came  downe  unto  us  a  great  number  of  Portugals
and  Indians,  with  whom  we  skirmished  the  space  of  two
houres  to  their  cost.

The  second  day  of  May  the  Admirals  boate  went
a  shore  with  14  men  to  fill  water,  and  presently  being  on
shore,  they  were  intrapped  with  two  or  three  hundred
Indians  which  assaulted  them,  and  slew  one  or  two  of
our  men,  but  the  rest  escaped  notwithstanding  the  number
of  the  enemie,  and  came  safe  againe  with  water  to  the  ship.
Gmse  negli-  We  suffered  this  losse  by  meere  negligence,  &  want  of
gence.  circumspection.

The  5  day  the  captaine  of  the  Admiral  himselfe  tooke
a  small  barke,  his  owne  little  caravel,  our  pinnesse  and  the
Dutchmans  boate,  and  at  night  went  on  shore  to  get
victuals,  amongst  the  bullocks  which  were  in  the  fields :
and  in  the  morning  they  were  gone  so  farre,  that  they
were  out  of  sight.  Which  being  perceived  by  the  enemie,
A  galley  at  they  presently  made  ready  their  galley  for  Admiral,  with
^^y^-  four  caravels,  with  as  many  men  in  them  as  possibly  could

thrust  in  &  stand  one  by  another :  and  they  bare  over  with
the  North  shore  to  meete  with  our  pinnesse  and  boats :
whereupon  our  men  fell  into  great  danger,  although  M.
Lister  our  captaine  disswaded  M.  Withrington  from  that
attempt,  by  laying  before  him  the  danger  both  of  himselfe
and  us  also,  being  so  far  one  from  the  other.  But  being
once  gone,  there  was  no  remedie  but  they  were  to  abide
whatsoever might happen : we in the barke Clifford,

218

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  ad.

1587.

although  wee  were  weakely  left,  yet  perceiving  the  Galley
to  make  after  our  men,  weyed  and  pursued  the  galley,  as
neere  the  shore  as  we  could  conveniently  come  for  want  of
water :  the  hulke  also  weyed  and  came  after  us  to  follow
the  enemie,  but  the  enemie  with  his  oares  got  sight  of  our
pinnesse  and  boats  before  wee  could,  and  bare  directly
with  them  :  which  being  espied  of  our  men,  and  they  see-
ing no  way  to  avoide  them,  made  themselves  ready  (not-
withstanding the  great  oddes)  to  fight  it  out  like  men,  and
to  live  and  die  together.  The  course  that  they  tooke  for
their  best  advantage  upon  the  sudden,  was  this  :  they
went  all  into  the  pinnesse,  and  made  fast  the  Dutchmans
boate  to  one  side,  and  the  small  caravel  to  the  other
side,  and  so  waited  the  comming  of  the  enemie,  giving
them  first  of  all  a  piece  of  Ordinance  for  their  welcome,
which  they  presently  repaied  againe  with  a  piece  out  of  the
prowe  of  the  galley,  and  presently  after,  with  three  or  foure
small  brasse  pieces,  charged  with  haileshot,  and  so  giving  a
mighty  shoute,  came  all  aboord  together,  crying,  entrad,
entrad :  but  our  men  received  them  so  hotely,  with  small
shot  and  pikes,  that  they  killed  them  like  dogs.  And  thus
they  continued  aboord  them  almost  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
thinking  to  have  devoured  our  men,  pinnesse  and
all.  And  surely  to  mans  judgement,  no  other  thing
was  likely  in  regard  of  their  great  number,  and  the
fewnes  of  our  men,  and  they  at  the  first  thought  all
was  their  owne :  but  God,  who  is  the  giver  of  all
victories,  so  blessed  our  small  company,  and  so
strengthened  their  armes  and  mindes  to  fight,  that  the
enemie  having  received  a  mighty  foyle,  was  glad  to
ridde  himselfe  from  their  handes  :  and  whereas  at  their  ^  marvellous
entrance,  wee  esteemed  them  to  bee  no  lesse  then  ^^"^^^  °f^^^
betwixt  two  hundred  and  three  hundred  men  in  the  a  few  of  our
galley,  we  could  scarse  perceive  twenty  men  at  their
departure  stand  on  their  legs,  but  the  greater  part  of
them  was  slaine,  many  deadly  wounded,  their  oares
broken,  &  she  departed  from  our  men,  hanging  upon
one  side  (as  a  Sowe  that  hath  lost her  left eare) with

219

men.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

the  number  of  dead  and  wounded  men  that  lay  one
upon  another.  And  whereas  their  comming  aboord  was
in  a  great  bravado,  with  drumme,  shouting,  and  crying,
they  departed  without  either  noise  of  drumme  or  speech.

We  lost  in  this  conflict  of  our  men,  three  onely,
which  were  Alexander  the  Master  Gunners  mate,
Laurence  Gambrel,  a  proper  yoong  man  of  Hampton,
and  another  that  was  master  Benmans  man.  Some  also
were  hurt  with  the  arrowes  of  the  enemie,  but  the
wounds  were  curable :  and  thus  it  pleased  Almighty
God,  of  his  great  goodnes,  to  give  victory  to  50
[III.  776.]  or  60  Englishmen,  against  sixe  or  seven  hundreth
Portugals  and  Indians,  for  which  we  ceased  not  to  give
such  dutifull  thanks  to  his  Majestie,  as  so  miraculous
a  victory  required.

Now  touching  the  purpose  of  our  men,  who  made
that  attempt  for  fresh  victuals,  their  labour  was  nothing
lost,  but  in  despite  of  the  enemie  they  brought  to  our
ships  16  or  17  yong  bullockes,  which  was  to  our
great  comforts  and  refreshing.  As  for  us  that  were
in  our  ship,  we  could  not  come  neere  them  by  two
miles,  or  more,  to  give  them  any  aid,  yet  we  suppose
that  the  countenance  of  our  ships  was  an  incouragement
to  our  men,  and  some  maner  of  feare  to  the  enemie.

Now  whereas  our  opinion  concerning  the  number  of
the  Portugals  and  Indians  which  were  slaine,  as  afore-
sayd,  was  grounded  at  that  time  upon  our  probable
conjecture,  not  being  able  otherwise  to  come  to  the
knowledge  thereof:  you  shall  understand  that  the  next
night  after  the  fight  there  came  aboord  us  two  Indians
upon  a  Gyngatho,  who  were  runne  away  from  their
masters,  and  they  told  us  for  a  very  good  trueth,  that
the  gallie  went  out  from  the  towne  with  foure  hundreth
Above  ido  men  in  her,  but  there  came  not  backe  to  the  towne
Portugals  15  again  alive  above  thirty  of  them  all  :  and  I  amongst
the  rest  being  desirous  to  know  of  one  of  them,  what
the  newes  was  at  the  towne,  he  answered  me  with  great
laughter  : Todo  esta  cacado  en  Tierra.

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  ad.

1587.

The  twelfth  day  I  was  sent  for  to  come  aboord  the
admirall,  about  the  hulke  :  where  upon  the  complaint
of  the  Dutchmen,  master  Withrington  entred  into  bond
to  them  for  the  paiment  of  their  fraight,  but  how  my
lord  would  like  that  bond  of  debt  at  our  returne,
I  knowe  not.  I  gave  him  my  advise  and  counsell  to
get  his  bond  againe  into  his  hands.

The  thirteenth  day  our  captaine  sent  out  of  our  ship
certaine  victuals  unto  the  Admirall,  as  one  butte  of
dight  rise,  two  chests  of  clean  rise,  one  barrell  of
oatemeale,  one  barrell  of  peason,  and  one  barrell  of  oile,
because  they  were  somewhat  scanted  of  victuals,  and
we  at  this  time  were  to  have  out  of  the  Admirall  our
part  of  five  and  twenty  chests  of  fine  sugar,  and  more,
of  eight  chests,  and  sixe  chests  that  were  taken  in  the
Bay  of  Todos  Santos,  at  the  Ingenios,  more  of  one
hundreth  and  thirty  hats,  and  other  divers  pillages,
which  were  taken  in  the  prizes,  and  at  the  shore.

The  foureteenth  day  being  Monday,  it  was  concluded
amongst  us  all,  not  to  leave  the  towne  of  Baya  so,
but  notwithstanding  the  time  that  they  had  to  strengthen
themselves  and  the  towne,  yet  to  give  an  attempt  for
the  winning  of  it  :  and  therefore  wee  provided  our
pinn esses,  caravels,  and  boates  for  the  enterprise  :  and
as  we  were  departing  from  our  shippes,  the  winde
turned  directly  contrary  to  our  course,  so  that  our
determination  for  that  time  was  broken,  and  wee
returned  againe  to  our  ships  :  and  to  say  the  trueth,
if  the  weather  and  winde  had  served,  our  attempt  had
bene  very  desperate,  considering  the  number  of
Portugals  and  Indians  which  were  then  gathered
together,  to  the  number  of  seven  or  eight  thousand,
and  their  artillery  upon  the  shore,  playing  upon  us :
but  neverthelesse  we  had  proceeded,  if  the  winds  had
favoured  us.

The  16  day  we  went  to  certaine  Ingenios  of  the
Portugals,  where  we  found  the  people  fled  and  we
entered their houses without resistance. We found

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

in  their  purging  house  1000  pots  of  sugar,  some  halfe
purged,  some  a  quarter,  and  some  newly  put  into  the
pots  :  so  that  every  man  tooke  his  pot  of  sugar  for
their  provision,  and  set  all  the  rest  on  fire.

The  17  day  wee  all  weyed  to  goe  to  another  Ingenio,
to  see  if  wee  could  find  there  better  sugar,  and  in  the
way  we  met  with  a  prize,  which  was  a  caravel,  which
wee  found  driving  with  the  weather,  and  entred  her,
and  had  in  her  onely  three  Faulcons  of  yron,  which  our
pinnesse  brought  away,  and  set  the  ship  on  fire.
Dalamor  in  the  small  prize  ran  so  farre  in,  that  hee
brought  his  ship  on  ground,  where  shee  lay  three  or
foure  houres,  till  such  time  as  there  came  from  the
towne  five  caravels  full  of  men,  which  being  perceived
of  us,  our  captaine  with  our  men  went  to  him  to  ayde
him.  The  caravels  came  within  Faulcon  shot  of  us,
but  durst  come  no  neerer,  lest  they  might  have  tasted
of  the  like  banket,  that  they  received  the  last  time.
About  halfe  flood  came  the  galley  againe,  and  three
caravels  more,  but  before  they  came,  the  barke  was  a
floate,  and  set  sayle  :  and  then  they  all  went  to  gard
their  Ingenios,  which  we  had  purposed  to  visit  :  but  the
night  comming  on,  perswaded  us  to  the  contrary.
They  return  The  1 9  day  we  set  sayle  to  goe  into  the  roade  of
again  to  Baya.  g^yg^  againe,  with  our  pinnesses,  and  a  flag  of  truce,  to
see  if  we  could  recover  our  foure  men,  which  remained
alive  of  those  ten,  that  perished  in  our  boate,  of  whom
we  spake  before,  which  foure  were  unfortunately  fallen
into  their  hands  :  but  they  at  our  approching  neere  the
towne,  shot  at  us,  and  wee  as  ready  as  they,  gave  them
in  all  27  shot,  and  so  ankored  a  little  from  the  towne,
to  see  what  they  would  doe.

The  20  day  riding  still  before  the  towne,  our  Admirall
sent  a  Negro  ashore,  with  letters  from  the  Portugals,
that  wee  had  prisoners  aboord  :  the  eff'ect  of  which
letters  was,  that  if  we  might  have  our  men  released
and  delivered  us,  they  should  have  theirs  from  our
ships.

WITHRINGTON AND LISTER  ad.

1587.

The  next  day  in  the  morning,  in  stead  of  their  [III.  777.]
bloody  flagge,  they  put  up  two  white  flagges,  and  sent
a  Gingatho  off  to  us  with  two  Indians,  with  letters  of
answere  from  the  Governour ;  but  they  would  not
consent  in  any  case  that  we  should  have  our  men,  and
willed  their  Portugals  to  take  their  captivitie  patiently,
for  they  would  not  redeeme  them  :  a  motion  they  made
in  their  letters,  to  buy  againe  one  of  their  prizes,
which  we  had  taken  out  of  the  rode  :  but  our  admirall
answered  them,  no,  seeing  they  detained  our  men,  wee
would  keepe  both  their  men,  and  ships  too.  The  same
evening  we  weyed,  and  came  out  of  the  haven,  halfe
a  league  to  seaward.

The  22 we set saile to sea, and  the 23  came  to  an  ^n  Island  12
Island  twelve  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Baya,  to  wood,  (^^^f '  f"/'^

,  o  y '  ' South  of  Bata.

and  water.

The  24  day  being  aboord  with  our  pinnesses,  we
met  with  a  Canoa,  wherein  was  one  Portugall,  and  sixe
Indians :  we  shot  at  the  Canoa,  and  killed  an  Indian,  and
tooke  the  Portugall,  and  one  of  the  Indians,  and  brought
them  aboord  our  shippes  :  we  there  examined  them,  and
the  Portugal  confessed  that  there  was  a  shippe  laden  with
meale,  and  other  victuals,  bound  for  Fernambuck,  but
put  into  a  creeke,  because  she  durst  not  goe  along  the
coast,  hearing  of  our  shippes.  Whereupon  we  manned
both  our  pinnesses,  and  tooke  the  Portugal  with  us,
to  goe  and  seeke  the  same  ship,  but  that  night  we
could  not  find  her.

The  26  day  we  went  againe,  and  found  her,  being
hailed  up  into  a  creeke,  where  a  man  would  have  thought
a  shippe  boate  could  not  have  entred  :  wee  found  her
indeed  laden  with  meale  principally  :  but  she  had  also
in  her  fourteene  chests  of  sugar,  of  which  two  were  in
powder,  and  twelve  in  loaves.  This  ship  was  of  the
burden  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  tunnes,  and  a  new  ^  ^ezu  Portu-
ship,  this  being  the  first  voyage  that  ever  she  made,  ^^^  '^^^  ^^^"^
and  as  the  Portugall  confessed,  shee  was  fraighted  for
Fernambuck, but  the  men of  Baya  having  great  want

223

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

of  bread,  bought  both  the  ship  and  her  lading,  and
so  thought  to  stay  her  in  this  creeke,  till  we  were
gone  off  the  coast :  but  it  was  our  good  hap  to  dis-
appoint their  pretense,  and  to  fetch  her  from  thence,
where  they  thought  her  as  safe  as  if  she  had  bene  at
Lisbon.

The  28  day  we  devided  the  meale  amongst  us,
according  to  the  want  of  every  ship.

The  30  day,  16  or  17  Dutchmen  went  with  their
boate  from  the  hulke  to  shoare,  to  fill  water  :  and
upon  a  sudden  they  were  assaulted  with  fifty  or  sixty
Portugals,  and  so  many  more  Indians  armed  with  shot
and  other  weapons,  and  they  slew  their  Master  and
Purser,  and the rest were hurt,  but yet escaped with

A  good  warn-  their  lives  : a  good  warning  for  us  to  bee  circumspect,

ingfor  us  to ^^^  carefuU  in  our  landing.

In  ^andini  ^ '^^^  ^^^^  ^^7  °^  May  wee  cast  off  one  of  our  prizes,

which  wee  called  the  George,  and  our  Admirall  and  the

hulke  tooke  the  men  and  other  necessaries  out  of  her,

into them. The same day the Portugals which had

hurt  the  Dutchmen  came  to  the  shore,  and  dared  us  to

come  on land :  whereupon  wee  went  into  our  pinnesses

with fortie shot : but the  cowardly villanes ranne all

away  to  the  hils,  from  the  water  side : but  master  Lister

with nine  men  followed  them,  and  they  fled  still  before

them,  and durst not  stay  their  approch :  so  they  came

backe  againe,  and  wee  filled  water quietly,  and at our

pleasure.

June.  The third day  of  June our  captaine master Lister,

having  a  great  desire  for  the  performance  of  this  voyage,

according  to my  Lords  direction,  went  to  our  admirall,

and requested him to  give  him sixe  buts  of  wine,  one

barrell  of  oile, three  or foure barrells  of  flesh, and  to

Jn  offer  of have Thomas Hood  and seven or eight seamen for

captaine  Lister  some of  our  landmen,  and by Gods help  he  with the

'lnfsM^\nd ^^^^^  Clifford,  would  alone  proceede  for  the  South  sea:

for  ^the  South ^^^  admirall  mightily  withstoode  his  motion,  and  would

sea.  grant  no  iote  of  his  particular  requests.

224

WITHRINGTON  AND LISTER  ad.

1587.

The  7  of  June,  having  no  use  at  all  of  our  prizes,
we  burnt  one,  and  cast  off  another,  and  filled  our  owne
ships  with  the  necessaries  of  them.

The  8  day  wee  put  off  to  sea,  but  yet  with  much
adoe  came  againe  to  our  ankoring  place,  because  of  the
weather.

The  10  day  the  admirall  sent  for  us  to  come  aboord
him,  and  being  come,  hee  opened  a  Carde  before  all  the
company,  and  tolde  us  that  my  lords  voyage  for  the
South  sea  was  overthrowen  for  want  of  able  men,  and
victuals,  and  that  therefore  hee  thought  it  best  to  plie
for  some  of  the  Islands  of  the  West  India,  or  the
Azores,  to  see  if  they  could  meete  with  some  good
purchase,  that  might  satisfie  my  lord.  These  wordes
were  taken  heavily  of  all  the  company,  and  no  man
would  answere  him,  but  kept  silence,  for  very  griefe  to
see  my  lords  hope  thus  deceived,  and  his  great  expenses
and  costs  cast  away.  The  common  sort  seeing  no
other  remedie,  were  contented  to  returne  as  well  as  he.

The 16 day  wee  espied  a  sayle,  whereupon  our  pin-
nesse  and Dalamor  gave  her  chase,  and  put  her  ashore
upon the Island,  where  the  men forsooke her,  and  ran
away  with  such  things  as  they  could  conveniently  carie :  [ill.  778.]
our  pinnesse  boorded  her,  and  found  little  in  her ;  they  Another pin-
tooke  out  of  her  nine  chests  of  sugar,  and  one  hogge,  '^^^^^  taken.
and '}^K^ pieces of  pewter, and so left her upon the
sands.

From  this  time  forward  we  began  to  plie  Northwards,  J«'b-
and  the  first  of  July  fell  with  the  land  againe,  where  we They  returned
fished,  and  found reasonable good store. I tooke the
latitude  that  day, and found  our  selves  in 10 degrees
and  22  minutes.

The  7  day  we  determined  to  fall  with  Fernambuck,
and  wee  came  so  neere  it,  that  Dalamor  (as  he  told  us)
espied  some  of  the  ships  that  were  in  the  harbour :
yet  notwithstanding  we  all  fell  to  leeward  of  the  river,
&  could  not  after  that,  by  any  meanes  recover  the
height  of  it  againe :  but  we  ceased  not  on  all  parts  to
XI  225  p

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

endevour  the  best  we  could,  &  oftentimes  lost  com-
pany for  a  day  or  two,  one  of  another,  but  there  was
no  remedie,  but  patience,  for  to  Fernambuck  we  could
not  come,  having  so  much  overshot  it  to  the  North-
ward, and  the  wind  keeping  at  the  South  and  South-
west.

The  20  day  I  tooke  the  Sunne  in  5  degrees  50  minuts,
Fernambuck which  was  2 degrees to  the  Northward  of  Fernambuck,
in  the  Southerly  ^^^  ^1^^  further  wee  went,  the  more  untowardly  did  the
dez^^omin ^^^^  °^  °^^ ships  worke,  either  to  come  into  haven,  or
to  keepe  company  one  with  another. And  truely  I  sup-
pose, that by reason of the froward course of the
Admirall,  he meant  of  purpose to  lose  us :  for  I know
not how  the neerer  we  endevoured to be to  him,  the
further  off  would  he  beare  from  us,  and  wee  seeing  that,
kept  on our  owne course,  and lookt to  our selves as
well  as  we  could.

The  24  day  our whole  company  was  called together

to  consultation,  for our best  course : some  would goe

for the  West India,  some  directly  North  for  England ;

and  in  conclusion,  the  greater  part  was  bent  to  plie  for

our  owne  countrey,  considering  our  necessities  of  victuals

and  fresh  water,  and yet if any  place  were  offered  us

in  the  way,  not  to  omit  it,  to  seeke  to  fill  water.

A  lozve  Island The  26  day  in  the  morning,  we  espied  a  lowe  Island,

in  3  degrees  y  ^3^^  ^^ \q^^ j^ againe,  and could descrie it no  more.

49  mtnu  es. 'pj^^g j^y.  ^g found our selves in 3 degrees  and 49.

minutes.

The  27  day  we  searched  what  water  we  had  left  us,
and  found  but  nine  buts  onely,  so  that  our  captaine
allowed  but  a  pinte  of  water  for  a  man  a  day,  to  pre-
serve it  as  much  as  might  be,  wherewith  every  man
was  content,  and  we  were  then  in  number  fiftie  men
and  boyes.
Jugust.  The first  of  August  we found our  selves 5 degrees

to  the  Northward  of  the  line,  all  which  moneth  we
continued  our  course  homeward,  without  touching  any
where : toward the  end  whereof,  a  sorrowfull accident

226

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

fell  out in  our  hulke,  which  being  devided  from  us  in  T^^^  ^^^^^  of
a  calme,  fell afire by  some great negligence,  and per-  ^^^^^^^i^^^^^
ished by  that meanes in  the  seas,  wee  being not  able  ^^^^  ^„  „g„ii_
any  wayes  to  helpe  the  ship,  or  to  save  the  men.  gence.

The  4  day  of  September,  we  had  brought  our  selves
into  the  height  of  41  degrees  &  20  minutes,  somewhat
to  the  Northwards  of  the  Islands  of  the  Azores :  and
thus  bulting  up  and  downe  with  contrary  winds,  the
29  of  the  same  moneth,  we  reached  the  coast  of  Eng-
land, and  so  made  an  end  of  the  voyage.

A  discourse  of  the  West  Indies  and  South  sea
written  by  Lopez  Vaz  a  Portugal,  borne  in
the  citie  of  Elvas,  continued  unto  the  yere
1587.  Wherein  among  divers  rare  things  not
hitherto  delivered  by  any  other  w^riter,  cer-
taine  voyages  of  our  Englishmen  are  truely
reported:  w^hich  was  intercepted  with  the
author  thereof  at  the  river  of  Plate,  by
Captaine  Withrington  and  Captaine  Christo-
pher Lister,  in  the  fleete  set  foorth  by  the
right  Honorable  the  Erie  of  Cumberland  for
the  South  sea  in  the  yeere 1 586.

Rancis Drake an Englishman being on  This  voyage
the sea,  and having knowledge of  the  "^^^  ^^^^  ^"
small strength  of  the  towne  of  Nombre  ^tj^^^
de Dios,  came into the  harborough  on
a  night  with  foure  pinnesses,  and  landed
an  hundreth  and  fifty  men :  and  leaving
one halfe of  his men with a trumpet
in  a  fort  which  was  there,  hee  with  the  rest  entred  the
towne  without  doing any harme till  hee  came  at the
market  place : and  there  his  company  discharging  their
calivers, and sounding their trumpets (which made a
great noyse in the towne) were answered by their
fellowes  in the  forte,  who discharged and  sounded in

227

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

like  maner.  This  attempt  put  the  townesmen  in  such
extreme  feare,  that  leaving  their  houses,  they  fled  into
the  mountaines,  and  there  bethought  themselves  what  the
matter  should  be  in  the  towne,  remaining  as  men  amazed
at  so  sudden  an  alarme.  But  the  Spaniards  being  men
for  the  most  part  of  good  discretion  joyned  foureteene
or  fifteene  of  them  together  with  their  pieces,  to  see
who  was  in  the  towne :  and  getting  to  a  corner  of  the
market-place  they  discovered  the  Englishmen,  and  per-
ceiving that  they  were  but  a  few,  discharged  their  pieces
at  them ;  and  their  fortune  was  such,  that  they  slew
[III.  779.]  the  trumpetter,  and  shot  the  captaine  (whose  name  was
Francis  Drake)  into  the  legge :  who  feeling  himselfe
hurt  retired  toward  the  Fort,  where  he  had  left  the
rest  of  his  men :  but  they  in  the  Fort  sounded  their
trumpet,  and  being  not  answered  againe,  and  hearing
the  calivers  discharged  in  the  towne,  thought  that  their
fellowes  in  the  towne  had  bene  slaine,  and  thereupon
fled  to  their  Pinnesses.  Now  Francis  Drake  (whom  his
men  carried  because  of  his  hurt)  when  he  came  to  the
fort  where  he  left  his  men  and  saw  them  fled,  he  and
the  rest  of  his  company  were  in  so  great  feare,  that
leaving  their  furniture  behinde  them,  and  putting  off^
their  hose,  they  swamme  &  waded  all  to  their  Pinnesses,
and  departed  forth  of  the  harbour,  so  that  if  the  Span-
iards had  followed  them,  they  might  have  slaine  them
all.  Thus  Captaine  Drake  did  no  more  harme  at
Nombre  de  Dios,  neither  was  there  in  this  skirmish
any  more  then  one  Spaniarde  slaine,  and  of  the  Eng-
lishmen onely  their  Trumpetter,  whom  they  left  behind
with  his  trumpet  in  his  hand.

From  hence  the  coast  lieth  all  along  till  you  come
to  Cartagena.  Betweene  Nombre  de  Dios  and  Carta-
gena is  a  great  sound  or  gulfe,  where  the  first  Spaniardes
that  ever  dwelt  upon  the  firme  land  built  and  inhabited
the  towne  of  Dariene :  howbeit  they  abode  not  long
there,  because  of  the  unholesomenesse  of  the  place.

But  Captaine  Drake  being  discontent  with  the  repulse

228

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

that  the  men  of  Nombre  de  Dios  gave  him,  went  with
his  Pinnesses  into  the  said  bay  or  sound  of  Dariene,
where  having  conference  with  certaine  Negros  which  were
ranne  away  from  their  masters  of  Panama  and  Nombre  de
Dios,  he  was  informed  that  at  the  very  same  time  many
mules  were  comming  from  Panama  to  Nombre  de  Dios
laden  with  gold  and  silver.  Upon  this  newes  Francis
Drake  taking  with  him  an  hundred  shot,  and  the  said
Negros,  stayed  in  the  way  till  the  treasure  came  by,  accom-
panied and  guarded  onely  by  those  that  drove  the  mules,
who  mistrusted  nothing  at  all.  When  captaine  Drake
met  with  them,  he  tooke  away  their  golde :  but  the  silver
he  left  behinde,  because  he  could  not  carrie  it  over  the
mountaines.  And  two  dayes  after  this  he  went  to  the
house  of  crosses  called  by  the  Spaniards  Venta  de  Cruzes,  Venta  de
where  all  the  merchants  leave  their  goods,  where  hee  slew  "'^'^^^•
sixe  or  seven  of  the  marchants,  but  found  neither  gold
nor  silver,  but  great  store  of  marchandize :  and  so  he  fired
the  said  house,  with  all  the  goods,  which  were  judged  to
be  worth  above  two  hundred  thousand  ducats.  Thus  not
finding  golde  in  this  house  to  satisfie  his  minde,  hee  burned
the  marchants  goods,  and  foorthwith  recovered  his  Pin-
nesses :  where  fortune  so  favoured  his  proceedings,  that  he
had  not  bene  aboord  halfe  an  houre,  but  there  came  to  the
sea  side  above  three  hundred  souldiers,  which  were  sent
of  purpose  to  take  him  :  but  God  suffered  him  to  escape
their  hands,  to  be  a  farther  plague  unto  the  Spaniards.

Also  another  Englishman  named  John  Oxenham  hear-  JohnOxenham
ing  what  spoyle  Captaine  Drake  had  done  upon  that  coast,  ^^^°  ^575-
made  a  voyage  thither  to  enterprize  the  like.  His  ship
was  of  burthen  about  an  hundred  and  twentie  tunnes,  and
he  was  accompanied  with  seventie  persons :  he  had  con-
ference also  with  the  foresaid  Negros,  but  being  advertized
that  the  treasure  was  conducted  by  souldiers,  he  deter-
mined with  himselfe  to  doe  that  which  never  any  man
before  durst  undertake  to  doe.  For  being  most  resolute
of  his  purpose,  and  not  looking  nor  forecasting  what
danger  might  ensue  of  this  bold  enterprize,  he  landed  his

229

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

men  in  the  same  place  where  Captaine  Drake  was,  and
hailing  his  ship  to  shore,  cut  downe  boughes  of  trees,  and
covered  his  ship  with  them,  and  hid  up  his  great  ordinance
in  the  ground.  Thus  leaving  not  one  man  in  his  ship,  he
tooke  two  small  peeces  of  ordinance,  and  his  calievers,  and
good  store  of  victuals,  with  all  other  necessaries  for  his  in-
tended voyage.  And  he  went  with  the  Negros  above
A  river  run-  twelve  leagues  up  into  the  maine  land,  unto  a  river  that
mngtnio  the  j-unneth  into  the  South  sea  :  and  by  this  river  in  a  wood  he
cut  downe  timber,  and  built  a  Pinnesse,  which  was  45  foote
long  by  the  keele ;  which  Pinnesse  being  finished,  he
went  downe  the  river  and  passed  into  the  South  sea,  carry-
ing sixe  Negros  with  him  for  his  guides,  and  he  arrived  at
the  Hand  of  Pearles  being  25  leagues  distant  from  Panama.
This  Hand  lieth  in  the  South  sea  as  they  saile  from  Peru
to  Panama,  and  here  he  stayed  ten  dayes,  before  he  could
take  any  shipping,  but  at  length  there  came  a  small  barke
from  a  place  called  Quito  in  Peru  :  this  barke  he  tooke,
and  found  in  her  60000  pezos  of  golde,  with  much  wine
and  bread  :  and  not  being  content  with  this,  he  stayed  a
long  while,  before  he  would  sende  away  his  prize  or  any  of
his  men.  Shortly  after  he  tooke  another  barke  that  came
from  Lima,  wherein  he  found  1 00000  pezos  of  silver  in
barres,  which  being  all  aboord  his  Pinnesse,  he  shaped  his
course  toward  the  river  from  whence  he  came  :  but  before
his  departure  he  landed  on  the  foresaid  Hand  to  finde
pearles,  and  went  to  a  small  towne  of  the  Hand  inhabited
by  Negros  for  the  same  purpose :  where  finding  but  small
store,  he  returned  to  his  Pinnesse,  and  comming  neere
unto  the  river  he  sent  away  his  two  prizes,  and  with  his
Pinnesse  entered  up  the  river.  The  Negros  of  the  Hand
of  perles,  so  soone  as  the  Englishmen  were  departed,
[III.  780.]  posted  in  their  Canoas  to  Panama,  to  signifie  unto  the
Governour  what  they  had  done.  Whereupon  the  Gover-
nour  within  two  dayes  after  sent  out  foure  barkes  and  an
hundred  souldiers,  and  Negros  to  rowe,  the  captaine  of
which  souldiers  was  called  Juan  de  Ortega :  who  went  first
to  the  Hand  of  pearles,  &  there  had  knowledge  which  way

230

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.
the  Englishmen  did  take,  and  in  pursuing  them  he  met
with  the  two  prizes  taken  by  the  Englishmen,  which  tolde
him  that  they  were  gone  up  the  river.  But  when  he  was
come  to  the  enterance  of  the  river,  he  knew  not  which
way  to  take,  because  the  river  ranne  into  the  sea  by  three
mouthes,  and  not  all  at  one.  Therefore  being  determined
with  himselfe  to  passe  up  the  greatest  of  the  three,  he  saw
comming  downe  with  the  streame  many  feathers  of  hens
out  of  one  of  the  lesser  mouthes  :  which  mouth  he  entered,
and  sayling  foure  dayes  up  the  same,  hee  descryed  the
Englishmens  pinnesse  lying  upon  the  sand,  and  comming
to  boord  her,  they  found  in  her  no  more  but  sixe  English-
men, of  which  they  killed  one,  and  the  other  5  fled,  &
having  thoroughly  ransacked  the  said  pinnesse,  they  could
finde  nought  in  her,  but  victuals.  The  Spaniards  seeing
this,  determined  to  seeke  out  the  Englishmen  by  land,  and
leaving  about  twentie  men  to  keepe  their  barks  they
marched  with  eightie  shot  up  into  the  countrey,  and  halfe
a  league  from  the  river  they  found  a  little  house  made
with  boughes,  where  the  Englishmen  had  left  all  their
treasure ;  which  the  Spaniards  tooke  and  carried  backe  to
their  barkes,  meaning  not  to  follow  the  Englishmen  any
further;  but  the  English  captaine  with  all  his  men,  and
above  200  Negros  followed  the  Spaniards  unto  the  rivers
side,  and  set  upon  them  with  great  fury :  howbeit  the
Spaniards  lying  behind  the  bushes  did  easily  put  the
English  to  flight,  and  they  tooke  seven  of  them  alive,  and
slewe  eleven  and  five  Negros :  so  the  Spaniards  returned
with  the  losse  of  two  men  and  five  or  sixe  hurt.  Then
they  asked  those  Englishmen  which  they  had  taken  pri-
soners, why  they  departed  not  with  their  treasure,  having
fifteene  dayes  libertie  ?  They  answered,  that  their  captaine
had  commanded  them  to  carry  all  that  golde  and  silver
unto  the  place  where  their  ship  was,  and  they  were  agreed
to  carry  it,  although  they  made  three  or  foure  journeys,
for  he  promised  to  give  them  part  of  the  treasure  beside
their  wages,  but  the  mariners  would  needes  have  it  by  and
by :  whereat  the  captaine  being  angry  because  they  put  so

231

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

small  trust  in  his  word,  would  not  suffer  his  saylers  to
Carrie  it,  but  said  he  would  get  Negros  to  serve  his  turne,
and  so  these  were  the  Negros  aforesaid,  whom  he  had
brought  to  carry  away  the  golde  and  silver:  but  by  the
way  he  met  with  the  five  Englishmen  which  fled  from
the  pinnesse,  who  told  him  of  the  Spaniards;  and  then
he  made  friends  with  all  his  men,  and  got  the  Negros
to  take  his  part:  but  having  the  overthrow,  and  his  best
men  being  slaine  and  taken  prisoners,  he  thought  to
have  returned  to  his  ship,  and  so  to  have  gone  for
England.  The  Spanish  captaine  having  heard  this  dis-
course of  the  English  prisoners,  buried  the  dead  bodies,
embarking  all  things,  and  with  the  Englishmen  and  their
pinnesse  returned  backe  unto  Panama.  Thus  was  the
Englishmens  voyage  overthrowen.

Now  so  soone  as  the  foure  barkes  and  the  pinnesse  were
arrived  at  Panama,  the  Governour  of  that  place  sent  a
messenger  overland  to  Nombre  de  Dios,  to  advertise  the
townesmen,  where  the  Englishmens  ship  lay :  whereupon
they  of  Nombre  de  Dios  manned  out  foure  ships  and
went  into  the  bay  of  Dariene  where  the  Englishmen
had  left  their  ship,  which  they  tooke  away  with  them  to
Nombre  de  Dios,  with  all  her  ordinance  ;  so  that  the
poore  Englishmen  were  left  in  the  mountaines  very  naked
and  destitute  of  all  comfort :  for  the  Spaniards  had  taken
out  of  the  foresayd  house  of  boughes  all  their  tooles  &
other  necessaries,  so  that  they  could  by  no  meanes  have
any  succour :  whereas  otherwise  they  might  have  builded
another  pinnesse,  and  provided  better  for  themselves  to
have  returned  for  their  owne  countrey.

These  newes  comming  to  the  eares  of  the  Viceroy  of
Peru,  he  thought  it  not  convenient  to  suffer  those  liftie
Englishmen  which  were  yet  alive,  to  continue  in  the
mountaines  among  the  said  Negros.  Wherefore  he  sent
a  servant  of  his  called  Diego  de  Frees  with  1 50  shot
to  seeke  them,  who  at  length  found  them  making  of
Canoas  to  take  some  one  small  barke  or  other  that  sayled
to  and  againe  in  the  North  sea,  whereby  they  might  the

232

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

better  shift  for  themselves  :  but  before  they  had  finished
their  pretended  worke,  the  Spanish  souldiers  set  upon
them,  and  tooke  fifteene  of  them  that  were  sicke :  but
the  rest  fled,  whom  the  Spaniards  pursued  among  the
mountaines,  and  in  the  end  the  Negros  betraied  them,
and  they  were  all  taken  and  carried  to  Panama,  Where
the  Justice  asked  the  English  captaine,  whither  he  had
the  Queenes  license,  or  the  license  of  any  other  Prince  or
Lord  ?  And  he  answered  that  he  had  none,  but  that  he
came  of  his  owne  proper  motion.  Which  being  knowen
to  the  Justice,  the  Captaine  and  his  companie  were  con-
demned and  were  all  put  to  death  at  Panama,  saving  the
Captaine  himselfe,  the  Master,  and  the  Pilot,  and  five  boyes,
which  were  caried  to  Lima,  where  the  Captaine  and  the
two  other  men  were  executed,  but  the  boyes  are  yet  living.

The  king  of  Spaine  having  intelligence  of  these  matters,  f^arre  made
sent  300 men of  warre  against  those Negros  who  had  ^S'^^"^^  ^"^
assisted  the  Englishmen,  which  Negros  before  were  slaves  rjjj  -g  j  -1
unto  the  Spaniards,  and  (as  is  aforesaide)  fled  from  their
masters  into  those  mountaines,  and  so  joyned  themselves
to  the  Englishmen,  thinking  by  that  meanes  to be  re-
venged of  the  Spaniards  crueltie.

At  the  first  comming  of  these  three  hundred  souldiers
they  tooke  many  of  the  Negros,  and  did  great  justice
on  them  according  to  the  qualitie  of  their  offences.  But
after  a  season  the  Negros  grew  wise  and  wary,  and  pre-
vented the  Spaniards  so,  that  none  of  them  could  be
taken.  Whereof  the  king  being  advertised  by  his
Captaines,  as  also  how  the  countrey  was  full  of  moun-
taines and  rivers,  and  very  unhealthfuU,  insomuch  that
his  souldiers  died,  he  wrote  unto  his  said  Captaines  to
make  an  agreement  with  those  Negros,  to  the  ende  the
countrey  might  be  in  quiet.  And  so  they  came  to  agree-
ment with  the  Captaines  of  the  Negros,  and  all  was
appeased.  Afterward  the  Negros  inhabiting  two  places
which  the  Spaniardes  allotted  unto  them,  the  kings  par-
don was  proclaimed  unto  all  those  which  before  the  day
of  the  proclamation  thereof  had  runne  from  their  Masters,

233

A.D.

1572-87.

Frenchmen.

Seven  French
ships  taken  by
the  gallies.
Sir  Francis
Drakes  voyage
to  S.  I  ago,
Sani  Domingo,
Cartagena,
and  S.  Augus-
tine.

Cartagena.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

upon  condition  that  from  that  day  forward,  whatsoever
other  fugitive  Negros  should  resort  unto  them,  they
should  returne  them  home  either  dead  or  alive,  if  not,
that  they  should  pay  for  them.  Upon  these  conditions,
and  to  make  all  quiet  in  the  mountaines,  all  things  were
concluded  and  agreed  upon.  So  that  now  the  Negros
dwell  in  great  townes,  where  they  have  Spaniardes  for
their  teachers,  and  a  Spaniard  for  their  Judge,  and  with
this  they  holde  themselves  very  well  contented,  and  are
obedient  unto  their  rulers.

The  Spaniards  since  they  conquered  those  parts  have
seene  many  Frenchmen  on  that  coast,  but  never  any
Englishmen  in  that  place,  save  those  two  onely  which
I  have  before  mentioned.  And  although  the  Frenchmen
have  come  strong,  yet  durst  they  never  put  foot  on  shore
as  the  English  did.  But  the  king  of  Spaine  hearing  that
Englishmen  as  well  as  Frenchmen  beganne  to  haunt  that
coast,  caused  two  gallies  to  be  made  and  well  appointed,
to  keepe  the  coast.  The  first  yeere  that  they  were  made
they  tooke  sixe  or  seven  French  ships.  So  soone  as  this
was  knowen  there  used  fewe  English  or  French  men  of
warre  to  come  on  the  coast,  untill  this  yeere  1586.  when
as  the  aforesaid  Francis  Drake  came  with  a  strong  fleete
of  about  foure  and  twentie  ships,  and  did  such  harme
as  is  well  knowen  unto  all  Christendome.  But  (God
sparing  the  king  of  Spaine  life)  hee  will  sufficiently  pro-
vide to  keepe  his  subjectes  from  the  invasions  of  other
Nations.

Now  to  go  forward  with  our  begunne  discourse,  the
next  towne  upon  this  coast  beyond  Nombre  de  Dios  is
Cartagena :  it  standeth  in  a  more  healthfull  place,  and
is  a  greater  towne  then  the  other,  bordering  upon  a  better
countrey,  which  aboundeth  with  plentie  of  victuals,  and
having  a  very  good  port  for  the  harbour  of  ships :  and
it  is  called  Cartagena,  because  it  resembleth  very  much
the  citie  of  Cartagena  in  Spaine.  It  containeth  above
foure  hundred  housholds.  It  is  very  rich  by  reason  of
the ships staying there, when they  goe or  come  from

234

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

Spaine.  And  if  the  ships  chance  to  winter  before  they
goe  home  into  Spaine,  then  they  lie  at  Cartagena.  Also
it  is  greatly  enriched  by  the  marchandize,  which  is  there
discharged  to  be  carryed  to  the  new  kingdome  of  Granada,
from  which  kingdome  much  golde  is  brought  unto  Carta-
gena. This  new  kingdome  of  Granada  is  two  hundred  ^«^^"  ^^J'««
leagues  within  the  land:  neither  can  they  travel  from  ^^  Granada.
Cartagena  to  this  kingdome  by  land,  because  of  the
mountaines  and  standing  waters,  which  lie  in  the  way,
so  that  they  are  faine  to  carry  their  goods  up  a  river
called  The  great  river  of  Magdalen.  They  can  goe  with  Rio  &'ande
their  barkes  but  two  hundred  leagues  up  this  river ;  for  ^^j'j^  Magda-
although  it  be  large  and  very  deepe,  yet  there  runneth
so  swift  a  current,  that  the  barkes  are  constrained  to
discharge  their  goods  at  a  place  in  the  river  called  Branco  Branco  de
de  Malambo,  into  small  canoas  which  rowe  close  by  the  ^^^^^^  "•
shores  side.  In  this  river  are  great  abundance  of  Croco-
diles, so  huge  and  terrible  to  behold,  that  such  as  never
sawe  them  before  are  very  fearefull  at  the  first  sight  of
them,  for  if  a  man  chance  to  put  his  hand  or  foote  into
the  water,  they  will  streightway  catch  at  them.  In  some
places  this  river  is  very  unhealthfull  and  full  of  noysome
wormes  ;  but  the  first  place  thereupon  which  the  Spaniards
doe  inhabite  called  Mompox  is  exceeding  healthfuU.  The  Mompox.
countrey  adjoyning  upon  this  river  they  call  The  new
kingdome  of  Granada,  because  the  captaine  called  Cesada
which  first  conquered  the  same,  and  inhabited  there,  was
borne  at  Granada  in  Spaine :  for  it  is  the  use  of  the
Spanish  captaines,  when  they  have  conquered  any  Pro-
vince of  the  Indies,  to  call  it  after  the  name  of  the  place
where  they  themselves  were  borne.  This  new  kingdome
of  Granada  is  very  fruitfull,  and  bringeth  forth  much
corne  &  other  victuals,  and  hath  many  gold-mines,  and
great  quantitie  of  emeralds,  wherof  they  send  so  many
into  Spaine,  that  now  they  are  become  little  worth  :  but
before  these  countreys  were  found,  they  were  in  great
estimation.  Here  are  also  dwelling  many  of  the  Indian
people so meeke and gentle of  nature,  that they are

235

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

called  flies. This  land  is  very  plaine  and  holesome,  and
the  inhabitants  are  given  to  peace.
[III.  782.]  From  this  kingdome  they  travell  to  another  countrey

Fopayan.  called  La  governacion de  Popayan ; it is  rich  of  golde,

and  withall  very  fruitfull,  but  fuller  of  mountaines  then
the  new  kingdome  of  Granada,  and  hath  fewer  Indians
dwelling  in  it,  but  those  that  are  there  are  full  of  courage
and  very  valiant,  which  caused  the  Spaniardes  to  make
great  warre  before  they  could  overcome  them.  In  this
province  there  are  1 3  townes  of  Spaniards,  and  in  The  new
kingdome  of  Granada  there  are  nine  townes  of  Spaniards.
From  this  countrey  of  Popayan  they  travell  along  till
they  come  to  the  first  inhabitants  of  Peru  dwelling  in
Quito.  a  towne  which  joyneth  upon  the  South  sea  called  Quito.

This  towne I  will  leave any  further  to  speake  of  till  I
come particularly to  intreate of  Peru. Onely I have
spoken  of  the  two  foresaid  Provinces,  to  the  intent  you
A  passage might  know,  that  there  is  a  passage by  land  from  Car-
over  land  from  ^^gena to Peru, which is about five hundred leagues
PgJ.J^  through  : so  that  besides  the  two  hundred  leagues  which

they  goe  up  the  river,  the  other  three  hundred  leagues
is  a  countrey  well  inhabited  and  without  danger  to  travell
in,  insomuch  that  oftentimes  postes  are  sent  too  and  fro.
But  because  it  is  so  long  a  journey,  marchants  use  not  to
travell  that  way,  but  when  they  are  inforced  so  to  doe.
If  any  forren  Nation  should  become  Lordes  of  the  South
sea,  the  king  of  Spaine  might  have  his  treasure  conveyed
unto  this  towne  of  Cartagena  from  Peru,  and  so  into
Spaine.  For  in  times  past  there  being  a  rebellion  in
Peru  made  by  the  Spaniardes  against  their  king,  he  sent
his  power  to  suppresse  them  through  these  Provinces.
This  I  write  onely  for  that  I  knowe  some  Englishmen
have  thought,  that  in  taking  the  South  sea,  or  Panama
or  Nombre  de  Dios  from  the  king  of  Spaine,  his  treasure
of  Peru  could  not  be  conveyed  unto  him,  and  that  the  king
could  not  succour  Peru,  if  it  wanted  helpe.  Howbeit
I  doe  here  most  certainely  assure  you,  that  there  be
many  wayes  to  Peru.

236

LOPEZ VAZ  A.D.

1572-87.
But  now  I  will  returne  to  my  former  discourse. Upon
the seacoast  of  Tierra  firma Eastward from Cartagena
standeth a  little towne called Santa Martha, betweene  SantaMartha.
which  towne  and Cartagena  the  mightie river of  Mag-
dalen before  named  falleth  into  the  sea  with  such  a  strong
current,  that  by  reason  thereof  it  is  knowen  20  leagues
from  the  shore. Santa Martha  is  a very  poore  towne,
because it hath  often bene  robbed by  the Frenchmen,
and  hath no trade but  with  a  fewe  Indians that  dwell
thereabout. Here  beginneth  that  wonderfull  long  ridge  ^  mightie
of  hiffh  mountaines  covered  with  snow,  which  streatching-  ^^^^  °J.

^TtOlDltlltflP  f

through  many  countreys,  runneth  along  the  kingdomes
of  Peru  and  Chili,  and  continueth  to  the  very  streights
of  Magellan.  These  mountaines  are  scene  with  snow
upon  their  tops  above  thirtie  leagues  into  the  sea.  At
the  foote  of  these  wilde  mountaines  there  is  a  valley  called
Tagrona,  which  is  the  richest  place  that  is  knowen  there-  '^^^  ''^^'^
about :  but  because  the  countrey  adjoyning  is  so  moun-  ^  ^-^  '^
tainous,  and  the  inhabitants  so  many  and  of  so  good  a
courage,  shooting  poysoned  arrowes  which  are  present
death  to  such  as  are  wounded  with  the  same ;  therefore
it  lyeth  as  yet  unconquered,  notwithstanding  it  hath  cost
many  Spanish  captaines  their  lives.

Passing  along  the  coast  of  Tierra  firma  to  the  East  of
Santa  Martha,  where  is  an  other  small  towne  of  above  an
hundred  houses  called Rio  de Hacha. This  towne  is 'Rio  de  Hacha.
somewhat  rich  by  reason  of  the  pearles  which  they  get
there. Also  they  have  a  trade  with  the  Indians  for  some
small  quantitie of  golde. From  hence  they  goe  along
the  coast  to  Cabo  de  la  Vela,  which  because  it  is  of  the  ^^^°  ^^  ^^
same  propertie  with  Rio  de  Hacha  before  mentioned,  I
omit  to  speake  of  it. Upon  this  coast  there  is  a  lake  or
gulfe  which  openeth  into  the  sea,  at  the  mouth  whereof
they  gather  great  store  of  pearles. Beyond this  place  Great  store  of
there  is  another  poore  towne,  which  hath  sixe  or  seven  P^^^'^^^'
times beene  spoyled  by the  Frenchmen. From hence
there lyeth an high way to the newe kingdome of
Granada,  but  it  is  above  seven  hundred  leagues  in  length,

237

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

this  way  is  travelled  very  seldome,  because  the  Indians
will  usually  set  upon  the  travellers. More  up  into  the
land  the  countrey  lyeth  plaine,  and  there  is  some  golde,
and a  fewe  townes inhabited with Spaniardes, whereof
I  have  had  but  small notice,  and therefore  I  let  them
The  lie  of passe. The next place  of  any  account  is the Hand  of
Margarita. Margarita,  where  there  are  but  fewe  Spaniardes  inhabi-
tant. This  Island  of  Margarita  is  very  small,  and  lyeth
foure  leagues  from  the  maine  lande : it  hath  heretofore
bene  very  rich  of  golde  and  pearles,  and  so  would  have
continued  till  this  present  day,  had  it not  beene  spoyled
by  men  of  warre,  because  it  standeth  so  farre  from  the
maine  land,  notwithstanding  they  yet  gather  good  store  of
Excellent pearles. Upon this Island are bred better horses and
horses  and mules then in any  other part of  the Indies, therefore
they  carry  them  from  hence  to  Peru,  albeit  they  have
great store  of  horses in Peru,  but  not  so good. And
because we have begunne to speake of  the Hand of
Margarita, you are to understand, that to the North
More  then  70. Qf  ^^e  foresaid coast  of  Tierra  firma  lie  above  seventie
'^^  ^'  Hands being all very little, except Cuba, Hispaniola,

and  Boriquen,  or  Sant  Juan  de Puerto rico,  which He
[III.  783.] of Boriquen,  although it bee not very  great,  yet is it
inhabited by the Spaniards. The other smaller Hands
have  bene  inhabited  by  the  Indians,  and  have  had  good
store  of  gold,  pearles,  and  emraldes ;  but  the  Spaniards
have  destroyed  most  of  those  Indians  from  off  the  earth,
and in many  of  those Hands there is  nothing of  any
value, wherefore I have small cause to intreate any
Hispaniola. further  of  them. But Hispaniola  is  an Hand  of  great
bignesse,  and  hath  bene  very  full  of  people,  and  abounded
with mines  of  golde and with pearles, but now  all is
The  Indians wasted away. It was at the Spaniards first coming
killed  them- thither,  as  full  of  inhabitants  as any  place  of  that  big-
selves,  rather nesse  in  the  whole  world,  yet  now  there  are  none  left :
then  they ^^^ ^^^ ^^j.^ ^^^ ^f gQ \i'3sdi a heart, that they
Ihe  t-irannlus rnurthered themselves  rather  then  they  would  serve  the
Spaniards. Spaniards:  for  being  men  under  so  small  civill  governe-

238

LOPEZ VAZ  AD

1572-87.

ment  as  they  were,  never  was  there  any  people  knowen  of
so  resolute  and  desperate  mindes :  for  oftentimes  a  great
number  of  them  being  together  over  night,  they  should
be  found  all  dead  before  the  morning :  such  extreme
hate  did  this  brutish  people  beare  against  the  Spaniards,
that  they  chose  rather  to  die  the  death,  then  to  indure
their  insolencies.  It  happened  on  a  time,  that  a  Spaniard
calling  certaine  Indians  to  worke  in  the  mines  (which
labour  of  all  others  did  most  grieve  them)  they,  rather
then  they  would  goe,  offered  to  lay  violent  hands  on
themselves :  which  the  Spaniard  perceiving  sayd  unto
them:  seeing  you  will  hang  your  selves  rather  then  goe  A  pretty  jest.
and  worke,  I  likewise  will  hang  my  selfe  and  will  beare
you  company,  because  T  will  make  you  worke  in  an
other  world :  but  the  Indians  hearing  this,  replied,  we
will  willingly  worke  with  you  here,  to  the  intent  you
may  not  goe  with  us  into  another  world :  so  unwilling
were  they  of  the  Spaniards  companie.  So  that  of  all
the  inhabitantes  of  this  Hand  there  were  none  that
escaped  death,  save  onely  these  fewe,  which  came  to
passe  by  the  meanes  of  this  one  Spaniarde,  otherwise
they  would  have  hanged  themselves  also.  Some  of
these  people  are  yet  living,  but  very  few.  This  Hand
of  Hispaniola  is  for  the  most  part  called  The  He  of
Sant  Domingo,  because  the  chiefe  citie  thereof  is  so
called,  which  was  the  first  citie  in  all  the  West  Indies
that  was  inhabited.  There  are  in  this  citie  above  eight
hundred  fire-houses  of  good  building  inhabited  by
Gentlemen  of  great  wealth.  This  Hand  is  unhealthfull,
for  it  raineth  here  the  most  part  of  the  yeere.  The
riches  that  now  this  Hand  afi^ordeth  are  sugar  (for  ^ugar,  hides,
here  are  many  Ingenios  or  sugar-houses)  and  great  <:opper-mines.
store  of  hides  by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  cattell ;
there  are  copper  mines  also,  which  is  the  cause  that
they  have  such  store  of  copper-money,  for  their  gold
mines  be  all  exhausted,  and  the  golde  which  they  have
commeth  from  other  places.  This  Hand  being  (as  is
beforesaide) destitute of  the first inhabitants, and the

239

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

Spaniardes  lacking  men  to  worke  in  their  Ingenios,  and
to looke unto their cattell, they were forced to bring

l^legros  Negros thither out of Guinea, where they have so

mghiily  increased,  that  the  Hand  is  nowe  as  full  of  them,  as
it  was  of  the  naturall  inhabitantes ;  so  that  the  Spaniardes
Carrie  Negros  from  this  Hand  to  the  maine  lande  and
there sell  them. The chiefest victuall that they have

J  root  called  \^  ^his  Hand,  is  a  kinde  of  roote  called  Tuca,  which  beinp-
'^^'  eaten  as  it  commeth new  out  of  the  ground  is  present

death :  but  first  they  boyle  it  and  after  presse  it,  and
the  liquor  that  is  strained  therefrom  is  deadly  poyson  :
howbeit  this  roote  being  pressed  so  dry,  that  there
remaineth  no  moisture  in  it,  they  mingle  and  temper  the
same  with  water  and  so  make  cakes  therof,  which  are
very  savory  &  good  to  eat,  &  this  is  all  the  bread
which  they  have  in  those  Hands.  There  go  from  hence
yerely  into  Spaine  7  or  8  ships  at  the  least  full  fraighted
with  sugar  &  hides.

The  lie  of  Neere unto Hispaniola lyeth another greater Hand

called  Cuba,  it  is  like  unto  Hispaniola,  although  there  is
not  so  much  sugar.  The  principall  towne  of  this  Hande
is  called  Havana,  which  hath  an  excellent  harborough
belonging  thereunto.  The  townesmen  are  very  rich  by
reason  of  the  fleetes  that  come  from  Nueva  Espanna,  and.
Tierra  firma  which  touch  there ;  for  the  safeguarde  of
which  fleetes  and  of  the  towne  it  selfe  there  is  a  castle
built  neere  the  said  harborough  kept  with  Spanish
souldiers ;  neither  is  there  any  castle  or  souldiers  in  all
the  Hands  but  onely  here. There  is  also  another  Hand

S.  Juan  de inhabited  with Spaniards called  Boriquen or  Sant  Juan

Puerto  rico.  j^  Puerto  rico.  It  is  but  little,  yet  every  way  as  plenti-
fuU  as  the  other  two  are ;  and  therefore  I  omit  to  speake
thereof.

But  now  to  prosecute  my  discourse  of  the  port-townes
upon  the  maine  lande  :  Eastwarde  and  Southward  from
Margarita  there  are  no  townes  inhabited  by  Spaniardes  or

Fernambuck,  Portugals,  till  you  come  to  Fernambuck  upon  the  coast
of  Brasil ;  notwithstanding  that  betweene  the  sayd Hand

240

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

and  Fernambuck  runneth  the  mightie  river  of  Marannon, The  great

whereof  (both  because  of  the  greatnesse  and  the  riches  ^l^J^'  ^

> , . , T  1  1  1 • • Marannon,

contayned  therein)  1  must  needes  make  some  relation,  m

regarde  I  have  promised  to  speake  of  every  place  that

is  of  any  value  in  all  the  Indies. This  river  is  one  of  the

greatest  in  the  world,  and  was  first  found  when  as  the

Spaniardes sought out the other coast: but none can

passe  up  this  river  because  of  the  greatnesse  of  the  current

which  commeth  downe,  as  also  there  are  many  shelves  of

sand lying  in  the mouth  thereof: wherby  it  was  long  [III.  784.]

before  the  riches  in  and  about  this  river  were  knowen,

untill  such  time  as  the  kingdome  of  Peru  was  conquered :

at  which  time  a  Captaine  called  Gonsalo  Pizarro  passing  Gomah

thorough the countrey  of  Peru came  at  length into a  ^^'^^^"''°-

lande  which  they  named  La  Canela,  because  there  groweth  La  Canela.

great  store  of  Sinamome,  but  not  altogether  so  good  as

that which  commeth  from  the  East Indies. The  sayd

Captaine proceeding  farther into the countrey  came at

length  to  a  mightie  river,  where  he  sawe the countrey  The  great

people  rowing in their Canoas, and bringing  golde to  ^'^^  °J

buy  and  sell  with  the  Spaniards. Captaine  Pizarro  seeing  Qrellana.

this,  was  desirous  to  finde  out the  ende  of  this river,

but  he  could not  travell by  lande  because  of  the  high

mountaines :  wherefore  he  made  a  small  Barke  or  Pin-

nesse  to  goe  and  discover  from  whence  the  saide  Indians

brought  their  golde, and sent in the saide Pinnesse a

Captaine under him called Orellana, who with fiftie  Orellana  sent

men went downe  the river,  but could not  returne to T'^^  ^f,

their Generall Pizarro, because of the great current  annonwith

which  was very strong against them, forcing them to  fiftie  men.

passe  along  the  river,  and  to  enter  into  the  Sea,  and  so

they  sayled  on  forwarde  to  the  foresaide  He  of  Margarita :

but  as  they  passed  downe  this  river  they  found  it  well

inhabited with Indians, which were possessed of  great

store of  golde. These men with their Pinnesse  were

passing  downe  this river eight  monethes,  for  the  river

lyeth  very  crooked,  which  maketh  a  long  way  by  water,

neither  durst  the  Spaniardes  ever  lande,  because  they  sawe

XI  241  Q

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

the  countrey  so  full  of  people,  but  they  tooke  many
Canoas,  wherein  they  had  great  store  of  victuals  and
some  golde.

Now  this  Orellana  comming  unto  Margarita  with  these
good  newes  and  riches,  determined  not  to  returne  unto
his  Captaine  Pizarro  which  sent  him,  but  tooke  his  way
from  thence  to  the  king  of  Spaine,  and  presented  him
with  the  golde  that  he  brought  out  of  the  river :  where-
upon the  king  sent  him  with  a  fleete  of  shippes  and  sixe
hundred  men  to  inhabite  the  sayd  river :  but  because
of  the  great  current  and  sholdes  that  are  therein,  hee
left  the  most  part  of  his  men  and  shippes,  and  with
those  that  remained  he  went  unto  certaine  Ilandes  hard
by  the  river,  and  built  him  Pinnesses ;  but  the  countrey
being  very  unhealthfull,  himselfe  and  many  of  his  men
dyed,  and  the  residue  went  every  man  which  way  pleased
him  best.  The  fame  of  this  river  was  straightway  spread
through  Spaine  and  Portugal,  insomuch  that  a  Gentleman
Lewis  de  of  Portugall  called  Lewis  de  Melo  asked  license  of  Don
•  Juan  the  third,  then  king  of  Portugall  to  goe  and  con-
quere  the  sayd  river :  for  from  the  mouth  of  this  river
to  the  mouth  of  the  river  of  Plate,  is  that  part  of  America
which  the  kings  of  Portugall  (according  to  the  partition
made  betweene  them  and  the  kings  of  Spaine)  doe  holde  :
so  that  the  king  of  Portugall  having  this  river  in  his  part
gave  it  to  the  saide  Lewis  de  Melo  to  conquere  :  who
taking  tenne  ships  and  eight  hundred  men  (among  which
many  were  gentlemen)  and  comming  to  the  mouth
of  this  river,  lost  all  the  said  ships  saving  two,  in  one
of  the  which  two  was  Lewis  de  Melo  himselfe  :  also
the  most  part  of  the  men  that  were  in  the  ships  cast  away
were  saved  and  got  to  the  shore,  and  so  went  by  lande  to
the  Hand  of  Margarita  ;  from  whence  they  were  dis-
persed throughout  all  the  Indies.

Thus  these  two  fleetes  of  shippes  being  so  unfortunately
cast  away,  never  durst  any  Captaine  afterward  attempt  by
sea  to  conquer  the  sayde  river.  Howbeit  from  the  king-
dome  of  Nueva  Granada before mentioned there have

242

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

gone  two  or  three  Captaines  by  land  to  discover  it,  for  a
rumour  went  over  all  the  countrey  of  the  great  riches
contained  in  this  river  ;  whereupon  the  Spaniards  named
it  El  Dorado,  that  is  to  say,  The  golden  river.  It  is  El  Dorado.
thought  that  God  will  not  have  this  river  to  be  knowen,
for  that  one  Captaine  by  lande  had  most  of  his  people
slaine  by  those  of  the  countrey,  and  others  for  want
of  victuals  returned.  So  that  none  of  all  these  came
to  any  plaine  discovery,  till  a  few  yeeres  past  a  Captaine
of  the  countrey  of  Navarre  called  Pedro  de  Orzua,  who  ^^^^'°  '^^
went  frorti  Peru  almost  the  same  way  that  Gonsalo  ^^^^'
Pizarro  had  before  discovered,  and  was  accompanied
with  about  some  seven  hundred  Spaniards,  it  being  a
great  marvell  how  he  could  get  so  many,  amongst  whom
were  many  Gentlemen  and  old  souldiers  of  Peru,  who
caused  divers  mutinies  and  insurrections,  as  hereafter  I
will  more  at  large  declare,  which  mutinous  souldiers  were
the  cause  of  their  captaines  death.  Howbeit  with  all
these  men  captaine  Pedro  de  Orzua  came  unto  the  head  of
the  said  river  :  but  you  must  understand,  that  this  river
is  nourished  not  onely  with  the  waters  and  freshets  that
come  from  the  mountaines  of  Peru,  but  also  by  all  the
rivers  betweene  the  Equinoctiall  and  sixteene  degrees  of
Southerly  latitude,  which  fall  thereinto  and  cause  it  to  be
so  great.  Nowe  at  the  head  of  this  river  the  sayde
Captaine  Pedro  de  Orzua  made  fifteene  Pinnesses  with
many  Canoas,  wherein  he  caried  above  two  thousand
Indians  to  helpe  him,  with  many  horses  and  other  pro-
vision, as  meaning  to  inhabite  there  :  for  it  was  not
possible  for  him  to  carry  all  his  provision  by  lande,
because  the  mountaines  be  very  great,  there  being  also
betweene  them  many  small  rivers  which  fall  into  this  [III.  785.]
great  river  above  twentie  leagues  out  of  the  land.  So  this
captaine  having  all  his  things  in  good  order  went  downe
the  river  with  his  whole  company,  and  at  length  came
from  among  the  mountaines  to  a  plaine  countrey  where
the  Indians  dwelt ;  and  there  he  held  a  councell,  deter-
mining in  the  same  place  to  build  a  towne  and  to  fortifie

243

A.D.
1572-87.

Lope-z.  de
Agira.  his
dangerous  con
spiracle.

Pedro  de
Orzua  mur-
thered.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

it  very  strongly,  to  the  end  he  might  leave  all  his  stufFe
there,  and  such  men  as  were  not  souldiers.  And  so  they
began  to  build  the  said  towne,  and  wrought  upon  it  all
the  winter  :  where  because  it  raineth  much,  and  withall  is
very  hot,  sicknes  and  want  of  victuals  began  to  prevaile
amongst  them,  wherupon  the  souldiers  fell  a  murmuring
among  themselves.  For  comming  out  of  Peru,  which  is
one  of  the  fruitfuUest  &  richest  countries  of  the  world,
they  were  more  inclined  to  have  their  fill  of  bread  and
meat  then  to  apply  their  bodies  to  labour :  which  was  the
cause  that  albeit  the  countrey  in  which  they  now  were,
was  exceeding  fruitful!,  and  that  they  saw  with  their  eyes
most  evident  apparances  of  golde,  &  also  that  up  into  the
countrey  it  seemed  to  be  much  better ;  yet  for  all  this
they  murmured  &  would  needes  returne  for  Peru  from
whence  they  came.  In  the  company  of  these  men  there
was  a  souldier  of  Biskay  called  Lopez  de  Agira,  a  very
little  man  of  bodie  &  lame  of  one  of  his  legs,  but  very
valiant  and  of  good  experience  in  the  warres.  This  man
having  bene  one  of  the  principall  mutiners  in  Peru,  could
not  here  give  over  his  old  wont,  but  asked  his  fellow-
souldiers,  what  they  went  to  seeke  for  in  those  wild
deserts  whither  they  were  brought :  For  (said  he)  if  you
seeke  riches,  there  are  enough  in  Peru,  and  there  is  bread,
wine,  flesh,  and  faire  women  also ;  so  that  it  were  better
to  conquer  that,  and  to  take  it  out  of  the  handes  of  the
Spaniardes,  and  that  it  were  no  hard  enterprize,  because
all  the  souldiers  and  poore  men  of  Peru  would  turne  unto
them,  and  that  that  were  a  better  course,  then  to  goe  and
conquere  the  savage  people  in  those  mountaines :  so  that
once  having  the  government  of  Peru,  the  king  of  Spaine
should  be  inforced  to  agree  with  them  :  if  not  (sayd  he)
we  shall  not  lacke  them  that  will  succour  us,  to  have  the
riches  of  Peru.  By  these  perswasions  he  brought  many
souldiers  to  be  of  his  minde,  and  conspired  also  with  a
young  gentleman  of  Sivill  called  Don  Fernando  de  Gus-
man  (who  was  in  love  with  a  young  woman  which  the
captaine Pedro de Orzua had, and therefore did the

244

LOPEZ VAZ  AD

1572-87.
sooner  agree  unto  the  wicked  intent  of  Agira)  to  murther
the  captaine.  Who  on  a  night  being  asleepe  in  his  bed,
the  said  conspirators  and  their  faction  entered  into  his
bed-chamber,  and  there  stabbed  him  with  their  daggers ;
which  being  done,  they  slew  also  all  the  Captaines  that
were  his  friends,  and  therewithall  made  a  great  out-cry,
saying,  God  save  the  king,  God  save  the  king :  where-
upon all  the  campe  was  in  an  uprore.  Then  Lopez  de
Agira  made  unto  the  souldiers  a  long  oration,  and  got
them  all  to  consent  unto  him,  some  by  force,  and  some
because  they  durst  not  say  to  the  contrary,  and  others  of
their  good  will,  and  so  in  the  end  they  all  agreed  unto  his
determined  purpose.  Then  made  they  Fernando  de  Gus-
man  their  head,  &  Agira  was  made  a  captaine.  This
done,  because  the  people  should  the  better  hold  their
opinion,  he  did  as  great  a  villany  as  ever  any  Spaniard
committed :  for  he  made  an  altar,  wheron  he  and  all  the
souldiers  renounced  their  service  unto  the  king  of  Spaine,
&  so  as  people  without  a  king,  chose  the  said  Don  Fer-  Don  Ferdi-
nando  to  be  their  king,  and  did  homage  unto  him.  These  ^^'"'^°  ^^
matters  being  thus  finished  they  consulted  among  them-  claimed  kins:
selves  which  should  be  the  best  way  for  them  to  goe  of  Peru.
to  Peru  ?  For  they  could  not  goe  up  the  river,  by  which
they  came  downe,  in  regarde  of  the  strong  current,  and
going  backe  overland  they  should  be  very  weake  for
want  of  horsemen :  wherefore  they  determined  to  goe
downe  the  river.  Then  saide  Lopez  de  Agira,  that  they
would  carry  nothing  with  them  but  the  pinnesses  &
souldiers  which  should  fight,  and  that  it  were  best  to
leave  behind  them  all  the  Indians  which  they  brought
from  Peru,  with  the  women  and  the  sicke  men.  Where-
unto  the  Generall  Don  Ferdinando  would  not  agree,
because  he  knew  that  when  they  were  gone  the  people
of  the  countrey  would  kill  them  all.  Lopez  de  Agira
hearing  this,  and  longing  to  be  chiefe  governour  himselfe,
tooke  unto  him  30  of  his  owne  countreymen  of  his
disposition,  and  on  the  sudden  slew  Don  Fernando,  Q^^^^an
whom  not  many  dayes  before  he  had  sworne  to  obey :  &  siaine.

245

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^572-87.

now  by  his  subtill  practises,  being  withall  eloquent  in  his

talke,  he  caused  the  souldiers  to appoint  himselfe  their

governour,  &  made them beleeve  that  all  the  cruelties

committed were for their saveguard : neither did the

tyrannic  of  this  wretched  man  here  ende. He  was  borne

in Biskay a countrey neere  unto France,  wherefore I

beleeve  him  rather  to  have  beene  a  Frenchman  then  a

Spaniard,  for  that  in  the  heart  of  a  Spaniard  could  not  be

A  nezv  mas- so  much  crueltie  as  this  man  shewed. Now  being  readie

sacre.  ^^  g^g  j^jg  ^^^.^  j^g  determined  not  to  carry  with  him  any

gentlemen  or  persons  of  qualitie,  and  therefore  he  slew  all

such  persons  ;  and  then  departing  onely  with  the  common

souldiers,  he  left  behind  him  all  the  Spanish  women  and

sicke  men,  with  all  other  creatures. If  I  should  rehearse

all  the  cruell  murthers  of  this  wicked  man  one  by  one,  I

should  be  over  tedious  unto  you, Onely  in  fewe  words  I

say,  that  this  man  proceeded  downe  the  river,  having  with

him  onely  foure  hundred  men : but  before  he  passed  the

[III.  786.] river,  and  was  come  to  Margarita,  he  had  no  more  left

but  two  hundred  and  thirty  men,  for  the  rest  hee  had  put

to death, and left on  shore  among  the people of  the

countrey  : all  which  tyranny he  used,  because he ever

stood  in  feare  of  his  life  : for  had  he  seene  at  any  time  but

two  souldiers  talking  together,  he  would  streight  suspect

that  they  were  conspiring  of  his  death,  and  therefore  he

used  the  practises  abovesaide. And he never  went  any

way,  but  that  hee  had  in  his  company  thirtie  Biscaines

of  his  owne  will  and  minde  readie  to  execute  his  cruell

purposes.

Great  store  of As these souldiers with their  Captaine came downe

gold  in  the <^^ river, they  sawe many Canoas  with  golde  in  them

river  oj ai-  p^ggjj^g  ^qq  ^j.^^  £-j.q^  ^j^j  people  on  both  sides  of  the  river,

and  in their  passage many  times they  landed, and  got

good  store  of  golde  and  victuals. Now  also  did  they

Amaz^nes finde  that  to  be  true  which  Orellana  had  reported,  namely

women  which ^j^^^ ^j^^j.^ ^^^^  Amazones,  that  is  to  say,  women  that

nelpe  their ri-i  -ii  i  1  1

husbands  in "g"^  '^'^ the  warres  With bowes  and  arrowes  : but  these

the  warres. women  fight  to aide  their  husbands,  and not by  them-

246

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

selves alone  without  the  companie  of  men,  as  Orellana

reported. There were of these women upon divers

partes  of  this  river,  who  seeing  the  Spaniardes  fighting

with their husbandes came in to succour them, and

shewed themselves more  valiant  then  their  husbandes ;

for  which  cause  it  was  named,  The  river  of  Amazones.

The Spaniardes intent was onely  to passe downe the

river,  neither  sought  they  at  all  to  discover  the  Inland,

and  yet  they  tooke  good  store  of  golde,  putting  it  into  Good  store  of

one  of  their  Pinnesses,  where  Lopez  de  Agira  himselfe  S"^^-

was  embarked,  which  Pinnesse  at  the  mouth  of  the  river

was  cast  away,  but  he  himselfe  escaped,  because  he  had

not as yet fulfilled his bloodie  minde. And  when  he

was come to the  Ilande of  Margarita,  the  Governour  Lopez  de

thereof  supposing  he  had  beene  one  of  the  kings  loyall  -A^ra

captaines,  received  him  with  pinnesses,  and  brought  good  ^J'l'^'^^th  at
^ r .  1  i-T. 1  •  11 Marmnta

Store  or  victuals  unto him. Uut he putting the sayd j-^g^

Governour  immediatly  to  death,  landed  on  the  Hand,
and  tooke  it  and  two  shippes  that  were  there,  and  con-
strained likewise  an  hundred  and  fiftie  men,  which  he
there  found,  to  goe  with  him,  besides  others  that  went
voluntarily,  carrying  from  thence  good  store  of  victuales,
and  many  horses  also.  And  then  he  returned  to  the
maine  land,  saying,  that  with  his  small  forces  hee  would
subdue  the  whole  Indias :  imagining  belike  that  all  the
olde  souldiers  and  poore  people,  at  the  first  sight  of
him,  would  turne  to  his  side  and  take  his  part.  How-
beit  he  was  foulely  deceived :  for  before  he  had  marched
two  dayes  journey  up  into  the  land,  the  Governour  of
Nueva  Granada  came  against  him  with  a  power  of  men :
but  Lopez  de  Agira  hoping  that  other  souldiers  would
have  joyned  themselves  unto  him,  whereby  his  strength
might  have  beene  the  more,  was  quite  frustrate  of  his
expectation :  for  even  his  owne  men  left  him,  and  tooke
part  with  the  kings  Captaine.  Nowe  seeing  himselfe
thus  left  destitute  of  his  souldiers,  and  voide  of  all
helpe,  he  committed  a  more  unnaturall  bloodie  act  then
ever  Nero  the  tyrant  did,  for he murthered his owne

247

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-i

daughter  being  but  sixeteene  yeeres  of  age,  which  he
had  brought  with  him  out  of  Peru :  the  cause  why  he
killed  her  was,  that  she  might  not  become  a  concubine
to  villaines,  nor  be  called  the  daughter  of  a  traytor :
and  these  words  he  used  unto  her,  so  soone  as  he  had
given  her  her  deaths  wound :  but  before  he  could  finish
this  cruell  act,  the  souldiers  came  upon  him,  and  cut
him  in  pieces,  also  his  daughter  died  of  her  wound  in
that  place.

Thus  have  you  heard  the  miserable  ende  of  this
bloodie  caitife :  in  regarde  of  whose  treacherous  and
mischievous  dealing  the  king  would  never  since  suffer
this river to bee throughly discovered; so that the

Great  riches riches  and  treasure  of  the  said  river  remaine  unknowen

hidden  zvithhi g^gj^ yj^^'ll  i-his  present  day.

Marannon  Now  leaving  to  discourse  any  longer  of  this  river  of

Marannon,  all  the  coast betweene the saide river and

The  coast  of the  river  of  Plate,  is  called  The  coast  of  Brasill,  taking

Brastll,zvhyti  ^]^^^  name  from  a  kinde  of  wood  in  the  same  countrey,

and  b'i  whom ^^^^^'^ Brasill-wood, whereof there is great store in

it  was  at  the those  partes. This  coast  of  Brasill  was  first  discovered

first  discov- by  Pedro  Alvarez Cabral,  in  the second  voyage  which

^^'^^-  the  king  of Portugall caused to  be  made  to  the East

Indies  :  and  the  foresayde  Pedro  Alvarez  tooke  possession

of  this  land  for  the  king  of  Portugall : whereupon  the

king  Don  Emanuel  hearing  newes  thereof  sent  presently

shippes to discover the whole countrey, and found it

to  be  part  of  America  otherwise  called  The  West  Indies :

for  which  cause  there  grewe  some  controversie  betweene

him  and the  king  of Spaine : but being kinsmen  and

great friends one to  another,  they  agreed in the end,

that  the  king  of  Portugall  should  holde  all  the  countrey

that  he  had  discovered,  the  which  was  (as  I have  said)

from the river of Marannon to the river of Plate ;

albeit  the  Spaniards  affirme,  that  it  stretcheth  no  further

then  the  Hand  of  Santa  CateHna;  whereupon  there  have

risen many  controversies betweene the Portugales and

Spaniardes, which have  cost  many  men  their lives.

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

There  came  into  the  said  river  of  Plate  in  the  yeere
1587  two  English  ships  and  a  Pinnesse  of  the  right
Honourable  the  Earle  of  Cumberland,  which  were  bound
for  the  streights  of  Magellan,  and  ankored  ten  leagues  [III.  787.]
within  the  said  river  before  a  little  Hand  lying  hard
by  another  called  Seal-Hand.  On  which  lland  the
Captaine  of  one  of  the  ships  called  Christopher  Lister,
and  his  whole  company  landing,  found  the  king  of
Portugales  armes  graven  on  a  rocke  by  the  sea  side ;
which  are  thought  to  have  beene  there  engraven  by  one
Martin  Alonso  de  Souza,  who  was  sent  by  the  king
Don  Emanuel  to  discover  this  coast.  Therefore  I  thinke
the  Portugales  have  reason  for  that  which  they  alleage
concerning  the  extension  of  the  said  coast  of  Brasil.
Wherfore  the  king  of  Portugall  gave  this  land  to
diverse  of  his  gentlemen  to  inhabite.  Most  of  the
naturall  inhabitants  of  this  countrey  are  very  rude,  and
goe  Starke  naked  both  men  and  women,  and  are  man-
eaters  ;  for  which  cause  they  make  warres  one  against
another  to  get  men  to  eate ;  they  are  stout  and  good
bow-men.  The  first  place  inhabited  on  this  coast  be-
yonde  the  river  of  Marannon  is  called  Fernambuck  so  Femambuck.
named  by  the  Indians,  but  in  Portugall  it  is  called
Villa  de  Olinda.  Before  you  come  to  this  place  there
is  a  port  called  Parajua,  unto  which  port  not  many
yeeres  past  the  Frenchmen  hearing  of  the  troubles  which
were  then  in  Portugall  resorted,  and  built  there  a  fort;  A  fort  built  by
whereunto  certaine  French  ships  made  yeerely  voyages  i^e  Frenchmen
to  lade  Brasill-wood.  But  they  of  Fernambuck,  with  ^  ^^^J  •
the  helpe  of  the  Spaniardes,  went  and  burnt  five  French
shippes  within  the  port,  and  tooke  the  fort  it  selfe,  and
the  Frenchmen  that  were  there  fled  part  into  the  moun-
taines,  and  part  of  them  were  slaine ;  so  that  since  that
time  the  Spaniardes  have  inhabited  there  till  this  present.  Parajm  now
Nowe  to  returne  to  Fernambuck  inhabited  by  a  Portugall  "^^^'^^^^f  ^

^  .  11 1 T-w  r^ ^• • ' ^  hpamards.

Captame  called  Duarte  Coelio,  it  is  the  greatest  towne  fgrnambuck
in  all  that  coast,  and  hath  above  three  thousand  houses  containeth
in  it,  with  seventie  Ingenios  for  sugar,  and  great  store 1000  houses.

249

A.D.
1572-87.

Cape  S.  Au-

gusiin.

Rio  de  Satii

Francisco,

Bay  ha  a  towne
ofi  000  houses .

As  llhas.

Puerto  Seguro.

The  sholdes
called  Abrcl-
hos.

Espirito  Santo.

Rio  de  Jenero.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  Brasill-wood  and  abundance  of  cotton,  yet  are  they
in  great  want  of  victuals :  for  all  their  victuals  come
either  from  Portugall  or  from  some  places  upon  the
coast  of  Brasill.  The  harbour  of  this  towne  is  a  barred
harbour,  and  fit  onely  for  small  barkes :  this  place
belongeth  as  yet  unto  the  sonne  of  Duarte  Coelio.
Beyond  this  towne  lyeth  the  Cape  of  Sant  Augustin,
and  next  thereunto  is  the  river  of  Sant  Francisco,  which
is  a  great  river.  Betweene  this  river  and  Baya  it  is
all  a  wildernesse  inhabited  with  cruell  salvages,  for
whomsoever  they  take  they  kill  and  eate  him.  The
towne  of  Bayha  belongeth  to  the  king,  and  therefore
the  governour  of  all  the  coast  keepeth  his  residence  in
the  same,  as  also  the  bishop.  It  containeth  1000  houses,
&  40  Ingenios  for  sugar,  and  hath  much  cotton,  but
no  Brasill-wood  at  all.  The  sea  runneth  up  into  the
countrey  here  14  or  15  leagues,  where  they  get  some
yeres  good  store  of  Amber-griese.  Here  is  great  plentie
of  victuals,  and  although  the  countrey  be  hot,  yet  is  it
healthfull,  &  the  aire  holesome.  The  next  towne  upon
the  coast  called  As  llhas,  or  The  lies,  is  but  a  small
towne,  containing  not  above  1 50  houses,  and  but  three
Ingenios  for  sugar.  Most  of  the  inhabitants  are  labour-
ing men,  which  use  to  carry  victuals  in  their  small  barkes
unto  Fernambuck :  their  Lord  is  called  Lucas  Giraldo.

The  next  place  unto  this  is  called  Puerto  Seguro :  it
consisteth  of  4  small  townes,  which  containe  not  in  all
above  300  houses.  The  inhabitants  of  this  towne  also
live  by  carrying  of  victuals  along  the  coast ;  and  the
towne  it  selfe  belongeth  to  the  Duke  de  Avero.  Hard
by  this  port  begin  the  sholdes  which  they  call  Abrolhos ;
and  these  sholdes  lie  above  25  leagues  into  the  sea.

The  next  habitation  of  Christians  beyond  these  sholdes
is  Espirito  Santo  which  consisteth  of  two  townes,  both
of  them  contayning  about  300  houses :  and  they  belong
to  a  gentleman  called  Vasques Fernandes  de  Coutinho.

From  hence  you  passe  along  the  coast  to  the  river
of  Jenero,  which  hath  about  three  hundred  houses. In

250

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

this  place  the  Frenchmen  first  inhabited,  whose  Captaine
was  called  Monsieur  de  Villegagnon.  The  said  Captaine
made  here  a  fort,  and  planted  good  ordinance  thereon,
and  laded  every  yeere  great  store  of  Brasill-wood  from
hence,  and  had  great  friendship  with  the  salvage  people,
who  did  him  good  service,  by  reason  whereof  the  French-
men reaped  much  benefite  out  of  this  countrey.  But  the
king  of  Portugall  sent  out  a  power  against  the  French-
men, who  first  tooke  the  French  shippes  by  sea,  and
then  landed  and  besieged  the  fort,  and  at  length  tooke
it,  and  the  Captaine  thereof:  unto  whom,  because  he
was  a  gentle  person,  and  never  hurt  the  Portugales,
they  gave  thirtie  thousand  ducats  for  his  ordinance,  and
for  all  other  things  that  were  in  the  fort,  and  so  sent
him  for  France.  Since  which  time  the  Portugales  have
inhabited  this  river.  There  are  at  this  present  onely  two
Ingenios,  but  great  store  of  Brasill-wood,  with  plentie
of  victuals.

From  this  river  of  Jenero  they  passe  along  the  coast  Foure^  townes
to Sant Vincente, which hath 4 townes, the greatest  Jj'^'^^^f/f/^
whereof  is  called  Santos,  and  consisteth  of  foure  hundred  yincente.
houses,  there are also three Ingenios. A  fewe yeeres  These  English
past there came two English ships into this harbour  fn^n  zoere  M.
which  were  going  for  the  Streights  of  Magellan. Who  ^^"(""r^^,
being  in  this  port,  there  came  thither  three  of  the  king
of  Spaines  ships,  and  fought  with  the  Englishmen,  but  the
Englishmen  sunke  one  of  their  ships,  and  therefore  the  [m-  788.]
king commanded  a  fort  to  be  made,  to  the ende that  ^fi^'thj^i^it
no  English  shippes  that  were  bound  for  the  streights  of  % tV^'^c^ t
Magellan  should  victuall  there,  the  which  fort  standeth  on  against  the
the  mouth  of  the  harbour. This  countrey  belongeth  to  a  English.
Gentleman  called  Martin  Alonso  de  Souza :  this  is  the  last
inhabited  place  upon  all  the  coast  of  Brasill. This  coast
of  Brasill  is  very  full  of  mountaines,  and  hath  much  raine
falling  upon  it,  for  which  cause they cannot  goe from
towne to towne by land : all the habitations of this  . ^

countrey are  by  the  sea  side. From  Sant  Vincente  the  5^^^^  c^z/^-
coast  is  all  mountainous,  till  you  come  to  the  He  of  Santa  Una.

251

A.D.
1572-87.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Sebastian  Ca-
bota.

Catelina,  and  from  this  Hand  till  you  come  even  to  the
straights  of  Magellan,  the  coast  is  very  plaine  and  without
woods.

Having  proceeded  thus  farre,  it  will  not  be  amisse  to
Rio  delaP lata,  speake  somewhat  of  the  river  of  Plate,  which  is  one  of  the
greatest  rivers  in  all  the  world :  for  at  the  mouth  it  is
above  five  and  twentie  leagues  from  land  to  land  :  and  the
Spaniards  have  gone  up  in  it  above  sixe  hundred  leagues,
and  could  not  attaine  to  the  head  thereof.  The  first
Spaniard  that  entered  this  river,  and  inhabited  the  same
was  called  Solis,  who  passed  up  100  leagues  into  it,  and
called  it  by  the  name  of  Rio  de  la  Plata,  that  is  to  say,
The  river  of  silver,  because  of  the  fine  and  cleare  water
that  is  in  it,  for  I  have  not  heard  of  any  silver  that  ever
was  found  there.  The  saide  Solis  returned  into  Spaine,
without  any  further  search  into  this  river  :  howbeit  another
Captaine  called  Sebastian  Cabota  went  up  this  river  150
leagues,  and  built  a  fort,  which  fort  standeth  untill  this
present  :  where  leaving  his  ships,  he  went  higher  up
the  river  in  smal  Pinnesses,  and  all  along  as  he  went
he  found  many  Indians  :  but  finding  neither  gold  nor
silver,  nor  ought  else  of  any  great  value,  he  returned  to
his  ships,  and  sayled  for  Spaine.  Not  many  yeeres  after
a  certaine  Gentleman  called  Don  Pedro  de  Mendoza  fur-
nished forth  a  great  fleete  of  ships,  wherein  were  shipped  a
thousand  men,  fortie  mares,  and  twentie  horses,  with
all  other  creatures  to  inhabite  this  river  :  and  comming
thither  he  went  up  into  the  countrey  to  see  what  riches  he
could  there  finde,  leaving  all  his  stuffe,  cattle,  and  provision
at  a  place  called  Buenos  Ayeres,  so  named  in  regard  of  the
freshnesse  of  the  ayre,  and  the  healthfulnesse  of  his  men,
during  their  abode  there  :  this  place  was  eightie  leagues
within  the  river,  and  here  he  landed  first  :  at  this  place
the  river  is  above  seven  leagues  broad,  and  very  low  land
on  both  sides  without  trees.  This  river  is  very  often
subject  to  great  and  sudden  stormes,  so  that  with  a  storme
this  Don  Pedro  lost  eight  of  his  ships,  and  in  the  rest  he
returned  for  Spaine,  saying  to  his  men,  that  he  would  goe

252

Buenos
Jyeres.

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87,
seeke  victuals,  and  so  left  the  greater  part  of  them  behinde.
In  his  way  homeward  he  died,  and  the  poore  men  which
he  left  behind  him,  for  the  most  part  of  them  died  for
hunger  also,  because  in  that  place  there  were  very  few
Indians,  and  therefore  but  small  store  of  victuals,  onely
they  lived  by  hunting  of  Deere,  and  by  fishing.  Of
all  the  men  that  Don  Pedro  left  behind  him  there  were
but  two  hundred  remaining  alive,  who  in  the  ship  boates
went  higher  up  the  river,  leaving  in  the  place  called
Buenos  Ayeres  their  mares  and  horses :  but  it  is  a  wonder  The  zuonderfull
to see,  that  of  thirty  mares  and  seven  horses  which  the  '■^'^^^'^^^  y^

r. -jir^.i  .1 •  • c .•  P"^  horses  and

bpaniards  lert  there,  the  mcrease  m  rortie  yeeres  was  so  Snares
great,  that  the  countrey  is  20  leagues  up  full  of  horses ;
whereby  a  man  may  conjecture  the  goodnesse  of  the  pas-
ture, and  the  fruitfulnesse  of  the  soile.  The  Spaniards
that  went  up  this  river  passed  three  hundred  leagues,  and
found  the  countrey  ful  of  Indians :  who  had  great  plenty
of  victuals,  among  whom  the  Spaniards  dwelt  as  their
friends,  and  the  Indians  bestowed  their  daughters  in  mar-
iage  upon  them,  and  so  they  dwelt  altogether  in  one
towne,  which  the  Spaniards  called  La  Ascension,  and  it  T-a  Ascension
standeth  on  the  North  side  of  the  river.  The  foresaid  3°°  leagues
Spaniardes  were  twentie  yeres  in  this  place,  before  any  pj^u^^
newes  of  their  inhabiting  upon  this  river  was  brought  into
Spaine :  but  waxing  olde,  and  fearing  that  when  they  were
dead,  their  sons  which  they  had  begotten  in  this  countrey
being  very  many,  should  live  without  the  knowledge  of
any  other  Christians :  they  determined  among  themselves
to  build  a  ship,  and  to  sende  newes  into  Spaine  with  letters
unto  the  king  of  all  things  that  had  passed  among  them,
upon  that  river.  These  newes  being  brought  to  the  king,
he  sent  three  ships,  with  a  Bishop  and  certaine  Priests,  and
Friers,  and  more  men  and  women  to  inhabite,  with  all
kind  of  cattell,  when  this  succour  was  come,  they  inhabited
in  two  places  more  on  the  North  side  of  the  river,
and  travelled  three  hundred  leagues  beyond  the  Ascen-
sion ;  but  finding  neither  gold  nor  silver,  they  returned
backe againe  unto the  Ascension. The  people  are so

253

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

multiplyed  in  this  citie,  that  now  it  is  one  of  the  greatest
in all the Indias,  and containeth above two thousand
houses. The countrey adjoyning  is  exceeding fruitfuU,
abounding  with  all  kinds  of  victuals,  &  with  sugar  and
cotton. From  this  citie  of  Ascension  1 50  leagues  towards
the mouth of  the  river standeth another  towne  which
Santa  Fe. they  call  Santa  Fe,  on  the  South  side  of  the  said  river,
from  which  towne  there  lyeth  an  open  high  way  leading
into  the  land  of  Peru,  so  that  when  I  come  to  intreat  of
Peru  I  wil  speake  of  this  way,  and  declare  who  first  found
it. Also  five  yeeres  past  they  have  inhabited  anew  the
towne  of  Buenos  Ayres  on  the  South  side  of  the  river,  to
[III.  789.] the  end  they  might  have  trade  from  the  coast  of  Brasill,
but their fortune was such, that the very first time
they went to Brasill,  and  would have returned againe
Two  English ^q  the  river of  Plate,  they  were  taken  by  two ships  of
'jiLF^ntlT'^  England  that  were  going  for  the  streights  of  Magellan.
was  General! The coast  along  from  this river  to the streights of
1582.  Magellan  hath  not  bene  perfectly  discovered,  either  by  sea

or  lande,  saving  onely  certaine  portes  which  they  have
found,  sayling  to  the  streights.  Wherefore  passing  them
over,  I  will  here  intreat  of  the  saide  streights,  and  declare
who  was  the  first  finder  of  them,  as  likewise  what  was  the
cause  why  they  were  sought  for.  The  Portugales  there-
fore having  first  found  and  conquered  the  East  Indies,  and
discovered  the  coast  of  China,  with  the  Hands  of  the
Malucos,  (all  which  places  abound  with  gold,  precious
stones,  silkes,  and  other  rich  commodities)  and  bringing
home  the  foresaide  riches  in  their  ships  into  Portugall  :
there  grewe  by  this  meanes  great  envie  betweene  the
Portugales  and  their  neighbours  the  Spaniardes ;  insomuch
that  the  Councell  of  Spaine  saide  unto  the  Emperour
Charles  the  fift  being  then  their  king,  that  the  Portugales
would  be  Lordes  of  all  the  riches  of  the  world.  Upon
which  words  beganne  a  controversie  betweene  the  Em-
perour and  the  king  of  Portugall :  but  they  being  great
friends  before,  and  also  kinsmen,  agreed  immediatly  to
part  the  whole  world  betweene  them,  in  such  wise  as  I  for

254

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.
my  part  could never understand the certaintie thereof.
The  world  being  thus  divided,  a  Portugal-gentleman  called
Fernando  Magellanes  born  in  a  place  of  Portugall  called  Fernando
Punta  de  la  barte,  being  of  a  good  house,  &c  very  wel ^^"^  ^"^^'
seene in cosmographie,  and an excellent  Pilot,  as also
being  offended  with  Don  Emanuel  his  Sovereigne,  departed
out  of  Portugall  into  Spaine,  and  affirmed  to  the  Councell
of  Spaine,  that  the  Isles  of  the  Malucos  were  in  that  part
of  the  worlde  which  was  allotted  to  the  king  of  Spaine,
and  that  he  would  finde  a  shorter  way  thither  then  the
Portugales  tooke,  and layed  before  them such  infallible
reasons,  that  the  Councell  giving  credite  unto  his  wordes,
sent  him  to  sea  with  five  ships  and  400  men  all  very  well
appointed. With  these  five  ships  setting  saile from S.
Lucar,  he  came  to  the  coast  of  Brasill,  where  at  that  time
two  places  were  inhabited  by  Portugales,  and  so  sayling  on
along  that  coast  he  passed by  the  river of  Plate,  which
river  was  discovered  a  little  before  by  Solis. And  not-
withstanding many  stormes,  and  great  mutinies  among  his
companie,  he came  at  length unto 48 degrees,  to the
Southwards  of  the  river  of  Plate :  where  he  found  an  har-
bour, which he named Puerto de Sant Julian, and  PorteS.Julian.
wintered  there :  and  there  also  he  hanged  5  men,  and  put
on  shore  a  Priest,  because  they  would  have  made  the  com-
pany to stand against their captaine,  and so to have
returned  backe  againe. But  in  the end  having  pacified
his  men,  he  put  to  sea,  and  within  5  dayes  after  he  found  The  discovery
the  streights,  which  by  him  were  so  much  desired : but  y ^  '^[^!,^  ^^
before  he  entered  the  said  streights  there  befell  such  a
mutinie  in  one  of  his  ships,  that  the  same  ship  returned
backe  againe. And  so  himselfe  with  the  other  foure  ships
entering the streights,  one of  the said foure with all
the men therein was cast  away  at  the  very  enterance :
which losse notwithstanding  he proceeded  on with the
other three  ships,  and  passing  many  troubles  and dan-
gers in this long discovery, ceased not to prosecute
his intended voyage. This discovery  was  at  the first
thought  very  profitable  unto  the  Spaniards,  but  of  late

255

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

it  hath  prooved  very  hurtful!  unto  them  by  meanes  of  cer-
taine  coasters  which  have  sayled  the  selfe  same  course.
The  Southerly  These  streights  stand  in  52  degrees  and  a  halfe  of
mlits^t  Southerly  latitude.  Also  here  is  to  be  noted,  that  it
Masellmi.  ^^  colder  to  the  Southward  of  the  line  then  to  the  North-
ward :  in  such  wise,  that  in  forty  degrees  to  the  Southward
the  colde  is  more  sharpe,  then  in  fiftie  degrees  to  the
North :  experience  doth  alwaies  shew  the  same :  for  it
is  as  colde  even  in  the  streights  of  Magellan,  as  it  is  in
sixty  degrees  of  Northerly  latitude.  Howbeit  the  colde
is  not  the  cause  why  navigators  frequent  not  the  same,
but  the  Westerly  and  Southerly  windes,  which  blowe
most  furiously  on  that  coast,  and  that  oftentimes  out  of
the  very  mouth  of  the  streightes,  and  so  continue  for  the
most  part  of  the  yeere.  Also  there  runneth  sometimes
such  a  strong  current,  that  if  the  winde  and  it  goe  all
one  way,  the  cables  cannot  holde,  neither  can  the  ship
withstand  the  force  thereof.  For  which  cause,  and  also
for  that  there  is  no  harbour,  till  you  be  passed  30  leagues
into  the  said  streights,  most  part  of  the  ships  that  have
gone  thither  have  indured  many  troubles  before  they
could  come  to  the  streights,  and  being  come  to  the  mouth
thereof  they  have  bene  hindered  by  the  current  and
winde,  and  so  have  beene  put  backe  againe.  And  to  the
end  you  may  understand  the  truth,  I  will  declare  unto
you  all  the  shippes  that  have  past  through  the  said  streights,
since  Magellan  first  found  them,  unto  this  present  yeere
of  1586,  when  I  have  once  ended  my  discourse  of
Magellan  his  owne  voyage.  Nowe  you  are  by  the  way
to  understande,  that  the  North  side  of  the  enterance  of
these  streights  is  plaine  lande  without  any  wood  or  trees :
Paiagones.  here  are  likewise  some  Indians  though  not  many,  yet
are  they  very  mightie  men  of  bodie  of  ten  or  eleven  foot
high,  and  good  bow-men,  but  no  man-eaters,  neither
have  they  any  victuals,  but  such  as  they  get  by  hunting
[III.  790.]  and  fishing ;  they  cover  their  bodies  with  the  skinnes  of
beasts  that  they  kill,  to  defend  them  from  the  colde:
neither  was there ever to  this  day  any  silver or  golde

256

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

found  among  them  or  in  their  countrey. These  Streights  '^he  length  of
(they say) extend in length from  East  to  West  about  f/ireightsof

111  1  -1  A 1  -jji ri  Magellan.

an  hundred  and  twentie  leagues. At  the  middle  or  these  j  mighty  rUg
streights  on  the  North  side  are  many  mountaines  covered  of  mountains.
with snow,  which mountaines  stretch  from  thence  along
the  frontiers  of  Chili,  Peru,  and  Nuevo  reino  de  Granada,
even  unto  the  shore  of  the  North  sea  at  Santa  Martha,
as  I  have  before  signified. It  is  a  wonder  to  behold  the
exceeding heigth of these mountaines, and the way
which  they  continue covered  with snow,  for  even  under
the  Equinoctiall  line  they  have  as  much  snowe  upon  their
tops  as in 52 degrees. Also  it  is  worthy  the  remem-
brance, that  all  this countrey  towarde the South sea  is
very  fruitfuU,  and  the  people  very  discreete  and  gentle:
but  all the  coast  towardes Brasill upon  the  North sea
is poore,  whereas never  yet  was  found  any  commoditie
of  account,  and  the  people  themselves  are  very  cruell  and
salvage  ;  for  the  will  of  God  is,  that  good  and  civill  men
should  inhabite  fruitfuU  countries. And for the  better
understanding  hereof  you must  note,  that all the  land
lying  betweene  the  said  ridge  of  mountaines  and  the  South
sea is  called by the  names  of  Chili,  Peru, and  Nuevo  Chili,  Peru,
reino  de  Granada,  which  are  the  best  and  richest  countreys  '^'^j  l^uevo
in all the  world : and most  part  of  the  land  from  the  ^Q^°„fja
said  mountaines  to  the  North  sea  is  called  Brasill,  being
a mountainous  countrey,  *where  as  yet  was  never  found  *  But  of  late
either golde or  silver. From  the said mountaines in  there  are  found
the  middle  of  the  streights  the  land  riseth  high,  till  you
come to the  end  of  the  streights  where  you  enter  into
the South  sea,  in  which place next  the  South sea the
streights  are  very dangerous,  by reason of  the  sholdes
&  rocks that  lie  on the North  side. Thus Magellan
after  he  had  entered  the  South  sea,  within  60  dayes  came
to the lies  of  the Malucos, without touching  at any
land untill he came thither : and so  seeking there to  The  death  of
lade  his  ships  at  an Hand  inhabited  by  Moores,  he  was  Magellan.
by  them  treacherously  slaine. Now  the  Spaniards  being
too few for the managing  of  all  three ships, because

XI  257  R

diverse  rich

A.D.

1572-87.

Sebastian  del
Cano  the  first
man  that  ever
say  led  about
the  world.

Two  ships  of
Genoa.

A  third  voyage
to  ye  streights.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

many  of  them  were  dead,  partly  with  sicknes,  and  partly
with  the  hardnesse  of  the  voiage,  determined  to  abandon
one  of  their  said  ships,  and  so  manned  the  other  two  :
which  two  being  laden  with  spices  and  other  riches  knew
not  what  course  they  were  best  to  take  :  howbeit  at
length  it  was  determined,  that  one  of  these  two  ships
should  go  for  Nueva  Espanna,  and  the  other  for  the  cape
of  Buena  Esperanza,  and  so  for  Spaine.  The  ship  that
went  for  Spaine  was  called  The  Victorie,  the  Pilot
whereof  was  a  Biscain  named  Juan  Sebastian  del  Cano,
to  whom  the  king  gave  great  rewardes,  and  appointed
him  the  globe  for  his  armes,  whereon  was  written  :
Primus  omnium  circunde  disti  me;  that  is,  thou  art
the  first  man  that  ever  sayled  about  me.

And  albeit  this  voyage  was  so  long  and  troublesome
as  is  before  mentioned,  yet  many  others  have  attempted
the  same.  And  the  next  that  sought  to  passe  the  said
streights  of  Magellan  were  two  ships  of  Genoa,  which
comming  as  farre  as  the  mouth  of  the  streights  were  by
a  mightie  storme  driven  backe  againe,  and  one  of  them,
whose  master  was  called  Pancaldo,  put  into  the  river  of
Plate,  and  was  cast  away  about  Buenos  Aeres,  where
to  this  day  part  of  the  said  ship  is  to  be  scene,  and  some
of  the  men  are  yet  living  in  the  river  among  the
Spaniards :  and  the  other  ship  returned  to  Genoa
againe.

Also  there  was  a  bishop  of  Placencia  in  Spaine,  who
coveting  riches,  set  foorth  a  fleet  of  foure  sailes,  to  passe
the  streights,  and  so  to  goe  for  the  Malucos :  and
getting  license  of  the  Emperour  he  sent  his  said  4  ships
towards  the  streights  which  had  very  faire  windes  till
they  came  thither :  but  being  entered  20  leagues  within
the  streights,  a  storme  of  Westerly  windes  tooke  them,
&  drove  3  of  them  on  shore,  &  the  fourth  backe  into
the  sea,  which  (the  storme  being  past)  returned  into
the  streights  to  seeke  for  his  consorts,  &  found  many
men  going  on  the  shores  side,  but  the  ships  were  beaten
all  to pieces. So  they  on  land  called  unto  the  ship ;  but

258

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

the  captaine  therof,  considering that his ship  was but

little,  &  that  he  had  but  small  store  of  victuals,  would

not  go  to  them  on  shore,  but  proceeded  on  his  voyage,

&  passed  the  streights. And  because  he  was  alone  he

would  not  saile  to  the  Malucos,  but  went  for  the  coast

of  Peru  to  the  citie  of  Lima,  where  the  ship  remaineth

unto  this  day. The  men  of  the  other  three  ships,  which

were  left  in  the  streights being  to  the  number  of  two

hundred  and fiftie (whose Captaine being kinsman to

the  bishop  of  Placencia  was  called  *Queros)  were  never  *  Gonsaho  de

heard of  untill this present day,  it  being fortie yeres  ^^/Z/"' ^"^^'^

since  they  were  left there. A  yeare  after  this,  certaine  c'allet'h  this

marchants  of  the  Groine  in  Galicia  set  foorth  other  three  Captaine

ships, which ships  also came to the streights  mouth,  'Z^amargo.

where  one  of  them  was  cast  away  with  all  the  men,  and P^^^h
,  ,  1 r c •  vo-jage  to  the

the  other  two  returned  tor  bpame.  streights.

Also I have had intelligence of certaine Portugal!  Afiftandsixt
ships,  which  being  come  to  the  mouth  of  the  Streights  "voiage  to  the
lost  two  of  their  Pinnesses  which  they sent  to  discover  ^^^"^^f  ^
the  land,  and  then  returned  back. And  after  these,  two  ^.^oo  French
French ships were sent from the river  of  Jenero  by  ships  sent  for
Monsieur  de  Villegagnon,  but  being  come  to  the  latitude  the  streights  of
of  45.  degrees,  they  were  driven  backe  by  a storme  of  ^^S^^^^f^-
contrary  winds. After  all  this  the  governour  of  Chili  •- '  ' "  -J
called Don  Garcia de  Mendoza  sonne to the  Marques
of  Cannette  determining  to  discover  the sayd  Streights
from  the  South  sea,  sent  from  Chili  two  ships  under  the
conduct  of  a  captaine  called  Latherelio :  but  the  danger
to  seeke  these  Streights by  the  South  sea  is  more  then
by  the  North  sea,  because  all  the  stormes of  the  North
sea  come  from  the  land,  but  in the South sea  all  the
windes  and  stormes  come  off  the  sea,  and  force  the  ships
to  run upon  the  leeshore,  insomuch  that  the sayd  two
ships  were  cast  away  in  fiftie  degrees.

The  seeking  of  these  Streights  of  Magellan  is  so  dan-
gerous, and  the  voyage  so  troublesome,  that  it  seemeth
a  matter  almost  impossible  to  be  perfourmed,  insomuch
that  for  the  space  of  thirty  yeeres  no  man  made  account

259

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1572-87.
Sir  Francis thereof;  untill  of  late  one Francis  Drake an English-
Drakes  voyage  ^^^^  ^q^  -v^^hom  I  have  before  spoken)  seeing  hee  could
■^ ■  doe  no  good  on  the  maine  lande  of  the  West  Indies  to
benefite himselfe, because  of  the galleys of  Cartagena
that  kept  the  coast,  determined  to  seeke  the  Streights  of
Magellan,  and to  passe  into the South sea. And so
having  provided  two  ships  and  three  pinnesses  in  Eng-
land, he proceeded on his voyage, and comming to
the  Islandes  of  Cape  Verde  tooke  a  Portugal  shippe  laden
with wine, the  Pilot  whereof  beeing  a Portugal called
Nuno  da  Sylva,  hee  caried  along  with him,  who  was  a
great  helpe  and  furtherance  unto  him  in  his  voyage. And
this which I shall  here say, I had  in writing of  the
Portugall  pilot  himselfe.

From the Islands of  Cape Verde  the  sayd Francis

Drake  sailed  unto  Port  Sant  Julian,  where  he  wintered:

The  cause  why  and there  also hee put to death a gentleman of his

b  h  Td  '^^^  company,  because  hee  would  have  returned  home. This

port  I  take  to  bee  accursed,  for  that  Magellan  likewise

put  some  to  death  there  for  the  like  offence.

This  Francis  Drake  putting  out  of  the  sayd  port,
entred  the  Streights,  and  within  twelve  dayes  gotte  into
the  South  sea.  And  two  dayes  after  there  arose  such
a  storme  of  Westerly  windes  (which  are  usuall  in  those
parts)  that  he  lost  his  pinnesse,  and  his  Viceadmirall
master  John  Winter  was  driven  backe  againe  into  the
Streights,  who  passing  many  dangers  returned  home  into
Sir  Francis England. But Francis  Drake  himselfe ranne  with this

Drake  driven ^^^^^^  \^^q  Seven  and fifty  degrees  of  Southerly  latitude,

tnto  z. 7  dezrees  ^ ,^

ofSoutherh where  hee  found  an  Island  with  a  good  harborough,  and

latitude.  fresh  water,  and  stayed  at  the  same  Island  two  moneths  to

repayre  his  ships : and  then,  the  weather  beeing  faire,  he

proceeded  on  his  voyage,  and  came  to  the  coast  of  Chili  to

La  Mocha  in an Island  called  La  Mocha;  where  hee  went  on  shore,

Z^/^eg.  30 ^^^  talked  with  the  Indians:  but  when  hee  would  have

min.  over  ,  t  • 1  1  1  i •  ^  1  •

against  the  returned  unto  his  boate  they  shotte  their  arrowes  at  him,
province  of  and  killed  two  of  his  men,  and  hee  himselfe  was  wounded
Jrauco.  in the face.

260

LOPEZ  VAZ

Going  from  thence  hee  passed  by  the  towne  of  Con-
cepcion  not  knowing  the  place,  and  so  to  Valparizo  which
is  the  port  of  Sant  lago,  where  hee  found  a  ship  laden
with  a  kind  of  victuals  and  wine,  and  had  in  her  besides
threescore  thousand  pezos  of  gold,  every  pezo  being  worth
eight  shillings  sterling :  and  taking  this  ship  with  him
hee  went  from  thence  to  another  port  called  Coquimbo :
where  seeing  many  cattell  on  the  land,  he  sent  presently
some  of  his  men  with  calievers  to  kill  of  the  sayd  cattell :
but  being  espied  of  the  Spaniards  that  dwelt  in  the  towne,
they  sent  twelve  horsemen  to  see  what  they  were  that
killed  their  cattell,  for  they  knew  them  not :  and  comming
neere  unto  them,  the  Englishmen  fled  to  their  boates,  but
the  horsemen  overtooke  one  of  them  who  had  a  halbard
in  his  hand,  whom  the  Spaniards  thought  to  have  taken :
but  hee  with  his  halbard  killing  one  of  their  horses  was
himselfe  runne  through  with  a  lance,  and  so  the  Spaniards
carried  him  dead  with  them  into  the  towne.  The  next
day  the  newes  came  to  Sant  lago,  that  they  were  English-
men, and  how  they  had  taken  the  shippe  out  of  the
harbour  of  Valparizo :  whereupon  they  of  Sant  lago  sent
a  Post  by  land  to  give  warning  unto  them  of  Peru.
Howbeit  by  reason  that  the  countrey  betweene  this  place
and  Peru  is  not  inhabited  for  the  space  of  two  hundreth
leagues,  and  many  huge  and  colde  mountaines  covered
with  snowe  lie  in  the  way,  the  Poste  was  so  long  in
perfourmance  of  this  journey,  that  captaine  Drake  was
upon  the  coast  of  Peru  a  moneth  before  the  sayd  Poste
came  thither :  neither  could  they  send  any  newes  by  sea,
because  they  were  destitute  of  shipping.

Captaine  Drake  departing  from  Coquimbo  sayled  to
another  porte  not  inhabited,  where  he  set  up  a  pinnesse.
And  going  from  thence,  the  next  place  where  he  touched
was  a  porte  upon  the  coast  of  Peru  called  los  Pescadores :
and  there  hee  landed,  and  in  one  of  the  fishermens  houses
found  of  a  Spaniards  three  thousand  pezos  of  silver  in
little  barres.

From  hence  he  went  to  another  port  called  Arica,  which

261

A.D.

1572-87.
The  towne  of
Concepcion.
Valparizo.

The  port  of
Coquimbo  in
29  deg.  30

LosPescadores.

Arica  in  18
deg.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

being  the  next  towne  to  Chili  that  the  Spaniards  have  in  all
Peru,  containeth  an  hundreth  houses :  and  this  is  the  porte

[III.  792.]  where  they  discharge  their  merchandize  that  passe  from
Lima  to  Potossi,  and  to  all  other  cities  within  the  land,  and
likewise  at  this  place  they  were  woont  to  embarke  all  the
silver  which  they  caried  for  Panama.  At  this  port  of
Arica  he  found  a  ship  that  had  in  her  thirteene  thousand
pezos  of  silver,  which  having  taken  out,  he  burned  the
sayd  ship,  and  after  thought  to  have  landed,  but  seeing
both  horsemen  and  footemen  on  shore  hee  would  not,  but
proceeded  on  his  voyage.  Since  captaine  Drake  was  at
this  porte  they  carie  their  silver  by  land  to  Lima,  and  lade
no  more  treasure  here,  but  onely  discharge  the  merchants
goods  that  come  from  Spaine  hither.  Also  they  have
built  a  forte  at  this  place  for  the  better  safety  of  the
inhabitants,  and  have  planted  it  with  ten  pieces  of
Ordinance,  and  every  summer  there  lie  in  garison  an
hundred  souldiers  besides  the  townesmen. From  hence

Chuli.  he  sayled  to  another  porte  called Chuli :  in  which  port

was  a  ship  that  had  three  hundred  thousand  pezos  of
silver  in  barres:  but  they  had  sent  horsemen  from  Arica
to  give  advertizement  of  Drakes  being  on  the  coast,  which
newes  came  but  two  houres  to  the  towne  before  his
arrivall  at  the  sayd  porte :  whereupon  the  Master  of  the
shippe  having  no  leisure  to  carie  his  silver  on  shore,  was
forced  to  throwe  it  into  the  sea  in  sixe  fadome  water,
where  his  ship  road,  and  so  to  runne  on  shore  in  the
shippes  boate.  And  captaine  Drake  comming  aboord  the
ship  was  told  by  an  Indian,  that  the  Master  had  throwen
the  silver  overboord.  Wherfore  seeing  that  newes  began
to  run  of  him  from  towne  to  town  he  stayed  not  here,  but
ran  along  the  coast :  and  because  he  would  have  no  lets,
he  cast  off  the  ship  which  he  had  taken  at  Sant  lago,  with
never  a  man  in  her,  which  ship  was  never  heard  of  after.
And  so  without  staying  any  where  he  shaped  his  course

El  Callao  de  for  Lima,  and  comming  to  the  harborough  of  Lima  called

Lima.  YX  Callao,  being  two  leagues  distant  from  Lima  it  selfe,

(for  Lima  standeth  up  into  the  land)  hee  arrived  there  one

262

LOPEZ  VAZ  A.D.

1572-87.

day,  before  the  newes  of  him  was  brought  to  Lima,  and
found  the  men  in  the  ships  without  suspicion.  And
as  hee  entred  into  the  port,  there  came  in  also  a  ship  from
Panama  laden  with  merchandize,  and  hee  sent  his  pinnesse
to  take  her :  but  the  men  forsaking  the  ship  betooke  them
to  their  boate,  and  went  on  shore :  and  as  the  Englishmen
followed  the  boat,  a  Spaniard  that  was  therein  shot  a  piece,
and  slew  one  of  captaine  Drakes  men  in  the  pinnesse.
Wherefore  hee  followed  the  boat  no  farther,  but  went
with  his  pinnesse  into  the  harbour  among  fourteene  saile
of  ships  that  lay  there,  in  all  which  ships  there  was  not  a
man  that  had  so  much  as  a  sword  or  a  piece  to  molest
him,  wherefore  hee  did  with  lesse  feare  go  from  ship  to
ship,  asking  them  if  there  were  any  ships  gone  for  Panama ;
for  he  knew  wel,  that  the  ships  which  goe  for  Panama  carie
both  silver  &  gold,  neither  sought  he  for  any  thing  else,
for  there  were  marchandize  enough  for  him  in  those  ships,
if  hee  had  bene  desirous  to  have  had  the  same.  So  they
told  him  that  three  dayes  past  there  was  a  ship  gone  for
Panama  which  caried  all  the  merchants  silver  thither.
Whereupon  he  presently  set  saile  towards  Panama;  for
when  hee  came  into  this  port  it  was  about  midnight,  so
that  the  Spaniards  could  not  see  what  ships  he  had.  At
last  the  newes  came  to  Lima  unto  the  Viceroy  of  Peru,
that  there  were  enemies  in  the  harbor,  but  they  knew  not
what  they  were.  Wherefore  the  Viceroy  &  all  the
people  were  in  great  feare,  lest  some  Spaniards  had
made  a  mutinie,  and  put  themselves  in  armes :  and  so
the  next  morning  himselfe  accompanied  with  2000  horse-
men &  footmen  came  from  the  citie  down  to  the  waters
side,  and  finding  some  of  the  Englishmens  arrowes  that
were  shot  at  the  boat,  out  of  which  their  man  was  slain,
they  knew  them  to  be  Englishmen :  and  then  they  were
al  in  quiet,  seeing  it  was  but  one  ship,  for  as  yet  the  ship
lay  becalmed  3  dayes  before  the  towne.  Whereupon  they
forthwith  provided  2  ships  with  200  men  in  them,  to
boord  captain  Drake  or  els  to  burne  his  ship ;  and  after
the  ships  went  2  small  pinnesses,  because  that  if  any  of  the

263

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

ships  should  be  sunke,  they  might  save  the  men.  But
it  was  a  day  &  a  halfe  before  these  things  could  be  made
ready,  &  in  the  end  going  foorth  they  found  ye  English
ship  still  becalmed,  &  the  calme  was  such,  that  the
Spaniards  could  not  come  at  them.  The  same  night,
the  wind  blowing  a  fresh  gale,  the  Spaniards  returned
into  the  harbour,  and  captaine  Drake  set  forward  to
Panama.  The  cause  of  the  Spaniards  returne  was,  for
that  they  had  no  Ordinance,  nor  victuals  to  tarry  any
longer  out.  Then  the  Viceroy  caused  sixe  pieces  of
Ordinance  to  bee  made,  neither  could  hee  make  any
more,  in  regard  of  the  shortnesse  of  time :  so  with  these
Three  ships  pieces  of  Ordinance,  and  three  shippes,  and  two  hundred
sent  ape] ^^^  ££^ u\&n  in  them  hee  sent  after  captaine  Drake :  who

captaine  riij-i  i  1  ^  ,  ,•

Drake.  alter  nee  had  wmde  stayed  no  where,  nor  tooke  any  ships

at  all,  notwithstanding  hee  met  with  many  comming  from

Panama  laden  with  merchandize,  but still hee inquired

after  the  shippe  that  was  gone  to  Panama  before  him  :  of

J  rich  prize which  ship  he  had  sight  about  the  cape  of  Sant  Francisco,

taken  ^j  jzr ^^^  Master  wherof  was  a  Biskaine,  called  Juan  de  Anton  :

r  T cut  CIS  Dv^kc

at  Cape  S.  ^^^  Seeing  this  ship  of  the Englishmens,  thought  that

Francisco  the Viceroy  of  Peru had  sent  him some  message,  and

situate  one  therefore  strooke  all  his  sailes :  but  so  soone  as  hee  might

degree  to  ye  discerne  the  shippe  somewhat  better,  hee  would  then  faine

north  of  the  .  .

Equinoctial. ^^^^  gone  his  way,  for  hee  knew  that  it  was  none  of  that

coast,  and  then  hee  began  to  hoise  his  sailes,  but  could  by

[III.  793.] no meanes get from Captaine Drake because hee was

within  the  reach  of  his  great  Ordinance,  for  the  Spaniards

not having  so  much  as a  rapier  to  defend  themselves,

Read  Nuno were soone  constrained to yeelde. There  were  in this

da  Syha  con-  shippe above eight hundred and fifty thousand pezos

treasure ^ °^  silver,  and forty thousand pezos of  gold,  all  which

silver  and  golde  was  customed ;  but  what  store  of  treasure

they had besides uncustomed I knowe not, for many

times  they  cary  almost  as  much  more  as  they  pay  custome

for  ;  otherwise  the  king  would  take  it  from  them,  if  they

should  be  knowen  to  have  any  great  summe ;  wherefore

every  shippe  carieth  his  bill  of  custome,  that  the  king  may

264

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.
see  it.  All  this  treasure  that  captaine  Drake  tooke  was
merchants  and  other  mens  goods,  saving  one  hundred  and
eighty  thousand  pezos  of  the  kings.  He  had  also  out
of  this  ship  good  store  of  victuals  with  other  necessaries,
which  were  to  bee  caried  for  Panama  and  was  five  dayes
taking  out  of  such  things  as  hee  needed.  This  done,  he
sayled  from  hence  to  the  coast  of  Nueva  Espanna  without
going  to  Panama.  Surely  this  was  a  great  plague  of  God
justly  inflicted  upon  us  for  our  sinnes :  for  the  taking  of
these  ships  is  an  especiall  cause  of  all  the  dangerous  warres
that  are  likely  to  ensue  betweene Spaine  and  England.

Now  the  ships  that  were  sent  by  the  Viceroy  of  Peru
from  Lima  after  Francis  Drake,  arrived  at  Cape  Sant
Francisco  twenty  dayes  after  hee  had  taken  the  foresayd
shippe,  and  had  intelligence  by  a  ship  comming  from
Panama,  which  they  met  at  the  sayd  cape,  that  Francis
Drake  had  taken  the  ship  with  silver,  and  was  not  gone
for  Panama.  Whereupon  the  captaine  of  the  three  ships
thinking  that  captaine  Drake  had  bene  gone  for  the
Streights  of  Magellan,  directed  his  course  that  way  to
seeke  him.

Captaine  Drake  carried  from  the  coast  of  Peru  eight
hundreth  sixty  sixe  thousand  pezos  of  silver,  which  is  as
much  as  eight  hundred  sixty  sixe  quintals,  at  100  pound
weight  the  quintal,  every  quintal  being  worth  one
thousand  and  two  hundreth  ducats  of  Spaine  ;  all  which
summe  amounteth  to  a  million  and  thirtie  nine  thousand
and  two  hundreth  ducats.  Besides  this  silver  hee  caried
away  a  hundred  thousand  pezos  of  gold,  that  is  ten
quintals,  each  quintal  being  valued  at  a  thousand  five
hundreth  Spanish  ducats,  which  last  summe  amounteth
to  an  hundreth  and  fifty  thousand  ducats :  over  and
besides  the  treasure  in  the  sayd  ship  which  was  uncus-
tomed (the  value  whereof  I  cannot  learne)  consisting  of
pearles,  precious  stones,  reals  of  plate,  and  other  things  of
great  worth.

With  all  this  purchase  he  sayled  toward  Nueva
Espanna ; and at an Island lying before that coast

265

A.D.

1572-87.

The  Island  of
Cario.

Pedro  Sarmi-
ento  sent  from
Lima  to  the
Streits  of
Magellan.

5  8  degrees  of
Southerly  lati-
tude discov-
ered.

Many  Islands
discovered  to
the  South  of
the  Streights.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

called  The  Island  of  Cano  hee  discharged  all  things  out
of  his  shippe  and  graved  her,  and  remained  there  ten
dayes.  From  thence  hee  went  along  the  coast  of  Nueva
Espanna,  where  hee  tooke  certaine  ships  laden  with  spices,
silkes,  and  velvets,  but  no  golde  nor  silver,  for  there
was  none  to  bee  had  on  this  coast.  And  here  at
Guatulco  he  set  on  shore  his  Portugal-pilot,  which  he
tooke  at  one  of  the  Islands  of  Cape  Verde.  But  what
course  he  kept  from  this  coast  till  he  came  into  England
I  know  not  of  certainety,  and  therefore  I  will  not  meddle
therewithall.

The  foresayd  three  ships  which  were  sent  in  pursuit
of  captaine  Drake,  returned  backe  againe  to  Lima  without
doing  of  ought.  All  which  notwithstanding,  the  Viceroy
of  Peru  determined  to  send  two  ships  to  the  Streights
of  Magellan,  either  to  meete  with  captaine  Drake  there,
or  else  to  see  if  they  could  fortifie  the  sayd  Streights
against  such  ships  as  might  afterward  attempt  to  passe
through  the  same.  And  albeit  this  was  thought  a  most
dangerous  voyage,  and  impossible  to  be  perfourmed,  by
reason  of  the  sholds  on  that  side  of  the  Streights,  yet
sent  he  forth  the  two  said  ships.  The  Admirall  being  a
ship  of  an  hundreth  tunnes,  and  the  other  of  eighty  tunnes,
&  having  one  hundreth  and  twenty  men  in  them  both,
sayled  from  Lima  under  the  conduct  of  Pedro  Sarmiento,
who  was  then  accompted  the  best  navigator  in  all  Peru.
These  ships  after  their  departure  touching  on  the  coast  to
take  in  victuals,  were  nine  moneths  before  they  came  to
the  latitude  of  the  Streights,  and  there  were  they  en-
countred  with  a  cruel  storme  :  but  Pedro  Sarmiento  being
a  man  of  good  courage,  bare  in  with  the  land  in  this
storme,  &  in  a  night  hee  was  put  into  the  streits,  not
knowing  how  nor  which  way ;  and  the  other  ship  running
farther  into  the  sea,  sayled  to  58  degrees  of  Southerly
latitude.  The  storme  being  past,  this  other  shippe  found
many  Islands  neere  unto  the  main  land,  and  so  returned
with  faire  weather  all  along  the  shore,  neither  could  they
find  any  other  way  to  enter  the  Streights,  but  onely  that

266

LOPEZ  VAZ  A.D.

1572-87.

which  Magellan  discovered :  notwithstanding  that  others
affirme  the  contrary,  saying  that  the  Streights  be  full  of
Islands  to  the  Southwards :  but  they  may  be  deceived,
for  if  there  be  any  other  Streight,  it  is  beyond  58  degrees,
and  hath  never  bene  seene  of  any  man :  for  this  ship
was  farthest  to  the  Southwards  of  all  that  ever  I  heard  of:
for  Francis  Drake  being  driven  by  tempest  no  farther
then  57  degrees  could  not  know  so  much  as  this  other;
which  ship  from  hence  returned  backe  to  Lima.  But
Pedro  Sarmiento  entred  the  Streights,  where  his  men  fall-
ing into  a  mutinie  would  have  returned  to  Lima ;  where-  [III.  794.]
upon  hanging  one  of  them  he  proceeded  on  his  voyage
for  Spaine.  Where  being  arrived,  he  told  the  king  that  P^^ro  Sarmi-
there  were  two  narrow  places  in  the  Streights  where  he  ^nt°  perswad-

Ctrl  V^  Kttl9^  or

might  build  a  forte,  and  that  there  was  a  very  good  spaine  to  fir-
countrey  abounding  with  great  store  of  riches  and  other  tifie  the
necessaries,  and  very  well  inhabited  with  Indians.  Upon  Streights  of
whose  wordes,  and  for  that  there  were  more  ships  making  ^^S^^^^^-
ready  in  England  to  passe  the  sayd  Streights,  the  king
sent  Diego  Flores  de  Valdez  with  23  ships  and  3500
men,  and  a  new  governour  to  Chili  with  five  hundred
old  souldiers  newly  come  out  of  Flanders.  These  ships
had  the  hardest  hap  of  any  that  ever  went  out  of  Spaine
since  the  Indias  were  first  discovered :  for  that  before
they  could  get  cleere  of  the  coast  of  Spaine,  a  storme
tooke  them,  and  cast  away  five  of  them,  and  above  eight
hundred  men,  and  the  residue  of  the  fleete  put  into
Cadiz.  Notwithstanding  which  hard  successe,  the  king
sent  them  word  that  they  should  proceede :  and  so  they
did  with  sixteene  sailes  only,  for  two  other  of  their  ships
were  so  shaken  with  the  storme,  that  they  could  not  goe
foorth.  In  these  sixteene  saile  of  ships  Pedro  Sarmiento
was  sent  to  be  governour  in  the  Streights  :  he  caried
with  him  all  kind  of  artificers,  to  build  forts,  and  other
necessaries,  with  great  store  of  Ordinance  and  munition.
This  fleete  because  it  set  late  foorth,  wintered  on  the
coast  of  Brasil  in  the  river  of  Jenero.  Winter  being
past, they set  sayle  from hence,  and about  the  height

267

A.D.
1572-87.

Two  English
ships  under  the
conduct  of  M.
FentonandM.
Luke  Ward.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  42  degrees  they  had  such  a  storme,  that  Diego  Flores
was  faine  to  beate  it  up  and  downe  about  22  dayes ;  in
which  storme  was  sunke  one  of  his  best  ships,  and  in
her  three  hundred  men  and  twenty  women  that  went  to
inhabite  the  streights,  and  most  part  of  the  munition  that
should  have  bene  left  in  the  streights  were  all  cast  away.
In  the  ende  the  storme  grew  so  intollerable,  that  the
ships  not  being  able  to  endure  it  any  longer  were  con-
strained to  put  backe  againe  unto  an  Island  called  Santa
Catelina  :  and  there  he  found  a  barke  wherein  were  cer-
taine  friers  going  for  the  river  of  Plate,  which  friers  told
him  of  two  great  English  ships  and  a  pinnesse  that  had
taken  them,  but  tooke  nothing  from  them,  nor  did  them
any  harme,  but  onely  asked  them  for  the  king  of  Spaines
ships.  Now  Diego  Flores  supposing  that  these  English
ships  would  go  to  the  streights,  was  himselfe  determined
to  go  to  the  streights  also,  though  it  was  in  the  moneth
of  February ;  and  choosing  tenne  shippes  of  the  fifteene
that  were  left,  he  sent  three  of  the  residue  that  were
old  and  shaken  with  the  storme  (wherein  he  put  all  the
women  and  sicke  men  that  were  in  the  fleete)  backe
againe  to  the  river  of  Jenero ;  leaving  the  other  two
shippes,  which  were  not  able  to  brooke  the  sea,  at  the
foresayd  Island ;  and  so  himselfe  with  the  sayd  ten  ships
returned  againe  for  the  streights.

Now  the  three  ships  wherein  the  sicke  men  and  the
women  were  embarked,  came  to  the  port  of  Sant  Vincent :
where  finding  the  two  foresayd  English  ships,  and  urging
them  to  avoide  the  harbour,  the  English  entred  combat
with  them :  and  by  reason  that  these  three  ships  were
weakened  with  former  tempests,  and  were  manned  with
the  refuse  of  all  the  Spanish  fleete,  the  Englishmen
easily  put  them  to  the  worst,  and  sunke  one  of  them,
and  might  also  have  sunke  another,  if  they  had  bene  so
minded ;  but  they  desired  not  the  destruction  of  any
man :  and  doubtlesse  it  is  the  greatest  valour  that  any
man  can  shew,  that  when  hee  may  doe  hurte,  he  will  not.
Hereupon  the  Englishmen  departed  from  this  porte  unto

268

LOPEZ  VAZ  A.D.

1572-87.
Espirito  Santo,  where  they  had  victuals  for  their  mer-  Espirito  Santo.
chandize :  and  so  they  returned  home  to  England  without
doing  any  harme  in  the  countrey.  The  cause  why  these
English  captaines  went  not  to  the  streights  I  know  not :
some  say,  that  they  were  put  backe  by  foule  weather,
others  suppose  that  it  was  for  feare  of  the  kings  ships :
but  the  pinnesse  that  belonged  to  these  shippes  wherein
John  Drake  went  as  captaine,  departed  from  them:  the
cause  why  hee  did  so,  is  unknowen  :  but  this  pinnesse  John  Drake.
entred  the  river  of  Plate,  and  within  five  leagues  of  Seale-
island,  not  farre  from  the  place  where  the  Erie  of  Cum-
berlands  ships  tooke  in  fresh  water,  it  was  cast  away
upon  a  ledge  of  rockes ;  but  the  men  were  all  saved  in
the  boate.  Who  being  eighteene  in  number  went  on
shore  upon  the  Northside  of  the  Island,  and  passing
tenne  dayes  journey  up  into  the  lande,  they  met  with
certaine  Salvage  people,  which  are  no  man-eaters,  but  take
all  the  Christians  that  they  can  get,  and  make  them  their
slaves :  howbeit  the  Englishmen  fought  with  them,  and
being  too  fewe  in  number,  five  of  them  were  slaine,  and
the  other  thirteene  taken  prisoners,  who  remained  with
the  Salvages  about  fifteene  moneths.

But  the  Master  of  the  pinnesse  called  Richard  Faire-
weather,  being  loath  any  longer  to  indure  that  miserie
wherein  hee  was,  and  having  knowledge  of  a  towne  of
Christians  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  called  on  a  night
John  Drake,  and  another  yoong  man  which  was  with
them,  and  tooke  a  Canoa  being  very  little,  and  having
but  two  oares,  and  passed  therewith  on  the  other  side
of  the  river,  which  is  full  nine  leagues  broade ;  and
being  three  dayes  before  they  could  get  over,  they  were
much  pined  for  lacke  of  meate.  But  comming  to  land,
they  hit  upon  an  high  way  that  went  towards  the
Christians :  and  spying  the  footing  of  horses,  they
followed  it,  and  at  last  came  to  an  house,  neere  unto  [ill,  795.]
the  which  corne  was  sowed.  And  there  they  met  with
Indians  that  were  servants  to  the  Spaniards,  who  gave
them  foode,  and  clothes  to  cover  them  withall,  for  they

269

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

were  all  naked.  And  one  of  the  sayd  Indians  went  to
the  towne,  and  caried  newes  of  the  Englishmen  :  where-
upon the  captaine  of  the  towne  sent  out  foure  horse-
men, which  brought  them  to  the  towne  behinde  them,
and  the  sayd  captaine  clothed  them,  and  provided
lodging  for  them,  and  John  Drake  sate  at  the  captaines
owne  table,  and  hee  intreated  them  all  very  well,
thinking  to  send  them  for  Spaine.  But  the  Viceroy
of  Peru  hearing  this  newes  sent  for  them,  and  they
sent  him  John  Drake  ;  but  the  other  two  they  kept,
because  they  were  maried  in  the  countrey.  Thus  much
concerning  their  affaires.  Upon  these  newes  also  there
were  prepared  fifty  horsemen  to  goe  over  the  river,
both  to  seeke  the  rest  of  the  Englishmen,  and  certaine
Spaniardes  which  were  amongst  those  Salvage  people  ;
but  I  am  not  assured  whether  they  went  forward  or  no.
Nowe  let  us  returne  to  Diego  Flores  :  who  passing
from  the  Island  of  Santa  Catelina  towards  the  streights
of  Magellan  in  the  middle  of  February,  and  comming
The  governor  to  the  height  of  the  river  of  Plate,  sent  the  governour
ofChih  q£  Chili  with  three  ships  up  the  river  to  Buenos  Ayres,

b^\he  river ^^^^ ^^^ might from thence passe overland to Chili.
of  Plate.  Of  these three ships two were  lost, but the men  and

provisions  were  saved  ;  and  the  third  returned  for
Spaine.  Then  Diego  Flores  with  the  other  seven  ships
proceeded  on  to  the  latitude  of  52.  degrees,  whereas
the  mouth  of  the  Streights  beginneth  :  but  because  it
was  the  ende  of  March,  which  there  is  the  latter  ende
of  summer,  the  countrey  was  so  full  of  snow,  and
withall  there  arose  such  a  sudden  storme,  that  he
could  not  set  Sarmiento  and  his  men  on  shore,  but
was  constrained  the  second  time  to  returne  unto  the
river  of  Jenero  upon  the  coast  of  Brasil  ;  where  he
heard  newes  of  the  English  ships  by  the  two  Spanish
ships  that  escaped  from  them.  Upon  which  newes  he
left  his  lieutenant  Diego  de  Ribera,  and  Pedro
Sarmiento,  that  they  might  the  next  yeere  returne  for
the  streights. And  so  Diego  Flores  himselfe  with  foure

270

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87-
ships  which  were yet remaining unto him, and other
foure  which  the  king  sent  to  succour  him,  set  forth  to  Foure  ships
seeke  the  EngHshmen  ; but  having  runne  along  all  the  ^T^  ^^^^  ^°
coast  of  Brasil  hee  could not finde them,  because they
were gone directly for England. Whereupon shaping
his  course  unto  a  port  called  Parajua,  and  finding  there  ^^^^  French
five French ships,  he  burnt three and tooke  two,  and  ^p^rXl^"  ^^
the  fort  also  which  the  Frenchmen had built,  and put
Spaniardes  therein,  but the Frenchmen fledde into the
mountaines  to the Salvages. This done hee returned
for  Spaine.

In  the  meane  season  his  Lieutenant  Diego  de  Ribera,
and Pedro Sarmiento had the next yeere so good  ^^^^°  Sarmi-
fortune,  that  they  arrived  safely  in  the  streights  with  all  ^"^l/ffj"  ^^
their  ships,  and  set  on  shore  foure  hundreth  men  :  but  Magellan
because the ships boate could not land, being once  tuith  400  men
laden,  they ran that ship, which had all the victuals ^  3°  -^omen.
and munition in her,  on shore in a bay,  and as  the
water did ebbe they tooke all things out of her.
This being done,  Diego de  Ribera  left  Sarmiento  with
foure hundreth men, thirtie women,  and a ship,  with
victuals for  eight moneths  : and  with the other  three
shippes hee  returned,  having  remained  in  the  Streights
but  eight  dayes. Nowe  Pedro  Sarmiento  built  a  towne  Nombre  de
at  the  mouth  of  the  Streights  on  the  North  side,  placing  -^^^^^  bmlded.
therein  an  hundreth  and fiftie men  : and from thence
he  went by  land, and sent the ship further into the
streights,  and  fiftie  leagues  within the Streights,  at  the
narrowest  place  of  all,  where  there  is  a  very  good  porte,
hee built  another towne, which he named  The towne  Ciudad  del
of  king  Philip  ;  and  would  also  have  made  a  forte,  and  ^'p^J^^J^PP^
planted Ordinance for the defence of the Streights  :
but  the  snowe  and  Winter  was  so  intollerable,  that  hee
could not bring it to perfection. Whereupon taking
about  25  mariners  with  him  into  the  foresayd  ship,  hee
sayd  hee  would  goe  see  howe  his  other  people  did,  and
so  hee sayled to the Streights  mouth,  unto  the  towne
which was  first  built ; where having continued a day

271

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

or  two,  he  sayd  that  a  storme  put  him  from  the  Streights
by  force  and  brake  his  cables  ;  but  his  men  affirmed
the  contrary,  that  himselfe  cut  his  cables  (God  knoweth
the  trueth)  and  so  he  passed  to  the  river  of  Jenero  ;
and  not  finding  there  any  succour  come  from  the  king,
he  sayled  to  Fernambuck,  craving  ayde  of  the  captaine
to  furnish  him  with  victuals.  And  so  the  captaine
presently  fraighted  his  ship  with  victuals  and  clothes  for
his  people  left  in  the  Streights,  and  so  sailed  thither-
ward. But  between  Cape  S.  Augustin  and  Baya  the
wind  came  off  the  sea  with  such  violence,  that  it  forced
the  ship  to  run  on  shore  ;  where  Sarmiento  had  three
of  his  men  drowned,  and  he  with  the  rest  hardly  escaped  :
and  so  this  ship  was  lost  with  all  the  provision  in  her.
From  thence  hee  passed  by  land  to  Baya  where  the
governour  of  Brasil  bought  him  a  barke  that  lay  in
the  harbour,  lading  the  same  with  victuals  and  clothes
for  Sarmientos  colonic.  With  this  provision  and  divers
other  necessaries  for  his  people  hee  tooke  his  voyage
for  the  Streights,  and  comming  to  the  height  of  foure
and  forty  degrees,  hee met on the  sudden  with  such  a

[III.  796.]  furious  storme,  that  he  was  forced  to  throw  his  fraight
overboord,  and  also  to  returne  to  the  river  of  Jenero.
Where  staying  a  whole  yeere  for  succour  from  the  king,
there  came  not  so  much  as  a  letter  from  him.  For
the  king  was  sore  displeased  at  Pedro  Sarmiento,
because  hee  made  him  beleeve  that  the  narrowest  place
of  the  Streights  was  but  a  mile  over  :  and  that  it  might
bee  fortified  so  that  a  boate  could  not  passe  :  whereas
Diego  de  Ribera,  and  others  certified  the  king,  that  it
was  above  a  league  broade,  and  that  if  a  ship  came
vi^ith  winde  and  current,  all  the  Ordinance  in  the  world
could  not  hurte  it.  Wherefore  the  king  thought  that
Pedro  Sarmiento  had  deceived  him,  in  making  him  to
lose  so  many  men,  and  so  much  charges  to  no  effect.
And  the  governour  of  Baya  seeing  that  the  king  wrote
not  unto  him,  would  give  him  no  more  succour :  so  that
Sarmiento  was  constrained  to  make  a  voyage  for  Spaine

272

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

in the same shippe, wherein hee last sayled toward
the  Streights: and  it  is  sayd  that  hee  was  taken  in  the  Pedro  Sar-
way  by  Englishmen, and caried into England. This  ^^^^"^"3^%.
Sarmiento  hath  caried  the  name  to  be  the  best  Navigator  fj^alter  Ra-
in all  Spaine,  and  that  hee hath  sayled  the  furthest  of  leghs  barkes
all others. After  all  this the captaine of  the river  of  1586.
Jenero  sent  a  smal  ship  with  victuals  for  the  Streightes,
which  was  put  backe  also  in fortie degrees. And this
is  all  the  discovery  of  the  Streights  of  Magellan,  made
as  well  by  Spaniards  as  other  nations  unto  this  present
yeere 1586. It is  foure yeeres since these poore and  Master  Can-
miserable Spaniards were left in the Streights,  from  '^"h  found  but
which  time  there  hath  no succour  gone  unto  them,  so  of  them.
God  he  knoweth  whether  they  be  dead  or  alive.

Thus  according  to  my  promise  I  have  declared  unto
you  to  the  uttermost  of  my  knowledge,  all  things
concerning  the  Indias,  as  farre  as  the  very  Streights  of
Magellan  ;  thinking  to  have  proceeded  along  the  coast,
as  at  the  first ;  but  that  the  doings  of  captaine  Drake
and  other  captaines  which  attempted  to  passe  the  sayd
Streights  have  caused  mee  to  bee  the  longer  in  this  my
pretended  worke.  Howbeit  now  let  us  proceede  on
forward  from  the  Streights  to  the  coast  of  Chili  :  the
distance  betweene  which  two  places  no  man  hath
travelled  by  land,  in  regard  of  the  huge  mountaines
covered  with  snow  that  lie  in  the  way  :  yea  I  may  well
say,  that  it  hath  not  often  bene  travelled  by  sea  ;  for
that  all  the  ships  which  have  passed  that  way  have  at
the  least  gone  thirty  leagues  off  the  shore,  to  avoide
the  sholds  and  many  little  Islands  that  lie  neere  the
maine  land ;  and  therefore  the  inland  of  that  coast
remaineth  as  yet  unknowen.

The  first  towne  after  you  have  passed  the  Streights
standeth  on  the  coast  of  Chili,  and  is  called  Castro,  Castro  upon
being  situate  upon  the  worst  place  of  all  the  coast,  for  ^^e  coast  of
there  is  but  small  store  of  golde  with  scarcitie  of  victuals,
and  a  sharpe  colde  ayre.  The  harbour  belonging  to
this  towne  is  compassed  about  with  so  many  sholdes,
XI  273  s

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

that it will serve but to receive small barkes onely.
Baldivia. The  next  towne  to  this  is  Baldivia.

A  description But before  I  passe  any  farther I  will heere describe

ofjhep^-o'''^nce  ^^^^ ^^^ ^j^^ situation and quality of Chili. This

countrey stretcheth in length from North to South

above  two  hundreth  leagues, conteining  in  breadth but

five  and  twenty  leagues  at  the  most.

From  the  great  ridge  of  mountaines  lying  to  the  East
of  Chili runne very  many  rivers into the sea, which
rivers are  the  cause  of  divers  valleys  the  fruitfuUest  in
all the worlde,  where bread, wine, and other victuals
Rivers  rich  of  mightily  abound  :  and  the  sayd  rivers  also  are  very  rich
golde,  q£  gold. But  to  declare  in  fewe  wordes  the  excellencie  of

this  province,  I  say  that  it  might  well  bee  called  an  earthly
paradise,  save  that  it  lacketh  one  onely  commodity,  and
that  is  peace.  It  was  first  discovered  on  this  maner :  the
Spaniards  having  conquered  the  kingdome  of  Peru,  (as
I  will  hereafter  shewe  unto  you)  found  in  the  sayd  king-
dome  great  store  of  golde ;  and  asking  the  Indians  from
whence  it  came,  they  answered,  from  Chili.  Upon  which
newes  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  being  one  of  the  principall
captaines  that  conquered  Peru  made  a  voyage  with  three
hundreth  horsemen  toward  Chili,  being  constrained  in
his  way  to  goe  over  part  of  the  snowy  mountaines,  which
way  his  Indian  guides  conducted  him,  to  the  ende  that
himselfe  and  all  his  companie  might  die  for  colde.  How-
beit  the  Spaniards,  though  they  lost  some  of  their  horses,
Copiapo  the  came  to  the  first  towne  of  Chili  called  Copiapo  being
next  towne  of  situate  upon  the  first  plaine  at  the  entrance  of  the  sayd
P^j,.^  province. But  having  newes  that  the  Indians  were  risen

against  the  Spaniards  of  Peru  and  had  inclosed  them,  hee
returned  backe  without  going  any  farther.

Nowe  this  captaine  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  being  slaine
in  the  warres  of  Peru,  another  called  Don  Pedro  de
Baldivia  marching  into  Chili  with  foure  hundreth  horses,
easily  conquered  that  halfe  of  the  countrey  which  was
subject  to  the  kings  of  Peru.  For  knowing  that  Peru,
being  the  chiefe  countrey  of  their  Emperour,  was  over-

274

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.
come  by  the Spaniards,  they  also  immediately  yeelded
their  lande  unto  them. But  the  other  halfe  as  it  was  El  estado  de
the  richest  and  the  fruitfuUest  part,  so  God  had  peopled  ^^'^*''''-
it with the most valiant and furious people in all
America.

The  province  which  they  inhabite  called  El  Estado  de  [^^^-  797-J
Arauco  is  but  a  small  province  about  20  leagues  in  j  "^^  °  ^
length,  and  is  governed  by  ten  principall  men  of  the
countrey,  out  of  which  tenne  they  chuse  the  valiantest
man  for  the  generall  in  the  warres.  The  kings  of  Peru
in  times  past  could  never  conquere  this  part  of  Chili,  nor
yet  any  other  kings  of  the  Indians.  The  weapons  used
by  these  people  of  Arauco  are  long  pikes,  halbards,  bowes
and  arrowes :  they  also  make  them  jacks  of  seale-skinnes,
and  head-pieces :  in  times  past  the  heads  of  their  halbards
and  pikes  were  of  brasse,  but  now  they  have  gotten  store
of  yron.  They  pitch  their  battels  in  maner  like  the  Chris-
tians :  for  putting  their  pikemen  in  rankes,  they  place
bowmen  among  them,  and  marshall  their  troupes  with
discretion  and  great  valour.  Now  the  Spaniards  com-
ming  unto  this  province  sent  word  unto  them  by  other
Indians,  saying  that  they  were  the  children  of  God,  and
came  to  teach  them  the  word  of  God,  and  that  therefore
they  ought  to  yeelde  themselves  unto  them :  if  not,  they
would  shoot  fire  among  them  and  burne  them.  These
people  not  fearing  the  great  words  of  the  Spaniards,  but
desiring  to  see  that  which  they  had  heard  reported,  met
them  in  the  field,  and  fought  a  most  cruell  battell :  but
by  reason  of  the  Spaniards  great  ordinance  and  calivers,
they  were  in  the  end  put  to  flight.  Now  these  Indians
thinking  verily  that  the  Spaniards  were  the  children  of
God,  because  of  their  great  ordinance  which  made  such
a  noise,  and  breathed  out  such  flames  of  fire,  yeelded
themselves  unto  them.  So  the  Spaniards  having  divided
this  province  made  the  Indians  to  serve  their  turnes  for
getting  of  gold  out  of  the  mines,  which  they  enjoyed  in
such  abundance,  that  hee  which  had  least  had  20000
pezos,  but  Captaine  Baldivia  himselfe  had  300000  pezos

275

A.D.
1572-87.

Villa  neuva  de
la  Serena,  La
Concepcion,
Sant  I  ago,  La
Imperial,
Baldivia,  La
Villa  rica,  the
first  sixe
tozvnes  that
were  inhabited
in  Chili.

A  stratageme
of  the  Indians
of  Chili
against  the
Spaniards.

The  death  of
Baldivia.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

by  the  yeere. The  fame  of  these  riches  in  the  end  was
spred  as  farre  as  Spaine ;  from  whence  soone  after  resorted
many Spaniards to the  land of  Chili, whom Captaine
Baldivia  caused to inhabite sixe  townes : to  wit, Villa
nueva  de  la  Serena  called  in  the  Indian  tongue  Coquimbo  ;
the  second  Sant  lago  which  the  Indians  call  Mapocha;
the  third  La  Concepcion  called  by  the Indians  Penco ;
the  fourth  La  Imperial ;  the  fift  Baldivia ;  and  the sixt
La  Villa  Rica. Also  he  built  a  fort  in the  middle  of
all  the  land,  wherein  hee  put  ordinance  and  souldiers;
howbeit  all  this  their  good  successe  continued  not  long :
for  the  Indians  in  short  time  perceiving  that  the  Spaniards
were  but mortall men as well as they, determined to
rebell  against  them  :  wherefore  the  first  thing  that  they  did,
they  carried  grasse  into  the  said  fort  for  the  Spaniards
horses,  and  wood  also  for  them  to  burne,  among  which
grasse  the  Indians  conveyed  bowes  and  arrowes  with  great
clubs. This  done,  fiftie  of  the  Indians  entred  the  fort,
betooke  themselves  to  their  bowes,  arrowes,  and  clubs,
and  stood  in the  gate  of  the  sayd  fort : from  whence
making  a  signe  unto  other  of  their  nation  for  helpe,  they
wanne  the  fort,  and  slewe  all  the  Spaniards. The  newes
of  this  overthrow  comming  to  the  towne  of  Concepcion
where  Captaine  Baldivia  was,  hee  presently  set  foorth  with
two  hundred  horsemen  to  seeke  the  Indians,  taking  no
more  men  with  him,  because  he  was  in  haste. And  in
a  plaine  he  met  the Indians,  who  comming  of  purpose
also  to  seeke  him,  and  compassing  him  about,  slew  most
part  of  his  company,  the  rest  escaping  by  the  swiftnesse
of  their horses : but Baldivia having his horse slaine
under  him  was  taken  alive. Whom  the  Indians  wished
to  be  of  a  good  courage,  and  to  feare  nothing ;  for  the
cause (said  they) why  we have taken you, is to give
you  gold ynough. And having made a  great  banquet
for  him,  the  last  service  of  all  was  a  cuppe  full  of  melted
gold,  which the Indians  forced him to drinke, saying.
Now  glut  thy  selfe  with  gold, and so  they  killed  him.
This  Baldivia  was  a  most  valiant  man,  who  had  beene  an

276

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

olde  souldier  in  the  warres  of  Italy,  and  at  the  sacking
of  Rome.

Upon  this  discomfiture  the  Spaniards  choose  for  their
Captaine one Pedro de Villa  grande : who assembling  P^^^°  ^^  ""^^^^
all the Spaniards in  Chili,  and taking  with him tenne  ^''^^  ^'
peeces  of  ordinance,  marched  against  those  Indians ;  but
with  so  badde  successe,  that  he  lost  not  onely  the  field
and  many  of  his  men,  but  also  those  ten  peeces  of  ordin-
ance which  hee  brought. The  Indians  having  thus  gotten
the  victorie,  went  streightway  against  the  towne  of  Con-
cepcion,  from  whence the Spaniards fled  for feare,  and
left the towne desolate. And in this maner were the
Spaniards  chased  by  the  Indians  out  of  the  countrey  of
Arauco. But  newes  hereof  being  brought  to  the  Mar-
ques of  Cannete  viceroy  of  Peru,  hee  sent  his  sonne  Don  DonGardade
Garcia de  Mendoza  against  those  Indians,  with  a  great "  ''^'^'
power  of  horsemen,  and  footmen,  and  store  of  Artillerie.
The  nobleman  having  subdued  Chili  againe,  &  slaine  in
divers  battels  above  40000 Indians,  and  brought  them
the  second  time  under the Spaniards  subjection,  newly
erected  the  said  fort  that  stoode  in  the  midst  of  the  land,
inhabited  the  towne  of  Concepcion  againe,  and  built  other
townes  for the  Spaniards: and so leaving the  land in
peace,  hee  returned  for  Peru. But  yer  hee was  cleane
departed out of  the land the Indians rebelled againe,
but  could  not  doe  so  much  mischiefe  as  they  did  before,
because the Spaniards tooke better heede  unto  them.
From  that  time  untill  this  present  there  hath bene  no  [III.  798.J
peace at  all : for notwithstanding  many Captaines and
souldiers have  done  their  uttermost, yet can they  not
bring  that  people wholly  in subjection. And  although
the  Spaniards  have  in  this  province  eleven  townes  and  Elevemowns,
two  bishoprickes,  yet  have  they  little  ynough  to  maintaine  ^^fl^l^Qkui
themselves,  by  reason  of  the  warres ;  for  they  spend  all
the golde that the land yeeldeth in the maintenance
of  their souldiers : which would not bee so, if they
had peace, for then they might worke in all their
mines.

277

A.D.

1572-87.

J  description
of  the  totvnes
of  Chili.
Baldifia.

The  province
sfJrauco  over
against  the
Island  La
Mocha  situate
in  3  8  deg.  and
a  halfe.
La  Con-
cepcion.

Falparizo
which  is  the
port  ofS.  I  ago
standeth  in  3  3
deg.  40  min.

Coquimbo
standethimc).
deg.  30.  min.
Copiapo.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Thus  having  spoken  somewhat  of  the  situation  of
Chili,  and  of  the  troublesome  conquest  therof,  I  will
returne  to  my  former  discourse  where  I  left.  Baldivia
therefore  being  of  150  houses  hath  twise  bene  burnt
and  spoyled  by  the  Indians ;  so  that  now  it  is  waxen
poore,  but  before  the  Indians  sacked  it,  it  was  very
rich :  and  it  standeth  up  a  river  foure  leagues  from  the
sea.  Passing  from  hence  you  come  to  the  plaine  countrey
of  Arauco  being  situate  over  against  the  Island  La  Mocha,
on  which  Island  the  Indians  that  inhabite  belong  to  the
maine  land.

Having  passed  this  plaine  of  Arauco,  the  next  towne
of  the  Spaniards  that  you  come  unto  is  La  Concepcion
which  hath  beene  the  greatest  and  the  richest  towne  in
all  Chili :  but  by  reason  that  the  Indians  have  burned
the  same  foure  times,  it  is  now  growen  very  poore,  and
hath  small  store  of  people :  it  contayneth  about  some
two  hundred  houses.  And  because  it  adjoyneth  upon
the  plaine  of  Arauco,  where  these  valiant  Indians  bee,
therefore  this  towne  is  environed  about  with  a  strong
wall,  and  hath  a  fort  built  hard  by  it :  and  here  are  500
souldiers  continually  in  garrison.  Betweene  this  place
and  Valparizo,  the  Indians  call  the  coast  by  the  name
of  Mapocha.  Sant  lago  it  selfe  standing  25  leagues
up  into  the  countrey,  is  the  principall  towne  of  all  Chili,
and  the  seate  of  the  governour :  it  consisteth  of  about
800  houses.  The  port  of  Valparizo  whither  the  goods
come  from  Lima  by  shipping,  hath  about  twentie  houses
standing  by  it.  The  next  towne  neere  the  sea  side
beyond  this  is  Coquimbo,  which  standeth  two  leagues
up  into  the  land,  and  containeth  about  200  houses.  Next
unto  Coquimbo  standeth  a  port-towne  called  Copiapo  in-
habited altogether  by  Indians  which  serve  the  Spaniards :
and  here  a  gentleman  which  is  governour  of  the  towne
hath  an  Ingenio  for  sugar :  at  this  place  endeth  the  whole
province  of  Chili.  Here  also  the  mountaines  joyning
hard  upon  the  sea  are  the  cause  why  all  the  land  betweene
Copiapo  and  Peru,  containing  1 60  leagues,  lyeth  desolate.

278

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.
The  first  towne  on  the  coast  of  Peru  called  Atacama  is  ^  description
inhabited  by  Indians  which  are  slaves  unto  the  Spaniards.  ^  ^^^'
But  before  I  passe  any  farther  I  will  here  also  declare  unto
you  the  first  discoverie  of  Peru  with  other  matters  thereto
belonging,  and  then  will  I  returne  to  the  seacoast  againe  :
and  to  the  ende  you  may  understand  mee  the  better,
I  will  begin  with  Panama.  After  that  the  Spaniards  had
inhabited  the  North  side  of  this  maine  land,  passing  over
the  mountaines  they  discovered  the  South  sea  :  where
because  they  found  Indian  people  with  gold  and  pearles,
they  built  a  towne  eighteene  leagues  to  the  West  of
Nombre  de  Dios  hard  upon  the  sea-side,  and  called  it
Panama.  From  hence  they  discovered  along  the  coast  of
Nueva  Espanna  :  and  for  that  Nueva  Espanna  was  at  the
same  time  inhabited  by  Spaniards,  there  beganne  a  trade
from  thence  to  Panama :  but  from  Panama  by  sea  to  the
coast  of  Peru  they  could  not  trade  in  a  long  time,  because
of  the  Southerly  winds  blowing  on  this  coast  almost  all  the
yeere  long,  which  are  a  hinderance  to  shippes  sayling  that
way :  and  by  land  the  passage  was  impossible,  in  regard
of  mountaines  and  rivers :  yea  it  was  fifteene  yeeres  before
they  passed  the  Island  of  Pearles,  which  is  but  twentie
leagues  from  Panama.  There  were  at  this  time  in  Panama
two  men,  the  one  called  Francisco  Pizarro  borne  in  the
citie  of  Truxillo  in  Spaine,  a  valiant  man,  but  withall
poore  :  the  other  called  Diego  de  Almagro  was  very  rich.
These  men  got  a  company  unto  them,  and  provided  two
Caravels  to  discover  the  coast  of  Peru :  and  having  ob-
tained licence  of  the  governour  of  that  place,  Francisco
Pizarro  set  foorth  with  the  two  foresayd  caravels  and  100
men,  and  Diego  de  Almagro  stayed  in  Panama  to  send
him  victuals  and  other  necessaries.  Now  Francisco  Pizarro
sayling  along  the  coast  met  with  much  contrary  winds
and  raine,  which  put  him  to  great  trouble ;  and  he  began
also  after  a  while  to  lacke  victuals,  for  hee  was  sailing  of
that  in  eight  moneths  which  they  now  passe  in  fifteene
dayes,  and  not  knowing  the  right  course  hee  ranne  into
every  river  and  bay  that  hee  saw  along  the  coast :  which

279

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

was  the  chiefe  cause  that  hee  stayed  so  long  on  his
voyage  :  also  thirtie  of  his  company  dyed  by  reason  of  the
unhealthfulnesse  of  the  coast. At  last  hee  came  to  an

IsladelGallo.  Island  called  by  him  Isla  del  Gallo,  being  situate  from  the
maine  land  sixe  leagues.  From  hence  he  sent  one  of
his  ships  to  Panama  for  a  new  supply  of  victuals  &  of
men  :  which  ship  being  departed,  40  of  his  men  that
remained  behind  made  a  mutiny,  and  passed  up  into  the
countrey,  meaning  to  returne  by  land  to  Panama,  but  in
the  way  they  all  perished,  for  they  were  never  heard  of
untill  this  day.  So  that  Francisco  Pizarro  was  left  upon
the  said  Island  onely  with  thirteene  men  :  who  although

[III.  799.]  he  had  his  ship  there  in  which  he  might  have  returned,
yet  would  he  rather  die  then  goe  backe  ;  and  his  13  men
also  were  of  his  opinion,  notwithstanding  that  they
had  no  other  victuals,  but  such  as  they  had  from  the
maine  land  in  the  night  season.  Thus  he  continued  nine
moneths,  before  any  succour  was  brought  him  from
Panama :  but  in  the  end  his  ship  returned  with  40  men
onely  and  victuals :  whereupon  hee  prosecuted  his  voyage
till  he  came  to  the  first  plaine  countrey  of  Peru  called
Tumbez,  where  he  found  a  fort  made  by  the  king  of
Peru  against  the  Indians  of  the  mountaines.  Wherefore
Pizarro  and  his  men  were  very  glad  in  that  they  had
found  a  people  of  so  good  understanding  and  discretion,
being  rich  also  in  gold  and  silver  and  well  apparelled.
At  this  port  of  Tumbez  hee  tooke  30000  pezos  of  gold
in  trucke  of  marchandize :  and  having  too  few  men  to
proceede  any  further  hee  carried  two  Indians  with  him
to  learne  the  language  and  returned  backe  for  Panama.
Upon  this  discovery  Francisco  Pizarro  thought  it  ex-
pedient to  travell  into  Spaine  to  crave  of  the  king  the
conquest  of  this  land.  Whither  being  come,  the  king
granted  his  request.  And  with  the  money  which  he
carried  over  with  him  he  hired  a  great  number  of  men
with  a  fleete  of  ships,  and  brought  also  along  with  him
foure  of  his  brethren  very  vaHant  and  hardy  men.  And
being  come  to  Panama  he  straightway  went  on  his  voyage

280

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

for  Peru,  being  accompanied  with  his  partner  Diego  de
Almagro.  They  sailed  first  to  the  Island  called  Isla  del
Gallo ;  where  Francisco  Pizarro  and  his  brethren  went  on
land,  and  left  Diego  de  Almagro  in  the  ships.  And  the
whole  number  which  afterward  landed  on  the  maine  land
were  60  horsemen  and  120  footemen,  with  two  great
field-peeces.

But  before  we  proceede  any  farther,  we  thinke  it  not  ^■^^  ''^"^^''  ?/*
amisse  to  describe  unto  you  the  situation  of  Peru,  and  the  ^'^"
naturall  disposition  of  the  inhabitants  :  This  countrey  was
called  Peru  by  the  Spaniards,  of  a  river  so  named  by  the
Indians,  where  they  first  came  to  the  sight  of  gold.
From  which  river  standing  under  the  line,  till  you  come
to  Copiapo  the  first  towne  on  the  coast  of  Chili,  stretcheth
the  land  of  Peru,  for  the  space  of  eight  hundred  leagues :
upon  sixe  hundred  whereof  from  Atacama  to  Tumbez
did  never  drop  of  raine  fall,  since  the  flood  of  Noah :  and
yet  it  is  the  fruitfuUest  land  for  all  kinds  of  victuals  and
other  necessaries  for  the  sustentation  of  mans  life  that  is
to  be  found  in  all  the  world  besides.  The  reason  why  it  The  cause  why
raineth  not  in  this  land  is  because  it  beeing  a  plaine  coun-  ^-Jp^^^  ^°^
trey  and  very  narrow  and  low,  situate  betweene  the
Equinoctiall  and  the  tropique  of  Capricorne,  there
runneth  on  the  West  frontier  not  above  twentie  leagues
from  the  sea  called  Mar  del  Sur  Eastward  thereof,  a
mighty  ridge  of  high  mountaines  covered  with  snow,
the  height  of  which  mountaines  so  draweth  the  moisture
of  the  cloudes  unto  it  selfe,  that  no  raine  falleth  upon
the  vallies  of  Peru.  From  these  mountaines  issue  great
store  of  rivers  into  the  South  sea,  with  the  waters  whereof
drawen  by  certaine  sluces  and  chanels  they  moisten  their
vineyardes  and  corne-fields,  and  by  this  meanes  the  land
is  so  exceeding  fruitful!.  Betweene  these  mountaines  and
the  mountaines  of  Chili  that  stretch  unto  the  Streits  of
Magellan,  lyeth  a  plaine  of  60  leagues  over,  being  so  cold
that  it  yeeldeth  no  Wheat,  but  good  store  of  other
victuals.  This  countrey  of  Peru  is  full  of  people  well
apparelled  and  of  civill  behaviour. It  hath many  mines

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1572-87.

Gold,  silver, of  gold  and  more  of  silver,  as  also  great  store  of  copper,

copper,  time, ^^^ tinne-mines, with abundance  of  salt  peter,  and  of

brimstone brimstone  to  make  gun-pouder. There  are  likewise  cattell

The  sheepe  of  of  all  sorts,  among  which  there  is  a  beast  in  shape  some-

Peru  called what  resembling  a  camel,  but  no  bigger  then  a  steere  of  a

Llamas.  yeere  olde  ;  they  serve  to  carry  burthens,  their  flesh  being

good to eate, and their  wooll apt  for  many  purposes.

This  beast  is  accounted  the  most  profitable  of  al  others

for  the  use  of  man  : howbeit  the  Spaniards  since  their  first

comming  have  replenished  this  countrey  with  horses,  kine,

sheepe,  and  goates,  and  likewise  with  plentie  of  wheat. So

that  in  fewe  words  this  land  hath  abundance  of  riches  and

victuals, and is the healthfullest place in the world.

There  were  in  times  past  kings  of  this  land  which  were

mightie Monarchs,  whose dominions stretched 1200.

leagues,  and  their  lawes  were  very  civill,  save  that  they

were worshippers of the Sunne. At what time the

Spaniards  first  entred  this  land  there  were  two  brethren  of

Atabalipaand  the  blood  royall  which  strove  who  should  have  the  king-

Guascar  two (^qj^^ ^^  Q^e  called  Guascar,  and  the  other  Atabalipa.

brethren  com- xt  /^  i i  •  r ^^ ^  •  j

petitours  for ^owe  Lruascar  had  possession  or  all  the  mountames  and

the  empire  of  the  lands  within  them  : and  Atabalipa  was  lord  of  all  the
Peru.  sea coast,  and  of  the  valleys situate  betweene  the said

mountaines  and  the  sea.  The  Indians  seeing  the  Spaniards
at  the  first  arrive  upon  their  shore  called  them  Vera  coche,
which  in  their  language  signifieth.  The  fome  of  the  sea.
Also  Atabalipa  the  Indian  prince  sent  unto  them  to  know
what  they  did  in  his  land,  and  what  they  sought  for :  the
Spaniards  made  answere  that  they  were  the  messengers  of
a  great  lord,  and  that  they  came  to  speake  with  the  prince
himselfe:  who  sent  them  word  that  they  should  come
with  a  very  good  will ;  and  so  Atabalipa  stayed  for  them
at  a  citie  called  Caxamalca,  being  thirtie  leagues  distant
from  the  sea  side.  Whither  being  come,  they  found  the
Indian  prince  sitting  in  a  chariot  of  gold,  carried  upon
[III.  800.]  mens  shoulders,  and  accompanied  with  above  60000
Indians  all  ready  armed  for  the  warres.  Then  the
Spaniards tolde them that they were sent from an

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

Emperour  (unto  whom  the  Pope  had  given  all  that  land)
to  convert  them  unto  the  Christian  faith.  Whereunto
Atabalipa  answered,  that  hee  would  gladly  be  friends  with
the  Emperour,  because  he  was  so  great  a  Monarch,  but  in
no  case  with  the  Pope,  because  he  gave  to  another  that
which  was  none  of  his  owne.

Now  while  they  were  thus  in  talke,  the  Spaniards
discharging  their  two  field  peeces,  and  their  calivers,  set
upon  the  Indians,  crying  Sant  lago.  The  Indians  hearing
the  noise  of  the  ordinance  and  small  shot,  and  seeing  the
fire,  thought  that  flames  of  fire  had  bene  come  downe  from
heaven  upon  them :  whereupon  they  fledde,  and  left  their
prince  as  a  booty  for  the  Spaniards.  Whom  they  at  the  first
intreated  very  gently,  wishing  him  not  to  feare,  for  that
their  comming  was  onely  to  seeke  for  golde  and  silver.
During  the  time  of  Atabalipas  imprisonment,  his  Cap-
taines  had  slaine  his  brother  Guascar,  and  had  subdued
all  the  mountaines  and  plaine  countreys.  Upon  which
newes  Atabalipa  told  the  Spaniards,  that  if  they  would
release  him,  hee  would  give  them  all  that  they  should
demaund.  This  communication  having  continued  a
whole  day,  at  length  a  souldier  named  Soto  sayd  unto
Atabalipa:  what  wilt  thou  give  us  to  set  thee  free.?
The  prince  answered,  I  will  give  whatsoever  you  will
demand.  Whereunto  the  souldier  replied,  thou  shalt
give  us  this  house  full  of  gold  and  silver  thus  high,
lifting  up  his  sword,  and  making  a  stroke  upon  the
wall.  And  Atabalipa  sayde,  that  if  they  would  grant
him  respite  to  send  into  his  kingdome,  he  would  ful-
fill their  demand.  Whereat  the  Spaniards  much  mar-
veiling,  gave  him  three  moneths  time,  but  he  had  filled
the  house  in  two  moneths  and  an  halfe,  a  matter  scarce
credible,  yet  most  true :  for  I  know  above  twentie  men
that  were  there  at  that  time,  who  all  affirme,  that  it  was
above  tenne  millions  of  gold  and  silver.  Howbeit  for  all
this  they  let  not  the  prince  goe,  but  thought  that  in  kill-
ing of  him  they  should  become  lords  of  the  whole  land,
and so the Spaniards on a night strangled him. But

283

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

God  the  righteous  judge  seeing  this  villanous  act,  suffered
none  of  those  Spaniards  to  dye  by  the  course  of  nature,
but  brought  them  to  evill  and  shameful!  ends.

Upon  the  newes  of  these  great  riches  there  came  store
of  people  out  of  Spaine,  and  inhabited  many  places  in
this  countrey.  The  king  in  recompence  of  the  good
services  of  the  two  foresayd  partners,  appoynted  Diego
de  Almagro  governour  of  halfe  the  land,  and  Francisco
Pizarro  of  the  other  halfe,  whom  also  hee  made  a
Marques.  But  these  two  consorts  in  parting  of  a  land
belonging  unto  other  men,  fell  at  variance  and  sharpe
warre  betweene  themselves :  and  at  length  Pizarro  hav-
ing slaine  Almagro  got  all  the  land  into  his  owne  hands.
Howbeit  this  prosperitie  of  Pizarro  continued  not  long :
for  a  bastard-sonne  of  Diego  de  Almagro,  to  bee  re-
venged of  his  fathers  death,  slew  Pizarro,  for  which
acte  he  lost  his  head.  In  this  controversie  betweene
these  two  partners  were  slaine  also  two  brothers  of
Pizarro,  and  the  third  was  carried  prisoner  into  Spaine
and  there  dyed  in  prison ;  but  the  fourth  called  Gonsalvo
Pizarro  rebelled  with  the  whole  countrey  and  became  a
cruell  tyrant,  vanquishing  many  of  the  Emperours  Cap-
taines  in  battell,  and  possessing  the  countrey  in  peace
for  two  yeeres :  howbeit  being  in  the  ende  overcome
hee  lost  his  head  like  a  traitour.  And  thus  dyed  they
all  an  evill  death  that  were  causes  of  the  death  of  that
innocent  king  Atabalipa.  And  yet  there  are  mutinies
raised  oftentimes  by  the  Spaniards,  but  the  Indians
never  rebelled,  after  they  had  once  peace  granted  unto
them.  The  Indian  people  of  this  land  are  parted  among
the  Spaniards,  some  being  slaves  unto  the  gentlemen
that  conquered  their  land,  other  some  to  others,  and
the  residue  to  the  king :  and  these  Indians  pay  eche
man  for  his  tribute  seven  pezos  of  fine  golde,  which  is
about  tenne  ducats  and  a  halfe.  There  are  in  this
vT P' countrey above fortie cities and townes inhabited by

archbishopruk  ^^  Spaniards : also  they  have  here  erected  nine  bishop-

in  Peru,  ricks  and  one  archbishopricke.

284

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

Now after this countrey was fully conquered and
brought in good order, certaine Spaniards being de-
sirous  to discover the land on the other side of  the
snowy  mountaines,  found  a  very  wholesome  countrey  and
there  inhabited. The  sayd  province  situate  behinde  the
mountaines  is  called  The  province  of  Tucuman,  wherein  The  province
are  five  townes inhabited by  the  Spaniards,  the  last  of  °f'^"'^^^^'"-
them  called  Cordova,  from  which  towne  unto  Santa  Fee  Cordova.
situate  upon  the  river  of  Plate  it  is  seventie  leagues. This
towne  of  Santa  Fee  was  built  in  that  place,  to  seeke  a  way
to  Peru  by  the  river  of  Plate. And  from  hence  downe  the
sayde  river  to  Buenos  Ayres  are  120  leagues,  and  from
Buenos  Ayres  unto  Sealisland  you  have  40  leagues.

Now having  put downe  all that  I  know  concerning
the  countrey  of  Peru,  and  of  the  way  from  the  river  of
Plate  unto  Tucuman,  I  will  returne  unto  Atacama  the  Atacama.
Southermost  towne  upon  the  coast  of  Peru,  where  I  left.
From  this  towne  of  Atacama  till you come to Arica,
all the  coast is inhabited by  Indians subject  unto the
Spaniards. But since Captaine Drake was here they  [III.  801.]
have  built  towers  by  the  sea  side,  whereon,  seeing  any
saile  that  they  doe  mistrust,  they  presently  make  smokes,
and  so  from  tower  to  tower  they  warne  all  the  countrey.
Having before spoken of  Arica  all that  I can, I will
now proceed to the  next  port  called Camana  being  a  Camana.
towne  of  Spaniards  and  containing  about  two  hundred
houses. Here  they  make  store  of  wine,  and  have  abun-
dance of  figges  and  reisins. The  next  towne  called  Acari  Acari.
containeth  about  three  hundred  houses,  and  here  is  made
the  best  and  greatest  store  of  wine  in  all  Peru. From
hence passing along  the  coast you come to El Calao  El  Calm.
the port of Lima consisting of about two hundred
houses :  and  here  was  a  strong  fort  built  since  Captaine
Drake  was  upon  the  coast. The  citie  of  Lima  standing  Lima.
two  leagues  within  the  land,  and  containing  two  thousand
houses,  is  very  rich,  and  of  more  trade  then  all  the  cities
of  Peru  besides :  and  this  citie  is  the  seat  of  the  viceroy,
the  archbishop,  and  the  inquisition.

285

A.D.
1572-87,

Sn7ita.

Cnnnete.

Truxillo.

Paita.

Guaiaqu'il.

Tumbcz.

Salsapeiilla.
Ships  built  at
Guaiaquil.
Puei'to  Viejo  a
place  zohere
Emralds
abound.

La  Buenaven-
tura,

La  gover-
nacion  de

Popaian.

Negros  fied
from  their
masters.

Panama.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Next  unto  this  standeth  a  small  towne  of  the  Spaniards
by  the  sea  side  called  Santa :  and  next  unto  Santa  is
another  small  towne  of  Christians  called  Cannete.  From
hence  they  saile  unto  a  rich  citie  called  Truxillo,  being
one  of  the  principall  townes  of  Peru,  and  containing
about  five  hundred  houses.  Then  foUoweth  Paita
which  hath  to  the  number  of  two  hundred  houses.
Leaving  this  towne  they  passe  to  Guaiaquil  which
standeth  fortie  leagues  up  into  a  great  bay  or  river,
at  the  entrance  of  which  river  standeth  Tumbez  a
towne  of  the  Indians.  All  this  coast  along  from  Ata-
cama  to  Tumbez  it  never  raineth,  as  I  have  before
said :  so  that  all  the  houses  in  their  townes  are  not
tyled,  but  covered  with  bourdes  to  keepe  off  the  heate
of  the  Sunne,  for  they  feare  no  raine  at  all.  Guaiaquil
is  the  first  place  where  it  raineth,  and  here  they  gather
Salsaperilla.  Here  is  also  great  store  of  timber,  and  at
this  place  they  build  many  shippes.  Hence  they  sayle
along  the  coast  to  a  small  and  poore  towne  called  Puerto
Viejo,  which  in  times  past  hath  bene  rich  with  emralds :
but  now  since  these  stones  in  regard  of  their  plenty
are  growen  nothing  worth,  this  towne  likewise  is  waxen
very  poore.  Below  this  village  standeth  another  called
La  Buena  Ventura :  but  whosoever  go  thither  must
needs  meet  with  evill  fortune,  the  place  it  selfe  is  so
waterish  and  unholesome.  Here  abide  not  above  20
men,  who  serve  onely  to  transport  goods  unto  a  citie
standing  fiftie  leagues  within  the  maine,  in  a  province
called  La  governacion  de  Popaian.  From  Buena  Ven-
tura and  Popaian  till  you  come  to  Panama  there  is  no
other  towne,  by  reason  of  the  high  mountaines,  the
manifold  rivers,  and  the  unholesomenesse  of  the
countrey.  In  this  place  doe  inhabite  the  Negros  that
runne  from  their  masters,  and  upon  these  mountaines
was  Oxnam  the  English  Captaine  and  his  men  taken,
as  is  before  mentioned.  Beyond  these  mountaines
standeth  the  citie  of  Panama,  being  a  rich  place,  by
reason that  all  the  treasure  which commeth from Peru

286

LOPEZ  VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

is  brought  thither,  and  it  consisteth  of  about  foure
hundred  houses.  The  coast  running  along  betweene
this  city  and  Nueva  Espanna  is  called  Costa  rica,  Costa  rka.

Next  unto  Costa  rica,  which  is  a  mountainous  and  The  province
desolate  place,  lieth  the  coast  of  Nicaragua,  being  in-  of  Nicaragua.
habited  by  the  Spaniards,  and  having  many  good  ports
belonging  to  it,  and  is  frequented  with  trade  of  mar-
chandize ;  but  having  no  knowledge  of  the  situation
thereof,  nor  of  the  townes  therein  contained,  I  sur-
cease to  speake  any  more  of  it.

A certaine viceroy of Nueva Espanna called Don
Luis de  Velasco  caused certaine ships to  be built  for
the  discovery  of  the  Malucos  and  of  the  coast  of  China :
which sbippes in sayling thitherward found certaine  The  discovery
Islands 80 leagues  distant  from  the maine  land,  which  "-^J^^  Phtlip-
the  Spaniards,  according  to  the  name  of  their  king,  called  ^
The Philippinas : and having conquered one of  these
Islands  called Manilla,  inhabited  with  a  barbarous  kind  The  hie  of
of  people, they built  a fort and a towne thereupon,  ^^""^'^^
from  whence  they  have  trade  with  the  people  of  China.
Unto these Islands they have foure great ships that
usually  trade,  two  of  them  continually  going,  and  two
comming :  so  that  such  spices  and  silkes  as  the  Portugals
bring  home  out  of  the  East  Indies,  the  very  same  doe
the  Spaniards  bring  from  these  Islands  and  from  China,
for Mexico the chiefe citie of  Nueva Espanna. The
principall port-townes of  the coast  of  Nueva  Espanna
are  Guatulco,  and  Acapulco.

All  the  viceroyes  and  governours  that  the  king  of
Spaine  sendeth  for  Peru  and  Nueva  Espanna  have  a
custome,  for  the  obtaining  of  his  favour,  to  seeke  and
discover  new  countreys.  But  the  greatest  and  most
notable  discoverie  that  hath  bene  from  those  parts  now
of  late,  was  that  of  the  Isles  of  Salomon,  which  were  The  discovery
found  in  maner  following.  The  Licenciate  Castro  being  "-f^^^  ^^^"  °f
governour  of  Peru  sent  foorth  a  fleete  of  shippes  to
discover  certaine  Islands  in  the  South  sea  upon  the
coast  of  Peru,  appointing  as  Generall  of  the  same  fleete

287

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-87.

a  kinsman  of  his  called  Alvares  de  Mendanio,  and
Pedro  Sarmiento  as  lieutenant,  and  in  the  Viceadmirall
went  Pedro  de  Ortega.  This  fleete  departing  forth  of
the  haven  of  Lima,  and  sayling  800  leagues  Westward
[III,  802.]  off  the  coast  of  Peru,  found  certaine  Islands  in  eleven
degrees  to  the  South  of  the  Equinoctial  inhabited  with
a  kind  of  people  of  a  yellowish  complexion,  and  all
naked,  whose  weapons  are  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  darts.
The  beasts  that  they  saw  here  were  hogges  and  little
dogges,  and  they  found  some  hennes.  Here  also  they
Cloves^inger,  found  a  muster  of  cloves,  ginger,  and  sinamon,  although
and s'lnamon.  ^^  sinamon  were  not  of  the  best;  and  heere  appeared
unto  them  likewise  some  shewe  of  golde.  The  first
Island  that  the  Spaniards  discovered,  they  named  Santa
Izabella;  and  here  they  built  a  small  pinnesse,  with  the
which  and  with  their  ships  boate  they  found  out  betweene
nine  and  fifteene  degrees  of  Southerly  latitude  eleven
great  Islands  being  one  with  another  of  80  leagues  in
compasse.  The  greatest  Island  that  they  discovered
The  Isle  of  was  according  unto  the  first  finder  called  Guadalcanal,
Guadalcanal.  ^^  ^|^g  coast  whereof  they  sayled  150  leagues,  before
they  could  knowe  whither  it  were  an  Island  or  part  of
the  maine  land  :  and  yet  they  know  not  perfectly  what
to  make  of  it,  but  thinke  that  it  may  be  part  of  that
continent  which  stretcheth  to  the  Streights  of  Magellan  ;
for  they  coasted  it  to  eighteene  degrees  and  could  not
find  the  ende  thereof.  The  gold  that  they  found  was
upon  this  Island  or  maine  land  of  Guadalcanal,  whereas
they  landed  and  tooke  a  towne,  finding  small  graines  of
golde  hanged  up  in  the  houses  thereof.  But  because
the  Spaniards  understood  not  the  language  of  the
countrey,  and  also  for  that  the  Indians  were  very  stout
men,  and  fought  continually  against  them,  they  could
never  learne  from  whence  that  gold  came,  nor  yet
what  store  was  in  the  land.

These  Indians  use  to  goe  to  sea  in  great  Canoas
that  will  carrie  100  men  a  piece,  wherein  they  have  many
conflicts  one  against  another : howbeit  unto  the  Christians

LOPEZ VAZ  AD.

1572-87.

they  could  doe  no  great  hurt ;  for  that  with  a  small
pinnesse  and  two  falcons  a  few  may  overcome  100  of
them.  At  this  place  foureteene  men  mistrusting  nothing,
rowed  to  land,  to  take  in  fresh  water,  whome  on  the
sudden  certaine  Indians  in  foure  Canoas  set  upon,  tooke
the  ships  boat,  and  slewe  all  the  men  therein :  where-
fore a  man  cannot  goe  on  shore  too  strong,  nor  yet
be  too  wary  in  a  strange  land.  Hereupon  the  Spaniards
went  on  shore  in  their  pinnesse,  and  burnt  the  towne,  Atozmebumt.
and  in  this  towne  they  found  the  small  graines  of  gold
before  mentioned.  They  were  discovering  of  these
Islands  from  one  to  another  about  foureteene  moneths,
at  the  ende  of  which  time  (because  that  upon  the  coast
where  they  were,  the  wind  continuing  still  in  one  place,
might  bee  an  occasion  of  longer  tarying)  they  consulted
which  way  to  returne.  Southward  they  durst  not  goe
for  feare  of  great  tempests  which  are  that  way  usuall :
wherefore  sayling  to  the  North  of  the  line,  they  fell  with
the  coast  of  Nueva  Espanna ;  on  which  coast  they  met
with  such  terrible  stormes,  that  they  were  forced  to
cut  their  maine  masts  over-bourd,  and  to  lye  nine
moneths  beating  it  up  and  downe  in  the  sea,  before
they  could  get  into  any  harborow  of  the  Christians.  In
which  time  by  reason  of  evill  governement,  and  for  lacke
of  victuals  and  fresh  water,  most  of  the  men  in  their
Admirall  dyed ;  for  five  whole  dayes  together  they  had
neither  water  nor  meate:  but  in  the  other  ships  they
behaved  themselves  so  well,  that  the  greater  part  of  them
came  safe  unto  the  land.  He  that  passeth  the  Streights
of  Magellan,  or  saileth  from  the  coast  of  Chili  directly
for  the  Malucos  must  needs  runne  in  sight  of  some  of
these  Islands  before  spoken  of.  At  which  Islands  lying  so  Abundance  of
conveniently  in  the  way  to  the  Malucos  you  may  furnish  SP°'^  victuals
your  selfe  with  plenty  of  victuals,  as  hogges,  hennes,  ^fft  IqLqI"
excellent  almonds,  potatos,  sugar-canes,  with  divers  other
sortes  fit  for  the  sustenance  of  man  in  great  abundance.
Also  among  these  Islands  you  shall  have  some  quantity
of  gold,  which  the  Indians  will  give  you  in  truck  for
XI  280  T

A.D.
1572-87.

A  new  rich
trade  for  gold,
cloves,  ginger,
and  sinamon.

Why  these
Isles  zoere
called  The
Isles  of
Salomon.

[III.  803.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

other  commodities.  For  the  Spaniards  in  their  discovery
of  these  Islands  not  seeking  nor  being  desirous  of  gold,
brought  home  notwithstanding  40000  pezos  with  them,
besides  great  store  of  cloves  and  ginger,  and  some  sina-
mon also  which  is  not  so  good  as  in  other  places.  The
discoverer  of  these  Islands  named  them  the  Isles  of
Salomon,  to  the  ende  that  the  Spaniards  supposing  them
to  bee  those  Isles  from  whence  Salomon  fetched  gold  to
adorne  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  might  bee  the  more
desirous  to  goe  and  inhabite  the  same.  Now  the  same
time  when  they  thought  to  have  sent  colonies  unto
these  Islands,  Captaine  Drake  entered  the  South  sea :
whereupon  commandement  was  given,  that  they  should
not  be  inhabited,  to  the  ende  that  such  Englishmen,  and
of  other  nations  as  passed  the  Streights  of  Magellan
to  goe  to  the  Malucos  might  have  no  succour  there,
but  such  as  they  got  of  the  Indian  people.

The  admirable  and  prosperous  voyage  of  the
Worshipfull  Master  Thomas  Candish  of  Trim-
ley  in  the  Countie  of  SufFolke  Esquire,  into
the  South  sea,  and  from  thence  round  about
the  circumference  of  the  whole  earth,  begun
in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1586,  and  finished
1588.  Written  by  Master  Francis  Pretty
lately  of  Ey  in  Suffolke,  a  Gentleman  em-
ployed in  the  same  action.

i^Ee  departed  out  of  Plimmouth  on  Thurs-
day the  21.  of  July  1586.  with  3.  sayles,
to  wit,  The  Desire  a  ship  of  120.  tunnes,
The  Content  of  60  tuns,  and  the  Hugh
gallant  a  barke  of  40.  tunnes :  in  which
small  Fleete  were  123.  persons  of  all
sortes  with  all  kinde  of  furniture  and
victuals  sufficient  for  the  space  of  two  yeeres,  at  the  charges
of  the  worshipfull  Master  Thomas  Candish  of  Trimley
in  the  Countie  of  Suifolke  Esquire,  beeing  our  General!.

290

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1586.

On Tuesday  the 26.  of  the  same  moneth,  we  were
45. leagues from Cape Finis terras where wee  mette
with  5.  sayles of  Biskaynes  comming  from the  Grande  z- Great  Bis-
Bay in Newfound-land, as we supposed, which our  ^"^^"f  ^^^^^  ^
Admirall  shot  at,  and  fought  with  them 3.  houres,  but
wee  tooke  none  of  them  by  reason  the  night  grew  on.

The  first  of  August  wee  came  in  sight  of  Forteven-  August.
tura,  one  of  the  Isles  of  the  Canaries,  about  ten  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning.

On  Sunday  being  the  7.  of  August,  we  were  gotten
as  high  as  Rio  del  oro  on  the  coast  of  Barbarie.  Rio  del  oro.

On Munday the 19.  we  fell with  cape Blanco: but  Cape  Blanco.
the  winde  blew  so  much  at  the  North,  that  we  could  not
get up where the Canters doe use to ride and fish :
therefore  wee  lay  off  6.  houres  West  Southwest,  because
of  the  sand  which  lieth  off  the  cape  Southwest  and  by  ^  dangerous
South.  '^'^^•

The  15.  day  of  the  same  moneth  we  were  in  the  height
of  cape  Verde  by  estimation  50.  leagues  off  the  same.

The  18.  Sierra  leona  did  beare  East  off  us,  beeing  45.
leagues  from  us :  and  the  same  day  the  winde  shifted  to
the  Northwest,  so  that  by  the  20.  day  of  the  sayd  moneth
we  were  in  6.  degrees  \  to  the  Northward,  from  the
Equinoctiall  line.

The  23.  we  put  roome  for  Sierra  leona,  and  the  25.
day  wee  fell  with  the  poynt  on  the  South  side  of  Sierra  Sierra  leona.
leona,  which  Master  Brewer  knew  very  well,  and  went
in  before  with  the  Content  which  was  Vice-admirall :
and  we  had  no  lesse  then  5.  fathoms  water  when  we
had  least,  and  had  for  14.  leagues  in  Southwest  all  the
way  running  into  the  harbour  of  Sierra  leona  16.  14.
12. 10  and  8.  fathoms  of  water.

The  26.  of  the  said  moneth  we  put  into  the  har-
borough,  and  in  going  in  we  had  by  the  Southermost
point  when  we  had  least  5.  fathoms  water  faire  by  the
rocke  as  it  lieth  at  the  said  point,  and  after  we  came,
2  or  3.  cables  length  within  the  said  rocke,  we  never
had  lesse  then 10.  fathoms,  untill  wee  came  up  to  the

291

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

roade,  which  is  about  a  league  from  the  poynt,  borrowing
alwayes  on  the  South  side  untill  you  come  up  to  the
watering  place,  in  which  Baye  is  the  best  roade ;  but  you
must  ride  farre  into  the  Baye,  because  there  run  mar-
veilous  great  tydes  in  the  offin,  and  it  floweth  into  the
road  next  of  any  thing  at  a  Southeast  and  by  East
moone.

It  is  out  of  England  to  this  place  930.  leagues :  which
wee  ranne  from  the  21.  of  July  to  the  26.  of  this  moneth
of  August.

On  Saturday  being  the  27.  day  there  came  2.  Negros
aboord  our  Admiral  from  the  shore,  and  made  signes  unto
our  Generall  that  there  was  a  Portugal  ship  up  within
the  harborough ;  so  the  Hugh  Gallant  beeing  the  Rere-
admirall  went  up  3.  or  4.  leagues,  but  for  want  of  a  Pilot
they  sought  no  farther  :  for  the  harborough  runneth  3.
or  4,  leagues  up  more,  and  is  of  a  marveilous  bredth
and  very  dangerous,  as  we  learned  afterward  by  a
Portugal.

On Sunday  the  28. the Generall sent  some of his
company  on  shore,  and  there  as  they  played  and  daunced
all the forenoone among the Negros,  to the end to
have heard some good newes of the Portugal ship,
A  Portugal  toward their comming aboord they  espied  a Portugal
taken.  which  lay  hid  among the  bushes,  whom we  tooke and

brought  away  with  us  the  same  night :  and  he  tolde  us
it  was  very  dangerous  going  up  with  our  boates  for
to  seeke  the  ship  that  was  at  the  towne.  Whereupon  wee
went  not  to  seeke  her,  because  we  knew  he  told  us  the
trueth  :  for  we  bound  him  and  made  him  fast,  and  so
examined  him.  Also  he  told  us  that  his  ship  was  there  cast
away,  and  that  there  were  two  more  of  his  company  among
the  Negros :  the  Portugals  name  was  Emmanuel,  and  was
by  his  occupation  a  Calker,  belonging  to  the  Port  of
Portugal.

On  Munday  morning  being  the  29.  day,  our  Generall

[III.  804.]  landed  with  70.  men  or  thereabout,  and  v/ent  up  to  their

towne,  where  we  burnt  2.  or  3.  houses,  and  tooke  what

292

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1586.

spoyle  wee  would,  which  was  but  litle,  but  al  the  people
fled :  and  in  our  retiring  aboord  in  a  very  litle  plaine  at
their  townes  ende  they  shot  their  arrowes  at  us  out  of  the
woods,  and  hurt  3.  or  4.  of  our  men;  their  arrowes  were  Poysoned
poysoned,  but  yet  none  of  our  men  miscaryed  at  that  time,  ^^^'°'^^^-
thanked  be  God. Their  towne is  marveilous  artificially  ^-^^  descrip-
builded  with  mudde  walles,  and  built  round,  with their  ]2:n{^^^^^'
yards paled in and kept very cleane as  well  in their
streetes as in their houses. These Negros use good
obedience  to  their  king,  as  one  of  our  men  sayd,  which
was  with  them  in  pawne  for  the  Negros  which  came  first.
There were in their towne by estimation about one
hundred  houses.

The  first  of  September  there  went  many  of  our  men  on  September.
shore at the  watering  place,  and did  wash shirts very
quietly  all  the  day :  and  the  second  day  they  went  againe,
and  the  Negros  were  in  ambush  round  about  the  place :
and the carpenter of  the  Admiral  going into  the  wood
to doe some speciall businesse, espied them by good
fortune. But the Negros rushed out upon our men
so  suddenly,  that  in  retiring  to  our  boates,  many  of  them  Many  of  our
were  hurt :  among  whom  one  William  Pickman  a  souldier  ff  ^ ^''^  "^
was  shot  into  the thigh,  who plucking  the arrow out,
broke  it,  and  left the head behinde;  and he told the
Chirurgions  that  he  plucked  out  all  the  arrow,  because  he
would  not  have  them  lance his thigh : whereupon the
poyson  wrought  so  that  night,  that  hee  was  marveilously
swollen,  and  all  his  belly  and  privie  parts  were  as  blacke
as  ynke,  and  the next morning he died,  the peece of  ^i^iam  Pkk-
the arrow with the poyson being plucked out of  his  ^J^^^^^f''/^

^ ■'  or  poysoned

thigh.  _  arrozv.

The  third  day  of  the  sayd  moneth,  divers  of  our  fleete  This  poyson  is

went up 4 myles  within the  harbour  with our boate,  the  jwjce  of  an

and caught  great  store  of  fish,  and  went  on shore  and  '^^^^'"^•
tooke Limmons from the  trees,  and comming aboord

againe,  saw  two  BufFes.  rf'^'^d'

The  6.  day  we  departed  from  Sierra  leona,  and  went  out  turefrom

of  the  harborough,  and  stayed  one  tide  3.  leagues  from  the  Sierra  leona.

293

A.D,

1586.

The  Isles  of
Madrabumba
inhabited  by
'Negros.

A  towne.

Fresh  water.

October.

Cape  Trio  in
Brasil.

"November.
S.  Sebastians
Hand.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

point  of  the  mouth  of  the  Harborough  in  6.  fathoms,  and
it  floweth  South  Southwest.

On  Wednesday  being  the  7.  of  the  same  moneth
wee  departed  from  one  of  the  Isles  of  Cape  Verde,
alias  the  Isles  of  Madrabumba,  which  is  10.  leagues  distant
from  the  poynt  of  Sierra  leona :  and  about  five  of  the
clocke  the  same  night  we  anchored  2.  miles  off  the  Hand  in
6.  fathoms  water,  and  landed  the  same  night,  and  found
Plantans  only  upon  the  Ilande.

The  8.  day  one  of  our  boats  went  out  &  sounded
round  about  the  Hand,  &  they  passed  through  a  sound  at
the  west  end  of  the  Hand,  where  they  found  5.  fathoms
round  about  the  Hand,  until  they  came  unto  the  very
gutte  of  the  sound,  and  then  for  a  cast  or  two  they  had  but
two  fathoms,  and  presently  after,  6.  fathoms,  and  so
deeper  and  deeper.  And  at  the  East  ende  of  the  Hand
there  was  a  towne,  where  Negros  doe  use  at  sometimes,  as
we  perceived  by  their  provision.

There  is  no  fresh  water  on  all  the  South  side,  as  we
could  perceive,  but  on  the  North  side  three  or  foure  very
good  places  of  fresh  water  :  and  all  the  whole  Hand
is  a  wood,  save  certaine  litle  places  where  their  houses
stand,  which  are  invironed  round  about  with  Plantan-trees,
whereof  the  fruit  is  excellent  meat.  This  place  is  subject
marvellous  much  to  thunder,  raine,  and  lightning  in  this
moneth.  I  thinke  the  reason  is,  because  the  sunne  is  so
neere  the  line  Equinoctiall.

On  Saturday  the  tenth  wee  departed  from  the  sayde
Hand  about  3.  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  the
winde  being  at  the  Southwest.

The  last  of  October  running  West  Southwest  about
24.  leagues  from  Cape  Frio  in  Brasile,  we  fell  with  a
great  mountaine  which  had  an  high  round  knoppe  on
the  top  of  it  standing  from  it  like  a  towne.  with  two
litle  Hands  from  it.

The  first  of  November  wee  went  in  betweene  the
Hand  of  Saint  Sebastian  and  the  mayne  land,  and  had  our
things on shore, and set up a Forge, and had our

294

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1586.

caske  on  shore :  our  coopers  made  hoopes,  and  so  we
remayned  there  untill  the  23.  day  of  the  same  moneth :  in
which  time  we  fitted  our  things,  built  our  Pinnesse,  and
filled  our  fi-esh  water.  And  while  our  Pinnesse  was  in
building,  there  came  a  Canoa  from  the  river  of  Jenero,  'I'he  river  of
meaning  to  goe  to  S,  Vincent,  wherein  were  sixe  naked  ^^'"^^°-
slaves  of  the  Countrey  people,  which  did  rowe  the
Canoa,  and  one  Portugal.  And  the  Portugal  knewe
Christopher  Hare  Master  of  the  Admirall,  for  that
Master  Hare  had  bene  at  Saint  Vincent  in  the  Minion  of
London  in  the  yeere  1581,  And  thinking  to  have  John
Whithal  the  Englishman  which  dwelleth  at  Saint  Vincent
come  unto  us,  which  is  twentie  leagues  from  this  Har-
borough  with  some  other,  thereby  to  have  had  some  fresh
victuals,  we  suffered  the  Portugal  to  goe  with  a  letter  unto
him,  who  promised  to  returne  or  send  some  answere
within  ten  dayes,  for  that  we  told  him  we  were  Marchants,
and  would  traffique  with  them  :  but  we  never  received
answere  from  him  any  more ;  and  seeing  that  he  came  not
according  to  appoyntment,  our  businesse  being  dispatched
wee  weyed  anchor,  and  set  sayle  from  S.  Sebastian  on  the
23.  of  November,

The 16. day  of  December  we fell  with  the coast of  [HI.  805,]
America  in  47.  degrees  \.  the  land  bearing  West  from  us  ^^'^^^''^'"•
about 6, leagues off: from  which  place  we ran along
the  shore,  untill  we  came  into  48.  degrees. It  is  a  steepe  48  Degrees.
beach  all  along.

The  17.  day  of  December  in  the  afternoone  we  entred
into  an  harborough,  where  our  Admirall  went  in first  :
wherefore  our  Generall  named  the  said  harborough  Port  Port  Desire.
Desire : in  which  harborough  is  an  Hand  or  two,  where
there  is  wonderful  great  store  of  Scales,  and  another  Hand
of  birds which are grey guls. These  Scales are  of  a  ^f^^^^  strangi
wonderful great bignesse, huge, and monstrous of  ^^  ^  ^^^
shape,  and  for  the  fore-part  of  their  bodies  cannot  be  com-
pared to any thing better  then to  a  lion : their head,
and  necke,  and  fore-parts  of  their  bodies  are  full  of  rough
haire  :  their  feete  are  in  maner  of  a  finne,  and  in  forme  like

295

A.D.
1586.

To)ig  Seaks
are  very  good
me  ate.

Fotiles  breed-
ing in

hurrozves  like
conies.

We  call  these
foules  Pen-
gzvins.

They  grave
and  trimme
their  ships.

A  man  and  a
boy  hurt  by
negligence.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

unto  a  mans  hand :  they  breed  and  cast  every  moneth,
giving  their  yong  milke,  yet  continually  get  they  their
living  in  the  sea,  and  live  altogether  upon  fish  :  their  yong
are  marveilous  good  meate,  and  being  boyled  or  rosted,
are  hardly  to  be  knowen  from  lambe  or  mutton.  The
olde  ones  be  of  such  bignesse  and  force,  that  it  is  as  much
as  4.  men  are  able  to  doe  to  kill  one  of  them  with  great
cowle-staves :  and  hee  must  be  beaten  downe  with  striking
on  the  head  of  him  :  for  his  body  is  of  that  bignesse  that
foure  men  could  never  kill  him,  but  only  on  the  head.
For  being  shotte  through  the  body  with  an  Harquebuze  or
a  Musket,  yet  he  will  goe  his  way  into  the  sea,  and  never
care  for  it  at  the  present.  Also  the  fowles  that  were
there,  were  very  good  meate,  and  great  store  of  them  :
they  have  burrowes  in  the  ground  like  conies,  for  they
cannot  flie.  They  have  nothing  but  downe  upon  their
pinions :  they  also  fish  and  feede  in  the  sea  for  their  living,
and  breede  on  shore.

This  harborough  is  a  very  good  place  to  trimme  ships
in,  and  to  bring  them  on  ground,  and  grave  them  in  :  for
there  ebbeth  and  floweth  much  water  :  therefore  wee
graved  and  trimmed  all  our  ships  there.

The  24.  of  December  being  Christmas  Even,  a  man  and
a  boy  of  the  Rere-admirall  went  some  fortie  score  from
our  ships  into  a  very  faire  greene  valley  at  the  foote  of  the
mountaines,  where  was  a  litle  pitte  or  well  which  our  men
had  digged  and  made  some  2.  or  3.  dayes  before  to  get
fresh  water :  for  there  was  none  in  all  the  Harborough ;
and  this  was  but  brackish  :  therefore  this  man  and  boy
came  thither  to  wash  their  linnen:  and  beeing  in  washing  at
the  sayde  Well,  there  were  great  store  of  Indians  which
were  come  downe,  and  found  the  sayd  man  and  boy
in  washing.  These  Indians  being  divided  on  eche  side
of  the  rockes,  shotte  at  them  with  their  arrowes  and  hurt
them  both,  but  they  fledde  presently,  beeing  about  fiftie  or
threescore,  though  our  Generall  followed  them  but  with
16.  or  20.  men.  The  mans  name  which  was  hurt  was
John  Garge,  the  boyes  name  was  Lutch  :  the  man  was  shot

296

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad

1587.

cleane  through  the  knee,  the  boy  into  the  shoulder :  either

of  them  having  very sore  wounds. Their  arrowes  are

made  of  litle  canes,  and  their  heads  are  of  a  flint  stone,  set

into  the  cane  very  artificially :  they  seldome  or  never  see

any  Christians : they  are  as  wilde as ever  was  a bucke

or  any  other  wilde  beast : for  wee followed them,  and

they  ranne  from  us  as  it  had  bene  the  wildest  thing  in

the  worlde. Wee  tooke  the  measure  of  one  of  their  feete,  ^  ^^^^^  "f

and  it  was 18.  inches  long. Their  use  is  when  any  o^  sy^'"^^-

them  dye,  to bring  him  or  them to the  cliffes  by  the

sea-side,  and  upon  the  toppe  of  them  they  burie  them,

and  in  their  graves  are buryed  with them their bowes

and arrowes, and  all their  jewels  which they  have in

their  life time,  which  are fine  shelles  which they finde

by  the  sea  side,  which  they  cut  and  square  after  an  arti-

ficiall  maner : and all is  layd under their  heads. The

grave  is  made  all  with  great  stones  of  great  length  and

bignesse,  being  set  all  along  full  of  the  dead  mans  dartes

which he used  when he  was  living. And they  colour

both  their  darts  and  their  graves  with  a  red  colour  which

they  use  in  colouring  of  themselves.

The  28  of  December  we  departed  out  of  the  Port  of  Their  depar-
Desire,  and  went  to  an  Hand  which  lieth  3.  leagues  to  ^^^  from  port
the Southward of it; where we trimmed our saved
pengwins with salt for victual all that and the next
day, and departed along the coast Southwest  and by
South.

The  30.  day  we  fell  with  a  rocke  which  lieth  about
5.  leagues  from  the  land,  much  like  unto  Ediestone,
which  lieth  off  the  sound  of  Plimouth,  and  we  sounded,
and  had  8.  fathoms  rockie  ground,  within  a  mile  thereof:
the  rocke  bearing  West  Southwest.  Wee  went  coasting
along  South  Southwest,  and  found  great  store  of  Seales
all  along  the  coast.  This  rocke  standeth  in  48.  degrees
^.  to  the  Southward  of  the  line.

The  2.  day  of  Januarie  wee  fell  with  a  very  faire  white  January
Cape,  which  standeth  in  51.  degrees,  and  had  7.  fathoms ^587-
water  a  league  off  the  land.

297

A.D.

1587.

[III.  806.]

They  enter
the  Sireigkts
the  6.  of
Januarie.
A  Spaniard
taken  in  the
Streights  of
Magellan.

The  Barke
John  Thomas
one  of  sir
Francis
Drakes  cen-
sor tes.

King  Philips
citie  left  de-
solate in  the
Streights  of
Magellan,
which  our
Generall
called  Port
famine.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  third  day  of  the  foresayd  moneth  we  fell  with
another  great  white  cape,  which  standeth  in  52.  degrees
and  45.  minutes :  from  which  Cape  there  runneth  a  lowe
beach  about  a  league  to  the  Southward,  and  this  beach
reacheth  to  the  opening  of  the  dangerous  Streight  of
Magellan,  which  is  in  divers  places  5.  or  6.  leagues  wide,
and  in  two  severall  places  more  narrow.  Under  this
Cape  wee  anchored  and  lost  an  anchor,  for  it  was  a
great  storme  of  foule  weather,  and  lasted  three  dayes
very  dangerous.

The  6.  day  we  put  in  for  the  Streights.

The  7.  day  betweene  the  mouth  of  the  Streights  and
the  narrowest  place  thereof,  wee  tooke  a  Spaniard  whose
name  was  Hernando,  who  was  there  with  23  Spaniards
more,  which  were  all  that  remayned  of  foure  hundred,
which  were  left  there  three  yeeres  before  in  these  streights
of  Magellan,  all  the  rest  being  dead  with  famine.  And
the  same  day  wee  passed  through  the  narrowest  of
the  Streights,  where  the  aforesayd  Spanyard  shewed  us
the  hull  of  a  small  Barke,  which  we  judged  to  be  a  Barke
called  The  John  Thomas.  It  is  from  the  mouth  of  the
streights  unto  the  narrowest  of  the  Streights  14.  leagues,
and  the  course  lieth  West  and  by  North.  The  mouth
of  the  streights  standeth  in 52.  degrees.

From  the  narrowest  of  the  Streights  unto  Pengwin
Hand  is  10.  leagues,  and  lyeth  West  Southwest  some-
what to  the  Southward,  where  wee  anchored  the  8.  day,
and  killed  and  salted  great  store  of  Pengwins  for  victuals.

The  ninth  day  wee  departed  from  Pengwin  llande,  and
ranne  South  Southwest  to  King  Philips  citie  which  the
Spaniards  had  built :  which  Towne  or  citie  had  foure
Fortes,  and  every  Fort  had  in  it  one  cast  peece,  which
peeces  were  buryed  in  the  ground,  the  cariages  were
standing  in  their  places  unburied :  wee  digged  for  them
and  had  them  all.  They  had  contrived  their  Citie  very
well,  and  seated  it  in  the  best  place  of  the  Streights  for
wood  and  water :  they  had  builded  up  their  Churches
by  themselves : they  had  Lawes  very  severe  among  them-

298

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad

1587.

selves,  for  they  had  erected  a  Gibet,  whereon  they  had
done  execution  upon  some  of  their  company.  It  seemed
unto  us  that  their  whole  living  for  a  great  space  was
altogether  upon  muskles  and  lympits :  for  there  was  not
any  thing  else  to  bee  had,  except  some  Deere  which
came  out  of  the  mountaines  downe  to  the  fresh  rivers
to  drinke.  These  Spaniards  which  were  there,  were
onely  come  to  fortifie  the  Streights,  to  the  ende  that
no  other  nation  should  have  passage  through  into  the
South  sea  saving  onely  their  owne :  but  as  it  appeared,
it  was  not  Gods  will  so  to  have  it.  For  during  the  God  enemie  to
time  that  they  were  there,  which  was  two  yeeres  at  the  ^^^  Spaniards.
least,  they  could  never  have  any  thing  to  growe  or  in
any  wise  prosper.  And  on  the  other  side  the  Indians
oftentimes  preyed  upon  them,  untill  their  victuals  grewe
so  short,  (their  store  being  spent  which  they  had  brought
with  them  out  of  Spaine,  and  having  no  meanes  to
renew  the  same)  that  they  dyed  like  dogges  in  their
houses,  and  in  their  clothes,  wherein  we  found  them  still
at  our  comming,  untill  that  in  the  ende  the  towne  being
wonderfully  taynted  with  the  smell  and  the  savour  of
the  dead  people,  the  rest  which  remayned  alive  were
driven  to  burie  such  things  as  they  had  there  in  their
towne  either  for  provision  or  for  furniture,  and  so  to
forsake  the  towne,  and  to  goe  along  the  sea-side,  and
seeke  their  victuals  to  preserve  them  from  sterving,
taking  nothing  with  them,  but  every  man  his  harque-
buze  and  his  furniture  that  was  able  to  cary  it  (for  some
were  not  able  to  cary  them  for  weakenesse)  and  so  lived
for  the  space  of  a  yeere  and  more  with  rootes,  leaves,
and  sometimes  a  foule  which  they  might  kill  with  their
peece.  To  conclude,  they  were  determined  to  have
travailed  towards  the  river  of  Plate,  only  being  left  alive
23.  persons,  whereof  two  were  women,  which  were  the
remainder  of  4.  hundred.  In  this  place  we  watered  and
woodded  well  and  quietly.  Our  Generall  named  this
towne  Port  famine:  it  standeth  in  53.  degrees  by  obser-  Port  famine
vation  to  the  Southward.  in  t^i  degrees.

299

A.D.
1587.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

CapeFrozvard
in  54  degrees.

Elizabeth
Bay.

The  14.  day  we  departed  from  this  place,  andUran
South  southwest,  and  from  thence  southwest  unto  cape
Froward  5.  leagues  West  Southwest,  which  Cape  is  the
Southermost  part  of  all  the  streights,  and  standeth  in
the  latitude  of  54.  degrees.  From  which  cape  we  ran
West  and  by  north  5.  leagues,  and  put  into  a  bay  or
Muskle  Coze.  Cove  on  the  south  side,  which  we  called  Muskle-Cove,
because  there  were  great  store  of  them  :  we  ridde  therein
6.  dayes,  the  wind  being  still  Westerly.

The  21.  day  of  Januarie  we  departed  from  Muskle-
cove,  and  went  Northwest  and  by  West  10.  leagues  to
a  very  faire  sandie  Bay  on  the  North  side,  which  our
Generall  called  Elizabeth  Baye,  and  as  wee  ridde  there
that  night,  one  of  our  men  dyed  which  went  in  the
Hugh  Gallant,  whose  name  was  Grey,  a  Carpenter  by
his  occupation,  and  was  buryed  there  in  that  Baye.

The  22.  wee  departed  from  Elizabeth  Bay  in  the  after-
noone,  and  went  about  2.  leagues  from  that  place,  where
there  was  a  fresh  water  river,  where  our  Generall  went
up  with  the  ship-boate  about  three  myles,  which  river
hath  very  good  and  pleasant  ground  about  it,  and  it  is
lowe  and  champion  soyle,  and  so  we  saw  none  other
ground  els  in  all  the  Streights  but  that  was  craggie  rocks
and  monstrous  high  hilles  and  mountaines.  In  this  river
are  great  store  of  Savages  which  wee  sawe,  and  had  con-
ference with  them :  They  were  men-eaters,  and  fedde
altogether  upon  rawe  flesh,  and  other  filthie  foode :  which
people  had  preyed  upon  some  of  the  Spaniardes  before
spoken  of.  For  they  had  gotten  knives  and  peeces  of
Rapiers  to  make  dartes  of.  They  used  all  the  meanes
they  could  possibly  to  have  allured  us  up  farther  into
the  river,  of  purpose  to  have  betrayed  us,  which  being
espyed  by  our  Generall,  hee  caused  us  to  shoote  at  them
with  our  harquebuzes,  whereby  we  killed  many  of  them.
So  wee  sayled  from  this  river  to  the  Chanell  of  Saint
Jerome,  which  is  2  leagues  off.

From  the  river  of  Saint  Jerome  about  three  or  foure
leagues,  wee  ranne  West  unto  a  Cape  which  is  on the

300

[III.  807.]
The  most
brutish
Savages  that
ever  zoere
seene.

The  Chanel  of
Saint  Jerome.

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1587.

North  side :  and  from  that  Cape  unto  the  mouth  of  the
Streights  the  course  lyeth  Northwest  and  by  West,  and
Northwest.  Betweene  which  place  and  the  mouth  of  the
Streights  to  the  Southward  we  lay  in  Harborough  untill
the  three  and  twentieth  of  Februarie,  by  reason  of  con-  Februane
trary  windes  and  most  vile  and  filthie  fowle  weather,  with  '  ^  7-
such  rayne  and  vehement  stormie  windes  which  came
downe  from  the  mountaines  and  high  hilles,  that  they
hazarded  the  best  cables  and  anchors  that  we  had  for  to
holde,  which  if  they  had  fayled,  wee  had  bene  in  great
danger  to  have  bene  cast  away,  or  at  the  least  famished.
For  during  this  time,  which  was  a  full  moneth,  we  fedde
almost  altogether  upon  muskles  and  limpits,  and  birds,  or
such  as  we  could  get  on  shore,  seeking  every  day  for
them,  as  the  fowles  of  the  ayre  doe,  where  they  can  finde
foode,  in  continuall  raynie  weather.

There  is  at  every  myle  or  two  myles  ende  an  Har-
borough on  both  sides  of  the  land.  And  there  are
betweene  the  river  of  Saint  Jerome  and  the  mouth  of  the
Streights  going  into  the  South  sea  about  34.  leagues  by
estimation. So that  the  length of  the  whole Streights  T'hc  streights

is  about  QO.  leagues. And  the  said  mouth  of  the  Streights  °f^^f^^^^

11-1  1-11  1  , f . are  about  90

standeth  m  the  same  height  that  the  entrance  standeth  in  leagues  long.

when  we  passe  out  of  the  North  sea,  which  is  about  52.  The  Westerne

degrees  and  f  to  the  Southward  of  the  line.  ^"^^{■^  of  the  ^

The 24.  day  of  February  wee  entred  into  the  South  5/mj^/^  is  in

sea : and on the  South side  of  the  going out of  the  ^^^  zterces.

Streights  is  a  faire  high  Cape  with  a  lowe  poynt  adjoyning  Their  entrance

unto  it :  and  on  the  North  side  are  4.  or  5.  Hands,  which  into  the  South

lye 6. leagues off  the mayne, and much broken  and  ^^^ /^^  ^4  V

sunken ground about them : by  noone  the same day  ^^^^^^  ^^  '^^^

wee  had  brought  these  Hands  East  of  us  5.  leagues  off;  Southseacalkd

the  winde  being  Southerly.  LasAnegadas.

The  first  of  March  a  storme  tooke  us  at  North,  which  March  i .
night  the ships  lost  the  company  of  the  Hugh  Gallant,

beeing  in  40.  \  and 4C. leagues  from  the  land. This  Extreme  dan-

&  t-^2  1-J&  jri  •  geroftheHugh

Storme  continued  3.  or  4.  dayes,  and  tor  that  time  we  Ca/la-ntbya

in  the  Hugh  Gallant  being  separated  from  the  other  2.  great  kake.

301

A.D.

1587.

The  lie  of
Mocha  in  38
degrees  not
subject  to  the
Spaniards.

Arauco  is  the
richest  place  in
the  South  sea
for  golde,  and
is  not  subdued
by  the

Spaniards  as
yet.

Saint  Marie
Hand  in  3  7
degrees  and  i .
terce,  which  is
subdued  to  the
Spaniards.

A  Church
with  crosses
and  altars.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ships,  looked  every  houre  to  sinke,  our  barke  was  so
leake,  and  our  selves  so  dilvered  and  weakened  with
freeing  it  of  water,  that  we  slept  not  in  three  dayes  and
three  nights.

The  15.  of  March  in  the  morning  the  Hugh  Gallant
came  in  betweene  the  Hand  of  S.  Mary  and  the  mayne,
where  she  met  with  the  Admiral  and  the  Content,  which
had  rid  at  the  Hand  called  La  Mocha  2.  dayes,  which
standeth  in  the  Southerly  latitude  of  38  degrees:  at
which  place  some  of  our  men  went  on  shore  with  the
Vice-admirals  boate,  where  the  Indians  fought  with  them
with  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  were  marveilous  warie
of  their  Calivers.  These  Indians  were  enemies  to  the
Spaniards,  and  belonged  to  a  great  place  called  Arauco,
and  tooke  us  for  Spaniards,  as  afterward  we  learned.

This  place  which  is  called  Arauco  is  wonderfull  rich,
and  full  of  golde  mynes,  and  yet  could  it  not  be  subdued
at  any  time  by  the  Spaniards,  but  they  always  returned
with  the  greatest  losse  of  men.  For  these  Indians  are
marveilous  desperate  and  carelesse  of  their  lives  to  live
at  their  owne  libertie  and  freedome.

The  15.  day  aforesayde  in  the  afternoone  wee  weighed
anchor,  and  ranne  under  the  West  side  of  Saint  Marie
Hand,  where  we  ridde  very  well  in  6.  fathoms  water,  and
very  faire  ground  all  that  night.

The  16.  day  our  General  went  on  shore  himselfe  with
70.  or  80.  men  every  one  with  his  furniture :  there  came
downe  to  us  certaine  Indians  with  two  which  were  the
principals  of  the  Hand  to  welcome  us  on  shore,  thinking
we  had  bin  Spaniards,  for  it  is  subdued  by  them :  who
brought  us  up  to  a  place  where  the  Spaniards  had  erected
a  Church  with  crosses  &  altars  in  it.  And  there  were
about  this  Church  2.  or  3.  store  houses,  which  were  full
of  wheate  and  barley  ready  threshed  and  made  up  in  cades
of  strawe  to  the  quantitie  of  a  bushel  of  corne  in  every
cade.  The  wheate  and  barly  was  as  faire,  as  cleane,  and
every  way  as  good  as  any  we  have  in  England.  There
were  also  the  like  cades  ful  of  potato  rootes,  which  were

302

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1587.

very  good  to  eate,  ready  made  up  in  the  store  houses  for

the  Spaniards  against  they  should  come  for  their  tribute.

This  Hand  also  yeeldeth  many  sorts  of  fruits,  hogs,  and

hens. These  Indians  are  held  in  such  slavery  by  them,

that  they  dare not  eate  a  hen  or  an  hogge  themselves.  [^^I-  808.]

But the Spaniards have made them all in that Hand  '^^'^"ff/^f^

Christians. Thus we  fitted  our  selves  here  with corne  ^^^^  ^//

asmuch  as  we  would  have,  and  as  many  hogges  as  we  had  Christians.

salt  to  powder  them  withall,  and  great  store  of  hennes,

with  a  number  of  bags  of  Potato  rootes,  and  about  500.

dried dogge-fishes, and Guinie  wheate, which is called

Maiz. And  having  taken  as  much  as  we  would  have,  yet

we  left  marveilous  great  store  behind  us. Our  General

had  the  two  principals  of  the  Hand  aboord  our  shippe,  and

provided  great  cheere  for  them,  and  made them  merie

with wine :  and  they  in  the ende perceiving  us to bee

no  Spaniards,  made  signes,  as  neere  as  our  Generall  could

perceive,  that  if  wee  would  goe  over  unto  the  mayne  land

unto Arauco, that there was much Golde, making us  Araucorkhin

signes,  that  we  should  have  great  store  of  riches. But  ^°'''^^-

because we could not understand them, our Generall

made some haste, and within 2. or three dayes we

furnished  our  selves.

The  18.  day  in  the  morning  we  departed  from  this  place,
and  ran  all  that  day  Northnortheast  about  10.  leagues,
and  at  night  lay  with  a  short  sayle  off  and  on  the  coast.

The 19.  wee  ranne  in  East  Northeast  with  the  land,
and  bare  in  with  a  place  called  The  Conception,  where  The  Concep-
wee anchored under an Hand, and departed the next  ^^°^'
morning  without  going  on  land.

The  20.  wee  departed  from  The  Conception,  and
went  into  a  litle  Baye  which  was  sandie,  where  we
saw  fresh  water  and  cattell,  but  we  stayed  not  there.

The 30. day we came into the Bay of Quintero, Quintero
which  standeth  in  33.  degrees  & 50  minutes.  standethin  ^i

The  said  day  presently  after we  were  come  unto  an  J^^^^
ancre in the  Bay, there  was  a Neteherd or one that
kept  cattle  which  lay  upon  the  point  of  the  hill  asleepe,

303

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

which  when  he  awaked  and  had  espied  three  shippes  which
were  come  into  the  Bay,  before  wee  could  get  on  shore,
he  had  caught  an  horse  which  was  feeding  by,  and  rode
his  way  as  fast  as  ever  hee  might :  and  our  Generall  with
30.  shot  with  him  went  on  shore.  He  had  not  bene
on  land  one  houre,  but  there  came  3.  horsemen  with
bright  swords  towards  us  so  hard  as  they  might  ride,
until  they  came  within  some  twentie  or  thirtie  score  of  us,
and  so  stayed,  and  would  come  no  neerer  unto  us :  so  our
Generall  sent  unto  them  a  couple  of  our  men  with  their
shotte,  and  one  Fernando,  which  was  the  Spaniard  that
wee  had  taken  up  at  the  mouth  of  the  Streights,  which
was  one  of  the  400.  that  were  sterved  there.  But  the
Spaniards  would  not  suffer  our  men  to  come  neere
with  their  shot,  but  made  signes  that  one  of  our  men
should  come  alone  unto  them :  so  the  said  Fernando
the  Spaniard  went  unto  them,  and  our  two  men  stood
not  farre  from  them.  They  had  great  conference,  and
in  the  end  Fernando  came  backe  from  them,  and  told
our  Generall  that  he  had  parled  with  them  for  some
victuals,  who  had  promised  as  much  as  we  would  have.
Our  General  sent  him  backe  againe  with  another
message  and  another  shotte  with  him  :  and  being  come
neere  unto  them,  they  would  not  suffer  any  more  than
one  to  approch  them,  whereupon  our  men  let  the
Spaniard  goe  unto  them  alone  himselfe :  who  being
some  good  distance  from  them,  they  stayed  but  a
Theperjimeof  small  time  together,  but  that  the  said  Fernando  leaped
a  Spaniard.  ^p  bghij-iti  one  of  them  and  rid  away  with  them,  for
all  his  deepe  and  damnable  othes  which  hee  had  made
continually  to  our  general  and  all  his  company  never
to  forsake  him,  but  to  die  on  his  side  before  he
would  be  false.  Our  Generall  seeing  how  he  was
dealt  withall,  filled  water  all  that  day  with  good  watch,
and  caried  it  aboord :  and  night  being  come,  he  deter-
mined the  next  day  to  send  into  the  countrey  to  find
their  tov/ne,  and  to  have  taken  the  spoyle  of  it,  and
to  have  fired  it  if  they  could  have  found  it.

304

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1587.

The last of March  Captaine Havers  went up into

the  Countrey  with  50.  or  60.  men  with  their  shot  and

furniture  with  them,  and  we  travailed  7.  or  8.  miles  into  Our  men

the  land : and as we were marching  along, we  espied  ^^J''^\  7  "r  8
1  /-I J  r ,,11 ri-  J1111 miles  into  their

a number or heroes or  cattell, or  kine  and buUockes  ^^g^ig^  /^^^

which  were  wonderfull  wilde :  we  saw  also  great  store
of  horses,  mares  and  coltes  which  were  very  wilde  and
unhandled :  there  is  also  great  store  of  hares  and  conies,
and  plenty  of  partriges  and  other  wild  foules.  The
countrey  is  very  fruitful  with  faire  fresh  rivers  all  along
full  of  wilde  foule  of  all  sorts.  Having  travailed  so  farre
that  we  could  goe  no  further  for  the  monstrous  high
mountaines,  we  rested  our  selves  at  a  very  fayre  fresh
River  running  in  and  alongst  faire  lowe  medowes  at
the  foote  of  the  mountaines,  where  every  man  drunke
of  the  River,  and  refreshed  themselves.  Having  so
done,  we  returned  to  our  Ships  the  likest  way  that  we
thought  their  Towne  should  bee :  so  wee  travailed  all
the  day  long,  not  seeing  any  man,  but  we  mette  with
many  wilde  dogges :  yet  there  were  two  hundred  horse-
men abroad  that  same  day  by  meanes  of  the  Spaniard
which  they  had  taken  the  day  before  from  us,  who
had  tolde  them  that  our  force  was  but  small,  and  that
wee  were  wonderfully  weake ;  who  though  they  did  espie
us  that  day,  yet  durst  they  not  give  the  on-sette  upon
us.  For  wee  marched  along  in  array,  and  observed  good
order,  whereby  wee  seemed  a  great  number  more  then
we  were,  untill  we  came  unto  our  ships  that  night
againe.

The  next  day  being  the  first  of  Aprill  1587,  our  [III.  809.]
men  went  on  shoare  to  fill  water  at  a  pit  which  was  a
quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  waters  side :  and  being
earely  hard  at  their  businesse  were  in  no  readinesse.
In  which  meane  while  there  came  powring  downe
from  the  hilles  almost  200  horsemen,  and  before  our
people  could  returne  to  the  rockes  from  the  watering
place,  twelve  of  them  were  cut  off,  part  killed,  and  part
taken  prisoners,  the  rest  were  rescued  by  our  souldiers
XI  305  u

1-

Out  of  the

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

which  came  from  the  rocks  to  meete  with  them,  who
being  but  fifteene  of  us  that  had  any  weapons  on  shoare,
yet  we  made  the  enemie  retire  in  the  end  with  losse  of

z4r  Spaniards some foure and twentie of their men, after we had

slaine.  skirmished  with  them  an  houre.

The  names  of  our  men  that  were  slaine  were  these.

Thomas  Lucas  of  London,  souldier.

Richard  Wheeler  of  London.

Robert  Pitcher  of  Norffolke,  souldier.

John  Langston  of  Glocestershire.  j' Admirall.

William  Kingman  of  Dorsetshire,  souldier.

William  Hilles  of  Cornewall.

1  William  Byet  of  Weymouth.  1  Killed  out  of

2  Laurence  Gamesby,  of  Newcastle.  j theviceadm.

1  Henry  Blackenals  of  Weymouth.

2  William  Stevens  of  Plymmouth,  gunner.

3  William Pitte of  Shereborne  inDorsetshire

4  Humphrey  Derricke  of  London.

After  the  losse  of  these  men,  wee  rid  in  the  roade,
and  watered  in  despight  of  them  with  good  watch  and
ward,  until  the  fift  of  the  sayd  moneth.

The  fift  day  wee  departed  out  of  this  bay  of  Quintero  :

A  little  Hand  and  off  from  the  bay  there  lyeth  a  little Hand  about a

full  of  pen- league  distant,  whereon  there  are  great  store of  penguins

^'  and  other  fowles ;  wherof  we  tooke  to  serve  our  turnes,

and  sailed  away  North  and  North  and  by  West :  for  so

lyeth  the  coast  along  in  this  place.

Morro  The  fifteenth  wee  came  thwart  of  a  place  which  is  called

moreno  tn  zt, Morro  moreno,  which  standeth  in  23  degrees  ^,  and  is  an

halfe  ^  ^^ ^ excellent  good  harborough  : and  there  is  an  Iland  which

maketh  it  an  harborough  :  and  a  ship  may  go  in  at  either

end  of  the  Iland  : here  we went with  our Generall on

shore  to the number of  30  men  : and  at  our  going  on

shore  upon  our  landing,  the  Indians  of  the  place  came

downe  from  the  rockes  to  meete  with  us,  with  fresh  water

and  wood  on  their  backes. They  are  in  marvellous  awe

306

Killed  out  of
the  Hugh
Gallant.

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1587.
of  the  Spaniards,  and  very  simple  people,  and  live  mar-
vellous savagely  :  For  they  brought  us  to  their  hidings
about  two  miles  from  the  harborough,  where  wee  saw
their  women  and  lodging,  which  is  nothing  but  the  skin
of  some  beast  layd  upon  the  ground  :  and  over  them
in  stead  of  houses,  is  nothing  but  five  or  sixe  sticks  layd
acrosse,  which  stand  upon  two  forkes  with  stickes  on  the
ground  and  a  fewe  boughes  layd  on  it.  Their  diet  is  raw
fish,  which  stinketh  most  vilely.  And  when  any  of  them
die,  they  burie  their  bowes  and  arrowes  with  them,  with
their  canoa  and  all  that  they  have :  for  wee  opened  one  of
their  graves,  and  saw  the  order  of  them.  Their  canoas
or  boates  are  marvellous  artificially  made  of  two  skinnes  Mostarti-
like  unto  bladders,  and  are  blowen  full  at  one  ende  with  /"'^"  ooaies.
quilles :  they  have  two  of  these  bladders  blowen  full,
which  are  sowen  together  and  made  fast  with  a  sinew
of  some  wild  beast ;  which  when  they  are  in  the  water
swell,  so  that  they  are  as  tight  as  may  bee.  They  goe  to
sea  in  these  boates,  and  catch  very  much  fish  with  them,
and  pay  much  of  it  for  tribute  unto  the  Spaniards  :  but  Tribute  payd
they  use  it  marvellous  beastly.  tnfisk.

The  23  in  the  morning  we  tooke  a  small  barke  which  ^  ^<^f'k^

came  out  of  Arica  road,  which  wee  kept  and  called  The  ^^'^^"'  Z^^f
„  ,  ^'.  ,  ^  .,,. they  called

George : the  men  rorsooke  it,  and  went  away  with  their  ^he  George.

boate. Our  admirals  pinnesse  followed  the  boate,  &  the
Hugh  Gallants  boate tooke  the  barke :  our  admirals  pin-
nesse could  not  recover  the  boat  before  it  got  on  shoare,  but
went  along into the  road of  Arica, and  layd  aboord  a  Aricastandeth
srreat  shippe  of  an  hundreth  tunnes  riding:  in the road  ^^  ^'^  degrees
right  afore  the  towne,  but  all  the  men  and  goods  were  ^  ^^^-^
gone  out  of  it,  onely  the  bare  ship  was  left  alone. They
made  three  or  foure  very  faire  shots  at  the  pinnesse  as
shee  was  comming  in,  but  missed  her  very  narrowly  with
a  Minion  shot  which  they  had  in  the  fort. Whereupon
wee  came  into  the  road  with  the  admirall  and  the  Hugh
Gallant:  but the Content which was  viceadmirall was
behinde  out  of  sight : by  meanes  whereof,  and  for  want  of  [HI.  810.]
her  boate  to  land  men  withall  wee  landed  not  :  otherwise

307

A.D.

1587.

Great  store  of
wine  found.

Another  barke
taken  in  the
road.

The  fourth
barke  taken.

A  watchhouse.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

if  wee  had  bene  together,  our  Generall  with  the  companie
would  resolutely"  have  landed  to  take  the  towne,  what-
soever had  come  of  it.  The  cause  why  the  Content
stayed  behind  was,  that  shee  had  found  about  14  leagues
to  the  Southward  of  Arica,  in  a  place  where  the  Spaniards
had  landed,  a  whole  ships  lading  of  botijas  of  wine  of
Castillia,  whereof  the  sayd  Content  tooke  into  her  as  many
as  shee  could  conveniently  carrie,  and  came  after  us  into
the  road  of  Arica  the  same  day.  By  this  time  wee  per-
ceived that  the  towne  had  gathered  all  their  power  to-
gether, and  also  conveyed  all  their  treasure  away,  and
buried  it  before  wee  were  come  neere  the  towne :  for  they
had  heard  of  us.  Nowe  because  it  was  very  populous
with  the  ayde  of  one  or  two  places  up  in  the  land,  our
Generall  sawe  there  was  no  landing  without  losse  of  many
men :  wherefore  hee  gave  over  that  enterprise.  While
wee  rid  in  the  road  they  shot  at  us,  and  our  ships  shot  at
them  againe  for  every  shot  two.  Moreover,  our  pinnesse
went  in  hard  almost  to  the  shoare,  and  fetched  out
another  barke  which  rid  there  in  despight  of  all  their  forts
though  they  shot  still  at  the  pinnesse,  which  they  could
never  hit.  After  these  things  our  Generall  sent  a  boate
on  shoare  with  a  flag  of  truce  to  knowe  if  they  would
redeeme  their  great  shippe  or  no ;  but  they  would  not :
for  they  had  received  speciall  commandement  from  the
viceroy  from  Lima,  not  to  buy  any  shippe,  nor  to  ran-
some  any  man  upon  paine  of  death.  Our  Generall  did
this  in  hope  to  have  redeemed  some  of  our  men,  which
were  taken  prisoners  on  shoare  by  the  horsemen  at
Quintero,  otherwise  hee  would  have  made  them  no  offer
of  parley.

The  25  riding  stil  in  the  said  road,  we  spied  a  saile
comming  from  the  Southward,  and  our  Generall  sent
out  his  pinnesse  to  meete  her,  with  all  our  boates ;  but
the  towne  made  such  signes  from  the  hill  with  fires
and  tokens  out  of  the  watch-house,  that  before  our
pinnesse  could  get  to  them,  they  ran  the  barke  on  shoare
two miles to the Southward of  the towne ; but they

308

taken.

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

^587-
had  small  leasure  to  carrie  any  thing  with  them  ;  but  all

the  men  skaped,  among  whom  there  were  certaine  friers :
for  wee  sawe  them  in  their  friers  weedes  as  they  ran  on
shoare :  many  horsemen  came  from  the  towne  to  rescue
them,  and  to  carrie  them  away,  otherwise  wee  had  landed
and  taken  or  killed  them.  So  wee  went  aboord  the  barke
as  she  lay  sunke,  and  fetched  out  the  pillage :  but  there
was  nothing  in  it  of  any  value,  and  came  aboord  our
shippes  againe  the  same  night :  and  the  next  morning  wee
set  the  great  shippe  on  fire  in  the  road,  and  sunke
one  of  the  barkes,  and  carried  the  other  along  with
us,  and  so  departed  from  thence,  and  went  away  North-
west.

The  27  day  wee  tooke  a  small  barke,  which  came  from The  first
S. lago neere unto Quintero,  where  wee  lost  our  men  ^^rkeofadvise
first. In  this  barke  was  one  George  a  Greeke,  a  reason-
able pilot  for  all  the  coast  of  Chili. They  were  sent  to
the citie of  Lima  with  letters  of  adviso  of  us,  and  of
the  losse  of  our  men. There  were  also in the sayde
barke  one  Flemming  and  three  Spaniards :  and  they  were
all  sworne  and  received  the  Sacrament  before  they  came  to
sea  by  three  or foure friers, that  if  wee should  chance
to meete them, they should throw those letters over
boord : which  (as  wee  were  giving  them  chase  with  our
pinnesse)  before  wee  could  fetch  them  up,  they  had  accord-
ingly thro  wen  away. Yet  our  Generall  wrought  so  with
them, that they did confesse it : but hee was  faine
to  cause them to bee tormented with their thumbes
in a wrinch, and to continue them at severall times
with  extreme  paine. Also  hee  made  the  old  Flemming
beleeve  that  hee would  hang  him ;  and  the  rope  being
about his necke hee was pulled  up  a  little from the
hatches,  and  yet  hee  would  not  confesse,  chusing  rather  A goodmindif
to  die,  then  hee  would  bee  perjured. In the  end  it  was  ^^  had  bene  in
confessed  by  one  of  the  Spaniards,  whereupon  wee  burnt  ^  ^°°  '^^'"^'
the  barke,  and  carried  the  men  with  us.

The third  of  May  wee  came  into  a  bay where are
three  little  townes,  which  are  called  Paracca,  Chincha,  and

309

A.D.
1587.

The  bay  of
Pise  a  in  13.
^eg-  I-

Jn  Hand  of
Seaks.

The  Hugh
Gallant  lost
companie  of
the  fee  te,
a?id  met  not
untill  the
seventeenth.
[III.  811.]

400  bags  of
me  ale  found.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

Pisca,  where  some  of  us  landed  and  tooke  certaine  houses,
wherein  was  bread,  wine,  figs  and  hennes  :  but  the  sea
went  so  high,  that  wee  could  not  land  at  the  best  of  the
townes  without  sinking  of  our  boats,  and  great  hazard
of  us  all.  This  place  standeth  in  thirteene  degrees  and  f
to  the  Southward  of  the  line.

The  fift  of  May  wee  departed  from  this  harbour,
leaving  the  Content  our  viceadmirall  within  at  an  Hand  of
scales,  by  which  meanes  at  that  time  wee  lost  her  companie.

The  ninth  wee  gave  chase  to  a  saile,  namely,  Our
admirall,  The  Hugh  Gallant,  and  The  George  which  wee
had  taken  before  comming  out  of  the  roade  of  Arica ;  The
Content  which  was  our  viceadmirall  being  still  lost  :  but
wee  could  not  fetch  it.  The  George  made  after  it,  but
lost  it  that  night.

The  tenth  day  the  Hugh  Gallant  (in  which  barke  I
Francis  Pretie  was)  lost  companie  of  our  admirall.

The  eleventh  we  which  were  in  the  Hugh  Gallant
put  into  a  bay  which  standeth  in  12  degrees  f,  in
which  bay  wee  found  a  river  of  fresh  water  about
eight  of  the  clocke  at  night ;  and  though  we  were  but
of  small  force,  and  no  more  but  one  barke  and  18
men  in  it,  yet  wee  went  on  shoare  to  fill  water  ;
where  having  filled  one  boates  lading,  while  our  boate
was  in  going  aboord,  two  or  three  of  our  companie
which  were  on  shoare,  as  they  were  going  a  little  from
the  watering  place  with  their  furniture  about  them,
espied  where  there  were  foure  or  five  hundred  bagges
of  meale  on  an  heape  covered  with  a  fewe  reedes.  So
that  night  we  filled  water  and  tooke  as  much  meale  as
wee  thought  good  :  which  fell  out  well  for  us  that
were  then  lost  and  stoode  in  neede  of  victuals  :  and
by  breake  of  day  in  the  morning  wee  came  aboord,
and  there  stayed  and  rode  untill  the  afternoone.  In
which  meane  time  the  towne  seeing  us  ride  there  still,
brought  downe  much  cattell  to  the  sea  side  to  have
intised  us  to  come  on  shoare :  but  wee  sawe  their  intent,
and  weyed  anker  and  departed  the  twelft  day.

310

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1587.

The  13  day  at  night  wee  put  into  a  bay  which  J  bay  in  <).
standeth  in  9  degrees  and  J,  where  wee  sawe  horsemen  :  ^^s:''^^^  ^^"^  ^s-
and  that  night  wee  landed,  namely,  M.  Bruer  Captaine,
my  selfe  Francis  Pretie,  Arthur  Warford,  John  Way  -^"^^  ^^"i  ^
Preacher,  John  Newman,  Andrew  Wyght,  William  P''^"^'^"'-
Gargefield,  and  Henry  Hilliard.  And  we  8  onely,
having  every  man  his  harquebuze  and  his  furniture
about  him,  marched  three  quarters  of  a  mile  along  the
sea  side,  where  wee  found  a  boate  of  five  or  sixe  tunnes
haled  up  drie  on  the  shoare  about  a  cables  length  from
the  water  :  and  with  extreme  labour  wee  lanched  the
barke  ;  when  it  was  on  flote,  Captaine  Bruer  and  I
went  in,  while  the  rest  of  our  companie  were  fetching
their  things  :  but  suddenly  it  was  readie  to  sinke  :  And
the  Captaine  and  I  stoode  up  to  the  knees  lading  out
water  with  our  targets  ;  but  it  sunke  downe  faster  then
wee  were  able  to  free  it,  insomuch  as  in  the  end  wee
had  much  adoe  to  save  our  selves  from  drowning.
When  wee  were  out,  wee  stood  in  great  feare  that  our
owne  boate  wherein  wee  came  on  shoare  was  sunke  :
for  wee  could  no  where  see  it.  Howbeit  the  Captaine
commanded  them  to  keepe  it  off,  for  feare  of  the  great
surge  that  went  by  the  shoare.  Yet  in  the  end  wee
spied  it,  and  went  aboord  by  two  and  two,  and  were
driven  to  wade  up  to  the  arme-holes  60  paces  into  the
sea  before  wee  could  get  into  the  boate,  by  reason  of
the  shoaldnesse  :  and  then  departed  the  foureteenth  day
in  the  morning.

The  16  wee  tooke  with  the  Hugh  Gallant,  being  but
sixteene men of  us in it,  a great  shippe which  came  ^  ^^^P  ofl^^
from Guaianil, which was called  The Lewis, and was  ^T/^'^^tj"^^
of  the  burthen  of  three  hundred  tuns,  having  foure  and  houres  fisht.
twentie  men  in it, wherein  was  pilot one Gonsalvo de
Ribas,  whom  wee  carried  along with us, and a  Negro
called  Emmanuel. The  shippe  was  laden  with nothing
but  timber  and  victuals  : wherefore  wee  left  her  seven  5^2'^w  degrees
leagues from the land very  leake and ready to sinke  V^J>^^J^^^V
in  7  degrees  to  the  Southward  of  the  line  : wee  sunke

311

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

her boate and tooke away her foresaile and certaine

victuals.

They  met  The 1 7 of  May  wee met  with our  admirall againe,

theu-fleete ^^^ ^ ^^ j-gg^ ^f  q^j. flge^ie. They had taken two

Two  rick  ships  ^hips,  the one laden with sugar, molosses, maiz, Cor-

taken.  dovan-skinnes, montego de Porco, many packes of

pintados, many Indian coates, and some marmalade,

and 1000 hennes  : and the other ship  was laden with

One  shippe wheate-meale, and boxes of  marmalade. One of  these

worth  20000  ships  which  had  the  chiefe  marchandise  in  it,  was  worth

i'°^^  ^-  twentie  thousand  pounds,  if  it  had  bene  in  England  or

in any  other place of Christendome where wee might

have solde it. Wee filled all our  ships  with  as much

as  wee  could  bestow  of  these  goods  : the  rest  wee  burnt

and the ships  also  ; and  set  the  men and  women  that

were  not  killed  on  shoare.

The  bay  of  The  20  day  in  the  morning  wee  came into  the  road

Patta  z«  5 Qf  Paita,  and being at an anker,  our  Generall landed

eg7eesii^ in.  ^-^^ sixtie or seventie men, skirmished with them of

the  towne,  and  drave  them  all  to flight to the top  of

the  hill  which is over  the  towne, except a few slaves

and some other  which  were of the meaner sort, who

were commanded by  the  governours to stay  below in

A  new  fort  in  the towne, at  a place which is in building  for  a fort,

building.  having  with them a bloodie ensigne, being  in  number

about one hundred men. Nowe as wee  were rowing

betweene  the  ships  and  the  shoare,  our  gunner  shot  off

a  great  peece  out  of  one  of  the  barkes,  and  the  shot  fel

among  them,  and  drave  them  to  flie from the fort as

fast  as  they  might  runne,  who  got  them  up  upon  an  hill,

and  from thence  shot  among  us  with their small shot.

The  towne  of  After  wee  were landed and had taken the towne, wee

Paita  taken ^^^ upon them, and chased them so fiercely up the

hilles for the space of  an houre that wee  drave them

in  the  ende  away  perforce,  and  being  got  up  the  hilles,

wee found where they had layd all their stuffe which

they  had brought out of the towne,  and had hidden

it there upon the mountaines. We also found the

312

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1587.
quantitie  of  25  pounds  weight  in  silver  in  pieces  of  ^^  pounds
eight  rials,  and  abundance  of  houshold  stuffe  and  store-  "^fW^  ^'^

o  '  StlVCT

houses full of  all kinde of  wares  : but our Generall

would not suffer any man to carrie much cloth or

apparell  away,  because  they  should  not  cloy  themselves

with  burthens  : for  hee  knew  not  whether  our enemies

were  provided  with furniture  according to the number

of  their men  : for  they  were  five  men  to one of  us  :

and  wee  had  an  English  mile  and  an  halfe  to  our  ships.

Thus  wee  came  downe  in  safetie  to  the  towne,  which  was  [III.  812.]

very  well  builded,  and  marvellous  cleane  kept  in  every

streete,  with  a  towne-house  or  Guild  hall  in  the  middest,

and  had  to  the  number  of  two  hundred  houses  at  the  least  ^-^f  ^"^^^  '^f

in  it. Wee  set  it  on  fire  to  the  ground,  and  goods  to  the  ^^^^^^^^^^oo

o  -^  o  houses  IH  tt,

value  of  five  or  sixe  thousand  pounds  :  there  was  also  a  jbarkese'ton
barke riding in the roade  which wee set on fire,  and  fire.
departed,  directing  our  course  to  the  Hand  of  Puna.

The  25  day  of  May  wee  arrived  at  the  Hand  of  Puna,  The  Hand  of

where  is  a  very  good  harbour,  where  wee  found  a  great ,^  ■Within  i

J <D  '  _  D  dest'ee  the

shippe  of  the  burthen  of  250  tunnes  riding  at  an  anker  Equinoctial  to
with  all  her  furniture,  which  was  readie  to  bee  haled  on  the  South.
ground : for there is a speciall good place for that  ^  great  ^hip
purpose. Wee sunke it, and went on shoare where  ^"■^^t.
the lord of  the Hand dwelt,  which  was by  the waters
side,  who  had  a  sumptuous  house  marvellous  well  con-
trived with very many singular good roomes and
chambers  in  it :  and  out  of  every  chamber  was  framed  a
gallerie  with  a  stately  prospect  into  the  sea  on  the  one
side, and into the Hand on the other side, with a
marvellous  great  hall  below,  and  a  very  great  storehouse
at  the  one  ende  of  the  hall,  which  was  filled  with  botijas
of  pitch  and  bash  to  make  cables  withall :  for  the  most  Great  store  of
part  of  the  cables  in  the  South  sea  are  made  upon  that  ^^^^-^  ^'^^'^  ^^
Iland. This great Casique doth make  all the Indians
upon  the  Hand  to  worke  and  to  drudge  for  him :  and  hee
himselfe  is  an  Indian  borne,  but  is  married  to  a  marvellous
faire  woman  which  is  a  Spaniard,  by  reason  of  his  pleasant
habitation  and  of  his  great  wealth.

313

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

This  Spanish  woman  his  wife  is  honoured  as  a  Queene
in  the  Hand,  and  never  goeth  on  the  ground  upon  her
feete :  but  holdeth  it  too  base  a  thing  for  her :  But
when  her  pleasure  is  to  take  the  ayre,  or  to  goe  abroad,
shee  is  alwayes  carried  in  a  shadowe  like  unto  an  horse-
litter  upon  foure  mens  shoulders,  with  a  veile  or  canopie
over  her  for  the  sunne  or  the  winde,  having  her  gentle-
women still  attending  about  her  with  a  great  troope  of  the
best  men  of  the  Hand  with  her.  But  both  shee  and  the
lorde  of  the  Hand  with  all  the  Indians  in  the  towne  were
newly  fled  out  of  the  Hand  before  wee  could  get  to  an
anker,  by  reason  wee  were  becalmed  before  wee  could
get  in,  and  were  gone  over  unto  the  maine  lande,
having  carried  away  with  them  to  the  summe  of
1 00000  crownes,  which  wee  knew  by  a  captaine  of  the
Hand  an  Indian,  which  was  left  there  with  some  other
upon  the  Hand  under  him,  whom  wee  had  taken  at
sea  as  wee  were  comming  into  the  road,  being  in  a
balsa  or  canoa  for  a  spie  to  see  what  wee  were.

The  27  our  General  himselfe  with  certaine  shot  and
some  targettiers  went  over  into  the  maine  unto  the
place  where  this  foresayde  Indian  captaine  which  wee
had  taken  had  tolde  us  that  the  Casique,  which  was
the  lord  of  all  the  Hand,  was  gone  unto,  and  had  caried
all  his  treasure  with  him  :  but  at  our  comming  to  the
place  which  wee  went  to  lande  at,  wee  found  newly
arrived  there  foure  or  five  great  balsas,  which  were  laden
with  plantans,  bags  of  meale,  and  many  other  kinds  of
victuals.  Our  Generall  marvelled  what  they  were  and
what  they  meant,  asking  the  Indian  guide  and  command-
ing him  to  speake  the  trueth  upon  his  life  :  being  then
bound  fast,  hee  answered  being  very  much  abashed,  as
well  as  our  companie  were,  that  hee  neither  knewe  from
whence  they  should  come,  nor  who  they  should  bee  :
for  there  was  never  a  man  in  any  one  of  the  balsas  :
and  because  hee  had  told  our  Generall  before,  that  it
was  an  easie  matter  to  take  the  sayd  Casique  and  all
his treasure,  and that there were but three or foure

314

CANDISH'S CIUCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1587.

houses  standing  in  a  desert  place  and  no  resistance,  and
that  if  hee  found  it  not  so,  hee  should  hang  him.
Againe  being  demaunded  to  speake  upon  his  life  what
hee  thought  these  Balsas  should  bee,  hee  answered  that
hee  coulde  not  say  from  whence  they  should  come,
except  it  were  to  bring  60  souldiers,  which  hee  did
heare  were  to  go  to  a  place  called  Guaiaquil,  which  ^-^^  ^"^"f  "f
was  about  6  leagues  from  the  saide  yland,  where  two  ^^^'^i^^l-
or  three  of  the  kings  shippes  were  on  the  stocks  in
building,  where  are  continually  an  hundred  souldiers  in
garisons  who  had  heard  of  us,  and  had  sent  for  sixtie
more  for  feare  of  burning  of  the  shippes  and  towne.
Our  Generall  not  any  whit  discouraged  either  at  the
sight  of  the  balsas  unlooked  for,  or  for  hearing  of  the
threescore  souldiers  not  untill  then  spoken  of,  with  a
brave  courage  animating  his  companie  in  the  exployte,
went  presently  forward,  being  in  the  night  in  a  most
desert  path  in  the  woods,  untill  such  time  as  hee  came
to  the  place;  where,  as  it  seemed,  they  had  kept  watch
either  at  the  waters  side,  or  at  the  houses,  or  else  at
both,  and  were  newly  gone  out  of  the  houses,  having
so  short  warning,  that  they  left  the  meate  both  boyling
and  rosting  at  the  fire  and  were  fledde  with  their  trea-
sure with  them,  or  else  buried  it  where  it  could  not  bee
found,  being  also  in  the  night.  Our  companie  tooke
hennes  and  such  things  as  wee  thought  good,  and
came  away.

The  29  day  of  May  our  Generall  went  in  the ship-  A  little  Hand
boate  into  a  little  Hand  there  by,  whereas  the  sayd  Casique  ^^^^  "'"^° "
which was  the lord  of  Puna,  had  caused all  the  hang-
ings of  his  chambers,  which  were  of  cordovan  leather  all
guilded  over,  and  painted  very  faire  and rich,  with  all
his houshold stuffe, and all the ships tackling which
was  riding  in  the  road  at  our  comming  in,  with  great
store of  nailes, spikes of  yron,  and very many other  [in.  813.]
things to be conveyed : all which wee found, and
brought  away  what our Generall  thought  requisite for
the  ships  businesse.

315

A.D.

1587.

The  He  of
Puna  is  almost
as  big  as  the
lie  of  Wight.

Cotton  trees.

An  excellent
orchard.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

This  Hand  is  very  pleasant  for  all  things  requisite,  and
fruitful :  but  there  are  no  mines  of  gold  nor  silver  in
it.  There  are  at  the  least  200  houses  in  the  towne
about  the  Casiques  pallace,  and  as  many  in  one  or  two
townes  more  upon  the  Hand,  which  is  almost  as  bigge
as  the  He  of  Wight  in  England.  There  is  planted  on
the  one  side  of  the  Casiques  house  a  faire  garden,  with
all  herbes  growing  in  it,  and  at  the  lower  end  a  well
of  fresh  water,  and  round  about  it  are  trees  set,  whereon
bombasin  cotton  groweth  after  this  maner :  The  tops
of  the  trees  grow  full  of  cods,  out  of  which  the  cotton
groweth,  and  in  the  cotton  is  a  seede  of  the  bignesse
of  a  pease,  and  in  every  codde  there  are  seven  or  eight
of  these  seedes :  and  if  the  cotton  bee  not  gathered
when  it  is  ripe,  then  these  seedes  fall  from  it,  and
spring  againe.

There  are  also  in  this  garden  fig-trees  which  beare
continually,  also  pompions,  melons,  cucumbers,  radishes,
rosemarie  and  thyme,  with  many  other  herbes  and  fruits.
At  the  other  end  of  the  house  there  is  also  another
orchard,  where  grow  orenges  sweete  and  sower,  lim-
mons,  pomegranates  and  lymes,  with  divers  other
fruits.

There  is  very  good  pasture  ground  in  this  Hand ;
and  withall  many  horses,  oxen,  bullockes,  sheepe  very
fat  and  faire,  great  store  of  goates  which  be  very  tame,
and  are  used  continually  to  bee  milked.  They  have
moreover  abundance  of  pigeons,  turkeys,  and  ducks  of
a  marvellous  bignesse.

There  was  also  a  very  large  and  great  church  hard  by
the  Casiques  house,  whither  hee  caused  all  the  Indians
in  the  Hand  to  come  and  heare  masse :  for  he  himselfe
was  made  a  Christian  when  he  was  maried  to  the  Spanish
woman  before  spoken  of,  and  upon  his  conversion  he
caused  the  rest  of  his  subjects  to  be  Christened.  In
this  church  was  an  high  altar  with  a  crucifixe,  and  five
belles  hanging  in  the  nether  end  thereof.  We  burnt
the  church  and  brought  the  belles  away.

316

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1587.

By  this  time  wee  had  haled  on  ground  our  admirall,  The  second
and  had  made  her  cleane,  burnt  her  keele,  pitched  and  S^^f^^S"/
tarred  her,  and  had  haled  her  on  flote  againe. And  in "''  ^  ^^^'
the  meane  while  continually  kept  watch  and  ward  in  the
great  house  both  night  and  day.

The  second  day  of  June  in  the  morning,  by  and  by
after  breake  of  day,  every  one  of  the  watch  being  gone
abroad  to  seeke  to  fetch  in  victuals,  some  one  way,  some
another, some for hennes, some for sheepe, some for
goats,  upon  the sudden there came down  upon  us  an
hundred  Spanish  souldiers  with  muskets  and  an  ensigne,
which  were  landed  on  the  other  side  of  the  Hand  that
night,  and  all  the  Indians  of  the  Hand  with  them,  every
one  with  weapons  and  their  baggage  after  them :  which
was  by  meanes  of  a  Negro,  whose  name  was  Emmanuel,
which fled from us at our first landing there. Thus
being  taken at advantage we had the  worst : for our  The  first
companie  was  not  past  sixteene  or  twentie ;  whereof  they  ^^^^'""h  with
had  slaine one or two before they were come to the  ^^^  ^P^"^^^"^^-
houses :  yet  we  skirmished  with  them  an  houre  and  an
halfe : at  the  last being sore overcharged with multi-
tudes, we were driven down from the hill to the
waters  side,  and  there  kept  them  play  a  while,  until  in
the  end  Zacharie  Saxie,  who  with  his  halberd  had  kept  Zacharie
the  way  of  the  hill,  and  slaine  a  couple  of  them,  as  hee  ^^^^^  ^^^^^^
breathed  himselfe  being  somewhat  tired,  had  an  honour-  ^°^°^^^h'
able  death  and  a  short : for  a  shot  strooke  him  to  the
heart :  who  feeling  himselfe  mortally  wounded  cryed  to
God for mercie, and fell downe presently dead. But
soone  after the enemie was driven somewhat to retire
from the bankes side  to the  greene :  and  in  the  ende
our  boate  came  and  carried  as  many  of  our  men  away
as could goe in her,  which was in hazard of  sinking
while  they  hastened  into  it :  And  one  of  our  men  whose
name  was  Robert  Maddocke  was  shot  through  the  head  Robert  Mad-
with  his  owne  peece,  being  a  snap-hance,  as  hee  was  hast-  ^"^'^  ^^^'^'^^
ing  into  the  boate. But  foure  of  us  were  left  behinde  "^/f  ^''  '"""'
which the boate could not carrie : to wit, my selfe

317

A.D.
1587.

46  Spa7itards
and  Indians
slaine.

[III.  814.]
The  second
skirmish  with
the  Spaniards.

The  chiefe
towne  in  Puna
burnt.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Francis  Pretie,  Thomas  Andrewes,  Steven  Gunner,  and
Richard  Rose :  which  had  our  shot  readie  and  retired
our  selves  unto  a  cliffe,  untill  the  boate  came  apaine,
which  was  presently  after  they  had  carried  the  rest
abourd.  There  were  sixe  and  fortie  of  the  enemies
slaine  by  us,  whereof  they  had  dragged  some  into
bushes,  and  some  into  olde  houses,  which  wee  found
afterward. Wee  lost  twelve  men  in  maner  following.

1  Zacharie  Saxie,

2  Neales  Johnson,

3  William  Geirgifield, \  Slaine  by  the  enemie.

4  Nicolas  Hendie,

5  Henry  Cooper,

1  Robert  Maddocke,  killed  with  his  peece.

2  Henry  Mawdly,  burnt.

1  Edward  the  gunners  man,

2  Ambrose  the  musitian,

1  Walter  Tilliard,

2  Edward  Smith,

3  Henry  Aselye,

They  arrived
at  Puna  the
25  of  May.

drowned.

taken  prisoners.

The  selfe  same  day  being  the  second  of  June,  we  went
on  shoare  againe  with  seventie  men,  and  had  a  fresh  skir-
mish with  the  enemies,  and  drave  them  to  retire,  being  an
hundred  Spaniards  serving  with  muskets,  and  two  hun-
dred Indians  with  bowes,  arrowes  and  darts.  This  done,
wee  set  fire  on  the  towne  and  burnt  it  to  the  ground,
having  in  it  to  the  number  of  three  hundred  houses :
and  shortly  after  made  havocke  of  their  fieldes,  orchards
and  gardens,  and  burnt  foure  great  ships  more  which
were  in  buildins:  on  the  stockes.

The  third  of  June  the  Content  which  was  our  vice-
admirall  was  haled  on  ground,  to  grave  at  the  same
place  in  despight  of  the  Spaniards :  and  also  our  pinnesse
which the  Spaniards  had  burned,  was  new  trimmed.

The  fift  day  of  June  wee  departed  out  of  the  roade
of Puna, where wee had remained eleven dayes, and

318

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

'587.
turned  up  for  a  place  which  is  called  Rio  dolce,  where
wee  watered :  at which place  also  wee  sunke  our  rere-
admirall called The Hugh Gallant for want  of  men,  T'he  Hugh
being  a  barke  of  fortie  tunnes.  Gallant  a

The  tenth  day  of  the  same  moneth  wee  set  the  Indians  tms^sunke.
on  shoare,  which  we  had  taken  before  in  a  balsa  as  we
were  comming  into  the  road  of  Puna.

The eleventh day wee departed from the  sayd Rio  Rio  dolce.
dolce.

The  twelft  of  June  wee  doubled  the  Equinoctial  line,
and  continued  our  course Northwarde  all  that  moneth.

The  first  of  Julie  wee  had  sight  of  the  coast  of  Nueva
Espanna,  being  foure  leagues  distant  from  land  in  the
latitude  of  ten  degrees  to  the  Northward  of  the  line.

The ninth of  Julie wee tooke a new ship of  the
burthen  of  1 20  tunnes,  wherein  was  one  Michael  Sancius,
whom our Generall tooke  to  serve his  turne to  water
along  the  coast : for hee was one  of  the best coasters
in the South sea. This Michael Sancius was a Pro-  Michael
vensal,  borne in Marseils, and was the first man  that  Sancius  a
tolde us newes of the great ship called The Santa  ^''''''^'''''■
Anna,  which wee afterward tooke comming from the
Philippinas.

There  were  sixe  men  more  in  this new shippe : we  ^  great  new
tooke her  sailes,  her  ropes,  and  firewood,  to  serve  our  ^^^^  burnt.
turnes,  set  her  on  fire,  and  kept  the  men.

The  tenth  we tooke  another  barke  which  was  going  The  second
with advise  of  us and our ships all along  the  coast,  barkeof advise
as  Michael  Sancius  tolde  us : but  all the  companie  that  ^'^  ^^'
were in the barke were fledde on shoare. None  of
both these ships had any goods in  them. For they
came  both  from  Sonsonate  in  the  province  of  Guatimala ;  Sonsonate  in
the new shippe,  for feare  we should  have  taken  her  in  ^j^^ province  of

,1  J  i iU u 1  ^  •  r  1  Guatimala.

the road,  and the barke, to  carrie newes or  us  along

the  coast ;  which  barke  also  wee  set  on  fire.  Abarkebumt.

The 26 day of  July wee  came  to an anker  at 10
fathoms  in  the  river  of  Copalita,  where  wee  made  account  The  river  of
to  water. And the  same  night  wee  departed with 30  Copalita.

319

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.
Aguatulco  in men in the  pinnesse,  and  rowed  to  Aguatulco,  which  is
1 5  degrees  and  ^^^  ^^q  leagues from  the  aforesayd  river ;  and  standeth
N'orihzvard. ^" ^5 ^^^g^ees 40 minutes to the Northward of  the
Equinoctial  line.

The  27  in  the  morning  by  the  breake  of  day  wee  came

Abarkebunit.  into  the  roade  of  Aguatulco,  where  wee  found  a  barke  of

50  tunnes,  which  was  come  from Sonsonate  laden  with

Anile.  cacaos  and  anile which  they  had  there landed: and  the

Azmtulco  a "^^" ^^^^ "^ ^^^ °^  shoare. Wee landed  there, and

towne  of  \oo burnt  their towne,  with the church  and custome-house

houses  burnt, which  was  very  faire  and  large  :  in  which  house  were  600

bags  of  anile  to  dye  cloth ;  every  bag  whereof  was  worth

40  crownes,  and  400  bags  of  cacaos : every  bag  whereof

Cacaos  goe  for  is  worth  ten  crownes. These  cacaos  goe  among  them  for

money  in meate  and  money. For  1 50  of  them  are  in  value  one  rial  of

Estanna  pl^te  in  ready  payment.  They  are  very  like  unto  an  almond,

but  are  nothing  so  pleasant  in  taste  : they  eate  them,  and

make  drinke  of  them. This  the  owner  of  the  shippe  tolde

us. I  found  in  this  towne  before  wee  burnt  it,  a  flasket

full  of  boxes  of  balme. After  we  had  spoyled  and  burnt

the  towne,  wherein  there  were  some  hundred houses, the

owner  of  the  shippe came downe  out  of  the  hilles  with

a flag  of  truce  unto us,  which before  with the  rest  of

all  the  townesmen  was  run  away  at  our  first  comming;

and  at  length  came  abourd  our  pinnesse  upon  Captaine

Havers  worde  of  safe  returne. We  carried  him  to  the

river  of  Copalita  where  our  shippes  rode  : and  when  hee

came  to  our  Generall,  hee  caused  him  to  bee  set  on  shoare

in safetie the  same night, because hee came upon  the

captaines  word.

The 28 day  we set  saile  from Copalita, because  the

sea  was  so  great  there,  that  wee  could  not  fill  water,  and

ran  the  same  night  into  the  roade  of  Aguatulco.

Our  Generall The 29 our Generall landed and went on shoare

entredtwo yf^\\}ci thirtie men two  miles  into  the  woods,  where  wee

maine  land tooke  a  Mestizo,  whose  name  was  Michael  de  Truxillo,

with  30  men. who  was customer of  that towne,  and  wee  found  with

him  two  chambers  full of  his stuff^e: wee  brought  him

320

A.D.

1587.

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION

and  his  stufFe  abourd.  And  whereas  I  say  he  was  a
Mestizo,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  a  Mestizo  is  one
which  hath  a  Spaniard  to  his  father  and  an  Indian  to
his  mother.

The  second  day  of  August,  we  had  watered,  and
examined  the  said  Mestizo,  and  set  him  on  shore
againe  and  departed  from  the  port  of  Aguatulco  the
same  night,  which  standeth  as  I  sayd  before  in  15  degrees
and  40  minuts  to  the  Northward  of  the  lyne.

Here  wee  overslipped  the  haven  of  Acapulco,  from
whence  the  shippes  are  set  foorth  for  the  Philippinas.

The  foure  and  twentieth  day  of  August,  our  Generall
with  30  of  us  went  with  the  pinnesse  unto  an  haven  called
Puerto  de  Natividad,  where  wee  had  intelligence  by
Michael  Sancius  that  there  should  bee  a  pinnesse,  but
before  wee  could  get  thither  the  sayde  pinnesse  was  gone
to  fish  for  pearles  1 2  leagues  farther,  as  we  were  informed
by  certaine  Indians  which  we  found  there.  We  tooke  a
mullato  in  this  place,  in  his  bedde,  which  was  sent  with
letters  of  advise  concerning  us  along  the  coast,  of  Nueva
Galicia,  whose  horse  wee  killed,  tooke  his  letters,  left  him
behinde,  set  fire  on  the  houses,  and  burnt  two  newe
shippes  of  200  tunnes  the  piece,  which  were  in  building
there  on  the  stockes,  and  came  abourd  of  our  shippes
againe.

The  sixe  and  twentie  day  of  August,  wee  came  into  the
bay  of  S.  lago,  where  wee  watered  at  a  fresh  River,  along
which  river  many  plantans  are  growing:  here  is  great
abundance  of  fresh  fish.  Heere  also  certaine  of  our
companie  dragged  for  pearles  and  caught  some  quantitie. Pearles  taken

The  second  of  September  wee  departed  from  Sant  lago
at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  evening.  This  bay  of  Sant
lago  standeth  in  nineteene  degrees  and  eighteene  minuts
to  the  Northward  of  the  lyne.

The  3  of  September  wee  arrived  in  a  litle  bay  a  league

to  the  Westwarde  off  Port  de  Natividad  called  Malacca,

which  is  a  very  good  place  to  ride  in :  and  the  same  day

about  twelve of  the clocke our Generall landed with

XI  321  X

[III.  815.]

Ou7- departure
from  Agua-
tulco.

Puerto  de
Natividad  in
19  degrees.

The  third poste

of  advise

taken.

Puerto  de

Natividad

burnt.

Two  new  ships

burnt.

The  river  of
Sant  lago.

The  bay  of
Malacca

A.D.
1587.

The  towne  of
Acatlanburnt.

The  road  of
Chaccalla.

The  Isle  of
Sant  Andrew.

1  guanos  good
meate.

Massatlan  in
23  degrees,
and  an  halfe.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

thirtie  men  or  there  about,  and  went  up  to  a  towne  of
Indians  which  was  two  leagues  from  the  road,  which
towne  is  called  Acatlan  :  there  were  in  it  about  20  or  30
houses  and  a  Church,  which  we  defaced  and  came  abourd
againe  the  same  night.  All  the  people  were  fled  out  of
the  towne  at  the  sight  of  us.

The  fourth  of  September,  wee  departed  from  the  roadc
of  Malacca,  and sayled  along  the  coast.

The  8  we  came  to  the  roade  of  Chaccalla,  in  which  bay-
there  are  two  litle  houses  by  the  waters  side.  This  bay
is 18 leagues  from  the  Cape  de los  Corrientes.

The  9  in  the  morning  our  Generall  sent  up  Captaine
Havers  with  fortie  men  of  us  before  day,  and  Michael
Sancius  being  our  guide,  wee  went  unto  a  place  about
two  leagues  up  into  the  countrey  in  a  most  villainous
desart  path  through  the  woods  and  wildernesse:  and  in
the  ende  we  came  to  a  place  where  wee  tooke  three
housholders  with  their  wives  and  children  and  some
Indians,  one  carpenter  which  was  a  Spaniard,  and  a
Portugall,  wee  bound  them  all  and  made  them  to  come
to  the  sea  side  with  us.

Our  Generall  made  their  wives  to  fetch  us  Plantans,
Lymmons,  and  Oranges,  Pine-aples  and  other  fruites
whereof  they  had  abundance,  and  so  let  their  husbandes
depart,  except  Sembrano  the  Spanish  Carpenter,  and
Diego  the  Portugal  ;  and  the  tenth  day  wee  departed  the
roade.

The  twelfth  day  wee  arrived  at  a  little  Island  called  the
Isle  of  Sant  Andrewe,  on  which  there  is  great  store
of  fowle  and  wood :  where  wee  dryed  and  salted  as  many
of  the  fowles  as  we  thought  good :  wee  also  killed  there
abundance  of  seales,  and  Iguanos  which  are  a  kinde  of
Serpents,  with  foure  feete,  and  a  long  sharpe  tayle,
strange  to  them  which  have  not  seene  them ;  but  they
are  very  good  meate.  Wee  ridde  here  untill  the  seven-
teenth day,  at  which  time  wee  departed.

The  24  day  wee  arrived  in  the  roade  of  Massatlan,
which  standeth  in  23  degrees  \^  just  under  the  Tropicke

322

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1587.
of  Cancer :  It  is  a  very  great  river  within,  but  it  is  barred
at  the  mouth :  and  upon  the  North  side  of  the  barre
without,  is  good  fresh  water :  but  there  is  very  evill
fiUing  of  it ;  because  at  a  lowe  water  it  is  shoald  halfe  a
mile  off  the  shoare.  There  is  great  store  of  fresh  fish  in
that  bay :  and  good  fruites  up  into  the  countrey,  whereof
wee  had  some,  though  not  without  danger.

The seven  and  twentieth  day  of  September,  wee  de-
parted from  the  roade  of  Massatlan  and  ran  to  an  island  -^^  "^'^"'^  "■
which  is  a  league  to  the  Northward the  sayd Massatlan,  ^^^^  ^J^^^'
where wee trimmed our ships and new built our  Massatlan.
pinnesse : and there is a litle island a quarter of  a
league  from it, on  which  are  seales :  where a Spanish  T"^^  escape  of
prisoner,  whose  name  was  Domingo,  being  sent  to  wash  °^^ J^^J^^SPy
shirtes  with  one  of  our  men  to  keep  him,  made  a  scape,
&  swam  to  the  maine,  which  was  an  English  mile  distant :
at which place we had seen 30 or 40 Spaniards &
Indians, which were  horsemen, and kept watch there,  [HI.  816.]
which  came  from  a  towne  called  Chiametla,  which  was 1 1 CUametla.
leagues  up  into  the  countrey,  as  Michael  Sancius  told  us.
We found upon the island where we trimmed our
pinnesse,  fresh  water  by  the  assistance  of  God  in  that  our
great neede by digging two or three foote deepe  in
the  sande, where  no  water  nor  signe  of  water  was  before
to  be  perceived. Otherwise  we  had  gone  backe  20  or  30
leagues  to  water :  which might  have  bene  occasion  that
we  might  have  missed  our  prey  wee  had  long  wayted  for.
But  God  raysed  one  Flores  a  Spaniard,  which  was  also  a
prisoner  with  us,  to  make  a  motion  to  digge  in  the  sands.
Now our Generall having had experience  ones before
of  the  like,  commanded  to put  his  motion  in  practise,
and  in  digging  three  foote  deepe  wee  found  very  good  Fresh  water
and  fresh  water. So we  watered  our  ships,  and  might  '^^  ^  °^.  3fi°^^
have  filled  a  thousand tunnes  more,  if  we  had  would, f^^j  ^"  ^  ^

We  stayed  in  this  island  untill  the  9  day  of  October,
at  which  time  we  departed  at  night  for  the  cape  of
S.  Lucar,  which  is  on  the  West  side  of  the  point  of
California.

323

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1587.

The  cape  of  S.  Xhe  14  of  October  we  fell  with  the  cape  of  S.  Lucar,

Lucar  on  the  -^^ich  cape  is  very  like  the  Needles  at  the  isle  of  Wight ;

potnt  of  Call-  ,./.,-'.,  .  ,  11 1 1  1

fQj-fiia,  and  Within  the  said cape is  a  great bay  called by  the

Aguada  Spaniards  Aguada  Segura : into  which  bay  falleth  a  faire

Segura.  fresh river,  about  which many  Indians use to keepe :

wee  watered  in  the  river  and  lay  off  and  on  from  the

saide  cape  of  S. Lucar  untill  the  fourth  of  November,

and  had  the  windes  hanging  still  Westerly.

The 4 of November the Desire and the Content,

wherein  were  the  number  of  Englishmen

onely  living, beating  up  and  downe  upon  the  headland

California  in of  California, which  standeth in 23 degrees  and  f  to

z'3,  degrees  and  ^j^^  Northward, betwene  seven  and 8 of  the clocke  in

two  thirds.  ,  .  r 1  r  \ i • 11

the  morning  one  or  the  company  or  our  Admiral!
which  was  the  trumpeter  of  the  ship  going  up  into
the  top  espied  a  sayle  bearing  in  from  the  sea  with
the  cape,  whereupon  hee  cryed  out  with  no  small  joy
to  himselfe  and  the  whole  company,  A  sayle,  A  sayle,
with  which  cheerefull  word  the  master  of  the  ship  and
divers  others  of  the  company  went  also  up  into  the
maine  top,  who  perceiving  the  speech  to  be  very  true
gave  information  unto  our  General!  of  these  happy  newes,
who  was  no  lesse  glad  then  the  cause  required :  where-
upon he  gave  in  charge  presently  unto  the  whole  com-
pany to  put  all  things  in  readines,  which  being  performed
we  gave  them  chase  some  3  or  4  houres,  standing  with
The  fight  our  best  advantage  and  working  for  the  winde.  In  the
betweene  the  afternoone  we  gat  up  unto  them,  giving  them  the  broad
\yi^ ^^'  '  side  with  our  great  ordinance  and  a  volee  of  small  shot,
and  presently  layed  the  ship  aboord,  whereof  the  king
of  Spaine  was  owner,  which  was  Admiral  of  the  south
sea,  called  the  S.  Anna,  &  thought  to  be  700  tunnes
in  burthen.  Now  as  we  were  ready  on  their  ships  side
to  enter  her,  being  not  past  50  or  60  men  at  the  utter-
most in  our  ship,  we  perceived  that  the  Captaine  of  the
said  ship  had  made  fights  fore  and  after,  and  layd  their
sailes  close  on  their  poope,  their  mid  ship,  with  their
fore  castle,  and  having not  one  man  to  be  seene,  stood

324

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1587.
close  under  their  fights,  with  lances,  javelings,  rapiers,
&  targets,  &  an  innumerable  sort  of  great  stones,  which
they  threw  overboord  upon  our  heads  and  into  our
ship  so  fast  and  being  so  many  of  them,  that  they  put
us  off  the  shippe  againe,  with  the  losse  of  2  of  our
men  which  were  slaine,  &  with  the  hurting  of  4  or  5.
But  for  all  this  we  new  trimmed  our  sailes,  and  fitted  The  second
every  man  his  furniture,  and  gave  them  a  fresh  encounter  ^^'^(>^^^^^-
with  our  great  ordinance  and  also  with  our  small  shot,
raking  them  through  and  through,  to  the  killing  and
maiming  of  many  of  their  men.  Their  Captaine  still
like  a  valiant  man  with  his  company  stood  very  stoutely
unto  his  close  fights,  not  yeelding  as  yet :  Our  General  1'^^  third
encouraging  his  men  a  fresh  with  the  whole  noyse  of  ^^'^°^^t^^-
trumpets  gave  them  the  third  encounter  with  our  great
ordinance  and  all  our  small  shot  to  the  great  discom-
forting of  our  enemies  raking  them  through  in  divers
places,  killing  and  spoiling  many  of  their  men.  They
being  thus  discomforted  and  spoiled,  and  their  shippe
being  in  hazard  of  sinking  by  reason  of  the  great  shot
which  were  made,  wherof  some  were  under  water,  within
5  or  6  houres  fight  set  out  a  flagge  of  truce  and  The  great  8.
parled  for  mercy,  desiring  our  Generall  to  save  their  ^^^^y^^^'^^^h.
lives  and  to  take  their  goods,  and  that  they  would  pre-
sently yeeld.  Our  Generall  of  his  goodnes  promised
them  mercy,  and  willed  them  to  strike  their  sayles,  and
to  hoyse  out  their  boate  and  to  come  aboord :  which
newes  they  were  ful  glad  to  heare  of,  and  presently
strooke  their  sailes,  hoysed  their  boat  out,  and  one  of
their  cheife  marchants  came  aboord  unto  our  Generall :
and  falling  downe  upon  his  knees,  offered  to  have  kissed
our  Generals  feete,  and  craved  mercie  :  our  General  most
graciously  pardoned  both  him  and  the  rest  upon  promise
of  their  true  dealing  with  him  and  his  company  con-
cerning such  riches  as  were  in  the  shippe :  and  sent  for
the  Captaine  and  their  Pilote,  who  at  their  comming
used  the  like  duetie  and  reverence  as  the  former  did.
The  Generall  of  his  great  mercy  &  humanitie,  promised

325

A.D.

1587.
One  hundreth
and  two  and
itveniy  thou-
sand pezos  of
gold.
A  pezo  is  %s.

The  marchan-
disc  in  the
great  ship.
[III.  817.]

The

Spaniardes  set
on  shore  to
the  number  of
190.

Mutinie
against  the
General!.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

their  lives  and  good  usage.  The  sayd  Captaine  and
Pilote  presently  certified  the  Generall  what  goods  they
had  within  boord,  to  wit,  an  hundreth  and  22  thousand
pezos  of  golde :  and  the  rest  of  the  riches  that  the
ship  was  laden  with,  was  in  silkes,  sattens,  damasks,
with  muske  &  divers  other  marchandize,  and  great  store
of  al  maner  of  victuals  with  the  choyse  of  many  conserves
of  all  sortes  for  to  eate,  and  of  sundry  sorts  of  very  good
wines.  These  things  being  made  knowne  to  the  Generall
by  the  aforesaide  Captaine  and  Pilote,  they  were  com-
manded to  stay  aboord  the  Desire,  and  on  the  6  day  of
November  following  wee  went  into  an  harbour  which  is
called  by  the  Spaniards,  Aguada  Segura,  or  Puerto  Seguro.

Here  the  whole  company  of  the  Spaniardes,  both  of
men  and  women  to  the  number  of  190  persons  were
set  on  shore :  where  they  had  a  fayre  river  of  fresh
water,  with  great  store  of  fresh  fish,  foule,  and  wood,
and  also  many  hares  and  conies  upon  the  maine  land.
Our  generall  also  gave  them  great  store  of  victuals,  of
garuansos,  peason,  and  some  wine.  Also  they  had  all
the  sailes  of  their  shippe  to  make  them  tents  on  shore,
with  licence  to  take  such  store  of  plankes  as  should
bee  sufficient  to  make  them  a  barke.  Then  we  fell  to
hoysing  in  of  our  goods,  sharing  of  the  treasure,  and
alotting  to  every  man  his  portion.  In  devision  whereof
the  eight  of  this  moneth,  many  of  the  company  fell
into  a  mutinie  against  our  Generall,  especially  those
which  were  in  the  Content,  which  neverthelesse  were
after  a  sort  pacified  for  the  time.

On  the  17  day  of  November,  which  is  the  day  of
the  happy  Coronation  of  her  Majestic,  our  Generall
commanded  all  his  ordinance  to  be  shot  off,  with  the
small  shot  both  in  his  owne  shippe  where  himselfe  went,
and  also  in  the  Content,  which  was  our  Vice-admirall.
This  being  done,  the  same  night  we  had  many  fire-
workes  and  more  ordinance  discharged,  to  the  great
admiration  of  all  the  Spaniards  which  were  there :  for
the  most  part  of  them  had  never  scene  the  like  before.

326

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1587.

This ended, our Generall discharged the Captaine,
gave  him  a  royall  reward,  with  provision  for  his  defence
against the Indians  and his company, both of  swords,
targets, pieces, shot  and  powder  to his  great content-
ment : but  before his departure,  he  tooke  out  of  this
great shippe two yong lads borne in Japon, which  l"'^"  ^oy^^  of
could  both  wright  and  reade  their owne  language,  the  -^^P"^-
eldest  being  about  20  yeers  olde  was  named  Christopher,
the  other  was  called Cosmus,  about 17 yeeres  of  age,
both  of  very  good capacitie. He  tooke  also  with  him
out  of  their  ship,  3  boyes  borne  in  the  isles  of  Manilla, ^-^^'^f  ^-^^ "/
the  one  about  15,  the  other  about  13,  and  the  yongest  ^'^"^^^'^•
about 9 yeeres old. The name of the eldest was
Alphonso, the  second  Anthony de Dasi, the third re-
maineth with the right honourable the Countesse of
Essex. He  also  tooke  from  them,  one  Nicholas  Roderigo  -^^/^'^'^•f  ^od-
a  Portugall, who  hath not onely bene in Canton  and  ^"'^"j  ^
other  parts  of  China,  but  also  in  the  islands  of  Japon
being  a  countrey  most rich in silver mynes,  and hath
also  bene  in  the  Philippinas.

Hee tooke also from  them  a  Spaniard  whose name  ^^^panisk

was  Thomas de  Ersola,  which  was  a  very  good Pilote

from  Acapulco  and the coast of  Nueva  Espanna  unto  ^'^^/«^'^«'  ^•f

the  islands  of Ladrones,  where  the  Spaniardes doe put  ^y^^^^J^^^^

in  to  water,  sayling  betweene  Acapulco  and the  Philip-  setfoorth  to

pinas: in which isles of Ladrones, they finde fresh  thePhUip-

water,  plantans,  and  potato  rootes : howbeit the  people  P^^^^-

be  very  rude  and  heathens. The 19  day  of  November  J^^j^^-^^^

aforesaid,  about  3  of  the clock in  the  afternoone,  our  drones.

Generall caused the kings shippe to be set on fire,

which  having to  the  quantitie  of 500 tunnes  of  goods

in her we saw burnt unto the  water,  and then gave  ^, . , ,

D  ^  fig  zotndc  dt

them  a  piece  of  ordinance  and  set  sayle  joyfully  home-  Eastnortheast.

wardes  towardes  England  with  a  fayre  winde,  which  by  The  Content

this  time  was come  about to  Eastnortheast : and  night  'thereof

growing neere, we left the Content a sterne of us, ^^^^^"  /^''^
DO'  ' zvus  muster

which  was  not  as  yet  come  out  of  the  road. And  here  Mt  behind  in

thinking she would have overtaken us, we lost her  the  road.

327

A.D.

1587

The  island  of
Guana  one  of

the  Ladrones
hi  1 3  degrees
and  two  thirds.
Commodities
of  the  isles  of
Ladrones.

The  colour  and
stature  of  the
people  of  the
isles  of  La-
drones.

[III.  818.]
Their  images.

Artificial

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

companie  and  never  saw  her  after.  Wee  were  sayling
from  this  haven  of  Aguada  Segura  in  California  unto
the  iles  of  Ladrones  the  rest  of  November,  and  all
December,  and  so  forth  until  the  3  of  Januarie  1588,
with  a  faire  winde  for  the  space  45  dayes :  and  we
esteemed  it  to  be  between  17  and  18  hundred  leagues.
The  3  day  of  January  by  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning  wee  had  sight  of  one  of  the  islands  of  Ladrones
called  the  island  of  Guana,  standing  in  13  degrees  |^
toward  the  North,  and  sayling  with  a  gentle  gale  before
the  winde,  by  i  or  2  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
wee  were  come  up  within  2  leagues  of  the  island,  where
we  met  with  60  or  70  sailes  of  canoas  full  of  Savages,
who  came  off  to  sea  unto  us,  and  brought  with  them
in  their  boates  plantans,  cocos,  potato  rootes,  and  fresh
fish,  which  they  had  caught  at  sea,  and  helde  them  up
unto  us  for  to  truck  or  exchange  with  us ;  which  when
we  perceived,  we  made  fast  little  pieces  of  old  iron
upon  small  cords  and  fishing  lines,  and  so  vered  the
iron  unto  their  canoas,  and  they  caught  hold  of  them
and  tooke  off  the  iron,  and  in  exchange  of  it  they  would
make  fast  unto  the  same  line  either  a  potato  roote,  or
a  bundle  of  plantans,  which  we  haled  in  :  and  thus  our
company  exchanged  with  them  until  they  had  satisfied
themselves  with  as  much  as  did  content  them  :  yet  we
could  not  be  rid  of  them.  For  afterward  they  were  so
thicke  about  the  ship,  that  it  stemmed  &  brake  i  or  2
of  their  canoas :  but  the  men  saved  themselves  being  in
every  canoa  4,  6,  or  8  persons  all  naked  &  excellent
swimmers  and  divers.  They  are  of  a  tawny  colour  &
marveilous  fat,  &  bigger  ordinarily  of  stature  then  the
most  part  of  our  men  in  England,  wearing  their  haire
marveilous  long ;  yet  some  of  them  have  it  made  up
and  tyed  with  a  knot  on  the  crowne,  &  some  with  2
knots,  much  like  unto  their  images  which  wee  saw  them
have  carved  in  wood,  and  standing  in  the  head  of  their
boates  like  unto  the  images  of  the  devill.  Their  canoas
were  as  artificially  made  as  any  that  ever  wee  had  seene :

328

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1588.
considering  they  were  made  and  contrived without  any
edge-toole. They  are  not  above  halfe  a  yard  in  bredth
and  in  length  some  seven  or  eight  yardes,  and  their  heades
and  sternes  are  both  alike,  they  are  made  out  with  raftes
of  canes  and  reedes  on  the  starrebordside,  with  maste  and
sayle : their  sayle  is made  of  mattes of  sedges,  square
or  triangle  wise : and  they  saile  as  well  right  against  the  Camas sayling
winde,  as  before  the  winde:  These  Savages  followed  us  ^^ght  against
so  long,  that  we  could  not  be  ridde  of  them  :  untill  in
the  end  our  General  commanded  some  halfe  dozen  harque-
buzes  to be made ready ; and  himselfe  strooke  one  of
them  and  the  rest  shot  at  them  :  but  they  were  so  yare
and  nimble,  that  we could not discerne whether they  '^^^  nlmble-
were  killed  or  no,  because  they  could  fall  backward  into  ^'^  ^^^^  ,

t>6Qi)iC  of  the

the  sea  and  prevent  us  by  diving.  _  _ Ladrones.

The 14  day  of  January  lying  at  hull with our ship
all the middle watch, from 12  at  night  until foure  in
the  morning,  by  the  breake  of  day  wee  fell  with  an  head-
land of  the  isles  of  the  Philippinas,  which  is  called  Cabo Cabo  del
del  Spirito  Santo  which  is  of  very  great  bignes  and  length,  ^P'^^^^°  Santo,
high land  in  the  middest  of  it,  and  very low  land as  °of  the  Philtp-
the Cape  lyeth  East and  West,  trending  farre  into  the  pinas  in  13
sea  to  the  westward. This  cape  or  island  is  distant  from  degrees.
the  ile  of  Guana,  one  of  the  Ladrones,  310  leagues. We  ^^'°^  Guana
were in  sayling  of  this  course  eleven  dayes  with  skant  '^laJrmfs  to
windes  and  some  foule  weather,  bearing  no  sayle  two  or  Cabo  del
three  nights. This  island standeth in 13 degrees, and  Spirito  Santo
is a  place  much  peopled with heathen people, and all  " 'i^° ^^^gu^^-
woodie  through  the  whole  land  : and  it  is  short  of  the
chiefest island of  the  Philippinas called Manilla about
60  leagues. Manilla  is  well  planted  and  inhabited  with  ^_^^  descrip-
Spaniards to the number of  sixe or seven hundred  ^^°^°f^^^

tOZOfZ Of

persons : which dwell in  a  towne  unwalled,  which  hath  Manilla.
3 or  4  small blocke houses,  part made of wood,  and
part  of  stone  beeing  indeede  of  no  great  strength  :  they
have  one  or  two  small  Gallies  belong  to  the  towne. It  is  Trade  from
a  very  rich  place  of  golde  and  many  other  commodities  ;  ^'^^^■If  ^°
and  they  have  yeerely  trafficke  from  Acapulco  in  Nueva

329

A.D,
1588.

Merchants  of
China.
Marchants
called  Sangue-
los.

Silver  ex-
changed
waight  for
waight  for
golde.

The  island  of
Capul  at
zuhich  our  men
stayed  9  da'^es.

One  of  the
chiefs  gover-
nours  of  the
island  came
aboord  us.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Espanna,  and  also  20  or  30  shippes  from  China  and  from
the  Sanguelos,  which  bring  them  many  sorts  of  marchan-
dize.  The  marchants  of  China  and  the  Sanguelos  are
part  Moores  and  part  heathen  people.  They  bring  great
store  of  gold  with  them,  which  they  trafficke  and  ex-
change for  silver,  and  give  waight  for  waight.  These
Sanguelos  are  men  of  marveilous  capacitie  in  devising
and  making  all  maner  of  things,  especially  in  all  handie
craftes  and  sciences :  and  every  one  is  so  expert,  perfect,
and  skilfull  in  his  facultie,  as  fewe  or  no  Christians  are
able  to  goe  beyond  them  in  that  which  they  take  in  hand.
For  drawing  &  embrodering  upon  satten,  silck,  or  lawne,
either  beaste,  fowle,  fish  or  worme,  for  livelines  and
perfectnes,  both  in  silke,  silver,  gold,  &  pearle,  they
excell.  Also  the  14  day  at  night  wee  entred  the  streights
betweene  the  island  of  Luzon,  &  the  island  of  Camlaia.

The  fifteenth  of  January  wee  fell  with  an  island  called
Capul,  and  had  betwixt  the  sayd  island  and  another  island
but  an  narrowe  passage,  and  a  marveilous  rippling  of  a
very  great  tyde  with  a  ledge  of  rockes  lying  off  the  poynt
of  the  island  of  Capul :  and  no  danger  but  water  ynough
a  fayre  bredth  off:  and  within  the  point  a  fayre  bay  and
a  very  good  harborough  in  foure  fathom es  water  hard
aboord  the  shore  within  a  cables  length.  About  10  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning  wee  came  to  an  anker.

Our  shippe  was  no  sooner  come  to  an  anker,  but
presently  there  came  a  canoa  rowing  aboord  us,
wherein  was  one  of  the  chief  Casiques  of  the  island
whereof  there  be  seven,  who  supposing  that  we  were
Spaniardes,  brought  us  potato  rootes,  which  they  call
camotas,  and  greene  cocos,  in  exchange  whereof  we  gave
his  company  pieces  of  linnen  to  the  quantitie  of  a  yard
for  foure  Cocos,  and  as  much  linnen  for  a  basket  of
potato  rootes  of  a  quart  in  quantitie ;  which  rootes
are  very  good  meat,  and  excellent  sweete  either  rosted
or  boyled.

This  Casiques  skinne  was  carved  and  cut  with  sundry
and  many  strakes and devises  all over  his  body. We

11^

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1588.

kept him still  aboord and caused  him to send those

men  which  brought  him  aboord  backe  to  the  island  to

cause the  rest  of  the principals to come  aboord : who

were  no  sooner  gone  on  shore,  but  presently  the  people

of  the  island  came  downe  with their  cocos  and  potato

rootes, and the rest of  the principals likewise came

aboord and brought with them hennes and hogges :  Hemes  and

and they used the same order with us which they °^^^'

doe with the Spaniardes. For they tooke for every

hog (which  they  cal Balboye) eight rials of  plate,  and

for every  henne  or  cocke  one  riall of  plate. Thus  we

rode at  anker  all that day, doing nothing  but  buying

rootes,  cocos,  hennes,  hogges,  and  such things as they

brought,  refreshing  our  selves  marveilously  well.

The  same  day  at  night  beeing  the  fifteenth  of  January

1588,  Nicolas  Roderigo  the  Portugal,  whom  wee  tooke

out  of  the  great  Santa  Anna  at  the  Cape  of  California,

desired to speake with our General in secret : which

when our General understood, he sent for him, &

asked  him  what  he  had  to  say  unto  him. The  Portugal

made him  this  answer, that  although he had  offended

his worship heretofore, yet nowe hee had  vowed  his  [III.  819.]

faith  and  true  service  unto  him,  and  in  respect  thereof

he neither  could nor would conceale such treason as

was  in  working  against  him  and  his  company:  and  that

was this. That  the Spaniard which was taken  out  of  The  treason  of

the great sant Anne for a Pilote, whose name was  i^e  Spanish

•  1 Pilote  ?'e-

Thomas de Ersola, had written a letter, and secretly  j,^^/^^

sealed it and locked it up in his cheste, meaning  to  The  copy  of

convey  it  by  the  inhabitants  of  this island to Manilla,  the  Spanish

the contents whereof  were : That there  had bene  two  Pi^o^^^  ^^t^^r

English ships along the coast  of  Chili, Peru, Nueva  ^'J^^^^^^.  ^^

Espanna, and  Nueva  Galicia,  and that they had taken Manilla,

many shippes and marchandize in them, and burnt  which  was

divers  townes,  and  spoiled  all  that  ever  they  could  come  M^^  ^"  ^"

unto, and that they had taken the kings ship which  '^f^anslaied  b

came from Manilla and all his treasure,  with all  the  Timothy  Shot-

marchandize that was therein ; and had set all the  ton.

331

A.D.

1588,

Cdpul  adjoin-
ing upon  the
South  isle  of
Manilla.

The  North-
west passage.
50  leagues
from  Manilla.

The  Spanish
Pilote  hanged
for  his
trecherie.

The  maner  of
the  people  of
Capul.

A  strange
thing.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

people  on  shore,  taking  himselfe  away  perforce.  There-
fore he  willed  them  that  they  should  make  strong
their  bulwarks  with  their  two  Gallies,  and  all  such  pro-
vision as  they  could  possibly  make.  He  farther  signified,
that  wee  were  riding  at  an  island  called  Capul,  which
was  at  the  end  of  the  island  of  Manilla,  being  but
one  shippe  with  small  force  in  it,  and  that  the  other
ship,  as  he  supposed,  was  gone  for  the  North-west
passage,  standing  in  55  degrees:  and  that  if  they  could
use  any  meanes  to  surprize  us  being  there  at  an  anker,
they  should  dispatch  it :  for  our  force  was  but  small,
and  our  men  but  weake,  and  that  the  place  where  we
roade  was  but  50  leagues  from  them.  Otherwise  if
they  let  us  escape,  within  fewe  yeeres  they  must  make
account  to  have  their  towne  besieged  and  sacked  with
an  armie  of  English.  This  information  being  given,  our
Generall  called  for  him,  and  charged  him  with  these
things,  which  at  the  first  he  utterly  denyed :  but  in  the
ende,  the  matter  being  made  manifest  and  knowen  of
certaintie  by  especiall  tryall  and  proofes,  the  next  morn-
ing our  General  willed  that  he  should  be  hanged :
which  was  accordingly  performed  the 16  of  January.

We  roade  for  the  space  of  nine  dayes  about  this  island
of  Capul,  where  we  had  diverse  kindes  of  fresh  victuals,
with  excellent  fresh  water  in  every  bay,  and  great  store
of  wood.  The  people  of  this  island  go  almost  all  naked
and  are  tawny  of  colour.  The  men  weare  onely  a
stroope  about  their  wastes,  of  some  kinde  of  linnen  of
their  owne  weaving,  which  is  made  of  plantan  leaves,
and  another  stroope  comming  from  their  backe  under
their  twistes,  which  covereth  their  privie  parts,  and  is
made  fast  to  their  p-irdles  at  their  navels.

o

These  people  use  a  strange  kinde  of  order  among  them,
which  is  this.  Every  man  and  man-childe  among  them
hath  a  nayle  of  Tynne  thrust  quite  through  the  head
of  his  privie  part,  being  split  in  the  lower  ende  and
rivetted,  and  on  the  head  of  the  nayle  is  as  it  were  a
crowne : which is driven through their privities when

332

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1588.

they  be  yong,  and  the  place  groweth  up  againe,  without
any  great  paine  to  the  child :  and  they  take  this  nayle
out  and  in,  as  occasion  serveth :  and  for  the  truth
thereof  we  our  selves  have  taken  one  of  these  nailes
from  a  sonne  of  one  of  the  kings  which  was  of  the
age  of  10  yeeres,  who  did  weare  the  same  in  his  privie
member.

This  custome  was  granted  at  the  request  of  the
women  of  the  countrey,  who  finding  their  men  to  be
given  to  the  fowle  sinne  of  Sodom ie,  desired  some
remedie  against  that  mischiefe,  and  obteined  this  before
named  of  the  magistrates.  Moreover  all  the  males  are
circumcised,  having  the  foreskinne  of  their  flesh  cut  away.  Circumcision.
These  people  wholly  worship  the  devill,  and  often  times
have  conference  with  him,  which  appeareth  unto  them
in  most  ugly  and  monstrous shape.

On  the  23 day  of  January,  our  Generall  M.  Thomas

Candish caused al the principals  of  this  island, and  of

an hundred islands more,  which he had made  to  pay

tribute  unto  him  (which  tribute  was  in  hogges,  hennes,

potatoes and  cocos,) to appeare before him,  and  made

himselfe  and  his  company  knowne  unto  them,  that  they

were  English  men,  and  enemies  to  the  Spaniardes :  and

thereupon spredde his Ensigne and sounded up the

drummes,  which they  much marvelled  at :  to  conclude,  The  inkabi-

they  promised  both  themselves  and  all  the  islands  there-  ^^^/^  ofCapul
•i r  ^  11-  1  1  111  ■ '^lih  all  the

about  to  ayde  him,  whensoever  hee  shoulde  come  agame  iskndsadmn-
to overcome the  Spaniardes. Also  our Generall gave  ing,  promise  to
them,  in  token  that  wee  were  enemies  to  the  Spaniardes,  ^j^^?  the
money  backe  againe  for  all  their  tribute  which  they  had  ^^eJ^^^
payed :  which  they  tooke  marveilous  friendly,  and  rowed  ^sfa"Lrds^
about  our  shippe  to  shewe  us  pleasure  marveilous  swiftly :
at  the  last  our generall caused a saker  to  be  shot off,
whereat they wondered, and with great contentment
took  their  leaves  of  us.

The next day being the twentie foure  of  Januarie,  Our  departure
wee  sette  sayle  aboute  sixe  of  the  clock  in  the  morning,  {^i^^^lf
and  ran  along  the  coast  of  the  island  of  Manilla,  shaping  Capul.

333

A.D.
1588.

The  isle  of
Masbat.

The  island  of
Panama.

[III.  820.]

Markes  of
shallow  water.

A  Balsa  is  a
great  canoa.

A  Spaniard
of  Manilla
taken.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

our course Northwest betweene the isle of  Manilla,
and  the  isle  of  Masbat.

The  28  day  in  the  morning  about  7  of  the  clocke,
riding  at  an  anker  betwixt  2  islands,  wee  spied  a  Frigat
under  her  two  coarses,  comming  out  betweene  2  other
islands,  which  as  we  imagined  came  from  Manilla,  sayling
close  aboord  the  shore  along  the  maine  island  of  Panama :
we  chased  this  frigat  along  the  shore,  &  gat  very  fast
upon  it,  until  in  the  end  we  came  so  neere  that  it  stood
in  to  the  shore  close  by  a  winde,  untill  shee  was  becalmed
and  was  driven  to  stricke  her  sayle,  and  banked  up  with
her  oares :  whereupon  we  came  unto  an  anker  with  our
ship,  a  league  and  an  halfe  from  the  place  where  the
Frigate  rowed  in ;  and  manned  our  boat  with  halfe  a
dozen  shot  and  as  many  men  with  swords,  which  did
row  the  boat:  thus  we  made  after  the  Frigate  which
had  hoysed  saile  and  ran  into  a  river,  which  we  could
not  find.  But  as  we  rowed  along  the  shore,  our  boate
came  into  very  shallow  water,  where  many  weares  and
sticks  were  set  up  in  divers  places  in  the  sea,  from
whence  2  or  3  canoas  came  forth,  whereof  one  made
somewhat  neere  unto  us,  with  3  or  4  Indians  in  it :  we
called  unto  them,  but  they  would  not  come  neerer  unto
us,  but  rowed  from  us :  whom  wee  durst  not  followe
too  farre  from  feare  of  bringing  our  selves  to  much  to
the  leewarde  of  our  ship.  Here,  as  we  looked  about
us,  we  espied  another  Balsa  or  canoa  of  a  great  bignes
which  they  which  were  in  her,  did  set  along  as  we  do
usually  set  a  barge  with  long  staves  or  poles,  which  was
builded  up  with  great  canes,  and  below  hard  by  the
water  made  to  row  with  oares ;  wherein  were  about  5
or  6  Indians  and  one  Spaniard  :  nowe  as  wee  were  come
almost  at  the  Balsa,  wee  ran  a  ground  with  our  boate ;
but  one  or  two  of  our  men  leaped  over-boord  and  freed
it  againe  presently,  and  keeping  thwarte  her  head,  we
layed  her  aboord  and  tooke  in  to  us  the  Spaniard,  but
the  Indians  leaped  into  the  sea  and  dived  and  rose  farre
off  againe  from us. Presently  upon the  taking  of  this

334

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1588.

canoa,  there  shewed  upon  the  sand  a  band  of  souldiers  5°  °']  60
marching  with an  ensigne  having  a  red  Crosse  like  the  ^P^^^^^'^^

D  ^00  ^  shew  thsfn-

flagge  of  England,  which  were  about  50  or  60  Spaniardes,  ^^/^^^

which  were lately come from Manilla to that towne

which  is  called  Ragaun  in  a  Barke  to  fetch  a  new  shippe  Aneweshi

of  the  kings, which  was  building  in  a  river  within  the  of  {he  kings  m

bay, and  stayed there but for certain yrons that  did

serve  for  the  rudder  of  the  said  ship,  which  they  looked

for  every  day.

This band of  men  shot  at us from the  shore  with
their  muskets,  but  hyt  none  of  us,  and  wee  shot  at  them
againe :  they  also  manned  a  Frigate  and  sent  it  out  after  T^hey  manned
our  boat  to  have  taken  us,  but  we  with  saile  and  oares  ^«f  ^^^^^^'-^
went from them : and  when they  perceived that  they
could not fetch us, but that they  must  come within
danger of  the ordinance of our ship, they stood in
with  the  shore  againe  and  landed  their  men,  and  presently
sent  their  Frigate  about  the  point,  but  whether  we  knew
not. So  we came  aboord  with  this  one  Spaniard,  which
was  neither souldier  nor  sayler,  but  one  that  was  come
among the rest from Manilla, and had bene in the
hospital  there  a  long  time  before,  and  was  a  very  simple  An  hospitdl in
soule, and  such  a  one  as could  answere to  very  little  '^^""^^^
that  hee  was  asked,  concerning  the  state  of  the  countrey.
Here  wee  roade  at  anker  all  that  night,  and  perceived
that  the  Spaniards  had  dispersed  their  band  into  2  or  3
parts,  and  kept great  watch  in  several  steedes  with  fires
and  shooting  off  their pieces. This island hath  much
plaine  ground  in  it  in  many  places,  and  many  fayre  and
straight  trees  do  grow  upon  it,  fit  for  to  mxake  excellent
good  mastes  for  all  sorts  of  ships. There  are  also  mynes  Mynes  of  very
of  very  fine  gold  in  it  which  are  in  the  custodie  of  the  •fj/^?^^''^^
Indians. And  to  the  South-ward  of  this  place,  there  is  Panama.
another  very  great  island, which  is  not  subdued  by  the
Spaniards, nor any other nation. The people which
inhabite  it  are  all Negros ;  and  the  island  is  called  the  T^^  "^^"'i  of
island  of  Negros : and  is  almost as bigge  as  England,  ^^S''°^  ^"  9
standing  in  9 degrees:  the  most part  of  it  seemeth  to

335

A.D.

1588.

Their  depar-
ture from  the
Phiiippinas.

Batochina.

\\  or  \z small
glands  in  3
degrees  10
min.  to  the
Southward.

Islands  in  4
degrees  south-
ward of  the
line.

The  death  of
^aptaine
Havers.

[III.  821].

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

be very lowe land, and by all likelihood is very
fruitfull.

The  29  day  of  January  aboute  sixe  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning  we  set  saile,  sending  our  boate  before  until
it  was  two  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoone,  passing  all
this  time  as  it  were  through  a  straight  betwixt  the  said
2  islands  of  Panama,  and  the  island  of  Negros,  and
about  16  leagues  off  we  espied  a  fayre  opening,  trending
Southwest  and  by  South,  at  which  time  our  boate  came
aboord,  and  our  Generall  sent  commendations  to  the
Spanish  captaine  which  wee  came  from  the  evening  before
by  the  Spaniard  which  we  tooke,  and  willed  him  to  pro-
vide good  store  of  gold :  for  he  meant  for  to  see  him
with  his  company  at  Manilla  within  fewe  yeeres,  and
that  he  did  but  want  a  bigger  boate  to  have  landed  his
men,  or  else  hee  would  have  scene  him  then:  and  so
caused  him  to  be  set  on  shore.

The  8  day  of  February  by  8  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning  we  espied  an  island  neere  Gilolo,  called  Bato-
china, which  standeth  in  one  degree  from  the  Equinoctial
line  Northward.

The  1 4  day  of  February  we  fell  with  11  or  12  very
small  islands,  lying  very  low  and  flat,  full  of  trees,  and
passed  by  some  islands  which  be  suncke  and  have  the
dry  sands  lying  in  the  maine  sea.  These  islands  neere
the  Malucoes,  stand  in  3  degrees  and  10  min.  to  the
South-ward  of  the  lyne.

On  the  17  day,  one  John  Gameford  a  Cooper  dyed,
which  had  bene  sicke  of  an  olde  disease  a  long  time.
The  20  day  wee  fell  with  certaine  other  islands  which  1
had  many  small  islands  among  them,  standing  4  degrees
to  the  South-ward  of  the  lyne.  On  the  21  day  of
Februarie,  being  Ashwednesday  Captaine  Havers  dyed
of  a  most  fervent  and  pestilent  ague,  which  held  him
furiously  some  7  or  8  dayes,  to  the  no  small  griefe  of
our  Generall  and  of  all  the  rest  of  the  company,  who
caused  two  Falcons  and  one  Sacre  to  be  shot  off,  with
all  the  small  shotte  in  the  ship,  who  after  he  was  shrowded

336

1ART  OF  THE  WORLD  SHOWING  THF,  CIRCUMNAVIGATIONS  OF  DRAKF.  AND  CAVENDISH

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1588.

in  a  sheete  and  a  prayer  sayd,  was  heved  over  bord  with

great  lamentation of  us  all. Moreover, presently after

his death  my selfe  with divers others in the ship  fell

marveilously  sicke,  and  so  continued  in  very  great  paine

for the  space of  three  weekes or a moneth by  reason

of  the  extreeme  heat  and  untemperatnesse  of  the  Climate.

The first day of March having passed  through  the  March  1588.

Straights  of  Java  minor  and  Java  major,  wee  came  to  an

ancker  under  the  Southwest  parts  of  Java  major :  where  Ourarrivdat

wee espied certaine of  the people which were fishing '^  major.

by  the  sea  side  in  a bay  which was under the yland.

Then our Generall taking  into the ship-boat certaine

of  his company, and  a Negro  which  could  speake  the

Morisco  tongue,  which  hee had taken  out  of  the  grreat  ^-^^  Morisco

S.  Anna,  made  toward  those  fishers,  which  having:  espied  r' ^^  ^^^

, '  .  .  '  \ r r  r  tongue  common

our boat  ranne on shoare mto the  wood  tor reare or  i^  y^^^_

our men : but  our Generall caused his Negro to call

unto  them  :  who  no  sooner  heard  him  call,  but  presently

one of them came out to the shore  side and made

answere. Our  Generall  by  the  Negro  enquired  of  him

for  fresh  water,  which  they  found,  and  caused  the  fisher

to  goe  to  the  King  and  to  certifie  him  of  a  shippe  that

was  come  to  have  trafique  for  victuals,  and  for  diamants,

pearles,  or  any  other  riche  jewels  that  hee  had  :  for  which

hee  should have either golde or  other marchandise in

exchange. The  fisher  answered  that  we  should  have  all

maner  of  victuals  that  wee  would  request. Thus  the  boat

came  abord  againe. Within  a  while  after  wee  went  about

to  furnish  our  shippe  throughly  with  wood  and  water.

About  the  eighth  of  March  two  or  three  Canoas  came

from  the  towne unto us with  egges,  hennes,  fresh  fish,

oranges, and lymes, and brought worde wee should

have  had  victuals  more  plentifully,  but that they  were

so  farre  to  bee  brought  to  us  where  wee  ridde. Which

when  our  Generall  heard  hee  weighed  ancker  and  stoode

in  neerer  for  the  towne  :  and  as  wee  were  under  saile  wee

mette  with  one  of  the  kings  canoas  comming  towarde  us :

whereupon wee shoke the shippe in the winde and

XI  337  Y

A.D.

1588.

JKingofJava
his  Secretary.

Niper  zvine.

Cloves,

pepper,  sugar,
and  many  other
commodities  in
Java  major.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

stayed  for  the  canoa  untill  it  came  abord  of  us,  and
stoode  into  the  bay  which  was  hard  by  and  came  to  an
ancker.  In  this  canoa  was  the  Kings  Secretarie,  who  had
on  his  head  a  piece  of  died  linen  cloth  folded  up  like
a  Turkes  Tuliban  :  he  was  all  naked  saving  about  his
waste,  his  breast  was  carved  with  the  broade  arrowe  upon
it :  hee  went  barefooted  :  he  had  an  interpretour  with  him,
which  was  a  Mestizo,  that  is,  halfe  an  Indian  and  halfe  a
Portugall,  who  could  speake  very  good  Portugese.  This
Secretarie  signified  unto  our  Generall  that  he  had  brought
him  an  hogge,  hennes,  egges,  fresh  fish,  sugar-canes  and
wine :  (which  wine  was  as  strong  as  any  aquavitae,  and  as
cleare  as  any  rocke  water  : )  he  tolde  him  farther  that  hee
would  bring  victuals  so  sufficiently  for  him,  as  hee  and
his  company  would  request,  and  that  within  the  space
of  foure  dayes.  Our  Generall  used  him  singularly  well,
banquetted  him  most  royally  with  the  choyce  of  many
and  sundry  conserves,  wines  both  sweete  and  other,  and
caused  his  Musitians  to  make  him  musicke.  This  done
our  Generall  tolde  him  that  hee  and  his  company  were
Englishmen ;  and  that  wee  had  bene  at  China  and  had
had  trafique  there  with  them,  and  that  wee  were  come
thither  to  discover,  and  purposed  to  goe  to  Malaca.  The
people  of  Java  tolde  our  Generall  that  there  were  certaine
Portugals  in  the  yland  which  lay  there  as  Factours
continually  to  trafique  with  them,  to  buy  Negros,
cloves,  pepper,  sugar,  and  many  other  commodities.
This  Secretarie  of  the  King  with  his  interpretour  lay
one  night  abord  our  shippe.  The  same  night,  because
they  lay  abord,  in  the  evening  at  the  setting  of  the  watch,
our  Generall  commanded  every  man  in  the  shippe  to
provide  his  harquebuze  and  his  shotte,  and  so  with
shooting  off  40.  or  50.  small  shot  and  one  Sacre,  him-
selfe  set  the  watch  with  them.  This  was  no  small
marveile  unto  these  heathen  people,  who  had  not  com-
monly scene  any  shippe  so  furnished  with  men  and
Ordinance.  The  next  morning  wee  dismissed  the
Secretarie  and  his  interpretour  with  all  humanitie.

338

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1588.

The  fourth  day  after,  which  was  the  12.  ot  March,
according  to  their  appointment  came  the  Kings  canoas ;
but  the  winde  being  somewhat  skant  they  could  not  get
abord  that  night,  but  put  into  a  bay  under  the  yland
untill  the  next  day,  and  presently  after  the  breake  of
day  there  came  to  the  number  of  9.  or  10.  of  the  Kings  Nine  or  \o.
canoas  so  deepely  laden  with  victuals  as  they  could  swim,  °f^^^  ^^"^^
with  two  great  live  oxen,  halfe  a  skore  of  wonderfuU
great  and  fat  hogges,  a  number  of  hennes  which  were
alive,  drakes,  geese,  eggs,  plantans,  sugar  canes,  sugar
in  plates,  cocos,  sweet  oranges  and  sowre,  lymes,  great
store  of  wine  and  aquavitas,  salt  to  season  victuals  withall,
and  almost  all  maner  of  victuals  else,  with  divers  of  the
Kings  officers  which  were  there.  Among  all  the  rest  of
the  people  in  one  of  these  canoas  came  two  Portugales,  Ttoo  Portu-
which  were  of  middle  stature,  and  men  of  marvellous  ^^^"  ^"  •'^^'''
proper  personage;  they  were  each  of  them  in  a  loose
jerkin,  and  hose,  which  came  downe  from  the  waste  to  the
ancle,  because  of  the  use  of  the  Countrey,  and  partly
because  it  was  Lent,  and  a  time  for  doing  of  their
penance,  (for  they  accompt  it  as  a  thing  of  great  dislike  [III.  822.]
among  these  heathens  to  weare  either  hose  or  shoes  on
their  feete : )  they  had  on  ech  of  them  a  very  faire  and
a  white  lawne  shirt,  with  falling  bands  on  the  same,  very
decently,  onely  their  bare  legs  excepted.  These  Por-
tugales were  no  small  joy  unto  our  Generall  and  all  the
rest  of  our  company :  For  we  had  not  seene  any  Christian
that  was  our  friend  of  a  yeere  and  an  halfe  before.  Our
Generall  used  and  intreated  them  singularly  well,  with
banquets  and  musicke  :  They  told  us  that  they  were  no
lesse  glad  to  see  us,  then  wee  to  see  them,  and  enquired
of  the  estate  of  their  countrey,  and  what  was  become
of  Don  Antonio  their  King,  and  whether  hee  were  Enquirie  oj
living  or  no :  for  that  they  had  not  of  long  time  bene  ^°^  Antonie.
in  Portugall,  and  that  the  Spaniards  had  alwayes  brought
them  worde  that  hee  was  dead.  Then  our  Generall
satisfied  them  in  every  demaund;  Assuring  them,  that
their  King  was  alive,  and  in  England,  and  had  honourable

339

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

allowance of  our Queene, and that there was warre

betweene  Spaine  and  England,  and  that  we were  come

under  the  King  of  Portugall  into  the  South  sea,  and  had

warred  upon  the  Spaniards  there,  and  had  fired,  spoiled

and  sunke  all  the  ships  along  the  coast  that  we could

meete  withall, to  the number of  eighteene or twentie

sailes. With  this  report  they  were  sufficiently  satisfied.

The  state  of On  the  other side they  declared  unto  us  the  state  of

Java.  ^i^g yland of  Java. First the plentifulnes and great

choise  and  store  of  victuals  of  all  sorts,  &  of  all  maner  of

fruits as before  is  set  downe : Then  the  great  and  rich

marchandize which are  there to be had. Then they

described the properties  and nature of the people as

followeth. The  name  of  the  King of  that  part  of  the

Raja  Bolam- yland  was  Raja  Bolamboam,  who  was  a  man  had  in  great

boam.  majestie  and feare among them. The  common  people

may  not  bargaine,  sell,  or  exchange any  thing  with  any

other  nation  without  speciall  licence  from  their  king:  and

if  any  so doe,  it  is  present  death  for  him. The  King

himselfe  is  a  man  of  great  yeeres,  and  hath  an  hundred

The  wives  kill  wives,  his  sonne  hath  fiftie. The  custome  of  the  countrey

themselves ^g  ^|^^^  whensoever  the  king:  doeth die, they  take  the
after  thetf  .  .

husbands  body  SO  dead  and  burne  it  and  preserve  the  ashes  of  him,

deaths.  and within five dayes next  after,  the  wives  of  the  said

king  so  dead,  according  to  the  custome  and  use  of  their

countrey, every  one  of  them goe together to a  place

appointed, and the chiefe of the women, which was

neerest  unto  him  in  accompt,  hath  a  ball  in  her  hand,  and

throweth it from her, and to  the  place  where  the  ball

A  strange resteth,  thither  they  goe  all,  and  turne  their  faces  to  the

order.  Eastward,  and every  one with a dagger  in  their hand,

(which  dagger  they  call  a  Crise,  and  is  as  sharpe  as  a  rasor)

stab themselves  to  the  heart,  and  with  their  hands  all  to

bee-bath themselves in their owne blood, and falling

groveUing  on  their  faces  so  ende  their  dayes. This  thing

is  as  true  as  it  seemeth  to  any  hearer  to  be  strange.

The  men  of  themselves  be  very  politique  and  subtile,

and singularly  valiant,  being naked  men,  in any  action

340

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1588.

they  undertake,  and  wonderfully  at  commandement  and

feare  of  their  king. For  example :  if  their  king  command

them  to  undertake  any  exploit,  be  it  never  so  dangerous

or  desperate,  they  dare  not  nor  will  not  refuse  it,  though

they  die every  man  in  the  execution  of  the  same. For

hee  will  cut  off  the  heads  of  every  one  of  them  which

returne  alive  without  bringing  of  their  purpose  to  passe :

which  is  such  a  thing  among  them,  as  it  maketh  them  the

most  valiant people in all the Southeast parts of  the

world :  for they never feare any death. For  being in

fight  with  any  nation,  if  any  of  them  feeleth  himselfe  hurt

with  launce  or sword,  he  will  willingly  runne himselfe

upon the weapon quite through his  body  to  procure

his  death the more speedily,  and in  this desperate  sort

ende his dayes, or overcome  his enemie. Moreover,

although  the  men  be  tawny  of  colour  and  go  continually

naked,  yet  their  women  be  faire  of  complexion  and  go  Faire  women

more  apparelled.  *'«  ^'''"''

After  they  had  thus  described  the  state  of  the  yland,
and  the orders and facions  of  the  people; they  tolde
us  farther,  that  if  their  king  Don  Antonio  would  come  ^f»  Jnmio
unto them, they would warrant him to have  all the  J^!^  ^^ as  Kins:
Malucos  at  commandement,  besides,  China,  Sangles,  and  i„  ^j^g  £^^^
the yles of the Philippinas, and that hee might be  ln£ss.
assured  to  have  all  the Indians  on  his side  that  are  in
the countrey. After we had fully contented these
Portugals,  and the people of  Java which brought us
victuals  in  their  Canoas,  they  tooke  their  leaves  of  us  with
promise  of  all  good  entertainement  at  our  returnes,  and
our  Generall  gave  them  three  great  pieces  of  Ordinance
at  their  departing. Thus the next day  being the 16.  The';)  depart
of  March  we  set  saile  towards  the  Cape  of  good  hope,  -^["^ g/^J^^\
called  by  the  Portugals  Cabo  de  buena  Esperancza  on  j-*gg
the  Southermost  coast  of  Africa.

The  rest  of  March  and  all  the  moneth  of  April  wee
spent  in  traversing  that  mightie  and  vaste  Sea,  betweene
the  yle  of  Java  and  the  maine  of  Africa,  observing  the
heavens,  the  Crosiers  or  South-pole,  the  other  starres,  the

341

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

foules,  which  are  markes  unto  the  Sea  men  of  faire
weather,  foule  weather,  approching  of  lands  or  ylands,  the
winds,  the  tempests,  the  raines  &  thunders,  with  the
alterations  of  tides  and  currents.

The  10.  day  of  May  we  had  a  storme  at  the  West,
and  it  blew  so  hard  that  it  was  as  much  as  the  ship
could  stirre  close  by  under  the  wind :  and  the  storme
continued  al  that  day  and  al  that  night.
[III.  823.]  The  next  day  being  the  11.  of  May  in  the  morning
one  of  the  company  went  into  the  top,  and  espied  land
bearing  North,  and  North  and  by  West  off  us,  &  about
noone  wee  espied  land  to  beare  West  off  us,  which  as
we  did  imagine  was  the  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza,  wher-
of  indeed  we  were  short  some  40.  or  50.  leagues  :  and
by  reason  of  the  skantnesse  of  the  winde  we  stood  along
to  the  Southeast  untill  midnight ;  at  which  time  the  winde
came  faire,  and  we  haled  along  Westward.

The  12.  and  13.  dayes  we  were  becalmed,  and  the
sky  was  very  hazie  and  thicke  until  the  14.  day  at  three
of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  at  which  time  the  sky
cleared,  and  we  espied  the  land  againe  which  was  the  cape
Cabo  Falso.  called  Cabo  Falso,  which  is  short  of  the  Cape  de  buena
Esperanza  40  or  50  leagues.  This  Cape  is  very  easie
to  be  knowen.  For  there  are  right  over  it  three  very  high
hilles  standing  but  a  smal  way  one  off  another,  and  the
hiest  standeth  in  the  middest,  and  the  ground  is  much
lower  by  the  seaside.  The  Cape  of  Good  hope  beareth
West  and  by  South  from  the  said  Cabo  Falso.

The 16. day  of  May  about 4. of  the  clocke in  the

afternoone  the  winde  came  up  at  East  a  very  stiffe  gale,

which  helde  untill  it  was  Saturday  with  as  much  winde

as  ever the ship could goe  before : at  which  time by

sixe  of  the  clocke  in the morning  wee  espied  the  pro-

They  double  montorie  or  headland,  called  the  Cape  de  Buena  Esperanza,

the  Cape  de  ^j^j^h  is  a  reasonable  hie  land,  &  at  the  Westermost  point

Speranza ^  ^^^^^  °^  ^^^  maine  do  shew  two  hammocks,  the  one  upon

the  other,  and  three  other  hammocks  lying  further  off  into

the  sea,  yet  low  land  betweene  and  adjoyning  unto  the  sea.

342

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  ad.

1588.

This  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza  is  set  down  and  accomp-  Pf°"^  J^^^  t°
ted for two thousand  leagues from the yland of  Java  *^ ^^^  ^
in  the  Portugall  sea  carts : but  it  is  not  so  much  almost  speranza  is
by  an  hundred  and  fiftie leagues, as  we  found by  the  but  1850.
running of  our ship. We were in  running of  these  leagues.
eighteene  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  just  nine  weekes.

The  eighth  day  of  June  by  breake  of  day  we  fel  in  June  1588.
sight  of  the  yland  of  S.  Helena,  seven or  eight  leagues
short  of  it,  having  but  a  small  gale  of  winde,  or  almost
none  at  all :  insomuch  as  we  could  not  get  into  it  that
day,  but  stood  off  and  on  all  that  night.

The next  day being  the 9. of  June having  a  pretie  They  anker  at
easie  gale  of  wind  we  stood  in  with  the  shore,  our  boat  ^J J ^^  J '
being  sent away  before  to  make the  harborough  ; and  of  June.
about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  we  came  unto
an  ancker  in  12.  fathoms  water  two  or  three  cables  length
from  the  shore,  in  a  very  faire  and  smooth  bay  under
the  Northwest  side  of  the  yland.

This  yland  is  very  high  land,  and  lieth  in  the  maine
sea  standing  as  it  were  in  the  middest  of  the  sea  betweene
the  maine  land  of  Africa,  and  the  maine  of  Brasilia  and
the  coast  of  Guinea  :  And  is  in  15.  degrees  and  48.  minuts  S.Helena  is  in
to  the  Southward  of  the  Equinoctiall  line,  and  is  distant  ^l^^  l^f^'^^  "f
from  the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperanza  betweene 5, and  6.  ^i^min.tothe
hundreth  leagues.  Southward.

The  same  day  about  two  or  three  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone  wee  went  on  shore,  where  wee  found  a  mar-
veilous  faire  &  pleasant  valley,  wherein  divers  handsome
buildings  and  houses  were  set  up,  and  especially  one  which
was  a  Church,  which  was  tyled  &  whited  on  the  outside
very  faire,  and  made  with  a  porch,  and  within  the  Church
at  the  upper  end  was  set  an  altar,  whereon  stood  a  very
large  table  set  in  a  frame  having  in  it  the  picture  of  our
Saviour  Christ  upon  the  Crosse  and  the  image  of  our
Lady  praying,  with  divers  other  histories  curiously  painted
in  the  same.  The  sides  of  the  Church  were  all  hanged
with  stained  clothes  having  many  devises  drawen  in
them.

343

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

There  are  two  houses  adjoyning  to  the  Church,  on
each  side  one,  which  serve  for  kitchins  to  dresse  meate
in,  with  necessary  roomes  and  houses  of  office :  the  cover-
ings of  the  said  houses  are  made  flat,  whereon  is  planted
a  very  faire  vine,  and  through  both  the  saide  houses
runneth  a  very  good  and  holsome  streame  of  fresh
water.

There  is  also  right  over  against  the  saide  Church  a
faire  causey  made  up  with  stones  reaching  unto  a  valley
by  the  seaside,  in  which  valley  is  planted  a  garden,  wherein
grow  great  store  of  pompions  and  melons :  And  upon
the  saide  causey  is  a  frame  erected  whereon  hange  two
bells  wherewith  they  ring  to  Masse  ;  and  hard  unto  it
is  a  Crosse  set  up,  which  is  squared,  framed  and  made
very  artificially  of  free  stone,  whereon  is  carved  in  cyphers
what  time  it  was  builded,  which  was  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lord 1 57 1.

This  valley  is  the  fairest  and  largest  lowe  plot  in  all

the  yland,  and  it  is  marveilous  sweete  and  pleasant,  and

planted  in  every  place either  with  fruite trees,  or  with

herbes. There  are  fig  trees,  which  beare  fruit  continually,

& marveilous plentifully : for on  every tree  you shal

have  blossoms,  greene  fig5,  and  ripe  figs,  all  at  ones : and

it  is  so  all  the  yere  long : the  reason is  that  the  yland

Thegreatstore  standeth  so  neere  the  Sunne. There  be  also  great  store

of  divers  of  lymon trees,  orange  trees, pomegranate  trees,  pome-

"^^S  ^u  i^^  citron  trees,  date  trees,  which  beare  fruite  as  the  fig  trees

do, and are planted carefully and very  artificially  with

very pleasant  walkes  under  and  betweene  them,  and  the

saide walkes bee overshadowed  with the leaves  of  the

trees : and in every voyde place is planted parceley,

[III.  824.] sorell,  basill,  fenell,  annis  seede,  mustard  seede,  radishes,

and many speciall good hearbes : and  the fresh water

brooke  runneth  through  divers  places  of  this  orchard,  and

may  with  very  small  paines  be  made  to  water  any  one  tree

in  the  valley.

This fresh water  streame  commeth  from the  tops  of
the  mountaines,  and  falleth  from  the  clifFe  into  the  valley

344

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1588.

the  height  of  a  cable,  and  hath  many  armes  out  of  it,

which  refresh  the  whole  yland,  and  almost  every  tree  in

it. The  yland  is  altogether  high  mountaines  and  steepe

valleis,  except  it  be  in  the  tops  of  some  hilles,  and  downe

below  in  some  of  the  valleis,  where  marvellous  store  of

all  these  kinds  of  fruits  before  spoken  of  do  grow :  there

is  greater  store  growing  in  the  tops of  the  mountaines

then  below  in  the  valleis  :  but  it  is  wonderfuU  laboursome

and  also  dangerous  travelling  up  unto  them  and  downe

againe,  by reason  of  the  height  and  steepenesse  of  the

hilles.

There  is  also  upon  this  yland  great  store  of  partridges,  Abundance  of
which  are  very  tame,  not  making  any  great  hast  to  flie  P^^'^rtdges  m
away  though  one  come  very  neere  them,  but  onely  to
runne  away,  and  get  up  into  the  steepe  cliffes  :  we  killed
some  of  them  with  a  fowling  piece.  They  differ  very
much  from  our  partridges  which  are  in  England  both  in
bignesse  and  also  in  colour.  For  they  be  within  a  little  as
bigge  as  an  henne,  and  are  of  an  ashe  colour,  and  live  in
covies  twelve,  sixteen,  and  twentie  together :  you  cannot
go  ten  or  twelve  score  but  you  shall  see  or  spring  one  or
two  covies  at  the  least.

There  are  likewise  no  lesse  store  of  fesants  in  the  yland.  Great  store  of
which  are  also  marveilous  bigge  and  fat,  surpassing  those  fi^^^^^-
which  are  in  our  countrey  in  bignesse  and  in  numbers  of
a  company. They  differ  not  very  much  in  colour  from
the  partridges  before  spoken  of.

Wee  found  moreover  in  this  place  great  store  of  Guinie  Turkies  in  ^
cocks,  which  we  call  Turkies,  of  colour  blacke  and  white,  gr^^^H^^^M^^-
with  red  heads : they  are  much  about  the  same  bignesse
which  ours  be  of  in  England :  their  egges  be  white,  and
as  bigge  as  a  Turkies  egge.

There  are  in  this  yland  thousands  of  goates,  which  the  Exceeding
Spaniards  call  Cabritos,  which  are  very  wilde : you  shall  ^'*"^^^"  °f
see  one  or  two  hundred  of  them  together,  and  sometimes  ^°^  ^'
you  may  beholde  them  going  in  a  flocke  almost  a  mile
long. Some  of  them,  (whether  it  be  the  nature  of  the
breed  of  them,  or  of  the  country  I  wot  not)  are  as  big  as

345

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

an  asse,  with  a  maine  like  an  horse  and  a  beard  hanging
downe  to  the  very  ground  :  they  will  clime  up  the  cliffes
which  are  so  steepe  that  a  man  would  thinke  it  a  thing
unpossible  for  any  living  thing  to  goe  there.  We  tooke
and  killed  many  of  them  for  all  their  swiftnes :  for  there
be  thousands  of  them  upon  the  mountaines.
Pkntie  of  Here  are  in  like  maner  great  store  of  swine  which  be

smne.  very  wilde  and  very  fat,  and  of  a  marvellous  bignes  : they

keepe  altogether  upon  the  mountaines,  and  will  very
seldome  abide  any  man  to  come  neere  them,  except  it
be  by  meere  chance  when  they  be  found  asleepe,  or  other-
wise, according  to  their  kinde,  be  taken  layed  in  the  mire.
We  found  in  the  houses  at  our  comming  3.  slaves
which  were  Negros,  &  one  which  was  borne  in  the  yland
of  Java,  which  tolde  us  that  the  East  Indian  fleete,  which
were  in  number  5.  sailes,  the  least  whereof  were  in  burthen
8.  or  900.  tunnes,  all  laden  with  spices  and  Calicut  cloth,
with  store  of  treasure  and  very  rich  stones  and  pearles,
were  gone  from  the  saide  yland  of  S.  Helena  but  20,  daycs
before  we  came  thither.

This  yland  hath  bene  found  of  long  time  by*the  Por-
tugals,  and  hath  bene  altogether  planted  by  them,  for
their  refreshing  as  they  come  from  the  East  Indies.  And
when  they  come  they  have  all  things  plentiful  for  their
reliefe,  by  reason  that  they  suffer  none  to  inhabit  there
that  might  spend  up  the  fruit  of  the  yland,  except  some
very  few  sicke  persons  in  their  company,  which  they
stand  in  doubt  will  not  live  untill  they  come  home,  whom
they  leave  there  to  refresh  themselves,  and  take  away
the  yeere  following  the  other  Fleete  if  they  live  so  long.
They  touch  here  rather  in  their  comming  home  from  the
East  Indies,  then  at  their  going  thither,  because  they
are  throughly  furnished  with  corne  when  they  set  out
of  Portugal,  but  are  but  meanely  victualled  at  their
comming  from  the  Indies,  where  there  groweth  little
corne.
from  S  T\\Q,  20.  day  of  June  having  taken  in  wood  &  water  and

Helena.  refreshed  our  selves  with  such  things  as  we  found  there,

346

CANDISH'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION  a.d.

1588.

and  made  cleane  our  ship,  we  set  saile  about  8.  of  the
clocke  in  the  night  toward  England.  At  our  setting  saile
wee  had  the  winde  at  Southeast,  and  we  haled  away  North-
west and  by  West.  The  winde  is  commonly  off  the  shore
at  this  yland  of  S. Helena.

On  Wednesday  being  the  thirde  day  of  July  we  went  July  1588.
away  Northwest the  winde being still  at  Southeast ; at
which  time  we  were  in i.  degree  and  48  minuts  to  the
Southward  of  the  Equinoctial  line.

The  twelfth  day  of  the  said  moneth  of  July  it  was  very
little  winde,  and  toward  night  it  was  calme  and  blew  no
winde  at  all,  and  so  continued  untill  it  was  Munday,  being
the  15.  day  of  July.

On  Wednesday  the  17.  day  of  the  abovesaid  moneth
wee  had  the  winde  skant  at  West  northwest.  Wee  found
the  wind  continually  to  blow  at  East,  and  Northeast,
and  Eastnortheast  after  we  were  in  3.  or  4.  degrees  to  the  [III.  825,]
Northward  ;  and  it  altered  not  untill  we  came  betweene  30.
and  40.  degrees  to  the  Northward  of  the  Equinoctial  Line.

On  Wednesday  the  21.  day  of  August  the  wind  came
up  at  Southwest  a  faire  gale :  by  which  day  at  noone
we  were  in  38.  degrees  of  Northerly  latitude.

On  Friday  in  the  morning  being  the  23.  day  ot
August,  at  foure  of  the  clocke  we  haled  East,  and  East
and  by  South  for  the  Northermost  ylands  of  the  Azores.

On  Saturday  the  24.  day  of  the  said  moneth  by  5.  of
the  clocke  in  the morning  we fel  in sight of  the two
ylands  of  Flores  and  Corvo  standing  in  39.  degrees  and  CorvoandFlo-
1.  and  sailed  away  Northeast.  ^nlTJiZe:

The  third  of  September  we  met  with  a  Flemish  hulke
which  came  from  Lisbone,  &  declared  unto  us  the  over-
throwing of  the  Spanish  Fleete,  to  the  singuler  rejoycing
and  comfort  of  us  all.

The  9.  of  September,  after  a  terrible  tempest  which
caried  away  most  part  of  our  sailes,  by  the  merciful!
favour  of  the  Almightie  we  recovered  our  long  wished
port  of  Plimmouth  in  England,  from  whence  we  set  foorth
at  the  beginning  of  our  voyage.

347

A.D.
1588.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Certaine  rare  and  special  notes  most  properly  belong-
ing to  the  voyage  of  M.  Thomas  Candish  next  before
described  ;  concerning  the  heights,  soundings,  lyings
ot  lands,  distances  of  places,  the  variation  of  the
Compasse, the just length of  time spent in
sayling  betweene  divers  places,  and  their  abode
in  them,  as  also  the  places  of  their  harbour
and anckering, and the depths  of  the
same, with the observation of the
windes  on  severall  coastes:  Written
by  M.  Thomas  Fuller  of  Ipswich,
who  was  Master  in  the  desire
of M. Thomas Candish
in  his foresaid pros-
perous voyage
about  the
world.

A  note  of  the  heights of  certaine places  on  the
coast  of  Barbarie.

Nprimis Cape Cantin
standeth  in  the  la-
titude of
Item the yland of
Mogador  standeth
in
Item Cape d'oro
standeth  in
Item the ylands of the Canaries

about
Item  Cape  Bojador  standeth  in
Item  Cape  Verde  standeth  in
Item  the  Cape  of  Sierra  Liona  in
Item  an  yland  called  Ilha  Verde  in

348

32.  degr. 4.  min.

3^'

30-

28.

27.

14.

8.

7-

degr.  30.  min.

degr.  20.  min.

degr.

degr.  30.  min.

degr.  30.  min.

degr.

degr.  30.  min.

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES

A.D.
1588.

A  note  of  the  heights  of  certaine  places  from  the
coast  of  Brasill  to  the  South  sea.

INprimis  Cape  Frio  standeth  in  the
latitude  of
Item  the  yland  of  S.  Sebastian  in
Item  Port  desire  standeth  in
Item  Seales  bay  standeth  in
Item  Port  S.  Julian  standeth  in
Item  The  white  river  standeth  in
Item  Cape  Joy  standeth  in
Item  Port  famine  within  the  Straights

of  Magellan  standeth  in
Item  Cape  froward  within  the  Straights

of  Magellan  standeth in
Item.  Cape  desire  in  the  entring  into

the  South  sea  standeth  in

23.  degr.  30.  min.

24.  degr.

47.  degr.  50.  min.

48.  degr.  20.  min.
50.  degr.

50.  degr.  30.  min.

52.  degr.  40.  min.

53.  degr.  50.  min.

54.  degr.  15.  min.
53.  degr.  10.  min.

A  note  of  the  heights of  certaine  places  on  the
coast  of  Chili  and Peru  in  the  South  sea.

INprimis  the  yland  of  Mocha  stand-
eth in  the  latitude  of
Item  the  yland  of  S. Mary  in
Item  the  bay  of  *Valpares  in
Item  the  bay  of  Quintero  in
Item  Coquimbo  in
Item  Morro  moreno  in
Item  Arica  standeth  in
Item  the  bay  of  Pisca  standeth  in
Item  the  bay  of  Lima  standeth  in
Item  Santos  standeth  in
Item  the  bay  of  Cherrepe  in
Item  the  bay  of  Paita,  in
Item  the  yland  of  Puna,  in
Item  Cape  Sant  Francisco  to  the  North
of  the  Equinoctiall,  in

349

38.

37-

33-

33-
29.

23-
18.

II.

9
6.

5-

2.

degr.
degr.
degr.
degr.
degr,
degr.
degr.
degr.
degr,
degr.
degr.
degr,
degr.

30.  mm.
15.  min.

40.  min.  *  Fa/parizo.
20.  min.
30.  min,
20.  min.
30.  min.
30.  min.
50.  min.

20.  min.  [III.  826.]
30.  min.
4.  min.
50.  min.

I.  degr

A.D.
1588.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

*0r,

Guatulco.

*  Las  tres
Marias.

Or  Panuma.

places  to  the
line,  on  the

degrees,
degr.  10.
degr.  10.
degr.  40.
degr,  50.
degr.  20.
degr.  50.
degr.  30.
degr.  30.
degr.  20.
degr.
degr.  40.

min.
min.
min.
min.
min.
min.
min.
min.
min.

min.

A  note  of  the height of  certaine
Northwards  of  the  Equinoctiall
coast  of  New  Spaine.

INprimis Panama standeth  in the

latitude  of  9.

Item  the  yland  called  Isla  de  Canoas,  in  9.

Item  Cape  Blanco,  in  10.

Item  Rio  Lexo,  in  12.

Item  *Aguatulco,  in  15.

Item  Acapulco,  in  17.

Item  Sant  lago,  in  18.

Item  Cape  de  los  Corrientes,  in  20,

Item  the  bay  of  Xalisco,  in  21,

Item  the  ylands  of  the  *  Maries,  in  21,

Item  the  yland  of  Saint  Andrew,  in  22

Item  the  ylands  of  Ciametlan,  in  23,
Item,  that  the  Cape  of  Santa  Clara

on  the  point  of  California  is  in  23.  degrees.

A  note  of  the  heights  of  certaine  places  begin-
ning from  the  ylands  of  the  Ladrones  and
passing  by  the  Philippinas,  the  Malucos,  Java
minor,  Java  major,  the  Cape  of  Bona  Speranza,
and  the  yle  of  Santa  Helena.

INprim.  one  of  the  ylands  of  the  La-
drones  called  Guana  standeth  in
Item  Cape De  Spirito  Santo  on  the

yle  of  Luzon  standeth  in
Item  the  yland  of  Capul  in
Item that the yland of Seboyon

standeth  in
Item that the Easterly end of  the

yland  of  *  Pannay  is  in
Item  that  the  opening  betweene  the
South  head  of  Pannay  and  the
South  head  of  Isla  de  los  Negros  is  in  10.  degr.  10.  min.

350

13.  degr.  50.  min.

13.  degr.

12.  degr.  30,  min.

12.  degr.

1 1 .  degr.

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES

Item  that  the  South-head  of  Isla  de

los  Negros  is  in
Item that the North-head of the

yland Mindanao  is  in
Item the South-head of  Mindanao

called  Cape  Cannel is  in
Item  the  Cape  of  Batochina  is  in
*  Item  that  12.  small  ylands  stand  in
Item  the  latitude  of  two  other  ylands

is  in
Item  the  Westerly  head  of  Java  minor

is  toward  the  South  in
Item  the  Easterly  head  of  Java  major

is  toward  the  South  in
Item  Malaca  standeth  to  the  North-
ward in
Item  Cape  Falso  on  the  promontory

of  Africa,  standeth  in
Item the Cape of Bona Speranza

standeth  in
Item the yland of Santa Helena

standeth  in
Item the Cape of S. Augustine

standeth  Southward  in

A.D.

1588.

9.  degr.  10.  min.

7.  degr.  50.  min.

6.  degr.  40.  min.
10.  min.

3.  degr.

4.  degr.  10.  min.

8.  degr.  30.  min.
8.  degr.  20.  min.
2.  degr.

34.  degr.  20.  min.

34.  degr.  40.  min.

15.  degr.  40.  min.

8.  degr.  40.  min.

To  the  South-
wards of  the
Line.

Soundings  on  the  coast  of  Barbaric  from  Rio
del  Oro  unto  Cape  Blanco.

Nprimis  about  3.  leagues  off  Rio  del  Oro
you  shall  have  very  faire  shoulding,  fine
white  sand  18.  fathoms,  and  so  alongst
unto  Cape  Blanco  two  or  three  leagues
off  the  shore  you  shall  have  18.  and  20.
fathoms.  And  when  you  come  within
one  league  of  the  Cape  you  shall  have
thirteene  fathoms,  browne  sand,  very  faire
And  if  you  will  hall  in  with  Cape  Blanco,

twelve or
shoulding.

beware  you  come  not  within  seven  or  eight  fathoms  of
the  Cape : for  there  lyeth  a  sand  off  the  Cape.

351

I

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Also  about  7.  or  eight  leagues  ofF  the  Cape  lyeth  a
long  should  next  hand  Southwest  and  by  South  off  the
Cape.

[III.  827.]  Soundings  on  the  coast  of  Guiny.

Tern,  Going  unto  Sierra  Leona,  having  the  cape  East-
northeast  off  you,  7.  leagues  off,  you  shall  have  22
fadome  browne  sand.  And  hailing  in  you  shall  finde
very  faire  shoalding.  You  may  be  bold  to  borrow  on
the  Southermost  shore :  but  take  heed  of  a  rocke  that
lieth  in  the  faire  way  a  good  birth  off  the  shore,  but
there  is  no  feare  of  it :  for  it  lieth  above  the  water,
and  is  distant  two  miles  off  the  South  shore.

Item,  You  may  be  bolde  to  borrow  hard  by  the  rocke ;
for  on  the  North  side  going  in  there  lieth  one  long
sand  which  runneth  Southeast  and  Northwest,  and  lieth
distant  from  the  South  shore  2  leagues.  And  you  shall
anker  in  14  or  15 fadoms  hard by  the  shore.

Also  going  unto  the  island  called  lUha  Verde,  the
which  iland  lieth  10  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Sierra
Leona,  the  course  is  Southsouthwest,  and  Northnorth-
east :  and  you  shall  have  betweene  them  9  or  10  fadome.
And  if  you  will  anker  at  the  sayd  iland,  you  shall  have
5  or  6  fadome  hard  by  the  shore.

Also  you  must  have  especiall  care  of  a  great  current
that  setteth  alongst  the  coast  of  Guiny  to  the  Eastward.
Item,  And  if  you  be  bound  unto  the  Southwards,
you  must  go  Westsouthwest  off,  for  feare  of  the
shoald  that  is  called  Madera  Bomba,  the  which  shoald
is  to  the  Southwards  of  the  iland.

Soundings  on  the  coast  of  Brasil.

ITem,  Unto  the  Northwards  of  Cape  Frio,  the  cape
bearing  southwest  off  you,  about  17  or  18  leagues
off,  you  shall  have  45  fadoms  streamy  ground :  and
running  Southwest,  you  shall  find  32  fadoms  blacke
sand :  and  then  running  Westsouthwest  into  a  deepe
bay,  which  lieth  tenne  leagues  to  the  Northwards  of  the

352

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES  a.d.

1588.

cape,  you  shall have 22 fadoms oaze : that  depth  you

shall  have  all  alongst,  except  you  be  farre  into  the  bay ;

and  then  you  shall  have 16  fadoms  all  oazie.

Item,  To  the  Northwards  of  Cape  Frio,  about  6  or
7  leagues,  you  shall  have  many  small islands.

Item,  To  the  Northwards  of  the  cape  6.  leagues,  you
shall  have  two  small  islands  one  mile  distant  the  one
from  the  other,  and  they  are  distant  from  the  maine
five  leagues.  And  betweene  those  ilands  and  the  cape
you  shall  have  very  many  islands  hard  aboord  the  maine.

Item,  The  cape  bearing  West  of  you  two  leagues  ofF,
you  shall  have  ^^  fadoms  oaze.  Also  you  shall  know
when  you  are  shot  about  the  cape  unto  the  Southwards,
by  deeping  of  the  water.

Also  if  you  will  go  for  S.  Sebastian  from  the  cape,
you  must  go  West  and  South,  and  Westsouthwest
among.  And  the  distance  from  the  cape  unto  S.
Sebastian  is  50  leagues.  And  being  shot  into  the  bay
any  thing  nere  the  shore,  you  shall  have  24  fadoms  all
oazie.

And  hailing  in  for  S.  Sebastian,  you  shall  know  it  by
two  little  islands  which  be  round :  and  those  ilands  lie
from  the  iland  of  S.  Sebastian  next  hand  East  and  by
South ;  and  are  distant  the  one  from  the  other  about
foure  leagues.

Also  off  the  Southermost  end  of  S.  Sebastian,  there
lieth  one  iland  about  6  leagues  off;  which  iland  is
called  the  Alcatrarza,  and  there  lie  foure  little  ilands
about  it.  Also  you  may  know  it  by  the  trending  of
the  land  unto  the  Southwards.

Item,  If  you  will  go  in  at  the  Northermost  end  of
S.  Sebastian,  you  must  take  heed  of  a  sand  that  lieth
on  the  Northeast  part  of  the  iland :  but  you  may  be
bolde  to  borrow  on  the  iland :  for  the  sand  lieth  off
the  maine  side.  Also  you  may  anker  on  the  Norther-
most part  of  the  iland  in  tenne  fadoms ;  and  the  maine
is  distant  from  you  where  you  shall  ride  two  leagues
off.

XI  353  z

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Item,  If  you  will  come  in  at  the  Southermost  end  of
the  Hand  of  S.  Sebastian,  your  course  from  the  Alcatrarza
is  Southwest  &  Northeast,  and  their  distance  is  6  leagues
the  one  from  the  other.

Item,  Unto  the  Southwards  of  the  river  of  Plate,  being
in  the  latitude  of  45  degrees  and  60  leagues  ojfF  the
maine,  you  shall  have  shoalding  in  60  fadoms  or  65
fadoms  oazie  sand :  and  then  hailing  in  for  the  shore
Westsouthwest  16  leagues,  you  shall  have  50  fadoms
oaze,  and  you  shall  have  faire shoalding  all  along.

Item,  In  the  latitude  of  47J  you  shall  see  about  one
mile  in  length,  not  passing  one  league  off  the  shore,
a  ledge  of  broken  ground,  but  no  danger.  Also  you
shall  have  very  faire  shoalding  all  along  the  coast ;  and
the  land  lying  South  and  North  untill  you  come  unto
port  Desire,  which  standeth  in  48 degrees.

Item,  If  you  will  go  into  port  Desire,  on  the  North
side  there  lieth  one  ledge  of  rocks  about  a  league  distant
from  the  shore.  Also  on  the  North  side  at  the  mouth
of  the  harborow,  there  lie  a  couple  of  rocks,  which  are
at  halfe  flood  under  water :  but  be  bolde  to  borrow  on
[III.  828.]  the  Southermost  shore;  for  there  is  no  danger;  and
you  shall  have  no  lesse  then  6  fadoms  water  at  a  low
water,  the  harborow  lying  East  and  West.  Also  you
may  know  the  harborow  by  one  litle  iland  that  lieth
Southeast  off  the  mouth  of  the  harborow,  and  it  is
distant  4  leagues.  Furthermore,  you  may  know  the
harborow  by  an  high  rocke  that  standeth  on  the  South
side ;  and  this  rocke  is  very  much  like  a  watch  tower.
Also  if  you  be  any  thing  in,  you  may  anker  in  5  fadoms
at  a  low  water.

Item,  It  floweth  there  South  and  North,  and  higheth
at  spring  tides  3  fadoms  and  an  halfe  water ;  and  in
the  offing  the  flood  setteth  to  the  Northward.

Item,  In  the  latitude  of  48  degrees  50  minuts  you
shall  have  44  fadoms  blacke  sand  about  5  leagues  off:
and  about  3  leagues  off  you  shall  have  25  fadoms,  and
great  shingle  stones.

354

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES  a.d.

1588.

Item,  In  the  latitude  of  49  degrees  J  you  shall  have
sounding  in  38 fadoms  oazie  sand.

Item,  In  the  latitude  of  51  degrees  10  minuts  you
shall  have  soundings  4  leagues  from  the  shore  in  44
fadoms  small  blacke  stones.

Soundings within the entrance of  the Streights.

ITem,  About  two  leagues  from  the  Northermost  shore
you  shall  have  38  fadoms  blacke  sand,  and  all  along
you  shall  have  deepe  water,  not  lesse  then  18  or  20
fadoms  in  the  faire  way.

Soundings  on  the  coast  of  Chili  in  the  South

sea.

ITem, In the latitude  of  36 degrees  you  shall  have

soundings  in  12  fadoms,  2  miles  from  the  land,
browne  sand.

Item, In  the  latitude  of  35 degrees,  you  shall  have

soundings  one  league  off  from the  land  in  10  fadoms
white  sand.

Soundings  on  the  coast  of  New  Spaine  in  the
South  sea.

ITem,  In  the  latitude  of 14  degrees  to  the  North  of
the  line,  you  shall have soundings 4 leagues from
the  land  in  30  fadoms,  browne  sand.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  14  degrees  unto  the  latitude
of  15  degrees,  you  shall  have  faire  shoalding  3  leagues
from  the  land.

Soundings  on  the  coast  of  Africa  unto  the
Eastward  of  the  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza
40  leagues.

ITem,  To  the  Eastwards  of  the  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza
40  leagues,  in  the  latitude  of  34  degrees  and  10
minuts,  8  leagues  from  the  land,  you  shall  have  6^
fadome,  and  browne  sand.

[A  note
355

A.D.
1588.

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

A  note  of  the  lying  of  the  land  unto  the
Southward  of  Port  Desire.

N  prim  is,  Scales  bay  standeth  unto  the
Southwards  of  Port  Desire  12  leagues
Southsouthwest.  Furthermore,  unto  the
Southwards  of  Seales  bay  3  leagues,  you
shall  have  very  low  land.  Also  more
unto  the  Southwards  of  Seales  bay  7
^  leagues,  in  the  heighth  of  48  degrees
40  minuts,  you  shall  see  a  rocke  5  leagues  off  the  shore,
the  land  lying  Southwest  and  by  South.

Item,  In  the  latitude  of  49  degrees  |-,  you  shall  see
a  small  flat  Hand,  about  a  league  and  an  halfe  off  the
shore,  the  land  lying  Southwest  and  by  South.  Further-
more, from  the  latitude  of  49  degrees  ^  unto  the
latitude  of  50  degrees,  the  land  lieth  South  and  by
West,  and  is  high  land.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  50  degrees  unto  the
latitude  of  50  degrees  40  minuts,  the  land  lieth  South-
west and  by  South.  Furthermore,  from  the  latitude
of  50  degrees  40  minuts  unto  the  latitude  of  52  degrees
17  minuts,  the  land  lieth  South  and  by  West,  North
and  by  East.

Item,  In  the  sayd  latitude  of  52  degrees  17  minuts,
there  goeth  in  an  harborow,  which  is  to  be  knowen  by
a  long  beache  that  lieth  on  the  South  side  of  the
harborow.  Moreover,  the  sayd  harborow  standeth  12
leagues  unto  the  Northwards  of  Cape  Joy.  Further-
more, from  the  latitude  of  52  degrees  17  minuts  unto
the  latitude  of  52  degrees  40  minuts  (in  which  heigth
standeth  Cape  Joy)  the  land  lieth  Southsoutheast,  and
Northnorthwest.

Item,  Comming  from  the  Northwards,  you  shall  see
before  you  come  to  Cape  Joy,  a  very  long  beach,  about
the  length  of  8  leagues,  being  5  leagues  short  of  the
cape  unto  the  Northwards.  Also  unto  the  Southwards
of  the  cape,  you  shaU  see  another  beach  about  a  league

356

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES  a.d.

1588.

long,  adjoyning  hard  under  the  cape;  about  which  beach

is  the  entrance  of  the  Streights  of  Magellan,  the  which

Straights are in breadth sixe leagues over, from the

cape  unto  the  South  shore,  lying  South  and  by  East.

Item, From Cape Joy, being the entrance of  the  [HI.  829.]

streight  of  Magellan,  unto  the  first narrow  passage of  ^^he  entrance
•  •  r &  of  the  streizht

the sayd  streight ; the course is West  and by North,

and  East  and  by  South,  and  are  distant  1 8  leagues  ;  the

land being in breadth  from  the  one side to  the  other

one  league.

Item,  From  the  first  narrow  unto  the  second  narrow
passage,  the  course  is  West  &  by  South,  and  East  and
by  North ;  and  the  distance  is  12  leagues :  and  in
breadth  the  one  side  is  from  the  other  about  two  leagues
over.

Item,  from  the  second  narrow  unto  the  islands  that
be  called  Elizabeth,  Bartholomew,  and  Penguin  ilands,
the  distance  is  5  leagues,  and  the  course  is  Southwest
and  Northeast :  the  islands  being  distant  a  league  and
an  halfe  the  one  from  the  other.

Item,  From  the  sayd  ilands  unto  Port  Famine  is  16
leagues  :  the  course  is  Southsouthwest,  and  Northnorth-
east.  Moreover,  from  Port  Famine  unto  Cape  Froward,
the  course  is  South  and  by  West,  and  North  and  by
East :  and  they  are  distant  8  leagues  asunder.

Item,  From  Cape  Froward  unto  S.  Jeromes  river,  is
16  leagues  :  the  course  is  Northwest  and  Southeast.
Also  from  S.  Jeromes  river  unto  the  uttermost  land  on  The  end  of  the
the  South  side,  the  which  is  called  Cabo  Deseado,  the  ^^^^^Sf^^-
course  is  Northwest  &  somewhat  to  the  Northward,  and
are  distant  30  leagues.  So  the  whole  length  of  the
streight  of  Magellan is 105  leagues.

A  note  of  the  lying  of  the  lands  in  the  South

sea.

IN  primis,  There  stand  in  the  latitude  of  52  degrees
and  50  minuts,  three  or  foure  ilands,  about  8  leagues
from  Cabo  Deseado :  the  course  is  Northnorthwest,  and

357

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Southsoutheast.  And  those  Hands  stand  in  the  mouth
of  the  streight  of  Magellan,  at  the  going  into  the
South  sea.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  52  degrees  50  minuts,
unto  the  latitude  of  51  degrees,  the  land  lieth  North-
northeast,  and  Southsouthwest.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  50  degrees  unto  the
latitude  of  38  degrees  and  30  minuts,  the  land  lieth
Northeast  and  by  North,  Southwest  and  by  South.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  38  degrees  30  minuts  unto
the  latitude  of  37  degrees  14  minuts,  the  land  lieth
North  and  South.

Item, From the iland of S. Marie, being in the

latitude  of  37  degrees  14  min.  unto  the  heighth  of  36

The  bay  of degrees 14 minuts, in  which height standeth  The Bay

Conception. q£  Conception,  the  course is Northeast and Southwest,

and  the  distance 12  leagues.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  36  degrees  40  minuts
unto  the  latitude  of  35  degrees  20  minuts,  the  land
lieth  Northeast  and  by  North,  Southwest  and  by  South.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  35  degrees  20  minuts
unto  the  latitude  of  33  degrees  30  minuts,  the  land
lieth  Northnortheast,  and  Southsouthwest.

Item, In the latitude of  34 degrees you shall see

about five miles off  from the shore  a banke of  sand,

on  the  which  you  shall  have  but  shoald  water.

lldeg.zomi. Item,  From  the  latitude  of  33  degrees  20  minuts  unto

In  which ^^ latitude of  29 degrees 20  minuts, the  land  lieth

Quintero. Northnortheast,  and  Southsouthwest.

Item, From the latitude of  29 degrees 20 minuts
z-] deg. \o  mi.  unto the latitude of  27 degrees 40 minuts, the  land

/^"'^^^j lieth  Northnortheast,  and  Southsouthwest.
CM>iapr  '  Item,  In the  latitude  of  29  degrees 20  minuts,  there

lie  two  ilands  distant  4  leagues  asunder,  and  about  one
league  from  the  maine.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  27  degrees  40  minuts  unto
the  latitude  of  23  degrees  30  minuts,  the  land  lieth
North  and  by  East,  South  and  by  West.

358

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES  a.d.

1588.

Item, From the latitude of 25 degrees unto the
latitude  of  23  degrees  and  30  minuts,  the  land  is  very  z7,deg.'iomi.
high.  ^"^  ""^''^

Item, From the latitude of 23 degrees unto the  Mfrromorem.
latitude of 22 degrees, the  land  lieth Northnortheast,
and  Southsouthwest.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  22  degrees  unto  the  latitude
of  18  degrees  and  30  minuts,  the  land  lieth  North  and  by i?,deg.^omi.
East,  South  and  by  West.  heilutmdeth

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  1 8  degrees  30  minuts,  unto  JJf^^^
the  latitude  of  18  degrees,  the  land  lieth  Northwest  and
by  West,  Southeast  and  by  East.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  1 8  degrees  unto  the  latitude
of  13  degrees  30  minuts,  the  land  lieth  Northwest  and \-^deg.iomu
Southeast : in  which  heigth  there  lie  two  or  three  ilands, j'^  ^^^'^^
which  ilands  lie  off  a  place  where  are  two  townes  called  pfj.J^^/^^
Paraca,  and  Pisca.  pisca.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  13  degrees  30  minuts,
unto  the  latitude  of  1 1  degrees  50  minuts,  the  land  lieth
Northnorthwest,  and  Southsoutheast.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  11  degrees  50  minuts,  unto  [III.  830.]
the  latitude  of  6  degrees,  the  land  lieth  North and  by  ^  i  ^^S-  5°  f"i-
West,  South  and  by  East. Also  you  shall  see  two  ilands, ,  ^l!"t''\

1-11  rrd T1 1 r  T 1  1  J • 1 height  Stand

which  be  called  The  Ilands  or  L,obos,  that  stand  m  the  ^J^g  n^^j^  ^

latitude  of  6  degrees.  Lobos.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  6  degrees,  unto  the  latitude
of 5 degrees,  the  land  lieth Northwest  and by  West,  5.  degrees.
Southeast  and  by  East.  ^"  '^^^^^

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  5  degrees  unto  the  latitude  ^^'^t^'^^d'th
of  4  degrees,  the  land  lieth  Northwest  and  Southeast :  in
which  height  of  4  degrees  standeth  Cape  Blanco.

Item,  From  the  latitude  of  4  degrees  unto  the  latitude

of  2  degrees  50  minuts  (in  which  latitude  of  2  degrees  zdeg.'^omin.

CO minuts standeth the iland of  Puna) the course is ,  ^"^^"^
i-r ,  J o 1  height  Standeth

Northeast  and  bouthwest.  tj,^  ;i^f,rf  nf

the  iland  of
Puna.

[A  note
359

A.D.

1588.

Leases  25.

Leahies  12.
Leagues  80.
Leagues  y.

Leagues  72.

Leagues  55.

Leagues  70.
Leagues  90.

Leagues  120.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  note  of  the  distance  betweene certeine places
on  the  coasts  of  Chili  and  Peru.

N  primis,  From  the  iland  of  Mocha
unto  the  iland  of  S.  Mary,  the  course
is  North  and  South,  and  the  distance  is
25  leagues.

Item,  From  the  iland  of  S.  Mary  unto
the bay of Conception, the course is
Northeast and Southwest, and the dis-
tance is 12  leagues.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Conception  unto  the  port  of
Valpariso,  the  course  is  Northnortheast  and  Southsouth-
west,  and  the  distance  is  80  leagues.

Item,  From  the  port  of  Valpariso  unto  the  bay  of
Quintero,  the  course  is  Northeast  and  by  North,  and
Southwest  and  South,  and  the  distance  is  7  leagues.  In
which  bay  of  Quintero  there  lieth  one  small  iland.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Quintero  unto  the  bay  of
Coquimbo,  the  course  is  Northnortheast,  and  South-
southwest,  and  the  distance  is  72  leagues:  in  which
height  stand  two  ilands.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Coquimbo  unto  the  bay  of
Copiapo,  the  course  is  Northnortheast  and  Southsouth-
west,  and  the  distance  is  c^^  leagues:  in  which  height
standeth  one  iland.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Copiapo  unto  the  bay  of
Morro  moreno,  the  course  is  Northnortheast  and  South-
southwest,  and  the  distance  is  70  leagues.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Morro  moreno,  unto  the  bay
of  Arica,  the  course  is  North  &  by  East,  South  &  by
West,  and  the  distance  is  90  leagues :  in  which  bay
of  Arica  standeth  one  small  iland.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Arica  unto  the  bay  of  Par-
raca,  the  course  is  Northwest  and  Southeast,  and  the
distance  is  120  leagues:  in  which  bay  of  Parraca  stand
three  or  foure  ilands.

Item, From the bay of Parraca unto the bay of

360

THOMAS FULLER'S  NOTES  ad.

1588.

Lima,  the  course  is  Northwest  and  by  North, South-
east and  by  South,  and  the  distance  is  25 leagues: in  Leagues  $$.
the  bay  of  Lima  is  one  iland.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Lima  unto  the  bay  of  Cherrepe,
the  course  is  North  &  by  West,  South  and  by  East,
and  the  distance  is  90  leagues.  Leagues  90.

Item, From the bay of  Cherrepe unto the bay of
Paita it is  45 leagues,  the course is 20  leags West-  Leagues  45.
northwest  unto  two  ilands  that  be  called  The  ilands  of
Lobos, and from thence unto the bay of  Paita it is
25  leagues,  the  course  is  North  and  by  East.

Item,  From  Paita  unto  Cape  Blanco,  the  course  is
North  and  by  West,  South  and  by  East,  and  the
distance  is  25  leagues.  Leagues  25.

Item, From Cape Blanco unto the iland of  Puna,
the  course  is  Eastnortheast  and  Westsouthwest,  and  the
distance  is  25  leagues:  and  you  shall  see  one  iland  that  Leagues  z^.
is  called  Santa  Clara,  which  standeth 10  leagues  to  the  Leases  in  all
Southward  of  Puna.  '^^^  7Si.

A note of  certeine places unto the Northwards
of  the  Line.

IN  primis.  From  Cape  Blanco  unto  Cape  S.  Laurence,
the  course  is  North  &  by  East,  South  and  by  West,
and  the  distance  60  leagues.  Leagues  60.

Item,  From  Cape  S.  Lorenzo  unto  Cape  S.  Francisco,
the  course  is  North  &  by  East,  South  and  by  West,  and
the  distance  is  40  leagues.  Leagues  40.

Item,  From  Cape  S.  Francisco  unto  the  cape  that
is  called  Cape  Blanco,  which  cape  is  on  the  coast  of
New  Spaine,  the  course  is  Northnortheast  and  South-
southwest,  and  the  distance  is  1 60  leagues :  and  you  Leagues  1 60.
shall  have  a  great  current  that  setteth  out  of  the
bay  of  Panama ;  and  the  sayd  current  setteth  South
out.

Item,  From  Cape  Blanco  unto  the  Port  de  Veles,  the
course  is  Northeast  and  Southwest,  and  the  distance
8 leagues.  Leagues  8.

361

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Item, From the  Port  de  Veles  unto the  port  of  S.
John, the course is Northwest and Southeast,  and  the
Leagues  17. distance  is 1 7  leagues.

"[III.  831.]  Item,  From  the  port  of  S.  John  unto  Rio  Lexo,  the

course  is  Northwest,  and  Southeast,  and  the  distance  is
Leagues  40. 40  leagues.

Item, From Rio Lexo unto the gulfe of  Fonsecco,
the course is Westnorthwest, and Eastsoutheast, and
Leagues  14. they  are  distant 14  leagues.

Item,  In  the  mouth  of  Rio  Lexo  there  lieth  one  iland,
and  you  must  goe  in  on  the  Northwest  part  of  that  iland  ;
on  the  which  iland  you  may  be  bolde  for  to  borrow  on :
and  you  must  goe  from  that  iland  Southeast  up.

Item,  That  in  the  gulfe  of  Fonsecco  you  shall  have
lying  ten  ilands,  whereof  three  be  peopled  with  Indians,
whereon  you  may  have  water,  wood,  and  salt.

Item,  On  the  West  side  of  the  gulfe  of  Fonsecco
there  is  one  towne  of  Indians,  which  is  called  Mapal,
in  which  towne  there  is  great  store  of  beeves.

Item,  From  the  river  Lexo  unto  the  bay  of  Sonsonate,
the course is East and West, and the distance is
Leagues  60. 60  leagues.

Item, From the bay of  Sonsonate  unto  the port of
Aguatulco,  the  course  is  Northwest  and  by  West,  South-
Leagues  160. east  and  by  East,  and  the  distance 160  leagues.

Item, From the bay of  Coppeleto unto  the port of
Leagues  2. Aguatulco  it is 2 leagues, the course is  West  and  by
North,  East  and  by  South.

Item, From the  port  of  Aguatulco  unto  the  port  of
Angeles, the course  is  East and West, and they are
Leagues  12. distant 12 leagues.

Item, From the port of  Aguatulco unto the port
of  Acapulco,  the  course  is  West  &  by  North,  East  and
Leagues  78. by  South,  and  the  distance  is  78  leagues.

Item, From the  port of  Acapulco unto the port of
S. lago,  the  course is  West  and by  North, East  and
Leagues  80. by  South,  and  the  distance  is 80  leagues.

Item, From the port of S. lago unto the port of

362

THOMAS  FULLER'S  NOTES  ad.

1588.

Natividad,  the  course  is  East  and  West,  and  the  dis-
tance is  7  leagues.  Leagues  7.

Item,  From  the  port  of  Natividad  unto  the  port  of
the  islands  of  Chiametla,  the  course  is  East  and  West,
and  the  distance  is 10  leagues.  Leagues  10.

Item,  From  the  ilands  of  Chiametla  unto  Cape
de  los  Corrientes,  the  course  is  Northwest  and  by
West,  Southeast  and  by  East,  and  the  distance  is
30  leagues.  Leagues  30.

Item,  From  the  Cape  de  los  Corrientes  unto  the  bay
of  Xalisco,  the  course  is  Northnortheast,  and  South-
southwest,  and  the  distance  is 18  leagues.  Leases  18.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Xalisco  unto  the  port  of
Chiametlan,  the  course  is  Northnortheast  and  South-
southwest,  and  the  distance  is  30  leagues.  Leagues  30.

Item,  From  the  Cape  de  los  Corrientes  unto  the
ilands  called  Las  tres  Marias,  the  course  is  Northwest
and  Southeast,  and  the  distance  is  20  leagues.  Leagues  20.

Item,  From  the  Cape  de  los  Corrientes  unto  the  cape
of  Santa  Clara  on  the  point  of  California,  the  course  is
Westnorthwest,  and  Eastsoutheast,  and  the  distance  is
108 leagues.  Leagues  108.

A  note  from  the  coast  of  America  unto  the

Westwards.

ITem,  From  the  cape  of  Santa  Clara  unto  the  ilands  of
The  Ladrones,  the  course  is  West  and  by  South,  East

and  by  North,  and  the  distance  betweene  them  is 1 8  Co  Leagues
1  -^  ^ 1850.

leagues.  ^

Item,  That  the  Southermost  iland  of  the  Ladrones
standeth  in  the  latitude  of  12  degrees  and  10  minuts,
and  from  thence  unto  the  Northermost  iland,  the  course
is  Northnortheast  &  Southsouthwest,  and  the  distance
betweene  them  is  200  leagues :  and  the  said  Northermost
iland  standeth  in  21 degrees 10  minuts.

Item,  From  one  of  the  ilands  of  the  Ladrones,  which
standeth  in  the  latitude  of  13  degrees  and  50  minuts,
which  iland  is  called  *Guaihaime,  unto  the  Cape  de  Spirito  Or  Guana.

363

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

santo,  which  cape  is  upon  one  of  the  ilands  of  the  Philip-
pinas,  the  course  is  West  and  to  the  Southwards,  and  the
Leagues  320. distance  is  320  leagues.

Item,  From  the  cape  of  Spirito  santo  unto  the  mouth
of  the  entrance  of  the  Streights  of  the Philippinas, the
course  is  West  and  by  North,  East  and  by  South,  and
Leagues  15. the  distance  is 15  leagues.

Item,  From  the  mouth  of  the  Streights  unto  the  iland

Leagues  6. Capul,  the  course  is  Southwest  and  by  West  6  leagues.

Item, From  the  iland  of  Capul  unto  the  North  head

of  the  iland  called  Masbat,  the  course  is  Northwest  and

Leagues  15. Southeast,  and  the  distance  betweene  them  is  15  leagues.

Item,  From  the  North  head  of  the  iland  called  Masbat
J  unto  the  iland  called  Sebojon,  the  course  is  Westsouth-

Leagues  in  all  ^^^^  ^^^^  Eastnortheast,  and  the  distance  betweene  them
2414.  is 15  leagues.

[III.  832.] A  note  of  our  course  kept  from  the  iland  Sebojon

unto  the  Southwards.

Tem,  From  the  iland  of  Sebojon  unto  the  East  end  of
the  iland  called  Pannay,  the  course  is  Southeast  and
by  South,  Northwest  and  by  West,  and  the  distance  is
Leagues  22. 22 leagues.

Item,  That  off  the  Easter  end  of  the  iland  of  Pannay
there  lie  certeine  small  ilands,  unto  the  number  of  12
or  more,  and  you  shall  have  shoald  water  among  them.
Item,  From  the  Easter  end  of  Pannay  unto  a  bay
that  is  called  The  bay  of  Lago  grande,  on  the  same
iland,  the  course  is  Westsouthwest,  and  Eastnortheast,
Leagues  \%. and  the  distance  is 18  leagues.

Item,  From  the bay  of  Lago grande  unto  the iland
Leagues  6. that  is called  Ysla de  los Negros,  is  the distance  of  6
leagues  Southeast  and  Northwest.

Item,  From  the  bay  of  Lago  grande  unto  three  small

ilands  that  stand  in  the  latitude  of  10  degrees,  the  course

is  South  and  by  West 12  leagues. Furthermore,  from

those  three  ilands  unto  the  Westermost  end  of  Ysla  de

Leagues  10. los  Negros,  the  course is  Southwest  and  Northeast  10

364

I

THOMAS FULLER'S  NOTES  ad.

1588.

leagues, where we were cleere of the ilands of  the
Philippinas.

Item,  From  the South  end of  Ysla  de  los Negros
unto  the  North  head  of  the  Hand  called  Mindanao,  the
course is South and North, and the distance is 30  Leagues  30.
leagues.

Item,  From  the  North  end  of  Mindanao  unto  the
South  head  of  the  sayd  iland,  which  is  called  Cape
Cannal,  the  course  is  South  and  by  West,  North  and
by  East,  and  the  distance  is  26  leagues.  Leagues  26.

Item, From  the  cape  of  Cannal betweene the  South
and  the  Westsouthwest  about 10  or 12  leagues  off  you  Leagues  12.
shall  have  great  store  of  small  ilands,  about  the  number
of  24  or  more.

Item,  From  the  cape  of  Cannal  unto  the  cape  of  Bato-
china,  the  course  is  Southsouthwest,  and  Northnortheast,
and  the  distance  is  100  leagues,  and  betweene  them  setteth  Leases  100.
a  great  current  unto  the  Eastward.

Item,  From  the  cape  of  Batochina  unto  the  West  head
of  Java  minor,  the  course  is  Southwest  and  by  South,
Northeast  and  by  North,  and  the  distance  betweene  them
is 220  leagues.  Leagues  220.

Item,  From the  West end of  Java minor  unto the
East end of  Java major, the course is West and  by
North,  and  East  &  by  South,  and  the  distance  betweene
them  is  18  leagues: in  the  which  course  there  lieth  one  Leagues  18.
*  iland betweene them, which iland is in length 14  "^  This  is  the
leagues.  '^'  "f^^^y-

Item, From the  East end of  Java major unto the
cape of  Buena  Esperanza, the course is  West and by
South, and  Westsouthwest, and the distance betweene  j^g^gues
them  is 1800  leagues.  1800.

Item, That Cape Falso standeth 30 leagues to the  Leagues  30.
Eastward  of  Cape  de  Buena  Esperanza,  &  off  the  sayd
Cape Falso  you  shal have shoalding 20 leagues  off  in
80 or 90 fadoms, & the course is from Cape Falso
unto the  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza  Westnorthwest  and  Leagues  in  all
Eastsoutheast.  ""^^  2292.

365

A.D.

1588.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I

Leases
1200,

A  note  of  the  distance  and  course  from  the  cape
of  Buena  Esperanza  unto  the  Northwards.

Tern,  From  the  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza  unto  the
Hand  of  Santa  Helena,  the  course  is  Northwest,  and
Northwest  and  by  West,  and  the  distance  betweene  them
Leagues  600. is  600  leagues.

Item,  From  the  iland  of  Santa  Helena  unto  the  iland
of  Flores,  the  course  betweene  them  is  Northnorthwest,
and  Northwest  and  by  North,  and  the  distance  betweene
them  is 1200 leagues.

Item,  From  the  iland  of  Flores  unto  the  lands  end
of  England,  the  course  is  betweene  the  Eastnortheast,
and  the  Northeast  and  by  East,  and  the  distance  be-
tweene them  is  foure  hundred  and  fifty  leagues,

A  note  of  the  variation  of  our  Compasse.

N  primis,  The  variation  of  our  compasse
on  the  coast  of  New  Spaine  in  the
South  sea  in  the  latitude  of  12  degrees,
was  one  point  to  the  Eastwards.

Item, the  variation of  our compasse

betweene  the  cape  of  California  and  the

ilands  of  the  Philippinas,  was  one  point

and  an  halfe  unto  the  Eastward,  that  was,  that  the  North

did stand North  and  by East,  and halfe  a  point unto

the  East.

Item,  The  variation  of  our  compasse  betweene  the
ilands  of  Maluco  and  the  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza,  was
two  points  and  an  halfe  at  the  most  to  the  Westward,
that  was,  that  the  Northnortheast  was  our  North.

366

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES

A  note  of  our  time  spent  in  sailing  betweene
certeine  places  out  of  England, 1586.

N  primis,  We  were  sailing  betweene  Eng-
land and  the  coast  of  Guinea  from  the
2 1  day  of  July  unto  the  26  day  of  August
unto  the  haven  called  Sierra  leona,  where
we  watered  and  stayed  untill  the  6  day
of  September.

Item,  Wee  departed  from  the  coast  of

A.D.

1588.
[III.  833.]

Of  our  abode
tenne  dayes
where  we
watered.

Guinea  for  the  coast  of  Brasil  the  10  day  of  September,
and  wee  had  sight  of  the  coast  of  Brasil  the  26  day  of
October,  being  sixe  leagues  to  the  Northwards  of  Cape
Frio :  and  from  thence  wee  were  sailing  unto  the  iland
of  S.  Sebastian  untill  the  31  and  last  day  of  October,
where  wee  watered  and  set  up  our  pinnesse :  and  we
ankered  on  the  Northwest  part  of  the  iland  in  tenne
fadoms,  and  stayed  there  untill  the  23  day  of  November.

Item,  The  23  day  of  November  we  departed  from  the
iland  of  Sant  Sebastian,  keeping  our  course  South  and
by  West  unto  the  port  that  is  called  Port  Desire,
where  we  arrived  the  1 7  day  of  December ;  in  which
port  we  graved  our  shippe :  and  we  stayed  there  untill
the  28  day  of  December,  where  we  ankered  in  5  fadoms.

Item,  The  eight  and  twentieth  day  of  December  wee
departed  from  the  Port  of  Desire  toward  the  Streight  of
Magellan,  where  wee  arrived  the  third  day  of  January :
and  wee  remained  in  the  Streights  untill  the  foure  and
twentieth  day  of  February ;  where  we  watered  in  many
places  on  the  South  side,  having  the  winde  all  that
while  betweene  the  Westsouthwest  and  the  Northwest.

Item,  We  departed  out  of  the  Streights  the  24  day
of  February  toward  the  iland  of  Mocha,  which  island  we
had  sight  of  the 14  day  of  March.

Item,  The  14  day  of  March  at  night  we  ankered  in
the  bay  of  Marroccos ;  where  we  rode  in  9  fadoms  water.

Item,  The  15  day  of  March  we  ankered  in  the  iland
of  Saint Marie, on the  North  part of  the island in

367

Of  our  abode
foure  y
twenty  dayes,
where  we
watered.

Of  our  abode
eleven  dayes,
where  we
graved  our
ships.

Of  our  abode
two  y  fiftie
dayes,  where
we  watered.

Of  our  abode
foure  dayes.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

eight  fadoms  water,  blacke  sand,  where  we  stayed  foure
dayes.

Item,  The  19  day  of  March  we  departed  from  the
island  of  Saint  Marie,  and  the  same  day  we  ankered
in  the  bay  of  Conception,  where  we  stayed  untill  the
next  day  :  and  there  we  rode  in  ten  fadoms  water,
shingle  stones.

Item,  The 20  day  of  March we  departed  from  the

bay  of  Conception,  and  the  thirtieth  day  of  March  we

Of  our  abode arrived in the bay of Quintero, where we watered:

6  dayes, where  ^^^  there  the  first  day  of  April  we  had  twelve  of  our

zve  watered.  i-  i-  ijr  *.  j  ^j

men slame, bemg on land ror water: and  we stayed

there  sixe dayes  : and  we  ankered  in 7 fadoms  water,

white  sand.
Of  our  abode Item,  We  departed  from  the  bay  of  Quintero  the  5  day
three  dayes. of  April,  and  we  arrived  at  the  bay  of  Arica  the  24  day  of

April,  and  we  ankered  in  7  fadoms  water.
Of  our  abode Item,  The  27  day  of  April  we  departed  from  the  bay  of
two  dayes. Arica,  and  the  third  day  of  May  we  arrived  in  the  bay  of

Pisca,  and  we  ankered  in  4  fadoms  water  in  oaze.
Of  our  abode Item,  The  5  day  of  May  we  departed  from  the  bay  of
sixe  dayes. pigca,  and  the  1 2  day  we  ankered  in  the  bay  of  Cherrepe,

where  we  ankered  in  7  fadoms  water,  in  white  sand.
Of  our  abode Item,  The  1 8  day  of  May  we  departed  from  the  bay  of
one  day.  Cherrepe,  and  the  20  day  of  May  we  arrived  in  the  bay

of  Payta,  where we  ankered  in 6 fadoms  water.

Item,  The  20  day  of  May  we  departed  from  the  bay

of  Paita,  and  the  26  day  of  May  we  ankered  at  the  iland

of  Puna,  and  we  ankered  in  5 fadoms.
Of  our  abode Item,  From  the  iland  of  Puna  we  departed  the  fourth
9  dales,  where  ^^y q^  June unto Rio dolce in the main, where we

watered, and we ankered  in 10 fadoms  water, browne

sand.
Of  our  abode Item,  The  12  day  of  June  we  departed  from  the  place
%dayes,where  ^^gre  we  watered,  being  bound  for the  coast of New
we  waere  . Spaine,  and  the  29  day  of  July  wee  arrived  in  the  port  of

Aguatulco,  where  wee  watered,  and  ankered  in 6  fadoms

water.

368

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES  ad.

1588.

Item,  The 3 day  of  August  we departed from the

port  of  Aguatulco,  and  the  26  day  of  August  we  arrived

at  the  port  of  S. lago,  where  wee  watered,  and  stayed  Of  our  abode

there  untill  the  second  day  of  September,  and  ankered  in  7  ^-^^^-f^  ^-^f^^
r r ^  y  r  '  ^^  watered.

6  radoms.

Item,  The  2  of  September  we  departed  from  the  port
of  S. lago,  and  the  3 day  of  September  we  put  into  a
port  one  league  unto  the  Westwards  of  Natividad,  where  Of  our  abode
we  ankered  in  8 fadoms  water.  °^^  '^^^•

Item,  The  4  day  of  September  wee  departed  from  the  Of  our  abode
port  of  Natividad, and  the  7 day  of  September  we  put  ^^^'^^  '^'^■^^^•
into the  bay  of  XaHsco,  where  we  ankered  in  9  fadoms
water,  and  the  10  day  of  September  we  departed  from  the  [HI.  834.]
bay  of  Xalisco,  and  the  1 2  day  of  September  we  ankered
at  the  island  of  S.  Andrew, where  we ankered  in 17
fadoms  water.

Item,  The 17 day of  September  we departed  from  Of  our  abode
the  island  of  S.  Andrew, and  the  24  day  of  September  ^^^  ^^y^^-
we  put  into  the  bay  of  Chiametlan,  where  we  ankered
in  8  fadoms  water,  and  the  26  of  September  we  departed
from  the  bay  of  Chiametlan,  and  the  28  day  wee  ankered  Of  our  abode
under  the  islands  of  Chiametlan  in  4  fadoms.  z  day es  where

Item,  The  q day  of  October  wee  departed  from  the  ^^ ,  *

•  1 1 r  /-^i  •  1  1  •  7  1 r  Of  our  abode

islands  or  Chiametlan,  and  crossing  over  the  mouth  or  twelve  dayes,
Mar  vermejo,  the  14  day  of  October  we  had  sight  of  the  where  we
Cape  of  California.  watered

Item,  The  15 day  of  October  we  lay  off  the  Cape  of
S.  Lucas,  and  the  4  day  of  November  we  tooke  the  great
and rich ship called Santa Anna, comming from the
Philippinas:  and  the  5  day  of  November  we  put  into  the  Of  our  abode
port  of  S.  Lucas,  where  we  put  all  the  people  on  shore, ^^ ■^^^'
and  burnt  the  Santa  Anna :  and  we  ankered  in  1 2  fadoms  watered.
water.

Item, The 19 day  of  November  we departed from
the  port  of  S.  Lucas,  and  the  3  day  of  January  wee  had
sight  of  one  of  the  islands  of  the  Ladrones,  which  island
is  called  The  island of  *Iwana,  standing  in  the  latitude  *  Guana.
of  13  degrees  and  50  minuts.

XI  369  2  A

A.D.

1588.

Of  our  abode
nine  dayes.

Spaniards
building  of  a
new  ship  in  the
Philippinas.

Dayes  30.

Of  our  abode
eleven  dayes,
where  we
watered.

Java  major.
Dayes  56.
The  cape  of
Buena  Espe-

Of  our  abode
twelve  dayes,
where  we
watered.

Dayes  14.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Item,  The  3  day  of  January  we  departed  from  the
iland  of  Iwana,  and  the  14  day  of  Januarie  we  had  sight
of  the  cape  of  Spirito  santo,  and  the  same  day  we  put
into  the  Streights  of  the  Philippinas ;  and  the  1 5  day
of  January  we  ankered  under  the  iland  of  Capul,  on  the
which  iland  we  watered  and  wooded.

Item,  The  24  of  January  we  departed  from  the  iland  of
Capul,  and  the  28  day  of  January  we  arrived  in  the  bay
of  Lago  grande,  which  bay  is  in  the  island  of  Pannay,
where  there  were  Spaniards  building  of  a  new  ship.

Item,  The  29  of  January  wee  departed  from  the  bay  of
Lago  grande,  and  the  same  day  at  night  wee  were  cleere
from  the  islands  of  the  Philippinas,  shaping  our  course
towards  the  ilands  of  Maluco.

Item,  From  the  29  day  of  January  unto  the  first  day
of  March,  we  were  navigating  between  the  West  end  of
the  island  of  Pannay  and  the  West  end  of  the  island  of
Java  minor.

Item,  The  first  day  of  March  wee  passed  the  Streights
at  the  West  head  of  the  island  of  Java  minor,  and  the  5
day  of  March  we  ankered  in  a  bay  at  the  Wester  end  of
Java  major,  where  wee  watered,  and  had  great  store  of
victuals  from  the  towne  of  Polambo.

Item,  The  16  day  of  March  wee  departed  from  the
island  of  Java  major,  and  the  1 1  day  of  May  we  had  sight
of  the  land  40  leagues  unto  the  Eastwards  of  the  cape  of
Buena  Esperanza,  the  land  being  low  land.

A  note  from  the  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza  unto
the  Northw^ards.

ITem,  The  2 1  day  of  May  wee  departed  from  the  cape
of  Buena  Esperanza,  and  the  8  day  of  June  we
ankered  on  the  Northwest  part  of  the  iland  of  Santa
Helena,  where  we  watered,  and  made  our  abode  12
dayes.

Item,  The  20  day  of  June  at  night  wee  departed
from  the  island  of  Santa  Helena,  and  the  4  day  of  July
we  passed under  the  Equinoctiall  line.

370

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES

A.D.
1588.

Item,  The  20  day  of  June  at  night  wee  departed  from
the  island  of  Santa  Helena, and  the  25  day  of  August
in  the  morning  wee  had  sight  of  the  islands  of  Flores  and  Tf^^  •f/'^^^  °f
Corvo  in  the  latitude  of  40  degrees.  TZTelf those

Item,  The  9  day  of  September  1588  wee  arrived,  after  Hands  was
a  long  and  terrible  tempest,  in  the Narrow  seas,  in  the  threescore  y
haven  of  Plimmouth  in  safetie,  by  the  gracious  and  most  fi'^^  da^es.
mercifull  protection  of  the  Almighty,  to  whom  therefore
be  rendered  immortall  praise  and  thankesgiving  now  and
for  ever. Amen.

A  note  of  our  ankering  in  those  places  where  we
arrived  after  our  departure  from  England  1586.

N  primis,  Wee  ankered in  the  harborow
of  Sierra  leona  in  10  fadoms  water:  and  Fadoms  10.
a Northwest  winde in  that  rode  is  the
woorst  that  can blow.

Item,  You  may  anker  under  the  island
that  is  called Ilha Verde in 6 fadoms  Fadoms  6.
water  :  and  the  winde  being  at  the  West-
northwest  is  the  woorst  winde  that  can  blow.

Item,  You  may  anker  under  the  island  of  S.  Sebastian
on  the  Northwest  part  in  10  fadoms: and  a  Westsouth-  Fadoms  10.
west  winde  is  the  woorst  winde.

Item,  You  may  anker  in Port Desire in 5 fadoms  [HI-  835.]
water,  and  a  West  and  by  South  winde  is  the  woorst. ^'^^"'"^  5-

Item,  You  may  anker  under  Cape Joy without the
mouth  of  the  Streights  of  Magellan  in  7  fadoms  water. Fadoms  7. «

Item,  You  may  anker  within  the  Streights  of  Magellan,
untill  you  come  unto  the  first  narrowing  in 25 or 30  Fadoms  25.
fadoms  water,  in  the  mid  way  of  the  Streights.

Item, You may  anker  in  the second  narrow  of  the
Streights  in 16  fadoms  water.  Fadoms  16.

Item,  You  may  anker  under  Penguin  island  on  which
side  you  please  in  6  or  7  fadoms  water.  Fadoms  7.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  Port  Famine  in  5  or  6  fadoms  Fadoms  6.
water,  and  a  Southsoutheast  winde  is  the  woorst.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  Muskle  cove,  which  cove  is  on

371

A.D.

1588.

F adorns  12.
F adorns  8.

F adorns  8.
F adorns  9.

F adorns  g.

Fadcnts  7.

F adorns  6.

F adorns  5.
F adorns  8.

Fadoms  7.

Fadoms  4.
Fadoms  10.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  South  side,  and  is  7  leagues  to  the  Southwards  of
Cape  Froward,  and  you  shall  ride  in 12  fadoms.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  Elizabeth  bay,  which  bay  is  on
the  North  side  of  the  Streights  in  8 fadoms  water.

Item,  From  Elizabeth  bay  unto  Cabo  deseado,  you  may
anker  on  both  sides  of  the  Streights  in  many  places.

A note of  our ankering after we were entred
into  the  South  sea.

IN  primis.  You  may  anker  in  the  bay  of  Mocha  in
7  or  8  fadoms  water,  and  there  a  Northeast  winde
is  the  woorst.

Item,  You  may  anker  on  the  North  side  of  S.  Mary
island  in  nine  fadoms  water :  and  there  a  Northnorth-
west  winde  is  the  woorst  winde.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  the  bay  of  Conception  under
one  small  island  in  9  fadoms  water,  and  a  Northnorth-
west  winde  is  the  woorst  winde  in  that  bay.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  the  bay  of  Quintero  in  7
fadoms  water,  and  a  Northnorthwest  wind  is  the  worst
winde.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  the  bay  of  Arica  in  6  fadoms,
and  in  that  bay  a  Westnorthwest  winde  is  the  woorst
winde.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  the  bay  of  Pisca  and  Paraca
in  five  fadoms :  and  in  that  bay  a  Northnorthwest  winde
is  the  woorst.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  the  bay  of  Cherepe  in  8
fadoms,  and  there  from  the  Northwest  unto  the  South-
east it  is  open.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  the  bay  of  Paita  in  7  fadoms
water :  and  there  a  Northnortheast  wind  is  the  woorst
winde.

Item,  You  may  anker  on  the  Northeast  part  of  the
island  of  Puna  in  4  fadoms :  and  a  Northeast  winde
is  the  woorst.

Item,  You  may  anker  at  Rio  dolce,  where  wee  watered,
unto  the  Eastwards  of  the  island  of  Puna  in  10  fadoms.

372

THOMAS  FULLER'S  NOTES  a.d.

1588.

A note of  what depths we ankered  in on the
coast  of  New  Spaine.

I  Tern, You may  anker  in the  port  of  Aguatulco  in
sixe  fadoms water  : and a  Southsouthwest  winde  is  F adorns  6.
the  woorst.

Item,  You may  anker  in  the port  of  S.  lago  in  6  Fadom  6.
fadoms water : and a Westsouthwest winde is the
woorst.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  the  port  of  Natividad  in 8 Fadoms  8.
fadoms  water :  and  a  Southeast  winde  is  the  woorst.

Item,  You may anker on the bay  of  Xahsco  in 9  Fadoms  9.
fadoms water : and a Westsouthwest winde is the
woorst.

Item,  You  may  anker  on  the  Northwest  part  of  the
island of  S.  Andrew  in 17  fadoms  water.  Fadoms  17.

Item,  You  may  anker  under  the  island  of  Chiametlan
in  4  fadoms  water  :  and  a  Southeast  winde  is  the  woorst. Fadoms  4.

Item, You may  anker in the port  of  S. Lucas on
the Cape of California in 12 fadoms water: and a  Fadoms  iz.
Southeast  winde  is  the  woorst.

A note of  what depths we ankered in, among
the  ilands  of  the  Philippinas.

ITem,  You  may  anker  on  the  Southwest  part  of  the
island  of  Capul in 6 fadoms water : and  a West-  Fadoms  6.
southwest  winde  is the  woorst.

Item, You may anker  all along the South part of  [III.  836.]
the island of  Panna  in shoald water, in the depth of
10  or 12 fadoms.  Fadoms  10.

Item,  You  may  anker  in  the  bay  of  Lago  grande  in
seven  fadoms  water,  which  bay  is  on  the  South  side  of
the  island  of  Panna.

Item,  You  may  anker  at  the  East  end  of  Java  major
in 16  fadoms  water,  and  an  Eastsoutheast  winde  is  the  Fadoms  16.
woorst.

Item,  You  may  anker  on  the  North  part  of  the  island
of  Santa  Helena  in 12  fadoms  water.  Fadoms  12.

373

A.D.

1588.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  note  of  our  jfinding  of  the  winds  for  the  most
part  of  our  voyage 1586.

N  primis,  From  the  21  day  of  July  unto
the  19  day  of  August  we  found  the
winde  at  Northnortheast,  being  in  the
latitude  of  7  degrees.

Item,  From  the  19  day  of  August
unto  the  28  day  of  September,  wee
found the  wind for the most part  be-

*To  ye  South tweene the West and the Southwest, being in *24

TXoftLll. ^^g^^^s-

qutnocta  .  Item,  From  the  28  day  of  September  unto  the  30
day  of  October,  we  found  the  windes  betweene  the
Northeast  and  the  Eastnortheast.

Item,  From  the  23  of  November,  from  the  island  of
S.  Sebastian,  unto  the  30  day  of  November,  we  found
the  winde  betweene  the  Southeast  and  the  Southsouth-
east,  being  in 36  degrees.

Item,  From  the  30  day  of  November  unto  the  6  day
of  December,  we  found  the  windes  to  be  betweene  the
West  and  the Southwest.

Item,  From  the  6  day  of  December  unto  the  first  day
of  January,  we  found  the  winds  for  the  most  part  be-
tweene the  North  and  the  Northeast,  being  then  in  the
latitude  of  52 degrees.

Item,  From  the  first  day  of  January  unto  the  23  day
of  February,  we  found  the  windes  to  be  betweene  the
Northwest  and  the  Westsouthwest,  wee  being  all  that
time  in the Streights  of  Magellan.

Item,  From  the  23  day  of  February  unto  the  first
day  of  March,  we  found  the  winds  to  be  betweene  the
South  and  the  Southeast,  being  then  in  the  South  sea  in
the  latitude  of  48 degrees.

Item,  From  the  first  day  of  March  unto  the  7  day
of  March,  we  found  the  winde  to  be  at  the  North  and
the  Northnortheast  in  the  latitude  of  43 degrees.

Item,  From  the  7  day  of  March  unto  the  14  day  of

374

THOMAS FULLER'S NOTES  a.d.

1588.

March,  wee  found  the  windes  to  be  betweene  the  South
and  the  Southwest,  in  the  latitude  of  37  degrees.

Item, From  the 14  day  of  March  unto  the  28 day  1587.
of  May,  we  found  the  winds  to  be  betweene  the  South
and  the  Southwest,  in  the  latitude  of  3 degrees  to the
South  of  the  Line.

A  note  of  the  varying  of  our  windes  to  the  North
of  the  Equinoctiall  line  on  the  coast  of  New
Spaine.

I  Tern,  From  the  28  day  of  May  unto  the  5  day  of  July,
we  found  the  winds  for  the  most  part  to  be  betweene
the  Southsoutheast,  and  the  Southsouthwest,  being  in
the  latitude  of  10  degrees  to  the  Northward  of  the  Line
on  the  coast  of  New  Spaine.

Item,  From  the  5  day  of  July  unto  the  14  day  of
October,  we  found  the  windes  for  the  most  part  to  be
at  the  Eastnortheast  in  the  latitude  of  23  degrees  North-
ward, and  almost  under  the  tropicke  of  Cancer.

A  note  of  the  windes  which  we  found  betweene
the  coast  of  New  Spaine  and  Islands  of  the
Philippinas  on  the  coast  of  Asia.

IN  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1587  we  departed  from  the
cape  of  Santa  Clara  on  the  coast  of  California  the  19
day  of  November,  and  we  found  the  winds  to  be  be-
tweene the  East  and  the  Eastnortheast,  untill  the  29
day  of  January;  departing  then  from  the  ilands  of  the
Philippinas,  being  in  the  latitude  of  9  degrees.

Item,  From  the  29  day  of  January  unto  the  19  day
of  March,  wee  found  the  windes  for  the  most  part  be-
tweene the  Northnortheast  and  the  Northwest,  being
then  among  the  Ilands  of  Maluco,  in  the  latitude  of  9
degrees.

Item,  From  the  19  day  of  March  unto  the  20  day
of  May,  wee  found  the  windes  for  the  most  part  be-
tweene  the South and the Eastsoutheast, being then

375

A.D.

1588.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

between  the  Hands  of  Maluco,  and  the  cape  of  Buena
Esperanza,  in  the  latitude  of  34  degrees  to  the  South
of  the  Line.

Item, From the 20 day of  May  unto  the 11 day

[III.  837.]  of  July,  we  found  the  winds  for  the  most  part  betweene

the South and the  Southeast,  being  then  betweene  the

cape of Buena Esperanza, and 15 degrees unto the

Southward  of  the  line.

Item,  From  the  1 1  day  of  July  unto  the  1 8  day
of  August,  we  found  the  winds  for  the  most  part
betweene  the  Northeast  and  Eastnortheast,  being  then
betweene  the  latitude  of  15  degrees  to  the  South-
ward of  the  line,  and  38  degrees  unto  the  Northwards
of  the  line.

A  letter  of  M.  Thomas  Candish  to  the  right
honourable  the  Lord  Hunsdon,  Lord  Chamber-
laine,  one  of  her  Majesties  most  honourable
Privy  Councell,  touching  the  successe  of  his
voyage  about  the  world.

Ight  honourable,  as  your  favour  heretofore
hath  bene  most  greatly  extended  towards
me,  so  I  humbly  desire  a  continuance
thereof:  and  though  there  be  no  meanes
in  me  to  deserve  the  same,  yet  the  utter-
most of  my  services  shall  not  be  wanting,
whensoever  it  shall  please  your  honour  to

dispose  thereof.  I  am  humbly  to  desire  your  honour
to  make  knowen  unto  her  Majesty  the  desire  I  have  had
to  doe  her  Majesty  service  in  the  performance  of  this
voyage.  And  as  it  hath  pleased  God  to  give  her  the
victory  over  part  of  her  enemies,  so  I  trust  yer  long  to
see  her  overthrow  them  all.  For  the  places  of  their
wealth,  whereby  they  have  mainteined  and  made  their
warres,  are  now  perfectly  discovered :  and  if  it  please
her  Majesty,  with  a  very  small  power  she  may  take
the spoile  of  them  all. It  hath  pleased  the  Almighty

376

LETTER  FROM THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1588.
to  suffer  mee  to  circompasse  the  whole  globe  of  the
world,  entring  in  at  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  and
returning  by  the  cape  de  Buena  Esperanza.  In  which
voyage  I  have  either  discovered  or  brought  certeine
intelligence  of  all  the  rich  places  of  the  world  that
ever  were  knowen  or  discovered  by  any  Christian.  I
navigated  alongst  the  coast  of  Chili,  Peru,  and  Nueva
Espanna,  where  I  made  great  spoiles :  I  burnt  and
sunke  19  sailes  of  ships  small  and  great.  All  the
villages  and  townes  that  ever  I  landed  at,  I  burnt  and
spoiled :  and  had  I  not  bene  discovered  upon  the  coast,
I  had  taken  great  quantitie  of  treasure.  The  matter
of  most  profit  unto  me  was  a  great  ship  of  the  kings
which  I  tooke  at  California,  which  ship  came  from  the
Philippinas,  being  one  of  the  richest  of  merchandize
that  ever  passed  those  seas,  as  the  kings  register  and
merchants  accounts  did  shew:  for  it  did  amount  in
value  to  *  in  Mexico  to  be  solde.  Which  goods  (for
that  my  ships  were  not  able  to  conteine  the  least
part  of  them)  I  was  inforced  to  set  on  fire.  From
the  cape  of  California,  being  the  uttermost  part  of  all
Nueva  Espanna,  I  navigated  to  the  Islands  of  the
Philippinas  hard  upon  the  coast  of  China;  of  which
countrey  I  have  brought  such  intelligence  as  hath  not
bene  heard  of  in  these  parts.  The  statelinesse  and
riches  of  which  countrey  I  feare  to  make  report  of,
least  I  should  not  be  credited :  for  if  I  had  not  knowen
sufficiently  the  incomparable  wealth  of  that  countrey,
I  should  have  bene  as  incredulous  thereof,  as  others
will  be  that  have  not  had  the  like  experience.  I
sailed  along  the  Hands  of  the  Malucos,  where  among
some  of  the  heathen  people  I  was  well  intreated,  where
our  countrey  men  may  have  trade  as  freely  as  the
Portugals,  if  they  will  themselves.  From  thence  I
passed  by  the  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza,  and  found
out  by  the  way  homeward  the  iland  of  S.  Helena,
where  the  Portugals  use  to  relieve  themselves :  and
from that  iland  God  hath suffered  me to returne  into

377

A.D.
1588.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

England.  All  which  services  with  my  selfe  I  humbly-
prostrate  at  her  Majesties  feet,  desiring  the  Almighty
long  to  continue  her  reigne  among  us :  for  at  this
day  she  is  the  most  famous  and  victorious  prince  that
liveth  in  the  world.

Thus  humbly  desiring  pardon  of  your  honour  for
my  tediousnesse,  I  leave  your  lordship  to  the  tuition
of  the  Almighty.  Plimmouth  this  ninth  of  September
1588.

Your  honours  most  humble  to  command,

Thomas  Candish.

Certeine  notes  or  references  taken  out  of  the  large
map  of  China,  brought  home  by  M.  Thomas
Candish 1588.

He  great  kingdome  of  the  Mogores  is
upon  the  Northwest,  and  falleth  upon
Tanassarin  beyond  Malaca,  and  joyneth
upon  Bengala  :  they  are  men  of  warre,
and  use  no  fight  but  on  horsebacke :
they go in their apparell  like Portu-

2  A  city,  wherein  is  captaine  a  Chinian,  a  man  very
deformed,  having  under  him  many  men  of  warre :  he
maketh  warre  both  against  the  Tartarians  and  the
Mogores ;  lying  betweene  them :  and  lieth  without  the
circuit  of  the  wall.
[III.  838.]  3  Certeine  hils,  beyond  which  the  Tartarians  do  inhabit,
who  heretofore  were  great  friends  with  the  Chinians,  and
now  mainteine  continuall  warres  against  them,  so  great,
that  sometimes  there  are  slaine  in  a  battell  1 00000  of
men  adjoyning  upon  Moscovie :  and  they  have  in  their
warres  all  kinde  of  armour.

4  The  province  of  Cansas  hath  4  great  cities,  and
20  small  cities,  and  77  townes  &  castles:  it  conteineth
in  length  ^^  leagues,  it  hath  362000  houses  of  great
men that  pay tribute,  and 13900 men of  warre: and

378

CANDISH'S NOTES OF CHINA  ad.

1588.

hath  47000  horses,  which  are  the  kings,  kept  for  his
defence.

5  The great city of Paquin, where the king doth  ItisascoUeat
He, hath belonging  to it 8 great cities,  and 1 8 small  ^^f«j«  ^^  ^"
cities, with 118 townes and castles: it hath 418789

houses  of  great  men,  which  pay  tribute,  it  hath  horse-
men for  the  warre  258100.  This  city  is  in  the  latitude
of  50  degrees  to  the  Northwards,  being  there  as  colde
as  it  is  usually  in  Flanders.

6  The  great  city  of  Canton,  wherein  are  many  men
of  warre,  to  keepe  that  passage  from  the  Tartars.

7  The province of  Soychin hath 7  great cities,  and

16  small,  with  12  townes  and  castles,  and  one  great
city,  to  which  many  doe  repaire  to  fight  against  the
Tartars:  it  hath  17  leagues  in  length,  and  hath  1 641 18
great  houses,  which  pay  tribute,  and  96000  men  of  warre.

8  The  province  of  Santo  hath  6  great  cities,  and  14
small,  with  90  townes  and  castles :  it  is  82  leagues  long,
and  hath  77555  great  houses,  which  pay  tribute,  63808
horsemen,  and  31000 footmen  of  warre.

9  The  province  of  Gyman  hath  7  great  cities,  and
13  small,  and  90  townes  and  castles,  being  470  leagues
long,  and  132958  great  houses  that  pay  tribute,  82800
men  of  warre.  Out  of  this  city  commeth  copper,  quicke-
silver,  and  blacke  lead.

10  The  province  of  *Cutchew  hath  8  great  cities,  and  *OrQuicheu.
12  small,  and  83  townes,  which  make  armor  to  fight  with

the  Jawes,  which  do  inhabit  beyond  Cauchinchina :  it  is
100  leagues  broad,  and  hath  32920  horsemen  and  foot-
men, with  405670  great  houses  which  pay  tribute,  whereof
the  men  of  warre  are  payed.

11  The  province  of  Languyn  hath  14  great  cities,  and

17  small,  and  95  townes  and  castles  :  it  is  120  leagues
over,  and  hath  962818  great  houses  which  pay  tribute,
it  hath  208900  men  of  warre,  whereof  there  are  52500
Tartar  horsemen  that  take  wages.

12  The  province  of  Uquam  hath  14  great  cities,  and
19 small, 150 townes and castles, and  is 210  leagues

379

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

broad,  and  53 161 houses  that  pay  tribute,  and 71600
men  of  warre.

1 3  The  province  of  Som  hath  7  great  cities,  and  1 1
small,  and  105  townes  and  castles,  and  is  200  leagues
broad,  and  hath  houses  that  pay  tribute  139567,  and  men
of  warre  345632.

14  The  province  of  Essiran  hath  11  great  cities,  and
75  small,  and  80  townes  and  castles,  and  is  440  leagues
broad,  and  hath  great  houses  that  doe  pay  tribute  1242 13 5,
and  339000  men  of  warre.

15  This  lake  lieth  behinde  Siam,  and  before  Champa,
and  doth  joyne  with  the  Lappians,  and  from  thence
commeth  all  the  water  that  serveth  the  kingdome  of
China :  and  the  Indians  &  the  Chinians  doe  report  this
lake  to  be  the  whole  world,  and  so  they  paint  the  sea,  the
moone,  and  the  starres  within  it.

1 6  The  province  of  Cansay  hath  1 3  cities,  and  a  chiefe
citie,  and  73  townes  and  castles,  and  is  260  leagues  broad,
and  hath  great  houses  that  pay  tribute  1393629,  and
12700  men  of  warre.

17  The  province  of  Cuausa  hath  12  great  cities,  45
small,  and  51  townes  and  castles:  it  is  260  leagues  broad,
and  hath  great  houses  that  pay  tribute  1306390,  and
men  of  warre  both  footmen  and  horsemen 100 100.

18  The  province  of  Vanam  hath  14  great  cities,  and
36  small,  and  34  townes  and  castles,  and  is  88  leagues
broad,  with  589296  great  houses  that  pay  tribute,  and
1 5 100  men  of  warre.

Garisons  i^  The province of  Fuckin  hath 8 great cities,  and

against  the ^^^ principall city,  and 54  townes  and  castles,  and  two

^F°'^^' great  cities  of  garison,  to  keepe  watch  upon  the  Japons,

and is 200 leagues broad, and hath 5009532 great

houses  that  pay  tribute,  and  4003225  men  of  the  kings

guard.

20  The  province  of  Canton  hath  40  great  cities,  and
7  small,  and  77  townes  and  castles,  and  a  city  that
putteth  forth  hundreds  of  ships  for  the  keeping  of
Cauchinchina, and is 380  leagues  in  breadth,  and  hath

380

JOHN CHIDLEY

A.D.
1589.

483383  great  houses  which  pay  tribute,  and  39400  men
of  warre.

21  The  port  of  Cauchinchina  standeth in  the  latitude
of  sixteene  degrees  and  a  halfe  to  the  Northward.

22  The  citie  Champa standeth in fourteene degrees
to  the  Northwards  of  the  Equinoctiall.

23  The  province  of  Enam  hath  7.  great  cities,  and  13.  [III.  839.]
small  and 90. townes and castles,  and is 88. leagues

broad,  and  hath 589296.  great  houses  that  pay  tribute,
and 1 5 100. souldiers.

{Horsemen  454528.} {Footmen  7459057.}
The  totall  summe  7923785.

A  briefe  relation  of  a  voyage  of  The  Delight  a
ship  of  Bristoll  one  of  the  consorts  of  M.  John
Chidley  esquire  and  M.  Paul  Wheele,  made
unto  the  Straight  of  Magellan :  with  divers
accidents  that  happened  unto  the  company,
during  their  6.  weekes  abode  there:  Begun
in  the  yeere  1 589. Written  by  W.  Magoths.

He  fift  of  August  1589.  the  worshipfuU
M.  John  Chidley  of  Chidley  in  the
countie  of  Devon  esquire,  with  M.  Paul
Wheele  and  Captaine  Andrew  Mericke
set  forth  from  Plimmouth  with  three
tall  ships,  the  one  called  The  wilde  man
of  three  hundred  tunnes,  wherein  went
for  General  the  aforesaid  M.  John  Chidley  and  Benjamin
Wood  as  Master,  the  other  called  The  white  Lion,
whereof  M.  Paul  Wheele  was  captaine  and  John  ElHs
Master,  of  the  burthen  of  340.  tunnes :  the  third  The
Delight  of  Bristol,  wherein  went  M.  Andrew  Merick
as  Captaine,  and  Robert  Burnet  Master,  with  two
pinnesses  of  14.  or  15.  tunnes  a  piece.  The  Generall
in  his  ship  had  180.  persons:  M.  Paul  Wheele  had  140,
in  our  owne  ship  we  were  91.  men  and  boyes.  Our
voyage  was  intended by  the Streight  of  Magellan for

381

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1589.

M.  Chidleys The South  Sea, and  chiefly  for  the  famous  province  of

voyage  in- Arauco  on  the  coast  of  Chili. We  kept  company  together

for  Jrauco  '^in  ^°  ^^  7^^^  °^  ^^  Canaries  and  so  forward  to  Cape  Blanco

Chili.  Standing  neere  the Northerly  latitude  of  20.  degrees  on

Cabo  Blanco, the  coast  of  Barbarie,  where  some  of  our  people  went  on

shoare finding nothing  to their content. Within 12.

The  Delight dayes after  our  departure  from  this  place  The  Delight,

looseththecom-  wherein I William Magoths was, lost  the company of

pany  of  the ^^^  Other  two  great  ships,  and  the  two  small  pinnesses.

' Fleet  Howbeit  we  constantly  kept  our  course  according  to  our

directions along  the coast of  Brasil, and by  the  River

of  Plate,  without  touching  any  where  on  land  untill  we

Port  desire. came  to  Port  desire  in  the  latitude  of  48  degrees  to  the

Southward of the Equinoctial. Before we arrived at

this  place there  died  of  our  company  by  Gods  visitation

of  sundry diseases 16. persons. Wee stayed in this

harborough 17.  dayes to  grave our ship  &  refresh  our

wearied people, hoping here to have met with our

consorts :  which fell out contrary to our  expectations.

Two  springs  of  During our abode in this place we found two little

fresh  zvatet springs of  fresh water, which were upon the North-

cle"ir  ^^ °^ westerly part of  the  land, & lighted upon  good store

of  scales  both old and yong. From hence we sailed

They  enter toward the Streight of Magelan,  and entred  the same

into  the  about  the  first of  January. And comming  to  Penguin

/;^z^/o/ yiand within the Streight we  tooke  and  salted  certaine

hogsheads  of  Penguins,  which  must  be  eaten  with  speed  r

for  wee found  them  to be  of  no  long  continuance;  we

also furnished  our selves with  fresh water. And  here

at  the  last  sending  off  our  boat to  the  yland  for  the  rest

They  loose  \^.  of  our  provision, wee lost her  and 15. men  in  her  by

of  their  men force of  foule  weather  ;  but what became of  them we

by  tempest. ^ould not tel. Here also  in this  storme  we  lost twO'

anckers. From  hence  we  passed  farther  into  the  Streight,

A  Spaniard and  by  Port  famine  we  spake  with  a  Spaniard,  who  told

taken  at  Port-  us  that  he  had  lived  in  those  parts  6.  yeeres,  and  that  he

famine.  ^^g  ^^^ of  ^^ ^^^^  ^a^^  that  were  sent  thither  by  the

king of  Spain in the  yere 1582.  to  fortifie  and  inhabit

382

JOHN CHIDLEY  ad.

1590.

there,  to  hinder  the  passage  of  all  strangers  that  way  into

the  South  sea. But  that  and  the  other  Spanish  colonie

being  both  destroyed  by  famine,  he  said  he  had  lived  in

an  house  by  himselfe  a  long  time,  and  relieved  himselfe

with  his  caleever  until  our  comming  thither. Here  we

made  a  boat  of  the  bords of  our  chests ;  which  being

finished  wee  sent  7.  armed  men  in  the  same  on  land  on

the North shore,  being  wafted on  land  by  the  Savages  Seven  of  our

with  certaine  white  skinnes ;  who  as  soone  as  they  came  ^^^  ^^^^^'^  h

on  shore  were  presently  killed  by  an 100.  of  the  wilde  [f  1^^^°^  '^
1 • , • 1  r ■' r  ^  1-1  J 1  ^"^  Savages  on

people  m  the  sight  or  2.  or  our  men,  which  rowed  them  the  North

on shoare, which  two  onely escaped  backe  againe  to  us  shore.

with  the  boat. After  this  traiterous  slaughter  of  our  men,

we  fell  backe  againe  with our  ship  to  the  Northeastward

of  Port famine  to  a certaine  road,  where  we  refreshed

our  selves with muskles, and  tooke  in  water  &  wood.

At  this  time  wee  tooke  in  the  Spaniard  aforesaid,  and  so

sailed  forward  againe into  the  Streight. Wee  passed  7.  They  passed

or  8.  times  10.  leag^ues  Westward  beyond  Cape  Froward,  7-  °^  ^-  ^^^^^

being still encountered  with mightie Northwest  winds. Westward  of

These  winds  and the  current  were  so  vehement  against  Cape  Fro-

us,  that  they  forced  us  backe  asmuch  in  two houres, as  '^ard.

we were  getting  up  in  8.  houres. Thus  after  wee  had

spent  6.  weekes  in  the  Streight  striving  against  the  furie

of  the  elements,  and having  at  sundry  times  partly  by

casualtie,  and  partly  by  sicknes  lost  38.  of  our  best  men,

and  3.  anckers,  and  nowe  having  but  one  ancker  left  us,

and  small  store  of  victuals,  and,  which  was  not  the  least

mischiefe, divers of our company raising dangerous  [HI.  840.]

mutinies : we consulted, though somewhat with the

latest, for the safegard of  our lives  to returne  while

there  was  some  small  hope  remayning :  and  so  set  saile

out  of  The  Streight  homeward  about  the  14.  of  Februarie

1590. We  returned  backe  againe  by  The  river  of  Plate; They  returne

and  sailing  neere  the  cost  of  Brasill  we  met  with  a  Portu-  ^o^^'^^^^-

gal  ship  of  80.  tunnes,  which  rode  at  an  ancker  upon  the

coast, who as soone  as she descried us to chase her,

incontinently  weyed,  &  ran  her  selfe  on  ground  betweene

383

A.D.
1590.

The  yle  o/S.
Sebastian  i?;
24.  degr.  of
southerly  lati-
tude on  the
coast  of
Bras'tl.

They  land  at
Monville  de
Hage  8.  miles
West  of  Cher-
bourg.

The  wracke  of
the  ship  by  the
malice  of  the
'Normans.

They  ariive
in  England.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  yland  of  S.  Sebastian  and  the  maine  land.  But  we
for  want  of  a  good  boat,  and  by  reason  of  the  foule
weather,  were  neither  able  to  bord  her,  nor  to  goe  on
shore.  Thence  in  extreeme  misery  we  shaped  our  course
for  the  yles  of  Cape  Verde,  and  so  passing  to  the  yles
of  The  Azores,  the  Canaries  being  something  out  of  our
course ;  the  first  land  that  wee  mette  withall  in  our
Narrow  sea  was  The  yle  of  Alderney.  And  having  now
but  sixe  men  of  all  our  company  left  alive,  the  Master
and  his  two  mates  and  chiefe  Mariners  being  dead,  wee
ran  in  with  Monville  de  Hage  eight  miles  to  the  west
of  Cherbourg  in  Normandie.  Where  the  next  day  after
our  comming  to  an  ancker,  having  but  one  in  all  left,
being  the  last  of  August  1590.  by  the  foule  weather  that
rose  the  ancker  came  home,  and  our  ship  drave  on  the
rocks :  And  the  Normans  which  were  commanded  by  the
governor  of  Cherbourg  (who  came  downe  to  us  that
night)  to  have  layd  out  another  ancker  for  her,  neglect-
ing his  commandement,  suffered  her  miserably  to  be
splitted,  with  desire  to  enrich  themselves  by  her  wracke.
Within  few  dayes  after  this  last  mischance  foure  of  us
being  Englishmen  departed  from  Cherbourgh,  and  passed
home  for  England  in  a  barke  of  Weymouth,  leaving
the  two  strangers  there  behinde  us.

The  names  of  us  sixe  that  returned  of  all  our  company
were  these.

William  Magoths  of  Bristol.
Richard  Bush.
John  Reade.

Richard  Hodgkins  of  Westburie  neere  Bristol,
The  two  strangers.

5  Gabriel  Valerosa  a  Portugal.

6  Peter,  a  Briton.

384

JOHN CHIDLEY

A.D.

1590-

A  petition  made  by  certaine  of  the  company  of
the  Delight  of  Bristol  unto  the  Master  of  the
said  ship  Robert  Burnet,  one  of  the  consorts
of  M.  Chidley,  being  in  the  Streights  of
Magellan  the 12.  of  February 1589.

E  have  thought  good  to  shew  unto  you
(being  our  Master)  our  whole  mindes
and  griefes  in  writing :  that  whereas  our
Captaine  Matthew  Hawlse,  and  Walter
Street  doe  beginne  to  take  into  the
Captaines  cabin  this  12.  of  Febr.  both
bread and butter,  (such as  was put in

for  the  provision  of  the  shippe  and  company)  only  to
feed  themselves,  and  a  few  others,  which  are  of  their
messe :  meaning  thereby  rather  to  sterve  us,  then  to
keepe  us  strong  and  in  health :  And  likewise  upon  the
same,  hee  hath  taken  into  his  cabin  certaine  furniture,
as  swords,  caleevers,  and  musquets :  We  therefore  not
well  knowing  their  intents  herein,  except  by  certaine
wordes  cast  out  un wares,  wee  may  conjecture,  that  your
death,  which  God  forbid,  by  them  hath  bene  determined  :
doe  all  most  humbly  desire  you  being  our  Master,  and
having  charge  of  the  shippe,  and  us,  this  present  voyage
committed  unto  you,  to  consider :  First,  that  by  Gods
visitation  wee  have  lost  16.  men,  and  that  so  much  the
rather  because  they  were  not  alotted  such  necessary
provision,  as  was  in  the  ship  to  be  had.  Also  to  con-
sider the  great  losse  of  15.  of  our  men  with  our  boat
at  Penguin-yland  within  the  Streights  of  Magellan :  and
of  7.  good  and  serviceable  men  besides  neere  Port
famine :  and  of  three  anckers,  and  our  Carpenter.  Over
and  besides  all  these  calamities  to  consider  how  you
have  (without  all  reason  and  conscience)  bene  over-
thwarted,  disgraced,  and  outcountenanced  by  your  mate
Street,  and  Matthew  Hawlse :  Also  what  danger  you
now  are  subject  unto,  your  death  having  bene  so  often

XI  385  2B

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590-

conspired,  and  what  danger  we  should  be  in,  if  it  were
(which  God  forbid)  effected.  Furthermore,  to  weigh
with  your  selfe  the  great  want  of  many  necessaries  in
our  ship :  namely  that  we  have  but  6,  sailers,  (besides
your  selfe  and  your  mate  Street,  whom  wee  dare  not
trust,)  Also  that  wee  have  but  one  ancker,  likewise  the
lacke  of  our  boate  and  a  Carpenter,  of  ropes,  of  pitch,
[III,  841.]  treynailes,  bolts,  and  plankes,  and  the  want  of  a  skilfull
Chirurgian.  And  whereas  a  view  being  taken  of  our
provision  there  was  found  but  five  moneths  victuals  of
bread,  meale,  greets,  and  pease,  and  also  but  three
moneths  victuals  of  beefe,  penguins  and  porke,  three
hogsheads  of  wine,  ten  gallons  of  aquavitae  (whereof
the  sicke  men  could  not  get  any  to  relieve  them,)
foure  hogsheads  of  syder  and  18.  flitches  of  bacon,  &c.
the  company  hath  but  three  flitches.  Also  the  said
Captaine  Hawlse  and  Street  have  taken  and  seased  upon
17.  potts  of  butter,  with  certaine  cheese,  and  an  hogs-
head of  bread  at  a  time,  and  have  bene  thereof  possessed
to  their  owne  private  uses :  And  have  not  onely  im-
moderately spent  the  companies  provision  in  butter,
cheese,  aquavitae,  &c.  but  have  also  consumed  those
sweete  meates,  which  were  layed  up  in  the  shippe  onely
for  the  reliefe  of  sicke  persons  (themselves  being  healthy
and  sound,  and  withholding  the  said  meates  from  others
in  their  sickenesse)  and  even  at  this  time  also  (by  reason
of  the  small  store  of  our  provision,  wee  being  enforced
to  come  to  a  shorter  allowance)  they  the  saide  Captaine
Hawlse  and  your  mate  Street,  doe  finde  themselves
agrieved  at  the  very  same  allowance,  wherewith  other
men  are  well  contented.  And  although  (besides  our
ordinary  allowance,  and  more  then  all  the  rest  of  the
company)  they  only  have  their  breakefasts  permitted
unto  them,  yet  they  complaine  that  the  company  goeth
about  to  famish  them,  whereas  indeed  they  doe  what
lyeth  in  them  to  famish  the  company  by  feeding  them-
selves fat,  which  doe  no  labour  at  all.  These  things
being  well  weighed,  you  ought  likewise  to  consider  the

386

JOHN CHIDLEY  a.d.

1590.

long  time  that  wee  have  lien  here  in  these  Streights  of
Magellan,  having  bene  at,  and  seven  or  eight  times,
tenne  leagues  beyond  Cape  Froward,  we  have  had  but
a  small  gale  of  winde  with  us :  neither  could  wee  come
to  an  ancker,  the  water  being  so  deepe  :  and  (you  know)
the  place  is  so  dangerous,  that  wee  were  once  embayed,
and  coulde  scarce  get  out  againe :  And  likewise.  What
fogges  and  mists  are  here  already  ?  Much  more  here
wil  be,  the  winter  and  darke  nights  being  at  hand,  &
we  having  not  so  much  as  a  boate  to  seeke  out  any
roade  to  ride  in,  saving  a  small  weake  boate  made  of
mens  chestes,  in  which  it  is  not  convenient  to  goe  on
shoare  in  a  forreine  countrey,  where  wee  must  goe  with
force :  and  having  but  one  ancker  left  us,  there  is  but
little  hope  of  life  in  us,  as  you  may  sufficiently  judge,
if  wee  should  lose  either  the  saide  ancker  or  our  boate,
and  therefore  wee  dare  not  put  the  same  in  danger  for
feare  of  loosing  them.  Also  wee  having  lien  here  these
sixe  weekes  and  upward,  the  winde  hath  continued  in
the  North-west  directly  against  our  course,  so  that  wee
can  no  way  hope  to  get  through  the  Streights  into  the
South  sea  this  yeere,  and  if  we  could,  yet  our  provision
is  not  sufficient,  having  spent  so  much  thereof,  in  this
our  lingering  aboade.  Nay  wee  have  scarcely  victuals
ynough  to  cary  us  home  into  England,  if  they  bee  not
used  sparingly,  and  with  very  good  government.  There-
fore wee  doe  againe  most  humbly  desire  you  to  con-
sider and  have  regard  unto  the  premisses,  as  you  tender
your  owne  safetie  and  the  safetie  of  us  which  remaine
alive,  that  wee  may  (by  Gods  helpe)  returne  backe  into
England,  rather  then  die  here  among  wilde  and  savage
people :  for  if  wee  make  any  longer  abode  in  this  place,
it  will  bee  (without  all  doubt)  to  the  utter  decay  and
losse,  both  of  our  selves,  and  of  the  shippe:  and
in  returning  backe,  it  may  please  God,  that  we  may
finde  our  fifteene  men,  and  our  boat  at  Penguin-
yland  (although  this  bee  contrary  to  the  mindes  of
Matthew  Hawlse,  and your mate Street) and having

387

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

found  them,  wee  doe  not  despaire  in  Gods  mercie,  but
that  in  our  returne  home-ward,  hee  will  send  us  pur-
chase sufficient,  if  wee  would  joyne  our  selves  together
in  prayer,  and  love  one  another.  And  thus  doing  (as
wee  shalbe  bound)  even  so  wee  will  also  heartily  pray
for  the  continuance  of  your  good  estate,  and  wel-fare,
and  for  the  length  of  your  dayes,  to  the  pleasure  of
Almightie  God.

Lastly,  wee  doe  most  humbly  beseech  you  to  con-
sider, that  (after  the  losse  of  so  many  men  and  all  the
casualties  aforesaid,  as  we  were  taking  in  of  water  by
Port  Famine,  our  boate-swaine,  the  hooper,  and  William
Magoths  being  on  shoare)  Matthew  Hawlse  did  hallow
to  have  them  in  all  the  haste  come  on-bord :  saying
therewithall  these  words :  He  that  will  come  in  this
voyage,  must  not  make  any  reckoning  to  leave  two  or
three  men  on  shore  behinde  him,  whereas  we  had  so
lately  lost  all  the  foresaide  men,  having  then  but  sixe
sailers  left  us  on-bord.  Also  the  saide  Matthew  Hawlse
did  cary  a  pistoll  for  the  space  of  two  dayes  secretly
under  his  gowne,  intending  therewithall  to  have  mur-
thered  Andrew  Stoning,  and  William  Combe,  as  by
confession  of  Hawlse  his  man,  William  Martin,  it  is
manifest :  for  the  saide  William  Martine  reported  unto
two  of  his  friends,  viz.  Richard  Hungate,  and  Emanuel
Dornel,  that  he  kneeled  upon  his  knees  one  whole  houre
before  Matthew  Hawlse  in  his  owne  cabin,  desiring  him,
for  Gods  cause,  not  to  kill  either  of  them,  especially
because  the  saide  Stoning  and  Martin  came  both  out  of
one  towne.  Also  the  said  Hawlse,  at  our  second  time
of  watering  in  the  place  aforesaid,  came  into  the  Gunners
roome  to  speake  with  you  (your  selfe  with  the  master
Gunner  Thomas  Browne,  and  his  mate  William  Frier
being  then  present)  demanding  of  you,  if  he  should
send  certaine  men  to  Port  famine  being  two  leagues
from  the  ship  by  land.  Thomas  Browne  answered  him
[III.  842.]  presently,  that  he  should  send  none,  for  feare  least  the
wind  might  arise,  and  by  that  meanes  we  should  loose

388

JOHN CHIDLEY

A.D.
I59I.

SO  many  of  our  men  more :  to  whom  Matthew  Hawlse

replied  that  it  was  not  material,  for  that  he  had  made

choyce  of  a  company  for  the  very  same  purpose,  whose

names  were  Emmanuel  Dornel,  Richard  Hungate,  Paul

Carie, John Davis, Gabriel Valerosa, a  Portugall, and

Peter  a  Britaine,  and  the  Spaniard  which  we  had  taken  The  Spaniard

in at the same place, at our first time of  watering.  ^^^^^ ^  ^^

. .  .  tOTt  t  UlUiflB

And  thus  we  end,  desiring  God  to  sende  us  well  into

our native countrey. In witnesse whereof  wee have

subscribed  our  names.  r^.!  r>  r-

1  homas Browne,  Lrunner,

John  Morrice,  &c.

The  last  voyage  of  the  worshipfull  M.  Thomas
Candish  esquire,  intended  for  the  South  sea,
the  Philippinas,  and  the  coast  of  China,  with
3.  tall  ships,  and  two  barks:  Written  by  M.
John  Jane,  a  man  of  good  observation,  im-
ployed  in  the  same,  and  many  other  voyages.

He  26.  of  August  1 59 1,  wee  departed
from  Plimmouth  with  3.  tall  ships,  and
two  barkes,  The  Galeon  wherein  M.
Candish  went  himselfe  being  Admiral,
The  Roebucke  vice  admirall  whereof  M.
Cocke  was  Captaine,  The  Desire  Rere-
admirall  whereof  was  Captaine  M.  John
Davis  (with  whom  and  for  whose  sake  I  went  this  voyage)
The  Blacke  pinnesse,  and  a  barke  of  M.  Adrian  Gilbert,
whereof  M.  Randolfe  Cotton  was  Captaine.

The  29.  of  November  wee  fell  with  the  bay  of  Salvador  -^^J"^  ^^  5^^-
upon  the  coast  of  Brasil 12.  leagues  on  this  side  Cabo  ^^'^°^-
Frio, where wee were becalmed untill the second of
December:  at  which  time  wee  tooke  a  small  barke  bound  J  barke  taken.
for  the  River  of  Plate  with  sugar,  haberdash  wares,  and
Negros. The  Master  of  this  barke  brought  us  unto  an ,
yle  called  Placencia  thirtie  leagues  West  from  Cabo  Frio,  ^^/^  ^^
where  wee  arrived  the  fift  of  December,  and  rifled  sixe  or  placencia.

389

A.D.

I59I.

Isla  de  S.  Se-
bastian.

The  towne  of
Santos  taken.

The  towne  of
S.  yincent
burnt.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

seven  houses  inhabited  by  Portugales.  The  11.  wee
departed  from  this  place,  and  the  fourteenth  we  arrived
at  the  yle  of  S.  Sebastian :  from  whence  M.  Cocke  and
Captaine  Davis  presently  departed  with  The  Desire  and
the  blacke  pinnesse,  for  the  taking  of  the  towne  of  Santos.
The  15.  at  evening  we  anckered  at  the  barre  of  Santos,
from  whence  we  departed  with  our  boates  to  the  towne  ;
and  the  next  morning  about  nine  of  the  clocke  wee  came
to  Santos,  where  being  discovered,  wee  were  inforced  to
land  with  24.  gentlemen,  our  long  boat  being  farre  a
Sterne,  by  which  expedition  wee  tooke  all  the  people  or
the  towne  at  Masse  both  men  and  women,  whom  wee
kept  all  that  day  in  the  Church  as  prisoners.  The  cause
why  master  Candish  desired  to  take  this  towne  was  to
supply  his  great  wants :  For  being  in  Santos,  and  having
it  in  quiet  possession,  wee  stood  in  assurance  to  supply  all
our  needes  in  great  abundance.  But  such  was  the  neg-
ligence of  our  governour  master  Cocke,  that  the  Indians
were  suffered  to  carry  out  of  the  towne  whatsover  they
would  in  open  viewe,  and  no  man  did  controll  them  :
and  the  next  day  after  wee  had  wonne  the  towne,  our
prisoners  were  all  set  at  libertie,  onely  foure  poore  olde
men  were  kept  as  pawnes  to  supply  our  wants.  Thus  in
three  dayes  the  towne  that  was  able  to  furnish  such
another  Fleete  with  all  kinde  of  necessaries,  was  left  unto
us  nakedly  bare,  without  people  and  provision.

Eight  or  tenne  dayes  after  master  Candish  himselfe
came  thither,  where  hee  remained  untill  the  22.  of
January,  seeking  by  intreatie  to  have  that,  whereof  we
were  once  possessed.  But  in  conclusion  wee  departed
out  of  the  towne  through  extreeme  want  of  victuall,  not
being  able  any  longer  to  live  there,  and  were  glad  to
receive  a  fewe  canisters  or  baskets  of  Cassavi  meale ;  so
that  in  every  condition  wee  went  worse  furnished  from
the  towne,  then  when  wee  came  unto  it.  The  22.  of
January  we  departed  from  Santos,  and  burnt  Sant  Vincent
to  the  ground.  The  24.  we  set  saile,  shaping  our  course
for  the  Streights  of  Magellan.

390

LAST  VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1592.

The  seventh  of  February  we  had  a  very  great  storme,
and  the  eighth  our  Fleet  was  separated  by  the  fury  of  the
tempest.  Then  our  Captaine  called  unto  him  the  Master
of  our  ship,  whom  hee  found  to  be  a  very  honest  and
sufficient  man,  and  conferring  with  him  he  concluded  to
goe  for  Port  Desire,  which  is  in  the  Southerly  latitude
of  48.  degrees ;  hoping  that  the  Generall  would  come
thither,  because  that  in  his  first  voyage  he  had  found
great  reliefe  there.  For  our  Captaine  could  never  get
any  direction  what  course  to  take  in  any  such  extremities,
though  many  times  hee  had  intreated  for  it,  as  often  I
have  heard  him  with  griefe  report.  In  sayling  to  this
port  by  good  chance  we  met  with  The  Roe-bucke,  wherein
master  Cocke  had  endured  great  extremities,  and  had  lost
his  boate,  and  therefore  desired  our  Captaine  to  keepe
him  company,  for  hee  was  in  very  desperate  case.  Our
Captaine  hoised  out  his  boate,  and  went  abord  him  to
know  his  estate,  and  returning  tolde  us  the  hardnesse  [III.  843,]
thereof,  and  desired  the  Master  and  all  the  company  to
be  carefull  in  all  their  watches  not  to  loose  The  Roe-
bucke,  and  so  wee  both  arrived  at  Port  Desire  the  sixth  The^  arrive  at
of  March.  ^  Port  Desire.

The 16.  of  March  The  Blacke  pinnesse  came  unto  us,
but  master  Gilberts  barke  came  not,  but  returned  home  -^-  Adrian
to  England,  having  their  Captaine  abord  the  Roe-bucke  ^^f/^Jj/^^^^
without  any  provision  more  then  the apparell that hee  England,
wore,  who  came  from  thence  abord  our  ship  to  remaine
with our Captaine, by reason of  the great friendship
betweene  them. The  18.  the  Galeon  came  into  the  road,
and  master  Candish  came  into  the  harborough  in  a  boat
which  he  had  made  at  sea  ; for  his  long  boat  and  light-
horseman  were  lost  at  sea,  as  also  a  pinnesse  which  he  had A  pinnesse
built  at  Santos :  and  being  abord  The  Desire  he  tolde  our  b^iii'^t Santos.
Captaine  of  all  his  extremities,  and  spake  most  hardly  of
his  company,  and  of  divers  gentlemen  that  were  with  him,
purposing  no  more  to  goe  abord  his  owne  ship,  but  to
stay  in  The  Desire. We  all  sorrowed  to  heare  such  hard
speaches  of  our  good  friends  ;  but  having  spoken  with  the

391

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

gentlemen  of  the  Galeon  wee  found  them  faithfull,  honest,
and  resolute  in  proceeding,  although  it  pleased  our
Generall  otherwise  to  conceive  of  them.

The  20.  of  March  we  departed  from  Port  Desire,
master  Candish  being  in  The  Desire  with  us.  The  eighth
Theyfallwith  of  April  1592,  wee  fell  with  the  Streights  of  Magellan,
ifj^^irelghts of  induring  many  furious  stormes  betweene  Port  Desire  and
<i-ge  an.  ^^  Streight.  The  14.  we  passed  through  the  first
Streight.  The  16.  we  passed  the  second  Streight  being
ten  leagues  distant  from  the  first.  The  18.  we  doubled
Cape  Froward,  which  Cape  lieth  in  53.  degrees  and  \.
The  21.  wee  were  inforced  by  the  fury  of  the  weather
to  put  into  a  small  coove  with  our  ships,  4.  leagues  from
the  said  Cape,  upon  the  South  shoare,  where  wee  remained
until  the  15.  of  May.  In  the  which  time  wee  indured
extreeme  stormes,  with  perpetual  snow,  where  many  of
our  men  died  with  cursed  famine,  and  miserable  cold,
not  having  wherewith  to  cover  their  bodies,  nor  to  fill
their  bellies,  but  living  by  muskles,  water,  and  weeds  of
the  sea,  with  a  small  reliefe  of  the  ships  store  in  meale
sometimes.  And  all  the  sicke  men  in  the  Galeon  were
most  uncharitably  put  a  shore  into  the  woods  in  the
snowe,  raine,  and  cold,  when  men  of  good  health  could
skarcely  indure  it,  where  they  ended  their  lives  in  the
highest  degree  of  misery,  master  Candish  all  this  while
being  abord  the  Desire.  In  these  great  extremities  of
snow  and  cold,  doubting  what  the  ende  would  be,  he
asked  our  Captaines  opinion,  because  he  was  a  man  that
had  good  experience  of  the  Northwest  parts,  in  his  3.
severall  discoveries  that  way,  imployed  by  the  marchants
of  London.  Our  Captaine  tolde  him,  that  this  snow  was
a  matter  of  no  long  continuance,  and  gave  him  sufficient
reason  for  it,  and  that  thereby  hee  could  not  much  be
prejudiced  or  hindered  in  his  proceeding.  Notwithstand-
ing he  called  together  all  the  company,  and  tolde  them,
that  he  purposed  not  to  stay  in  the  Streights,  but  to  depart
upon  some  other  voyage,  or  else  to  returne  againe  for
Brasil. But  his  resolution  was  to goe  for  the  Cape  of

392

LAST  VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  ad.

1592.

Buena  Esperanza.  The  company  answered,  that  if  it
pleased  him,  they  did  desire  to  stay  Gods  favour  for  a
winde,  and  to  indure  all  hardnesse  whatsoever,  rather  then
to  give  over  the  voyage,  considering  they  had  bene  here
but  a  smal  time,  and  because  they  were  within  fourtie
leagues  of  the  South  sea,  it  grieved  them  now  to  returne  ;
notwithstanding  what  hee  purposed  that  they  would
performe.  So  hee  concluded  to  goe  for  the  Cape  of  Buena
Esperanza,  and  to  give  over  this  voyage.  Then  our
Captaine,  after  master  Candish  was  come  abord  The
Desire  from  talking  with  the  company,  tolde  him,  that
if  it  pleased  him  to  consider  the  great  extremitie  of  his
estate,  the  slendernesse  of  his  provisions,  with  the  weake-
nesse  of  his  men,  it  was  no  course  for  him  to  proceed  in
that  newe  enterprize  :  for  if  the  rest  of  your  shippes  (said
hee)  bee  furnished  answerable  to  this,  it  is  impossible
to  performe  your  determination :  for  wee  have  no  more
sailes  then  mastes,  no  victuals,  no  ground-tackling,  no
cordage  more  then  is  over  head,  and  among  seventie  and
five  persons,  there  is  but  the  Master  alone  that  can  order
the  shippe,  and  but  foureteene  saylers.  The  rest  are
gentlemen,  servingmen,  and  artificers.  Therefore  it  will
be  a  desperate  case  to  take  so  hard  an  enterprize  in  hand.
These  perswasions  did  our  Captaine  not  onely  use  to
master  Candish,  but  also  to  master  Cocke.  In  fine  upon  a
petition  delivered  in  writing  by  the  chiefe  of  the  whole
company,  the  Generall  determined  to  depart  out  of  The
Streights  of  Magellan,  and  to  returne  againe  for  Santos
in  Brasil.

So  the 15.  of  May  wee  set saile,  the Generall then  They  returne
being  in  the  Galeon. The  eighteenth  wee  were  free  of  •^"^/^'^
the  Streights,  but  at  Cape  Froward  it  was  our  hard  hap  Magellan.
to  have  our  boat  sunke  at  our  sterne  in  the  night,  and
to  be  split  and  sore  spoiled,  and  to  loose  all  our  ores.

The  twentieth  of  May  being  thwart  of  Port  Desire,  in  The  occasion  of
the  night  the  Generall  altered  his  course,  as  we  suppose,  ^°J,^'"^  ^^^
by  which  occasion  wee  lost  him :  for  in  the  evening  he
stood  close  by  a  winde  to  seaward,  having  the  winde  at

393

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

Northnortheast,  and  wee  standing  the  same  way,  the  winde

not  altering,  could not the next  day see him :  so that

[III.  844.] we then perswaded  our selves, that hee was gone for

Port  Desire  to  relieve  himselfe,  or  that  hee  had  sustained

some  mischance  at  Sea,  and  was  gone  thither  to  remedy  it.

Whereupon  our  Captaine  called  the  Generals  men  unto

him,  with  the  rest,  and  asked  their  opinion  what  was  to

bee  done. Every  one  sayde,  that  they  thought  that  the

Generall  was  gone  for  Port  Desire. Then  the Master

being the Generals man, and carefuU of his masters

service,  as  also  of  good  judgement  in  Sea-matters,  tolde

the company howe dangerous it was to  goe for Port

Desire,  if  wee  shoulde  there  misse  the  Generall :  for  (saide

hee)  wee  have no boate to lande  our  selves, nor  any

cables  nor  anckers  that  I  dare  trust  in  so  quicke  streames

as are  there :  yet in all likelyhood concluding  that  the

Generall was gone thither, wee stayed our course for

Port Desire, and by chance mette with the Blacke

pinnesse, which had likewise lost the  Fleete, being in

very  miserable  case : so wee both concluded to seeke

the  Generall  at  Port  Desire.

The'^  come  The  sixe  and  twentieth  day  of  May  we  came  to  Port

agametoPot^  Desire,  where not  finding  our  Generall, as we hoped,

ofMa'i '  ^^^^^ most slenderly victualled, without sailes, boate,

ores, nailes, cordage, and all other  necessaries  for  our

reliefe,  wee were strooken into a  deadly  sorrow. But

referring  all  to  the  providence  and  fatherly  protection  of

the  Almightie,  wee entered the harbour,  and  by  Gods

J  quiet  road, favour  found a place  of  quiet  roade,  which  before  wee

knewe  not. Having  mored  our  shippe  with  the  pinnesses

boate,  wee  landed  upon  the  South  shore,  where  wee  found

J  poole  of a  standing  poole  of  fresh  water,  which  by  estimation  might

fresh  water  on  \^q\^q Some tenne tunnes, whereby wee were greatly

ofPortDesire Comforted. From this poole wee  fet  more then  fortie

tunnes  of  water,  and  yet  we  left  the  poole  as  full  as  wee

found  it. And  because  at  our  first  being  in  this  harbour

wee  were  at  this  place  and  found  no  water,  we  perswaded

our  selves that God  had  sent  it  for  our  reliefe. Also

394

LAST  VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1592.
there  were  such  extraordinary  low  ebbes  as  we  had  never
seene,  whereby  wee  got  muskles  in  great  plentie. Like-
wise God sent about our shippes great  abundance of  Abundance  of
smelts,  so that  with hookes made of  pinnes  every  man  ^^^y^^  ^^'^
caught  as  many  as  hee  coulde  eate :  by  which  meanes  wee
preserved  our  ships victuals,  and  spent  not  any  during
the  time  of  our  abode  here.

Our  Captaine  and  Master  falling  into  the  consideration
of  our  estate  and  dispatch  to  goe  to  the  Generall,  found
our  wants  so  great,  as  that  in  a  moneth  wee  coulde  not
fitte  our  shippe  to  set  saile.  For  wee  must  needes  set  up
a  Smiths  forge,  to  make  boltes,  spikes,  and  nayles,  besides
the  repairing  of  our  other  wants.  Whereupon  they
concluded  it  to  bee  their  best  course  to  take  the  pinnesse,
and  to  furnish  her  with  the  best  of  the  company,  and
to  goe  to  the  Generall  with  all  expedition,  leaving  the
shippe  and  the  rest  of  the  company  untill  the  Generals
returne ;  for  hee  had  vowed  to  our  Captaine,  that  hee
would  returne  againe  for  the  Streights,  as  hee  had  tolde
us.  The  Captaine  and  Master  of  the  pinnesse  being  the
Generals  men  were  well  contented  with  the  motion.

But  the  Generall  having  in  our  shippe  two  most  -^  dangerous
pestilent  fellowes,  when  they  heard  of  this  determination  ^^^^^3-
they  utterly  misliked  it,  and  in  secret  dealt  with  the
company  of  both  shippes,  vehemently  perswading  them,
that  our  Captaine  and  Master  would  leave  them  in  the
countrey  to  bee  devoured  of  the  Canibals,  and  that  they
were  mercilesse  and  without  charitie :  whereupon  the
whole  company  joyned  in  secret  with  them  in  a  night
to  murther  our  Captaine  and  Master,  with  my  selfe,  and
all  those  which  they  thought  were  their  friendes.  There
were  markes  taken  in  his  caben  howe  to  kill  him  with
muskets  through  the  shippes  side,  and  bullets  made  of
silver  for  the  execution,  if  their  other  purposes  should
faile.  All  agreed  hereunto,  except  it  were  the  bote-
swaine  of  our  shippe,  who  when  hee  knew  the  matter,
and  the  slender  ground  thereof,  reveiled  it  unto  our
Master,  and  so  to  the  Captaine. Then  the  matter  being

395

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

called  in  question,  those  two  most  murtherous  fellowes
were  found  out,  whose  names  were  Charles  Parker  and
Edward  Smith.

The  Captaine  being  thus  hardly  beset  in  perill  of
famine,  and  in  danger  of  murthering,  was  constrained  to
use  lenitie,  and  by  courteous  meanes  to  pacific  this  furie:
shewing,  that  to  doe  the  Generall  service,  unto  whom  he
had  vowed  faith  in  this  action,  was  the  cause  why  hee
purposed  to  goe  unto  him  in  the  pinnesse,  considering,
that  the  pinnesse  was  so  necessary  a  thing  for  him,  as  that
hee  could  not  bee  without  her,  because  hee  was  fearefuU
of  the  shore  in  so  great  shippes.  Whereupon  all  cried
out  with  cursing  and  swearing,  that  the  pinnesse  should
not  goe  unlesse  the  shippe  went.  Then  the  Captaine
desired  them  to  shewe  themselves  Christians,  and  not  so
blasphemously  to  behave  themselves,  without  regard  or
thankesgiving  to  God  for  their  great  deliverance,  and
present  sustenance  bestowed  upon  them,  alleaging  many
examples  of  Gods  sharpe  punishment  for  such  ingratitude;
and  withall  promised  to  doe  any  thing  that  might  stand
with  their  good  liking.  By  which  gentle  speaches  the
matter  was  pacified,  and  the  Captaine  and  Master  at  the
request  of  the  company  were  content  to  forgive  this  great
treachery  of  Parker  and  Smith,  who  after  many  admoni-
tions concluded  in  these  wordes :  The  Lord  judge  be-
[III.  845.]  tweene  you  and  mee  :  which  after  came  to  a  most  sharpe
revenge  even  by  the  punishment  of  the  Almightie.  Thus
by  a  generall  consent  it  was  concluded  not  to  depart,
but  there  to  stay  for  the  Generals  returne.  Then  our
Captaine  and  Master,  seeing  that  they  could  not  doe  the
Generall  that  service  which  they  desired,  made  a  motion
to  the  companie,  that  they  would  lay  downe  under  their
handes  the  losing  of  the  Generall,  with  the  extremities
wherein  we  then  stoode :  whereunto  they  consented,  and
wrote  under  their  hands  as  followeth.

396

LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1592.

The  testimonial!  of  the  companie  of  The  Desire
touching  their  losing  of  their  Generall,  which
appeareth  to  have  beene  utterly  against  their
meanings.

THe  26  of  August  1 59 1  wee  whose  names  bee  here
under  written,  with  divers  others  departed  from
Plimmouth  under  M.  Thomas  Candish  our  Generall,
with  4  ships  of  his,  to  wit,  The  Galeon,  The  Robuck,
The  Desire,  and  The  Black  pinnesse,  for  the  performance
of  a  voyage  into  The  South  sea.  The  19  of  November
we  fell  with  the  bay  of  Salvador  in  Brasil.  The  16.  of
December  we  tooke  the  towne  of  Santos,  hoping  there
to  revictuall  our  selves,  but  it  fell  not  out  to  our  content-
ment. The  24  of  January  we  set  saile  from  Santos,
shaping  our  course  for  The  Streights  of  Magellan.  The
8  of  Februarie  by  violent  stormes  the  sayde  fleete  was
parted :  The  Robuck  and  The  Desire  arrived  in  Porte
Desire  the  6  of  March.  The  16  of  March  The  Black
pinnesse  arrived  there  also :  and  the  18  of  the  same
our  admirall  came  into  the  roade  ;  with  whom  we  de-
parted the  20  of  March  in  poore  and  weake  estate.  The
8  of  Aprill  1592  we  entred  The  Streights  of  Magellan.
The  21  of  Aprill  wee  ankered  beyond  Cape  Froward,  within
40  leagues  of  The  South  sea,  where  wee  rode  untill  the
1 5  of  May.  In  which  time  wee  had  great  store  of  snowe,
with  some  gustie  weather,  the  wind  continuing  still  at
Westnorthwest  against  us.  In  this  time  wee  were  inforced
for  the  preserving  of  our  victuals,  to  live  the  most  part
upon  muskles,  our  provision  was  so  slender;  so  that
many  of  our  men  died  in  this  hard  extremitie.  Then  our
General  returned  for  Brasil  there  to  winter,  &  to  procure
victuals  for  this  voyage  against  the  next  yeere.  So  we
departed  The  Streights  the  15  of  May.  The  21  being
thwart  of  Port  Desire  30  leagues  off  the  shoare,  the
wind  then  at  Northeast  and  by  North,  at  five  of  the
clock  at  night  lying  Northeast,  wee  suddenly  cast  about

397

A.D.
1592.

The  maner
how  they  lost
theirGenerall.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

lying  Southeast  and  by  South,  and  sometimes  Southeast  :
the  whole  fleete  following  the  admirall,  our  ship  comming
under  his  lee  shot  ahead  him,  and  so  framed  saile  fit
to  keepe  companie.  This  night  wee  were  severed,  by
what  occasion  wee  protest  wee  know  not,  whither  we  lost
them  or  they  us.  In  the  morning  we  only  saw  The
Black  pinnesse,  then  supposing  that  the  admirall  had
overshot  us.  All  this  day  wee  stoode  to  the  Eastwards,
hoping  to  find  him,  because  it  was  not  likely,  that
he  would  stand  to  the  shoare  againe  so  suddenly.  But
missing  him  towards  night,  we  stood  to  the  shoareward,
hoping  by  that  course  to  finde  him.  The  22  of  May  at
night  we  had  a  violent  storme,  with  the  winde  at  North-
west, and  wee  were  inforced  to  hull,  not  being  able  to
beare  saile,  and  this  night  we  perished  our  maine  tressle-
trees,  so  that  wee  could  no  more  use  our  maine  top-saile,
lying  most  dangerously  in  the  sea.  The  pinnesse
likewise  received  a  great  leake,  so  that  wee  were
inforced  to  seeke  the  next  shoare  for  our  reliefe.
And  because  famine  was  like  to  bee  the  best  ende,
wee  desired  to  goe  for  Port  Desire,  hoping  with
seales  and  penguins  to  relieve  our  selves,  and  so
to  make  shift  to  followe  the  Generall,  or  there  to  stay
his  comming  from  Brasil.  The  24  of  May  wee  had
much  winde  at  North.  The  25  was  calme,  and  the  sea
very  loftie,  so  that  our  ship  had  dangerous  foule  weather.
The  26  our  fore-shrowdes  brake,  so  that  if  wee  had  not
beene  neere  the  shoare,  it  had  beene  impossible  for  us
to  get  out  of  the  sea.  And  nowe  being  here  mored
in  Port  Desire,  our  shroudes  are  all  rotten,  not  having
a  running  rope  whereto  wee  may  trust,  and  being  pro-
vided onely  of  one  shift  of  sailes  all  worne,  our  top-sailes
not  able  to  abide  any  stresse  of  weather,  neither  have
wee  any  pitch,  tarre,  or  nailes,  nor  any  store  for  the
supplying  of  these  wantes  ;  and  wee  live  onely  upon  seales
and  muskles,  having  but  five  hogsheads  of  porke  within
bourd,  and  meale  three  ounces  for  a  man  a  day,  with
water  for  to  drinke. And  forasmuch  as  it  hath  pleased

398

LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH

A.D.
1592.

God  to  separate  our  fleete,  and  to  bring  us  into  such  hard
extremities,  that  only  now  by  his  mere  mercy  we  expect
reliefe,  though  otherwise  we  are  hopelesse  of  comfort,  yet
because  the  wonderful!  workes  of  God  in  his  exceeding
great  favour  toward  us  his  creatures  are  farre  beyond  the
scope  of  mans  capacitie,  therefore  by  him  we  hope  to  have
deliverance  in  this  our  deepe  distresse.  Also  forasmuch
as  those  upon  whom  God  will  bestow  the  favour  of  life,
with  returne  home  to  their  countrey,  may  not  onely
themselves  remaine  blamelesse,  but  also  manifest  the
trueth  of  our  actions,  wee  have  thought  good  in  Christian
charitie  to  lay  downe  under  our  hands  the  trueth  of
all  our  proceedings  even  till  the  time  of  this  our
distresse.

Given  in  Port  Desire  the 2  of  June  1592. Besech-  [III.  846.]
ing  the  almightie  God  of  his  mercie  to  deliver  us  from
this miserie, how or when it shall please his divine
Majestic.

^  ~  '  Thomas  Watkins.

John  Davis  Captaine.
Randolph  Cotton.
John  Pery.

William  Maber  gunner.
Charles  Parker.
Rouland  Miller.
Edward  Smith.
Thomas  Purpet.
Matthew  Stubbes.
John  Jenkinson.
Thomas  Edwards.
Edward  Granger.
John  Lewis.
William  Hayman.
George  Straker.
Thomas  Walbie.
William  Wyeth.
Richard  Alard.
Stephan  Popham.
Alexander  Cole.

M

George  Cunington.

John  Whiting.

James  Ling.

The  Boat-swain.

Francis  Smith.

John  Layes.

The  Boat-swaines  mate.

Fisher.
John  Austin.
Francis  Copstone.
Richard  Garet.
James  Eversby.
Nicolas  Parker.

Leonard.
John  Pick.

Benjamin.
William  Maber.
James  Not.
^  Christopher  Hauser.

399

A.D.
1592.

An  Isle  mere
Port  Desire
abounding
with  seales
and  penguins.

They  depart
the  second  time
from  Port  De-
sire for  the
Streights  of
Magellan.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

After  they  had  delivered  this  relation  unto  our
captaine  under  their  handes,  then  wee  began  to  travell
for  our  lives,  and  wee  built  up  a  smiths  forge,  and  made
a  colepit,  and  burnt  coles,  and  there  wee  made  nailes,
boltes,  and  spikes,  others  made  ropes  of  a  peece  of  our
cable,  and  the  rest  gathered  muskles,  and  tooke  smeltes
for  the  whole  companie.  Three  leagues  from  this
harborough  there  is  an  Isle  with  foure  small  Isles  about
it,  where  there  are  great  abundance  of  seales,  and  at
the  time  of  the  yeere  the  penguins  come  thither  in
great  plentie  to  breede.  Wee  concluded  with  the  pin-
nesse,  that  she  should  sometimes  goe  thither  to  fetch
seales  for  us ;  upon  which  condition  wee  would  share
our  victuals  with  her  man  for  man ;  whereunto  the
whole  companie  agreed.  So  wee  parted  our  poore  store,
and  shee  laboured  to  fetch  us  seales  to  eate,  wherewith
wee  lived  when  smeltes  and  muskles  failed :  for  in  the
nepe  streames  wee  could  get  no  muskles.  Thus  in
most  miserable  calamitie  wee  remained  untill  the  sixt
of  August,  still  keeping  watch  upon  the  hils  to  looke  for
our  Generall,  and  so  great  was  our  vexation  and  anguish
of  soule,  as  I  thinke  never  flesh  and  blood  endured  more.
Thus  our  miserie  dayly  increasing,  time  passing,  and
our  hope  of  the  Generall  being  very  colde,  our  Captaine
and  Master  were  fully  perswaded,  that  the  Generall  might
perhaps  goe  directly  for  The  Streights,  and  not  come  to
this  harborough  :  whereupon  they  thought  no  course  more
convenient  than  to  goe  presently  for  The  Streights,  and
there  to  stay  his  comming,  for  in  that  place  hee  could
not  passe,  but  of  force  wee  must  see  him :  whereunto
the  companie  most  willingly  consented,  as  also  the
Captaine  and  Master  of  the  pinnesse ;  so  that  upon
this  determination  wee  made  all  possible  speede  to
depart.

The  sixt  of  August  wee  set  saile,  and  went  to  Penguin-
isle,  and  the  next  day  wee  salted  twentie  hogsheads  of
seales,  which  was  as  much  as  our  salt  could  possibly
doe,  and  so  wee  departed  for  The  Streights  the  poorest

400

LAST  VOYAGE OF  THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1592.
wretches  that  ever  were  created. The  seventh  of  August
towarde  night  wee  departed  from  Penguin-isle,  shaping
our course  for  The  Streights,  where  wee  had  full  con-
fidence to meete with our Generall. The ninth wee
had  a  sore  storme,  so  that  wee  were  constrained  to  hull,
for  our  sailes  were  not  to  indure  any  force. The  14  wee
were driven in among certaine Isles never before dis-  Certaine  Isles
covered by any knowen relation, lying fiftie leagues  ^^^^^  before
or  better  from  the  shoare  East  and  Northerly  from  The  i"ame7north-
Streights : in  which place, unlesse it had pleased God  east  off  The
of  his  wonderful!  mercie  to  have  ceased  the  winde,  wee  Streights.
must of necessitie have perished. But the winde
shifting  to  the  East,  wee directed our course  for The
Streights, and the 18 of  August wee fell with the
Cape  in  a  very  thicke  fogge  ; and the  same  night  we
ankered  ten  leagues  within  the  Cape. The  19  day  wee  The  first  and
passed  the  first  and  the  second  Streights. The  21 wee  ^^"^^
doubled  Cape  Fro  ward. The  11  v7Q  ankered  in  Salvage  Q^lf  f].g_
coove, so named, because wee found many Salvages  ward.
there : notwithstanding  the extreme  colde  of  this  place,  Salvage  coove.
yet doe all these  wilde  people  goe  naked,  and  live  in
the  woods  like Satyrs, painted and disguised, and flie
from  you  like  wilde  deere. They  are  very  strong,  and
threw  stones  at us  of  three  or  foure  pound  weight  an
incredible  distance. The  24  in  the  morning  wee  departed  [III.  847.]
from this  coove,  and the same day  we came  into the
Northwest  reach,  which  is  the  last  reach  of  the  Streights.  ^■^^  northwest
The 25  we  ankored  in  a  good coove,  within  fourteene  ^y^^^ ^^_^<^h of
leagues  of  the  South  sea :  in  this  place  we  purposed  to
stay  for  the  General,  for  the  streight  in  this  place  is  scarce
three  miles  broad,  so  that  he  could  not  passe  but  we  must
see  him. After  we  had  stayed  here  a  fortnight  in  the
deep of  winter, our  victuals  consuming, (for  our  Seals
stunke most  vily, and our  men  died pitifully  through
cold  and  famin,  for  the  greatest  part  of  them  had  not
clothes to defend the extremitie of  the  winters cold)
being  in  this  heavie  distresse,  our  captaine  and  Master
thought  it  the  best  course  to  depart  from  the  Streights
XI  401  2  c

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

into  the  South  sea,  and  to  go  for  the  Isle  of  Santa  Maria,
which  is  to  the  Northward  of  Baldivia  in  37  degrees  &
a  quarter,  where  we  might  have  reliefe,  and  be  in  a
temperate  clime,  and  there  stay  for  the  Generall,  for
of  necessity  he  must  come  by  that  Isle.  So  we  departed
Their  first  en-  j-^g  j^  of  September,  &  came  in  sight  of  the  South  sea.
terance  into  ye  'jpj^g  14  we  were  forced  backe  againe,  and  recovered  a
They  enter  the  coove  3  leagues  within  the  streights  from  the  South  sea.
South  sea  the  Againe  we  put  foorth,  &  being  8  or  10  leagues  free  of
second  time.  the  land,  the  wind  rising  furiously  at  Westnorthwest,
we  were  inforced  againe  into  the  streights  only  for  want
of  sails;  for  we  never  durst  beare  saile  in  any  stresse  of
weather,  they  were  so  weake :  so  againe  we  recovered  the
coove  three  leagues  within  the  streights,  where  we  indured
most  furious  weather,  so  that  one  of  our  two  cables
brake,  whereby  we  were  hopeles  of  life.  Yet  it  pleased
God  to  calme  the  storme,  and  wee  unrived  our  sheates,
tackes,  halliers,  and  other  ropes,  and  mored  our  ship
to  the  trees  close  by  the  rockes.  We  laboured  to  recover
our  ankor  againe,  but  could  not  by  any  means,  it  lay  so
deepe  in  the  water,  and  as  we  thinke  cleane  covered  with
oaze.  Now  had  we  but  one  ankor  which  had  but  one
whole  Flouke,  a  cable  spliced  in  two  places,  and  a  piece
of  an  olde  cable.  In  the  middest  of  these  our  troubles
it  pleased  God  that  the  wind  came  faire  the  first  of
October ;  whereupon  with  all  expedition  wee  loosed
our  morings,  and  weighed  our  ankor,  and  so  towed  off
into  the  chanel ;  for  wee  had  mended  our  boate  in  Port
Desire,  and  had  five  oares  of  the  pinnesse.  When  we  had
weighed  our  ankor,  we  found  our  cable  broken,  onely  one
strand  helde :  then  wee  praysed  God  ;  for  we  saw  appar-
antly  his  mercies-  in  preserving  us.  Being  in  the  chanel,
we  rived  our  ropes,  &  againe  rigged  our  ship,  no  mans
hand  was  idle,  but  all  laboured  even  for  the  last  gaspe  of
life.  Here  our  company  was  devided ;  some  desired  to
go  againe  for  Port  Desire,  and  there  to  be  set  on  shore,
where  they  might  travell  for  their  lives,  and  some  stood
with the Captaine  & Master  to  proceed. Whereupon

402

LAST VOYAGE OF  THOMAS CANDISH  ad.

1592.

the  Captaine  sayd  to  the  Master :  Master,  you  see  the
wonderful!  extremitie  of  our  estate,  and  the  great  doubts
among  our  companie  of  the  truth  of  your  reports,  as
touching  reliefe  to  be  had  in  the  South  sea :  some  say
in  secret,  as  I  am  informed,  that  we  undertake  these
desperate  attempts  through  bhnd  affection  that  we  beare
to  the  General.  For  mine  owne  part  I  plainely  make
knowen  unto  you,  that  the  love  which  I  bare  to  the
Generall  caused  mee  first  to  enter  into  this  action,  whereby
I  have  not  onely  heaped  upon  my  head  this  bitter  cala-
mity now  present,  but  also  have  in  some  sort  procured
the  dislike  of  my  best  friends  in  England,  as  it  is  not
unknowen  to  some  in  this  company.  But  now  being
thus  intangled  by  the  providence  of  God  for  my  former
offences  (no  doubt)  I  desire,  that  it  may  please  his  divine
Majestie  to  show  us  such  mercifuU  favour,  that  we  may
rather  proceed,  then  otherwise :  or  if  it  be  his  wil,
that  our  mortall  being  shal  now  take  an  ende,  I  rather
desire  that  it  may  bee  in  proceeding  then  in  returning.
And  because  I  see  in  reason,  that  the  limits  of  our  time
are  now  drawing  to  an  end,  I  do  in  Christian  charity
intreat  you  all,  first  to  forgive  me  in  whatsoever  I  have
bin  grievous  unto  you ;  secondly  that  you  wil  rather  pray
for  our  General,  then  use  hard  speeches  of  him ;  and
let  us  be  fully  perswaded,  that  not  for  his  cause  &
negligence,  but  for  our  own  offences  against  the  divine
Majesty  we  are  presently  punished ;  lastly,  let  us  forgive
one  another  and  be  reconciled  as  children  in  love  &
charity,  and  not  think  upon  the  vanities  of  this  life :  so
shall  we  in  leaving  this  life  live  with  our  glorious
redeemer,  or  abiding  in  this  life,  find  favour  with  God.
And  now  (good  master)  forasmuch  as  you  have  bin  in
this  voyage  once  before  with  your  master  the  general,
satisfie  the  company  of  such  truths,  as  are  to  you  best
knowen;  &  you  the  rest  of  the  generals  men,  which
likewise  have  bin  with  him  in  his  first  voyage  if  you
heare  any  thing  contrary  to  the  truth,  spare  not  to
reproove  it,  I  pray  you. And  so  I  beseech  the  Lord  to

403

I

A.D.
1592.

[III.  848.]

This  Santos
standeth  upon
the  coast  of
Peru  in  9  deg.
of  Southerly
latitude.

They  enter  the
South  sea  the
third  time.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

bestow  his  mercy  upon  us.  Then  the  master  began  in
these  speeches  :  Captain,  your  request  is  very  reasonable,
&  I  referre  to  your  judgment  my  honest  care,  &  great
pains  taken  in  the  generals  service,  my  love  towards
him,  &  in  what  sort  I  have  discharged  my  duety,  from
the  first  day  to  this  houre.  I  was  commanded  by  the
general  to  follow  your  directions,  which  hitherto  I
have  performed.  You  all  knowe,  that  when  I  was  ex-
treamely  sicke,  the  General  was  lost  in  my  mates  watch,
as  you  have  well  examined :  sithens  which  time,  in  what
anguish  and  griefe  of  minde  I  have  lived,  God  onely
knoweth,  and  you  are  in  some  part  a  witnesse.  And
nowe  if  you  thinke  good  to  returne,  I  will  not  gainesay
it :  but  this  I  assure  you,  if  life  may  be  preserved  by
any  meanes,  it  is  in  proceeding.  For  at  the  Isle  of
Santa  Maria  I  doe  assure  you  of  wheate,  porke,  and
rootes  enough.  Also  I  will  bring  you  to  an  Isle,  where
Pelicans  bee  in  great  abundance,  and  at  Santos  wee
shall  have  meale  in  great  plenty,  besides  all  our  possibilitie
of  intercepting  some  shippes  upon  the  coast  of  Chili  and
Peru.  But  if  wee  returne  there  is  nothing  but  death
to  be  hoped  for :  therefore  doe  as  you  like,  I  am  ready,
but  my  desire  is  to  proceede.  These  his  speeches  being
confirmed  by  others  that  were  in  the  former  voyage,
there  was  a  generall  consent  of  proceeding;  and  so  the
second  of  October  we  put  into  the  South  sea,  and  were
free  of  all  land.  This  night  the  winde  began  to  blowe
very  much  at  Westnorthwest,  and  still  increased  in  fury,
so  that  wee  were  in  great  doubt  what  course  to  take  :
to  put  into  the  Streights  wee  durst  not  for  lacke  of
ground  tackle :  to  beare  sayle  wee  doubted,  the  tempest
was  so  furious,  and  our  sayles  so  bad.  The  pinnesse
come  roome  with  us,  and  tolde  us  that  shee  had  received
many  grievous  Seas,  and  that  her  ropes  did  every  houre
fayle  her,  so  as  they  could  not  tell  what  shift  to  make:
wee  being  unable  in  any  sort  to  helpe  them,  stood  under
our  coarses  in  view  of  the  lee-shore,  still  expecting  our
ruinous  end.

404

LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  ad.

1592.

The  fourth  of  October  the  storme  growing  beyond  all
reason  furious,  the  pinnesse  being  in  the  winde  of  us,  strake
suddenly  ahull,  so  that  we  thought  shee  had  received
some  grievous  sea,  or  sprung  a  leake,  or  that  her  sayles
failed  her,  because  she  came  not  with  us :  but  we  durst
not  hull  in  that  unmercifull  storme,  but  sometimes  tried
under  our  maine  coarse,  sometime  with  a  haddock  of
our  sayle,  for  our  ship  was  very  leeward,  and  most
laboursome  in  the  sea.  This  night  wee  lost  the  pinnesse,  'I'he  blacke
and  never  saw  her  againe.  ^thrZlhlea

The  fift,  our  foresayle  was  split,  and  all  to  torne :
then  our  Master  tooke  the  mizzen,  and  brought  it  to  the
foremast,  to  make  our  ship  worke,  and  with  our  sprit-
saile  we  mended  our  foresayle,  the  storme  continuing
without  all  reason  in  fury,  with  haile,  snowe,  raine,  and
winde  such  and  so  mighty,  as  that  in  nature  it  could  not
possibly  be  more,  the  seas  such  and  so  lofty,  with
continuall  breach,  that  many  times  we  were  doubtfull
whether  our  ship  did  sinke  or  swimme.

The  tenth  of  October  being  by  the  accompt  of  our
Captaine  and  Master  very  neere  the  shore,  the  weather
darke,  the  storme  furious,  and  most  of  our  men  having
given  over  to  travell,  we  yeelded  our  selves  to  death,
without  further  hope  of  succour.  Our  captaine  sitting
in  the  gallery  very  pensive,  I  came  and  brought  him
some  Rosa  solis  to  comfort  him;  for  he  was  so  cold,
that  hee  was  scarce  able  to  moove  a  joint.  After  he
had  drunke,  and  was  comforted  in  heart,  hee  began
for  the  ease  of  his  conscience  to  make  a  large  repetition
of  his  forepassed  time,  and  with  many  grievous  sighs  he
concluded  in  these  words :  Oh  most  glorious  God,  with
whose  power  the  mightiest  things  among  men  are  mat-
ters of  no  moment,  I  most  humbly  beseech  thee,  that
the  intoUerable  burthen  of  my  sinnes  may  through  the
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  be  taken  from  me :  and  end  our
daies  with  speede,  or  shew  us  some  mercifull  signe  of
thy  love  and  our  preservation.  Having  thus  ended,  he
desired  me  not  to  make  knowen  to  any  of  the  company

405

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

'592.

his  intollerable  griete  and  anguish  of  minde,  because  they

should  not  thereby  be  dismayed. And  so  suddenly,  before

I  went  from  him  the  Sunne  shined  cleere ;  so  that  he
and  the  Master  both  observed  the  true  elevation  of  the
Pole,  whereby  they  knew  by  what  course  to  recover  the
Streights.  Wherewithall  our  captaine  and  Master  were
so  revived,  &  gave  such  comfortable  speeches  to  the
company,  that  every  man  rejoiced,  as  though  we  had
received  a  present  deliverance. The  next  day  being  the

I I  of  October,  we  saw  Cabo  Deseado  being  the  cape
on  the  South  shore  (the  North  shore  is  nothing  but
a  company  of  dangerous  rocks.  Isles,  &  sholds.)  This
cape  being  within  two  leages  to  leeward  off  us,  our
master  greatly  doubted,  that  we  could  not  double  the
same :  whereupon  the  captain  told  him :  You  see  there
is  no  remedy,  either  we  must  double  it,  or  before  noon

^  we  must  die:  therefore  loose  your  sails,  and  let  us  put
it  to  Gods  mercy.  The  master  being  a  man  of  good
spirit  resolutely  made  quicke  dispatch  &  set  sails.  Our
sailes  had  not  bene  halfe  an  houre  aboord,  but  the
footrope  of  our  foresaile  brake,  so  that  nothing  held
but  the  oylet  holes.  The  seas  continually  brake  over
the  ships  poope,  and  flew  into  the  sailes  with  such
violence,  that  we  still  expected  the  tearing  of  our  sayles,
or  oversetting  of  the  ship,  and  withall  to  our  utter  dis-
comfort, wee  perceived  that  wee  fell  still  more  and  more
to  leeward,  so  that  wee  could  not  double  the  cape :
wee  were  nowe  come  within  halfe  a  mile  of  the  cape,
and  so  neere  the  shore,  that  the  counter-suffe  of  the
sea  would  rebound  against  the  shippes  side,  so  that  wee
were  much  dismayed  with  the  horror  of  our  present
ende.  Beeing  thus  at  the  very  pinch  of  death,  the
winde  and  Seas  raging  beyond  measure,  our  Master
veared  some  of  the  maine  sheate  ;  and  whether  it  was
by  that  occasion,  or  by  some  current,  or  by  the  won-
derfull  power  of  God,  as  wee  verily  thinke'  it  was,  the
ship  quickened  her  way,  and  shot  past  that  rocke,  where
wee  thought  shee  would  have  shored. Then betweene

406

LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  ad.

1592.

the  cape  and  the  poynt  there  was  a  little  bay  ;  so  that

wee  were  somewhat  farther  from  the  shoare  : and  when  [HI.  849.]

we were come so farre as the cape, wee yeelded to

death  : yet our good God the Father of  all mercies

delivered  us,  and  wee  doubled  the  cape  about  the  length  ^^■^^  ^^P^  ^^-

of  our shippe, or very little more. Being shot past  ^^f^"  ^°^\

the  cape,  we  presently  tooke  m  our  sayles,  which  onely  doubled,  after

God had preserved unto us : and when we  were shot  they  had  been

in betweene the high lands, the  wind blowing  trade,  »^'»^  dayes  in

without  any  inch of  sayle,  we spooned before  the  sea,  ^^^  ^°^^^  '^^•

three  men  being  not  able to  guide the helme,  and in

sixe  houres  wee  were  put  five  and  twenty  leagues  within

the  Streights,  where  wee  found  a  sea  answerable  to  the

Ocean.

In  this  time  we  freed  our  ship  from  water,  and  after
wee  had  rested  a  little,  our  men  were  not  able  to  moove ;
their  sinewes  were  stiffe,  and  their  flesh  dead,  and  many
of  them  (which  is  most  lamentable  to  bee  reported)  were
so  eaten  with  lice,  as  that  in  their  flesh  did  lie  clusters  of
lice  as  big  as  peason,  yea  and  some  as  big  as  beanes.
Being  in  this  miserie  we  were  constrained  to  put  into  a
coove  for  the  refreshing  our  men.  Our  Master  knowing
the  shore  and  every  coove  very  perfectly,  put  in  with
the  shore,  and  mored  to  the  trees,  as  beforetime  we  had
done,  laying  our  ankor  to  the  seaward.  Here  we  con-
tinued until  the  twentieth  of  October;  but  not  being  able
any  longer  to  stay  through  extremitie  of  famine,  the  one
and  twentieth  we  put  off  into  the  chanell,  the  weather
being  reasonable  calme :  but  before  night  it  blew  most
extreamely  at  Westnorthwest.  The  storme  growing  out-
rageous, our  men  could  scarcely  stand  by  their  labour ;
and  the  Streights  being  full  of  turning  reaches  we  were
constrained  by  discretion  of  the  Captaine  and  Master  in
their  accounts  to  guide  the  ship  in  the  hell-darke  night,
when  we  could  not  see  any  shore,  the  chanell  being  in
some  places  scarse  three  miles  broad. But  our  captaine,  ^"  excellent

as  wee  first  passed  through  the  Streights  drew  such  an  -^f  •  i!^/
•  •  i^ri  T  1-  . streights  of

exquisite  plat  or  the  same,  as  1  am  assured  it  cannot  in  Magellan.

407

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

any  sort  be  bettered  :  which  plat  hee  and  the  Master  so
often  perused,  and  so  carefully  regarded,  as  that  in
memorie  they  had  every  turning  and  creeke,  and  in  the
deepe  darke  night  without  any  doubting  they  conveyed
the  ship  through  that  crooked  chanell :  so  that  I  conclude,
the  world  hath  not  any  so  skilfull  pilots  for  that  place,  as
they  are :  for  otherwise  wee  could  never  have  passed  in
such  sort  as  we  did.

The  25  wee  came  to  an  Island  in  the  Streights  named
Penguin-isle,  whither  wee  sent  our  boate  to  seeke  reliefe,
for  there  were  great  abundance  of  birds,  and  the  weather
was  very  calme ;  so  wee  came  to  an  ankor  by  the  Island
in  seven  fadomes.  While  our  boate  was  at  shore,  and
we  had  great  store  of  Penguins,  there  arose  a  sudden
storme,  so  that  our  ship  did  drive  over  a  breach  and  our
boate  sanke  at  the  shore.  Captaine  Cotton  and  the
Lieutenant  being  on  shore  leapt  in  the  boate,  and  freed
the  same,  and  threw  away  all  the  birdes,  and  with  great
difficultie  recovered  the  ship  :  my  selfe  also  was  in  the
boate  the  same  time,  where  for  my  life  I  laboured  to  the
best  of  my  power.  The  ship  all  this  while  driving  upon
the  lee-shore,  when  wee  came  aboord,  we  helped  to  set
sayle,  and  weighed  the  ankor;  for  before  our  comming
they  could  scarse  hoise  up  their  yardes,  yet  with  much
adoe  they  set  their  fore-coarse.  Thus  in  a  mighty  fret
of  weather  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  October  wee
were  free  of  the  Streights,  and  the  thirtieth  of  October  we
Penguin-isle  came  to  Penguin-isle  being  three  leagues  from  Port  Desire,
within  three  ^^  place  which  wee  purposed  to  seeke  for  our  reliefe.
offfn?-...  When wee were come to this Isle wee sent our

boate  on  shore,  which  returned  laden  with  birdes  and
egges ;  and  our  men  sayd  that  the  Penguins  were  so
thicke  upon  the  Isle,  that  shippes  might  be  laden  with
them ;  for  they  could  not  goe  without  treading  upon
the  birds,  whereat  we  greatly  rejoiced.  Then  the  cap-
taine appointed  Charles  Parker  and  Edward  Smith,  with
twenty  others  to  go  on  shore,  and  to  stay  upon  the  Isle,
for  the  killing  and  drying  of  those  Penguins,  and  promised

408

Port  Desire,

LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1592.
after  the  ship  was  in  harborough  to  send  the  rest,  not
onely  for  expedition,  but  also  to  save  the  small  store  of
victuals  in  the  shippe.  But  Parker,  Smith,  and  the  rest
of  their  faction  suspected,  that  this  was  a  devise  of  the
Captaine  to  leave  his  men  on  shore,  that  by  these  meanes
there  might  bee  victuals  for  the  rest  to  recover  their
countrey :  and  when  they  remembered,  that  this  was  the
place  where  they  would  have  slaine  their  Captaine  and
Master,  surely  (thought  they)  for  revenge  hereof  will
they  leave  us  on  shore.  Which  when  our  Captaine  under-
stood, hee  used  these  speeches  unto  them :  I  understand
that  you  are  doubtfuU  of  your  security  through  the  per-
versenesse  of  your  owne  guilty  consciences :  it  is  an  ex-
treame  griefe  unto  me,  that  you  should  judge  mee
blood-thirstie,  in  whome  you  have  seene  nothing  but
kinde  conversation :  if  you  have  found  otherwise,  speake
boldly,  and  accuse  mee  of  the  wrongs  that  I  have  done ;
if  not,  why  do  you  then  measure  me  by  your  owne
uncharitable  consciences  ?  All  the  company  knoweth
indeed,  that  in  this  place  you  practized  to  the  utmost  of
your  powers,  to  murther  me  and  the  master  causeles,
as  God  knoweth,  which  evil  in  this  place  we  did  remit
you :  &  now  I  may  conceive  without  doing  you  wrong,
that  you  againe  purpose  some  evill  in  bringing  these
matters  to  repetition :  but  God  has  so  shortened  your  [ill.  850.]
confederacie,  as  that  I  nothing  doubt  you :  it  is  for
your  Masters  sake  that  I  have  forborne  you  in  your
unchristian  practizes:  and  here  I  protest  before  God,
that  for  his  sake  alone  I  will  yet  indure  this  injury,  and
you  shall  in  no  sorte  be  prejudiced  or  in  any  thing  be
by  ime  commanded  :  but  when  we  come  into  England
(if  God  so  favour  us)  your  master  shall  knowe  your
honesties  :  in  the  meane  space  be  voide  of  these  suspicions,
for,  God  I  call  to  witnes,  revenge  is  no  part  of  my
thought.  They  gave  him  thanks,  desiring  to  go  into
the  harborough  with  the  ship,  which  he  granted.  So
there  were  ten  left  upon  the  Isle,  and  the  last  of  October  Port  Desire
we  entred  the  harborough. Our  Master  at  our  last  being  the  third  time.

409

A.D.
1592.

Penguin  Isle
scarce  a  mile
from  the

Nine  men  lost.

A  great  mul-
titude of  Sal-
vages zvith
mzai'ds,  or
faces  like  unto
dogs  faces.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

here  having  taken  carefull  notice  of  every  creeke  in  the
river,  in  a  very  convenient  place,  upon  sandy  oaze,  ran
the  ship  on  ground,  laying  our  ankor  to  seaward,  and
with  our  running  ropes  mored  her  to  stakes  upon  the
shore,  which  hee  had  fastened  for  that  purpose ;  where
the  ship  remained  till  our  departure.

The  third  of  November  our  boat  with  water,  wood,
and  as  many  as  shee  could  carry,  went  for  the  Isle  of
Penguins :  but  being  deepe,  she  durst  not  proceed,  but
returned  againe  the  same  night.  Then  Parker,  Smith,
Townesend,  Purpet,  with  five  others,  desired  that  they
might  goe  by  land,  and  that  the  boate  might  fetch  them
when  they  were  against  the  Isle,  it  being  scarce  a  mile
from  the  shore.  The  captaine  bade  them  doe  what  they
thought  best,  advising  them  to  take  weapons  with  them  :
for  (sayd  he)  although  we  have  not  at  any  time  scene
people  in  this  place,  yet  in  the  countrey  there  may  be
Savages.  They  answered,  that  here  were  great  store  of
Deere,  and  Ostriches ;  but  if  there  were  Salvages,  they
would  devoure  them  :  notwithstanding  the  captaine  caused
them  to  cary  weapons,  calievers,  swordes,  and  targets :
so  the  sixt  of  November  they  departed  by  land,  and  the
bote  by  sea;  but  from  that  day  to  this  day  wee  never
heard  of  our  men.  The  1 1  while  most  of  our  men  were
at  the  Isle,  onely  the  Captaine  and  Master  with  sixe
others  being  left  in  the  ship,  there  came  a  great  multi-
tude of  Salvages  to  the  ship,  throwing  dust  in  the  ayre,
leaping  and  running  like  brute  beasts,  having  vizards  on
their  faces  like  dogs  faces,  or  else  their  faces  are  dogs
faces  indeed.  We  greatly  feared  least  they  would  set
our  ship  on  fire,  for  they  would  suddenly  make  fire,
whereat  we  much  marvelled:  they  came  to  windward  of
our  ship,  and  set  the  bushes  on  fire,  so  that  we  were  in
a  very  stinking  smoke  :  but  as  soone  as  they  came  within
our  shot,  we  shot  at  them,  &  striking  one  of  them  in  the
thigh  they  all  presently  fled,  so  that  we  never  heard  nor
saw  more  of  them.  Hereby  we  judged  that  these  Cani-
bals  had  slaine  our  9  men. When  we  considered  what

410

LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  ad.

1592.

they  were that  thus  were  slaine,  and found  that they

were  the  principall  men  that  would  have  murthered  our

Captaine  and  Master,  with  the  rest  of  their  friends,  we

saw  the  just  judgement  of  God,  and  made  supplication

to  his  divine  Majesty  to  be  mercifull  unto  us. While

we  were in  this  harborough,  our Captaine  and Master

went  with  the  boat  to  discover  how  farre  this  river  did

run,  that  if  neede  should  enforce  us  to  leave  our  ship,

we  might  know  how  farre  we  might  go  by  water. So

they found,  that farther  than 20  miles  they  could  not  The  rher  of

20  with  the  boat. At  their  returne  they  sent  the  boate  P"''^  ^^^"',^
° 1 T  1 r  T-i  •  11  J  .,, but  zo  mt/es

to  the  Isle or  Penguins ;  whereby  wee  understood  that  passable  by

the  Penguins  dryed  to  our  hearts  content,  and  that  the  boate.
multitude  of  them  was  infinite. This  Penguin  hath  the
shape of  a  bird, but hath no  wings,  only  two stumps
in  the  place  of  wings,  by  which  he  swimmeth  under  water
with  as  great  swiftnes  as  any  fish. They  live  upon  smelts,
whereof  there is great  abundance upon this coast : in
eating  they  be  neither  fish  nor  flesh:  they  lay  great  egs,
and  the  bird  is  of  a  reasonable  bignes,  very  neere  twise
so  big  as  a  ducke. All  the  time  that  wee  were  in  this
place, we  fared passing  well  with egs,  Penguins,  yong
Scales,  young  Guiles,  besides  other  birds,  such  as  1  know
not :  of  all  which  we  had  great  abundance. In  this  place
we  found  an  herbe  called  Scurvygrasse,  which  wee  fried  The  great
with egs, using traine oyle in stead of  butter. This  ^f^f^jj^
herbe  did  so  purge  ye  blood,  that  it  tooke  away  all  kind  scurv^grasse
of  swellings,  of  which  many  died,  &  restored  us  to  per-
fect health  of  body,  so  that  we  were  in  as  good  case  as
when  we  came  first  out  of  England. We  stayed  in  this  They  stayed  7
harbour  until  the  22  of  December,  in  which  time  we  had  ^^^/s  in  Port
dried 20000 Penguins; & the Captaine, the Master,
and  my  selfe  had  made  some  salt,  by  laying  salt  water  A  pretty  de-
upon the  rocks  in holes,  which in 6 daies would be  ^"^  ^°  ^^^^
kerned. Thus God did feed  us even  as it  were  with
Manna  from  heaven.

The  22 of  December  we  departed  with  our ship  for
the  Isle,  where  with  great  difficulty,  by  the  skilful  industry

411

A.D.
1592.

A  poore  allow-
ance of
victuals.

[III.  851.]

The  Isle  of
Placencia  in
Brasill.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  our  Master  we  got  14000  of  our  birds,  and  had  almost
lost  our  captaine  in  labouring  to  bring  the  birds  aboord :
&  had  not  our  Master  bene  very  expert  in  the  set  of
those  wicked  tides,  which  run  after  many  fashions,  we
had  also  lost  our  ship  in  the  same  place  :  but  God  of  his
goodnes  hath  in  all  our  extremities  bene  our  protector.
So  the  22  at  night  we  departed  with  14000  dried  Pen-
guins, not  being  able  to  fetch  the  rest,  and  shaped  our
course  for  Brasil.  Nowe  our  captaine  rated  our  victuals,
and  brought  us  to  such  allowance,  as  that  our  victuals
might  last  sixe  moneths  ;  for  our  hope  was,  that  within
sixe  moneths  we  might  recover  our  countrey,  though
our  sailes  were  very  bad.  So  the  allowance  was  two
ounces  &  a  halfe  of  meale  for  a  man  a  day,  and  to
have  so  twise  a  weeke,  so  that  5  ounces  did  serve  for
a  weeke.  Three  daies  a  weeke  we  had  oile,  three
spoonfuls  for  a  man  a  day  ;  and  2  dayes  in  a  weeke
peason,  a  pint  betweene  4  men  a  day,  and  every  day
5  Penguins  for  4  men,  and  6  quartes  of  water  for  4
men  a  day.  This  was  our  allowance  ;  wherewith  (we
praise  God)  we  lived,  though  weakly,  and  very  feeble.
The  30  of  January  we  arrived  at  the  lie  of  Placencia
in  Brasill,  the  first  place  that  outward  bound  we  were
at  :  and  having  made  the  sholde,  our  ship  lying  off  at
sea,  the  Captaine  with  24  of  the  company  went  with
the  boat  on  shore,  being  a  whole  night  before  they
could  recover  it.  The  last  of  January  at  sun-rising
they  suddenly  landed,  hoping  to  take  the  Portugales
in  their  houses,  &  by  that  meanes  to  recover  some
Casavi-meale,  or  other  victuals  for  our  reliefe  :  but
when  they  came  to  the  houses,  they  were  all  razed,  and
burnt  to  the  ground,  so  that  we  thought  no  man  had
remained  on  the  Hand.  Then  the  captaine  went  to
the  gardens,  &  brought  from  thence  fruits  &  roots  for
the  company,  and  came  aboord  the  ship,  and  brought
her  into  a  fine  creeke  which  he  had  found  out,  where
we  might  more  her  by  the  trees,  and  where  there  was
water,  and  hoopes  to  trim our  caske. Our  case being

412

LAST  VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1593-
very  desperate,  we  presently  laboured  for  dispatch
away ;  some  cut  hoopes,  which  the  coopers  made,
others  laboured  upon  the  sailes  and  ship,  every  man
travelling  for  his  life,  &  still  a  guard  was  kept  on
shore  to  defend  those  that  laboured,  every  man  having
his  weapon  like  wise  by  him.  The  3  of  February
our  men  with  23  shot  went  againe  to  the  gardens,
being  3  miles  from  us  upon  the  North  shore,  and
fetched  Cazavi-roots  out  of  the  ground,  to  relieve  our
company  instead  of  bread  ;  for  we  spent  not  of  our
meale  while  we  staied  here.  The  5  of  February  being
munday,  our  captaine  and  master  hasted  the  company
to  their  labour ;  so  some  went  with  the  Coopers  to
gather  hoopes,  and  the  rest  laboured  aboord.  This  night
many  of  our  men  in  the  ship  dreamed  of  murther  &  Ominous  and
slaughter  :  In  the  morning  they  reported  their  dreames,  fof^'^^rmng
one  saying  to  another  ;  this  night  I  dreamt,  that  thou
wert  slaine  ;  another  answered,  and  I  dreamed,  that
thou  wert  slaine  :  and  this  was  general  through  the
ship.  The  captaine  hearing  this,  who  like  wise  had
dreamed  very  strangely  himselfe,  gave  very  streight
charge,  that  those  which  went  on  shore  should  take
weapons  with  them,  and  saw  them  himselfe  delivered
into  the  boat,  &  sent  some  of  purpose  to  guard  the
labourers.  All  the  forenoone  they  laboured  in  quiet-
nesse,  &  when  it  was  ten  of  the  clocke,  the  heat  being
extreme,  they  came  to  a  rocke  neere  the  woods  side
(for  al  this  countrey  is  nothing  but  thick  woods)  and
there  they  boyled  Cazavi-roots,  &  dined  :  after  dinner
some  slept,  some  washed  themselves  in  the  sea,  all  being
stripped  to  their  shirts,  &  no  man  keeping  watch,  no
match  lighted,  not  a  piece  charged.  Suddenly  as  they
were  thus  sleeping  8z:  sporting,  having  gotten  themselves
into  a  corner  out  of  sight  of  the  ship,  there  came  a
multitude  of  Indians  &  Portugales  upon  them,  and  slew
them  sleeping  :  onely  two  escaped,  one  very  sore  hurt,
the  other  not  touched,  by  whom  we  understood  of
this  miserable  massacre  :  with  all  speed  we  manned  our

413

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

'593-

boat, & landed to succour our men  ; but we found

them  slaine,  &  laied naked  on  a  ranke  one  by  another,
with their faces upward, and a crosse set by them  :
and  withall  we  saw  two  very  great  pinnesses  come  from
the river of  Jenero very  ful of  men  ; whom  we  mis-
trusted  came from thence to take us  : because there
came from Jenero souldiers to Santos, when the
Generall had taken the towne and was strong in it.
Of  76 persons which departed in our ship out of
Thlrteenemen  England,  we  were now  left but 27, having  lost 13  in
^°fpj^^^}^^ this place, with their chiefe furniture, as muskets,
%  theirlwne calivers,  powder,  &  shot. Our  caske  was  all  in  decay,
extreme  negli-  SO  that  we  could  not take in more  water than  was  in
gence.  our ship, for want of  caske, and that which we had

was  marvellous  ill  conditioned  :  and  being  there  mored
by  trees  for  want  of  cables  and  ankers,  we  still  expected
the  cutting  of  our  morings,  to  be  beaten  from  our
decks  with  our  owne  furniture,  &  to  be  assayled  by
them  of  Jenero  :  what  distresse  we  were  now  driven
into,  I  am  not  able  to  expresse.  To  depart  with  8
tunnes  of  water  in  such  bad  caske  was  to  sterve  at  sea,
&  in  staying  our  case  was  ruinous.  These  were  hard
choises  ;  but  being  thus  perplexed,  we  made  choice
rather  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  then  into
the  hands  of  men  :  for  his  exceeding  mercies  we  had
tasted,  &  of  the  others  cruelty  we  were  not  ignorant.
So  concluding  to  depart,  the  6  of  February  we  were
off  in  the  chanell,  with  our  ordinance  &  small  shot  in
a  readines,  for  any  assalt  that  should  come,  &  having
a  small  gale  of  winde,  we  recovered  the  sea  in  most
deepe  distresse.  Then  bemoning  our  estate  one  to
another,  and  recounting  over  all  our  extremities,  nothing
grieved  us  more,  then  the  losse  of  our  men  twise,  first
by  the  slaughter  of  the  Canibals  at  Port  Desire,  and  at
this  He  of  Placencia  by  the  Indians  and  Portugals.  And
considering  what  they  were  that  were  lost,  we  found
that  al  those  that  conspired  the  murthering  of  our
captaine & master were now slain by salvages, the

414

LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH  ad.

1593-
gunner only excepted. Being thus at sea, when we

came  to  cape  Frio,  the  winde  was  contrary  ;  so  that  Cabo  Frio  30
7  weekes  we  were  grievously  vexed  with  crosse  windes,  ^^^g^^^  east  off
o^  .  •  u  c vc  the  lie  of

(X our water consuming, our hope or lire was very  p^ ■

small.  Some  desired  to  go  to  Baya,  &  to  submit
themselves  to  the  Portugales,  rather  then  to  die  for
thirst  :  but  the  captaine  with  faire  perswasions  altered
their  purpose  of  yeelding  to  the  Portugales.  In  this  [III.  852.]
distresse  it  pleased  God  to  send  us  raine  in  such  plenty,
as  that  we  were  wel  watered,  &  in  good  comfort  to
returne.  But  after  we  came  neere  unto  the  sun,  our
dried  Penguins  began  to  corrupt,  and  there  bred  in
them  a  most  lothsome  &  ugly  worme  of  an  inch  long.  -^  most  strange
This  worme  did  so  mightily  increase,  and  devoure  our  ^"^J"^^™'
victuals,  that  there  was  in  reason  no  hope  how  we  hredof^m^
should  avoide  famine,  but  be  devoured  of  these  wicked  salted  Pen-
creatures  :  there  was  nothing  that  they  did  not  devour,  ^«^'«^-
only  yron  excepted  :  our  clothes,  boots,  shooes,  hats,
shirts,  stockings  :  and  for  the  ship  they  did  so  eat  the
timbers,  as  that  we  greatly  feared  they  would  undoe
us,  by  gnawing  through  the  ships  side.  Great  was  the
care  and  diligence  of  our  captaine,  master,  and  company
to  consume  these  vermine,  but  the  more  we  laboured
to  kill  them,  the  more  they  increased  ;  so  that  at  the
last  we  could  not  sleepe  for  them,  but  they  would  eate
our  flesh,  and  bite  like  Mosquitos.  In  this  wofuU  case,
after  we  had  passed  the  Equinoctiall  toward  the  North,
our  men  began  to  fall  sick  of  such  a  monstrous  disease,
as  I  thinke  the  like  was  never  heard  of:  for  in  their
ankles  it  began  to  swell ;  from  thence  in  two  daies  it
would  be  in  their  breasts,  so  that  they  could  not  draw
their  breath,  and  then  fell  into  their  cods  ;  and  their
cods  and  yardes  did  swell  most  grievously,  and  most
dreadfully  to  behold,  so  that  they  could  neither  stand,
lie,  nor  goe.  Whereupon  our  men  grew  mad  with
griefe.  Our  captain  with  extreme  anguish  of  his
soule,  was  in  such  wofuU  case,  that  he  desired  only  a
speedie  end,  and  though  he  were  scarce  able  to  speake

415

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1593-

for  sorrow,  yet  he  perswaded  them  to  patience,  and  to

give  God  thankes,  &  like  dutifull  children  to  accept  of
his  chastisement.  For  all  this  divers  grew  raging  mad,
&  some  died  in  most  lothsome  &  furious  paine.  It
were  incredible  to  write  our  misery  as  it  was  :  there
was  no  man  in  perfect  health,  but  the  captaine  &  one
boy.  The  master  being  a  man  of  good  spirit  with
extreme  labour  bore  out  his  griefe,  so  that  it  grew  not
upon  him.  To  be  short,  all  our  men  died  except  i6,
of  which  there  were  but  5  able  to  moove.  The  captaine
was  in  good  health,  the  master  indifferent,  captaine
Cotton  and  my  selfe  swolne  and  short  winded,  yet  better
then  the  rest  that  were  sicke,  and  one  boy  in  health  :
upon  us  5  only  the  labour  of  the  ship  did  stand.  The
captaine  and  master,  as  occasion  served,  would  take  in,
and  heave  out  the  top-sailes,  the  master  onely  attended
on  the  sprit-saile,  and  all  of  us  at  the  capstcn  without
sheats  and  tacks.  In  fine  our  miserie  and  weaknesse
was  so  great,  that  we  could  not  take  in,  nor  heave  out
a  saile  :  so  our  top-saile  &  sprit-sailes  were  torne  all
in  pieces  by  the  weather.  The  master  and  captaine
taking  their  turnes  at  the  helme,  were  mightily  distressed
and  monstrously  grieved  with  the  most  wofull  lamenta-
tion of  our  sick  men.  Thus  as  lost  wanderers  upon
They  arrive  the  sea,  the  II  of  June  1593,  it  pleased  God  that  we
at  Bear-haven  arrived  at  Bear-haven  in  Ireland,  and  there  ran  the  ship
Ti  0/7'^  ^  ^  on  shore  :  where  the  Irish  men  helped  us  to  take  in
1593.  our sailes, and to more our ship for flooting  : which

slender  paines  of  theirs  cost  the  captaine  some  ten
pounds  before  he  could  have  the  ship  in  safetie.  Thus
without  victuals,  sailes,  men,  or  any  furniture  God
onely  guided  us  into  Ireland,  where  the  captaine  left
the  master  and  three  or  foure  of  the  company  to  keepe
the  ship  ;  and  within  5  dayes  after  he  and  certaine  others
had  passage  in  an  English  fisher-boat  to  Padstow  in
Cornewall.  In  this  maner  our  small  remnant  by  Gods
onely  mercie  were  preserved,  and  restored  to  our  countrey,
to  whom  be  all  honour  and  glory  world  without  end.

416

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTERS

A.D.
1596.

The  letters  of  the  Queenes  most  excellent  Majestie
sent  in  the  yere  1596  unto  the  great  Emperor
of  China  by  M.  Richard  Allot  and  M.  Thomas
Bromefield  marchants  of  the  citie  of  London,
who  were  embarqued  in  a  fleet  of  3  ships,  to
wit,  The  Beare,  The  Beares  whelpe,  and  the
Benjamin;  set  forth  principally  at  the  charges
of  the  honourable  knight  Sir  Robert  Duddely,
and  committed  unto  the  command  and  con-
duct of  M.  Benjamin  Wood,  a  man  of  ap-
prooved  skill  in  navigation :  who,  together
with  his  ships  and  company  (because  we
have  heard  no  certaine  newes  of  them  since
the  moneth  of  February  next  after  their  de-
parture) we  do  suppose,  may  be  arrived  upon
some  part  of  the  coast  of  China,  and  may  there
be  stayed  by  the  said  Emperour,  or  perhaps
may  have  some  treacherie  wrought  against
them  by  the  Portugales  of  Macao,  or  the
Spaniards  of  the  Philippinas.

TJLizabetha  Dei  gracia  Angliae,  Franciae,
&  Hiberniae  Regina,  verae  &  christianae
fidei  contra  omnes  falso  Christi  nomen
profitentes  invictissima  propugnatrix
&c.  Altissimo,  Serenissimoque  Principi,
potentissimo  magni  regni  Chinas  domi-
natori,  summo  in  illis  Asiae  partibus
Insulisque  adjacentibus  imperatori,  &  magno  in  orienta-
libus  mundi  regionibus  Monarchae,  salutem,  multosque
cum  omni  optimarum  rerum  copia  &  affluentia  laetos
&  foelices  annos.  Cum  honesti  &  fideles  subditi  nostri,
qui  has  literas  nostras  ad  serenitatem  vestram  perferunt,
Richardus  AUott  &  Thomas  Bromefield,  civitatis  nostras
Londini in dicto nostro regno  Angliae mercatores, im-

XI  417  2D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

pense  a  nobis  efflagitaverint,  ut  eorum  studia  ad  imperii
[III.  853.]  vestri  regiones  (commercii  gracia)  navigandi  commen-
daremus :  Cumque  regni  vestri  fortiter  prudenterque
administrati  fama,  per  universam  terrarum  orbem  dis-
seminata &  divulgata,  subditos  hos  nostros  invitaverit,
non  solum  ut  dominationis  vestrae  regiones  invisant,  sed
ut  regni  vestri  legibus  &  institutis,  dum  in  illis  mundi
partibus  commorati  fuerint,  regendos  se  &  moderandos
permittant,  prout  mercatores  decet,  qui  mercimoniorum
commutandorum  causa  ad  tarn  longe  dissitas,  nee  adhuc
nostro  orbi  satis  cognitas  regiones,  penetrare  cupiunt,
illud  unum  spectantes,  ut  mercimonia  sua,  mercimonior-
umque  quorundam,  quibus  ditionis  nostras  regiones  abund-
ant, exemplaria  quaedam  sive  specimina,  serenitatis  vestrae
subditorumque  vestrorum  conspectui  offerant,  &  dili-
genter  cognoscere  studeant,  si  quae  alias  sint  apud  nos
merces  quas  vestro  usui  inserviant,  quas  honesto  &  ubique
terrarum  licito  commercii  ritu  aliis  mercibus  (quarum  in
imperii  vestri  regionibus,  tam  artis  quam  nature  beneficio
magna  copia  est)  commutare  possint.  Nos  aequissimis
honestorum  hominum  precibus  acquiescentes,  quia  nihil
ex  justissimo  hoc  mercaturae  usu  incommodi  sive  dis-
pendii  oriturum,  sed  plurimum  potius  emolumenti  utri-
usque  regni  tum  principibus  tum  subditis  proventurum
existimamus,  dum  earum  rerum  quibus  abundamus  ex-
portatione,  &  aliarum  quibus  egemus  invectione,  aequis-
simis preciis  ivuari  utrinque  &  locupletari  possimus ;
Serenissimam  Majestatem  vestram  rogamus,  ut  subditis
his  nostrisj  cum  mercimoniorum  vendendorum  &  permu-
tandorum  gratia,  ad  imperii  vestri  stationes,  portus,  loca,
oppida,  civitates  accesserint,  eundi,  redeundi,  &  cum
subditis  vestris  negotiandi,  plena  &  libera  fiat  potestas :
Illisque  hujusmodi  libertates,  immunitates,  &  privilegia,
quae  aliorum  principum  subditis,  apud  vos  mercaturam
exercentibus,  concedi  solent,  serenitatis  vestrae  dementia
inviolata  conserventur ;  &  nos  vicissim,  non  tantum
omnia  amicae  principis  officia  serenitati  vestrae  deferemus,
sed  ad  majorem  communis  inter  nos  subditosque  nostros

418

QUEEN  ELIZABETH'S  LETTERS ad.

1596-
amicitiae  &  commercii  propagationem,  subditis  vestris
omnibus  &  singulis,  si  serenissimae  Majestati  vestrae  ita
visum  fuerit,  plenam  &  integram  in  ditionis  nostrae
quascunque  regiones  veniendi,  commorandi,  negotiandi,
&  revertendi,  potestatem  per  prassentes  has  literas
nostras  libentissime  concedimus.  Quae  omnia  &  singula
regii  nostri  sigilli  appositione  communiri  fecimus.  Deus
opt.  max.  cceH  &  terrae  conditor,  regiam  Majestatem
vestram  diutissime  servet  incolumem,  Datas  in  Palatio
nostro  Grenovici  xj.  mensis  Julii  Anno  Christi  1596.
annoque  nostri  regni  xxxviij.

The  same  in  English.

ELizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of  England,
France,  and  Ireland,  the  most  mightie  defendresse
of  the  true  &  christian  faith  against  all  that  falsely
professe  the  name  of  Christ  &c.  To  the  most  high
and  soveraigne  Prince  the  most  puissant  Governour  of
the  great  kingdome  of  China,  the  chiefest  Emperour
in  those  parts  of  Asia  and  of  the  Hands  adjoyning,  and
the  great  monarke  of  the  orientall  regions  of  the  world ;
wisheth  health,  and  many  joyfuU  and  happy  yeeres,  with
all  plenty  and  abundance  of  things  most  acceptable.
Whereas  our  honest  and  faithfull  subjects  which  bring
these  letters  unto  your  Highnesse,  Richard  Allot  &
Thomas  Bromefield,  marchants  of  our  citie  of  London
in  our  foresaid  kingdome  of  England,  have  made  most
earnest  suit  unto  us,  that  we  would  commend  their
desires  and  endevours  of  sayling  to  the  regions  of
your  Empire  for  trafEques  sake :  whereas  also  the  fame
of  your  kingdome  so  strongly  and  prudently  governed,
being  dispersed  and  published  over  the  face  of  the  whole
earth,  hath  invited  these  our  subjects  not  onely  to  visite
your  Highnesse  dominions,  but  also  to  permit  themselves
to  be  ruled  and  governed  by  the  lawes  and  constitutions
of  your  kingdome  during  the  time  of  their  aboad  in
those  partes  of  the  world,  as  it  becommeth  marchants,
who  for  exchange  of  marchandize  are  desirous  to  travell

419

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596-

unto  regions  so  farre  distant  and  not  hitherto  sufficiently
knowen  unto  these  nations  of  the  world,  having  this
regard  onely,  that  they  may  present  their  wares  and
certaine  examples  or  musters  of  divers  kinds  of  mar-
chandizes,  wherewith  the  regions  of  our  dominions  do
abound,  unto  the  view  of  your  Highnesse  and  of  your
subjects,  &  that  they  may  indevour  to  know,  whether
here  be  any  other  marchandize  with  us  fit  for  your  use,
which  (according  to  the  honest  &  lawfuU  custome  of
traffique  in  all  countries)  they  may  exchange  for  other
commodities,  whereof  in  the  parts  of  your  Empire  there
is  great  plentie  both  naturall  and  artificiall :  We  yeelding
unto  the  most  reasonable  requests  of  these  honest  men,
because  we  doe  suppose  that  by  this  most  just  intercourse
of  traffique,  no  inconvenience  nor  losse,  but  rather  most
exceeding  benefite  will  redound  unto  the  Princes  and
subjects  of  both  kingdomes,  while  by  the  carrying  foorth
of  those  commodities  wherewith  we  abound,  and  the
bringing  home  of  others  which  we  want,  wee  may  on
either  side  at  most  easie  rates  helpe  and  inrich  one
another ;  doe  crave  of  your  most  soveraigne  Majestie,
that  these  our  subjects,  when  they  shall  come  for
[III.  854.]  traffiques  sake  unto  any  the  stations,  portes,  places,
townes  or  cities  of  your  Empire,  they  may  have  full
and  free  libertie  of  egresse  and  regresse,  and  of  dealing
in  trade  of  marchandize  with  your  subjects,  may  by
your  Highnesse  clemency  most  firmely  enjoy  all  such
freedomes,  immunities,  and  privileges,  as  are  usually
granted  to  the  subjects  of  other  Princes  which  exercise
traffique  in  your  dominions ;  and  we  on  the  other  side
will  not  onely  performe  all  the  offices  of  a  well-willing
Prince  unto  your  Highnesse,  but  also  for  the  greater
increase  of  mutuall  love  and  commerce  between  us  and
our  subjects,  by  these  present  letters  of  ours  doe  most  wil-
lingly grant  unto  all  and  every  your  subjects  (if  it  shall
seeme  good  unto  your  Highnesse)  full  and  entire  libertie
unto  any  of  the  partes  of  our  dominions  to  resort,  there
to  abide  and  traffique,  and  thence  to  returne. All  and

420

QUEEN  ELIZABETH'S LETTERS  a.d.

1596.

every  of  which  premisses  we  have  caused  to  be  con-
firmed by  annexing  hereunto  our  royall  seale.  God
most  mercifull  and  almighty,  the  Creator  of  heaven
and  earth,  continually  protect  your  kingly  Majestie.
Given  in  our  palace  at  Greenwich  the  11  of  the
moneth  of  July,  in  the  yeere  of  Christ  1596,  and  the
eight  and  thirtie  yeere  of  our  reigne.

[Three  several!
421

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

THREE  SEVERALL  TESTIMONIES

Concerning  the  mighty  kingdom  of  Coray,  tribu-
tary to  the  king  of  China,  and  borthering  upon  his
Northeast  frontiers,  called  by  the  Portugales  Coria,
and  by them  esteemed at  the  first  an iland,  but
since  found  to  adjoyne  with  the  maine  not  many
day es  journey  from  Paqui  the  metropolitan  citie  of
China. The more perfect discovery whereof
and  of  the  coast  of  Tartaria  Northward,  may
in  time  bring  great  light (if  not  full  cer-
taintie) either of a Northwest or a
Northeast passage from Europe to
those  rich  countries. Collected  out
of  the  Portugale  Jesuites  yeerely
Japonian Epistles dated

159O' 159I' 1592,
1594,  &c.

The  first  testimony  containing  a  resolute  determi-
nation of  Quabacondono  the  great  Monarch  of
all  Japan,  to  invade  and  conquere  China  by  the
way  of  Coray,  being  a  country  divided  from
the  lies  of  Japan  onely  by  an  arme  of  the  sea
about  twentie  leagues  broad,  and  abounding
with  victuals  and  all  other  necessaries  for  the
maintenance  of  the  warres.  Out  of  the
Epistles  of  father  Frier  Lewis  Frois,  dated
1590.

Uabacondono  having  subdued  all  the  petie  king-
domes  of  Japan,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
1590 (as father Frier Lewis Frois writeth in

^^

his  Japonian  Epistles  of  the  foresaid  yeere)  grew  so
proud  and  insolent  that  he  seemed  another  Lucifer;
so  farre  foorth,  that  he  made  a  solemne  vow  and  othe,

422

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  ad.

1590.
that  he  would  passe  the  sea  in  his  owne  person  to
conquere  China :  and  for  this  purpose  hee  made  great
preparations,  saying,  that  since  hee  is  become  Lorde
of  all  Japan,  he  hath  nothing  now  to  doe  but  to  conquere
China,  and  that  although  he  should  end  his  life  in  that
enterprize,  he  is  not  to  give  over  the  same.  For  he
hopeth  to  leave  behinde  him  hereby  so  great  fame,  glorie,
and  renowne,  as  none  may  be  comparable  thereunto.
And  though  hee  could  not  conquere  the  same,  and
should  ende  his  life  in  the  action,  yet  should  he  alwayes
remaine  immortall  with  this  glory.  And  if  God  doth
not  cut  him  off,  it  is  thought  verily,  that  hee  will
throughly  attempt  the  same.  And  for  his  more  secure
passage  thither,  he  is  determined  to  leave  behinde  him
two  Governours  (after  his  maner)  in  the  parts  of  Miaco
with  the  administration  of  Finqua;  and  of  those  of  his
Monarchie  he  saith  that  he  will  take  with  him  all  the
great  Japonish  Lords,  or  at  the  least  all  his  principall
subjects,  and  leave  in  his  dominions  such  guard  and
garisons  as  shall  seeme  best  unto  him.  And  so  having
passed  the  winter,  he  meaneth  to  come  to  these  partes
of  Ximo,  for  from  hence  he  is  to  set  forth  his  armie,  Ximo.
&  to  passe  to  the  land  of  Coray,  which  the  Portugales  Coray  con-
call  Coria,  being  devided  from  Japan  with  an  arme  of  the  t^»"^i  j^'^^d
sea. And  although  the  Portugales  in  times  past  thought,  ^

that  it  was  an He  or  Peninsula, yet  is  it firme  lande,
which  joyneth unto  the  kingdome of  Paqui. And he
hath  now stricken such  a  terror  with his  name  in  the
countrey  of  Coray,  that  the  king thereof  hath sent  his
ambassadors  hither  to  yeelde  unto  him  a  kind  of  homage,
as  he  required  ; which  ambassadors  are  now  in  the  city  of
Miaco. And  by  this  Peninsula  of  Coray  he  may  passe  FromCoray an
with  his  army  by  land  in  fewe  dayes iourney  unto the  ^^^^^ ^^y
citie  of  Paqui,  being  the  principall  citie  where  the  king  of  in  few  dayes
China  hath  his  residence. And  as  the  Chinians  be  weake,  to  Paqui  the
and  the  people  of  Japan  so  valiant  and  feared  of  them,  if  <^htef^  citie  of
God  doth  not  cut  him  off  in  this  expedition,  it  may  fall  ^'^^'^''■'
out  according  to  his  expectation.

423

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.
[III.  855.]  But  whatsoever  become  of  China,  it  is  held  for  a
certaintie,  that  his  comming  will  cause  great  alterations
in  these  partes  of  Ximo,  especially  in  this  kingdom  of
Figen,  wherein  are  the  princedomes  of  Arima  and  Omura,
and  all  the  force  of  our  Christianity :  and  he  told  Don
Protasio  when  he  was  with  him  once  before,  that  he
would  make  him  a  great  man  in  China,  and  that  he  would
remoove  these  lordes,  and  deliver  their  governments  unto
lordes  that  were  Gentiles  ;  which  would  be  the  ruine  of
all  this  Christianitie ;  neither  should  we  have  any  place
wherein  to  remaine.  For,  as  it  is  the  custome  of  Japan
in  the  alterations  of  estates  and  kingdomes  (which  they
call  Cuningaia)  to  remoove  all  the  nobilitie  and  gentry,
and  to  leave  onely  the  base  people  and  labourers,  com-
mitting them  to  the  government  of  Ethnicks,  wee  shall
hereby  also  leese  our  houses,  and  the  Christians  shall  be
dispersed  with  their  lords ;  whom  sometimes  he  handleth
in  such  sort,  that  he  giveth  them  nothing  to  susteine
themselves,  and  so  they  remaine  with  all  their  followers,
as  men banished,  and  utterly  ruined.

The  second  Testimonie  containing  the  huge  levies
and  preparations  of  Quabacondono,  as  also  his
warres  and  conquests,  and  the  successe  thereof
in  the  kingdome  of  Coray.  Together  with  a
description  of  the  same  kingdom,  and  of  their
trafficke  and  maner  of  government :  and  also  of
the  shipping  of  China,  Japan,  and  Coray,  with
mention  of  certaine  isles  thereunto  adjacent,
and  other  particulars  very  memorable.  Out  of
the  Epistles  of  the  aforesaid  Father  Fryer  Luis
Frois  dated 1 591,  and 1 592.

A  Bout  this  time  Quabacondono  determining  to  put  his
warre  against  China  in  execution,  assembled  sundry
of  his  nobles  and  captaines,  unto  whom  he  declared  his
intent; who, albeit they were all  of  a  quite contrary

424

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  a.d.

1591-92.

opinion,  yet  all  of  them  without  any  pretense  of  difficulty
approved  his  determination.  For  he  had  given  out  that
he  would  not  abstaine  from  this  warre,  although  his  owne
Sonne  should  rise  from  death  to  life  and  request  him ;  yea
whosoever  would  moove  any  impediment  or  difficulty  in
that  matter,  hee  would  put  him  to  death.  Wherefore  for
certaine  moneths  there  was  nothing  in  all  places  to  be
seene,  but  provision  of  ships,  armour,  munition,  and  other
necessaries  for  the  warres.  Quabacondono  making  a  cata-
logue of  all  the  lordes  and  nobles  his  subjects,  willed
every  one  of  them  (not  a  man  excepted)  to  accompany
him  in  this  expedition,  injoyning  and  appointing  to  each
one,  what  numbers  they  should  bring.  In  all  these  king-
domes  of  Ximo  he  hath  nominated  4  of  his  especiall
favourites ;  whom  (to  all  mens  admiration)  he  will  have
to  be  heads  over  all  these  new  kingdomes,  notwith-
standing that  here  are  4  others  farre  more  mighty
then  they.  Of  whom  (by  Gods  good  providence)
two  are  Christians,  to  wit,  Augustine  Eucunocamindono
governour  of  half  the  kingdom  of  Finga,  &  Cainocami
the  son  of  Quambioindono  governour  of  the  greater  part
of  the  kingdome  of  Bugen.  The  other  two  are  Ethniques,
namely  Toranosuque  governour  of  the  halfe  of  the
kingdom  of  Finga  and  Augustins  mortall  enemie;  and
Iconocami  governour  of  the  residue  of  the  kingdome  of
Bugen,  and  an  enemie  both  to  Augustine  and  Cainocami.
And  Quabacondono  hath  commanded  all  the  Christian
lordes  of  Teximo  to  follow  Christian  governours.
Whereupon  the  lord  Protasius  was  there  with  2000
souldiers;  &  Omurandono  the  lord  of  Ceuxima  and
Augustins  Sonne  in  law,  which  lately  became  a  Christian,
with  a  thousand.  Also  he  appointed  that  the  governours
of  Firando  and  Goto  should  follow  Augustine,  who  albeit
they  were  Gentiles,  had  many  Christians  to  their  subjects.
Wherefore  Augustine  was  to  conduct  15000  souldiers,
besides  mariners,  slaves,  and  other  base  people  to  cary  the
baggage  of  the  army,  all  which  being  as  great  a  number
as  the  former,  so  soone  as  they  arrived  in  the  kingdom  of

425

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-92.

Coray,  were  made  souldiers,  and  bore  armes.  Unto  the
said  Augustine,  Quabacondono,  in  token  of  singular
favour,  granted  the  first  assault  or  invasion  of  the  king-
dom of  Coray,  to  wit,  that  he  onely  with  his  forces  might
enter  the  same,  the  other  lordes  remaining  in  Ceuxima
(which  is  1 8  leagues  distant  from  Coray)  till  they  should
bee  advertized  from  Augustine :  which  thing  procured
unto  Augustine  great  envie  and  disdaine  from  them  all ;
howbeit  (as  you  shall  forthwith  understand)  it  prooved  in
the  end  most  honourable  unto  him.  The  other  Christian
governour  Cainocami  being  but  a  yong  man  of  23
yeeres,  he  commanded  the  king  of  Bungo  to  follow  with
6000  souldiers ;  so  that  with  the  4000  which  hee  had
before,  his  number  amounted  unto  loooo,  besides
mariners  and  others  which  caried  burthens.  This  was
most  joyful  newes  to  us,  and  to  all  the  Christians.  Of
the  Ethnick  lords  Quabacondono  appointed  the  governour
of  Riosogo  together  with  Foranosuque  to  march  with
8000 :  and  likewise  the  king  of  Sazeuma  and  Iconocami
with  as  many.  And  amongst  all  he  gave  the  first  and
chiefe  place  unto  Augustine.  All  the  other  souldiers  of
Japan  hee  caused  to  accompanie  his  owne  person :  the
number  of  all  together  (as  appeared  out  of  a  written
catalogue)  amounting  to  three  hundreth  thousand  per-
sons :  of  whom  two  hundred  thousand  were  souldiers.
[III.  856.]  The  order  prescribed  in  this  whole armie was, that

first  they  should  make  their  entrance  by  the  kingdome  of
A  description  Coray,  which  is  almost  an  island,  one  ende  whereof
of  Loray.  joyneth  upon  the  maine  lande  of  China  ;  which  though
it  be  a  severall  kingdome  of  it  selfe,  yet  is  it  subject  and
tributarie  unto  the  king  of  China.  And  because  this
kingdom  of  Coray  is  divided  but  by  an  arme  of  the  sea
from  Japan,  Quabacondono  determined  to  subdue  the
same,  for  that  it  so  aboundeth  with  victuals,  that  from
thence  he  might  the  easier  invade  China.  While  all
things  were  preparing,  it  was  commanded,  that  at  the
chief  port  of  Ximo  called  Nangoia,  being  twelve  leagues
distant  from  Firando,  there  should  be  erected  a  mightie

426

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  ad.

1591-92.
great  castle  ;  where  Quabacondono  with  all  his  fleet  was
minded  to  stay,  till  newes  were  brought  of  the  successe  of
the  aforesaid  4  governours  or  captaines.  Hee  appointed
also  another  castle  to  bee  built  in  Fuchinoxima,  which  is
another  island  situate  betweene  Nangoia  and  Ceuxima.
And  he  built  a  third  castle  in  Ceuxima,  that  his  passage
might  be  the  more  commodious.  The  charge  of  building
these  castles  he  imposed  upon  the  4  aforesaid  governours,
and  commanded  the  other  lords  of  Ximo  their  associates
to  assist  them  ;  all  which  so  applyed  that  busines,  that  in
6  moneths  space  it  was  wholly  finished.  The  castle  of
Nangoia  was  environed  with  a  double  wall  of  square  and
beautifull  stone,  with  broad  and  deepe  ditches  like  unto
Miac6.  The  innermost  wall  being  lesse  then  the  other
two  was  100  fathom  square,  within  the  compasse  whereof
wer  so  many  houses  built  both  for  the  lordes,  and  their
followers,  and  also  for  marchants  shoppes,  and  victualers
houses,  distinguished  with  broad  and  direct  streetes,  that
it  seemed  a  faire  towne.  But  (that  which  was  much
more  admirable)  all  the  way  from  Miaco  to  Nangoia,  at
the  ende  of  every  dayes  journey,  all  the  lords  and  gover-
nours, at  the  commandement  of  Quabacondono,  built  each
one  within  his  jurisdiction  new  and  stately  palaces  from
the  ground,  so  that  for  20  dayes  together  he  lodged  every
night  with  all  his  traine  in  one  of  those  palaces.  And
because  these  things  were  done  at  the  very  same  time
when  the  expedition  into  the  kingdome  of  Coray  was
in  hand,  all  Japan  was  so  grievously  oppressed  (Quaba-
condono in  the  meane  while  being  at  no  charges)  as  it
was  most  intollerable.  Yet  is  it  incredible  how  ready
every  one  is  to  do  him  service :  which  appeareth  by  these
magnificent  stately  buildings  reared  up  in  so  short  a  space,
which  in  Europe  would  have  required  a  long  time  and
huge  expences.  In  the  meane  season  it  was  commonly
given  out,  that  this  enterprize  of  Quabacondono  would
have  most  unfortunate  successe,  as  being  a  matter  wrought
by  constraint,  and  that  it  would  be  an  occasion  of  mani-
fold  dissentions  in  Japan : for no  man there  was, but

427

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-92.

misliked  of  this  warre  :  yea,  all  the  lordes  were  in  great
hope,  that  some  one  man  at  length  would  step  foorth  and
restore  their  libertie ;  howbeit  there  is  none  as  yet  found,
which  dare  put  his  hand  to  that  businesse.  Wherefore
they  were  all  (though  to  their  great  griefe  and  lamenta-
tion) violently  constrained  to  prosecute  the  enterprize.
But  Quabacondono  being  voyde  of  all  anxiety,  to  the  ende
hee  might  encourage  his  followers,  boasted  that  hee  would
make  great  alterations  of  kingdomes,  and  would  bestow
upon  them  the  kingdoms  of  Coray  and  China  ;  and  unto
the  lord  Protasius  hee  hath  promised  3  kingdomes  :  but
he  with  all  the  other  lords  giving  him  great  thankes,  had
much  rather  retaine  a  smal  portion  of  their  estate  in
Japan,  then  to  hunt  after  all  those  kingdomes  which  he
promiseth.

And  whereas  Quabacondono  had  by  proclamation  pub-
lished, that  he  would  personally  be  present  at  Nangoia  the
3  moone  of  this  yeere  ;  troups  and  armies  of  men  began
to  resort  from  all  the  quarters  of  Japan  to  these  parts.
Now  were  our  afflictions  renewed.  For  so  long  as
Quabacondono  remained  at  Miaco,  we  might  stay  in
these  parts  of  Ximo  without  any  danger  :  but  after  he
began  to  come  this  way,  it  seemed  impossible  for  our
state  to  continue  whole  and  sound,  and  we  were  put  into
no  small  perplexitie.  For  the  Christian  lordes  advised  us,
that  sithence  Quabacondono  was  come  so  neere,  all  our
companie  that  lived  in  the  Colledge,  in  the  house  of
Probation,  and  in  the  Seminary,  should  depart  to  some
other  place.  And  the  Christians  from  Miaco  writ  dayly
unto  us,  that  wee  shoulde  pull  downe  our  houses  and
Churches  at  Omura,  Arima,  and  Cansaco,  and  that  the
fathers  of  Europe  should  return  unto  Nangasaque  in  the
secular  habite  of  Portugals,  but  that  the  Japonian  Fryers
should  retire  themselves  unto  several  houses  of  Christians,
that  so  they  might  al  remaine  safe  and  out  of  danger.
But  this  remedy,  as  it  was  too  grievous  and  subject  to
many  difficulties,  so  did  it  afford  us  but  small  comfort.
In brief  the  Father  visitor talking of  this  matter  with

428

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  a.d.

1591-92.
Eucunocamindono,  the  lord  Protasius,  and  Omurandono.
before  their  expedition  toward  the  kingdom  of  Coray,
found  them,  as  before,  in  the  same  fortitude  of  minde,
being  constant  in  their  first  opinion  :  neither  would  they
give  any  other  counsel  or  direction,  then  that  the  fathers
should  keepe  themselves  secret,  and  should  only  forsake
their  houses  at  Arima,  and  Omura,  wherein  the  Toni  or
great  lordes  would  have  some  of  their  kinsemen  remaine.
It  was  also  thought  convenient,  that  the  number  of  the
Seminary  should  bee  diminished,  and  that  of  90  there
should  onely  remaine  50  in  our  scholes,  namely  such
as  studied  the  Latine  tongue.  With  the  Father  Visitour  [III.  857.]
there  came  unto  Nangasaque  certaine  Fathers  and  Friers,
which  were  said  to  be  of  Fungo  and  Firando.  For
the  sayde  Father  under  the  name  of  a  Legate  might
retaine  them  with  him  more  openly.

About  this  time  Quabacondono,  that  hee  might  with
some  pastime  recreate  his  Nobles  which  accompanied  him  ;
and  also  might  declare,  with  how great  confidence  and
securitie  of  minde  hee  tooke  upon  him  this  expedition  for
China  ;  and  likewise  to  obscure  the  most  renowmed  fame
of  a  certaine  hunting  and  hawking  performed  of  olde  by
that  mightie Prince Joritono,  who  was  Emperour  over
all  Japan  ;  hee  determined  to  ordaine  (as  it  were)  another
royall  court  of  divers  kindes  of  fowle. Whereupon  bee-
ing  accompanied  with  many  great  lordes  and  others,  hee
departed  to  the  kingdome  of  Oiaren,  where  his  game  had
so  good  successe,  that  hee  caught  above  30000.  fowles  of
all  sortes  ; amongst  which  were  many  falcons. Howbeit,
for  Quabacondono  his  greater  recreation,  and  for  the  more
solemnitie  of  the  game,  there  were  also  added  many  dead
fowles,  which the Japonians  with certaine poulders or  ^  meane  to
compositions know how to preserve sweete in their  ^^fP^  ^^^^
feathers  a  long  time. This  game  beeing  ended,  Quaba-  i^  thei!-^^^^
condono  returned  with  great  pompe  unto  Miaco ; before  feathers  a  long
whom  went  great  multitudes  which  carried those  thou-  time.
sandes  of  fowles  upon  guilded  canes. Next  after  these
followed many horsemen sumptuously  attired, carying

429

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-92.

a  great  number  of  Falcons  and  other  birdes.  After  them
were  lead  many  horses  by  the  reines,  most  richly  trapped.
Next  of  all  were  brought  Coscis  or  Littiers  very  stately
adorned  :  after  which  was  carryed  Quabacondono  himselfe
in  a  Littier  of  another  fashion,  like  unto  those  which  in
India  are  called  Palanchins,  which  was  made  in  China,
with  most  curious  and  singular  workemanship,  and  was
presented  unto  him  by  the  Father  Visitour,  and  seemeth
exceedingly  to  content  him,  for  that  in  all  actions  of
solemnitie  hee  useth  the  same.  Last  of  all  followed  a
great  troope  of  Princes  and  Nobles  bravely  mounted  on
horsebacke,  and  gorgeously  attired,  thereby  the  more
to  delight  Quabacondono,  who  in  triumphant  sort  beeing
welcomed  by  the  way,  with  the  shoute  and  applause  of
infinite  swarmes  of  people,  entred  the  citie  of  Miaco.

Now  when  the  time  of  sayling  towardes  China  approched,
Quabacondono  determined  first  to  proclayme  his  nephew
Inangondono  his  successour,  and  governour  of  all  Japan,
to  the  ende  hee  might  supply  his  owne  roome  in  the  time
of  this  warre.  And  therefore  he  commanded  the  Dairi  to
transferre  unto  his  sayd  nephew  the  dignitie  belonging  to
himselfe,  calling  him  by  the  name  of  Taicusama,  that  is
to  say,  Great  lord.  Which  dignitie  was  in  such  sort
translated,  that  albeit  he  assigned  unto  his  nephew  large
revenues,  together  with  that  princely  title,  yet  himselfe
remained  the  very  same  that  he  was  before.  The  day
of  the  sayd  translation  being  appointed,  hee  summoned  all
the  Princes  of  Japan  to  appeare,  and  to  sweare  obedience
unto  this  his  nephew  :  Who  with  great  pompe  going  unto
the  Dairi  to  receive  that  dignitie  at  his  hande,  had  sur-
rendred  unto  him  the  Castle  of  Miaco,  and  the  palaces  of
Quabacondono  to  dwell  in.

Thus  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  moone,  he  set
forward  on  his  journey  to  Nangoia,  having  before  given
order,  that  Augustine  should  passe  over  into  the  kingdome
of  Coray,  and  that  his  other  Captaines  should  remayne  in
Ceuxima.  Wherefore,  the  twentieth  day  of  the  third
Moone  hee came  unto Nangoia,  where  the companies

430

forked
arrowes.

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  ad.

1591-92.
of  the  other  lordes  beeing  numbered,  were  founde  to  bee
200000.  persons,  besides  those  that  were  conducted  by  the
foure  foresayde  governours.  In  the  meane  season  Augus-
tine with  his  forces,  and  with  a  Fleete  of  eight  hundred  ^  Fkete^  of
Ships,  arrived  at  Coray.  In  whose  armie  the  lord  Pro-  ^°°'  ■^'^^^•^•
tasius  excelled  all  others  ;  for  though  hee  had  but  the
leading  of  2000.  souldiers,  yet  for  the  goodnesse  of  his
armour,  and  the  beautie  of  his  ships,  he  was  admired  of
all  men.  At  their  very  first  entrance  they  wonne  2.
castles  of  the  kingdome  of  Coray  by  maine  force,  wherein
the  Corayans  reposed  great  confidence ;  for  they  were
environed  with  mighty  high  walles,  and  defended  with
great  multitudes  of  souldiers,  and  with  a  kinde  of  gunnes  Shone  gunnes
of  2.  spannes  and  J.  long,  which  in  stead  of  bullets  '^ffJlff^^^^
discharged  with  a  terrible  noise  woodden  arrowes  headed
with  forked  points  of  yron :  but  the  sayd  gunnes  beeing
able  to  hurt  but  a  small  distance  off,  and  the  Japonians
being  furnished  with  brazen  ordinance  unknowen  unto
the  Corayans,  they  presently  drave  them  from  their  walles,
and  with  ladders  made  for  the  same  purpose  of  great
canes,  they  forthwith  scaled  the  same,  and  planted  their
ensignes  thereon  ;  the  Corayans  indeed  for  a  short  time
making  resistance,  but  after  a  while  betaking  themselves
to  dishonorable  flight,  5000  men  of  their  part  being
slaine,  and  of  Augustines  but  100.  and  400.  wounded.
Augustine  perceiving  that  the  Corayans  could  not  endure
any  long  assault,  determined  to  take  upon  himselfe,  and
his  armie  the  whole  burthen  and  honour  of  this  warre,  and
not  staying  for  the  governours  his  associates,  to  march  up
into  the  heart  of  the  kingdome,  and  to  the  principall  City ;  [III.  858.]
unto  which  determination  all  the  lordes  that  were  with
him  gave  their  consent.  This  was  (no  doubt)  a  bolde,
yea,  and  in  some  sort,  a  rash  enterprise  of  Augustine :
but  yet  it  argueth  a  wise  and  valiant  minde  in  him.  But
this  long  delay  was  so  greevous  to  the  Captaines  which  in
Ceuxima  expected  the  successe  of  the  warre,  that  before
they  heard  any  newes  at  all  concerning  the  surprize  of  the
two  Castles,  they  brought  Augustine  in  suspition  among

431

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-92.

their  friends,  that  hee  ambitiously  affected  the  honour  of
the  whole  warre.  Which  thing  beeing  knowen  unto
Quabacondono,  he  was  so  troubled  in  mind  even  before
he  came  to  Nangoia,  that  suddenly  hee  commaunded  the
other  Captaines  to  set  sayle  from  Ceuxima.  But  when
Quabacondono  was  come  to  Nangoia,  and  heard  newes  of
the  two  Castles  taken,  and  that  Augustine  pursuing  the
The  sign'tfica-  victorie  proceeded  on  towards  the  Miaco,  that  is  to  say,
tion  of  Mtaco.  -j^-^q  kingly  citie  of  Coray,  and  was  determined  to  invade
the  same  also  (all  which  Augustine  himselfe  wrote,  and
requested  him  to  send  the  other  captaines  and  com-
manders to  assayle  the  kingdom  on  all  sides,  and  to
furnish  the  castles  which  he  had  taken  and  should  take,
with  garisons  of  souldiers,  because  as  yet  he  had  not  men
enough  to  hold  those  fortresses  which  he  had  wonne)  he
was  surprized  with  such  unspeakable  joy,  as  he  affirmed
openly,  that  in  all  Japan  he  had  no  subject  comparable  to
Augustine :  and  that  neither  Nabunanga,  nor  himselfe
ever  knewe  any  man  indued  with  so  valiant  and  couragious
a  mind.  I  (saith  he)  knowing  against  whom  and  with
what  forces  I  waged  warre,  subdued  by  litle  and  litle  all
Japan  unto  me :  but  Augustine  in  so  short  a  time  and
with  so  small  forces,  hath  boldely  set  his  foote  in  a  forren
region,  and  with  most  glorious  victory  hath  subdued  the
mightie  kingdome  of  Coray.  Wherefore  (quoth  he)  I
will  reward  him  with  many  kingdomes,  and  wil  make  him
next  unto  my  selfe  the  greatest  Prince  in  all  Japan.  Hee
added  farther,  that  now  his  owne  sonne  seemed  to  bee
risen  from  the  death :  and  that  whosoever  durst  either
disgrace  or  extenuate  the  deedes  of  Augustine,  he  would
grievously  punish  him,  not  respecting  whether  hee  did  it
upon  reason  or  malice.  By  this  speach  the  name  and
report  of  Augustine  grew  so  honourable  amongst  all  men,
that  those  which  most  envied  his  estate,  durst  not  speake
one  ill  worde  of  him,  but  highly  commended  him  before
Th  / h ^  Quabacondono.

bredth  of  This  kingdome  of  Coray extendeth in length about

Coray.  100.  and  in  bredth 60.  leagues. And  albeit  the  inhabi-

432

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  ad.

1591-92.

tants  in  nation,  language,  and  strength  of  body  (which

maketh  the  people  of  China  to  dread  them)  be  different

from  the  Chinians,  yet  because  they  pay  tribute  to  the

king of  China,  and  exercise  traffique  with his  subjects,

they  doe  after  a  sort  imitate  the  Lawes,  apparell,  customes,

and  governement  of  the  Chinians. They  border  on  one

side upon the Tartars, and other  nations,  with  whom

sometimes they have peace,  and  sometimes  warre : but

with  the  Chinians  they  have  continuall  peace. They  are

speciall  good  bow-men  ; but  at  other  weapons,  because

they  have  but  few,  and  those  bad,  they  are  nothing  so

skilful!. Wherefore they are not comparable to the

Japonians,  who  by  reason  of  their  warres  are  continually

exercised in  armes,  and  are  by  nature  more couragious

and  valiant,  being  furnished  with  yron-peeces,  with  lances,

and  with  excellent  swordes. Onely  in  shipping  they  are

inferiour  to  the  Corayans  and  Chinians,  by  reason  of  the

hugenesse  of  their  Ships  which  they  use  upon  the  sea.

Wherefore,  if  they  were  to  joyne  battels  by  sea,  there  is  no

doubt  but  that  both  the  foresayde  Nations  would  be  too  The  people  of

hard  for  them. But  now  because  they  knewe  nothing  of  ^J'f'^  ^^^

the  comming  of  the  Japonian  armie, or  for that they  ^fj.g„^g^  i„

doubted that  their  sea-forces  were  the stronger, or els  skipping,  then

because  God  was  determined  to  punish  them,  he  suffered  they  of  Japan.

them  to  be  destitute  of  all  the  defence  of  their  shipping,

so  that  the  Japonians  without  any  resistance  landed  upon

their  dominions.

Now  the  fame  of  Augustines  victory  causing  the  armie
notably  to  increase,  and  the  Mariners,  and  many  others
which  caryed  burthens  (as  they  were  trained  up  in  warre
from  their  childhood)  bearing  armes,  while  the  Corayan
captives  supplied  their  baser  offices :  so  great  a  terrour
possessed  all  the  people  of  Coray  where  Augustine  came,
that  all  the  castles  and  fortresses  which  hee  passed  by  were
forsaken  by  their  garisons,  and  all  men  fled  for  refuge  to
the  principal!  city.  And  while  other  commanders  and
Christians  sent  from  Ceuxima  and  Nangoia  shaped  their
course  for  Coray,  Augustine  had  pitched  his  campe  neere
XI  433  2  E

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-92.

unto  the  foresaid  principall  citie  :  of  the  which  being  come
within  3.  dayes  journey,  he  was  encountered  by  20000.
men ;  whom  at  the  very  first  assault,  having  slaine
3000.  of  them,  hee  put  to  flight.  But  approching  very
neere  unto  the  citie,  and  having  passed  a  river,  hee  main-
tained a  valiant  conflict  at  a  certaine  narrow  passage
against  80000.  Corayans,  8000.  whereof  were  slaine,  and  a
great  number  drowned  in  the  river.  Heere  while  Augus-
tine appointed  all  his  troopes  to  remayne  for  two  dayes,  to
the  end  they  might  somewhat  refresh  their  wearie  limmes,
ne  king  of the  king  of  Coray  seeing  himselfe  besieged  by  his  enemie,

Loray  Jieeth ^^^  ^^^^  many  other  Taponian  lordes  with  strong  armies
out  ot  MS  prin- .  . .  *■  .  .  ~  .

cipall  citie. invaded  his  kingdome  on  all  sides,  determined  to  have  his

citie strengthened with  garisons, and  to retire  himselfe

[III.  859.] into the in-land of  China. Which by reason of  the

abundance  of  horses  that  he  had,  he  was  able  right  com-

modiously  to  performe. Whereupon  the  second  or  third

day after,  Augustine  without  any  resistance entred the

head-city,  being  presented  with  great  store  of  victuals  and

gifts  by  them  that  remained  therein. Thus  Augustine,

with other captaines his associates, became lord  of  the

principall  citie,  and  wonne  all  the  honour  of  the  victory

unto  himselfe :  for  albeit  by  this  time  the  other  captaines

were  come  from  Ceuxima,  and  many  from  Nangoia,  yet

they  found  all  things  performed  to  their  hands.

Quabacondono  being  advertised  of  this  second  victory,

yeelded as much honour unto  Augustine as he could

possibly  devise,  speaking  so  highly  to  the  commendation

both  of  him,  and  of  other  Captaines  his  associates,  as  if

but the  tenth  part  of  his  faire  promises  come  to  effect,

they  shall  be  farre  greater  then  they  are,  and  Augustine

(next  unto  himselfe)  shall  be  the  principall  person  in  all

Japan. And  now  he  is  become  so  famous  in  the  Court,

and  throughout  the  whole  kingdome  of  Japan,  that  at  all

their  meetings  and  assemblies  there  is  no  talke  but  onely

of  the  valour  and  fortitude  of  Augustine,  who  in  twentie

dayes  space  hath  subdued  so  mightie  a  kingdome  to  the

Crowne of  Japan. And  all  the  Nobles  account  him a

434

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  a.d.

1591-92.

most happy man, being astonished at the immortall

renowme  which  he  hath  attained  unto  by  this  exploite :

yea,  and  Quabacondono  sent  forthwith  unto  him,  as  unto

the  conquerour  and  vanquisher  of  the  Corayans,  in  token

of  great  honour,  a  two-edged  sword  and  a  horse,  which

among  the  Japonians  is  a  pledge  of  the  most  peerelesse

honour  that  can  possibly  be  done  to  a  man :  and  this  very

gift  did  Nabunanga  in  times  past  send  unto  Quabacon-

dono,  when  hee  had  in  any  battel  wonne  any  kingdome

from Morindono. And  by this  great  event  the  power

of  the  Christians  God, and  his  providence  towards his

children  is  knowen  not  onely  to  the  Christians,  but  even

to  the  very  Ethnicks  themselves,  for  that  in  the  heate  of

such extreme persecution it hath pleased his divine

Majestic  to  lay  the  honour  of  all  this  warre  upon  Christian

lords. Wherefore we doubt not, but they wil prove

more  mighty  and  famous  then  ever  they  were.

Hence  it  commeth  to  passe  that  the  Portugals  ship
come  from  China,  hath  wintered  in  Japan  :  by  which
occasion  the  presence  of  the  father  Visitour  hath  bene
a  great  comfort  not  onely  to  us,  but  to  all  the  other
Christians,  who  in  regarde  of  the  departure  of  so
many  men  with  Quabacondono  and  his  captaines  to  the
warres,  thought  they  should  have  bene  left  utterly  for-
saken and  destitute,  had  not  the  father  Visitour,  in  whom
they  reposed  all  their  confidence,  remayned  here.  But
the  singular  providence  and  love  of  God  towards  us
appeared  in  this,  that  hee  would  have  the  sayd  Ship,
contrary  to  their  usuall  custome,  to  winter  in  Japan.  For
when  Quabacondono  having  obteined  that  victorie,  was
determined  to  returne  unto  Ximo,  they  were  all  shrowded
under  the  protection  of  the  foresayd  Father ;  who  hearing
that  hee  was  entred  into  Nangoia,  caused  Frier  John
Rodorigues  and  the  governour  of  the  Portugal  ship  to
salute  and  welcome  him.  For  the  Christians  of  Miac6,
which  succeeded  in  their  roomes  that  went  for  Coray,
advised  him  in  their  letters  so  to  doe.

And  it  was  very  acceptable  to  Quabacondono  to  see  the

435

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1591-92.

Portugals  Captaine  General  attended  upon  by  so  many
Portugals  sumptuously  attired,  and  comming  with  so
many  shippes  in  the  company  of  Frier  John  Rodoriguez  :
and  hee  asked  the  Frier  how  the  father  Visitour  did  ?
And  whether  the  presents  to  the  Vice-roy  liked  him  .?  As
also,  that  hee  tooke  it  in  very  good  part  that  the  Father
had  wintered  in  Japan,  and  that  the  Frier  should  stay
with  him.  Afterward  writing  an  answere  to  the  father,
he  declared  therein  the  great  favour  which  he  bore  to  the
captaine  of  the  ship.  Whom,  having  familiarly  enter-
tained him  for  the  space  of  2.  houres,  hee  dismissed  with
evident  tokens  of  good  will.  After  the  Captaines  returne,
Frier  Rodoriguez  staying  behinde  above  a  moneth,
attempted  very  often  to  speake  with  Quabacondono,  of
whom  hee  was  alwayes  most  kindly  used.  Afterward  by
reason  of  sicknesse  hee  returned  to  Nangasaque  ;  where-
upon Quabacondono  demaunded  why  he  was  not  cured  at
the  same  place  where  himselfe  remained  ?  Jacuino  an-
swered, that  beeing  a  stranger,  hee  was  to  bee  cured  with
such  diet  and  medicines,  as  were  not  there  to  bee  had :
with  which  answere  hee  was  satisfied.  Hence  it  is,  that
by  often  conferences  which  were  made  by  reason  of  the
ambassage,  Quabacondono  waxeth  every  day  more  cour-
teous and  affable.  And  yet  for  all  this,  new  occasions  of
troubles  and  afflictions  are  not  cut  off:  for  certaine  it  is,
that  Quabacondono  hath  given  out,  that  if  he  have  good
successe  with  his  warre  against  China,  he  will  make  great
alterations  of  estates,  in  assigning  the  kingdomes  of  Coray
and  China  to  the  Christian  princes,  and  placing  in  their
roomes  Ethnick  lordes  throughout  Japan:  which  thing
might  redound  to  the  ruine  and  destruction  of  all  Chris-
tianitie  heere,  neither  should  the  Christians  finde  in  Japan
any  place  of  refuge.  And  albeit  Augustine  had  certainly
informed the  father  Visitour  of  the sayde  alteration  of

[III.  860.]  estates,  and  Jacuine  had  written  unto  Augustine,  that
Quabacondono  had  fully  determined  to  alter  the  states  or
governments  of  Ximo,  and  so  consequently  the  state  of
Augustine, and  of  the Christian  princes  of  Arima  and

436

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  a.d.

1591-92.
Omura;  yea,  and  that  the  said  two  princes  had  notice
thereof:  yet  almightie  God  with  the  eyes  of  his  infinite
mercy  hath  vouchsafed  to  regard  the  prayers  of  his  faith-
full  servants  (who  for  this  cause  were  most  perplexed  and
sorowfull)  and  to  provide  this  remedie  following.

The  Corayans  having  intelligence,  that  their  king  and
the  forces  which  hee  caried  with  him  were  in  safety,  went
the  greatest  part  of  them,  with  as  much  victuals  as  they
could  get,  and  hidde  themselves  in  the  mountains  and
woods,  remaining  there  with  such  hate  and  indignation
against  the  Japonians,  that  with  promise  of  safe  conduct
they  could  by  no  meanes  be  drawen  out  of  their  starting
holes.  Wherefore  albeit  the  Japonians  have  all  the
castles  and  places  of  defence  in  their  owne  possession,  yet
because  they  want  people  to  tille  the  ground,  and  to
doe  them  other  necessary  services,  they  cannot  chuse  but
foregoe  all  that  which  they  have  woon.  Moreover,  the
common  high  wayes  are  so  pestered  with  theeves  and
murtherers,  that  unlesse  the  Japonians  march  in  whole
troopes  all  together,  they  are  suddenly  oppressed  with
swarmes  of  Corayans  issuing  foorth  of  the  woods.  Many
of  the  Corayans  also  have  retired  themselves  unto  the
neighbour-islands,  from  whence  with  numbers  of  great  Hands  mere
ships,  to  the  mighty  losse  of  the  Japonians,  they  assaile  ^^^°  Coray.
their  small  and  weake  ones,  and  have  already  sunke  many
of  them.  Wherefore  all  the  Japonian  lords  whi  h  re-
maine  in  Coray  have  written  unto  Quabacondono,  that  his
army  must  for  a  certaine  time  in  no  wise  remoove  from
the  place  where  it  is,  for  avoyding  of  such  imminent
dangers  as  in  proceeding  further  it  may  incurre.  Upon
these  advertisements  Quabacondono  being  ready  to  take
his  journey  to  Coray,  to  divide  the  whole  kingdome,  was
hindred  from  his  purpose,  and  sent  most  friendly  letters
to  all  his  nobles,  willing  them  to  be  of  good  cheere,  for
that  he  would  not  deale  about  altering  of  their  estates,
till  3.  yeres  were  expired:  whereupon  they  were  eased  of
exceeding  great  care  and  grief.  For  albeit  there  is  no
great  trust  to  be  given  to  his  words,  yet  we  hope  that

437

leag.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-92.

this  yere  he  wil  not  meddle :  what  he  wil  doe  afterward,
God  knoweth.  In  Coray  at  this  present  there  are  above
200000.  Japonian  souldiers,  who  at  the  commandement
of  Quabacondono  are  divided  throughout  the  whole  king-
dom. Augustine  lieth  upon  the  very  extreame  frontiers
of  China:  but  because  the  Chinians  are  separated  from
A  mighty  the  kingdome  of  Coray  with  a  mighty  river  of  3.  leagues
rtverofi.  j^j-oad,  and  abound  with  great  ships,  and  have  planted
innumerable  troopes  of  men  upon  the  shore,  the  successe
of  the  warre  remayneth  most  doubtfuU  and  uncertaine.
Neither  doe  wee  know  whether  the  Japonians  will  pro-
ceede  any  farther  this  yeere  or  no.

The  third  testimony  of  Coray,  signifying  (amongst
other  notable  and  politicall  observations)  the
later  successe  of  the  warres  of  Japan  against
Coray  ;  and  to  what  end  Quabacondono  still
mainteineth  garisons  in  that  kingdome.  Out
of  the  Epistles  of  Father  Organtino  Brixiano,
bearing  date  from  Japan  Anno 1594.

THe  whole  Empire  of  Japan  is  now  in  the  handes  of
this  king  Quabacondono :  and  (which  hath  not
bene  knowen  since  the  first  creation  thereof)  there  is  not
the  bredth  of  one  foote  throughout  all  the  whole  Island,
which  is  not  absolutely  subject  unto  him.  And  hee
reigneth  in  so  great  peace  and  tranquilitie,  that  if  his  suc-
cessors follow  the  same  course  of  government,  there  is  no
likelihood  of  future  sedition  or  perturbation  in  any  of  the
kingdoms.  And  doubtles  the  meanes  which  he  useth  to
estabHsh  continuall  peace  and  concord  among  the  Japon-
ians, are  very  great  and  effectuall.

One  is,  that  after  he  hath  passed  his  publique  promise,
he  never  putteth  any  of  his  adversaries  to  death,  which
his  predecessour  Nabunanga  performed  not  :  for  he
having  subdued  any  kingdom,  would  put  all  the  lords
and  governours  to  the  sword.  But  this  king  granteth  unto
them  not only  life,  but  also  yerely  revenues,  whereby  to

438

TESTIMONIES OF COREA  ad.

1594.

maintaine  themselves  in  an  honest  and  meane  estate  :
in  which  regarde  they  all  rest  contented,  and  willingly
submit  themselves.

Another  is,  in  that  he  hath  brought  the  husbandmen  and
pesants  (by  whose  assistance  &  wealth  all  the  pety- king-
doms were  after  a  sort  susteined)  unto  such  extreme
poverty,  that  they  have  scarce  wherewithall  to  keepe  life
and  soule  together :  as  likewise  hee  hath  bereaved  them
of  all  kinde  of  weapons.

The  third  is,  because  hee  hath  most  streightly  forbidden
all  contentions,  seditions,  frayes,  and  skirmishes.  For
whosoever  be  found  culpable  of  this  crime,  they  dye
every  man  of  them  on  both  parties.  If  any  escape  by
flight,  their  kinsefolks  are  punished  in  their  stead ;  and
for  lacke  of  them,  their  servants ;  and  for  defalt  of  both
their  next  neighbours.  If  many  were  guilty,  many  are
punished  and  suffer  death:  but  hence  it  commeth  to  [III.  861.]
passe,  that  many  innocent  persons  are  constrained  to
die.  And  this  severitie  is  the  cause,  why  there  are
at  this  present  so  seldom e  frayes  and  contentions  in
Japan.

The  fourth  is,  that  in  administring  of  justice  hee  is
most  upright,  without  all  respect  either  to  his  owne
kindred,  or  to  his  ancient  captaines,  or  the  blood  royall,
or  any  of  the  Bonzii,  bee  they  never  so  famous :  and
being  once  advertized  of  a  crime,  hee  pardoneth  no  man.
And  albeit  himselfe  is  exceedingly  addicted  to  women,  yet
will  he  permit  none  of  his  subjects  to  have  any  con-
cubines. For  which  cause  not  many  dayes  agoe,  hee
banished  a  Bonzio  of  great  wealth,  being  in  alliance  and
dignitie  most  neere  unto  himselfe.  And  being  informed
that  all  the  Bonzii  of  Miaco  kept  concubines,  hee  would
have  put  them  all  to  death,  had  not  the  governour  of
Miaco  promised,  that  hee  would  undertake  to  keepe  them
from  offending  any  more  in  that  kinde.  Wherefore  hee
caused  all  the  Bonzii  every  moneth  to  bee  sworne,  that
they  should  live  honestly  upon  paine  of  death :  as  also
hee hath sworne the heads or superiors of all their

439

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1594.

religious  houses  under  paine  of  death,  to  give  up  their
names  whom  they  most  suspect  of  the  foresayd  crime.
Hence  it  is,  that  all  of  them  (if  you  regard  their  outward
estate)  live  in  extreme  feare.

The  fift  is,  for  that  hee  suffereth  none  of  his  souldiers,
nor  his  great  lordes  to  live  in  idlenesse.  If  there  be  no
warres  for  their  imployment,  hee  occupieth  them  in  build-
ing of  stately  palaces,  and  in  raising  new  fortresses,  or
in  repairing  and  strengthening  of  olde,  and  also  in  per-
forming other  notable  workes,  to  the  ornament  of  Japan,
and  to  his  owne  lasting  honour.  So  that  at  this  present
neere  unto  Miaco  there  are  thirtie  thousand  men  imployed
about  the  building  of  one  castle  ;  and  in  the  citie  of
Bozacca  above  an  hundred  thousand :  which  imploy-
ments  afforde  them  neither  place  nor  time  to  practise
any  rebellions.

The  sixt  is  his  altering  of  governments :  for  hee  re-
mooveth  his  governours  from  one  extreme  part  of  Japan
to  another.

The  seventh,  for  that  unto  his  souldiers  (besides  the

ordinarie pay continually allotted unto  them for  their

service)  in  time  of  warre  hee  alloweth  victuals  at  his  owne

costes. Wherof  it  commeth  to  passe,  that  hee  effecteth

whatsoever  hee  thinkes  good  by  their  meanes. Neither

hath  hee  hitherto  waged  any  warre,  wherein  his  enemie

was  not  vanquished,  according  to  his  owne  desire : this

The  warre  of  late warre of  China onely excepted, which farre sur-

Japan  against  mounted  all his forces. Howbeit in the kingdome  of
Lora\  and ^  ,  . . ,  •  n

Chma  Coray  nee  mamtameth  as  yet  great  garisons,  as  well  to

keepe  his  honour,  as  to  constraine  the  Chinians  to sue

for  peace.

The  eighth  is,  in  that  hee  curbeth  and  restraineth
persons  of  ambitious  and  aspiring  mindes,  who  (as  hee
conjectureth)  after  his  death  might  worke  some  innova-
tions in  the  common  wealth,  or  disturbe  the  kingdomes.

The  ninth  is,  because  hee  hath  on  no  side  within  foure
or  five  dayes  journey  of  Miaco,  any  mightie  or  industrious
captaine  or  governour.

440

TESTIMONIES OF COREA

The  tenth  and  last  is,  for  that  hee  hath  brought  his
yeerely  revenues  to  two  millions  of  gold.

By  these  courses  and  meanes,  wee  are  in  good  hope
that  firme  peace  will  bee  established  in  all  these  king-
domes,  and  also  that  a  fit  way  will  be  prepared,  for
the  conversion  of  all  the  great  lordes  unto  Christian
religion.

A  briefe  note  concerning  an  extreme  Northerne
province  of  Japan  called  Zuegara,  situate
thirtie  dayes  journey  from  Miaco,  which
argueth  the  Isle  of  Japan  to  be  of  greater
extension  Northw^ard,  then  it  is  ordinarily
described  in  maps,  or  supposed  to  be :  to-
gether with  mention  of  a  certaine  nation  of
Tartars  called  Jeza  inhabiting  on  the  maine
to  the  North  of  China,  never  heard  of  in
these  parts  before:  taken  out  of  an  Epistle
written  1596  from  Japan  by  Fryer  Luis
Frois  unto  Claudius  Aquaviva,  &c.  Printed
in  Latine  at  Mentz  in  Germanic 1 599.

Ot  many  dayes  ago  was  baptized  a  certaine
honourable  personage  called  John  Vongui
the  Sonne  of  Taigarandono,  who  is  gover-
nour  of  a  certaine  princedome  situate  on
the  borders  of  Japan  towardes  the  North,
being distant from Miaco thirtie dayes

A.D.
1596.

journey.

And  after  a  few  lines  it  foUoweth.

This  Taigorandono  being  the  most  Northerly  gover-
nour  in  all  Japan  hath  traffique  with  the  Jezi,  who  are
a  nation  of  Tartars,  which  from  the  maine  continent
resort  unto  the  Isle  of  Mateumai,  being  about  twelve  or  "^he  Isle  of
fifteene  leagues  distant  from  the  foresayd  Northerly  ^^^^^»^^^'
princedome  of  Zuegara ;  where  they  sell  fishes,  the
skinnes  of  beasts,  and  certaine  herbes  of  the  sea  used  by  [III.  862.]

441

A.D.
1596.

Jezi  a  nation
of  Tartars
dwelliiigonthe
continent  to
the  North  of
China  using
cloth.

The  Pilot.

The  Master.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  Japonians  for  foode,  with  other  such  like  commodi-
ties. On  the  other  side  the  said  Jezi  Tartari  buy  of
the  Japonians,  cloth  to  make  them  garments,  with  weapons
and  other  instruments.  These  Tartars  (they  say)  are  a
most  barbarous  kinde  of  people,  of  a  browne  colour,  with
long  haire  on  their  heads  and  beardes  like  the  Moscovites :
they  live  by  hunting  and  fishing,  and  neglect  husbandry.
This  Northerly  princedome  of  Zuegara  (as  the  sayd
governour  reported  to  our  Fathers)  aboundeth  with
excellent  grapes  both  black  and  white,  which  without
the  labour  of  man  grow  naturally  in  all  places,  and  he
promised  the  Fathers  to  bring  some  of  these  vines  to
Miaco,  that  they  might  be  planted  there.

Advertisements  touching  the  shippes  that  goe
from  Sivil  to  the  Indies  of  Spaine  ;  together
w^ith  some  notes  of  the  Contractation  house
in  Sivil.

Our  Pilot  must  be  examined  in  the  Con-
tractation house,  and  allowed  by  such  as
be  appointed  for  the  examination  of  Pilots,
that  hee  be  a  sufficient  man  to  take  the
charge  in  hand,  and  that  which  belongeth
thereunto,  and  to  governe  and  lead  the
same  ship  directly  by  his  onely  commande-
ment  to  such  ports  as  are  convenient  for  the  voyage  that
hee  taketh  in  hand.

You  must  have  a  Master,  that  must  give  in  sureties  to
the  value  of  6000  dukats :  and  such  as  be  his  sureties
must  be  landed  men,  and  their  lands  worth  to  the  value
of  that  summe  aforesayd,  if  the  sayd  ship  be  betweene
three  or  foure  hundred  tunnes.  And  if  shee  be  more
or  lesse  of  burthen,  then  he  must  give  sureties  of  a  greater
summe  or  lesse,  according  to  the  proportion  of  her
burden.

He  shall  in  all  his  voyage  give  a  just  and  true  accompt
of  all  such  goods,  and  marchandizes,  as  shall  in  all  that

442

REGULATIONS FOR SPANISH SHIPS

voyage  come  into  the  ship :  as  also  of  such  plate  and
money,  as  shalbe  registred  in  the  Kings  Register,  apper-
tayning  to  the  King,  or  any  other  particuler  marchant :
and  if  any  default  be,  hee  or  his  sureties  are  to  pay  all  such
losses  as  thereof  shall  growe :  as  also  to  see  the  mariners
payed  well  and  truely,  the  third  part  of  all  such  fraights,
as  the  sayde  shippe  shall  get  going  and  comming.

The  ship  being  fraighted  by  her  merchants,  the  Master
shall  take  order  that  there  be  sufficient  mariners  abourd
her  to  take  in  such  lading  from  time  to  time,  as  the
marchant  shall  send  to  her :  And  also  the  Purser  must  be  The  Purser.
a  man  sufficient  of  abilitie  to  take,  &  to  give  account  of
all  such  goods,  marchandize,  silver  and  golde,  as  shall
come  in  and  out  of  the  sayd  shippe  that  present  voyage,
as  also  give  sureties  of  1 500  dukats  at  the  least  to  come
backe  from  the  Indies  in  the  said  shippe,  and  not  to  tarrie
there,  if  hee  live.

The  Master  must  provide  a  perfect  mariner  called  a
Homager,  to  raunge,  and  bestow  all  marchandize  in  such  A  Romager.
place  as  is  convenient :  and  that  it  be  not  put  in  place,
where  it  may  perish  for  lack  that  it  be  not  fast,  sure,  and
drie,  according  to  the  qualitie  and  forme  of  the  sayd
marchandize.

When  it  is  all  bestowed,  and  the  shippe  able  to  beare
no  more,  than  a  mariner  called  the  Countermaster,  or
Masters  mate,  hath  charge  to  locke  fast  the  hatches,  that  The  Masters
none  of  the  marchants  wines,  or  oyles,  or  any  other  kind  ''"■^*^-
of  marchandize  be  robbed  or  spoyled  by  the  mariners.
And  if  it  fortune  that  any  bee  so  spoyled,  then  the
mariners  are  to  pay  for  it  out  of  the  third  part  of  all  the
whole  fraight  of  the  shippe  that  doth  appertaine  to  the
sayd  marchants.

The  shippe  being  laden,  goeth  to  the  port  wherehence
she  saileth  to  goe  towards  the  Indies  called  S.  Lucar,  and
there  one  of  the  chiefe  Judges  of  the  Contractation  house  The  chiefe
commeth  downe  to  dispatch  the  shippes  that  goe  together  ^^^g^^  "f^^^
in  that  fleete. And  that  Judge  goeth  abourd  every  ship,  ^^^^/^^^
and  with  him  hee  doth  carrie  an  expert  mariner  or  two

443

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Fisiiors  being
skilfuU  mari-
ners.

The  names  and
markes  of  men
taken.

The  Pragma-
tics or  orders
of  the  Con-
tractation
house.

[HI.  863.]

Provision  of
victuals  upon
othe.

called  Visitors  of  the  shippes,  to  know  whether  the  sayd
shippe  or  ships  be  well  tackled :  whether  they  have  men
sufficient :  and  in  every  ship  every  mans  name  is  taken,
and  if  he  have  any  marke  in  the  face,  or  hand  or  arme,  it
is  written  by  a  Notarie  (as  well  as  his  name)  appertaining
to  the  Contractation  house,  appointed  for  these  causes.
Also  the  Master  is  bound  to  bring  backe  every  mariner
againe,  and  to  leave  none  behinde  him  there,  upon  great
paines,  unlesse  he  be  a  passenger  appointed  by  the  King  at
the  court,  and  bringeth  his  licence  from  thence  for  the
same  purpose.

The  ship  must  be  well  appointed  with  ordinance  of
brasse,  and  yron,  according  to  The  orders  of  their  house,
of  that  there  must  want  nothing,  and  every  ship  is
appointed  according  to  her  burthen  in  all  kinde  of  artil-
lerie,  as  peeces  of  brasse  and  yron,  hand-guns,  cross-
bowes,  pikes,  swords,  daggers,  targets,  and  for  all  ordinance
double  shot,  with  powder,  with  new  cables  and  ankers
sufficient  for  the  voyage.  And  moreover  it  is  ordeined,
that  the  shippes  have  double  sailes,  that  is,  that  they
bee  thorowly  sayled,  and  moreover  all  newe  sayles  of  fore-
sayle,  and  maine-sayle,  of  coarse,  and  bonnet  newe  made,
and  kept  in  some  driefat  or  chest  in  the  same  ship  ;  that
if  the  weather  take  the  one  from  them,  the  other  may  be
in  readines.

Every  ship  must  have  their  master  sworne  before  the
sayd  Judge  of  the  Contratacion,  that  all  this  is  in
a  readinesse  in  the  shippe,  as  also  so  many  newe  pipes
of  fresh  water,  so  many  buttes  of  good  rackt  wine,  so
many  kintals  of  bread,  so  many  jarres  of  oyle,  so  many
jarres  or  Botijas  of  vineger,  so  much  flesh,  so  much  fish,
and  such  quantitie  of  every  kinde  of  victuall,  as  the  burthen
of  the  shippe  requireth,  wherein  every  shippe  according
to  her  greatnesse  is  appointed  by  The  ordinances  of  the
house :  Also  so  many  gunners,  so  many  mariners,  so
many  gromettes,  so  many  pages,  and  so  many  souldiers.
Then  all  these  aforesaide  matters  being  under  Register  by
the  notarie  and  all  things  prepared  for  the  voyage,  the

444

REGULATIONS FOR SPANISH SHIPS

Judge  doeth  command  the  masters  to  hoyse  up  the  yards

acrosse  unto  the  howndes  of  the  mastes  ;  and  many  times,

if  they  perceive  the  shippe  to  be  walty  and  overladen,  as

many  covetous  masters  doe,  then  hee  hangeth  the  boates

in  the  fore  and  maine  tackle,  to  see  whether  the sayd

shippe  will  make  any  helde  downewarde,  in  laying  downe

her  side :  if  she  doe  helde,  he  commandeth  barkes  abourd,

to  discharge  her  of  such  lading,  as  is  thought  to  be  too

much  in  her :  and  there  can  no  ship  depart  before  they

cary  the  Register  of  the  said  Judges,  howe  that  shee  goeth  The  Register

by  their  order :  and  every  shippe  carieth  her  owne  Register,  ^  ^""^^^  ^^^f-

and  in  the  Register  the  quantitie  of  al  the  goods  that  are

laden  in  her,  and  if  there  be  any  more  goods,  they  be

forfayted  in  the  Indies,  both  shippe  and  goods.

The  masters  are  bound  to  keepe  the  course  that  the  1'^^  ^^°  ^hlps
Admiral  doeth  leade,  and  every  shippe  to  follow  her,  and  ^^^T^?
shee  must  goe  alwayes  in  the  Sea  before  all  the  rest  of  the  i^  tifng  of
fleete,  and  by  night  cary  light,  that  all  may  knowe  where  peace.
she  goeth. The  viceadmirall  must  come  behinde  all,  and
so  every  shippe  in  the  fleete  before  her :  if  any  be  ill  of
sayle,  all  are  bounde  to  fit  their  sayles  in  such  order,  that
they  goe  no  faster  then  she  doeth.

The  Admiral  and  the  viceadmirall  goe  never  but  halfe
laden,  but  very  well  armed  of  men,  and  artillery,  three
times  double  and  more  then  any  of  the  other  have :
because  they  may  help  to  defend  all  the  rest,  if  neede  doe
require :  and  the  dead  freight  of  these  two  shippes  is
alwayes  borne  upon  the  whole  goods  that  are  laden  in  the
fleete,  as  also  at  the  least  there  be  two  hundred  souldiers
in  every  of  these  two  shippes  besides  the  mariners,  great
gunners,  gromettes,  and  other  officers.

The  voyages  bee  so  appointed,  that  alwayes  they  goe  l^ote.
and  come  in  the  best  of  Summer,  and  bee  there  all  the
winter  in  the  ports  to  discharge  their  lading  and  recharge
backe  againe.

The  ships  that  are  Admirall  and  viceadmirall  be  neither
the  greatest  nor  the  smallest  shippes,  but  of  3  hundreth
or  4  hundreth  tunnes  at  the  most :  but  they  be  very  good

445

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ACaptalne'in
every  ship.

Sixe  Judges.

Foure  msi-

tours.

The  reader  of

the  arte  of

'Navigation.

The  booke  of
orders,  called
in  Spanish
Pragmatics,
common  in
writing  among
the  masters.

saylers,  and  strong  chosen  for  the  purpose,  to  sayle  well
and  to  beare  good  store  of  ordinance.  In  these  two
shippes  are  alwayes  going  and  comming,  two  good  knights
men  of  warre,  and  Captaines  and  souldiers  expert  in
the  warres.

And  in  every  other  ship  is  a  Captaine,  which  ruleth  in
all  causes  of  controversie,  or  fights  in  the  seas ;  the  Pilot
directeth  onely  in  government  and  leading  the  shippe  to
her  port.

All  the  Captaines,  Masters,  Pilots,  Maryners,  and
passengers,  and  all  others  bee  obedient  to  the  two  shippes,
so  appoynted  to  passe :  they  doe,  as  in  all  other  commande-
ments  what  is  by  them  appoynted,  having  power  to  hang,
or  doe  any  justice  upon  any  man,  as  to  them  seemeth
good  at  sea,  and  this  is  the  last  commandement  upon
payne  of  death,  if  the  General  please.

Concerning  the  Contractation  house,  there  are  therein
sixe  Judges  of  the  highest  sort.

There  are  visitours  of  shippes,  as  it  is  sayd  before,  to
see  whether  the  ships  goe  in  order  well,  and  sufficient  in
al  things :  and  what  manner  of  men  the  Masters  of  the
ships  and  Pilots  are,  whether  they  be  able  to  answere  to
all  such  articles,  as  the  reader  is  able  to  objecte  unto  them,
in  matters  of  Navigation  :  if  they  be  not  found  sufficient,
they  are  not  admitted  to  take  charge.

The  master  must  knowe  whether  the  ship  be  sufficiently
calked,  tackled,  and  furnished  in  all  things  accordingly,  as
with  mastes,  sayles,  cables,  ankers,  and  all  other  necessary
furniture:  that  at  such  time  as  any  of  the  high  judges
with  their  ordinary  visitours  appointed  for  such  causes  doe
come,  there  be  nothing  found  out  of  order  or  lacking,
according  to  The  booke  of  orders,  which  every  shippe
proportionable  to  her  burthen  ought  to  have,  which  is  not
unknowen  to  any  of  the  masters,  being  in  writing  common
among  them :  and  all  the  charge  given  to  the  Master  and
Pilot  serveth  onely  to  conduct  the  ship  from  port  to  port.

The  counter  Master,  or  masters  mate  is  obedient  in  all
things  whereunto  hee  shall  bee  commanded  by  the  master

446

REGULATIONS FOR SPANISH SHIPS

and  Pilote,  and  at  his  commandement  are  all  the  maryners
of  the  ship.

The  shippes  commonly  goe  deeper  laden  from  Spaine,
then  our  shippes  doe  in  any  voyage.

The  order  of  the  Carena  given  to  the  ships  that  [HI.  864.]
go  out  of  Spaine,  to  the  Indies.

He  shippe  of  what  burthen  soever  shee  bee
must  give  a  Carena,  as  they  call  it  in  the
Spanish  tongue,  which  is  in  English,  shee
must  be  throughly  calked,  and  fortified,
as  well  with  carpenters  to  set  knees  into
her,  and  any  other  tymbers  appertaining
to  the  strengthening  of  a  shippe,  as  with
calking :  which  is  to  put  occam  into  her  sides ;  and  that
kinde  of  calking  is  not  used,  as  ours  is  here  in  England ;
but  first  before  they  put  in  any  threede  of  occam,  they
with  certaine  crooked  yrons,  with  an  hammer  in  one
hande,  and  the  crooked  yron  in  the  other,  doe  forcibly
pull  out  all  the  olde  threede  that  hath  bene  in  the  shippe
the  voyage  before,  and  so  drive  in  new.

If  the  seame  of  the  shippe  be  worne  to  any  bredth,  as  Calking  with
many  olde  shippes  be,  by  reason  of  often  raking  them,  thime plates  of
upon  that  seame  there  is  clapt  a  piece  of  caste  leade,
nayled  upon  the  calking,  and  seame  with  speciall  nayles,
which  leade  is  cast  a  handes  bredth,  and  as  thinne  as  may
bee  for  the  same  purpose,  and  at  every  voyage  it  is  taken
off  and  renued,  and  by  that  meanes  their  shippes  are  very
stanch  a  yeere  or  two.

The  Carenero  or  the  Calker  doeth  give  in  suerties,  that  TheCalkeror
if  the  shippe  so  cast  over,  as  they  doe  commonly  use  to  ^^^^""'''•
cast  them,  in  such  sort  as  any  man  may  goe  drie  upon  the
keele,  as  I  have  done,  and  without  any  butte,  pipe,  or  any
other  kinde  of  timber  under  her  sides,  more  then  with
counter-poyze  of  stones  in  her,  made  within  certaine
timber  as  though  it  were  a  cheste;  and  with  the  stones
the  Carenero  doeth  bring  her  as  hee  will,  high  and  low,
leaning,  or  rysing :  and  if  shee  miscarrie  in  her  Carena,

447

A.D.
1586.

Ahnso  de
Chiavez
Piloto  mayor.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

then  is  the  Carenero  bound,  if  it  bee  either  by  fire,  water,
or  sinking,  or  any  other  misfortune,  to  pay  for  the  valew
of  the  ship.

The  Carena  of  a  shippe  of  one  hundred  tunnes  being
done  so  substantially  as  they  use  to  doe  it,  will  cost  two
hundred  Duckets,  of  two  hundred  tunnes,  foure  hundred
Duckets,  of  three  hundred  tunnes,  sixe  hundred  Duckets,
and  so  according  to  the  greatnesse  of  the  shippe.

It  would  be  done  here  in  England  for  one  third  part  of
the  money,  by  reason  that  the  necessaries  that  goe  to  it
are  better  cheape  here  by  much,  and  the  calkers  farre
better  cheape  by  two  parts.

This  Carena  may  not  be  given  at  any  hand  but  in
a  river  where  no  tempest  can  arise,  as  in  this  river  of
London  in  such  a  place,  where  at  al  times  the  sayd  ship
may  ride  aflote :  it  may  not  be  done  in  any  dangerous
harbour,  where  the  winde  may  bring  up  the  waves  of  the
Sea,  neither  where  the  Sea  may  heave  and  set.

The  calking  of  Sivill  is  so  substantially  done,  that  in
one  day  one  calker  doeth  not  throughly  calke  past  one
yarde  and  an  halfe  in  one  seame,  or  two  yardes  at  the
most,  and  to  that  he  doeth,  the  master  calker  is  at  hand  to
oversee  him,  and  this  done,  the  Carenero  doeth  with  his
ballast  set  her  upright,  and  so  shee  beginneth  to  lade.

Examen  de  los  maestros  y  Pilotos,  que  navegan
en  las  flotas  de  Espanna  para  las  Indias  del
mar  oceano,  escrito  por  Pedro  Dias  Piloto,
natural  de  la  Isla  de  la  Palma,  1586.

Rimeramente  pide  al  Piloto  mayor,  que
es  al  presente  Alonso  de  Chiavez,  que  lo
admita  al  examen,  por  quanto  es  natural
y  sufficiente  para  ello.

Manda  el  Piloto  mayor,  que  haga
enformacion,  de  como  es  marinero,  y
platico  de  aquella  parte,  de  que  se  quiere
examinar.  Luego  presenta  cinco  o  seis  testigos  de  los
Pilotos  examinados,  de  como  es  buen  marinero,  y  suf-

448

EXAMINATION OF  SPANISH PILOTS  ad.

1586.

ficiente  para  ser  Piloto,  y  como  es  natural  de  los  Reynos
de  Espanna;  y  que  no  es  de  casta  de  Moro,  m  Judeo,
ni  Negro.

Y  hecha  la  enformacion,  presenta  la  al  Piloto  mayor.

Y  visto el Piloto mayor la enformacion ser buena,

manda  que  el  Cathedratico  Rodrigo  Zamorano  lo  admita  Rodrigo  Za-

a la Cathedra. Y alii se iuntan  a  vezes quatorze o  ^'"'^"o  CatAe-

qumze que pretenden  exammarse, y  acuden  alii  a  una

casa,  que  El  Cathedratico  tiene  para  aquello  efeto,  a  las

ocho  de  la  mannana,  y  estan  dos  oras,  y  otras  dos  a  la

tarde. El  Cathedratico  tiene  por  costumbre  de  leer  en

la  Cathedra  una  ora,  y  otra  ora  ocupan  en  preguntarse

los  unos  a  los  otros  muchas  cosas  convenientes  a  la  arte

de  navegar  en  presencia  del  Cathedratico. Y  el  que  no

responde  a  proposito,  El Cathedratico le  emienda,  y  le

dize de  la  manera que es cade cosa. Y este estudio

dura  nos  meses,  en  los  quales  no  ha  de  faltar  de  ir  dos

vezes  al  dia,  como  tengo  dicho.

Y  despues  de  aver  oido  la  Cathedra  estos  dos  meses,  [HI-  865.]
van  a  la  Sala del Examen,  que es en  la Contratacion.  ^^ '^  ^^^

Y  alii  esta  el  Piloto  mayor,  y  los  de  mas  pilotos,  qui
son  por  lo  menos  veinte  cinco :  y  alii  estando  todos
assentados  por  su  orden,  manda  el  Piloto  mayor,  que
lean  las  enformaciones ;  y  despues  de  aver  leidas  las
enformaciones  o  testimonios,  pregunta  el  piloto  mayor
al  piloto  y  maestro,  que  se  quiere  examinar,  de  que
parte  de  las  Indias  se  quiere  examinar }  Y  luego  el
piloto  responde,  que  de  Nueva  Espanna,  o  de  Nombre
de  Dios.  Y  otros,  que  no  son  platicos  de  estas  tierras,
dizen,  que  de  Santo  Domingo,  y  Puerto  rico,  y  Cuba
y  luego  demanda  el  Piloto  mayor,  que  tienda  la  carta
en  la  mesa,  y  en  presencia  de  los  demas  pilotos  parta
de  la  barra  de  San  Lucar  para  las  Islas  de  Canaria,  y
de  alii  para  las  Indias,  hasta  llegar  a  aquella  parte  de
donde  se  examina,  y  buelve  para  Espanna,  a  tornar,  a
la  Barra  de  San  Lucar,  de  donde  partio.

Y  el  Piloto  mayor  le  preguntas  Que  si  yendo  nave-
gando por la mar le diese un viento contrario, que

XI  449  2  F

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

remedio  haria  para  que  su  nao  no  trabajasse  tanto  en
la  mar  ?  Y  el  le  responde  lo  mejor  que  entiende.
Luego  le  pregunta  uno  de  los  pilotos  por  las  reglas
del  Sol,  y  de  la  Estrella  del  norte,  y  que  cuenta  le
hara  en  todo  tiempo  del  anno  ?  A  lo  qual  ha  de
responder  el  piloto  que  se  examina  a  todo  aquello  que
le  preguntaren.  Y  luego  le  pregunta  otro  por  las  sennas
de  las  tierras  que  estuvieren  en  el  camino,  hasta  Uegar
al  puerto  de  donde  se  examina.  Y  luego  pregunta  otro,
que  si  con  tormenta  se  le  quebrasse  los  arboles,  Que
remedio  haria  ?  Y  otros  le  preguntan,  Que  si  la  nao
abriesse  un  agua,  a  donde  peligrassen  las  vidas,  que
remedio  haria  para  tomarla  con  menos  riesgo  ?  Y  otros
le  preguntan,  que  si  le  faltasse  el  timon,  que  remedio
haria  ?  Y  otros  le  preguntan  por  la  cuenta  de  la  Luna,
y  de  las  mareas.  Y  otros  le  preguntan.  Que  si  lo
tomasse  un  corsario,  y  lo  dexasse  sin  carta  y  sin  astro-
labio,  y  otros  instrumentos  para  tomar  la  altura  del
Sol  y  de  la  Estrella  del  norte,  que  orden  tendria  para
hazer  los  ?  Otros  le  preguntan  otras  preguntas  neces-
sarias  a  un  marinero,  que  quiere  ser  piloto.  A  todo
esto  esta  attento,  respondiendo  a  todo.  Y  despues  que
todos  le  an  preguntado  todo  lo  necessario,  le  mandan,
que  saiga  fuera  de  la  sala,  paraque  a  solas  de  cada  uno
su  boto  debaxo  de  juramento  en  un  libro,  que  prometen
La  manera  de  Je  dezir  verdad.  Y  luego  ponen  dentro  de  un  vaso  de
elemn  de  los  ^\^^^  q^g  ^ll^  gs^^  p^j.^  aquel  efeto,  tantas  havas,  y
maestros,  y ^  ' ^  ^ . . /i  1111

pilotos.  tantos  garvanzos,  como  ai  pilotos  dentro  de  la  sala :  y  va

cada  uno  por  su  orden  ;  y  el  que  le  parece  que  es  suf-
ficiente,  saca  una  have,  y  el  que  le  parece,  que  no  lo
es,  saca  un  garvanzo.  Y  despues  que  todos  an  sacado,
mira  el  piloto  mayor  los  botos  que  tiene ;  y  si  halla
que  tiena  tantos  botos  en  su  favor  como  en  contrario,
manda  que  haga  otro  viaje  :  y  si  tiene  mas  botos  en  su
Carta  del  ex-  favor,  que  en  contrario,  luego  le  dan  una  carta  de
amen.  examen  firmada  del  piloto  mayor,  y  del  Cathedratico,  y

del  Escrivano,  y  sellada  con  el  sello  de  la  Contratacion.
Y  teniendo esta carta,  luego da de presente  al piloto

450

EXAMINATION  OF SPANISH PILOTS  a.d.

1586.
mayor,  y  al  Cathedratico  para  guantes  y  gallinas,  con-
forme  que  cada  uno  puede,  que  es  de  ordinario  dos  o
tres  ducados.  Y  luego  se  puede  concertar  por  piloto
en  qualquier  navio  que  quisiere,  para  aquella  parte
dedonde  se  examino.  Y  si  hallare  en  las  Indias  algun
navio  que  tenga  piloto  no  examinado,  lo  puede  botar
fuera,  y  venir  el  piloto  examinado  en  el  navio  por  el
mismo  concierte,  que  el  otro piloto  tenia  hecho.

Suelen  Uevar  los  pilotos  de  partido  y  concierte  por  Sueldo  de  ks
un  viaje  de  yr  y  bolver,  conforme  que  es  el  navio.  Si  P^^"^"^-
es  de  ciento  tonelladas,  dozientos  ducados,  y  dozientos  y
cinquenta ;  y  si  es  de  quatrocientas  o  de  quinientas,  lleva
de  partido ;  y  mas,  todos  los  dias  que  estuviere  en  tierra,
quatro  reales  para  su  comida.  Y  las  naos  grandes
siempre  llevan  los  pilotos  mas  viejos,  porque  el  son  mas
experimentados  y  mejores  pilotos  que  los  manzebos,  que
comienzan  a  navegar,  y  a  ser  pilotos.

El  piloto  no  tiene  mas  trabajo  ni  mas  cuidado  que  Maestmy  sus
en  la  navegacion :  porque  los  maestros  de  los  navios  °.ffi'^^°^-
tienen  cuidado  de  fretar,  y  aderezar  sus  naos,  y  pagar
a  los  marineros,  y  hazer  todo  lo  que  es  menester  para
su  nao :  porque  el  piloto  no  viene  a  la  nao,  si  no  es
quando  los  visitadores  vienen  a  visitarla,  si  tiene  todo
lo  necessario  para  el  viage.

Los  visitadores  son  quatro  hombres  qui  estan  puestos  Los  quatro
por el rey, y  estos son hombres muy entendidos, y  ^"^^^or^hy
vienen  a  visitar  los  navios,  antes  que  tomen  carga, por  ^^ ""'
ver si estan bien aderezados para hazer el  viage. Y
despues  que  estan  los  navios  cargados,  buelven  otra  vez
a  visitarlos,  por  ver  si  tienen  todas  las  cosas  necessarias,
conforme  a  la  Prematica ;  y  si  tienen  todos  los  marineros,  Prematka.
y  bastimentos, y  polvere, y  artilleria, y balas, y todo
lo  de  mas necessario para el  viaje. Y  si alguna  cosa
les  falta,  les  mandan  con  graves  penas  que  lo  compren,
antes  que  salgan  del  puerto.

Suelen llevar los navios que van a las Indias un  Esaivam y  su
escrivano  que  tiene  cargo  de  tomar  por  memoria  todas  °ffi"°-
las  mercaderias  que se cargan en la nao,  y  tomar las

451

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

[III.  866.]  marcas,  para  por  ellas  entregar  la  carga  a  sus  duennos,
despues  de  aver  acabado  su  viaje :  y  sirve  tanbien,  si
un  hombre  caesse  enfermo,  para  hazer  testamiento  y
otros  recaudos  que  se  suelen  hazer  delante  un  escrivano :
y  gana  por  su  sueldo  en  un  viaje  tan  to  como  dos
marineros.

Primero  navio Tiene  el  general  de  las  flotas  por  costumbre,  despues

^''^'^^°'  que  llega  a  las Indias, de embiar un navio de aviso,

para  dar  relacion  al  rey,  de  como  ha  Uegado. Y  despues

Segundo  navio  q^g  estan  prestas  para  partir  despacha  otrio  navio  de
e  aviso.  aviso,  para  hazer  relacion,  de  como  estan  ya  prestas  para

partir, con  otras  particularidades.

Dos  naos  de  Y^in  en  las  flotas  dos  naos  grandes,  la  una  por  Capitana,

^^"^"^^  y  la otra por  Almiranta,  cada  una de seiscientas y de

sietecientas  tonelladas,  que  no  Uevan  mas  que  bastimentos
y  soldados  para  defensa  de  la  defensa  de  la  demas  flota :
y  lleva  cada  una  como  docientos  soldados :  y  estas  se
pagan  de  las  mercaderias  que  vienen  en  la  flota  a  uno
por ciento,  y algunas  vezes  a  uno  y  medio  por  ciento.

Ay  en  la  casa  de  la  Contratacion  de  Sevilla  una
tabla  que  sirve  de  Aranzel,  escrita  con  letras
de  oro ;  en  que  stan  avaliadas  todas  las  mer-
caderias que  se  embarcan  para  las  Indias.

EN  esta  tabla  se  puede  saber  quantas  botijas  hazen
una  tonellada  de  vino  y  quantos  quintales  y  quantos
bariles,  y  quantos coffres  sea  una  tonellada.

Y  todas  mercaderias  estan  alii  taxadas,  para  pagar  los
derechos  al  rey,  y  el  flete  al  maestro.

Y  alii  esta  puesto  que  ningun  maestro  puede  llevar
a  las  Indias  ningun  passagero,  ni  frayle,  ni  clerigo,  ni
otras  personas,  ni  estranieros  de  los  reynos  de  Espanna,
sin  licencia  del  Rey.

Y  mas,  que  no  puerde  llevar  mercaderias  fuera  de  la
Prematica,  y  todo  lo  que  llevaren,  lo  lleven  registrado,
so  pena  de  la  vida.

Y  mas, que ningun maestro ni piloto puede llevar

452

EXAMINATION OF SPANISH PILOTS  ad.

1586.
instrumentos  que  no  sean  firmados  por  el  piloto  mayor
Alonzo  de  Chiaves,  y  el  cosmografo  Cathedratico  Roderigo
Zamorano :  como  son  la  carta,  el  astrolabio,  la  balestilla,
y  el  regimiento.

Y  mas,  que  yendo  en  la  compannia  de  la  flota,  obe-
descan  al  General,  y  no  hagan  mas  de  lo  que  el  mandare,
so  pena  de  la  vida.

The  same  in  English.

The  examination  of  the  Masters  and  Pilots  which
saile  in  the  Fleetes  of  Spaine  to  the  West
Indies  :  Written  in  the  Spanish  tongue  by
Pedro  Dias  a  Spanish  pilot  taken  by  Sir
Richard Grinville 1585.

First  they  make  suit  unto  the  Pilot  major  (who  at  this
present  is  called  Alonzo  de  Chiavez)  that  he  would  admit
them  to  examination,  because  they  are  naturall  Spaniards,
and  sufficient  for  the  same.

Hereupon  the  Pilot  major  commandeth  the  party  to  T^^^  witnesse
be  examined,  to  give  information  that he  is  a  mariner,  °ffi'^^  °^  "^^
and  well  practized  in  those  parts,  about  which  hee  desireth  ^^
to  be  examined. And  then  immediately  he  bringeth  five
or  sixe  pilots  before  examined  to  give  testimonie  that  he
is  a  good  mariner,  and  sufficient  to  become  a  pilot,  that
he  is  a  Spaniard  borne,  and  that  he  is  not  of  the  race  of
the  Moores,  Jewes  or  Negros.

Having  made  this  information,  hee  presenteth  it  unto  The  pilots  ad-
the Pilot major. And  the  Pilot  major seeing the  in-  Y"'^°^^°r^l
formation  to  be  good,  willeth  the  Kings  publique  reader  Kin?s  reader
of  navigation  (who  is  now  Roderigo  Zamorano)  to  admit
him  to  his  lectures. Whither  there  doe  resort  foureteene
or  fifteene  persons  that  desire  to  be  examined:  and  they  They heare the
come to a  certaine house  which  the kings  reader  hath  ^^'«^-f  readers
appointed  unto  him  for  the  same  purpose,  at  eight  of  the  ^^/^^^^^^  ^'^
clocke  in  the morning:  and  then  they  stay  two  houres,  for  two ^^
and  two  houres  likewise in the afternoone : in one  of  moneths.

453

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

which  houres Zamorano  readeth  unto  them,  and  in  the

Their  dispute-  other  they  aske  one  another  many  particulars  concerning

tions  of  the  art  ^^  ^j-j- ^f  navigation in the  presence  of  the  said  kings

before  ^fhe  ^°^ reader :  and him  that  answereth  not  to  the  purpose  the

Kings  reader sayd  reader  instructeth more  perfectly, and  telleth  him

who  is  their how everything is. And this  exercise continueth two

moderatour. moneths, during which  time the examinates must not

faile  to  bee  present  twise  in  a  day,  as  is  aforesaid.

And  having  heard  the  kings  reader  those  two  moneths.

The  hall  of they  resort  then  unto the  hall  of  examination  which  is

examination, -j^ ^^  Contractation house, where  there are assembled

the  Pilot  major  and  divers  other  pilots,  to  the  number  of

25  at  the  least;  who  all  sitting  there  in  order,  the  Pilot

[III.  867.] major demandeth of  him  that would  be  examined,  of

The  maner  of  ^j^^^  p^j-j- Qf  ^^ Indies he desireth to be  examined :

pilots  exa- Whereto the examinate answereth, that he would bee

mination.  examined concerning Nueva Espanna, or of Nombre

de  Dios and Tierra Firma. And  others that are not

experienced in those partes, crave to be examined  of

Santo  Domingo,  Puerto  rico,  and  Cuba.

Then  the  Pilot  major  commandeth  the  examinate  to
spread  a  sea-chart  upon  the  table,  and  in  the  presence
of  the  other  pilots  to  depart  or  shewe  the  course  from
the  barre  of  Sant  Lucar  to  the  Canarie-Islands,  and  from
thence  to  the  Indies,  till  he  come  to  that  place  whereof
he  is  to  bee  examined,  and  then  also  to  returne  backe
to  the  barre  of  Sant  Lucar  in  Spaine,  from  whence  he
departed.  Also  the  Pilot  major  asketh  him,  if  when  he
saileth  upon  the  sea,  hee  be  taken  with  a  contrary  wind,
what  remedie  he  is  to  use,  that  his  ship  be  not  too  much
turmoiled  upon  the  sea }  And  the  examinate  answereth
him  aswell  as  he  can.

Then  one  of  the  other  pilotes  opposeth  him  about
the  rules  of  the  Sunne  and  of  the  North-starre,  and  how
hee  ought  to  use  the  declination  of  the  Sunne  at  all
times  of  the  yeere :  whom  the  examinate  is  bound  to
answere  in  every  thing  that  hee  demandeth.  Then
another  asketh him of  the signes and  markes  of  those

454

EXAMINATION OF SPANISH PILOTS  a.d.

1586.

lands  which  lye  in  his  way  to  that  haven  whereof  he  is
examined.  And  then  another  demandeth,  that  if  his
mastes  should  be  broken  by  tempest,  what  remedy  hee
would  use  ?  Others  aske  him,  if  his  ship  should  take  a
leake,  to  the  hazarding  of  the  lives  of  himselfe  and  his
company,  what  remedy  he  would  find  to  stop  the  same
with  least  danger?  Others  aske  him,  what  remedy,  if
his  rudder  should  chance  to  faile  ?  Others  oppose  him
about  the  account  of  the  Moone  and  of  the  tides?
Others  aske  him  if  a  Pirate  should  take  him  and  leave
him  destitute  of  his  Chart,  his  Astrolabe,  and  his  other
instruments  serving  to  take  the  height  of  the  Sunne  and
of  the  starre,  what  course  hee  would  take  in  that  ex-
tremitie?  Others  demand  other  questions  needfull  for
a  mariner  to  know,  which  desireth  to  be  a  pilot.  Unto
all  which  the  examinate  is  very  attentive,  and  answereth
to  every  particular.

After  they  have  all  asked  him  so  much  as  they  think Themaneroj
expedient,  they  bid  him depart  out  of  the  hall,  to  the  ^hetr  election.
ende  that every  one  of  them  may  severally  bee  sworne
upon a  booke,  that  they  will  speake  the  trueth. Then
they  put into  a  certaine  vessell  of  silver  standing  there
for"  the  same  purpose  so  many  beanes,  and  so  many  peason
as  there  are  pilots  within  the  hall :  and  every  one  putting
his  hand  into  the  vessell  in  order,  he  that  thinketh  the
partie  examined  to  be  sufficient,  taketh  up  a  beane,  and
he that  thinketh him not  sufficient,  taketh  up  a  pease,  ^^ttej-s  testi-
And after that  all  have  taken  out  what  they  please,  the  ^°^^^^^°f

T^-l  -1111  1  •  1 1  J ^^^O'  »^^

Pilot  major  looketh  what  voyces  the  exammate  hath :  and  piQ^^  g^a-

if  he  finde  him  to  have  as  many  voyces  for  him  as  against  minatlon  and

him,  he  commandeth  him  to  make  another  voyage :  but  approbation,

if  he  hath more voyces  for  him  then  against  him,  then  ^ f  V  i
,  .  1  • 1 '^  •  •  n r 1  •  • • hands  of  the

they give him letters testimonial! or his examination  pn^f  ^ji^j^^.

signed  by  the  Pilot  major,  by  the  kings  reader,  and  the  the  kings

secretary,  and  sealed  with the seale  of  the  Contractation  reader,  and

house. And  upon  the  receipt  of  these  letters  testimoniall,  ^^^ ^^"'^fary,

-  •  dtid  sbuIb  of

the  new  pilot  giveth  a  present  unto  the  Pilot  major,  and  ^^^  Contracta-
the  kings  reader,  for  their  gloves  and  hennes,  every  one  tion  house.

455

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

according  to  his  abilitie,  which  is  ordinarily  some  two
or  three  ducats.

And  then  he  may  take  upon  him  to  be  pilot  in  any
ship  whatsoever,  unto  that  place  for  which  he  was  ex-
amined :  and  if  he  finde  in  the  Indies  any  ship  under  the
charge  of  a  pilot  not  before  examined,  hee  may  put  him
out  of  his  office,  and  may  himself  take  charge  of  that
ship  for  the  same  wages  that  the  other  pilot  agreed  for.

The  pilots  wages  for  making  a  voyage  outward  and
homeward  is  according  to  the  burthen  of  the  ship.  If
she  be  of  100  tunnes,  hee  hath  200  or  250  ducats:  and
if  shee  bee  of  400  or  500  tunnes,  he  taketh  for  his  wages
500  or  550  ducates :  and  if  she  be  bigger,  he  hath  a
greater  allowance :  over  and  besides  all  which,  he  hath
every  day  while  he  remaineth  on  land,  foure  reals  for
his  diet.  And  the  greater  shippes  are  alwayes  committed
unto  the  more  ancient  pilots,  because  they  are  of  greater
experience  and  better  skill,  then  the  yonger  sort  which
newly  take  upon  them  to  be  pilots.

The  pilot  undertaketh  no  farther  travell  nor  care,  but

in  directing  the  course  or  navigation  :  for  the  masters  ot

the ships take charge of the freighting and preparing

their  ships,  and  to  pay  the  mariners,  and  to  doe  all  things

needefull for  the  ship  ;  for  the  pilot  commeth  not  unto

the shippe, untill  the  visitours  come  to  visite  the  same,

to  see  whether  he  hath  all  things  necessary  for  the  voyage.

Foure  The  visitours  are  foure  men  which  are  appoynted  by

Fisitours. t:he  king,  and  these  are  men  of  great  understanding  :  and

they  come  to  visite  the  shippes  before  they  take  in  their

lading, to see  whether they  be  well  prepared  to make

the  voyage. And  after  the  ships  bee  laden,  they  returne

againe to visite  them the second  time,  to  see  whether

The  orders  of  ^j^gy  h^ve all  things  necessary,  according  to the orders

the Contracta-  ^£  ^^^^  Contractation  house: and  whether they have  all

tion  house.  .  .  .  ,  j  ,  j j-  j

[III.  868.1 their  manners,  victuals,  pouder,  shot,  and  ordmance,  and

all  other  things  necessary  for  the  voyage.  And  if  they
want  any  thing,  they  charge  them  upon  grievous  penalties,
to  provide  the  same  before  they  set  out  of  the  haven.

456

EXAMINATION OF SPANISH PILOTS  a.d.

1586.

The  ships  that  goe  to  the  Indies  are  wont  eche  of
them  to  have  with  them  a  Notarie,  whose  charge  is  to
keepe  a  note  of  remembrance  of  all  the  marchandize
which  is  laden  in  the  ship,  and  to  take  the  marks  thereof,
therby  to  deliver  the  commodities  in  the  ship  to  their
particular  owners,  after  they  have  finished  their  voyage,
and  he  serveth  likewise  to  make  willes,  and  other  instru-
ments, which  are  wont  to  be  made  by  a  Notarie,  if  any
man  chanceth  to  fall  sicke.  And  his  wages  in  eche
voyage  is  as  much  as  the  wages  of  two  mariners.

The Generall  of the fleetes useth continually, after  The  first  barke
hee  is  arrived  in  the  Indies,  to  send  into  Spaine  a  barke  ^f^'^^^"-
of  Aviso,  to  advertise  the  king  of  the  state  of  his  arrivall ;
And after  the fleetes be ready  to  come  home,  he  dis-
patcheth  another  pinnesse  of  Aviso  to  certifie  them  how  ^-^^  j^^ok^
the fleetes  are  now  ready  to set saile, with  other  par-  ^  . °-^
ticularities. There  go  with  the  fleetes  two  great  ships,
the  one  as  Admirall, the  other  as  Viceadmirall,  of  the
burthen  of  400  or  500  tunnes,  which  carry  nothing  but
victuals  and  souldiers  for  the  wafting  of  the  rest  of  the
fleete,  and  these  are  payd  out  of  the  marchandize  which
come  in  the  fleete,  after  the  rate  of  one  in  the  hundred,
and  sometime  at  one  and  an  halfe  in  the  hundred.

There  is  in  the  Contractation  house  of  Sivil  a
table  which  serveth  for  an  Aranzel,  or  table
of  rate  or  taxation,  written  in  letters  of  gold,
wherein  the  values  of  all  kind  of  marchandize,
which  are  embarqued  for  the  Indies,  are  set
downe.

Y  this  table  a  man  may  know  how  many  Botijas  ^  ^^^^^  °f
or iarres make a tunne  of  wine,  or  how  many  '^^^^'  P^- ^^^

• Wb  ttl  t/lB  C^071—

packes, or how many quintals, or how many  tractation

barrels,  or  how  many  chests  make  a  tunne.  house

And  all  marchandize  have  their  rates  set  downe,  to
pay  the  king  his  customes  and  the  Master  his  due
fraight.

457

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586,

And  therein  is  set  up  in  writing  that  no  Master  may
carry  any  passenger  to  the  Indies,  without  licence,
especially  no  learned  men,  nor  any  fryer,  or  clergyman,
nor  any  body  else  without  licence  of  the  king  :  nor
any strangers  not borne in the kingdomes of  Spaine.

Moreover,  that  they  may  not  carry  away  any  mar-
chandize  not  comprized  in  the  foresaid  orders,  under
paine  of  death  :  and  that  all  goods  which  they  carry
with  them,  they  ought  to  carry  the  same  registred  ;
under  paine  of  death.

Furthermore,  that  no  Master  nor  Pilot  may  carry
any  Chart,  nor  Astrolabe,  nor  Crosse-staffe,  nor  regi-
ment, without  they  bee  signed  and  sealed  by  the  Pilot
major  Alonzo  de  Chiavez,  and  the  Cosmographer  the
kings  reader  Rodrigo  Zamorano.

Moreover,  that  going  in  company  with  the  fleete,
they  doe  and  obey  all  such  things,  as  their  Generall
shall  command  them,  under  paine  of  death.

Written  by  me  Pedro  Dias  borne  in  the  Isle  of
Palma  one  of  the  Canaries,  upon  the  request
and  gratification  of  M.  Richard  Hakluyt,  in
February 1586.

END OF VOLUME XI.

i

PI  IV;

-lOAN
..JAR.

r/TR*

?if^r

f,

(J^

J^^"-^^

^Tx/.^..

■^  \fr'-ii>'

_  yXiOi-^

Nt-

'\^

ir^

i/^

14'-'-

.ViAJl£

"5^^!^

iNSyiAIL  MOIVCC'AE  rdebernma'
funt  oOjXQsxmnm  AXimatMm  ^oyutm  quamtotum  tcrr
arum  orbrm  imttunt  hai-mpimi'uejMt rcntafi-Ji
iions,Afoti<v't'Jnon  el  Bat/iwr..hiJ  /;uiHnm  arfii^n^unt]
(xilolum.Cf/fiiflri,Bonifonfm„4ml'oinum  etBandam  ■
ExIn/ulo'Cmoii?  I'l'iwopflir.  rtiuf/iunhirSanm/nruimJ
cr<i»/!,t>  D;iririn:'Vi;ffS  iriyn/?ic,T,nim  Flore, vuljo  rfifM

y'deHjustnb'-Ua  ad nwum  e^ftejpis  yom  cu

^<i'

^;,l

Nova ^gvi;  Inea  -I

J  Noua  Q'uineci  „.../u  &  rfrrf»

TryVTNOCTIALIS'N

"~I  \lmi)vnui  ilt  Landon  in-  -  ^  j

.R^ii-cK

I

WitttmM

I'i'ii  >  I  Witttimdrl

a/Z)Uffl '^

p|HH||[>7?.

MAP  OF  THE  MOLUCCAS.  OR  SP[CE  ISLANDS

^mmi

CLAPP

3  5002  00074  2200

Hakluyt,  Richard

The  principal  navigations  voyages  Iraffi

G  240  . H2  1903  11
Hakluyt,  Richard, 1552?-

leie.

The- principal navlgat.lons
voyages ■trajffic(ue-s &
